The Gospel of the Resurrection (B.F. Westcott, 1866)
==========================================================
Westcott's 1866 Gospel of the Resurrection — the great Cambridge scholar's theology of Easter and the risen life. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

THE

GOSPEL  OF  THE  EESUKEECTION.


THE

GOSPEL  OF  THE  RESURRECTION:

THOUGHTS  ON  ITS  RELATION  TO
REASON  AND  HISTORY.


BROOKE   FOSS   WESTCOTT,  D.D.,  D.C.L.,

LOKD   BISHOP   OF   DURHAM.


SEVENTH    EDITION.


antr  (ZDambrfoge :
MACMILLAN     AND     CO.

AND   NEW  YOBK.

1891
{The  Right  of  Translation  is  reserved.]


EyAo'rooc    6    AiA<\c«AAoc    HMOJN
riNEIOE   TPAnEZITAI   AOKIMOI.


First  Edition  printed  1866  (Ext.  Fcap.  Svo.),  Second  1867,

Third  1874  (Cr.  8vo.),  Fourth  1879,  Fifth  1884,

Sixth  1887,  Seventh  1891.


NOTICE   TO   THE   FOURTH   EDITION.


TN  revising  the  following  pages  I  have  had  the
great  advantage  of  considering  two  important
criticisms  upon  its  main  argument,  one  by  Mr  B.
W.  Macau  in  his  Essay  on  The  Resurrection  of
Christ,  1877,  and  the  other  by  the  Author  of
Supernatural  Religion,  in  the  third  volume  of  his
work,  and  in  two  papers  in  the  Fortnightly  Review
for  February  and  March,  1878.  It  would  be
affectation  to  say  that  either  writer  has  brought
forward  arguments  which  I  had  not  considered
previously  to  the  best  of  my  ability ;  but  I  gladly
acknowledge  the  help  which  both  have  given  me
in  understanding  modes  of  thought  which  are
foreign  to  my  own.  I  hope  that  the  few  verbal
changes  and  additions  which  I  have  made  in  the
w.  K.  b

2017209


vi  Notice  to  the  Fourth  Edition.

statement  of  my  views  may  help  to  render  my
meaning  clearer,  where  I  find  that  it  has  been
misapprehended.  One  or  two  errors  have  been
corrected,  and  one  or  two  difficulties  have  been
touched  upon  more  fully  than  before,  where  the
reasoning  of  my  critics  or  my  own  experience
shewed  such  changes  to  be  necessary.  But  I  have
made  the  changes  silently,  for  I  cannot  think  that
the  pursuit  of  the  highest  Truth  is  a  matter  for
personal  controversy.  No  one,  I  feel,  has  a  mono-
poly of  Truth.  It  is  enough  that  in  defending
the  Truth  which  we  know,  we  never  consciously
underrate  or  neglect  the  objections  of  opponents.
The  teacher  who  either  presumes  to  claim  the
knowledge  which  he  has  not,  or  dissembles  his
own  difficulties,  carries  in  his  own  heart  the  ele-
ments of  a  stem  and  inevitable  chastisement.

TRINITY  COLLEGE,
CAMBRIDGE,
May  13,  1879.


NOTICE   TO   THE   THIRD   EDITION.


"OEFORE  issuing  a  new  edition  of  the  present
Essay  I  have  carefully  reconsidered  the  whole
argument,  and  by  the  help  of  several  kind  critics
have  been  enabled  to  correct  (as  I  hope)  some
faults  and  to  remove  some  ambiguities,  which
had  been  overlooked  before.  I  have  not,  how-
ever, made  any  attempt  to  alter  the  general
character  of  the  book.  No  one  can  feel  more
keenly  than  I  do  how  often  I  must  tiy  the
patience  of  my  readers,  but  I  believe  that  any
one  who  has  felt  the  difficulties  which  are  touched
upon,  will  be  willing  to  follow  out  in  detail  the
lines  of  thought  which  are  suggested ;  and  in
subjects  where  all  language  necessarily  falls  short
of  the  truth  which  we  perceive  '  in  many  parts

62


viii  Notice  to  the  Third  Edition.

'and  in  many  fashions,'  it  seems  better  to  stir
inquiry,  if  it  may  be,  than  to  appear  to  antici-
pate and  satisfy  it.

Some  recent  speculations  on  the  scope  and
foundation  of  Christianity  shew  with  singular
clearness  that  even  the  most  candid  interpreters
of  the  Gospel  can  still  miss  its  scope.  For  it
cannot,  as  far  as  I  can  see,  be  finally  questioned
by  any  student  of  the  apostolic  records  that  the
earliest  known  description  of  a  Christian  is  '  one
'who  believes  on  Christ'  and  not  'one  who  believes
'  Christ.'  Or  in  other  words,  a  Christian  is  essen-
tially one  who  throws  himself  with  absolute  trust
upon  a  living  Lord,  and  not  simply  one  who
endeavours  to  obey  the  commands  and  follow
the  example  of  a  dead  Teacher.  The  question
at  issue  is  not  the  observance  of  a  certain  number
of  definite  precepts  but  a  view  of  the  whole
Universe,  of  all  being  and  of  all  life,  of  man  and
of  the  world,  and  of  GOD.

In  this  aspect  the  Resurrection  is  not  an  iso-
lated fact,  but  emphatically  a  revelation  (ch.  ii.
§§16  ff.).  If  the  fragmentary  accounts  of  the
Resurrection  were  such  as  to  yield  a  simple  and


Notice  to  the  Third  Edition.  ix

consistent  narrative  of  the  restoration  of  the  Lord
to  the  circumstances  of  the  earthly  life  which  He
lived  before,  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  the
hope  which  they  convey  would  be  destroyed.
The  marvel  of  the  records  is  that  details  which
mark  the  identity  of  the  Lord's  person  are  com-
bined naturally  (so  to  speak)  and  in  the  same
Gospel  with  details  which  mark  the  change  in
the  conditions  of  His  personal  existence,  as  if
those  who  put  the  facts  together  were  conscious
of  no  difficulty  in  the  apparent  contradiction  from
their  actual  realisation  of  the  new  Truth.  And
when  we  come  to  combine  their  narratives  we
find  it  impossible  to  form  any  theory  of  the
nature  of  the  Resurrection  as  a  fact  like  in  kind
to  any  other  facts  of  our  experience  which  is  not
at  variance  with  some  at  least  of  the  recorded
details.  Thus  if  we  take  one  series  of  events,  the
Resurrection  might  appear  to  have  been  a  mere
coming  back  to  life :  if  we  take  another,  it  might
appear  to  be  a  deduction  from  a  series  of  appa-
ritions. Either  supposition  would  be  more  or  less
consistent  with  the  ordinary  course  of  things ;  but
an  examination  of  the  records  will  not  justify  a


x  Notice  to  the  Third  Edition.

simple  choice  between  the  two  alternatives.  In
some  cases  again  the  manifestations  carried  with
them  instant  conviction  to  those  to  whom  they
were  made :  in  others  they  raised  questionings  and
even  left  doubt.  But  so  far  from  these  variations
creating  a  difficulty  they  lead  us  to  the  fullest
perception  which  as  yet  we  are  able  ( to  gain  of
the  new  life  as  a  fact.  If  they  are  held  firmly  as
a  whole  they  offer  an  adequate  explanation  of  the
faith  of  St  Paul.  If  on  the  other  hand  any  one
series  of  phenomena  be  disregarded,  we  lose  some-
thing either  of  the  reality  or  of  the  breadth  of  the
revelation :  there  are  features  in  the  unquestion-
ably contemporaneous  faith  of  the  Apostles  which
are  left  without  an  adequate  explanation1.

Thus  as  we  reflect  upon  the  substance  of  the
apostolic  records  and  the  experience  of  the  Church
with  more  simplicity  of  heart  and  more  complete
self-devotion,  the  more  nearly  are  we  brought
back  to  the  words  of  St  Paul,  If  thou  shalt  make
the  confession  with  thy  mouth  JESUS  is  LORD,  and
shalt  believe  in  thy  heart  that  God  raised  Him

1  I  have  endeavoured  to  give  a  general  view  of  the  lessons  of
the  different  narratives  in  The  Revelation  of  the  Risen  Lord.


Notice  to  the  Third  Edition.  xi

from  the  dead,  thou  shalt  be  saved.  The  acknow-
ledgment of  the  present  sovereignty  of  the  Son
of  Man  in  this  earliest  Creed  (TO  prj^a)  rests  upon
faith  in  the  actual  Resurrection  of  the  Son  of
Man;  and  together  these  two  facts, — Christ's
Sovereignty  and  Christ's  Resurrection — offer  to
men  the  power  and  the  motive  which  are  required
for  a  life  of  sacrifice  and  hope.

This  elementary  conception  of  Christianity  as
involving  a  living  relation  with  One  'who  died
'and  is  alive  again'  may  be  of  service  in  the
prospect  of  immediate  dangers.  For  it  seems
to  be  commonly  admitted  that  once  again  we
are  approaching  a  great  crisis  in  the  history  of
human  society  and  human  thought;  and  many
look  with  doubt,  or  even  with  more  than  doubt,
on  the  adequacy  of  Christian  Theology  to  meet
and  reconcile  the  conflicting  elements  which  are
rising  around  us.  It  is,  indeed,  confessed  that
our  distinctive  Faith — the  Gospel  of  the  Resur-
rection— contained  within  it  the  vital  and  con-
structive forces  which  were  able  to  preserve  the
treasures  of  the  old  world  from  the  shipwreck
of  the  Roman  Empire,  to  organise  and  guide  the


Xll


Notice  to  the  Third  Edition.


fresh  energies  of  the  northern  nations,  to  receive
and  consecrate  the  recovered  heritage  of  Greek
art  and  Greek  speculation;  but  there  is  still
a  vague  fear  that  the  dangers  by  which  we  are
now  menaced  are  greater  than  any  which  have
gone  before,  greater  than  political  dissolution,
greater  than  triumphant  barbarism,  greater  than
paganised  culture.  It  is  perhaps  necessary  that
it  should  be  so.  For  while  it  is  comparatively
easy  to  estimate  the  relative  value  of  forces  from
a  distant  and  quiet  vantage-ground,  all  that
is  seen  through  the  dimness  and  mist  of  the
struggle  appears  gigantic  and  alarming.  Yet
even  at  first  sight  we  must  acknowledge  that
the  past  victories  of  faith  cannot  but  inspire  us
with  confidence  in  entering  on  that  struggle  to
which  we  are  called,  and  at  the  same  time  furnish
us  with  those  lessons  of  experience  which  may
free  us  from  some  natural  fears.  No  one  now
questions  that  Christianity  has  been  made  richer
and  stronger  by  the  loss  of  the  imperial  patronage
with  which  it  was  once  dignified,  by  the  action
of  the  restless  freedom  of  the  Teutonic  spirit
upon  the  personal  apprehension  of  its  teaching,


Notice  to.  the  Third  Edition.  xiii

by  the  calm  light  of  ancient  literature  which
reveals  and  harmonizes  a  manifold  variety  in  the
providential  dealings  of  GOD  with  man.  And  thus
taught  we  can  rejoice  to  believe  that  the  coming
renaissance  of  science  will  minister,  no  less  than
the  past  renaissance  of  culture  has  already  done,
to  the  abiding  efficacy  of  the  Truth  which  has
been  handed  down  to  us.

But  though  we  believe  that  it  will  be  so,  or
rather  because  we  believe  that  it  will  be  so,  it
is  well  for  us  to  prepare  for  the  coming  access  of
light,  to  take  account  of  the  whole  scope  of  the
Truth,  to  consider  what  belongs  to  its  essence
and  what  to  the  form  in  which  it  is  embodied,
to  test  the  various  modes  by  which  men  strive
towards  a  fuller  knowledge  of  it,  to  ascertain
the  relation  which  the  particular  fragment  with
which  we  happen  for  the  time  to  be  busied  bears
to  the  great  sum  to  which  it  contributes.  There
is  a  constant  and  perilous  tendency  in  partial
study,  and  all  study  must  be  more  or  less  partial,
to  exaggerate  details  or  shapes  of  Truth,  to  pursue
exclusively  a  method  legitimate  in  one  region,
and  so  to  apply  it  to  inappropriate  subjects,  to


xiv  Notice  to  the  Third  Edition.

neglect  the  ennobling  inspiration  which  comes
from  a  sense  of  the  magnificence  of  the  whole
work  in  which  we  are  allowed  to  take  some
small  part.  And  this,  which  is  true  elsewhere,
is  most  true  of  that  study,  which  is  of  all  the
widest  and  grandest,  the  pursuit  and  setting  forth
of  the  science  of  Theology,  to  which  all  other
sciences  contribute,  and  in  which  they  find  their
crown  and  consummation, — a  unity  of  idea  ac-
cording to  our  present  forms  of  thought,  and  the
assurance  of  eternal  worth.

In  proportion  therefore  as  the  exposition  of
Christian  Doctrine  becomes  more  complicated,  it
becomes  more  necessary  to  strive  to  keep  ever
present  to  our  minds  the  thought  of  Christ  Himself,
Incarnate,  Crucified,  Raised,  Ascended,  in  whose
Person  and  Work  all  doctrine  is  implicitly  con-
tained. And  the  study  of  the  Bible  and  the  study
of  the  Church  history  are  the  chief  means  through
which  the  Holy  Spirit  opens  out  the  understanding
of  our  personal  faith.  Through  this  double  study
pursued  fearlessly  and  thoroughly,  because  it  is
pursued  in  the  sight  of  GOD  and  in  dependence  on
His  Spirit,  doctrine  and  ritual  first  become  really


Notice  to  the  Third  Edition.  xv

intelligible :  and  though  it  is  a  dangerous  thing
to  use  the  word  'proof  of  subjects  to  which  no
method  of  deduction  or  induction  is  applicable,
this  double  study  brings  that  conviction  of  the
truth  of  Christianity  on  which  the  intellect  as
well  as  the  soul  of  man  can  rest  with  absolute
assurance.  As  we  read  the  Holy  Scriptures  with
more  open  minds,  dissembling  none  of  the  diffi-
culties by  which  they  are  beset,  claiming  for
them  no  immunity  from  the  ordinary  processes  of
criticism,  realising  with  the  most  strenuous  en-
deavour every  detail  of  their  human  character-
istics, we  shall  learn  what  is  meant  by  'living
'  words,'  what  is  meant  by  '  the  inspiration  of  a
'  book.'  As  we  follow  the  progress  of  the  Christian
society  through  conflicts  and  triumphs  and  dis-
asters, through  periods  of  threatening  gloom  and
rekindled  light,  often  checked  and  diverted  but
never  stopped,  often  entangled  and  impeded  by
strange  accretions  but  yet  always  able  to  cast
them  off,  we  shall  feel  that  there  is  in  it  a  power
greater  than  that  of  man.  Such  inquiries,  so  far
as  they  are  undertaken  in  fellowship  with  Christ,
will  enable  us  to  stand  in  a  living  relationship


xvi  Notice  to  the  Third  Edition.

with  prophets  and  apostles  and  confessors,  so  that
their  words  will  come  to  us  not  as  a  tradition  or
a  formula,  but  as  fresh  utterances  called  out  by
the  actual  needs  of  men  like  ourselves,  from  the
hearts  of  those  who  sympathised  with  them.  We
shall  find  that  we  are  the  inheritors  of  a  life  and
not  of  a  system,  of  a  life  which  is  a  pledge  of  the
unity  of  all  that  is  seen  and  temporal  with  that
which  is  unseen  and  eternal.

While  therefore  I  do  not  desire  to  dissemble
or  to  exaggerate  the  gravity  and  even  the  strange-
ness of  the  new  trial  of  Faith,  the  occasion  is,
as  I  believe,  more  full  of  hope  than  of  fear.
I  cannot  doubt  what  the  Church  of  England  may
do,  within  whose  reach  are  placed  the  three  great
springs  of  power  which  have  been  given  separately
to  other  Churches,  the  simplicity  of  a  pure  creed,
the  strength  of  a  continuous  organisation,  the
freedom  of  personal  faith.  I  cannot  doubt  what
our  own  University  may  do,  in  which  a  grave  and
sober  intellectual  discipline  prepares  men  for
patient  criticism  and  large-minded  research.  But
still  the  time  of  labour  is  short,  and  if  we  waste
it  there  appears  to  be  no  further  prospect  that


-     Notice  to  the  Third  Edition.  xvii

the  work  to  which  we  are  called  will  be  hereafter
accomplished.

But  it  cannot  be  needful  to  dwell  on  the
possibility  of  this  most  disastrous  failure.  The
symptoms  of  dissension  and  confusion  and  doubt
among  us  are  rather  indications  of  the  restless
unsatisfied  energy  of  newly  awakened  life  than
warnings  of  decay  and  dissolution.  We  are,  in-
deed, forced  to  confess  that  we  have  not  yet
shewn  practically  what  Theology  is,  what  the
Church  is,  what  doctrine  is.  We  have  allowed
questions  of  social  and  national  right  to  be  dis-
cussed without  reference  to  that  infinite  Truth
which  though  above  our  grasp  is  yet  a  light  by
which  we  can  guide  our  course.  We  have  stood
as  Christians  so  far  aloof  from  secular  speculation
that  we  have  almost  forgotten  that  it  must  be
through  these  lower  studies  that  our  apprehen-
sion of  our  own  unchanging  message  is  advanced.
We  have  so  persistently  dissembled  the  power
of  the  Gospel — the  historical  reconciliation  of
GOD  with  the  world  and  man — that  it  is  pardon-
able if  those  who  judge  of  it  by  us  should  doubt
whether  it  is  anything  more  efficacious  and  in-


xviii  Notice  to  the  Third  Edition.

spiring  than  the  pathetic  guesses  which  adorn  the
writings  of  philosophy.  But  while  we  deplore
our  faithlessness  we  can  rise  out  of  it.  And  this
we  must  do,  if  once  again  we  see  Christ  as  the
ascended  Lord,  and  let  the  light  of  His  glorious
Person  fall  upon  our  life  and  upon  all  life.

B.  F.  W.

TBINITY  COLLEGE,
Feb.  23,  1874.


PREFACE.


OMOAon-ICHC    TO    f>HMA  €N    TCi    CTOMATI   COY  OTI

Kypioc  MHCOYC    KAI   nicTeycHC   CN    TH   KApAiA  coy  OTI

6    060C    AyTON     HfeipeN    €K    NGKpWN,    C000HCH.


present  Essay  is  an  endeavour  to  consider
some  of  the  elementary  truths  of  Christianity
as  a  miraculous  Revelation  from  the  side  of  His-
tory and  Reason.  There  seems  to  be  a  growing
impression,  for  it  is  too  vague  to  be  called  a  belief,
that  such  a  fact  as  the  Resurrection  cannot  be
brought  into  harmony  with  what  we  see  of  the
life  of  the  world  or  what  we  feel  of  the  laws  of
individual  thought.  The  opponents  of  Christi-
anity tacitly  assume  that  a  miracle  must  be  ex-
plained away  ;  and  its  defenders  neglect  to  notice
the  manifold  lines  of  culture  and  thought  which
converge  towards  the  central  lessons  of  the  Gos-
pel and  again  start  from  them  with  the  promise
of  richer  fruitfuliiess.  If  the  arguments  which


xx  Preface.

are  here  adduced  are  valid  they  -will  go  far  to
prove  that  the  Resurrection,  with  all  that  it  in-
cludes, is  the  key  to  the  history  of  man,  and  the
complement  of  reason.  At  least  they  will  shew
that  the  supposed  incompatibility  of  a  devout  be-
lief in  the  Life  of  Christ  with  a  broad  view  of  the
course  of  human  progress  and  a  frank  trust  in  the
laws  of  our  own  minds,  is  wholly  imaginary.  In-
deed it  is  riot  too  much  to  assert  that  the  fact  of
the  Resurrection  (as  the  typical  miracle  of  the
Gospel)  becomes  more  natural  as  we  take  a  more
comprehensive  view  of  history,  and  more  harmo-
nious with  reason  as  we  interrogate  our  instincts
more  closely.  A  conviction  of  the  certainty  of  the
facts  of  the  Gospel  seems  to  be  best  gained  either
by  the  most  general  or  by  the  most  personal  view
of  their  import.  They  fill  up  the  most  critical
place  in  the  great  record  of  the  progress  of  man-
kind; and  they  satisfy  wants  which  each  man  feels
for  himself.  Christianity  has  many  sides;  and
those  are  by  no  means  the  least  noble  which  are
thus  opened  to  the  student  of  life  and  thought.

The  object  which  I  proposed  to  myself  neces-
sarily involved  a  mode  of  treatment  wholly  un-


Preface.  xxi

theological.  Many  topics  consequently  are  dealt
with  otherwise  than  they  would  be  dealt  with  in  a
doctrinal  exposition ;  and  many  are  wholly  omitted
which  would  have  found  a  place  in  such  a  work.
But  while  I  have  endeavoured  to  avoid  technical
language,  I  trust  that  no  word  in  the  Essay  will
be  found  at  variance  with  the  fulness  of  Catholic
truth.

He  who  has  long  pondered  over  a  train  of  rea-
soning becomes  unable  to  detect  its  weak  points.
It  is  so,  I  am  conscious,  with  what  I  now  offer  to
the  criticism  of  others.  But  the  only  desire  which
he  can  have  who  writes  on  such  a  subject  must
be  to  learn  the  truth  fully  that  in  turn  he  may
speak  it.  The  questions  which  are  raised  are
momentous  and  personal.  If  we  believe  that  the
answers  which  I  have  given  are  true  or  like  the
truth,  our  modes  of  thought  and  our  lives  must
bear  witness  to  our  Faith.

And  it  seems  impossible  not  to  acknowledge
that  the  recognition  of  the  Resurrection  as  a  fact
which  has  moulded  the  thoughts  of  Christians  and
yet  retains  the  fulness  of  its  vital  power,  is  less
spontaneous  and  instinctive  among  us  than  it
w.  R.  c


xxii  Preface.

ought  to  be  in  a  Christian  age.  Nay,  more,  its
teachings  are  not  so  much  neglected  as  absolutely
unperceived  in  popular  estimates  of  what  Christi-
anity claims  to  be  and  is.  Two  passages  from
recent  works,  which  have  perhaps  nothing  else  in
common,  will  illustrate  my  meaning.  '  There  is
'  no  hope,'  we  are  told,  '  of  a  good  understanding
'  with  Orientals  [i.e.  Muslims]  until  Western  Chris-
'tians  can  bring  themselves  to  recognise  what
'there  is  of  common  faith  contained  in  the  two
'  religions ;  the  real  difference  consists  in  all  the
'  class  of  notions  and  feelings  (very  important  ones
'no  doubt)  which  we  derive  not  from  the  Gospels
'  but  from  Greece  and  Rome,  and  which  are  alto-
'  gether  wanting  here  [in  the  East].'  And  again  :
'  Christian  morality  (so  called)  has  all  the  charac-
'  ters  of  a  re-action ;  it  is,  in  great  part,  a  protest
'against  Paganism.  Its  ideal  is  negative  rather
'  than  positive :  passive  rather  than  active :  Inno-
'  cence  rather  than  Nobleness:  Abstinence  from
'  Evil  rather  than  energetic  Pursuit  of  Good;  in  its
'  precepts  (as  has  been  well  said)  "  thou  shalt  not"

'predominates  unduly  over  "thou  shalt"

'  It  holds  out  the  hope  of  heaven  and  the  threat  of


Preface.  xxiii

'  hell  as  the  appointed  and  appropriate  motives  to

'a  virtuous  life Even  in  the  morality  of  pri-

'  vate  life,  whatever  exists  of  magnanimity,  high-
'  mindedness,  personal  dignity,  even  the  sense  of
'  honour,  is  derived  from  the  purely  human,  not  the
'  religious  part  of  our  education,  and  never  could
'  have  grown  out  of  a  standard  of  ethics  in  which
'  the  only  worth,  professedly  recognised,  is  that  of
'obedience.'  Now,  apart  from  all  other  criticism,
to  which  these  statements  lie  open,  it  is  not  too
much  to  say  that  they  absolutely  could  not  have
been  written  if  their  authors  had  realised  that
Christianity  is  emphatically  the  Gospel  of  the
Resurrection,  in  which  fact  lies  a  spring  of  human
dignity  and  social  fellowship  infinitely  deeper  and
fuller  than  anything  which  was  anticipated  in
classical  teaching.

During  the  passage  of  the  Essay  through  the
press  I  have  been  indebted  to  many  friends,  and
especially  to  one,  for  important  suggestions  and
criticisms.  Of  some  I  have  been  able  to  make
use :  others,  if  an  opportunity  be  given  me,  I  shall
hope  to  use  hereafter ;  for  all  I  render  them  my
sincere  thanks.  And  the  deepest  obligation  which

c2


xxiv  Preface.

any  reader  can  confer  upon  me  will  be  to  point  out
whatever  seems  obscure  or  faulty  or  erroneous  in
what  is  here  advanced.  For  writer  and  for  reader
Truth  is  the  common  aim.  The  subject  is  not  a
vain  thing  for  us :  it  is  our  life.

B.  F.  W.

CAMBRIDGE,

Dec.  Wth,  1865.


NOTICE   TO   THE   SECOND   EDITION.

TT)Y  the  kindness  of  many  old  and  some  new
friends  I  have  been  enabled  to  correct  and
modify  and  supplement  many  of  the  details  in
my  original  Essay ;  but  a  careful  and  (as  I  trust)
impartial  review  suggests  to  me  no  change  in  the
main  argument.  Indeed  every  symptom  of  the
theological  controversies  of  our  own  day  points
most  distinctly  to  the  paramount  necessity  of  a
historical  appreciation  of  the  origin  and  develop-
ment of  the  Church  as  the  key  to  the  wider  ques-
tions which  are  opening  before  us.  The  Epistle
to  the  Ephesians  and  the  writings  of  St  John
contain  in  a  divine  commentary  on  the  Resurrec-
tion, of  which  Christian  history  is  the  gradual  and
partial  fulfilment,  the  complete  solution  of  the
greatest  problems  to  which  the  thoughts  of  men
are  now  being  turned,  the  Solidarity  of  Humanity
and  the  relation  of  our  World  to  the  whole  Kosmos.


xxvi  Notice  to  the  Second  Edition.

If  my  leisure  and  health  had  allowed  me,
I  should  have  added  a  final  chapter  on  the  Re-
surrection and  the  World,  which  has  for  some  time
been  drawn  up  in  outline.  In  this  it  would  have
been  necessary  to  take  account  of  the  '  Positive
'Religion'  of  M.  Comte,  which  in  many  of  its
characteristic  dogmas  appears  to  cast  unexpected
light  upon  neglected  Christian  Truths.  The
system  offers  in  fact  a  very  noble,  though  a  very
partial,  view  of  Christianity  in  its  political  and
social  aspects,  but  without  the  one  essential  found-
ation of  a  historic  CHRIST1.

It  may  perhaps  be  worth  while  to  state  that
the  sketch  of  the  Essay  was  made  many  years  ago
and  that  it  was  written  in  1864  and  printed  in
the  early  part  of  1865,  though  it  was  not  pub-
lished till  1866.  I  cannot  therefore  take  to  my-
self the  credit  which  a  friendly  critic  gave  me  of
'  popularising '  arguments  on  miracles  which  were
in  time  subsequent  to  my  own  and  wholly  in-
dependent of  them.  The  coincidence  of  reason-
ing, if  it  exists,  as  I  take  for  granted,  is  most

1  [I  have  now  added  as  an  Appendix  an  Essay  which  marks
what  appear  to  me  to  be  the  chief  points  for  consideration
under  this  head.  1874.]


Notice  to  the  Second  Edition.         xxvii

satisfactory,  though  practically  I  believe  that  there
can  be  little  difference  of  opinion  on  this  subject
between  those  who  will  take  the  trouble  to  think
it  out  in  all  its  cardinal  bearings.

But  all  speculation  leaves  the  profound  con-
viction that  life  is  stronger  than  thought;  and  the
present  season  itself  proclaims  more  eloquently
than  many  words  the  Gospel  of  the  Resurrection,
and,  if  we  are  faithful,  more  convincingly.  If
each  Christian  would  openly  'confess  with  his
'  mouth '  the  truth  which  he  '  believes  in  his
heart,'  the  world  would  gladly  yield  to  the  glori-
ous greeting  of  our  Easter  morning,  '  Christ  is
risen.'

B.  F.  W.

ST  LEONABD'S,
Easter  Eve,  1867.


CONTENTS1.

STATEMENT  OF  THE  QUESTION,     pp.   1-14.

THE  Besurrection  as  the  central  truth  of  Christianity  (§§  1-3)
either  true  or  false :  no  mean  (4).

Morally  a  Eevelation  (5).
Historically  a  Fact  (6).

Uniting    the    objective    and    subjective  elements  of

religion  (7*).

A  religion  of  the  world  necessarily  historical  (8).
The  history  essentially  moral  (9).

Preliminary  questions  (10).

INTRODUCTION.
IDEAS  OF  GOD,   NATURE,  MIRACLES.

pp.    15-54.

The  difficulties  of  Christianity  essentially  included  in  common
life  (§  1).

The  Eesurrection  a  new  fact  (2*),  and  not  an  explanation
of  mysteries  essentially  insoluble  by  us  (3),  which  are
reducible  to  the  final  antithesis  of  finite  and  infinite  (4).

I.     Christianity  assumes  the  existence  of
An  Infinite  Personal  GOD,
A  finite  human  will  (5).
Explanation  of  the  terms  (6).

1  The  numbering  of  the  sections  is  made  continuous,  but  the  new  sec-
tions are  marked  by  an  asterisk.    [Ed.  2.]


xxx  Contents.

Hence  we  gain  some  conceptions  of
(a)    Nature  in  relation  to  GOD  (7).

The  idea  of  Succession  belongs  to  our  apprehension
of  GOD'S  action  and  not  to  His  action  in  itself  (8).

()3)  Laics  of  Nature :  simply  laws  of  human  observation
(9),  which  include  the  operation  of  an  unknown  force
(10),  and  cannot  therefore  be  absolute  (11).

The  generality  of  Laws  decreases  as  the  complexity  of
their  subjects  increases  (12*) ;  knowledge  complete  as
the  subject  of  it  is  limited  (13*).

Indeterminate  powers  in  Nature  (14,  15).

II.     Christianity  claims  to  be  miraculous  (16).
The  idea  of  a  miracle  (17).

A  miracle  not  impossible  (18),
nor  unnatural  (19).

What  natural  explanations  must  be  avoided  (20*).
(a)    In  relation  to  GOD

A  miracle  not  an  afterthought  (21),

nor  due  to  a  material  cause  (22).

(ft)     In  relation  to  man

A  miracle  generally  involves  an  indeterminate  element

(23),
and  is  predominantly  subject  to  moral  conditions  (24).

Why  a  scientific  age  is  incredulous  of  miracles  (25),
though  Science  and  Theology  can  never  meet  (26*).

Theology  the  highest  member  in  the  Hierarchy  of
Sciences  (27*).

Instinct  is  not  conquered  by  science  (28).
Miraculous  records  not  antecedently  incredible  (30).
The  alternative  (31).


Contents.  xxxi

CHAPTER   I.

THE  RESURRECTION   AND   HISTORY.

pp.  55-137.

Christianity  claims  to  restore  harmony  to  all  creation  (§  1).
A  historical  Progress  observable  in  the  physical  (2,  3)  and  moral
worlds  (4,  5),

with  which  Christianity  is  intimately  connected  (6),  accord-
ing to  the  teaching  of  the  Apostles  (7),  whether  the  ad-
vance was  realised  among  the  Jews  or  Gentiles  (8).
And  Christianity  itself  is  a  history  (9),  and  has  been  deve-
loped historically  (10).
In  this  lies  its  distinguishing  characteristic  (11),  which

centres  in  faith  in  the  Person  of  Christ  (12).
If  therefore  the  circumstances  of  its  origin  were  unique,  so
also  may  have  been  the  phenomena  which  it  includes
(13-15).

I.     Christianity  in  connexion  with  Universal  History.

(a)     The  relation   of   Christianity   to  pre-Christian  his-
tory (16).

(a)  Jewish  History.     Characteristics  of  the  history
of  the  Jews  (17- 20).

(1)  The  discipline  of  Egypt  (21).

Sinai  (22).
The  Conquest  (23).
The  Kingdom  (24,  25).
The  Captivity  (26).
The  Dispersion  (27,  28).

(2)  The  development  of  the  idea  of  a  Deliverer  (29).

The  doctrine  of  Messiah  (30).

The  Word  (31).
Contrast  of  the  two  doctrines  (32).

(b)  Gentile  History  (33).

(1)  Greek  literature  and  thought  (34).

(2)  Roman  statesmanship  and  law  (35).
The  crisis  (36).


xxxii  Contents.

(/3)  The  relation  of  Christianity  to  post- Christian  history  (37).
General  outline  of  its  progress  (38,  39).

(a)  The  Church  of  the  first  centuries.   Orthodox  (40).

(b)  The  Mediaeval  Church.     Catholic  (41).

(c)  The  Church  of  Modern  Europe.  Evangelical  (42).
The  divisions  mark  a  real  but  not  final  advance  (43,  44).

n.     The  special  evidence  for  the  Resurrection  (45).
(a)     The  testimony  of  St  Paul  (46).

Conclusive  as  to  the  universal  and  definitely  ex-
pressed belief  of  Christians,  within  ten  years
afterwards,  that  the  event  was  historically  true
(47-49).

(/3)     The  character  of  the  event

(a)  Excludes  the  possibility  of  delusion  (50).

(b)  Not  anticipated   by  any   popular  belief  among

Greeks  (51*)  or  Jews  (52).

(c)  Contrary  to  the  Messianic   expectations  of  the

Jews  (53),
to  the  ideas  of  the  Apostles  (54).

(7)     The  effects  of  the  event

(a)  On  the  character  of  the  Apostles  (55),

(b)  On  the  Apostolic  view  of  the  Person  of  Christ  (56),

(c)  Especially  on  St  Paul's  teaching  on  the  Death  of

Christ  (57,  58)  and  our  relation  to  Him  (59).

(5)    The  relation  of  the  belief  in  the  event  to  other  parts
of  Christian  doctrine.

The  Return  of  Christ  (60).
The  Holy  Sacraments  (61).
The  Life  of  the  Church  (62*).
Summary  (63).


Contents.  xxxiii

CHAPTER   II.

THE    RESURRECTION   AND    MAN.

pp.    138-190.

The  final  elements  of  every  moral  question  :  GOD,  the  World,
Self  (§  2).

The  result  of  the  suppression  of  any  one  of  these  ele-
ments (3*).

The  individual  '  self  ('  I ')  felt  at  present  to  be  twofold  (4),
and  the  antithesis  which  it  includes  is  essential  to  our
personality  (5).
Hence  arise  the  questions  (6)

I.  Will  our  Personality  he  preserved  after
death  ?

II.  What  is  the  future  relation  of  Self  to
GOD?

III.  What  is  the  relation  of  Self  to  the
World?

I.     Personality,  as  far  as  we  can  see,  depends  upon  the  special
.   limitation  (body)  through  which  the  soul  acts  (7).

(a)     Eeason  can  shew  that  we  survive  death  by  shewing
either  that

(a)  The  soul  will  itself  have  a  personal  existence  ;
or  that

(b)  It  will   act  through  an  organism  corresponding
to  its  present  one.

But  (a)     On  principles  of  Eeason  there  is  no  reason
to  think  that  the  individual  soul  is  personal  (9).

(1)  The  judgment  of  Aristotle  (10,  11).

(2)  The  arguments  adduced  in  support  of
the  belief  apply  to  the  past  as  well  as  to
the  future  (12).

(3)  Plato's  teaching  based  on  instinct  not
reason  (13).


xxxiv  Contents.

(b)  We  have  no  ground  for  supposing  that  the  soul
can  take  to  itself  any  organisation  soever  (14).

Thus  there  remains  a  final  conflict  between  Instinct
and  Beason  as  to  our  future  Personality  (15).

(|8)     The  doctrine  of  the  Kesurrection  preserves  the  idea
of  our  Personality  completely  (16).

This  significance  brought  out  gradually  (17*).

The  Lord's  Body  the  same  (18,  19),

yet  changed  (20,  21).

After  death  the  whole  complex  nature  of  man  is  en-
nobled (22).

II.     The  final  relation  of  man  to  GOD  depends  upon  the  reality
and  issues  of  sin  (23).

(a)     What  reason  teaches  of  sin.

(a)  The  possibility  of  sin  included  in  the  idea  of
a  finite,  free  being  (24).

(b)  Its  realisation  not  required  for  moral  deve-
lopment, though  in  some  forms  it  may  be  sub-
servient to  it  (25-29).

(c)  It  is  indeed  essentially  foreign  to  our  nature,
and  yet  when  once  realised  permanent  in  its
effects  (30-32).

Thus  there  remains  an  Instinct  which  looks  for
forgiveness  of  sin,  and  Beason  which  points
to  the  inexorable  sequence  of  the  results  of
action  (33).

(/3)     The  light  which  the  Resurrection  throws  on  the
forgiveness  of  sin  (34).

In  what  way  the  Lord's  Suffering  and  Triumph
belong  to  us  (35-41).


Contents.  xxxv

III.     The  relation  of  Self  to  the  World.

This  is  indicated  by  the  dignity  assigned  to  the  body
(42),  which  is  the  seed  of  that  which  shall  be  (43).

Effects  of  the  doctrine :

I.  Morally  as  to  the  individual  and  society  (44-46).

II.  Physically  in  relation  to  the  outer  world  (47,  48).
Summary  (49-51).

CHAPTER  III.

THE  RESURRECTION  AND   THE    CHURCH.

pp.  191-247.

The  Resurrection   in  relation  to  the  history  of  the  Church

(§§  1*,  2*).
Various  images  under  which  the  Christian  society  is  described.

(a)    A  Kingdom  (3,  4).

(/3)     A  Temple  (5,  6).

(y)     A  Body  (7).
How  these  images  are  seen  in  the  light  of  the  Resurrection.

(a)     A  spiritual  kingdom :  a  new  heaven  and  a  new
earth  (9,  10).

(/3)    A  structure  reared  through  many  ages  and  hal-
lowed by  One  Spirit  (11).

(7)     The  visible  Body  of  the  Risen  Christ  (12).

Contrast  between  the  fundamental  idea  of  Christianity  as  the
basis  of  a  society  and  those  of

Paganism  (15).
Judaism  (16).

The  principle  of  unity  (18,  19)

illustrated  by  the  Resurrection  (20).

The  principle  of  life  (21).


xxxvi  Contents.

I.  The  essential  unity  of  the  Church  does  not  require  exter-
nal unity  (22,  23),

nor  one  visible  centre  of  authority  such  as  was  for  a  time
established  at  Jerusalem  (24),  till  '  the  end  of  the  world'
(25*),  and  afterwards  at  Eome  (26).

The  extent  of  variation  consistent  with  sub-
stantial unity  not  to  be  determined  ante-
cedently (27) ;
yet  illustrated  by  the  history  of  the  Jewish

Church  (28).

The  admission  of  the  necessity  of  variations
in   the   Church  does   not  sanction   secta-
rianism (29,  30).
We  have  to  deal  with  a  world  in  which  sin  is

realised  (31*).

Progress  itself  implies  antagonism  (32)  and
individuality  (33).

II.  The  essential  unity  of  the  Church  seen  in  its  historic
development  (34,  35).

This  development  one  of  organisation  (36),
not  of  doctrine  absolutely  (37),
corresponding    to    the   general   progress  of
civilisation  (38),  and  the  complexity  of  the
Christian  Body  (39).

Hence  it  includes  many  partial  and  transitional
developments,  which  are  set  aside  when  their
work  is  done  (40).

How  far  this  development  is  due  to  human  imperfec-
tion (41).

Scripture  the  unchanging  test  of  development  (42).
Our  age  presents  an  epitome  of  all  past  ages  (43).
The  function  of  national  Churches  (44*).

Churches  like  nations  '  redeem  each  other'  (45).
Grounds  of  hope  in  the  midst  of  the  contradictions

of  modern  life  (46,  47).
Conclusion  (48).


STATEMENT  OF  THE  QUESTION.

KoXoP  TO  aOXov  Kal  r)  e\7ris  fJ-eydX-rj.

PL  A  TO.

1.      TEAN  PAUL,  in  one  of  his  magnificent     STATE-

I  MENT^

^  Dreams,  has  endeavoured  to  present  QUESTION.
to  the  mind  an  image  of  the  infinite  extent  and
fulness  of  the  Universe.  He  represents  his  own
disembodied  Spirit  as  carried  by  thought  from
system  to  system  through  the  starry  skies  under
the  conduct  of  some  Angel  of  light.  Wearied  at
length  and  bowed  down  with  the  overwhelming
sense  of  his  littleness  as  he  traverses  the  desolate
intervals  between  world  and  world,  he  prays  that
he  may  go  no  further:  'I  am  lonely  in  creation;
'  lonelier  in  these  wastes.  The  full  world  is  great ;
'  but  Vacancy  is  greater.'  And  the  answer  came  :
'  In  the  sight  of  GOD  there  is  no  Vacancy.  Even
'  now,  O  child  of  man,  let  thy  quickened  eye  be-
'  hold,  and  thy  dreaming  heart  embrace  the  depths
'  of  Being  which  are  around  thee.'  Then  his  eye
was  opened  and  a  sea  of  light  filled  all  the  spaces
which  had  seemed  desolate  before,  and  his  heart
w.  R.  1


2  The  Resurrection  is  the

STATE-     felt  the  presence  of  an  unspeakable  power,  swell-
MENT  .

QUESTK?N.  mg   m    varied    forms    of    existence    around    him.

Suns  and  planets  were  seen  to  float  as  mere
specks  in  the  vast  ocean  of  life  which  was  re-
vealed to  him.  For  a  time  he  was  conscious  of
no  pain.  Immeasurable  joy  and  thanksgiving
filled  his  soul.  But  in  this  glorious  splendour  his
guide  had  vanished.  He  was  alone  in  the  midst
of  life,  and  he  yearned  for  some  companionship.
'Then  there  came  sailing  onwards,'  he  continues,
'  from  the  depth,  through  the  galaxies  of  stars,  a
'  dark  globe  along  the  sea  of  light ;  and  a  human
'  form,  as  a  child,  stood  upon  it,  which  neither
'  changed  nor  yet  grew  greater  as  it  drew  near.
'  At  last  I  recognised  our  Earth  before  me,  and  on
'  it  the  Child  JESUS,  and  He  looked  upon  me  with
'a  look  so  bright  and  gentle  and  loving,  that  I
'  awoke  for  love  and  joy.'

2.  The  thought  which  inspires  this  grand
vision  is  that  which  I  now  wish  to  develope  and
confirm.  It  is  my  object  to  shew  that  a  belief  in
the  Resurrection  of  our  Lord  is  not  indeed  the
solution  (for  that  we  cannot  gain),  but  the  illu-
mination of  the  mysteries  of  life :  that  in  this
fact  the  apparent  contradictions  of  the  immensity
and  insignificance  of  the  individual  are  harmo-
nized: that  in  this  lies  an  end  to  which  pro-


central  Truth  of  Christianity.  3

Christian  history  converged,  a  spring  from  which     STATE-

0  .  MKNT

post-Christian  history  flows:  that  in  this  man  QUESTION.
finds  the  only  perfect  consecration  of  his  entire
nature :  that  in  this  there  is  contained  a  promise
for  the  future  which  removes,  as  far  as  may  be,
the  sense  of  isolation  which  belongs  to  our  finite
nature,  and  unites  our  world  again  to  the  absolute
and  eternal :  that  in  this,  to  sum  up  all  briefly,
we  may  contemplate  Christianity  in  relation  to
history,  to  man,  and  to  the  future,  not  as  a  vague
idea,  or  as  a  set  of  dogmas,  or  even  as  a  system,
but  as  the  witness  to  actual  events,  in  the  sub-
stantial reality  of  which  lies  all  its  power  and  all
its  hope.

3.  At  the  outset  it  is  important  to  define  the
field  within  which  the  foundation  of  our  inquiry
lies,  and  to  close  it  within  the  narrowest  limits.
It  includes  only  the  Cross  and  the  Sepulchre.
It  is  open  to  the  full  light  of  day.  The  Death,
the  Burial,  and  the  Resurrection  of  Christ,  claim
to  be  facts  exactly  in  the  same  sense,  to  be  sup-
ported by  evidence  essentially  identical  in  kind,
and  to  be  bound  together  indissolubly  as  the
groundwork  of  the  Christian  Faith.  If  they  are
true,  then  they  will  be  seen  to  form  the  centre
round  which  other  truths  group  themselves,  not
less  real,  nor  less  significant,  though  they  are  not

1—2


4  The  Resurrection

STATE-    equally   capable   of  being   directly   subjected   to

QUESTION,  historical  tests.     If  they  are  not  true,  then  '  is  our

'  faith  vain/     Christianity  is  a  name  and  nothing

more,  a  sentiment,  an  aspiration,  the  expression

and  not  the  satisfaction  of  human  need.

4.  The  natural  indistinctness  of  common  lan-
guage leaves  room  for  a  vague  impression  that
in  this  case  there  is  some  mean  between  truth
and  falsehood :  that  though  the  Resurrection
was  not  a  fact  (as  the  Crucifixion  was  a  fact),
yet  it  was  something  more  than  a  fiction :  that
it  expressed  (it  may  be)  an  intuition  or  a  divine
belief.  Yet  it  is  obvious  that  the  power  of  the
Resurrection,  as  the  ground  of  religious  hope,  lies
in  the  very  circumstance  that  the  event  which
changed  the  whole  character  of  the  disciples  was
external  to  them,  independent  of  them,  unex-
pected by  them.  We  are  speaking  here,  of  course,
of  things  as  they  present  themselves  to  the  senses,
and  in  this  light  the  Resurrection  claims  to  have
been  so  far  a  fact  of  the  same  order  as  the  Burial
of  the  Lord.  Its  objectivity  is  essential  to  its  sig-
nificance. A  conviction  that  a  particular  person
had  risen  again,  when  he  had  not,  is  simply  false,
however  it  may  have  been  produced.  And  if  the
conviction  embodies  itself  in  a  circumstantial
narrative  of  facts  intended  to  establish  the  imagi-


true  or  false :   no  mean.  5

nary  event,  the  narrative  is  simply  a  falsehood  and     STATE-

J  r  J  MENT

nothing  more.  There  are  cases,  as,  for  example,
in  the  description  of  the  tumult  of  a  battle,  where
fictitious  or  unreal  details  convey  a  relatively  true
idea  of  the  whole.  It  is  obviously  impossible
either  to  record  or  to  apprehend  the  multitudi-
nous phases  of  action  which  go  to  fill  up  a  com-
plicated and  changing  scene ;  and  the  genius  of
an  artist  may  be  able  to  convey  to  others  the
reality  which  he  has  himself  grasped  through  re-
presentative incidents  moulded  to  his  purpose.  It
might  be  so,  within  certain  limits,  with  the  details
of  the  Resurrection.  But  '  if  Christ  be  not  risen,'
it  is  the  whole  and  not  the  details  which,  on
such  a  supposition,  is  imaginary.  The  Resur-
rection then  is  either  a  fact  in  itself  wholly  in-
dependent of  those  who  were  witnesses  to  it,  or
it  is  a  fiction — it  matters  not  whether  designed
or  undesigned — on  which  no  belief  can  be  found-
ed. It  is  a  real  link  between  the  seen  and  the
unseen  worlds,  or  it  is  at  best  the  expression  of
a  human  instinct.  Christ  has  escaped  from  the
corruption  of  death ;  or  men,  as  far  as  the  future
is  concerned,  are  exactly  where  they  were  before
He  came.  Whatever  may  be  the  civilizing  power
of  Christian  morality,  it  can  throw  no  light  upon
the  grave.  If  the  Resurrection  be  not  true  in
the  same  sense  in  which  the  Passion  is  true,  then


6  The  Resurrection

STATE-     Death  still  remains  the  great  conqueror.     As  far

MENT

UESTION,  as  all  experience  goes,  no  pledge  has  been  given
to  us  of  his  defeat.  A  splendid  guess,  an  inex-
tinguishable desire  alone  have  sought  to  pierce
the  darkness  beyond  the  tomb,  if  JESUS  has  not
(as  we  believe)  borne  our  human  nature  into  the
presence  of  GOD.

5.  When  once  we  grasp  clearly  the  momen-
tous interests  which  are  involved  in  the  belief  in
the  Resurrection,  we  shall  be  prepared  to  under-
stand how  it  formed  the  central  point  of  the
Apostolic  teaching ;  and  yet  more  than  this,  how
the  event  itself  is  the  central  point  of  history,
primarily  of  religious  history,  and  then  of  civil
history  of  which  that  is  the  soul.  It  often  seems
indeed  as  if  we  do  not  realise  the  vastness  of  the
consequences  which  it  brings.  An  influential
Christian  teacher  has  said  that  the  Resurrection
belongs  to  the  teaching  on  Scripture  rather  than
to  the  teaching  on  the  Person  of  Christ,  forgetting
that  faith  in  Christ  as  the  Saviour,  so  far  as  this
was  a  Gospel  for  the  world,  did  not  precede
but  follow  it.  Even  those  who  hold  most  firmly
to  a  faith  in  the  Resurrection  are  tempted  to
regard  it  as  a  doctrine  rather  than  as  a  fact,  as  an
article  of  belief  rather  than  as  a  sensible  ground
of  hope.  Gradually  we  have  been  led  to  dissociate


morally  a  Revelation.  7

faith   in  the  resurrection  of  the  body  from   the     STATE-

MENT

actual  Resurrection  of  Christ,  which  is  the  earnest  QUESTKMI
of  it.  And  not  unfrequently  we  substitute  for
the  fulness  of  the  Christian  creed  the  purely
philosophic  conception  of  an  immortality  of  the
soul,  which  surrenders,  as  we  shall  see  hereafter,
the  idea  of  the  continuance  of  our  complete  per-
sonal existence.  But  according  to  the  divine
instinct  of  the  first  age,  the  message  of  the
Resurrection  sums  up  in  one  fact  the  teaching  of
the  Gospel.  It  is  the  one  central  link  between
the  seen  and  the  unseen.  We  cannot  allow  our
thoughts  to  be  vague  or  undecided  upon  it  with
impunity.  We  must  place  it  in  the  very  front  of
our  confession,  with  all  that  it  includes,  or  we
must  be  prepared  to  lay  aside  the  Christian  name.
Even  in  its  ethical  aspect  Christianity  does  not
offer  a  system  of  morality,  but  a  universal  principle
of  morality  which  springs  out  of  the  Resurrection.
The  elements  of  dogma  and  morality  are  indeed
inseparably  united  in  the  Resurrection  of  Christ ;
for  the  same  fact  which  reveals  the  glory  of  the
Lord,  reveals  at  the  same  time  the  destiny  of  man
and  the  permanence  of  all  that  goes  to  make  up
the  fulness  of  human  life.  If  the  Resurrection  be
not  true,  the  basis  of  Christian  morality,  no  less
than  the  basis  of  Christian  theology,  is  gone.  The
issue  cannot  be  stated  too  broadly.  We  are  not


8  The  Resurrection  as  a  fact

STATE-     Christians  unless  we  are  clear  in  our  confession  on

MKNT^

QUESTION,  this  point.  To  preach  the  fact  of  Resurrection
was  the  first  function  of  the  Evangelists ;  to
embody  the  doctrine  of  the  Resurrection  is  the
great  office  of  the  Church ;  to  learn  the  meaning
of  the  Resurrection  is  the  task  not  of  one  age
only,  but  of  all.  Yet  there  seem  to  be  times
when  the  truth  has  a  special  significance :  times,
like  our  own,  when  the  spirit  of  material  progress
tends  to  confine  the  thoughts  of  men  within  the
limits  of  its  own  domain ;  when  we  are  in  constant
danger  of  forgetting  the  larger  relationships  of
human  existence,  because  we  find  within  us  and
around  us  enough  to  distract  and  occupy  our
thoughts ;  when  the  sense  of  the  infinite  vastness
(so  to  speak)  of  our  present  finite  being  turns  the
soul  away  from  its  natural  aspirations  towards  the
absolute  and  the  unseen.

6.  This  is  one  aspect  of  our  subject.  The
Resurrection  is  a  revelation,  so  far  as  such  a
revelation  is  possible,  of  the  spiritual  world  and
of  our  own  connexion  with  it.  But  it  has  also
another  aspect  as  a  fact  in  the  common  history
of  the  world.  Its  essentially  objective  character
is  not  less  important  than  its  divine  message.
For  we  may  notice  that  a  religion  which  is  to
move  the  world  must  be  based  on  a  history.


the  basis  of  Christianity.  9

A  religion  drawn  solely  from  the  individual  con-     STATE-

MKNT

sciousness  of  man  can  only  reflect  a  particular
form  of  intellectual  development.  Its  influence
is  limited  by  the  mould  in  which  it  is  cast.  Its
applicability  is  confined  to  those  who  have  at-
tained to  a  special  culture.  Even  to  the  last  it
is  essentially  of  the  mind  and  not  of  the  heart
or  of  the  life.  This  is  obvious  equally  from  the
record  of  the  speculations  on  Natural  Theology,
and  from  the  history  of  all  those  religions  which
have  had  any  power  in  the  world.  A  subjective
religion  brings  with  it  no  element  of  progress
and  cannot  lift  man  out  of  himself.  A  historical
revelation  alone  can  present  GOD  as  an  object  of
personal  love.  The  external  world  answering  to
human  instinct  suggests  the  conception  of  His
eternal  power,  but  offers  nothing  which  justifies
in  us  the  confidence  of  'sons.'  Man  is  but  one
of  the  many  elements  of  creation  and  cannot
arrogate  to  himself  any  special  relationship  with
his  Maker.  Pure  Theism  is  unable  to  form  a
living  religion.  Mahommedanism  lost  all  reli-
gious power  in  a  few  generations.  Judaism  sur-
vived for  fifteen  centuries  every  form  of  assault
in  virtue  of  the  records  of  a  past  deliverance  on
which  it  was  based,  and  the  hope  of  a  future
Deliverer  which  it  included.


10   The  fact  and  the  idea  of  the  Resurrection

STATE-  7.     Briefly   the    Gospel   of   the   Resurrection

MKNT  J  L

IHRSTHW  harmonizes  in  itself  the  objective  and  subjective

JUCjOl  1UJN.  J  J

elements  of  religion.  On  the  one  hand  it  reposes
on  a  fact  which  however  unique  yet  claims  to  be-
long to  the  circle  of  human  experience.  On  the
other  hand  the  fact  is  such  that  its  personal
appropriation  offers  the  widest  scope  for  the  ener-
gies of  spiritual  life.  The  Resurrection  is  suffi-
ciently definite  to  take  religion  out  of  the  domain
of  caprice  and  rest  its  hopes  upon  a  foundation
external  to  the  believer ;  and  it  is  so  far-reaching
in  its  ultimate  significance  as  to  present  itself  to
every  age  and  every  soul  with  a  fresh  power.  It
gives  faith  a  firm  standing  ground  in  history,  and
at  the  same  time  opens  a  boundless  vision  of  the
future  development  of  our  present  powers.  It
brings  down  dogma  to  earth  and  then  vindicates
the  infinitude  of  the  issues  of  temporal  existence.
By  the  definiteness  of  its  actual  occurrence  it  gives
dignity  to  all  human  action :  by  the  universality
of  its  import  it  lifts  the  thoughts  of  the  believer
from  the  man  to  the  race  and  to  the  world.  It
stands,  so  to  speak,  midway  between  the  seen  and
the  unseen:  it  belongs  equally  to  the  spiritual
and  to  the  material  order,  and  it  reconciles  both :
it  gives  immediate  reality  to  the  one  by  the  mani-
festation of  the  Son  of  man  who  '  came  forth  from
the  Father  and  went  to  the  Father ;'  it  ennobles


equally  necessary  to  Christianity.  11

the  other  by  the  revelation  of  a  divine  presence     STATE-

J  MENT

in  the  world  according  to  His  word,  Who  said, '  Lo,  QUESTION.
I  am  with  you  all  the  days.'  In  both  respects  its
teaching  is  essential  to  Christianity.  Exactly  in
proportion  as  it  is  lost  sight  of  in  the  popular
Creed,  doctrine  is  divorced  from  life,  and  the
broad  promises  of  divine  hope  are  lost  in  an
individual  struggle  after  good.

8.  It  is  possible  that  individual  exceptions
may  be  found  to  the  truth  of  these  statements.
Faith  is  indeed  without  question  the  spring  of
all  progressive  or  universal  religion ;  and  the
essence  of  faith  lies  in  the  transference  of  trust
to  something  outside  the  believer.  Yet  on  the
other  hand  some  great  souls  appear  to  have  an
immediate  perception  of  isolated  truths,  so  that
in  their  case  a  thought  becomes  a  distinct  reality,
contemplated,  as  it  were,  apart  from  the  thinker.
For  such  men  faith  in  a  thought  is  possible,  and
is  the  source  of  all  that  approaches  most  nearly
to  a  new  creation  in  human  history.  These  soli-
tary heroes  can  in  some  measure  at  least  live  as
seeing  the  unseen  by  the  force  of  their  innate
power;  but  for  the  mass  faith  needs  some  out-
ward pledge  to  rest  upon,  and  some  outward  fact
to  call  it  into  action.  Exactly  in  proportion  as
the  popular  idea  of  religion  is  separated  from  the


12  The  Resurrection  supported

STATE-  personal  relation  of  the  worshipper  to  the  Deity,
QUESTTON  ^tested  (or  supposed  to  be  attested)  by  historical
manifestations,  the  worship  itself  degenerates  into
a  discipline  or  a  form.  Even  Christianity  is
capable  of  such  a  degradation ;  but  we  need  only
to  go  back  to  the  Evangelists  to  regain  a  pure
conception  of  its  majesty.  As  it  is  seen  in  their
narratives  it  satisfies  equally  the  wants  of  the
few  and  of  the  many ;  and  that  most  signally  in
the  message  of  the  Resurrection,  which  was  the
assurance  of  the  establishment  of  the  kingdom
of  GOD.  The  facts  of  the  visible  Life  of  Christ
are  for  all  time  a  living  Gospel ;  and  the  doctrine
which  they  include  meets  and  carries  forward  the
boldest  speculations  of  philosophy.

9.  For  it  is  evident  that  the  events  recorded
by  the  Evangelists  while  they  are  most  truly  his-
torical are  not  merely  history.  Their  significance
is  not  in  the  past  only  or  even  chiefly.  And  so
also  the  evidence  by  which  they  are  supported  is
not  simply  that  of  direct  testimony.  The  au-
thority of  testimony  is  supplemented  by  that  of
the  instinct1  within  us  which  recognises  that  the

1  The  word  is  open  to  many  objections,  but  I  can  find  no
other  to  express  the  spiritual  impulse  through  which  man's
constitution  expresses  itself,  as  it  is  slowly  trained  by  the
circumstances  of  life.  Experience  shews  that  it  is  as  much  a


by  internal  evidence.  13

idea  of  a  Divine  Revelation  corresponds  with  the     STATE-

r  ME  NT

essential  wants  of  man.  Man  feels  that  he  was
born  for  GOD,  and  looks  for  some  sign  to  assure
him  of  the  reality  of  a  fellowship  with  the  unseen.
The  feeling  will  shew  itself  in  the  course  of  the
whole  education  of  humanity  in  many  ways,  but
it  is  not  without  its  appropriate  discipline.  A
Divine  Revelation  must  from  the  very  nature  of
the  case  tend  to  satisfy  the  loftiest  conception
which  can  be  formed  of  man's  destiny.  If  it  does
not  do  so,  it  is  condemned  by  the  instinct  which
looks  for  it.  Thus  in  discussing  the  truth  of  the
Resurrection  as  a  fact  it  is  impossible  not  to  take
into  consideration  its  moral  significance.  Evidence
which  would  be  felt  to  be  insufficient  to  prove  the
occurrence  of  a  prodigy,  may  be  amply  sufficient
to  establish  the  objective  reality  of  a  fact  which  is
found  to  answer  to  the  circumstances  or  condi-
tions of  our  nature.  Nay  more,  it  may  be  af-
firmed that  no  external  evidence  alone  could
ever  establish  more  than  an  '  otiose '  belief  in
the  occurrence  of  an  isolated  or  seemingly  ar-
bitrary miracle  in  a  distant  age,  while  the
combination  of  external  and  internal  evidence
is  capable  of  producing  a  measure  of  conviction

part  of  his  nature  to  turn  to  GOD  as  it  is  to  turn  to  the  light.
Reason  and  experience  in  each  case  help  him  to  determine
how  he  shall  best  do  that  which  he  was  made  to  do.


14  Outline  of  the  plan.


STATE-     which    is    only  less    certain    than   an    immediate
MENT  J

OF  THE

QUESTION,


10.  But  in  order  to  estimate  the  spiritual
significance  of  the  Resurrection  we  must  first
take  into  account  the  relation  in  which  it  stands
to  many  elementary  thoughts  which  lie  at  the
very  foundation  of  our  ordinary  life.  Above  all
it  is  necessary  that  we  should  set  down  clearly
what  must  be  taken  for  granted  and  not  proved  :
what  is  the  conception  which  we  form  of  Nature,
and  of  miracles  :  what  are  the  limits  within  which
human  speculation  is  confined.  Till  these  points
are  determined,  as  far  as  they  seem  to  admit  of
determination,  all  further  discussion  must  be
fruitless.  If,  for  example,  a  miracle  is  inherently
incredible,  it  is  idle  to  reason  about  a  fact  which
in  the  end  must  be  explained  away.  If  on  the
other  hand  we  hold  that  miracles  are,  in  certain
cases,  as  credible  as  ordinary  events  generally,  it
is  necessary  that  we  should  shew  how  this  belief
is  reconcileable  with  the  ideas  which  we  entertain
of  an  Infinite  GOD  and  of  the  constancy  of  natural
laws.  These  fundamental  questions  will  form  the
subject  of  the  Introduction  ;  and  afterwards  we
shall  be  in  a  position  to  consider  the  Resurrection
in  itself  and  in  its  application  to  History,  to  the
Individual,  and  to  Society.


INTRODUCTION.

Tpf<f>oi>Tai  TrdvTfS  ol  dvOpwirivot  VO/JLOI  virb  ecos  rov  Otiov.
reei  yap  TOGOVTOV  buttaov  tOeKei  KO.I  e^apKfti  •jrafftv  Kal  irepi-
fTai.

aERACLITUS.


1.     rilHE  simplicity  of  the  Gospel  is  not  due  INTRODUC-

-*-  to  the  absence  of  difficulties,  but  to  the
coincidence  of  the  difficulties  which  it  involves
with  the  inherent  difficulties  of  human  existence,
when  existence  is  taken  as  a  subject  of  specu-
lation. Christianity  does  indeed  involve  many
difficulties,  but  it  does  not  create  them.  The  dif-
ficulties themselves  beset  us  in  our  daily  life  (§3);
but  as  long  as  they  take  a  practical  form,  they
receive  a  practical  answer.  However  arduous  it
may  be  to  form  a  clear  conception  of  responsible
freedom,  we  treat  others  and  ourselves  as  respon-
sible. Christianity,  however,  which  reveals  the
significance  of  life  makes  us  also  feel  its  mysteries.
It  brings  out  what  was  ill-defined  before,  like  the
light  which  does  not  make  the  shadows,  though
they  are  seen  by  contrast  with  it.  The  truth


16  The  Resurrection  a  new  Fact.

INTRODUC-  involved  in  this  distinction  is  of  vital  importance
TION.

towards  the  understanding  of  its  claims.  We  are
so  constituted  that  we  must  look  beyond  and
beneath  the  phenomena  of  physical  life.  We
cannot  acquiesce  in  ignorance ;  and  that  religion
necessarily  claims  our  allegiance  which  answers
most  completely  to  all  the  conditions  of  our  na-
ture. If  it  could  be  shewn  that  Christianity  in-
troduces some  idea  into  life  wholly  alien  from  its
common  tenor,  or  assumes  principles  which  we  do
not  act  upon,  or  asserts  consequences  at  variance
with  the  natural  reason  of  men,  we  might  pause
before  receiving  its  teaching.  But  if  on  the  con-
trary its  mysteries  rest  on  fundamental  mysteries
of  our  finite  being ;  if  it  takes  its  stand  on  human
nature  as  it  is  and  interprets  its  aspirations ;  if  it
carries  on  thoughts  of  which  we  feel  the  begin-
nings within  ourselves,  and  opens  gleams  of  hope
where  we  acknowledge  that  our  prospect  is  clouded ;
then  it  cannot  but  be  monstrous  to  reject  it  for
reasons  on  which  we  might  with  equal  justice
declare  life  itself  to  be  impossible.

2.  For  it  is  necessary  to  bear  in  mind  that
the  Resurrection  is  not  primarily  an  explanation
of  existing  phenomena,  growing  out  of  them  or
introduced  to  explain  them,  but  a  new  fact  added
to  the  sum  of  human  experience.  The  fact  may


The  Resurrection  a  new  Fact.  17

prove  to  be  an  explanation  of  mysteries  which  INTRODUC-
are  already  felt,  so  far  as  it  opens  a  way  towards
their  solution  by  bringing  them  into  connexion
with  another  order  of  being,  but  in  itself  it  claims
to  take  its  place  among  the  events  of  human  his-
tory. Like  all  historical  facts  it  differs  from  the
facts  of  physics  as  being  incapable  of  direct  and
present  verification.  And  it  differs  from  all  other
facts  of  history  because  it  is  necessarily  unique.
Yet  it  is  not  therefore  incapable  of  that  kind  of
verification  which  is  appropriate  to  its  peculiar
nature.  Physical  science  deals  with  law  as  uniform
and  consequently  its  results  can  be  tested  at  any
moment.  History  generally  records  the  average
results  of  human  action,  and  its  heroic  passages
are  judged  by  the  tendencies  which  are  observed
towards  similar  displays  of  exceptional  power  in
less  moving  crises  (§  11).  And  so  the  Resurrec-
tion, the  fact  that  Christ  rose  from  the  grave  and
did  not  again  die — the  one  fact  absolutely  un-
paralleled in  itself  and  in  its  circumstances — is  to
be  taken  in  connexion  with  the  whole  course  of
human  life,  and  with  that  instinct  of  immortality
which  from  time  to  time  makes  itself  felt  with  an
overwhelming  power.  Its  verification  lies  in  its
abiding  harmony  with  all  the  progressive  develop-
ments of  man  and  with  each  discovery  which
casts  light  upon  his  destiny.

w.  R.  2


18        The  final  Mysteries  of  Life  remain.
INTRODUC-        3.    It  is  on  this  new  fact  that  Christianity  first

TION.  J

rests  its  claims.  It  asserts  that  the  Resurrection  is
itself  a  Gospel.  For  the  rest  it  makes  no  attempt
to  lessen  or  remove  the  problems  by  which  all  life
is  perplexed.  For  instance,  the  existence  of  mat-
ter, the  relation  of  soul  and  body,  the  existence  of
evil,  existence  absolutely  and  in  time  and  space,
individual  freedom  and  general  laws  of  sequence,
are  all  fundamental  and  final  mysteries  from
which  we  can  never  escape.  They  are  taken  ac-
count of  and  dealt  with  in  the  doctrines  of  Chris-
tianity, but  Christianity  does  not  make  them.  It
will  be  seen  hereafter  how  they  are  dealt  with,
but  for  the  present  it  is  enough  to  notice  that  the
rejection  of  the  mysteries  of  Christianity  will  not
eliminate  the  element  of  mystery  from  life.  We
are  absolutely  unable  to  form  a  conception  of  a
beginning  or  of  an  end  of  things.  The  very  idea
of  life  involves  the  antithesis  of  finite  and  infinite,
and  the  special  difficulties  which  have  been  enu-
merated simply  represent  the  various  forms  which
this  one  fundamental  difficulty  assumes  when  con-
templated in  connexion  with  the  physical  world
or  with  human  action.

4.  This  antithesis  of  the  finite  and  infinite
which  meets  us  as  soon  as  we  lift  our  thoughts
above  single  phenomena  is  the  final  basis  of  all


Fundamental  Assumptions.  19

religion.  It  is  apprehended  more  or  less  sharply  INTRODUC-
in  different  ages  or  races,  but  the  essence  of  wor-
ship even  in  its  lowest  form  necessarily  includes
the  tendency  towards  a  true  perception  of  it.  In
this  respect  Christianity  differs  from  all  other
religions,  not  in  principle,  but  in  virtue  of  the
absolute  clearness  with  which  the  idea  of  the
antithesis  is  laid  down.  The  two  terms  are  re-
garded in  their  most  complete  separation  and  in
'the  fulness  of  time'  they  are  combined  in  one
Person.  But  in  saying  this  we  are  anticipating
what  will  appear  more  naturally  afterwards.  It
is  not  necessary  yet  to  consider  how  Christianity
resolves  or  harmonizes  the  antithesis  on  which  it,
equally  with  all  religions,  is  founded.  That  which
is  essential  to  our  argument  is  that  the  antithesis
itself  is  not  brought  into  being  by  Christianity,
but  is  the  clear  expression  of  that  element  in
man's  nature,  which  has  sought  at  all  times  to
embody  itself  in  religious  thought  and  worship —
in  thought  as  well  as  in  worship :  for  the  mind
which  strives  to  establish  its  own  relation  to  the
unseen  by  the  worship  of  a  GOD,  is  always  led  at
the  same  time  to  ponder  on  the  relation  of  the
World  to  the  same  Power.

5.     Christianity  therefore  as  the  absolute  re-
ligion of  man  assumes  as  its  foundation  the  exist-

2—2


20  Fundamental  Assumptions.

INTROUUC-  ence  of  an  Infinite  Personal  GOD  or  rather  of  a

TION.

Heavenly  Father  of  absolute  power,  justice  and
goodness,  and  a  finite  human  will  (ii.  §  2).  This
antithesis  is  assumed  and  not  proved.  No  ar-
guments can  establish  it.  It  is  a  primary  in-
tuition and  not  a  deduction.  It  is  capable  of
illustration  from  what  we  observe  around  us ;
but  if  either  term  is  denied  no  reasoning  can
establish  its  truth.  Each  man  for  himself  is
supposed  to  be  conscious  of  the  existence  of
GOD  and  of  his  own  existence.  We  can  go  no
further.  If  he  has  not,  or  says  he  has  not
this  consciousness,  he  must  be  regarded  as  one
whose  powers  are  imperfect.  It  would  be  as  vain
to  reason  with  him  on  religion  as  to  reason  on
the  phenomena  of  light  with  a  blind  man.  No
proof  can  establish  the  existence  of  that  within
a  man  of  which  he  alone  has  the  final  cognisance.
Practically  every  one  is  found  to  act  as  if  he
believed  that  he  had  a  will,  and  also  as  if  he  were
justly  accountable  for  his  actions  :  he  is  conscious
of  satisfaction  within  himself,  and  awards  praise
or  blame  to  others ;  but  whether  this  be  univer-
sally true  or  not  is  of  no  real  moment  to  us.  It
is  taken  for  granted  that  religion  is  possible  ;  and
if  so  the  conceptions  which  are  involved  in  the
fundamental  antithesis  on  which  it  reposes  are
also  assumed  to  be  true,  though  they  do  not


Nature  in  relation  to  OOD.  21

admit  of  a  formal  proof.     If  they  are  riot  axioms  INTRODUC-
we  claim  them  as  postulates1.

6.  But  though  we  appeal  to  the  individual
consciousness  for  the  recognition  of  the  truth  of
the  assumptions  which  have  been  made,  the  lan-
guage in  which  one  term  of  the  antithesis  is  ex-
pressed requires  explanation.  We  speak  of  GOD
as  Infinite  and  Personal.  The  epithets  involve
a  contradiction,  and  yet  they  are  both  necessary.
In  fact  the  only  approximately  adequate  concep-
tion which  we  can  form  of  a  Divine  Being  is
under  the  form  of  a  contradiction.  For  us  per-
sonality is  only  the  name  for  special  limitation
exerting  itself  through  will ;  and  will  itself  im-
plies the  idea  of  resistance.  But  as  applied  to
GOD  the  notions  of  limitation  and  resistance  are
excluded  by  the  antithetic  term  infinite2.  For  us

1  It  might  appear  at  first  sight  that  the  Religion  of  M.  Comte,
which  is  a  powerful  reality  for  those  who  hold  it,  is  an  exception
to  the  truth  of  these  statements.     In  fact  it  is  the  strongest
testimony  to  their  necessary  validity.     The  '  Great  Being  '—
the  sum  of  humanity— which  is  the  object  of  worship,  satisfies
the  condition  of  '  Infinity  '  by  embracing  in  itself  all  the  past,
the   present,   and  the  future  in  the  conception  of  the  wor-
shipper :  it  satisfies  the  condition  of  '  Personality '  by  the  con-
cession whereby  each  worshipper  is  encouraged  to  realise  the
whole  by  looking  at  it  as  partially  represented  by  an  indivi-
dual.    On   the  other  hand  M.   Comte   distinctly   recognises
human  freedom  within  certain  (undetermined)  limits.

2  From  this  it  is  evident  how  utterly  false  it  is  to  represent


22  Nature  in

INTRODUC-  again  infinity  excludes  the  conception  of  special
action :  it  belongs  to  the  nature  and  not  to  the
manifestation  of  being.  But  as  applied  to  GOD
it  is  necessarily  connected  with  action  and  with
phenomena,  because  it  is  only  through  these  that
personality,  so  far  as  we  observe  it,  can  shew
itself.  Thus  it  follows  that  by  speaking  of  GOD  as
Infinite  we  simply  mean  that  none  of  the  deduc-
tions which  can  be  drawn  from  corresponding
attributes  or  powers,  or  the  uses  of  power  in  man,
can  be  transferred  to  Him.  It  would  be  false
for  instance  to  argue  from  the  usual  sense  of  the
terms  employed  that  what  He  '  does'  or  '  pur-
poses' is  in  itself  bound  by  time  and  space.  And
on  the  other  hand  by  speaking  of  Him  as  Per-
sonal we  wish  to  express  that  He  rules  and  creates
as  if  it  were  by  will,  with  a  purpose  towards
which  all  things  are  guided.  So  only  can  we
guard  against  the  representation  of  GOD  as  the
Absolute  simply,  whether  the  Absolute  be  re-
garded as  the  Unchangeable  which  lies  beneath
the  changing  phenomena  of  the  world,  or  as  the
sum  of  all  that  'is'.

the  Christian  (theological)  philosophy  of  the  world  as  based  on
the  conception  of  '  a  world  governed  and  created  by  wills  of
which  the  model  is  in  the  human  will.'  For  the  use  of  the
word  'will'  in  such  a  philosophy  is  simply  analogical,  and
checked  at  every  application  by  the  supplementary  idea  of
Infinite  Power.


relation  to  GOD.  23

7.  This  conception  of  the  Divine  Being,  INTRODUC-
which,  it  must  be  remembered,  is  not  peculiar  to
Christianity,  except  in  the  distinctness  of  its  enun-
ciation, clears  the  way  to  our  apprehension  of  the
course  and  phenomena  of  nature.  For  we  can-
not contemplate  nature  apart  from  GOD.  But  it
may  be  said  that  such  a  conception  of  GOD  be-
longs only  to  a  late  age :  that  the  primitive
notions  of  GOD  are  simpler  and  ruder :  that  it
is  unfair  to  claim  as  natural  to  man  thoughts
which  have  a  limited  currency  after  the  lapse  of
incalculable  time.  To  such  an  objection  it  is  suffi-
cient to  reply  that  we  are  in  no  way  concerned
with  the  manner  in  which  the  conception  has  been
fashioned.  The  question  is  whether  man  has
gained  it,  whether  he  was  made  to  gain  it,
whether  it  covers  the  facts  of  his  spiritual  ex-
perience ?  The  child  includes  the  man  poten-
tially ;  and  the  principle  which  holds  true  of  the
development  of  the  individual  holds  true  with
necessary  modifications  of  the  development  of  the
race.  Meanwhile  this  conception  of  GOD  is  as-
sumed, and  we  must  use  it.  Hence  it  is  against
reason  to  press  the  results  of  our  observation
of  phenomena  to  consequences  inconsistent  with
our  conception  of  His  infinite  and  personal
Being.  Two  errors  are  specially  to  be  guarded
against  which  are  most  fruitful  of  fallacious


24           •    Succession  not  true  for  GOD.

INTRODUC-  issues.  The  one  is  the  transference  of  the  phe-
nomena of  succession  and  gradual  growth  and
slow  sequence,  which  -are  necessarily  part  of  our
observation  of  nature,  to  nature  as  the  expression
of  the  Divine  will.  The  other  is  the  supposition
that  'laws'  have  in  themselves  (so  to  speak)  a
motive  force :  that  the  law,  which  declares  the
mode  in  which  phenomena  present  themselves  to
us,  has  some  virtue  by  which  the  phenomena  are
absolutely ;  or,  in  other  words,  that  the  Law  not
only  declares  how  we  see  things,  but  makes  them
such  as  we  see  them.  Each  of  these  misconcep-
tions will  require  to  be  noticed  a  little  more  in
detail.

8.  The  only  idea  which  we  can  form  of
nature,  that  is  of  the  sum  of  all  phenomena,  in
relation  to  an  Infinite  Mind  is  as  one  thought.
For  GOD  all  is  one  and  at  once1.  He  is  cognisant

1  The  reader  will  be  glad  to  dwell  on  the  thought  as  it  is
worked  out  in  Tennyson's  noble  words  :

To  your  question  now,

Which  touches  on  the  workman  and  his  work.
Let  there  be  light  and  there  was  light :    'tis  so ;
For  was,  and  is,  and  will  be,  are  but  is ;
And  all  creation  is  one  act  at  once,
The  birth  of  light :   but  we  that  are  not  all,
As  parts,  can  see  but  parts,  now  this,  now  that,
And  live,  perforce,  from  thought  to  thought,  and  make
One  act  a  phantom  of  succession :   thus
Our  weakness  somehow  shapes  the  shadow,  Time.


Laws  of  Observation.  25

(if  we  may  so  say)  of  things  themselves,  and  not,  INTRODUC-

'  J  '  .  TION.

as  we  naturally  think  and  reason,  of  our  percep-
tions of  them.  He  sees  them  as  they  are  and  not
as  we  observe  them.  Indeed,  if  we  reflect,  there
is  something  strangely  absurd  in  applying  to  the
Divine  Power  conclusions  which  are  based  on
human  apprehensions  of  things.  We  must,  be-
cause we  are  finite,  conceive  of  things  as  hap-
pening in  time ;  and  in  the  same  way  we  must
conceive  of  GOD  as  acting,  whenever  He  acts,
in  time  ;  but  it  is  equally  clear  that  we  must  not
argue  as  if  time  belonged  really  to  the  Divine
relation  to  the  world,  or  as  if  GOD  acted  at  this
time  and  that,  or  at  every  moment,  one  after
another.  Any  conclusion  which  rests  on  this
supposition  as  a  premiss  is  radically  false.  The
statement  that  'Goo  acts'  is  true  at  all  times
in  regard  to  our  human  conception  of  Him.
We  can  say  justly  that  He  acts  now,  that  He
acted  then,  and  that  He  will  act  at  some  future
moment ;  but  when  we  reason  on  the  human
element  in  these  statements,  that  is  on  the  tem-
poral limitations,  it  is  obvious  that  this  process
of  reasoning  can  give  us  no  conclusion  with  re-
gard to  the  action  of  GOD.

9.     Again,  a  'law  of  nature'  can  mean  no-
thing else  than  the  law  of  the  human  apprehen-


26  Laws  presuppose  Force.

INTRODUC-  sion  of  phenomena.  We  are  forced  to  regard
things  under  conditions  of  time  and  space  and
the  like,  and  the  consequence  is  that  phenomena
are  grouped  together  according  to  certain  rules.
We  find  that  for  us  (such  is  the  constitution  of
our  powers)  the  sequence  of  phenomena  is  this
and  not  that.  Partial  sequences  are  compared
and  combined  and  thus  more  general  sequences
are  discovered.  But  however  far  we  may  go  we
never  go  beyond  ourselves.  The  law  at  last  is
a  law  for  men :  its  form  depends  on  limitations
which  are  characteristic  of  men.  We  have  not
the  least  reason  for  supposing  that  it  has  any
absolute  existence.  For  to  say  that  things  when
observed  by  men  will  be  observed  by  them  under
such  and  such  limitations  and  therefore  ac-
cording to  such  and  such  laws,  is  obviously  a
very  different  thing  from  saying  that  such  arid
such  are  the  laws  of  things  in  themselves  and
for  all  intelligent  beings.  And  if  we  know  no-
thing of  the  laws  of  things  in  themselves,  how  can
we  know  anything  of  things  in  relation  to  GOD  ?

10.  From  what  has  been  said  it  is  evident
that  a  law,  which  expresses  nothing  more  than
the  result  of  our  observation  of  phenomena,  cannot
make  phenomena  what  they  are.  It  is  no  expla-
nation of  how  the  phenomena  came  to  be  or  con-


Laws  of  Observation  in  Nature.  27

tinue  to  be.  It  would  have  appeared  to  be  insist-  INXRODUC-
ing  on  a  truism  to  dwell  on  this,  were  it  not  for
the  general  idea  which  seems  to  find  currency,
that  when  a  law  (as  of  gravitation)  is  laid  down
nothing  more  remains  to  be  explained.  The  law
may  afterwards  (it  is  admitted)  be  found  to  be
part  of  one  much  wider  and  more  comprehensive,
but,  as  far  as  it  goes,  this  satisfies  all  our  inqui-
ries. In  reality  it  tells  us  that  something  pro-
duces results  (as  far  as  we  are  concerned)  in  such
and  such  a  way.  But  obviously  if  the  knowledge
were  within  our  reach  our  chief  desire  would  be
to  know  what  produces  the  results  ?  What  brings
about  the  phenomena  according  to  the  law  ?  We
can  shew  that  if  a  body  be  projected  in  a  certain
direction  and  acted  upon  by  a  central  force  vary-
ing in  a  particular  way  it  will  describe  an  orbit
like  that  of  the  earth  round  the  sun.  But  to  go
no  further,  What  projected  the  earth  ?  It  would
be  easy  to  follow  up  this  question  by  others ;  but
this  alone  is  sufficient  to  shew  that  in  the  sim-
plest phenomena  we  are  face  to  face  with  a  power
of  which  observation  can  tell  us  nothing  but  the
fact  of  its  existence.

11.  There  is  then  nothing  absolute  in  laws
of  nature.  They  are  relative  to  man,  and  do
not  explain  either  the  origin  or  the  preservation


28  Laws  of  Observation  in  Nature.

iNTRonuc-  of  things.  It  is  quite  possible  for  us  to  conceive
that  the  unknown  power  through  which  pheno-
mena are  produced  according  to  an  observed  way
might  have  caused  them  to  be  produced  in  an-
other way  wholly  different.  The  belief  in  the
immutability  of  the  observed  law  springs  wholly
from  ourselves,  and  is  simply  a  special  expression
of  the  axiom  that  the  same  power  will  produce
the  same  results  under  the  same  circumstances.
But  we  have  no  right  to  assume  that  the  circum-
stances will  always  be  the  same.  The  range  of
our  observation  is  bounded  within  very  narrow
limits.  And  yet  further  if,  as  we  have  supposed,
the  Divine  thought  of  the  world  leaves  room  for
the  exercise  of  free  human  will,  it  is  antecedently
likely  that  we  should  be  enabled  in  some  way  to
be  made  sensible  of  what  we  call  by  a  figure  the
Divine  will.  We  may  expect  from  time  to  time
in  the  evolution  of  the  whole  scheme  of  creation
to  be  made  aware  of  the  presence  of  a  Personal
Power,  not  by  the  suspension  of  the  laws  of
sequence  which  we  commonly  observe,  but  by
the  action  of  some  new  force.  Or  to  put  the  sub-
ject in  another  light;  as  changed  circumstances
would  lead  to  different  results  under  the  action  of
the  same  power,  so  we  must  allow  that  there  are
many  cases  in  which  the  exertion  of  the  free
human  will  must  modify  not  indeed  the  Divine


Laws  of  Observation  in  Nature.  29

action  in  itself,  but  the  phenomena  in  which  the  IN-HJODUC-
results  of  it  are  presented  to  us.  The  building  of
a  city,  for  example,  which  depends  on  the  free
action  of  individuals,  may  modify  to  an  almost
indefinite  extent  the  physical  character  of  its  im-
mediate neighbourhood,  and  so  more  or  less  of  all
other  districts,  in  a  manner  which  we  can  gene-
rally follow  out;  and  thus  also  we  can  conceive
that  the  natural  (though  unseen)  action  of  GOD
may  make  itself  felt  with  varying  distinctness  in
the  course  of  ages,  though  in  this  case  the  law  of
sequence  is  undiscoverable  by  us.  At  least  gene-
rally it  is  undeniable  that  if  we  believe  in  the
existence  of  a  Personal  GOD  by  whose  influence
we  are  affected,  there  is  no  more  difficulty  in
admitting  the  reality  of  His  action  in  various
ways  and  degrees  on  the  physical  world,  than  in
recognising  it  (as  we  do)  in  our  own  souls.  In-
deed the  difficulty  in  the  latter  case  is  greater ;
for  it  is  perhaps  impossible  for  us  to  conceive  how
the  Infinite  Divine  will  can  act  on  the  human  will
(as  it  is  felt  to  do)  without  destroying  the  freedom
of  man.

12.  What  we  can  observe  of  the  actual  '  laws'
of  phenomena  tends  in  some  degree  to  illustrate
the  general  manner  and  limits  of  this  modification
of  effects  by  the  introduction  of  new  forces.  It


30  Laws  modifiable.

INTRODUC-  holds  true  universally  that  the  generality  of  a  law
decreases  as  the  complexity  of  the  subject  with
which  it  deals  increases.  In  other  words,  when  a
result  depends  upon  the  combined  working  of
many  elements  the  probability  of  variation  is  in-
creased. The  action  of  each  element  may  suffer
alteration  as  to  intensity  or  duration,  from  causes
which  are  not  calculable  by  our  powers  of  obser-
vation. The  results  of  physical  laws,  for  instance,
are  only  infinitesimally  modifiable  when  compared
with  the  results  of  biological  laws.  In  the  former
case  we  can  approximately  take  account  of  all  the
interfering  forces,  but  in  the  latter  case  forces  are
brought  into  play  which,  as  far  as  can  yet  be
known,  escape  all  individual  estimation,  either  as
to  their  actual  or  as  to  their  potential  energy.
In  Sociology  this  uncertainty  is  confessedly  yet
greater.  In  Theology,  which  completes  the  philo-
sophy of  life  by  uniting  it  with  a  higher  Order,
the  same  progression  continues,  and  it  is  as  un-
reasonable to  expect  results  absolutely  universal
in  their  observed  form  relative  to  us  in  Theology,
the  crowning  science  of  being,  as  it  would  be  to
expect  the  results  of  Sociological  laws  to  admit
of  a  mechanical  or  chemical  or  biological  ex-
pression. Each  higher  science  in  the  'hierarchy'
includes  the  action  of  those  below  it  according
to  their  special  laws,  but  at  the  same  time  it


Indeterminate  Powers  in  Nature.          31

introduces   new    forces   by   which    these    simpler  INTRODUC-
results  are  variously  modified  (§  26).

13.  The  same  truth  may  be  set  forth  yet  in
another  way.  Even  if  it  is  admitted  uncondition-
ally that  our  present  knowledge  is  of  phenomena
only,  it  is  obvious  that  the  phenomena  are  of  dif-
ferent orders,  extending  from  those  which  mark
the  conditions  of  our  observation  (e.g.  time,  space)
to  isolated  facts  representing  the  resultants  of  the
action  of  a  multiplicity  of  forces,  which  facts,  from
the  nature  of  things,  are  severally  unique.  Some
of  these  may  be  general :  others  may  be  excep-
tional. In  some  we  can  analyse  the  result  and
reduce  it  to  simple  results  of  known  '  laws ' :  in
some  the  problem  is  indeterminate.  And  exactly
as  the  subject  rises  to  a  nobler  elevation  our
knowledge  becomes  more  incomplete.  Complete-
ness indeed  is  but  another  name  for  ascertained
limitation.  The  grandest  and  highest  faculties
of  man  are  exactly  those  in  which  he  most  feels
his  weakness  and  imperfection.  They  are  at
present  only  half-fulfilled  prophecies  of  powers
which,  as  we  believe,  shall  yet  find  an  ample  field
for  unrestricted  development1.

1  The  student  of  Browning  will  recall  countless  passages  in
which  he  illuminates  this  truth.
For  thence — a  paradox
Which  comforts  while  it  mocks —


32  Indeterminate  Powers

INTUODUC-  14.  In  a  word,  it  is  evident  from  the  extent
of  creation,  of  which  we  see  but  the  least  fraction,
and  from  the  connexion  of  its  parts  one  with  an-
other, and  from  the  presence  about  us  of  forces
which  we  are  wholly  incompetent  to  estimate,
that  we  are  absolutely  unable  to  judge,  whether
we  may  not  from  time  to  time  be  capable  of  call-
ing into  action  ourselves  or  otherwise  coming
under  the  influence  of  powers  which  are  usually
dormant.  Every  one  must  have  felt  at  critical
moments  that  he  has  a  fund  of  physical  strength
and  also  a  capacity  for  moving  others  by  vigour
of  will  of  which  under  ordinary  circumstances  he
is  wholly  unconscious.  The  crisis  brings  out  the
gift,  and  when  the  crisis  is  over  we  fall  back  again
into  our  usual  state.  Nor  is  this  the  case  with
individuals  only.  History  shews  that  there  are
epochs  of  extraordinary,  and  as  we  should  say,
who  live  in  calmer  times,  of  unnatural  activity
and  power  in  societies  and  nations.  A  city  or  a
race  under  the  pressure  of  some  great  passion
works  wonders.  Above  all  religious  enthusiasm,
whether  in  men  or  in  bodies  of  men,  is  capable  of
producing  results  which  under  ordinary  circum-

Shall  life  succeed  in  that  it  seems  to  fail :

What  I  aspired  to  be,

And  was  not,  comforts  me :

A  brute  I  might  have  been,  but  would  not  sink  i'  the  scale.


in  Nature.  33

stances  would  be  regarded  as  impossible.   It  seems  INTRODUC-

.  .  TION.

as  if  the  idea  of  an  immediate  intercourse  with  a

spiritual  world,  quite  apart  from  the  special  form
which  it  takes,  were  able  to  quicken  man's  powers
with  a  marvellous  energy  and  in  some  degree  to
work  out  its  own  accomplishment.

15.  Thus  in  contemplating  nature  from  its
moral  side  we  find  ourselves  in  the  presence  of
two  indeterminate  forces.     Not  only  are  we  forced
to  admit  that  there  is  room  in  the  whole  scheme
of  the  world  (of  which  we  are  poor  and  imperfect
judges)  for  changed  conditions  which  necessarily
include  changed  results ;   but  also  we  find  that
men  and  mankind  generally  are  possessed  of  facul-
ties capable  of  vast  and  indefinite  energy.     We
cannot  measure,  as  we  cannot  explain,  the  influ-
ence which  one  mind  can  exercise  on  another,  or
which  the  mind  can  exercise  on  the  body.     The
influence  is  obvious,  but  what  are  the  springs  and
what  the  limits  of  it  we  cannot  tell.     In  such  a
case  even  past  experience  is  no  final  judge.     And
this  reflection  brings  us  to  another  fundamental
assumption  of  Christianity.

16.  Christianity  assumes,  as  we  have  seen,
the  existence  of  an  Infinite  Personal  GOD  and  of  a
finite  human  will :  it  claims  also  to  be  miraculous.

w.  R.  3


34         Christianity  essentially  Miraculous.

INTRODUC- It  takes  for  granted   that  'miracles'  (S   17)  are
TION.

recognised  modes  of  Divine  action.  From  the  con-
ception which  we  are  necessarily  led  to  form  of
the  relation  of  Nature  to  the  Creator  it  has  been
shewn  that  exceptional  action  in  its  course  is  not
only  not  excluded  by  the  laws  which  we  base  on
observation,  but  even  antecedently  likely.  Chris-
tianity affirms  that  this  exceptional  action  does
actually  take  place.  And  in  doing  this  it  only
affirms  what  every  other  historical  religion  must
affirm ;  for  all  alike  appeal  to  an  immediate  reve-
lation as  their  original  basis.  It  follows  then
that  all  religion  which  can  influence  the  mass  of
men  (p.  8,  §  6)  is  declared  to  be  impossible  if
such  an  exceptional  manifestation  of  GOD  is  in-
conceivable or  unaccomplished.  Nothing  remains
but  a  faith  which  begins  and  ends  within  the  in-
dividual. But  not  to  dwell  on  this,  it  is  evi-
dent that  if  the  claim  to  be  a  miraculous  religion
is  essentially  incredible  apostolic  Christianity  is
simply  false.  If  Christ  did  not  rise  again — the
words  cannot  be  too  often  repeated — then  is  our
faith  vain.  Something  may  be  left — a  system  of
morals  or  the  like — but  that  is  not  Christianity.
The  essence  of  Christianity  lies  in  a  miracle ;  and
if  it  can  be  shewn  that  a  miracle  is  either  im-
possible or  incredible,  all  further  inquiry  int6  the
details  of  its  history  is  superfluous  in  a  religious


The  idea  of  a  Miracle.  35

point  of  view.     The  rise  of  Christianity  will  still  INTRODUC-
TION.
furnish   a  historical   or  philosophical  problem  of

surpassing  interest,  but  the  data  which  it  presents
will  contain  nothing  on  which  to  found  the  faith
of  a  world.  Thus  we  are  forced  to  consider  whe-
ther the  difficulties  which  are  supposed  to  lie  in
the  conception  of  a  miracle  are  a  fatal  hindrance
to  the  literal  acceptance  of  the  Gospel.

17.  By  a  miracle  (using  the  word  in  its
strictest  sense)  we  mean  a  phenomenon  which
either  in  itself  or  from  the  circumstances  under
which  it  is  presented,  suggests  the  immediate
working  of  a  personal  power  producing  results
not  explicable  by  what  we  observe  in  the  ordi-
nary course  of  nature.  Thus  some  facts  are  in
their  essential  character  miraculous,  as  the  Re-
surrection; others,  again,  are  perfectly  natural  in
themselves,  but  miraculous  from  the  circum-
stances under  which  they  occur,  as  the  miraculous
draught  of  fishes  or,  to  take  a  different  example,
the  true  prediction  of  a  special  event.  But  they
have  this  in  common,  that  they  lead  us  to  recog-
nise the  action  of  some  personal  power:  they
involve,  as  a  general  rule,  an  appeal  to  or  a  de-
claration of  divine  strength.  Some  facts  again,  as
many  of  the  cases  of  healing,  may  be  regarded  as
natural  or  miraculous,  according  as  we  look  at

3-2


36  Miracles  not  impossible.

INTRODUC-  them  as  resulting  from  powers  already  existing  in
TION.

man  and  evoked  by  special  circumstances,  or  as

immediate  acts  of  divine  blessing.  This  indeed  is
a  mere  question  of  interpretation.  The  principle
is  attested  in  a  single  case.  He  who  believes  in
the  Resurrection  will  feel  no  anxiety  as  to  the
exact  limits  within  which  the  divine  working  is
to  be  confined.  Probably  he  will  see  it  every-
where and  that  even  in  the  same  sense,  for  the
difference  or  identity  of  mode  will  seem  to  him
to  depend  on  causes  which  he  cannot  investigate.

18.  From  what  has  been  already  said  it  will
be  seen  that  a  miracle  cannot  be  declared  impos-
sible by  any  one  who  believes  in  a  Personal  GOD.
Nature  is  the  expression  of  His  will,  and  ante-
cedently to  experience  we  could  not  have  deter-
mined that  it  would  be  manifested  in  one  way
rather  than  in  another.  Nor  again  can  all  con-
ceivable experience  give  us  a  complete  knowledge
of  the  conditions  which  may  affect  its  manifes-
tation to  us  so  as  to  exclude  variety.  On  the  con-
trary under  particular  circumstances  which  may
happen  if  GOD  reveals  Himself  to  men,  miracles
are  as  probable  as  ordinary  phenomena  under
common  circumstances.  If  the  result  is  different,
the  power  being  the  same,  we  suppose  that  the
conditions  are  different ;  and  conversely  if  the


Miracles  not  unnatural.  37

conditions    are    different,    we    suppose    that    the  INTRODUC-
TION.
result  will  be  changed.     Nor,  again,  in  speaking

of  a  fact  as  a  miracle  do  we  offer  any  explanation
of  its  being  or  becoming.  The  mystery  as  to  how
GOD  acts  is  left  untouched.  Whether  He  acts  as
He  ordinarily  does  (naturally),  or  in  an  extraor-
dinary way  (miraculously),  this  fundamental  diffi-
culty remains  absolutely  the  same.  It  is  neither
greater  nor  less  in  the  one  case  than  in  the
other.  The  power  which  produces  the  pheno-
mena is  indeterminate  and  indeterminable.  Thus
while  it  would  be  impossible  that  two  and  two
should  ever  make  five,  because  the  law  on  which
the  result  depends  lies  wholly  within  us ;  yet  it  is
not  impossible  that  an  (unknown)  power  which
as  far  as  our  observation  reaches  has  always  pro-
duced (say)  four  phenomena  of  a  particular  kind,
should  on  a  particular  occasion  produce  five  such
phenomena.

19.  Yet  further  it  will  appear  that  a  miracle
is  not  unnatural,  that  is  contrary  to  and  not
only  different  from  the  observed  course  of  phe-
nomena. It  would  be  unnatural  only  if  it  were
supposed  that  the  miraculous  and  the  ordinary
result  were  both  produced  by  the  same  force
acting  under  the  same  conditions.  Or,  if  for  a
moment  we  may  use  popular  language,  if  it


38  Miracles  not  unnatural.

INTRODUC-  were  supposed  that  the  same  law  could  produce
TION.

different  effects.  But  on  the  other  hand  it  is
distinctly  laid  down  that  in  the  case  of  a  miracle
a  new  force  is  introduced,  or  rather,  as  the  source
of  all  force  is  one,  that  the  force  which  usually
acts  freely  in  a  particular  way  now  acts  freely  in
another.  That  is,  to  continue  to  use  popular  lan-
guage, the  law  is  not  suspended,  but  its  natural
results  are  controlled.  The  law  produces  its  full
effect,  but  a  new  power  supervenes,  and  the  final
result  represents  the  combined  effect  of  the  two
forces.  Let  it  once  be  seen  that  the  law  neces-
sarily involves  the  idea  of  a  power  acting  accord-
ing to  the  law,  and  acting  freely,  for  the  law  is
evidently  subsequent  to  and  not  essentially  regu-
lative of  the  action,  and  there  will  be  no  more
difficulty  in  feeling  that  the  miraculous  action  of
GOD  is  as  truly  natural,  that  is  in  accordance  with
what  we  may  expect  from  a  consideration  of  the
whole  scheme  of  nature,  as  His  ordinary  action.
To  affirm  that  miracles  are  unnatural  is  to  consti-
tute general  laws  of  observation  into  a  fate  supe-
rior to  GOD,  or  to  deny  His  personal  action.  And
it  must  be  observed  that  the  denial  of  His  per-
sonal action  in  the  physical  world  involves  the
denial  of  His  action  on  the  hearts  of  men;  for
there  is  not  the  least  reason  to  suppose  that  what
is  seen  is  less  immediately  dependent  upon  Him


Miracles  not  an  afterthought.  39

than  what  is  unseen,  or  that  it  can  be  affirmed  INTRODUC-
TION.

beforehand  that  He  is  more  likely  to  act  on
one  part  of  that  which  He  has  created  than  on
another.  In  other  words,  if  miracles  are  un-
natural, then  we  are  hopelessly  enclosed  within
the  barriers  of  material  laws  and  absolutely
shut  off  from  all  intercourse  with  the  Infinite.
But  this  is  against  the  fundamental  axiom  of
religion.

20.  While,  however,  it  is  maintained  that  in
this  larger  sense  of  the  word  miracles  are  '  natural,'
it  is  necessary  to  guard  carefully  against  two  ex-
planations which  have  been  given  to  account  for
their  occurrence  naturally;  and  the  more  so
because  they  have  obtained  a  popular  currency.
Some  have  said  that  a  miracle  is  but  the  com-
pression, so  to  speak,  of  results  which  are  obtained
slowly  and  successively  in  the  general  course  of
things.  The  water,  it  is  argued,  which  was  made
wine  by  a  word  at  Cana  once,  is  made  wine  by  the
vintage  every  year.  The  slightest  reflection  will
shew  that  these  two  processes,  as  far  as  we  can
follow  them,  have  absolutely  nothing  in  common,
so  that  the  one  cannot  even  illustrate  the  other.
But  even  if  the  parallel  were  perfect  it  would  be
equally  nugatory,  for  in  that  case  it  would  tend,
in  proportion  to  its  completeness,  to  exclude  the


40  Miracles  not  an  afterthought.

INTRODUC-  idea  of  personal  action  which  is  of  the  essence  of
TION.

a  miracle.  The  same  remark  holds  true  of  the
second  false  explanation,  which  is  in  every  way
more  profound  and,  even,  in  some  aspects,  un-
answerable. It  is  alleged  that  natural  laws,  like
some  mathematical  series,  may  be  intermittent,
so  that  by  the  action  of  the  same  law  one  result
may  be  given  for  a  thousand  (or  a  million)  times
in  succession  and  a  different  result  next  time.
Miracles  then,  it  is  argued,  may  be  the  exceptional
terms  of  such  an  order.  They  certainly  may  be,
but  if  so  their  permanent  significance  is  destroyed.
Their  moral  and  spiritual  value  vanishes  at  once
when  they  are  derived  from  the  constant  action
of  the  same  forces  as  commonly  work  around  us.
A  miracle,  if  it  has  any  real  existence,  lifts  man
truly  and  not  in  appearance  only  above  the  laws
of  the  present  general  order.

21.  It  may  however  be  objected  that  this
view  of  miracles  as  occasional  manifestations  of
the  power  of  GOD  is  a  conception  unworthy  of  His
Majesty :  that  it  represents  Him  (so  to  speak)  as
dependent  on  time  and  circumstance.  The  objec-
tion, as  far  as  it  has  any  force,  would  lie  equally
against  all  action  of  GOD  among  men.  It  is,
indeed,  a  mystery  wholly  beyond  our  comprehen-
sion how  an  Infinite  Being  can  reveal  or  in  any


Miracles  not  an  afterthought.  41

way  manifest  Himself  to  finite  creatures.  But  in  INTRODUC-
obedience  to  the  bidding  of  our  spiritual  na-
ture we  have  taken  it  for  granted  that  He  does
so.  And  yet  further  the  invidiousness  of  the
objection  lies  in  the  transference  to  GOD  of  those
ideas  of  time  and  succession  which  as  we  have
seen  (§  8)  are  proper  only  to  men.  There  is  no
'occasion'  to  GOD.  The  world  and  all  its  history
is  for  Him  necessarily  one.  His  action  which  we
contemplate  now  in  one  (general)  mode  and  now
in  another  (exceptional)  mode,  is  not  in  itself
divided,  though  we  are  forced  so  to  regard  it.
The  principle  (if  we  may  so  speak)  which  accord-
ing to  His  wisdom  directs  the  form  of  the  general
action  and  the  principle  which  directs  the  form  of
the  exceptional  action,  are  not  separated,  so  that
the  one  is  subsequent  to  and  corrective  of  the
other,  but  simultaneous  or  coincident.  What  is
unfolded  to  us  in  a  gradual  process  of  '  becoming'
in  relation  to  an  infinite  mind  simply  '  is.'  We
are  obliged  to  speak  of  'the  purpose  of  GOD'S
'will,'  and  so  we  are  obliged  to  speak  of  His
'Special  Providence'  or  miraculous  working;
but  the  original  phrase  and  the  adaptation
of  the  phrase  to  facts  are  both  accommoda-
tions ;  and  we  must  carefully  guard  against  any
deductions  based  upon  the  human  element  in
them  (§  6).


42    Not  necessarily  due  to  a  material  cause.

INTRODUC-  22.  Nor  yet  again  can  it  be  said  that  mate-
rial results  involve  a  material  cause.  We  know
absolutely  nothing  of  cause.  We  know  nothing
of  the  power  manifested  in  material  results  (§  10).
And  unless  we  believe  in  the  eternity  of  matter,
(which  is  an  absolute  contradiction,)  some  material
results  must  have  had  an  immaterial  cause.  More-
over we  experience  daily  the  influence  of  will  in
ourselves,  and  this  is  not  material.  And  it  has
been  assumed  that  our  finite  will  is  a  real  power
and  potentially  free,  for  otherwise  religion  is  as
completely  destroyed  as  by  denying  the  person-
ality of  GOD.

23.  There  is  yet  another  aspect  in  which  we
may  regard  Miracles.  Viewed  from  the  human
side,  when  man  himself  is  looked  upon  as  the
centre  of  the  power  by  which  they  are  wrought,
they  fall  into  distinct  groups,  corresponding  to  the
subject-matter  (so  to  speak)  on  which  they  are
wrought.  Thus  man  may  be  conceived  as  acting
upon  the  external  world  absolutely,  where  the
general  law  is  modified  by  his  interference,  as  if
he  were  to  walk  on  water  or  control  the  move-
ments of  the  heavenly  bodies :  or  he  may  act  upon
the  external  world  in  immediate  relation  to  him-
self or  to  those  about  him,  as  if  he  were  to  modify
the  perception  of  external  phenomena  in  particular


Miracles  in  relation  to  nian.  43

cases :  or  he  may  act  upon  man  directly,  either  INTRODUC-
himself  or  others,  as  in  the  removal  of  disease.
Now  in  the  two  latter  cases  an  indeterminate
element  is  introduced,  the  influence  of  man  upon
man,  or  the  working  of  spirit  upon  spirit  and
matter  in  limited  relation  to  itself;  and  prior  to
observation  it  is  impossible  to  determine  what
varying  effects  may  be  produced  by  its  opera-
tion. Experience  alone  can  determine  in  each
instance  what  phenomena  may  be  produced  by
human  will ;  and  the  vast  range  of  the  power  of
will  and  the  unknown  depth  of  its  relations,  sug-
gest the  possibility  of  an  almost  infinite  variety
of  results  produced  by  its  action  under  new  con-
ditions. From  time  to  time  we  are  startled  by
occurrences  which  reveal  a  power  of  one  mind
over  another,  or  of  the  mind  over  the  body  which
seems  to  be  practically  indeterminate.  In  these
cases  then  there  is  (it  may  be  said)  a  natural  open-
ing for  miracles :  they  have  a  point  of  contact  with
what  we  observe  in  the  course  of  life.  So  far  then
we  must  be  careful  not  to  lay  upon  some  '  miracu-
lous' phenomena  a  weight  which  they  will  not
bear.  But  in  the  first  case,  on  the  contrary,  this
'natural'  conception  of  a  miracle  is  inadmissible.
We  can  understand  how  the  individual  will  can
affect  other  individuals  upon  whom  it  can  work
immediately,  but  we  cannot  see  how  it  can  act


44  Moral  limitation

INTRODUC-  upon  the  external  world  with  which  it  has.  as  far
TION.

as  we  know,  nothing  homogeneous,  or,  which
would  come  to  the  same  thing,  upon  the  universal
perception  of  men.  Thus  in  miracles  of  this  kind
we  are  face  to  face  with  a  final  difficulty,  which
(from  this  point  of  view)  culminates  in  the  Resur-
rection. Yet  even  here  the  miracle  has  a  cor-
"  responding  phenomenon  in  life.  Special  prayer
is  based  upon  a  fundamental  instinct  of  our
nature.  And  in  the  fellowship  which  is  esta-
blished in  prayer  between  man  and  GOD  we  are
brought  into  personal  union  with  Him  in  Whom
all  things  have  their  being.  In  this  lies  the  pos-
sibility of  boundless  power;  for  when  the  con-
nexion is  once  formed,  who  can  lay  down  the
limits  of  what  man  can  do  in  virtue  of  the  com-
munion of  his  spirit  with  the  Infinite  Spirit  ?
The  distinctions  thus  indicated  ought  never  to  be
overlooked  in  arguments  on  miracles,  but  in  one
respect  all  three  cases  are  alike.  Whether  man
works  upon  nature  or  upon  his  fellow-men,  it  is  in
virtue  of  a  trust  in  the  unseen.  Personal  faith  is
the  condition  of  effectual  action ;  and  where  GOD  is
supposed  to  act  immediately  the  same  condition
is  satisfied  in  the  recognition  of  His  working.

24.     It  follows  that  the  moral  element  in  mi-
racles is  both  essential  and  predominant.     There


of  Miracles.  45

is  always  a  natural  relation  between  the  acts  and  INTRODUC-
TION.

those  for  whom  or  by  whom  they  are  wrought.
The  external  phenomenon  which  would  in  one  age
and  to  one  people  suggest  the  idea  of  the  personal
working  of  GOD  would  not  do  so  in  another  age
and  to  another  people.  The  effect  of  the  fact,  and
miracles  are  always  supposed  to  be  directed  to
an  end,  depends  upon  its  inherent  characteristics
and  the  capacity  of  the  witnesses  to  apprehend
and  interpret  them.  To  use  a  mathematical  phrase
miracles  must  therefore  be  (generally  speaking)
a  function  of  the  age  in  which  they  are  wrought.
That  which  on  one  occasion  would  be  felt  to  be
a  personal  revelation  of  GOD  might  convey  an
impression  wholly  different  at  another.  The  mi-
racles of  one  period  or  state  of  society  might  be
morally  impossible  in  another.  It  seems  certain
that  knowledge  limits  faith,  not  indeed  as  dimin-
ishing its  power  but  as  guiding  its  direction.  For
instance,  when  any  particular  physical  phenomena
are  apprehended  as  subject  to  a  clear  law,  which
is  felt  to  be  a  definite  expression  of  the  Divine
Will,  it  is  inconceivable  that  faith  could  contem-
plate an  interference  with  them,  not  because  it
would  be  impossible,  but  because  the  prayer  for
such  an  interference  would  itself  be  disloyal.  For
example,  it  would  be  positively  immoral  for  us
now  to  pray  that  the  tides  or  the  sun  should  not


46  Aspect  of  Miracles

INTRODUC-  rise  on  a  particular  day.  The  corresponding  act
is  represented  in  the  Gospels  as  suggested  by  the
Tempter.  There  is  even  a  divine  'cannot'  recog-
nised in  the  Gospels  as  well  as  a  divine  'must.'
But  as  long  as  the  idea  of  the  physical  law  which
rules  them  was  unformed  or  indistinct,  the  prayer
would  have  been  reasonable,  and  (may  we  not
suppose)  the  fulfilment  also.  We  cannot  act  when
we  feel  that  our  influence  is  excluded ;  and  may
not  the  converse  also  be  true  ?  May  not  all  things
be  possible  for  us  which  we  firmly  hold  to  be
possible,  if  at  least  the  result  would  be  such  as  to
convey  as  its  whole  and  general  effect  the  idea  of
the  personal  action  of  GOD  ?  An  age  records  only
what  it  believes ;  but,  in  a  certain  sense  also,  it
does  what  it  believes.

25.  These  reflections  serve  to  explain  the
real  force  which  lies  in  two  remarks  on  miracles
which  have  at  present  gained  a  very  wide  cur-
rency. It  is  said  that  'a  belief  in  miracles  de-
'  creases  with  the  increase  of  civilisation ;'  and,
further,  that  '  our  age  in  virtue  of  its  advanced
'  civilisation  is  essentially  and  inevitably  incredu-
'  lous  of  miracles.'  Within  certain  limits  both  ob-
servations are  undoubtedly  true,  but  the  limits
within  which  their  truth  is  circumscribed  exclude
the  deductions  which  are  drawn  from  them.  The


in  a  Scientific  age.  47

sense  of  the  antecedent  likelihood  of  a  miracle  INTRODUC-
proceeds  from  a  comprehensive  view  of  all  nature,
moral  and  physical,  according  to  the  full  develop-
ment of  the  mutual  relations  of  its  parts,  as  con-
stituting a  scheme  for  us  practically  infinite.  But
the  necessary  condition  of  all  scientific  inquiry,
and  the  progress  of  science  is  here  assumed  to  be
the  test  of  the  progress  of  civilisation,  is  to  put  out
of  sight  the  indeterminate  element  in  nature,  and
thus  to  unfamiliarise  the  mind  with  those  aspects
of  the  world  in  which  the  miracle  finds  its  proper
place.  And  not  only  so,  but  the  requirements  of
exact  science  bind  the  attention  of  each  student
to  some  one  small  field,  and  this  little  fragment
almost  necessarily  becomes  for  him  the  measure
of  the  whole,  if  indeed  he  has  ever  leisure  to  lift
his  eyes  up  to  the  whole  at  all.  The  more  inti-
mately we  are  acquainted  with  any  one  subject,
and  the  more  sensible  we  become  of  the  fulness  of
thought  which  it  contains,  the  less  we  are  fitted  to
take  a  due  measure  of  its  proper  relations  to  other
subjects,  or  to  acknowledge  practically  and  with-
out effort  that  the  conditions  under  which  we
contemplate  it  are  not  in  themselves  absolute.
Thus  in  an  inductive  age  laws  of  observation  are
treated,  and  with  a  view  to  the  immediate  results
which  are  sought,  treated  rightly,  as  laws  of  nature.
If  the  moral  element  of  life — the  idea  of  person-


48  Theology  the  last  member

INTUODUC-  ality — be  neglected,  we  cannot  of  necessity  take
TION.

account  of  any  results  which  are  not  entirely  phy-
sical. For  physical  students  as  such,  and  for  those
who  take  their  impressions  of  the  universe  solely
from  them,  miracles  can  have  no  real  existence.
Nor  is  this  all :  not  miracles  only,  and  this  is  com-
monly forgotten,  but  every  manifestation  of  will  is
at  the  same  time  removed  from  the  world :  all  life
falls  under  the  power  of  absolute  materialism,  a
conclusion  which  is  at  variance  with  the  funda-
mental idea  of  religion,  and  so  with  one  of  the
original  assumptions  on  which  our  argument  is
based.

26.  At  the  same  time  such  considerations
shew  that  there  can  be  no  antagonism  between
Theology  and  Science  as  they  are  commonly  con-
trasted. So  far  as  these  keep  within  their  proper
limits  they  move  in  distinct  regions.  Their  re-
spective paths  lie  in  parallel  and  therefore  in
unintersecting  planes.  Theology  deals  with  the
origin  and  destiny  of  things :  Science  with  things
as  they  are  according  to  human  observation  of
them.  Theology  claims  to  connect  this  world  with
the  world  to  come :  Science  is  of  this  world  only.
Theology  is  confessedly  partial,  provisional,  ana-
logical in  its  expression  of  truth :  Science,  that  is
human  science,  can  be  complete,  final,  and  abso-


in  the  Hierarchy  of  Sciences.  49

lute  in  its  enunciation  of  the  laws  of  phenomena.  INTRODUC-
TION.
Theology  accepts  without  the  least  reserve  the

conclusions  of  Science  as  such :  it  only  rejects
the  claim  of  Science  to  contain  within  itself
every  spring  of  knowledge  and  every  domain  of
thought.

27.  This  holds  true  of  the  lower  and  more
exact  forms  of  Science  which  deal  with  inorganic
bodies ;  but  as  soon  as  account  is  taken  of  the
Science  of  organic  bodies — of  Biology  and  Sociology
— then  Science  itself  becomes  a  prophet  of  Theo-
logy. In  this  broader  and  truer  view  of  Science
Theology  closes  a  series, '  a  hierarchy  of  Sciences,'
as  it  has  been  well  called,  in  which  each  successive
member  gains  in  dignity  what  it  loses  in  definite-
ness,  and  by  taking  account  of  a  more  complex
and  far-reaching  play  of  powers  opens  out  nobler
views  of  being.  The  Sciences  of  form  and  num-
ber are  absolute  for  man  and  have  no  tendency
to  lift  the  individual  out  of  himself.  They  are
purely  human  and  individual.  The  Sciences  of
inorganic  bodies  add  the  idea  of  external  imper-
fectly-known forces  to  the  universal  conditions  of
human  observation  and  thereby  enlarge  and  ele-
vate the  scope  of  Science  while  they  take  away
its  claims  to  absoluteness.  The  Sciences  of  or-
ganic bodies  by  claiming  to  deal  with  the  pheno-
w.  R.  4


50  Records  of  Miracles

rneria  of  life  and  will  in  all  their  separate  and  col-

TION.

lective  forms  bear  a  wider  margin  of  indetermi-
nate problems  and  carry  our  thoughts  beyond  the
region  of  certain  knowledge.  The  Science  of
Theology,  which  is  last  in  its  complete  evolution
as  it  is  first  in  instinctive  apprehension,  completes
the  progression,  and  by  unfolding  that  which  is
permanent  in  life  prepares  a  solid  passage  from
the  temporal  to  the  eternal.  The  individual  mind,
the  material  world,  humanity,  GOD,  form  the  cen-
tral subjects  of  the  successive  groups  of  Sciences.
Each  Science,  it  will  be  seen,  takes  up  into  itself
those  Sciences  which  have  gone  before,  but  adds
to  them  elements  peculiar  to  itself  (§  12).  To  the
last  the  laws  of  each  are  of  full  force  within  their
proper  sphere  though  the  results  which  are  pro-
perly due  to  them  are  liable  to  be  modified  by  the
interference  of  forces  acting  according  to  other
laws.  And  thus  in  due  order  knowledge  which
begins  with  the  knowledge  of  the  conditions  of
human  observation  culminates  in  the  knowledge
of  GOD,  a  knowledge  infinitely  less  perfect  than
the  former  but  at  the  same  time  infinitely  more
ennobling.

28.  While  then  we  admit  that  the  tendency
of  a  scientific  age  is  adverse  to  a  living  belief  in
miracles,  we  see  that  this  tendency  is  due  riot  to


not  antecedently  incredible.  51

the  antagonism  of  science  and  miracle,  but  to  the  INTRODUC-
TION.

neglect  and  consequent  obscuration  by  science  of
that  region  of  thought  in  which  the  idea  of  the
miraculous  finds  scope.  And  even  here  the  power
of  general  feeling  makes  itself  most  distinctly  felt
against  the  power  of  abstract  reason.  Exactly
when  material  views  of  the  universe  seem  to  be
gaining  an  absolute  ascendancy,  popular  instinct
finds  expression  now  in  this  form  of  extravagant
credulity,  and  now  in  that.  Arrogant  physicism
is  met  by  superstitious  spiritualism ;  and  there  is
right  on  both  sides.  The  harmony  of  a  true  faith
finds  a  witness  to  its  fulness  in  this  independent
assertion  of  the  antithetic  elements  which  it  tem-
pers and  reconciles.

29.  It  is  however  foreign  to  our  purpose  to
consider  what  may  be  the  causes  which  impress
a  very  distinct  character  on  different  cycles  of
miracles,  and  on  the  form  which  the  belief  in  the
miraculous  assumes  at  different  periods.  The
investigation  itself  is  full  of  interest,  and  contri-
butes in  a  remarkable  degree  to  illustrate  the  pro-
gressive forms  of  revelation.  But  for  the  present
we  are  concerned  simply  with  the  possibility  of  a
miracle,  which  is  seen  to  be  included  in  the  idea
of  a  Personal  GOD.  Whether  the  possibility
has  been  realised  in  the  Resurrection  still  remains

A. O

i?  — «


52  Records  of  Miracles

INTRODUO  for  consideration ;   but  the  consideration  is  now
TION.

open.


30.  For  if  miracles  are  neither  impossible,
nor  unnatural,  it  follows  that  the  records  of  them
cannot  be  inherently  incredible.  But  on  the  other
hand  in  proportion  as  an  event  is  rare,  we  are
scrupulous  in  examining  the  evidence  by  which
the  truth  of  its  occurrence  is  established ;  and  the
more  so,  if  the  event  itself  is  such  as  to  be  easily
misapprehended  or  referred  to  wrong  causes,  or
connected  with  false  antecedents  or  consequents.
Cases  of  healing,  for  example,  except  under  very
peculiar  circumstances,  cannot  be  alleged  as  cer-
tainly miraculous  (§  17).  Other  events  are  un-
equivocal in  this  respect.  The  Resurrection  is
•  either  a  miracle  or  it  is  an  illusion.  Here  there
is  no  alternative  :  no  ambiguity.  And  it  is  not  an
accessory  of  the  Apostolic  message,  but  the  sum
of  the  message  itself  (pp.  5,  ff.).  Its  unique
character  is  the  very  point  on  which  the  first
teachers  of  Christianity  support  all  their  arguments.
It  claims  to  be  the  opening  of  a  new  life  to  the
world.  It  cannot  then  be  rightly  contemplated
by  comparing  it  with  the  events  of  common  his-
tory. It  is,  according  to  the  original  interpreta-
tion of  it,  as  singular  in  the  history  of  the  whole
race  of  men  as  birth  is  in  the  existence  of  the


not  antecedently  incredible.  53

individual.    In  dealing  with  the  evidence  adduced  INTRODUC-

.      .  TION.

in  confirmation  of  such   a   fact,   it   is   therefore

necessary  to  take  into  account  its  relation  to
preceding  and  subsequent  history;  for  it  may
well  happen  that  the  presumption  in  its  favour
gathered  from  the  preparation  which  found  its
fulfilment  in  it,  and  from  the  results  which
flowed  out  of  it,  will  more  than  counterbalance
the  natural  distrust  which  is  raised  at  first  sight
by  its  exceptional  character.  On  a  comprehensive
survey  of  all  nature,  as  far  as  we  can  judge  from
the  results  Avhich  are  obtained  by  a  faint  approxi-
mation to  such  a  view,  the  Resurrection  of"  our
Lord,  including,  as  it  does,  the  resurrection  of
man,  may  be  as  natural  as  events  like  birth  and
death,  which  are  accepted  as  natural,  not  because
we  can  explain  them  in  any  way,  but  because
the  range  of  our  experience  includes  the  obser-
vation of  their  constant  recurrence.

31.  So  far  then  we  have  cleared  the  ground
for  our  inquiry.  If  we  grant  the  two  assumptions
which  Christianity  makes  as  being  a  religion  for
man  (§  5),  there  is  nothing  antecedently  impro-
bable in  the  Apostolic  Gospel  of  the  Resurrection
considered  as  miraculous.  The  same  principles
which  would  exclude  as  impossible  a  belief  in  such
a  miracle  as  the  Resurrection,  would  equally  ex-


54  A  belief  in  Miracles  and  the  alternative.

INTRODUC-  elude  a  belief  in  anything  beyond  ourselves  and
the  range  of  present  physical  observation.  Thus
the  question  practically  is  not  simply  Is  Chris-
tianity true  ?  but  Is  all  hope,  impulse,  knowledge,
life,  absolutely  bounded  by  sense  and  the  world
of  sense  ?  Is  the  present  and  the  finite  the  defi-
nite limit  (not  only  of  the  mode  but)  of  the  object
of  human  thought  ?  Is  each  individual  person-
ality bounded  on  both  sides,  past  and  future  ?  Is
life  as  well  as  science  of  phenomena  only  ?  Is
there  no  faculty  by  which  man  can  contemplate
the  temporal  as  (for  him)  a  true  image  of  the
eternal  ?  Is  there  no  fact  which  unites  the  seen
and  the  unseen  ?  Is  the  spirit,  as  well  as  the
understanding  confined  by  present  laws  of  obser-
vation not  only  in  the  embodiment  of  ideas  but  in
intuition  ?  Or  can  the  soul  reach  forward  to  fuller
forms  of  being,  not  so  much  future  as  absolute  ?
Can  it,  with  a  consciousness  of  its  divine  destiny,
look  beyond  the  limits  of  time  ?  Can  it  rejoice
in  feeling  what  is  the  glorious  part  which  it  has
to  play  in  the  whole  economy  of  the  universe,
and  regard  as  its  proper  heritage  a  future  appear-
ance in  the  fulness  of  a  glorified  humanity  before
the  presence  of  GOD  ?


CHAPTER  I.
THE  RESURRECTION  AND   HISTORY.


<&i\offO(j>ia.  T]  'EXXTjwidj  olov  irpOKa.6a.ipfi  KOL  TrpoeOifci  TTJV
«'s  wapaSoxfiv  Tr/crrews,  etj>'  77  rr)i>  yvuffiv  f7coiKo5ofj.ei  i]  aXr/Ofta.

CLEJfKA'S  ALEX.

1.     TT  is  the  common  object  of  all  religion  to   CHAP.  i.

-*-  establish  or  realise  a  definite  relation  be-
tween the  worshipper  and  the  Divine  Being  whom
he  approaches.     Christianity  goes  much  further
and  proposes  to  reveal  the  relation  between  man-
kind, or  more  fully  between  the  world  and  GOD,
and  to  restore  the  original  harmony  of  all  crea-
tion.    It  addresses  not  the  individual  only,  but  John  i.  29.
the  race  ;  its  effects  are  declared  to  extend  not  to
man  only,  but  to  '  all  things  which  are  in  heaven  Eph.  i.  10.
'and  which  are  on  earth.'     It  is  universal  at  the        '


same  time  as  it  is  particular.     Just  as  Aristotle  5?™'  vm-

'_  1  .    *_  '_  .

taught  that  the  State  is  prior  to  the  Man,  so  Rev-  v.  13.
Christianity  claims  to  address  the  World  while  it
addresses  the  Individual  or  even  more  exactly  to


56  Life  of  the   World.

CHAP.  i.  address  the  Individual  in  the  World.  To  use
two  common  phrases,  it  contains  a  Philosophy  of
History,  as  well  as  a  Philosophy  of  Salvation.
It  disregards  nothing  in  the  rich  development  of
human  life.  It  takes  account  alike  of  the  evil
and  of  the  good.  It  refers  to  final  principles —
final,  that  is,  for  our  present  powers — the  progress
which  we  can  observe  in  societies  and  nations,
and  the  moral  and  spiritual  education  of  men.

2.  For  all  creation  is  progressive.  It  is  a
law  as  well  in  the  moral  as  in  the  physical  world
that  nothing  is  lost.  All  that  has  been  modifies
all  that  is  and  all  that  will  be.  The  present
includes  all  the  past  and  will  itself  be  contained
in  the  future.  Each  physical  change,  each  indi-
vidual will  contributes  something  to  the  world
to  come.  The  earth  on  which  we  live  and  the
civilisation  which  fashions  our  conduct  are  the
result  of  immeasurable  forces  acting  through  vast
periods  of  time.  There  are  crises  in  the  his-
tory of  nature  and  in  the  history  of  man,  periods
of  intense  and  violent  action  and  again  periods
of  comparative  repose  and  equilibrium,  but  still
the  continuity  of  life  is  unbroken.  Even  when
the  old  order  is  violently  overthrown  the  new
order  is  built  in  part  out  of  its  ruins  and  not  only
upon  them.


Life  of  the  World.  57

3.  The  conception  of  a  life  of  the  universe,  CHAP.  i.
of  a  general  law  which  unites  and  directs  the
successive  forms  of  all  organized  beings,  is  ne-
cessarily of  modern  growth.  It  could  not  be
formed  till  History  had  called  Geology  to  her
aid,  and  men  were  familiarised  to  some  extent
with  the  vast  space  of  time  covered  by  the  records
of  the  ancient  world.  Even  now  the  researches  of
science  are  far  too  limited  to  do  more  than  sug-
gest the  idea  and  mark  some  salient  points  in  its
realisation.  Yet  it  is  impossible  not  to  feel  that
it  falls  in  with  our  general  notions  of  the  working
of  GOD  from  whatever  source  they  may  be  derived;
whether  they  lie  in  the  original  conception  of  a
Divine  Being,  or  are  suggested  by  what  we  observe
in  the  noblest  forms  of  human  action.  There  is
something  soothing  and  elevating  in  the  thought
of  a  scheme  of  Divine  government  reaching  through
all  time  and  space  thus  opened  to  our  contempla-
tion. So  far  from  obscuring  the  presence  of  the
Creator  it  enlarges  and  strengthens  our  faith  in
His  operation.  It  enables  us  to  distinguish  be-
tween His  will  as  it  is  and  our  apprehension  of  its
becoming.  It  teaches  trust  and  hope  when  we  are
inclined  to  be  dismayed  at  what  we  reckon  as
immobility  or  waste  in  the  moral  world.  The
sea-worn  cliffs  which  are  once  again  fashioned
before  our  eyes  into  records  of  a  new  order  by


58  Life  of  Mankind.

CHAP.  i.  the  same  power  through  which  they  were  first
built  up,  teach  patience  with  a  silent  eloquence
which  would  be  irresistible  if  we  could  enter  into
its  force.  Surely  we  can  afford  to  wait  when  GOD
works  thus  slowly.


4.  The  belief  in  a  common  life  of  mankind  is
of  far  older  date.  This  is  the  result  of  intuition
and  not  of  science.  It  was  the  teaching  of  the
prophet  first  and  not  of  the  philosopher.  If  it
was  permitted  to  a  later  generation  to  see  the
Matt.  xxii.  pledge  of  a  personal  immortality  in  a  covenanted

01  00

relation  which  GOD  granted  to  the  patriarchs,  it
must  have  been  equally  clear  at  an  earlier  time
that  all  men  who  are  '  the  offspring  of  GOD  '  were
in  some  degree  under  His  government  and  work-
ing out  His  will.  At  first  sight  it  might  appear
that  the  spirit  of  the  Mosaic  Law  was  opposed  to
this  divine  unity  of  peoples.  But  the  opposition
was  accidental,  and  the  Law  itself  was  potentially
universal  in  its  promises.  The  exclusiveness  of
the  Jews  was  something  wholly  different  from  the
exclusiveness  of  the  Greeks  or  Romans.  It  was
based  essentially  on  moral  and  not  on  political  or
social  differences.  It  was  religious  and  not  na-
tional. The  privileges  of  Judaism  were  offered  to
him  who  accepted  the  responsibilities  and  claims


Life  of  Mankind.  59

of  Judaism.  The  Jew  was  taught  to  look  for-  CHAP.  i.
ward  to  the  time  when  all  the  nations  of  the
earth  should  worship  his  GOD.  The  triumph  to-
wards which  he  was  to  strive,  was  to  win  fellow-
worshippers  and  not  to  raise  himself  as  a  lord
over  enslaved  peoples.  Hence  the  later  prophets
were  led  to  regard  'the  kingdoms  of  the  world'
in  their  relation  to  'the  kingdom  of  GOD,'  of
which  the  Jewish  Church  was  the  figure  and  the
seed.

5.  Something  of  the  same  notion  lies  in  the
Eastern  representation  of  the  successive  ages  of
the  world,  which  was  borrowed  by  the  earliest
Greek  poets,  and  again  adopted  by  the  writers  of
the  so-called  Sibylline  books  shortly  before  the
Christian  era.  But  the  vastness  of  the  scale  on
which  this  thought  was  moulded  deprived  it  of
all  practical  importance.  When  it  was  applied  to
human  life  it  expressed  at  most  the  contrast
which  we  find  in  the  New  Testament  between
'  this  age '  and  '  the  age  to  come.'  Its  units,  so  to
speak,  were  periods,  dispensations,  as  we  call
them,  and  not  nations.  It  expressed  a  far-reach-
ing faith  in  the  general  advance  of  '  the  ages '
through  distress  and  disorder  towards  a  glorious
end,  but  it  had  no  connexion  with  the  progress
or  development  of  the  '  age  '  itself  in  which  we  live.


60  Connexion  of  Christianity

CHAP.  i.  6.  Still  however  dim  and  uncertain  the  pros-
pect of  the  life  of  the  world  and  the  life  of  hu-
manity may  have  been  in  old  times,  it  is  impos-
sible now  to  doubt  the  noble  continuity  of  progress
by  which  both  are  revealed  and  characterised ;
and  the  view  which  is  thus  opened  to  us  of  the
course  of  history  throws  a  fresh  light  on  the  posi-
tion of  Christianity.  It  is  not  an  isolated  system,
but  the  result  of  a  long  preparation.  According
to  the  teaching  of  the  Apostles,  Christ  came  when
all  things  were  ready,  and  the  measure  of  the
appointed  seasons  was  accomplished.  Christianity
cannot  then  be  regarded  alone  and  isolated  from
its  antecedents.  It  is  part  of  a  whole  which
reaches  back  historically  from  its  starting-point  on
the  day  of  Pentecost  for  nearly  two  thousand
Acts  vii.  years.  It  was  new  but  it  was  not  unprepared.
It  professed  to  be  itself  the  fulfilment  and  not  the
abolition  of  that  which  went  before :  to  reveal
outwardly  the  principle  of  a  Divine  Fatherhood
by  which  all  the  contradictions  and  disorders  of
life  are  made  capable  of  a  final  resolution ;  and  to
possess  within  it  that  universal  truth  which  can
transfigure  without  destroying  the  various  charac-
teristics of  men  and  nations.  It  is  then  possible
that  what  we  feel  to  be  difficulties  in  its  historic
form  are  removed  or  lessened  if  we  place  it  in  its
due  relation  to  the  whole  life  of  mankind;  and,  on


with  the  past.  61

the  other  hand,  the  obvious  fitness  with  which  it   CHAP.  i.
carries  on  and  completes  a  long  series  of  former
teachings  will    confirm   with    singular  power  its
divine  claims.

7.  Again:  though  the  birth  of  Christianity
was  comparatively  late  in  time,  yet  in  fact  it
claims  to  have  existed  from  the  beginning  as  part
of  the  Divine  Counsel.  We  have  seen  (Intr.  §  8)
that  we  are  obliged  to  regard  the  purposes  and
acts  of  GOD  as  following  one  another,  though  in
themselves  all  the  results  of  creation  simply  are,
without  distinction  of  succession.  But  though
the  Apostles  necessarily  think  and  speak  as  men,
they  expressly  caution  us  against  supposing  that
the  Incarnation  of  the  Word  was  in  any  way
an  afterthought  consequent  upon  the  Fall,  and
not  already  included  in  the  Creation.  Without
touching  upon  the  abstract  truth  of  the  absence
of  temporal  limitations  in  the  Divine  Mind,  they
teach,  what  is  in  this  case  the  practical  equivalent,

that  'before  the  foundation  of  the  world'  GOD  had  Col.i.l5ff.

Eph.  i.  4.
foreordained    the    coming   of    Christ.      The    Fall  iPet.i.20.

necessarily  modified  the  circumstances  of  the  In-
carnation, but  the  true  conception  of  the  World
and  of  Humanity  becomes  first  possible  when  they
are  thus  regarded  in  their  essential  relation  to
the  Word,  the  Son.  We  do  not  at  present  de-


62  Connexion  of  Christianity

CHAP.  i.  mand  more  for  this  statement  than  a  recognition
of  its  significance.  At  least  it  places  before  us
what  the  first  exponents  of  Christianity  believed
Christianity  to  be.  It  was  according  to  their
interpretation  eternal  in  its  essence,  as  well  as
universal  in  its  application.  It  was  in  itself  be-
yond time  though  it  was  wrought  out  in  time.

8.  It  follows  necessarily  from  this  view  of
Christianity  that  it  must  be  placed  in  intimate
connexion  with  the  divine  discipline  of  the  world
in  former  ages  if  we  are  to  understand  it.  As  we
cannot  conceive  of  the  world  as  abandoned  by
GOD,  and  as  the  coming  of  Christ  is  declared  to
be  the  complete  expression  of  His  love,  Christi-
anity must  have  gathered  up  and  ratified  either
implicitly  or  by  a  direct  sanction  whatever  men
had  truly  hoped  or  learned  of  Him  in  earlier
times.  And  this  is  exactly  what  our  Lord  and
His  Apostles  professed  to  do.  They  came  not
to  destroy  but  to  fulfil : — to  lay  open  and  enforce
the  spiritual  meaning  of  the  Law  and  the  Pro-
phets, in  which  the  Jews  '  thought  that  they  had
'  eternal  life ; '  and  to  declare  to  the  Gentiles
the  GOD  whom  they  '  ignorantly  worshipped.'
They  appealed  to  all  history  and  to  the  experience
of  all  men  in  support  of  the  Gospel.  Christ  came,
so  St  Paul  teaches,  in  the  fulness  of  time,  when


with  previous  History.  63

the  due  measure  of  the  appointed  seasons  was  ac-   CHAP.  i.

complished,  each  of  which  was  charged  with  the

realisation  of  some  part  of  the  Divine  Will.     GOD

spoke  at  last  to  us  in  the  Person  of  a  Son  (so  it  Heb.i.l,2.

is  written)  when  He  had  spoken  of  old  time  to

our  fathers  in  the  prophets,  revealing  His  Counsel

gradually  (in  many  parts),  as  men  were  able   to

bear  it,  and   variously  (in  many  ways),  as  they

could  best   enter  into   its  purport.     There  have

been  attempts  in  all  ages  to  separate  Christianity

from  Judaism  and  Hellenism  ;    but  to  carry  out

such  an  attempt  is  not  to  interpret  Christianity,

but  to  construct  a  new  religion.     Christianity  has

not  only  affinities  with  Judaism  and  Hellenism,

but  it  includes  in  itself  all  the  permanent  truths

to  which  both  witness.     It  was  bound  up  (so  the

Apostles  said)   with    promises    and   blessings   by

which    the    Jewish    people    had    been    moulded

through  many  centuries.     It  answered  to  wants

of    which    the    Gentiles    had    become    conscious

through  long  periods  of  noble  effort  and  bitter

desolation.    It  came  not  at  an  arbitrary  moment,

but  at  a  crisis  when  '  all  things  were  now  ready.'

If  it  was  divine  in  its  essence,  it  was  no  less

human  in  the  form  of  its  embodiment,  and  in  the

circumstances  of  its  reception.

9.     Christianity  was  connected  at  its  origin


64  Christianity  a

CHAP.  i.  with  a  vast  history — with  the  history  of  the  whole
ancient  world — and  it  is  also  a  history  itself.  It
is  a  history  in  its  fundamental  form  so  far  as  it  is
a  revelation;  anil  it  is  a  history  also  in  its  ap-
propriation so  far  as  it  is  the  informing  power
of  modern  society.  The  doctrines  of  Christianity
flow  from  alleged  facts.  The  belief  in  the  historic
event  precedes  the  belief  in  the  dogma.  The  life
of  Christ  (if  we  may  use  this  illustration)  comes
first,  and  then  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit.  The
substance  of  our  Creed  lies  in  what  Christ  was
and  what  He  did,  and  not  primarily  in  what  He
taught.  Or,  to  put  the  same  idea  in  another
way,  His  teaching  was  in  His  Person  and  in  His
Life,  and  not  in  His  words  only  or  chiefly.  It  is
impossible  to  resolve  Christianity  into  sentiment
or  morality.  The  sentiment  which  it  involves
springs  out  of  a  historical  union  of  man  and  GOD  :
the  morality  which  it  enforces  is  based  on  the
reality  and  significance  of  Christ's  Death  and  Re-
surrection.

10.  And  yet  more  than  this.  From  the  time
of  the  first  preaching  of  the  Apostles,  Christianity
has  been  a  power  in  the  world  acting  upon  society
and  acted  upon  by  it.  It  conquered  the  Roman
Empire,  and  remained  unshaken  by  its  fall.  It
sustained  the  shock  of  the  northern  nations,  and


History  itself.  65

in  turn  civilised  them.  It  suffered  persecution  CHAP.  i.
and  it  wielded  sovereignty.  It  preserved  the  trea-
sures of  ancient  thought  and  turned  them  to  new
uses.  It  inspired  science,  while  it  cherished
mysteries  with  which  science  could  not  deal.  It
assumed  the  most  varied  forms  and  it  moulded
the  most  discordant  characters.  And  all  this  was
done  and  borne  in  virtue  of  its  historic  founda-
tion. For  its  strength  lay  not  in  the  zeal  of  a
hierarchy  who  were  the  depositaries  of  hidden
doctrines,  but  in  the  open  proclamation  of  a
Divine  Saviour.  The  Cross  has  remained  in
every  age  the  symbol  and  the  monument  of  its
power.

11.  These  characteristics  of  Christianity  by
which  it  is  distinguished  from  every  other  religion,
— that  it  is  historical  in  its  Creed  and  historical
in  its  development, — even  if  they  are  considered
only  in  their  most  obvious  and  indisputable  form,
sufficiently  prove  that  its  origin  was  an  event
wholly  unique  and  unparalleled  in  the  history  of
the  world.  There  have  been  conquerors  who  in
the  course  of  a  lifetime  have  overrun  half  the
world  and  left  lasting  memorials  of  their  progress
in  cities  and  kingdoms  founded  and  overthrown.
There  have  been  monarchs  who  have  by  their
individual  genius  consolidated  vast  empires  and
W.  R.  5


66  Christianity  centres  in  the

CHAP.  i.  inspired  them  with  a  new  life.  There  have  been
teachers  who  through  a  small  circle  of  devoted
hearers  have  rapidly  changed  the  modes  of  thought
of  a  whole  generation.  There  have  been  religious
reformers  who  by  force  or  eloquence  have  modi-
fied or  reconstructed  the  belief  of  nations.  There
have  been  devotees  whose  lives  of  superhuman
endurance  have  won  for  them  from  posterity  a
share  of  divine  honour.  There  have  been  heroes
cut  off  by  a  sudden  and  mysterious  fate,  for  whose
return  their  loyal  and  oppressed  countrymen  have
looked  with  untiring  patience  as  the  glorious  and
certain  sign  of  dawning  freedom.  There  have
been  founders  of  new  creeds  who  have  furnished
the  ideal  of  supreme  good  to  later  generations
in  the  glorified  image  of  their  work.  But  in  all
the  noble  line  of  the  mighty  and  the  wise  and  the
good,  in  the  great  army  of  kings  and  prophets
and  saints  and  martyrs,  there  is  not  one  who  has
ever  claimed  for  himself  or  received  from  his
followers  the  title  of  having  in  any  way  wrought
out  salvation  for  men  by  the  virtue  of  his  life  and
death,  as  being  in  themselves,  and  not  only  by
the  moral  effect  of  their  example,  a  spring  of
divine  blessings.  It  is  of  comparatively  little
moment  how  and  by  whom  the  Christian  religion
was  first  propagated,  wonderful  and  exceptional
as  that  may  seem.  The  one  absolute  mark  by


doctrine  of  the  Person  of  Christ.          67

which  its  establishment  is  distinguished  from  that  CHAP.  i.
of  all  other  systems  lies  in  its  very  essence.  The
Gospel  differs  from  every  message  delivered  as
from  GOD  to  men,  in  that  its  substance  was  con-
tained in  what  befel  a  Teacher  to  Whom  the
Apostles  had  listened,  in  what  He  did  and  suffered.
Christ  was  Himself  the  Word  and  the  Truth
which  He  announced.

12.  For  us  Christianity  is  so  naturally  iden-
tified with  abstract  statements  of  doctrine  and
ecclesiastical  institutions,  that  we  are  in  danger
of  losing  sight  of  the  essentially  personal  basis  on
which  it  rests.  It  requires  an  effort  to  realise
with  any  distinctness  the  sublime  originality  of  a
faith  not  in  the  might  and  goodness  and  love  of
a  Prophet,  but  in  the  inherent  power  and  virtue
of  the  Person  and  Death  of  a  Saviour.  The  con-
ception of  such  a  faith  was  equally  novel  and
definite  in  the  apostolic  age.  The  relation  of
the  Lord  to  men,  viewed  simply  historically,  was
set  forth  as  something  wholly  singular  and  mar-
vellous. Within  thirty  years  after  the  death  of
Christ,  if  we  adopt  the  most  extreme  views  of
chronologers,  He  was  habitually  mentioned  to-
gether with  the  Father  as  the  source  of  spiritual
grace.  We  need  only  place  any  other  name  for
a  moment  in  the  same  position,  if  our  soul  does

5—2


68         The  origin  of  Christianity  unique,

CHAP.  i.  not  revolt  from  the  thought,  to  feel  what  must
have  been  the  intuitive  consciousness  of  a  divine
presence  which  enabled  the  Apostles  to  adopt
such  a  formula  and  to  consecrate  it  for  uni-
versal use.  And  the  effort  is  comparatively  easy
for  us,  which  for  them  (till  it  was  hallowed  by
some  unquestionable  sanction  of  GOD)  must  have
been  blasphemous.  We  are  familiarised  in  theory
with  the  idea  of  GOD  dwelling  as  man  with
men,  but  a  Jew  had  no  such  belief  to  soften
the  awful  grandeur  of  the  truth  which  he  ac-
knowledged.

13.  Exactly  in  proportion  as  we  apprehend
the  exceptional  (but  not  unnatural)  character  of
Christianity,  we  shall  be  better  able  to  judge  of
all  the  phenomena  by  which  (as  we  believe)  it
was  attended.  If  it  was — and  this  cannot  be
denied — wholly  original  in  its  fundamental  idea,
if  it  effected  a  revolution  in  the  popular  concep-
tion of  the  relation  of  man  to  GOD,  if  it  came  to  a
world  prepared  to  receive  but  not  to  create  it,  if
it  was  bound  up  with  a  long  anterior  history,  and
has  been  in  turn  the  life  of  modern  nations,  then
we  may  expect  to  find  that  the  circumstances
which  attended  its  origin  were  themselves  also
exceptional  but  not  unnatural.  The  reality  of  the
Resurrection  is  an  adequate  explanation  of  the


and  so  the  circumstances  of  its  origin.      69

significance  which  was  attached  to  the  Death  of  CHAP.  i.
Christ.     It  seems  impossible  to  discover  anything
else  which  can  be.


14.  Nothing,  indeed,  can  be  more  unjust  than
the  common  mode  of  discussing  the  miracles  of
the  first  age.  Instead  of  taking  them  in  connexion
with  a  crisis  in  the  religious  history  of  the  world,
disputants  refer  them  to  the  standard  of  a  period
of  settled  progress  such  as  that  in  which  we  live.
The  epoch  at  which  they  are  said  to  have  been
wrought  was  confessedly  creative  in  thought,  and
that  in  a  sense  in  which  no  other  age  ever  has
been ;  and  there  seems  to  be  a  positive  fitness  in
the  special  manifestation  of  GOD  at  such  a  crisis
in  the  material  as  in  the  spiritual  world.  The
central  idea  of  the  time  which,  dimly  apprehended
at  Rome  and  Alexandria,  found  its  complete  ex-
pression in  the  teaching  of  the  Apostles,  was  the
union  of  earth  and  heaven,  the  transfiguration
of  our  whole  earthly  nature ;  and  the  history  of
ancient  speculation  seems  to  shew  that  nothing
less  than  some  outward  pledge  and  sign  of  its
truth  could  have  led  to  the  bold  enunciation  of
this  dogma  as  an  article  of  popular  belief.  If,
as  we  have  seen,  miracles  are  not  in  themselves
either  unnatural  or  incredible,  in  this  case  there


70  Historic  tests  of  Miracles.

CHAP.  i.   is    even   an    antecedent    presumption    for    their


occurrence.


15.  It  has  been  said,  and  said  rightly,  though
the  statement  has  been  strangely  misunderstood,
that  science  can  take  no  cognisance  of  miracles.
Science  deals  simply  with  the  ordinary  working
of  GOD,  with  phenomena  which  experience  shews
to  be  capable  of  being  combined  in  what  are
for  us  laws  of  nature.  It  represents  the  power
according  to  its  general  action  and  then  assumes
it  to  be  immutable.  It  cannot  from  its  very
nature  deal  with  exceptions  which  are  so  rare
as  not  to  be  capable  of  being  grouped  according
to  our  present  knowledge.  But  while  miracles
do  not  belong  to  Science,  they  belong  to  History ;
and  if  they  are  not  to  be  rejected  without  exami-
nation, the  simple  question  in  each  case  when
they  are  alleged  is  What  is  the  evidence  in  their
favour  both  general  and  special  ?  Is  there  any-
thing in  the  character  or  work  of  the  time  which
leads  us  to  expect  that  GOD  should  reveal  Him-
self outwardly  as  He  does  inwardly  ?  Is  there,
that  is,  anything  which  thus  makes  miracles  in
some  degree  natural  events  according  to  the
larger  sense  of  the  word  ?  And  then  Is  the
special  evidence  for  the  miraculous  fact  as  clear
as  we  should  be  content  to  act  on  in  ordinary


The  Apostolic  Age.  71

cases  ?  This  is  all  which  we  can  require ;  for  CHAP.  i.
the  necessary  presumption  against  a  miracle,  as
an  exceptionable  occurrence,  is  removed  by  an
affirmative  answer  to  the  former  question;  and
religion  is  essentially  a  practical  matter,  or,  to
express  the  same  truth  somewhat  differently,  it
belongs  to  that  order  of  subjects  in  which  we  are
forced  to  trust  to  conclusions  which  fall  short  of
complete  certainty.

16.  The  position  which  the  apostolic  age  oc-
cupies with  regard  to  the  development  of  ancient
life  has  often  been  investigated.  Yet  even  thus
there  are  many  points  in  the  historic  bearing  of
Christianity  which  are  commonly  neglected.  It
is  true  that  we  can  see  how  the  lines  of  Jewish
and  Gentile  progress  converge  towards  it.  It  is
true  that  we  can  see  how  it  satisfies  instincts  which
found  expression  more  or  less  vague  in  earlier
times.  It  is  true  that  the  Gospel  was  preached
first  at  an  epoch  when  the  organisation  of  society
was  more  favourable  to  its  spread  than  at  any
other.  But  this  is  not  all ;  nor  indeed  are  these
essentially  the  most  important  features  of  the
preparation  by  which  the  Advent  was  preceded.
If  this  were  a  complete  statement  of  the  case  it
might  be  said  that  Christianity  was  a  natural  pro-
duct of  the  concurrence  of  Rome  and  Greece  and


72  The  Apostolic  Age.

CHAP.  i.  Palestine ;  that  the  anticipations  of  men  after
periods  of  eager  expectation  fashioned  for  them-
selves an  imaginary  fulfilment :  that  the  circum-
stances of  the  age  offer  an  explanation  of  the  suc-
cess of  a  mere  creation  of  enthusiasm.  A  full
view  of  the  character  of  the  preparation  for  the
Gospel  excludes  such  interpretations  of  its  signifi-
cance. There  was  a  tendency  towards  the  central
truth  of  Christianity,  but  there  was  no  tendency
to  produce  it.  Keligious  speculations  had  branched
out  in  so  many  ways  that  nothing  short  of  the
coming  of  Christ  could  have  harmonised  the  vari-
ous results  to  which  they  led;  but  till  He  came
the  results  were  simply  conflicting  and  irrecon-
cileable,  and  even  after  He  came  the  solution
which  He  brought  to  the  riddles  of  earlier  life
was  long  misunderstood.  Philosophers  and  moral-
ists had  variously  discussed  the  destiny  of  man
and  the  grounds  of  right  and  duty  and  knowledge,
but  the  debates  had  ended  practically  in  exhaus-
tion and  despair.  The  records  of  their  specula-
tions shew  at  once  their  power  and  their  weak-
ness :  they  reveal  what  man  aspires  to  know  and
confess  his  inability  to  gain  the  knowledge  for
himself.  The  combinations  of  various  nationalities
in  the  Roman  Empire  necessarily  made  broader
views  of  the  union  of  men  possible ;  but  at  the
same  time  the  triumph  of  imperialism  tended  to


Characteristics  of  Jewish  History.         73

suppress  every  independent  power.  The  material  CHAP.  i.
advantages  which  it  offered  for  free  intercourse
were  more  than  counterbalanced  by  the  depressing
influence  of  its  overwhelming  might.  The  time
was  marked  by  the  simultaneous  existence  of
countless  adverse  powers  then  first  forced  into
contact,  but  Christianity  bears  no  trace  of  any
temporal  or  local  character.  It  came  as  some-
thing wholly  new  to  a  world  whose  course  was
already  run.  It  belonged  to  no  time  and  to  no
place.  It  was  a  beginning  even  more  than  it  was
an  end.  And  as  there  are  periods  in  the  indivi-
dual life  when  the  exceptional  becomes  natural,
it  may  be  so  with  that  vast  and  complex  progress
of  humanity,  which  we  are  forced  equally  by
thought  and  experience  to  regard  under  the  form
of  a  common  life.


17.  The  very  conception  of  the  history  of
humanity  as  a  life,  which  is  now  an  axiom  with
conflicting  schools,  was  due  (as  we  have  already
seen)  in  the  first  instance  to  the  Jews.  In
spite  of  the  exclusiveness  of  their  national  reli-
gion they  faithfully  maintained  the  belief  in  a
real  unity  of  the  human  race,  out  of  which  the
idea  of  a  common  life  of  humanity  springs.  The
Romans  had  partially  witnessed  to  the  truth  when


74  Jewish  Character

CHAP.  i.  they  acknowledged  the  inherent  supremacy  of
Greece  in  art :  the  Stoics  had  taught  it  as  part  of
their  stern  theory  of  the  world ;  but  the  Jews  held
it,  however  imperfectly,  as  lying  at  the  very  foun-
dation of  their  religion.  The  promise  to  which
they  looked  for  the  pledge  of  their  divine  election
extended  at  the  same  time  a  heavenly  blessing  to
all  nations.  The  history  of  Israel  was  a  continual
advance  towards  the  realisation  of  this  fellowship
of  nations.  Each  crisis  left  the  chosen  people
nearer  to  that  kingdom  of  heaven  of  which  they
were  the  sign  and  the  prophets.  And  the  typical
prophet  of  the  Captivity  looking  upon  the  great
powers  of  the  world  portrays  them  at  once  in

Dan.ii.vii.  their  organic  unity,  and  in  the  separate  complete-
ness of  their  distinctive  energies.  In  this  respect
it  is  of  no  consequence  how  we  interpret  the
visions  of  Daniel,  or  to  what  date  we  assign  the
book  which  bears  his  name.  The  idea  of  a  life  of
mankind,  of  a  law  binding  together  different  mon-
archies and  states,  is  there;  and  from  the  time
when  the  book  became  current  this  idea  has  been
part  of  the  heritage  of  men.  The  book  of  Daniel
is  (on  its  human  side)  the  first  philosophy  of
history,  even  as  the  book  of  Genesis  is  the  pledge
that  such  philosophy  is  possible.  The  one  pre-
sents the  kingdoms  of  mankind  as  mutually  de-
pendent and  subject  to  the  laws  of  a  common


and  History.  75

development :   the  other  presents  them  federally   CHAP.  i.
united  in  '  the  first  Adam.'


18.  The  long  continuance  and  varied  for-
tunes of  the  Jewish  nation  enabled  it  to  be  be-
yond any  other  nation  the  messenger  of  unity  and
progress.  And  more  than  this,  the  purely  intel-
lectual defects  with  which  the  Semitic  character
is  charged  fitted  the  people  to  perform  this  their
appointed  work.  The  forms  of  literature  which
our  western  training  leads  us  to  regard  as  the
highest,  the  Epic  and  the  Drama,  found  no  place
among  the  Jews.  The  free  culture  of  art  among
them  was  forbidden.  Or,  in  other  words,  they
were  led  to  dwell  upon  the  indeterminate  and
infinite  and  not  upon  the  fixed  and  limited  in  the
world.  For  them  all  separate  histories  and  lives
and  embodiments  of  beauty  were  incomplete.
They  were  unwilling  and  unable  to  see  every-
where one  formula  reproducing  itself.  The  whole
history  of  mankind  was  for  them  an  Epic,  a
Tragedy — the  one  Epic,  the  one  Tragedy,  of
which  the  fortunes  of  generations  or  families  or
men  were  but  scattered  fragments.  They  looked
upon  history  as  a  life  directed  by  will,  and  not  as
catastrophes  ruled  by  destiny  or  phenomena  pro-
duced by  law1.

1  The  intellectual  contrast  of  the  East  and  West  has  never


76  The  Discipline

CHAP.  i.  19.  Thus  it  is  that  the  work  of  the  Jews  is
written  on  their  character.  But  it  is  yet  more
legibly  written  in  their  history.  It  is  difficult  to
say  whether  their  national  integrity  or  their
power  of  assimilation  is  more  surprising.  One
catastrophe  after  another  overwhelmed  them,  and
they  rise  the  same  yet  nobler  from  the  fire  in
which  they  were  purified.  The  old  spirit  remain-
ed, but  it  clothed  itself  in  a  new  form.  The
conqueror  lived  in  the  conquered.  The  people
fell  beneath  each  of  the  great  forms  of  ancient
civilisation  and  received  from  each  the  choicest
treasures  which  it  could  bestow.

20.  Egypt,  Persia,  Greece  and  Rome — the
great  powers  of  the  East  and  West — contributed
to  discipline  the  mind  and  further  the  work  of
the  Jews.  The  hopes  of  the  people  were  kindled
by  times  of  triumph  and  chastened  by  times  of
captivity.  A  theocracy,  a  monarchy,  a  hierarchy,
brought  out  in  succession  various  sides  of  their
complex  character  and  gave  to  it  solidity  and
completeness.  Meanwhile  the  spiritual  teaching
of  the  nation  was  carried  on  from  stage  to  stage,

been  given  better  in  a  short  compass  than  by  Browning  in  a
speech  at  the  close  of  'Luria,'  beginning  'My  own  East!  How
nearer  GOD  we  were ! '  to  which  whoever  has  not  read  it  will  be
glad  to  be  referred.


of  Egypt.  77

so  that  while  nothing  was  lost  which  could  serve  CHAP.  i.
for  the  training  of  the  simplest,  something  was
ever  added  which  might  elevate  the  faith  of  those
who  saw  deepest  into  the  divine  truth.  When
the  Law,  fixed  and  eternal,  failed  to  satisfy  all
the  wants  which  were  called  out  by  the  manifold
growth  of  a  high  social  civilisation,  the  prophets
laid  open  its  inner  meaning  and  drew  the  outlines
of  a  spiritual  kingdom.  This  new  creative  period
itself  came  to  a  close,  and  the  learned  diligence
of  priests  and  scribes  then  framed  out  of  the
materials  which  it  provided  a  system  which  gave
definiteness  and  consistency  to  the  noblest  belief
of  the  past  throughout  a  scattered  and  tributary
people.

21.  We  are  often  reminded  that  the  fore-
father of  the  Jews  was  an  Arab  Sheikh.  Abra-
ham, it  is  true,  was  a  Sheikh,  but  he  was  much
more.  His  true  representative  was  not  the  Be-
douin Esau,  but  Jacob,  in  whom  lay  the  promise
of  a  nation.  The  fulfilment  of  this  promise  was
first  prepared  in  Egypt.  Without  entering  in
detail  into  the  various  influences  of  Egypt  upon
the  Jews,  we  may  notice  this  the  greatest  of
all :  the  descendants  of  Jacob  were  there  bound
together  into  one  body  by  prosperity  alike  and
by  suffering.  Every  power  which  goes  to  con-


78  The  Discipline  of  Egypt.

CHAP.  i.  solidate  and  unite  a  people  was  brought  to  bear
upon  them.  The  recollection  of  a  noble  descent,
the  consciousness  of  a  high  destiny,  the  presence
of  a  hostile  nation,  common  occupations,  practical
isolation  in  life  and  worship,  combined  to  create
and  keep  alive  a  feeling  of  fellowship  and  mutual
dependence  among  the  growing  host.  The  sense
of  unity  and  nationality  may  have  been  degraded,
though  it  could  not  be  destroyed,  by  the  con-
ditions of  ancient  slavery.  And  thus  in  due  time
a  people  was  prepared  for  a  sterner  discipline  and
a  sterner  work.  It  is  impossible  as  yet  to  deter-
mine exactly  how  far  the  form  of  the  religion  of
Israel  was  modified  by  Egyptian  influences.  But
the  silence  of  the  Pentateuch  as  to  the  future  life
shews  that  a  power  immeasurably  stronger  than
custom  limited  the  character  of  such  a  depend-
ence. That  which  is  most  conspicuous  in  the  faith
of  Egypt  is  wholly  wanting  in  the  teaching  of
Moses.  The  earth  and  the  "  present  had  to  be
felt  in  their  full  meaning.  For  it  is  only  by
looking  both  backward  and  forward  that  the
circumstances  of  the  Exodus  can  be  seen  in
their  true  light.  When  the  multitude  had  rea-
lised their  common  helplessness  at  last  the  voice
of  the  GOD  of  their  fathers  quickened  again  the
true  life  of  the  children  of  Abraham ;  and  the
faith  which  was  called  out  by  the  sight  of  terrible


The  Discipline  of  Sinai.  79

judgments  on  their  enemies,  was  deepened  with   CHAP.  i.
awful  intensity  by  a  lonely  sojourn  in  the  wil-
derness in  the  very  presence  of  the  LORD  their
Saviour.

22.  The  Jews  left  Egypt  a  host  of  fugitives :
they  entered  the  promised  land  a  conquering
army.  But  an  entire  lifetime  lay  between  the
two  events.  A  new  generation  grew  up  in  the
wilderness  to  whom  the  LORD  revealed  Himself
as  King.  Henceforth  the  people  never  wholly
forgot  their  divine  allegiance.  They  were  the
people  of  the  LORD  even  when  they  most  fatally
misinterpreted  the  meaning  of  their  title.  The
majesty  of  Sinai  rests  on  the  whole  of  their  later
history.  The  sense  of  a  personal  relation  of  each
Jew  to  his  GOD  gave  strength  to  the  nation
and  dignity  to  the  citizen.  Moses  made  use,
we  must  believe,  of  'the  wisdom  of  the  Egyp-
'  tians,'  of  their  skill  in  science,  in  art,  in  organi-
sation, even  in  sacred  symbolism ;  but  the  con-
stitution which  he  framed  was  infinitely  nobler
than  that  of  Egypt.  It  was  based  on  the  word
of  GOD  addressed  to  all:  it  was  free  from  the
degradation  of  caste:  it  included  the  possibility
of  progress.  Egypt  made  the  body  of  the  nation,
so  to  speak ;  Sinai  infused  into  it  its  spirit.
Egypt  united  the  race :  Sinai  inspired  each  man


80     Discipline  of  the  period  of  the  Judges.

CHAP.  i.  with  the  consciousness  of  his  own  direct  covenant
with  the  LORD  who  had  redeemed  His  people.
Each  individual  life,  in  all  its  parts,  no  less  than
the  life  of  the  nation,  was  consecrated  to  GOD.
To  realise  the  kingdom  of  heaven — the  perfect
Sovereignty  of  the  LORD  among  men — was  from
this  time  the  acknowledged  mission  of  the  Jew.

23.  After  the  conquests  of  Joshua  and  the
first  settlement  of  the  tribes  followed  times  of
disruption  and  disaster.  The  nation  was  not  yet
disciplined  sufficiently  by  common  trials  to  trust
in  an  unseen  Power.  Hitherto  heroic  leaders
had  represented  to  them  the  personality  of  the
Theocracy,  and  momentous  crises  had  called  out
their  utmost  energy.  But  all  was  changed  when
they  once  entered  on  their  inheritance.  In  times
of  distress  they  still  remembered  that  GOD  was
their  king;  but  they  forgot  Him  in  times  of  peace.
The  lessons  of  the  wilderness  were  not  at  once
applicable  to  the  course  of  common  life.  The
people  acknowledged  a  spiritual  deliverer,  but
they  were  not  ripe  for  a  spiritual  sovereignty.
This  was  indeed  the  end  of  their  hopes,  but  the
time  was  not  yet.  To  lead  them  to  look  on-
ward, to  reveal  the  inherent  weakness  of  dominion
based  on  external  might,  even  though  the  might
was  from  GOD,  to  prepare  the  way  for  another  and


The  Discipline  of  the  Kingdom.  81

more  gradual  training,  based  upon  the  character-  CHAP.  i.
istic  feelings  of  the  nation — in  respect  of  this
progressive  development  the  type  of  all  nations —
was,  as  it  appears,  the  use  of  the  troubled  period  of
the  Judges.  The  free  uncentralised  government,
and  the  moveable  Tabernacle,  shewed  by  no  un-
certain symbols  the  nature  of  the  kingdom  which
GOD  designed  for  His  people :  arbitrary  authority
and  unhallowed  sanctuaries  shewed  that  they
were  not  yet  prepared  to  submit  to  its  sway.  The
idea  of  the  Theocracy,  if  the  phrase  may  be  al-
lowed, was  presented  at  the  outset  of  the  national
life ;  and  experience  proved  that  it  could  only  be
realised  by  a  long  season  of  discipline.

24.  Thus  the  establishment  of  the  kingdom
was  in  the  truest  sense  a  defection  from  GOD,  and
yet,  humanly  speaking,  it  was  a  necessary  de-
fection. An  earthly  king  fell  infinitely  short  of
the  type  of  divine  government  represented  by
Moses,  or  Joshua,  or  Samuel ;  but  he  was  at  once
a  definite  centre  and  a  clear  sign  of  something
greater  than  himself.  If  he  presented  the  spiritual
idea  in  a  fixed  and  limited  form,  he  also  gave
distinctness  to  the  conception  of  the  present
moral  sovereignty  of  GOD,  and  furnished  imagery
under  which  the  prophets  could  construct  a  more
glorious  picture  of  the  future.

W.  R.  6


82  TJie  Discipline  of  the  Kingdom.

CHAP.  i.  25.  The  establishment  of  the  kingdom  was
necessarily  connected  with  the  building  of  the
Temple.  And  the  Temple  occupied  the  same
place  with  regard  to  the  Tabernacle  as  the  mon-
archy with  regard  to  the  Theocracy.  Both  were
earthly  and  partial,  though  at  the  time  necessary,
representatives  of  something  greater  and  more
spiritual.  In  both  we  see  the  attempt  to  give  a
limited  and  permanent  shape  to  that  which  was,
in  its  original  revelation,  divine  in  essence  and
transitory  in  its  embodiment.  But  even  as  GOD
was  pleased  to  use  the  monarchy  for  the  exhibition
of  higher  truth,  so  also  He  used  the  Temple  ;  and
we  cannot  see  now  how  the  lessons  conveyed
through  it  to  the  Jews  and  to  ourselves  could
otherwise  have  been  realised.

26.  The  kingdom  and  the  Temple  were  de-
stroyed when  they  had  fixed  indelibly  upon  the
heart  of  the  nation  the  idea  of  the  unity  of  the
sovereignty  and  worship  of  GOD  which  they
symbolised.  The  Captivity  then  spiritualised  by
the  teaching  of  facts,  as  the  prophets  by  word
of  mouth,  the  lessons  which  had  been  taught  in
a  material  form.  The  people  came  up  from  Egypt
a  united  nation :  they  returned  from  Babylon  a
small  colony  to  form  the  centre  of  a  religious
commonwealth.  A  great  revolution  had  been


The  Discipline  of  the  Captivity.  83

wrought  in  their  national  hopes,  in  their  social  CHAP.  i.
organisation,  in  their  spiritual  creed.  They  were
no  longer  outwardly  bound  together  by  civil  ties.
Subject  to  different  monarchs,  they  even  served
in  adverse  armies.  Their  hereditary  sovereignty
was  lost.  But  political  separation  did  not  destroy
true  fellowship.  The  unity  of  a  church  succeeded
to  the  unity  of  a  nation ;  and  the  scattered
members  of  the  religious  society  looked  forward
in  common  to  the  eternal  kingdom  of  a  future
Son  of  David.  At  the  same  time  the  service  of
the  synagogues  was  added  to  that  of  the  Temple.
A  hierarchy  whose  power  was  derived  from  edu-
cation and  not  from  descent,  grew  up,  and  more
than  rivalled  the  power  of  the  priests.  The
labour  of  these  scribes  witnessed  to  the  cessation
of  prophecy,  and  jealously  guarded  the  heritage
which  it  had  left.  As  a  necessary  consequence
religion  assumed  a  more  distinctly  personal  cha-
racter. The  house  of  prayer  and  the  skilled
teacher  brought  it  close  to  the  home  of  each  Jew.
Exile  had  taught  men,  when  they  were  removed
from  their  holy  place,  the  full  blessing  of  spiritual
communion  with  GOD.  In  the  strength  of  this
faith  they  were  allowed  to  gaze  upon  the  con-
flicts of  good  and  evil  in  a  higher  world  ;  and  the
enemy  of  GOD  was  seen  at  length  in  his  personal  Zech.iii.l.
power.

6—2


84          The  Discipline  of  the  Dispersion.

CHAP.  i.  27.  Thus  Persia  wrought  out  its  work  upon
the  Jews,  and  when  the  discipline  was  ended  the
people  were  prepared  to  meet  the  new  influences
of  Greece.  The  most  abiding  monument  of  the
triumphs  of  Alexander  was  the  city  which  he
chose  to  bear  his  name  in  the  border  land  of
the  East  and  West ;  and  the  spirit  of  Alexandria
nowhere  found  a  truer  expression  than  in  the
Jewish  colony  which  from  the  first  formed  an
important  element  in  its  population.  The  Alex-
andrine Jews  penetrated  deeply  into  the  specula-
tions of  Greek  philosophy,  and  their  national  faith
gained  breadth  without  losing  its  individuality.
Nor  was  the  influence  of  Greece  upon  Judaism,
which  was  strong  at  Alexandria,  confined  to  that
centre.  It  was  spread  from  the  first  more  or  less
throughout  Asia  Minor  and  Syria.  The  policy
of  conquerors  and  the  instinct  of  commerce  scat-
tered the  Jews  over  the  whole  civilised  world.
The  dispersion,  which  was  begun  on  the  return
from  Babylon,  was  extended.  Judaism  adopted
a  new  language  for  its  ancient  doctrines.  A  people
who  had  once  been  bound  by  the  strictest  ritual-
ism within  the  narrow  limits  of  one  land  were
found  throughout  all  nations  witnessing  to  the
spiritual  truths  which  they  had  inherited  and
preparing  the  way  for  a  universal  faith.  The
Hellenists  were  thus  at  once  missionaries  and


The   Growth  of  the  Doctrine  of  Messiah.    85

prophets.  They  proclaimed  a  purer  creed  to  CHAP.  i.
the  heathen,  who  gathered  round  the  synagogue
without  formally  taking  upon  themselves  the
covenant  of  Israel;  and  they  lifted  the  thoughts
of  their  countrymen  to  the  prospect  of  a  spiritual
law  circumscribed  by  no  requirements  of  season
or  place.


28.  One  special  feature  of  the  growth  of
Hellenism  among  the  Jews  demands  a  passing
notice.  The  spirit  of  independent  thought  led  to
the  foundation  of  sects.  The  conflicting  tendencies
which  coexist  everywhere  in  religious  societies
found  separate  embodiments.  Freedom,  ritualism
and  asceticism  found  a  characteristic  expression
in  Sadducees,  Pharisees  and  Essenes.  The  whole
breadth  and  depth  of  the  national  faith,  so  to
speak,  was  tested.  Nor  was  a  fiery  trial  wanting
when  the  elements  of  truth  and  error  were  in
danger  of  being  fatally  confounded.  The  Macca-
baean  conflict  restored  the  Law  to  its  true  supre-
macy while  it  left  untouched  all  that  was  nobler
in  the  lessons  of  Greek  art  and  culture.  A  final
struggle  fixed  the  limits  of  the  teaching  of  the
ancient  prophets,  and  founded  the  stability  of
the  nation  on  the  victorious  profession  of  its
completed  faith.


86  The  Doctrine  of  Messiah,

CHAP.  i.  29.  Meanwhile  through  these  vicissitudes  of
disaster  and  triumph  one  faith  grew  in  many
fashions  and  in  many  parts.  The  Jews  never
lost  the  sense  of  the  blessing  which  was  to
come  through  them  to  all  the  nations.  Up  to
the  giving  of  the  Law  no  personal  trait  of  the
promised  Redeemer  is  found.  Hope  was  centred
in  a  narrower  circle  at  each  great  crisis  in  the
spiritual  history  of  mankind,  in  a  race,  in  a  nation,
in  a  tribe,  in  a  family.  For  the  first  time  the  work
of  Moses  furnished  occasion  to  a  special  portraiture
of  Messiah's  office.  He  was  to  be  the  mediator  of
a  new  Law.  To  establish  an  abiding  covenant
between  GOD  and  man  was  declared  to  be  the
substance  of  His  work.  The  Law  alone  was  un-
able to  train  the  Jews  to  their  appointed  work.
A  kingdom  was  established,  and  with  it  a  new  con-
ception of  Messiah  was  added.  The  king  who  gave
unity  and  security  to  the  nation  was  but  a  type  of
the  Son  of  David  whose  kingdom  should  extend
in  eternal  blessings  over  all  the  world.  The
earthly  sovereignty  of  the  line  of  David  fell.  The
chosen  people  passed  into  captivity,  and  under
the  pressure  of  national  disaster  learnt  from  the
teaching  of  prophets  to  see  in  their  promised
Messiah  'a  Son  of  Man,'  who  should  sympathise
with  the  sufferings  of  those  whom  He  came  to  save
as  well  as  to  govern.  Thus  the  central  belief,  in


The  Doctrine  of  Messiah.  87

virtue  of  which  Judaism  lived,  was  providentially  CHAP.  i.
shaped  in  the  progress  of  the  history  of  the  chosen
people.  Nothing  was  lost  as  the  conception  of
the  Redeemer  was  gradually  completed.  Each
period  added  something  which  belongs  essentially
to  the  fulness  of  the  conception.  And  so  at  last
the  Lawgiver,  the  King,  the  Prophet,  the  Priest,
the  Man,  are  all  included  in  the  Christ  whom  the
Gospels  present  to  us.

30.  Two  characteristic  doctrines  which  be-
longed in  their  completest  forms  respectively  to
Palestine  and  Alexandria  summed  up  this  na-
tional belief  at  the  time  of  the  Lord's  Coming.
The  expectation  of  a  Messiah  '  who  should  redeem
'  Israel,'  and  the  belief  in  a  Divine  Word  by  whom
GOD  could  reveal  Himself  to  mankind  at  large.
The  first  hope  found  expression  in  a  series  of
so-called  apocryphal  writings  which  generally
agree  in  describing  a  period  of  intense  suffering,
followed  by  the  advent  of  a  triumphant  Con-
queror, who  should  bring  beneath  his  sceptre
and  the  Law  all  the  nations  of  the  earth.  The
process  of  the  consummation  is  variously  pictured
according  to  the  position  in  which  the  several
writers  stood.  At  one  time  an  era  of  blessing,  at
another  an  era  of  vengeance  fills  the  imagination
of  the  seer.  But  the  earth  is  the  scene  of  both.


88  The  Doctrine  of  Messiah.

CHAP.  i.  The  purification  of  the  soul  through  suffering,  the
end  of  the  great  tragedy  of  human  life,  finds  no
fitting  place  in  the  schemes  of  outward  aggrand-
isement. 'The  master  of  Israel'  was  startled
at  the  seeming  paradox  of  a  second  birth.  In
proportion  as  the  teaching  of  the  prophets  was
made  more  definite,  its  traits  were  exaggerated
and  externalised.  But  in  spite  of  error  and
prejudice  the  hope  of  the  Palestinian  Jew  was  in
a  Person,  a  Saviour.  The  deliverance  for  which
he  confidently  looked  was  to  be  wrought  out
among  men.  It  was  to  be  historical  in  its
foundation  and  not  moral  only  or  intellectual.
He  through  whom  it  should  be  accomplished
was  recognised  as  'the  Son  of  GOD,'  but  none
the  less  its  end  was  to  be  the  restoration  of  the
kingdom.

31.  At  the  same  time  while  this  external
conception  of  Messiah  was  gaining  defmiteness
and  strength,  wider  views  of  the  general  action
of  GOD  were  gradually  opened.  Religious  think-
ers, especially  in  Egypt,  pondered  on  the  way  in
which  we  may  conceive  an  Infinite  Being  in  con-
nexion with  the  finite.  The  result  was  a  wide-
spread doctrine  of  a  Divine  Word  through  whom
GOD  was  supposed  to  be  revealed  in  action  and  in
utterance.  In  Palestine  this  Word  was  regarded


The  Doctrine  of  the  Word.  89

chiefly  as  the  medium  of  outward  communication,  CHAP.  i.

like  the  angel  of  the  Pentateuch :  at  Alexandria

as   the   power   in   virtue   of  which   a  fellowship

between  GOD  and  man  is  rendered  possible.     The

one  doctrine  tended  towards  the  recognition  of  a

divine  Person  subordinate  to  GOD  :  the  other  to

the  recognition  of  a  twofold  personality  in  the

divine  nature.     In  Greek  writers,  like  Philo,  the

conception  of  the  Word  was  further  enlarged  by

the  ambiguity  of  the  term  Logos,  which  was  used

to  express  it.     As  this  might  be  taken  for  '  Word '

or  '  Reason,'  so  the  corresponding  idea  fluctuated

between  the  objective  manifestation  of  the  Divine

will  and  the  subjective  correlative,  whether  in  the

mind  of  GOD  in  which  the  primal  thought  lay,

or  in  the  mind  of  man  by  which  he  apprehends

the  revelation.     Each  varying  notion  has  obvious

points  of  connexion  with  Christian  dogma,  and

just  as  the  Jewish  belief  in  Messiah  preserved

the  belief  in  a  historic  Saviour,  so  the  Jewish

belief  in  the  Word  prepared  the  way  for  a  larger

view  of  a  revelation  of  GOD  in  man  and  through

man.

32.  The  two  complementary  conceptions  of
a  Saviour  manifested  on  earth  and  of  an  eternal
omnipresent  Word  thus  existed  side  by  side,  but
they  were  absolutely  unconnected.  Philo  may


90      The  Preparation  of  the  Gentile  world.

CHAP.  i.  have  conceived  of  the  Word  as  acting  through
Messiah,  but  not  as  one  with  Him.  The  lines  of
thought  which  pointed  to  the  action  of  a  second
Person  in  the  Godhead,  and  to  the  victories  of
some  future  conqueror,  were  not  even  parallel  but
divergent.  It  was  reserved  for  St  John  to  unite
the  antithetic  truths  in  one  divine  phrase,  which
could  not  have  entered  into  the  mind  of  Philo.

Johni.       'The  Word  was  GOD,... and  the  Word  was  made
1 14.

'  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us.'

33.  But  the  preparation  of  Judaism  was  not
the  only  preparation  for  Christianity.  In  another
sense  the  Gentile  world  were  making  all  things
ready  for  the  advent.  The  vast  monarchies  of
the  East,  the  intellectual  culture  of  Greece,  the
civil  organisation  of  Rome,  each  fitted  men  in
some  peculiar  way  for  the  reception  of  the  message
of  the  Gospel.  The  spirit  of  the  East  made  itself
felt  directly  through  the  Jewish  nation  while
prophets  yet  spoke  to  interpret  its  lessons.  The
teaching  of  Greece  was  reflected  more  or  less
clearly  in  the  common  version  of  the  Sacred
Books  and  in  the  speculations  of  an  influential
school  of  Jewish  teachers,  both  in  Palestine  and
in  the  Dispersion.  The  material  unity  and  order
of  the  Roman  Empire  prepared  the  way  for  the
spread  of  a  new  Faith  and  furnished  the  type  of


The  Development  of  Greek  life.  91

a  universal  kingdom.  But  it  is  not  our  purpose  CHAP.  i.
now  to  consider  the  relative  effects  of  Greece  or
Rome  on  Judaism  or  Christianity,  but  rather  to
estimate  generally  what  ancient  life  in  its  noblest
forms  was  in  itself  as  a  step  in  the  progress  of
humanity.

34.  Something,  indeed,  has  been  said  already
of  the  direct  influence  of  Greece  upon  Jewish
development.  But  the  independent  progress  of
classical  thought  and  life  had  in  itself,  though
indirectly,  a  more  important  bearing  on  the  con-
summation of  the  crisis  of  human  life  at  the  time
when  Christ  came.  In  a  word,  it  may  be  said
that  the  history  of  the  ancient  world  is  generally
the  history  of  the  gradual  separation  of  man  from
GOD,  so  far  as  the  original  relation  was  the  ground-
work of  faith  and  personal  devotion.  At  the  same
time  the  civil  power  was  more  and  more  central-
ised and  offered  as  the  object  towards  which  the
highest  hopes  of  the  citizen  might  be  directed.
The  standards  which  bore  the  image  of  the
Emperor  became  the  idols  of  the  Roman  army;
and  in  its  essence  the  idea  of  Imperialism  is  the
human  antithesis  to  the  Homeric  sovereignty  of
Zeus.  It  would  be  easy  to  trace  out  the  necessary
progress  of  this  elimination  of  the  heavenly,
externally  religious,  element  from  Gentile  life  in


92  The  Development  of  Greek  life.

CHAP.  i.  society,  literature,  and  thought.  The  instinct  from
which  this  element  derived  its  origin  and  strength
could  not  bear  a  rigid  analysis,  nor  meet  the  mani-
fold difficulties  of  a  complex  polity.  Step  by  step
the  patriarchal  communities,  in  which  the  ruler  and
the  priest  were  one,  passed  into  the  great  republics,
where  a  solemn  ceremonial  witnessed  to  a  feeling
of  religion,  powerful  only  as  an  instrument  to  rule
the  masses.  A  single  century,  but  that  a  century
which  ranks  in  the  richness  and  variety  of  its
mental  results  only  after  the  first  and  sixteenth,
saw  the  passage  from  the  pious  theocratic  history
of  Herodotus  to  the  self-reliant,  human  analysis  of
national  fortunes  in  Thucydides;  from  the  awful
questionings  on  fate  and  foreknowledge  and  future
punishment  in  ^Eschylus,  which  sound  like  echoes
of  a  Hebrew  prophet,  to  the  intellectual  natural-
ism of  Euripides ;  from  the  rude  choric  song,  in
which  still  lingered  some  sense  of  the  personal
bounty  of  a  GOD  of  gladness,  to  the  conventional
portraiture  of  an  artificial  life  in  the  comedies
of  Menander.  The  advance  of  philosophy  was
scarcely  less  rapid.  The  discussions  on  being
which  occupied  the  earliest  thinkers,  passed  into
discussions  on  knowing.  Aristotle  sums  up  the
results  of  all  who  had  gone  before  him  with  stern
impartiality,  and  a  school  of  scepticism  followed.
Thenceforth  philosophy  was  content  to  treat  of


The  Development  of  Roman  life.  93

duty   and   to   abdicate   the    higher    prerogatives  CHAP.  i.
which  it  had  once  claimed.

35.  The  growth  of  the  Roman  Empire  is  the
noblest  spectacle  of  the  natural  triumph  of  human
power,  as  it  was  based  upon  the  surest  of  human
affections.  But  like  Greek  philosophy  the  Roman
constitution  contained  essentially  in  itself  the
seeds  of  its  own  ruin.  The  conception  of  the
family  bound  together  by  a  common  worship  on
which  the  state  was  built  was  unequal  to  meet
the  difficulties  of  enlarged  dominion.  First  arose
the  divisions  in  the  capital  itself  when  the  pater-
nal authority  of  those  who  had  been  once  fathers
in  act  as  well  as  in  name  was  unable  to  satisfy  the
wants  of  the  multitude  who  had  placed  themselves
under  their  protection.  Next  the  policy  of  iso-
lation and  civil  independence,  by  which  the  early
republic  had  sought  to  keep  in  contented  loyalty
her  subject  states,  was  inapplicable  to  the  wider
dominion  of  later  times.  The  idea  of  the  family
and  with  it  that  of  religion  was  lost ;  and  when
Rome  had  conquered  the  world,  it  was  felt  on
every  side  that  one  irresponsible  will  could  alone
wield  the  resources  of  the  state.  The  soul  was
gone  when  the  body  had  reached  its  full  develop-
ment. Yet  even  thus  the  influence  of  Rome  upon
Christianity  was  not  less  than  that  of  Greece.  If


94  The  Development  of  Roman  life.

CHAP.  i.  the  speculations  of  Greek  thinkers  had  raised
problems  and  fashioned  a  language  which  could
aid  Christian  teachers  in  unfolding  the  doctrine  of
the  Divine  Nature,  the  determinations  of  Roman
jurists  were  equally  powerful  in  preparing  for  the
exhibition  of  the  relation  of  man  to  GOD,  which
was  the  office  of  the  Latin  Church.  But  this  work
was  still  future  and  unperceived.  For  the  pre-
sent even  the  splendours  of  the  reign  of  Augustus
were  a  sign  of  failure.  Greek  speculation  had
ended  in  scepticism.  The  constitutional  liberty
of  Rome  had  issued  in  Imperialism.  The  pro-
mise which  the  Jew  had  inherited  from  his  fathers
alone  waited  for  an  accomplishment,  which  each
change  seemed  to  bring  nearer.

36.  Thus  the  fulness  and  the  exhaustion  of
hope  met  at  the  epoch  of  Christ's  coming.  The
hope  of  an  external  deliverance  which  had  been
gradually  moulded  through  a  long  history  was
waiting  its  fulfilment.  The  hope  which  man  had
formed  of  working  out  his  own  way  to  truth  and
freedom  was  wellnigh  quenched.  Old  forms  of
belief,  old  modes  of  government,  were  passing
away.  It  was  felt  that  '  the  world's  great  age'  was
even  then  to  begin  anew.  Carried  away  by  this
belief,  Romans  saw  in  the  rise  of  Imperialism  the
promise  of  a  Golden  Age.  But  the  imagery  of


Revealed  Religion  progressive,  95

the  Augustan  poet,  who  described  the  advent  of  CHAP.  i.
this  glorious  time,  was  borrowed  from  the  East,
and  it  was  to  the  East  that  many  still  looked  for
the  great  Conqueror.  So  firm  and  so  widespread
was  this  expectation  that  nearly  seventy  years
afterwards  Vespasian  was  thought  to  have  ful-
filled the  prophecy  by  passing  from  Syria  to  the
throne  of  the  Caesars.  It  is  needless  however  to
dwell  upon  this  instinctive  homage  of  the  age  to
the  LORD  whom  it  knew  not.  It  may  have  been
a  mere  echo  of  Jewish  hopes,  or  one  of  those
intuitive  interpretations  of  a  great  crisis  which
seem  to  rise  simultaneously  in  the  hearts  of  na-
tions. So  much  at  least  is  clear  to  us  now,  that
the  Coming  of  Christ  coincided  with  the  beginning
of  a  new  life  in  mankind,  with  a  new  development
of  history  which  is  not  yet  completed ;  and,  yet
more  than  this,  that  the  principles  of  this  life  are
found  in  their  simplest  form  in  the  Gospels.

37.  Judaism  had  existed  in  the  face  of  every
form  of  antagonistic  religion,  but  it  had  not  sub-
dued them.  It  had  the  power  of  life,  but  not  the
power  of  conquest.  The  life  of  Christianity  lay
in  progress.  It  was  essentially  aggressive  and  es-
sentially human.  Christ  was  the  Son  of  Man  as
well  as  the  Son  of  David.  And  thus  through  the
Apostles  first  all  the  treasures  of  the  East  were


96  Religion  progressive.

CHAP.  i.  brought  to  the  Western  nations  in  a  form  which
they  could  appreciate  and  accept.  The  strength
of  modern  civilisation  lies  in  the  combination  of
faith  and  reason — to  use  the  shortest  phrase —
which  was  the  issue  of  their  message.  The  power
of  their  Gospel  was  felt  far  beyond  the  range  of
its  acknowledged  influence.  The  old  philosophies
were  quickened  with  a  new  life.  Christianity  had
revealed  the  seat  of  their  weakness,  and  enthusi-
astic teachers  endeavoured  to  supply  what  was
wanting  in  them.  Classical  paganism  itself  was
made  to  assume  a  new  dress,  and  the  bitterest
enemy  of  the  faith  acknowledged  its  inherent
power  by  a  vain  endeavour  to  transfer  its  spirit
to  the  polytheistic  creed.

38.  These  considerations  suggest  a  conclusive
answer  to  a  fallacy  which  has  come  to  be  regarded
as  a  truism.  It  is  said  that  while  science  is  pro-
gressive religion  is  stationary.  The  modes  of  ad-
vance in  the  two  are  certainly  not  the  same,  but
the  advance  in  science  is  not  more  real  than  the
advance  in  religion.  Each  proceeds  according  to
its  proper  law.  The  advance  in  religion  is  not
measured  by  an  addition  to  a  former  state,  which
can  be  regarded  in  its  fulness  separately,  but  by
a  change :  it  is  represented  not  by  a  common  dif-
ference but  by  a  common  ratio.  Viewed  in  this


Religion  progressive.  97

light,  we  can  trace  on  a  great  scale  the  triple  CHAP.  i.
division  of  post-Christian  history  as  marked  by
the  successive  victories  of  the  Faith.  The  fact
of  the  Resurrection  is  its  starting-point,  the  real-
isation of  the  Resurrection  is  its  goal.  The  ful-
ness of  the  Truth  is  once  shewn  to  men,  as  in
old  times  the  awful  splendours  of  the  Theocracy,
and  then  they  are  charged  to  work  out  in  the
slow  struggles  of  life  the  ideal  which  they  have
been  permitted  to  contemplate.  Thus  it  is  that
we  can  look  without  doubt  or  misgiving  upon
the  imperfections  of  the  sub-apostolic  Church  or
the  corruptions  of  the  middle  ages  or  the  excesses
of  the  Reformation.  Even  through  these  the
divine  work  went  forward.  The  power  of  the
Resurrection  was  ever  carried  over  a  wider  field.
At  first  Christianity  moved  in  the  family,  hallow-
ing every  simplest  relation  of  life.  This  was  the
work  of  the  primitive  Church.  Next  it  extended
its  sway  to  the  nation  and  the  community,  claim-
ing to  be  heard  in  the  assemblies  of  princes  and
in  the  halls  of  counsellors.  This  was  the  work  of
the  mediaeval  Church.  Now  it  has  a  still  wider
mission,  to  assert  the  common  rights  and  fellow-
ship of  men,  to  rise  from  the  family  and  the  nation
to  humanity  itself.  To  accomplish  this  is  the
charge  which  is  entrusted  to  the  Church  of  the
Present ;  and  no  vision  of  the  purity  or  grandeur
w.  R.  7


98  The  Greek  Period:   Orthodox.

CHAP.  i.  of  earlier  times  should  blind  us  to  the  supreme
majesty  of  the  part  which  is  assigned  to  us  in
the  economy  of  faith.

39.  It  is  at  once  obvious  that  these  great
divisions  of  Christian  history,  or  even  more  truly
speaking  of  the  post-Christian  world,  answer  in  a
remarkable  degree  to  the  periods  of  Jewish  his-
tory which  have  been  already  marked  out.     The
law  of  progress  is  the  same  in  both.     But  if  his-
tory repeats  itself,  it  is,  at  least  in  this  case,  on
an  ampler  field  and  with  more  momentous  issues.
The  discipline  of  a  nation  is  replaced  by  the  dis-
cipline of  a  world ;  and  (as  we  believe)  an  Advent
of  Triumph  answers  to  an  Advent  of  Redemp-
tion.    Without  following  out  this  parallel  further,
though  it  seems  to  include  many  unexpected  har-
monies in  things  old  and  new,  we  must  yet  notice
a   progress   in    Christianity   itself    corresponding
with  this  progress  in  its  work.     The  three  words
which  by  common  consent  characterise  the  great
representative  Churches  of  the  different  periods
describe    the    successive    stages    into    which    it
may  be  divided,  Orthodoxy,  Catholicity,  Evangeli-
calism.

40.  At  first  the  Christian  Faith  was  simply
historic.     As  long  as  its  work  was  confined  in  the


The  Greek  Period:   Orthodox.  99

narrow  limits  of  the  family  or  of  the  small  commu-  CHAP.  i.
nities  scattered  throughout  the  Empire,  consider-
able latitude  in  interpreting  the  fundamental
facts  on  which  it  rested  was  natural  or  even  ne-
cessary. The  principles  of  Truth  were  held  firm,
but  no  deductions  from  them  were  authorised.
The  rapid  spread  of  Christianity  through  every
rank  made  this  state  of  things  impossible  for
any  great  length  of  time.  Philosophers  became
Apologists  and  reasoned  in  turn  upon  the  truths
which  they  defended.  Yet  even  thus  heresy  was
long  active  in  every  direction  laying  down  false
conclusions  before  the  Church  assumed  the  peril-
ous function  of  defining  the  Truth.  But  the
work  was  done  by  those  who  by  natural  gifts
and  intellectual  training  were  best  fitted  for  its
accomplishment.  It  was  the  glory  of  the  Greek
Church  to  win  the  title  of  Orthodox.  But  the
work  of  the  Orthodox  Church  though  necessary
was  full  of  danger.  There  is  a  strange  fascination
in  reasoning  on  mysteries.  As  the  argument  pro-
ceeds men  are  unwilling  to  limit  their  conclu-
sions, and  they  end  too  often  by  measuring  Being
by  our  conceptions  of  it.  But  yet  more  than
this :  doctrine  itself  is  external  to  us.  There  is
no  right  doctrine  which  ought  not  to  affect  con-
duct, but  as  doctrine  it  has  no  necessary  effect
on  life :  no  conquering  or  transforming  power.

7—2


100  The  Roman  Period:   Catholic.

CHAP.  i.  The  effects  of  a  predominantly  speculative  study
of  Christianity  were  seen  before  long  in  the  cha-
racter and  fortunes  of  the  Eastern  Communion.
The  Orthodox  Church  is  the  least  inclined  of  all
churches  to  missionary  work.  Its  part  hitherto,
since  its  first  great  triumphs,  has  been  that  of  a
witness  rather  than  that  of  a  herald.  It  could
hardly  have  been  otherwise.  Orthodoxy  as  such
is  the  translation  of  facts  into  a  dialectic  form ;
but  the  life,  the  power  of  assimilation  and  expan-
sion, remains  in  the  facts.  Unhappily  the  Greek
Church  from  the  time  when  its  original  mission
was  fulfilled  was  united  with  Imperialism.  Its
potential  dangers  were  thus  realised,  and  Mo-
hammedanism conquered  the  East.  It  has  been
said  that  the  Byzantine  Empire  died  of  Chris-
tianity :  it  would  be  more  just  to  say  that  the
Byzantine  Empire  sought  to  imperialise  Chris-
tianity and  perished  in  the  attempt,  for  Greek
Christianity  was  strong  enough  only  to  rescue
itself  and  not  the  State  from  the  ruins  of  the
judgment  which  followed.

41.  But  meanwhile  a  greater  Church  had
risen.  When  Constantine  transferred  the  dignity
of  Empire  to  his  new  capital  he  was  unable  to
bear  away  to  Byzantium  the  ancient  glory  and
name  of  Rome.  The  majesty  which  had  grown


The  Roman  Period:    Catholic.  101

round  the  city  during  a  thousand  years  remained  CHAP.  i.
undisturbed  as  the  prize  of  the  power  which
should  prove  worthy  to  claim  it.  And  the  Roman
Church  was  alone  able  to  bear  the  weight  of
sovereignty,  for  she  alone  had  life  amidst  the
shadows  which  lingered  round  the  ancient  seats
of  honour.  From  the  first,  if  we  can  interpret
rightly  its  fragmentary  records,  the  Roman  Church
had  adopted  something  of  the  policy  of  the
Roman  State.  It  had  regarded  ecclesiastical
problems  from  the  point  of  view  of  society.  Its
characteristic  was  breadth  rather  than  precision.
In  proportion  as  it  embodied  more  and  more
openly  the  style  and  power  of  the  Csesars,  Ca-
tholicity became  more  conspicuously  its  ruling
principle.  Its  aim  was  to  incorporate  rather  than
to  assimilate  the  people  who  were  brought  under
its  control.  The  Republic  received  the  gods  of
conquered  nations  within  its  Pantheon,  and  the
Church  accepted  under  new  titles  such  popular
beliefs  and  superstitions  as  could  be  fitly  clothed
in  a  Christian  dress.  The  policy  of  the  Roman
Church  was  to  deal  with  society  as  it  was,  and
not  to  rebuild  it  again  from  its  simplest  elements.
Thus  equally  from  its  position  and  from  its  in-
herent character  it  became  a  sovereign  power.
At  Constantinople  the  attempt  was  made  to  im-
perialise  the  Church:  at  Rome  the  Church  became


102  The  Evangelical  Period.

CHAP.  i.  an  Empire.  The  transformation  was  subservient
if  not  essential  to  the  fulfilment  of  its  work.  By
the  glory  of  its  name  and  the  strength  of  its
organisation  it  conquered  the  northern  tribes  and
preserved  the  treasures  of  ancient  civilisation
for  a  higher  use.  At  the  same  time  it  presented
the  noble  spectacle  of  a  universal  spiritual  power
side  by  side  with  the  temporal  power,  and  inde-
pendent of  it.  In  these  respects  its  function  with
regard  to  discipline  was  as  needful  as  that  of  the
Greek  Church  with  regard  to  Truth.  But  the
traditional  policy  which  was  its  strength  prepared
the  way  for  its  corruption.  When  the  Church
became  nobler  outwardly,  it  engrossed  more  com-
pletely the  devotion  of  its  members,  and  con-
versely it  became  more  dependent  on  popular
opinion.  At  last  the  Christian  was  in  danger  of
losing  his  sense  of  a  personal  connexion  with
Christ;  and  the  simplicity  of  Truth  was  hidden
beneath  the  accretions  of  centuries.  The  spirit
of  Northern  Europe,  which  had  never  been  com-
pletely Romanised,  had  in  the  meantime  gained
maturity,  and  claimed  in  the  full  consciousness  of
life  to  hold  communion  with  GOD  face  to  face.

42.  Thus  a  third  development  of  the  Church
began  corresponding  to  a  new  period  of  life ;  but
it  differed  from  those  which  preceded  by  the  fact


The  successive  periods  mark  an  advance.  103

that  it  was  manifold  and  not  one.  It  was  essen-  CHAP.  i.
tially  the  expression  of  individual  faith  and  not
of  common  belief.  Its  ecclesiastical  forms  fol-
lowed from  the  concurrence  of  private  convictions,
and  did  not  underlie  and  mould  the  societies
which  arose.  Its  strength  lay  in  the  confident
affirmation  of  two  great  principles,  that  the  Chris-
tian is  continuously  in  direct  spiritual  intercourse
with  GOD  through  Christ,  and  that  he  is  throughout
continuously  responsible  to  Him  for  his  judgment
in  divine  matters.  Personal  vitality  was  infused
into  religion.  Faith  claimed  the  homage  of  free
reason.  Individuality  was  added  to  Catholicism.

43.  It  would  be  easy  to  point  out  the  weak-
ness of  the  Reformation  in  itself  as  a  power  of
organisation.  Its  function  was  to  quicken  rather
than  to  create,  to  vivify  old  forms  rather  than  to
establish  new.  But  however  we  may  grieve  over
its  failure  where  it  arrogated  the  office  not  of  re-
storation but  of  reconstruction,  it  was  a  distinct
advance  in  Christian  life.  Where  it  failed,  it  failed
from  the  neglect  of  the  infirmities  of  man  and
of  the  provisions  which  have  been  divinely  made,
to  meet  them.  On  the  other  hand,  the  lessons
which  it  taught  are  still  fruitful  throughout
Christendom,  and  destined,  as  we  hope,  to  bring
forth  a  still  more  glorious  harvest.  What  that


104  The  successive  periods

CHAP.  i.  may  be  we  cannot  as  yet  know,  but  all  past
history  teaches  us  that  the  power  of  the  Gospel
is  able  to  meet  each  crisis  of  human  progress,
and  we  can  look  forward  with  trust  to  the  fulfil-
ment of  its  message  to  our  age.  The  advance
towards  that  perfection  of  Christian  fellowship
which  we  can  all  imagine,  and  to  look  forward  to
which  is  our  noblest  hope,  may  be  slow,  but  it  is
slow  only  in  the  same  sense  in  which  the  life  of
nations  is  slow.  Generations  are  the  days  by
which  it  is  measured,  but  in  the  end  it  will  not
Matt.  xiii.  fail.  The  parables  of  nature  are  fulfilled  in  the

qi oq  -*•

Mark  iv.     history  of  the  Church.
26—29.

44.  The  student  of  history  will  readily  see
that  the  great  forms  of  Christian  progress  which
have  been  marked  out  correspond  in  a  remarkable
manner  with  other  great  periods  in  art  and  litera-
ture and  science.  The  divisions  are  neither  arbi-
trary nor  applicable  only  to  some  parts  of  human
life.  The  final  result  of  each  was  a  permanent
advance,  and  the  power  by  which  each  was  ani-
mated was  drawn  from  the  Gospel.  If  the  fact
of  the  Resurrection  be  in  itself,  as  it  confessedly
is,  absolutely  unique  in  all  human  experience,  the
point  which  it  occupies  in  history  is  absolutely
unique  also.  To  this  point  all  former  history
converges  as  to  a  certain  goal :  from  this  point  all


mark  an  advance.  105

subsequent  history  flows  as  from  its  life-giving  CHAP.  i.
spring1.  If  the  Resurrection  were  alleged  to
have  occurred  abruptly  in  the  middle  of  a  series  of
events  which  passed  on  slowly  to  their  consumma-
tion unaffected  by  its  interruption ;  if  it  stood  in
no  definite  relation  to  the  past,  as  in  some  sense  a
solution  of  the  riddle  which  had  baffled  exhausted
nations :  if  its  significance  had  not  been  witnessed
to  at  once  by  the  rise  of  a  new  and  invincible
power  which  fashioned  the  development  of  all
aftertime  :  then  we  might  have  paused  in  doubt
before  so  stupendous  a  miracle,  and  pleaded  the
uniformity  of  nature  against  the  claims  of  such  an
event  upon  our  belief.  But  now  the  testimony  of
nature  itself  is  in  favour  of  the  fact.  We  form
our  notions  of  a  result  from  what  we  know  of  the


1  Tert.  de  Virg.  Vel.  \.  Nihil  sine  fetate  est :  omnia  tempus
expectant.... Aspice  ipsam  creaturam  paulatim  ad  fructumpro-
moveri.  Granum  est  primo,  et  de  grano  frutex  oritur,  et  de
frutice  arbuscula  enititur.  Deinde  rami  et  frondes  invalescunt,
et  toturu  arboris  nomen  expanditur :  inde  germinis  tumor,  et
flos  de  germine  solvitur,  et  de  flore  fructus  aperitur.  Is  quoque
rudis  aliquarndiu  et  informis  paulatim  aetatem  suam  dirigens
eruditur  in  mansuetudinem  saporis.  Sic  et  justitia  (nam  idem
Deus  justitise  et  creaturas)  primo  fuit  in  rudimentis,  natura
Deum  metuens.  Deninc  per  legem  et  prophetas  promovit  in
infantiam.  Dehinc  per  evangelium  efferbuit  in  juventutem.
Nunc  (the  words  admit  a  Catholic  interpretation)  per  Paracletum
coniponitur  in  maturitatem. . .  I  should  despair  of  rendering  the
words  adequately  into  English.  As  a  master  of  rhetorical  lan-
guage the  '  barbarian '  Tertullian  has  few  rivals.


106  The  Special  Evidence

CHAP.  i.  conditions  under  which  the  forces  act,  no  less
than  from  what  we  know  of  the  forces  themselves.
If  the  force  is'  the  same  we  are  sure  that  it  must
act  differently  under  varied  circumstances.  If
the  circumstances  are  absolutely  singular  in  all
experience  we  conclude  that  an  event  will  occur
without  a  parallel.  If  a  long  train  of  occurrences
before  and  after  lead  us  to  expect  that  the  event
would  be  of  some  specific  kind,  then  its  singu-
larity is  an  argument  in  favour  of  its  credibility
and  not  against  it.  On  a  large  view  of  the  life  of
humanity  the  Resurrection  is  antecedently  likely.
So  far  from  being  beset  by  greater  difficulties
than  any  other  historical  fact,  it  is  the  one  fact
towards  which  the  greatest  number  of  lines  of
evidence  converge.  In  one  form  or  other  pre-
Christian  history  is  a  prophecy  of  it  and  post-
Christian  history  an  embodiment  of  it.

45.  If  we  next  turn  to  consider  the  direct
evidence  for  the  Resurrection,  we  shall  find  in  it
several  elements  of  singular  force.  These  are  the
more  deserving  of  attention,  because  the  narrative
of  the  event  itself  in  the  Gospels,  is  in  no  wise
distinguished  from  the  narrative  of  any  other  or-
dinary fact  which  they  record.  The  Evangelists
treat  the  Resurrection  as  simply,  unaffectedly,
inartificially,  as  everything  else  which  they  touch.


for  the  Resurrection.  107

The  miracle  to  them  seems  to  form  a  natural  part  CHAP.  i.
of  the  Lord's  history.  They  shew  no  conscious-
ness that  it  needs  greater  or  fuller  authentication
than  the  other  events  of  His  life.  Their  position
and  office  indeed  excluded  such  a  thought.  They
wrote  not  to  create  belief  but  to  inform  those  who
already  believed.  A  knowledge  of  the  chief  events
in  the  Lord's  ministry,  including  the  Resurrec-
tion, and  a  general  conviction  of  their  reality
and  significance,  is  everywhere  assumed  in  the
Apostolic  writings.  The  existence  of  a  Christian
society  is  the  first  and  (if  rightly  viewed)  the
final  proof  of  the  historic  truth  of  the  miracle  on
which  it  was  founded  (§§  49,  50).  It  may  indeed
be  said  that  the  Church  was  founded  upon  the
belief  in  the  Resurrection,  and  not  upon  the
Resurrection  itself:  and  that  the  testimony  must
therefore  be  limited  to  the  attestation  of  the  be-
lief, and  cannot  reach  to  the  attestation  of  the
fact.  But  belief  expressed  in  action  is  for  the
most  part  the  strongest  evidence  which  we  can
have  of  any  historic  event.  Unless  therefore  it
can  be  shewn  that  the  origin  of  the  Apostolic
belief  in  the  Resurrection,  with  due  regard  to
the  fulness  of  its  characteristic  form,  and  the
breadth  and  rapidity  of  its  propagation,  can  be
satisfactorily  explained  on  other  grounds,  the  be-
lief itself  is  a  sufficient  proof  of  the  fact.  We


108  The  witness

CHAP.  i.  shall  be  in  a  position  to  consider  whether  such  an
explanation  is  possible  when  we  have  examined
the  form  in  which  the  outward  record  of  the
belief  has  come  down  to  us.

46.  The  letters  of  St  Paul  are  amongst  the
earliest,  if  not  actually  the  earliest  writings  in  the
New  Testament.  Of  these  one  important  group
has  been  recognised  as  certainly  genuine  even
by  the  most  sceptical  critics.  No  one  doubts  that
the  Epistles  to  the  Corinthians,  Galatians,  and
Romans  were  composed  by  St  Paul,  and  addressed
to  the  Churches  whose  name  they  bear.  Nor  is
there  much  uncertainty  as  to  the  date  at  which
they  were  written.  The  most  extreme  opinions
fix  them  between  A.D.  52 — 59,  that  is  under  no
circumstances  more  than  thirty  years  after  the
Lord's  death  (A.D.  30 — 33).  There  can  then  be
no  doubt  as  to  the  authority  of  their  evidence  as
expressing  the  received  opinion  of  Christians  at
this  date,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  the
opinion  itself.  In  each  of  the  Epistles  the  literal
fact  of  the  Resurrection  is  the  implied  or  ac-
knowledged groundwork  of  the  Apostle's  teaching.
Bom.  iv.  The  very  designation  of  GOD  is  '  He  who  raised
&c  V1  ' '  UP  ^ne  Lord  from  the  dead.'  In  this  miracle  lay
the  sum  of  the  new  revelation,  the  sign  of  Christ's
Sonship.  To  believe  this  fact  and  confess  it  was


of  St  Paul.  109

the  pledge  of  salvation.  On  many  points  there  CHAP.  i.
was  a  diversity  of  judgment  among  the  Apostles,
and  a  wider  discrepancy  of  belief  among  their
professed  followers,  but  on  this  there  is  no  trace
of  disagreement.  Some,  indeed,  questioned  the
reality  of  our  own  resurrection,  but  they  were
met  by  arguments  based  on  the  Resurrection  of
Christ  which  they  acknowledged.  Whatever  else
was  doubted  this  one  event  was  beyond  dispute.

47.  Moreover  the  fact  itself  was  treated  histo-
rically and  not  ideally.  It  was  not  regarded  as  the
embodiment  of  a  great  hope,  or  as  a  consequence
of  some  pre-conceived  notion  of  the  Person  of
Christ.  On  the  contrary,  the  hope  was  expressly
rested  on  the  fact ;  and  the  Apostolic  view  of  the
nature  of  Christ  is  deduced  from  His  rising  again.
(§§  57  fT.)  In  one  place  St  Paul  has  given  an
outline  of '  the  Gospel '  by  which  men  '  were  saved.'
'  I  delivered  unto  you  first  of  all  that  which  also  1 1  Cor.  xv.

•  Q  IT

'  received,  how  that  Christ  died  for  our  sins  accord-
'  ing  to  the  Scriptures ;  and  that  He  was  buried ;
'  and  that  He  hath  been  raised  on  the  third  day,
'  according  to  the  Scriptures ;  and  that  He  ap-
'  peared  to  Cephas ;  then  to  the  twelve ;  then  He
'  appeared  to  above  five  hundred  brethren  at  once,
'  of  whom  the  greater  part  remain  until  now,  but
'some  are  fallen  asleep;  then  He  appeared  to


110  The  witness

CHAP.  i.  '  James ;  then  to  all  the  Apostles.  And  last  of  all,
'  as  unto  one  born  out  of  due  time,  He  appeared
'to  me  also... Whether  then  it  be  I  or  they,  so
'  we  preach,  and  so  ye  believed.'  Nothing  can
be  more  simply  historic.  What  we  call  the  mira-
culous facts  are  placed  beside  the  others  without
any  difference.  The  Resurrection  of  the  Lord,
and  His  appearances  after  the  Resurrection,  are
taught  as  events  of  the  same  kind  essentially,  and
to  be  received  in  the  same  way  as  His  Death  and
Burial.  Together  they  formed  '  the  Gospel ; '  and
in  this  respect,  whether  it  was  '  the  Three,'  or  St
Paul  who  preached,  the  substance  of  their  preach-
ing was  the  same.

48.  Of  '  the  five  hundred '  to  whom  Christ
appeared  many  were  still  alive  when  St  Paul
wrote.  So  too  were  most  of  the  Apostles,  who
were  their  fellow-witnesses,  as  well  as  St  Paul
himself.  Thus  we  stand,  as  it  were,  in  the  direct
presence  of  the  immediate  witnesses  of  the  fact.
But  it  has  been  said  that  the  very  circumstance
that  St  Paul  reckons  the  appearance  revealed  to
himself  in  the  same  list  with  the  other  appear-
ances, shews  that  he  did  not  insist  on  their
objective  reality :  they  may  have  been  merely
subjective  visions  as  this  is  assumed  to  be.  The
exact  converse  is,  however,  the  true  explanation


of  St  Paul.  Ill

of  the  fact.  St  Paul  believed,  and  always  acted  CHAP.  i.
as  if  he  believed,  that  the  Lord  did  appear  in
His  human  nature  as  really  to  him  as  to  the
other  witnesses  of  the  Resurrection.  He  asserts
that  all  the  appearances  were  equally  actual,  that
is,  external  manifestations  of  the  Lord,  but  not
that  they  were  all  like  in  circumstances.  There
was  an  objective  reality  in  the  revelation  of  Christ
made  to  him  no  less  than  in  the  revelations  to
others;  but  this  objective  reality  was  not  limited
to  one  outward  shape.  It  was  apprehended  (as  it
appears)  variously  by  various  minds.  Thus  we
find  that  the  forms  of  the  Lord's  manifestation
were,  according  to  the  Evangelists,  most  varied
(n.  §  18).  A  marvellous  change  had  passed  over
Him.  He  was  the  same  and  yet  different.  He
was  known  only  when  He  revealed  Himself.
He  conformed  to  the  laws  of  our  present  life,  and
yet  He  was  not  subject  to  them.  These  seeming
contradictions  were  necessarily  involved  in  the
moral  scope  of  the  Resurrection.  Christ  sought
(if  we  may  so  speak)  to  impress  on  His  disciples
two  great  lessons,  that  He  had  raised  man's  body
from  the  grave,  and  that  He  had  glorified  it.
Nor  can  we  conceive  any  way  in  which  these
truths  could  have  been  conveyed  but  by  appear-
ances at  one  time  predominantly  spiritual,  at  an-
other predominantly  material,  though  both  were


112  The  witness

CHAP.  i.  alike  real.  •  For  the  same  reason  we  may  suppose
that  the  Lord  took  up  into  His  Glorified  Body
the  material  elements  of  that  human  body  which
was  laid  in  the  grave,  though,  as  we  shall  see
(il.  §  7),  true  personality  lies  in  the  preservation
of  the  individual  formula  or  law  which  rules  the
organisation  in  each  case,  and  not  in  the  actual
but  ever  changing  organisation,  which  may  exist
at  any  moment1.  The  resumption  of  the  Cruci-
fied Body  conveyed  to  ordinary  minds  a  concep-
tion which  could  not  otherwise  easily  have  been
gained,  while  at  the  same  time  it  brought  the
fact  of  the  Resurrection  within  the  reach  (as  far
as  could  be)  of  continuous  observation.  For  us
the  appearance  to  St  Paul  would  certainly  in
itself  fail  to  satisfy  in  some  respects  the  condi-
tions of  historic  reality — it  might  have  been  an
internal  revelation — but  for  him  it  was  essentially
objective  and  outward2;  and  when  taken  in  con-

1  This  consideration  will  help  to  explain  a  difficulty  which
has  been  felt  as  to  the  appearances  of  the  Lord  after  the  Resur-
rection.   His  dress  (it  has  been  said)  must  have  been  purely  sub-
jective.   But  a  little  reflection  will  shew  that  the  special  outward
forms  in  which  the  Lord  was  pleased  to  make  Himself  sensibly
recognisable  by  His  disciples  were  no  more  necessarily  connected
with  His  glorified  Person  than  the  robes  which  He  wore.

2  It  is  important  to  observe  that  on  another  occasion  St
Paul  notices  the  doubt  which  he  felt  as  to  the  character  of  the
revelation  which  he  received :  2  Cor.  xii.  1  ff.     His  vision  of
the  Lord  was  realised  under  the  full  conditions  of  human  life  :


of  the  Apostles.  113

nexion  with  his  life  and  the  other  appearances  CHAP.  i.
which  he  records,  it  lays  open  something  more
of  the  Divine  fulness  of  the  exalted  Manhood  of
the  Risen  Saviour.

49.  It  is  unnecessary  to  dwell  longer  on  St
Paul's  direct  testimony  to  the  Resurrection,  which
is  thus  carried  up  to  the  time  of  his  Conversion,
that  is  to  a  date  not  more,  at  most,  than  ten
years  after  the  Lord's  death.  No  one  probably
will  deny  that  the  Resurrection  was  announced
as  a  fact  immediately  after  the  Passion.  No-
thing else  will  explain  the  origin  of  the  Chris-
tian Church.  We  may  go  even  further,  and  take
for  granted  that  the  Apostles  who  announced  it,
believed  in  its  reality.  The  life  of  St  Paul  may
be  considered  conclusive  on  this  point ;  and  even
if  his  life  were  explicable  on  any  other  theory
than  that  of  a  faith  which  he  claimed  to  share
with  the  other  Apostles,  it  is  long  since  a  critic
has  been  found  to  maintain  that  the  miraculous
narrative  was  an  intentional  fiction  of  those  by
whom  it  was  promulgated.  It  remains  then,  if
the  Resurrection  be  uiihistoric,  that  they  were
deceived,  and  if  so,  that  they  were  predisposed  to

his  '  ecstasy  '  left  him  uncertain  as  to  the  circumstances  under
which  he  was  allowed  to  hear  '  unspeakable  words,'  whether
'  in  the  body  '  or  '  out  of  the  body.'

W.  R.  8


114  The  witness

CHAP.  i.  a  credulous  and  ill-grounded  belief,  either  by
their  own  character,  or  by  the  popular  expecta-
tions of  the  time.

50.  Before  examining  whether  this  was  so
we  may  observe  how  incredible  it  is  from  the
nature  of  the  testimony  alleged  that  the  Apostles
could  have  been  deceived.  The  sepulchre  in  which
the  Lord  had  been  laid  was  found  empty.  This
fact  seems  to  be  beyond  all  doubt,  and  is  one
where  misconception  was  impossible.  On  the
other  hand,  the  manifestations  of  the  Risen  Sa-
viour were  widely  extended  both  as  to  persons
and  as  to  time.  St  Paul,  and  in  this  his  record  is
in  exact  accordance  with  that  of  the  Evangelists,
mentions  His  appearances  not  only  to  single  wit-
nesses, but  to  many  together,  to  '  the  twelve '
and  to  'five  hundred  brethren  at  once.'  One
person  might  be  so  led  away  by  enthusiasm  as  to
give  an  imaginary  shape  to  his  hopes,  but  it  is
impossible  to  understand  how  a  number  of  men
could  be  simultaneously  affected  in  the  same
manner1.  The  difficulty  of  course  is  further  in-

1  It  must  be  observed  that  the  question  here  is  not  as  to
the  propagation  of  a  belief  in  a  statement  through  a  large  num-
ber of  men,  but  as  to  the  simultaneous  perception  by  many  of
an  alleged  phenomenon.  The  former  is  intelligible  even  if  the
belief  be  in  fact  unfounded :  the  latter  is  not  intelligible  un-
less the  phenomenon  be  really  objective.  In  this  connexion  too


of  the  Apostles.  115

creased  if  we  take  account  of  the  variety  as  well  CHAP.  i.
as  of  the  number  of  the  persons  who  were  ap-
pealed to  as  witnesses  of  the  fact  during  their
lifetime ;  and  of  the  length  of  time  during  which
the  appearances  of  the  Lord  were  continued.
It  is  stated  in  the  Acts  that  the  necessary  quali-
fication of  an  Apostle  was  that  he  should  be  a
personal  witness  of  the  Resurrection;  and  St
Paul  admits  the  qualification,  and  shews  that  it
was  fulfilled  in  his  case.  Every  avenue  of  delu-
sion seems  to  be  closed  up.  For  forty  days  Christ
was  with  the  disciples  talking  with  them  of  the
things  pertaining  to  the  kingdom  of  GOD  (n.  §  18).
If  we  cannot  believe  that  the  Apostles  deceived
others,  it  seems  (if  possible)  still  more  unlikely
that  they  were  the  victims  of  deception.

51.     For  there  was  no  popular  belief  at  the
time  which  could  have  inspired  them  with  a  faith

it  is  most  instructive  to  notice  that  the  report  of  the  Lord's
Besurrection  was  in  each  case  disbelieved.  Nothing  less  than
sight  convinced  those  who  had  the  deepest  desire  to  believe  the
tidings  ;  and  even  sight  was  not  in  every  case  immediately  con-
vincing (Matt,  xxviii.  17).  See  [Mark]  xvi.  9—11,  13,  14.
Luke  xxiv.  11,  13,  22—24.  John  xx.  25.  In  St  Matthew  the
promised  sight  of  the  Lord  is  the  message  of  joy  which  the
women  are  to  carry  to  the  disciples :  xxviii.  7,  10.  In  St  Luke
the  contrast  between  the  effects  of  the  report  of  the  appearance
of  the  Lord  and  the  sight  of  Him  is  vividly  given  :  xxiv.  34,  35,
compared  with  36  ff.

8—2


116  No  predisposition  to

CHAP.  i.  in  an  imaginary  Resurrection.  There  was  none
among  the  Greeks  whose  mythology  might  ap-
pear at  first  sight  to  offer  scope  for  its  sponta-
neous growth.  But  without  pressing  any  parti-
cular interpretation  of  the  remarkable  words  of
St  Luke,  it  is  evident  from  the  narrative  in  the
Acts  xvii.  Acts  that  the  doctiine  of  the  Resurrection  was

•I   Q         Ort

the  chief  point  in  the  address  of  St  Paul  which
arrested  the  attention  and  excited  the  ridicule
of  his  Athenian  hearers.  And  naturally  so ;  for
while  the  legends  of  Greece  recorded  the  eleva-
tion of  men  even  to  the  honours  of  Olympus,
this  elevation  was  effected  by  the  deposition  of
their  humanity.  They  became  gods  by  ceasing
Acts  xiv.  to  be  men.  If  the  rude  inhabitants  of  Lystra,
according  to  the  faith  of  a  simpler  age,  supposed
that '  the  gods  were  come  down  in  the  likeness  of
'men,'  in  the  persons  of  Paul  and  Barnabas,  yet
in  this  case  the  outward  shape  was  but  a  disguise
in  which  it  was  believed  that  their  divine  majesty
was  veiled  and  had  110  essential  connexion  with
their  nature.  There  is  not  the  least  trace  in  the
popular  traditions  of  Greece,  much  less  in  Greek
speculation,  of  any  belief  in  the  possibility  of  the
restoration  of  the  dead  to  the  transfigured  fulness
of  a  human  life.  The  chief  myths  which  ex-
pressed the  idea  of  the  restorative  power  of  na-
ture were  drawn  from  the  stated  recurrence  of


the  idea  of  a,  Resurrection  in  Greece.    117

day  and  night,  or  from  the  annual  vicissitudes  of  CHAP.  i.
the  seasons.  Their  teaching  was  simply  of  the
inexorable  and  yet  kindly  alternations  of  dark-
ness and  light,  of  death  and  life,  without  the
element  of  progress  or  the  transforming  change  2  Cor.  iii.
'  from  glory  to  glory.'  Even  when  the  fiction
became  personal  it  stopped  short  of  the  essence
of  Christian  hope.  If  Hercules  was  fabled  to
have  met  Death  and  rescued  Alcestis  from  his
grasp  by  force,  or  to  have  descended  into  Hades
and  delivered  Theseus  from  confinement  there,
he  is  said  to  have  conferred  on  them  no  greater
blessing  than  a  fresh  span  of  earthly  existence.
If  after  the  accomplishment  of  his  labours  he
was  himself  wedded  to  immortal  Youth  in  the
mansions  of  the  gods,  it  was  not  till  he  had
ceased  to  be  the  champion  of  men,  and  had  con-
sumed in  the  fires  of  (Eta  whatever  shewed  his
fellowship  with  them.  Nowhere  else  in  ancient
mythology  is  there  a  clearer  embodiment  of  the
instinct  which  craves  for  a  personal  immortality
and  communion  with  GOD  than  in  this  noble
legend,  and  yet  even  here  the  entrance  to  the
new  life  is  symbolised  by  the  destruction  and
not  by  the  restoration  of  human  powers.  To  the
Greeks  the  Resurrection,  whether  as  the  type  or
as  the  spring  of  a  new  life,  was  a  strange  idea.


118          The  Resurrection  not  anticipated

CHAP.  i.    It  included  and  interpreted  their  old  beliefs,  but
it  also  transcended  them  (n.  §  14).

52.  Nor  was  it  otherwise  with  the  Jews.
Even  among  them  there  was  no  belief  which
could  have  furnished  the  basis  for  the  apostolic
Gospel.  There  was,  it  is  true,  a  popular  expec-
tation that  Elijah,  or  some  other  of  the  old  pro-
phets, should  be  sent  from  heaven,  whither  they
had  been  specially  withdrawn,  to  prepare  the
advent  of  Messiah ;  but  this  expectation  had  no
real  connexion  either  in  its  ground  or  in  its
scope  with  the  Resurrection  of  Christ,  as  preached
by  the  Apostles.  It  centred  in  a  direct  mission
from  GOD  and  not  in  a  rising  from  the  grave  to
a  new  life :  it  culminated  in  the  accomplishment
of  a  work  among  men,  and  not  in  the  elevation
of  humanity  to  heaven.  After  the  death  of  John
the  Baptist,  again,  some  said  'that  he  was  risen
'  from  the  dead '  when  they  heard  of  the  works
of  Christ ;  but  this  was  simply  the  interpretation
of  a  report  in  connexion  with  the  opinion  that
John  was  indeed  'Elias.'  Nothing  was  based
upon  the  conjecture.  Others,  again,  in  the  course
of  the  Lord's  ministry  were,  according  to  the
Evangelists,  restored  to  life ;  but  this  restoration
was  to  a  mortal  and  not  to  an  immortal  life.


by  popular  Jewish  belief.  119

Such  a  resurrection,  so  far  from  being  a  parallel  CHAP.  i.
to  the  Resurrection  of  Christ,  is  the  very  opposite
to  it.  The  belief  in  the  resuscitation  of  the  dead
to  the  vicissitudes  of  ordinary  life  would  indispose
for  Uie  belief  in  a  rising  to  a  life  wholly  new  in
kind  and  issue.  And  such  is  the  life  of  the  Risen
Lord  which  is  portrayed  in  the  Gospels.  Thus
while  we  admit  all  the  records  of  resuscitation
contained  in  the  Scriptures,  there  is  absolutely
not  the  slightest  anticipation  in  earlier  history
of  such  a  Resurrection  as  that  of  Christ.  The
conception  as  expressed  by  the  Evangelists  and
Apostles  has  itself  the  characteristics  of  a  Reve-
lation (comp.  II.  §  16).

53.  But  it  may  be  said  that  the  idea  was  in-
cluded in  that  of  Messiah.  There  were  it  is  true
very  vivid  anticipations  of  a  coming  Messiah,  of
some  triumphant  King  who  should  restore  the  old
glories  of  the  house  of  David,  but  the  path  which
was  marked  out  for  Him  by  common  consent  was
that  of  victory  and  not  of  defeat  and  death.
There  is  no  evidence  that  the  Jews  in  our  Lord's
time  had  formed  any  conception  of  a  suffering
Messiah.  If  Christ  spoke  of  His  Passion  as  the
Son  of  Man,  they  could  only  ask  with  wonder,
Who  this  Son  of  Man  was  ?  If  the  prophet  de-  j0hn  xii.
scribed  a  deliverer,  despised  and  afflicted,  the


120  The  effects  of  the  Resurrection

CHAP.  i.    question   rose   to   their   lips   whether  '  he  spoke

Actsvm.    <Qf  himse}f  or  some  other.'     And  if  the  idea  of

Messiah's  death  was  unknown,  so  also  was  that

of  the   Resurrection,   which  is   the   complement

of  it.


54.  Nor  were  the  disciples  in  this  respect
more  far-seeing  or  better  instructed  than  their
countrymen.  On  this  point  the  Gospels  are  an
unexceptionable  authority;  and  nothing  is  more
striking  than  the  apparent  inability  of  the  Apo-
stles, who  were  nearest  to  the  Lord,  to  lay  aside
the  hopes  in  which  they  had  been  reared.  When
the  Lord  was  raised  from  the  dead  they  under-
stood at  last  what  He  had  said  to  them,  but  not
Matt.  xvi.  before.  The  thought  of  His  death  was  one  which

01 03

they  felt  ought  to  be  cast  aside  as  a  temptation  to
Luke  xxiv.  distrust.     And  when  at  last  He  died,  their  hope

21

was  gone.  There  is  not  a  word  to  indicate  that
this  catastrophe  led  them  to  any  truer  view  of
His  work.  Those  who  loved  Him  most  devotedly
came  to  embalm  His  corpse.  The  first  tidings  of
His  Resurrection  seemed  as  'idle  talk;'  and  the
Evangelists  paint  in  vivid  colours,  the  strangeness
of  which  proves  them  to  be  faithful,  'the  slow-
'  ness '  and  '  hardness  of  heart,'  which  hindered  the
disciples  from  believing  a  fact  which  brought
with  it  a  revolution  of  their  ancient  faith.


on  the  character  of  the  Apostles.         121

55.  But  the  revolution  was  accomplished.  If  CHAP.  i.
we  compare  the  portraiture  of  the  Apostles  as
given  in  St  Luke's  Gospel  with  that  in  his  book
of  the  Acts,  we  cannot  but  feel  that  we  are  look-
ing on  the  same  men,  but  transfigured  in  the
latter  case  by  the  working  of  some  mighty  in-
fluence. There  are  the  old  traits  of  individuality,
but  they  are  ennobled.  The  relation  in  which
the  disciples  stand  to  their  Lord  is  not  less  per-
sonal, but  it  is  less  material.  He  is  regarded
as  their  Saviour  as  well  as  their  Teacher.  What
was  before  vague  and  undecided  is  defined  and
organised.  Those  who  when  Christ  was  yet  with
them  wavered  in  spite  of  their  love  for  Him,
mistook  His  words,  misunderstood  His  purpose,
forsook  Him  at  His  Passion,  after  a  brief  interval
court  danger  in  the  service  of  a  Master  no  longer
present,  proclaim  with  unfaltering  zeal  a  message
hitherto  unheard,  build  up  a  society  in  faith  on
His  Name,  extend  to  Samaritans  and  Gentiles
the  blessings  which  were  promised  to  the  people
of  GOD.  However  we  explain  it  the  change  is
complete  and  certain.  Their  whole  moral  nature
was  transformed.  As  far  as  we  can  see  there  was
no  spring  of  hope  within  them  which  could  have
had  such  an  issue.  The  anticipations  which  they
shared  with  their  countrymen  and  those  which
the  immediate  presence  of  Christ  had  awakened,


122  The  ejjects  of  the  Resurrection

CHAP.  i.  were  dissipated  by  His  death.  Whatever  new
impulse  moved  and  animated  them  must  have
been  from  without,  clear,  and  powerful.  It  must
have  been  clear,  to  make  itself  felt  to  men  who
were  in  no  way  predisposed  to  yield  to  it :  power-
ful, to  remould  once  and  for  ever  their  notions
of  the  work  of  Messiah.  The  Resurrection  satis-
fies both  conditions.  As  a  fact  with  which  the
disciples  were  familiarised  by  repeated  proofs  it
was  capable  of  removing  each  lingering  doubt :  as
a  Revelation  of  which  the  meaning  was  finally
made  known  by  the  withdrawal  of  Christ  from
the  earth,  it  opened  a  new  region  and  form  of
life,  the  apprehension  of  which  would  necessarily
influence  all  their  interpretations  of  the  Divine
promises.  If  the  crucified  Lord  did  rise  again,  we
can  point  to  effects  which  answer  completely  to
what  we  may  suppose  to  have  been  the  working
of  the  stupendous  miracle  on  those  who  were
the  first  witnesses  of  it :  if  He  did  not,  to  what
must  we  look  for  an  explanation  of  phenomena
for  which  the  Resurrection  is  no  more  than  an
adequate  cause  ?

56.  In  nothing  is  the  spiritual  transformation
of  the  Apostles  more  striking  than  in  their  view
of  the  Person  of  Christ.  The  words  in  which  He
spoke  of  the  atonement  which  He  should  make


on  the  belief  of  the  Apostles.  123

necessarily  fell  unheeded  by  those  who  could  not  CHAP.  i.
realise  the  fitness  of  His  Death.  There  is  nothing
in  the  Gospels  (and  for  this  we  may  fairly  quote
them)  to  shew  that  personal  deliverance  from  sin
and  corruption — the  transfiguration  of  all  man's
natural  powers — was  ever  connected  with  His
work  during  His  lifetime  by  those  who  heard
Him1.  '  These  things,'  it  is  emphatically  said,  John  xii.
'  understood  not  His  disciples  at  the  first.'  He  Luke  xviii.
received  sinners,  it  is  true,  but  it  was  not  felt
that  their  restoration  was  a  type  of  the  restora-
tion of  all  men.  Still  less,  if  possible,  is  there
any  indication  that  the  Apostles  understood  be-
fore the  Resurrection  that  the  Blood  of  Christ
should  ratify  a  new  covenant  to  be  embodied
in  a  Universal  Church.  The  meaning  of  the  Last
Supper  was  hidden  from  them,  as  subsequent
events  shewed,  till  after  the  Lord's  Death.  But
then,  from  some  source  or  other,  a  flood  of  light
is  seen  to  have  been  poured  on  all  which  they
had  regarded  before  with  silent  and  hesitating
wonder.  The  first  invitation  which  they  addressed
to  those  who  had  joined  in  the  Crucifixion  was
'  to  be  baptized  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  for  Acts  ii.  38.
'the  remission  of  sins.'  The  day  of  Pentecost

1  The  inspired  confession  of  St  Peter,  John  vi.  68,  is  the
nearest  approach  to  a  direct  recognition  of  this  Truth  which
the  Lord  taught  (Matt.  xx.  28),  but  in  this  respect  it  may  be
compared  with  the  use  of  the  corresponding  passage  in  Acts  v.  20.


124  The  fact  of  the  Resurrection

CHAP.  i.  sealed  the  testimony  of  Easter.  And  from  that
time  forth  union  with  Christ  by  baptism  was  the
first  condition  of  Apostolic  fellowship.  His  Name
Acts  iv.  12.  was  declared  to  be  the  only  '  name  under  heaven
'given  among  men  whereby  we  must  be  saved.'
His  Passion  was  acknowledged  as  part  of  the  di-
vine counsel.  His  Return  was  set  forth  as  the
certain  object  of  the  believer's  hope.  Nor  are  we
left  in  doubt  as  to  the  power  which  had  wrought
the  change.  The  ground  on  which  the  Apostles
rested  their  appeal  was  the  Resurrection :  the
function  which  they  claimed  for  themselves  was
to  bear  witness  to  it.  Their  belief  was  not  an
idle  assent,  but  the  spring  of  a  new  life.  And
the  belief  itself  was  new  in  kind.  It  was  not
like  that  affectionate  credulity  with  which  an
oppressed  state  or  party  believes  in  the  reappear-
ance of  a  lost  leader.  It  was  a  confession  of  error
before  it  was  an  assertion  of  faith.  It  involved
a  renunciation  of  popular  dogmas  in  which  those
who  held  it  had  been  reared.  It  proclaimed  a
truth  altogether  new  and  unlike  any  which  men
had  held  before  (§§  51  f.).  If  ever  the  idea  of  de-
lusion can  be  excluded,  it  must  be  in  a  case  when
it  is  alleged  to  explain  a  conviction  which  trans-
formed at  once  the  cherished  opinions  of  a  large
body  of  men  of  various  characters  and  powers,
and  forced  them  to  a  painful  and  perilous  work


as  the  basis  of  Christian  teaching.        125

for  which  outwardly  they  had  no  inclination  or   CHAP.  i.
advantages.

57.  If  we  look  a  little  deeper  at  the  Apostolic
faith  we  shall  feel  still  more  strongly  the  effect  of
the  belief  in  the  Resurrection.  To  do  this  we
must  turn  to  the  Epistles  of  St  Paul,  as  the
earliest  memorials  of  Christian  teaching  addressed
to  Christians ;  for  hitherto  we  have  noticed  only
the  simple  message  addressed  to  mixed  and  un-
believing hearers.  In  many  respects,  as  we  might
naturally  expect,  there  is  a  wide  difference  be-
tween the  contents  of  these  two  forms  of  the  Gos-
pel ;  but  their  groundwork  is  identical.  The  fuller
and  more  developed  doctrine  of  St  Paul  is  as  essen-
tially historical  as  the  first  address  of  an  Evangel-
ist to  Jews  or  Gentiles.  This  has  been  pointed
out  already  (§§  45  ff.) ;  but  one  most  important  ele-
ment of  faith  which  St  Paul  brings  out  from  the
history  remains  yet  to  be  considered.  In  the  first
addresses  of  the  Apostles  reported  in  the  Acts  the
Death  of  Christ  is  treated  rather  as  a  difficulty  to
be  explained,  than  as  a  spring  of  blessing.  If  we
realise  the  circumstances  under  which  they  spoke,
it  could  not  be  otherwise,  and  this  peculiarity
alone  justifies  us  in  assuming  that  the  narrative
is  in  the  main  authentic.  But  St  Paul  in  writing
to  Christians  (and  no  less  in  speaking  to  Chris-  xx.


126  The  fact  of  the  Resurrection

CHAP.  i.  tians)  treats  this  fact  very  differently.  The  Death
of  Christ — the  mode  and  the  issue  of  that  Death
— is  the  centre  round  which  all  his  doctrine  turns ;
for  to  the  Christian  the  Death  of  Christ  involves

1  Cor.  ii.  2.  the  Resurrection.  '  I  determined  not  to  know
'  anything  among  you/  he  says  to  the  Corinthians,

Gal.  vi.  14.  '  save  Jesus  Christ,  and  Him  crucified.'  '  GOD  for-
'bid,'  he  writes  in  another  place,  'that  I  should
'  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.'
And  the  reason  is  obvious ;  since  the  Death  of
Christ  for  the  Christian  includes  the  whole  mys-
tery of  the  Redemption.  The  Resurrection  is
necessarily  involved  in  it,  when  we  acknowledge
that  He  who  died  was  the  Son  of  GOD.  Thus  the
great  Epistles  to  which  we  confine  ourselves
abound  with  such  passages  as  the  following :

Gal.  i.  4.    '  Christ  gave  Himself  for  our  sins.'     '  We  are  not
1  Cor.  vi.  ,          ,  .  ,  ,         Tp

20.  our  own:    we  were  bought  with  a  price.

15C°18  V  ' onc  ^d  f°r  all  tnen  all  died... Behold  all  things
'  have  become  new.  But  all  things  are  of  GOD,
'  who  reconciled  us  to  Himself  through  Jesus

Rom.  v.  8,  '  Christ.'  '  GOD  commendeth  His  love  towards  us,
'  in  that  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for
'  us.  Much  more  then,  being  now  justified  by
'  His  blood,  we  shall  be  saved  from  wrath  through
'  Him.'

58.     With  these  passages  are  connected  others


as  the  basis  of  Christian  teaching.        127

which  present  the  same  truth  of  the  restoration   CHAP.  i.

of  unity  to   humanity   in   the   Risen   Christ   in

different  points  of  view.     Thus :  '  To  us  there  is  l  Cor- viii-

'  one  GOD,  the  Father,  of  Whom  are  all  things,

'  and  we  unto  Him ;  and  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ,

'  through  Whom  are  all  things,  and  we  through

'  Him.'     And  again  :    '  We  being  many,  are  one  Kom-  xii-

O.

'  body  in  Christ,  and  every  one  members  one  of
'another.'  We  'are  all  the  children  of  GOD  by  Gal.iii.26,

28

'faith  in  Christ  Jesus... There  can  be  neither  Jew
'nor  Greek,  there  can  be  neither  bond  nor  free,
'  there  can  be  no  male  and  female :  for  ye  all  are
'  one  man  in  Christ  Jesus.'  Or,  in  other  words,
Christ,  as  He  is  revealed  to  us,  in  His  Life,  His
Death,  His  Resurrection,  is  the  One  Mediator  by
Whom  every  blessing  comes ;  the  one  all-containing
Presence  by  Whom  men  are  bound  together.  In
His  Person  every  difference  of  race,  of  station,  of
nature,  is  done  away.  'In  Christ,'  to  use  the
favourite  phrase  of  the  Apostle,  our  whole  life
and  being  and  work  are  centred.

59.  Long  familiarity  with  such  words  has
made  it  very  difficult  for  us  to  realise  the  magni-
tude of  the  revelation  which  they  convey.  The
fitness  of  the  doctrine  to  satisfy  the  wants  of  men
makes  us  inclined  to  believe  that  it  is  natural.
But  if  we  place  on  the  one  side  the  outward  cir-


128       Doctrine  based  on  the  Resurrection.

CHAP.  i.  cumstances  of  Christ's  Death,  and  on  the  other
these  interpretations  of  its  significance :  if  we
measure  what  seemed  to  be  the  hopeless  ignominy
of  the  catastrophe  by  which  His  work  was  ended,
and  the  Divine  prerogatives  which  are  claimed  for
Him,  not  in  spite  of,  but  in  consequence  of  that
suffering  of  shame ;  we  shall  feel  the  utter  hope-
lessness of  reconciling  the  fact  and  the  triumphant
deduction  from  it  without  some  intervening  fact
as  certain  as  Christ's  Passion  and  glorious  enough
to  transfigure  its  sorrow.  For  we  must  ever  bear
in  mind  that  the  Apostles  do  not  deal  with  ab-
stract doctrine,  but  with  doctrine  centred  in  facts.
They  .do  not  teach  a  redemption  to  be  wrought
out  by  each  man  for  himself,  after  the  example  of
Christ,  but  of  redemption  wrought  for  each  by
Christ,  and  placed  within  their  reach.  They  do
not  teach  merely  an  original  union  of  men,  but
l  Cor.  xv.  a  spiritual  union  accomplished  in  the  Person  of
Christ.  They  do  not  teach  a  liberty  which  sets
aside  the  distinctions  and  duties  of  society,  but  a
liberty  which  springs  from  the  transformation  of
every  claim  of  life  into  a  spontaneous  act  of  filial
love  through  the  revelation  of  the  Father  in  His
Son.  They  do  not  teach  an  immortality  of  the
soul  as  a  consequence  flowing  from  any  concep-
tions of  man's  essential  nature,  but  a  resurrection
of  the  body  not  only  historically  established  in


The  belief  in  the  Return,  129

the  rising  again  of  Christ,  but  "given  to  us  through  CHAP.  i.
Him  who  is  '  the  Resurrection  and  the  Life.1  If
Christ  rose,  to  repeat  the  alternative  which  we
have  proposed  before,  all  this  is  intelligible.  The
miracle  was  as  a  new-birth  of  humanity.  If  Christ
did  not  rise,  we  have  not  only  to  explain  how  the
belief  in  His  Resurrection  came  to  be  received
without  any  previous  hopes  which  could  lead  to
its  reception ;  but  also  how  it  came  to  be  received
with  that  intensity  of  personal  conviction  which
could  invest  the  Life  and  Person  of  Christ  with
attributes  never  before  assigned  to  any  one,  and
that  by  Jews,  who  had  been  reared  in  the  strictest
monotheism.

60.  There  is  yet  one  other  aspect  in  which
we  may  see  the  power  of  the  early  faith  in  the
Resurrection.  Next  to  the  fact  that  Christ  rose
from  the  dead,  the  topic  most  frequently  insisted
on  in  the  Apostolic  writings  is  that  He  will  come
again  from  heaven.  It  would  be  out  of  place  to
discuss  the  form  which  this  belief  took,  or  the
interpretation  of  the  passages  of  the  Epistles  in
which  it  is  enforced.  One  point  only  may  be
noticed.  The  material  imagery  in  which  the
belief  was  popularly  embodied  shews  in  what  sense
the  Resurrection  itself  was  understood.  In  pro-
portion as  the  Return  of  Christ  was  apprehended
w.  R.  9


130  The  belief  in  the  Return.

CHAP.  i.  in  a  definite  outWard  shape,  so  also  must  His
Departure  have  been  held  to  have  taken  place
in  the  same  manner.  The  two  events  are  com-
pletely correlative.  And  upon  reflection  it  will
be  felt  that  the  expectation  of  the  Return  was  in
itself  exceptional  and  in  need  of  explanation.  It
has  frequently  happened  that  nations  have  looked
for  the  restoration  of  the  hero-king  in  whom
they  had  seen  the  pledge  of  unaccomplished  tri-
umphs. But  in  each  case  the  hope  was  based  on
the  denial  of  death.  The  hero  was  sleeping  like
Arthur  in  the  deep  shades  of  Avalori,  or  like
Barbarossa  in  some  subterranean  cavern;  or  he
was  withdrawn  for  a  time  like  Harold  in  the  re-
cesses of  a  cloister,  or  like  Don  Sebastian  in  obscure
captivity;  but  the  devotion  of  his  people  would
not  believe  that  he  was  dead.  That  alone  was
impossible :  against  that  supreme  issue  popular
faith  knew  no  availing  power.  But  it  was  quite
otherwise  with  the  belief  of  Christians.  The
Death  of  their  Lord  was  as  much  a  part  of  their

Phil.  ii.  Gospel  as  His  Resurrection.  Nay  more,  His
Exaltation  was  in  one  aspect  a  consequence  of  His
Death.  Thus  if  the  early  looking  for  Christ  has
any  point  of  contact  with  the  instinctive  ex-
pression of  national  love,  it  is  essentially  dis-
tinguished from  it  in  the  circumstances  of  its
origin.  Such  a  fact  as  the  Resurrection  inter-


The  witness  of  the  Sacraments.  131

veiling    between    the    Passion   and    the    Return  CHAP.  i.
explains  adequately,  as  it  appears  nothing  else
could  do,  the   confident   expectation   of  Christ's
Second  Coming  in  the  mode  in  which  the  early
Christians  looked  for  it.

Gl.  The  same  also  may  be  said  of  the  Apo-
stolic interpretation  of  the  Sacraments.  It  has
been  frequently  argued  that  the  Christian  doc-
trine of  the  Sacraments  corresponds  with  the
Christian  doctrine  of  the  Incarnation.  It  could
be  shewn  that  it  is  equally  closely  connected,
though  the  correspondence  is  necessarily  less
complete,  with  the  fact  of  the  Resurrection.  But
it  does  not  fall  within  our  scope  to  examine  the
essential  conception  of  a  Sacrament.  It  is  enough
to  observe  that  the  external  forms  in  which  the
conception  was  realised  witness  to  the  transform-
ing power  of  the  belief  in  the  fact  of  Christ's
rising  again.  The  belief  in  the  Resurrection
which  was  the  groundwork  of  the  Church  pene-
trated every  part  of  its  faith  and  worship.  The
earliest  Christians  kept  '  the  eighth  day  for  joy,  Barn.  Ep.
'as  that  on  which  Jesus  rose  from  the  dead;'...
and  the  two  rites  which  were  of  universal  ob-
servance commemorated  not  obscurely  the  same
central  fact.  The  celebration  of  the  Holy  Eu-
charist is  absolutely  unintelligible  without  faith

9—2


132  The  witness  of  the  Sacraments.

CHAP.  i.    in  a  risen  Saviour.     '  As  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread
l  Cor.  xi.    '  and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do  shew  the  Lord's  death

26

'till    He   come.'     The  rite  was   not  a  memorial
of  death  simply,  but  of  death  conquered  by  life.

Eom.  iv.     The  seal  of  the  efficacy  of  the  death  of  Christ
25.

was  given  in  the  Resurrection ;  and  the  limit  of

the  commemoration  of  His  Passion  was  looked
for  in  His  Return.  Baptism,  again,  was  regarded
as  embodying  the  teaching  of  the  same  facts  :  '  We
Bom.vi. 4.  'were  buried  with  Him  by  baptism  unto  death:
'  that  like  as  Christ  was  raised  up  from  the  dead
'  by  the  glory  of  the  Father,  even  so  we  also  should
'walk  in  newness  of  life.'  So  thoroughly  was
the  faith  in  the  Resurrection  of  Christ  inwrought
into  the  mind  of  the  first  Christians  that  the
very  entrance  into  their  society  was  apprehended
under  the  form  of  a  Resurrection.  The  fact  was
not  an  article  of  their  creed,  but  the  life  of  it.
It  was  confessed  in  action  as  well  as  in  word.
And  no  evidence  of  the  power  or  reality  of  a
belief  can  be  less  open  to  suspicion  than  that
which  is  derived  from  public  services,  which,  as
far  as  all  evidence  reaches,  were  contemporaneous
with  its  origin  and  uninterruptedly  perpetuated
throughout  the  body  which  holds  it.

62.     Thus  the  continuity  of  the  life  of  the
Christian   Church  is  itself,  when  viewed  in  this


The  Resurrection  the  basis  of  the  Church.  133

light,  a  substantial  proof  of  the  reality  of  the  fact  CHAP.  i.
on  which  it  was  established.  Other  religions
have  been  powerful  and  lasting  in  virtue  of  the
partial  truths  which  they  enshrined  and  offered  to
the  devotion  of  believers.  But  in  Christianity,  if
we  regard  the  claims  on  which  it  was  first  ac-
cepted and  through  which  it  has  at  all  times  ex-
ercised its  characteristic  power,  no  such  partiality
is  possible.  It  professes  to  bring  a  new  life  to
light.  It  is  a  subordinate  though  yet  a  necessary
part  of  its  working  that  it  illuminates  the  past.
Christ  is  presented  to  us  not  simply  as  the
Guide  of  men,  but  as  the  Way.  The  Apostles
preach  not  only  that  men  may  be  united  to  GOD,
but  how  they  may  be  united  to  Him.  Every  pre-
cept of  Christianity  is  quickened  by  the  power  of
the  Death  and  Resurrection  of  Christ.  It  is  by
the  presence  of  this  power  that  they  are  Christian  ;
and  it  is  as  Christian  that  they  conquer  the  world.
Nothing  could  shew  a  more  profound  misappre-
hension of  the  Gospel  than  to  substitute  the  name
Catholicity  for  Christianity  in  the  estimate  of  its
social  and  political  work.  Its  essence  lies  in  the
exhibition  of  a  personal  Saviour.  '  If  thou  shalt  Bom.  x.  9.
'  confess  with  thy  mouth  '  Jesus  is  Lord,'  and  shalt
'  believe  in  thine  heart  that  GOD  raised  Him  from
'  the  dead,  thou  shalt  be  saved.'  From  this  con-
fession and  this  faith  spring  directly  the  various


134  Summary  of  the

CHAP.  i.  organisations  of  the  Church  which  have  found  ac-
ceptance at  different  times  and  under  different
circumstances.  The  one  fact  of  the  Resurrection
underlies  them  all,  and  when  divorced  from  it
they  lose  their  vitality  (Intr.  §  16).  This  being
so  it  is  impossible  to  exaggerate  the  importance
of  a  living  apprehension  of  the  Resurrection  as
the  Apostles  announced  it.  It  is  not,  as  we  have
seen,  taken  out  of  the  range  of  possible  facts  by
any  antecedent  considerations;  and,  as  it  seems,
no  other  evidence  in  its  favour  consistent  with  its
character  as  the  basis  of  a  religion  at  once  his-
torical and  spiritual,  could  have  been  more  com-
plete than  that  which  still  lies  within  our  reach.


63.  To  sum  up  briefly  what  has  been  said.
It  has  been  shewn  that  the  Resurrection  is  not  an
isolated  event  in  history,  but  at  once  the  end  and
the  beginning  of  vast  developments  of  life  and
thought ;  that  it  is  the  climax  of  a  long  series  of
Divine  dispensations  which  find  in  it  their  com-
plement and  explanation :  that  it  has  formed  the
starting-point  of  all  progressive  modern  societies,
ever  presenting  itself  in  new  lights  according  to
the  immediate  wants  of  the  age.  It  has  been
shewn  that  in  the  character  of  the  fact  there  is
nothing  which  can  appear  incredible  or,  in  such


evidence  for  the  Resurrection.  135

a  connexion,  even  improbable  to  any  one  who  CHAP.  i.
believes  in  a  Personal  GOD.  It  has  been  shewn
that  the  direct  evidence  for  the  event  is  exactly
of  the  same  kind  which  we  have  for  the  other
events  in  the  Life  of  Christ ;  that  St  Paul  appeals
to  his  own  experience  and  to  the  experience  of  the
Apostles  for  the  certainty  of  its  literal  accomplish-
ment ;  that  it  is  incontestable  that  the  Apostles
acted  from  the  first  as  if  they  believed  it,  and
that  their  sincerity  cannot  be  doubted ;  that  the
nature  of  the  outward  proof  alleged  seems  to
render  it  impossible  that  they  could  have  been
victims  of  a  delusion ;  that  the  substance  of  their
belief  was  something  wholly  novel,  removed
equally  from  the  belief  in  a  phantastic  vision,  and
from  the  belief  in  a  restoration  to  a  corruptible
life ;  that  the  effects  of  it  upon  themselves  were
such  that  the  conviction  must  (so  to  speak)  have
been  forced  upon  them  by  overwhelming  power,
capable  of  changing  their  personal  character,  of
transforming  their  hereditary  faith,  of  inspiring
them  with  new  thoughts  and  hopes;  that  the
Christian  Church  was  founded  upon  the  belief,
and  embodied  it  in  rites  coeval  with  its  founda-
tion. Nothing  has  been  said  of  the  testimony  of
St  John,  and  St  Peter,  and  the  first  three  Evan-
gelists, lest  exception  might  be  taken  to  their  au-
thority. Every  conclusion  has  been  rested  upon


136  Summary  of  the

CHAP.  i.  documents  which  criticism  has  never  assailed.
But  at  this  point  we  may  take  account  of  the
evidence  from  other  sources.  The  common  con-
tents of  the  Synoptic  Gospels  can  be  shewn  (I
believe)  to  be  anterior  to  the  Epistles  of  St  Paul,
and  to  contain  the  sum  of  the  earliest  Apostolic
preaching  in  Judsea;  if  this  be  so  we  have  in
them  the  testimony  not  of  one  witness  only,  but
the  common  testimony  of  most  of  those  who  saw
the  Lord  after  He  rose  again.  The  authenticity
of  the  first  Epistle  of  St  Peter  cannot  be  ques-
tioned without  the  most  arbitrary  neglect  of  ex-
ternal evidence,  and  in  that  the  Apostle  to  whom
Christ  first  shewed  Himself  speaks  of  Him  as
l  Peter  i.  '  foreordained  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,

20  21

'  but  (made)  manifest  in  these  last  times  for
'(those)  who  by  Him  do  believe  in  GOD,  that
'raised  Him  up  from  the  dead,  and  gave  Him
'glory;  that  (their)  faith  and  hope  might  be  in
'  GOD.'  The  Gospel  of  St  John,  again,  seems  to  me
to  be  an  indubitable  work  of  the  disciple  whom
Jesus  loved ;  and  after  recounting  some  of  the
appearances  of  the  Lord  after  His  Resurrection,
the  Evangelist  completes  his  Gospel,  as  it  stood
John  xx.  originally,  with  the  words :  '  Many  other  signs

30   31

'  truly  did  Jesus  in  the  presence  of  His  disciples,
'  which  are  not  written  in  this  book ;  but  these
'  are  written,  that  ye  might  believe  that  Jesus  is


evidence  for  the  Resuivection.  137

'  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  GOD,  and  that  believing  CHAP.  i.
'  ye  might  have  life  in  His  name.'

Indeed  taking  all  the  evidence  together,  it  is
not  too  much  to  say  that  there  is  no  single  his-
toric incident  better  or  more  variously  supported
than  the  Resurrection  of  Christ.  Nothing  but
the  antecedent  assumption  that  it  must  be  false
could  have  suggested  the  idea  of  deficiency  in  the
proof  of  it.  And  it  has  been  shewn  that  when  it
is  considered  in  its  relation  to  the  whole  revela-
tion of  which  it  is  a  part,  and  to  the  conditions  of
the  Divine  action,  which  we  have  assumed,  this
miraculous  event  requires  a  proof  in  no  way  dif-
fering in  essence  from  that  on  which  the  other
facts  with  which  it  is  associated  are  received  as
true.  In  a  word,  the  circumstances  under  which
GOD  is  said  to  have  given  a  revelation  to  men  in
the  Resurrection  of  the  Lord  Jesus  were  such  as
to  make  the  special  manifestation  of  power  likely
or  even  natural ;  and  the  evidence  by  which  the
special  Revelation  is  supported  is  such  as  would
in  any  ordinary  matter  of  life  be  amply  sufficient
to  determine  our  action  and  belief.

If  we  next  turn  from  history  to  the  Individual
man,  it  will  appear  that  the  Resurrection  throws
as  much  light  on  the  mysteries  of  personal  life  as
it  does  on  the  whole  progress  of  mankind.


CHAPTER  II.
THE  RESURRECTION  AND  MAN.

C'est  un  des  grands  principes  du  Christian isme,  que  tout  ce
qui  est  arrivS  d  JESUS-CHIIIST  doit  se  passer  dans  rdmc  et  dans  le
corps  de  chaque  Chretien.

PASCAL.

CHAP.  ii.  1.  TTITHERTO  we  have  considered  the  Resur-

•*-•*-  rection  simply  as  a  fact,  the  central  point
of  universal  history,  the  outward  cause  of  revolu-
tions in  thought  and  in  society.  It  still  remains
to  analyse  the  essential  meaning  of  the  fact  in  re-
ference to  the  individual,  to  discover,  if  it  may  be,
what  are  the  special  lessons  as  to  our  nature  and
destiny  of  the  Revelation  which  it  contains.  Some
of  these  we  have  indeed  already  touched  on  in
considering  the  views  of  our  Lord's  Person  and
Work  which  were  presented  by  the  Apostles  after
He  rose  from  the  dead  (i.  §§  55  ff.).  But  we  may  go
yet  further,  and  consider  the  relation  of  the  Resur-
rection, accepted  as  a  fact,  to  some  of  the  great
problems  of  life,  apart  from  the  earliest  historical
interpretation  of  its  teaching.


Final  elements  of  Life.  139

2.  That  we  may  do  this  in  any  way  satisfac-  CHAP.  n.
torily,  it  is  necessary  that  we  should  go  back  for

a  moment  to  take  account  of  the  simplest  elements
to  which  the  questions  which  are  involved  in  the
discussion  can  be  reduced.  It  appears  then  that
we  are  conscious  of  three  distinct  existences,  Self,
the  World  (that  is  a  limited  '  Not-I'\  and  GOD.
We  cannot  prove  the  reality  of  these  existences
as  we  have  already  seen  (Introd.  §  4) ;  but  on  the
other  hand  in  some  form  or  other  all  our  life
testifies  to  our  conviction  that  they  are.  It  is
impossible  to  hold  that  Self  is  the  only  true  being
or  self-existent:  it  is  equally  impossible  to  hold
that  Self  is  the  only  manifestation  of  the  Being  on
which  it  depends.  Thus  we  are  forced  to  accept
that  mystery  as  final,  which  represents  as  essen-
tially distinct,  yet  for  us  in  inseparable  juxta-
position, on  one  side  the  Creator,  on  the  other
Creation,  of  which  the  individual  '/'  is  a  part.

3.  The  suppression  of  any  one  of  these  ele-
ments necessarily  involves  an  essentially  imper-
fect and  therefore  a  false  view  of  the  Universe
and  every  age  offers  types  of  the  errors  which
thus   arise.     Some   speculators   neglect   the   free
power  of  the  human  will.     Man  is,  according  to
this    view,   only   a    piece    of    mechanism   which
responds  completely  to  the  forces  which  act  upon


140        The  constitution  of  the  Individual.

CHAP.  n.  it ;  but  in  himself  he  has  no  originative  power  of
thought  or  action.  The  result  is  Fatalism,  which
is  logically  unassailable  and  yet  known  instinct-
ively to  be  untrue.  Others  again  with  a  nobler
aspiration  reduce  life  to  a  personal  relation  be-
tween man  and  his  Creator.  For  them  the  world
vanishes  before  this  awful  fellowship,  and  finds  no
place  in  their  scheme  of  existence.  So  mysticism
arises,  which  with  all  its  holy  power  yet  does  vio-
lence to  the  conditions  of  life,  and  neglects  some
of  its  richest  resources  and  most  certain  safe-
guards against  fatal  error.  Then  comes  a  reac-
tion, and  a  third  school  possessed  by  the  fulness  of
earthly  existence  refuse  to  look  beyond  it.  For
them  GOD  lies  wholly  beyond  the  region  of  know-
ledge. But  the  conscience  of  man  triumphs  over
material  Positivism  and  claims  a  religion,  which
by  a  strange  irony  is  offered  in  a  shape  most  akin
to  Fetishism.  Thus  humanity  rejects  each  im-
perfect system,  which  severally,  as  systems,  are
irrefragable ;  and  waits  patiently  for  that  com-
pleter  wisdom  which  shall  harmonise  the  present
contradictions  of  the  full  view  of  life.

4.  If  then  we  look  outside  ourselves  there  is
an  antithesis  which  cannot  be  reduced.  If  again
we  look  at  that  which  we  each  call  /,  it  will
be  seen  to  be  essentially  twofold.  There  is  an


The  constitution  of  the  Individual.        141

organism,  and  something  which  acts  through  the  CHAP.  n.
organism.  There  is  a  unity  of  will  with  a  mul-
tiplicity of  functions.  There  is  an  element  of  per-
manence in  the  midst  of  constant  change.  There
are  laws  and  a  power  which  makes  itself  felt  in
accordance  with  these  laws.  The  organism,  with
all  its  variety  of  sense,  its  capacity  for  service,  its
laws  of  decay  and  assimilation,  we  call  the  body :
the  self-moving  power,  which  originates  and  con-
trols action,  we  call  the  soul.  And  this  twofold
being  is  naturally  influenced  by  a  twofold  affinity.
On  the  one  side,  through  the  'body,'  it  is  con-
nected with  the  world :  on  the  other,  through  the
'  soul'  (the  '  spirit'),  with  GOD.  Or,  in  other  words,
the  body  is  inherently  finite,  the  soul  aspires  at
least  towards  the  infinite.  Thus  recurring  to  what
has  been  already  said  (§  2)  we  see  that  conscious-
ness reveals  to  us  in  ourselves  individually  a
fundamental  antithesis  corresponding  to  the  anti-
thesis which  we  are  forced  to  recognise  without  us.

5.  Yet  more  :  the  /  consists  in  this  antithesis.
Nothing  is  more  common  than  to  hear  it  assumed
that  the  'soul'  is  the  real  self.  Yet  nothing  can
be  more  clear  upon  reflection  than  that  the  only
'  self '  of  which  we  are  conscious  is  made  up  of
'soul'  and  'body.'  The  workings  of  these  two
are  absolutely  inseparable.  We  cannot  contem-


142  The  problems  of  human  Life.

CHAP.  n.  plate  the  independent  action  of  either  for  an
instant.  If  we  try  to  do  so,  we  find  at  the  outset
the  presence  of  some  condition  or  power  which  is
due  to  the  complementary  part  in  our  whole
nature.  One  remarkable  proof  of  this  duality  (so
to  speak)  in  our  life — of  all  that  we  are,  as  far  as
we  can  observe  ourselves — may  be  found  in  the
fact  that  some  speculators  have  seen  in  life  nothing
but  the  manifestation  of  the  one  element,  and
others  nothing  but  the  manifestation  of  the  other,
since  the  demonstrable  presence  on  every  occa-
sion of  either  taken  alone  seemed  to  exclude  the
presence  of  the  other.  Nor  is  there,  indeed,  any
possible  refutation  of  the  'materialist'  or  'spi-
'  ritualist'  systems  except  in  the  appeal  to  the
individual  consciousness.

6.  Thus  we  find  ourselves  face  to  face  with
two  great  personal  problems :  What  is  the  perma-
nent relation  of  soul  and  body  ?  and  next,  What  is
the  relation  of  the  complex  self  to  GOD  ?  in  which
latter  question  is  included  the  mystery  of  sin.  To
these  may  be  added  one  other  question,  not  per-
sonal but  yet  inevitable  to  man :  What  is  the
relation  of  the  individual  self  to  the  world  ?  In
other  words,  Shall  we  be  hereafter  ?  and,  if  so,
What  shall  we  be  ?  and,  What  is  the  destiny  of
creation  generally  ?  Round  these  three  ques-


Elements  of  Personality.  143

tions  the  noblest  thoughts  of  the  ancient  world  CHAP.  n.
turned:   to  these   the   most   daring   speculations
of  later  times  have  been  addressed.     What  light
is  thrown  upon  them  by  faith  in  the  Resurrec-
tion ?

7.  Our  present  personality,  as  we  have  seen
(§  4),  involves  the  antithesis  of  soul  and  body.
One  element  is  not  more  needful  to  it  than  the
other.  Indeed,  the  clearest  conception  which  we
can  form  of  a  person  is  the  special  limitation  of
a  self-moving  power.  The  power  must  be  self-
moving  because  a  person  is  necessarily  endowed
with  a  will  which  is  a  spring  of  motion.  It  must  be
limited,  because,  as  far  as  our  experience  reaches,
a  will  can  only  make  itself  felt  in  and  through  an
organism  with  which  it  is  connected.  And  yet,
further,  the  mode  of  the  limitation,  including  the
fundamental  laws  by  which  the  generic  limitation
is  governed,  the  original  specialities  of  the  par-
ticular organism  and  the  accumulated  acts  by
which  the  effects  of  these  laws  and  properties  are
modified,  expresses  the  individual  differences  of
personality  among  beings  similar  in  kind.  This
conception  of  personality  presents  to  the  mind  an
easy  method  of  conceiving  of  the  change  of  cha-
racter in  the  same  person,  and  likewise  of  the
continuous  effect  of  soul  and  body  upon  one


144  Elements  of  Personality.

CHAP.  n.  another  while  the  body  is  in  constant  flux.  For
man  the  body  is  the  outward  expression  of  the
limitation  in  each  particular  case.  Yet  the  word
must  be  used  with  caution.  We  cannot  under-
stand by  body  simply  a  particular  aggregation  of
matter,  but  an  aggregation  of  matter  as  repre-
senting in  one  form  the  action  of  a  particular  law,
or  rather  the  realisation  of  a  special  formula.  The
specific  law  or  formula  of  assimilation  and  com-
bination is  that  which  is  really  essential  and  per-
manent. The  same  material  elements  may  enter
into  a  thousand  bodies,  but  the  law  of  each  body,
as  explained  above,  gives  to  it  that  which  is
peculiar  to  and  characteristic  of  it.  To  take  an
illustration  from  Chemistry,  the  same  element,
pure  carbon  for  instance,  can  exist  in  forms
wholly  different.  This  difference  we  represent  to
ourselves  under  the  idea  of  some  peculiar  law  of
arrangement  of  the  similar  particles  in  each  case.
And  conversely  we  can  conceive  how  if  the  con-
stituent element  were  changed  the  action  of  the
different  laws  of  arrangement  (supposed  to  con-
tinue) would  produce  substances  truly  answering
to  those  which  resulted  from  their  action  before.
Thus  with  regard  to  man,  there  is  nothing  unna-
tural in  supposing  that  the  power  which  preserves
his  personality  by  acting  according  to  the  indi-
vidual law  of  his  being  in  moulding  the  conti-


Elements  of  Personality.  145

nuous  changes  of  his  present  material  body  and  CHAP.  n.
all  that  depends  upon  'it,  will  preserve  his  per-
sonality hereafter  by  still  acting  according  to  the
same  law  in  moulding  the  new  element  (so  to
speak)  out  of  which  a  future  body  may  be  fash-
ioned. In  other  words  we  can  understand  how
the  law  which  now  rules  the  formation  of  our
body  may  find  its  realisation  hereafter  in  some
other  element,  while  the  new  body  will  be  es-
sentially the  same  as  the  old  one,  as  expressing
the  corresponding  action  of  the  same  law  in  re-
lation to  the  new  sphere  in  which  it  may  be
supposed  to  be  placed.  No  person  is  what  he  is
solely  in  himself,  but  is  in  part  dependent  on  all
around  him.  If  an  individual  remained  unchang-
ed while  everything  else  changed  he  might  be
physically  the  same,  but  he  would  not  be  the
same  morally.  There  is  a  necessary  relativity  in
our  nature,  and  according  to  the  view  just  indi-
cated, since  all  the  forms  of  being  are  changed
in  the  new  sphere  of  existence,  each  body  is
changed  harmoniously  with  the  remainder  and  in
due  proportion  to  the  whole.

8.     This  consideration  will  help  us   in    exa-
mining on  grounds  of  simple  reason  the  question
of  the  permanence  of  our  personality  after  death.
This,  as  far  as  we  can  see,  can  happen  only  in
w.  R.  10


146    There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the

CHAP.  ii.  two  ways.  It  may  be  argued  that  the  soul  after
death  will  itself  have  a  personal  existence ;  or
that  it  will  continue  to  act  through  an  organisa-
tion (where  the  word  is  used  in  its  widest  sense)
which  is  itself  the  expression  of  the  same  law  as
moulds  all  that  we  now  call  our  body.  These
alternatives  must  be  considered  separately.

9.  First  then  on  principles  of  reason  there
seems  to  be  no  ground  whatever  for  supposing  that
the  soul  as  separate  from  the  body  is  personal1.
There  is  indeed  an  imperious  instinct2  which
affirms  that  we  shall  survive  death,  but  this  in-
stinct does  not  attempt  to  analyse  our  being,  or
deal  with  its  constituent  elements.  It  teaches
simply  that  the  dissolution  of  which  our  present
senses  are  cognisant  is  not  the  destruction  of  our-
selves; but  it  does  not  define,  or  even  tend  to
define,  in  what  the  /  consists,  further  than  this.
Personality  implies  special  limitation,  and  this
limitation  (as  far  as  we  can  see)  is  conveyed  per-
fectly by  our  bodies,  which  though  continually
changing  yet  change  according  to  one  law.  It  is
conceivable  that  the  soul  may  have  some  indi-

r

1  Nothing  is  here  said  of  the  intermediate  state  of  the  soul
after  death  and  before  the  Eesurrection ;  and  probably  there  is
something  wholly  deceptive  in  our  use  of  words  of  time  ('before'
and  'after')  in  such  a  connexion.     Comp.  Introd.  §  8.

2  Compare  p.  12,  n.


Soul  separate  from  the  Body  is  personal.  147

vidual  inner  limitation  (so  to  speak),  but  of  this  CHAP.  n.
we  have  and  can  have  naturally  no  knowledge.
Doubtless  the  soul  is  limited  by  general  laws,
which  circumscribe  its  powers  and  capacities,  for
otherwise  it  would  not  only  have  an  affinity  with
the  infinite,  but  be  infinite ;  but  these  general
laws  do  not  constitute  individual  personality.
Again :  if  souls  are  originally  the  same  at  their
connexion  with  the  body  we  cannot  shew  how
they  can  be  so  affected  by  it  as  that  they  should
bear  away,  when  wholly  dissociated  from  it,  the
various  results  of  the  connexion.  Nor  if  they
are  originally  different  can  we  see  how  the  origi-
nal differences  would  be  modified ;  while  the
assumption  of  the  original  difference  introduces  a
fresh  difficulty  into  the  question,  unless  we  sup-
plement the  assumption,  as  Plato  did,  by  the
assertion  of  the  previous  existence  of  souls.

10.  Popular  language  and  belief  are  so  strong
in  the  assertion  of  the  personal  immortality  of
the  soul  in  our  post-Christian  times,  that  it  is
very  difficult  for  us  to  realise  the  true  state  of  the
problem.  The  firmness  of  Christian  faith,  even
where  its  presence  is  least  suspected,  influences
the  conclusions  if  not  the  processes  of  indepen-
dent reasoning.  Happily,  the  noble  speculations
of  the  Greek  philosophers  are  a  monument  of

10—2


148  The  Judgment

CHAP.  ii.  what  thought  alone  could  do  on  this  and  kindred
topics.  Yet  even  here  instinct  will  make  itself
felt;  and  again  and  again  the  sequence  of  an
argument  is  broken  by  the  independent  assertion
of  the  truth  which  instinct  and  not  reason  fore-
sees or  feels.  One  writer  however  follows  the
guidance  of  his  logic  to  its  last  conclusions.  In
his  formal  treatise  On  the  Soul  Aristotle  has
examined  with  the  most  elaborate  care  the  vari-
ous elements  included  in  it,  and  their  mutual
relations.  He  seems  to  watch  the  process  which
he  guides  as  one  wholly  unconcerned  in  its  issue.
Sternly  and  pitilessly  he  states  the  last  conclusion
on  man's  natural  hope  of  immortality  as  tested
by  reason ;  and  the  very  coldness  of  his  words
gives  them  an  undescribable  pathos.

De  Animd  11.  'In  every  natural  object  there  are,'  he
says,  'two  elements,  the  one  the  characteristic
'  matter  (so  to  speak),  which  includes  potentially  all
'  the  manifestations  of  the  object,  and  the  other  the
'  causative  and  active  principle.  These  differences
'  therefore  must  exist  essentially  in  the  soul ;  and
'the  rational  part  of  man  is  necessarily  twofold.
'  On  the  one  side  is  the  "  reason"  which  is  to  be
'so  called  in  virtue  of  its  becoming  everything;
'  on  the  other  that  which  takes  its  name  from
'making  everything,  in  the  manner  in  which  (to


of  Aristotle.  149

'  take  an  example)  light  does  ;  for  in  a  certain  CHAP.  n.
'sense  light  makes  colours  existing  potentially,
'to  be  colours  actually.  And  this  latter  reason'  —
that  is,  the  active  reason  which  has  an  absolute
existence  —  '  is  separable  and  impassive  and  un-
'  mixed  in  essence.'  It  is  not  dependent  in  any
sense  on  the  present  organism  of  man;  it  is  not
affected  by  the  changes  which  it  reveals  ;  it  is  not
modified  in  any  manner  by  the  connexion  in
which  it  is  placed.  It  is  independent  of  a  union
which  is  begun  and  ended  in  time,  'and  when
'  separated  it  is  that  alone  which  it  is  essentially.'
It  carries  with  it  no  trace  of  its  temporary
combination  with  the  passive  "reason";  'and
'this  alone'  —  this  impersonal  and  unchangeable
reason  —  'is  immortal  and  eternal.'  It  has  been
and  we  are  unconscious  of  the  past.  It  will
be  and  we  shall  be  unconscious  of  the  present.
'We  have  no  recollection'  of  any  former  exist-
ence, and  we  shall  have  none  hereafter  of  our
life  on  earth,  '  because  this'  eternal  reason  which
alone  survives  '  is  impassive,  while  the  passive
'  and  susceptible  reason'  —  the  reason  which  is  the
seat  of  all  personal  feeling  and  emotion  and  im-
pression —  '  is  corruptible,  and  without  the  eternal
'  reason  is  incapable  of  thought  or  consciousness.'


12.     One  very  important  reflexion  #ill  illus-


150  The  Arguments  reach

CHAP.  u.  trate  the  force  and  bearing  of  Aristotle's  judg-
ment. We  commonly  interrogate  the  soul  only  as
to  the  future :  it  can  speak  equally  well  of  the  past.
Every  argument  for  the  soul's  permanence  hereafter
based  upon  its  essential  character,  tells  equally  in
favour  of  its  preexistence.  Reason  cannot  take
into  account  the  idea  of  its  creation ;  and  all  the
presumptions  drawn  from  what  we  can  observe  of
its  nature  and  action  to  shew  that  it  will  be,  shew
equally  that  it  has  been.  The  idea  of  '  continu-
ance' is  equally  applicable  to  the  beginning  and  to
the  end  of  the  life  which  falls  under  our  observa-
tion. In  other  words,  the  purely  logical  arguments
which  are  supposed  to  prove  that  the  soul  is
immortal,  prove  that  it  is  eternal1 ;  and  the  legiti-

1  In  this  aspect  the  opening  chapter  of  the  Analogy  is  a
most  instructive  lesson  in  the  weakness  of  pure  reason  to
establish  that  hope  of  a  future  life,  which  has  existed  more
or  less  in  every  period.  Here  only,  perhaps,  Bp  Butler
has  been  unable  to  cast  off  the  influences  of  the  time  in  which
he  lived,  and  adopted  the  narrow  methods  of  popular  argu-
ment which  were  current  in  a  mechanical  age.  Throughout
he  assumes  that  the  'living  being'  or  'agent,'  of  which  he
gives  no  definition,  is  separable  from  our  present  organisation
and  in  itself  personal.  And  again  he  never  notices  the  appli-
cation of  his  arguments  to  a  prior  as  well  as  to  a  future  exist-
ence. This  is  the  more  remarkable  as  he  considers  with
remarkable  candour  and  wisdom  the  objection  urged  from  the
extension  of  his  reasoning  to  the  life  of  brutes.  From  what-
ever cause  the  defects  arose,  and  it  seems  most  likely  that  the
thoughts  which  he  failed  to  meet  were  wholly  foreign  to  the
speculations  of  the  time,  the  fact  remains  that  he  assumes  the


lackivard  as  well  as  forward.  151

mate  deduction  is,  that  as  we  are  now  unconscious  CHAP.  n.
of  any  previous  existence,  and  cannot  in  any  way
connect  our  present  circumstances  and  characters
in  this  world  with  our  conduct  in  another  former
world,  so,  if  we  survive  in  any  future  state,  we
shall  be  equally  unconscious  of  this  through  which
we  are  now  passing,  and  not  recognise  any  retri-
butive justice  in  the  conditions  under  which  we
shall  exist.  At  least  any  presumption  that  we
shall  be  conscious  hereafter  of  our  present  life
while  we  are  not  conscious  of  that  which  we  have
passed  through  before,  could  only  be  drawn  from
the  observation  of  a  corresponding  difference  be-
tween the  conditions  and  circumstances  of  our
present  and  past  lives  which  obviously  lies  wholly
without  the  range  of  our  faculties.  For  us,  as  far
as  the  teaching  of  nature  goes,  this  life  stands
absolutely  alone.  The  application  of  the  general
experience  which  it  gives  is  confined  within  the
limits  of  its  duration.

two  great  principles  which  above  all  others  he  ought  to  prove,
the  possibility  of  conceiving  our  personality  apart  from  our
present  bodies,  which,  though  changeable,  are  yet  changeable
according  to  observed  laws ;  and  next  that  what  is  true  if  we
look  back  to  the  first  origin  of  our  present  life  is  not  true  if  we
look  forward  to  its  close.  How  momentous  the  latter  assump-
tion is  may  be  seen  at  once  if  any  one  will  substitute  '  birth '
for  '  death '  and  '  origin '  for  '  destruction '  in  the  earlier  argu-
ments of  the  chapter.  The  former  assumption  is  even  more
obviously  the  assumption  of  the  chief  point  in  the  conclusion.


152  The  teaching  of  Plato.

CHAP.  n.  13.  The  judgment  of  Aristotle  sums  up  the
final  result  of  Greek  Philosophy  on  the  soul,  as  a
subject  of  pure  speculation.  From  his  time  phi-
losophy became  essentially  practical.  The  great
questions  of  being  and  knowledge  were  merged  in
those  of  morals,  in  which  intuition  has  a  legitimate
exercise.  Later  writers  therefore  furnish  nothing
of  importance  to  the  exact  discussion  of  the  hope
of  immortality;  but  it  is  impossible  not  to  com-
pare the  conclusions  of  Aristotle  with  those  of
Plato.  The  master  is  as  confident  and  sanguine
as  the  scholar  is  sceptical  and  passionless.  But
the  method  of  Plato  is  as  full  of  instruction  as  the
results  of  Aristotle.  Plato  is  sure  of  his  belief
beforehand.  His  arguments  are  merely  to  justify
it.  And  when  he  feels  that  these — though
strengthened  by  the  bold  proposition  that  we  do
bring  with  us  to  earth  traces  of  our  former  exist-
ence— are  unequal  to  support  the  weight  of  his
conclusion,  he  makes,  as  he  expresses  it,  a  bold
venture,  and  presents  the  substance  of  his  faith
in  one  of  those  magnificent  myths,  by  which  he
endeavours  to  bridge  over  the  chasm  between  the
seen  and  unseen  worlds1.  His  "  Republic"  closes
with  the  noble  legend  of  Er  the  son  of  Armenius,
who  saw  in  a  trance  the  judgment  of  the  dead,

1  I  venture  to  refer  for  a  fuller  discussion  of  these  myths
to  the  Contemporary  Review,  1866.


The  soul  has  no  power  to  make  an  organisation.  153

and  the  hidden  glories  of  the  world.     For  once,  CHAP.  u.

he  tells  us,  a  soul  was  allowed  to  return  to  the

body  without  drinking  the  waters  of  Forgetfulness.  P\&t.Resp.

x    fi21

And  so  '  this  story  was  saved  and  not  lost,  and  it
'  will  save  us,'  he  adds,  '  should  we  listen  to  its
'teaching;  and  then  we  shall  happily  cross  the
'river  of  Lethe  and  not  defile  our  souls;  but
'deeming  that  the  soul  is  immortal  and  capable
'  of  bearing  every  evil  and  winning  every  good,
'  we  shall  keep  close  to  the  upward  path,  and
'  practise  in  every  way  justice  and  wisdom,  that
'we  may  be  friends  to  ourselves  and  friends  to
'  the  gods.'  '  To  confidently  affirm  that  [the  fate  Plat.
'  of  souls]  is  such  as  I  have  described,'  Socrates  114.
says  at  the  end  of  the  "  Phaedo,"  '  becomes  no
'  reasonable  man.  But  I  do  think  that  it  becomes
'  him  to  believe  that  it  is  either  this  or  like  this,
'  if  at  least  the  soul  is  shewn  to  be  immortal ;
'  and  that  it  is  worthy  of  him  to  face  peril  boldly
'in  such  a  belief,  for  the  peril  is  glorious;  and
'  such  thoughts  he  ought  to  use  as  a  charm  to
'  allay  his  own  misgivings,  in  which  spirit  I  have
'  myself  dwelt  thus  long  upon  the  story.'  For  in  Plat,
such  questions  the  really  brave  man  '  will  either  35.
'  learn  or  discover  the  truth,  or  if  this  be  impos-
'  sible  he  will  take  at  any  rate  the  best  of  human
'words  and  that  which  is  most  irrefragable,  and
'carried  on  this  as  on  a  raft  sail  through  life  in


154  The  soul  has  no  power

CHAP.  ii.  'perpetual  jeopardy,  unless  one  might  make  the
'journey  on  a  securer  vessel,  some  divine  word  if
'  it  might  be,  more  surely  and  with  less  peril.'

14.  If  then  pure  reason  cannot  suggest  any
arguments  to  establish  the  personality  of  the  soul
when  finally  separated  from  the  body,  and  for  us
personality  is  only  another  name  for  existence,
still  less  can  it  shew  any  grounds  for  supposing
that  it  possesses  in  itself  the  power  of  assuming  at
death  another  organisation  corresponding  to  our
present  body  whereby  its  personality  may  be  pre-
served. Our  present  body  is  not  in  any  way,  as
far  as  we  can  see,  due  primarily  to  the  action  of
the  soul,  which  acts  through  and  upon  it ;  and
when  the  body  is  dissolved,  the  only  action  of  the
soul  of  which  we  can  have  naturally  any  know-
ledge ceases.  It  may  have  some  inherent  energy
in  virtue  of  which  it  manifests  itself  throughout
the  ages,  now  in  this  form,  now  in  that.  It  may,
but  that  seems  harder  to  conceive,  have  gained  on
earth  the  means  of  realising  a  personal  existence
hereafter.  It  may,  as  many  thought  even  among
GOD'S  ancient  people,  go  back  to  Him  who  gave
it  and  continue  to  exist  only  as  part  of  His  Infi-
nite Being.  Our  utter  incapacity  of  forming  a
clear  conception  of  any  mode  of  existence  differing
in  essence  from  our  own,  and  not  simply  in  extent


to  make  an  organisation  for  itself.       155

of  similar  powers,  forces  us  to  contemplate  these  CHAP.  n.
and  other  alternatives,  and  to  withhold  our  judg-
ment till  we  gain  some  new  light.  If  we  look
within  or  without  we  have  absolutely  no  analogy
to  carry  our  thoughts  one  step  onward  into  a
realm  wholly  unknown:  none  to  shew  that  the
soul  will  exert  a  power  there  which  has  been  un-
developed or  dormant  here.  Every  change  which
we  can  follow  is  simply  of  the  earth.  Faith,  or
love,  or  instinct,  may  cross  the  dark  river,  but
they  go  alone :  reason  cannot  follow  them.  Nay
more :  reason  shews  that  the  visions  which  they
see  are  mere  shadowy  projections  of  what  we  see
and  feel  now.

15.  Thus  we  are  placed  before  a  final  con-
tradiction. On  the  one  side  we  are  so  constituted
as  to  cling  to  the  belief  in  the  continuance  of  our
personality  after  death  :  on  the  other  reason  points
to  death  as  a  phenomenon  absolutely  singular
which  closes  life,  as  far  as  we  know  it,  and  takes
away  the  conditions  of  our  life.  But  if  a  single
experience  can  shew  that  these  conditions  are  not
destroyed,  but  suspended  as  far  as  we  observe
them,  or  modified  by  the  action  of  some  new  law :
that  what  seems  to  be  a  dissolution  is  really  a
transformation :  that  the  soul  does  not  remain
alone  in  a  future  state,  but  is  still  united  with


156      The  conflict  of  Instinct  and  Reason

CHAP.  ii.  our  body,  that  is  with  an  organism  which  in  a  new
sphere  expresses  the  law  which  our  present  body
now  expresses  in  this  (supr.  §  7) ;  then  reason  will
welcome  the  belief  in  our  future  personality  no  less
than  instinct.  For  the  truth  is  not  against  reason
but  beyond  it.  Reason  shews  simply  that  what
we  commonly  see,  and  what  we  can  learn  from  the
analysis  of  our  own  nature  lends  no  support  to
the  conclusion  which  we  cannot  abandon.  But
let  some  new  fact  come  in,  and  all  will  be  changed,
if  that  reveals  to  us  something  of  the  character  of
life  after  death.

16.  Such  a  fact  is  the  Resurrection.  In  one
sense  no  event  can  be  more  natural  than  this,  so
far  as  it  answers  to  a  craving  for  knowledge  of  the
unseen  world,  which  by  its  intensity  indicates  that
it  was  intended  to  be  satisfied,  as  much  as  any
other  original  instinct  of  man.  In  another  sense
nothing  can  be  more  beyond  nature,  for  it  intro-
duces us  to  a  novel  phase  of  being,  of  which  we  feel
even  in  the  presence  of  this  revelation  that  we  can
know  only  a  part  darkly  and  '  in  a  riddle.'  T"or  the
Resurrection  is  not  like  any  one  of  the  recorded
miracles  of  raising  from  the  dead.  It  is  not  a
restoration  to  the  old  life,  to  its  wants,  to  its  special
limitations,  to  its  inevitable  close,  but  the  revela-
tion of  a  new  life  foreshadowing  new  powers  of


solved  by  the  Resurrection.  157

action  and  a  new  mode  of  being.     It  issues  not  CHAP.  n.

in  death  but  in  the  Ascension  for  which  it  is  the  John  xx.

17

preparation  and  the  condition.  It  is  not  an  ex-
tension of  an  existence  with  which  we  are  ac-
quainted, but  the  manifestation  of  an  existence
for  which  we  hope.  It  is  not  like  any  of  the
fabled  apotheoses  of  the  friends  of  gods,  whose
spirits  purified  by  the  funeral  fire  from  the  stains
of  earth,  were  carried  to  the  immediate  presence
of  those  whom  they  had  loved,  but  it  is  the  con-
secration of  a  restored  and  perfected  manhood.
It  is  not  a  withdrawal  from  men  or  a  laying  aside
of  humanity,  complete,  final,  and  immediate,  but
the  pledge  of  an  abiding  communion  of  a  Saviour
with  the  fulness  of  our  nature  on  earth  and  in
heaven.  It  is  not  the  putting  off  of  the  body,  but
the  transfiguration  of  it.  And  so  in  its  record  it
is  not  like  any  of  the  dreams  in  which  earlier
poets  had  endeavoured  to  convey  to  others  the
hope  which  they  cherished.  Its  teaching  is  con-
veyed in  a  series  of  facts.  Now  one  incident  and
now  another  brings  out  some  aspect  of  the  whole
truth,  as  far  as  we  can  apprehend  it.  But  all  in-
cidents alike  are  simple  and  in  a  certain  sense
natural.  No  vision  is  opened  of  glory  or  suffering.
No  display  is  made  of  fresh  powers.  No  over-
powering exhibition  of  majesty  strikes  unwilling
conviction  into  the  hearts  of  those  who  were  before


158  The  character  of

CHAP  n.  unbelieving1.  The  Lord  rose  from  the  grave ;  and
those  who  had  known  Him  before,  knew  that  He
was  the  same  and  yet  changed.  This  is  the  sum
of  the  Apostle's  testimony,  the  new  Gospel  of  the
world.


1  It  has  been  objected  that  our  Lord  revealed  Himself  only
to  believers  or  to  those  inclined  to  believe.  If  we  regard  the
resurrection  as  a  revelation  of  a  new  life  it  is  obvious  that  it
could  not  have  been  otherwise.  In  order  to  establish  the  belief
in  the  reality  of  this  new  existence  it  was  necessary  that  some
power  should  exist  in  the  witnesses  to  apprehend  it.  There  was
a  spiritual  side  to  the  manifestation  of  the  Risen  Christ  which
could  only  be  discerned  spiritually.  If  it  had  been  necessary
merely  to  shew  the  restoration  of  the  Lord  to  the  condition  of
an  ordinary  human  life,  as  in  the  case  of  Lazarus,  the  testi-
mony of  indifferent  spectators  would  have  been  adequate.  But
if  the  appearances  were  designed  to  be  a  revelation  of  a  glori-
fied human  life,  then  the  manifestation  to  unbelievers  would
not  only  have  been  contrary  to  the  usual  method  of  the  Provi-
dence of  GOD,  but  also,  as  far  as  we  can  see,  unavailing.  For  if
the  Lord  had  appeared  to  them  as  a  man  simply,  their  evi-
dence would  have  gone  to  establish  a  false  view  of  His  Eisen
Person  :  if  He  had  appeared  to  them  under  new  conditions  of
being,  they  would  have  been  unable  to  acknowledge  the  reality
of  His  manifestation.  The  believer  who  had  familiarly  known
Christ  and  felt  His  power  could  alone  grasp  and  harmonise
the  two  modes  of  the  Eevelation  of  His  Person.  Afterwards,
when  the  idea  of  the  Eisen  Christ  was  fully  established,  we
find  an  appearance  granted  to  St  Paul,  which  carried  with  it
immediate  conviction  to  an  unbeliever ;  but  till  this  idea  was
established,  as  far  as  we  can  judge,  such  an  appearance  would
have  been  without  effect.  The  appearance  to  St  Paul  was  as
real  as  the  others  (i2^>Qtf)  but  made  under  different  circum-
stances. It  was  a  revelation  of  Christ  glorified  and  as  such
left  its  impression  on  all  the  teaching  of  St  Paul.


the  appearances  of  the  LORD.  159

17.  In  this  connexion  there  is  one  most  CHAP.  n.
important  consideration  which  is  commonly  over-  .
looked.  The  Apostles  announce  the  fact  of  the
Resurrection  and  its  immediate  bearing  upon  the
individual  hopes  of  men,  but  they  do  not  deve-
lope  its  significance.  The  fact  is  added  to  the
sum  of  human  experience.  The  interpretation
of  it  is  left  for  life.  And  so  it  is  that  with  the
comments  of  eighteen  centuries  its  meaning  is
yet  unexhausted.  Deeper  insight,  wider  sympa-
thies, grander  aspirations,  have  been  granted  to
men  in  the  progress  of  ages,  but  the  idea  of  the
Resurrection  penetrates  beneath  and  beyond  all
the  thoughts  which  history  or  science  has  hitherto
made  known.  The  Gospel  is  still  the  same,  but
known  more  fully  with  ever-growing  clearness  as
the  successive  crises  of  thought  and  life  have
shewn  its  fitness  for  meeting  them.  And  it  is
obvious  why  this  is  so.  The  Resurrection  is  a
new  creation.  Its  issues  cannot  be  contemplated
by  man  at  first,  though  its  utmost  consequences
are  included  in  its  actual  realisation.  And  just
as  in  the  creative  works  of  human  genius  har-
monies and  lessons  are  found  in  virtue  of  their
relation  to  absolute  truth,  of  which  their  authors
were  never  conscious,  so  in  this  which  is  the
Truth,  all  later  speculation  will  find  fresh  light
upon  the  problems  of  human  existence.


100    The  full  significance  of  the  Resurrection.

CHAP.  n.  18.  There  are  indeed  passages,  especially  in
the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  and  in  the  writings
of  St  John,  in  which  the  Apostles  announce  mys-
teries springing  out  of  the  Resurrection  which
are  only  now  dawning  upon  the  students  of  his-
tory and  life ;  but  as  a  general  rule  they  declare
the  fact  that  'Christ  rose  again'  without  dwelling
on  those  aspects  of  its  meaning  for  which  men
were  not  at  that  time  prepared  by  knowledge  or
experience.  In  this  respect  the  narratives  of  the
Resurrection  are  unparalleled.  The  Evangelists1
record  the  miracle  so  calmly,  looking  solely,  as
we  must  think,  at  its  historic  aspect,  that  in  read-
ing of  it  we  lose  sight  of  its  stupendous  signifi-
cance from  the  natural  simplicity  of  the  details
in  which  its  lessons  are  conveyed.  The  mani-
festations of  the  risen  Saviour  are  mixed  with
scenes  of  fear,  of  misgiving,  of  unbelief.  He  ap-
peared in  Galilee  and  at  Jerusalem  :  now  at  night
and  again  in  the  early  morning :  in  the  upper
room  and  under  the  open  sky :  in  an  assembly
gathered,  as  it  would  seem,  for  religious  exercise,
and  to  men  busy  with  their  ordinary  work.
N  othing  is  (if  we  may  so  speak)  farther  from  the

1  At  this  point  I  shall  use  the  writings  of  the  New  Testa-
ment without  reserve.  If  the  Eesurrection  is  admitted  on
other  grounds  to  be  a  fact,  no  one  will  (I  believe)  question  the
general  veracity  of  the  Evangelists.


The  LORD  the  same  yet  changed.         161

thought  of  the  Evangelists  than  to  give  a  doc-  CHAP.  n.
trinal  view  of  the  mystery  which  they  declare.
Christ  was  the  same  and  yet  changed.  That  was
in  substance  what  they  had  to  tell ;  and  in  that
lies  the  full  answer  to  the  first  great  question
before  us.  The  body  is  not  destroyed  by  death.
Its  union  with  the  soul  is  for  a  time  (as  we  are
forced  to  conceive  of  it,  though  perhaps  quite
wrongly)  interrupted  but  not  closed.  Our  specu-
lative doubts  are  met,  as  they  could  only  be  met,
by  a  fact.

19.     It  is  unnecessary  to  dwell  on  the  various
details  by  which  the  identity  of  the  Lord's  human
body  is  brought  out  in  the  Gospels.     It  is  obvious
from  a  mere  enumeration  that  they  meet  each
misgiving.    The  body  which  the  disciples  had  laid  John  xx.
in  the  sepulchre  was  no  longer  to  be  found  when
they  looked  for  it.    The  marks  of  the  Passion  were
made  sensibly  present  in  the  Risen  Saviour  to  him
who   would   not   otherwise   believe.     Nay    more,
Christ  Himself  offered  this  very  proof  to  those
who  '  supposed  that  they  had  seen  a  spirit.'     '  Be-  Luke  xxiv-
'hold  my  hands  and  my  feet,  that  it  is  I  myself:
'  handle  me,  and  see,  for  a  spirit  hath  not  flesh  Comp.
'and  bones,  as  ye  see  me  have'... 'And  He  took  20.
'  [meat]  and  did  eat  before  them.'     And  it  can
hardly  be  without  reference  to  this  incident  that
w.  R.  11


162         The  LORD  the  same  yet  changed.

CHAP.  u.  St  John  in  his  Epistle  reckons  this  'handling'
Uohni.l.  last  among  the  various  revelations  which   GOD
had  given  of  His  Son.     The  length  of  time  too
during  which  the  appearances  were  extended  fa-
miliarised the  disciples  (so  to  speak)   with   the
mystery  which  had  at  first  filled  them  with  terror.
Acts  i.  3.    For  forty  days  He  '  shewed  Himself  alive  to  them
'  by  many  infallible  proofs,  being  seen  of  them  and
'  speaking  of  the  things  pertaining  to  the  kingdom
'  of  GOD.'

20.  But  this  Body  which  was  recognised  as
essentially  the  same  Body,  had  yet  undergone
some  marvellous  change,  of  which  we  can  gain  a
faint  idea  by  what  is  directly  recorded  of  its  mani-
festations1. Thus  we  find  that  the  Person  of
Christ  was  not  recognised  directly  by  those  who
saw  Him.  However  firm  their  conviction  was
afterwards  that  they  had  '  seen  the  Lord,'  they
knew  Him  first  when  He  was  pleased  to  make
Himself  known.  Human  sense  alone  was  not

1  It  is  not,  I  believe,  a  mere  fancy  to  see  a  typical  indi-
cation of  this  change  in  the  words  used  by  our  Lord  Himself
of  His  glorified  Body:  Luke  xxiv.  39  ('flesh  and  bones')..
The  significant  variation  from  the  common  formula  '  flesh  and
blood'  must  have  been  at  once  intelligible  to  Jews,  accustomed
to  the  provisions  of  the  Mosaic  ritual,  and  nothing  would  have
impressed  upon  them  more  forcibly  the  transfiguration  of
Christ's  Body  than  the  verbal  omission  of  the  element  of  blood
which  was  for  them  the  symbol  and  seat  of  corruptible  life.


The  Resurrection.  163

capable  of  discerning  Who  He  was.     It  could  not  CHAP.  n.
be  otherwise  if  His  Body  was  glorified,  for  our
senses  can  only  apprehend  that  which  is  of  kin-
dred nature  with  themselves.    At  one  time  it  was  Matt,
by  a  word  of  general  or  personal  tenderness,  that  j0hn  xx'
Christ  awakened  the  faith  by  which  sense  was  16>  19>

quickened:   at  another  time  by  the  celebration  Luke xxiv.

30  31
of  that  holy  rite  which  He  had  instituted  before

His  death :   at  another  by  a  mighty  act  which  John  xxi.
symbolised  the  blessing  of  the  apostolic  work.

21.     And    as    Christ's   Body   was   no   longer
necessarily  to  be  recognised,  so  also  it  was  not
bound  by  the  material  laws  to  which  its  action
was  generally  conformed.     He  is  found  present,
no  one  knows   from   whence.     He   passes   away,
no  one  knows  whither.     He  stands  in  the  midst
of  the  little  group  of  the  Apostles  '  when   the  John  xx.
'  doors   were   shut   for   fear   of    the   Jews.'     '  He  Lu'ke  xxiv.
'  vanished  out  of  the  sight'  of  those  whose  eyes  31<
were  opened  that  they  knew  Him.     And  at  last
'  while  they  beheld,  He  was  taken  up,  and  a  cloud  Acts  i.  9.
'  received  Him  out  of  their  sight.'    It  is  impossible
not  to  feel  in  reading  the  narratives  that  we  are
regarding  a  form  of  existence  human,  indeed,  yet
indefinitely  ennobled  by  the  removal  of  needs  and
limitations  to  which  we  are  at  present  subject.
It  is  vain  for  us  to  speculate  on  the  nature  of

11—2


164    The  transfiguration  of  our  whole  being.

CHAP.  ii.  that  transformed  human  Body.  We  can  form  no
clear  positive  conception  which  is  not  shaped  by
the  present  laws  of  thought.  Negatively  we  can
only  say  that  it  was  not  bound  by  those  laws  of
space  (for  example)  which  necessarily  enter  into
all  that  we  think  or  do.  The  life  which  is  re-
vealed to  us  is  not  the  continuation  of  the  pre-
sent life,  but  a  life  which  .takes  up  into  itself
all  the  elements  of  our  present  life,  and  trans-
figures them  by  a  glorious  change,  which  we  can
regard  at  present  only  under  signs  and  figures.


22.  Thus  the  Resurrection  answers  as  com-
pletely as  it  can  be  answered  the  first  great  question
by  which  we  are  met.  In  the  Person  of  Christ
we  see  the  whole  of  man,  his  body  and  soul,
raised  together  from  the  grave.  No  part  is  left
behind.  The  whole  complex  nature  is  raised  and
glorified.  It  is  not  that  the  soul  only  lives ;  nor
yet  that  the  body,  such  as  it  was  before,  is  restored
to  its  former  vigour.  The  Saviour,  as  far  as  we

2  Cor.  v.  4.  regard  His  Manhood,  is  not  unclothed,  to  use  St
Paul's  image,  but  clothed  upon.  Nothing  is  taken
away,  but  something  is  added  by  which  all  that

l  Cor.  xv.  was  before  present  is  transfigured.  '  The  corrupt-
'  ible  puts  on  incorruption :  the  mortal  puts  on
'  immortality.'


The  idea  of  Sin.  165

23.  This  thought  brings  us  to  the  second  CHAP.  n.
question,  the  final  relation  of  man  to  GOD,  of  man,
that  is,  as  subject  to  the  consequences  of  sin.
And  here  it  will  be  necessary  to  consider  somewhat
carefully  the  idea  which  lies  at  the  root  of  sin,
lest  it  may  seem  that  we  are  dealing  with  a  mere
phantom.  But  still  we  may  leave  out  of  our
investigation  some  questions  which  have  been
connected  with  it.  Our  inquiry  does  not  extend
to  the  obstacles  which  material  nature  places  in
the  way  of  man,  of  whatever  form  they  may  be,
nor  yet  to  the  mutual  relations  of  animals  to  one
another  or  to  man.  We  are  obviously  wholly
incapable  of  knowing  anything  of  the  position  in
which  any  beings  except  ourselves  stand  towards
GOD,  or  of  their  latent  powers,  or  of  their  future
destiny.  It  is  quite  conceivable  that  what  ap-
pears to  us  in  the  light  of  suffering  and  decay  in
beings  wholly  unlike  ourselves  may  to  a  higher
intelligence  assume  a  different  aspect ;  or  (and
this  seems  even  from  a  view  of  nature  far  more
probable)  the  fate  of  the  physical  and  animal
creation  may  be  bound  up  by  some  mysterious
influence  with  that  of  man.  At  least,  we  can  see
the  difference  between  what  we  call  evil  in  inor-
ganic or  brute  nature,  and  evil  (moral  evil)  in  man
which  involves  the  operation  of  a  free  will,  and
an  acknowledged  relation  between  the  person  of


166    Sin  not  necessary  for  man's  development

CHAP.  n.  the  sinner  and  GOD.  Whether  these  conditions
of  action  can  exist  in  the  case  of  other  creatures
or  not  we  are  wholly  unable  to  determine  ;  but  it
is  at  least  remarkable  that  as  soon  as  the  pheno-
mena of  free  will  are  observable  in  animals  (as  in
the  case  of  those  which  have  been  long  associated
with  man)  we  attribute  to  them  a  measure  of
responsibility  by  according  praise  and  blame  to
their  actions.

24.  If  then  we  look  at  the  problem  in  its
simplest  form  it  is  evident  that  the  possibility  of
sin  is  necessarily  included  in  the  creation  of  a
finite,  free  being ;  for  the  simplest  idea  which  we
can  form  of  sin,  is  the  finite  setting   itself  up
against   the   infinite.      Selfishness,   which    exists
potentially  as  soon  as  'self  exists,  is  the  ground  of
all  sin.     Hence  we  can  see  how  a  perfect  finite
being  may  yet  be  exposed  to  temptation,  for  the
sense  of  limitation  brings  with  it  the  thought,  or
the  possibility  of  the  thought,  of  passing  the  limit.

25.  And  not  only  is  a  perfect  finite  being  in
this  way  necessarily  under  a  moral  probation,  but
the  actual  existence  of  sin  is  not  required  for  his
moral  development.     It  is  necessary  to  dwell  on
this  point,  for  if  it  could  be  shewn  that  sin  belongs
essentially    to    the    idea    of    individual    human


Evil  may  be  the  occasion  of  good.        167

progress  as  one  of  the  conditions  of  its  realisation,  CHAP.  n.
we  might  at  once  dismiss  as  vain  the  obstinate
questionings  with  which  we  ponder  over  its  future
issues.  It  is  only  if  sin  is  an  intrusive  corruption
of  our  nature  that  we  need  feel  anxious  about  the
permanence  of  its  results.  But  it  follows  from
the  final  analysis  of  sin  which  has  been  given  that
man,  though  he  had  not  sinned,  might  yet  have
practised  some  (at  least)  essentially  human
virtues:  all  indeed  which  are  comprised  in
self-control  and  the  recognition  of  dependence.
Nothing  therefore  can  be  more  false  than  to  say
that  '  moral  good  and  moral  evil — as  distinguished
'  from  the  possibility  of  good  and  evil — came  into
'  being  together.'  A  command  implies  the  possi-
bility of  obedience  and  disobedience,  but  obedience
is  no  less  real  though  disobedience  in  fact  never
takes  place.  Love,  again,  the  centre  of  all  social
virtues,  and  truth  the  centre  of  all  intellectual
virtues,  are  both  wholly  independent  of  the  pre-
sence of  evil  among  men.

26.  But  it  may  be  said  that  if  moral  evil
were  removed  from  the  world  '  life  would  be
'  impoverished.'  So  indeed  it  appears  at  first
sight  to  us  who  are  habituated  to  the  startling
contrasts  of  life  :  for  us  shadow  is  a  necessity  of
distinct  vision.  Yet  it  would  be  difficult  to  shew


168          Evil  not  the  condition  of  good.

CHAP.  ii.  that  the  more  splendid  qualities  which  are  brought
out  (for  instance)  by  war  are  better,  in  any  sense,
than  their  correlatives  which  need  no  such  field
for  their  display :  that  the  heroic  forgetfulness  or
contempt  of  danger  or  suffering,  which  springs
from  a  great  passion  or  a  generous  impulse  in
the  midst  of  a  fierce  conflict  or  under  the  sense  of
a  deep  wrong,  is  better  than  that  rational  self-
control  which  we  have  seen  can  exist  in  the  high-
est degree  without  the  presence  of  evil.  We  are
too  apt  to  think  that  virtue  which  is  seen  on  a
larger  scale  is  itself  magnified.  On  the  other  hand
it  may  be  allowed  that  evil  itself  serves  as  part
of  our  discipline :  that  it  gives  occasion  for  the
exercise  of  special  virtues,  and  by  antagonism  calls
them  into  play;  yet  this  is  only  to  say  that  it
has  been  so  ordered  that  evil  shall  in  some  de-
gree minister  to  its  own  defeat.

27.  And  while  we  grant  that  in  society  evil
may  be  the  occasion  of  good,  it  is  by  no  means
clear  that  this  is  true  in  the  individual.  As  far  as
we  can  see,  the  presence  of  evil,  that  is  the  wilful
transgression  of  limit  as  distinguished  from  the
original  limitation,  is  neither  the  occasion,  nor
the  condition  of  good,  nor  on  the  narrow  stage  of
human  life  the  preliminary  to  it.  The  highest
conception  of  active  virtue — duty — is  absolutely


Sin  foreign  to  our  nature.  169

untouched  by  it  both  in  its  origin   and   in   its  CHAP-  "•
fulfilment,  even  when  evil  is  regarded  under  the
extreme  form  of  pain.

28.  Moreover  it  must  be  observed  that  evil,
while  it  may  be  the  occasion  of  good,  is  never
transmuted  into  good.     Evil  remains  evil  to  the
last  in  whatever  form  it  may  shew  itself.     Sin
remains  sin :    pain  remains   pain :    ignorance   (so
far  as  it  is  culpable)  remains  ignorance :  though
sin  and  pain  and  ignorance  may  call  forth  efforts
of  love  and  fortitude  and  patience.

29.  Nor  can  it  be  said  that  sin  realised,  and
not  merely  the  possibility  of  sin  by  the  action  of
a  free  will,  is  the  necessary  condition  of  human
virtue,   and    consequently    of    human    happiness.
For  if  this  were  true,  then  it  would  follow  either
that  evil  itself  will  be  eternal,  or  that  human  life
in  its  true  sense  will  cease  to  be.     Whatever  may
be  the  function  of  evil  in  the  social  discipline  of
men  whose  powers  are  already  impaired  by  sin,
we  have  no  reason  to  think  that  evil  could  find  any
place  for  giving  occasion  to  new  or  higher  good  in
a  society  of  men  animated  by  those  active  and
personal   virtues   which   have   been   seen   to    be
wholly  independent  of  it  (§§  25,  27) ;  not  to  speak
of    the    possibility   of    other   forms   of    virtuous


170  Sin  foreign  to  our  nature.

CHAP.  ii.  character  inconceivable  in  our  present  mixed  state ;
for  the  permanence  of  the  antitypes  or  perfections
of  our  present  virtues  in  another  state  by  no
means  excludes  the  possibility  of  the  existence  of
other  virtues  as  yet  unknown,  which  may  come
into  play  from  the  manifestations  of  new  relations
between  ourselves  or  of  ourselves  to  other  intelli-
gent beings.

30.  It  follows  then  that  sin — moral  evil  as
involving  the  action  of  will — is  in  fact  something
wholly  foreign  to  human  nature  :  that  in  its  essen-
tial character  it  remains  always  evil  even  when
it  is  the  occasion  of  good :  that  it  is  not  a  lower
form  of  goodness  or  a  necessary  condition  for  its
exercise,  but  the  conscious  transgression  of  limit :
that  in  the  individual  it  leads  to  no  good :  that
even  in  society  at  large  its  disciplinary  power  only
effects  by  sacrifice  and  imperfectly  what  the  ob-
servance of  the  true  bounds  of  nature  would  effect
perfectly.  It  is  then  a  foreign  element  in  our
nature,  and  absolutely  abhorrent  from  our  proper
destiny.  But  it  is  also,  as  far  as  reason  can  trace,
permanent  in  its  issues.  If  therefore  a  belief  in
personal  immortality  be  held  on  any  grounds
except  those  furnished  by  the  Gospel,  it  must  be
accompanied  by  an  awful  sense  of  the  consequences
of  past  offences.


Suffering  no  expiation.  171

31.  It  is  this  fact  which  gives  to  the  idea  CHAP.  n.
of  sin  its  most  terrible  significance.     As  far  as

we  can  conceive  by  the  help  of  reason  the  effects
of  every  action  must  be  infinite,  and  in  regard  to
the  agent  (whatever  they  may  be  to  others)  cor-
responding to  and  like  the  action.  But  all  sin  (as
such)  necessarily  involves  the  idea  of  suffering  to
the  person  who  commits  it ;  for  selfishness,  the
final  element  of  sin,  is  the  contrary  of  love,  and
therefore  when  set  against  Infinite  Love  must
bring  the  misery  of  unavailing  desire  and  isolation.
Hence  punishment  (for  all  consequences  must  at
last  be  referred  to  the  Will  of  the  Personal
Creator),  or  (in  another  light)  suffering  as  the
natural  consequence  of  selfishness,  must  exist  as
long  as  sin  exists ;  and  so  in  any  particular  case
the  past  sin  must  still  work  its  full  effect  in  sepa-
rating the  sinner  from  GOD  without  end,  unless
some  new  power  be  interposed.

32.  For  it  must  be  noticed  that  suffering  has
in   itself    no   power   or   tendency   to   remove   or
expiate  sin,  the  consequences  of  which  are  best
conceived  as  evolved  (so  to  speak)  naturally  and
centring  in  the  changed  character  of  the  guilty,
and  not  imposed  externally  according  to  any  fixed
standard.     Nor  again  has  it  in  itself  any  power
to  produce  repentance,  by  which  in  the  intercourse


172  Conflict  of  Instinct

CHAP.  ii.  of  man  and  man  the  effects  of  wrong-doing,
as  far  as  their  mutual  relations  are  concerned,
may  be  removed.  But  even  in  this  latter  case  no
repentance  can  cancel  the  consequences  of  the
wrong  action,  either  without  the  doer  or  within
him.  These  throughout  life  and  (as  far  as  we  can
see)  beyond  it  are  inwrought  into  the  world  and
into  his  nature.  Future  punishment  is  a  conclu-
sion of  reason,  if  we  grant  the  future  continuance
of  our  personality.  The  mystery  which  reason
cannot  of  itself  apprehend  is  that  this  punish-
ment can  be  stayed.  Thus  if  we  approach  the
subject  from  this  side  it  is  the  forgiveness,  or
rather  the  'washing  away'  of  sins  and  not  their
punishment,  which  is  the  real  subject  of  Revela-
tion. If  on  the  other  hand  we  confine  our  view
to  this  life,  the  idea  of  a  Supreme  Being  tempering
suffering  with  a  view  to  repentance  answers  to  an
instinct  of  man  and  not  to  any  logical  process ;
and  Scripture  first  teaches  us  to  believe  that  the
instinct  is  true.

33.  For  just  as  there  is  an  instinct  within  us
which  claims  the  inheritance  of  a  future  life,  so
we  feel  that  after  sin  repentance  is  still  possible
and  efficacious,  and  that  our  Heavenly  Father  can
do  away  our  sins.  But  Reason  which  deserted  us
before  equally  deserts  us  now.  It  tells  us  from


and  Reason.  173

the  observation  of  what  we  see  around  and  from  CHAP.  n.
the  conception  which  we  are  forced  to  make  of
the  dependence  of  the  future  on  the  past,  that
we  must  be  for  ever,  in  relation  to  GOD,  what
we  are,  and  bear  about  with  us  the  scars  and
wounds  which  sin  has  inflicted  upon  us.

34.  Here  again  the  fact  of  the  Resurrection
meets   our  doubts   with   a   new    Revelation.     If
we  look  at  our  Lord  simply  as  He  was  seen  out-
wardly, He  bore  in  Himself  all  the  consequences

of  sin.     '  He  was  tempted  in  all  points  like  as  we  Hebr.  iv.
'are'  except  by  personal  sin.     He  took  our  flesh  15>
with  its  liabilities  to  hunger,  and  fatigue,  and  pain
upon  Him :  He  shared  the  emotions  of  anger,  and
sorrow,  and  affection:    He   bore   death   with   its
most  terrible  accompaniments,  the  last  issue  of
sin,  and  that  sense  of  utter  isolation  from  GOD  Matt
which   is   its   complete   punishment.      Whatever  xxvii.  46.
sin  could  work  He  took  upon  Himself;  and  when
all  was  ended  GOD  raised  Him  up  '  for  our  justifi-
'  cation,'  and  the  Lord   JESUS   bore   our   human
nature,  over  which  sin  had  no  longer  power,  to
the  immediate  presence  of  the  Father.

35.  But  it  will  be  said  that  the  Lord's  suffer-
ings were  not  the  result  (as  ours  are)  of  personal
sin,    and    consequently    that    we    can    draw    no


174  The  Resurrection  in  connexion

CHAP.  ii.  comfort  from  His  triumph  over  death.  To  this
objection  it  is  in  part  an  answer  to  reply  that  the
sufferings  of  Christ  were  as  though  they  were  due
to  Himself,  and  that  not  by  a  fiction,  but  by  His
real  assumption  of  human  nature.  How  this
could  be  in  regard  to  the  more  general  conse-
quences of  sin,  as  want  or  grief,  is  sufficiently
intelligible  from  the  fact  that  He  was  truly  man.
But  how  He  could  take  sin  upon  Him  is  a  mys-
tery which  we  cannot  solve,  though  in  fact  it  is
only  a  mystery  of  the  same  kind  as  His  '  becoming

John i.  14.  'flesh'  (comp.  §  38).  Yet  even  here  so  much  at
least  we  can  see,  that  in  the  Agony  and  on  the
Cross  He  suffered,  yet  with  an  intensity  which  we
cannot  appreciate,  even  as  those  do  who  bear  the

Heb.  v.  7.  consequences  of  personal  sin.  '  He  offered  up
'  prayers  and  supplications  with  strong  crying  and
'  tears  unto  Him  that  was  able  to  save  Him  from
'  death,  and  was  heard  in  that  He  feared.'

36.  The  complete  answer  lies  somewhat
deeper,  as  has  been  already  indicated,  in  the
recognition  of  our  Lord's  Divine  Person.  It
is  impossible  to  understand  the  Resurrection
completely  apart  from  the  Incarnation.  It  may
indeed  be  said  that  the  Resurrection  is  the
historic  seal  of  the  Incarnation,  which  remains  for
ever  a  mystery  removed  from  all  witness.  And


with  the  forgiveness  of  Sin.  175

it  was  in  this  sense  that  the  first  teachers   of  CHAP.  n.
Christianity  understood  and  interpreted  it.    After
the  Resurrection,  as  we  have  seen  (l.  §§  56  ff.),
they  saw  in  Christ  a  Saviour  of  boundless  power.
His  Life  and  Death  were  contemplated  in  their
atoning  virtue :   His   Name   was   given   as   that
whereby  men  might  be  saved :  in  Him  was  Life.
The    contrast    between   that    which   was   appre-
hended, if  with  the  deepest  reverence  we  may  so
speak,  as  personal  discipline  and  redeeming  power,
was  placed  in  its  broadest  light.    '  It  became'  GOD  Heb.  ii.
'  to  make   Him   perfect   through   suffering,'   and   '     '
even  thus  '  He  tasted  death  for  every  man.'     He
was  '  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  GOD  with  power,  Bom.  i.  4.
'  according  to  the  Spirit  of  holiness,  by  the  resur-
'  rection  from  the  dead.'     And  '  though  He  were  Heb.  v.  8,
'a  Son,  yet  learned  He  obedience  by  the  things
'  which  He  suffered ;  and  being  made  perfect,  He
'  became  the  author  of  eternal  salvation  unto  all
'  them  that  obey  Him.'

37.  Apart  from  this  faith  in  the  Divinity  of
Christ,  His  Resurrection  loses  its  highest  signifi-
cance. It  has  in  itself  and  absolutely  no  direct
and  immediate  connexion  with  ourselves.  It  is
an  isolated  incident  in  the  history  of  mankind,
glorious  and  full  of  hope  but  not  the  new  birth  of
humanity.  It  answers  to  that  view  of  the  Lord


176         How  the  Resurrection  of  Christ

CHAP.  ii.  which  represents  Him  as  a  Teacher  simply,  and
does  not,  according  to  the  apostolic  pattern,  bring
out  into  chief  prominence  what  He  did  and  what
He  was.  If  Christ  was  only  man,  such  as  we  are
in  nature,  then  His  triumph  over  death  is  no
Gospel  for  those  who  are  bowed  down  with  the

John  xiv.   weight  of  guilt.     In  Him  we  can  feel  that  '  the

on

'  Prince  of  this  world  when  he  came  had  nothing : '
Death  could  not  hold  Him.     For  ourselves,  we
Lukexxiii.  'receive'  in  corruption  'the  due  reward  of  our
•  '  deeds :  but  this  man  hath  done  nothing  amiss.'

38.  On  such  a  theory  no  hope  like  that  of
St  Paul  could  repose.  But  once  introduce  the
belief  in  Christ's  divine  nature,  and  His  Death
and  Resurrection  are  no  longer  of  the  individual
but  of  the  race.  Nor  in  doing  this  are  we  taking
refuge  in  an  arbitrary  assumption  to  help  our
argument.  On  the  contrary,  we  simply  repeat
the  interpretation  which  the  Apostles  placed  on
the  whole  work  of  the  Saviour.  It  was  on  this
belief  that  the  Church  was  founded  and  built  up.
The  belief  was  not  indeed  always  drawn  out  with
exact  precision,  yet  it  was  always  implied  in  the
relation  which  the  believer  was  supposed  to  hold
to  GOD  in  Christ.  The  formula  of  Baptism,  which
has  never  changed,  is  unintelligible  without  it.
The  Eucharist  is  emptied  of  the  blessing  which


includes  ours.  177

every  age  has  sought  in  that  Holy  Sacrament,  if  CHAP.  n.
it  be  taken  away.

39.  If  Christ  took  our  nature  upon  Him  (as
we  believe)  by  an  act  of  love,  it  was  not  that  of
one  but  of  all.  He  was  not  one  man  only  among
men,  but  in  Him  all  humanity  was  gathered  up.
And  thus  now  as  at  all  time  mankind  are  (so
to  speak)  organically  united  with  Him.  His  acts
are  in  a  true  sense  our  acts,  so  far  as  we  realise  the
union :  His  death  is  our  death  :  His  Resurrection,
our  Resurrection.  Nothing  can  be  plainer  than

the  assertion  of  this  doctrine.     Our  '  bodies  are  l  Cor.  vi.

15
'members  of  Christ;'  and  conversely  a  Christian

society  is  '  a  body  of  Christ.'     '  I  have  been,'  St  l  Cor.  xii.

27

Paul  says,  '  crucified  with  Christ.'  If  we  died  Gal.  ii.  20.
'with  Christ,'  he  writes  to  the  Romans,  'we  be-
'lieve  that  we  shall  also  live  with  Him... Reckon
'  ye  also  yourselves  to  be  dead  indeed  unto  sin,  but
'  living  unto  GOD  in  Christ  Jesus.'  And  yet  more
plainly, '  When  we  were  dead  in  sins  [GoD]  quick-  Eph.  ii.  5,

n

'ened   us   together  with   Christ,   and    raised   us   '

'up  together,  and  made  us  sit  together  in  the

'  heavenly  realm  in  Christ  Jesus.'     '  In  whom  also  Col.  ii.  11,

12

'  ye  were  circumcised  with  the  circumcision  made
'without  hands,  in  putting  off  the  body  of  the
'  sins  of  the  flesh,  in  the  circumcision  of  Christ ;
'buried  with  Him  in  baptism,  wherein  also  ye

W.  R.  12


178  The  personal  significance

CHAP.  n.  '  were  raised  with  Him  through  faith  in  the  opera-
'  tion  of  GOD,  who  raised  Him  from  the  dead.'  So

1  Pet.  i.  3.  again  St  Peter  speaks  of  GOD  '  who  begat  us
'again  to  a  living  hope  through  the  resurrection
'  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead ;'  and  his  final

l  Pet.  v.     salutation  is  '  Peace  be  with  you  all  who  are  in
14

'Christ  Jesus.'

40.  The  ground  of  these  and  similar  state-
ments is  found  in  the  words  of  our  Lord,  which
first  receive  through  them  their  full  significance.

John  xv.  'Abide  in  me  and  I  in  you...  I  am  the  Vine;  ye
'  are  the  branches.  He  that  abideth  in  me  and  I
'  in  him,  the  same  bringeth  forth  much  fruit ;  for
'apart  from  me  ye  can  do  nothing.'  And  again,
in  His  last  great  prayer  for  His  disciples,  He  says  :

John  xvii.  '  For  their  sakes  I  sanctify  myself,  that  they  also
'may  be  sanctified  in  truth.  Neither  pray  I  for
<  these  alone,  but  for  them  also  which  believe  on
'me  through  their  word,  that  they  all  may  be
'  one ;  as  Thou,  Father,  art  in  Me,  and  I  in  Thee,
'that  they  also  may  be  in  Us... I  in  them,  and
'  Thou  in  Me,  that  they  may  be  made  perfect  into
'  one/

41.  The  full  doctrine  of  the  Resurrection  can-
not be  understood  without  constant  reference  to
these  deeper  revelations  of  Christ's  Person;  nor


of  the  Resurrection  of  the  Body.         179

again  is  the  Apostolic  doctrine  of  the  Person  of  CHAP.  n.
Christ  intelligible  without  the  light  of  the  glorious
manifestations  of  Himself  which  He  made  to  His
disciples  after  He  was  risen  from  the  dead.  But
it  is  not  our  object  now  to  follow  out  the  mutual
relations  of  these  two  elements  of  our  Creed,  or  to
trace  them  both  back  to  the  Incarnation.  It  is
enough  to  have  indicated  in  what  way  we  can
conceive  that  the  efficacy  of  the  Resurrection  is
extended  to  those  for  whom  Christ  died;  and
having  done  this  we  may  next  notice  how  the
teaching  of  the  Resurrection  on  the  dignity  of
the  body  tends  to  explain  the  relation  of  the
individual  self  to  the  world.

42.  The  noblest  of  the  ancient  moralists
looked  upon  man's  body  as  a  hopeless  burden  and
fatal  hindrance  to  the  soul ;  and  in  this  they
have  been  followed  by  the  noblest  non-Christian
moralists  in  every  age.  The  famous  thanksgiving
of  Plotinus  that  '  he  was  not  tied  to  an  immortal
'body'  expresses  the  common  feeling  of  all  who
have  not  felt  the  power  of  the  Resurrection.  But
Christianity  transfigures  what  philosophy  would
destroy.  It  shews  that  the  corruption  by  which
we  are  weighed  down  does  not  belong  to  our
proper  nature,  and'  is  not  necessarily  bound  up
with  it  for  ever.  It  lays  open  with  a  deeper  and

12—2


180  The  moral  significance

CHAP.  ii.  more  searching  criticism  than  a  system  of  morality
could  direct,  the  internal  struggles  to  which  the
'  flesh'  must  give  occasion,  and  the  inevitable  de-
feats which  we  must  suffer  in  our  efforts  towards
the  divine  life.  Plato  does  not  describe  more
sadly  than  St  Paul  the  afflictions  by  which  we  are

Phil.iii.2i.  beset  while  yet  oppressed  by'  the  body  of  humi-
'  liation.'  Or  to  take  an  example  from  a  different
sect  and  age,  M.  Aurelius  does  not  express  more
keenly  than  St  John  a  sense  of  the  evils  of  the
present  life.  But  there  is  an  immeasurable  chasm
between  the  Apostles  and  Platonists  or  Stoics.
'  We  that  are  in  this  tabernacle  do  groan,  being

2  Cor.  v.  4. '  burdened,'  St  Paul  writes :  '  not  for  that  we  would
'be  unclothed,  but  clothed  upon,  that  mortality
'  may  be  swallowed  up  by  life.'  The  better  change
for  which  he  longed  was  not  the  destruction  but

Phil. iii.2l.  the  ennobling  of  his  body,  so  that  it  might  'be
'  fashioned  like  unto  [Christ's]  body  of  glory,  ac-
'  cording  to  the  working  whereby  He  is  able  even  to
'  subdue  all  things  unto  Himself.'  And  the  power
by  which  this  transformation  should  be  effected
was  the  simple  contemplation  of  Christ  in  His
essential  majesty.  Nay,  in  some  sense  the  change
is  already  begun  on  earth,  so  far  as  that  we  can
look  forward  with  full  hope  to  its  accomplish-

2  Cor.  iii.  ment ;  for  '  we  all,  with  open  face  beholding  as  in
'a  glass  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  are  changed  into


of  the  Resurrection  of  the  Body.         181

'  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory.'     '  Beloved,  CHAP.  n.
'  now  are  we  the  sons  of  GOD,'  such  are  St  John's  1  John  iii.
words,  '  and  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall
'be:   but  we  know  that,  when  He  shall  appear,
'  we  shall  be  like  Him,  for  we  shall  see  Him  as
'He  is.'


43.  In  a  word  our  present  body  is  as  the
seed  of  our  future  body.  The  one  rises  as  naturally
from  the  other  as  the  flower  from  the  germ.  '  It  1  Cor.
'  is  sown  in  corruption,  it  is  raised  in  incorrup-
'  tion :  it  is  sown  in  dishonour,  it  is  raised  in  glory  :
'  it  is  sown  in  weakness,  it  is  raised  in  power :  it
'is  sown  a  natural  body,  it  is  raised  a  spiritual
'  body.'  We  cannot,  indeed,  form  any  conception
of  the  change  which  shall  take  place,  except  so
far  as  it  is  shewn  to  us  in  the  Person  of  the  Lord.
Its  fulfilment  is  in  another  state,  and  our  thoughts
are  bound  by  this  state.  But  there  is  nothing
against  reason  in  the  analogy.  Every  change  of
life  which  we  can  observe  now  must  be  from  one
material  form  to  another  equally  falling  under  our
senses ;  but  such  a  change  may  help  us  to  under-
stand how  a  form  at  present  sensible  may  pass
through  a  great  crisis  into  another,  which  is  an
expression  of  the  same  law  of  life,  though  our
present  senses  cannot  naturally  take  cognisance
of  it  (supr.  §  7).  If  the  analogy  were  to  explain


182  The  moral  significance

CHAP.  ii.  the  passage  of  man  from  an  existence  of  one  kind
(limited  by  a  body)  to  an  existence  of  another
kind  (unlimited  by  a  body),  it  would  then  be
false ;  but  as  it  is,  it  illustrates  by  a  vivid  figure
the  perpetuity  of  our  bodily  life,  as  proved  in  the
Resurrection  of  Christ.

44.  The  moral  significance  of  such  a  doctrine
as  the  Resurrection  of  the  body  cannot  be  over-
rated. Both  personally  and  socially  it  places  the
sanctions  if  not  the  foundations  of  morality  on
a  new  ground.  Each  sin  against  the  body  is  no
longer  a  stain  on  that  which  is  itself  doomed  to
perish,  but  a  defilement  of  that  which  is  con-
secrated to  an  eternal  life.  To  injure  another,  is
to  injure  one  with  whom  we  are  bound  by  the
closest  ties  through  a  common  fellowship  in
1  Cor.  vi.  Christ.  '  The  body  is  not  for  fornication,  but  for

i  o        IK

'  the  Lord ;  and  the  Lord  for  the  body.  And  GOD
'  both  raised  up  the  Lord,  and  will  also  raise  up  us
'  by  His  power.  Know  you  not  that  your  bodies
Eph.iv.25. '  are  the  members  of  Christ  ?'  '  Speak  every  man
'  truth  with  his  neighbour :  for  we  are  members  one
'  of  another/  Each  Christian  society  is  '  a  body  of
'  Christ,'  of  which  the  members  are  charged  with
various  functions ;  and  these  '  bodies '  again  are
'  members'  of  other '  bodies'  wider  and  greater,  and
these  at  last  'members'  of  that  universal  Church


of  the  Resurrection  of  the  Body.         183

which   is   the    '  fulness   of    Christ/   its   heavenly  CHAP.  n.
Head.


45.  In  this  way  the  doctrine  of  the  Resur-
rection turned  into  a  reality  the  exquisite  myth
of  Plato,  in  which   he   represented  tyrants  and
great  men  waiting  for  their  final  sentence  from
the  judges  of  Hades,  with  their  bodies  scarred  and
wounded  by  lust  and  passion  and  cruelty.    And  at
the  same  time  the  notion  of  civic  union  in  which
lay  so  much  of  the  strength  and  virtue  of  classical
life,  is  freed  from  the  dangers  of  party  and  class
and  extended  to  the  utmost  limits  of  a  human
brotherhood.     The   earliest   religious   instinct   of
men  taught  them  to  regard  each  class,  each  guild,
each  city,  each  state,  as  standing  in  a  corporate
connexion  with   some   particular   deity,  and   en-
joying  his  protection :   Christianity  satisfies  the
instinct,  and   harmonises  the   idea   of  a   special
relationship  to  a  Divine  Lord  with  that  of  catholic
union  in  Him.     It  gives  the  largest  range  to  the
sympathies  and  obligations  of  men  at  the  very
time  when  it   lays  the   greatest  weight  on  the
distinct  importance  and  eternal  issues  of  every
isolated  human  action.

46.  The  perfect  reconciliation  of  the  claims
and  duties  of  the  individual  and  of  the  society


184         The  doctrine  of  the  Resurrection

CHAP.  ii.  is  no  less  characteristic  of  the  teaching  of  Chris-
tianity than  the  hallowing  (so  to  speak)  of  the
mutual  relationship  of  soul  and  body ;  and  both
doctrines  alike  find  their  historical  basis  and  the
pledge  of  their  realisation  in  the  Resurrection.
In  prse-  Christian  times  the  individual  was  either
sacrificed  to  the  state,  or  contemplated  wholly
apart  from  it.  The  Platonist,  in  theory,  regarded
the  man  in  a  perfect  society  as  simply  living  for
it,  and  having  independently  no  personal  worth.
The  Stoic  stood  apart  in  proud  loneliness,  and
looked  on  the  turmoil  of  statesmanship  and  war
with  the  stern  indifference  of  despair  or  resig-
nation. In  practice  both  were  more  or  less  un-
faithful to  their  creed.  Socrates  found  problems
of  life  which  were  so  absorbing  that  till  he  had
solved  these,  he  affirmed  that  he  could  not  inter-
fere with  politics.  M.  Aurelius,  while  he  steeled
himself  against  the  future  by  steadfastly  affirming
the  existence  of  a  fatal  cycle  of  human  destinies,
yet  laboured  with  a  faithful  will  to  discharge  the
offices  of  the  empire.  But  neither  had  any  prin-
ciple to  justify  the  combination  of  the  conflicting
elements  of  action  and  thought.  Nature  only
was  stronger  than  logic.  But  the  Apostles  could
declare  that  the  sanctity  of  the  man  rests  on  the
same  fact  as  the  sanctity  of  the  society :  that  the
dignity  of  personal  action  is  not  in  conflict,  but


in  relation  to  our  view  of  Nature.        185

in  absolute  harmony,  with  that  of  social  action :  CHAP.  n.
that  duties  to  self  and  to  others  are  simply  dif-
ferent expressions  of  the  same  belief  in  one  abso-
lute unity.  No  power  which  has  ever  effectually
stirred  men  to  heroism  or  self-devotion  is  lost,
but  all  are  seen  in  one  source.

47.  The  glorious  view  which  is  thus  opened
of  the  one  life  '  fulfilled  in  many  ways'  which
animates  mankind,  potentially  at  least,  does  not
exhaust  the  prospect  which  Christianity  offers  to
the  eye  of  faith.  Glimpses  are  given  of  a  yet
wider  harmony  and  a  vaster  change.  Reference
has  been  made  already  to  the  passages  in  which
the  apostolic  writings  notice  the  fellowship  of
nature  in  the  blessings  of  Redemption  (i.  §  1).  It
is  evident  from  our  ignorance  of  the  forces  at
work  in  the  outer  world,  of  which  we  can  ob-
serve only  some  effects  according  to  our  limited
powers  of  perception,  that  we  are  quite  unable
to  form  any  notion  of  '  a  new  heaven  and  a  new
'  earth.'  Yet  the  fact  of  the  Resurrection  of  the
body  suggests  more  forcibly  the  literal  truth  of
that  'restitution  of  all  things'  which  was  an- Actsiii.2i.
nounced  from  the  first  by  St  Peter.  The  enno-
bling of  our  material  organisation  contains,  as
it  were,  the  promise  of  a  more  complete  transfi-
guration of  Nature.  It  is  possible  that  the  change


186  Summary.

CHAP.  n.  lies  nearer  to  us  than  we  are  apt  to  imagine.  It
may  perhaps  be  the  case  that  what  appear  to  us
to  be  imperfections  and  evils  in  the  physical  or
animal  world  may  derive  the  character  which
we  attribute  to  them  from  the  incompleteness  of
our  own  faculties ;  and  that  this  transfiguration
(relative  to  us)  may  lie  within  us  and  not  with-
out (comp.  §  23) 1.

48.  Whether  this  view  is  true  or  not  it  con-
tains an  important  element  of  truth  which  is
commonly  neglected.  What  we  call  'laws  of
'nature'  are,  as  has  been  seen  (Intr.  §  8),  no-
thing more  than  laws  of  our  present  observation
of  nature.  They  are  a  resultant,  so  to  speak,  of
some  unknown  force  without  and  our  own  powers
of  sensation  and  thought.  The  permanence  of
the  law  depends  on  the  permanence  of  these  two
elements :  if  either  is  changed  the  resultant  is
also  changed.  If  then  our  bodily  powers  are
transfigured,  as  we  see  in  the  Resurrection  of  the
Lord,  our  powers  of  observation  and  the  limitations
(as  of  space  or  time  and  the  like)  according  to
which  we  class  phenomena,  will  undergo  a  pro-
portionate change.  Thus  for  us  the  'law'  will

1  This  thought,  I  now  find,  has  been  admirably  worked  out
by  Mr  Hinton,  whose  Life  and  Letters  is  full  of  illustrations  of
the  argument  which  I  have  suggested.


Summary.  187

be  changed  while  the  power  whose  working  we  CHAP.  n.

notice   and   describe   by  it   is   itself  unchanged.

But   still   there   is   no   abruptness,  no   arbitrary

revolution,  in  this  new  aspect  of  Nature.     The

new  law  must  be  conceived  as  springing  out  of  our

new  powers,  just  as  the  present  law  springs  from

our  present  powers,  when  they  are  turned  to  the

objects  which  fall  under  them.     If  our  present

body  is  the  germ  of  that  which  will  be,  so  is  the

present  law  of  that  which  will  hereafter  regulate

our  perceptions.     Thus  to  the  Christian  the  lawp

of  Nature  are  not  laws  only,  but  prophecies.      In

the  light  of  the  Resurrection  they  are  symbols

of  something  broader  and  more  glorious  beyond

them.     They  do  not  confine  hope  but  guide  it.

49.  The  line  of  thought  which  has  been  just
opened  leads  to  the  Christian  solution — as  far  as
a  solution  is  possible — of  the  last  question  which
arises  out  of  the  simplest  views  of  life,  our  rela-
tion to  the  world ;  but  the  fuller  discussion  of
this  must  be  reserved  for  a  separate  section.
Meanwhile  we  have  gained  some  insight  into  the
doctrinal  significance  of  the  Resurrection  in  rela-
tion to  the  fulness  of  our  future  personal  exist-
ence and  to  our  hope  of  restoration  before  GOD.
It  has  been  seen  that  our  present  self  is  essen-
tially twofold ;  and  that  we  cannot  in  any  way


188  Summary.

CHAP.  ii.  conceive  that  we  can  remain  the  same  if  either
of  the  elements  of  which  it  is  made  up  wants
its  proper  representative.  The  doctrine  of  the
'  immortality  of  the  soul'  is  therefore  wholly  insuffi-
cient to  satisfy  that  desire  for  a  life  hereafter  for
which  man  naturally  craves.  In  confirmation  of
this  conclusion  it  has  been  shewn  that  Aristotle
and  Plato,  while  regarding  the  subject  from  very
different  points  of  view,  equally  indicate  that  no
arguments  of  pure  reason  can  establish  the  future
personal  existence  of  the  soul,  as  a  conscious  con-
tinuance of  our  present  existence.  Aristotle  de-
nies the  conclusion  on  the  strength  of  a  direct
analysis :  Plato  clothes  his  instinctive  hope  in  the
form  of  a  story,  confessing,  as  it  were,  that  his
logical  process  fails  him.  Yet  further,  the  argu-
ments which  point  forward,  point  backward  also,
and  thus  fail  to  establish  the  conscious  depend-
ence of  the  future  on  the  present.  Introduce  the
belief  in  the  Resurrection  and  each  difficulty
disappears.  In  the  Person  of  the  Lord  we  see
how  we  can  hereafter  be  the  same  and  yet  indefi-
nitely ennobled :  how  our  souls  and  bodies  may
be  for  ever  united,  so  that  the  individual  self
remains,  while  the  body  is  transformed  by  a  glo-
rious change.

50.     In  the  next  place  it  has  been  shewn  that


Swnmary.  189

while  the  possibility  of  sin  is  necessarily  included  CHAP.  11.
in  the  existence  of  a  free  finite  will,  actual  sin
is  wholly  alien  from  the  perfection  of  man's
nature :  that  in  itself  and  in  the  individual  sin  is
inherently  and  immutably  bad,  though  it  may
give  occasion  to  good  by  antagonism:  and  that
while  it  is  such  it  must  bring  with  it  suffering
which  has  no  virtue  to  remove  sin  or  the  conse-
quences of  sin,  of  which  it  is  itself  one.  In  the
way  of  nature  then  we  cannot  see  how  the  evil  of
which  we  are  conscious  can  ever  cease  to  work  out
torment,  though  at  the  same  time  we  instinctively
turn  to  GOD  as  a  Father  ready  to  forgive  and
also  (but  how  we  know  not)  wash  away  sin.  Again
in  this  aspect  the  Resurrection  presents  to  us
the  fulfilment  of  man's  triumph  in  Christ  over
the  issues  of  sin,  which  culminate  in  death.  But
here  the  full  significance  of  the  Resurrection  and
our  personal  share  in  it  is  seen  to  be  bound  up
with  the  Apostolic  teaching  on  the  Person  of
Christ  as  unfolded  in  His  Life  and  Ascension,  on
which  the  Church  was  founded,  and  in  which  we
find  all  our  hopes  fulfilled,  in  virtue  of  a  fellow-
ship potential  for  the  race  and  actual  by  faith  for
the  individual.  '  In  Christ '  we  can  stand  without
fear  in  the  very  presence  of  GOD.

51.     Further  we  have  been  led  to  notice  some


190  Summary.

CHAP.  ii.  of  the  moral  consequences  of  a  belief  in  the  Resur-
rection: how  it  reveals  a  majesty  in  the  body
which  philosophers  have  denied,  and  the  conse-
quent importance  of  every  human  action :  how  it
hallows  with  a  new  sanction  the  idea  of  society
at  the  same  time  and  in  the  same  way  as  it  raises
the  dignity  of  the  individual :  how  it  harmonizes,
by  the  faith  in  the  gathering  together  of  all
humanity  in  Christ,  claims  which  before  were
thought  to  be  contradictory  in  their  origin  and  in
their  fulfilment :  how  finally  it  casts  a  light  over
the  destiny  of  the  world  and  helps  us  to  under-
stand how  our  perception  of  nature  will  be  indefi-
nitely raised,  even  if  nature  itself  is  unchanged,
by  the  ennobling  of  our  own  faculties  and  the  re-
moval or  proportionate  transformation  of  those
limitations  by  which  they  are  at  present  con-
fined.

It  remains  to  consider  more  in  detail  some  of
these  thoughts  as  illustrating  what  may  be  called
the  social  aspects  of  the  Resurrection,  so  far  as  it
contains  a  revelation  of  our  relation  to  the  world
around  us,  and  of  the  character  of  that  Church
which  is  the  divine  witness  and  embodiment  of
its  truth.


CHAPTER  III.
THE  RESURRECTION  AND  THE  CHURCH.

Willst  du  ins  Unendliche  schreiten,

Geh  nur  im  Endlichen  nach  alien  Seiten.

GOETBE.

1.  TN  the  preceding  chapters  the  Resurrection  CHAP.  m.

-*-  has  been  viewed  in  two  main  aspects.  At
first  it  was  contemplated  as  a  fact,  standing  in  the
centre  of  the  development  of  human  life,  and  add-
ing a  new  element  to  the  sum  of  the  records  of
human  experience.  It  was  then  contemplated  as
an  idea,  harmonizing  conflicting  instincts  of  man's
nature  and  lifting  him  into  a  real  communion
with  a  nobler  order  of  beings  by  an  abiding  fel-
lowship with  the  unseen.  So  far  the  Gospel  of
the  Resurrection  vindicates  its  claim  to  a  true
historic  basis  and  a  moral  fitness  for  meeting  the
essential  needs  of  men.  But  it  has  a  yet  wider
application.  It  offers  a  new  foundation  for  social
union.  It  is  not  only  a  message  of  salvation  to


192    The  Resurrection  in  relation  to  the  Church.

CHAP.  in.  the  individual :  it  is  also  the  pledge  of  a  divine
life  to  the  Church.  The  promise  of  Redemption,
symbolised  by  the  deliverance  from  Egypt,  pre-
figured by  the  types  of  the  law,  illustrated  by  the
teaching  of  the  Prophets,  was  the  vital  bond  of
the  people  of  Israel ;  and  no  less  the  accomplish-
ment of  Redemption,  shewn  in  the  Resurrection,
the  Ascension,  and  the  consequent  Mission  of  the
Comforter,  is  the  spring  of  life  in  the  Christian
Body.  In  the  Church  the  fact  of  the  Resurrec-
tion, so  to  speak,  is  perpetuated ;  and  the  idea  of
the  Resurrection  is  realised.  On  the  one  hand,
the  development  of  the  Church  witnesses  to  the
consecration  of  every  power  of  man  to  a  divine
use  and  marks  the  potential  transfiguration  of
every  variety  of  individual  or  national  character,
as  parts  of  a  sublimer  whole ;  and  on  the  other
hand  it  claims  the  possession  of  this  transforming
energy  in  virtue  of  the  working  of  a  Risen  Saviour
through  its  outward  institutions.  Briefly  it  is
inherently  historical  and  sacramental ;  and  the
clue  to  the  apprehension  of  its  history  and  its
sacraments  lies  in  the  Resurrection.

2.  The  detailed  examination  of  the  insti-
tutions of  the  Church  in  the  light  of  the  Resurrec-
tion is  at  present  impossible  (comp.  I.  §  61).  It
will  be  sufficient  to  consider  how  the  fact  and  the


The  Resurrection  in  relation  to  the  Church.     193

idea  of  the  Kesurrection  affect  the  general  con-  CHAP.  in.
ception  and  working  of  the  Christian  Society.
Nor  can  the  consideration  be  regarded  as  super-
fluous at  the  present  time.  Some  strange  for-
getfulness  of  truth  must  prevail  when  it  can  be
possible  for  philosophical  writers  to  stigmatize
Christianity  as  'selfish.'  The  very  same  Gospel
which  sets  before  the  single  believer  the  glorious
issue  of  life  at  the  same  time  and  by  the  same
message  binds  up  his  hope  with  that  of  every
other  believer,  and  more  than  that  with  the
destiny  of  the  whole  world.  It  is  only  by  neg-
lecting the  Resurrection  that  the  Christian  can  be
isolated  (comp.  i.  §  1).

3.     The   first   announcement    of    the   Gospel
connects  it  with  the  establishment  of  a  society.
It  is  emphatically  '  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom.'  Matt.  iv.
'  The  Kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand'  was  equally  Matt.  xi.


the  message  of  the  Baptist  and  of  Christ  Himself
at  the  beginning  of  His  teaching.  At  one  time
this  Kingdom  is  contemplated  as  still  future,  at
another  as  already  present.  We  are  taught  to  pray
for  its  'coming,'  and  encouraged  to  press  as  it
were  by  force  and  claim  by  violent  effort  a  share
in  its  immediate  blessings.  Its  origin,  its  growth,  Matt.  xiii.
the  manner  of  its  reception,  the  perils  to  which  it
would  be  exposed,  the  variety  of  elements  which
w.  E.  13


194  The  Church  a  Kingdom.

CHAP.  in.  it  would  include,  are  portrayed  under  a  rich
Lukexxii.  variety  of  parables.  'I  appoint  unto  you  that
'  ye  may  eat  and  drink  at  my  table  in  my  King-
'dom'  were  among  the  last  words  which  the  Lord
addressed  to  His  disciples ;  and  after  His  Resur-
rection, during  the  forty  days,  He  spoke  'of  the
'  things  pertaining  to  the  Kingdom  of  GOD.'  The
idea  which  was  thus  prominent  during  the  minis-
try of  Christ  was  included  in  the  groundwork  of
the  Apostolic  preaching.  The  first  address  of  St
Peter  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  declared  '  Jesus  to
'  be  the  Lord  and  Christ'  Whom  GOD  had  promised
'  to  raise  up  to  sit  on  the  throne  of  David.'  The
first  record  of  a  mission  beyond  the  limits  of  Ju-
da3a  describes  Philip  'preaching  the  things  con-
'  cerning  the  Kingdom  of  GOD.'  The  definite  charge
which  was  brought  against  St  Paul  when  he  first
Acts  xvii.  preached  in  Europe  was  that  he  did  '  contrary  to
xvi.  21.  '  the  decrees  of  Cassar,  saying  that  there  is  another
'  King,  one  Jesus.'

4.  It  is  unnecessary  to  consider  the  various
misconceptions  to  which  this  proclamation  of
Christ's  'Kingdom'  was  exposed.  Even  to  the
time  of  the  last  manifestation  of  the  Lord  on
earth  before  the  Ascension,  the  Apostles  seem  to
Acts i.  3,6.  have  confounded  '  the  Kingdom  of  GOD'  with  that
which  was  its  figure, '  the  Kingdom  of  Israel.'  But


The  Church  a  Kingdom.  195

there  is  not  the  least  trace  that  the  Christian  idea  CHAP.  IIL
of  a  heavenly  kingdom  was  ever  mixed  up  with
direct  political  aims.  The  very  bitterness  with
which  the  Jewish  zealots  at  the  time  of  their
rising  persecuted  the  Christians,  is  a  sufficient
proof  that  these  'children  of  the  Kingdom'  were
as  far  as  possible  removed  from  schemes  of  tem-
poral ambition.  The  Christian  belief  did  away
with  the  bitterness  of  civil  bondage,  and  substi-
tuted a  higher  hope  for  the  dreams  of  national
enthusiasm.  But  none  the  less  the  Kingdom
whose  coming  believers  were  charged  to  hasten,
was  regarded  as  a  society  truly  answering  to  the
name,  though  its  establishment  was  referred  to
the  action  of  Divine  Providence,  and  not  to  human
design.  The  kingdoms  of  the  earth  were  types  of
this  kingdom  which  should  be  on  earth  though
not  of  the  earth.  In  other  words  the  glorious
society  in  which  the  Gospel  was  to  find  its  out-
ward embodiment  would  have  a  Sovereign,  of
whose  Personal  Rule  His  subjects  would  be  con-
scious and  by  Whose  Will  they  would  be  guided,
an  organisation,  by  which  the  relative  functions
and  duties  and  stations  of  those  included  within
it  would  be  defined  and  sustained,  a  common
principle  of  action,  and  common  rights  of  citizen-
ship. This  was  the  earliest  form  under  which  the
establishment  of  a  Christendom,  at  first  militant

13—2


196  The  Church  a  Temple.

CHAP.  in.  and  then  triumphant  (though  this  distinction  was
but  faintly  perceived),  was  realised.  The  old
Kingdom  of  GOD  whose  history  could  be  traced  in
the  Old  Testament  furnished  the  language  in
which  it  was  described,  and  the  wide-felt  presence
of  the  Roman  Empire  gave  distinctness  to  the
broader  traits  of  universal  dominion  and  unity.

5.     But  the  idea  of  a  Kingdom  was  not  the

.  only  one   under  which   the    Church — the   whole

Matt.  xvi.   society  of  Christians — was  regarded.     '  Thou  art

1  o

'  Peter  (Petros)'  our  Lord  said,  in  answer  to  the
confession  which  the  great  Apostle  had  made,
'  and  on  this  Rock  (Petra,  the  living  rock,  from
'  which  the  Petros  is  hewn  or  taken)  I  will  build
'  my  Church.'  This  then  is  a  second  figure :  the
church  is  a  building,  or  more  specially  a  house
or  temple.  And  it  is  worthy  of  notice  that
St  Peter,  in  his  first  Epistle,  brings  out  this  con-
1  Pet.  ii.  4,  ception  into  the  clearest  light.  '  Ye,'  he  writes,
'coming  to  the  Lord,  a  living  stone,... as  living
'  stones  are  built  up  a  spiritual  house/  of  which
'  the  stone  which  the  builders  disallowed  is  made
'  the  head  of  the  corner.'  And  St  Paul  yet  more
in  detail  follows  out  the  structure  of  this  Chris-
tian sanctuary.  Reckoning  up  the  blessings  of
the  Gentile  converts,  he  tells  them  that  they  are
— 22.'  now  '  fellow-citizens  of  the  saints. .  .since  they  have


The  Church  a  Temple.  197

'  been  built  upon  the  foundation  of  the  apostles  CHAP.  in.
'  and  prophets,  Jesus  Christ  Himself  being  the  chief
'corner-stone,  in  whom  every  part  of  the  build-
'  ing,  fitly  framed  together,  groweth  unto  an  holy
'  temple  in  the  Lord ;  in  which  ye  also  are  builded
'  together  for  an  habitation  of  GOD  in  the  Spirit.'
It  is  however  to  be  observed  that  the  same  image
which  is  used  of  the  society  is  used  also  of  the
individuals.    We  are  '  Christ's  house,' '  GOD'S  build-  Heb.  iii.  6;
'  ing,'  '  the  temple  of  the  living  GOD,'  where  the  9 ;
words  are  used  of  the  many  to  whom  or  in  whose  16  or'  V1'
person  the  Apostle  is  speaking  ;  and  on  the  other
hand  he  asks, '  Know  ye  not  that  your  body  is '  (in
each  separate  case ;  or  better  perhaps,  according
to  another  reading,  'your  bodies  are')  'a  temple
'  of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  is  in  you  ?'

6.  This  figure  of  a  Temple  has  several  points
in  common  with  that  of  a  Kingdom,  from  which
it  is  distinguished  in  its  essential  scope.  In  both
there  is  the  design  of  the  whole  to  which  the
parts  are  subordinated,  a  variety  of  office  and  po-
sition in  the  constituent  elements,  a  central  power
on  which  the  stability  of  all  depends.  But  there
is  no  necessary  connexion  between  the  Temple
and  Him  Who  dwells  within  it,  such  as  is  implied
in  the  reciprocal  duties  of  governor  and  governed.
The  house  may  be  defiled  or  desolated,  while  the


198  The  Church  a  Body.

CHAP.  in.  occupant  seeks  some  other  abode ;  but  the  King
is  such  in  virtue  of  his  special  sovereignty.  Briefly
the  Temple  prefigures  the  Church  in  its  outward
fabric,  in  its  splendour,  in  the  vastness  of  its  plan,
in  the  variety  of  materials  of  which  it  is  con-

l  Cor.  iii.   structed,  in  the  consecration  of  all  which   men

~l  f\  ft

have  to  GOD  by  men  and  so  through  GOD  by  His
Presence.  It  is  the  material  as  contrasted  with
the  moral  type  of  the  Christian  society.

7.  But  there  is  yet  another  image  under
which  St  Paul  presents  the  relation  of  the  Church
to  GOD.  It  is  not  only  His  Kingdom,  and  the
Temple  of  the  Holy  Spirit :  it  is  also  the  Body  of
Christ.  Our  Lord  indicated  this  vital  connexion
between  Himself  and  His  disciples  in  the  parable
of  the  Vine  and  the  branches;  and  after  His
Death  and  Resurrection  the  truth  thus  signified
grew  plainer  and  more  prominent.  It  was  seen
that  Christians  had  not  only  severally  works  to
do,  but  different  works :  they  were  felt  to  be  not
branches  merely,  but  members  of  Him  from  whom
they  drew  their  life.  So  it  is  that  this  idea  of  the
Church  as  the  body  of  Christ  includes  in  itself
both  the  idea  of  the  Kingdom  and  that  of  the
Temple.  Sovereignty  and  organisation  are  im-
plied in  the  Headship  of  Christ,  and  in  the
mutual  action  and  dependence  of  the  members :


The  images  of  the  Church.  199

external  structure  and  multiformity  and  consecra-  CHAP.  in.
tion,  in  the  framework  of  the  body,  and  in  the
variety  of  its  parts,  and  in  the  relation  of  the
whole  to  the  vital  Spirit  by  which  it  is  informed.
But  it  also  adds  much  to  the  ideas  which  it  thus
harmonises.  The  connexion  of  life  is  substituted
for  that  of  government  or  occupancy.  We  live  in
Christ,  and  He  in  us.  We  grow  in  Him ;  and  He
is  seen  more  and  more  perfectly  in  the  society  of
Christians.  The  government  of  a  society  shews
something  of  the  character  of  the  ruler  :  the  fabric
of  a  building  something  of  our  conception  of  him
for  whom  we  rear  it ;  but  the  body  reveals  in  part
the  very  person  of  him  whose  it  is,  and  is  the
organism  by  which  alone  his  acts  can  be  mani-
fested or  fulfilled.

8.  We  are  not  perhaps  justified  in  pressing
the  details  of  these  three  images  in  an  examina-
tion of  the  general  characteristics  of  the  Christian
Church.  The  images  indeed  are  by  no  means
always  kept  distinct.  Language  borrowed  from
one  is  used  in  the  development  of  another.  '  Ye  l  Pet.  ii.  5,
'  ...are  built  up  a  spiritual  house... ye  are  a  chosen
'  generation,  a  royal  priesthood,  an  holy  nation,  a
'  peculiar  people.'  The  gifts  which  Christ  has
variously  distributed  among  men  are  'for  the  Eph.iv.12.
'  building  up  of  His  body.'  '  Know  ye  not  that  is(  19.


200  The  images  of  the  Church.

CHAP.  HI.  'your  bodies  are  members  of  Christ  ?... Know  ye
'  not  that  your  body  is  (or  bodies  are)  a  temple  of
'the  Holy  Spirit  which  is  in  you  ?'  One  relation
runs  into  the  other,  just  as  in  all  other  cases
we  stand  in  threefold  connexion  with  Him  who
created,  redeemed  and  sanctified  us.  But  without
insisting  on  the  minute  interpretation  of  the
figures  so  much  at  least  is  evident,  that  they  mark
the  Church  as  ruled  by  a  personal  Governor,  pos-
sessed of  an  outward  organisation,  inspired  by  an
immediate  divine  life.  What  light  then,  it  may
be  asked,  does  the  Resurrection  throw  upon  the
nature  of  this  Kingdom  of  GOD,  this  Temple  of
the  Holy  Spirit,  this  Body  of  Christ,  for  it  is  with
this  subject  only  that  we  are  immediately  con-
cerned.

John  xviii.  9.  '  My  Kingdom,'  our  Lord  said,  in  answer  to
Pilate,  '  is  not  of  this  world.'  And  yet  He  added
presently,  '  Thou  sayest  [rightly]  that  I  am  King.
'  For  this  purpose  have  I  been  born,  and  for  this
'  cause  have  I  come  into  the  world  that  I  may
'bear  witness  to  the  Truth.  Every  one  who  is
'  of  the  Truth  heareth  my  voice.'  The  Resurrec-
tion was  the  passage  to  the  proper  realm  of  truth
— of  that  which  really  is ;  and  in  the  contempla-
tion of  the  Resurrection  the  Christian  learns  some-
thing of  things  as  they  are  in  the  sight  of  GOD.


A  spiritual  realm  opened  to  us.          201

The  Resurrection  is  a  new  birth :  to  realise  it  as  CHAP.  m.
an  actual  fact  with  the  consequences  which  it  in-
volves, is  to  share  in  it ;  and  thus  we  gain  the  full
meaning  of  Christ's  words  to  the  Teacher  who
seemed  to  boast  of  the  insight  into  spiritual  things
which  his  training  had  given  him  :  '  Verily,  verily,  John  iii.  3.
'  I  say  unto  thee,  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he
'  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  GOD' — he  will  have
no  faculties  to  apprehend  that  which  it  contains.
Plato,  in  one  of  his  grandest  myths,  has  repre-  Plat,
sented  the  progress  of  unembodied  spirits  in  the  p  '247'.
train  of  the  gods  in  the  face  of  all  that  is.     When
they  fall  to  earth,  as  their  powers  fail  them  in
their  course,  their  destiny  is  determined  by  the
clearness  and  extent  of  the  impressions  which  they
retain.     These  recollections  form  the  basis  of  all
that  men  know  of  truth.     The  Christian  reverses
the  idea.     He  is  going  to  a  kingdom  of  absolute
Truth,  and  is  not  fallen  from  one.     The  Resurrec-
tion is  the  bridge  by  which  the  passage   to  the
unseen  is  effected.     Resting  on  that  he  looks  out
to  the  heavenly  state  of  which  he  is  a  citizen :  he
feels  the  constraining  force  of  his  allegiance  to  a
spiritual  King:  he  apprehends  something  of  the
divine  hierarchy,  to  a  fellowship  with  which  he  is
admitted,  and  according  to  whose  laws  he  works  :
he  sees  the  enemies  against  whom  he  has  to  con-
tend, '  principalities,  and  powers,  and  rulers  of  the  Eph.vi.  12.


202  The  Church  as  a  Kingdom.

CHAP.  m.  '  darkness  of  the  world,  and  spiritual  wickedness
'in  the  heavenly  realm.'  The  order,  the  scene,
the  persons,  the  objects  of  this  spiritual  kingdom,
answer  to  what  we  see  now  on  earth,  but  no  more.
A  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  await  the  mani-
festation of  Christ,  even  as  men  themselves  will
be  transfigured  by  His  presence  (n.  §§  47,  48).

10.  It  is  obvious  that  there  is  great  danger
in  dwelling  exclusively  on  this  royal  aspect  of  the
Church.  It  is  likely  that  in  such  a  case  either  the
relations  and  duties  of  men  on  earth  will  be  neg-
lected and  disparaged,  or  conflicts  and  differences
here  will  be  absolutely  confounded  with  those  which
are  essentially  spiritual.  History  furnishes  many
examples  of  both  errors.  'The  kingdom  of  GOD'
has  been  the  watchword  equally  of  those  who  have
cast  aside  the  restraints  and  claims  of  life,  and  of
those  who  have  sought  to  mould  its  form  by  the
most  merciless  fanaticism.  And  it  was  perhaps
in  part  due  to  their  vivid  anticipation  of  Christ's
Return  with  kingly  majesty  that  the  early  Chris-
tians took  so  little  interest  in  civil  affairs.  Yet  this
cannot  justly  be  turned  to  their  reproach ;  for  it
must  be  remembered  that  in  the  Roman  Empire
politics,  as  we  understand  the  word,  had  no  place ;
and  Christianity,  as  such,  has  no  special  relation
to  any  one  form  of  government.  In  the  long  run


The  manifold  building  of  the  Church.     203

it  tends  to  certain  social  results,  but  in  virtue  of  CHAP.  HI.
its  universality  it  is  capable  of  the  highest  per-
sonal  development   under   any  outward  circum-
stances.

11.  But  the  Church  is  not  a  Kingdom  only.
It  is  a  structure  complex  and  multiform.  The
society  as  a  whole  is  a  dwelling-place  of  the
Holy  Spirit.  It  is  reared  from  age  to  age  by  the

accumulated  efforts  of  all  who  serve  GOD.     Each  l  Cor.  ill.

12.
brings  that  which  he  has  of  special  worth  and  it  is

built  into  the  fabric.  All  work  is  not  the  same
work,  yet  all  which  can  bear  the  presence  of  GOD
is  equally  employed  in  some  part  or  other  of  the
spiritual  '  building.'  If  the  notion  of  a  Kingdom
suggests  the  essential  majesty  of  the  Church,  this
of  a  Temple  brings  out  the  human  interest  of  its
progress.  So  it  was  with  the  structure  which
suggested  the  image  of  St  Paul.  'Forty  and  six  John ii. 20.
'  years  was  this  Temple  in  building,'  and  it  carried
with  its  foundations  the  memories  of  ten  cen-
turies. So  it  is  with  our  Christian  Temples
which  combine  and  hallow  the  thoughts  and  gifts
of  successive  ages.  And  the  spiritual  reality
answers  to  the  material  figure.  The  Church  is
itself  the  record  of  its  history :  it  is  a  monument
and  a  shrine.  Each  race,  each  nation,  each
century,  nay  each  faithful  workman,  has  left


204     The  manifold  building  of  the   Church.

CHAP.  in.  some  mark  upon  it.  Time  gradually  harmonises
parts  which  once  seemed  incongruous.  Additions
which  were  at  first  thought  to  mar  the  symmetry
of  the  plan  are  felt  at  a  later  period  to  increase
its  richness.  One  Spirit  hallows  all,  and  that
Spirit  is  a  gift  consequent  on  the  Resurrection.
The  local  withdrawal  of  Christ  from  among  men
in  the  one  limited  form  in  which  they  had  known
Him,  and  the  transfiguration  of  that  form  '  by  the
'glory  of  the  Father,'  were  the  conditions  through
which  they  could  realise  His  unseen  presence

John  xvi.    through  the  Spirit.     '  It  is  expedient  for  you  that
7

'  I  go  away/  the  Lord  said  to  His  disciples  on  the

eve  of  His  Departure ;  '  for  if  I  go  not  away,  the
'  Comforter  will  not  come  unto  you ;  but  if  I  depart,
'  I  will  send  Him  unto  you.'     He   first  wakened
their  souls  to  the  perception  of  His  new  Life,  and
then  removed  all  which  might  still  seem  to  con-
John  xx.     fine  its  manifestation.     '  Cling  not  to  me,'  was  the
17

Bom.  vi.  4.  loving  reproof  to  her  whose  eyes  He  had  opened
by  a  familiar  word,  '  for  I  am  not  yet  ascended
'  to  my  Father.'  No  love,  however  true,  which
sought  to  keep  Him  as  He  was  seen  on  earth,
could  know  the  fulness  of  Christ's  majesty.  The
Ascension  was  the  necessary  completion  of  His
work.  So  only  could  men  trust  in  His  abiding
power  ever  testing,  and  receiving  and  consecrat-
ing the  many  offerings  of  every  generation,  and


The  Church  the  visible  Body  of  Christ.    205

using  all  in  due  measure  for  the  service  of  that  CHAP.  m.
society  in  which  He  was  pleased  to  dwell.

12.  So    far   we    have    touched    upon    those
aspects  of  the  Church  which  represent  its  eternal
constitution  and  its  temporal  growth.     The  Re-
surrection gives  force  and  distinctness  to  both.
But  it  is  more  especially  in  the  last  figure  of  the
Church,  as  the  Body  of  Christ,  that  it  finds  its
peculiar  application.     The  idea  which  this  figure
expresses  springs  indeed  properly  out  of  the  belief
in  a  Risen  Saviour.     Anticipations  of  the  idea  are
found  in  the  later  discourses  of  Christ  which  have
been  already  noticed ;  and  elsewhere  He  spoke  of
His  continual  presence  among  men  in  the  per-
sons of  the  poor  and  of  His  ministers.     But  these
and  other  intimations  of  like  kind  fall  far  short  of
the  full  grandeur  of  the  conception  which  St  Paul
lays   open.     Nor  can  it   be  without  significance
that  the  revelation  is  made  to  us  through  him

who  was  resolved  not  to  know  'a  Christ  according  2 Cor. v.  16.
'  to  the  flesh,'  and  to  whom  the  Lord  was  first  ma-
nifested in  the  majesty  of  His  divine  glory.  The
Church  is  (if  we  may  so  speak)  the  visible  Body
of  the  Risen  Christ :  it  is  through  this  that  He
still  works,  in  this  that  He  still  lives.

13.  Three  principal  relations  are  included  in


206     Christianity  in  relation  to  Paganism.

CHAP.  in.  this  conception  of  the  Church  as  the  Body  of
Christ.  Christians  as  such  are  essentially  united
together  in  virtue  of  their  relation  to  Christ,  and
that  irrespective  of  any  feeling  or  will  of  their  own.
Next  they  are  bound  to  one  another  by  the  obli-
gation of  mutual  offices,  the  fulfilment  of  which  is
necessary  for  the  well-being  of  the  whole.  And
lastly,  all  alike  derive  their  life  from  their  Head
Who  is  in  heaven.  The  Body  is  one  :  it  is  multi-
form ;  and  it  is  quickened  by  a  power  which  is  not
of  itself  but  from  above.  Now  this  element  in  its
constitution,  now  that,  is  brought  into  prominence,
but  none  can  be  neglected  if  we  wish  to  form  an
adequate  notion  of  its  power  and  functions.  For
the  present  it  will  be  enough  to  consider  a  little
more  exactly  the  principle  of  unity,  and  that  in
which  the  unity  consists,  the  principle  of  life.
The  multiformity  of  Christendom  will  be  noticed
sufficiently  while  we  endeavour  to  establish  its
unity.

14.  Before  doing  this  however  it  may  be  well
to  notice  how  the  fundamental  idea  of  Christianity
as  the  basis  of  a  society  is  related  to  the  corre-
sponding ideas  of  Judaism  and  Paganism.  It  has
been  frequently  argued  that  modern  civilisation
has  lost  some  essential  element  of  good  which
ancient  civilisation  possessed.  It  has  been  said


Christianity  in  relation  to  Paganism.     207

that  we  are  less  self-reliant  than  the  nations  of  CHAP.  in.
classical  antiquity :  less  conscious  of  a  Divine  Pre-
sence than  the  Jews.  Without  pausing  to  inquire
whether  this  is  so  in  fact  or  not  we  may  be
contented  to  ask  whether  there  is  anything  in
Christianity  itself  which  tends  to  produce  such  a
result :  whether  the  evil  or  loss  if  it  be  actual  is
also  necessary.

15.  The  noblest  lesson  of  Paganism  is  with-
out doubt  the  revelation  which  it  makes  to  us  of
the  inherent  dignity  of  human  nature :  of  the
powers  of  endurance  and  self-denial  and  faith :  of
the  perceptions  of  beauty  and  truth :  by  which
the  soul  is  at  all  times  capable  of  asserting  its
divine  relationship.  The  work  of  Paganism  was,
we  are  led  to  believe,  the  complete  exhibition  of
these  natural  faculties,  in  their  strength  and  in
their  weakness.  The  nobility  of  man  as  man  and
as  standing  apart  from  GOD  is  that  portion  of  its
teaching  by  which  it  still  appeals  most  forcibly  to
the  sympathies  of  our  own  time.  There  is  a  dark
side  to  the  picture  which  we  are  apt  to  forget,  but
still  there  is  an  abiding  grace  and  manliness  in
classical  life  as  it  is  seen  in  history  and  literature
and  art.  Unaffected  interest  in  every  human
feeling,  manysided  culture,  stern  and  indomitable
will,  claim  our  respect  and  awaken  in  us  respon-


208      Christianity  in  relation  to  Paganism.

CHAP.  in.  sive  efforts.  But  so  far  as  we  admire  Paganism
there  is  nothing  in  Christianity  antagonistic  to  it.
Paganism  closed  its  eyes  to  suffering  and  death.
Christianity  takes  account  of  the  whole  nature  of
man,  of  its  good  and  its  evil,  and  justifies  in  the
face  of  the  contradictions  of  life  the  instinct  which
affirms  its  dignity.  It  looks  death  face  to  face
not  as  an  inevitable  necessity  but  as  a  final  conse-
quence of  sin,  and  yet  realises  even  now  more  than
a  victory.  It  lays  bare,  what  each  one  must  feel
for  himself,  our  natural  infirmity,  and  yet  ratifies
the  bold  words  of  the  heathen  poet  that  '  men  are

Acts  xvii.    '  GOD'S  offspring'  and  sets  before  believers  as  the

28

2  Pet.  i.  4  aim  °f  their  faith  a  more  complete  '  fellowship  in
'  the  divine  nature.'  It  represents  life  as  a  struggle,
and  yet  as  a  struggle  only  to  realise  the  blessings
which  are  already  won  for  man  and  within  his
reach.  It  claims  his  entire  homage,  but  at  the
same  time  it  consecrates  to  its  own  service  the
natural  exercise  of  every  power  which  he  pos-
sesses, and  the  fulfilment  of  every  situation  in
which  he  is  placed.  It  looks  upon  the  world  as
suffering  with  him,  but  it  regards  it  no  less  as
destined  to  share  his  glorious  future.  It  differs
from  Paganism  as  a  whole  differs  from  a  part.
It  takes  up  into  itself  and  harmonises  with  the
rest  of  our  experience  the  isolated  truths  to  which
Paganism  bears  witness.


The  principle  of  unity.  209

16.  This  is  equally  true  of  the  relation  in  CHAP.  in.
which  Christianity  stands  to  Judaism.  If  Pa-
ganism is  a  testimony  to  the  self-assertion  and
independence  of  man,  Judaism  is  the  confession  of
his  dependence.  In  the  first  we  contemplate  man
in  himself:  in  the  other  man  as  the  creature  of
GOD.  In  Paganism,  at  least  when  it  reached  its
full  development,  an  appeal  is  made  to  a  com-
mon conscience,  or  to  necessary  laws  of  thought,
or  to  history :  in  Judaism  the  binding  message  is
'  the  Word  of  the  Lord.'  In  the  one  men  obey,
because  they  recognise  the  essential  justice  of  the
command  or  submit  to  a  stronger  force :  in  the
other  the  statutes  of  right  are  not  primarily  based
on  intuitions  or  suggested  by  experience,  but  em-
bodied in  a  Law  which  is  absolute,  not  in  virtue
of  its  inherent  character  but  as  coming  from  JE-
HOVAH. The  one,  if  we  look  to  the  principle  by
Avhich  it  lived,  is  a  witness  to  human  freedom :  the
other  to  Divine  sovereignty.  And  as  the  principles
which  they  respectively  embody  are  eternal,  so  are
the  spirit  of  Paganism  and  the  spirit  of  Judaism.
The  history  of  Christianity  is  little  more  than  the
history  of  the  approximate  harmonization  of  the
two.  Now  the  solution  turns  in  this  direction
and  now  in  that,  according  as  the  spirit  of  Greece
or  of  Rome  prevails — the  theology  of  Athanasius
or  of  Augustine — but  apostolic  Christianity  recog-

W.  R.  14


*

210  The  principle  of  unity

CHAP.  in.  nises  and  hallows  both  elements.  The  coming  of
the  Lord  invests  humanity,  even  as  it  is,  with  a
more  awful  majesty  than  man  could  have  claimed
for  himself;  and  at  the  same  time  connects  the
realisation  of  that  majesty  with  the  direct  revela-
tion of  the  Divine  Will.  Paganism  proclaims  the
grandeur  of  man :  Judaism  the  supremacy  of  GOD.
Christianity  accepts  the  antithesis  and  vindicates
by  the  message  of  the  Resurrection  the  grandeur
of  man  in  and  through  GOD.

17.  This  then  is  the  work  of  Christianity,
first  to  establish  the  common  dignity  of  men  as
men,  and  to  place  on  a  sure  basis  all  purely  human
virtues ;  and  next  to  connect  the  life  of  men
with  its  source  and  consummation  and  bring  it
into  fellowship  with  GOD.  Both  these  results  are
grounded  on  the  historic  facts,  of  the  Gospel.
The  unity  of  the  Christian  Society,  to  which
potentially  all  men  belong,  depends  not  on  any
personal  feeling  but  on  a  common  relation  in
which  men  as  belonging  to  the  society  stand  to
GOD.  And  the  reality  of  this  divine  fellowship  is
at  once  the  seal  of  the  nobility  of  man  and  the
pledge  of  the  possibility  of  its  final  perfection.

l  Cor.  xii.         18.     'As   the   body  is   one,'  St   Paul   writes,

I  O      1  Q

'and  hath  many  members,  and  all  the  members


in  Christianity.  211

'  of  the '  body  being  many  are  one  body :  so  also  is  CHAP.  in.
'  Christ.  For  in  one  Spirit  we  all  were  baptized
'  into  (i.  e.  by  baptism  incorporated  in)  one  body,
'whether  we  be  Jews  or  Greeks,  whether  we  be
'  bond  or  free ;  and  were  all  made  to  drink2  one
'  Spirit.'  Here  the  unity  is  seen  to  spring  out  of
a  definite  outward  act,  and  the  participation  in  a
spiritual  blessing  consequent  upon  it.  No  other
conditions  are  added.  Yet  it  must  be  observed  that
according  to  the  formula  which  Christ  Himself  en-
joined, baptism  includes  a  profession  of  faith,  such
as  has  been  connected  with  it  in  all  ages,  in  which
the  historic  facts  of  the  Lord's  Life  are  plainly
set  forth.  Hence  in  another  place  St  Paul  says
more  fully :  '  There  is  one  body,  and  one  Spirit,  Eph.  iv.  4.
'  even  as  ye  were  called  in  one  hope  of  your  calling :
'  one  Lord,  one  faith,  one  baptism.'  The  act  once
done  brings  with  it,  in  virtue  of  Christ's  work,  fel-
lowship with  Him,  in  which  lies  unity.  '  Know  ye  Bom.  vi.  3,
'  not  that  so  many  of  us  as  were  baptized  into  Jesus
'  Christ,  were  baptized  into  His  death  ?  Therefore
'  we  were  buried  with  Him  by  baptism  into  death  ;
'  that  like  as  Christ  was  raised  up  from  the  dead
'  by  the  glory  of  the  Father,  even  so  we  also  should
'  walk  in  newness  of  life.'  Here  the  issue  is  viewed
from  the  human  side.  It  is  ours  to  realise  in
action  the  fulness  of  the  heavenly  life  of  which
1  Omit  one.  2  Omit  into.

14—2


212  The  principle  of  unity

CHAP.  in.  we  are  made  partakers.  Elsewhere  it  is  viewed
in  relation  to  GOD,  and  in  this  aspect  all  is  accom-

Eph.  ii.  5,  plished  once  for  all.  '  When  we  were  dead  in
'sins  [Goo]  quickened  us  together  with  Christ,
'  and  raised  us  up  together  [with  Him]  and  made
'  us  sit  together  in  the  heavenly  realm  in  Christ
'  Jesus.'

19.  The  participation  in  Christ's  Death  and
Resurrection  through  Baptism  is  then  the  final
condition  of  unity :  to  work  out  the  Resurrection
in  life  the  means  and  measure  of  its  preservation.
For  unity  is  not  uniformity.  Differences  of  race,
class,  social  order  obviously  have  no  influence
upon  it.  They  are  of  earth  only.  But  more  than
this,  it  is  consistent  with  serious  differences  in
the  apprehension  of  the  common  faith  on  which
it  reposes.  St  Paul  naturally  insists  on  the  re-
moval of  the  partition  between  Jew  and  Gentile

Eph.  ii.  15.  by  the  Death  of  Christ,  whereby  He  '  made  of
'  twain  one  new  man.'  Primarily  without  doubt  he
regarded  the  contrast  as  it  was  before  the  Gospel ;
but  it  seems  equally  certain  that  he  included
within  the  scope  of  Christ's  reconciliation  those
diversities  of  opinion  by  which  the  Jewish  and

Gal.  ii.  7 ff.  Gentile  Churches  were  separated.  The  Apostles
of  the  circumcision  recognised  in  him  the  aposto-
late  of  the  uncircumcision ;  and  he  gladly  received


in  Christianity.  213

from  them  '  the  right  hand  of  fellowship.'  The  CHAP.  in.
divergences  of  practice  between  the  teachers,  and
of  belief  to  a  certain  extent  between  the  disciples
of  the  two  schools,  were  not  sufficient  to  destroy
their  true  unity.  Love  still  found  its  expression
among  them  in  acts  of  charity.  It  was  only  Gal.  ii.  10.
when  the  attempt  was  made  to  enforce  one  partial
system  as  universal  that  the  unity  of  the  whole
was  endangered.  The  first  serious  effort  to  esta-
blish uniformity  threatened  to  end  (as  it  did  after
the  time  of  the  Apostles)  in  a  schism.

20.     It  may  not  indeed  be  a  mere  fancy  to
regard  the  manifold  appearances  of  the  Lord  after
His  Resurrection  as  prefiguring  in  some  way  the
varieties  which  should  exist  in  after  time  in  His
Church.     The  unity  of  His  Person  was  not  in  any
way  impaired,  and  yet  He  shewed  Himself  to  His
disciples  in  different  '  forms.'     And  it  may  be  still  Mark  xvi.
that  the  faithful  eye  can  see  a  Body  of  Christ   ' '
where  His  Presence  is  hidden  from  others.     For
even  in  the  one  body,  there  are  many  bodies;
and  as  the  whole  Church  is  sometimes  contem-
plated in  its  completeness  as  distinct  from  Christ,
though  most  closely  bound  to  Him,  as  His  bride ;  Eph.  v.  27.
so  also  is  the  same  true  of  separate  Churches.    '  Ye  2,  9.
'  are  a  body  (not  the  body)  of  Christ,  and  members  LC°r'  *"'
'in   particular'    St  Paul   says  to    the   Church    of


214  The  principle  of  life

CHAP.  in.  Corinth.  The  definite  article  destroys  the  force
of  his  argument.  And  so  again  in  his  second

2  Cor.  xi.  Epistle  :  '  I  espoused  you ' — the  congregation  to
which  he  is  writing — '  to  one  husband,  that  I  may
'  present  you  as  a  chaste  virgin  to  Christ.'  Thus
the  whole  is  not  only  relatively  complete  but  it  is
made  up  of  parts  (so  to  speak)  similar  to  itself.
And  this  is  true  if  we  regard  even  the  ultimate
members  of  which  it  is  composed.  The  individual
Christian — a  temple  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  well  as
a  living  stone  of  a  more  glorious  Temple — is  like
the  special  Church  of  which  he  is  a  member,  even
as  this  is  like  that  Universal  Church  in  which  it
discharges  some  special  function.

21.     But   while   the   Christian,   the   separate
Churches,  and  the  Universal  Church  have  seve-
rally, in  some  sense,  a  completeness  in  themselves,
yet  their  real  life  is  solely  in  their  connexion  with
iCor.xi.3.  Christ  'the  Head  of  the  man,'  and  'the  Head  of
Eph.iv.16. '  the  Church.'     From  Him  flows  that  energy  by
j°  •  "•   9-  which  every  member  is  enabled  to  discharge  its
function  effectually  and  in  due  proportion  to  the
harmonious   working   of  the   whole :   from   Him,
that  power  of  love  by  which  the  several  parts  are
fitted  and  knit  together:   from  Him,  that  vital
force  by  which  the   multiform  body  '  increaseth
'with  the  increase  of  GOD.'     Each  phase  of  this


in  Christianity.  215

divine  Life  is  distinctly  marked.     'The  bread'  —  CHAP.  m.
the   heavenly   manna  —  '  which   I  will   give,'   the  Jolmvi-51-

Lord  said.  '  is  my  flesh,  for  the  life  of  the  world.'  John  xiv.

19.
—  '  Because  I  live,  ye   [my  disciples]   shall   live  j0hn  xi.

'also'  —  'I   am   the   Resurrection   and    the    Life.'

'  Ye  died/  St  Paul  writes  to  the  Colossians,  '  and  Col.  iii.  3,

'  your  life  hath  been  hidden  with  Christ  in  GOD  ;

'but  when  Christ  is  manifested,  our  Life,  then

'  shall  ye  also  be  manifested  with  Him  in  glory.'

'  It  is  no  longer  I  who  live,'  he  says  in  another  Gal.  ii.  20.

place,  '  but  Christ  liveth  in  me.'     '  He  that  hath  l  John  v.

12
'  the  Son  hath  life  ;  but  he  that  hath  not  the  Son

'  of  GOD  hath  not  life.'


22.  It  is  then  necessary  to  bear  two  things
in  mind  in  treating  of  the  Unity  of  the  Church.
The  Unity  of  the  whole  is  consistent  with  a  wide
variety  of  parts,  each  having  to  a  certain  degree
a  corresponding  unity  in  itself.  And  next,  the
essential  bond  of  union  is  not  external  but  spi-
ritual :  it  consists  not  in  one  organisation  but  in
a  common  principle  of  life.  Its  expression  lies  in
a  personal  relation  to  Christ  and  not  in  any  out-
ward system.  Of  the  life  of  the  Church  part  is
open,  part  is  hidden.  We  can  see  divisions,  dif-
ferences, limitations;  but  all  that  is  eternal  and
infinite  in  it,  all  that  controls  actions  which  per-
plex us  and  harmonizes  discords  which  are  un-


216  Essential  unity  does  not

CHAP.  in.  resolved  to  our  senses,  is  not  to  be  perceived  on
earth  but  is  with  Christ  in  heaven.

23.  It  follows  necessarily  from  what  has  been
said  that  external,  visible,  unity  is  not  required
for  the  essential  unity  of  the  Church.  To  recur
to  the  example  which  has  been  already  used,  the
congregations  of  Jewish  and  Gentile  Christians
were  no  less  One  in  Christ,  though  the  outward
fellowship  between  them  was  imperfect  or  wanting :
their  common  life  lay  deeper  than  the  controversies
which  tended  to  keep  them  apart.  Their  isola-
tion was  a  proof  of  imperfection,  but  not  of  death.
What  errors  are  deadly,  it  does  not  fall  to  our
part  to  attempt  to  determine.  It  is  enough  to
observe  that  differences  of  opinion  which  were
once  thought  by  many  to  be  fatal  to  unity  were
really  consistent  with  it.  The  promise  of  Christ
does  not  reach  to  the  unity  of  the  outward  fold
John x.  16.  at  any  time.  'Other  sheep,'  He  said,  'I  have,
'  which  are  not  of  this  fold :  them  also  I  must
'  lead,  and  they  shall  hear  my  voice ;  and  there
'shall  become  one  flock,  one  shepherd' — one
flock  in  however  many  folds  it  be  gathered,
because  it  listens  to  the  voice  of  the  One  Shep-
herd.

24.     If  the  true  unity  of  the  whole  Church,


require  external  unity.  217

which  is  derived  from  the  participation  in  the  CHAP.  in.
Spirit  of  Christ,  is  compatible  with  the  existence
of  outward  divisions  on  earth,  it  is  no  less
compatible  also  with  the  existence  of  independent
centres  of  local  and  partial  authority  in  its  mani-
fold organisation.  Christ  Himself  is  the  One
Head;  and  He  left  no  single  successor  to  repre-
sent in  outward  form  the  relation  in  which  He
stands  to  the  Body.  For  a  time  indeed  an  idea
seems  to  have  prevailed  in  one  province  of  Christ-
endom that  the  office  of  Christ  (if  we  may  so
speak)  and  not  of  the  Apostles  only  was  to  be
perpetuated.  The  Jewish  Bishops  of  Jerusalem,
who  were  taken  as  long  as  might  be  from  the
family  of  the  Lord,  were  held  by  many  to  be  (even
though  they  did  not  claim  the  title  themselves)
His  successors.  They  were,  according  to  the  title
claimed  for  them,  '  bishops  of  bishops.'  Their
authority  as  far  as  can  be  learnt  now  was  sup-
posed to  extend  over  the  whole  world  and  not
to  be  confined  to  a  single  diocese  or  district.  They
symbolised  the  idea  of  an  earthly  kingdom,  which
was  characteristic  of  the  party  who  professed  to
maintain  their  opinions.  It  would  be  idle  to
speculate  on  the  form  which  this  belief  might
have  taken  if  Jerusalem  had  not  been  destroyed.
As  it  is,  it  is  impossible  not  to  feel  that  the  effect
of  the  desolation  of  'the  Holy  City'  must  have


218  The  end  of  the  world.

CHAP.  in.  been  to  chasten  and  purify  (as  soon  as  they  could
bear  the  discipline)  those  who  had  hoped  to  mould
the  Christian  Church  after  the  pattern  of  Judaism.
The  conception  of  unity  based  on  a  historic  and
divine  succession  in  the  religious  centre  of  the
world  was  proved  to  be  no  part  of  the  true  idea
of  the  Church.  The  thoughts  of  men  were  turned
with  a  deeper  faith  to  that  'Jerusalem  which  is
'  above,'  to  which  from  the  first  St  Paul  had  di-
rected them.

25.  These  considerations  tend  to  remove  a
difficulty  which  has  been  often  felt  in  dealing
with  the  interpretation  of  the  New  Testament.
The  Apostles,  it  is  urged,  looked  for  an  immediate
'  end  of  the  world,'  and  the  event  shews  that  they
were  in  error.  Yet  to  any  one  who  really  pene-
trates below  the  surface  of  the  first  age  it  will  be
equally  evident  that  'the  end  of  the  world'  was
expected  and  that  it  really  came.  It  is  possible
that  the  Apostles  themselves,  like  the  prophets  in
earlier  times,  did  not  realise  the  mode  in  which
their  expectations  would  be  fulfilled :  it  is  certain
that  many  who  heard  them  affixed  false  and  chi-
merical interpretations  to  their  teaching;  but  in
the  light  of  Christian  history  their  written  words
were  fully  accomplished.  The  destruction  of  Je-
rusalem is  '  the  meeting  of  the  ages/  the  death  of


How  external  unity  was  aimed  at.       219

the  '  old  world'  and  the  birth  of  the  '  new  world.'  CHAP.  in.
The  Lord  '  came'  when  the  acknowledged  centre
of '  the  people  of  GOD'  was  desolated.  A  spiritual
and  universal  Presence  was  substituted  for  a
material  and  local  Presence.  The  lesson  of  the
Resurrection  replaced  the  lesson  of  the  Law.  A
fresh  'age'  (ceori)  began  its  course  destined  itself
to  culminate  in  another  'coming'  of  which  the
first  was  a  living  figure.  In  a  religious  aspect  all
things  were  essentially  become  new.  Christianity
had  first  vindicated  its  inheritance  in  the  past,
and  then  in  due  time  it  asserted  its  independence.

26.  The  outward  unity  which  was  aimed  at
in  the  early  Jewish  Church  was  based  upon  a
religious  idea.  The  outward  unity  which  after-
wards grew  up  round  the  Roman  Church  sprang
from  political  influences.  The  two  systems  are
essentially  distinct  in  their  origin,  though  finally
they  can  be  traced  in  theory  to  the  same  prin-
ciples. The  Roman  system  became  in  the  end
what  the  Jewish  system  was  from  the  first,  but
with  one  remarkable  difference.  The  priesthood
which  was  in  both  cases  the  visible  representative
and  instrument  of  the  theocracy  was  limited  in
Judaism  to  a  distinct  family  succession:  in  Ro-
manism the  succession  was  spiritual  and  effect-
ually disconnected  from  hereditary  ties.  In  the


220        The  extent  of  permissible  variation

CHAP.  in.  Christian  Church  of  Jerusalem  the  fleshly  descent
from  a  sacred  stock  was  observed  for  several  gene-
rations, but  there  is  no  trace  of  a  similar  custom
at  Rome.  The  idea  of  spiritual  supremacy  seems
indeed  absolutely  to  exclude  it.  But  it  must  be
enough  to  have  indicated  the  external  contrast
between  systems  essentially  similar.  This  is  not
the  place  to  follow  out  the  steps  of  their  parallel
but  converse  development.  Nor  can  we  dwell  on
the  marvellous  process  by  which  the  Roman
Church  was  prepared  for  the  preservation  of
Christianity  on  the  dissolution  of  the  Empire.  It
would  be  foreign  to  our  purpose  to  trace  the  steps
by  which  the  bishop  of  the  imperial  city  received
one  by  one  the  prerogatives  of  sovereignty,  and  in
due  time  seated  himself  on  the  vacant  throne  of
the  Caesars.  It  would  be  equally  out  of  place  to
attempt  any  estimate  of  the  strength  which  the
mediaeval  Church  thus  received  for  the  execution
of  the  work  with  which  it  was  charged.  The  facts
are  of  vast  significance,  and  occupy  so  large  a
space  in  the  history  of  Christendom  that  they  may
not  lightly  be  passed  over.  They  formed,  as  we
may  well  believe,  part  of  the  providential  scheme
of  the  historical  growth  of  the  Church.  But  the
unity  to  which  they  led  was  no  necessary  part  of
the  constitution  of  the  Church.  It  answered  to
the  one  Empire  of  the  first  age,  and  not  to  the


not  to  be  determined  antecedently.        221

many  kingdoms  of  the  maturer  life  of  Europe.  CHAP.  m.
It  supplied  a  bond  between  the  disorganised  na-
tions till  the  states-system  into  which  they  were
formed  was  firmly  consolidated.  Under  its  pro-
tection the  Romanic  and  German  elements  were
allowed  to  gather  strength  till  they  were  ready
to  fulfil  their  independent  office.  But  without
dwelling  upon  this  temporal  function  of  the  ex-
ternal unity  of  the  Christian  society  we  can  at
least  see  from  the  fall  of  its  prototype  after  the
Jewish  Return  (l.  §§  27  f.)  that  the  spiritual
unity  of  the  Church  is  independent  of  it.  The
outward  unity  arose  from  historic  causes :  it  was
broken  by  historic  causes.  No  external  organisa-
tion can  supersede  the  original  relation  in  which
the  Society  stands  to  its  Founder.  The  gift  of
the  Holy  Spirit  was  the  outward  sign  of  the  ele-
vation of  humanity  to  glory  at  the  right  hand  of
GOD  :  the  sharing  in  that  gift  is  the  life  of  the
Church :  the  absolute  oneness  of  the  source  from
which  the  gift  flows  is  the  ground  of  essential
unity  in  the  congregations  of  which  the  Church  is
composed.

27.  But  though  the  principle  of  the  unity  of
the  Christian  Church  is  spiritual  and  not  neces-
sarily connected  with  uniformity  of  constitution  or
even  with  intercommunion,  it  by  no  means  follows


222  Possible  divisions  illustrated

CHAP.  in.  that  the  outward  organisation  of  the  whole  of  the
constituent  Churches  is  a  matter  of  indifference.
On  the  contrary  the  direct  teaching  of  the  Resur-
rection points  to  the  inherent  connexion  between
the  outward  and  the  spiritual,  the  organisation
and  the  life.  The  range  of  variation  in  the  con-
stitution of  the  Christian  societies  must  be  limited
by  their  fitness  to  embody  the  fundamental  ideas
of  Christianity.  Of  this  fitness  history  on  a  large
scale  gives  the  final  judgment.  Whatever  may
be  the  immediate  result  of  controversy,  however
false  may  be  the  issues  on  which  it  is  decided,
however  blinding  the  influences  by  which  its  pro-
gress has  been  modified,  in  the  end  it  is  seen  in
its  true  light,  and  the  final  judgment  which  is
ratified  by  general  practice  or  belief  is  commonly
the  true  one.  In  this  sense  history  is  the  arbiter
not  of  truth  but  of  the  right  embodiment  of  truth.
The  early  records  of  the  Church  are  little  more
than  the  records  of  conflicts  which  once  seemed
doubtful ;  but  in  each  case  that  which  had  in  it
the  element  of  permanence  lived  on,  and  Catho-
licity stood  in  full  strength  against  the  broken
forms  of  partial  and  erroneous  teachings.

28.  It  is  possible  perhaps  to  extend  this  view
of  a  historic  development  of  Christianity  to  later
ages.  It  seems  difficult  to  believe  that  the  Greek


by  the  Idstory  of  the  Jewish  Church.     223

and  Latin  Churches  include  the  only  two  great  CHAP.  m.
aspects  of  Christian  truth,  so  that  it  remains  for
us  at  present  only  to  recur  to  the  principles  on
which  they  were  built,  and  to  strive  vainly  to  re-
produce in  another  period  a  transcript  of  the  past.
The  vast  advances  of  civilisation,  the  further
growth  of  national  life,  the  wider  range  of  know-
ledge, which  brings  with  it  the  recognition  of  the
importance  of  special  views,  seem  to  force  upon
us  the  conviction  that  the  various  Churches  of
modern  times  fulfil  under  the  changed  conditions
of  society  the  same  functions  as  could  be  discharged
in  earlier  times  by  a  single  Church.  Even  in
the  history  of  Judaism  something  of  the  same
kind  may  be  noticed.  In  no  way,  as  we  should
judge,  could  the  possibility  of  variation,  and  still
more  of  division  be  excluded  with  greater  certainty
than  by  the  institutions  of  the  Jewish  Church,  and
yet  in  that  Churoh  outward  union  was  soon  broken,
and  the  rupture  if  not  expressly  sanctioned  was
in  the  end  implicitly  accepted  by  the  divine  pro-
phets of  Israel.  Israel  was  'made  to  sin,'  and
yet  even  so  while  their  primal  sin  remained  they
were  not  abandoned  by  GOD.  The  Temple — the
permanent  (i.  §  25)  symbol  of  unity — was  hardly
completed,  before  a  large  part  of  the  nation  was
shut  out  from  the  use  of  it.  The  political  and
religious  schism  of  which  Israel  was  a  monument


224  History  of  the  Jewish  Church.

CHAP.  in.  was  not  passed  over  without  rebuke,  but  in  spite
of  that  a  distinct  spiritual  work  was  carried  on  in
Israel,  not  less  blessed  by  outward  signs  than  that
which  was  simultaneously  accomplished  in  Judah.
At  a  later  time  the  office  which  was  discharged  by
the  Jews  of  the  Dispersion,  and  specially  by  the
Alexandrine  Jews,  in  modifying  and  extending
their  traditional  faith,  was  still  more  manifestly
recognised  by  GOD  in  the  providential  office  which
He  allowed  it  to  fulfil  for  the  spread  of  Chris-
tianity. Here  as  elsewhere  it  appears  as  if  the
sins  and  wilfulness  of  men  gave  occasion  to  the
accomplishment  of  the  Divine  plans.  These  in-
deed were  not  dependent  on  such  evils  for  their
fulfilment;  but  yet  it  seems  as  if  GOD  were  pleased
to  use  our  imperfections  for  the  complete  exhi-
bition of  His  will.  The  rebellion  of  Israel,  the
schism  of  Alexandria,  the  permanent  settlement
of  Jews  throughout  the  East  and  West  which  in-
volved a  violation  of  large  parts  of  the  Mosaic
law,  were  in  themselves  evils,  and  had  their  spring
in  selfishness  and  disobedience,  but  none  the  less
they  served  to  work  out  a  vast  counsel,  which,  as
far  as  we  can  see,  could  not  otherwise  have  been
perfected.  Thus  in  the  history  of  that  earlier  king-
dom of  GOD,  which  was  essentially  outward,  we  are
taught  by  special  examples  not  to  judge  every-
thing by  our  own  standard  of  unity.  And  at  least


Variation  no  sanction  of  Sectarianism.    225

no  argument  can  be  drawn  from  the  circumstances  CHAP.  in.
which  attend  the   rise   of  any  great   movement
against  the  importance  of  the  part  which  it  may
have  to  discharge  in  the  furtherance  of  the  pur-
poses of  GOD.

29.  But   it   may  be  said  that  such  a  view
sanctions  sectarianism.     If  we  are  to  suppose  that
the  form  of  the  Christian  Church  in  each  nation
will  (within  certain  limits)  embody  the  common
peculiarities  of  national  character,  just  as  on  a
larger  scale  the  Greek  Church  is  Orthodox  and
the  Latin  Church  Catholic,  differences  will  still
exist  in  the  body  thus  formed.     Each  nation  will
include   men   most   widely   at    variance  in  their
religious  tendencies.     Are  they  then  to  be  held
blameless  if  they  seek  to  attach  themselves  to  a
communion   which   expresses   most   clearly   their
own  views  ?   The  national  character  is  not  reflected
in  them ;   and  the  same  general  principle  which
justifies   the    formation    of    a    separate    national
Church  may  be  appealed  to  in  support  of  an  in-
definite number  of  subordinate  associations.

30.  Disregarding   for   the    present    all    con-
siderations of  ecclesiastical  organisation,  it  may  be
sufficient  for  us  to  answer  to  such  a  line  of  reason-

w.  R.  15


226  The  admission  of  variation

CHAP.  in.  ing  that  it  applies  equally  well  to  all  social  com-
binations. No  one  will  deny  that  there  is  a
tendency  in  every  nation  towards  the  establish-
ment of  the  government  best  suited  to  it.  This
tendency  which  may  be  latent  in  the  mass,  though
really  there,  will  be  developed  most  strongly  in
those  who  are  the  true  leaders  of  popular  thought.
And  though  various  obstacles  may  hinder  or
modify  the  embodiment  of  the  idea  which  they
represent,  in  the  end  it  finds  an  adequate  expres-
sion. But  even  then  individuals  in  the  state
will  find  themselves  at  variance  with  the  consti-
tution. This  divergence  however  will  not  release
them  from  the  duties  of  loyal  obedience,  nor  yet
deprive  the  government  of  its  right  to  be  regarded
as  the  representative  of  the  national  feelings.  The
state  though  made  up  of  individuals  has  an  exist-
ence of  its  own.  The  individual  will  exercise  his
full  influence  in  preparing  for  further  changes,
but  meanwhile  the  whole  claims  a  sacrifice  of  the
part.  It  is  so  also  in  the  case  of  a  national  Church.
No  general  principles  can  be  laid  down  to  justify
a  schism  or  a  revolution.  The  future  alone  can
decide  on  the  sufficiency  of  the  alleged  causes
from  which  they  arose.  And  in  many  cases  the
issue  which  is  sanctioned  by  experience  may  have
been  occasioned  though  not  caused  by  selfish
motives.


no  sanction  of  Sectarianism.  227

31.  In  the  history  of  the  Church  no  less  than  CHAP.  in.
in  the  history  of  nations  we  have  to  deal  with
humanity  in  which  sin  is  active  already.    It  would

be  easy  to  shew  that  among  perfect  men  every
blessing  would  arise  naturally  and  completely
without  conflict  or  division,  which  in  our  present
state  is  realised  through  these  exceptional  means
in  pain  and  at  best  partially.  But  as  it  is,  conflict
and  sorrow  are  the  means  by  which  the  powers  of
men,  material  and  moral,  are  braced  and  purified.
The  existence  of  distinct  nations  with  rival  in-
terests is  practically  necessary  for  the  full  de-
velopment of  those  special  powers  in  each  which
holds  out  the  surest  promise  of  a  final  union
of  men.  And  so  the  antagonism  of  separate
societies  of  Christians  serves  not  as  the  best,
but  as  the  most  appropriate,  discipline  for  bring-
ing out  the  manifold  applications  and  capacities
of  the  one  Gospel.

32.  History  has  in  fact  sanctioned  divisions
in  the  Christian  Church  whatever  we  may  think
of  the  events  which  first  led  to  them,  or  of  the
actors  by  whom  they  were  made.    However  deeply
we  may  deplore  the  loss  of  that  outward  fellow-
ship which  would,  if  it  could  have  been  preserved,
have  increased  a  thousandfold  the  power  of  the
Church  upon  the  world ;  yet  it  is  impossible  not

15—2


228  Progress  implies  antagonism

CHAP.  in.  to  feel  that  GOD  has  revealed  His  purposes  and
furthered  His  work  not  only  in  spite  of,  but
even  through  the  separate  societies  which  have
severally  appropriated  this  or  that  part  of  the  whole
truth  as  the  characteristic  object  of  their  devout
study.  And  even  without  regarding  the  lessons
of  the  past  it  is  hard  to  see  how  the  fulness  of
Christianity  could  have  been  manifested  among
men  otherwise  than  by  antagonism  and  conflict.
Antagonism  is  in  our  present  imperfect  condition
the  preliminary  to  our  apprehension  of  anything
which  is  not  itself  absolutely  bounded  by  our
finite  powers.  Every  spiritual  truth  can  be  fol-
lowed out  to  a  final  antithesis ;  and  this  antithesis
finds  its  most  complete  expression  in  societies
rather  than  in  individuals.

33.  The  same  law  which  holds  in  all  other
fields  of  human  activity,  holds  also  in  the  noblest.
The  condition  of  advance  in  the  comprehension
of  the  whole  Gospel  is  the  special  mastery  through
the  circumstances  of  life  of  its  constituent  parts.
Progress  implies  a  separate  development  of  powers.
The  tendency  to  division  grows  as  knowledge
widens.  There  was  a  time  when  all  nature
seemed  to  lie  within  the  range  of  one  mind.
Deeper  inquiry  has  shewn  that  each  fragment
includes  phenomena  which  may  occupy  a  life-


and  individuality.  229

time.  And  so  it  is  in  religion.  The  complexity  CHAP.  in.
of  modern  society,  which  is  in  part  a  creation  of
Christianity,  lays  before  us  endless  problems  of
right  and  duty,  and  opens  countless  avenues  for
the  entrance  of  truth  into  the  manifold  life  of
men  which  could  not  have  been  presented  if  all
the  conditions  of  existence  had  been  similar.  As
a  necessary  consequence  of  this,  each  nation,  each
association,  each  man  has,  in  proportion  to  the
distinctness  of  character,  a  tendency  to  do  one
thing;  and  the  tendency  to  do  it  springs  (as  a
general  rule  and  upon  a  large  scale)  from  the
fitness  for  doing  it.  There  is  thus,  in  virtue  of
the  universality  of  Christianity,  a  constant  ap-
proximation towards  the  complete  manifestation
of  its  power.  And  when  each  age  and  race  and
individual  has  fulfilled  its  proper  function — and
so  far  as  it  fulfils  it — a  glorious  harmony  must
result,  which  is  true  Catholicity.

34.  The  recognition  of  some  such  historic
development  of  Christianity,  varying  according  to
the  wants  of  particular  ages  or  races,  as  belonging
to  its  present  form,  restores  to  the  divided  Churches
a  true  unity.  One  of  the  earliest  images  under
which  the  unity  of  Christendom  was  described
was  that  of  many  streams  flowing  from  one  source.
The  longer  the  streams  flow,  the  greater  will  be


230  The   Unity  of  the  Church

CHAP.  in.  their  divergence ;  but  the  divergence  is  due  to
progress  and  does  not  in  any  way  destroy  the
original  unity  of  the  waters  which  pass  along  the
various  courses.  But  the  streams  will  not  always
be  divided.  They  start  from  one  source  and  they
end  in  one  ocean.  They  have  been  united  out-
wardly, and  they  will  again  be  united.  Mean-
while the  fashion  of  their  currents  is  moulded  by
the  country  through  which  they  pass,  and  this  in
turn  furnishes  the  peculiar  elements  which  they
bear  down  to  their  common  resting-place  to  form
the  foundations  of  a  world  to  come.

35.  There  is  indeed  much  of  human  selfish-
ness in  the  present  administration  and  conduct  of
Christian  societies,  even  as  there  was  in  their
establishment  and  organisation.  It  is  not  argued
that  the  divisions  as  we  see  them  are  not  de-
formed by  much  that  is  unchristian.  They  are  a
witness  to  human  imperfection ;  but  at  the  same
time  they  shew  how  the  failings  of  man  are  over-
ruled to  the  furtherance  of  his  highest  destinies.
They  belong  to  an  order  of  things  in  which  sin  is
realised  and  not  only  possible  (n.  §§  23  ff.);  but
they  are  made  an  occasion  during  this  brief  time
of  trial  for  the  salutary  discipline  and  fruitful  de-
velopment of  powers  which  cannot  yet  be  harmoni-
ously concentrated  on  one  end.  On  the  whole  a


seen  in  its  historical,  Development.        231

fictitious  unity  is  more  destructive  of  vital  energy  CHAP.  in.
than  partial  dismemberment,  for  it  tends  to  weaken
the  striving  after  essential  unity.  The  disruption
of  the  visible  Church  was  a  calamity  which  still
impedes  its  action,  though  even  thus,  as  by  the
fate  of  Jerusalem,  we  are  taught  to  look  above
for  the  source  of  the  one  life  by  which  its  parts
are  seen  to  be  inspired.  The  petty  rivalries  of
the  day  are  an  evil,  though  they  are  an  evil  which
may  be  borne.  But  the  line  of  thought  which
has  been  opened  leads  to  a  trustful  and  reasonable
view  of  Christendom.  It  enables  us  to  regard  the
progress  of  the  Church  as  we  regard  the  progress
of  civil  society  (§  38).  It  encourages  us  to  extend
our  sympathies  beyond  the  limits  of  our  own  com-
munion :  to  look  forth  without  despair  upon  a
world,  in  part  hardly  reached  by  the  very  sound
of  Christ's  message,  in  part  divided  as  to  the
exact  meaning  of  it.  It  teaches  us  to  watch  with
patience  the  slow  and  painful  and  wavering  ad-
vance of  truth  through  long  ages,  as  falling  in
with  what  we  observe  in  nature  of  the  enormous
scale  and  gradual  progress  of  the  accomplishment
of  the  operations  of  GOD  (i.  §§  2,  3).  The  example
of  the  Jewish  Church,  the  legible  chronicle  of  past
centuries,  shews  that  under  circumstances  similar
to  those  which  exist  now,  though  simpler  and
narrower,  He  wrought  out  His  work  and  used


232  The  Development

CHAP.  in.  the  fruits  of  man's  wilfulness  and  one-sidedness
for  the  accomplishment  of  His  designs.  So  we
trust  it  will  be  now,  and  in  confidence  we  can
fulfil  the  task  which  we  find  ready  to  our  hands,
without  distrusting  the  means  placed  within  our
reach  for  furthering  the  coming  of  the  Kingdom
of  Christ.

36.  Some  law  of  development  Christianity
must  have.  The  Christianity  of  the  first  age,
regarded  as  a  whole,  is  not  the  Christianity  of
any  later  age;  and  no  view  of  the  Church  can
be  complete  or  satisfactory  which  does  not  include
and  explain  the  principle  of  the  change.  It  is
impossible  for  a  Christian  of  to-day  to  date  the
descent  of  his  faith  from  any  critical  epoch  in
modern  times,  and  neglect  ten  or  fifteen  centuries
as  a  mere  parenthesis  in  the  history  of  the  Ca-
tholic Church.  All  the  past  is  included  in  the
present.  The  Reformation  was  the  fruit  of  ages
gone  by  no  less  than  the  germ  which  should
spring  to  maturity  in  ages  to  come.  There  can
be  no  suspension  in  the  fulfilment  of  the  divine
promise,  however  varied  may  be  the  forms  under
which  it  is  accomplished.  The  leaven  still  works
in  the  manifold  mass :  the  seed  advances  stage  by
stage  towards  its  ripe  perfection :  the  tree  grows
under  every  change  of  season  and  climate,  and


one  of  organisation.  233

offers  shelter  to  all  who  repose  beneath  its  CHAP.  in.
branches.  Each  image  under  which  we  are  taught
to  contemplate  the  function  of  the  Church  pre-
sents at  once  an  element  of  permanence  and  an
element  of  change.  There  is  the  essential  life
by  which  the  whole  body  is  quickened,  absolutely
one  and  immutable,  and  the  organisation  which
the  vital  force  moulds  and  by  which  it  reveals
itself,  which  is  mutable  and  fashioned  out  of  ele-
ments earthly  and  transitory.  But  even  so  the
continuity  of  the  organisation  is  necessary  for  the
preservation  of  the  complex  life.

37.  The  principle  of  life  is  one  and  immutable.
In  this  there  is  no  development.  The  faith  which
is  written  in  the  facts  of  the  Gospel,  and  the  im-
mediate apostolic  interpretation  of  them,  admit
of  no  necessary  and  authoritative  additions.  A
dogmatic  development  of  Christianity,  in  the  sense
of  an  increase  of  the  fundamental  doctrines  of  the
faith,  is  foreign  to  the  whole  spirit  of  the  apostolic
writings,  and  is  itself  inconceivable  without  a  new
revelation.  Such  a  development  would  only  take
place  by  the  addition  of  new  dogmas  in  virtue  of
the  direct  action  of  an  adequate  power,  or  by
deductions  from  existing  dogmas.  But  both  me-
thods are  excluded  by  the  nature  of  the  case.
Christianity  rests  essentially  on  facts.  Its  ele-


234  The  Development  not  of

CHAP.  in.  mentary  doctrines  are  presented  to  us  in  the
shape  of  facts ;  and  thus,  even  if  any  central
power  existed  with  absolute  dogmatic  power,  new
facts  would  be  required  for  the  basis  of  new  doc-
trines, for  the  Apostles  declare  with  unmistakeable
distinctness  the  full  significance  of  the  Incarnation
and  the  Mission  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  And  again,
the  truths  which  answer  to  the  facts  of  the  Gospel
belong  in  themselves  to  a  higher  form  of  exist-
ence, and  cannot  be  brought  within  the  domain
of  our  powers  of  reasoning.  Every  process  which
we  pursue  involves  necessarily  at  each  step  limita-
tions (as,  for  example,  of  time  and  space)  to  which
the  Divine  Being  is  not  subject.  Every  conclu-
sion, therefore,  which  we  form,  so  far  as  it  is
presented  as  an  absolute  truth,  must  have  in  it
an  element  of  error.  Indeed,  on  reflection,  it
cannot  but  seem  infinitely  presumptuous  that  we
should  venture  to  speculate  on  that  of  which,  even
in  its  simplest  form,  we  can  give  no  positive  con-
ception. Nor  is  there  any  characteristic  by  which
the  apostolic  writings  are  more  clearly  distin-
guished from  the  greatest  writings  of  masters  of
theology  than  the  absence  in  them  of  secondary
deductions  from  the  principles  which  they  enforce.
In  this  respect  they  differ  equally  from  the  meta-
physical and  speculative  theology  of  the  East,  and
from  the  moral  and  legal  theology  of  the  West.


Doctrine  absolutely.  235

They  contain  a  record  of  facts,  and  an  immediate  CHAP.  in.
application  of  the  facts,  but  no  more :  life  and
not  thought  is  the  object  to  which  they  primarily
minister,  and  so  they  minister  (as  no  other
writings  ever  could  do)  to  thought  through  life.
They  set  forth  with  simple  distinctness  that  a  fact
or  truth  is,  but  not  how  it  is  or  why  it  is.  What
there  is  more  than  this  in  later  speculations,  how-
ever beautiful  and  however  precious  it  may  be,  is
wholly  different  in  kind.  From  the  first  the
difference  has  been  instinctively  felt.  The  records
of  the  most  critical  struggle  for  the  truth  in  the
history  of  the  Church  shew  how  widespread  was
the  unwillingness  to  introduce  into  the  historic
creed  of  Catholic  Christendom  a  single  word  which
was  not  found  in  the  Scriptures  though  it  was  the
necessary  exponent  of  their  teaching  in  opposition
to  error:  the  language  of  the  noblest  champion
of  orthodoxy  shews  how  far  he  was  willing  to
dispense  with  the  acceptance  of  a  word  when  the
fact  which  it  imperfectly  expressed  was  admitted.

38.  But  while  the  principle  of  life,  the  record
of  the  facts  of  the  Gospel,  remains  the  same,  the
form  in  which  it  is  embodied  may  change.  Thus
we  naturally  turn  to  history  as  shewing  the  con-
ditions and  ruling  the  mode  of  the  development
of  Christianity.  Here  we  can  see  on  a  large


236

CHAP.  in.  scale  how  the  same  truths  are  apprehended  by
different  races,  how  they  are  embodied  under
different  circumstances  and  according  to  different
modes  of  thought,  how  they  conquer,  and  array
themselves  in  the  spoils  of  the  conquered.  No
one  would  deny  that  in  successive  ages  special
aspects  or  parts  of  Truth  are  brought  out.  The
general  outline  of  the  history,  including  both  the
history  of  dogma  and  the  history  of  practice,  has
a  necessary  connexion  with  that  of  civil  and  intel-
lectual history.  The  one  is,  so  to  speak,  a  func-
tion of  the  other.  And  it  follows  that  as  we  can
trace  in  the  general  condition  of  man  a  constant
advance  towards  a  true  fulfilment  of  the  capabili-
ties of  his  nature,  so  we  may  hope  for  a  corre-
sponding progress  in  the  Church,  towards  that
ideal  which  is  held  before  us  in  Scripture  as  its
proper  consummation.  Advance  in  the  first  case
is  not  only  consistent  with  wars,  revolutions,  iso-
lated action,  but  (as  far  as  we  can  judge)  is  even
dependent  on  these  which  we  are  tempted  to  call
hindrances  in  its  way.  And  it  may  be  so  with
Christianity.  The  divisions  and  rivalries  and
heresies  and  schisms  by  which  the  Church  is  torn
may  be  means  towards  the  fulfilment  of  its  office.
As  we  look  back  we  can  scarcely  doubt  that  it
is  so.  The  storm  no  less  than  the  sunshine  is
needed  that  the  rainbow,  the  visible  token  of


to  the  progress  of  Society.  237

GOD'S  covenant  with  man,  may  be  seen  upon  the  CHAP.  in.
cloud.

39.  It  is   indeed   impossible   to   regard   the
Church  as  a  body  without  recognising  the  neces-
sity  of    a   constant   change   in   its   organisation.
Growth  itself  is  change ;  and  in  proportion  as  the
life  of  the  body  is  complex  we  may  expect  the
forms  in  which  it  is  clothed  to  be  varied.     There
are  times  when  the  individual  is  forgotten  in  the
society,  and  conversely  when  the  society  is  for-
gotten in  the  individual.     In  the  apostolic  view
of  the   future  of  Christianity  there  is  a  distinct
recognition  of  a  progressive  work  in  both.     The
life  of  the  Church  is  continuous  even  as  the  life
of  the  man ;  but  with  this  difference  (as  we  have
seen,  §  20),  that  this  life  is  manifested  not  in  one
outward   embodiment,   but   in   many,  which   are
severally  similar  to  the  whole  which  they  combine
to  form.

40.  It  is  no  part  of  our  task  to  attempt  to
follow  out  in  detail  the  various  phases  of  the  life
of  the  Christian  Churches.     But  it  would  not  be
difficult  to  shew  that  institutions  or  dogmas  have
wrought  a  most  important  work  for  the  cause  of
Christ  in  one  age,  which  in  another  have  been
converted  into  obstacles  to  the  full  apprehension


238  Developments

CHAP.  in.  of  the  Truth.  There  is  always  a  great  danger
that  that  which  has  been  found  of  critical  use  at
one  time  will  be  pronounced  necessary  for  all  time.
Mistaken  gratitude  changes  the  outward  means  of
deliverance  into  an  idol.  The  organisation  through
which  the  spirit  once  worked  is  reckoned  holy,
even  when  the  spirit  has  left  it.  And  thus  that
which  once  was  a  development  of  life  becomes  a
corruption,  not  because  it  has  (in  every  case)
changed  in  itself,  but  because  it  stands  in  a  different
relation  to  the  whole.  The  work  of  the  mediaeval
Church  (for  example)  required  modes  of  operation
which  could  not  be  retained  now  without  a  faith-
less neglect  of  the  lesson  which  GOD  has  taught
us  in  the  last  four  centuries.  The  same  pheno-
menon meets  us  at  every  step  in  the  economy  of
individual  life.  The  seed  from  which  rises  the
fruit-bearing  tree,  to  which  the  visible  society  of
Christendom  is  likened,  gives  birth  to  a  thousand
successive  organisations,  from  the  seed-leaf  to  the
flower,  which  fall  away  when  their  peculiar  office
is  fulfilled.  They  perish,  but  their  work  remains,
and  remains  because  they  perish.

41.  This  consideration  brings  with  it  the
answer  to  a  general  objection  which  may  be  urged
against  the  belief  in  a  divine  historical  develop-
ment of  Christianity.  It  may  be  said  that  the


often  transitional. .  239

development  is  due  to  the  imperfection  of  man :  CHAP.  in.
that  so  far  from  carrying  forward  the  perception
of  the  Truth,  he  lowers  the  truth  to  his  own  level
and  confines  it  in  a  form  borrowed  from  his  own
weakness.  The  objection  is  true  if  it  be  directed
to  any  particular  point  of  the  development.  The
Truth  itself  is  infinite,  and  it  is  simply  because
the  powers  of  man  are  imperfect  and  finite  that
any  development  is  necessary.  He  can  only
realise  step  by  step,  and  by  successive  efforts,
what  is  indeed  from  the  beginning1.  According  to
the  position  in  which  he  finds  himself,  he  takes
now  this,  now  that  fragment  of  the  whole,  because
it  meets  his  wants.  Every  embodiment  of  the
Truth  must  be  wrought  out  in  this  way.  And  the
nearest  approximation  which  we  can  form  to  the
complete  truth  is  by  the  combination  of  the  par-
tial realisations  of  it  which  history  records.  The
imperfection  of  each  stage  of  the  development  is
then  only  perilous  when  an  attempt  is  made  to
transfer  the  forms  of  thought  or  practice  of  a  parti-
cular period  to  another,  without  any  regard  to  their
bearing  upon  the  whole  life  of  the  time.  The
interpretation  of  Ecclesiastical  history,  like  the
interpretation  of  Scripture,  is  based  upon  a  pro-
portion. Neither  admits  a  rigid  literalism.  The

1  Augustine's  enforcement  of  this  truth  in  one  of  his  most
pregnant  passages  is  full  of  interest :  Enarr.  in  Psalm,  xliv.  5.


240        Scripture  the  test  of  Development.

CHAP.  in.  training  of  the  child  and  of  the  man  will  be  dif-
ferent, if  both  are  according  to  the  same  law ;  but
the  man  may  learn  still  (if  he  reads  them  rightly)
from  the  lessons  of  the  child.

42.  It   is   not   denied  that  there  will  be  a
tendency  in  man  not  only  to  seize  that  element
in  the  Truth  which  he  himself  needs,  but  also  to
exaggerate  its  importance,  to  array  it  in  fancies
of  his  own,  to  transmit  his  embodiment  of  it  as
an  inviolable  heritage  to  all  who  shall  come  after.
If  it  were   not   so,  superstition  would   have   no
vitality.     But  while  we  look  to  history  for   the
record  of  the  continuous  growth  of  the  Church,
we  carry  the  Holy  Scriptures  with  us,  as  the  test
whereby  to  try  the  essential  value  of  each  de-
velopment.    The  history  of  the  Old  Covenant  is
enacted  afresh  in  the  history  of  the  New.     The
fulness  of  the  apostolic  writings  has  not  yet  been
exhausted  in  the  life  of  eighteen  centuries.     The
providence  of  GOD  is  at  every  stage  interpreted  by
His  Word.     The  spirit  of  the  Resurrection  tries
and  transfigures  each  transitory  embodiment  of
Truth.

43.  The  same  test  which  is  applied  to  the
past  history  of  the  Church,  can  be  applied  to  the
present.     The  vast  complexity  of  modern  life,  the


The  complexity  of  the  present  age.       241

various  degrees  of  national  culture,  the  broad  CHAP.  in.
differences  between  class  and  class  in  the  same
nation,  set  before  us  simultaneously,  so  to  speak,
distinct  periods  of  the  simpler  life  of  the  ancient
world.  We  live  (and  the  statement  is  not  a  mere
figure)  in  the  presence  of  many  ages.  We  cannot  be
surprised  then  if  we  see  around  us  many  Christian
societies  distinct,  and  subserving  in  virtue  of  their
distinctness  to  distinct  types  of  thought  and  feel-
ing. Differences  which  once  were  found  in  the
same  external  body  are  now  seen  embodied  in
separate  societies.  We  lose  something  by  the
change,  but  the  gain  must  not  be  neglected.  We
are  led  to  look  for  the  spiritual  basis  of  unity  in-
stead of  reposing  in  the  fact  of  formal  unity.  And
more  than  this.  The  full  development  of  each
part  is  best  secured  by  independent  action.  Divi-
sion (if  we  regard  the  imperfection  of  our  nature)
appears  to  be  the  preliminary  of  that  noblest
catholicity,  which  will  issue  from  the  separate  Eph.iv.16.
fulfilment  by  each  part  in  due  measure  of  its
proper  function  towards  the  whole.  Thus  the
material  unity  of  Judaism  is  transformed  into  the
moral  unity  of  the  Apocalypse.  The  unity  which
was  at  first  spontaneous  becomes  at  last  conscious,
tested  in  all  its  elements  and  made  perfect  by
conflict.

w.  R.  16


242       The  /auction  of  National  Churches.

CHAP.  in.  44.  It  has  been  urged  against  this  view
which  leads  directly  to  the  recognition  of  national
Churches  as  a  providential  mean  towards  the  com-
plete exhibition  of  Christianity,  that  national
Churches  are  'contradictory  to  the  nature  of  a
religious  body'  and  '  opposed  to  the  genius  of
Christianity.'  If  Christianity  were  of  this  world
only,  a  simple  organisation  for  social  and  political
discipline,  the  objections  would  be  true.  But  they
fail  because  the  Church  is  a  religious  body,  par-
tially manifested  on  earth  but  drawing  its  life  from
an  unseen  source,  and  one  because  that  source  of
its  life  is  One.  In  this  respect  the  idea  of  the
Church  may  be  compared  with  the  idea  of  hu-
manity with  which  it  is  potentially  commensurate.
The  existence  of  separate  and  conflicting  nations
is  not  destructive  of  the  moral  unity  of  the  whole
body  of  mankind,  but  rather  on  a  large  view  is
seen  to  minister  to  its  external  realisation  in  the
long  succession  of  ages.  And  so  with  the  Church,
though  in  this  case  the  unseen  principle  of  unity
is  far  more  easily  apprehended,  the  distinct  embo-
diments of  partial  sections  of  it  tend  to  bring  about
in  the  end  that  complete  development  which
will  answer  to  the  fulness  of  its  divine  life.  The
separate  Churches  thus  become  as  individual
members  in  the  larger  body,  and,  like  single  men
themselves,  contribute  by  the  most  distinct  pro-


Churches  'redeem  each  other!  243

servation  of  their  individuality  to  the  perfection  CHAP.  m.
of  the  whole.     In  the  light  of  the  Resurrection
all  the  powers  of  man  in  their  most  free  combi-
nations are  capable  of  transfiguration.

45.  But  it  will  be  obvious  that  this  division
of  Churches,  like  the  division  of  nations,  is  only  a
transitional  phase  in  the  whole  history  of  human-
ity (comp.  §  26).  It  belongs  not  to  the  early  but
to  the  later  stage  of  its  development.  Nay  rather
if  the  history  of  the  ancient  people  of  GOD  may  be
taken  as  a  type  of  the  progress  of  the  new  '  world'
it  appears  to  be  the  latest  stage  in  the  evolution
of  '  the  present  age'  and  to  precede  a  more  imme-
diate revelation  of  the  Divine  Presence.  However
this  may  be,  the  faint  recognition  of  national
Churches  is  not  a  mere  'resource  in  the  face  of
'  overwhelming  difficulties,'  but  a  testimony  to  the
power  of  Christianity  to  find  for  itself  new  organ-
isations to  meet  new  phases  of  society.  Mean-
while we  can  be  content  to  find  in  this  diversity  of
operations  scope  for  the  most  devoted  energy  and
the  firmest  faith.  It  has  been  nobly  said  that
'  nations  redeem  each  other.'  One  supplies  that
which  another  lacks  in  moral  character  and  pur-
pose ;  and  the  existence  of  a  deficiency  in  one
place  is  not  unfrequently  the  stimulus  and  the
occasion  for  the  display  of  the  corresponding  virtue

16—2


244  Grounds  of  hope  in  the

CHAP.  in.  in  another.  At  least  it  is  evident  that  we  cannot
understand  how  with  our  present  powers  the  full
grandeur  of  humanity  could  be  exhibited  or  deve-
loped except  by  the  coexistence  of  many  peoples
distinct  and  even  antagonistic.  And  that  which
is  true  of  humanity  in  a  political  or  social  aspect
is  true  of  it  also  in  a  religious  aspect.  Separate
organisations  appear  to  be  as  necessary  for  the
complete  manifestation  of  the  many  sides  of  Chris-
tian truth  in  relation  to  man,  as  they  are  con-
fessedly for  the  manifestation  of  national  life.
But  we  do  not  rest  in  the  contemplation  of  a
divided  humanity  or  of  a  divided  Church.  Under
the  varieties  of  race  and  character  there  exist
tokens  of  an  essential  union  which  may  yet  be
realised  and  towards  which  the  current  of  events
is  ever  turned.  There  are  indications,  faint  it  may
be  and  often  baffling,  of  a  common  life  grander
than  the  life  of  men  and  the  life  of  nations,  which
is  struggling  to  assert  its  sovereignty.  And  in  the
Church  there  is  yet  more  than  this,  the  certainty
of  the  presence  of  a  Holy  Spirit  who  '  is  able  to
'  subdue  all  things  unto  Himself  But  whether
we  look  to  nations  or  Churches,  it  is  needful  that
we  should  pause  before  we  claim  to  exercise  the
prerogatives  of  a  knowledge  which  belongs  to  a
higher  sphere.  As  citizens  arid  Christians  we
stand  in  varied  relations  to  a  universe  of  which  we


midst  of  antagonism.  245

can  see  but  the  least  part.     This  world  is  not  all ;  CHAP.  m.
and  if  we  look  confidently  for  a  unity  of  the  whole,
we  dare  not  attempt  to  construct  it  in  imagina-
tion upon  the  little  field  which  is  open  to  us.

46.  The  forms  which  present  divisions  as-
sume are,  it  is  admitted,  and  must  remain  causes
for  the  deepest  sorrow.  Nothing  can  be  more
grievous  than  the  partial  wilfulness  with  which
Christian  men  and  Christian  societies  exalt  from
time  to  time  with  an  idolatrous  devotion  special
fragments  of  truth,  which  tend  to  lose  their  essen-
tial character  by  being  isolated,  But  such  reflec-
tions as  have  been  suggested,  while  they  leave
the  special  evils  of  a  divided  Christendom  just  as
they  are,  yet  enable  the  devout  mind  to  regard
them  without  despair :  nay  more  to  regard  them,
as  it  would  regard  the  disorders  of  the  physical
world,  with  quiet  confidence  and  faith.  We  can-
not yet  see  how  the  whirlwind  or  the  earthquake
falls  in  with  an  infinitely  benevolent  system  of
nature ;  but  we  do  not  doubt  that  it  does  do  so.
In  looking  on  human  life  we  have  even  better
grounds  for  faith.  There  we  can  see  faint  begin-
nings of  a  final  harmony,  converging  tendencies
towards  a  divine  order,  which  will  embrace  all  the
varieties  of  thought  and  life  in  their  richest
fulness.  When  we  see  what  the  belief  in  Christ


246  Conclusion.

CHAP.  in.  and  the  power  of  His  Resurrection  has  done,  how
it  has  interpreted  and  made  its  own  this  and  that
instinctive  feeling,  how  it  has  found  an  embodi-
ment, natural  if  not  complete,  under  every  variety
of  external  circumstances,  how  it  includes  in  it-
self a  principle  of  unity  capable  of  combining
whatever  there  is  in  these  of  permanent  value,
we  can  look  out  upon  the  conflict  of  sects  without
distrust,  and  look  forward  to  that  golden  age  to
which  and  not  from  which  the  history  of  the
Church  advances.

47.  Nothing  is  more  paralysing  than  a  sense
of  isolation :  nothing  is  more  cheering  than  a  con-
sciousness of  fellowship  in  the  combined  action  of
a  great  nation  or  of  a  great  society.  Christendom
is  weak  not  only  because  it  is  divided  but  chiefly
because  each  section  is  enfeebled  by  a  sense  of
the  littleness  of  its  power  as  it  measures  the  tri-
umphs of  Christianity  by  its  own  peculiar  stand-
ard. Our  strength  will  be  indefinitely  increased
if  we  believe  that  GOD  works  not  only  through  us
or  in  our  way  and  according  to  our  notions,  but
uses  us  according  to  the  measure  of  our  capacities,
and  others  with  us  in  the  accomplishment  of  the
design  of  His  Love.  Every  energy  will  be  turned
to  its  proper  work  as  our  thoughts  rest  on  the
glory  of  the  Risen  Saviour.


Conclusion.  247

48.  Wherever  we  look  the  first  question  CHAP.  in.
which  arises  is  ever:  To  what  purpose  is  this
waste  ?  On  all  sides  we  see  a  prodigal  wealth  of
powers  which  to  us  appear  to  pass  away  without
effect,  of  germs  of  life  which  never  fulfil  what  we
think  to  be  their  proper  destiny,  of  beauty  which
gladdens  no  human  eye.  In  the  moral  world  the
same  mystery  recurs.  One  man  out  of  many,  one
family  of  many,  one  nation  of  many,  one  world  of
many  (if  our  thoughts  dare  wander  so  far),  are
centres  of  blessings  of  which  all  are  equally  capable
of  sharing,  and  we  cannot  trace  the  law  by  which
their  influence  gradually  reaches  to  the  furthest
limits  of  being,  while  we  see  multitudes  perish
unconscious  of  their  common  heritage.  All  na-
ture teaches  the  same  lesson.  '  We  know  in  part.'
It  is  enough.  If  Christ  be  risen,  in  that  fact  lies
the  pledge  of '  the  restitution  of  all  things'  towards  Actsiii.2l.
which  men  are  encouraged  to  work.


APPENDIX   I.

ASPECTS  OF  POSITIVISM   IN   RELATION
TO   CHRISTIANITY1.


6  ovv  dyvoovvTfs  evffepeire  rovro  £yu  Kar

Acts  xvii.  23.

Catecliisme  Positiviste,  on  Sommaire  Exposition  de  la  Religion
Universelle.  Par  AUGCSTE  COJITE.  Paris.  1852.

Sys&me  de  Politique  Positive,  ou  Trait£  de  Sociologie  Instituant
la  Religion  de  1'Humanite.  Par  AUGDSTE  COMTE.  Paris.
1851—1854.

I.

"1VTO   religion   can   fail  to  be  a  fruitful  subject  of  APPENDIX
-L  i    study  :  even  the  rudest  reveals  something  of  the         I-
natural  feelings  and  wants  of  man  which  are  awakened
by  the  experience  of  life.     And  exactly  as  we  believe
Christianity  to  be   the  Truth,   we    shall    confidently
expect  to  find  in  it  all  that  is  true  in  the  manifold
expressions  of  human  thought.     Thus  it  has  happened
not  unfrequently   that  independent   speculations    or
instinctive  aspirations  have  brought  out  elements  in
the  Gospel  which  had  been  before  overlooked  or  set

1  This   Essay   originally  appeared    in    the   Contemporary
Review.


250  Aspects  of  Positivism  in

APPENDIX  aside.  They  were  there,  and  even  actively  at  work,
but  they  were  not  consciously  apprehended.  And
so  it  seems  to  be  now.  The  religion  of  Positivism
is  offered  as  the  final  result  of  a  profound  analysis  of
society  and  man,  and  its  unquestionable  attractive-
ness to  pure  and  vigorous  minds  indicates  that  it
does  meet  with  some  peculiar  force  present  phases  of
thought.  Are  there  not  then  lessons  which  we  may
learn  from  it  1

While  I  endeavour  to  answer  this  question,  I
shall  be  content  to  take  Comte's  own  conclusions,
without  discussing  the  processes  by  which  he  obtains
them.  The  strength  of  the  Positivist  philosophy  lies  in
its  method ;  the  strength  of  the  Positivist  religion  lies
in  its  conception :  and  the  Positivist  alone  is  concerned
with  reconciling  the  two.  That  which  is  at  best  only
a  hypothesis  for  the  Positivist  may  prove  to  be  a
reality  for  the  Christian ;  and  while  I  set  aside  the
physiological  basis  of  the  Positive  religion,  it  need
scarcely  be  said  that  I  do  not  propose  to  deal  with
the  principles  of  Positivism  as  furnishing  a  method
of  philosophy.  I  desire  simply  to  explain  what  Comte
lays  down  as  the  essential  bases  of  religion,  from  an
exclusively  human  point  of  view,  and  to  consider
whether  his  exposition  throws  any  light  upon  neg-
lected aspects  of  Christianity.

But  though  this  is  not  the  place  to  discuss  the
philosophic  aspect  of  Positivism,  one  remark  is  un-
avoidable. It  seems  to  be  generally  assumed  that
there  is  some  fundamental  antagonism  between  the
Positive  method  and  Christianity.  Nothing,  I  be-
lieve, can  be  more  false.  I  should  even  venture  to


Relation  to  Christianity.  251

maintain  that  the  spirit  of  Positivism  is  more  in  APPENDIX
harmony  with  a  historic  religion  than  that  of  any
other  system  of  philosophy.  It  knows  nothing  of
causes,  and  consequently  decides  nothing  prior  to
observation.  It  refuses  to  recognise  absolute  laws,
and  consequently  is  always  ready  to  take  account  of
new  facts.  As  against  a  metaphysical  theism  the
arguments  of  Positivists  may  perhaps  avail;  but  they
are  inherently  powerless  against  a  faith  which  is
based,  not  on  subjective  theories,  but  on  outward
events,  of  which  all  personal  experience  and  all  social
development  furnish  the  adequate  and  only  conceiv-
able verification.

This  being  so,  it  is  evident  that  a  Positivist  in
philosophy  may  be  a  Christian  in  religion ;  and  the
religion  constructed  on  Positivism  may,  as  far  as  it
goes,  illustrate  or  confirm  the  doctrine  and  consti-
tution in  which  the  Church  has  embodied  the  facts  of
the  Gospel.  How  far  this  is  so  is  the  subject  with
which  we  have  now  to  deal.  And  with  this  problem
before  us,  it  would  be  superfluous  to  criticise  the  errors
and  misrepresentations — to  use  no  harsher  terms —
with  which  Comte's  religious  writings  are  disfigured.
He  puts  them  forward  so  boldly  and  so  frequently,
that  no  one  moderately  conversant  with  Christianity
can  be  misled  by  them1.  It  is  equally  unnecessary  to
exhibit  his  weaknesses.  Others,  who  have  dwelt  on
these  with  more  than  necessary  detail,  have  paid  the
penalty  of  becoming  blind  to  what  there  is  really

1  Something  has  been  said  in  a  former  paper  on  Comte's
fundamental  misconception  of  the  idea  of  Christianity,  Gon-
temporary  Review,  vi.  pp.  417  ff.


252  Aspects  of  Positivism  in

APPENDIX  noble  and  just  in  his  teaching.  And  it  is  with  this
I-  that  we  are  concerned.  A  system  is  formidable,  not
by  what  there  is  false  in  it,  but  by  what  there  is  true
in  it.  If  then  it  can  be  shewn  that  Christianity  assures
what  Positivism  promises — if  it  can  be  shewn  that  it
includes  in  a  fact  what  Positivism  symbolises  in  a
conception — if  it  can  be  shewn  that  it  carries  on  to
the  unseen  and  eternal  the  ideas  which  Positivism
limits  to  the  seen  and  temporal— we  may  be  sure  that
Positivism  will  have  no  lasting  religious  power,  except
as  a  transitional  preparation  for  a  fuller  faith.  Comte
will  be  one  more  in  the  long  line  of  witnesses  who
shew  that  the  soul  is  naturally  Christian1.

II.

To  some  however  it  must  seem  strange  to  speak  of
any  system  as  a  religion  which  does  not  recognise  the
action  of  a  Personal  God.  For  us  indeed  the  idea  of
religion  is  so  naturally  connected  with  that  of  theology,

1  In  this  unconscious  prophecy  of  faith,  Comte  offers  a  sin-
gular parallel  to  the  great  poet  of  the  Roman  Republic.  Both
were  bitterly  hostile  to  the  established  faith  of  their  countries.
Both  sought  to  lay  in  the  study  of  nature  the  firm  basis  of
human  life  and  hope.  Both  were  profoundly  impressed  with
the  sense  of  the  unity  of  the  world.  But,  in  spite  of  the  simi-
larity of  the  moral  position  of  the  two  teachers,  we  feel  that
they  are  separated  by  more  than  eighteen  Christian  centuries.
Lucretius  sought  in  the  explanation  of  the  origin  of  things  that
confidence  which  Comte  looks  for  in  the  observation  of  their
being.  The  one  feels  his  way  towards  the  intellectual  concep-
tion of  a  harmony  of  nature ;  the  other,  towards  the  moral
law  of  the  discipline  of  life.  Both,  as  it  seems,  were  heralds
of  a  crisis  of  thought.  To  both  the  Resurrection  is  the  com-
plete fulfilment  of  aspiration  and  teaching.


Relation  to  Christianity.  253

that  it  requires  a  serious  effort  to  separate  the  two.  APPENDIX
A  perfect  religion  must  indeed  take  account  of  three  I-
elements — the  individual,  the  world,  and  GOD  ;  but
an  imperfect  religion  can  exist,  if  the  individual
recognises  without  him  an  infinite  power,  contem-
plated as  personal,  and  such  as  to  claim  the  complete
devotion  of  the  worshipper.  The  Great  Being  of
Comte — the  sum  of  all  humanity,  past  present  and
future — practically  satisfies  the  condition  of  infinity  ;
and  it  satisfies  the  condition  of  personality  by  the
concession  which  is  made  to  each  worshipper  to  re-
present it  to  himself  under  some  definite  historical
or  imaginary  type.  In  fact,  we  may  be  driven  to  ask
ourselves  whether  the  Being  which  some  Christians
worship  is  less  truly  an  abstraction  than  the  idealised
humanity  of  the  Positivists.

But  while  we  must  never  leave  out  of  sight,  in
dealing  with  the  Religion  of  Positivism,  the  funda-
mental defect  which  mars  its  completeness,  it  is
necessary  to  remember  that  this  is  not  the  only  form
in  which  a  religion  can  be  founded  upon  a  dualism,
though  it  is  that  most  repugnant  to  our  instincts.
Dr  Newman,  in  a  striking  passage  of  his  '  Apologia1,'
has  sketched  the  permanent  influence  of  evangelical
teaching  upon  him,  which  consisted  in  '  confirming
'  me,'  he  says,  '  in  my  mistrust  of  the  reality  of
'  material  phenomena  and  making  me  rest  in  the
'  thought  of  two,  and  two  only,  supreme  and  luminously
'  self-evident  beings — myself  and  my  Creator.'  Thus,

1  P.  59.  It  is  however  difficult  to  judge  whether  Dr  Newman
himself  holds  this  to  be  the  final  analysis  of  the  elements  of
religion.


254  Aspects  of  Positivism  in

APPENDIX  as  Comte  leaves  out  the  Deity  from  his  elementary
L  conceptions,  another  school  leaves  out  the  world.  A
little  reflection  will  shew  that  a  system  based  upon
either  dualism  is  irreparably  though  not  equally  im-
perfect. The  one  passes  into  Secularism,  the  other
into  Mysticism ;  while  the  fulness  of  Truth  springs
from  the  co-ordination  of  both.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  quotation  from
Dr  Newman  expresses  the  popular  view  of  the  con-
stituent elements  of  religion,  though  this  personal
antithesis  is  more  truly  characteristic  of  Protestantism
than  of  Roman  Catholicism.  It  is  therefore  easy  to
see  in  which  direction  the  study  of  the  Positive
religion  is  likely  to  be  fruitful  to  us.  By  dwelling
on  the  relations  of  man  to  humanity  and  to  the
world,  Comte  has  again  vindicated  for  religion  its
social  destination.  Since  the  Reformation,  the  general
tendency  of  religious  influences  has  been  to  indivi-
dualism ;  and  thus  a  bold  and  exclusive  enunciation
of  the  complementary  aspect  cannot  but  contribute  to
the  restoration  of  the  true  harmony  between  personal
and  social  religion  which  Christianity,  as  we  believe,
alone  contains.

III.

Having  thus  indicated  the  one  vast  lacuna  in
Comte's  theory  of  religion,  and  the  manner  in  which
his  system  is  likely  to  supplement  other  popular
theories,  we  may  proceed  to  trace  the  outlines  of  it
as  he  has  drawn  them.  '  Religion  is,'  he  says,  '  the
'  complete  harmony  proper  to  human  existence,  indi-


Relation  to  Christianity.  255

'  vidual  and  collective,  when  all  its  parts  are  brought  APPENDIX
'into  due  relation   to  one  another1.'     It  is  for  the         L
soul,  in  other  words,  what  health  is  for  the  body2;
and  as  health  is  essentially  one,  though  in  all  cases
variously  and  imperfectly  realised,  so  too  religion  is
essentially  one,  though  it  is  attained  in  various  forms
and  in  different  degrees.     Even  to  the  last,  it  is  an
ideal  to  which  each  specific  type  is  an  approximation3.

The  object  of  religion,  corresponding  to  this
definition,  is  set  forth  as  twofold.  It  is  destined  at
once  to  discipline  (regler)  the  individual,  and  to  unite
(rallier)  the  separate  individuals  in  a  harmonious
whole.  It  aims  at  personal  unity  and  social  unity4.
And  the  same  influences  which  tend  to  correct  the
selfish  instincts  of  each  man,  tend  at  the  same  time
to  bring  all  men  into  a  true  and  lasting  concord5.

And  as  the  aim  of  religion  is  twofold,  so  also  is
its  base.  It  reposes  on  an  objective  and  on  a  sub-
jective foundation6.  Without,  there  is  the  external
order,  in  itself  independent  of  us,  which  necessarily
limits  our  thoughts  and  actions  and  feelings.  Within,
there  is  a  principle  of  benevolent  sympathy,  which

1  Politique   Positive,    n.   8.     Compare   Catechisme,   p.    2.
'  [Religion]  indique  1'etat  de  complete  unite  qui  distingue  notre
4  existence,  a  la  fois  personnelle  et  sociale,  quand  toutes  ses
'  parties,  tant  morales  que  physiques,  convergent   habituelle-
'  ment  vers  tine  destination  commune.'

Thus  Comte  adopts  the  derivation  from  religare,  and  not
from  relegere,  which  Augustine  also  defends  :  De  Vera  Religione,
55 ;  Retract.  13  (the  whole  of  this  revision  is  full  of  interest).

2  Pol.  Pos.  I.  c.  3  Pol.  Pos.  I.  c.     Cat.  3.

4  Pol.  Pos.  ii.  66.     Cat.  I.  c.

5  Pol.  Pos.  ii.  10.         6  Pol.  Pos.  ii.  12,  17,  25.     Cat.  28.


256  Aspects  of  Positivism  in

APPENDIX  prompts  us  to  look  beyond  our  own  wants  and  wishes,
*•         and  to  seek  in  a  wider  harmony  the  satisfaction  of
the  deepest  instincts  of  our  nature.

The  same  dualism  is  extended  also  to  the  com-
position of  religion.  It  has  an  intellectual  part  and
a  moral  part.  The  former  includes  the  adequate  con-
ception of  the  general  laws  of  physics,  of  life,  of  so-
ciety, to  which  our  feelings  and  our  actions  are  subor-
dinated. The  latter,  under  the  shape  of  discipline,
regulates  our  conduct  at  once  public  and  private,  and,
under  the  shape  of  worship,  guides  and  intensifies  our
feelings.  Briefly,  the  sphere  of  doctrine  is  thought,
and  its  end  is  the  True ;  the  sphere  of  discipline  is
action,  and  its  end  is  the  Good  ;  the  sphere  of  worship
is  feeling,  and  its  end  is  the  Beautiful.  And,  as  a
whole,  religion  teaches  us  to  know,  to  serve,  and  to
love  the  great  Being,  in  whom  all  that  falls  within
the  range  of  our  power  is  summed  up '.

IV.

In  this  view  of  the  character  and  scope  of  religion,
which  no  one  can  deny  to  be  grand  and  comprehen-
sive, even  while  it  lacks  the  Christian  elements  of
infinity  and  personality  which  we  necessarily  crave,
one  point  is  of  commanding  importance.  Religion,
Cornte  tells  us,  is  the  bringing  into  harmony  the
order  without  us  and  the  spirit  within  us ;  the  last
and  perfect  combination  of  faith  and  love2.  This
conception  is  the  true  key  to  his  whole  system.  Our
chief  work,  therefore,  is  to  learn  the  character  of  the

1  Pol.  Pos.  ii.  19  ff.  2  Pol.  Pos.  ii.  16.


Relation  to  Christianity.  257

bases    on    which   these   final   principles   respectively  APPENDIX
repose.

On  the  one  side  then  we  have  a  vast  external
order,  of  which  a  fuller  knowledge  is  gradually  un-
folded in  the  long  course  of  ages,  whereby  we  appre-
hend it  as  within  certain  limits  at  once  fixed  and
variable.  Step  by  step  we  are  forced  to  contemplate
the  phenomena  which  it  presents  as  falling  into
groups,  and  connected  with  one  another  by  certain
relations  of  sequence.  The  laws  of  observation  which
we  thus  form  are  extended  gradually  from  physics
to  life,  and  from  life  to  history,  till  we  feel  that  not
only  are  the  ages  permeated  by  '  an  increasing  pur-
'  pose,'  but  that  all  being  also  is  united  by  one  prin-
ciple. The  efforts  of  Reason — and  the  juxtaposition
is  important — naturally  culminate  in  the  nobler  efforts
of  Faith1.

This  order  is  apprehended,  as  has  been  said,  as
being  both  fixed  and  variable;  and  in  both  respects  it
affects  us  beneficently.  The  fixity  furnishes  a  solid
basis  for  our  thoughts  and  actions,  and,  by  making
foresight  generally  possible,  saves  us  from  idle  specu-
lation and  from  misdirected  energy.  At  the  same
time  it  sets  an  impassable  limit  to  personal  caprice,
and,  by  basing  all  life  upon  submission,  prepares
men  for  sympathetic  effort  as  united  in  obedience  to  a

1  Pol.  Pos.  n.  25  ff.  p.  17.  '  L'6tat  religieux  repose  done
'  sur  la  combinaison  permanente  de  deux  conditions  egalement
'  fundamentals,  aimer  et  croire,  qui,  quoique  profondement
'  distinctes,  doivent  naturellement  concourir.  Chacune  d'elles,
'  outre  sa  necessity  propre,  ajoute  a  1'autre  un  complement
'  indispensable  a  sa  pleine  efficacite.'

W.  R.  17


258  Aspects  of  Positivism  in

APPENDIX  common  supremacy'.  Its  variability,  on  the  other
L  hand,  is  the  pledge  of  progress.  It  stimulates  specu-
lation by  suggesting  a  series  of  problems  of  surpassing
interest.  It  guides  activity  by  opening  fields  for
labour,  and  substituting  fruitful  obedience  for  passive
resignation.  It  represses  at  once  asceticism  and
mysticism  by  offering  its  greatest  blessings  not  to
personal,  but  to  social  labour2.

Such  according  to  Comte  is  the  objective  base  of
religion.  On  the  other  side,  it  is  observed  that  there
is  an  internal  tendency  in  man,  springing  from  be-
nevolent affections,  which  carries  him  beyond  himself
in  the  search  after  his  proper  happiness  and  dignity3.
Just  as  the  laws  of  the  external  world  are  only
slowly  arid  partially  made  known,  so  this  inner  life  is
brought  out  by  the  gradual  evolution  of  society.  The
love  of  the  Family  passes  into  the  love  of  the  State ;
and  the  love  of  the  State  rises  into  the  all-embracing
love  of  Humanity.

This  tendency  also,  like  the  external  order,  is  at
once  fixed  and  variable.  In  some  shape  or  other,  it
will  make  itself  felt  in  every  man.  It  may  be  dwarfed
and  neutralised  by  atrophy,  or  strengthened  and
ennobled  by  exercise.  But  in  its  normal  development
Love  spontaneously  apprehends  by  moral  intuition
what  Faith  systematically  constructs  by  intellectual
processes ;  and  at  the  last  both  coincide  in  their  com-
plete fulfilment.  Faith  sees  the  harmony  of  all  things,
which  Love  feels.


1  Pol.  Pos.  n.  28  ff.  2  Pol.  Pos.  ii.  37  ff.     Cat.  16,  41.

3  Pol.  Pos.  n.  14.


Relation  to   Christianity.  259

Nor  may  we  forget  that  while  the  ultimate  ob-  APPENDIX
jective  and  subjective  bases  of  religion  are  thus
broadly  distinguished,  there  is  yet  always  a  human
element  in  our  conception  of  the  Cosmos,  and  a
cosmical  element  in  our  feelings  as  men.  The  unity
of  the  world  is  subjective1.  The  laws  of  phenomena
are  gained  by  the  abstraction  of  the  constant  part
from  the  variable.  And  conversely,  the  development
of  love  is  objective.  It  gains  strength  only  as  it  is
manifested  according  to  the  conditions  of  our  exist-
ence. Man  indeed  is  himself,  according  to  the  wise
instinct  of  old  philosophers,  a  microcosm,  including
in  his  own  person  the  action  of  all  the  laws  which
we  observe  without  us,  and  supplementing  them  by
that  higher  law  of  love  whereby  he  alone  is  capable  of
religion2.

According  to  this  exposition,  it  is  evident  that
religion  is  built  upon  knowledge,  and  the  Positivist
system  of  doctrine  is  simply  the  outline  of  the
hierarchy  of  the  sciences,  which  are  severally  subordi-
nated one  to  another,  and  each  regulated  by  its
peculiar  laws.  In  due  succession  the  believer  or  the
student — for  the  words  become  synonymous — learns
to  appreciate  the  universal  laws  of  number,  time,  and
space,  by  which  all  our  definite  conceptions  are  ruled  ;
next  he  passes  to  those  of  physics,  which  are  more
complicated  and  less  general ;  then  to  those  of  che-
mistry, which  brings  him  to  the  verge  of  life.  The
investigation  of  the  laws  of  life  leads  to  that  of  the

1  Pol.  Pos.  n.  32  f.     Cat.  36,  77.
2  Cat.  95,  122.

17—2


260  Aspects  of  Positivism  in

APPENDIX  laws  of  society ;  and  the  last  and  crowning  science
L         in  this  scheme  is  that  of  morals1.

Such  an  encyclopaedic  review  of  the  great  depart-
ments of  knowledge  reveals  two  important  principles.
Each  science  is  based  upon  those  which  precede  it  in
the  scale,  so  that  in  every  case  the  nobler  phenomena
are  subordinated  to  the  lower.  And,  secondly,  each
science,  as  it  increases  in  complexity,  admits  also  of
greater  variations2.  To  these  principles  two  corollaries
may  be  added.  First,  that  each  series  of  laws  pro-
duces its  full  effect  in  every  instance,  though  the
result  may  be  modified  by  the  action  of  new  forces
acting  according  to  new  laws.  And,  again,  that  the
power  of  foresight,  which  measures  the  definiteness  of
the  law,  varies  from  absolute  certainty  in  the  case  of
combinations  of  number,  and  the  like,  to  indefinite
doubt  when  we  speculate  on  the  isolated  action  of
individuals.

V.

One  important  conclusion  follows  from  this  mode
of  viewing  the  relations  of  religion  and  science,  which
has  been  commonly  lost  sight  of  by  physicists  no  less
than  by  theologians.  If  it  be  true,  and  it  seems  to
be  incontestable  as  far  as  it  goes,  a  conflict  between
religion  and  science  is  impossible.  Not  only  are  the
two  subjects  heterogeneous,  but  the  results  of  science —

1  The  connexion  of  the  sciences  is  clearly  given,  Pol.  Pos.
n.  58  ff.     The  most  complete  examination  of  their  distribution
and  relations  is  in  Pol.  Pos.  iv.  187  ff.

2  Cat.  50,  70,  73.     Thus  many  phenomena  will  never  be
brought  under  definite  laws. — Cat.  52.


Relation  to  Christianity.  261

whether  physical  or  human — are  part  of   the  data  APPENDIX
which  it  is  the  function  of  religion  to  co-ordinate.  L

Moreover,  if  we  complete  the  great  hierarchy  of
the  sciences  by  the  addition  of  theology  above  morals,
it  is  obvious  that  the  same  principles  will  hold  good.
The  new  science,  so  far  as  it  deals  with  facts,  will
never  be  independent  of  the  action  of  the  forces
revealed  by  the  lower  sciences ;  but  it  is  not  itself
shaped  by  them.  In  dealing  with  it,  we  shall  have
to  take  account  of  new  forces  manifested  under  new
laws,  which  may  modify  in  a  manner  wholly  in-
conceivable before  experience  the  laws  and  forces  of
the  lower  sciences ;  but  theology  is  no  more  there-
fore inconsistent  with  them  than  the  science  of
chemistry,  for  instance,  is  with  the  science  of  life.
It  is  impossible  to  anticipate  from,  the  observation
of  an  inferior  science  what  will  be  the  phenomena
of  another  above  it ;  and,  conversely,  the  phenomena
of  every  superior  science  will  be  subject  to  the  laws
of  those  below  it,  though  they  are  not  explicable  by
those  alone.  A  problem  in  biology  cannot  be  solved
by  the  application  of  chemical  laws,  though  these
must  be  considered  in  dealing  with  it ;  and  so  also
a  question  in  morals  cannot  be  dealt  with  solely  by
laws  of  life,  or  a  question  of  theology  by  laws  of
ethics;  though,  in  both  cases,  the  subordinate  laws
underlie  the  final  result.

Thus  the  Positive  view  of  the  dependence  of
religion  on  science  errs  by  defect,  and  not  in  prin-
ciple. It  requires  to  be  supplemented,  and  not  over-
thrown. And  when  the  whole  cycle  of  human  thought
and  experience,  of  consciousness  as  well  as  of  obser-


262  Aspects  of  Positivism  in

APPENDIX  vation,  is  brought  within  the  range  of  scientific  study,
*•  we  are  first  capable  of  perceiving  the  full  grandeur  of
the  idea  of  religion.  Its  destiny  is  not  only  to  dis-
cipline (regler)  and  to  unite  (rattier),  but  still  more  to
reunite  (relier).  It  is  the  final  harmony  of  man,  the
microcosm,  not  with  the  world  alone,  but  with  GOD.

It  is  of  no  moment  in  this  respect  what  view  we
may  take  of  nature  (natura,  werden).  Every  fact  in
science  furnishes  new  material  for  religion,  and  at  once
enlarges  its  scope  and  tends  to  define  its  character.
But,  that  it  may  do  so,  no  fact  must  be  looked  at  by
itself.  At  present,  science  suffers  at  least  as  much
as  religion  from  partial  and  contracted  views.  The
student  of  physics  perpetrates  as  many  solecisms  as
the  student  of  theology.  Every  one  would  feel  the
absurdity  of  a  geometrician  denying  a  fact  in  morals
because  it  is  not  deducible  from  his  premisses ;  and
yet  it  is  not  a  rare  thing  to  hear  some  explorer  of
inorganic  nature  gravely  argue  that  nothing  can  be
known  of  GOD,  because  his  inquiries  give  no  direct
results  as  to  His  being  or  His  attributes.  Thus  eacli
partial  observer  of  ethics,  or  history,  or  nature,  is
tempted  to  forget  that  there  are  other  phenomena
than  those  with  which  he  deals,  and  so  to  use  his
fragmentary  laws  as  measures  of  the  universe.  The
degradation  of  science  is  the  inevitable  consequence.
But  when  all  observed  facts  are  placed  in  their  proper
categories,  whether  they  be  facts  in  physics,  or  biology,
or  social  science,  or  ethics,  or  theology,  they  will,  as
we  believe,  teach  us  something  more  of  the  will  of
GOD,  which  is  made  manifest  to  us,  according  to  the
nature  of  the  subject-matter,  in  the  several  orders  of


Relation  to  Christianity.  263

being  with  which  each  of  these  departments  of  know-  APPENDIX
ledge  is  respectively  conversant.  *•

We  claim  then,  by  our  Christian  faith,  that  the
sphere  of  religion  be  recognised  as  co-extensive  with
the  utmost  bounds  of  human  thought  and  knowledge,
while  at  the  same  time  it  is  dominated  by  a  moral
purpose  which  springs  from  sympathy  or  love.  The
personal  object  of  religion — the  reconciliation  of  man
to  GOD — is  not  likely  ever  to  be  absent  from  our
minds ;  but  there  is  at  all  times  a  tendency  to  omit,
at  least  in  popular  exposition,  this  complementary
view  of  the  harmonization  of  man  with  humanity  and
nature.  Scepticism  at  once  occupies  the  ground  which
is  abandoned.  And  in  this  lies  one  of  the  great  les-
sons of  Positivism,  that  by  asserting  religion  to  be  the
complete  harmony  of  man  and  the  Cosmos,  it  has
forced  again  upon  our  notice  aspects  of  Christian
truth  which  have  been  more  or  less  hidden  since  the
teaching  of  the  greatest  Greek  fathers  was  superseded
in  the  West  by  the  necessarily  narrower  system  of
Latin  theology.  Some  conception  of  the  great  order
at  present  we  must  have1 ;  and  if  our  religion  is,  as
we  believe,  the  highest  expression  which  can  be  given
to  faith  and  love,  it  will  embrace  this  also.  We  shall
rise  beyond  the  individual  standing-point  to  some  one
higher  and  more  commanding ;  and  while  we  retain
firmly  our  original  sense  of  the  inestimable  worth  of
the  individual  soul,  we  shall  feel  also  that  each  is
part  of  a  sublimer  whole,  extending  through  all  time
and  space,  and  bound  by  sensible  and  indissoluble
links  to  the  sum  of  all  being.
1  Cat.  26.


264  Aspects  of  Positivism  in

APPENDIX  VI.

i.

It  is  not  difficult  to  characterise  the  ideas  which

are  brought  into  prominence  by  this  extension  of  the
religious  field  of  life.  The  Positivist  suggests  the
ideas  of  continuity,  solidarity,  and  totality ;  the  Chris-
tian, going  yet  further,  adds  the  idea  of  infinity ;  and
without  the  distinct  recognition  of  these  four  ideas,  it
seems  to  be  impossible  to  represent  adequately  the
message  of  Christianity,  as  a  historical  and  sacra-
mental religion,  to  our  own  age.

A  very  little  reflection  will  shew  the  profound  in-
fluence which  continuity  exercises  upon  life.  When
it  is  once  apprehended,  no  religion  which  claims  to  be
universal  can  neglect  it.  Materially,  intellectually,
and  morally,  we  are  the  children  of  the  past,  destined
in  turn  to  give  birth  to  a  new  race  which  will  inherit
all  that  we  possess.  Whatever  view  we  may  take  of
the  originative  power  of  the  individual,  and  we  claim
necessarily  that  the  personal  will  shall  be  admitted  to
be  an  independent  force,  it  is  evident  that  the  accu-
mulations of  wealth  of  every  form  which  furnish  the
instruments  of  our  action,  the  treasures  of  language
which  control  the  general  tenour  of  our  thoughts,  the
forms  and  habits  of  social  and  national  intercourse
which  stimulate  and  guide  our  feelings,  are  incom-
parably stronger  than  any  individual  power  which  can
be  brought  to  bear  upon  them.  If  it  were  not  so,  in
place  of  society  we  should  have  chaos.  And  all  these
are  in  their  source  and  growth  independent  of  us.
We  can  watch  how,  in  old  times,  the  various  results
of  labour  and  reflection  and  conflict  were  gathered  up


Relation  to  Christianity.  265

and  perpetuated  in  abiding  shapes ;  but  we  have  no  APPENDIX
choice  but  to  receive  them.  It  is  our  privilege  to
modify,  but  not  to  begin.  More  and  more  as  the
ages  go  on,  in  Comte's  striking  phrase,  we  who  live
are  ruled  by  the  dead,  though  it  is  our  prerogative  to
serve  them  with  a  free  and  willing  service,  and  in  our
turn,  when  our  work  is  done,  to  be  joined  with  them
in  the  sovereignty  of  the  future1.

Two  important  conclusions  flow  from  this  law  of
our  earthly  existence.  The  first  is,  to  borrow  again
Comte's  own  phrase,  that  progress  is  the  development
of  order 2 ;  and  the  second,  that  the  thoughts  or  insti-
tutions of  the  past  can  be  applied  to  the  present  only
by  a  method  of  proportion.

As  to  the  first,  it  is  of  no  moment  whether,  like
the  Positivist,  we  regard  the  phenomena  of  society
simply  in  themselves,  without  referring  them  to  any
higher  cause,  or  whether  we  see  in  them  (as  we  do)
the  manifestation  of  the  will  of  GOD.  No  one  looking
back  over  the  past  can  fail  to  detect  a  general  advance
of  humanity,  as  a  whole,  in  certain  definite  directions
corresponding  to  what  we  observe  in  the  fuller  de-
velopment of  the  man.  The  progress,  on  a  large  scale,
exhibits  the  harmonious  elevation  of  our  whole  complex
being,  even  though  periods  of  devastation  and  fiery  trial
are  needed  for  the  preparation  of  the  future  growth.

The  second  consequence,  though  it  is  really  more
obvious,  is  more  commonly  overlooked.  Any  expres-
sion of  popular  judgment,  whether  it  be  made  by

1  Pol.  Pos.  ii.  61.  Cat.  32.  The  question  of  hereditary
character  deserves  more  attention  from*  moralists  than  it  has
received.  Cf.  Cat.  102.  2  Cat.  108.


266  Aspects  of  Positivism  in

APPENDIX  word  or  by  act,  is  necessarily  relative  to  the  time  and
L  circumstances  under  which  it  is  made.  As  circum-
stances change,  it  does  not  by  any  means  follow  that
the  changes  in  the  acceptation  of  words  or  in  the  sig-
nificance of  acts  will  be  made  in  the  same  direction,
so  that  the  relation  between  them  will  remain  fixed.
And  therefore,  if  we  would  gain  for  ourselves  the
blessings  which  we  can  refer  in  past  ages  to  certain
institutions  or  formulas,  it  can  only  be  by  realising
the  relation  in  which  they  stood  to  the  whole  consti-
tution of  society  then,  and  finding  their  proportional
representatives  now.  To  transfer  a  form  of  one  age
unaltered  into  another  is  in  most  cases  to  be  faithless
to  that  very  principle  of  continuity  by  which  we  claim
to  be  children  of  the  first  century,  or  the  fourth,  or  the
ninth,  or  the  thirteenth.  We  are  the  children  of  the
men  who  lived  then  ;  we  cannot  be  the  men  themselves.
The  doctrine  of  solidarity  is  not  less  fruitful  of
thought  than  that  of  continuity.  It  presents  to  us  (if
such  an  illustration  is  allowable)  in  a  horizontal  sec-
tion a  similar  succession  of  varieties  of  society  to  that
which  we  have  considered  before  in  a  vertical  section.
Or,  to  take  another  mode  of  expression,  it  presents  in
the  extension  of  space  what  continuity  regards  in  the
extension  of  time.  In  a  family,  or  a  city,  or  a  nation,
we  can  readily  apprehend  how  the  co-existing  mem-
bers are  bound  together  so  as  to  form  a  whole,  of
which  each  part  is  really,  though  remotely,  united  to
the  others  by  material  and  moral  actions  and  reactions.
Our  observation  of  the  subtle  influences  by  which  con-
tinuity is  preserved  helps  us  to  extend  this  idea  yet
further.  Nation  is  thus  seen  to  be  moved  by  nation,


Relation  to  Christianity.  267

stock  by  stock,  till  the  whole  race,  which  is  connected  APPENDIX
spiritually  by  a  community  of  nature,  is  felt  also  to  be
connected  actually  by  mutual,  though  often  indirect,
operations  of  each  fragment  upon  the  rest.

Whenever  we  seize,  however  tremblingly,  as  at
best  it  must  be,  this  vast  conception  of  the  Great
Being  in  which  all  mankind  is  for  the  time  united,
it  is  evident  that  our  views  of  the  destiny,  of  the
relations,  and  of  the  action  of  men  will  be  greatly
influenced.  The  thought  which  inspires  hope,  and
assures  patience,  at  the  same  time  ennobles  labour,
and  stimulates  action.  Hope  and  patience  spring
necessarily  out  of  the  application  of  the  lessons  of  the
past  to  the  present.  We  can  see  how  rivalries  and
conflicts,  the  rise  and  fall  of  principles  and  states,
the  very  exhaustion  of  powers  once  beneficent  and
life  giving,  have  contributed  to  the  whole  progress  of
human  life.  We  can  believe  then  that  phenomena  of
the  same  kind,  when  co-existent,  are  no  less  instru-
mental of  good.  And  it  is  no  objection  to  this  faith
that  it  is  not  in  our  experience  converted  into  sight.
Life  would  be  indefinitely  impoverished  if  the  fruits  of
effort  or  suffering  were  not  reserved  in,  the  richest
measure  for  the  future.

The  present  effect  of  the  idea  of  solidarity  upon
labour  and  action  is  perhaps  less  frequently  realised
than  the  remoter  effect  which  has  been  just  noticed,
but  it  is  at  least  capable  of  being  far  more  energetic.
Briefly,  it  may  be  summed  up  in  two  principles.  It
consecrates  the  permanent  variety  of  functions  in  life1,
and  substitutes  duties  for  rights2.

1  Cat.  109,  113.

2  Cat.  289.    The  conception  of  salary  as  simply  designed


268  Aspects  of  Positivism  in

APPENDIX  As  long  as  we  regard  individuals  as  so  many
separate  units,  it  is  clear  that  we  must  regard  com-
plete equality  as  the  ultimate  ideal  of  their  state.
The  object  of  reform  must  be  to  assimilate  man  to
man.  But  this  chimerical  fancy  loses  all  rational
basis  when  the  individual  is  seen  to  be  the  member
of  a  body  which  itself  is  part  of  a  greater  whole,  of
which  the  final  dimensions  surpass  all  human  imagi-
nation. Then  it  follows  at  once  that  complexity  of
office  is  the  condition  of  health.  The  completeness  of
health  depends  on  the  completeness  of  the  organism.
Society,  in  every  true  sense,  would  cease  to  exist
without  an  abiding  distinction  of  classes.  Humanity
would  be  poorer  if  it  were  deprived  of  any  national
or  specific  types.  There  is  no  confusion  in  the  multi-
plicity of  service.  There  is  no  levelling,  no  disparage-
ment, in  the  just  subordination  of  distinct  works.
The  essential  variety,  the  actual  combination,  both
belong  to  the  characteristics  of  life.

And  if  we  apply  the  principle  to  the  separate
work  of  each,  it  becomes,  as  it  were,  a  revelation  of
the  moral  dignity  of  labour.  No  one  in  any  society
works  for  himself.  Each  worker  is  a  servant  of  the
body.  He  does  really  co-operate  with  all  for  the
good  of  all.  It  is  only  required  that  he  should  feel
the  destination  and  the  source  of  what  he  does  and

'  a  remplacer  chez  chaque  organe  social  les  materiaux  qu'il
'  consomme  toujours,  comme  provisions  pour  'sa  subsistance
'  ou  instruments  pour  sa  function '  (Cat.  116),  is  worthy  of
attention,  as  well  as  the  principle  on  which  it  is  based,  that
'  chaque  service  personnel  ne  comporte  jamais  d'autre  recom-
'  pense  que  la  satisfaction  do  1'accomplir  et  la  reconnaissance
'  qu'il  procure '  (Cat.  117).


Relation  to  Christianity.  269

of   what   he   receives.     Then   at   last   he  would,   as  APPENDIX
Comte  admirably  expresses  the  truth,  know  that  '  to
'  live  for  others '  is  but  another  aspect  of  '  living  by
'others1.'

At  the  same  time  the  transference  of  our  point  of
sight  from  the  individual  to  the  body  brings  out  into
clear  light  the  second  principle.  If  the  individual  be
the  centre,  then  he  may  have  rights ;  but  if  the  body
be  the  centre,  he  can  have  only  duties.  It  is  possible
that  these  complementary  aspects  may  be  reconciled,
but  there  can  be  no  doubt  which  we  most  frequently
forget.  And  if  we  once  add  the  Christian  idea  of
what  the  body  potentially  is,  all  notion  of  personal
claims  vanishes  in  comparison  with  the  infinite  debt
whereby  we  are  bound,  each  in  our  measure,  to  fill
up  that  which  is  lacking  to  the  completeness  of  the
whole.

The  doctrine  of  what  I  have  ventured  to  call  the
totality  of  life  carries  yet  one  step  further  the  doc-
trines of  its  continuity  and  solidarity.  It  is  not  only
that  the  successive  generations  of  men  are  linked
together  by  laws  which  they  can  only  modify,  and
not  abrogate,  nor  yet  that  each  generation  is  inter-
penetrated and  united  by  a  common  life ;  but  the  life
of  humanity  is  itself  ruled,  in  a  great  measure,  by  the
medium  in  which  it  is  passed.  The  influence  of  phy-
sical powers  upon  man  may  have  been  exaggerated,
but  we  cannot  deny  that  it  is  real.  Comte  himself

1  '  Vivre  pour  autrui  devient  chez  chacun  de  nous  le  devoir
'  continu  qui  r6sulte  rigoureusement  de  ce  fait  irrecusable —
'  vivre  par  autrui '  (Cat.  266).  To  a  Christian  the  words  have
a  tenfold  force.


270  Aspects  of  Positivism  in

APPENDIX  does  not  overstate  it.  'The  world,'  he  writes,  'fur-
L  '  nishes  the  materials,  and  man  determines  the  form.'
'  Man  is  not  a  result  of  the  world,  and  yet  he  depends
'upon  it1.'  The  observed  variations  in  the  constancy
of  the  relations  of  nature  and  man  are  not  sufficient
to  disturb  our  confidence  in  the  fixity  of  what  we
call  natural  laws.  And,  conversely,  while  the  laws
remain  fixed,  man  is  so  far  capable  of  modifying  the
elements  through  which  their  action  is  displayed,  as
to  seriously  alter  their  total  effect.  If  again  we  regard
only  living  forms,  here  the  power  of  man  is  supreme.
Some  die  away  at  his  approach ;  others  follow  him ;
others  are  capable  of  receiving  what  we  are  forced  to
call  the  moral  impress  of  his  character.

To  pursue  in  any  detail  the  consequences  which
flow  from  this  connexion  of  man  with  the  physical
world  would  be  impossible  here.  It  must  be  enough
to  notice  the  general  lessons  which  it  teaches  as  to
the  action  of  man  and  the  destiny  of  creation.  As
to  the  first,  it  shews  that  the  sovereignty  of  man  is
manifested,  not  in  the  direct  exertion,  but  in  the
guidance  of  force2.  The  effect  in  each  case  depends
not  so  much  on  power  as  on  wisdom.  In  other
words,  our  true  strength  lies  in  taking  each  discovered
law  as  the  rule  according  to  which  we  may  employ
our*  energies,  always  remembering  that  the  higher
phenomena  rest  upon  and  include  the  lower,  and  are
modifiable  in  direct  proportion  to  their  complexity.

On   the  other  hand,   as  man  is  at  present  con-
tinually modifying  all  nature,  both  spontaneously  and
of  purpose,  it  is  necessary  to  regard  the  connexion
1  Cat.  42,  37.  2  Cat.  105  ff.


Relation  to  Christianity.  271

thus  established  as  in  some  sense  permanent.     We  APPENDIX
cannot  wholly  sever  the  fate  of  the  lower  and  humbler         L
companions  of   man,  for  example,  from  the  fate  of
man  himself.     And  perhaps  there  is  nothing  more
characteristic  of  Comte  than  the  almpst  importunate
eagerness  with  which  he  claims  for  the  animals,  which
habitually    labour    with    man   to  secure   his   worthy
objects,  incorporation,  according  to  their  individual
dignity  and  services,  in  the  great  being  into  which
man  himself  passes'.

VII.

Now  these  grand  and  far-reaching  ideas  of  the
continuity,  the  solidarity,  the  totality  of  life,  which
answer  equally  to  the  laws  of  our  being  and  the
deepest  aspirations  of  our  souls,  are  not  only  recon-
cilable with  Christianity,  but  they  are  essentially
Christian.  The  Positivist  theory,  so  far  from  ad-
vancing anything  novel  in  such  teaching,  simply
places  us  once  again  in  the  original  Christian  point  of
view  of  the  Cosmos.  Once  again  the  divinity  of  the
Gospel  is  vindicated  by  its  power,  when  honestly
interpreted,  to  stand  abreast  or  in  advance  of  the
noblest  generalisations  of  experience.  And  this  is  in
virtue  of  its  essential  constitution,  intellectually  no
less  than  spiritually.  For,  because  it  is  contained
primarily  in  facts,  and  not  in  words,  it  rises  beyond
the  possible  associations  of  a  single  age  to  a  full
harmony  with  universal  life.  And  so,  as  our  view  of
life  becomes  fuller  and  richer,  our  view  of  the  Gospel,

1  Cat.  31.


272  Aspects  of  Positivism  in

APPENDIX  which  is  the  transfiguration  of  life,  becomes  fuller  and
*•  richer  in  the  same  degree.  Doctrine  which  is  based
upon  the  Incarnation  or  the  Resurrection  must  be
progressive,  organic,  and  total.  These  facts,  however
imperfectly  interpreted,  yet  mark  human  existence
by  an  advance  in  a  definite  direction,  by  relation  to
one  centre,  by  approximation  towards  a  perfect  ideal.
They  contain  a  principle  of  continuous  life,  a  principle
of  social  unity,  a  prospect  of  '  the  restoration  of  all
'  things.'  And  this,  too,  was  the  case  before  history
or  science  had  laid  open  the  general  laws  of  human
progress  or  the  necessary  connexion  of  man  with  the
world.

Nor,  while  the  facts  in  themselves  are  found  to
be  thus  pregnant,  does  the  apostolic  interpretation  of
the  facts  in  any  degi'ee  fall  short  of  the  meaning
which  has  been  assigned  to  them.  '  It  was  the  pur-
'pose  of  GOD,'  we  read,  'that,  in  the  dispensation  of
'  the  fulness  of  times,  He  might  sum  up  all  things  in
'  Christ,  the  things  in  the  heavens  and  the  things  upon
'the  earth'.'

Because  of  Christ's  Incarnation  and  Passion,  '  GOD
'  also  highly  exalted  Him,  and  gave  unto  Him  the  name
'which  is  above  every  name,  that  in  the  name  of
'Jesus  every  knee  should  bow,  of  things  in  heaven,
'and  things  on  earth,  and  things  under  the  earth2.'

From  Christ, — '  which  is  the  head,' — '  all  the  body
( fitly  framed  and  knit  together  through  that  which
'  every  joint  supplieth,  according  to  the  working  in  due
'  measure  of  each  several  part,  maketh  the  increase  of
'the  body  unto  the  building  up  of  itself  in  love3.'
1  Eph.  i.  10.  2  Phil.  ii.  9,  10.  3  Eph.  iv.  16.


Relation  to  Christianity.  273

'  The  earnest  expectation  of  the  creation  waiteth  APPENDIX
'for  the  revealing  of  the  sons  of  GOD... groaning  and
'  travailing  in  pain  together  until  now '.'

Such  language,  in  its  assured  confidence,  passes
our  hope;  and  as  we  ponder  on  it,  we  may  well
doubt  whether  even  to  St  Paul  himself  the  infinite
depths  of  wisdom  which  it  contains  were  open  as
they  are  to  us  now.  Here  also  it  seems  as  if  the
lapse  of  ages  and  the  slow  widening  of  thought  could
alone  adequately  reveal  the  significance  of  prophecy2.

But  Christianity  does  not  pause  where  Positivism
pauses,  in  the  visible  order.  It  carries  the  unity  of
being  yet  further,  and  links  all  that  is  seen  with  that
unseen  which  can  only  be  figured  to  us  in  parables.
An  imperious  instinct  asserts  that  our  individual
existence  is  not  closed  by  what  falls  here  under  our
senses ;  and  every  indication  of  the  intimate  relation-
ship of  man  with  man,  and  of  age  with  age,  confirms
the  belief  in  the  further  extension  of  this  law  of
dependence  to  an  order  of  being  beyond  the  present.
If  we  further  take  account  of  the  many  tokens  of  a
scheme  begun  and  not  completed  here,  which  requires
for  the  present  the  sacrifice  of  races,  it  may  be,  or
of  generations,  the  same  conviction  is  deepened.
Even  in  the  constitution  and  advance  of  society,  the
effects  of  selfishness  and  sin  are  so  open  and  great,
that  we  are  forced  to  look  onward  to  some  future
resolution  of  the  discords  by  which  they  interrupt  the
harmony  of  life.

From  the  nature  of  the  case,  it  is  impossible  that
we   should   have  any   distinct   apprehension    of   this
1  Horn.  viii.  19,  22.  a  Comp.  1  Pet.  i.  10—12.

W.  E.  18


274  Aspects  of  Positivism  in

APPENDIX  unseen  order.  Our  utmost  resources  of  language  only
J*  enable  us  to  combine  variously  the  phenomena  with
which  we  are  already  acquainted ;  and  this  to  which
we  are  looking  is  a  new  order,  and  not  the  transfer-
ence of  the  old  to  a  new  sphere.  But  though  our
notions  of  the  future  must  be  vague,  Christianity  so
treats  it  as  to  assure  us  of  our  personal  hope,  and  at
the  same  time  to  indicate  the  direction  in  which  we
may  look  for  the  solution  of  the  mysteries  of  society.
In  the  first  place,  it  accepts  unequivocally  the
indivisibility  of  man'.  The  body  is  not  a  burden  by
which  the  soul  is  temporarily  weighed  down,  but  an
essential  condition  of  our  personality,  to  be  won2  and
disciplined,  and  in  the  end  to  be  transfigured,  but  not
destroyed.  The  central  fact  in  which  these  truths
are  conveyed  is  absolutely  unique,  as  is  the  combina-
tion of  the  truths  themselves.  Between  the  Resur-
rection and  any  of  the  other  raisings  from  the  dead
there  is  no  more  resemblance  than  there  is  between
the  Incarnation  and  any  of  the  fabled  visits  of  the
Greek  gods  to  earth  in  human  shapes.  The  same
event  which  declares  the  essential  permanence  of  our
whole  being  shews  that  the  conditions  of  its  action  and
existence  will  be  changed.  In  what  way  this  change
will  be  accomplished  we  cannot  tell.  We  know  only
that  we  can  draw  no  conclusions  from  the  limitations
of  this  world  as  to  the  character  of  the  next,  and,  on
the  other  hand,  that  nothing  in  us  will  be  lost.

Corresponding  reflections  help  us  to  see  how  that
which  appears  to  be  lost  or  prematurely  carried  away
here  may  have  truly  fulfilled  its  work.     It  is  clear
1  Comp.  Cat.  24.        2  Comp.  1  Thess.  iv.  4  (KTaff0ai).


Relation  to  Christianity.  275

that  performance  is  not  a  final  test  of  character,  nor  APPENDIX
external  action  of  effect.     We  are  conscious  of  subtle         L
powers  about  us,  which   cannot  be  analysed  or  re-
sisted.    In  another  order,  as  we  can  believe,  we  may
be  allowed  to  see  how  these  had  their  origin  in  silent,
unnoticed,   or   forgotten    souls,   which   will    then    be
revealed  in  the  plenitude  of  their  true  energy.

The  mystery  of  evil,  we  allow,  still  remains ;  but
even  on  this  light  is  cast.  It  ceases,  at  least,  to  be
triumphant  or  active.

'  Then  cometh  the  end  when  [Christ]  shall  deliver
'  up  the  kingdom  to  GOD,  even  the  Father ;  when  He
'  shall  have  abolished  all  rule,  and  all  authority  and
'power.  For  He  must  reign  till  He  hath  put  all
'  His  enemies  under  His  feet.  The  last  enemy  that
'shall  be  abolished  is  death... Then  shall  the  Son  also
'  Himself  be  subjected  to  Him  that  did  subject  all
'things  unto  Him,  that  GOD  may  be  all  in  all1.'

This  sublime  prospect  lies  before  us,  in  which  all
the  varied  developments  of  life  are  crowned  with
their  divine  fulfilment.  And  though  the  contem-
plation of  it  may  lie  without  the  range  of  the  personal
teaching  of  Christianity  which  commonly  limits  our
religious  thought,  yet  it  is  a  duty  to  strive,  as  occasion
may  arise,  to  grasp  the  full  proportions  of  the  hope
which  it  brings  to  man  and  to  the  world.  It  is  not
always  enough  that  each  should  feel  in  his  own  heart
the  power  of  the  Gospel  to  meet  individual  wants.
We  must  claim  for  it  also  to  be  recognised  as  a
wisdom  revealed  and  realised  only  in  the  advance  of
time,  and  embracing  in  one  infinite  fact  all  that  men
1  1  Cor.  xv.  24  ff.

18—2


276  Aspects  of  Positivism,  &c.

APPENDIX  have  aspired  to  for  themselves  and  for  the  transitory
**         order  in  which  they  are  placed.

It  is  our  lot  to  live  in  an  age  when  this  need  is
imperative.  On  all  sides  there  is  a  restless  striving
after  some  solid  construction  of  truth  which  may  rise
out  of  and  above  the  results  of  negative  criticism.
Never  before  were  the  evils  of  dispersive  study  more
apparent  or  more  pressing.  Never  before  were  iso-
lated views  of  truth  more  capable  of  being  exhibited
in  their  one-sidedness.  Never  before  was  anarchy  of
thought  and  life  felt  to  be  more  at  variance  with  the
highest  destiny  of  man.  Never  before  was  there  a
more  passionate  longing  for  spiritual  unity  among
those  whom  the  conditions  of  life  have  separated.  Of
all  these  facts  the  teaching  of  Positivism  is  an  un-
looked-for and  unsuspected  witness.  At  the  same
time  it  seems  to  point  out  how  we  may  apply  the
apostolic  message  to  combine,  and  supplement,  and
guide,  and  animate  the  scattered  elements  out  of
which  the  future  may  be  worthily  built.  And  while
we  thankfully  receive  the  lessons  which  it  gives,  we
owe  to  it  also  a  new  confirmation  of  our  historic  creed.
For  if  anything  external  can  re-assure  faith,  it  must
be  that  the  widest  interpretation  of  human  progress,
the  subtlest  analysis  of  human  nature,  is  only  a  partial
commentary  on  the  Resurrection.


APPENDIX  II.

THE  RESURRECTION   OF  CHRIST  A   NEW
REVELATION1.

I.

IT  is  greatly  to  be  regretted  that  those  who  enter  APPENDIX
on  the  examination  of  religious  questions  do  not  in  IL
every  case  state  distinctly  the  postulates  which  under-
lie their  reasoning.  As  it  is,  serious  misunderstanding
arises  from  the  use  of  words  which  carry  with  them
wholly  different  associations,  according  as  they  are
used  on  one  side  or  the  other ;  and  discussions  which
profess  to  be  impartial  are  conducted,  it  may  be  even
unconsciously,  in  the  interest  of  foregone  conclusions.
It  is  obvious,  for  example,  that  the  idea  of  a  '  sign '
or  '  miracle '  is,  under  particular  circumstances,
natural  or  unnatural  according  as  a  man  believes,  or
does  not  believe,  in  a  Creator  who  is  still  in  a  living
connexion  with  His  creation.  If,  again,  it  is  assumed
that  a  revelation  is  impossible,  the  belief  in  a  revela-
tion must  be  a  delusion,  and  the  records  which  give  an
account  of  its  delivery  must  be  incredible.  This  being

1  This  Essay  originally  appeared  in  the  Contemporary  Re-
view, Nov.  1877.


278  The  Resurrection  of  Christ

APPENDIX  go,  it  is  clear  that  the  charge  which  is  habitually
n>  urged  against  so-called  'apologists,'  of  being  com-
mitted to  the  conclusion  which  they  have  to  establish,
applies  more  completely  to  the  '  alogists,'  who  deny
the  possibility  of  revelation  altogether.  The  'apolo-
'gist'  is  perfectly  free  to  modify  his  view  of  the
methods  of  revelation,  to  strive  to  gain  a  fuller  con-
ception of  the  unity  of  the  Divine  plan,  to  seek  for  a
more  comprehensive  survey  of  '  nature,'  as  embracing
the  utmost  potency  of  being  which  falls  within  the
grasp  of  his  powers  ;  but  the  '  alogist '  has  barred  his
own  progress  by  an  absolute  negation.  '  This  and
'this,'  he  ventures  to  say,  'cannot  be:  if  it  is  ever
'  said  to  have  been,  the  statement  is  inherently  false.
'All  that  remains  for  the  critic  is  to  explain  as  plausibly
'  as  he  can  how  the  statement  gained  currency.'

I  propose,  therefore,  in  the  present  paper  to  state
as  clearly  as  I  can  under  what  conditions  the  Chris-
tian enters  on  an  examination  of  the  evidence  for  the
Resurrection,  what  is  the  Evangelic  conception  of  the
fact  itself,  how  the  fact  thus  interpreted  illustrates  the
character  of  the  Christian  faith  generally  as  a  historical
faith,  how  it  bears  upon  our  views  of  the  world  and
upon  studies  of  present  interest.  It  is  obviously  im-
possible to  do  more  than  indicate  lines  of  thought  in
these  different  directions.  The  examination  of  the
details  of  evidence  belongs  to  another  place.  But  a
general  view  of  the  Christian  position,  apart  from
other  advantages,  will  shew  that  some  of  the  attacks
directed  against  it  are  based  on  misconceptions.

Three  final  assumptions  are  made  everywhere
throughout  the  Bible.  It  is  assumed  (1)  that  GOD  is,


a  New  Revelation.  279

and  that  He  is  righteous  and  loving ;  (2)  that  man  APPENDIX
was  made  in  the  image  of  God ;  and  (3)  that  man  has  IL
fallen.  It  is  taken  for  granted  that  these  statements
correspond  with  man's  constitution,  and  that  he  is
directly  conscious  of  their  truth.  They  lie  beyond
the  region  of  debate.  It  is  indeed  possible  to  shew
not  only  that  they  fall  in  with  what  we  can  observe,
but  that  the  sum  of  experience  illustrates  and  con-
firms them ;  still,  if  they  be  denied,  argument  is
useless.  No  '  proof '  can  establish  the  existence  of  a
Heavenly  Father,  the  GOD  of  conscience,  and  not  'the
'  Absolute  Being  '  of  ontology.  No  '  proof  '  can  shew
beyond  contradiction  that  we  can  hold  intercourse
with  Him,  the  finite  with  the  Infinite.  No  '  proof '
can  demonstrate  that  that  which  is  to  lift  us  up  must
be  outside  us  and  above  us.  But  we  claim  that  these
ultimate  facts  are  given  in  germ,  in  consciousness.
We  claim  that  those  who  have  attained  to  the  maturity
of  self-knowledge  under  normal  conditions  recognise
them  as  true.  They  form  for  us  the  presuppositions
of  all  religious  controversy1.

Assumptions  of  the  same  kind  underlie  all  reason-
ing ;  they  are  not  peculiar  to  theology.  The  belief  in
the  external  world,  and  the  belief  in  our  own  personal
responsibility,  rest  on  grounds  exactly  similar  to  those
which  support  the  belief  in  a  Heavenly  Father.  Each
of  these  three  ultimate  beliefs  is  open  to  specious


1  This  is  not  the  place  to  explain  more  at  length  or  to  de-
fend these  presuppositions.  I  wish  simply  to  mark  clearly  the
position  which  Christian  critics  occupy.  It  is  evident  that  all
examination  of  evidence  involves  some  presuppositions.


280  The  Resurrection  of  Christ

APPENDIX  objections ;  each  belief  is  maintained  by  the  require-
II-        ments  and  the  experience  of  living.

Several  important  conclusions  follow  immediately
from  these  assumptions.  If  GOD  is  the  Father  of  men,
it  becomes  probable  that  He  will  under  certain  cir-
cumstances make  His  presence  felt  by  peculiar  'signs/
and  that  these  '  signs '  will  bear  a  definite  relation
both  to  the  Divine  lessons  with  which  they  are  con-
nected and  to  the  persons  to  whom  the  lessons  are
addressed.  It  becomes  probable,  further,  that,  when
the  discipline  of  humanity  is  regarded  on  a  large
scale,  these  special  manifestations  of  the  Divine  will
appear  to  be  analogous  to  crises  in  the  development  of
the  individual  life,  in  which  exceptional  powers  are
active  for  a  time  and  then  subside,  all  being  harmonious
parts  of  one  life.  And  again,  to  look  at  the  subject
from  another  point  of  sight,  if  we  derive  our  being,  it
matters  not  through  what  descent,  from  a  good  Creator,
each  natural  desire  or  instinct  of  man  carries  with  it
the  promise  of  fulfilment.  It  is  not  conceivable  that
he  should  have  been  endowed  with  aspirations  which
must  always  remain  unsatisfied.  He  may  be  unable
beforehand  to  anticipate  how  they  will  be  satisfied ;
he  may  even  form  false  and  confident  anticipations  •
but  after  the  event  it  must  be  discernible  that  the
satisfaction  is  real.  If  we  feel  that  the  scheme  of
things  in  which  we  are  placed  is  true,  if  we  feel,  that
is,  that  the  apparent  signs  of  progress  which  it  exhibits
reveal  its  essential  nature,  we  cannot  doubt  that  the
characteristic  tendencies  of  human  action  and  feeling
and  thought  are  also  true,  and  turned  towards  that
which  we  are  made  to  attain  to.  It  cannot,  then,  be


a  New  Revelation,  281

in  vain  that  we  instinctively  look  forward  to  a  nobler  APPENDIX
future,  and  a  closer  fellowship  with  GOD  hereafter;        n-
and  turn  heavenward,  as  knowledge  widens,  for  some
fuller  teaching  as  to  these  loftiest  hopes.     No  doubt
our  instincts,  both  physical  and  moral,  require  to  be
disciplined  and  trained ;  but  they  are  in  a  real  sense
prophetic.     While  they  are  not,  in  our  present  condi-
tion, authoritative,  they  are  suggestive.

Thus  revelation,  which  is  only  one  form  of  the
continuous  intercourse  of  GOD  and  man,  so  far  from
being  improbable,  is  seen  from  the  actual  circumstances
of  life  to  be  a  natural  consequence  of  the  Divine
Fatherhood.  It  is  in  regard  to  the  life  of  the  society
as  natural  as  prayer  in  the  life  of  the  individual.
Prayer  in  fact  presupposes  revelation,  for  it  is  man's
answer  to  the  voice  of  GOD.  And  the  thoughts  of
revelation  and  prayer  illustrate  one  another  in  other
ways.  The  mode  of  revelation,  for  instance,  may  be
expected  to  vary  from  age  to  age,  just  as  the  scope  of
prayer.  As  man  advances  in  the  knowledge  of  GOD,
he  will  at  each  point  in  his  progress  fashion  his
thoughts  of  Him  in  harmony  with  the  sum  of  all  he
knows.

Nor  can  it  be  fairly  said  that  such  a  view  of  the
living  relation  between  GOD  and  man  and  the  world  as
is  assumed  by  the  Christian  introduces  any  confusion
into  his  view  of  the  order  in  which  he  is  placed.  It
simply  substitutes  the  conception  of  a  rational  order
for  the  conception  of  a  mechanical  order.  All  action
is  based  upon  the  supposition  that  man  can  himself,
within  certain  limits,  modify  the  medium  in  which  he
moves,  and  the  personal  influence  of  each  man  is


282  The  Resurrection  of  Christ

APPENDIX  absolutely  incalculable,  yet  this  indeterminate  factor
II-  introduces  no  practical  disharmony  into  the  universe;
and  it  is  obviously  impossible  that  this  special  action,
which  (it  is  assumed)  answers  to  perfect  wisdom,
should  do  so.  Alogists  habitually  discuss  miracles
as  if  they  were  supposed  to  be  arbitrary  manifestations
of  power,  and  not  essentially  connected  with  a  moral
purpose  and  adapted  to  the  wants  of  those  to  whom
they  were  granted.  If  they  were  arbitrary  they  would
have  no  theological  value.  The  'signs'  of  GOD  would
cease  to  be  '  signs '  unless  they  illustrated  what  we
can  recognise  as  a  divine  law  of  progress1.

For  nothing  external,  no  'sign,'  has  an  absolute
or  irresistible  force.  Every  alleged  '  sign '  must  be
carefully  interpreted  and  brought  to  a  spiritual  test.
As  a  '  sign '  of  GOD  it  must  be  consistent  with  all
that  we  already  know  of  Him  •  and  the  same  power
which  enables  us  in  the  first  instance  to  recognise
GOD,  enables  us  also  to  recognise  further  manifesta-
tions of  His  nature  and  will2.

The  order  of  the  universe  which   the   Christian

1  Such  a  statement  as  that  of  Mr  Macan  (for  example,)  '  If
'miracles  are  possible,  history  is  impossible'  (p.  116,  note),  is
only  intelligible  on  an  assumption  which  a  Christian  utterly
denies.    I  should  venture  to  say  that  Christianity  alone  gives  a
stable  foundation  to  history,  as  shewing  the  law  and  end  of
life.     Viewed  in  relation  to  the  whole  history  of  the  Church
or  of  the  world,  '  miracles '  take  an  intelligible  place  in  the
development  and  interpretation  of  life.

2  The  full  significance  of  these  statements  will  appear,  on  a
careful  examination  of  the  following  typical  passages  : — Dent.
xiii.  1  ft. ;  Ezek.  xiv.  4  ff. ;  Matt.  xxiv.  23  f. ;  2  Thess.  ii.  8  ff. ;
Apoc.  xiii.  13  f.


a  New  Revelation.  283

maintains  is  therefore  as  real  as  that  of  the  alogist,  APPENDIX
and  as  truly  verifiable,  while  it  is  vaster.  Both  II-
orders  correspond  with  abstractions  which  are  based
upon  observation  ;  but  the  Christian  order  regards  the
seen  as  standing  in  a  vital  connexion  with  the  unseen,
and  under  the  necessary  limitations  of  our  present
human  faculties  presents  potentially  the  completest
synthesis  of  being  which  we  can  conceive.  The  occur-
rence of  '  signs'  causes  no  break  in  the  continuity  of
history :  on  the  contrary,  they  indicate  something
more  as  to  the  nature  of  the  whole  life  which  history
expresses.  Nor  again,  is  any  function  of  historical
criticism  dependent  on  the  assumption  that  facts  of  a
particular  kind  are  impossible.  The  object  of  criticism
is  to  test  the  records  of  a  belief,  and  then  comes  the
interpretation  of  the  belief.  The  recorded  instances
of  revelation  are  for  the  believer  so  many  elements  of
which  he  takes  due  account  in  his  view  of  the  whole
system  of  phenomena  which  is  offered  for  his  devout
study.  Little  by  little  he  is  enabled  to  apprehend  the
course  of  things  according  to  its  true  law,  till  the
distinction  of  'natural'  and  'supernatural'  is  lost  in
the  perception  of  the  one  will  of  GOD  wrought  out  in
many  ways  and  parts  throughout  the  whole  range  of
creation  which  falls  under  our  notice.

II.

These  general  remarks  enable  us  to  approach  the
consideration  of  the  Resurrection  from  the  true  point
of  sight.  For  the  believer  the  Resurrection  is  the
crowning  revelation  of  GOD,  the  sign  of  the  continuity


284  The  Resurrection  of  Christ

APPENDIX  of  the  fulness  of  human  being  through  the  seen  into
IL  the  unseen.  Under  this  aspect  it  is  not  open  to
objection  on  the  ground  that  it  is  '  contrary  to  expe-
'  rience,'  for  its  significance  is  affirmed  to  consist  in  the
fact  that  it  is  absolutely  without  parallel.  It  cannot
be  said  to  be  even  improbable,  if  it  can  be  shewn  to
convey  that  teaching  as  to  the  future  of  creation  which
we  are  constituted  to  expect.  The  alogist  utterly
misunderstands  the  state  of  the  case  when  he  persist-
ently represents  the  Resurrection  of  Christ  as  one  of
many  raisings  from  the  dead1.  If  it  were  no  more
than  this,  it  could  not  form  the  foundation  of  a  Gospel.
The  fact  was,  as  we  maintain,  essentially  unique ;  the
teaching  which  it  conveyed  was  essentially  new.

A  twofold  difficulty  stands  in  the  way  of  a  just
estimate  of  the  novelty  of  the  teaching  of  the  Resur-
rection. It  is  difficult  to  realise  the  absence  of  a
great  and  familiar  idea;  it  is  difficult  also  to  leave
room,  so  to  speak,  for  larger  aspects  of  a  fact  which
we  seem  to  have  felt  already  in  all  its  grandeur.
And  thus  it  comes  to  pass  that  the  revelation  given
us  by  Christ's  rising  is  in  one  direction  spoken  of  as
'  commonplace,'  and  in  another  it  is  unconsciously
neglected.  Part  of  the  truth  signified  by  it  has
passed  so  completely  into  modern  thought  that  we
can  hardly  imagine  that  men  were  ever  without  the
sure  trust  that  death  is  the  personal  admission  to  the
nearer  Presence  of  GOD.  Part  of  it  again  is  only
now  at  last  dawning  upon  us ;  and  we  are  in  danger
of  refusing  to  recognise  the  new  light,  though  in  this

1  E.g.  Supernatural  Religion,  iii.  428  n.


a  New  Revelation.  285

respect  it  is  not  hard  to  see  how  the  original  apostolic  APPENDIX
message  meets  the  latest  results  of  time.

Something  at  least  has  been  gained  by  recent  dis-
cussions. It  is  admitted  on  all  sides  that  the  first
disciples  believed  that  the  Lord  had  been  raised  from
the  dead ;  it  is  admitted  also  that  the  eleven  apostles
and  St  Paul  believed  that  they  had  seen  Him  after  the
Resurrection.  Historical  evidence,  alone,  can  go  no
further  than  this.  It  cannot  do  more  than  establish
the  reality  of  the  belief  in  a  particular  fact.  The
belief  is  itself  the  interpretation  of  phenomena  which
cannot  be  recalled,  and,  in  every  case,  only  one  of
several  conceivable  interpretations.  It  is  obviously
impossible  to  preserve  completely  the  grounds  on
which  the  belief  was  embraced.  These  may,  indeed,
be  indicated  more  or  less  completely,  but  it  is  easy  to
see  that  details,  which  find  no  record,  may  have  been
rightly  decisive  at  the  moment.  Thus  our  judgment
on  the  truth  of  a  belief  is  to  be  decided  mainly  by  the
character  of  the  belief  and  by  the  circumstances  of
those  who  first  held  it.  In  the  case  of  the  Resurrec-
tion the  question  at  issue  is  simply,  in  one  form  or
other,  Is  it  more  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the
apostles  were  mistaken  or  that  the  Lord  did  rise  ?  Or,
to  break  the  question  into  its  parts,  What  was  the
character  of  the  belief?  And,  Can  the  belief,  with
its  results,  be  explained  from  the  actual  position  of
those  who  held  it  without  the  acceptance  of  the  cor-
responding objective  fact?

The  general  character  of  the  apostolic  belief  in
Christ's  Resurrection  may  be  best  seen  by  regarding
the  Resurrection  in  connexion  with  other  raisings


286  The  Resurrection  of  Christ

APPENDIX  from  the  dead.  Briefly  it  may  be  said  that  all  the
l'  other  raisings  from  the  dead  recorded  in  the  Bible  are
instances  of  restoration  to  the  conditions  of  earthly
life  :  the  Resurrection  of  Christ  was  the  revelation  of
a  new  life1.  The  distinction  is  equally  unquestionable
and  significant.  There  cannot  be  the  least  doubt  that
those  whom  the  Lord  is  recorded  to  have  called  back
to  life  were  afterwards  subject  to  the  ordinary  circum-
stances of  our  present  existence.  It  is  no  less  certain
that  all  the  notices  of  the  Risen  Lord  represent  Him
as  changed  while  still  personally  the  same.  The
daughter  of  Jairus,  the  young  man  at  Nain,  and
Lazarus,  as  far  as  we  can  see,  resumed  their  former
positions ;  but  the  connexion  of  the  Lord  with  the
disciples  after  the  Resurrection  was  wholly  altered.
He  was  known  only  when  He  pleased  to  reveal  Him-
self. He  was  surrounded  with  a  mysterious  awfulness.
At  the  very  time  when  He  offered  a  material  test  of
the  reality  of  His  presence  He  shewed  that  He  was
not  bound  by  the  laws  of  matter.  There  is  evidently
a  'law'  by  which  the  conditions  of  His  appearances
are  determined.  And  these  contrasted  traits  are  pre-
served in  the  different  narratives  with  perfect  con-
sistency, so  that  it  is  impossible  to  doubt  that  the
disciples  believed  that  the  Lord  lived  again  after  the
Passion,  and  yet  under  new  and  glorious  conditions  of
life  hitherto  unrealised.  For  such  a  conception  they
had  absolutely  no  precedent.  To  speak  of  it  as  a
'ruling  idea'  of  their  age,  is  to  misrepresent  facts.
On  the  contrary  it  was  to  them  a  most  difficult  and

1  I  do  not  enter  on  the  discussion  of  Matt,  xxvii.  52  f.    The
incident  recorded  there  is  wholly  isolated.


a  New  Revelation.  287

strange  idea.  They  thought  at  first  that  '  they  saw  a  APPENDIX
'  spirit,'  and  this  impression  had  to  be  overcome.  So  IL
far  as  they  had  any  acquaintance  with  a  rising  again,
their  notions  were  directly  at  variance  with  the  cir-
cumstances of  the  Lord's  Resurrection.  The  language
of  Herod  and  of  the  people  who  identified  the  Lord
with  John  the  Baptist  raised  from  the  dead,  or  with
one  of  the  prophets,  so  far  as  it  had  any  serious
meaning,  indicates  no  capacity  for  a  belief  in  a  Resur-
rection such  as  that  by  which  the  Church  lived.  And
as  a  matter  of  experience  the  popular  conceptions  of
a  carnal  Resurrection  very  speedily  overpowered  the
teaching  of  the  New  Testament  in  the  early  Church1.'
From  this  point  of  sight  the  importance  of  the  two
chief  'moments'  in  the  history  of  the  Resurrection
becomes  obvious.  The  tomb  in  which  the  body  of  the
Lord  was  laid  was  found  empty.  The  Lord  appeared
and  disappeared  at  pleasure.  All  that  belonged  to
His  humanity  was  preserved,  and  at  the  same  time  all
was  transfigured.  This  twofold  conception  presented
with  perfect  simplicity  and  perfect  distinctness  by  the
Evangelists  was  entirely  unparalleled  ;  and  it  includes
teaching  which  has  not  yet  been  popularly  appro-
priated.

This  being  so,  it  will  be  seen  that  no  misunder-
standing of  the  Christian  idea  of  the  Resurrection  can
be  more  complete  than  that  which  is  involved  in  the
following  dilemma :  —

1  Any  one  who  will  take  the  trouble  to  verify  in  detail  the
facts  indicated  summarily  in  this  paragraph,  will  learn  a
valuable  lesson  on  the  historical  characteristics  of  the  Gos-
pels.


288  The  Resurrection  of  Christ

APPENDIX        '  One   or  other    alternative    must  be  adopted : — If    Jesus
H-         possessed  his  own  body  after  his  resurrection  and  could  eat
and  be  handled,  he  could  not  vanish ;  if  he  vanished,  he  could
not  have  been  thus  corporeal1.'

The  very  point  of  the  revelation  lies  in  the  reconcilia-
tion of  these  two  aspects  of  the  Lord's  humanity.  The
one  assures  us  in  the  only  way  in  which,  as  far  as  we
can  see,  the  assurance  could  be  given,  that  nothing  is
lost  in  the  passage  through  death  ;  the  other  that  the
limitations  which  belong  to  earthly  existence  are  not
to  be  extended  to  the  future  order.

The  full  power  of  this  complex  conception  is
gathered  up  in  the  fact  of  the  Ascension,  which  is  the
natural  or  necessary  sequel  of  the  Resurrection  accord-
ing to  the  Christian  view.  The  manifestations  of  the
Risen  Christ,  as  recorded  in  the  Gospels,  lead  up  to  it.
The  history  of  the  forty  days  shews  a  gradual  prepara-
tion of  the  disciples  for  the  realisation  of  a  spiritual
presence  of  Christ  with  His  Church.  So  long  He
allowed  them  to  feel  that  He  was  moving  locally
among  them.  Then  He  made  it  clear  by  a  sensible
sign  that  He  had  entered  on  a  new  state.  Thus,  the
Resurrection  rightly  interpreted  includes  the  Ascen-
sion ;  and  conversely,  the  Ascension  finally  interprets
the  Resurrection  for  men  and  under  the  forms  of
common  thought.  That  visible  lifting  from  the  earth
marked  the  close  of  one  epoch  of  revelation  and  the
beginning  of  another.  Henceforward  the  Lord  was
recognised  as  throned  in  glory  011  the  right  hand  of
GOD,  near  alike  to  all  His  people.

But  it  will  be  said  that  the  view  which  has  been

1  S.  R.  iii.  462.


a  New  Revelation.  289

given  of  the  Resurrection  is  an  'inference'  from  the  APPENDIX
records.  The  statement  is  true  ;  and  true  necessarily.  n'
It  is  only  by  inference,  by  interpretation,  that  we  can
obtain  an  adequate  conception  of  a  fact  which  belongs
to  two  orders.  The  Risen  Christ  belongs  to  earth  and
to  heaven.  If  His  Resurrection  and  His  raised  man-
hood were  of  earth  only,  it  might  be  possible,  perhaps,
to  imagine  how  any  single  observer  might  have  ascer-
tained the  fact  by  outward  observation,  though  it  is
clear  that  he  could  not  have  transmitted  his  assurance
to  others.  But  as  it  is,  no  external  tests  could  have
established  what  is  of  the  essence  of  the  fact,  the  per-
manence of  the  old  under  new  conditions  not  expressed
by  the  'laws'  of  this  world.  On  the  contrary,  if
external  tests  alone  were  satisfied,  the  very  ground
of  our  hope  would  be  destroyed.  That  which  is  the
strength  of  the  Christian  now  would  be  taken  away.
In  this  respect  the  Christian  view  of  the  Resur-
rection, as  an  interpretation  of  all  the  phenomena
recorded,  corresponds  with  the  interpretation  of  every
other  divine  sign.  No  external  phenomenon  in  itself
can  prove  the  existence  of  an  Almighty  GOD.  But  if
we  believe  that  GOD  is,  then  we  can  learn,  through
the  world  without,  lessons  as  to  His  character  and
will.  There  will,  however,  always  remain  a  way  of
evasion  for  the  unbeliever.  Even  if  he  admits  the
.  accuracy  of  the  original  observation,  and  the  complete-
ness of  the  testimony  to  the  observed  facts,  it  will
still  be  possible  to  refer  whatever  is  exceptional  in
them  to  some  unknown  force  simply  sufficient  to  pro-
duce the  given  effect.  In  other  words,  the  presuppo-
sitions of  belief  underlie  the  interpretations  of  belief.

W.  R.  19


290  The  Resurrection  of  Christ

APPENDIX        It  is  therefore  quite  true  in  one  sense  that  the
n>         Resurrection  'proves'  nothing.     It  has  no  constrain-
ing power  to  compel  assent  to  any  proposition ;  but  it
is  the  crowning  'sign'  of  the  counsel  of  GOD  for  men.
It  comes  to  satisfy  aspirations,  to  illuminate  doubts,
to  confirm  and   define  faith.     That  which   St  John
observes  of  the  effect  of   'the  beginning  of  signs'  is
S.  John      fulfilled  in   this   latest  sign :    Jesus   'manifested   His
11-     '         glory,  and  His  disciples  believed  on  Him.

This  consideration  places  the  narratives  of  the
Gospels  in  their  proper  light.  They  are  addressed  to
those  who  believe  the  fact,  and  are  not  directly
designed  to  create  the  belief.  They  are  in  this  respect,
as  in  all  others,  a  record  of  a  revelation.  When  this
is  once  recognised,  it  will  be  seen  how  completely
most  of  the  criticism  of  the  parallel  narratives  of  the
Resurrection  falls  to  the  ground.  There  is  not  the
least  reason  to  suppose  that  the  Evangelists  told  us  all
that  they  knew,  nor  yet  the  least  necessity  that  they
should  have  done  so.  They  recorded  what  was  suffi-
cient for  their  purpose.  And  there  can  be  no  doubt
that  the  Gospels  both  severally  and  collectively  bring
before  us  the  Risen  Lord  as  the  same  and  yet  changed ;
as  having  entered  with  His  perfect  Manhood  on  a  new
form  of  existence ;  as  having  established  in  His  glori-
fied humanity  a  new  connexion  with  mankind  ;  as
having  led  His  disciples  by  His  personal  intercourse
to  grasp  these  novel  conceptions  as  their  abiding
heritage.

Now  whether  this  revelation  be  accepted  or  not,
it  cannot  be  doubted  that  it  was  original  and  pregnant
with  consequences.  But  it  has  been  frequently  said


a  New  Revelation.  291

that  the  apostles  lived  in  '  an  atmosphere  of  miracles ;'  APPENDIX
that  they  could  not  but  have  framed  some  explanation  IL
to  remove  the  disappointment  caused  by  their  Master's
death ;  and  that  '  it  was  inevitable  that  they  should
'believe  Him  to  have  risen  again  in  the  body1.'  It
might  be  sufficient  to  reply  that  there  is,  as  we  have
already  seen,  no  parallel  to  the  Resurrection  either  in
its  character  or  in  its  effects,  and  that  just  so  far  as
the  idea  could  be  shewn  to  be  familiar  it  would  be
deprived  of  its  efficacy.  If  the  belief  was  'inevitable'
it  would  also  have  been  powerless  to  change  opinion
and  life.  But,  as  far  as  evidence  exists,  the  claim  to
work  miracles  was  not  common  in  the  first  age,  unless
the  practice  of  exorcism  be  brought  under  this  head.
On  the  contrary,  it  is  most  remarkable  that  the  mira-
cles of  Jewish  history  belong  to  critical  periods  of
comparatively  short  duration,  and  to  typical  men.
The  age  of  the  Maccabees  is  not  marked  by  miracles.
'  John  vvrought  no  miracle.'  It  is  of  course  quite  S.  John
true  that  the  Jews  were  acquainted  with  records  of  x-
miracles  in  their  Scriptures ;  quite  true  also  that  they
could  not  feel  all  that  is  involved  in  a  miracle  as  we
do;  but  it  appears  from  the  Gospels  that  the  works  of
Christ,  though  they  were  often  veiled,  created  a  pro-
found impression  as  being  wholly  unprecedented.  It
is  at  any  rate  unquestionable  that  they  overcame
inveterate  prejudices.  All  this  tends  to  shew  that  we
are  unconsciously  tempted  to  transfer  to  the  whole
period  of  Jewish  history  phenomena  which  belong
to  limited  manifestations  within  it,  and  to  use  what

1  Contemporary  Review,  November,  1876,  p.  905.

19—2


292  The  Resurrection  of  Christ

APPENDIX  sprang   from   Christianity  to    explain   the  origin   of
IL         Christianity.

A  similar  remark  applies  to  the  alleged  prevalence
and  power  of  Messianic  expectations  in  the  first  cen-
tury.    There  were  indeed  some  Jews  who  were  looking
for  the  promised  King  when  Christ  came,  or,  perhaps
S.  Luke  ii.  more  strictly  speaking,  for  the  Kingdom  of  GOD,  or  for

nK     QQ

the  consolation  of  Israel.  John  the  Baptist  gave
distinctness  to  expectation.  But  the  teaching  of  John
and  the  earlier  teaching  of  the  Lord  excited  question-
ings rather  than  satisfied  them.  It  was  only  when
the  Lord's  work  was  drawing  to  a  close  that  He
accepted  the  title  of  the  Christ  from  Jews,  and  then
under  circumstances  which  shewed  how  far  the  confes-
sion was  not  only  from  popular  feeling,  but  even  from
the  feeling  of  the  disciples.  After  the  appearance  of
the  Lord  had  called  out  the  religious  aspirations  of
the  nation,  false  Christs  arose ;  but  the  hopes  which
they  embodied  were  rather  due  to  Christ's  action  than
originally  contributory  to  His  acceptance.  He  created
the  idea  which  He  fulfilled  in  spite  of  current  opinions,
and  in  doing  this  He  gave  occasion  to  the  character-
istic embodiment  of  the  ideas  which  He  set  aside.  So
far  from  '  answering  the  ideal '  of  His  followers,  He
gave  them  a  new  one,  which  they  were  painfully  slow
S.  John  to  grasp.  Men  could  not  'see'  the  Kingdom  of  GOD
111.  3.  which  He  proclaimed  unless  they  were  born  again.
There  was  practically  nothing  in  the  current  thoughts
which  Christ  encountered  which  was  fitted  to  call  out
a  spontaneous  belief  in  the  message  of  His  Resurrec-
tion. The  silence  of  the  Old  Testament,  the  'bold
'guesses'  and  sad  negations  of  Gentile  philosophy,  are


a  Neiv  Revelation.  293

equally   instructive.       The   one   shews    how    Divine  APPENDIX
wisdom  was  constrained  to  delay  the  revelation  till  it        IL
could   be  presented  vitally :    the  other   that  reason,
while  baffled  by  the  problem  of  the  future,  finds  no
rest  in  scepticism.     When  Christ  came  this  only  re-
mained to  men  as  the  issue  of  ages  of  resolute  and
patient  thought,  that  the  instinct  by  which  they  clung
to  a  continuous  personality  beyond  the  grave  was  at
hopeless  variance  with  such  an  analysis  of  their  own
being  as  they  could  make.

To  reconcile  this  antagonism  there  was  need  of  a
new  fact.  And  this  fact  was  given,  as  we  have  seen,
in  a  manner  suited  to  the  end.  For  that  end  it  was
enough  to  shew  in  a  single  example  the  fulness  of  life
undiminished  by  death  ;  to  shew  that  what  seems  to  be
dissolution  is  transformation ;  that  heaven  lies  about
us,  and  that  life  eternal  is  not  future  but  present;
that  whatever  be  the  unknown  glories  and  endow-
ments of  the  after-life,  nothing  is  cast  off  which  rightly
claims  our  affection  and  reverence  in  this.

But  it  may  yet  be  said  that  the  Evangelists  at  any
rate  write  as  if  they  were  dealing  with  ordinary  phe-
nomena, that  they  shew  no  perception  of  the  marvel-
lous or  contradictory  character  of  the  incidents  which
they  relate.  The  Evangelists  certainly  write  as  mem-
bers of  a  society  in  which  the  divine  action  was  felt  to
be  a  present  reality  manifested  in  many  ways.  If  they
had  recorded  miracles  calmly,  and  lived  ordinary  lives,
there  might  be  some  force  in  the  objection ;  but  it  is
undeniable  that  their  action  corresponded  with  their
words.  If  they  wrote  as  men  to  whom  the  'super-
'  natural'  was  familiar,  they  lived  so  too.  Everything


294  The  Resurrection  of  Christ

APPENDIX  which  the  first  Christians  did,  as  well  as  everything
IL  which  they  said,  so  far  as  we  know,  shewed  a  supreme
conviction  that  they  were  living  in  an  unexampled
crisis.  Heaven  (so  they  said,  and  their  work  answered
to  their  words)  was  open  about  them,  and  the  effects
of  their  teaching  corresponded  with  the  conviction.

For  the  belief  in  the  Resurrection  was  from  the
first  not  a  belief  only,  but  a  spring  of  energy.  The
disciples  were  not  only  assured  that  their  Lord  was
living :  they  felt  that  He  was  with  them,  and  their
conduct  answered  to  the  reality  of  the  feeling.  It
is  not  then  sufficient  to  shew  how  a  belief  in  the
rising  of  Christ  might  have  been  created  among  men
familiar  with  the  idea  of  the  Resurrection  as  we  are.
The  problem  to  be  solved  is  how  a  belief  was  created
which,  from  the  first  even  till  now,  has  made  believers
act  as  knowing  that  it  is  literally  true  that  when  two
or  three  are  gathered  together  in  Christ's  name,  there
He  is  in  the  midst  of  them.  This  we  may  safely  assert
was  a  '  new  idea  introduced  into  human  conscious-
'  ness,'  and  fruitful  beyond  all  example '.  Later  visions,
so  far  from  explaining  its  origin,  serve  only  as  faint
reflections  to  witness  to  its  power.

The  Resurrection,  to  set  the  matter  in  another
light,  was  not  an  isolated  event.  It  was  and  is  an
abiding  fact.  It  was  the  beginning  of  a  new  and  living
relation  between  the  Lord  and  His  people.  He  came
to  them  while  He  went.  The  idea  may  be  expressed
by  saying  that  the  apostolic  conception  of  the  Resur-
rection is  rather  'the  Lord  lives,'  than  'the  Lord

1  Mr  Macan  fails  to  apprehend  the  idea  of  the  Resurrection
when  he  denies  this,  p.  108.


a  New  Revelation.  295

'  was  raised.'  This  important  truth  is  entirely  over-  APPENDIX
looked  by  critics  who  lay  stress  on  the  point  that
'there  was  no  eye-witness  of  the  Resurrection1.'  It
is  impossible  to  see  what  we  should  have  gained  by
the  testimony  of  such  a  witness,  or  what  he  could
have  established  which  was  not  established  by  the
intercourse  of  the  living  Lord  with  His  disciples.
That  which  had  to  be  made  clear  as  to  Christ,  was  the
reality  of  His  new  life.  This  was  first  established  for
the  apostles  by  their  complete  experience  of  the  con-
tinuity of  His  manifestation  to  them,  and  for  the
Church  in  all  ages  through  the  signs  of  His  power.
And  it  is  here  that  the  'proof  of  the  Resurrection  is
to  be  found.  Christ  lives,  for  He  works  still.

I  have  spoken  of  the  Resurrection  as  a  revelation  ;
it  was  a  revelation  in  two  main  respects — as  to  the
relation  of  Christ  to  men,  and  as  to  the  relation  of
the  present  life  to  the  future.  In  both  these  respects
it  is  undeniable  that  the  belief  in  the  Resurrection
completely  changed  the  views  of  the  disciples.  Before
the  Passion  they  had  been  unable  to  endure  the
thought  of  any  external  separation  from  Christ ;  after-
wards they  lived  in  effectual  fellowship  with  Him
though  He  was  invisible.  His  influence  was  felt  to
be  confined  within  no  local  limits.  An  entirely  new
connexion  was  shewn  in  life  to  be  established  between
One  and  all,  between  the  Son  of  Man  and  men.  The
disciples  looked  for  His  return,  but  the  mode  in  which
they  conceived  of  His  being  preserved  them,  though  in
many  cases  not  their  followers,  from  sensuous  imagin-
ings of  its  nature.

1  S.  R.  pp.  449,  549 ;  Macan,  p.  28.


296  The  Resurrection  of  Christ

APPENDIX  For  the  apostles'  view  of  the  life  of  the  Risen
IL  Christ  was  in  close  dependence  on  their  view  of  the
relation  of  believers  to  Him.  His  being  was  conti-
nuous with  that  which  they  had  known ;  but  it  was
become  infinitely  glorious,  without  being  deprived  of
anything  belonging  to  the  perfection  of  humanity.

These  two  thoughts  together  opened  a  prospect  of
the  future  of  individuals  which  is  far  larger  than  the
popular  conceptions  of  later  times.  Believers  were  to
be  transfigured,  and  at  the  same  time  their  life  was  to
continue  in  Christ.  In  other  words,  a  glimpse  was
given  of  a  'personality'  of  a  raised  humanity,  in
which  each  member  was  included  but  not  absorbed.

At  the  same  time  light  was  thrown  upon  the  dark
mysteries  of  sin  and  suffering.  The  uttermost  sorrow
was  the  preparation  for  the  most  complete  triumph.
Once  for  all,  that  dualism  to  which  the  phenomena  of
this  world  taken  by  themselves  seem  to  point  was
shewn  to  be  false.

Nor  can  we  stop  at  man.  The  apostles  felt  that
the  Resurrection  had  a  message  in  regard  to  all
creation.  Man  was  bound  up  with  the  whole  visible
order,  and  this,  too,  was,  as  they  announced,  to  partake
of  his  restoration,  and  to  be  included  in  the  divine
consummation  of  all  things.

Such  a  final  unity,  to  touch  upon  the  last  mystery
of  all,  is  referred  to  an  archetypal  unity.  The  Resur-
rection appears,  in  the  New  Testament,  as  the  fulfil-
ment through  victory  of  a  purpose  involved  in  creation,
but  checked  in  its  normal  progress  by  the  self-assertion
of  the  finite1.

1  This  truth  is  plainly  expressed  in  Col.  i.  15  ff.,  and  does
not  remain  to  be  'excogitated,'  Macan,  p.  141.


a  New  Revelation.  297

Now  such  thoughts  as  these  evidently  reach  to  the  APPENDIX
last  problems  of  life,  and  illuminate  them.  Such  IL
thoughts  flow  directly  from  the  Resurrection  if  the
fact  be  accepted  simply  as  it  is  presented  to  us  in  the
Gospels ;  and,  as  it  is  admitted,  they  were  set  forth
by  the  apostles  in  virtue  of  their  belief  in  it.  Our
contention  is  that  nothing  but  the  fact  can  explain
their  origin,  and  the  power  with  which  they  were
propagated.  The  reality  of  the  Resurrection  and  the
action  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Risen  Christ  is  a  sufficient
cause  for  the  announcement  and  for  the  spread  of  the
Gospel,  and  no  other  has  been  brought  forward.

But  when  stress  is  laid  upon  the  correspondence
of  the  Gospel  of  the  Resurrection  with  man's  nature,
it  is  said  that  that  very  correspondence  furnishes  a
presumption  that  man  devised  that  which  answered
to  his  wishes.  There  is,  however,  a  wide  difference
between  recognising  and  creating.  All  pre-Christian
experience  is  unfavourable  to  the  theory  that  man  had
any  tendency  to  find  such  a  solution  of  his  difficulties
as  the  Resurrection  offers.  The  whole  discipline  of
the  world  prepared  men  to  welcome  the  Gospel,  but
had  no  power  to  produce  it.  And  this  second  corre-
spondence of  the  Resurrection  with  the  course  of
human  progress,  no  less  than  with  the  constitution  of
man,  forms  another  strong  sign  of  its  divine  reality  to
every  one  who  believes  in  a  Providence.  To  such  a
one,  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  the  Resurrection,
taken  in  connexion  with  the  history  of  the  race  before
and  after,  is  antecedently  more  probable  than  any
particular  event  in  the  life  of  any  individual  man.  So
far  is  it  from  being  contrary  to  'universal  experience,'


298  The  Resurrection  of  Christ

APPENDIX  that  it  is  in  a  most  true  sense  according  to  universal
IL        experience,  for  it  is  seen  universally  that  aspirations,
tendencies,  instincts,  are  not  left  for  ever  unattained
and  unsatisfied  '.

If  now  we  consider  the  direct  evidence  for  the  fact
of  the  Resurrection  from  this  position,  it  will  be  found
to  be  overwhelming.  It  is,  of  course,  idle  to  affect  to
discuss  evidence  for  an  event  if  it  is  laid  down  that
the  event  'is  at  once  disposed  of  on  abstract  grounds2,'
or  to  insist  on  the  testimony  of  documents  which
record  miracles  if  '  a  supernatural  phenomenon  is  to
'be  at  once  rejected;'  for  on  this  assumption  they  are
already  declared  to  be  untrustworthy.  But  if  the
Resurrection  and  the  testimony  by  which  it  is  main-
tained are  examined  in  the  light  of  a  belief  in  the
Providential  government  of  the  world,  of  a  belief,  that
is,  that  there  is  a  purpose  and  a  goal  for  man,  and
men,  and  nature,  then  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  the
evidence  could  have  been,  according  to  the  analogy  of
history,  more  complete.  We  have,  in  the  Synoptic
Gospels  and  the  appendix  to  St  Mark  (to  summarise
results  which  appear  to  me  to  be  unquestionable),  a
general  view  of  .the  oral  teaching  of  the  Twelve,  which
was  the  original  foundation  of  the  Church  :  we  have
in  the  writings  of  St  Paul,  who  must  have  been  well

1  But  for  a  strange  misunderstanding  of  this  sentence  I
should  have  thought  it  unnecessary  to  say  that  the  Besurrec-
tion  of  Christ  does  seem  to  me  to  give  the  satisfaction  which  we
need  now  in  our  present  life,  which  is,  as  I  have  endeavoured
to  shew,  completely  transfigured  by  it  in  every  region  of  thought
and  observation  and  work.

2  S.  R.  in.  522.


a  New  Revelation.  299

acquainted  with  the  earliest  belief  of  Christians,  an  APPENDIX
explicit  statement  of  what  he  '  received '  and  taught
with  intense  personal  conviction  won  through  expe-
rience :  we  have  in  the  Gospel  of  St  John  the  per-
sonal testimony  of  one  who  had  actually  seen  and
heard  the  Risen  Lord ;  and  these  three  distinct  lines
of  evidence  are  in  complete  accordance  as  to  the
reality,  the  nature,  and  the  effects  of  the  Resurrection
of  Christ.  It  is  utterly  unhistorical  to  say  that

'  the  whole  of  the  evidence  for  the  Resurrection  reduces  itself
to  an  undefined  belief  on  the  part  of  a  few  persons,  in  a  noto-
riously superstitious  age,  that  after  Jesus  had  died  and  been
buried  they  had  seen  him  alive  V

The  belief  of  the  original  witnesses  was  so  clear  that
it  completely  revolutionised  their  national  expecta-
tions ;  so  energetic  that  it  changed  their  whole  charac-
ter; so  vivid  that  it  was  from  the  very  first  expressed
in  rites  which  symbolise  with  most  remarkable  power
the  fundamental  thought  of  life  through  death.  It
answers  questions  which  men  cannot  but  ask,  and  that
in  a  way  wholly  unanticipated  and  coextensive  with
the  utmost  range  of  knowledge ;  it  is  supported,  not
only  by  specific  testimony,  which,  from  the  nature  of
things,  must  be  partial  and  fragmentary  and  capable
of  misinterpretation,  but  by  that  underlying  trust  in
the  reality  of  the  divine  government  and  the  divine
destiny  of  creation  which  is  '  practically  infinite.'
For  the  direct  voice  of  testimony  is  a  very  small  part
of  the  evidence  by  which  the  Resurrection  is  esta-
blished. The  Resurrection  explains,  as  nothing  else
can  explain,  the  acts  and  words  of  Christ  before  it,

1  S.  E.  p.  519.


300  The  Resurrection  of  Christ

APPENDIX  and  of  His  apostles  after  it ;  it  gives  a  sufficient  reason
IL  for  the  spiritual  power  and  insight  of  the  first  Chris-
tians, which  is  different  in  kind  from  all  that  went
before ;  it  explains  the  life  of  Christendom,  for  it  is
not  a  past  event  only,  but  a  fact  attested  by  its  present
efficacy,  by  the  signs  of  an  actual  union  of  believers
with  the  Son  of  Man  operative  in  life.  If,  now,  we
give  fair  weight  to  all  these  considerations,  upon  the
assumptions  which  have  been  laid  down, — to  the
personal  attestation  of  the  fact  by  the  apostles,  to  the
circumstances  under  which  St  Paul  was  led  to  pro-
claim it,  to  its  relation  to  Christ's  whole  work,  to  the
transformation  which  it  effected  in  the  opinions  and
conduct  of  the  first  disciples,  to  its  continuous  efficiency
in  life,  to  its  consilience  with  instinct,  to  its  harmony
with  what  we  can  see  of  the  divine  discipline  of  the
world,— I  find  no  reason  to  modify  what  I  have  said
elsewhere,  that,  'taking  all  the  evidence  together,
'  there  is  no  single  historical  incident  better  or  more
'variously  supported  than  the  Resurrection  of  Christ.'
Let  any  one  who  thinks  otherwise  endeavour  to
frame  for  himself  evidence  for  the  whole  fact — for  the
fact,  that  is,  as  belonging  to  two  orders,  the  seen  and
the  unseen,  and  uniting  them — which  he  thinks  would
have  been  more  satisfactory  than  that  which  we
possess,  and  then  candidly  determine  how  far  the
modifications  which  he  has  introduced  would  have
removed  his  difficulties,  and  how  far  they  would  have
detracted  from  the  significance  of  the  fact  as  a  '  sign,'
a  Divine  Revelation.


a  New  Revelation.  301

APPENDIX

ii.
III.

The  view  which  has  been  given  of  the  Resurrec-
tion as  a  Revelation  will  serve  to  shew  in  what  sense
Christianity  is  said  to  be  'a  historical  religion.'  The
phrase  is  ambiguous,  and,  as  applied  to  Christianity,
it  is  persistently  misinterpreted  by  critics  who  speak
of  Buddhism  or  Mohammedanism  as  '  historical '  in
the  same  sense.  It  is  true,  no  doubt,  that  these  three
religions  are  so  far  alike  that  they  owe  their  origin  to
historical  personages.  It  is  possible  to  fix  their  begin-
ning and  progress  with  more  or  less  completeness  in
connexion  with  definite  circumstances.  But  it  is  not
in  this  relation  that  Christianity  is  described  as  his-
torical. Christianity  is  described  as  a  historical  reli-
gion because  its  teaching — in  regard  to  its  doctrines,
its  motives,  its  promises — is  conveyed  in  facts.

In  this  respect  the  Gospel  is  absolutely  unique.
The  Lord  claimed  to  come,  not  as  a  prophet,  but  as
One  greater  than  prophet  or  temple,  as  'the  Truth
'  and  the  Life.'  And  as  such  He  was  preached
and  accepted.  What  the  apostles  proclaimed  was  a
Person  who  had  died  and  risen  again,  by  whose  Death
and  Resurrection  light,  as  they  affirmed,  was  thrown
upon  the  final  mysteries  of  being.  They  very  rarely
quote  His  words,  but  everywhere  speak  of  what  He
was  and  is,  of  His  work,  of  His  power,  of  His
presence.

It  is  impossible  to  exaggerate  the  importance  of
this  unquestionable  character  of  the  apostolic  message.
Nothing  can  be  more  certain  than  that  the  apostles


302  The  Resurrection  of  Christ

APPENDIX  did  not  regard  their  Lord  as  one  simply  who  had
declared  new  truths  or  who  had  made  old  truths
plainer.  Every  interpretation  of  the  rise  of  Chris-
tianity must  be  fatally  misleading  which  does  not  take
Christ's  Person,  what  He  did,  what  befell  Him,  what
He  was  therefore  held  to  be,  as  the  novel  power  by
which  men  were  moved.

This  historical  foundation  of  Christianity  is  seen
most  strikingly  in  the  writings  of  St  Paul.  Perhaps
we  might  have  expected  from  his  intellectual  constitu-
tion, and  from  the  circumstances  of  his  conversion,
that  he  would  have  rested  on  abstract  dogmas,  on
'  the  Christ  within ; '  but,  in  fact,  Christ  '  of  the
'  seed  of  David,'  '  born  of  a  woman,  born  under  the
'  Law,'  is  the  centre  of  his  faith.  It  has  been  said  that
it  is  'a  most  striking  and  extraordinary  fact  that  the
'life  and  teaching  of  Jesus  have  scarcely  a  place  in  the
'system  of  Paul  V  If  St  Paul  had  regarded  Christ  as
a  prophet  only,  the  remark  would  have  been  just :  as
it  is,  so  far  as  it  is  true,  it  places  in  more  conspicuous
prominence  the  meaning  which  St  Paul  found  in  '  the
'  blood  of  Christ,'  in  the  historic  person  and  human
work  of  Him  '  who  died  and  rose  again.'  The  facts
of  Christ's  life,  the  facts  which  are  recited  in  the
earliest  creeds,  are  the  revelation  of  sin.  and  righteous-
ness which  he  unfolds ;  they  are  never  absent  from
his  mind :  without  them  his  teaching  is  unintelligible.

This  truth  may  be  exhibited  in  another  way.     In

the  Epistles  of  St  Paul,  no  less  than  in  the  preaching

recorded  in  the  Acts,  the  facts  of  the  Faith  precede

the    dogmas.     And    the  relation  holds  good  always.

1  S.  R.  in.  567.


a  New  Revelation.  303

The  dogmas  are  the  progressive  and  approximate  APPENDIX
interpretation  of  the  facts.  As  the  facts  are  more  n-
completely  understood  the  dogmas  become  more  and
more  fully  defined.  For  this  reason  the  apprehension
of  Christian  truth  can  never  be  final,  and  it  can  never
be  exhausted.  Each  fresh  acquisition  of  knowledge
as  to  the  relation  of  man  to  man  and  of  man  to  the
world  throws  light  upon  Christian  work.  Teaching
necessarily  reflects  in  some  measure  the  modes  of
thought  of  the  age  to  which  it  belongs,  but  the  broad
facts  of  a  human  life  grow  more  luminous  as  life  itself
is  more  deeply  studied.  The  Death  and  the  Resur-
rection of  the  Son  of  Man  are  felt  by  us  to  mean  far
more  than  could  have  been  grasped  by  an  earlier  gene-
ration.

It  is  undoubtedly  true  that  at  present  we  receive
the  facts  and  the  dogmatic  interpretation  of  the  facts
simultaneously  ;  too  often  perhaps  we  are  tempted  to
lose  the  facts  in  the  dogmas.  But  this  circumstance
cannot  alter  the  essential  relation  in  which  they  stand
to  one  another.  At  every  crisis  of  thought  it  is  our
duty  to  turn  again  to  the  records  of  Christ's  work,  not
in  a  spirit  of  superficial  realism,  but  with  a  strenuous
endeavour  to  follow  out,  as  far  as  our  powers  will
allow  us1,  the  consequences  which  are  involved  in  that
union  of  the  divine  and  human,  of  the  seen  and  the
unseen,  which  we  believe  to  have  been  fulfilled  in  the

1  The  unhappy  boldness  of  later  speculation  on  the  state  of
the  disembodied  spirit,  when  compared  with  the  silence  of
Scripture  upon  the  subject,  offers  an  instructive  illustration
of  the  neglect  of  this  limitation.  It  is  strange  that  this  con-
trast should  be  misunderstood  (Macan,  pp.  154  ff.).


304  The  Resurrection  of  Christ

APPENDIX  present  order  of  life  and  to  remain  as  the  foundation
n'        and  the  goal  of  hope  and  faith  and  love.

This  principle,  which  has  an  obvious  application  to
our  main  subject,  requires  to  be  insisted  upon,  because
it  is  frequently  overlooked  or  misunderstood.  The
Christian  Faith,  as  a  system,  is  the  interpretation  of
the  facts  of  Christ's  life  in  the  light  of  the  assumptions
which,  as  we  have  seen,  are  everywhere  made  in  the
Bible.  The  interpretation  may  come  in  different  ways.
At  one  time  it  is  through  the  inward  voice  of  GOD,  at
another  time  through  a  better  understanding  of  apo-
stolic words,  at  another  through  the  experience  of  life,
at  another  through  the  investigation  of  the  '  laws '  of
nature;  but  in  every  case  the  Person  of  Christ  and
the  facts  of  His  life  are  the  final  sum  of  the  eternal
Gospel,  the  abiding  test  by  which  every  approxima-
tion to  the  fulness  of  truth  is  tried.


IV.

It  follows  from  what  has  been  said  that  the  belief
in  Christ's  Resurrection  is  not  merely  the  belief  in  a
past  event,  but  in  a  present,  or  rather  in  an  eternal,
fact.  It  is  sometimes  said  that  Romanists  are  more
consistent  or  more  logical  than  '  Anglicans  and  Pro-
4  testants,'  in  that  they  affirm  the  reality  of  a  present
revelation  to  which  the  latter  make  no  pretence.  The
statement  is,  I  venture  to  believe,  a  complete  miscon-
ception. All  Christians  alike,  as  I  suppose,  believe
equally  in  the  unbroken  intercourse  between  GOD  and
man,  which  is  the  essence  of  revelation ;  but  the


a  New  Revelation.  305

Romanist  holds  to  the  permanence  of  old  forms  in  the  APPENDIX
mode  of  revelation,  while  others  consider  that  the  n"
mode  of  revelation,  as  being  a  function  of  life,  will
vary  with  the  progress  of  humanity.  In  one  age,  or
at  one  period  of  popular  growth,  isolated  '  signs '  can
be  seen  to  be  the  most  appropriate  vehicle  for  convey-
ing a  divine  message.  In  another  age  or  at  another
period,  corresponding  lessons  may  come  through  the
investigation  of  history  or  of  nature  which  was  impos-
sible before.  In  each  case  GOD  speaks  to  men  as  they
can  hear  Him,  and  according  to  the  knowledge  which
they  have  gained  of  Him.

It  is  most  untrue,  therefore,  to  affirm  that  the
frank  acceptance  of  '  critical '  methods  in  the  investi-
gation of  the  records  of  past  revelation  involves  any
abandonment  of  the  '  supernatural.'  The  study  of
the  Bible  in  such  a  spirit  enables  us  undoubtedly  to
realise  a  completer  harmony  between  the  ordinary
processes  of  thought  and  action  and  those  which  GOD
has  been  pleased  to  use  for  the  conveyance  of  His
lessons,  but  none  the  less  the  facts,  and  the  record  and
interpretation  of  the  facts,  retain  their  divine  charac-
ter wholly  unimpaired.  The  question  as  to  the  record
(for  example)  is  whether  we  suppose  that  the  guidance
was  given  directly,  or  through  character,  experience,
circumstances.  In  the  latter  case  there  is  as  much
room  for  divine  action  as  in  the  former ;  and  if  it
appears  that  we  can  most  rightly  apprehend  '  inspira-
'  tion '  in  the  past  in  this  way,  we  are  at  once  encour-
aged to  look  for  some  manifestations  of  the  Divine
will  now,  which  will  come  also  to  us  through  the
ordinary  channels  of  life  and  thought.  So  far  from
w.  R.  20


306  The  Resurrection  of  Christ

APPENDIX  '  criticism '  obscuring  the  work  of  GOD,  it  opens  our
n*        eyes  to  see  it  going  on  about  us.

This  is  not  the  occasion  to  pursue  such  reflections
in  detail ;  but  certainly  nothing  is  more  remarkable
than  the  way  in  which  the  apostolic  writers  bring  out
the  eternal  aspects  of  the  facts  which  they  proclaim,
without  admixture  of  anything  which  was  local  and
temporal.  They  exhibit  in  different  directions  that
universality  of  character  which  every  historian  must
recognise  in  Christ.  And  it  is  important  to  notice
that  this  characteristic  is  dei'ived  naturally  from  the
message  of  the  Resurrection  which  they  announced.
They  felt  and  they  expressed,  what  we  have  not  yet
come  to  understand,  that  the  belief  in  the  resurrection
'in  Christ'  carries  with  it  a  belief  in  the  continuity,
the  solidarity,  the  totality  (if  I  may  so  speak)  of  crea-
tion. The  unity  of  being,  of  which  science  is  slowly
shaping  a  conception,  was  for  them  a  unity  of  life
tending  to  an  issue  of  unimaginable  glory.

The  Resurrection,  indeed,  gives  a  permanent  value
to  all  human  effort  and  achievement.  As  long  as  the
earth  was  held  to  be  the  everlasting  scene  of  man's
dominion,  each  worker  could  look  forward  to  an
endless  life  in  posterity ;  but  we  know  now  that  the
earth  itself  can  exist  only  for  a  time,  and  a  hope  of
immortality  requires  the  assurance  of  life  continued
under  new  conditions.  This,  as  we  have  seen,  is
exactly  what  the  apostolic  records  are  fitted  to  convey.
They  meet,  unexpectedly  as  it  might  appear,  a  diffi-
culty of  the  latest  time;  they  receive  illustration  from
researches  supposed  to  be  alien  in  scope  and  spirit.
In  this  respect,  as  in  all  points,  the  Gospel  of  the


a  New  Revelation.  307

Resurrection  answers  to  the  whole  sum  of  life.  The  APPENDIX
fact  of  the  Resurrection  is  as  divinely  original  as  the  IL
character  of  Christ.  It  adds  the  element  of  con-
tinuance, the  possibility  of  consecration,  to  every
earthly  interest.  It  offers  the  fulness  of  truth,  as
against  the  one-sided  materialism  which  will  acknow-
ledge nothing  as  real  but  the  objects  of  sense,  and  the
one-sided  spiritualism  which  disparages  the  outward.
It  represents,  like  life  itself,  a  combination  of  anti-
theses. But  this  superficial  conflict  of  elements  is
inevitable  as  long  as  man  is  regarded  in  action.  For
the  present  we  must  speak,  even  as  we  must  think,
according  to  the  limitations  which  are  imposed  upon
us.  But  these  limitations  are  shewn,  in  Christ,  not
to  be  inherent  in  our  personality.  Our  individual
personality  is  shewn  to  be  contributory  to  some  vaster
'  personality.'  The  unity  of  which  we  are  conscious
becomes  the  figure  of  a  unity  of  humanity,  of  a  unity
of  creation.


CAMBRIDGE:  PRINTED  BY  c.  j.  CLAY,  M.A.  &  SONS,  AT  THB  UNIVERSITY  PRESS.


MESSRS  MACMILLAN  &  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS.

WORKS  BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR.

Just  Ready.     Globe  8vo.     6s.

ESSAYS   ON    THE  HISTORY  OF    RELIGIOUS  THOUGHT  IN

THE  WEST.     By  BROOKE   Foss  WESTCOTT,  D.D.,  D.C.L.,  Lord  Bishop  of
Durham,  Honorary  Fellow  of  Trinity  and  King's  Colleges,  Cambridge.
TIMES : — "  Their  scholarly  execution,  their  graceful  style,  their  devout  temper,
and  their  wealth  of  suggestion  and  instruction,  should  render  these  masterly  essays
as  welcome  as  if  they  were  new  to  all  serious  readers."

SCOTSMAN: — •"  Readers  of  all  shades  of  opinion  will  recognise  in  the  volume
a  work  of  high  excellence,  and  find  in  it  everywhere  evidence  of  copious  learning  and
sympathetic  and  penetrative  insight."

8vo.     Cloth.
THE   EPISTLES   OF    ST   JOHN.      The  Greek  Text,  with  Notes.

Second  Edition.     I2S.  6d.

THE    EPISTLE    TO   THE    HEBREWS.     The    Greek    Text,   with

Notes  and  Essays.     141.

CLASSICAL  REVIEW:—"  It  would  be  difficult  to  find  in  the  whole  range  of
exegetical  literature  a  volume  at  the  same  time  so  comprehensive  and  so  compact.  It
possesses  characteristics  which  will  command  for  it  the  permanent  attention  of
scholars."

Crown  8vo.     Cloth.

GENERAL  SURVEY  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  CANON  OF
THE  NEW  TESTAMENT  DURING  THE  FIRST  FOUR  CENTURIES.  Sixth
Edition.  los.  6d.

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  THE  FOUR  GOSPELS.

Seventh  Edition.     ios.  6d.

THE  GOSPEL  OF  THE  RESURRECTION.    Seventh  Edition.   6s.
THE  BIBLE  IN  THE  CHURCH.     Tenth  Edition.     i8mo.     4j.  6d.
THE  CHRISTIAN   LIFE,   MANIFOLD  AND  ONE.     is.  6ti.
ON  THE  RELIGIOUS  OFFICE  OF  THE  UNIVERSITIES.     Ser-

mons.     4S.  6d.

THE  HISTORIC  FAITH.     Third  Edition.     6j.

THE  REVELATION  OF  THE  RISEN  LORD.     Fourth  Edition.    6s.

THE  REVELATION  OF  THE  FATHER.     6s.

CHRISTUS  CONSUMMATOR.     Second  Edition.     6s.

SOME  THOUGHTS  FROM  THE  ORDINAL,     is.  6d.

SOCIAL  ASPECTS  OF  CHRISTIANITY.     6s.

GIFTS  FOR  MINISTRY.     Addresses  to  Candidates  for  Ordination.

is.  (xt.
THE  VICTORY  OF  THE  CROSS.     Sermons  preached  during  Holy

Week,  1888,  in  Hereford  Cathedral,     y.  (xi.
FROM  STRENGTH  TO   STRENGTH.     Three   Sermons   (in  Me-

moriam  J.  B.  D.).    zs.
ESSAYS.     Globe  8vo.

WESTCOTT  AND    HORT'S   GREEK  TESTAMENT.

Crown  8vo.

THE  NEW  TESTAMENT  IN  THE  ORIGINAL  GREEK.  Revised
Text.  2  vols.  ids.  dd.  each.  Vol.  I.  Text.  Vol.  II.  The  Introduction  and
Appendix.

i8mo.

THE  NEW  TESTAMENT  IN  THE  ORIGINAL  GREEK.  An
Edition  for  Schools.  The  Text  revised  by  Bishop  WESTCOTT  and  Dr  HORT.
4$.  6tf. ;  roan,  $s.  (xi. ;  morocco,  6s.  (xl.

MACMILLAN   AND   CO.,    LONDON.


MESSRS  MACMILLAN  &  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS.

BY   THE  LATE  BISHOP  LIGHTFOOT.
St  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Galatians.     A  Revised  Text,

with  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Dissertations.     loth  Edition.     8vo.
\is.

St  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Philippians.     A  Revised

Text,  with  Introduction,  Notes  and  Dissertations.     9th  Edition.
8vo.      1 2  s.

St  Paul's  Epistles  to  the  Colossians  and  to
Philemon.  A  Revised  Text,  with  Introduction,

Notes  and  Dissertations,     pth  Edition.     8vo.      iis.

Primary  Charge.  Two  Addresses,  delivered  to  the
Clergy  of  the  Diocese  of  Durham,  1882.  8vo.  is.

The  Apostolic  Fathers.  Part  I.  St  Clement  of
Rome.  A  Revised  Text,  with  Introductions,  Notes,
Dissertations,  and  Translations,  i  vols.,  8vo.  32.?.

The  Apostolic  Fathers.  Part  II.  St  Ignatius  to
St  Poly  carp.  Revised  Texts,  with  Introductions,
Notes,  Dissertations,  and  Translations.  3  vols.  2nd  Edition.
Demy  8vo.  48^.

A  Charge  delivered  to  the  Clergy  of  the  Diocese
of  Durham,  Nov.  25th,  1886.  Demy  8vo.  2s.

Essays  on  the  Work  entitled  "  Supernatural
Religion."  8vo.  los.  6d.

Apostolic  Fathers.  Abridged  Edition.  With  short
Introductions,  Greek  Text,  and  English  Translation.  8vo.

Uniform  Edition  of
BISHOP  LIGHTFOOT'S   SERMONS.

Crown  8vo.,  Cloth.     6s.  each.

Leaders    in   the    Northern    Church.     New   Edition.
Ordination   Addresses   and   Counsels   to   Clergy.

New  Edition.

Cambridge  Sermons.

Sermons  preached  in  St  Paul's  Cathedral.

Sermons  on  Special  Occasions.

MACMILLAN   AND   CO.,    LONDON.


•


University  of  California

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY

405  Hilgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388

Return  this  material  to  the  library

from  which  it  was  borrowed.


3   1158  00306  8144
