COLLECTANEA HERMETICA 


EDITED BY 


W. WYNN WESTCOTT, M.B. D.P.H. 








VOLUME V. 


SOMNIUM SCIPIONIS 


TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH 
WITH AN ESSAY 
“THE VISION OF SCIPIO 
CONSIDERED AS A FRAGMENT OF 
THE MYSTERIES” 
By L. O. 





THE GOLDEN VERSES OF PYTHAGORAS 


By A. E. A. 


THE SYMBOLS OF PYTHAGORAS 


By S. A. 


SOMNIUM SCIPIONIS. 
THE VISION OF SCIPIO 


BY 


Marcus TULLIUS CICERO. 


ICERO, who was almost the most celebrated orator 

of antiquity, was born B.c. 107, and was educated by 
Crassus. He served as a Roman warrior under Sylla, 
and subsequently became a philosopher. After many 
years he entered political life, becoming Questor of 
Sicily, then Ædile, and finally Consul. At the last he 
retired to Tusculum, and was assassinated B.c. 43. He 
left many classical works, among which are the beautiful 
essays on ‘“‘ Friendship ” and on “Old Age.” His only 
mystical work was the Somnium Scipionis, or Vision of 
Scipio, of which a translation by L. O. is here pro- 
duced, with an Essay upon its connection with the 
doctrines taught in the ancient Mysteries. 

This Scipio was named Africanus the Younger ; he 
had died in B.c. 128; he was the grandson by adoption 
of Publius Cornelius Scipio Africanus the Elder. The 
account of this dream or Vision is put into the mouth 
of the younger Scipio Africanus, who relates that, in 
early youth, when he first served in Africa he visited 
the Court of Masinissa, the steady friend of the Romans, 
and particularly of the Cornelian family. During the 
feasts and entertainments of the day, the conversation 


4 


turned on the words and actions of the first great Scipio. 
His adopted grandson having retired to rest, the Shade 
of the departed hero appeared to him in sleep, darkly 
foretold the future events of his life, and encouraged 
him to tread in the paths of Patriotism and true glory, 
by announcing the reward prepared in a future state for 
those who have served their country faithfully in this 
life. The scene is laid in the suburban garden of the 
younger Africanus, and the ‘dvamatis persone consist of 
certain intimate friends and acquaintances. 

A few literary and suggestive Notes have been added. 


THE VISION OF SCIPIO 


Translated by L. O. 


WHEN I came to Africa, where, as you know, I was 
Tribune to the Fourth Legion of soldiers, under the 
Consul Manius Manilius, nothing appeared to me more 
desirable than that I should meet Masinissa, a Monarch 
who had ever been most friendly to our family for just 
reasons. When I came to him, the old man, having 
embraced me, wept, and, after a pause, looked up to 
Heaven: “ Ah, thanks,” said he, “to Thee I render, 
Oh highest Sun, and to ye other Celestial companions, 
in that before I depart this life, I am permitted to 
behold in my own Kingdom and under these skies P. 
Cornelius Scipio, whose name itself refreshes me: for, 
never from my soul has the memory of that best and 
most invincible of men departed!” Then I inquired 
of him concerning the affairs of his Kingdom, and he 
of me respecting our Republic; and our day thus passed 
in lengthened conference. After a royal entertainment 
our talk again drew out into the far night, when the old 
man would speak of nothing save the elder Scipio 
{Africanus Major): everything about him he remem- 
bered, not only his deeds, but even his sayings. When, 
therefore, we parted to retire to rest, what with the 
journey and our nocturnal sitting, I was more than 
usually tired and fell sound asleep. 

Whereupon (as I believe arising out of the subject of 
our talk ;—for it often happens that our thoughts and 
conversation produce some such result in sleep as that 


6 


which Ennius? relates to have happened concerning 
Homer, whom it appears he was frequently accustomed 
to meditate upon and to talk about during his waking 
hours) Africanus appeared to me in a form* which I 
recognised more from his bust than frora my knowledge 
of the man himself. When I recognised him, I trem- 
bled indeed: he, however, speaking said, ‘ Take 
courage and banish fear, O Scipio; commit to memory 
what I have to say.” 

“ Seest thou yonder City, which, compelled by me to 
submit to the Roman people, yet renews its former 
wars, unable to remain at peace? (Here he shewed 
me Carthage from a certain clear and brilliant spot in 
the celestial heights, full of stars) and to the assault of 
which thou comest, as yet a mere boy? This City, in 
two years from the present time, thou as Consul shalt 
overthrow, and that hereditary name, which hitherto 
thou bearest from us, shall belong to thee by thine own 
exertions. When moreover Carthage has been razed 
by thee, thou shalt effect thy Triumph and be made 
Censor; then as Legate thou shalt proceed to Egypt, 
Syria, Asia and Greece, being made Consul a second 
time during thy absence, and undertaking thy greatest 
war, destroy Numantia. But when thou are borne upon 
the triumphal car to the Capitol, thou shalt find the 
Republic thrown into confusion by the policy of my 
grandson.® Here, O Africanus, it will be necessary for 
thee to display to the Fatherland the light of thy spirit, 
thy genius, and thy wisdom; at this period of thy life 
I see but darkly the course of thy destiny, though when 
thine age shall have completed eight times seven 
circuits and returns of the Sun, thus bringing thee to 
the fatal epoch of thy life’ by the natural circuit. of 
these two numbers (each of which is held to be perfect, 
the one from a different reason to the other); to thee 
alone and to thy name the whole State will turn; to 
thee, as Senator, all good people, the Latin allies and 


7 


the Latins themselves shall turn; thou shalt be the 
one upon whom the whole salvation of the State shall 
rest, and, lest misfortune befall, it behoves thee as 
dictator to firmly establish the Republic if you would 
escape the impious hands’ of thy kinsmen:” at this 
portion of the recital Laelius? cried out and the others 
bitterly lamented, but Scipio, smiling slowly, said: ‘I 
beseech you not to arouse me from slumber; peace for 
a little, and hear the rest.” 

“But, O Africanus, in order that thou mayest be 
the more devoted to the welfare of the Republic, mark 
this well: for all those who have guarded, cherished, 
and assisted their Fatherland, a particular place in 
Heaven is assigned, where the blessed enjoy everlasting 
life. For nothing on earth is more acceptable to that 
supreme Deity who reigns over the whole Universe, 
than those assemblages and combinations of men united 
by Law which we call States; the rulers and pre- 
servers whereof coming forth from this place, return 
thither.” 

At this point, although I was thoroughly terrified, 
not so much by the fear of death, as by the treachery 
of my own kinsmen, I asked notwithstanding whether 
he himself was really alive and my father Paulus and 
others whom we believed to be annihilated ? 

“« Yea,” said he, ‘‘1n very truth, those still live who have 
flown forth from the bonds of the body as from a prison: 
for indeed, what is called your life, is but a death ! 
Why,dost thou not see thy father Pauluscoming to thee ?” 

At that sight I indeed burst forth into a flood 
of tears: he, on the other hand, embracing, kissed me 
and forbade me to weep; and then, when my tears had 
been repressed, and I began to be able to speak, 
« Prithee tell me,” said I, “ most revered and excellent 
father: Since this is life, as I have heard Africanus 
say, Why do I tarry upon Earth? Why do I not 
hasten to come hither to you? ” 


8 


“Tt may not be,” he replied, “for, unless that 
Deity who is the Lord of this Universe which 
thou beholdest, shall liberate thee from the prison 
of your body,” hither approaching, it is not possible 
to come. For men are born under this Law to be 
faithful guardians of that Globe which thou seest 
in the midst of this Universe and which is called the 
Earth: anda Soul has been given to them from those 
sempiternal fires which you call Stars and Constella- 
tions; these being spherical and globular bodies, 
animated with divine Souls, pursue their circling orbits 
with marvellous celerity. Wherefore, O Publius,” both 
by thee and all pious persons, the Soul should be 
retained in the keeping of the body: not without His 
command, by whom that Soul is given to you, must it 
depart from mortal life, lest you should appear to be 
untrue to that duty to Mankind which has been assigned 
to you by the Deity. But do thou cultivate justice and 
piety, O Scipio, following in the steps of thy Grandsire 
and of myself, who begat thee. These qualities, 
although excellent among parents and relations, become 
still more noble when practised towards one’s Country : 
through this life lies the road to Heaven and to the 
assemblage of those, who have already lived upon earth 
and now, released from the body, inhabit this place 
which thou seest (this Sphere shone forth with the most 
resplendent brightness amid blazing stars) and which, 
after the Greeks, you call the Milky Way. From this 
place all other bodies appeared to my gaze exceedingly 
bright and marvellous. There were, moreover, those 
Stars which are never seen from Earth: and the mag- 
nitude of all of them were such as we have never sus- 
pected: among these I beheld the smallest’ to be the 
farthest from Heaven and the nearest to Earth, shining 
with a borrowed Light. Moreover, the spheres of the 
Stars far transcended the size of the Earth. Thus, the 
Earth itself already appeared small to me, so that I 


9 


was grieved to observe how small a part of its surface 
we in reality occupy.’’” 

As I continued to gaze steadfastly, Africanus continu- 
ing said, ‘“ How long wilt thy mind remain rivetted to 
the Earth? Dost thou not behold into how glorious a 
Temple thou art come? Now know that the Universe 
consists of nine circles or rather Spheres, all connected 
together, one of which is celestial and the furthest off, 
embracing all the rest, the supreme Deity preserving 
and governing the others. In this sphere are traced 
the eternal revolutions of the Stars and to it are 
subject the seven spheres which revolve backwards 
with a contrary motion to that of the Celestial Sphere. 
The first (of these Seven) Spheres is occupied” by the 
Star which on Earth is called Saturn. Next comes the 
sphere of that splendid Star, salutary and fortunate to 
the human race, called Jupiter. Then comes the Red 
Sphere, terrible to the Earth, which you cali Mars. 
Following beneath these spheres, and in almost the 
middle region, is placed the Sun, the Leader, Chief 
and Governor of the other Lights, the mind” of the 
World andthe organizing principle,—of such wondrous 
magnitude that it illuminates and impregnates every 
part of the Universe with its Light. The Spheres of 
Venus and Mercury in their respective courses follow 
the Sun as companions. In the lowest Sphere the 
Moon revolves illumined by the rays of the Sun. 
Below this in truth nothing exists which is not subject 
to death and decay, save indeed the Souls, which by the 
gift of the Gods are bestowed upon the human race. 
Above the Moon all things are eternal, but the sphere 
of the Earth, which occupies a middle place and comes 
ninth® does not move: it is the lowest and to it all 
ponderable bodies are born by their own gravity.” 

When I had recovered from my amazement at the 
sight of these things, ‘‘ What,” said I, ‘‘is this sweet 
and wondrous melody which fills my ears ? ” 


IO 


“This,” said he, ‘is that harmony, which, affected 
by the mingling of unequal intervals, yet notwithstand- 
ing in harmonious proportions and with reason so 
separated, is due to the impulse and movement of the 
spheres themselves: the light with the heavier tones 
combined,—the various sounds uniformly going to 
make up one grand symphony.” For, not with silence, 
can such motions be urged forward, and Nature leads 
us to the conclusion that the extremes give forth a low 
note at the one end and a high note at the other. Thus 
the celestial sphere, whose motion in its starlight course 
is more rapid, gives forth a sharp and rousing sound: 
the gravest tone being that of the lunar sphere, which 
is lowest ; but the Earth, the ninth sphere, remains im- 
movable, always fixed in the lowest seat encompassing 
the middle place of the Universe. Moreover, the 
motions of those eight spheres which are above the 
earth, and of which the force of two” is the same, 
cause seven sounds supported by regular intervals ; 
which number is the connecting principle of almost all 
things. Learned men, having imitated this divine 
mystery with stringed instruments and vocal har- 
monies, have won for themselves a return to this place, 
just as others, who, endowed with superior wisdom, 
have cultivated the divine sciences even in human 
life.” 

‘“ Now to this melody the stopped ears of men have 
become deaf ;” nor is there any duller sense in you. 

ust as at that place which is called Catadupa,” where 
the Nile falls from the highest Mountains, the people 
living there lose the sense of hearing on account of the 
magnitude of the sound, so, indeed, such a tremendous 
volume of sound arises from the rapid revolution of the 
whole Cosmos that the ears of men are not capable of re- 
ceiving it, just as you are unable to look straight at the 
Sun whose rays would blind the eye and conquer the 
sense.” 


II 


Filled with wonder at these things, my eyes ever and 
anon wandered back to Earth. 

Hereupon Africanus said: “I perceive that even now 
you gaze upon the habitation and abode of mortals. 
But, if it appear as small to thee, as indeed it is, thus 
seen, strive ever after these heavenly things and lightly 
esteem those of earth. For what glory or renown 
really worthy of being sought after canst thou derive 
from the mouths of men. Thou seest that the earth is 
inhabited in scattered places confined within narrow 
limits, such inhabited regions are in themselves mere 
specks upon its surface with vast wildernesses inter- 
vening: and those who dwell upon the earth are not 
only separated thus, so that no communication Is possi- 
ble amongst them from the one to the other, but they 
occupy positions partly oblique, partly transverse, 
partly even opposite to yours; from these you can 
certainly hope for no glory. Also thou wilt perceive 
this same earth to be, as it were, circumscribed and en- 
circled by zones, two of which, the most widely 
separated and situated at each end under the very poles 
of heaven, are ice-bound as thou seest™*: while the 
middle and largest zone is burnt up with the heat of 
the Sun. Two zones are habitable, one of which lies 
to the South, those who dwell therein planting footsteps 
opposite to your own, and having nothing to do with 
your race. As to the other zone which you inhabit, 
and which is subject to the North wind, see how very 
slender a part has to do with you: for the whole surface 
inhabited by your race, restricted towards the poles and 
wider laterally, is indeed but a small island surrounded 
by the sea, which you call on earth the Atlantic, the 
Great Sea, or Ocean. Yet, notwithstanding its name, 
it is but small as thou seest. How then is it possible 
that from these known and cultivated countries either 
thy name or that of any of us can cross those Caucasian 
Mountains, which thou seest, or pass beyond the 


I2 


Ganges? Who, in the remaining parts of the East, in 
the uttermost regions of the wandering Sun, either in 
Northern or Southern Climes, will hear thy name? 
So then, with these parts taken away, dost thou indeed 
perceive within what narrow limits your glory seeks to 
spread itself; and how long even will those who sing 
your praises continue to do so? 

‘Yea, indeed, if generations hence posterity shall seek 
to perpetuate the fame of anyone of us handed down 
from father to son, yet notwithstanding, on account of 
fire and flood, which will inevitably happen at certain 
fixed periods” of time, we are unable to attain lasting 
renown, much less eternal glory. Moreover, of what 
importance are the things which shall be said concern- 
ing thee by those to be born hereafter, when no one 
who existed before will then be alive? More especially, 
when of those same men who are to come, not one 
will be able to remember the events of even one year. 
Now, according to common custom, men usually 
measure the year merely by the return of the sun, or, 
in other words, by the revolution of one star. But 
when the whole of the constellations shall return to the 
original positions from which they once set forth, thus 
restoring at long intervals the original configuration of 
the Heavens, then can that be truly called ‘the Great 
Year,’ within which period, I scarcely dare say how 
many generations of men are comprised. For, just as 
in time past, when the Soul of Romulus entered into 
these sacred abodes, the Sun appeared to fail and be 
extinguished, so when the Sun shall again fail in the 
same position and at the same time, then, when the 
Signs of the Zodiac shall have returned to their original 
position, and the Stars are recalled, the cycle of the 
Great Year shall be accomplished; of this enormous 
period of time, know that not a twentieth part has yet 
passed away.” 

« Wherefore, if thou despairest of a speedy return to 


13 


this quarter, wherein all things are prepared for great 
and excellent men, pray of what value is that human 
glory which can scarcely endure the smallest part of one 
cycle? And so, 1f you would look on high and fix your 
gaze on this state and your eternal home, thou shalt 
pay no heed to vulgar talk, neither allow thy actions to 
be influenced by the hope of human rewards. True 
virtue for its own sake should lead thee to real glory. 
Leave to others the care of ascertaining what they may 
say of you: they will assuredly speak of you beyond all 
doubt. Human fame is wholly restricted within these 
narrow limits which thou seest, and never at any time 
has anyone gained immortal renown, for that is impos- 
sible through the annihilation of men and the oblivion 
of posterity.”” 

Whereon I said, “ If indeed O, Africanus, for those 
who have deserved well of their country a Path, as it 
were, lies open to Heaven*”—although from my ‘youth 
up I have followed in the footsteps of yourself and my 
father, and never tarnished your great renown—now 
nevertheless, with such a prospect before me, I will 
strive much more vigilantly.” 

‘Strive on,” said he, “ with the assurance that it is 
not you who are subject to death, but your body. For 
thou art not what this form appears to be, but the real 
man is the thinking principle of each one—not the 
bodily form which can be pointed out with the finger.” 
Know this, then, that thou art a God,” inasmuch as 
Deity is that which has Will, sensation, memory, fore- 
sight, and who so rules, regulates and moves the body 
to which his charge is committed, just as the supreme 
Deity does the Universe, and as the Eternal God 
directs this Universe, which is in a certain degree 
subject to decay, so a sempiternal Soul moves the frail 
body. 

Now, that which is always in motion is eternal, 
whereas that which only communicates motion, and 


14 


which itself is put in motion by some other cause, must 
necessarily cease when the motive impulse is withdrawn. 
Accordingly that alone which moves spontaneously 
because it is ever all itself, never indeed ceases to move, 
and is moreover the source of motion in all things. 
Now a primary cause is not derived from any other 
cause; for forth from that do all things proceed, and 
from no other. That which springs from something 
else cannot be the primary cause, and if this indeed 
never had a commencement, neither will it ever have an 
end. For the primal cause once destroyed could neither 
be generated afresh from any other thing, nor itself 
produce anything else: for all things must necessarily 
proceed from the primal cause. This eternal principle 
of all Motion arises out of that which is moved by 
itself and of itself, and cannot therefore be born or 
perish ; or else of necessity the whole heavens must 
collapse, and all Nature come to a standstill, unable 
any longer to derive the impulse by which it was set in 
motion at the first. 

‘Since, accordingly, it is manifest that that is eternal 
which moves ofitself, who will deny this eternal principle to 
be a natural attribute of Souls. For everything which 
is moved by an external impulse is inanimate : but that, 
on the other hand, which energizes from within is truly 
animated, and this 1s the peculiar operation of the Soul. 
If then the Soul is the one thing above all, which is self 
motive, it certainly is not born, but eternal. Do thou 
then exercise this Soul of thine in the noblest pursuits: 
solicitude and care for the welfare of one’s country are 
the best: for, animated and controlled by these senti- 
ments, the Soul passes more swiftly to this sphere—its 
true home. And this may be the more speedily achieved 
if, while imprisoned in the body, it shall rise superior to 
terrestrial limitations, and by the contemplation of those 
things which are beyond the body, it shall abstract 
itself to the greatest degree from its earthly tabernacle. 


15 


“For the Souls of men who have delivered themselves 
over to the desires of the body, and of those women 
who, as abettors, have surrendered themselves, and by 
the impulse of passions obedient to sensual gratifica- 
tions, have violated the iaws of God and of Man, once 
liberated from the body, are whirled around this world, 
and such tortured Souls will not return to this place, 
save after many centuries.” 

Here he ceased, and I awoke from sleep. 


16 


THE VISION OF SCIPIO 
CONSIDERED AS A FRAGMENT 


OF THE MYSTERIES. 
By L. O. 


«To some he gave the ability of receiving the knowledge 
of Light, which may be taught, but to others, even when 
asleep, he extended the fruit of his strength.”—Synesios. 





As a literary production merely, this is one of the 
most beautiful and imaginative compositions bequeathed 
to us by Cicero. A careful examination of the ideas un- 
folded in its few short pages will prove instructive to 
every earnest student of the Mysteries—those great In- 
stitutions of Antiquity, guardians of a sacred science, 
the echoes of which still linger herein. This opinion 
has been entertained by more than one commentator 
upon the strength of internal evidence, and constitutes 
the raison d'être of the present translation. 

The Vision of Scipio is suggestive, resuming as it 
does so many of the leading conceptions involved in the 
mystical philosophy of the old world, and, in this 
respect, it but rarely happens that so much is conveyed 
in so brief a fragment. To those, however, who have 
grasped the many beauties of the Magian philosophy, 
or such traces of it as appear discernible in the lapse of 
time, any attempt to reconstruct the scattered fragments 
which remain to us must be welcome, and hence the 


L7 


object of this article is to examine the leading concep- 
tions of the Somnium, in order to arrive at a coherent 
view of the philosophy which underlies it. That philo- 
sophy, it is reasonable to conjecture, was alike the 
system inculcated in the ancient Mysteries of every 
nation—those Mysteries being considered as the organ- 
ised endeavour of illuminati to elucidate the great pro- 
blems of Life and Death, the nature of the Soul and its 
relation to the Deity. 

Men have ever found themselves face to face with 
these great difficulties, striving to unravel the skein of 
life with all the poverty of language, and the restrictions 
of human thought. But human thought alone is power- 
less for such sublime ascents—a higher faculty of the 
Soul being requisite. ‘‘ Strive,” says the Zoroastrian* 
Oracle, “to understand the Intelligible which exists be- 
yond the Mind, with the extended flame of an extended 
intellect.” 

The solution of these momentous questions is of the 
first importance, because of the moral consequences in- 
volved; morality being largely modified in scope and 
direction by the conclusions arrived at in philosophy. 
Thus the influence of a system of thought purely of the 
intellect, must obviously differ from that resulting in 
the case of a Religio-philosophical system: while it is 
worthy of remark that no influence has proved so 
powerful in the direction of human affairs—no sentiment 
so ineradicably implanted in the human breast—as that 
of Religion. Here lies the supreme bond of union be- 
tween all human beings—the most highly vitalized sen- 
timent of which humanity is capable. 

It seems probable that the Mysteries—which were 
almost cosmopolitan +—had for object to draw men 


* The Chaldean Oracles form Volume VI. of this Series. 


+ Vide L'immortalité de lame chez les anciens Egyptiens, by 
Wiedemann. 


18 


closer to each other by bonds of union deeper than 
those of mere worldly interest, and this was only possible 
byan appeal at once to both the philosophic and religious 
sides of the nature. Before the instinct of veneration had 
been dwarfed, as, generally speaking, it has now largely 
become, and, at a time when the whole activities of the 
higher mind functioned, so to speak, under the egis of 
Religion, it is net surprising that the Mysteries should 
have exerted an enormous influence in the lands where 
they were established. 

What, it will be asked, was the nature of the revela- 
tions vouchsafed to participants, or the benefit to be 
derived from initiation therein? Our information on 
this subject is confined to certain meagre historical de- 
tails, from which we gather that these Institutions pro- 
fessedly existed to celebrate the mythological histories 
associated with certain divinitics. That they were held 
in universal esteem and treated with profound reverence 
is certain—a fact which sufficiently points to the serious 
nature of these activities, and the lofty intentions which 
animated them. Indeed, it is difficult to understand 
how any suggestions to the contrary could gain credence 
in face of the fact that the most cultured and luminous 
minds in the past have contributed to elucidate our re- 
flections upon this subject—all the resources of poetry 
and philosophy in the early days of the world being 
mainly burthened with this one theme in some shape 
or form. 

The best thought of the ancient world was, to a large 
extent, the Theosophy we know to-day in another dress. 
From Plato to Proclus, from Homer to Ovid—the 
thoughts of such men have lived after them, and even 
if to-day largely misunderstood, they nevertheless suc- 
ceeded in investing the traditions of their time with a 
significance which none but a student of the Mysteries 
can hope to understand. 

The peculiar Mythoiogies of Egypt and Greece re- 


1g 


spectively were but the machinery of a symbolism, the 
interpretation of which formed alike the science of the 
Soul and the system of the Mysteries. Herein lay con- 
cealed those great truths which serve to explain the 
immediate mysteries of our environment, the develop- 
ment and elucidation of which served to enlighten and 
astonish the Neophyte; these culminating in appropriate 
theurgic formule, conferred a clearer hope of immor- 
tality—a perception of the Universal Presence, such as 
the Entheast* alone could derive. 

Needless to say that such results are not attainable 
by any process of thought per se: all that thought can 
do is to dimly apprehend a higher faculty of the Soul—a 
mode of perception transcending the merely intellectual. 

In the Vision of Scipio this higher faculty takes the 
form of a clairvoyant perception, a marvellous insight 
superior to all bodily limitations, whereby the con- 
sciousness is brought into.rapport with other worlds than 
those normally perceived by the senses. 

Apuleius, who was initiated into the Isiac Mysteries, 
thus refers to his experience: “ 1 approached the con- 
fines of death, and having trod on the threshold of 
Proserpine, I returned therefrom, being borne through all 
the elements. At midnight I saw the Sun shining with 
its brilliant Light, and I approached the presence of the 
Gods bzneath and the Gods above, and stood near and 
worshipped them. Behold, I have related to you things 
of which, though heard by you, you must necessarily 
remain ignorant.” + 

Although the initiates themselves appear to have re- 
mained true to their trust and we are thus denied a 
direct statement, professedly expounding the system 


* A word used by the Neoplatonic writers meaning ‘‘ Immersed 
in God.” 


+ Metamorphosis of Apuleius, 11th Book. 


20 


in question, there yet remain to us a collection of 
utterances attributed to Zoroaster and others, known as 
the Zoroastrian Oracles, which were continually ap- 
pealed to by the ablest commentators* on the Mysteries 
and are of great assistance in solving this difficult 
problem. These fragments tersely resume many of 
the most daring conceptions of mature thinkers and 
theurgists long ago—conceptions which endow Religion 
with enterprise and the Soul with God-like attributes. 
Little wonder then at the old proverb ‘“ Man, know 
thyself,’—when that knowledge involved so much. 
Such self-knowledge—the most profound homage that 
man can render to the divinity—was by no means an 
analysis of the human self, but an attempt to consider 
the principles working in the great Universe around us 
as all reflected in the total constitution of each human 
being. It is for this reason that the Vision of Scipio is 
apparently devoted to an exposition of the divine 
Potencies operating in the Universe around us. 

The Gods, in the antient conception, around which 
so many classic traditions have clustered, were repre- 
sentations through images and similitudes of certain 
mighty powers, considered to exist between Man and 
the Supreme Principle: these powers, although rooted 
in this Principle, were yet regarded as possessing 
energies distinct from their ineffable cause. ‘‘ These 
mighty powers,” says Taylor, “ are called by the Poets 
a Golden Chain, on account of their connection with 
each other and incorruptible nature, . . . . they 
are rooted in this Supreme Principle like trees in the 
Earth, which have a distinct energy of their own at the 
same time that they energize in conjunction with their 
cause.’’+ 





* Vide the writings of Proclus on the Philosophy cf Plato, also 
of Plotinus and Porphyry. 


t Taylor’s Miscellany, p. 129. 


2I 


But what, it may be asked, about the Supreme 
Principle of things, that which is so incomparable to its 
attributes :— was this not lost sight of in the multitude 
of divinities? ‘“ To that God,” says Porphyry, ‘“‘ who is 
above all things, neither external speech ought to be 
addressed, nor yet that which is inward, when it is 
defiled by the passion of the soul, but we should 
venerate him in pure silence and through pure concep- 
tions of his nature.” 

With this view in mind the student is led to regard 
the Pantheon of any Nation as a collection of symbols, 
more or less appropriate, and intended to convey some 
idea of the totality of divine attributes. 

It is moreover comparatively easy to discover certain 
fundamental similarities which may be said to underlie 
the great classic Pantheons, and such comparisons 
clearly indicate a unity of conception which enables us 
to identify as essentially one and the same the Mystical 
Systems pervading alike Chaldea and Greece on the 
one hand, and Egypt on the other. 

The divinities of Mythology were symbols ;—symbols 
which translated to the trained perception of the 
initiate the factors of his great equation, those supra- 
mundane forces which are most reverently defined as 
deific. One in many and many in One. It was the 
intimate knowledge of these and of the various entities 
correlated therewith which constituted the ‘ Divine 
Sciences ” to which reference is made in the Vision of 
Scipio. 

These Divine Sciences, by the practice of which wise 
men have attained release from the gross and the 
nether, gaining the upper air and endless light, were 
formulated on Universal Truths, proceeding from 
Universals to Particulars. The unspeakable harmony 
in the bosom of the world which causes all things to 
sympathise with all, justified the Hermetic Axiom, 


22 


Quri se cognoscit, in se omnia cognoscit,* and hence our con- 
sideration of Macrocosmic truths implies in reality much 
more than their merely phenomenal observance would 
seem to warrant. 

The nine Spheres alluded to in this Vision, and 
which for the purposes of study are more properly 
regarded as either seven or ten—are primal powers and 
the roots alike of force and form. Hence the “ divine 
sciences ” derived from the decimal numeration rest 
upon a basis of mathematical accuracy—mathematics 
being an exact science. Here we find the first traces 
of the Kabalistic Sephiroth,—three Triads of Powers 
resumed in a Tenth,—the Ennead or procession of nine 
Gods occurring alike in Chaldean and Egyptian Theo- 
logy as well as in the Platonic system. 

This idea was no doubt based upon the principle that 
as the numbers from 1 to 10 formed the base of every 
possible numerical variation, so every manifested thing 
in Nature is ultimately referable to these Ten primordial 
powers, for number guides form and lies at the root of 
sound. Pursuing this conception further, it will be 
seen that the linear equivalents of numbers 1 and 2cannot 
of themselves produce a concrete form: for the first 
would be represented by one straight line, and the 
second by two straight lines, neither of which can en- 
close a space. These two numbers must therefore ever 
remain abstractions, and the succeeding number Three 
become the first concrete expression : on the other hand, 


* Who knows himself knows all things in himself. 


+ Compare also the Jupiter, Neptune and Pluto of the Greeks and 
Romans ruling respectively over three great Realms—Heaven, 
“The Sea,” and Infernal Regions. Alsoin Lydus (de Mensibus) p. 
121, Taylor, we read ‘‘ That the number nine is divine, receiving 
its completion from three triads, and preserving the summits of 
Theology according to the Chaldaic philosophy as Porphyry informs 
us.” 


23 


the number Ten is a synthetical return to Unity, or the 
commencement of a fresh series. It is for this reason 
that the objective powers of manifestation are septenary, 
and these, corresponding to their geometrical forms, are 
also allied to colours and sounds, as suggested in the 
Somnium. 

These Seven divine forces were anciently supposed to 
reside in the Planets, the ruling intelligences of which 
were thus regarded as the Vicegerents of the Sephirotic 
powers; and the administration not only of the whole 
physical world, but even of human affairs, came to be 
attributed to the celestial wanderers. 

This Septenate—called also the ‘‘ Tree of Life ’’—was 
traced in every created thing—in the Animal, Vegetable, 
and Mineral departments. This theoretical procession, 
from primal natures down to the more complex, also 
laid the foundation of Alchemy, for some subjects, from 
the simple integrity of their nature, were considered as 
peculiarly appropriate vehicula for the Anima Mundi. 

It is important to notice in the Vision of Scipio, that 
the Planets are regarded as in a way distinct from the 
Spheres within which they energize, and here also lies 
a conception which will repay attention.* According to 
Hermetic teaching, everything which has culminated in 
idea or materiality—in form, per se, or its physical ex- 
pression—is regarded as ensphered, and thereby indi- 
vidualized: such intangible and magnetic circuli are 
conceived to be forces evolving form—form being static 
force. Each individual or entity—-whether a stone, a 
plant, an animal, or a man—energizes according to its 
nature, f.e., gives expression to the archetype of its 
sphere, and this is the work of evolution: while the 


* “ According to the Orphic theology, each of the planets is fixed 
in aluminous ethereal sphere called odoTHsS or Wholeness, because it 
is a part with a total subsistence and is analogous to the sphere 
of the fixed stars.” Metamorphosis of Apuleius, eleventh book, 
Taylor's translation. 


24 


crown of manifested life is naturally considered to be 
the production of spiritually perfect man—the form of 
forms. 

In just the same way as the planetary spheres are 
here said to be comprised within the sphere of the fixed 
Stars, so all entities are vested in the Anima Mundi in 
varying degree, according to vehiculum; in the higher 
kingdoms increased complexity obtains, culminating in 
the human being—as it is said, “ Oh, Man of a daring 
nature, thou subtil production ! ”* 

The Unity of the Divine One—“ circumscribing the 
Heavens with convex form ’”’—which is considered to 
underlie all manifestation, is a necessary conception to 
the doctrines of Macrocosm and Microcosm, the greater 
and lesser worlds: that which is a part, of necessity 
partakes of the nature of the whole, and thus every 
entity 1s a microcosm, or little world, reflecting the 
greater world or macrocosm after a certain formula—- 
but reflection involves reversal. This latter truth, re- 
sumed also in the old axiom, ‘‘ As above, so below, but 
after another manner,” is probably the explanation of 
more than one incongruity in the Somnium. 

Man being made in the likeness of the Gods, the 
planetary forces find their representatives in the con- 
stitution of his being, but whereas in macrocosmic 
action their operation 1s, as it were, without within—in 
the human organism it israther within without, and not 
only are the Seven great Sephirotic powers distributed 
throughout the entire human system as a whole, but 
also the three worlds in Man, vtz., the head, the chest, 
and vital parts, are said to each contain Seven important 
centres or orifices.+ 


* See Vol. VI. The Zoroastrian Oracles. 


t+ Vide Sepher Yetzivah, Westcott, and Mather’s Kabbalah Unveiled 
p. 50. 


25 


In the ancient conception, the Planets were the presi- 
dential heads of the elemental permutations—exciting 
forces which communicated their own peculiar energies 
through one or another of the Signs of the Zodiac. To 
understand the action of the Planets, it is necessary to 
consider what these Signs of the Zodiac are. The 
celestial definition is of course familiar to everyone, but 
that does not throw light on the Chaldean theory. The 
twelve constellations were related to the three con- 
ditions of each of the four elements of the ancients, thus 
making twelve elemental variations in all: these are 
not, however, to be confounded with the Fire, Air, 
Water, and Earth usually recognized under these terms, 
but to the subtil ethers underlying them, and necessary 
for the manifestation of the gross elements. Thus the 
fiery Signs, viz., Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius, were all 
considered to transmit the influence of subtil Fire, but 
in three different conditions, these being respectively 
the Fiery, Watery, and Airy degrees of ætheric Fire— 
and so on with each of the other elemental triplicities. 

In one complete diurnal revolution of the Sun, the 
successive influences of the whole of these twelve con- 
stellations are transmitted around the circuit of our 
Earth: this would give an average time of two hours to 
each Sign, during which its elemental current would be 
operative.* These influences are intensified, or the re- 
verse, by the presence or absence of the planets from 
the Signs, because some planets are considered to 
harmonize with the elemental vibrations of certain Signs, 
and vice versd. 

This, in its human application, will be the better 
understood when it is stated that the four elements re- 
ferred to were especially connected with the constitution 
of the human being, and the proportion in which these 


* Compare the Eastern theory of the Tatwas. 


26 


mingled would thus regulate the temperament of the in- 
dividual under the regimen of the planets. According 
to the Hermetic system, it is only when these ætheric 
vibrations are disposed with due interval and proper 
balance that the spirit can berendered manifest—the dead 
Osiris be raised to life, and the Lord of this World enter 
into his Kingdom. Some Souls lack qualities in which 
others abound, but the perfect man is fully representa- 
tive. The elemental constitution of the individual is 
derived from the vivific fountains of Nature’s energies: 
the Zodiacal hierarchies having successively endowed 
the human race at certain stages of its evolution, under 
the presidency of the Sephirotic powers. 

The history of human evolution passing in its different 
phases, from the blackness of putrefaction “ through all 
the colours,” to the golden glory of spiritual perfection, 
presents a perfect parallel with the Alchemical process 
of the “ Great Work,” with which, indeed, in a major 
aspect it is identical. The period of the Annus Magnus, 
or Great Year, comprising 25,868 solar years, or there- 
abouts, is that of one complete ‘ circulation,” for a 
minor revolution of the Zodiacal powers is both begun 
and finished within that time. The great celestial phe- 
nomena thus become coincident with the progress of 
the Race, and its final apotheosis approximately pre- 
dicable. 

The Earth is now under the dominion of Sorrow and 
Sadness: ‘* When, Oh Lord of the Universe, shall she 
turn from her evil ways, and again behold Thy face? ” 

« The music of the Spheres, *—a doctrine attributed 
to Pythagoras (who probably learnt it from the 
Egyptians)—is another cardinal Mystery tenet: by the 
skilful blending of these celestial harmonies, we are 


* Vide “ Creation by Voice and the Ennead of Hermopolis,” 
Maspero. 


27 


told, sages achieve their apotheosis. This is an allusion 
to the secret of the Lagash (mystical speech or incan- 
tation) and probably has the same significance as the 
Seven Thunders of Revelations (accompanied by 
lightning). As itis written, ‘‘Thy splendour, Oh Lord, 
shall fill the ends of the Universe!” But, in addition 
to this, the subtil forces of our spiritual being have 
long been denoted by the Rainbow of Glory, our per- 
ception of which is the promise of a new life. 

This blessed vision has been vouchsafed to other 
Seers of the World. Hai Ebn Yokdhan also perceived 
and described the essences of those Spheres: in each 
“ he saw distinct immaterial essences, like the image of 
the Sun reflected from one glass to another, according 
to the order of the Spheres . . . inall he dis- 
covered infinite beauty, brightness and pleasure, such 
as neither eye hath seen, nor ear heard, nor hath it 
entered into the heart of man . . . except those 
who have attained it or experimentally known it.” 

No wonder then at the exclamation of the younger 
Scipio, “ Quid moroy in terris? Quin huc ad vos 
venire propero ?”’+ 

To so reasonable a suggestion as this the reply given 
is not one which it is easy to appreciate. Upon this. 
head Plato observes :—“ The instruction in the doctrine 
given in the Mysteries that we human beings are ina 
kind of prison, and that we ought not to free ourselves 
from it or seek to escape, appears to me difficult to be 
understood, and not easy to apprehend.” } 

On the other hand, itis of course not clear that the 
suicide really escapes from his prison by reason of 


* Vide Platonist, Vol. II., p. 335. 


+ ‘(Why tarry upon the earth? Why do I not hasten to come 
to thee ? ”' 


ł Phedo 16: 


28 


having put off the material body: the explanation 
appears to be that the term of our life period is imposed 
by the astral forces prior to birth, and is therefore not 
dependent for its determination on physical circum- 
stance during the individual career. The result there- 
fore of such an abrupt termination of human life as 
that involved by suicide,* would be to transfer the life 
energies to the astral centres where they would still be 
operative, thereby enormously intensifying the un- 
impeded phantasy of excarnate life to which the Soul 
of the suicide would be subject. 

In early life the disciples of the magi learnt to resolve 
the bonds of proscription, and by loosening the ungirders 
of the Soul, to enter the immeasurable region. 

“Explore the River of the Soul,” says the Oracle, 
t so that, having become a servant to the body, you 
“ may again rise to the order from which you descended, 
‘joining works to sacred reason.” 

The Magian and Hermetic philosophies appear to 
have persistently considered the body as the charnel 
house of the Soul, ‘‘occultly intimating that the death 
of the Soul was nothing more than a profound union 
with the ruinous bonds of the body.’’} 

Perplexing possibly, but none the less is it a great 
truth that the exterior and sensuous life is death to the 
highest energies of the Soul, for all divine natures are 
incorporeal, 

This identification of the spiritual and, comparatively 
speaking, immortal being, with the impermanent and 
fleeting nature, was overcome by the purifications. The 
method adopted seems to have been that, after a certain 
period of rigour of life and practice of the virtues, the 
latter were, so to speak, confirmed and established by 


* Vile Eleusinian and Bacchic Mysteries, p. 31 
+ Taylor. 


29 


initiation into the Sacred Mysteries. Julian says, 
« The Oracles of the Gods declare that through purity- 
ing ceremonies, not the Soul only, but bodies them- 
selves become worthy of receiving much assistance 
and health: ‘for (say they) the mortal vestment of 
bitter matter will by these means be preserved.’ ”* 

According to Plato, “ Purification is to be derived 
from the five mathematical disciplines, viz., from 
Arithmetic, Geometry, Stereometry, Music and 
Astronomy.” But the parts of initiation into the 
sacred Mysteries were also five, and the first of these 
parts consisted of the purification. ‘‘ The fifth grada- 
tion isthe most perfect felicity . . . and according 
to Plato an assimilation to divinity as far as it is possi- 
ble to mankind.”’}+ It is possible that this five-fold 
initiation had reference to the regimen of the four 
elements of the ancients and the Eternal Spirit operat- 
ing therein. f 

The Hermetic doctrine, which explains and resumes 
these ideas, considers these four Elements to intervene, 
as it were, between man and the divine Spirit. They 
are the Zones immediately penetrated by Souls depart- 
ing this life, and their period of detention therein is regu- 
lated by the past spent life. Some few Souls coming forth 
pure, traverse these without let or hindrance and others 
require a long purification therein. The following 
allegorical fragment of Empedocles, cited by Plutarch, 
is doubtless a true echo of the ancient Mystery teaching 
concerning this matter. Speaking of the unpurified 
Souls which enter these Regions, he thus describes the 
treatment they undergo: ‘‘ The ethereal force pursues 
them towards the Sea. The Sea vomits them forth 
upon its shores, the Earth in turn flings them upwards 


* Julian Orat, V., P. 334. } Mathematica, Theon of Smyrna. 
t Vide Hermes in Asclepios, Part III. 


30 


to the untiring Sun, and the Sun again drives them back 
into the Whirlwind of Space. Thus all the elements 
toss them from one to another, and all hold them in 
horror.” 

Purity of Soul is therefore a sine gud non to all, who, 
while yet upon the Earth, would come ‘forth from the 
bands of body step by step.” But purity itself is not 
sufficient, it must be accompanied by Intelligence and 
Will: Intelligence to direct the life to the highest Good, 
Will to preserve the “equilibrium of balance,’—that 
steady mean between two opposing forces, which to 
pursue is indeed difficult. 

The exhortation to devote attention to divine things, 
while faithfully performing the duties of practical life, is 
one which must echo universal response. The calms of 
lofty contemplation expand our being, enlarging the 
purview of life, and the true dignity ot the Soul is alone 
maintained when in alliance with its own divine summit. 
For not until the Spirit has penetrated beyond the 
limitations of body, and the mind been raised amid the 
stately solitudes of the Universal Temple, can the Man 
be said to be really Man, or the “ Mercury of the philo- 
sophers”’ “ truly animated.” 

The value of right motive in the direction of human 
ife is forcibly exemplified in the Somnium, and while 
the noblest activities in incarnation are recognised to 
be those which benefit collective interests, yet the fal- 
lacy of identifying the self with a life of even political 
celebrity or warlike achievement for their own sake, is 
clearly shown ; personal fame is but the meteoric gleam 
flashing at intervals down the avenues of time, and 
cannot permanently endure. The cataclysms of Water 
and Fire, which at regular intervals visit our Earth, 
are vicissitudes too sweeping and vast in their nature to 


* Asclepios, Part X. 


3I 


permit the unbroken continuity of the human race ; 
these ‘‘ baptisms” of the two primal elements confirm 
and initiate each new phase in the great work of the 
world’s perfectionment: marking stages alike in the 
spiritual history of Mankind. 

The human Soul—the child of the Night of time— 
tends ever to the phenomenal and transient on the one 
hand, and the noumenal and essential on the other: 
situated between the divine and the animal, it is 
assimilable unto either. The channel to the other 
world is a still-covered way—often impassible, formed 
of spiritual aspirations—stepping-stones across the 
River of Lethe. This efflorescence of the human mind 
opens up a pathway into Heaven, a means whereby the 
identity may be transferred to the higher spheres by 
those who, while yet in the body, study the divine 
science. This off-shoot of the “ Tree of Lifé’”’ was, in 
the Kabbalistic initiation, resolvable into a septenary of 
perfections, reflecting the glories of the Seven Heavens, 
denoted respectively as Wisdom and Understanding, 
Mercy and Severity, Beauty, Glory and Victory. 

The great revelation vouchsafed to the illuminati of 
all ages, and which has been the constant experience of 
Seers and initiates throughout the past, is a perception 
of Light—a brilliance unperceived by the normal senses 
—compared to which physical illumination is but dark- 
ness. Itisthis LVX AOUR or Limitless Light pervading 
the primeval vastnesses of Universal Nature, the attain- 
ment of which confers unspeakable content upon the 
“subterranean workers’’—dwellers in this material 
sphere—for it is the divine radix of all things. ‘ The 
mortal who approaches the Fire shall receive a Light 
from divinity: for unto the persevering mortal the 
blessed Immortals are swift !” 


32 


NOTES 


ON THE 


SOMNIUM SCIPIONIS. 





1. M. Manilius was introduced as a sharer in the 
dialogue. 

2. The just causes were that the elder Scipio had 
amply rewarded Massinissa, Prince of Numidia, for his 
fidelity in the Second Punic War. 

3. Ennius not only said that Homer used to appear 
to him in dreams, but also that he was indeed a re- 
incarnation of Homer. 

4. Thatis, his adoptive grandfather appeared to him; 
but as Africanus the Elder had died when our Scipio 
was but a year old, he could have had no idea of his 
personal appearance. 

5. Tiberius Gracchus, a Tribune of Rome, died 
B.C. 133. 

6. That is fifty-six years of age. 

Seven was esteemed venerable, holy, divine and 
motherless. See Westcott on Numbers, p. 31. Eight 
was called Perfect, being the first cube; it is the only 
evenly even number of the decad. 

7. Scipio was found dead in bed in B.c. 128, murdered 
by order of Caius Gracchus, and it is said that the 
chamber door was opened by his wife, Sempronia, to 
give admission to the assassins. 

8. Lelius was a character seen as an actor in the 
vision. 


33 


g. Paulus Æmilius, the conqueror of Perseus, son 
of Philip King of Macedon, was his natural father, but 
our Scipio was adopted by the son of the Elder Scipio 
Africanus. 

1o. A condemnation of suicide, which deprived one 
of the entry to the Heaven, before mentioned. 

11. The heavenly bodies are inhabited by egos in 
certain states of progress, but not necessarily by men, 
perhaps by those higher than men. 

12. Publius Cornelius Æmilianus Scipio was the 
full name of the dreamer; Africanus Minor was added 
by his admirers. 

13. This heaven was in the Via Lactea. 

14. The Moon, which is not itself a luminary, but is 
illuminated by the Sun. 

15. The Roman Empire was but a small spot of the 
whole exposed surface of the earth. 

16. Eight similar spheres enveloped in a ninth vast 
and glorious envelope. 

17. Note the distinction between the Sphere and the 
Planet pertaining to it. 

18. Mens; in ancient occult works, this word is of 
far higher import than our word, mind. Compare the 
Chaldaic philosophy in Stanley’s History of Philosophy. 

19. G.R.S. Mead in his remarks on the Somnium, 
calls attention to this paragraph as demonstrating the 
early existence in Europe of the present Theosophic 
system. Of the Nine, omitting the first universal sphere, 
and the last, the Earth, there remain Seven types, which 
are traced in Man as the Seven human Principles. 

20. This is a statement of the Pythagorean doctrine 
of the ‘‘ Music of the Spheres,” so frequently referred 
to in occult works. In this consideration refer to the 
first chapters of the Tzmaus of Plato. 

21. G. R. S. Mead suggests Mercury and Venus. 

22. The hearing of this Music being constant, is not 
perceived by men. 


34 


23. The Great Cataract. 

24. H. P. Blavatsky suggested that at the true poles 
this was not so. 

25. Island: the word is Insula in all the Latin 
versions I have seen. Mead reads Infula, a strip. 

26. H. P. Blavatsky’s Theosophic cosmology states 
that the dominant races are successively overthrown by 
alternate cataclysms of water and fire. The words are 
indeed here “ eluviones exustionesque.”’ 

27. The Romans knew of this Great Cycle of rather 
more than 25,000 years. Hipparchus noted the Pre- 
cession of the Equinoxes, which forms a reason for this 
cycle. 

"8. Only about 600 years had passed. 

29. Kill out ambition, is the burden of this passage ; 
both Western and Eastern schools of Occult Science 
dwell on the need of subjugating the lower Self. 

30. Even patriotism is not the Highest Path. Com- 
pare the Thirty-two Paths of Sepher Yetzirah. 

31. The constant theme of the Mystic, but one 
utterly neglected by the man in the street. 

32. A truly Rosicrucian idea. 


35 


THE 
GOLDEN VERSES & THE 
SYMBOLS OF PYTHAGORAS. 


THS most eminent philosopher, the founder of the 

Italic School, was born about the year 580 B.C., at 
Samos, an island in the Ægean Sea; he studied in Greece 
and in Egypt and is said to have visited also India, 
Persia and Palestine. He settled at Crotona, a notable 
city of Greek colonization in the south of Italy; here he 
taught for forty years, but was at last obliged to leave 
the country on account of the disturbances accompany- 
ing a revolution there, he reached Metapontum where 
he died about the year 500 B.C. 

It is said that he left no written works, and all that 
remains of his doctrine is derived from his pupils and 
successors. Mnesarchus, his son, and Aristæus, who 
married his widow, were the immediate successors who 
carried on the school of philosophy and they were suc- 
ceeded by Bulagoras, Tidas and Diodorus. At a later 
date the teachings were continued at three centres, 
Heraclea, Metapontum and Tarentum. 

The oldest authors who have left any record of his 
teachings are Philolaus, circa 370 B.c.; Archytas of 
Tarentum; Aristotle, B.c. 322; Theon of Smyrna; 
Jamblichus of Chalcis; Proclus; Simplicius; and 
lastly Photius of Constantinople, who lived about 850 
A.D., and left a Bibliotheca of ancient philosophy. 
During the middle ages Meursius, Meibomius, Kircher, 


36 


Beroaldus and Marsilius Ficinus reprinted the old re- 
mains of the Pythagoreans. 

Later editors have been Michael Neander, André 
Dacier, Thomas Stanley, 1700, and J. C. von Orelli, 
1819. 

The “ Golden Verses” and the ‘‘ Symbols ” enshrine 
the Pythagorean doctrine in a concise and convenient 
form; they are the only works extant directly attributed 
to the great master, but history records that many 
treatises were written by his pupils to explain his 
philosophy; suchare—Three Treatises, paideutic, politic 
and physic; the Universe; the Sacréd discourse; the 
Soul; on piety; arithmetic; prognostics; and Magical 
virtues of herbs. 

There are however two short epistles, one to Anaxi- 
menes and one to Hiero, which are thought to be 
authentic ; and lastly, there is a short paragraph on the 
letter Y as a symbol of human life. 

The Notes aré chiefly gleaned by A.E.A. and by S. A. 
from the commentaries of Hierocles, who lived about 
330, from Jamblichus of Chalcis, 320, and André Dacier, 
whose treatise is dated 1706, of which there is an 
English edition of 1707, by N. Rowe. 

S. A. 


37 


THE GOLDEN VERSES 
OF PYTHAGORAS 


Translated by A. E. A. 


1. First worship the immortal gods as the Law 
ordains. 
2. Reverence thy oath, and next, the illustrious 
heroes. 
3. Then supplicate the good terrestrial demons, 
with proper offerings. 
4. Honour also thy parents, and those most nearly 
related to thee. 
5. Of other men, make him thy friend who is most 
distinguished by virtue. 
6, Listen to his kind words, and copy his good 
deeds. 
7. Do not hate thy friend for a small fault. 
8. Now, Power is a near neighbour to necessity. 
g. Know these things; accustom thyself to be the 
master of thy Passions: 
10. First gluttony, then sloth, luxury, and anger. 
11. Do no shameful act in private with thyself, nor 
with another : 
12. And above all things respect thyself. 
13. In the next place be just both in deed and word. 
14. And let it not be thy habit to behave thyself in 
any matter thoughtlessly, 


38 


15. But consider this,—that all must die. 

16. And that as the good things of Fortune may 
be acquired, so also they may be lost. 

17. As to those calamities which befall men through 
Divine Fortune, 

18. If thou suffer, suffer in patience, and resent them 
not. 

1g. Do thy best to remedy them, and bear in mind, 

20. That Destiny does not give the largest share to 
good men. 

21. Many sorts of reasonings, good and bad, are to 
be found amongst men; 

22. But be not disturbed by them, nor allow them 
to harass thee. 

23. But it anything false of thee be put forth, bear 
it patiently. 

24. Listen now carefully to what I am about to tell 
thee. 

25. Let no one ever seduce thee by his words or 
acts, 

26. Nor make thee do what is not seemly. 

27. Deliberate before doing, in order that what thou 
doest may not be foolish. 

28. For it is the part of a stupid man to speak and 
act without thought. 

29. But do thou act so that thou shalt not be troub- 
led by the result. 

30. Do nothing also which thou dost not understand, 

31. But learn all that thou shouldest know, and so 
thou shalt lead a pleasant life. 

32. Neglect not the health of thy body. 

33. Be moderate in food, and drink, and exercise. 

34. Now by moderation I mean what will not injure 
thee. 

35. Accustom thyself to a style of living which is 
simple but not luxurious. 

36. Avoid anything which can give rise to envy. 


39 


37. Spend not unseasonably as one who knows not 
what is right. 

38. Be not niggardly nor covetous. 

39. Moderation in all things is most excellent. 

40. Do only those things which cannot hurt thee, 
and think before doing (even them). 

41. Never sleep before going over the acts of the 
day in thy mind. 

Wherein have I done wrong? What have I done? 
What have 1 left undone ? 

Examine thyself. If thou hast done evil, blame. 
And if thou hast done well, rejoice. 

45. Practise thoroughly all these maxims; think on 
them ; love them. 

46. They will put thee in the way of Divine Virtue; 

47. I swear it by Him who has put into our soul 
the Quaternion. 

48. Who is the Eternal Source of Nature? 

49. But go to thy work only after having prayed the 
gods to accomplish it. 

50. Having done this, thou shalt know the constitu- 
tion of the immortal Gods and of mortal men ; 

51. How far the different Beings extend, and what 
contains them and holds them together. 

52. Thou shalt know also, according to right, that 
Nature is alike in all; 

53. So that thou shalt not hope for that which 
thou shouldst not, and nothing shall be hidden from 
thee. 

54. Thou shalt know also that men draw their mis- 
fortunes upon themselves of their own choice. 

55. Wretches! they neither see nor understand that 
their Good is close at hand. 

56. Few know how to free themselves from their 
misfortunes. 

57. Such is the Fate that takes away the senses of 
men. 


40 


58. Some like wheels are carried in one direction, 
some in another, pressed down by ills innumerable. 

59. For fatal strife, innate, ever following, unseen 
afflicts them. 

60. They ought not to provoke this, but yield and 
so escape. 

61. O Jove, mighty Father, wouldst Thou deliver 
them from many evils. 

62. Show them what Fate is about to overtake 
them. 

63. But be of good heart, the race of man is divine. 

64. Holy Nature shews them all her mysteries. 

65. Ifthou knowest these things, thou wilt do what 
I bid thee do ; 

66. And, having healed thy soul, thou will deliver it 
from these evils. 

67. But abstain thou from the food, of which I have 
spoken, in the purifications, 

68. Andin the deliverance ofthy Soul, decide between 
the courses open to you, and thoroughly examine all 
things. 

69. Take the Supreme Mind as thy guide (who 
must ever direct and restrain thy course). 

70. And when, after having thrown aside thy body, 
thou comest to the realms of most pure ether, 

71. Thou shalt be a God, immortal, incorruptible. 


4I 


NOTES BY A. E. A. 


SUGGESTED BY THE COMMENTARIES OF 


HIEROCLES AND DACIER. 





Ir is doubtful whether we have in these verses the 
work of the philosopher himself, for they were probably 
written by one of his disciples, and the ancients ascribed 
them to Lysis. They bear the name of Pythagoras not 
only because they contain his doctrines, but also because 
his disciples never put their names to their works, 
which they allimputed to their Master to do him honour 
and to testify their gratitude. 

« Among all the Rules that contain a Summary of 
Philosophy, the verses of Pythagoras, called the 
Golden Verses, justly hold the first Rank, for they 
contain the general Precepts of all Philosophy, as well 
for what regards the Active, as the Contemplative. 
By their means every one may acquire Truth and 
Virtue, render himself pure, happily attain to the 
Divine Resemblance, and as is said by Plato in the 
Timeus, after having regained his Health, and 
recovered his Integrity and his Perfection, he may see 
himself again in a State of Innocence and Light.” 

Pythagoras begins with the precepts of active Virtue. 
Practical Philosophy is the mother of Virtue, as we are 
taught by these Verses, where practical Philosophy is 
called “Human Virtue” — and where the con- 
templative is celebrated under the name of ‘ Divine 


Virtue” (45, 46). 


42 


V.i. Damascius says ‘God (the First Principle, 
that is) is raised above the reach of thought; He is an 
unknown and impenetrable obscurity:” while the 
Egyptians did not, it is said, worship this First Being, 
as they did not know him. And this may be the reason 
why, in this verse, we are bidden to worship not God, 
but the Sons of God. 

V.u. Pythagoras taught that God created before 
all things the reasonable beings: the highest and most 
excellent of all substances, the Immortal Gods, were created 
by his first Thought—the middle Substance, the Heroes, 
by the second Thought—the Souls of men by his third 
Thought. 

V. ii. “ Terrestrial’’—lt. “under the Earth.” The 
phrase has been explained as meaning ‘‘ those who are 
dead after having lived a virtuous life.” But Pytha- 
goras taught that the souls of men went not under 
the Earth but to the Ether. Demons=endowed with 
knowledge. [The good Demons were the heads of the 
hierarchies of Elemental and planetary spirits.—S.A.| 

V. vi. Or “ Give way to thy friend by speaking to 
him mildly, and be kind to him.” 

Vv. xii-xvi. The school of Pythagoras accounted 
for the various states and conditions of men by asserting 
them to be the results of their first Life, which the 
souls had led in their spheres before bodies had been 
assigned to them. Jamblichus defends the Gods against 
the charge of injustice in the distribution of good and 
evil by saying that they knew the whole of the previous 
lives of each soul: lib. iv., cap. 4. Compare also Plato, 
De Repub., lib. x. 

V. xx. Because these evils then change their nature, 
for the good suffer patiently, and are supported by the 
certainty that divine good is reserved for the perfect. 
Compare Plato, The Laws: lib. x. 

V. xxix. Compare the teaching of the Bhagavat 
Gita.—S.A. 


43 


Vv. XXX., xxxi. Comp. Plato, Philebus. The Pytha- 
goreans called the first Cause or Principle, Opportunity ; 
and the Master himself made a Precept of Opportunity. 
Plato in Phedrus says, ‘‘ For this vicious Horse (the 
‘body ’) grows unruly and prances, his weight drawing 
him towards the Earth, unless the groom take care not 
to feed him too high.” 

Here, too, we find the reason for the choice of food 
made by Pythagoras. 

V. xxxv. An effort has been lately made to forma 
guild of “ Simple life.’—S.A. 

Vv. xli.-xliv. Porphyry tells us that Pythagoras ad- 
vised his disciples to be particularly careful of two 
hours—that when they rise, and that of going to bed: 
of the first, to reflect on what lay before them; and of 
the second to give an account of the day’s actions, and 
that he said of the first :— 


“When drowsy sleep to morning Thoughts gives way, 
Think what thou hast to do th’ ensuing day.” 


Comp. M. Aurelius at the beginning of the second 
book, ‘‘ We ought every morning when we rise to say 
to ourselves, ‘To-day I shall have to do with an imper- 
tinent fellow, an ungrateful person, etc.’”’ 

V. xłvii. Quaternion, t.e., the occult powers of 
the number 4, meaning God. How comes God 
to be the Quaternion? Pythagoras is said to have 
treated of this question in his Treatise of the Gods, 
which is now lost: in it he is also said to have 
explained the teaching of Orpheus, ‘‘ That the essence 
of number was the Principle of Things, and the Root 
of the Gods and of the Demons.” Aristotle, too, says 
of numbers, that they “can never be the Principles of 
Actions and of changes; that they may denote certain 
Causes, but they can never be those Causes.” The 
Master taught that God was the unit, that all the num- 
bers were derived from the unit, and that the finite 


44 


interval of number was ten. The Power of ten is four, 
for before we reach the Decad, we find all the virtue 
and all the Perfection of the ten in the four: 
1+2+3+4=10; four is an arithmetical middle between 
one and seven, for the excess above one = its defect 
from seven. Now the unit contains the Powers of all 
other numbers, and the seven being a Virgin (for it 
produces no number between itself and ten, nor can it 
be produced by any of the numbers in that interval). 
So, too, the first solid is found in the Quaternion— 
for the Point answers to the Unit, the Line to a Binary, 
for from one Point we go to another Point; the super- 
ficies answers to the Ternary, for a Triangle is the most 
plain of all rectilineal Figures: but solidity is the 
nature of the Quaternion, for in the Four we find the 
Pyramid. There are Four Faculties that form a Judg- 
ment— Understanding, Knowledge, Opinion, and Sense. 
Aristotle teaches this, and adds Understanding answers 
to One, Knowledge to Two, Opinion to Three, or the 
Superficies, and Sense to the Quaternion or Solid. 
Plutarch in The Opinions of the Philosophers, chap. iii., 
explains the reasons. 

Vv. ili, lili. Pythagoras and Socrates included 
Morality in Physics. In his commentary on these 
verses Hierocles plainly asserts that by Metempsychosis, 
Pythagoras meant that Vice changes man into the like- 
ness of a beast, while Virtue makes him resemble God; 
and that he can be neither the one nor the other by his 
nature. 

Vv. Ixvii.-lxix. For an expanded statement of this 
teaching consult Plato, Phedrus. 


45 


THE 


SYMBOLS OF PYTHAGORAS 


By SAPERE AUDE. 


Jugum ne transileas. 

Go not beyond the Balance.—Dacier. 

Do not exceed the necessities of the case : be accurate 
in judgment, and moderate in all your undertakings. 

Transgress not the laws of justice.—Plutarch. 

Obey not the dictates of avarice.— Athenæus. 

This latter has a similar meaning, because covetous- 
ness is the common cause of injustice. 

The Kabalah makes great use of this symbol of the 
Balance, and expatiates upon the need for equilibrium ; 
« forces which are unbalanced, perish in the void.” The 
kings of Edom are Kabalistic types of the results of the 
action of unbalanced forces.—S.A. 


II. 


In chænice ne sedeto. 

Sit not down upon a bushel.—Dacier. 

The chcenix was a Greek measure for corn, and each 
slave was allowed this quantity per day; it was equiva- 
lent to a pint and a half English measure. The symbo 


46 


should mean, do not rest content with a bare subsis- 
tence. 

A curious little book is Dussertation sur le Chénix de 
Pythagore, par J. Du Rondel, 1690. 


III. 


Coronam ne vellito. 

Tear not the crown to pieces.—Dacier. 

Some authors read “ vellica.” 

Do not transgress the laws of the country, for the laws 
are the crown.—Hierome. 

Vellice, not only means to tear up, but also to defame, 
so that the symbol may mean, “do not speak evil of 
dignitaries ;” this will be analogous to the dictum of 
Solomon in Ecclesiastes, c. 10, v. 20. “ Curse not the 
king, no, not in thy thought.” 


IV. 


Cor non comedendum. 

Eat not the heart.—Dacier. 

It has been suggested that this symbol means that we 
ought not to wear out our hearts with grief, nor to 
abandon ourselves to despair. Homer uses the same 
expression in regard to Bellerophon, “eating his own 
heart.” The brain is usually associated with the in- 
tellect, and the heart with the emotions. Some of the 
ancients held that by eating the heart of an animal, 
man obtained a tinge of the peculiarities of that animal, 
in a much greater degree than by eating the flesh of 
other parts. 


V. 


Ignem gladio ne scalpas. 

Stir not up fire with a sword.—Dacier. 

Some old authors say that this symbol means that we 
ought not to inflame any further, persons who are 


47 


already at enmity. Hermetic adepts say that the true 
meaning is that the Elementals of the Fire should not 
be threatened by the use of a steel sword, for fire and iron 
are analogous, but that these may be coerced by the 
correct pentagrammatic use of the sword when it is 
used with a due knowledge of the correspondences. 
H. P. B. in Isis Unveiled, Vol. I. p. 247, refers to this 
symbol and points out that this maxim is familiar to 
the folk-lore of many nations, Tartars, Laplanders, 
Russians and the Aborigines of North and South 
America; see Tylor, Primitive Culture, who quotes De 
Plano Carpim of 1246. 


VI. 


Non vevertendum, quum ad terminos perveneris. 

When you have arrived at the end, desire not to turn 
back.—Dacier. 

This has been applied to a human life,—when you 
have come nigh unto death, do not be dismayed and 
desire not to live. We know that an old proverb says, 
“‘vestiga nulla retrorsum,” “no returning footsteps are 
visible.” This symbol seems to be a statement of the 
law of Karma, that there is no escape from the proper 
reward or punishment of one’s own deeds; as one has 
made one’s bed, so one must lie upon it. A craven 
repentance made when one has no longer an oppor- 
tunity of re-adjusting the effects ofaction, is of no value. 
As the tree has fallen so must it lie. Jamblichus gives, 
« Having started do not turn back, for the Furies have 
followed you.” 


VII. 


Per viam publicam ne vadas. 

Go not in the public way.—Dacier. 

Old commentators have said that we ought not to 
follow public opinion, but rather the counsel of the 


48 


wise. Avoid the broad way, and take instead the 
narrow path. Carlyle has said, ‘the majority of man- 
kind are fools,” and so the common procedure in any 
case is erroneous. Christianity teaches that ‘many 
are called but few chosen,’’ so that one needs to be 
exceptional in purity and goodwill to earn the reward. 
Each man has a natural constitutional peculiarity, and 
so is suited to progress in some particular path, and 
not in any common mode of advancement. This 
assurance should lead us to be charitable in judging of 
the lives of others, and not to be hasty in judgment, for 
if one have fallen how do we know ‘that we could 
have withstood the same temptation.” —S.A. 

Go not into crowded places or mix freely with the 
multitude if you do not harmonise therewith: if you 
are regardless of this injunction, beware of ill effects 
therefrom. There are occult or astral influences eman- 
ating from all human beings: and in addition to that, 
astral entities love to keep men company, as they derive 
vitality from them, which is more easily effected in the 
contingency mentioned.—L.O. 


VIII. 


Domesticas Hirundines ne habeto. 

Suffer no swallows about your house.—Dacier. 

We may be sure that this symbol does not mean that 
we ought to interfere with the visits of these birds of 
passage, and that a philosophical maxim is here in- 
tended. Old commentators translated this symbol into 
the instruction :—do not encourage great talkers to visit 
your family. Perhaps rather, do not estimate and 
encourage temporary acquaintances by the standard of, 
and with the welcome due to familiar permanent friends. 
The feelings of many an old and valued companion have 
been hurt by effusive sympathy shown to new acquain- 
tances. 


49 
IX. 


In annulo, imaginem Det, ne civcumferto. 

Wear not the image of God upon a ring.—Dacier. 

We ought not to profane the name of the God we 
adore by speaking of Him at every turn, and before 
unsympathetic persons. It was, of old, deemed an 
offence to wear a ring, or bear a coin of the ruling 
monarch, when on an illegal errand, or in an unseemly 
place. Dion writes of a young man condemned for 
visiting a scandalous place while bearing a coin of the 
Prince of the city, Caracalla. Seneca and Suetonius 
report the same fact of the illegality of wearing a ring 
bearing the image of a king when engaged in immoral 
conduct. Philostratus says that one was found guilty 
of treason for beating a slave who bore a medal of 
Tiberius Cæsar. 

The Hebrews were forbidden to make or wear any 
image of their divine Ruler. The Kabalist teaches that 
no representation of the Ain Soph is possible, while the 
emanations of the Sephiroth may be fitly typified by 
number, letter and word. Neither Buddhist nor 
Brahman makes any image of the Supreme, although 
numerous representations of the members of the issuant 
triad of Brahma, Vishnu and Siva are permissible. 


N.O. M. 
X. 


Hominibus onus simul imponendum, non detrahendum. 

Help men to burden, but not to unburden themselves. 
—Dacier. 

Reward is not to be obtained by throwing aside 
responsibility, but by undertaking it. So that by 
relieving others of a duty, you assume their responsi- 
bility, and deprive them of an opportunity for good 
deeds. When one man assumes the Karma of another 


50 


he does him no good service, and yet is himself 
answerable for the result. 


XI. 


Ne cuquam dexteram facile porrigito. 

Shake not hands easily with any man.—Dacier. 

Or rather, do not give the right hand too freely. The 
right hand given to another was the special sign of 
suretyship. Solomon gives special warnings in the book 
of Proverbs, chap. vi., v. 1, and chap. xvii., v. 18, 
against a careless pledging of oneself to or for others, 
such a one, he says, is “void of understanding.” But 
the right hand when given with due preparation is of 
the utmost service, for it is of the Pillar of Geburah, 
carrying intensity and efficiency. The instructed 
occultist does not shake hands readily with the chance 
interviewer, and the Freemason regards the giving of 
the right hand as a sure pledge of brotherhood. 


XII. 


Olla vestigium in cinere confundito. 

Leave not the mark of the pot upon the ashes.— 
Dacier. 

This symbol refers to the cooking utensil, an earthen 
or iron vessel, and to the ashes of a wood fire. Having 
cooked, remove the signs of the vessel having rested 
upon the heap of ashes. Having realised your aims, 
do not dwell upon the efforts that have been expended. 
Some say, that having effected a reconciliation with one 
who has been in enmity with you, do not again refer to 
the cause of your estrangement. Do not rake up old 
grievances. Do not add insult to the triumph you have 
gained over another. 


51 
XIII. 


Herbam Molochen serito, ne tamen mandito. 

Sow the seeds of the Mallow plant, but do not eat 
the fruits thereof.—Dacier. 

This symbol is explained by the old commentators 
to mean—use mildness to others, and not to yourself; 
pardon offences of others, but do not overlook your 
own. The mallow and marsh-mallow are plants having 
a soothing property, and were sown and grown as 
medicinal herbs. Do good to others, but not for your 
own reward. Do not look for gratitude and expressions 
of thanks for good actions, and if possible, do not 
accept any reward for a deed done from a conscientious 
motive.—S. A. 

Look for the medicinal virtue of the mallow plant in 
the leaves, not in the flowers.—L. O. 


XIV. 


Facule sedem ne extergito. 

Wipe not out the place of a torch.—Dacier. 

This symbol must be compared with number twelve: 
wipe out the mark of the pot, but do not obscure the 
placeof the enlightenment. Do not dwell upon the history 
of a past success, but do not forget the Light which has 
illuminated you in your search for inspiration; for the 
same Light may ilumine the path for others, but the 
material steps will be different for others. 


XV. 


Augustum annulum ne gestato. 

Wear not a straight ring.—Dacier. 

The translation of Dacier leaves much to be desired ; 
in what sense can a ring be called straight? The 
Greek adjective is ‘ stenos,” not straight but narrow, 
confined, too tight. Still the word is used in the same 


52 


sense as in the New Testament where the narrow way is 
called “straight.” The maxim then, is ‘‘ Do not wear 
a tight ring.” Liberty of action is to be desired, and is of 
great advantage if liberty be not allowed to degenerate 
into license, and into folly, and thence into sin. Do not 
be fettered by custom and fashion, but do that which 
conscience prompts as right to be done by you. 
Fashion is a great slavery unto us all, brave souls alone 
save themselves from the current of common stupidity. 


XVI. 


Ammalia unguicurvia ne nutrito. 

Feed not animals that have crooked claws.—Dacier. 

Curved claws and nails are a sign of rapacity and of 
such as prey upon other animals: vegetable feeders 
have hoofs or soft cushiony feet—among animals. Do not 
encourage or be familiar with anyone whom you have 
known to profit by an injustice to others, for such a one 
will one day turn and rend you also. The appetite 
grows by what it feeds upon. Do not hold a candle to 
the Devil for him to see his work by. Do not partici- 
pate in ill-gotten gains. 


XVII. 


A fabis abstineto. 

Abstain from beans.—Dacier. 

This symbol has been interpreted in very various 
manners, as follows :— 

1. Inthe natural sense; that Beans were a faulty 
article of food. 

2. That Beans were a type for errors, sins, or any 
other impurity. 

3. That Beans referred to civil offices of the state, 
because in elections and judgments, beans were used 
in voting; in a similar manner to our English form of 
lodge ballot by black and white balls. 


53 


Hesychius says that the bean signified the suffrages 
of judges, and that a synonym for a judge was a bean- 
caster. 

4. Fora theological reason in Egypt, as Herodotus 
tells us that the bean was sown but not eaten, and that 
a priest was forbidden even to look at them lest he 
should become unclean. See Book xi. 

Hippocrates in chapter 15 of his second book on Diet, 
condemns beans as an article of food, calling them too 
astringent, and tending to cause intestinal gases. 

Bonwick says that the cult of Ceres condemned the 
bean, and the Sabeans of Syria also refused it. There 
was a Sacred Egyptian Bean, which was thrown upon 
graves as a symbol of a renewal of life, from a notion of 
a sexual resemblance. 


XVIII. 


Melanuros ne gustato. 

Eat not fish whose tails are black.—Dacier. 

Melas means black, and ouvis means tail, but it is 
not certain what sort of fish was so called; some say 
the perch, others the sea bream. This symbol has 
been explained, thus :— 

Frequent not the company of infamous men. Black- 
tailed may be a fair simile for persons of seeming 
good aspect, who have a hidden evil side behind them, 
or who have left behind them an evil record. 

Do not accept a doctrine which has a hidden failing, 
simply because its first appearance is attractive.—S.A. 

Jamblichus of Chalcis, gives “ Abstain from him who 
hath a black tail, for it belongs to the infernal gods.” 


N.O. M. 
XIX. 


Ne Erythinum editto. 
Do not eat the gurnet (or gurnard—a fish),—Dacier. 


54 


It is a curious fact that so many of these symbols are 
apparently directions for diet. No doubt the Pytha- 
goreans fully recognised that diet largely affected the 
health and tendencies of a man, and it is equally certain 
that these symbols have always been understood to require 
a double interpretation; one upon the material plane, 
and another of a philosophic or religious nature. 

Pliny, the ancient naturalist, says that the Erythrinus 
was a fish all red excepting a white belly. The fish we 
now call gurnard is red; medizval authors say it was 
an emblem of blood. 

The symbol may mean, Do not shed blood, or avoid 
revenge which may lead to bloodshed. 

I have not found that this fish was condemned as 
food by any other teacher than Pythagoras. Some 
authorities, however, read in the Greek proslambanon and 
not esthiein, or do not take up, instead of do not eat. 

Rubrum aliquid ne suscipias ; Do not undertake anything 
red; do not shed blood, is another reading found in 
Marsilius Ficinus.—S. A. 

XX. 

Animalis vulvam ne comedito. 

Eat not the matrix of animals.—Dacier. 

Vulva is not synonymous with matrix—-the womb. 
The Latin should be uterus, not vulva, for the oldest 
Greek version reads Metvan. The symbol may mean, 
avoid all that leads to sensuality ; do not ponder over 
the ideas of sexual relation. This is almost entirely a 
man’s failing; women are generally the victims of 
affection rather than passion. The apparently natural 
dissimilarity of the human sexes in this respect seems 
inexplicable. 

XXI. 


A morticinis abstineto. 
Abstain from the flesh of animals that die of 
themselves.—Dacier. 


55 


On the purely material plane this rule is almost 
universally applied in our times; all butcher’s meat 
is slaughtered, and presumably only healthy animals 
are chosen: but Christian butchers outvie the Jews in 
their rush for wealth, for among the Jews no meat is 
sold for human consumption when it is found post 
mortem that the animal has been suffering from disease ; 
such carcases are handed over to the Christians, who 
buy them readily. Meat duly passed by the official 
appointed by the Rabbi is called ‘“ Kosher,” that is, 
really fitted for use as human food. It is believed 
that this procedure is one reason for the smaller percen- 
tage of deaths from communicable diseases among the 
Hebrews. 

The moral meaning of the symbol is not clear. 
Some old authors have said—Share not in the flesh of 
profane animals that are not fit for sacrifices, and 
renounce all dead works. Perhaps, renounce all un- 
profitable works; such as have no imprint of spiritual 
progress. Do not long follow a path which leads to 
no good result ; or perhaps—abstain from dwelling or 
past events, rather look forward to future good results 


Si A; 


XXII. 


Ab animalibus abstineto. 

Abstain from eating animals.—Dacier. 

There is here no necessary reference to eating. 
Abstain from animals is the simple translation. This 
might mean, spend your energies upon your fellow men 
and women, rather than in making pets of animals. 
Some have referred the word animals to unreasonable 
men, as animals are believed to be without reason. 


56 


XXIII 


Salem apponito. 

Always put salt upon the table.—Dacier. 

Provide salt, simply. The material sense may be 
as Dacier suggests. Salt was a Greek symbol for 
Justice, for as salt preserves substances, so Justice 
preserves the rights of men, and without Justice there 
is corruption. Leviticus, c. 3, v. 13, says “Thou shalt 
add salt to all thy offerings.” Compare the old proverb 


concerning the spilling of salt, which was regarded as 
the precursor of evil. 


XXIV. 


Panem ne frangito. 

Never break the bread.— Dacier. 

What this may mean on the material plane is not 
clear, for bread is clearly meant to be broken, unless 
indeed cut, from which no gain is apparent. Greek 
bread was made in long portions, with surface markings 
dividing each loaf into four pieces. When given to 
the poor, it was frequently broken into these pieces and 
so distributed ; so perhaps the meaning is, give a whole 
loaf, do not be mean to the poor. 

Bread was also a symbol of Life, and this symbol has 
been interpreted, do not too much distribute your 


energies, but choose some good aim in life, and devote 
all your strength to that end. 


XXV. 

Sedem oleo ne abstergito. 

Spill not oil upon a seat.—Dacier. 

There is some error here, for ‘‘ne abstergito” and 
the original Greek ‘mz omorgnusthait” both mean 
« do not wipe,” and have no reference to *‘ spilling.” 

Old authors said, of was intended for praise, and seat 


57 


referred to official positions ; their explanation was that 
dignitaries should not be praised The English version 
needs to be changed to, “ Do not clean a seat with oil; ” 
meaning, use the proper remedy in each case. Jacob at 
Bethel poured oil upon the stone upon which his head 
rested when he dreamed of the ladder to heaven, 


in token of his gratitude, and he did not wipe it away. 
Genesis, c. 28, v. I8. 


XXVI. 


Ne cibum iu matellam injicite. 

Put not meat into a foul vessel.—Dacier. 

On the material plane this is sound advice, for nothing 
will make meat decay so rapidly as exposure to animal 
excreta. <A foul vessel is the symbol of a wicked man, 
the New Testament calls the wicked, ‘‘ vessels of dis- 
honour.” It is useless, if not worse, to give to the 
vicious the spiritual knowledge which a good man will 
appreciate and be thankful for. 


XXVII. 


Galium nutrito, ne sacrificato, Lune enim et Soli sacer est. 

Feed the Cock, but sacrifice him not, for he is sacred 
to the Sun and the Moon.-—Dacier. 

The ancients used to sacrifice a cock to Æsculapius, 
as the thank-offering for recovery from sickness: even 
in our century, the great Platonist Thomas Taylor did 
this in pursuance of ancient usage. 

The Cock was a symbol of Watchfulness and care 
for others. The Templar degrees of Freemasonry refer 
to this idea. The people of Crotona and Metapontum, 
colonies of Greeks among whom Pythagoras laboured, 
were not mindful of the maxim, for they killed him ; 
and the Athenians sacrificed Socrates, who had been as 
the symbolic Cock to them. In our own days Madame 


58 


Blavatsky, who introduced to Europe the exalted ethics 
of the mystic East, was sacrificed in honour and reputa- 
tion, if not indeed as to her life, by the modern Christian 
Pharisees. Jesus clearly held ‘that the teacher should 
be tended by his pupils, and he sent out his disciples 
with orders to possess nothing themselves and to trust 
to sympathizers for maintenance. 


XXVIII. 


Dentes ne frangito. 

Break not the teeth.—Dacier. 

The Romans used this formula to mean “do not 
revile,” or ‘‘avoid satire.” Do not break your teeth 
is a wise maxim, for the teeth are necessary to good 
digestion, and in ethical matters a good perception 
must precede clear development and real progress. 


XXIX. 


Acetarium vas abs te removeto. 

Keep the vinegar cruet far from you.—Dacier. 

This is a wise maxim as to diet, and in a moral sense 
sourness of temper, malice and bitterness of expression 
ought to be avoided. 


XXX. 


Capillovum et Unguium tuorum præsegmnia conspuito, 

Spit upon the parings of your nails and the clippings 
of your hair.—Dacier. 

The act of spitting upon anything meant the casting 
off and rejection of it: these parings were things of no 
farther use, superfluities which, if allowed to remain, 
would only be sources of mischief, so they are to be 
cast off remorselessly ; this clearly must be extended to 
our faults, which are excrescences. 


59 
XXXI. 


Pros Helion tetrammenos me ouret. Contra Solem ne merito. 

In sight of the Sun do no indecency. 

No comment is needed upon this maxim, Erasmus, 
contrary to all rules, says Dacier, holds that this symbol 
means, ‘“ Do no evil Magic.” Hesiod has a similar 
caution to men, as to public decency. The Sun as 
chief light-giver was also the symbol of divine purity, 
to which no unworthy action should appear. 


XXXII. 


Ad Solem versus, ne loquitur. 

Speak not, facing the Sun.—Dacier. 

It has been said that this maxim means, do not pub- 
lish your thoughts to the world. Perhaps, do not 
dictate in the presence of those wiser than you are: or 
as the Sun was the emblem of the Greatest, the chief 
benefactor of the earth, do not speak when you have 
turned unto him, but be humble and presume not to 
speak. 


XXXIII. 


In meridie ne dormito. 

We ought not to sleep at noon.—Dacier. 

This symbol was considered to mean that when light 
is offered to you, do not accept darkness; nor ignorance, 
when wisdom is tendered to you. 

Do not neglect opportunities, work while day is at 
its brightest, ‘“‘for the night cometh when no man can 
work.” 


XXXIV. 


Surgens e lecto, stragulam conturbato, vestigium que corporis 
confundito. 


60 


Stir up the bed, as soon as you have risen, and leave 
on it no print of your body.—Dacier. 

Suffer not anything to make you remember by day, 
what has passed during the night, for when the night 
has gone, and it has become day, think not of the 
concerns of the darkness, but expend all your energies 
in attaining to the knowledge which the Light may 
bring. 


XXXV. 


Carminibus utendum ad Lyram. 

Never sing but to the harp.—Dacier. 

It is said that Pythagoras objected to all musical 
instruments but the harp. The Greek words are 
‘*Songs are suited to the Lyre.” There should bea 
certain congruity maintained in all human concerns. 


XXXVI. 


Stragula semper convoluta habeto. 

Always keep your things ready packed up.—Dacier. 

Or, always have your coverings rolled up. 

Be always ready for emergencies. The Greeks had 
to gather up their flowing robes in order to run. Live, 
so that you may be always prepared to die, 


XXXVII. 


Injussu Imperatoris, de Statione et præsidia, ne decedas, 

Quit not your post, without the order of the 
General.—Dacier. 

This is not only a phrasing of the well-known 
military rule, but also means do not take your own life, 
which the Divine Ruler—the General-—will require of 
you at the proper time. 


61 
XXXVIII. 


In via, ne ligna cedito. 

Cut not wood by the way.—Dacier. 

Do not convert to private use what is intended for 
the public welfare. 

Otherwise, the cutting of wood was a menial task, 
among Greeks and also among the Hebrews; so the 
maxim may mean, do not be content to labcur at low 
employments, when higher occupations are within your 
ability. 

Stanley quotes the following meaning :—Do not dis- 


quiet your course of life with excessive cares and vain 
solicitude. 


XXXIX. 
Quod elixum est, non assato. 


Roast not that which is boiled.—Dacier. 
Do no things which are superfluous. 


XL. 
Gladinm acutum avertito. 
Avoid the two edged sword.—Dacier. 


The words are “a sharp sword.” This is a common 
symbol for a slanderer, who should be always avoided. 
XLI. 


Que ceciderunt e mensa, ne tollito. 

Pick not up what has fallen from the table.—Dacier. 

This maxim was believed to encourage charity; leave 
the crumbs for the birds, and the loose ears of corn for 
the gleaners. 


XLII. 


Ab arca cyparissina abstineto. 
Abstain even from a cypress chest.—Dacier. 


62 


Do not provide expensive funerals. 

The rich affected coffins of cypress, a very expensive 
wood, and one believed to tend to long preservation of 
a dead body. Plato and Solon also condemned expen- 
diture on funerals. 


XLIII. 


Celestibus, imparia sacrificato ; inferis vero parta. 

Sacrifice an odd number to the Celestial Gods, and 
to the Infernal an even number.—Dacier. 

Odd numbers cannot be halved and so were con- 
sidered the most perfect; even numbers could be 
equally divided. 

Deity was typified by Unity, and Matter by the 
Dyad. 


XLIV. 


Ex imputatis vitibus, ne Dits libato. 

Offer not to the Gods the wine from an unpruned 
vine.—Dacier. 

This has been rendered as an encouragement to 
agriculture: some have thought that “the wine of an 
unpruned vine” meant Blood, and that the symbol was 
intended to condemn the sacrifice of living animals and 
birds. 


XLV. 


Ne sine farina sacrificato. 

Never sacrifice without meal (or flour).—Dacier. 

Barley flour was sprinkled over the heads of animals 
before sacrifice. It has been suggested that the mean- 
ing is to substitute vegetable offerings for animal 
sacrifices. Or perhaps, as was done in Egypt, to offer 
a cast or mould of flour, shaped like a certain animal, 
rather than a living being. 


63 


XLVI. 


Nudis pedibus adorato et sacrificato. 

Adore the Gods, and sacrifice barefoot.—Dacier. 

Reverence was indicated by the baring of the feet, by 
the Hebrews, Greeks and Romans. Remember the 
instruction to Moses. The maxim refers to spiritual 
humility, as well as to bodily procedure. 


XLVII. 


Circumactus adora. 

Turn round when you worship.—Dacier. 

Or rather “turn around,” not alone reverse your posi- 
tion. This seems to mean that God is everywhere, and is 
not to be approachedin any one place or direction ; nothing 
but a complete circle can assimilate with His universa- 
lity. 


XLVIII. 


Adovaturus sedeto. 

Sit down when you worship.—Dacier. 

Kneeling was not an accepted position for prayer 
among the ancient Greeks, they stood or sat. Perhaps 
the maxim may mean, be seated, in the sense of devote 
some considerable time to devotion, and do not be con- 
tent with hurried prayers, it is not always the Passover. 


XLIX. 


Ad sacrificia ungues ne præcidito. 

Pare not your nails during the sacrifice.—Dacier. 

Pay attention to your devotions, and do not let the 
mind wander to commonplace ideas, nor carry on 
commonplace actions. Jamblichus reads this symbol 
to mean, ‘do not exclude poor relations from your 
festivals.” 


64 


The following ave less clearly appropriated to Pythagoras, 
although they have come down to us from his school of thought : 


L. 


Cum tonat terram tangito. 

When it thunders, touch the ground.—Dacier. 

Be submissive to the trials sent by the gods. Some 
moderns have seen in this maxim electrical reference ; 
no doubt a recumbent posture would attract a flash of 
lightning less than a form erect, but any mere stooping 
to touch the ground with the hands would not conduce 
to safety. 


LI. 


Ad lucernam faciem in speculo ne contemplator. 

Regard not yourself in the looking glass, by the light 
of a torch.—Dacier. 

A mirror is apt to be deceptive, but the distortion is 
increased by artificial light. We should not estimate 
ourselves by fallacious standards. Jamblichus says a 
mirror represents only the surface of things, and the 
torch means opinion: do not judge by appearances 
aided by unlearned representations. 


LII. 


Unum, Duo. 

One, Two.—Dacier. 

By the number One was intended the Divine; by 
Two, Nature: if we know nothing of God, we cannot 
understand his works. 


LIII. 


Honorato imprimis habitum, tribunal et triobolum. 
Honour the marks of dignity, the Throne and the 
Ternary.—Dacier. 


65 


The Kabalist would say, First Kether, the Crown, 
and then the Supernal Triad. 


LIV. 


Flantibus ventis, Echo adora. 

When the winds blow, adore Echo.—Dacier. 

Lilius Giraldus explains thus: the winds mean revolts 
and sedition, and Echo means a desert place, and so 
the maxim means, leave your homes in the towns when 
there are conspiracies. 

Leave the room when men quarrel. 

When there is disputation, the calm where an echo 
can be heard, is the haven of peace. 


LV. 


Ex curv, ne comedito. 

Eat not in a chariot.—Dacier. 

In the olden Greek, currus was diphros, a seat as well 
as a carriage. 

Life may be symbolised as a drive through time, and 
the meaning may be that life is not for enjoyment 
alone. 


LVI. 


Dextrum pedem primum induito, sinistrum vero primum 
attolito. (Or calceato and lavato.) 

Put on the right shoe first, but wash the left foot 
first.—Dacier. 

Orin the first case, put on the right shoe first, but in 
taking shoes off, take off the left first. 

Be more ready to take up rightful work than to begin 
a pleasure. 


LVII. 


Cerebrum ne edito. 
Eat not the Brain. —Dacier. 


66 


Do not consume your faculties of mind by over- 
study. 


LVIII. 


Palman ne plantato. 

Plant not the Palm tree.—Dacier. 

This is supposed to mean, do not transplant a grow- 
ing palm tree, but raise it from seed; because the 
Babylonians reckoned up 367 advantages to be derived 
from the Palm tree, but as a matter of experience it 
was known that a transplanted Palm bore fruit of no 
value. Do no useless works. 


LIX. 


Libamine Diis facito per Auriculam. 

Make libations to the Gods by the ear.——-Dacier. 

Apollonius has it that this means that religious 
services should be accompanied by music and singing. 

Do not make drink offerings to Gods, but rather 
pray so steadfastly that they may hear you.—S. A. 

Some authorities give another version; ‘ Libamina 
Diis facienda juxta auriculam poculorum.” Libations 
to the Gods are to be made from near the ear (or 
handle) of the cups.—N. O. M. 


LX. 


Sepiam ne edito. 

Eat not the cuttle fish.—Dacier. 

This animal when attacked is able to eject a black 
fluid which discolours the water around it, in which 
obscurity, the fish that attack lose its whereabouts. 
Have no concerns with those who revile when dis- 
pleased. 


67 
LXI. 


In limine non consistendum. 

Stop not at the threshold.—Dacier. 

Do not waver, choose one path or the other and 
continue upon it. Having put your hand to the 
plough, look not back. 


LXII. 


Pregvedients gregi e via cedendum. 
Give way to a flock passing by.—Dacier. 
Do not openly oppose the multitude. 


LXIII. 
Mustelam devita. 
Avoid the weazel.—Dacier. 
Avoid tale-tellers is said to be the meaning, referring 
to an old fancy that the weazel bore its young through 
its mouth. 


LXIV. 


Arma a muliere sumministvata vejice. 

Reject the weapons a woman offers you -—Dacier. 

When your own conscience does not lead you to 
combat, do not consent to fight because a woman 
encourages you. The ancients said that woman’s 
weakness made her more liable to be revengeful, and 
that men should not prove themselves weak also, by 
acting with impropriety at their dictation. 


LXV. 


Colubram intra ædes ccllapsum, ne perimito. 

Kill not a serpent that chances to fall within your 
house.—Dacier. 

Do not harm your enemy, when he is your guest as 
suppliant. 


68 


LXVI. 


Lapidem in fontem jacere, scelus. 

It is a crime to throw stones into fountains.—Dacier. 

It is wrong to cast obloquy upon those who are 
doing public service. 


LXVII. 


Sinistrum, cibum ne sumito. 

Do not feed yourself with your left hand.—Dacier. 

Support yourself honourably, and not by left hand, or 
as we now say, by underhand devices. 


LXVIII. 


Sudovem fervo obstergere, tetrum nefas. 

It is a horrible crime to wipe off the sweat with 
Iron.—Dacier. 

It is wicked to take by force from another, the thing 
he has earned by his own exertions. Compare 
Ecclesiasticus, c€. XXXİV., V. 21. 


LXIX. 


Hominis vestigia, ferro ne configito. 
Stick not iron into the footsteps of a man.—Dacier. 
Do not attack the character of the dead. 


LXX. 


In sepulchro ne dormito. 

Sleep not upon a grave.—Dacier. 

Do not rest content with the property left to you by 
parents, but make a living of your own. 


69 
LXXI. 


Integrum fasciculum in ignem ne mittito, 

Lay not the whole faggot upon the fire.—Dacier, 

Live thriftily, and do not squander your estate. Do 
not put all your eggs in one basket. 


LXXII. 


De rheda, junctis pedibus, ne exilito, 

Leap not from a chariot with your feet close 
together.—Dacier. 

Do not make sudden changes of attitude or of 
occupation ; unless indeed your feet are ready to support 
you in the new condition. 


LXXIII. 


In astrum ne digitum intendito. 

Do not threaten the stars.—Dacier. 

This is an error by Dacier; intenta would mean 
threaten, but intendere digitum, means to point with the 
finger at anything, as in derision. 

The meaning is, do not contemn the astral influences, 
which you cannot evade. 


LXXIV. 


Candelam ad parietem ne applrcato. 

Place not a candle against the wall.—Dacier. 

This was said to mean, do not persist in endeavours 
to teach those who are too stupid to understand, for 
they will resist your instructions even as a wall throws 
back the rays of the sun. Perhaps, do not apply the 
candle flame to the wall, for that would be a mischief 
and cause a blackening: so occult Light must be con- 
ferred with caution, and not be delivered to the stupid 
or vicious; this necessity is insisted upon by both 
Eastern and Western schools of Esoteric knowledge. 


70 
LXXV. 


In nive ne scribito, 
Write not in the snow.——Dacier. 


Do no unprofitable task; the Greeks also had the 
maxim, Do not write upon water. 


LXXVI. 


Cachinno ne indulgeto. 
Do not indulge in immoderate laughter. 


LXXVII. 


Non propter opes, ducenda uxor. 
Do not marry for money. 


LXXVIJI. 


Locum ubi humanus sanguis effusus est. 
Lapidibus obruito.—]. Castalio. 


Cover up with stones the place where human blood 
has been shed. 


LXXIX. 


Deum imitatus. silentium serva.—]. Castalio. 
Imitate the Deity by keeping silent. 
Another similar maxim is simply :— 
Silentium servato, 

Keep silence. 


LXXX. 


Templum dextra ingredito, sinistra egredito.—]. Castalio. 
Enter a church by the right hand side, and leave it 
by the left. 


71 
LXXXI. 


De rebus Divinis etsi incredibilia navventuy visu abstineto.— 
J. Castalio. 

When Divine things are told to you, restrain from 
smiling, even if they are incredible. In the middle 
ages, it was said, Credo quia impossibile est, I believe 
because of its impossibility. 


LXXXII. 


Clara voce precandum. 
You should pray in a clear voice. 


LXXXIII. 


In terva ne naviges. 
Do not go to sea on dry land. 
When at Rome do as the Romans do. 


LXXXIV. 


Neque in aquiminali intingendum, neque in balneo lavandum 

Neither bathe in a hand basin, nor wash yourself in 
a bath. 

There is a place for every purpose under heaven, and 
a place designed for one purpose should not be con- 
verted to another use. 


LXXXV. 


Ad faemineam divitem ne accedito sobolis procreanda causa, 

Do not give a rich woman the means of having 
children. Because such women are apt to think most 
of their pleasures and their appearance, and do but 
seldom give that personal attendance to children which 
is so necessary to the health and growth.—S. A. 


LXXXVI. 


Mitem neque violes neque cedas plantam. 
Neither injure nor destroy the tender plant. 


LXXXVII. 


De Pythagorets sine lumine, ne loguttor. 
Do not criticize the (doctrines of the) Pythagoreans 
without light (unless you understand them).
