COLLECTANEA HERMETICA


EDITED BY


W. WYNN WESTCOTT, M.B., D.P.H.


VOLUME VI.


THE
CHALDÆAN ORACLES
OF
ZOROASTER


EDITED AND REVISED


By SAPERE AUDE.


WITH AN INTRODUCTION


By L. O.


THE CHALDAAN ORACLES
ATTRIBUTED TO
ZCOROASTER.


PREFACE


By SAPERE AUDE.


PE Oracles are considered to embody many of

the principal features of Chaldæan philosophy.
They have come down to us through Greek transla-
tions and were held in the greatest esteem throughout
antiquity, a sentiment which was shared alike by the
early Christian Fathers and the later Platonists.
The doctrines contained therein are attributed to
Zoroaster, though to which particular Zoroaster is not
known ; historians give notices of as many assixdiffer-
ent individuals all bearing that name, which was pro-
bably the title of the Prince of the Magi, and a generic
term. The word Zoroaster is by various authorities
differently derived: Kircher furnishes one of the
most interesting derivations when he seeks to show
that it comes from TZURA =a figure, and TzIUR=to
fashion, ASH=fire, and STR=hidden; from these
he gets the words Zairaster=fashioning images of
hidden fire; —or Tzuraster=the image of secret
things. Others derive it from Chaldee and Greek
words meaning “a contemplator of the Stars.”


4

It is not, of course, pretended that this collection as
it stands is other than disjointed and fragmentary,
and it is more than probable that the true sense of
many passages has been obscured, and even in
some cases hopelessly obliterated, by inadequate
translation.

Where it has been possible to do so, an attempt has.
been made to elucidate doubtful or ambiguous ex-
pressions, either by modifying the existing transla-
tion from the Greek, where deemed permissible, or
by appending annotations.

It has been suggested by some that these Oracles
are of Greek invention, but it has already been pointed
out by Stanley that Picus de Mirandula assured
Ficinus that ٥٥ had the Chaldee Original in 5
possession, “in which those things which are faulty
and defective in the Greek are read perfect and
entire,” and Ficinus indeed states that he found this
MS. upon the death of Mirandula. In addition to
this, it should be noted that here and there in the
original Greek version, words occur which are not of
Greek extraction at all, but are Hellenised Chaldee.

Berosus is said to be the first who introduced the
writings of the Chaldeeans concerning Astronomy and
Philosophy among the Greeks,* and it is certain that
the traditions of Chaldea very largely influenced
Greek thought. Taylor considers that some of these
mystical utterances arethe sources whence the sublime
conceptions of Plato were formed, and large commen-
taries were written upon them by Porphyry, Iam-
blichus, Proclus, Pletho and Psellus. That men of
such great learning and sagacity should have thought
so highly of these Oracles, is a fact which in itself
should commend them to our attention.


* Josephus, contra Apion. T.


5


The term “Oracles ” was probably bestowed upon
these epigrammatic utterances in order to enforce the
idea of their profound and deeply mysterious nature.
The Chaldæans, however, had an Oracle, which they
venerated as highly as the Greeks did that at
Delphi.”

We are indebted to both Psellus and Pletho, for
comments at some length upon the Chaldæan Oracles,
and the collection adduced by these writers has been
considerably enlarged by Franciscus Patricius, who
made many additions from Proclus, Hermias, Sim-
plicius, Damascius, Synesius, Olympiodorus, Nice-
phorus and Arnobius; his collection, which com-
prised some 324 oracles under general heads, was
published in Latin in 1593, and constitutes the
groundwork of the later classification arrived at by
Taylor and Cory; all of these editions have been
utilised in producing the present revise.

A certain portion of these Oracles collected by
Psellus, appear to be correctly attributed to a Chal-
dzean Zoroaster of very early date, and are marked
“Z, following the method indicated by Taylor, with
one or two exceptions. Another portion is attributed
to a sect of philosophers named Theurgists, who
flourished during the reign of Marcus Antoninus,
upon the authority of Proclus,{ and these are marked
<T.” Oracles additional to these two series and of
less definite source are marked “Z or T.” Other
oracular passages from miscellaneous authors are
indicated by their names.


* Stephanus, De Urbibus.
+ Vide his Scholia on the Cratylus of Plato.


6


The printed copies of the Oracles to be found it
England are the following :—

1. Oracula Magica, Ludovicus Tiletanus, Paris, 1563.

2. Zoroaster et ejus 320 oracula Chaldaica; by
Franciscus Patricius. . . . 1593.

3. Fred. Morellus ; Zovoastvis oracula, 1597. Sup-
plies about a hundred verses.

4. Otto Heurnius; Barbarice Philosophie antiqui-
tatum libri duo, 1600.

5. Johannes Opsopoeus; Ovacula Magica Zoroastris
1599. This includes the Commentaries of Pletho and of
Psellus in Latin.

6. Servatus Gallceeus; Szdulliakot Chresmoi, 1688.
Contains a version of the Oracles.

Thomas Stanley. The History of the Chaldaic
Philosophy, 176017. This treatise contains the Latin
of Patricius, and the Commentaries of Pletho and
Psellus in English.

Johannes Alb. Fabricius, Bibliotheca Greca, 1705-7-
Quotes the Oracles.

Jacobus Marthanus, 1689. This version contains the
Commentary of Gemistus Pletho.

Thomas Taylor, Zhe Chaldæan Oracles, in the
Monthly Magazine, and published independently,
1806.

Bibliotheca Classica Latina; A. Lemaire, volume
124, Paris, 1823.

Isaac Preston Cory, Ancient Fragments, London,
1828. (A third edition of this work has been pub-
lished, omitting the Oracles.)

Phenix, New York, 1835. A collection of curious
old tracts, among which are the Oracles of Zoroaster,
copied from Thomas Taylor and I. P. Cory ; with an
essay by Edward Gibbon.


INTRODUCTION
By L. O.


Tt has been believed by many, and not without
good reason, that these terse and enigmatic utter-
ances enshrine a profound system of mystical philo-
sophy, but that this system demands for its full dis-
cernment a refinement of faculty, involving, as it
does, a discrete perception of immaterial essences.

It has been asserted that the Chaldzean Magi* pre-
served their occult learning among their race by
continual tradition from Father to Son. Diodorus
says: “ They learn these things, not after the same
fashion as the Greeks: for amongst the Chaldzans,
philosophy is delivered by tradition in the family, the
Son receiving it from his Father, being exempted
from all other employment; and thus having their
parents for their teachers, they learn all things fully
and abundantly, believing more firmly what is com-
municated to 7

The remains then of this oral tradition seems to
exist in these Oracles, which should be studied in
the light of the Kabalah and of Egyptian Theology.
Students are aware that the Kabalah ې‎ is susceptible


* This powerful Guild was the guardian of Chaldean philo-
sophy, which exceeded the bounds of their country, and
diffused itself into Persia and Arabia that borders upon it; for
which reason the learning of the Chaldzeans, Persians and
Arabians is comprehended under the general title of Chaldzean.


t Diodorus, lib. I.
t Vide Kabalah Denudata, by MacGregor Mathers.


8


of extraordinary interpretation with the aid of the
Tarot, resuming as the latter does, the very roots of
Egyptian Theology. Had a similar course been
adopted by commentators in the past, the Chaldean
system expounded in these Oracles would not have
been distorted in the way it has been.

The foundation upon which the whole structure of
the Hebrew Kabalah rests is an exposition of ten
deific powers successively emanated by the Illimitable
Light, which in their varying dispositions are con-
sidered as the key of all things. This divine pro-
cession in the form of Three Triads of Powers,
synthesized in a tenth, is said to be extended through
four worlds, denominated respectively Atziluth, Briah,
Yetzirah and Assiah, a fourfold gradation from the
subtil to the gross. ‘This proposition in its meta-
physical roots is pantheistic, though, if it may
be so stated, mediately theistic; while the ulti-
mate noumenon of all phenomena is the absolute
Deity, whose ideation constitutes the objective
Universe.

Now these observations apply strictly also to the
Chaldzean system.

The accompanying diagrams sufficiently indicate
the harmony and identity of the Chaldzean philosophy
with the Hebrew Kabalah. It will be seen that the
First Mind and the /ztelligible Triad, Pater, Potentia,
or Mater, and Mens, are allotted to the Intelligible
World of Supramundane Light: the “First Mind”
represents the archetypal intelligence as an entity in
the bosom of the Paternal Depth. This concentrates
by reflection into the “Second Mind” representative
of the Divine Power in the Empyrean World which
is identified with the second great Triad of divine
powers, known as ٨/6 /ntelligible and at the same time
intellectual Triad : the Æthereal World comprises the
dual third Triad denominated J/z/ellectual: while the


9


fourthor Elementary Worldis governed by Hypezokos,
or Flower of Fire, the actual builder of the world.


CHALDHAN SCHEME.


The Intelligibles The Paternal Depth
World of Supra-mundane Light The First Mind


The Intelligible Triad
Pater: Mater or Potentia: Mens


The Second Mind


Intelligibles and Intellectuals Iynges
in the Synoches
Empyrean World Teletarchze


(The Third Mind.)
Three Cosmagogi


Intellectuals (Intellectual guides inflexible.)
in the Three Amilicti
Ethereal World (Implacable thunders).
Elementary World Hypezokos
The Demiurgos of the (Flower of Fire)
Material Universe Effable, Essential and


Elemental Orders


The Harth- Matter


IO


KABALISTIC SCHEME.


World of Atziluth The Boundless Ain Suph.
or of God The Illimitable Ain Suph Aur
Light
A radiant triangle.


Kether
World of Briah (crown)
Divine Forces Binah Chokmah


(Intelligence) (Wisdom)


Geburah Chesed
World of Yetzirah Tiphereth
or of Formation Hod Netzach
Vesod
World of Assiah Malkuth
Ruled by
Material Form. Adonai Melekh


The Earth- Matter.


II


CHALDÆAN SCHEME OF BEINGS.


Representatives of the previous classes guiding our
universe.


I. Hyperarchii—Archangels
II. Azoncei—Unzoned gods
111. Zoncei—Planetary Deities.


Higher demons: Angels


Human Souls
Lower demons, elementals
Fiery
Airy
Earthy
Watery


Evil demons
Lucifugous; the kliphoth


Chaldzean Theology contemplated three great divi-
sions of supra-mundane things:—the First was
Eternal, without beginning or end, being the
“Paternal Depth,’ the bosom of the Deity. 6
Second was conceived to be that mode of being having
beginning but no end; the Creative World or Empy-
reeum falls under this head, abounding as it does in
productions, but its source remaining superior to
these. The third and last order of divine things had
a beginning in time and will end, this is the transitory
Ethereal World. Seven spheres extended through
these three Worlds, vzz., one in the Empyreeum or


I2


verging from it, three in the Ethereal and three in
the Elementary Worlds, while the whole physical realm
synthesized the foregoing. These seven spheres are
not to be confounded with the Seven material Planets;
although the latter are the physical representatives of
the former, which can only be said to be material in
the metaphysical sense of the term. Psellus professed
to identify them but his suggestions are inadequate
as Stanley pointed out. But Stanley, although dis-
agreeing with Psellus, is nevertheless inconsistent
upon this point, for although he explains the four
Worlds of the Chaldæans as successively noumenal to
the physical realm, he obviously contradicts this in
saying that one corporeal world is in the Empyræum.

Prior to the supramundane Light lay the “ Paternal
Depth,” the Absolute Deity, containing all things
“in potentia” and eternally immanent. This is
analogous to the Ain Suph Aur of the Kabalah, three
words of three letters, expressing three triads of
Powers, which are subsequently translated into objec-
tivity, and constitute the great Triadic Law under
the direction of the Demiurgus, or artificer of the
Universe.

In considering this schema, it must be remembered
that the supramundane Light was regarded as the
primal radiation from the Paternal Depth and the
archetypal noumenon of the Empyræum, a universal,
all-pervading—and, to human comprehension—ulti-
mate essence. The Empyræum again, is a somewhat
grosser though still highly subtilized Fire and creative
source, in its turn the noumenon of the Formative or
Ethereal World, as the latter is the noumenon of the
Elementary World. Through these graduated media
the conceptions of the Paternal Mind are ultimately
fulfilled in time and space.

In some respects it is probable that the Oriental
mind to-day is not much altered from what it was


13


thousands of years ago, and much that now appears
to us curious and phantastic in Eastern traditions,
still finds responsive echo in the hearts and minds of
a vast portion of mankind. A large number of
thinkers and scientists in modern times have advocated
tenets which, while not exactly similar, are parallel
to ancient Chaldzean conceptions; this is exemplified
in the notion that the operation of natural law in the
Universe is controlled or operated by conscious and
discriminating power which is co-ordinate with
intelligence. It 1s but one step further to admit that
forces are entities, to people the vast spaces of the
Universe with the children of phantasy. Thus history
repeats itself, and the old and the new alike reflect the
multiform truth.

Without entering at length into the metaphysical
aspect, it is important to notice the supremacy attri-
buted to the ‘‘ Paternal Mind.” The intelligence of
the Universe, poetically described as “energising
before energy,” establishes on high the primordial
types or patterns of things which are to be, and, then
inscrutably latent, vests the development of these in
the Rectores Mundorum, the divine Regents or powers
already referred to. As it is said, ‘‘Mind is with Him,
power with them.”

The word “Intelligible” is used in the Platonic
sense, to denote a mode of being, power or perception,
transcending intellectual comprehension, z.e., wholly
distinct from, and superior to, ratiocination. The
Chaldeans recognised three modes of perception, vzz.,
the testimony of the various senses, the ordinary pro-
cesses of intellectual activity, and the intelligible
conceptions before referred to. Each of these opera-
tions is distinct from the others, and, moreover,
conducted in separate matrices, or vehicula. The
anatomy of the Soul was, however, carried much
farther than this, and, although in its ultimate radix


14


recognised as identical with the divinity, yet in
manifested being it was conceived to be highly com-
plex. The Oracles speak of the “ Paths of the Soul,”
the tracings of inflexible fire by which its essential
parts are associated in integrity; while its various
“summits, “fountains,” and “vehicula, are all
traceable by analogy with universal principles. This
latter fact is, indeed, not the least remarkable feature
of the Chaldæan system. Like several of the ancient
cosmogonies, the principal characteristic of which
seems to have been a certain adaptability to intro-
version, Chaldæan metaphysics synthesize most clearly
in the human constitution.

In each of the Chaldæan Divine Worlds a trinity of
divine powers operated, which synthetically con-
stituted a fourth term. “Iu every World,” says the
Oracle, “a Triad shineth, of which the Monad is the
ruling principle.” These “ Monads” are the divine
Vice-gerents by which the Universe was conceived to
be administered. Each of the four Worlds, viz., the
Empyræan, Ethereal, Elementary and Material, was
presided over by a Supreme Power, itself in direct
rapport with “the Father” and “moved by unspeak-
able counsels.” These are clearly identical with the
Kabalistic conception of the presidential heads of the
four letters composing the Deity name in so many
different languages. A parallel tenet is conveyed in
the Oracle which runs: “ There is a Venerable Name
projected through the Worlds with a sleepless revolu-
tion.’ The Kabalah again supplies the key to this
utterance, by regarding the Four Worlds as under the
presidency of the four letters of the Venerable Name,
a certain letter of the four being allotted to each
World, as also was a special mode of writing the four-
lettered name appropriate thereto; and, indeed in that
system itis taught that the order of the Elements,
both macrocosmic and microcosmic, on every plane,


T5


is directly controlled by the ‘‘revolution of the name.”
That Name is associated with the Æthers of the
Elements and is thus considered as a Universal Law;
it is the power which marshals the creative host,
summed up in the Demiurgus, Hypezokos, or Flower
of Fire.

Reference may here be made to the psychic anatomy
of the human being according to Plato. He places
the intellect in the head; the Soul endowed with some
of the passions, such as fortitude, in the heart; while
another Soul, of which the appetites, desires and
grosser passions are its faculties, about the stomach
and the spleen.

So, the Chaldzean doctrine as recorded by Psellus,
considered man to be composed of three kinds of
Souls, which may respectively be called:

First, the Intelligible, or divine soul,

Second, the Intellect or rational soul, and

Third, the Irrational, or passional soul.

This latter was regarded as subject to mutation, to
be dissolved and perish at the death of the body.

Of the Intelligible, or divine soul, the Oracles teach
that “It is a bright fire, which, by the power of the
Father, remaineth immortal, and is Mistress of Life; ”’
its power may be dimly apprehended through regene-
rate phantasy and when the sphere of the Intellect has
ceased to respond to the images of the passional
nature.

Concerning the rational soul, the Chaldeans taught
that it was possible for it to assimilate itself unto the
divinity on the one hand, or the irrational soul on the
other. ‘Things divine,” we read, “cannot be obtained
by mortals whose intellect is directed to the body
alone, but those only who are stripped of their gar-
ments, arrive at the summit,”

To the three Souls to which reference has been
made, the Chaldzeans moreover allotted three distinct


16


vehicles: that of the divine Soul was immortal, that
of the rational soul by approximation became so;
while to the irrational soul was allotted what was
called ‘‘the image,” that is, the astral form of the
physical body.

Physical life thus integrates three special modes of
activity, which upon the dissolution of the body are
respectively involved in the web of fate consequent
upon incarnate energies in three different destinies.

The Oracles urge men to devote themselves to
things divine, and not to give way to the promptings
of the irrational soul, for, to such as fail herein, it is
significantly said, ‘‘Thy vessel the beasts of the earth
shall inhabit.”

The Chaldeans assigned the place of the Image, the
vehicle of the irrational soul, to the Lunar Sphere;
it is probable that by the Lunar Sphere was meant
something more than the orb of the Moon, the whole
sublunary region, of which the terrestrial earth is, as
it were, the centre. At death, the rational Soul rose
above the lunar influence, provided always the past
permitted that happy release. Great importance was
attributed to the way in which the physical life was
passed during the sojourn of the Soul in the tene-
ment of flesh, and frequent are the exhortations to
rise to communion with those Divine powers, to
which nought but the highest Theurgy can pretend.

“Let the immortal depth of your Soul lead
you,” says an Oracle, “but earnestly raise your
eyes upwards.” Taylor comments upon this in the
following beautiful passage: ‘‘By the eyes are to be
understood all the gnostic powers of the Soul, for
when these are extended the Soul becomes replete
with a more excellent life and divine illumination;
and is, as it were, raised above itself.”

Of the Chaldean Magi it might be truly said that
they “among dreams did first discriminate the truth-


17


ful vision!” for they were certainly endowed with a
far reaching perception both mental and spiritual;
attentive to images, and fired with mystic fervours,
they were something more than mere theorists, but
were also practical exemplars of the philosophy they
taught. Life on the plains of Chaldzea, with its mild
nights and jewelled skies, tended to foster the interior
unfoldment; in early life the disciples of the Magi
learnt to resolve the Bonds of proscription and enter
the immeasurable region. One Oracle assures us
that, “The girders of the Soul, which give her
breathing, are easy to be unloosed,” and elsewhere
we read of the ‘‘Melody of the Ether” and of the
“Lunar clashings,”’ experiences which testify to the
reality of their occult methods.

The Oracles assert that the impressions of charac-
ters and other divine visions appear in the Ether.
The Chaldean philosophy recognized the ethers of
the Elements as the subtil media through which the
operation of the grosser elements is effected—by the
grosser elements I mean what we know as Earth,
Air, Water and Fire—the principles of dryness and
moisture, of heat and cold. These subtil ethers are
really the elements of the ancients, and seem at an
early period to have been connected with the Chal-
dzean astrology, as the signs of the Zodiac were con-
nected with them. The twelve signs of the Zodiac
are permutations of the ethers of the elements—four
elements with three variations each; and according
to the preponderance of one or another elemental
condition in the constitution of the individual, so
were his natural inclinations deduced therefrom.
Thus when in the astrological jargon it was said that
aman had Aries rising, he was said to be of a fiery
nature, his natural tendencies being active, energetic
and fiery, for in the constitution of such a one the
fiery ether predominates. And these ethers were


18


stimulated, or endowed with a certain kind of vibra-
tion, by their Presidents, the Planets; these latter
being thus suspended in orderly disposed zones.
Unto the Planets, too, colour and sound were also
attributed; the planetary colours are connected with
the ethers, and each of the Planetary forces was
said to have special dominion over, or affinity with,
one or other of the Zodiacal constellations. Commu-
nion with the hierarchies of these constellations
formed part of the Chaldean theurgy, and in a
curious fragment it is said: “If thou often invokest
it” (the celestial constellation called the Lion) “then
when no longer is visible unto thee the Vault of the
Heavens, when the Stars have lost their light
the lamp of the Moon is veiled, the Earth abideth
not, and around thee darts the lightning flame, then
all things will appear to thee in the form of a Lion!”
The Chaldeans, like the Egyptians, appear to have
had a highly developed appreciation of colours, an
evidence of their psychic susceptibility. The use of
bright colours engenders the recognition of subsis-
ting variety and stimulates that perception of the
mind which energizes through imagination, or the
operation of images. The Chaldean method of
contemplation appears to have been to identify the
self with the object of contemplation; this is of
course identical with the process of Indian Yoga, and
is an idea which appears replete with suggestion ;
as it is written, ‘‘He assimilates the images to him-
self, casting them around his own form.” But we are
told, ‘“ All divine natures are incorporeal, but bodies
are bound in them for your sakes.”

The subtil ethers, of which I have spoken, served
in their turn as it were for the garment of the divine
Light; for the Oracles teach that beyond these again
« Asolar worldandendless Light subsist!” This Divine
Light was the object of all veneration. Do not think


19


that what was intended thereby was the Solar Light
we know: “The inerratic sphere of the Starless
above” is an unmistakable expression and therein
“the more true Sun” has place: Theosophists will
appreciate the significance of “the more true Sun,”
for according to The Secret Doctrine the Sun we see
is but the physical vehicle of a more transcendent
splendour.

Some strong Souls were able to reach up to the Light
by theirown power: “ The mortal who approaches the
fire shall have Light from the divinity, and unto the
persevering mortal the blessed immortals are swift.”
But what of those of a lesser stature? Were they,
by inability, precluded from such illumination?
“Others, we read, ‘‘even when asleep, He
makes fruitful from his own Strength.” That is to
say, some men acquire divine knowledge through
communion with Divinity in sleep. This idea has
given rise to some of the most magnificent contribu-
tions to later literature; it has since been thoroughly
elaborated by Porphyry and Synesius. The eleventh
Book ofthe Metamorphoses of Apuleius and the Vision
of Scipio ably vindicate this; and, although no doubt
every Christian has heard that “ He giveth unto his
beloved in sleep,” few, indeed, realise the possibility
underlying that conception.

What, 11 may be asked, were the views of the Chal-
deeans with respect to terrestrial life: Was it a spirit
of pessimism, which led them to hold this in light
esteem? Or, should we not rather say that the key-
note of their philosophy was an immense spiritual
optimism? It appears to me that the latter is the
more true interpretation. They realised that beyond
the confines of matter lay a more perfect existence, a
truer realnı of which terrestrial administration is but
a too often travestied reflection. They sought, as we
seek now, the Good, the Beautiful and the True, but


20


they did not hasten to the Outer in the thirst for sensa-
tion, but with a finer perception realised the true
Utopia to be within.

And the first step in that admirable progress was a
return to the simple life; hardly, indeed, a return, for
most of the Magi were thus brought up from birth.*
The hardihood engendered by the rugged life,
coupled with that wisdom which directed their asso-
ciation, rendered these children of Nature peculiarly
receptive of Nature’s Truths. “Stoop not down,”
says the Oracle, “to the darkly splendid World, For a
precipice heth beneath the Earth, a descent of seven
steps, and therein is established the throne of an evil
and fatal force. Stoop not down unto that darkly
splendid world, Defile not thy brilliant flame with the
earthly dross of matter, Stoop not down for its splen-
dour is but seeming, It is but the habitation of the
Sons of the Unhappy.” No more beautiful formula-
tion of the Great Truth that the exterior and sensuous
life is death to the highest energies of the Soul could
possibly have been uttered: but to such as by purifi-
cation and the practice of virtue rendered themselves
worthy, encouragement was given, for, we read, ‘‘ The
Higher powers build up the body of the holy man.”

The law of Karma was as much a feature of the
Chaldzean philosophy as it is of the Theosophy of to-
day: from a passage in 76/7714), we read, “ The Soul
perpetually runs and passes through all things in a
certain space of time, which being performed it is
presently compelled to pass back again through all
things and unfold a similar web of generation in the
World, according to Zoroaster, who thinks that as
often as the same causes return, the same effects will
in like manner return.”


* They renounced rich attire and the wearing of gold.
Their raiment was white upon occasion; their beds the
ground, and their food nothing but herbs, cheese and bread


21


This is of course the explanation of the proverb
that “History repeats itself,” and is very far from the
superstitious view of fate. Here each one receives
his deserts according to merit or demerit, and these
are the bonds of life; but the Oracles say, “ Enlarge
not thy destiny,” and they urge men to “Explore the
River of the Soul, so that although you have become
a servant to body, you may again rise to the Order
from which you descended, joining works to sacred
reason!”

To this end we are commended to learn the Intelli-
gible which exists beyond the mind, that divine por-
tion of the being which exists beyond Intellect: and
this it is only possible to grasp with the flower of the
mind. “Understand the intelligible with the extended
flame of an extended intellect.” To Zoroaster also was
attributed the utterance “who knows himself knows
all things in himself;” while it is elsewhere suggested
that “ The paternal Mind has sowed symbols in the
Soul.” But such priceless knowledge was possible
only to the Theurgists Who, we are told, ‘‘ fall not so
as to be ranked with the herd that are in subjection to
fate.” The divine light cannot radiate in an imper-
fect microcosm, even as the Clouds obscure the Sun;
for of such as make ascent to the most divine of
speculations in a confused and disordered manner,
with unhallowed lips, or unwashed feet, the progres-
sions are imperfect, the impulses are vain and the
paths are dark.

Although destiny, our destiny, may be “written in
the Stars” yet it was the mission of the divine Soul to
raise the human Soul above the circle of necessity, and
the Oracles give Victory to that Masterly Will, which


“ Hews the wall with might of magic,
Breaks the palisade in pieces,
Hews to atoms seven pickets .
Speaks the Master words of knowledge! 1”?


22


The means taken to that consummation consisted
in the training of the Will and the elevation of the
imagination, a divine power which controls conscious-
ness: “ Believe yourself to be above body, and you
are,” says the Oracle ; it might have added “Theu shall
regenerate phantasy disclose the symbols of the Soul.”

But it is said “ On beholding yourself fear!” t.e.,
the imperfect self.

Everything must be viewed as ideal by him who
would understand the ultimate perfection.

Will is the grand agent in the mystic progress; its
rule is all potent over the nervous system. By Will
the fleeting vision is fixed on the treacherous waves
of the astral Light; by Will the consciousness is
impelled to commune with the divinity: yet there is
not One Will, but three Wills—the Wills, namely, of
the Divine, the Rational and Irrational Souls—to
harmonize these is the difficulty.

It is selfishness which impedes the radiation of
Thought, and attaches to body. This is scientifically
true and irrespective of sentiment, the selfishness
which reaches beyond the necessities of body is pure
vulgarity.

A picture which to the cultured eye beautifully por-
trays a given subject, nevertheless appears to the
savage a confused patchwork of streaks, so the
extended perceptions of a citizen of the Universe are
not grasped by those whose thoughts dwell within
the sphere of the personal life.

The road to the Summum Bonum lies therefore
through self-sacrifice, the sacrifice of the lower to the
higher, for behind that Higher Self lies the concealed
form of the Antient of Days, the synthetical Being of
Divine Humanity.

These things are grasped by Soul; the song of the
Soul is alone heard in the adytum of God-nourished
Silence!


THE


ORACLES OF ZOROASTER.


CAUSE. GOD.


FATHER. MIND. FIRE.
MonapD. DvyAp. ‘TRIAD.


1. But God is He having the head of the Hawk.
The same is the first, incorruptible, eternal, unbe-
gotten, indivisible, dissimilar: the dispenser of all
good; indestructible; the best of the good, the
Wisest of the wise; He is the Father of Equity and
Justice, self-taught, physical, perfect, and wise—He
who inspires the Sacred Philosophy.

Eusebius. Preparatio Evangelica, liber. I., chap. X.


This Oracle does not appear in etther of the ancient
collections, nor in the group of oracles given by any of the
medieval occultists. Cory seems to have been the first to
discover tt in the voluminous writings of Eusebius, who
attributes the authorship to the Persian Zoroaster


2. Theurgists assert that He is a God and cele-
brate him as both older and younger, as a circulating
and eternal God, as understanding the whole number
of all things moving in the World, and moreover
n through his power and energizing a spiral
orce.


Proclus on the Timæus of Plato, 244. Z. or T.


24


The Egyptian Pantheon had an Elderand a Younger
Florus—a God—son of Osiris and Isis. Taylor suggests
that He refers to Kronos, Time, or Chronos, as the later
Platonists wrote the name. Kronos, or Saturnus, of the


Romans, was son of Uranosand Gaia, husband of Rhea,
father of Zeus.


3. The God of the Universe, eternal, limitless,
both young and old, having a spiral force.


Cory includes this Oracle in hts collection, but he gives
no authority for it.
Lobeck doubted its authenticity.


4. For the Eternal Aon*—according to the Oracle
—is the cause of never failing life, of unwearied
power and unsluggish energy.


Taylor.—T.


* « For the First Aton, the Eternal one,” or as
Taylor gives, “ Eternity.”


5. Hence the inscrutable God is called silent by
the divine ones, and is said to consent with Mind,
and to be known to human souls through the power
of the Mind alone.


Proclus in Theologiam Platonis, 321. T.


luscrutable. Taylor gives © stable; perhaps “ in-
comprehensible” is better.


6. The Chaldzeans call the God Dionysos (or
Bacchus), Iao in the Phoenician tongue (instead of


25


the Intelligible Light), and he is also called Sabaoth,*
signifying that he is above the Seven poles, that is


the Demiurgos.
Lydus, De Mensibus, 83. T.


* This word is Chaldee, TzBAUT, meaning hosts;
but there ts also a word SHBOH, meaning The Seven.


7. Containing all things in the one summit of his
own Hyparxis, He Himself subsists wholly beyond.
Proclus in Theologiam Platonis, 212.


Hyparxis, ts generally deemed to mean “ Subsistence.”
flupar is Reality as distinct from appearance; Hup-
arche is a Beginning.


8. Measuring and bounding all things.
Proclus in Theologiam Platonis, 386. T.


“ Thus he speaks the words,” ts omitted by Taylor and
Cory, but present in the Greek.


For nothing imperfect emanates from the‏ .و9
Paternal Principle,‏
Psellus, 38; Pletho. Z.‏


This implies—but only from a succedent emanation.


10. The Father effused not Fear, but He infused
persuasion.
Pletho. ZL.
11. The Father hath apprehended Himself, and
hath not restricted his Fire to his own intellectual
power.
Psellus, 30; Pletho, 33. Z.


26


Taylor gives :—The Father hath hastily withdrawn
Himself, but hath not shut up his own Fire in his
intellectual power.


The Greek text has no word “ hastily, and as to
“ withdrawn—Arpazo means, grasp or snatch, but also
“apprehend with the mind.”


12. Such is the Mind which is energized before
energy, while yetit had not gone forth, but abode in
the Paternal Depth, and in the Adytum of God
nourished silence.


Proc. in Tim., 167. T.


13» All things have issued from that one Fire.

The Father perfected all things, and delivered them
over to the Second Mind, whom all Nations of Men
call the First.


Psellus, 24; Pletho, 30. Z.
14. The Second Mind conducts the Empyrean
World.
Damascius, De Principiis. T.
15. What the Intelligible saith, it saith by under-
standing.
Psellus, 35. Z.


r6. Power is with them, but Mind is from Him.
Proclus in Platonis Theologiam, 365. T.


17. The Mind of the Father riding on the subtle
Guiders, which glitter with the tracings of inflexible
and relentless Fire.


Proclus on the Cratylus of Plato. T.


1. . . . . After the Paternal Conception
I the Soul reside, a heat animating all things.
For he placed


27


The Intelligible in the Soul, and the Soul in dull
body,
_ Even so the Father of Gods and Men placed them
in us.
Proclus in Zim. Plat., 124. Z. or T.


19. Natural works co-exist with the intellectual
light of the Father. For it is the Soul which adorned
the vast Heaven, and which adorneth it after the
Father, but her dominion is established on high.


Proclus in Zim., 106. Z. or T.


Dominion, krata: some copies give kerata, horus.


20. The Soul, being a brilliant Fire, by the power
of the Father remaineth immortal, and is Mistress of
Life, and filleth up the many recesses of the bosom of
the World.

Psellus, 28; Pletho, 11. Z.


21. Thechannels being intermixed, therein she per-
formeth the works of incorruptible Fire.


Proclus in Politica, p. 399. Z. or T.


22. For notin Matter did the Fire which is in the
first beyond enclose His active Power, but in Mind;
for the framer of the Fiery World is the Mind of
Mind.


Proclus in Theologiam, 333, and Tim., 157. T.


23. Who first sprang from Mind, clothing the one
Fire with the other Fire, binding them together, that
he might mingle the fountainous craters, while pre-
serving unsullied the brilliance of His own Fire.


Proclus in Parm. Platonis. T.


28


24. And thence a Fiery Whirlwind drawing down
the brilliance of the flashing flame, penetrating the
abysses of the Universe; for from thence downwards
do extend their wondrous rays.

Proclus in Theologiam Platonis, 171 and 172. T.


25. The Monad first existed, and the Paternal
Monad still subsists.


Proclus in Huclidem, 27. T.


26. When the Monad is extended, the Dyad is
generated.
Proclus in Huclidem, 27. T.


Note that“ What the Pythagoreans signify by Monad,
Duad and Triad, or Plato by Bound, Infinite and Mixed ;
that the Oracles of the Gods intend by Hyparxis, Power
and Energy.”

Damascius De Principiis. Taylor.


27. And beside Him is seated the Dyad which
glitters with intellectual sections, to govern all things,
and to order everything not ordered.


Proclus in Platonis Theologiam, 376. T.
28. The Mind of the Father said that all things


should be cut into Three, whose Will assented, and
immediately all things were so divided.


Proclus in Parmen. T.
29. The Mind of the Eternal Father said into
Three, governing all things by Mind.
Proclus, Timæus of Plato. T.


30. The Father mingled every Spirit from this
Triad.
Lydus, De Mensibus, 20. ‘Taylor.


29


31. All things are supplied from the bosom of this
Triad.
Lydus, De Menstbus, 20. Taylor.


32. All things are governed and subsist in this
Triad.


Proclus in I. Alethtades. T.


33. For thou must know that all things bow before
the Three Supernals.


Damascius, De Principiis. T.


34. From thence floweth forth the Form of the
Triad, being preéxistent; not the first Essence, but
that whereby all things are measured.


Anon. Z. or T.


35. And there appeared in it Virtue and Wisdom,
and multiscient Truth.


Anon. Z. or T.


36. For in each World shineth the Triad, over
which the Monad ruleth.


Damascius in Parmenidem. T.


37. The First Course is Sacred, in the middle
place courses the Sun,* in the third the Earth is
heated by the internal fire.

Anon. Z. or T.


* Jones gives Sun from Helios, but some Greek versions
give flerios, which Cory translates, air.


38. Exalted upon High and animating Light, Fire
Ether and Worlds.


Simplicius in his Physica, 143. Z. or T.


30


IDEAS.


INTELLIGIBLES, INTELLECTUALS, IYNGES, SYNOCHES,
TELETARCHA, FOUNTAINS, PRINCIPLES, HECATE
AND DASMONS.


39. The Mind of the Father whirled forth in re-
echoing roar, comprehending by invincible Will Ideas
omniform ; whiclt flying forth from that one fountain
issued; for from the Father alike was the Will and
the End (by which are they connected with the Father
according to alternating life, through varying
vehicles). But they were divided asunder, being by
Intellectual Fire distributed into other Intellectuals.
For the King of all previously placed before the
polymorphous World a Type, intellectual, incorrup-
tible, the imprint of whose form is sent forth through
the World, by which the Universe shone forth decked
with Ideas all various, of which the foundation is One,
One and alone. From this the others rush forth
distributed and separated through the various bodies
of the Universe, and are borne in swarms through its
vast abysses, ever whirling forth in illimitable
radiation.

They are intellectual conceptions from the Paternal
Fountain partaking abundantly ofthe brilliance of Fire
in the culmination of unresting Time.

But the primary self-perfect Fountain of the Father
poured forth these primogenial Ideas.


Proclus in Parmenitdem. Z. or T.


40. ‘These being many, descend flashingly upon the
shining Worlds, and in them are contained the Three
Supernals.

Damascius in Parmenidem. T.


3I
41. They are the guardians of the works of the
Father, and of the One Mind, the Intelligible.
Proclus in Theologiam Platonis, 205. T.
42. All things subsist together in the Intelligible


World.
Damascius, De Principiis. T.


43. But all Intellect understandeth the Deity, for
Intellect existeth not without the Intelligible, neither
apart from Intellect doth the Intelligible subsist.


Damascius. Z. or T.
44. For Intellect existeth not without the Intelli-
gible; apart from it, it subsisteth not.
Proclus, 7%. PL, 172. Z.or T.


45. By Intellect He containeth the Intelligibles
and introduceth the Soul into the Worlds.


46. By Intellect he containeth the Intelligibles,
and introduceth Sense into the Worlds.
Proclus in Craf. T.
For this Paternal Intellect, which comprehen-


47.
deth the Intelligibles and adorneth things ineffable,
hath sowed symbols through the World.


Proclus in Cratylum. T.
48. This Order is the beginning of all section.
Dam., De Prin. T.
49. The Intelligible is the principle of all section.
Damascius, De Principiis. T.


so. The Intelligible is as food to that which under-
standeth.


Dam., De Prin. T.


32


51. The oracles concerning the Orders exhibits It
as prior to the Heavens, as ineffable, and they add—
It hath Mystic Silence.

Proclus in Cratylum. T.


52. The oracle calls the Intelligible causes Swift,
and asserts that, proceeding from the Father, they
rush again unto Him.

Proclus in Cratylum. T.


53. Those Natures are both Intellectual and
Intelligible, which, themselves possessing Intellection,
are the objects of Intelligence to others.


Proclus, Theologiam Platonis. T.


The Second Order of the Platonist philosophy was the
“Intelligible and Intellectual Triad? Among the
Chaldeans this order includes the Lynges, Synoches and
Teletarchs. The Intellectual Triad of the later Platonists
corresponds to the Fountains, Fontal Fathers or Cosmagogt
of the Chaldeans.


54. The Intelligible lynges themselves understand
from the Father; by Ineffable counsels being moved
so as to understand.

Psellus, 41; Pletho, 31. Z.


55. Because it is the Operator, because it is the
Giver of Life Bearing Fire, because it filleth the
Life-producing bosom of Hecaté; and it instilleth
into the Synoches the enlivening strength of Fire,
endued with mighty Power.


Proclus in Zim., 128. T.
56. He gave His own Whirlwinds to guard the


Supernals, mingling the proper force of His own
strength in the Synoches.
Dam., De Prin. T.


23


57- But likewise as many as serve the material
Synoches. :


58. The Teletarchs are comprehended in the


Synoches.
Dam., De Prin. T.


59. Rhea, the Fountain and River of the Blessed
Intellectuals, having first received the powers of all
things in Her Ineffable Bosom, pours forth perpetual
Generation upon all things.

Proc. in Crat. T.


60. For it is the bound of the Paternal Depth, and
the Fountain of the Intellectuals.
Dam., De Prin. T.


61. For He is a Power of circumlucid strength,
glittering with Intellectual Sections.
Dam. T.


62. He glittereth with Intellectual Sections, and
hath filled all things with love.
Dam. T.


63. Unto the Intellectual Whirlings of Intellectual
Fire, all things are subservient, through the persua-
sive counsel of the Father.

Proc. in Parm. T.


64. O! how the World hath inflexible Intellectual
Rulers.


65. The source of the Hecaté correspondeth with
that of the Fontal Fathers.
T.


66. From Him leap forth the Amilicti, the all-
relentless thunders, and the whirlwind receiving


34


Bosoms of the all-splendid Strength of Hecaté
Father-begotten; and He who encircleth the
Brilliance of Fire; And the Strong Spirit of the
Poles, all fiery beyond.

Proc. in Crat. T.


67. There is another Fountain, which leadeth the
Empyrean World.
Proc. in Zim. Z. or T.


668. The Fountain of Fountains, and the boundary
of all fountains.
Dam., De Prin.


69. Under two Minds the Life-generating fountain
of Souls is comprehended.
Dam., De Prin. T.


70. Beneath them exists the Principal One of the
Immaterials.
Dam. in Parm. Z. or T.


Following the Intellectual Triad was the Demiurgos,
from whom procecded the Effable and Essential Orders
including all sorts of Demons, andthe Elementary World.


71. Father begotten Light, which alone hath
gathered from the strength of the Father the Flower
of mind, and hath the power of understanding the
Paternal mind, and doth instil into all Fountains and
Principles the power of understanding and the func-
tion of ceaseless revolution.

Proc. in 7zm., 242.


72. <All fountains and principles whirl round and
always remain in a ceaseless revolution.


Proc. in Parm. Z. or T.


33


73. The Principles, which have understood the
Intelligible works of the Father, He hath clothed in
sensible works and bodies, being intermediate links
existing to connect the Father with Matter, rendering
apparent the Images of unapparent Natures, and
inscribing the Unapparent in the Apparent frame of
the World.


Dam., De Prin. Z. or T.


74. Typhon, Echidna, and Python, being the
progeny of Tartaros and Gaia, who were united by
Uranos, form, as it were, a certain Chaldzan Triad,
the Inspector and Guardian of all the disordered
fabrications.

Olymp. in Phed. T.


75. There are certain Irrational Demons (mindless
elementals), which derive their subsistence from the
Aerial Rulers; wherefore the Oracle saith, Being
the Charioteer of the Aérial, Terrestrial and Aquatic
Dogs.

Olymp. in Phed. T.


76. The Aquatic when applied to Divine Natures
signifies a Government inseparable from Water, and
hence the Oracle calls the Aquatic Gods, Water
Walkers.


Proc. in Tim., 270. T.


77. There are certain Water Elementals whom
Orpheus calls Nereides, dwelling in the more ele-
vated exhalations of Water, such as appear in damp,
cloudy Air, whose bodies are sometimes seen (as
Zoroaster taught) by more acute eyes, especially in
Persia and Africa.


Ficinus de Immortalilate Anime, 123. T.


36


PARTICULAR SOULS.


SouL, Lire, MAN.


78. The Father conceived ideas, and all mortal
bodies were animated by Him.
Proc. in Tim., 336. T.


79. For the Father of Gods and men placed the
Mind (nous) in the Soul (psyche); and placed both
in the (human) body.

80. The Paternal Mind hath sowed symbols in
the Soul.


Psell., 26; Pletho, 6. Z.


81. Having mingled the Vital Spark from two
according substances, Mind and Divine Spirit, as a
third to these He added Holy Love, the venerable
Charioteer uniting all things.


Lyd. De Men., 3.


82. Filling the Soul with profound Love.
Proc. in Pl. Theol, 4. Zor T.


83. The Soul of man does in a manner clasp God
to herself. Having nothing mortal, she is wholly
inebriated with God. For she glorieth in the har-
mony under which the mortal body subsisteth.


Psellus, 17; Pletho, 10. Z.
84. The more powerful Souls perceive Truth
through themselves, and are of a more inventive


Nature. Such Souls are saved through their own
strength, according to the Oracle.


Proclus in I. A/c. Z.


37


85. The Oracle saith that Ascending Souls sing a


Peean.
Olymp. in Phed. Z or T.


86. Of all Souls, those certainly are superlatively
blessed, which are poured forth from Heaven to
Earth; and they are happy, and have ineffable
stamina, as many as proceed from Thy Splendid Self,
O King, or from Jove Himself, under the strong
necessity of Mithus.


Synes. De Jnsom, 153. Zor T.
Query Mithras.


87. The Souls of those who quit the body violently
are most pure.
Psellus, 27. Z.


88. The girders of the Soul, which give her
breathing, are easy to be unloosed.


Psellus, 32; Pletho, 8. Z.


89. For when you see a Soul set free, the Father
sendeth another, that the number may be complete.


Z.or T.


go. Understanding the works of the Father, they
avoid the shameless Wing of Fate; they are placed
in God, drawing forth strong light-bearers, descend-
ing from the Father, from whom as they descend, the
Soul gathereth of the empyreean fruits the soul-
nourishing flower.
Proc. in Tim., 321. Z. or T.


gt. This Animastic Spirit which blessed men have
called the Pneumatic Soul, becometh a god, an all-
various Dæmon, and an Image (disembodied), and in
this form of Soul suffereth her punishments. The


38


Oracles, too, accord with this account; for they


assimilate the employment of the Soul in Hades, to
the delusive visions of a dream.


Synesius De Zrsom. Z. or T.


The word Demon in the original meaning of the term
did not necessarily mean a bad Spirit, and was as often
applied to pure spirits as to impure.

Compare the Eastern doctrine of Devachan, a stage
of pleasing tllusion after death.


92. One life after another, from widely distributed
sources. Passing from above, through to the opposite
part; through the Centre of the Earth; and to the
fifth middle, fiery centre, where the life-bearing fire
descendeth as far as the material world.

Z. or T.

93. Water is a symbol of life; hence Plato and
the gods before Plato, call it (the Soul) at one time
the whole water of vivification, and at another time a
certain fountain of it.


Proc. in 7zm., 318. Z.


0 Man, of a daring nature, thou subtle
production.
Psell., 12; Pletho, 21. Z.


95. For thy vessel the beasts of the Earth shall
inhabit.


Psell., 36; Pletho, ]. Z.
Vessel is the body in which the Nous—thou, dwellest
for a time.


96. Since the Soul perpetually runs and passes
through many experiences in a certain space of time ;


39


which being performed, it is presently compelled to
pass back again through all things, and unfold a
similar web of generation in the World, according to
Zoroaster, who thinketh that as often as the same
causes return, the same effects will in like manner be
sure to ensue.


Ficin. De lm. An., 129. Z.


97. According to Zoroaster, in us the ethereal
vestment of the Soul perpetually revolves (reincar-
nates).

Ficin. De Im. An., 131. Z.


98. The Oracles delivered by the Gods celebrate
the essential fountain of every Soul; the Empyrean,
the Ethereal and the Material. This fountain they
separate from (Zoogonothea) the vivifying Goddess
(Rhea), from whom (suspending the whole of Fate)
they make two series or orders; the one animastic, or
belonging to the Soul, and the other belonging to
Fate. They assert that the Soul is derived from the
animastic series, but that sometimes it becometh sub-
servient to Fate, when passing into an irrational
condition of being, it becometh subject to Fate
instead of to Providence.

Proclus de Providentia apud Fabricium in Biblioth.


Greca., wol. 8, 486. Z.or T.


MATTER.


THE WORLD—AND NATURE.


99. The Matrix containing all things.


100. Wholly divisible, and yet indivisible.


40


1or. Thence abundantly springeth forth the genera-
tions of multifarious Matter.


Proc. in Tim., 118. T.


102. These frame atoms, sensible forms, corporeal
bodies, and things destined to matter.


Dam, De Prin. T.


103. The Nymphs of the Fountains, and all the
Water Spirits, and terrestrial, aërial and astral forms,
are the Lunar Riders and Rulers of all Matter, the
Celestial, the Starry, and that which lieth in the
Abysses.

Lydus., p. 32.


1o4. According to the Oracles, Evil is more feeble
than Non-entity.


Proc. de Prov. Z.or T.


105. We learn that Matter pervadeth the whole
world, as the Gods also assert.


Proc., Tim., 142. Z. or T.


106. All Divine Natures are incorporeal, but bodies
are bound to them for your sakes. Bodies not being
able to contain incorporeals, by reason of the Cor-
poreal Nature, in which ye are concentrated.


Proc. in PZ. Polit., 359. Z. or T.


107. For the Paternal Self-begotten Mind, under-
standing His works sowed in all, the fiery bonds of
love, that all things might continue loving for an
infinite time. That the connected series of things
might intellectually remain in the Light of the
Father; that the elements of the World might con-
tinue their course in mutual attraction.


Proc. in 77m., 155. T.


4I


108. The Maker of all things, self-operating, framed
the World. And there was a certain Mass of Fire:
all these things Self-Operating He produced, that the
Body of the Universe might be conformed, that the
World might be manifest, and not appear membranous.


Proc. in Tim., 154. Z. or T.


1609. For He assimilateth the images to himself,
casting them around his own form.


110. For they are an imitation of his Mind, but
that which is fabricated hath something of Body.
Proc. in Tim., 87. Zor. T.
111. There isa Venerable Name, with a sleepless


revolution, leaping forth into the worlds, through the
rapid tones of the Father.


Proc. in Crat. Z. or T.


112, The Ethers of the Elements therefore are
there.


Olympiodorus in Phed. Z. or T.


113. The Oracles assert that the types of Cha-
racters, and of other Divine visions appear in the
Ether (or Astral Light).


Simp. in PAys., 144. Z. or T.
114. In this the things without figure are figured.
Simp. in PAys., 143. Z. or T.


115. The Ineffable and Effable impressions of the
World.


116. The Light hating World, and the winding
currents by which many are drawn down.


Proc. in Tim., 339. Z. or T.


42


117. He maketh the whole World of Fire, Air,
Water, and Earth, and of the all-nourishing Ether.


Z. or T.


118. Placing Earth in the middle, but Water
below the Earth, and Air above both these.
Z. or T.


119. He fixed a vast multitude of un-wandering
Stars, not by a strain laborious and hurtful, but with
stability void of movement, forcing Fire forward into
Fire.

Proc. in Tim., 280. Z. or T.


120. The Father congregated the Seven Firma-
ments of the Kosmos, circumscribing the Heavens
with convex form.


Dam. in Parm. Z, or T.


121. He constituted a Septenary of wandering
Existences (the Planetary globes).


Z. or T.
122. Suspending their disorder in Well-disposed
Zones.
Z. or T.


123. He made them six in number, and for the
Seventh He cast into the midst thereof the Fiery Sun,


Proc. in 77zm., 280. Z. or T.


124. The Centre from which all (lines) which way
soever are equal.
Proc. in Auclidem.


125. And that the Swift Sun doth pass as ever
around a Centre.


Proc. in Plat. Th., 317. Z. or T.


43


126. Hagerly urging itself towards that Centre of
resounding Light.


Proc. in Tim., 236. T.
127. The Vast Sun, and the Brilliant Moon.


128. As rays of Light his locks flow forth, ending
in acute points.


Proc. in P} Pol. 387. T.


129. And of the Solar Circles, and of the Lunar,
clashings, and of the Aérial Recesses ; the Melody of
Ether, and of the Sun, and of the phases of the Moon,
and of the Air.


Proc. in Tim., 257. Z. or T.


130. The most mystic of discourses informs us
that His wholeness is in the Supra-mundane Orders :
for there a Solar World and Boundless Light subsist,
as the Oracles of the Chaldæans affirm.


Proc. in Tim., 264. Z. or T.


131. The Sun more true measureth all things by
time, being itself the time of time, according to the
Oracle of the Gods concerning it.


Proc. in Tim., 249. Z. or T.


132. The Disk (of the Sun) is borne in the Starless
realm above the Inerratic Sphere; and hence he is
not in the midst of the Planets, but of the Three
Worlds, according to the telestic Hypothesis.


Jul., Crat., 5,334. Z. or T.


133. The Sun is a Fire, the Channel of Fire, and
the dispenser of Fire.


Proc. in Zim., 141. Z. or T.


44


134. Hence Kronos, The Sun as Assessor beholds
the true pole.


135. The Ethereal Course, and the vast motion of
the Moon, and the Aérial fluxes.


Proclus in 77m., 257. Z. or T.


136. O Ether, Sun, and Spirit of the Moon, ye are
the chiefs of the Air.
Proc. in Tim., 257. Z. or T.


137. And the wide Air, and the Lunar Course, and
the Pole of the Sun.
Proc. in Tim., 257. Z. or T.


138. For the Goddess bringeth forth the Vast Sun,
and the lucent Moon.


139. She collecteth it, receiving the Melody of
Ether, and of the Sun, and of the Moon, and of
whatsoever things are contained in the Air.


140. Unwearied Nature ruleth over the Worlds
and works, that the Heavens drawing downward
might run an eternal course, and that the other
periods of the Sun, Moon, Seasons, Night and Day,
might be accomplished.


Proc. in Tim., 4, 323. Z. or T.


141. And above the shoulders of that Great
Goddess, is Nature in her vastness exalted.


Proc. in Zim., 4. T.


142. The most celebrated of the Babylonians,
together with Ostanes and Zoroaster, very properly
call the starry Spheres “Herds”; whether because
these alone among corporeal magnitudes, are per-
fectly carried about around a Centre,or in conformity
to the Oracles, because they are considered by them


+5


as in a certain respect the bonds and collectors of
physical reasons, which they likewise call in their
sacred discourse “Herds” (agelous) and by the in-
sertion of a gamma (aggelous) Angels. Wherefore
the Stars which preside over each of these herds are
considered to be Deities or Deemons, similar to the
Angels, and are called Archangels; and they are
seven in number.


Anon. in Zheologumenis Arithmeticis. Z.


Daimon in Greek meant “a Spirit,’ not “a bad


Spirit”


143. Zoroaster calls the congruities of material
forms to the ideals of the Soul of the World—Divine
Allurements.

Ficinus, de Vit, Cel. Comp. Z.


MAGICAL AND PHILOSOPHICAL
PRECEPTS.


144. Direct not thy mind to the vast surfaces of
the Earth; for the Plant of Truth grows not upon the
ground. Nor measure the motions of the Sun, col-
lecting rules, for he is carried by the Eternal Will of
the Father, and not for your sake alone. Dismiss
(from your mind) the impetuous course of the Moon,
for she moveth always by the power of necessity.
The progression of the Stars was not generated for
your sake. The wide aérial flight of birds gives no
true knowledge nor the dissection of the entrails of


46


victims; they are all mere toys, the basis of mercenary
fraud: flee from these if you would enter the sacred
paradise of piety, where Virtue, Wisdom and Equity
are assembled.

Psel., 4. Z.


145. Stoop not down unto the Darkly-Splendid
World; wherein continually lieth a faithless Depth,
and Hades wrapped in clouds, delighting in unintelli-
ble images, precipitous, winding, a black ever-rolling
Abyss; ever espousing a Body unluminous, formless
and void.

Synes., de Jusom., 140. Z. or T.


146. Stoop not down, for a precipice lieth beneath
the Earth, reached by a descending Ladder which
hath Seven Steps, and therein is established the
Throne of an evil and fatal force.


Psell., 6; Pletho, 2. Z.
147. Stay not on the Precipice with the dross of


Matter, for there is a place for thy Image in a realm
ever splendid.


Psell., 1, 2; Pletho, 14; Synesius, 140. Z.


148. Invoke not the visible Image of the Soul of
Nature.


Psell., 15; Pletho, 23. Z.


149. Look not upon Nature, for her name is fatal.
Proc. in Plat. Th., 143. Z.
150. It becometh you not to behold them before


your body is initiated, since by alway alluring they
seduce the souls from the sacred mysteries.


Proc. in Z Alcib. Z. or T.


47
151. Bring her not forth, lest in departing she re-
tain something.
Psell., 3; Pletho, 15. Z.


Taylor says that “her” refers to the human soul.


152. Defile not the Spirit, nor deepen a superficies.
Psell., 19; Pletho, 13. Z.


153. Enlarge not thy Destiny.
Psell., 37; Pletho, 4.


154. Not hurling, according to the Oracle, a trans-
cendent foot towards piety.


Dam. in Vitam Isidore. ap. Suidam Z. or T.


155. Change not the barbarous Names of Evoca-
tion for there are sacred Names in every language
which are given by God, having in the Sacred Rites a
Power Ineffable.

Psell., 7. Nicephotus. Z. or T.


156. Go not forth when the Lictor passeth by.
Picus de Mirandula, Concl. Z.


157. Let fiery hope nourish you upon the Angelic


plane.
Olymp. in Phed. Proc. in Alcib. Z. or T.


158. The conception of the glowing Fire hath the
first rank, for the mortal who approacheth that Fire
shall have Light from God; and unto the persevering
mortal the Blessed Immortals are swift.


Proc. in Tim., 65. Z.or T.
159. The Gods exhort us to understand the radia-


ting form of Light.
Proc. in Crat. Z. or T.


48


160. It becometh you to hasten unto the Light,
and to the Rays of the Father, from whom was sent
unto you a Soul (Psyche) endued with much mind
(Nous).

Psell., 33. Pletho, 6. Z.


161. Seek Paradise.
Psell., 41. Pletho, 27. Z.


162. Learn the Intelligible for it subsisteth beyond
the Mind.
Psell., 41. Pletho, 27. Z.


163. There is a certain Intelligible One whom it
becometh you to understand with the Flower of Mind.


Psell., 31. Pletho, 28. Z.


164. But the Paternal Mind accepteth not the
aspiration of the soul until she hath passed out of her
oblivious state, and pronounceth the Word, regaining
the Memory of the pure paternal Symbol.


Psell., 39. Pletho, 5. Z.


165. Unto some He gives the ability to receive the
Knowledge of Light; and others, even when asleep,
he makes fruitful from His own strength.


Synes., de Jnsomn, 135. Z. or T.


166. Itis not proper to understand that Intelligible
One with vehemence, but with the extended flame of
far reaching Mind, measuring all things except that
Intelligible. But it is requisite to understand this;
for if thou inclinest thy Mind thou wilt understand it,
not earnestly; but it is becoming to bring with thee a
pure and enquiring sense, to extend the void mind of
thy Soul to the Intelligible, that thou mayest learn
the Intelligible, because it subsisteth beyond Mind.


Dam. T.


49


167. Thou wilt not comprehend it, as when under-
standing some common thing.


Damascius, de primis principiis. T.


168. Ye who understand, know the Super-mundane
Paternal Depth.


Dam. Z.or T.


169. Things Divine are not attainable by mortals
who understand the body alone, but only by those
who stripped of their garments arrive at the summit.


Proc. in Crat. Z. or T.


170. Having put on the completely armed-vigour
of resounding Light, with triple strength fortifying
the Soul and the Mind, He must put into the Mind
the various Symbols, and not walk dispersedly on the
empyrean path, but with concentration.


171. For being furnished with every kind of
Armour, and armed, he is similar to the Goddess.


Proc. in Pl. Th., 324. T.


172. Explore the River of the Soul, whence, or in
what order you have come: so that although you have
become a servant to the body, you may again rise to
the Order from which you descended, joining works to
sacred reason.


Psell., 5. Pletho, i. Z.


173. Every way unto the emancipated Soul extend
the rays of Fire.
Psell., 11. Pletho, 24. Z.
174. Let the immortal depth of your Soul lead you,
but earnestly raise your eyes upwards.
Psell., rr. Pletho, 20.


50


175. Man, being an intelligent Mortal, must bridle
his Soul that she may not incur terrestrial infelicity,
but be saved.

Lyd., De Men., 2.


176. If thou extendeth the Fiery Mind to the work
of piety, thou wilt preserve the fluxible body.


Psell., 22. Pletho, 16. Z.


177. The telestic life through Divine Fire removeth
all the stains, together with everything of a foreign
and irrational nature, which the spirit of the Soul has
attracted from generation, as we are taught by the
Oracle to believe.

Proc. in Zim., 331. Taylor.


178. The Oracles of the Gods declare, that through
purifying ceremonies, not the Soul only, but bodies
themselves become worthy of receiving much assis-
tance and health, for, say they, the mortal vestment of
coarse Matter will by these means be purified.” And
this, the Gods, in an exhortatory manner, announce
to the most holy of Theurgists.


Jul, Czat. v., p. 334. Z. or T.


179. We should flee, according to the Oracle, the
multitude of men going 11 herd.


Proc. in Z. Alc. Z.or T.


180. Who knoweth himself, knoweth all things in


himself.
I. Pic., p. 211. Z.


181. The Oracles often give victory to our own
choice, and not to the Order alone of the Mundane
periods. As, for instance, when they say, “On
beholding thyself, fear!” And again, “ Believe thy-
self to be above the Body, and thou art so.” And,


51


still further, when they assert, “That our voluntary
sorrows germinate in us the growth of the particular
life we lead.”


Proc., de Prov., p. 483. Z. or T.


182. But these are mysteries which I evolve in the
profound Abyss of the Mind.


183. As the Oracle thereforth saith: God is never
so turned away from man, and never so much sendeth
him new paths, as when he maketh ascent to divine
speculations or works in a confused or disordered
manner, and as it adds, with unhallowed lips, or un-
washed feet. For of those who are thus negligent,
the progress is imperfect, the impulses are vain, and
the paths are dark.

Proc. in Parm. Z. or T.


184. Not knowing that every God is good, ye are
fruitlessly vigilant.
Proc. in Platonis Pol., 355. Z. or T.


185. Theurgists fall not so as to be ranked among
the herd that are in subjection to Fate.


Lyd., De men. ‘Taylor.


186. The number nine is divine, receives its com-
pletion from three triads, and attains the summits of
theology, according to the Chaldaic philosophy as
Porphyry informeth us.

Lyd., p. 12%


187. In the left side of Hecate is a fountain of
Virtue, which remaineth entirely within her, not
sending forth its virginity.

Psell., 13; Pletho, 9. Z.


52


188. And the earth bewailed them, even unto
their children.


Psell., 21; Pletho, 3. Z.


189. The Furies are the Constrainers of Men.
Psell., 26; Pletho, 19. Z.


190. Lest being baptized to the Furies of the Earth,
and to the necessities of nature (as some one of the
Gods saith), you should perish.


Proc. in Theol., 297. Z. or T.


191. Nature persuadeth us that there are pure
Demons, and that evil germs of Matter may alike
become useful and good.

Psell., 16; Pletho, 18. Z.


192. For three days and no longer need ye
sacrifice.
Pic. Conci. Z.


193. So therefore first the Priest who governeth
the works of Fire, must sprinkle with the Water of
the loud-resounding Sea.


Proc. in Craft. Z.or T.


194. Labour thou around the Strophalos of Hecaté.
Psell., 9. Nicephorus.


195. When thou shalt see a Terrestrial Demon
approaching, Cry aloud! and sacrifice the stone


Mnizourin.
Psell., 40. Z.


196. If thou often invokest thou shalt see all
things growing dark; and then when no longer is
visible unto thee the High-arched Vault of Heaven,
when the Stars have lost their Light and the Lamp of


53


the Moon is veiled, the Earth abideth not, and around
thee darts the Lightning Flame and all things appear


amid thunders.
Psell., 10; Pletho, 22. Z.


197. From the Cavities of the Earth leap forth the
terrestrial Dog-faced demons, showing no true sign
unto mortal man.

Psell, 23; Pletho, 10. Z.


198. A similar Fire flashingly extending through
the rushings of Air, or a Fire formless whence cometh
the Image of a Voice, or even a flashing Light abound-
ing, revolving, whirling forth, crying aloud. Also
there is the vision of the fire-flashing Courser of
Light, or also a Child, borne aloft on the shoulders of
the Celestial Steed, fiery, or clothed with gold, or
naked, or shooting with the bow shafts of Light, and
standing on the shoulders of the horse; then if thy
meditation prolongeth itself, thou shalt unite all
these Symbols into the Form of a Lion.


Proc. in ?/. Polit, 380; Stanley Mist. Philos.
Z. or T.


199. When thou shalt behold that holy and form-
less Fire shining flashingly through the depths of
the Universe: Hear thou the Voice of Fire.


Psell., 14; Pletho, 25. Z.


ORACLES FROM PORPHYRY.


1. There is above the Celestial Lights an Incor-
ruptible Flame always sparkling; the Spring of Life,
the Formation of all Beings, the Original of all
things! This Flame produceth all things, and


34


nothing perisheth but what it consumeth. It maketh
Itself known by Itself. This Fire cannot be con-
tained in any Place, it is without Body and without
Matter. It encompasseth the Heavens. And there
goeth out from it little Sparks, which make all the
Fires of the Sun, of the Moon, and of the Stars.
Behold! what I know of God! Strive not to know
more of Him, for that is beyond thy capacity, how
wise soever thou art. As to the rest, know that
unjust and wicked Man cannot hide himself from
the Presence of God!

No subtilty nor excuse can disguise anything
from His piercing Eyes. All is full of God, and
God is in All!


2. There is in God an Immense Profundity of
Flame! Nevertheless, the Heart should not fear to
approach this Adorable Fire, or to be touched by it; it
will never be consumed by this sweet Fire, whose
mild and Tranquil Heat maketh the Binding, the
Harmony, and the Duration of the World. Nothing
subsisteth but by this Fire, which is God Himself.
No Person begat Him; He is without Mother; He
knoweth all things, and can be taught nothing.

He is Infallible in His designs, and His name is
unspeakable, Behold now, what God is! As for us
p are His messengers, We are but a Little Part of
70d.
