A New Theory of the Earth
William Whiston
A New Theory of the Earth. London: Benjamin Tooke, 1696 (first edition).
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_a-new-theory-of-the-eart_whiston-william_1696).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

| ANEW


THEORY


THE


E A R T H,


From ies ORIGINAL, to the


ConsumwnaTtion of all Things.


WHEREIN

The CREATION of the World in Six Days,
| The Univerſal DELUGE,

And the General CONFLAGRATION,


As laid down in the Poly Scriptures,


Are ſhewn to be perfe&ly agreeable to
EPEOA and PHILOSOPHY.


With a hirge IntroduQtory Diſcourſe concerning the Genu-
inc Nature, Stile, and Exrent of the My/-ick Hiſtory of
te CREATION.


By WILLIAM WHISTON, M.A
Chaplain to the _ Reverend Father in God,
7OHN Lord Biſhop of NORWICH, and
Fellow of Clare-Hall in Cambridge.

=. yg:

| LOND O N:


Printed by R. Roberts, for Benj. Tooke at the
| | Middle-Temple-Gate in Fleet-ſtreet. MDC XCVL |


— — oo —O— |


4


=
|
* :
No |
3 ,
" ;
F d J
F +> Jr: of 3
& ,
"
"IT .
b -
LO X


— _


Ummo Vio Isaaco New-
Ton, Apud Londinenles Socie-

raris Regalis, Apud Cantabrigicnſes
ſuos Collegij S. S. Triniatis Socie


'Dignifſimo ; . Matheſess Profeſſor:


Lucaſrano longe Celeberrimo.; nec-
non. Regio Nummorum .Cularum


' Prafeto,; Reipublicz, quoquo ,pa-


ret., -Literariz Ornamento 3 - Seculi,
Gentis, Academiz. £gregio .Necori ,;
Orbis Philoſophici Delicijs. .. Quirem
przſertim Mathematicam eouſgue Ex-


_ coluit, :Adauxit, Dilatavit,..ut ipſam


Phyſicam intra pomeria \ ſua com-
plei, .& Mundi.Syſtema, conatu'in-
audito, ditioni ſux ſubjicere tandem
aliquando audear. Quem Morum
Candor & Modeſtia; Quem Sagax
animus & penetrans; Quem afſidui
Labores, indefeſſz Vigiliz, Induſtria
incredibilis promovendis verz ac (0-
lide Sapientiz tudijs unice dicara z
Qnem Rerum Divinarum Humana-
rumq; hoc eſt Univerſz Philoſophiz,

peritia


-»


peritia plane r ngularis ; Quem de-
mum\-Pr1ilLoSoOPHIX NaTuRa-
L1S PRINCIP1A MATHEMATI-
© a, auro contra z{timanda, '& rigs
talibus vix aur ne' vix propaland
mere; 'Ultimx polterirati #terniim
Commttabiing. -

Exiguum hocce Tentaminis Philo-
ſophic?'Spicilegiuim, e Meſſe Ne w-
ToxXTAN& primitds ſuble&um ;
Subſivijs, 'Confilijs, 'Auſpicijs potifli-
mim Newrton14 1s acceptum,
uti pat eſt; referendum ratus, Totum
hoc ,/ ualecunque fir, NewToN1
nom, "it omne zvum perennaturo,
Nuneuſan? um ;''&, -inGrati Anim
Mrnudeuriy; + C onſecrandam cenſuit' Gu-
Helmnus Whiſton. 17. Kal. Fun. A; D.
be be ng :


A
DISCOURSE


Concerning the


Nacure, Stile, and Extent
OF THE |


Mosaick HisTtox y |
OF THE


ATION |}


$1, T being no inconſiderable part
Ss of the enſuing Theory, to
account for the Creation of
= the World, agreeable to the
a deſcription thereof in the Book
=_ of Geneſis, it cannot bur be =O
CR ncceſſaryin this place, to dif-
courſe of the nature of that Sacred Hiſtory, the
| Stile in which it is Writ, and how far it is to be
Extended. The miſunderſtanding of which
points has been, I think , the principal occa- |
ſion of thoſe perplexities and contrarieties into
which Men have run with relation to it ; while
ſome have adher'd to the common and vulgar,
tho* leſs rational Expoſition , without any
B con-


Of the Moſaick Cr2ation.
conſideration of Nature , Reaſon , Philoſophy ,


or juſt Decorum in the ſeveral parts of it: And
others, on the contrary , have been ſo ſen-
ſible of the wildneſs and unreafonableneſs
- of That, that they ihave ventur'd to exclude it
from any jult ſenſe at all ; aſſerting ic to be a
meer Popular, Parabolick, or Mythological re-
lation; in which the plain Letter is no more to
be accounted for or b<clicv'd, than the fabulous
repreſentatians of e/£/op, or at beſt than the my-
ſtical Parables of our Saviour. Of what miſ-
chievous conſequence this latter is commonly
eſtecm'd, I need not fay ; a late excellent Au-
thor, who thought it abſolutely neceſſary to be
introduc d, having felt reflections ſufficiently ſe-
vere, and ſeen ettedts ſufficiently miſchievous of
ſuch an Interpretation. And how unworthy of
God, how incoherent and abſurd the former
Expoſition is in it ſelf, and muſt be eſteem'd by
free and inguititive Thuikers, 'tis not ditficulr to
make appear to any impartial Min, and ſhall in
this Diſcourke be particularly attempted. Indeed
I cannot but imagine that, as thoſe who plead
for xhe Mythological ſenſe, do it only becauſe
they ſuppoſe ic impollible ro give a commodious
and rational ictheme of it on any other Hypo-
theſis; and therefore will calily and readily em-
brace any more literal Interpretation which
ſhall agree to the Divine Attributes, the Reaſon
of their own Minds, and the true Syſtem of the
World; ſo I think thoſe who, notwithſtanding
ics apparent incongruicies, adhere to the vulgar
Expoſition, will have great reaſon to encourage,
and reſt ſatizfy'd in ſuch an account, as ſhall at
once keep ſufficiently cloſe to the Letter of Me-
ſes, and yet be far from allowing what contra-


didts the Divine Wiſdom, Common Reaſon, or
Philoſophick |.


- —


Of the Moſaick Creation.


Plilofophick Deductions : to both which there-
fore, I perfuade my ſelf this new attempt oughe
not to be nee coi {ry |

But becauſe the principal difficulty is likely to
ariſe from che prejudices and prepoſſeflions of
the latter, and from the vulgar and common no-
tions already fix'd in the Minds of moſt Men,
relating to this Mo/axck Creation ; I ſhall in this
place chiefly have a reſpect to them, and endea-
vour to evince, That the notions they have en-
tertain'd of the Nature, Stile, and Extcnt of the
Creation of the World in fix days, are falſe,
precarious, and no lefs contrary to the Holy
Scriptures themſelves, than to ſound Reaſon and
true Philolophy. The Propoſiti therefore
which ſhall be the ſubjeR of this Diſſertation, and
includes the whole point beface us, ſþall 52 this :
The Moſaick Creation s not a IVice and Philo o0bi-
cal account of the Origin of All Things; but an
Hiſtorical and True Repreſentation of the formation
of our fogle Earth ou: of a cont u/ed Chaos, and of
the [wcceſſrye and wviſcole changes thereof each day,
till it became the habitation of Mankind,

That this Propolition is exactly agreeable to
that Account, which in the following Theory
is given of this Creation, will be evident upon
the peruſal thereof ; and that the ſame Propoſi-
tion is alike agreeable ro the Deſign and Stile of
the Sacred Penman in the firſt Chapter of Ge-
neſis, is what I am now to make appear; and
that I ſhall endeavour to do by the following
Arguments ; which tho' they might have been
diſtinguiſh'd, and ſuited to the ſeveral branches
of this Aſſertion, yer for eaſe I ſhall wave that
niceneſs, and ſer them down indiflerently in that
order they were put into by my own thoughts,
before I intended to adapt them to the juſt .
B 2 (s


Gen. 1. 1.


Of the Moſaick Creation.


of the foregoing Propoſition ; Strength of Rea-
foning, more than Exatnefs of Compoſure, be-
ing the aim of the Author in this whole Theory :
And if - he be found to go upon ſolid grounds,
he hopes the Reader will never the leſs embrace
the Conclufions, becauſe. of the inaccuracy of
the Stile, or harſhneſs of the Periods ; which
wholly to have avoided, he freely owns, would
to him have been more tedions and operoſe than
the Work ir felt ; and ſo he hopes 'twill not be
expected from him by the Inquiſitive Reader :
Which Apology once for all he deſires may be
accepted, and call'd to mind whenever {as too
frequent'y it will) there ſhall be occaſion in
-the following Pages.


I. Thevery firſtkwords of Moſes plainly imply,
that the Production of all the World out of no-
thing, which we uſually ſtile Creation, was pre-
cedaneous to the Six days Works, given an ac-
count of in the ſame chapter. In the Peginning
God Created the Heawen ond the' Earth, ſays the
Scripture ; whichis, as I take it, a Preface or In-
rroduttion to the following account, and may
be thus paraphras'd : © Altho* that Hiſtory of
* the Orrgin of the World which ſhall now be
* given you, do not extend any farther, as will
* appear preſently. than that Earth we live up-
© on, with thoſe Bodies which peculiarly be-
© long to it ; and fo the reſt of the Univerle be
* nnot- at all directly concern'd therein ; and al-
* tho* the ſame Hiſtory will not reach to the
& Greation of the matter, but only Production
« of the form, and diſpoſition*ef the Earth it
«ſelf: Yer, te prevent +any miſunderſtanding,
© and obviate any ill effects of a p-ite& filence
* touching theſe things, I am obiigd, by the

*© Divine


a —


-


Of the Moſaick Creation,


* Divine Command, to aſſure you, That the
* Original of all Beings whaifoever, was pri-
© marily. owing to that ſame God of 7/rzel,
* whoſe Works I am going to :<late ; and thar
* not only this Earth, and all ics Podics, but the
* vaſt Frame of Univerſal] Nature, was by him
«* at firſt Created our of Nothing, and dispos'd
&* jinto thoſe ſeveral Syſtems which now are cx-
© tant, and make up what in the largeſt ſenſe
&« is ſtil'd Heaven and Earth, or te whoic

* Word. | |
This ſenſe of the Words is allow'd by our
late Excellent ComMentatour , the Righe Re-
verend the Lord Biſhop of Ely; (whoſe Senti-
ments cannot but be juſtly valued by all who
are converſant in his Expoſitions of the Holy
Scriptures) and 15 I think clearly contirm'd by
the-following words; And the Earth was with-
out Form and Vc:i, and Darkne(s was upon the Feee
of the Deep, and the Spirit of God moved on the
Face of the Witcrs, Where *tis clear, that as ſoon
as the Holy Writer deſcends to. the Deſcription
of the Chaos, and the commencing of the Six
Days Creation, he mentions not a word of any
Production our of Nothing (before ſuppos'd and
aſſerted to have been paſt and done, In the Be-
ginning) he omits, and thereby evidently ex-
cludes that Heaven, or thoſe Superior Syſtems
of the World alrcady ſpoken of, from any place
therein, and by the whole coherence plainly con-
fines the Narration following to the Earth alone
with its dependencies. Moſes does not ſay, as
the common Expoſlitors do, © That juſt ar the
* commencing of the Six Days Work, the
*« Earth, and all the reſt of the World was
* originally produc'd ; Burt that, When - God
* had (formerly) an all che World, which
. 3 «c iS


v
Cen. 3. 3


Of the Moſaick Creation”


© is uſually diftinguiſh'd into the Heaven and
*the Earth, the latter of theſe, (the conſide-
© ration whereof was alone pertinent to the
© preſent _ at the time preceding the
* Six Days Work , was in a Wild, Irregular,
* and Dark condirion ; or ſuch a perfe& Chaos,
* as nothing but the Power of God, and his
Spirit's moving on, and influencing the ſame,
* could ever have redac'd into a habitable
*© World.

This is a very eaſie and natural account of
this matter, and I think the moſt obvious and
genuine” ſignification of the words themſelves :
And were not Mens Minds too much prejudic'd
with other apprehenſions, this alone might be
ſufficient ro limit their thoughts, and prevent
their Fnquiries after any Creation of Bodies out
of nothing ir the Six Days Work; and their
ſtretching the ſame beyond the Earth, either
to the whole Syltem of . things, as the moſt do;
or indeed to the Solar Syitem, . with which
' others are more modeſtly contented in the caſc.
Which ewo things once granted me, the Propo-

ſition we are now upon would ſoon be e&fta-
bliſh'd, and little farther labour become ne-
_ c&ilary.

Pur that I may give all poflible ſatisfation,
and lay this Foundation firm, on which my Ac-
count of the Mo/aick Creation is intirely fuper-
ftruced ; I ſhall more at large prove the 7 pot
Truths, craving the Pardon of thoſe Readers
who are already fatisty'd in theſe matters, if 1
ſhall ſeem to' them to infiſt roo long on a plain
caſe ; as perhaps they may (and that T1 think
very quſtly ) eftcem this to be.

And indecd, The prejudices of Men are here
ſo great; their fears of a Philoſophical Hypo:
thelis


_ -- — :


 — x


Of the Moſaick Creation:


theſis ſo rooted ; the attempts hitherto made
have been ſo _unſucceſsful; and beſides, the
Honour of God in his Holy Word is fo much
concern'd; and the uſual Expoſitions of this
Hiſtory of the Origin of Things is fo poor, fo
jejune, fo unbecoming the Penman, much more
the primary Author of the ſame; that a large
and full Diſcourſe is but neceſſary ; and tho' it
ſhould prove ſomcwhat prolix, will be; 'tis hop'd,
not improper ; but as well ſerviceable to Reli-
gion as to Philoſophy, by reſcuing this Ancient,

enerable, and Sacred Account of che Origin
of things, from ſuch falſe and unwary Gloiſes
as have been, and ſtill are put upon it ; as have
rendred it, in the opinion of too many, an un-
couth and incredibie Syſtem, nay ſomewhat be-
low ſome of thoſe ©: 039) 6u or Keruoy ia, vhich
the imperfe&t Traditions of the Heachen World
fore in the arguments before us, I athim,


IT. That the words here us'd of Creating ,
_— , Or Frammg of things, on which the
wain ſtreſs is laid; in the ſtil: of Scripcure are
frequently of no larger importance than the
Propoſition we are upon does allow ; and figni-
he no more than the ordering, difpoling, chang-
ing, or new modelling thole Creatures which
exiſted already, into a difterent, and ſomerimes
perhaps a better, and more uſcful ſtate than chey
were in before. 1 do not ſay this is the utmoſt,
or only importance of theſe words ; I have al
ready allow'd, that Creating, in the firſt words
of Geneſis, inciudes Producing out of nothing z
and I add, that in our common Creed, where-
in we profeſs our Faith im God the Father Al-
mighty, Muker of Heaven and Earth; the words
B 4 are,


Nam. xvi.


a -


> hah.


If. xv. 7.


Of the Moſaick Creation.


are, agreeably to the extent of the Divine
Power, and the nature of that profeſſion, to be
takenin the ſame large and comprehenſive ſenſe:
and the like is to be ſaid of many other places
of the Holy Scripture. But then I obſerve with-
al, that the other more narrow and limited ſenſe
is very common and familiar in the Holy Wri-
tings ; and therefore, where the ſubje& marter
and coherence requires it, as I think "twill be
evident it does in the preſent caſe, theſe words
both may and ought to be taken in the fame
acceptation.

This ſignification of the two latter words
Make and Frame , will, I ſuppoſe, be granted
me by all; and that the ſame is as-true of the
other Create, the following Texts will ſuffi-
ciently evince ; and from the promiſcuous uſe
of them all, and others of a like importance,


' might however he very fairly ſuppos'd. F, ſays


Moſes, the Lord make a new thing, or Create a
Creature, and the. Earth open ber Mouth and ſwal-
low them uv. Whete none can imagine any thing
produc'd out of nothing, but only ſuch an un-
uſual and miraculous diſpoſal of things as would
at, once demonſtrate God's Vengeance againſt
the Wicked, and his abſolute Command over
all Creatures. Thus God himſelf ſays, I form the
hight and create darkneſs; I make peace and create evil ;
I the Lord do all theſe things : Where the objects
of the Divine Creation being nor real and ſub-
ſtantial Beings, could not be capable of a pro-
per production out of nothing : Which allo is


- the caſe in the verſe immediately following, Let


ver. $.


Cap. Ixv,
7,


righteouſneſs ſpring up together ; I the Lord have
created it, Thus alſo, ys God by the ſame


Prophet, I create new Heavens and a new Earth :


. which, tho' the very caſe before us, yet-would


odly


—_


Of the Moſaick Creation.

odly enough he expounded of an annihilation of
the World, and a reproduttion of iragain. But
what comes- ſtill more -home to our purpoſe is,
that in the very Hiftory- of the Creation it ſelf,
the word Create, as well as Make, is usd in the
ſenſe we contend for ; the very ſame things be-
ing aſcrib'd ro the Creating and Making Power
of God, which are alſo deſcrib'd as the regular
offfpring of the Earth and Seas: God created great
IWhales ,* and 'every living Creature” that moveth
which the waters brought forth abundantly after
their kind. And God ſaid, Let the Earth brig forth
the living Creatme after bu kind, Cattel and creeping
thing, and Beaſt of the Earth after bu kind 5 and it
was ſo: And God made the Beaſt of the Earth after
bus kind, and Cattel after their kind, and every thing
that creepeth upon the Earth after his kind; and God
ſaw that it was good.

So that when the words made uſe of in the
Hiſtorv of the Creation are there, and every where


' taken — when ſome of them are,


by the confellion of all, of no larger importance


.. than the Propoſition before us will admit ; and

when, laſtly, that word, of which the greateſt

| doubt can ariſe, has been-prov'd not only in other
: Texts of Scripture, but in the very Hiſtory of


which we are treating, to be of no more deter-
minate ſignification than the reſt, and alike ca-

ble of the ſenſe we here put upon it; I chink
tis a clear Caſe, that if no Argument can be
drawn from ſuch words for, yet neither can there
juſtly be any againſt, that Propoſition we are now


upon.


HI. Thoſe fynonymous Phraſes, The 1/7r!4; or
the Heavens, and the Earth, under which the Ob-
jet of the ſix days Creation is comprehended


every


Gen. 1.21,


Ver.24,29,


F


yo


Atts xvii.
24. John
110, Mar.
Xiii. 35. &
XXIV. 21.

& xxv. 34.


Luk.xi.50.


Joh. xvii.
S, 24-
Rom.1.29,
Eph. i. 4.
Heb. iv.z.
& ix. 26,
1 Pct. 20,
Apoc xi11.
8. & xvii.
8 Mark
Xili. 19.
Gen. 14. 1.


ver. 4+


Com-


Of the Moſaick Creation.


every where in Scripture, do not always denote
the whole Syſtem of Beings; no nor any great
and general Portion of them ; but are in the Sa-
cred Stile frequently, if not moſtly, to be re-
ſtrained to the terraqueous Globe with its depen-
dances; and conſequently both may, and if the
ſubjet matter require it, ought to be underſtood
in ſuch a reſtrained fenſe, and no other : That
by theſe Phraſes the Mo/aick Creation, or ſix days
work is uſually underitood, is evident every
where in Scripture, as the following Texts will
ealily evince: God who made the World, and all
things therem. The Diwyine A5ſG- was in the World,
and the World wat made by H:m, and the World knew
Him not. Hence thoſe Ce—_ exprefiions, From
the Foundation of the World, from the Beg mning of the
World, from. the Creation of the World, and before the
World was 3 which, tho' capable of including
more, muſt yet be allowd to have generally a
peculiar, nay ſometimes a ſole regard to the fix
days work , particularly itild by St. Mark, Tye
Beginning of the Creation which God created.

n the ſame manner, and with the like fre-
quency, the other Phraſe Heaven and Earth, de-
note the ſame fix days work alſo : This the Hea-
wvens and the Earth were finiſhed, and all the Hoſt of
them. Theſe are the Generatuns of the Heawens and
of the Earth when they were created, in the day that
the Lord God made the Earth and the Heavens, In


mand. 4. fix days the Lord made Heawen and Earth, the Sea,


and all that tm them , and reſted the ſeventh day ;
which being ſo expreſs, I ſhall not need to look
out for any other parallel places.

And that both the #rld; and Heaven, and
Earth, ſignify the terraqueous Globe alone, with
its Air or Atmoſphere and other Appurtenances,
without including the whole Univerſe, nay', of


* - PR ” ee.


Of the Moſaick Creation,


Solar Syſtem, alſo, ( which yet I do not deny
ſomerimes to be comprehended therein) the fol-
lowing Texts will ſufficiently ſhew. Oar Lord
ſays of the Woman who poured the Oyntment
on him, Whereſocyer this Goſpel ſhall be preached mn
the whole World, there ſhall alſo this which thus We-
man bath done be toll far a memorial of her, Vs
Charge and Commithon to his Apoſtles was, Go
ye into all the World, and preach the Goipel to every
Creature. The Tempter came to feſus, and ſhew'd
bir all the Kingdoms of the Werld, and the Glory of
them. In all which places, no other than the
habitable Earth can be underſtood : and 'tis (till
fo frequent and natural for Men to ufe this man-
neref french in the ſame reſtrained Senſe to this
very day, that one may the leſs wonder at the Sa-
cred Stile in this Caſe. Burt this word, the Hr !d,
having not fo much difficulty in it, nor being fo
much ſtood upon, as thoſe which follow, :be Hea-
wvens and the Earth , | ſhall no longer inſiſt upon
Tn, but proceed.

And here, when the 7Forld, as a totumn imtegrale,
1s divided into its two contradiſtin&t Parts , the
Heawens and the Earth, it will be faid, That by
ſuch a Phraſe or Enumeration of the Parts of
the Univerſe , no lefs can be meant than the
whole World in the largeſt acceptation ; or how-
ever, more muſt be intended than the bare Earth,
which is but one Member or Branch, and ſo cer-
tainly lefs than that whole of which it is a parrt.

In anſwer whereto, I freely confeſs, Thar the
Heavens and the Earth do not ſeldom denote the
intire Univerſe, an inſtance of which the firſt
words of Geneſis have already afforded us; bur
that they always do fo, I have reaſon to de-
ny. As the Signification of the Earth is known,
and capable of no Ambiguity, fo 'tis quite other-


wiſe


Mat. xxvi.
13+


Murk xvi.
5.


Mat. iv. 8.


I2


Gen.i. 7,8,


Of the Molaick Creation.


wiſe in the word Heaven, which in common uſe,
and the ſacred Authors, ſometimes refers to the
Seat of the Bleſſed, or the third Heaven ; ſome-
times to the place of the Sun, Moon, and Stars;
and otherwhules is no farther to be extended chan
the Clouds, or the open Expanſum about the
Earth , where the Air, Atmoſphere, Meteors,
Clouds, and Volatils, have their abode. In-
ſtances of the two former Significations, were it
pertinent to my preſent purpoſe , might eaſily
be produc'd; but that not being fo, I ſhall wave
the ſame, and only prove the third and laſt Sig-
nification, namely, That by the Heavens is fre-
quently underſtood nothing 'more than the At-
moſphere of the Earth, with its appendant or
contained Bodies.

Thus, God made the Firmament, and divided the
Waters which were under the Eirmament , from the
Waters which were above the Firmament ; and it was


ſo. ind God called the Firmament, Heaven. Which


Cap. x1. 4.


Deur ix. 1,
Mart. xxiv.
30.

& xxv1.
64.


PC. cxlviii.
4+


Mar. vin.
20. & xul.


_
. (


fenced up to Heaven, The Clouds pa


place is fo expreſs; and in the very Hiſtory ic
{clf, which we are now about alſo, that it ought
to be of peculiar force in the preſent caſe. Thus
alſo the Builders of Babc/ ſaid, Go to, Let us build


ns a City, and a Tower, whoſe top may reach unto


Heawen. So mention 1s. made of Cities great and

f by the
name of the Clouds of Heaven ; nay, they are by
the P/almiſt , ( agreeably to the Interpolition of
the Expan/um, Firmament or Heaven on the ſe-
cond day of the Creation berween the ſuperior
and inferior Waters) made as it were its fartheft
Eoundaries and ' Limits; the Waters contain'd
in them being call'd, Waters which are above the
Heawveiis, The very Fowls , which ſtill reſide
ncarer to the Earth, are ſtil'd tbe Fowls of. Hea-
wi; and were originally appointed to fly above y

Eart


Of the Molaick Creation.


Earth in the open Firmament of Heaven. By all which Gen. i.
places *ris evident, That the word Heaven is com- **:


monly ſo far from including the Sun or Plane-
tary Chorus, (much leſs the fix'd Stars , with all
their immenſe Syſtems) that the Moon , our
attending and neighbour Planet is not taken in :
The utmoſt bounds of our Atmoſphere, being fo
of this our Heaven alſo ; which was the only
Point which remain'd to be clear'd.

But here, before I proceed farther, I muſt
take notice of a conſiderable Objeftion, which
threatens to wreſt this Argument out of my
hands, and indeed to ſubvert the intire Founda-
tion of the Propoſition before us; and is, I free-
ly own, the main difhculty in this whole mart-
ter ; and 'tis this, That ſuch a Senſe of the words,
IWorld, and Heaven, and Earth, as has been plead-
ed for , whatever may be faid in other caſes ,
will yet by no means fit here, nor tak in all the
exrent of the Mzſaick Creation ; becauſe 'tis cer-


* tain, that neither the Light, by whoſe Revolu-


tion Night and Day are diſtinguiſh'd, nor the
Stn, Moon, and Stars, which are fer in our Fir-
mament, belong to our Armoſphere, or are con-
tain'd within thote Boundaries, within which we
confine the preſent Hiſtory ; and 'tis equally cer-
tain that both of them belong to the 2o/aich
Creation, and arewhe firſt and fourth days works
therein; and by conſequence it may be ſaid, the
Subject of the fix days Creation muſt be the
whole Syſtem of the heavenly Bodies, or at leaſt
that particular one in whic!) the Earth is, and
is {til d the Solar Syſtem.

Now this Objection 1s in- part already taken
off by the Senſe, in which the Production and
Creation of things has been ſhewn to be fre-
quently taken in the Holy Scriptures; —

| there


*


Gen. i.14,
15, 16,
17.


lights, the greater light to rule the day, and the leſſer


Of the Moſaick Creation,


there appeats to be no necellity of delleving Gelb
Bodies to have been then brought into being ,
when they are firſt mention'd in the ?oſarck
Creation.

But becauſe this is not meerly che chicf, but
only conliderable Objection agaialt the Propoſi-
tion we are upon ; becauſe it ſzems to have been
the principal occalion of men's Miltakes and
Prejudices about this whole Hiſtory ; and be-
cauſe 'tis the ſingle inſtance wherein this intire
Theory, as far as I know, ſeems to recede from
the obvious Letter of Scripture ; 'twill be but
proper to give it a particular review, and clear
withal, not only this, "but ſeveral other like Ex-
preflions and Pallages in the Holy Scripture.

Now, in order to the giving what ſatisfaction
I can in this Point; let it be confider'd, That
the Light being not ſaid to be created by Moſes, its
Original were without difficulty to be accounted
for, if the ocher Point, the making of the Heaven-
ly Bodies were once fetled , which therefore is
the ſole remaining difficulty in the caſe before us.
And that would be no harder, it the Tranſlation
of the Words of Moſes were but amended, and
the Verſes hereto relating, read thus, And God
ſaid; Lei there be lights in the firmament of the_Hea-
wen, to divide the day froms the night 5 and let them
be for fiens, and for ſeaſons, and for days and years;
and lit them be for liohts in the firmament of the
Heaven, to give light upon the Earth, and it was
/o. And God baving ( before ) made two great
lights, the greater light t6 rule the day, and the leſſer
l:2bt ro rule the might; and bawing ( before) made
the ſtars al.o, God ſet them in the frmament of Hea-
win to £7 oe light upon the Earth , &c. or which is
all one, And God had (before) made two great


light


Of the Moſaick Creation.


light to rule the night ; be had (before) made the
{tars allo, and God ſet them in the firmament, &c.
In which rendring, 'tis only changing the perfe-
Hum for the pluſquam perfettum, and every thing
is clear and caſy, and the Objection vaniſhes of
ies own accord ; the Creation of the heavenly
Bodies being hereby aſſigned to a former time,
and the Work of the fourth day no other than
the _—_ them in our Firmament, according
as the account hereafter to be given does re-
quire.

Now to prove this a fair and juſt Interpreta-
tion. (to omit the Creation of the Heavens and
Heavenly Bodies already related before the fix
days work) 'tis only neceſlary to obſerve that the
Hebrew Tongue having no Plu/quam perettum ,
muſt and does expreſs the Senſe of it by the per-
fefum; and that accordingly, the particular cir-
cumſtances of each place muſt alone determine
when thereby the time preſent, and when that
already paſt and gone, is to be underſtood. How
many knots in the Scripture the omiſſion of this
Obſervation has left unfolv'd , and which bein
obſerv'd would be immediately untied, I ſhal
not go about to enumerate, there being ſo many
in the very Hiſtory before us, of the Origin of
the World, that I ſhall not. go one jot farther for


inſtances to confirm the beftore-mention'd Tran-


, lation; and which, on 'the account of their
agreement in place, will more forcibly plead for
a like agreement in Senſe alſo. On the ſeventh Gen i. »:


day God had ended bis work which be bad made, and
be reſted on the ſeventh day from all his work which


be bad made. ———— He had reſted from all his work ver. 3.
which God bad created and made. ——— The Lord ver. 5, 6.


God bad not cau'ed it to rain on the Earth, and there
bad not been a man to till the Ground 5 but there had


£ 07le


16


ver. 9.


ver. 19.


Of the Moſaick' Creation.


gone ip a miſt from the Earth, and had water d the
whele face of the ground; and the Lord God bad form-
ed man of the duſt of the'ground, and bad breathed
into bis noſtrils the breath of life. ———— And the Lord
God bad planted a Garden eaſtward in Eden. ——
And out of the ground had the Lord God made to
grow every tree that is pleaſant to the ſight, and good


for food, ———— And ont of the gronnd the Lord God


had formed every beaſt of the field, and every fowl of
the air. In all which places the whole
Context is fo clear'd by this rendring , and
ſo many ſtrange Abſurdities avoided, that there
is, I think, all imaginable reaſon to acquieſce
in it.

And tho' the fourth days work is among thoſe
other, where no ſuch alteration need be made, in
which therefore it may ſeem hard to allow of a
ſingle inſtance againſt the uſe in the precedent and
ſubſequent Context in the firſt Chapter, yet the
circumitances of that day being pecvliar ; the like
mixture of the perſefum and plu/quam perfettum
being in the {zcond Chapter, and in other places
of Scripture to be obſerved ; and a diſtin& work
being ſtill hercby preferv'd to that day , the
placing the Sun, Moon, and Stars, in our Fir-
mament, which otherwiſe is after a ſort dou-
ble ; do all in good meaſure, take away the
force of ſuch Reaſoning, and confpire to allow
us that Interpretation before given, and thereby
to ſecure the Propoſition before us from that
grand Objection which ſeemed capable of cau-
ling ſo great an obſtrution in our courſe. Burt
if any thould be diſſatisfied with this Anſwer, I
ſhall,tor their ſakes,enter deeper into this matter ;
and, without any afliſtance from what has been
already ſaid, endeavour to eſtabliſh the Propoſition
before us, and rake away the foundation of the
preſent difficulty. And


F
| l


Of the Moſaick Creation.


And here I obſerve, That the Scripture all
along accommodates its ſelf ro the vulgar Appre-
henſions of Men, with relation to ſuch Points
of "Natural Philoſophy as they were not able to
comprehend ; and in particular, with relation to
the Site, Diſtance, Magnitude, Uſe, and Mo-
tions of the Heavenly Bodies. Tho' theſe be re-
ally very diſtint, as well as diſtant from the
Earth , with all its dependances; yet are they
rarely, if ever, ſo conlider'd in the Holy Scrip-
tures. They are all along chere repreſented as

Luminaties plac'd in our Atmoſphere, and
as much belonging to, and depending on the
Earth as the Clouds, . Meteors, or other Aerial
Phenomena : And fo 'tis no wonder that in the
Hiſtory before us, they are included among the
reſt of their Fellows, and come within the verge
of the- Moſaick Creation , notwithſtanding its 1i-
mits be no larger than we here aflign thereto;
- _ to the accounting for which things, 1

3


» (1:) Shew the truth of the Obſervation, in ſe-
veral inſtances from the Holy Scriptures.

(2.) Shew the rational Original and Occalion
of ſuch ways of ſpeaking.

(3.) Explain what, according to my Notion,
muſt be meant by the Creation or Production
of theſe Heavenly Bodies 'in the Moſaick Hiſtory
before us, and demonſtrate fuch a Conſtruction
to be agreeable ro the Sacred Stile in other
places.


(4.) Aſſign ſome Reaſons, why, in a Hiſtory


of the Origin of our Earth, theſe remote and di-


ſtant Bodies come to be taken notice of, tho”
their own proper Formation did not at all belong


to 16 |
; C (adi


Cen. i. 3,
4, 5-


Verſe 14,
Ig,16,17,


As .20,


Of the Moſaick Creatign.


( 1.) I ſhall ſhew the truth of the Obfſeryarion,
in ſ:vcral inſtances from the Holy Scriptures ;
namcly, that the Heavenly Bodies are no other-
Earth, and as Members ard Appurcenances of
our Armoſphcre. And this Obſervation js cony
tirm'd by the firſt mention chat is made of them
1 this very Hiſtory we are upon ; all the; Cir-
cumfſtances whereof fully atcelt the truth of what
is here affirm'd of them. When the Lighe firlt
diſplay'd ir felf, notwithſtanding thgſe;number-
'efs advantages accruing'.tro the whole. World
therefrom, none are taken notice of but ſuch as
reſpect our Sub!\unary World. "Twas. jnticely
with regard to our Light and Darkneſs, our Day
and Night , that all was done, as far as can be
collected from the wards. of 1Mec/cs. Thus, as ſoon
as the Heavenly Bodies are made , tha' they be
univerſally uſctul, they are plrc'd im the Firmament
of Heawen, (a Phraſe us'd in this Hiſtory for. our
Air only) 7 divide our day from night, to be to us
for fiens and ſeaſons, for drys and years; to be for
lights m the firmament of heaven to give light upon
the earih ; to rule ever Our duy and-might, to divide
our /;ght from. darkneſs, And as to the order of
their Introduction, 'tis not that of their proper
Greatneſs or Dignity, hut that of their-reſpective
Appearance and Utles bcre below. All which is
far from a full account ot che real Original, uni-
verſal Intentions., and .true Blaces of theſe Glo-
rious Bodies ;. but on the: Suppoſition here made
uſe of, exactly cafy and natural. Agreeably
whereto when our Air/is clogg'd with groſs Va-
pours, fo as to hide or disfigure their I/aces to us,
The Sun is Aaid to be tmra'd mio darkneſs; the Moon
into blood 5 and when ſome Aerial Metears, . call'd


by their Names, and for a moment reſembling


them,


— CO — _


——QP—T—— WI —Oo—_ 1
an __ -


Of the Moſaick Creation, 19


them; ſhoot and drop down in the Air ; the_Stars Mar. xxiv.
are faid to fall from Heaven. The Sun and Moon, *9
as if they were ewo Globes of Fire and Light
pendulous in our Air, and hanging over certain
places, are order'd to ſtand fill, the one wpor Gi- Joſhua x.
beon , the other im the Valley of Aijalm. The Sun 1z. _
is repreſented as {ct in a Tabernacle, rejoycing as « Pim —_
Gyant to run bis race. His going forth, 1s ſaid to be ® Tom
from the end of Heaven, or the Horizon, and bs
circuit wnty-the ends of it, All which Expreflions,
with many others through the whole Bible,plainly Vide PC1.
ſhew, That the Scripture did not intend to teach iv. 1,&c.
men Philoſophy, or accommodate it ſelf to the Waiah al.
true and Pyrhagorick Syſtem of the World. The **
Holy Writers did not conſider the Heavenly Bo-
dies abſolutely, as they are Great and Noble in
themſelves, main and glorious Parts of the Uni-
verſes, very diſtint from our Earth, plac'd at
various and immenſe Diſtances from it, and
from one another; deſign'd for, and ſubſervient
to many, wiſe, and comprehenſive Ends and
Methods of the Divine Providence; diſpos'd in
a regular order, in proportionate and harmonious
Periods and Revolutions, and finally enducd
with mighty Powers and Influences with reſpe&t
to numerous and vaſt Syſtems of Beings. Un-
der ſuch a conſideration we might have expected
another fort of Repreſentation of th: Heavenly
Bodies, their Original , Defigns, Courſes, and
Circumitances , than the forcgoing Texts , or
their parallels every where afford us." >But if we
look on them under the Notion of Neighbour-
Lummaries, which are fitcate at the utmoſt
bounds of our Atmoſphere, and belong, as well
as the Clouds, to our Earth ; which are appoint-
ed to be our peculiar Attendants, and a part of
our Retinue;. ſerve our tingle Neceflities , and

2 crery


Of the Moſzick Creation.
every day riſe and ſet on purpoſe to provide for


our Advantage and Convenience: If I fay, we
thus look upon them, (as all Men not otherwiſe
taught by Philoſophy do and muſt ) the Texts
above-ciced, and the whole current of the Hol
Books will eafily accord and correſpond to fu

a Syſtem. And I dare appeal to any impartial
and competent Judge, to which of the foremen-
tion'd Schemes the moſt obvious and eaſy Senſe
of the Expreflions of Scripture hereto relatingare
adapted ; and whether it does not uſually ſpeak
as an honeſt and inquiſitive Countryman, who
no more doubted of the Heavenly Bodies, than
of the Clouds appertaining to the Earth; rather
than as a new Aſtronomer, who knew them to
be vaſtly diſtant from, and to have nothing in a
peculiar manner to do with the fame.” Which
will be leſs wondred at when we conſider in the
next place,

(2.) The Reaſon and Occaſion of ſuch ways
of ſpeaking. And here I ſhall not content my
ſelf in general to obſerve, that the deſign of Di-
vine Revelation was of quite another nature,
than requir'd a nice Adjuſtment and Philoſophick
Explication of the Natural World ; that the Ca-
pacities of the Pcople could not bear any ſuch
things ; that the. Prophets and Holy Penmen
themſelves, unleſs over-rul'd by that Spirit which
ſpake by them, being ſeldom or never Philoſo-
phers, were not capable of repreſenting theſe
things otherwiſe than they ,with the Vulgar,under-
ſtood them : That even, ſtill, choſe who believe
the true Syſtem of the World, are forc'd among
the Vulgar, and in common Converſation to
ſpeak as they do , and accommodate their Ex-
preflions to the Notions and Apprehenfions of
the generalicy of Mankind. I ſhall not, I ſay,

content


_—


»


Of the Moſaick Creation.


content my ſelf with ſuch Obſervations, moſt of
which are uſually, and with good reaſon, inſiſted
on in the preſene caſe ; but rather attempt to tind
out the true Origin and Source of ſuch Notions
and Expreſſions, made uſe of, as by molt other
Writers , ſo eſpecially by the Sacred Ones in the
Holy Bible.
od has ſo fram'd the Eyes of Men , that
when the diſtance of Bodies, and their proper
Magnitude is very great, they ſhall both be im-
perceptible to us. "There is every way from our
Eye a ſpherical Diſtance or Superficies which ter-
minates our diſtin& Perceptign of Objects, and
beyond which, all Diſtances and Magnitudes, ab-
ſolutely conſidered, are not by us diitinguiſhabie.
The Clouds, tho”, lying parallel ro the Horizon,
they are (ſo far as comes at once within our
view) almoſt in the ſame Plain, yet to us they
ſeem bent into a concave Figure, or kind of He-
miſpherical Superficies, equidiſtane almoſt on eve-
ry ſide from its Center, the Eye of the Spectator ,
and fo ſeem every way to touch the Ground at a
Mile or two's diſtance from him. And this hap-
pens by reaſon of the Imperfefion of our Sight,
which diſtinguiſhing remore Obje&s but to a
certain diſtance, beyond which the Clouds are,
can have no other Idea of their Situation than
ſmall and like Objects at that Spherical Superticies
would excice. On which Principle tis certain,
that till Geometrick and Philoſophick Principles
rectify mens Notions, all Bodies whatſoever be-
yond the Clouds, fuch as the Cualeltial are ,
muſt needs be efteem'd at the ſame equidiſtant
Superficies wich the Clouds, and appear among
them ; and by conſequence 'twould be on this
account , as poſlible for the Vulgar to be per-
ſuaded that the Clouds were vaſtly remote from,
/ C 9 and


21


— Gi CAE rs <d CEEOEE a -  Mts 2


PRI


VS wes. Si. wes «< —_ - A-_


Of the Moſaick Creation.


-and bear no relation to this Earth, 'as' that the


Sun, Moon, and Stars were ſo; and to them as
ſtrange to have found no account of the Forma-
tion of them with that of the other vifſble World;
as the omiſſion of the Cleuds would have been.
Ir being impoſſible that the Sun, fot. inſtance
tho' ſo many thouſands of Miles diſtant, ſhould
ro us appear above one or two from us; and alike
impoſiible that his bigneſs, tho' ſo many thotfand
Miles in Diameter, ſhould appear to be as many
Feet to us on Earth : As all who have any kill in
Opricks very well know.

So that when theſe Heavenly Bodies are and
muſt needs be ro our Sight and Imagination at
the ſame diſtance with the Clouds, and conſe.
quently, as to w, are with them plac'd in our
own Air ; when thcir viſible Magnitude, Situa-
tion, Motion, and Habirudes, are all one with
re/rolt 19 us, abit they really were light and ficry
Balls rowlizg upon or among the Clouds; when
their apparent Changes, Figures, Colour, Coun-
cenance, Effeas, and Influences would be (as
far as Senfe and vulgar Obſervation could deter-
mine) on this Earth, and to its Inhabitants; the
very ſame as were to be expected from ſuch lighr
and fiery Balls, revolving at the preſumed di-
ſtance; when all wiſe: Men, cſpecially the Sacred
Penmen, in their Writings deſign'd for the Advan-
tage and Inſtruction of all, condeſcend till to
the Apprehenſions and Capacities of Men, and
ſpeak of rhe Beirg of thihgs as they conſtantly
App:ir 3 of which the Fible is full of inſtances :
All chefe things confider'd , *ris not to be won-
der'd at,'thar the Heavenly Bodies are account-
ed Appendages of our Earth, and apreeably
thereto made mention of 11 the Mofaick Crea-


wad
a (3) 1


Of* the Molaick Creation,


(3-) I ſhall explain what, according to my
Notion, muſt be meant by the Creation or Pro-
duction of theſe Heavenly Bodies in the Hiſtory
before us; and demonſtrate fuch a Conſtruction
to be agreeable to the Sacred Stile in other places.
Now 'ris eaſy to tell what is meant by their
Creation in the caſe before us, when it has ap-
pear'd that their Production out of nothing was
precedaneous to the (ix days Work, and that they
are wholly conſider'd as belonging to our Earth,
and plac'd in our Air; wir. therr primary being
ſo placd ;; their firſt b coming eifible to Alſen on
Earth, or in other words * their original APPenye
ng to be there, IT mean in plain Ernz/:|h, Tight 1s
ſaid then firſt ro Be, (for it being an effect of the
Heavenly Bodies, nor a diſtinct tliing from them,
is not. by Moſes faid to be made or created )
when the ſuperior Regions of the Chaos were
become fo far clear and defzcate, that the Rays
of the Sun in ſome depgres could penetrate the
ſame, enough to render a ſenſible Diſtin&ion
between Night'and Day, or that ſpace the Sun
was above, and that it was beneath the Horizon.
And agrecably, The Sun, Yoon, and Stars, are
then {aid firſt t9 Be, or tQ U? m de, When aicers
wards the Air was rendred fo very clzar and
tranſparent, that thoſe I uminaries become con-
ſpicuous, and their Podics diltinctly vilihle, as
in a clear Day or Night they now appear
tO us,

That this Expoſition'is agreeable to the Scrip-
ture Stile, is evident by this Obſervation; That
ſeveral things are there atfirm'd to Be, in any
certain manner, when only thoſe cftet> we fect
are ſuch as they would be were they fo indeed ;
and ris not unuſual to afſert the Eorg of any
Cauſz, when all thoſe conſequeaccs arz no ot'05-
C 4 wile


Ver - It,
IS,


Apoc. xxi.
CT.

Iſciah Ixv
t7.


Of the Moſaick Creation,


wiſe in the World, and with regard to Men ,
than they muſt and would be upon its real Ex-
iltence, without any exacter nicenelſs as to the
truth of the ſame. Thus God is ſaid ſeveral times
to repent of ſomewhat he has before done, when
his future Actions are the very ſame as would in
Humane, as well as Divine Aﬀairs, be the cer-
tain conſequents of a proper 'Repentance : Thus
alſo God is ſaid to be pleas'd or angry with Men ,
and that in a very paſſtonate and ſenſible manner ,
when he confers ſuch great Mercies, or inflicts
ſuch great Judgments, as, were he really fo, he
mult naturally do. Thus alſo Eyes and Ears are
frequently ſuppos'd of God, becauſe he as cer-
tiinly is conſcious of all the Actions and Speeches
of Men, as if hereally ſaw and heard the ſame. In
a Cifterent inſtance, The Sun is ſaid to fand fi
or «ve, tho' in propriety of Speech, as is now
well known, choſe affections ought to be aſcrib'd
to the Earth, becauſe every thing, as to ſenſible
appearance, is in the ſame condition as from the
Annual and Diurnal Motions of the Sun, were
they real, muſt, and would obtain. The Sun 1s
ſaid to be' rurned into Darkneſs, and the Moon
mo Blood , when without any. alteration in
themſelves, they appear of a dark or bloody
Countenance to the Inhabitants of the Earth.
Nay, which is moſt of all co our preſent pur-
poi-, God is then ſaid to make all things new ,
and to weate a new Heawen , and a new Earth ,
when he fo changes the Conſtitution and State
of our Earth, as to render thereby this whole
Sublunary World very different from, and much
excelling that which formerly appear'd. In all
which , and innumerable other inſtances , 'tis
plain and evident, that the Holy Writers do not


conlider merely how things are-in themſelves, but *


how


RR
A IE


.
%
ſn Gert eo tmns. _


Of the Moſaick Creati on.


how they are to ws ; not what is their proper na-
ture, but viſible appearance in the World.


But here, leſt this Doctrine ſhould be abus'd, |


I muſt interpoſe this neceſſary caution , That
ſuch a liberty is neither by other Authors, nor
the Sacred Penmen taken on all occaſions, or in
every caſe; but peculiarly when the ſublimity
of the Matter, the capacities of the People, the
more eaſje inſtilling uſeful principles into Men,
or ſome other weighty now” any requires ſuch an
accommodation. 'Tis chiefly with regard to the
Spiritual Nature, and ſublime way of operation
in God; or ſuch Phyſical and Philoſophick
Truths, as relate to diſtant, inviſible, or inac-
cefſible bodies ; the abſolute Eſſence or Aﬀecti-
ons whereof, were not explicable to the vulgar
in a plain and natural manner. In which caſes
this Liberty in the Interpretation of Scripture is,
with the greateſt Juſtice ro be allow'd. Bur
'twere thence very unreaſonable to extend it to
all others, or indeed to any, where the ſame, or
as good, reaſons were not allignable. He who
ſhould argue, that becauſe the Literal ſenſe of
Scripture about the Corporeal Members, and
Humane Paffions of the Divine Nature, is not
to be ſtritly urg'd, that therefore when he is
call'd a Spirit, and repreſented as the Rewarder
of Good, and the Puniſher of Bad men, thofe
Expreflions are no more to be depended
on ; or he who ſhould infer, that becauſe the
Firſt and Fourth Days Works, the Origin of
Light, and the making of the Heavenly Bodies,
muſt not be ſtrictly literal , that therefore nei-
ther in the Moſaick Creation, ought the other
four to be any more eſteemed 6; He, I fay,
that ſhould thus argue or infer, would be very
unfair and unreaſonable ; becauſe he would af-


fect


25


Of the Moſaick © Creation.


ſert that in one caſe, without ground , which
on peculiar and weighty ones afone was allow'd
in another. Thus thoſe things that are aſcrib'd
to God, which evidently agree to his Nature,
and Idea, are ſurely to be fiterally underſtood ;
tho* the other which are repugnant thereto be
not: And in like manner, 'tis but juſt to be-
lieve, that ſo much of the Moſaitk Creation, as
related diretly to the Earth and its appurtenan-
ces, and ſo came at once within the comprehen-
ſion of the Hiſtory, and of the capacities of
the Readers, ought literally to be Interpreced ;
tho* ſome things extraneous to the Formation
of the Earth, and beyond the notice of the
People, be to be taken in a different acceptation:
Tho* the common uſe of Tropes and Figures
make our Speech very often not to be Uteral,
yet generally we can underſtand one another
very well without danger of deception, or of
turning plain Sentences into Allegorical Dil-
courſes, in our Converſation one with ano-
ther.

And *tis evident that the Holy Books ought
not to be tormented or eluded, as to their ob-
vious ſenſe, on every occalion , under pretence
that ſome particular Texts are to be conſtrued
another way.” That SACRED RULE ought
for ever RELIGIOUSLY to be obſerved,
That we never forſ[ake the plam, obviow, eaſie and
natural ſenſe, unle/s where the nature of the thing it
ſelf, parallel places, or evident reaſon, afford a ſolid
and [ofciem ground for ſo domg. _

Now this being preſuppos'd ; I ſhall leave it
to the impartial Reader to judge, after the peru-
ſil of this whole diſcourſe, whether I have not
ſubſtantial reaſons for the preſent Expoſition;
and whether therefore, any one ought to blame
my


*.


by il...
a - a


Of the Moſaick Creation.


my receding from the Letter in this ſingle caſe,
or imagine that I give a juſt handle thereby to
others, /to Allegorize this Hiſtory of the Crea-
tion, or any other parts of Scripture.
And I'muft here own and profeſs, That tho?
I think, in caſe the common Tranſlation be re-
ceiv'd, there-is an abſolute neceflity of receding
from the Letter in the point before us, and thar
this Venerable and Sacred Korwomnuia, Or hiſtory
of the Creation, is otherwiſe in the higheſt de-
ree, ſtrange and unaccountable to the Fee Rea-
Pa of Mankind; yer IT am fully of opinion,
chat generally the difficulties occurring in the
Sacred Books are to be clear'd, not by a greater
receding from, but a cloſer adhering to the ob-
vious and moſt natural Interpretation of the Pe-
riods therein contain'd : And that the general
nature of the Scripture Stile every where due!y
obſerv'd and conſider'd , ſeveral - great ſcruples
with relation to the Actions and Providence of
God, and other things contain'd in thoſe Books,
would be taken away, it we might be allow'd to
recede a little from the receiv'd opinions of men,
andPlacirs of Syſtematical Authors; on no other
condition than that, for a recompence, we
keep fo much the cloſer ro the Oracles of God,
and the obvious and literal Interpretationof them;
and explain the Fible no otherwiſe than the plain
words themſelves would appear molt naturally
to intend to any diſintereſted and unconcern'd
Perſon : Of which many inſtances might eaſilv
be given, were this a proper, place for it. But I
mult leave this digreflion, and return to what I
before propos'd in the |
(4) fan gen, viz. To Aſſign ſome Reaſons
why in a' Hiſtory of the Origia of our Farth,
thee


28


Of the Moſaick Creation.


theſe remote and diſtane Bodies come to be ta-
ken notice of, tho" their own proper formation
did not at all belong to it. Now. tho" many
might eaſily be alledg'd for this procedure, yer
I ſhall include the main I intend here to inſiſt on
in the two following:

(1.) The Advantage of the Fews, or fecu-
'ring them from the Adoration of the Hoſt of
Heaven, could not otherwiſe have been provided
for. Now as the foundation of ſuch Idolatry is
taken away by their being included in this Hi-
ſtory, which imply'd them to be ſuch dependent


* and created Beings, as could have no influence


of their own, but what were deriv'd from God ;
and conſequently were ſubject to his diſpoſal
and government ; which affirm'd them to be by
Him plac'd in the Firmament, and there ſubject-
ed to ſuch Motions, Rules and Laws, by which
they became advantageous and ſerviceable to the
World: So had they been taken no notice of,
they would have ſeem'd exempted Bodies, and
when all Worſhip of Terreſtrial things was de-
monſtrated, by this account of their Original,
to be fooliſh and abſurd; that of the Celeſtial
Bodies would ſeem thereby to be permitted at
lealt, if not patroniz'd and recommended to
em.

For when, as we have before obſerv'd, *'twas
impoſlible for the Jews to know the real ſtate of
the caſe, and to apprehend that they were vaſtl
remote from, and lo no way. belonging to this
Earth , or its Formation; there was no other
way to apply a fitting remedy, to that prevailin
cuſtom of Worſhiping the Hoſt of Heaven, (ſo


'Devut. jv. Particularly caution'd by Moſes) but to conde-
19% xvii. {cend to the Capacities of the People, and ſup-


3.


poſing them Light and Fiery Globes pendulous
fa ik in


of the Moſaick Creation.


in the Air, and revolving juſt beyond or among
the Clouds, to recount their re/pettiwve, as well
as the real Formation of the other parts of the vi-
ſible World, and aflign them their proper place,
and diſtin& period in the Six days work, as well
as 'any other more dire&tly concern'd therein.
TheSun, Moon, and Stars were ſuch noble and
glorious Bodies, and ſo viſible, ſo remarkable, fo
uſeful of the World ; 'and the Heathen Na-
tions ſo generally dotedon the Worſhip of them ;
that had they been intirely omitted in this par-
ricular. account of the Origin of things, there
would have been the moſt eminent danger of
this kind of Idolatry among the Fews; and the
ſeeming approbation of that practice, to which
they were 1o prone before, Gom the ſilence of
their great Lawgiver in his Creation of the
World, might probably have defy'd all difſua-
ſions , and been the moſt fatal encouragement
to-them, to ſo vile a Worſhip that were ealie
to be imagin'd. Any particular declaration of
the reaſons of ſuch omiffion, from the real Di-
ſtance, Magnitude, Motions, and Deſigns of the
ſaid Bodies, and how improperly they could be
reduc'd within the ſaid narration, (the only pre-
caution ſuppoſable in the cafe) being more like-
ly to diſcredit the whole Book, than overcome
their prejudices, than give them a true and juſt
Idea of the matter it Fir and fo obviate their
falſe reaſonings and practices thereupon in the
foremention'd Idolatry. So that 'twas abſolute-
ly neceſſary to include the Heavenly Bodies in
the Mo/aick Creation, in order to prevent Idola-
ery among the Fews : which ſeems to have been
a principal aim not only of recording this whole
Narration, but of the intire Me/aick Diſpenſa-

tion


30


Of the Moſaick Creation.


tion : and therefore was in the firſt place by all
means to be conſider'd. ) vl
(2.) The peculiar Nature and Circumſtances
of this Hiſtory of the Creation, neceſſarily re-
quire the mention of the Heavenly Bodies, as well
as of any other parts of the Viſible World. And
tis chis miſtake that has bitherto hindzed any
rational account thereof ; that men have guher
ſuppos'd it a Real and Philoſophical relation of
the proper Creation of all things; or a  me&r
Mychological and Myſterious Reduction of che
viſible parts of it to fix periods or divilions,' un-
der which mighty Myſteries were loppoe'd to be
hid, and by which the foundation of a ſeventh-
day Sabbath was to be laid among the Fews.
Now tho' ſomewhat of truth I believe be con-
tained in each of thele different notions; yerl
think *tis : undeniable that they are neither of
them to be acquieſced in, and by no means give


a SH account of the compleat Nature
th


and Kind of this Hiſtory. That alone to which
all its- payticulars exactly anſwer, and which is
as Liccral and Philoſophical as the capacities of
the Jews could expect or reach, and did require,
is, An Hiftorica! fournal or Diary of the Mutations
of the Chaos, and of the wiſible Works of each Day,
fuch an ove as on honeſt and obſerving Spettator ov
the Earth would have made, and recorded, way and
belig'd to. be in all caſes the truth and reality of. the
goings thbem| ewes. Now that this Idea alone fits
this Sacred Hiſtory, might eaſily be made.,quys
by the'contideration of the particulars related,
and of thoſe omicred, with all the other circum-
ſtances thereof, by no means correſponding top
any other Hypotheſis ; but . moſt exactly to this
»/ ho us ; without the leaſt force offer'd to the
Nature and Syltem of the World, to the Divine

Perfections,


Of the Moſaick Creation,


Perfe&tions, or the Free Reaſon of Mankind;
and exactly ſujzable. to the Stile of the Holy
Bogks, in. the mention of the Phenomena of the
Natural World in other places. Which being
ſuppos'd (and by that time this Difſfertation is
er'd throughout, I hope "wilt appear no
precarious ſuppoſition, ) 'tis evident that both
the appearance of Light , and of the Bodies
them: es, the Sun, Moon and Stars, (the things
we are now enquiring about,) muſt as certainly
come within ſuch a Journal, and make as re-
markable Turns and Changes in the World, as
far as this Spectator could judge, as any other
within the intire ſix days could pony do. The
appearance of Light to him who never befote is
7 x have fegn ſuch a thing, and was till
then incompaſs'd with the thickeſt Darkneſs ;
and the plain view of the Heavenly Bodies them-
' ſelvesto bs who beforghad no mannerof notion
of 'cm,efpecially when he had nopoflible means of
diſtinguiſhing them from Light and Fiery Balls,
ſituate with, and pertaining to the Clouds ; muſt
as certainly have inferr'd a new Creation, and
under ſuch a notion have been recorded in their
due place in the Journal before-mention'd, as
any other whatſoeyer ; and cheir order, poſition,
and uſes would naturally be recounted no other-
wiſe thag we now find them in the Moſaick
Creation, From which conſideration I think
'ris not at all ſurprizing, .that theſe parts of the
Viſible World, how remote and ſeperate ſocver
they bg. from our Earth in" themſelves, are yet
included in -this Hiſtory - before. us ; and hare
their diſfin& periods. in the Tix days work ; tho”
at the ſame.time the Keguzzulz it ſelf do proper-
ly relate tg, the formation of the Sublunary
World only. ; 9 |
wo” n.


JI


Of the Moſaick Creation,


TV. I prove that the Hiſtory before us, ex-
- tends not beyond the Earth and its A ages,
becauſe that confuſed Maſs, or rude heap of
Hererogeneous matter, which we call the Chaos,
whence all the ſeveral parts were deriy'd,extended
no farther. Ir will here I ſuppoſe beallow'd me,
that the ancient Chaos, ſo Lemons among the
old Philoſophers, and ſo evidently refer'd to ky
Moſes, was the intire and ſingle ſource or promp-
tuary of the ſix days productions ; and that con-
ſequently nothing ought to be efteem'd a part
of that Creation, but what in irs Rudiments and
Principles was ſo of the -Chaos alſo ; and this
Poſtulatum is ſo agreeable to Moſes, as well as all
the antient accounts of the Chaos, and I think
ſo ſuitable to the ſentiments of moſt men, that
I ſhall, without farther proof, ſuppoſeit granted,
and betake my ſelf immediately to the other
branch of the argument, and endeavour to
evince, that the Chaos was ſo far from compre-
hending the intire matter of the Univerſe, nay
or of the Solar Syſtem, that it reach'd not fo far
as the Moon, nor indeed any farther than -that
Terraqueous Globe we now Inhabit, with ſuch
Bodics as are immediately contiguous and apper-
taining thereto. Which I think the following
arguments will ſufficiently demonſtrate.

(1.) If we Appeal to External Nature, and en-
quire what confuſed Maſſes or Chaos's either at
preſent are, or ever, within the Annals of Time,
were extant in the Viſible World, we ſhall dif-
cover no footſteps of any ſuch thing, exceptin
what the Atmoſphere of a Comet affords us. 1
therefore, without the allowance of precarious
and fanciful Hypotheſes, relying on no known
Pheromena of Nature; a Comet's Armoſj uo


Of the Molaick Creation.


be the ſole pretender, if moreover the fame At-
moſphere gives a Juſt Adequate, Primitive, and
Scriptural Idea of that ancient Chaos ; if it an-
ſwers its particular Phnozmena, recounted by
Sacred or Procheve Hiſtory ; if it prove a pecu-
liarly fit Foundation of ſuch an Earth as ours is,
and is extraordinarily adapted to ſuit,and account
for its preſent and paſt Phenomena ; all which
ſhall be prov'd hereafter; I think we may ccaſe
our farther enquiries, and with the higheſt rea-
ſon and juſtice conclude, That a Comet, or more
peculiarly the Armoſphere thereof, was that ve-
ry Chaos, from whence that World aroſe,
whoſe Original is related in the Moſaick Hiſtory :
And with equal reaſon and juſtice be farisfi'd,
(which is but a certain conſequent thereof) that
not the innumerable Syſtems of the fixt Stars, noc
the narrower Syſtem of the Sun, nay nor the
Moon her ſelf, but our Earth alone, was the
proper ſubje& of the Meoſaick Creation. Which
concluſion will be farther eſtabliſh'd by the coin-
cidence of the ſeveral days works recounted by
Moſes, with thoſe Natural and Orderly Muta-
tions which , in the Digeſtion and Formation
of a Planet from a Comet's Atmoſphere, would
Mechanically procezd , as hereafter will ap-


bp, :

ty The Chaos mention'd by Moſes is by
him expreſly call'd The Earth, in contradiſtinct-
on to The Heavens, or the other Syſtems of the
Univerſe ; and all its parts taken notice of in
the Sacred Hiſtory, appear, by the following
Series of the Scriptures, to belong to our Earth
and no other. The words of Moſes are, Is the
Beginning God created the heaven and the earth ;
and the earth was without: form and woid, and
darkneſs was upon the face of the deep ; and the

Spirit


Gen. i. 1,


2,


Of the Moſaick Creation.


Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.

'here I think 'tis plain, as has been already ob-
ſcrv'd, that when the Author comes to the Chaos
or Foundation cf the fix days work, he excludes
the Heavens from any ſhare therein, and calls
the Chaos it ſelf A» Earth, without form and woid,
wirh Darkneſs npon the Face of irs Abyſs ; and
this all ought ro grant, theſe being the very
Words from which *tis concluded that the Hea-
then Chaos was no other than what Moſes de-
riv'd the World from.

And that the' Chaos is here confin'd to the
Earth, will be ſure pur paſt doubt by the latter
part of this Argument, which obſerves no other
pare to be mention'd belonging thereto, than
uch as the ſucceeding Series of the Holy Scrip-
tures ſhews to have afterward belong'd to our
Earth and no other, viz. An Abyſ or Deep, and
Waters : Both of them frequemly mention'd in
the Holy Books, and now attual parts of the
preſent Globe, as will appear hereafter.

So that when Moſes calls his Chaos exprefly the
Earth ; when by the coherence of his diſcourſe
he excludes the Heavens, taken in a large aud
proper fenſe, from the ſame ; when, laſtly, he
mentions no other parts. of this Chaos than fuch
as afterward, and at this day, are parts of our
Earth ; *Tis ſomewhat unacconnrable, and like
| a kind of fare upon Commentators, that they
ſhould unanimouſly reſolve to make this Chaos
of ſo extravagant a compaſs as they too incon-
grucuſſy do ; and that they ſhould agree in it fo
univerſally, tho'* without any warrant from,
nay contrary to, the obvious ſenſe of the 'Text
ic ſelf, and the plain drift, coherence and de-
ſcription of Mo/es therein. I know it will be
ſaid the Firſt and Fourth days works, (the Ori-

y gin


Of the Molaick Creation.


gin of Light, and of the Sun, Moon and Stars)
neceflicated ſuch a ſuppoſition, and gave juſt
cauſe for the common Expoſition. Which as I
believe to have been the true occaſions of all
ſuch miſtaken Gloſles , fo I think them far from
juſt and neceſſary ones; and if what has been al-
ready ſaid has clear'd thoſe difficulties, there can
be no reaſon to reject the Cogency of the preſent
Argument, but a great deal to reſt ſarisfi'd in it ;
and to confeſs it no lefs unſcriptural than 'tis
abſurd, to expect from this ſingle Chaos, a Sun,
Moon, and Syſtems of fix'd Stars, as hitherto
the World has commonly done.

(3.) The Meſaick and ancient Chaos could not
include the Sun or fix'd Stars, becauſe juſt before
the extraction of Light from ir, as 'tis uſually ex-
oaks it was Dark and Caliginous ; which on
uch a ſuppoſition is not conceivable. A ſtrange
Darkneſs this! where more than ninety nine
parts of an hundred (whether we take in the
intire Syſtem of the World, or the Solar Syſtem
only) appear to be fiery Corpuſcles , and the
very ſame from whence all the fix'd Stars, or at
leaſt the Sun, were conſtituted ; and are now the
Fountain of all that Light and Heat which the
World has ever ſince enjoy'd. Let every un-
biaſs'd perſon judge, how Dark that Chaos could
be, where the Opake and Obſcure parts were fo

etly inconſiderable in compariſon of the
ighte, the Active, and the Fiery ones. So that
on this Hypotheſis, The ſtate of the Chaos muſt


| have been exceeding Light, Hor, and Fiery, be-


Vid. Lin.
33. infrd,


fore the firſt days work ; whery it was on the


contrary, according to all Antiquity, Sacred
and Profane, Dark and Caliginous. Tis true,
upon the ſeparation of the particles of Light (the
buſineſs, in this ab "y of the Fil Day)

| 2 the


36


Of the Moſaick Creation:


the Chaos would become Obſcure and Dark
enough, at the ſame time that the Sun, or fix'd
Stars, were collecting their Maſſes fo lately ex-
tracted, and were growing Splendid and Glo-
rious. But this is to contradict the Hiſtory, ac-
cording to which the Light, on the Firſt Day, is
conſider'd with relation to the Chaos, _ its
diſtinguiſhing Night and Day There, not as it
was collecting into Bodics of Light without it
(which rather muſt belong to the Fourth Days
Work); when by this account 'tis evident, that
this day is the peculiar time for the moſt pitchy
Darkneſs poſlible. For when all the Light was
juſt ſeparated from the Chaos, the moſt Caligi-
nous Nighe muſt certainly enſue. So that unleſs
we can change the Order in Meſes, and prove
that the Chaos before the Firſt Days Work was
all over Light, and on the Firſt Day cover'd with
the Thickeſt Darkneſs, we in vain pretend to
juſtifie the vulgar opinion, and include the Sun
or fix'd Stars among the other Matter of . the
Chaos.

Beſides, when Heat is the main Inſtrument of


| Nature in all its ſeparations of Parts, and Pro-


duQtions of Bodies, 'tis ſure a very improper ſea-
ſon juſt then to extract the my Fiery Cor-
puſcles out of the Chaos, when the Formation
of i began, and there was the principal oc-
caſion for their preſence and efficacy, that ever
was or could rollbly be. A ſtrange method of
Generation ! 'To take away the Cauſe at the ve-
ry inſtant when it was to produce irs Effects, and
to recount the Effects not before, but as ſoon as
ever the Cauſe is taken away ! But to proceed.
(4.) The now undoubted property of the Uni-
verſal Gravitation of Matter,contradidts and over-
throws this fancy of the Heavenly Bodies haying
en


Of the Moſaick Creation. J7


been originally included in, and at the Creation
extracted from the Chaos of which we are


_ For on this Hypotheſis when once
nd.
a


were mingled with the parts of the Earth,
are ſince at immenſe diſtances from it, they
muſt have fled off every way from their former
place, and in a ſmall ſpace of . time have thrown
themſelves to thoſe vaſtly remote ſeats which
they have ever ſince poſleſs'd. Now if inſtead
of the ws centripeta, a Vis centrifuga ; inſtead of
| mutual attraction, a mutual repulſe or avoidance
were found to be the ſtanding unchang'd Law
. of Nature, and Property of Matter, this might
have look'd like a poflible, at leaſt, if nor a pro-
bable Hypotheſis ; andthe whole Order of Na-
ture ever fince need not have been contradicted
' In this primary formation of things. But when
the contrary force, that I mean of mutual renden-
Cy, attraction, or gravitation obtains, and that, as
far as we have any means of knowing, univerſal-
ly, which Mr. Newton has demonſtrated, there is
no room or foundation in Nature for ſuch an
Imagination.
'Tis by no means impoſlible that all the Bo-
dies in the Univerſe ſhould approach toone ano-
ther, and at laſt unite in the common Center
of Gravity of the intire Syſtem : Nay from the 74; cop,
univerſality of the Law of Gravitation, and the r. & :
finiteneſs of the World, in length of time, Ze». 11,
without a miraculous power interpoſe and pre- %"*
vent it, it muſt really happen. But by what
4 ff} Law of Nature, or Property of Bodies, they,
1 when once conjoin'd, (as thoſe I now oppoſe


hk rg


M muſt affirm) ſhould be ſeparated, *tis hard to
1- Conceive. ” . . , PR

r= Which difficulty is increas'd by the prodigious
_ velocity of their motions; when, according to


D 3 the


Of the Moſaick Creation.


the vulgar Hypotheſis, but a few hours can be
allow'd the Heavenly Bodies to waft them to
thoſe immenſly , yet variouſly diſtant Seats ,
which they were immediately and for ever after
to poſlefs. All which harſh and ungrounded
fictions are intirely avoided, and all things re-
reſented according to the known Laws of

trer and Motion, in that natural and eaſie
Hypotheſis we take, and which therefore is as
conſonant to, as the other is averſe from ,
the Make and Conſtitution of the Natural
World.

(5.) This fancy, that the Heavenly Bodies
proceeded originally from the Terreftrial Chaos,
and caſt themſelves off from it every way, ſup-
poſes the Earth to be the Center of the World,
or of all that Syſtem of Bodies, and they plac'd
in a kind of circumference every way about it.
How well foever ſuch a Notion would agree
with the Vulgar or Ptolomaick Syſtem of the
World, I fear the Pythagorean , which has forc'd
it» 1cception, and is univerſally receiv'd by Aſtro-
nomers, will not at all ſquare therewith. In
that account which would only include the Pla-
netary or Solar Syſtem within the ſix days Crea-
tion, the Sun, its known and undoubred Center,
ſeems the only proper place for. ſuch a Chaos
as were to be the common ſource and promp-
tuary of the whole : But in the vulgar account,
where all the Stars and Planets of the Univerſe
arc to be ſuppos'd at a Center together, we,
who know not the bounds and circumference
of the World, cannot be ſippos'd able to pirch
upon a Center proper for ſo immenſe and ſtrange
a Chaos. Only one may venture to fay, that
the Earth, a ſmall moveable Planet, revolving
about the Sun, is an ill-choſen one ___


Of the Moſaick Creation;


And now upon a recolleRion and view of this
whole Argument, I do not queſtion but an un-
rejudic'd perſon, who knew nothing of the
enthngats of Commentators, or of the opinions
of the vulgar , and who had only been conver-
fant in the Works, and Word of God, the Book
of External Nature, and the Book of Scripture,
would eaſily find the bounds of the Ao/aick
Creationg; and on. a little conſideration and
comparilon of the Sacred and Profane Accounts
of the Primitive Chaos, with the. preſent Nature
and Situation of the Heavenly Podies, would
uickly be convinc'd that our -Earth alone were
« wow concern'd ; he could ſcarce be ſuppos'd
once to Dream that the Origin of the Sun and
Planets, much lefs of innumerable Suns and Pla-
nets, and of the intire Univerſe, was there ac-
counted for. Such Notions, how general ſoever,
are not the reſult of Nature and Scripture care-
fully conſfider'd and compar'd one wirh another ,
bur the effects of ignorance of the frame of
the World , and of the ſtile of Scripture;
of an unacquaintednefs ,with the Works, and
thence an inability of judging concerning the
Word of God relating to them ; or indeed com-
monly of a certain dxg4vyes, or narrowneſs
of Soul, which Temper, , Education, Converſa-
tion, Application to ſome particular Studies and
Authors, with a ſtrangeneſs to free and generous
Enquiries, ſome or all have been the unhappy
occaſions of. In ſhort, 'tis becauſe men are not
able ro give themſelves or others a fatisfatory
account of ſuch things, that thev are forced to
fall into a beaten not and content theinfelves
with thoſe r and jcjune Schemes, which,
when carefully examin'd, prove neither Rational
nor Scripmral bur as perfedtly contradictory to
D 4 - found


Of the Moſaick* Creation,


ſound Philoſophy, as the genuine ſenſe of thoſe
very Texts on which they build their conclu-
ſions. Every unbyaſs'd Mind would eaſily allow,
that like Effects had like Cauſes ; and that Bodies
of the ſame general Nature, Utes, and Motions,
were to be deriv'd from the ſame Originals; and
conſequently, that the Sun and the fixed Stars
had one, as the Earth, and the other Planets
another ſort of Formation. If therefore any
free Conſiderer found that one of the latter ſort,
that Planet which we Inhabirt, was deriv'd from
a Chaos ; by a parity of Reaſon he would ſup-
poſe, every one of the other to be ſo deriv'd
alſo ; I mean each from its peculiar Chaos.

Nay truly I might carry this matter ſtill higher,
and if one Planet muſt be made Parent to ano-
ther,juſtly claim the principal place for Fupiter, a-
bout ſixty times as big as our Earth,and the largeſt
and moſt conſiderable of all the Sun's Chorzs ; and
fo with greater ſhew of Probability aſſert, that
from its Chaos any of the other Planags were de-
riv'd, than himſelf from theirs. Particularly the
Earth is ſo ſmall a Globe,that in point of Dignity
or Origination, very many of the Celeſtial Bodies
may molt fairly claim the precedence of her,
hd curb her aſpiring pretenlions to any ſuch
mighty Prerogatives above her Fellows. « There
is in reality no occation for any ſuch childiſh rea-
ſoning on either ſide y and every one of the Pla-
nets (eſpecially the -Moon, fo exatly reſem-
bling her Siſter Earth) ought to be deduc'd from
a diſtin Chaos of its own, as well as- that
zarticular one which Providence has allotted
or the Sear of Mankind. And *tis not to be
queſtion'd, were we as well acquainted with the
Nature, Conſticution, and Uſes of the other
Planets, with their various Inhabitants, and the

| ſeveral


Of the Moſaick Creation,


ſeveral methods of Divine Providence relating t
'em all; we ſhould not be backward to allow
'em every one a proportionable {hare in the care
of Heaven, and a like coriduct in their Origins
and Periods, as the Earth, on which we dwell,
can boaſt of. We ſhould, 'tis probable, ſoon un-
derſtand, that, (bating the ſtupendious and mi-
raculous diſpenſation of the Goſpel by the Meſſtas
Ordrywr@&) as well the Moral, as the Natural
Hiſtories of theſe Worlds; thoſe of their firlt riſe
our of Chao's, of their ſeveral Changes, Revolu-
tions, and Cataſtrophes, with regard to the ina-
nimate, the animate, and Reaſonable Beings,
both as to che dignity of the things themſelves,
and their newneſs to us, would equally deſerve
the view and conſideration of Inquiſitive Minds,
with any like Accounts relating to our own
Earth ; and we ſhouldeaſily fatisfy our ſelves, that
. the ſingle Chaos, the Seminary of our preſent
Farth, was fo far from extending it ſelf to the
Sun, or fixt Stars , that not the leaſt ſecondary
Planet in the Solar Syſtem could be contain'd
therein. |


V. The AMe/aick Creation is confin'd to our
Farth , with its Appurtenances, becauſe other-
wiſe the time of the Creation of each Body was
fo extreamly diſproportionate to the Work it ſelf,
as is perfealy irreconcileable tro the Divine
Wiſdom of its Creator, and the accounts of the
Works themſelves as they are ſet down by
Alles.

In order to the Reader's perceiving and admit-
ting the force of this, and ſome following Argu-
ments, I muſt- premiſe ſome things rouching the
. nature of ſuch Reaſonings, and how far they
may be made uſe of without any juſt Impura-


tion


Of the Molaick Creation.


tion of Boldneſs, Irreverence, or an audacious
Stinting and Determining the Divine Acti-
ONs.


And here I freely confeſs, That 'tis not necel-
fary in all Caſes that we ſhould comprehend the
reaſons of the Divine Actions or Providence
before we can be under an Obligation to believe
them. They may be hid from us on ſeveral ac-

' counts, tho” the things themſelves be plain in
Scripture. © Under which circumſtances, I hear-
tily own the ſtricteſt Obligation to vield our un-
feigned Aſſent to what God has clearly reveald,
notwithſtanding we cannot ſee the intire accoun-
tableneſs thereof toour imperfe&t Underſtandings.
But then, *tis one thing to be above, and ano-
ther to be repugnant to our Reaſon; 'tis one thing
to be beyond the comprehenſion of, and another
diretly contradictory to our Humane Faculties.
Beſides, the clearneſs or obſcurity of the Revela-
tion is here very conſiderable; the former caſe re-
ſolves our Aſſent into the Divine Veracity; but
the latter may only be the miſtakes of Hu-
mane Deductions, and by conſequence, tho” our
fallible rcaſonings be ſuperſeded by the firſt, yet
there is room for them in the ſecond. I believe,
for inſtayce, and am oblig'd fo to do, that our
Saviour Chriſt is truly @4&/%$wr@& , God and
Man, becauſe I find it every where plain and
evident that the Stile, Titles, Attributes, Acti-
ons, and incommunicable Name of the Eternal
Deity, the God of i/rael, are at leaſt as frequent-
ly afcribd ro him the Son, as to the Father
himſelf, ovngh By whole Bible - Keagrog man
ing any inabiliry oft comprehending the Nature
of i God, and thence of judging of the Unity or
Pluralicy of Perſons in the Divine Eflence. Bur
I do not think my elf equally oblig'd to beloy
C


Of the Moſaick Creation.


the Dodrine of abſolute and uncondition'd Re-
robation , becauſe the Proofs alledg'd for it are

r from being clear, and becauſe 'ris nor fo pro-
perly above, as contradictory to the molt evident
Reaſon. And this comes neareſt to the preſent
caſe; in which, neither can any one juſtly af-
ſert the plainneſfs of the Revelation on the ſide
of the common Scheme ; nor alledge the ſubl-
mity of the Subjet, on account whereof it
might be fairly ſuppos'd above the reach of our
finite Capacities. The Scripture, as I take it,
is evidently for, at leaſt muſt be own'd not evi-
dently againſt this reſtramed Senſe of the Ae
ſaick Hiſtory before us; and the Subje& ir ſelf
- is finite and limited , and fo within our ken,
and capable of our comprehenſion : On which
accounts ſuch Arguments as follow, ought to
have their place, and if conſiderable, their force
and influence on our Faith alfo, and go a great
way to determine ſuch a Diſpute as we are now
upon.

And 'tis ſure not impoſſible , within certain
bounds, for a conſidering man to determine
what is rational, wiſe and prudent ; what is con-
ſonant to the nature of things ; what is ſuicable
to forecaſt and contrivance ; what is in moſt ca-
ſes proper , decent and becoming, even with re-
lation to the Divine Operations in the World.
We naturally, in the reflecting on the Syſtem of
External Nature, obſerve many Marks and To-
kens of the Wiſdom and Art, the Skill and Ar-
tifice of the Great Creator ; which ſuppoſes that
we are competent Judges in ſuch matters. And
indeed, 'tis but changing the Scene, and conſi-
dering what we naturally pronounce to be ratio-
nal and orderly, fit and proportionable among
Men ; what will become a Wiſe General -

Statel-


\


Of the Molaick Creation.


Stateſman , a Skilful Builder and Archited
nay an ordinary Workman or Arrtificer, in
uſual and obvious cafes : What on the one hand
are the Tokens of Foreſight and Prudence ; and
on the other , of Heedleſnefſs and Folly, in the
common Afﬀeairs of Life ; and we ſhall not whol-
ly be to ſeek what to think of ſeveral analogous
Actions relating to God himſelf : Due allowance
being every where made for that infinite diſtance,
and different ſtate and management of the Su-
pream Governour of the World, from thoſe of
all finite Beings, depending on, and ſubje to
him. Thus we colle& our Idea's of the Divine
Artributes, by conſidering what is good, great,
valued, and eſteemed lovely and venerable among
Men, and aſcribing every ſuch thing to the Di-
vine Nature ; who being the Origin of them all,
muſt contain 'em within himſelf in a higher and
more eminent manner. By accumulating. all
things that appear Perfe&tions in Men, or other
Creatures, and removing all Imperfections ne- .
ceſſarily adhering to them, we arrive at the No-
tion of an Infinicely Perfect Being 3 which is but
another name for God ; and whom, on that ac-
count, we juſtly think the proper Object of our
Worſhip and Adoration.

When therefore our very Idea's of che Divine
Properties are owing to, and depend on, our con-
ſideration of thoſe leſſer degrees of the ſame
which we obſerve in Men; and when the reaſon
why the contrary Propernes are not by us aſcri-
bed to him, is, becauſe we find that in —_—
argue imperte&tion ; what is a ſign or e O
"a Fa. ney Perfection in 4 muſt, alſo be
acknowledg'd a ſign or effect of a like PerfeQtion
in God. And what is a ſign or effec of Imper-
f:tion in Men, muſt alſo be own'd, if it _

up-


Of the Moſaick Creation,


{uppoſable, a ſign or effec of a like Imperfection
in God. Thus? for inſtance we _— ather,
e


that God cannot be properly pleas'd or delighted
in the miſery and torment of his Creatures, where
yer the Juſtice and Wiſdom of his Government
require him ſeverely to puniſh 'em ; Becauſe we
cannot bur eſteem it an odious Vice, and baſe
ny 9x7 ra in a Judge on Earth, in like caſes,
to be fo affefted; and whether we will or no,
we look upon it 'as an inſtance of cruelty and
barbarity of diſpoſition to relliſh and taſte a
ſweetnels, in the Cries and Groans of condemned
and dying Malefactors. In like manner we juſtly
conclude, God cannot Inpoſe on Innocent Crea-
tures, no not by ſuch Wiles, Stratagems, or other
methods of Collufion , wherein yet dire& and
downright Falſchood were avoided ; becauſe we
find a ſpontaneous averſion and indignation ariſes
in our minds when fuch Tricks and Shams are
diſcovered, among Men. And by the fame way,
and equal force of reaſoning may we collect,
that God cannor, in the formation or diſpoſition
of things, no more than in other caſes, act ab-
ſurdly or difagreeably to Reaſon ; diſproportio-
nately or unfſuitably to the nature of things ;
immethodically without rule and order , or fool-
iſhly without drift and deſign , according as an
impartial and conſidering Man , who were duly
acquainted with the Syſtem of Nature, would
judge and determine in the caſe. And conſe-
quently, Tis a diſhonourable reflection on God,
Faculties of Mankind would amongſt us be look'd
on as marks of unskilfulnefs, imprudence, or fol-
ly, in parallel caſes; and for which mcer Men
could not eſcape the moſt ſevere and indecorons
imputations.

Pat


Of the Moſaick Creation.


Put the caſe that I ſhould chance to obſerve a
certain Maſter-builder in his parcelling out the
ſeveral diſtint Tasks of the Ie es. cles: 4
and apportioning the time he would allow to the
finiſhing of the whole ; and that I perceiv'd
9 parts of 10 were to be done in one day, but
the other ſingle part had a month's ſpace atligned
to it; and yet 9 parts of 10 of the intire number
of Workmen were to club together for that


| Work to be done in the month, while only every


tenth man were permitted to afhiſt at the days
task : Were it pothible to ſuppoſe fuch a cafe on
Earth, I need not inform you what opinion the
S tor would have of the Abilities or Prudence
of the Architet. Or, Put the caſe that an or-
dinary Husbandman, who had two Plots of
Ground, the one of a ſcore feet in circumfe-
rence, not very promiſing or capable of Culci-
vation above others, the other of a thouſand
Acres of good Land, and very fit for Tillage or
Improvement; ſhould ſpend four or five days
every Week about his little ſpot of Indifferent
Ground, and allot no more than the remainin
one or two for the Care and Management


- the other ſpacious Field : 'Tis cafie ro imagine


o_


under what Notion and Characterthe Plowman
would paſs in the World. Or laſtly, Suppoſe
one ſhould lighe upon an Hiſtorian, who under-
took to give a compleat and full Account of


' ſome large and ſpacious Country, with the ma-


ny Noble Kingdoms, Principalities, Lordihips,
and Governments therein contain'd; and upon
peruſal nothing was to be found mention'd in any
particular manner, but a certain little and remote
Iſland ( fo inconſiderable that the generglity of
the Inhabitants of the Main .Land never kcard fo
much as its name ) which indeed was deſcrib'd
carefully


Of the Moſaick Creation,


carefully, and its ſeveral circumſtances diligently
accounted for : Bur as to the reſt, there appear'd
no more than at the concluſion of a Chapter ewo
or three names of its: principal Diviſions, and
ſome advantages which one or two of their Mari-
time Towns atforded this ſmall Iſland, and then all
was concluded. Now he that ſhould take this for
a juſt and adequate Hiſtory of the whole, and ear-


| _ neftly contend for the Compleatneſs and Perfecti-


on of the Work, would be certainly taken for a
ſtrange perſon ; or rather would be thought in
Jeſt, and to deſign the real expoſing of the foll
and ridiculouſneſs of the Publiſher thereof. Theſe
familiar inſtances amongſt Men ſhew what un-
brib'd and untainted Nature inſtantaneouſly pro-
nounces in ſuch cafes; and thereby directs us
what we ought to judge in parallel ones in which
God himſelf is direaly intereſted. «
Where the change of the Perſon is fo far from
altering, that ic exceedingly confirms theſe diRates
of Right Reaſon, and makes thoſe ſuppolitions
which were harſh and incredible with regard to
Men, to become intolerable and impious when
apply'd to the Deity. Wharſoerer bears the cha-
raters of Truth, Juſtice, Order, Wiſdom, and
Contrivance , which I cannot bur expe from
and skilful Men; I undoubtedly require and
here of the Divine Majeſty without the leaſt he-
ſitation, in the higheſt degree and ſupreameſt
meaſure imaginable. But whatſoever looks like
Falfeneſs, Injuſtice , Confuſion , Folly , and a
Wild Diſproportion or Precipitancy among Men,
and which I am difficultly induc'd ro imagine
of a frail and imperfe& Creature like my felt, 1
am much more hardly perſuaded, or rather find
it impoſlible to believe of God. Thoſe very fa-
culties by which I am enabled to diſtinguiſh and


pals


#


48


* fſedfor evermore; there ma


Of the Moſaick: Creation.


paſs a Sentence in theſe matters, are deriv'd from
God, and a part of the Divine Image on the
Soul of Man; and ſhall I fo odly make uſe of
them, that what I could not be brought to Cre»
dit of any one of my Neighbours , it were ſo
uncouth, abſurd, and prepoſterous , I freely ad-
nit and contend for when aſcrib'd to my Crea-
tor 2 The Mind of Man, if it have leave to re-
fle&tfreely, can no acquieſce in any Scheme
of the Works: of God, where nothing of Fore-
caſt, Order, Deerumy and Wiſdom is confpicu-
ous ; where every period ap puzling, im-
methodical, diſproportionate, and ill diſpos'd ,
(ſuch is that of the vulgar Idea of the Moſaick
Creation, as will be prov'd preſently) than it
can believe contradictions, or that God is an In-
finitely Wiſe and Perfe& Being indeed,but yer at
the ſame time acting what, in the Common ſenſe
of Mankind, argues the greateſt folly and im-
ection 3 which intirely and with plenary
tisfaction to do, is certainly impoſſible. There


15 ſomewhat in the Humane Soul that has too


quick aſenſe of the decency and fieneſs of things,
and withal too deep a veneration for the Ado-
rable Majeſty of God, to be eaſe wider, tho' it
may be overborn with{uch Notions. It cannot be
willing to believe that of its Wife and Glorious
Creator, which for another to believe of ic ſelf
would be eſteem'das an high indignity.

"Tis true, there is {0 great a difference be-
eween the compaſs of the Divine, and the
ſtreightneſs of Humane Knowledge ; berween
the State of Creatures and of the Creator, Bleſ-
be ſuch an incapa-
City in us to reach, or unftathomable, yer wile,
reaſons for God to hide ſome things from us;
not to inſiſt on the Divine Prerogative, _—_
recs


Of the Moſaick Creation.


frees him from the obligation of giving an ac-
count of every thing to any of thoſe Beings he has
made ; That we ought to be very wary of Ar-

ing from Man to God, withourdue allowance
or theſe conſiderations; and conſequently
mighty cautious of- affirming or - denying what-
ever is aſcribd to him from ſuch a compariſon.
In particular, wherever a clear Revelation in-
terpoſes, we are bound to quit our fallible rea-
ſonings, and fully to acquieſce in fuch a deci-
ſion : Ir mu impoflible for God to Lye, but

y no means fo, that we may be miſtaken.

But then this neceſſary prudence and warinels
is chiefly, if not only, concern'd in ſublime
and myſterious points; concerning the incom-
prehenſible Nature, or unſearchable Providences
of God ; which Dodrines ſometimes are ſo much
above the preſent Scene of things ; {© remote
from the notions and affairs of this World ; relate


to and depend on ſuch other Syſtems of Beings


or circumſtances of the Invilible World ; that
we ought not raſhly to paſs our Judgment of
them; but wait till our Souls become fo im-

rov'd, and our pe grego enlightened in a
Teas ſtate; till our means of information, and
opportunities of looking through the whole
Chain and Syſtem, be ſo many more than now
they are, that we may juſtly be ſuppos'd more
competent Judges, and equal Arbitrators, than
at preſent the imperfection of our condition will
permit us in reaſon to pretend to.

Bur this beingagain precaution'd,toprevent any
nuſconſtruction or abuſe of this reaſoning, I cans
not but ſay, that ſince 'rewill be hard to prove
the caſe before us to be of ſo exalted a nature as
to tranſcend our faculties ; and perhaps till
harder to prove the plainneſs of the revelation =

E the


49


—_
_


Of the Moſaick Creation.


the ſide of the common ſition, I am fully
perſuaded that while the Perfections of God are,
as to our aſſent,  deduc'd from their effedts, they
may in good meaſure, within certain bounds, as
was before diſcours'd, be jucg d of by what is
obſervable among Men. And as whatſoever is
worthy, good, and valuable among our ſelves, is
rightly own'd as an efflux and gift of God ; fo
whatſoever is prepoſterous, abſurd, or diſorderly,


' whatſoever is unworthy, baſe, or deſpicable in
' humane affairs, cannot without great indignity


be believed of him; and where we have no
other ways of determining, ſuch reafonings
ought to be perſuaſive and decretory.

tin, all this being faid by way of
Introduction to this and fome following Argu-
ments, let us apply it to the caſe before us ; and
{uppoling,- (which = I need not allow) that
the matter were indifferent on all other conſi-
derations, let us ſpeak freely whether ſuch a me-
thod, ſuch time, and ſuch proportion of the {c-
veral parts as the Ordinary Scheme of the Crea-
tion ſets before us, be in any degree fo well con-
triv'd, and ſuitably diſpos'd, as, I fay not a Di-
vine, but a meer Humane Architect may be ſup-
pos'd the Author of. I need not here give a
particular acgount of the vulgar expoſition of the
firſt Chapter of Genefis: *Tis ſufficiently known
as to themain parts of it. But the diſproportions
I would take notice of in it under this Head are
theſe three

(1.) The length of the Day uſually aflign'd, is
wholly diſproportionate to the buſineſs done up-
on it.

(2.) When the Works of each of the other
Days are ſingle, diſtin, 2nd of a fort, the Third
Day has two quite different, nay incomparible
Works afſipned tOit, (3.) And


Of the Moſaick Creation.


(3.) And Principally the Earth with its fur-
niture, how inconſiderable a Body ſoever it is,
takes up four intire. days, at leaſt, of thoſe fix _
which were allotted tothe whole Creation,when
the Sun, Moon and Stars, thoſe vaſtly greater
and more conſiderable bodies, are crowded into
one ſingle day together.

(1.) The _ of the Day uſually aflign'd
of Twenty four Hours is wholly dif| 1onate
to the butineſs done upon it. This plainly ap-
pears by the Hiſtory ie ſelf, where, to omit


other inſtances, the whole train in the genera-


tion or firſt production of Animals, has no longer
a ſpace afforded to it; when yet all expericnce
jſhews, that a much longer is neceſſarily requir'd,
and has obtain'd in all the ſubſequent Ages.
Now I do not queſtion bur it will be conkel's
by all, that according to the conſtant proceſs of
Nature, this time is utterly infufhcient for this
purpoſe : But what will be ſaid is, that.a Divine
Power immediately interpos'd, and either form'd
every thing in its grown and mature ſtate ; or
at leaſt accelerated and haſten'd the courſe of Na-
turz, ſo as to enable her to perfe&t each Crea-
ture in ſo ſhore a ſpace; -and that conſequent!
no ſtraitneſs of time ought to be alledg'd on this
account. In anſwer whereto I freely granc,
that God can produce all things in their moſt
perfect ſtate, in a moment; and if that could be
prov'd to have been the method here, this ex-
ception were of no validity. But as on ſuch a
_—_— 'is ſtrange that ſix intire and ſuc-
vedays ſhould be requiſite to, or piech'd u
by an Infinite and Unlimited Agent ; when
the inſtantaneous Creation of the whole appears
more agreeable to the Dignity and Power of tho
Creator; ſo I am prenny” OO Cn
2 theſis


Of the Moſaick Creation.
theſis, how common ſoever, is repugnant to the


. Meſaick Hiſtory. The Sacred Penman does there


Divine Power; yet no otherwiſe than the like
would be, and is done by the Holy Writers af-
terwards, nay by every body at this day ; when
yet the conſtant method of Generation is exactly
obſerv'd. . If any of us were ask'd who made us ?
Weſhould foon anſwer, God ; without the leaſt
imagination that we were excuſed from that nine
months abode, and gradual growth in our Mo-
thers Womb ; which every one by the general
Rule and Method of Nature is oblig'd to under-
go. Which appears in the preſent caſe to be the
intention of _ the Holy Writer, becauſe he makes
theſe very Animals productions of the Water and
Earth , as well as the proper effects of the Divine
Power; as has been obſerv'd already on another
occaſion. -: And thoſe who deny this gradual Ge-
neration according to the freer of Nature, muſt
without reaſon recede from the Letter of Moſes,
and that when by fo doing they render this Sa-
cred Hiftory more ditficule and unintelligible
than it really is.

Bur if 1 of immediate Creation it be ſaid
that 'twas only'a ſupernatural acceleration of na-
tural cauſes, without any other alteration of the
proceſs ; which is I think the only probable eva-
ſion, and the faireſt ſuppoſition of all other ; I
reply,Thar this is grats dictum, without any foun-
dation in the Scripture, and fo as eaſily denied
as aſſerted; it is introduc'd only to falve the
ſhortneſs of time mention'd in the Hiſtory,
which will be prov'd hereafter to ſtand in no
need of it ; and it overthrows all attemprs of ac-
counting for this ſix days Creation in a rational


and natural way ; for if a miraculous power be
allow'd


WH


VJ


Of the Moſaick Creation.
allow'din a needleſs caſe, we ſhall be ever ata loſs


how far to extend it, and where mechanical
cauſes ought to take place. On which conlide-
rations I take this extraordinary acceleration of
natural cauſes to be, tho' not- impoſſible, nor
(were there any intimation or neceflity of its
interpoſition from the Sacred Hiſtory ) very im-
probable neither, yer in-thepreſent caſe, ground-
leſs, unneceſſary, perplexing of the cauſe, and
by no means a ſufficient ſolution in the preſent
Aﬀair. Which being therefore thus wlll
the Argument remains in full force, and the
length, of the days aflign'd by the vulgar Hypo-
theſis appears wholly diſproportionate to the
Works done therein ; of which farther notice will
be taken hereafter.

(2.) When the Works of.each of the other
Days are ſingle, diſtinct, and of a fort, the third
Day has two quite diiferent, nay incompatible
ones afligned to it. This is plain from the 1i-
ſtory, where the diviſion of the Waters from the
Earth, or the diſtinction of the Terraqueous Globe
into Seas and dry Land, the firſt work on this
Day, is ſucceeded by that of the production of
the intire Vegetable Kingdom ; contrary to the
perpetual Tenor 'of the other periods of the
Creation. How this comes about, or is accoun-
table in the vulgar Scheme, I know not; and I
believe the reaſon thereof is very little enquir'd
into, and leſs underſtood. But becauſe this whole
difficulty will be urg'd againſt the ſhortneſs of
days in the Vulgar Hypotheſis, and clear'd in
Ours, at their proper places hereafter, I ſhall
_ the farther inſiſting upon it here, and pro-
ceed.

(3.) But principally, the Earth with its Furni-
ture, how inconliderable . body ſoever it is, takes

3 up


Of the Moſaick Creation.


up four intire days, at leaſt, of thoſe ſix which
were allotted to the whole Creation ; when the
Sun, Moon and Stars, thoſe vaſtly greater and
more conſiderable Bodies, are crowded into one
ſingle day together. Now in order to our paſ-
ſing a rational judgment in this matter, I ſhall
take leave to repretent to the Reader's view a
ſhore compariſon or parallel berween the Earth
on one ſide, and the reſt of the World on the
other ; and ſee what reſemblance , correſpon-
dence and proportion there is between the for-
mer and the latter, cither in its ſeveral parts, or
the whole taken together ; and this ſhall be done
on ſuch certain and undoubted grounds and
principles as the late vaſt advancement of Naru-
ral Knowledge has afforded us; and will be more
at large explain'd in the following Pages. *

This Earth then, on which we live, though it
be in diameter more than 8-00 miles, and fo a
vaſt Globe, if compar'd with thofe Bodies we
daily ſee, imagine, and converſe withal, is 1 ct
one of the leſſer of the primary Planets, and with
Jupiter, Mars, and the other her fellows, re-
volves round the great Center of our Syſtem the
» Swn, in a years time. "Tis an Opake and Dark
Body, as they all are, and in common with
chem borrpws its light and heat from that glo-
rious Body which we juſt now obſerv'd to obtain
the center of their Orbits;z without which it, as
well as 'the inrire Chorus of the other Planets,
muſt be ſoon reduc'd all ro one dark heap of
matter, far beyond the deſcription of the old ca-
liginous and unprofitable Chaos, and inno capaci-
ry of ever emerging our of that horrid and fnghrt-

| ſtate. In dignity, i four Earth expe& not
to come the /aft, yet is ſhe fo exceeded, in all
things that might ſeem Characters A by
vera


Of the Moſaick Creation,


ſeveral of the reſt, that there can be no manner
of claim to the fr Place. ' If ſhe have a ſecon-
dary Planet, the Mon , for her attendant (tho
in truth ſhe is at leaſt as ſerviceable to that Pla-
net, as that Planet is co her) ; T7upiter has cer-
tainly four ; and ſome good Glaſſes have diſco-
ver'd five about Satzrn ; who however is not
wholly deſticute, as all Aſtronomers confeſs.
The denſity and place of the Earth is pretty near
the middle of the Planets, and as ſhe exceeds,
and is higher than ſome, ſo is ſhe exceeded by,
and lower than others in thoſe reſpets. Her
own Secondary Planet, the Aeon, has an Air
much more homogeneous, pure, and tranſparent,
than ſhe at preſent enjoys ; and m all probabili-
ty free from Winds, Clouds, Storms, 'Tempelts,
Thunder, Lightning, and ſuch other irregular
and pernicious Effects, which render our Atmo-
ſphere ſo contagious and peſtilent to the Inhabi-
tants of the Earch. In which circumſtances the
generality of the other Planets imitate the Moon,
and render our miſerable Condition the more
remarkable and ſenſible ; as appearing thereby
almoſt ſingular. Our days and nights are longer
than thoſe of ſome, and ſhorter than thoſe of
others of the Planers. The figure of the Earth
is nearly ſphzrical , as is that alſo of the other
— Bodies; irs ſurface unequal,with Moun-
nc be. Only 'ti
ally the Moon's, appears to y ts
obſervable that the laſt, Shack much-leſs in big-
neſs, has her Mountains higher than we on
Earth. The Sea and Land, Mountains and Val-
leys, and other ſuch correſponding Phamomena
of the Moon, ſhew, that that ſmall Planer is not
nearer our Earth in place, than in quality and
diſpoſition alſo, If we compute the true mag-
E 4 nitude


Valleys, as well as that of the reſt, ef-


J5


56


Iſa. xxxix.
15, 17-


Of the Moſaick Creation.


nitude or quantity of matter in the Earth, it will
appear that ſhe is not the 6th part ſo big as F«-
puter, nor the 3oth as Saturn, nor the 600coth as
the Sun. So that ſhe is very inconſiderable, if
compar'd with the reſt of the Solar Vortex ay s
but if with the intire Univerſe or Syſtems of the
fixe Stars, in the elegancy of the Propherick Ex-
preflions, as a drop of a Bucket, xs the (mall duſt


of the Balance, yea leſs than nothing , and wa-


nity. Infomuch , that to all thoſe remote Sy-
ſtems of the Heavenly Bodies , this Earth, with
all its fellow Planets , are no more viſible than
thoſe which, *tis probable, revolve about any of
them, are to us in theſe our Planetary Regions.
And as we uſually little think of thoſe inviſible
Globes, fo any of their Inhabitants never once
imagine that there is ſuch a Planet as ours (about
which we make ſuch a mighty ſtir) in the whole
World. As to the main uſe of this Earth, 'tis to
afford habitation to a ſinful and lapſed Race of
Creatures, of ſmall Abilicies or Capacities at pre- |
ſent, but of great Vices and Wickedneſfs ; and is
eſteemed , as far as appears, in its preſent con-
ſtitution ſo peculiar!y and ſolely fit for them, that
when they are gone, or their Diſpoſitions and
Faculties reform'd and improv'd, a better ſcene
of Nature, (a new Heaven, and a new Earth,) is
to be introduc'd, for ſuch better and more noble
Creatures: The Old one, which now obtains,
being, it ſeems, only a ſort of Priſon or Con-
hnement, which is to be our Lot whilſt we are
ſinful and miſerable, but no longer.

And is this the only Darling of Nature, the
prime Obje& of the Creation- and Providence
of God? Can ſuch a Globe's original, nay , of
the external and viſible Parts of it only, claim
four parts of ſux of that entixe ſpace, which the
| + Wiſdom


Of the Molaick Creation.


Wiſdom . of God allotted for the Formation of
all things in the whole World, while the Origin
of the Sun, Moon, and numberleſs Syitems of
Stars has only a poor ſingle part allotted to it ?
Muſt the expanding the Air between the Earth
and the Clouds, be chought to equal the diſpoſal
of all thoſe Ceurleſtial Bodies into their ſeveral Re-
10ns? and the producing a few Fiſh and Fowl ,
a weightier concern, and require more time
than the repleniſhing all the other habitable
Worlds with Beings ſuitable to their ſeveral Con-
ſticutions? Will a wife Builder beſtow twice as
much time in decking and adorning of one By-
cloſer of inferior uſe, and that only ro ſome of the
meaneſt Servants tooz as of. the Royal Palace, with
all irs ſtarely Rooms and Apartments, intended
for the King himſelf, and his Courtiers? Should
we hear of ſuch ſtrange Actions, and diſpropor-
tionate Procedure among Men, we ſhould not be
able to induce our ſelves to give credit thereto.
But ir ſeems Suppoſitions ten thouſand times
more diſproportionate and unaccountablz, when
afcribd to God Almighty, are ealily believ'd.
So far can Ignorance, Prejudice, and a miſun-
derſitanding of the Sacred Volumes carry the
Faith, nay, the Zeal of Men! and to fuch a
- mean Opinion of the moſt glorious and perfect
of Beings are we thereby reduc'd, that as it we
were not content to think him ſuch a one as our
ſelves , but intended to depreſs him below the
very meaneſt of us, we venture with confi-
diſproportionate , unequal , and unaccountable
difoſal of the Works of Creation, which the
m— Artificer could not bear the Imputati-
on Ot,


' , {c


57


58


Of the Molaick Creation.


It muſt here be confeſs'd, That ſuch Notions of
the Moſaick Creation , as I now ſe, havin
begun, or at leaſt been chiefly eſtabliſh'd a
propagated when the Ariferelean Philoſophy, and
Ptolomaick Aſtronomy were believ'd ; thoſe who
have embrac'd them till this Age were lefs abſurd,
and nearer to ſometolerable degree of probabiliry.
For ſo long as the Earth with its adjoyning Ele-
ments was fu 'd the Center and Batfis of all the
World; while the diſtance of the Heavenly Bo-
dies was believ'd to be , comparatively to what
we now find, very ſmall and inconſiderable; and
all their Motions perform'd about us their pro-
per and immovable Center; while the whole Se-
ries of Spheres above ( tho' the ſeveral diſtint
ones mov'd the contrary way by their own pe-
culiar Motions) was in twenty four hours con-
ſtantly hurried from Eaſt to Weſt by. the Primum
Mobile, on purpoſe to cauſe Day and Night to us
below ;. while Comets were eſteem'd Exhalations
from the Stars, and ſent only at certain Seaſons
to affright Mankind with their fiery Tails, and
then ro be diflipated and vaniſh into Vapours
again 3 while the Sun and Stars, in the Opinion
of the Philoſophers themſelves, were nouriſh'd
by the Steams from our Earth; and while the
laſt named were either ſtuck in one Spherical Su-

rficies as the fix'd Stars, -or faſtned in their

lid Orbs, like a Nail in a Cartwheel, as the
Planets, and no other uſe imagin'd but to twin-
kle to us in Winter Evenings, and by their
Aſpects to forebode what little Changes of Wea-
ther , or other Accidents were to be expected
below ; while no other habitable World was
dream'd of than this Globe of Earth ; no other
Animals once conjectur'd at, beſides thoſe on
the face thereof ; while Mankind was look'd on

| as


F


———


Of the Moſaick Creation,


25 the ſo'z Lord of the Creation, and Him for
whoſe ſake all other Creatures in the World
were made; and while 'twas commonly grant-
ed that, as all things, the viſible Heavens and
Earth, with their intire Furnicure began with
him; fo at the Concluſion of his Succetſion, or
the period of Humane Generations here, muſt
they for ever ceaſe and be annihilated ; While
all this, I fay, was the current Philoſophy, 'ris
not very ſurprizing that the Moſaick Hiſtory we
are now upon was underſtood in the Vulgar
Senſe, and ſeem'd not wholly diſagreeable to the
preſumed Frame of Nature; and 'twas not hard
to believe, that this Earth and its Inhabitants,
in th: Opinion of the World, the main and
principal concern of all, and- that to whole uſes
every thing elſe inrirely ſerv'd , had the princi-
pal care beſtow'd upon it, both in its Original
Creation, and its ſubſcquene Changes and Revo-
lutions. ;

Bue tho” ſuch a Scheme, and ſuch an Appre-
henſion were paſſable enough in the days of our
Forefathers; 'tis by no means ſo now. Thoſe
greater degrees of Knowledge which the Provi-
dence of God has in this Age afforded us, make
ſuch Opinions intolerable in the preſent, which
were not fo in the paſt Centuries. 'Tis now evi-
dent, That every one of the Planets, as well as
that on which we live, muſt have a right in its

roportion to ſhare in the care of Heaven, and

d therefore in all probability a ffiitable ſpace
or number of Days allow'd to its proper Forma-
tion ; much what the ſame CE of Parts,
Digeſtions, and Collections, being no doubt to
be ſuppos'd in the Original Formation of any
other, as in that particular Planet, with which
Moſes was concern'd. And if one or two on ac-
count


60


- and bur one in the Formation 0


Of the Moſaick Creation. »


count of their ſmallneſs , might be finiſh'd in
leſs ; the reſt on account of their bigneſs, from
a parity of Reaſon, would take up much more
than that ſix days time which was ſpent .in our
Earth's Formation.

And let the Reader judge, if it be fo impoſſ-
ble ro reduce the Planets alone within the fourth
days Work, how much more fo it will be (in
caſe we allow degrees of impoſlibilities) to re-
duce thither that vaſt noble and uſeful Body the
Fountain of our Light and Heat, the Sun ; and
ſtill in a prodigious degree more ſo, to include
the immenſe and numberleſs Syſtems of che fixt
Stars; among whom when the Sun 1s but one,


" and perhaps no bigger than the reſt ; (and con-


ſequently to have in reaſon but an- equal portion
of time with them allotted for its Origination)
It muſt, tho' above Sixty thouſand times as big as
the Earth, while the Earth takes up four intire
ones, be thruſt into the Corner of a ſingle Day ;
Corner , did I fay? rather Minute , nay, Mo-
ment of a Day; and 'tis uncertain whether even
that pittance of time can fairly and ſeparately
be allow'd to it. So that one, need not fear to
allert,T hat he who ſhould affirni the Divine Power
to have ſpent four entire Days in the Formation
of a Hy or Worm, nay, of _—— Plant or Herb
the Terraqueous

Globe with all its Parts, Regions, and Furniture,
would be lefs unreaſonable than ſome Expoſitors
now.are, and more obſerve Decorum , Fitneſs,
Agreement, and Proportion, than they do in the
Vulgar Interpretations of the Me/aick Creation.
And I need not be afraid to call all that Aſtrono-
my and Philoſophy are Maſters of, to atteſt the
fairneſs of ſuch a Compariſon. And can any one
who is ſenſible of chis, and entertains no other than
great


Of the Molaick Creation.


great and worthy Thoughts of his Alwiſe Crea-
ror, embrace ſo fond and fo ſtrange an Opinion?

And if the Reader will pardon a ſhort Digreſ-
ſion, and give me leave to ſpeak a great Truth on
this occaſion, I cannot but obſerve, That 'tis not
the genuine Contents of the Holy Books them-
ſelves, but ſuch unwary Interpretations of them
as theſe, which have mainly contributed to their
contempt, and been bur too Inſtrumental to make
'em appear Abſurd and Irrational to the Free
Reaſon of Mankind. For when Men found
that the Scriptures , according to the Univerſal
as their plaineſt reaſon could not think compati-
ble to a Wiſe Man, much lefs to the All-wiſe
God ; they were under a ſhrewd Temptation of
thinking very meanly of the Bible ir ſelf, and by
degrees of rejecting it, and therewith all Divine
Revelation to the Sons of Men. How fatally
this Malady hath ſpread, of late eſpecially, I need
not ſay ; and tho' I _— believe the main ſtroke
or ſtep, as to the generality, be Vicious Diſpoſi-
tions and a Debauched Temper, yet how far fuch
Ill-contriv'd, Unskilful, and Unphiloſophical In-
terpretations,or rather Miſrepreſentations of Scrip-
eure, particularly relating tothe Material World of
which weare now ſpeaking, may have contributed
to ſo fatal and pernicious an effect, deſcrves the
moſt ſerious and ſober conſideration.

This Miſchief is not to be remedicd , nor the
Veneration due to the Sacred Volumes retriev'd
by an obſtinate maintaining ſuch ſtrange opini-
ons as thoſe here vefer'd to, by patromzing the
ſame wich Divine Authority , and then making
vehement Invectives againſt ſuch ( as many un-
$kilful, yet good men, are ready to do) whoſe on-
ly fault is this that they can no more be yr ro
believe


Of the Moſaick Creation,


believe what is plainly unworthy of, and unſuit-
able ro the Divine Pertections, than what is
evidently contradictory to Divine Revelation.
Wiſe Men would rather ſet themſelves carcfully
to compare Nature with Scripture , and make a
free Enquiry into the certain Phanwmena of the
one, and the genuin Senfe of the other ; which
if Expoſitors would do , 'twere not hard to de-
monſtrate in ſeveral ſuch caſes, that che latter is
ſo far from oppoling the truths deducible from the
former , or the common notions of Mankind,
that *tis in the greateſt harmony therewith ; and
in thoſe caſes ( where the thing mention'd is
within the ſphere of human Knowledge ) no lefs
accountable to the reaſon, than cnforc'd on the
belief of Mankind. And I perſuade my ſelf if
there were a carcful colle&tion made of the An-
cient knots and difficulcies in the ſeveral parts of
the Bible, with relation to ſuch points as we are
upon , or any others of a different nature'; and
how very many of them, as preludes and pledges
of the reſt, are now intirely clear'd, or might ea-
fily be ſo ; ir would more contribute to the re-
covery of the Ancient Honour, and due Eſteem
of the Sacred Scriptures, than all the moſt Zea-
lous and general Harangues from ſome popular
Topicks, either for them, or againſt their -Con-
temners, the looſe Dez#ts and pretended Socinians
of this Age. For my own part I cannot but pro-
feſs, that tho* I be very nice and tender in the
reaſonableneſs of my Faich , and deſirous ro ad-
mit nothing but what agrees to the Divine Actri-
butes , the common notions of our Souls, and
the Phanomena of Nature ; yet upon an Imparrtial
Enquiry into ſome of the moſt perplexing dithcul-
ries occurring there , I have obtain'd fo great a
Meaſure of ſatisfaction about them , that my

; ſcruples


Of the Moſaick Creation,


ſcruples now intirely ceaſe, and I cannot doube
cicher of the Truth or Divine Authority of the


Scri I do not mean, that all the difficulties
ave 1n "T_T vaniſh'd and ly clear'd to
me tis whar-is ſcarce tobe hop'd for in this


World : But I have fo frequently mer with fewer
difficulties in the conſideration of -the Books
themſelves, than inthe common Interpretations,
' and. thoſe very Comments which ought to af-
ſoil 'em: And in fo many, and thoſs moſt re-
markable Points of all, have met with ſuch clear
and plenary, tho' unexpected fatisfation, that I
have all imaginable reaſon to believe the reſt
equally capable of the ſame, and to remain con-
ſtant in this aſſurance, That 'tis the ignorant or
fooliſh Expoſitions of Men, not the natural and
genuine Senſe of the Words chemſelves,that makes
us imagine Scripture, Reaſon, andthe Nature of
Things irreconcileable or contradictory to one a-
nother. And I hope the inſtances he will meet with
in the following Theory, will go a great way to
perſuade the unbyals'd Reader of the ſame Truth;
and toconvince him,that greater ſatisfaction is to
be look'd for from the view of God's own Books
of Nature and Scripture, than thoſe of any Men
whatſoever. Whatever incompetent Judges may
fay, nothing will ſo much tend co the vindication
and honour of reveal'd Religion, as free enqui-
ries into, and a ſolid acquaintance with, (not in-
ious and precarious Hy es, but) true and
emonſtrable principles of Philoſophy, with the
Hiſtory of Nature, and with ſuch ancient Tra-
ditions as in all probabilicy were deriv'd from
Noab, and by him from the more Ancient Fa-
thers of the World. From which mediums, what
ſurprizing and unhop'd for light may be given to
ſome famous portions of the Holy Scriptures, the
following


63


64


Of the Moſaick Creation,


following Pages will, *tis hop'd, afford ſome con-
vincing Inſtances, and prove ſufficient to take
away mens ungrounded Fears and Apprehenſfions
in ſuch matters : And, by the Divine Blefling,
appear a feaſonable Actteſtation ro the Certainty
and Authority of thoſe Lvely Oracles on: which


. our Happineſs in this, and the next World does


fo vaſtly depend. But I muſt leave this digreflion,
and proceed , |


VI. The Vulgar Scheme of the Moſarck Crea-
tion, beſides the difproportion as to time, re-
preſents all things from firſt co laſt ſo diſorderly,
confuſediy, and unphiloſophically, that 'ris in-
tirely difagreeable to the Wiſdom and Perfection
of God.

And here I might juſtly Appeal to the Con-
ſcience of every careful Reader, even tho' his
Knowledge of the true Syſtem of the World
were not great, whether the vulgar account has
not ever ſeem'd ſtrange and ſurprizing to him?
But if he were one Philoſophically _—_— and
allow'd himſelf a free conſideration of it ; whe-
ther it has not ever been the moſt perplexing
thing to his thoughts that could be unagin'd :
*Tis well known how far this matter has been
carried by Wiſe and Good Men; even to the
taking away the literal, and the reſolving the
whole into a Popular Moral or Parabolick ſenſe:
And under what notion this Hiſtory ;on the ſame
account has appear'd to others, of no leſs free,
but lefs Religious Diſpoſitions and TRI [
need not ſay : What is indeed matter of doubr
and perplexity to pious men, being unqueſtion-
ably to the Looſe and Profane, the Subject of
Mirth and Drollery, and the ſure encourage-
ment to Atheiſm and Impicty. Burt I ſhall nor
COntent


Of the Moſaick Creation.


the irregular and unbecoming procedure in the
vulgar e of the Creation, as are plainly
pe


(1.) Bodies Alike in Nature have here an un-
like Original.

(2.) Bodies Unlike in Nature have a like Ori-
inal. |

q (3.) Bodies moſt conſiderable in themſelves,
have the moſt inconſiderable accounts given of
them.

(4.) No Bodies but the Earth have either time
for, or particulars of, the formation of the ſeve-
ral parts aflign'd.

(5.) The Light appears before its Cauſe and
Fountain the Sun was made.

(6.) The Excavation of the Channel of the
Ocean, and the Elevation of the Mountains i
annatural and indecent. Of each of which
ſhall ſay bur a word or two, and then as brigfly
argue from them.


(1.) Bodies Alike in nature, have an unlike
Original. Our Earth is one of the Planets, and
in all reaſon, belonging to their formation ;
is ſhe the Subject of the Second, Third, Fifth,
and Sixth days works, while the reſt are inclu-
ded in the Fourth Day.

(2.) Bodies Unlike in nature have a like Ori-
ginal. - The Sun, a glorious Body of Light,
with his Fellows the fixe Stars, are join'd in the
fourth day with the Opake and Dark Globes of


the Plancts,
F (3.) Bodies


65


66


Of the Molaick Creation.
; (4.) Bodies moſt conſiderable in - themſelves,
inconſiderab


have the moſ? i te accounts given of
them. This is very obvious in that mighty adoe
about our poor, Earth, while the vaſtly greater
and nobler Bodies of the Sun and Stars are
ſcarce taken any notice of. And how di
portionate ſuch a procedure is, the compariſon
already made of the Earth on one ſide, with the
reſt of the World on the other, does more than
ſufficiently demonſtrate.

(4.) No Bodies but the Earth have, either
time for, or particulars of, the formation. of the
ſeveral parts affign'd. For when four days are
wholly taken up with the mp relating to
our Earth ; the diviſion of its Aerial from its
ng Waters; the diſtinguiſhing the latter
from the dry Land, and draining 'em into the
Channels of the Seas ; the growth of Plants ;
generation of Fiſh,Fow!, and Terreſtrial Animals;
and at laſt the Creation of Man, with ſeveral
circumſtances relating to him, and the other
Creatures ; not a ſyllable as to the particulars of
the reſt of the World. Light is only command-
ed to ſhine on the : Firſt Day ; and the Heavenly
Bodies made on the Fourth, and there's all, as
ro themſelves, which occurs here.

(5+) The Light appears before the Creation
of the Sun, from whence it is deriv'd : That be-
ing the Work of the Firſt, This of the Fourth
Day. Which how Philoſophical and Account-
able 'tis, let the Reader judge.

(6.) The Excavation of” the Channel of the
Ogean, and the Elevation of the Mountains, is
unnatural and indecent. For when the Earth
was at firſt even, and cover'd with Waters, Ex-
paſtors imagine, that"God, as it were, digg'd a
rot Channel for the Ocean, and heav'd ny

the


Of the Molaick Creation.


the Earth, re 7 nds it on all parts of the Globe,
to make the ntains. Which how indecene
it is, I had rather leave to the judgment of the
Reader, than ſtand here tor exaggerate; eſpe-
cially where the naked repreſentation of the thing


it elf is a ſufficient ex thereof to free


Thefe obvious Remarks on the vulgar Scheme
of the Mofaick Creation (to omit the paſling by
of the intire inviſible World, whether within or
without the ſurface of the Earth, whether corpo-
real or ſpiritual ) are, I think, ſufficient demon»
ſtrations that 'tis a very diſtant one from the true
nature of things ; and ſuch as is both unworthy
of the Writer and Author of the Sacred Hiſtory.
Whoever will take the pains carefully to:confider
the Syſtem of Nature, and compare it with theſe
Remarks, and the common Opinion of the pro-
per Creation of all things im the ſix Days Works,
will nor, I believe, be at a loſs for Argumenes to
over-turn the old, and to prove that a new Theory
isto be enquir'd —— a narrower World to be
expected in the Firſt Chapter of Geneſs, than has
generally been.

Bur Before I conclude this Head, I muſt here
obſerve,that the conſideration of theſe matters has
had ſo great influence on our late moſt Excellent
Commentatgs, oa Geneſis , that tho' he keep more
ſtrialy to the,letter of Moſes than others, yer he
finds occaſion and room for theſe four great Con-
ceſlions, no leſs contrary to the vulgar, than ap-
proaching. to the preſent Account of the Hiſtory
of the Creation.


(1.) He is willing to allow thar Aves meddles
not with the intire Univerſe, but with the Pla-
netary Syltem only, Er 2 (2.) He


+


67


68


Of the Moſaick Creation.


(2.) He allows the: Creation of the World to
have beer over before the fix Days Work begins.

(3.) He grants the ſame fix Days Works to be
the regular and orderly reduction of a confuſed
Chaos into a habitable World , without any
ſtrange Miracles in every part.

(4.) He _— that for a conſiderable time
before the ſix Days Work began, there were ſuch
preparatory agitations, fermentations and ſepara-
tions or conjun&tions of parts, as diſpoſed the
whole to fall ino the ſucceeding method, and
introduce the ſix Days ' Productions follow-
ing.


Which Conceſſions of ſo great a Man and
excellent a- Commentator , as they argue his
ſenſe of the necefflity of receding from the
vulgar Hypotheſis , 'fo they, I confeſs , leſſen
and diminiſh the difficulnes in this Hiſtory.
Leſſen, I ſay, and diminiſh; not take them
away. For beſides the want of any foundation
in Scripture , as far as I ſee , for the diſtinRion -
berween the fixt Stars and Planets ; the Argu-
ments I have all along urged, reach , and are
fram'd with regard to this limited Hypotheſis
alſo; and, with thoſe yer to come , are I think
more than ſufficient to my purpoſe ſtill , and
will demonſtrate the unaccormtablenefs of the
Hiſtory of the Creation even” on, this , tho'
much more on the+ commen”' Interpretati-

it 'Y 6


on.


VII. -The Moſaick Creation does not extend
beyond this Earth, becauſe the alone final
cauſe of all therein contained, is the advan-


tage of Mankind the Inhabitant thereof.


Now


Of the Mofaick Creation,
Now- that the final: cauſe of all the particu-


lars mention'd in the Hiſtory before us, is here
rightly allign'd, is not only viſible in almoſt
every verſe of it , and in the places of Scrip-
eure afterwards referring to the ſame thing ; but
commonly acknowledg'd , nay contended for ,
by the Patrons of the vulgar account: So that
I ſhall here take ic for granted. But then as to
the conſequence , that therefore the Creation
is no farther to be extended, or at leaſt nor
ſo far as here it muſt otherwiſe be, ro the Sun
and Planets ; nay with the moſt, to the innu-
merable Syſtems of the fix'd Stars ; 'ris to me
ſo natural and neceſſary, that methinks 'tis
perfectly needleſs to go about the proof of ir.
That fo vaſt and noble a Syſtem , conliſtin

of ſo many, fo remote, ſo different , and fo
glorious Bodies , ſhould be made only for the
uſe of Man, is ſo wild a Fancy, that it de-


ſerves any other treatment ſooner than a ſerious


confutation : And one may better think filent-
ly with, ones ſelf, than with due deference
and decency ſpeak, what naturally ariſes in ones
Mind on this occaſion. '

If *tis an inſtance of, or conſiſtent with the
Divine Wiſdom, to make thouſands of glorious
Bodies for the ſole uſe of a few fallen and rebellious
Creatures, which were to live for a little while
ypon one of rhe moſt inconſiderable of them !
To create an innumerable multitude of Suns and
Planets , and place them at prodigious diſtances
from us and from one another, (the greateſt
part of which were never ſeen till the lace in-
vention of the Teleſcope ; and of ſuch as are
viſible, the Sun excepted, the ſingle Moon, as
deſpicable a Body as. it is in compariſon to the

F 3 moſt


Of the Mofaick Creation,


moſt of the others, is much more beneficial to us
than they all pur together) for the meer con-
venienee of one little Earth! If 'ris Wiſe and
Ratiqnalto make the Sun more than Sixty thou-
ſand times as big as that Globe it was to ſerve ,
only that it might be plac'd above Fifry millions
of Miles off: ( for in a nearer poſition it would
' have ſcarch'd and burnt , inſtead of warm'd
and invigorated the Earth ) when a ſmall Fiery
Ball plac'd near us would have done as well !
To make a vaſt number of Planets, ( every
way as capable of Creatures of their own )
only for the ſake of us on Earth ; that we might
in the night time view and calculate their po-
ſitions and motions ! To place five ſecondary
Planets about Satwn , and four about TFupiter ,
that after for more than Five thouſand years
no one had dream'd of. their Exiſtence', a few
Aſtronomers might , with their Glaſſes , peep
at them, and obferve their periods! To ap-
point the orbit of one of the primary Planets
( Mercury) fo near the Sun, that not one in a
hundred ever gets a diſtin view of him all
his Life! To move the Comets in orbits fo ex-
tremely large and elliptical or oblong , that b

their diftance from the Planetary Regions mo

part of cach revolution, they ſhould be fo
little 0! 4rvable , that the World were juft end-
ing bctore they could be known to be other
than Mailes of Vapours foon conjoin'd , and
as ſoon, diſlipated again , and now not viſible
the hugdredch or perhaps thoufandth part of
their periods ! To make all this immenſe frame
of the Heavenly Syſtems ; fo Glorious , Au-
guſt , and Magnificent, and fo curing of
our Contemplation ; and yet withal to frame


our


-
*
:


Of the Moſaick Creation,


our Eyes and Senſations in that manner , as
to be uncapable to diſcern or imagine any thing
thereof in compariſon ! fo that had not Aſtro-
nomical obſervation rectify'd our miſtakes , we
muſt have cy_ the whole World nor near
ſo big as one of its leaſt bodies really is; and
all this without any farther proſpe& , or nobler
deſign than the ſingle Uſe and Advantage of
Mankind ! 1f, I ſay, all this be the effect of In-
effable Wiſdom and Contrivance , and worthy
to be believed of the All-wife God ; 'tis ſcarce
_ to. ſuppoſe , in the Material World at
eaſt , what will not be equally fo. And ſuch
ſtrange and aſtoniſhing incongruities , which
among poor Mortals would unqueſtionably argue
the moſt extravagant degree of folly, in the
Deity, Bleſſed for evermore, muſt be Argu-
ments of unbounded Perfection , and EMuxes
of Infinite Reaſon , Wiſdom, and Prudence.
Certainly one ought to be very well aſcer-
tain'd of the ſenſe of Scripture , before from
thence one venture to aſlert ſuch unreaſonable
opinions. R
Nay even tho” the Senſe of Scripture ſeem'd
exceeding favourable to any Scheme of this Na-


. ture , yet in that caſe, a _— Perſon


would chuſe rather honeſtly co own his Igno-
rance , and confeſs he did not underſtand the
matter, than be poſitive in that which is fo
plainly repugnant to the Divine Perfe&tions.

And this ( to digreſs little ) is methinks the
only ſafe and rational way of procedure in thoſe
Caſes, where we cannot reconcile the Divine
Attributes , the Pheanomenes of the World, or
the Reaſon of our own Minds, to the Revealed
Word of God, wiz. bn hs firſt place carefully

4 to


Of the Moſaick Creation.


to conſider the Texts concern'd , and whether
they are not — : if on ſuch a conſide-
ration we cannot them to be fo , and that
without a forc'd , unnatural and violent ſenſe
be put upon plain words , the difficulties ſtill ap-
oe inſuperable; *tis then our Duty and our

iſdom to imitate the Jews in that admirable
and pious Proverb in theſe caſes , Cm Elias we-
merit, ſolver Nodes. To fit down and reſt fſa-
tished with this expectation , That when the
Divine Wiſdom ſees it a fit time, all will be
aſſoil'd; and every one of the Knots of Scrip-
”. ture and of Providence unty'd. To ſtay with
patience for thoſe 1 x842934 peculiar ſeaſons ,
which with regard both to che improvement of
Knowledge , and unvailing of Myſteries , no
leſs chan the fulfilling Decrees, the Father has
put im bis own power. And as the Old Fews
ſhould in vain have attempred the intire under-
flanding of their own Ceremonial Law rill the
iNG- ares, the coming of Chriſt ; fo I be-
lieve we muſt not expect the clearing of every
Text of Scripture . and of every ſecret of Pro-
vidence , till the 10@- xeve3s , rhe time appointed
of the Father. Till then we ought not , where
inſuperable difficulties occur, by a bold deter-
mination to run counter to God , either in his -
Word, whether engraven on our Minds, or
written in the Bible , or his Works viſible in
the World. ,

'Tis hard to ſay whether thoſe diſhonour God
moſt who embrace Doctrines, ſuppos'd dedu-
cible from Scriprure , tho* plainly abſurd and
unreafonable in themſc!ves; or thoſe who ven-
rure to deny or at lealt wreſt and prevaricate
with the obvious meaning of ſuch Texts whence


thoſe


Of the Moſaick Creation,


thoſe Dodtrines us'd to be infer'd. Both theſe.


methods of procedure are bold and dangerous;
Effects of our own Pride,and too high an pinion
of our proper apprehenſions and abilities, and
of ſad .confequence to our ſelves, to others ,
and to Divine Revelation. There is a third or
middle way , which , tho' an inſtance of real
ſelf-denial, we both may and ought to take.
Let God be true, but every man a liar. Our Un-
derſtandings are finite , our Capacities ſmall ,
our Sphere of Knowledge not great. We de-
pend on God Almighty as to what we know,
as well as what we have, or what we are. *Tis
poſſible ir may not yet be the proper ſeaſon for
unravelling the Myſtery , and fo the requiſite
helps not yet afforded ; our own unskilfulneſs
or prejudices ; ſome falſe notions or precarious
Hypotheſes we have embrac'd ; our miſunder-
ſtanding the nature of the Scripture Stile; a
miſtake of a Copy; the ignorance of the va-
rious ſtages and periods of the World ro which
the particulars belong ; with many other ſuch
circumſtances, may juſtly be ſuppoſed the ovc-
caſions of our diffhcultics , withour calling in
queſtion either the truch of our humane facul-
nes, the Attributes of God , the Phenomena of
Nature, or the genuine ſenſe of the Holy
Scriptures. And truly were 1 asked in ſuch a
caſe how I could fatisfie my felf , or reſolve the
int; I could not more properly anſwer than
yalluding to. the Fexwnſb Proverb before-men-
tion'd ; and alledging that , Cim Meſſias wene-
rit , Solyet Nodum ; till which time I might de-

ſireleave to defer my farther anſwer.
And here from a general View of what has
been ſaid on theſe three laſt Arguments, we can-
nor


-


73


Rom. iik.4.


Of the Molaick Creation.


not but obſerve, into what Erroneous Extremes
Good Men have been betray 'd,with relation toſe-
veral main difficulties occurring in the Sacred
Writings : While, from a profound reſped tothe
revealed Word of God , the moſt were wi
to lay aſide che uſe of their own Reaſon ;
others from a no leſs veneration for the Divine
Attributes, and regard to thoſe common no-
tions which God had implanted in their Souls ,
, were willing to indulge too great a liberty in
the Interpretation of Scripture. The former ,
being generally Pious. and Devout Souls , but
little vers'd in contemplation , or the improve-
ments of natural knowledge, were dispos'd to
receive all that a Vulgar and Religious, tho”
lefs Wary and Prudent Expoſition, ſhould re-
commend to their Affent. The latter having
added to their Picty and Vertue , a careful en-
quiry into Nature, and a freer exerciſe of
their Humane Faculties, and obſerving how hea-
vy imputations ſome common Interpretations
laid on the Divine Majeſty , how dilagreeable
they were to External Nature , as well as the
Reaſon of Mankind ; were carried too far on
the other hand ; and when the latter were ſe-
cur'd , were not proportionably folicitous about
the former : I mean, fo that nothing but what
Reaſon, the Attributes of God, and the Syſtem
of the World allow'd, were admitted, theſe
did not take a proportionable care that the na-
-1aq ſenſe of Scripture were equally provided
or.
What I would here further obſerve, is, the
equal Condicion and Deſerts , but the unequal
Reputation and Fate theſe two ſorts of Men
have generally met with in the Chriſtian wary
cir


Of the Moſaick Creation,


Their CharaQters to me ſeem ſo correſpondent,
and their contrary Miſtakes ſo equally wide from
Truth , equally derogatory tro the Honour of
God, and yet equally proceeding from a Religi-
ous Principle, a deſire to ſecure the Intereſt of
Divine Revelation ; that to me they ſeem to de-
ſerve the ſame Reſpet and Commendation for
their ſincere Endeavours, and pious Intentions ;
the ſame Pity and Pardon for their Errors ar.d
Miſtakes. But it has happen'd much otherwile;
for by reaſon of the lictle Leiſure and Avilities
of the generality of Teachers to cultivate their
own Reaſon, or make any ſuccesful enquiries
into the Natural World; the former fort bein
in themſelves moſt numerous, and as mu
needs happen , having the moſt part of Chriſti.
an People on their ſide, did with Zeal and Ear-
neſtneſs decry the latter; and tcho' themſelves on
one ſide did as highly Diſhonour the Sacred Ora-
cles, as the other on the oppoſite, vet they vehe-
mently laid bat Imputarion on the latter , and
decry'd them as ſecrer Underminers of that
Word of God they pretended more rationally to
explain. "Twere eaſy to. give Examples in this
e, but I ſhall content my ſelf with one con-
cerning thoſe very Hiſtories of the Creation and
Deluge, which I am to explain in the following


"Tis well known what t, and hicherto in-
ſuperable Difficulties theſe Hiſtories have involv'd
in them, to the general view of Mankind; and
how much ſtill greater , and ſtill more inſupera-
ble choſe Difficulties appear'd to Philoſophick En-
quirer's, who came more nicely to conſider them,
and compare what was afferted in the Holy
Scriptures, with the true Frame and ___ G

xterna


-”


726


Of the Moſaick Creation,


External Nature. The conſideration of theſe
things ſo affeted a great and good Man, thac
he reſolv'd on a noble Attempt, and undertook


-to clear thoſe Points, and ſhew that the rempo-


rary Origin of the World from a Chaos, and a
Univ Deluge , were rational and account-
able Theorems, and thereby take away that Blot
and Obſtacle , which the ſeeming impoſlibilicy
of theſe things laid in the way of ill-diſpoſed
Perſons. In which matters , he *mploy'd his
ytmoſt kill in the beſt Syſtem of Philoſophy
then known in the World; his moſt diligent
reſearches into the ſacred and prophane Ac-
counts relating to thoſe anciently more known
Phenomena of Nature , together with ſuch other
helps as his own excellent Abilities could afford
him ; and that as to ſeveral main and principal
ſtrokes, to very great SatisfaQtion, and to the very
remarkable Ill ration of the Holy Scriptures.
Bur in the Proſecution of this Scheme, being ſo
vaſt, ſo noble, ſo uniform, ſo coherent, and.
withal, fo new and fſurprizing , it at laſt ap»
pear'd that ſuch his Theory would not in ſeve-
ral Particulars accord with the letter of Scri
ture. This unhappy diſlonancy the Theorilt
was ſoon ſenſible of, and no doubt not a little
concern'd about. In which ſtreight, ſeeing no
poflible way of ſecuring the main Points with-
out ſo unpleaſing a Concellion ; inſtead of re-
ſolving to reſt ſatisfied in the natural Senſe of
Scripture, and acquieſcing in the Divine Reve-
lation , cill farther means of clearing the whole
ſhould offer themſelves, which I think is a good
Man's Duty in ſuch caſes, he ventur'd to ſuppoſe
that the Sacred Books were not always to be
fo literally and naturally underſtogd, as was ge
| nerally


-


Of the Moſaick Creation.


nerally believ'd hicherto. He alledg'd, That
conſigering the mean Capacities of the Fews,
which were not capable of ſuch Points of Phi-
loſophick Truths, conſidering the moſt ancient
way of conveying ( or rather of concealing )
ſublime Theorems , by Parables, Fables, and
Hieroglyphicks ; conſidering the Scripture Stile
in ſome other caſes, very much different from
the preſent plain and explicit way of Diſcourſe,
and nearer a-kin to that moſt ancient Method;
conſidering the main end of the Holy Writings,
the benefit of the Moral World, ſeem'd not to
require a fſtrit adherence to truth in every
circumſtance relating to the Natural ; nay, ra-
ther enforc'd a receeding from it in ſome caſes;
conſidering, laſtly, That all Ages had in vain
endeavoured to clear theſe Points according to
the ſtritneſs of the moſt obvious Senſe , and
that the greater Improvements in Philoſophy
ſeem'd bur to render them ſtill more unaccount-
able ; conſidering , I fay, all theſe things, He
ſuppos'd that the Holy Writers only ſecur'd the
Fundamental and General Verities, involving the
reſt under, and explaining the whole by a way
of ſpeaking, which was Myſtical and Mytholo-
gical ; rather popular than true, and fitted
more to the needs of Men, than to the reality
of Things. This is,. I think, a fair and full Ac-
count of the Opinion, and a genuine Explicati-
on of the occation of this unhappy Slip of our
late Excellent Theoriſt ; and fuch an one I
acknowledpe 'tis, as in it elf, has no folid or
neceſſary Foundation, is of ill conſequence to
the Authority of the Holy Scriptures, and dif-
honourable both to their Penmen , and chiefly

to


”7”


78


Of the Molaick Creation.
to theic Principal Indicer, the Bleſſed Spirit of


In which Cenfure, if the Learned Author
think me too free, or too ſevere, he will, I
hope, ſee reaſon to excuſe, and not to be dil-
pleas'd with me, when I have own d, as I muſt

do, That is accuſing him , I condemn
my ſelf, for I my ſelf, in great meaſure, bave thought
the things. For I cannot but with t
Theorilt » That = — = ms
V Expofitions were fo t;

_— aſcrib's to by them; the true
Syſtem of the World did ſo diſagree , and in-
creaſe the*Scruples ; the main Hiſtories them-


ſelves d fo a to be any other
way Grd, Several of the 7 ln. ch gi-
ven by the Theoriſt were in the main ſo inge-
nious, ſo probable, and fo agreeable to Ancient
Tradition, upon a curſory ideration ; and
the Arguments before-mention'd ſeem'd ro me
fo conliderable, that 'twas not eafy for me to
all Aﬀſeat to thac very Concluſion, which
yet on farther Enquiries and Diſcoveries, I
think not unworthy of the foregoing Cenſure.
And I ſhould _— fignal happineds ,
if, as «bat Theory was ſo inſtrumental in. draw-
ing me into the foremention'd Miſtake ; fo
this might be fortunate enough to perſwade
the Author of that, of the oppoſite Verity, in
which the Diſcoveries it contains have fully
ſettled my own Mind, and are, I think, ſuth-
cient in themſelves to ſertle the minds of 0-
thers. |
But to wave theſe too ambitious Expectati-
ons, I cannot but ſay ſo much in behalf of that
Learned Theoriſt, 'That as he juſtly deſerves the
higheſt


- Of the Moſaick Creation,


higheſt Commendations for ſo generous and
worthy an Attempt; for the great Illuſtration
he has given thoſe Hiſtories from the moſt An-
cient Traditionary Learning ; and the Light af-
forded to the Holy Scriptures in ſeveral, and
thoſe very confiderable Points : So he has, I
think , reafon to expeR an eaſy Pardon where
he was not able to do the fame; ially ,
when not only Pardon , but the free Praiſe.
_—_— on thoſe , _——_—_
erv'd, equally have expos'd the Honour of God,
"and CO net from che Reputation of
the Sacred Writings by their unwary and un-
Skilful Interpretations. A good Man, who to
the higheſt Veneration for the Perfections of the
Divine 'Nature, has joyn'd a careful Enquiry in;
to the Frame of the World, and a free, but
modeſt uſe of thoſe Faculties God has given
him ; and has withal exactly conſider'd the un-
doubted evidence for the Divine Authority of
the Scripture ; ought to be, and will be as ten-
der of believing a Senfe which is contrary to
his innate Notions, to the Perfections of God,
and the certain Obſervations of Nature, as of
that which puts a force upon the Words them-
ſelves, and renders them meerly Popular and
Mythological. And by conſequence either thofe
who fo Cocnencly and zealouſly do the former,
are to be, condemn'd, which yet the Chriſtian
World has been far from doing ; or thoſe who
have been forc'd upon the latter, ought to eſcape
any greater Severity, For my own part, as in
ſuch difficult Caſes, I cafily paſs over the Mi-
ſtakes, and value the Truths diſcover'd by an)
well-diſpo;'d Perſons ; which is but a due Debt
owing from one fallible Creature to ano-

: ther:


79


Of the Moſaick Creation.


ther : So I humbly bleſs God, the Author and
Giver of all good things, for that Light he has
afforded me ( and which, by the Divine Blef-
ſing, I hope the following Pages will afford the
Reader ) in theſe matters ; by which I am con-
vinc'd of the no-neceſlity oppoſing the lueral
to the true; the Obvious and Natural, to the
Rational and Philoſophick Interpretations of the
Holy Scriptures; and ſhall chearfully wait for
that happy time , - when all Doubts being re-
mov'd, and all Objections prevented by the
Improvement of our Knowledge, and the Con-
duc of the Divine Providence, Reaſon 4nd Re-
velation , ſhall reci lly bear Witneſs to”,
and embrace each other; when no one ſhall be
able to pretend to the one, but he who is equal-
ly acquainted and fatisfied with the other; and
the whole reaſonable Creation ſhall unite their
Heaits and Tongues in Hymns to God, AU thy
Commandments are faithful. Thy Statutes ave rig

rejoicing the beart, Thy Fudgments, O Lord, are


W. owe and righteous altogether. Righteous art thou, O


Lord, and juſt are thy judgments, Great and mar-


| wellous are thy works, O Lord God Almighty ! Fuſt


and true are thy ways, O King of Saints ! But
to return from this Digreflion , and to pro-
ceed.


VIII. I prove the Meſaick Creation extends no
farther than our Earth, and is of no other Na-
ture than is aflign'd here; becauſe neither the In-
tentions of the Author require, nor the Capaci-
tics of the People could bear eicher a ſtritly Phi-
loſuphical, or a truly Univerſai Account of the
Origin of things.


The


—= a ac aw a= FR .


Of the Moſaick Creation.


The deſigns of Moſes, the inſpired Penmat
or rather of that Bleſſed Spiric which infpir'
him, in this Hiſtory of the Creation, were not
the gratifying the Curioſity , or ſatisfying the
Philolophick Enquiries of a few elevated Minds,
but of a more general and uſeful Nature; name-
ly, To inform the Fews, and the reſt of the
World, that all the viſible Frame of Heaven and
Earth was neither exiſtent from all Eternity, nor
the reſule-of blind Chance, fatal Neceflity, nor
unaccountable Accidents,but the Workmanſhip of
God Almighty. To make them ſenſible that every
Being they. had any knowledge of, was deriv'd
from, and ſubject to that Febowab whom they
worlſhipp'd, and that in him themſelves with all
their fellow Creatures in the open Air, on the
wide Earth, or in the deep Seas, liw'd, mov'd,
and bad their Being; who therefore muſt needs
be the Governor and Ruler of them all. To
affet their Minds, by this means, with the aw-
fulleſt, Veneration for the God of Iſrael, and in-
ſpire them wich a juſt Gratitude to him for all
their joyments, who had not only created
this Earth for Mankind , and furniſh'd it with
various Creatures for their uſe, but beſide theſe
Terreſtrial, had made the very Celeſtial Bodies
ſubſervient to their Neceflities. To demonſtrate
the Original Goodneſs and Perfection of things,
and that therefore whatever was Evil muſt have
been the conſequent of Man's Fall, and not of
God's primary Introduction ; and thereby to
teach men Humility, and raiſe their abhorrence
of Sin, the cauſe of all their Miſeries. To ſhew
them che unreaſonableneſs of all ſorts of Idola-
try, or of the Worſhip of any viſible Beings ,
tho? never ſo uſeful or glorious, by aſſuring them
they were all in — the Creatures of God,


Atts xvik
28,


Bf the Moſaick Creation:


and all their. Influences, of what kind ſoever, in-
tirely deriv/d from him , and under his dif

In ſhort, the main deſign was to ſecure i-
ence to thoſe Laws he was about to deliver from
' God to them, by giving them the and
juſteſt Ldea's of their Legiſlator, the Almig hry Aſaker
of Heaven and Earth. ;

Theſe were, I ſuppoſe, the principal Reafons
of thus recording the Creation of the World,
and theſe Reaſons made a ,particular Acconnt of
the viſible Parts of this Earth, with all ics-Fur-
niture, that was obſervable and expos'd to their
daily view, neceſſary and expedient ; nay, they
enforc'd ſome kind of mention of the Heavenly
Bodies, ſo far as they were concern'd with us
below, and fo far as to ſhew, that God original-
ly created them, as well as the more ordinary
Bodies on the Face of the Earth. All- this was

' but proper and neceſſary in order to the fore-
mention'd purpoſes. But why a Natural and
Philoſophical Account of the primary Formation
of ſuch remote and different Syſtems of Bodies,
whoſe real Bigneſs, Diſtances, Natures, and Uſes,
abſtractedly conſider'd, never came into Mens
thoughts, nor were once imagin'd by them, 1
cannot ſo eaſily tell.

Eſpecially, if it be conſider'd, That the Capa-
cities of the Jews, to whom Moſes peculiarly |
wrote, were very low and mean, and their Im-
provements very ſmall, or rather none at all in
Philoſophick Matters. *'Tis not to be imagin'd
that an_.intire Agcount of. the —_ the
whole Frame of Nature (the nobleſt and moſt
ſublime Theory the higheſt Philoſopher could
exerciſe his thoughts upon ) ſhould be within |!

the reach of -the Fewiſh Apprehenſions. We do |!
not find in our Learned and Inquilitive Age, |
uch


Of the Moſaick Creation.


ſuch a ready Comprehenſion and: Reception of
Fruths in Philoſophy among the generality of
Men ; and 'tis fo lately, that an eaſy Propoſition
of the — _— — annual,rais'd a
ight* , and was V ithcultly embrac'd b

_ thoſe who call'd chemſctves ; beer
that from ſuch an inſtance we may eaſily imagine
how any natural Notions relating to the Con-
ſticution and Original of all the Bodies in the Uni-
verſe mult have been enterrain'd among the rude
and illicerate Fews, newly come from the Egyp-
tian Bondage , and deſticure of the very firſt
Elements of Natural Knowledge. Every one in
the Hiſtory of the Bible may with eaſe obſerve,
That the Abilities and Studies of the I7aelites
(as indeed *tis true of moft of them to this day)
were of another Nature and Size, than muſt
here be ſuppos'd , if we bring in all the World
into the Mo/aick Creation. If an indifferent
Stander by, who had never read the firſt of Ge-
meſis, were to judge what a fort of a zwouwemnile
were to be given to fo Ignorant and Unskiiful
a Nation; he could not with common Pru-
dence ſuppoſe either that it oughtto be perfealy
Philoſophical , or include any more than the
Senſes and Capacities of the 7ews could arrive
at, the Earth with its Appurtenances, and the
Heavens ſo far as they were plainly therewith
concern'd. Indeed, not only the Fews, bur the
generality of Mankind's Apprehenſions always
were , and ſtill are much too narrow for any
noble Diſcoveries relatiig ro Univerſal Nature;
and a Chapter about Algebra might almoſt
as ſuitably to Reaſon be recommended to them,
as an Account of the true Origination of all the
World. Nay, de fad#o, ir appears, That Moſes
was ſo far from deeming his People capable of

G 2 urider-


83


l


84


Fid. Phan.


13, infra,


Of the Moſaick Creation.


jncecſteading the intire Syſtem of Bodies re-


mote and diſtant; that *ris clear, he eſteem'd it
improper to ſay a word about the internal Con-
ſticution and Parts of our own Earth, content-
ing himſelf with what the Surface afforded, and
what unavoidably came under the notice of their -
Senſes, as is too plain to be deni'd in the Hiſtory
before us. -

And ſhall we after all this believe or imagine
that 'twas fit and proper, nay, or barel roliile,
for Moſes to give a full Account of the begin-
ning of all the World ? And impreſs a juſt, true,
and adequate Idea thereof on the Minds of the
People! I believe 'twas ſo far from it, that ſtill
after all the Accommodation to the Senſes and
Capacities of Men', which he and the other
Holy Writers uſe on ſuch occaſions 3 yet the
meer Obſervation of the Trath of things forc'd
chem ſometimes to ſpeak what the others were
not able rightly to comprehend ; and they ſeem
rather, in Natural Truths, to have gone too
high, than deſcended too low, conſidering the
groſs Ignorance of their Readers, in thoſe Mat-
ters... |
Thoſe Expreflions of Scripture concerning the
roundneſs of the World; the Earth's being found-
ed on the Seas , and eſtabliſhed on the Floods;
a Compaſs or Orb being fet on the Face of the
Deep; the ſtretching out the Earth above the
Waters, and its conſiſting out of the Water and
in the Water; of moſt of which we ſhall take
notice hereafter. Thoſe Expreflions, I fay, are
exactly accommodate to the real Conſtitution of
the Earth, as will appear in due place; but
were, *tis plain, very much miſtaken afterward.
Men generally took the Earth to be round, not


as a Sphere, but a Circle; and ſuppos'd the
Aby(s


Of the Moſaick Creation.


Abyſs, on which 'twas founded to be the Ocean,
or Great Sea; on whoſe Surface, in their Opi-
nion , it ſwam ,- and which on every lide en-
compals'd it as far as the very Virmament gare
leave, and the ends of the Heaven would per-
mit. That Continent we inhabir , was taken
for the whole World, and its Midd!c or Center,
mee by moſt to be near the place where
himſelf dwelt. The Horizon or Sea, and the
Firmament, were belicv'd to bound and termi-
nate each other. The Sun, Moon, and Stars,
were ſuppos'd at thcir deſcending below the Ho-
rizon, to be immers'd in the Sea; and at their
aſcending above it, to emerge out of it again.
How ridiculous theſe Conceits are , every one
will eaſily judge, who has but a ſmall inſight in-
to the Syſtem of the World; and how little they
are countenanc'd by the Texts before referr'd
to, *ewere eaſy to ſhew; but 'tis plain, They
were ſo apply'd, and the particulars pretty hand-
ſomely adjuſted ro Mens own Fancies, on theſe
hy eſes.

hen therefore we obſerve the Expreſſions of
Scripture about the Conſtitution of ourown Earth,
to have been ſo miſerably miſunderſtood and mif-


apply'd, we may eaſily colle& what fate any Noti- .


ons of a ſublimer Nature, concerning the Heavens,
and the whole Syſtem of Beings, muſt have un-
dergone amongſt them. If the Apoſtles in a more
Learned Age had began their Preaching with the
requiring Mens beliet to the Motion of the Earth,
the being of Antipodes, or any other ſuch Pa-
radox in Philoſophy, nay, or given them a true
and rational Scheme of the Origin of the Uni-
verſe in all its Parts, we may ſoon gueſs at the
Reception they would have met with, and at
the Succeſs of their Miniſtry. This procedure

G 3 could


TY


2 Per. itt.
4, Oc.


Of the Moſaick Creation.


could contribute nothing to their deſign, neither
could the People be made to underſtand and
believe ſuch ſtrange Notions. And as in this
caſe, every one will allow the Abſurdity of ſuch
a method, and never imagine it probable that
the Apoſtles could make uſe of it ; ſo ought
we, by only changing the Scene, to conclude,
a priori, that 'tis highly unlikely that Moſes
would take ſuch a courſe ; and that, unleſs the
words of the Hiſtory were too expreſs and plain
to be deny d, 'tis extremely improbable fo great
a Lawgiver (to go no farther) would extend his
Coſmogony beyond the ends of his Writing it,
and the Abilities of thoſe who ſhould read it;
or in other words, tis extreamly improbable that
the Moſaick Creation is of any other Nature or
Extent than the Propoſition we are upon does
allert.


IX. Laſtly, I prove the Moſaick Creation ex-
tends no farther than this Earth and its Appen-
dages , becauſe the Deluge and Conflagration ,
whoſe Boundaries are the ſame with that of the
Moſaick Creation extend no farther.

I ſhall here rake it for granted, That the limits
here aſhign'd to tie Deluge and Conflagration
are juſt; it be1ng certain as to the former, and
I think more than probable as to the latter; and
only quote a _ or two to prove the ſix Days
work to be of the very ſame, and no larger ex-
tent than thoſe are, and leave the whole to the
Judgment of the Reader. There ſhall come in the
laſt days ſcoffers walking after ther own lufts, and
ſaying , Where w the promi/e of bu coming ? for ſince
4 oq + fell aſleep, all thimgs continue as they were
from the beginning of the creation. For this they wil-
lingly are ignorant of , that by the word of God the

heavens


Of the Moſzick Creation. 8


heavens ipire of old, and the earth ftariding out of
the water and in the water , whereby the world that
then was being overflowed with water, periſhed : But
the heavens and the earth which are now, by the (ame
word are kept im ſtore, reſerved unto fire againſt the
day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly men. The
day of the Lord will come as a thigf m the night, m Verſe 10.
| the which the heavens ſhall paſs away with a great
"  moiſe, and the elements ſhall melt with fervent _
the earth alſo, and the works that are therein, ſhall
| be burnt uy. In the day of God the beavyens being on ya ;1,
| fre (bpll be diſſolved, and the elements ſhall melt 13,
| with” fervent heat. Nevertheleſs we, according to bis
promiſe, look for a new heaven, and @ new earth,
wherein dwelleth right eouſneſ;.
Thou, Lord, im tbe beginning baſt laid the foundation Heb. i.1r,
of the earth, and the beawvens are the works of thine 12,13-
ds: They ſhall periſh, but thou remameſt ; and they
all ſhall wax old as doth a garmenit 5 and as a we-
fture ſhalt thew fold them up , and they ſhall be
changed.
I have now finiſh'd all thoſe Arguments which
to me are fully ſatisfactory , and I think prove
| beyond rational contradiction , That not the
vaſt Univerſe, but the Earth alone, with its
| dependencies, are the proper ſubje& of the Six
Days Creation: And that the Moſaick Hiſtory
is not a Nice, Exact and Phi:ofophick account
of the ſeveral ſteps and operations of- the whole z
but ſuch an Hiſtorical Relation of each Muta-
tion of the Chaos , each ſucceflive day, as the
Journal of a Perſon on the Face of Earth
all that while would naturally have contained.
The ſum of all is this:


(1.) The very Words and Coherence of Mo-
(es himſelf require ſuch a Conſtruction.
G 4 (2.) The


po 0p m—— -


Of. the Moſaick Creation.


(2.) The Words of Creating , Making or
Framing things here us'd, are commonl w no
larger importance than this Propoſition allows.

(3.) _—_— z Or Heaven and -_ the
obj this Creation , are alike frequent!
uw ety to the ſublunary World , the Air _
Earth. |

(4-) The Chaos , that known fund-and ſe-
minary of the Six Days Creation , extended
no farther. 4.4") 0h

(5.) On the contrary ſuppoſition, the time
of the Creation of each Body is extremely dif-
proportionate to the work it ſelf.

(6.) On the ſame ſuppoſition there is an in-
tolerablediſorder , diſproportion , and confuſion
in the works themſelves.

(7.) The final cauſe of the fix days Creation
is the advantage of Mankind , the Inhabitant of
the Earth.

(8.) Neither the intention of the Author ,
nor the capacity of the Readers require or could
bear any other account of the origin of
. things.

(9.) Laſtly, Neither the Deluge nor Con-
flagration , whoſe extent appears commenſurate
to that of this Creation , are of any larger
'compals than is here aflign'd.


Upon this view of the whole matter give me
leave to ſay, That to make the Univerſal Frame
of Nature concern'd in the particular Fates and
'Revglutions of our Earth, is at this time of
day , to demonſtrate either very mean thoughts
of the Ends of the Divine Workmanſhip , and
of the Effects thereof in the World ; or elſe
very proud and extravagant conceits of our wn
wort


Of the Moſaick Creation:


worth and dignity ; and at beſt argues a narrow,
ignoble, and unphil ical Soul. Tis much
uch another Wiſe and Rational Notion ,- as it
would be to ſuppoſe that the whole Terraqueous
Globe, with all its parts and dependencies ,
all irs furniture and productions , was alike con-
cern'd in the Fates and Revolutions ( pardon the
exprefiions) of one ſingle Fly or Worm be-
longing to it. And we may e'en as fairly allow
the intire dependence of this ſublunary World
on the fortune of ſuch a fingle animalculum ;
That on its peeping into the World , the whoke
Earth muſt ariſe out of nothing to afford it a
reſting place ; while it was growing , and con-
tanel in its prime, all things below muſt ſpring
and flouriſh , rejoyce and look gay ; on its
decay, all things muſt put on a mournful coun-
tenance ; and on its deſtruction , Univerſal Na-
ture here beneath muſt expire together , and re-
turn to its primitive nothing. This repreſenta-
tion will, I imagine , ſeem bold and extrava-
gant. Bur 'ewill be hard to proveit ſo. And I
may appeal to Aſtronomy whether the Earth can
be ſhewn to bear as conſiderable a proportion
to the Univerſe, as ſuch a poor animalculum does
certainly bearto it.

I would not by this , or any thing elſe I have
heretofore ſaid in this Diſcourſe, be fo far mi-
ſtaken , as to be belicv'd prone to depretiate and
and debaſe Mankind ; or to put a flight on all
thoſe Works of Nature and Providence which
are ſubſervient to ir. Neither do I deny that in
ſome ſenſe all che Viſible World , Heaven and
Earth , are ordain'd for our uſe and advantage ;
I fully believe that we are the Creatures of God ,
of whom he has a tender regard , and over

whom
A


90


Luke xx.
0


Of the Moſaick Creation,


whom he exerciſes a coriſtant, a al Care
and Providence. As I look upon Souls of
Men , in cheir proper and primitive perfection ,
when they came out of their Maker's Hands,
to be no hrs Glorious , to _—
Beings , in capacities or faculties ,
in den ity or happi XY not inferior to ſome of
the Angelick ; fo I alſo moſt undoubted-
ly believe what our Saviour affirms of good mens

te hereafter, that they ſhall be 'Iatſancr,
equal to the Angels; and "Tri F Or7 Children
God himſelf. While I. am perſwaded that
the Creation of Man was not effected without
the concurrence and joint conſultation of the -
Bleffed Trinity ; Nor his Redemption without
the Acceptance of the. Father , the Sacrifice
and Death of the Son in his Humane Nature ;
and the SanRtification and Operation of the Ho-
ly Spirit. While F am perſwaded that the Di-
vine A5ſG Ocdrywr@- has ever ſince the Fall of
Hidam been follicitous about our Reconciliation to
God, and made it his conſtant buſineſs , even
before as well as ſince his Incarnation, to me+
diate for us , and take care of our eternal hap-
pineſs. While I believe that by the new Cove-
nant Good Men, even in this Imperfe&t ſtate,
ace eſteem'd Heirs of God , joint-Heirs with
Chriſt, and denominated the Brethren and
Friends of their Glorious Redeemer. While I
do not doubt but our Humane Nature is now ,
inthe Perſon of our Bleſſed Saviour, in Heaven,
and there on account of the Hypoſtatical Union
with the Eternal Aiſ&; and as a reward of
that Obedience and Suffering, it underwent for
us\on Earth, advanc'd above the moſt exalted '
Intelletual Orders, at the Right Hand of the
Majeſty


Of the Moſaick Creation,


Majeſty on High. While I expe the ſame Per-
ſon in the Glory of the Father, coming to
Judge the World in Righteouſneſs; and Man-
kind , after that final doom, to be partaker of
everlaſting Joy or Miſery according to their be-
haviour here on Earth. While, I fay, I believe
all this , as I moſt ſincerely do , I can be under
no temptation of looking with contempt upon ,
or of entertaining a mean opinion of Mankind ,
or of thoſe Syſtems of Nature and Providence
relating to it. Yet all this notwithſtanding , L
think that Opinion I am now expoſing, deſerves
- other Character than I have before given
"of it.

Tho' I look upon Mankind as one Species of
very Noble and Glorious Creatures , yet I ſup-
pole it but One, and that there may be Millions
of others at the leaſt not inferior wo him. Tho' I
believe Humane Naturz , when Innocent and
Perfect , at that height of Purity and Felicity
which it once had, and by the Chriſtian Diſpen-
ſation may be again adranc'd to , as fo conſi-
derable and exalted a Species of Beings ; yet with-
al I look upon it at preſent as under a very diffe-
rent Character. We are all now in a deprav'd,
aſinful, and fo in a low, a miſerable ſtate. We
have by our own wilful Rebellion and Difobe-
dience, made it neceſſary for God to. place us
in a ſhort, a vicious, inan uneaſie and vexa-
tious World ; where at preſent we are under a
ſort of confinement in a place of Trial and Pro-
bation ; and through a doleful Wilderneſs muſt
make our way to the Land of Canaan. Qui/que
ſuos patimur manes. We here feel the fad effects
and puniſhments of former Sins. We ares left
to ſtruggle with great difficulties , abide many


aſſaults ,


91


Of the Moſaick Creation.


aſlaults , and undergo ſevere Apgonies, e're we
muſt expe& to recover our native dignity, to
retrieve our ancient felicity again, Exinde
per amplum Mittimur Elyſium , & reduces lata arva
tenemns. AS fleſh and blood cannot inherit the
kingdom of God , fo that Kingdom « not of thus
World. T ſee no reaſon to eſteem the preſent
condition of Mortality as at all conſiderable »
is ſelf, (tho' in its conſequences it extremely
ſo ) in compariſon of the paſt and future
pn of our Beings; and therefore without
lieving the Earth one of the greateſt or nobleſt
Globes in the World , I can ſuppoſe it a very
proper and ſuitable habitation for us at preſent: *
Moſt wiſely contriv'd, ( as it certainly is )
and its Funiture peculiarly and wonderfully adap-
ted ro our nc&ds , capacities and operations. I
acknowledge that Providence has fo conſtituted
our Earth that we receive ſome advantages from
all, and very great ones from ſome other parts
of the external and viſible World. All which
were in the Original Creation of things both
foreſeen and foredeſign'd by God, and ſo may
not 15 app be ſo far ſaid to have been made
for our uſe, and appointed to ſerve our necefli-
ties. I do not think that thoſe Syſtems of the
. Univerſe we here ſpeak of, are ever a whit the
leſs uſeful to us, or the benefits we reap from
them ever the leſs in themſelves , or leſs worthy
of our notice and obſervation , our admiration
and gratitude to God , becauſe they alſo are ſub-
ſervient to other noble purpoſes, and are by
Divine Providence made uſe of in ſeveral great
deſigns over and above thoſe advantages we are
able to take notice of , or can our ſelves enjoy
from them. I cannot imagine that God is pe-
culiarly


Of the Molaick Creation.


culiarly fond of any particular parts of the Ma-
terial tion , or any more a Reſpeter of ſome
manimate Bodies, than of Perſons. He no doubt
equally makes uſe of them all, according to
their ſeveral kinds and capacities , in the ſer-
vice of the various ſpecies of Intelligent Crea-
tures , and in the bringing about the great Pe-
riods of Nature , and the Drnnace of Heaven ;
which as they are in great meaſure unknown to
us , ſo may they regard Rational Beings very
different and remote from us and our con-
cerns.

If we duly reflet on the Infinite Nature ,
* and unlimited Perfections of the Divine Being ,
the Creator and Original of all things , as well
as on the number, . vaſtneſs, and glory of thoſe
his works which are within our view , we ſhall
ſee reaſon to confeſs , there may be millions of
Nobler Intelle&ual Beings interpoſed between
Man and God: And the whole World might be
more reaſonably ſuppos'd made at the Creation ,
and for the ſole uſe of any one ſpecies of thoſe ,
than of Mankind. If therefore we be un-
willing to be our ſelves excluded from a ſhare
in the intentions and deſigns of Heaven , let
us not exclude any other rational Creatures from
the ſame ; but be willing to ſuppoſe as this Earth


was form'd in lix days for the ſake of Man ;


ſo were the reft of the Heavenly Bodies, form'd


at other proper times, for the ſake of other of


God's Creatures ; for whom Providence ought
to be allow'd to have taken a proportionable
Care , and made a ſuitable proviſion , as we our
ſelves find has been done with regard to us and
our affairs. Let .us learn humble and modeſt
ſentiments of our ſelves, from the contempla-

tion


93


Of the Molaick Creation.
tion of the i of the Works of God in*
he World. Which ulful Leflon the Holy PLL
miſt would by his own example teach us. With
whoſe Natural and Pious Retledtion in this very
cafe I ſhall conclude this whole diſcourſe. Wher
1 conſider thy Heavens , the work of thy fingers , the
Aeon and the Stars which thow haſt ordamed; Lord!
what s Man that thou art mu of bims ! And
the Son of Man that thou wifiteſt bim ! O Lord our
Lord! How excellent s thy name m all the Earth !


PosSTULATA.


POSTULATA.


I. H E Obvious or Literal
Senſe of Scripture is the
True and Real one, where no
evident Reaſon can be given to
the contrary.


II. That which is clearly account-
able in a natura] way, is not with-
out reaſon to be aſcrib'd ro a Mi-


raculous Power,


II. What Ancient Tradition aſlerts
of the conſticution of Nature, or
of the Or'gin and Primitive States
of the World, is to be allow'd
for True, where 'tis fully agree-
able to- Scripture, Reaſon, and
Philoſophy.


\ Daws o the
$K v


f* (30)


mCT A


Dave of the 6
ird month [+ LY

FT

(97: e


vY
"foo
Lo
-]
NR 4
wy"
_—
eo”!
LH
”*
<


Ms + oo®©


nu bogu FIgen) ammpoy
. —_—


=—_


1
1


TP FULL) 29 1479 00*\ »
pn


—


au nee


A A —— oo
%


CEOEED
#


1
|


w


_ "". hand

_ _—-

F LO
——_
Þ © - —_ .. ® ©


=


——


- ms —


=


My wt...
' v2
=_S
- 2,
Vo
8 _
ho
LU wa
%
Lb, ht
I %
%
LL %
' %
P %
LL %
py %
k v
8
4 v
*s .
%
, ,
+ 8 - -
= * © ,
a. ja] fa;
p (
41," 4
, s
LU þ
A s
P
1, #
8 -
- -
' Py
LL Fg
4 -
-
-
' Ay
-
4 t*
-
L oF
-


' P, |
' | 's
, ' ' T1T j 1
: | CANT ; ul
On ' '! A yi
j
\E,
wh (AK Ll Wil. clips
: —_— TY
l ML
| ws, 4 MANA _


1
|
.þ
J&\


q


is Magn
|
)


; usOrb


Fa; ectori®
(C
ti


®
T7
LY
IT* CI , k
"NAG \
"*;
a», 4%, +. ” .
4 4
. » -
: at * ell :
: " * i of ET ages *
my -


gf 7 '" $55 l j ' th i ,

WP ANONAAL {WW q Fo np TA0AR
j ALL, '
WAN KIANALINN (/ A HAY Ts l; a [ WA
NANA MAD | MANA WAI MLL


ſ ' | ' ' | Ni ' : |
WAL KITTEL I, W ALON h | VALLMALD
VANMINYUAAMAY YN DOA BUONANIAIYIILK
Wh! WAV "Wh WAY (1 þ HOARY hk, ru! UIIK ly -
' ' |
WON 1h (OW W PMOALINA WNT WAL ug. 7
' j $1 T1, | [ "1 n .
Ws! ALMANAC W l, i YINL fl HAMA jl
Ou ' AMAA A [TYAN TUUYYL
Mil og! AIG v no wa Y WMA
INN JNANANMATS WAN!


| WA DNWAN
SIVY, Vf ie!
WWAAVIAN Wy Wl, Ml!
WATIN Wa | Mt AL 0


ONT F
Fg 100 WRINOD worm wnen "yp ,


:

© -

—_C %

38.--.08

I & k
Y
_
3


=Z Radrus ( J, þ
Tr a4 £4


AV


New TrtEeokry


E A R T H.
BOOK I. .


OO. - COS > —


LEMMATA.


| L L Bodies will perſevere for ever in
that ſtate, whether of Reſt or Mo-
tion, in which they once are, if no
other force or impediment act upon
them, or ſuffer by them. |

II. All Motion is of it felf rcailinear, and
with the ſame conſtant uniform Celerity, if no
other external Cauſe diſturb it.

Corollary 1. *Tis evident from theſe two Propeſs-
tions, that Matter is mtirely a p:ſſrve Subſtance.

Coroll. 2. No Spontaneous Motion or Attion can
be the effett of meer Matter.

Coroll. 3. Toe Soul of Man , whoſe leaſt Power
ſeems tobe that of Spontaneous Motion, # incorporeal :
which is alſo a neceſſary conſequence of the firſt Co-

H rollary
\


LEMMATA. Bookl,
yollary 3 for if Matter be perfetly a paſſive Thing, the


Sou!, which u ſo ative a Being, cannot be material.

Coroll. 4. The Bruit Creatures giving all poſſible
Demonſtrations of Spontanevus Motion, and of a prin-
ciple of Aion , cannot reaſonably be ſuppos'd meerly
Corporeal Machmes.


HI. All thoſe fingle Corpuſcles of which Bo-
dies are compos'd , do attract -all other ſingle
Corpuſcles of which other Bodies are compos'd,
and are alike mutually attrated by them, If
this Aﬀection of the Parts of Bodies be conſji-
derd with reſpet to thoſe rowards which the
Motion is, *tis call'd Attration, and they are
aid to draw all others. Bur if it be conſider'd
with reſpe& to thoſe which are mov'd, 'tis call'd
Gravitation, or a Tendency in them towards
others. Thus in Magnetiſm we imagine a Power
of Attraction belonging to the LoaditMme; and in
the Iron a Tendency, or (as I may call it, tho'
ſomewhat improperly ) Gravitation towards it.
Tho' indeed, by the way, the Force or Aﬀection
being found to be mutual and equal on both ſides,
the Terms might jultly be ſotoo; and a Loadſtone
might as properly be faid to tend or gravitate
towards the Iron , or Iron to attract the Load-
' ſtone, as the contrary ; juſt as 'tis in the Pointe
before us. This however will ſerve for an Illu-
ſtration, and explain our meaning in the preſent
caſe, where all the Parts of Bodies are endew'd
with ſuch a mutual Gravitation and Attraction
with reſpect to all ochers.


SCHOLIU M.


That no prejudice nor miſunderſtandin may”
ariſe, 'tis to be oblery'd, That when we ule the
: terms


- —_— —_ ww...


©


Book I, LEMMAT 4. ;


terms of Attraction or Gravitation , we do not
thereby determine the Phy tical Cauſe or Sear
of any effects, as if ſome innate Power or cult
Quality were to be ſuppos'd in Bodics ( as will
appear preſently ); but only uſe ſuc. familiar
Terms whereby our meaning may be cahly un-
derſtood , and the Effects of Nature cxplain'd ,
even where the laſt and proper cthcient Cauſe
is not mechanically affignable. Thus we do and
may ſay, as before, That the Loadſtone attracts
the Iron, or the Iron tends or gravitates to the
Loadſtone, not aſcribing thereby any proper and
ſitive Quality or Power to theſe: Bodies , but
for caſe of Expreſſion, and-for ſupplying what
we cannot otherwiſe readily explain relating to
them. Thus alſo we commonly ſay, That Stones
are heavy, or tend towards the Center of the
Earth; and the Expreflions, rightly underſtood,
are true and natural: Tho' perhaxs in both cafes
the real cauſe of thoſe Effects which we afcribs
to ſuch an Attraction, Tendency, or Gravita-
tion, is External, and ſome continual Impulſe
from without, not any. inherent Power rcally
Exiſtent within, is the Original of all. But in
ſuch caſes, where the true Agent is inviſible or
unknown, we muſt have leave to uſe thole terms
which the Matter will bear, or Cuitom has ren-
dred familiar 5 without which, uneaſy and rtrou-
bleſume Circumlocutiohs will be unavoidable;
eſpecially, ſecing chat no Error can hereb' creep
into our Reaſonings, becauſe 'tis evid-1t, that
all che Effects of Nature arc exactly t.: very
ſame in the World, and not otherwit- , whicn
they certainly would and muſt be if Bodies did
really and properly, by their own inh$ent Vir-
tue or Quality, attract, and were attracted by all

others.
H 2 IV. This


I OM, 3 J-
4/14.


f


LEMMAT 4. Bookl.


IV. Tms Anection of mutual Attraction or
Gravitation is univerſal in &tct 5 all Bodies in
the whole World, as far as we have any means
of knowing whercloever they are plac'd , be-
ing-in common ſubject thereto, and concern'd
therein,

V. This Aﬀection is alſo univerſal as to the
kinds of its Objects; it belonging equally to all
the Parts of Mattcr, of what Sort or Form, in
what Figure or Condition ſoever they are: the
difference of Bodies as to Texture and Compo-
ſition, Huidity and Firmnefſs, Motion and Reſt,
Pignels and Subtilty, or any other ſuch mutable
Qualities, not in the leaſt diminiſhing the Influ-
ence thereot.


VI. This Aﬀection is alſo univerſal and equa-


ble as to Time, without all manner of intermiſ-


fion; without any increaſe or diminution in dif-
ferent Ages.

VII. The Quantity of the force of Attraction
ar cqual diſtances is exactly proportionable to
the Quantity of Matter in the attracting Body,
being in reality nothing but the Reſult or Summe
of the united Forces of 2!l thoſe ſingle Particles of
which 'tis composd. Thus it A be double to,
;. &. has twice as much matter as B;z A will have
a double force 0! Artraction alfo , at cqual di-
ftances from their Centers reſpectively. If A
repreſent the Earth, B the Moon ; if B contain
but the ewenty (ixth part of the matter in A, (as
it really does contain no more) and a Globe or
Ball were plac'd at the ſame diſtance from the
Center of Þ, at which another equal to it wer,
from thax-of A, it would be but the ewenty ſixth
part ſo heavy towards B, as the other were to-
wards A. Y |


VIII, This


Bookl. LEMMAT 4.


VIIE. This mutual tendency of. Bodies is groat-
cr or lefs, according as the Bodies thenfſe!ve;
are nearer to, or farther from cach other. The
ſame Body more forcibly attracting thoſe which

are near, than thoſe which are farther of ©
that Stone of Pillar which is with us very heavy,
would be comparatively very light, if ic were az
far diſtant from us as the Moon.

IX. The proportion of the Increaſe and Dc
creaſe of this Gravity of Bodics in their —_—
to, or receſs from cach other, is neither that of
Similar Lines nor Solids , but of Superficies or
Plains.:: The force of Attraction in ſeveral di-
ſtances being reciprocally in a Duplicate Propor-
tion thercof. Thus w hen the {ame Body, with-
out the Surface of the Larth , l5 ewice as near
its Center, as ic was bÞcfore, "tis four times as
heavy; when thrice as near, 'tis:nine times as
heavy ; when four times as near, "tis lixtcen times
as heavy as before. In like manner, the ſame
ſtrength which were able to ſuſtain a Bcdy of
one hundred weight here, would at twice our
diſtance from the Earth's Center , be equally
able ro ſuſtain four hundred weight ; art three
times our diſtance, nine hundred weight ; at
four times our diltance, ſixteen bundred weighe,
and fo, m mf, at all other difltances. For as
the Squares of the diſtances increaſe, ſo does the
Power of Attraction decreaſe; and as the Squar es
of the diſtances decre aſe, ſo does the Power of
Attraction at the ſame time increaſe proportiona-
bly ; as v ll be prov'd preſently from the known
Phenomena of Aſtronomy.

Corollary L. From tbe Comp art on of the two firſt
Propoſittons with the ſeen laſt, "tis es ut \, That
this univerſal force of mutual Attrattion or Gravy ;-
tion of Bedies is not a reſult from the Nature of Mat


H ; ter;


Vil Br.
l-y, Serm.
-, Þ. 26,
©


LEMMAT 4. Bookl.


Matter ; which being circam{crild within its own
bounds , being incapable of atting at a diſtance, and
beſiles being intively paſſive m its wery Eſſence, can
not poſſibly " draw others, or tend towards them of it
ſelf.

Coroll. 2. This wniver/al force of Grawitation be-
ms [0 | Plainly abowe, beſici es, and contrary to the Na-
ture of Mat ters On the formenticn'd Accounts muſt be
the F fect of a Divine Power and Efficacy which go=
werns the whole World, and which is abſolutely nece;<
fary to ats 16g to0 11100.

Coroll. 3. Hhin the Divine Power is inſeparable
frem the Eſſence of God, "tus evident , the latter is
Ormipreſert as wel, as the former, and every where
ena, IPasd t tf YOU! h the Univerſe 1 3 and that there-
fore m God we jrep:r!y live, move, and have our
bciag. :

Coroll. 4. The Dix '7e Nature is Incorporeal and
Spiritual, as ' being e« equally preſent, and equally power-
fe! wm! » midſt of the material I 'rld, as in thoſe im-
menſe Spaces which every where diſtinguiſh the Parts,
and /[urreund the Limits of tt.

Cc -oll 5. The Providence of God in the Natural
World is rot meerly a Conſercation of its being, or a
Neor-anmbil.tion thereof 5 but a conſtant , uniform ,
ative Influence or Enorgy in all the Operations done
in it; the wery ſame W; hi ch was bands 4 the Or:o: fe.
ral Impr{ſion of thoſe Laws of Motion on which it de
penas, The two firſt F repoſicions , 'tis true, ſeem to
Yeauire only a Cont innation of. E xiſtence, 2 without an.
mew or continual Action 5 but the ſeryen laſt flons
require ore 3 and 10 leſs than I am here pleadm
fer. So that if We ſhould ſuppoſe e God Almighty .
4's! har. I * of pend this bis atlual Efficacy and Is-
fenence on all \ the Bodies im the World, tho" be pre»
ery 4 their bi ig 3 the whole would immediately be
deife! lv'd, and each of the Heavenly Bodies be erum:-


bld


BookI, LEMMAT A.


bled into Duſt ; the ſingle Atoms commencing their (=
wveral Motions in ſuch ſeveral ſtraight Lines, according
to which the Projeftile Motion chanc'd to be at the in-
ſtant when the Divine Influence (the cau'e of Grawi-
tation , and all ſuch other Aﬀetions of Matter ) was
ſuſpended or withdrawn. R

Coroll. 6. Mechanical Philoſophy , which relies
chiefly on the Power of Gravity, 1s, if rightly under-
feed, ſo far from leading to Atheiſm, that it /olcly
depends on, ſuppoſes, and demonſtrates the Being and
Providence of God ; and its Study by conſequence i the
moſt ſerviceable to Religion of all, other.

Coroll. 7. The Epicareans, who endeawcur'd to
caſt the belief of a Providence at leaſt , if not of a
Deity out of the World by their Atomical or Mechani-
cal Philoſophy , wery fooliſhly mi[underſtood and abus'4
their own Principles ; which m realty, when vight-
ly comprebended, do with the greateſt Evidence and
Convittion eſtabliſh them both, beyond all other what-
ſoever.

Coroll. 8. There is no ſuch Ethereal Subſtance, ow
Subtitle Matter, pervading the Pores of Bodies, which
being it ſelf free from the Law of Gravity, orrendu'd
with a leſs 'Prorortion thereof, might be imagin'd to be
the cauſe of it in other Bodi.s, or the meams of any other
Effe&s in the World.

Coroll. 9. 4 Vacuum, or Space diſt init fro
Matter, is. neceſſary to be admitted. ÞFor were F4

Vorld equally full every where , when all Mater is
equally Gol in proportion to its Quantity, there could
yot pany be any diff, rence 1 the Spectfick Gravity of
Bodies; it being on the Hypotheſis of a Pienum im-
poſſible that a Cube of Go!d ſhould be heavier than an
equal Cube of Air , and its contained ſnvt:le Matter
together ; and by conſequence equally impoſſible that the
former ſhould over-ballance or deſcend in the latter,
which yer all experience ſhews It realiXqoes. So that

I 4 a Plenum


Fig. 3.


LEMMAT A. Bookl.


@ Plenum is ſo far from accounting for the Phas-
nomenon of Gravity, as ſome would bave it , that
it utterly ſubyerts the poſſibility of it 3 and while the
lift is evident, the firſt muſt needs be indefen-
fible.


X. From the Uniform - Projeftile Motion of
Bod:e; in ſtraightlines, and the Univerſal Power
of Attraction or Gravitation, the curvilinear
motion of all the Heavenly Bodies does ariſe.
If a Body, as B, be moving uniformly along
theline DC, fromD to C; and another Body
A be preſent, this latter Body A muſt draw the
former B from its ſtraight line D C, and by do-
ing ſo continually, while at the ſame time the
Body B retains its Projectile force along a ſtraight
linein every point of ics Courſe, muſt make the
line of its real motion a bent one, and change
ics rectilincar into a curvilinear trajectory.

Coro'l. Fence we may learn what u that cona-
tus recedendi a centro motus mr revolying Bodies,
and in what [:n't tis to be underftkccd. For when,
as we bawe already ſeen, 'alf Bodies have a Vis Cen»
tripeta; or propcr;ſion towards one another 35 "tus im
poſſeble they ſhould of thens elves, in as proper a man-
ner, bave a contrary propenſu M, Ct Vis centrifuga z
an endeayour of avoiding one another, (if theſe im-
proper terms 146 be allow'd me.) The true meaning
therefore of 11s attempt or endeavour to get farther
off the Center of Motion a only this, That all Bodies
beirg furely Paſizye, aud ſo incapable of altering
their uniform motioz: along thoſe ſtraight lines, or tan-

ents to their curves, in whico they are every moment,
fti!ll tend onwards in the . ſame limes, and retain their
properſion or eff rt towards that rettilinear motion all
the time they gre obliged io move in curves ; and cone
fequerily at every point of their courſe, endeavour to


tt


XX RQW "FL


'Bookl, LEMMAT A. 9


fly off by their Tangents. Now the parts of the Tan-
ent to which this endeavour is, berg farther from
the Center than thoſe of th: Curves ts which the bodies
are attually forc'd, an attempt to go on in the Tangent
may be, and is ſtid an attempt to go farther off or
recede Joo that Center ; tho" from no other affetl ion
than that of inaftruity, or of perſevering in a ret{i-
linear motion. So that tho' the vis Ccartripeta, or
power of gravitation be an attrye and poſitive foree,
continually renew'd and impreſs d on Bodies; the vis
centrifuga, cr conatus recedendi a centro motus
js not ſo, but the mere conſequent and reſu!: from
their mattivity. This 1s evident in Bodies revolving
im Ellipſes about one of the Foci, mm their deſcent t6-
wards 0- where the Tangent bens oblique fo the
Radins, or Line, from the Point of Contatt to the
Focus, this very conatus recedendi a centro mo-
tis, by wrging it along. the Tangent, will ſor ſome
time make it approach nearer to the Focus; (the
not ſo much nearer as by its,rewolving im the Ellipfis
it ſelf ) as may be ſeen in the Scheme, if a Body at
were moving towards L.. abeut the Focns I. Schem. 1.
And this explication is confirm'd by all experience, For Fig. 6.
ket a Stone be let looſe from the Sling, or any revo!-
wving body be diſengag'd from the force which retam'd
it m its Curve, and it will not go from the Center,
but only paſs atong the Tangent m which it was
moving as if there were 10 ſuch Center near it at


all,


XI. A Rectilinear or Projectile motion of the
Planets along the Tangents to their Orbits ,
(which when once begun, always uniformly
continues) join'd or compounded with their
gravitation to the Sun, in the common Center
or rather Focus of our Syſtem, is the Original


of all the Planetary Revolutions about him.
Thus


IO


Fig. 3+


LEMMAT 4. Bookl,


Thus if Tupiter, for inſtance, repreſented by B,
were moving uniformly along the Line DC,
from D towards C ; if the Sun A were abſent,
the Planer would paſs on ſtraight from B to C,
with the ſame velocity with which it had come
from D to B. Bur if upon its arrival at the
point B, the Sun in the Center or Focus A begin
to affect it, the Planet, by the Sun's AttraQtion,
muſt be drawn from a rectilinear to a curvilinear
courſe; and be oblig'd, if the Sun's Power be
great enough compar'd with the Planets velocity,
to revolve about him, and that, the attractive
force always continuing, for ever after. The
caſe is juſt the ſame as if B were a Stone in a
Sling, A-the Hand of the Slinger, (by the help
of the ſtrings united together, and repreſented
by. the line AB) whicling it round continually.
For #s the Stone at its coming to the point B,
were it let looſe and left to it ſelf, would fly off in
the ſtraight Line or Tangent B C, yet by force
is ſtill retain'd at an equal diſtance from the hand
of the linger, and compell'd to revolve in a kind
of circle ; fo 'tis here. The Attraction of the
Sun in the common Center or Focxs compels all
the Planets, which of themſelves would paſs
along their ſeveral Tangents, to revolve about
bits. And the cafe is the ſame in the ſecondary
Planets with reſpect to their primary ones, about
which they revolve in the ſame manner as they
all both Primary and Secondary revolve about
the Sun, in the common Center or Focus of the
intire Syltem.

Coroll. 1. Hence *tis n—_—_ that the Law of
wniver/al Attrattion once eſtabliſhed, unleſs the Di-
wine Power had put the Planets into a ſuitable motion
in right lines, they muſt ſoon have been drawn down-

wards,


Book l LEMMAT A.


wards, and fall'n into the Sun; And ſill, if their
motions ſhould be intirely ſtop'd and ceaſe, the ſame
muſt happen, and they muſt not only be uncapable of
thoſe noble wſes to which they are now [ubjervient,
but utterly periſh in the wiolence of the Sun's /corching
beat. The preventing of which therefore ougbt juſtly
to be attributed to the Wiſdom and Power of God m
the conſtitution of the World.
Coroll. 2. If the World be limited and finite in
its extent, "tis ſo im its time alſo; and ſo vice vers
if eternal in its time, 'tis infintte alſo m its extent.


For when all Matter (as far as we bawe any means of


knowing , and ſo in reaſon all Matter whatſozver )
is endud alike with a power of atirattion 3 and
muſt all thereby, without proper motions along ſtraight
lines, at laſt meet in the common Center of Gravity
of the whole ; and when withal the ether Syſtems of
fixt Stars, ſuppos'd bere finite z Yetam their ſae and
diſtance from each other, and thence appear net to
bave any projettile motion along ſtraight lines to pre-
went the ſame ; bad the frame of the IWorld been
eternal , the «ffett abovemention'd muſt have innu-
merable ages ago, really come to paſs ; and all the
matter of the mtire Univer/e compos d one ſingle dull
and unmoveable beap or maſs m the common Center
of Gravity of the whole : Which not having bap=
gen'd, demonſtrates the impoſſibility of the Eternity
of the World, and the neceſſity of admitting its pre=
duttion in time by the Power of God. Ib oen there-
fore "tis unreaſonable to ſuppoſe the material World
truly unlimited in extent, "tis neceſſary to [uppoſe it
no more unlimited in duration alſo. And this reaſor-
ing is unavoidable, unleſs we allow the moſt invye-
riable and conſtant property of Matter in our Sy/tem
ro be peculiar toit, and ſo to be a voluntary Conſt it «-
tion of God Almighty ; or at leaſt that a miraculons
Providence does Yancke the foremention'd Effe&# con-

timually,


—  — ——— - >


Serm.”7,
p. 37, 38.


LEMMAT 4. Bookl.


tenually. So that upon the whole, as the wery Learn-
ed Mr. Bentley bas obſery'd , either the Divme
Power in Creating, or peculiar Providence m Govern-
ing the frame of Nature, is on theſe undouvted Prin-


| ciples for ever eſtabliſh'd.


XIT. When the Projectile Motion of the Pla-
nets 15 in its Direction, Perpendicular to a Line
from the Sun, and in its degree of velocity, fo
nicely adapted and contemper'd to the quantity
of the Sun's Attraction there, that neither can
overcome the other, (the force of gravitation to-
wards the Sun, and the celerity of the Planets
proper motions being perfetly i e£quilibrio) the
Orbics of ſuch revolving Planets will be compleat
Circles, themſclves neither approaching to, nor
receding from the Sun the Center! of their mo-
tions. And the Caſe is the ſame in the Secon-
dary Planets about their Primary ones. Thus
'ris ſuppoſable, that the Velocity of all the. Pla-
nets about the Sun, was exactly accommodate
Originally to his Power of Attration, and that
their Primitive Orbits were perfect Circles; from
which at this day they do not mightily differ.
Thus however Ffup:ter's four Satellits or little
Moons have their Motions fo exactly propor-
tion d to their gravitation to him, that their Or-
birs, as far as the moſt nice Obſervations can
judge, are pertet Circles , they keeping at an
equal diſtance from his Center in all the points
of their courſes about him.

XIII. When the Projectile Motion is not adap-
ted to, but is either too ſwift or too flow for
the Attraction towards the Central Body, the
Orbics defcrib'd will be Ellipſes ; and in the for-
mer caſe, when the Projectile Motian. is too


{wift, the Orbic will be bigger than the Circle
before-


Bookl. LEMMAT 4.


before-mentioned ; and the nearer Forzs of the EL.
lipfis will be coincident withthe Central Body;And
in the latter caſe the Orbit will be lefs than the
Circle, and the farther Fecrs of the Ellipfis will be
coincident with that Central Body. Thus if the ce-
lerity of. B, be exactly correſpondent to the at-
tractive forceof the Central Body A, ncither will
revail, and the Body, preſerving an equal diſtance
If the Celeriry be greater,it will overcome the At-
traction, and caſt itſelf farther off the Center for
ſometime, and fo revolve about it in the larger
Ellizxfs BHFG; the Central Body, colleling
that Focrs A,which is neareſt the point B,where the
Attraction began. Bur if the Celerity be ſmaller,
the Attraction of the Centra! Body A,will be too
hard for it, will force it for fome time ro come
he Central Body poſlefling that Feers A which
is fartheſt from the point B, where the Attracti-
on began : As will be very plain from the con-
ſideration of the Figure relating hereto.


SCHOLIU M.


Tis indeed poſlible that the Celerity of Bodies
may be fo great, compar'd with the force of
Attraction to the Central Body, as to caſt them
off with ſuch violence, that the Attraction will
never be able to bring them round, or make
them revolve about it: In which caſe the Orbits
deſcrib'd will be one of the other Conick Sections,
cither Parabe/a's or Hyperbola's; according to the
leſs or greater violence with which the Bodies
are thrown; and the Central Body wi'l pollets
the Feers of fuch a Figure. But no Phenomena
of Nature perſuading us that de fats any of the

Heavenly


v3


Fig. 3+


14


LEMMATA. Bookl,


Lines, (tho' Comets Ellipes come near to Para-
bola's ; of which hereafter) I ſhall not farther
inſiſt upon them here. For if what has been ſaid
of Ellipſes has been well underſtood, the reſt can
have no great difficulty in it.


XIV. Several Bodies moving about the fame
Central one, tho* their Primitive Velocity were
equal, and direRton alike, yetif they be at diffe-
of different Species abour ir. , For when that
determinate degree of Velociry, which at one di-
ſtance were juſt commenſurate to the Central Bo-
dies Attraction, and ſo would produce a circular
Orbit, muſt at a farther diſtance be too hard for it,
by reaſon of the diminution of the Attraction
there ; an Elliptical Orbit muſt be deſcrib'd;
whoſe nearer Focrs would be coincident with the
Central Body. In like manner, when the ſame
determinate degree of Velocity were at a nearer
diſtance, where the Central Attraction is aug-
mented, it would be too little for the ſame ; and
an E!/;ptical Orbit muſt be deſcrib'd , whoſe far-
ther Focus would be' coincident with the Central
Body. This cannot be difficult if what has been
hitherio ſaid have been rightly apprehended.
For when the ſpecies of the - Planetary Orbits
depend ſolely on the proportion between the
Artraction towards the Central Body, and the
Velocicy of the Projectile Motion ; as that pro-
portion remaining at any diſtance whatſoever,
the bigneſs of the Orbits will be various, but the
Species the ſame ; ſo when that proportion is
chang'd, rhe Species of the Figures muſt be
chang'd alſo: Which being done, the Velocity
given, by the various force of Attraction in *

ver


Book 1, LEMMAT 4A.


veral diſtances from the Center , as well as by
the various Velocity, at a given diſtance, of
which before ; 'tis evident the Species of; the
Orbits will be different in this, as well as in the
former Caſe.

Coroll. The greater di/propertion there s between
the quantity of Attraftion, and the Velocity of the re-
wolying Bodies, in the circumſtances mention'd in the
two laſt Propoſitions , the farther from a Circular,
and the more Oblong and Eccentrical will the Orbits
deſcrib'd be. And the greater approach to correſpor-
dence there is, the nearer to circular, and the leſs Ob-
long and Eccentrical will the ſame Orbits be.


XV. The circular Orbits of Planets depend
not only on the exact adjuſtment of the Projectile
Velocity to the attractive Power of the Sun, but
upon the direction of the ſame Projectile Motion,
at the original Commencing of the Attraction.
Thus where the Planer is in its own Tangent
neither Aſcending nor Deſcending, and the
Angle preceding C B A is aright one, which we
have hitherto ſuppos'd ; from the correſpondence
of the Velocity to the Attraction, the Orbits
will be perfect Circles. Otherwiſe, when the
direction of the motion is oblique, in any mea-
ſure aſcending from, or de{cending to the Cen-
tral Body, and the preceding Angle C B A o6b-
tuſe or acute, the Planer, tho' its Velocity were
exactly adapted to the Attraction of the Central
Body, would revolve in an Elly; and the
point B, where the Attraction began, would be
the end of che leſſer Axis thercok. All which
will become eaſier by what- we ſhall preſently
come toexplain of that figure.

Coroll. From theſe four laſt Propeſitiens, compar'd
with the preſent Syſtem of the Planetary World, *tis


obyiou


13


Fig. 3.


LEMMAT 4. Bookl,


obvious to take notice of the Wile and Careful Provi-
dence of God, and his moſt accurate contrivance m
the diſpoſal and regulation of the whole : Whereby the
primary Velocity of the Planets, their ſexeral diſtan-
ces from the Central Bodies, and the origmal direftion
of their motions, hawe been each ſo nicely adjuſted
and adapted to the force of Attration every where,
that all the Orbuts of- the Planets became thereby either
truly circular, er not very much different from the
fame. Which remark will appear the more juſt, and
conſiderable, if we reflett on rhe infinitely different de-
grees of Velocity, and oblique direttion 3 with the im-
menſly waricus diſtances from the Central Bodies,
equally poſſible with thoſe which were ſo fitly pitch'd
pen 3 ard obſerve, to what noble and valuable uſes
theſe Bodies are now ſublervient, which, without the
foremention'd exattne/s of contrivance in each parti-
cular, could not have been provided for. All which
demonſtrate the great neceſſity of intereſting the Di-
wine Providence ; and the worthineſs of its ſo careful
anterpoſition in ſuch caſes.


SCHOLIU AL


In order to the eaſier apprehenſion of the Mo-
tions of the Celeſtial Bodies, and of thoſe things
already ſaid, or to be ſaid hereafter, relating to
them, *twill not be improper in this place to give
ſome account of the Generation, Nature, and


| Eafie Properties of E!/;p/es; in which, (including


tac Circle, as is commonly done) all the Hea-
venly Bodics (as far as we have hitherto reaſon
to believe) revolve perpetually ; ſo far at leaſt
as will be directly ſubſervient to our preſent pur-
pole, and give any Lightto the following Theory.
Take theretore, trom the great Des Cartes, this
natural and obvious deſcription or delineation of
an


— = oc + ..c_ ce... w”


La


Bookl. LEMMAT A. 17


an Oval or Ellis; which tho' familiar to the
Gardener and Joyner, is a very good one, and.
gives as juſt and compleat an des of it as any,
other whatſoever.

Take a ſmall Cord or Packthread, which is Fig. 6
very pliable, and yer not eaſily ſtretch'd beyond its
natural length ; Tye the two ends together, by
which means ir will be a ſort of round or circu-
lar circumference murable into all Figures. Let
ewo Pins or Nails, H and I, be driven into 2
plain Board or Table ; put the Cord or Pack-
thread round the wo Pins or Nails H and I, and
with a Pencil or any ſuch ching, (which, as ir
isdrawnalong, will make a ſmall ſtroke) in your
hand, turn it round about the two Pins or Nails,
as about a double Center, till you return to the
Point from whence you began. Thus if B be
the Point where you begin the delineation, con-
rinue it cicther way, by OFMKNEPD, or Fig 6.
DPENKMEO, till you return to B agatn. Schem. 1;
By which means the Point of your Pencil will
is call'd an Ellipſis, The nature and properties
whereof, as far as at preſent we hall conſider
the ſame, are as follow.

(1.) The Species of the Ellizſis depends on the
proportion there is between the length of the

» Card,and the diſtance of the two Centers H and
I; And conſequently, wherever that determinate
praportion is given, the Species is given alſo, tho”
the bigneſs and capacity be chang'd : But where
that proportion is not given ; as, the length

\ofthe Cord remaining, where the diſtance of the

| ters is chang'd; or, that diſtance remaining,
he length of the Cord is chang'd ; or both are
chang'd, butnot in the ſame proportion ; in all
theſe caſes the Species - the Ellipfhs is —_
us


LEMMAT 4. Bookl,


Thus in particular where thediſtance of the Cen-
rers, or the Line H I, is greater in proportion to
the length of the Cord, there the Ellipfis is farther
from , and where 'tis lefs the Ellipfis 1s nearer to
a Circle. . All which is fo obvious on avery little
conſideration of the Delineation, and Figure, as
"tis repreſented in the rwo different Schemes,
that no more words need be us'd abour ir.

(2.) If in a conſiderably large Figure the two
Poiats H and I be very near together, it will be
ſcarce diſtinguiſhable from a Circle; and in any
Figure if chey be ſuppos'd to unite, and be coinci-
denr,: the Eccentrical Curve will become Con-
centrical ; and the E!lip/is degenerate into , a
Circle ; as perfet a one, as any drawn with a
pair of Compaſſes. Whence we ſee why a
Circle is reckon'd among the Ellp/es; and how
ir may be generated by a way very like that made
uſe of in their delincation.
 «(3.) As when the Points II and I are coinci-
dent, the El/ipſis loſes its Eccentricity, and deno-
mination, and commences a Circle; fo, on the
other hand, if the diſtance H I be indefinitely
lengchened, while the difference between thacr
diſtance and the length of the Cord, (equal to
D H and IK or double to one D H; as the Pen-
cil at D is calily perceiv'd) remains the ſame,
the Ellixfis will go through all Species, and ;at
laſtbecome indefinitely Oblong and Eccentrieal,
andone half of it, as FD E, will degenerate in-
to-the very ſame Figure we call a Parabola. For as
all Gyyron of Eccentricity make Ellipſes of all Spe-
cies; fo no degree of Eccentricity makes a Circle;
and an indefinite or infinite degree of ic makes a
Payabola: Which, tho' we have no neceflity to
conſider itfo diſtinctly in this place (none of the
Heavenly Bodies, as far as we ver know, deſcrib-
6 ao: Ang


Book Il LEMMAT 4.
ing truly fuch a Line,as has been already obſerv'd;)


yet on account of the Comets Orbirs, which Fig. 7.


are nearly Parabelical, at leaſt deſerv'd our notice ;
and the tuft Figure will ſhew an example of it.
(4) An Ell;p{ being deſcrib'd about ewo Points,
as a Circle about one, or thoſe two united ; hence
may appear in ſome meaſure the nature of theſe
Points. 'They are indeed called the Focz or Umbilics
of the Figure, but might not unfitly benam'd the
Centers thereof. And how naturally each of them
bears much the ſame reſpect to the Ellprick Pe-
riphery, that the Cexter does to the circular one,
is partly obvious from the foregoing delineation ;
and of which thoſe who are acquainted with the
Conick Settions cannot be ignorant. To whom
the matter will be ſtill plainer, if they conſider
che generation of an E!l;pſis from the Section of
a Conick ſuperficies, by a plain interſe&ing the
oppoſite ſides of the Cone, and yet not parallel to
the Baſis ; as the Geometricians uſually do. For
there'the Ax of the Cone, or Line which paſles
from its/Vertex through the Center of the Circle
its Baſis, does not paſs through the middle or
Center of the E!lip/is ; but one of thoſe Points we
are ſpeaking of. And accordingly, if the name
Center had not by cuſtom in the E!/ipſis been bor-
rowed from the Circle on account of its poſition,
rather than ſome other properrties of ir, and chence
appli'd ro the middle point in the. Elf: ; it
might very fiely, as has been before ſaid, have
been given to the two Points H and I, now ſtil'd
the Foct or Umbilici thereaf. And by the ſame
reaſon the correſponding ſingle Points, going un-
der the ſame names in the Paraboia and Hyper-
bola, would deferve and challenge the ſame de-
nomination. And this is fo agreeable to the true


Syſteni of the Planetary World, that in the new
EF 2 Aſtronomy


ko


LEMMAT A. Bookl.


Aſtronomy (and thence in theſe Papers) the
ſtile is ſometimes continued; and 'tis not unuſual,


F may add, nor very improper, toſay, Thatthe


Sun, the common Focus or Umbilicus of all the Ce-

leſtial E/liptick Orbits, is in the Center of our

_ , or poſſeſſes the Center of the Planetary
orld.

(5.) Tho' all the Lines paſſing through the
Center in a Circle, being equal, areequally con-
ſiderable; yet 'tis otherwiſe in the Conick Setions;
where that Line through the Focxs alone which
cuts the principal Axis at right Angles, is remark-
able above all the reſt ; and in very y caſes
peculiarly conſiderable. This Line 1s fti'd the
Lats Reftum, and in the Flliz/ts is, after the lon-
ger and ſhorter Axis, the third proportional.
Thus in the Figure before us, as DK isro E F,
ſo is the fame EF to OP or MN, the Latzs
Refum thereof, ſo famous with the Writers on
the Conick Sefions.

(6). The ſubtenſe of che Angle of Conta&t
b d, parallel to the diſtance from the Focws B H,
at an equal diſtance from the Point of conta® B,
if that diſtance be ſuppos'd infinitely ſmall, is in
all parts of the ſame Ellip/is, or other Conick Sefti-
on equalto itſelf. The Truth and Uſe of which
property is not yet ſufficiently known.

(7.) If from any Point in the circumference
of an Ellipſis as B, Lines be drawn to each Focms,
B H, BI; theſe cwo Lines taken together are al-
ways equal to themſelves, and to the longer
Axis K D: Asthe delineation of the Figure does
plainly manifeſt.

(8.) If the Angle made by the Lines to the
Fori from any certain Point, H BI be divided in
the midſt by the Line B A ; the ſaid Line BA


will be perpendicular to the Tangent, or Curve
| | | at


Book I, LEMMAT 4.


at the Poine of contact ; and fo the Angles A BL
A BG will beright ones, and equal toeach other,
as conſequently will equal parts of them L BH :
I BG.

(9.) A Line drawn from either Fecrs to the
end of the leſſer Axis, HE or IE, is equal to
half the longer Axis CD or C K: as is evident
by the laſt particular but one. And the ſame
Line is Arithmetically che middle proportional
berween the greateſt and leaſt diſtance from
the ſaid Focws, Thus H E, for inſtance, is juſt
ſo much longer than HD, as 'tis ſhorter than
HK ; the difference in both caſes being the Ec-
centricity H C or C I.

(10.) The Tangent of.an Ellipſs L G is never
perpendicular to a Line drawn trom the Focrs,
excepting the ewo points which terminate the
longer Axis D and K. And if you imagine the
point of contact B, with the Radius B H, and
the Tangent L G, to move round the E//p/is to-

ether, trom B towards D; the preceding Angle,
# BL, will, in the deſcent from K by F to D,
be an acute one ; (its acuteneſs increaſing from
K to F, and as much decreaſing from F to D)
and in the aſcent from D by E to K an obtuſe
one; (itsobtuſeneſs increaſing from Dto E; and
as much decreaſing from E to K:) in both ſemi-
revolutions arriving atrigheneſs at the Points D
and K, the ends of the longer Axis alone; as was
here to be obſerv'd.

(11.) The Area of an Ellipfis is to that of a
circumſcrib'd Circle, (whoſe Diameter is equal to
the others longer Axis) as the ſhorter Axis of the
Ellipfis is to the ſame longer Axis or Diameter.

(12.) If the Clommilraiom of a Circle, and
of an Ellipſis, be equal; the Area of the Circle
is the greater. It being known, that of all Fi-


I 3* gures,


21


Fig. 6.
Scheme 1.


Fig. 1.


LEMMAT 4. Bookl.


gures, whoſe Perimeters are equal, the Circle is
the moſt capacious.

(13.) If an Ellipfs, by becoming infinitely
Eccentrical, degenerate into a Parabola ; the
Latns Reftum will be four times as long as the
neareſt diſtance to the Focrs thereof. Thus rs
is four times as long as H te.


XVI. All Bodies which, together with a Pro-
jectile or Uniform Motion along righe Lines,
are continually. attracted or impell'd towards one
certain Point or Center , let the attraction or
impulſe be of what nature or quantity ſoever ,
will always (no other Force interpoſing) by a
Line drawn from that Center to themſelves, de-
tionable Area's in proportionable times, through
all parts of their courſes. Thus if the Area de-
ſcrib'd the firſt minure were equal to a thouſand
ſquare Feet z whether the Bodies came nearer or
went farther off, it would always in a minute
equal to the ſame thouſand ſquare feet ; in two
minutes double, or two thouſand ; in three minutes
treble, or three thouſand ; in four minutes
Quadruple, or four thouſand ; and fo for ever
proportionably. The demonſtration of this
noble and exceeding uſeful Theorem is both
eafic and pleaſant : But that not being my pre-
fent bufinefs, I ſhall, as in the reſt, refer the
Reader to the Great Author himſelf for fatif-
fation.

XVIE. All Bodies, wice verſa, which revolve
in Curves; and by a Line drawn from them-
Area's proportionable to the times of deſcgption ;
are attracted or impell'd continually towards that
Point or Center.

Corollary.


Bookl. LEMMATA


Corollary. When therefore Lines drawn” from ev. /


Area's proportionable to the times of deſcription 5 as
is own'd by all Aſtronomers ; "tis certain that, beſides
thetr ſeveral Projetitle Mntions, they are every one
continually attratted or impell d rewards the Sun ; and
from ſuch compornded forces reveoe abeut him.
And the caſe being the [ame in the Moon about the
Earth ; te Circumyovials about Jupiter 5 and the
Circumfaturnals abcur Saturn ; this Core(lary equally
' belongs to them al/o.


XVIII. If Bodies from a Projectile Motion,
and an attraction or impulſe to 'a Point or
Center move about the ſame in a Spiral Line,
which interſectsevery Radius in the ſame Angle;
the force of the attraction or impulſe, at ditfe-
rent diſtances from that Center is reciprocally as
the Cubes of ſuch diſtances : And wrce wer(a, if
the force of attraction or impulſe ro any Center
be as the Cubes of the diſtances reciprocally ;
yu Lines, interſecting the Radij in the ſame
Angle.

XIX. It Bodics from a Projetile Motion and
an attraction or impulſe to a Point, move about
it, beingthe Centcy of an Ellipſis, in the Periphe-
ry of the ſame Ellip/s ; the force of attraction
is doettly as the diſtance from ſuch a Center:
And wice verſa, if the force of attraction or im-

lſe to any Point be as the diſtance from the

ame dire#ly, Bodies revolving about it muſt de-
the fore-mention'd Point will be coincident.

XX. If Bodies from a Projettile Motion, and
Ellipſis about that Point, coincident with one of

I 4 its


23


* Coroll.


LEMMATA. Bookl.


its Foci; the force of Attraction towards that
Focxs is reciprocally as the ſquares of the diſtances
from the ſame. And wice werſi, if the force or
attraction to any Point be in a duplicate propor-
tion of the diſtances from the ſame reciprocally ;
Ellip/-s about it, coincident with one of the Foci
thereof.

Corollary 1. Where Bodies revolve about any
Point or Central Body, from the Figure deſcrib'd, and
the Situation of the Point or Central Body, the Law
of attrattion or impulſe tending trwards the ſame is
diſcovered. And vice verſa, where ' the Law of at-
tration or impulſe is known, thy Figure to be deſcrib'd
by revolving Bodies, and the Situation of the Point or
Central Body, towards which the attratton or impulſe
w with reſpet# to ſuch Figures, 1: a priori diſcover'd
alſo. F

Coroll. 2. Nere of the Heawen'y Bodies deſcri-
bing either Spiral Lines, or Ellipſes about their Cen-
ters, "tis certain no Law of Gravitation m a tripli-
cate reciprocal, or dire&t ſimple proportion of the
diſtance from the Central Body, obtains m the Plane-
tary World. |

Coroll. 3. * All the Planets revolutions ariſmg


Lem. 19, from the comprſition of their Projettile Motion and


prius.


Gravitation towards the Sun; and they all _—
Ellipſes abou: him, m the Common Focus of a
their Orbits, as is evident from Aſtronomy 5 'tus
hence certain that the force of their attrathion or im-
pulſe towards the Sun is in @ duplicate proportion of
their diſt ances reciprocally.

Coroll. 4. The caſe being the ſame as to the Moon
about the Earth, and the Circumfſaturnals about Sa-
turn; this laſt Cordllary belongs equally tothems al/o,
But yn Satellus revolyumg m compleat Circles are
mcapable of affording evidence m his caſe.

pable of affording Pi of


Book. LEMMAT A.


XXL. If ſeveral Bodies revolve about the ſame
central attractive Body gr ſeveral diſtances; and
the periodical Times in which they revolve be
to each other, as the Squares of their diſtances
from the ſame; the force of Artrattion or Im-
pulſe to that central Body is in a triplicate Pro-
portion of ſuch diſtances reciprocally ; and wice
vers , if the force of Artrattion or Impulſe be
as the Cubes of their diſtances yreciprocally,, the
periodical Times of Revolution will be to each
other, as the Squares of their diſtances from the
ſame central Body.

XXII. If ſeveral Bodies revolve about the ſame
central attraftive Body, at ſeveral diſtances in
Circular or Elliptick Orbits, and the periodical
Times of revolving be all equal; the force of At-
traction or Impulſe towards the central Body is
direly, as the diſtances from the ſame.

XXIII. If ſeveral Bodies revolve about the
ſame central Body, in Circular or Elliptick Or-
bits, at ſeveral diſtances; and the Squares of the
periodical Times of revolving are to each other
as the Cubes of the middle diſtances from the
{ame central Body; the force of Attraction or
Impulſe towards the ſame is in a duplicate Pro-
portion of the diſtances from the ſame reciprocally.

Corollary 1. Where ſeveral Bodies, from a proje-
Hile Motion, compounded with a Grawitation towards
a gentral Body, revolve about the ſame at ſeveral di-
ſtances; from the Proportion there 1s between J-=_
dical Times of revolvmg, compar'd with the diſtances
from the central Body, the Law of \Grawitation tend-
ing towards the ſame 1 diſcovered ; and vice versi,
where the Law of Gravitation is known , the Propor-
tion berween the periodical Times compar'd with the
diſt ances from the central Body is, a priori , diſco-


ver d allo.
Coroll. 2,


25


26


* Cord.


LEMMAT 4 BookTl,


Coroll. 2. None of the Heawenly Bodies periodical
Times of revolyi to each other as the Squares
of their diſtances from the central Body, nor equal to
one another ; "tw certain, as before, that no Law of
Gravitation in a triplicate reciprocal, or direct /im-
ple Proportion of the diſt ances from the central Body ,
obtains m the Planetary World.

Coroll. 3. * All the Planets Revolutions ariſing


Lem. 1]. from the. Compoſition of therr projettile Motion and


prins.


Gravitation towards the Hun, and the Squares of their


periodical Times of revolving being to each other as the


Cubes of thetrr middle diſtances from him ; 't1s bence
certain, That, as before, the force of their Attrattion
or Impulſe towards the Sun, » in a duplicate Propor-
tion of therr diff ances reciprocally.

Coroll. 4. The Caſe being the ſame as to the Cir-


© cumjovials ebour Jupiter, and the Circumſaturnals


about Saturn; this laſt Corollary belongs equally to
them alſo. But the Moon being a ſingle Planet revo!-
wing about the Earth , x mcapable of giving evidence
m ber Caſe.

Coroll 5. As before, the Law of Gravitation be-
ing demonſtrated from the Planets revolving m Ellip-
ſes about the central Bodies in one of the Foci z the
Propertion between the periodical Times, compar'd with
the diſtances from the central Bodies , was deducible
a priori; /o vice vers, the periodical Times compar'd
with the diſtances demonſtrating the Law of Gravita-
tion , thence the neceſſity of rhe Planets Revolution in
Ellipſes, about the central Bodies im one of the Foci,
« a priori demonſtrated alſo. \

Coroll. 6. *Tis certain, That the Annual Motion
belongs to the Earth about the Sun, not to the Sun
about the Earth. For when from the Moon's Orbit, and
the Planet's Orbits and periodical Times , "tu certain,
That the Law of Gravitation towards the Earth ,
and towards the Sun is the ſame ; and by conſequence,
all


Book I. LEMMATA,
all the periodical Times of Bodies revolving about each


of them im the [:me Proportion to one anotber , com-
par'd with their ſever of Diſtances from each of them :
On Which Hypothelis, 1his Proportion [wits the Phac-
nomena of Nature, the (ame muſt be the true one ,
and to be fully acquieſc'd im. Now "tis known, That
on the Hypothelis of the Earth's Annual Motion, her
iodical Time exactly (uits, and is ſo berween that of
/enus and Mars, as the Proportion obſery'd through
the whole Syſtem, and demon({trable 3 priori, withal,
exattly requires; but on the other Hypotheſis 'tis
enormouſly different. For when the Mom undoubtediy,
and on this Hypotheſis rhe Sun al/o , revolves about
our Earth; and when the diſtance of the Sum is to
that of the Mcon as about 10000 to 46; and the
Meon's periedical Time leſs than 28 days ; the peric-
dical Trme of the Sun i; by the Rule of Three di/-
coverable thus : As the Cube of the Moon's diſtance, 46
cqual to 973 36; 10 the Cube of the Sun's 10000 equal
tO 1900000000000. ( or almoſt as 1 to 10000000)
ſo muſt the Square of the Moon's periodical Time 28
Days equal to 784. be to the Square of the Sun's pe-
riodical Time , 7840000000 53 whoſe ſquare Root,
88204, are Days alſo, equal to 242 Years. So that
on the Hypotheſis of the Sun's Revolution about the
Earth, its periodical Time 'muſt undoubtedly be 242
Years,which all Experience atteſ{s to be but @ ſingle one.
So that at length the Controverſy between the Ptole-
maick and Pythagorean Syſtems of the World is to
# Demonſtration determin'd , and the Earth's Annual
Motion for ever unqueſt ion«bly eſt abliſh'd.

Coroll. 7. Tx certain thoſe Opake Maſſes which
ſometimes appear at the Sun, are not Planets revol-
wving at any the leaſt diſtance from bim , but Spots or
Maculz adbering to him : for whereas they revolve but
onee im about twenty ſix Days; on Calculation it will
appear , that 8 Planet near the Sun's Surface as theſe


muſt


27


28


Fig. 6.


Fig. 6.


LEMMAT 4. Book,


muſt be, cannot bavve three hours allow'd for its
periodical Revolution , which being ſo different from
the foremention'd (pace of twenty fix days, quite decides
that Controverſy, and demonſtrates thoſe Maſſes to be
real Maculz adbering ts the Body of the Sun , as is
bere aſſerted.


its central Body in the Focws thereof, it will move
faſteſt when 'tis neareſt to, and ſloweſt when
'tis fartheſt from the ſaid central Body or Focus ;
and agreeably in the intermediate places. For
ſeeing whereſoever the revolving Body is , the
Area 1s {till proportionable to the time, as was
before ſhew'd; and fo in equal times always

ual ; *tis evident by how much the Diſtance is
les, and the Line from the Focus is ſhorter ; by fo
much muſt the Bodies motion be the ſwifter to
compenſate the ſame: and wice wers# , by how
much the former is longer, by ſo much muſt the
latter be flower to allow for it.

the central Body in the Focus H ; as the Area de-
ſcrib'd by the Line B H, will be exactly uniform
and proportional to the time of Deſcription; fo
the Angular Motion, or Velocity of the Line from
the other Focus B I , will be proportional to the
time, and uniform alſo; tho* not fo Exadtly and
Geometrically.

XXVI. The Law of Gravitation already ex-
an Ellipſis about the central Body in the Focus H,
its Center : If the Semidiameter of the Circle be
equal to HE, the middle diſtance in the EL
lipfs from the ſame Center or Focus , their pe-


niodical Times of revolving will be the my
an


BookI LEMMAT 4.


and when the Diſtances are equal, cheir Velocity
will be ſo too.

Corollary, Tho' therefore the Planets revolve in
Ellipſes of ſeveral Species, yet their periodical Times
may be as well compar'd with one another, and with
therr diſtances from the central Bodies, as if they all
revoly'd in compleat Circles; as was above done.


XXVII. If a Body revolve about a central
Body ,, as about A in a Circle, as Be Eb; and
another revolve about the ſame in the Focus of its
Ellzſis BHF G, fo that the Semediameter of the
Circle were equal to the neareſt diſtance in the
Ellipſis, A B; the Velocity of the Body at the
neareſt Point of the Ellp/is will be greater than
the Velocity of the Body in the Circle ; and will
be to it in half the Proportion of the Latvs reffum
of the Ellipſs p q, to the Diameter of the Circle
e b; or as that Line pq, to a middle proportional
between it ſelf and eb. *'

XX VIII. If one Body revolve round a central
Body in a Circle, and another about the ſame in
that it may paſs for a Parabela; the Velocity of
the Body moving along the Ellipfis , will be to
that of the Body moving in the Circle (the Point
in the Ellipſic being as far from the central Body
as the Circumference of the Circle) very nearly
as ten to ſeven.

XXIX. If a central Body have —_——
revolving about it; *tis perte&ly indifterent in
it ſelf, and with regard to the central Body, in
what Plains ſoever, or which way in thoſe Plains
ſoever, they all or any of them move.

Corollary. Hence ariſes a convincing Argument of
the Interpoſition of Council and Providence m the Con-


ftitution of our Syſtem; m which all the nn m_—_
roe


79


Fig. 3.


P- 13.


LEMMAT 4. Bookl.


the ſame way , from Weſt to Eaſt; and that in
Plains almo#t coincident with one another, and with
that of the Ecliptick, as Mr. Bentley hath alſo ob-
fere'd.


XXX. The Order of the Heavenly Bodies in
the Solar Syſtem is as follows: Firſt of all, The
valt and glorious Body of the Sun is plac'd in the
middle, very near the Center of Gravity of che in-
tire Syſtem, in the common Focus of every one of
the Planetary Orbits. Next to him Mercury de-
Earth rarely obtain a diſtinct view of him. Next to
Merevwry is the Elliprick Orbit of Venus, our glori-
ous Morning and Evening Star. Next to Ven
our Earth, with its attendant the Moon, perform
a joint Courſe, and Meaſure out the Annual
Period. Next to the Earth the fiery Star Mars
alone, without any viſible Guard accompanying


- him, revolves about the ſame Center. Next to


Mars, tho' at a mighty diſtance from him , the
largeſt of the Planets, Fupiter, with his four re-
markable Satellirs; and laſtly Sarwn with tus tive
and moſt remote Orhbirs, and compleat the in-
tire Planetary Chorus, as the Frontiſpiece of the
goon repreſents them to the Contemplation of the
Reader. |


SCHOLIU AM.


Beſides the Planets, whoſe Orbits are not ve-
ry different from Circles, there are another Spe-
cies of Bodies revolving about the Swn in ſuch
Ellipſes , as may pals for Parabola's ,« they are fo


. exceeding Eccentrical; but as regularly retaining


their ſeveral Periods and Orbits, as the Planets
now


Book 1. LEMMAT A.”


now mention'd. But becauſe theſe Bodies will
be more diſtinaly conſider'd hereafter, I ſhall
wave their farther Conſideration at preſent, and
proceed.


XXXIT. The periodical Times of each Planet's
Revolution about the Swn, are as follow.


Re


S. ja -

Mercury 00 —— OBS —— 00
Venus revolves a- \ 00 — 224—1 8
The Earth k bout the Joo-— 365 —06
Mars Sun in the Yol—315-—0o0

- TFupiter ſpace of I 2 — 000 ——-0OQ
Saturn 30 —— COO——00


XXXII. The middle diſtances of the Planets
from the Sun, are as follow.


Mercury \ f o2cg52000 1 Statute
Venus | i5 diſtant | 039096000 Miles,
The Earth ! from the j 054000000 | each
Aars P Sun \ 082242000 F000
Fupiter | | 280582000 | Paris
Saturn | L 513540000 ) Feet.


SCHOLTIU AM.


The Proportions of theſe Numbers are un-
queſtionable : But the Numbers themſelves only
within about a fourth part under or over. The
Reaſon of fuch uncertainty is, That the Sun's
Parallax or Angle which the Diameter of the
Earth would fſubtend to an eye at the Sun, on
which the whole depends , is not yer accurately
determined. by Aſtronomers ; ſo that between
24 and 40 Seconds, no number can be certainly

picch'd


31


wp ©


32


LEMMATA4. Bookl.


pitch'd' upon , - till farther Obſervations put an
end to our Doubes. On which Account I have
endeavour'd to come as near to Probability as
poflible , and have ſuppos'd the Sun's Parallax
32” in a middle between the two foremen-
tion'd Extreams ; and from this Hypotheſis made


- theſe and the following Calculations ; which


therefore cannot well be above a fourth part un-
der or over the truth, but very probably are much


Nearer it.


XXXIII. The quantity of Matter in ſuch of
the Heavenly Bodies as afford us means of deter-
mining the ſame, is in the Proportions follow-


ing.
The Sttn's — =— 66690.
Titſpiter's nm — 0006c4.
Saturn's — —— ©00028z.


The Earth's noon nn == COOOT.
The Moon's ——— 0002


SCHOLIU AM.


Becauſe the Solidity or Quantity of Matter in
Bodies is in a triplicate Proportion of their Dia-
meters; that ſmall uncertainty in the Sun's Pa-
rallax beforemention'd , imports a great deal in
the preſent Calculation. I ſhall therefore give
the Reader the Proportions of the Quantity of
Matter in the Heavenly Bodies on the two ex-
tream Hypotheſes, as well as I have done on the
middle one; only informing him, 'that the Hypo-
theſis of 24” ſeems nearer the truth than the op-
poſite extream of 40”, as being neareſt the ac-
curate Obſervations of our great Aſtronomer
Mr. Flamſteed. The quantities of Matter there-
fore, are as follow,

The


Bookl; LEMMATA4. 33


The Sun's—=28700 lf the | The Sun's—136560 If the
Tupiter's —00026nf Sun's | Fupiter's —0001243 { Sun's
Saturn's — 00012; PParal- | Saturn's-—0000 574 ÞParal.
The Eartb'-00001 Wax be | The Earth's-000001 \ lax be
The Moon's-0000c4, 40”. | The Moon's-000000%4; ) 24”,


Corollary. The weight of Bodies at equal diſtances
from the Sun and Planets, being in the ſame Propor-
tion with the Quantity of their Matter , as has been Lim. 7,
already ſaid ; the ſame Numbers aſſign'd in the laſt pris
Lemma , which explam the latter , ſerve equally to
explain the former alſo.


XXXIV. The Diameters of the Sun and Pli-
nets, are as follows. |


The Sun's 494100 1

Saturn's —043925

Tulpiter" 5m — 052522

Mar' 5- = 002816 1! Statute Miles, each
The Earth's 008202 f 5000 Paris Feet.
The Moon's ——— 00222}

Venus's — 004941

Mercury's =——— 002717


XXXV. The weight of Bodies on the Surface
of the Sw , and thoſe Planets mention'd in the
33" Lemma before, is as follows. On the Sur-
ace of (


The Sun
The Earth ——— ——— 0125 8
Fupiter — — 04
The Moon — —— —— -00630.


Saturn W—— — —©0F36.


I XXXVI. Thg


34


LEMMAT 4. Bookl,


XXXVI. The Denſities of the ſame, ( what-
ever be the Sun's Parallax) 1s as follows.


The Vf00n' 5 eons nmnmmm nn 700.
The Earth's -———- — ——— J87,
The Sun's — | ——_— 0 ——— TOO,


” .
Satire 5 ooo ernrnnnn ern — 60,


XXKXVII. As the weight of Bodies without the
Superficies of the Heavenly Bodies increaſes in a


duplicate Proportion of their nearneſfs to their


Centers; fo within the ſame Superficies, does it
decreaſe in a ſimple Proportion thereof; and is
conſequently greateſt upon the Yuperficies them-
ſelves. Thus a Body at 10000 Miles diſtance
from the Earth's Center, is four times fo hea-
vy as it would be at 20000. But within the
Earth, if a Body were twice as near its Center
as 'tis on the Surface, it would be but half fo
heavy as *tis here; if thrice as near, it would be
bur a third part ſo heavy; if four times as near,
it would be but a quarter fo heavy; and ſo for
ever proportionably. Gravity therefore is moſt
conſiderable on the Surface, decreaſing both ways,
upward in a duplicate Proportion of the reciprocal
Diſtance ; and reowadbbes (= a ſimple dire Pro-
tion thereof.

XXXVIIL If the central Regions of a Globe
contain a ſpherical Cavity within the ſame ; Bo-
dies plac'd therein, from the equality of Attra-
&ion .on every ſide, will not tend any way, Or
gravitate at all, but be as perfely art liberty, as
if they were not affeted by any ſuch Law of At-
traction 'or Gravitation.

XXXIX. "The Aon revolves about the Earth
from Je to Eaſt in 27 Days, 75 Hours, 43 Mi-

. nutes;z


 X=#* RV wr


BookIl. LEMMATA.


nutes ; and in the very ſame ſpace of Time, by
a ſtrange Correſpondence and Harmony of the
ewo Motions, revolves the ſame way about its
own Ax ; whereby (one Motion as much con-
verting it to, as the other turns it from the
Earth) the fame fide is always expos'd to our
ſighr.

BXL The Librations of the Moon's Body, which
cauſe not exactly the ſame Hemiſphere thereof
to be perpetually expos'd to our ſight, ariſe from
the Eccentricity of the Moon's Orbit , from the
Perturbations by the Sun's Attrattion, and from
the Obliquiry of the Ax of the Diurnal Rotatiort
to the Moon's own Orbit, without the knowledge
of which Circumſtances her Phznomena were in-
explicable, but by the conſideration of them args
very demonſtrable.

XLL. In the 2365 year of the Fulian Period ,
the Autumnal Equinox was on the 11 day of
Ottober. "Tis evident from the Aſtronomical
Tables of the Anticipation. of the Equinox, that
in 4044 years ( the time ſince. the beforemen-
tion'd Year) the R—_ have anticipated
20 Days 9 Hours. "Tis alſo evidenc, That
this Year 1696. the Vernal Equinox is on the
9® of March, and the Autumnal on the 12"
of September; 'tis farther evident, That whereas
now the Space from the Vernal to the Autumnal
Equinox is eight or nine Days longer than from
the Autumnal to the Vernal, by reaſon of the
Poſition of the Peribelion of the Earth's Orbir
near the Winter Solſtice; at the time beforemen-
tion'd it was not above five or ſix Days fo. By
the Anticipation therefore of the Equinoxes a-
lone, if the Poſition of the Peribelion had been
always the ſame, the Equinoxes at the time af-
ſigned had been on the 9® of April in the Morn-


K 2 10g,


—


LEMMAT 4. Bookl.


ing, and on the 12% of Ofober in the Evening ;
and the equaller Diviſion of the Year allow'd for,
the Vernal Equinox was on the 10% of April, and
the Autumnal on the 11 of OfFober, as was to
be prov'd.

XLII. Comets are a Species of Planets , or
Bodies revolving about the Sun in Elliptical Or-
bits, whoſe periodical Times and Motions arc
as conſtant, certain, and regular as thoſe of the
Planets , tho' cill very lately wholly unknown to
the- World.

XLIII. Theſe Eliptica! Orbits of Comets are
ſo very Oblong and Eccentrical, that while they
come within our Obſervation, they are bur little
different from Parabola's, and may accordingly
be conſider'd as ſuch.

XLIV. The Plains in which various Comets
move, are themſelves exceeding various, and at
all imaginable Angles of Inclination with one
another, and with that of the Ecliptick.

XLV. The courſe of Comets in their Orbits is
not determin'd one way, ( as is that of the Pla-
nets from Weſt to Eaſt) but indifferently ſome of
them move one way, and ſome another.

Corollary 1. From theſe two laſt Lemmata , '::
evident , that Comets move ſometimes from Ealt ts
Welt, orher times from Weſt ro Eaſt 3 ſometimes from
North to South, other times from South to. North;
or obliquely between any of theſe ways, according as the
Situation of the 'Plains of thetr Orbits, and the Dire-
tions of their Courſes together determine them.

Coroll. 2. Hence *tis certain, That the heawent)
Motions are not perform'd in corporeal Vortices; when
the Comets exattly obſerye the ſame Laws and Velocity
of Motion , whether they revolye with or againſt , or
croſs to the Planets, and the ſuppos'd fluid Matter of
the Vortices,


XLVI. Comets


— ny + Aa gow — FEARED Y


Bookl, LEMMAT 4.


XLVIL: Comets in their deſcent to, and aſcent
from the Sun, paſs gw through the Planetary
Syſtem ; as may be ſeen in the Frontifpiece.

Corollary. Hence we may obſerve a new peſſible
Cauſe of vaſt Changes in the Planetary World, by the
acceſs and approach of theſe waſt and hitherto lutle
known Bodies to any of the Planets.


« XLVIL If a Comet in its deſcent to, or
aſcent from the Sun, approach near to a Planet as
it paſſes by, and its Plain be different from that in
which the Planets move ; by its attractive Power
it will, agreeably to the univerſal Law of Gra-
vitation of Bodies, draw it from the Plain in
which it before mov'd , and fo cauſe it afterward
to move in a new one, inclin'd to the former,
bur paſſing through the Swn, as the former did.

Corollary. Hence "tw ſuppoſable, That tho" the
Planets originally revoly'd im the ſame common Plain,
get by the | "a Attrattion of Comets, their Plams
may now be inclin'd to one another, and different; as
"tus certain de facto they now are.


SCHOLIU


When the Law of Gravitation is univerſal and
mutual , 'ris evident, The Planet would draw
the Comet from its Plain, as well as the Comet
would draw the Planet; and fo generally, what
effects ſoever the Comets could have on the Pla-
nets, the latter would have correſpondent ones
on the former. But as this Indication once gi-
ven for all, there is no neceſlity of raking nonce
of the changes in the Comets; fo accordingly,
in what follows, I ſhall wholly omit the ſame;
and confine my ſelf to ſuch things as will be im-
mediately uſeful in the following Theory.

[| ka XLVIIL


37


*- eo”


z3$


Fig. 3.


Lem. 11,
12, 13.
privy.


LEMMAT A. Bookl,


XL-VIIL. If a Comet revolving in the ſame
Plain with a Planet, whoſe Orbit is a perfe&t
Circle, as it paſſes by, approach near it, y AC
celerating or retarding the Velocity of the Planet,
it would render its Orbit Eliptical. Thus if B
were a Planet revolving about the San at the
Center A, in the circular Orbit Be Eb; and a
Comer either in irs deſcent towards, or aſcent
From the Sn ſhotild pafs near ir, it would agree-
ably to the univerſal Law of Gravitation of Bo-
dies, accelerate ir, if concurring with, or retard
ing it, if contraditing the Planet's own annual
Motion along the ter ye ' of its Circle. Where-
upon the concentrica it would become ex-
centrical, and the Planet would afterward re-
volve in an Ellis, which on an Acceleration
would be bigger, and on a Rerardation lefs
than the Circle which it had till then deſcrib'd
the former repreſented by BHFG, the latter
by BELI. For when the original Velocity of
B was exactly adjuſted tro the Sun's Power of
Attration, and its Orbit thereupon a perfect
Circle, this new Acccleration or Retardation
muſt render it afterward incommenſurate, and
too. great, or too little for the ſame ; and accord-
ingly the Orbit to be afterward agreeably to
what has been formerly explain'd, deſcrib'd by
the Planet, muſt be an Elip/; and bigger or
leſs than the former Circle, as the force was
direqed for, or againſt, the Planer's own Mo-


c10n.
Corollary 1. In this Caſe the Sun would nd longer


be in the Center of the Figure, but in bwie of the Foci,
Viz. m the nearer FOCUs of the larger, and the farther

of the ſmaller Ellipſis.
Coroll. 2. If B were the Earth moving circularly
abent the Sun from Welt to Eaft, i. e. from B bye,
E b


Book I, LEMMAT A.


Eb to B again; and a Comet h in its deſcent towards
the Sun ſhould paſs by before it, or on the Eaſtſide; the
annual Motion of the Earth/would be accelerated ,
and its circular Orbit degentrate mto the larger El-
lipſis BH F G, about ihe Sun im its nearer Þ'0-


cus A.


%LIX. If a Comet in paſling by as before, ac-
celerate the Plancts Motion, and fo enlarge the
Orbit, the Planets periodical Time of revolving
will be enlarg'd, and become longer thereby. In
like manner, if the Comet retard the Planets
Motion , and fo diminiſh the Orbit, the pcrio-
dical Time of revolving will be lefſen'd , and
become ſhorter. And ſtill the more conſiderable
the Acceleration or Retardation is, compar'd
with che original Velocity of the Planet, the
greater will be the eccentricity, and the greater
difference between the former- and latter Orbis,
and the former and latter periodical Times of re-
volving alſo.

Corollary 1. If in the foregomg Caſe the Semidia-
ter of the ancient Circle, with the middle Diſtance
in the Ellipſis afterward deſcrib'd be given, as alſo
the periodical Time of revolving in the latter, the
periodical Time of revolyuing in the former is at the
[ame time determin'd. For as the Cube of the mid-
dle Diſtance im the Ellipſis, to the Cube of the Semi-
diameter of the Circle, ſo is the Square of the perio-
dical Time in the-Ellipſis, to the Square of the perio-
dical Time in the Circle. So that three of thoſe terms
being known , which is bere ſuppos'd; the fourth, by
the Golden Rule, is known alſo, whoſe ſquare Root
anſwers the demand of this Corollary.

Coroll. 2. When therefore the three Poſtulata's now
mention'd are given in the caſe of the Earth, (ſuppo-
ſg that ut anciently revoly'd in a circular Orbit ) as

K 4 will


39


Fig. 3-


LEMMAT 4. Bookl,


will hereafter appear ; the time of its annual Revolu-
tion im that original and circular Orbit may eaſily be at
this day diſcover d.


L. If a Planet moving in a circular Orbit were
accelerated by an Attraction diretly along its -
Tangent or Periphery ; the preceding Angle
made by the Tangent and Radius CBA would
ſtill remain a right one, and the point B, where
the Acceleration happen'd, would afterward be
the neareſt to the Focus, or the Peribelion in the
Ellipfis afterward to be deſcrib'd. So if it were
alike direRly retarded along its Tangent or Peri-
phery , the Angle would ſtill be a right one
and the Point B where the Retardation hap-
pen'd, would be the fartheſt from the Fees, or
the Aphelion in the Ellipſs to be afterward de-
ſcrib'd. :

LI. If therefore ſuch Acceleration or Retar-
dation were cauz'd by a Body moving uniformly
o_—. its Trajectory on each ſide of the Planets
circular Periphery , the oblique Acceleration
above, wou'd rake off the nearly equal oblique
Retardation below, or the contrary ; and there-
by the effet afterward remaining would be all
one, as i the prevailing force, whether of Acce-
leragon or Retarlation were only along the
Tangent or Periplicry ; all one, as if the whole
Attraction were caus'd while the attracting Bod
was at or near that Tangent or Periphery it ſelf;
and by conſequence the Point B would be, as
above, the Peribelion or Aphelion of the Ellipſis af-
terward deſcrib'd. :

LII. But by rcaſon that Bodies revolving about
the Swz, move ſtill ſwifter when nearer, and
ſlower when farther off; the Motion of a Comet
is ſwiſter within than without the Periphery of


the


Bookl. LEMMAT A.


the fore-mention'd Circle. If therefore (to omie
here and hereafter caſes not to our purpoſe) a Co-
metin its deſcent towards its Perihelion paſs juſt be-
fore the Body of a Planet, and Accelerate it ; be-
cauſe the time of Acceleration without the Peri-
phery of the Circle islonger than the time of the
retardation within it , the effects of the outward
oblique Attraction muſt be ſomewhat more than
of the inward ; and the preceding Angle become
ſomewhat obtuſe. Thus if a Comet in its deſcent
from X by h to W Accelerate thePlanetB ;
by reaſon of the prevalence of the outward

lique Attraction, the Planet will be not only
Accelerated, but drawn outward in fome mea-
ſure alſo, and the preceding Angle, which before
was conſtantly a right one, and repreſented by
CBA will be a little obtuſe, and be repreſented
by TB A; and by conſequence the Point B
will be a few degrees paſt the fucceeding Peri-
helion, juſt ſo many as in the ſaid Elligfes are ne-
ceſſary to render the Angle made by the Radius,
or Line from the Focws, and the Tangent, obtuſe
in the ſame proportion with that above-men-
tion'd. So that on ſuch an Acceleration the Pe-
ribelicn will be ſome degrees more backward than
the Pointe B, at which the Acceleration hap-

n'd.

Coroll. If therefore m a given fears a Comet, m
its deſcent towards the Sun, Accelerated the Earth's
Annual Motion, and chang'd its Orbit from a Circle
to an Ellipfis; the degree cf the Ecliptick, and day
of the year, when the ſame Attrattion happen'd,
may be pretty nearly determined by the place of the Pe-
rihelion at the ſame time, from the Aſtronomical
Tables of its Place and Motion.


LIIL If


Fig. 3.


— _ . > ITE mer - *
=


g PRE _ _ —_—


42


Fig. s.


LEMMATA4. Bookl.


LHI. If the neareſt diſtance of a Comet to a
Planet be given, the time of Attration: to be
conſider'd is from thence determinable. Thus
if a Comet in its Deſcent towards the Sun, as
from E to H, paſs'd by a Planet moving in the
Circumference of its circular Orbicfrom A to D,
andſo accelerated the ſame ; Let CG be the Line
deſcrib'd by the Comet while the Planet paſſes
along from B to C, at which laſt Point C the
Comet is ſuppos'd to have been at its neareſt
diſtance, when the Planer is at B; andlet C F
be equal to C G. In this caſe the Acceleration
by the Comet between E and F, being nearly
taken off by the retardation berween Gand H ;
(andthe like isto be ſuppos'd of the Acceleration
beyond E, and the retardation beyond H, not
to be contain'd in the Figure) 'tis evident that
all the Attraction which is to be conſider'd, is


_ that Accelerating the Planet while the Comet


paſſes from F to G, and the Planer from Q to
C : As the ſole view and conſideration of the
Figure it ſelf will give ſufficient evidence. Which
from the Velacity of the motion of Comets and
Planers eaſily calculated, might be ſoon deter-
mined ; if the neareſt diſtance C B were once
aſcertain'd.

Coroll. 1. If therefore the neareſt diſtance C B
were known, and the bigneſs or quantity of Matter
# the Comet it ſelf ; ſeep the time of Acceleration
x withal known ; the quantity of Acceleration, the
mereas'd Velocity of the Planet 5 and by conſequence
the Magnitude of the Elliptick Orba to be afterwards
fri 7; and the perwdical tine of revoluimg anſwe-
Pably thereto, might all be a priori Severe ,

Coroll. 2. Vice verla, If the neareſt diſtance
B C, with the Eccentricity of the ſubſequent Ellip-
tick Orbit, or #: periodical time be given ; the j>

neſs


Book 1. LEMMAT 4A. 43
neſs of the Comet may, on the ſame gromnds, be de-


termin'd al/0.


LTV. If a Comet deſcending towards the Sun
paſs'd near a Planer which had a ſecondary one
revolving about it; unleſs their ſituation were ſo
accurately and nicely adjuſted that it approach'd
equally near to them both , theſe two Planets
would-no longer revolve together, but being for
the Sun. Thisis eafily demonſtrable ;z ſince any
diverſity of Attra&tion muſt change each of their
annual Orbits and Periodical times in propor-
tionably different degrees : The leaſt of which
were more than ſufficient to ſuch a purpoſe as we
here are ſpeaking of.

Coroll. If therefore the Planetary Orbits were all
or any of them Orig mally Circles 5 and by the Attrattt-
on of Comets paſſing by, were chang 'd mto Ellipſes 3
The Peſition of their ſeveral Satellits which they [till re-
tam, muſt have been moſt 4; ely and wonderfully adjuſt-
ed, by the Divine Providence, with their fellows 5 with
their Primary Planets and with the Orbits and Pe-
riods of the Comets 5 without which correſpondence the
preſent [yſkem of the World muſt have been waſt ly
alter'd ; and the Primary Planets baws loſt their At-
tendants for ever.


LV. When therefore the Earth ſtill retains
its Secondary Planet the Moon , which at -its
Original Formation belong'd to it ; if its preſenc
Eliiprick Orbit be the effect of the paſſing by of
a Comet, the time of ſuch paſſing by mult have

been about three days after the New or Full Fig. 2;
Moon. Let og repreſent a Section of the Ec-
cliptick Periphery ; in which the Earth a is per-
forming its annual courſe, from Weſt to Eaſt,
or


LEMMAT 4. Bookl.


or from o towards g: Let c be the Moon, per-
forming in like manner, (beſides her menſtrual
revolution the ſame way, from t by c towards s,
about the Earth,) her annual courſe, with the
ſame Velociry as the Earth, from u towards w,
along her Periphery u w, equidiſtant from the
Eccliptick o g: Let n m repreſent the trajectory
of the Comer, interſe&ting the Line pafling
through the Sun I i, in the Angle m b i of 12,
14, or 16 degrees more or leſs : Let b bethe Co-
met deſcending from n towards m in its approach
towards it Peribe/:on : From the Earth's Center,
from d and x, (the Line a x being drawn pa-
rallel to the Comets Trajectory n m,) let Fall
En to the Trajectory af, de, x y.
ow if while the Comet were paſling from f
to y, the Moon ſtood till, and did not proceed
in her annual courſe along her Periphery u w,
ſhe muſt have been at that Point x, ornot above
one day paſt the newat t; and fo the neareſt di-
ſtances af xy being equal, the Attractions of the
Earth by the Comet at f, and of the Moon by
the Comet at y, would have been equal alſo ;
and by <enſequence this poſition would have ſe-
cur'd the furure agreement and company of theſe
ewo Planets, and the time of the paſling by of
the Comet fix'd to a ſingle day. after the New
Moon. Bur by reaſon of the Moons progreflive
annual motion along her Periphery u w, while
the Comet deſcends from t towards y ; the muſt
have been in that Point of her Menſtrual Orbit
c, wherecd isto cq ord a, as her Velocity to
the Comets, or as 7 to 10; that ſo the Comet
deſcending from its neareſt diſtance to the Earth
at f, to its neareſt diſtance ro the Moon at e ;
and the Moon arrivingatthe fame time, by her
annual motion, at the Point d , the neareſt di-
ſtances


Bookl. LEMMAT 4.


ſtances a f;d e os {till be equal ; and the acce-
leration of the Earth and the Moon may ſtill be
the ſame. Now this being the caſe ; the placeof
the Moon c muſt be about 41, 43, or 45 de
more or leſs paſt the Point te, in its Menſtrual
Orbit, or the Conjunction with the Sun or three
days paſt the New Moon. And the like will be
demonſtrated of three days paſt the Full Moon,
by the ſame figure and feaſoning ; if we do but
ſhift the Scene, andler c repreſent the Earth, and
u w the Ecliptick Periphery ; a the Moon, and
o g its Periphery. For all the reſt remaining as
above; the Angle & c a which the Moon a muſt
have paſs'd after the full at 7, being equal to the
alternate ca t , would require equal time to be
deſcrib'd ; and fo the time proper for the ſitua-
tion of the Earth and Moon, (which is equally
neceſſary in this as in the former caſe) as the
Figure repreſents it , will be three days after the
Full ; as this Corollary afferts.

Coroll. If therefore in a grven year 4 Comet m its
deſcent towards the Sun Accelerated the Earth and
Moon's annual motions, and thereby chang'd their Or-
bit from a Circle to an Elliptis ; when :he day of the
gear, from the place of the Perihclion, were pretty
nearly determined ; by thi; laſt Lemma, the very
day :s determined alſo from the iſt romomicat Tables of
the Conjunttions of the Sun and Moon.


LVI. If our Earth once revolv'd about the
Sun in a.circular Orbit, whoſe Semidiameter
were equal to the Earth's original diſtance from
the Sun ſix degrees paſt its Perihelion, che an-
nual per:od was exactly cqual to 12 Synodical or
13 Periodical Months. "Tis evident that 12 Sy-
nodical or 13 Periodical Months, (equal to each
other in the preſent caſe,) are 355 days 4 hours

19


LEMMAT 4 BookT[,


19 minutes. *Tis alſo evident that the Eccen-
ericity of the Earth's Orbit, or the diſtance be-
eween the Focus and Center of irs Ellipfs, was,
according to the ancient Aftronomers, Hippar-
chas and Ptclomy, x5, of the intiremiddle diſtance.
By the Moderns 'tis found ſomewhat leſs, (and
thoſe who know Mr. Newton's Philoſophy will
eaſily allow of ſome diverſity in different ages; )
by 7ycho 'ewas determin'd to be near 8; ; by
Caſſaui ſince 3 and laſt of all by our moſt accu-
rate Obſerver Mr. Flamſteed, (as he was pleas'd
by Letter with great freedom to affure me,)
1692., Or NEAT 1, as Caſſini hadbefore determin'd.
All which conlider'd, we may very juſtly take
the middle between the Ancient and the Modern
Eccentricity ,22; for the true original one; and
about x; or more nicely 3$; for the difference
berween the ancient Semidiameter of the circular
Orbit,andthe middle diſtance in che nt Ellp-
rick one ; (the point of acceleration being abour
6 degrees paſt the Peribe/on,not juſt at it, as is be-
fore prov'd.) Then by the Golden Rule, as the
Cube of 100000, (the middle diſtance in the
Ellipſis,) to the Cube of 98154, (the Semidia-
meter of the Ancient Circle) ſo is the ſquare of
525949, (thenumber of minutes in our preſent
Solar ycar,) to the ſquare of the number of Mi-
nutesin the ancient Solar year, whole Root being
511459 minutes, or 355 days 4 hours 19 minutes,
appears tobe exactly and ſurprizingly equal to
the Lunar year before mention'd.

Coroll. Upon ths Hypotheſis rhe Ancient Solar
and Lunar year were exattly commenſurate and equal ;
and 10 days, 1 hour, 3o minidtes, ſhorter than the pre-
ſent Solar year. Which laſt number tho'.it be not
equal to the Lunar Epact at preſent; s yet rightly
aſſign'd ; each Synodical Month being (by the quicker


angu


Book1 LEMMATA.


angnlar revolution of the Earth then) ſo much lowger,
as upen the whole aoppas the periods as 1: aboue fta-
ted ; which oncalcu/ation will eaſily appear.


 T.VIE. As Comets agree with Planets in a re-
gular Motion about the Sun, the common Cen-
ter or Foexs of our BO ſo do they oe to their
bulk and magnitude; being, generally ſpeaking,
abour the bienef of Planers, _ the obſervations
of Aſtronomers demonſtrate.

LVIII. Beſfidesthe Bodies of the Comets them-
ſelves, which are folid, compact, and durable ;
there is round about the ſamea vaſtly large, thin,
pellucid Fluid ; containing withal great quanti-
ties of Opake or Earthy Particles; conſtitutin
together a confuſed , irregular, unequally dit-
pos'd, and uncertainly agitated Maſs of Bodies;
whoſe Diameter is ro if not 15 times as long as
that of the Body it ſelf, and this Maſs is call'd
the Atmoſphere thereof.

LIX. By reaſon of the mutual acceſs, and re-
ceſs of the Comets to, and from the Sun, their
Armoſpheres are uncapable of attaining, or at
lcaſt of long retaining any regular and order
ſituation and diſpoſition of parts accord-
ing to the Law of Specitick Gravity. In ſhort,
while they are mov'd in fo exceeding Eccentri-
cal Orbits, they can neither acquire, or at leaſt
not long preſerve, ſuch a permanent conſtitution
as the Planets have, and as the conſervation of
Plants and Animals do neceſlarily require, and
are therefore to be look'd upon in their preſent
ſtate as uninhabitable.

L'X. But in caſe the Orbit of a Comet were
chang'd into that-of a Planet, 7. e. if its Eccen-
erical Elipſis were turn'd into a Concentrical
Circle, or an Elligffr not much differing __

rom


LEMMAT 4. BookT,


from ; at a ſuitable and convenient diſtance
from the Sun ; there is no reaſon to doube but
' the parts of that confuſed Atmoſphere which
now encompaſs it to ſuch a prodigious diſtance,
would ſubſide and ſettle downwards according to
their ſeveral Specifick Gravities ; and both obtain
and preſerve as ſetled, fixt, and orderly a conſti-
tution as a Planet has : Which Conſtitution, if
the Atmoſphere of a Comet were as well pre-
diſpos'd for the ſame as the original Chaos of a
Planet, would produce a Planet as fit for the
growth of Vegetables and the habitation of A+
nimals as that on which we live, or any other in
the Solar Syſtem. |

LXI. Beſides the Central Solid, or Body of
the Comet, and its vaſt Atmoſphere encompaſl-
ſing it, thereis alſo a long lucid Train, which in
the approach to the Sun is by it acquir'd ; and
appears to be nothing elſe bur the Lighteſt and
Rarelt parts of its Atmoſphere rarified by the
Sun's heat; which becoming thereby lighter
than the Sun's own Atmoſphere, riſe in a miſt or
ſteam of vapours towards the parts oppoſite to
the Sun; and are call'd the 7ail of it.

LXII. This immenſe Cylindrical Column of
rarifi'd Vapour, tho' its Craflitude or Diameter
be uſually more than 400000 miles, is ſo very
much expanded, and in ſo exceeding rare a con-
dition, that the fix'd Stars may be diſcern'd quite
through the ſame.

LXIIE. This fo rare, fine, expanded Vapour
moves regularly with, and accompanies the Co-
met ir ſelf in its intire courſe, any way what-
ſoever; even through the Syſtem of the Planets,
and that without any diſturbance.

Coroll. The waſt ſpaces between, and beyond the


Planets are not ſull of ſubtile or ethereal matter ;
bur


6a. a ® = =


BookI, LEMMATA.


but either perfeFly, or at leaſt ſenſibly a real vacunm
or word.


LXIV. The Phenomena of Comets Motioris
ſuppoſe and depend on the annual motion of the
Earth , without which they are inſoluble. Thus
they ſometimes ſeem ro move with greater ,
ſometimes with leſſer Velocity, than the rules
of their own, or indeed any other regular mo-
tion require or permit: Nay ſometimes they ap-
pear to us Stationary and Retrograde: All which,
as in the Planets, will naturally ariſe from the
motion of the Earth, and of the SpeRtators Eve
therewith, and is thence exa&tly deducible ; bur
without that Hypo:beſfe, cannot be accounted for.
Thus alſo towards the end of their appearances
they ſeem to deflect from that great Circle in
which chey before were ſeen to move ; the motion
of the Earth then being more conſiderable com-
par'd with that of the Comets ; and fo cauſing a
more ſenſible Parallax or diverſity of appearance
than before, while their own motion was fo
much ſwifrer: And the ſame i obſervable in
their other Phammena.

Corollary. Hence ariſes a convincing argument fer
the annual motion of the Earth:Which, as 'rwas known
to be neceſſary to account for the Phanomena of Pl:=
nets before 3 ſonew appears 10 le(s /6 m relation t otheſe
of the Comets. All the Heavenly Motions at laſt atteſt«
mg the truth, and eſtabliſhung the certainty of the /ame.


LXV. Some Comets approach in their Per:-
helia ſo very near to the Sun, that they muſt be
prodigiouſly heated and ſcorch'd thereby ; and
this to ſuch a degree that they may not be in-
tirely cool'd in very many thouſands of years.
Thus the laſt famous Comet 1680, 1681. at its

L Perihelicn


49


LEMMAT 4. Bookl,


Perihelion on the 8 of December 1680, ſuſtain'd a
degree of heat 280co times as great as that we feel
with us in Summer ; or about 2000 times as in-
tenſe as is that of a red hot Iron. So that, by Mr.
Newton's Calculation, if that Comet were as bi
as our Earth ; as Denſe and Solid as Iron ; an
were throughout equally heated to the fore-men-
tion'd degree, *twould ſcarce in our Air be fully
cool'd in go000 years. And by conſequence in
the vaſtly rarer Atmoſphere of the Sun, in which
the Heavenly Bodies revolve, not under a vaſtly
longer time. |

Corollary 1. Comets do not wholly conſiſt of wa-
pours, exhalations, or ſuch other diſſipable matter, as
was formerly ſupposd : Otherwiſe they muſt bave
been utterly uncapable of | uſt aming any part of [o wic-
lent a heat, (which yet we ſee they ſometimes do)
without an mire Diſſipation and Diſſolution.

Coroll. 2. When the Atmoſphere of a Comet is
chiefly a Fluid, and yet but a [mall part thereof by the
utmoſt heat capable of rarefattion (which appears
from the but ſmall diminution of the Atmoſphere when
the Tail is largeſt, and the Heat moſt intenſe) "tis
eviden: that its Fluid ts a wery different one from thoſe
we are here acquagzted withal, For when the mam
bulk thereof retains jts conſtitution and ſit uation ”m
through the attion of the moſt wiolent heat imaginjble ;
which" would diſſipate and ravifie all the Watery, and
perhaps Earthy parts wiſible with ws 3 it muſt, by its
mighty denſity, gravity, compbattneſs, or ſome other
property not belonging to Fluids here on Earth, be un-
capable of greater expanſion than it has of it ſelf ;
and be a Compatt, Denſe, or Heavy Fluid, or Maſs of
Fluids, of which2ve have no obvious example ; and for
which we have no proper Epithet or Name among + ws.

Coroll. 3. 7ho Vapour, or the [mall parts of Wa-
ter, be the ſooneſt ſubjeff to rarefattion ; and a

Tat


BookI, LEMMAT 4.


Tail of a Comet, before its approach to the Sun, be
therefore perbaps nothing but a miſt or ow of ſuch
Vapours ; yet may the [ame Tail = the Perihelion
be in part compo/ed of more groſs avy and opake COT -

wſcles. For when the intenſeneſs of the heat in the
Perihetion is __ to diſſolve and rarifie not 4ya-
pour alone, but Sulphur, Niter, Coal or other Groſs and
Earthy Steams and Exhalations 3 whatſoever of fuch
a Nature the Atmoſphere of the Comet contains, will
[ure be m ſome ſort affetted, and elevated with the
Vapour mto the Tail, upon ſuch an oach of the
Comet to the Sun- as we are [peaking of. Tho' there-
fore the Tail ſhould be ſuppos'd in its deſcent towards
' the Sun to bepure unmixed Vapour, or Watery Particles,
(as withal the outmoſt regions of the Atmoſphere it
ſelf m probability are) yet the ſame Tail after the
Perihelion, ought to be eſteem'd a more Heterogeneous


and impure mixture ; eſpecially in the loweſt ſpaces of


it, and thoſe parts which are neareſt to that Atmoſphere
i: ſelf, from whence the whole does proceed,


LXVI. The Diurnal Motion of Planets is in it
ſelf perfely diſtinct from, and wholly indepen-
dent on the Annual. This I hope will be uni-
verſally granted without any neceflity of a de-
monſtration.

LXVIL. If a Chaos, 4. e. a confuſed fluid maſs
or congeries of heterogeneous Bodies, (ſuppoſe
it were a Comets Atmoſphere, or any other fuch
like irregular compeſitum of mingled corpulcles)
in its formation were ſubject only to an Annual
motion about the Sun, without any Diurnal


Rotation about an Axis of its own ; the Figure ,


thereof would be that of a perfe&t Sphere; as

from the uniform force of Gravity, and conſe-

uent equilibration of parts on all ſides, is eafily

emonſtrable, But if Ivy its Formation it
2


Fi


C2


LEMMAT 4. Bookl.


had a Diurnal Rotation about an Axis of its own,
the Figure thereof, (by reaſon of the great velo-
city and conſequent conatns recedend: &@ centro
motize, diminiſhing the force of Gravity at the
Equatorial parts) would be that of an oblate Spha-
roid, ſuch as an Ellip/is revolving about its leſſer
£x:1s would generate.

LXVIII. If a Planet conſiſted in great mea-
ſure of an Abyſs or Denſe Internal Fluid, and a
Cruſt or Shell of Earth plac'd on its Surface; tho”
the Diurnal Rotation were not begun at the For-
mation thereof from a Chaos, and fo its original
figure were Spherical; yet upon the commen-
cing of the ſaid Diurnal Rotation, it would de-
generate immediately into that of an cblate Spha-
roid, and retain it afterward, as well as if it had
put on the ſame atits primary formation.

Corollary. It ben therefore the greater quickneſs
of the wibrations of the ſame Pendulum, and the
greater gravitation of Bodies near the Poles than the
Equator, conſequent thereupon, demonſtrate the former
Regions of the Earth to be nearer its Center than the
latter; and that conſequently the Figure 15 that of an
Oblate Spharoid ; "ris evident, that either the Diur-
nal Motion commenc'd be/ore the Original of its pre-
ſent conſtitution ; or that its internal parts are in ſome
degree” Fluid, and ſo were pliable and altorable on the
after commencing of ſuch Diurnal Rotation. And
this Corellary extends equally, if no: more to Jupiter ;
whoſe Diurnal Rotation 1s quicker than our Earth's,
and by conſequence its Figure farther from Spherical,
Tous by Mr. Newton's Calculation the Diametcr
of the Equator of the Earth zs to the Axis thereof on-
ly as 692 io 609. Put m Jupiter, accordirs to the
ſame Mr. Newton's Calculation Cerretted, as
about 8 to 7. Which is wery conſiderable and ſenſible 3;


and accordirrly atteſted to by the concurrent ob(erus-


twnsof Cathini, and Mr. Flamltced. LXIX.


Book Il, LEMMAT 4.


LXIX. If ſuch an Upper Cruſt or Shell of
Earth on the face of the Abyſs, were Fix'd and
Conſolidated before the Diurnal Rotation there-
of commenc'd, it would remain intire, continued,
and uniced all the time of its Spharical Figure,
or all the time it had no other than an Annual re-
volution. But by the beginning of the Diurnal
Rotation ; which would make the ſurface of the
Abyſs and its ſuſtained Orb of Earth put on the
Figure of the Oblate Sphrroid before-mention'd ;
that Upper Orb mult be ſtretch'd, chap'd, and
crack'd ; and its parts divided by perpendicular
Fiſſures. For the Periphery of an El/y/is being
larger than that of a Circle where the Area 15
equal ; and the Superficies of a Spheruid genera-
ted by irs circumvolution, conſequently, larger
than that of a Sphere generated by the like cir-
cumvolution of the Circle, which is the preſent
caſe ; that Orb of Earth, 'tis plain, which ex-
actly fitted, and every way enclos'd the Abyſs
while it was a Sphere, would be too little and
ſtraight for it, when it after became a Spheroin ;
and muſt therefore ſuffer ſuch Breaches and Fif<
ſures as are here exprefs'd. _

LXX. The ſtate of Nature in a Planet, con-
ſtiruted as above, while it had only an Annual
revolution, would be as follows.

(1.) By reaſon of the ſame face of the Planet's
reſpecting continually the ſame Plaga of the Hea-
vens, or the ſame fixt Stars; and its continual
parallelliſm to ic ſelf; all the apparent revolu-
tion of the Sun muſt depend on the Annual Mo-
tion ; and a Day and a Year be all one. This
is evident, becauſe, as a Year is truly that ſpace
in which the Sun ſeemingly, and the Earth
really performs a ſingle revolution round the
Ecliptick ; fo a Day is truly that ſpace in which


L 3 the .


53


LEMMAT A. Bookl,


the Sun paſſes or appears to paſs from any cer-
tain Semi-Meridian to the | rank again once:
Which ſpaces of time are here the very ſame,
andſo the appellations themſelves Year and Day,
may indifferently and promiſcuouſly. be appli'd
thereto.

(2.) The courſe of the Sun and Planets, (for
the fixt Stars were then F:xt indeed ; having
neither a Real nor Seeming motion) muſt be
contrary to what it has appear'd ſince: Their
Riſing being then in the #*#, and their Setting
in the Faſt: Which, from the way of the pre-
ſent Diurnal Rotation, has ſince, as all know,
been quite different.

(3.) There muſt be a perpetual Equinox, or
equality of Day and Night, through the whole
Planet ; by reaſon of the Sun's deſcribing each
revolution a great Circle about the ſame , on
which alone fuch an equality depends.

(4.) The Ecliptick muſt ſupply the place of
an Equator alſo ; and the Torrid, Temperate,
and Frigid Zones be' almoſt alike diſpos'd with
regard to that Circte, as with us they are with
regard to the real Equator.

(5.) To ſuch as liv'd under or near the faid
Fcliprick, the Poles of the World or Ecliptick,
the only ones then in Being, would beat the Ho-
rizon; and fo not elevated or deprefs'd to the
Inhabitants there. But upon the commencing
of a quicker Diurnal Rotation the ſame wa
with the Annual. The caſe would be in al
theſe particulars quite different. For,

(1.) By reaſon of the quickneſs of the new
Diurnal, in compariſon of the Ancient and Con-
tinued Annual Revolution , Days and Years
would be intirely diſtin& ſpaces of time : The
Sun returning to the ſame Semi-Meridian very


ofren,


Book I. LEMMAT 4.


ofren, while (from one Tropick to another, and
ſo to the ſame agaia) he appear'd to have com-
pleated his longer Annual period.

(2.) By the Diurnal Rotation of the Planer
from /#*/t to Exf,the revolution of the Sun,of the
other . Planets, and of all the Heavenly Bodies,
would be from Eaſt to Hf ; and they would all
Riſe at the former, and Set at the latter partof
the Horizon.

(3.) The perpetual F.qu:nox would be confin'd
to the Equatorial parts of the Planet; and all
other Countries would have longer Days in Sum-
mer, and ſhorter in Winter, as now obtains in
the World: When only March 10 and September
12 have Day and Night equal to each other
through the whole Earth.

(4) The Ecliptick and Equator wouid be in-
tirely different ; the latter a Real Circle, or
Line, on the Planet ; equally diſtant from its
own proper Poles : The former, conlin'd to the
Heavens , and not with reſpe&t to the Planer,
eaſily to he taken notice of. The Torrid, Tem-
perate, and Frigid Zones would regard the new
Equator, and be from it diſtinguſh'd and dif-
pos'd almoſt in the ſame manner as before they
were from the Ecliptick, and that with greater
nicenels, and more exact boundaries.

(5.) The Poles of the World which before
were to the Inhabitants at or near the ancient
Ecliptick, neither elevated nor depreſs'd, but fi-
tuate at the Horizon, would ſeem intirely
chang'd, and particularly at the Interſe&ion
of ſuch ancient {Ecliptick, and the ſucceeding
Northern Tropick, the North&h Pole would ap-

ear to beelevated above, the Southern depreſfs'd
below the Horizon; and the Sun and Planets,
whoſe Motions were before over the Vertex, and
L 4 at


LEMMATA. Bookl.


at right Angles with the Horizon, would appear
inclin'd or bent towards the Southern parts ;
and-that way become oblique, and at unequal
Angles with the Horizon for ever after.
Corollary 1. To the Inhabitants of that place lift
mention'd, the beg inning of the Night, and f the Au-
trmms or Sun-ſet, and the c\utummal Equinex, would
in ſuch a Primitive State of a Planet, be exactly Co-
incident : And vice verſa, the place to which they were


| fo ceincident, was that Inter/e&iom juſt now aſſign'd,


$ id. Arg.7:
Hyp«t, 1,
amr a.


or at leaſt under the ſame Meridian therewith.

Coroll. 2. Such a Planet weuld be more equally
habitable in the Second than in the Firſt State. For
from the Spherical Figure of the Planet at firſt, the
Central Hot Body , ( of which bereaftir ) would
equally reach all the Regions 3 and the Sun chiefly
affett the Torrid Lon: and ſtill leſs the Temperate,
but leaft of ail the rigid ones 5 as be decs at preſent.
So that if any on? of theſe Climates, by reaſon of the
due proportion of v:at afforded it from the Sun, were
babitable, neither of the ctber ceuld with any ſort of
equality be ſo tro. But when the Figure of the Pl.:-
net became an oblate Spharoid, (4s on the com:-
mencing of the Diurna! Kotatun we bave T7 w 4 it
wenl1) the propertun of neat would be upon the whole
more equable through the |c.ral Climates of the Pli-
ret; the greater vicinity of the Central Hot Body to
the F;:2id Zones, tn ſome mea; ure compenſating the
greater » directneſs of the Sun's Tofiizen to the Torrid
ene ; end rendrims tbe cumpleat ſurf.tce of the Flanet
pretty untverſally bavitable on account thereof.

Coroll. z. {thre the States of External Nature
are jo ery different (as on the ſame Planet before and
after its Diurzal Rotation begin, they appear to be)
tus reaſonable to ſuppoſe, that the Natures, Conftutu-
tions, and Circumſtances of Creatures, which were
gbe Inhabitants im ſuch different States, muſt be

ſuitably


Book I, LEMMAT A.
ſuitably and proportionably different from one ano-


ther.

Coroll. 4. 'Ti therefore, without due allowance
for every thing, wery wnſate arguing from one State or
its Circumſtances 10 another ; ond very unjuſt to con-
clude things unaccountavle or ab/urd m one, only becau/e
they are ſtrange and unknown to the other State. The
like is to be ſaid of Phraſes, Deſcriptions, or Relations
concerning one, which may eaſily be miſunderſtood m
the other , without an exact Conſideration and Allows
ance for the Drveſity of things belonging thereto.


LXXI. If the Armoſphere of a Comet, or
any other ſuch a tiuid confuſed Chaos, were by
a regular and orderly Digeſtion and Subſidence
brought into a conſiſtent and durable ſtate, the
univerſal Law of ſpecitick Gravity mult prevail ,
and each Maſs take its place, generally ſpeak-
ing, according to it ( whether "were tluid or
ſolid ) from the Center to the Circumference of
the whole.

LXXILE Fluids are capable of all degrees of
Denſity and ſpecitick Gravity, as well as Solids.
Thus the Proportion of the heavieſt and lighteſt
Fluids, Quickſilver , and Oyl, are nearly as fif-
teen and one; when yet the Proportion of the
heavieſt ſolid, Gold, and the lighteſt Earth oe
Mold which we t:ind here, is not quite as ten to
one. On which account 'tis highly reaſonable
to allow that poſlibly there may be as much Va-
riety and Diverlity in the Fluids belonging to a
Planet, as we ſee there is in the Solids thereof.

Corollary. From theſe two laſk Lemmata, it ap-=
pears as reaſonable to ſuppoſe a great part of the inter-
nal Conſt itutign of a Planet to be a Fluid, or Syſtem
of Fluids, as to be a Solid or Syſtem of firm and
earthly Strata, which yet is uſually ſuppos'd 5 and which


0


$8


LEMMAT 4. Boekl.


of theſe Hypotheſes be/# /uits the Conſtitution of the
Origmal Chaos, and the Phanomena of Nature af-
rerward, is in reaſon to be embrac'd.


LXXIIL In the Formation of a Planet from
a Chaos, it muſt be much more rare and unuſual
to lodge very heavy Fluids near the ſuperhciary
Regions, among Bodies of a lighter and rarer
Texture, than Solids equally fo. For the Cor-
puſcles of very denſe and heavy Solids, when
they are once entangled among, and mixed with
others, tho' of very different denſity and ſpecifick
Gravity, muſt afterward, let the hes proper for
Bodies of their weight be never to much nearer
the Center, lye according to thcir firlt caſual Si-
euation. Thus if you take duſt of Gold, Silver,
or Braſs, with Sand, Gravel or Saw-duſt, and mix
them, or let them ſubſide indifferently. together,
as they place themſelves ar firit, fo, notwith-
ſtanding their different weight, will they be (i-
tuarte ever after, But in Fluids the cafe is quite
otherwiſe, for they will obtain their due place,
not only when mixed with Fluids, but with any
{olid Corpuſcles whatſoever. Nay, beſides that,
they will penetrate tne Interſtices of heavier Bo-
dies than themſelves ; and unlefs where they are
firmly confolidated or conjoin'd together, will
ſettle into, and fill up the ſame, without any
regard to the Situation according to ſpecifick Gra-
vity. Fluids are compos'd of moveable, ſepara-
ble parts, diffuſing, fubſiding, and flowing eve-
ry where, and thereby will be fo far from reſt-
ing at Regions too high and remote from- the
Center,” conſidering their ſpecifick Gravity, that
how light ſoever they are, unleſs the earth
Parts under them be either fixt and conſolidated,
or their Interſtices already intire!y fill'd and -

cur


Book 1. LEMMAT A.


tur'd, they will infinuate themſelves, and by de-
grees approach as near as poflible ro the Center
of that Planet to which they belong.

Corollary 1. Thy” our Earth ſhould contain waſt

uantities of denſe and heavy Fluids within , as well
as like denſe and heavy Solids; yet "tis more ſtrange
that we have near th: Surface one Specimen of the
former , ( viz. "Quickſilver ) than that we bave ſo
many ſorts, and [o much larger Quantities of the latter
(rhe Mineral and Metallick Bodies) much denſer and
heavier than that common Earth among which they are

ound.

Coroll. 2. No Argument can be drawn from the
variety of denſe and beawvy Solids, and the ſingle in-
ſtance of a den/e and heavy Fluid, to prove the rmpro-
bability of a waſt ſubterraneous denſe and heavy Fluidg
or Syſtem of Fluids, on whoſe Surface our Orb of
Earth may be /appos'd to rely; if the other Phoeno-
mena of Nature require ſuch an Hypotheſs.


LXXIV. If a Chass were chiefly compos'd of
a denſe Fluid, of greater ſpecitick Gravity than
its ſolid dry or carthy Parts, the place of ſuch
a denſe Fluid upon a regular Formation, would
be neareſt the Center, and the ſolid or earthy
Maſs would encompatls it round, encloſe ic with-
in it ſelf, and reſt upon its Surface; and wice
vers4, if an Orb of Earth be ſituate on the Sur-
face of a Fluid, that Fluid is denſer and heavier
than the intire Columns of ſuch an Orb of Earth
conſider'd together.

LXXV. It a Solid be either contain'd in, or
fall pon a Fluid of greater ſpecifick Gravity than
it af. ir will neicher ſink ro the bottom, ſubſide
intirely within,nor emerge quite out of the ſame ;
bur part of it remaining immers'd, che other part
will be extant above the Surface of the Fluid ;


and


60


LEMMAT 4. Bookl.


and that in a different degree proportionably to
the different ſpecifick Gravity of the Solid, com-
par'd with that of the Fluid.

LXXVI. Such a Solid will continue to that


| certain depth immers'd in the Fluid before-men-


tion'd, that if the ſpace taken up thereby were
fill'd with the Fluid, that Portion of the Fluid
were exactly equal in weight to the whole Solid.
Thus, if a Cube of Wood or Brafs were im-
mers'd in a Fluid of ewice its ſpeciticx Gravity,
it would one half ſubſide within, and the other
half be extant above the Surface of the Fluid. If
it were immers'd in a Fluid of thrice its ſpeci-
fick Gravity, two thirds of it would be extant,
and but a third part inclos'd within the ſaid Sur-
facc, and ſuitably hereto in all other Proportions
whatſoever. Theſe two Propoſitions are demon-
ſtrated by Archimedes, and are the known Foun-
dations of Hydreſtaticks.

LXXVIL. If therefore ſolid Bodies, equal in
viſible Bulk, or eaking up equal Spaces, but of
uncqual denſity and ſpecitick Gravity, reſt upon
the Surface of a Fluid denſer and heavier than
themſelves, they muſt remain immers'd in the
ſame in different degrees ; the heavieſt ſinking
deepeſt, and the lighteſt being the moſt extant
above the Fluid. Thus, if ſix ſeveral Cubes of
equal apparent Magnitude, made of Gold, Lead,
Silver, Braſs, Iron, and Stone, were laid upon the
ſame Fluid, denſer and heavier than any of them,
every one ſeverally would fink ſo much deeper
as it was heavier, and thereby the upper Surface
ariſing from them all, become very unequal.

LXXVIIE. If upon the firſt general Digeſtion
and Separation of Parts in a Chaos, the upper
Regions are for the moſt part compos'd of liquid
or tluid Bodies, with only a few dry ,folid,or w—_

”arts


Book Il LEMMATA.


Parts intermixt; the outward Surface, after the
Formation is intirely over, will be ſmooth and
even, as the Surface of Liqours conſtantly of
ie ſelf is. But if, on the contrary, the quantity
of dry, ſolid, or carthy Parts be vaſtly greater
than of the liquid or fluid ones, the Surface will
be rugged and uneven, by the different degree
of the Immerſion of the different Columns there-
of, in that denſe Fluid or Abyſs upon which the
Orb is plac'd.

Corollary 1. In the former caſe all the Corpuſcles
will obtain their proper place, (the Fluidity freely per-
mitting their paſſage) according to their re/pettivve [pe-
cifick Gravity. But mm the latter they muſ* take their
places rather according as they chanc'd to be before ſie
tuate , than according as therr [pecifick Gravity would
of it ſelf determine them. The cafe of that part'of the
Lemma, and of this Corollary, being dImo#t the
ſame wich that before mention'd 5; where the Duſt of
Gold , Silver, or Braſs, with Sand, Gravel, o
 Saw-duſt, are ſuppos'd to be let fall mncertainly upon a
Fluid heavier than the whole mixed Maſs taken toge-
ther; For thoſe Columns where the Gold, and otver
Atctallick Duſt were predominant ſinking fartheſt, and
thoſe where Sand or the other lighter Particles were
ſe, not ſo far mto the Fluid; the upper Surface muſt
be uneven, and withal the everal Species of Corpu/-
cles retain that place where they chane'd to be at firſt
diſpos'd, without any poſſubility of recovering ary other
which by the Law of ſpecifick Grawity were ane to
them.

Coroll. 2. If therefore the upper Regions of 6
Chaos , whoſe quantity of Liquid 15 wery [mail m
compariſon of its ſolid Corpuſcles, do ſubſide mio a Fluid
of greater [pecifick Grawity than its own Columns ta-
ken together are; . an Orb of earth will be compor d
on the Surface of the Fluid, and its different Colunms

beirg


61


LEMMAT 4 Bookl.


being mad: up of Bodies of wery different Natures and
ſpecifick Gravities, (as muſt happen in ſuch a con-
fuſed beterogencons Maſs, as we call a Chaos, parti-
cularly the Atmoſphere of a Comet ) that Orb will
fmk into the Fluid m different degrees, and thereby
render its Surface tmequal, or diſt imguiſhed into Moun-
tains, Plains, and Vallies. So that by bow much any
Columm was compos d of rarer , more porous, and
lighter Bodies, by jo much would it produce a higher
Mountain ; and in like manner , by how much a
Column was compos d of more cloſe, fix'd, denſe and
ſolid Bodies, by ſo much would it produce a lower
Valley ; and jo vice versi, the higher any Mountain,
the more rare, forous, and light its Column ; and the
lawer any Valley, the more fix'd, cloſe, denſe, and ſolid
its Column muſt needs be ſuppor'd.

Coroll. 3. If therefore any Planet be immediately
on its firſt Formation of an unequal Surface, compos'd
of Mecuntains, Plains, and Valleys; and the order of its
internal Strata be diſagreeable to the Law of ſpecifick
Gravity; ut has exattly proper Indications to prove,
that the quantity of Fluids m the upper Regions Was
originally ſmall im compariſon of us earthy Parts,
and that ſuch an uneven Orb is ſituate on a Fluid
denſer and heavier than it ſelf. [Which caſe how ex-
actly it correſponds to the known Circumſtan-
ces of our Earth, is left to the conſideration of the
Reader. |


LXXITX. If any of the Heavenly Bodies be
plac'd near a Planet, by the inequality of its
Actraction of the Parts at unequal diſtances from
it, a double Tide, or Elevation of the Fluids
thereto belonging, whether they be inclos'd
within an Orb of Earth, or whether they be on
its Surface above, mult certainly ariſe, and the
Diurnal Rotation of ſuch a Planet being ſup-


- pos'd,


Book I LEMMAT A.


pos'd, muſt cauſe. ſuch a ſuccefiive Flux and Re-
flux of the ſaid Fluids, as our Ocean is now
agitated by. Thus, if ad bc be the Earth, and
bi D h be a Comet, or any one of the Heaven-
ly Bodies plac'd near the Game, and the upper
Orb of Earth be ſituate above a vaſtly large fluid
Abyſs, the Comet or Heavenly Body will con-
6derably more attract the nearer parts about b,
than it does thoſe about the Line dc, or the
middle parts of the Earth ; by which Attraction
whereever the Particles attracted are not folid,
fixed, and unmoveable, they will be elevated or
raiſed into a Protuberance d bc. In like manner,
the Comet or Heavenly Body will conſiderably
more attract the middle parts near the Line dc,
than thoſe more remote about a, and thereby
occaſion their ſlower Motion towards it ſelf, than
that 'of the foreſaid middle parts; and conſe-
quently permit them to remain farther off the
Center; or which is all one, to elevare them-
ſelves into the oppolite Protuberance d a c. And
this Effect not depending on the Situation of the
Fluid under the Orb of Earth, is equally evident
with reſpe&t to the Atmoſphere and Ocean up-
on , as any Abyſs beneath the ſame, and fo
mult cauſe a double Tide or Elevation of the
Fluids of the Globe. And this double Tide, by
the Diurnal Rotation of the Earth from 1/*/# to
Eaſt, will ſhift continually from Eaſ# to H*/,
and cauſe that Elevation and Depretlion of the
Ocean twice each Revolution , which we fo
wonder at, and take ſo much notice of
amonglt us.

Corollary 1. Hhen therefore the Vieinity of the
Moon, and the Vaſtneſs of the Sun's Body, make
their force conſiderable with regard to the Fluids of our
Earth, their [everal Attraftions muſt produce two fe.

TI'.14


63


Fig. 7+


LEMMAT 4. Bookl.


weral double Protuberances, Tides , or Elevations of
the Ocean and Atmoſphere thereof ; whence muſt ariſe
very remarkable Phanomena relating thereto ; of
which in the following Corollaries.

Coroll. 2. The ſenſible Elevation or Tide would be
only double, as if it aroſe from one of the Luminariesbut
ſuch as from the Compoſition of thetr attrattrue Power.
were to be expetted.

Coroll. 3. When therefore the Sun and Moon's
Forces unite , or when they are ſituate im or near the
ſame Line through the Center of the Earth, which hap-
pens only at the New and Full Moon, the Tides muſt
be the greateſt; and when their Forces contradict each
other, or when they are ſituate in the middle between
the New and Full, at the Quadratures , the Tides
muſt be the leaſt.In the former caſe,the wiſivle Flux and
Reflux ariſes from the Surmme ; and in the latter, from
the Difference of their Attrattions; and ſothe Spring=
Tides, after the New and Full, are the reſult of the
Elevation and Depreſſion of both the Sun and Moon
conjoyntly ; but the Nepe-Tides, after the Quadra-
tures, the reſult only of the prevailing Elevation and
Depreſſion of the Moon above thoſe of the Sun; and
by conſequence , exactly agreeable to experience , much
leſs than the other.

Coroll. 4. 4s if the Luminaries were ſituate m
the Axis of the Earth, the Diurnal Revolution would
not more expoſe any places to therr force one time than
another , and wo Reciprocation of Flux and Reflux
wou!'d ariſe ; ſo the nearer they are to ſuch a Poſition,
the leſs muſt ſuch a Reciprocation be , and the farther
from ſuch a Poſition, the greaters On which account,
The Elevation or Tide muſt be greater aftcr the Equi-
noxial New and Full Moon , than afier the Sol-
ſticial z and the higheſt Spring-Tides be thoſe about
March 10. and September 12. ar all Experience
alteſts them to bez and the Situation of the Luminaries

near


Bookl. LEMMAT 4. F


near the Equator of the Earth, and fartheſ# from the
Poles, does require.

Coroll. 5. When by the Vicinity of the Moon, the
viſible Tides follow ber Influence ; and when withal
our Earth im about 245 Hours, reccyers the ſame Si-
tuation with regard to ber; "tis evident , That in the
ſaid ſpace, each Part of the Ocean muſt have twice
been elevated, and twice depreſs d, or had a double
Flux, and double Reflux of its IWaters, as all Ob/erya-


tion aſſures us it really has.


LXXX. The Elevatians or Tides cauſed by
ewo different ies at&he fame diſtance, are al-
ways proportiohable go the Quantity of Matter
in the ſame attractive Bodies ; as from the force
of Gravitation in general, proportionable to the
attracting Body, will calily be underſtood. Thus
if a Comet or Planet, whoſz Quantity of Mat-
ter were ten or twelve times as much as tlie
Moon's, were at an equal diſtance with her from
the Center of the Earth, the Tides, whether of
the internal Abyſs , if ſuch there be, or external
Air and Water, would be ten or ewelve timcs
as high as thoſe ſhe is the cauſe of with us.

LXXXI. The Elevations or Tides cauſe by
the ſame, or an equal Body at various diſtances,
are reciprocally in a- triplicate Proportion of fuch
diſtances. Thus if the Acer thould approach as
near again to the Earth's Center, as now the is,
the Tides would be eight times as high ; it thrice
as near,twenty ſeven times as high ; if four times
as near, ſixty four times as high as thoſe ſhe at
her preſent diſtance produces.

Corollary 1. Hence appears (which Mr. Bentley
bas in part alſo obſery'd) a ſignal Inſt ance of the D:-
vine Providence reſpctting the Conſtitution of the


J


World, in placing the Heavenly Bodies as ſo waſt a
=> M


I,q


* 67/8 aLCC


65


Germ. $.
P. 14.


Lem 7}.
Pri KS,


Fig. >,


LEMMA T 4. Bookl.
diſt ance ſrom each other, and thegreateſt at the greateſt


d:tonce, that when we conſider it , we cannot but be
amazed at it. For had they been ſituate any whit
rear to one another, they would have caus'd prodigious
Di/erders; and m particulay 2 ſuch deſtrufrve Tides,
whenever there was waſt quantities of Fluids, or a
great Ocean, that neither Plant nor Animal could have
avoided its force, or ſuſtain'd its fury , which by the
wiſe placing the Heavenly Bodies at ſo vaſt a diſtance
w mirely prevented.

Coroll. 2. The ſame _ Providence u alike ,
ard on the like accounts, con{picuous in the ſmaline/s of
the ſecondary Planets ; whoſe nearneſs otherwiſe being
fo great, muſt hawe been attended by the foremention'd
Inconveniences, but is now perfettly ſecure from them.
Thus for inſtance , our ſecondary Planet , the Moon,
hich is ſo near to ms, is withal ſo ſmall, (but the
26" part ſo big as the Earth, not the 700" part ſo
big as Saturn , mor the 1400" as Jupiter , nor near
the millioneth as the Sun) that the Tides ſo cauſed are
but of ſome few Feet im height, wery moderate, not at
all incommodicus , nay in truth very advantagions to
ws, which in the other ſecondary Planets 1s al/o no leſs


true, and no leſs remarkable.
.


I.XXXII. Of the two Protuberances produc'd
by the preſence of a Comet, or other Celeſtial
Body, that which is directly rowards that Body,
as dbc, is larger and higher than the oppoſite
one, dac. This is 4 priori demonſtrable, and
found agreeable to experience alſo.

LXXXIIL If ſuch a double Tide were very
great, and ſhould on a ſudden be produc'd in a
{ubterrancous Abyſs, on whoſe' Surface an Orb
of Earth, fix'd and conſolidated together, were
ſituate, it would raiſe or depreſs the Regions of
that Orb, as it ſelf was rais'd ordepreſs'd; _
; y


Bookl. LEMMATA.


by putting on the Figure of an Oblong Spheroid,
| (fuch as an Ellpſis revolving about its longer Axis
would generate ) and thereby increaſing its Sur-
face ſo much , that the Orb of Earth could not
fir and encloſe it Uniformly as before, would
ſtrain and ſtretch the ſaid Orb of Earth, would
crack and chap it, and cauſe Fiſſures and
Beaches quite through the ſame. All which is


ſaid of a Caſe very agreeable to this we are now


upon, and ſo can ſtand in need of no farther
Explication here.


M2 BOOK


eaſily underſtood from what has been already


67


BOOK IL


HYPOTHESES.


L. HE Ancient Chaos, the Ori-
gin of our Earth, was the
Atmoſphere of a Comer.


This Propoſition, however new and ſurprizing, 5: 5+ 7:
will, I hope, appear not improbable, when I ſhall f:moxi-:
have ſhewn , That the Atmoſphere of a Comet 5 the
has thoſe ſeveral Properties which are recorded bom go i

of the Ancient Chaos: That it has ſuch peculiar js phe.
Properties beſides, as lay a rational Foundation nomenon
for fome of thoſe Phenomena of our Earth, which «ftowa-2.
can ſcarce otherwiſe be Philoſophically ex-

lain'd; and that no other Body, or Maſs of

Bodies now known , or ever. heard of in the
"World, can ſtand in Competition, or ſo much as
pretend to the ſame Charafter, which it fo
agrecably —_—_— to: Which will be the de-
ſign of, and ſhall be compriz'd under the follow-


ing Arguments.


(1.) The Names of theſe two Bodies, or Sy-
ſtems of Bodies, are exactly the ſame, and equal-
ly agreeable to the Nature of each of them.
'The- Original Chaos, by the Ancient Tradition
of the Phenicians, was ftil'd, 'Alg Copulrs &
ard udluins, & Nved *AigOr Cogalus 35 in Engliſh,
A dark and ſtormy Atmoſphere. Which Appella-

M 3 tion,


HYPOTHESES. Book ll.


tion, (the conſtant Character of that Maſs en-
compaſling the Body of a Comer, and art the
ſame time of the old Chaos) if we ſuppoſe ir to
have been as firly by Antiquity appli'd to the
latter , as certainly, Obſervation being judge, ir
is to the former; is as proper a one for our pre-
* ſent purpoſe, as could potlibly be deſir'd.

(2.) The main bulk of the ancient Chaos, and
of the Atmoſphere of a Comet, is a Fluid, or Sy-
ſtem of Fluids. As to the former, tis both ne-*
c:ffary to be gc got in order to the ſucceed-


ing Separation, an


regular Diſpoſition of the


Parts; and is contirm'd by all the Accounts of it.


But 17%


es himſelf being expreſs, I ſhall content


niy felf with his ſingle Teſtimony; who not on-
ly calls it an 6y/s, but gives it the ſtile of W#a-


fi s


Darkneſs was upon the face of the deep, and


Gen. i. 2. the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.
Now,


that the main part of a Comet's Atmo-


ſphere is alſo a Fluid, appears both by its Pellu-
cidnefs, (a thing unuſual in Bodies, but ſuch as
are, or Once were in a fluid Condition) and by
thoſe perpetual Changes and Agitation of Parts
wichin the Regions of it, which in any other
than a Fluid are plainly impoflible ; and which
indeed , withal, have hitherto ſeem'd fo viſible
and remarkable, that thence men were ready to
imagine the whole Maſs to be nothing elſe but a
Congeries of Vapours or Clouds , uncertainly
jumbled rogether, and as uncertainly diffipated


again.


(3-) The Chaos is defcrib'd to have been very
ſtormy and rempeſtuous; of which ſome of the
Ancient Writers take particular notice. To
which thoſe frequent and violent Agitations and
Changes, thoſe ' ({trange , uncertain Hurries of
Opake Mailes hither and thither , which the


Phanomana


Book Il. HYPOT HESES.


Phanomena of Comets Atmoſpheres preſent us
with, moſt exactly agree.

(4.) The Chaos was a mixed Compound of all
forts of Corpuſcles, in a moſt uncertain confus'd
and diſorderly State; heavy and light, denſe and
rare, fluid and ſolid Particles were in a great
meaſure, as it were at a venture, mingled and
jumbled together. The Atoms, or ſmall conſti-
euent Parts of Air, Water, and Earth, (to which,
together with Fire, the name of Element has
been peculiarly appli'd ) every one were in evc-
ry place, and all in a wild and diſturbed Co: f 1-
fron. This is the very Eſſence, and enters the
Definition of a Chaos; in which therefore all
both do, and muſt agree. And if any one care-


fully conſider the perpetually various Viſage cf


a Comet's Atmoſphere, irs va!t Exterit, ths no
manner of Order or Method of its ſeveral Ap-
pearances, and remember that in ſome Comets
it has in its near approach to the Sw, been
ſcorch'd and burn'd by a degree of heat many
hundred times as Intenſe as the Swn's is with us
in the midſt of Summer , he will not wonder
that I ailert the Parts of this Atmoſphere ro be
in a perfectly confus'd and Chaotick Condition.
One might indeed as well, and as reafonably,
expe Order and Method in the ruinous Re-
liques of a City burnt to Aſhes, or in the
Smoke proceeding from the fame, as in feve-
ral, at leaſt, of thoſe Armolſpheres we, are fpeak-
ing of. |

(5.) The ancient Chaos, juſt before the bc-
ginning of the ſix days Creation, was very dark


and caliginous. Darkneſs was utou the face of


the deep, ſays the Sacred, and the very ſame ſay
the prophane Writers. Now , when we every
Year ſee how far that ſmall Company of col-

M 4 leQed


zl


Cen. i. 2.


HYPOTHESES. Book 11;


leted Vapours, of which a Cloud conſiſts, can
go towards caufing darkneſs on the Face of the
Larth; we may -ealily gueſs how thick the Dark-
nefs of the Comet's Armoſphere muſt needs be,
when .all thoſe earthy and watery Corpuſcles ,
which flying up and down in the vaſt Regions
thereot do now fo often, and fo much obſcure
the Comet's central Body, and are here ſo very
{>niible ; when all theſe, I ſay, ſhall riſe up,
and make a confus'd cloudy Orb on the more
c-r:fin'd Surface of the Atmoſphere of ſome
ſcores, if not hundreds of Miles chick, as muſt
hapren in the beginning of its Formation.
If chis be not ſufficient ro account for this thick
Darknels on the Face of the fbyls, "twill, I imagine,
be difficult to ſolve it better.

(6.) Our upper Farth, the Product of the an-
cient Cheos, bcing in all probability founded on
a denſe Fluid or Abyſs, as will appear in the
Sequel, the main part of the Fluid of that anci-
ent Ch:c;, by conſequence muſt have been ſuch
a denſe and hea one as is here mention'd.
Ard indeed, *tis in Vt ſelf but very reaſonable,
if not neceſſary, ro allow the inferior Parts of
a fluid Ch:95, ro have been compos'd of. much
denſer and heavier Mafſes than the ſuperior, or
than Water, the main viſible Fluid of our Globe.
For, if we conſider the matter in any fort ac-
cording to the Law of ſpecitick Gravity ; all
heavy Fluigs muſt, at leaſt, as certainly be near
the Center, as like heavy. Solids ; and *tis but
mechanical to allow that in a confuſed Fluid
feme meaſure, as well as exatly in a digeſted
one , the Iiuids -contain'd in the inner Regions
mult be much heavier than thoſe at or near the
outer Surtace thereof. But beſides, twill be
nard to account for the conius'd moving ay
©


Book Il. HYPOT HESES.


of the earthy Parts, or, which is much the ſame,
che fluidity of the intire Chaos, without allowing
a much greater quantity of Fluids in it, than
what we now fee with us, the Waters of our
preſent Earth ; and thoſe of a Denſity and Gra-
vity fit to. retain their Poſts, as well nearer the
Central , as the ſuperficiary Parts. And that
on this account, (of the Comet's Atmoſphere's
fixed and denſe Fluid ) 'tis peculiarly adapted
to the foreſaid Deſcription of the Chaos, is evident
by what has been already obſerv'd of the ſame;
to which I refer the Reader for ſatisfaction.

(7.) Whereas very many, and very confider-
able Phenomena of Nature, (which Dr. Woodward
has excellently obſerv'd ) as well as ancient Tradi-
tion, require and ſuppoſe a Central Fire, or in-
ternal Hear diffuſing warm and vigorous Steams
every way from the Center to the Circumfe-
rence of the Earth; and whereas 'tis very dith-
cult on the common Hypethe/es, or indeed on
any hitherto taken notice of, to give a Mccha-
nical and Philoſophical Solution of the ſame:
If we will but allow the Propoſition we arc now
upon, and that the Earth, in its Chaorick State,
was a Comet, a moſt eaſy and Mechanical Account
thereof is hereby given, and. the Phenomena of
Nature rendred plain and intelligible. For a
Comet , beſides its thinner fluid Atmoſphere ,
conſiſting of a large, denſe, ſolid, central Bo-
dy; and ſometimes approaching ſo near the Sun
that the immenſe Heat acquir'd then, tho' ſooner
failing in the thinner and expos'd Atmoſphere,
will not do fo in the central Solid , under very
many thouſands of Years; nothing can better
ſuit the caſe of our preſent Earth, than to allow
a Comer's Atmoſphere to have been her Chaos;
and the Central Body of the Comet, the Source


and


73


Coroll. x2;
Lem. Ce.
pris
£ay, Part
3. vcd}. I,


Vid L m.
Ge. pri 4


Lam, 57,
$8. prin,


Vid. News.
p. cos. &
Coroll. r.
Solat. 78.
mrs


HYPO THESES. Book 11.


and Origin of that Central heat, which our
Earth appears ſtill to incloſe within ir.

(8.) The bigneſs of Comets and their At-
moſpheres agrees exactly with che ſuppoſition we
are now upon. For tho” the Atmoſpheres are
10 or perhaps r5 times in Diameter as big as the
Central Bodies, (which yet have been Grmady
obſerv'd to be near the Magnitude of che Phanets)
and thereby of a much larger capacity than this
Argument ſuppoſes ; yer if, from that thin, rare,
expanded ftate in which they now are, they were
ſuppos'd to ſubſide or ſettle cloſe together, and
immediately reſt upon the Central Body ; as on
a Formation they muſt do ; the intire maſs would
make much fuch Bodies in Magnitude, as the
Planets are : As Aftronomers, from the obfer-
rations made about them, muſt freely confcls.
So that when to all the other inducements to be-
lieve theſe Atmoſphetes to be the ſame Maſſes of
Bodies we call Chao's, (from one of which all
Anriquiry Sacred and Prophane derive the Ori-
gin of our Earth) it appears that the Magnitude
15 alſo exaQtly correſpondent ; I know not what
can be alledg'd to take off or weaken the force
of them. Which general concluſion might be
confirm'd by ſome other ſimilitudes berween
them and the Planets , obſervable in the fuc-
ceeding Theory, or probably deduc'd from
their Phenomena; which I ſhall not at pre-
ſent inſiſt particularly upon. So that on the
whole matter, upon the credit of the foregoing
Arguments united together and conſpiring to the
ſame Conclufion ; 1 may, I think, venture to
affirm, "That as far as hitherto preſent Nature
and Ancient Traditions are known, 'tis very rea-
ſonable ro believe, that a Planer is a Comet


form'd into a' regular and laſting conſtitution,
and


Book Il. HYPOT HESES.


and plac'd at a proper diſtance from the Sun in
a Circular Orbit, or one very little Eccentrical ;
and a Cornet is a Chaos, i, e. a Planet unform'd,
or inits primzval ſtate, plac'd in a very Eccentri-
cal one: And I think I may fairly appeal to all
that the molt Ancient Hiſtory, or Solid Philo-
{ophy can produce hereto relating, in atteſtation
to ſuch an Aſſertion. Eſpecially conſidering
withal,

(9.) Laſtly, That chere is no other pretender ,
no other Maſs of Bodies now known, or ever
related to have been known in the whole Syſtem
of Nature, which can ſtand in competition, or fo
much as ſeem to agree to the deſcription of the
Ancient Chaos, but that which is here afbgn'd
and pleaded for. Now this I am fecure of, and
all will and muſt grant: They cahnot bur be
forc'd to confeſs, that, (the Atmoſphere of a
Comet ſet aſide) they have no other-/dea of the
Nature and Properties of that Maſs of Bodies
call'd a Cheos, but what profane Tradition, with
the concurrence of the Holy Books, afford them ;
without any viſible inſtance or pattern in Nature.
Which acknowledgement, join d to the remark-
able correſpondence of the particulars before-
mention'd ; and the no objection of- any mo-
ment, as far as I ſee, to be produc'd to the con-
trary ; 15, I think,a mighty advantage in the pre-
ſent caſe. All that can reaſonably be requir'd
farther is, that the Phenomena of the Earth, to be
ſuperſtructed on this foundation, and deriv'd fuc-
cellively through the ſeveral Periods, to the con-
{ſummation of all chings, prove coincidents to
this Hypotheſis, and confirm the fame: Which
being the attempt of the following Theory, muſt
be by no means here pretended to before-hand;
but leftto the Impartial Judgment of the Reader,


when


73


76


HYPOTHESES. Book ll.


when he is arriv'd at the end of his Journey, and
digeſted the whole Scheme. From the intire
and conjoint View whereof, and not from any
particulars by the way occaſionally reflected on,
a —p—_ and well-grounded Sentence is to be
paſs'd upon it, and upon ſeveral of the prior Con-
cluſions themſelves alſo. However, when here
is a known and viſible foundation to depend on ;
and the Reader is refer'd to no other Chaos than
what himſelf has ſeen, or, *ris probable, may in a
few years have opportunity of ſeeing ; it muſt
be at the leaſt allow'd a fair and natural proce-
dure, and of the conſequences whereof every
thinking and inquiſitive Perſon will be a proper
Judge. The reatonings proceeding, without beg-
ging any precarious Hypotheſis at firſt, of the na-
ture of that old fund and promptuary whence all
was to be deriv'd, or ſending the Reader to the
utmoſt Antiquity for . his Notion thereof; to
which yet, in the moſt Authentick accounts of
the Primitive Chacs now extant, I fear not toap-


' peal, and ſubmit my elf.


II. The Mountainous Columns of the
Earth are not fo denſe or heavy as


the other Columns.


This Propoſition will alſo I imagine, be new
and unexpected to very many ; but I hope the
following Arguments, which I ſhall very briefly
propole, will demonſtrate it to be no unreaſon-
able or precarious one.


(1.) Mountains are uſually Stony and Rocky,
and by confequencelighter than the main Body of


the Earth.F or tho! Stone be ſomewhat heavier than
the


Book Il. HYPOTHESES,


the uppermoſt Stratum or Garden Mold, as ſome
ſtile it; yer 'ris conſiderably lighter than that be-
neath the ſame. For if we compare its weight
with that in the bottom of our Mines, which is
alone conſiderable to our purpoſe, (our upper fra-
74, as will hereafter appear, being generally factiri-
ous, or acquir'dat the Univerſal Deluge) we ſhall
be forc'd to own the neceflity of the conſequence
of the preſent Argument. The Specitick Gravity
of Stone, is to that of Water, as 14 to 54. bur
the Specitick Gravity of the Earth at the bottom
of our Mines, is to that of Water, as 3 to 1,
ſomerimes as 4 to 1, nay ſomerimes almoſt as
to 1, and therefore to be ſure conſiderably
enſer and Heavier than Stone. So that were
the Mountainous Columns of the Earth intirely
made upof Stone, they would, (without the con-
ſideration of thoſe empry Caverns they incloſe)
be plainly the lighteſt parts of the whole Earth.
(2.) Thoſe very Denſe and Heavy Corpuſcles
of Gold, Lead, Silver, and other ſuch like Me-
cals and Minerals, are moſtly, if not only, found
in the Bowels of Mountains. Now, when the
Gravity of theſe Bodies is fo great,that in a regu-
lar formation they ought to have ſeated them-
ſelves, one would think, much nearer the Cen-
ter, than they now are; to account for ſuch
their poſition, it muſt be ſuppos'd, that the Co-
lumns under them, and the Earth among them,
were lighter and rarer than the Neighbouring
Columns did afford ; that upon the whole, the
intire Compeſitum or Maſs taken together, may be
allow'd to be, if not lighter, yet, at leaſt, not
heavier than others at the ſame diſtance from the
Center. So thatby a juſt, tho? a little ſurprizing
way of reaſoning , from the greater weight of
ſome parts of the Mountainous Columns, the lefs
weight of the whole is infer'd. (3.)


77


Newt. P.
417.


Eſſy.
part 3.


8


HYTPOT HESES. Book ll.


(3.) Mountains are the principal Source and
Origin of Springs and Fountains. Now Dr.
Iodward, from his own obſervations, aſſerts,
Thar theſe are neither deriv'd from Vapours con-
dens'd inthe Air at the Tops of Mountains, nor
from meer Rains, or fall of Moiſture, as ſeveral
have differently aſſerted ; but from the Waters
in the Bowels of the Earth ; and that 'tis a Steam
or Vapour rais'd by the Subterraneous Heat
which affords the main part of their Warers to
them. On which Hypotheſis, which I cake to
be che trueſt, and moſt rational of all others,
the Vapours appear to have a more free and open
vent or current up the Mountainous Columns,
than the neighbouring ones; and conſequently,
any are more rare, laxe and porous, or lefs
denſe and weighty than the others.

(4.) All YVolcano's, or ſubterraneous Fires, are
in the Bowels of ſome Mountain, to which a
Plain or a Valley was never known to be liable.
Which obſervation affords a double Argument
for ſuch a levity and rareneſs as we are now con-
tending for: The One, from the temper of an


ntlammable Earth, Sulphureous and Biruminous;


which being in part made up of Oily Particles,
the lizhteſt Fluid we have, muſt in likelihood be
the lighteſt of all Srrara whatſoever. The other,
from the free admiflion of Air into the Bowels
of theſe Mountains; without which no_ Fire or
Flame can be preſerv'd: Which alſo infers
ſuch a poroſity and laxeneſs as we are now con-
cern d to prove.

(5.) Mountainous Countries are chiefly ſub-
jet to Earthquakes, and conſequently are as well
Sulphureous and Inflammable, as Hollow and
Cavernous, Looſe and Spungy in their inward


parts ; without which properties the A”
0


Book Il, HYPOTHESES.
of Earthquakes were diffcultly accountable :


Eſpecially according to Dr. Weodward's Hypotheſis Eſſay.
of them; who deriving them from ſteams of 2?-134:©c.


Subterraneous heat aſcending from the Central
parts, and collected in great quantities together,
muſt by conſequence own that the Bewels of
Mountains, ſo commonly ſubject to Earthquakes,
are moſt Pervious, Porous, and Cavernous of all
other. All which Arguments, eſpecially taken
together with ſome other coincidences hereafter
obſervable, will, I hope, be eſteem'd no incon-
ſiderable evidence of the Truth of the Propoſition
we arc now upon.


II, Tho' the Amnual Fontion of the
Earch commenc'd at the beginning
of the .Moſaick Creation ; yet its
Diurnal Rotation did not till after the
Fall of Man.


Tho” I cannot but expect that this will appear
the greateſt Paradox, and moſt extravagant Af-
ſertion of all other, to not a few Readers; yet I
hope to give ſo great evidence for the ſame from
Sacred as well as Prophane Authority , that com-
perent and impartial Judges ſhall ſee reaſon to lay,
that if it be not ſuthcient to force their aſſent, yet
'tis ſuch as they did not expedt in ſo ſurprizing, re-
mote, anddifhcult a cafe ; the Records relating to
which (the Sacred Ones excepted) are fo few, To
dubious, and ſo ancient; and the conſtant opinion
of the World, within the Memory of Hiſtory, fo
tixt and ſetled on the contrary fide. I et it only
be, by way of Preparation, remark'd, T.Jat the


Annual and Diurnal Motions are in themſelves Z-m. 66.
wholly Pr


80


HYPOTHESES. BookI1L


wholly independent on each other, as was before
taken notice; and conſequently, that 'tis as ratio-
nal to ſuppoſe the former without the latter, if
there be evidence for the ſame, in the Original
State of Nature , as 'tis fo believe them capable
of being conjoin'd, from the known Phenomena
of che World, in the preſent ſtate. Let it alſo
be obſerv'd., that there is yet no evidence
that either the Central Bodies of any of the
Comets, or that even ſeveral of the Planets,
who undoubtedly have an Annual Motion about
the Sun, have yet any Diurnal Rotation about
{Zixes of their own: And let it, laſtly, be conſider'd,
that when the Diurnal Rotation muſt have an
Original, a time when it began ; that time may


. ns — and naturally be ſuppos'd after the


Fall, as before the Creation, or Six days Work ;
and which was the true and real one, muſt be
determin'd by the Teſtimonies of Antiquity, or
other Collateral Arguments to be from thence,
or from the Phenomena of Nature Ancient or
Modern, deriv'd and infer'd. Which things be-
ings ſuppos'd, I thus attemptto prove the preſent
Ailertion ; If the Primitive State of Nature be-
fore the Fall, had thoſe peculiar Phenomena or
Ciaracters which certainly belong to a Planer be-
fore ics Diurnal Rotation began ; and are as cer-
tainly impofiible in the preſent ſtate of the Earth
revolving about its own Axw ; *tis plain the Af[-
ſertion before us is true and real: But that
thoſ: peculiar Phanomena or Charatters did be-
Ing to that Primitive State, the Teſtimonies of
Sacred and Piofane Antiquity, to be preſently
produc'd, do make appear; and by conſequence
the Aflertion before us is true and real. The
Phenomena or Peculiar diſtinguiſhing Characters
here intended have been already mention'd, and

are


BookIl, HYPOT HESES. 81


are theſe five. (1.) A Day and a Year are all one, Zm. 79
(2.) The Sun and Planets Roſe in the ef and 7%
Set in the Eaſt. (3.) There was through the
whole Eartha perpetual Equmox. (4.) The Eclip-
tick and Equator were all one ; or rather the lat-
ter was not in Being, bur all the Heavenly Moti-
ons were perform'd about the ſame invariable
Axu,that of the former. (5.) To luch as liv'd un-
der the Ecliprick, the Poles of the ſame (or of the
World, they being then not different,) were
neither elevated nor depreſt, but at the Horizon.
Theſe are the certain and undeniable Characters
of ſuch a ſtate: And that they belong'd to the
Primitive State-of our Earth, before the Fall, I
am now to pfove..
the Primicive ſtate of the World Days
and Years were all one. Which Aſertion I en-
deavour to Frince by the following Arguments.
(1.) On this Hypotheſis the Letter of Moſes is as ex-
atly followed as in the contrary one. "Tis agreed
* that Moſescallsthe ſeveral Revolutions of the Sun,
in which the Creation was Perfected, Days, every
where in that Hiſtory. Now as a Tear is pro- *
ly the ſucceſſion of the four ſeveral Gow) wt
pring, Summer, Autumn and Winter, ariling
from one ſingle Revolution of the Earth aboutthe
Sun ; ſo a Day is the ſucceflion of Light and
Darkneſs once ; or the ſpace of one /*g/c apparent
Revolution of the Sun from any certain Semi-
meridian, above or below the Horizong till its
return thither again. Now in the caſe be-
fore us, both theſe Periods are exactlv coinci-
dent ; and both are perform d in the ſame ſpace
of time : Which ſpace therefore in equal pro-
priety of ſpeech belongs to either or both thoſe
names indifferently ; and by conſequence, may
with the exacteſt Truth and Propriety be ſtil'd a
. N Daz


82


Gen it,
41 5-


Cap. iv. 3.


Cap.v.4,5.


Jud. xvii.
lo.


Jolh. xiii.
I's


Cap. xxiii.
I


2 Sam. u,
I.


1 King. 11,


28. :
Amos 1v,
4+


HYPOTHESES. Bookll.


Day or a Near. Which thing duly confider'd, if I
had no poſitive evidence for the Propoſition before
us, yet, ſetting alide prepoſſeflion, I had an equal
right and prerence to Truth with the Common
Expoſitors ; I keeping equally cloſe to the Letter
of the Sacred Hiſtory. (2.) This Hyporbeſis gives a
rational account of the Scripture ſtile, wherein a
Day, even in after Ages, very frequently denotes
a Jwarz as is commonly taken notice of by Ex-
poſitors. Thus by Moſes himſelf the Word Day
is not only, in the very recapitulation of the
Creation, us'd for the intire S:x ; (Theſe are the
Generations of the Heawens and of the Earth whenthbey
were Created, im the Day that the Lord God made the
Larth and the Heavens, end every Plant of the Field
before it was in the Earth, and every Herb of the
Field before it grew.) Put, in other places, as it. -
ſeems, for the juſt ſpace of a Year. And at the
end of Days, or after ſome Tears, it came to paſs,
that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offer-
ing unto the Lord. The days of Adam after be bad
begotten Seth were eight hundred years. And all the days
that Adam lied were nine hundred and thirty years,
and he died. And fo of the reſt of the Genealo-
giesin that Chapter. Thus in others of the Holy
Writers, I ll give thee ten ſhekels of Silver by the
days, 1. C. per annes, by the years, or every year.
Thus what in one place is, Feſhuab waxed Old,
and came mto Days ; is in another, Joſbhuabh was
old, and ſtricken in years. The like phraſes we
have of David ; the number of Days that David
was King in H:bron, cyer the bouſe of Judah, was
fſewen Years ard ſix rhonthe. The Days that David


iy, reigned over [rae! were forty years. So, what was


in the Law, Bring your Tyths after three Years 3 is
in the Prophet, Bring your Tyths after three Days.
Which ways of ſpeaking, with others that follow,

may


BookIl, HYPOTHESES.


may ſeem alluded to, and ag—_ by theſe two,
tho' themſelves ſfomewhac of a different nature.
Your children, ſays God to the Iiraclices, ſha! Wans


der in the IWilderneſs forty Years 5 after the number of


the Days m which ye ſearched the land, even forty
Days, each Day for a Year, ſhall you bear your int-
quities, even forty Years. Lye thou, ſays God to
the Prophet Ezekiel, on thy lefr fide, and lay the ini
quity of the honle of Iſrael npon it 5 according to the
number of the Days that thou ſhalt the upon it, thou
ſhale bear their iniquity : Fer I have laid upon thee
the Years of their miquity, according to the Number
of the Days, three hundred and ninety Days ;
ſo ſhalt thou bear the iniquity of the boule of [ſrael.
And when thou haſt accompliſh'd *em, ls again on thy
; right ſide 5 and thou ſhale bear the miquity of the
bouſe of Fudab forty Days ; I have appointed thee a

Day for a Year. But what I mainly and princi-
pally intend here is, that known, frequent and
ſolemn way in the Prophetick Writings of deter-
mining Tears by Days ; the inſtances of which are
very obvious, ſome whereof I ſhall here barely
quote for the Reader's fatisfaQtion ; (and more
in a caſe ſo notorious and remarkable nced not
be done.) How long ſhall be the v:fron concerning the
daily ſacrifice, and the tran/preſſion of dejciation, to
give both the Santfuary and the Hoſt to be trodden m:-
der foot ? And he (aid unto ms, Unto two thouſand
three hundred Days ; then ſhall the Seanttuary be cleans
ſed. From the time that the daily [acyifice ſnall be
taken away, and the abomination that maketh deſc-
late be ſet up, there ſhall be one thouſand two hundred
and nmety Days. Bleſſed is he that waiteth, and
cometh to the one thouſand three hundred froe and thirty
days. But go thou thy way till the end 52 ; for thoa
ſhalt reſt, and ſtand in thy Lot at the end of the
days. I will give power unto my two witneſſes, an
2 they


v3


Num. 2iv,
33, 3+


Dan. viil,
13, 14


Cap. xii.
11, $2,13-


Apoc. xi,
3.


Cap. xii.6.


Dan. ix.
24,25,26.


Apoc. xi.
2.
Cap. Xt»
©


HYPOTHESES. Bookl1l.


they ſhall prophecy one theuſand two bundred and ſixty
days, cloathed im ſack-cloth. The Woman fled into
the IWilderneſs, where ſhe bath a place prepared ber
of God, that they ſhould feed her there, one thouſand
two hundred and ſixty days. Agreeably whereto a
Week conſiſting of jewven days, denotes [even years 3
and a Month, conliſting of rhiry days, denotes
thirty yeors, in the ſame Propherick Writings.
Thus in that moſt famous of all Prophecies, con-
cerning the death of the AMeſſias. ' Seventy Weeks
are determin'd ufon thy people, and _ thy boly city;
to finiſh the tranſgreſſion, and to make an end of ſins,
and to make reconciliation for miquity, and to bring in
everlaſting righteouſneſs, and to ſeal up the viſion and
prophecy, and to anoint the moſt. Holy. Know there-
fore and underſtand, that from the $9we forth of the
commandment to reſtore and to build Feruſalem, unto
the Meſſiah the Prince, ſhall be ſeven weeks, and ſixty
and two weeks ; the ſtreet ſhall be built again, and
the wall, even 3m a ſtraight of times. And after the
fixty and two weeks ſhall Meſſiah be cut off : but not
for bimſel7. The Ho.y City (ball they tread underſoot
forty and two month;.ower was given to the Beaſt to
continue forty and 1110 months, All which expreſſions,
with others of the ſame nature, are not account-
able ; I mean there is no ſacisfatory reaſon can
be. given why a Day ſhould ſo frequently denote
a Yer in the Sacred Writings , on any other Hy-
potheſis, We uſually. indeed content our ſelves in
theſe caſes with the bare knowing the meaning
of Scripture expretlions, as if they were choſen
at a venture ; and fo, for inſtance, finding a
Daz to repreſent a 7earin the ſame Books, we reſt
ſarisfi'd, wichout enquiring why a Day rather than
an Hour, a Week, or Munih,( the rwo latter of which
terms are yetus dby theſe Authors) werepitch'd
upon to ſignifie the before-mention d ſpace tous ;

or


Book Il. HY POT HESES. 85


or why if the word Day muſt be made uſe of,
it hos foo a determinate juſt 7*ar, rather than

a Week, a Month or a Thouſand Years, (for which

laſt ic yer ſeems ſometimes to be taken) 1o tre-
quently in the Sacrcd, _— the Propherick PF. xc. 4.
Writings. But 'tis very ſuppoſable, that 'tis our 2 Periii.8.
Ignorance or Unskilfulnefs - in the Stile of Scrip. &*w-ii.t7,
ture, and thoſe things therein deliver'd (not the
Inaccuracy of the Writers themſelves) which
occaſions our ſo laxe and general Interpretations.

It will ſure at leaſt be allow'd me, that wherever

not only the Meaning of Phraſes, but the Origi-

nal and Foundation of ſuch their Meaning is
naturally and eaſily aflignable, an account there-

of is readily to be embrac'd. And certainly the
Primitive Years of the World being once ſuppos'd

to have been Day: alſo ; and call d by that name

ia the Hiſtory of the Creation ; this matter will

be very eaſie ; the ſucceeding Stile of Scrip-

ture will appear only a continuation of the Pri-

mitive, and fitred ro hint to us a time wherein a

Day and a Year were really the fame: And this
without any diminution of the true deſigns of

the Propherick numbers ; I mean the involving

their Predictions in fo much, and no more ob-
{curity, as might conceal their meaning till their
completion, or till ſuch time at lcaſt as the Di-

vine Wiſdom thought moſt proper for their ma-
nifeſtation in ſucceeding Ages. So that this Ar-
gument demonſtrates the preſent Expoſition to

afford a natural foundation of accounting for

ſuch ways of ſpeaking in the Holy Scriptures,

which otherwiſe are, as to their Occaſion and
Original , unaccountable ; and conſequently ,

proves it to be as truly agreeable to the Stile, as

the former did to the Letter thereof. (3.) The


ſix Days of Creation, and the ſeyenth of Reſt,
N 3 were,


86


HYPOTHESES. Book Ill.


were, by Divine Command, to be in after Ages
commemorated by Years as well as by Days;
and fo in reaſon anſwered alike to both thoſe
denominations. 'Tis evident, that the Works of
the Creation were compleated in fix Evenings
and Mornings, or fix Revolutions of the Sun,
call'd Days and that the ſeventh was imme-
diately ſer apart and ſanctified as a Day of Reſt,
and Memorial of the Creation juſt before com-
pleated ; and *tis evident that this SanRtification
of the ſeventh, as well as the operations of the ſix
foregoing, belong'd to the Primitive ſtate of the
World, before the Fall. Now that we may
know what fort of Days theſe were, 'rwill be pro-
per to enquire into the enſuing times ; and ob-
ſerve, after the diſtinction of Days and Years un-
doubredly obtain'd, what conſtant Revolutions of
fix for Work, and a ſeventh for Reſt there ap-
pear ; or in what manner, and by what ſpaces
theſe Original ones were commemorated ; which
will go a great way to clear the Point we are
upon. And here, *tis evident, that when God
gave Laws to the; [[rae/zres, he allow'd them fix
ordinary Pays of Work, and ordain'd the ſeventh
for a Day of Reſt or Sabbath, in Imitation and
Memory of His Working the firſt ſix, and Reſt-
ing or keeping a Sabbath on the Seventh Day, at
the Creation of the World. This the Fourth
Commandment ſo expreſly aſſerts, that 'tis paſt
politbilicy of queſtion. *Tis moreover, evident
that God, upon the Children of I/rae/s coming
into the Land of - Canaan, ordained (with refe-


. rence, as 'tis reaſonable to ſuppoſe, to the ſame


" 3, 4+


Primitive Stateof the World, the ſix Days of Crea-
tion and the Sabbath) That ſix Tears they ſhould
Sow their Fields, and fix Tears they ſhould Prune
their Vineyard, and gatherin the Fruits thereof ;

But


— —


Book Il. HYPOT HESES.
But in the ſeventh Tar ſhould be a Sabbath of


87


Reſt unto the Land, a Sabbath for the Lord :


They were neitherto Sow their Field, nor Prunc
cheir Vineyard : 'Then was the Land to keep a
Sabbath unto the Lord. So that if we can juſtly
preſume that the primary ſpaces of the World,
here refer'd to, were proper Evamings and Morne
ings, or Natural Days, becauſe they were repre-
ſented and commemorated by fix Proper and Na-
tural Days of Work, and the ſeventh of Reſt :
I think 'tis not unreaſonable to conclude they
were Proper and Natural Years alſo; conlidering
they appear to have bcen among the ſame
People, by the fame Divine Appointment, re-
preſented and commemorated by theſe fix Proper
and Natural Years of Work, and the ſeventh of
Reſt alſo. Nay, if there be any advantage on the
ſide of Natural D:ys, from the expref5nefs of the
reference they had to the Primitive ones (which
the Fourth Commandment forces us to acknow-
ledge) there will appear in what follows fome-
what that may juſtly be eſteem'd favourableon
the ſide of Years. Beſides the fix Days for Work,
and the ſeventh for Reſt, the Jews were com-
manded (on the ſame account, as we may juſtly
ſuppoſe) to number from the Paſſover ſeven
times ſeven Days, or ſeven Weeks of Days, ard
at the concluſion of them to obſerve a ſolemn
Feaſt, call'd the Feaſt of Weeks or of Sabbaths,
once every year. In like manner beſides the
Yearly Sabbath as I may call it , or the ſeventh
Year of Reſt and Releaſe after the fix Years of
Work, the Fews were commanded (on the ſame
account, as we may juſtly ſuppoſe) to number
ſeven Sabbaths of Years, ſeven times ſeven Years
and at the concluſion thereof to celebrate the


great Sabbatical Year, the Near of Fubilce; They
N 4 Were


ver. 1,
Fid. Deur.


4


Lev. xxiii,


15-21,


HYPOTHESES. Book ll.


were neither to Sow, nor Reap, nor Gather
in the Grapes, bur eſteem ic Holy, and ſuffer
every one to return to his Poſleflion again.
Where that which is remarkable is this, that
when the Sabbatical Days, and Sabbatical Years
equally return'd by perpetual revolutions
immediately ſucceeding one another ; yet the
caſe was not the fame as to the Feaſt of
Weeks at the end of ſeven times ſeven Day: ;
that following the Paſſover, and not returning
till che next Paſſover again, ani fo was bur
once a Year : Whereas its correſponding Solem-
nities, the 7wbilees, or great Sabbatical Nears, at
the end of ſeven times ſeven Years, did, as the
former, return by perpetual revolutions imme-
diately ſucceeding one another for all future Ge-
nerations. All which duely confider'd, I think
upon the whole, 'tis but reaſonable to conclude,
That ſecing the Primitive ſpaces, or periods of
Work and Reſt, appear, by Divine Appoint-
ment, to have been commemorated among the
Fews by Years as well as by Days ; the ſame Pri-
mitive ſpaces or periods were equally Days and
Nears alſo. (4.) The Works of the Creation, by
the Sacred Hiſtory, concurring with Ancient
Tradition, appear to have been leiſurely, regu-
lar, and gradual, without any precipitancy or
acceleration by a Miraculous hand on every oc-
caſion : Which is impoſlible ro be ſupposd in
thoſe Days of rwwenty four ſhort hours only ; but
if they were as long as the preſent Hypotheſis ſup-
poſes, they were truly agreeable and propor-
tionable to the ſame productions. Which con-
ſequence ' will beſo eaſily allow'd me, that I
may venture to fay, That as certain asis the re-
gular and gentle, the natural and leiſurely pro-
cedure of the Works of the Creation (of which [
| | now


i&


BookIl. HYPOTHESES.
know no good Reaſon from any Warrant ſacred


or prophane to make any queſtion) fo certain is
the Propoſition we are now upon, or fo certain-
ly the Primicive Days and Years were all one.
(5.) Two ſuch Works are by Moſes alcrib'd to
the third Day, which (if that were not longer
than one of ours now ) are inconceiveable and
incompatible. On the former part of this Day
the Waters of the Globe were to be drain'd off
all the dry Lands into the Seas; and on the ſame
Day afterward, all the Plants and Vegetables were
to ſpring out of che Earth. Now the Velocity of
running Waters is not ſo great, as in a part of
one of our ſhort Days, rodelcend from the middle
Regions of the dry Land into the Seas adjoyn-
ing to them; nor if it were, could the Land be
dry enough in an inſtant for the Production of
all thoſe Plants and Vegetables, which yerc we
are atlur'd appear'd the ſame Day upon the face
of it; which Difficulties vaniſh, if we allow che
primitive Days to have been Years alſo, as will
more fully be made appear in due place. (6.)
Whatever might poſlibly- be ſaid of the other
Days works, by recurring to the Divine miracu-
lous Power ; (which yer 1s here not only unnecel-
ſarily, and without warrant from the Sacred Hi-
{tory ir ſelf, but ſometimes very mdecently done)
yet the numerous Works aſcrib'd to the ſixth Day
plainly ſhew, That a ſpace much longer than we
now call a Day, muſt have been reterr'd to in
the Sacred Hiſtory. The bufineſs of the fixth
Day includes evidently theſe following particulars.
(1.) The Production of all the bruic dry-land
Animals. (2.) The Conſultation about, and the
actual Creation of the Body, and Infuſion of the
Soul of Adam. (3.) The Charter or Donation of


Dominion over all Creatures beſtow'd on Adam.
(4.) The


89


Gen. i.
g——-13,


Gen, i. &


il,


90


Vid Biſhop
Patrick on
Gen. m
Initio,
Gen, 11, 4,
Oc.


On Gen. 3.


Init,


HYPOTHESES. Book 1l.


(4.) The Exerciſe of Part of that Dominion,
or the giving Names to all the dry-land Ani-
mals; which ſure. ſuppos'd ſome acquir'd know-
ledge in Adam, fome Conſideration of the Na-
ture of each Species, ſome kill in Language,
and the uſe of Words; andwithal, ſome propor-
tionable Time for the gathering ſo great a num-
ber of Creatures together , and for the diſtin
naming of every one. (F5.) When on this re-
view it appear'd, that among all theſe Creatures
there was not a Meet-help, or ſuitable Compa-
nion for him; God then caſt him into a deep
Sleep, ( which 'tis probable laſted more than a
few minutes to - # 22x that Appellation ) took
out one of his Ribs, cloſed up the Fleſh inſtead
theregf, and out of that Rib made the Woman.
(6.) After this God brings this Woman to Adam,
he' owns her Original, gives her an agreeable
Name, takes her to Wife, and they together re-
ceive that Benediction, Increaſe and Multiply.
(7.) God appoints them and their Fellow-Ani-
mals, the Vegetables for Food and Suſtenance.
All which ( to omit the Fews Tradition of the
Fall of Man this ſixth Day, and ſuch things pre-
ſuppos'd thereto which muſt belong to it, even
by the Mo{aick Hiſtory it ſelf.) put together, is
vaſtly more than is conceivable in the ſhore ſpace
of one ſingle Day in the vulgar Senſe of ic. Tis
true, God Almighty can do all things in what

rtions of Time he pleaſes. But *nis alſo true,
(as Biſhop Patrick well obſerves in a like cafe)
that Man cannot. He muſt have time allotted
him , in proportion to the buſineſs to be done ,
or elſe *tis not to be expedted of him. And 'tis


" plain, That Adam and Eve were mainly con-


cern'd in the latter Actions of this Day: ſo that
by a juſt and neceſſary conſequence , That Day
| wt


Book Il, HYPOT HESES. g1
in which' they went through ſo many and diffe-


rent Scenes, and perform'd ſo many Actions, re-
quiring at leaſt no ſmall part of a 7ear; and that
after themſelves and all the dry-land Animals had
beenon the ſame [)z, ; -oduc'd,was certainly ſuch
a Day as might be proyurrionate'to ſuch Operati-
ons, and not ſhorter than a Near, which the pre-
ſent Hypotheſis allows in the cafe. (7.) If the
Hiſtory- of the Fall of Man be cither included
in the ſixth Day, according to the Ancient 'Tra-
dition of the Jews, which I confels to be very
improbable; or belong to the ſeventh, as might,
by coming as near as peflible to ſuch old Tra-
dition, more probably be allow'd: On cither of
theſe Suppolitions, there is the greateit neceſlity
GR of ſuppoling ſuch a Day much lon-
ger than is commonly done. Which I think
1s of it {clf ſo plain, that I need not aggravate
the matter , but leave it to the free Conlidera-
tion of the Reader.” All which Arguments to
me appear very fatisfatory , 'and evince , that
the firſt diſtinguiſhing and peculiar Character
of ſuch a primitive State of Nature as was be-
fore-mention'd did really belong to our Earth
before the Fall, and that then a Day and a
Year were exattly one and the ſame ſpace of
Time.

(2.) In the primitive State of the World the
Sun and Planets roſe in the eſt, and fet in the
Eaſt, contrary to what they have done ever
ſince. This way ſeem to have been the founda-
tion of that Story ih Herodotus, who tells us, Lib. 2.
That the Sur, in the ſpace of 10440 Years, four cap. 142.
times inverted his Courſe, and roſe in the We.
But what I mainly depend on, is that Diſcourſe
in Plato, who relating ſome very ancient Tradi- 4rcheo! p.
tions about che prinutive State of things, and 259,25),

what *9*”


92


Theor. lib.
2. Cap. 1.

& 1o, 4r-
cheol. lib.
2. Cap, $-

&6.


HYPOTHESES. Book ll.


what a mighty and remarkable Change was ef-
fefted by a certain mighty and remarkable Al-
ecration in the Heavenly Motions, ( which Al-
teration in general deſerves alſo to be taken no-
tice of , as agreeing ſo well with the preſent
Hypotheſis) the moſt furprizing, and of the great-
eſt conſequence of all others, and the cauſe of
ſuirably ſurprizing and conſiderable Effects in the
preſent State of Nature , makes it to be this
change of the Way or Courſe of the Heavenly
Bodies, which is the conſequence of the preſent
Aﬀſſertion. For this grand thing of which he
had ſpoken fo highly, is this, "Eo 8 is d3 937”
v7}, 1 iy 4 mynis goegy, mri wif, ip' & rw 0997 ),
gipiett, mn of Gm T7 arerria, The Motion of the
Univerſe [ometimes revolyes the ſame way that it does
now, and ſometimes the contrary way. Which Te-
ſtimony is very plain , and full ro our preſent
purpoſe.

(3.) In the primitive State of Nature there
was a perpetual Equinox, or Equality of Day and
Night through the World. This Phenomenon, or
ſuch Effets as in part ſuppoſe it, i; uſually by
the Chriſtian Fathers applied to the Paradiſiacal
State; and by the Ancient Heathens to the
Golden Age, or the Reign of Satwrn : (coinci-
dent, *tis probable, at leaſt in part, thereto) For
they all with one conſent deny that the Swn's
Courſe was oblique from one Tropick to ano-
ther, or that the difference and inequality of Sea-
ſons, which muſt have followed therefrom, did
belong to that firſt and moſt happy State of the
World, as may at large be ſeen the places

uoted in the Margin, too long here ro Tran-
cribe ; to which therefore I refer the Reader, and
proceed.


(4-) In


Book1l. HYPOTHESES. ,


(4.) In the primitive State of the World, there
was no Equator diſtin from the Ecliptick; all
Motions were perform'd about one invariable
Axis, that of the latter ; ( for the Plains of the
Planet's Orbits, I conſider as nearly coincident
with that of the Ecliptick) without the Obliqui-
ty of one Circle or Motion to another. "
this be ſomewhat related to lic former particu-
lar, yet I ſhall diſtintly quote a Teitimony or
ewo diretly belonging hereto, and not ſo pro-
perly reducible to the other. The firſt is that of
Anaxagoras, who ſays, Te d' des 197 dd; 1d
Soros iyILZau, won x7! xopuily # yins + act gau-
yweroy 17) mihev. That the Stars in their primitioe
State revolyy'd in a Tholiform manner, inſomuch ,
that the Pole appear'd perpetually at the Vertex of the
Earth. Whoſe meaning, tho' ſomewhat obſcur
ſeems to be, That the Motion of the Heave
was originally about one Center or Axis, that
of the Ecliptick , whoſe Pole was continually
over againſt the ſame Point of the Earth; which
on the Hyrerheſi; before us is true, bur in the pre-
ſent Frame of Nature impoſſible. The next Au-
thor, whom I ſhall produce, is Plato, who in
the foremention'd Diſcourſe about the Ancient
and Modern States of the World, ſays, That in
the former of them the Motion of the Heavens
was uniform, which thing was the cauſe and ori-
ginal of the Golden Age, and of all that happi-
neſs which therein Mankind enjoy'd, or external
Nature partook of ; which, how well it ſuits the
preſent Hporheffs, I need not ſay. All that ex-
ceeding happy State of Nature, which innocent
Man enjoy'd , beyond what he does ſince the
Fall, being therein owing to ſuch a Conſticution
of the World as this Author intimates, and I


am now proving. Which in the lait place, ml
e


93


94


bad. p.


273-


Hypeth. 4.


inſra,


Theory. lib.


2, Cap. 10,


HYPOTHESES. Book ll.


be confirm'd from Baptiſts Mantwanue, who ſays,
( relating the Opinion of the old Aſtonomers)
All che Celeſtial Spheres were in the beginning
of the World concentrical and uniform in their
Morior; and the Zediack of the Primum Mobile,
and that of the Planets (the Equator and Eclip-
tick ) were united and coincident , by which
means all ſublunary Bodies were more vivid and
vigorous at that time than in the preſent Ages of
the World; as the Th:oriſt ſums up the force of his
Teſtimony,very agrceably to the Hypetbeſis before
us, of the Aſtronomy in the primitive State of the
Heavens.
(5.) To the firſt Inhabitants of the Earth ,
( dwelling at the Interfetion of the ancient
Ecliprick with the preſent Norrhern Tropick ; of
which hercafter ) the Poles of the World were
neither elevated nor depreſfs'd, but at the Hori-
zon. But ſometime after the Formation of things,
they ſuddenly chang'd their Situation 3 the Nor-
thern Pole appear'd to be elevated above , and
the - Southern deprefs'd below the Horizon ; and
the Courſe of the Heavens ſeem'd bent or in-
clin'd to the Seurhern Parts of the World; or in
lain words, there was a new Diurnal Rotation
gan about the preſent Axis of the Earth;
which I take to be the true and eafy Expoſi-
tion; of the fame Phenomena, This Matter is
much inſiſted on by the Ancients, and being ſo,
will fully confirm our Aflertion, and give light
and ſtrength ro ſome of the former Teltimomes.
Plutarch has a Chapter entituled, Nee "Eqxaiones
T#:, Of the Inclination of the Earth; in which
he thus recites the Opinion of Lewcippres , Napsrne
mady 7 yi its me weonuCewd with, Nt Tw & mis
remnaCeuwris acyiomme, Ts i cremporuy i fageiov
et T2 namely flea mig xpuudis, 0% 3 art mr mus
coor,


Book Il. HYPOTHESES. 95


ewel.wy, That the Earth fell, or was enclin'd towards
the Southern Regions, by reaſon of the rareneſs of
thoſe Parts; The Northern Regions being grown
rigid and compatt , while the Southern were fry
or on fre. Whoſe Opinion is alſo recited by L-
ertius in almoſt the ſame words, *Exmcimer 3 favs |
x evniviu md xenlo me yi agfs wonuCelar, me 3
es dgrmy deiry vice, x) x9gminfuyen i), x; Myr
By reaſon of the failure im the Sun and Moon, the
Earth was bent or inclin'd towards the South. But
the Northern Regions grew rigig,and inflexible by


the ſnowy and coid Weather which enſued thereon. '
To the ſame purpoſe is the Opinion of Derocri- |
tus, Aid T3 adwingy i) m3 wonuCeriy F eherigar I, ;


evfouirly Thy yu x7 T7 yada ; Ta » Cogern
axeams, ma 3 wonuCene wites), Ih 17! fur GiCagn)
&Ts mygran ir Tis 1g0mis 4 Th avtiow, That by
reaſon of the Southern Ambient Air's imbecillity , or
ſmaller Preſſure, the Earth im thoſe Parts mcreas'd m
bulk, and ſo ſunk and bent that way. For the Nor-
thern Regions were il! temper'd , bu: the Southern
wery well ; whereby the latter becoming fruitful, wax- ſ
ed preater , and by an over-weight preponderated and
mnclm'd the whole that way. As expre(s to the full
is the Teſtimony of Empedecles, 15 aiz@ «tal
T5 Ts walks ogun, eſwrituvar mis agt]es, x 7 Ws Boe
gz iedirauy mm 5 vine ewwratrreu, 1893 © x, +
GAoy x5auer, The North, by reaſon of ihe 43” 8 neld-
mg to the Sun's force, was bent jrom ts former Poſte
tion; whereupon the Northern Regions were elcyated,
and the Southern depreſs d z; as together with them,
was the whole World. "To which agrees Anagage-
ras in theſe words, which immediately {ow
thoſe juſt before quoted, *Toreer 5 miner Thu [rae
my AaCiiy, But afterward the Pole recery'd a turn
& inclmation. Theſe ſo many, and ſo preg-
nant Teſtimonies of Antiquity, as to the matters


96


HYPOTHESES. Book l1l,


of fat foregoing, (for as to the ſeveral Reaſons
aflign'd by them , they being, I ſuppoſe, but
the ſingle Conjectures of the Authors, muſt be
uncertain , and need not be farther conſider'd
or inſiſted on in the preſent caſe) ſeem to me
ſo weighty , that I cannot but build and rely
very much upon them. How ſhould ſach
ſtrange and ſurprizing Paradoxes run fo univer-
ſally through the eldeft Antiquity, if there were
not ſome ground or foundation in earneſt for
them? *Twould be hard who!ly to rejet what
were ſo unanimouſly vouched by the old Sages of
Learning and Philoſophy, even tho' there were
no other evidence or reaſon for our belicf. But
when all theſe Authors, rhe only competent Wit-
neſſes in the Cale, do but confirm what on other
Accounts, as we have ſeen, and ſhall farther
ſee, there is ſo good reaſon to believe; and
when ſo great light is thereby afforded ro the
primitive Conſtitution of Nature, and the Sacred
Hiſtory of the State of Innocency ; their Artte-
ſtations are the more credible, and the more
yaluable, and in the higheſt degree worthy of
our ſerious Conſideration. What I can foreſee
of Objection , dcferving our notice , againft
what has been advanc'd from the Teſtimonies
of the old Philoſophers, is this, That they ſeem
to favour the perpetual Equinox before the Flood,
by the right Poſition of the preſent xs of the
Earth, parallel to that of the Ecliptick, ( as the
Theoriſt imagines) and its Inclination or oblique
Poſgion acquir'd at the Deluge, (as the ſame
Author ſuppoſes ) rather than the original Ab-
ſence, and ſubſequent commencing of the Diur-
nal Rotation after the Fail of Man, as I here
apply them. I anſwer, (1.) The Paralleliſm of


the Ax« of a Diurnal, to that of an Annual Re-
volution,


RBookIl; HYPOTHESES;


volution, is as far as I find, a perfect ſtranger to
the Syſtem of the World; there being, I think,
not one of the Heavenly Bodies , Swn or Planet,
but has its own Axs oblique to the Orbit in
which 'it moves. (2:1) It will be farther evinc'd
hereafter, That, de fa#o, before the Flood, the
Axis of the Earth was Oblique to its Annual
Orbit, the Plain of the Ecliptick ; and the Year
diſtinguiſh'd into the preſent Seaſons , Spring ,
Summer, Autumn, and Winter, (3:) That equa-
ble and healthful Temper of che A , which the
Theoriſt chiefly relied upon , as neceſſary to the
I ongerity of the Antediluvians, and fully prov'd
by Antiquity , ſhall be accounted for without
ſuch an Hypotheſis. C4.) The Teſtimonies before
alledg'd do not, if rightly confider'd , ſuit this
Hypetheſis 3 nay, in truth, they fully confute it.
Of the five Characters before-mention'd , undet
which we have reduc'd the main Teſtimonies ,
there are twb which are common to this, and
to the Theoriſt's Hypotheſis, wiz. (1:.) The perpe-
rual and univerſal Equinox. (2.) The coinci-
dence of the Equator and Ecliptick (tho' in ſome-
what a different manner). So that the Teſtimo-
nies for theſe two can neither eſtabliſh the one ,
nor the other, as equally ſuitirig them both. The
other” three ate peculiar to that Hypetheſis we have
been proving, and by conſequence at the ſame
time eſtabliſk'that, and confute the Theori?'s Hy-
potheſis, And theſe three arey- (1.) The Equality
of a Day and a Year. (2.) The Swi'and Planet's
riſing in the eff, and ſerting'in the Eaf. (3.)
'The Poticion of the Poles at the Horizon, with
the.afrer Elevation of the Norebern, the Depreſ(-
lioh &f the Southern Pole, and the inclination or
bending of che bleavenly Bodies Courſes towards
«he Sourh. Tis evident at firſt view, That the
wc » wo


HYPOT HESES. Book ll.


ewo former of theſe three laſt mention'd Phenc-
mena, are inconliltent with the Theoriſt's Hype-
theſis, and on a little Conſideration 'twill be
ſo of the laſt alſo. For while the Poles of
the Earth or World remain in being the ſame,
as depending on the ſame proper Axs of the
Farth's own Diurnal Revolution ; *tis plain, the
Latitude of Places on the Earth, or the Eleva-
tion of the Pole equal thereto , remains invaria-
blez and fo that Pole which to the Inhabitants
of Paradiſe was elevated ar the leaſt 234 degrees,
could not be at the Horizon, whatever right Po-
ſition the "x of the Earth might have with re-
ſpe&t to the Ecliptick. On the fame account
there could, even-in the 7heoriſt's own Hyporbeſis,
be no new Elevation of. the one,, or Depreflion
of the other Pole at the Deluge, nor inclination
of the Courſes of the Sw and Planets towards
the South, All that could on the Theorif's Prin-
ciples be effected, (bclides the Earth's Equator
and Poles pointing to difterent fix'd Stars, and
its Conſequences ) was only this ; that whereas
before the Sun was'always in the Equator , or
middle diſtance from any Climate, it afterwards
by turns came nearer to them (as we commonly,
tho' carelefsly expreſs it) in Summer, and went
farther from them in /{nter, than before; which
upon the whole, was no more a bent or inclina-
tion to one part of the Heavens than to the other ;
and fo of = Planets alſo. And the caſe is the
ſame as to the Poles of che Ecliptick ; the Nor-
thern one being as much elevated above that of
the World at one hour of the Day, as deprefs'd
beneath ic at another. All which is, I think,
ſufficient to ſhew, That the Teſtimonies of An+-
tiquity alledg'd by the 7heorit for the pevpetual
| Equinox, or the right Poſition of the Earth's as


Book Ill, HT POTHESES,


till the Deluge, and the oblique Poſition, and
different Seaſons then acquir'd, are ſufficient of
themſelves alone to confute his , and eſtabliſh
the pre/ert Hypotheſis. (F5.) All things confider'd,
ſuch a Poſition as the Theorif contends for, was
more likely to incommode, than be uſcful wo
Mankind. Taking the Matter wholly as the
Theorift puts it, it would prevent the Peopling of
the Southern Hemiſphere , by the ſcorching heat
juſt under the Equator, without the leaſt Inter-
miſffion at any time of the Year. It would ren-
der the Earth __ unſerviceable, both under
che Fquator and Poles, and in the Climates ad-
joyning, and fo ſtreighten the Capacity of the
Earth in maintaining its numerous Inhabitants ;
which, were the whote 'inhabitable, will appear
bur juft ſufficient to contain them. Ir wonld by
the Perpetration of one and the ſame Seaſon con-
rinually, hinder the variety of Fruits and Vege-
tables of every Country; and many other ways
ſpoil the ſerled Courſe of Nature, and be perni-
cious to Mankind. (6.) No mechanical and ra-
tional Canſe of the Mutation of the Earth's
Axis either has been, or, I believe, can be af-
ſign'd on the Theori/#s Hypotheſis , or any others
which ſhould embrace the fame” Conclation.
(7.) Laſtly, co name no more Arguments, 'The
Teſtimonies of Drogenes and Anaxagoras, ate as
expreſs almoſt ro the Time, as to this Change it
ſelf. The words being exceeding remarkable, are
theſe, as Plutaych himſelf relates them', Aaugivns
*) Aretey exs wile 3 ovrliier # xh7 wor, & 8 Cod 3h
+ yiis iBaſaytiv, niaivivar mis + xdauor ts F av-
Toure us T3 wonuCemdy wars wig. Vous Vas aty-
relag, Tra & 1d mra aoixrrs jdm), & 5 Gore wen
on xiops, x7 Ew, 2, tumiguay, x, wreener. Twas
the Doftrine both of Diogenes and I

O 2 at


99


Vid. Phas
nem. JJ.
intra.


Vid. Bent-
ley, Serm.


4 5
. - - -x


8. p

Oc. And
Dr. IWoed-
ward's Eſ-


Jay, D.267+
&s


Theor. lib.


2, CaÞ. 10.


HYPOTHESES, Book Il.


That after the Creation or primary Conſtitution of the
World, and the Produttion of Animals out of the
Earth, the Iorld, as it were of its own accord, was
bent or incln'd towards the South. And truly 'tis
.* probable this Inclination was the Effet of Providence,
01 purpoſe that ſome Parts of the World might become
habitable; and, others uninbabitable , by reaſon of the
difference of the frigid, torrid, and temperate Climate:
thereef. Which obſervable and moſt valuable
Fragmens of Antiquity ought to have been be-
fore mention'd, but was on purpoſe reſerv'd fo
this place; where it not only fully atteſts the
marter of fat, the Inclination of the Heavens
towards the South; not only afligns the final
Cauſe cruly enough, ( conſidering the uninhabi-
tableneſs of the Torrid, as well as of the Frigid
Zones, in the Opinion of thoſe Apes) the Di-
ſtribution of the Earth into certain and fix'd
Zones, Torrid, Temperate, and Frigid ; but fo
accurately and nicely foci the time af{o, That
ſucceeding the Creation, agreeably to the pre-
ſent Hypotheſis ; that were I to wiſh or chuſe for
a Teſtimony fully to my mind, I could ſcarcely
have deſir'd or pitch'd upon a better. To cheſs
five faregoing Arguments, for the proof of my
main Conclution, I ſhall, by way of ſupernume-
rary ones, or Appendages, add one or two more,
and fo leave the whole to the Conſideration of clic
Impartial Reader.

(6.) The State of Mankind without queſtion,
and perhaps that of other Animals, was before
_ the Hall vaſtly different from the preſene; and
conſequently requir'd a proportionably different
State of external Nature; of which, without the
Hypotheſis before us, no Account can be given,
or at leaſt_ has not yer by any been attempted.
The. World, as to other things , ſeems to pore
bp cen


Book Il. HYPOTHESES.


been at firſt, in great meaſure, put into the ſame
Condition which we ſtill enjoy; and yer Req-
| ſon, as well as Scripture , aſſures us, That fo
different a condition of things in the Animal,

Rational and Moral , muſt be fuired with an
agreeably different one in the Natural and Cor-
porcal World. Which being conſider'd, and that
at the ſame time no remarkable difference has
been, or perhaps can be athgn'd , bur what the
Hypotheſis before us, and its conſequences afford
us ; and that withal a ſatisfaory account of the
ſeveral Particulars is deducible from the ſame , |
as I hope to make appear hereafter; upon the
whole, I think this a very conſiderable Atteſta-
tion to what has been before infilted on. *Tis
indeed pofiible, that what I look on as an ad-
vantage to, others may imafine to be a preju-
dice againſt the preſent 1yporbeſis ; as inferring ,
among other things, a half year of Night, as
well as a half ycar of Day, which may be ſup-
pos'd too diſproportionate to the State and Con-
dition of Mankind ; and eſpecially, roo incon-
venient for ſo happy and ealy a Life, as that of
Mankind in Paradiſe undoubtedly was, without
any conſideration of the other Creatures. Bur it
ought to be conlider'd, as has been already re- ,,,, . x.
mark'd, that our judging of one Scheme or Sy- 4.1. ;o.
ſtem of Nature by another, is very fallacious , pri.
and very unreaſonable. Almighty God adapts
each particular State to fuch rational and animal
Beings as are on purpoſe defign'd for the ſame;
but by no means thereby confines his Power and
| Providence, which can with the ſame eaſe adapt
| other Beings, or the fame in other Circumſtan-
ces, to a very different and clean contrary
Condition: The Days in Jupiter are not ten
hours long; thoſe in the Moon near Seventy two
O 3 cumes


HYPOTHESES. Book Il.


times as long as they, or a Month; yet any one
who ſhould thence conclude, that eicher Jupiter
or the Moon, if not both, were uncapable of In-
habirants, he would, I think, be very raſh, not
to ſay preſumpruous, in ſo doing. *Tis true, he
might juſtly conclud:, That ſuch Creatures as
dwell on this Earth in their preſent Circumſtances
could not, or at leaſt could not with conveni-
ency, inhabit either of them. Put the necetfary
conſequence of that is only this, 'Ti.at as the State
of cxcernal Nature appears to be in Jupiter and
the Mecen, very different from ours on Ear:b
now; fo moſt probably are the Stare and Cir-
cumſtances , the Capacitities and Operations of
their ſeveral Inhabicants equally different from
thoſe of Mankind at preſent upon it; which is
what I fully allow, and plead for, in the Caſe
before us; and which, when rightly conlider'd,
may fave me the labour of returning any other
Anſwer to the particular difficulty here menti-
on'd, and of enlarging upon ſeveral other things
which might be ſaid to great ſatisfaction on the
preſent oc-alion ; which in proſpect thereok ,
ſhall therefore bz no further proſecuced in this
Ace.

(7.) Laſtly, The preſent Hypotheſis gives an ea-
ſy Account of the vaſt change in the Natural, on
the change in the Moral World ; and of the fad
Eſfects of the Divine Malediction upon the Larth
atter the Fall of Man ; which cill now has nor,
that I know of, been ſo much as attempted by
any. deveral have been endeavouring to account
for. that change which che Deluge made in the
World: But they are filent as to the natural cauſes
or occaſions of a Change, which (Antiquity, Sa-


%


75

cred or Prophane, being judge ) was in all re-
_ Ipects vattly more remarkable : The State of In-
nNOcency,


Book Il. HYPOT HESES,


nocency, and that of Sin, being ſure on all ac-
counts more different from, and contraditory to
each other , than the Antediluvian and Poſtdilu-
vian, either in reaſon can be ſuppos'd, or in fat
be prov'd to be. Now as to the particulars of this
Change, and thecauſes of them; and how well,
on the Hypotheſis we are upon, they correſpond to
one another, I muſt leave that to the Judgment
of the Reader, when I come to treat of 'em in
their own place hereafter. In the mean time this
may fairly be ſaid, that 7h being the ft attempt
at an Intire Theory, or ſuch an one as takes in Al!
the great Mutations of the Earth; As it will on
chat account claim the Candor of the Reader, and
his unbiaſs'd Reſolution of embracing the [Truth
(however new or unuſual theAfſertions may ſeem)
when ſufficiently evidenc'd to him ; So the co-
incidence of things from firſt to laſt, through fo
many ſtages and periods of Nature, 'and the ſo-
lution of all the main Phenomena of every ſuch
different ſtage and period from the Creation to
the conſummation of all things ; if thev be found
juſt, mechanical, and natural, will ic ſelf deſerve
to be'eſteemed one of the moſt convincing and
fatisfactory Arguments for any ſingle particular of
this Theory that were to be defir'd ; and ſhew,that
not any great Labour or Study of the Author, but
the happy Advantage of falling into true and real
Cauſes and Principles is, under the Divine Pro-
vidence, to be own'd the occaſion of the Diſco-
veries therein contain'd. In all which , may
theſe my poor Endeavours prove as fatisfactory
to the minds of others,” as they have been to my
own, and give them the ſame aſſurance of the
Verity and Divine Authority of thoſe Holy
Books , where the ſeveral Periods are recorded,
and the Phenomena chiefly preſery'd, which the

O 4 diſcovery


103


104


* Gen. 11.
14.


HYPOTHESES. Book II,


diſcovery of theſe things has afforded my ſelf,
and I am- fure that my Labours will not be in


vain,


IV. The ancient Paradiſe or Garden
of Eden, the Seat of our firſt Pa-
rents in the State of Innocence,
was at the joynt Courſe of the Ri-
vers Tigris and Euphrates ; either be-
fore they fall into the Perſian Gulf,
where they now unite together ,
and ſeparate again ; or rather where
they anciently divided themſelves
below the If]and Ormus, where the
Perfian Gulf, under the Tropick of
Cancer, falls into the Perſian-Sea.


That ſomewhere hereabouts, on the Southern
Regions of Me/opotamia, berween Arabia-and Per-
/ia, was the place of the ancient Paradiſe, 'tis
paſt reaſonable doubt from ewo of its Rivers,
Tigris and #': phrates, occuring in the Deſcription
of ics Situation by Meſes. And when the follow-
ing Theory 1 :!? ler{tood, perhaps there will ap-


pe-: reaſo «© the place, where more nicely
it may be fuppo; 1 co have been, to that other
here conjectur ia Ys, '//ben the fo low mg Theory


1; underſtood; for tho? che particular place aflign'd
be now under Water, and a Branch or Bay of
the great Ocean ; yet in probability it might not

he ſo then, as will bereaſcer appear. My reaſons


lor this Sicuation of Paradiſe, arc theſe,
(1.) The


BookIl. HYPOTHESES. 105


(1.) The Ancient Tradicion of the Fews and 4rcbeo). p.
Arabians was, that Paradiſe was ſeated under the 2%:
Primitive Equinoctial ; which is impofhble, un-
leſs it were as far South as the Tropick of Cancer :
Under which therefore it ought to be, and ac-
cordingly is by this Hypotheſis plac'd and deter-
man'd.

(2.) *'Twill be caſic on this Hypotheſis for every
one to ſuppoſe that the other two Rivers, or
Branches of theſe, P:/on and Gibon, which have
been in vain hitherto ſought for, muſt be now
lolt in the Perſian Sea ; and therefore not to
be diſcover'd, nor their diſcovery to be expected,
ſince the Deluge.

(3.) The Countries encompaſs'd by, and bor-
dering on, theſe four Streams or Rivers, being
alike, in part, under Water; the ditkculties ari-
ſing from the common miſtaken Suppoſitions re-
lating thereto will ceaſe , and Light be afforded
to the Mo/-ick Deſcription on the particular con-
ſideration thereof.

(4.) The moſt literal and obvious ſenſe of the
Words of the Sacred Hiſtorian concerning the
ſituation of Eden, and its Garden or Paradiſe, will
be accountable , and exactly ſuitable to the ſtate
of theſe Countries, according to the preſent Geo-
o2raphy. The words of Moſes are, And the Lord Cen. i.. 8,
God planted a Garden eaſtward in Eden; and ***
there be put the man whom be had formed. ind a
River went out of Eden to water the garden; and
from thence it was parted and became mts four heads.
To which the preſent Hypotheſis -is correſpondent
to the greateſt nicenefs, if we ſuppoſe that 7igris
and Evnphrates being united, as they are now, in
Babyloma, ran in one Stream quite through that
Valley, which is now cover'd with Water, and

call'd


HYPOTHESES. Book ll.


call'd the Gulf of Perſia (I ſuppoſe the Country
of Eden then) upon the Exit of x which, beyond
Ormrns , the {aid United Streams divided them-
ſelves (as Nile into ſeven) into four ſeparate
branches; and -by them, as bv four Mouths,
diſcharged it ſelf into the Perſia Sea : Two of
which Streams retain'd the Names of the Origi-
nal ones, Tigris and Euphrates ; and the other two
acquir'd new ones, and were call'd P:/o» and
Gibon ; juſt before or about which Diviſion, that
Country ſtil'd. Paradi/e,or the Garden of Eden was,
I imagine, accordingly ſituate. This I take to
be the moſt probable account of this Point ; and
ſuch an one as takes away the perplexities of this
matter ; agrees to the Letter of Moſes, and the
Geography of the Country ; and is ſuitable
withal both to whatthe Jew! and Arabian Tra-
diction betore-mention'd aflert, and what the
next Fiypotheſis requires.


V. The Primitive Ecliptick, or its
correſpondent Circle on the Earth,
interſected the Preſent Tropick of
Cancer at Paradiſe ; or at leaſt at
its Meridian.


When from the laſt Hypotheſis but one, it ap-
pears that the Primitive Ecliptick was a fixed
Circle on the Earth, as well as in the Heavens
and muſt both equally divide the preſent Equa-
tor, and touch the preſent Tropicks; 'tis pro-
+ per to fix, if poſſible, the Point of Interſe&tion
with the Northern Tropick ; whereby-the intire
Circle may be ſtill defcrib'd, and its Original Si-
tration determin'd. Which is the nenrpe of
this


Book Il, HYPOT HESES. 107
this Hypotheſis we are now - upon ; and which I


thus prove.


(1.) Without this Hypotheſis the b:fore-men-
tion'd Fewiſh and Arabian Tradition, of the fitua-
tion of Paradiſe under the Primitive Equinoctial,
is unaccountable and impollible to be true. For
Paradiſe being, at the moſt ſouthern” Poſition
ſuppoſable, bur juſt under the Tropick of Cancer , |
it could no where be under the ancient Equi- :
notial or Ecliptick, but at their mutual Inter-
ſection ; which muſt therefore have been as this
Propolition aſlerts.

(2.) The Production of Animals out of the
Earth and Waters, at or near Paradiſe, ſezms to
have requir'd all the heat poſſible in any part of
, the Earth; which being to be found only under
the Equinoctial , confirms the laſt mention'd Ar-
gument, and plcads for that ſituation of Paradiſe
which is here alligned to it.

(3.) And Principally, This ſituation is deter-
min'd by the coincidence of the Autumnal Equi-
nox, and the beginning of the Night or Sun-ſet,
at the Meridian of Paradiſe. "Tis known that
at Paradiſe, or the place of the Creation of Man,
the NvxS*weegyy, or Natural Day, commenc'd gen, i. 5,
with the Sun-ſetting, Six a Clock, or coming on 8, 13, 19,
of the Night. *Tis granted alſo, that the begin- 23, 31.
ning of the moſt Ancient Year, (which ſhall pre-
ſently be prov'd to have been at the Autumnal
Equinox) was coincident with the beginning of
the World, or of the Moſaick Creation. Which
things compar'd together, do determine the que-
ſtion we are upon. Ir being impoſlible, on the
grounds here ſuppos'd, that Sun-ſer and the Au-
eumnal Equinox ſhould be coincident to any\but
thoſe in the Northern Hemiſphere, at che Pojnt


0
\


Tos


Lev. xxii.


- a
3 <-


Fil. Cate”.
Prolerey .
4: rem pure
Al ma!

( 14:78


Cop. 34-


Lev. xx1ui.
«> BE
V.mb,
(X1X, 1G,


HYPOTHESES. Book I.
of Interſefion of the Ancient Ecliptick, and the


preſent Tropick of Cancer ; or ſuch as were under
the fame Meridian with them ; as any ordinary
Aſtronomer will ſoonconfeſs: Which Argument
is Decretory, and fixes the place of Paradiſe to
the greateſt -exactnels and ſatisfaction.

Corollary 1. Hence a plain reaſon is given, of

the Days of Creation commencing at Evening ;
which otherwiſe is a little ſtrange: It beins 4.
a meceſſary reſult of the time of the Year, and Re-
gion of the Earth, when, and where the Creation
began.
Coroll. 2. As al'o why the Jewiſh Days, eſpe-
cially their Sabbath-Days, began at the ſame time
ewr ſince: The Memory of the Days of Creation bes
thereby exattly preſerry d.

Coroll. 3. As alſo hy their Civil Years, but eſpe-
cially their Sabbatical Years, and Years of Fubtke
(even after their Months were reckon'd from the Ver-
n1,) began at the Autumnal Equinox : The memory
of the Years of the Creation being thereby alike exattly
Fre | ry &,


VI. The Patriarchal, or moſt an-
cient Year mention'd in the Scrip-
rure, began at the Aurumnal Equi-
noXkxs.


The Reaſons of this Aſertion are theſe en-

ſuing.
(1.) The principal Head or Beginning of the
Tewith Year inall Ages was the firlt Day of their
urumnal Month 7: r: 3 and was accordingly ho-
nour'd with an extraordinary Feſtival, the Feaſt
of Trumpets ; When the Head or Beginning of
their


BookIl. HYPOTHESES:
their Sacred Year, the firſt of Ni/an, had no ſuch


ſolemnity annex'd to it 2 As is known and con-
feſs'd by all. m4

(2.) When God commanded the Jews on their
coming out of Egypr, to-elteem the Month N:-
(an, the Firſt in their Yeary it ſeems plainly to
unply, that cill then ic had not been fo eſteemed
by them. The words are theſe. The Lord ſpake


wnto Moſes and Aaron in the Land of Egypt, [aying,


This Month (ſhall be) wnt2 you. the beginning of
Mombs ; 'it (ſhall be) the firſ# Month of the Year 19
you. And this is ſtrengthened by conſidering,
that tho' we here find an Original of the Sacred
Year in the Spring ; yet we no where do of the
Civil in Autumn: Which therefore, tis very
probable, was the immemorial beginning of the
Ancient Year long before the times of Moſes.
(3-) Whatever beginning of the Jewiſh Year
there might be on other: accounts; "Tis confeſs'd
by all, That the beginning of the Sabbatical
Years, and Years of Jubilee, (by which in all
probability the Primary Years of the World were
commemorated and preſerv'd) was at the Au-
tumnal Equinox : Which is a very-good Argu-
ment that thoſe Ancient Years, ſo commemo-


|


Exod. it.
1, 2. with
alll. 4+


rated and preſerv'd, began at the fame time


alſo.

(4.) The Feaſt of Ingathering, or of Taber-
nacles, which was ſoon after the Autumnal Equi-
nox, 15 ſaid to be # the End, or after the Revolu-
tion of the Year ; Which is a peculiar confirmation
of the Aﬀertion we are now upon.

(s5.) Unleſs that Year at the Deluge com-
menc'd at the Autumnal Equinox, we muſt (ſays
the Learned Lightfoot in his Scheme thereof ) ſup-
poſe one Miracle more than either Scripture or
Reaſon give us ground to think of ; and that is,

eat


Fxo, xXiit,
16. &
XXXIV. 22»


HYPOTHESES, Book ll.


that the Waters ſhould: increaſe, and lie at their
height all the Heat of Summer , and abate and
decreaſe all the cold of Winter. Which, with-
out Reaſon, he ſuppoſes s not to be allow'd.

(6.) What was alledg'd under the laſt Propo-
fition is here to be confider'd, That on this Hypo-
theſis a clear Reaſon ivigiven of the Nights pre-
ceding the Day in the Hiſtory of the Creation,
and ever- fince among the Fews ; which other-
wiſe is not fo eafily to be accounted for.

(7.) The teſtimony of the Chaldee Ranging,
(to which Fo/ephrs does fully agree) i; as exprels *
as poſſible, upon 1 Kings 8. 2. where the words
are, I the Month Ethamim, which 1s the ſeventh
Month; (wiz. as all confeſs, from the Vernal
_—_— upon which the Paraphraſe is , 7hey
call'd ut of Old the Firſ® Memth ; but now it is the
Seventh Month : Which may well counterpoiſc
all that froni fome later Authors can be pro-
duc'd to thecontrary. Sothat upon the whole I
may fairly conclude, notwithſtanding ſome ſmall
Objections, (which either loſe their force on ſuch
Principles as are here laid down, or will on
other occaſions betaken off ) That the moſt An-
cient or Patriarchal Year began at the Autumnal
Equinox.


VII. The Original Orbits of the Pla-
nets, and particularly of the Earth,
before the Deluge, were perfect
Circles.


This is in it ſelf fo cafie and natural an Hypo-
theſis, that I might very juſtly take it for granted,
and make it a Poſtulatum ; And in caſe I could
prove


Book. HYPOTHESES.


e every. thing to agree to, and receive Light
om the fame, and withal account for the pre-
ſent Eccentricity , no man could fairly charge it
with being a precarious or unreaſonable one.
Bur alchough the main reaſons for ſuch a Propo-
fition are, I confeſs, to be taken from the con-
ſequences thence to be deriv'd ; and the admi-
rable correſpondence of them all to Ancient Tra-
dition, to the Phenomena of the Deluge, and to
the Scripture Accounts thereto relating, as will
be viſible hereafter ; yet there being ſome Argr-
- ments of a different nature which may render ir
' Probable, and prepare the Reader for admitting
the ſame, before the conſequences thereof come
to be fully underſtood , I chuſe to place this
Aſſertion here, among my Hypotheſes ; tho” I do
not pretend that the Arguments here to be made
uſe of, ought to put the ſame fo near to cer-
tainty , as its fellows have, I think, reaſon to
expect with unprejudic'd Readers.  Butto come
to the matter it ſelf : The Reaſons I would offer
are theſe following.


(1.) The Deſigns and Uſes of Planets feem
moſt properly to require circular Orbits. Now in
order to give a rational guels at the ſame Deſigns
and Uſes of Planets, I know no other way than
that from compariſon with the Earth. And here,
when we find one of the Planets, and that plac'd
in the middle among the reſt, to agree with the
others in every thing of which we have any
means of enquiry ; 'tis but reaſonable to ſuppoſe,
that jt does fo alſo in thoſe, which 'tis impoflible
for us, by any other certain way, to be aflured
of. It we obſerve a certain Engin in one Coun-
try, and fee to what uſe 'tis put, and to what
end it ſerves; and if afterward we fee another,

tho'


_— =>


T :1. AYT7.?.
Hy>0:h, Ic.


Z i. 4,


HYPOTHESES. BooklIl[.


tho' in a different Country, agreeing to the for-
mer in all things, as far as we are able to diſco-
ver : Tho' we are not informed of its deſign and
uſe, we yet very naturally, and very probably,
believe that it ſerves to the ſame purpoſe, and
was intended for the ſame end with the former.
Thus ic ought ſure to be in the caſe before us;
and by the ſame way of reaſoning we may fairly
conclude ro what uſes all the Planets ſerve, and
on what general deſigns Providence makes uſe of
them, v3. To be the ſeat or habitation of
Animals, and the Seminary of ſuch Plants and
Vegetables as are neceflary or convenient for
their ſupport and ſuſtenance. Which being
therefore probably ſuppos'd of the reſt, and cer-
eainly known of the Earth, I argue, That a circu-
lar Orbie being the moſt fit and proper for fuch
purpoſes, may juſtly be preftum d the original li-
ruation of the Planets , and the primary work of
Providence in ordering weir courſes. Such Crea-
tures, Rational, Senfitive, or Vegetative, as are
fir and diſpos'd for a certain degree of the Sun's
heat, are very much incommoded by one much
greater, or much leſs ; and by conſequence are
peculiarly accommodate to a Circular, but by nv
means to an Eccentrical Orbit. And- tho” the
inequality of the Earth's diſtance from the Sun,
in the different Points of its Orbit, be 1o incon-
ſiderable, chat we obſerve little effect of irc; yet
in ſome of the other Orbits, which are -much
more Eccentrical, it muſt be very fenhble, and
have a mighty infiuence on the productions of
Nature, and the con{titution of Animals in Pla-
nets revolving therein. And what reaſon can
we imagine why the Southzrn Hemiſphere, for
inſtance, of a Planet, by the ftituation of the
Perihelion neat itz Summers Solſtice, thould be fo

| dilterent


Bookll, HYPOTHESES.


different from the Northern, in the primary
contrivance of the Divine- Providence? This ſeems
not fo agreeable to the original regularity and
uniformity of Nature ; nor does it look like the
immediate effe&t of the Divine Power and Wil-
dom in the firſt frame of the World , wher all
things juſt coming out of the Creator's hatids,
muſt be allow'd to have been e& in their
kind, and exceeding good ; when the rational
Creatures beirig Pure and Innocent, the natutal
ſtate of things was to be ſuited to them ; and dif-
pos'd agreeably to reaſon, proportion, and the
convenience of the fame unſpotted and ſinlefs
Creatures.

(2.) The oppoſite poſition and uſe of the oppo-
ſite Species of Bodies the Comets, ſeem, by tht
rule of contraries, to ſuppoſe what we have been
contending for. If indeed we had found a mix-
ture of Planets and Comets in the ſame Regiorts
of the Solar Syſtem, anda confuſion of the Orbits
and Order of both : If we had diſcover'd all {
cies of Ellipſes, with all degrees of Eccentricity
from the Circle to the Parabola ; the Propoſitiort
I am upon would be more than precarious, and
but too diſagreeable to the frame of Nature.
But when we find no ſuch thing, bur the clean
contrary ; namely, That all the Comets revolve
in Orbits ſo extremely Eccentrical, that ſuch ſeg-
ments of them as come within our obſervation
are almoſt Parabolical, or of an infinite degree of
Eccentricity; *Tis not unreaſonable to conclude,
Thar likely enough the contradiſtirit Species of
Bodies the Planets originally revolv'd in Orbits
of no degree of Eccentricity, that is, in perfect
Circles : The Eccentrical or Elkprick Orbits of
the one, among other things, probably diſtin-

Þ guiſhing


T


114


HYPOTHESES. Book ll.


guiſhing th&m from the other ; which originally
moved in{Congcentrical or Circular ones. {
(3.) This HypoNy/is is favour'd by the Ancient
Aſtronomy which T&F pertinaciouſly adher'd to
the Circulan, Hyporhe/is, notwithſtanding all its
Eccentricks , \ Epicycles, and ſtrange Wheel-
work; that it may ſeem the effet of Ancient
Tradition , that once the Heavenly Motions
were really Circular. And This is the more re-
markable, becauſe, not only the true Syſtem of
the World, but the Conch Sefions, and among
them the Eljptick Figure was very anciently
known and conlider'd. By the introduction of
which, all the fanciful and uncouth figments they
were forc'd upon, might have been wholly ſpar'd,
and an caſie and natural Idea of the Planetary


' Motions obtain'd. Which if ever it had been


{tarted, by its exact agreement to the Phenomena,
could ſcarce ever have been loſt; and which yet,
as far as I know, never came into the Minds of
Aſtronomers till the Great Kepler's time 3 who


firſt prov'd the Orbits tro be Eliprick too plainly
to be denied, or almoſt doubted any longer.


(4.) The Quantity of the ſeveral Orbits Eccen-
tricity, and the Poſition of their Aphelia, are fo vari-
ous, different, and without any vilibledeſign, order
or method, as far as is hitherto diſcover'd, that
the Whole looks more like the reſult of Second
Cauſes, in ſucceeding times, than the Primary
Contrivance and Workmanſhip of the Creator
himſelf. *Tis, indeed poffible that there may be
Deſign and Contrivance in theſe things, tho' we
cannot diſcern them; yer ſeeing we have, on
the common grounds, no Reaſon to attirm ſuch
a thing ; ſeeing the equidiſtant ſicuation from
the Sun would more clearly ſhew ſuch Deſign and


Contrivance ; ſeeing alſo, the original circular
Motion


Book Il. HYPOTHESES.


Motion of the Earth granted, the Pofition of
the Earth's Aphelion, and the quantity of its Or-
bit's Eccentricity, do fo remarkably infer the Di-
vine Wiſdom and Artifice therein, and are won-
derfully fubſcrvient to the higheſt purpoſes ; (By
the one, the Day of the Year when the Flood
began ; by the other, the length of the Antedi-
luvian Year, being nearly determinable ; of
which hereafter) ris I think, but fair reaſoning

to conclude, That that Hyporhbeſis which does fo
certainly argue Art and Contrivance, Order and
Providence, is to be prefer'd to another, which
ſcems to infer the clean contrary, or at beſt only
leaves room for a poflibility thereof; as 'tis in

the preſent caſe. I do by no means queſtion but
theſ: uncertain Fccentrieuies and various Poſition
of the Apbelia of the Planets, with all other ſuch
ſeemingly Anomalous Phenomena of Nature, hap-
pen'd by a particular Providence,and were all one
way or other fitted to the ſtate of each Species of
Creatures Inhabiring the ſeveral Planets, accord-
ing as their reſpective Behaviours or Circum-
ſtances, in their ſeveral Generations requir'd :


(of which the ſucceeding Theoty will be a preg-


| nant inſtance) Bur my meaning is this; That


before any good or bad ations of Creatures ,
when every thing was juſt as the Wiſdom of
God was pleas'd to appoint; when each Crea-
ture was compleat and perfet in its kind, and fo
ſuited to the moſt compleat and perfect ftare of
external Nature ; tis highly probable that the out=
ward World, or every fuch ſtate of external Na»
ture was even, uniform, and regular, as was the
temper and diſpoſition of each Creature that was
to be plac'd therein : And as properly ſuited to
all cheir neceffiries, and conveniences, as was
pollible and reaſonable to be expeted. Such a


P 2 ſtate,


215


HYPOTHESES. Bookll.


ſtate, *cis natural to believe, obtain'd through the
Univerſe till ſucceeding changes in the Living
and Rational, requir'd proportionable ones in the
Inanimate and Corporeal World. *Tis moſt Phi-
ly what appears wiſe, regular, uniform, and har-
monious, to the Firſt Cauſe ; (as the main Phe-
nomena of the Heavenly Bodies, their Places, and
Motions, do, to the degree of wonder and ſur-
prize ) but as to ſuch things as may ſeem of
another nature, to attribute them intirely to ſub-
ſequent changes, which the mutual actions of
Bodies one upon another, fore-ordain'd and ad-
juited by the Divine Providence, in various Pe-
riods, agreeably 'to the various exigencies of
. Creatures, might bring to pals.

(5.) Ir being evident, that multitudes of Co-
mers have paſs'd* through the Planetary Syſtem ;
that in ſuch their i they were ſometimes
capable of cauſing, nay, in very long periods
muſt certainly, without a Miracle, have cauſed
| great alterations in the ſame ; and that the na-

ture and quantities of the preſent Eccentricities or
Anomalies are no other than what muſt be ex-
peRed from ſuch Cauſes;'tis very reaſonable to al-
low theſe effects to have really happen'd, and that
conſequently all might be, as I here contend it
was originally, orderly, uniform, and regular ;
and particularly the Planetary Orbits uniform,
concentrical, and circular, as I am here con-
cern'd to prove. If any one of us ſhould ob-
ſerve that a curious Clock, made and kept in
order by an excellent Artiſt, was very notably
different from the true time of the day, and
took notice withal of a certain rub or ſtoppage,
which was very capable of cauſing that Error in


its Motion ; he would calily and undoubtedly
conclude


Book Il. HYPOTHESES.


conclude that ſuch an Error was truly occaſion'd
by that viſible Impedimene ; and never deſign'd
at firſt, or procur'd by the Artiſt. The applica-
tion of which reſemblance, is too obvious to need
a Comment, and naturally enforces what I am
now contending for.

(6.) 'Tis evident that all the lictle Planets
about Tupiter move in Orbirs eruly Circular,
without the leaſt ſenſible degree of Eccentri-
city : On which account the preſent Hypotheſis
appears to be far from contrary to the frame
of Nature; nay to be no other with regard
to the Primary , than is de fads, true in this
Secondary Syſtem: And from that ſo remark-
able a parallel, may the more eaſily be belicv'd
to have once been the caſe of this alſo.

(7.) 'Tis evident, that in caſe the Comets
Attractions were the cauſe of the Eccentricity
of the Planets, they would uſually draw them
alſo from che Plains of their former Orbits, and
make them inclin'd or oblique to one another :
So that where the Orbits are Eccentrical, "tis
probable, according to the preſent H,porhe/is, the
Plains muſt be different, and oblique to each
other; and where the Orbits are Circular, the
Plains of the ſeveral Orbits muſt be as they were
at firſt, or, in probability, coincident. Now
this is really obſervable in the two Syſtems laſt
mention'd : The Plains of the Circular Orbits
about Fupiter being nearly, if not exa&tly coinci-
dent, and thoſe of the Eccentrical ones abour
the Sun being oblique to each other. Which
Obſervation is no inconſiderable Argument,
that originally the Planetary Orbits were ex-
atly Circular ; as well as that at the ſame time
they were every one in the ſame common Plain,
or in Plains coincident to one another. Week

P 3


117


HYPOTHESES. Rookll.


laſt mention'd Hypotheſis, (to Speak a word or
ewo of that by the way) tho' I look upon it as
not unlikely, and ſuch an one as ſeveral of the
foregoing Arguments might be apply'd to, and
do plead for ; yer I ſhall not infiſit farther upon
it here: Both becauſe the following Theory
does not dire&ly depend upon it in any part;
and becauſe the moving in different Plains does
not cauſe any ill effects, or notable inconve-
niences, in the Syſtem of Nature, as we have
ſhewn the Eccentricity does; and ſo cannot with
the ſame cltearneſs and force be urg'd againſt
its being the Original Workmanſhip of God,
as I have above diſcoursd in the other caſe.
Only this I may ſay, That ſeeing the Planetary
Orbits are ſtill almoſt in the ſame Plain ; ſecing
the Comets Paſſages are capable of cauſing ſuch
little obliquiry ; nay were they originally in the
ſame Plain, in length of time, by the fore-men-
tion'd Artraftion, they muſt without a Miracle,
have been drawn from their common Plains,
and been obliged to revolve in thoſe different
from each other, as they now do; and ſeeing
withal that Eccentricity and Obliquity , as wnitorm:-
ty of diſtance from the Center, and comcidence of the
Plains, go together in the World , as has been
juſt before noted ; this Hypotheſis of the Original
coincidence of the Planetary Plains, is an opi-
nion neither improbable, nor unphiloſophical ;
and only a {tle l/s evident than what this Pro-
poſition was to. prove, viz. That the Primary
Orbirs of the Planets were perfe&t Circles; but
otherwiſe very much a-kin, and exceeding cor-
reſpondent thereto ; they at once receiving
lighe from, and affording light tro one another
mutually,


VIII The


BookIl. HYPOTHESES.


VII. The Ark did not reſt, as is com-
monly ſuppos'd, in Armenia; bur
on the Mountain Caucaſus, or Paro-
pamiſus, on the Confines of Tartary,


Perſia, and India.
This Propoſition is proved by theſe following


Arguments.


(1.) This Mountain agrees to the place where
the Firſt Fathers after the Deluge Inhabited ;
which any part of Armenia does not. *Tis evi-
dent from Scripture, that the firſt removal of the
Fathers after the Flood there mention'd, was
from the parts on the Eaſt of Babylon : It came
to pals as they journeyed from the Eaſt, that they
found a plain in the land of Shinar, and they dwel:
there; and accordingly there they built the Tow-
er of Babel, as you find in thefollowing Hiſtory.
Now Armenia, on one of whoſe Mountains the
Ark is commonly ſuppos'd to have reſted, is fo
far from the Eaſtern Point from Babylon, that
'tis ſomewhat towards the Weſt, as any Map of
thoſe Countries will eaſily ſhew: But the Moun-
rain here pirch'd upon, Caucaſus, or Paropamiſns,
being ſituate near to the Eaſt Point from Babylon,
is on that account peculiarly agreeable to the
Hiſtory of Moſes, of the Habitation of the firſt
Fathers after the Flood, and fo to the Seat of the
Ark thence to be determin'd.

(2.) Notwithſtanding we meet with few or
no Colonies ſent Eaſtward, after the confuſion
of Tongues, as we do into other quarters; yet
* the Eaſtern Nations appear, in the moſt Ancient

” 4 Prophane


Cen. x1. 2,


339


HYPOTHESES. Book ll,


Prophane Hiſtories of the World, to have been
then the moſt numerous of all others, On which
account thoſe Countries muſt have been firſt
Peopled before the Deſcent of the Sons of Men
to Babylon, which the remoteneſs of Armenia
is uncapable of ; but the Neighbourhood of Cau-
caſus permits, and naturally ſuppoſes. Ir being
probable that if the Sons of *Neab, for the firſt
Century after the. Flood, dwelt upon or near that
Mountain , they , would firſt ſend Colonies, or
leave a Company thereabouts, which ſhould
ſtock thoſe Eaſtern Countries adjoining , before
they ' ſpred themſelves into the remoter parts of
Aſia, Europe, and Africa ; and wice verſa, ſeeing
they appear to have firſt Peopled thoſe Regions,
'ris equally probable that they originally were
ſituate at or near the ſame Regions, #. e. at or
near the Mountain here determin'd.

(3.) The Teſtimony of Porcizs Cato is expreſs
in the Point, who affirms, That two hundred
and fifty years before Nmas, the Earth was over-
town with Waters ; and that In Scythia Saga re-
natum mortale Genus : Mankind was renew'd or ve-
ffor'd in that part of Scythia which i ca!l'd4 Saga,
which Country , ſays Sir Walter Raleigh, is
undoubred.y under, the Mountain Parepa-
2 M1Hs.

(4.) The fame Aſertion is confirm'd by the
Tradition of the Inhabitants, who, ſays Dr. Hey-
/m, aver, That a large Vineyard in Margiana ,
near the Foot of Mount Caucaſus, was of Noah's
Plantation, which may juſtly be ſer againſt any
pretended Reliques or Tradition for Armenia ;
and agreeing with the place determin'd by the
other Arguments, deſerves juſtly to be preterr'd
before them. Theſe are the Arguments, _

on


Book Il. HYPOT HESES,


from Goropius Becanus , Sir Waker Raleigh , and
Dr. Heylin make uſe of in the Caſe, and which
T think are very fſatisfatory. But I ſhall add
one more, which they take no notice of, but
which I eſteem to clear, that it might almoſt alter
the Denomination of the Propoſition, and give
it a claim to a place among the foregoing Lem-
mata , which I propoſe as certain ; not theſe
Propoſitions, which whatever degree of evidence
they or any of them may have, I yet chuſe to
propoſe under a ſofter Name, and call them Hy-
potheſes. And the Argument is this;

(5.) The Ark reſted upon the higheſt Hill in
all 4/2, nay, at that time the higheſt Hill in the
World ; but Paropamiſus ( the true and moſt fa-
mous Caucaſus, in the old Authors) is the high-
eſt Hill in all 4/2, nay, was then of the whole
World; and is by conſequence, the very ſame
on which the Ark reſted. Now, in this Argu-
ment, I ſuppoſe ic will be allow'd me, That Caw-
caſus is the higheſt Mountain in Afis (Sir Walter
Raleigh ſays 'tis wndowvtedly fo); that it was the
higheſt in the World alſo at that time, will


Sir Wake»
Raleigh's
Hiſt lib.
I. cap. 7.
ſet. 10.
And Hey.
lm's Col-
"Yu P- 7


Lib. r. cap.
7. kQ. 10,
ſubj. 12.

Solut. 59.


from the ſame Aﬀertion be hereafter prov'd , infa.


whatever pretence the Pike of Teneriff, or any
other may at preſent make: All that therefore [
am here to make out, is, That the Ark muſt have
reſted on the higheſt Mountain in the World,
which is eaſily done: For the Waters covering
the Tops of all the higheſt Hills on the Face of
the Earth, fifreen Cubits ; and yet the Arkreſting
the very firſt day of the abatement of the Wa-
ters, above two Months before the Tops of other
Mountains were ſeen(as will be proved hereafter:)
'Tis evident , That not only the lower Hills of
Armenia , but all other in the World, beſides
Caucaſus , were uncapable of receiving the Ark
at


Phen. 59.


ra.


I22


2 Kings
XIX. 37.
Iſa-xxxvii.
38,


In Loc.


HYPOTHESES. Book II.


at the time afſigned for its reſting in the Sacred
Hiſtory ; and by conſequence, "That and That
only was the Mountain on which it reſted. If
it be here objefed, That Ararat, where the Ark
reſted, is in Scripture taken for Armenia; and by
conſequence it muſt be an Armenian Mountain
which we are enquiring for. In Anſwer, I grant
that Ararat is in Scripture taken for Armenia ;
but I deny, that all the Mountains of Ararat are
included in that Country. Tis poflible the Alps
or Pyrenees, might give or receive their Names
to, or from ſome ſmall Country at which they
roſe, or through which they paſſed ; but it
would not from thence follow , that all the
Alps or Pyrenees belong'd to, and were contain'd
in ſuch a Country. *Tis uſual for vaſt and
long Ridges of Mountains to be call'd by one
Name; tho” they paſs through , and thereby be-
long to many and diſtant Regions, which I take
to be the preſent Caſe; and that the intire Ridge
of Mountains running /#e# and Eaft from Ar-
menis to the Fountains of the Rivers Oxws and
Indis , call'd ſince by the general Name of
Mount Tawr«s , were anciently ſtil'd Ararat, or
the Mountains of Ararar. To which the Mo-
faick Hiſtory does well agree, by uſing the plu-
ral number , The Ark reſted on the Mountains of
Ararat, 4. e. on one of thoſe Mountains, or of
that ridge or aggregate of Mountains going by
the general Name it has at its Wefern nfe, and
ſtil'd Ararat. This is, I think, a fair and faris-
fatory Interpretation of the Mountains of Ara-
rat; and ſuch an one as Biſhop Patrick embraces,
tho' he be by no means partial to that Opinion
I here defend thereby. But if any be not yet
ſatisfied -of the truth of the Propoſition we are


upon, they may conſult the Authors abovemen-
tion'd,


Book Il. HYPOT HESES.


tion'd, who have more at large infiſted on it,
and alledg'd other Arguments on the fame ac-
count , to which I ſhall therefore refer the
Reader.


IX. The Deluge began on the »7%
Day of the ſecond Month from the


Autumnal Equinox, (or on the
27% Day of November in the Julian
Stile extended backward) in the
2365 year of the Julian Period,
and in the 2349®* year before the
Chriſtian Ara,


In this account of the number of Years from
the Deluge, I follow the moſt Reverend and
Learned Arcnbiſhop Uſher's Chronology, deriv'd
from the Hebrew Verity , without taking notice
of what Years the S:maritan and Se fuag mt have
added thereto; they being, as will =. th ap-
pear, added without _—_ , and not at all co
be conſider'd. Now, that the number of Years
aſtign'd by Archbiſhop Uſher is rightly deduc'd
from the Hebrew, is, I think, notwithſtanding
the wide and manifold Miſtakes of the former,
pretty well agreed upon among the lateſt Chro-
nologers; and capable of a much more farisfa-
Rory Proof, than from fo great Differences be-
fore thereto _— one would be ready to
imagine, as upon a little enquiry I eaſily found.
Indeed, the Archbiſhop has made the matter ſo
plain, that one cannot but wonder how former
Chronologers came fo ſtrangely to be miſtaken ;
and 'tis perhaps one of the moſt difficult things to

give


123


Coroll. 6.


h. 10.
ra.


124


HYPOTHESES. Book


give a good account of , that is readily to be


pitch'd upon. I once intended to have here not
only given the Canon of the ſeveral Periods, but
confirm'd the ſame from the Scripture, and an-
ſwer'd theprincipal Objections made againſt any
parts thereof ; as well from the ſaid Archbiſhop's
Ran, tho' imperfect Chronologia Sacra, as
from fuch other Obſervations as having been
ſince made, (eſpecially by the very Learned Sir
Fobn Marſbam , who has intirely and evidently
clear'd what the Archbiſhop principally labour'd
at without ſucceſs, the Chronology in the Book
of Fudges) give farther light and ſtrength to the
ſame Accounts. But this would perhaps be too
much like a Digreflion, and ſomewhat foreign
to my main Deſign, ſo I forbear, and only fer
down the Chronological Canon, according to which
I reckon from the Creation to the preſent time,
as follows. -


T. From


$


-
4


| Bookll. HYPOTHESES.


Moſaick Creation,till the Crea-
Ro Adam, 29; (Days to a 4 An
Month, cill the Deluge. )——
II. From the Creation of Adam,
till the day when the Earth be- :
gan to be clear of the Waters, © 1656—05=14
or the Autumnal Equinox, in
the Year of the Deluge. _——
III From the Azad Baines
in the Year of the Deluge, ill
the departure of Abraham out p0426—06—15
of Haran(3c3DaystoaMonth
ſince the Deluge. )
IV. From Abraham's departure


out of Haran,till the Exodus of h
the Children of 15ae/-out of( ©?


FP — —

Y, m2 Exodus of the Chil-
dren of Irael! out of Egypr, cill FE
the Foundation of Solomon's _ =
Temple. ——

VI. From the Foundation of a?


I. From the beginning = Y. M. D.


39»==00——00


—


0424—03—08


.


lomon's Temple, till its Con-

flagration.
VII. From the Conflagration of

Solomon's Temple, till the Ka-

lends of Fanuary,which began

the Chriſtian fra, — —
VIII. From the beginning of the

Chriſtian «/£ra, till this = 1695 —0$—26


o5879—04—25


tumnal Equinox, Anno Do-

mint, 1696.- 2 i
Sum of all. _ 5705 —00—0v
From the firſt day of the Delu po


_- _— = — CO— _—— — — —


till the 28" of Ofober in this p4044—00=— 00
ſame Year» 1696, —
This


125


126


Lim 4g? ,
&c. pris.


'All which being ob


HYPOTHESES. Book II.


This Cana agrees with the Archbiſhop's in
every thing, but that, for exactnefs, I make uſe
of Tropical,. or natural Solar Years, inſtead of 7«-
lian ones ; to which accordingly I proportion the
Months and Days; 1 add chole hve Months four-
teen Days which his Hypotheſis forc'd him, with-
out ground, to omit berween the Creation and
the Deluge; and I give the primitive Years of
the Creation their place, which having been ta-
ken for ſhort Days of twenty four Hours long ,
were not hitherto ſuppos'd to deſerve the ſame.

(rv'd , I refer the Reader,
who deſires farther ſatisfaction, to the Archbiſhop
himſelf, where he may find the particulars of the
ſeveral Periods clear'd to him.


X. A Comet, deſcending, in the


Plain of the Ecliptick, towards its


Peribelion ; on the firſt Day of the
Deluge paſt juſt before the Body
of our Earth.


That ſuch a Poſition of a Comet's Orbit, and


ſuch a pafling by as is here ſuppos'd, are in


themſelves potiible, and agreeable to the Phenc-
»ena of Nature, All competent Judges, who are
acquainted with the new and wonderful Diſco-
veries in Aſtronomy, according to the Lemmata
hereto relating, mult freely grant. But that it
really did fo at the time here ſpecified, is what I
am now to prove. "Tis true, when upon a meer
Suppoſition- of ſuch a pafling by of a Comet, I
had in my own mind obſerv'd the Phenomena re-
lating to the Deluge to anſwer to admiration , I
was not a little ſurpriz'd , and pleas'd at fuch a

Diſcovery.


Book Il. HYPOTHESES.


Diſcovery. It gave me no ſmall Satisfaction to
ſee, that upon a poſlible and ny Hypotheſis, I
could give fo clear an Account of thoſe things,
which had hitherto prov'd fo hard, not to -
inexplicable , and could ſhew the exa&t coinci-
dence of the particulars with the Sacred Hiſtory,
and the Phenomena of Nature. I thought to be
able to proceed ſo far, was not only more than
had been yet done , more than was generally ex-
pected ever would be done ; but abundantly ſuf-
ficient to the beſt of purpoſes, to clear the Holy
Scriptures from the Imputations of ill-diſpoſed
Men, and demonſtrate the Account of the De-
luge to be in every part neither impoflible nor
unphiloſophical. Bur proceeding in ſome farther
Thoughtsand Calculations on the ſaid Hypotheſis, I,
to my exceeding great Content and Admiration,
found all chings to correſpond fo ſtrangely, and
the time of the Year by ſeveral concurring wavs
fo exactly fix'd, agreeably to the Sacred Hiſtory
thereby ; that, as I ſaw abundant Reaſon my
ſelf co reſt ſatisfi'd of the reality, as well as pro-
bability of what I before barely ſuppos'd ; fo I
thought the producing the Particulars I had dil-


cover'd might afford evidence to the minds of


others, and go a great way to the intire eſta-
bliſhing che certainty of that, of whole great
probability the Correſpondence of the ſeveral
Phenomena of the' Deluge had before afforded
ſufficient ſatisfaction. But before I come to the
Arguments to be here made uſe of themſelves,
give me leave by way of Preparation , to ſhew
what ſort of evidence ſuch Afſertions as this be-
fore us, when good and valid, are capable of;
and how great or ſatisfactory ic may be in any
other, and ſo may be expected to be in the pre-
ſent Caſe. *'Tis evident, That all Truths arc


nor


127


128


Lib. 4.


Cap. 10,


HYPOTHESES. Book ll,


not capable of the ſame degree of evidence, or
manner of Probation. Firlt Notions are known
by Intuition, or fo quick and clear a Perception,
that we ſcarce obſerve any Deduction or Ratio-
cination at all in our Aſſent to them. Some
principal Metaphyſical Truths have ſo near a
Connexion with theſe, that the-manner of rea-
ſoning or inferring is ſcarce ro be trac'd or de-
ſcrib'd; a few obvious and quick Refle&tions en-
forcing our hearty acquieſcence : Among which,
the belt of Metaphylicians Mr. Lock, in his Eſſay
of Humane Underſtandmg, very rightly placesthe
Being of God. Purely Mathematical Propoſi-


' tions are demonſtrated by a chain of deductions,


each of which is certain and unqueſtionable.
So that on a clear view of the truth and con-
nexion of each Link, or Member of the intire
Argumentation, the Evidence may {till belook'd
on as infallible. Propoſitions in mixt Mathe-
maticks, as in Opticks, Geography, and Aſtro-
nomy, depending partly on abſtract Mathema-
tick Demonſtrations, and partly on the Obſer-
vations of the Phenomena of Nature ; tho' not
arriving to the {tric infallibility of the evidence
with the former fort, are yer juſtly in moſt caſes
allow'd to be truly certain and indubitable.
Hiſtory is all that we commonly can have for
matters of fact paſt and gone; and where 'tis
agreed upon by all, and uncontroulable, *ris
eltcemed fully ſatisfactory, tho* not abſolutely
certain in common Cafes. And Laſtly, To
come cloſer to the Point, the knowledge of
Cauſes is deduc'd from their Effects. Thus all
Natural Philoſophy, 4. ce. the knowledge of the
Cauſes of the ſeveral viſible Phznomena of the
World, is folely deriv'd from thoſe Effects,or Phu-
romena themſelves, their accurate Correſpondence

to


Book Il, HYPOTHESES.


to, and neceſlary dependance on certain ſup
fed Cauſes, and their infolubility or any deer
Hypotheſes, with the coincidence of the particular
Calculations of w- A_ of Motion, Velo-
city, Periods, an ies of Fi to be eve

wh accounted is On he Univerſal On
ſpiration and Correſpondence of which , with
the impollibility of producing an inſtance to the
contrary , depends what may be truly ſtil'd a
Phyſical Demonſtration. T mean, Then, and only
Then is a Phyſical Cauſe to be eſteem'd Demon-
ffrated , when all the Phenomena of the World
may be certainly ſhewn to be juſt ſo, and no
otherwiſe, as they neceſſarily would, and muſt
be on ſuppoſition thereof. This laſt method is
that which our beſt of Philoſophers has taken in
his Demonſtration of the Univerſal Aﬀection or
Property of Bodies, which he calls Mutual Attra-
ion or Gravitation, and which accordingly he has
eſtabliſh'd beyond poſlibility of Contradidton z
and this is the fole way of bringing natural
Knowledge to perfection, and extricaring it from
the lictle Hypothe/es , which in defect of true Sci-
ence, the World has till lately been forc'd to be
contented with. In the Point before us, there
are only three poflible ways of proving the truth
of the Afſſertion here laid down. The firſt, that
of Propoſitions in mixe Mathematicks, by Cal-
culation of the Motion 'of ſome Comet, as we
do of Planets from the Aſtronomical Tables ,
and thence demonſtrating the certainty thereof.


But beſides the improbability of this Comet's ha-


ving ever return'd ſince the Deluge; 'tis plain,
the defe&t of old Obſervations, and the fo late
diſcovery of the Laws and Orbits of their Mo-
tions , render ſuch a way of Probation, at


leaſt at preſent , np The ſecond way
0


2129


HYPOTHESES, Book1l.


of Probation, is that of Hiſtorical Relation, that
at the Deluge a Comet did fo paſs by ; of which
there is directly none in the preſent Caſe. Nor
ſeeing the poflibility of the ſame was not
known., nor the thing viſible to the Inhabirants
that out-liv'd the Flood . as will hereafter ap-


. pear; is this kind of Evidence to be at all ex-


2 Bur the third and laſt way, poſlible, is
the Being of ſuch plain and ſenſible Effets, as
muſt be- undoubted confequents of ſuch an Aſ-
ſertion, and without the ſuppoſal thereof were
perfetly unaccountable; which is the very me-
thod of Probation I ſhall here uſe, and do whol-
ly depend upon. There are ſeveral degrees of
evidence , and kinds of proofs , very different
from thoſe made uſe of in the Mathematicks,
which yet are little lefs ſatisfactory to the minds
of wiſe Men, and leave little more room for
doubting than they. Several ſorts of Propoſiti-
ons muſt be evinc'd by ſeveral ſorts of Argu-
ments; and whatever poſhble and eaſy Aſſertion
has all the proofs which its nature requires, or
could juſtly be expe&ted upon ſuppoſal of its
real Exiſtence, ought to be admitted for true


' and evident. Thus in that fort of things we are


now upon; if a certain Cauſe be aflign'd, which
being ſuppos'd would neceſſarily infer ſeveral
lain and viſible Effets, and occaſion ſeveral
enſible Phenomena ; 'tis plain, if thoſe Effects
and Phenomena be upon Examination found to
be correſpondent, and as they muſt and would be
on the real being of ſuch a Cauſe, the exiſtence
of that Cauſe is prov'd. And as where the Effects
are few, ordinary, otherwiſe accountable and
incapable of Reduction to Calculation, or accu-
racy of correſpondence in the juſt Quantity and
Proportion necellary ; the proof is weak and yr
v


Book II, HYPOTHESES.


ly probable ; and as where ſeveral of the conſe-
uenes of chat Cauſe agree well enough , yer
ome others diſagree, the diſagreement of one
or two, is a ſtronger Objection againſt , than
the coincidence of the reſt an evidence for the
fame, and the proof none at all: So on the other
fide , where a Cauſe is afligned , whoſe certain
conſequent Effects muſt be very many, very ſur-
prizing, otherwiſe unaccountable, correſpondent
on the greateſt niceneſs of Calculation in the


po—_ Quanticy and Proportion of every Ef-
et, and where withal no diſagreeing Ph.enc-


menon can be urg'd to the contrary ; the evidence
hence deriv'd of the reality of the aſſigned Cauſe,
tho' of a different nature, and, if you will, de-
gree too, from Demonſtration, is yet little leſs
ſatisfa&ory to the minds of wiſe and conſidering
Men , than what is efteem'd more ftritly fo,
Thus, for inſtance, Aſtronomers at this day find
little more Inclination or Reaſon to doubt of the
Annual and Diurnal Motions of the Earth, than
of any ſtritly demonſtrated Propoſition; and as
much , in a manner, take it for granted in all
their Reaſonings, as they do the Propoſitions iri
Euclid, tho' the evidence for the ſame be in its
kind different from, and inferior to the other.
And thus, as I have before obſerv'd, Mr. New-
ton has given ſufficient evidence of the Univerſal
Law of Mutual Attrattion and Gravitation of Bodies,
which accordingly there is no more occaſion to
doubt of, than of thoſe common matters of Fat


or Hiſtory , of which no wiſe Man ever made ,


any queftion. And thus it is, that I hope to
evince the truth and reality of that Cauſe athgn-
ed in this Propoſition, wiz. by proving that thoſe
viſible Effects or Phenomena relating to the Uni-
rerfal Deluge , which are very many , very fur-

Q 2 prizing


13t


132


HYPOTHESES. Bookl1l.


prizing, hitherto unaccountable, ſeveral of which
are capable of Calculation as to the particular
Time, Quantity, and Proportion of the reſpe-
ive particulars, are every one fo, and no other-
wiſe, as on ſuppoſal of the afligned Cauſe they
either certainly muſt, or at leaſt probably would
have been. And as upon a Demonſtration of the
diſagreement of any one Phenomenon , which
were a neceſlary conſequence of the fame, I
muſt own the falſentſs of the Propoſition before
us ; fo I hope, if the univerſality of Correſpon-
dence, even to the exatneſs of Calculation in
proper caſes be eſtabliſh'd, and no contradictory
inſtance can be produc'd ; it will be allow'd,
that I have ſufficiently evinc'd the reality, and,
in a prop-r Senſe, certainty of the ſame Afſer-
tion, This then being premis'd, *tis plain, that
every one of the particular Phenomena of the De-
luge afterward accounted for, is a proper Ar-
gument of this Propoſition, and might juſtly
claim a place here on that: account. But
cauſe ſuch an Enumeration of them before-hand
would prevent their own more peculiar place
hereafter , and diſturb the propos'd method of
che enſuing Theory, I ſhall leave them to their
roper places, tho' with this Premonition, That
everal of them do ſingly ſo exactly fit the
otherwiſe unaccountable Phenomena of Nature,
and of the Deluge, and determine the time and
circumſtances of the latter fo nicely, that their
_ evidence is conſiderable ; but when
taken conyjointly with the reſt, as ſatisfactory as
I think the Nature of the thing is capable of.
Buc beſides theſe particular correlpondent Phenc-
ena of the Deluge , and after the diſcovery of
the moſt of them, I found proofs of ſomewhat


another nacure 3 which not only confirmed a
that


Book Il. HYPOT HESES.


that I had before obſerv'd, but enabled me to
determine the time when the Flood began, to
the greateſt exactneſs pollible.; which therefore
I ſhall alone produce here, reſerving thoſe other
for their own places hereafter. Now on the
Hypotheſis, that a Comet pals'd by the Earth, ill
then revolving circularly about the Sun at the
time, and in the manner aflign'd by the Propo-
ſition , the neceſſary Effets or Conſequents of
it are theſe Five. (1.) The circular Orbit of the
Earth would be chang'd into that of an Ellipfis ;
and the Sun, which was before in the Center ©
the Circle, would be afterward in that Focxs of
the Elipſs, which were neareſt the place at
which the Attraction of the Comer happen'd.
(2.) The Year, after ſuch a pafling by of che
Comet, would be increaſed ten Days, one Hour,
thirty Minutes. (3.) The time of the pafling
by of the Comet, or the beginning of the De-
luge to bedetermin'd by the I of the Perihelion,
muſt be coincident with that afligned in the
Mojaick Hiſtory. (4.) The very day of the Co-
met's paſſing by, or of the beginning of the De-
luge, to be derermin'd from the Aſtronomical
Tables of the Conjunctions of the Sun and Moon,
muſt be coincident with the time determin'd by
the ſaid place of the Peribelion, and with the very
day aflign'd in the Moſaick Hiſtory. (5.) The
quantity of Acceleration , to be determin'd 4
Priori, from the force of the Comet's Attracti-
on, mult correſpond with that which the pre-
ſent Elliptick Orbit does require. All which that
they are, de fato, true and real, I ſhall now
prove.


(1.) The Orbit of the Earth is now Elliptical,
and the Sun is in that Focus thereof, which was
Q 3 neareſt


133


Hypoth 7,


priu.


Lem. 48.
cum Cored
Prius,


Lem, <6.
cm Corod
pre tef.
Lem. J?.
cums Coroll.


pris,


Lem. <<.
cum Coroll..
privs.


Lem. $3} «
cum Coroll.
pris,


134


Arg. 3-
Hypoth bu


je:r, infra.


Fid. Phe»
nom. 22.


ar fr " p


HYPOTHESES. Book I,


neareſt the place of the Earth, when the Deluge
began. This Propoſition 1s ſufficiently known
ro Aſtronomers, as to the former part of it:
And if it beconſider'd, That the Earth when the
Deluge began, was but juſt pait that degree of
the Ecliptick , where the Perihelion was after-
ward , as will' prefently appear ; the latter
pare will be equally evident with the for-
mer.

(2.) The Year before the Flood was ten
days; or more nicely, ten days one hour
and thirty minutes, ſhorter than the preſent.
In order to the proof of whick” I ſhall ſhew
firſt in general, that che Antediluvian Year was
different from, nay ſhorter than the preſent
Year ; and afterwards determine the particu-
lar length thereof more exactly ; and ſhall com-
priſe what reaſons I have for theſe Aſſertions in
the following Arguments.


(1.) The true length of the Solar Year was
ſo long unknown after the Deluge, that there
muſt have happen'd ſome mighty change and
lengthening thereof at the Deluge, or elſe no
rational account can be aflign'd of ſuch grofs
and fo laſting an ignorance. Tis not to be
queſtion'd but the Antediluvian Parriarchs were
perfettly acquainted with the Antediluvian
Year ; every oneof thoſe mention'd in Scripture
having ſeen ſo many Summers and Winters, or
natural Solar Years, that himſelf were able to


aſcertain their length, and corre& any miltake


about them. *Tis alſo not to be ' doubted but
the Poſtdiluvians would have retain'd the ſame
Year, and determin'd it by the ſame num-
ber of Days, as their Fore-fathers , had they
found it tr: agree with the Courſe. of the _

then,


BookIl. HYPOTHESES.


then, as it did formerly. But 'tis evident from
the Ancienteſt Authors, that 'twas many hun-
dreds of Years after the Deluge e're the moſt
Learned Nations re&tifi'd their Year to the Sun's
Courſe, or arriv'd at more than three hundred
and ſixty Days in their Accounts. Which number
accordingly was the Standard of a Year for ma-
ny Apes, (The full proof of which, and theclea-
ring thereby of ſeveral Prophetick Periods, that
famous one of Daniel's Seventy Weeks eſpecially,
is what we impatiently expe&t from a moſt
Learned Prelate of our Church) till Aſtronomi-
cal Obſervations forc'd Men to corre the ſame.
Now all this on the preſent Hypotheſis is eafie and
natural ; That when the Antediluvian Year was
but a few hours above three hundred and fifty
five Days ; and at the Deluge was inſenſibly be-
come fome odd hours above three hundred and
ſxty five Days, without the leaſt knowledge or
ſuſpicion of any change therein; *Tis, I ſay, ve-
ry eaſie and natural in this caſe to ſuppoſe, that
upon their obſerving the ſeaſons to be protracted,
and return ſtill later every Year than other ; (as
on the retaining the Antediluvian Year muſt
needs happen,) and conſequently their Ancient
Standard of three hundred and fifty five days,
to be too ſhort for the Sun's Revolution ; that
they ſhould lengthen their accounts to thirty
Days in every Month, and the even number
three hundred and ſixty Days in the whole Year.
Which convenient and remarkable number three
hundred and ſixty, being probably fixt at the time
when Aſtronomy began to be improv'd, or at leaſt
reviv'd after the 7% ak and fo become the di-
viſion of the Ecliptick, and of every Circle of
the Sphere ; was not quickly chang'd, but mea-
ſur'dthe Ancient Year among not a few Nations,

Q 4 and


n35


33


HYPOTHESES. Book Il.


and thatnot a few Ages together : As being alſo
lefs obſervably different from the Sun's Courſe,
and correſpondent both to the degrees of a
Circle, and twelve even Months of thirty Days
a-piece- Andindeed this adjuſtment of the Year
and Months, with the degrees of a Circle, and
of each Sign in the Ecliptick, was found fo eaſe,
ready, and uſeful on all accounts, that even when
the odd five days were added afterward, they
were not inſerted into the Months, nor perhaps
eſteem'd part of the Year, but look'd upon as
"Hulexr Emmy ler, adventitions Or. odd days, of a
quite different denomination and character from
all the reſt. However *tis till agreeable to the
preſent Hypotheſis, that on the farther obſervation
of the protraction of the Seaſons, and on the im-
provement of Aſtronomy ſtill higher, as the
Year hadbeen increas'd before from three hun-
dred and fifty five to three hundred and ſixty, fo
afterward it ſhould be increas'd from three hun-
dred and ſixty to three hundred and ſixty five
days; and at laſt, (the Obſervations of the more
Learned Aſtronomers enforcing it,) from three
hundred ſixty five to 365; or the Julan Year,
which with us 4s retain d to this very day. All
this is I think caſie and natural in the preſent
caſe, upon that Hyporh:/i5s which is hee defend-
ed ; bur without it 'tis very ſtrange and unac-
countable. Tis, I ſay, very frange and wnaccount-
able either how the Antediluvian Patriarchs
ſhould not know the length of their own Year;
or that none of their Polterity, who were deſti-
tute of Divine Revelation, ſhould retain the
ſame afterwards, but be forc'd to make uſe of
one that was ſo far from correſponding to thoſe.
Seaſons, and that Revolution of the Sun which
a Year was on purpoſe defign'd to be vein
| urate


Book Il. HYPOT HESES.


_ to. Which concluſion is farther con-
firm'd,

(2.) By the Eſſential difference of the Ancient
Years among ſeveral Nations ſince the Deluge :
Some of which made uſe of Solar, and others of
Lunar ones, or endeavour'd to adjuſt their pe-
riods to thoſe of each of theſe Luminaries. This
difference of Years, is kitown in Antiquity, has
been the occaſion of great diſputes; and is not
yet a ſtranger to the World. Nay, as far as I
find, ſome of thoſe Nations who agreed with the
moſt general Standard of three hundred and ſixty
days, ſuppos'd that number agreeable in ſome
meaſure to the Lunar, as well as to the Solar
courſe, as conſiſting nearly of twelve Synodical
or Ny Revolutions of the former, as well
as of a ſingle Annual one of the latter; and em-
brac'd it as much, if not more on the account
of its imagin'd correſpondence with the Afocon,
as of alike imagin'd correſpondence with the
Sun, Now this Eſſential difterence of Solar and
Lunar Years in the eldeſt Antiquity- after the
Flood, is on no other ————— accountable
as that the Antediluyian Year. having been
delivered down from their Fore-fathers to have
agreed with the courſes both of the Sunand Moon,
(as on the preſent Hypotheſis it really did) ſome
Nations followed ene Branch, and others another
of the ſame Tradition : And when they no lon-
ger were commenſurate, accommodated their ac-
counts to the one or the other, according as the
one or the other was moſt prevalent, and uni-
verſal among them. This is an eaſie and ratio-
nal account of this Eſſential difference of Solar
and Lwnar Years, ſo variouſly followed by ſo ma-
ny Nations ſince the Deluge : Which otherwiſe,
it the Year was of the ſame length with che go

c


nt,


137


- —m—m—C— —  — —_ Sz ————D—_—_ > W—_—_— =
my -


—_


138


Im. 39.


privs,


HYPOTHESES. Book II.


ſent, and fixr before the Flood, 'tis hard to aſſign
the Original of. But That it were, as in this Hy-
potheſis, a Solar and Luner Year, all is very
eaſie, and what muſt naturally happen upon an
imperceptible change at the Deluge. Which
will be {till farther confirm'd if we conſider,

(3.) That the Moon's other Motions, Diurnal
and Menſtrual, are ſtill ſo accurately adjuſted and
commenſurate to each other, that 'tis very pro-
bable the Annual was alike adjuſted and com-
menſurate to thoſe in the primitive Conſtitu-
tion of Nature. *Tis certain the Moon accom-
panies our Earth, and has her Amma! Revolu-
tion exactly equal to the others. *'Tis alſo cer-
tain, as has been before obſerv'd, that her Mer-
ſirnal Periodical Revolution about the Earth, is
exactly equal to her Dwuwrnal about her own Axis:
Which wonderful and remarkable coincidence or
correſpondence of two ſuch intirely diſtin& mo-
tions, renders it highly probable that the third
or Amma! Revolution was not by Providence
Originally deſign'd to be ſo incommenſurate to
thoſe others, as ſince the Deluge it moſt evident-
ly has been; and that to the greateſt trouble and
pry of many Ages, and the intire diſtur-
bance of the Ancicnt Chronology. ' Where we
cannot but in one caſe acknowledge, the moſt ex-
at interpoſition of Providence in the Equality
of the Menſ#rua! and Diurnal Revolutions; and
the notable effe& thereof, the expoſition of the
ſame Hemiſphere of the Moon to the Earth con-
tinually : We cannot ſure be unwilling to own
a like Interpoſition in the other, in the commen-
ſurabilicy and correſpondency of the ſame Mer-
ffrual and Diurnal Revolutions to the Amnual one
of it ſelf, and of its Companion the Earth : Ef-


pecially where the reaſon and advantage of fuch
an


BookIl. HYPOT HESES.


an adjuſtment, (the eaſie and regular accounts
of Time through the World thence ariſing) is
much more plain and evident than in that other
caſe, of which yet there can be no poflibility
of doubt or heſitation : Which therefore conſide-
_ enforces the fore-mention'd Hypotheſis, ac-
cording to which the Wiſe and Careful Interpo-
ſition of Providence in the Original Conſtitution
of the World, appears to have been as accurately
ſollicitous, and engag'd in the adjuſtment of the
Annual Motion to the Menſtrual, as "tis unque-
ſtionably true in the like correſpondence of the
Menſtrual to the Diurn:l, fo worthy the preſent
conſideration and admiration of Aſtronomers:
Which will be moſt of all confirm'd by the exact
agreement of the ſeveral Periods, to be taken
notice of in the next place.

(4.) The Ectentricity of the Sun is fo exatly
coincident with the Epact of the Moon ; or the
Annual Motion in the Circular Orbit before the
Deluge, fo nicelv equal to thirteen Periodical,
and twelve Synodical Revolutions of the Moon
that 'tis very improbable it ſhould be wholly by
chance,or withourt any relation of one to another.
The Eccentricities of Planets are various, uncer-
tain, and boundleſs ; and 'ewill be next to im-
poſlible in ſuch caſes to obſerve accurate coinci-
dences where nothing but Chance is concern'd,
and there is no Analogy or Connexion in Na-
ture for 'em. If there were a cercain Watch-
word out of Foo pitch'd upon among certain
Conſfpirators, and a Perſon was taken on ſuſpici-
on, and prov'd to have nam'd that very word to
his ſuppoſed Partner ; it were in reaſon, and the
opinion of the World 44g. to one he before
knew of it, and did not by chance only hit up-
on ic, If any Ancient Hiſtorian ſhould aif-:c,

{liat


139


140


HYPOTHESES. Book ll,


that a certain remarkable accident happen'd on
{uch a Day, and ſuch an Hour, of a given Year,
and a way was afterward diſcover'd of deter-
mining the time on which, if it really did hap-
pen, it muſt have done fo ; tho' the Authority
of the Author were not conſiderable otherwiſe,
no doubt would be any more made of his vera-
City in that point, if the coincidence was fo
exact as to determine the ſame hour mention'd
by the Hiſtorian. Thus if on other intimations
it be conjectur'd, that the Earth mov'd circularly
before the Deluge, and the Year was both a S0-
lar and Lunar one ; and if afterward the Eccen-
tricity of the Earth's Orbit, and the Lunar Epadt,
or difference between the Solar and Lunar Year,


' be reduc'd to Calculation, and found accurately


Lem. <6
cum Coroll.


Prius,


coincident, when the Eccentricity of no other of
the Planetary Orbits , is at all Correſpondent ;
There is, I think, very great probability to be-
lieve that coincidence founded in Nature, and that
the alteration of the Year juſt ſo much as thoſe
agreeing-quantitics raquire, was the true occaſion
thereof, The Eccentricity requiſite to correſpond
to the Lunar Fpa&, muſt be 5/2; of che intire
middle diſtance: "That of Saturn is ;£; that of
Fupiter #5; that of Mrs ,; that of Venus pg; that
of Mercury #3, that of the Moon 5 which all
widely differ from the quantity here neceſlary.
But when we conlider the Eccentricity of the
MagnusOrbis, or Orbit of the Earth's and Moon's
Annual Courſe, it exatly accords , and is n& of
the intire middle diſtance; as we have before parti-
cularly obſerv'd,and as the Moon'sEpact molt nice-
ly requires. Tis, I confeſs, not inpoſſeb/e that Calcu-
lacions and Numbers, in which there isall imagina-
ble room for diverſity under or over, may be coin-
cident, without any natural Dependance or Ang:

x OBY


Book Il, HYPOTHESES.


logy one to another. *Tis poſſible , that T may
ſeveral times by gueſs, or at a venture, hit upon
any number which another. Perſon has in his
mind. *Tis poſſible, a Gameſter may, without
any foul dealing, throw all. Sizes or Aces, be the
Dice never ſo many, a hundred times together.
Theſe things it muſt be own'd are poſſible, and
ſo no Compact or Collufion can be demonſtrated
by ſuch Coincidences ; neither , conſequently ,
do I pretend that this, or any of the like Coin-
cidences in the preſent Theory do abſolutely de-
monſtrate that Afſertion they are brought to prove.
Bur as in the former cafes, the Obſervation of
the mention'd Coincidences would afford evi-
dence fully ſatiea#ory of ſome Myſtery, Cun-
ning, or Artifice us'd therein; fo I think it ought
to be in the preſent caſe ; I mean where all
things elſe are rightly correſpondent, and no
contradictory inſtances to be alledg'd, the nice
and accurate Coincidences of Calculations in
this, and the other proper cafes through this
Theory, ought to ſatisfy the minds of conſider-
ing Men of the real truth and evidence of the
Propoſition on which they all depend, and from
which they are deriv'd ; and particularly , that
the Lunar Epatt and Sun's Eccentricity which are fo
nicely equal to each other , muſt have a natural
Relation, and a common Occaſion; the altera-
tion of the Year at the Deluge : Which _ {o
far eſtabliſh'd by theſe Chronological and Aftro-
nomical Arguments, ſhall be now confirm'd from
the Holy Scripture.

(5.) This Hypotheſis of the ten days addition to
the year, is very agreeable to the Hiſtory of the
Deluge in the Hebrew it ſelf; and abſolutely neceſ-
fary to reconcile the Text as we have ic from the
ſame Hebrew verity, with that Tranſlation —_

the


141


142


Gen. vii.
11,13.
& viiilg,
15, 16,17.


Hid.Biſhop
Patrick m
Loc.


Gen. vii.
24+ & vii
3. with
Vil 4.


HYPOTHESES. Book Il.


the Septuagint, and from them Foſephus, give us
thereof. *Tis chmmonly, and probably ſuppos'd,
That the ſpace in which Noah was inthe Ark was
a juſt Solar year :. "Tis expreſly ſo in the Seprw. «
gint and Joſephus; the entrance and exit being
on the ſame day of the ſame month ; when yet
'ris in the Hebrew, and our Bibles, 4 year and
ten days ; the entrance on the 17th, and the exic
on the 27 of the ſecond month, as is evidenc
in the Texts quoted in the Margin. Which
ſeeming repugnances have nor hit!:erto met with
any ſatisfactory conciliation, and are generally
allow'd to be inconſiſtent with one another. Some
great Men are willing to ſuppole theyear referr'd
to at the Deluge, to have been a Lunar one,
ſuch as was in after-ages made uſe of ; which
in the common years having eleven days lefs
than the Solar, will nearly account for this mat-
ter, and pretty well accommodate the whole.
But this, I chink, will not ſatisfy, becauſe the
Fewiſh Lunar year began at the Vernal, but this
at the Autumnal Equinox: becauſe five, art leaſt,
of theſe months had thirty days a-piece, whereas -
the Lunar had generally thirty, and ewenty nine,
by turns throughout the year : Becauſe withal
this brings the matter only nearer, but does not
reconcile it, there ſtill wanting a day to that
purpoſe: For when the Moon's Epadt is eleven
days, the Hebrew affords only ten ; fo that Noab
muſt both prevent the Solar year one day, and
the Septuagmt be ſtill irreconcilable with the He-
brew, though this conjefure were admitted. All
which rightly conſider'd, 'tis, I think, evident
that this Hypotheſis of the Lunar year is nor only
wholly precarious, but indecd indeteniible ; and
were 1t otherwiſe, would nor be at all advanta-
gious in the caſe before us; to which haglors

ome-


BookIl, HYPOTHESES.


ſomewhat elſe muſt be anſwer'd, and ſomewhat
farther advanced , or the Knot muſt remain
ſtill unſolved at leaſt, if not inſoluble. I affirm
then, That the allowance of thoſe days, which
we have before endeavoured to ſhew were want-
ing in the year before the Flood, will take off
the difficulty, and reconcile the Hebrew with the
Septuagint to the greateſt exattneſs : And *tis not
a little obſervable, That the number of days
requiſite to this reconciliation, are the very ſame
that we have already , from the Eccentricity of
the Sun, and the Lunar Epa& conſpiring toge-
ther, determined to have been the difference be-
eween the Antediluvian and the Polt-diluvian
year. Let us but therefore ſuppoſe the H:ir-w
to make uſe of that year which was in uſe ar
that time to which the Hiſtory belongs, and
which Noah in a journal of the Deluge muſt be
allowed to reckon by; and the Tranſlators,
after obſervation had forc'd men to increaſe the
year ten days, to allow for the ſame, and expreſs
the duration of the Deluge, or the ſpace of
Neah's remaining in the Ark, according to that
juſt year then only current among them, and
there is no difficulty lefr., Now this procedure
of receding from the very words or numbers of
an Author, in order the more eaſily and jultly
to expreſs his meaning, and give a truer Idea to
the preſent age, of what was repreſented art firſt
in a way ſuitable to that of any Hiſtory or oc-
currence, but afterwards forgotten, is a very ra-
tional one ; and if applied to other Authors and
Caſes, is neither unuſual nor inconvenient.
Thus if in an Hiſtory of the ancient ſtate of
Egypr, the Egyptian years were made uſe of ; a
Tranſlator who ſhould, upon the introduction


and ſole uſe of the Fnlan year afterwards, re-
duce


143


144


HYPOTHESES; Book IT.


duce them all to that, and reckonall the months
and days according to that only, he wonld do
at once the greateſt juſtice ro the Author, and
deſerve the thanks of the Reader, for ſo much
eaſier and more familiar an 14:a of cach period,
than a rigid and ſcrupulous keeping to the Au-
thor's own words and numbers could ever have
given him. The caſe is the ſame as to Weights
and Meaſures us'd by former Ages, or Foreign
Nations ; which when reduc'd to others equiva-
lent ro them in Terms familiar and known, are
much more uſeful than when word anſwers to
word, and number to number in every thing.
And if we allow but this to have been the caſc
between Moſes himſelf who wrote the Hebrew
Text, and the Septuagint who many Ages after
Tranſlated it, we ſhall find, according to our
foregoing calculations, that the year us'd by Neab
was but Three hundred fifty five days; and that
by the Sepruaginr, Three hundred fixty hve ;
and ſo that ſpace, which with the firſt Author is
certainly a year and ten days, from the 17" to
the 27 of the ſecond Month ; and is alike evi-
dently a juſt year from che 27 to the 25" of
the ſame ſecond month with the Tranſlators, are
coincident,or the ſameentire Solar year. Whereby
our Hypotheſis 15 at once confirmed, and the dith-
culty ariling from the Hebrew Text it ſelf, but
chiefly as compared with the Seprnagint's Tranſla-
tion, does entirely vaniſh and diſappear : Which
Argument join'd to the foregoing, will, I hope,
be thought not inconſiderable.

(3.) The time of the patling by of the Comet,
or of the yp gring- of the Flood, derermin'd by
the place of the Peribelion, is exactly agreeable
to that mention'd in the Moſaick Hiltory. "Tis *
certain, That the place of the Peribelion of the

Earth's


BookIl. HYPOTHESES,


Farth's Orbit is now in the beginning of the
eighth degree of Cancer : And by Mr. Flamſteed's
Aſtronomical Table of its Motion, it goes for-
ward in 4044 Years full 56 Degrees : So that
by going back to the time following the De-
luge, the Peribelov muſt then have been at the
beginning of the 12" Degree of Tawurws. It has
alſo been before proved, that the place of the
Comets pafling by mult have been a tew Degrees,
as hve, fix or Gm, paſt the Peribelion,that is, on
or near the 18 Degree of Tawas: Which in the
Ancient Year, beginning at the Autumnal Equi-
nox, will fall upon or near the 17 Day of the
Second Month : On which very Day, by the
expreſs Teſtimony of the Sacred Hiſtorian (a-
greeing within a Day or two with the Corre-
ed Teſtimonies of Ab:4enws and Beroſws) the De-
luge began. Which exa&nefs of coincidence I
look upon as ſo remarkable and ſurprizing, that
nothing can be more ſo; and I need not fear
to appeal to the Conſidering Reader, if this be
not the moſt peculiar and convincing Atteſtation
ro our Hypotheſis, which could eafily be defir'd,
or in the leaſt wiſh'd for: That from it not
only. the ſeveral Phenomena of the Deluge, but
the time of its commencing is fo _- ely de-
termin'd alſo; and that in the greateſt Correſpon-
dence and Harmony with the Sacred Hiſtory of
the ſame thing imaginable.

(4.) The very day of the Comets paſling by,
or of the beginning of the Deluge determin'd
from the Aſtronomical Tables of the Conjundi-
ons of the Sun and Moon, is exatly coincident
with that before nearly determin'd by the place
of the Peribelion, and exatly by the Moſaick Hi-
tory. It has been before prov'd, that ſeein
the Aon Atill accompanies the Earth, it nul

R need;


145


Gen, vit.
It.

Vid. Verba
ipſa apud
Lamgiuns
de annis
Chriſti. p»
2554


Lem. 59,
Þrius,


Gen. vil.
11,


Lem, 27.
prin,


Len. 53.
cam coroll,
pri:h


HYPOTHESES. Bookll.


needs have been three Days paſt the New os
Full, art the patling by of the Comet. It has
alſo been betore prov'd, that the Flood began
in the Year of the Jian Period 2365, or the
2349 before the Chriſtian eAra. Now it ap-

cars by the Aſtronomical Tables of the Con-
junctions of the Swz and Mcon, that the mean
New Moon happecn'd at the Meridian of Babylon
juſt before Eleven a Clock in the Forenoon, on
the 24® day of November, (in the Fulian Year)
and fo at Eleven'a Clock on the 25" of Nowvem-


» ber, "ewas three days after the New. Which be-


ing the 17 day of the Second Month, from the
Autumnal Equinox, is the very ſame pitched
upon from the 'place of the Peribelon, and ex-
reſly mention'd 1n the Sacred Hiſtory : And by
bo wonderfully correſponding therewith, gives
the higheſt Acteſtation to our Hyporbeſi; that could,
for the completion and conſummation of the
foregoing Evidence, be reaſonably deſir'd.
(5.) The Quantity of Acceleration determin'd
& priori from the force of the Comets Attraction,
does very well correſpond with that which the
preſent El;ptick Orbit does require. Upon Cal-
culation according to the Lemma quoted in the
Margin, the Velocity acquir'd by the Earth on
ics firſt change, from a Circular to an Elliprick
Orbit appears to have been about nz; of the in-
tire Velocity z or ſuch. as would carry it in three
hours and a half's time 1248 Miles. *Tis alſo
upon calculation evident, from what has been
already obſerv'd, thar in caſe the Comets neareſt
diſtance were a quarter of the Moons, or ſixty
thouſand Miles, and it {elf of much the ſame
bigneſs with the Earth ; (two very probable and
ealie Hypotheſes; ) the time of the Comets At- +
traction to bs ſolely conlider'd is three hours and
a half,


Book Il, HYPOTHESES.


a half, and the quantity of Velocity therein pro-
duc'd is the requifite quantity $5; of the intire
Velocity, or fo much as carries 4 body 1248
Miles in the fore-mention'd ſpace of three hours
and a half. And in cafe the Comets neareſt di-
ſtance were lefs, if the Comet withal be ſuppo-
ſed in the fame proportion lefs alſo ; the effect
will be the ſame, and the fore-mention'd Velo-
ciry equal to what the former Calculation af-
ſign'd, and the Eliprick Orbie of the Earth does
exactly require. Which accuracy of correſpon-
dence, in the due quantity of Velocity, added
to the former Arguments, cannot bur be
eſteem'd a mighty Evidence for the reality of
our Hypotheſes : All whoſe conſequents are fo
ſurprizingly true, and fo fully bear Witneſs to

one another.
Corollary 1. From what has been ſaid under thit
Propoſition, we may pretty nearly determine the Con-
itution of the Antediluvian Tear. For when it
conſiſted of three hundred and fifty frve Days, feur
Hours, and nineteen Minutes, and ha for at leaſt five
Months together, from the ſecond to the ſixth, thirty
Days to a Menth, or one hundred and fifty to firoe
Months, as we bat? ſeen, it ruſt im all probability have
conſiſted of twelhye Months; The firſt [cvren whereof had
th:rty, and the laſt five only twenty nine days apiece:
Or rather the firſt eleven Months had thirty, and the
twelfth only twenty five Days. That as in the fa-
mous Egyptian Year, or that of Nabonaſlar after
the Deluge, every Menth had thir:y Days a prece,
end the [upernumerary froe were added by themſelves,
and ftil'd "Huigen Empatiwaus lo before the Deluge
all the Months, as near as poſſible, hag thirty days
apiece alſo 5 and the five deficient ones were taken
from the loſt, and might be denominated "Huigaz
"Azeu;i fuer: And peſibly might groe occaſion to that
R 2 method


1:47


148


 Lem.4l.
Prins.


HYPOTHESES, Book 1l,


wethod of the before-mention'd Year in the following
Ages. How. often the odd Hours and Minutes were
intercalated, and came to juſt even Days before the
Deluge, *tis not, for a certam reaſon not here to be
mention'd, eaſie, ery exattly to determine 5 nor per-
baps of conſequence that it ſhould be ſo determined.
Only m general every ſixth year at leaſt, one with
another, muſt be Leap-Year, and have three bundred
and fifty fox days ; as every fourth ts Leap-Year, and
has three hundred and ſixty ſix days now among
us.
Coroll. 2. Every Antediluvian Year and Sea-
len, Spring , Summer, Autumn, and Winter, began
at Sunſet following the Solar ingreſs imto a Cardinal
Point, and the Full Moon.” It appears, as has been
before prov'd, that the Autummal Equinox precedmg
the Deluge , happen'd on the 11" day of Ocober.
It alſo appears, by the Aſtronomical Tables of. the Con-
gunttions of the Sun and Moon , that "twas Full
Moon the ſame Day :. The Night ſucceeding which
Day, began the Firſt Day of Autumm, and the Firft
Day of the Year alſo. Which being ſuppos'd, and
that, as we bave prov'd, the Solar Year was exattly
coincident with twelve Synodical Months, or the Lu-
nar Year, it muſt neceſſarily have been ever ſo. And
nor only the other particular ſeaſons, but the Year it
ſelf began at the moſt remarkable time poſſible. The
Aſtronomers had a double coincidence to obſerye , at
the concluſion of one, and the commencing another
gear, Viz. The Autumanal Equinox, and the Full
Moon : Which muſt for ever fix and eſtabliſh the con-
ftancy of their Annual (ſpace. And even the Coun-
tryman had. ſomewhat eaſily 05/e1able to. fix his Ac-
count, and Charatterize his Year, the Full Moon Ri-
ſing when theSun ſet, as the | ame common period of
the Old, and infFoducer of the New Year. So.that
in /o regular and truly natal Solar and Lunar Years


as


Book Il. HYPOTHESES,


as then obtain'd, no Obſervations of Aſtronomers were
neceſſary to adjuſt or calculate their meaſures of Time ;
Nature, & rather Divine Providence, having ſo fit-
ted the Heavenly Revolutions , that nothing mere
than the __ obſervation of a Full Mecon was ne-
ceſſary to determine their Seaſons, and their Nears,
and to retain them at a conſtant ſettmg cut, with
the Equincttial and Solſtitial Points in the Heavens.
Than which Diſpoſition , nothing of ſuch a nature
could more clearly demonſtate the Wiſe Proviſion of
the great Creator ; or more uſefully be ſubſerwient to
Mankind.
Coroll. 3. Hence we eaſily underſtand the prima-
occaſion of the confuſions in Aſtronomy and Chronc-
ter the Floed, notwuhbſtanding they might have
been well underſtood before it. ihile the Solar and
Lunar Years were equal, and every one of them be-
gan both at the Equinox, and at the Full Meon ;
(this latter, obſervable by all, fixing the former, -
ſervable but by a few, ) *Twere next to impoſſible to
luppoſe any difference in Years, or im the Accounts of
ime depending thereon. But upon an imperceptible


change of the Year at the Deluge, and the conſequent ,


incommen{urate duration of the Solar and Lunar Pe-
riods, Tis natural to ſuppoſe great diverſity of Years,
and perplexity of Accounts. Some might long ve-
tain therr Ancient Year, and ſuffer its Head to wan-
der through all Seaſons : Others might -retain their
Ancient Year, as far as it agreed with the twelve
Lunations or Months afterward, and make wſe of a
Lunar-year : Whoſe Head they might either, as the
former, ſuffer to wander through all my or fix as
well as they could by the intercalation of a Month, as
oft as they found ſo much deficiency from the Solar Year.
And as the former ſort, having a regular Cycle, or
conſtant method for the finding the Head of their
Months and Years, needed no other Obſeryations, (0


3 toe


149


150


HYPOTHESES. BooklIl.


the latter muſt ahvays remark the gdous of the
Moon, and begin their Months, or Years , or both
&t [ome ob/eryable Pomt of an entire Lunation , as
at the Full cr New Moon, er /o ſoon as any de-
creaſe or increaſe of its Light became ſenſible. Some
might ſtrive to- find cut the rumber of Days me«
ceſſary to be added to their old Year , and fo to ve-
duce the ſame to the true Solar Revolution 5 and
accordingly mig ht firſt make every Month :hirty Days,
and the Year three hundred and ſixty , till that af-
pearing too little, frue more Days, and at laſt the odd
fix Hors were by degrees added , and the Cruil be-
come almoſt eanal to the Natural Year. Ii/hile others
were intent wpon the Adjuſtment of the Solar and
Lunar Periads , and inrcentmg Cycles for the corre-
ſpondence of thoſe ſecral Accounts , which were ve-
[peftroely followed by ſeveral Nations, 2! which
waricty of reckoning , with its natural con/equences,
muſt cauſe ſtrange Conſuſicn im the accounts of Time,
and create mighty Difficulties in the Ancient Chrerc-
logy 3 wery agreeably to bat every one- knows to have
been really the caſe, who ſearches into ſuch Metters ,
to what our Fypothelis lays a rational Occaſion anid
Foundation fer, and to what, without ſuch a (uf-
poſed change at the Deluge, is by no meens acccunt-
avie,

Coroll. 4. I#hen tbe nur:ber Three hundred and
ſixty is not only a middle proper: :enal between the Days
1 an Anted:iuvian and Þoſt dilnwvian Year, and nearly
berween the preſent Solar and Limar Tear, is not only
the number of Degrees in the Fcliptick , and in. every
Circle er. Orvit ; | was the juſt number of Days mm a
Year among ſo many Nations, for ſo many Ages. The
reaſon of that Prophetick Stilegn which a Day, or Year
thereby meant , does plainly ſignify Three hundred and
fexty Days,and no moregs clear and evident. What Diffi-
culties the want of this Obſervation, that Danicl's Pro-
| pherick


Book Il, HYPOT HESES,


phetick Year conſiſted of Three hundred and, ſixty Days,
has left unjoly'd , and what light may be afforded to
ſome places' of the higheſ# importance thereby, 'I bad
rather the Reader ſhould be left ro his own Ob/er-
vations , and that Work fo impatient! expefled, of
which I made mention before , than prepoſſe/s him
with any more particular inſtances thereof in this
lace. |

: Coroll. 5. When the viry day of the beginning of
the Deluze , nearly determin'd by the place of the
Perihelion, and cxatly by the Aſtronomical Tables
of the Conjunttions of the Sun and Moon, is the we-
ry ſam? individual Day with that mencion'd by the
Sacred IWriter; hence ariſes a very ſurprizing and un-
expetted Confirmation of the Verity of the Scripture
Hiſtory, Here is a great and firnal inſtance b; the
wonderful Providence of God indeed, and of h:s care
for the Credit and Eſtabliſhment of the Holy Books;
chat he has left us means ſufficient, after above Four
thou/and Years, of examining and a/certaining the Ve-
racity of thi moſt Ancient of its Writers, and im one
of the moſt ſcrupled and exceptionable Points of bis
Narration, that f the Univerſal Deluge; and that
from unexceptionavle Principles , the Aſtronomical Ta-
bles of the Celeſtial Motions. To bow great a degree
this thing will deſerve the moſt ſerious Conſideration of
every one , eſpecially in this our Sceptical Age , I need
19t determine. The importance of the concern, and the
greatneſs of the Evidence hence afforded , ſufficiently
enforcing this Point , without any farther Applica-
T10n.

Coroll. 6. The years added in the Samaritan Pen-
tateuch and Septuagint to the accounts of Time ,
from the Hebrew Verity , ſince the Deluge , are
added without reaſon , and are contrary to the Truth,
and to the Sacred Writings together, For whereas ,


by the Hebrew Verity, and the Aſtronomical "_
R


4


51


_— OD. Dr -


* OO ——— rr oe... - Aa


HYPOTHESES. Bookll. .
of the place of the Perihelion, and of the Conjunttions


of the Sun and Moon; (not to mention the Teſt ixmo-
ries of Abidenus and Beroſus here ) rbe Deluge's
biginning w fix'd to the Seventeenth day of the Second
Month from the Autumnal Equinox, or to the 27 of
November in the Year of the Julian Period 2365,
and the 2449" before the Chriſtian Fra; (by reaſon of
the juſt number of 4044 Years ſince lic and clapſed;) In
Je thoſe Eight hurdred or Nine bundred Years which
the Samaritan and Septuagint h:we added , are to
be allowed for, all is put thereby imto Confuſion. - The
Situaticn of the Moon neceſſary to this matter is loſt,
and no reaſonable Account to be grven of her ſtill ac-
companying the Earth. The place of the Perihelion,
and Day of the beginning of the Deluge thence nearly
determin'd, muſt bawe been about twelye Dezrees, and
as many Days ſoener 5 and the Day wiich Noah er-
tred into the Ark muſt bawve been not the Twenty ſeventh
of the Second Month, as even the Septuagint by their
way of reckoning were oblig'd to expreſs it ; nor the
Seventeenth day of the ſame Month, as the Hebrew
Verity and Samaritan Pentateuch do rightly deter-
mine it 5 but rather the Fifth of the ſame Month,
contrary to the Faith and Agreement of all Copies and
Tranſlations in the World, So that upon the whole,
. the mtire force of this Reaſoning, and the conjoint
. Tifiucnce of the ſeveral ways by which this Hypo-
thelis fixes the day of the Deluge ſo nicely, conſpires
to confirm and give undoubred Atteſtation to the
Hebrew Verity ; and conſequently to deſtroy the Au-
ilority of the Samaritan and Septuagint, /o far as
they contrad: the ſame, in the matters herem cor;-
cerpd.

Corol!, 7. Hence the Chronology of the Bible is
eſtabliſh'd, ard all the pretended immenſe numbers of
Tears, which the Annals of ſome Nations recount, are
confreed, [or as the Tear of the Deluge , from the
Hebrew


Bookll, HYPOTHESES.


Hebrew Chronology given, the Day of the beginning
of the Deluge therem aſſign'd is fully atteſted to, and
determin'd cn our Hypotheſis, from Aſtrenomy ; /o,
vice vera , the Day of the begmning of the Deluge
from the ſame Sacred IHi{/ory grom, (and within 4
Day or two confirm'd /r61; Abydenus and Beroſus
correted) the number of Years thereby aſſign'd, at
the ſame time eſtabliſh'd alſv. The Methods before-
munticn'd of fixing that Day , net permitting the
Addition or Subtrattion of a few hundreds , much
leſs many thouſands of Years , to or from thoſe
Four thouſand and forty four, which the Heily Scrip-
tures require us to account ſince that time : Which
therefore ought to be fully acquieſced im; and all
other wild and extravagant Numbers 'be utterly rc-
zeet ed.

Coroll. 8. Hence, upon ſuppoſition that the Comet
was of any given Mognutude, the height of the Tide,
or elevation of the ziby{s, with its meumbent Orb ,
may be reduc'd to Calculatien , and its Quantity con-
ſider'd and compar'd with the Phanomena depend-
mg on it. Thus for inſtonce, if the Comet were half
as big as the Earth , which wnl! hereafter appear not
fer from tru , and conſequently approxch'd eight
times as near as the Moon, or Thirty thouſand Miles
off us; at its neareſt diſtance , the el.yaiton of the
Fib/s, or the height of the Tide above its former Poſ*-
tion muſt have been near eigbs Miles. For the Moon
elcvates the Ocean about ſix Feet above its moderate
State 5 a Comet at the ſame diſtance, (half as big as
the Earth,which is ) Thirteen times as big as the Moon,
would elevate the [ame Thirteen times as high , or Se-
wventy eight Feet 5 and at an eighth [art of its dijt ance
Five hundred and twelve times as bigh «s the laſt,
Thirty mine thouſand nine bundred and thirty [ix Feet,
which is very neer the before-mentioned beis bt of eight
Alles. Which Ekwvation of the Aby/s ſeems wery agree-

/ able


153


Vid. Solur.


58. inh&


Lem. $0,
81. prius.


E


154


Fig r,


HYPOTHESES. Book Il,


able to the Phxnomena afterwards to be obſerey'd>
and ſo within a due Latitude eſtabliſhes the foregoing
Hypotheſes of the nearneſs of the Comets approach,
and the conſequent bigneſs of the Comet it ſelf before-
mention'd.


SCHOLIU M.


Having thus eſtabliſh'd this main Propoſition,
Phenomena of Comets, and of the Deluge, afford
us any guidance, the particular Trajefory of the .
Comet, or that part of it which could be con-
cern'd with us, and our lower Planetary Regi-
ons, which accordingly, in a mean between
ſuch as approach exceeding near to, and ſuch as
remain at ſomewhat 'remoter diſtances from the
Sun in their Peribelia, and agreeably to that Hi-
{torical Trajefery of the laſt famous Comer deli-
neated by Mr. Newton, I ſhall here attempt. For
tho* *twere folly to think of delineating the very
ſame in which the Comet revolv'd, yet we may
calily come pretty near itz we may give the Reader
a clear and diltint lea of the whole matter,
and enable him to judge of any particular con-
ſequences occaſionally to be drawn therefrom.
Now verbal Deſcriptions in ſuch caſes being of
{mall advantage, compar'd to Schemes and
Graphical Delineations, I ſhall wave more
words about it, and cxhibic an intire Figure
of the whole to the view and conſideration of
the Reader. From the careful Obſervation
whereof the following inferences may be eaſily
drawn.

Corollarv 1. The Earth would twice paſs quite
through the Tail of the Comet ; the farſt time at the
bermning of the Deluge, and the ſecond abcut Fifty

three


BookIl. HYPOT HESES.


three or fifty four Days after : Their ſeveral Motions,
then bringizs them to the Situation deſcrib'd in the
Figure. ;

Coroll. 2. At the ſecond paſſing by of the Comet ,
before its cutting the Eeliptick 12 its Aſcent from the
Sun, about Sixty tzwo Days after the former paſſage,
ihe Moon , which at the fiſt was three Days paſt
the New, at this laſt time muſt have been within a
dry or myo of iis Quadrature, paſt the like Conjun-
& ton.

Coroll. 3. If at the firſt prſſing by of the Comet, the
Moon was a [mail matter nearer the Comet than the
Earth hed been juf# before ; ſhe won! be accelerated
ſomewhat more than the Earth , and by hor Peſiticn
at the ſecond paſſage ſhe weu!d be a little mere retor de
ed than the Earth; and upen the bole might after-
ward retain an equal Felceity with it , as "tas certam
ſhe ftill dees.

Coroll. 4. That fermer ſuperabundant Velocity
would in the intermediate (pace caſt the Moon far-
ther «ff the Sun, and thereby '\make it approach nearer
the Earth at the Conjunilion or New; and recede

srther from it at the Oppoſition cr Full than it did
before. IVihich thirgs being ſo, it may deſerve conſis
aeration, whether the preſent Eccentricity of the
Moon's Orbit avcut the Earth, might no!, without
any change in its periodical Revolution , be hence de-
riv'd ? And (o, Whether the Menſtrual Courſe were
not as traly circular befcre the Deluge, as we have
already ſhew'd the Annual to have been ? Eſpecially,
when the Situation of the Moon's Apogzon was,
from the preſent Aſtronomical Tables, ſomewhat near
that place which according to ſuch an Hypotheſis ,
and ſuch a Trajeory of the Comet, it ought to have
been, I mean the latter degrees of Cancer, or the fur-
mer of [.£0.


Coroll.


135


156


HYPOTHESES. Book Il.


Coroll. 5. *7was almoſt the New Moon when
the Comet*s Tail imvoly'd the Earth and the Moon the
ſecond time; as the Poſition of the Earth in the Fi-
gure, with the conſideration of the place of the Moon


' then, will eafily ſhew.


157


—


—


BOOK Il


PHANOMENA.


CHAP. I.


Phxnomena relating to the Moſaick
Creation, and the Original Conſtitution
of the Earth.


l. LL thoſe particular ſmall Bodies

of which our habitable Earth is

now compos'd, were originally

in a mixed, confuſed, fluid, and
uncertain Condition; without any order
or regularity. It was an Earth without form, Gen. i. >.


and void ; had darkneſs ſpread over the face of Got Ver.


its Abyſs; and in reality was, what it has _—
been ever ſtild, a perfeCt Chaos. 16. Bura,


The Teſtimonies for this are ſo numerous, and opt |
the Conſent of all Authors, Sacred and Pro- |, -*


phane, ſo unanimous, that I need only refer s [Rvas
os to them for the undoubted Atteſtation . 2. c. 1.
of it. -

It, The Formation of this Earth, or the


Change of that Ch:os into an habitable
World, was not a meer reſult from any
neceſſary


Cen 1: c,
8, 13, 19,


23z 30+


Gen. 1. 2-


158 7


PHANOMENA. Booklll,


neceſſary Laws of Mechaniſm independent-
ly on the Divine Power ; but was the pro-
per effect of the Influence and Interpoſition,
and all along under the peculiar Care and
Providence of God.

The Teſtimonies for this are ſo numerous, and
ſo expreſs, both in the Moſaick Hiſtory it ſelf,
in the other parts of Scripture relating thereto ,
and in all Antiquity, that I may refer the Rea-
der to almoſt every place where this matter is


ſpoken of, without quoting here any particulars.
He who is at all. acquainted with the Primitive
Hiſtories of this riſing World, whether Sacred or
> can have no reaſon to make any doubt
OL It,

III. The Days of the Creation, and that
of Reſt, had their beginning in the Even-
ing.

The Evening and the Mornmg were the fixft Day.
And ſo of the reſt afterward.

IV. Art the time immediately preceding
the ſix days Creation, the face of the Ab»/s,
or ſuperior Regions of rhe Chaos, were 1n-
volv'd in a thick Darkneſs. |

Darkneſs was upon the face of the Derp. To which
Teſtimony the Prophane Traditic1:s do fully
agree; as may be ſeen in the Authors before re-
fer'd to. |

V. The viſible part of the firſt days Work,
was the Production of Light, or 1:5 ſuccel-
ſive appearance toall the Parts of th» Earth ;
with the conſequent diſtintio: of Darknels
and Light, Night and Day vpoa 12 face
of it.


Chap. I. PH ANOMENA.


God ſaid , Let there be Light ; and there as
Light : And God ſaw the Light that it was god,
and God divided the light from the darkneſs : And
God called the light, Day, and the darkneſs he called
Night : And the Evening and the Morning was the
firſt day.

VI. The vilible part of the Second Days
Work was the elevation of the Air, with
all its contained Vapours ; the ſpreading
it for an Expazſum above the Earth; and
the diſtinQtion thence ariſing of Superior
and Inferior Waters: The former conſiſt-
ing of thoſe Vapours, rais'd and ſuftain'd
by the Air; the latter of ſuch as either
were encloſed in the Pores, Interſtices and
Bowels of the Earth, or lay upon che Sur-
face thereof.

God ſaid, Let there be a firmament, or Expan-


ſum, in the mid/# of the waters, and let it divide
the waters from the waters. Hind God made the fir-
mament, and divided the waters which were under
the firmament, from the waters which wire above
the firmament: And it was ſo; and Geid called the
firmament Heaven. Ana the Evening and the Meorn-
mg were the ſecond dy.

VII. The viſible parts of the Third
Day's Works were two, the former the
Colleftion of tl;e inferior Waters, or ſuch
as were: now under the Heaven into the
Scas, with the conſequent appearance of
the dry Land; the latter th: production
of Vegetables out of that Ground lo lately


become 0ry.


159


Gen. 3,
4, 5.


ver. 6," 8,


160


ver. 9, 10,
11,12,13-


ver.14,15
16,17,18,
19.


PHANOMENA. Book IT.


God ſaid, Let the waters under the beavens be ga-
thered together unto one place, and let the dry land aps
pear ; and it was fo. And God called the dry land
Earth ; and the gathering together of the waters called
he Seas : And God ſaw that it was good. And God
ſaid, Let the Earth bring forth graſs, the berb yield-
ing ſeed, and the fruiut-tree yielding fruit after his
kind, whoſe ſeed is m it ſelf upon the earth; and it was
fo. And the earth _— forth graſs, and herb
nielding ſeed after his kind, and the tree yielding
fruit, whoſe ſeed was m it ſelf after bis kind ; and
God ſaw that it was good. And the Evening and
the Morning were the third day.


VIII. The Fourth Day's Work was the
Placing the Heavenly Bodies, Sun, Moon


and Stars, in the Expanſam or Firmament, .
7, e, The rendring them Vilible and Con-
om on the Face of the Earth : Toge-
ther with their ſeveral Aſſignations to their
reſpeCtive Offices there.

God ſaid, Let there be lights im the Expanſum,
Or, firmament of heaven, to divide the day from the
might ; and let them be for ſigns and for ſeaſons, and
for days and years ; and let them be for lights in the
firmament of heaven, to groe light upon the earth ;;
and it was ſo. ind God made two great lights ; the
greater light to rule\the day, ond the I:Ver light to rule
the night; he made the ſtars alto. And Ged ſet them
in the firmament »f the heaven, to give I:ght upon the
earth ; and to rule +47 the day, ond wor the night,
and to divide the light from ihe darkneſs; and Ged
ſaw that it was £00G, flnd ihe Evaiung «nd the
Morning were the fourth day.

IX. The Fifth Day's Work was the Pro-
duction of the Fh and Fowl out of the


Watc:5


Chap. 1. PH ANOMEN A.


Waters; with the Benediftion beſtow'd
on them in order to their Propagation,

God ſaid, Let the Waters bring forth abzndant!y
the moving creature that hath life, and fow! that may
fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven,
And God created great Whales, and every lying crea-
ture that moveth, which the waters brought forth
abundantly after their kind ; and every winged fowl
after bus kind ; and God ſaw that it was good.
Hnd God bleſſed them, ſaying, Be fruitful and mul-
tiply, and fill the waters m the Seas; and let fowl
mulrivly in the earth. And the Evenins and the
Mornung were the fifth day.

X. The Sixth Day's Work was the Pro-
dion of all che Terreftrial or Dry-land
Animals ; and thatin a different manner.
For the Pruit Beaſts were produc'd out of the
Earth, as the Fiſhand Fowl had been before
out of the Waters: Bur after that the Body
of 4dim was form'd of the Duſt of the
Ground ; who by the Breath of Life breath'd
into him in a peculiar manner, became a
Living Soul, Some time atter which, on
the lame day, he was caſt into a deep Sleep,
and Eze Was form'd of a Rib taken from
his (ide. Together with ſeveral orher
things, of which a more particular account
has been already given on another occa-
ſion.

God ſaid, Let the Earth bring forth the lwomg
creature after his kind, cattel and creeping thing,
and beaſt of the Earth after his kind; and it was jo.
And God made the beaſt of the earth after bis kind,
and cattel after their kind, and every thing that

5 creepeth


161


ver.20,21,
22, 23+


Hyporth.3.
p 3g, &c.


prius,


ver.24,29,
26, 27.


162


"PHANOMENA. Book Il.


creepeth upen the earth after bis kind; and God ſaw
that it was geod, ind God ſaid, Let us make man
in Our Image, 'after Our likeneſs, and let them bave


dominion over the Fiſh of the ſea, and over the fowl!
of the air, and over the cattel, and over all the earth,


and yer every creeping thing that creepeth upon the
earth. So God created Man m his own image, inthe
image of God - be him; Male and Female
created he them, &c. Vid. ver. 28, 29, 3o, 31.


and Cap. 2. 7, 15, KC.
XI. God having thus finiſh'd the Works


of Creation, Reſted on the Seventh day
from the ſame ; and SanQified or ſet that
day apart for a Sabbath, or day of Reſt,
to be then and afterward obſerv'd as a Me-
morial of his Creation of the World in the
ſix foregoing, and his Reſting or keeping a
Sabbath on this ſeventh day. Which Sab-
bath was reviv'd, or at lealt its Obſervation
anew enforc'd on the Jews, by the Fourth


- Commandment.


Gen. 11, 1,


Exod, 20,
8,9,1o,11,


Thus the Heawens and the Earth were finiſhed, and
all the hoſt of them, and on the ſeventh day God had
ended bis work which be had made; and be reſt-
ed on the ſeventh day from all his work which he had
made. And Ged bleſſed the ſeventh day, and ſanttif;-
ed it, becauſe that in it he bad reſted from all his work
which God created an


bou keep holy the Sabbath day.
Six days ſhalt z#6u labour, and do all thy work : But
the ſeventhay is the Sabbath of the Lord thy Gol ;
in it thou ſhalt do no manner of work, thou, nor thy
ſon, nor thy daughter, nor thy man-ſervant, nor thy
maid-ſervant, nor thy cattel, nor the {ranger which
is within thy gates: For in fix days the Lord made


Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that is: them i,
an


Chap. 1: PHENOMENA.


and reſted the ſeventh day; wherefore the Lord ble-
ſed the ſeventh day, and hallowed tt.

XII. There is a conſtant and vigorous
heat diffuſed from the Central towards the
Superficiary partsof our Earth.

Tho” I might bring ſeveral Arguments from
Ancient Tradition, the Opinion of great Phi-
loſophers, and che preſent Obſervations of Na-
ture for this Aſſertion ; yet I ſhall chuſe here,
for brevities ſake, to depend wholly on the laſt
evidence , and refer the inquiſitive Reader to
what the Learned Dr. Woodward ſays in the
ru caſe ; which I take to be very fatif-
actory.

XIII, The Habitable Earth is founded
or ſituate on the Surface of the Waters ; or
of a deep and vaſt Subterraneous fluid.

This Conſtitution of the Earth is-a natural re-
ſult from ſuch a Chaos, as we have already al-
ſign'd ; affords foundation for an eafie account
of the Origin of Mountains ; renders the Hiſto
ries of the ſeveral ſtates of the Earth, and of the
Univerſal Deluge very intelligible ; is as Philo-
ſophical, and as agrecable ro the common 7h.c-
nomena of Nature as any other; without this
ſuppoſition 'twill be, I believe, impoflible to ex-
plain what Antiquity, Sacred and Prophane,
aſſures us of relating, to the Earth, and its great
Cataſtrophes ; but this being allow'd, "twill not be
difficult to account for the ſame to the greateſt
degree of ſatisfaction, as will appcar in the pro-
greſs of the preſent Theory: And Laſtly, The
ſame aſſertion is moſtexactly conſonant to, and
confirm'd by the Holy Scriptures ; as the fol-
lowing Texts will fairly cvincg.


$ 2 TE he";


163


Eſſay, Part
3. Set. 1,


Id. Theor,
L.i.Cap.s
'2, Cs
bs & I P,


-
- F


164


P 9: viii.
27,428,29.


P[. xxiv. 2+


& cxxxvi,
G.
2 Pet in.


5,6.


Gen. vii.
11


& viii. 2,


PH ANOMENA. BookIll,


Iii the Lord prepared the heawens I was there :
Il en be {et a compa|[s (C arcle cr Orb) = the face
of the acep : Ii hen be (/ tablſhed the clouds above,
when he ſtreygthen 4 the ſeantain of the deep: When
he gave to the ſea his decree, that the waters Ry bd
201 peſs Dis C111 andmnt ; when be appointed 1.
F777, di CICNS of the earth.

He bath fumded the earty upon the ſeas, and

e/? abl. ih d it "5 no the flood is,

To him thi 4 ffretched out tbe Cari 'þ above the WJ
ters; tor bis mercy endurcth for ever.

Tis they willingly are ITner aut of » that by the
30Y« 1 of God the he TVers were of ou, 6s -nd {be Earth,
ftxnding out of the water, and| in the water 53 where-
by the world that then Ws 4s, being wt with
waters, per:ſned.

Toe four ams of the great deep were broken
/ DP

The fountams of the det Pp Were rop pred,

XIV. The interior or intire Conſtitution
of the Earth is correſpondent to that of an
Foo.


"TR. very well known that an Fes was the ſo-


. lemn Ga ad io! mai kavie yy mbol or Rei orclentation


of the World among the molt venerable Anti-
quity ; and thar —— was more ceJebrated
than the Original, 72 '0g24zey, in themolt early
Authors ; which if extended beyond the Earth
to the IY [tem of the He. Wens, 15 groundlels and
idle; it referr'd to the Figure of the Earth, is
directly falſe, and ſo is moſt reaſonably to be
underitood of the intire and internal Conſticution
thcreok.

XV. The Primi ive Earth had Seas and
Dry-land diftioguiſhd from cach other in


great mealure as the preſent ; and thole (i


tUate


Chap. r. PHANOMEN 4.


ruate in the ſame places generally as they
{till are.

This is put paſt doubt by part of the third, the
intire hfth, and part of the ſixth Day's Works.
One half of the third being ſpent in diſtinguiſhing
the Seas from the Dry-land; the intire fifth in
the Production of Fiſh and Fowl out of the Wa-
rers, and in the afligning the Air to the
latter ſort, and the Seas to the former for their
reſpetive Elements; and on the ſixth , God be-
ſlows on Mankind the Dominion of the Inha-
bitants, as well of the Seas as of the Dry-land.
All which can leave no doubt of the truth of the
former part of this Afſertion. And that their
Diſpoſition was originally much what as it is at
ns, appears both by the Rivers, 7igr:s and
Eupbrates, running then into the ſame Per/ian Sea
that now they do; And by the Obſervations of
Dr. Weedward fully confirming the ſame.

XVI. The Primitive Earth had Springs,
Fountains, Screams, and Rivers, in the fame
manner as the preſent, and uſually in or
near the ſame places alſo,

This is but a proper conſequence of the Di-
ſtin&tion of the Larth into Seas and Dry-land;
the latter being uninhabitable without them
and ſuch Vapours as are any way condenſed in-
to Water on the higher parts of the Dry-land ,
naturally deſcending and hollowing themſelves
Channels, cill they fall into the Seas. However,
the other direct proofs for both parts of the Afſer-
tion are ſufficiently evident.

I was ſet up from everlaſting, from the beginning,
or ever the earth was. When there were no depths, I
was brought forth ; when there were no fountains a»
bounding with water.


S 1 A rivi


165


Gen. 1 9,
IO.
Verſe 25,


21,22,23.


Verſe 26.
23.


EMry, P29.
252, 253»


Prov. viii.
23, 24+


Gen. 11.
10, &c.


Eſſay, p.


253,


Prov. viit.
22, 23,25z


26.


Tob xv. 7.


Pſalm xc.
F,2-


PHANOMENA. Booklll.


A river went out of Eden to water the garden;
and from thence it was parted, and became mto four
heads, Piſon, Gihon, Tigris, and Euphrates: The
two latter of which- are well-known Rivers to
this very day. And the ſame thing is confirm'd
by Dr. Woodward's Obſervations.


XVII. The Primitive Earth was diſtin-
guiſh'd into Mountains, Plains, and Vallies,


' 4n the ſame manner, generally ſpeakiog ,


and in the {ame places as the preſent,


This is a natural conſequent of the two for-
mer : The Caverns of the Seas, with the extant
Parts of the Dry-land, being in effe& great Val-
lies and Mountains; and the Origin and Courſe
of Rivers neceſſarily ſuppoſing the ſame. ( For
tho* the Earth, in the Theorit's way, were Oval,
which it 1s not, "tis demonſtrab!e there could be
no ſuch deſcent as the courſe of Rivers requires.)
However the direct proofs are evident.

The Lord poſſeſſed me in the beginning of his way ,
before bis works of old. I was ſet up from everl:ſt-
ing, from the beginning, or ever the Earth was. Be-
fore the mountams were ſetled: before the Hills was
I brought forth: While as yet he had not made the
earth, nor the fields, nor the higheſt part of the duſt of
the world.

Art thou the firſt man that was born? or waſt thou
maae before the hills? |

Lord, thou haſt been cur dwelling place from one ge-
meration to ancther, Before the motntams were broug bt
forth , or ever then badſt formed the earth and the
world, even from eonl:?:1:7 to erlaſting, thou art
Ged. And ingoed theſe three laſt rYhanomena
are in their own Natures io linked together, they
ſo depend on, and infer one another mutually,
that tlie proofs of cach of them {inely may now

(&


Chap. 1: PHENOMENA. 167


be eſteemed under the ſame Character to both the
other ; and all of them are thereby eſtabliſh'd paſt
all rational Contradiction. Of which whole
matter , Dr. Wocodward's Obſervations are a ſuffi- £7, p.
cient Atteſtation alſo. 249
XVIII. The Waters of the Seas in the :;: _
Primitive Earth were $/t, and thoſe of the 258.
Rivers Freſh, as they are at preſent, and
each, as now, were then ſtor'd with great
plenty of Fiſh,
This appears from the difference of the Species
and Natures of Fiſhes, ſome being produc'd and
nouriſh'd by Salt Water , others. by Freſh ; and
yet all created on the fifth Day. And this in all
its parts is confirm'd by Dr. Woodward's Obſerva- E175, p.
tions. G 263, 254,
XIX. The Seas were agitated with a like ***
Tide, or Flux and Reflux, as they are at +
preſent.
There is in it ſelf no reaſon to doubt of this ;
and 'tis moreover atteſted by Dr. Woodward's Ob- Eſa, p;
ſervations. 254+
XX. The ProduCtions of the Primitive
Earth, as far as we can gueſs by the remain-
ders of them at the Deluge, difter'd little
or nothing from thoſe of the preſent, either
in Figure, Magnitude, Texture of Parts,
or any other correſpondent reſpe@.
This is prov'd by Dr. Woodward's Obſerva- Ys, Þ
tions. 22, 23,
XXI. The Primitive Earth had ſuch *5*
Metals and Minerals in it, as the preſent
has.
In the land of Havilah there was gold ; and the gold Gen. ii.
of that land as good, there was bdellium and the 51, 12
onyx-ltone, - I 4 Tubal-


\


'n68


Cen. iv.


22.


Eſſay, Part
4. Vid. p.
258, 259-


Gen. iv. 2.
Verſe 17.
Verſe 20,


Verſe 21.
Verſe 22,


Vid. Grot.
Ierit. Rel.
Chriſt. I. 1,
ſet. 16.
Theor. 1.
1.C, 5.1,


3. & Jo


PHANOMENA. Book ll.


Tubal-cain, Was an inſt rutter of eUery artificer in
braſs and iron. Which is withal atteſted by Dr.
Weodward's Obſervation.

XXII. Arts and Sciences were invented
and improv'd in the firſt Ages of the World,
as well as they ſince have been.

Abel was @ keeper of ſheep, but Cain was a tiller

the ground,

Cain buiided a city , and called it after the name

of bis ſen Enoch.

Jabal was the father of ſuch as dwel! in tents, and
of. ſuch as have cattel. -

Jubal was the father of all ſuch as handle the bary
and organ.

Tubal-cain was an inſtrutter of every artificer in
braſs and tron. See alſo the Right Reverend Bi-
ſhop Patrick, on Gen. iv. 20, 21, 22, 25. and v.
18.


PD — —— —TC—————


SA F. 4


Phznomena relatinz to the Primitive


State of the Earth.


XXIII. HE Primitive State of the
Earth admitted of the prima-
Ty Production of Animals out of the Waters
and dry Ground , which the ſubſequent
States, otherwiſe than in the ordinary me-
thod of Generation have been incapable of.
This appears from the Hiſtory of the Creati-
on, compar'd with that of Nature ever ſince.
By the former of which, (agreeing with the old-


eſt


Chap. 2. PHENOMENA.


eſt Traditions) 'ris evident, Thar the Fiſhes and
Fowls were the immediate Productions or Off-
ſpring of the Waters, and the Terreſtrial Animals
of the Dry-land in the Primitive State of the
Earth: And by the latter 'tis equally fo, that nei-
ther of thoſe Elements have afforded the like
ever lince.

XXIV. The Conſtitution of Man in his
Primitive State was very different from
that ever fince the Fall, not only as to the
Temper and Pertetions of his Soul, but as
ro the Nature and Diſpoſition of his Boty
allo.

This the whole Drift and Scries of the Sacred
Hiſtory of this Primitive State ſuppoſes ; in
which theſe two Particulars may here be taken
notice of : (1.) Nakednefs was no ſaame, and
ſo no ſenſe of any nced to cover it does appear.
Thoſe Inclinations-which provide for the Propa-
gation of Mankind were , it ſeems, fo regular,
and fo intirely under the command of Reaſon,
that not ſo much as an Apron was eſteem d ne-
cellary to hide thoſe Parts, which all the World
have ſince thought propzr to do. (2.) lhe
Temper of the Humane Body was more ſoft,
pliable, and alterabie than now it is: Some forts
of Fruits: and Food were capable of cauſing a
mighty change therein , either to fix and adapt
it to its preſent Condition , or diſcompoſe and
diſorder it; z. e. in other words, either to render
it Permanent and Immortal on the one hand;
or to devolve upon it Diſeaſes, Corruption, and
Mortality on the other. What concerns the Soul,
or its moral Perfections, is without the compaſs
of this Theory, and not here to be conlider'd.


XXV. The


169


Gen it.
25.and ill.


7,10, 11.


Cap. it. 9,
16, 17.
and 11. 1,


&c.


170


Gen. v. 2.


and uu. 23,
24,


Chap. iii.
16.


Ibid,


Gcea 120,


PHANOMENA. Booklll.


XXV. The Female was then very diffe-
rent from what ſhe is now ; particularly
ſhe was in a ſtate of greater equality with
the Male, and little more ſubje&t to Sor-
row in the Propagation of Poſterity than
he. |

(1.) Her Names were as much as poflible the
very ſame with his. The Husband was call'd
Adam, the Wife Adamab; the Husband 1/ch, the
Wife I//chah. God called their Name Adam im
the day that they were created, She ſhall be cal-
led Wchah , becauſe ſhe was taken oat of Ifich.
(2.) We find little to infer any Inequality or
Subjection till after the Fall. Adam ſaid , This
is now bone of my bone, and fleſh of my fleſh: There-
fore ſhall a man leave his father, and his mother, and
ſhall cleave unto his wife, and they ſhall be one fleſh.
Unto the woman God [aid, (after the Fall) thy de-
ſire ſhall be ( ſubjef4 to) thine husband, and be ſhall rule
over thee. ( 3.) Her pains in Conception. and
Childbirth were inconliiderable in compariſon of
what they ſince have been. Unto the woman God
laid, (after the Fall) I will greatly multiply tby [or=
row, and thy conception; in ſorrow thou ſhalt bring
forth children.


KXVI. The other Terreſtrial Animals
were 18 a ſtate of greater Capacities and
Operations ; nearer approaching to reaſon
and diſcourſe, and partakers of higher de-
grees of Perfeftion and Happineſs, than
they have been ever ſince.

This appears, (x) From the neceflity or oc-
caſton ot a particular view and diſtin& conſide-
ration of each Species of Animals before Adam
was fatished that none of them were a Help

meet


Chap. 2. PHANOMENA.


meet for him , or ſuitable to his Faculties and
Condition. (2.) From the Serpent's diſcourſe with
the Woman : In which, tho' the O!4 Serpent, the
Devil,was alſo concern'd,yetthe particular S«6:;/ry
of the Serpent is taken notice of as a means of her
Deception, and a Curſe denounced and inflicted
on the ſame Beaſt upon account thereof. Now
the Serpent was more [ubtil than any beaſt of the
field, which the Lord God had made, &c. I fear
leſt by any means, as the Serpent beouiled Eve
through his ſubtilty. The Lord God ſaid unto the ſer-
pent, Becauſe thu haſt done this, thou art curſed
above all cattel , and abeye every beatt of the field ;;
upon thy belly ſhalt thou go, and duſt ſhalt thou ea:
all the days of thy life. (3.) From St. Paul's Dif-
courſe in the Eighth Chapter to the Remers ,
For the earneſt expectation of the creature waiteth for
the manife(tation of the Sens of God. For the crea-
ture was made ſubject to vanity, not wilingly, but by
rea/on of him who hath (ſubjected the ſame m hope :
Becauſe the creature it ſelf allo ſhall be delivered from


the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of


the children of God. For we know that the whole
creation groaneth and travellcth m pain together, until
N02,

- XXVII. The temper of the Air, where
our firſt Parents liv'd, was warmer, and the
heat greater before the Fall than ſince.


This appears, (1.) From the heat requiſite to,


the Production of Animals, which muſt have been
greater than we are ſince ſenſible of, Of which
the hot Wombs in which the Fetwrs in wiviparores
Animals do lye, and the warm brooding of the
Ow:1arors, with the hatching of Eggsin Ovens,are
good evidence. (2.) From the nakednefs of our
tirſt Parents. (3.) From that peculiarly warm


, cloathing


171


Gen. 11. r.
2 Cor. xi.
3

Gen. iu.

I 4


Rom. viit
I9, 20,
20, 32+


Gen.u.25-


172


Chap. iii.


21.


Gen. 11.15.


Chap. iii.
17,18,19.


23, 24+


PHANOMENA. Booklll.


cloathing they immediately ſtood in need of af-
terwards, the Skins of Animals. Unto Adam al/o,
(after the Fall) and to his wife, did the Lord God
make coats of skins, and cloathed them.


XXVIII. Thoſe Regions of the Earth
where our firſt Parents were plac'd , were
productive of better and more uſeful Vege-
tables, with leſs Labour and Tillage than
ſince they have been. _

The Lord God took the man , and put him mto the
garden of Eden to dreſs it , and to keep it; (bcfore
the Fall).

The Lord God ſaid unto Adam, (after the Fall )
Curſed is the ground for thy ſake; m ſorrow hal:
thou eat of it all the days of thy life. Thorns alſo and
thiſtles ſhall it bring forth to thee, and thu ſhalt eat
the herb of the field. In the (weat of thy face ſhalt
thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground , for
out of it waſt thou made.

XXIX. The Primitive Farth was not
equally Parzdifiacal all over. The Garden of
Eden or Paradiſe being a peculiarly fruitful
and happy ſoil, and particularly furni{h'd
with the necellaries and delights of an inno-
cent and bleſled life, above the other Regions
of the Earth.

The Lord God Planted a Garden Eat ward in Eden,
and there he put the man whom be had formed : And


Out of the ground made the Lord God to grow every


rree that is pleaſant to the fight, and good for food;
the tree of life allo m the midſt of the garden, and the
tree of knowledge of good and evil. |
The Lord God ſent the Man forth from the garden
of Eden to till the ground from whence he was taken :
So be drove out the man.
XXX.


Chap. 2. PH ANOMENA.


XXX. The place of Paradiſe was where
the united Rivers Treris and Euphrates divi-
ded themſelves into four ſtreams, Piſon,
Gibon, Tigris and Euphrates.

Of this ſee the fourth Hyporbeſis before laid down.

XXXI. The Earth inits Primitive State
had only an A»nual Motion about the Sun :
Bur fince it has a Diurnal Rotation. upon
its own Ax/s allo; Whereby a valt diffe-
rence ariles in the ſeveral States of the
World.

Of this with all its conſequents ſce the third
Hypathejis lxeture laid down.

XXXII. Upon the firſt commenciog of
this D.urzal Rotation after the Fall, its
Axis was oblique to the plain of the Eclip-
tick as it (till is: Or in other words, the
preſent viciſſitudes of Seaſons, Spring, Sum-
mer. Autumn and Winter, ariſing trom the
Sun's accels to, and receſs from the 7rec-
picks, have been ever fince the Fall of
Man .

God ſaid, on the fourth Day, Let there be lights
in the firmame nr of t be beaver, ro divide the day from
the night ; which was their proper office til! the
Fall. And let them be, ever pk for "71s, and
for ſeaſons, and for days, and years. After the
Flood, It bile the Earth remaimeth, Seed-tirme and
Harweſt, and Cold and Heat, and Summer and Win-


173


Cap. viii.
ule.


ter, and Day and Nig3t ſhall not ceaſe. Implying, .


that tho" the Seaſons,” as well as Night anq1 Day,
had been, during the Deluge, ſcarcely diſtingui-
ſhable from one another; yerthe former as well as


the latcer diſtinction had been-in nature before -
. An


PHANOMENA. Booklll,


And ſurely the Spring, Summer, Autumn and
Winter, with their varicties of Cold and Heat,
Seed-time and Harveſt, were no more —_—
begun after the Deluge, than the ſuccetlion of
Day and Night mention'd here together with
them is by any ſuppos'd to have been. But of
this we have at large diſcours'd under the third
Hypotheſis foregoing already ; to which the Rea-
der is farther referr'd for ſatisfaction.


——


CHAP. III.


Phzaomena relating to the Antedilu-
vian State of the Earth.


AXXUI \HE Inhabitants of the

Earth were before the
Flood valtly more numerous than the pre-
lent Earth either aCtually does , or per-
haps is capable to containand ſupply.

In order to the proof of this Aſſertion, I ob-
ſerve, (1.) That the Polterity of every one of
the Antediluvians, is to be ſuppos'd fo much
more numerous than of any ſince, as their lives
were longer: This is but agrecable to the Sacred
Hiſtory, in which we find ewo at lixty five, and
one at ſeventy years of Age to have begotten
Children : While the three Sons of Noah were
not begotten till after their Father's five hundredth
year: When yct, at the ſame time the ſeveral
Children of che fame Father appear to have ſuc-
ceeded as quickly one after another as they uſual-
ly do at this day. For as toCain and 4be!, they

appear


Chap.z. PHANOMEAN.


appear to have been pretty near of an Age, ehe
World being at the death of the latter, nor with-
out conſiderable numbers of People, tho” their
Father Adam was not then an hundred and
thirty years old; and fo in probability contain'd
many of the Poſterity of both of them. (Which
by the way fully eſtabliſhes the early begerting
of Children juſt now obſerv'd in the Antedilu-
vian Patriarchs, and if rightly conſider'd, over-
turns a main Argumentfor the Septwagint's Ad-
dition of ſo many Centenaries in the Genera-
tions Before and After the Deluge.) And as to
the three Sons of Noeab, born after the five hun-
dredth year of their Father's Life, 'tis evident
that two of them at the leaſt, Fapher and Sem,
were born within two years one after another.
All which makes it highly reaſonable to ſuppoſe,
that in the ſame proportion that the Lives of the
Amediluwyians were longer , was their Poſterity
more numerous than that of the Poftdilunwimns.
(2.) The Lives of the Antediluwians being pretty
evenly prolong'd, without . that mighty inequa-
lity in the periods of humane Life, which we
now experience, the proportion between the
Lives of the Antediluwians and thoſe of the 1 of dis
luvians, 1s to be taken as about nine hundred the
middle period of their Lives; to twenty two,
the middle period of ours : Which is full torty to
one. Andaccordingly inany long ſpace, the n-
redilrwvians mult have forty times as numercus a
Polterity, as we uſually ailow with us tor the ſame
ſpace, on account thereof. 63.) On account of
the Coexiſtence of ſo many of ſuch Generations as
are but ſucceflive with us, we muſt allow the
Anmtediluvian number of preſent Inhabitants to
have been in half an Arithnicrical proportion of
ſuch their longer lives after the duration of the
firft


175


Gen. iv.
Id, IC,
with 17


Fid. Cap,
Vit. 13,
with v.z 2, |


Gen. v.32.
& vit. 11,
& viii. 13.
with xi.
10.


I", Gravut
(V1 Biils
of Mor-


til. p. 84.


Frxod. xii.
T7.
Numb. 1.


45, 46.


Pag 83-


Pag. Cz.


176 |


PHANOMENA. Booklll.


firſt Fathers is expir'd, and a gradual decreaſe of
the Ancient ſtock going off, as well as a gradual
increaſe of the New ſtock coming on, to be al-
low'd for : Till which time the proportion is
not to be diminiſh'd. So that on this account
for the firſt nine hundred years of the World tl:c
number of Inhabicants on the Face of the Earth,
muſt te elteem'd forty times as great as in fo
long time are now derivable from a, ſingle
Couple; and afterwards ewenty times fo; which
Poſtulata ſuppos'd, I ſhall propoſe a Calculati-
on {built upon certain matter of tat) firſt how
many they might have been by the Deluge; and
afterward another or two, relying alike on Mat-
ter of fat, how many 'tis probable they really
were, and muſt have been at the ſame time.
(1.) 'Tis evident from the Sacred Hiſtory, and
not to be denied by thoſe who forfake the He-
brew Chronology themſelves, or who would
leſſen the numbers of the Antediluwians; That in
the ſpace of about two hundred fixty fix years,
the Poſterity of Jacob alone, by his Sons, (with-
out the conlideration of Dimab his Daughter)
amounted to ſix hundred thouſand Males, above
the Ape of Twenty, all able to go forth to War.
Now by Mr. Graunts Obſervations on the Bitls
of Morality it appears that about #4 are berwecn
the Ages of ſixteen and fifty ſix: Which may be
near the proportion of. the Males numbred, to
the intire number of them all. So that as thirty
four to an hundred, by the Golden Rule, muſt
ſix hundred thouſand be to the intire number of
the Males of Iſrael atthat time : Which was there-
fore one Million ſeven hundred fixty four thou-
ſand and ſeven hundred. To which add Fe-
males, near 7; fewer, as ſuppoſe, ro make the


ſum even, one Million fix hundred thirty five


thouſand


—_— nw £e a as amoacs oa@£a cc cc.


Chap. 3. PHANOMEN 4.


millions, and three hundred thouſand ; add forty
three thouſand for the Lewites, (not included in
the former accounts,) the intire Sum will at laſt
amount to three millions, and three hundred
forty three thouſand Souls. Now if we ſuppoſe
the increaſe of the Children of Trae! to have
been gradual, and equal through the whole ewo
hundred ſixty fix years, it will appear that they
doubled themſelves every fourteen years at leaſt ;
which 'proportion, if we ſhould continue it
through the entire hundred and fourteen Pe-
riods, (which the ſpace from the Creation to the
Deluge admits) the produdt or number of People
on the face of the Earth at the Deluge would be
the hundredth, and fourteenth place in a Geome-
trick double proportion, or ſeries of numbers,
ewo, four, cight, ſixteen, &c. where every
ſucceeding one were double to that before it :
Which to how immenſe a Sum it would ariic,
thoſe who know' any thing of the nature of
Geometrick Progrefltions will eaſily pronounce,
and may be ſoon tried by any ordinary Atichme-
rician. So that without allowing for the Luv -
wvity, and that CeexiFence, and more numerous
Off-/pring thereon depending, without taxing
as advantagious an Hypothe/is as one might pre-
cariouſly, tho” poſſibly, do in fuch a caſe; If
the Antediluvians had only multiplied as falt be-
fore, as 'tis certain the Traclites did inc the
Flood for the afl:zgned erm ; 'the numbers of Man-
kind actually Alive and Coext/tims at the Deluge,
muſt have been, not only more than the Larth
now does or poſſibly could maintain, bat pro-
digiouſly more than the whole number of Man-
kind can be juſtly ſuppos'd ever tince the Deluge,
nay indeed, with any degree of likelihood, ever

1 ince


»


thouſand , three hundred, the Tiral is, three Numb. :i
39-
Ga


177


1p. 1. 47.
45, 49+


178


PHANOMENA. Book lll.


ſince the Creation of the World. On which
account this Calculation muſt not be at all
eſtcem'd a real one, or to exhibit in any mea-
ſure the juſt number of the Poſterity of Adam
alive at the Univerſal Deluge. But it ſerves to
ſhew how vaſtly numerous, according tq the
regular method of humane Propagation, the Off-
ſpring of a ſingle perſon may certainly be ; and
this on a Calculation from undoubted matter
of fact, not from a mzer poflible Hyporhe/is, (ac-
cording to which numbers prodigiouſly greater
would till ariſe.) It demonſtrates the probabi-
lity, if not certainty, of Mankind's Original
from a common head as well before as ſince the
Deluge, and that within a few Millenarics of
years. It, laſtly, is more than ſufficient to demon-
ſtrate the Propoſition we are upon, that the
whole Earth mult have been peopled long before :
the Flood, and at its approach have contain'd
vaſtly more in number than the preſent does or +
can do. $9 that altho' I do not pretend to give
a particular gueſs at the number of the Amedi-
luwimns thereby, yet I thought it not improper
to be hcre inferted. Which firſt Computation
being thus d:!patch'd I come to the (2.) which
I rake to be very probable, and very rational ;
and perhaps, within certain limits, to be ad-
mitted in the preſent caſe : Namely , That the
Primary incicate of Mankind after the Creation,
{that tac World might not 'be deſtitute of In-
habitants -for many Ages) was not, at leaſt
conlidering their greater Loygavity, lels
thani that of the [ſraeites in Egypr before-men-
tiond: But that afrerwards, (which was the
caſe of the [relies aiſo) a much leſs proportion
obtain'd. Upon which fair and modeſt Poſtu-
lata 1 thall demonſtrate the truth of that pro-
polition


Chap.z: PHZNOMEN A.


p_ we are now upon. In order to which


179


obſerve, from Mr. Grawnt, that at this day the Pa. 59.
number of People does fo increaſe, that in two #5 86.


hundred and eighty years, the Country doubles
its People, and the on of London much ſooner.
Let us therefore ſuppoſe that after the firſt two
hundred and fixty ſnx years of the World, the
former of thoſe proportions were obſerved (and
that muſt by all be own'd ſufficiently fair; ) and
compute how many the number of People muſt
on ſuch a Calculationariſe to before the Deluge.
When therefore after the firſt two hundred and
ſixty ſix years, there was near hve periods, each
of two hundred and eighty years, (if the Lon-
gevity of the Antediluvians, and the conſequent
Coexiſtence and more numerous poſterity were ex-
cluded) the number of the Inhabitants by the
Deluge would amount to about thirty times the
former ſum of three millions three hundred forry
three thouſand, or one hundred millions two hun-
dredand ninety thouſand of Souls. But if.we withal
allow, as we ought, that this number is on account
of Coexiſtence to be twenty times as great; andon
account of more numerous poſterity forty times
ſo (which is on both accounts cight hundred
times as great as the laſt mention'd) ; the num-
ber of People at the Deluge will amount to
eighty thouſand two hundred and thirty two
millions 3 which number, fince the preſent In-
habitants of the Earth, as ſome conjecture,
ſcarcely exceed three hundred and fifry millions,
is above two hundred and twanty nine times
as great as the Earth now actually contains upon
it, and by conſequence many more than at preſent
it could contain and ſupply. - And this Hypotheſis
and Calculation are confirm'd by what I Fall
propoſe in the (3.) a and which, mul} 5y
2


al


180


PHANOMEN A. Book lll,


all be allow'd very fair and reaſonable, namely,
That tho' Mankind, Caters Paribas, increas'd but
in the ſame proportion befozxe, as they have
done ſince the Deluge; we ſhall find, upon a
due allowance for the two things before-men-
tion'd, Coexiſtence and more numerous Poſter:ty,
that the number laſt aflign'd is rather too ſmall
than too great, and the numbers of the Inha-
bicantsof the Earth were more than the preſent
Earth does or can maintain, many years before
the approach of the Deluge. For if the number
of years before had been the ſame as that ſince
the Flood, the Inhabitants, tho* they had been no
longer livers than we now are, would have
been as numerous as the prefent. Bur becauſe
the number of years before the Deluge wanted
about two thouſand four hundred of that ſince ;
we muſt allow or abate the increaſe, which has
ariſen in the laſt two thouſand and four hundred
cars ; Which, ſince in theſe latter ages it has
then double in two hundred and eighty years,
and ſo in two thouſand and. four hundred years
about three hundred times as great as betore ;
the Antediluvians, if their lives had been no
longer than ours ſince, muſt kave been but the
three hundredth part fo many as the Earth now
contains upon it. But when on the two fore-
mention'd accounts, the number is to be eight
hundred times as great, and on this only three
hundred times as ſmall ; the exceſs is on the ſide
of the Antediluyians, and their number fixe hun-
dred times as great as that of the preſet Inha-
bicanes of the Earch. So that on this laſt Hype-
theſss, which I ſuppoſe none can juſtly except
againſt, tho* the preſent Earth be allow'd ca-
pable of maintaining five times as many People
as are now by. computation upon it; yet will
it


Chap. 3. PHENOMEN 4.


it appear that the Antediluvian Earth maintain'd
an hundred times as many. Which I imagin
not to be wide from probability; and, being fo
near the calculation before, may be allow'd as
reaſonable in the preſent caſe.

XXXIV. The Bruit Animals whether
belonging to the Watcr or Land, were
proportionably at leaſt, more in number
before the Flood than they are ſince.

This 1s I think generally look'd upon asno other
than a reaſonable deduction from the laſt Propoſi-
tion; andis very fully atteſted by Dr. |eodw.zrd's
Obſervations, as far as the remains of thoſe Apes
afford any means of knowing the ſame: And fo
ought in reaſon to be ankeertly allow'd.


XXXV. The Amtediluvian Earth was
much more fruitful than the preſent ;- antl
the multitude of its vegetable produQtions
much greater. |

This is both neceſſary to be allow'd by reafon
of the multitude of its Inhabitants, rational and
Irrational, maintained by them ; of which be-
fore : And abundantly conftirm'd alſo by Dr.
IWoodward's Obſervations.

RXXVI. The Temperature of the 4»-
tediluvian Air was more equable as to its
difterent Climates, and-its different Sca-
ſons; without ſuch exceſſive, and ſudden heat
and cold ; without the ſcorching of a 7orrid
Zone'y and of burning Summers ; or the
freezing of the Frigid Zones, and of pier-
cing Winters; and without ſuch ſudden
and violent changes inthe Climates or Sea-
ſons from one extreme to another, as the
preſent Air, to our ſorrow, is fubjeR to.

SS Theſe


EſLy, pa.
257, 258,


192


Theor. 1.
2:6, b.
10.Arches
I. 2.C. 5,
& 6.


PHANOMENA. Book II.


Theſe Charatters are extremely agreeable to,


& and atteſted by, the ancient Accounts of the


Golden Age. The gentleneſs of the Torrid and
Frigid Zones is neceſlary to be ſuppos'd in order
to the eaſlic Peopling of the World, with the
diſpertion and maintenance of thoſe numerous
Inhabitants we before prov'd it to have con-
tain'd : Which if they were as now they are,
would be very difficulcly accountable. The
gentleneſs of Summer and Winter, with the eaſie
and gradual coming on, and going off of the
ſame Seaſons, are but neceſſary in order to the
very long lives of the Artedilwvians ; which
elſe 'twere not fo eaſie to account for. And in-
decd the moſt of thoſe Teſtimonies which have
been ſuppos'd favourable to a perpetual Equinox
before the Deluge, are reſolv'd into this Propo-
ticion 3 and if 1t can be ſeparately eſtabliſh'd,
necd not be extended any farther.

XXXVII. The Conſtitution of the An-
tediluvian Air was Thin, Pure, Subtile
and Homogeneous, without ſuch groſs.
Steams, Exhalations, Nitroſulphureous, or
other Heterogeneous mixtures, as occaſion
Coruſcations, Meteors, Thunder, Lighten-
ing, Contagions, and Peſtilential InfeQi-
ons, in our preſent Air; and have fo very
pernicious and fatal (tho' almoſt inſenſ{ible)
eftects in the World ſince the Deluge.

* This is the natural\ conſequent, or rather ori-
ginal, of the before-mention'd equability an1
uniformity ' of the Amediluwian Air : This muſt»
be ſuppos'd on the account of the Longevity of
the Inhabitants: And this' is very agrecable to
the laſt cited deſcriptions of the Golden Age:
\; Fw | The


Chap. 3. PHANOMENA.


The contrary Heterogeneous and Groſs A4tmr-
ſphere, which now encompaſſes the Earth, is
viſa reeable to a regular ſtare, (which an ori-
ginal formation from the Chaos ſuppoſes) as con-
training ſuch Denſe and Bulky Exhalations, and
Maſſes, which at firſt muſt have obtain'd a
lower ſituation, and were not to be ſuſtain'd by
the Primitive Thin and Subtile Air or X:ther,
Such mixtures as this Propoſition takes notice of,
or thoſe effects of them therein mention'd, have
no Footſteps in Sacred or Prophane Antiquity ,
relating to the firſt Ages of the World; there
is no appearance of them in the Screne and Pel-
lucid Air of the Moon, or of the generality of
the Heavenly Bodies, and fo there can be no
diluvian (tate.


XXXVIIl. The Antedilunimm Air had no
large, groſs Maſſes of Vapours, or Clouds,
hanging for long ſeaſons in the fame. Ir
had no great round drops of Rain, deſcend-
ing in multitudes together, which we call
Showers: But the Ground was watered
by gentle Miſts or Vapours aſcending in the
Day, and deſcending, in great mealure,
again 1n the ſucceeding Night.

This Afertian is but a proper conſequent of
ſuch a Pure, Thin, Rare Xther as originally en-
compaſs'd the Earth. "Tis os agreeable to
the deſcriptions of the Golden Age, and to the
preſent Phenomena of molt of the Planets (elpe-
cially of the Moon, whoſe face, tho' fo near us,
15 never obſcur'd or clouded from us.) "Tis ne-
ceſſary to be ſuppos'd in an Air without a Rain-
bow, as the Antediluvian was ; (of which pre-

T4 fently )


18)


Theor. |.
3. CG 3


184 PHANOMENA. Book lll,


ently) and is indeed no other than the words
of the Sacred Hiſtory inform us of.
Gen. ii. 5, The Lord God had no: cauled it to Rain upon the
6. Earth, -——— But there went up a Miſt from the
Earth, and watered the whole face of the ground.
XXXIX. The Antcdiluvian Air was free
from violent Winds, Storms, and Apitations,
with all their effe&ts on the Earth or Seas,
which we cannot now but be ſufficiently
{ſenſible of.
This the foregoing Pharomena enforce: So
Homogeneous, Pure, and Unmix'd a Fluid, as
"that Air has been deſcrib'd to have been, by no
means ſceming, capable of exciting in it ſelf, or
undergoing any ſuch diforderly commotions or
fermentations. Where no Vapours were colle&t-
ed into Clouds; there muſt have been no Winds
to coliet them ; where the Climartes preſerv'd
their own proper temperature, no Storms mult
have hurried the Air from colder to hotter, or
from hotter to colder Regions; where was no
Rainbow, there muſt have been no driving to-
gether the ſeparate Vapours into larger Globules,
or round drops of Rain, the immediate requi-
ſire thereto. This is alſo highly probable by
reaſon of the perpetual tranquility of the Air
for the firſt five intire Months of the Deluge, (as
will be proy'd anon) which is ſcarce ſuppoſable
if Storms and Tempeſts were uſual before.
XL. The Artediluwian Air had no Rain-
| bow; asthe preſcnt fo frequently has.
Gen. is. Ged ſaid, (after the Deluge) This i the token
12,1214, of the covenant which I make berween me and you,
V. ka and every living creature that w with you, for per-
Theo 1.2, Pinal generations. I do ſet my bow in the cloud ;
c 5. era it (hail oe for a-tcken of a covenant between me
and


Chap. 3, PHANOMENA,


and the ear:h. And it ſhall come to paſs when I
bring a cloud over the earth, that the bow (hal; be
ſeen mthe cloud. Hind 1 will remember my covenant,
which w between me and you, and every ling crea-
ture of all fleſh ; and the waters ſhall no more become
a flood to deſtroy all fliſh. And the bow ſhall be in
the cloud, and I wil! look upon it, that I may remen-
ber the everlaſting covenant between God and every
livmg creature of all fleſh that is upon the earth,
find God ſaid unto Noah, this is the token of the
covenant which 1 have eſftabliſh'd between me and all
fle ſh that 13 upon the earth.


XLI. The Arnted:luviens might only Eat
Vegetables ;- but the Uſe of Fleſh after the
Flood was freely allow*d allo.


God ſaid, (to our firſt Parents in Paradiſe) Be-
bold I have gruen you eviry berb, bearing ſeed,
which is wpen the face of all the earth; and every
tree, in the which is the fruit of a tree nelding ſeed,
to you it ſhall be for meat ; and to every beaſt of the
earth, and to every fowl! of the air, and to every
thing that creepeth upon the earth wherem there is
life ; I have groen every green berb for meat : And


it was (0,


185


Gen. 1. 29,
30.


God bleſſed Noah and bis ſons, (after the flood) Cap. ix.}1,


and (aid unto them, Be fruutful and multiply, and
repleniſh the earth. And the fear of you, and the
aread of you ſhall be upon every beaſt of the earth,
and upon every fowl of the air, upon all that muveth
upon the earth, and upon all the fiſhes of the ſea ;
mto your hand are they delryered. Every moving
thing that [ieth ſhall be meat for you; even as the
green herb bawe [ given you all thmgs. To which
when the Prince of Latin Poets fo exaaly agrees,
I:t us for once hear him in the preſent caſe.


)


Ant [4


&,


Gror. ubi
ſupra.

_ Theor. I].
2.C. 3.
Hor. Ode
Jo


Gen. vi.
14,15,16.


PHANOMENA. Booklll.


Ante etiam ſceptrum Dif i Regis, & ante
Impia quam c&ſis gens eſt epulata juryencts,


Aurens in terris banc vitam Saturnns agebat.


XLII, The Lives of the Antediluvians
were more univerſally equal, and vaſtly
longer than ours now are: Men before the
Flood frequently approaching near to a


thouſand, which almoſt none now do to a


hundred years of Age.

This is both fully atteſted by the moſt anci-
ent Remainders of prophane Antiquity, and will
be put paſt doubt hereafter by a Table of the
Apes of the Antediluvians, out of the fifth Chap-
ter of Geneſis. Semotique prins tarda neceſſitas Lett
corripuit gradum.


XLIII. Tho' the Antedi/nwian Earth was
not deſtitute of leſſer Seas and Lakes, eve-
ry where diſper'd on the Surface thereof ;
yet had it no Ocean, or large receptacle of
Waters, ſeparating one Continent from ano-


ther, and covering fo large a portion of it,
as the preſent Earth has.

This is evident, Becauſe (1.) the number of
the Antediluvicns before aflign'd, muſt have been
too numerous for the Continents alone to main-
tain: (2.) The Ark appears to have been the
firſt Pattern and Inſtance for Navigation (which
had there been an Ocean, muſt have been very

e& long before ); and this ſeems probable
om the conſtant ſilence concerning Navigation
in the Golden Ape, from the common Opinion
of all Authors; and from; the neceflity of che


moſt minute and particular Dire&tions from God
himſelf


Chap. 4, PHENOMENA.


himſelf to the Fabrick of ic in the Moaick Hi-
ſtory. (3.) That famous Tradition among the
Ancients of the drowning a certain vaſt Conti-
nent, call'd Arlants, bigger than 4frica and ia,
ſeems to be a plain Relique of the Generation
of the Ocean at the Deluge, and conſequently of
that Antediluuian State, where the greateſt part
of what the Ocean now poſſeſſes was Dry-land ,
and inhabited as well as the reſt of the Globe.
(4.) The Generation of the Ocear, with the Si-
euation of the preſent great Continents of the
Earth, will be fo naturally and exactly account-
ed for at the Deluge, that when that is under-
ſtood there will remain to thoſe who are ſatished
with the other Concluſions, ſmall reaſon to
doubt of the truth of this before us. (5.) The
Teſtimony of Foſephas (if the Theorift hir upon
his true Senſe) is agreeable, who ſays, Ar the
Deluge God "Es Sur aways # nTH4c2v wTiCa)s ; chang'd
the Continent into Sea.


ir


CHAP. IV.


Phxnomena relating to the Univerſal De-
luge, and its Effetts upon the Earth.


XLIV.T N the Seventeenth Century from

the Creation, there happend a

moſt extraordinary and prodigious Deluge
of Waters upon the Earth.

This general Aſſertion is not only atteſted by


a large and ſpecial Account of it in-the Sacred
Writings , but by the univerſal Conſent of the


moſt ancient Records of all Nations beſides, as
may


187


Acrchaol.
P. 241
Theor. L


b.&6&


Theor. 1.
3. GG 5%
P. 230.


PHANOMENA. Book [lII.


i may be ſeen in the Authors quoted in the Mar-


gin; and is put moreover paſt doubt by Dr. HWood-
ward's Natural Obſervations *.


. C. 4. Edward's Authoriry of Script. p. 118, &c. And Com-


Mmenrtacors


Cen.vii. 4.


Verſe 11,


I 2,


Verſe 17.


on Gen. 6. and 57. * Eſſay, Pref. and Part 3. SeR. 2.

XLV. This prodigious Deluge of Wa-
ters was mainly occaſion'd by a moſt extra-
ordinary and violent Rain, for the ſpace of
forty Days, and as many Nights, without
ince2miſſion.

Yet ſeven days, and I will cauſe it to rain upen the
earth forty days and forty nights.

The windows of heawten were opened, and the rain
was upon the Earth forty days and forty nights.

Hnd the flood was forty days upon 4 earth,

XLVI. This vaſt quantity of Waters
was not deriv'd from the Earth or Seas, as
Rains conſtantly now are ; but from ſome
other Superior and Ccleſtial Original.

This is evident, Becauſe (1.) the Anted:luwvian
Air (as was before prov'd ) never retain'd great
quantities of Vapours, or ſuſtained any Clouds
capable of producing ſuch conſiderable, and fo
laſting Rains, as this molt certainly was. (2.) The
quantity of Waters on the Antedilwvian Earth,
where there was no Occan, (as we ſaw juſt now)
was very ſmall in compariſon of that at preſent,
and {o could contribute very little towards the
Deluge. (3.) If the quantity of Waters on the Face
of the Earth had then been as great as now, and
had all been elevated into Vapours, and deſcended
on the Dry-land alone, ic were much too ſmall to
cauſe ſuch a Deluge as this was. (4.) Bur becauſe,
if the Waters were all rais'd into Vapours, and
deſcended in Rain, they muſt either fall upon,
or run down into the Ocean, the Seas, -and thoſe

Declivities


Chap. 4 PHENOMENA.


Declivities they were in beforz, they could _
take up and polleſs their old places; and fo
could not contribute a jot to that ſtanding and

rmanent Maſs of Waters which cover d the
Earth at the Deluge. (5.) The Expretlion us'd
by the Sacred Hiſtorian , that the Windows,
Flood-gates, or Cataratts of Heaven were open d
at the fall, and ſhut at the ceaſing of theſe Waters,
very naturally agrees to this Superior and Cule-
ſtial Original.

XLVII. This vaſt fall of Waters, or for-
ty Days rain, began on the fifth day of the
Week, or Thurſday the twenty (eventh day
of November, being the ſeventeenth day of
the ſecond Month trom the Autumnal Equi-
nox ; (correſponding this Year 1696. to the
twenty eighth day of Ooter.) |

In the ſix hundredth year of Noah's life, in the [e-
cond memth, the ſeventeenth day of the month, the
windows of heaven were opened , and the rain was
upon the earth forty days and forty night

Thus Abydenzs and Beroſus ſay it began on the
fifteenth day of Dwſis, the ſecond Month from
the Vernal Equinox ; which, if the miſtake, ariſing
'tis probable from the ignorance of the change

in the beginning of the Year at the Exodw out
| of Egypr, be but corrected, is within a day or
-two agreeable to the Narration of Mo/cs, and fo
exceedingly confirms the ſame.


XLVIII. The other main cauſe of the
Deluge, was the breaking up the Fountains
of the great Aby/s, or the cauſing ſuch
Chaps and Filſures in the upper Earth, as
might permit the Waters containd in the
Bowels of it wheg violently prels'd and
{queez'd


139


Gen. vii.
IT.

And viit.
2,


Gen. vit,


It,


Langius de
anni Chri»


ft, p. 255»


PHANOMENA. Booklll,


ſqueez'd upwards to aſcend, and ſo add to
the quantity of thoſe which the Rains pro-
duced.

All the fountains of the great deep were broken up.

The ſea brake forth, as if it had iſſued ont of the
WwWomy,

XLIX. All theſe Fountains of the great
Deep were broken up on the very firſt day
of the Deluge, or the very firſt day when


'i.he Rains began.


In the fix hundredth year of Noah's life, in the ſe-
cond month, the ſeventeenth day of the month , the
ſame day were all the fountams of the great deey
broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened.


L. Yet the very ſameday, Noah, his Family,
and all the Animals entred into the Ark.

In the ſelf-/ame day 5 laſt mention'd 5 entred
Noah, and Shem, and Ham, and Japheth, the
ſons of Noah, and Noah's wife, and the three wives
of his ſons with them into the ark : They, and every
beaſt after bis kind, and all the cattel after their kind,
and every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth
after bis kind, and eviry fowl after bis kind, every
bird of every (ot.

LI. Tho? the firſt and moſt violent Rains
continued without intermiſſion but forty
days, yet after ſome time the Rains began
again, and ceaſed not till the ſeventeenth
day ot the ſeventh Month, or a hundred
and fifty days after che Deluge began.

This 15 very probably gather'd from the migh-
ty increaſe of the Waters, even after the firſt
forty days Rain were over; and from the expreſs
fxing of the ſtoppage of the Rains to the laſt day
here athgned,

The


Chap. 4. P HANOMEN 4.


And the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the
Earth.


91


The Waters prevailed, and were increaſed preatly. Gen. vii.


8.
Verſe 19.


The waters prevailed (or were increaſed) njon Verſe 24.


the Earth an bundred and fifty days. Hnd Ged re
membred Noah, and every Irving thing, and all the


Cattel that was with him in the Ark : And God Cap. viii,
made a wind to paſs over the Earth, and the waters 1, 2


aſſwaged. The fountains allo of the deep, and the
windows of heaven were ſtopped ; and the ram from
beaven was reſtramed.


LII. This ſecond, and leſs remarkable
Rain was deriv'd from ſuch a caule as the


former was.

This Propoſition is (1.) Very fair and pro-
bable in it felf. (2.) Gives an account of the
augmentation of the Waters by their fall, when
had they been only exhaled and ler fall again,
as our Rains now are, they would have added
nothing thereto. (3.) Is exaatly agreeable to
the expreſſions in Moſes ; who ſays the Windows
of Heaven which were vpen'd at the n_ of
the firſt, were not ſhut or fopped till the end of
this ſecond Rain ; thereby plainly deriving this


latter, as well as the former, from a Superiour -


and Celeſtial original. The fountams \ the deep Cen. viii.
b


and the windows of heaven were ſtoppe
rain from heaven was reſtrained.

LIII. Tho' the fountains of the great
deep were broken up, and the forty days
Rain began ar the ſame time, yet is there
a very oblervable mention of a threefold
growth, or diſtinct augmentation of the
Waters; as if it were on three leveral ac-


counts, and at three ſeveral times.
| The


and the 2.


192


| Cen. Vil.
| 17.


Verſe 18.
Vcrſe 19.


Gen.vi.rs.


Biſhop
Crmverse
land's
Weights
and Mea-
ſures, p.
3+


PHANOMENA. Booklll,


The flood was forty days upon the earth, and the
waters mcreaſed, and bare up the ark, and it was
lift up above the earth.

nd the waters prevailed, and were increaſed
greatly, and the ark went upon the face of the
waters.

And the waters prevailed exceedingly npon the
earth, and all rhe high hills that were under the whole
heaven were cover'd.

LLV. The Waters of the Deluge increas'd
by degrees rill their utmoſt height; and
then decreas'd by degrees till they were
clearly gone off the face of the earth.

This is evident from theintire ſeries and courſe
of the Mo/aick Hiſtory, in the ſeventh and eighth
chapters of Geneſis.

LV. The Waters of the Deluge were
Still, Calm, free from Commotions, Storms,
Winds, and Tempeſts of all forts, during
the whole time in which the Ark was afloar
upon them.

This is evident from the impoſlibility of the
Ark's abiding a Stormy Sea, conſidering the vaſt
bulk, and particular figure of it. For ſince it
was three hundred Cubits long, fifty Cubits
broad, and thirty Cubirts high : Which 1s, ac-
cording to the moſt accurate determination of
the Cubits length, by the Right Reverend the
Lord Biſhop of. Pererborovgh, above five hundred
and forty ſeven Engliſh Gor long, above ninety
one feet broad, and near fifty five feet high :
And lince withal it appears to have been of the
figure of a Cheſt, without ſuch a peculiar bot-
com, and proportion of parts, as our great Ships
are contrived with ; 'tis evident, and will be al-
low'd by Perſons $kill'd in Navigation , that
"rwas


Chap. 4. PH &NOMEN A. 193


'twas not capable of enduring a Stormy Sea. It
muſt, whenever either the Ridges or Hollows of
vaſt Waves were fo ſituate, that it lay over-crols
the one or the other, have had ics back broken,
and it ſelf muſt have bcen ſhatter'd to pieces;
which having not happen'd , 'tis a certain evi-
dence of a calm Sea during the wliole time it was
afloar.

L'VI: Yet during the Deluge there were
both Winds and Storms of all forts in a
very violent manner.

God made a wind t6 paſs over the earth, and the Gen.vii.t,
waters aſſwaged.

Thou ceveredſt the earth with the deep, as with a Palm civ.
garment , the waters ſtood aboye the mountains. At $,7, 9.
thy rebuke they fled; at the woice of thy thunder they
haſted away. They go up by the mountams ; they go ,., py.
down by the allies unto the place which thou haſt #= mn + deſerip=

mted for them. tionem Di-

LVIE. - This Deluge of Waters was unt- #*% 4944
verſal in its extent and effe& ; reaching to poegruryre
all the parts of the Earth , and deſtroying 235.
all rhe Land-animals on the intire Surface
thereof ; thoſe only excepted which were
with Noab in the Ark:

The following Texts, efpecially if compar'd

with the thirty third foregoing Phenomenon, and Eſa, Pref.
added to Dr. Weodward's Obſervations atteſti m—_—
the ſame thing, will put this Aſfertion —— Via. Th.
rational Exception. | | L 1. & 3;

God looked upon the earth, and bebold it was tor- Gen. vi.
rupt ; for all fleſb bad corrupted his way the earth. 13
And God ſaid unto Noah , The end of all fleſh is come
before me: , AY |

| Behold, I, even I do bring a waters upon Verſe t+,
the earth, to deſtroy all fle yen 4 the breath of
lifes


194


_ Chap. vii.


4-

Verſe 19,
29, 21,
22, 23.


Vid. Vas
ren. Geog.
P. Go.
Gen. vit.
19, 20,


Vid. Hy-
poth. 8.


prius.


PHANOMENA. Book lII.


life from under heaven: and every thing that is in the
earth ſhall dye. :

Every living ſubf! ance that I bave made , will 1
deftroy from off the face of the earth.

All the high hills that were under the whole heaven
were covered. »»——= And all fleſb died that moved
wpon the earth, both of fowl, awd: of cattel, and of
beaſt, and of every creeping thing that creepeth upan
the earth, and every man. All. wr whoſe noſtrils was
the breath of life 3 all that was' im the dry land died.
find every living ſubſtance. was deſtroged which was
upon the face of the ground, both man, and catte!,
and the creeping thing, and the fowl of the beaver,
and they were deſtroyed from the earth; and Noah:
only remain'd alive, and they that were with bim m
the Ark. |

LVIIT. The Waters at .their utmoſt
height were fitteen Cubits above the higheſt
Mountains, or three Miles at the leaſt per-
pendicular above the common Stirtace of the
Plains and Seas. ;

All the high hills under the 32bole. heaven were 'c6-
ver'd. Fifteen eubits upwards 4d the waters prevail,
and the mountains were cover d. {14

LIX. Whatever be the , height of the
Mountain Cauca/as, whereon the 474 reſted
Now ; it was at that time the higheſt in the
whole World. &V, oo

This is evident from whar has 'been already
obſerv'd, That tho' the utnioſt heighe of tle
Waters were fifreen Cubics*above "the highelt
Mountains,- and ſo many hundreds, nay, chou-
ſands above the moſt of them; 'yet, did the
Ark reſt on the very firſt day on which the Waters
began to diminiſh, more than two Months be-


fore the emerging of the tops of the other
Mountains;


Chap. 4. PHENOMEN 4


Mountains; As is evident from the Texts fol-
lowing.

"The waters prevailed upon the earth (from the ſe-
veſiteenth day of the ſecond, to the ſev enteenth
day of the ſeventh month) an hundred : and fifty days.
And God remembred Noah, and all the cattel that
was with him im the Ark; and God made a wind to


paſs over the earth , and the waters aſſwaged. The


fountams alſo» of the deep, and the windows of be awvau
were ſtopped, and the rain from beawen was reſtrain-
ed, find the waters re! turned from off the earth cont
muaily, and after the end of the hundred and fifty aays
the wr were abated. ind the Ark reſte [ mm the
ſeventh month, on the ſeventeenth day ofthe month,ufon
the mountains of Ararat. wind the waters decrea/ed
continually until the tenth month : m the tenth month,
on the firſt day oj the month z were the rops 0 the
mountains /een.

LX. As the Fountains of the great Deep
were broken up at the very ſame time that
the firſt Rains began, ſo were they itopp'd
the very ſame time that the laſt Rains end-


ed; on the ſeventeenth day of the ſeventh
Month.


The fountains al'o of the ceep, and the windows of


heaven were ſtopped, and the rain from heaven was
reſtr aimed.


. LEXL. The abatement and decreale of the
Waters of the Deluge was firſt by a Wind
which dried up ſome. And ſecondly, by
their deſcent through hole Fiſſures, C haps,


and Breaches, (at which part of them had.


beſore aſcended ) into the Bowels of the
Earth, which received the reſt. To which
latter allo the Wind, by hurrying the Wa-

Ti ters


Y


Gen. vii,
ule (with
verſe 11.)
Chap. viii.
I, 2,3, +4
9.


Gen. vii.


%
—%s


196


Cen. viii.
I.


Verſe 3.
Job


xxxVii. 8,
10,11,


Pſilm cv.


PH ANOMENA. Book Ilt.


ters up and down, and ſo promoting their
lighting into the beforemention'd Fiſlures ,


was very much ſubſervient.

God made a wind to paſs over the earth, and the
waters aſſwaged,

The waters returned from off the earth continually,
or going and returning.

Who ſhut up the ſea with doors, when it brake forth
as if it bad iſſued out of the womb? IWhen I
brake up for it my decreed place, and ſet bars and
doors, and ſaid, Hitherto ſhalt thou come, but 10 fut-
ther ; and here ſhall thy proud wares be ſtayed.

Theu coveredſt the earth with the deep, as with a


6,7,8,9. garment : the waters ſtood above the mountains. At


thy rebuke they fled: at the woice of thy thunder they
baſted away. They went up by the mountains : they
went down by the wallies unto the place which thow
hadſt appointed for them. Thou haſt ſet a bound that
they may not paſs, that they turn not again to cover
the earth. |

LXIL The dry Land, or habitable Part
of the Globe, is ſince the Deluge divided
into two valt Coxtinents, almoſt oppolite to
one anorher, and ſeparated by a great Ocean
interpos'd between them,

This every 'Map of the Earth is a ſufficient
proof of. |

LXIII. One of theſe Continents is conli-
derably larger than the other.

This is evident the ſame way with the for-
mer.

LXIV. The larger Continent lies moſt
part on the North-ſid2 of the Equator, and
the ſmaller molt part on the South,


This


Chap. 4, PHENOMENA.


This (if we take Sourb- America, the moſt con-
ſiderable and intire Branch of the whole, for the
Continent here referr'd to, as 'tis reaſonable to
do) is alſo evident the ſame way with the for-
mer. Y

LXV. The Middle or Center of the
North-Contizent is about ſixteen or eighteen
degrees of Northern Latitude ; and that of
the $:uth about ſixteen or eighteen degrees
of Southern Latitude.

This may ſoon be found by meaſuring the
Boundaries of the ſeveral Continents on a Globe
or Map, and obſerving the Poſition of their
Centers.


LXVI. The diſtance between the Conr:-
nents, meaſuring from the larger or Nor-
th:rn South-Eaſtward, is greater than that
the cantrary way, or South Weſtward.

This is evident by tae like means with the
former : Ir being farther from China, or the
Eaſt-Indies to America going forward South-Eaſt ,
than from Europe Or fifrica going thither South-
Weſt.

LXVIL Neither of the Continents is ter-
manated by a round or even circular Cir-
cumference, but mighty Creeks, Bays, and
Seas running into them; and as mighty
Peninſula's, Promontories, and Rocks jet-
ting out from them, render the whole very
unequal and irregular.

This none who ever faw a Globe or Map of
the World can be ignorant of.


EXVIII. The depth of that Ocean which


ſeparates theſe two Cortinents is uſually
Y 3 greateit


198


PHANOMENA. BookllI.


greateſt fartheſt from, and leaſt neareſt to
cither of the ſame Continents ; there being
a gradual deſcent from the Continents to the
middle of the Ocean, which is the deepeſt
of all.

This is a Propoſition very well-known in Na-
vigation; and in ſeveral Sea-Charr; relating there-
to, may eaſily be obſerv'd.

LXIX. The greateſt part of the I/lands
of the Globe are ſituate at ſmall diſtances
from the Edges of the great Continents ;
very few appearing near the middle of the
main Ocean.

This the bare Inſpection into a Map or Globe
of the World will ſoon give ſatisfaction in.

LXX. The Apes of Men decreas'd a-
bout one half preſently after the Deluge ;
and in the ſucceeding eight hundred or nine
hundred Years were gradually reduced to
jo ſtandard at which they have ſtood ever

INCE,


"this


Chap. 4+ PHANOMENA.


199
This the following Tables will eaſily evince.
Ages of the Antediluv.- , Ages of the Poſt diluoians
ans in their Years. in the preſent Years.
Adam w— 0 | Noah 950 Gen.v.r1.
Seth womnm—_———— 12 | Sem- =— 600 and xxv.7.
Enos -— 905 | Arphaxad—-—— —438 and en"
Cainan —— 910 | Salab- — 4 2 x of
Mabalaleel - --=$95 Heber - —— ——- — 464 and L. 26.
Fared- — 962 | Phaleg-———— 239
Enoch (tranſlated )--365 | Rey —— ——239
Methuſelah-<—— —969 | Serug — —— —239
Lamech — = = —-7 77 þ Nabor — 4
Noah — 950 | Terab- —
Sem — bc } Abram 17;
Vaac ———— ——— 1
Facch —— — 147
Joſeph — 110
The days of our years are threeſcore years and ten; pl, ...
and if by reaſon of ſtrength they be fourſcore years, yet 16,
xs their ſtrength labour and ſorrow :* for it is /con cut
off, and we fly away. In the Days of Moſes.
LXXI. Our upper Earth, for a conſide-
rable depth, even as far as we commonly
penetrate into it, is Fadtitionus, or newly ac-
quir'd at the Deluge: The ancient one ha-
ving been covered by freſh S:ratz or Layers
of Earth at that time, and thereby ſpoil'd
or deſtroy'd as to the ule and advantage of
Mankind.
I will deſtroy them with the Earth. Geri. vi.


Neither ſhall there any more be a flood, &rapRilent, 13.


ro deſtroy, Corrupt, or ſpoil the Earth. and ix,
of This ?*


200


PHENOMENA. Book Ill,


This is moreover evident by the vaſt numbers
of the Shells of Fiſh, Bones of Animals, Intire
or Partial Vegetables, buried at the Deluge, and ,
Incloſed in the Bowels of the preſent © Earth,
and of its moſt ſolid and compacted Bodies, to
be commonly ſeen at this day. Whoſe truth
is atteſted not only by very many occaſional re-
marks of others, but more eſpecially by the
careful and numerous Obſervations of an Eye-
witneſs, the Learned Dr. Woodwerd., *Tis true,
this excellent Author was forc'd to imagine,
and accordingly to aflert, That the Ancient
Earth was diflolv'd at the Deluge, and all its
parts ſeparated from one another ;z and ſo the
whole, thus diſſolv'd and ſeparate, taken up in-
to the Waters which then cover'd the Earth ;
till at laſt they together ſetled downward, and
with the fore-mentioned Shells, Bones, and Ve-
getables, incloſed among the reſt of the Maſs,
compos'd again that Earth on which we now
live. But this Hypotheſis is ſo ſtrange, - and ſo mi-
raculous in all it: parts ; 'tis ſo wholly different
from the natural Series of the Meſaick Hiſtory
of the Deluge ; takes ſo little notice of the forty
days rain, the principal cauſe thereof ; is ſo con-
trary to the Univerſal Law of mutual AttraQti-
on, and the ſpecifick gravities of Bodies; ac-
counts for fo few of the before-mention'd Phe-
»omena of the Deluge ; fixes the time of the year
for its commencing ſo different from the truth ;
implies fuch a fort of new Formation or Crea-
tion of the Earth at the Deluge, without war-


rant for the ſame; is in ſome things ſo little


conſiſtent with the Meſaick Relation, and the
PLenomena of nature; and upon the whole is
ſo much more than his Obſervations require,
that I cannot bur diſſent from this particular Hj-
TY” | | I potheſis,


Chap. 4. PHANOMENA.


Porbeſis, tho" I fo juſtly honour the Author, and
o highly eſteem, and frequently refer to
the Work it ſelf. All that I ſhall ſay farther is
this, That the Phenomena of the interior Earth,
by this Zuthor ſo exaftly obſerv'd, are on the
common grounds or notions of the Deluge,
(which ſuppoſe the Waters to. have been pure,
without any other mixtures) ſo unaccountable,
and yet fo remarkable and evident, that if no
other rational ſolution could be offer'd, 'ewere
but juſt and neceſſary to admit whatever is al-
ſerted by this Author, rather than deny the reality
mains of the Animal and Vegetable Kingdom
to the ſportings of Nature, or any ſuch odd and
Chimerical occaſions, as ſome perſons are incli-
nable to do. But withal, I muſt be allow'd to
lay, and the Author himſelf will not diſagree,
That” his m—__ includes things ſo ſtrange,
wonderful, and ſurprizing, that nothing bur the
utmoſt neceflity, and the perfe& unaccountable-
neſs of the Phenomena without it, ought to be
eſteem'd ſufficient to juſtifie the belief and in-
troduction of it. Which ſtraits that account of
the Deluge we are now upon, not forcing me
into, as will appear wakes I have, I think,
but juſt reaſons for my disbelief thereof, and as
juſt, or rather the ſame reaſon to embrace that
Aſlertion we are now upon, That this upper
Earth, as far as any Shells, Bones, or Vegetables
are found therein, was adwvertitions, and newly
acquir'd at the Deluge, and not only the old
one diſloly'd, and reſorted in its ancient place
again. ;
* LXXII. This FaTitions Cruſt is univer-
fal, upon the Tops of the generality of
| Mountains,


Eſſay, p.
$2.


Eſſay, ps,


} #*


Pref, and
Pp. 74.


P. 75, 76, .


PHANOMENA. Booklll,


Mountains, as well as in the Plains and
Valleys; and that in all the known Climates
and Regions of the World, ..

This 1s fully atteſted by the Obſervations of
the ſame Author, and thoſe which he procur'd
from all parts of the World conſpiring together.

LXXIIT. The Parts of the preſent up-
per &Srrata were, at the time of the Wa-
ters covering the Earth, looſe, ſeparate, di-
vided, and floated in the Waters among
one another uncertainly,

— This isproved by the ſame Author's Obſerva-
tions.

LXXIV. All this Heterogeneous Mals,
thus floating in the Waters, by degrees de-
{cended downwards, and ſubſided to the
bottom, pretty nearly, according to the
Law of Specifick Gravity ; and there com-
pos'd thoſe ſeveral Srrata or Layers, of
which our preſent upper Earth does conſiſt,

This is prov'd by the ſame Obſervations.

LXXV. Vaſt multitudes of Fiſhes, be-
longing both to the Seas and Rivers, pe-
riſh'd at the Deluge ; and their Shells were
buried among the other Bodies or Maſſes
which ſubſided down, and compos'd the
Layers of our upper Earth

This is prov'd by the ſame Obſervations.

LXXVI., "The ſame Law of Specifick
Gravity which was obſerv'd in the reſt of
the Maſs, was allo oblerv'd in the ſubſi-
dence of the Shells of Fiſhes; they then
ſinking together with, and accordingly be-
ing


Chap. 44 P HAENOMENA.


ing.now found enclos'd among thole Strata
or Bodies which are nearly of their own
ſeveral Specifick Gravitics : The heavier
Shells being conſequently {till enclogd a-
mong the heavier Srratz, and the lighter
Shells among the lighter Srrata, in the
Bowels of our preſcar Earth.
This is prov'd by the fame Obſervations.


LXXVII., The Strata of Marble, of Stone,
and of all other ſolid Bodies, attained their
ſolidity as ſoon as the San, or' other matter
whereof they conſiſt, was arriv'd at the
bottom, and well fſetled there, And all
thole Strats which are ſolid at this day,
have been ſo ever lince that time.

This'isprov'd by the ſame Obſervations.


LXXVIII. Theſe Strata of Stone, of
Chalk, of Cole, of Earth, or whatever mat-
ter they conlitted of, lying thus each upon
other, appear now as if they had at firſt
been parallel, continued, and not interrup-
ted : But as if, after ſome time they had
been diſlocated and broken on all ſides of the
Globe, had been clevared in ſome, and de-
prels'd in other places ; from whence the
fiſſures and breaches, the Caverns and Grot-
to's, with many other irregularites within
and upon our preſent. Earth, ſeem to be
deriv'd.

This is prov'd by the ſame Obſervations.

LXXIX. Great numbers of Trees, and
of other Vegetables were alſo, at this ſubſi-
dence of the Maſs aforeſaid, buried in the

Bowecls


203


F. 795, 76,


P. 29, 8,


204 PHANOMENA. Booklll.


Bowels of the Earth: And ſuch very often
as will not grow, in the places where they
are m_-_ Many of which are pretty in-
tire and perfeft, and to be diſtintly ſeen
and conſider'd to this very day.

P.77, 78. This is prov'd by the ſame Obſervations.

"Ru LXXX. It, appezrs from all the tokens
and circumſtances which are ſtill obſervable
about them, That all theſe Vegetables were
torn away from their ancient Seats in the
Spring time, in or about the Month of
May.

P. 274, This is prov'd by the ſame Obſervations.

275. LXXXl. All the Mzrals and Minerals
among the Strata of our upper Earth owe
their preſent frame and order to the Deluge ;
being repoled therein during the time of the
Waters covering the Earth, or during the
ſubſidence of the before-mention'd Maſs.

P. 179, This is prov'd by the ſame Obſervations.

480, LYEXXII. Thele Metals and Minerals
appear difterently in the Earth, according
to the different manner of their firſt lodg-
ment : For ſometimes they are 1n looſe and
ſmall Particles, uncertainly inclos'd among
ſuch Maſſes as they chanc'd to fall down
withal; At other times ſome of their Cor-
puſcles happening to occur and meet toge-

ther, aftix'd to each other ; and ſeveral conve-
ning, uniting, and combining into one Mals,
form'd thole Merallick and Mineral Balls or
Nodules which are now found in the Earth :
And according as the Corpulcles chanc'd

ta


a


Chap. 4. P HANOMEN A.


to be all of a kind or otherwiſe, ſo the
Maſſes were more or leſs ſimple, pure, and
homogeneous. And according as other Bq-
dies, Bones, Teeth, Shells of Fiſh, -or the
like happen'd to come in their way, theſe
Metallick and Mineral Corpuſcles affix'd to
and became conjoin'd with them ; either
within, where it was poſlible, in their hol-
lows and interſtices ; or without, on their
ſurface and outſides, filling the one, or co-
vering the other : And all this in different


degrees and proportions, according to the,


ooo circumitances of each individual
caſe.

All this is prov'd by the ſame Obfervations.

LXXXIII. The inward parts of the pre-
ſent Earth are»very irregular and confuſed.
One Region is chiefly Sony, another Sandy,
a third Gravely, One Country contains
ſome certain kinds of Metals or Minerals,
another quite different ones, Nay the
ſame lump or maſs of Earth not ſeldom
contains the Corpuſcles of ſeveral Metals
or Minerals, confuledly intermix'd with
one another, and with its own Earthy
parts. All which irregularities, with fe-
veral others that might be obſerv'd, even
contrary to the Law of \ Specifick Gravity
in the placing of che different Srata of the
Earth, demonſtrate the Original Fuz4d or
Promptuary of all this upper FaQtitious Earth
to-have been in a very Wild, Confus'd and


Chaotick condition,
All


205


P. 179,
&c.


206


Flay, pal
ſim & p.

I 79, CC.
Varen.
Geog. |. 1.
C. 7. prop.
7.


Cen. 11 10,
Il,12,13,
I4.


Gen 11.10,
11,12.12,
14 Ezek.
XX. 17,
ApoCc, xxi,
18,19,20.
with xxii,
2.


PHANOMENA. Book [[T,


All this the fore-mention'd, and all other Ob-
ſervations of the like- nature fully prove.

LXXXIV. The Uppermolt and Lighteſt
Stratum of Soil or Garden Mold, as*tis call'd
which is the proper Seminary of the Vege-
table Kingdom; 1s ſince the Deluge very
thick ſpread uſually in the Valleys and
Plains, but very thin on the Ridges or Tops
of Mountains : Which laſt for want there-
of are frequently Stony, Rocky, Bare and
Barren,

This, eaſie Obſervations of the ſurface of the
Farth in difterent places will quickly faristic
us of.

LXXXV, Of the four Ancient Rivers
of Paradiſe two ſtill remain, in ſome mea-
ſure ; but the other two do not ; or atleaſt
are ſo chang'd, that the Moſarch Deſcrip-
tion docs not agree tothe at preſent.

This the multitude of unſatisfactory attempts
to diſcover all theſe Rivers, and their pre 2p
with an impartial compariſon of the Sacred Hi-
ſtory with the beſt Geographical deſcriptions of
the Regions about Babjion, will eafily convince
an unbyafſs'd Perſon of.

LXXXVI. Thoſe Metals and Minerals
which the Mo/aick deſcription of Paradiſe,
and its bordering Regions rakes ſuch par-
ticular notice of, and the Prophets fo em-
pharically refer to, are not now met with
ſo plencitully therein.

This muſt be | allow'd on the ſame grounds
with the former.

LXXXVII. This Deluge of Waters was
a


Chap. 4: PHANOMEN J.


a ſignal Inſtance of the Divine Vengeance
on a Wicked World; and was the effect
of the Peculiar and Extraordinary Provi-
dence of God. |

God ſaw that the wickedneſs of man was great
inthe earth, and that every imagimation of the thoughts
of bis heart was only evil continually. And it repent-
ed the Lord that he had made man on the Earth,
and i! grieves bim at his beart. And the Lord [aid,
I will deſtroy men whom I bawve created from the face
of the earth ; both man, ana beaſt, and the creepiry
thing, and the fowls of the air; for ut repenteth me
that I bawe made them.

The earth was corru2t belore God, and the earth
2'as filled with 4 lence, and God luwked Hpeu the
earth, and behold it was corrupt 5 for all fleſh bad
corrupted bay way upon the Larth. ind God aid
unto Noab, the end of all fliſh is come before me, for
the earth is filled with wivlence through them 5 and le-
bold I will deſtroy them, with the earih.

Bebold I, even I; do bring a flood of wats upon
the earth, to deffroy all fleſh wherem is the breath 0
life from under beaten; aud every thing that 1s mm
the earth ſhall aye.

God ſpared no! the ol world, but {awed Noah,
the eighth perion, 4a preacher of right ecu ue ; 3 DY 1117 =
ing m the flood pon the world of the ungod!y, ,

LXXXVIII. Tho' the Moo» might per-
haps undergo ſome ſuch changes at the De-
luge as the Earth did, yer that Face or H--
miſphere which is towards the Earth, and
which 1s alone expos'd to our view, has
not acquird any ſuch grols Armoſph-re, or
Clouds, as our Earth has now abut it, and
which are here luppos'd to have becn ac.
quir'd at the Deluge.

This


dS


Gen, vi. 5,


=
3 4%


. Ver. 17.


+ Pet. i1.<.


203


Gen. vii.


Eſky, par.
I, & Fd


PHANOMENA. BookllI.


This the preſent figure, and large diviſions of
Sea and Land viſible inthe Moon, with her con-
tinued and uninterrupted brightneſs, and the ap-
pearance of the ſame Spots, (without the inter- |
poſition of Clouds or Exhalations) perpetually,
do ſufficiently evince. |

LXXXIX. Since the Deluge there nei-
ther has been, nor will be, any great and
general Changes in the ſtate of the World,
till that time when a Period 1s to be put to
the preſent Courſe of Nature.

The Lord ſmelled a ſweet ſawour, and the Lord
ſaid in his heart, 1 will not again curſe the ground
any more for man's ſake ; for (or altho') the ima-
gination of man's heart is evil from his youth : Nei-
ther will I again (mite any more every thing Irving
as I have done, While the Earth remaineth, ſeed-time
and barweſt, and cold and heat, and Summer ani
winter, and day and night ſhall not ceaſe.

And this as to the time paſt is abundantly con-
firm'd by all the Ancient Hiſtory and Geogra-
phy compar'd with the Modern ; as is in ſove.
ral particulars well obſerv'd by Dr. Woodward,
againſt the groundleſs opinions of ſome others
to the contrary,


Chap. 5, PHANOMENA.


CHAP. V.


Phenomena relating to the General Con-
flagration. With Conjetures pertain»
mg to the ſame, and to the ſucceeding
period till the (onſummation of all
things.


RC. A*® the World otice periſhed by
Water, ſo it muſt by Fire at the
Concluſion of its preſent State,
The heavens and the earth which are now, by the
word of God, are kept in ſtore, reſerved unto fire,


againſt the day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly
”


en.

The heavens ſhall paſs away with a great noiſe,
and the elements ſhall melt with fervent beat ; The
earth alſo, and the works that are therein, ſhall be
burnt up.

In the day of God the heavens, being on fire, ſhall
be diſſobved, and the elements ſhall melt with fervent
heat, |

But this is fo fully atteſted by the unanimous
conſent of Sacred and Prophane Authority, that
I ſhall omit other particular Quotations ; and


only refer the Reader where h2 may have more |


ample ſatisfaction.


SCHOLIU AM.


Havzge proceeded thus far upon more certain
Mins and generally allow'd Teſtimonies, as
to che .molt of the foregoing Phenomena; I

X might


269


2 Petit. 7,
Verſe to,


Verſe 12,


C.13.
Theor 1.3.
© 3.


PHANOMEN A. Book II, *


might here break off, and leave the following
Conjetures to the- ſame ſtate of Uncertainty
they have hitherto been in. Burt being willing
to comply with the Title, and take in all the

reat and general Changes from firſt to laſt ;
— the primigenial Chaos, to the Conſumma-
rion of all things : Being alſo loth to deſert my
Peftulztum, and omit the account of thoſe things
which were moſt exactly agreeable to rhe Obvious
and Literal ſenſe of Scripture, and fully conſo-
nant to Reaſon and Philoſophy : Being, laſtly,
willing however to demonſtrate, that tho* theſe
moſt remote and difficult Texts be taken accord-
ing to_ the greateſt ſtritneſs of the Letter, yer
do they contain nothing but what is pothible,
credible , and rationally accountable from the
moſt undoubred Principles of Philoſophy : On
all cheſe accounts I ſhall venture co enumerate,
and afterward to account for the following Coz-
jefures, In which I do not pretend to be Dog-
matical and Poſitive; nay, nor to declare any
firm belief of - the ſame, W ſhall only propoſe
them as Conjettwres, and leave them to the free
and impartial conſideration of the Reader.

XCI. The ſame Cauſes which will ſet
the World on Fire, will alſo cauſe great
and dreadful Tides in the Seas, and inthe
Ocean; With no leſs Agitations, Concuſlions,
and Earthquakes in the Arr and Earth,


Mat. xxivv The Powers of Heaven ſhall be ſhaken.


554d ah The Lord ſhall roar out of Stom,. and utter bis wcice
__ uw” from Teruſalem, and the beavens and the earth ſha!
. 7 *
bake. :


Luk. xxi. The ſea and the waves rearing : Mans hggrts fail.
25, 26, ing them for fear, and for lokmg after thife things


Vid. which are coming on the Earth; for the powers of
Theor.l.;. we 0 Ca.
= 1's, bewyen ſhail /C ſhake. SCIE


Chap. 5. PHANOMEN A.


XCII. The mtmoſphere of the Earth, be-
fore the Conflagration begin, will be op-
preſs'd with Meteors, Exhalations,and Steams;
and thelc in ſo dreadful a manner, in fuch
prodigious quantities, and with ſuch wild
confuſed Motions andgd gitations, That the
$un and Mon will have the moſt frightful
and hideous countenances, and their antient
ſplendour will be intirely obſcur'd ; The
Stars will ſeem to fall from Heaven ; an
all manner of Horrid Repreſentations wil
terrihe the Inhabitants of the Earth.

I will
earth ; blood, and fire, and pillars of ſmoke. The
ſun ſhall be turned into darkneſs, and the moon into
blood, before the great and terrible day of the Lord
come.

The ſun ſhall be darkened, and the Aſcon ſhall not


211


ſhew wonders in the heavens and in the Joelii. 35;
31.


Mat xx19,


give ber light, and the ſtars ſhall fall from heawen, 29-


and the powers of heaven ſhall be ſhaken.

There ſhall be ſigns in the ſun, and in the moon,
and in the ſtars, and upon the Earth diſtreſs of Ne-
tons, with perplexity : — Mens hearts failing them
for fear, and for looking after thoſe things which are
commg on the earth,

XCIII. The Deluge and Conflazration are
referr'd, by ancient Tradition, to great Con-
junctions of the Heavenly Bodies; as
both depending on, and happening at the
ſame. | |

Thus Seneca expreſly: Beroſns (ſays he) who
was an Expoſitor of Belus, affirms, That theſe Rewolu-
tions depend on the Courſe of the Stars; mſomuch that
be doubts nct to afſiqn the werv times of a Conflagr=
tion, and a Deluge : That firſ® mention'd when all

X 2 the


Luk. xx1,
24, 26(


Theor. I.


LS:4


PHANOMEN A. Book III,


the Stars, which have now ſo different Courſes, ſhall
be in Conjunttion in Cancer ; All of them being (0
direttly fituate with reſpett to one 'another, that the
ſame right lme will paſs throwgh them all together :
That laſt mention'd when the ſame company of Star,
ſhall be in conjunttion in the oppoſite ſign Capri-
COIN.

XCIV. The ſack between the Deluge


and the Conflagration, or between the an-


_ cient ſtate of the Earth, and its Purgation


by Fire, Renovation, and Reſtitution again,
is, from ancient Tradition, defin'd and ter-
minated by a cermin great and: remarkable
year, Or Annual Revolutionof ſome of the
Heavenly Bodies: And is in probability what
the Ancients ſo often refer'd to, pretended
particularly to determine, and ſtil'd The
Great or Platonick Year,

This year is exceeding famous in old Authors;
and not unreaſonably apply'd to this matter by
the Theoriff : Which it will better ſuit in 2h:
than it did in that Hypotheſis.

XCV. This general Coxflaoration is not
to extend to the intire dulolution or de.
ſtruftion of the Earth, but only to the Al.
reration, Melioration, and peculiar diſpo- '
ſition thereof into a new ſtate, proper to re-
ceive thoſe Saints and Martyrs for its Inha-
bicants, who are art the firſt Reſurretion
to enter, and to live and*reign a thouſand
years upon it, till the ſecond ReſurreQtion,
the general Judgmeat, and the final con-
ſummation of all things,


be


the elements ſhall melt with fervent heat.


Chap. 5, PHFNOMEN A.


Ne-


wertheleſs we, atcording to his promiſe, look for new
beavens, and a new earth, wherein dwelleth Riz h-
teouſne/s.

Behold, I create new heavens, and a new earth,
and the former ſhall nat be remembered nor ceme into


mind.


 Perily I ſay unto you, That Je which followed me,
m the regeneration, woentve Son of Man ual! ſit up411


the throne of his glory, ye alſo ſhall ſt en wide


thrones judging the twelve tribcs of Tacl


And


every one that hath forſaken houfes, or brethren, or


ſiſters, or father, or mether, &r wife, & chillrcr,


or lands for my names /ake, ſhall receive an bund;d


fold, now in this time, heuſes, and brethran, and
ſiſters, and mithers, and chiliren, and linds, with


(his preſent) per/ecutions, and mm the world to come
ternal life.


Of old thou baſt laid the foundations of the earth ;;


and the beawvens are the. work of thy hand : They
ſhall periſh, but thuu ſhalt endure 3 yea ell of them
ſhall wax old like a garment ; as a weſture ſhalt theu
change them, and they ſhall be changed.


I ſaw thrones, and they ſat upon them ; and judg-


[urrettion.


Chriſt ;


ment was given wito them: /ind T1 ſaw the Souls
of them that were bebeaded for the witneſs of Feſus,
and for the word of God, and which bad net wor-
ſhipped the beaſt, neither his tmage, nether had re-
ceived his mark upon their forebeads, or in their hands,
and they Iived and reigned with Chriſt a thouſand
years. But the reſt of the dead lived not again until
the thouſand years were finiſhed : This is the firſt ve-
Bleſſed and holy is he that hath part m


the foſt. reſurrettion; on [uch the ſecond death bath
mo power: But they ſhall be pri«ſts of God, and of
and ſhM!l reign with bum a 1!


3


or/and years &C.


But


21}
The Heavens being on fire ſhall be diſſolved, and 2 Per. iii,


I =
I2,13.


If. 1x1


« 4


Mir. XiX.


28, 29.


Mir x 29,
35, Luke


xVini 29,


Zo.


PC. cit 25,
26.


Apcc xx,


4, KC.


214


Theor.1 4.


C. 2, 3,44
1 9+


Ads ii,
21,


ApoCc. xx1.
I.


PHANOMENA. Booklll,”


But ſo much has been faid on this head, to
omic others, by the Theoriſt , that I ſhall refer
the Reader thither, for the other Teſtimonies of
the Holy Scriptures, and the unanimous conſent
of the moſt Primitive Fathers : Both which he


at large, and to mqw—ed pr gy. (fome parti-
calars excepted) has inſiſted on. *


XCVI. The ſtate of Nature during the
Millennium will be very ditterent from that
at preſent, and more agreeable to the An-
tediluvian, Primitive, and Paradiſiacal ones.

Whom the beawens muſt receive until the time of
the reſtitution of all things, which God" hath ſpok
by the mouth of all his holy Prophets fince the Cd
began. See more in the Theory. Book 4. Chap.
9. and in the proofs of the former Propoſition.

XCVII. The Earth in the Mculexnium
will be without a Sea, or any large recep-
tacle fill'd with mighty collections and quan-
tities of Waters,

I ſaw a new heaven, and a new earth ; for the
firſ# beaven, and the firſt earth were paſſed away,
and there was no more ſea.

XCVIII. The Earth in the Millennium
will have no ſucceſſion of Light and Dark-
neſs, Day and Night; buc a perpetual
Day.

The gates of the new Jeruſalem ſhall not be ſhut
at all by day ; for there ſhall be no mgbt there.

And there ſhall be no night there.

XCIX. The ſtate of rhe Millennium will
not ſtand in need of, and ſo probably will be
without, the light and preſence of the Sun
and Moon,


And


Chap. 5. PHANOMEN A. 215


And the City had no need of the Sun, neither of the Apoc.xxi.
Moon to ſhine m it, 23,
And they need no candle, neither light of the ſun, Cap. xii.
C. At the concluſion of the Millennium, 5
the Final Judgement and Cormpummation of all
things, The Earth will deſert its preſent
Seat and Station in the World, and be no
longer found among the Planetary Chorus.
I ſaw a great white throne, ani him that ſat on it 5 Apoc. xx.
from whoſe face the earth and the' heavens fled away, 11.
and there was found no place for them. Theor.l 4.


BOOK IV.


VT  __ ——— —_— - ——


SOLUTIONS:
O R,


An Account of the foregoing Pheno»
mena from the Principles of Philo-
ſophy already laid down,


CHAP. I.


A Solution of the Phznomena relating to
the Molaick Creation, and the origi-
nal Conſtitution of the Earth,


I, All thoſe particular ſmall Bodies of which our habi-
table Earth is now compos'd , were originally in a
mixed, confuſed , fluid, and uncertain ition ;
without any order or regularity. It was an Earth with-
out form, and woid; had darkneſs ſpread over the face of
it: Aby/r; and in reality was, what it has been ever
ftil'd, A perfe&t Chaos, »


I, HIS has been already ſufficiently ac- rypecb. r.
counted for, and necd not be here a- 2ri-.
gain inſiſted on.


II. The Formation of this Earth , or the Change of that


Chass into an babitable World, was not a meer _
om


218


Vid. Lem.
9. cum Co-
roll. prius.

And Bent-
ley, Serm,

7- P. 25,

Oc.


SOLUTIONS. BooklV,


from any neceſſary Laws of Mechaniſm independently
on the Divine Power ; but was the proper effe& of the
Influence and Interpoſition, and all along under the
' peculiar Care and Providence of God,


II. *Tis not very eaſy, I confeſs, in ſuch
mighty Turns and Changes of the World, exactly
to determine how far , and in what particulars,
a ſupernatural or miraculous Interpofition of
the Divine Power is concern'd ; and how far
the Laws of Nature, or Mechanical Powers
ought to be extended. Nay, indeed , 'tis diffi-
cult enough , in ſeveral inſtances , to determine
what is the effect of a natural and ordinary,
and what of a ſupernatural and extraordinary
Providence. ,”Tis now evident, That' Grawny ,
the moſt mechanical Aﬀection of Bodies, and
which ſeems moſt natural,depends entirely on the
conſtant and efficacious, and, if you will, the
ſupernatural and miraculous Influence of -Al-


mighty God. And I do not know whether the


. Falling of a Stone to the Earth ought not more


eruly to be eſteem'd a ſupernatural Effet, or a
Miracle, than what we with the greateſt ſurprize
ſhould fo ſtile, its remaining pendulous in the
open Air; ſince the former requires an ative In-
fluence in the firſt Cauſe, while the latter ſuppoſes
Non-annibilation only. But beſides this, 'Tho' we
were able exactly to diſtinguiſh in general the
ordinary Concurrence of God from his extraor-
dinary, yet would the task before us be ſtill ſut-
ciently difficult. For thoſe Events or Actions
are in Holy Scripture attributed immediately to
the Power and Providence of God, which yet
were to all outward appearance according to the
conſtant courſe of things, and would, abſtract-
edly from ſuch Affirmations of the Holy Books,
have been eſteem'd no more miraculous oo

ne


Chap. 1. SOLUTIONS,


the other common Effets of Nature, or uſual
Accidents of Humane Afﬀairs ; as thoſe who
have carefully conſider'd theſe matters , eſpecial-
ly the Hiſtorical and Prophetical Parts of the
Old Teſtament muſt be oblig'd to confeſs. Nei-
ther is it unreaſonable that all things ſhould in
on ſeveral accounts. 'Tis from him every thing
iz ultimately deriv'd: He conſerves the Natures,
and continues the Powers of every Creature :
He not only at firſt produc'd , but perpetually
diſpoſes and makes uſe of the whole Creation ,
and every part thereof, as the Inſtruments of his
Providence : He foreſaw and foreadapted the in-
tire Frame : He determin'd his Co-operation or
Permiflion to every Action : He fo order'd and
appointed the whole Syſtem with every indivi-
dual Branch of ir, as to Time, Place, Proportion,
and all other Circumſtances, that nothing ſhould
happen unſeaſonably, untitly , difproportionate-
ly, or otherwiſe than the Junctures of Afﬀairs, the
demerits of his reaſonable Creatures, and the
wile Intentions of his Providence did require.
In fine, he fo previouſly adjuſted and contem-
per'd the Moral and Natural World to one ano-
ther, that the Marks and Tokens of his Provi-
dence ſhould be in all Ages legible and conſpi-
cuous, whatſoever the vilible ſecondary Cauſes
or Occaſions might be. Seeing then this is the
true ſtate of the Caſe ; and that conſequently,
Almighty God has fo conſtituted the World that
no Body can te!l wherein it differs from one,
where all were ſolely brought to paſs by a mira-
culous Power; 'tis by no means untrue or im-
proper in the Holy Books to refer all thoſe things
which bare Humane Authors would derive fron
ſecond Cauſes, the conltant Courſe of Nature,
and


220


SOLUTIONS. BooklV.


and. the Circumſtances of Humane Afﬀairs to
the firſt Cauſe, .the ultimate Spring and Original
of all; and to call Mens Thoughts ( which are
to0 apt to terminate there ) from the apparent
occaſions, to the invitible God the Creator, Go-
vernor, and Diſpoſer of the whole, and the fole
Object of their Kegard and Adoration. This is,
I fay, a very proper and reaſonable procedure
this 15 uſually oblerv'd by the Sacred Penmen,
( who are thereby peculiarly diſtinguiſh'd from
Prophane Authors) and this is of the higheſt
advantage in Morality. But chen it muſt be
withal acknowledg'd, That this creates great dif-
ficulties in the preſent Caſe, and makes it very
hard ina Philoſophick Attempt of this nature, to
diſtinguiſh between thoſe parts of the AMoſaick
Creation , which are Aechanically to be account-
ed for, and thoſe in which the miraculous Energy
of God Almighty interpos'd it ſelf; which yer, *
if ever, is certainly to be allow'd in this caſe,
where a new World was to be form'd, and a
wild Chaos reduc'd into a regular, beautiful, and
permanent Syſtem. "This being ſaid in general,
to beſpeak the Reader's Candor in the preſent
Caſe, and to forewarn him not to fear the
moſt Mechanical and Philoſophick Account of
chis Creation, as it thereby the Holy Scriptures
were ſuperſeded, or the Divine Power and Pro-
vidence excluded ; I come dire&ly to the Poine
before us, and ſhall endeavour to determine
what are the Inſtances. of the extraordinary
Power and Interpoſition of God in this whole
Aﬀair. That as we ſhall preſently ſee how Or-
derly, Methodical, and Regular this Formation
was, ſo we may b:fore-hand be duly ſenſible how
Supernatural, Providential, and Divine u was
alſo; and fo as well; like Chriſtians,- comem-

plate


Chap. i. SOLUTIONS.


plate and adore the Omnipotent Creator in his
Miraculous , as we , like Philoſophers, ſhall at-
tempt to conſider and remark his Vicegerent Na-
ture in her Mechanical Operations therein. For,
notwithſtanding what has been above inſiſted
on touching the frequency and propriety of af-
cribing the Effects of Nature to the Divine
Power ( the former being indeed nothing, bur
the latter acting according to fixt and certain
Laws); yet, becauſe more has been commonly,
and may juſtly be ſuppos'd the importance of
the Texts of Scripture hereto relating 3 becauſe
the Finger of God, or his ſupernatural Effici-
ency, is if ever to be reaſonably expected in the
Origin of Things, and that in a peculiar and
remarkable manner ; becauſe ſome things done
in this Creation are beyond the power of Philo-
ſophy and Mechaniſm , and no otherwiſe ac-
countable but by the Infinite Power of God him-
ſelf; becauſe the days of Creation are ſignally
diſtinguiſh'd from thoſe following , in which
God 1s faid to have reſted (when yet his ordi-
nary Concurrence, and the Courle of Nature
was continued without Interruption), and mult
therefore be reckon'd ſuch , on which he truly
exerted a Power different from the other. On
all theſe accounts, I freely, and in carneſt al-
low and believe, That there was a peculiar
Power, and extraordinary Providence cxercis d
by che great Creator of all, in this Primitive Ori-
gin of the Sublunary World, or Formation of
the Earth which we are going to account for.
The particular inſtances I ſhall give of the ſame,
without preſuming to exclude all others, are theſe
following,


1. Ihe


Diſcourſe ,
P- 4» 5 7-


»L1,


SOLUTIONS. BooklV.


1. TheCreation of the matter of the Univerſe;
and particularly of that of the Earth, out of no-
thing, was without doubt originally the alone
and immediate Work of God Almighty. Nature
(let what will be meant by that Name) could
have no hand in this, from whence art the ut-
moſt ſhe can bur date her own Birth. The pro-
dudtion of a real Being out of nothing, or to
ſpeak more properly,the primary bringing any real


| thing into Being, is in the Opinion of all Men,


the Effect of no leſs than an Infinite and Om-
nipotent Deity. I have already owned this to be
the import of the firſt words of this Creation
we are now upon , In the beginning God created
the Heaven and the Earth. And I think 'ris here
no improper place to declare my Opinion ,
Thar conſidering the 14ea and Nature of God in-
cludes Ative Power , Infmite Perfettion , with Ne-
ceſſity and fo Eternity of Exiſtence; when the Idea
and Nature of matter ſuppoſes imrrre Inattivity ,
mo poſi:rve Perfeft:on, and a bare Poſſibility or Capa-
city of Exiſterce ; "tis as abſurd and unreaſonable


. to attribute Eternity and Neceflity of Exiſtence


to the latter, as 'tis rational and natural to af-
cribe thoſe Perfetions, with a Power of Crea-
tion, to the former. The very Being and Nature,
as well as the Properties and Powers of Matter be-
ing molt juſtly and moſt philoſophically to be re-
ferr'd to the Author of all, the Almighty Creator.
And altho' our imagination (a poor, finite, li-
mited, and imperfect Faculty) be unable ro have
a politive [/e4 of the manner of the Production
of a real Being ar firſt (as indeed 'twere ſuffici-
ently ſtranse, if fo conftin'd a Power of fo im-
perfect a Creature ſhould adequately reach the


Vid. Bent» higheſt point of Omniportence it ſelf ) ; yer ſee-


ley,
6,


SEED 3ng the Abſurdities following the Eternity, and
5 _


Sit-


Chap. 1. SOLUTIONS.


Self-ſubſiſtence of Matter on the other ſideare fo
enormous ;3 and the certainty of the proper
Creation of Spiritual Beings nobler than Matter,
ſuch as the Souls of Men are, as great, as 'tis
utterly incredible they ſhould have been ab zter-
no too ( for I take it to be demonſtrable that
Souls are immaterial: ) I think 'tis far more rea-
ſonable to reſt ſatisfied with our former Aſſer-
tion, That God did truly bring Matter into be-
ing at firſt, than its Ecernity fuppos'd, to make


only the Modification and Management thereof


the Province of the Almighty : And conſequent-
ly the firſt inſtance of a Divine Efficiency with
relation to the Subject we are now upon, and
the higheſt of all other', was the original Pro-
duction of the Matter of which the Earth was
to conlilt, or the proper Creation of thoſe infe-
rior Heavens, and of that Earth which were to be
the ſole Obje&t of the Divine Operations in the
ſix days Work. This particular, I confels, does
not ſo properly belong to our preſent buſineſs,
the Formation of the Chaos into a habitable
World; but could not well be omitred, either
conlider'd in ir ſelf, as it bears fo peculiar a Re-
lation to our preſent purpoſe; or with reſpect
to that miſconſtruction I might with fome Rex
ders have otherwiſe been liable ro, Bur I pro-
ceed;

2. The charging of the Courſe and Orbit of
the Ch:os into that of a Planer (to omit the for-
mer Amm:!, and ſubſ:quent Diumna! Revolutions,
which tho” equally from God, yet do net fo
fully belong to this place }, or the placing of


the Earth in its primitive Ccilzr Orbie at its


Power, or at lcalt of the peculiar Providence of


God,


© —


wy ay


—  ——  — — —


224


SOLUTIONS. BooklV,


God. For if, we ſhould ſuppoſe , as 'tis poſlible
to do, that God did not by a miraculous Ope-
ration remove the Chaos or Comet from its very
Eccentrick Ellip/is to that Circle in which it now
began to revolve; but that he made uſe of the
Attraction or Impulſe of ſome other Body ; yet
in this caſe, (without conſidering that one of
thoſe Powers at leaſt is nothing but a Divine
Energy,) the Lines of each Bodies motion, the
quantity of force, the proper diſtance from the
Sun where , and the exact time when it hap-
pen'd (toname no other particulars here) muſt
have. been ſo py and nicely adjuſted be-
fore-hand by the Preſcience and Providence of
the Almighty, 'that here will be not a much leſs
remarkable Demonſtration of the 1//dom, Contri-
wance, Care, and Goodneſs, than the'other immedi-
ate Operation would have been of the Power of
God in the World.

(3.) The Formation of tl. Seeds of all Ani-
mals and Vegetables was originally, I ſuppoſe the
immediate Workmanſhip of God. As 4 as our
Micrometers can help us to diſcern the Make
and Conſtitution of Seeds ; thoſe of Plants evi-
dently, and by what hitherto appears of Ani-
mals too, are no other than the intire Bodies
themſelves # par, and contain every one of
the ſame Parts and Members with the compleat
Bodies themlelives when grown to maturity.
When therefore, conſequently, all Generation is
with'us nothing, as far as we can find, but Nu-
trition Or //ugmer:t ation of Parts; and that agree-
ably thereto no Seed has been by any Creature
produc'd tince the beginning of things : 'Tis
very Juſt, and very Philolophical to conclude
them to have been originally every one created
by God, either out of nothing in the primary

Exiſtence


Chap. x. SOLUTIONS.
Exiſtence of things ; or out of preexiſting Mat-
ter,at the Moſaick Creation. And indeed ſince the
Origin of Seeds appears to be hitherto unaccoun-
table by the mechanical Laws of Matter and Mo-
tion, *tis but reaſonable to ſuppoſe them the im-
mediate work of the Author of Nature : which
cherefore I think the warieſt Philoſopher may well
do in the preſent caſe.

(4.) The Natures, Conditions, Rules and Quan-


tities, of thoſe ſeveral Motions and


225


Powers according to which all Bo-
dies ( of the ſame general nature in
themſelves ) are ja in'd, diſtin-
guiſh'd, and fitted for their ſeveral
uſes, were no otherwiſe determin'd
than by the immediate Fir, Com-
mand , Power, and Efficiency of
Almighty God. 'Tis to be here
conlider'd, That tho' the Power of
mutual Attraction or Gravitation of


Utinam Catera Naturs
Phammens ex princypus
mechanics eodem argue
ment and: genere derryare
licers!. Nam multa me
movers ut noun ſuſdie
cer ca onmnis ex viribus
quibuſdam pendere poſſe,
quibur corporum Daviicus
le, per cauſas nondum cove
nitas , wel in ſe mutud


impelluntur, © ſecundum


Bodies appears to be conſtant, and fgwer regulares cole


univerſal ; nay almoſt effential co
Matter in the preſent conſtitution of
the world ; (the intire Frame of that


rem, wel 4 invicen fun
gantur, & recedunt : qui»
bus wiribur ignotis, Phi«
loſephi haTenus naturan


|
|
|


Syſtem in which we are, if not of fr«frs tentarunt. Newt,
all the other Syſtems, ſo ſtrily de- Fr=t. 2d Lottor,
pending thereon) yet the other Laws |
of Nature, on which the particular qualities of
Bodies depend, ſeems not to be ſo; but mutrable
in themſelves, and actually chang'd according
to the changes in the tigure, bignels, texture, or
other conditions of the Bodies or Corpuſcles with
which they are concern'd. Thus the Coheſion of
che parts of Matter , and that in ſome with leſs,
but in others with the greateſt and moſt ſurpri-
zing firmneſs; the Fermentation of ſeveral hetero-
geneous Particles , when muxt together 3 the

þ 4 Alogneti'm


Gen. 1. 2.
id. Loca
ae Chao
prius laus
data.


SOLUTIONS. BooklV.


Apps of the Loadſtone, with' the various
and very ſtrange Phenomena of that wonderful
Foflil ; the Elefticiry of certain Fluids and So-
lids; the contrary obſtinate inflexibility and re-
filtance of others ; the different Denſity of ſeve-
ral colie&tions or maſles of Fluids, (while yet the
greateſt part of their contained ſpace is Vacuity)
not to be conſiderably increas'd or diminiſh'd,
without the deſtruction of the /pecier : All theſe,
and many other Phenomena ſhew, That there are
various Rules and Laws of Matter and Motion
not belonging to all, as that of Gravication does,
but peculiar to ſome patticular conditions there-
of ; which therefore may be chang'd, without
any damage to the Law of Gravity. In the
impreſfling and ordering of which there is room
for, if not a neceſlity of, introducing the Þarti-
cular and .immediate efficacy of the Spirit of
God art firſt, as well as of his continual concur-
rence and conſervation ever ſince ; When there-
fore, in a full agreement with the ancient Tra-
ditions, *tis ſaid by Moſes, That the Spirit of God
moved on the face of the waters. We may ultly
underſtand thereby his imprefling, exciting , or
producing ſuch Motions, Agitations, and Fermen-
tations of the ſeveral Parts ; ſuch particular
Powers of Attraction or Avoidance (beſides the
general one of Gravity) of Concord or Enmity,
of Union or Separation; and all theſe in ſuch
certain Quantities , on ſuch certain Conditions
of Bodies, and in ſuch certain diſtin&t Parts and
Regions of the Chass, as were proper and neceſ-
fary for that particular Courſe and Diſpoſition of
Nature which ic ſeem'd good to the Divine $pi-
rit to introduce, and on which this future frame
of things here below was ever after to depend.


(5.) The


Chap. 1: SOLUTIONS.
( {-) The Ordering of all things fo that in


the ſpace of ſix ſuccetlive Solar Revolutions the
whole Creation ſhould be finiſh'd, and each di-
ſtint Day's work ſhould be confin'd to, and
compleated in its own diſtinct and proper period,
is alſo to be aſcrib'd to the particular Providence
and Interpoſition of God. That every thing fol-
lowed in its own order and place : As that the
Seeds of Vegetables on the Third, thoſe of Fiſh
and Fowl on the Fifth, and thoſe of the Terre-
{trial Animals on the Sixth Day, ſhould be every
one plac'd in their proper Soil, and fitly difpos'd
at their proper time to accompany and Send
with the ſuitable diſpoſition of external Nature;
and juſt then ro germinate and fructify, when the
order and proceſs of the other parts of the Crea-
tion were ready for, and required the ſame.
Every thing here does fo ſuit together, that the
plain footſteps of particular Art and Contrivance
are viſible in the whole conduct and management
of this matter : Which therefore is not to be de-
riv'd from meer Mechanical Laws of Brute Mat-
ter, but from a Supernatural and Divine Provi-
dence.

(6.) But principally, The Creation of our Firſt
Parents 1s to be elteem'd the peculiar Operation
of the Almighty ; and that whether we regard
the Formation of their Bodies , or the Forepaſt
Creation and Afrer-Infufion of their Souls. 'Tis
Evident from the 1Mo/aick Hiſtory of the Creati-
on, that Our Firſt Parents were on the very ſame
Day in which they were made, in a State of Ma-
turity and Perfection . and capable” of all Hu-
mane Actions, both of Mind and Body. Now
if they , like the ocher Animals , had been pro-
dicd in the uſual Time and Proceh of Gene-
rain, and come to ripenels of Ape aid Factl-


S.2


227


SOLUTIONS. Book IV.


ties by degrees afterwards ; That were prnny
impollible. This Creation therefore muſt have
been peculiar, and the immediate Effect of a
Divine Power. And this is nolefs agreeable to
Philoſophy , than ſuirable ro the Dignity of the
Subjs:t , and for the Honour of Mankind. Ir
has been already obſerv'd that the Seeds of
* Plants and Animals muſt be all ow'd to have
been all the immediate Workmanſhip of God ;
and that they contain every individual Part or
Member of the intire Bodies, #» parwo ; and that
by conſequence Generation is nothing elſe bur
Nuuicion or Augmentation. Since therefore God
by his immediate Power, Created the intire Bo-
die. of all Plants and Animals, tis by no means
har d to concave that he might Create them in
what degree of Maturity and Perfe&tion he
vleas'd , without any manner of infringement of
the Order of Nature then to be eftabliſh'd : And
if we have reaſon to believe , that the Bodies of
bruic Creatures were created # parvo, in a {mall
State, ſuch as we now call Seeds, and fo requir'd
a proper Generation, z.e. Nutrition and Augmen-
ration of parts ( as the Meſaick Hiſtory plainly
could not with any certainty have aſſerted it );
We have ſure equal reaſon to believe, from the
deſcription of the ſame Author in this other caſe,
that the Bodies of our Firſt Parents were Origi-
nally created in their Mature Bulk, and State of
Manhood, fo as immediately to be capable of the
{ame Operations which at any time afterward
they might be thought ro be. This Miraculous |
Origination of the Podies of our Firſt Parents is
therefore very rationally afcribed to the Finger of
God by Aves : And we may juſtly believe that
the Bleſſed Trinity, as 'tis repreſentcd in the _
Crec


Chap. 1. SOLUTIONS.


cred Hiſtory , was peculiarly concern'd in the
Production of that Being which was to bear the
Image of God, and be made capable of ſome de-
gree of his Immortality. And then as to the Soul
of Man, 'tis certainly a very diſtinct Being fion),
and one very much advanced abore the Fody ;
and therefore if we were forc'd to introduce a Di-
vine Power in the Formation of the latter, we
can do no lefs than that in the Creation and In-
fuſion of the former. And indced the Dignity
and Faculties of the Human Soul are ſovaſtly ex-
alted above all the Material, or merely Animal
Creation, that irs Original mult be defriv d from
the immediate Finger of God in a manner till
more peculiar and Divine than all the reit. That
nearer reſemblance of the Spiritual Nature, Im-
mortal Condition, Acive Powers, and Free,
Rational, and Moral Operations of tlie Divine
Being it ſelf, which the Souls of men were to
bear about them , did hut require ſome peculiar
and extraordinary Condudt in their firſt Exittence,
afrer-Union with Matter , and Introduction
into the Corporeal World. Agreeably whereto
we may eaſily obſerve a ſignal diſtinction in the
Sacred Hiſtory, berween the formation of all
other Animals, and the Creation of Man. In
the former caſe 'tis only ſaid, Let the waters bring
forth the moving creature that bath life, Let the earth
bring forth the ring creature after his kind. But of
the latter the entire Trinity conſult : Ard God
faid, Let Us make man in our image, after our like-
neſs. ind the Lord God formed man of the duſt of
the ground, and breathed mto bis noſtrils the breath of
life , and man became a living ſoul. As therefore
the ſeveral parts of the Moſ{aick Creation before-
mention'd are not to be mechanically attempted,
but look'd upon as the effects of the Extraordi-
S-4 nary


Gen. i. 20,


Vuſe 24.
Verſe 26.


Coroll. x.
Lem. 70.
q & Hypo: h
5. cum Con
rod, 1. pri-
45.


SOLUTIONS. BooklVY,


nary and Miraculous Power and Providence of
God, ſo more eſpecially the Formation of the
Body of Man in its mature ſtate, and moſt of all
the primary Creation and after-Infuſion of the
Rational Human Soul, is to be wholly aſcrib'd to
the ſame wonderful Interpoſition and Efficiency
of the Supreme Being, the Creator of all things,
God bleſſed for evermore, All which taken rOpe-
ther and duly conſidered, is, I think, a ſufficient
and ſatisfactory Account of the Propoſition be-
fore us, and attributes as much to the Miracu-
lous and Immediate Hand of God , as either
Tradition, Reaſon, or Scripture, require in the


preſent Caſe.


IM. The Days of Creation, and that of Reſt, had their
beginning in the Evening.


III. This has been already accounted for, and
need not here be repeated.


Corollary 1. This Phanomenon in ſome meaſure
confirms our Hypotheſis, that the Primitrve Days of
tbe World were Years allo. For otherwiſe the ſpace of
one ſingle ſhort Night ſeems too inconſiderable to hawe
been taken ſuch notice of in this Hiſtory 3 and then, and
ever after, made the fit half of the Natural Day.
But if it were equal to half a Year, it was to conſi-
derable to be omitted , and its memory was wery juſtly
preſeru'd in jucceeding Apes,

Corollary 2, We may here begin to take notice of
the Regularity and Methodicalneſs of this Hiſtory of the
Creation : Which, tho' it principally mtends the gong
an account & the Vilible Parts of the World, and how the
ſtate of Nature in each Period appeared in the Day
tyre; yet Onnts not the foregoing Night : which :s
very Mcchanical and Natural. For in the preceding

Night


Chap. i. SOLUTIONS,


Night all things were ſo prepar'd and diſpos'd, that the
Wark of each Day might, upon its appearance, di/play
it ſelf ; pe ber exbibited, not in itswnſ{cen boy mnings,
or ſecret 1 orkmgs, not im its ffferyions Caules, and
gradual Procedure, ( which was not"the 'Deſjan of thi;
Hiſtory ) but in that more diſtmft end. perfett cond.
tion in which things would in the Day tume appear to
the view of .4. Sptttator, and under which chufly they


IV. At the time immediately ;
gions of the 'Chaar, were invol in


-


IV. If we conſider what has been already ſaid of


the Nature of a Gomer, or peonliarly of that Ar-
110/pbere which has been before ſhewn to havebeen
the anciefit Ghagr, we ought to; t tto our
ſelves as contaſhing a Central,” ;- Hor Body,
of about 7000 or Boos Miles ii-Diameter ; and
beſides that, 'a valtly large, fluid, - heterogeneous
Maſs, or congenes of Bodies, in a very rare, ſe-
perate, and expand:zd condition, whoſe Diame-
ter were twelve, or perhaps fifreen times as long
as that of the central Solid, or about 100000
Miles; which is the Armo/phere or Chacs now to be
conſider'd : In which we muſt remember was
contain'd both a ſmaller quantity of dry, folid, or
earthy Pats, ( with a ſtill much ſmaller of Aery
and Watery). and a much larger quantity of denſe
and heavy Fluids, of which the main bulk of the
Atmoſphere was compos'd, all confuſedly mix'd,
blended, and jumbled together. In which ſtate
the Theorit's Firſt Figure, excepting the omifhon
of the Central Solid, will well enough repreſent
it; and in which ſtate we accordingly delineate
it in the following Figure :

Y 4- Bur


231


+ Lem. 41,
Cc. ind
$7, Oc.
& Hypth,


pris.


Theor 2.35,


SOLUTIONS. Book lV,


But upon ths change of the Comet's Orbit
from Elliptical ro Circular, the Commencing of
the Moſarck Creation, and the Influence of the
Divine Spirit, all things would begin to take
their own places, and each ſpecies of Bodies rank
themſelves into that order, which, according to
the law of ſpecifick gravity, were due to them.
By which method the Maſs of denſe Fluids:,
which compos'd the main bulk of the intire
Chacs , being heavier than the Maſſes of Earth,
Water, and Air, would fink downwards with


the greateſt for: and velocity, and elevate thoſe
Maſle


Chap. 1. SOLUTIONS.


Maſſes incloſed among them upwards. Which
procedure mult therefore diſtinguiſh the Chaos or
Armoſpbere into two very different and diſtin&
Regions: The lower and larger whereof would
be a colle&ion or ſyſtem of denſe and heavy
Fluids, or a vaſt Aby/s immediately encompaſling
the central ſolid Body : The higher and leſſer
would be a colleftion, or ſyftem of earthy,
watery, and aery Parts, confuſedly mix'd toge-
ther, and encompaſling the ſaid Aby%, in the
ſame manner as that did the central Solid. And
this I take to be the ſtate of Darkneſs, which
the Propoſition we are upon mentions: And
that the Chaos , particularly, the Face or upper
Regions of it, were atthis time inſuch a dark and
caliginous Condition, will cafily appear. For all
thoſe Opake or Earthy Corpultles which before
rov'd about the immenſe Regions of the Armo-
{phere , and frequently even then obſcur'd the
Central Solid to any external SpzRator , were
now crouded nearer together ; and inſtead of
flying up and down in, or poſlefling an Orb of
4-00c or 54050 Miles in thicknels, were reduced
to a narrower Sphere, and confin'd within a ſpace
not perhaps in Diameter abovethe thouſandch part
ofthe former ; and muſt by conſequence exclude
the Rays of the Sun in anothergueſs manner
than before, We cannot bur obſerve in our pre-
ſent Air, That the very ſame Vapours which, when
dillipated” and {catter'd through the Atmo/pheve,
( whoſe extent yet is not great) freely admit
the Rays of the Sun, and afford us clear and light-
. ſomedays; when they are colledted into Clouds,

become opake Maſſes, and are capable of obſcu-
ring the Sky, and rendring it conſiderably dark
to us. In the ſame manner 'tis galy to ſuppoſe;


that thoſe Opake and Earthy Matiles, which in
the


_


233


Theor. p.


SOLUTIONS. BooklV.


thoſe vaſter Regions would but in a leſs degree,
and in ſome places , exclude the Beams of the
Sun, muſt, when colle&ed and crowded cloſer
together on the ſurface of the A4by/s , exclude
them in a degree vaſtly ſurpaſſing the former ;
muſt occaſion an entire darkneſs in all its Regi-
ons, and particularly in thoſe upper ones, over .
which they were immediately colle&ted. And it

from the former compariſon we eſtimate how few
Vapours colle&ed into a Cloud with us will cauſe
no inconſiderable degree of darkneſs; and allow,
as is but reaſonable, a proportionably greater de-
gree of darknefs to a proportionably greater num-
ber of Earthy and Opake Corpuſcles crowded to
gether ; we ſhall not doubt but all manner of
communication with the Heavenly Bodies,and che
External World, muſt be incirely interrupted ; and
the leaſt imaginable Ray or Beam of Light from
the Sun excluded, not only from the loweſt, hut
even all, excepting the very higheſt Regions of
this ſuperior Chaos, Which ſtate of Nature, be-
longing to this time, immediately preceding the
Hexameron, is not amiſs repreſented by the 7hes
riſt's Second Figure, which is accordingly here
delineated,


Chap. 1. SOLUTIONS.


V. The Viſible part of the Firſt Day's Work was the
Prodution of Lighr, or its ſucceſſive Apperrance ro
all the parts of the Earth ; with the conſequent di-
ſtinttion of Darknels and Light, Night and Day upon


the face of it.


V. If we remember in what ſtate'we left the
Chaos in the laſt Propoſition, and ſuffer our
thoughts torun naturally along with its ſucceed-
ing mutations, we ſhall find that the next thing
to be here conſider'd, (for the Subterraneous
Syſtem of denſe Fluids, or the great A4by/s, not
coming diretly within tht-Deſ1gn of Moſes, is

not


235


SOLUTIONS. Book IVY.


not here to be particularly proſecuted any far-
ther) is the Separation of this Upper and El.-
mentary Chaos, or Congerics of Farthy, Watery

tes, awo ſomewhat diffe-


Pores ; the
ie, or Maſc
eſt of the Wa-


&r chan the Abyſs be-

y Heterogeneous,

nes ( che Earthy

ty, and thoſe yet

| $ 3) 'ris evident,

a&*this whole mixed

from't heavier Abyſs bc-

ir mr fares and divide i in-
Orbs as were juſt now men-

denſer and


ſolider pry, Foc | 7, Claiy , Sandy,


Gravelly ony | | preſent Earth,


with ſo man articles as either
being already in thoſe Regions mult be incloſcd
therein, or could deſcend from above, and have
admittance into the Pores thereof : The [ter of
the lefs SoliJ, Lighter, and Earthy, with the reſt
of the Watery, and the Aery Particles, not yet
ſufficiently diſtinguiſh'd from each ther. This
proceſs will I ſuppoſe eaſily be allow'd, except-
ing what relates to the encloling of the Watery
marts within the- Earth ; with relation to which,
'tis commonly fuppos'd that becauſe Water is
ſpecitically lighter chan Earth, it muſt in the re-
gular digeftions of a Chaos, take the Upper fi-
taation, and cover that higheſt Orb, as that


wonld others of rreater gravity than ie ſelf, *Tis
a'fo


Chap. r. SOLUTIONS.


alſo commonly imagin'd that the Moſaick Coſmo-
gony favours ſuch an Hypotheſis, and ſuppoſes the
Waters to have encompals'd the Globe, and co-
ver'd its ſurface, till on the third day they were
deriv'd into the Seas. Now, as I by no means
apprehend any necefliry of underſtanding the
Moeſaick Creation in this ſenſe; ſo I am very
ſure 'tis contrary to a Philoſophick account. of
the Formation of the Chaos; unleſs one of theſe
ewo things were certain, Either that the quanti-
ty of Water were fo much greater than that of
Earth, that all the Pores and Interſtices of the
latter could not contain ir; or elſe that it was
enerally elevated into the Air in the form of
'apour, and ſuſtained chere while the Earth ſet-
led and conſolidated together, and did nor till
then deſcend and rake its own proper place.
The former of which is neither reconcilable to
the Meſaick Creation, nor will be aflerted by any
who knows, even ſince the Deluge, how ſmall
the quantity of Fluids in compariſon to that of
the Solids is in the Earth on which we live. And
the latter is too much to be granted in the preſent
caſe by any conſidering perlon, who knows that
a Comer's Vapours conſtitute the main part of
that Tail or Miſt, which is ſometimes equal to a
Cylinder, whoſe Bafis is 1000-00 Miles in Dia»
meter, and its Altitude as far as from the Sun
to the Earth, or 540cc000 Miles ; (as it was
in the laſt famous Comer in 1681. repreſented
in Mr. Newten's own Scheme) Let the rarity of
the ſame be ſuppos'd as great as any Phenomena
ſhall require. For to clear this matter by a fa-
nuliar Inſtance or Experiment ; Take Sand or
Duſt, and let them fall gently into a Veſſel, ill
it be near full: Take atrerwards fome Warer,
and pour it alike gently into ths fame Veſſel :
And


237


SOLUTIONS. Book lYV,


And it will ſoon appear, that, notwithſtandin
the greater ſpecifick gravity of the Dry _
Earthy, than of the Moiſt and Watery parts,
(whence one might imagine that the Sand or
Duſt would be the loweſt, and the Water ſwim
uppermoſt on the ſurface of the other, without
mingling therewith) yet will the latter imme-
diately fink downwards, and ſo throughly drench
and ſariate the ſaid Maſs before any will remain
on the top, that its proportion to that of the
Solid parts will be very conſiderable. Which
being apply'd to the point before us, will take a-
way all imaginable difficulty in the cafe : Ir be-
ing evident, without this compariſon, that ſuch
Watery Particles as were already intermix'd
with the others would remain where they were;
and with this, equally ſo, that the reſt, which
' were above the ſame, upon the firſt ſubſidence of
-the Earthy Strars would penetrate, pervade and
ſaturate the ſame, So that on this firſt Day or Tear
of the Creation, the Earthy and Deals parts
would take their places loweſt, on the ſurface of
- thegreat Abyſs; would ſettle in part intothe ſame,
and compole an Orb of Earth; and in its Inter-
ſtices and little Cavities all ſuch Watery Particles
as were already in this Region, or deſcended up-
on it before its conſolidation, would be en-
clos'd ; and that as far above the ſurface of the
Abyſs, to which they would be contiguous, as
their quanticy could enable them to reach: On
this firſt Day or Near alſo the upper Regions of
the Chaos, being now in fome meaſure freed from
thoſe Earthy and Opake Maſſes which before
excluded the ſame, and cauſed. the before-men-
tion'd thick Darkneſs; would in ſome degree
admic the Rays of the Sun. Now therctore
that glorious Emanation, Liyb', the vilibic oy
0


Chap. 1. SOLUTIONS.


of this days Work, would begin to appear on
the face of the Earth: Now would It, by the
Annual Motion, ſucceflively illuminate the ſe-
veral parts of it: And now would it conſequent-
ly cauſe that natural Diſtin&tion between Dark-
neſs and Light, Night and Day round thewhole
Globe, which was to be accounted for in this
Propoſition. Which progrels of the Chaos, and
ſtate of Nature is well enough exhibired by the
Theoriſt's third Figure 3 which therefore is here Theor. p.
delineated. 38.


Pg 3.


240 SOLUTIONS. Book IV.


Corollary, Hence we may obſerve the Fuſt meſs of
the Maſaick Creation, and how fitly it begins at the
Produfion of Light ; without taking notice of ſuch
prior conditions, .and ſuch preparations of the Chaos
which have been before explam'd, and were in order
of Nature previous to this days Work. For this ac-
count reaching only to the Viſible World, and the Viſible
Effels im ut ; and keepmg ſtill within the bounds of
ſenſe, and of common obſervation , could not better
be accommodated to the truth of things, and the ca«
pacities of all, than by ſuch a Procedure. The Ancient
#ondition of the Chaos in formey Ages was no wa
here concern'd, and \ſo was wntirely ro be abies
The State of Darkneſs which amr fare preceded the


are ac-


= fr


Ville Berl, Uſe parts of it were ſing
h concern'd;; But prineiyatly the Effetts to be enu-
merated wes. ſuch as requir d the! Light and Heat
of the $25 th one to be View'd, the other to be Pro-
duced by ; and without the latter could no more have
Been at all, than been Confpicuous without the
former; "Twas very ſuitable; and very natural m the
firſt place to introduce the Cauſe or Inſtrument, and
afterwards m the ſucceedivo Feriods, to recount the
Effe&*s thereof in the Ieorld ; Firſt to acquaimt us
that the Lizht end Heat of the Sun were in ſome
meaſure admitted imo the upper Regions of the Chaos,


and


Chap. 1. SOLUTIONS.


and then to velate thoſe remarkable conſequences theres
of which the ſucceeding Periods of the Creation exhi-
bited on the face of the Earth, Which Order of Na-
tare, and Succe/ſun of Things, ws acccrdingly wery
prudently and fitly obſerv'd, and kept pace with, m
this Sacred Hiſt ory.


VI. The viſible part of the Second Day's Work was the
Elevation of the ir, with all its contained Vapours ;
the ſpreading it for an Expanſwm above the Earth, and
the diſtinQion thence ariſing of Superior and Inferior
Waters : The formet conſiſting of thoſe Vapours ,
raiz'd and ſuſtain'd by the Air; The latter of fuch as
eith:r were inclos'd in the Pores, Interſtices and Bowels
of the Earth, or lay upon the Surface thereof,


VI. When at the Concluſion of the former
Day the Heart of the Sun began conſiderably to
penetrate the Superior Regions of the Chzox,
and the two different Orbs, the Solider Earthy,
and the Fluider Aery Maſles, began to be pretty
well diſtinguiſhed, the ſame things wou!d pro-
ceed ſtill on this fuccecding Day. The Lower
Earthy Strata would be ſerrling ſomewhat cloſer
rogether ; the Watery parts would fubiide, and
ſaturate their inward Pores and Vacuities, and
the Atmoſphere would free ir ſelf more and more


from the heavieſt and moſt Opake Corpuſcles, -


and thereby become in a greater degree tenuious,
pure, and clear than before. Whereupon by
that time the Night or firſt half of this Second
Day or Year was over, and the Sun aroſe, The
Light and Heat of that I.uminary, would more
freely and deeply penecrate the Armoſphere,
and become very ſentible in theſe Upyer or Aery
Regions. Which being ſupposd, the proper
Eitect which were to be ncxt expected muſt be,
that vaſt quantities of Vapours would be eleva-
ted into, and there ſuſtained by the now better

4 purified


241


14 SOLUTIONS. BooklY,


purified Air; while in the mean time all the
Earthy Corpuſcles which were uncapable of
rarefaction, and with them all ſuch Watery Par-
ticles as were ſo near the Earth that the Sun's
Power could not ſufficiently reach them, were
ſtill ſinking downwards and increaſing the craf-
ſirude and bulk of the Solid Earth, and of its
included Waters. From all which *'tis eaſie
to account for the Particulars of this Day's
Work. The Expanſum or Firmament which
was this day ſpread out above the Earth was
lainly the 4 , now truly fo called , as be-
ing freed from moſt of irs Earthy mixtures. The
Superior Waters, All thoſe which in the form of
Vapour a half years heat of the Sun, with the
continual afliftance of the Central Hear, could
elevate, and the Air ſuftain. The Inferior Waters,
thoſe which were not elevated, but remain'd
below, all that - fell down with, were encloſed
in, ſunk into, and, if you will, lay upon the
Orb of Earth beneath. And when it is part -
cularly faid by Moſes that 'twas this Expan/um
or Firmament which was to divide the Superior
from the Inferior Waters, that is exactly agree-
| ableto the nature of things, and ſuitable to chis
account : It being the Aw which truly and pro-
perly ſuſtain'd all thoſe Vapours, as now it does
the Clouds, above the Earth; and was theicby
the means of ſeparating them from their Fellows
in the Bowels, or on the ſurface thereof. Which
| ſtate of the Chaos, or Progreſs of the Creation, is
Theor, p. well repreſented in the Theori/#s fourth Figure ;;


19. which here follows.


Corollary


Chap. 1. SOLUTIONS. -—*ow


P: 243


Corollary 1. Hence mu a ſuſfciem Reaſox
why mm this Six Days Creation one mtire Day ts al
low'd to the Formation of the Air, and the diſt ingui
my the Vapours m the ſame, from thoſe ro
n. ie has hutherto ſeem d ſomewbat ſtrange and diforo>
portionate, Tis certain this Work requir' d 1s long
a time, and was of as great mportance as any other
whatſoever : : All that Water which the Earth was
to bawe in its Air, or upon its Surface, till the De-
luge, being, *tis $—s entirely owmg to thus. day's
eltvatien of them. For had they not been thus buoy'd
up and ſuſtain 'd on higb, they muſt bave ſunk ow.

£ 2


ward


244


SOLUTIONS. Book IV.


ward, and ſo been mcloſed mm the Bowels of the Earth,
withe: ut poſſibility of redemption 3 and have rendred
the Antediluvian 1/orl4 more like to a dry and barren
Wilderneſs, ,cham, what i: was toexceed, a juicy
fruitfe! and habitable Canaan.

Coroll. 2. Hence ariſes a new confirmation that
the Days of the Creation were Years al/o. - Fer [ee-
ing the quantity of Water which was preſery'd abovesy
__ and #1 d all the Seas before the Deluvge, was

ater than was this Second Day elevared into
Fapog' » had this Day been no longer than one of ours
ent, the faremention'd quantity would have

or pew. ft: a from ſatutring the Earth, | mg the Ri-
vers; ind mM all the Seas, that z. y doy it would
be wholly exhad afterwards, and ſuffer the intrre
Vegetable ond ag dom: ta\periſh for want
of r:0i//re. All w _p- the Hypotteſi we bere


o_ ts vided, and a way fit and ſuitable
oportion of * + "tit abgoe for all the ne-
#56 of the Ear, Ws. s Prodntions and Inhabi-


tomts. find thr conſe deration affords one wery good
realen why the commencing of. the Diurnal Rotation
was defer'd till after the "Fermation r of the Earth was
over; there berg an cvident neceſſity thereof im order
fo the providing Water ſufficient for the needs of thoſe
Creatures for whoſe ſake the whole Creation was or-
dam'd and perform'd. In which fronernn plain tc-
kens of the Drumme Wiſdom cannct but be very conſpt-
cuons and obſerycble t9 ns.


VII, The viſible parts of the Third Day's Works were
two; the former, the ColleQion of the inferior Wa-
rers, or ſuch as were now under the Heaven, into the
Seas, with the conſequent appearance of rhe dry Land ;
the latrer, the produRtion of Vegetables out of that
Ground 10 lately become dry,


VII. In


Chap, 1. SOLUTIONS.
VII. In order to the Apprchending of the


double operation of this Day, we mult call to
mind what ſtate the Orb of Earth was in by this
time. We have ſcen already that it had been
ſerling together, and fixing it {cif on the ſurface
of the Abyſs from the very beginning of the Crea-
tion; and we ought to ſuppoſe that in the ſpace
of two years it was not only become wholly di-
| ſtint from the -by/; below, and the Atmo'phere

above it, but that it was ſetcled and conſolidated

together, and irs Strata grown firm and com-

pacted. We muſt farther obſerve, that by rea-

ſon of its Columns, different Denſity, and Spe--

cifick Gravity , (atteſted ro, 4 prier: from the

Chacs's, and 4 p3eriovi from the internal Earth's

Phenomena, ) it was ſetled into the Abyſs in dif- ;;4 1.

ferent degrees, and. thereby became of an un- 78. cm

equal ſurface diſtinguilh'd into Mountains; Plains Cor92. &

and Valleys. Which things being ſuppos'd and 792%: 2:

conlider'd, the two Works of this Day or ear of

the Creation, which are of themſelves very dif-

ferent, will be eafily underſtood and reconcil'd.

For when at Sun-ſer, or the concluſion of the

laſt Day, we left the Air by half a Years Power

of the Sun crowded with Vapours to a prodigious

degree; upon the coming on of this Third Day,

and in its Night or former half, the faid vaſt

quantities of Vapours muſt needs deſcend, and

{ by degrees muſt leave the Air pretty free,

and take their places on the Surface of the Earth;

altering thereby their own denomination, and

becoming of Upper or Celefizl, Lower or Tev-

retrial Waters. Indeed if we-do but allow the

etfet to be in any mcaſure an{werahle to the

time, we ſhall grant that in the half year of

Night , which is the former part of this Third

Period of the Creation, the main Body of the
£ } Vapours


-


SOLUTIONS. BooklIY.


Vaponrs muſt have not =_ deſcended down
upon the Earth, but, by reaſon of the inequality
its Surface, and the Solidity withal, have run
down from the higher and more extane parts,
by the Declivities and Hollows, into the loweſt
Valleys, and moſt depreſſed Regions of all ;

muſt in theſe places have compos'd Seas a
Lakes every where throughout the Surface of the
Earth ; and ſo by that time the light appear'd
and the Sun's riſing began the latter part of this
Day, the intire face of the Globe, which was
juſt before cover'd as it were with the deſcend-
ing Waters, muſt be diſtinguiſh'd into over-
flow'd Valleys, and extant Continents, into Seas
and Dry-land, that very Work of this Day we
were in the firſt place ro enquire about. The
waters under the heavens were now gathered together
into their reſpective and diſtin places, and the
dry land appear'd and became fit for the Produdti-
on of the Vegetable Kingdom. Which there-
fore moſt naturally leads us to the ſecond branch
of this Day's Work. For when this part hither-
to - was compleated on the Night or former half
of this Day (which the Abſence of the Sun fo
long together rendred peculiarly and ſolely fit to
permit and procure the deſcent of the Vapours);
and when at the ſame time the Dry Land was
now diſtinguiſh'd f:om the Seas, and juſt become
( in the utmoſt degree) moiſt and juicy; upon
che Sun Riſing, or coming on'of the Day-time,
'ewas ci all other the moſt fit and convenient
Seaſon for the Germination of the Seeds of Ve-
getables, and the growth of Trees, Shrubs,
Plants and Herbs out of the Farth. The Soil,
Satur d and Fatned by the foregoing half Year's
deſcent of Vapourz, was now like the "Lavs that
fruitful. Seminary of the Vegetable and Animal
productions


Chap. 1. SOLUTIONS. 247


rodudions of Primitive Nature, fo much cele-

ated by all Antiquity. An intire half year of Theor. 1
the Sun's preſence together, was a time as proper !-P 42
and as natural for ſuch a purpoſe as could po#li- ©L2-07.
bly be defir'd. And when there was this haif
Year of Day to ſpare in this Period of the Crea-
tion, afrer one Work was compleared ; and the
ſame was fo very fitly prepar'd and diſpos'd for
the produRtion of Vegetables ; 'tis no wonder
that{this above all the other Diviſions has a double
Task, and that the Seas and Dry I and were di-
| ſinguiſh'd, and the Vegetables produc'd on the

ſame Day or Year of the Creation ; according

as from. the Mo/aick Hiſtory the preſent Propo-
ſition aſſerts. And if we allow for the deft
of the inequalities of the outward Surface, too
ſmall to be therein conſider'd ; and ſu poſe the
Atmoſphere ſomewhat clearer than before; the
former figure will ſtill ſerve well enough, and Theor. p.
repreſent the progreſs and ftate of the Earth at 39 © /*
the concluſion of this Third Day. RY

Ln 1. When according to our preſent ac-
counts of theſe matters, this is the only day of the
Creation to which a double work, and tht the one
quite different from the other, ought to be aſcrib'd,
and is aſcrib'd by Moſes ; The Night being pecn/iar-
ly fit for the former, and the Day for the latter opc-
ration ; which could happen on none of the other Pe-
riods, This exattneſs of correſpondence ought to be
efteem'd an Evidence of the literal ſenſe of the Wri-
ter, and of his accommodation to the nature of things ;
and a wery conſiderable confirmation of thoſe Hypo-
theſes on which it ſo naturally depends.

Coroll. 2. Hence ariſes @ Confirmation of what Phenom
was before aſſerted that the Antediluyian Earth bad 43 pri.
only leſſer Lakes and Seas, not a vaſt Ocean. For
ws: i the quantity of ws belonging to the Farih

4+ and


SOLUTIONS. BooklV,


and Air at firſt, was no more than was elevated in
one balf year, and at once ſuſtain'd by the Air ; no
one will imagine it /ufficient to fill the intire Occan
alone, if there bad been neither leſſer Seas, nor Rivers
to be ſupply'd therewith. zind ſo, viceverſa, It baving
been prov'd by other Arguments, that there was no
Ocean, but only tjer Seas, bejore the Flood, This
Account which affords ſufficient quantity of Water for
the latter, but vot for the former, is thereby nat a
litthe confirm d.

Coroll. 3. Thy" the Heat and Influence of the Sun
was on this Third Day wery great, yet was bis Body
rot yet Viſiale, | For ſince at bis Riſms the Earth qnd
loweſt Regions of the clir were very full of moiſture,
while the higher Regions were wery clear and bright ;
the - force of bis beat weuld be /o great as to elxvate
conſiderable quantities of Vapours on a ſudden, ard
thercby (ere the loweſt Air had def: ſited its I "afemn ſ,
and renared it ſelf tranſparent ) the Sun would anew
bide bimſelf in a thick Miſt, and ſo preyent bis own

ecommg con{pienous, which otherwiſe 't1s not impro-
bable he might this Day have been.


VIII, The Fourth Day's Work was the Placing the Hea-
venly Bodies, Sun, Moon, and Stars, in the Expmmſcen or
Firmament, z. e. The rendring them Viſible and Con-
ſpicuous on the Face of the Earth : Togerher wick rheir
ſeveral Aſſignations to their re!/peRtive Offices there.


VIIE. Altho' the Light of the Sun penetrated
rhe Aitmcſpherg in fome fort the firſt Day, and
in the ſucceeding ones had very conſiderable in-
fluence wpon:ir; yet is it by no mcans to be
ſuppcs'd that lits Ludy was Viſible all thae while.
1Tho' we every day enjuy much more Light and
Heat frora the*Sun than the Primicive Earth
could, for a con{iJerable ſpace, be ſuppos'd to
have done, yet tt but fomerimes that the Ai

b a . " '


Chap. 1. SOLUTIONS.


is ſo clear as to render his Body diſcernible by
us. A very few Clonds or Vapours gather'd to-
gcther in our Air areable,.we ſee, to hinder ſuch
a proſped for Weeks, if not Months together ;
while yet art the ſame time we are ſufficiently
ſenſible of his Force and Influence in the con-
ſtant productions of Nature. Which things be-
ing duly conlider'd, and the vaſtneſs and den-
ſity of « & Upper Chaos allow'd for , *ewill be but
reaſonable to afford a great ſpace, even after the
firſt penetration of Light, for the intire clearing
of the Armo/phere, and the diſtin view of the
Sun's Body by a Spectator on the Surface of
the Earth. I ſuppole no one will think the
two firſt Days or Nears of the*Creation too long
for ſuch a work ; or if any one does, the par-
ricular work and ſlate of the Atmoſphere on
the ſecond Day will prevent the moſt probable
part of ſuch a ſurmiſe, and ſhew the impoſ-
ſibility of the Sun's Appearance at that time.
And the ſame real{6n will in a ſufkcicnt, tho a
leſs degree, prevent any juſt Expectations cn the
third Day, as was obſ:rv'd in the laſt Corelar;.
Eur now upon the coming on of this feur:b Day,
and the S's deſcent and abode below the Hori-
zon for an intire half year, thoſe Vapours which
were rais'd-the day before mult fall downwards,
and ſo before the approattref che Morning leave
the Air in the greateſt clearnefs and purity ima-
ginable, and permit the Aſcon firft, then the Stars, -
and afterward, vpon the coming on of the Day,
the Sw himſelf moſt plainly to appear and he
conſpicuous on the Face of the Earth. "This few:
D-y 15 therefore the very time when, acording to
this Account,” and the Sacred Hiſtory both, theſe
Heavenly Podics, which were in being before,
but ſo as to'be wholly Strangers to a Spectator on
| Earth,


250


Atlzs


2. Þ.


Part
46.


SOLUTIONS. BooklV.


Earth, were rendred viſible, and expos'd to the
view of all who ſhould be ſuppos'd to be there at
the ſame time. They now were in the Sacred
Stile, placed in the Firmament of Heaven, gave Light
wpon the Earth ; began to rule plainly and viſibly
over the Day, and over the Night, and to divide the
Light from the Darkneſs; as ever fince they have
continued to do. And now the inanimate World,
or the Earth, Air,, Seas, and all their Vegetable
Productions are compleat ; and the Tradition of


War. Geo- thoſe Chineſes who inhabit Formoſa, and other
log, p.58. Iſlands, appears well-grounded, and exactly true,


«1.


who hold, That the World, when firſt created, was
without Form or Shape ; but by one of their
Deities was brought to its full Perfection in four


Years. Which Progreſs of the Creation, and State


. p. Of Nature is exactly repreſented by the 7heorift”s


fifth and laſt Figure ; which therefore here fol-


lows,


Chap. 1. SOLUTIONS.


Fig:5. p:251


IN. The fifth Day's Work was the ProduRtion of the Fiſh
and Fowl out of rhe Waters; with the BenediQtion
beſtow'd on them in order to their Propagation.


IX. The Terraqueous Globe being now become

habitable boch to che ſwimming and volatil Ani- |
mals; and the Air clear, and fo penetrable by that |
compleat 'Heat of the Sw», which was requilire
to the Generation of ſuch Creatures; 'tis a very
proper time for their Introdution. Which was
accordingly done upon this fifth Day or Year of
the Creation. Thoſe Seeds, or little Bodies of.
Fiſh and Fowl which were contain'd in the Water,

- (or


SOLUTIONS. BooklV,


(or moiſt fruitful "Tavus of kin to it) were now ex-
pos'd to the kindly warmth of the Swn, and the
conſtant ſupply of a moſt gentle and equal Heat
from beneath; they were neither diſturbed. by
the ſudden alteration of the Temperature of the
Air from the violence of Winds, or by the Agita-
tions of the Tide" ( which was both very ſmall,
in theſe ſmall Seas ; and" by reaſon of the ab-
ſence of the Diurnal Regs Ioipartepribly ealy,
gentle, and gradual;) theſt'Secds, I ſay, when
invigorated with the Divine Benediftion , be-
came now : PIN fifth Day's rime
a numerous ing of the ſwimming and vo-
latil Kinds arofe, whereby the two fwd Ele-
ments ,* Water and Air became repleniſh'd with
thole firſt Pairs), "which by the BenediRtion they
{traightwiy-receiv'd, were enabled to become
the originat*ob. all of the ſame Kinds , which
ever were to be the Inhabitatugof thoſe Regions


afrerwards. Which time and procedure is no leſs
agreeable to the State of the World in our Hypo-
theſis, than 'tis to the expreſs Afﬀirmations of
Moſes, who makes Fiſh and Fowl the ſole Pro-
duct of the fifth Day or Tear of the Creation,


X. The Sixth Day's Work was the ProduRtion of all the
Terreſtrial or Dry-land Animals; and that in a different
manner. For the Brute Beaſts were produc'd our of the
Earth, as the Fiſh and Fowl had been before out of the
Waters ; but after that the Body of Adam was form'd
of the Duſt of the Ground ; who by the Breath of
Life breath'd into him in a peculiar minaer, became a
Living Soul.” Some time after which ; on the ſme
day, he wzs caſt into a deep Sleep, and Eve was form'd
our of a Rib taken from his ſide. Together with feve-
ra! other things, of which a more particular account
h.s been already given on another occaſion.


X. The


Chap. 1. SOLUTIONS.


X. The Earth being now grown more Solid,
Compact, and Dry, its Surface diſtinguiſh'd in-
to Sea and Dry-land, each of which were ſtor'd
in ſome fort with Inhabitants and Vegetables ,
the Air being fully clear, and fit for Reſpiration,
and the other Diſpoſitions - of External Nature
being equally ſubſervient to this, as well as it had
been before to the laſt day's Produdtions ; 'twas
a proper Seaſon for the Generation of the Dry-
land Animals, and the Introduction of the nobleſt
of them, Man; which accordingly were the firſt
Works, on this ſixth Day or Year of the Crea-
tion, Any more particular account of which,
or of the following Works is not ſo dire&ly the
co of this Theory , and ſo ſhall not be here
farther inſiſted on. We may only take notice
of ewo things; the one is the peculiar Mar-
ner; the other the peculiar Time for the Crea-
tion of Man. As to the former, Tho' 'tis grant-
cd that all the other Day's Works mention'd by
Meſes were brought to paſs in a natural way by
proper and ſuitable Inſtruments, and a mecha-
nical Proceſs, as we have ſeen through the whole
Series of che foregoing Creation ; ver 'tis evi-
dent, as has been already obſerv'd, That an im-
mediate and miraculous Power was exercis d in
the formation of the Body, and Infuuon of the
Soul of Man, as well as in fome other particu-
lar Caſes belonging to this Origin of Things.
In plain terms, I take it to bes evident, That
that ſame Aiſ& ©idr$eG&, our Blefſcd Media-
tor, who was afterward very frequently conver-
ſant on Earth, appeard in a humane Form to
the Patriarchs, gave the Law in a viſible Glory,
and wich an audible Voice on Mount Sinat ,
guided the [rac/ites perſonally in a Pillar of Fire,
and of a Cloud through the Wilderneſs, inhabi-


ted


253


Solvur. 2.


mraue,

Vid John
i 18. and
v 37 and
vi 45 46.
Mirth xt.
27.1 John
wW.12.
Rom 1.20.
Col. 1. 15,
i Tim. 1.
17. and 6,
15, 15.
with Excd
3. and 19,


254 SOLUTIONS. BooklV.


my 20 ted between the Cherubins in the Holy of Holies,
"1:41 and took the peculiar Stile, Tides, Attributes ,
*, ts, }3- Adoration, and incommunicable Name of the
12, 13. God of [/rael, and at laſt was Incarnacte, liv'd a
Namb.xii. true Man amonglit us, died for us, and aſcended
$,Or.ond into Heaven, makes ſtill Interceffion for us with
2 '+ the Father, and will come to Judge the World
in Righteouſneſs at the laſt Day : That this very

ſame Divine Perſon was y and viſibly, in

a humane Shape, converſant on Earth, was

truly and really employ'd in this Creation of the

\z. World (and particularly in this peculiar Forma-
Vid. Prov. the Holy Scriptures. It being both unfit and
32 Heb impoſlible for the Divine Nature it ſelf, or at
1, 2. with leaſt that of the Father, to be ſo much, and in
11.3-Col. ſuch a manner concern'd with the Corporeal
1. 14,15, World, and the ſinful Race of Mankind, as we
JoknT 4 find here and every where this Divine Perſon ,
2.3. Heb, Our Bleſſed Mediator , to have been; as the
1.10, 11, Texts quoted a little above compar'd together
12, do I think fully prove. Seeing therefore our
Saviour Chriſt, God-man , was perſonally pre-

ſent, and actually employ'd -in this Primitive
Creation of the World : Seeing Man was to be

a Creature intirely different from all the reſt, a

Being compounded of a Spiritual and Immortal

Soul, and of a Material and Corruptible Body :

Seeing in both theſe he was to be made in the

likeneſs of that Divine Perſon , who created

him, and be conſtituted his Deputy and Vice«

zrent among the Creatures here below; 'twas

c reaſonable there ſhould be as great a diftin-

&ion in his/Original, as was to be in his Na-

ture and Faculties, his Othce and Dignity, his
Capacities and Happineſs from the other parts

of the viſible Creatiog ; and by conſcquence ,

that


»


' Chap. 1. SOLUTIONS.


that iar Interpoſition of God himſelf in the
_— ode, and Infuſion of the
Soul of our firſt Parents, fo particularly obſerva-
ble in the Moſaick Hiſtory , is both very agree-
able to the Nature of things, very ſuicable to the
Wiſdom of God, and very reconcilable to the
moſt Philoſophick Accounts of this Origin of
the World; and withal a remarkable token of
the Dignicy of Human Nature , of the diſtin-
&ion berween his Soul and Body, and of the
great Co:ideſcenſion and Love of God towards
us, and ſo the moſt highly worthy of our con-
ſideration. Neither is the other circumſtance the
peculiar Time of the Creation of Man to be
paſs'd over wichout a proper Refleftion on it.
*T were caſy to ſhew , That none of the prece-
ding Days were in any degree ſo tit for; nay,
__ of them not capable of this Creation and
Introduction of Man. Bur upon this ſixth Pe-
riod, when every thing which could be ſubſer-
vient to him, and advance his felicity, was com-

leated ; he who was to be the Lord of All, and
for whoſe ſake the whole was fram'd, was brought
into the World. When the Ligb: had been pene-
trating into, and clarifying this dark and thick
Atmoſphere for more than five compleat Years toge-
cher ; when the ir was freed from its number-
leſs Vapours, and become pure, clear, and fir for
his Reſpiration 3 when rhe I/zters, as well ſupe-
rior as interior, were fo difpos'd as to miniſter
to his neceflities by Milts and Dews from the
Heavens, and by Springs and Rivers trom the
Earth; when the Surface of :he Earth was become
dry and ſolid for his ſupport, and was cover'd
over with Trees, Shrubs, Plants, Herbs, Grals,
and Flowers for his Suſtenanc2 and Delight ;
when the glorious Firmament of Heaven, and the
beautiful


Pſ.lm viii.
6.


SOLUTIONS. Book 1Y.


beautifal Syſtem of the Sw, Moon , and Star:
were viſible and conſpicuous to him, the Objects of
his Contemplation, the Diſtinguiſhers of his Sea-
fons; by whoſe powerful Iniluences the Earth
was invigorated, and the World rendred a fruit-
ful and uſeful, a lightrfome and pleaſant Habita-
tion to him ; when, laſtly, a? ſcrrs of Animals in
the Seas, in the Air, or on the Earth, were (0
diſpos'd as to attend, benefit, and pleaſe him one
way or other ; when, I ſay, all theſe things were
by the Care, Beneficence, and Providence of God
prepar'd for the entertainment of this principal
Gueſt, then, and not till then, was Man crea-
ted and introduc'd into the World: Then, and
not before was He conſticutzd the Lord and Go-
vernor of the whole, and all rhings put m ſubje-
tion under his feet. In which intire procedure
the Wiſdom and Goodneſs of the Creator, and
the Dignity and Honour of his principal Crea-
ture here below, are equally conſulted ; and the
greateſt occaſion imaginable given to our firſt Pa-
rents, and all their Poſtericy of adoring and ce-
lebrating the Divine Bounty to them in the pre-
ſent and ſucceeding Ages. Which naturally leads
us to the next Propoſition.


XI. God having thus finiſh'd the Works of Creation ,
Reſted on the Seventh day from the Time ; and San$i-
fied or ſer that Day apart for a Sabbath, or Day of
Reſt, ro be then and afrerward obſcrv'd as a Memo»
rial of his Creation of the World in the fix foregoing,
and his reſting or keeping a S:bbath on this Seventh
day. Which $:bbath was reviv'd, or at I-aſt irs Ob-
ſervation anew eatorc'd on the Jews, by the Fourth
Commandment.


XI. Nothing ſure could be more fic and 546


Ip-


mg


per at this time than che prailing and wor


Chap. 1. SOLUTIONS.


ping of that Powerful and Munificent Creator ,
who in the foregoing ſix Days Productions had
ſo operouſly and fo liberally provided for the
well being and happineſs of Mankind. And ſee-
ing this intire Fabrick was deſign'd for the uſe
and advantage of all ſucceeding Generations as
well as the preſent”, it could not but be reaſon-
able to perpetuate the Memory of this Creation,
and devote one Period in ſeven to the peculiar
Worſhip and Service of that God who was both
the Author of the Works themſelves, and of this
Inſticution of the Sabbath, to perpetuate the me-
mory of ſuch his fix Days of Work, and of this
ſeventh of Reſt, to all furure Generations. What
relates to the Fall of Adam, 'and the intire Mo-
ral State of the World, comes not within the
compals of this Phyſical Theory, and fo ( not-
withſtanding it naturally enough belongs to this
Day, and might, -I imagine, be ſhewn not to be
ſo difficult, as for want of a right underſtand-
ing thereof, 'tis uſually imagin'd to be, and that
without receding from the literal, obvious, and
uſual Senſe of Scripture) muſt be wholly omitted
in this place.


X!T There is a conſtint and vigorous Heat diffuſed
from the Central towards the ſuperficiary Parts of our
Earth,


XII. This has been already accounted for, and
need not here be reſum'd.

Corollary. From the conſideration of the wery long
time that the Heat of a Comet's central Solid may en-
dure, "tis eaſy to account for that otherwiſe ſtrange
Phanomenon of ſome of thoſe Bodies , viz. That
the” the Tails of the Comets appear to be no other than
Steams of Vapours rarified by the pos Heat ac-
autr”d in thei approaches to the Bun; yet ſome at


a leaſt


257


Vid. Lets.
65. & Hy«
poth. 1.
Arg. 7.
prius.
Vid. Fig.
Comer. A.
D. _
2pu
Newt. &
noſtram,
Fig. 1+


SOLUTIONS. BookIV,


leaſt of theſe Comets have no inconſiderable ones as
they are deſcending towards the Sun, long before they
approach near encugh to acquire new ones by a freſh
Rarefattion of their Vapours im bis Victnity. For ſince
the prodigious Heat acquir'd at the laſt Perihelion
muſt remain for ſo many thouſands of Years , tho" the
Tail which the Sun's own Heat rais'd at that time
muſt have been either disperſed through the Ether, or
by its Gravitation return'd to its old place in the At-
moſphere ; yet will there ſtill remain a Tail , and
its Poſition will be mo other than if the Sun's own
Heat bad elevated the ſame, For by what Heat [6
ever the | afours in 4 Comet's Atmoſphere become
rarer than the Parts of the Solar Atmoſphere m
which they are , or ſubje& to the Power and Velocity
of the Sun's Rays elevating the ſame, a Tail muſt be
as certainly produc'd as if the Sun's own Heat were
the occaſion of it. Which Obſervation rightly confider'd,
will afford light to the foremention'd Phanomenon,
and will deſerve the conſideration of Altronomers, to


whom it ts ſubmitted.


XII The habitable Earth is founded or firuate on the
Surface of the Waters ; or of a deep and vaſt Subter-
rancous Fluid.


XIII. This has been ſufficiently explain'd al-
ready, and is obſervable in the foregoing Figures
of the four latter periods of the Meojaick Creation.


XIV. The interior or intire Conſtitution of the Earth is
correſpoudent ro that of an Egg.


XIV. This is alſo very eafily obſervable in the
ſame Figures: Where (1.) the Central Solid BB
anſwerable to the 7/4; which by its fiery Co-
lour, great Quantity, and innermoſt Situation,
exactly repreſents the ſ:me; Where ( 2.) the |

great


Chap. n. SOLUTIONS.


eat 4 is analogous to the 7Tite; whoſe

nſity, Viſcoſiry, moderate Fluidity, and mid-
dle Poſitition, excellently expreſs the like Qua-
licies of the other: Where (3.) the uyper Orb
or habitable Earth correſponds to the Shell, whole
Ligheneſs, Tenuity , Solidity, lictle incqualities
of Surface , and uppermoſt Situation admirably
agree to the ſame. 'Tis indeed poſſible to ſuppoſe
that the Quancities, ſpecifick Gravities, and Craſ-
fitudes of each Orb (to inſtance in nothing elſe
here) may be in the Earth proportionable to
their Analogous ones in an Fyg ; but becauſe the
Similitude 1s ſo very obvious and full in the fore-
going more certain reſpects, and more than ſuf-
ficient on thoſe accounts to ſolve the preſent
Phenomenon 5 and becauſe a bare pollibility, cr
fancicd probabilicy cannot deſerve any more nice
conſideration ; I forbear; and look upon the Co-
incidences already obſerv'd, not a little ſurpri-
zing and remarkable.


XV. The Primitive Earth had Seas and Dry land diſtin-
guiſh'd from each other in great meaſure as the preſenr;
_ thoſe ſituate in the ſame places generally as they

ill are,


XV. The former part of this has been already
ſufficiently explain'd; and of the latter part there
can then be no reaſon to make any queſtion ;
ſince the ſame Earth that was made at firſt, does
ſtill, as co 1ts main parts, remain as it was to this


Day.
XVI. The Primitive Earth had Springs, Fountains ,


Streams, and Rivers, in the ſame manner as the pre-
ſent, and uſually in or near the Came places allo.


XVI. The Origin of Fountains and Rivers is
undoubtedly eichzr from Vapours deſcending
a 2 from


239


Solur. 7.
prius.


260


Eſlay, p.
121, &c.
andp.1s 2.


Vid. Lem,
67,68,69.
Prius,


SOLUTIONS. BoeklV.


from without the Surface of the Earth, or from
Steams elevated by the heat wichm. And which
way ſoever we chuſe to ſolve the preſent, twill
a!ſo ſerve to folve the Primitive Phenomens here
mention'd. "Tis only to be obſerv'd, That be-
fore the upper Earth was chap'd and broken at
the commencing of the Diurnal Rotation ; and
indeed before the Srrata became fo firmly con-
ſolidated as they afterward were, the ſubterra-
neous Steams would ariſe, and paſs through the
ſame more uniformly, and more eaſily, and fo
10re equally diſpenſe their Waters over every
Pare and Region of the Larth, than after-
ward. h
Corollary. If therefore Dy. Woodward be right

m aſſerting, That the Cracks and Fiſlures , which be
calls perpendicular ones, ſirce the mtire Conſol:da-
tion of the Strata of the Earth , are. neceſſary to the
Origin of Springs, ( and I belicve be may bawve good
ground, fer bis Op:11on } {rom the Bemg of ſuch
Springs and Fountains aſter the Conſolidation of the
Strata, and before the Flood , "tus evident , that the
Diurnal 2ation did not commence till after the An-
nual ; nay, till. after the Formation and Can/olula-
tion of the Earth: ind /o what m other grounds
was before rendred bighly probable, will appear nearer
to certamty on "This: For 'tss plam, If the preſent
Diurnal Action commenc'd either wwith the Annual ,
or indeeÞ any time before the Formation of the Fartb,
the Fieure of the Chaos, and ſo of the Abyſs and
Upper Earth, would origmaly be that of an Oblate
Sphzrotd, as if 15 10M; the rata 2'( uld be all cobc-
rent , united, and continued, without any Cracks or
perpendicular Fiſſures at a!/; and the Origin of
Sprimgs, on the Docor's Grounds , muſt in a natu-
ral way be plataly amtol/ivie.. Since therefore the
Diurnal Rotations commmncre aſter the Conſelida-
1107


Chap.1; SOLUTIONS.


t10n of the Strata groes a Mechanical and Natural
Account" of the Chaps and perpendicular Fiſſures ;
fince without the ſame in the preſent Caſe no natural
Cau/e of them 1s by any o/foned; irce withal "tis mi-
queſt ionable that there were Springs and Rivers b-
fore the Flood; and ſince, laſtly, it appears that [uch
Fiſſures were neceſſary to the beirg of tho/e Springs on:d
Rivers, tis wery reaſonable, nay, neceſſary 16 [nproſe,
that the Diurnal Rotation did not commence til] a'ter
the Formation and Conſol:dation of the Earth was over ;
or , which is almoſt all one, til} the ial of Man, as
we formerly aſſerted. |


XVI. The Primitive Earth was diſtinguiſh'd into Moun-
rains, Plains, and Vallies, in the ſame manner ,
generally ſpeaking, and in the ſame places as the
preſent.


XVII. This has been ſufficiently explain'd al-
ready, and need not here be reaſſlum'd. And that
each of theſe Seas, Springs with their Rivers, and
Mountains, were generally the ſame, and in the
ſame places as the preſent, there is no reaſon to
doubt; they being uſually the very fame inaivi-
duals then and now, and fo unqueſtionably can-
not have chang'd their primary Situations.


XVIII. The Waters of the Seas in the Primitive Earth
were Salt, and thoſe of the Rivers Freſb, as they are at
preſent, and each ,/ as now, were then ſtor'd with
great plenty of Fiſh.


XVIII. This has no ditficulty in it, ſeeing our
preſent Seas and Rivers are the very ſame, or of
the ſame nature; and their ſeveral Inhabitants
the Spawn or Oft-ſpring of thoſe primitive ones.


XIX. The Seas were agicited with a like Tide, or Flux
and Reflux, as they are at preſear.


Aa-3 XIX. The


261


Hypoth.
3- Pt us.


Lem. 71,
&c. and
Solur. 7,
Prius


262


Lem. 79.
cum Co-
rol. prius.


SOLUTIONS. Bookly.


XIX, The preſence of the Moon and Sun be-
ing the cauſe of the Tides, and thoſe Bodies by
conſequence being equally diſpos'd before , as
ſince the Deluge, to produce them; this Propoſi-


« tion can have no manner of difficulty. Only we


may take notice of theſe ewo things, (1.) "That
in the State of. Innocence, before the Diurnal
Revolution began , the frequency of the Tide
muſt depend on the Lunar Period , and happen
but ewice in each Month, as now it does in
{ſomewhat above a days time wich us: On which
account the increaſe and decreaſe of the Waters
would be extreamly gentle, leiſurely, and gra-
dual, without any imaginable Violence or Pteci-
pitation. (2.) 'That in the whole Antedilutian
State the Tides were leſſer than ſince, by reaſon
of the ſmalineſs of the Seas then in compariſon
of the great Ocean, from whence row the molt
conliderable ones are deriv'd. All which yer
hinders not, but they raight be ſenfible enough
in ſome Creeks, Bays, and Mouths of Rivers:
The peculiar circumitances of thoſe places in
thit as well as itt the preſent State, rendiing the
Tides, the Elevations and Deprethons cf tlic
Waters :4ere, moſt conſiderable and violent of
all others.


XX. The ProduRtions of the Primitive Farth, as for 2s
we can gueſs by the remainders of them at the De-
Inge, differ'd little or nothing from thoſe of rhe pre»
ſent, either in Figure, Magnirude, Texture of Parts,
or any other correſpondent reſpe&.


XX. Theſe things ſeem to depend on two
Particulars ; viz, partly on the primary Bigneſs,
Figure, and Conſtitution of the conſtituent, in-
ſenſible: Parts or Elements of Bodies ; and partly
on elie quantity, of Heat made uſe of in their

Production


Chap. 1,, SOLUTIONS.


Production or Coalition. Which being ſuppos'd,
the Propoſition will eaſily be eſftabliſh'd. For,
as to the firſt, I ſuppoſe they remain 4anvariab!y
the ſame in all Ages, and are by any natural
Power unalterable. And as to the laſt , what-
ever be to be ſaid of the State of Innocence, or
the firſt Apes ſucceeding, on ſome peculiar ac-
counts, which I believe might be warmer than
at preſent ; yer as to the times here referr'd to,
there is no need to ſuppoſe any rear ditfe-
rence of Heat, either from the Sw, or the Cen-
tral Body : And indecd, all the diſterence on any
accounts to be ſuppos'd between the eat before
and fince the Deluge, muſt be roo inconliderable
to be taken notice of in any ſuch ſenſible Effects
as this Propoſition does refer to. For the Sun's
heat was not above a twenty fifth part greater than
'ris now, and the ſpace of four or five thouſand
Yeais makes bur a {nall difference in that of the
Central Solid, if at firſt it were heared any whit
near the degree mention'd in the Calculation re-
ferr'd to in the Margin. And tho' its real Heat
were decreas'd, yet in caſe its facility of Pene-
tration were 'increas'd in the ſame Proportion ,
the heat on the Face of the Earth wonld fill be
equal and invariable. And ſo by theſe accounts,
the Productions of Nature in all Agcs mult be
pretty equal and agrecable, as this Propoſition
requires.

Corollary. The' the Lives of the Antediluvians
were ſo much longer than: ours at preſent , yet were
they not general'y of a more Gygantick Stature than
the paſt or preſent Generations ſince bawe been. In
all which Ages, notwithſtanding, there have been jone
of an extraordinary Bigneſs and Stature , and will be
ſtill no doubt in the future Ages to the end of the


World.
Aa4 XXL. The


Phenom,
23. & 27


Þ* iUS.,


Lem. 65.


prius,


264


SOLUTIONS. BooklV.


XXI. The Primitive Earth had ſuch Maral and Miner ol:
in it, as the preſent has.


XXI. This is caſily accounted for. For ſince
the Antidiluvian, and the preſent Earth , are ci-
ther the very fame, as the lower Regions ; or at
leaſt of the ſame nature, the Off-ſpring of a Co-
mets Atmoſphere ( as even that acquir'd Cruſt
at the Deluge was ) 'tis no wonder if each of
them contain the ſame Speczes of Bodies with-
in it,

XXII. Arts and Sciences were invented and improved in


_ firſt Ages of the World, as well as they ſince have
n.


XXII. There is little need of giving particu-
lar Reaſons for this. All I ſhall obſerve, is, That
ſeeing the Ignorance and Barbarity of the Ages
afcer che Deluge, is the greateſt Objection againſt
this Propoſition ; 'tis avoided in our Hyporbeſis.
The inſenſible, tho' prodigious Change of the


State of Nature, and the periſhing of all the Mo-


numents of the old Learning or Arts at the Flood,
with the want 'of correſpondence in the latter
Years to the former Tradition , reducing the
few remainders of the former State wholly to
ſeek for their Learning, notwithſtanding it might
have been cultivated and improv'd to great de-
gree before the Deluge ; as therefore in all pro-
bability it was.


CHAP.


Chap.z. SOLUTIONS.


CHAP, Il,


A Solution of the Phanomena relating to
the Primitive State of the Karth,


XXITI The Primitive (hits of the Earth 2dmitr'd of the
primary production of Animals our of the Warers and
Dry Ground, which the ſubſequent (tires, otherwiſe
than in the ordinary method of Generation, have bezn
uncapable of.


XXIII. * IS not to be expected that I ſhould

here be able to give a full and me-
thodical account of the growth of the Primitive:
Pairs of Animals, and of the ſeveral dilpolicions of
the Primigenial ſtate of Nature ſubſervient or con-
wibutary thereto. The method of the Generation
of Animals is ic felf in general fo lict'e known,
and the Hiltory of this firlt ſtage of che World, as
well ſo ſhort in the Sacred Writings, as fo dith-
cult to be, in all its circumſtances, now other
wiſe underſtood, that ſuch an Attempt might
juſtly be look'd upon as too ralh a preſumption.
All that ought to be expected, andail that 1 (hall
endeavour 1s this; To ſhew, that as far as is
known of that Original Earth, its properties
were as peculiarly fic for, as thoſe oppolite ones
of the ſucceeding are incapable of, ſuch a pro-
duction of Animals at firſt, as this Propoſtion
takes notice of. Which the five following par-
ticulars ſhall include. (1.) The long and con-
tinued ſpaces of Day and Night in the Primit:ve
ſtare did capacitate it for fuch productions ;
which the quick returns of the ſame afterward
| prohibited.


Hypoch.,
3. Prits,


266


S var. 7.
PLIus.


SOLUTIONS. BooklV.


prohibited. + "Twill be eaſily granted, that in the
Generation of Animals there muſt be a pretty


conſtant and continual warmth, without the fre-


quent interpoſition of Cold during the moſt
part of the proceſs. Now this the long days
of half a ycar afforded theſe Primary Embrio's ;
which the ſhort ones of only ewelve Gal hours,
and the ſudden and frequent returns of equal
Nights, has utterly deni'd to any ſuch ever ſince.
(2.) The Primitive Earth. was moiſt and juicy
enough to ſupply nouriſhment all the time of
the Generation of the Fz!zs ; which after it was
once become perfe&ly Dry and Solid was not
again to be _ It was before obſerv'd,
that upon the deſcent of the vaſt quantities of
Vapours on the Third Day, the ground was fo
tender, ſoft, and full of juices, as very naturally
anſwered to what all Antiquity made the fund
and promptuary of the riſing Plants and Ani-
mals, the famous *Iavs. And as that was but 4a
neceſſary qualification of a Soil which was to
produce Animals, fo the want of it ever ſince
takes away all hopes of a like Propagation.
(2.) The Primitive ſtate of the Earth and Air,
where the Animals were produc'd, had heat
ſufficient for that purpoſe ; which the ſubſe-
quent has not. - Tis evident that a greater heat
than the preſent Earth or Ambient Air can af-
ford, is requiſite to, and made uſe of in the pre-
ſ-nt Generation of Animals (which the Incu-
bation in the Oviparous, and the ſtill warmer
Poſition of the F-t:5 in the Viviparous Animals
aflure us of:) On which account the preſent
Earth muſt needs be.incapable of their pro-
duction. But that the Heat in the Primuive
Earth, and particularly where the Animals were


produc'd, was much greater, will thus appear.
| As


Chap. x. SOLUTIONS.


As to the Heat from the Central Body ; while
the Earth was ſomewhar looſe, and pretty freely


267


admitted the aſcending ſteams, that, would


be conſiderably greater than after its more intire
conſolidation, when theſe fleams were thereby
ſo much confin'd within, or diverrcd to fome
particular conceptac!es. Belides, The Producti-
on of Animals was near Paradi/e, and I ſuppoſe
no where elſe. Now thoſe middle Regions, (of
which Eden, the Country of Par.:di/e, was one)
being ſituate under the ancient Ecliptick, and
preſent Tropick, (of which before) enjoy 'd alfo
a greater Heat from the ſame Central Body by
reaſon of their greater nearneſs thereto, than
ſince they or the correſponding, parts of the 7or-
rid Zore do or can partake of. For when the
Earth was then perfectly Sphxrical, the middle,
and their neighbouring parts were about 10
miles ncarer the Central So'id than the ſame
Regions now are : (They being in that pro-
portion Elcvated , and tne circumpolar de-
pre(s'd at the commencing of the Dimnal Rota-
tort) Which greater Vicinity of the Central
Heat m:{t certainly have a ſuicable e#e&t, and
caufs ſomewhat warmer Regions thereabours


than they have been ever finc2. Moreover. It
L *% ©* +.4 } ST ws 4 yp. ” # FY 7 » ! % '4 v4 © » ; %. Nod ! O

ne Toa Prot cat Or Ne T.EATTY Onda oe m
any confiderable proportion diminifh d in near
5005 Years time, (as 12 /ome proportion it muſt


be) That degree of Heat which it had ar firſt,
was ftill the moſt powerful of ail other ever
ſince. But then as to the Solar Hear. 'to take
no notice of the greater nearneſfs of the Sun's
Body before the Del:ce than ſince, as not di-
rely reaching the preſent caſe: ) 'Tis evident
that Paradiſe, ſituate under or near the very
Ecliptick it ſelf, muſt receive the utmoſt a"

®


Hvrorth 4.
prius,


[ em. 67,
C9, cum
coroll,
priu.,


Phaxnom.
39- prius.


Solur. 19.


Prius.


Phenom.


36, prius.


Solur. 2,
prius,


SOLUTIONS. BooklY,


of the ſame heat which any part of the Globe
were capable of, which by lying under the Tro-
pick afterward it would not do. On all which
accounts joyn'd together, tis evident that the heat
in the Primitive State was much more conſide-
rable, and ſo much more adapted to the Gene-
ration of Animals than that in the ſubſequent
ever was or can pollibly be. (4.) The Primi-
tive ſtate was perfe&tly ſtill and calm; free from
all ſuch winds, ſtorms, violent tides, or any the
like hurries and diſorders as at preſent wholly
render the production of Animals impoſlible :
Which quiet condition, if in ſome reſpects ic en-
dur'd till the Deluge, yet, as even in thoſe the
Paradiſiacal ſtate might have the preheminence ;
ſo in others, particularly the gentleneſs of the
Tides, it had ſtill the moſt peculiar advantage ;
as was before obſerved. (s5.) The Equability
of Seaſons, and the greater uniformity of the
Air's temperature,” which in part remain'd till
the Deluge, but might be more ſignal in the Pa-
radifiacal ſtate, rendred that Earth as proper, as
the contrary ſudden, uncertain, and violent ex-
treams of heat and cold, drought and moiſture,
ſultry and froſty Weather now, wholly indiſpoſe
it, for ſuch a production of Animals. Which
Prerogatives of the Primitive Earth and Air will
certainly demonſtrate, -if not its intire fitneſs,
yet ſure its leſs unfitneſs for ſuch an original
Generation as was here to be accounted for,
and is all, as was before obſerv'd , that can
ey be rcquir'd and expected in the preſent
caſe.

Corolla Y. Iffen it has been before acow'd, that
all Generation « bu: Nutrition 5 and that all Seeds, as
well of inimols, as of Plants, are the immediate
workmanſhip of God ; 'Tis evident that this Suppo-


ſaion


Chap. 2. SOLUTIONS.


ſition of the Original Produttion of Animals out of the
Waters and Earth ; according to the plaineſt letter of
the Moſaick Hiſtory, does by no means derogate
from the Divine Efficiency, and the wonderful Art
and Skill m the tant, their Bodies 5 nor mm the
leaſt fawour that ungrounded and pernicious opinion of


the Equivocal or Spontaneous Generation of any of Vid. Bext«
ley, Serm.


them.


XXTV. The Conſtitution of Man in his Primitive State
was very different from that ever ſince the Fall; not
only as to the Temper and Perfe&ions of his Soul ,
but as to the Nature and Diſpoſition of his Body
alſo,


XXIV. The Book of Geneſis affords us fo ſhort
a Hiſtory of this Primitive Stage of the World,
and of the Conſtitution of Man therein ; and
all other accounts are ſo inconliderable in this
reſpect, that a particular account of all things re-
lating to this Propoſition is by no means to be
expected. *Tis in general ſufficient, that we
have, from Sacred and Prophane Authority ,
evinc'd the ſtate of External Nature to have
been mighty different from the preſent ; and
that conſequently the State of Man, even on
Philoſophical Conſiderations, ought to be ſu
pos'd equally different from the preſent alſo.
And 'tis fo highly unreaſonable from meer ob-
ſervations made now, to paſs a Cenſure on what
was done then ; and from the Frail, Imperte&,
Sinful, and Miſerable Condition of Humane


Nature in our Days, to judge of the ſame in_


its State of Innocence, Pertection and Felicity ;
or from che Circumſtances ic is in at preſent,
to determine thoſe it muſt at that time have
been in ; that nothing can be more ſo. We
might almoſt as well Argue that Ange!s Eat and

Drink,


P


4+


Lem. 70.
cum Co-


roll. &


Hypoth. 3.


prius,


 -— ” OO ——eI—onmE— i _ —_— —— _ —— — —


SOLUTIONS. BookIV.


Drink, Sleep and Wake, Work and Reſt, be.
cauſe We do fo ; or that the Infant in the Womb
Sees and Hears, Talks and Diſcourſes, Reads
and Writes, becauſe afterward He commonly
does the fame things, as that becauſe We have
need of Cloathing to cover our Shame, and
have Inflexible, Robuſt, and in a certain time
Cygrruptible Temperaments of Body, therefore
ſo had our Primi:rve Parents in the State of Inno-
cency. But to ſpeak ſomewhat more diftin&ly
to thoſe two particulars included under this Pro-
poſition, (1.) That in the ations relating to
the propagation of the Species, there ſhould be no
rats of Shame, and conſequently no occaſion
for coverine (uch parts as were therein concern'd,
4s by no means ſtrange, in a ſtate of Innocence;
where there was no inclination to any ſinful
kind or degree of Application, and where all
ſuch inferior Appetires were in compleat ſub-
jetion to the Superior, the Reaſon and Con-
ſcience of Man. *'Tis rather an evident Token
of our Guilt, a demonſtration of the diſorder
and pollution of our Nature and Faculties now,
that what in permitted circumſtances is inno-
cent and natural in it ſelf, nay neceſſary. for
the propagation of the Species, and the preſcrva-
tion of Mankind, ſhould make us bluſh: *Tis a
plain note of the vileneſs of our preſent ſtate, a
mark of the baſeneſs of our condition now, that
what God and Nature . have ordain'd for the
continuation of the World, ſhould yet inevita-
bly ſeem to have ſomerhing of Indecency and
Turpitude adhering to it : So far, that meer baſh-
fulncſs and modclty oblige us tro conceal and
paſs over in fiience all that belongs thereto. Ir
mdeed might more reaſonably be made a query,
why the Covering our Nakednefs has been fo
general,


Chap.2z. SOLUTIONS.


eneral, and is ſo neceſſary now, (as it has
juſtly by all Ages and Nations been eſteem'd)
than why it was otherwiſe in this Primitive ſtate
of the World. (2.) That the uſe of one fort of
Food (that of the Tree of Life) might be ca-
pable of fixing and ſetling the temper of a hu-
mane Body , of rendring it fo laſting, that,
while its Earthly condition was to continue, it
might never be diſfolv'd; and that the uſe of a
contrary fort of Food, (That of the Tree of
Knowledge of Good and Emil) might be capable
of fo far corrupting and diſordering the fame,
that ic would become ſubject to Sickneſs, Miſery,
and Diſſolution in a ſhorter ſpace, is, I think,
even by what we at preſent ſee, by no means
incredible. We cannot but obſerve how great
a change a courſe of Diet, moderate, whole-
ſome, and agrezable, will make in our preſent
temperament for the better ; and on the con-
; trary, how far an intemperate, and immoderate
indulgence of our Appetites, either as to the
kinds or quantities of our Meats and Drinks,
tho* but for a few Weeks or Months, will
do the ſame for the worſe; even to the ſpoiling
and deſtroying of a very good habit of Body, to
the depriving men of their healths; nay fre-
quently of their Lives too by a violent Diſeaſe.
If we therefore, to take the narroweſt Suppoſi-
tion, imagine the eating of chat pernicious and
forbidden Fruit to have been confin'd to one
Day or Year of this Primitive State ( which yet
ehere is no neceflity of doing) ; 'ewill be no harſh
or incredible ſuppoſal ; eſpecially, if we conlider
what has been ſaid of the preſent State of
Things, and how much more the temper of our
firſt Parents Bodies, and the particular Food oa
which they fed , might be peculiarly fitted for
. ths


271,


SOLUTIONS, BooklY.


the ſame purpoſes ; that the egpagarans Indul-


gence of a very peſtilent courſe of Diet for {6
many Months together might break and pervert
the well temper'd Conſtitutions of our firſt Pa-
rents, might render their Bodies liable to ſuch
Diſtempers as in length of time would diffolve
and entirely overthrow themz or, in other
words, would render Mankind ſickly, miſerable, and
mortal Creatures for ever after. Which is, I think,
enough to clear the Propoſition before us, ſo far
as a bare Phyſical Theery is concern'd therein.


XXV. The Female was then very different from what
ſhe is now; particularly ſhe was in a ſtite of greater
Equality with the Male, and httle more ſubje& to
Sorrow in the Propagation of Poſterity than he.


XV. That the original, State and Circum-
ſtances of the Female, thould be as they are here
repreſented , is fo far from being ſtrange , that

*rhe contrary ones of that Sex at preſent, were
mot the occaſion thereof known , might much
more juſtly appear ſo. For granting the Equa-
lity of Humane Souls in themſelves, tis not ver

eaſy to give a good reaſon, why that part which
one half of Mankind was to bear in the Propa-
gation of ir, ſhould ſubjet ir to ſuch a low Con-
dition, great weaknels of Nature, and thoſe ſe-
vere Pains and Agonies which did not a: all af-
fet the other ; as God and Nature have at pre-
ſent made unavoidable. And as to the change
of her Name after the Fall, from AJamab and
Ichab to Eve (which latter ſzems ro denote her
Capacity rhen artzin'd4 of becoming the Mother
of all thoſe Generations of Mankind which were
afrerward to live on the Face of the Earth ) ic
may probably intimate (to omit any other Ob-


{ervations that miglit be made on it) fome
change


MA GAww6_ i NI” YR 2 = RI


| Chap. 2. SOLUTIONS.


change in the Method or Circumſtances con-
cerning Humane Generation. And if we con-
ſider, that Adam and his I/ife were nd inconſi-
derable time in Paradiſe together, even after che
Blefling of Increaſe and Multiply , before their
Fall; and carefully conſider the Texts quored in
the Margin, we ſhall perhaps believe 'tis no im-
probable conjecture.


XXVI. The other Terreſtrial Animals were in a ſtate of
greater Capacities and Operations ; nearer approaching
to reaſon and diſcourſe; and partakers of higher de-
grees of Perfeftion and Happineſs, than they have


been ever ſince.


XXVI. Since the Primitive ſtate of External
Nature was ſo exceeding different from the pre-
ſent, as has been already prov'd ; the other Ter-
reſtrial Animals, as well as Man, ought to be
ſuppos'd of a ſomewhat proportionably diffe-
rent Temper, Abilities and Actions. Beſides,
The Divine Providence is concern'd to ſuit one
Being to Another ; and to accommodate {till
the Chondiacs, to the Superior rank of Crea-
tures in the World : On which account *tis not
ſtrange, that the Bruit Animals were in their
Primitive Conſtitution very much diſtinguiſh'd
from, and advanc'd prog if as are now upot
the Earth; the Diverſity with Relation to Man-
kind, to whom in each Period they were to be
ſubſervient, being ſo very remarkable. For
ſince Mankind upon the Fall degenerated into a
Senſual and Bruitiſh way of Living, the Bruic
Creatures themſelves would very unwillingly
have paid their due homage and {2bmillion, had
not they in ſome degree degenerated from their
Primitive Dignity at the ſame time. Which de-
generacy ſuppos'd, a former greater degree of

B b * Abilities,


Gen. 11.29,
& iii. 7,
to, 11. &


ww. 1.


274


SOLUTTONS. BooklV,


Abilities, Operations, and Happineſs is at the
ſame time ſuppos'd alſo. And to ſtrengthen this
conjeRure, I own venture to Appeal to Anatomy,
whether the preſent Bodies of Bruits do not ap-

ar capable,. as far as can be diſcover'd, of no-

ler operations than we ever now obſerve from
them. The advantage of even Mankind in this
reſpe&t ſeeming not very conſiderable over the


Bruits that periſb.


XXVII The temper of the Air, where our firſt Parents
liv'd, was warmer, and the Heat greater before the
Fall than ſince.


XXVII. This has bcen already accounted for


in the twenty third Propoſition before.


XXVIII. Thoſe Regions of the Earth where our firſt Pa-
rents were plac'd, were produftive of better and more
vſeful Vegetables with leſs Labour and Tillage than
ſince they hive been.


XXVIII. That we may account for this Pro-
poſition, and that Curſe which was inflicted on
the ground at the Fa'l; in good meaſure inclu-
ded therein 3 we muſt obſerve, that the growth
of Plants and Vegetables depends on a deegrce
of Heat proportionate to the peculiar temper
and exigence of each Species ; and by conſe-
quence that, let the number of Secds in any
Soil be never fo many, or their kinds _——
diverſe, yet the' Surface of the Earth muſt re-
main bare and barren, until the peculiar Heat


of the Seaſon and Climate be adapted to them :


Now ſeeing different kinds of Sceds require dif-
ferent degrees of Heat, 'tis only ſuch certain
kinds of the fame that will at once ſhew them-
ſelves, or ſpring out of the Earth ; the reſt, to
which the Heat is not adjuſtcd, lying all Ls

WHILE


— = a a A Oh a a. a. «6


i. @aX5 AS. 22% 9 © Wh EIN,


ce


Chap. 2. SOLUTIONS.


while as Dormant and Dead as if they did not
really Exiſt in Nature. Thus we have ſeveral
diſtin Crops of Vegetables in the ſeteral Sea-
ſons of the Year. Thoſe Seeds which the ſmall
Heat of February and March is not able to raiſe,
lye ſtill in the Earth cill the greater force of the
Sun in Apriland May excite them. In like man-
ner ſeveral others, which are too craſs and un-
pliable for the moderate warmth of the Spring,
are by the yet greater intenſeneſs of the Heat in
Tune, Fuly, and Auguſt, rais d from their Seats,
and oblig'd ro ſhoot forth and diſplay themſelves.
Nay, when in the Months of Serrember and Otto-
ber the Sun's Power is diminiſh d, and its Heat
but about equivalent to that of March and 4pril,
it again ſuits the Plants which were then in Sea-
fon ; ſo that they many of them ſpring up afreſh
in theſe Months, and flouriſh over anew, as
before they did in thye;z as Dr. Woodward
very well diſcourſes upon this occaſion. In like
manner we may alſo conſider this matter with re-
lation to the different Climates and Zones of the
Earth, and their quite different Crops of Plants,
according to thoſe different degreesof Heat made
uſe of in their Vegetation. When therefore we
obſerve in the ſame Country a various Crop and
Order of Vegetables every Year, according to
the various Power of Heat in-each Scafon; (a
different Face of the Earth being gradually vi-
ſible from Febrrary till Fuly, in proportion to the
gradual increaſe of Heat all that ſpace; ) we
cannot tell, in cafe the Heat increas'd ftill to a
greater intenſenefs afterward, but a new and
unſeen Face of things might appear ; and many
unheard-of kinds of Vegetables might put forth,
and expoſe themſelves to our Obſervation, even
in the preſent State and Age of the World.

B b 2 Bus


275


257, CC.


SOLUTIONS. BooklIY;


But as to the Primittve World, wherein al}
the Seeds of thoſe Vegetables which God OQ-.
riginally Created were freſh and vegetous ,
and wherein there was a much greater Heat
than ſince has been to invigorate and produce
them ; *tis very reaſonable, and very agreeable
to Nature to ſuppoſe, that many ſorts of Trees,
Plants, Herbs, and Flowers, which the colder
temper of the ſubſequent Earth were unable to
excite and produce, were then every Year rais'd,
and became the principal Recreation and Suſte-
nance of our firſt Parents in the ſtate of Inno-
cency. *Tis very probable they might never
ſee ſuch a Poor, Jejune, and Degenerate State of
the Vegetable Kingdom as we lince have done,
till their unhappy Fall occaſion'd the Introdudti-
on of that miſerable condition of all things
which has ever ſince continued among us. Thus
as one Country or Climate , becayſe of its
greater Coldneſs, is now the Seminary of ſeve-
ral Vegetables which the warmer Regions are
either perfe&t Strangers to, or advance to a
greater Gegete of perfetion; So upon the de-
generacy of the Primeval State into the preſent,
and the mighty Abatement of the Ancient Heat
(taken together with the worſe Juices and other
effects of that Abatement contributary x
to the ſame thing) 'tis natural to allow that ſe-
veral ſuch Vegetables (ſuppoſe Thorns and Thiſtle:)
which were before either perfe&t ſtrangers to,
or had been advanc'd to a greater degree of
Perfte&tion by the Juices and Warmth of Para-
diſe, became the conſtant and troubleſome Heir-
looms there ; to the no little regret of our firſt
Parents; who till then had only ſeen and en-
joy d the better Set of the Primigenial Vegetables.
And if we conlider withal, that a main inten-
tion


Chap. 2: SOLUTIONS.


tion of the Toil, Tillage and Manure of the
Husbandman, ſeems to be deſign d to Enfpiric
and Envigorate the too Cold and Unadtive Soil
with Warm and Active Particles, we ſhall not
be unwilling to grant, that thoſe Labours of the
Husbandman, on this, as well as on ſeveral
other: accounts which might be mention'd, muſt
have been in the Primitive itate very facile and
eaſie, in compariſon of thoſe which are neceſſary
in the preſent (tate.


SCHOLIU AM.


"Twill be here, I imagin, not improper to re-
mind the Reader once for all of the Nature
and Effeds of that extraordinary Change, which
the Fall of Man, and the Conſequent Curſe of
God brought upon the Earth : That he may
with the greater eaſe, of his own accord, view
and compare the States of External Nature be-
fore and” after the Fall one with another, and
wich thoſe things which the Propoſitions we are
now upon do alert concerning them. "Tis evi-
dent then, frons what has been before laid down
hereto relating, that the Primitive ſtate of things


before the Fall was thus. The Earth, being Lem. 6y,
newly form'd, was ſcarcely as yet intirely con- &<.& Hy-


ſolidated, and fo pretty uniformly pervious to
the warm Steams aſcending from beneath. Its
Figure was perfe&tly Sphzrical, and its Strata or
Layers by conſequence were even, continued,
and join'd; and ſo the Central Heat, being equal-
ly diſtant from all the parts of the Earth's Sur-
ace, did very equally diffuſe it ſelf, and equally
affe& all the Climates of the Globe. The Soift
Bb 3 Or


%


Prius.


J-


SOLUTIONS. BooklV.


or Uppermoſt Stratum of the Earth was newly
moiſten'd by the deſcent of the Waters, before


they compos d the Seas bn the Third Day of ;
the Creation, and by the plenty of Moiſture


which it {till receiv'd every Night. The Air
was perfectly Clear, Homogeneous, Tranſparent,
and Suſceptive of the utmoſt Power of the Solar
Heat. 'The Seaſons were equable, or gently
and gradually diltinguiſh'd from one another,
by the Riſing, Setting, Deſcending and Aſcend-
ing Sun, without any quick Interpoſitions of
Pay and Night to diſturb them; The Torrid
Zine of the Earth, as I may call thoſe Regions
near the Solar Courſe, was very much Expos'd
to the Sun, and very much warm'd withal by
its Vicinage to the Central Solid. The Mun
in twelve Revolutions equally meaſur'd out the
Year, and caus'd the molt gentle, eaiie, and gra-
* Cual Tides imaginable. This, with all its natu-
ral Conſequents, was the State of the Primuze
World. But as ſoon as Man had ſinn'd and
render'd that happy State too good for him, or
indeed rendred himſelf wholly uncapable there-
of : And as ſoon as God Almighty had pro-
nounced a Curſe on the Ground, and its Pro-
ductions, preſently the i arth began a new and
ſtrange . Motion, and revolv'd from Weſt to
Eaſt on its own Axis: A fingle NvyS5uiger, Or
Revolution of Night and Day , either imme-
diately or by degre2s, (according as the preſent
Velocity of the :rnal Rotation was ſuddenly or
gradually acquir'd) returned frequently, and
Became no longer than 24 thort Hours ; while
the Arzneal Motion, perform'd on a different
Zxis, diitinguith'd the Seafons, and in Con-
junctiun with the Dixra/, defcrib d the Equator,
and the Tropicks; and by the accels and wi
0


|


Chap. 2. SOLUTIONS,


of the Sun from the laſt named Circles, caus'd
it to viſit the ſeveral Regions enclos'd thereby.
The Face of the Earth was really diſtinguiſh d
into Zones, by the Tropicks and Polar Circles,
truly divided from one another; wich reſpe&t
whereto the particular Regions of the Earth
chang'd their Situation ; the Equator being that
Circle with regard whereto they were now to be
determin'd, as they had been before with regard
to the Ecliptick ; and fo that Paradiſe which was
before at the middle, became the Northern
boundary of the 7orrid Zone. The Figure of the
Earth, which was before truly Spharical, dege-
nerated into an Ob/:te Spheroid 5 the Torrid Zone
riſing about 10 Miles upward, and the Frigid
one ſubſiding as much downwards: The Com-
pages of the Upper Earth, and of its Strata, be-
came thereby chap'd, broken and divided, and
ſo carried up the warm Steams from beneath, to


particular Conceptacles and YVelcano's, which be-/


fore ſerv'd in a more equal and uniform manner
to heat and invigorate the intire Earth, and its
productions. The Tides, laſtly, became fre-
quenter, and ſo more ſudden and violent than
before. Which ſhort Summary or Scheme of
the States of Nature in our Hypotheſis before and
after the Fall, ought to be all along born in
mind, and refleted on, in order to the paſling
a right judgment on the accounts of thoſe Phe-
nomena, in the Solution whereof we arg now en-
gag'd : And which otherwiſe might ſeem very
odd and unaccountable to the Reader, Which
being thus diſpatch'd, I proceed :


XXIX. The Primitive Farth was not equally Parad:ſia»
cal all over. The Garden of Ede» or Paradiſe being

a peculiarly fruitful! and happy ſoil, and particular-
ly furniſh'd with all the necelicies and delights of an
Bb 4 innocent


279


280


SOLUTIONS. BookV.


innocent and bleſſed life, above the other Regions of
the Earth.


XXIX. That all the Primitive Earth could not
be equally Paradiſiacal, and enjoy the ſame Pri.
viledges and Conveniences beyond the Preſent,
is eaſily prov'd. For ſ:eing one of its principal
cauſes of Fertility, and other Prerogatives, was
the greater degree of Heat at the Paradiſiacal
Regions; The Climates near the Solar Courſe
being alone capable of ſuch greater Heat, muſt
be alone capable of its Effects alſo ; and conſe-
quently, we are to confine our enquiries for
the Garden of Elem to the Countries not very
remote from the Ancient Ecliptick. Now that
ſome peculiar Spot or Region thereabouts might,
beyond all the reſt, be Fertile, Pleaſant. and Pa-
radifiacal, 'ris not difficult to ſuppoſe. At the

reſent there iz a mighty variety in Countries
in the very ſame Hemiſphere, Climate, and Pa-
rallel. The particular Prerogatives of one Re-
gion beyond another do not intirely depend on
the Sun, or the Vicinage of the Central Heat :
But partly on the Nature and Temper of the
Soil ; the kinds of Vegetables and Foflils there-
to belonging ; the number, qualities, and conflux
of Rivers ; the firmneſs or looſeneſs of the infe-
rior Strata, hindring, or freelier permitting the
aſcent of the Subterrancous Steams, Juices, and
Effiuvia: From the coincidence of which, and of
otherſuch things, in a peculiar and advantagious
manner, order'd and diſpos'd on purpoſe by the
Divine Providence at the Meo(aick Creation, the
extraordinary pleaſantne(ſs and felicity of this
Eartchly Paradiſe , or Garden of Pleaſure, is I ſup-


poſe to be deduc'd; and which being conſider'd,
will, I believe, be ſufficient to give ſatisfaction in
the Propoſition before us,


%XX., The


Chap.2z. SOLU TIONS.


XXX. The place of Paradiſe was where the united Rivers
Tigris and Euphrates divided themſelves into four
Streams, Piſon, Gihon, Tigris, and Euphrates,


XXX. This Situation of Paradiſe has been
already conſider'd, and need not here be real-
ſum'd. Only we may obſerve, That no Scru-
ples would ever have been rais'd about this Mat-
ter, in caſe the foremention'd Rivers had till
been viſible, their Courſe ſtill agreeable to the
Moſaick Deſcription, and the Metals and Minerals
mention'd of the adjoyning Countries had been
as evidently there to be found in ours, as they
appear to have been in thoſe Primitive Times,
Seeing therefore the following Theory will ſo clear-
ly aſhgn the Cauſe of ſuch Diverſity, that every
Reader will be oblig'd to grant it much harder
to have accounted for the Phenomena of Paradiſe,
conſiſtently with th2 other Phenomena of Nature,
if all things were now as they were at firſt, than
almoſt any other of the Antedi/rvian World : I
may juſtly hope that this ſo diſputed a Queſtion
of the Situation of the Garden of Eden, or- Pri-
mitive Paradiſe, to thoſe who embrace the other
parts of the Theory, will remain no longer ſo,
byte be as fixdd and undoubted, within at leaſt
the limits of that Hyporbeſis here referr'd to, as


any other Country or Region with the ſame cx-


actneſs determin'd by Geography.


XXXIT. The Farth in its Primative State had only an An-
nual Mo:ion about the Swn : But ſince it has a Diwrnal
Rotation upon its own Axtr allo : Whereby a vaſt diffe-
rence ariſes in the ſeveral States of the World,


XXXI. This has been at large explain'd and
prov dalr eady,


XXXIL. Upon


75,


Lem.
& Hy-


232


Newt. p.
187,


SOLUTIONS. BooklV.


-


XXXTI. Upon the firſt commencing of this Diurnal Ro-
tation after the Fall, irs Axis was oblique to the Plain
of the Ecliptick as it ſtill is: or in other words, the
preſent Viciſſitudes of Seaſons, Spring , Summer , Av
tun, and Winter, ariſing from the Sun's acceſs to, and
receſs from the Tropicks, have been ever ſince the Fall


of Man.


XXXIL This has in ſome meaſure been in-
ſiſted on already in the Hyporheſis laſt mention'd,
and needs no other dire and poſitive proof than
the preſent Obliquity of the Earth's Axis: It be-
ing evident, that without a miraculous Power, the
ſame Situation or Inclination which it had ori-
ginally, would and muſt invariably remain for
all ſucceeding Ages. |


Fu


C H A P. III.


A Solution of the Phznomena relatmg to
the Antediluvian State of the Earth,


XXXIIL, The Inhabitants of the Earth were before the
Flood vaſtly more numerous than the preſent Earth
either aftually does, or perhaps is capable to maintain
and ſupply.


noo I HIS Propoſition will not appear
{trange, it we conſider, ( i.) The
much greater fertility of the Antediluvian Earth,
to be preſently accounted for; whereby it was ca-
=_ ot maintaining a much greater number of In-
1abitants than the preſent, even on the ſame ſpace
of Ground. (2.) The Earth was more equally
habicable all over before, than ſince the Deluge.

For


Chap. 3- SOLUTIONS.


For before the acquiſition of thoſe heterogene-
ous mixtures, which the Deluge occaſion'd, and
which I take to be the Cauſes of all our violent
and pernicious Heat and Cold in the Torrid and
Frigid Zones of our Earth; 'tis probable the Earth
was pretty equally habitable all over, by reaſon
of the Vicinage of the Central Heat to the Polar
Regions , and the more direct Expoſition of the
midale Regions to that of the Swr. I do not


mean that the Frigid Zones were equally hot with


the Torrid 5 but that the Heat in the one, and
the Cold in the other, were more kindly; and
the exceſſes of cach much lefs contiderable: than
at preſent, ſince the Introduction of the before-
mention'd Mixtures , and particularly of fuch
Sulphureous and Nitrous Efiuwia, as are now, ]
believe, become Caloritick and Frigoriftick Par-
ticles in our Air, the main occaſions of the vio-
lence and pernicious Qualities of the Heat and
Cold thereof, and the moſt affecting to our
Senſes of all other. So that *tis probable, before
the Acquilition of theſe Adwventi:iuns Maſles, the
Zntediluvian Air was every where ſufficiently
temperate to permit the comfortable Habitation
of Mankind on all parts of the Globe ; and the
fintediluvian Earth was by conſequence capable
of many more Inhabitants than the preſent is,
or can be; as every one will readily grant, who
conliders how few Inhabitants, in compariſon ,
three of the five Zones of our preſent Earth do
maintain. (3.) The dry Land or habitable Earth
it ſelf was, by reaſon of the abſence of the intire
Ocean , full as large and capacious again as the
preſent : For the Ocean, I think, takes up now
at the leaſt one half of the intire Globe ; but
then afforded as large, ſpacious, and habitable


Countries, as the other parts of the Earth.
(4-) The


283


SOLUTIONS. BooklV.


(4.) The Mountains which are now generall
bare /and barren, were before the Deluge , to
far as they were ſuppli'd with Water, as fruit-
ful as the Plains or Vallies; and by reaſon of

a larger Surface, were capable of maintainin
rather more Animals than the Plains, on whict
they ſtand, would otherwife have been : The
preſent defet of a fruitful Soil being owing
to the Deluge ; and there being no good reaſon,
that I know of, to be afign'd why, on a pri-
mary Formation, and in a calm and ſtill State
of fs Air, the higher Parts of the Earth ſhould
not be cover'd with a fruitful Soil or Mold, as
well as the level or lower adjoyning to them.
All which Accounts taken together, will, I think,
ive reaſonable Foundation for ſuch vaſt num-
of Inhabitants, as according to the Com-
-putation of this Propoſition , the Antediluvian

orld was repleniſh'd withal.

Corollary 1. Simce by wery reaſonable Computa-
trons of the numbers of the Inhabitants of the Earth at
the Deluge, according to the Hebrew Chronology, they
appear to have been ſufficient abundantly to repleniſh
he intire Globe, and as many as mm reaſon the ſame
ceuld ſuſtain ; The Septuagints add:tion of near ſix
bundred Years in this Period of the World to the He-
brew Accounts , x /o far from clearing Difficuities
thereto relating, that it rather increaſes the ſame, and
entor:es the allowance of neore Inhabitants at the De-
'u9”, than we can well tell where they could rue and
be maintain'd.

Coroll. 2. Since according to the Hebrew Chrone-
logy from the Deluge till the time of Abraham's go-
mg mto Canaan, was the mtire ſpace of 427 Years,
and the Lives of Men during that mterval were m
& mean three hundred Years long ; 'tis ealy on the
Grourds proceeded uton i this Phanomenon's Caicu-
lations,


Chap. 3: SOLUTIONS.


lations, to prove , That there is no meed to recede fromi
that Account, or introduce the additional Years of the
Septuagint i this Period , to produce the greateſt
Numbers of Men which in that , or the immediately
. ſucceeding Ages, any Authentick Hiſtories of thoſe An-
cient Times do require us to ſuppoſe.

Coroll. 3. The Deluge a deſtroy'd the whole
Race of Mankind ( thoſe only mn t k excepted )
could not poſſibly be confin'd to one or more certain
Regions of the Earth, but was, withaat queſtion ,
truly Univerſal.

Coroll. 4. Seeing it appears, That Mankind has
a gradual increaſe, and that in ſomewhat more than
four thouſand Years, our Continent of Europe, Aſia,
and Africa, has been ſo entirely Peopled from the Sons
of Noah; and ſeeing withal America is much leſs in
extent, and, 1 ſuppoſe, generally [aa Was never
ſo full of People : In caſe we ſuppoſe that Famines,
Wars, Peſtulences, and all ſuch fall defrojer of Man-
kind have equally afflicted the ſeveral Contments of
the Earth , Some light might be afforded to the Pec-
pling of America, and about what Age ſince the De-
luge , the American's paſt firſt from this Continent
thuher ; which a more nice enquiry into the Part;-


culars here to be conſider d might aſſiſt us im,


XXXIV. The Bruit Animals, whether belonging to the
Water or Land, were proportionably at leaſt, more in
number before the Flood than they are ſince.


XXXIV. That part of this Propoſition which
concerns the Dry-land Animals, is ſufficiently ac-
counted for, by what has been diſcours'd under
the laſt Head, which equally belongs to them as
to Mankind: And if we extend the other pare
concerning the Fiſhes, to the Seas then in Being,
and their comparative Plenitude, there will need
no additional Solution. It being nor to be wy

pos


285


SOLUTIONS. BooklV,


pos'd that the abſolure numbers of Fiſh before
the Deluge, ſhould be greater than at preſent,
as the on was of the Dry-land Animals; be-
cauſe the latter being univerſally deſtroy'd ,
(thoſe in'the Ark alone excepted) were to begin
their Propagation anew; but the former not be-
ing ſo, did but increaſe their ſtill numerous In-
dividuals , and muſt thereby ſoon recover and
ſurpaſs their former Multictude , as will eafily
be allow'd on a little conſideration of this
Matter.

Corollary. Hence ariſes a ſtrong Confirmation of
what is on other ground; already aſſerted, That there
were only ſmaller Lakes and Seas, but no great Ocean
befere the Deluge. For ſince it appears by this Pha-
nomenon , that the Waters of the Antediluvian
Earth were much more replemſh'd, nay, crouded with
Fiſh than now they are ; and ſince there was no gent«
ral Deſtruttion of them , as there was of Dry-land
Ammals at the Deluge ; had there been as preat a
Compaſs, or as waſt an Ocean for their Reception then,
as at preſent there is, the numbers vow in every part
of the Ocean or Seas, ought to be waſtly greater than
they then were, as being all the Off-/pring of thoſe
which every where ſurvry'd the Deluge , and which
have propagated themſelves for more than four thou-
ſand Years ſince the ſame; which being d:/agreeable
to the Obſervations referr'd to in this Phxnomenon,
is little leſs than a Demonſtration of the falſhood of
that Hypotheſis on which "tis built, or a full Atte-
ſtation to our Aſſertion , that there were only [maller
Lakes and Seas , but no great Ocean before the De-
luge.


XXXV. The Antcdilavien Earth was much more fruitful
than the prefent; and the multitude of its vegetable
ProduQtions much greater,


XXKXV. Before


Chap. 3. SOLUTIONS.


XXXV. Before I come direly to folve this
and the following Propoſitions, I muſt premiſe,
that 'tis uſually unreaſonable to ask, why ſuch
Phanomera belong'd to the Antedilrwian World :
They being commonly but the natural and re-
gular Properties of an Original Earth , newly


orm'd out of a Chaos; ſuch as one ſhould ratio- -


nally expe&t in a World newly come out of the
Hands of irs Creator, and fitted for the Conve-
nience and Fruition of noble Creatures ; ſuch as
the generaliry of our fellow Planets, (eſpecially
our next Neighbour, the Moon) as far as we
can obſerve, appear to have had at firſt, and hi-
therto retain'd. All that can in reaſon be deſir'd,
is this, To give a plain and intelligible Account
of thoſe oppoſite Phenomena of the Earth, which
we now are ſenſible of, and by what means the
Deluge cou!d occaſion the fame. Which there-
fore thall be frequently the buſineſs of the ſuc-
ceeding Solutions. And as to the preſent caſe,
the decreaſe of the Fertilicy of the Earth at the
Deluge, theſe Cauſes are afſignable, (r.) The
decreaſe of the Sun's Heat by the greater di-
ſtance of the Earth from him lince, than before
the Deluge. Ir has been before prov'd, that till
the Deluge, the Earth's Orbit was Circular, and
the Radins of that Circle very little longer than
the neareſt diſtance at the Peribe/ron now : So,
that when the Heat of the Sn is as the denſity
of his Rays, or reciprocally as the Squares of the
Earth's diſtance from him : If inſtead of the
preſent Ell;x/is we take, for Calculations ſake,
as we ought, a Circle in the middle between
the —_ and fartheſt diſtance, we ſhall find
that the Swn's Heat on the Earth in general
before the Deluge , was to its preſent Heat , as
almoſt a hundred to ninety fix, or a twenty fifth

part


287


SOLUTIONS, BooklV.


part of his intire Heat greater before than ſince
the ſame, which is by no means inconſiderable
in the Caſe before us (2.) The Heat of the
Central Body was conſiderably damp'd and ob-
' ſtructed , both by the 'Waters of the Deluge
themſelves, acquir'd from abroad, and now con-
tain'd in the Pores and Caverns of the Earth
under us; and by that Sediment of them which
now compoſes that upper Cruſt of Earth wedwell
upon, and which being ſetled and conſolidated
on the Superficies of the Ancient Earth would
prove a great hindrance to the aſcending Steams,
not to be overcome but by degrees, and in
length of time afterwards. From both which
Cauſes very a notable Damp would be put to the
Influence of the Central Heat, on which as well
as on the Sun's, the Fertility of every Soil does
in part depend. (3.) The upper Earth, or fruit-
ful Soil it ſelf, the main Fund and Promptuary
of the vegetable Kingdom, is now very inconſi-
derable in quantity, it compar'd with that of the
Primitive or Antediluvian Earth. For when this
laſt mention'd was the intire product of the An-
cient Chaos at the original Formation of the
Earth, and the firſt, what only was afforded from
a ſmall part of ſuch a Chaos, the Comet's Armce-
ſphere, and by the Storms born off the Tops of
Mountains at the Deluge, while the old Soil
lies buried under che Sediment or Cruſt on which
we live; 'tis no wonder that our fertile Stratum
is now thinner ſpread , and fo the Productions
leſs copious in the preſent, than they wete in the
Antediluvian State of Things. And this, tho' we
ſuppoſe the Soil from the Comet, or from the
Tops of the Mountains, to be as good in it ſelf,
and to have remain'd as pure and unmix'd wich
any heterogeneous Matter in this confuſjon of

things


Chap. 3. SOLUTIONS.


things at the Deluge, as ir would at the regular
Formation, of the Earth at firſt ; which yer is
by no means ſuppoſable; and the contrary to
which being allow'd for, will {till farther afford
us a reaſon of the preſent Aſſertion. So thar
ſince the preſent Soil is both much worſe in Qua-
lity , _ much leſs in Quantity than the old
one; and ſince the Heat, whether of the Swn or
Central Solid is fo much leſſen'd at the Deluge ,
which things inc:ude the main Cauſes of Ferti-
lity ; 'tis no wonder that the preſent Earth is no-
thing near ſo fruitful and luxuriant in her Pro-
ductions, as the Autediluvian was,


XXXVI. The Temperature of the Antediluvian Air was
more equable as to irs different Climates, and its Jiffe-
rent Seaſons ; withour ſuch exceſſive and ſudden Hear
and Cold ; withour the ſcorching of a Torrid Zone, and
of burning Swmers ; or the freezing of the Frizid Zones,
and of piercing Wint:r:;; and withour ſuch ſudden and
violent changes in the Climares or Seafons from one ex-
trem2 ro another, as the preſent Air , to our Sorrow,
153 ſubje& to,


XXXVI. Seeing the primary State here men-
tion'd, is but a proper reſule from the tirlt For-
mation of the Earth; all that nced be accounted
for, is the Alteration at the Deluge. (1.) The
mighty difference of Climares , efpecially of
the Torrid and Frigid Zones, is, I fuppole, owing
not wholly to the Sun's Hear, or the Nature of
the Air it ſelf, but partly co choſe Calontick and
Frigorifick Mixtures, which are uncertainly con-
tain'd therein. Meer Heart and Cold are very
different things from that Pothery and Sultry ,
that Froſty and Congealing Weather, which al-
ternately in Summer and H'mter, at the Line and
the Poles we uſually now feel. Thiele Litects
tem plainly deriv d from Nitrous or Sulphu-

C& 6 1eOU5,


289


SOLUTIONS. Book IV.


reous , or other the like Steams exhaled into,
mixed with , and ſuſtained by that thick and
groſs Armo[phere which now encompaſſes the
Farth. All which, I mean as well the grofs
Atmoſphere it ſelf, as thoſe irs Heterogeneous Mix-
tures, are a very natural Off-ſpring of the De-
luge, according to the preſent Account thereof.


' For ſecing we at that time paſs'd clear through


the Chaetick Atmoſphere of a Comet, and through
the Tail deriv'd from it, we muſt necds bear off,
and acquire vaſt quantities of ſuch heterogeneous
and indigeſted Maſſes, as our Air now contains
in it ; whence thoſe Effets here mention'd
would naturally proceed. *'Tis probable the ori-
ginal Air was too pure, rare, and thin, to ſuſtain
any groſs and earthy Particles, tho' they had
been leſt in it at the firſt ; and ſo its Heat both
for kind and degree, was no other than the pro-
per Place and Influence of the Sun could re-
quire : And 'twas :h:n ſure more uniform through
the ſeveral Climates of the Earth than now it
is; when our Air in the Torrid Zone, being full of
Sulphureous and Sultry, and in the Frig:d ones
of Nitrous and Freezing Efuvia or Exhalations ,
the violence of an unkindly in Heat the one,
and of the like unkindly Cold in the other, are
ſo ſenſible, 'and fo pernicious , as all experience
atteſts chem now to be. (2.) The uncertainty
of our Seaſons, with the ſudden and unexpected
changes in the Temper of our Air, are on the
ſame accounts equally viſible with the former.
For the Temper of the Air ſince the Deluge,
eſpecially with regard to our Senfations, not re-
ſulting from the external Heat only, but from
the Kinds and Quantities of its heterogeneous
and adventitious Mixtures, will not now depend
on the Seafon of the Year alone, but on the
vecring


Chap. 3. SOLUTIONS.


veering of the Wind, and irs uncertain removal
of the Air and its Steams from one Region to
another, Thus if in Summer the North Wind
chance to blow any long time rogether, 'ewill
bring along with the Air ſo great quantities of
the Cold , Freezing , Nitrous Steams , as may
quite overcome the Swn's Heat, and cauſe a very
cold Seaſon of a ſudden; if the South Wind do
the like in the Witer , the contrary Effet will
follow, and we ſhall have a warm Seaſon when
Froſt and Snow were more naturally to be ex-
pected. Thus , accordingly , frequent experi-
ence ſhews the Swn to be fo little maſter of the
Seaſons of the Year, that ſomerimes January and
Fuly for ſeveral Days are hardly diſtinguiſhable.
Ic ſometimes happens, that we have this Day a
Froſt, the next proves fo warm, that the former
Cold is forgotten , till perhaps the ſucceeding
ight puts us more affectingly' in :mind of it
gain. Nay, in a very few Hours ſpace a ſultry
1 a freezing Air not ſeldom do accent each
ather, to che great harm and miſery of Mankind,
d of all their fellow Animals in our preſenc
Seate ; from which therefore we have good rea-
ſon to believe our happier Progenitors before the
Deluge were intirely free. (3.) That our Sea-
ſons are ſo extream in their ſeveral Kinds, is eaſy
to be hence accounted for alſo.. For were there
no ſulphureous or caloritick Steams in the Air, all
pothery and ſultry Weather, and ſuch fort of
Hear as chiefly affes our Bodies, would be quite
avoided, and the great increaſe thereof after the
Summer Solſtice, which ariſes, 'tis probable, in
part from the Airs retention of one days Hear,
till the next augments it again, would in good
meaſure ceaſe among us. And the like is to be
ſaid of the Cold in Winter, in all the ref;
Cc 32 betore-


SOLUTIONS. BooklV.


before-mention'd. The original of all which
Effects being fo eaſily deducible from the preſent
Account of the Deluge, ris no queſtion bur the
Antedilaviant might, to their comfort, be wholly
Strangers to them. Their Climates were not of
{o very different Temper; .cheir Seaſons leiſurely
and gradual, intirely following the Solar Courſe ;
And their Summers and Winters not ſo mighty
different; at the moſt in the ſingle Proportion
of the Sun's Preſence or Abſence, Dire& or Ob-
lique Situation. In this equable State the Polar
Inhabitants might with little danger cut the Line,
and the Erhioprans viſit the Frigid Zones. In this
condition of the World, the peculiar Air of eve-
ry Country went not far from home, to diſturb
that of others: -A. few Days never made any
fenſible Alteration in the temperature of the Air;
and all chat an intire Sprimg or Autumn could do,
would tilt leave the fame pretty equable , to
be ſure very tolerable. On all which, and ſeve-
ral other conſequential Accounts, we have but
too much reaſon to envy the Ancient Happineb
of our Forefathers, and to be ſenſible of that fatal
and deſtructive Cataſtrophe , which the wicked-
neſs of Mankind brought upon themſelves, and
all their Poſterity to this very Day, at the De-
Inge we are now ſpeaking of.


XXXVII. The Conſticution of the Antediluvian Air wa
Thin, Pare, Subtile and Homogeneous, withour ſuch
groſs Steams, Exhalations, Nitroſulphureous, or other
Heterogeneous Mixtures , as occaſion Coruſcations ,
Meteors, Thunder, Lightning, wich Contagious and Pe»
fiilential InfeRionsin our preſent Air; and have fo ve-
ry pernicious and fatal (tho' almoſt inſenſible) Effet
in the Worll fince the Deluge,


XXXVII. The


—


. os 7 _ ww _ T=* "eo


&


|


Chap: 3: SOLUTIONS.


XXXVIT The conſideration of the foregoing
Solution is ſufficient to clear the preſent Phenome-


on alſo ; ' tro which therefore the Reader is re-
ferr'd.


XXXVIIT. The Antedibrovian Air had no large , groſs
Maſſes of Vapours or Clouds, hanging for long ſerſons
in the ſame. It had no great round drops of Rain,
deſcending in multitudes together , which we cl!
Showers : But the Ground was watered by gentle Mitts
or Vapours aſcending in the Dy, and deſcending , in
great meaſure, again in the ſucceeding Night:


XXXVIIL. This is alfo eaſily underſtood from
what has been already ſaid. So-rare; thin, pure,
and ſubtile an Air as the Zntediluwion was, would
{carce ſuſtain ſuch groſs and heavy Maſles , as
the Clouds are: Icfwould not precipitate the ſu-
perior Vapours upon the inferior in ſuch quanti-
ties, and with ſuch violence, as is necellary to the
Production of great round fenlible Drops of Rain:
It had no grols Steams to retain Heat after the
cauſe of it was gone, and the Sun ſet; and fo
the Vapours which were rais'd in the Day, would
deſcend again in the Night, with the greateſt re-
gularity and gentleneſs. In all which reſpects
the different Nature, Craſlitude ; and irregular
Compolition of our preſent grols Atmoſphere, ac-

vir'd at the Deluge from the Comer's, in which

ch Opake Maſſes, as the Clouds, are frequent-
ly to be obſerv'd, muſt naturally adwit and re-
quire thoſe &bntrary Effects, which the preſent
Propoſition takes notice of, and were to be here
accounted for.


XXXIX. The Amtediluwvien Air was free from violent
Winds, Storms, and Agitations, with all cheir Effets
on the Earth and Seas, which we cannot but now be
ſufficiently ſeaſible of.


Cc 3 _ XXXIN, Theſe


293


294


Gen. 1ii. $.
Margin.


SOLUTIONS. BooklV.


XXXIX. Theſe Phenomena are fuch proper
conſequents of a Primitive Formation , and the
original of thoſe oppoſite ones ever fince the De-
luge ſo naturally thence to be deriv'd, that there
is no reaſon to imagine them to have been be-
fore. A Comet's Atmoſphere 15 a very formy Fluid,
wherein Maſſes of Opake Matter are continual-
ly hurried about, all manner of ways, in a very
uncertain and violent manner. Seeing therefore
we acquir'd at the Deluge ſo great a quantity of
the ſame Atmoſphere, oft which ours is now in
part compos'd , 'tis impoſſible to expe&t any
other State of things than ſuch as this Phamome-
nn mentions, and was to be here accounted for.

Corollary. Hence it appears, That the Wind of the
Day, of which Moſes makes mention at the Fall
Man, was not a conſt ant Phznomenon of the Eart ,
but peculiar to that time. And this is very agreeable
ro & Hypotheſis before laid down of the commence-
ment of the Diurnal Rotation at the wery Day here


" mention'd; according to'which, a Wind muſt neceſſarily


ariſe at that point of Time , tho" there were mone be-
fore or after, till the Deluge. On that brginning of
the Diurnal Rotation. (1.) The Equatorial Repr-
ons aenld be elevated, the Polar _"— the Orb
of Earth would be chap'd and broken, and warm
Steams burſt out at the Fiſſures thereby produc'd ; all
which cenld ſcarce happen without ſome Apitation of
the Air. ' But, (2.) What is more certam and more
conſcderable , when the Terraqueous Globe began
on a ſuilden to revolve from Weſt to Eaſt, the Air
could not preſently accompany it, 'and ſo muſt cauſe a
Wind from Eaſt to Welt ; till receiving by degrees
the Impreſſion', 'it kept at laſt equal pace therewith ,
and reſt ing reſpetirvely , canſed a conſtant Calm after-
wards.” Which Wrtd being therefore ( from the Earth's
Velccity there) greateff towards the Equator and Tro-
tt; nat FS picks,


Chap. 3. SOLUTIONS.


picks, near the latter of which was the place of Pa-
radije , would be confiderable enough , eſpecially in a
ſtate otherwiſe ſtill and calm, to be taken notice of by
the Sacred Hiſtory; and be a kind of Relick or Foot-
ſtep of the then Commencement of that Diurnal Ro-
tation, which is ſo neceſſary to account for it, and
has been from other Arguments already prov'd in its


proper place.


XL. The Autedi/uvian Air had no Rainbow ; as the pre»
ſent ſo frequently has.


XL. This is eaſily accountable from what has
been already ſaid. For, (1.) The deſcent of the
Vapours neceſſary to it was uſually, if not on-
ly in the Nighe when the abſence of the Su»
, rendred its appearance impoſſible. (2.) The des
ſcending Vapours compos'd only a gentle Milt,
not ſenlible round Drops of Rain, as we have
before ſeen, on which yet the Ram-bow entirely
depends; as thoſe who underſtand the Nature
and Generation thereof will eaſily confeſs. So
that tho' the Sun were above the Horizon at the
fall of the Vapours, the appearance of the Rain.
bow was not to be expected. (3.) Were the Va-
pours that fell compos'd of ſenſible round Drops,
and fell in che day-time, and this in ſufficiene
Quantities, yet for want of a Wind which might
drive them together on one ſide, and thereby
clear the Air on the other, for the free admiflion
of the Rays of Light, a Rain-bow were ſeldom
or never to be ſuppos'd before the Deluge ; all
which circumſtances being now quite otherwiſe,
give us clear reaſons for the preſent frequent ap-
pearance of that beautiful and remarkable Pheno-
menon , tho' till the Deluge, it was a perfect
Stranger to the World. 3
Cc 4 XLL. Thg


SOLUTIONS. BooklV.


XLI. The Anti: lwvien; might only eat Vegetables ;
but the Uſe of Fleſh after the Flood was freely allow'd
alſo.


XLI. That a State of Nature as to the Air,
Farth, Fruits, and other circumſtances fo very
different from ours at preſent , ſhould require a
ſuicable difference in the Food and Suftenance of
Mankind, is very reaſonable to believe. But be-
ſides, (1.) When the Lives of Animals were na-
turally ſo long, (as in correſpondence to Man-
kind 1s fairly to be ſuppos'd) before the Deluge ;
*ris not improbable that God Almighty wou'd
not permit them to be taken away on any other
occaſion than. that of Sacrifice or Oblation to
himſelf. (2.) Perhaps in the tender and even
Condition of the Antediluwiins, the eating of
Fleſh would have ſpoil'd their Tempers , and
ſhorrened their Lives ; ſuch Food being, I ſup-
poſe , fitter for. our groſs and ſhort-liv'd State
ſince the Flocd , than that refin'd and laſting
one before it. (3.) Perhaps the Antediluwian Ve-
_ were more juicy, nouriſhing, and whol-
ome, not only than Fleſh , but than themſelves
have ſince been; which the better -and more
fertile Soil out of which they grew then, gives
fome reaſon to conjeure. And whether they
had not then ſome Vegetables which we have not
now, may dcferve the conſideration of ſuch as
ſearch after their remains in the Bowels of th2
Earth: The ſame care of the Vegetable, as of
the Animal-Kingdom not appearing in the Sa-
cred Hiſtory relating to the Deluge. However,
(4-) If we obſerve that even at this day , the
warm Seaſons and Countries are-lefs diſpos'd 'to
the eating of Fleſh than the cold ones; and re-
member that the Antediluvian' Air was in ſome
4254 | ihe degree


Chap.3. SOLU TIONS.


XLIW. The Lives of the Antediluvians were more univer-
fally equal, and vaſtly longer than ours now are : Men
before the Flood frequently approaching near to a thou-
oo which almoſt none now do to a hundred years
of Age.


XLII. Tho' ſeveral other things might here
deſerve ro be conſider'd, yer I ſhall only inſiſt
upon the difference between the Antediluwuian
Air, and that ſince the Flood, to give an ac-
count of this Propaſition. The conſideration of
the Pure, Unmixed, Equable, and Gentle Con-
ſtirution of the former; compar'd with the
Groſs, Thick, Hetorogeneous, Matable, and Vio-
lent Condition of the latter, of ir ſelf affording
a ſufficient Solution of this difficulty. That Air
which is drawn in every breath; whoſe inclu-
ded Particles, 'tis probable, inſinuate themſelves
continually into our Blood, and the other Fluids
of our Bodies; and on which all experience
ſhews humane Life and Health exceedingly to
depend ; being at the Deluge chang'd from a
Rare and Thin, to a: Thick and Grofs Conſift-
ence ; from an equability or gradual and gent!e
warmth and coolneſs of Temperature, to ex-
tremity of Heat and Cold; and that with the
moſt ſudden and irregular ſteps from one to
another ; from True and Pure Air, or an Ho-
mogeneous Elaſtical Fluid, to a mix'd and con-
fuſed Compoſitum or Atmoſphere, whercin all ſorts
of Effwvia, Sulphureous, Nitrous, Mineral and
Metallick, &+c. are contain'd. Which circum-
ſtances, if there were no other, will, I imagine,
give a ſatisfatory account of the mighty diffe-
| rk rence


297
degree warmer than the preſent, we ſhall not be Solur. 35.


wholly to ſcek for a particular reaſon of this Phe- Prius.
MOMmenn.


SOLUTIONS. BooklV.


rence as to the point of Longzvity between the
Antediluvians and thoſe which ever ſince have
dwelt on the Face of the Earth. We may ob-
tain ſome ſmall and partial reſemblance of it in
a younn who had liv'd many years upon the top
of a high Mountain, above the Clouds and
Steams of oue Earth, and whoſe temperament
of Body was peculiarly diſpos'd for ſo Pure,
Thin, and Undiſturb'd an e/ther as there he en-
joy'd; and afterward were confin'd to the moſt
Foggy, Marlhy, and Stinking part of the Hun-
dreds in Eſſex, or of the Boggs in Ireland. What
Effect in Point of Life and Health ſuch a Change
muſt have on the Perſon before-mention'd, *tis
not difficule to imagine : And as caſie, on a
like compariſon of the Antediluvian e/Ether, and
the preſent Atmoſphere to account for the Pro-
poſition before us ; and ſhew as well why men
dye at all uncertain Periods of Years, and have
while they live a Precarious State of Health,
with frequent ſickneſſes; as why none reach
any whit near the long Ages of thoſe that before
the Deluge continued in Health and Security
for ncar a thouſand Years.


XLILE Tho” the Antediluvian Earth was not deſtitute of
leſſer Seas and Lakes, every where diſpers'd on the
Surface thereof; yer had it no Ocean, or large recep-
tacle of Warers, ſeparating one Continent from ano-
ther, and covering ſo large a portion of it, as the pre-
ſent Earth has.


XLIIL From the Original Formation of the
Earth above deſcrib'd, and its unequal ſubſidence
into the Abyſs beneath, while in the mean time
vaſt quantities of Vapours were ſuſtain'd above,
and afterwards let fall upon the Earth, its Surface
would be unequal ; its loweſt Valleys fl'd with
Wacer ;


Chap. 3. SOLUTIONS.


Water; and a, truly  Terraqueozs Globe would
ariſe. But theſe two plain Reaſons may be aſ-
ſigned why any great Ocean were not to be ex-
_ at the ſame time. (1.) So Vaſt and

p a Valley as the Ocean implies, is not in
reaſon to be deriv'd from ſuch a regular forma-
tion of the Earth from a Chaos, as we have
above deſcrib'd. No good reaſon being aflign-
able, why in ſuch a confuſed mixture as we call
a Chaos, the parts ſhould be ſo ſtrangely diſpos'd,
that on one ſide, all the Upper Orb for ſome
ſcores of Degrees, and ſome thouſands of Miles
together, ſhould be Denſer and Heavier than
the reſt, and by its ſinking deepeſt into the
Abyſs, produce the valt Channel of the Ocean
while on another ſide the ſame Orb, for as ma-
ny Degrees and Miles, ſhould be univerſally
Rare and Light enough to be very much extant,
and compoſe a mighty Continent, as the caſe
is in our preſent Earth. Tho” the Atmoſphere of
a Comet, be fo truly Heterogeneous, and its
Opake or Earthy Maſſes fo unequally ſcatter'd
abroad on the different ſides thereof, as even,
ſerting aſide the inequality of the Denſity and
Specifick Gravity of the ſeveral Columns, might
compoſe an Orb of different Thickneſs or Craf-
ſitude, and fo cauſe an unequal Orb on the
Face of the Aby/7, like that we before ſuppos'd
it originally to have been; Yet ſo mighty an
inequality, as the preſent Diviſion of the Earth
into an Occan wy Continents muſt ſuppoſe, is
by no means tobe allow'd in the Primitive Chaos ;
nor would | fuppote by any be aſſerted, if the
Generation of thofe grand Diviſions of our
Globe were otherwiſe accountable : which on
our Principles being fo eaſily done, as will ſoon
appear, no reaſon can plead here for their Primi-


tive


299


Joo


SOLUTIONS. BooklIV


trve Tntroduftion. And ſure thofe Agitation
and Motions of Parts viſible in ſome fort now in
Comets Atmoſpheres, and to be however granted
in the digeſtion of its parts at firſt, muſt ſure
mix and jumble the parts rogether ro a degree
ſufficient to prevent ſo ſtrange an inequality, as
the Original Exiſtence of the Ocean and Conti-
nents muſt needs imply. However ( 2. ) The
quantity of Water prefervd above ground was
little or nothing more,as we have ſhew'd,than the
Heat of the Sun and Central Solid was able to
elevace, and the Air at once to ſuſtain, during
half a years ſpace; the day time of the ſecond
Period of the Creation : Which how inſufficient
it muſt have been to the filling of the great Ocean,
is eaſily underſtood. Which things conſider'd,
the Abſence of the Ocean, as well as the Exiſt-
ence of Seas, is very eaſily accountable in the
Antediluvian World.


CHAP. IV.


A Solution of the Phenomena relating tq
the Univerſal Deluge, and its Effefts
upon the Earth,


XLIV. In th: Seventeenth Century from the Creation,
there happen'd a moſt extraordinary and prodigious
Deluge of Waters upon the Eatth.


XLIV. Hatever ditficulties may hitherto
have rendred this moſt Noted

Cataſtrophe of the Old World, that it was de-
froy'4 by Water, very hard, if not wholly in-
explicable


Chap. 4: SOLUTIONS. 304


explicable without an Omnipotent Power, and
Miraculous Interpoſition; ſmce the Theory of Vid. Fig.
Comets, with their Armoſpheres and Tails is dil- 1, & +
cover'd, they muſt vaniſh of their own accord. © ©
For if we conſider that a Comer is no other
than a Chaos ; including the very ſame Bodies,
and Parts, of which our own Earth is compos'd ;
that the outward Regions of its Atmoſphere arc
plain Vapours, or ſuch a fort of Milt as we fre-
quently fee with us; and the Tail a column of
the fame Vapours, rarified and expanded to a
greater degree ,- as the Vapours which in the
cleareſt Days or Nights our Air contains at pre-
ſent, are ; and that withal ſuch a Comet is ca-
pable of pafling ſo cloſe by the Body of he
Earth as to involve it in its Atmoſphere and Tai

a conſiderable time, and leave prodigious quan-
tities of 'the ſame Condenſed and Expanded Va-
pours upon its Surface ; we ſhall eaſily fee that a
Deluge of Warers is by no means an impoflible
thing ; and in particular that ſuch an individual
Deluge as to the Time, Quantity, and Circum-
but fully accountable, that it migbr be, nay al-
moſt demonſtrable that it really #2. All which
the Solutions following will I chink give an caſie
and mechanical account of.


XLV. This prodigious Deluge of Waters was mainly oc-
caſion'd by a molt extraordinary and violent Rain, for
the ſpace of forty Days, and as many Nights, without
intermiſſion,


er
XLV. When the Earth paſſed clear through
the Atmoſphere and Tail of the Comet, in which
it would remain for about 10 or 12 hours (as
from the Velocity of the Earth, and the Crafli-
eude of rhe ſaid 7j/ on Calculation does appear )


SOLUTIONS. BooklY.


it mnft acquire, from the violence of the Co-
Iumn of Vapours deſcend towards the Sun, im-
peded by the Earth's Interpoſition and Reception
of the ſame ;_ and from the Attractive Power of
the Earth ir ſelf withal, enforcing more to de-
ſcend ; it mult, I fay, acquire upon its Surface
immenſe quantities of the Vapours before men-
tion'd. A great -= of which being in a very
Rare and Expanded condition, after their Pri-
mary Fall, would be immediately mounted
ward into the Air, and afterward deſcend in
violent and outragious Rains upon the Face of
the Earth. All thoſe Vapours which were rarer
and lighter than that Air which is immediately
contiguous to the Earth, muſt certainly aſcend
to ſuch a height therein, where its Denſiry and
Specifick Gravity were correſpondent (as far as
that Croud of their fellow Vapours, with which
the Air was oppreſs'd would give leave ;) And fo
afterwards, as they cool'd, thicken'd, and col-
le&ed together, like our preſent Vapours muſt de-
ſcend in moſt prodigious Showers of Rain for a
long time afterwards, and very naturally occaſion
that forty Days and forty Nights Rain mention'd
in the Propoſition before us.


XLVI. This vaſt quantity of Waters was not deriv'd
fromthe Exrth or Seas, as Rains conſtantly now are ;
bur from ſome other Superior and Caleſtial Original,


XLVI. This is already evident from what has
been juſt now ſaid : The ſource of all theſe
Rains being one of thoſe Superior or Celeſtial
Bodies which we call Comers 3 or more pecu»
liarly the Armoſpbere and Tail thereof.


XLVIL This vaſt Fall of Waters, or forty Days Rain,
began on the fifth day of the Week, or Thar/day the


ewenty


Chap. 4. SOLUTIONS.


ewenty ſeventh day of November, being the ſeventeenth
day of the ſecond Month from the Autwwwal Equinox ;
(correſponding this Year 1696. to the, twenty cighth
day of Ofober ) |


XLVII. This has been already explain'd in
effet, in the Hypotheſis hereto relating ; where
it was prov'd that a Comet on that very day
here nam'd paſs'd by the Earth ; and by conſc-
quence began thoſe Rains which for the ſucceed-
ing forty days ſpace continued without any In-
eerruption.


XLVIN. The other main cauſe of the Deluge, was the
breaking up the Fountains of the great 4&7, or
cauſing ſuch Chaps and Fiffures in the upper Earth, as
might permit the Waters contain'd in the Bowels of it
when violently preſS'd and ſqueez'd upwards, to aſcend,
and fo add to the quantity of thoſe which the Raios
produced.


XLVHI. This has in part been explain'd in
the Lemmata hereto relating ; and will be more
fully underſtood from the Figure there alfo re-
.fer'd to. For Let adbc efent the Earth,
moving along the Ecliptick G H, from G to-
wards H. *Tis evident that the Figure of the
Earth before the ap roach of the Comer, as far as
'tis here concern tj , was Spharical. But now,
let us ſuppoſe te Comet bi Dh (as it was de-
ſcending rowards its Perihelion, along its Traje-
#ory EF, from E towards F) to approach very
near, and arrive at the neareſt Poſition, repre-
ſented in the Figure. *Tis evident that this

eſence of the Comet would cauſe a double

ide, as well in the Seas above, as in the Aby/s
below ; the former of which being lefs conſider-
able in ic ſelf, and not to our preſent purpoſe,
need not be taken any farther notice of: ihe
the


Hypoth.
10. prius,


Lem. $2,
83. prius.
Fig. 7-


J9+


Vid.
Schol.
poſt Hy-
poth, 10,
prifts


Lem. $2.
Prius.


SOLUTIONS, Book1V.


the latter would be vaſtly great, ( ſuppoſe ſeven
or eight Miles high above its former Poſition )
would produce mighty Effects on the Orb above
it, and fo deſerves a nicer Conſideration in this
place. As ſoon therefore as the Comer came
many near, (as ſuppoſe within the Moon's diſtance )
this double Tide would begin toriſe, and increaſe
all the time of its approach, till the Comet was
neareſt of all, as in the Figure. And then theſe
Tides, or double Protuberances of the Aby/: ,
would be at their utmoſt height. So chat the
Surface of the Aby/s, and of its incumbent Orb
of Earth, would put 'on that Ellprick, or rathcr
truly and exactly Oval! Figure, under which 'tis
here repreſented. Now, 'tis certain, that this
Spheroid Surface of the Abyſs is larger than its for-
mer Spherical one ; 'tis alſocertain, that the Orb
of Earth which reſted on this Aby/s, muſt be
oblig'd to follow its Figure, and accommodate it
{elf ro this large Owva! 3 which being impoſlible
for it to do while it remain'd Solid , continued,
and conjoyn'd, ic muſt of neceſlity enlarg ic
ſelf, and by the violent force of the encreaſing
Surface of the Aby/s be ſtretch'd, crack'd, broken,
and have innumerable Fiſ/ures made quite through
it, from the upper to the under Surface thereof,
nearly perpendicalar to the ſame Surfaces. So
that this Orb. of Earth which originally, in its
primary formation, was Spharical ; its inward
Compages or. Strata even, conjoin'd, and con«
tinual ; which had afterward, at the commencing
of the Diurnal Rotation, been .chang'd into an
Oblate Sphwrcid, and at the ſame time been there-
by broken, chap'd, and disjointed ; by that time
its wounds had been well healed, and it was in
ſome meaſure ſetled, and fix'd in ſuch a condi-
tion, receiv'd this new Diſruption at the De-

luge.


Chap. 4: SOLUTIONS.


luge. Its old Fiilures were ,open'd, and the
Fountains of the Ab /s ( moſt Naturally and
Empharically {o ſtir , according ro Dr. We.


ward's, Account of the Origin of Fountains) ?


broken . up ; and ſufficient Gaps made for a
Communication between the 4by/s below, and
the Surface of the Earth above the ſame, if any
occaſion ſhould be given for the Aſcent of the
former, or Deſcent of any thing from the latter.
And here 'tis to be noted, that theſe Chaps and
Fiſſures, tho' they : weze never fo many or fo
open, could not of themſelves raife any $Sub-
terrancous Waters, nor contribute one jot to
the drowning of the Earth. The Upper Orb
was long ago fetled, and funk as far into the
d4by* as the Law of Hydroſt aticks requir'd ; and
whether 'twere intire or broken, would cauſe no
new preſſure ; and no more than maintain its
prior ſituation 'on the Face of the Deep. Theſe
Fiſſures had been ag leaſt as open and extended
in their Original Generation, when the Diurnal
Rotation began, as at this time, and yet was
theie no danger of a Deluge. So that tho' this
breaking up of the Fountains of the Deep was
a prercquiſite conduion, and abfolutely neceſla-
ry to, the Aſcent of the Subterraneous Waters,
yet was it not-the proper and direct cauſe or
efficient thereof ; That* is to be deriv'd from
another original, and is as follows. As foon as
the preſence of the Comet had produc'd thoſe
valt Tides, or double elevation and depreflion
of the A4by/s, and thereby disjointed the Earth,
and caus'd the before-mention'd patent holes c1
breaches quite through the Body of it, the Fall
of Waters began, andquickly cover'd the Earth,
and crouded the Air, with vaſt quantities there-
of ; Which Waters being ayvenion or addi-


riona!


&


305


. Vid Eſy


%
12s,


id


Pa


Lem. 75,
- 6. prius,


Solat. 6
Prius,


SOLUTIONS. BooklV.


tional ones, and of a prodigious weight withal,
muſt preſs downward with a mighty force, and
endeavour to fink the Orb of Earth deeper into
the 463/s, according as the intire weight of each
column of Earth, and its incumbent Waters to-
gether, agrecably ro the Law of Hydroftatick;,
did now require. And had the Earth, as it was
in irs firſt ſubſiding into the Aby/s, been looſe,
ſeparate, and unfix'd, fo as to admit the 4by/;
berween its parts, and ſuffer a gentle ſubſidence
of the Columns of Earth in the requiſite
proportion, we could ſcarce have motel any
Elevation of the Subcerraneous Waters. Burt
the Strata of the Earth were long ago ſetled,
faſtened, and conſolidated together , and fo
could not admit of ſuch a farther immerſion in-
to the fluid. On which account the new and
vaſt preſſure of the Orb of Earth upon the Aby/;
would certainly force it upward, or any way,
whereſoever there were a paſſage for it: To
which therefore the Breaches, Holes, and Fiſſures
ſo newly generated, or rather open'd afreſh by
the violence of the Tides in the Abyſs beneath,
would be very ready and natural Outlets;
through which it would Aſcend with a mighty
force, and carry up before it whatever was in
its way, whether Fluid or Solid, whether *twere
Earth or Water. And ſeeing, as we before ſaw,
the Lower Regions of the Earth were full of
Water, pervading and repleniſhing the Pores
and Interſtices thereof ; which Waters on the
opening cf the Fiſſures would from all ſides ouze
into, and fill up the Inferiour parts of the ſame,
and reſt upon the Face of the Aby/s ; the Denſe
Fluid of the Aby/s, in its violent Aſcent through
the Fiſſures, would carry before it, and throw
out at the tops of the ſaid Fiſ/ures great quanti-

ries


"0 RT” WW 0 ©» ann WW 7 V


mana


fi


Chap. 4. SOLUTTONS.


ties of the ſame; andif irs force were any where
ſufficient, would caſt ir ſelf alfo our ar the ſame
paſſages; and by both or either ways would
mightily add to the quantity of the Waters al-
ready on the Face of the Earth, and become a
freſh and a prodigious augmentation of that De-
luge, which began already to overwhelm and
deſtroy the Inhabitants thereot. For the betrer
apprehenſion of this marter, let us imagine the
following Experiment were made. Suppoſe a
Cylmder of Stone or Marble fitred fo exactly to
a hollow Cylmdrical Veſſel, that it may uſt
Aſcend or Deſcend freely within ie : Let the
Cylinder of Stone or Marble have ſmall holes
bored quite through it, parallel ro the Axs
chereof ; Let the Veſſel be fill'd half full of Wa-
rer; and the Cylmder, as gently as you pleaſe,
be pur into the Veſſel, till it couch the Water:
Let then each of the holes through the Cylmuer
be fill'd in pare wich Oyl, or any- other Fluid
lighter than the Water, to Swim upon the Sur-
face thereof : Things being thus provided, you
have the very caſe of the Deluge before you ;
and - whar effects you here,' in a Yetler degree,
will obſerve, are but the repreſentations of choſe
_ and remarkable ones of which we are now
peaking. For as the weight of the Cylmder
prefling upon the Surface of the -Water would
ſqueeze the Oyl upon its Surface through the
holes, and caſt it our chereat with fome violence,
and” caſt ir ſelf too our ar the ſane paſſages it
the holes were not too high, in comparilon to
the quantity of the intire preſſure upon the ur-
face of the Water ; juſt fo the Weight oi the
Columns of Earth, augmented by the additional
Waters of the Comet, would ſqueeze and prets
upon the Surface of rhe A46y/s ; which being a
Dd 2 Fluid


SOLUTIO NS.. Book IV.


Fluid Maſs, and incapable of fuſtaining a preſ-
ſure in one part; without equally communica-
ting it to all the reſt, any way whatſoever ;
mult burſt out wherever ſuch pretfure was want-
ing, and throw it ſelf up the Fiſſures ; carrying
up before it; and throwing out upon the Earth
thoſe Waters which (like Oyl on the Water in
the Experiment) lay upon its Surface, and for
che alticude perhaps of ſome Miles cover'd the
ſame ; and thereby mightily increaling the great-
neſs of the Deluge, and having a main ſtroke
in that deſtruction which it brought upon the
Earth. All which, I think, gives us a clear, eaſe,
and mechanical account of this (hitherto inex-
plicable) Secondary Cauſe of the Deluge, the
breaking up the Fountains of the Great Deep,
and therear the elevaring the Subterraneous Wa-
ters, and bringing them out upon the Face of
the Earth.

Corollary 1. The/e Chaps or Fillures at the De-
luge weuld commonly be the ſame with thoſe at the
commencing of the Diurnal Rotation. I: being
eaſier to break the Compages of the Earth where it
had once been. broken already, and was never united
well again, than in other places where it was intire
and cominued: ind thoſe parts which ſuſtam'd the
rather greater force at the former Convoulſion, would
at leaſt as well- ſuſtain thus, of which we are now
ſpeaking, and preſerve their farmer continuity ſtill, as
they did before the Flood.

Coroll. 2. Hence if theſe Fiſſures are the occaſion
and jource of Fountains, as Dr. Woodward wery
probably aſſerts, The Antediluvian and Poltdilu-
Vian OPrimgs muſt le generally the very lame z as
ariſing from the |ame Originals; ſo far as the muta-
tions at the Earth's Surface to be afterward explain'd
would permit and allow m the caſe.


Coroll. 3.


Chap. 4: SOLUTIONS.


Coroll. 3. Since we have befort# ſhew'd, that the
Mountainous Columns. of the Earth fre the borſeſt,
the haſt compatted, and leaſt [olid of ail others, Th:
Earth would be the moſt ſubjett to the Fiſlures and
Breaches in thoſe parts, and the generality of Springs
and Rrvers would now proceed from thence : Unleſs
the peculiar Stony, or other firm Compages of the
ſame prevemed the Effetts here mention'd, as ſome-
times perhaps might happen in the preſent caſe.

Coroll. 4. Hence "tis evident, that there was 10
great Ocean, but only |maller Lakes and Seas, before
the Flood. For otherwiſe the Tule or Flux of the
Ocean would hawe been (o great and wiolent, as to


have ſuperſeded almoſt ail the deſigns of the enſuing


Deluge, and bave withal extremely endanger'd, if
Fi , "a
not certainly deſtroy d, the Ark, and al! thoje Crea-


tures which were entring into tt : foich the (mall


"Tides im the [mall Lakes and Seas would not at all


aff, ect , Or diſt u; b.


XLIX. All theſe Fqunrains of the great Deep were broken
up on the very firſt day of the D:luge, or the very firſt
day when the Rains began.


XLIX. This 1s very eafily underſtood from
the ſpace of time that the Comer was near the
Earth. For che duration of this Diſruption, or
breaking of the Orb of Earth, occalion'd by the
DES of the C@met, muſt be commenſurace
therero ; which, tho' we ſhould take in all the
ſpace it was nearer than the Moon, could not
pollibly, as is eafie to Calculate, amount to Nine
Hours; which 15 indeed much more than need
be allow'd ; and is yet fſuthcieftly within that
Days ſpace which this Phenomenon, if occaſion
were, could allow us to ſuppoſe ; and fo fully
ſatisfies the ſame.


Dd 3 L. Yet


307


Solor 65.
| inf:3
Fig. 7.


SOLUTIONS. BooklY,


#& Y '


TL. Yet the very ſame day, Noah, his Family, and all the
Animals enrred into the Art.


L. Tho' 'tis otherwiſe nor a little ſtrange that
the entry into the Ark ſhould be defer'd rill this
Day ; yer 'tis clear and eaſe on the u_—_— Hy-
potbeſis, For as to the Fountains of the great
Peep, which were broken up this Day, thereby
the Ezith and irs Conrents were only gradually
and infenſibly elevated ;3 bur no other diſtur-
bance given to Noah in lis Entry into the Ark
at the {me time. The EF: res indeed were now
made, but till the weight of the Waters from
the Camet could operate, no Water would from
thence ariſe to diſturb him. And tho' they had,
yer unleſs there were ſome of the great Fiſſures
or Spouts juſt where he was, no interruption
could this day be given him therefrom. As to
the Rains theinſelves, tho” they all fell firſt upon
the Earth nearly within the compaſls of this Day,
and fo muſt c2uſe a molt prodigious deſtruction
and confuſion upon the Earth where they fo fell;
yer the peculiar ſituation of Mount Cancaſws, on
or near which the Ark was, did ſecure it ; this
day. tho' ſo outragious and deſtructive a one to
the Inhabitants of the other parts of che Globe,
was yet here fair and calm, as at other times :
Which is thus d:monſtrated. *Tis evident that
Mount Cauca/zrs 15 ſicuate pretty near the Center
of our Nerther» Continent ; or indeed fome 25
or 25 d-orecs Northeaſt from the ſame ; that is,
as will ke:eafcer appear, pretty near the Point b,
or fom-w hat below it towards c: Which Moun-
fain Cenc/vs was: directly expos'd therefore to
the Comet at its neareſt diſtance, repreſented
in the Figure. When the Comet therefore was
moving


Chap. 4. SOLUTIONS.


moving from E to F, ſo ſoon as the Earth came
within its Atmoſphere and Tail, a Cylmarical Co-
lumn of Vapours would be intercepted, and
bore off by the Earth in its patſage, whole Baſis
were ſomewhat larger than a greac Circle on the
Earth, and whoſe Dire&tion or Ax:. from the
compound Motion of the Comet and of the
Earvh, were at about 45 degrees of Inclination
with the Ecliptick or parallel co cd, the l-tler Axis
of the Earth. That 1s, the fuſt fall of the Va-
pours would affe&t one Hemi/phere of the Earth at
a time, that, naniely, which were properly expos'd
to their deſcent ; and the other would be not at
all affected cherewith, till- the Earth's Diurnal
Rotation by degrees expos'd the other parts in
like manner, and brought every one at laſt with-
in the verge of that Hemiſphcre on which was
the firſt and moſt violent deſcent of the Vapours,
Now this Hemi/phere would be repreſented in the
Figure by a d b; and the oppolite one, which
intirely eſcap'd at the ſame time by a c b. So
that ſeeing the Ark, or Mount Cauca/ws, was
below the Point b; and by the Diurnal Rota-
tion quickly got farther within the fair Hem/-
pherez it would remain in the fame during all
the time of this firſt violent Fall of the Waters,
and have a calm and quiet day for the entry in-
to the Ark ; while the other Regions of the
Globe were ſubject to fo violent a Storm, and
ſuch fury of deſcending V apours as no Age paſt
or future had been, or were to be expoſed to.
This place could only be capable of ſome falling
Vapours three or four. hours after Sun-ſer , in
cate the Earth were not at that time por clear
of the Tail of the Comet, in which it had been
all the preceding day : And conſequently, Noab
had as fair and calm a time of Entring into the


Dd 4 Ark,


Ji,


'?


SOLUTIONS. Book lV.


Ark, with all his Family, and the other Animals,
as could be defr'd ; when no other parts of the
Globe, bur thoſe agrecing in ſuch a peculiar
ſrtuation with him, could have permitted the
{ame. Which 1s, I think, not a meer Satisfattory,
bur a very Swrprizing account of the preſent
Propoſition.

Corollary 1. Hence the time of the breaking open
of the Fountains of the Deep, and of the beginning of
the Rains, wery nearly comcident therewith, is deter-
min'd ; and that, agreeably ro the Moſaick Hiſtory,
much nearer than to a Day ; (with which exattneſ;
2e have hitherto contented cur ſelves im the caſe)
And mdeed alweſt to an Hour. For ſeep all the
Ferntains of the great Deep were broken up on this
day ; ſeeing the forty days Rain began on the ſume
day; [ceing Noah, with all bis Family, and all the
oth.y Creatures entred on this ſelſ</ame day into the
Ark; all which certamly vequire ycry near an intre
day ; and yet ſeem wery mcompatible ; there is no
other way bat to aſſert, that tho" the breaking up of the
Fountams of the Great Deep, and the Fall of the Wa-
fers, were coincident, . and upon the [ame day with
the Extry imto the Ark , as the Text moſt expreſly
aſſerts ; vet the place where the Ark was, eſcap'd the
fects of the ſame till the Evening ; and while the reſt
of the Earth was abiding the fury of the ſame, er:-
103d. ſo calm,. fair, and undiſturb'd a day, as per+
mitted their regular and orderly going mto the Ark
vefore the Waters overtock them. So that the Delugs
muſt, according ta the Sacred Hiſtory, bawve commenc'd
m the Meorning, and yet not. reach'd the particular
place 2here Noah was till the Evening, or the com-
ng on of the. enſuing Night ; Which bow exattly rhe
preſent Hypothelis is corre/pondent. to, I ſhall leave
ihe Reader to judge from what bas been [aid under
tis laſt Propoſition.z according to which 'tis plam,

BY 1 has


Chap. 4. SOLUTIONS.


that the Comet paſs'd by the Earth, broke up the Foun-
tains of the Deep, and began the forty days Rams
after Sun-riſmg, about Eight or Nine a Clock m the
Morning ; from which time till Eight or Nine a Clock
at Night, and long after Sun-ſet, tho" the Waters
fell with the greateſt wiolence on the Earth, yet they
affefted a ſingle Hemiſphere at a time only, mto
hich the Diurnal Rotation did not all that while
comvert the Regions near the Ark; and this moſt nicely
and wonderfully correſponds to the greateſt accuracy of
the preſent caſe, and of the Molaick Hiſtory. So
that now we may, agreeably both to the Sacred Hi-
ſtory, and the Calculations from the preſent Hypothe-
ſis, aſſert, that the Deluge began at the Meridian
of Mount Caucaſus o» Thurſday the twenty ſeventh
day of November, mm the year of the Julian Period,
@365, between Eight and Nine a Clock in the Morn-
ing. Which exattne(s of Solution, wherein not only
the Day, but almoſt Hour aſſign'd from the Moſaick
Hiſt ory Is correſ} pondent fol preſent Hypotheſis,
how remarkable an Atteſt ation it ts to the ſame, and
how full a confirmation of the moſt accurate Verity of
the Moſaick Hiſtory, I need not remark : Such re-
flettions when Juſt, being very Natural with every
careful Reader.

Corollary 2. Here is an mſtance of the peculiar
Providence of God im the Preſervation of the Ark, by
ordering the Situation [0 as to eſcape the Violence of
;he thick Vapours m therr firſt preciputate fall , which
0: herwiſe muſt probably have daſh'd it to pieces, For
conſidermg ther Velocity of Motion, which mdeed was
mcredible, no leſs than eight hundred Miles in the
{pace of a Minute ; "tis met eaſy to ſuppoſe , that any
Buil4mg could ſuſtain and preſerye tt [elf under the
violence thereof 3 which we ſee the Ark, by the pecu-
liar place of its Situation, twenty or twenty degrees
North-Eaſt from the Center of eur Northern Conti-
FX 4 | newt,


SOLUTIONS. BooklV.


nent, was wonderfully ſecured from , while the other
Regions of the Earth were expoſed thereto, and m
great meaſure, "ts probable, deſtroy'd thereby.

Coroll. 3. Hence 'tz« evident , That the place of
the Ark before aſſien'd, at Mount Caucaſus, was its
true one, and not any Mountain in or near Armenia,
For had it been there ſeated, it bad been expos'd to
the wiolence of the falling Vapours, and inſtead f a
quiet entry into the Ark onth:s firſt day of the Deluge,
the Ark it ſelf, with all the Creatures that were to be
preſert'd im it, would bave utterly periſh'd im the wery
beginmmg thereof. |

Coroll. 4. Hence the rea'on may eaſily be given,
why the Hiſtory of the Deluge takes no notice of this
palling by of the Comet ; viz. becauſe none of thoſe
who ſurvru'd the Deluge , coald ſee or percerve the
ſame. For at the time of the approach of the Comet
at firſt, both the latter end of the Night-/eaſon, when
all were aſleep; \ and the Miſts, which accordmy to the
Nature of the Antediluvian Air, were probably then
wpon the Earth, and obſcur'd the Face of the Heawens,
hindred any proſpett of this dreadful Body. And
ſoon after the Morning came, they were attually in-
woly'd in the "wie Favax of the Comet, and ſo m
its Tail preſently after , which would only appear a
ftrange and unuſual Miſt or Cloud at a diſt ance, 2ho!-
ly depreving them of the diſt mt wiew of the Comet it
jelf, and leaving them utterly ignorant of the true oc-
caſion - of the followmg Cataſtrophe , wnle/s any mmti-
mation ſhould have been gruen them thereof by a Di-
vine Revelation,


LI. Tho' the firſt and moſt violent Rains continued with-
out intermiflion but forty Days, yet after ſome time
the Rains began again, -and ceaſed not rill the ſeven-
teenth Day of the ſevenrh Month, or a hundred and
fifry Days after the De'u je began,


LL it


Chap. 4. SOLUTIONS.


cond time, about fifty four or fifty five Days at-
ter its firſt paſfling by, as well as it did before;
as 'tis alſo hy in the Figure. Which
being ſuppos'd , the Earth muſt receive a new
ſtock of Vapours as before; and the Rains which
had intermitted for fourteen or fifreen Days,
muſt begin again. The differences berween the
former and latter Rains would be, (1.) Theſe
latter Vapours proceeding from the Tail, whereas
the former did principally from the much denſer
Atmoſphere of the Comet, would be lefs copious,
and lefs violent than the other, and cauſe a gent-
ler Rain. (2.) Theſe Vapours being newly ra-
ried by the prodigious Heat at the Perihelicn,
and raisd thereby to a mighty height in the 7azl,
from their greater rarity and lightneſs, higher
aſcent in our Air conſequent thereupon , and
longer time thence. necellary to their cooling
and deſcent in Rains upon the Earth, would be
much longer in falling, and produce a conti-
nual Rain of many more days than the former
did. Both which are exactly agreeable to the
Moſaick Hiſtory ; whence it appears, that the firſt
Rains had the principal ſtroke in the Deluge; and
thar if chis ſecondary Rain commenc'd at the
time here aflign'd, it muſt have continued 95 or
96 days ; which is conſiderably more than dou-
ble the number of thoſe 40, within which the
former Rains were confin'd.


LIE. This ſecond, and leſs remarkable Rain was deriv'd


from ſuch a cauſe as the former was.


LIE This is ſufficiently evident already, ſince
the ſame Comet afforded the matter for both
Rains equally, > LI


Z'5
LI. It has been already obſerv'd , That the Croll. r.
Comet would involve the Earth in its Tail a ſe- Sol.


poſt Hy.
poth. 10,
prius,
Fig. 1.


316 SOLUTIONS. BooklV.


LIT. Tho' the Fountains of rhe great Deep were broken
up, and the forty days Rain began at the ſame rime ;
yet is there a very obſervable mention of a threefold
growth, or diſtin& augmentation of the Wate:s , as if
ir were on three ſeveral accounts, and at three ſeveral


tunes.


LIII. This is particularly correſpondent to the
preſent Hyporbeſis ; wherein (1.)g The principal
Rain of 40 days; (2.) The Eruption and Aſcent
of the Subterraneous Waters, occation'd by their
werght and preſſure; (;.! The leiler Rain of
95 or 96 days, were both ditterent in themſelves,
and in their time of commencing, and caus'd a
diſtinct augmentation of che Waters , agreeably

"co the greateſt nicery of this Propoſition.


LIV. The Waters of the Delug* increas'd by degrees till
their urmolt height ; and rhen decreas'd by degrees till
they were clearly gone off the Face of the Earth,


LIV. This is evident as to the increaſe of the
Deluge, by what has been already faid ; and will
cquaily be fo of ics decreaſe, when we come to ic
hereafter.


LV. The Waters of the Dclage were Still, Calm, free
from Commotions, Storms, Winds, and Tempeſts, cf
a'l forts, during the whole time in which the Ark was


float upon them.


IV. It has already appear'd, that there were no
Storms, Tempelts, or other violent Commortions
n the ,-ztedi/uiian Arr till the Deluge ; and that
Guring the ſpace here referr'd to, none wou!d
arifz, *tis but reaſonable to allow. For as to the
firit and principal Rain , it was ſo conſtant, fo
downright, and ſo uninterrupted, that no little


commotion in the Air could have place; or if it
had


Pi;znom.


® #4 *%
- tf tb


Chap. 4; SOLUTIONS.


had, could diſturb it; which is commonly the
caſe of long and fetled Rains with us ac this day.
As to the Subterrancous Waters, aſcending with
ſome violence, they were confin'd to ſeveral par-
ticular places, and not univerſal ; and though
they might cauſe ſome commotions at the bottom
of the Waters, yet mighe the ſurface of the ſame,
and the Air, be ſufficiently calm and undiſturb'd.
Bur as to the third Cauſe of the Deluge, It muſt
be granted, agreeably to what has been before
obſerv'd, That the deſcending Vapours would
not be merely ſuch, but mix'd with many hete-
rogenerous Particles of all forts, Sulphur, Brim-
ſtone, Niter, Coal, Mineral Effluwia, Metallick
Steams, and the like, which the prodigious heat
at the Per:be/:on had difſolv'd and elevated into the
Tail of the Comet : From the confuſed mixture,
irregular fermentations, and Giſagrecing motions
of all which, 'tis probable the precernatural and
violent commotions in the Atmo/phere then, and
lince, are mainly to be deduc'd. So that atſoon
as the latter 94 or 95 days Rains were almoſt
over; aſloon as theſe rarified Corpuſcles were
deſcended into the lower and narrower Regions
of the Air ; and being crouded cloſer, were, by
the greater heat there predominant, pur into ſuch
irregular fermentations as they were already dif-
poſed for ; 'Tis natural to fuppoſe that Winds,
and Storms of all forts, and thoſe in a = EX-
traordinary manner, would ariſe, and cauſe the
molt ſenſible and extream perturbations of che
Waters (now covering to a valt depth the face of
the whole Earth ) that could eaſily be conceir'd :
Of which the following Propolicion will give
farther occaſion to diſcourle.
LVI. Yet during the Deluge there were both Winds and
Storms of all forts in a very violent m—_—_ TY,
V1. SECINT


317


Coroll. 3.
Lem. $5.
prius.


318


Vid. S:lu.
59. infra.


Gen. vii.


20,


SOLUTIONS. BooklV.


VI. Seeing, as we juſt now ſaw, that at the
end of the latrer Rains the greateſt Storms poſli-
ble were to be expected ; and ſeeing yet the Ark,
which had been afloat ſo long, and was fo ſtill
(the Waters being now at the very higheſt) was
incapable of abiding a ſtormy Sea, as we prov'd
under the former Phenomenon; there at firſt view
appears the greateſt danger imaginable, of its
pzriſhing in the future immoderate and extraor-
dinary Commotions. And this danger is increa-
ſed by this Refletion.; That as probably it had
been afloat during the moſt part of che 150 days,
while the Waters were gradually and gently aug-
menting; ſo one would imagine ought it to be,
for at leaſt as many days, during the at leaſt as
gentle and gradual decreaſe of the ſame after-
wards : z. e. The 4rk ought to have been as long
afloat in the ſtormy, as it had been in the calm
part of the Deluge. But this difficulty, which is
ro appearance ſo entirely inſoluble, will ſoon va-
niſh, if we conſider that the Ark reſted upon Cau-
ca(us, the then higheſt Mountain inthe world. For
ſeeing the Waters prevailed above the ſame Moun-
tain 15 Cubits only, a great part of which depth
of Water would be drawn by the Ark it ſelf ;
upon the very firſt ceaſing of the Rains from
above, and of the Waters from. the Aby/s be-
neath , which permitted the leaſt ſubſiding and
diminution of the Deluge, the Ark muſt imme-
diately reſt upon the ground , and thereby ſe-
cure it ſelf from the impending Storms. And
that accordingly it did fo, at the cime aflign'd, on
the concluſion of the 150 days, or thevery ſame
individual day when the Wind began, is parti-
cularly and expreſly obferv'd and afftirm'd by
Moſes : Which being a very remarkable coinci-
dence, exactly agrecable to the preſent Hypotheſis,

as


Chap. 4. SOLUTIONS.


as well as to the Sacred Hiſtory, and of very
conſiderable Importance , I ſhall fer down the
words at large, as follows :


The waters prevailed upon the Earth an hundred Gen. vii.
and fifty days ( viz. from theſeventeenth of the ſz. ulc. & viii,
cond, to the ſeventeenth of the ſeventh Month). *» 7: 3» +


And God remembred Noah , and every living thing,
and all! the Cattel that was with him in the Ark :
And God made a wind to paſs over the earth, and
the waters aſſwaged. The fountains allo of the deep ,
and the windows of beatven were ſtopped, and the ram
from beawen was reſtrained. And the waters re-
turned from off the earth continually : and after the
end of the hundred and fifty days, the waters were
abated. . And the ark reſted in the ſeventh morth, on
the ſeventeemh day of the month, upon the mountams
of Ararat.

Corollary. Hence *rz obwious to remark the won-
derful Providence of God for the Preſervation of the
Ark, and the ſole Remains of the old World therein
contatn'd, m ordering all circumſtances, ſo, that it was
afloat juſt all the calm Seaſon of the Deluge , but as
ſoon as ever any tempeſt uouws Weatber aroſe , was /afe


landed on the top of Caucaſus.


LVII. This Deluge of Waters was univerſal in its extent
and effatt ; reaching to all the parts of the Earth, and
d:Ntroying all the Land-Animals on the intire Surface
thereof; thoſe only excepted which were with Noah in
the Ark.


© TI VIE. This might juſtly have been made a
Corollary of the next Propoſition, ( forif the Wa-
ters 1n any one Region, much more a compleat
Hemijphere , exceeded the tops of the higheſt
Mounrains, it would certainly diffuſe ir a and
overtiow the other alſo ): Buc being capable in
the preſent Hypotheſis of a ſeparate Proof 2 de-
ervcs


319:


ſerves a diſtin Conſideration. Now of the ſe-
veral Cauſes:of the Neluge, thoſe Vapours which
were deriv'd from the Comet's Tail, both art the
firſt and ſecond paſlage of the Earth through the
entire Column thereof, by reaſon of the Earth's
Miure, or abiding therein about 12 hours, or a ſe-
mi revolution, 4nd che fall of the Vapours on an
ere Hemiſphere at the ſame time, would af-
fet the whole Earth, and though not exactly
equally, yet pretty univerfally make a Deluge
in all the Regions of the Globe. The ſubterra-
neous Waters, being the proper effect of the
weight of the other, would alſo be as univerſal
as they, and that every where, generally ſpeak-
ing, in the ſame proportion. Tis true, the
Waters which were derived from the Atmoſphere
of the Comet ( the principal Source of the 40
days Rain ) were not wholly fo univerſal as the
former at. frſt, by reaſon of the ſhorter Mora or
abiding of the Earth therein ( though even
much above half of the Earth's entire ſurfacg
would hence be immediately affected ) : Bur if


we contider the Velocity of the Earth's Dumnal -


Rotation , and that the Maſs of newly acquir'd
Vapours was not at firſt partaker of the fame,
but by degrees to receive the impretlion thereof,
we ſhall with eaſe apprehend, that a few of the
firſt Rotations would wind or wrap theſe, as
well as the other Vapours, quite round the Earth,
and thereby cauſe a very equal diſtribution of
them all in the Atmoſphere, and at laſt render
the Rains very evenly Univerſal. To which
uniform diſtribution the Nature of the Air ic
ſelf, as at preſent ic I ſuppoſe does, might con-
tribute : Such an Elaſtical Fluid as the Air ſcarce
ſuffering a laſting Denſity or Croud of Vapours
in one Region, without communicating ſomg
part


SOLUTIONS. Book IVY;


Chap. 4. SOLUTIONS.


part to the others adjoining ; that ſo a kind of
TA in the weight, craflitude, and denſity
of its ſeveral Columns may be preſerv'd through
the whole. | So that at laſt, the Deluge muſt
have been Univerſal, becauſe every one of the


Cauſes thereof appear to have been truly fo.


LVINE The Waters at their utmoſt height were fiſtcen
Cubits above the high-ſt Wountains, or three Miles :£
the leaſt perpendicular above the common Surface of
the Plains and Seas.


LVITIL. In order to make ſome eſtimate of the
quantity of Water which this Hyporh:/is affords
us, ler us ſuppoſe that the one haif came from
the. Comet, or the Rains; and the other-half
from *the' Subrerrancous .Water : (Tho' 'tis not
impoſlible that much the g-eater pare might
ariſe from the latter: ) Let us alſo ſuppoſe, that
the tenth part of the reſt aroſe from the 7.ul of
the Comer, at both the times of its encloſing
the Earth; and the other nine from its Arme;-
phere; (tho' 'tis poſlible that a much lefs propor-
tion ought to be deriv'd from the former) *Tis
evident from the Velocity of Comets, at the di-
ſtance from the Sun here to be conſider d, and
the uſual Craflitude or Diameter of the Tails
thereof, that the Earth would be near half a day,
or 12 hours each time within the limits thereot ;
and by conſequence that it would intercept and
reccive upon it ſelf a Cylmadrical Column of Va-
pour, whoſe Baſis were equal to that of a great
Circle on the Earth, and whofe Altitude we:
about 750000 Miles. If we therefore did bur
know the proper denſity of the Vapour compc-
ſing the Tail of the Comet, or what proportion
it-bears to that oft Water, 'twere ealic to reduce
this matter to Calculation, and very nearly co

E e determins


321


322


SOLUTIONS. BookTlY.


determine the quantiry enquired after. That
the Tail of a Comet, eſpecially at any conſide-
rable diſtance from the Comet it ſelf, is exceed-
ing rare, is evident, by the vaſtneſs of its extent,
and the diſtin& appcarance of the fixt Stars quite
through the immenſe Craflitude of its entire Co-
lumn. Let us, for computation's ſake, ſuppoſe
that the Denſity of Water to that of this Ex-
panded Column of Vapour isas 34-0000 to one;
or, which is all one, (fince Water is to our Air
in Denſity as 850 to one) that the Denſity of
our Air, is to the Denlity of this Column -of
Vapour, as 400v to one, (which degree of rare-
neſs if it be not enough at a great diſtance from
the Comet, as at the fecond paſlage ; yet I ſup-
poſe may be more than ſufficient at the very Re-
gion adjoining thereto, as at the firſt pallage ;
and fo upon the whole no unreaſonable Hypo-
theſis: ) So that if we divide the Altitude of
this Cylmdrical Column of (750000 Mites, or)
3750000000 Feet by 3400000 (37500 by 34)
we ſhall have a Column of Water equal there-
to. By which Calculation the quantiry of Wa-
ter acquir'd at each time of the paſſage through
the Tail, would equal a Cylmder, whole Baſis
were a great Circle on the Earth, as above ; and
whoſe A/ticude were 1103 Feet : Which quantt
ty being twice acquir'd, muſt be doubled; and
then will amounc to a Cz/mder whoſe Baſis were
the fame as above, and whoſe Altitude were
double the others, or 22<6 Feet. Now Archimed:s
has demonſtrated, that the intire Superficics of a
Sphere or Globe is four times as large as the res
of one of its great Circles. And by conſequence
the Column of Vapour before-mention'd, when
converted into Raia Water, and ſpread upon the
Face of the Enrich, would cover the Globe intire-


ly


Chap. 4. SOLUTIONS.
ly round (had there been no Dryland or Moun-
tains extant above the Surface of the Plains and
Seas) a quarter of the height laſt afſign'd, or
F414 Feet every way : Which being Ronos's,
and what was at the firſt Poftulared of the Ar-
moſphere's quota, the whole Water afforded by the
Comet will cover the Farth intirely co the per-
pendicular height of the 541c4 Feet. To which
add, by the Original Pefulatwm, the equal quan-
tiry aſcending from the Bowels of the Earth, the
Total amounts to 10821 Feet; or above two Miles

icular Altitude :* Which, when allowance

15 made for thoſe large ſpaces taken up by the
extant Dry Land and Mountains, will approach
very near that three Miles perpendicular heighe
requir'd by the prefent Phamomenon.

Corollary. If the ſeveral particulars requiſire fo
the nice adjuſt ment of theſe Computations were more
exattly enquit'd into, ſome light on the preſent Hypo-
theſis, might be afforded to the Denſity of the Atmol-
pheres and Tails of Comets, which is hitherto mndeter-
min'd; the conſideration of which matter muſt be re«
fer'd to Aſtronomers.


LIX Whatever be the height of the Mountain Cau-1/r,
whereon the Ark reſted, now ; it was 4 that tne the
higheſt in the whole World.


T.IX. If we conſult the Figure here refer'd to,
we ſhall eaſily apprehend the Reaſon of this,
otherwiſe, ſtrange Phemomenen. For feeing this
Mountain was the higheſt in 4/2, or the middle
Regions of our Continent ; and feeing withal
chat intire Continent, and chiefly the middle
Regions thereof, were elevated by the greateſt
protuberance of the Aby/s d b c above any other
correſpondent parts of che whole Globe, the ab-
ſolute' or intire hcight of this Mountain ariſes
Ec 2 not


Z?


Fig. 71


2


2


324


SOLUTIONS. BooklY.


not only from its proper Altitude above the
neighbouring Plains, but alſo from the Elevation
of the whole Continent, or peculiarly of its
middle Regions above the Ancient Surface of
the Seas 5 {> that by this advantage of ſituation,
it was at the time here concern'd higher not on-
ly than its wy gn: which its own Elevation
was ſufficient for, but than any other on the Face
of the whole Earth : Some of which otherwiſe
ic could, I believe, by no means have pretended
to match, much leſs ro ourt-doin Altitude. Now
alcho' the preſence of the Comet which produc'd
theſe Tides in the Aby/s, and elevated the intire
Continents above their ancient level, did not re-
main after the Diſruption of the Fountains of the
Deep on the firſt day of the Deluge; yet the
Effect thereof, the Elevation of the Continents
above their ancient Level, would not ſo ſoon, nay
would ſcarce ever intirely ceaſe. We know by *
common obſervation , that if a Solid or Setled
Maſs of Bodies be torn or pull'd in pieces, *tis not
ealie to put every thing into its place, and re-
duce the whole to the ſame fixed Poſition, and
within the ſame fixed limits, it had before. If a
folid compactzd mound of Earth were once
ſhatter'd and divided, were levell'd and remov'd,
tho' afterward every individual Duſt of the for-
mer Earth were laid together again upon the ve-
ry ſame Plot and Compaſs, yet would it not be
immediately confin'd within its ancient dimen-
ſions ; its height would be at firſt conſiderably
greater than before ; and tho' that in length of
time would be by degrees diminiſh'd, by the gra-
dual ſetling and crouding rogether of the parts,
and fo ſome approaches would be made thereby
towards its ancient denſity, and leſſer elevation ;
yer neither would be intirely atrain'd ; in any

mo-


Chap. 4. SOLUTIONS.


moderate ſpace of time at leaſt. And this
is the very caſe before us. That Oval Figure
which the Orb of Earth was ſtretch'd to atgthe
Deluge, would remain for a conſiderable time,
and be many years in ſetling fo cloſe together,
that it might afterward remain fixt and firm for
che following generations ; before which time
'ris evident, that the Regions near the Center of
our Northern or Larger Continent, were the
_— and thoſe at 9o degrees diſtance every
where the loweſt ; and by conſequence at the
time of the Arks reſting, the Mountain Cauca/w,
near the Center of the Northern Continent, was
elevated above the reſt, and particularly above
the Pike of Tenerif, which ſcems to be ar preſent
che higheſt of all others. And thus that terrible
Phenomenon is ſolv'd, which the Reverend Mr.
Warren was ſo puzzled with, that even on the
allowance of ſo much Miracle as the creaticn
of the Waters of the Deluge, and Annibilation of
the ſame afterward, yet could ke not account
for the Letter of Moſes without a forc'd and un-
grounded Suppoſition, to the ſame purpoſe with
the Propoſition before us: As you will find him,
and not without reaſon, very emphatically exprel-
fing himſelf on this occaſion.

Corollary 1. Here is a viſible inſtance of the D:-
vine Providence for the preſervation of the Remains
of the Old World, by ordering the building of the Aik
near that which would be the hig beſt Mountain m the
World ; that ſoupon the wery firſt ceaſing of the Rains,
and the beginning of the Winds and Storms, 't might
immediately be ſafe on the top thereef.

Coroll. 2. The ſame careſul and wiſe providence
is conſpicuors in the ſo accurately adjuſting all the cir=
cumſtances of the Deluge; that tho" it ſhould be bigb
enough to deſtroy the whole ſtock of th: Dry-land

EQ}


Ammal: ;


323


Geolog. p.
329, 330»
and De-
F:nce, p.
171, 192.


326


SOLUTIONS. BookIY,


' £urmals ; and yet but juſt ſo much above the Mour-


14: Caucaſus, a: permitted 4 on toreſt ot the very

FW decreaſe I Waters, Ihe COMmenci _
-<« Wes 0 A Air, and the Waves wocrib "_
ing; which otherwiſe muſt ſtill have deftroy'd ut, not-
W:tb/t anding the advantage of its ſuuation before ob-
lery'd.

Coroll: 3. Suppoſing the Truth of our 4. Poſtu-
lacum, of the Verity of the Letter he aick Hi
ſtory ; as certem as is the greater beight of the Pike of
Teneriff, or of any other Mountamm the World, above
that of Caucaſus Now; (of which I ſuppoſe no body
makes any queſtion) ſo certain is a (bating unknown
cauſes, and a miraculous Power, as u always m ſuch
caſes to be ſuppos'd) that a Comet was the cauſe of the
Moſaick Deluge. For 'ts certain, by the plameſt de-
duc/ton from the expreſs words of Scripture, that the
AMeuntein ow which the Ark veſted was at that time
the kigheſt inthe World. *Tis therefore certain, that the
Continent or Baſis on 2:þhich Ment Caucaſus tand.,
25 elevated higher at the Deluge than "tus at preſent :
and "tis alſocertain, that no Body or aſs of Bodies in
the whole World can clevate or depreſs @ Content of
the Earib, but ſuch as are capable of approaching the
fame; or mother words, but Comets; and con/eauent-
ly a Comet did approach near the Earth at the time


" aſſigned, and was the cauſe of the Deluge. Which Chain


or Correxion 1 take to be ſo ſtrong, that I believe
*rwill not be poſſible to evade its force; and ſo what on
other arguments has been already eftabliſh'd, is fully
torfirm'd by this, |

Coroll. 4.' *7:; cqually dcmonſtrable, that the Up-
per Orv'er Habitable Earth is founded on a Subterrane-
d::; Fluid, denſer and beawier than it ſelf : This circum-
farce being abſolutely neceſſary 19 account for the Pha:-
nNcmenon-we are now upon. For if the internal Re-
grens *f 162 Globe were firm and ſolid (as it _—
| ſuppos'd;'


, ,


Chap. 4: SOLUTIONS.


ſuppor'd 3 tho' wholly gratis, and without ground: )
Thy the Comet had paſs d by, yet there could have
been no elevation of any Continent, and the Propoſition
before us muſt ſtill bave remain'd Inſoluble.


LX. As the Fountains of the great Deep were broken up
at the very fame time rhat the firſt Rains began, ſo were
they ſtopp'd the very ſame time that the laſt Rains

ed ; on the ſeventeenth day of the ſeventh Month.


LX. Tho” I cannot ſay that the Account of
the Deluge, now given, can determine to a Day
the time of the Subterrancous Waters ceaſing ro
ſpour forth (this /oppage of the Fountains of the
Deep in Moſes) yet 'tis evident, that the time de-
fin'd by the Hiſtory is very agreeable to that
which from the conlideration of the thing it ſelf
one ſhould naturally pitch upon. For ſince the
Aſcent of the Subterraneous Waters depended on
the Waters produc'd by the Rains, as on the be-
ginning of thoſe Rains it began to aſcend, on
the continuance thereof continued to do the like,
ſo at the ceaſing, probably enough might it ceaſe
alſo; as this Propoſition aſſures us it really did.


LXT. The abatement and decreaſe of the Waters of the
Deluge was firſt by a Wind which dried up ſome. And
ſecondly, by their deſcent through thoſe Fiſſures, Chaps,
and Breaches, at which part of them had before aſcend-
<d into th: Bowels of the Earth, which received the
reft. To which latter alſo the Wind, by hurrying the
Waters up and down, and ſo promoting their lighting
= the before-mentjon'd Fiſfures, was very much ſub»
ervienr,


LXI. In order to the giving a fatisfaftory ac-
count of this Propolition, and of the draining the
Waters of the Deluge off the Surface of the Earth
(which to ſome has ſeem'd almoſt as difficult to
folvs as their firſt Introduction); It mult firſt be


Ee 4 granted,


ad '
"Y
os.


Lem. 78.
cum Co-
roll. & So»
Jur. 6.
Pr3us,


SOLUTIONS. BooklIV.


F

granted that the Air could receive and ſuſtain but
very inconſiderable quantities, in- compariſon of
the intire Maſs which lay upon the - Op yer
ſome it might, and would naturally do; which
accordingly both the I/nd here mentioned, and
the Swr alſo took away, and turn d into Vapour
immediately afcer the ceating of the Jatter Rains.
Pur as to all the reſt, there is no imaginable place
for thcir Reception , or whither their natural
Gravitv oblig d them to retreat ro, excepting the
Powels of the Earth ; which muſt cherefore be di-
ftintly conſider d in this place. Now we may re-
member, from what has been formerly ſaid, that
the quantity of Solids,or earthy Parts in the upper
Orbs primary Formation, was very much greater
than that of Fluids, or watery Parts;. and conſe-
quently, thar the inward Regions of the Earth be-
ing generally dry and porqus, were capable of
recciving mighty quantities of Waters without
any ſwe!lng, wichout any alteration of the exter=
nal Figure, or viſible bulk. And indced, if we
allow, as we ought, any conſiderable Craflitude
to this upper Orb, 1ts interior Regions might eaſily
contain a much greater quantity of Waters than
what was ypon the Earth at the Deluge; cſpeci-
ally when ſo great a. part of them was before
there, and would only fill up their old places
again. So that all the dithculty is now reduc'd
to this, By whar Pipes, Canals, or Paſſages, theſe
Waters could he convey d into the Bowels of the
Earth? Which in truth can admir of no diſpute,
nothing ſure being to be conceiv d more natu-
ral Inlers to theſe Waters, than thoſe very perpen-
dicular Fiſſures which were the On:lets to fo great
2 part of them before. As ſoon therefore as the
Waters ceas' to aſcend upward: through thoſe
Breaches, they muſt ro be ſure deſcend down-

ge | wards


Chap. 4. SOLUTIONS.


wards by the ſame; and this deſcent is more na-
tural than the prior aſcent could be eſteem'd to
be; which was a force .upon them, compelling
them againſt their Natures to ariſe upwards,
when this retreat into the ſame Interſtices is no
other than their own proper Gravity requir'd,
and inclin'd them to. The caſe here is in part
like that of a Sive, firſt by force preſsd down in-
to a Veſſel of Water, till ic were filVd therewith,
and then ſuffer'd to emerge again ; where through
the very ſame Holes at which the Waters aſcend-
ed into, they afterward deſcended out of the
Stve again, and retreated into their own Ele-
ment as before. All that in* particular deſerves
here to be farther noted, is, the Intereſt of the
Wind, or of the Agitations of the Waters ( goings
and return: ng s in the Hebrew Phraſe ) made men-
tion of in this Propoſition. And theſe Commo-
tions are in truth very uſeful, and very neceſſar
aſſiſtants to the draining of the Waters from off
the Earth. For when the moſt part of the Fil-
ſures were in the Mountains, 'twould have been
a difficult thing to clear the Vallies and lower
Grounds, had there been a perfe& Calm, and
every ColleRion of Waters remain'd quietly in its
own place. Bur when the Waters were fo vio-
lently agitated and hurried from one place to
another, they would thereby very frequently light
into the F:ſures, and Breaches, and fo deſcend
as well as the reſt into the heart of the Earth;
very agreeable to the Allertion of this Propoſi-
tion.

Corollary 1. Seeing the moſt of the Fiſſures were m
the Mountams, the decreaſe and going off of the Wa-
ters would be greateſt at firſt, while the generality of
the Mountains were under water, and leſs and gentler


afterward,
| " Coroll.


330


SOLUTIONS. BooklY,


Coroll. 2. Several low Countries new bordering on
the Seas, might for many Years after the Deluge be
wnder Water, which by the deſcent of more of the Wa-
ters into the Bowels of the Earth, might become Dry-
Land afterward ; and by their (moothneſs and nel
hty ſbew ther once baving lain under, and been made
fo pi: by the Waters. Inſtances of which are now
rj ob[eruable im the World: In particular, thoſe parts
of Cambridgeſhire and Lincolnſhire which border on
the German Ocean, appear very evidently to have ori-
ginally been in the ſame caſe, as any careful Obſerver
will eajily pronounce.


LXIIL. The dry Land, or habicable Part of the Clobe, is
ſince the Deluge divided into two vaſt Continents , ak
moſt oppoſite to one another, and ſeparated by a great
Ocean interpos'd berween them.


LXII. The Figure in which the Comet left the
Earth, and which ie would in ſome meaſure re-
eain ever after, was, as may be ſeen in the Fi-
gure, an Oval or 9blong Spheroid, whoſe longer
Axis a b would determine the higheſt extanc
Parts of the Earth; and whole ſhorter Ax« cd,
by a Revolution about the Center perpendicu-
larly to the longer Ax«, would alike determine
the loweſt or molt deprefs'd Parts thereof. When
therefore as many Waters were run down into
:1;c Earth as the Apertures could receive ; all that
1:main'd (excepting the ancient leſſer Seas ſfome-
what augmented every where) muſt be found
in the loweſt Vallies, or near the ſhorter 4x5's
Revolution, all round the Globe , compoſing a
rnglhty Ocean; while the ewo elevated Regions,
near "A rwo ends of the longer Axis, were extant
above the Waters, and compos'd thoſe two oppo-
ſize Conginents of the Earth , made mention of


i: {11is Propoſition,
Corollary


Chap.4: SOLUTIONS.


Corollary 1. *7:s probable that America is mtire-
ly ſeparated from our Contient by the interpos'd Ocean,
wh any Neck of Land , by which it has been by
wany imagin'd to communicate with 'Tartary.

Cocoll. 2. America was peopled from this Conti-
nent ſome Ages after the Deluge by Navigation. For
ſeeing there 1s no Communication between us and them
by Land; ſeeing alſo the Ancient Inhabitants of i pc-
riſh'd imtirely at the Deluge (as the Teftimony of the
Sacred Scriptures , the conſideration of their leſſer Niun:-
bers, and the impoſſibility of any Preſervation of Men
by an Ark any but at the Mountain Caucaſus,
tbe bigheſt Hill near the Center of the higheſt Conti-
nent m the World, appearing from what has been ſaid,
do conſpire to demonſtrate ). "Tis evident they muſt
have been repeopled by Sea, from this Continent.

Coroll. 3. Nov ation, tho" it was no! before the
Flood , or till then wer y inconſiderable ; Jet a5 no! /o
wholly new aud late m the Warld, as ſome imag nc.
IWhich Obſervation is wery agreeable with the Sacred
Records, which intimate no leſs than three Tears !"©y-
«ges in the days of Solomon; and with Herodotus,
ho mentions @ Voyage through the Red-Sea round
Africa, and /o es the Straights of Gibraltar n:4
tbe Mediterranean the 4ays of Neco.


LXIII. One of theſe Continent: is conſiderably larger than


LXIIL Since in all Tides, and fo in thoſe Pro-
tuberances which occalion'd the preſent Conti-
nents , that which reſpects che Body producing
the ſame, is larger than its oppoſite one; 'tis evi-
dent, fo it ought to be here, and the Continent
ſituate about the Point b, conſiderably larger than
the oppoſite ons about a, agreeebly io this Pro»
polition, |


Coroll:


r Kings
R 32.

2 Chron,
Ix. 21.

L 4. C42,
"TY


332


SOLUTIONS. BookIV,


Corollary. In this poſture of the Abyſs, and its
encumbent Orb , the Earth is correſpondent to the Egg,”
its ancient Symbol and Repreſentative , not only in its
imward and intire Conſtitution, but in ſome meaſure in
its external Figure alſo; the reſemblance between them
becoming by this means in a manner Unrverſal.


LXIV. The larger Continent lies moſt part on the North-ſide
of the Equator ; and the ſmaller, moſt part on the South.


LXIV. The Poſition of the Continents depend-
ed mainly onthe time of the year when the Comet
paſſed by. For ſince the Comet deſcended in the
Plain of the Ecliprick from the Regions almoſt op- .
poſite to the Swn, and came to its neareſt diſtance
about 130 degrees onward from the Point in the
Ecliptick oppoſite to the Swn, before which, and
yet ſcarce till after the Comet were paſt go degrees,
or the Periphery of the Ecliprick, would the Tides
be great enough to burſt the Orb of Earth, and
fix the Centers of the Continents ; By conſidering
the place of the Earth in the Ecliprick,and counting
about 100 degrees onward , one may determine
the Latitude of the Point on the Earth direaly
expos d to the Comet's Body, and by conſequence
of ics oppoſite Point alſo; about which Points the
rwo Continents lay. Now the Earth being about
the middle of Taurus to an eye at the Sun (which
I always in ſuch caſes ſuppoſe), atthe time of the
paſling by of the Comet, about the middle of the
{econd Monch from the Autummal Equinox, the lat-
ter part of Leo (being 100 degrees onward from
the Point oppoſite to the Sun) will nearly deter-
mine the Latitude of the larger Continent d bc,
as by conſequence will the latter part of Aquarius
chat of che ſmaller d a c: On which accounts 'tis
evident , that the larger muſt be moſtly on the
North, and the ſmaller moſtly on the South-/ide of
the Equator. LXV. The


Chap.4. SOLUTIONS.


LXV. The Middle or Center of the North Continent is
about ſixteen or eighteen degrees of Nuwr:bern Lacirude;
and that of the Sour abour lixteen or eighteen degrees
of Sourhern Latiiude.


LXV. This Propoſition -( which more nicely
determines that Poſition of the Continents which
the laſt more generally aſſerted ) is tlius demon-
ſtrated. Eacl» Continent muſt retain that Poſi-
tion which ic had when.its Compages was burſt
by the Elevation of the Aby/s. Now the burſting
of the Orb is to be ſuppos'd before the Comets
neareſt diſtance; and by conſequence the Centers
of the two Continents a and b ought to have the
Latitude of the Points abour 9u, or rather nearer
an 100 degrees onward beyond that oppoſite to
the Swn,or beyond the Swn it ſelf. So that the Cen-
ter of the Northern Continent, near the Sourh-Ezſt
point of Arabia, and of the Suuthern, near the
Source of the vaſt River De la Plata, ought to be
about the ſame Laticude with the; 20® | of
Leo, and of Aquarius, or near 16 degrees, the
former of Northern, the latter of Seuthern Latitude,
as this Propoſition aflerrs them really to be.

Corollary 1. If therefore we were to determine the
time of the Year of the Comet's paſſmg by the Earth,


or the commencing of the Deluge, from the Poſition of


the Centers of our two oppoſite Continents, which depend
thereon, we ought to aſſign it near the middle of the ſc-
cond Month, from the Autumnal Equinox, agreeab/y
to the time already fixt both from the Sacred Hiſtory,
and the Calculations of Aſtronomy at the tenth Hypo-
thelis foregoing.

Coroll. 2. Hence all thoſe Corollaries to the third
and fourth Argument of the ſaid tenth Hypothelis are
mightily confirm'd: To which I refer the Reader
their ſecond perujal ; the importance of their S:
well-deſerving the [ame at his hands, Co:


333


334


Theor. 1,
2. C. 9.


SOLUTTIONS. BookIV.
Coroll. 2. Hence perhaps we may derive the occa-
fron of that ancient, current, and mach mnfiſted-on Tra-
dirinn cor rerning the high or clewated ſituation of Para-
diſe; which ir ſo wiry much atteſted to by Antiquity,
and yet ſo yer y ftrange and obſcure in it ſelf. For ſince
Paradiſe, as bas betts already prov'd, was very near
that point where the. Center of out Continent is, rhe
Eaſt or Southeaſt Border of Arabia: And fince
withal, as we have ſhewn, the ſame Regions were by
the Comet at the Deluge elevated more than any others
on the mtire Globe ;; and ſence, laſtly, it would for along
tame” retain in good meaſure ſuch us moſt rais d firua-
tow, and contmue higher than any other correſpondent
parts of the Earth 5, this appears a rationab Occaſion or
Foundation of that celebrated Tradition here refer d to:
IWhich otherwiſe how to grove any tolerable account of,
tpon ary [olid Principles, I confeſs I am, and have al-
ways been wholly to ſeek. ,


LXVI. The diſtance between the Continents, meaſuring
from the larger or Northern Seuth-Eaftward, is greater
than that thecontraty way, or Sour Weftword,


EXVL. Seeing the Motion of the Comer about
its neareſt Poſition was much more conſiderable
than. the Diwrnal one of the Earth ; and ſeein
withal the greaterand higher protuberance won
arrive at a ſufficient force to burſt its incumbent
Orb or Continent ſomewhat ſooner than the
lefſer and lower ; it will follow thar the Point b
would not bejult oppofirerothe Point a, but near-
cr the place q in-the Figure. By which means the
diſtance from q by c to a would be greater than
from the ſame q by d toa; or from the Center
of the greater Continent to that of the leſſer
South-eaſtward, than South-weſt ward : Exactly as
this Propoſition requires,


LXVII. Neither


Chap. 4. SOLUTIONS.


LXVH. Neither of the Continents is terminated by a ronnd
or even circular Circumference: but mighty Crecks,
Bays, and Seas running into them; and as mighty
Peninſula's, Promontories, and Rocks jerting our | 2
them, render the whole very unequal and irregular:


LXVII. If the Surface of the Earth before the
Deluge had been even and ſmooth, without Moun-
tains and Valleys, and their Confequents, Seas
and Dry Land, the pafling by of the Comet muft
indeed, as before, have certainly caus'd a diſtin&i-
on of the two Continents, and muſt have intcr-
pos'd an Ocean between them; but then theſe rwo
circumſtances would have obtain'd alſo, firſt, thar
all che Waters of the intire Globe would have left
the Continents, and folely compos'd an Ocean ;
and ſecondly, That the Termination or Boun-
daries of the Ocean and the Continents. wauld
have been circular, round, and even on every
fide. But ſince the Surface of the Earth was un-
even, irregular, and diſtinguiſh'd every where in-
to Mountains, Plains and Valleys, into Seas and
Dry Land, the preſent Terraqueous Globe, with
thoſe inequalities of the Termination of each
Continent mention'd in this Propofition, is a
10ſt eafie and natural, nay plainly neceſſary
refult of this great Mutation at the Deluge.

Coroll. x. Hence *tis farther evident, that the Sur-
face of the Antediluvian Earth 2v4s not plain and
even, but had thoſe diffn& ons of Mogntams and Va!
leys, Seas and Dry Land, which from other” Arrumencs
has been before eftabliſh'd.

Coroll. 2. Hence therefore it appears (what fhoutd
have been before ob/ery'd) 114 all the Earth might be
Planted and Peopled before the Diſugetho" Newigat io
were they cit hey not_at all, o 119) contilerably known 7
There being no Ocean or ſeparats Continents; and ſcarce
any ſuch tomg as an land, or Coun:r) Pligg hat 214! /
eaſe might; be gone 14 by Land. AVE,


SOLUTIONS. Book I'V,


LXVIN. The depth of that Ocean which ſeparates theſe
rwo Contment:, is uſually greateſt fartheſt from, and leaſt
neareſt to either of the ſame Continents ; there being a
gradual deſcent from the Continents to the middle of
the Ocean, which is the deepeſt of all.


LXVIII. The reaſon. of this gradual declivity
towards the middle of the Ocean, is very plain
from the Figure hereto belonging. For ſince the
Earth's Surtace became in ſome dzgree an Oval,
or oblong Spheroid , tis neceſſary that there
ſhould be (as far as the other irregularities of the
Globe would permit) a deſcent from the ends of
the longer Axis b and a, to thoſe of the ſhorter
c and d in their intire circumvolution, which
gives a molt obvious account of the preſent Phe-
nomenon.


LXTX. The greateſt part of the 17ands of the Globe are
ſiruate at ſmall © nw from the Edges of the great
Continents; very few appearing near the middle of the
Main Ocean,


LXIX. Since Iſlands are only ſuch high Re-
gions as would be extant. above the Surface of
the Waters, tho' they cover'd the Neighbouring

rts ; and ſince the Ocean, as we. have now
ſhewn, was deepeſt in the middle between the
ewo Continents ; 'tis plain that, Czteris paribus,
the higher Regions would more frequently be
extant near the Continents, than about the middle
of the ſaid Ocean ; as this Propoſition aſſerts.


LXX. The Ages of Men decreas'd about one half preſently
after the Deluge ; and in the ſucceeding eight hundred
or nine hundred Years, were gradually reduced to that
ſtandard at which they have ſrood ever ſince.


LXX. The firſt parr of this is already ſufficiently
accounted for in that Propoſition, where the _
Ee 0


Chap. 4. SOLUTIONS.


of the change in the duration of Mens lives at the
Flood were in general enquir'd into. But the
reaſons of the gradual Decay in the ſuccecding
Ages are here to be aflign d. Now here 'tis not
impoſlible that the contiderably long lives of the
firſt Pofdilwuian Patriarchs might in part depend
on the vigorous Conſtitution of their Fathers, not
to be zmmediately impair d to the utmoſt , or de-
ſtroy'd in their Poſterity, till-by degrees, and in
length of time it was effected.Bur belides,'tis to be
conſider'd, which I take to be the principal thing,
that ſeeing the corrupted 4rmoſphere, with the per-
nicious Steams ariſing from the newly acquir'd
Chaotick Cruſt , or Sediment of the Waters, and
their unhappy Effects on the Fruits, as well as li-
ving Creatures upon the Earth, muſt be allow'd
the occaſion and cauſe of the ſhortning of Hu-
mane Life; ſuch Regions as were freeſt from, or
moſt clevated above the faid Sediment, or Chaotick
Atmoſphere, mult have chiefly continued as they
were before, and fo the ancient Longevity would
chiefly be preſerv'd therein. Which being ſup-
posd , and what has been already advanc'd
withal conſider'd , this Propoſition will be eaſy,
plain, and natural; and a peculiar Atteſtation of
the preſent Hypotheſis. For ſeeing Ndab and the
Ark were landed on Canco/wr , the moſt elevated
Region of the Earth, and freeſt from the Sedi-
ment of the Waters, as well as the groſſncſs of
the Chaotick Atmoſphere below , that place would
ſcarce differ for a good while from the Antedilu-
wvian State of things, and the hives of Animals
would retain very ncar their ancient - Duration ;
which accordingly we find was really done. Noab
ſurvived the Deluge no lefs than 350 Years, and
compleated 950 in the whole (ſomewhat beyond
the moderate proportion of the Antediluvians

Ft them-


338


Gen x1. 2.


*Graunt, p.
©9, 85,86,


Job 42.
on -*


SOLUTIONS. BooklY.


themſelves, as. the Table will eaſily ſhew ). But
then by reaſon both of the deſcent of his Poſte-
rity into the Plains, and lower Grounds, and
principally by the gradual ſubſidence of thoſe
Regions themſelves into the groſs Armo/pbere be-
low, they became gradually liable to thoſe Dif-
eaſcs, and that ſhortneſs of Life, which we be-
fore ſhew'd to have been the ſad Effects thereof,
and to which all Mankind has ſince been ſub-
ject.

Corollary 1. Mankind mcreaſed waſtly more (con
after the Deluge than in theſe latter Ages of the World.
For whereas a Country is 280 Years now in doubling
its Inbabitants, had the ſame rate held ever fince the
Deluge, Mankind at this day would not bave reach'd
the number of two hundred thouſand Souls z which
get is eſteem'd to be between three and four hundred
Millions, or near two thouſand times as many as the
ſaid number, deducible from the preſent rate of the Ir-
creaſe of Mankind. So that "tis evident , That the
Antediluvian Fruitfulnels, and numerous Stock of
Inhabitants ( which are al/o themſelves bereby fully
eftabliſh'd ) muſt have prevail'd , ſervata propor-
tione, among the Primitive Poſtdiluvians [or /ome
Centuries, or elſe no Account were to be gioen of the
preſent numbers of Men upon the Face of the Earth ;
wobereby the Verity of this Propoſition , the Veracity
of Moſes therein, the great importance thereof , and
the neceſſity of the preſent Solution , and of tha!
Fheory on» which it x built , are mightily con-

rm d. x

Coroll. 2. Hence we may nearly determine the
Ages of Men for the firſt eight or nine hundred
Years after the Deluge, frem the length of their Lives
_ Thus Job , who appears to have liv'd at the


eaſt between to and three Lundred Years , muſt


| bave been contemporary with ſome of the Patriarchs


between


Chap. 4. SOLUTIONS.


between Heber and Abraham, to whom that Dura-
tron of Humane Life belog'd ; and thus we may exa-=
mine and determine the Ages of the moſt Ancient
King's mention'd in Prophane Hiſtories, from the like
Deratien of their Lives. or Reigns , as the. following
Cor ollary will more —_—_ ob/e ET VE.

Coroll. 3. Neither ibe Egyptian, Dynaſties, nor
the Aſſyrian Monarchy, conld be coral with the
firſ® ſeven or eight bundred Years pfter the De-
luge, none of their Kings Reigns ſet down by Chrenole-
gers reaching that number of Tears which the length of
Humane Life at that time requird ; nayg nor any
other than Kirgs now may, and do arrive at m the/e
latter Apes of the World.

Coroll. 4. 7he Antediluvian and Poſtdiluviafn
Years mention'd in Scripture were true Years of twelve,
not fit itieus ones of ne Month apiece, as [ome, that
they might reduce the Age of the firlf Patriarchs to the
ſhort term of Liſe ſince uſually attam'd to, bawye beein
willing to ſurmiſe. This fancy is ſtrangely abſurd ,
and contrary to the Sacred. Hiſtory , and im particular
irreconcilable with this Propeſition. For bad the anct-
ent Years been Lunar, of one Month, and the latter
Solar of a twelve, by which the ſame Duration of
Humane Life had been diff-rontly meaſur'd; the num-
bers of Tears which Men liv'd, muff have alrer'd in
the Proportion of rwelve to one of a ſudden, #t fuch
a change in the Tear referr'd to, and net gradually and
gently, as 'tis here evident they did.


LXXT. Our upper Earth for a conſiderable depth, eveti
as far as we commonly penetrate into it, is Feffithons ,
or newly acquir'd at the Deluge : The ancient oae be
ing covered by freſh Srrats or Lajers of Earth at that
time, and thereby ſpoil'd or deftroy'd as rothe uſe and
advantage of Mankiad,


Ff 2 LXXI. 'Tis


SOLUTIONS. Book IV.


LXST. *Tis not to be ſuppos'd, that the Wa-
ters of the Deluge were merely the pure ' Ele-
ment of Water, ſincere and unmix'd. What
came froth che Comet's Armoſphere, muſt partake
of irs tarthly hererogeneons Mixtures; and whar
was queer 6 up from, beneath, muſt carry up
muth Dire Art earthy * Matter along with it.
Beſides which, as foorr as the ſtormy Weather
began, the Toak'y and looſen'd Tops of Moun-
tains would cafily, by the Winds and Waves to-
gether, be waſh'd off, or carried away into the
Maſs of Waters, and increaſe the impurity and
earthy tmixthres thereot. On all which accounts
the Waters, of the Deluge would be a very im-
pure, thick, and muday Fluid, and afford fuch
a quanrity of carthy Matter as would bear ſome
conſiderable Proportion to that of the Water it
Tel. Now this earthy Matter being heavier than
the Water, would by degrees ſettle downwards,
and compoſe firſt a mighty thick, dirty, muddy
Tuid in the lower Regions of the Waters, and
at_ laſt, a, plain. carthy Sediment at the bottom
of them; which would at once ſpoil and bury
the. 0! 8 face of the Ground, and become a
ew Cruft or Cover on the face thereof. Now,
that we may. ſpe. whether this Sediment or Cruſt
Cold. be fo thick and conſiderable as this Phenc-
menom requires, lot us ſuppoſe, as before, the
perpendicular height of he Waters of the De-
luge to, haye been three Miles above the com-
mon Surface of the Plains, and Seas, and the
thirticeh-i pare:qnly; of the incire Fluid on the
Fxce of þs Earth ro have been carthy Parts fit
to compoſe he" Sediment or Cruft beforemen-
tion'd. Let us alſo remember what has been al-


Hypoth. Teady,obſerv'd. from Mr. Newto, That Earth is
2. pris, At leaf? three times as denſe and heavy as Wa-


cer ;


Chap. 4. SOLUTIONS.


ter; fo that the thirtjieth part in quantity of.
Matter, would only take up the nineticth part of
the whole ſpace, cicher in the Waters, or when
'twas fetled down by ir {elf, and became a new

Cruſt or Orb upon tlic Earth. It we then di-
vide 15000, the number of Feet in the whole
height of the Waters, (not here to allow for the
ſpaces polilels'd by the extant Parts of the Earth)
by 90, ( 1500 by 9) the quotient will ſhew the

the Craflitude or Thickneſs of this Sediment or
Cruſt covering the Face of the Earth, wiz. 166
Feet, one place taken with another indifferent! Y.
Which quantity fully accounts for the Propolitiog
we are upon, and agrees with the Obſervations
made in the Bowels of our preſent Earth to as
great accuracy as one Could delire or ex-


Corollary 1. Hence it appears , That the Farth
was generally uninhabitable for [evercl years after the
Flood: The new faftitions Sedtment of the Waters
requiring no lutle ſpace of time ere it would be fully
fetled, is Strata conſolidated, its Surface become hard
end dry , and its Vegetables /prung out of it ; before
which. time *twere uninhabitable by Man X and the
ot her Dry-land Animals.

Coroll. 2. Hence we may ſee the Care and W:/-
dom of Drume Provifence for the Preſervation and
Maintenance of Noah, and of all the Creatures m the
Ark, after their commg out of the ſame again ; by
ordering all things ſo, that the Ark ſhould reſt on the
b:gbeſt Mountain in the World , and that the Waters
ſhould fo lutle ſurpaſs the fac , that the Sediment
thereof could neuber (pol the Fruits of the Ground ,
nor render the Surface uninbabitable, as it did on the
other Regions of the Earth. For ſince the quantity of
the. Sediment would generally be proportionable every
where to the perpendicular ga of tbe Waters over

Fi3


I 2e


341


Gen. viii.


i.


SOLUTIONS. BooklVY.


the Surface of the Ground below ; tho" it would c<-
ver all the other Regions of the whole Earth, yet on
this higheſt of all Mountains, ( cover'd but a few
Days, or perbaps Hours, with any Waters , and they
never above freen Cubits perpendicular height) the
quantity of the Sediment would bere be perfettly in-
corfiderable, and the Earth would not be at all al-
ter'd from what it was before » mor its Vegetables
burt by this Univer Al Deluge. So that this, and
this only was the [pot of Ground capable of receiving
the Ark, and of juſtaming the Creatures therein, till
afterwards the reſt of the Earth became fit for their
Deſcent and Habitation. To this ſpot therefore , by
ſuch a wonderful ailjuſtrment of all the requiſite Cir-
cumſtances of the Deluge, preſer'd and diſt mguiſh'd
from all the reſt of the World, the Divine Providence
did condutt the Ark; and on this was laid the Foun-
dation of the preſent Race of Mankind, and of all
thoſe Terreſtrial Animals, which are now on the Face
of the whole Earth ; which otherwiſe bad periſh'd at
their Exit out of the Ark , no:withſt anding ther
” wt Preſervation therem during the Rage of the
Deluge.

Coroll. 3. Hence 2e may eaſily underſtand whence
the Olive-branch a5 brought by the Dove to
Noah. For when the Trees adjoyning to the Ark,
or on the' neighbouring Tops of the Hills had ſuſjer'4
ſmall {amaze by the Flood, and bad ſince the clear-
ing of the Waters enjoy'd almoſt the wyoole Spring ,
and half the Summer; they muſt be as flouriſhms,
and full of as many new and tender Sprouts as ever;
one of which might therefore be eaſily broken off by the
Dove , and brought to Noah i her Aouth 5 which
new, dry, and frim Sprout or Branch , being a clear
evidence, that the Waters were not only gone, and
the Ground dry a great while before , but that -the
Earth was til, as formerly, fit fer the Preduttwn

by


/


Chap. 4: SOLUTIONS.


of its wonted Trees and Fruits , muſt exceedingly tend
to the Satisfattion of Noah , and the Confirmation of
his Faith and Hope iv an entire Deliverance, and
the future Renovation of the World.


LXXIT. This Fa#:tions Cruſt is univerſal, apon the Tops
of the generality of the Mountains, as well as in the
Plains and Vallies; and that in all the known Climates
and Regions of the World.


LXXIL. This is a neceſſary conſequent from
the Univerſality of the Deluge already account-
ed for. And tho' the generality of the Moun-
tains would uſully have a thinner Sediment or
Cruſt than the Plains or Vallies, in proportion
to the leſſer height of the Waters over cach of
them reſpectively ; yer they being at the De-
luge much inferior to the height of Cauca/us ,
muſt be generally cover'd with the ſame Cruſt
(unleſs the Storms and Waves waſh'd it down
again after its firſt ſerling upon any of them )
as the Obſervations ſhew they really now
are.

Corollary 1. *Tix brnce evident , even abſtratted-
ly from the Sacred Hiſtory , that there has formerly
been an Univerſal Deluge , much bigher than the ge-
nerality of the Mountains, So that hereafter, ſmce
the ſo uſeful Obſervations of Naturaliſts , and princi-
pally of Dr. Woodward bereto relating , we need
wot endeavour to ſecure the Credit and Veracity of the
Moſaick Hiſtory of the Deluge by Ancient Records ,
and the uniyer/al Atteſtation of Antiquity; (which
Teſtimonies yet are too evident and numerous to be de-
nied) but may from our own Eyes , at the neighbour-
ing Mines and Coal-Pits , ſatisfy our ſelves of the
exatt truth of this part of the Sacred Volume , which
bas been ſo much excepted againſt 'by ill-diſpoſed Per-
ſons. So wonderful is the Method of the Drome Wif-
Ff 4 dom


343


SOLUTIONS. BooklV.


dom in its ſeaſonable Atteſtations afforded to the Sa-
cred Scriptures ! That not only the Very Day, as we
have ſen, when the Flood began, aj/ign'd by Moles
may ſtill, after more than four thouſand years, be
prov d from Aſtronomy to bawe been the true one,
which the Learned are chiefly capable of judging of,
and being frimarily influenc'd by : But the Realuy
and Untvoerſality of the Deluge it ſelf xs demonſtrable
= from ſuch common and eaſie Obſervations, mm all parts
of the World, at the Neig bbouring Mines or Coal-pits,


Vid. Bene Fhat the Vulgar and Moſt Iiiterate may be Eye-wit-
ley's Serm, meſſes of the certam Effects of it, and ſo fully con-
4-P-34,35, wimc'd of the fideluy of the Sacred Hiſtorian therem.


Coroll. 2. '7x no wonder that none of the An-
tediluvian Cities, Towns, Buildings, or other Remains
are any where to be met with ſince the Deluge: They
being all generally buried perbaps above two hundred
foot deep m the Earth, by the Sediment of the Waters,


LXX!II. The Parts of the preſent npper $trats were, at
the time of the Waters covering the Earth, looſe, ſe-
parate, divided, and floated in the Waters among one
another uncertainly.


LXXIII. This. Propoſition needs no farther
Explication ;. being already plain in what has
been alrcady ſaid.


LXXTV. All this H-rerogerous Maſs, thus floating in
the Waters, by d-grees delcended downwards, and
ſubſided r'> the Potron:, pretty nezrly according to the
Law &f Specifick Gravity; and there compos d thoſe
ſever] Srrate or Layers, of which our preſent upper
Earth does cuniift.


LXXIV. This Propofirionis as cafie as the for-
mer ; and included in what has been already ſaid.


LX:.V. V.ſt mul itu !:« of Fiſkes, be!coging both to the
£4> and Kive:s, pcii{b'd at the Deluge ; and their
Shells


Chap. 4. SOLUTIONS.


Shells were buried among the other Bodies or Miſſes
which ſubſided down, and compos'd the Layer: of our


upper Earth.


LXXV. Where ſo Heterogeneous a Maſs of
Corpuſcles were diſpers d every where through
the Waters, and towards the bottom, eſpecially
at the latter end of their ſubſidence, render'd the
ſame very thick and muddy, 'tis natural to ſup-
poſe, that multitudes of t iſhes, partly ſtifled with
the Spiſlitude and grofneſs of the Fluid, (ſcarce
there deſerving that name; ) and partly poifon'd
with the kinds of ſome of thoſe Corpuſcles
which they took in together with their Nouriſh-
ment therein, would be deftroy'd and perilh in
the Waters : Which being granted, the relt fo
ealily follows as not to need any farther Explica-
tion.


LXXVT. The fame Law of Specifick Graviry which was
obſerv'd in the reſt of the Mals, was allo obſerv'd in the
ſubſidence of the Shells of Fiſhes ; they then finking to-
gether with, and accordingly being now found enclos'd
among thoſe 4:-a:a or Bodies which are nearly of their
own Specifick Gravities : The heavier Shells being cons»
{cquently till enc!os'd among the heavier S$1ra74, and
the lighter Shells among the lighter $/r4's, in the
Bowels of gur prcfent Earth,


LXXVI. This Phevomenon is ſo natural and
neceſſary, conlidering the gradual increaſe. of
the thickneſs of the groſs Sediment downward,
and the equal ſubjection of Shells tro the Law of
Specihck Gravity with all other Bodies, that I
ſhall nor infiſt any farther upon it.

Corollary. 7h: /ing/e Phaznomenon of the Shells
of Fiſh inclos'd in the moſt Sol:d Bodies, as Stone and
Marble , and that all over the World, according to
therr ſeveral Specifick Graves, at great depths with-
in the Bowels of the Earth ; which x (o [frange in it

(eff,


345


SOLUTIONS. BooklV.
ſelf, fo ſurprizing to the Spettators, and ſo unac-


countable without the moſt unu/ual and precarious Mi-
racles be introduc'd, on any other principles; and yet
ſo eaſily and naturally ſolv'd m the Hy pothelis before
us 5 is 4 ſtrong, I bad almoſt ſaid an Inomcble r-
gument for the werity thereof 3 and as undemable as
a Phyſical aſſertion ti capable of : That is, *Tis (as far
as we can m reaſon pronounce) without a Miracle,
certainly true.


LXXVIT The Strata of Marble, of Stone, and of all other
ſolid Bodies, atrained their ſolidiry as ſoon as the Sand,
or other matter whereof they conſiſt, was arriv'd at
the bottom, and well ferled there. And all thoſe
Strata which are ſolid at this day, have been ſo ever
ſince that time.


LXXVIL Seeing this upper Cruſt or Sediment
was compos'd in great part of the Earthy Cor-
puſcles or Maſſes of a Chaos, as well as the Pri-
mitive Earth was at the Mo/aick Creation: The
very ſame reaſons aflignable for the coaleſcence
and conſolidation of the former, are equally to
be ſuppos'd in the preſent caſe, and render it
equally reaſonable with the other. And if the
Denſe Fluid, or any parts or ſteams from that
were inſ{trumencal to the Original Union of parts
at the Primary Formation of the Earth , *tis
probable there was no want of it at the Deluge ;
'The Atmo/phere of the Comet, and the Fountains

'of the Deep, being both capable of ſupplying
ſufficient quantities, among the larger plenty of
their Watery and Earthy Maſſes ; as is plain
from what has been already ſaid. Neither in
caſe ſome of it were acquir'd by the means afore-
mention'd, is it to be expected that we ought to
ſee it (till on the Face of the Earth, as we do
the Ocean. For ſeeing this Denſe Fluid is much
heavier


Chap.4. SOLUTIONS.


heavier than Water or Farth, it would be at the
very bottom of all, and fo either be incloſed in
the Pores and Caverns at the bottom of the Sedi-
ment, or transform'd into a different Body by
ts compoſition wich the Earthy parts it was en-
clos'd withal, and did conſolidate,


LXXVIII. Theſe Strata of Stone, of Chalk, of Cole, of
Earth, or whatever matter they conſiſted of, lying thus


each upon other, appear now as if they had at firſt been _


paralle}, continued, and nor inrerrupred : Bur as if,


after ſome time thev had b:zen diſlocated and broken*-


on all ſides of the Globe, had been elevated in ſome,
and depreſs'd in other pl:ces ; from whence the Fiſlures
and Breaches, the Caverns and Grotto's, with many
other irregularities within and upon our preſent Eirth,
ſeem ro be deriv'd.


LXXVIIE. When the Sediment ſerled down
gradually upon the Surface of the Ancient Earth,
it would compoſe Strata or Layers as even, con-
tinued, and parallel as one could delire, and as
the ſaid Surface did permit.” And had the ſaid
Surface been fix'd and unalterable, this evenneſs
and parallelliſm, this uniformity and continuity
of the Strata would have remain'd unalterable
alſo ro this day. Bur lince, as we have former-
ly ſhewn, the intire Orb of Earth was at the be-
ginning of the Deluge crack'd, chap d, and bro-
ken; and for many years afterwards would by
degrees ſettle and compoſe ir felt rowards its for-
mer figure and rotundiry again ; tho' the Serics
and Connexion of the Stratz might before they
were conſolidated, be as regular as vou can ima-
gine, yer when the Buſs or Foundation on
which they reſted, and the Surface on which they
were ſpread fail'd by degrees, in ſeveral places,
and proportions, by the riſing of ſome Columns
upwards, and the fetling of others _—_—
e211S


347


|
|


348


SOLUTIONS. Book1V.


this Upper Orb or Cruſt, where the Strata were
not become intirely Solid, like Stone and Marble,
muſt follow in great part the fare of the other,
and be diſlocated, elevated, or depreſs d in cor-
reſpondence to that whereon it reſted : And have
thereby a Set of Chaps and Fiſ/ures diretly over-
againſt thoſe which were before in the Ancient
Earth. , But as for ſuch places where the new
Strata were become Stony or Solid, and inca-
pable of a compliance with the under Earth, by
the ſettling downward or elevation of its imme-
diate Baſis the Primitive Earth, thoſe Caverns and
Grotto's, thoſe Caves and Hollows which appear
within the Earth, or its Mountains, would na-
turally ariſe ; while the Solid Strata, like Beams
or Arches, fſuſtain'd the impending Columns,
notwithſtanding the finking and failure of their
immediate Foundations ; by which Cauſes the
Surface and Upper Regions of the Earth would
become very uneven, and full of ſmall irregula-
rities, ſuch as the preſent Phenomenon atlurgs
us of.

Corollary 1x. Hence we ſee a plam Reaſon why
Mountainorrs and Stony Countries are only or princi-
pally Hollow and Cavernons : Some leſſer Mountains
berg perhaps occaſion'd by the ſubſidence of the neig -
beurmg Columns, and the Caverns they encloſe thereby
produc'd; and the Solidity of the Strata bemg the pre-
per Cauſe of ſuch Caverns m other Caſes : Of which
the ſofter, more looſe, and pliable Earth was accord-
mgly mcapable.

Corollary 2. Tho' the Ancient Farth were ſetled,
and become uneven in the ſame degree, and m the
{ame places as the preſent ws ; and that before the con-
ſolidation of the new Sediment ; yet the Serigs of the
ſeveral Strata one under another on each ſide of any


Fillure, would in ſore meaſure correſpond to one anc-
ther,


Chapi/a. SOLUTIONS.


ther, as if the conſimilar Strata had once been united,
and bad afterwards been broken and ſunk down un-
equally ; as 1 manifeſt from the conſimilar ſituation and
Nobfolens of © the confemular Corpuſcles ; —_— the
like order and craſſitude of each Stratum might be ſtill
prefered, tho" not ſo exatly, as if the ſuſtaming Sure
face bad been even and ſmooth 'when the Sediment
compos'd theſe Strata, and the Fiſſures had afterward
been made through both Orbs at once, and caus'd ſuch
mequality.

roll. 3. Hence would ariſe mighty and nume-
YOms — we of Water within the Earth, eſpecially
in the Mountamons parts thereof. For uſually where
a ſolid Strarum ſaft ain'd the Earth above, while the
parts beneath ſunk lower, and thereby produc'd a Ca-
vern, the Waters would ouze and flow into it from
all quarters, and cauſe a conflux or imeloſed Sea of
Wirers in the Bowzls of the Earth: Which Cavities
might ſometimes communicate with one another, or
with' the Ocean ; and ſometimes contain Reſt agnant
Waters, without any outlet © All which are very agree-
able to the'preſent Phamnomena of the Earth,

Coroll.” 4. Hence appears the Reaſon of the ragmg
of Earthquakes in Mount ainous Countrtys, and of the
burſting forth and contmuation of Volcano's there.
For the/e Cawerns, which we hawe obere)'d the Moun-
tamons Countreys to be mainly liable to, are fit to re-


349


eeivle "and contain together Nitrous and Exploſiee, +


Sulphurcorrs and Inflammable teams, an great quanti-
tits 3 and withal to admit the Air to. fan, and aſ/it
that: Exploſion or Inflammation, which ſeems to be the
occfion of thoſe dreadful Phanomena m our preſent
Ear;h,

Corvll. 5. If therefore there be no other Caverns
than theſe accounted for juſt now, and taking date
from the Deluge; "tis wery probable there were few
no Volcano's or Earthquakes, ſo much depending on


them, [4 fore the Fli 6d, Coroll, 6,


Solut. 56,
prius.


SOLUTIONS. BooklY,


roll. 6. In caſe what has been, or might far
ther be ſaid, be not found ſufficient to account for
ſome obſervations made, concerning the imward parts
of our Earth 5 but Dr. Woodward's Hypotheſis
of the Diſruption of the before united Strata, by a ge-
neral Earthquake, or the exploſive force of the Steams
of Heat, aſcending from the Central parts, be found
neceſſary 3 ſuch a ſuppoſition will by no means diſagree
with the preſent Theory, For when the Subterraneons
aſcending Steams were every way ſtop'd, and their
ordinary courſe from the Central to the Superfictary Parts
obſtrutted, by the new Sediment or Cruſt growmy faſt
and ſctled, and in ſome places Stony and Impenetrable ;
they would, be every where preternaturally aſſembled,e/pe-
cially inthe cracks, breaches and fiſſures of the Ancient
Earth, in greater quantities than u/ual, and ſo might
by a violent Ravefatiion, or Explcſion, burſt through the
Upper Cruſt, and cauje all thoſe Fiſſures, lutle Hills,
Caverns, Grotto's, «nd Inequalities which Dr.
Woodward s Obſervations require, and this Prope-
ſition takes notice of. In this caſe therefore the par-
ticular and diſtinit conſideration of the Phanome-
na, muſt determine and arbitrate berween the former
more nature! and gentle, and this latter more wiolent
and extraordinary method of accounting for the preſent
face of Nature upon and within the Earth.


LXXIX. Great numbers of Trees, and other Vege-
tables, were alſo, at this ſubſidence of che Maſs afore»
ſaid, buried in rhe Bowels of the Earth : And ſuch
very ofren as will not grow in the places where they
are lodg'd : Many of which are pretry intire and perfect,
and to be diſtinQly ſeen and conlider'd ro this very day,


LXXIX. Seeing the latter part of the Deluge,
afcer the ſeventeenth day of che ſeventh Month,
or the twenty ſeventh day of Afarch with us at
preſent,


Chap. 4. SOLUTIONS.


preſent, was very Windy, Stormy, and Tem-

- the moſt Extant and Mountainous
parts'of the Earth would be mightily expos'd to
the fury both of the Winds and Waves : Which
conſequently would tear up, or waſh away the
looſe and unſolid Upper Earth, with all ics Fur-
niture of Trees and Plants; and not ſeldom car-
ry them great diſtances from their former Seats.
Now theſe Vegetables, if - no Earthy Merallick or
Mineral Maſſes adher d to them, being, bulk for
bulk, lighter than the Earthy Sediment, would
ſettle down laſt of all, and would lye upon the
Surface of the Earth, and there rot away and
diſappear. But if conſiderable quantities of the
heavieſt Strata, or of Metallick or Mineral Matter,
as would ſometimes happen, adher'd to them,
they would fink lower, and be incloſed in the
Bowels of che Earth , &:cher near to, or far from
the place of their own growth, —_— as the
Billows and Storms bn_ to diſpoſe of them.
All which Changes and Diſlocations of the Soil
and Surface, with their Fruits and Plants, might
leave once Fertile Countries Bare and Barren ;
and lodge ſuch Vegetables in others, which of
themſelves, before the new Sediment, much
more lince the ſame, were wholly incapable of
ſuch productions ; according to the exigency of
the Propoſition before us.


LXXX. It appears from all the tokens and circumſtances
which are ſcill obſervable abour them, Thar all theſe
Vegetables were torn away from their ancient Seats in
the Spring time, ia or about the Month of atay,


LXXX. When we have already prov'd, that
the Windy and Stormy Weather which tore up
theſe Vegetables, did not begin till the feven-
tcenth


WY


z5T


Solut. 56,


Prius,


A


SOLUTIONS. Book lIV.


ceenth day of the ſeventh Month from the Au-
tumnal Equinox; anſwering to our 'Manch .the
ewenty ſeventh now; and when it appears that the
higher any Mountain or Continent was, the leſs
while, and in a lefs degree would the Waters
prevail upon it; and fo lictle ſometimes as not
wholly to deſtroy the growing Vegetables, at this
due rime of the Year”; 'tis evident that whether
the Sediment were newly ſerled, 'and had en-
clos'd them or not, fo many as were torn up
from theſe higheſt parts of the Earth muſt be in
chat forwardneſs as ithe Months ſucceeding the
beginning of the Storms (April, May and fune)
uſually bring them to , very agreeably 'to the
Propoſition before us. And that we have rightly
ſuppos'd theſe Fei! Plants to have been ſuch as
grew on the elevated parts of the Earth only,
(how fardiſtant foever the fury of the Waves and
Storms may have lodg d them) and fo to have
been torn up by the Storms in the afligned man-
ner, appears both by che heaps in which they are
frequently found crouded together, and by the
kinds of Plants thus buried in the Earth:Of which
latter, (tho' his opinion,according to his own Hy-
potbeſis be, thar all forts were originally lodg'd in
the Earth, tho' ſome be ſince periſh'd ) Dr. #ood-
ward's words are (in his kind and free Letter, in
anſwer ro my Queries about them) The Feſfil
Planits are very mumerovs and <arious, and ſome
of them intire, and wecll preſrryd., I bawve met


with many of the ſame Species with thoſe, now
growing on our Hills, Woods, M-adows, Heaths, &C.
But mone of the WW-iter-Planits; I mean [uch as are
peculiar to Lakes, Rivers, and the Sea. Which
Teſtimony 15 a peculiar Confirmation of the
preſent Hy20rheſiz,


Corollary.


Chap. 4 SOLUTIONS.


Corollary. Hence the Ancient Years beginnings at
the Autumnal Equinox, and the conſequent com-
mencing of the Deluge, the ſeventeenth Day of the
fecend Month from thence, and not from the Spring,
& evidenc'd by this very Obſervation 141ch Dr.Wood-
ward, the Author thereof, ſuppoſes wou'd prove the
contrary. So that the time of the Deluge s commen-
cing aſſhgn'd by our Hypothelis, appears at [iſt to
be po both by the Scriptures, by the Ancients,
by Aſtronomy , by Geography, and by Natural
Obſervation ; and i conſequently by ſo very remark.tble
a Concurrence and Correſpondence of "om ail, put be-


, A Cw 1
youd avy reaſcnable Doubt or Scrupte.


LXXXI. All the Mctalr and Minerals among the Strata
of our upper Earth, owe their preſent Frame and Or-
der to the Deluge ; being repos'd rthere1n during the
time of the Waters covering the Earth; or during the
Subſidence of the before-mention'd Mais.


LXXXI. This can have no difficulty in it,
ſeeing our upper Earth is fa&itions, and com-
pos'd of the foreſaid Sediment of the Waters of
the Deluge ; which including the Corpuſcles of
Mezetals and Minerals, as well as others, woud
alike afford every one thoſe places which they


have ever ſince poſle{s'd.


LXXXII. Theſe Metals and M wer; appear different!\
in the Earth, according ro the difterenc manners ot
their ficſt Lodgment: For fomerimes they are in
looſe and ſmall Particles, uncerrainly inclos d among
ſuch Maſſes as they chanc'd to fall down withall :
Ar other times, ſome of their Corpulcles happering
ro occur and meer together, athx'd to exc} orher ;
and ſeveral convening, anitng, and combining into
one Maſs, form'd thoſe Mera & and Minrz! Burl: or
Nodules which are now found in the Farth. And ac-
cording as the Corpuſcles chanc'd to be all of a kind,
or otherwiſe, fo thg Matles were mure or leis fur-
ple, pure, and homogeneous : And according as 0*

Gg rher


394


SOLUTIONS. BooklV.


* ther Bodies, Bones, Tecth, Shells of Fiſh, or the
like, happen'd ro come in their way, theſe Meral-
lick and Mineral Corpeſcles afhx'd ro, and became
conjoyn'd with 'em; either within, where it was
polible, in their Hollows and Iaterſtices ; or with-
our, on_their Surface and Outlides ; filling the one,
or covering the other. And all this in different De-

eres and Proportions, according to the different


Ln »


Circumſtances of cach individual Cafe.


LXXXII. All theſe things are but proper


- Effects of ſuch a common Subtidence of all theſe


Mailes and Corpuſcles together in the Chaotick
Sediment as is above-mentiond : And no longer
or more particular Account is neceſlary, or can
be ſatisfactory, till Dr. Wocdward $ larger Work
(which we in time hope for ) affords us the
Obfervations more nicely and particularly .than
we vet have them. To which, therefore, the
Inquilitive Reader muſt be refer'd in this and
the like Caſes.


LYXXXIIT. The inward parts of the preſent Earth are
vury irregular and confus'd : One Region is chiefly
Srony, another Sandy, a third Gravelly : One Coun-
try contatias ſome certain kinds of Merals and Mine-
rals ; another contains quite different Ones : Nay the
fame Lump or Maſs of Earth not ſeldom contains
the Corpuſcles of ſeveral Metals or Minerals con-
fuſedly intermixt one with another, and with its
own FEarthy Parts. All which Irregularities, with
leveral others that might be obſerv's, even contrary
to the Law of ſpecifick Gravity , in the placing of
rac different Strata of the Earth, demonſtrates the
original Fund or Promptuary of all rhis upper fati-
tious Earth, ro have been in a very wild, confus'd,
and Chaetick Condition.


LXXXIII. Secing the Sediment of the Wa-
ters was compos'd of what Earthy Matter was
uncertainly brought up out of the inner Earth,


and of what a true and proper Chaos afforded,
theſe


Chap. 4 SOLUTIONS.


theſe Phenmena are as natural and accountable
therefrom, as on any other mechanical Hjp--
thefis, they muſt apyear ſtrange, perplexing, and
inexplicabie ro Philoſophick Minds.


LXXXIV. The uppermoſt and lighreſt $:r3:4n of Soil
or Gr-den-Aold, as 'tis calFd, winch is the proper
Seminary of the Vegerable Kingdom, is !ince the De-
Inge very thick fprezd ufally in the Valleys and
Plains, bur very thia on the Ridges and Tops of
Mountains : Which lit tor want thereof arc fie
Guently ſtony, wcky, bare, and barren.


LXXXIV. Two plain reafons are to he gi-
ven for this Phanameren 3 (1.) The quantity of
Water, and its Sediment ; and by conſequence
of Soil or fertile Earth was lefs over the Moun-
tains than over the Plains and Valleys. (2.) Af-
rer the Subſidence of the Sediment, and before
its entire Confolidation, the Tops of Moun-
tains Were moſt expos'd ro the fary of the
Winds and Storms; which wou'd therefore
more eafiiy hear away that lighteſt and leaſt
united S:ra: mm which lay uppermoſt in thoſe
bleak places, than in the more rerird and
Skreen'd Plains and Valleys ; and by diminith-
ing the Soil in the former, and tie. hy ans-
mencing ic in the latter places , mioft eatil\
make all things correfpond in tus Propoil
LON,


[XXXV. Of the four ancient Rims of Parrdife, two
ſtill remain im ſome meature ; bur the ogfher two
do nor ; or at the Jeait are fo ching'd rhar the Mr
«ik Deſcription does not agree 70 them at. pie-
Lene,


I XXXV. That the great Rivers wou'd ſtill
retain in great meaſure their old Courſes, has
been obſerv'd already ; and fecing the Foun- +
tains


Gg 2


33)


— _ A COR


|


356


SOLUTIONS. BooklV,


tains, and the general inequalities of the Earth,


: on Which their Origin and Channels depend,


Hyporth.4
prius.


were the ſame generally before as ſince the
Deluge, there :can be no doubt thereof. As to
the change, with reference to the other ewo
Rivers, If the Gulph of Perſia were anciently
free from Waters, and -were no other than the
very Country of Eden; and if the very En-
trance of that Gulph into the Perſian Sea were
the Garden of Eden, or Paradiſe, as has been be-
fore aſlerted, there can be no ditficulty in the
caſe : The Channels of theſe Rivers, and in-
deed of their Fellow-Branches too after their
laſt Particion, bcing now under Water, and not
to be enquir'd after. But tho' we ſhou'd al-
low that Paradiſe was where 'tis generally pla-
ced, near R2bz/m, and upon the Continent,
yet will there be no wonder at the diſappear-
ance of theſe two Rivers, which, with their
I'<llows, are bury'd to a ſufficient depth under
the Sediment we- have been ſpeaking fo much
of before ; and ſo no more to be enquir'd after
i1 this than in the former Caſe.


LXXXVI. Thoſe Metal: and Minerals which the Mz
laick Deſcription of Paradiſe, and of its bordering
Regions, takes ſuch particular notice of, and the
Prophers fo emphatically refer ro, are not now mct
with fo plentifully therein.


LXXXVI. The preſent upper Earth being, as
we have ſeen, fatitions, and a new Cruſt tince
the Flood covering over the ancient Surface
thereof, thoſe Primitive Treaſures muſt lie too
deep in the Powe!ls of the preſent Earth, to be
eafiiy approach'd by us, and fo are entirely loſt
as to the uſe or enjoyment of Mankind.


LXNXXVIL


Chap. 4 SOLUTIONS.


LXXXVII. This Deluge of Waters was a fign alin-
ſtance of the Divine Vengeance on a wicked World,
and wes the effe&t of the peculiar and extraordinary
Providence of Cod.


LXXXVII. Tho' the paſling by of a Co-
met, and all thoſe Eﬀects of ir in the drown-
ing of the World, of which we have fo large-
ly diſcours'd hitherto, be not to be ſtil'd in the
common uſe of the Word Miraculoxs ; (tho' in
no very improper Senfe, all ſuch Events may


317


have that Appellation, of which before) yer is Vi! So-
there the greateſt reaſon in the World to at- IT, 2.


tribute this mighty Turn and Cataſtrophe of Na-
tare, to the Divine Providence, and the imme-


diate, voluntary, actual, interpolition of God ; ,


and that in theſe enſuing Particulars, and on
theſe following Accounts ; which 1 ſhall be the
ſhorter upon, as having in the place fore-men-
tion'd explain'd my Mind ſomewhat largely
about things of this Nature. (1.) The Bodies
made uſe of in this and the like Changes of
Nature, are originally the Creatures of God,
and continually preferv'd by Him ; and fo what
they are inſtrumental in, ought moſt juſtly co
be aſcrib'd to the principal Cauſe, the great
Creator and Conſervator of 'em all. (2.) All
thoſe Powers of Attraction or Gravitation, &c.
and thoſe Laws of Motion by which theſe
Bodies are capable of producing ſuch Effects,
ac alike owing to the Divine Operation, Ap-
pointment, and Efficacy; both in their primi-
tire Impreſhon, and continual Energy ;
and fo ſtill the Effects themſelves are to be a-
{crib'd to a Divine Original. (3.) Thar parti-
cular Conſtitution of the Earth on the Face
of the fluid Abyſs, and other ſuch Diſpoſitions,
' Sa where-


pru.4s.


358


SOLUTIONS. BooklV.


whereby it became ſubjet to a univerſal De-
luge, were allo the Conſequents of the Divine
Power and Providence in the formatton of
the Earth. (4.) Thar peculiar Situation or
Conſtiturion of the Orbirs and Motions of
Comets, whereby they, by reaſon of their
palling thro' the Planecary Syltem cach Revo-
lution are fic to cauſe ſuch great Mutations in
it, was che Litect of the particular Order and
Diſpoltion of God, in the primary frame of
he Univerſe. (5.) The Coincidence of the
Plain of a Comca's Oibit with that of the
Ecliptick, can have no other Foundation in
Nature, than a like deiign d and contriv'd Ap-
pointment of God.  (6.) The way of the Co-
mers Motion from Eaſt to Welt, contrary to
that of the Planets, by which - the Particulars
of the Peluye were in good Mcalure ptovi-
ded for, cou'd alſo be nathing but the Eftect
of the fame Pauign and Providence of God.
(5.) ilketo nice awd exact adjultmenre of the
Motions of both the Comer and the Earth ;
that the former ſhou'd pals jult fo ncar, and
unpart: fach a cercain quantity of Waters, and
nor more or Ich than wou'd drown the World,
FRO juli cover the higheſt Mountain, and yet
reach no farther ; in ſhort, as wou'd ſecure
the 74 tor fururc Generations, and Yct not
leave one Gry-land Animal belides alive ; this
exaine's is a molt pecutiar and ſtrange Eftet
of the moſt wiſe and ſagacious Providence of -
God in this mighty Revolucon. Bur (8.)
I aſtly, (ro omit repeating ſome things before
oblerv d as we pals d along) The preciſe time
of the pathng by of the Comet, and thereby
of deſtroying the World, is, in the moſt pecu-
liar mannc;, and highelt degree, the _
the


—


Chap, 4. SOLUTIONS.


the Divine Providence. That exactly at a
time which was fit and proper, and in an
Age that juſtly deferv d fo great a Judgment,
the Comet ſhou'd come by, and over-whcim
the World, is very remarkably and extraordi-
narily the Finger of God himfelf. That Om-
niſcient Being, who  forcfaw when the dege-
neracy of Human Nature wou'd be arriv'd at
an wn/uferable degres of Wickednel(s, the Ini-
quities of the World wou'd be compleatly fir;
and when conſequently his Vengeance ough:
to fall upon them, prxdiſj;ofed and prxada >:-
ed the Orbits and Motions of both the Comer
and che Earth, fo chat at that very time, and
only at that time. the former ſhou'd pak: cloſz
by the Jarter, and bring that dreadfu! Punith-


ment upon them. Had not God Alnghey on,


urpole thus adjuſted the Nioments and Cout
& of cach , *rwere -intinite odds that fuch a
Conjunition or Coincidence of a Comer and
a Planer, wou'd never have happen d during
the whole ſpace, between the Creation and
Contiagration of this World ; much more at
lucii a critical Point of time when Niankind,
by their wpary/e! Wickedacls were deterving
of, and on! difpos'd for this mparec!d Ven-

g-ance, no lcls than almoſt an wtter Frciſcen.
And this 1 take to be the Secret of the Di-
vine Providence in the Government of the
World, and that whereby the Rewards and
Puniſhmenrs of God's Mercy and Juſtice are
diltnbuted to his Rational Creatures, without
any diſturbance of the ſc:'cd Courſe of Na-
ture, or a miraculous interpoſition on every
Occaſion. Our Impertection is fuch, that we
Can only act pro re nata, can never know be-
fore-hand the Behaviour or Actions of Nien ;
Gg 4 | Neitizes


379


2360


SOLUTIONS. Book IV.


neither can we foreſee what Circumſtances
and Conjunctures will happen at any certain
time hereafter ; and ſo we cannot provide for
furure Events, nor pradiſpoſe things in ſuch a
manner that every one ſhall be dealt with, or
every thing done no otherwiſe than if we
were then alive and preſent, we ſhou'd think
proper and rcaſonable, and ſhou'd actually do.
Bur 1n the Divine Operation *tis quite other-
wiſe : God Preſcience enables him to act af-
ter a more ſublime manner ; and by a conſtanc
Courſe of Nature, and Chain of Mechanical
Cauſes, to do every thing fo as it ſhall not be
diſtinguiſhable from a parcicular Incerpoſition of
his Power, nor be otherwiſe than on ſuch a


particular Interpoſition woud have been


brought to paſss He who has created all


- things, and given them their ſeveral Powers


and Faculties, foreſees the Eifects of 'em all:
At once looks through the intice Train of future
Cauſes, Actions, and Events, and ſees at what
Periods, and in what manner twill be neceſla-
ry and expedicnt to bring about any changes,
beſtow* any Mercies, or inflict any Puniſhments
on the World : Which being unqueſtionably
rue, 'tis evident he can as well provide and
prediſpoſe natural Cauſes for thoſe Mutations,
Mercies, or Judgments before-hand ; he can as
alily put the Machin into ſuch Motions as
!hall, wicthour a -neceflity of his mending or
correcting ir, correſpond to all theſe forelecn
Lyents or Action, as make way for ſuch Al-
terations aiicrward by giving a random force
to the whoiv : And when tixcle two ways are
cgually pottible,, I need not fay which is
not agreeable ro the Divine Perfeftions, and
molt worthy of God. So that when the Unj-

verſal


Chap. 4 SOLUTIONS.


verſal Courſe of Nature, with all the Powers
and Effects thereof, were at firlt deriv'd from,
and are continually upheld by God; and
when nothing falls out any otherwiſe, or at
any other rime, than was determin'd by Di-
vine Appointment in the Primitive Formation
of the Univerſe: To aflign Phyſical and Me-
chanical cauſes for the Deluge, or fach mi hry
Judgments of God upon the Wicked, is fo far
from- taking away the Divine Providence there-
in, that it ſuppoſes and demonſtrates its In-
rereſt in a more Noble, Wiſe, and Divine
manner than the *bringing in a miraculous
Power wou'd do. Let us ſuppole a Fulmen
or Thunderbolt originally, and on purpoſe,
put into ſuch a Motion, as without any farther
Interpolition of Providence, wou'd direct it to
the Head of a Blaſphemer ; and whilſt he was
curſing his Maker, ſtrike him dead upon the
Spot; which the Praſcience and Power of
God ſhew to be equally poſlible with a pre-
ſent Miracle : I think ſuch a violent Death
wou'd be as properly extraordinary, and a Di-
vine Judgment , as any other whatſoever :
Which I take to have been the very caſe of
the Deluge, which I am here peculiarly
concern'd about. Nature is God's Conſftitu-
tion , and ever ſubſervient to him ; and the
ſtate of the Natwal is always accommodated
to that of the Moral World. What is done
by Nature, and ſecond Cauſes, is moſt pro-
perly done by God at laſt, who is ultimate-
ly and really almoſt all we can mean by
thoſe Names.

| Corollary. What has been here ſaid upon this
Occaſion, if rightly underſtood and apply d to all
other Caſes, wen'ld clear our Minds from many


of


361


362


SOLUTIONS. Book IV,


of thoſe Perplexities about the Divine Providence
whith are ready to diflerb "em. For Inflance :


We pray to God for fruitful Seaſons, for Health,


for Peace, for the Succeſs of our Endeavorrs, for 8
on our Food and Phyſick , and deprecate the
contrary Miſeries from us. Yet at the ſame time
we ſee the Seaſons depend on the ſertled Courſe of
the Sun, or other natural, and neceſſary Cauſes ;
we find our Health o& Sickneſs to be the proper
Effetts of our Diet and Regiment ; we obſerve Peace
and War ſubjet to the Imvigues of Princes, and
the plain Reſults of viſible Conjunttares in Humane
Airs; we know that Worldly Prudence and Cun-
mng bas & main Stroke in the Sweceſs of Mens
Labonrs ; we feel the advantagioas Effetts of [ome
Food and Phyſick, and have Reaſon to believe the
ſame does wery much reſult the Goodneſs of
tbe Druggs, the Fitneſs þ & Proportion, the Diſ-
Poſition of the Body, and the Skill of the Phyſici-
72,27 can give a Plain and mechanical Rea-
fon of the differem Operations of all thoſe things;
wither do we hope for the Exerciſe of a miraculous
Power in theſe or the like Caſes. The Conſidera-
tiow and Compariſon of all theſe things together
frequently puzzles the Minds of good Men, eſpeci-
thoſe that ave more Contemplative and Philoſc-
phical, and makes "em winder what Intereſt owr
Devotions, or what Advantage ow Prayers can
bave. Second Canſes will work according” to their
Natwres, tet Mens Snpplications be never ſo impor-
tamate : , And to expett a Miracle in anſwer to e-
very Petition, is more than the moſt Religious dare
pretend to. Tozs Dilemma bas had a contra-
ry Effect upon the Minds of Men, while the Phi-
Joſopher was in Dangcr of doubtin> of the Suc-
ce/s, and jo ready to grow cold iv his Devotions, |
and the mere mthinking, yet ni le's r:(igious Mal


oÞ
Tt


Chap. 4 SOLUTIONS.


rejected the Conſideration of the Manner, or the
Oper ation f ſecond Cauſes, and more wiſely look'd
up only to God, and imagin'd bim immediately con-
cern'd in every Occurrence, and on that Principle
douvted not the Effett of bu Prajers. But "tis, me-
thinks, evident that neither of theſe were exattly in
the Right 3 and equally ſo, that the dne Conſiderati-
on of what has been above-/aid, would prevent
the Dilemma, and take away all reaſonable Scoru-
ple. "Tis true thit Natwal Cauſes will operate as
w/ul : Tw allo true that Miracies are not ordinari-
ly to be expetted : But withal "tis as true that the
ſame all-wiſe Creator, who apyointed that conſtant
Cuur's of Nature, foreſaw at tbe [ame time all thoſe
Di/poſations of Men, end in particuiar theſe Devo-
tions of bu Worſnippers, to which ſuitable Rewards
were to be provided, and ſnitable rinſuvers return-
ed ; and therefare bas jo order d the Sevies of Ne-
tural Cauſes, as to make that very Previſien for the
{ame which atherwiſe be would have done by the mi-
raculons Interpoſition of bus Providence 5 and which
therefore is equally to be alcribd to bim wit
the greateſt Wonders. Tis true, the Frome of Na-
ture ts now conſbent and ſettled : But 'tzs true al-
{o that it was ſo ſettled on the Proſpett of the mo-
ral Rehaviowr, and in Correſpondence to the good
& bad Actions of Mankind, foreſeen and pre/uppo-
ſed in the Primitive Conſtitution of all 3 and by
Conſequence whatever Benefits or Aflictions the con-
ſtant Courſe of Nature and ſecond Canſes bring to
us, are equally capable to be the Matter of our
Prayers or Deprecations of our Humiliation or Grati-
tude before God, as the immediate Effetts of a
mirac Power ; and the Divine Providence nd
leſs ro be acknowledg'd and addreſs d to inthe former
than in the latter Caſe : But becauſe our Imperfe-
fin = ſo great that the Conſideration of R..

ri


z6;


yy
W


—
——


— -- a


== Oo ?


—
© -


- -


_ —
- —_


364


SOLUTIONS. BooklV.


Priority of the future Actions, Men to the Pra-
ſcience of God in the Order of Nature ; and the De-
pendence of the latter on the former, too high for
our Comprehenſion, and tho” demonſtrable by, yet in-
ſerutable to the Reaſon of Mankind ; and becauſe we
are therefore ſtill ready to conceive what u fore-
known by God to be neceſſary and inevitable ; let the
moral Behaviour of Min be as it will: Becauſe
1 ſay ths Prafcience of Goel is too Divine a thing
to be eaſily penetrated and aply'd by us to all Oc-
cafions. I confeſs "tis the moſt obvious and the moſt
prudent, as well xs the moſt Seriptural IWay to keep
within our Faculties, and alway to ſuppoſe an im-
mediate Exerting of a new Power in every new
Turn in the World, and without the troubleſome
Inquiſition into the Nature and Deſion of the Pri-
mitive Conſtitution of the Material World, to refer
all things to an immediate Providence : Into which
every one muſt ultimately and originally be re- |
ſoly'd, and which has as- well and as congruouſly
taken care of all Events, as if ſuch a wg-
raculous Efficiency were really concern d on ever
individual Occaſion. Which whole Matter thus
explaind may be of Uſe to thoſe who through
the not underſtanding the Mathod of the Divine
Providence, and its Conſiſtency with an uninterrupt-
ed Courſe of Nature , have verplex'd their own
Minds, and endanger d their Religion : Which per-
nicious ſcruples true Philoſophy, when rightly un-
derſ/tood, is the only Means of diſpellins and pre-
venting. Nothing being more true or momentous
than this, that 115 as ever our Ignorance or Mi-
ſtakes only, that fully - the Providence of
God, or diminijh our” Religious Afﬀections to
hum.


LXXXVIIL


Chap. 4 SOLUTIONS. 365


LAXXVIIE Tho' the Moon might perhaps undergo
ſome ſuch Changes at the Deluge as the Farth ; yet
thar Face or Hemiſphere which is towards the Earth,
and which 1s alone expos'd ro our View, has not ac-

uir'd any ſuch groſs Atmoſphere or Clouds, as our
arth has now about it, and which ae here ſuppos'd
ro have been acquir'd at the Deluge.


LXXXVIII. Seing the Moon appears to be of
a Conſtitution fo like that of the Earth, and
ſceing ſhe is ſo near a Neighbour and conitanc
Companion thereof, ſhe ſeems ar firſt Sight
liable to the ſame Czraſtrophe with the Earth
at the Deluge. Bur that we may conſider how
fir the Comet could affect her, we muſt remem-
ber that at the firit Patlage of the Comer, Her
Situation ſcems almoſt dipos'd ro convey her juſt
after the Earth along that large void Cylindrical
Space, whoſe Vapours the Earth had intercepted,
and born away betore it; as by comparing the
2d and 4b Figures is calie to under{tand. Bc-
ſides, tho' ſhe caught her Share of the Vapours
from the Atmoſphere and Tail of the Comer,
yet her Mountains are fo much higher, compar'd
with thoſe on Earth, that at the moſt only an
inconliderable Inundation of Waters on one He-
miſphere, not an univerſal Deluge were to be
ſuppos'd : For, laſtly, by Reaſon of the Slow-
a. js” her Diurnal Revolution thoſe Vapours x... .,
which were caught by one Hemiſphere (and in- prius.
deed by very little more than one at the utmoſt)
wouid fall near the ſame Places in Rain, which
they ar firſt fell upon when Vapour ; and till
aftect little more than a ſingle Hemiſphere
thereof. So that the moſt that can be ſuppos'd
of the Mu: 5 Deluge, is, that the lower Grounds
e1 one Hemiſphere ſthouid be overfiow'd ; cſpe-
Cially if we except the ſecond Paſtage through
the


366


Coral. c.
Schol.
poſt Hy-


porth. 1G.
prius.


Bp. 7k,
New
World.
Lib. r.
Prop. 10,


SOLUTIONS. Book IVY.


the Taibof the Comet after its Peribeliurm ; For it
muſt be confeſs'd chat thofe ſecondary and leſs
principal Rains of about 97 Days Continuance,
which we before obſerv'd the Earth to have been
liable ro,muſt needsbe allow'd to have affected the
Moon alfo; and ſeeing from them the Impurities
and Commotions of our Atmoſphere appear to
have beenderiv'd, it ſeems at firſt View neceflary
that the Moon ſhould have acquir'd ſuch a grofs
Atmoſphere, fuch Clouds and Metcors as we faw
the Earth did at the ſame time ; which looks
very unlike to her Phenomena, or the latter Part
of this Propoſition we are now upon. But this
Difficulty which at firſt fight ſeems fo formida-
ble, wilt intirely vaniſh if we obſerve the then
Poſition of the Moon, and thence confider
which Hemifphere would be affected therewith.
For (as we before in Part obferv'd) the Moon
wanted but ewo or three Days of the New,
when ſhe with the Earth paſs'd the ſecond time
thro* the Tail of the Comer ; and by Confe-
quence the Vapours aſcending from the Sun fell
pretty exactly upon that Hemiſphere of the
Moon,which 15 never cxpos'd tothe Earth; with-
qut Affecting thac which we can obſerve, and
with which we are alone concern'd. In a Word,
in this ſecond Paſſage, the Moon ought ro have
acquir'd a groſs Armoſphere on the oppoſe He-
miſphere and its bordering Parts, the Limb of
her Body, while the viſible Hemiſphere retain-
cd its ancient Purity and Clearnefs : The latter
Part of which is known to be true; 'and #
the Reader conſults the Right Reverend and
Learned Author quoted in the Margent, he
may ſee reaſon to eſteem the other very probabl-
alſo ; which is, I think, abundantly ſufficienc
to clear this Macter.

LXXXIX,


Chap. 4 SOLUTIONS.


LXXXIX. Since ' the Deluge there neither has been,
nor will be any great and general Changes in the
State of the World , rill the time when a Peri-
od is to he put to the preſent Courſe of Na-


rure.


LXXXIX. Secing we know no other Na- |


tural Cauſes that can produce any great and

eneral Changes in our Sublunary World, but
Pach Bodies as can approach to the Earth,
or, in other Words, but Comets; and ſecing
withal, the next Approach of the Comet, will,
in probability, bring the preſent State of things
to a Concluſion , and Bun the World ; of
which preſently : *Tis evident the Earth 1s ſc-
cure enough all the intermediate ſpace : And
as hitherto we accordingly find it has been,
ſo we need not fear bur it will be, preſerv d
till che foremention'd Conflegration.


CHAP,


367


368


SOLUTIONS. BooklV.


VE — —_— _ - Bo—_ wn” ym — — — — — — — — —— _— ——  —— ——_ — — — —————_—————


QOH AP.


Phznomena relatmg to the General Con-


Hagration; with Conjectures pertamimng


to the ſame ; and to the ſucceeding Pe-
riod , till the Conſummation of all


things.


XC. $ the World once periſh'd by Water, fo it
muſt by Fire at the Concluſion of its pre-
ſent Stare.


XC. As we. have given ah Account of the
Univerſal Deluge from the Approach of a Co-
met in its deſcent towards the Sun; fo will it
not be difficult to account for the Genera! Con-
flagration from the like Approach of a Comet
in its aſcent from the Sun.. For 'tis evident
from what has bcen already explain'd, that in
caſe a Comet paſs'd behind the Earth, tho'
it were in its Deſcent, yer if it came near e-
nough, and were it Caf big enough, it wou'd
ſo much retard the Earth's annual Motion,
and oblige -it to revolve in an Ellipfe ſo near
to the Sun in -its Peribelion', that the Sun it
ſelf wou'd ſcorch and burn, diſſolve and deſtroy
it in the moſt prodigious degree; and thus
Combuſtion being renew'd every Revolution,
wou'd render the Earth a perfect Chaos again,
and change it from a Planet to a Comet for
ever after. *Tis evident thi is a ſulficient cauſe
ct a general Contlagration wich a Witneſs ;


and


— — EC  —————— —


Chap.s. SOLUTIONS.


and fuch. an. one as wou'd intirely ruine the
Make of the preſent, and the poſlibilicy of a
fucure World. On which laſt account, if we
allow the following Phenomena, we muſt not
incroduce.thws , at this Period however z but
ſee whether a Conflagration of a lefs deltru-
&tive, and more refining Nature, be not to be
expected, and may nor be accounted for. And
here-let it be obfſerv'd, that the Central Heat
of it {elf ſeems ſufficient co burn up, and dit-
ſolve the upper Earch, ( as thoſe who, with
Dr. Wondward, know the Power and Vehemence
of the ſame now, and its aſtoniſhing Force,
and terrible Effects in Earthquakes, Erupiions
of Volcans's, and other Phenomena of preſent Na-
ture , oughe to. allow ) if theſe ewo things
were by any means remov'd ; I mean che //a-
ters of the Seas and Occan, and the Coldre/s
of the Air : For 'tis the valt quantity of Wa-
ters of the Earth, and the Coldnef; of the
middle Region of the Air every where, and of the
whole Air in the Frigid Zones, returning th
Vapours /d down again,.. which were. lent »p
into 'cm- never ſo by, which ſeems ſtill to
prevent the effects of the Subterraneous Hear,
and to hinder the Contlagration of the Erich.
If therefore the pafling by of a Comet be ca-
pable of emptying the Seas and Ocean, and
of rendring the Air, and.its contiguous upper
Surface of the Earch  extreamly hot and in-
flam'd, no more, I ſuppoſe, will be necciſary
to a general, Conilagration :. Or if any more
Afliſtance be aftorded .by the Preſence of the
Comet, it wil. be ax abundaznti, and only con-
tribute ſtill the more certainly, and the more
ſuddenly, to kindle ſuch a fatal Fire, and fo
dreadful a Combuſtion. - Now that both thoſe

; H h requuite


369


SOLUTIONS. BooklIV.


requiſite conditions for a general Confla-
gration wou'd be the conſequents of
this Paſſage of the aſcending Comet, is
plain and evident : For (1.) on the Approach
of the Comet, a vaſt Tide wou'd ariſe in the
great Aby/s; and by the new, more conſide-
rable, and more violent Elevations thereof in-
to the Protuberances, and the Spheroid Sur-
face of the whole, the old Fiſures and Breach-
cs wou'd be. open'd again, and not a few
new ones generated ; not only, as at the De-
luge, in the Mountainous or mo-e looſe Co-
lumns, extant above the Surface of the Wa-
ters of the Globe ; but in all Parts, and un-
der the Seas .and Ocean , as well as in other

laces; which Fſwes muſt immediately ſwal-
on up the main Maſs or Bulk of the Wa-
ters upon the Face of the Ground, and ſend
**m to their Fellow-Waters in the Bowels of
the Farth; which was the firſt and principal
itep' rowards a general Conflagration. And
then (2.) the Vapours acquir'd from the Co-
met's Atmoſphere, which at the Deluge were.
by reaſon of their long abſence from the Sun
in the remote Regions beyond Saturn, pretty
cool ; at this time muſt be ſuppos'd, by reaſon
of -their ſo late and near approach to the Sun
about the Peribelion , exceeding hot and burn-
ing ; and that to ſo extraordinary a degree,
that nothing but the*1dea of the Mouth of a
Volcano , "iſ belching out immenſe quantities
of liquid and burning Streams, or Torrents of
fhery Matter, can in any meaſure be ſuitable to
the Violence thereof. Imagine, therefore, the
Earth to paſs through the very middle of this
Atmoſphere, for 7000 or 8000 Miles together,
and. to bear off with it a Cylmdrice! Column
thereof,


Chap.z. SOLUTIONS. 321


thereof , whoſe Baſis were ſomewhat larger
than' a great Circle on the Farth, and whoſe
Alrcitude were the Number of Miles juſt now
mention'd; and then tell me whether the Air,
and its adjoining uppermoſt Region of the
Earth, will not be ſufficiently hot and ſcorch-
ing ; which was the other Step to the general
Conflagration. Beſides all which, what quan-
tities of this fiery Exhalation, or Torrent of
melted liquid Matter wou'd run, down the F/-
ſures into the Bowels of the Earth, and by F
joining with the central hot Steams already |
there, invigorate them , and accelerate the ,
direful Inflammation; and what piercing and ,
ſcorching fiery Corpuſcles the central Body it
ſelf during its vicinity, wou'd alfo ſend out ;
and what an additional Power wou'd thereby


be afforded the prevailing Heat , I need not f
ſay. Upon the whole, I may appeal to the af
Reader, if the concurrence of all theſe external b


Cauſes, to ſay nothing here of any internal y;q
Diſpoſitions in the Earth it felf thereto, do Theor 1.3.
not appear abundantly ſufficient within a little <. 7- %-
time to ſet the World on Fire, and bring an

that terrible Conflagration which both Sacred

and Profane Teſtimonies conſpire to forewarn

us of; and ſo whether the Theory of Cumers does

not afford us almoſt as commenſurate and
compleat an Account of th@Jaſt burning, as ic
already has done of the ancient drowning of the
Earth.


XCT. The ſame Canſes which will fer the World on
Fire, will alſo cauſe great and dreadful Tides in the
Seas and Ocean ; with no le Agitations, Concuſſi»
ons, and Earthquakes in the Air and Earth,


H h 2 XCI.


3/2


Theor.


SOLUTIONS. BooklIV,


XCI. Secing the Eruption of the central
Heat, ( the cauſe, 'tis probable, of all our
Earthquakes) the preſence of a Comet, ( the
cauſe once already of the moſt prodigious Tides
that ever were ) and the enflam'd Chaos, or
ſcorch'd Atmoſphere of the Comer, ( a ſmal-
ler part of which occaſion'd all our Tempeſts,
our Meteors, our Thunder and Lightning ever
iince the Deluge ) will all concur at once,
ard with joint Forces conſpire together ; no-
thing in the World can be ſupposd more ter-
rible, nor more exactly correſpondent to the
Phenomenon before us.


XCIT. The Armoſphere of the Earth, before the Con-
flagration begin, will 'be oppreſs'd with Meteors,
Exhalations, and Stcams ; and theſe in ſo dreadful a
manner, in ſuch prodigious quantities, and with
ſuch wild confusf'd Motions and Agitations, that
the Sun and Moon will have the moſt frighttful
and hideous Countcnances, and ther ancient Splen-
dor will be intirely obſcur'd : The Stars will ſeem
to fall from Heaven ; and all manner of hornd Re-
—— —__ will rerrifie the Inhabitants of the


:arth.


XCII. Thoſe who conſider how a Comet's
Armoſpherg appears to us after its Peribelion,
and what large quantirics of its newly fcorch'd
Maſles our Air muſt be clog'd and burthen'd
withal, will expect no other effects than thoſe
here mention'd; and will eaſily believe that all
ſuch horrible Appearances wou'd enſue, and
that in the molt amazing Degree, and extra-
Yagant Inſtances poflible. The Theorift's Repre-


L. 3: G11. ſentation of this Matter will be, generally ſpeak-
ing, but a fair and juſt [ea thereof,


XCIIL


Chap. 9. SOLUTIONS.


XCIIT. The Deluge and Conflagration are referr'! by
ancient Tradition to great Conjun&tions of the Hea-s
venly Bodies, as both depending on, and happening
at the ſame.


XCIIL In our Accounts of the Deluge and
Conflagration, there is a notable conjunction of
the Heavenly Bodies indeed ; not ſuch an Ima-
ginary one as the 4/trologers ſo ridiculouſly make
a ſtir about ; the bare Poſition of two or more
of the Celeſtial Bodies in or near the ſame
ſtreighe Line, from the Eye of the Spectator,
while they are at the moſt remote Diſtances
from one another ; which is a poor jejune thing
indeed : Bur a real one with a Witneſs 5 when
three of the Heavenly Bodies, the Earth, the
Moon, and the Comer, not only are in a:1 A-
ſtrological Heliocentrick Conjunction, or only
ſeem to an Eyc in tlie Sun to be conjoyn d
rogether, bur are really ſo. near as to have the
mightyeſt ettects and Influences on one another
potfible ; which we have fſuthciently ſhewn in
the preſent Theory, and which does peculiarly
correſpond to the Phenomenon before us.

Corollary. "7s not improbable but the ancient
Tradition, that the Deluge and Cerflagration ſome way
depended on certain remarkable Conjunttions of the
Hecwmly Bodies , miſ-underſtood , and afterward
precariouſly and widely miſ-apply d, might give oc-
caſion and riſe to Altrology 3 or that mighty quoit


and pother ſo many in ail iges bave made about


the Conjuntions, Oppoſitions, and Aſpects of


the Heavenly Bodies, and the Judiciary tred:ctions
therefrom ; which ' even the Improvements of ſolid
Philoſophy in owr Age have not been able yet to baniſh
wholly from among us ; the occaſion whereof « other-
wiſe excecding dark and unaccountable.


Hh 3 XCIV.


374


Lem. 6s.
cum Co-
ro). praus.


SOLUTIONS. BooklV


XCIV. The ſpace between the Deluge and the Con-
flagration ; or between the ancient State of the
Earth and its Purgation by Fire, Renovation, and
Refſtirurion again, 15 from ancient Tradition defin'd
and terminated by -a certain great and remarkable
Tear, or Axnual Revolution of ſome of the Heavenly
Bodies; ind is in” probabiliry what rhe Ancients
{o otren referr'd to, pretended particularly to derter-
mine, and ſil'd the Great or Platonick Year.


XCIV. If we allow, as we ought, that in
all probability the ſame Comet that broughe
on the Deluge will bring on the Conflagra-
tion ; and that the ſame Comet has not re-
eurnd, nor 1s to return, till the Conflagrati-
on; this matter is eaſic, and the correſpon-
dence accurate and remarkable : For this ſmgle
Revolution is truly an Anal one, and as pro-
per a Year with regard to the Comet, as that
of our Earth is with reſpe&t to us; and fo
may moſt fitly and naturally fuir the Great or
Platonick Year, taken notice of in the Propoſi-
tion before us.


XCV. This general Confagratien is not to: extend to
the intire Diflolrtion or DeſtruQtion of the Earth ;
bur only to the Alteration, Mehioration, and pecus
liar Diſpoiition thereof into a new State, proper to
receive thoſe Saints and Martyrs for its Inhabitants,
who are at the firſt ReſurreGtion to enter, and to live
and reign a thouſand Years upon ir, till the ſecond
Reſurrection, the. general Judgment, and the fins!
Conſummation of ail things.


XCV. Seeing the 46z/5 conſiſts of a denſe
and compa Fiuid, not capable of any Rarefa-
ion or Diſſokution by the moſt violent Heat
im: ginable, 'tis evident that the cauſes here aſ-
hgn'd can only extend to the upper Orb, or
habirable Earth, without any farther Progreſs.

8. S0


—O— OO rn mrmnn—— ——  —


Chap. 5. SOLUTIONS.


So that the effet of this Conflagration
will be the reduction of chis upper Earth, and
its Armoſphere, into a confus'd, mixt, and Cha-
otick State; much ſuch an one as was before ob-
ſerv'd to have preceded the Original Formati-
on of it. So that as the Heat decreaſes , 'tis
but reaſonable to expect a kind of Reiteration
of the Moſaick ſix Days Creation, or a Reno-
vation of the Primitive State of the Earth ;
ro the Deſcription of which therefore I muſt
refer the Reader,


XCVI. The Srate of Nature during this M/Yeminn
will be very different from that at preſent, and more
agreeable ro the Anedilwoign, Primitive, and Pars
4iſiacal ones.


XCVI. This is apparent from the concluſion
of the former Solution.


XCVH. The Earth in the Milamiwm will be withour-a
Sea, or any large Receptacle fil'd with mighry Col-
letions and Quantities of Warer.


XCVII. The Primizive Seas depended. on
two things; the former, the concurrence of
the Central- and Solar Heat for an intire half
Year together, in the Elevation of ſufficient
quantities of Vapours : The latter, the Earth's
conſiderable folidity attain'd before the deſcent
of the ſame Vapours which were to compoſe
the Seas, of which we are ſpeaking : So that
if either of theſe be wanting in this reiterated
Formation of the Earth, tis evident the Effet
muſt fail, and the Globe be no longer a Terra-
queous One after the Conflagration. Now the
next Propoſition bur one, allerting the probabi-
lity of the intire abſence of the Sun, muſt infer

_—_ ” an


373


Solur 6 &
p, rigs


376


Lem. 39.
Pr1us.


SOLUTIONS. © Book IV.


an equal probability of the 'entire Abſence
* Seas alſo, according as this Propoſition
alterts.


XCVTIT. The Earth in the M/Zomium will have no Suc-
ceftion of Tight and Darkneſs, Day and Night; bur
a perpetual Day. |


XCVTIT. In caſe the Earth's Diurnal Rotati-
MM, upon which theſe Vicifhitudes depend, was
retarded ſo as to be only exactly equal and
commenſurate to its Annual Motion, (as the cafe
in the Aoun's Diurnal and Menſtrual Revoluti-
ons is at preſent, as we have before obſerv'd)
the Earth wou'd conſtantly expoſe the ſame He-
miſphere to the Sun, (as the Moon does now to
the Earth) and all fucccilion of Day and Night
for ever ceaſe ; the one. half of the Globe en-
joying a perpetual Day, while the other was
involvd in Darkneſs, or excluded all advan-
tages from him, and thereby enduring # con-
tinual Night, fo far as natural Cauſes are here
to be conliderd. And that this Retardation
of the Larth s/ Diurnal Kotation (even without a
recuriing to the miraculous Power of its firſt
Author ) is accountable from that paſſing b
of a Comet, which we allign for the occaſi-
lion of the Conftlagration, is very. eaſie and ob-
vious: For in cafe its Aſcent and Paſſage by
be on the Laſt ſide, or before the Earth ; and
in caſe it approach ſo near as.to Tub againſt
it, 'tis evident fuch an Impulſe. is contrary to
the courſe of the Diwnal Rotatiow, and is there-
fore capable (the Proportions of every. thing
being adjuſted by- Divine Providence) of put-
ting ſuch a ſtop co the ſame as 1s _—
to the preſent Phenumencn, - and ſo may put a
Pczicd to that conſtant Succeſſon of Light and


Dark-


Chap. 5. SOLUTIONS.
Darktieſs, Day and Night, which has obtain'd


ever ſince the Fall of Man ; and withal diſtin- -


uiſh the Surface of the Earth into rwo quite dif-
| n—_ and contrary Hemiſpheres ; near the Ver-
tex of one' of which the Sun it ſelf, and
near that of the other, its oppoſite Point in the
Heavens, will be always ſituate.

Corollary. Seeing ſuch a rub of the Comet wou'd
affet; the Annual Motion of. the Earth as well as
tbe Diurnal , 'ws poſſible ir might retard the for-
mer ag well as the latter, and reduce the Elliptical
Corrie and Orbit of tbe Earth, to its ancient Circular

XCIX. The Srate of the Ailrmionn will not ſtand in


need of, and ſo probably will be without, the Light
and Preſence of rhe Sun and Aon.


XCTS. Seeing the Earth wou'd be on the fore-
going Suppoſition diſtinguiſh'd into ewo quite
different Hiewiſpticres, thepne of which wou'd
be © wholly defticure of the Lighe and pre-
ſence of the Swi, and, as far as appears by
Oo ſupply'd by a -Supernatural Light, fixt
and permanent above «s Horizon, tis clear that
the firſt Branch ot this Propoſition is account-
able thereby, as far as this Phyſical Theory is
concern d therein. And as to the Moon, ſce-
ing twas only a ſignal and peculiar Providence
that caus'd her equal acceleration,and conſequent
accompanying the Earth at the former pafling
by of the Comet; and that no ſuch Providence
15 again to be expected ; "ris evident that that
Rub or Stoppage of the Earth's Annual Motion,
which 'retaids the ſame; and does nor retard
the Mown's alſo, will ſeparate theſe Planets,
and procure their Orbirs, Courſes, © and Pe-
riods to be quite different from one another's
ever


—_


376


SOLUTIONS. Book IV.


ever after ; according to the greateſt rigour of
the preſent Propoſition.


C. At the Concluſion of the Millenium , the Final
Judgment, and the Conſummation of all things, the
Farth will deſert its preſent Sear and Station in
the World, and be no longer found among the
Planetary Chorw.


C. If any __—_ a I fling by, or

tly rubbing the Earth, hit diretly againſt
” 4 ies Courſe either towards or hog the
Sun, it muſt deſert its ancient Station , and
move in a quite different Elliptick Orbit ; and
ſo of a Planet become _ a Comet, for the
future Apes of the World,


——


COROLLARIES
FROM THE
W HOLE.


L GE the new and ſolid Improvements of Phi-
bleply do all along give ſo rational Accounts

of thoſe Ancient Theorems, which have been propa-
gated down from the Ages, without being then
either underſtood, or intelligible to their Propagators ;
"res re le to truſts and rely on ſuch Ancient
Traditions, mot only Sacred, but prophane alſo, in
theſe or any other parallel Caſes ; they being in all
probability the moſt valuable Remains, and moſt
meravie


, Chap. 5. SOLUTIONS.


nerable Truths which the primitive Parents of the
World deliver d down to their Poſterity in ſucceeding


Gener ations.


IL See; Anciens Theorems
very Bury Ihr AA. Knawvledge of thoſe od


deliver them ; contrary to the common Opinion of


Mankind, judging uſually by ſenſible arances 5
and in 6 Lax. ml conſidering the low 7 om of Na-
tural Knowledge at the ſame times, were highly impro-
bable, if not utterly incredible to inquiſitive Minds :
and indeed ſeveral of them relating to the Chaos,
tbe Creation, the primary Conſtitution and State
of the World, and the Deluge it ſelf, _—_—
to be diſcover'd without Supernatural Revelation ;
and yet ſering, after all, they do now appear as a-
greeable to Reaſon, and the moſt ſolid Mechanical
Philoſophy, as any new Diſcoveries , built on the
exatteſt Obſervations of preſent Nature whatſoever 3
"Tis apparent that theſe Ancient Accounts, eſpeci-
ally thoſe contain'd in the Holy Scriptures , were
not originally deriv'd from the Natural Skill and
Obſertation of the firſf® Authors, or any other meer-
ly Humane Means, but from the immediate and
Supernatural Revelation of God Almighty ; who
was therefore much more comurſant with Mankind
in the firſt, than be has been in theſe laſt Ages
of the World ; as the Old Teltament-Hiſftory a/-


ſures ws.


III. The Meaſure of our preſent Knowledge coughs
not to be efteemd the Kerriewy or Teft of Truth ;
or to be oppos d to the Accounts receiv d from Pro-
fane Antiquity, much leſs to the inſpir'd Writings.
For por. you. that ſeveral Particulars relating
to the Eldeſs Condition of the World, and its great
Cataſtrophe's, examin'd and compar'd with ſo _
Phj-


380


SOLUTIONS. BooklV.


Philoſophy as was till lately known, were plainly un-
accountable, and, naturally ſpeaking, impoſſible ; yet
we ſee, now Nature zs more fully, more certainly,
and more ſubſtantially underſtood , that the ſame
things approve themſelves to be plain, eaſie, and ra-
tional.


IV. *Tix . therefore Folly in the higheſt degree, to
rejett the Truth, or Divine Authority of the Holy
Scriptures, becaufe we cannot give our Minds par-
ticular Satisfattion as to the manner, nay or even
pollibility of /ome things therein aſſerted. Since
we bave ſeen ſo many of thoſe things which ſeem'd
the moſt incredible in the whole Bible , and gave
the greateſt Scruple and Scandal to Philoſophick
Minds, jo fully and particularly atteſted, and. next
to demonſtrated from certain Principles of Aſtrono-
my and Natural Knowledge ; 'rz but reaſonable
to expect, in due time, a like Solution of the other
Difficulties. Tis but juſt ſure to depend upon the
Veracity of thoſe Holy Writers in other Aſſerti-
ons, whoſe Fidelity & ſo mtirely eſtabliſh'd in 1heſe


bitherto equally unaccountable ones.


V. The Obviows, Plain, or. Literal Senſe of the
Sacred Scriptures, ought not, without great Reaſon,
to be eluded or laid aſide : Several of thoſe wery
Places which ſcem'd wery' much to require the
ſame hitherto, appearing now to the minuteſt Cir-
curſtances, true and rational, according to
the ſtritteſG and moſt Literal Interpretations of
them.


VI. We may be under an Obligation to believe
ſuch things on the Autbority of the Holy Scriptures,
as are piper Mylteries ; that «, though not real-
ly Contradittary , yet plaimly Unaccountable to onr

(pre-


—


*


Chap. 5, SOLUTIONS.


(preſent degree of ) Knowledge and Reaſon. Thus
the Sacred Hiſtories of ' the Original Conſticuti-
on, and great Cataltrophe's of the World have
been in the paſt Ages rhe Obyetts of. the Faith of Jews
and Chriſtians, rhough rhe Divine Providence had
not afforded ſo much Light as that they cond 0-
otherwiſe (atisfie themſelves im the Credibility of
them , till the new Improvements in Philoſophy.
And thus is but juſt and reaſonable; for ſure the
Ionorance or Incapacity of the Creature does by no
means afford ſufficient Ground, for Incredulity , «t
juſtifie Men in their rejefting Divine Revelation,
and impeaching the Veracity or Providence of the
Creator,


VII. Seeing the Natural and the Moral Worl:
are alike ſubjett to the Divine Providence , and
that the ſame Author has indited thoſe Writings
which relate to both ; the Diſcovery of the Verity
of the Huly Scriptures in the moſt difficult Points
relating to the one, ought to make ns entirely [e-
cure of the like \\etity of the ſame Seviptares 1e-
lating to the other, notwithſtanding any Difficul-
ties ſtill remaining about 'em : As the wiſe, proportio-
nate, and Harmonious Order and Regularity of the
Natural World , where no Freedom of the Crea-
ture Interpoſes, and gives any occaſion for Diſor-
der, juſtly oblige: us to believe the moſt wiſe and
nal Methods of Providence to be equally exer-
cis d about the Moral one alſo ; although the In-
ificaties wriſing from the abuſe f the Liberty of
Will in Rational Creatures, render them hitherto
more obſcure. to us in the latter Caſe than in the
former : So certainly the Eſtabliſhment of the Ve-
rity of the Scriptures in the moſt harſh and dif-
ficult Aſſertions touching the Natural Werld, ( the
proper Caſe in which the Improvement of Philoſophy

as


z81


=
= -


i}


332


SOLUTIONS. Book IV.


was likely to afford means for our Ditermination)
ought to - Yeoh of the like Verity of the ſame Scri-

in the other Points, "i peculiarly the Sub-
jets f Divine Revelation , leſs capable L/ afford;
any other means of Satisfattion, and yet more direttly
the Deſign, Scope, and Drift of the Sacred Wri-
ters, and the Concern of Divine Providence than
the other.


TS I Bank Tay Aiwvwy Apbapre, Aoegry,
Mz « "wr ator A: &s Tvs *Aoves


Twy ©


Chap.s. SOLUTIONS.


A


POSTSCRIPT.


INCE the gs the fore-going

Theory, I met, a few Days ſince, with a

very good Book juſt publiſh'd, call'd, 4
Conference with a Theift ; By the Reverend

and Learned Dr. Nichols ; wherein I found him
making coxfidereblsi us of — Eſſay of Sir William
erry's, concerning the Multiplication of Mankind ,
a the Growth of the on of London ; and percei-
ving thence that Learned Gentleman to have there
made uſe of 360 Years, as the Mean or equal
Standard for the doubling of Mankind in the
preſent Age ; when I had, by Miſtake, pitch'd
upon 280, from a Book which tis ſuppos'd the


ſame Author was concern'd in before, I here- Phenom.
upon procur'd this latter Book it felt, 'and fer 33- privs


my ſelf & the conſideration thereof, and par-
ticularly as to what more immediately concern'd
my ſelf,

ſtructed upon a ſomewhat different Hype

By which means I found that this laſt, and
therefore more Authentick Eſay had not only on
very good Grounds fixt 360 Years for'the ordi-
nary middle 1ate of the doubling Mankind with
us atpreſent, but had withal remark'd ſuch
. very different Extreams on either hand ſome«
times obſery'd, and {iill more different ones ve«


ry


and choſe Calculations I had oe ©
Ej15


- * _ —
» =


Ibid.


Phanom.
33- cum
70 prius.


SOLUTIONS. BooklV.


ry poſlible to be obſerv'd in the World, as
gave great Light to ſeveral things concain'd in
the Holy Scriptures, and particularly to ſome,
inſiſted on in the foregoing Theory, and ſo was
very well worthy of a carctul Conſideration. Thus
it has ſeem'd very ſtrange to ſome, that in
215 Years, the 70 Perſons deſcended of Fa-
cob ſhou'd amount ro. ſo many as by the Cal-
culation. above has been made appear clicy re-
ally did. But now if we conſider what Sir /17/-
liam Petty proves, that the increaſe of Mankind
has been actually from 120 to 1200 Years in
-doubling ; and may fairly be from 10 to 1200,
according to the preſent Obſervations 5 and
withal conſider that the Lives of Men then, gene-
rally ſpeaking, were 'more than ſix times as long
as the middle duration of ours new ; and fo on
account of more numerous Poſterity, and Co-
exiſtence, there is ro be about eighteen times as
many as the ſame Number, at the ſame Rate of
Propagation, wou'd produce with us : If, I fay,
we conſider theſe things, we ſhall be ſoon 1a-
tisfy'd with the Sacred Hiſtory in this other-
wiſe ſurprizing Narration, and not at all think
it ſtrange that the Children of Iſrael doubl'd
themſelves in fourteen Years , till' the Exodus
out of «Agypr, or the Afrer-Reduction of the
Period of Human Lite, to the preſent Standard,
before their Entrance into the Land of C#-
naan, ſeeing 'tis not fo incredible as the dou-
bling of any Family or Nation in twenty Years
now with us wou'd appear to be; which no
one can fay to be otherwiſe than very reaſo-
nable, and what does not unfrequently happen
in theſe latter Ages of the World, for many Ge-
nerations together. But what is more to my
preſent purpoſe, and the main Occaſion of _
Poſt -


Book iV. SOLUTIONS.


Poſt(cripr ( beſides the rectifying my own mi-
ſtakes, and chat ſmall difference which it has oc-
calion'd in my Calculations, which the Candid
Reader will calily pardon and amend) is an Ob-
ſervation I have made on occaſion of my light-
ing upon this laſt Eſay of Sir William Petty ,
whereby at once this Matter, of the Multiplica-
tion of Mankind in the palt Ages , may be in
ood meaſure determin'd ; and Sir William's mi-
ake rouching the different Proportions thereof
in the different Periods of the World lince
Moeſes's time, may be corrected, to the great Illu-
ſtration of the Sacred, as well as Prophane Ac-
cgunes of the ancient Ages of the World. And
the Obſervation s this, That Mankind, as far
as we have means of enquiry, have generally
ſpeaking increaſed in one and the ſame given
Proportion , and doubled themſelves in 360
Years in all the palt Ages of the World, ſince
the fixing of the preſent Period of Humane
Life. The truth of which Obſervation I thus
prove. *'Tis evident that the moſt ancient Age
. of the World, capable of being compar 'd with
the preſent, was that of Aves, when the
Lives of Men were rednc'd to Seventy or Eighty
Years, their preſent Standard ; and that there-
fore che ſucceding Period of Four hundred and
feventy nine Years, from the Z£xo4us out of Egypr,
till che building of Solomon's "Temple, was the
firſt conſiderable enough for /our preſent pur-
.pole. 'Tis alſo evident, That the Hiſtory of
.the Fews , or the Sacred Hiltory , is ths only
one encient enough , and certain enough to be
incroduc'd, and depended on in the prelcne caſe.
Nay, indeed, 'tis evident that the Fews from
their Union together , and cheir DiſtinRtion
Ii from


Vid The.
NC. 33s
cum 70.
prius.


Exod x1.
Numb. 1.
L, 3,55,
205,495,490)


4), 4y- G


SOLUTIONS. BookIV,


from the neighbour Nations, as well as the
accuracy of their Genealogics and Numbers fre-
guently recorded in Scripture, are alone capa-
ble of affording any full and unconteſted in-
ftances of this Matter. Tis, laſtly, evident in
particular, "Thar the numbers of the Children
of [ral were exactly taken, and/are as exaR-
ly recorded at the beginning , and a little be-
fore the end of the foremention'd Period ; as
we ſhall ſee preſently. So' that we have -here
the faireſt opportunity poſſihle of clearing this
n'atcer, and of comparing the moſt ancient ,
with the lateſt incrcaſe of Mankind ; the do-
ing of which will c{tabliſh the truth of that Ob-
ſervation I am” now upon , beyond reaſonable
contradiction'; which I thus arrempt. Ar the
Pxedzs of the Chi'dren of Iraet out of Epypr ,
the nun.ver of tlie men on foot, b:fides children, was
abour /x b::::dred 1honſand More exactly, a lietle
above a year afterwards, the number of the
Males of Tre! above rurenty years old , all that
were able to go forth ro war, were (beſides the
Levites ) Six hundred and three thouſand, five


tandred and fifty. Now the number of the years


berween theſe Accounts of the People, and that


'rowards the Conclution of the Reign of Dawid,


473, 45 Chronologers very
well know. Say then, &y che Golden Rule; if
260 Years doubie the People, or produce


x
LE -. 5 4 * 4
Was about 402 0! :


112v55c0, how maty, by 2 proportionable in-


creaſe, will 4-3 Years produce? The Produt


whereof is 15765655; which therdfore, accord-


in? to the*foremention'd rate, ought to be the
number of. the 772:{rres at the time when David
numbred chem 473 Years afterwards. _ Now
the number 'of the ['raelires taken by Foab was

| exprelly


—


——


Book IV. SOLUTIONS.


ewelve Companies of. 24:00 men a-picce , al-
ready numbred and enroll'd, tro wait by Turns
on the King in the twelve Months of the” Year :
Which are 28800. So that the Total of the
Men of All I real was 1088000, or, in a round
number, 1100000 Mex, as 'tis exprefly” in the
Book of Chronicles, To which add the Men of
Fudab 470000. or, including, as uſual, . the
ſmall Tribe of Benjamrr, (which, beſides Loi,
came not into the former Sum: ) about 5o0ccoo,
according to the expreſs words. of the Pook of
Samuel. And ſoat lait the 7otz! Sum is 16000c 0,
or more nicely 1588090, which is wonderfully
near the former ſum of 1576666 produc'd by tl
Arichmetical Calculation above, and highly wor-
thy of aur regard and admiration. "Tis rruc, the
Iraelites rather decreas'd in the Wilderneſs; and
at the end of the firſt thirty cight or thirty nine
years, (by reaſon of the cutting off the intire
murmuring Generation ere the youngeſt of
them were fifty nine years old) were not quite
ſo many as at the time of their firſt numbring
when they came out of Fezp:. But then as
this will be an excepted cafe, and the remain-
ing 434 years within a ſmall matter will ſtill an-
ſwer the afligned Proportion ; fo indecd this
deſtruction was not greater than ought to be
ſuppos'd oft-times' to happen, and ſuch as hoth
has formerly, and does at this day frequently
happen in the World; on the allowance of
which, the Period of 369 Years was determi-
ned : And therefore ought not to be diſtinctly
conſider'd in the preſent caſe. We may there-


*
=


Aa”
=—-


fore, upon the whole matter, very reaſonably
Iiz


deter-


expreſly eight bundred thouſand valiant min tat
drew the Sword. Belides which, chere were


XXIV,


1 Oh
XXVu.


Nomb
XXVI1


64,GF.


287


2 Sim.
J.


On.


3 #


SOLUTIONS. Book IV.


determine , that , exceptins what diſturbance
extraordinary and uncommon Wars, Famines,
Plagues, and ſuch other Mercilefs deſtroyers
of Mankind have given thereto, Mankind have
generally increas'd in the ſame determinate Pro-
portion, and doubled themſelves in three hun-
derd and fixty years, for more than three thou-
ſand years, from the Time of Mc{s, till the
preſent Age; as was to be prov'd. Which
Obſervation thus eſtabliſh'd, what Light ir mighe
afford Ancient Hiftory, and the” Holy Seriptares, as
well as the preſent Theory , 'tis not my buſineſs
here to enquire: But I ſhall- refer the ſame ro


[4


the carefnl Conſideration of the Reader.


= nn —_ — — —_—


FINIS.


Broks Printed for Benj. Tooke.


Urſus Mathematicus: Mathematical Scienczs

in Nine Books : comprehending Arichme-

rick, Geometry, Coſmography, Aſtronomy, N:1-

vigation, Trigonometry, with the Dcſcription ,

Conſtruction and Uſe of Geometrical Nau-

tical Inſtruments, and the Doctrine of Triang'es

applied to Practice in Menſurations of all Kins.
By Wilkam Leybourn, Philomath. el.

Fables of «£/p, and other Emincnt My: 10-
logilts, with Morals and 'Refletions. By -ir
Roger L'Eftrange. Fol.

A Catalogue of Books printed in England ſince
the dreadfut Fire of London in 1666. to the end
of Michaelmas Term 1695. With an Abſtract of
the General Bills of Mortality ſince 1660. And
the Titles of all the Claflick Auchors, Cum Ne-
tis Varioruam, and thoſe for the uſe of the Dau-
phim. Fol.

Dioptrica Nowa: A Treatiſe of Dioptricks. In
Two Parts. Wherein the various Effetts and
Appearances of Spherick-Glaſles, both Convex and
Concave, Single and Combined in Teleſco
and Microſcopes. Together with their Uſeful-
neſs in many Concerns of Humane Life, are ex-

lained. -By William Molyneux of Dublin , Elq;

ellow of the Royal Society.” Quarto.
- Two Sermons preach'd before the Condemn'd
Criminals at Newgate,” 1695. By B. Creoke, M. A.
Recor of St. Michael Weed!
$* ot qi b


Free, Londen. Quarts.
ens Calle


_ — wo =. @4td tt


-


- gp of ſome doe writ upon ſeve-
and Counterfeit
ney, and Trade, 2 it relates to the
— Belo, By Dr Hugh Chamberlain.
warto.
Prelefiones Actdemice m Scholes Hiftarxes Cam-
deniana. Auttore Henrico Dodwello. wo.
Two Letters written to a Gentleman of Note,
7 of Common Swearing. To which is ad-
a third Letter to another Gentleman in the
Commillion of the Peace , exciting him eo the
Performance of his part in executing the late
AR againſt Prophane Curſing and Sweming,
Twekoes. |


— A —
_


ERRATA.


.t. bn 4g reada bly. p.5..11.r. World. p.7.1.$.r.arc
=—_ os hes. hang —_—_ r. had. p.33-1 4. wc —
mena. p.47.1.16. r dire&. p.56. 3. r. ſcarce: p.77. L157. re-
ceding. p.89. 1.20. dele and. p.31- L10.r.1 year 322 days Lt.
12 years or more nicely 4332 days. L 12. 30 years more nice-
ly 10759 days. p. 34. |. 2. 7. ares p. 66. L 29. at the end add
[will be I ſuppoſe ] p. 93. {. 32. r. Hypotheſis. p. 101. Ls.
muſt have been. p.138- [.2. r. But if that were as. p.142,4 23.
y.months [immediately ſucceeding one another.] p.149. L10.
r.demonſtrate. p.159. 5. r. were. p.175. Tit. r. Phanomena,
p-176. Lpenult. marg. r.104. p.211. 1.1. r. Armoſphere. p.221.
{ 23. r. with the courſe, &c. p.225. 129. r.ſcem. p 230. {17.
after [and ] add [that Account]. p. 231. mag. r. Hypoth.r.
p 234. (. 23. r. Hexaemeron. p. 236. /. 27. r. And lighter
Earthy. p.246, & 252. r.'lavs. p 252. 16. r.nor. p.290. L.25.
y, Hear in p. 300. {.1.r Agitations.
