ery
hid


i


ie a ee t ; " = 2 . fs 3 | ‘ 2 ak f ey = J igs
OH pe ine Re AY WER GE g War? ah


a


: a
<S eere


ASTRONOMICAL
—-Orinciples of Beligion, —
Naturat and REVEALD.


In NINE Parts:


|L Lemmata; or the known Laws of Matter and Motion.

If. A particular Account of the Syftem of the Univerie.

JUL The Truth of that Syftem briely Demonftrated.

IV. Certain Od/ervations drawn from that Syftem.

V. Probable Conjedfures of the Nature and Ufes of the

_|__ feyeral Celeftial Bodies contain’d in the fame Syftem.
VI. Important Principles of Narurd&L Reticion De-

_monftrated from the foregoing Odfervations.

VII. Important Principles of Divine REVELATION Con-
firm’d from the foregoing Coxjedfures. j

VIN. Such Inferences thewn to be the common Voice of
Nature and Reafon, from the Teftizzonies of the moft
confiderable Perfons in all Ages.

IX. A Recapitulation of the Whole: With a. Large and
Serious Addrefs to all, efpecially to the Scepticks and
Unbelievers of our Age. :


Together with .


APREFACK


Of the Lemper of Mind neceflary for the Difcovery
of Divine Truth ; and of the Degree of Evidence
that ought to be expected in Divine Matters, |


By WILLIAMWHISTON, M.A.
Sometime Profeffor of the Mathematicks in the Univerfity
ot ALAR RE DG EB:


LONDON + Printed for J: Senex in Fleet-fireet, W. and
. Innys near St. Paul’s, J. Ossornz, and T. Loncman
in Pater-Nofter-Row. Mopccxxv-


“PS my & Poin abt


" ee rus
boty iy ry by | oa

og He Ogg ca hg 2 out n i"
YEN eg. VE Sai


ee ee oe


Be ‘ td rs Tie
me ait: Hi


a
o jet iareee 8


ompleo ener:


in hop Le Seti itty te


Samal date pee


RAS


To the Illuftrious |


Sir [faac Newton,


PRESIDENT,


And to the reft of the


Councit and MEMBERS
OF THE


Rovat SocieEtTvy;
THESE


ASTRONOMICAL
Principles of Religion


Natura and REVEAL,
ARE
Moft Humbly DEpicaTED


March 10> 172%.


The AuTuor.


| Dee hey wel Sug oo


SALE FORE Icome totreat of this
#4) Noble Subject, The Aftronomi-
cal Syftem of the Univerfe,
with its wonderful Confequences
as it 1s now difcovered tous by
the good Providence of God, and the labo-
vious Searches of this and the laf? Age;
and chiefly, by the furprizing Sagacity and
Penetration of the Iuftrious Sir Waac New-
ton; I think it proper to premife two En-
quiries, as of great Confequence in way of
Preparation tothe receiving real Advantage
by this Treatife , and without Satisfaction -
aherein, all {uch Difcourfes will be of little
Effeci with many of its Perufers : I mean
the Enquiry about that Temper of Mind,
which is neceffary forthe Difcovery of Divine
A Truth 5


PREFACE.


Truth, and the Enquiry into that Degree of
Evidence, that ought to be expected in Divine
Matters. For, if all our Knowledge be de-


vived from God, and if it bas pleafed God


to require a certain Degree of Probity, Se-
rioufnef{s, Impartiality, and Humility of
Mind, together with hearty Prayers to him
for his Direétion, Bleffing, and Affiftance ;
and a proper Submiffion to him, before be will


communicate bis Truths to Men, T mean,


at leaft, communicate the fame fo as
fhall make a due Impreffion upontheir Minds,
and turn to. their real Profit and Edification,
to their true Improvement in Virtue and
Happinefs: And if Men at any time come
to the Examination either of the Works or
Word of God, without that Temper of Mind,
and without thofe Addreffes for bis Aid, and
Submiffion to bis Will, which He has deter-
mined {ball be the Conditions of his Commu-
nications to them, efpecially if they come
with the contrary Difpofitions, with aWick-.
ed, Partial, Proud, and Ludicrous Temper,
and with an utter Difregard toGod, bis Pro-
vidence, Worfbip, and Revelation ;, all their
Refearches will come to nothing. If, I fay,
this bethe Cafe,as tothe Divine Knowledge,as
I believe itis, it cannot but be highly necef>
Savy for us allto confider of this Matter be~
forehand, and to endeavour after the proper
ae | | Qualifr~


PRE KA © F. lij
Qualifications, before we fet our felves about
the main Enquiries themfelves. If it bas
alfo pleafed God to expe from us foe more
Deference and Regard for him, than for our
‘poor fallible Fellow-Creatures bere below ;
and to claimour Belief and Obedience, upon
plain external Evidence, That certain Do-
cirines or Duties are derived frombim, with-
‘out our being always let into the Secrets of his
Government, or acquainted with the Reafons
of his Condué , and alfoto exped that this
plain external Evidence be treated, as it is
in allthé other Cafes of Htiman Determina-
tions and Fudgments, Imean, that it be fub-
mitted to, and acquiefced in, whénit appears
to be fuch, as in all other Cafes would be
allowed to be fatisfactory, and plainly tupe-
‘rior to what it alledged to the contrary: Tf,
I fay, this alfo be the Cafe as to Divine
Knowiedge, as I believe itis, It will be very
proper for us allto confider of this Matter
before-band alfo, that fo we may not be af-
‘terward difappointed, when in our future
Progre{s we donot always find thatirrefitible
and over-bearing Degree of Evidence for
certain Divine Truths, which in fuch Cafesis
not tobe bad, which in truth is almoft pecu-
liar tothe Mathematicks , and the Expela-
tion of which is fo common, tho’ unjuft, a
Pretence for Infidelity among use |


A 2 As


PRE PACE,


As to the former of thefe Enquiries, or
that Temper of Mind which is neceffary


for the Difcovery of Divine Truth, it can


certainly be no other than what the Light of
Nature, and the Confciences of Men influ-
enc'd thereby, ditiate to us, thofe, I mean,
already intimated 5 fuch as Serioufnefs, In-
tegrity, Impartiality, and Prayer to God;


with the faithful Belief, andready PraGice


of fuch Truths and Duites, as we do allalong


difcover to be the Word and Willof God;


together with fuch a Modefly, or Refignation


of Mind, as will reft fatisfyd in certain


fublime Points, clearly above our Determina-
tion, with full Evidence that they are re-
vealed by God, without always in Sifting, upon
knowing the Reafons of the Divine Condu
therein immediately, before we will believe
that Evidence. Thefe are fuchthings as all
honeft and fober Men, whobave naturally a
Senfe of Virtue and of God intheir Minds,
muft oven their Obligationto. We allknow,
by the common Light of Nature, till we
eclipfe or corrupt it by our own Wickednefs,
That we are to deal with the utmoft Fairnefs,
Honefly, and Integrity in all, efpecially in
Religious Matters, that we are to hearken
to every Argument, and to confider every
Teflimony without Prejudice, or Byafs, and
ever to pronounce agreeably to our Conviéti-
ons, that we are but Weak, Frail, Depen-

dent


PREFACE.


dent Creatures, all whofe Faculties, andthe
Exercife of them, are derived from God ,
that we ought therefore to exercife a due
Modefly, and prattife a due Submiffion, of
Mind in Divine Matters, particularly inthe
Search after the Nature, and Laws, and Pro-
vidence of our great Creator : A Submiffion, I
‘mean, not to Human, but to Divine Autho-
rity, when once it {hall be authentickly made
known tous: That the Humble Addreffing
of our felves to God for his Aid, Direction,
and Bleffing on our Studies and Enquiries, is
one plain Inftance of fuch our Submiffion to ©
Him , and that a ready Compliance with
Divine Revelation, and aready Obedience to
the Divine Will, fo far as we have clearly
difcover'dit, is another neceffary Inftance of
the fame bumble Regard to the Divine Maje/ty.
Nor indeed can any one who comes to thefe
Sacred Enquiries with the oppofite Difpofiti-
ons, Of Difhonefty, Partiality, Pride, Buf-
foonry, Negleé of all Divine Worfbip, and
Contempt of all Divine Revelation, and of
all Divine Laws, expe&, even by the Light
of Nature, that God fhould be oblig’d to dif-
cover further Divine Truths to him. Nor
will a fober Perfon, duly fenfible of the dif-
ferent States of Creator and Creature, imi-
tate Simon Magus, and his Followers, in
the firft Ages of the Gofpel, and ferup fome
Metaphyfical ee Captious Queftions
| 3


about


vj ee P R E PAI aa


about the Conduéi of Providence, as fuffici-.

ent tofet afidethe Evidence of confeffed Mi-

racles themfelves , but will rather agree ta

that wife Apborifm laid down inthe Law of
Moles, and fuppofed allover the Bible, That
Deuxsix. Secret Things belong unto the Lord ,
29. but Things that are revealed, to Us and
to ovr Children, that we may do them,


Now in order to the making fome Impreffions
upon Men inthis Matter, andthe convincing
them, that All our Difcoveries are tobe de-
rived from God, and that we are not to ex-
pect bis Bleffing upon our Enquiries, without
the foregoing Qualifications, Devotions, and
Obedience ; Give me leave bere, inftedd of
my own farther Reafoning, to fet down
from tbe Ancient Jewith and Chriftian Wri-
‘ters, feveral Paffages which feem to mevery
remarkable, and very pertinent to our prefent
Purpofe: Not now indeed, as fuppofing any of
thofe Obfervations of Sacred Authority, but
as very right in themfelves , very agreeable
to the Light of Nature, and very good Te-
ftimonies of the Senfe of wife Men in the
feveral ancient Ages of the World to this
Purpofe. And I chufeto da this the more
largely bere, becaufe I think this Matter to —
be of very great Importance : becaufe it feems
to be now very little known or confider’d, at
leaf? very little pradis d,by feveral pretended
Enquirers into Reveal’d Religion ; and be-
uo | . caufe


PREFACE


Vi}


‘caufe the Negleé hereof feems to me amain


Occafion of the Sceptici{m and Infidelity of


this Age.


_. The Lord {pake unto Mofes faying ; See,
Ihave called by Name Bezaleel, the Son
of Uri, the Son of Hur, of the Tribe of
Judah: And I have filled him with the
Spiritof God, in Wifdom, and in Under-


flanding, and in Knowledge, @c. Andin-


the Hearts of all that are wife-hearted, I
have put Wifdom, ec.

It fhall come to pafs, if thou wilt
not hearken unto the Voice of the Lord
thy God, to obferve to do all his
Commandments, and his Statutes, which
I command thee this Day, that all thefe
Curfes fhall come upon thee, and over-
take thee: The Lord fhall {mite thee
with Madnefs, and Blindnefs, and Afto-
nifhment of Heart ;, and thou fhalt grope
at Noon-day, as the Blind gropeth in
Darknefs.

The Lord hath not given you an Heart
to perceive, and Eyes to fee, and Ears to.
hear, unto this Day. aes

Give thy Servant an Underftanding
Heart, to judge thy People; that I may
difcern between Good and Bad: For who
is able to judge this thy fo great a Peo-
ple ? And the Speech pleafed the Lord,
; A. 4 that


Ex, xxxi.
1, 2) 3,6,


Deut.
XXXVI
1§-


a 28, 29,


XXIX. Zo


1King.ii
9» 105 Lie
12


Vil j


Job xxxil.
7, %


MxXXIi.
12, 13>


XXXIV.
Bly 32


MUXVII. 5.


PREFACE.


that Solomon had asked this Thing. And
God faid unto him, becaufe thou haft
asked this Thing;


ment; behold I have done according ‘to. —
thy Words: Lo, I have giventhee a Wife
and an Uuderftanding Heart; fo that there .
was none like thee before thee; neither
after thee fhall any arife like unto thee.
And all I/rael heard of the Judg-
ment which the King had judged; and
they feared the King; for they faw that
the Wifdom of God wasin him, to do
Judgment,

I faid, Days fhould fpeak ; and Mul-
titude of Years fhould teach Wifdom: But
there is a Spirit in Man, and the Infp1-
ration of the Almighty giveth them Un-
derftanding.

Behold in this thou art not juft; I will
anfwer thee, that God is greater than
Man. Why doft thou ftrive againft him?
For he giveth not Account of any of his
Matters, |

Surely it is meet to be faid unto God,
Ihave born Chaftifement; I will not of-
fend any more: That which I fee not,
teachthou me; if I have done Iniquity, I
will do no more. |

God thundreth marvelloufly with his
Voice: Great Things doth he which we
cannot comprehend, With


Haft asked foe.”
thy felf Underftanding to difcern Judg-


PREFACE. ix


With God is terrible Majefty : Touch- v. 22,23»
ing the Almighty we cannot find him out: ** i
_-Heis excellent in Power, and in Judg-

ment, and in Plenty of Juftice: He will


~ not afhict. Men do therefore fear him :


“He refpecteth not any that are wife of
) Aearty<

Who hath put Wifdom in the inward eae
Parts? Or who hath given Underftanding 3°
unto the Heart?

Then Job anfwered the Lord and faid; »liii. Tits
I know that thou canft do every Thing, >
and that no Thought can be with-holden
fromthee. Whoisis hethat hideth Coun-
fe] without Knowledge > Therefore have
{ uttered that I underftood not; Things
too wonderful for me, which I knew not.
~—— | have heard of ‘thee by the Hearing y. 6, 6,
of the Ear, but nowmine Kye feeth thee :
Wherefore Iabhor my felf, and repent in
Duft and Athes.

The Meek will he guide in Judgment; Ea XXV.
The Meek will he teach his Way.

‘The Secret of the Lord is with them fon

fear him; and he will fhew them his ©
Covenant.

Thou through thy Commandments haft cxix. 985
made me wifer tha mine Enemies; for 99) 1°°
they are ever with me. I have ‘more
Underftanding than all my Teachers, for
ey Teftimonies are my Meditation. J

under-


a PRE RAGE


- underftand more than the Ariel be-

% t04 caufe [keep thy Precepts. Through
thy Precepts I get Underftanding ; there-

. _ fore] hate every falfe way.

fom © Lord, my Heart is not haughty, nor

mine Eyes lofty, neither do I exercife

my felf in great Matters, or in Things too.

high for me.

The Lord giveth Wifdom: Out of his
Mouth cometh Knowledge and Under-
7 {tanding.

iii. 5, 6. ‘Truft in the Lord with all thine Heart;
and lean not to thine own Underftanding:
In all thy ways acknowledge him, 2nd he
fhalldired thy Paths.
The Froward is Abomination to the


Prov.il.6.


Ve 32.

* Lord: But his Secret is with the Righ-
teous.

Recleti God giveth to a Man that is good in


his Sight, Wifdom, and Knowledge, and


Side yx, Jy God hath made every Thing Beatitiful
in his Time: Alfo he hath fet the World
in their Heart; fo that no Man can find
out the Work that God maketh, from the
Beginning to the End.

a Then I beheld all the Work of God,
iG that a Man cannot find out the Work that
1s done under the Sun; becaufe thougha

Man labour to feek it out, yet he fhall

not find it: Yea further, though a ‘

an


PREFACE: i


Man think to know it, yet fhall be not be
able to find it. |

As for thefe Four Children, God gave Dan. i.17,
them Knowledge and Skill in all Learning de
and Wifdom.

None of the Wicked fhall stiedetlahd, xii. 10.
butthe Wife fhall underftand.

Who is wife, and he thall vitderBad Hof. xiv.
thefe Things; prudent, and he fhall know 9
them? For the ways of the Lord are
right, and the Juft fhall walk in them;
but the Tranfgreffors fhall fall there- ma
in.

And the Angel that was fent unto me,-2 E44. iv.
whofe Name was Uriel, gave me an An- 1} *
fwer, and faid, Thy Heart hath gone too
far in this World: And. thinkeft thou
to comprehend the Way of the moft
High ?

Hefaid moreover unto me; Thine own ¢. to, 15
Things, and fuch as are srown up with
thee, canft thou not know; how fhould
thy Velfel then be able to comprehend the
way of the Highett >

They that dwell vpon the Barth may y, 2:
underftand nothing: but that which is
upon the Earth: And he that dwelleth
above the Heavens, may only underftand
the Things that are above the height aq
= Heavens, Oe.


” 3


Into


xj


Wifd. 1,
Al Ge


Ix. 4y 556+


PROE FF ACE:


Into a malicious Soul Wifdom fhall not
enter, nor dwell in the Body that 1s fub-
ject unto Sin, Ge.

Their. own Wickednefs hath blinded
them. i

As for the Myfteries of God, they know ~
them not. ~

Wherefore I prayed, and Underftand-
ing was given me: I called upon God,
and the Spirit of Wifdom came to
me.

It 1s God that leadeth unto Wifdom,
and directeth the Wife. For in his Hand
are both we and our Words; all Wifdom
alfo, and Knowledge of Workmanfhip.

When I perceived that I could not
otherwife obtain Wifdom, except God
gave her me; (and that wasa point of


‘Wifdom alfo, to know whofe Gift fhe


was, ) I prayed unto the Lord, and be-
fought him, and with my whole Heart]
faid : | |

Give me Wifdom that fitteth by thy
Throne, and reject me not from among


thy Children. For I thy Servant, and


perfe&t among the Children of Men,


Son of thine Handmaid, ama feeble Per- —
fon, and of a fhort Time, and too young
for the Underftanding of Judgment and
Laws. Forthough a Man be never fo


yet


PREFACE xiij


yetif thy Wifdom be not with him, he
{hall be nothing regarded,

Hardly do we guefs aright at Things v. 16.

that are upon Earth; and with Labour

do we find the Things that are before us :
But the Things that are in Heaven who
hath fearched out ?

All Wifdom cometh from the Lord, ectug ;,
and is with him for ever. She is }
with all Flefh according to his Gift; and “7
he hath given her to them that love
hini. |

If thou defire Wifdom, keep the Com- y, 26, 27,
mandments, and the Lord fhall give her
unto thee. For the Fear of the Lord is
Wifdom and Inftru@ion ; and Faith and
Meeknefs are his Delight.

Myfteries are revealed unto the Meek ii} 19,21
Seek not out the Thingsthat are too *”
hard for thee ; neither fearch the Things
that are above thy Strength. But what is
commanded thee think thereupon with
Reverence: For it is not needful for thee
to fee the Things that are 1n Secret.

Let thy Mind be upon the Ordinances yj. 54,
of the Lord, and meditate continually in
his Commandments. He fhall eftablith
thine Heart, and give thee Wifdom at
thine own Defire. —

Wifdom, Knowledge, and Underftand- yi.15, 16.
ing of the Law, are of the Lord. Love,

and


X1V


PRERA GRE


and the way of good Works, are from him.
Error and Darknefs had their Beginning


©) « together -with Sinners.


XV.7, 8.


¥xi. If.


KXXIX. 24°
xliii. 33.


John Vile
17.


Rom, xi.
33°.


Jam. 1. 5.


Ys B7e


Foolifh Men fhall not attain unto
Wifdom ; and Sinners fhall not fee her.
For theis far from Pride; and Men that are
Lyars cannot remember her.

He that keepeth the Law of the Lord
getteth the Underftanding thereof; and
the Perfedion of the Fear of the Lord ; 1s
Wifdom .

As his Ways are plain unto the Holy,
fo are they Stumbling-blocks unto the
Wicked. —

The Lord hath made all Things, and
to the Godly hath he given Wifdom. —

If any Man will do his Will, he hall
know of the Dodtrine whether it be
of God, or whether I fpeak of my
felf.

O the Depth of the Riches both of the
Wifdom and Knowledge of God! How
unfearchable are his Judgments, and his
Ways paft finding out!

If any of you lack Wifdom, Iet him
ask of God, that giveth to all Men libe-
rally, and ‘upbraideth not, and it fhalk
be given him. Every good Gift,
and every perfect Gift, is from Above,


and cometh down “from the Father bf


pushes
If


’ Ba ra ES oe cl OO EY NER Ke - ! | ;


PREFACE.


na ye ee ee


XV


Sr,


- Tf I once know that he is a Man of Recog. ii


Probity, and unblamable in thofe Points *


of Duty wherein there can be no doubt
but they are good , that is, if hebe fober,
if he be merciful, 1f he be juft, if he be
meek and human; which no one can
doubt to be virtuous and good Things;
then it will, in all Probability, be reafon-
able to expe that to him that hath
thefe excellent Virtues, that which is
wanting to his Faith and Knowledge will
be conferr’d; and that wherein his Life,
which is fo commendable in the reft,
fhall ftill appear blamable, it may be
amended. But 1f he be involved and
polluted in Sins, thofe I mean which are
notorioufly fuch; I muft not then declare


plainly to him the leaft Part of the con-
ceal’d recondite Branches of Divine Know-
ledge: But rather, with great Boldnefs,
deal with him that he muft leave off his


Sins, and amend his vicious Actions.
Whence ’tis very plain, that fome do
oppofe the Truth of the Religion of God,
not becaufe the Foundation of Faith does
not feem to them certain; but becaufe
they are either involv’d in a Superabun-
dance of Sins, or prepoffefs’d by their
wicked Habits, or puft’d up by the Pride
of their Heart; fo that they do not be-


lieve’


Pr
s


16.


XV)


Pej Est sAvCaks


lieve even thofe Things which they think
they fee with their own Eyes.

But now, becaufe an innate Affection
towards God our Creator, might feem
fufficient for the Salvation of thofe that
lov’d him, the Enemy ftudies to pervert
the Affection of Men, and to render
them Enemies and Ungrateful to their
Creator, Cc.

We not only do enjoy God’s Benefits,
but by his Aid and Power it was that we
came into Being, when we were not:
whom alfo, 1f we pleafe, we fhall obtain
from him, as our Reward, to be for ever
in Happinefs. To the End_ therefore
that Unbelievers may be diftinguifh’d
from Believers, and the Pious from the
Impious; the Evil one has Permiffion
to make Ute of thefe Arts, whereby every
one’s Affections LOE ar ‘their proper Pa-
rent may be tried,

Here therefore, et is, while we con-
tinue in this prefent Life, where is the
Place of Adion, you ought to acknow-
ledge the Will of God. For if any one
has a mind to enquire after Things that
cannot be found out, before heamends his
Life, fuch Enquiry i is foolifh, and will
betonoPurpofe. For Times ‘fhort ; and.
the Judgment of God will be appointed on
Account of Mens Actions, and not their

— Queftions,


PF .E. YAO CUE, XV}

Queftions. And therefore let us firft of
all make Enquiry what we are to Do, and
after what manner it isto be done; that .
we may be thought worthy of Eternal .
Life. For if we fpend this fhort Time * *%
of Life inidle and unprofitable Queftions,
we fhall certainly go to God empty, and
deftitute of good Works; at that Time I
mean, when the Judgment fhall be ap-
pointed for our Works; for every Thing
has its proper Time and Place. This is
the Placc, this is the Time for Works: The
World to come for Retribution. Left
therefore we fhould change the Order of
Time and Place, and thereby be our own
Hindrance ; let our firft Enquiry be what
is God’s Righteoufnefs , that like thofe that
are going a Journey, we may have a plen-
tiful Provifion for our Journey, that is,
good Works; that fo we may be able to
arrive at the Kingdom of God, as at a
very great City. For to thofe who are
well difpos’d, God is manifefted by thofe
Works of Nature whichhe has made, and
is attefted toby hisown Creatures. Since
therefore there ought to be no doubt
concerning the Exiftence of God, we are
only to enquire about his Righteonfnefs,
and hisKingdom. Butif our Minds have
an Inclination to put us on the Enquiry
about fecretand hidden Things, before we
ae a enquire


XVilj


PREFACE.


enquire after the Works of Righteoufnefs,
we ought to give an Account to our felves
of this Procedure: For if we live well,
and are thought worthy to obtain Salvation,
we fhall go to God Chaft and Pure, and
be filled with the Holy Ghoft; and fhall
know all fuch fecret and hidden Things,
without any Cavilling or Queftion ; which
at prefent, though any one fhould fpend
the entire Timeof his Life inthe Enquiry,


he will be fo far from finding them out,


fil. 19.


that he will bring himfelf into greater Er-
rors; becaufe he aims to arrive at the


Haven of Life,without walkingin the way


of Life.

Do but confider that Silence and Quiet-
nefs with whichall the People ftand; and
how, as you fee, they are very Patient,
and pay a great Honour to the Truths of
God, even before they are inftruéed in
them. For as to any greater Honour they
have not yetlearned that “tis their Duty
topayit. For whichReafonI have Hope,
in the Mercy of God, that he will re-
ceive kindly this Religious Difpofition of
their Minds towards him ; will afford the
Reward of Victory to him that preaches
the Truth; and will make ae to
them which of us isthe Preachey of the


Truth.


| There-


nah AC GE ae


Therefore is it neceflary for Men to $. 37
enquire whether they have it in their
Power, by feeking to find what is good,
and when they have found it, to do it.
For this is that for which he mutt be
jude’d. As for what is beyond this, no
one but a Prophet needs to knowit: And
with good Reafon. For to what Purpofe
is it for Men to know after what Manner
the World was made? Which yet would
be neceflary for us to know, if we were
to undertake fo artfula Piece of Work our
felves. But now it 1s fufficient for us, and
for our Worfhipping God, to know that
He made the World: But after what Man-
ner he made it, we are not to enquire;
becaufe, as I faid, *tis not our Bufinefs to
learn the Knowledge of that Art, asif we
were to make fomewhat like it. Nor are
wetobe called to Account for this, Why
we did not learnafter what Manner the
Worldwasmade>? But only for this, That
we are ignorant of its Creator. But we
fhall know that God, the Creator of the
World, is both Juft and Good, if we feek
after him in the Pathsof Righteoufnefs,
God, who 1s the One and True God,
refolv’d to prepare good and faithful
Friends for his firft-begotten Off{pring :
But knowing they could not be Good,
unlefs they had in their own Power that
| a4 Senfe


§: §2+


xX


Vili. 61;
62.


PREFACE.


Senfe of the Things whereby they might
become good; that they might be what
they defired to be by their own Choice ;
and that otherwife they could not be really
Good, if they were not fuch by Choice,
but were forced to be fuch by a Neceflity
of Nature; he gave every one the free
Power of his own Will; that he might be
able to be fuch an one as he defired to be,

ef |

See alfoix. §. 4,5, 6,8.
As God has plac’d the Compafs of Hea-
ven above the Mountains and the Earth,
fo has he covered the Truth with the Veil
of hisCharity ; that he only might attain
toit, who would firft knock at the Gate
of the DivineLove. _ )
See iv. §. 4, 5. vil. §. 52, 52, 56,
58, 59°

Men are not able to arrive at any cer-
tain Conclufion of Scienceand Knowledge
by fuch Difputations , and they find their
Lives to be at an End before their Que-
{tions are fo. When therefore all Things
appear to be uncertain as to thefe Points,
we muft have our Recourfe to the True
Prophet, whom God the Father would
have beloved by all: And inorder thereto
he would entirely put an End to thefe
Inventionsof Men, wherein there was no
certain Knowledge to be found, that oo
Shee e


PREFACE.


He might be the more enquired for, and
might open that way of Truth to Men,
which thofe others had fhut for them.
For his Sake God didalfo make the World ;
and by him the Worldis fettled: Whence
it is that he is every-where prefent to
thofe that feek him after a Pure, and Holy
and Faithful Manner.

See this Matter further Profecutedin

my Chronology, p, 3--7.


Now from all this Evidence, and much
more that might be alledg’d, it is apparent
that the Jewith and Chriftian Religions al-
mays fuppofe that there muft be a due Temper
of Mind in the Enquirers, orelfe the Argu-
ments for thofe Religions will not have their
due Effe. ThattheCourfe of Goa’s Provi-
dence defigns hereby to diftingui(h between the
well-difpos'd, the Meek, the Humble, and
the Pious ,; which are thofewhomthe common
Light of Nature declares may expe the.
Divine Bleffing on their Studies of this
fort, and the Ill-difposd, the Obfti-
nate, the Proud and the Impious, which
are thofe whom the fame common Light of
Nature affures us may expe the Divine Ma-
ledittion on the fame’: And that *tis not for
want of convincing and fatisfattory Evidence
in the Bufinefs of Revelation, be becaufe
many Men come with Perverfe, Sceptical,

| a 3 and


XXI}


PR EOF ACC’ E: 3
and wicked Difpofitions, that they fail of
Satisfaction therein. Accordingly, I think
it is true in common Obfervation, That the
Virtuous and the Religions, I mean thofe
that are fuch according to Natural Confcience
dorarely, if ever, fail on their Enquiries to
Embrace and Acquiefce in both the Jewith
and Chriftian Revelations, and that the
Debauch’d and Prophane do as feldom fail on
their Enquiries to Reje& and Ridicule them.
Which. different Succefs of the fame Exami-
nation, agrees exally with the whole Tenor
of the Scriptures ; and is the very fame
which muft be true, in cefe thofe Scriptures
Letrue alfo, andis, byConfequence, aconfi-
derable Confirmation of their real Verity and
Infpiration. And certainly, he that confiders
bis own Weaknefs and Dependance on God,
and that alTruth and Evidence muf? come
originally from bim, will by Natural Fudg-
ment and Equity pronounce, that he wha
expels the Divine Bleffing and umination,
in Points of fuch vaftConfequence, as thofe


_ of Revelation moft certainly are, ought above


all things to purify his Will, and rectify his
Conduti in fueh Points as allthe World knows
to be the Will of God, andto Addrefs him-
felfto the Divine Majefty with due Fervency
and Sevioufnefs, for bis Aid and Affiftance,
before he canjuftly promife himfelf Succefs
in fo great and momentous an Undertaking.


But


Peer ACE  o xxm


But then as to-the Second Enquiry, or
the Degree of Evidence that ought to be
expetied in Religious Matters, it feems to
me very neceffary to fay fomewhat upon this
Subject alfo, before we come to our main De-
fign. For as ontheone Sideit is a great
Evvor in all Cafes to expe fuch Evidence
as the Nature of the Subjett renders impof-
foble, fo is it as weak on the other Side, to
lay the Strefs of important Truths on fuch
Evidence, as is in its own Nature Unfatil-
fatory and Precarious, or to affert with
reat Affurance what cannoway be Proved,
even by that-fort of Evidence which is proper
for the Subje& in Debate. An Inflance of

the firft Sort we have in Autolycus, an Hea- m1 eonh

then, im bis Debates with Theophilus of ad Bats.

Antioch; who appears weakly tobaveinfified lye L. 1.

upon Seeing the God of the Chriftians, e’er Nya ae
he would believe his Exiftence: While one of
the known Attributes of thatGod is, that he
isInvifible. And almoft equally prepofterous
would any Philofophick Sceptick now be, who
foould require the Sight of the Air in which
we Breath, before be would believe thatthere
was fuch an Element at all, Whereas it is
clear, that the Air may be demonftrated to
be fufficiently fenfble and real, by aThoufand
Experiments, while yet none of thofe Expe-
riments can render it Vifible to us: Fuft as
the Exaftence of a Supreme Being may. be

a4


deman-


XXIV


demonflrated by innumerable Arguments, al-
though none of thofe Arguments imply even
the Poffibility of his being properly Seen by
any of bis Creatures. But then, that we
may keep a Mean bere, and may neither on
one Side, expect in our Religious Enquiries,
overbearing, or flriéily Mathematick Evi-
dence, fuch as is impoffible to be deny’d or
doubted of by any, which would render the
conftant Defign of Providence, already flated
entirely inefeciual, and force both Good and —
Bad to be Believers, without all Regard to
their Qualifications and Temper of Mind :
Nor on the other Side, may depend on fuch
weak and precarious Arguments, as are not
really fufficient nor fatisfattory toeven Fair,
Honeft, and Impartial Men, Lintend here
to Confider, what that Degree of Evidenceis,
aebich ought to be here infifted on; without
which we are not, and with which we are
obliged to acquiefce in Divine Matters. Now
this Degree of Evidence I take to be that,
and no other, which upright Fudges are de-
termin’d by in all the important Affairs of
Eftate and Life that come before them: And
according to which, they ever aim to give
Sentence in thetr Courts of Fudicature. I
chufe to Inftance in this Fudictal Evidence,
andthefe Fudicial Determinations efpecially,
becaufethe Perfons concern’d in fuch Matters
are, by long Ufe, and the Nature of thei

4 : | Employ


Pon By PHA Cok:


XXV


Employment, generally fpeaking, the beft and
moft fagacious Difcoverers of Truth, and
thofe that judge the moft unbiafs'dly and
fairly, concerning fufficient or infufficcent Evi-
dence of all others. Such upright Fudges
then, never expec firittly Undeniable, or
Mathematick Evidence; whichthey know is,
in Human Affairs, abfolutely impoffible to be
had: They dowt require that the Witneffes
they Examine, fhould be Infaliible, or Im-
peccable, which they are fenfible would be
alikeWild and Ridiculous: Yet do they ex-
ped full, fufficient, or convincing Evidence;
and fuch a is plainly Superior to what is al-
ledged on the other Side: And they require
that the Witneffes they believe, be, fo far as
they are able to difcover, of a good Cha-
rather, Upright and Faithful. Nor do they
think it too much Trouble to ufe their utmoft
Skill and Sagacity in difcovering where the
Truth lies; how fartheWitneffes agree with
or contradict each other, and whichwaythe
feveralCircumftances may be beft compar’ d, fo
as to find out any Forgery, or dete& any Kna-
very which may be fufpected in any Branches
of the Evidence before them. They do not
themfelves pretend tojudge of the Reality or
Obligation of any Ancient Laws, or A&s of
Parliament, from their own meer Gueffes or
Inclinations, but from the Authenticknefs of
the Records which containthem, and though


they


XXV yj


PURVE FAC &.
they are not able always to fee the Reafon, or
Occafion, or Wifdom of fuch Laws, or As of
Parliament ; yet dothey, upon full External
Evidence that they are Genuine, allow and
execute the fame: As confidering themfelves
tobenot Legiflators, but Fudges: And own-
ing that Ancient Laws, and Ancient Fads,
are to be known not by Gueffes or Suppofals,
but by the Production of Ancient Records,
and Original Evidence for their Reality.
Nor in fuch their Procedure do they think
themfelves guilty in their Sentences, if at
any Time afterwards they difcover that they
bave been impos’d upon by falfeWitneffes, or
forged Records, fuppofing, Imean, that they.
are conf{cious that they did their utmo ft to. dif-
cover the Truth, and went exattly by the
beft Evidence that lay before them, as know=
ing they have done their Duty, and muft in
fuch aCafe be Blamelefs before God and Man,
notwithftanding the Miftake in the Sentences.
themfelves.Now this is that Procedure which E
would earnefily recommendtothofe that have
a Mind toenquire to good Purpofe into Re-
veal’d Religion. That after they havetaken
Care to purge themfelves from allthofe Vices,
which will make it their great Intereft that
Religion fhould be falfe, after they have re-
folv’d upon Honefty, Impartiality, and Mo-
defly, which are Virtues by the Law of Na-
ture, after they have devoutly implor’dthe
2 Divine


PREFACE. XXVij -


Divine Affiftance and Bleffing on this their
important Undertaking, which is a Duty
likewife they are obliged to by the fame Law
of Nature, that after all this Preparation,
I fay, they will fet about the Enquiryit felf,
in the very fame Manner that has been al-
ready dcfcril’d, and that all our upright
Fudges proceed by inthe Difcoveryof Fruth.
Let them [pare for no Pains, but confult all
the Originals, whenever they can come at
them: And let them ufe all that Diligence,
Sagacity and Fudgment, which they are Ma-
fters of, inorder to fee what real External.
Evidence there is for theTruth of the Fa&s
on which the Jewith and Chriftian Religions
do depend. I here fpeak of the Truth of
Facts, as the furef? way to determine us in
this Enquiry, becaufe allthe World, I think,
owns thatif thofe Faéts be true, thefe Infti-
tutions of Religion muft alfo.be true, or be
deriv’d from God; and that no particular
Difficulties, as to the Reafons of feveral
Laws, or the Condué of Providence in feve-
val Cafes, which thofe Inftitutions no where
pretend to give us a full Account of, can be
fufficient to fet afide the convincing Evidence
which the Truth of fuch Facts brings along
with it. For Example: Thofe who are well
Satisfy d of the Truth of the Mofaick Hiftory
of the Ten miraculous Plagues with which


the God of VWrael fmote the Egyptians ; of
| the


PREFACE
the drowning of the Egyptians in the Red-


Sea; while the M{raelites were miraculoufly
conducted through the fame ,and of the ama-
xing manner wherein theDecalogue was given
by God to that People at Mount Sinai, will
for certain, believe that the Jewith Religion
was inthe main derived fromGod, though he
fhould find feveral occaftonal Paffages inthe
Jewith Sacred Books, which be could not
Account for, and feveral ritual Laws given
that Nation, whith he could not guefs at the
Reafonswhythey were given them. Andthe
Cafe is the very fame as to the Miraculous
Refurrettion, andGlorious Afcenfion of our
Bleffed Saviour, Jelus Chrift, with Regard
to the New Teftament. . Onwhich Account
I reckonthat the Truth of fuch Facts isto be
principally enquired into, when we have a
mind to fatisfy our felves in the Verity of
the Jewith and Chriftian Religions. And
if it be alledg’d that fome of thefe Faéts are
too remote to afford us any certain Means of
Difcovery at this Diftance of Time , I An-
fwer, That then we are to feleét [uch of thofe
Faé&s as we can examine, and to fearchinto
_ the Acknowledgment or Denial of thofe that
ave Ancienter, inthe oldeft Teflimonies now
Extant , into the Effeéts and Confequences,
and ftanding Memorials of fuch Fa&s in After
Ages, and how far they were real, and al-
low'd to be fo, and in fhort, we are ta
, , deter=


XXVIJ


PREFACE. XKIX


determine concerning them, by the bef? Evi-
dence we can now have, andnot let a bare
Sufpicion, or a Wilh that Things had been
otherwife, overbalance our real Evidence of
Fads in any Cafe whatfoever. I donot
mean that our Enquirer is to have no Regard
to Internal Characters, or the Contents of
the Jewith and Chriftian Revelations; or
that he is not to examine into that alfo in
the General, before be admits even the
Proof from Miracles themfelves, becaufe
what pretended Miracles foever are wrought
for the Support of Idolatry, or Wickednefs,
for the Eftablifhment of Notions contrary to
the Divine Artributes, or of anImmortal, or
Prophane, or Cruel Religion, though they
may prove fuch a Religiouto be Supernatural,
yet will they only prove that it comes from
wicked Demons, or Evil Spirits, and not
from aGod of Purity and Holinefs, and fo
will by no means prove it Divine, or worthy —
of our Reception. But then it is, for the
main, fo well known, that the Jewith and
Chriftian Inftztutions do agree to the Divine.
Attributes, and do tend to Purity, Holinefs.,
Fuftice, and Charity , and are oppofite to all
Immorality, Prophanenefs, and Idolatry, that
I think there will not need much Examination
in fo clear a Cafe, and that, by Confe-
quence, our main Enquiry is to be as to the
Truth of the Fatis theretorelating, And in


this


mre E>


XXK


v REE AGE.


this Cafe, I fear not to Invite all our Scep-
ticks and Unbelievers, to ufe their greateft
Nicety, their entire Skill, their fbrewdeft
Abilities, and their utmoft Sagacity in this
Enquiry, being well affur’'d from my own Ob-
fervations in this Matter, That the proper
Refult of fuch an exat Hiftortcal Enquiry
will be as plainly and evidently onthe Side
of Reveal’d, as I bave demonftrated in this
Treatife, that Philofophy and Mathematicks
are on the Side of both Naturaland Reveal’d
Religion, And now having Premisd this,
I come to my main Defign; to fhew what is
properly the Religion of @ genuine and con-
fidering Aftronomer , or what are properly


tbe Aftronomical Principles of Natural and


Reveal’d Religion. !


=
=
:
ma
=
Zz


ft (3 Hefe are thy glorious works, Parent of good,
Almighty, thinethis univerfal Frame,

Thus wondrous fair; thy felf how wondrous then!

Unfpeakable, who fitt’it above thefe Heavens

To us invifible, or dimly feen

In thefe thy loweft Works; yet thefe declare

Thy Goodnefs beyond ‘Thought, and Power Divine;

Speak ye who beft can tell, ye Sons of Light,

Angels, for ye behold him, and with Songs

And choral Symphonies, Day without Night,

Circle his Throne rejOycing ye in Heav’n,

On Earth join all ye Creatures to extoll

~ Him firft, Him laft, Him midft, and without End.

Faireft of Stars, laft in the train of Night,

If better thou belong not tothe Dawn,

Sure Pledge of Day, that crown’ft the {miling Morn

With thy bright Circlet, praife him in thy Sphere

While Day arifes, that {weet Hour of Prime.

Thou Sun, of this great World both Eye and Soul, ©

Acknowledge him thy Greater, found his Praife

In thy eternal Courfe, both when thou climb’ft,

And when high Noon haft gain’d,and when thou fall’.

Moon, that now meet’{t the orient Sun, now fly’ft,

With the &xt Stars, fixt in their Orb that flies, —


And


xxxl) Mr. Milton’s Hymn, &c.


And ye Five other wandring Fires that move

In myftic Dance, not without Song, refound

His Praife, who out of Darknefs call’d up Light.
Air, and ye Elements, the eldeft Birth fo
Of Nature’s Womb, that in quaternicn run
Perpetual Circle, multiform: and mix =~

And nourith all Things, let your ceafelefs Change
Vary to our great Maker {till new Praife.

Ye Mifts and Exhalations that now rife

From Hill or fteaming Lake, dusky or grey,

Till the Sun paint your fleecy Skirts with Gold,
In Honour to the World’s great Author rife :
Whether to deck with Clouds the uncolour’d Sky,
Or wet the thirfty Earth with falling Showers,
Rifing or falling ftill advance his Praife. |
His Praife ye Winds that from four Quarters blow,
Breath foft or loud; and wave your tops, ye Pines,
With every Plant, in fign of Worfhip wave.
Fountains, and ye, that warble, as ye flow,
Melodious murmurs, warbling tune his Praife.
Joyn Voices all ye living Souls, ye Birds,

That finging up to Heaven’s high Gate afcend,
Bear on your Wings and in your Notes his Praife ;
Ye that in Waters glide, and ye that walk

The Earth, and ftately tread, or lowly creep;
Witnefs if I be filent, Morn or Even,

To Hill, or Valley, Fountain or freth Shade

Made Vocal by my Song, and taught his Praife,
Hail univerfal Lord! be bounteous ftill

To give us only good; and if the Night

Have gathered ought of evil or conceal’d,

Difperfe it, as now Light difpels the Dark.


Paradife Loft, Lib. V.


Aftrono-


Aftronomical PRINCIPLES
OF |


RELIGION,


Naturat and ReEvVEAL?p,


LEMMAT A:
Or, The known Laws of Mattet and Mo:
_ tion, preparatory to the enfuing Treatifes


(Taken out of the AUT HO R’s Mathematical Philofe
phy, where they dre all demonftrated. )


Kf] VERY Body perfevetes in its
a fy, OWN prefent State, whether it be
that.of Reft, or uniform direé
Motion ; unlefs it be compelled
by fome Force imprefs’d, td
ehange that State, |

B (a) Ail


Aftronomical Principles
(2.) All Motion is of it felf, Reétilinear.
(3.) All revolving Bodies endeavour to re= —
cede from the Center of their Motion; and by |
how much the Motion is the fwifter, this En-
deavour is the greater.

- (4.) The Mutation of Motion is proportional
to the moving Force imprefs’d ; and is accord-
ing to the Direétion of that Line along which
that Force is imprefs’d.

C5.) Re-aétion is always contrary and equal
to Action. ‘That is, the Actions of two Bo-
dies acting upon each other, whether they be
Impulfes or Attractions, are always in oppofite
Directions, and are alfo equal. ;

(6.) If of two equal Bodies, void of Elafti-
city, one of them which is in Motion meets
the other at reft, upon the meeting they will
both proceed forwards together, to the fame
Part, with half the Velocity of the Body which
was moved.

(7.) If two equal Bodies, void of Elafticity,
do direétly meet each other with the fame Ve-_
wtih they upon the Collifion will both of them
-reft. |

(8.) If two unequal Bodies, deftitute of Ela-
{ticity, meet one another with fuch Velocities,
that by how much the greater exceeds the other
in Magnitude, by fo much it is exceeded by the
lefler in Swiftnefs, fo that the Velocities are re~
ciprocal to the Bodies ; they will beth reft after
that meeting.

(9.) If a moving Body {trike another at reft,
(but both void of Elafticity>) how unequal fo-
ever they be in Bulk and Quantity of Matter,
they will both move after the Shock with the
fame Velocity towards the fame Parts, as . 7
. 1Xth


of RELIGION.


fixth Law: And the common Velocity will be
fo much lefs than the firft, as both the Bodies
together are greater than the Body firft mo-
vedy

(1o.) If two unequal Bodies, void of Elafti-
city, which are moved with equal Velocity to
oppofite Parts, hit againft one another, the Quan-
tity of Motion in both, taken together after
the Collifion, will be the Difference only of the
former Motions.

C11.) If two equal Bodies, void of Elaftici-
ty, be movd with unequal Velocity towards
the fame Part, upon their Collifion there wilt
remain the fame Quantity or Sum of their Mo-
tions; but the common Velocity will be only
the Half of both the former Velocities put to-
gether. |

(12.) If of two unequal Bodies, void of Ela-
fticity, the greater overtakes the leffer, the
common Velocity, after the Shock, will be
greater than half the Sum of the former Velo-
cities. And on the contrary, it will be lefs
when the leffer Body overtakes the greater.

(13.) If a Body perfectly Elaftic dafheth up-
on another Body of the fame fort which is qui-
efcent and equal; after the Collifion the Motion
will be wholly transferr’d into that which was
quiefcent before, and with the fame Celerity ;
“but the Body which was mov’d before, will
‘now reft. |

(14.) If two Bodies perfectly Elaftic, which,
are equal, but mov’d with an unequal Celerity,
dafh one upon another, they, whether they were
before carried to the fame Part, or to the con-
trary, will, after the Contact, be mov’d each with
that Celerity which the other had before.


Bz ee eee es Sy Aany


A Aronomical "g rinciples


(15:) Any Body, how great foever, will be
moyed by any Body, how {mall foever, coming
with any Velocity whatfoever.

(16.) When two Bodies, perfectly Elaftical,
are dafh’d one upon the other, they depart
from one another with the fame Celerity where-


with they approach’d one to the other; that is,


not with the fame ab/olute, but relative Celerity.

(17.) If two.Bodies perfectly Elaftical, do
each return to the Impulfe with the fame Cele-
rity wherewith they rebounded from it; they
will each of them, after the fecond Impulfe,
acquire the fame Celerity as they had before
the firft Meeting.

(18.) Iftwo Bodies meet one another, whe-


ther they be Elaftic or not Elaftic, there doth
not always remain the fame Quantity of Moti-


on as was before, but it may be greater or lefs.

C19.) If a Body perfectly Elaftical, which is
greater, hits upon a lefler one which is quief-
cent, it will givea Velocity to it lefs than the
double of its own.

(20.) If two Bodies perfeétly Elaftic, the Ce-
lerities whereof are in reciprocal Proportion to
their Magnitudes, meet one another directly
and oppofitely, they will both rebound with the


fame Celerity with which they came to each


other.
(21.) The Celerity which a great Body per=


fectly Elaftic, gives to a leffer perfectly quief= —


» cent, which is alfo perfeétly Elaftic, hath that
Proportion to that Velocity, which the leffer
moved with the like Celerity gives to the great-
er when quiefcent, which the Magnitude of the
greater hath to the Magnitude of the lefs.


(22.) Every |


of RELIGION.


(22.) Every Body will in the fame time de-
feribe the Diagonal of a, Parallelogram with
Forces conjunét, that it would do the Sides
with thofe Forces feparate. ,
 (23.) All compound Forces and Motion what-
ever may be reduc’d into innumerable other di-
rect Forces and Motions ; and on the contrary,
all direét Forces, and rectilinear Motions, may
be fuppos’d to be compounded of innumerable
oblique Motions and Forces. |
- ‘(24.). The Quantity of Motion which is col-
lected, by’ taking the Sum of the Motions to
the fame Part, and the Diffetence of thofe to
the contrary Parts, is not cHang’d by the Acti-
ons of Bodies one upon another.

(25.) ‘Fhe common Center of Gravity of a
Syitem of Bodies doth not change its State ci-
ther of Motion or Reft, from the Actions of
the Bodies amonegft themfelves, (whether they
be Attractions or Impulles ;) and therefore the
common Center of Gravity of all Bodies a¢ct-
ing upon one another (Actions and Impedi-
ments, whether external or otherwife arifing,
being excluded ) doth either reft, or is mov’d
uniformly ftraight forwards.

-(26.) The Motions of two Bodies included in
a given Space, and partaking of the Motion
thereof; are the fame amongft themfelves, whe-
ther that Space refteth, or the fame is mov’d
uniformly ftraight forward, without a Circular
Motion.

(27.) If Bodies be mov’d in any wife amongft
themfelves, and be preffed with equal accelera-
tive Forces according to parallel Lines, they will
all continue to be mov’d in the fame manner
amoneft themfelves, as if they were not preffed
with thofe Forces. - B 3 P & O-


Aftronomical Principles


PROPOSITIONS.


III. The Velocities of a Body accelerated by
any uniform urging Force whatever, are betwixt
themfelves, as the Times are wherein that uni-

form Force is,imprefs’d; that is, in double the
Time double, in triple the Time triple, and
in foy.r times the Time quadruple.

IV. The Lines which Bodies by any urging —
uniform Force do defcribe, are in the. duplicate
Proportion of the Times, z. e. if the ‘Times be
Seconds, One, Iwo, Three, Four,. Five, €%.
the whole Lines defcrib’d will be  amongft
themfelves, as One, Four, Nine, Sixteen,
Twenty-five, &c. which are the Squares of the
former.

VIL. In a Cycloid inverted, whofe Axis is
erected. perpendicular, the Times of the De-
{cent wherein a Body let down from any Point
whatever in it, comes to the loweft Point, are
always equal betwixt themfelves.

VIII. All Projectiles, not perpendicular to
the Horizon, defcribe Parabola’s, fo far as they
are not hindred by the Refiftance of the Air. -

EX. If two Bodies do in equal Times run over
two whole unequal Circumferences, with an
equable Motion, the centripetal Force in the
greater Circumference will be to that which is
in the lefs, as the Circumferences are one to
another directly; or,. which is the fame, as
their Diameters, or Radii.

X. If two Bodies revolve in the fame, or equal
Circles with unequal Celerities, but both with

an


of RELIGION.


an equable Motion, the centripetal Force of the
fwifter will be to that of the flower, in the
Proportion of the Celerities duplicated; or as
the Squares of the Arches defcribed together.

XI. If two Bodies revolve in unequal Circles:
with equal Velocity, their centripetal Forces will
be in the reciprocal Proportion of their Circum-
ference or Diameters ; fo that in the. leffer Cir-
cumference there will be the greater centripetal
Force, and in the greater the leffer.

XII. If two Bodies be mov’d in unequal
Circles, with an unequal Velocity, in the fub-
duplieate Proportion of the ‘Circumferences,
Diameters, or Radii, the centripetal Forces
will be equal every where, and neither increas’d
in the Accefs nor Recefs.

XIII, If two Bodies be mov’d in unequal
Circles, with an unequal Velocity, in the fub-
duplicate Proportion of the Circumferences, Dia-
meters, or Radii, reciprocally ; fo that in the
greater Circle the Velocity be the leffer, and in
the leffer Circle the greater, and this in the
faid fub-duplicate reciprocal Proportion, the
centripetal Force will be reciprocally as the
Squares of the Radii or Diftances.

XIV. If two Bodies revolve in unequal Cir-
cles with an unequal Celerity ; fo that by how
much greater the Radius, Diameter or Circum-
ference is, fo much the lefs the Velocity is;
and by how much the lefs the Radius is, fo much
the greater is the Velocity, and this in the reci-
procal Proportion of the Radii, the centripetal
Forces will be as the Cubes of the Radii reci-
procally.

XV. The Area’s, which revolving Bodies do
defcribe by Radii drawn unto the unmovable

B 4 Center


ar


Aftronomical F. rinciples


Center of Force a€ting upon them, do both lie


in immovable Planes, and are’ proportional to
the Times ; and fo in any given Time areeve-

ry where equal ; the Velocity of Motion in the
jJeffer Diftance, and the Slownefs thereof inthe
greater fo tempering the Defcription of the
Area’s, that from thofe various Diftances' no
Difference of the Spaces run over in the: 2 pase
Time doth ever arife. |

XVI. Every Body which is mov'd ina Curvé |
Line, and doth by a Radius drawn to fome
Point, either immovable, or going forwards
uniformly. with ‘a Reé¢tilineal Motion, defcribe
Area’s about ‘that Point proportional to: the ~
Times; is urged or impreis’d by a centripetal
Force tending to the fame Point.

XIX. Ifa Body be mov’din an Ellipfis about
the Center of the fame, the centripetal Force
will be directly as the Diftance of the toa frony
aids 8 Center.

. If a Body be poled ina Spital Line;
ics cuts allthe Radii insthe fime Angle, the
centripetal Force will) be reciprocally as the
Cube of the Diltance from the Center of the
donee

XXI. If a Body be mov’d in an Ellipfis or Pa-
rabola, or Hyperbola, about its Focus, the cen=
tripetal Force will be every where in the dupli-
cate Proportion of the Diftance from the fame,
Focus reciprocally.

XXII. The Velocity of a Body moving ina
Parabola about a Body placed in the Focus, the:
Force whereof is in the reciprocal duplicate Pro-


portion of the neecaane is every where to the


Velocity of a Body revolving in a Circle in the
fame time, in the fubduplicate Proportion of
the


of RELIGION,


the Number, Two to Unity; or as the Diago-
nal of a Square to its Side ; that is, as 10 to 4


nearly. :

XXVIL Two Bodies attracting one another,
defcribe like Figures both about the Common
Centerof Gravity, and about one another ; that
is, whilft they really defcribe like Figures about
the Common Center of Gravity, the Eye being
placed in either of the two, and not perceiving
its own Motion, or that of the Center of Gra-
vity, a Figure like to the fame will thereby feem
to it to be defcrib’d. :

XXXI. If a primary Planet revolving about


the Sun carry a Moon along with it, this will


be fo mov’d about the Primary, that it will per- .


petually be accelerated from the Quadrature with
the Sun, unto the Conjunction or Oppofition
next following ; but from the Conjunction to
the Quadrature, it will be retarded ; and confe-
quently will be carried more {wiftly about the
Conjunction and Oppotition, but more flowly
08h the Quadratures.

XXXVI. The abfolute Force of the Sun in
the difturbing the Secondary Planets, and the
Effeéts thereof, in divers Diftances from the
Sun, is in the triplicate Proportion of thofe
Diftances inverfly.

XLI. If a Fluid be contain’d in a Channel
form’d in the Surface of any Planet, Primary or
Secondary, and be uniformly revolv’d together
with the Planet with a diurnal periodic Motion ;
each Part of this Fluid will be accelerated and
retarded by turns; in its Conjunétion and Op-
pofition, or at Noon-day and Midnight, it will
be {wifter ; in the Quadratures, or at the 6th
‘Hour Evening and Morning, it will be flower
tha


uk


10


Afironontical Principles


than the contiguous Surface of the Globe ; and


thus there will be a flux and reflux in the Chan-
nel, by turns perpetually. |
XLII. if a Solid Ring be put about a Globe
perfectly {pherical, at the Equator of the fame,
and {tick to it; there will indeed be no Motion
of Flux and Reflux,.but the vibrating Motion


of Inclination, and the Preceffion of the Nodes,


willremain. Let the Globe have the fame Axis
with the Ring, and compleat its Revolution
in the fame time; and with its Surface touch
the Ring inwardly, and cleave to it ; by its par-
ticipating of the Motion thereof, the whole
Frame will vibrate to and fro, and the Nodes
will go back.

XLIV. If towards each equal Points of a Sphee
rical Phyfical Surface of equal ’Thicknefs every
where, but which Thicknefs is fo {mall that it


is not to be regarded, there be a Tendency of


equal Centripetal Forces decreafing in the dus
plicate Proportion of the Diftances from the
fame Points; any Corpufcle placed any where
within this Surface, will not be attraéted unto
any Part by the faid Force ; but will either reft,
or continue that Motion which is begun with-
out any Difturbance, and in the fame manner as
if it were acted upon with no Force at all from
that Surface: And the cafe is the fame in any
Spherical concave Space within a folid Sphere,
about its Center. |
- XLVII. If unto each Point of fome given
Sphere,which is Homogeneous, or of equal Den-
fity every where, there be a'Tendency of equal
Centripetal Force decreafing in the duplicate
Proportion of the Diftances from the points; a
Corpufcle placed within the Sphere, is attracted

: with


EEO  ORE


with a Force proportional to its Diftance from
the Center thereof. ie

LIX. If the Denfity of a Fluid compos’d of
Particles which do flee from each other, be as
the Compreffion ; {fo that if the prefling Force
be two, or four, or eightfold, the Denfity thence .
arifing is fo likewife; the Centrifugal Force of |
the Particles is reciprocally proportional to the
Diftances from the Center: And, vice versa,
where the faid Force is reciprocally proportional
to the Diftances from their Centers, the Parti-
cles which flee from each other compofe an ela-
{tic Fluid, the Denfity whereof is proportional
to the Compreffion. {9

LX. The Quantity of Matter in all Bodies,

is exactly proportional to their Weight.
_ LXII. Bodies mov’d with an unequal Velo~
city in a very Subtle Fluid, are refifted by the
Fluid in the Duplicate Proportion of their Ve-
locity. :
LXIV. As the Refiftance of Fluids in divers
Velocities is in the duplicate Proportion of the
Velocity; fo in divers Denfities the Velocity be-
ing given, it is in the direct Proportion of the
Denfity it felf; but the Denfity and Velocity
being given, in the duplicate Proportion of the
Diameters; and confequently the Refiftance in
general is in a Proportion compounded of the
duplicate Proportion of the Velocity, and the
duplicate Proportion of Diameters, and the
fimple Proportion of the Denfity of the Medi-
um direétly. .

LXVII. If a folid Cylinder, infinitely long,
be revolv’d in an uniform and infinite Fluid
about its own Axis, the Pofition whereof is gi-
ven, and the Fluid be mov’d round by the Im-

ze: Ay? en 4 pulle


12


A | ftronomical Principles


pulfe of this Cylinder only ; and every Part of
the Fluid perfeveres uniformly in its Motion ;
the periodic Times of the Fluid will be as their
Diftances from the Axis of the Cylinder di-
rectly ; and the Velocities will be every where
equal.

LXVIII. If a folid Sphere, in an uniform
and infinite Fluid, be revolv’d uniformly about
its own Axis, the FPofition whereof is given ;
and by the Impulfe of this alone the Fluid be
turned round, and every part of the Fluid per-
feveres uniformly in its Motion; the periodic
Times of the Parts of the Fluid will be as the
Squares of the Diftances from the Center of the
Sphere.

LXIX. The Velocities of ail the Planets,
whether Primary or Secondary, about their
Central Bodies, by being in the reciprocal fub-
duplicate Proportion of the Diftances from their
Centers, do wholly overthrow the Cartefian Hy-
pothefis of Vortices.

LXX. The Six Primary Planets, each with
its own Satellites, where they have any, encom-
pafs the Sun with their Orbs, and revolve about
it.

LXXI. The periodic Times of the fix Prima-
ry Planets, are in the fefqui-alteral Proportion
of their mean Diftances from the Sun.

LXXII. The fix Primary Planets do always,
by Rays drawn to the Sun, defcribe equal
Areas in equal'Times, and in general Areas pro-
portional to the Times. .

LXXIII. The Moon, by Rays drawn to the
Center of the Earth, defcribes in equal Times


“Areas almoft equal ; and in general, Areas al-


moft proportional to the Times.


LXXIV.° The j


of RELIGION,


LXXIV. The Satellites of Fupiter do, by
Rays drawn to the Center of Jupiter, defcribe
Areas proportional to the ‘Times: And their
periodic Times are in the fefqui-alteral Propor-
tion of their Diftances from the Center of their
ag i
_ LXXYV. The Satellites of Saturn do, by
Rays drawn to the Center of Swturuy defcribe
Areas proportional to the Times: And their
periodic Times are in the fefqui-alteral Propor-
tion of their Diftances from the Center of their
Primary.

LXXVI. The Force whereby the Primary
Planets are perpetually drawn back from right
Lines, and retain’d in their Orbs, does refpe¢ct
the Sun; and is as the Squares of the Di-
ftances from the Center of the Sun recipro-
cally. | |

LXXVI. The Force wherewith the Satel-
lites of Jupiter and Saturn are perpetually
drawn back from right Lines, and retain’d in
their Orbs, refpect the Centers of Fupiter and
Saturn refpectively ; and is as the Squares
of the Diftances from thofe Centers recipro-
cally. |

LXXVIII. The Force wherewith the Moon
is perpetually drawn back from a Reétilinear
Motion, and retain’d in its Orb, refpects the
Center of the Earth; and is as the Squares of
the feveral Diftances from the fame Center re-

ciprocally.


PART


2 Nee i tee ia ah & ang be ‘


A ftronontical Principles


ERR LALA ALA ORCAS ORER
RAR ACR URTACACACRURCAURORCK


PON Ree


A particular Account of the Sy flea of
the Univerfe.


j


eye H E §un, that immenfe and amazing
Globe of Fire, the Fountain of all
“o T © the Light and Heat of the whole
EA @ 2 Planetary and Cometary World, is
icy in Diameter 763,000 Miles, in Sur+
face it contains 1,813.200,000.000 Square Miles,
and in Solidity 23.000,000.000,000.006 Cubical
Ones, in Magnitude 900.000, and in Quantity
of Matter 230.000 Times as great as the Earth,
tho’ only a Quarter fo Denfe; and all Bodies
weigh 24 Times as much on its Surface, as on
the Surface of the Earth. It is fituate near the
Center of Gravity of the whole Syftem, and
revolves in about 25 Days and a half round its
own Axis. It has frequently Spots, and fome~
times brighter Parts feen upon its Surface, of
vaft Dimenfions; as if they were great burning
Vulcanos, fometimes clouded with Smoke, and
fometimes clear. Its Heat, on its own Surface
iS


of RELIGION.


pe EES a


is about 45000 Times as Intenfe as that on the
Earth. All the Planets and Comets gravitate to
the Sam in a duplicate reciprocal Proportion of
their Diftances from it, and are thereby retain-
ed in their feveral Orbits. Their Periodical
Times are in a fefquiplicate or fefquialteral pro-
portion to their Diftance; that is, the Tripli-
cate or Cubes of the Diftances, are as the Du-
plicate or Squares of the periodical Times ; and
that to the greateft Exactnefs poflible; which
equally obtains in the fecondary Planets, with
regard to their primary Ones alfo; and is the
fundamental Law of the entire Syftem.
Mercury is the neareft to the Sun of all the
known Planets. Its utmoft Elongation from it,
to an Eye on the Earth is but 28 Degrees, fo
that it is but rarely feen by us. This Planet is
in Diameter 4,248 Miles, in Surface it contains
55,000.000 of {quare Miles; and in Solidity
3.9.000,000.000 of Cubical Ones, & is 32,000.000
Miles diftant from the Sun, and defcribes a ve-
ry Eccentrical Ellipfis about it in lefs than 3
Months, or in 88 Days. ‘The Eccentricity of its
Orbit is 28 of its mean Diftance from the Sun ;
and by its Pofition muft appear thro’ a 'Telefcope
with Phafes like thofe of the Moon. No fecon-
dary Planets have yet been obferved about it,
nor any Diurnal Rotation. It enjoys above 6
‘Times as much Light and Heat from the Sun, as
doth the Earth ; and it appears very rarely like a
Spot in the Disk of the Sun, in its Retrograde
Conjunctions, when it paffes between the Sun
“and Barth. =<
Venus is fomewhat higher in the Syftem, and
fo has its utmoft Elongation 45 Degrees. It is
a larger Planet than Mercury, and comes fome-
times


7


Aftronomical Principles


times much nearer, to us. It is our Morning
and Evening Star by turns, and is the Brighteft
of the Heavenly Bodies to us, next the Moon,
as cafting a vifible Shadow in the Dark, and
fometimes appearing in the very Day-time alfo.
It isin a Diameter 7.900 Miles; in Surface it
contains 200,000.000 of Square Miles; and in
Solidity it is 264.000,000.000 of Cubical Ones ;
and is diftant 59,000.000 from the Sun, and de-«
{cribes its Ellipfis about it in 7 Months and a
half, or 225 Days. [he Eccentricity of its Or-
bit is but z-3= of its mean iDiftance from the
Sun. It moft plainly thro’ the Tellefcope ap«
pears with Phafes, and Horned like the Moon.
No fecondary Planets have yet been difcovered
-about it, yet has it a Diurnal Revolution on its
own Axis in 23 Hours. It receives almoft dou«
ble the Light and Heat from the Sun which the
Earth does; and appears very rarely as a Spot

in the Sun alfo. | sie
The Earth is the next Planet to Venus, and
has the Moon for its fecondary Planet; the
common Center of whofe Gravity defcribes an
Ellipfis about the Sun in one Year, or 365 Days
and a Quarter, nearly ; the Eccentricity of its
Orbit is +33< of its mean Diftance from the Sun,
in Surface it contains 200,000.000 of Square
Miles, and in Solidity 266.000.000.000 of Cu-
bical Ones, and is in Diameter 7.970 Miles,
and is diftant from the Sun 81,000.000 Miles.
‘This Annual Motion is perform’d in the Eclip-
tick, and is directed, as is that of all the Pla-
nets, primary and fecondary, from Weft to
Eaft, or according to the Order of the Signs,
and therefore caufes the Sun to have an appa-
rent Annual Motion the fame way, and in the
2 fame


i


of RELIGION. 17


fame Plane; but as ftiil in the oppofite Point
of the Ecliptick. It has alfo Diurnal Rotation
upon its own Axis from We? to Haff in 24.
Hours, and fo occafions an apparent Motion of
all the Heavenly Bodies from Ea? to Weft in
the fame time. ‘The Axis of the Diurnal Mo-
tion is 23 Degrees and one half, oblique to that
of the Ecliptick, which occafions the Varieties
of Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter. Ye
is in Figure an Oblate Spheroid, as having
the Diameter of its Equator about 62 Miles
longer than its Axis, on account of the Eleva-
tion of the Equatorial and Depreffion of thé
Polar Regions, occafion’d by the centrifugal

POteesos. the Diurnal Motion, 2y:s/ cies,
Mars is ttill higher i in the Syftem, and looks
more red and fiery than the reft of the Planets.
It takes a larger Circuit than the Earth, and fo
comes to its Conjunction, Quadratures and.Op-
ees ; and in fome degree imitates the Pha~
es of the Moon, being fometimes only Gib-

bous, tho’ it cannot be at all horned like the
other. This Planet defcribes its Ellipfis about
the Sun in lefs than 2 Years, or in 687 Days.
‘The Eceentricity of its Orbit is 72+> of its mean
Diftancé from the Sun; it is in Diameter 4AAA.
Miles; in Surface it contains 60,000.00 of
quare Miles; and in Solidity 4.4.000,000.000

of Cubical ones; and is diftant from the Suni
123,000.000 Miles; it has no fecondaty Pla-
net that can be feen, but revolves about its own
Axis in 24 Hours and 40 Minutes. The Quan-
tity of Light and Heat it enjoys from the Sun
is between one half and one third of what the
Earth receives ftom it. Ic alfo appears to us
upon the Earth to be fometimes Direct, fome-
G times


18


Aftronomical Principles :


times Stationary, and fometimes Retrograde


in its Courfe, as all the fuperior Planets moft _


remarkably do; which Appearances, their high
er Situation, and flower Angular Motion, or
longer Periods, muft neceffarily produce, with
out the leaft Alteration of their real progreffive
Motion about the Sun all the while. ae
Fupiter, the largeft of all the Planets, is
tnuch higher in the Syftem, and has four Satel-
lites or Moons revolving about it; and all by
their common Center of Gravity defcribe a very
great Ellipfis about the Sun. ‘The Eccentricity
of its Orbit is .45+ of its mean Diftance from the
Sun. It comes to its Conjunction, Quadratures,
and Oppofition, as well as Mars; but at fo
great a Diftance can never appear other than
full, or early fo. It is in Diameter 81.000.
Miles; in Surfacé it contains 20.000,000.000
of Square Miles, and in Solidity 280,000.000,
000.000 Cubical ones; and revolves about the
Sun in eleven Years and ten Months, or 4.332
Days and a half, at the Middle Diftance of
424,000.000 Miles. It revolves about its own
Axis in 9 Hours and 56 Minutes, which makes
its Figure that of an Oblate Spheroid, ha-
ving the Diameters of its Equator confiderably
longer than its Axis. ‘The Quantity of Light
and Heat it receives from the Sun is but one
twenty-feventh Part fo great as ours on the
Earth. Its Quantity of Matter is about 220
times fo great as that of the Earth. Its Deni-
fity is about one fifth Part of the Earth’s, and
fo the Weight of all Bodies on its’ Surface is
about double to that with us. It is alfo Dire&t,
Stationary and Retrograde as Mars, but not‘in
fo great a Degree. It has Belts, like Clouds,
| lying


\


of RELIGION. ae)


: Rae feeaewnit regularly along the Equatorial
Parts, but fubject to many Glneee and Vari-
ations.

Saturn, the higheft and- moft remote of all
the known Planets, has five Satellites or Moons,
and a vaft but thin Ring encompafling his Bo-
‘dy, as an Horizon does a Globe; all which, or
_ rather the common Center of sheik Gravity, de-
{cribes an Ellipfis about the Sun, The Eccen-
tricity of its Orbit is 724 of its mean Diftance
from the Sun. It comes to its Conjunétion,
Quadratures and Oppofition, as well as the two
former, but with no vifible Decreafe of its.
Light at its Quadratures, which is fcarce to be ©
expected at fo great a Diftance. It revolves
about the Sun in about 29 Years and a half, or
about 10.760 Days. It isin Diameter 68.000
Miles; in Surface it contains 14.000,000.000
of Square Miles, and in Solidity 160,000.000,
000.000 of Cubical ones, at the mean Diftance
of 777,000.000 Miles from the Sun. Its Quan-
tity of Matter is about 94 times as great as
that of the Earth, tho’ its Denfity be only
between a fixth and a feventh Part fo great as
that of the Earth’s ; and the Weight of Bodies
on its Surface is to that on the Surface of the
Earth as about five to four. It is not yet certain-
dy known to revolve about its own Axis, tho’
its Ring is faid to do fo. The Light and Heat
communicated to it by the Sun are not quite the
ninetieth Part fo great, as thofe beltow’d on
the Earth. It is alfo in fome meafure Direct,
Stationary and Retrograde, as well as the two
former Planets, tho’ ftill in a lefs Degree.


C2 . Qf


Po


20


A fironomical Principles


Of the Satellites, or fecondary Planets; the
smoft eminent as to us is the Moon. It defcribes


an Ellipfis about our Earth (or rather both Earth
and Moon deferibe their own fimilar Ellipfes
about the common Center of their Gravity, as


_-is the Cafe in all fuch Syftems) in a periodi-


cal Month of 24 Days 7 Hours 43 Minutes.
The mean Eccentricity of its Orbit is réé< of
its mean Diftance from the Earth. It makes a
Lunation or Synodical Month in 29 Days 12
Hours 44. Minutes. At a Mean it is diftant
from the Earth about 240,000 Miles, tho’ with
confiderable Difference on account of its great
Eccentricity. ‘The Moon’s Diameter is 2175
Miles ; in Surface it contains 14,000.000 of


‘Square Miles; and in Solidity $.000,000.000


of Cubical ones. It has between the 39t" and
4oth Part of the Quantity of Matter of the
Earth; its Denfity is to that of the Earth as
about 5 to 4 whilft the Weight of all Bodies


is but about a third Part fo great on its Surface, —


as on that of the Earth. It revolves from Weft
to Zaft upon its own Axis, exactly in a perio-
dical Month, and thereby turns in general the
dame Face towards the Earth continually; yet
does the Inequality of its Motion, and the Ob-


liquity of its Axis, occafion fome unequal Li-
brations here alfo. It has very high Mountains,
and very deep regular Valleys, and has lately
had an Atmofphere difcover’d about it; nor —


does it feem unlike the Earth as to Sea and


Land. It has all Variety of Phafes, according


to its various Pofition with refpect to the Sun, ~


or according as we on the Earth can fee the
whole, the half, or only fome Part of its en-
lighten’d Hemifphere. Its own Day and Night
are

e


:
|


of RELIGION.


are each half a fynodical Month, or near 15 of
our Days long. Its Orbit is inclin’d to that of the
Ecliptick, at the leaft in an Angle of 5 Degrees;
fo it but fometimes paffes juft between the Sun
and Earth at the new Moon, and but fometimes
falls into the Earth’s Conical Shadow at the Full.
Yet when itis in, or neartheNodes, or Interfeécti-
on of thofePlanes,it cannot avoid thofe Accidents;
from the former of which the So/ar, and from
the latter of which the Lunar Eclipfes are deriv'd.

Fupiter’s four Satellites, or fecondary Planets,
are vifible with an ordinary Telefcope, and
fometimes pafs like Spots on the Face of Fupi-
ter, and fometimes enter into his Shadow;
which to an Eye in Fupiter would caufe Ap-
pearances juft like our So/ar and Lunar Eclip/es.
They revolve about him in Circles, or Ellipfes
very little Eccentrical ; the innermoft at 130.000
Miles diftance, in 1 Day 18 Hours and ahalf;
the next at 364,000 Miles diftance, in 3 Days
13 Hours and a quarter; the third at $80,000
Miles diftance in 7 Days 33 Hours; the fourth
at 1,000.000 Miles diftance, in 16 Days 16?
Hours. - The Cubes of their Diftances are alfo
as the Squares of their periodical Times: and
fo they are kept in their Curvilinear Orbits by
their Gravity towards ‘Fupiter’s Center, in a
duplicate reciprocal Proportion of their Di-
ftances from it; asistheCafe of all the Planets,
both Primary and Secondary about the Sun.

Saturn has five Satellites, or fecondary Pla-
nets. The fourth in order from Saturn is
the largeft, and was difcover’d by the ce-
lebrated Hugenius; the third and fifth are
vifible in the next degree; but the Knows
ledge of the two innermoft were firft owing

C 3 £Q


a2.


| Aftronomical P rinciples


to Caffini’s extraordinary Glaffes and Diligence,
They all revolve in Orbits almoft Circular, and
are all in or very near the Plane of his Ring,
which is inclined in an Angle of 31 degrees to
that of the Ecliptick. The innermoft revolves
about Saturn at 146,000 Miles diftance, in
1 Day 21 Hours one third ; the next at 187.000
Miles in 2 Days 14 Hours, and two thirds;
the third at 263,000 Miles, in 4. Days 13 Hours —
three quarters; the fourth or large one at 600,000
Miles in 15 Days 22 Hours two thirds; the
Jaft at 1,800.000 Miles, in 79.Days 22 Hours,
Nor is it improbable, that the large Interval
between the fourth and fifth may have a fixth,
which is yet to us invifible, as Hugenius conje-
étures. As to that ftrange and unparallel’d Phe-
nomenon of Saturn’s Rzxg, which is commonly


‘vifible through an ordinary Telefcope; its


Thicknefs may well be 500, or perhaps 1000 —
Miles, tho’ it be at that Diftance almoft invifie
ble; its Breadth is certainly about 21,000 Miles,
and its Diftance from the Body of Saturn on
every Side as much. It caufes many different
Appearances, not only to us on Earth, but
much more to the Inhabitants of Saturn, if any —
fuch there are; all which Hugenzus has de-
fcrib’d in his Syftem of that Planet, and.others

from him. |
As to the Sytem of the Comets, it appears
now to be very confiderable, and indeed they
are the moft numerous Bodies of the entire
Solar Syftem. They appear both by their Bignefs
and Motions to be a fort of Planets revolving
about the Sun in Ellipfes, fo very oblong, that
their vifible Parts feem in a manner Parabolical
but have fuch vaft Atmofpheres about them,
and


of RELIGION.


and ‘Tails deriv’d from the fame, efpecially after
their Peribelia, and thofe fubjeét to fuch Mu-
tations, pafs thro’ fo much Cold and Darknefs
near their Apbelia, and fo much Light and
Heat near their Peribelia, as imply them de-
fign’d for very different Purpofes from the Pla-
nets; and indeed, as to their outward Parts, in
their prefent State they are plainly uninhabita-
ble. Yet by paffing through the Planetary Re-
gions in all Planes and Direétions, they fully
prove thofe Spaces to be deftitute of Refiftance
or folid Matter, and feem fit to caufe vaft Mu-
tations in the Planets, particularly in bringing
on them Deluges and Conflagrations, accerding
as the Planets pafs through their Atmolpheres, in
their Defcent to, or Afcent from the Sun; and
fo feem capable of being the Inftruments of Di-
vine Vengeance upon the wicked Inhabitants of
any of thofe Worlds; and of burning up, or
perhaps, of purging the outward Regions of

them in order toa Renovation. ‘This, I mean,

feems likely to be their Ufe in the prefent State 3

tho’ indeed they do withal feem at prefent Chaos’s

or Worldsin Confufion, but capable of a Change

to Orbits nearer Circular, and then of fettling

into a State of Order, and of becoming fit for

Habitation like the Planets; but thefe Conje-

étures are to be left to tarther Enquiry, when it

pleafes the Divine Providence to afford us more

Light about them. However, in my Solar Sy/tews

{ have defcrib’d the Orbits of all the Comets that

Dr. Halley has put into his Catalogue, and that in

the Order of their Nearnefs to the Sun, at their

Peribelia, and as they are in their proper Planes,

without any Reduétion to the Ecliptick. They

are in Number 21; for tho’ he has 24 there fet
‘ C4 | down,


23


A [fronontical Frinciples


down,(all which are accordingly number’d there}


yet becaufe he fcarcely doubts that three of them
are the fame Comet, and guefles that two more
are alfo the fame, in both which Cafes I fully:
agree with him; the real Number will then be
but 21.. The former of thefe two Cwhich alfo
feems to have appeared before his Catalogue be-
gins, Anno Domini 1456.) was feen in 1531,
1607, and 1682, whofe Period therefore is 75
or 76 Years, and whofe Return is to be expect-
ed in 1758. ‘The latter of them appeared
Anno Dom. 15323 and probably the fame again.
in 1661, whofe Period theretore being about
129 Yeats, it is to be expected again in 1789.
‘The moft eminent of them all appear’d in the
44th Year before the Chriftian /Era; as alfo
A. D. §31, or §323 and 4. D. 11063 and laft-
ly, 4. D. 1680, 1681, when I faw it 5 and fo.
Has made within the Limits of our prefent Hi-


ftories, three periodicalR evolutions, in about 57


Years apiece. The middle Diftance of the tor-
mer from the Sun’s Center muft be 1458,
000.000 of Miles, and its longer Axis twice fo
Jong, and fo its Apbelion Diftance near four
times as great as the Diftance of Saturn; and
its greateft Diftance to its leaft as about 60 to 15
and therefore its greateft Light and Heat to its _
leaft as about 3600 to 1. ‘The middle Diftance
of the fecond muft be about 2025,900.000 of
Miles, and its longer Axis twice fo long, and
fo its Aphelion Diftance between 5 and 6 times
as great as the Diftance of Saturn; and its
greateit Diftance to its leaft, as more than 100
to 1, and therefore its greateft Light and Heat —
to its leaft, as more than ten thoufand to one.
he middie Diftance of the laft muft be about
rs Ae OEE RN: WELT Se 8


‘of RELIGION, 26


§.600,000.000. Miles; and its longer Axis
twice fo long; and fo its Aphelion Diftance
abqut 14 times as. great as the diftance of Sa-
turn; and its greateft diftance to its leaft as
above 20.000 to 1. and fo its greateft Light and:
Heat to its leaft as above 4.00,000.900 to I.

As to the Fixed Stars, they are vaftly remote
from this our Planetary and Cometary Syftem,
but may perhaps every one be the Center of ano-
ther fuch like Syftem. Dr. Hook and Mr. Flam-
freed think they have difcover’d their annual Pa-
rallax, and that it is about 4.7", which will im-
ply them to be about 700.000.000.000 of Miles
diftant from the Sun; or, according to an exact
Calculation in the like Cafe, farther than a Bul-
Jet fhot out of a Musket would go in sooo Years.
But of fuch vaft and numberlefs Syftems, if fuch
they are, we know very little: Only fo much
we know of the Planetary and Cometary Worlds,
and of the Probability of vaftly more among the
Fixed Stars (to fay nothing of the nobleft or
invifible Parts of the Creation, nor of the par-~
ticular Phenomena here below ) as is fufficient
to make us cry out with the P/a/mift, O Lord,
bow manifold are thy Works! In Wifdom haft thon
made them all! Pial. civ. 24. ;


aTTS
oes


PAR?


e a


A fironomical Priaciples


REE


Part IIL


“The Truth of the foregoing SystEM


briefly Demonttrated. —


MSS to N order to let the Reader fee the
: Sige Certainty of our prefent Syftem of
795 I yS@ Aftronomy, and to prepare the way
sbieacatSe for his entire Satisfaction, as to
wees the noble Inferences that fhall
hereafter be drawn from the fame, I fhall now


attempt, not only to prove the foregoing Sy-


_ ftem, in all its Parts, to be very probable, and


fo preferable to any other Hypothefis ; but to
Demonfirate it to be really true and certain ;
and this after fo familiar a manner, that ordi-
nary Mathematicians may eafily apprehend the
Force of each Argument, and fee the Evidence
for the feveral Conclufions all along. Now the
Propofitions I fhall here Demonftrate are thefe:.


I. That the Divrual Motion, or that which
occafions the Succeffion of Day and Night, and
the apparent rifing and fetting of the Sun, Moon, ~
and Stars, in the fpace of 24 Hours, which we.

| | call


of RELIGION.


calla Day, belongs to the Earth, and not to
the Heavens.


Il. That the Annual Motion, or that which
Occafions the Succeflion of Summer and Winter,
and the apparent Motion of the Sun through
the Ecliptick in the Space of 365+ Days, which
we call a Year, belongs to the Earth, and not
to the Sun. |


II. That there isan Univerfal Power of Gra-
vity acting in the whole Sy{ftem; whereby
every Body, and part of a Body, Attracts,
and is Attracted by every other Body and part
of a Body through the whole Syftem ; that this
Power of Gravity is greater in greater Bodies,
and leffer in leffer ; and this in the exact pro»
portion of fuch their Magnitude: That it is alfo
greater when the Bodies are nearer, and leffer
when they are farther off; and this in the ex-
at duplicate proportion of {uch their nearnefs:
That this Power is the fame in all Places, and at
all Times, and to all Bodies: And that, laftly,
this Power is entjrely Immechanical, or beyond
the Power of .all material Agents whatfoever.


IV. That the Orbits, Revolutions, Diftances,
Quantities of Matter, Denfities, Gravity on the
Surfaces, Revolutions about their Axes, Quauti-
ties of Light and Heat, Sc. above fet down,
concerning the Sun and Planets, both Primary
and Secondary, with thofe of the Comets alfo,
are true and certain; with an Account-of the
-Ways whereby we difcover every one of thofe
Particulars. : - |


PROP.


27


(28


Aftronomical Principles


Pig Re Ouse sik,


The Diurnal Motion, or that which occafions:
the Revolution of Day and Night, and the ap-
parent rifing and fetting of the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, in the Space of 24. Hours, which we call
a Day, belongs to the Earth, and not to the
Heavens. |


DEMONSTRATION.


(1.) All the Phenomena or Appearances rela-
ting to this Matter, are now certainly known to
be equally natural and neceflary Confequences
of a diurnal Revolution of the Earth from We?
to Eaft, as of the like Revolution of the whole
Syftem of the Heavens from Eaf to Weft; as
thofe who have apply’d themfelves to this part
of Aftronomy do well know: Juft as it is equal
to a Perfon that defires to fee quite round a
'Terreftrial Globe, fet_in a proper Pofition ;
whether he walks himfelf round that Globe,
while it ftands ftill ; or whether the feveral parts
of that Globe be turned round to him, while
he ftands ftill: Which if it be granted; and the
Waftnefs of the Syftem about us be confider’d,
with refpect to the Smallnefs of our Earth; the
immenfe fwiftnefs neceffary in one cafe, com-
par’d with the greater flownefs in the other ;
the prodigious diverfity of perplex’d Motions in
the Sun, the Planets, the Comets, and the fix’d
Stars to be provided for in the former Hypo-
thefis, with the eafy fimple Motion of one Globe
about its own Axis to be allow’d in the latter;
the difproportion, as to the probability of the

. one


of RELIGION,


one and the other Notion, will appear vaftly
great and prodigious. Whether it is more fit
and reafonable for 100 Auditors, ina Courfe of
Geography, to have a terreftrial Globe turned
once round on its own Axis, in order to their
diftinét and gradual view of the particular
Countries thereon defcrib’d ; or to have Car-
penters fet to work to remove the Room, and
_ the Houfe it felf, and to carry it on Wheels in
order to avoid that fingle Circumvolution ?
When once we are fatisfyed of the Juftnefs of
fuch a procedure in one Cafe, we may begin
to think of allowing the like Juftnefs in the
other ; but not fooner.
~ (2.) There are no mechanical Laws of Moti-
on known inthe World, which can account for
fuch a Diurnal Revolution of the Heavens ; nay,
it is direétly contrary to all fuch known Laws
whatfoever. *T'is true, a Clock or Machine may
have feveral diftin€t Motions within, and yet a
_ Spectator may turn the whole round on its Axis
at the fame time ; becaufe all the Parts and
Wheels are connected together, and take hold
of each other, by material contact and infer-
tion: So that he who removes one part, does
of neceffity remove allthe reft. But this is far


from the real Cafe in the World about us ; where.


the feveral Bodies are vaftly remote from, and
unconnected with each other ; and where there-
fore no fuch ( imaginary) Revolution of any
(fictitious) Primum Mobile, or material external
Sphere can affect or move the feveral Bodies
therein contain’d. When once we fee the Revo-
lution of a large Wheel make other inward
Wheels, which it does not touch, dance atten-
darice thereto, and commence circular Revolu-


tions


29


ae


A ftronomical Principles


tions round its Axis, we may begin to think of
fuch a parallel Notion as to the prefent Syftem,
but not fooner.

(3.) There is no Example of ict Periodical
Revolutions, which carry different and feperate
Bodies round the fame Axis, in the fame time,
in the whole World about us. No Vortices or
Whirlpools excited in Fluids do fo: None of —
the Primary Planets are carried fo about the
Sun, nor Secondary ones about their Primaries.
Nor indeed is the thing poffible in any mecha-
nical Method whatfover, agreeing to the pre- -
fent Syftem of things, that we know of. So
that tis meerly an Hypothefis or Romance, ‘un-
fupported by all good Evidence, and deriv’d -
entirely from the Prejudices and Notions of the
Vulgar, before they are acquainted with the
Principles neceffary to make them competent

udges in fuch Matters.

(4.) 'The frequent, if not Sai ae Diurnal
Revolutions of the reft of the Heavenly Bodies,
renders it moft highly rational, if not neceflary, :
to allow the like Revolution to our Earth. If —
we caft our Eyes abroad, and ufe Telefcopes to
affift them, we fhall find that Fupéter and Mars
among the higher Planets; that Venus among
the lower; that the Moon in our Neighbour-
hood; and that the Sun it felf in the Center of
thefe Planetary Motions, have, for certain, fuch
a diurnal Revolution about their own Axes.
Nor is it any way certain, that either Saturn,
or Mercury, the fecondary Planets, the Comets,
or fixed Stars, z..e. that any of the Heavenly
Bodies are deftitute of fuch a Motion. So that
hence it is exceeding probable that our Earth


may: Have the like Motion alfo. .
a ? C5.) The-


of RELIGION.


(5.) The contrary Hypothefis introduces the


utmoft Confufion into the apparent Heavenly
Motions, while *tis certain there is no manner
of reafon for doing fo. For what ftrange Con-
fufion is it to imagine, that while in Venus, in
the Moon, in Mars, and in ‘Fupiter, if not in
all the other Planets and heavenly Bodies be-
fides, there is fuch a diurnal Rotation, as feve-
rally produces a regular fucceffion of Day and


Night in them, according tothe feveral natural |


Periods of thofe Revolutions; and while we
cannot deny that the like diurnal Revolution
of the Earth, would regularly produce a corre-
fpondent regular Succeflion of Day and Night
in 24 Hours with us, without the introduction
of any farther Motions of the Heavens for this
purpofe ; what Confufion, I fay, is it, after all
this, for us to introduce a ftrange, a violent,
an unexampled, an unphilofophical Circumgu-
ration of the whole vaft Univerfe about our
poor Earth, every Day, to the diforder and
perplexity of thofe other diurnal Appearances,
and of the whole Syftem? and all this with-
out any juft occafion in the World? If we were
but for a while tranflated to ‘Fupiter, which we
know to have the quickeft diurnal Revolution of
all the reft, and obferv’d how regular the rifing


and fetting of the Sun, Moon, and Stars ap-:


pear’d therein from that diurnal Motion alone,
1 dare fay we fhould never after that fo much as
dream of any other than a diurnal Motion of
our Earth, to account for the like rifing and
fetting of the fame Sun, Moon, and Stars with

us here upon Earth. |
(6.) In Fact, our Earth certainly has fuch a
diurnal Revolution about its own Axis, as we
are


31


roe a


b>


Wo


See Sir J-
faacNew-
ton’sPrin-
cip. 2a.
Edit. p.
3379 338.
and P437 7
438.


Afironontical Principles 3


are now {peaking of: For though we do not
{tand conveniently enough to /ce the diurnal
Revolution as toour own Earth, which we do
as to the other Heavenly Bodie: yet are we
capable of certainly knowing by one grand Ef-
fect of fuch a Motion, whether our Earth has
that Motion or not? All Globes which have no
diurnal Revolutions about their own Axes, muft,
by the Equality of the weight of Bodies in all -
their Regions, be pertect SMe ab and all the
Parts of their Surface muft, generally {peaking,
be at the fame diftance from the Centen aiBuE
all Globes that have fuch a diurnal Rotation;
C which will neceffarily be {witteft at the Equa-
tor; and by confequence will caufe the Parts to
recede fromthe Axis of Motion, chiefly near’
the Equator ) will be Od/ate Spheroids, or higher
in the Equatoreal, and lower in the Polar Regi-
ons, as has been already obferv’d. Now to this
certain zrrieey do we appeal tor the determi-
nation of this matter. For fince it appears
from the leffer length of the Pendulum which’
vibrates Seconds near the Equator, than near
the Pole, that the Surface of the Earth is about
31 Miles higher at the st than at the
Poles ; and fince the regrefs of the Earth’s Nodes,
which we call the preceffion of the Equinox,


-with the Equilibration of the Waters near the
Equator, and near the Poles, do both fully con-


firm the fame thing ; all which are the necefla~
ry Effects of the Earth’s diurnal Rotation, and
are accountable on no other Princlples whatfo-
ever ; I conclude, that our Earth has fuch:a
diurnal Rotation; or, which is the fame thing,
that the diurnal Revolution belongs to the
Earth, and not to the Heavens. catia?)

N. B. E


of RELIGION.


N. B. I propofe the Five firft as Arguments
exceeding probable; but this laft as a really
certain Demonttration. )


PROP. I. -


The Annual Motion, or that which occafions
the Succeffion of Summer and Winter; and the
apparent Motion of the Sun through the Eclip-
tick, in the Space of 3.641 Days, which we call
a Year, belongs to the Earth, and not to th¢
Sun.


DEMONSTRATION


(1.) All the Phenomena or Appedarancés re~
lating to this Matter, are now certainly known
to be equally natural and-neceflary Confequen-
ces of an Annual Revolution of the Earth, as
of the Sun; as all Aftronomers confefs. And.
he who confiders the prodigious Greatnefs of
the Sun’s Body, and the comparative Smallnedfs
of the Earth, will be under no Temptation to
fuppofe that the vaft Sun revolves round this
little Earth; efpecially when he refleéts, that
all things will be the very fame, if this little
Earth be fuppos’d to revolve about that vaft
Sun in the fame time. 7

(2.) There are no known Laws of Motion
according to which fo great a Body as the Sun
can revolve about fo {mall a Body as the Earth;
nay, this is direétly contrary to all fuch known
Laws whatfoever. For let the Occafion or Ins
fluence derived from thefe two Bodies be of
‘What fort you pleafe, either Gravitation, or
Magnetifm, or Impulfe, €c; {till the greater
. D


Body.


33


. a 5 Sear 5 EF SRE RE A LET REE AIEEE TT IOS an :


34 A flronomical Principles


Body, as in all like Cafes, muft have the great-

eft Force and Efficacy to move the other. And
we may full as well expect that a Sling, con-
taining a Milftone in it, may be faften’d to a
Pebble, and continue its Motion about that Peb-
ble, without removing it, as that the Sun can
revolve about our Earth,’ while the Earth con-
tinues immoveable in the Center of that Mc~
tion.

(3.) There is no Inftance of fuch a thing in
the vifible World, as a great Body thus revolving
about a {mall one, that continues it felf im-
moveable all the while; but all the Inftances
are on-the other fide. ‘The {maller Moon re-
volves about the larger Earth; the {malier Cir- —
cumjovials and Circumfaturnals revolve about
the larger Fupiter and Saturn; Saturn, fupiter,
Mars, Venus, and Mercury, revolve all, not
‘about the fmaller Earth, but about the larger
Sun; as is now confefs'd by the whole Aftro-
‘nomical World ; and as is certainly demontftra-
ted by the Phafes of Venus and Mercury feeh

See Fig. 1. through a'Telefcope. And tho’ ina ftriét Senfe —
all thefe larger Bodies may be fo far faid to re- ©
volve about thofe {maller, as they may ftill, on —
‘both fides, revolve about the common Genter’ i
of Gravity ; yet becaufe the common Genter
of Gravity ofthe Sun and Earth muft be fo
very near the Center of the Sun, and fo very ,
far from the Center of the Earth; and by con- ‘
fequence, the Motion of the Sun, if compar’d —
with that of the Earth about it, muft be fo ve- ;
ry infenfible; it follows, that the moft fenfible ‘
Annual Motion, of which we are now fpeak- — ‘
ing, muft ftill, by all parallel Inftances, eget?) ;
to the Earth, "and not to the Sun. ~

(4...) The


Binet bo Beg sine 2 ES 3


mere ee yy ae
. ee, Ra ts


asia op Aas Se irae Sy


ae.
- as


+


ere
yee


me


A ayettiry et


ha


rat tee

“ue +
ws
a


Seen ee


- 7% a

“A hee OF
ire peeve eats i:
ah ° ies |


wae ee me ge


ae ee


The Copernican, or true Solar Syitem. . Ay. 34
wv AY Oe five Bp i


R
y


Lhece are the three Pamous Syftemd of lfirgnemy In the Copernican é
the Phates of Venus and Mercury rhicharePull inone Cnyunction redh thes
vuhen they are beyond itad to the Larch Doman, trate that 7 Ptolemaick/yfea
unrehich that Stuaticn Wf umpe id utterly fale. i)
Vlorw there the lealEevidence in the Cm forthe Lychonick:rrhich the very Fugu
| thens to be absurd and Menftrous: tthe Vafh Suc twith itd Pro: isle
ot the Llanets, fhould be as in the Copernican, and gee this Syltern f the Sun an


Planets fhewld alt Revolve round thes litle Earth ina Years ane Wey." Smee Ma


mh “


of REL G10 N..


(4.) The Hypothefis that this Annual Motion :


belongs to the Sun, and net to the Earth, in-
troduces the utmoft Confufion among the Ce-
leftial Motions, and that without any proper
occafion in the World. For what ftrange con-
fufion is it for us to imagine that the fingle
Earth, which is now confets’d by all to be fituate
between Mars above, and Venus below <it 5
while all the reft of the Planets, Saturn with
his Satellites, ‘Jupiter with his, and, Mars, Ve-
nus, and Mercury, without any, do all revolve
not about the Earth, but about the Sun; nay
that the Superior revolve about it in longer,
and the Inferior in fhorter Periods or Years,
while the Annual Period, is ina mean between
them; that I fay the fingle Earth be exempted
from the common Law of the whole Syftem ?
What a heap of Abfurdities are here? ‘That


while all the reft of the Planetary World re-


volve about the Sun, in their feveral regular
Periods or Years, that yet our Earth, contrary
to all Probability, fhould be fuppos’d to carry
not the Sun only, but all the Solar Syftem alfo
round it felf in a Year's time, as it certainly


muft, if the Annual Motion belong to the Sun? See Fig. 11


This Hypothefis of the famous Tycho, which is
the only one that is not abfolutely impoffible


to be true, is yet fo wild, groundlefs, and ex-


travagant in ic felf, and fo prodigioufly impro-
bable, that I fhould exceedingly wonder at its
firft Introduction, and much more: at its Ad-
miffion ftill in Roman-Catholick Countries, did
T not know that Injudicious Perfons have inter-
preted Scripture againft the true Syftem; and
that an Infalléble Church has Eftablifh’d that In-
terpretation; nay, has condemn’d the true one
pee, Dz aS


\


“~


2


\


{Tas


eh


A flronomical | Principles


as Herefy ; and that, by Confequence, the Po-


pifh Aftronomers have been driven into this
terrible Dilemma, of either f{ubmitting to the
Abfurdities of the Zychonian, or elfe of refign-
ing themfelves up to Imprifonment, if not to
Death it felf for the true or Copernican Hypothefis :
So dangerous is it, in that Church at leaft, if
not infome others, to admitof Truth not only
in Divine, but even in Natural and Aftronomi-
cal Matters alfo!


(s.) There is one known fixed Proportion be- —


tween the Periods and Diftances of all the Hea-


venly Bodies from the Sun ; I mean that the ©


Squares of the Periods, are ever as the Cubes


of the Diftances ; and this Proportion is fo uni- —
verfal, that it obtains not only in this general —


Syftem of the Primary Planets about the Sun,
but in the particular Syftems of the Secondary
Planets about their Primaries, without the leaft


ait


Exception that we know of in the univerfe: —
Which Proportion demonftrates,that theAnnual —
Revolution belongs to the Earth, and notto the ©


Sun. For as the Cube of theMoon’s diftance,which


is 240,000 Miles, to the Cube of the Sun’s di, —


{tance, which is 81,000.000 Miles, z.e. as 1 to
38,272.753, {fo is the Square of the Moon’s Pe-


‘riod,’ or of lefs than 28 Days, which is about ~
784, to the Squre of the Period of any Body ~
moving about the Earth at the Sun’s diftance in —
Days, or tO 30,c05.838,352, whofe Square —
Root, or 173,510 are therefore the Number of —
Days of the Solar Year, in cafe the Sun revolves —
about the Earth ; which yet in reality are known —
tobe but 365%. Now this laft Number is con= —
tain’d no lefs than 4.75 Times in the former. —
So that if the Sun revolv’d about the Earth, from ~

2 3 that —


ane


eA oer


is
Red ee os


e eh


i)


SOO Ree RT


I ‘ in 4
j ee


ae of ty Tt Ay? db J ‘


AX
ap wr
peo eons wt dint


eee : oi


os 00
aes


“wy inky i,
f NN


a ay “I
<r pial |


2.
42 hes Cure


‘hi Pee et reprefents the Direction Station,and Retro gradation tedium
| rear Llanes, by Ue heaton eee Ta upiter, one of these Llanets, eureeey
Fi whole fears motionof the Une,and a Monthé motion of the Other ; from ther
Lositun at 143, whenJupiter appears Direct, and near the unction,; ab22. 2 a
FIR when iecrhuindeel Dirtee wie reper unis motucn; whould 44, when wt
Raa See, ats 5.5 when ie-appears aregrade rade, - alfo at 6. 6. Shs wha tn Op |
| postion) and 7. 5 pen appeas Res tation z |


wn: After which 9-9: 4


‘an 16 GE Bree Agattt, an? re Hi a GEMM Ih ‘me a A 42%
Cafe lo! i and dard ‘ze much the Jaime \. Z LSinen_ fi


7
j


of RELIGION,


By


that Analogy and Harmony which is every where
eife obferved in the Heavens, the Year muft be
475 Times as long asit nowis. ‘This Calcula-~
tion feems to me to determine this Difpute in
favour of the Copernican Syftem ; according to
which, the Proportion above-mentioned of the
‘Cubes of the Diftances, as the Squares of the


Periodick Times, is known to agree to all the ©


Planets, to the utmoft exacinefs of Aftrono-
mical Obfervations.

(6.) In Fat, the Earth has fuchan Annual Re-
volution about the Sun ; as appears by all the
Indications of fuch a Motion poflible : even by
that of Parallax ; which is the known Geome-
trical Foundation of the Science of Aftronomy.
Thus if the Earth have an Annual Revolution
about the Sun, it muft affect the apparent Mo-
tions of all the other Planets and Comets, and,
notwithftanding the Regularity of their feveral
Motions in their own Orbits, muft render the
regular Motions, as to us, living upon the mo-
ving Earth, fometiines Direct, and that fwiftly
orflowly ; fometimes Stationary, and fometimes
Retrograde, and that {wiftly or flowly alfo;
and all this at fuch certain Periods, in fuch cer-
tain Places, for fuch certain Durations, and ac-
cording to fuch certain Circumftances, as Geo-
metry and Arithmetick will exactly determine,
and not otherwife. Now that this is the real
Cafe in Faét; and that every one of thefe Par-
ticulars are true in the Aftronomical World, all
that are skilful in that Science do freely confefs ;
even thofe who, for Reafons already hinted at,
do not think fit to declare openly for this An-
nual Revolution of the Earth, which is the na~
tural, the certain Confequent of that Conceflion.
Drie D 3 *Tis


SeeFig AIL


A [ftronomical Principles


ST RS TN RRL TTE


_ "Fis true, fuch Perfons may pretend, that tho’


thefe Phenomena be undoubted ; and would be
the undoubted Effects of fuch a Motion; yet


_ that this Annual Revolution is not the undenia-


ble, the ftriétly Geometrical Confequence of
them; that they may poffibly be accounted for on
other Hypothetes, and that on the Suppofition
of certain complex Motions, deriv’d from ( ima-
ginary ) Epicycles, and Eccentricks, and folid
Orbs, €c. they may be folved without the in-
troduction of this Annual Motion of the Earth. ©
Now this I do not abfolutely deny, that if fuch
precarious, aukward, immechanical, falfe, and
abfurd Figments, were the true and real Laws
of Nature, thefe Phenomena might poffibly be
otherwife accounted for: But then I affirm, —
that fuch Hypothefes are indeed not at all the
real Laws of Nature, but no better than meer
precarious, aukward, immechanical, falfe, and
abfurd Figments only ; fuch indeed, as if they -
were allow’d in other Cafes, would take away


all Certainty in all mix’d Mathematicks at leaft,


ifnot in Arithmetick and Geometry themfelves;


and would enable Men to evade the grand Foun-


dation of Aftronomy, I mean that of the com-
mon Parallax it felf; Thefe Phenomena being
as truly Inftances of an Annual, as other known
ones are of the Diurnal Parallax. TI believe the
skilful Aftronomers will know my meaning by
this general intimation ; but if not, I will eafily
undertake todemonftrate, that thofe who, not


_ withftanding thefe Indications, or Demontftrati-_


ons, do deny or doubt of the Earth’s Annual
Motion, may, in Confequence thereof, become
Aftronomical Scepticks, and deny, or doubt of —
almoft all the other Principles of Aftronomy,

Bp 5 Ah and


of RELiGioN. 39


and of Human Knowledge, which are never paft
the Evafions of refolved Scepticks. But I need
not here enlarge, becaufe I am well affur’d that
all Aftronomers; who are compleat Mafters of
that Science, as foon as other Prejudices and
Fears are over; will agree with me, that the
Arguments under this Head, when allow’d their
free and tull Weight, do certainly prove that this
Annual Revolution belongs to the Earth, and
not to the Sun. I do not here mention that
Annual Parallax of the Fixed Stars, which
Dr. Hook and Mr. Flamfteed think they have
difcovered, which would certainly demonftrate
the Earth’s Annual Motion, and which I have
elfewhere vindicated from the Objections of
Dr. Gregory, and of the French; becaufe it is See Afron.
not yet generally allow’d for true by the Learn- Led. IV.

ed. Nor need I have recourfe tothat Attempt : PRL
fince the moft evident Annual Parallax of the 7.¢ ba
Planets and Comets, already infifted on, does
plainly prove this Annual Motion of the


Earth. :


N. B. 'The Reader will eafily perceive, that
I propofe the former Five Arguments as highly
probable, but this laft as a certain Demontftrati-
on of the Annual Motion of the Earth.


N. B. I do not here meddle with the feveral
Objections made formerly againft either the Di-
urnal or Annual R evolutions of the Earth, either
from Scripture or from Nature ; fince there are ze Gali-
few of the truly Learned and Judicious which leo’s Sy@.
do now infift upon them ; and fince they. have: SV"
been fully confider’d and confuted by others, jan, 4.
in treating on this Argument ; to whom. I fhalb pyo1.Theoh
yo D4 | refer Pref.


40


oblige them by a Line drawn from the Cenz


Afironomical Erinciples


refer the Reader, if he ftill want Satisfaction
therein.


PROP. Wl.


(1.) There is an univerfal Power of Gravity
acting in the whole Syftem; whereby every Bo-=
dy, and part of a Body, Attracts and is Attract-
ed by every other Body and part of a Body,
through the whole Syftem. (2.) This Power of
Gravity is greater in greater Bodies, and lefler
in leffer; and that in the proportion of fuch
their Magnitude. (3.) It is alfo greater when
the Bodies are nearer, and lefler when they are
farther off, and that inthe exact duplicate pro-
portion of fuch their nearnefs. (4.) This Power
is the fame in all Places, and at all ‘Times, and
with regard to all Bodies whatfoever. ( 5.) This
Power is entirely immechanical, and beyond the
Abilities of all material Agents whatfoever.


®
Demontftration of the firft Part; Lhat there zs
_ fich a Power of Gravity im the Univerfe.


C1.) Becaufe all the Planets, Primary and Se-
condary, with the Comets, are ‘perpetually
drawn trom their natural Reétilinear Courfes
along {trait Lines, the 'Tangents of their prefent
Orbits,. and made to revolve in Curves 5 there
is therefore a continual Power sor Force aéting
upon them; and becaufe the Power or Force
acts fo upon them, as to caufe the Bodies to
move juft fo much quicker, as they are nearer
their Central Bodies ; and juft fo much flower,
as they are farther off them; and thereby to


tral


of RE Hy Peet ae Pee


AT


tral Bodies ever to defcribe equal Area’s in
equal Times ; it therefore follows, by Geome-
trick Demonftration, that this Power or Force
always tends dire¢tly to the Centers of thofe
Bodies about which they revoive; or is ftill a
Centripetal Power or Force, with regard to the
fame Bodies. |
_(2.) This Power or Force’is properly the
Power or Force of Gravity, or the very fame
which caufes Stones and all heavy Bodies with
us to gravitate, and thereby to defcend down-
ward towards the Earth’s Center ; becaufe upon
exact Geometrick Deduction, and Arithmetick
Calculation it appears, that the Force which
retains the Moon in its Orbit, tends to the
fame Center, and is exactly of the fame Quan-
tity with that, which accelerates heavy Bodies
with us on the Earth’s Surface ; due Allowance
being made for the Difference of their Diftan-
ces from the Earth: which Force caufes all Bo-
dies whatfoever on the Earth’s Surface to de-
fcend a little more than 16 Exgli/b Feet, in one
Second of ‘Time. 2


Demonftration of the Second Part, that this
. Gravity is exattly proportional to the Magui-
tude of the Central Body. | ;


(1.) Becaufe the Heavenly Bodies are all
Spherical, and the Force of Gravity tends ftill
directly to their feveral Centers, that Force, by
- Geometrical Demonftration, is the very fame as
if it tended to every Particle of thofe Central
Bodies, and as if the Gravity of each whole
Central Body were compos'd of the Gravity to


See Math.
Philof.
Prop. 162


See Math,
Philof.
Prop. 79:


See Math.
Philof.
Prop. 4%


each ©


42


i A (ronomical Principles


See Math.
Philof.
Prop. 84-


each Patt of the fame; which indeed is the
only rational Conception of this Matter; be=
caufe otherwife this Force muft refpeét not a
Body, which is fomewhat real, but a Mathema-
tical Point, which, phyfically fpeaking, is no-


thing at all.


(2.) In Fact, the greateft Bodies have the:
sreate{t Gravity towards them through the
whole Univerfe. ‘Thus by Calculation from the
Heavenly Motions it appears, that the vaftly
greateft Force of Gravity is that tending to
the Sun, the next that to ‘Fupiter, the next that
to Saturn, the next that to the Earth, and the
next that to the Moon ; according to the known
Order of the Magnitude of their feveral Bo-
dies refpectively. Nor do I omit the other
Planets and the Comets here, as if the Cafe
were not the fame in them alfo; but becaufe
they have no Planets, that we know of, mo-
ving about them ; and becaufe they occafion
no fenfible Tides in our Ocean; which are the:


only Phenomena, whence we can draw any


certain Indications of the Quantity of that.
Power of Gravity which tends to them.


Demonftration of the 'Third Part; that this
Gravity is exactly in the Duplicate Proportion
of the Nearnefs of Bodies, i. e. when twice
as near, four Times ;-when thrice as nears
nine Times ; when four times as near, fixteen
Times as firong ; and fo for ever.


(1.) Becaufe the Cubes of the Diftances of


the feveral primary Planets about the Sum, ni
ond


of RELIGION. 43


of the feveral Secondary Ones about their Pri-
-maries, are ftill found to bear accurately the
fame Proportion to each other, which the
Squares of their refpective Periodical Times of |
Revolving alfo bear ; it follows, by ftriét Geo- See Math.
metrick Reafoning, that the Centripetal Force, Philof.
which keeps them in their feveral Gurves, is P? 13°
_ accurately in the duplicate Proportion of their
Nearnefs to their Central Bodies. |

(2.) Becaufe all the primary Planets and Co- |
mets revolve about the Sz, and all the fecon-
dary Ones, that are Eccentrical, about their Pri-
maries in Ellipfes, or Conick Seétions, and that
about the Sw, or their Primaries, fituate in
their Focz ; it follows, by {trict Geometrick Rea- |
foning, that the Centripetal Force, which re- See Math.
tains them in fuch Conick Sections, is exatly Philof.
inthe duplicate Proportion of their nearnefs to ">: 2%
their Central Bodies. |

(3.) Becaufe the Aphelia, or longer Axes of
thefe Ellipfes do reft, as to the fixed Stars, in
the primary Planets and Comets; and in the
fecondary Ones, do move only in proportion to
the difturbance they neceffarily meet with from
the Inequality of their Diftances from the Sun,
it follows from Mathematick Reafoning, that See Math.
the Centripetal Force, which acts upon thofe Philof.
Planets and Comets, is moft accurately in the Pal SEE
duplicate Proportion of their Nearnefs to their
- Central Bodies. |

N. B. 'That there appears no manner of Ne-
ceffity for this Proportion of Increafe and Di-
minution of the Power of Gravity, as the -
Squares of the Nearnefs of Bodies, more than
for any other Proportion ; as fuppofe that of

L y . the


“a


A4


See Math.
Philof,
Prop. 20+


A ftronontical Principles


the Nearnefs it felf, or that of the Cubes, or Bi-
quadrates, €c. of that Nearnefs or Diftance. Yet
would any other Proportion have been exceed-
ing inconvenient for this Syftem. For if it had
been as the Nearnefs it felt, we have no regular
Curve Line, in which the Eccentrical Planets or
Comets could then revolve: If in a Triplicate
Much Bodies muft ever have defcended, or af-
cended in Spiral Lines, till they fell into the
Sun, or fome Fixed Star, and perifhed therein.
And if the Proportion had been {till greater,
the Effect would have been quicker alfo.


Demonftration of the Fourth Part; that this
Gravity is the fame in all Places, and at alt
Times, and with regard to all Bodies what/o-
ever.


This is plain from Faét and Obfervation ; for
(1.) Heavy Bodies fall as faft in one Country as
in another; and Gravity affects the Planets and
Comets in its proper Proportion, equally in all
the Parts of the Univerfe where Planets or Cas
mets go, z.¢. in all the immenfe Regions of
it every Way.

(2.) The Planets and Comets, guided by this
Law, have invariably preferv’d their Motions,
Orbits, Periods, and Influences, fince the firft
Ages of Aftronomy and Chronology : And,

(3.) This Gravity does ftill, upon Tryal,
equally affect Fluids and Solids ; Bodies in Mo-_
tion and at Reft; Great and Small; and this
through the whole Univerle alfo, fo far as we
can examine it, fae tes


Demons


of RELIGION.


45


Demonftration of the Fifth Part; that this
Gravity 1s an entirely immechanical Power,
and beyond the Abilities of all material Ageuts
whatfoever.


C1.) This Power acts upon the very inward
fubftantial Parts of Bodies, as well as the out-
ward and vifible ; and is proportionable not to
the Surface but to the folid Content, or Quan-
tity of Matter contained in them: Whereas,
all Mechanical Caufes are meerly fuperficial,
and act by External Contact on the External
Surface only.

(2.) This Power aéts upon Bodies equally,
when they are in the moft violent Motion, and
when they are at Reft; as the Celerity of De-


See Math,
Philo
Prop. $2.


{cending Bodies with us; and the Celerity of See Math,


the Comets inthe Heavens, Geometrically com-
puted, do particularly fhew. Now this is ab-
folutely impoffible; that «ny Mechanical Pref-
fure, or Impulfe from a Body, let its Motion
be never fo {wift, or its Preffure never fo ftrong,
fhould equally accelerate another Body, when
at Reft, and when in Motion ; it being a known
Law of Mechanifm, that a Body in Motion
impels another at Reft with its whole Force;
but one in Motion, with only the Exceis of its
own Velocity above the others; as is moft ob-
vious alfo on the leaft Reflexion.

(3.) By this Power Bodies act upon other
Bodies at a Diffance, nay at all Diftances what-


Philof
Prop. 3s


See Math,
Phiic&
Law of
Motion6, °
CP es


foever; that is, they a? where they are uot:


Which is not only impoflible for Bodies Mecha-
nically


46


A fironontical Principles


nically to do, but indeed is impoffible for all
Beings whatfoever to do, either Mechanically
or Immechanically, it being juft as good Senfe
to fay, an Agent can act when he is not in Be-


ing, as where he is not prefent. "Whence, by


the way, as we fhall fee hereafter, it will ap-
pear, that this Power of Gravity is not only
Immechanical, or does not arife from Corpore-
al Contract or Impulfe, but is not, ftri€tly fpeak-
ing, any Power belonging to. Body or Matter
at ail; tho’ for eafe of Conception and Calcula-
tion we ufually fo {peak ; but is a Power of a
fuperior Agent, ever moving all Bodies after
fuch a manner, as if every Body did Attraét,
and were Attra€ted by every other Body in the
Univerfe, and no otherwife.


N. B. Altho’ There do only infift in particu-


lar on the wonderful Power of Gravity, which


is the general or univerfal Power of the entire »
Syftem; and which is the beft known, the
moft eafily proved, and is indeed the moft evi-
dently Immechanical ; yet do not I exclude
thofe other Noble and Immechanical Powers of
Refra¢tion in pellucid Bodies; of mutual Re-
pulfe in the Particles of the Air, which render
it Elaftical ; of the Cohefion of Parts in con-
fiftent Bodies, and of another Kind of Attra-


tion in homogenial, and of Repulfe in hete-


rogeneous Fluids, €%c. on which the particular
Phenomena of Nature do now appear to de-~
pend; but fhall upon Occafion make ufe of
them fometimes in what follows.


P Raf,


f ReveoN. 47


PROP. Iv.


The Orbits, Revolutions, Diftances, Diame-
ters, Quantities of Matter, Denfities, Gravity
on the Surfaces, Revolutions about their Axes,
Quantities of Light and Heat, above fet down,
concerning the Sun and Planets, both primary
and fecondary, with thofe of the Comets alfo, |
are ‘True and Certain. With an Account of
the Ways whereby we difcover all thofe Parti-
culars.


Demonfivation of the feveral Particulars.


(1.) 'That the Orbits of all the primary Pla-
nets are, as above ftated, El/iptical, was firft dif-
covered, and prov’d with the utmoft Labour
and Induftry, from Zycho’s Obfervations, by the
famous Kepler; particularly as to the Planet De Moti-
Mars; arid is now difcover'd by the great Ex- busStelle
aétnefs of all the Planets Places, and apparent M4"
Diameters, when calculated in fuch Orbits, and
compared with the beft Obfervations. Nor
was the old Hypothefis of the Eeceutrick Civeu- See lig.1V.
Jar Orbits, other than an Approximation to the
true Sy/tem; efpecially when the Aftronomers
came to obferve, that their Circular Eccentrici-
ty would not agree to Obfervation, without its
Bifeétion, as it was call’d; 2. e. without fuppo-
fing the Point of even equable Motion to be as
far beyond, asthe Eccentrical Point was on this
fide the Center of the Circle, which was al-
«moft the fame Thing with owning fuch Orbits
to be Elliptical, and having the Sun in the Infe-
3 rior,


48


A ifironomical Principles


See Math


rior, and the Point of even Motion in or very
near the fuperior Focus; which is the State of
thofe Orbits in our prefent Aftronomy. And —
the Cafe will be the fame as to the Orbits of
the Secondary Ones about their Primaries,where=
ever their Eccentricity can be difcover’d. Nor
is the State of the Comets to be excepted from
this Rule: For tho’ We now generally ufe, Pa+
rabolick inftead of Elliptick Orbits in the Com=


Philof, of Putation of the Comets Motions, yet is this

Comets, Only for that {mall part of their Courfe which

See 381, we can fee, and for the eafe of Calculation ;
Ce


while we are fatisfy’d from their Appearances,


_ that they really move in very Oblong Ellipfes,


Cor fuch as approach to Parabola’s, ) about the
Sun in their lower Foc7, as do the Planets ; that
accordingly they have their proper Periods, in
which they revolve quite round, and return to
the Sunagain; four of which Periods are now
difcover’d ; and that if we computethem in Ellips
fes, inftead of Parabola’s, where-ever the Spe-
cies of thofe Ellipfes are known, we fhould find
our Calculations {till more exaétly to agree with
our Obfervations, as is already the Cafe as to
the Comet 1687.

(2.) The Revolutions of the primary Planets —
about the Sun, and of the Secondary Ones about
their Primaries are above by me thus ftated.


Mera —


of RELIGION.


| 49


Mercury
Venus revolves iv
The Earth about the 365
Mars Sun in the 686
Fupiter (see of set 4332
Saturn 10759
Circumpovials.
D.
The Innermoft ) revolves a- I
The Second bout = 3
The Third ter in the "
The Fourth Space of 16
Circumfaturnals.

? D.
The Innermoft revolves >). I
The Second about Sa- 2
The Third turn in 4
The Fourth Pe as +)
The Fifth 19
The Moon revolves round

the Earth, from any fixed 24
Star, to the fame again, in
From the Sun to the Sun ‘ ,
again, in ?
| y.
Firft of the Four Comets)
revolves i Si rctre =A 13
Second —— vee
Third—~ eee: 129
rr Sas


E


This


ee


See Fig.V.
pe 145.


A ftronomical Principles


This is plain and dire€t Matter of Obferva-
tion ; and depends only on the Comparifon of
the former Places of Planets noted by Aftrono-
mers, to the fixed Stars, to the Sun, or to their
Primaries, with the latter; and the eafy Com-
putation of the Number of Years, Days, Hourss


and Minutes, between fuch Obfervations. Thus, —


ce pO gn NOREEN en Fe!


aye Me Ae tne


for Inftance, we firft know, by grofs Obferva- —
tion, that the Moon is above 27 Days in re= |
volving round us, from any fixed Star to the —
fame again ; we then compare feveral Months —
at once, and find that in 12 Months one with |
another, the Moon is almoft eight Hours above ~
27 Days in fuch a Revolution. And then, ~


laftly, we compare the like Revolutions for
many Years together, and fo difcover that juft |
27 Days, 7 Hours, and 43 Minutes, is its true


Periodical Time.
.N. B. 'The ordinary or Diurnal Parallax
of any Celeftial Body, is the fmall Angle that


is made in a plain Triangle compofed of three


ftrait Lines ; the One from the Center of the —
Body, to a Spectator on the Earth’s Surface: —


The Second from that Center to the Earth’s
Center: The Third from the Spectator to the


fiarth’s Center; or that Angle which is ever


over againft the Earth’s Semidiameter.


N. B. Ifthe Reader be unacquainted with plain


Trigonometry, he is to obferve, that in every
plain Triangle, if two Angles be known, the


thirdsis of Courfe known; and the Proportion
of the Sides is known alfo: This he may try


himfelf in any Triangles equiangular to one’


another, and may, by meafuring the Sides, fee
that their'Proportion is perpetually the fame.
G3.) The


.
.

. x -

4 Z i
.
sn, 2
ee oe ib 3
p


| ries
Thi Plate contains the,fchemes of the Diurnal Parallaxes, of thi ana Moon; |
efor, ep ehory of he Ditrgal ORE TES Sear ithe ee


: ruth:The be Peculiar to cur Famous L):.
Teexhuibits theParallactick Triangle in every Cale: nd in the DiurnalParatlaxs


tthe Sun and Myron in ther Grealét quantity atthe Horizon, their Mean guantity
zea confiderable elevation above theHorizon, and thetr vanifhing arvay t2 Mothuing


apes ag at the D ih th
realguantty, foun atign; L TIL 47. cf the 4
| Aerteruat oth un ahouiee. aD ihe YI ps Ds 3 7 abould}, .
’ lume of.
“the lant. dividing theLightand Dark part. rod ;
Tho Bun haf the Denil Finale £57 he Diletnced otthe Moon b0.lemidia=\


oem


BY i~"an Bp hoe YMA ay
. EN hs eRe
| ; hd Sv}
h :. SVG 4
AAP cy xe , i
) Fen
ACES, ae en ON Ne ue oe es ha ip ir en ney tier
f > aia on 4a +
ike tr 3 Le
5 ne 4 ru 7 | 7 oy .
Bay Ft? eis ee ve WAP lind elas ae 1? ‘ ‘fh >
a eR bmveccryege terme side hi uae ”
= . “a 7 acta, " PA ae, tee . oj Alte peg
Se hh Aneta tee ges vis gestae kang a oe eae hie hiiias dsb Yr ha aside ti Ra Pale
“e + j ¥ on OF 4 Daa
Pi 3 } Pp as
LA
.
4) i
7.
a
te
> : a
* 7 *}
\ ;
> Be ¥
4 3: : wy cd
s Fs ie :
( tS v A: . Wit
. mE “ ‘
iy : to 1a, ‘
A ae +? :
: a :
ae wn t
, ry bond F;
i st  .* 1% a"
ch. a: ~
| y- Ay
oe : °
, ee
)


.


os
a
ive


~
= ee. ae:


Me


ia —


yellers bordieecsl


ie ~- eae te


“ > rm ‘ bail
yeti Ta.


| ain $ ie Ss ; gti i 2
‘of ‘a7 Sag, FEMA
pd 1 a LA,


of RELIGION. 51


©.) The real mean Diftances of the Primary
Planets, and the known Comets, from the Sun,
as alfo of the Secondaries from their Primaries,
have been by me thus determined.


Mercury te 3 2,000.0001 5 i
Venus v | 59,000.00) o 2
The Earth s 7 81, 000.000 es
Mars ia 123,000.000| < 5
Fupiter Ke 424,000.00 & Ae
Saturn | g 77'7,000.000f « &
Neareft of the ¢Com. | & 3 | 1.45'8,000.000 So
Second | $2: 1 1-534,000.000) %
Third | 8 | 2.02$,000.000] 3S
Fourth 2 %6.600,000.0007 & &
Circumpovials.
The Innermoft )is diftant 130,000


The Second (from the ( 364.000 Miles
The Third | Center of (580.000 ‘
The Fourth « )7upiter abt )1,000.000. ,


2 Circumfaturnals.

The Innermoft a 146.090

The Second | 6. sitet 187.000

The Third Path va (263.000 >Miles,
The: Fourth: °\ ge atk 600.006


The Fifth


C obit iy 038 The


52


Aftronomical Principles |


a eo


is diftant ?
: from the » a9 Pcs eyed nt
The Moons 5 snth’sCen-( 240:90° Miles 4
ter about |


Thefe Diftances, as to their Proportion, are
well Known from plain Trigonometry ; I mean,
by the utmoft. Elongation of the Inferiors 5
where ina Rectanglar Triangle, joining the Eye,
the Center of the Sun, and the Center of the
Planet, two of the Sides bear this Proportion to
each other: And by the Angle of Retrogradation
thereto equivalent, in the Superiors; for ’tis
but imagining your Eye, transferr’d to the Su-
perior Planet, and the Earth is an Inferior one
with refpect tothe Eye, andthe Proportion as
before is given; as alfo by the Pofition of Fu-
piter’s Shadow in the Eclipfes of its Satel/ts,
where the Middle of the Eclipfe givesthe Po-
fition of the Central Shadow of ‘Jupiter from
the Sun ; and our Inftruments givethe Pofition
hence : So that we have all the Angles ina
plain Triangle made by the Center of the Sun,
the Center of ‘Fupiter’s Shadow, and the Eye,
which gives the Proportion of the Sides, or of ©
the Diftances ; and by the Proportion of the
Periodick 'Times, compar’d with the mean Di-
{tances in the Comets, all which Methods agree
together in the prefent Cafe. And as tothe Di-
ftances in» Miles themfelves, they are derived
from the «beft Obfervations of the Parallax of
Mars and Venus, by Mr. Flamfteed, Caffini, and —
others, which give us that of the Sun about
10”, and which is followed by Sir I/aac New-
tou inthe fecond Edition of his Principia. On-


dy we may Note, that.this Parallax cannot be


much


of RELIGION, og


much larger, becaufe that would eafily be dif-
cover’d by our Inftruments, but may be a little
lefs, becaufe that is more difficult to be found
out. So that it is more probable that thefe Di-
ftances are fomewhat too little, than that they
are at all too great. But as to fuch farther Ex-
actnefs, it muft be left to the niceft Obfervati-
ons of Pofterity. Nor will it be at all difficult
in that Cafe to fettle more exa¢ét Numbers for
thefe Diftances before us; v#%. thofe in the
reciprocal Proportion to that Parallax. |


* Corollary. From thefe two'Tables compar’d
together, we learn the Mean Annual Horary
Velocities of the Primary Planets, and of the
four Comets about the Sun, and of the Secon-
daries about their Primaries ; as follows:


*


Mercury iy ie Saal ih aati
Venus | 3S 70.000
The Earth ‘3 §6.000
‘Mars bik | 4.5.000
“Fupiter | S, 24.000
“Saturn a ttibiogn? 5 S$ 18.000 2 Miles.
Neareft of the 4 | vere

Comets t & m Mate
Second : | o = 12.5000
Third S) "9.000
Fourth a © 6.0002


N. B. Light moves about 650,000.000 Miles
in an Hour; 10,800.000 in a Minute; and
about 180.000. in a fecond of Time.


E 3 Circnie


A [fronomical P rinciples


Circumjoutals, :


The Innermoft \movesinthe{32.700).
The Second Space of 25-700 ( wasteg
The Third one Hour 20.0007
The Foyth / about


15.900
Circum{aturnals.
The Innermoft 7
The Second moves in the / 3
The Third PSpace of one 714.300 PMiles.
The Fourth... \Hour about \ 9. |
The Fifth ,
_, D moves in the Daal e
The Moon. Space of one~ 2.200 Miles,
: Hour about Sine


(4.) The real Diameters of the ‘Heavenly
Bodies have been by me thus determined, in
Englifh Statute Miles, gens to Mr, Batt:
freed’s Obfervations. | a),


The Sun's Est Otte
Satury’s -——— 61.000
Lupiter s —— 81.000
Mars’s ——— 4.440
Lhe. Earth's ———~, 4.970
The Moon's ——— .2.170
Veuns’s —— 7.900.»
Mercury’ s—-~em——= 4.248


Thefe


of RELIGION.


Thefe Numbers, which are difcover’d by the
apparent Diameters, compared with their real
Diftances, are asto the Earth and Moon, with-
ina {mall Latitude, certainly true in the Miles
themfelves 3 and as to the reft, are within no
great Latitude, certainly true, inthe Proportzon
of one to another ; but not focertain.as to the
Miles themfelves. The Reafon is plain, that
the real Bignefs of the Earth, andof our Neigh-
bour the-Moon, are eafily difcover’d, and meae
fur’d by the Rules of Aftronomers ; but that the
reft are’ fo vaftly remote from. us, that our
niceft Inftruments cannot yet perfectly define
the Difances of any of them; and fo by Con-
fequence cannot perfectly determine their real
Diameters, which depend thereon. Only fotar
Imay, as before, venture to conjecture, that the
real Diftances and Diameters are rather larger
than {maller than thofe here fet down; becaufe
if the Diftances, and fo.the Diameters, were
much lefs, they would. be certainly difcover’d
by our Inftruments ; whereas if. they be fuppos’d
confiderably greater, it muft be {till harder to
difcover thofe. Diftances and Diameters by the
fame Inftruments.

N. B. The Diameters of the Circumjovials
and Circumfaturnals, have not yet been ex-
actly obferv’d by Aftronamers ; fothey can have
no Place in this and fome other Calculations.
Only fo far we perceive by Mr. Huygeus’s Infor:
mation, that they are full.as largeas our Moon ;
nay rather, as the leffer of the primary Planets
themfelves.

_. N.B. Hence we learn the Contents of all thefe
Surfaces in Square Miles, by the help of the

Rlements of Geometry. | |
E 4 phe


55


Cofineth.
Pp q Cc I e


26


RO 415123


A (ftronomical Principles


The Sum contains’ In Surface.

about 1581 3200,000,000 | ¥
Saturn———- —— 14.000,000.000 BS
Jupiter — Bb obieds aaa S
Mars rs, 60,000.000 2 4
The Earth 200,000.000 3
The Moon | 14,000.000!
Venus —- | 200,000.000
Mercury aig 555000.000}


N. B. Hence alfo, by the fame Help of the


Elements, we learn the folid Contents of all


thefe Bodies in Cubical Miles, as follows.


| In Solidity.
The Suz con-


. 230,000,000,000,000,000
tains eur Fo eR RP RNA


a
Saturn 1 60,000.000,000.000 | &
Fupiter 280,000.000,000.000 | &
Mars — —- 4.4..000,000.000 4
The Earth 2.66.000,000.000 | -S
The Moon — 5.000,000.000 | 5
Venus -———-——— 264..000,000.000 |
Mercury Spain 39.000,000.000 }


N. B. Mr. Huygens’s Numbers of the appa-
rent Diameters, are confiderably different from
thofe of Mr. Flamfteed. And I do fuppofe ftill,
what I once propos’d to the Reverend Mr. Der-
bam, and which he approves of in his Aftro-
theology, that the middle Number between
Mr. Flamfteed’s and Mr. Huygens may be the
trueft: Yet do I, in all my Calculations
here, follow thofe of Mr. Flamfteed ; becaufe
Sir I/aac Newton has done fo, even in the laft

2 Edition


of Re LIGION.


Edition of his Principia. When once new Tri-
als have determin’d which of thefe Obfervati-
ons are moft exact, it will not be very difficult
to correct thofe Errors which arife from the
prefent Uncertainty there is among the Obfer-
vations, as to the prefent Diameters.

N. B. If we fum up the laft Quantity of Mat-
ter for the Sun and Planets in the Solar Syftem
together ; and add to it, for the Comets, another
Quantity equal to that of all the Planets ; and,
allowing nothing for the interfpers’d Vacuities,
which yet are much the greater Part, compare the
whole with the Cubical Content of this Syftem
upon the Foot of Mr. Flam/teed’s Parallax of the
fixed Stars, we fhall find that the Quantity of
the Matter is about 231,000.000,000.000, 000
Cubical Miles; and that a Cube of the Diameter
of the Syftem, which I efteem equivalent there-
tO, is Near 3,000.000,000.000,000.000,000,000
©00.000.000.000 of the fame Miles, 7. e. it will
~ appear that this Quantity of Matter is little more
than the 12,000.000,000.000,000.00oth Part of
the empty Space; or in other Words, that a
{mall Pin-head bears a much greater Proportion
to a Cubical Mile, than all the Matter in this
Syftem bears to the empty Space therein con-
tain’d.

C5.) The Quantities of Matter in fuch of the
Planets as afford us the Opportunity of difco-
vering the fame, have been by me thus ftated ;


The Sun’s 227500
Fupiter’s as 220
Saturn’s : 94
The Earth’s —F


The Moon’s between —75 and 73 |
I Thefe


57


58
_""'Phefe Numbers are agreeable to Sir Jjaae


A  ftronontical ¥; rinciples |


Newton's laft Calculations, and belong only to
fuch of the. Heavenly Bodies as have Planets
about them, or which influence our ‘Tides ; from
the Quantity of which Effects alone we can col-
leét the Quantity of the Caufes, or of the Mat-
ter ineach Body. The way of difcovering this
Quantity is eafy, from what. has. been already
proved, that the univerfal Power of Gravitation
is in proportion. always to the Quantity of Mat-
ter in each attracting Body. . For if from the
conftant Equality of Proportion there is ber
tween the Cubes of the Diftances and the Squares
of the Periods, we, by the Rule of Three, re-


‘duce the feveral Syftems of the Planets to any


one Diftance from their Central Bodies, and
there Geometrically compute the Proportion of
the Centripetal Power to each Central Body,
which. in that Cafe. is. directly. proportional to
the Square of the Velocity of the Planet, we
fhall have the Quantity of the Force of Gravity
towards every one of them; and, by Confe-
quence, the Quantity of that Matter which oc-
cafions the fame, and is proportionable thereto,
Fot Example; Let us reduce the Diftance of
Jupiter's innermoft Planet from ‘Fupiter, tothe
jame Diftance as the Earth has from the Sun ;
and obferve the Difference of their Preiods or —
Velocities in thofe equal Circles, by this Rule;
As the Cube of the SateWits real Diltance 230,
000=12.167,000.000,000.000, to the Cube of
its imaginary. Diftance 81,000.000=$31.44.1,
©00.000,000.0090,000.000;. fo is the Square of —
its real Period in Minutes 2548, at its prefent Di-
ftance from Fupiter 6492304, to 28357660311 ~
2024, the Square of its imaginary Period vf the
3} ame


of RELIGION. 59


fame Diftance from it, as the Earth has from the

Sun; whofe Square Root therefore 16,839.733

is the Period of that Suteiit there in Minutes.

Now as the Squares of thefe Periods recipro-

cally, which is as the Squares of their Velocities
directly, 7.¢, as 276643388961 to 283 §86607
511289, Oras 220 to. 227500 nearly, {fo are their
Attractions towards their refpective Central Bo-

dies, and /o are the Quantities of Matter in thofe

Central Bodies ; which was to be demonftrated:

and fo for the reft. By this Method we know

the Sun's, ‘Fupiter’s, Saturn’s, and the Earth’s,
Quantity of Matter. As for the Moon, this Me-

thod cannot reach it; becaufe there are no

Planets revolving about it: But then the Tides

in our Ocean, arifing from the Suu and.Mooi’s
Influences, or the Water’s Gravitation towards

them ; and the Spring Tides being the Effet of

the Sum of their Forces, when they are united;

while the Nepe Tides are owing to the Diffe-

rence letween them.when_ they. are .oppofite ;

we gather from the Obfervation, made of thofe

Spring and Nepe Tides, what the Proportion.

of their Powers is at their, different Diftances ;
whence we compute what it would be at equal
Diftances; 7. ¢ what Proportion there is be-

tween the Quantity of their Matter refpectively.

Thus for Example; the higheft Elevation of

the Tide by the Sun and Moon, at the Conjun-

Ction and Oppofition, is to its Elevation by the
prevalence of the Moon over the Sun after the
Quadratures, by the beft Obfervations, as 5+ to

32. Whence it follows, that the Moon’s Force See Sir 1-
is to the Sun’s as 43\to 1. For half the Sum of faacNew-
any two Quantities, atided to half their difference '°" ‘ a A
giving the larger, and fubftracted from it gi- Bais, pag,
eS : : ae, VINE 426,-430.


60 A  flronomical Principles


ving the fmaller, as any one may eafily try, it
follows from the proportion of the Sum, to the —
Difference above ftated, 5 to 3:3 that their fe-
parate Forces muft be in the proportion juft
now mentioned of 47 to 1. Whence that Quan-
tity of Matter in the Moon, which at its pro-
per diftance will bear this proportion of 47 to x
in the Elevation of our Tides and no other,
muft be its true Quantity. By a Computation
from which Principles, it appears that the Moon
has little more than the 9,100.000th part of
the Quantity of Matter in the Sun ; or, which
is all one, little more than the goth part of the
Quantity in the Earth, as this’Table informs us.
For if you fuppofe the Sun as near as the Moon,
its Force on the Tides will be fo much greater
than that of the Moon, as its Magnitude is
See Math. greater; 7. e. as about 9,100.000 is to 1, but then
Philof. that Force being diminifhed as the Cube of the
Prop. 38. “Sun’s greater Diftance is increas’d, or nearly as
eS » the Cube of 337 = 38,272.753 to 1; is upon
ee the whole fo much more diminifh’d than in-
creas’d, that it amounts to only the 4:th part of
it; that being nearly the quotient of 38,272,753
divided by 9,100.000. By this means we are
able to add the Moon’s Quantity of Matter to —
that of the reft of the foregoing Bodies. But
fince neither Mars, Venus, Mercury, nor any
of the Comets, have any vifible Planets abotit ~
them; nor do they fenfibly affect our Tides ;
we have no means of knowing the Quantity of
Gravitation towards them, and fo no means of
knowing the Quantity of Matter contained in
them. | : -
(6.) The Denfities of the foregoing Heavenly
Bodies have been by me thus already sg vi
‘The


of RELIGION.


The Moon’s. as 123%


The Earth’s as 100
The Sun’s as hej ORS
Tupiter’s as O19
Saturn’s as 15


_ 'Thefe Numbers are thus difcover’d. By what
has been already fet-down, we know the real
quantity of Matter in thefe feveral Heavenly
Bodies ; as alfo their true Diameters, and thence
their entire Bulk or Magnitude; whence we ha-
ving given quantities of Matter in given Spaces,
we muft have withal the Denfities of the fame
quantities alfo.

Or thus; Spheres of the fame Diameters
with thefe Bodies, will not have their juft
quantities.of Matter above ftated, unlefs their
Denfities be as thofe Numbers here fet down ;
whence it follows, that thefe and no other ex-
prefs their real Denfities refpectively.

Thus for Example: The Solid Space in the
Earth is to that in the Moon, as the Cubes of
their Diameters, or as 482 to 1; but, as we
have feen,-the quantity of Matter in the Earth
is to that in the Moon only, as 39: to 1;
whence it follows, that the Denfity of the Moon
compenfates its fmallnefs, and is to that of the
Earth as 482 to 3975 Oras 1237 to roo, accord-
ing to the Table before us; and the Cafe is the
very fame in the reft.

(7.) The Weights of equal Bodies on the
Surfaces of the Sun and Planets laft mentioned,
have been by me thus determined.


On


——


oa


62 Pha Aronomical Principles


On the Surface of the Suz, as 24,40
The Earth, as 1,00


Fupiter, as 2,00
The Moon, as 0,34,
Saturn, as 1,28


That is, one Pound with us weighs on the
Sun’s Surface 24% Pounds, and fo of the reft,
‘Thefe Numbers are eafily deriv’d from fome
of thofe that go before. For fince we have al-
ready obtain’d thofe that exprefs the Gravita«
tion towards thefe Heavenly Bodies, at equal di-
{tances from their refpective Centers ; and fince
we have alfo already obtain’d their true Diame-
ters ; and thence know their true Semi-dia-
meters; and fince we know withal, that the
Power at different diftances is ever at the Squares
of thofe diftances reciprocally : It cannot be
difficult thence to compute the quantity of this
Power at the particular diftances of every ones
Semi-diameter ; which is the fame with the
Weight of equal Bodies on their refpective Sur=
faces. '
Thus for Example: The-quantity of Matter
in the Earth is to that in the Moon as.39: to I
and in the fame proportion do all Bodies gravi-
tate to them at equal Diftances from their re
{pective Centers. But fince the Force of Gra-
vitation diminifhes, as the Square of the diftance
increafes, and the diftance of the Earth’s Surface
from its Center is to that of the Moon’s from
its Center, as 365 to 100, whofe Squares are ag
133 to 1, this greater diftance diminifhés the
former Excefs of Proportion, and reduces it to”
that of 397 to 133, or, as inthe Table, to tha
) | of


&


of RELIGION. 63


of 100 to 34. And the Cafe is the fame in the
reft.

(8.) The Diurnal Revolutions of the Sun and
Planets about their own Axis, with ref{peét to
the Fixed Stars, have been already ftated thus :


| 1B Paes Go eg

The Sun revolves in about 25: 6: ©
Fupiter in OG). 07 £0

Mars in Bt aay Ais

The Eartb in G3'33 f-¥6

Venus in hide peed ae.

The Moon in A Ay DR


The way by which thefe Diurnal Revolutions
are difcovered in the Sun, Jupiter, Mars, and
Venus, is obvious ; I mean the Obfervations by
_ Telefcopes of certain Spots in their Surfaces, and
the Noting how long it is e’er thofe Spots come
round again. The Earth’s Period is known from
the apparent Motion of the Fixed Stars from any
Meridian to the fame again ; which isa Periodi-
cal Revolution, or Day. The Moon’s diurnal
Period is known from the Periodical Month,
which is exactly equal thereto; otherwife the
fame fide of the Moon would not be always.
turned to our Earth, as it certainly is; and that
to fuch.a degree of Nicety, that the Menftrual
and Diurnal Motions of the Moon have not in
the leaft gain’d nor loft upon each other from
the earlieft Times of Obfervation: which is a
thing exceeding remarkable, and what will be
taken particular Notice of hereafter.


Corollary. ‘By comparing this and the fourth
Table together, we learn the true Horary Diur-
ry: nal


O4


Afironomical Principles


nal Velocity of the Equatorial Parts of the feve-
ral Planets: which therefore are as follows.


The Sun’s Equator *) 4.000)
‘Jupiter's moves in {25.000


Mars’s the {pace gool &
The Earth’s of an 1.030f @
Venus’s Hourabt.\ 1.060\ ©
The Moon's — 10


(9.) The Quantity of Light and Heat deriv’d
from the Sun to every Primary Planet of this
Syftem, and to each of the four Comets, when
at their mean diftance, has been already fet
down, according to the Numbers following.


Bodies clofe by the Sun as 45000


Mercury as 6
Venus as 2
The Earth and Moonas 1x
Mars as fs
Jupiter as a7
Saturn as 3°
1{t Comet as 528
2d Comet os yee ae
3d Comet | zs
4th Comet eaee


-'Thefe Numbers are eafily found; being as
the Squares of the Planets diftances from the
Sun reciprocally. a

(10.) The Eccentrictties of the Orbits of the
feveral Planets, and of the 4. Comets, are thus
fet down already ; fuppofing each of their mid-
dle Diftances to be reprefented by 1000.


In


TT Ee EA TE STE DASE TTA EN EE SR,


of RELIGION. 65
In Proportion. In Miles.
Saturn's 55—— 4.2573 5.000 -
Fupiter’s 4.8—— 2053 §2.000
Mars’s 93--— 1154.39.000
Lhe Earth's 17 —— 15377.000
Venus’s ~—— 054.13.000
Mercury’ s 210 —— 6,720.000


The Moon's 55-— 0501 3.000


N. B. The Eccentricities of the Orbits of the
four Comets, are nearly equal to their middle
Diftances themfelves; which are already fet
down, p. 51. prius. ;

Thefe Eccentricities are known, as to the
Planets, by the Difference of their Apparent
Diameters, and of their Real Difances, reci-
procally proportional to them in the Aphelia
and Perihelia of the Planets ; the half of which
Difference is equal to this Eccentricity. But in
the Comets, whofe fartheft Diftance is invifi-
ble, *tis known by the mere Subtraction of their
neareft from their mean Diftance ;. and noting
the Difference : this Difference is the Eccentri-
city it felf. |

The Times in which the feveral Primary
Planets would fall to the Sun, and the Secor-
aries to their Primaries, if their Projectile Ve-
locities were {topp’d, and they were permitted
to fall dire€tly to thofe Centers, by the Power
of Gravity, are by me elfewhere thus ftated.


B . _. Mercury


A ftronontical Principles


D.
Mercury 4 > 15
Venus | | 39
The Earth or Moony — 64
Mars | would 121
fupiter fall to | 767
Saturn theSunin}{ Igo0o0
Neareft Comet | 4.000
Second 5000
Third 8000
Fourth J: 7 34000

The Circumjovials.
The Innermoft would fe)
‘The Second fall to O
‘The Dihird ys Jupiter ¢ 1
The Fourth in 2
The Circumfaturnals. -

The Innermoft 3 °
The Second would O°
The Third fall to re.
The Fourth Saturn 2
The Fitth in 14,
‘The Moon would fall to the
- Earth in -


20


A Stone would fall to the Earth’s Center, if
there were a hollow Paffage, in 21’. 9”.


The Way of difcovering thefe Numbers is —
this: It has been demonttrated in the Place al-
ready referr’d to, that half the Period of every
Planet, when it is diminifhed in the Sefquialte-


yal Proportion of the Number 1 to the Number 2,


or


a hce
he

7...
ih »


4
be


De baer i ey | ye hae
Ki ie SAD AR. vat
, . i


‘

, Bat Bei thy i

PVE A Lie oc eae eres A pdtima teed «had te Gee
}


oe a


a" .
a


By


es Sn hat
\4 af ee PVN
Sia


A MAP of the Moon 76!


JS Fe Fuccean ?


a:MareHypertoreum .
b.Paludes Hyperboree :


72. toa Cherfor nclud :
o.Ltahi. Pp: Mzfi2 = 2 , F NY
7: diaMhinsr. r. Colchis &. bya. a .dnf> Cercnt
.Mong—Sinar . shar eh 3 Al. Sopher. ¢ dBina. 5 Ml. Apenninus . (ae


faa St a the Pace of the Moon as tappears throu
actheLull and ad deliribed by Bevelius; the DarkPy ta
ae the Bri phe Parts Lind, andthe long white Streaks, theltt Lrmieald
of Ridges ot Hi tghMaountaind .
LheSoots. here Defé ribed are for the main the Jame thatare continu
expos to cur -ondecountof the exact adpufiment of the Maron
| Diurnal and Menfirual Revolutions, whereby ‘beailashe very same
face contnually turned towards ourE arth.
 Lbay nothing of heLibrationd difecverd in its Mouond by Lev
L L wd, which ae heLartd sometimed hidden to appear to ud ated
| thereby affordtls Bordering Inhabitants /, (enh choviba) the gl
= oud Veet PMs ich the more remote Ones can never ¢
without: aveling agreatway forso uncommon abroop,
Co hr capes an dtmolphere aboutit we have late Yy diiovs
but that dtmoffhere being very thin and onl, visible in Lotal


Beliphes i aa cena i Seneca’ ei


of RELIGION, | 67


or nearly in the proportion of 1000 to 2828,
_ is the Time of its fall ing to the Center : From
‘which Demonftration it is eafy to derive the
foregoing Numbers.

(a1.) The Moon has Day, and Night, Sum-
mer and Winter, Mountains and Valleys, Land
and Sea; as alfo an Air or Atmof[phere, with s
Clouds and Vapours, and a Moon, and all after Maret the
the fame manner, in general, that our Earth Moon, Fig.
has them. . VI. |

That the Moou has Day and Niebr, is evident
from the conftant falling of the Sun’s Light up-
on one Hemifphere of the Moon, and the re-
moval of that Light, from Eafto Weft, quite
round it, in a Synodical Month, and is vifible
to our Eyes; which Space is therefore equal ta
anentire NuxSiweesvy which ig 29d. 12h. 44’,
long by our Computations.

That the Moon has Sunumer and Winter, is
evident from the Librations of its Body, North
and South, which imply that its Axis is about
6: Degrees diftant from that of the Ecliptick,
as our Summer and Winter is made by the De-
clination of the Earth’s Axis 23+ Degrees from
the fame Axis. Only it hence follows, that in
the Moon, tho’ the Day be near 30 times as
Jong as ours, and the Year only equal to ours
in duration; yet that Year is with much lefs.
Inequality of Seafons, of Heat in Summer, and
Cold in Winter, than ours ; on account of the
much {mailer Declination of the Moon’s Axis,
than of that of our Earth, as compard with
the Axis of the Ecliptick.

That the Moon has Mowitains and Valleys,
every Body that has feen its Face througha Te-:


lefcope cannot but know; thefe Inequalities of
EZ ? its


Ul


68


A {fironomical Principles


Aftro-
Theol.
Pref, p.51


its Surface, efpecially near the Limits of Light
and Darknefs, excepting the Full Moon, being
to all moft obvious and fenfible ; as are alfo a
great Number of circular Cavities in othi
Places, into whichthe Sun may be perceiv'd'to
fhine, and caft a Shadow, ( excepting near the
Full Moon) as evidently as the Moon does fo
here withus. Only it muft be noted, that thofe
who have meafur’d the Height of the Lunar
Mountains, which we ftand here very conveni-
ently to do, find them much higher, at leaft in
proportion to its Semi-diaineter, if not alfo in
reality, than thofe of our Earth. .
That the Moon has Land and Sea, or fome
Parts fullof Inequalities, like our Land, which
ftrongly refleét Light; and others {mooth and
plain, like our Seas, which refle¢t it more
weakly, is, Ithink, now very clear, not only


from the obvious diftinétion which even the


naked Eye makes between the rougher brighter
Parts, and the {moother Spots, and which the
Telefcope does more fully confirm ; but more
particularly from Mr. Derham’s Noble Obferva-
tion, which Iam inform’d was firft made by He-
velius ; thatwhenthe Limit of Lightand Dark-
ne{fs paffes over the brighter Parts, *tis plainly
jagged and uneven; but ftrait and even when
it paffes over the darker; which feems to me
entirely to determine this Matter.


That the Moon hasan 4ir or Atmofphere


encompaffing it round, is now, I think, very


plain alfo, from its Appearance in Total Eclipfes —


of theSun, the fitteft Times of all for its Ob-


fervation, and efpecially from the two laft 'To-


tal Eclipfes, in 1706, and 1715, of which laft
Ihave given a full Account to the World; and
which


ee ae y As se ‘


wee. Aoi


P wile


hewn tee re atiersin =<


coed
-


ae cad


he S
RENE Sr


Sheet
eee
eee


=


a hb ne


or


Kor!
mah ah


A me he


a


“ag


a Le


of RELIGION.


_ which Atmo/phere has alfo been in fome degree
taken notice of in the laft total Eclipfe, May 11.
1724. and of which I have taken notice in my
_ Account of that Eclipfe. Only we muft ob-

ferve, that it appears by the Phenomena, that

“the Moon’s Atmofphere is, in proportion at leaft,
_ much digher than ours, and at the fame time
much rarer alfo. si |


That the Moon has Clouds and Vapours, is


evident from the foregoing Affertions, as to its
Seas and Atmofphere ; and is diftinétly proved
by the Phenomena of the Eclipfe, 1715. in
the Scheme or Account before-mentioned. On-
ly it muft thence be noted, that the rarenefs of
its Atmofphere is fo great, that it will not fup-
port fuch grofs opake Maffes as our Clouds are
here ; but that the Vapours there rife and fall
ina more eafy and infenfible manner, than is
the Cafe inour Earth, at leaft fince the Deluge
of Noah: For I am ftill of the fame mind as to
the Antedilvuian State, which I propofed in my
New Theory, that the Earth’s Atmofphere was
at that time comparatively regular and clear,
and did then refemble what we find to bethe
agreeable condition of the Lunar Atmofphere at
this Day ; I mean by the Rifing of the Vapours
in the Day, and their Falling down inthe Night,
in the Form of a gentle Mift; without any of
thofe Opake Maffes which we call Clouds; and
without any of thofe violent Storms of Wind,
Rain, Thunder, and Lightning, €c. which we,
to our Sorrow, experience in our Atmofphere
fince that time.
That our Earth is a Moon to the Moon it


p.24.6,247


felf, and that a glorious and moft ufeful One |


alfo, isnot only evident from the Confiderati-


F 3 on


i


-


Aftronomical Principles


onof the Aftronomical Syftem of the Earth and
Moon, but is direétly vifible to our felves alfo ;
it being clear that that Secondary Light which
we commonly fee inthe dark part of its Body,
for feveral Days before and after the New Moon,
is no other than Light reflected to the Moon
from oir Earth, and thence reflected back to
us again. Nor is this very furprizing neither;
fince the Square of the Earth’s Diameter is more
than Thirteen times as great as that of the
Moon; and by Confequence the Light of the
Earth is at the Moon in the fame proportion grea-
ter, thanthat of the Moon at the Earth. Only
it muft be here noted, that how confiderable
foever the Light of a full Moon be to us, and ~
the Lightof afull Earthto the Moon, yet that
both of them are very inconfiderable, if com-_
par’d with that of the Sun to either of thems
as being ceteris paribus in the Proportion only
of the Square of the Earth’s Semi-diameter, to
the Square of the diftance between the Earth and
Moon, or, which is the fame thing, asthe en+


_lightned Hemifpherical Surface of the Moon or


Earth, whence the Sun’s Light is reflected, to
that Hemifpherical Surface whofe Radius is the
diftance of the Moon from the Earth, over
which that reflected Light is fpread : 7. e. that
the Sun’s whole Light is about 48000 times as
great as that of a Full Moon to us; and about
3600 times as great as that of a Full Earth to
the Moon.


' N. B. Poflibly therefore the Reafon why we
have never been able to procure any fenfible
Heat by burning Glaffes, when expos’d to the
Moon, is not from any real want of Heat in
them,


of RELIGION. 71


them, but only becaufe thofe Glaffes have never
. been large enough to gather Lunar Rays fuffi-
cient for that Purpofe.

N. B. 'The other Secondary Planets, I mean.
thofe about Fupiter and Saturn, are too fmall
and too remote from us, to afford us fuch In«
dications of their State, as we have of the
State of our Secondary Planet the Moon, Nor
indeed do the primary ones themfelves afford
us enow of them to determine in particular
theirown State, astomany fuch Matters. On-
ly ‘Fupiter affords us the Appearance of Belts,
or movable Girdles, and befides them, his
Satellites afford us that famous Phenomenon
of the Velocity of the Rays of Light: And
Saturn, befides his Five Planets, affords us fuch
a Ring encompaffing his Body, as feems to be
the moft fingular and curious Spectacle in the
whole Syftem. Of thefe Three Phenomena there-
fore I fhall give fome farther Account, before I
proceed to the Cometsand fixed Stars.

(12.) As to the Belts, or movable Girdles of g.. Fig,
Jupiter, they feem to be formed by its Clouds, VIII.
which appear to lie and to move regularly,
parallel to its Equator, much after that man-
ner that our Clouds do between the Tropicks 5
where the conftant Trade-Winds blowing ftill
from Eaft to Weft, muft in a lefs Degree,
caufe our Earth’s Surface to appear at a great
Diftance with fuch Belts alfo. Nor is it
very ftrange, that Fupiter’s Clouds lie more
copioufly and regularly in fuch a parallel Situ-
ation, than oursdo, if we remember the vaftly
greater Magnitude of ‘fupiter, than of our
Earth 5; and its much quicker diurnal Revolu-

/ F4 | tion


B hase rie Ss


Aftronomical Principles


_tion.at, the fame Time. But. as to Fupiter’s,.—


SeeFig 1X,


and other bright fixed Spots, compar’d with
the reftof the duller Parts, I take them, as in
the Moon to be Indications of the Diverfity of
Land and Sea in thofe Planets ; although their.
much greater Diftance from us, makes it hi-
therto a great deal harder to difcover the fame
more diftinétly. |

(73.) That the Rays of Light arenot ameer
and abfolute Inftantaneous Preflure through a
Fluid, but a real Succeffion of the {mall Parti-
cles of Light gradually, and in a Time flowing
from the Sun’s Body, isproved by the Eclipfes
of Fupiter’s Planets, ‘Thefe Eclipfes ever anti-
cipate the even Calculation, when our Eye, by -
the annual Motion, meets the Rays of Light
reflected from them, whether at their laft Egrefs
from the Sun’s Light into ‘Fupiter’s Shadow,
or at their firft Ingrefs into the fame Light af-
terward ; and the Eclipfes ever come too flow
for the fame even Calculation, when we are.
going from thofe Rays; and this ftill in that
Proportion, which implies that the Rays go
no lefs than 81,0c00.000 ‘Miles, or fromthe _
Sun to the Earth, in half a Quarter of an —
Hour. : :

C14.) That Satury has a broad Ring about...
it felf, like a broad Tin Horizon about a Globe, ~
is now well Known, fince the Days. of the fa-.


mous Monfieur Huygens, who firft difcovered .


what it was: And every body that views Sa--—


See Fig.X. turn through a good Lelefcope of 'Ten or more, ~


Feet, may fee it very plainly at this Day.
This Ring is-vaftly large; and when meafur’d
by the Micrometer, andcompar’d with Saturn’s

| oa own


fronting Lage 9a


- fave ie echibited fo we Bee Dien Seen 4 -
tes, tit thet? Lrie. tions, ad th La

iter had ws Beles; RAD dee ire of theme: tha SO, Gt by whore ae) i 7 7 -
velutuonteveral timid hid DiurnalPeriad wad Ab th tors oe:

turn had alfo herels Ringsn ets teueProportion . ' . \
efided thefe we have here'reprefented ankeliplectone cf, j > 4

rte rs As sos both atils enerhoil ale and kd meorst= i ' \
at: former cf which w alone vijil ble to wd fromJu cg foe rie
cesino rth eae to us Opposition ;or


pares 6, by a,and p, to 0: A i the late pM 7
ne fon the Penel loon tp us Conpunction; ids: San
ere J atc pe tas o,by hand 4, ie. er ia orth | | Orde}
rp ne thous appearance! from LW Aat $e '
remarkable wb this, that Sot spat: id :


ie ec
ad seas ea Jin 95 «alah too oan cur /;
we meet the last Rays before; and the LMS
» late, by our-going trom the first Rays i io
J empl ton of Light to $e acy rate \\ ule \y
180,000 ITules in one Second of ime ; orto be halfa
*chanHour tn comeing’ Sir00,cc0 Ilileds from Max “it rg.
ee arth. ie crane feule ©


i
S,
v
'
t
i
® i
we
!
t
; .
‘ j
oe


Raith ee oe


Bilodd sh Ravy song,


ee nnas
te
=
.


ee


a


ee


wr


re git


* Vee oat


Hus


:
:
4
q K
-
4 a
: ’ ¥ -
4 ny Py S 2


yh cine aM, me sah Rave ee ly rw a ae otk

+4 Bere oe PTY % 2, Ws bertoal eG Schare he
yo ey nde ae ete iti, A v or ar \ jo Say

i ibs . eee ghelb aes, Rear tal


; 7 Ae ye A wie hat i Aer + ky tani Ses
a? 4 4 4" % * a Bes *
Se “" . 4 oe abet xs % ba A bat
i Me ho ‘es POUT Hie | wR, 5 ie ‘ ¥ WS
. of 4 F
: ‘ osiyiy IT ETA HAY .
. an la


of RELIGION. : 93


own Body, appears to have the Dimenfions
following.


Outward Semi-Diameter 76000
Difference, or Breadth 21000
_Diftance from Saturn’s Body
on every Side ( 21 sy
Thicknefs not exactly known ;
perhaps | 750


Inward Semi-Diameter about 55000


Miles,


N. B. This Ring cafts a mighty Shadowupon
large Regionsof Saturn’s Body, which removes
from one Part to another, ahd caufes great Di-
verfity as to Lightand Darknefs thereon: And,
what is probably to them more ftrange, they
hardly know what it is that caufes thofe Vari-
 eties: For though we ftand conveniently to fee
what it is, and know it to be a mighty Ring
encompafling Saturn’s Body ; yet is it not fo
ealy for any in Saturn to difcover it. They
muft naturally imagine it to be in the Heavens
above them; and have, as it feems, no way
but by Aftronomical Obfervations and Parallax,
to find out what it is: Juft as we find out the

iance and Motions of the Moon, or of any
other Heavenly Body. Whether thisRing, or
indeed Saturn it felf, revolve about its Axis,
we are not yet affur’d: Norare we certain whe-
_ ther this Ring be Solid or Fluid. When once
our Glaffes can fhew us any permanent Spots
in the Body and Ring of Saturn, we fhall be
able to determine whether there be fuch a di-
jurnal Motion or not ; but till that Time we
_ muft be content with Conjectures: For which,
if there be room, I fhould certainly fuppofe the
», 1 Ring


74


1s:
=


A [ftronomical Principles |


Ring to be Solid, and both to have fuch a Mo-
tion ; nor only from its Conveniency for any
Creatures that may be thereon, but from parity
of Reafon, and the general Cafe of the reft of


the Heavenly Bodies: Notone of which are yet


See the Ac
countof Co-
mets to-
avards the
end of my
Mathe-
matick
Philofo-
phy, at
large.
Ibid. p-
Al5.


known to be deftitute of fuch a Motion; al-
though fome of them have not yet afforded us
an Opportunity of certainly determining the
fame. rst,

C15.) The Number of the Comets is. very
confiderable ; to be fure much greater than of
the vifible Planets. Our famous Dr. Halley, by
fearching into the Hiftories of them, and com-
paring the Obfervations made about them, has
given us a Catalogue or Table of fo many as
he could find well enough defcrib’d to af-
ford Foundation for determining their Orbits 5
which Table I have elfewhere given the
Reader. a

This Number is 24, all which have appear’d
within the laft4oo Years, inthefe Parts of the
World. He hasalfo obferv’d, that out of thefe


24, Three had their Orbits and Circumftances


P. 494
465.


fo very like, and the Intervals of appearing fo
nearly equal ; and that twice T wo others had their
Orbits and Circumftances fo very like alfo, that


he juftly concluded it exceeding probable that


the former Three were one and the fame ; and
infome Meafure fo, that the latter Two were fe-
verally alfo one and the fame Comet ; returning
the 1ft after 7, the 2d after 81, and the laft after
129 Years. Sir I/aac Newton allo difcover’d,and in
the new Edition of his Prine7pza, Publifhed his
Difcovery, that the laft moft eminent Comet of
1680, 1681, towards the end of its Appear-
nce, bent its Courfe fo much inward from a
Para-


ee ee ee


- “ . = . ere ae - Poco


of RELIGION. 75


Parabolick Line, as to shew its real Trajectory
to be Elzptical; and this in fuch Proportion,
that its Period of returning muft be more than
soo Years. After which Difcovery I my felf,
for feveral Reafons, fuppofing this to be the
fame Comet that caufed the Deluge, did ac-
cordingly guefs the Period to be either 575, or
$a4. Years; according as it had made either
Seven or Eight Revolutions fince that Time ;
and drew up Tables upon both thofe Hypothe-
fes, when the fame Comet muft have appear’d
afterwards, in order to fearch whether they did
fo or not; but not having either Hevelins’s or
Luvienetz’s Hiftories of Comets then by me,
I could not immediately confirm my Hypothefis
any further. But in a little time I found, that
Sir Ifaac Newton, and Dr. Halley, had com-
pleated what I wanted; and had difcovered that
juft fuch a Comet had appear’d the 44th Year
before the Chriftian va, which was the Year
that Julius Cefar was flain; as alfo, Anno Dom
$31, Or §32; andagain 4. D. 1106; and_laft-
ly, 4. D. 1680, 168, and this ftill, after the’
_forementioned Interval of about, 575 Years;
and that they accordingly did juftly conclude
it to be the very fame Comet that appeared in
thofe feveral Years. So that we have the Or-
bits of only 21 Comets, and the Periods at the
moft of only four of them yet known.

NN. B. The firft of thefe Three appear’d pro-
bably 1304, and 14.56, but more certainly 1531,
1607, and 1682; and will by Confequence ap-
pear again 1758, and 1832, and fo every 75
Years afterwards. The Second of them appear’d
_ probably 1475, 1556, and 1718, and may not
improbably be expected 1799. The third ap-

peared 4. D. 1582, and not improbably toe

an


76


A ifironomical Principles


SeeFig. XI.


were carried up by the Solar Rays; as alfo that ©


/


and fo may be expected 1789, and 1918, and
fo every 129 Years afterwards. The Fourth


having laft appear’d 1680, 1681, and having
its Period no lefs than 575 Years, cannot return


till 4. D. 2255. But then, as to the reft of
the Comets, we cannot yet foretel the Periods
of their Revolution, for want of Ancient exact
Hiftories and Obfervations, but muft leave their
Determination to future Ages ; which will, ‘no


doubt, if Aftronomical Learning continues in —


the World, be in Time fully difcovered, and
known by our Pofterity. |

N. B. The Obfervations fhew that the Co-
mets are about the Bignefs of the Planets, and
have vaft Amofpheres about them; the Cen-
tral Parts thereof being denfer than the Superfi-
cial; asalfo, that the Vapours and Clouds there-
of are hurried about in great Diforder and Con-
fufion, like Planets in a Chaotick State: It alfo


appears from the like Obfervations when near — |


the Sun, that their Atmofpheres wind themfelves
round like a revolving Globe, and afcend to-


wards the Regions oppofite to the Sun; as if —
the rareft Vapours whereof they are compos’d, _


thofe Tails are generally the longeft which
arife from the greateft Nearnefs to the Sun.
N. B. The Motion of Comets being fome
from North to South, others from South to
North; fome from Eaft to Weft, others from


I ge


Weft to Eafts in all Planes and Directions ; and —


this from the very Sun downwards, to the Re-
gions vaftly beyond Saturn upwards ; and that
Motion appearing moft exactly regular, without
the leaft Retardation by any fenfible R efiftance in


their feveral Courfes, it isthence moft certain,that —


there


hi


G
Litlo
L% alJS; ied


FEL A,


COME:
cLfelfi
the Cent,


.


Tal fa C.
72


LIC wera


of the
spd


~ he 4
BINS aor oe SS es. ‘
StH S SN.


LE


a
Lim
lac


te) rund about


feope .
'
‘
t
'
'
'
t
t
'
1
t
‘
'
'
'
t
'
'
'
'
'
t
’
'
'
'
'
'
!
'
‘
’
'
'
'
’
'
1
'
'
‘
'
’
'
‘
'
!
N '
hae
'
'
'
'
'
'
i)
WO
"
"
"
”
’
“
"
ft
'
’
'
'
'
ye


rlhot ils
’
‘
'
'
'
'
'
‘
'
'
‘
'
'
‘
'
'
'
i]
'
'
'
'
'
'
’
'
!
'
'
'
4
'
.)
’
,
i]
J
)
'
t
5
{
i]
'
!
'
!
!
'
'
i]
‘
'
'
)
'
'
1
'
1
,


-
tof “a AKaNE


‘Sy .
gas Slee ae Se Sen = = = = <a eS oe = Se eee = —e =a € x , ; mak won ‘
ee a - =< : a eo 2? eee Fo Sl
S nee = \ ene a a re ‘ ‘ v4
ai = = ae = --eseee~ 7 ‘ ee
a sd -—-? - 6 # - ia
oan ao 7 Te ee - 4 4 Ped eee ;
& og, ee sacl on he eee ae é. oi ee : H f
. ee ee a ee Ce Sa -- * he oF ‘ ‘ tof
. ----?* --—- % < maa f os
5 a ee, ee ne = at weet --*3 ‘ te shee oe
eee « ee Ae ae San * s tn “
aa a -_--7 ¥ at I 4 ‘
si rlri-- - ae
Sinan = «= a , a ‘ ed
«---- . <= 25 = a ae =" 7 é “cf
- re - © =<" A -n 7
a - ’ ’ YR net


refenta
with the
ae

1

'

'

‘

'

'
‘
‘
'
4
‘
‘
1
'
‘
1
‘

c
iy
t
‘

'
’
'
+
'
1
'
'
’
t
s]
1
'
'
Li
‘
\
‘
\

1
'
‘
‘

\ )
at

q
A
b)
4
‘
‘
x
‘

‘

)
ws
)

4
bal)

*

2
t


-- —= « -
Cy ee a - -
S Janome eee a teat tal 5 em
ee ae = a= mm 7 oe” at
pc: a Sa ie 23 ie ee ae gsonr
ou. eee ae a= Ss ae a
2 Ot ee teat -- << yes.
a= ae =e el <a ™
-~----"* = = a
= --~ ar *


the Re


nd the Clru
lippeard to
\
1‘
‘
'
,
‘
ay
‘
1
‘
‘
'
\
1
\
‘
‘
*
'
'
;
1
'
‘
‘
'
w
a 1
+e
: F
&
v4
mee
{
'
‘
'
'
1
’
‘
‘
'


“
erthels


Se ee ee 2 oe wee ee oe
e a) “ a = ‘ be


eae: i i 22 Sal et . —— >
: x 4 ’ < I = . 4 Yo at, <p x
Si ace ae <a SW sal + oe ie aes SS ee ~ ae pets Oe ee ice Pkg >
—— aa , , , one" “Som a s ee. a —
———— ~ . . — P ‘ +
ge x A ae See


Subs he <5 oe hea Sree *
+= i > S =


. ss
‘ee © ae A ey


ww i


bs aa an seins FE tT wh RIP ABT tr “are
? 2
—
- alt +
i Se


Poe oe


ae ls AO >


ee eet

of RELIGION, 77
ee
there are no /folid Orbs, as the Ancients fup-
poled; and that there is no /wbtle Matter, as
the Cuartefians imagin’d; but that all the vaft ~
Spaces between and beyond the Planetary Sy-
ftem, are an immenfe Void or Vacuity, as to
fenfible refifting Matter; and admit ordinarily
of nothing but of the Rays of Light, unlefs it
be near the Comets with their Atmofpheres and
Tails; and near the Planets with their Atmo-
{pheres ; all which Particles put. together are
almoft nothing in comparifon of thofe vaftly
prodigious, thofe immenfely numerous Vacui-
ties which are interfpers’d between them, as we
have already feen from an exaét Calculation,
Page 19.

(16.) The Fixed Stars, vifible to the naked
Eye of the Acuteft Obfervers, are in Number
confiderably under 2000, and thofe feen only
through Telefcopes, about 10 or 20 times that
Number. Their Diftance is found by Mr. Huy-
gens’s conjectural Method to be about 2,200.000,
e00.000. And the Diftance of fome, from Dr.
flook’s and Mr. Flamfed’s Annual Parallax, See my A-
which I look on as much more certain, about the ve ANG
third Part of that diftance, or 700.000,000.000 >“
Miles. However, °*tis certain that this Diftance
is vaftly great, if compar’d with that of the
Planets and Comets, when they are remoteft
from the Sun ; and that in particular the famous
Comet of 575 Years Period, which goes fome-
times about 14 times as far off the Sun as Sz-
turn, 2. about £1.200,000.000 Miles, is not
then near enough to them to be altered by that
of the Fixed Stars Gravitation towards, or In-
fluences from them, 'Thefe Stars feem to be of

| the


e


73


A fironomical Frinciples


the fame Nature with the Sun, as fhining with
their own Native Light; and continuing fixed
in the Centers of their feveral Planetary and
Cometary Syftems, as the Sun does.

(17.) The Fixed Stars feem to be really of
very diferent Magnitudes, yet not of fuch very
different Diftances from this Syftem as is now
generally fuppofed. As to the firft Affertion, ‘it
feems very agreeable to the reft of the vifible


Bodies inthe World, whether Planets orComets, —
which are of very different Magnitudes alfo ;


and feems confirm’d from the fecond Affertion ;
for if the Fixed Stars vifible to the naked Eye


be at no very different Diftances from our Sy-.


ftem, that vaft apparent Inequality of Light


which they fend hither, and according to which ~


they areranked under fix or feven different Mag-
nitudes on our Globes and Planifpheres, will be


next to a Demonftration, that they are them- —


felves really of very different Magnitudes alfo.
Nor in that Cafe will it be proper to place the
Telefcopick Stars at any vaftly farther Diftances,
fince they do not at all feem different from the
other, only ftill gradually fmaller. Now that
the Fixed Stars, vifible to the naked Eye, are
not at any very different Diftances from our


Syftem, is moft probable, becaufe the beft Me--


thod we yet have of knowing thofe Diftances,
IT mean their Parallax, determine that the Di-


ftance of thofe Three which have been try’d,


tho’ all of different apparent Magnitudes, is
very nearly the fame. I do not deny that
fome Fixed Stars may be vaftly farther off
than others; and that there may be Syftems
of Worlds {cattered every where in the Unix
verfal Immenfe Void: But I fay, that if far-

ther


~


SRD et SS eee nadate masmmaimsdibutban oe


of RoBi Gro Nn:


oe ae pe ae ln


ther Obfervations confirm this Parallax, and any
fort of Equality thereof, we muft accommodate
our Opinions to our Evidence, and in that Cafe
muft fuppofe, that the grand Syftem them-
felves of Sun, Planets. Comets, and Fixed Stars
are, like the Parts of fuch aSyftem, vaftly re-
mote from each other; nay, perhaps, out of
the reach of each others Difcovery alfo. But
as to this noble Theory, we cannot be at all po-
fitive till the Parallax and Diftance of the Fixed
Stars be more nicely obferv’d, and the Aftro-
nomical World better fatisfy’d about it ; the
doing of which I would therefore earneftly re-
commend to the publick Confideration.

(18.) Several of thefe Fixed Stars, efpecially
of the {mallerfort, do fometimes difappear, and
new ones appear; and fome of them do appear
or difappear, look Brighter or Duller by Turns ;
and this fometimes after certain Intervals of Time
alfo.. This is a known Faét; and has in fome
meafure been noted from almoft the earlieft Ages
of Aftronomy. But then, what fhould be the
Caufe of fuch mutable Appearances among thefe
Fixed Stars, is by no means yet difcovered; nor
have I hitherto ventur’d to propofe any Conje-
cture aboutthem. However, fince others have
alteady begun their Hypothefes, which feem to
me commonly either entirely precarious or abfo-
jutely impoffible, I fhall make bold here to offer
my own, which shall not only be free from
{uch ftrong Objections, but agreeable to the
neareft parallel Cafe in the World. We know
that the Sun it felf, the only Fixed Star, as I
may call it, that is fufficiently within the reach
of our Telefcopes, has feveral Times not a few
Macule or Spots upon his Body ; which fre-
2 | | 7 quently


/?


~


mee


A  ftronontical Principles


quently become Facula, or Parts brighter than
the reft; and which come and go by turns.
How many there may poffibly be of thefe Spots
at certain times we cannot fay ; but this is plain,
that we do not know but fo many of them may
fometimes arife, as may, in good part, cover
over the Sun’s Surface, and render its Light
and Heat very Weak and Dull. Thefe Spots
may be again diffipated, and become Facula,
or Brighter than ordinary. 'Thefe Macule and
Facule may fometimes, by Turns, gain ground
on one another, after certain Intervals of Time,
and caufe the Sun to grow Darker and Brighter _
periodically. Nay, we do not know, but
thefe Macule may fometimes, efpecially in Cafe
the Sun were {maller, cover over the greateft
Part of its Surface, fo as to extinguifh, or at


— leaft to obfcure its Light ; which yet in Length


Tranfac.
Philof: N,
347. for

A.D.1706.


of ‘Time may be overcome, and the Sun may
recover its former Splendor, if not one greater
than that before. Since therefore fuch Pheno-
mena of the Fixed Stars are like what our Sun ap-
pears by known Obfervations to be in fome fort
Jiable to, I think it the beft Guide, as to what °
we fee to happen to others of them; and that
the Macule and Facule of thofe Stars may caufe
thefe furprizing Appearances.. Nor can I eafily
think in any other manner, about thofe fix
Spaces of Light, or Starry Mifts,; which have
been lately difcovered in the Heavens, than
by Analogy to what we know of Things of a
like Nature ; viz. that they are a Company of
very {mall Fixed Stars, as invifible to us with
our ordinary Telefcopes, as the known Telefco-
pick Stars in the Milky Way are to our natural
Eyes, which give fuch an irregular Appearance
of indiftin® Light alfo. PeRY


of RELIGION,


SNe


oe ws 2 be Sa ae


PAs Reso


Certain Obfervations drawn from
the foregoing Sy{tem.


1.) Beetektok = ING E Matter is entirely a
CD) Se IS SS y


oe £s* Paffive Subftance ; no{ponta-
73 Sos neous Motion or Action, even
- 8SicajyztSz in Brutes, can be derived from
wea it ; much lefs can that Active
and Free Being, the Soul of Man, be juftly fup-
pofed to be material,
- (@.) Since Bodies once exifting will continue
to exift, and that for ever, in the fame State of
Reft, or uniform Motion, along ftrait Lines,
wherein they once are; at leaft with the alone
Concurrence of the Firft Caufe; the Projectile
_ Motions of the Heavenly Bodies requireno new,
or particular conftant Acts of Power for their
continuation in that State. But,

(3.) Since none of the Heavenly Bodies move
uniformly in ftrait Lines, but allof them rather
unequally, and all inCurves, they are every one
impell’d, and that perpetually, by fome Exter-
nalPower, Efficacy, Force, orInfluence; and

G thereby


a


i


iA ftronomical Principles


thereby are obliged to revolve in fuch Curves 5 —
which Power we have already proved to be that _
of Gravity,

(4.) If that Power of Gravity were fufpend-
ed, all the whole Syftem would immediately
diffolve ; and each of the Heavenly Bodies would
be crumbled into Duft ; the fingle Atoms com-


- mencing their feveral Motions in fuch feveral


ftrait Lines, according to which the projectile
Motion chanc’d to be at the Inftant when that
Influence was fufpended or withdrawn.

(5.) Since pendulous Bodies receive no fenfi-
ble Refiftance in their Internal Parts ; and fince
both the Planets and Comets move prodigioufly
{wift, with the utmoft Freedom, and without
any fenfible R efiftance through the Athereal Re-
gions, “tis certain there is no Subtzle Matter


pervading the Univerfe, as fome have fup-
pofed. —


he" (6.) All the Solutions, therefore, of the Phe- |


nomena of Nature, which depend on the Sup-


- pofition of that Subtzle Matter, are entirely falfe,


and contrary to the plain State of our Sy-
ftem. |

C7.) To fuppofe a Plenum, or that the Uni- —
verfe is entirely full of fuch Subtile Matter, is
utterly vain and ungrounded; nay, contrary to.
the moft certain Obfervations.

(8.) Since the particular Proportion ever ob-
taining as to the Power of Gravity, f meen that
of the Duplicate of the Nearnefs of Bodies, is
not any neceflary Refult from the Nature of
Matter, or any Laws of Motion in the World ;
it is plain that this Proportion is no way owing
to any Mechanical Caufe or Neceffity whatfo-
ever, but entirely to free Choice, Prudence and
Judgment. | (9.) Since


of RELIGION.


~. (9.) Since all Bodies are equally capable of
Reft, and. of all Degrees of Velocity whatfo-
ever ; but arein their own Nature no way de-
termin’d to any of them ; thatnice Adjuftment
there is of the projectile Velocity to the At-
tractive Power through the whole Univerfe ;
whereby the Planets both primary and feconda-
ry revolve nearly in Circles, and the Comets
nearly in Parabola’s, is no way owing to any
Mechanical Caufe, or Neceflity whatioever ; but
entirely to free Choice, Prudence, and Judg-
ment.


(1o.) Since all Bodies are equally capable of,


being originally impell’d every way, and of
having their projectile Motions in any Directi-
on whatfoever ; and fince all the Planets, both
Primary and Secondary, have their projectile
Motions almoft perpendicular to the Lines from
their Central Bodies, which was abfolutely ne-


ceffary to their Motion at nearly thefame Di-


ftance from the Sun ; this nice Adjuftment of
the Dire¢tion of their projectile Velocity, where-
by they became fit for the Habitation of Ani-
mals, and without which they would have been
almoft ufelefs in the World, is no way owing
toany Mechanical Caufe, or Neceflity whatio-
ever; but entirely to free Choice, Prudence, and
judgment.


(11.) Since all Bodies are equally capable of


Reftas of Motion, and that in any Time, and
with any Velocity ; and fince there is no origi+
nal Connection between the projectile Directi-
ons and Velocities, of any two or more Bodies
which now revolve about the common Centers
of theirown Gravities; without which Revoluti-


Ons about thofe Centers,the prefent Syftem ofthe
G2. Univerfe


$3.


3


6


&


A (flronomical P rites


Univerfe could not befupported ; and yet with-
out the moft exaét Adjuftment of thofe Dire
&tions and Velocities to one another, the Di-
reétions parallel, but contrary to each other,
and the Velocities in a Proportion reciprocal to
thofe Bodies themfelves, fuch a Revolution
could not be performed : Such an Amazing and
Mathematical, and Univerfal, Adjuftment of
thefe Circumftances, cannot be owing to any
Mechanical Caufe or Neceflity whatfoever, but
muft arifeentirely from free Choice, Prudence
and Judgment.

(12.) Since all Bodies are equally capable of
pofleffing any part of Space whatioever ; and fince
the Planets, both Primary and Secondary, and
the Comets, with their feveral Degrees of Velo-
city, might be placed at any Diftance from their
Central Bodies ; that nice Adjuftment there is
of their feveral Diftances from thofe Central
Bodies, to their feveral Velocities; whereby
the Planets ali revolvenearly in Circles, andthe
Comets nearly in Parabola’s, can be no way ow-
ing to any Mechanical Caufeor Neceflity what-
foever ; but entirely to free Choice, Prudence,
and Judgment. ;

(13.) Since all. Bodies are equally capable of
any Dire€tion whatfoever, and yet all the Pia-
nets, both Primary and Secondary, do revolve -
about their Central Bodies, almoft according to
one Direction trom Weft to Eafi; this par=
ticular Direétion of the Annual Motions of all
the Planets is no way owing to any Mechanical
Caufe or Neceflity whatfoever; but entirely to
free Choice, Prudence, and Judgment.


(14.). Since


mt RR CE


of RELIGION. 35


(14.) Since all’ Spherical Bodies are equally
capable of turning round upon any Axis, or
according to any Direction whatfoever ; and yet
the Sunandallthe Planets, whofe Diurnal Moti-
ons are already difcovered,do revolve about their
own Axes nearly from Weft to Eaj? ; this parti-
cular Direction isno way owing to any Mecha-
nical Caufe, or Neceffity whatfoever ; but en-
tirely to freeChoice, Prudence, and Judgment.
~(1g.) Since all Spheres revolving about their
own Axes are equally capable of turning round
with any Velocity, and in any Period; and yet
all the Heavenly Bodies that do fo revolve, keep
within proper Limits, agreeably to the State of
every fuch Sphere ; as particularly we find to be
the Cafes of our Earth, and of Mars and Ve-
nus our Neighbouring Planets: ‘This due Pro-
portion of the Diurnal Motion is no way ow-
ing to any Mechanical Caufe, or Neceffity
whatfoever ; but entirely to free Choice, Pru-
dence, and Judgment.
~ (16.) Since all Bodies revolving about ano-
ther,are equally capable of moving in any Planes
whatfoever ; and yet the feveral Primary Pla-
nets move almoft in the fame Plane about the
Sun, and the Secondaries allin their fame feve-
ral re{pective Planes about their Primaries, this
exact Direction of the Planets into. the fame
Planes is no way owing to any Mechanical Caufe,
or Neceflity whatfoever ; but entirely to free
Choice, Prudence, and Judgment.

(17.) Since the greateft, as well as leaft Pla-
nets areequally capable of being plac’d near, as
well as far off the Sun, the placing the largeft
Primary Planets the moft remote, and the leaft
neareft the Sun, whereby the feveral Motions

G 3 continue


86 Aftronomtical P rinciples


EL IEE


continue moft undifturb’d, and many fatal Con-
fequences, which would otherwife happen, are,
prevented; is no way owing to any Mechanical
Caufe or Neceffity whatfoever ; but’ entirely to
free Choice, Prudence, and Judgment. ~ .

(18.) Since the Secondary Planets are equally
capable of revolving about their Primaries at
the fmalleft, as. at any other Diftance whatfo-
ever; and yet they allof them are fituate fo far
off, as to caufe no dangerous Tides inthe Prima-
ries Ocean,.which amuch greater Nearnefs would
certainly have done; this: due Place of | the
Secondaries from their Primaries, is no way
owing to any. Mechanical Caufe or Neceffity
whatioever; but entirely to free Choice, Pru-
dence, and Judgment.

_ (49.) Since all the Planets are equally capable
of revolving round the Sunatthe {malleft as great-
teft Diftances, and yet they are fituate ina
Mean, fo as néither to be feorch’d ‘with
its Heat, nor frozen up with Cold, for want of ©
its as we'particularly find to be the Cafe of our
Earth: This proper Situationof the Planets, is
no way owing to any Mechanical Caufe or Ne-
ceffity whatioever ; butentirely to free Choice,
Prudence; and. Judpment.

(20.) Sinee the Comets do revolve in very —
oblong Ellipfes, quite through the Planetary
Regions and this in vaitly long Periods, ac-
cording toall mannerof Directions, and in all
Situations of their Planes, contrary tothe Laws —
every where obferv’d among the Planets; *tis
very evident that the Intentionsand Defigns for
which they are fitted, are very different, at
leaft in ‘their prefent State, Sicha thofe for
which the other are accommodated.

: 3 (21.) Since


of RELIGION.


(21.) Since that Immechanical Power. of
Gravity, which is conftantly exercis’d in the
World, is proportionable to the Quantity of
each Body to which it belongs ; which Quan-
tity is vaftly unequal in the feveral Celeftial
Bodies; it is thence certain, that the Author
of that Power muft bea Being that exactly
knows, and takes perpetual Notice of all thote
Bodies whatfoever, in all the Variety of their
Partsand Magnitudes. |
_ (22.) Since that Immechanical Power of Gra~
vity which is conftantly exercis’d inthe World,
is not of one even and conftant Quantity, but
valtly unequal, according to the Squares of the
different Diftances of the Bodies affected with
it; it isthence alfo certain, that the Author of
that Power muft be a Being that exactly knows
and takes perpetual Notice of the Diftances of
all thole Bodies whatfoever, in all the Variety
of their Partsand Magnitudes.

_ (23.) Since all the Effeéts of this Immechanical
Power of Gravity do conftantly obtain, and all
the Confequences of that Power are ever found
true in Fact, throughout the Univerfe ; Cabating’
only the Cafe of Miracles, not here to be con-
fider’d ) it is certain, that the Author of that
Powér can and does move all Bodies, how


great foever, and with what Degree foever of ©


Velocity, according to that due and fixed Pro-
portion ; without the leaft Oppofition or Con-
tradiction, either from the Matter to be moved,
or from any other Agent whomfoever.

(24.) Since the Spherical Figures, withthe
Original Native Light of the Fixed Stars, and
all other Circumftances, do fhew that they be-

G 4 long.


a —— nnn nes Peer af Ey


88


A fronomical Principles


long toour Univerfe, or grand Syftem, andare —
fubje€t to the fame Law of Gravity which our
particular Syftem is governed by ; it follows, —
that the foregoing confequences concerning the
Author of that Law already drawn, as to one
Syftem, are alfo true, relating to all thofe
other Syftems.

(25.) Since all the Motions in our Solar Sy-—
ftem muft be fo far at leaft retarded, as their
Pafiage through a Medium every-where pene-
trated with the Rays of Light muft imply ; _
which Retardation, how {mall foever it be in
it felf, muft in fufficient Length of Time become
fenfible, (as it is thought bv fome to be already in
the Cafe of the Lunar Period, ) it follows, that
the feveral Parts of this Syftem do by Gravita~
tion naturally and conftantly, unlefs amiraculous
Power interpofe to hinder it, approach nearer
and nearer to the Center of Gravity of this
Syftem ; and in a fufficient Nuniber of Years
will aétually meet in the fame Center, to its
utter Deftruction. |

(26.) Since this entire grand Syftem of
Things is fubjectto this Powerof Gravity ; and
fince that Power of Gravity has its Effects as
well among the Fixed Stars, with their feveral
Syftems, as in our Planetary and Cometary
World, about the Sun; and fince withal, the
Sun and Fixed Stars do not revolve about one ~
another, or about any common Center of Gra-
vity, as the Planets and Comets do; which
Motionalone, according to Mechanical Laws,
can hinder the Effect of that Power of Gravity ;
it follows, that the feveral Syftems, with their
feveral Fixed Stars or Suns, do naturally and
conftantly, unlefs a Miraculous Foca

es


of RELIGION.


fes to hinder it, approach nearer and nearer to’


the common Center of all their Gravity ; and
that in a fufficient Number of Years, they will
a€tually meet in the fame common Center, to
the utter Deftruction of the whole Uni-
verfe. |

(27.) Since Power can be exerted no where
but where the Being which exerts that Power
is actually prefent; and fince it ‘is certain, as
has been fhewn, that this Power is conftantly
exerted all over the Univerle, *tis certain that
the Author of the Power of Gravity is prefent
‘at all Times in all Places of the Univerfe
alfo.

(28.) Since this Power has been demonftra-
ted to be Immechanical, and beyond the Abi-
lities of all Material Agents; ’tis certain that

the Author of this Power is an Immaterial
or Spiritual Being, prefent in, and penetrating
the whole Univerfe.

- (29.) Since the Sun and Fixed Stars fend out
perpetually, and with the utmoft Velocity,
_ Rays or Corpufcles of Light and Heat from
themfelves ; and fince we fee with our Eyes
that there is not any fuch Equality of thofe Stars
on every Side, as might induce us to believe
there can be an equal Circulation of thofe Rays
from one Sy{ftem to another ; and fince we find


by Mutations in our Sun, and by the Parallel


Mutations in feveral of the Fixed Stars, that
thefe very Suns themfelves, the Fountains and
grand Supports of the feveral Syftems, are
equally liable to Decay with the reft of the
Univerfe ; *tis hence alfo plain, that all thefe
Suns and Syftems are not of Permanent and
Eternal Conttitutions ; but that, unlefs a mira-
- “ : A culous


90


A | ftronomical Principles


See at the
End of my
Mathe-
matical


Philofo-
phy.


See Math.
Philof.


P. rope Ad


lous Power interpofes, they muftall, in length
of Time, decay and perifh, and be rendred ut-
terly incapable of thofe noble Ufes for which
at prefent they are fo wonderfully adapted.
N. B. Although the External Parts of the
Heavenly Bodies, with their Nature and Ufes,
may be moft eajily and certainly determin’d


from Fact and Obfervation, yet do there not


want Arguments whereby we may come at the
Internal Parts or Regions of the fame, their.
Nature and Ufes, at leaft from very probable
Confiderations. ‘Thus we know from Obferva-
tion in Comets, that there are large Central
Solids inclofed in their Atmofpheres, indiffo-
luble by the utmoft Heat in their greateft Nears
nefs to the Sun: We alfo know from the like
Obfervations, that Comets are about the Bignefs
of Planets, and that the Atmofpheres of Comets
do beft anfwer the Chaotick or Primary State
of Planets, of all other Bodies in the Univerfe.
We know farther by Demonftration, that if
there be any Central Cavities within fuch So-
lids, the Effects of the Power of Gravity will
be there fo equipois’d on every Side, that there.
will appear to be little or nothing of fuch a Power
at all: And, laftly, we may know, in fome
Meafure, by Obfervations and Demontftrations
compar’d together, whether there be fuch Ca-
vities in, them or not; and in which of the
Heavenly Bodies they are the moft confiderable,
as we fhall fee prefently. ‘This general Obfer-
vation thus Premisd, I come to the Fifth Part
of this Treatife, to give my Conjectures as to
the feveral Natures and Ufes of all the Parts of
this Syftem.


ag


of RELIGION.


pepper eta totes
sgeryanyenyenyti aeons ABEL, Le


Pee Roop s Mi


Probable ConjcGures as to the Nature
and Ues of all the Parts of the
SYSTEM of the vifible World.


C1.) Anes H E Sun and Fixed Stars are,


Y to be fure, on their external
se 'T Se Regions or fuperficial Parts,

Q Jr~ mott intenfe Fire or Light ;
and the grand Fountains of
that Fire and Light which is in the whole vifible
Univerfe, and without which there could be no
fuch thing as a Vifible Univerfe, or Ufeful Sy-
dftem at all. So that there can be no doubt of
the general Nature and Ufe of thofe external
Regions. Nor perhaps fhall we be far out of the
way, if we fuppofe thofe Parts of the Sun to be
more than 10000 Planets or Comets all on Fire.
(2.) The Planets, both Primary and-Secon-
dary, appear, as to their vifible external Regi-
ons, or fuperficial Parts or Atmofpheres, to the
like to that Planet we live upon, the Earth ; or


mo{t convenient and well contrived Bee et one .


for all forts of Sea and Land, vifible and grols
Animals 5


ot


Eze Prop.
after wy
Boyle’s
Leures
p. 287—
2Q7. or
Serm. EP
FUG pet TO,
OE L933
Meteor, p.
68---72.


Afironomical R rinciples


Animals ; with fuch Plants as are ufeful for


any of their Prefervation and Suftenance, du- —


ring their continuance thereon. :

'. 3.) The Air expanded about the feveral Pla-
hets, which, asto their Elaftical Parts, are cor-
poreal, but invifible, appear to be the proper
Places for the Habitation of not wholly Incorpo-
real, but Invifible Beings; or of fuch as have
Bodies made of too fubtle and aerial a Texture
and Conftitution to be ordinarily feen by our
Eyes, or felt by our Hands. And if it be con-
fidered, that while all the ancient Prophane
Traditions, and Hiftorical Accounts, as well as
the Sacred Writings, which affure us of the
Exiftence of fuch invfible Beings about our
Earth, do at the fame time affure us of their
inhabiting in our Air, which is the only appa-
rent Place, according to the beft Philofophy,
where fuch invifible Beings, not deftitute of all
Bodies, can poffibly inhabit ; it will juftly de-
ferve our Confideration, whether this be not the
nobleft Defign and Ufe of our Air; tho’ at the
fame time its loweft Regions be an Atmofphere
alfo ; or be ufeful in Refpiration, in Refraéti-


the Vapours belonging to our Earth, for the
Support of the Creatures, in grofler Bodies, in-
habiting thereon.

(4...) The external Regions of Comets, which
by paffing through fuch immenfe Heat when
neareft, and fuch prodigious Cold when fartheft
off the Sun; and by the confufed and Chaotick
State of their Atmofpheres, do evidently appear
incapable of affording convenient Habitations for
any Beings that have Bodies, or Corporeal Ve-
hicles, whether vifible or invifible tous; feem

vhs rather


—


on, €%c. and fo fitted as to elevate and let fall —


of RE LIGION.


93


rather fitted to caufe the grand Mutations of
Nature in the Planetary World; by bringing on
Deluges in their Defcent, and Couflagrations in
their Afcent from the Sun; as I have elfewhere
more fully Difcourfed.

_ ©.) Thefe Comets, with their Atmofpheres
and Tails, feem alfo fitted, as to their external
Regions, to be a very uneafy, hot, and fiery
Habitation when near, and a very uneafy, cold,
and’chill one, when tar off the Sun, and this
both on their Surfaces, and in their Airs.

(6.) As to the Internal Parts or Regions of the
Sun, Planets, and Comets, they feem to be Con-
cave, and to include vaft open Spaces within.
This Conjecture which is no way contrary to
any other Phenomena of Nature, I ground par-
ticularly upon the {mall Inequality there is in
Fact between the Polar and Equatoreal Semi-
diameters of thofe Heavenly Bodies which have
diurnal Revolutions about their own Axes, com-
pared, with the much greater Inequality there
would naturally be between them, if they had
not fuch Central Cavities. For Example, If the
internal Parts of the Earth were of the fame
Denfity with the External, it is Demonftrated
by Sir [/aac Newton, that the Polar Semi-dia-
meter or Axis would be about 17 Miles fhorter
- than the Semi-diameter of the Equator. Ifthe
Central Parts were much Denfer than the reft,
Cas on all mechanical Accounts they ought cer-
tainly to be ) thefe 17 Miles would be mighti-
ly increas’d, and probably amount to fome Hun-
dreds. Yet is that Semi-diameter in Fact but
about 31 Miles fhorter than the other. Whence
it is probable, that the greater Denfity in the
deeper Regions, is compenfated by the lefer

Denfity,


New
Theory,ps
437 438.
and Pp4acys
EC,


Princip.
ad Edit.
p: 382---
387.


94


A flronomical Principles


See pag.
§4. prius.


Denfity, or rather partial Cavity of the Central
Regions themfelyes, And this Reafoning is ftill
vaftly ftronger in ‘Zupiter; where the difference —
of Semi-diameters ought to be much more re-
markable, aud to amount to fome thoufands of
Miles, while yet it is therein but juft fenfible ;
and that only by the Ufe of the beft Inftru-
ments and Obfervations we have in Aftro-
nomy. |

». It is not improbable therefore, that thofe
Central Cavities may be fo fitted by Providence,
as to afford Habitations to fome Creatures, as
well as the external Surfaces, the Land, the
Water, and the Air, have appear’d to do; tho’
this in different Circumftances, as to the diffe-
rent Bodies, the Sun, the Planets, and the Co-
mets. See Dr. Ha/ey’s Conjecture to fomewhat.
the like Purpofe, Zran/act. Philof: N°. 34%. for
A, D. 1716.

(8.) If the Sun has fuch a Cavity for Habita-
tion, it muft be fenced from the Heat of his.
more external Parts by a vaftly thick Wall or
Partition ; which that there may be evenof many —
thoufand Miles, the prodigious largenefs of its


Diameter, and the little comparative depth of


the penetration of Heat through folid Earth, do


Demonftrate. Nor would fuch a central Cavi- —
ty in the Sun be in danger cf any pernicious
Heat, tho’ it were large enough to hold, on its
inward Surface, as many Creatures as the exter-
nal Surfaces of all the Planets and Comets put
together could contain ; as he that confiders the
Tables, pag. 54. and 56. before, will eafily believe. -
Perhaps fuch a Degree of Heat may be deriv’d
from the outward to the inward Regions, as
will fuir fome of the Purpofes of the Great

2 | Author


of ROP er ay oN


95


Author of Nature therein: But then all its
Light muft be derivd from fome other
Caufe, than from the outward Parts of the
Sun.

(9.) If the Planets, or any of them, have
fuch Cavities for Habitation ; becaufe they keep
nearly at the fame Diftance from the Sun, in
the feveral Parts of their Courfe, their Heat as
well as Light, muft come moft probably from
within alfo, as not being ever Recruited in their
Revolutions.

Cio.) If the Comets, while they continue
fuch, have the like Cavities for Habitation;
Part of their Heat, becaufe of their Accefs to
the Sun every Period, may be derived from it,
and recruited every Revolution: But then all
thefr Light, as well as that of the reft, muft be
deriv'd from within alfo. ,

(11.) That the Earth in particular has fuch
a Cavity, feems clear from Scripture, as well
as it may be conjectured from Aftronomy. For
when many, at leaft, of the Souls, departed
out of the World, are there reprefented as gone
down into the invifible World 5 as de/cexded into
the Place beneath, or as gove down quick znto the
Pit; and when our Bleffed Saviour is there {till
reprefented as upon his Death, go7ng down into
the Invifitle World, and de[cending into the lower
Parts of the Earth ; nothing feems {fo agreea-


ble both to Nature and Revelation, as this Hy-


pothefis; which fuppofes fuch a Receptacle
for Invifible Beings beneath, as exactly an-

{wers to the foregoing Defcriptions.
rr.) If there be any fuch Cavities and Recep-
ticles for living Creatures, and the Things ne-
ceflary for their Suftenance, in the Central
Regions


See Gen.
XXEVIL3 Js
Num. xvi.
3° 32.
Ezek.
XKVi. 20.
XXX1. 165
Ror, x.7-
Eph. iv.


y 1 Os


A iflronomical Principles


Regions of the Sun, or of the Planets, or Cos —
mets, “tis certain their State and Circumftances
mutt be very different from thofe on the Sur-
faces of the Planets. They muft all live in
Concave Spheres, which muft hinder all Inter-
courfe between them and this vifible World:
Nor can they have any Philofophical Evidence
that there is fuch an External World at all;
which is the Cafe of the reft of this Univerfe,
as to us, if we, with all the vifible Stars, Co-
mets and Planets, be our felves included in fuch
a Cavity ; which is not abfolutely impoffible to —
be fuppos’d. But then, as to the particular —
Circumftances of fuch Creatures, their way of
Living, and the Courfe of Nature and Provi-
dence, and Divine Revelation relating to them,
I fhall not venture here to propofe any particular


_ Conjectures about them; only hinting this, that


See Math.
Philof.


Prop. 44.


the Power of Gravity from the External Parts
being in this Cafe none at all, as we have elfe-


where obferv’d, there may be therein fuch a


World as is that we here fee, with the like Sun,
Planets, and Comets; only that they mutt be fo
much lefs in Quantity and Largenefs, as the
greater Narrownefs of their Cavities requires :
Yet ftill fuch as the Imagination will not be a-
ble to diftinguifh from our larger vifible Uni-

verfe it felf. |
N. B. I hope that all judicious Perfons will —
diftinguifh what I venture barely to Conjecture
fometimes in this, from what [ ufually Affert
in the other Parts of this Treatife: It being
ever proper, if any one propofes Conjectures to
the World, which are often of confiderable Ad-
vantage,as they affordHints for fartherEnquiries,
and Occafions for the Difcovery of Truth, to
diftin-

4


of RELIGION. | 97


diftinguifh them ftill from Affertions ; which
ought generally to be built on confiderable
Evidence, before they are propofed -as true to
the World: Which Diftinétion between Affer-
tions and Conjectures I always aim to make, and
always beg of my Readers, that intheir Perufal
Ue Papers, they will ever make the fame
alfo.


4


H Part


Aftronomical Principles


Sete tetnketets Gosek sie Cree sestatnte tote S }
EMO FXO, re BEA


Tnportant Principles of Natural Re-
ligion, Demon firated from the e fore-
Long Obfervations.


wu


ak the Ob/ervations already made
from the true Syftemof the World,
it appears, |


ee = C1.) That the Souls. of even all
Brute Creatures are Immaterial, 7.e. not com-
pos’d of that dull, unattive, infenfible, folid,
paffive Subftance, “which we call Matter, or
Body, and of which all the Vifible and Sen- -
fible World about us is compos’d. For it cer- —
tainly appears, that all this Subftance, which ©
we properly call Materzal Subftance, or Body, is
fo far from a Capacity of Senfation, Thought,
Adtivity, and Moving it felf and the Body,
which are the known Properties of the Souls —
of even Brute Creatures themfelves, that it is
not capableof any active Property at all; being
ever movd, impell’d, attracted, and directed
entirely as other-Bodies or Powers act upon it,
and not otherwife. This I fay is the natural
3 2 Confe-


7 of RELIGION.


~Confequence of all that Phyfical Knowledge of
Matter or Body, which Obfervation and De-
monftration leads us to. “We can Philofophi-
cally trace material Impulfe, and the material
Images of External Objects, in fome Meafure,
evenin Brutes, through the Organs of Senfe, up


tothe Brain, or the Fountain of Senfation and ~


Ation. But there Mechanical Caufes end, and

Material. EffeCts ceafe ; there that Agent or Sub-=

ftantial Being, which Sees, and Hears, and
‘Feels, and 'Taftes, and Smells, and Joys, and
Grieves, and Directs, and Moves, and Remem-
bers, and Hopes, and Fears, is prefent, and di-

rectly comes to be confidered by us. But then

‘it comes to be confider’d entirely as an Invifible
or Immaterial Agent, or Subftance, different

fromthe Eyes, and Ears, and Hands, or Feet,

and “Palate, and Noftrils, and Nerves, and

Brain, and Blood, and Animal Spirits of the

Brute Creature; jult as weconfider the Organift

that guides and directs the Pipes, and Sounds,

and Stops of his Organ, as entirely different

from thofe Pipes, and Sounds, and Stops them-

felves. Not that I pretend to tellof what par-

ticular Kind or Sortof Subftance, that Senfitive
and Aétive Being is compos’d, either in Brutes,

‘or in Men, or in any Superior, Invifible, and
Intellectual Beings. That Subftante may be

different in every different Kind. But that we
do ftill obferve from their Phenomena, that

thefe Souls are different in theif Properties

and Actions, in almoft all their Properties and

Ations, not only from their own Grofs Bodies,

but in general from what we call Matter or Bo-

dy, from all that we call Matter or Body in

the Univerfe. Immaterial they are indeed, and

; fi 2 | | diffe-


Send =


99


100


Aftronomical Principles


different from the Material Body, according to
all the Notions and Experiments we ever have
of thefe Brutes, and of Matter. But that does not
direétly inform us what they are, becaufe we know
not what Swb/tance is in general, nor what the par-
ticular Subftances of any particular Material or
Immaterial Being are. But by comparing the
Properties of Matter, with thofe of the Souls
of even Brutes themfelves, we plainly and evi-
dently perceive that thofe Souls are not Matter.
*Tistrue, we cannot determine how far the De-
ftruction of the grofs Body of a Brute affects the
Soul, or fenfitive Agent thereto united: Wedo
not know whether thofe Souls are Immortal or
not ! We do not know whether they utterly pe-
rifh with their Bodies; or whether they only
continue in a kind of inactive infenfible State,


till they a€tuate other Bodies again or no, and


fo perpetually. And the Reafon is plain, we
have no way of knowing fuch Secrets of Nature
and Providence, about Invifible Subftances, by


Obfervation, or Experiment: And the Author of —


Wature has not been pleas’d to difcover fuch
‘Things to us, by Revelation. If I were to
Gue/s where I cannot Kuow, I fhould imagine
that all fuch Immaterial Souls do ever, by their
peculiar Nature, perceive and feel whatever is
prefent to them, and no more; and that the
endeavour to act in a way fuitable to the Im-
preffions and Paffions thereupon arifing in them,
and no farther: ‘That therefore, when they are
out of a Body, their Senfations are fo few and
narrow, and there Powers fo fmali, that they
are in a fort of Sleep, Silence and Inactivity ;
that when they are in Bodies, (which are
moit wonderful Struétures and Machines, con-
: ; triy’d


~


SESE EEE: S Ne aertihe Aa PE
of RELIGION. 101


triv’d atonce to convey the Impreffions of moft
numerous, and even moft diftant. Objects to
them, and to follow their Directions and
Ations thereupon, ) while thofe Bodies keepin
Order, thofe Souls are alive, vigorous, and
active ; but when the Bodies are diffolv’d, or
their Contexture deftroy’d, their Souls returnto
their former State of Sleep, Silence, and In-
activity : though without a real Annihilation ;
and fo without any Incapacity of Revival and
Reactivity : I mean upon Suppofition, that the
Author of Nature, or any of thofe Minifters by
whom he Governsthe World, affords it another
Opportunity for fuch a Revival and Reactivity
again. This is, I fay, what I fhould Gue/s,
as to the State of the Immaterial Souls of Brutes,
if I wouldinduige my felf in fuch Uncertainties.
And whether the P/almf? does not favour fuch
a Conjecture, where he fpeaks thus, When God pry ciy
hideth bis Face from fuch Creatures, they are 29, 30.
troubled: When he taketh away their Breath they
die, and return to their Dut: When he fendeth
forth bis Spirit they are Created, and He re-
neweth the Face of the Earth: I fhall leave to
the Readers Confideration. But asto the Pro-
pofition it felf; I mean, that what perceives
and acts even in Brutes, is a Being or Agent
properly and entirely diftinét from that Body
in which it a¢ts, andis truly a Being or Agent
Immaterial; This I take to be the natural Re-
fult of Philofophick Reafoning, from Fact and
Experience: and by no means to be fet afide,
becaufe we are not able to folve all Difficulties
thereto relating: Which we are rarely, orin-
deed never capable of doing, inthe laft Refort
in any part of Knowledge whatfoever. But as
: H{ 3 to


=< == eS


102 ) Aftro


noutical Principles


poets <= ee eae a ee ead


to thofe who, to avoidallfuch Difficulties, pre-
tend that Bruteshaveno Souls, no Senfation, no
Action of their own, and are meerly Corporeal,
Clock-work, and Machines ; they yield me this.
Point, thatit they have Souls, and doreally Per--
ceiveand Act themfelves,thofeSouls,thofePrinci-,
ples of Senfationand Action, muft be Immecha- —
nical, and Immaterial: But then, they pretend .
to disbelieve that, which feems to mealmoft as _
plainly matter of Fact and Obfervation, as any.
of Mr. Boyle’s Experiments whatfoever, AndI |
care not to anfwer fuch an extravagant Ob-. —
jection, which it is next to impoffible to fup- —
pofe, that any fober Propofer can, in earneft,
believe himfelt in hisown Propofal of it. And
when the Scripture affures us, that a Righteous.
Prov. xij. OF Alerciful Man regardeth the Life of bis Beaft ;
io, and this in Oppolition to the Cruelty, which the
; tender Mercies of the Wicked or Savage Meu are
afirm’d to have; it moftnaturally implies, that
thofe Beafis are themielves really fenfible Crea-
tures, and not incapable of feeling the Effects of _
the Care, or of the Cruelty of their Mafters
towardsthem. . : “ott
(2.) Wehence learn more certainly, that the
Souls of Men are Immaterial. For if we have ©
found that the lower Faculties and Operations. —
of the Souls of Brutes, require us toallow them: —
to be Immaterial, how: much more muft we do-
fo asto Human Souls? For if we proceed higher
to the Rational, the Intelligent, the Penetrating,
the Free, the Active, the Sagacious Soul which
is in Man; if we confider its vaft Capacities.
and Faculties; and that it can and fometimes —
does, a€t contrary to all the material Impreffions,
_or ‘Temptations which the fenfitive Soul lays.
; | before ©


of RELIGION. 103


before it ; contrary to all worldly Views and
Motives, all corporeal and terreftrial Interefts,

and that it can and fometimes does freely chufe
Poverty, Mifery, and Perfecution in this World,

out of regard to God and Religion, and the
Happinefs of a Future State; ‘This. Rational

Soul, I fay, muft needs be of fo vaftly higher a
Nature, of fuch vaftly nobler Faculties, of fuch

a valtly fuperior Rankin the Creation, that He

who can once fuppofe, that there is nothing in

this Cafe but fuch Matter as we have Knowledge

of in the World, with its Accidents, is ina fair

way to believe any Properties may belong to any
Beings, and that there is really no Diftin¢ction
between a Square anda Circle ; no Difference be-

tween Strength of Reafon, and the Sound ofan
Organ; no Preference between the Arguments

ufed in a Theological Difpute, and the Collifi-

on of Elaftical Bodies in Motion; between a

piece of Clock-work manag’d by Wheels and
Springs, and an Human Soul govern’d by Rea-
fonand Religion ; which Confufion of Things,
entirely differentin their own Nature, feems to

me fo abfurd and prepofterous, fowild and auk-

ward, that [I have not Patience to fet about a

more operofe Confutation of it. Thofe who are

under any Temptation to believe fuch Notions,

which feem to meno lefs foolifh than the

wildeft Dreams of Ignorance and Superftition * gop}.
themfelves, may confult * Dr.Clark’s excellent Letter to
Confutation of a late Writer upon this Head. tae
Tho’, after all, I can hardly think that Writer j,/7,7,.pe-
weak enough to have beenin earneft; andif he fences.
were, I fhould have thought that too much Ho- |

nour was done him and his crude Notions, when

they were vouchfafed the favour of fo mafter-


H 4 ly


Gen. il. 7.
ey


A fircromical P rinciples


lyaConfutation. But this is too like a Digreffi-
on to be farther infifted on inthis Place. How-
ever, we may obferve here, how agreeable this
Immateriality of Human Souls is to the Sacred
Hittory of their firft Original ; where after the
Lord God had formed Man out of the duft of
the Ground, the material Body, perhaps with
its fenfitive Soul alfo ; He diftinétly, from above,
infus’d the Rational: He breathed into bis No-
fivils the Breath of Life, and Man became a
living Soul. . |
(3.) We hence learn not only the Immateria-
lity, but the Immortality alfo of Human Souls ;
or that the Deftruction and Diffolution of the
Body, with its Senfations, will not deftroy or
diffolve the Rational Soul united thereto ; but
will leave it {til capable, not only of exifting,
but of acting in another State; if it pleafe God
fo to difpofe of it, that it may have proper
Opportunities for doingfo. So far, as I take it,
true Philofophy carries us here ; mean, it obliges
us to put fuch a difference between the rational
Soul, and the brute Body, that the Ruin of the
one will no way infer the Ruin of the other ;
and that therefore, fince Divine Revelation
affures us of the living and acting of the Soul
in the intermediate State,andalfo ofits R eturn to
the Body, and acting therein again after the Re-
furre€tion, this is allagreeable to found Reafon
and Philofophy, to good Senfe and the Laws of
Nature: Tho’ ftill all this, without afferting
fuch aneceflary Immortality, or Eternal Durati-


on in Happinefs or Mifery, as is independent


on the Power, and Will, and Laws of the Au-
thor of Nature ; to which all the Enjoyments,
and Faculties, and Perceptions ofa Human Soul

MM Siete


of RELIGION.


105


may ftill be owing hereafter, altho’ the Sub-
ftance it felf of that Soul fhould, of it felf)
when once created, continue to exift, as all real
Beings feem to do, without any particular In-
terpotition of Providence for fuch their Conti-
nuance. Philofophy, Mathematical and Expe-
rimental Philofophy, obliges us to fuppofe, that
the Soul will continue to exift after Death, and


will therefore be {till capable of Action and En- ,


joyment, of Happinefs and Mifery. Divine Re-
velation affures us this feparate Soul /hbal Act
and Enjoy, fhall partake of Happinefs and Mifery
in a lower State and inferior Degree before, and
in an higher State and fuperior Degree after the
Refurrection: So that Reafon and Religion fup~
ply, and fupport, and confirm each other, and,
upon the whole, affure us of the Truth of this
grand Principle of all Religion, efpecially of the
Chriitian, ‘That this Life is not the only, or the
principal Stage on which we are to Act; that
this World is not the only or the principal Time
for our Happinefs, or Mifery ; but that, after
this frail and mortal Life is ended, which is

only a fhort State of Tryal and Probation, we

muft live a longer one of Enjoyment hereatter.

Which Truth is of that Importance for us to be
fatisfy’d in, that nothing of either Natural or
Supernatural Knowledge, which tends thereto,
ought to be neglected-by us. Nor may we
here omit the exatt Agreement of this Natural
Truth of the Immortality of Human Souls with
Divine Revelation, particularly with our Sa-
‘viour’s own important Words upon this Head :
Fear not them which kill the Body, but are not
able to kill the Soul: but rather fear bimy who 4s
gle to deftroy both Scul aud Body in Hell. |

ae 2 We


Mat.x, 4 3.


106


A  fironontical Principles


(4.) We hence learn the Being of God, the }
firft Intelligent Caufe and Author, the juft
Owner and Poffeffor, the Supreme Lord and


~ Governor, the conftant Preferver and Difpofer


of all Things. ‘This Foundation of all Religi-
on, the Belief of a Supreme Deity, is the firft,
the moft natural and obvious Deduétion of Hu-
man Reafon, even from the Contemplation of


the moft common and ordinary Appearances of


Nature ; from the Growth of every Plant, and
the Succeffion of every Seafon, and the gene-
ral View of every Heavenly Body, and every
Creature about us. And there have certainly
been no Nations or People, of the ufual Capa-
cities of Mankind, but have ever drawn this
Confequence in all Ages of the World. So that
if this Inference be not the Voice of Nature it —
felf, we fhall be at a great lofs to find other
Truths, requiring any Reafoning at all that
can deferve to be fo itiled. And no wonder,
fince the Argument is the very fame _by which,
from the Contemplation of a Building, we in-
fer a Builder ; and from the Elegancy and Ufe-
fulnefs of each Part, we gather he was a skil-
ful Architect; or by which from the View of a
Piece of Clockwork, we conclude the Being of
the Clockmaker; and from the many regular
Motions therein, we believe that he was a curi-
ous Artificer. Which Deductions he who is not
Able to make, has not the Reafeuw; and hethat ~
will not allow them to be Fu, has not the
Honeffy of the meaneft Countryman. Tis
true, that if this fort of arguing were confin’d
to Childhood or Folly ; to the Age of Igna-


-yance, or the Temper of Ideots; if the more


nicely we viewed the World, the lefs Reafon we |
} found.


of RE Lid Gel Onn


“eee


found to admire its Contrivance ; and when.we
were come to the top of Enquiry and-Examina-
tion, we loft all the Occafions of our Wonder


107


and Adoration: If, Ifay, this were the Cafe, a


fober Perfon might think fit to fufpend his Af
fent, and to caft about for fome other Solution
of the Phenomena of. Nature. But in cale
the wife and examining Man {till finds vaftly
ftronger and more numerous Reafons for the
Acknowledgment of the Divine Exiftence, than
the Fool, or the carelefs Enquirer does; fo that
if he fpends his whole Life in the purfuit. of
this fort of Knowledge, he perceives new Argu-~
ments every where crowd upon him to the fame
purpofe; which isthe known Cafe, as to Expe-
rimental Philofophy, at this Day ;. He who is
ftill refelv’d to futpend his Affent, and either to
wrap himfelf up in wilful Scepticifm, as if he
knew nothing; orto try how tar, he can be ab-
furd enough to believe, that the World is it felf
the only God, the only Eternal, Omnipotent, All-
wife Being; or, which is yet more abfurd, that
all the Wonders in its Contrivance came meerly
by Chance and Accident ; and will continue. by


Chance and Accident, till by the like Chance -


and Accident they all come to nothing again;
He, I fay, who acis thus, does certainly, if ever
Man did, dare cperam ui cum vatione infaniat;
takes great pains to.fecw himfelf, with great
Learning, the wcfi egregious Fool in the World.


While true Wifdom or Philofophy would teach.


him to affent.to the Apoftle Paul, when he.
juftly affirms, That the Invifiile.Lhings of Ged
are clearly {een from the Creation of the World ;
being underfiood by the things that are made;
even bis Eternal Power aud Godbead, So. that


103


Pag. 88,
$9, 90,
prius.


Afironomical Principles


| Men are without Excufe for Atheifm. But this


general Reafoning is fo obvious, and fo com- —
mon, that I fhall not here enlarge upon it; but —
rather apply my felf to demonftrate the parti-
cular Attributes and Operations of God from the
particular Phenomena of the World already fet
down; as being a thing lefs common, and of
greater Advantage. Accordingly from what has
been before advanc’d, we learn,

(5.) That the World has not been from all
Eternity, but that God was the Creator of it,
and that He, and He alone, at firft Difpofed
and Ordered the feveral Parts of the Uni-
verfe, into that wife and wonderful Structure
in which we now feethem. I donot here mean
to intermeddle with that more intricate Problem
of the proper Creation of the Matter of the Uni-~
verfe out of Nothing; becaufe the Phenomena
of Nature give us no Indications either way:
nor, as I underftand it, does Divine Revelati-
on ever direétly concern it felf with it. Only,
that I may not be miftaken, I declare my own
Opinion to be {till, as it has ever been, againft
the Eternity of Matter, and for its Original
Creation out of nothing by the Almighty Pow-
er of God. But then, I am not only of Opi
niot, but am fully Szatzsfyd from the plain
Phenomena of Nature, that the World was,
in the more ordinary Senfe, originally Created,
and at firft put into that State in which, for the
main, we ftill find it, by the Divine Power, Wif-
dom and Goodnefs. I have already fhewed, that
the prefent Syftem of things, acting accord=
ing to thofe Laws of Motion and Nature which.,
are now fixed in the World, cannot poffibly
have been 4 parte ante, and cannot poffibly be
a parte poft Eternal: Much lefs is it poffible, that

| one


of RELIGION, 109 _


one little Corner of it, fuch as our Earth, fhould
have been, or fhould be hereafter Eternal by it
felf. 'This pretended Eternity of the World, is
indeed fo far from the Refult of any juft Rea-
foning, or Philofophical Evidence, ( and to any
Divine Revélation it never yet, that I know of,
made the leaft Claim ;) that I dare appeal to
the entire Syftem of Nature, whether there ap-
pear one fingle Argument for, or Indication of
fuch an Eternity, either 2 parte ante, or a parte
poft, in the whole Univerfe. I protefs, I know
none. And unlefs Men be fo weak as to leave
Faét, Nature, Experiments, and Mathematicks,
for the Subtilties of Metaphyficks, and the Cob-
webs of Abftraét Notions, they muft believe
the World not to have been, or to be Eter-
nal. But for thofe that are fubtil enough to
deny the Reality of Motion, or the Freedom of
Human Aétions, becaufe they are not able to.
account Metaphyfically for Motions Migration
from one Subject to another, as they {peak, or
for the Mode and Seat of Human Freedom in
the Soul ; while their own Senfes and Obferva-
tions do every Day of their Lives affure them
of the Reality of them both; they are Perfons
fit for the Atheifts Purpofe in this Matter, and
will be proper Patrons for the Eternity of the
World., He that, with Ocelus Lucanus, can petinicer
prove the World to have o End in Point of Du- f, Cap.1.
ration, becaufe it is of a round Figure, which
certainly in another Senfe has 70 End; or He that
can demonftrate from abftraét Reafoning about
the Nature of Matter, and that Equality of Mo-
tion he may fuppofe to be in every Part of the
Univerfe ; that a certain Clock or Watch will of
it felf go for ever, tho’ at the fame time he a
uch


Tro


Gen. i. 1.


A fironomical Principles


fuch wearing of the Wheels and Pivots, fuch —
decay of the Spring, and fuch Ruft and Foul-—
nefs over the whole, ( befides the Necefiity of its
being wound up every Revolution ) as muft, by
Calculation, put a Stop to its Motion in 20 Years’
time ; Such asthefe, I fay, are alfo Perfons right- _
ly difpofed for the fame Do@trine of the World’s
Eternity. But for the reft, I mean for all the
fober Part of Mankind, who are govern’d by


common Reafon and Experience, they will, I


believe, yield to the Facts and Arguments al-
ready ufed ; and becaufe °tis thence certain,
that the prefent World is not, cannot be natu-
rally Eternal, will readily afcribe its Origin to
the great Author of Nature, to God himfelf:
‘They will eafily allow, that the Belief in God
the Father Almighty, as the Maker of Heaven
and Earth, is no lefs a certain Doctrine of Na-
tural Religion, than it is a primary undoubted
Article of the Chriftian Faith: Nor will they
wonder, that the Few7/b Legiflator beging his
Archeology with this Affertion, In the Recinuine 7
God created the Heaven andthe Earth, as a very
proper, a very neceflary, and certain Freliini-
nary to that Divine Legiflation he was to lay
down, in vertue of the Authority of the fame

great Creator. |
(6.) We learn from the foregoing Syftem of
the World, that God, the Creator of it, is an
Eternal Being, and has exifted before all'Time,
and all Worlds, even abfolutely from everlafting.
This Attribute of God of a proper Eternity, or
Neceffity of Exiftence, without any Caufe or Be-
ginning whatfoever ; (for thefe Properties feem
to me to infer each other, if not to be one and
the fame ;.) appears to be one of the hardeft No-
tions


of RELIGION.


rn ee er mt ne rN


tions that a human Mind can take in. Yetis it the


moft certain of all others. For ’tis moft appa-
rently plain, that if the Firft Caufe and Origi-
nal Being does now, or ever did exift, as we
have fhew’d he now does, and ever did fince
the World began; He muft have exifted from
all Eternity, otherwife He muft have at firft
produced himfelf into Being when He was not;
or muft Ad? and Create before He was; which
all the World owns to be abfolutely impoffible.


ee


This Attribute, we fee, isnot deriv’d fromany |


particular Phenomenon of the Univerfe; but
from them all, and every one together. Nor
do any who believe the foregoing Corollary,
concerning the Exiftence of God, fo much as
pretend to doubt of the Eternity of that Exi-
ftence; fo that I fhall not need to enlarge any
farther upon this Attribute in this Place. Only
we may obferve, how agreeable this Eternity of
God, here gathered from the Light of Nature,
is to Divine Revelation, which affures us, that
Before the Mountains were brought forth, or ever
he bad formed the Earth or the World, even from
Everlafting to Everlafting He is God.

(7.) From the foregoing Sy/tem we learn, that
God, the Creator of the World, does alfo ex~
ercife a continual Providence over it, and doés
interpofe his general, immechanical, immediate
Power, which we call the Power of Gravity, as
alfo his particular immechanical Powers of Re-.
frattion, of Attraction, and Repul/e, &c. in the
feveral particular Cafes of the Phenomena of
the World; and without which all this beauti-


Pfal. xc.


ful Sy/tem would fall to Pieces, and diffolve into —


Atoms. On which Occafion, the Apoffolical
| | Conftitu-


Tia


7s


onomical Principles


ae
wit.


Conftitutions {peak as agreeably to Philofophy as
to Religion, when they fay, The whole World
is beld together by the Hand of God. For, as
we have already obferv’d, though we fhould not
think it neceffary to fuppofe a particular In=_
terpofition of the Supreme Being, in the Con-
fervation of the Natures or Exiftence of Things,
and of their Original Projectile Motions, which
once begun may continue of themfelves, with-
out any new or particular Support ; Cin which ©
Cafe however not a few think it neceflary to
introduce the fame, and that the Con/ervation
of Things is no other.than a kind of continual
Creation of them; ) tho’, I fay, we fhould not
think it neceflary to fuppofe, that continual in-
terpofing Providence in the material World, in
order to its Prefervation, yet can we not avoid
allowing it in that grand immechanical Power
of the Univerfe, I mean that of Gravity, and
in the other immechanical Powers of the fame
Nature above-mentioned. 'Thefe do continually


actin the World, and alter the Places and Mo-


tions of Bodies perpetually ; which makes me
commonly chufe to call them here Powers ra«
ther than Laws, as the Power of Gravity, or
Refraction, rather than the Law of Gravi«
ty or Refraction ; and fo for the reft. For this
I take to be the Difference between a Power
and a Law, {peaking ftrictly ;. that a Law be-
longs to fuch Rules as neceflarily flow from
fome Property of Bodies, without any new
Aétion exercis’d thereupon ; as that Bodzes once
in Motion continue for ever to move with that
Degree of Velocity which they once have, without
Intermiffion, along thofe firait Lines, according to
which thofe Motions are already diretted: But a

\ \ Power


& 3
-


of REELEIGLON.


Power is here Such a Rule; by which the Bodies
are confiantly moved out of thofe Lines, and
Srom thofe Velocities they naturally bad, into
other Lines and Velocities diftintt from them ;

which plainly implies a real Aétion, a true

‘Force, Impreffion or Influence actually exerted
‘upon them; whether we call it Impulfe, or
Attraction, it mattersnot; and this per petually
alfo: Which istherefore quite different from the
foregoing Cafe, as to the ordinary Mechanical
Laws of Motion; and fuppofes a real Agent,
and. He fufficiently Active, arid Powerful!
alfo to remove all fuch Bodies through the
Univerfe perpetually. For I defire thofe who
think otherwife, to tell me, how unactive Mat-
ter, without fuch a continual Exerciie of Force
upon it, can be continually oblig’d to leave its
natural, even, rectilinear Motion, and to move.
fatter, of flower, in a cutve Line ? Can ity of
it felf, admit of a Law of Gravity, and of it
felf ever. exert this Clinamen, this Depdrture
from its proper Courfe? But this is to fuppofe
it not wuattive Matter, but an intelligent Self-
moving Being, which alone is capable of under-

ftariding of Laws, and acting according to
them. Infhort, it feems to mé moft evident
from the Phenomena of the World, that all
fuch Laws or Powers as we are now foe eaking of;
which are many and wonderful, and yet abfo-
lutely neceflary to the Prefervation of the pre-
dent Syftem, aré the real Effects of the conti-
fiual Power arid Providence of God himfelf, for
the Confervation. of the Univerfe; and that.


wheriever he pleafes tofufpeid fuch Exercife of.


that Powet and Providence, the World it felf


wilh diffolve i into Atoms, and its prefent Foim
Eee k fufter


a.


[tA


A ftronomical Principles


Pfal. civ.
24, Gc.


fuffer an utter Deftruction. I conclude this
Head in the elegant Words of the P/almift,
when he celebrates the great Creator, for fome —
remarkable Inftances of his Provzdentéal Care
ever his Creatures: O Lord, bow manifold are
thy Works! in Wifdom haft thou made them all:
The Earth is full of thy Riches. Sois this great
and wide Sea, wherein are things creeping
znuumerable, both {mal and great Beafis. There
go the Ships: Ibere is that Leviathan, whom
thou baft made to play therein. Thefe wait
all upon thee ; that thou may ft give them their
Meat in due Seafon: That thou giveft them they
gather : Thou openeft thine Hand, they are filled
with Good. --- 'The Glory of tbe Lord shall en-


dure for ever; the Lord fhall rejoice in bis


Works. --—I wll fing unto the Lord as long as
I live; Iwill fing Praife unto my God while I
have my Being. But to proceed. We farther
learn from this Syftem of the World,

(8.) That this Supreme God, the Creator
and Preferver of the World, and the Author of
the Power of Gravity, and of all otherthe Im-
mechanical. Powers of the Univerfe, is a Free
Agent, no way limited by any Neceffity or Fate,
but acting ftill by Chozce, and according to his
own good Pleafure. 'This Attribute of the Di-—
vinity, without which the Supreme Being him-
felf would be below Mankind, a meer Fatality,
and no way worthy of any Veneration, or
Love, or Gratitude from his Creatures, is
fully demonftrated under fo many of the fore=.
going Ob/ervatious from the Syftem of the
World, that I fcarce need quote any one of
them in Particular. And I appeal to all that
we now know of this entire Univerfe about us,

whether


of RELIGION.


whether there be one fingle Indication of fuch a
rigid Fatality; and Neceffity therein. °Tis

true, fuch ftrange Reafoners as Hobbs and

Spinoza, &c. pretend by Metaphyfick Argu-

ments to demonftrate this Fatality and Necef-

fity; even as to the A€ctionsof the Supreme Be-
ing, or @ zy itfelf. But then, they do by the

like Metaphyfick Reafoning, as {trongly pretend
to demonitrate the fame Fatality and Neceffity

of Human Actions allo; which laft we are
fure, from our own certain, conftant Experi-
ence, all our Lives long, is utterly falfe and ri-
diculous ; and therefore we have no Reaton to
depend on the like Subtilties in the other Cafe:

Efpecially while inftead of Metaphyfick Subtil-
tieson one Side, we produce the plaineft Expe-
iments, Obfervations, and Demonitrations
from Nature, and the Syftem of the Univerie,
‘onthe other: And while Dr. Clarke has, with
great Sagacity, fhew’'d the Inconfiftency of that

Metaphyfick Reafoning, and the Freedomof the

Divine Being, and of Human Actions, evenin
their own Way, bothin his Sermons at Mr. Boyle’s

Le@tures, and Anfwers to an Anonymous Author
already quoted, to which I thall reter thofe Rea-,

_ders, who have a mind to deal in that way of
Reafoning. As for my felf, while I clearly fee that

the conftant Experience of all Men, and theen-

tire Phenomena of the whole Univerie, directly

prove the Freedom of Human and Divine Acti< _

ons, Lamnot much concern’d what may be al-
ledg’d tothe contrary from Metaphyfick Uncer-
tainties ; efpecially when I find it every-where

confirm’d by Divine Revelation alfo ; which al-

ways teaches us to render fuch Praife and

Thank{giving to Almighty God, for the Sa

2 ok


116


Aflronomical P. rinciples


Pfal. ciil.


(os


of Creation and Providence, as would be per=


feétly ridiculous, if allfuch his Operations were _


entirely fatal, andinvoluntary. Ble/s the Lord,
O my Souk, and all that 7s within me, -blefs his
Holy Name. Ble{s the Lord,O my Sotl, and
forget. not al bis Benefits: Who forgiveth all |
thine Iniquities, who healeth all thy Difeafes:
Who redecmeth thy Life from Defiruttion, who
crowneth thee with loving-Kindune/s, and tender |
Mercies. Blefs the Lord, all his Works, in all
Places of bis Dominion : Blefs the Lord, O my |
Soul. ‘|
9. We learn from the true Syftem of the —
World, that this Supreme God is an-Intelligent —
and Omni/cient Being, and that he knows the


_entire State and ‘Condition of every Body'con-


tain’d in this entire Univerfe, at what Di-
‘f{tances, and inwhat Circumftances foever ;:and _
that inevery Momentof Time from the Begin- |
ning of this Syftem, till its Conclufion. This |
is derived from Obfervations 21ft and 22d |
foregoing ; and is a moft unqueftionable De- |
duction from the Phenomena of the Univerfe. |
TI ufe the Word Ovmifczence here, as fuch |
Words are commonly ufed in Scripture, and —
Ancient Authors, for fuch a Degree of Know- _
ledge, whether in it felf abfolutely infinite or —
no, which extends every-where ‘to the whole —


vifible Univerfe, and ‘takes in all the particular


Parts of the fame, ‘to the utmoft ‘Limits of our


Examination and Computations, without Excep-


tion. For inthis Senfe only, can the Pheno-


mena of Created Beings, which muft be every


-way finite, become Demonftrations of the At- |
tributes of their Uncreated Original Creator ; |


_ which alone canbe, ftrictly fpeaking, .efteemed


: abfolutely | )


|
i


|


ee
of RELIGION. 117


abfolutely Infinite. Nor are we here, or in
| other Cafes, concerned any farther. Forif the
‘Supreme Author of our Univerfe, doescertainly
and exactly know whatfoever is, or is done in
this Univerfe, what doesit concern us, whether
he equally knows what{oever is, or is done in
any other Invifible or Imaginary Sy{tems beyond
it? Although he who believes that this Omni-
{eience, orother fuch infinite Attributes, belong.
truly to the Supreme God, its Author, to the
utmoft Extent of this grand Syftem, muft be a
very ftrange Perfon, if he can deny, or doubt
whether the Omnifcience of the fame Supreme
‘Being, extends to thereft of the other invifible
Syftems alfo; fuppofing there be fuch other
Syftems, and that they are the Workmanthip of
his Handsalfo, as well as ours. All which con-
firms the Words of E/zbu,when he thus exhorts
the great Example of Patience 5 Hearken unio Jobxxxvii:
this, O Fob, fiand ftilland confider the wondrous 41511
Works of God. Doft thou know when God dif-
pofed them, and caufed the Light of bis Cloud to
foine? Doft thou know the Balancings of the Clouds,
‘the wondrous Works of him that is perfect in
Knowledge ¢
Cro.) We learn further from the true Syftem
of the World, that this Supreme God does not
barely know and underftand all the Bodies, and
all that is done by all the Bodies, in this entire
grand Syftem, but he moft Wzfely and Pru-
dently, and Sagacioufly Orders and Difpofes of
all the {aid Bodies, and particular Syitems there-
to belonging. This is fuch a known and fre-
quent Confequence of the foregoing Ob/erva-
tions from the true Syftem of the World, that
almoft.one half of them demonitrate the un-
| Oe doubted —


118 Aftronomical Principles


doubted Truth and Certainty of it. Norcould |
there be any Occafion for enlarging on this
Head, were it not that the Moral or Living
World, does net here always feem to agree
with the Natural or Aftronomical one. In the
latterthereis plainly and every where Marks of
fuch Exaétneis, Harmony, Prudence, Sagacity,
Wifaom, and Conduét, that not only perfectly
Convinces, but Amazes and Aftonifhes us, even
all of us, who throughly confider the particu-
lar Inftances, the innumerable, clear, irrefraga-
ble Inftances of the fame, in every Part of the’
Univerfe: And he muft be ftupid to the utmoft
Degree, who can go a Courfe of Mechanicks,
of Anatomy, of Botanicks, and efpecially of
Aftronomy, without the moft fatisfactory Con-
viction in this Cafe. Thofe natural Sciences,
particularly Aftronomy, will fully demonftrate
pralni what the Sacred Writings have already inform’d_
cxlvii.gss. US Of 5 not only that God telleth the Number of
the Stars, and calleth them all by their Names 5
that great 75 our Lord, and of great Power, and
that of bis Underftanding there is -no Number;
giv. 24. but alfo, that Hzs Works are manifold, and in
Wifdom has he made them all. But then, how
it comes about that we do by no means per-—
ceive the fame Exactnefs and Harmony, in the
Moral and Living World; which we every-
where fee in the Material and: Phyfical, isa
great andnoble Problem ; though not belonging
to this Place. I have my felf occafionally
touch’d upon it inmy other Writings ; but ac-
knowledge it to deferve a much larger and
fuller Difquifition. In the mean time, I muft
contefs, that I have met with no Accounts
theretorelating, fo Authentick, fo Rational and


fo


i)
:
:
|
j
|


of RELIGION.


fo Valuable, asthofe we have inan Ancient, but
too much defpifed Book of Primitive Chrittia-
nity; I mean the Recoguitions of Clement ;
whichI fome time fince 'Tranflated into Engli/h,
for the Advantage of the Unlearned, but In-
quifitive Reader ; to which therefore I muft re-
fer hitn for his Satisfaction in this Cafe. Only
fo far the prefent Propofition may juftly tend to
his Satisfaction, asit certainly Demonftrates the
Proportion, Harmony,and Decorum every where
provided for by the Supreme Being in the Natural
World,and by confequence affords us the greateft
Reafonto believe, what by the Light of Nature
we cannot but expect from Him, that in the
laft refort and upfhot of Things, we fhall find
the fame Proportion, Harmony, and Decorum
provided for, with regard to all his Living and
Rational, that is, to his Principal, which are
already fo remarkable and furprizing, as to the
reft of his Inanimate and Irrational, which are
but his Inferior Creatures.

C11.) We learn farther from the true Syftem
of the World, that the Supreme God, who
Made and Governs it, is a moft Powerful and
Almighty Being; whow: nothing can refift, and
againft whom nothing can oppofe it felf in the


whole Creation. This is not only the natural °


Refult of this World’s derivation from God,
and its receiving all its Powers and Abilities
from him ; which muft needs imply, that the
Author of them all is ftill of greater Power ;
and that no created Might can oppofe it felf


119


againft that Might by whichit was itfelf crea-  .


ted; but is a direét Confequence from the 23d
Obfervation before-going. And that we may
have fome particular Notion of the Greatnefs of

I 4 the


Aftronomical Prinetples


the Divine Power, and Al mighty Efficacy. in:
this our own Syftem, let us confider the Great-
nefg of the Bodies it every where moves; and
the Velocity with which it moves them. The
former you may find in the Table, pag. 56. and
the latter in that pag. §3. whereby. it appears,
that the Planets alone, which are continually.
moved, are together above Four Hundred Mil-
lions of Millions of Cubical Miles in Magni- —
tude ; that the Velocity wherewith they are
mov’d, in their Annual Motion, is, ata mean,
about ¢2000 Miles in an Hour ; and that the ©
Velocity of the Corpuicles of Light is ftillvaft-
ly greater, and no lefs than Six Hundred and
Fifty Millions of Miles in the fame time 5 and -
all this has been fo continuaily. from the begin-
ning of the whole Syftem to this very Day ;
and that without the leaft proper Refiftance or
Oppofition from either any of thefe Bodies them-
felves, or irom any other Power or Agent what-
foever. On which account we may every. one
of us. well fay with Holy Zod, after God had
made an Eminent Reprefentation to him of hig
own Onimipotenite,: and of Fob’s Weaknefs; I
- know that thou canft do every thing, and that no.
Thought of thine can be bindred :---- Wherefore I
abbor my (elf, and repent in duft and afbes.

(12.) We learn farther from this true Syftem,
That the Supreme God, ,who made and governs .
the World, is every where fubf{tantially and real-.
Jy prefeut through the whole; or is at all.

Times, and in all Places, Onmiprefent. This..
is a moft direét Confequence of the Divine.
Knowledge, and Wifdom, and Power, the At-
tributes and ACtions of the Supreme Being, con-
nually exerted thr oughout the whole Pniverfe..
Nor


of RELIGION.


Nor can we any more conceive them actually
exercis'd where, than when that Being, whole ©
Attributes and Powersthey are, does not it felf
exift; which laft is by all Men. allow’d to be
grofly abfurd and impoffible.. Nor does either
the Sun, or any other Being, afford. us any_
thing, like a Virtual, as diftinét from a Sub-
ftantial Prefence and Efficacy. ‘Ihe Sunindeed
fends out Rays of Light, which Rays operate
where the Sun is not : But then both of them’
operate only where themfelves are. Nor is any
other Notion confiftent with common Senfe, or
the poffibilities of Things. Forto fay that a-
Being Acts where it is not, is to fay in effect,
that Nothing Ats in that place; or that the
Effect produc’d, has in that Place no Caufe to
produce it ; which are the grofieft Abfurdities
and Contradi¢tions poffibles. “Butthen, astothe
Vattnels of the Extent of this Prefence of God,
through this grand Syftem, including all the
Syitems of the Fixed Stars alfo, it is to us hi-
therto unlimited and undetermin’d ; tho’, in all.
probability, init felf not really Infinite.” How-.
ever, fo far we are certainly upon Fatt to fup-
pofe the Divine Omniprefence to reach, and to.
be prefent, as we difcover the Effeéts of the.
fame; I mean fo far as the vifible Univerfe ex-
tends; which we know, on the loweft Compu-..
tation, muft be nearly thatof a Cube of 1,400.


©00,000.000 Miles Diameter,which contains near’
3 5000.0005 000.000, 000.000, 000.000,000.000,'
elaile Viott weg tS 4


000.000, 7. ¢. three Sextilions,or three Millions of:
Millions of Millions. of Millions of Millions of


Millions of Cubical Miles. An amazing Space
| | this,


122


A  fironomical Principles


~


fa.dvil.1 5.


this, and asto any Power of Imagination,fcarcely
to be diftinguifh’d from Infinite Space it felt!
And fo far, to be fure, the Omniprefence of
God extends it felf. Nor can even thefe Li-
mits inclofe, or limit the Prefence of the Su-
preme Being ; who as He is by Demonftration
prefent every where within, and between all the
Parts of the feveral immenfe Syftems, fo, no
queftion, is his Prefence extended as well be-


yond the Grand Syftem itfelf, as we know itis


beyond this particular Sy{tem wherein we live.
But fince the vaft Vifible Syftem of the Univerfe
is that with which we arealone concerin’d, and
fuch as even wearies and amazes our Faculties,
when we attempt fo much as to imagine its
Immenfity, I fhall wade no farther into that unfa-
thomable Abyfs of infinite Extramundane Space ;
the nicer Confideration of which, like that of
Infinite Duration or Eternity, is evidently too
large for our finite Thoughts ; and does ever


more Aftonifh and Confound, than Profit and |


Edify Mankind. And no wonder, fince ’tis
highly probable that both of them, as to their
inmoft Nature, and largeft Extent, are alone
knowable by that High and Lofty One, who,
in the Prophet’s Expreffion, In>abits Eternity.


I conclude this Head inthe appofite Words of


the P/almifi, of Feremiah, and of the Apoftolical


Con/tztutionsywhich fhew that Reafon and Revela-_


tion agree in this important Attribute of the Di-


- vine Omniprefence. Jf, fays the Pfalmif?, Iafcend


Pfalm.
CXXXIX.
8, 9) 10.


up into Heaven thou art there: If I make my
Bed in Hades, behold thou art there. If I take
the Wings of the Morning, and dwell in the uts
terimoft parts of the Sea; even there foall thy


Hand lead me, and thy right Hand foall hold
We, °


-


; ei


ite wr G1 ON,


125


me. And, fays God by feremiah, Am I a God Jer. xxill.
at hand, and not afar off? Can any bide bim- 73» >


felf in fecret places that I cannot fee him? faith
the Lord. Do not I fill Heaven and Earth ¢
faith the Lord. And fay the Conftitutions, Thou
art He who art in Heaven; He who art on
Earth ; He who art in the Sea 3; He who art in
finite Things, thy- (elf unconfin'd by any thing.
For of thy Majefry there is no Boundary. For
"tis not ours, O Lord, but the Oracle of thy Ser-
vant who faid ; And thou fhalt know in thine
Heart that the Lord thy God He is God, in
Heaven above, and on Earth beneath, there is
none befides Him.

(13.) We learn farther from this Syftem,
that the Supreme God, the Maker and Gover-
nor of the Univerfe, is, in his own Nature and
Subftance, Immaterial. 'This is alfo a moft di-
rect Confequence from the true Syftem of the
World, whereby it has appear’d that God, the
only Author of the Power of Gravity, does act,
and is prefent to the inmoft Parts of all folid
Bodies ; nay that he is equally prefent, and
equally acts in thofe inmoft Parts of all folid
Bodies, as in any empty Spaces themfelves, and
withal that this Action upon all Bodies is not
like to material and mechanical Impulle, which
is ever on the Surface only ; but penetrates
thofe Bodies themfelves, and every where caufes
a Gravitation, not according to the Surface, but
according to the entire folid Content, or Quan-
tity of the real Matter it felf, contain’d in every
one of thofe Bodies. "This Property is highly
remarkable, and of great Confequence againft
thofe who are unwilling to allow any real Being
but Matter inthe Univerfe, Whereas ir has for-

merly


L.VII.35.


Deut. ive
39:


A fironomical P rinciples


merly appear’d, that both the; Senfitive Souls.
of Brutes, and the Rational Souls of Men, are
Immaterial; and it does. now moft evidently
appear, that the Supreme Being himfelf is alfo.
Immaterial ; that is, it appears that the entire
nobleft Parts of the Univerfe, all the Living,
Active, Thinking, Enjoying Parts of it, for
whofe Sake alone the reft of it could be made, .
together with the Almighty Maker himfelf, are
really Immaterial. So little do the Wifhes, and
Defires, and Fancies, and Hypothefes of the.
Old and New Atheifts, agree with the true Sy-
ftem of the Univerfe ! And fo exadtly do the
wifeft Notions, and Inclinations, and Doétrines,
and Affertions of the Patrons of God and Reli-
gion, in all Ages, appear to correfpond to the
fame! I heartily wifh, that fuch Perfons would
well confider of this Obfervation; and nolong-
er make ufe of thofe {mall Arguments, to take
away the Being and Attributes of God ; which
{till appear, when we come to real Fatt, Expe-
riment, and Demontfiration, to be as little agree-
able to Philofophy and Mathematicks, as they
are in themfelves Impious, and Blafphemous
againft their great Creator: and Benefactor.
Nature as well as Scripture teaching us, that
John iv. God ts a Spirit ; and that by Confequence, they
35, 24. that worfbip Him muft worfbip Him in Spirit and

in Truth. |
(14.) We learn moreover from this true Sy-
ftem of the World, that the Supreme God, the
Maker and Governor of the Univerfe, is a
Good and Beneficent Being, and one that takes
Care of the Welfare and Happinels of his Crea-
tures. ‘This is a direct Confequence from no
{mall Number of the Obfervations foregoing,
which


of RELIGION,


which fhew the great Care he hastaken of the
Situation and Motion, and Circumftances of the
feveral Planets, at due Diftances trom the Sun,
and from one another, that fo they might be
the moft commodious and comfortable Habita- —
tions for the Creatures that were to live upon
them. And the fame might be more diftinétly
and particularly obferv’d as to our Earth, and
its Inhabitants, if this were a proper Place for
it. But thishas been fo frequently andfully done See Dr.
already, that I fhall rather chufe to infert what Moore «-
has already been excellently faid. by ‘others in ga Ms
the Eighth Part ; or toreter my Reader tothem yy. Ray's
here, than to repeat thofe Oblfervations in this Wisdom -of
Place. Upon the whole, the Provifion that is Se ia
made by the Divine Providence for Men, and all ly sea
Creatures living, which aloneare capable of the Dr. Chey-
Goodnefs and Beneficence of the Creator, both ne’s Philo-.
-intheir Entry into, and during their entire Con- (nee
tinuance in this World, is fo ample, fo abun- of Navarak
dant, fo furprizing, that he who carefully con- Religion.
fiders the Particulars in all. Sorts and Species of Part 1. C.
Animals with us, and efpecially in Man, the 5- S 24
Lord of themall, will be foon obliged not only “*
to grant, that God isa Beneficent Being, but
alfo, with the P/almif?, to Admire, and Adore, Pfal. 1¢7.
and Praife the Lord for bis Gooduefs, and for
bis wonderfub Works to the Children of Men.
And this Inference is the more juft, becaufe the
Infinite Perfection, and Self-{ufficiency of the
Divine Nature, does fo entirely privilege him
from all Want, and from all:expe¢tation of In-
creafe.of Happinefs from any of his Creatures,
that every one of the Inftances of his Benefi-
scence, both in the Creation and Confervation,
and Provifion :for thofe Creatures, muft needs
bia 2 be


A ftronomical Principles


Rom.ii.5.


be the alone free and generous Effects of his
Bounty, and the gratuitous Communication of
his Goodnefs to them ; inorder not to és, but
to their own Happinefs and Felicity ; which


‘Circumftance renders this Goodnefs and Benefi-


cence the moft highly Meritorious and Divine
of all others whatfoever. Ido not here take no=
tice of the Objections againift this Goodneds and
Beneficence of the Divine Nature, from the
feeming Irregularities now appearing in the Mo-
tal and Rational Part of the Creation ; becaufe
Divine Revelation always owns fuch feeming
Irregularities at prefent, and refers the full So-
lution of them to the Day of the Revelation of
the righteous ‘fudgment of God hereafter ; be-~


-caufe we are hitherto not fufficiently acquainted


with the laft Refult and Upfhot of Things to
determine thofe Matters ; and becaufethe moft
ancient Recognitions of Clement have prevented
me in good Part, and afforded more Authentick
and valuable Hints, than any others which weat
this Day can propofe, towards their Solution. To
which therefore I fhall here, as I did before, re-
fer the Inquifitive Reader for better Satisfaction.
Only fo far the prefent Propofition, as well asa
foregoing One, may be of ufe to us in that
Matter ; as it affures us of the Goodnefs and
Beneficence of God, in the wonderful Contri-
vance of the World about us, for the Eafe and
Comfort of the feveral Creatures which are
therein: Which cannot but difpofe us to be-
lieve, that the fume Attributes will at laft ap-
pear equally glorious as to the Moral, as they

do already as to the Natural World.
(15.) We learn farther from the true Syftem of
the World, that the Supreme God is sca ta
the


of RELIGION.


the fame in all Ages; or that he isan Immutable
Being. I donot mean that he is fo rigidly
Immutable as to be Inexorable to the Prayers of
his Suppliants, who ask in a due manner what
is fit for them ; or that he has zmmutably decreed
the Fates of Men, let them do whatever they
will. 'Thefe Properties would not be thofe of
a Wife or Good Being, but of a Foolifh and Evil
one. Nor do the Phenomena, whence I draw
this Attribute of Immutability, in the leaft im-
ply any fuch Things. But I mean, that God ap-
pears to act by certain and conftant Laws of Mo-
tion, of Gravity, of Refraction, &c. and this
at all Times, and in all/Places of the Univerfe,
from the beginning of this Syftem or World till
this very Day ; and from the utmoft Limits of
the fame Syftem one way, to thofe that are op-
pofite, fo far as we are ever able to examine ;
‘without any Variation fromthe fame, from one
Generation to another. Thofe only Cafes are
to be excepted, wherein God is pleafed to in-
terpofe in a more immediate manner, and by
leaving or contradiéting the fettled Courfe of
Nature and ordinary Providence, does more
effectually demonftrate his Divine Power and
particular Providence in ome extraordinary and
miraculous Cafes, for the greater Benefit of any
of his Creatures. ‘Tho’ by the way it will de-
ferve to be confidered, whether even in thofe
Cafes, fuch miraculous Operations may not be,
ufually at leaft, brought about, rather by the
means of Angels, or of fome other Spiritual
and Invifible Beings, which Revelation and Hi-
ftory affures us areas his Minifters in the World,
without the direct Alteration of thofe Fixed
and Conftant Laws of Nature, which we pe

wile


127


128


A fironomical. Prinei ples


2King vi.
516. |


Jam. i. yi


wife find to be immutably obferv’d by him.
Thus that Jron, which was made to fwim in
Water by the Prophet, contrary to the known
Law of Specifick Gravity, might as well be fup-
ported by an invilible Agent, notwithftanding
its fuperior Gravity, as that fuperior Gravity,
by the direct Subftraction of the Divine Influ-
ence be taken away from it ; and fo in many
other Cafes ; and this without the Impeachment —
of the Miracles themfelves, or their Intentions
among Mankind.However,fince we have ore in!
proved that the Supreme Being is a Powerful,

Wife,a Good,and a Free Agent,as well as weare
now fhewing him to be an ‘atesieiie One, it
cannot be juft fo to interpret one of thefe Di-
vine Perfections, as at all to clafh with, or con-
tradict the other : and by Confequence, we are
not fo to eftablifh Inmutability, as in any Cafe
to hinder the free Exerci/e of his Power, Wit-
dom,and Goodnefs, where fufficient Reafons de<
termine Him to a¢t ashe pleafes in the Govern
ment of the World. For that would be a
ftrange Notion of a Powerful, Wife, Good, and _


Free Being, that He could ante: that Rompr


Wifdom, and Goodnefs, in only one invariable —
manner, let the Occafions for a different Exer~
cife of the fame be never fo great or neceflary.
But, this Cafe excepted, Nature and Scripture
agree, that i God is uo variablenefs, neither
Jhadow of turning.

(16.) We learn alfo from this true Syftem of
the World, that the Supreme God, the Maker


and Governor of all Things, is not a blind Fate,


or Series of neceffary Caufes and Effects, but is
a Spiritual, a Living, and an Active Being ; per-
petually exerting his Divine Perfections in the

whole


of Ropipe ron. 129


whole Univerfe. I donot here take the Word
Spiv7tual meerly for Incorporeal or Immaterial ;

which Property I have already difcourfed upon ;

but as importing alfo that. Vigor, andthofe Adti-

ons which brute. Matter is uncapable of, and

which are the proper Effects of Life, and on

which Account the Sacred Writings fo often call

GO D the Living God, in oppofition to thofe

Dead or Inanimate Heathen Idols, which were
not able to do any Thing either for Mercy or
Judgment. Now thatthe Supreme God, the
Author of all Things, muft be thus a Spzritual

Living and Atizve Being, continually Obferving,

and Knowing, and Ordering, and Providing, and

Acting in the World, is not only highly proba-

ble becaufe he is the Creatot of all; and there-

fore will not certainly forget, or overlook, or
negleétthe Works of bis own Hands; but is di- pry,
rectly proved from many of the foregoing Pro- cxxxviii.
pofitions, which have given us abundant Inftan- $.
ces of fuch his Lifeand A@tivity. And no won-

der that the Supreme Spiritual Being is thus
Living and Active, fince, as Material Subftance

or Body is in its own Nature, according to all sa
the Experience we ever have of it, Dead, Inert,
and wholly Unactive ; fo does it feem that
Spiritual Subftance, or Soul, is in its own Na-
ture ingeneral, Living, Active, and Vigorous ;
and that the different Degrees of fuch Life,
Ativity, and Vigor, do conftitute or proceed
from the feveral Kinds of Spiritual Beings, from
the meanetft fenfitive Soul of a Brute, up to the
Supreme Spirit of the Univerfe himfelf I do
not mean with De Cartes, that a Soul or Spiri-
tual Being does for ever actually think, or is al-
ways by neceffity of Nature, in Action; no

: more


Dan. vi.
26, 27.


A ftronomical Principles


more than I believe that a Body is ever really,
and by neceflity of Nature in Motion; but that


it is always Quick and Active and Ready, up- —


on all Occafions and Objects that prefent them-
felves, tothink, and confider, andrefolve, and
exert it felf; and that this Faculty is one of
its main Diftinétions from Body or Matter,
which is entirely deftitute of all fuch Faculties
whatfoever. And certainly, He that produc’d
all the Living, and Active Powers and Abilities
which are inthe Creatures, muft himfelf poffefs
them in the higheft and moft exalted manner
poffible ; which Life and Adtivity, if He, the
Supreme Being, were wholly bereaved of, he
would be fo far from the Object of our Wor-
fhip, Fear, Love, and Adoration, as all \Men
naturally look upon him to be, that he wotild
be certainly the Subjeét only of Negleét and
Contempt. Wherefore Philofophy, as well as
Religion, affure us of the Truth of what Darius
an Heathen King was once obliged to acknow-
ledge, that Men ought to tremble and fear before
God ; for He is the Living God, and ftedfaft for
ever; and bis Kingdom that which fhall not be
deftroyed. And He worketh Signs and Wonders
in Heaven and in Earth. .
C17.) We farther learn from the true Syften
of the Univerfe, That the Supreme God, the
Maker and Governor of all Things, is but One.
This Unity of God, or that there is but One.
Infinite, Eternal, Omnipotent Being or Agent,
who created and governs all Things, is among
the firft Dictates of Nature and right Reafon,
when it refle¢ts upon the obvious Phenomena
of the World, and is moft clearly confirm’d by,
allthe foregoing Obfervations. The Univerfe
2 appears


Dit $2


of RELIGION. 3%


‘appears thereby to be evidently One Univerfe ;

govern’d by One Law of Gravity through the

whole; and obferving the fame Laws of Mo-

tion every where: ‘Lhe Conduét of the whole

is every where One and the fame ; and not the

Jeaft Signs or Traces do appear of any Op-

pofite, or Coordinate Power interpofing it

felf in any of its regular Phenomena. So

that this Unity of God, is now for ever efta=

blifhed by that more certain Knowledge we

have of the Univerfe ; as it was naturally alfo,

tho’ in a leffer Degree, difcoverable by all Man-

kind before. So true ard juftaretheWordsof |

the Apoftles in their Covftztutions, concerning L VI: €.

the Occafion of God’s impofing on the Fews *°

the rigid Ceremonies of the Law of Mofes,

after their Idolatry about the Golden Calf:

*¢ I impofe thefe Things on thee, that be-

*¢ ing prefs’d and gall’d by thy Collar thou mayeft _

“depart from the Eiror of Polytheifm, and _ __

laying afide that, Thee are thy GodsO Ifraél, Exod:

“© mayeft be mindful of that, Hear O Ifrael; the Dee ze

“ Lord our God is One Lord; and mayeft run

“ back again to that Law, which is inferted

“* by me inthe Nature of all Men, hat there

“ 73 only One God in Heaven, and on Earth.
(18.) Laftly, we learn from this true Sy{tem

of the World, that we and all Creatures are en-

tirely under the Dominion, and fubject to the

fupreme Authority of this One God, as to our

Lord and Governor. This is the moft natural and

obvious Confequence, from what, has been hi-

therto proved, concerning the Exiftence, the At-

tributes, and the Providence of the One Su-

prenie God; that this World, wherein we all

live, is God’s World; that this Syftem of the

K 2 Univertes


aS


332


Plalexey.
3---7.


Aftronomical Principle


Univerfe, is God’s great Houfe, or Family, or
Kingdom ; and that the Rational Beings are
God’s Creatures, the Members of that his Fa-
mily, and Subjects of that his Kingdom ; ows
ing all poffible Obedience, Duty, and Homage
tohim, as totheir great Mafter and King. 'This
abfolute Supremacy of the One God, and Obli-
gation of all Derived and Created Beings to en-
tire Submiffion to him,is{fo plain from thefe Confi-
derations, that as He muft bethe moft egregious
Fool, in pointof Prudence, that will daretoop-
pofe himfelf to the Omnipotence of his Al-
mighty Lord and King; fo is he the moft pro-
fligate Wretch in point of Duty, that will ven-
ture to refufe his Submiffion to the Infinite Wii
dom and Goodnefs of his moft beneficent Cre-
ator, Father and Benefactor, In whow he lives,
moves, and has bis Being; aud whofe Offspring
he is. Nor will Philofophy it felf in the leaft
{cruple the juftnefs of that Exhortation madeufe
of by the P/a/mzft upon this Occafion ; Becau/e
the Lord isa great God, and a great King above
all Gods 5 becaufe in bis Hand are the deep Pla-
ces of the Earth, and the Strength of the Hills
is his alfo; becaufe the Sea is His, and He made
it, and bis Hands formed the Dry Land; O
come therefore, let us Worfhip and Bow down, let
as Kneel before the Lord our Maker: For. be is,
our God, and we are the People of bis Pafture,
and the Sheep of bis Hand.


PART


RY ONG SNA IE OSA A AANGW ICY OG
Sanh, g IU MK WZ Sem i NS ). MZ D : ome :
aN Bee et A * i een ee: Wt ee, Y ple

Ff Zien iP SANGRE \) / ; FS py Ve S f§5 YS

G@ Ky oN 1¢ WSS \ Ve | SE yyy) La = Vif IN


Pare VEE


Ineportant Principles of Divine Re«
velation, coxfirm'd “from the fore-
going Principles, and Conjectures.


OS 5 is it has now pleafed God, as
we have feen, to difcover many no-
3 SG ble and important Truths to us, by
ot the Light of Nature, and the Sy-
{tem of the World ; as alfo, he has

long difcovered many more noble and impor-
tant ‘Truths by Revelation, in the Sacred Books;
It cannot be now improper, to compare thefe
two Divine Volumes, as 1 may well call them,
together ; in fuch Cafes, I mean, of Revelation,
as relate to the Natural World, and wherein
we may be affifted the better to ‘udge, by the
Knowledge of the Syftem of the Univerfe about
us. For if thofe Things contained in Scripture
be true, and really deriv’d from the Author of
Nature, we fhall find them, in proper Cafes,
confirm’d by the Syftem of the World; and
the Frame of Nature will, in fome Degree,
bear Witnefs to the Revelation. But if thofe
K 3 Points


‘7.4


Aftronomical Principles
Points contain’d in Scripture be falfe, and did
not really come from God, we fhall find the
Frame ot Nature, which is now much better
underftood than in the Days of thofe Antient
Writers, frequently to contradiét them, and fo
to detect their Forgery, and prevent their fur-
sher Impofition upon Mankind. Nor indeed have
we any way fo fure and fatista¢tory to examine
the pretended very ancient Accounts of ‘Things
by, as this in general ; Imean, the trying their
Verity in fuch Points, whether Natural or Hi-
ftorical, as we have fure Methods of knowing,
whether the Things afferted in them were, or
might be really trueornot. For asa plain Dif-
agreementof Nature, or certain Hiftory, from
Scripture, in fuch Points, will afforda terrible
Sufpicion, that the latter is either falfe,-or at
lJeaft interpolated ; fo will as plain an Agree-
ment bea mighty Evidencefor the Truth, and
Uncorruptnefs of thofe Scriptures; and this
even in general, as to fuch other Contents of
the fame, as can no way come under the like
Methods of Examination. If I am once fully
fatisfy’d, that a Witnefs is Upright and Honeft,
even in feveral Points where there was the
greateft Sufpicionas to his Sincerity, he will de~
ferve the better Credit in other Cafes, even
where nocorroborating Evidence can bealledg’d
for his Juftification. ‘Tothis kind of Evidence
then do I Appeal on behalf of thofe Sacred
Writings; anddo plead fortheir Reception, as
Genuine and Authentick Records, in the feveral
particular Cafes following. — |
Cx.) The Scriptures‘agree to declarethe very
fame, all the fame Truths, and afcribe the very
fame, all the fame Attributes to God, which
ae Os he


of RELIGION.


we have fhewed tobe real, and to belong to him
from the Confideration of the Syftem of the
World.

(2.) Their Accounts of the Creation of the
World out of a Chaos, when rightly underftood,
are not only agreeable to many Remains of An-
cient Prophane Tradition, but to the Frame and
Laws of Nature, and the true Syftem of the
Univerfe. |

(3.) Their Chronology, or Accounts of the
Antiquity of the World are right, and agreeable
to the beft Methods which Nature and Philofo-
phy afford us for the difcovery of the fame.

(4.) Their Accounts of the Paradifiacal State,
and its Mutation from that State, before the 4n-
tediluvian One, after the Fallof Man, areagreea-
ble to Nature, and the true Frame of the
World. |

C5.) So are their Accounts of the Univer/al
Deluge inthe Days of Noab.

(6.) So are their Accounts of the Invifible
World, or of Angels and Demons, their Places
and Miniftrations. |

(7.) So are their Accounts of the future Con-
flagration of the World.

(8.) Soaretheir Accounts of the Re/urre¢ti-
on of the Body, and Renovation of Things.

(9.) Soare their Accounts of the future Con-
fummation of ail Things.

Cio.) Soare their Accounts of “Adws, or of the
Place of Departed Souls, in the intermediate
State, before the Refurrection.

(11.) So are their Accounts of Heaven, or
of the Place and State of Happinefs for Good
Men after the Refurre€tion.


K 4 C12.) So


135


136


A [fronomical F rinciples


(12.) Soare alfo their Accounts of Hel, or
of the Place and State of Punifhment for wick-
ed Men, after the Refurrection. ;


Thefe are the Heads I propofe to Difcourfe of.
Only before I begin, I muft as I have already
done under the Head of Conjectures, io which
thisPart will commonly beara very nearR elation,
intreat the Reader to diftinguifh exactly between
the foregoing Propofitzons, with their luferences,


as to Natural Religion, Chapters IV. and VI. ~


which I propofe as certain ; and the foregoing
Conjectures, withtheir Inferences, asto Reveal’d
Religion, Chapters V.and VIL. which I propofe


as Probable only. 1.do not mean, that the —


Doétrines themfelves, contain’d in Scripture, are


only Probable ; for I believe they have the Cer-


tainty of Divine Revelation it felf; Butthat the
“Accounts, or Natural Solutions of thofe Points
here offered, which arecommonly the Refult of
my own peculiar Thoughts and Notions, upon
the Comparifon of Scripture and Philofophy
together, are not yet to be look’d on as more
than private or probable Conjectures, humbly
propofed to the Confideration of the Publick. I


{peak this in the general, and with regard to —


the greateft number of them: For as for fome
few of them, efpecially that relating tothe De-
Juge of Noab, I cannot but look on them as fo
exceeding probable, that I can {carcely avoid
placing them under the foregoing Affirmations,
or Affertions. But tocome to Particulars,
(1.) I obferve that the Sacred Accounts de-
clarethe very fame, all the fame Truths, afcribe
the very fame, a// the fame Attributes to God,
which we have fhewed to be real, and to be-
| long


of RELIGION.


long to God, from the Confideration of the

true Syftem of the World. This I have taken

care to prove or illuftrate all the way as 1 went

over thole particular Truths and Attributes ; and

took notice that both Nature and Scripture all

along correfpond to the feveral Conclufions :

‘That they jointly agree that the Souls of Brute

Creatures are diftinct from their grofs Bodies,

and are fenfitive, and moft probably zncorporeal ;

That the Rational Souls of Menare more cer-

tainly and entirely Immaterial ; thatthey arealfo

Immortal, or will naturally exift after the grofs
Bodies are diffolved ; that there is a God or

Supreme Being; that this World has not been

Eternal, but was Created by that Supreme Being ;

that this Supreme Being, the Creator of all

Things, is an Eternal Being ; that He Exercifes

a continual Providence over the Creatures he has

made ; that he is not a Neceffary, but a Free

Agent ; that He is Intelligent and Omnifcient ;

that He is an Af-wife, and that He is an Al-

powerful Being ; that He is Omuzprefent, Inma-
terial, and Immutable ; that He is Good or Bene-

_ficent 5 that He is a Spiritual, and Living, and
Altive Being ; that He is but Ove; and that He is
therefore the alone Supreme Lord and Governor
of the whole Univerfe. Now this cannot but be:
a great Confirmation of the Sacred Records,
that fuch Deductions from Aftronomy and Na-
tural Philofophy, as their Authors could either
not at all, or very imperfectly make when they
lived, do yet, upon that vaft Improvement of
Natural Knowledge, which has been of late
made, all appear right and agreeable to the
true Syftem of Things. And this is more par-
ticularly to be obferved, as to fuch of the be-
tore


ES


138.


A  fironomical Principles


fore-mentioned Divine Attributes, as the Hea-
thens differ’d from the fews and Chriftians in;
wherein the Syftem of the Univerfe does, as
we have feen, every where bear Witnefs againft
the Heathen, and for the Fewi/b and Chriftian
Notions in thofe important Matters.I inftance di-
ftin&tly in that grand Doétrine of the Unity of
God,wherein thele Sacred Records did all along
differ from the current Notions, and confequent
Praétices of the reft of the World, in all thofe
Ages whereto they belong ; and indeed infifted
on it tothat degree, as to lay their entire Foun-
dations on that Unity of God, in the direéteft
oppofition to the Polythez/m of the reft of the
World ; and this without the Pretence of grea-
ter Natural Knowledge than was in other Nati-


ons, to derive that Notion from ; and yet with


fuch Boldnefs and Affurance, as to Ordain the
hazard of Life it felf, and of all the Comforts
thereof upon its Truth, and the Hopes derived .
fromit. This Agreement of the Syftem of the
World to the Unity of God, now fo certainly
difcovered by the Syftem of the -Cuzverfe, in
exa¢t Concord with the ewi/b and Chriftian Re-
cords ; and in dire€t Contradi¢ton to the Opi-.
nions of the generality of the Heathen World,
even in the Politeft and moft Learned Ages of
it, is hike a Solemn Determination upon an Open
Appeal made on the fides. of the Fews and Chri-
{tians, againft all the reft of the World, in this
moft Important and Fundamental Point of true
Religion. Which Determination ought therefore
to be own’d as the higheft Atteftation to that
true R eligion,andthofe Original R ecords where-
init is contain’d, that could eafily be defir’d or
expected ;


of RELIGION.


expected : And which accordingly ought to be
allowed to be of the greateft Weight and
Moment poffible in the prefent Cafe. I
obferve,

(2.) That the Sacred Accounts of the Creatiou
of the World out of aChaos, when rightly un-
derftood, is exactly agreeable to the Frame of
Nature, and the true Sy{ftem of the Univerfe.
That Account of the Mo/aick Creation which
I mean, is this, That, taking the only Example
which is in Nature of a real Chaos, I mean
the Atmofphere of a Comet, for the Mofaick
Chaos ; and taking that Chaos or Atmo/phere,
not to be revolv’d about its own Axis, till after
its Formation into a Planet, which Nature fuily
agrees to, and which would imply a Day, and
a Year, to be allone, that °° This Mo/aick Cre-
¢ ation, I fay, is not a Nice and Philofophical
“© Account of the Origin of all Things; but an
€¢ Hiftorical and ‘True Reprefentation of the
“¢ Formation of our fingle Earth out of that
©¢ confufed Chaos, and of the fucceffive and
© vifible Changes thereof each Day, or Year,
* till it became fit for the Habitation of Man-
*° kind. Now astothis Matter, I have entirely
‘prevented my felf in my Preface to the New
Theory of the Earth ; wherein J have at large
Difcourfed thereof ; and I hope, in good Mea-
fure, to the Satisfaction of the Learned and In-
quifitive ; whither therefore I muft in this
Place refer my Readers. Only I fhall defire
them to reflect here upon a few ‘Things in Na-
tural Knowledge thereto relating, which are
peculiarly fuitable to my prefent Purpofe ; as
highly confirming the ‘Truth of the Sacred, or
Mofatck Hiftory of the Creation. The Things


I mean


Coe


) Afironomical Principles


I mean are thefe Four ; Firft Nature does now
exhibit to us fuch a Chaos as that Hiftory fup-
pofes, for the Fund and Promptuary of our
Earth ; which till lately the World could not
know, but by Revelation: Secondly, Nature
does now fhew the Poffibility of the greater
Length of the Periods, or Days of Creation,
than thofe of our ordinary Days, without which
no Natural and Rational Account could be gi-
ven of that Creation; and this confiftently with
the Letter of Mo/fes, that thofe Periods were
ftill, ftrictly fpeaking, Days at the fame Time :
Thirdly , Nature does now fo clearly fhew the
Impofhibility of the Eternity of this Syftem,
and much more of this particular Earth, in its
prefent State, as prepares the way for the Belief
of that Sacred Account of its Original Creation :
And Fourthly, Nature does fo plainly fhew the
necefiary Intereft the Supreme Being has in all
the ordinary Appearances of Nature, and in
the Prefervation of the feveral Worlds now in
being, as much more implies his Intereft in the
firft Original, and Primary Settlements of the
fame ; and fuch as prepares us moft eafily to
believe what Mo/es afferts of the Interpofition of
Divine Power, and Wifdom, and Goodnefs, in
that whole Affair. 'Thefe Obfervations deferve
a peculiar Regard ; and Aftronomy does now,
in thefe Refpects, fully fupport and atteft to the
Sacred Accounts, thus reafonably underftood,
againft all the oppofite Notions of thofe igno-
rant or prejudic’d Philofophers, who pretended
to givedifierent Accounts of fuch Matters; and.
efpecially againft thofe Two Famous Antifcrip-


tural Hypothefes of the Eternity of Things 5


and of their Original from meer Chance and
Accident 3


of RELIGION, 14!


Accident ; both which, as we have already
fhewn, are entirely confuted, and rendred not
only incredible, but ridiculous, trom the pres
fent Knowledge we have of the true Syftem of
the Univerfe. I obferve,

(3.) That the Sacred Chronology, or Scripture
Account of the Antiquity of the World, and its
Duration fince the Deluge, is right, and agree-
able, not only to the moft certain Remains of
Ancient Prophane Hiftory, but to. the beft
Methods which: Nature and Philofophy afford
us for the Difcovery of the fame. I mean not

only, that it appears from the true Sy{tem of
the World, that neither the Whole, nor any
Parts of the fame,can have been ftriétly ab eterno,
in their prefent Condition, of which before ; but
that the Antiquity of our prefent Earth, and its
Inhabitants, whether taken from Ancient Pro-
phane Tradition, and Hiftory, or from the Phe-
nomena of Nature, does belt agree tothe Sacred
Accounts, which make it nearly 6000, or 7000
Years Old, and not more. Now as to this ppitor
Matter, I muftown that a Perfon of very great Tranfa&.
Sagacity, has lately advanc’da contrary Notion, No. 346
from the Degree of Saltnefs of our prefent
Ocean,compar’d with the Length of Time which
he fuppofes neceflary, according to his own
Hypothefis,to bring it tothat Degree. Whence
he feems to think it to be much longer, not
only than the Scripture Account of the Time
fince the Deluge ; beyond which, I fhould think
it in vain to extend any fuch Calculations ; but
much longer than the Time fince the Afofaick
Creation it felf, as delivered in the fame Scrip-
ture ; unlefs we extend the Duration of the
Days of Creation to animmenfe Length, with-

A out


142


A flronomical Principles


out any Authority for fo doing. But then, this
Perfon allows all this to be built on an Hypo<
thefis, an uncertain Hypothefis, of the Origin
of the Saltnefs of the Ocean ; and he allows


that fuch Trials have not been made, nor in-


deed are now poffible to be made, as are necef-
fary even on this Hypothefis, to determine
that Duration, in this or feveral future Ages.
So that at the bottom the whole is, by his own
Conceflions, very uncertain, and only built on
fome Sufpicions, which it cannot be now known
whether they have any Foundation in Nature
or not. In which Cafe, by the way, it had
been but reafonable to avoid the giving any
Intimations to weaken the Sacred Chrology,
unlefs there had been fome real or fure Evidence
againft it ; which yet is not here pretended to.
However, leaving this Notion, as not yet wor-
thy of a direct Confutation, I venture to affert,
that the beft ways of Determination we now
have of the Age of the World, whether from
Prophane Hiftory, or the Phenomena of Na-
ture, do very well agree to the Sacred Chro-
nology, and confirm us in the Belief that
the Earth has not been in its prefent State above
6000 or 7000 Years ; and that fince the general
Flood, there have fcarce yet paffed sooo
Years ; according to the Sacred Chronology
thereto relating. Now the beft ways of know-~
ing this Duration of the World, abftraétedly
from Scripture, feem to be thefe Five fol-
lowing. (1.) By Ancient Prophane Hiftories,
directly relating to fuch Matters. (2.) By the
Hiftories of the Beginning and Progrefs of Arts
and Sciences. (3.) By the Accounts of the
Origin and fpreading of the feveral Colonies of

Nations


of RELIGION. 1423


ne es ee


Nations all over the World. (4.) By the pre-

fent Number of iviankind upon the Face of the

Earth, compar’d with the beft Computations

we have of the Time neceflary for fuch their

Increafe and Doubling. (5.) By the prefent

State of the Celeftial Motions, and Terreftrial

Appearances, and the Length of Time neceflary

for any fuch Irregularities arifing therein, as

would be fenfible to us. As to the former Four

Methods, which juftly pretend to the greateft Bochare

Nicety, they are not proper for this Place ; and pa

they have been fo fully examin’d already by ne a

others, or by my felt elfewhere, and found ginasion of

fo well to agree to the forementioned Inter- Afankind.

vals, that I believe judicious Men muft pro- See Chro-

. : nol. Old

nounce upon the whole, they are confiderable Telt.p.60,

Atteftations to this Sacred Chronology. But _¢s.

as to the laft Method, the Confideration of the Ejfay tore-

Celeftial Motions, and Terreftrial Appearances, frre the

I do not know that they can determine to any #2 7°
y Y of the O.T's

Degree of Exactnefs, how long they have con », 195--~-

tinued in their prefent State. Only thus far, z19.

that none of thofe Motions or Phenomena

do contradict the Sacred Accounts, and that

they all fhew that the World cannot have been

very much older than thofe Accounts affirm.

Thus the Moon’s Menftrual Motion muft be

gradually {topped by the Ether, or fine Medium

in which it revolves about the Earth : But then

this is hitherto fo perfeétly Infenfible, that Sh Treas

Dr. Halley feems to have been the firft that dif- Newton's

covered any Occafionin Aftronomy, for making Princip. 2d

the leaft Allowance for any Inequality in that Mo- Edit-p-48t

tion. Thus the Earth’s and Moon’s Annual

Motion muft be gradually retarded by the fame

~Refiftance ; yet to {mall has this hitherto been,


that


144


A ‘fronomical Principles


that the Aftronomers have not yet obferved it.
‘Thus the Confequence of the Retardation of the
Earth’s Diurnal Motion; which muft alfo in
length of Time arife from the fame R efiftance,
would be the receding of the Sea from the Dry
Land in the Torrid, and its overflowing it in the
Frigid Zones: ( Unlefs the Earth be fluid within,
and fo accommodates it felf to fuch Alterations |
which is not yet in the leaft obfervable. ‘Thus
the Fluids of our Earth are found gradually to
diminifh ; yet is this fo very inconfiderable hi-
therto, as no way to be diftin€tly found by any
inconveniences arifing from it. Thus the Moun-
tains do, for certain, wafh away, and are dimi-
nifh’d ; and the Valleys receive what the others
lofe, and are augmented : Yet donot we hither-
to obferve any notable Inequalities arifing
therefrom. In fhort, all fuch defects, decays,
or irregularities, which mult in length of ‘Time,
according to the fettled Laws of Nature, arife
in our prefent Conftitution, appear to have been
hitherto fo very {mall and inconfiderable, fince
the beginning of this Settlement, that we have
thereby certain Evidence that its Age cannot
be very much greater; and no Evidence that it
is at all greater than what is contain’d in the
Sacred Chronology. Which Thing, how con-
fiderable a Confirmation it is of that Chrono-
logy, I leave to the Impartial to determine. I
oblerve,

(4..) That the Sacred Accounts of the Muta-
tion from the Paradifiacal State before, to the
Antediluvium one, after the Fall of Man, is
agreeable to the State of Nature, and the true
Frame of the World. ‘That God, when he firft
made Man upon this Earth, placed him in

Paradife ;


of RELIGION.


145


Paradife; that He there gave hima Law for the
Tryal of his Obedience ; that Man did tranf=
erefs that Law; that this Tranfgreffion was oc-
cafion’d by the ‘Temptation of the Old Serpent
the Devil and Satan; and by the firft Compli-
ance of the Wife, and by her Perfuafion of her
Husband ; that they were thereupon caft out
of Paradife, and the happy State of Nature was


much altered for the worfe; that the Serpent:


was accutfed, and fubjected at laft to the Pow-
er of the Séed of the Woman; that the Ground
was alfo curfed, and made tobring forth Thorns
and Bryars, and not to bring torth its Fruit
without the extraordinary ‘Toil and Sweat of
Mankind; that the Female fhould be in greater
Subjection to the Male than otherwife the fhould
Rave been,and than many other Females now are ;
that fhe fhould have greater Sorrow in the Con-
ception and Bearing of her Offspring than other-
wife fhe fhould have had, and than any other
Females now have; and that ever afterwards
the Race of Men fhould have alfo fuch a
Senfe of Shame, or pudor circa res Venereas, 2s
they had fot before, and as is not in other
Animals; and withal moré conftant Inclinations
that way than thofe Animals have ; all which has
come to pafs accordingly, as ttanding Memori-
alsof the Truth of this Ancient Hiftory of the
Original State and Circumftances of Mankind :
For all this we have riot orily thefe natural,
‘Tokens, but thé certain Affirmation of the
Mofaick FHiftory, as all along fuppoféed and


confirmed inthe Heathen Traditions, and in the jj;


Fewifh and Chriftian Revelations; as has been
fhewn by others. But then, what the A/tera-
tion in thé State of the Earth and of Nature

L could


OE a
Gen. 1,11;
Make

See the
Commenta~
tors theres


4


1 46 A ftronomical Principles


could be, the Philofophy and Aftronomy of
former Ages was utterly at a Lofs todetermine,
till upon the Confideration of that Matter, and
the Comparifon of Scripture and Nature, now.
better underftood, together, I difcovered that
the commencing of the Earth’s Diurnal R otati-
on, not at the beginning of the Mo/aick Crea-
tion, but after the Earth’s compleat Formation,
and after the Fallof Man, would give the Beft,
the moft Rational, and Philofophical Account of
this Alteration of all other ; and I difcovered,
that this later Time of its Commencement
would beft agree, not only with the Sacred Ac-
counts, but with the Ancient Profane 'Traditi-
ons, and with the prefent Phenomena of Na-
ture alfo. All which I have long ago difcourfed
of in my New Lheory of the Earth; to which
Hypoth. I muft therefore refer my Reader for fatisfacti~
iit. p. 85. on. Only I fhall defire him in particular to
118. take notice of what is there efpecially infifted
P. tog, Onunder this Head, and which is peculiarly pro-
ara, per to my prefent Purpofe, and that is, Dr.
Hailley’s Inferences from the Variation of the
Needle’s Declination from the North, and of
Mine from the Mofaick Hiftory of the Crea-
tion and Fall of Man, relating tothe Time and
Circumftances of this Commencement of the
Farth’s Diurnal Revolution ; andthenceto ob-
ferve how exactly they both agree together. -
Nor fhall I enlarge farther here upon that whole
. Matter, but leave it entirely to the Determina-
tion of the Judicious. I obferve,

(5.) ‘That the Sacred Accounts of the Uni-
verfal Deluge, inthe Daysof Noah, is exactly
agreeable tothe Stateof Nature, and tothetrue
Frame of the Univerfealfo. Indeedthe Sghron:

©


of RELIGION.


147


of this moft remarkable Phenomenon of an
Univer{al Deluge, with its moft numerous and
eminent Circumftances, ‘as defcribed inthe Mo-
faick Hiftory, which till this Age could no way
be folved in a Natural way, nay feem’d utterly
uncapable of any Philofophical Solution at all ;
isnow, I think, become fo plain, evident, and
certain, from the Phenomena of Comets, with
their Atmofpheres and Tails, now fully difco-
vered, efpecially from the particular Circum-
‘ftances and Periods of the laft moft famous
Comet of 168°, which appears to have been the
Phyfical Caufe of the fame Deluge: I fay, the
Solution of thefe wonderful Phenomena, as gi-
ven in the later Editions of my New Theory of
the Earth, with its additional Sheet, is become
now fo plain, evident, and certain, that I own
I cannot but be my felf very much furprized
and fatisfy’d with it, and equally furprized and
fatisty’d with that {trong Confirmation it affords
to the Sacred Records, in one of the leaft pro-
bable, or moft exceptionable Branches thereof.
This is too large a Subject to be duly treated
of in this Place. But 1 beg of the Inquifitive
Reader, that he will carefully weigh the very
probable Solution I long fince gave of that De-
luge of Noah, from the Approach of a Comet,
betore I fo much as hoped for the Knowledge of
that very Comet which did fo approach to it,
and did caufe the fame ; and that he will con-
fider the ftrong additional Evidence fince arifen
from the knowledge of that very Comet which
did certainly approach to us on or about that
very Year, and on or about that very Day of the
Year, when the Sacred and Profane Accounts


_ agree that Deluge began. If this be not fatil-
L 2 factory


See that
Sheet ere
at the End»


148


Afironomical i rinciples


factory Evidence in fuch a Cafe, I do not well ©
know what Evidence will be fo efteem’d. For
my felf, I muft profefs, that while I look on
the Solution of the other Phenomena under
this Chapter as remarkahle enough, and com-
monly not a little probable alfo; I cannot but
look on the Solution of the Deluge by that very
Comet, which I my felf flaw 4. D. 1680, 1681,
to be ina manner certain ; and by Confequence
I cannot but efteem the Evidence thence ari-
fing, for the Truth of the Sacred Hiftory in this
important Cafe,exceeding ftrong and fatisfactory.
Nor do I think, that fo unexpe¢ted and emi-
nent an Atteftation, as that of the Circumftances
and Period of this Comet, for folving the De-
luge, lately difcovered, moft certainly is, has
ever happened to any fo ftrange an Hypothefis
before, fince the World began; which Thing
cannot but be highly pleafing to my felf; and
I think is highly worthy of the Obfervation of
others alfo. I obferve,

(6.) That the Sacred Accounts of the Jnvi-
fible World, or of good Angels, and wicked De-
mons, their Places and Miniftrations, is ex-
actly agreeable to the true Syftem and Pheno-
mena of Nature. Now that the Sacred and
Prophane Accounts, and the Hiftories of all
Nations and Ages, do fuppofe and inform us,
that befides the Supreme Invifible Deity, be-
fides the Vifible Material World of Bodies,
and befides the Invifible and Incorporeal World
of Souls or Spirits, inhabiting in Vifible and
Grofs Bodies, there are alfo another Spe-
cies of Beings belonging to our Syftem:
I mean, thofe Souls, or Spiritual Beings,
who are either wholly free from Bodies,

or


2


a a nel


of RELIGION. 149


or rather free from fuch Grofs and Vifible
Bodies as we have, but inhabit ordinarily in
purer and more etherial Regions, in more fub-
tle and aerial Bodies or Vehicles ; who are In-
vifible generally, and Intangible to our grofs
Senfes, but not wholly Incorporeal, or uncon-
cerned with us and our Affairs here below; that,
I fay, the Ancient, Sacred and Prophane Ac-
_ counts, and Hiftories, do affure us of the Exi-
{tence of thefe Species of Beings, every body
that has ever read either Ancient or Modern
Books, cannot deny or doubt. But that pre-
- fent Nature does at all favour thefe Accounts,
and that we can give the leaft Evidence from
the Phenomena of the World, of their Being,
or Place of Abode, or Influence here below,
is what is not generally pretended to by even
the Chriftian Philofophers. Now in this Cafe
T fhall venture a Step farther, and fhall here
fet down fuch Obfervations from Nature and
Aftronomy, as feem to me to favour this Ac-
count of the Invifible World. Accordingly I
obferve, C(x.) That Nature does as fully allow
of the Exiftence of Spiritual and Invifible Be-
ings out of grofs Bodies, as zm them. Nor can
thofe who are convine’d by the Phenomena of
Animals, both Irrational and Rational, that
they are compounded of Immaterial and Invi-
fible Souls, as well as of Material and Vifible
Bodies, as we have already difcours’d, at all
fcruple the Exiftence of fuch Spiritual and In-
vifible Souls, either by themfelves, or united ta
much finer Bodies than thofe of our grofs Ani-
_malshere below. I obferve, (2.) That Nature
does favour the Exiftence of fuch Creatures, by
fhewing us fueh large and noble Regions of the

L 3 Worlds


A flronoutical Principles


World, as beft of all fuit the Habitation. of,
fuch Beings; and which, if there be not fuch
Beings, feem, contrary to the ufual Cafe of the
other Parts of the Syftem, to be wholly defti-:
tute of Inhabitants: I mean all the wide Spaces
of the Atmofpheres of the Planets, efpecially
thofe ftill, calm, clear, and ethereal Regions of
the fame which are above the Clouds, and‘
Storms, and Diforders of their loweft Parts,.
Nature, as we {till find, abounds in ali proper:
Places with Living Creatures, not only on the


Earth, or dry,Land, but within the Barth, and


Waters, and loweft Air, every where; all made
to enjoy their Creator’s Bounty,.and to be fer-
viceable to other Beings Superior to them--
felves. What Reafon can there then be to fup--
pofe that this Air, the nobleft, Fluid in the
Univerfe, even in its pureft-and moft Celeftial.
Parts, fhould be deftitute of Living Inhabitants 5)
which yet it muft be, in cafe we exclude thofe ’
Invifible Powers above-mentioned. Now, in_
order to fhew how little Prejudice to the Exi--
ftence of fuch Beings, that Circumftance of
their being Invzible, ought here to be; I ob-
ferve, (3.) That whatever proper. Inhabitants)
the Air has, their very Bodies ought to be
Invifibley becaufe the Air it felf, whereof we
may fuppofe them made, is ever fo... This,
is the wonderful. Property of Air,. ftri€tly’
fpeaking, and that Property, which among all
Corporeal Beings, otherwife fenfible, feems al-
moft peculiar to it, that it is ever, upon the ut~ ;
moft Condenfation poflible, abfolutely tous Jn~
vifible. Whence ’tis no wonder that all fuch Be-
ings as live init, and perhaps take their Bodies
trom it, how real or powerful fo ever, are
likes


of RELIGION.


151


likewife ordinarily Invifible to us. I obferve,
(4.) That the known Phenomena of our Air
feem in a peculiar Manner, to require and
fuppofe the Exiftence and Agency of fuch In-
vifible Beings therein, as we are here {peaking
of; and cannot be fairly and mechanically
-foly’d without them. This I have particularly
taken Notice of, in my Account of the un-
ufual Meteors lately feen in our Air, to which
I refer the Reader. Nor do I find that any
other Philofophers are able to give us a better
Account of thofe Aerial Phenomena, without
that Hypothefis. SoIcannot but conclude, that
the Appearances of Nature do in this, as


See Dr.
Halley’s


Account of


this Phx-


well as in other Cafes, atteft to what Difco- nomenon,
veries Divine Revelation has made relating Tranfa&.
thereto: And that there are Good and Bad Philofoph’


Spirits in’ the Air, in our Neighbourhood,


% 347


ready to perform what the Sacred Writings ©


af{cribe tothem. As to theother Placeallotted
for certain tofome, now tous, Invifible Beings,
in Scripture, I mean zm the Heart of the


Earth ; I have already made it probable from


Natural Philofophy, that the Heavenly Bodies
have fuch mighty Cavities within, as are the
proper Receptacles for fome fuch Beings; and
fhall not need here to enlarge on that Subject ;
efpecially fince it will come again to be confi-
dered under the Tenth Particular hereafter. I
obferve,

(7.) That the Sacred Accounts of the Future
Conflagration of the World, isexactly agreeable
to the true Syftem of the Univerfe. Now this
Conflagration of the upper Earth, and all that
is upon it, according to the Difcoveries made
_ by Divine Revelation, is fo natural, or rather
L 4 necel-


a'Thetis


2 Pet. i.
2y 10


LS


gd fronomical Principles


| neceflary a Confequence of the Approach of a


P. AAC ~
849.


‘Ubi


fu prae


Sce Mr.
Derham’s
Phyfico-
Wheology,


Comet to a Planet, when it has juft been broil-
ed in the Sun’s Rays, which Aftronomy now
knows to benotonly poffible, but, in the courfe
of Time, fometimes certain; and Ihave fo fully
prevented my felf upon this Head in my New
Theory of the Earth, that I fhall not need to
enlarge upon it here: Tonly beg of the Inquifi-
tive Reader toobferve, ‘That the Two grand Ca-
taftrophes which the Scriptures certainly make
our Earth alone fubject to, I mean a Deluge,
and a Conflagration, are thofe Two Cataftrophes,


and thofe Two only which the true Syftem of
the world fhews fuch Planets to be naturally.
liable to :, Which Obfervation, how great aCon-.
firmation it is of the Truth and Divine Original


of thofe Scriptures, I leave to every Reader’s
own ferious Confideration. I obferve,


(8.) That the Sacred Accounts of the Renova- .


tion of things, and of the Refurrettion of the
Body, are very agreeable to fome known Phe-
nomena of Nature. That the mearypeveote, or
Renuvation, not utter Defiruttion of the World,
may be the Natural and Regular Confequence
of that Conflagration we have been lately fpeak-
ing of, I have particularly fhew’d towards the
End of my New Ybeory ; and fhallnot need ta
repeat it in this Place. But that the very Re-
furrccttion of the Body Should have any thing
properly to countenance it, or refemble it in
Nature, will not be eafily beliewd. Yet do E
look upon thofe Changes which are made in the
Bodies of not a few Infe¢ts, as particularly in
the Silkworm ; while ftill upon the moft fur-
prizing Mutations in the Body, the fame Life
or Soulisthe Inhabitant within ; as no ill Re-
weg i Mamie i femblances


of RELIGION,


Se ie,


femblances of, or Preludes to, the nobler Won-
der of the Refurrection of Human Bodies. I
mean this, as we thence learn, how very different
Forms and States the fame Creature can natu-
rally put on, without being really another Crea-
ture: Juft as the Chriftian Religion informs
us the Souls of Men muft undergo in the feve-
ral Conditions or Periods (1.) Of this grofs
Earthly Body now. (2.) Of the Aereal Ve-
hicle in the intermediate State. And (3.) Of
the Spiritual Body after the Refurrection. Nor
fhould we our felves have been able to believe
fuch Mutations in the fame Infects to be true,
unlefs continual Experience did affure us there-
of: as neither does the Chriftian Religion ex-
pect the Belief of the other, but upon the At-
teftation of Him who made all thofe mutable
Creatures, with Man alfo, who is to undergo
thofe other more important Mutations. |

C9.) I obferve, that the Sacred Account of the
future Confuimmation of all Things, is agreeable
to the true Syftem of the Univerfe. What I
here meanis that particular and final Cataftrophe
of our Earth, fpoken of by St. ‘fob in his Re-
welations where he informs us, that He faw a
great white Throne, and Him that fat on it ;
from whofe Face the Earth and the Heavens flea
away, and there was found no place for them :
Or when a final Period isto be put to the pre~
fent Place and Ufe of this Earth, with its Atmo-
fphere. Now that this Cataftrophe may natu-
rally and regularly befal our Earth, or any of
the Planets, according to the true Syftem of the
World, and without a Miracle, I have already
oblerv’d in the laft Propofition of my New
Gheory. Nor can any one that knows how a
: Gomes


See Confii-
tut. Apof.
Vo Ja:


Apoc, xX
Il. ,


154 | A [fironomical Frindipiae


=».


Comet may regularly ftrike againft a Planet in
its Courfe, and thereby remove it from its pre-
fent Station, into an Orbit of a quite different
Situation, Nature, and Ufe, from what it now
has, make any difficulty at all in believing this,
wiz. that there will be at laft, a Con/uxwmation
of al Things belonging to this Sublunary World,
according as the Infpired Writer has delivered
it to us. I obferve, .
C10.) That the Sacred Accountsof “Advs, or of
the Place of departed Souls, in the intermediate
State before the Refurrection, is very agreeable
to the true Frame of the Univerfe. That’ adwe,
or the Place of departed Souls, till the Refur-
rection, is either in the Air, or in the Heart of ©
the Earth, feems to me the Importance of all
the Ancient and Sacred Records we have of that
Sethe Ab- nratter, 7. e. they feem to me to imply, thar
pendix to : ; :
“t.Bovle’s fome of them are at liberty in the Air, and
Leét. or my others imprifon’d in the Earth ; which two Places
Serm. and we have fhewn to be, Philofophically fpeaking,
tees be the only fit Places for their Habitation alfo. So
"that hitherto Nature and Scripture feem to me
entirely to agree, and to bear Witnefs mutually
to each other in thefe Matters.
(11.) Lobferve, that the Sacred Accounts of
Heaven, or of the Place and State of Happinefs
for Good Men before the Cenfummation of all
' "Things, is not only agreeable to the Remains of
Ancient Profane'Tradition, but to the true Sy-
...._. ftem of the World alfo. This happy State is
Pi. x¥xXvVI. sg aa 4 y ‘
‘. defcrib’d in Scripture to be a State of Light, a
Colof.i. Reward in Heaven, and introduc’d by Good
12. Men’s mecting the Lord in the Air; and fo be=
Luc. vt ine ever with the Lord. Which if it be after
Sthemiy, the Conflagration, as feems not impr
iv. Wi


off RELIG LON. Is6


will belong to a more pure.and purged State of —
our Air or Heaven than what we now enjoy ;
which will well agree tofuch Glorious and Spirz- 1 Cor. xv.
tual, and Uncorrupt Bodies as Good Men are to 425 43-
have at that Time. Wheretore, as we have al-
ready feen, that the Air in its prefent State,
both according to Nature,and Scripture, is one
_ proper Placefor Invifible Beings, thofe I mean
that inhabit Aerial Bodies, fo may it by the
purifying Fire of the Conflagration be fo meli-
orated, as to. be a proper Place for the Habita-
tion of the Pious; with their Spirituab Bodies
alfo, till the Confuummation of all Things. For
as to the State and Place of Happinefs after
that Confummation, I do not know that the
Sacred Writings afford us any particular Light
about it ; and fo I fhall not prefume to indulge
my felf in) any groundlefs Conjectures thereto
relating ; as content with this exact Agree-
ment of Nature and Scripture till this grand
Period of our World, which feems to me to be
the Grand Period of thofe Sacred Books alfo.
.(1z.) I obferve, that the Sacred Accounts of
Hell, or of the Place and State of Punifhment
for wicked Men after the general Refurreétion,
is agreeable not only to the Remains of ancient
profane Tradition, but to the true Syftem of
the World alfo. This fad State is in Scripture
defcrib’d as a State of Darkuefs, of outward Matt.viii,
Darknefs, of blacknefs of Darkne[s, of Tor- 32.
ment and Punifbment for Ages, or for Ages of oe poe
Ages, by Flame, or by Fire, or by Fire and Briti- uc. xvi,
fione, with Weeping and Gnafbing of Teeth 5 24.
where the Smoak of the Ungodly’s Yorment Mat. vine.
afcends up for ever and ever ; where they are pvr


Tormented 7 the Prefence of the Hely Angels, yo, iy,
. aid


156 | Afironomical Principles


Mat. xiii. and in the Prefence of the Lamb ; when the
49> 5° Holy Angels foall have feparated the Wicked
from among the ‘fuft, and have caft them into a

Furnace of Fire. Now this Defcription does in

every Circumftance, fo exactly agree with the

Nature of a Comet, afcending from the Hot
Regions near the Sun, and going into the Cold
Regions beyond Saturn, with its long fmoaking

Tail arifing up from it, through its feveral

Ages or Periods of revolving, and this in the

Sight of all the Inhabitants of our Air, and of
the reft of the Syftem ; that I cannot but think .

the Surface or Atmofphere of fuch a Comet to

be that Place of Forment {o terribly defcribed

in Scripture, into which the Devil and his An-

gels, with wicked Men their Companions,when

2 Pet. ii.delivered out of their Préfon in the Heart of
4- Spa the Earth, fhall be caft for their utter Perdi-
ode as tion or fecond Death ; which will be indeed a
14. terrible but a moft ufeful Spectacle to the reft
| of God’s rational Creatures ; and will admonifh
Mat.x.28. them above all Things to preferve their Innoz
Luc.xN.5-cence and Obedience ; and to fear him who is

_ thus able to deftroy both Soul and Body iu Fell.


PART


of RELIGION,


RIE CA ON ORCA CA ORIRCACKURORORCK


SONI EEE EASON Lact So


Part VIL


— Such Inferences foewn to be the come
mon Voice of Nature and Reafon,
from the Teftimonies of the moft
confi iderable Perfons i in all Ages.


N. B. ra CO tee Teftimonies under this


ead will be of themfelves

ao T © {5 plain, that I fhall need to
& make no Comment nor Re-
i flections upon them; butthen

they will be withal fo numerous, that 1 mut
beg the fober Reader’s Patience and Attention


inthe diftinét Perufal and Confideration of them:


Which certainly are but a due Debt to the Im-
portance of the Subject, and to the Character
_ of the Witneffes. 1 begin with the Book of
70% 5 which I efteem the Ancienteft Record
now extant in the World.

Job] God is wife in Heart, and mighty in
{trength : Who hath hardened himfelf againft
him,and hath profpered ? Which removeth the
Mountains,and they know not: which overturn-
eth them in his Anger,Which fhaketh the Earth

out


aD.


1X ha 1%


158


A fronomical Principles


x. 8-12.


“li. 7--10,


XXli, 12.


XXVi. 7--


34.


out of her Place, andthe Pillars thereof trem-
ble. Which commandeth the Sun, and it rifeth
not : and fealeth up the Stars. Which alone
fpreadeth out the Heavens, and treadeth upon
the Waves of the Sea. Which maketh Aréfu-
rus, Orion, and Pleiades, and the Chambers of
the South. Which doeth great Things paft find-
ing out, yea, and Wonders without Number.

Thine Hands have made me and fafhioned me
together round about ; yet thou doft deftroy
me. Remember, I befeech thee, that thou haft
made me as the Clay, and wilt thou bring me
into Duft again? Haft Thou not poured me out
as Milk, and cruddled me like Cheefe ? Thou
haft clothed me with Skin and Flefh, and haft
fenced me with Bones and Sinews. Thou haft
granted me Life and Favour, and thy Vifita-
tion hath preferved my Spirit.

But ask now the Beafts, and they fhall teach
thee ; and the Fowls of the Air, and they fhall
tell thee: Or fpeak to the Earth, .and it thall
teach thee ; and the Fifhes of the Sea fhall de-
clare untothee. Whe knoweth not in all thefe,
that the Hand of the Lord hath wrought this ?
In whofe Hand is the Soul of every living
Thing, and the Breath of all Mankind.

Ts not God in the Heighth of Heaven? And
behold the Heighth of the Stars how high they
are.

He ftretcheth out the North over the empty
Place, and hangeth the Earth upon nothing. He
bindeth up the Waters in his thick Clouds, and
the Cloud is not rent under them. He holdeth
back the Face of his Throne, and fpreadeth his
Cloud upon it. He hath compaffed the Waters


with Bounds, until the Day and Night come to
| an


of RELIGION. 159


anend. The Pillars of Heaven tremble, and
are aftonifhed at his Reproof. He divideth the
Sea with his Power, and by his Underftanding
he {miteth through the Proud. By his Spirit
he hath garnifhed the Heavens ; his Hand hath
formed the crooked Serpent. Lo, thefe are
Parts of his Ways : but how little a Portion is
heard of him? but the Thunder of his Power
who can underftand ? |

God underftandeth the Way of Wifdom, and xxviii.
he knoweth the Place thereof. For he looketh 23-23: .
to the Ends of the Earth, and feeth under the
whole Heaven. To make the Weight for the
Winds, and he weigheth the Waters by meafure.
When he made a Decree for the Rain, and a
Way for the Lightning of the Thunder: Then
did he fee it, and declare it, he prepared it,
_ yea and fearched it out. And unto Man he faid,
behold, the Fear of the Lord that is Wifdom,
and to depart from Evil is Underftanding.

Behold, God is great, and we know him not, xxxvi. 26-
neither can the Number of his Years be fearched 33:
out. For he maketh {mall the Drops of Wa-
ter: They pour down Rain according tothe Va-
pour thereof - Which the Clouds do drop, and
diftill upon Man abundantly. Alfo can any un-
derftand the Spreadings of the Clouds, or the
Noife of his'Tabernacle ? Behold, he {preadeth
his Light upon it, and covereth the Bottom of
the Sea. For by them judgeth he the People,
he giveth Meat in Abundance. With Clouds he
_covereth the Light ; and commandeth it not
to fhine, by the Cloud that cometh betwixt.
The Noife thereof fheweth concerning it, the
Cattle alfo concerning the Vapour.


At


160


A | tronomical Principles


XXXVI.


I+-34,


At this alfo my Heart trembleth, and is:
moved out of his Place. Hear attentively the .
Noife of his Voice, and the Sound that goeth
out of his Mouth. He directeth it under the
whole Heaven, and his Lightning unto the Ends’
of the Earth. After it a Voice roareth > He
thundreth with the Voice of his Excellency, and:
he will not flay them when his Voice is heard.
God thundreth marvelloufly with his Voice 3
great Things doth he, which we cannot com-
prehend.. For he faith to the Snow, Be thou
on the Earth ; likewife to the fmall Rain, and
to the great Rain of his Strength. He fealeth
up the Hand of every Man, that all Men may
know his Work. Then the Beafts go into Dens,
and remain in their Places. Out of the South
cometh the Whirlwind: and Cold out of the
North. By the Breath of God, Froft is given :
and the Breadth of the Waters is ftraitned.


_ Alfo by watering he wearieth the thick Cloud?


He {cattereth his bright Cloud. And it isturned
round about by his Counfels : That they may
do whatfoever he commandeth them upon the
Face of the World inthe Earth. He caufeth it:
to come, whether for Correction, or for his
Land, or ‘for Mercy. Hearken unto this, O
Fob : Stand {till and confider the wondrous
Works of God. Doft thou know when God
difpofed them, and caufed the Light of his
Cloud to fhine ? Doft thou know the Balancings*
of the Clouds, the wondrous Works of | him
which is perfect in Knowledge ?. How thy Gar~"
ments are warm, when he ‘quieteth the Earth”
by the South-cwind ? Haft thou with him fpread’
out the Sky, which is ftrong, and as a Molten:
Looking-Glafs ? Teach us what we fhall fay
unto


Se «


| of RELIGION. 161


unto him ; for we cannot order our Speech by
-reafon of Darknefs. Shall it be told him that I
{peak ? if a Man fpeak, furely he fhall be fwal-
lowed up. And now Men {fee not the bright
Light which is in the Clouds: But the Wind
patleth and cleanfeth them. Fair Weather com-
eth out of the North: With God is terrible
Majefty. ‘Touching the Almighty, we cannot
find him out: He is excellent in Power, and in
Judgment, and in Plenty of Juftice: He will
not affliét. Men do therefore fear him: He
refpecteth not any that are wife of Heart.

| See Chap. XXXVill, XXxix, xl, xli. Gen i.
with 4, B{d. vi. 38--54.. |

Mojfes.| And left thou lift up thine Eyes un- Deut. iv.
to Heaven, and when thou feeft the Sun, and !%
the Moon, and the Stars, even all the Hoft of
Heaven, fhouldeft be driven to worfhip them,
and ferve them,which the Lord thy God hath di-
vided unto all Nations under the whole Heaven. -
_ Fofhua.\ And as foon as we had heard thefe Jofhua ii.
Things our Hearts did melt, neither did there ***
remain any more Courage in any Man, becaufe
ef you: For the Lord your God, he is God in
Heaven above, and in Earth beneath.

Nebemiah.| Then the Levites, Fefbua and Nehem.
Kadmiel, Bani, Hafbabniah, Sherebiah, Hodijah, % 31 *
Shebaniab, and Pethabiab, faid, Stand up and
blefs the Lord your God for ever and ever; and
Bleffed be thy glorious Name, which is exalted
above all Bleffing and Praife. Thou, even 'Phou
art Lord alone, thou haft made Heaven, the
Heaven of Heavens with all their Hoft, the.
Earth and all Things that are therein, the Seas
and all that is therein, and thou preferveft them


all, and the Hoft of Heaven worfhippeth thee.
| M David.


\


162 A ftronomical Principles


at Slip athe 7 eatin irenlagmue en aa
Pfal. viii. | David.| When I confider thy Heavens, the
ar Work of thy Fingers, the Moon and the Stars
which thou haft ordained ; What is Man that
thou art mindful of him ? And the Son of
Man, that thou vifiteft him? For thou haft
made him a little lower than the Angels, and
haft crowned him with Glory and Honour.
Thou madeft him to have Dominion over the
Works of thy Hands ; thou haft put all Things
under his Feet : All Sheep and Oxen, yea, and
the Beafts of the Field : The Fowl of the Air,
and the Fifh of the Sea, and whatfoever paffeth
through the Paths of the Seas. O Lord our
Lord, how excellent is thy Name in all the
Earth ! |
xix. 1--6, The Heavens declare the Glory of God: And
the Firmament fheweth his Handy-work. Day
unto Day uttereth Speech, and Night unto
Night fheweth Knowledge. There is no Speech
nor Language, where their Voice is not heard.
Their Line is gone out through all the Earth,
and their Words tothe end of the World: In
them hath he fet a Tabernacle for the Sun.
Which is as a Bridegroom coming out of his
Chamber, and rejoyceth as aftrong Man to run
a Race. His going forth is from the End of
Heaven, and his Circuit unto the Ends of it: |
And there is nothing hid from the Heat there=
of. |
exlviii.t-  Praife ye the Lord. Praife ye the Lord from
*-13. the Heavens: praife him in the Heights. Praife
ye him all his Angels: praife ye him all his
Hofts. Praife ye him Sun and Moon ¢ praife
him all ye Stars of Light. Praife him ye Hea-
vens of Heavens, and ye Waters that be ithe
‘the


of RELIGION.


the Heavens, Let them praife the Name of the


Lord: for he commanded, and they were cre-
ated. . He hath alfo ftablifhed them for ever and
ever : He hath made a Decree which fhall not
pats. Praife the Lord from the Earth, ye Dra-
» gons, and all Deeps. Fire and Hail, Snow and
- Vapour, ftormy Wind fulfilling his Word. Moun-
tains and all Hills, fruitful Trees and all Cedars,
Beafts and all Cattel, creeping Things, and
flying Fowl. Kings of the Earth, and all Peo-
ple ; Princes, and all Judges of the Earth. Both
young Men and Maidens, old Men and Chil-
dren. Let them praife the Name of the Lord:
for his Name alone is excellent, his Glory is
above the Earth and Heaven.

[ See civ, cxxxix, cxlv |. 7
_ Solomon. | But will God indeed dwell on the
Earth ? Behold, the Heaven, and Heaven of
Heavens cannot contain thee ; how much lefs
this Houfe that I have builded.

But who is able to build Him an Houle, fee-
ing the Heaven, and Heaven of Heavens can-
hot contain him ? Who am I then that I fhould
build him an Houfe, fave only to burn Sacri-
fice before him ?

_.The Lord by Wifdom hath founded the
_ Earth ; by Underftanding hath he eftablifhed

the Heavens. By his Knowledge the Depths
are broken up, and the Clouds drop down the
_ Dew. -

As thou knoweft not what is the Way of the
“Spirit, nor how the Bones do grow in the
Womb of her that is with Child: even fo thou
shagtia not the Works of God who maketh

Alky


M 2 dfaiab. |


163


1 Kings
Vill, 27s


2 Chron,
1ky.'Oie


Prov. ili,
I 9) 208


Eccl. xi,
5s


164


Ifaiah xl.
¥s~-l 7.


xls 5 ~-8,


were 28.


A ftronortical Principles


Ifaiab.| Who hath meafured the Waters in thé
Hollow of his Hand?And meted out Heaven with
the Span, afd comprehended the Daft of the
Earth itta Meafure, and weighed the Mountains
in Scales, and the Hills in a Balance ? Who hath
directed the Spirit of the Lord, or being his
Counfellor hath taught him ? With whom took
he Counfel, and who inftruéted him, and taught
him in the Path of Judgment, and taught him
Knowledge, and fhewed to him the Way of
Underftanding ? Behold, the Nations are as 2
Drop of a Bucket, and are counted as the {mall
Duft of the Balance ; Behold, he taketh upthe
Iflés as a very little Thing. And Lebanon isnot
fufficient to Burn, nor the Beafts thereof fuffi-
cient for a Burnt-Offering. All Nations beforé
him are as nothing, and they are counted to
him lefs than Nothing, and Vanity.

I am the Lord, and there is none elfe, there
is no God befides me : I girded thee, though
thou haftnot known me : That they may know
from the rifing of the Sun, and from the Weff,
that there is none befides me, I am the Lord,
and there is none elfe. I form the Light, and
create Darknefs : I make Peace, and create
Evil: I the Lord do all thefe Things. Drop —
down, ye Heavens, from above, and let the —
Skies pour down Righteoufnefs! Let the Earth
open, and let them bring forth Salvation, and
let Righteoufnefs {pring up together: I the
Lord have created it. ---For thus faith the |
Lord that created the Heavens, God himfelf
that formed the Earth and made it, he hath |
eftablifhed it, he created it not in vain, he |
formed it to be inhabited, I am the Lord, and
there is none elfe. |

k Thus


of RELIGION. 165


_ Thus faith the Lord, the Heaven is my Ixvi 1,
Throne, and the Earth is my Footftool: Where
is the Houfe that ye build unto me ? And where
is the Place of my Reft ? For all thofe Things
hath mine Hand made, and all thofe Things
have been, faith the Lord: But to this Man
will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a
contrite Spirit, and trembleth at my Word.

Feremiah.| Fear yenot me? Saith the Lord: Jeremiah
Will ye not tremble at my Prefence ; which v- 22-
have placed the Sand for the Bound of the Sea,
by a perpetual Decree that it cannot pafs it ;
and though the Waves thereof tofs themfelves,
yet can they not prevail ; though they roar, yet
can they not pafs over it ?

But the Lord is the true God, he isthe living x-19-13.
God, and an everlafting King: At his Wrath
the Earth fhall tremble, and the Nations fhall
not be able to abide his Indignation. ‘Thus fhall
ye fay untothem, the Gods that have not made
the Heavens, and the Earth, even they fhall
perifh from the Earth, and from under theie
Heavens. He hath made the Earth by his
Power, he hath eftablifhed the World by his
Wifdom, and hath ftretched out the Heavens
by his Difcretion. When he uttereth his Voice,
there isa Multitude of Waters in the Heavens,
and he caufeth the Vapours to afcend trom the

Ends of the Earth: He maketh Lightnings
with Rain, and btingeth forth the Wind out
of his 'Treafures.

_ AmTa God at hand, faith the Lord, and xxiii 23, -
not a God afar off ? Can any hide himfelf in **
fecret Places that J fhall not fee him? faith the
Lord: Do not I fill Heaven and Earth ? faith
the Lord.

M 3 Thus


ee rer TA NR


166


+ 4
XXX1. 3 5. ;


XXX1l, 17-


Danieliy.
34) 35°


Amos V.


Aflrononical Principles —


ne


ene eee


Thus faith the Lord, which giveth the Sun


fora Light by Day, and the Ordinances of the |
Moon and of the Stars fora Light by Night,
which divideth the Sea whenthe Waves thereof _
roar ; the Lord of Hofts is his Name.

Ah Lord God, Behold thou haft made the
Heaven and the Earth, by thy great Power and
ftretched-out Arm, and there 1s nothing too hard
for thee.

Daniel. | And at the End of the Days, I Neba-
chadnezzar litt up mine Eyes unto Heaven, and.
mine Underftanding returned unto me,and I blef-
fed the moft High,and Ipraifed and honoured him
that liveth forever, whofe Dominion is an Ever-
lafting Dominion, and his Kingdom is from
Generation to Generation. And all the Inhabi-
tants of the Earth are reputed as nothing: And
he doth according to his Will in the Army of
Heaven,and among the Inhabitants of the Earth:
And none can ftay his Hand, or fay unto him,
What doft thou ? fae

And thou his Son, O Bel/bazzar, haft not


“humbled thine Heart, though thou kneweft all


this: But haft lifted up thy felf againft the
Lord of Heaven, and they have brought the
Veffels of his Houfe before thee, and thou, and
thy Lords, thy Wivesand thy Concubines have |
drunk Wine in them, and thou haft praifed the
Gods of Silver and Gold, of Brafs, Iron, Wood
and Stone, whichfee not, nor hear, nor know.
And the God in whofe Hand thy Breath is, and
whofe are all thy Ways, haft thou not glori-
fied. | |
Amos. | Seek him that maketh the Seven Stars
and Ordon, and turneth the Shadow of Death in-
to the Morning, and maketh the Day eae
wit


ae


of RELIGION. 967


with Night: That calleth for the Waters of the
Sea, and poureth them out upon the Face of the
Earth, the Lord is his Name.
Fouab.| And he faid unto them, Tam an Jonanig,
Hebrew, and I fear the Lord, the God of Heaven,
which hath made the Sea and the Dry Land,
Habakkuk.) A Prayerot Habakkuk the Pro- Habakkuk
phet upon Sigionoth. O Lord, Lhave heard thy * *~*%
Speech and was afraid: O Lord revive thy —
~ Work in the midft of the Years, in the midi{t
of the Years make known ; in Wrath remem-
ber Mercy. God came from Zeman, and the
Holy One from Mount Pavan. Selab. His Glory
covered the Heavens, and the Earth was full of
his Praife. And his Brightnefs was as the Light,
he had Horns coming out of his Hand, and
there was the hiding of his Power. Before him
went the Peftilence, and burning Coals went
- forth athis Feet. He ftood and meafured the
Earth: He beheld, and drove afunder the Nati-
‘ons, and the everlafting Mountains were {cat-
- tered, the perpetual Hills did bow: His Ways
are everlafting. I faw the Tents of Cufban in
AffiGtion: And the Curtains of the Land of
Midian did tremble. Was the Lord difpleafed
againft the Rivers? Wasthine anger againft the
Rivers 2? Was thy Wrath againft the Sea, that
thou didft rideupon thine Horfes, and thy Cha-
~ riots of Salvation? Thy Bow was made quite
naked, according to the Oaths of the. Tribes,
even thy Word. Selah. 'Thou didft cleave the
Earth with Rivers. ‘The Mountains faw thee,
and they trembled: ‘The overflowing of the
Water paffed by: Ihe Deep uttered his Voice,
and lift up his Hands on high. ‘The Sun and
Moon ftood ftill in their Habitation: At the
M 4 Light


168


A [fironomical P. rinciples


Eccl xis,
15-25.


Light of thine Arrows they went, and at the
fhining of thy glittering Spear. Thou didft
march through the Land in Indignation, thou
didft threfhthe Heathenin Anger. ‘Thou went-
eft forth for the Salvation of thy People, even
for Salvation with thine Anointed ; thou wound-
ed{t the Head out of the Houfe of the Wicked,
by difcovering the Foundation unto the Neck.
Selah. Thou didftftrike through with his Staves
the Head of his Villages: They came out as a
Whirlwind to featter me: Their Rejoycing was
4s to devour the poor fecretly. "Thou didft-walk
through the Sea with thine Horfes, through the
Heapot great Waters. When I heard, my Belly
trembled: My Lips quivered at the Voice: Rot-
tennefs entred into my Bones, and I trembled
in my felf, that I might reft in the Day of
‘Trouble: Whenhe cometh upunto the People,
he will invade them with his Troops. Although
the Fig-tree fhall not bloffom, neither fhall Fruit.
be in the Vines, the Labour of the Olive fhall
fail, and the Fields fhall yield no~ Meat, the
Flock fhall be cut off from the Fold, and there
fhall be no Herd in the Stalls: Yet I will re-
joyce in the Lord, I will joyin the God of my
Salvation. The Lord God is my Strength, and
he will make my Feet like Hinds Feet, and he
will make me to walk upon mine high Places.
To the chief Singer on my ftringed Inftrus
ments.

Sirach.| 1 will now remember the Works of
the Lord, and declare the Things that I have
feen: Inthe Wordsof the Lord are his Works.
The. Sun that giveth Light, looketh upon all
Things, and the Work thereof is full of the
Glory of the Lord. ‘The Lord hath not given |

Power


of RE U8.Gib ON:


‘ 169


Power to the Saints to declare all his marvels
lous Works, which the Almighty Lord firmly
fettled, that whatfoever is might be eftablifhed
forhis Glory. He feeketh out the Deep, and
the Heart, and confidereth their crafty Devices:
For the Lord knoweth all that may be known,
and he beholdeth the Signs of the World. He
declareth the Things that are paft, and for to
come, and revealeth the Steps of hidden Things.
No Thought efcapeth him, neither any Word
is hidden from him. He hath garnifhed the ex-
cellent Works of his Wifdom, and he is from
Everlafting to Everlafting : Unto him may no-
thing be added, neither can be diminifhed,
and he hath no need of any Counfellor. Oh
how defirable are all his Works! And that a
‘Man may fee even toa Spark, All thefe Things
live and remain for ever, for all Ufes, and they
are all Obedient. All Things are double one
againit another: And He hath made nothing im-
perfe&t. One Thing eftablifheth the good of
another: And who fhall be filled with behold-
ing his Glory ?


The Pride of the Height, the clear Firma~ s1jij,,-


ment, the Beauty of Heaven, with his glorious
Shew ; The Sun when it appeareth, declaring
at his Rifing a marvellous Inftrument, the Work
of the moft High. At Noon it parcheth the
Country, and who can abide the burning Heat
thereof ? A Man blowing a Furnace isin “Works
of Heat, but the Sun burneth the Mountains
three Times more ; 3 breathing out fiery Vapours,
and fending forth bright Beams, it dimmeththe
Eyes. Great is the Lord that made it, and at
his Commandment is runneth haftily. He inade
- fhe Moon alfo to ferve in her Seafon, i 2 De-

claration


3°


A flronomical Principles


claration of ‘Times, and a Sign of the World.
From the Moon is the fign of Feafts, a Light
that decreafeth in her Perfection. The Month
is called after her Name, increafing won-
derfully in her changing, being an Inftrument
of the Armies above, fhining in the Firmament
of Heaven ; ‘The Beauty of Heaven, the Glory
of the Stars, an Ornament giving Light in
the higheft Places of the Lord. At the Com-
mandment of the Holy One, they will ftand in
their Order, and never faint in their Watches.
Look upon the Rainbow, and praife him that
made it, very beautiful it is in the Brightnefs
thereof. It compaffeth the Heaven about with
a glorious Circle, and the Hands of the moft
High have bended it. By his Commandment
he maketh the Snow to fall apace, and fendeth
{wiftly the Lightnings of his Judgment.
Through this the Treafures are opened, and
Clouds fly forth as Fowls. By his great Power
he maketh the Clouds firm, and the Hailftones
are broken fmall. At his Sight the Mountains
are fhaken, and at his Will the South-wind
bloweth. The noife of the Thunder maketh
the Earth to tremble ; fo doth the Northern
Storm and the Whirlwind: As Birds flying he —
{cattereth the Snow, and the falling down there-
of is as the Lighting of Grafhoppers. 'The Eye
marvelleth at the Beauty of the Whitenefs
thereof, and the Heart is aftonifhed at the
raining of it. ‘The Hoar-froft alfo as Salt he |
poureth on the Earth, and being congealed, it
lieth on the top of fharp Stakes. When the cold
North-wind bloweth, and the Water is con=_
gealed into Ice, it abideth upon every gathering
together of Water, and cloatheth the Water fi

with |


of RELIGION.


r7t


_with a Breaft-plate. It devoureth the Moun-


tains, and burneth the Wildernefs, and con-
fumeth the Grafs as Fire. A prefent Remedy
of all is a Milt coming {peedily: A Dew coming
after Heat, refrefheth. By his Counfel he
appeafeth the Deep, and planteth Iflands
therein. ‘They that fail on the Sea, tell of the


_ Danger thereof, and when we hear it with our


~~ | ees J


Ears, we marvel thereat. For therein be
ftrange and wondrous Works, Variety of all
Kinds of Beafts, and Whales created. By him
the end of them hath profperous Succefs, and


by his Word all Things confift. We may


fpeak much, and yet come fhort: Wherefore in
fum, he is all. How fhall we be able to mag-


 nify him? For he is great above all his Works.


The Lord is terrible, and very great, and mar-~


vellous is his Power. When ye glorify the
Lord, exalt him as much as yecan; for even


yet will he far exceed: And when ye exalt
him, put forth all your Strength, and be not


weary 5 for ye can never go farenough. Who
hath feen him that he might tell us? and who
can magnify him as he is? There are yet hid


_ greater Things than thefe be, for we have feen


but a few of his Works. For the Lord hath
made all Things, and to the Godly hath he
given Wifdom.

Baruch. | Who hath gone up into Heaven
and taken Wifdom, and brought her down from
the Clouds? Who hath gone over the Sea, and
found her, and will bring her for pure Gold ?
No Man knoweth her Way, nor thinketh of


her Path. But he that knoweth all Things,


knoweth her, and hath found her out with his


_ Underftanding: He that prepared the Earth for


ever=


Baruch
lil. 29-3 5-


A | ftronomical Principle


Manafiles


Prayer.


evermore, hath filled it with four-footed Beafts.
He that fendeth forth Light, and it goeth ;
calleth it again, and it obeyeth him with fear.
The Stars fhined in their Watches, and re-
joyced: When he calleth them, they fay, Here
we be: and fo with chearfulnefs they fhewed
Light unto him that made them. ‘This is our
God, and there fhall none other be accounted
of in comparifon of him.

[ See Song of the Three Children, at large.|

Manaffes. | O Lord, Almighty; God of our


Fathers, Abraham, Ifaac, and Facob, and of ©


their Righteous Seed, who haft made Heaven
and Earth, with all the Ornament thereof; whg
haft bound the Sea by the Word of thy’Com-
mandment ; who haft fhut up the deep, and
fealed it by thy terrible and glorious Name ;
whom all Men fear, and tremble before thy
Power ; for the Majefty of thy Glory cannot be
born, and thy angry threatning towards Sinners
is importable: but thy merciful Promife is un-
meafurable, and unfearchable: for thou art the
moft High Lord, of great Compaffion, Long-
fuffering, very Merciful, and repenteft of the
evils of Men.

Paul.| For as I paffed by, and beheld your
Devotions, I found an Altar with this Infcrip-
tion, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD.
Whom therefore ye ignorantly Worfhip, him


declare I unto you. God that made the World, _
and all Things therein, feeing that he is Lord —


of Heaven and Earth, dwelleth not in Temples
made with Hands: Neither is worfhipped with
Mens Hands, as though he needed any Things
feeing he giveth to all Life and Breath, and all
Things ; And hath made of one Blood all Na-

tions


of RELIGION. 73


tions of Men, for to dwell on all the Face of
the Earth: And hath determined the ‘Times
before appointed, and the Bounds of their Ha-
bitation. That they fhould feek the Lord, if
haply they might feel after him, and find
him, though he be not far from every one
of us. For in him we Live, and Move, and
have our Being ; as certain alfo of your own
Poets have faid, for we are alfo his Off-
{pring.

Becaufe that which may be known of God, Rom. i.
is manifeft in them; for God hath fhewed it 19» *%.
unto them. For the Invifible Things of him
are clearly feen from the Creation of the
World, being underftood by the Things
that are made, even his Eternal Power and
Godhead ; fo that they are without Ex-
cufe.

Fobn. | And every Creature which is in Hea- Rev.v.13
ven, and on the Earth, and under the Earth,
and fuch as are in the Sea, and all that are in
them, heard I, faying, Bleffing, and Honour,
and Glory, and Power, be unto him that fit-
teth upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for
ever and ever.

Clement. |'The Heavens holding faft to his Ap- 1 Epifth
pointment, are fubjeét to him in Peace. Day S **
and Night accomplifh the Courfes that he has
allotted unto them, not difturbing one another.

The Sun and Moon, and all the feveral Com-
panies and Conftellations of the Stars, run the
Courfes that he has appointed to them in
Concord, without departing in the leaft from
them. The Fruitful Earth yields its “Food
plentifully in due Seafon both to Man and
Beaft, and to all that is upon it, according to

his


174


A frronomtical Principles


Vil. 34.


his Will; not difputing, nor altering any
Thing of what was order’d by him. So alfo
the untrodden and unfearchable Floods of the
Deep are kept'in by his Gommand: And the
Conflux of the valt Sea being brought to-
eether at the Creation into its feveral Collectis


ons, pafles not the Bounds that he has fet to


it; but as he then appointed it, fo it re-
mains. For he faid, Hitherto fhalt thou come,
and thy Floods fhall be broken within thee. 'The
Ocean, unpaflable to Mankind, andthe Worlds
that are beyond it, are govern’d by the fame
Commands of their Mafter. Spring and Sum-
mer, Autumn and Winter, give Place peace-
ably to each other. ~The feveral Quarters
of the Winds, fulfil their Works in their
Seafons, without offending one another. ‘The
overflowing Fountains, made both for Pleafure
and Health, never fail to reach out their Breafts
to fupport the Life of Men. Even the {malleft
Creatures live together in Peace and Concord
with each other. And all thefe has the Great:
Creator and Lord of all, commanded to obferve
Peace and Concord ; being Good to all: But
efpecially to Us ‘who flee to his Mercy through
our Lord Jufus Chrift, to whom be Glory and


-Majefty for Ever and Ever. Amen.


Apoftles in their Conftitutions. | Thou art Blef-
fed, OLord, the King of Ages, who by Chrift
haft made the whole World, and by him in the
Beginning didft reduce into order the diforder’d
Parts. Who dividedit the Waters from the Waters
by a Firmament, and didft put into them a Spi-
rit of Life; who didft fix the Earth, and ftretch
out the Heaven, and didft difpofe every Crea-
ture by an accurate Conftitution: For by thy

Powers
a


of RELIGION.


Power, O Lord, the World is Beautify’d, the
Heaven is fix’d as an Arch over us, and is ren-
dred illuftrious with Stars for our Comfort in
the Darknefs: The Light alfo and the Sun
were begotten for Days, and the Production of
Fruit; and the Moon for the Change of Sea-
fons, by its Increafe and Diminutions; and one
was called Night, and the other Day. And the
Firmament was exhibited in the midft of the
_ Abyfs, and thou commandeft the Waters to be
gathered together, and the dry Land to ap-
pear. But as for the Sea it felf, who can pof-
fibly defcribe it? Which comes with Fury
from the Ocean, yet runs back again, being
ftopp’d by the Sand at thy Command; for
thou haft faid, * Thereby foal her Waves be
broken. "Thou haft alfo made it capable of
fupporting little and great Creatures, and made
it Navigable for Ships. Then did the Earth
become Green, and was planted with all forts


of Flowers, and the Variety of feveral Trees 5.


and the fhining Luminaries, the Nourifhers of
thofe Plants, preferve their unchangeable
Courfe, and in nothing depart from thy Com-
mand. But where thou biddeft them, there
do'they rife and fet, for Signs of the Seafons,
and of the Years, making a conftant Return of
the Work of Men. Afterwards the Kinds of
the feveral Animals were created, thole be-
longing to the Land, to the Water, to the
Air, and both to Air and Water; and the
_ Artificial Wifdom of thy Providence does ftill
impart to every one a fuitable Providence. For
as he was not unable to produce different
Kinds, fo neither has he difdain’d to exercife

a different Providence towards every one. And
at


175


* Job
XXXVIii-
II.


176


Gen. 1.26.


Vil. 3 5


e


Afirononical Principles


onclufion of the Creation thou gaveft
Direction to thy Wifdom, and formedft a
reafonable Creature, as the Citizen of the
World, faying, Let us make Man after our
Jnage, and after our Likenefs ; and haft exhi-
bited ‘him as the Ornament of the World, and
formed. him a Body out of the Four Ele-
ments, thofe primary Bodies, but hadft pre-
pared a Soul out of nothing, and beftowedft up-
on him his Five Senfes, and didft fet over his
Senfations a Mind, as the Conduéter of the
Soul. And, befides all thefe Things, O Lord
God, who can worthily declare the Motion of
the Rainy Clouds, the fhining of the Light-
ning, the Noife of the Thunder, in order to
the Supply of proper Food, and the moft
agreeable ‘Temperature of the Air? But when
Man was difobedient, thou didft deprive him
of the Life which fhould have been his Re-
ward; yet didft thou not deftroy him for
ever, but laidft him to Sleep for a ‘Time, and
thou didft by Oath call him to a Refurrection,
and loofedft the Bond of Death; O thou Re-.
viver of the Dead, through Jefus Chrift, who |
is our Hope. Ae
Great art thou, O Lord Almighty, and
Great is thy Power, and of thy Underftand-
ing there isno Number. Our Creator and Sa=
viour, rich in Benefits, Long-fuffering, and the
Beftower of Mercy, who doft not take away
thy Salvation from thy Creatures; for thou art
good by Nature, and fpareft Sinners, and in=
viteft them to Repentance ; for Admonition is:
the Effect of thy Bowels of Compaffion ; for
how fhould we abide if we were requir’d to:
come


fs


of RELIGION. 77


come to Judgment immediately, when after fo


much Long-iuffering, we hardly get clear of our


miferable Condition ? The Heavens declare thy
Dominion, and the Earth fhakes with Earth-


- quakes, and hanging upon nothing, declares
_ thy unfhaken Stedfaftnefs. The Sea raging with
_ Waves, and feeding a Flock of Ten thoufand


Creatures, is bounded with Sand, as ftanding —


in awe at thy Command; and compels allMen ,.. |.


to cry out, * How great are thy Works, O * Pf. ciii
Lord ! In Wifdom baft thou made them all! **


The Earth is full of thy Creation. And the


bright Hoft of Angels, and the Intellectual Spi+ {Dan.¢iit:


rits fay to Palmoni, ¢ There is but one Holy %.
Being : And the Holy Seraphim, together with
the Six-winged Cherubim, who fing to Thee
their Triumphal Song, cry out with never-


ceafing Voices, * Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of *1a. vi.3:


Hofts ; Heaven and Earth are full of thy Glory :


_And the other Multitudes of the Orders, Angels,


J


Arch-Angels, Thrones, Dominions, Principali-


ties, Authorities and Powers, cry. aloud, and ae

fay, || Blefed be the Glory of the Lord out of \Riek.iie
bis Place. But J/rael, thy Church on Earth; 12. ~

taken out of the Gentiles, emulating the Hea«
venly Powers, Night and Day,..with a full
Heart, and a willing Soul, fings, * Zhe Gha-. 2
riot of God is ten thoufandfold,.thoufands of .


*P fi bxdiis


the profperous : The Lord is antong them in


Sinai, zu the boly Place, The Heaven knows
him who fix’d it as a Cube of Stone, in the
Form of an Arch, upon nothing $ who united
the Land and Water to one another, and fcat-
ter’d the Vital, Air all abroad; and, conjoin’d
Fire therewith for Warmth, and Comfort againft..


Darknel’. The Tete of Stars ftrikes us with


Acdmirationg


178


A tronomical Principles


\


+ Deut.iv.
39°


Admiration, declaring him that numbérs them,
and fhewing him that names them ; the Ani-_
mals declare him that puts Life into them ;
the Trees fhew him that makes them grow :
All which Creatures, being made by thy Word,
fhew forth the Greatnefs of thy Power. Where-
fore every Man ought to fend up an Hymn
from his very Soul to thee, through Chrift,
in the Name of all the reft, fince he has
Power over them all, by thy Appointment. For
thou art kind in thy Benefits, and beneficent
in thy Bowels of Compaffion, who alone art
Aimighty ; for when thou willeft, to be able
is prefent with Thee ; for thy eternal Power
both quenches Flame, and ftops the Mouths of
Lions, and tames Whales, and raifes up the
Sick, and over-rules the Power of all Things,
and overturns the Hoft of Enemies, and cafts
down a People numbred in their Arrogance.
Thou art he who art in Heaven, he who art
on Earth, he who art in the Sea, he who art
in finite Things, thy Self unconfin’d by any
thing : For of thy Majefty there is no Boun-
dary : For ’tis not ours, O Lord, but the Oracle
of thy Servant, who faid; ¢ And thou foalt
kuow in thine Heart, that the Lord thy God
he is God, in fleaven above, and on Earth be-
neath, and there is none befides Thee : For there
is no God befides Thee alone, there is none holy
befides ‘Thee, the Lord, the God of Knowledge,
the God of Saints, holy above all holy Beings 5
for they are fanctified by thy Hands: ‘Thou
art Glorious, and highly exalted, invifible by
Nature, and unfearchable in thy Judgments ;
whofe Life is without Want, whofe Duration
can never fail, whofe Operation is without Toil,
whofe


of RELIGION. 179
whofe Greatnefs is unlimited, whofe Excellency —
_~ is perpetual, whofe Habitation is inacceffible,
whofe Dwelling isunchangeable, whofe Know-
ledge is without Beginning, whofe 'Truth is
immutable, whofe Work is without Affiftants,
whofe Dominion cannot be taken away, whofe
Monarchy is without Succeflion, whole King-
dom is without End, whofe Strength is irres
fiftible, whofe Army is very numerous. For
thou art the Father of Wifdom, the Creator of
the Creation, by a Mediator, as the Caufe.
The Beftower of Providence, the Giver of Laws,
the Supplier of Want, the Punifher of the Wick-
ed, and the Rewarder of the Righteous; the
God and Father of Chrift, and the Lord of
thofe that are Pious towards Him ; whofe Pro-
mife is infallible, whofe Judgment without
Bribes, whofe Sentiments are immutable, whofe
Piety is inceflant, whofe Thank{giving is ever-
lafting, through whom Adoration is worthily
due to Thee from every rational and holy Na-
ture.
“© Hermas.| Behold the mighty Lord, who viti. 3,
€° by his invincible Power, and with his excel-
¢ Jent Wifdom made the World, andby his glo«
«© rious Counfel encompafled the Beauty of his
“¢ Creature, and with the Word of his Strength
«¢ fix’d the Heaven, and founded the Earthups
*¢ on the Waters; and by his powerful Vertue
<¢ eftablifh’d his Holy Church, which he hath
©< blefled: Behold, he will remove the Heavens,
«¢ and the Mountains, the Hills and the Séas 5
“ and all things fhall be made plain for his
“¢ Bleét; that hemay render unto them the Pro«
_ © mife which he has promifed with much Hos
© nour and Joy ; if fo be that they fhall keep
N a *) the


i —— ee a


Pe oe Na en le ee


\


eee rm ePID ELI ETE ESTED


180


Vill. 20.


4


A flronomical Prinezples


<© the Commandments of God, which they
“© have received with great Faith. :
Author of the Recognitions.| But fomebody
may fay, that thefe things are done by Nature.
Now in this cafe the Contention is only about
a Word. For while ’tis certain that the World
is the Work of a Mind, and of Reafon, what
you call Nature 1 call God the Creator. And
clear it is, that neither formerly nor now
could it be, that either the Species of Bo-
dies, adorn’d with fuch neceffary Diftinétions
or the Faculties of the Mind, fhould be made by
any Labour, without Reafon, and without Senfe.
And now, if you look on the Philofophers as
proper Witnefles in this cafe, Plato gives us his
Teftimony in his Timeus ; where in his dif-
cuffion of this Queftion, about the Frame of the
World, Whether it always was, or had a Be-
ginning, he pronounces that it was made. For,
fays he, *tis vifible, palpable, and corporeal ;
and all things of that Nature were certainly
made. Now what was made, has without
queftion fome Author by whom it was made.
But then, as headds, To difcover this Maker


and Parent of all Things, is no eafy thing ; and —


when you have difcover’d him, to impart your
difcovery to the vulgar, is plainly impoffible.


—_


Thefe are certainly P/ato’s words. But fuppo- —


fing that he and the other Philofophers among
the Greeks had been difpos’d to fay nothing


about the making of the World, would it not —


{till be a plain cafe to all that had common Un-
derftanding ? For what Man is there, I mean
one of at leaft fome fmall Capacity, who upon
the fight of an Houfe with all its Furniture fit-


ted for Mens various Neceflities, whofe Top is
adorn’d |


of RELIGION.


adorn’d with a fpherical Cupolo, beautify’d
- with variety of fplendid Draughts and feveral
forts of Pictures, and adorn’d with the faireft
and largeft Lights; who is there, I fay, that
upon the view of fuch a Fabrick will not im-
mediately pronounce that it was fram’d by a
moft wife and moft powerful Architeét? And
can any one be found fo foolifh, as upon the
fight of the Work of Heaven, and the view of
the fplendorof the Sunand Moon, the regular
Courfe of the Stars, with their various Kinds
and Motions, and that fees all determin’d by
proper Laws, and to fuitable Periods ; to for-
bear tocry out, that thefe things were made by
a wife and rational Artificer, or rather by Wil-
dom and Reafon it felf?
But now if you defire to be a Follower of
others of the Greek Philofophers, andare vers’d
in Mechanicks, what they deliver about thefe
Celeftial things muft have certainly come to
your knowledge: For they fuppofe that the
Heavens are like a Sphere, onevery fide evenly
fituate, and having the fame refpect to every
part, and equally diftant from the Center of
the Earth ; and that therefore they ftand fo
firm by the equality of their Libration, that the
evennefs of their Situation dogs not allow them
to bend any one way more than another ; and
that by this means the Sphere is fuftain’d with-
out any prop to fupport it. Now if this Ma-
chine of the World bears really this Simili-
tude, there is a clear demonftration of Divine
Workmanfhip therein. But if, as others fup-
pofe, this fpherical Arch is fupported by the
Waters; either as it floats on their Surface, or
as it turns round within them, even on thofe


N 3 Fly po=


Viil. 21.


”


1 32


will. 22.


Will. 23.


- pointment of God, be crowded and fore’d out


A ftronomical Principles


Hypothefes the Workmanfhip of the great Ar-
tificer is manifefted therein. ‘

But left the Arguments of this kind, which.
all are not capable to underftand, fhould feem —
of an uncertain nature, let us proceed to fuch
as every one can comprehend. Who is it that
has order’d the Courfes of the Stars with fo
great Judgment, and appointed their times of
Rifing and Setting, and ordain’d every one of
them to hold its courfe in the Heavens in cer-
tain and fix’d Periods? “Who is it that has per~.
mitted fome of them to go always Weftward,
and others to return fometimes Eaftward 2? Who
is it that has fix’d Limits to the Courfes of the
Sun, that he might determine Hours, and Days,
and Months, and the Viciffitudes of Seafons by


its different Motions; and by the fure adjuft-


ment of its Courfe diftinguith thofe Seafons in-
to Winter firft, then the Spring, after that'the
Summer, and Autumn; foas ftill to determine
the annual Period by the fame Revolutions?
Who ts there, I fay, but muft pronounce the
Divine Wifdom it felf to be the Manager of
fo regular a Syftem? And fo much for that Hy-
pothefis which the Greeks have form’d about
the Syftem of the Heavens. |
What alfo can be faid to thofe Appearances
which belong to the Land andto the Sea? Are
not we plainly taught by them, that God did
not only make thefe Parts of the World, but
that he exercifes a Providence over them alfo?
For therefore are there high Mountains in fome
certain Places inevery partof the World, that
the Air which is, as it were, comprefs’d and
firaiten’d by them, may, according to the ap-


for
|


)


of R-E L 1G:10:N.


for Winds; whereby the Fruits grow, and the
Heat of Summer is temper’d, at the time when
the warm Pleiades are heated by the fiercenefs of
the Sun. But you will fay, why was there fuch
an intenfe Heat in the Sunat all, which fhould
require to be temper’d? Pray how could the
Fruits of the Earth, which are fo neceflary for
the Ufes of Mankind, be ripen’d without it?
Befides, takenoticeof another Thing, that near
the Equator, where the greateft Heat is, ther
isnogreat compreffion of the Clouds ; nordoes
any mighty quantity of Rain fall there, leit it
fhould breed Difeafes among the Inhabitants.
_ For moift Clouds, if they be as it were bak’d
with an intenfe Heat, do render the Air corrupt
and Peftilential. Asalfothe Earth, when it re-
ceivesover-warm Rain, doesnot afford Nourifh-
ment tothe Corn, but deftroysit. Which Ma-


nagement who can doubt but *tis the Effect of -


the Divine Providence ? To conclude with the
Cafe of Egypt, which becaule *tisnear the burn-
ing Heatof Ethiopia, and fo if it ftood in abfo-
lute Neceffiry of Rain, would have its Air into~
lerably corrupted; its Fields are therefore fup-
ply’d, not by Rain, which is deriv’d from the
Clouds; but they enjoy a kind of terreftrial
Rain, by the Inundations of the Nile.

What is alfo to be faid about the Fountains
and Rivers, which run with a conftant Current
into the Sea? aud yet all is fo fitted by the Di-
vine Pravidence, that thofe Rivers do not want
a plentiful Current of Water; and yet that the
Sea, which receives fuch vaft Quantities of Wa-
_ter, feemsnottobe augmented ; but thofe Ele-
ments continue in the fame Proportion, both
thofe which carry, and thofe which receive that

N 4 Supply


Vili. 24.


1 84 : ae A (fironomical Principles |


a


Supply of Water: the falt Water ftill naturally
confuming the fweet Streams mixed with it.
Herein therefore the Effects of Providence are
manifeft, that it fhould make that Element Salt
whereto the Courfe of all thofe Waters which
it had afforded for the Ufes of Men, was to
carry them; that fo the full Cavity of the Sea
might never, in all the Series of Ages, bring
upon the Earth and upon ‘Men, any fatal Inun-
dation of Waters. And there is no Man fo
foolith to fuppofe fo great an Inftance of Reafon
andof Providence could be taken care of by any
irrational Nature. . zt
viii. 25, . What fhall I {fay about Plantsand about Ani-
"> mals ? Is it not the Effect of Providence, that
when they are to be diflolv’d by Old Age, the
Plants fhould be repair’d again, either by young
Plants, or by Seeds, which proceed from them-
felves; and the Animals by the Propagation of
Pofterity? And indeed, *tis by the furprizing
Conduct of Providence, that Milk is provided
in the Breafts againft the time when the Young
one-is born, and that the fame young one, as
foon as’tisborn, without any Inftructor, knows
where to look for the Places wherein its Nou-
rifhment is laid up for it. And then Males as
well as Females are brought forth ; that by the
means of both, Pofterity may be provided for.
But now left, as Men are ready tovimagine,
- thefe Events might feem to happen according to
+afew fome fix’d Courfe of Nature, and not by the
of thefe Ex- Tifpenfation of the Creator, he ordain’d that
whieh were fome few Creatures fhould propagate their Kind
general’y Pe" upon Earth after a different manner, for an In-
Days of our dication and Sign of his Providence : That for
nowfand Example, #the Raven fhould bring forth her
seohes Tam Young
but {o that a valt number of others, of equal or greater Force, have been fince difcover’d.


of RELIGION,


Young at the Mouth, and the Weezle propagate


at the Ear; that fome fort of Fowls, as Hens,
fhould bring forth Eggs, addle either by the


- Wind or the Duft; that fome other Creatures


= « *


“ae


fhould change the Male by Turns, into the Fe-


male, and every Year alter their Sex ; as Hares
andthe Hyengz, which they call Monfters; that


fome fhould arife out of the Earth, and take
thence their Flefh, as Moles; others out of


Afhes, as Vipers ; others out of putrify’d Fleth,


as Wafps out of the Flefh of Horfes, and Bees


outof that of Kine; othersout of Cows Dung,
as Beetles; othersoutof Herbs, asthe Scorpion
out of Bafi/; and on thecontrary, thar Herbs


- fhould {pring out of Animals, as Smallage and


' Afparagus out of the Horn of a Stag or of a


Roe- Buck.
And indeed to what Purpofe fhould I reckon
up more Examples wherein the Divine Provi-


_ dence, by changing that Courfe which is fup-


~ pos’d to be appointed by Nature, has in many


Refpects varied the Circumftances of the Birth
of Animals? Whereby might bethew’d notany
irrational Courfe of Things, but God the Di-


fpofer of all Things might rationally be demon- .


ftrated. Isthere not alfo in another Inftance, a
compleat Demonftration of the Workmanthip


of Divine Providence ? In that I mean, when


Seeds that are fown are-repair’d for the Ufes of
Human Life? Which Seeds when they are
committed to the Ground, the Soil, by the
Will of God, affords them that Moifture it
has receiv'd, as if it were Milk for their Nou-


-rifhment. For there is in the Waters a certain


Vlil. 260


Power of theSpirit of God, which was afforded —


them at the beginning, by whole Efficiency the,
a. "2 entire


186


A fironomical | Principles


Vili. 27.


entire future Body begins to be form’d in the
very Seed, and to be reftor’d again by its Stem
and its Ear: For when a grain of the Seeds is
{well’d by the Moifture, that Power of the Spi-
rit which was beftow’d onthe Waters, and being
incorporeal eafily runs through certain narrow
Channels of the Veins, invigorates the Seeds till
they grow larger, and frames the Species of
them as they grow. It comes to pafs therefore
that by the Means of the moift Element, where-~
in this vital Spirit is ever inferted and implant-
ed, that not only the Corn is repair’d in gene=


ral, but that it returns again, as to its Species


and Form, entirely like thofe Seeds which were
fow’d. Which Regularity of Operation, who
that has the leaft Senfe can believe to be thus
perform’d by an irrational Nature, and not by
the Divine Wifdom? To conclude, Even thefe
Things are form’d after the fimilitude of a—
Human Birth; for the Earth appears to retain
the Place of the Womb, where the Seed when
it is caft into it, is form’d and nourith’d by the
Power of Water and of the Spirit, as we have -
{aid already. |
Moreover, the Divine Providence is herein
alfo to be admir’d, that it has order’d all, fo
that we can indeed fee and know what is made ;
but how, and after what manner it is made, is —
hidden and conceal’d from us; that they may
not be difcoverable by thofe that are unworthy,
but may be difclos’d to fuch as are worthy. and
faithful, and have meritedfuch a Favour. Now
that we may prove by Experiments and Inftan-
ces, that the Seeds do not receive any Part of
the 'Terrene Matter, but are made up entirely of
the Element of Water, and of the —.
+ that


of RELIGION. 187


that Spirit which is included therein; Do you
fuppofe, for Example’s Sake, that the Weight:
of an Hundred Talents of Earth were put into
a large Veffel; and the feveral Kinds of Seeds
were fow’d therein, either of Herbs, or of larger
‘Plants ; and that they had a fufficient Quantity
‘of Water to moiften them; and let this Procefs
‘be continued feveral Years. And then let the
Grain which has {prung from them, fuppofe of
Wheat or Barley, or of any other fort, be ga-
‘ther’d together, every Year’s Product by it felf,
till the Heap of every Kind of Grain is arifen
‘to the Weight of an Hundred Talents. ‘Then
let the Trees themfelves be pluck’d up, and
weigh’d; and when they are all taken out of
‘the Veffel, yet will the Earth it felf, when it is
weigh’d, afford you its entire original Hundred.
Talents again notwithftanding. Whence then
fhall we fay that all that Weight, and all that’
“Quantity of different Sorts of Grain, and of the
Trees has arifen? Is it not plain that’tis from _
the Water? For the Earth retains its own en-
“tirely, while the Water which was poured on
every one of them, wholly difappears; and all
this by the powerful Efficacy of the Divine
Difpofal of the Creator, which by the very
Element of Water both repairs the Subf{tances,
and frames the Species of fuch Seeds and Plants,
and preferves their Species with great In-
creafe. |
From ali which Inftances I think it is abun viii. 28.
-dantly evident to all Men, that all ‘Things are
made, and every Thing does fubfift by the
Skill of a wife Being, and not by the Opera-
tion of Brutal Nature. But now let us proceed
if you pleate, to our own Conftitution, or ser
Re ) we


188


A ftronomical Principles


Wii. oe


of a Man, whois a little World included in
the other : And let us confider with what Art
he is compounded, and thereby you will fee
in an efpecial Manner the Wifdom of the Crea- —
tor. Now though he be made up of different
Subftances, of that which is Mortal, and that
which is Immortal, yet by the Skill and Provi-
dence of his Creator is it brought to pafs
that thefe different Subftances, which are fo
widely remote one from the other, admit of
an Union; For one Part is taken from the
Earth, and fram’d by the Creator ; while the
other is deriv’ from the Immortal Sub-
ftances. And yet is the Advantage of Im-
mortality not at all infring’d by fuch a Con-
junction. Nor is he made up of rational,
and concupifcible, and irafcible Parts ; but
fuch forts of Faculties as thofe, are rather to
be fuppos’d Affections belonging to him;
whereby he may be carried to thofe feveral
forts of Objects. For the Body, which con-
fifts of Bones and Flefh, owes its Original _
to the Seed of the Male, which Heat fetches
out of the Marrow, and configns over to the
Womb, as to a proper Soil, whereto it ad-
heres:. And when it has by little’ and lit-
tle been moiften’d, by the flowing of the Blood —
to it, it becomes Flefh and Bones; and is made
up after the Species of him who caft in the
Seed. | )
Behold now the Contrivance of the Arti-
ficer herein! how he has inferted the Bones’
as certain Pillars, whereby the Flefh might
be fuftain’d and fupported. Befides this,
confider how a juft Meafure is preferv’d on
both Sides; I mean on the right Side, and

: : On


t


of RELIGION.


on the Left ; fo that one Foot agrees with
the other, and one Hand with the other,
one Set of Fingers with the other; that fo
every one of them might agree with his Fel-
low, without the leaft Inequality :. Which
is the Cafe alfo as to the one Eye with the
other, and the one Ear with the other; which
Members do not only refemble and agree
with one another, but are alfo fo fram’d,
as to ferve for the neceffary Occafions of
‘Life. The Hand, for Inftance, is fo difpos’d
as to be fit for Work, the Feet for walking,
the Eyes for feeing, as guarded by the Eye-
brows; the Ears are fo fram’d for Hearing,
that like a Drum they fend the rebounding
Sound of Words deep into the Head, and
even as far as the Senfation of the Soul; as
‘does the Tongue, when ’tis mov’d upon the
Teeth, fupply the Place of a Quill. 'Thofe
‘Teeth alfo are fo form’d, that fome chew
and divide the Food, and fend it to others,
who are more Inward; and thofe Teeth thar
are more inward are fo fram’d, that, like
Milftones, they chew and break it {mall ; that
fo it may be deliver’d to the Stomach in a ftate


fit for Digeftion. Whence it is that thefe’


Teeth have the Name of Grinders beftowed on
them. |


Befides thefe, the Noftrils were made for
the Paffage of the Breath to and fro, in Ex-.


piration and Infpiration ; that the natural
Heat which is in the Heart, may by the Ac-
cefs of frefh Air, be heated or cooled by the
Operation of the Lungs; which are there-
fore plac’d in the Breaft, that by its Softnefs
‘it may cherifh and enliven the Heart, in whofe
| vigo-


>
ooo a 3


190


A fironomical Principles


~~


viii. 31.


Vili. 32, "


vigorous State Life feems to confift. I fay


tthe Life, not the Soul. For what fhall I


fay of the Subftance of the Blood? Which
is like a River, proceeding from a Fountain,
which at firft is carry’d along one Channel,
but then is deriv’d farther by innumerable
Veins, as by fo many Pipes; and fo waters the
entire Soil of a human Body with vital Streams ;
whereto the Liver is alfo affifting, which is
fituate on the Right Side, for the more effectual
Digeftion of the Food, and its Converfion
into Blood: While the Place of the Spleen
is on the Left Side, that it may attract to it
felf, and after a fort cleanfe the Blood of its
Impurities. |
As to the Contrivance of the Inteftines,
how wonderful is it! For therefore are they
join’d together in long Foldings, like Cir-
cles, that they may leifurely throw off the
Remains of the Food after Digeftion; that
fo the Receptacles of the Nourifhment may
not be fuddenly empty’d; and yet there may
no Hindrance arife from the Food that is ta-
ken afterwards. But therefore are they con=
triv’'d to be Membranaceous, that the Parts
without them may by degrees receive from
them their moift Nutriment; that fo it may
not go away at once, and leave the Bowels
themfelves empty; nor be hindred by the
Thicknefs of the Skin, and leave the other
Parts dry, and diforder thereby the whole
Human Fabrick with inevitable 'Thirft
Moreover, who is there whom the Po-
fition of the Feminine Parts, and the Recep=
tacle of the Womb, moft exactly fitted for
| receiving:


of RELIGION.


receiving the Embryo, and—for cherifhing and
quickning it, will not perfuade that what was
made was made by Reafon and Prudence?
That the Woman fhould only differ from the
Man in thofe Parts eG): Pofterity was to
be provided for and fecur’d? As alfo, that the
Frame of the Man fhould be different from
that of the Woman, in thofe Parts only
wherein the Power of Semination and Gene-
ration does refide? And herein certainly
there is an illuftrious Teftimony of Provi-
dence afforded us ; I mean in this neceflary
Diverfity of the Parts. But yet this Tefti-
mony is ftronger where we find an External
Refemblance, and yet a Difference as to Ufe,
and a Wariety as to Operation. For fo it is in
the Paps, which are both in Men and Wo-
men ; yet fo that thofe of Women alone are
capable to receive Milk, in order to the In-


_ fants finding a proper Nutriment as foon as it


is Born. Now therefore, if we fee the Mem-
bers difpos’d in Men with fo great Skill, that
while the Shape of all the other Parts is the
fame, thofe alone do admit of a Difference,
wherein the feveral Ufes require that Diver-
fity; and while there is nothing in a Man
that is fuperfluous or wanting, nor any Thing


_ in a Woman that is too little or too much ;


7
yy


‘who is there that does not evidently con-


- clude from all thefe Obfervations, that all is


the Effect of Reafon, and of the Wifdom of
the Creator?


‘The fame Thing is confirm’d by the agree- vill: 33-


able Diverfity there is among other Ani-
: ~ Ials,


BB


SA.


192


. Fill, 44.


\


A {fironomical Principles


mals, every one of which are fuited to their
proper Ufe and Service. This is alfo con-
firm’d from the Variety there is in Trees;
the Diverfity there is in Herbs; with the
Difference of their Species and Juices: As
it is alfo from the Changes of the Seafons


-of the Year, as diftinguifh’d into Four Parts,


one fucceeding another; from the regular
Succeffion of Hours, Days, and Months in
the annual Period; which Period never
exceeds its appointed Limits one fingle
Hour. Hence, Laftly, is it that the Age
of the World it felf is to be eftimated at
a certain Number of Years, without any Va-
riation.

But you will fay, When was the World
made? And why fo lately ? This you might
as well have pretended, though it had been
made fooner; for you might {till have faid,
Why not fooner yet? For when you had
gone backwards never fo many Ages, you
might always ask, Why not fooner ftill? But
we are not now difcourfing of this Matter,
Why it was not made fooner than it was
made; but whether it were made at all or —
not. For if it fully appears to have been
made, *twas certainly the Work of a Power- —
ful and Supreme Artificer: Which when it”
is once fettled, we muft leave it to the Dif-_
pofal and Judgment of the wife Artificer,
when he thought fit to make it. Unlefs you
will fuppofe, that all the Wifdom which
fram’d this vaft Structure: of the World, and
form’d all the diftinét Sorts and Species of
Beings, fo as to difpofe their Conftitutions
not


of RELIGION.
not only to be agreeable in Point of Beauty,
but withal moft fuitable and neceffary for the
Ufes they were to be put to afterward, was.
only uncapable of this one Thing ; I mean of
chufing « proper Time for the rearing fo mag-
nificent a Building. Certainly he is not at
a lofs for fufficient Reafons, and evident Cau-
fes, why, and when, and how he would make
the World ; which were not furely to be
-reveal’d to Men, while they are fearce able
to enquire after, and underftand thofe Things
that are before their Eyes, and are 'Teftimonials
of his Providence. For what is conceal’d in
private, and is repofited within the wifeft
‘Underftanding, as within a Royal Treafury,
sis difclos’d to none but to thofe who have
jearn’d from him with whom they ~are in-
trufted and repofited. ’T'is God therefore who


‘made all Things, and was himielf made by;


none. But for thofe that put the Name of
Nature, for that of God ; and fo affirm, that
all Things were made by Nature, they do not
perceive the Miftake about that Appellation:
For if they fuppote this Nature to be Irra-
tional, tis egregious Folly to imagine that 4
Création where Reafon is fo vifible, fhould
proceed from a Maker who is deftitute of it.
But if this Nature be Reafon, or the Word,
whereby ’tis evident all Things were made,
they chufe another Name tono Purpote ; while
they profefs that ke that created themis endued
with Reafon.


ron


ee deine AN in oer
_194 Aftronomical Principles
N. B. The following Teftimonies, #om the
ancient Heathen Writers, are generally taken
fromthe very Learned Dr. Cudworth’s Intellectual
Syftem of the Univerfe, and that nearly as he has
tranflated them ; where the Originals of them
may alfo be confulted by the inquifitive Reader.
-A few others here are added out of the Szbyline
Oracles, and from thofe Two moft diligent and
ufeful Naturalifts, Mr. Ray and Mr. Derbam ; it
being perfectly needlefs to make a new and larger
Collection of my own out of the ancient Authors
~ themfelves, in fo known and fo endlefs a Matter
as this is. At the Conclufion I have omitted moft
ofthe Chriftian Writers,as here of lefs Force,and
as without Number; excepting a very few of
the moft eminent of our modern Philofophers 5
who were ofthe Laity alfo; and fo onall Accounts
: truly unexceptionable Witneffes in this Cafe.
Cudworth, Orpheus.| We will firft fing a pleafant and de-
p- 249. fiehtful Song concerning the ancient Chaos 5
How Heaven, Earth and Seas were framed out
‘of it: As alfo concerning that’ much-wife and
fugacious Love, the oldeft of all, and Self Per-
fot, which a€tually produced all thefe things,
3 {eparating one thing from another.
P. 300. Firft of all, the ther was made by God, and
after the Aither a Chaos, a dark and dreadful
Night then covering all under the whole Father.
Orpheus having declared alfo in his Expli-
cation, that there was a certain incomprehenfible
Being, which was the Higheft and Oldeft of all
things, and the Maker of every thing, even of
the ZEther it felf, and of all things under the
Hither. But the Earth being then invifible, by
‘reafon of the Darknefs, a Light breaking out
through the Ather illuminated the whole Crea-
tion,


of RELIGION. 195


tion. ‘This Light being faid by him to be that
Higheft ofall Beings,(before-mentioned, which
is called: alfo Counjel, and Life; thefe three
Names in Orpheus (Light, Counfel,: and Life,)
declaring one and the fame Force and Power
of ‘that GOD who’ is the Maker of all, and
who produceth all out of nothing into Being,
_ whether vifible or invifible. |
_ Wherefore, togetherwith the Univerfe, were P- 3°3«
made within ‘Jove, the Height of the Athereal
' Heaven, the Breadth of the Earth and Sea, the
_ great. Ocean, the profound Zartara, the Rivers
and Fountains, and all the other things, allthe
immortal Gods and Goddeffes : Whatfoever hath
been or fhall be was at once contained in the
Womb of Fove.
* The high thundring Zove is both the firft and P: 394.
the laft, ‘Fove is both the Head and the Middle
of all things - All things were made out of Fove.
_ fove is the Profundity of the Earth, and Starry’
Heaven; ‘ove is the Breath of all things ; Fove
is the Force of the untameable Fire ; ove is the -
Bottom of the Sea; ‘Jove is the Sun, Moon, and
Stars; ove is both the Original and King of all
things. There isOne Power, and One God, and
‘One great Ruler over all. See page 304,305.  _
| Lhales.| Thales faid, that Water was the firft unas
Principle of all Corporeal things ; but thatGOD:
was that Mind which formed all things out of
Water. LJ | |
Pythagoras. | Pythagoras thought, that GOD p 31%
was a Mind paffing through the whole Nature
of Things; from whom our Souls were, as it:
Were, cut off.
Behold we fee clearly, that Pythagoras held ». 337
there, was One GOD of the whole Univerfe,.
O02 the


<Reeercnceinanenaamn ane heetonmeen tata ANAT GEER DTT OTE LT TALI ETE LAS


£96


P- 233-


p. 395


A ftronomical Principles


the Principle and Caufe of all things, the Il-
luminator, Animator and: Quickner of the
whole, and the Original of Motion ; fromwhom __
all things were deriv’d, and brought out of
Non-entity into Being.

Onaius.\ It feemeth to me that there is not
One GODonly, but that there isOne, the great
eft and higheft God, that governeth the whole
World, and that there are Many other Gods be
fideshim, differing as to Power: That One GOD
reigning overthem all, who furmounts them all
in. Power, Greatnefs and Virtue. ‘This is that
GOD. who contains and comprehends the whole.
World; but the other Gods are thofe, who, to-
gether with, the Revolution of the Univerfe,
orderly follow that firft and intelligible GOD.

They who! maintain that there is only one
GOD, and not many Gods, are very much mi-
ftaken; asnot confidering aright, what the Dig-.
nity and Majefty of the Divine Tranfeendency
chiefly confifteth in; namely in Ruling and Go-
verning thofe which areliketo it, and in excel-
ling and furmounting others, and being fuperior
tothem. But all thofe other Gods which we
contend for, are to that firft andintelligibleGOD:
as but the Dancers to the Corypbaus or Choragusy


-and.as the inferior common Soldiers to theCaptain


or General ; to whom it properly belongs to
follow and comply with their Leader and Com-
mander. ‘The Work indeed is common, or the
{ame to them both ; to the Ruler and them that
are Ruled ; but they thatare Ruled could not or-
derly confpire andagree together into one Work


were they deftitute of a Leader ; as the Singers


aid Dancers could not confpire rogether into one
Harmony and Dance, were they deftitute of a
| Corypheus 5


of RELIGION. 197


— Corypheus ; nor Soldiers make upanorderly Ar-
- my, were they without a Captain or Commander.
_  £picharmus.| Nothing is concealed from the Pp: 263-
~ Divinity: This well deferves your Knowledge.
He is the Infpector of us. Nothing is impoffible
with GOD.
| Philolaus.| GOD is the Prince and Ruler of p,, 936
all, always one, ftable, immoveable, liketo him-
felf, but unlike to every thing elfe. |
Archytas..| Whofoever is able to reduce all — ibid.
_ Kinds of things under one and the fame Princi-
ple, this Man feems to me to have found out
an excellent Specu/a, or high Station; from
whence he may be ableto takea larger View and
 Profpeét of GOD, andof allother things ; and
he thallclearly perceive that GO D isthe Begin-
ning, and End, and Middle of all things that are
5 lags according to Juftice and Right Rea-
fon.
Xenophanes.| Thereisone GOD, thegreateft P- 377,
both among Gods and Men. Hemoveththe 3/*
_ whole World without any Labour or ‘Toil, meer-
ly by Mind. Thecpbraftus affirms, that Xenopha-
nes the Colophonian, Parmenides his Mafter, made
one Principle of all things ; hecalling it Ove and
All, and determining it to be neither finite nor
‘infinite, (in acertain Senfe, ) and neither moving
“nor refting. Which Zhreopbraftus alfo declares,
that Xenophanes in this did not write as a Na-
‘tural Philofopher, or Phyfiologer, but asa Me-
taphyfician, orTheologeronly. Xenophaneshis
* One and Al, being nothing elfe but GO D, whom
«he proved to be one folitary Being from hence,
- becaufe G O Dis the beft and moft powerful of all
‘things ; and therebeing many Degrees of Enti-


-ty, there muft needs be fomething Supreme to
— O 3 rule


»


| 199


P.379-


Be $95


A iftronomical P rinciples


Rule over all ; which beft and moft powerful
Being can be but one ; he alfo did demonftrate —
it to be unmade, as likewife to be neither finite —
nor infinite, (in a certain Senfe,) as he re-—
moved both Motion and Reft from GOD.
Wherefore when he faith that GOD always
remaineth or refteth the fame, he underftands
not this of that Reft which is oppofite to Moy
tion, and which belongs to fuch things as may
be moved, but of a certain other Reft which
is both above that Motion and its Contray.
Heraclitus.| O you Unwife and Unlearned,
teach us firftwhat GOD is, that fo you may be
believ’d in accufing me of Impiety.Tell us where
GOD is. Is he fhut up within the Walls of Tem-
ples 2 Is this your Piety, to place GOD inthe
dark, or tomake himaftony GOD? O you un-
skilful! know ye not that GOD is not made
with Hands, and hath no Bafis or Fulcrum to
ftandupon, nor can be inclofed within the Walls
of any Temple? The whole World, varioufly a-
dorn’d with Plants, Animals and Stars, being
his ‘Temple. Am limpious, O Euthycles!
who alone know what GOD is? Is there no
GOD without Altars ? or are Stones the only
Witneffes of him? No, His own Works give
Teftimony to Him, and principally the Sun ;_
Night and Day bear witnefs of Him; the Earth
bringing forth- Fruits declares Him ; the Cir-
cle of the Moon, that was made by Him, is
an Heavenly Teftimony of Him.
Heraclitus’s Defcription of GOD is this,
That moft fubtle and moft {wift Subftance,


which permeates and paffes through the whole


Univerfe ; by which all created things were


made. | |
, Zoroaftes. |


\


io


{ i a ee


Fe ete


of RELIGION.


Lo


e291


. Zoroaftres. | GOD is the firft, incorruptible, P 7


eternal, unmade, invifible, unlike to every
thing elfe, the Head and Leader of all Good,
one that cannot be bribed, the Beftof the Good,
the Wifeft of the Wife: He isalfothe Father of
Equity and Juftice, Self-taught, Perfect, and the
only Inventer of what is naturally Holy.


_ Anaxogoras.| Anaxogoras affirmed, thatthere p- 26


was, befides Atoms, an ordering and difpofing


_ Mind, that was the Caufe of all things ;---which


was the only fimple, unmixed, and pure thing
in the World, |

_ He was the firft, (that is, among the Jonick
Philofophers) who brought in Mind and GOD
to the Cofimopeia ; and did not derive all things
from fenfelefs Bodies. Mind, the firft Ma-
ker of the World; Mind, that which ftill governs
the fame; the King and Supreme Monarch of


_ Heavenand Earth.


Mind is mingled with nothing, but is alone
by it felf, and feparate: For if it werenot by it
felf, diftinét from Matter, but mingled there-
with, it would then partake of all things; be-
caufe there is fomething of all in every thing ;
which things mingled together with it would
hinder it ; fothat it could not mafter or conquer
any thing, as if alone by it felf. For Mind is


the moftfubtile of all things, andthe moft pure,


and has the Knowledge of allthings, together
with an abfolute Power over all.

Parmenides.| He defcribes the Supreme Dei-
ty asthe one aud all, immutable; as one fingle,


-folitary, and moft fimple Being ; unmade, or felf-


exiftent, and neceffarily exiftent, incorporeal,and
devoid of Magnitude, altogetherimmutable, or
unchangeable, whofe Duration therefore was ve-


O 4 ty


a2)


. 381.


. 388.


Aftronontical Principles 2


ry different from that of ours, and notin a
Way of Flux, or temporary Succeffion, but a
conftant Eternity. |
Parmenides, Meliffus, and Xenophanes.} Per-
haps, fays Sémplicius, it will not be improper
for us to digrefs a little here, and to gratify the
{tudious and inquifitive Reader, by fhewing how
thofe ancient Philofophers, tho’ feeming to dif-
{ent in their Opinions concerning the Principles
of the Univerfe, did notwithitanding harmoni-
oufly agree together. As firftof all, they who
difcourfed concerning the intelligible and firkt
Principle of all, Xenophanes, Parmenides, and
Meliffus; of whom Parmenides called it one,
finite, and determined, becaufe as Unity muft
needs exift before Multitude, fo that which is
to all things the Caufe of Meafure, Bound, and
Determination, ought rather to be defcrib’d by
Meafure and what is Finite, than by Infinity; as
alfo that which is every way perfect, and hath


attained itsown End, orrather is the End of all


things, ( as it was the Beginning,) mutt needs
be of a determinate Nature: For that which is
imperfect, and therefore indigent, hath not yet
attained to its Term or Meafure. But Meli/~
fas, though he confidered the Immutability
of the Deity likewife, yet attending to the ins
exhauftible Perfection of its Effence, the Unli-
mitednefs. and Unboundednefs of its Power, de-
clareth itto be Infinite, as well as Unbegotten
er Unmade. Moreover Xenophanes looking up-=


on the Deity as the Caufe of all things, and


above all things, placed it above Motion, and
Refit, and all thofe Oppofitions of inferior Be-


ings; as P/ato likewife doth in the firft Hy-


pothelis of his Parmenides. Whereas Parmeni=
o% * ae 2s eu 8 2 2 ‘ NE - ae Yeon pe “ des


of RELIGION. 201


des and Meliffus attending to its Stability, and
eonftant Immutability, and its being perhaps a-
bove Energy and Power, praifed it as immoveable. a
‘Zeno Eleates.| Zeno, tays Ariftotle, by hisone ® my
Ens which neither was moved, nor moveable; 77 —
meaneth GOD. If GOD be the beft of all
things, then He mult needs be One. This is:
GOD, and the Power of GOD, to prevail, con-
quer and rule overall. Wherefore by how much.
any thing falls fhort of the Beft, by fo much.
does it fallfhort of being GOD. Nowif there
befuppofed more fuch Beings, whereof fome are
better, fome are worfe; thefe could not be all
Gods, becaufe it is effential to GOD not to be
tranfcendedbyany. But if they be conceiv’d to
be fomany equal Gods, then would it not be the
Nature of GOD to be the Beft: One Equal be-
ing neither better nor worfe than another. Where-
fore if there be a GOD, and this be the Nature
of Him, then can there be but One. And in-
deed otherwife He could not be able to do
whatfoever he would.
Empedocles.| He is happy who hath his Mind p. 26
richly fraught and ftored with Treafures of Di-
vine Knowledge ; but hemiferable, whofe Mind
is darkned, as to the belief ofa GOD. He de-
nied GOD to be Corporeal ; —— and affirmed
that he is only an Holy and Ineffable Mind,
that by {wift Thoughts agitates the whole
World. | ek
Ecphantus and Arcefilds.| Ecphantusand Are rbide
cefilas held the corporeal! World to confit of
Atoms; but yet tobe ordered and governed by
a Divine Providence. :
Many of the oldeft Philofopbers.) Tt was a ® oH
moft ancient, and in q manner univerlally re-
d | Si ee ceived


202 Aftronomical Principles


ceived Tradition among the Pagans, that the.

Cofmogonia, or Generation of the World, took,

its firft Beginning froma Chaos: ‘This Traditi-

“  -onhaving been delivered down from Orpheus,

* and Linus, by Hefiod, and Homer, and others 5

acknowledged by Epicharmus, and embraced by.

Thales, Anaxagoras, Plato, and other Philofo-

phers; andthe Antiquity whereofis declared by
Euripides.

a Euripides.| Euripides’s Prayeris, That GOD

P 32” would infufe Light into the Souls of Men,

whereby they might be enabled to know what

is the Root from whence all their Evils {pring,

and by what Means they may avoid them, And

elfewhere, :


Thou felf-{prung Being, that dof all enfuld,

And in thine Arms Heav'ns whirling Fabrick bold,
Who avt encircled with re{plendent Light, |
And yet ly ft mantledo’re in foady Night 5

About whom the exultant Starry Fires

Dance nimbly round in everlafiing Gyres.


Sophocles.| There is in Truth oneonly GOD,
- 363. whomade Heaven and Earth, the Sea, Air and
Winds, €c. ~ : ;
Socrates.| Tamnowconvinced, fays Ariftode=
mus to Socrates, from what you fay, that the
Things of this World were the Workmanthip of
fome wife Artificer, who alfo was a Lover of
Pi Animals: Do you think that you only
have Wifdom in your felf, and that there 1s
none elfe in the World without you ? Is

Mind and Underftanding therefore the only thing ~
which you fancy you have fome way or other
tuckily got, and {natched unto your elf, whilft
I there


of RELIGION,


there is no fuch thing any where in the World
without you? All thofe infinite things therein
being thus orderly difpofed by Chance ? —Nei-
ther do you fee your own Soul which rules over
your Body: So that you might for the fame
Reafon conclude your felf to do nothing by
Mind and Underftanding neither, but all by
Chance, as well as that all things in the World
-are done by Chance. How much the more
magnificent and illuftrious that Being is which
takes care of you, fo much the more in all Rea-
fon ought it to be honoured by you. ——Confi-
der, Friend, I pray you, if that Mind which is
_in your Body does order and difpofe it every
way as it pleafes, why fhould not that Wifdom
which is in the Univerfe be able to order all
things therein alfo as feemeth beft to it? And
if your Eyes can difcern things feveral Miles di-
ftant from it, why fhould it be thought inrpoffi-
ble for the Eye of GOD to behold all things
at once? Laftly, if your Soul can mind things
both here, andin Egypt, and in Szczly, why may
not the great Mind or Wifdom of GOD be able
to take care of all things, in all Places? —GOD
is fuch and fo great a Being, as that he can at
once fee all things, hear all things, and be prefent
every where, and take care of all Affairs. —The
other Gods giving us good things, do it without
Vifibly appearing to us; and that GOD who
framed and containeth the whole World, in
which are all good and excellent things, and
who continually fupplieth us with them, He,
though He be feen to do the greateft things of
all, yet notwithftanding is Himfelf invifible and
-unfeen; Which ought the lefs to be wondered at
“by us, becaufe the Sun, which is manifeft to all,


yet


203,


yp s + 1.3


204


A ftronomical Principles


> 6 3<


Pe 155.


P- 402.


Pp. 4O4e


: yet will not fuffer himfelf to be exaCtly and di-
‘ftin@tly view’d ; but if any one boldly and im-
‘pudently gaze upon him, will deprive him of his


Sight. As alfo becaufe the Soul of Man, which
motft of all things in him partaketh of the Dei-
ty, tho” it be that which maanifeftly rules in us,
yet it is neverfeen. Which Particulars he that
confiders, ought not to defpife invifible things,
but to honour the Supreme Deity, taking No-


‘tice of his Power from his Effects.


'Plato..| Whofoever had but the leaft of Seri-
oufnefs and Sobriety in them, whenfoever they
took in hand any Enterprize, whether great or
{mall, they would always invoke the Deity for
Affiftance and Direction. | .

Thofe things which are faid to be done by
Nature, are indeed done by Divine Power.

When I begin my Epiftles with GOD, then
may you conclude I write ferioufly ; but not fo


“when I begin with Gods.


Plato calls the Supreme GOD, The GOD:
The Architect or Artificer of the World; the
Maker and Father of this Univerfe ; whom it
is hard to find out, but impoflible to declare to
thé vulgar: The GOD over all; The Greator
of Nature: The fole Principle of the Univerle :
The Caufe of all things: Mind, the King of all
things: ‘That Sovereign Mind which orders all
things, and paffes through all things: The Go-
vernor of the whole : That which always is, and
was never made: The Firft GOD: The greateft
GOD, and the greateft of the Gods: He that —
governeth or produceth the Sun: He that
makes the Earth, and Heaven, and the Gods,
and doth all things both in Heaven and Hell,
and under the Earth. ) | ae

aint if Ariftotle. |


i 2


A


of RELIGION. 205


| Ariftotle.| Ariftotle plainly affirms, that all the p. 118.
Philofophers before himfelf did affert the World
to have been made, or have had a Beginning.
There is more of Defign or final ‘Caufe, and p. 165.
of wife Contrivance, in the Works of Nature,
than in thofe of human Art.
It is more probable that the whole World was p. 168.
at firft made by Art, Cif at leaft it were made, )
and that it is {till preferved by the fame, than
that mortal Animals fhould be fo. For there is
much more of Order and determinate Regulari-
ties in the heavenly Bodies, than in our felves ;
but more of Fortuitoufnefs and Want of Regu-
larity among thefe mortal things. Notwith-
ftanding which, fome there are who, tho’ they
cannot but acknowledge that the Bodies of Ani-.
mals were all framed by an artificial Nature, yet
they will needs contend that the Sy{tem of the
‘Heavens fprung meerly from Fortune and
Chance; altho’ there be not the leaft Appear-
ance of Chance or Incogitancy in it.
If there be any fuch Subftance as this that is p. 386.~.
feparate (from Matter, or Incorporeal) and im- |


~ moveable (as we fhall afterwards endeavour to


fhew that there is; .) then the Divinity ought to
be placed here ; and this muft be acknowledged
to be the firft and moft proper Principle of all.

~ Ali Men have an Opinion or Perfuafion that p. 4°09.
there are Gods. And they who think fo, as —
well Barbarians, asGreeks, attribute the high-
eft Place to that which is Divine ; as fuppofing
_the immortal Heavens to be moft accommodate
to immortal Gods.

- Unlefs there were fomething elfe in the World p. 413
befides what is fenfible, there could be neither’
Beginning norOrder ; bnt one thing would bethe

fem * Principle


206 |


Afironomical Principles


P- 475»


Principle of another infinitely, or without End’
—It is not at all likely that either Fire or Earthy
or any fuch Body fhould be the Caufe of that
Fitnefs or Proportion that is inthe World. Nor
can fo noble an Effect as this be reafonably im=
puted to Chance or Fortune.


. Aratus.| Let us begin with Jove: Him of


whom we Men are never filent ; and of whom
all things are full. He penetrating and perva-
ding all, and being every where ; and whofe Be-
neficence we conftantly make ufe of and enjoy;
for we alfo are his Of-{pring ; whoasakindand _
benign Father fheweth lucky Signs to Men: For

he alfo fixeth the Signs in Heaven, diftinguifh-
ing Conftellations, and appointing Stars to rife
and fet at feveral 'Times of the Year. There-
fore is he always propitiated, and appeafed both
firft and laft. Hail, O Father! the great Won-


- der ofthe World, and the Intereft of Mankind.


iP 4325
433) 434


Cleauthes.| Cleantbes’s Prayer to the Supreme
GOD.. * Hail Fove! moft glorious of the im-:
© mortal Beings, who haft many Names, and art
€ ever Omnipotent, the Author of Nature, go~
© verning all things by Law. For all Mortals are
© allowed to addrefs to thee. For we are thy Off
* {pring ; tho’ a mere Imitation orEccho of Thee,
even all of us who live and creep upon the
Earth. Wherefore I will fing an Hymn to
Thee, and always Praife Thy Power. All this:
round World that circles about the Earth obeys’
Thee, whitherfoever Thou guideft it, and vo-
luntarily fubmits to Thy Government. Such
two-edged, fiery, and ever-living Thunder haft:
Thou, as Thy Inftrument, under Thy victori-
ous Hands; for all Nature trembles under Thy
Stroke; by the fame doft 'Thourule that com=

* mon


a)


Aa 7H A A A A A. A A


/


TRA RA OOP YS eS eee pe 8 EN Beh Oe Se 2 PHD ON BK 8 De wt


of RELIGION.


mon Reafon [ or Word ] which penetrates
through all ‘Things. So great and Supreme a
King art Thou always ; nor is there, O Spirit,
any Work done upon Earth without 'Thee,
nor in the ethereal and divine Heaven, nor in
the Sea, but what the Wicked do by their own
Foliy. Whatis difordered, 'Thou reduceft in-
to Order, and what is inimical, Thou rendreft
friendly to Thee. In fuch a Manner doft
Thou adjuft the confufed State of things,
good and bad, that there arifes a rational Sy-
{tem of Beings, perpetually going on, which
all the Wicked avoid, and will not acquiefce
in: Miferable as they are, who ftill, tho’ de-
firous of the Enjoyment of Happinefs, have no
Regard to the common Law of GOD, nor will
hearken thereto ; which if they would fubmit
to they might enjoy a found Mind, and a hap-
py Life: But they indeed do without Goodnefs
bend their Inclinations to feveral things; fome
affeét the troublefomeT oil of Ambition; others
turn themfelves to Covetoufnefs,: without any
Regard to Decency ; others give themfelves to
Reft, and the Pleafures of the Body. But do
Thou, O Fove, the Giver of all things, who
inhabiteft in the dark Clouds, and governeft
the Thunder, Deliver Men from their foolifh


and unhappy Inclinations, and drive fuch Paf-


fions away from their Souls. Grant them Skill
to underftand this Thy Determination, accord-
ing to which thou with Juftice governeft all
things ; that fowe, finding our felves honoured
of Thee, may pay back the Tribute of our
Honour to Thee, by celebrating thy Works in
our Hymns perpetually, as it becomes a Mor-


tal Being to do: For there is not any nobler


* thing


‘ene


A  flronomical Principles


—-_


Pp: 255.


P- 256.


PB 434


bid.


P+ 435°


P 436.


§ thing which either mortal Men, or the Gods
© themfelves can be employ’d in, than tocele«
€ brate righteoufly by Hymns the common Law
© of the entire Sy{tem.

 Cicero.| The Entire Nature of the Univerfe is
governed by the Force, Reafon, Power, Mind,
and Divinity of the Immortal Gods.

The Minds of Citizens ought to be firft of
all embued with a firm Perfuation that the Gods
are the Lords and Moderators of all things, and
that the Conduct and Management of the whole
World is directed and over-ruled by their Judg>
ment and Divine Power; that they delerve the
beft of Mankind; that they behold and confider
what every Man is, what he doth, and takes
upon himfelf; with what Mind, Piety, and Sin-
cerity he obferves the Duties.of Religion ; and,
Jaftly, that thefe Gods have a very different Re-
gard to the pious and the impious.

That there is fome moft excellent and eternal
Nature, which is to be admired and honoured
by Mankind, the Beauty of the World, and the
Order of the Heavenly Bodies compel us te
confefs. |

Who is fo mad or ftupid, as when he looks
up to Heaven is not prefently convinced there
are Gods? or can perfuade himfelf , that thofe
things which are made with fo much Mind and
Wifdom, as that no human Skillis able to reach
and comprehend the Artifice and Contrivance of
them, did all happen by Chance?

I fay that the World, and all its Parts, were
at firft conftituted by the Providence of the Gods:

We mutt needs acknowledge that the Benefits
of this Life, the Light which we enjoy, and


- the Spirit which we breathe, are imparted to us
_ from GOD. ere


of RELIGION.


209.


There is, there is certainly fuch a Divine
Force inthe World. Neither is it reafonableto
think that in thefe grofs and frail Bodies. of
ours, there fhould be fomething which hath Life,
Senfe, and Underftanding + and yet no fuch
thing in the whole Univerfe. Unlefs Men will
therefore conclude that there is none, becaufe
they fee it not: As if we could fee our own
Mind, (whereby we order and difpofe all things,


and whereby we reafon and {peak thus,) and |


perceive what kind of thing it is, and where it
is lodged.

Neither can GOD himfelf be underftood by
us otherwife than as a certain diftinét and free
Mind, feparate from all mortal Concretion,
which both perceives and moves all things.

When we behold thefe and other wonderful
Works of Nature, can we at all doubt but that
there prefideth over them either One Maker of


all, if they had a Beginning, as Plato conceiv-


eth ; or elfe, if they always were, as Arifotle
fuppofeth, One Moderator and Governor ?
Without Government neither any Houfe, nor
City, nor Nation, nor Mankind in general, nor
the entire Nature of things, nor the World it
felf could fubfift. For this alfo obeyeth GOD;
and the Seas and Earth are fubje¢ét to Him, and
the Life of Man is difpofed of by the Com-
mands of the Supreme Law. |
Whofoever thinketh that the admirable Order,


ibid,


ibid,


and incredible Conftancy of the Heavenly Bodies, Ray,ofttie
and their Motions, whereupon the Prefervation Creation,
and Welfare of all things doth depend, is not p- 67: 68


govern’d by Mind and Underftanding, he him-
elf is to be accounted void thereof. Shall
we,when we fee an artificial Engine, asa Sphere,
or Dial, or the like, at firft Sight acknowledge
| P | that


A ftronomical P rinciples


Fl a emma nena i iI RENTS 1 oP
that itisa Work of Reafon and Art? And can


Idem ap.
Ray. of
the Cre-
ation, p.
22h, 222


“Frenr ap.
Derlam ;
A firoiheol.
P45:


we, when we fee the Force of the Heavens,
mov’d and carried about with admirable Cele-
rity, moft conftantly finifhing its annual Revo
lutions, to the eminent Welfare and Preferva-
tion of all things, doubt at all that thefe things
are perform’d not only by Reafon, but by a cer-
tain excellent and divine Reafon ?

We might add many Reafons to this of the
Providence and Diligence, and Sagacioufneds of
Nature on our Account ; whereby we may be
fatisfied how great and eminent Bleflings are
peftowed on Men by GOD; who at firft raifed
them from the Ground, and fet them in an erect
and upright Pofture, that by viewing the Hea-
vens they might attain to the Knowledge of
the Gods. For Men are elevated from the Earth,
not like Inhabitants, but like Spectators of Hea-
venly things ;_ the Confideration of which be-
longs to no other Sort of Animals. ,

What can be fo plain and clear as when we
behold the Heavens and view the Heavenly Bo-
dies, that we fhould conclude there is fome De-
ity of a moft excellent Mind by which thefe
things are govern’d ? ----a prefent and an Al-


mighty God ; which he that doubts of, I do not


ibid, Ident,
p» 6d, OF,


underftand why he fhould not as well doubt
whether there be a Sun or no. ---- Time wears
out the Figments of Opinions, but confirms the
Judgments of Nature ; for which Reafon both
among our felves, and in other Nations, the
Veneration cf the Gods, and the Sacrednefs of
Religion, augment and improve every Day
more and more. » :
If thou fhould’ft fee a large and fairHoufe, thou
could’ft not be brought to imagine that(Houfe
was built by the Mice and Weezles ; altho’ thou
we | : fhould’ft


of RELIGION.


thouldeft not fee the Mafter thereof. So would’ft
thou not think thy felf very plainly to play the
Fool, if thou fhould’ft imagine fo orderly a
Frame of the World, fo great a Variety and
Beauty of Heavenly Things, fo prodigious a
_ Quantity and Magnitude of Sea and Land, to
_ be thy Houfe, thy Workmanship, and not that
of the Immortal Gods?


The fourth Caufe, and that even the chief, is Idem.ibid.


211.


the Equality of the Motion and Revolution of P'?°»
: . 106.


the Heavens ; the Diftinction, Unity, Beauty,
and Order of the Sun, Moon, and all the Stars;
_ the bare View alone of which Things is fufficient
to demonftrate them to be no Works of Chance.
As if any one fhould come into an Houfe, the


Gymnafium, or Forum, when he fhould fee the -


Order, Manner, and Management of every
Thing, he could never judge thefe Things to
be done without an Efficient ; but muft imagine
' there was fome Being prefiding over them, and
"whofe Orders they obeyed. Much more in fo
great Motions, fuch Viciflitudes, and the Or-
ders of fo many and great Things: ——- A Man
cannot but conclude that fuch great Acts of Na-


ture are governed by fome Mind.


So the Philofophers ought to have done, if Idem. ibid,


haply they had any Doubts at the firft View of Ps 7%


the World; afterwards, when they fhould be-
hold its Determinate and Equal Motions, and
all Things managed by eftablifhed Orders, and
with immutable Conftancy, they ought then to
underitand, that there is not only fome Inhabi-
tant in this Heavenly, this Divine Houte; but
“alfo fome Ruler and Moderator, and in a man
‘ner Architect of fo great 2 Work, fo noble a
Performance. !
| | Bea. . lt


|


i**


4


212


A | ftronomical Principles


Idem,ibid.
P- 212


=e te


Cudw. pe
439.


Proem.
pags 3 ; 5°


It was the Opinion of Ariffotle, that if there
were fuch a Sort of People that had always lived
under the Earth, in good and fplendid Habita-
tions, adorned with Imagery and Piétures, and
furnithed with all Things that thofe accounted
happy abound with ; and fuppofing that thefe
People had never at any Time gone out upon
the Earth, but only by Report had heard there
was fuch a Thing as the Deity, and a Power of
the Gods ; andthat at a certain Time afterwards
the Earth fhould open, and this People get out
from their hidden Manfions into the Place we
inhabit,when on the fudden they fhould fee the
Earth, the Seas, and the Heavens ; perceive the
Magnitude of the Clouds, and the Force of the
Winds, behold the Sun, and its Grandeur, and
Beauty, and know its Power in making the Day,
by diffufing its Light through the whole Hea-


vens ; and when the Night had overfpread the


Earth with Darknefs, they fhould difcern the
Heavens befpread and adorned with Stars, and
fee the Variety of the Moon’s Phafes, in her
Increafe and Decreafe, together with her Ri-
fings and Settings, and the ftated and immutable
Courfes of all thefe through all Eternity; this
People, when they fhould fee all thefe Things,
would infallibly imagine that there are Gods,
and that thofe grand Works were the Works of
the Gods.

Varro.| 'Thefe alone feem to Varro to have
underftood what GOD is, who believed him
to be a Soul, governing the whole World, by
Motion and Reafon.

The Sybiline Orables.|O Mortal, Carnal, and
Vile Men! How foon are you puft up ? not


confidering that you muft die. You don’ttremble


at,


tne eee


of RELIGION. 213


at, and fear the Supreme GO D who governs
you, who knows, fees, and obferves all Things ;
who is the Creator that preferves all Things ;
who fent his pleafant Spirit into all Things ; and
made him the Governor of all Mankind. There
is One GOD, whoalone Reigns: He is very
Great, Unbegotten, Omnipotent, Invifible. He
alone fees all 'Things, but cannot be feen by any
Mortal; for what Flefh can behold the Cele-
ftial, 'True, and Immortal GOD with his Eyes,
_ who lives in Heaven ? fince Men who are born
_ Mortals, of Bones, Flefh, arid Veins, cannot
ftedfaftly behold the fhining Beams of the Sun,
Worfhip Him who isthe Only Governor of the
World ; who alone is frem Everlafting to Ever-
lafting : He exifts from himfelf, is Unbegotten ;
He Governs all Things at all Times,and He hath
ordained a Judgment for all Men inone common
Day. --« Behold, He is manifeftto all, andis no Pp: 5
Deceiver.Come therefore, and do not purfue this
dark and tempeftuous way [_ of Idolatry and Po-
lytheifm ] any longer. Behold the pleafant Light
of the Sun fhines glorioufly. Know, and wifely
confider it, there is One GOD, who gives
Rain, and Winds; He caufes Earthquakes, Thun-
ders, Famines, Plagues, Snow, Ice, and fuch
grievous Calamities. But why dol reckon up
every Particular ? He commands in Heaven, and
Zoverns in the Earth, and really exifts.
__ There isOne only Supreme GOD,whohath |...
created Heaven, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and ‘
the fruitful Earth, and the {welling Waves of the
Sea, the Mountains full of Woods, and the eter-
Nal Streams of the Fountains. He produceth an
innumerable Quantity of Fifh in the Waters ;


and He nourifheth the creeping Creatures
ce | P 3 with.


Bre


214 Aftronomical Principles


with a cool Diet: And he gives to the {wift
Birds of various Kinds, harfh and pleafant
Notes,and to cutthe Air with their noify Wings 5 _
and He hath put the wild Beafts in the Hills,
covered with Wood ; and hath fubjected all
Beafts to Mankind: But hath made Man His ©
peculiar Workmanfhip, the Governor of all
Things ; and hath fubjected to him many vari-
ous Creatures which he cannot comprehend:
For what mortal Man can know all Things 2
But he only knows them who made them in the
“Beginning ; whois the incorruptible and eternal
Creator, living in Heaven; who gives to all
Good Men avery great Reward; but is angry
with the Unjuft, and Wicked, and punifhes them
by Wars, Plagues, and extraordinary Calamities.
rei Diodorus Siculus of the old Chaldeans. | 'The
BP. *9" Chaldeans affirm the Nature of the World to be
eternal; and that it was neither generated from

any Beginning, nor will ever admit Corruption.

They believe alfo, that the Orderand Difpofiti-

on of the World, is by acertain Divine Provi-

dence ; and that every one of thofe Things which

come to pafs in the Heavens, happens not by

Chance, but bya certain determinate and firmly

ratified Judgment of the Gods. "
' Ovid. | Of the Creation, fee the Beginning —

of his Metamorphofes at large. Other Paflages
out of Plautys, Virgil, Horace, and the reft of

the Poets are common, but here omitted for the

Sake of Brevity, andto leave Room for other
Teftimonies. ‘ iad :
p47. | Strabo.| Strabo affirms that the World was
"the joint Work of Nature and Providence ; =
which Providence, having a manifold Fecundity —
in it, and delighting in Variety of Works, it
Pe AF eee hey é, : 4) vi * ‘ defigned


of RELIGION,. 215


eee


defigned principally to make’ Animals, as the
moftexcellent Things; and among them chietly
thofe Two nobleft kinds of Animals, Gods,
and Men; for whofe Sakes the ether Things
were made; and then affigned Heaven to the
Gods, and Earth to Men, the two extreme Parts
of the World, for their refpeétive Habitations.
- Strabo teftifies of the ancient. Indian Brach- p. 504
_ mans, that in many ‘Things they philofophiz’d
after the Grecian Manner ; as when they affirm,
that the World had a Beginning, and that it
would be corrupted, andthatthe Maker and Go-
vernor thereof pervades the whole of it.

Seneca. |GOD, when He laid the Foundation
of this moft beautiful Fabrick, and began to
erect that Struéture, than which Nature knows
nothing greater or more excellent; tothe End
that all Things might be carried on under their
refpective Governors orderly, though he intend-
ed himfelf through the whole, as to prefide in
chief overall; yet did He generate Gods alfo, as
fubordinate Minifters of His Kingdom under
Him.

Seneca calls GOD, the Framer and Former p. 440.
of the Univerfe : [The Governor, Difpofer, and
Keeper thereof; Him upon whom all ‘Things
depend: The Mind and Spirit of the World:

The Artificer and Lord of this whole mundane
Fabrick: ‘To whomevery Name belongs: From
whom all ‘Things fpring: By whofe Spirit we
jive: Who is in all His Parts, and fuftaineth
Himfelfby His own Force: By whofe Counfel
the World is provided for, and carried on in its
Courfe, conftantly and uninterruptedly: By
whofe Decree all things aredone: The Divine
“Spiritthat is diffugd through all Things, both
great and{mall, inanequal Degree: ‘The GOD
Pa P4 whofe


. 2470


216


Mr. Der-
bam's A-
ftrotheol.
p- 2176
ex Epift.
I17e


A 'ftronomical Principles


whofe Power extendsto all Things: ‘The Great-
eft and moft Powerful GOD, who doth Himfelf
{npport and uphold all Things: Whois prefent
every where to all Things: The GOD of Hea-
ven, and of all the Gods; upon whom are fuf-
pended all thofe cther Divine Powers which we
{ingly worfhip and adore.

Seneca inftanceth in two Things that have
the Confent of Mankind for them ; the Im-
mortality of the Soul ; andthe Exiftence of the
Deity : Which, faith he, among other Argu-
ments, we collect from the innate Opinion


_ Which all Men have of the Gods. For there is.


“AY? bo-
gus Viris;
xe. 1.
ib.p, 217)
218.


no Nation in the World fovoid of Law and Mos
rality, 2s not to believe but there are fome
Gods. They lie, that fay they believe there
isnoGOD: For altho’ by Day they imay affirm
{fo tothee, yet by Night they are to themfeives
conf{cious of the contrary. ) Pht
Scneca takes it for granted, that there is fuch
a Thing as a Divine Power and Providence,
governing the World, andhefaith, It wasneed-
lefs for him‘to fhew that fo great a Work [asthe
World| could not ftand without fome Ruler ;
that fo regular Motions of the Stars could not
be the Effects of a fortuitous Force ; and thatthe
Impulfes of Chance mutt be oftentimes difturb’d
and juftle ; that this undifturbed Velocity, which
bears the Weight offo many Things in theEarth, —
and Seas, with fo great a Number of Heavenly
Lights, both very illuftrious and alfo fhining,
according toa Manifeft Regularity, muftneeds
proceed by the Direction of fome Eternal Law:
‘That this can never be the Order of ftraggling
Matter ; neither is it pofiible for things fortui-
toufly and rafhly combin’d todepend upon, and
manifeft fo much Art. Quintilian |


of RELIGION.» 217


Quintilian.| GOD isa Spirit, mingled with, p. 440,
and. diffusd through all the Parts of the 504
World.

Plutarch. | It is better for us to follow Plato,
and loudly to declare that the World was made
by GOD. For as the World is the beft of
Works, fois GOD the beft of allCaufes. Ne-
verthelefs, the Subftance or Matter out of which
the World was made, was not it felf made, but
always ready at hand, and {ubject to the Artificer,
to be ordered and difpofed by Him. For thema-
king of the World was not the Production of it
out of nothing, but out of an anteceedent, bad.
and diforderly State; like the making of an
Houfe, Garment, or Statue.

GOD {feems to excel in thefe three Things ; p. 203.
Incorruptibility, Power, and Virtue : Of all
which the moft divine and venerable is Virtue.

For Vacuum, and the fenfelefs Elements have In-
corruptibility : Earthquakesand Thunder, Blu-
ftring Winds, andover-flowing Torrents, much
of Power and Force: Wherefore the Vulgar be-
ing affected three Manner of ways towards the
Deity, fo asto Admire its Happinefs ; to Fear it ;
and to Honour it; they Efteem the Deity Happy
for its Incorruptibility: They Fear it, and ftand
in Awe of it for its Power; but they Worfhip
it, that is, Love and Honour it, for its Juftice.

Whereas there are twoCaufes of allGeneration. P+ 3050
( the Divine and the Natural, ) the moft Ancient
Theologers and Poets attended only tothe more
excellent of thefe two, ( the Divine Caufe;) re -
folving all Things into GOD, and pronouncing
this ofthem univerfally, That Jove was both the
Beginning, and Middle, and that all Things
were out of Jove; [ astheOrphick Verfehas it. |

| Infomuch


P> 197.


t


213


A 'ftronoutical Principles


Pp» 425»
424


Infomuch that thefe had no regard at all to the
other natural and neceffary Caufes of Things.
But on the contrary, their Juniors, who were
called Naturalifts, ftraying trom this moft ex-
cellent and divine Principle, placed allin Bodies,
their Affections, Collifions, Mutations, and
Mixtures together. |
Neither is it at all confiderable what the Sto-
icks here object againft a Plurality of Worlds ;
they demanding how there could be but one
Fate, and one Providence, andone ove, (Corin-
dependent Deity, ) were there many Worlds?
For what Neceflity is there that there mnft be
more Foves than one, if there were more
Worlds? And why mightnot that One and the
fame GOD of the Univerfe, call’d by us the Lord


. and Father of all, bethe firft Prince, and High-


Plut. de
placit.Phil.
Ie 6.


eft Governor in all thofe Worlds ? Or what hin-
ders but that a Multitude of Worlds might be all
fubjeét tothe Fate and Providence of one Fove,
or Supreme GOD? Himfelf infpecting and or-
dering themevery one, and imparting Principles
and Spermatick Influences tothem, according to
which all Things in them might be governed
and difpofed. For can many diftiné Perfons in
an Army, or Chorus, be reduc’d into ane Body
or Polity, and could not ten, or fifty, or a
hundred Worldsinthe Univerfe be all govern’d
by One Reafon, and be ordered together in re-
ference to One Principle. | See Page 4.59.

Men began to acknowledge a GOD, when
they faw the Stars maintain fo great an Harmo-
ny, and the Days and Nights, both in Summer,
and Winter, to obferve their ftated Rifings and
Settings, cee


Bion


of RELIGION, 219


Dion Chryfoftom.|)'The whole World is un- Cudw.
der a Kingly Power, or Monarchy. ---- The P: 443»
Supreme GOD is the common King of Gods 4+.
and Men, their Governor and Father : The
GOD that rules over all: The Firft and Great-
eft GOD: Thechief Prefident over all Things ; |
who orders and guides the whole Heaven and
World; asa wife Pilot deth a Ship: The Ru-
ler of the whole Heaven, and Lord of the
whole Subftance of Things. Concerning
the Nature of the Gods in general, but efpe-
cially of that Supreme Ruler over all, there is
an Opinion in all Human Kind, as well Barba-
vians as Greeks, that is naturally implanted in
them, as rational Beings, and not deriv’d from
any Mortal Teacher. |
~ Galen.| Should I any longer infift upon fuch ,
Brutifh Perfons as thofe, the Wife and So- ' “*
ber might juftly condemn me, as defiling
this Holy Oration, which I compofe as a
true Hymn to the Praife of Him that Made
us ; I conceiving true Piety and Religion to-
wards GOD to confift in this, not that I
fhould facrifice many Hecatombs, or burn
much Incenfe to Him; but that I fhould
my felf firft acknowledge, and then declare
to others, how great His Wifdom is, how
great His Power, and how great His Goodnefs.

For that He would adorn the whole World
after this Manner, envying to nothing that
Good which it was capatle of, I conclude
to be a Demonftration of mult abfolute Good-
nefs: And thus let Him be Praifed by us as
Good. And that He was able to find out how all
‘Things might. be adorn’d after the beft Many
mer, is a Sign of the greateft Wifdom in Him.
Paros: And


. —_—— anne : . sessninipatenenntittibteonateteli


220


A ftronomical Principles


p. 445


BP 51]


And laftly, to be able to effect and bring to
pafs all thofe Things which he had thus de-
creed, argues an infuperable Power. | See much
more to this Purpofe 4 in bis admirable Book,
De Ufu Partium. | iM
Maximus Tyrius.\ 1 will now more plainly.
declare my Senfe by this Similitude : Imagine
in your Mind a great and powerful Kingdomor
Principality, in which all the reft freely and
with one Confent confpire to direct their
AGtions agreeable to the Will and Command
of One Supreme King, the Oldeft and the
Beft : And then fupppofe the Bounds and Li-
mits of this Empire not to be the River Halys,
nor the Helefpont, nor the Lake of Maotis,
nor the Shores of the Ocean ; but Heaven above,


. and the Earth beneath. Here then let that great


King fit Immoveable, prefcribing Laws to all
His Subjeéts ; in which confifts their Satety
and Security: The Conforts of his Empire
being many, both vifible and invifible Gods ;.
Some of which, that are neareft to him, and
immediately attending on Him, are in the
higheft Royal Dignity, feafting, as it were,
at the fame Table with Him. Others again
are their Minifters and Attendants ; and a
third Sert Inferior to them both. And thus
you fee how the Order and Chain of this
Government defcends down by-Steps and De-.
grees from the Supreme GOD, to. the Earth,
and Men.

The End of your Journey is not the Hea-
ven, nor thofe fhining Bodies in the Heaven ;
for tho’ thofe be beautiful, and divine, and
the genuine Off-fpring of the Supreme Dei-

. tYs.


of RELIGION.
try, framed after the beft Manner; yet ought
all thefe to be tranfcended by you, and your
Heart lifted up far above the ftarry Heavens,
[ to the Father and Maker of all Things. |


221


Macrobius.| 'The whole World is well cal- p. 53


led the Temple of GOD, in way of Oppofi-
tion to thofe who think GOD to be nothing
~ elfe but the Heaven it felf, and thofe Celeftial


Things which we fee. Wherefore Cicero, that


he might fhew the Omnipotence of the Firft
and Supreme GOD to be fuch as could fcarcely
be underftood, but not at all perceiv’d by
Senfe; He calleth whatfoever falleth under Hu-
man Sight, His Temple ; that fo he that wor-
fhippeth thefe Things, as the Temple of GOD,
might in the mean time remember, that the
chief Worfhip is due to the Maker and Creator
of them. As alfo that himfelf ought to live
in the World like His Prieft ; holily and religi-
oufly.

sd irieaé, of the old Zgyptian Theology. |
They affert that GOD, who is the Caufe of
Generation, and of entire Nature, and of all
_ the Powers in the Elements themfelves, is fe-


P
3


parate, exempt, elevated above, and expanded °


over all the Powers and Elements in the World.
For being above the World, and tranfcending
the fame, Immaterial, and Incorporeal, Above
Nature, Unmade, Indivifible, manifefted wholly
from Himfelf, and in Himfelf, He rules over
all things; and in himfelf containeth all 'Things ;
and becaufe he virtually comprehends all Things,
therefore does he impart and difplay the fame
from Himfelf.


Minutius


» 3359.


Af
> ?
36.,


222


Tranflated
by Mr.
eeves.


Afironoutical Principles


Minutius Felix, in part from the old Philo-
fophers. | §. X VIL. Nor dol deny, what Cecilaus
has taken fo much painsto prove, that Man muft
learn to know himfelf, and diligently examine
his Nature, his Original, and the End of his
Being ; whether he was only a mere Concretion


~ of the Elements, and thus admirably adjufted by


blind Atoms; or made, and fafhioned, and ani-
mated by God. But this we cannot apprehend
without ftudying the World, and its Maker ; for
thefe Things are fo clofely conneéted and chain’d
together, that you muft diligently examine the
Nature of God, before you can underftand that
of Man ; nor can you ever be a good Citizen of
the World, before this common City of us All,
the World and You, are well acquainted; and


. certainly, fince in this chiefly it is that we differ


from Beafts, that whereas they are prone to
Earth, and bent downward by Nature, and
fram’d to look no farther than the good of their
Bellies; yet Man is made erect and upright,
and by that Make form’d for the Contemplation
of Heaven, and has Language and Reafon to
conduct him to the Knowledge and Imitation
of God; for a Creature fo conftituted to be igno-
rant of his Maker, to wink as hard as he can,
that he may not fee that Glorious Being that is
thrufting in at his Eyes, and knocking for Ad-
miffion at all his Senfes, is the moft inexcufable
Ignorance imaginable. For ‘tis moft abominable
Sacrilege to be Poring upon Earth, for that -
which you are only to find in Heaven. For
which reafon I can hardly think that fuch Men
have the ufe of their Soul or Senfes, no not of
their very Eyes, who cannot fee this glorious
Machine of the Univerfeto bethe Work of Di-

vine:


of RELIGION.


vine Wifdom, but dream that ’twas jumbled to-
gether by a fortuitous Concourfe of Atoms. For
what is fo clear and undeniable, when you lift
up your Eyes to Heaven, and when you look
down upon all about you, than that there is a
Deity of moft excellent Underftanding, that
infpires, moves, fupports, and governs all Na-
ture ? Confider the vaft Expanfe of Heaven, and
the Rapidity of its Motion, either when it is
ftudded with Stars by Night, or enlighten’d
with the Sun by Day ; then fhall you fee that
Almighty Hand which poifes them in their
Orbs, and balances them in their Movement.
Behold how the Sun girds up and regulates the
Year by its Annual Circuit, and how the Moon
meafures round a Month by its Increafe, Decay,
and total Difappearance. What need I mention
the conftant Vicifficudes of Light and Darknefs,
for thealternate Reparation of Reft and Labour ;
I muft leave it to Aftrologers to tell you more at
large the Ufes of the Stars, either how they
direct the Pilot in Navigation, or the Husband-
man in his Seafons of Plowing and Reaping ;
every one of which Celeftial Bodies, as they


requir’d Almighty Power and Wifdom at firft to.


create and range them in their Stations, fo do
they require the moft confummate Wifdom and
Sagacity to comprehend.them now they are
created. Moreover, does not the ftanding Va-
riety of Seafons marching in goodly Order te-
ftify the Divine Author ? The Spring with her
Flowers, the Summer with her Harvefts, and
the Ripening Autumn with grateful Fruits, and
the moift and un¢tuous Winter, are all equally
neceffary ; which Order had certainly been di-
_ fturbed before now, had it not been fix’d by the

| 2 wifeft


“«


223


ae A ftronomical Principles


wifeft Power. What an Argument of a Provi-
dence is it, thus to interpofe and moderate the
Extremes of Winter and Summer, with the
Allays of Spring and Autumn, that we pafs the
Year about with Security and Comfort, between
the exceffes of Parching Heat and Cold ? Ob-
ferve the Sea, and you'll find it bounded with a
Shore, a Law it cannot tranfgrefs ; look into
the vegetable World, and fee how all the Trees
draw their Life from the Bowels of the Earth ;
view the Ocean in conftant Ebb and Flow, and
the Fountains running in full Veins, and the
Rivers perpetually gliding in their wonted
Channels. What need I {pend more Words to
fhew, how providentially this Spot of Earth is
canton’d out into Hills, and Dales, and Plains?
What need I {peak of the various Artillery for
the Defence of every Animal? Some arm’d
with Horns, or hedg’d about with Teeth, or
fortify’d with Hoots and Claws, or fpear’d with
Stings ; and others either fwift of Foot, or
Wing? But above all, the beautiful Struéture
of Man moft plainly fpeaks a God ; Man of
Stature ftraight, and Vifage erect, with Byes
at top like Centries, watching over the other
Senfes within the ‘Tower. ~ :

XVIII. But I fhou’d never come to an end,
was L to travel through Particulars ; there is not
any one Part in Man, but is either neceffary
or ornamental. And what is ftill more miracu-
lous, isto finda general Refemblance in all, and
diftinguifhing Features in each ; fo that the
whole Species is alike, and yet not one Indi-
vidual, without fome difcriminating Character.
What think you of the manner of our Birth,
and the Inftin&t of Generation ? Who but ae

! cou'c


of RELIGION.


cou’d turn the Courfe of Nature againft fucha
Time, to fill thé Breafts with Milk for the
ripening Embryo, and fuckle the tender Infant
with that Plenty of lacteal Dew ? Nor does God
provide only for Univerfals but takes care alfo
of Particulars. Britain is made amends with
the warm Vapours of the circumambient Séa
for its deficiency of Sun. Nile ferves Egypt for
Rain. Euphrates cultivates Mefopotamia ; and
Indus is faid both to water and fow the Eaft
with the Seeds it difcharges into it. Shouwd
you chance to go intoa Houfe, and fee all the
Rooms exquifitely furnifh’d, and kept in great
order, you wou’d make no difpute but fuch a


-Houfe was under the Care and Infpéction of a.


Mafter, and that he himfelf was preferable to
‘all the Furniture. Thus in this Palace of thé
World, when you caft your Eyes upon Heaven
and Earth, and behold the admirable Order and.
Oeconomy of Things, you have as little reafon
to queftion whether there is a Lord of the Uni-
verfe, and that he himfelf is more glorious than
the Stars, and more to be admir’d than the
Works of his own Hands. But perhaps you
may have no Scruples concerning a Providence,
but only whether the Heavenly Government is
lodg’d in One, or a Plurality of Deities; And.
this is eafily decided, if you'll give your felf
but the Trouble to look abroad into the King-
idoms of the World, from which you may col-
‘leét the Regimen or Form above. For wher
did youever know any Gopartnerfhip in a King
dom commence with Integrity, or conclude
without Blood? Not to mention the Grandees
of Perfia, who confulted the Neighing of 2
Horfe in the Election of Kings, nor to revive
“= the


228


226


Aftronomical F rinciples


the old Story of the Theban Pair dead and
gone ; the fital Diffention of the Roman Bro-
Syers for a Kingdom of Shepherds and Shep- —
herds Sheds, is famous all the World over. The
Wars of Father and Son-in-Law, Caefar and
Pompey, fhook the Earth ; and. all the Roman


| Empire was not big enough to hold Two Men. .


See Examples of another kind ; the Bees have
but one King, and the Flocks and Herds but
one Leader ; and can you imagine ‘Two Su-
remes in Heaven, and that Almighty Power
‘s divifible? Since *tis manifeft, that God, the
Univerfal Parent, has neither Beginning nor
End ; but gave Beginning to Ail, and Eternity
+o himfelf ; who before the World was, was a
World to himfelf ; who commands all Things
by his Word, and difpenfes them by his Wil-
dom, and confummates them by his Power.
This God is Invifible, becaufe of his Bright-
nefs inacceflible ; and not tangible, becaufe
Incorporeal 5 and Incomprehenfible, becaufe too
great for our Capacity Infinite, Immenfe, and
this Immenfity intelligible by himfelf only.
Our Intelleét is too narrow to contain him,
and therefore we never conceive {fo worthily of
him, as when we conceive him Unconceivable,
Shall I fpeak my Senfe of this Matter ? Who-
ever imagines that he knows the Divine Majeftys
jeffens it; and whoever does not leffen it, can
never pretend to know it. Enquire not his
Name, for God is his Name, and there only we
ufe Names, where many Individuals are to be
diftinguifh’d by their proper Appellations ; but:
to God, who is but One, the Name of God is
all in all; for if I call him Father, you forth-
with conceive of him,as an Barthly Parent 5 if
King
4


of RELIGION,


King or Lord, your Fancy cloaths him with fuch
ideas as thofe Words ftand for with Men. Take
but away this human Covering of Words, and
you'll fee the Divine. Nature the better: Morez
over, have [not all the World on my Side in
the Acknowledgment of this One God? I hear’
the People when they lift up their Hands to
Heaven, fay nothing elfe, but Zhe God, The
Sreat God, The true God; and if it fhall pleafe


God. This Expteffion in the Vulgar, is the:


Voice of Nature; and is it not alfo the Con-


feffion of Chriftiahs ? And they who make Fove


the Supreme Deity; miftake indeed in the Name;
but agree in the Thing, in the Notion of One
Almighty. : |

XIX. I find the Poets likewife finging of one
Sovereign Deity, Father of Gods and Men, and
who fafhion’d our Souls according to his own
Will and Pleafure. What fays Virgil of Man-


tua ¢ Does not he yet fpeak more plait, and _


neareft to Truth ? Ju the Beginning Cfays he)
a Spirit quicken’a Heaven and Earth, and all
the Parts of the Univerfe, and a Mind infusd
atiuated the whole Mafs, the Author of Men and
Beafis, and every Animal. The fame Poet ir
another place calls this Mind and Spirit, God
his Words are thefe,


—— Deum namque ire per ones —
Yerrafq; trattufg, maris, calumg; profundum 3
Unde bontines & pecudes, unde imber 8 ignes:


Earth, Heavens Seas ali Natures vaft Abyfs
Does God pervade and fill.
Hence Mau, and Beaft ; Storm, and red Lights


ning bences
| QZ And


42%


Gen. 1. Qe


A ftronomical Principles


And what ether God do we Chriftians preach
up, than Mind, and Reafon, and Spirit ? Let us
run over the Doétrine of the Philofophers, if
you pleafe, and you'll. find them, though dif-
terently expreffing themfelves in Words, yet as
to the Thing, all confpiring in one and the fame
Opinion. I omit the ancient Wife Men of
Greece, defervedly focall’d upon the account of
their Sayings. Let Z/ales the Milefian, the Prin-
cipal of them, ferve for the re{t, who was the
firft that difcours’d accurately concerning Hea-
venly Matters. This fame Milefian Thales af=
firm’d Water to be. the Principle of Things ;
but withal, that God was that Mind which
form’d every Being out of this Fluid into a
World. But let me tell you, this Account of
Water and the Spirit was a Notion far above
the reach of any Mortal, had not God, who was
that Spirit, reveal’d it to Mofes. Thus you fee
how the principal Philofopher exaétly concurs
with us Chriftians. After him Ananimences,
and then Diogenes firnamed Apolloniates, make
God of a Nature Aerial; Infinite; and Immenfe.
Thefe then agree with us in the Doétrine of
One God.The God of Anaxagoras, isan Infinite
Mind that difpofes and puts every Thing in
Motion ; and the God of Pythagoras, is a Mind
that permeates and takes care of the Univerfe,
and is the Original of all Life. Xenopbanes is
well known to have defined God to be an Ani-
mated Infinite. Auti/thenes holds a Plurality of
Gods over feveral Nations, but one only Deity
Supreme by Nature. Speufippus is for that na=
tural, animal Virtue, by which All things are
conducted, to be God. Does not Democritus,

although


‘of RELIGION.


229


although the firft Inventor of the Atomick Phi-
lofophy, does nothe often {peak of that Nature,
which is the Author’ of thofe Images and Inten-
tional Species, by which we underftand, and
feel, and fee, €8c. as God ? Strato likewife fets
up Nature for God: Even your famous Epzcurus,
who makes either Unactive, or No Gods, Dei-
fies’ Nature. Ariffotie isat Variance with him-
felf: however he affigns one Sovereign Power ;
for one*'while he calls Mind God, another
while the World he will have God, and then
again he makes God above the World. Hera-
clidesof Pontus reels aboutin the fame manner 5
howevery he afcribes‘a Divine Mind to God, or
élfeto'the World, or elfe makes a pure Divine
Mind bit felf to-be God. Zheophrafius; and
Zend, atid Chryfippusyand Cleanthes, though all
at Difference,” yet'at the long run they all meet
in the’ Notion of one’Providence that fuperin-
tends ithe World... For Cleanthes fometimes
makés God’ to'be a Mind, fometimes a Soul,
fometimes Zther, and fometimes Reafon. His
Matter Zeno makes the Natural and Divine Law
in’"Thingsto be God; and fometimes Zrher, and
fometimes Reafon, to be the Fountain’ of all.
This*fame Philofopher, methinks, by calling
Funoy Kir, Fupiter Heaven, ‘Neptune Sea, Vul~
can Fire, and all the reft likewife of the-Popular
Gods, Elements, by fuich! Names feverely con-
fates, and lathes the Publick Vanity. of wor-
fhipping'fuch Deities. « Chryfippus Lays; much,
the fame Things ; for he believes God fometimes.
to bea Divine Energy, aRational Nature's and
then againthe World; andthen fatal Neceflity
_antd copies “after Zena by interpreting the Fables

hy ; 4:


Aftronomtical P riaciples


of theGods in the Verfes of Hefiod, Homer and


Orpheusj into Natural Principles. And Dzogenes
the Babylonian, expounds the lying-in of ‘Tove,
and the Birth of Minerva, and fuch like Fitti-
ons, not of the Gods, but of Nature... Xeno-
phon, the Difciple of Socrates, afirms,the Form
of the true God to be Invifible, and therefore
not to be fearch’d after. -Arifto of Chios affirms
him likewife to be Incomprehenfible; .and both
the one and the other underftood ‘the Divine
Majefty beft, by defpairing to underftand: it.
But of all the Philofophers, P/ato; deliver’d
himfelf the plaineft and trueft of God, of Things,
and Names ; ‘and his Difcourfes had been:purely
Divine, ‘had he not fometimes. comply’ too-fan


_ with the Vanities of the Age, andiallay’d them


with the Errors in Fafhion.. This fame Plato
therefore in his Zimeus fays, That by the Name
God, we are to underftand. the Parent: of the
World, the Architect of the Soul, andthe Ma-=
ker of Heaven and Earth ; whom it is‘hard to
underftand, by reafon of ‘his incredible _Immen-).
fity of Power, which: is too much for Hufhan
Intelle@ ; and when we do come to the Know-
ledge of Him, ’tis impoffible to make our No-}
tions intelligible to All. cAnd we Chriftiang als"
moft fay the fame Things 5 | for we’are: come to,
the Knowledge of this true»God, and we alfo.
call him the Parent-of all Things ; nor do|we:
preach thefe ‘Divine Myfteries in Pablick, ‘but:
when ‘the Publick calls us in Queftion about:
our Rieligion) © 79050 > > eon T Steet SHS
XX I have now run over the Opinions al:
moft of all. the Philofophers, ) thofe: of; Note:
efpecially, whereby tis evident, they pike
) fy clare


A
of RELIGION. SFr.


clare for one God, though under different De-
nominations ; infomuch, that ev’ry one muft
conclude, either. that the Chriftians now are
Philofophers, or that the Philofophers of old
were Chriftians. |.
- Lord Bacon. \\ had rather believe all the Fables Effay on

inthe Legend, and the Lalmud, and the Alcoran, 4rheifm.
than that this Univerfal Frame is without a Mind.
And therefore God never wrought a Miracle to
convinte: Atheifin, becaufe his ordinary Works
- corivince it. It is true, that a little Philofophy
inclineth Man’s Mind to Athei/in, but Depth in
Philofophy bringeth Mens Minds about to Re/-
gion. For while the Mind of Man looketh upon
Second Caufes fcattered, it may fometimes reft in
thém, and gono further: But when it beholdeth
the Chain of them Confederate and Linked toge-
ther, it muft needs fly to Providence and Deity. —
 M. Boyle. |'The Power and: Wifdom of God Of the Ve-
difplay themfelves by what he does, in reference neration
both to his Corporeal aind’his Incorporeal Crea- M27’ In-
tures. Among the manifold Effeéts of the Di- ue
vine Power, my intended Brevity willallow me jo, “8
to‘mention only 'T'wo or Three, which tho’ ta
difcerning Eyes they be very manifeft, are not
wont'to’ very attentively reflected on. The
Immenfe Quantity of Corporeal Subftance, that
the Divine Power provided for the framing of
_ the Univerfe; and the Great Force of the Local

Motion that was imparted to it, and is regulated
in it. ‘And firft, the Va/ine/s of that huge Mafs
of Matter that this’Corporeal World confifts of,
cannot ‘but appear ftupendious to thofe that skil-
fully contemplate it. "That part of the Univerfe
which has been “already difcovered by Human
Eyes, affifted with Dioptrical Glaffes, is almoft

| Q 4 uncon-


ps T2e


A [ftronomical Principles


unconceivably vaft, as will be eafily granted, if
we affent to what the beft Aftronomers, as well
Modern as Ancient, fcruple not to deliver. [See
Pag. $6, 57.above. | And it plainly appears by the


Parallaxesy and other Proofs, that this Globe-of


Earth and Water that we Inhabit, and often call


the World, though it be divided into,fo many


great Empires and Kingdoms, is fo far from be-
ing for its Bulk a confiderable part of the Uni-
verfe ; that, without much Hyperbole, we may
fay, that “tis in Comparifon thereof, but a
Phyfical Point. Nay, thofe far. greater Globes
of the Sun, and other fixed) Stars, and all the
folid Maffes of the World to boot, if they were
reduc’d into One, would perhaps bear a le{s Pro=
portion to the Fluid [empty | part of the Uni-
verfe, than a Nut to the Ocean. Which, brings
into my Mind the Sentence ofan excellent mo-
dern Aftronomer. ‘hat the Stars of the: Sky, if
they were crouded into One Body, and placed
where the. Earth is, would, if. that Globe were
placed at a fit Diftance, appear no bigger than
a Star.of the firft Magnitude now does... And
after all this, I muft remind you, that I have
been hitherto, {peaking but of that part of the
Corporeal Univerfe that has been already feen by
us.. And therefore I muftiadd, that as vaft.as
this is,, yet all, that the Eye, even. when power
fully promoted by -profpective Tubes hath dif+


covered to us, is far from reprefenting the World


of fo great an Extent, as I doubt not-but more
perfect 'Tclefcopes hereafter will do. ——-From


the vaft Extent of the Univerfe, I now:proceed


to confider, the ftupendious Quantity of Local
Motion, that the Divine Power has given
the Parts of it, and continually maintains in it.
) ry eet | See


c


of RELIGION. 233


[ See Pag.53,54.préus, |--- Thefe Things are men- p. 21.

_ tion’d, that we may have the more enlarg’d Con-

ceptions of the Power, as wellas Wz/dom of the

Great Creator, who has put fo wonderful a:

Quantity of Motion into the Univerfal Matter,

and maintains it therein; and is able not only to

fet Bounds to the. raging Sea, and effectually

fay to it, Hitherto fhalt thou come, and no far- 19},

ther; aud here fhall thy proud Waves be flayed: xxxviii.

But ( what is far more) fo | by the Power of.1t-

Gravity | to curb and moderate thofe ftupen-

dioufly rapid Motions of the Mundane Globes,

and intercurrent. Fluzds, | rather, zn the iuter-

posd Vacuities | that neither the Unweil~

dinefs of their Bulk, nor Celerity of their

Motions have made them exorbitate, or fly out,

and this for many Ages; during which, no

Watch for a few Hours has gone fo regularly.

The Contrivance of every Animal, and efpe- 4,

cially of a Human Body, is fo, curious and ex-

quifite, that ‘tis almoft impoffible for any

hody that has not feen.a Diffection well made,

and Anatomically confider’d, to imagine or

eonceive how fuch excellent Workmanfhip is

difplay’d ‘in that admirable Engine. ---1. thall

here tell you in aword,. Cand ’tisno Hyperbole, )

that ag St..Pan/faid onanother.Occafion, .fhat x Cor. i.

the Foolifh Things of God ave wifer than Men 525.

and the weak Things of .God fironger than Men :

So we may-fay, thatthe meaneft Living Crea-

tures of. God’s. making, are far more. witely

contriyd. than the moft excellent pieces of

_ Workmanfhip that Human Heads and Hands can p. 25.
boaft of. . And no Watch nor Clack inthe World

is any way-comparable for Exquifitenefs of Me-

chanifm to the Body of even an A/s or a Frog.

s=- We need not fly to Imaginary ultramundane

* | Spaces,


*
5°


Jere AS ECL LLL SA


an | Aftronomical Principles


Spaces to be convine’d that the Effects of the
Power and Wifdom of God are worthy of - their
Caufes, and not near adequately underftood by’
us; if, with fufficient Attention, we confider
that innumerable Multitude, and un[peakable
Variety of Bodies that make up this vaft Uns-
verfe. For there being among thefe a ftupen-
dious Number that may juftly be look’d upon as
fo many diftinét Engines, and many of them
very complicated ones too, as containing fundry
fubordinate ones ; toknow that all thefe, as well
as the reft of the Mundane Matter, are every
Moment fuftain’d, guided, and govern’d accord-
ing to theirrefpective Natures, and with an ex-
aét Regard to the Catholick Laws of the Uni-
verfe ; toknow, I fay, that there is a Besg that
doth this every-where, and every Moment,’ and
that manages all Things without either Aberra-
tion or Intermiffion ; isa Thing that, if we'at-
tentively refle€t on, ought toproducein us, for
that Supreme Being thar can do this, the hig heft
Wonder, arid the lowliet Adoration. | See the
| veft of that excellent Difcourfe. |
Bisptricks. Mr, Molynenn.| J fhould think itan Attempt
P- 195+ worth the Thought of fome profound Philofo-~
pher, to givean Account of thofe Admirable,
Orderly, and Beautiful‘Appearances of (Nature,
whereof we can moft® plainly. apprehend the
Defigns, and final Caufés, butcan hardly proceed
to any further Knowledge of them. ‘--- This
furely might be able to convince the moft ob-
ftinate Oppofers of Déviiity. For certainly, if
we can rely upon any Deduction, or Confequence
drawn out by the Mind of Man, we may af
furedly reft fatisfied in this, ‘That fo many Ph@-
nomena, “ftupendous and furprizing, for their
| al o2 Ye on defign'a


of RELIGION, 235


defigu’d Contrivance, could not proceed but from
an Onmipotent and Defigning Being.

And from hence may we juftly fall into the P- 273»
deepeft Admiration, that ome and the fawe */*
Law of Motion fhould be obferved in Bodies
fo vaftly diftant from . each other, and which
feem to have no Dependance or Correlpondence
with eachother. 'This does moft evidently de-
monttrate, that they. were all at firft put into
Motion by one and the fame unerring Hand,
even the zfinite Power and Wifdom of God,
who has jix°d this Order among them a//, and
has eftablifo’d a Law, which they cannot tran/-
grefs.. Chance or dull. Matter could never pro-
duce fuch an Harmonious Regularity in the Mo-
tion .of Bodies fo vaftly diftant: This plainly
fhews.a Defign,and Intention in the firft Mover.
And; with, Submiffion to the Reverend. and
Learned Dzvines, Iam apt to think that one
_ Argument drawn, from the Orders, Beauty and
Defign' of, Things, is. more. forcible: againft
Atheifim, than, Multitudes of Notional Proofs
drawn from. ‘ddeas, Apparitions: of Spectres,
Witches,,&c.. Cnot. that thefe fhould lofe their
due Strength.),For befides the Heavens, even
the Jittle Globe.we inhabit: affords us infinite
Variety inthis Kind; And for my own part, I
muft,.confefs, I;can read more Divinity in
Mae, Charleton’s admirable Mufeum, -on.a Box of
beautiful Shells, of delicately Painted Plants,
curioufly. adorned, \Jnfects, Serpenis, Birds, or
Minerals 3 than imlarge: Volumes! of Notional
Writers. «For. Ammals;, Plantsy-and Minerals
do yield.us;, abundant dnftances, which’ vifibly
fhew a Defigihori Bud: propofeds which, as it
cannot pofibly confifk with Cranée, fo neither


236


Optic. Ed.
Lat.p.314)
315:


A ftronomical Principles


can it be apprehended to have been {fo ab eterno :
For tis abfolutely unconceivable, that a
Thing defign’d for fome End or Purpofe, thould
not be fo defign’d in Lime, by fome defigning
Being. :

Sir I/aac Newton.| It is the Principal Thing |
that Natural Philofophy ought to do, and the
End of that Science,that by a Chain of Reafoning,
we proceed from Effects to their Caufes, until
we arrive at the very Fir Cau/e itfelf. ‘That
we do not only explain the Mechanifm of the
World ; but that befides this, and as the Fruit
of our Enquiries about it, we anfwer thefe fol-
lowing Queries, with others: of a like Nature’;,
What there is in the Celeftial Spaces void of
Matter? And whence it is that the. Sun and
Planets gravitate mutually towards one another,
while the Spaces between are void of Matter?
How it comes to pafs that Nature acts nothing
in vain? And whence proceeds the admirable
Beauty of the Univerfe? ‘To what End'the'Go-
mets were made ? And‘whence it is that they-
move in Orbits fo very Eccentrical, ‘from andto’
all Parts of the Heavens ? ‘whereas the Courfe’
of the Planets hath the fame Direction, towafds
the fame’ Parts, in Orbits Concentrical. And:
what hinders the Sun and fixed ‘Starg from
rufhing mutually upon oné another? “How: it
comes about that the Bodies of Animals are:
fram’d with fuch exquifite Art. and Wifdom?'
and for what Purpofes. their different Parts were:
fitted 2» Whether it were poffible that théEye-
could be framed without the Knowledge of Op~
ticks ; Or the Ear without the Knowledge of
Sounds?) Whence it is thatthe’Motions of thé
Body obey the Command’ of the Will? And

whence


=


of RELIGION. ery d


Whetherthe Seniory of Animals be not the Place
where the Subftance which has Senfation is pre-
fent, andinto which the fenfible Species of Ob-
jects are carried by the Nerves and the Brain,
that they may there be perceived where they are
actually prefent by that Subftance there prefent?
And whether from a right Solution of thefe
Queries, it doesnot appear that there isa Being,
Incorporeal, Living, Intelligent, Omniprefent,
who in infinite Space, as it were in his Senfory,
fees accurately and intimately, and difcerns
throughly the Things themfelves ; and by being

refent to them comprehends them all within
himfelf: Of which Things, that which in us Per-
_ceives and Thinks, Perceives and Beholdsin its
little Senfory, only the Images, brought to it
by the Organs of Senfe ?

This moft excellently contrived Syftem ofthe PhilofNa-
Sun, and Planets, and Comets, could not have ##/.Pria-
its Origin from any other than from the wife “*u"”
Conduct and Dominion of an Intelligent and schotins
Powerful Being. And incafethe Fixed Stars be Generale,
the Centers of the like Syftems, they that are p-,45*»
framed by the like wife Conduct, muft all be 4°3:
fubje€t to the Dominion of One Being; efpe-
cially while it appears that the Light of the
Fixed Stars isof the fame Nature with the Light
of the Sun ; and that all thefe Syftems do mu-
tually impart their Light to one another.

This Being governs all Things, not as a
Soul of the World, but as Lord of the Uni-
verfe ; and upon Account of his, Dominion,
he is {tiled Lord God, Supreme over all. For
the word God is a relative Term, and has refe-
rence to Servants; and Defty is the Dominion


of


- 3


Afironomical Principles


of God, not ¢ fuch as a Sonk bas) over a Body
of his own, but (/uch as a Governor bas J
over Servants. ‘The Supreme God is an Eter-
nal, Infinite, Abfolutely Perfect Being :. But
a Being, how perfect foever, without Domi-
nion is not Lord God. For we fay, my Gods
your God, the God of Ifrael: but we do not fay,
my Eternal, your Eternal, the Eternal of Ifrael:
We do not fay, my Infinite, your Infinite, the
Infinite of Ifrael. We do not fay, my Perfect,
your Perfect, the Perfect of Ifrael; for thefe
Terms have no Relation to Servants. The
Term, God, every where fignifies Lord; but
every Lord is not God. ‘The Dominion of a
Spiritual Being conftitutes him God; true Do
minion, trae God ; fupreme Dominion, /upreme
God; imaginary Dominion, zmaginary God.
And from his having true Dominion, it tollows,


that the true God is Living, Intelligent, and


Powerful ; from his other Pertections it follows;
that he is Supreme or mof? Perfect. We is E-
ternal and Infinite, Omnipotent, and Omni-
fcient; that is, he continues from Eternity to
Eternity, and is prefent from Infinity to Infi-
nity. He-governs all Things, and knows all
Things, which are done, or can be known.
He is not Eternity or Infinity, but Eternal
and Infinite. He is not Duration or Spacey
but he has Duration of Exiftence, and is pre
fent. He continues ahways, and is prefent
every where; and, by exifting always and
every where, he conftitutes Duration and Spaces
Eternity and Infinity. Since every Part of
Space always is, and every indivifible Moment
of Duration is every where 5 certainly the Ma-
ker and Lord of all ‘Things cannot be faid @

€


of RELIGION. 239


od


be in #0 Lime, and uo Place. He is Omnipre-
fent, not by his Power only, but in his very
Subftance: For Power cannot fubfift without a
Subftance. In biz all Things are ¢ contained
and move, but without any mutual affecting of
each other. For God is not at all affected with
the Motions of Bodies, neither do they find
any Refiftance from the Omniprefence of God.
*Tis agreed on all Hands, that the Supreme
God neceffarily exifts; and by the fame Necef-
fity he exifts always and every where: Whence


+ This was the Opinion of the Ancients; Aratus.] Les
usbegin with Jove: Let us Men never leave off difcourfing
of him: Forevery Concourfe of People, every Affembly of Man=
kind, the Seas alfo, and the Heavens ave all full of Jove.
We ail enjoy the Bleffings of Jove: For we are alfo his Of -
{pving. Phenom. at the Beginning. Paul. ] That they
fbould feek the Lord, if haply they might feel after him,
and find him ; though he be not far from every one of us. For
in him we live, and move, and have our Being ; as certain alfo
of your own Poets have faid, For ave are alfo his Off-{prings
A&s xvil,27, 28. Mofes.] Know therefore this Day, and con-
fider it in thine Heart, That the Lora he is God, in Heaven
above, andin the Earth beneath; there is none elfe, Deut.iv>
39. Behold the Heaven and the Heaven of Heavens is the
Lord’s thy God 5 the Earth alfo, with all that therein is, x.14.
David.] Whither {hall I ¢o from thy Spirit ? Ov whither {hail
I flee fromthy Prefence? If I afcend up into Heaven, thou avt
there. If I make my Bed in Hell, behold thou art there.
Pfal. cxxxix. 7,8. Solomon. ] Will God indeed dwell on the
Earth ? Bebold the Heaven, and Heaven of Heavens cannot
contain thee ; how much lefs this Houfe that I have builded ?
1 King viil. 27. Job.] Is not God in the Height of Heaven ?
And bebold the Height of the Stars bow high they are!
xxii. 12. Jeremiah the Prophet. ] 4m Ia God at Hand
faith the Lord, and not a God afar off 2 Can any hide himfelf
in fecret Places, that I {hall not fee bim, faith the Lord? Do

wot I fill Heaven and Marth, faith the Lard? xxill.t giv:
2 ailO


Afironomical Frinciples

alfo it follows, that he is @// fimilar, alJ Eye,
all Bar, all Brain, a// Arm, all Senfation, alt
Underftanding, a// active Power, but not in a
human manner, not in a corporeal manner ;
but in a manner wholly unknown to us. Asa —
blind Man has no Idea of Colours, fo we have
no Notion of the Ways by which the moft
Wife God perceives and underftands all'Things.
He is entirely without Body, or bodily Figure,
and therefore can neither be feen, nor heard,
nor touch’d, neither ought he to be worfhipp’d
under the Reprefentation of any corporeal
Thing. We have Ideas of his Attributes, but
we do not at all know what the Subflance of
any thing is. All that we fee of Bodies, is
their Figures and Colours ; we hear only their
Sounds, we touch only their outward Surfaces,
we {mell their Scents, and tafte their Savours.
We know not their inward Subftances by any
Senfe, or any reflex At; and much lefs have
we any Idea of the Subftance of God.

We know him only by his Properties and
Attributes, and by his moft wife and exqui-
fite Structure of Things, and by final Caufes:
And we reverence and worfhip him upon ac-
count of his Dominion, For God; without
Dominion, Providence, and final Caufes, is
nothing elfe but Fate and Nature. And thus
much concerning God ; to difcourfe of whom,
from the Appearances of Nature, does certain-
ly belong to Experimental Philofophy.


PART


is ART ate


A Recapitulation of the W, hole : With
a ferious Addrefs. to all, efpecially
to the Scepticks and Unbelievers
of our ABE


Eee ND now, Reader, whofoever thou
| es efpecially if thou beeft a Scep-
tick, or Unbeliever, either as to
ats Maridat or Revealed Religion, I
beg of thee ferioufly to look back

upon what Rap been hitherto Difcourfed on
the Behalf of them both ; even from the certain


Principles of Aftronomy, or the true Syftem of


the World ; and from thofe numerous Tefti-


monies of Sacred and Prophane Antiquity, |


which fhew us the natural Confequences of
fuch wonderful Phenomena. I fay, look
back ferion/ly upon this View of the Univerfe
before us, and its Confequences. For if ever
there be Occafion for Serioufnefs, it is here,
where our Al is at Stake ; where our future,
; our final Weal, or Woe, Happinefs or Mifery,
| R


al¢é


bs dea


ad


Aftronomical. Principles


ate the ‘Things under Examination. For ace
cordingly, as we fhall determine our felves in
this grand Enquiry, concerning the Being and
Providence of God, the Immortality of our
Souls, and the Truth of Divine Revelation, as
to the lafting Rewards and Punifhments of
another World; fo fhall we be oblig’d to be-
have our felves in our Conduct; upon which
our Eternal State is to be awarded us at the
great Day. For we cannot but be fenfible that
no Miftake of our own can alter the Nature
of Things ; and that they are not the moft
zealous, Wifhes, and» Inclinations ; the moft
pungent Jefts and Banter ; the moft Prophané
and Impidus Blafphemy againft God, his ‘At-
tributes, orPfovidence, that»can’ in the leaft
alter the Syftem of the Univerfe, or banifh the
Supreme Creator and Governor, with his Pro-
vidence and Laws, out of it. Let us confider,


“then, that) all the other Hypothefes relating


to the Gonftitution of the World, invented
by either Democritus, Epicurts, Ayiftotie, Pto-
lemy, Tycho, Cartes, Mr. Hobbs, or Spinoza, do
now plainly appear, from certain Evidence, to
be not only falfe, but abfurd ; contrary both,
to common Senfe, and to the known Laws and
Obfervations of found Philofophy ; and that
he who will now be an Athezf?, muft be an ab-
folute Ignoramus in Natural Knowledge 5 muft.
fieither underftand the Principles either of Phy-
ficks or Aftronomy. Let us confider farther,
that as to Dei/m, or the Denial of the Serip-
tures, and of Divine Revelation, it is really Ill:
Mens /Jaft Refuge, and taken up of late, not
by honeft Enquirers impartially fearching after
Truth, and difcovering upon Evidence, that,

all


of RELIGION.


all Revealed Religion is falfe ; but that it is
chiefly fallen into of late by fome Irreligious
Perfons, in the Diftrefs of their Affairs, and
upon that furprizing and overbearing Light,
which Sir I/aac Newtou’s wonderful Difcoveries
have. afforded; whereby they have’ perceiv’d
that Natural Religion, with its Foundations,
were now become too certain to bear any far-
ther Oppolition. That this is true, I appeal


to a certain Club of Perfons, not over religi-.


oufly difpos’d, who being foberly asked, after
Dr. Beutley’s remarkable Sermons at Mr.
Boyle's Lectures, built upon Sir J/aac Newton's
Difcoveries, and levell’d againft the prevailing
Atheifm of the Age, What they had to fay in
their own Vindication agaift the Evidence pro-
duc'd by Dr. Bentley ? ‘The Anfwer was, Zhat
truly they did not wel know what to fay againft
tt, upon the Head of Atheifm: But what, fay
they, 75 this, tothe Fable of Fefus Chrift ? And
in Confirmation of this Account, it may, I be-
lieve, be juftly obferv’d, that the prefent grofs
| Deifm, or the Oppofition that has of late fo
evidently and barefacedly appear’d againft Di-
vine Revelation, and the Holy Scriptures, has
taken its Date in fome Meafure from that Time.
And asto the main Obfervation which Iam now
upon, I mean that this modern Infidelity is not
properly owing to any new Difcovery of the
want of real Evidence for Reveal’d Religion, or
of the Falfity of any of the known Foundations
of it ; but to the like Neceffity of Affairs, and
the Impoffibility of fupporting the former, and
_worfer Notions, I think is plain from thefe
Two farther Confiderations : Firft, That the

moft truly Learned, the deepeft Enquirers, and
R 2 moft


243


A i fronomical Principles


moft Sagacious Examiners into Reveal’d Reli-
gion, have in this Age, as well as in all the
foregoing, declar’d themfelves in Favour of it,
both by their Conduct, and by their Writings ;
while the Generality of the Dez/s are known to
be fo Overly and Superficial in their Learning,
about fuch Matters, as renders them indeed
fometimes the Scare-crows of the Ignorant, but
generally the Contempt of the really Judicious
and Learned Chriftians. Secondly, That they
have, for fome ‘Time, almoft difcarded the
principal way of Examination into the main Evi-
dence for the ‘few#/b and Chriftian Revelations,
1 mean Ancient Faéts and 'Teftimonies ; which
they would never have done, had they not been
well affur’dthat fuch Sort of Arguments would
not be for their Service. However, I fhall
wave this, as fomewhat Foreign to my prefent
Undertaking, and proceed to that Recapitulation
of what I have alledg’d in this Treatife, onthe
Behalf of the Being, and the Attributes, and
the Providence of God, of the Immortality of
Human Souls,and of the feveral important Points
of Natural and Reveal’d Religion already treated
of, which I propofed to make in this Place.
We have then here, Good Reader, feen a
wonderful, a furprizing, an amazing Syftem.
or rather an innumerable Number of fuch
Syftems of Worlds ; 7. e. of Suns, of Pla-
nets, Primary and Secondary, and of Comets,
with their feveral Atmofpheres, all placed at
immenfe Diftances from one another ; in vari-
ous Pofitions, Velocities, and Pericds ; in divers
Circumftances and Magnitudes, ordain’d for fe-
veral great Ufes, and admitting dfferent particu-
Jar Laws ; -but foas every where to be fubjeét to
one


of RELIGION. 245


one Univerfal Power of Gravity, or mutual
Tendency of ali the Parts to one another, and
that of a certain Quantity, and in certain
Proportions. A Power this, amazing to think
of ! yet Undeniable, Regular, Univerfal as to
Time, Place, and Bodies ; and {till Exact and
Geometrical ; yet at the fame Time entirely
and abfolutely Immechanical, or beyond. all
Material Solutions, and Pretence of Material
Solutions whatfoever ; and indeed the proper
Effect of the Supreme Being. We have feen,
that accordingly this Immenfe World, or Innu-
merable Number of Immenfe Worlds, are for
certain all @od’s Worlds ; or Created, Governed,
and Provided for by One God, by One Supreme,
Omnipotent and Omnifcient Being; ever Pre-
fent to all its Parts ; and ever exerting his In-
finite Power, Wifdom, and Goodnets every
where therein. We have feen that the nobleft
Principles of Natural Religion are Fully and
Demonftratively deriv’d from the Phenomena
of thefe Syftems ; and that not a few of the
moft Concerning, and otherwife moft Excep-
tionable Parts of Divine Revelation, are alfo
ftrongly confirm’d thereby. Nor is there now
the leaft room for either of thofe Ancient
Refuges of Atheifm and Irreligion ; I mean the
wild Hypothefes of the Eternity of the World
and of its Temporary Derivation from the Ac=
cidental Concourfe of Atoms. Adl this we have
now feen with our Eyes, and as it were, felt
with our Hands, in the foregoing Treatife.
We have alfo there obferv’d and prov’d, that
this wonderful Syftem of Things is not any
bare Hypothefis, or meerly probable Account
of the Heavenly Bodies, and their Motions,

| R 3 but


246


A [fironomical P rinciples


but the certain Theory of them, attefted to be
fuch by unqueftionable Evidence, from Aftro-
nomical Obfervations, and from fure Geome-


‘trical Reafonings thereupon. So that theCon- ©


clufions regularly drawn from fuch Premifes,
ought themfelves to be look’d on as  Certazn.
We havethere alfo diftinétly followed the Steps
of Nature, and drawn out her grand Secrets
into plain Tables, for the Ufe of every body ;
even of thofe who are not, Mathematicians
good enough to Calculate themfelves. And
have farther given the Manner and Reafon of
each Operation, for every ones entire Satif-


‘faétion. Nor need my Readers take even the


Lenmiata themfelves for granted, if they un-
derftand but fome Elements of Geometry. For
they are demonftrated every one in my MMa-
thematical Philofophy , and that generally after
fo plain a Manner, that I dare fay very or-


_dinary Mathematicians will be able to under-
“ftand thofe Demonftrations, By thefe Calcu-


lations it is‘ that we arrive at the compleateft
and moft exact Knowledge of this Nobile, this
Amazing, this Divine Syftem, Nor can I ima-.
gine that the Inquifitive Reader, when he has


~ ‘well confider’d the Particulars, will think that


any of thofe Epithets, Noble, Amazing, and
‘Divine, are by me wrong apply’d in this Mat-
ter. For here we difcover that all the Hea-
venly Bodies Revolve in thofe moft agreeable
Geometrical Curves, the E/pfes ; the Planets
in thofe that are very little Eccentrical ; and
the Comets in thofe that are prodigioufly fo ;
even. in fuch as are almoft Parabolical. By
which known and Regular Orbits, wei readily


“seduce their Motions to Calculation, and eafily


difcos


of RELIGION.


difcover the Law of Gravity belonging to them,
Here we contemplate the Periods of all the Pla-
nets Primary and Secondary, and of the Comets,
about their Central Bodies,from the fmalleft Pe-
riod of the Innermoft Circumjovial of 42 Hours
and a half ; to the largeft of the outmoft Comet
of 575 Years. Here we take a View of the vat
middle Déftances of all the Planets,Primary, and
Secondary, and of the Comets, from their Cen-
tral Bodies, deriv’d from the beft Obfervations,
from the leaft of the innermoft Circumjovials
of 130.000, to the greateft of the utmoft
Comet of 5.600,000,900 Miles; the leaft of
which diftances does prodigioufly furpafs the
Power of Human Imagination, which can no
way enlarge it felf to any fuch meafures. Here
_ alfo wg may difcover the furprizing Magnitades
of the feveral Bodies belonging to our Syftem,
both in Diameter, Superficies, and Solidity,
from the {maller Quantities in our Moon, of
2170 Miles Diameter ; 14,000.000 fquare Miles
of Surface ; and §.000,000.000 cubical Miles,

of Solidity ; to the vaftly greater Quantities in
the Sun of 763.000 Miles Diameter ; 1,813.200,
000.900, {quare Miles of Surface ; and 230.
©00,000.000,000.000 cubical Miles of Solidity,
Numbers that are ftit! more immenfely beyond
all Human Imagination; and fuchas, if Epicuras
or Lucretius were alive, who could raife their
ftupid Conceptions no farther than the large.
nefs of a Cart-wheel for the Sun it felf, would
have quite affrighted them out of their foolifh
Philofophy. We here learn the Aumna? Velo
cittes of the feyeral Planets, Primary and Se-


condary ; and of the Comets, from the floweft _


_ Motion in the Moon, of 2200 Miles, ta the
_ : R°4™ ok Pyles}


ee


A (ftronoutical Prin ciples


248


Paradife
Loft. Lib,


{wifteft in Mercury, of 100.000 Miles, in the
fpace of one Hour. As alfo we here learn the
Diurnal Velocities at the Equator, the floweft of
the Moon of ro Miles, the fwitteft of Fupiter
of 25.000 Miles in the fame fpace of one hour:
And that even we upon the Surface of this
Earth, when we crofs the Line, with all our
Buildings, move along 1030 Miles in an Hour ;
and that by Confequence, inthis Latitude, I my
felf, while I feem to be at reft, writing this
Treatife in my Study, do yet, together with
my Study, and my Books, revolve at the rate
of above 600 Miles in the fame time. Nay,
we here get a ftep farther, and, without going
down into the Central Regions of any one of
the Celeftial Bodies, do certainly pronounce,
not only concerning the Mathematical ssiantty
of Bulk or Magnitude, but in many Cafes con-
cerning the real Phyfical Quantity of Matter con-
tain’d in thofe Bodies, as compar’d, I mean,
with one another ; which is as far as Philofo-
phy can poffibly carry us. _Whereby we find
that the Moon, which is the leaft of all thofe
Bodies whofe Quantities of Matter we know, is
not quite the 9,000.00o0th part fo great in this
refpect as the Sun; and that the Quantity of
Matter of all the Planets and Comets taken to-
gether, does not in probability amount to the
sooth part of that in the Sun alone ; the Su, I
fay, that moft amazing and moft prodigious
Creature of God that is in this Syftem, and
perhaps in all the vifible Syftems about us! of
which Mr. Milton bravely fings ; |
T ben Sun,of this great World,both Eye and Sottly
Acknowledge God thy Greater : Sound bis Praife
Jn thy Eternal Courfe ! More
x


eee atin
of RELIGION. | 249
Moreover, wehere certainly difcover by Confe-
quence, the very inward ‘l'exture of the fame
Geleftial Bodies; whofe Quantities of Matter
were above determin’d ; and, without digging
into the Bowels of any of the Planets, do, with
equal Certainty; pronoufice what comparative
degree of Denjfity they have : Whereby we learn
that the Sun is vaftly too denfe for a Flame,
as Cartes determined ; and that the Moon is the
Denfeft, and Saturn the Rareft of all thefe Bo-
dies ; and that the former is above eight times
as denfe as the latter. Which Conclufions thew
the admirable Nature, and profound Reach of
Sir Ifaac Newton's Philofophy, which, with
equal, eafe and certainty, penetrates to fuch
deep Truths, as no other Hypothefes do fo much
as in the leaft hope or pretend toattain to,
even by Conjecture. Nor dowe ftophere ; but
Placing our felves on the feveral Surfaces of
the fore-mentioned Planets, we by certain Rea-
foning determine thecomparative Weight of any
given Body on thofe feveral Surfaces ; and ob-
ferve, with great Satisfa€tion, that the fame
Strength that can here lift One Hundred Pound
would not be able on the Sun’s Surface to lift
Four Pounds; and that what on the Moon’s
Surface, where this Weight is the leaft, would
weigh one pound ; would, if transferr’dtothe _
Sun’s Surface, where it is the greateft, weigh
above 4x of the fame Pounds. We do
alfo here Contemplate thofe Diurnal Motions
_ With refpeé&t to the other Heavenly Bodies,
which we are forced: to gather by Geometrical
Reafoning, withrefpeét to our own Earth ; and
which the feveral Inhabitants of thofe Bodies,
Cif fuch there are, and if they be provided rig
Wi 9 uch


Sun under 66 Years... We have alfo taken a


A ftronontical Principles


fuch Means of feeing our Earth, as our Te-
lefcopes have of late afforded us for. feeing
them) may alfo Contemplate with their Eyes.
Whereby we find that they do revolve in Peri-
ods fufficient!y unequal ; from the floweft, that
of the Moon, in 27 Days, to the fwifteft, that
of Fupiter, ina little lefs than 10 Hours : which
Sight feems to me to be a kind of fenfible
Confirmation of thelike Diurnal Motion of our
Earth. |

We are here alfo taught to eftimate the dif-
ferent Degrees of Heat and Light, which our
Fellow Creatures derive from the great Foun-
tain of both, the Sun, when nearer, and when
farther off than we are: Which difference is fo
vaftly great, even at the mean Diftances of the
feveral Bodies from the Sun, that Mercury,
the neareft, has in a Mean no lefs than 120000
times the Quantity of Light and Heat which
the utmoft Comet has; and that the Heat at
the Sun’s Surface is no lefs than 45000 times
as great as any part of this Barth receives from
it, at any time; and that withal the outmoft
of our known Comets abides at one time an
Heat more than 400,000.000 of times, as great
asit doesanother. An amazing difference this!
and fuch as is no where elfe to be paralle?d,
that we know of, in the whole Syftem of Na-
ture. We here alfo feé, how foon our Earth,
and any of the Planets would fall to the Sui,
or to their central Bodies, if their Projectile
Velocities fhould ceafe; from the innermoft of
the Circumjovials, which would fall to Fupiter
in 4 Hours; to the outmoft Comet which
would not fall from its middle diftance to the


view


of RELIGION, 251.
view of our neighbouring Body the Moon, and
found it in almoft all refpeéts fuch a Planet, or
Place of Habitation, as our own Planet the Earth
is. And we fhould be greatly wanting to our
Selves, and to the Decorum of Things, as well
as highly injurious to our great Creator, if we
fhould fo much as fcruple the Suppofition of
fo noble an Habitation’s being Inhabited ; of fo
noble a Colony’s being Peopled. Thofe who can
attentively view the Wonderful, and Beautiful,
and Admirably contriv’d Structure of this our
adjoining Planet with its Sea and Land, Moun-
tainsand Valleys, Dayand Night, Summer and
Winter; together with its Clouds and Atmo-
{phere, and Moon; all in correfpondence to
our Earth, which is every where full of intelli-
gent Beings its Inhabitants ; and yet fhall pee-
vifhly deny that it either now is, or ever was,
or is to be in like manner inhabited by fuch In-
telligent Beings; and are refolv’d it fhall have
no other Ufe than to enlighten our Earth, and
be peep’d at through our Telefcopes; feem to
me too Unphilofophical to be argued with ;
and only worthy to be left to their own
narrow Genius, which can neither think a brave
uncommon Thought, nor admit any thing but
what their Education or Syftem have already
fore’d upon them. Nor indeed, dowe need to
debate here with fuch Men; becaufe it can
hardly be imagined they will ever have Skill or
Curiofity enough to perufe, what either has al-
ready been written, or may hereafter be written
upon fuch great and noble Subjects. Befides
this fingle Attendant of ours, we have taken a
Profpect of Four fuch Attendants on Fupiter,
gad Five on Saturn, withthe remarkable _
Bik. inet an


A fronomical Principles


and Diurnal Revolutionof the former; andthe
much more aftonifhing Réug of the latter: The
One bearing a near refemblance to our Clouds
underthe Torrid Zone, upon our Earth’s daily
Motion, and fo hinting to us the Likenefs there
is between that and our Planet: And the
Other affording an Inftanceof a more furprizing
Variety in the Works of God and Nature than
is any where elfe to be fo evidently difcover’d
in the- World. Nor muft I here pafs over in
Silence that wonderful, that prodigious, that
amazing Inftanceof Swiftne/s of Motion, which
the Raysof Light afford us, and which is ga-
thered from the Eclipfes of Fupster’s Planets ;
no lefs I mean than that of 180.000. Miles in
one Second of Time; whence it appears;
that a Being, might vifit all the Men in the
World, if he proceeded with the Swiftnefs
of thefe Rays, and thofe Men were placed
in any tolerable Order along or near a great Cir-
cle of the Earth, in a very Fev Seconds of time.


' Nor do any of the other fwifteft Motions


that we know of in the Univerfe deferve to
be called /wift in comparifon of this before us ;
which isno other than a conftant Inftance of the
Power of Godin moving the Bodies which he
has made, with what Velocity he pleafes ; and
thereby ofcommunicating his Influences, even in
a Mechanical Way;to immenfe Diftances, almoft
ina Moment. Butthen, befides this Planetary
World, which was in fome meafure known
to the Ancient Aftronomers, we have alfo
taken a View of another World, or Species of
Bodies, known indeed by Name, but hardly at
all by Nature tothe Ancients; I mean the Sy-
fiem of Comets, which till lately were ata

rally


incest itn tern chine sn
of RELIGION. 253


rally look’d on as inconfiderable and fortuitous
Meteors of our Air only ; but do now appear
to be more numerous, and not lefs canfiderable
than the Planetsthemfelves. Thefe Comets pafs
fo entirely through the Planetary Regions, and
may fo certainly approach to the Planets them-
felves both in their Defcent and Afcent ; that
they may ferve hitherto unknown Ends of Pro-
vidence, both in their own Conftitution, and by
the Changes they may occafion in the Planets ;
and do therefore well deferve our moft attentive
Confideration. Nor certainly were the Planets,
their Number, Magnitude, Motions, and Ufes
fo well known in fome Thoufands of Years after
their firft Obfervation, as the Comets now are
in a few Hundreds, or rather Decads of Years
fince they were to any good Purpofe obferved by
Aftronomers, And then, laft! y> after all, we have
taken a fhort imperfeét View of the vattly nu-
merous, the vaftly great, and vaftly diftant Sy-
{tems of the Fixed Stars, orto us new Syftems
of Worlds quite remote from this our Planetary
and Cometary World: InComparifon ofall which
Sy{tems of Worlds, our own entire Syftem,with
its Sun, and all its Planets and Comets, muft
_ be but inconfiderable ; probably not the 1 0.0004,
perhaps not the r00.000', or 1,900.000" Part
of the Whole: And whofe Diftance appears to
be fo great from us, that a Musket Bullet that
fhould go 240 Feet in one Second of T ime, if it
had been fhot up at the Mo/zick Creation to the
neareft fixed Star, and continued its Courfe even-
ly allthe Way, would hardly have arrived there
by this time,after the long Interval of 6200 Years.
‘So immenfly numerous, and immenfly great and
glorious is the entire Syftem ; and fo inconfide-
rable


et


ws) 54 . Aftronomical Poise iis


rable are we poor Worms, creeping upon this
little little Earth, if compared. thereto ; even
Ma.xl17. gs Nothing, yea lefsthan Nothing, and Vanity!
And here we have plainly loft our felves in the
amazing Length and Breadth, and Height of
the Grand Sy{tem, and of that Power, Wifdom
and Goodnefs, which fhines forthin every Branch
thereof; thofe chiefly excepted which depend
onthe Actions of Free-Creatures, andthe man-
ner of their ‘Treatment by that Providence
which difcovers it felf in the whole Univerfe ;
the Rules of whofe Conduét are not yet laid
fully open to our prefent Curiofity, but are ra-
ther referved for the laft and nobleft Scene of —
our Duration hereafter. Nor is this to be fo
much wondred at, if we confider that the moft
beautiful, and orderly, and wifely contrived Sy-
ftem of this vifible World it felf, which we
have been juft reviewing, tho’ it has all along,
fince the beginning of the World, afforded ma-
ny and noble Indications of that Divine Power
Wifdom, and Goodnefs to all Mankind, yet
have the entire Secrets of that Contrivance,with
that univerfal Power of Gravitation, by which
the whole Machine has all along been upheld,
lain in a manner hid through all paft Ages, and
is but juftnowdifcovered tous. Nay, the very
beft Syftem of the Heavens, whichthe Aftrono-
mers long had, is reported to have appeared to
‘Alpbonfus, One of them fo aukward, abfurd and difagree-
able, that he was not able to reftrain his Tongue
from a kind of Blafphemy againft its Author ;
meerly becaufe the Grand Myfteries of the
whole Machine, by the Knowledge of which
all thofefeeming Diforders are now entirely va~
Se pas nifhed,


of RELicion.


~mifhed, was not at that time difcovered to Man-
Kind, but was referved for thefe later, and on
that. Account happier Ages of the World.
And now, Good Readers, having made this
Review of the entire Univerfe, let us, in Agree-
ment with the reft of my Defign, turn our
Eyes from the Works to the Workman; from
the Effects to the Caufe; from the Creatures to
the Creator; from thefe Glorious, thefe Divine
Works of Nature, to the more Glorious and
more Divine Author of Nature, the great God,
leffed for ever. For as it is excellently ob-
ferv'd in the Book of Wifdom, Surely vain are
all Men by Nature who. are ignorant of God ;
and could not, out of the good Things that are
feeity know bin that is; ueither by confidering
_ the Works did they arknowledge the Workmafter.
a-- For by the G@reatne/s and Beauty of the Crea-


tures proportwnably the Maker of them is feen. v:


And if there be any Deduétions of Human
Reafon which are eafier and more obvious than
the reft, it is this Way of Arguing, which we
havealready ufed, from the Hou/eto the Archited ;
from, the Clock to the Clock-maker ;. from the
Ship to the Shipbuilder ; and from a noble,large


wel-coutriv'd, and well-proportion’d, and moft


beautiful Houle, or Clock, or Ship, to the ex-
cellent Architect, the ské/ful Clockmaker, the
fagacious Shipbuilder; this is fuch clear, na-
tural, obvious, fure Reafoning, that we even
at firft make ufe of it in Childhood, and
find it as clear, natural, obvious, and fure in
our elder Age; without occafion fora Tutorto
inftruct us init at firft, or for a Logician toim-
prove us in it afterward. And fhall we reject

that


Xlll. Ye


<4
a)
)


256


A [fironomical Principles


that way of Reafoning, in the moft eminent of
all Inftances, which we are not able to avoid
making inthe {malleft? Shall the comparative-
ly few, trifling, imperfect Contrivances of every
{mall Machine here ( which yet only applies the
Powers of Natureto particular Purpofes,) be
univerfally, without Hefitation, allowed to prove
afubtile, afhrewd, and a wife Contriver there-
of? And yet, fhall the numberlefs, the impor-
tant, and the moft compleat Contrivances
which furround us every where inthis Univerfe,
from the immenfly great Body of a Sun, tothe
as prodigioufly {mall Bodies of fome Anémalcula,
be afcrib’d to Fate, to Chance, to any Thing
imaginable, befides the great Creator and Contri-
ver of all Things himfelf; to whom yetfrom the
earlieft tothe lateft Records of Mankind, as we
have feen, the Wifeft and Beft have ever freely
and unanimoufly afcribed them ? But why dof
fpeak of the Wifeft and Beft only in this Cafe?
Asif the reft of Mankind have generally had
other Notions. No, the whole Race of Man-
kind, abating a very few, littlebetter either for
Ignorance, or Vice, or both, than Montfters,
have ftill from one Generation to another drawn
the very fame Conclufions and Truths in their
Minds; tho they have not all made equal Ap-
plication of thofe Conclufions and Truths to their
Practice. In witnefs whereof, I might alledge the
Conceffions of nota fewfuchbad Men ; but fhall
chufe only to inftance in the late famous Earl of
Rochefter, wholong wanted, not fo much Abili-
tiesto difcover, as Goodnefs to make ufe of fuch
Arguments. This Perfon therefore,as T have been
informed, having been one Night deeply en-
gag’d in Atheiftical and Blafphemous Difcourfe

among


enn enema en)
Pp RELIGION. PET

mong his Companions, as he too frequently

“was, atter-a while-happen’d to have occafion to

{tep abroad : where the Sky, being very clear,
prefented him: witha glorious Profpect of no

dmail Part of that? beautiful. World which we

have beenmore diftin@ly deferibing. Upon the

View of which he'was overheard to fay, What

a Dog am I, thustoblafpheme Him that wade me

and alt this beautiful World’ 1 do not at prefent
recollect from whom I had this Account ; tho’

the Thing it felf was too remarkable to be for-
gotten. But whether any Miftake might be

made in the Circumftances of this Story or not,

tis unqueftionable that fuch muft frequently be

the natural Reflections of a confidering Mind,

in thefe Circumftances ; whofe Impreffions no-

thing can entirely fuperfede. As for my felf, I

muft freely own, that as I had from my Child-

_ hood ever learned from the Works of God to
acknowledge and worfhip Him that made them ;

and as Timprov’d in Anatomy, in Aftronomy,

in Natural Philofophy, I faw that this firft Im-
preffion or Voice of Nature was ftill more and

more confirm’d and eftablifhed by farther En-
quiries ; fo that when, in my younger Days, I

had with great Difficulty and Pains, attained to

the Knowledge of the true Syftem of the World,
and.of Sir Ifaac Newton’s wonderful Difcoveries
thereto relating, I was not only fully convine’d,

but deeply and furprizinzly affetted with the

_ Confequences of this Nature ; I was fatisfy’d.

that they were evident Demonftrations of Natn-

val, and noble Attefations to Revealed Religion.

tn which Principles the farther Improvements

I have ftill made, or fueceeding Difcoveries of
others have ftill prefented to me, the more fure:
,-3 8 and:


Me)


253


A ftronomical Principles


and certain have thofe Principles appeared ; and
the more fure and certain have thofe Confequen-
ces feem’d; tho’ it muft -be confefs’d that the
Deepnefs of the Surprize and Impreffion, asin
all the like Cafes, can never be fo fenfible and
affecting, as it was upon the firft Knowledge of
fuch amazing Truths, and momentous Corolla-
ries from them. And I cannot but heartily wifh,
for the common Good of all the Scepticks and
Unbelievers of this Age, that I could imprint
in their Minds all that real Evidence for Natu-
ral and for Reveal’d Religion that now \is, or
during my paft Enquiries has been upon my
own Mind thereto relating: And that their
Temper of Mind were fuch as that this Evi-
dence might afford then as great Satisfaction as
it has my felf. For then I am fure they would
not wonder at my warm and zealous Endea-
vours, even at the Hazard of all I have in this
World, for the Reftoration of trueReligion, for
the refcuing the Wicked out of their dangerous
State, and tor the bringing as many as poffible
to that future Happinefs ; which is the grand
Defign of Religion, and the ultimate Felicity of


- Mankind. But tho’ this entire Communication


of the Evidence that is, or has been in my own
Mind, for the Certainty of Natural Religion,
and of the few#/b and Chriftian Inftitutions, be
in its own Nature impoffible.; yet I hope I
may havé leave here to addrefs my felf to all,
efpecially to the Scepticks and Unbelievers of
our Age ; todo what Jam able for them in this
momentous Concern ; and to lay before them,
as briefly and ferioufly as Ican, a confiderable


- Number of thofe Arguments which have the


sreateft Weight withme, as to the hardeft per
O


of RELIGION.


-of what is here defired and expected from them ;


I mean the Belief of Reveal’d Religion, or of


the Fewi/h and Chriftian Inftitutions, as con-
tain’d in the Books of the Oldand New Tefta-
- ment; or in all the Genuine Records now ex-
tant of both Religions. I have already obferv’d
that the Scepticks and Unbelievers of the beft
Senfe do now confefs, that the Arguments for
a God, his Attributes, and Providence, are very
ftrong ; but they will by no Means allow, that
thofe for Divine Revelation, and for the Bible
are fo: Tho’ indeed very few of them, I {peak
it upon certain Experience, have ftudyed thofe
Sacred Books with any Degree of that Imparti-
ality,Serioufnefs, Application,Sagacity or Piety,
which is but requifite for forming any tolerable
Judgment about them. But to wave farther
Preliminaries, fome of the principal Reafons
which make me believe the Zewi/h and Chriftian
Revelations to be true, are thefe following.

I. The Reveal’d Religion of the ews and
Chriftians lays the Law of Nature for its Foun-
dation ; and all along fupports and affifts Natu-
ral Religion ; as every true Revelation ought
to do. '

IT. Aftronomy, and the reft of our certain
Mathematick Sciences, do confirmthe Accounts
of Scripture ; fo far as they are concern’d.

III. The ancienteft and beft Hiftorical Ac-
counts now known, do, generally {peaking, con-
firm the Accounts of Scripture , fo far as they
- are concern’d..

IV. The more Learning has increas’d, the
more certain in general do the Scripture Ac-
counts appear, and its difficult Places are more


clear’d thereby.
BU S 2 | V. There


' oe


2


260


Aftronomical. Principles


V. There are, or have been generally ftand-
‘ing Memorials preferv’d of the certain Truths
of the principal Hiftorical, Facts, which were
conftant Evidences for the Certainty of them. :

VI. Neither the Mofaical Law, nor. the
Chriftian Religion, could poffibly have been
recciv’d and eftablifhed without fuch Miraclés
as the Sacred Hiftory contains.

VII. Altho’ the Zews all along Hated and
Perfecuted the Prophets of God ; yet were they
forced to believe they were true Prophets, and
their Writings of Divine Infpiration. |

VIII. The Ancient and Prefent State of the
sea Nation are ftrong Arguments for tke

ruth of their Law, and of the Scripture Pro-
phecies relating to them.

IX. The Ancient and Prefent State of the
Chriftian Church are alfo {trong Arguments for
the Truth of the Gofpel, and of the Scripture
Prophecies relating thereto. . ins al

X. The Miracles whereon the Fewi/b and
Chriftian Religion are founded, were of old
owned. to be true by their very Enemies.

XI. The Sacred Writers, who liv’d in Times
and Places fo remote from one another, do yet
all carry on One and the fame grand Defign,
wiz. that of the Salvationof Mankind, by the
Worfhip of, and Obedience to the One true
God, in and through the King Meffiab : which
without a Divine Conduct could never have been
done. ‘ | !

XII. ‘The principal Doétrines of the Jews
and’ Ghriftian Religion are agreeable to the an-
cienteft Traditions of all other Nations. — . >

‘ XLII. .'The Difficulties relating to this Reli-
gion are not fuchas affect the Truth of the F vee
Stk + ¥ be oF ut


eR SL


of Reeik i avon.


but the Conduct of Providence; the Reafons
of which the Sacred Writers never pretended
fully to: know, orto reveal to Mankind.

» XIV. Natural Religion, which is yet focer-
tain invit felf}ris: ‘not without {uch Difficulties
as to:the.Conductt of Providence, as are obje-
cted to Revelation.

. KV. The. Sacred’ Hiftory has the greateft
Marks of: Truth,» Honefty, and Impartiality of
all other Hiftories whatfoever’ ; and witha! has
nohe.of ithe known Marks of Knavery and Im-
pofiurs. siguooroijeloveM aris-yr
~KVI.°The Predictions of Scripture have
been ftill fulfilled in the feveral Ages of the
‘World whereto they belong. 3

~oIX VIL) No oppofite Syftems of the Univerfe,
or’ Schemes of Divine Revelation, have any
tolerable Pretences to be true, but thofe of the
*Fews and Chriftians. 2

«"Thefe are the plain and obvious Arguments
which perfuade me of thé Truth of the Fewifh
and Chriftzan Revelations : which I fhall briefly
infift‘on ‘here, and earneftly recommend them
to the farther Confideration of the inquifitive
Reader:Hoping that He will firft endeavour
to’ attain that Serious,’ Upright, Impartial, Ho-
neft,.and Obedient Temper of Mind, that a
Creature ought to’have when he is enquiring
into ithe Laws and Will of his Creator ; and
will join with me in putting up to that great
Creator, fome fuch humble Addrefs as this fol-
jowing; for the good Succefs of his Enquiries.


-° O God of my Fathers, and Lord of Mercy ; Wifd. ix.
** who haft made'all things with thy Word: Give 14:5. 1%


“me Wifdom that fitteth by thy Throne ; and
** reject me not from among thy Children. For
etiaomt | nS *€ I thy


262


Aftronontical Principles


“* I thy Servant, and Son of thine Handmaid,
*¢ am a feeble Perfon, andof a thort time: O
“ fend her out of thy Holy Heavens, and
** from the Throne of thy Glory ! That being
** prefent fhe may labour with me ; that I ma
** know what is pleafing unto thee : Amen!


CI.) Thefirft Reafon,why I believe the Fewi/2
and Chriftian Revelations tobe truesis this ; That
they lay the Law of Nature for their Foundati-
on; andall along fupport and affift Natural Re+
ligion , as every true Revelation ought to do.:

That all Divine Revelation fuppofes the Be~
ing and Attributes of God, whichare difcove-
rable by the Light of Nature ; and particularly
the Pertections of Unity, Juftice, Veracity; Ho-
linefs, and Goodnefs, all confidering Men will
readily grant : And that no pretended Revela-
tion, which clearly and evidently contradiéts
the Laws of Nature, founded on thofe Divine
Perfections, can be more than pretended, they
will as readily grant alfo. So that I thall not
need to prove that Part of my Propofition. But
then, that the Fewi/h and Chriftian Revelations
do, for the main at leaft, moft plainly and
clearly agree with, and fupport thofe: Natural
Notions we have of God and of Religion, and
is founded upon them, is every where fuppofed
and affrm’d in all the Original Records of thofe
Religions. And if the Ceremonial Burdenfome
Laws once given the Fews, be objected againft,
as unworthy of God, and oppofite to his Wif-
dom and Goodnefs, I fhall take leave to fay,
that this is objected without any juft Foundation,
and contrary to the beft and moft authentick
Accounts we have of the Reafon of thofe Laws}

. | I mean,


of RELIGION. 263


Imean, that they were given on purpofe for the
Support of Natural Religion ; and that thisap-
pears not only by occafional Paflages in the Sa-
cred and Acknowledged Books of the Old and
New Teftament, but by an entire particular and
noble Difcourfe,which we have upon this whole
Subje@ in the Apoftolical Conftitutzons,and which
without all difpute is of much greater Authority s¢. Cle-
than the uncertain Gueffles of the Moderns. I ment and
have fet down no fmall Parts of this Paffage elfe- Iten.Vind.
where, in Vindication of thofe Conftitutions : Ni ie
yet are they of fuch Importance, that I fhall Hers, j
take leave to repeat them in this Place.

¢ Werecommend to you,fay the Apoftles, Z7= Conpiitur.
€ tus, and Luke, and fajon, and Lucius, and Sofi~ \.vi.c.18.
© pater.By whom alfo we exhort you in the Lord,
© to abftain from your old Converfation, vain
€ Bonds,Separations,Obfervances, Diftinction of
© Meats,and daily Wafhings : for Old Things ave > Cor. v.
© paffed away, behold all things are become New. "

¢ For fince we have known God through Jefus ¢- 19-
€ Chrift, and all his Difpenfation, as it has been
© from the Beginning, that he gave a plain Law
© to affift the Law of Nature ; fuch an one as
€ is pure, faving, and holy; in which his own
© Name was infcrib’d ; perfect, which ts never to
€ fail; being compleat in TenCommands,un{pot-
© ted,converting Souls ; which when the Hebrews
© forgot, he put them in mind of it bythe Pro-.
© phet Malachi, faying,Remember ye the Law of 1 +
© Mofes, the Man of God, who gave you in charge
© Commandments and Ordinances ; ----

_© Now the Law is the Decalogue, which the e. 20.
© Lord promulgated to them with an audible
© Voice, before the People made that Calfwhich


€ reprefented the Egyptian Apis. And the Law is
S 4 * righteous


264 A ifironomical iP rincipies


‘righteous; and therefore it’is called! the Law,
“becaufe Judgments are therice: madé according

“tothe Law of Nature: +This Lawois Geods

*Holy, and fuch as lays no Compulfion in things .

Exod. xx. Politive; for He fays, If thou wilt: make mean
24. © Altar, theu foalt make tt of Earth. Tt doesnot
“fay, Make one, but If thou wilt make’: (It does

“not impoté a Neceffity, but gives leave for their

“own free Liberty ; For God: does) not ftand, in

_ “need of Sacrifices, being by Nature! above all
“Want. But knowing thatasof old,/Abel, beloved |

“of God,and Noab, and Abrabam, andithofe that
“fucceeded, without being requir’d, » but only

“mov'd of themfelves, by the Law of Nature,

“did offer Sacrifices to God, out of ‘a grateful

“Mind, fo he did now permit the Hebrews; not
“commanding, but if they shad a mind, | permit

“ting them; and, if they-offer’d from ‘aright
*Intention, fhewing: himfelf pleas’d: with their

Pfal.l, ‘Sacrifices. "Therefore he fays, Jf thou defiveft to
* © offer, donot offer to mé as one that ftandsiin need

“of it; for I fland in need of nothing :\ for the

“World is mine and the’ Fulne{s thereof. But,
“afterthe Sin of the Golden Calf, then was God |

“angry, as being ungratefully treated by them 5 ;

“and bound them with Bonds which couldnotibe

“loofed ; with a mortifying Burden, and a hard
“Collar, €%c, ——— that being prefs’d andgall'd

. »f by thy. Collar, thou mayft depart from the Faror
Ex.xxxil.° of Polytheifm ; and laying afide that, Lhefeare
541 “thy Gods, O- Ufrael; may'ft be mindful eofothat
_ ©Hear, O Wael, the Lord-onr God is one Tota

_ Deutivra§ ond may’ft run back again ‘to’that Daw: which
“is inferted by me inthe Naturé of all Men; ‘Dliat
“ there is only One God, in Heaven, and on are 3


*


of RELIGION, 265
and tolove him with all thy Heart, and allthy -
“Might, and all thy Mind, and to fear none but

‘him, €&e. thes |

‘But, Bleffed are your Eyes, forthey fee, and c. oy.
‘your Ears, for they hear: Yours, 1 fay, who Matth.
“have believ’d in. the One God, not by Necef-*ili.16.
“tity, but by a, found Underftanding, in obe-
“idience. to ‘Him, that called you; for you are
“relealed from .the Bonds, and treed from the
* Servitude |
. © You therefore are Bleffed, who are delivered

“from the Curfe,...For Chrift, the Son of God,
‘by his coming, has. confirm’d and compleated
“the, Law; but has taken away the additional
“ Precepts ; althoughnotall of them, yet at leaft
“the moft grievious ones: Having confirm’d the
‘former, and abolifh’d the latter; and has again
“fet the, Free Will,of Men at Liberty :
“And befides, before, his coming’ he refus’d the \
“Sacrifices of the People, while they frequently

‘ offer’d them, when) they finned againft him,

‘and thought he was to be appeafed with Sacri-

“fices, butnot by, Repentance, €%c, +— [ Here
‘follow many excellent Quotations to this Purpofe
Sout-oftthe Old.Feftament ; and then the Con-

“ {titutions go on ; | If therefore before his com-

‘ing, he fought for a clean Heart and a contrite
Sitniried more than Sacvifices, &c, —— Not eee
* taking away the Law of Nature, but abrogating

* thofetadditional Laws, €#c. 41

* For he did not. take: away: the,Law of Na-c, 23,

“tures ¢-but! confirm’d it:. For he that faid in

“the Law, The Lord thy God is one Lord ; the Deut.vi.g
‘fame fays in the‘Gofpel, That they sight know Johnxvii.
“thee the only true. God. And he that faid,3. 9 ~’
‘Dhow foalt love thy Neighbour as thy felf fays eee

iia ? In 18,


C, 226


266


A ftronomical Principles


John xiii° in the Gofpel, renewing the fame Precept, 4


3+


“new Commandment I give unto you, that ye love
“one another. We who then forbad Murder,
“does now forbid caufle(s Anger. He that for-
“bad Adultery, does now forbid all unlawful
“Lufs. He that forbad Stealing, now pro-
“nounces him moft happy who fupplies thofe


“that are in want out of his own Labours. He


“that forbad Hatred, now pronounces him blef-
“fed that Joves bis Enemies. He that forbad
“ Revenge, now commands Long-/uffering ; not
“asif jut Revenge were an unrighteous Thing,
“but becaufe Long-fuffering is more excellent.
© Nor did he make Laws to root out our na-
“tural Paffions, but only to forbid the Excefs of
“them, €8e. He has in feveral ways
“changed Baptifm, Sacrifice, the Priefthood,
“and the Divine Service, which was confin’d to
“one Place: For inftead of daily Baptifms, he
“has given only one, whichis that into bis Death.
*Inftead of one Tribe, he has appointed that out
“of every Nation, the Bef? fhould be ordained
“for the Priefthood ; and that not their Bodies
“fhould be examin’d for Blemifhes, but their
“Religion and Lives. Inftead of a bloody Sacrifice,
“he has appointed that reafonable and uubloody
“ yityftical one, of his Body and Blood, which is
* performed, to reprefent the Death of the Lord
“by Symbols, €3e. |

‘Tet us therefore follow Chrift, that we
‘may inherit his Bleffings. Let us walk


“after the Law, and the Prophets, by the Gof-


“vel, €8c.
©“ Let us be obedientto Chrift, as to. our
“King ; as having Authority to change the
*feveral. Conftitutions; and having, as a Le-
© giflator,


an a eee eee emer)
of RELIGION. 267

__ EE prupestntpeneneeensy

* giflator, Wifdom to make new Conftitutions, 3

* in different Circumftances : Yet fo that every

* where the Laws of Nature be immutably pre-

* ferv'd.

CII.) The next Reafon why I believe the
Truth of the ‘Fewé/b and Chriftian Revelations,
is this; That Aftronomy, and the reft of our
certain Mathematick Sciences, do confirm the
Accounts of Scripture; fo far as they are con-
cern’d.

*Tis certain that in many Points we can
examine the Affertions of Ancient Authors,
whether they fay true or not, by fome Parts of
the Mathematicks; and particularly in fuch
Cafes as the Enquiries of our Age enable us to
examine Things more nicely than the Authors
of Old Accounts could imagine: And againft
which Methods of Examination they could
therefore by no means provide; any other
ways, I mean, than by giving us the Ancient
Facts as they really’happen’d. In which Cafes
the Difcovery of the Juftnefs of the Proportions
of Things, and the Agreement of the Old
Narrations with Mathematical Computations,
will be a very great Argument for the Vera-
city of the Writers; as will the Abfurdity of
fuch Proportions, and the Difagreement of
Things, be a like great Argument for their
Carelefnefs or Falfity. Now this Reafoning
being obvions; let us try fome of the Sacred -
-Narrations by it; and fee on which Side this
xerm'excv Will incline us, and that in fome of its
moft remarkable Inftances. ‘Thus we have al- Part vii
ready feen that the Age of the World, as taken ¢., Py Mae
from the Sacred Records, perfeétly agrees with prius.
the beft Methods which Chronology and

Natural
4


968 A fronomical Principles :


N atural_Hiftery can afford us for its Determi-


nation. | + pacernt , 19%
NewTbeo- Thus it hes been elfewhere demonftrated,
FY, that the moft Ancient Year of the Werld3


PI4&ee oven before, .as well.as.after, the Deluge; ‘had
Gen. vii. juft, Twelve Months; of ‘Thirty Days. apiece;
11. with or Three Hundred and Sixty Days in the whole ;
v. 24- and as Mofess Accountof the Deluge does moft na-


AOR gral roi ed hs an
NewTheo- ‘Thus Ihave elfewhere largely fhewn,;'That
a that Deluge: muft by all. Aftronomical ,Compu-
pa tations, have begun, that very. Month; nay,
that,.yery .Week, and. that very Days, which
Mofes aflures us it really did begin... 9° «-
Chronol.Old Thus alfo I have elfewhere fhew’d how ex-


Tef.piz, actly. the Canon of Ptolemy, the fureft, Monu-

13, 14 mient.of Ancient Prophane Chronology now in

sd Oty the World, does agree to, and fupport the Sa-

~~ cred Chronology .;,. and. indeed. illuftrate,the

Sacred Prophecies of Dauie] thereon depend-

ing ;,and that in fuch difficult Branches of it,

Ibid. p. as .had been otherwife too hard, for, all) our

198, 199 Few and Chrifian Commentators». Many

ley other Inftances of this Nature may be» alfo

collected. by the Inquifitive from my. New

Theory of the Earth; from my Chronology of

the Old Leftament,, and. Harmony of the Four

Evaugeliis.; and from my Effay o# the Re-

velation.of St. John; to fay nothing’ of.my

other Writings. But becaufe thofe Examples —

have been, there, already ,produc’d by me, 4

fhall fay. no more, of.them here ; and rather

i __ alledge a.remarkable. one, which has not been
iv 8" there, mentioned. ; |


“Tt


of RELIGION. 269


It is well knowh, that Mofes affires us, Gen. vi.
how at the gerieral Deluge, all Land Animals V4 74)
that efcap’d the fame, were faved by an Ark ;
that this Ark held Sevens of Clean, and~Paits
of Uncleanh Beafts ; with their Food for the
full Space of a Year; and that from thence
therefore all fuch Creatures are now derived
throughout the Earth. He alfo gives us the
Dimenfions of this Ark, 3co Cubits long; 50
Cubits broad; and 30 Cubits high. Yet does
itno way appear that Mo/es, or any of his
Contemporaries, could then examine rhe Num-~
ber of all fuch Animals, orthe quantity of Food
neceflary: for them, during fo long an Inter-
val, as the Modern Mathematicians and Natu-
ralifts have done. Here therefore we have one
of the faireft and moftexa¢t Methods of trying
the Verity of this Part of the Sacred Hiftory
that could well be defired : And this Method
has accordingly been put in Praétice in
this very Cafe, by Two Eminent Mathema-
ticians and Naturalifts, Bateo, and Bifhop See Pool’s
Wilkims; and it has thence appeared, that if Synop fis,
we Meafure all by a common Cubit of 18 and Bishop
Inches, the Ark will fully contain all thofe Wilkins.
Creatures, with their Food for a Year ; and

that in feparate and convenient Cells arid
Apartments; though in a fomewhat ftrait and

dificult Manner. It has alfo fince appeared,

by Bithop Cumberiand’s more exact ftating of Scripture
the Old Cubit, that it was not fo fhort as irs
18, but in Reality near 22 Inches long; and pisshenic! =
by Confequence, as that Learned Prelate judi-

cioufly obferves, that an Ark built by that

Cubit, being almoft double to one built by

this other, will not only. in a {trait Manners
it but


A {fironomical Principles


but with great Eafe and Freedom, contain all
that we have above-mentioned ; though this
it will do ftill, without abundance of wafte
Room, which would have ferved to no ufe-
ful Purpofes. So that the Refult of thisCom-
putation is plainly this; That the Dimenfions
of Noah's Ark, as fet down in the Sacred
Hiftory, are fully attefted to by Geometry
and Natural Hiftory; and that thofe Dimen-
fiods are as well proportion’d to the End for
which they were defign’d, as any Mathema-
tician or Archite& could now chufe for the like
Purpofes: Which Exactnefs, fince none in the
Days of Mofes could naturally attain to, ’tis
moft reafonabfe to fuppofe it true Faét, and
to afcribe the Direction of the whole, as
Mofes does, to the moft perfect Geometrician,
who aéts always ix Number, Weight, and
Meafure, the Great Creator and Provider
for Mankind, and all Creatures whatfo-
ever.

CII.) Another Reafon why I believe the Truth
of the Fewi/band Chriftian Revelations, isthis ;
That the other Ancienteft and beft Hiftorical
Accounts now known, do, generally fpeaking,
confirm the Accounts of Scripture, fo far as
they are concern’d. ‘That this is a moft na-
tural and fure way of difcovering the Vera-
city of any pretended Ancient Hiftories in one
Country, to compare them with the other
Ancient and Approved Records of the Neigh-
bouring Nations, which had Concerns with
them; or with any other Ancient Records that
are of good Efteem relating to the fame Times,
and the fame Affairs, is without Controverly


- among all Men. Accordingly, when we are


examin«


of RELIGION.
examining the Veracity of the Sacred Writers
of the Fewifh Nation, by whom almoft all
the Books of Scripture were written, it can-
not but be highly neceflary to proceed by the
fame Method. Nor are our Unbelievers un-
appriz’d of the Fitnefs of this Procedure, when
they appear fo ready to alledge even the
moft poorly attefted Antiquities of fome other
Nations, to oppofe them to thefe well at-
tefted Antiquities of the Fews: Which Pro-
cedure fhews at once their Acknowledgment
of the Reafonablenefs of this way of Enquiry ;
and yet the Weaknefs of their Caufe upon fuch
an Examination. For, give me leave to fay,
that if all the {maller Fragments, of even any
tolerable Credit or Antiquity, which can be
found in all the old Books, of which we have
any Accounts, and may feem cenfiderably to
contradict the Sacred Records, were gathered
together, and were compar’d with thofe moft
Ancient, Authentick, and Numerous Books
and Fragments, which evidently fupportthem ;
thofe I mean, collected by Fofephus againft
Apion ; by Eufebiusin his Evangelical Prepara-
tion and Demonftration; by Auetius in his
Evangelical Demonftration ; by Grotins in his
Truth of the Chriftian Religion ; by Bochart in
his Phaleg. and Hierozoican; by Bifhop Stz/-
Hing fleet in his Origines Sacre ; and by many
others who have written on that Noble Sub-
ject, the Difference of the Evidence would
appear vaftly great andfurprizing. Infomuch
that one of the greateft Mafters of all that
Ancient Learning, Grotivs, does dire€tly pro-
fefs, that if we do not reckon fome open


\


Wh his


Dey
€


eritat


é A ya ae Relig.
Enemies to the Fewifh and Chriftian Religions, Chrift


who ili. 14.


279


- from. what is Trifling and Spurious. Thus


Afironomical Erinciples
who lived too late to know ‘Things themfelves>
and were too partial to be believ’d without
other Authority, there are not any Genuine
Records, or Teftimonies of Antiquity,extant,
that contradict the Scriptures. Which Thing


being fo, it is moft highly reafonable for us to


have agreat Veneration tor thofe Sacred ‘Re-
cords, which, however different from Modern
Hiftories, as they ought to be, are yet fo
very agreeable to, and fo fully confirm’d by the
other oldeft and moft faithful Remains of the
Ancient Ages of the World.

IV. Another Reafon why I believe the Truth
of the Fewifh and Chriftian Revelations isthis ;
that the more Learning has increafed, the more
certain in general do the Scripture Accounts
appear, ahd its difficult Places have been more
clear’dthereby. If Hypothefes, or Accounts of
Things in any Kind, efpecially when they are
ftrange and furprizing, be advanc’d or believ’d


by any, and then put into the Method of Ex-


amination before the World, when it is im-
proving in Knowledge, and New certain Dil-
coveries are frequently made in all Parts of
Learning; itis juftly to beexpetted, that what
is really true and well-grounded will ftand the
Teft, and what is not fo, will fink under it:
The one will thereupon be approv’d and efta-
blifhed ; and the other rejected and difcarded.
Thus-it happens frequently in Human Opini~
ons ;, and by this means the Improvement.


of the Learning of thefe Two laft Centu-


ries has done vaft Service to Truth, by di- —
ftinguifhing what is Solid and Genuine ;


we


of RELIGION:


we now generally know which Writings pre=
tending to Antiquity, or to belong to Ancient
Authors of Reputation, are Genuine, and which
are Suppolititious ; which till the late Revival
of Critical Learning, were {trangely confounded
together. ‘Thus the late Improvements in Aftro-
nomy, particularly by 'Telefcopes, and the won-
derful Difcoveries, of Sir J/aac Newton, have
determin’d the Difpute between the Pto/e-
maick, the Zychowicky and the Copernican
Syftems of the Heavens, in Favour of the
lait; which tilllately was Matterof great Dil-
pute, even among the Aftronomersthemfelves.
And agreat Number of other Examples might
ealily be alleg’d to the fame Purpofe. Let
us then apply this Method of Trial, and fee
whether the Ancient Polite Learning of the
Greeks and Romans of Old; or the much
greater and folider Learning of the Two laft
Centuries; the former of which grew u


fomewhat after the Times of the Qld Tefta-.


ment, and the latter long after the Time of
the New, has confirm’d or contradiéted thofe
Sacred Books of the Jews and Chrifiaus 5 that
we may the better judge of their Solidity and
Authority.. Now in this Enquiry, what Fo-
fepbus has produc’d for the Fewi/b Religion, in
his Books againft Apion, already quoted, may
ferve asa Specimen of the vaft Advantage the
Jew Infpired Writings received from the
Greek and Romain Learning ; of which he was
a great Mafter. Andwhat Grotius has produc’d
for both the fewi/band Chriftian Religion, and
the clearing their Difficulties in his Truth
of the Chriftian Religion, and Comments Re

3 this


274


A ftronontical Principles


the Scripture, may be a Sample of the great
Confirmation they all receive from the Revival


> of Ancient Learning in the laft Ages ; of which


he was no lefs a Mafter. Nor, as I hope,
will what has been above produc’d from the ~
Modern Aftronomy, Mathematicks, and Phi-
lofophy, for thé Support of the fame Infpired
Writings, be unfit to be efteemed a farther Spe-
cimen in’ general to the fame Purpofe. But
that I may not feem wholly to content my
felf with what has been already obferved by
my felf or others, under this Head, 1 fhall
produce a new Specimen or ‘Two for the fame
Purpofe. °Tis well known what a Noife the
Scepticks and Unbelievers make with the Un-
certainty of very Old Accounts, and very Old
Books ; the great Omiffions, Additions or In-
terpolations that may eafily have happen’d in
them, during a Courfeof many Ages; and the
confequent Uncertainty of the Books of the
New, but efpecially of thofe of the Old Tefta-
ment; and fo, moft of all, of the oldeft Parts
of it, fuch as the Five Books of Mofes. Now
in this Cafe the Revival of Learning, and of
Languages, and the Inquifitivenefs of this laft
Age, has procur’d us a moft Noble Treafure,
as an Atteftation in this Matter, where it was
leaft expected : And from the fmall Remainders
of the Old Samaritans, {till left about Sichem
in Fudea, we have ‘lately recover’d the Penta-
tench it felf: Not as in later Ages, known and
owned by the Body of the ‘Fewi/b Nation, or
Two Tribes, fpread over the World; but as
peculiarly receiv’'d and allowed by all the
‘Twelve’Fribes, before the Babylonifb Captivity 5


» PRELVALON.


ne CP eae EES RRS TRB AES


‘as written in’ the Original Character ufed be«
fore that Captivity, by| that whole Nation;
and as continued down to, and received by the
Remains of thofe Ten Tribes in Samaria, all
the ‘Times of their bitter Hatred to the other
jews, even to this very Day. So that this
muft.needs bea Copy entirely diftiné from the
common Mafforete one now current, and in alt
Probability much older than thofe from whence
even the Septuagint made their Tranflation;
long before the ‘Times of our Saviour. Yet
upon the Gomparifon of this Samaritan Penta-
tech, with the common Hebrew, and with
the  Septiagint ; abating the Diverfity of fome
Chronological Numbers in them all, as to the
Lives of the Patriarchs, before aid after the
-Plood, of {mall importance here; there appears
but very little Difference between them; and
none at all that know of inany Points of Gon-
{equence, either in Hiftory, Doctrine or Pratice:
So that forthe main, it exceedingly ftrengthens
the Authority of our prefent Copies of the
Peutateuch ; and by Parity of Reaion, af the
prefent Copies in good meafute of all the Books
of the Old Teftamerit, which do with us other-
wife ftand upon the fame Foot; and are ufually
of a much lower Antiquity than thefe Five
Books of Mofes:  'Tis alfo well known that the
Scriptures affirm, what feems to us very fur-
prizing, and next to impoffible, w/z that in
theearly Times or the: World, Men commonly
liv’d to mahy Hundred Years of Age; and
that in particular before the Deluge, they liv’d
frequently to near.a Thoufand; that afer the


Deluges their Lives declin’d gradually from
| id Vive


4


2753


Gen: ¥;
a na xi.


276


Antig. I.
ot


Chronol.
p- 60-- 65


Pp: 65-68.


A fronomical Principles :


Five or Six Hundred, to about Seventy or Eighty
Years only ; although fromthe Days of David,
till this’ Time, that Age of Man has been at.a
Stand, and about that {malleft Duration. This
Account muft be own’d to be bold and ftrange
tous, after near 3000 Years Experience of the
laft and fhorteft Period of Human Life. But
then, when we reflect that the Learning of 7o/e-
phus produc’d many ftrong Ancient Atteftations
to this Account, which were then Extant ;
that the prefent Chinefe Annals, lately difce-
ver'd, exactly agree, fo far as they are con-
cern’d; as I have elfewhere fhewn; and that
the prefent Numbers of Mankind upon the
Earth, taken together with the ufual Period
of Years for their Increafe and Doubling ; and
with the Number of Years that by thebeft Evi-
dence the Earth has been in its prefent State ;
do plainly require fuch longer Duration of
Mens Lives in thofe Ancient Ages: Which
laft ways of Trial are entirely owing to the
new Improvements in Learning: We thall fee
Reafon at once to believe the Truth of the
Fact, how ftrange foever it may now appears;
and to pay a due Deference to thofe Original
Sacred Records, whence we were firft and beft
inform’d of it. It cannotalfo but appear very
ftrange at firft Sight in the Old Teftament,
that David and Solomon efpecially, fhould in
fo peculiar a Manner poffefs and make Ufe
of a much greater Quantity of Silver and Gold
than wehave any like Examples of even in this
Age; when yet by our Modern Navigation,
the Indian Mines have yielded us fuch new
Treafures of that Kind; and that yet after-

ward


of RELIGION. 277


ward the ‘ewifa Nation fhould lofe thofe
mighty Riches. Yet will all this appear very
agreeableto Truth, if weconfult Dr. Prideaux’s
late Admirable Book, Of the Conjoining the
Hiftory of the Old and New Teftament, where in
the very Beginning of it, he has trac’d the
Fewifo Navigation, and fuch its Effeéts, with
the greateft Sagacity, and to the greateft Satif
faction.

I might alfo inftance in the Improvements
in Sacred Chronology, by the Difcovery of the
Canon of Ptolemy; in the full Solutions of the
Deluge long fince paft, and of the Conflagration
yet to come; with many other Things of a
like Nature, which the Modern Improvements
and Difcoveries have affifted us in; all ftill in
exact Agreement with the Scriptures of the
Old and New Teftament: But becaufe I have
already hinted at thefe Matters under former
Heads, and have elfewhere more fully infifted on
them to the fame Purpofe, I fhall no farther
enlarge on them in this Place.

CV.) [believe the Fewi/b and Chriftian Reves
lations to be true, becaufe there have been ge-
netally fuch ftanding Memorials prefery’d of
the Truth of the Principal Fatts, as give us
great Affurances they were real. That this
is a proper and ufual way of preferving the
Memory of paft Adtions, the Cuftoms, and
Medals, and Pillars, and Infcriptions, and So-
lemnities, and Sepulchral Monuments of all pyimitice
Nations, do Teftify.- And that both the Fewif) chrift.Re-
and Chriftian Legiflators have remarkably taken 2v'4,Vol.
the like Care and Method, I have elfewhere aps m5

T 3 obferv’d A bat


ge


Patt Vil.
§.4.p145:
prius.


‘obfery’d ; to which Trefer my Reader.


 Aftronomical Principles


, Only.
give me leave to Inftance here, in a few of
thefe ftanding Memorials or Monuments which
are not theretaken Notice of, and which feem
to me remarkable Confirmations of the 'Truth
of the Sacred Hiftory, even in fome of its leaft
probable Branches. Thus the. Accounts we have
in Genefis iii. of the Fall.of Adam, upon the
‘Temptation of the Devil under the Appearance
of a Serpent, and the Suggeftion of his Wife ;
and the confequent Change of the State of our
firft Parents thereupon, is, in all its Branches,
one of the moft improbable and amazing Hi+
{tories in the whole Bible. »-I:mean even as
taken barely and literally, and: 2s:expounded ia
the Old Chriftian Records themfelves 5 with-
out thofe abiurd Additions and Improvements
which Aufizn and Calvin, with their Followers,
have joined to it. Yet when I confider that
the Remains and Memorials. of this great Cas
taftrophe «already .mentioned, are. evidently
true in Fact, and yet can no way be accounted
for on anyother Hypothefis 51 fubmit’ my
Faith to the Evidence of the Sacred Hiftory, fo
well attefted to by the prefent State of: Natures
and rather wait with Patience’ till Providence
fhall pleafe to.:wnravel the Myftery of this furs
prizing Scene, than venture, by denying ‘the
Truth of the Facts, to oppofe my felf to that
ftrong Evidence, which the Mofaick Hiftory,as
attefted toby thofe fenfible - Demonftrations,


See Bifvop affords us. ‘Thus the Dead Sea, oy Lake of
Patrickon Sodom, with its’ known, ‘but:unexampled and


Gen, x1x.


furprizing Phenomena, look as if they were thé
dire€t Remains of a terrible Earthquake, join’d


of RELIGION.
swith a more terrible Shower of Fireand Brim-
tone. from Heaven, by which a fruitful Land
was turned into a Salt and Sulphureous Sea, for
the unnatural Wickedne/s of them that dwelt there-
in: Exactly according to the Sacred Hiftory of
that terrible Deftruction of thofe People, - who
-at oncé: Inhabited and Polluted that Noble Soil ;


279


Pfal. cyii
340


_and is become a feafonable and ftanding Exam- y


ples baving fuffered the Vengeance of au eternal
or unquenchable Five: Or, inthe Words of the
\Author of the Book of Wifdom, Of whofe
Wickedne[s even to this Day, the waft Land that
finoaketh..is a Teftimony; and Plants bearing
Fruit, which never come to Ripenefs; and a
franding Pillar of Salt, a Monument of an u-

believing Soul.
Thus the Annual Feafts of the Paffover, of
Weeks, and of Tabernacles, among the Anci-
ent Jews, together with the Annual Baptifm
and Weekly Communion among the Ancient
Chriftians ; with their Solemnities of Eafler,
Afcenfion, and Pentecoft; befides their imme-
diate Atpplication to the Ufes of Piety and
Religion, did alfo admirably and conitantly at-
teftto the Truthof thofe wonderful Facts, whofe
Memorials they were; I mean the miraculous
Deliverance of the ‘ews from the Egyptian
Bondage, with their Legiflation, and living in
Tabernacles for forty Years in the Wildernefs
afterwards; andthe Death and Refurrection,
and Afcenfion of our Saviour; on which
Fats the Iwo Inftitutions are principally
founded. Imight be very large and full under
this Particular : But that would make this
Argument too Difproportionate to the reft,
2 . ae ane


2


280


Aftrononical P riaciples


and would lead me ‘too far out of my
Way: So I forbear ;\ and proceed to’ De- -

ciare, 7 |
(VI.) That Itherefore believe the Zew#/b and
Chrifiian Revelations to be true, becaufe Iam
perfuaded that neither of thofe Religions —
could poffibly have been receiv’d, eftablifi’d ~
and preferv’d in the World, without fuch Won-
ders and Miracles as the Sacred Hiftory con-
tains, and whichare undeniable Proofs of their
coming from God. For, to-day nothing hereof
the Gentiles, if we Confider but the Obftinacy and
Perverfenefs of the People of the Fews»ine all
Ages, and that ftill they did, to the utmoft
‘Times we can trace them in general, and as a
Nation, moft firmly believe, andopenly fubmit,
and moft tenacioufly adhere to the Doétrines,
Difcipline, Laws and Government delivered by
Mojfos; how ftrange, uneafy, or burdenfome
foever, feveral of the Particulars were; and
did yet in great Numbers, on the Preaching of
the Gofpel, renounce many of thofe their for-
mer Opinions and Conftitutions, of which
otherwife they were fo exceeding tenacious ;
and entirely receiv’d, believ’d and obey’d the
Chriftian Revelation, on its firft Appearance
in the World; and this in Oppofition to their
former Prejudices, their certain Interefts, their
Reputation, and Defire of Self-prefervation ; nay.
at a Time when they knew they mutt frequently
lofe, and fuffer, and die for this new Religion ;
and all this without any other Hopes than what
belong’d to another World ; and muft be en-
tirely fruftrated, if that Religion proved falfe:
Confidering all this, I fay, it is, morally {peak-
ing,

f


of RELIGION,


ing, impoffible that fuch Numbers, of Fews
efpecially, fhould’ fubmit fucceffively to “both
thefe Religions, as they certainly did, without
convincing and undoubted Miracles for their
Confirmation.

CVII-) [believe the Truth of the Fewi/b Reve-


~ dation, becaufe I perceive that that N ation,which_


all along Hated and’ Perfecuted the Meffengers
and Prophets of God when they were alive,
were yet forced to believe all along that they
were true Meflengers and Prophets of God, and
their Writings of Divine Infpiration. 'This is
to me a very remarkable Obfervation, a very
Certain one, and of the greateft Confequence
inthis Enquiry. That the ews were ancientlya
Stubborn, Difobedient, and Stiff-necked People,
and not without the moft forcible Methods to
be reduc’d to the Obfervance of the Divine Laws,
is evident in their whole Hiftory; that they all
along, in particular, oppofed. Afofes,; and Re-
jected, and even Perfecuted and Slew, the fuc-
ceeding Prophets, when they were fent unto


okt


them to call them to Repentance and Amend-


ment, is alike evident therein : That yet they
were forced to own, that thefe Men were the
true Prophets of God, is equally plain therein ;
and is demonftrable from their conftant Recep-
tion afterwards of thofe Writings wherein thefe
Things appear, as Divinely Infpird to this
very Day. Itis alfo clear in thofe very Writings
{till extant, that their Contents. are fo cutting
and fevere, without the leaft Tin@ture of Flat-
tery, or {paring them in their Vices, that no-
thing but. a full Conviction of the Certainty of
their Divine Miffion and Authority, could ever

I | induce


282


A fironomical Principles


3Kings


xxll.7, 8.


¥.19°-38.


induce them toa Reception of them. TheC€afe
in general of the fewi/h Legiflator and Prophets,
was all along much the fame with that of good
Micaiahb, in the Days of ,Abab; concerning
whom when Fehofophat enquired, Is there uot a
Prophet of the Lord that we may enquire of bime
Wicked Abab reply’d, Lhere is One Mau, Mi-
caiah, the’ Son of Imlah, but I hate him ; for be
doth not prophefy Good concerning me, but Evil.
Yet all this Hatred notwithftanding, Micazah’s
Denunciation of God’s Judgments upon Ahab,
followed with its immediate and dreadful Com-
pletion, foon convine’d them all, that-he wasa
true Prophet of God: And He is accordingly
ever fince allow’d to have been {uch by that-whole


Nation. And this has been equally true of the
reft of the Fewifh Prophets all along. which


feems tome a {trong Argument for their Veraci-
ty and Authority, as ftill abfolutely undeniable
among that Nation. ee gota
(VIII.) I believe the Fewi/h Religion to be
True, becaufe the Ancient and Prefent State of the
Fewiflo Nation fhews the Truth of their Law,
and ofthe Scripture Prophecies relating to. them.
The Law of Mo/es did, in the plaineftand moft _
affecting manner, deliver fuch obliging Promi-
fes tothat Nation, upon their keeping clofe to
the Worthip of the True God, and to the Obe-
dience of the Laws then delivered to them;
with fuch terrible Threatnings upon their Reje-
étion of them, upon their Idolatry and Difobe-
dience ; and the fucceeding Hiftory and State of
that Nation all along, does fo clearly and parti-
cularly inform us of the Completion of thofe
Promifes and 'Threatnings to this very Day, as.
ae ee afford


of RELIGION. 2$2


afford us the ftrongeft Evidence for the Divine
Authority of thofe Denuncigtions. | See Bifhop
Patrick on Deut. xxviii. | Ries is the Cale dit-
ferent in the particular Prophecies occurring in
all the Old Teftament, relating totheir Defcent
_ into, and fojourning in Egypt; their Babylonifh
Captivity under Nevuchadnezzar, and their Re-
{toration under Cyrus; with their prefent long,
and tedious Banifhment from their own Coun-
try, without a Prophet, or King, orany Divine
Revelation; with many other Circumftances of
their Affairs, which have been evidently tulfilled
in their proper Seafons, ‘This Argument feems
alfo to me of very great Weight. But becaufe
I have elfewhere infifted on it, in my Boy/e’s
Leéiures, and in my Chronology of the Old Te-
filament, (fhallnot hereenlarge, but refer the in-
quifitive Reader thither for his farther Satisfa-
ction. Only I may be allow’d here to put the
Unbelievers in mind, how peculiar and unpa-
rallel’d the State of this People has ever been.
That at tirft they werefeparated from the reft of
the World ; thatthey lived in it afterward like
a feparate Species of Creatures; that after all
their Miferies and Captivities, they have ftilt
preferved themfelves a feparate People, and ftill
recovered their ancientLand andSettlement again |
in a wonderful manner, till this their laft grand —
Captivity and Difperfion ; and that the Body of
thetwo Tribes, and fome Remains of the Ten
at leaft, are even now, to the Surprize of all
confidering Men, afterfome Thoufands of Years
a feparate Body, unmixt with other Nations,
among which they fojourn; as at once a ftand-
jing Monument of the Truth of their original
“ia RIOD Sacred


2 84 A ftronomical Principles


sacred Books, and waiting in readinefs for their

final Reftoration, according tothe fame Prophe+
cies. wf

(IX.) I believe the Chriftian Religion in parti-

cular to be true, becaufe the Ancient and Prefent

State of the Chriftian Church fhews the Truth

of the Original Records of Chriftianity, and of

the Scripture Prophecies relating to them... The

Author of our Religion, and his Apoftles, re-

ferr’d the Fews tothe many Predi€tions concern-

Mat-xxiv. ing their Meffias occurring in the Old Tefta-

rj. _... ment ; particularly that famous onenow known

gp we by the Name of Daniel’s 70 Weeks, which they

Dan. ix. could not then deny to be fulfilled in him: They

24, &. foretoldthat Oppofition, and Perfecution, which

ewe. the Ghriftian Religion fhould meet with in its

alibi, ™ Propagation ; that yet it fhould gradually pre-

vail over the World, notwithftanding fuch Op-

pofition and Perfecution: That the Body ofthe

Jewifh Nation, with their'Temple and Worfhip

fhould, for a Punifhment of their heinous Sins

in Crucifying their Meffias, and Perfecuting his

_ Followers, in that very Generation of Men, be

Lue. xxl. utterly fubverted and deftroyed; that the Fews

74 foould fall by the Edge of the Sword; that they

fhould be led away Captive into all Nations ; and

that Jerufalem fhould be trodden down of the

Gentiles, ti the Times of the Gentiles /hould be

_ fullfilled : That the Church of Chrift fhould at

Mat-xx1ve firft be Pure and Holy : But that after fome time

| Ayan Gy falfe Teachers and Hereticks fhould corrupt it:

3. That at Rume or Myftical Babylon efpecially, a

Apoc.paf- Grand Apoftacy or Antichriftian State fhould

im, arife, and over-bear and corrupt true Chriftiani-

ty, and under'Ten Antichriftian Kingdoms, in-

troduce Tyranny and Idolatry into it for 1260

. Years


of RELIGION.


Years together ; tillafter whichtime the Church
fhould not be ableto recover her Primitive Pu-
rity ; with many other fuch great, and ftrange,
and, when the Chriftian Books were written,
moft highly improbable Events; all which have
eminently and notorioufly come to pafs in the
Face of all the World, as the moft conyin-
cing Demonftrations of the Verity and Divini-
ty of the Chriftian Religion. I have elfe-


where largely treated of the greateft Part of


thefe Predictions, in my Effay on the Reve-
lation of St. ‘Fobu, and fhewn the Exa@tnefs
of their Completion, I fhall not therefore

enlarge any farther upon them in this Place.
(X.) I believe the Chriftian Religion to be
true, becaufe the Ancient Adverfaries of Chri-
{tianity acknowledged the Miracles whereon the
-Chriftian Religion is founded. to be True. I
here infift only on the Confeffion of Adverfaries
as to the Truth of the Faéts on which the Chri-
fiian Religion depends: Not that I doubt of
the like Confeffion as to the Miracles wrought
by Mo/fes and the Prophets, for the Confirma-
tion of the Few7/b Religion,where-ever their Ad-«
verfaries had means of knowing the fame. But
becaufe we have but a few Records, or rather
Fragments of Records, now extant from the
Heathen Writers, contemporary with thofe of
the Old Teftament 5 and of them ftill fewer thar
relate diftinctly to the ancienteft and principal
fewifo Miracles, I chufe toconfine this Obferva-
tion to the Chriftian Miracles. And that rhefe
Facts themfelves were originally allow’d to be
_ true by the Enemies of Chriftianity, appears,
not only from the Converfion of yaft Multitudes
| of


285 i


: 236


A ftronomical Principles i


See Jutt.
Dialog.
with 'Try-
pho. Ori-
enagain
Celfus. f
Recognit.


palfim.


of thofe Enemies by the convi¢ctive Evidence of
fuch Miracles to the Faith of Chrift, which I
have fhewed could not have happen’d if they —
had not been fatisfy’d of their Reality ; but by

the Hiftory of the New Teftament, and the
Mention there of the Objections made againft

that Religion, which all fuppofed the fame Re-

ality; and by the Remains of the ancienteft

Writers againft Chriftianity, whether among

the Fews, fuch asZrypho; among the Heathens,

fuch as Ce//fus; or among the old Hereticks,

fuch as Simon Magus ; which do almoft unani-

moufly confefs, and take for granted, that Chrift
and his Apoftles did work fuch Miracles for the

Confirmation of the Chriftian Religion, as the

Chriftian Records do plainly teftify at this Day.
And I dare appeal to all our prefent Scepticks
and Unbelievers, whether they can poflibly per-
fuade themfelves, asthe Old Infidels did, that the
Chriftian Religion is falfe, notwith{tanding there
were very many real Miracles certainly wrought

for its Confirmation : I believe they aré not fo

weak; and I hope not fo wicked neither as this
comes to.

(X1.) I do therefore believe the Fewi/band
Chriftian Revelations to betrue, becaufe the Sa-
cred Writers, ‘who liv’d in Times and ‘Places fo
remote from one another, do yet all carry on
Oneand the Same Grand Defign,vzz. that of the
Salvation of Mankind, by the Worfhip of, and
Obedience to, the One true God, in and through
the King Meffiab; which without a Divine —
Conduétand Infpiration, reaching through thofe
Ages and Places,could never have been done. This
Obfervationis very remarkable as to the Fewif
and Chriftiah Writings, if they be compar’d

with


of RELIGION. 287


Meee noe,


with the feveral Books of the Grees Philofo-
phers ; the former of which never difpute or
debate what their main Scope was to be, or
what they were to have ever in View, as
ever naturally tending to one known Defign be-
forementioned ; while the latter were fo far
from any common Principles of that Nature,
that the very Defignthey wereto aim at, or the
Sumunm Bonum it {elf the fupreme Happinefs
of Man, was a Matter of wonderful Debate Ap. Au-
among them. Nay, Varro, one of their most See ae
famous Authors, is faid to have reckon’d UP NO pelt wix
fewer than 288 poflible Opinions about it. And aS Tek
"tis very plain, that the due Worfhip and blifs-
ful Enjoyment of the One True God, and that
by the Means of the King Meffich; or indeed
any other fuch Noble and Divine Means of at-
taining them, are almoft wholly Strangers to
the Heathen Philofophers. Andno wonder, when
they were fo far from knowing the Nature and
Will of the One True God, withthe true Wor-
thip and Obedience due to him, which yet were
Knowable to Inquifitive Honeft Minds by the |
Light of Nature; or from owning the Neceffity
of a Mediator, or of Divine Revelation; that
they did nor generally acknowledge the One
True God himfelf; much lefs did they make
the Worfhip of, and Obedience to him, the
Foundation of their Doétrine ; as all found
Philofophy, as well as Divinity, ought certainly
to have done. Accordingly, tho’ they all agreed
in the Excellency of Virtue in general, which
God has too deeply ftamp’d upon Human Souls,
and made too evidently neceflary in general to
Human Happinefs, even in this World, to per-
mit


238


A {fironouical Principles


mit it to beoverlook’d by any thinking Men ;
yet did they agreein almoft nothing elfe.And in-
deed, their feveral Philofophical Dogmata, {eem
like our Modern School-Divinity, to have been
rather creditable Kinds of Amufements,and Sub~-
jects for the Exercife of Wit and Parts in Di-
fputation, than directed to the real Inftruction
and Improvement of Mankind in true Religion,
or in the Attainment of Happinefs, either in
this or in another World ; which is the main
View of the Holy Scriptures. Andaccordingly
the Variety of Opinions, and the Frequency of
Difputes among thofe Philofophers, didbutnou-
rifh this difputacious Humour of the feveral
Parties ; and this without any Profpect of the
real Difcovery of Truth, or of reducing Men
to a regular and religious Way of Life, in
order to their future Happinefs ; which forcer-
tain ought to be the grand Intention of all our
Philofophical and Religious Enquiries. Let but
any one compare the unanimous Agreement of
all the Sacred Writers, from Mo/es to Polycarp,
in the main Scheme of Divine Revelation, and
Conduét of Human Life ; withthe almoft entire
Difagreement and Uncertainty there is as tofuch
important Matters among the Heathen Philofo-
phers ; fo far I meanas thofe Matters are known
tobe deriv’d from Revelation ; and he will foon
fee avaft Difference between them; and will not
be able to account for it, without allowing the
former to be of Supernatural and Dzvie, and
the latter of bare Human Original.

(XII) Ibelieve the Truth of the Zewi/h and
Chrifiian Revelations, becaufe the principal Do-
€trines therein delivered are agreeable to the

| ancienteft


of RELIGION. 289


ancienteft Traditions of all otherNations, For
tho’, as I have juft beenabferving, the Heathen
Philofophers among the Greeks, whowere com-=
paratively later, and more modern, and who-fol-
lowed their own Reafonings in all fuch Matters,
were mighty uncertain, and various in their
Philofophical and Religious Notions; as all Men
are when they have no better guidance than Hu-
man Suppofal and Conjecture ; Yet was it quite
otherwife with the more ancient Ages, and thofe
Natural and Divine Doétrines which they re-
ceived by ‘Tradition from their firft Founders,
and which moft probably were originally deriv’d
from the firft Parents of Mankind, or at leaft
from the earlieft of their Progenitors after the
Deluge. Thofe I mean whofe Traces and Frag~
ments are {till extant in the earlieft Sacred Books.
of the Egyptians, Druids,Tyrians,and Brachmans,
in the Remains of Lri/imegifius, of Orpheus, and
Loroafires, &c.and inthe Szbyline Oracles ; thofe
Parts I mean, of them which are well attefted
toby Heathen, Fewifb, and Chriftian Antiquity,
Thefe moft ancient Traditions, ashas been large= _-
ly and fully fthewn by Grotius, Bifhop Stiling fleet
and many others, do, for the main, admirably»
agree with the Fewi/fand Chriftian Revelations ;
not only as to the particular Hiftories and Fa¢ts
contained in the Old Yeftament,of which already ;
but.as to the principal Points on which thofe
Religions are grounded; Imean, the Unity and
Attributes of God ; the Creation of the World
by him; its Deluge already paft, and Confla-
gration {till future; the Immortality of Human
Souls; and the Judgment to come; with the
Rewards and Punifhments of the next World,
This Agreement of the moft Ancient Heathen
| | Traditions,


290
om.


A fironomtical Principles


Traditions, and that in feveral Parts of the
World, with the like Contents of thé Sacred
Writings of the Fews and Chrifizans, cannot but
beamighty Atteftation to them, both as tothofe
particular momentous Points themfelves, and
alfo, ina good Degree, tothe reft of their Con-
tents, fo far asthey are any way connected with,
er belong tothem. Infomuch that He who is
an Infidel, in thofe fundamental Articles efpe-
cially, muft not only oppofe himfelf to the In-
fpired Records of the ‘ews and Chriftians, but
alfo to the beft and oldeft Remains we have in
all others Nations, relating to the fame Do-
étrines. |
- CXL) Tbelievethe Truth of the Jews/band
Chriftian Records, notwithftanding the Difficul=
ties thereto relating, becaufe I obferve that thofe


‘Difficulties donot affeét the Truth of the Fats,


or Affertions, on which thofe Religions are
grounded, but the Conduét of Providence only ;
the Reafons of which Conduct are no Parts of
thofe Religions; and accordingly the Sacred
Writers do never pretend fully to know, or to
reveal them to Mankind. This Etake to bean
Obfervation.of great Weight, and yet not fuffi-
ciently taken notice of by any; v7. That thofe
Infpired Writers, who deliver us the moft im-
portant Meflages and Commands in the Name
of God, with the utmoft Affurance; who re-
late the moft furprizing Miracles, and that as
done, or feen’ by themfelves, and many others
openly, with the greateft Boldnefs; who de=
nounce Threatnings, or promife Bleflings, quite -
beyond their own Ability to make good, with °
the moft affured Confidence ; who reprove Prin=
ces and People as to Crimes of the higheft Na-»
HOE A : ture,


of Riniagiom

‘ture, even while they were entirely under their
Power, and in their Hands, with the utmoft
Freedom and Courage; andwho in their whole
Conduct ever fhow a perfeét fatisfaction in the
Fruth of their Miffion, and Certainty of their
- Infpiration from God ; doyetrarely or not at all
meddle with the Reafons of Providence, the Jue
{tification of the Divine Orders, or the Vindica-
tion of the Juftice and Goodnefs of Godin fuch
his Difpenfations by them. Nay, the reft of
the Prophetsor Apoftles, excepting our Bleffed
_ Saviour himfelf, do generally feem equaily puz-
zléed and furprized at feveral of thofe Difpenfa-
tions; and are found as ready to expoftulate, tho’
generally in a decent and moft humble manner,
with God, concerning fuch his ftrange and furs
prizing Procedure, as other Men, no way con-
cern’d in any fuch Divine Difpenfations at all.
‘Thus, for Example, we find in the ancienteft
Book now extant in the whole Bible, and pro-
bably in the whole World, I mean the Book of
Job, the fame Difficulties and Difputes about
the Conduét of Providence, the Profperity of
the Wicked, and Afflictions of the Righteous,
that we every where elfe meet with in other Au-
thors. And, what is moft of all remarkable,
we here find, that when God himfelf is intro-
duc’d, as finally determining thofe Debates, it


291


XXXVill;
XXX1¥:s


Is done without Affignation of the particular }


Reafons.for their Procedure ; any farther, than
the noble Reprefentation of the Power and Wifs
domof the Almighty in general, and the Means
nefsatid Inability of his Creature Man, andthe
confequent Submiffion due fromthe one to the
other, may be thought fufficient for that Pur«
pofe. Thus we find the Pfahuit equally fur-
U2


prig’d


Pf. Ixxiid,


292


Aftronomical Principles


Ter. Xl. Y,
ac,


priz’d at the fame ftrange Conduct of Provi~
dence, andhardly ableto extricate himfelf from
the Difficulties therein; even with all the Ad-
vantagesof the Mofaick Religion, and the more

nftant Happinefs of theGood, and Afflictions
of the Bad under it, than in any other Nations —
of the World. ‘Thus alfo we find the Prophet
Feremiah ; one whom God frequently made ufe
of in his Revelations tothe ‘few7z/b Nation, and
who endured the fevereft Imprifonment for his
Faithfulnefs to his Duty as a Prophet; was


equally fhock’d and furpriz’d,at the fame feem-


“ingly unequal and partial (Conduct of Provi-


Ecclef.
patiim.See
4 Efd.pai-
fim,


dence ; and complains to God of it; yet with-
out any fullor fatisfactory Anfwer: And thelike
Obfervations may be made asto Solomon, and
others of the Infpired Writers. While yet, thefe
their Difficulties and Complaints, never in the
leaft made them doubt or difpute about the Cer-
tainty of their Miffion and Infpiration ; about


the Truth of the Promifesand 'Threatnings they


Recog 1.
pafiim.


denounced from God ; or about the Reality of
the Miracles that were performed in his Name.
Accordingly I obferve, that Stmon Magus, with
his old Followers among the Hereticks, who al-
lowed the Truth of the Facts and Miracles of
theGofpel, did only make ufe of fuch Reafons

as were taken from the feeming Injuftice, and —
Unaccountablenefs of feveral Parts of Provi-


~ dence, in order to fubvert Chriftianity. _Noris


the Cafe much different among our prefent Un-
believers ; who being not able to find any good
Grounds to overthrow the Truth and Certainty
of the Prophetick and Miraculous Atteftations, »
which the Jews and Chrifitaus allege for the
Divinity


of RELIGION. 293


Divinity of their Religion, do commonly pro-
ceed after the fame manner, and mufter up all
the Arguments they are able from the like In-
{tances of Providence, or Paflages in Scripture
which feem to them abfurd and unreafonable.
Now what is the natural Refult of all this?
But that, as the Scriptures every where allow
and fuppofe, God’s proper Time for unravelling
the Myfteries of his Providence, the Day for 4
the Revelation of bis righteous Fudgment, is not Romiis.
yet come ; that he has yet, duringall this Inter-
val, afforded fufficient Demonftrations of the
Certainty of the Fewi/h and Chriftian Revela-
tion’s Derivation trom him notwithftanding ;
which is the proper State of this Matter,
and ought to be the proper Meafures of our
own Faith and Practice accordingly. For as the
Difficulties are there and only there, where Di-
vine Revelation does not pretend they are yet
cleared; fois thereno certain Difficulties, fo far
as the fame Revelation pretends to Evidence and
Demontftration, for what it recammends tous ;
which Cafe methinks highly deferves the Con-
fideration of our Modern Scepticks and Un-
believers.

CXIV.) Natural Religion, whichis yet fo cer-
tain in itsfelf, is not without fuch Difficulties,
as to the Conduct of Providence, as are object-
€d to Revelation; and therefore none that be-
lieve the former, ought to be deterr’d by fuch
Difficulties from believing the latter. This is
alfo a fomewhat uncommon, but certainly not
an improper Obfervation, as to the Credibility
of Divine Revelation, to all thofeI mean who
- are not entirely Atheifts, or againft all Divine
Providence. ‘Thus we find in the Condu& of

U 3 Natural


)


294. Aftronontical Principles —
Natural Providence fome fuch ftrange Phenome-
wa asare not eafily accountable, or reconcileable
to the moft becoming Notions we all have of
the One, Wife, Juft, and Beneficent Creator and
Governor of the Univerfe. We find fuch Anti-
pathies of even one brute Creature againft ano-
ther; fuch a vaft Number of thofe Creatures
deftroy’d immediately upon their Birth; fuch
fudden and untimely Deaths that frequently —
happen to many others of them in the Courfe
of Things; fuch a vaft Number of them de-
voured by other bruteCreatures, by Men, nay,
fometimes by thofe of their own Species: We find
in the State of Mankind,even abftracted from Re-
velation, fomany Miferies and Calamities every
where inthe World, involving thefeveral, Indi-
viduals from their Birth to their Grave, and thofe
often no way to be avoided or cured by any Me-
thodsof Prudence, or Virtue, or Religion itfelf,
as affords great Difficulties to thinking Per-
fons, and have occafion’d abundance.of Hypo- —
thefes, in order to their Reconciliation with a
general Providence: And after all, are in great
Meafure equally .difficult to us, as they have
been to the paft Ages of the World. If there-
fore, thefe great Objections notwithftanding,
the Arguments for Natural Providence do ftill |
appear cogent and undeniable, as indeed they —
now do more than ever; :and all wife Men ra-
ther chufe to believe what they have full Exter-
nal Evidence for,in Natural Religion, although
they cannot yet folve all the Difficulties therein
why do not we proceed after thefame Fair and
-[mpartial Manner in the Bufinefs of Revelation?
And equally believe thofe Scriptures, for which
‘we have fuch ftrong and cogent Arguments, —

| ‘| although


of RELIGION, © (295


although we cannot yet folve all the Difficulties
contained in them? Efpecially when I may
-yenture to fay, the Cafe of Divine Revelation,
compar’d with Natural Religion, is, as to this
Point, not at all to the Difadvantage of the
former ; and that the Objections againit Na-
“tural; are not at all Inferior to thofe againft Re-
veal’d Religion: As any Impartial Man will
-eafily confefs upon the Comparifon. ‘
CXV.) Itherefore believe the Jewish and Chri-
_frian Revelations to be true, becaufe the Re-
cords of the fame, or the Books of the Oldand
New Teftament, have the greateft Marks of
sHonefty:and Impartiality of all others ; and
-withal,’-have none of thofe known Marks of
Knayery and Impofture, which all falfe and
fpurious Writings muft certainly have. ‘Thefe
_ <Obfervations feem to me highly ufeful, and
very certain and obvious, uponacareful Perutal,
and exact Comparifon: But becaule they are
common, and frequently infifted on by others,
and if enlarg’dupon, would take up too great
-a Room here, I {hall chufe to refer the Reader to
‘thofe who have already treated of thofe
Subjects ;. particularly to our excellent. Dr.
Prideaux, in his Appendix to the Life of the
Impoftor Mahomet:
. Only I beg of the Inquifitive Reader him-
delf to refleét on this Head, as he reads the Sa-
cred Hiftories, and to confider with himfelf
thow very improbable it is that thofe Sacred
Accounts, which of all other Ancient Writings
now Extant, have evidently the greateft internal
‘Marks of Sincerity, and the leaft imaginable
Signs of Falfhood of all others, fhould yet be
the groffeft Forgeries, and moft notorious Im-
poftures in the whole World; Asupon the Sup-
| UA ——-pofition


296 Aftronomical Erinciples


pofition of their being untrue, they muft moft
certainly appear to be to all Mankind.

(XVI) Ibelieve the Truth of the Fewi/band
Chriftian Revelations, becaufe the Scripture Pre-
dictions have been ftill fulfilled in the feveral
Ages of the World wheretothey belong. This
isan eminent and open Method of trying the
Truth, or Falfhood, of any pretended Revela-
tion, which is fo explicit as to foretel future
Events; efpecially thofe that are very remote,
and depend mainlyon thefree Actions of. Men,

or on the Countels of God, and the State of
the Invifible World; fuch as the Fewi/b and
Chrifitan Revelations moft certainly are. And
to this Completion do I venture openly to ap-
peal, for the Juftification of thofe Inftitutions.
Accordingly, I dare venture to affirm, with
St. Peter, that this Character of a more fure

_ Word of Prophecy, is one of the ftrongeft Ar-
2 Pet. i. guments for the Truth of the Scriptures, of all
sl other whatfoever. I have already fhew’d elfe-
where, how exactly the Sacred Predictions that
belongto Times already paft, and were extant

in the Days of David; as alfo not a few of
thofe belonging to Chriftianity afterward, have
been exactly fulfilled in their appointed Times,

in my Sermons at Mr.Boyle’s Lectures, in myChro-
nology and Harmony, in my Effay ou the Revelation

of St.John, and lately in my Literal Accomplifhment

of Scripture Prophecies. And I declare I am fo
far from feeing any Reafon from the prefent
Pofture of Affairs in the World, to doubt of
the Completionof thofe which remain, even for
the main, as J have expounded them, that I rather
find great Caufe to believe, that the Prophetick
Scheme begins to clear up apace, and that the
Kingdoms


of RELIGION,


Kingdoms of this World, as is there Prediéted,
will in no long Time ( and this probably,
as moved in Part by the Plainnefs of the Com-
pletion of fome of the Sacred Predi€tions
juft_ now paft, or foon coming on) become the
Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Chrifts and
that he fball Reign for ever and ever. But this
important Matter has been fo particularly treated
of by me elfewhere, in the Treatifes already
referr’d to, that it is by no means proper ‘to
enlarge upon it here any farther ; Only, Whofo
Readeth, let bimunderfiand. He that hath Exys
to Hear, let bim Hear. :

(XVII) I am therefore obliged to admit the
Fewifh and Chriftian Revelations to be true, and
Divine; becaufe no oppofite Syftem of the Uni-
verfe, or Scheme of Divine Revelation, has any
tolerable Pretences to be true, or canbe com pard,
as to Evidence, with thofe of the fews and Chri-
fiians. Whither would our Atheifts or Deifts
have us go for Information or Satisfaction,
in our moft concerning Enquiries about the State
of the Univerfe, and of Religion, and of our
Souls hereafter, if we muft difcard the Hol
Scriptures? Muftwe go to any other Records,
as better attefted to? This I believe they will


297


Apoc, xi,
15.


Mat.xxiv.
15.
X1.e I 5:


not fay. Muft we have Recourfe to the ex- }


ploded and abfurd Schemes of the Eternity
of the World, and the Fatality of all Things ;
or to that greater Abfurdity of the Formation
and Diffolution of the Univerfe by the For-
tuitous Concourfe of Atoms? Thisalfo, I be-
lieve they will now not much_ infift upon.
Mutt we then rely on Natural Religion, and
the Voice of common Reafon for our Guidance
to Happinefs? This Rule, {0 far as it can £0,

. 1$


’ —_—— eee naan aes


298 A fronomical Principles


is entirely allow’d and improv’d by the Scri-
ptures, and does it felf naturally lead us farther
to Divine Revelation, as the only Security of
not erring in many Cafes, efpecially thofe of
Divine Worfhip, and Propitiation ;. and the ©
_ principal Means of difcovering the Certainty of
fuch future Rewards and Punifhments, as are
in many Cafes abfolutely neceffary to fupport
the Obfervance of the Laws of Nature. Muft
we, I fay, take our Leaves of the Fewsb and
Chriftian Revelations, which havefuch Mighty
Atteftations as coming from God, and truft our
{elves wholly to our own Human, Frail, and
Uncertain Imaginations, Inclinations, and Con-
jeCtures in Divine Matters¢ This feems ver
hard, and very unreafonable. Let us Sapeitbe
that the Philofophy and Religion we now are
in Poffeffion of, have feveral difficult Places,
and fome hitherto unaccountable Phenomena
in them: Yet for certain may we juftly expect —
to have a better Philofophy and Religion to be-
take our felves to, before we leave thefe ; I mean
better attefted, and freer from Perplexities and
Incumbrances, both in Faith and Practice ;
otherwife we fhallact abfurdly ; and imitate the
Folly of him whopulls down his prefent Houte,
on Account of fome apparent Inconveniencies
therein, without either the Skill or the Ability
to build a better in its Stead. And for my
felf, I venture to promife all the Scepticks and
Unbelievers of our Age, ‘that as foom as ever
they will thew mea Scheme of Philofophy and
Religion more Rational, and better Atteftedto
han. that of the Cbrifizan, which is the Per-
fection of the Fewifo alfo, I will be their
Profelyte ; But till.then they muft excufe me.
ia : Thefe


of RELIGION. 299
Thefe, Reader, are fome of the Arguments
and Motives which -induce me really to
believe, and confciencioufly to endeavour to
live up to the Chrifian Inftitution, and to ad-
mit the Holy Scriptures for Divinely Infpired :
And I heartily with they may have the fame
Influence upon every Reader; that fo they may
with the Heart believe unto Righteoufue(s, and
with the Mouth make Confeffion unto Salvation.
One Thing I will add here; that fince we
cannot act upon Motives and Arguments any
farther than we can know them; nor can we
go upon Evidence any farther than it is extant
in the World for our Examination; and finee
the Juftice of God can only require us to a@
upon the Motives and Evidence his Providence
affords us, and can only call us to an Account
for our Behaviour in Agreement with fuch
Motives and Evidence; I venture to fay, with
great. Affurance, that whatever be the Truth
of the Things themfelves, which we can
no otherwife determine «about, the Argu-
ments and: Evidence now Extant in the World
do for the main, fo greatly and undoubtedly
preponderate on the Side of the Fewifh and
Chrifitan Revelations, that we are bound by all
the Rules of Juftice, and Reafon, and good
Senfe, to preferit, to be determin’d by it,anda@
uponit; andthat therefore thofe who do otherwife
may juftly be call’dto Account, and punifh’d for
the contrary Procedure, for their Infidelity and
Difobedience ; feeing thefe are chofen in Defiance
of plainly greater, and plainly /uperior Evidence
forthe Divine Authority of the Sacred Writings.
I conclude the whole with Two remarkable
Paflages, taken from the Two great Apoftles
Bt, Peter and St, Paw/, and with the Recommen-
Sar dation


\ \


Rom. xX.
10,


300


A fironontical Principles


> Pet. i.


dation of Three Genuine Memorials of the moft


Primitive Martyrs: and I pray God they may
equally affect others, as they always do my felt,
while I confider them asthe Solemn Atteftations
of fuch Perfons, who moft of them certainly
knew whether the Religion they Preach’d was
Divine ornot ; and as generally made a little be-
fore their Deaths alfo; when, if ever, Men ufe
to be ferious, fincere, and in earneft infuch their
Declarations.

Peter. | Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give
Diligence to make your Calling and Election fure :
For if ye do thefe Things ye foall never fal: For
fo an Entrance foal be minifired unto you


abundantly, into the everlafting Kingdom of our


Lord and Saviour Fefus Chri. Wherefore I
will not be negligent to put you always im Rea
membrance of thefe Things, though ye know
them, and be eftablifbed inthe prefent Truth. .
Yea, I think it meet, as long as I am in this
Tabernacle, to ftir you up, by putting you in
Remembrance: Knowing that fhortly I muft put
off this my Tabernacle, even as our Lord fefus
Chrift hath foewed me. Moreover, I will endea-
wour that you may be able after my Deceafe to
have thefe Things always in Remembrance. For
awe have not followed cunningly devifed Fables,
cuhen we made known wto you the Power and
Coming of our Lord Fefus Chrift, but were Eye~
Witneffes of his Majefty. For he received from
God the Father, Honour and Glory, when there
came (uch a Voice to himfromthe Excellent Glory,
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleafed. And this Voice which came from Hea-
ven we beard, when we were with bim in the
Holy Mount. [ See Matt. xvii. 1--13. |

Fea : Paul..|


of RELIGION. eae


SS
Paul. | I charge thee therefore [ Timothy ] before = Tim.iy,
God, andthe Lord Fefus Chrift, whofball judge the 1) 2.
Quick andthe Dead, at his appearing, and his Kiug-
dom: Preach the Word, by infant in Seafoity out of
Seafon 5 reprove, rebuke, exhort with aif Long
fuffering and Doctrine. :
_ Bat watch thou in all things, endure Afflitzi= v. 5-8.
ons do the Work of an Evangelift, make full
Proof of thy Miniftry. For I am now ready to be
offered, and the time of my departure is at hand.
J have fought a good Fight, I bave. jinifoed my
Courfe, I have kept the Faith. Henceforth there
4s laid up for mea Crown of Righteoufie(s, which
the Lord the righteous Fudge foall give me at that
Day: And not to me only, but unto all them alfo
that love bis appearing. ;
The Genuine Memorials of the Martyrs which
I would here recommend,(and they are almoftall
the Memorials of that Kind, which appear to be
very Ancient andcertainlyGenuine)are,theE piltle
of St. Ignatius, Bifhop of Antioch, tothe Romans,
ashe was going to Martyrdom: The Epiftle of
the Church of Smyrna, concerning the Martyr-
dom of St. Polycarp their Bifhop : And the Epi-
{tle of the Churches of Vienna and Lyons, con-
cerning the Martyrs under the Perfecution of Ve-
rus in Eufebius: All which, if they do not in Hil Eceb.
fome meafure Affeét Men, and make them fenf- rae
ble, that the firft Chriftians, even thofe who
certainly knew whether Chriftianity was true or
not,were in earneft, and believed themfelves,their
Hearts are as hard as thenether Milfone, and paft
all ordinary Ways of Influence and Conviction.


London, Feb. 5. 1724, Witt. Wuiston.


Sir


Sir Richard Blackmore's HYMN


TO THE


C OR EA . Onn


Ail King Supreme! of Pow'r Immenfe Aby/s!
- Father of Light! Exhauftle{s Source of Blifs!
Thou Uncreated, Self-exiftent Caufe,
Controul’d by no Superior Being’s Laws 5
Ever Infant Light effaydto dart the Ray,
SmiPd heavenly weet, andiryd to kindle Day ;
E’re the wide Fields of Ether weredifplayd,
O¢ Silver Stars Cerulean Spheres inlaid,
Ever yet the eldeft Child of Time was Born,
Or verdant Pride young Nature did adorn,
Thou Art; and didft Eternity employ
In unmolefted Peace, in Plenitude of Foy.


Inits Ideal Frame the World defign’d
From Ages pat lay finifl’d in Thy Mind.
Conform to this Divine Imagivd Plan,

With perfect Art th? amazing Work began.

Thy Glance furveyd the Solitary Plains,

Whore [bapele/s Shade inert and filent Reigns 5

Then in the dark and undiftingmflrd Space,
Unfruitful, uninclosd, and wild of Face,

Thy Compas for the World did mark the Place.
Then didft Thou through the Fields of barren Night
Goforth collected in Creating Might.

Where Thou Almighty Vigour didft exert,

Which Emicant did This and That Way dart


Sir Richard Blackmore’s Hymn 303


Thro’ the black Bofors of the empty Space -
The Gulpbs confefs th’ Omnipotent Embrace,

ind pregnant grown with Elemental Seed

Unfinif’'d Orbs, and Worlds in Embryo breed.

From the crude Mafs, Omnifcient Archited, }


Thou for each Part Materials didft feled,

And with a Mafter-hand Thy Worldereét.

Labour’d by Thee, the Globes vaft lucid Buo ys

By Thee uplifted float in liquid Skies.

By Thy cementing Words their Parts cobere,

And roll by Thy Impulfive Nod in Air.

Thou in the Vacant didft the Earth fufpend,
Advance the Mountains, and theVales extend ;
People the Plains with Flocks, with Beafts the Wood,
And ftore with Scaly Colonies the Flood.


Next Man arofe at Thy Creating Word,
Of Thy Terreftrial Realms Vicegerent Lord.
His Soul more artful Labour , more refin'd,
And Emulous of bright Ser aphic Mind,
Exnobled by Thy Image [potle/s (bone,
Prais’d Thee her Author, and ador’d Thy Throne:
Able to Know, Admire, Enjoy her God,
She did her high Felicity applaud.


Since Thou didft all the {pacious Worlds difplay,
Homage to Thee let all Obedient pay.

Let glitt'ring Stars, that Dance their deftin’d Ring }
Sublime in Skys with Vocal Planets Sing

Confed'rate Praife to Thee, O Great Creator King.

Let the thin Diftritts of the waving Air,

Conveyancers of Sound, Thy Skill declare.

Let Winds, the Breathing Creatures of the Skies,

Call in each vig’rous Gale, that roving flies
By Land or Sea, then one loud Triumph raife,

And all their Blafts employ in Songs of Praifé.


While painted Herald-Birds Thy Deeds proclaim,
And on thy {preading Wings convey Thy Fame;
Let Eagles, whichin Heav’n’s Blue Concave fear;
Scornful of Earth fuperior Seats explore, )
And


304 to the CREATOR.


And rifewith Breafts ere againft the Sun, .
Be Minifters to bear Thy bright Renown,
aay And carry ardent Praifes to Thy Throne.


wy fed


Ye Fifh affuine a Voice, with Praifes fill
The hollow Rock, and loud reactive Hill.
Let Lions with their Roar their Thanks expre/s.
With Acclamation {bake the Wilderne]s.
Let Thunder-Clouds, that float from Pole to Poles
With Salvoes loud falute Thee, as they roll.
Ye Monfters of theSea, yenoify Waves,
Strike with Applaufe the repercuffive Caves.
Let Hail and Rain, let Meteors form’dof Fire;
Andlambent Flames, in this bleft Work confpire,


Let the High Cedar, andthe Mountain Pine
Lowly to Thee, Great King, their Heads incline.
Let ev'ry Spicy Odoriferous Tre
Prefent its Incen[e, and its Balmto Thee.


And Thov, Heav'n’s Viceroy oer this World below,
In this bleft Task Superior Ardor fhow :
To view thy Self inflect thy Reafon’s Ray.
Tranfported, Nature’s Theatre furvey.
Then allon Fire the Author’s Skill adores
And in loud Songs extol Creating Pow’r.


Degenerate Minds inmazy Error loft
| May combat Ueav'n, andimpious Triumphs boaft 5
But while my Veins feel animating Fires,
And vital Air my breathing Breaft infpires
Grateful to Heav'n Pll ftretchapious Wing,
And Sing His Praife,; who gave me Pow’r to Sing.
~ Creation, Lib. VIL. in calce.


FY UN “Tp.


0h ee 7 ey
nf Pabst fo


rr W
sar. ie


+ ee pitas te and Engi and Engh ie Italian, in
ae _,2 Vols. 4to. . 5


A ihe
26...
“Abridgement ' wt he $i pe Vols) po. 1796: 3
/Albin’s Sees *Hiftory_ of. Englith Infeas, with 1 00 Copper-Plates, colour’d
by the ‘Author Age tO which are added large Notes, and Fe urious: Obferva-
4 010 , by Wiliam Derham, FR. S. ato. L7ZAs ON eae a
S iade Sermons, pe d by) Dr. Sacheverel; 8ua.
nagovas’s Apologeticks, Eng. by Mr. Humphreys, Sv
Ani ga ‘to the Independent Whig, by. Fr. Sguire, A, Moe Ores BU
Antiquities of Weftminfter Abbey, 2 Vols, Folio, i
Anfwer to Fentinel’s Hiftory of Oracles, ie Vols. 8vo.
Antiquities of Palmyra, by Mr. Seller, 8v0. agp"
Allen of the Calybeat Waters of England, Su0d §
_ Antonici Iter Britan. cum comment: T. & R. Gale. a LG dees
Allen Synopfi s Medicine PraGicz, Sup. Whe chitere » ee: ee
Atlas Manuale, _or Sete of final Maps, by A. Mall, ae wer JG


nd of St. Pauls, 1726. -


Be $ Beanty of Holine@in the Coupon Sayer per <r ii * rm
ee cy and Order in publick Worthip, eS Be Ny a


bee Sermons on feveral Occafions
us Poetici olim con{cripti, 809.
ae Latina, Caftellionis, 3 Vols. x29
Brandt's Hiftory of the Reformation, : abrido’ dd yi
Bing ighams Antiquities, and other. Works, ° 2Vvi in rh
Benne *s Difcourfe of Schifm, 8v0. :
=-—— DireGions for ftudying Divinity, Sto.
Brags, on the Miracles of our Bleffed Saviour, rae Vols. 8u0>
- ~ on the Parabl bles, 2 Vols. 8v0. ; ee
"s Dialogues againtt ‘Scepticks and Atheifts, the Second Editi
Divine Right of i ao bh ee ee en
per Tradition. Bh WF hes a \


Paetiiorcaoney of the Chrc aye
os 800. - BR

} h and English Didionary, fun tie
a Freche  ataeaes Bu sree,
e jotheca Literaria, being a Colle@ion of In crip
ate Fa d of hot and cold Baths, ‘sth Edit. 8vo,


p lofophical Works, bridg’d, 3 Vols. 4to, |
a weg Lagentey ;


a


a - 2, ; Medicinal Exp shor vn
B ue’s Practical Aphorifms, 8vo. 1724.
ome ey pai ia to ‘his Aphorifins, Lomo. i, :
- Boulton’s Syftem of Rational and Pradtical Surgery, Su. ; .
~ Bibl Biblica, or a Commentary on the file, pol rion
Bellinger of the Nutrition of the Foetus, 8vo.' ‘


| Bellof’s Hofpital Surgeon, t2m0, Ms: 4 es US,
Blair's Boranick Effays, with Cuts, 800. ae aa


_ Bailey's Sermons, 2 Vols. vo.

Bennet of Confamptions, 8v0. ae

Bellinz’s Mechanical Accounts of Fevers, 8v¢. i .
Beutridge’s Private Thoughts, . es: citer cs

----- Sermons. : Ce

-— = ~~ omthe 39 Articles! Awe : ie aoe

=---- Thefaurus Theologicus, 4 Vols. 8v9.


Se me Ra fhd frequent Communion. — he We
Ai . Bsyrow §


ut AM an JOoun Senieks


Bs et ig el ge


Barvow’s Works, 2 Vols. Folio.
Bagiivi’ s Pradtice of py ick, 8 v0.


Lergyman’ 3 Law, or Compleat iddeinbene By wt Watfon, aa Fd :
C Chambers’s Univerfal DiGionar y of Arts By Sciences, in Folio, ( Tal, Pa 25:


Chifbull Antiquitatum Afiat. Reliquiz, 3 Vols. Folio, in the Pref. in pes ‘
Cole’s Latin and Englifh Dictionary. ee ae
Clerk’s Vade Mecum, or Clerkfhip improv “4 i2mo. 172 ie a
Croffinge of the Great Duty of iS Sa 8vo. ae
----of Charity, 8vo. * 5 Rhee


Chriftiart Eloquence, in Theory and Pratice, By Mr. D ol, fu Roky cae
Chilling worth’s Works, Folio.
St. Cyprian ’s Works, Engl. by Dr. Marfball, ‘Folic,
Coufin’s Devotions, r2m0. ; if Mise a
Chee Pattern: By Tho. a Kempis, Enol. by Dr. Stanhope, Sw! een he
wo ee - - - the fame in a Pocket ‘Volume, 12m0. % ee,”
Clebinte Epiftolz, cum Notis Hex. Wotton, So.
Archbp. of Cambray’s Pious Thoughts, 80.
Caftellt Lexicon Heptaglotton, 2 Vols. Folio.
Clergyman’s Vademecum. Per 7. Fohnfon, 2 Vols. 1 2m.
Crufo Thefaurus Medicamentorum, 12m,
Cockburn of a Gonnorrhea, 8v2.
Cotefii Harmonia Menfurarum, 4to,
Cowper's Myotomia Reformata, Folio, 1724, with Cats:
Czefar ex Recenfione Joh. Davifi, ato.
--------- Tho. Parfell, t2mo.-
- - - in UfumDelphini, 8u. i
Chronicon Saxonicum ex MSS, Cod. edi. Bar Gibfon, arnt
Cheneau’s True French Mafter, 8v0, a
Catalogus Librorum MSS. in Bibl. Coll. Corp. Chr. i in Cant. Folio, -
Caius de Ephemera Britannica, $vo.
Ld. Clarendon’s Hiftory of the Rebeflion, 6 ots. 8100.
Ciceronis Orationes im Ufum Delphini, 8ve.
wee eee ee feleétx, 120.
Gaftilio de Curiali five Aulico ex Recenf ‘cae Drake, 80.
Celfus de Vita & Rebus Geftis Julii Czfaris, 12m.
Bp. of Cork of drinking in Memory of the Dead, 8ve.
eee - of Healths in General, 8vo.
Cowley’s Works, 3 Vols. 1 2m. .
Compleat Geosrapher, the Fourth Edition, Folio, 1723.
Clementis Alexandrini Opera. Per Potter, 2 Vols. Folio.
Coke’s Reports in Englifh, 6 Vols. 8v0. hate


i -


ww


Licavins 4 de Situ Orbis. Per Watts, 80. 1726: 7 ate
Dodwell’s Works abride’d, with his DK, 2 Vets Sue 1723; nei
Sir Fohn Denham's Pialms, Su0.
Drake’s Anatomy, 2 Vols. 800.
Deidier de Morbis Venereis, 8vo. 17242 5
Dale Pharmacologia, 2 Vols. 12m,

--- Supplementum, feparatim.

Davfon’s Memoirs of the Order of the Garter, Sve:
Drelingourt of Death, 8vo. ; et eee eee
D’ Affigny again the Anabaptifts. 12me. . a “aye
Drake (Sam.) Concio ad Clerum, 8vo. hh MER RT
Dugdale’s Monafticon Anelicanum, Engl. Folio.


~- - - Supplement by Stevens, 2 Vols. Folie. aese * s
Dw» Pin’s Ecclef. Hift. the 17th Cent. Folio. |
Derham’s Phyfico-Theology, the 6th Edit. 8v0. 1729; ane
-— = te ~Aftro-Theology, the sth Edit. 8v0. 1726, an, vais


Decerpta ex Ovidio in Ufum Schole Etonentis, 8ve.
Dryden’s Plays, 6 Wols. 12mo.
ede = Milcellanies, 6 Vols. r2%e.


aa
| C3)
Dryden's Vircil, 3 Vols. J .
eis ms Wavenel tame. 0 Ue ;
Dugdale’s Antiquities of Watwickthire, Folio, in the P refs


4 Englith Expofitor, remo. ‘ae
Ele&a Majora ex Ovidio in Ufum Scholz Eton. $vo. Pen TNE
"+ - = Minora ex Ovidio, &c. 8vo.

_ Epitteti Enchiridion Lat. Verf. adumbr. per Edv. Ivie, vo.

Echard’s Hiftory of England. wid

- -- - Roman Hiftory, 5 Vols. 8vo. |
~ - — — Gazeteer, iv two Parts, 12mo. : ,
- - -~ Ecclefiaftical Hiftory, 2 Vols. Sve. -
Fpiftole Obfcurorum Virorum, 12m.
Epigrammatum Deledtus ex Poetis Latinis 1 2m?
Eéfon’s Liber Valorum & Decimarum, 8vo. 1723.

” Edwards againft Popery, 8vo. 1724. xine
Epigrammatum Grecorum Delectus Opera Th. Fohn{on. 80;


Piery ve


‘ FPiftola ad Amicum de Cotefii Inventis, cum Appendice, Ato.


Pieces Hiftoria Coeleftis 3 Vols. Folio,’ 1725.
.r 7 ~ Atlas Coeleftis, in the Prep. 9+!

Fiddes’s Life of Cardinal Walfey, Folio.

Fruit Walls improv’d, by D. N. Eatio, F. R.S. 4to.

Franklyn Orthotonia, five de Grace Lingue Tonis, 1270,

Farnaby’s Rhetorick. * ~ ti oa

Friend Emmenologia.

- - - de Febribus,

- - ~- de Purgantibus in Variolis,

Fuller Pharmacopoeia Extemporanea, 12me,

- - - the fame in Englith. | ry

- - ~ Pharmacopeia Domeftica,

- - - Pharm. Bateana. %

- -- Maxims, 12m, 1725.

Floyer’s Hiftory of Cold Bathing,

~ - ~ > Treatife of the Afthma. 870. 1726.


Florus in Ufum Delphini, 8vo. 1726.


Gites Chriftian Inftitutes, ‘
~~ -- Certainty and Neceffiry of Religion in General, eight Sermons at
_ Boyle’s LeGtures, 8 v0. ach geen ES Ht ,

Grabe’s Spicilegium Patrum, 2 Vols. &vo.

= - - two Tracts apainft Mr. Whiftan.’

Gentleman inftru&ed, 8vo.

Gregorti Nomenclatura in Ufum Schol, 8vo: _ .

Goodman's Penitent pardoned, 8vo. 1724.

= - - = - Winter Evening Conference, 89.

= =~ - - Old Religion, T2me, + *
» God's Judgment againft theApoftate Church, v0.

Gibfon’s Parochial Vifitations, vo. ;

God’s Mercies, an Abftraét from Scripture, 8a:

Geddes’s Hiftory of the Church of Malabar, vo.
Gravefande’s Mathem. Elements of Nat. Philofophy, 2 Vols. Sve. 1726,


.


- - = - - -Effay on Perfpeaive, 8vo, 1724.
Garretfon’s Englith Exercifes, 1270. - poetics
Gordon’s Geographical Grammar, 80.
Guardians, 2 Vols. 12m0.


Hers Ecclefiaftical Polity, ec. Folio, 1724.
 * Hool’s Addrefs to Parents, on Education, 8u0. 1724:
L’Hofpital’s Analytick Treatife of Conick SeXions, 4to.
Hatton’s Pfalter, 15th Edition, t2mo. 1724.
_ Hiftory of Herodotus, Engl. by Lirtlebury, 2 Vols, Svs. 5
yee Horneck’s


C4)

Horneck’s Crucified Jefus, 8va.
- --+- Great Law of Confideration, $0.
Hederict Lexicon Greco-Latinum, 4to. in the Prefs.
Hale Oratio Anniverfaria, 4t0. 1725. ah
Health, a Poem, the 3d EI Sv0. 1724... me > pe ee
Hammond's PraGtical Catechifm, vo. rae cee iF
Hudibras, with Cutts, 1270. iy ea
Hatton's Comes Commercii, 8vo. sae

- - ~ - Merchants Magazine, 4to. eave a0 Bib o
Howell’s Hiftory of the Bible, with Cutts, 3 Vols. Sup ® uh ts
Howard's Cookery , Sv0, 1725+ a inee, TURE
Horativs in Ufam Delphini, 8v0. ne ie
Homeri Viados Liber primus Gr. Lat. Silvani, 8vo. Oe
Hickes’s Devoticns, 12mo. iepeeer.
Hook’s Pofthumous Works, with Cutts; Folio. ot aarp
='- - Philofophical Experiments, with Cutts, 842. 1726. ep
Hiftory of England, 3 Vols. Folzo.

- ~ ~-of Majorca, Minorca, ge. 8vo. . .

Hiftoriz Britan.Saxon. Anglo-Danicz Scriptores XV. per Tho. Gale, Folie,”
Hippocrates de Morbis Popularibus cum Comment. Goh. Friend, M,. D.- a
Harris de Morbis Acutis Infantum. yey
- - - Differrationes Med. & Chirurg. 8v9. 1725. ay Meh aah ci
- -- de Pefte & Inoculat. Variolarum, 8a.: rt
_ Helverius of the Animal OEconomy and Sinall-Pox, 800, 1723. 6

Hart’s Bulwark ftorm’d, in Anfwer to Delaune’s Plea, ve. sya ox
Hiftory of Genghizcan the Great, 8vo. ois cal cadeabactel a a pe
- - ~ ~ of Thucidides, Enel. by Tho. Hobbes, 2 Vols. 800. 4 oe
----of Tinnr-Bec, commonly call’ d Tamerlain, 2Vols, 80. ne
Hiftoriarum Fabellarumque Delectus, 8vo. 1726. — pet


ye ry of Monmouth’s Brigth Hiftory, Engl. 8vo. t ~ see
Fenkin of the Chriftian Religion, 2 Vols. 800. ae
Ben. Fohnfon’s Works, with Cutts, 6 Vols. 8vo.

In{criptio Sigea cum Comment. Edm. Chifbull, Falia.

\ ‘Fohnfon’s Grammatical Commentaries,  8vo.


~ - - - Notes Nottinghamice, 8vo, OO dks ck dae
Ignatii Epiftole, per Th. Smith, 4f0. eR Oa Sate
Fuftinus in Ufam Delphini, Biss » haat


Sir Leoline Fenkins’s Life and Letters, 2 Vols. Folio, 1724, Me anda ome
Fuftin’s Hiftory of Engl. by Browne, 1 2mo. ‘ 4
Fuvenal cum Notis Eurnabii, 8v0.

Juftint Martyris Dialogus cum Tryphone, pet Sam. Edn Bus.

“Guvenal in Ufum Delphini, 8u0,


Ettlemell’s Works, with his Life, 2 Vols. Folio. ; AS

=---- his Life feparate. S| i
ere eee Meafures of Chriftian Obedience, Sve. . a
--+--- -of the Sacrament. As olka,
wee eee of Profufenefs. ER
~ -- = + - -Death made comfortable r2mo. ere ys eae
Keill (Fob.) Introduétio ad Veram Phyficam, 870. yee ee) ae
eee e ~Introduaion to Natural: Philofophy, 8va- Ee ee
- - -(fac.) Tentamina Medico-Phyf de OEcono. Anim. pe visas
~-- => = Effays of Animal OEconomy, 8106 renee 3
King’s Mifcellanies, 8vo. aM IG
_ Kennet’s Roman Antiquities, 8vo. ; ct |
Kidder’ s Critical Remarks on difficult Paffages sof Scripture, 800, 19725 re
Keay’s Practical Meafurer’s Pocket wi sme Sun, eh eae


L* cas’s Enquiry after happiee: 2 Vo's, Sve.
- - - Practical Chriftianity, 8ve.
ee eee Duty of Servants, 12mo.


7


Lucas’s Influence of Converfaticn, 12mo.


----- Plain Man’s Guide to Heaven.
Lowth’s Commentary on the Prophet Ifaiah and Jeremiah, 4f0.


Lay Baptifm Invalid, with the reft of the Author’s Works, in 8 Parts, 2 Vols,


$vo. 1725. !
ece-- Supplement to the Firft and Second Parts, and any fold


Law’s three Letters to the Bihop of Bangor, the eighth Edition. 8vo.


~ - ~ Practical Treatife of Chriftian PerfeGion, 8vo. 1726.

ro- > Remarks on the Fable of the Bees, the third Edition, 8vo.
- ~ ~ Unlawfulnels of Stage-Entertainment, 820. 1726.

Life of Archbihhop Whitgift, by Mr. Strype, Fol. are

- ~- and Negotiations of Sx:Leoline Fenkins, 2 Vols. Fol, -


feparate. hen
1726... > i


\


- - of Mr, Dodwell, with an Abridgment of his Works, .2 Vols. $vo. 1722.


- - of Mr: Kettlemell, $vo.

~ - of Mr. Sage, Author of the Cyprianick Age, 8vo,
- - of Dr. Feild, by Mr. Le Neve, vo.

~ - of Mr, Mills, 8vo.

- - of Cardinal Walfey, by Fiddes, Fol; 1726.

Lock’s Works, 3 Vols. Fol.

r - ~ of Homan Underftanding, 2 Vols. $70,
Littleton’s DiGtionary, qto.

L’Eftrange’s Hfop, 2 Vols. 8vo.

Lemery’s Chymiftry, 8vo..- tosis |
‘Lives of the Englith Bithops, by Mr. Le Neves, 2 Vols. $v0.
Lowthorp’s Abridgment of the Philofop. Tran. 3 Vols, 4to.
Le Neve’s Succeifion of the Bithops and Dignitaries, . Fol.
Luciani Dialogi Selecte, Gr. Lat. per Leedes, .8vo. 1726.
Lucretius cum Interpretatione 8 Notis, Tho. Creech, 80...
Leland de Scriptoribus Britannicis, 2 Vols. 8vo.
Leufdent Compendium Grecum Novi Teftamenti, 8vo,. »
Lommius de Curandis Febribus continuis, 8ve, a


.


Lancafter’s Ghronological Effay on Daniel, 4to,. |...
Letter of Inftruétion, thewing the Way to Chriftian Perfection, 1
Laws of Liberty and Property, 1 270. 1724. .


Mi4@0's Difcourfes on the Lord’s-Prayer, uo... >.


20. 192357


w=—— Defence of the Bifhop of London’s Letter to his Clergy, Sve.


samme Anfiver to Toland’s Nazarenus, Sve.
five fingle Sermons, 8ve.

Mattaire’s Englith Grammar, 8vo.

' Grece Lingue Diale&e, 8vo.
Mead de Pefte, 8vo.

——— Oratio Anniverfaria, 40. 1724.
Maclaurin Geometria Organica, 470.

Motray’s Travels, z Vols. Folio.

Mufe Anglicanz, 2 Vols, 12mo.


- Countefs of Morton’s Devotions, 24mo.


Medulla Hiftoriz Anglicanz, 8vo, 1724. Y

Marfball’s Tranflation of St. Cyprian’s Works, Fil.

Morland’s Vade Mecum, .

Mottenx’s Don Quixote, 4 Vols. 12m.

Marfhal Tabule Chronologice, Fol.

Morton on Confumptions, 8vo.

Mayern@ Praxis Medica, 2 Vols. 8vo.. | te

Moll’s Compleat Geographer, the Fourth Edit. Folio, 1723. -
Martin’s Genuinenefs of the Text, There are three in Heaven, 8vo.
- - = ~- two Critical Differtations, 8vo. I eciy
~ = - - Examination of Emlyn’s Anfwer, 8v0, .


- ~ - ~ Difcourfe of Natural Religion, the Second Edit. vo. 1725.


Moral Proof of the Certainty of a Future State, 8v0. 1725,
Milton’s Paradife Loft and Regain'd, 2 Vols. 12mo. 1725.
Memoirs of the Academy of Sciences at Paris, 8-vo,


13) eh


St. Macarius‘


Li ol ar a é
et i 3


r


‘¢ 6 ) 3 .
Sc. Macavius’s Spiritual Homilies, 8vo. sate
Metaphyfica Compendium, 8u0. 1723,


N4 rbvough’s Voyage, with Cuts, 8v0. 1724:
Sir Ifaac Newton’ s Opticks, “ginere
~--=- the fame in Latin by Dr. Clarke, $vo. ee
~- - = Algebra, in Enelith, by Mr. Raphfon.
ecct Analyfis per Quantitatum Series, &c. 4ta:' Sida
-"- - = Philofophiz ‘Naturalis’, ghee Mathematica, Editio tertia ‘aud,
4to. 1726.
Nicols de Literis Inventis, 8vo. © rn
Notarum ad Infcriptionem Sigeam mbsenaicites Folio. bipr iS
_ Notitia Anglicana, or the Arms of the Nobility, »2 Vols. 8v0. 1728. i ee
Nelfon’s Feafts and Fafts of the Church, Sve. a
~--- on the Sacrament, 120. ~


oh? Fh


O Ckley’s Account of Barbary, 8v0. ee
Ovidit Metamorph. in Ufam Delphini, 8v0; GE nen
-~---- Epiftole, in Ufum Delphini, 8vo. <a) gee
~---- Triftium, in Ufum Delphini, 8vo.
meee Faftorum, cum Notis Variorum, 8ve.


- - - ~ Directory for young Phyficians, Guo,
Patrick’s Devout Chriftian, 1270. oe
_ = = - = Chriftian Sacrifice, 12mo. SA
= = = = Advice to aFriend, 1270. + Ae eas

- - - -Help to young Beginners, 240. diary Ds -
_ 7 -- > Plalms, r2mo. 1724. po say anepelesine aedee ip ORS

Plutarch’s Morals and Lives, ih Enelifh, 10 Vols: Pe
Potter’s Greek Antiquities, 2 Vols. 8vo. Po ota ppidieds 5 y's
- - - - of Church Government,’ 8vo. a yates
Principles of Deifm truly reprefented, the Foutth watch, ‘Bv0. lig 726. LE
Pafchal Cycle, and other Tables ufed by the Church, $vo. ie oe
Pfalter in Welfh.
Plukenetit Opera. omnia Botanica, Tab. JEn. CCCCLIV. ig 6 Vols. Folie,
Perrault’s ArchiteGure, Englith’d by: James, Folio.
Pratt Grammatica Lingua. Latine, 8vo & 12me.
Palladio’s Archite@ure, Ato.
- - - - Ditto, by Leoni, 2 Vols. Folio. . amy
Pearfon on the Creed, Folio. li perl Sehr
Poz.zo’s Architedture in Perfpective, Folie. i ate
Puffendorf’s Law of Nature, Folio. ' ‘ lat Teg ye
- ----- Ditto, abride’d with Notes by Spavan, 2 Vols. Soe


pee s Effays on the Knowledge and Cure of Difeafes, $vo}


fifa eam, Etro a eheO et to the Hiftory of Europe, 8vo. ae ae
Prideanx’s Connexion of the Hiftory of the Old and New Teftament, + ve; y
----- Life of Mahomet, 8v0. Re ae

Pope’s Homer, with Cuts, 6 Vols. 120. ¥: 1 Be


--~ Mifcellanies, 2 Vols. 12mo. ue 2
. . Philofophical TranfaGions compleat, from rhe Year 166§ to abe: in $3 Vols.
4to. N.B. There are 391 Numbers, moft of which may be had fepai arate.
mere eee the fame abridg’d to the Year 1720, in 5 Vols, Ato. a 4 Baan:
Plautus in Ufum Delphini, 80. "782. en
Pharmacopeeia Collegii Regalis Medicorum Londinenfis, 12mo. ripe
wee eee Ditto, per Shipton, 12mo.
Pharmacoperia Baveana, Ed. nova. per Iho Filler, t2mo. )
Pye’s Obfervations on the various Methods: of Lithoromy, 4te. ge + oe
Pitcairne’s Elements of Phyfick, 80. Ee
Poetz minores, Gr. Lat. vo.
Prior’s Poems, 2 Vols. t2mo. ; a" a”
Phedrus, per Fobnfor,. in Ufam Scholae Etonenis Bye ;
Pliniié Panes. in Ufum ates 8v0. . an


‘ 43


~ Quintilian Sua
. ay y


ix Bye ie fe é Na:
a * a }


A


re
=


4 ay Roa? iy sip , A ee
- “Me: 4


f-) VinGilian de Inft. Orat, cum Notis Edm. Gitfon, Sve!
Quincy's LeGures in Pharmacy, 4to. 1723.
-~- -~ Collese Difpenfatory, in Enelifh, with Notes, Sve.
~ - - ~ Pharm. Officinalis, 840, :
= - - - Phyfical Dictionary.


Ay’s Philofophical Letvers, with Mr. Willoughby’s, 8c. v0.
R - - Wifdom of God in the Creation; 8th Edit. 8vo,

~~ =~ Phyfico Theological Difcourfes, ath Edit. vo. ~
> -~-- Perfuafive to a holy Life. 8vo.

- - -- Hiftoria Plantarum,-3 Vols. Fol. ,

w= ------ Supplementum, vel Tom: 3. feparatim.


- - =~ Synopfis Methodica Stirpium Britannicarum. Edit. tertia au@ior, cui


Icon. 2 Vols. 8vo. 1724. : fas
= - - = Stirpium Europ. extra Britan. nafcéntium Sylloge, 8ve,
- ~ - ~ Synopfis Methodica Avium & Pifcium, cum fig. 8v9.
- --- Hiftoria InfeGorum, 4to. . stp
- - - - Synopfis Methodica Animalium Quadr: $vo,

- - -- Methodus InfeGorum, 80.

- - - - Stirpium Orientalium Caralogi tres, 8vo.

~ --~- De Variis Plantarum Methodis, 8vo.

Robertfone Lexicon Hebraicum, 4to. t

Religion of Nature delineated, the Fourth Edit. 4to, 1726,
Reflections on Reafon, 8vo.

Rufbworth's Hiftorical ColleGtions, 8 Vols. Fol.

Rofcommon and Duke’s Poems.

Religious Philofopher, 2 Vols. 4to. Cuts. 17246

Ronayne’s Algebra, 8u0..

Robertfon’s Diffenters Self~condemn’d, 4to.

Ramazini of Tradefnens Difeafes, 8vo. (: H
Reafons againft Converfion to the Church of Rome, $vo, 1726.


Giztine of the Operations of the Holy Spirir, the Second Edit, ve.


--- Tracts againft the Bithop of Bangor, $v.
Sanderfonz PraleGiones de Confcientia, 8vo,
Sacheverel’s Sermons, 8-voi Ee
Suetonius in Ufum Delphini, 8ve.
Spectators, 8 Vols. 1270. ied
Stanhope’s Tho, a Kempis’s Chriftian Pattern, 8v0. and I 270,
- - - -~ Parfon’s Chriftian DireGtory, 849,
== = == St. Auftin’s Meditations, 8vo.
--- -- Epittetus’s Morals, 8vo. ge
Sydenham’s Works, 8vo.
= -- - - Practice of Phyfick, &vo:
Seneca’s Morals, by Sir R. L’Eftrange, 80.
Sherlock of Death, 8vo.
- -~-of Judgment, 840.
Smith’s Poems, 8vo.
Salluflius cum Notis Var. per ft Waffe, 4to: Ki
Sophoclis Trag. Anti. & Trachiniz, Gr. Lat. per T. Fohn{m, Bupa
Shaw's Syntax for Tamworth School, 8vo. 1724.
~ = ~ Grammatical DiGionary, 8vo. 1726.
Shelvock’s Voyage round the World, with Cuts, 80, 17244
See Atlas with Maps, Fol. inthe Pre. .
Shorey’s Fourteen Sermons, 810. 1725.
Shelton’s Don Quixote, with Cuts, 4 Vols. ram. 1725.
Smalvidge’s Sixty Sermons, Fol. 1724. ive
Sckickardi Horologium Hebraicum, -$ve.
Selden’s Works, 6 Vol. Fol. 1726. % nae
Sanélorins de Medicina Statica, cum Comment. Mf. Lifer, t2mo.
Sydenbami Proceffus Inteori & Tra&. de Phthifi, Edit, Quinta 1270.
Salmon on Bates’s Difpenfatary, &vo. Sain
“=== on Sydenham’s Practice of Phyficky 8vs,


\


*


f


1725.


aw? s. Gandéipeotal Dedriaes of the Church of Enlai 3 Vo 840)
_ State of Rufie, 2 ue Su. o iw iby ; Rae
Squire’s Aniwer to the In, ent ig, fun. aie EA ge yt be
ae Fobn Concio ad | 2 sda tk ; une re Oe >

_ «= = Sermon before the Sons of the Clergy, Bue. ’
_Saurin’s Differtations on the B ble Fol.
 Stillingfleet’s Origines Sacrzz,
- Saltuflins in Ufum Delp


Grate Methodus aererehrorale ‘4ta. ?
Tr, relectiones Poeticz, Tom,.‘3i 800.) - 4%
« Pafgoel Phyfica, in Ufum Juvent. Acad. 8v0. » ne
Trial of the Regicides, § Sve. 17240 sie
Tatlers, 4 Vols. 1270.
Telemachus, Engl. ‘with Cuts; 2 Vols. 12mo. é
Terence Engl. by Echard, &c. 12mo. ih
Terentius in Ufam ‘Delp. Sve.


ge


Tabor Exercitationes Medicg,. cum Figuris, fu, ined meee a

TOcabularium Anglo-Saxonicum, 80. Pesan ieee B:

Voffit Elementa Rhetorica, 8v0. 1724. yer es at te
Vide Poemata, 12m0. Oxon. — Pe ee ks
Vertot 5 Revolutions i in the Roman Republick, 2Vols. mn ks eee jae 2
------- = - in Sweden, 8vo. e > gt Tela F 7
--------- in Portugal, 80. >i . Wy A hayes LK
Virgilius com Notis Binald?, 1 amp, a at stag a
re em in Vom Delphini, 8v0.. > i amen x
Vitruvius Britannicus, or Britih Aichired, by rag Campbell, 3 Vols, Fal. OS hae
Validity of Englifh Ordinations, by Father Corayer, 8a. Ar e Rutt 9h ‘aka ae ia

wih, ER: Be Rakesh” >
5 agen Enoelith Particles, 8v0., persis ay i fg Mon eel gael
- = = Nouns and Verbs, 8 epic i Bac yey.

ween ~ Shorter Examples, 1270. nN"


Wynter’s Effay on Chronical Difeafes, 8vo. 1725. at SS aS a
Whifton’s Aftronomical Principles, with Cuts, W725. AA sh
- - - - Literal Accomplithment of hea Prophecies, son 126.”
'- - - - Supplement, 8v0. 1725-. oR Cert
Wells Elementa Arithmetice, numerofe & fpec. | ‘Edit. sin, 17.266 ve
Willoughby Hiftoria Pifeium. recogn. Fo. Rains, cum fig. Fol. Sy ba ae
Whitby Ethices Compendium, in Pofam Juvent. Acad. 8ve. 1724. oe ‘itty Tan
White's new and exa& Obfervations on Fevers, iat Hed —
Waterland’s 8 Sermons at Lady Moyer’ *s Lecture, Sve, ies
_---- Vindication of Chrif’s Divinity, 8vo._ is am Bt
.- =~ = Second Vindication of Chrift’s Divinity, Su0. OG ae
_ - += = Farther Vindication of Chrif’s Divinity, 8ve.
= ---~-- Critical Hiftory of the Athanafi ian Creed.
~---- 4 Single Sermons, 8vo. 1725. © ia


aie


Welfted de Ftate Vergente, 8ve. 1724. Oe il ck te Mlb le
. — = de Adulta Atate, Svc. Ni. ce cae
Whitby on the. New, Teftament, ‘2 Vols. Fol. AY

_ Wake on the Church Catechifm, ‘the Fourth Edie. 80.


Week’s Preparation, 12mo. eh},
Wifeman s Surgery, 2 Vols. $vo.


Aas cess 80. tthe i ee


Nes  pembisk bog Literature, containing an Mdaowe of new Books
, both at Howie hyruties with Differtations upon feveral Subjects, mi fe
ws Oblemations, dre. N. 8. hay Memoirs. will be: saan nee


a bee
Prem a. :


vom
wet 4d
ys ae


ARS.
