The Aims of Education and Other Essays (Alfred North Whitehead, 1929)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/aimsofeducation0000alfr). Essays on education, universities, and the rhythm of learning — 'the art of the utilization of knowledge.'
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

MP373/60¢


Alired North
- WHITEHEAD


THE AIMS OF
EDUCATIG


ae
Ss ans :
= aS
rete
—
a


Digitized by the Internet Archive
‘in 2026


Caer


The Aims of Education
And Other Essays


Other MENTOR Books by
Alfred North Whitehead


Apventures oF Ineas by Alfred North Whitehead
A history of mankind’s great thoughts, tracing the
development of crucial ideas from ancient times to
the present. (#MD141—50¢)


Dratocues or AtFrrep NortH WHITEHEAD
as recorded by Lucien Price
Alfred North Whitehead converses about books, people,
events, and ideas in this illuminating book by a friend
of 20 years’ standing. (#MD180—50¢)


Science AND THE MoperN Wort
by Alfred North Whitehead
A penetrating study of the influence of three centuries
of scientific thought on world civilization.
(#MD162—506)


The Aims of Education
And Other Essays


by
Alfred North Whitehead


MENTOR
PAENTOR
Y 00ks


A MENTOR BOOK
Published by THE NEW AMERICAN LIBRARY.


CopyricGHT, 1929, By THE MACMILLAN COMPANY


All rights reserved, including the right of
reproduction in whole or in part in any form.

For information address The Macmillan Company,
60 Fifth Avenue, New York 11, New York.


Published as a MENTOR BOOK
By Arrangement with The Macmillan Company


FIRST PRINTING, JULY, 1949
SECOND PRINTING, JULY, 1951
THIRD PRINTING, AUGUST, 1952
FOURTH PRINTING, JULY, 1953
FIFTH PRINTING, JULY, 1954

SIXTH PRINTING, SEPTEMBER, 1955
SEVENTH PRINTING, AUGUST, 1956
EIGHTH PRINTING, DECEMBER, 1957
NINTH PRINTING, DECEMBER, 1958
TENTH PRINTING, MARCH, 1960
ELEVENTH PRINTING, MARCH, 1961
TWELFTH PRINTING, DECEMBER, 1961


The Aims of Education is published in England
by Williams and Norgate, Ltd.


MENTOR TRADEMARK REG. U.S. PAT. OFF. AND FORBIGN COUNTRIES
REGISTHRED TRADBMARK—MABOA REGISTRADA
HEOCHO EN OHIOAGO, U.S.A.


MENTOR BOOKS are published by
The New American Library of World Literature, Inc.
501 Madison Avenue, New York 22, New York


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA


eo WD


ed


10.


CONTENTS


ALFRED NorTH WHITEHEAD Vil
by Felix Frankfurter


PREFACE xi
THE AIMS OF EDUCATION 13
THE RHYTHM OF EDUCATION 26


THe RHYTHMIC CLAIMS OF FREEDOM AND
DISCIPLINE 39


‘TECHNICAL EDUCATION AND ITS RELATION
TO SCIENCE AND LITERATURE 51


THE PLACE OF CLASSICS IN EDUCATION 66


THE MATHEMATICAL CURRICULUM 80
UNIVERSITIES AND THEIR FUNCTION 91
THE ORGANISATION OF THOUGHT 101


Tue ANATOMY OF SOME SCIENTIFIC IDEAS 117


SPACE, TIME AND RELATIVITY 148


ALFRED NORTH WHITEHEAD


By Felix Frankfurter


FROM knowledge gained through the years of the personalities
who in our day have affected American university life, I have
for some time been convinced that no single figure has had
such a pervasive influence as the late Professor Alfred North
Whitehead. Certainly so far as this applies to the country’s
oldest university, my statement will hardly be disputed. I
should like to try to describe the nature of the ferment im-
parted by a thinker whose philosophic speculations were
mostly beyond the capacity of those whom he touched.

That our universities have grave shortcomings for the in-
tellectual life of this nation is by now a commonplace. The
chief source of their inadequacy is probably the curse of
departmentalization. Among students, as well as among
teachers, there has been a tendency to regard courses as
something which exist in nature, instead of artificial simpli-
fications for the mastery of what are complicated organisms,
whether of nature or reason or society. Professor Whitehead
exerted powerful influence to break down this separation in
the various departments of the university.

From the time that he came to Harvard in 1924 he infused
an understanding of interdependence among the various dis-
ciplines, to use the current jargon. For all who came within
the range of his infectious personality, arid professionalism
was quickened into exhilarating meaning and the universe
expanded. Such was the quiet, almost shy magic of his quali-
ties that his influence imperceptibly but quickly permeated
the whole university.

The need for breaking down sterilizing departmentalization
has been widely felt. Unfortunately, however, a too frequent
way of doing it has been, wittily but not too unfairly, de-
scribed as the cross-sterilization of the social sciences. That
is a tendency by which a difficult problem, say of the law, is

Vii


Viii THE AIMS OF EDUCATION ~—


solved by relying on the formulation of a dubious truth in =


some other field.


Professor Whitehead’s insistence on understanding through .-


realization of the interdependence of thought and ideas and
institutions was quite otherwise.

He was fiercely on guard against the illusions of verbal-
ization and did not confuse certainty with certitude. In short,
he was tough-minded because he felt the universe as illimit-
able. He distrusted closed systems because they imprison the
creative possibilities of insight and experience. He was re-
lentlessly exacting of accurate responsible thinking, precisely
because he knew that even the most rigorous thought cannot
achieve fullness of comprehension.

It was not by courses or lectures that he ignited to deeper
understanding and more beautiful visions the minds and
feelings of hundreds of students, alike youngsters fresh from
high schools and colleagues themselves eminent. He did this
predominantly through informal and unpremeditated talk,
mostly in his modest apartment, which gave even the most
timid freshman the sense of participation in an exciting ad-
venture. Everything of distinction contributed toward these
unfailing memorable occasions. Not to mention Mrs. White-
head would be to omit enveloping loveliness.

Professor Whitehead had a benign and beautiful presence,
a voice and diction that made music of English speech, humor
that lighted up dark places, humility that made the foolish
wiser and evoked the wisdom of the taciturn. For twenty
years Professor Whitehead exercised this great and radiating
influence. He did so at Harvard because he was there. He did
so beyond because he was what he was. People came to
Harvard because he was there. People read his books who
had no background for understanding them. This partly ex-
plains why he is said to be so hard to read. No one who is
ready to read serious books can fail to find luminous charm
in his non-technical writings, like his recently published Essays
and his Adventures of Ideas.

To dwell, however inadequately, on the qualities of a
teacher like Alfred North Whitehead is important if our uni-
versities are important. They are important if the institutions
specially charged with the accumulation of the intellectual
capital of the world are important to a society. Who will
deny that Professor Whitehead was right in his belief that
the fate of the intellectual civilization of the world today is


to no inconsiderable extent in the keeping of our universities? —


|


|


THE AIMS OF EDUCATION : ix.


“The Aegean Coastline had its chance and made use of it;
Italy had its chance and made use of it; France, England,
Germany had their chance and made use of it. Today the
Eastern American states have their chance. What use will
they make of it? That question has two answers. Once Baby-
lon had its chance, and produced the Tower of Babel. The
University of Paris fashioned the intellect of the Middle Ages.”
The awful question that confronts American universities
is, What are they doing with their power and their duty?


Washington, January 7, 1948


The above appreciation appeared as a letter to the NEW
York Times on January 8, 1948, shortly after Professor
Whitehead’s death. It is reproduced as a special introduction
to the Mentor edition of THE AtMs oF EbucaTIon, by per-
mission of the NEw YoRK TIMES and Mr. Justice Frankfurter.


PREFACE


THE general topic of this volume is education on its intellec-
tual side. One main idea runs through the various chapters,
and is illustrated in them from many points of view. It can be
stated briefly thus: The students are alive, and the purpose
of education is to stimulate and guide their self-development.
It follows as a corollary from this premise, that the teachers
also should be alive with living thoughts. The whole book is
a protest against dead knowledge, that is to say, against inert
ideas. The separate chapters have, with the exception of
Chapter 9, been delivered as addresses at various conferences
| of educational bodies and of scientific societies. They are the
' outcome of practical experience, reflections on the practice of
| education and some criticisms on the meaning of the topics
_ constituting its content.
| The references to the educational system concern England.
_ The failures and successes of the system in that country are
somewhat different from those in America. But such Tef-
erences are merely illustrative: the general principles apply
equally to both countries.
The earliest of the addresses was delivered in the year 1912
to the Educational Section of the International Congress of
Mathematicians, meeting at Cambridge, England, and the
latest in the year 1928 at the Business School of Harvard
| University, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Chapters 1, 4, 6, 8, 9,
| and 10 have been published in my book, The Organisation
| of Thought (Williams and Norgate, London, 1917). Chapter
2, The Rhythm of Education, has been published as a sep-
| arate pamphlet (Christophers, London, 1922). In this re-
| publication there are omissions but no other alterations. In
| particular, the three final chapters of the present book, with
some omissions, stand as published in 1917, They are not
to be construed as commentaries on my writings since that
date. The converse relation is the true one.

My thanks are due to the Editor of The Hibbert Journal
for permission to republish Chapter 3, The Rhythmic Claims
of Freedom and Discipline, and Chapter 5, The Place of
Classics in Education, also to the Editor of The Atlantic
Monthly for permission to republish Chapter 7, Universities
and Their Function.

A.N. W.


Harvard University,
January, 1929.


|


1. The Aims of Education


CULTURE is activity of thought, and receptiveness to beauty
and humane feeling. Scraps of information have nothing to
do with it. A merely well-informed man is the most useless
bore on God’s earth. What we should aim at producing is
men who possess both culture and expert knowledge in some
special direction. Their expert knowledge will give them the
ground to start from, and their culture will lead them as
deep as philosophy and as high as art. We have to remember
that the valuable intellectual development is self-develop-


ment, and that it mostly takes place between the ages of six-


teen and thirty. As to training, the most important part is


given by mothers before the age of twelve. A saying due to


Archbishop Temple illustrates my meaning. Surprise was ex-
pressed at the success in after-life of a man, who as a boy


at Rugby had been somewhat undistinguished. He answered,


“It is not what they are at eighteen, it is what they become


afterwards that matters.”
In training a child to activity of thought, above all things


we must beware of what I will call “inert ideas”’—that is to


say, ideas that are merely received into the mind without


being utilised, or tested, or thfown into fresh combinations.


In the history of education, the most striking phenomenon
is that schools of learning, which at one epoch are alive
with a ferment of genius, in a succeeding generation exhibit
merely pedantry and routine. The reason is, that they are
overladen with inert ideas, Education with inert ideas is
not only useless: it is, above all things, harmful—Corruptio
optimi, pessima. Except at rare intervals of intellectual fer-
ment, education in the past has been radically infected with
inert ideas. That is the reason why uneducated clever women,
who have seen much of the world, are in middle life so
much the most cultured part of the community. They have


13


14 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


been saved from this horrible burden of inert ideas. Every —
intellectual revolution which has ever stirred humanity into —


greatness has been a passionate protest against inert ideas.


Then, alas, with pathetic ignorance of human psychology, it —


has proceeded by some educational scheme to bind humanity
afresh with inert ideas of its own fashioning. |

Let us now ask how in our system of education we are to
guard against this mental dryrot. We enunciate two educa-
tional commandments, “Do not teach too many subjects,”
and again, “What you teach, teach thoroughly.”

The result of teaching small parts of a large number of
subjects is the passive reception of disconnected ideas, not
illumined with any spark of vitality. Let the main ideas
which are introduced into a child’s education be few and
important, and let them be thrown into every combination
possible. The child should make them his own, and should
understand their application here and now in the circum-
stances of his actual life. From the very beginning of his
education, the child should experience the joy of discovery,
The discovery which he has to make, is that general ideas
give an understanding of that stream of events which pours
through his life, which is his life. By understanding I mean
more than a mere logical analysis, though that is included. I
mean “understanding” in the sense in which it is used in the
French proverb, “To understand all, is to forgive all.” Pedants
sneer at an education which is useful. But if education is not
useful, what is it? Is it a talent, to be hidden away in a
napkin? Of course, education should be useful, whatever
your aim in life. It was useful to Saint Augustine and it was
useful to Napoleon, It is useful, because understanding is
useful.

I pass lightly over that understanding which should be
given by the literary side of education. Nor do I wish to
be supposed to pronounce on the relative merits of a classi-
cal or a modern curriculum. I would only remark that the
understanding which we want is an understanding of an
insistent present. The only use of a knowledge of the past
is to equip us for the present. No more deadly harm can be
done to young minds than by depreciation of the present.
The present contains all that there is. It is holy ground; for
it is the past, and it is the future. At the same time it must
be observed that an age is no less past if it existed two
hundred years ago than if it existed two thousand years


4


ago. Do not be deceived by the pedantry of dates. The ages — .


THE AIMS OF EDUCATION 15


of Shakespeare and of Moliére are no less past than are the


| ages of Sophocles and of Virgil. The communion of saints
|} # a great and inspiring assemblage, but it has only one


possible hall of meeting, and that is, the present; and the
mere lapse of time through which any particular group of


| saints must travel to reach that meeting-place, makes very
| iittle difference.


Passing now to the scientific and logical side of education,
we remember that here also ideas which are not utilised are
positively harmful. By utilising an idea, I mean relating it
to that stream, compounded of sense perceptions, feelings,
hopes, desires, and of mental activities adjusting thought to
thought, which forms our life. I can imagine a set of beings
which might fortify their souls by passively reviewing dis-
connected ideas. Humanity is not built that way—except
perhaps some editors of newspapers.

In scientific training, the first thing to do with an idea is
to prove it. But allow me for one moment to extend the mean-


ing of “prove”; I mean—to prove its worth, Now an idea is
- not worth much unless the propositions in which it is em-
| bodied are true. Accordingly an essential part of the proof of


an idea is the proof, either by experiment or by logic, of the
truth of the propositions. But it is not essential that this
proof of the truth should constitute the first introduction to
the idea. After all, its assertion by the authority of respect-
able teachers is sufficient evidence to begin with. In our first
contact with a set of propositions, we commence by appreci-


ating their importance. That is what we all do in after-life.


We do not attempt, in the strict sense, to prove or to disprove
anything, unless its importance makes it worthy of that


| honour. These two processes of proof, in the narrow sense,
| and of appreciation, do not require a rigid separation in time.
_ Both can be proceeded with nearly concurrently. But in so


far as either process must have the priority, it should be
that of appreciation by use.

Furthermore, we should not endeavour to use propositions
in isolation. Emphatically I do not mean, a neat little set of
experiments to illustrate Proposition I and then the proof of
Proposition I, a neat little set of experiments to illustrate
Proposition II and then the proof of Proposition II, and so
on to the end of the book. Nothing could be more boring.
Interrelated truths are utilised en bloc, and the various
propositions are employed in any order, and with any reitera-
tion. Choose some important applications of your theo-


16 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


retical subject; and study them concurrently with the system-
atic theoretical exposition. Keep the theoretical exposition
short and simple, but let it be strict and rigid so far as it goes.
It should not be too long for it to be easily known with thor-
oughness and accuracy. The consequences of a plethora of
half-digested theoretical knowledge are deplorable. Also the
theory should not be muddled up with the practice. The child
should have no doubt when it is proving and when it is
utilising. My point is that what is proved should be utilised,
and that what is utilised should—so far as is practicable—
be proved. I am far from asserting that proof and utilisa-
tion are the same thing.

At this point of my discourse, I can most directly carry
forward my argument in the outward form of a digression.
We are only just realising that the art and science of educa-
tion require a genius and a study of their own; and that this
genius and this science are more than a bare knowledge of
some branch of science or of literature. This truth was par-
tially perceived in the past generation; and headmasters,
somewhat crudely, were apt to supersede learning in their
colleagues by requiring left-hand bowling and a taste for
football. But culture is more than cricket, and more than foot-
ball, and more than extent of knowledge.

Education is the acquisition of the art of the utilisation
of knowledge. This is an art very difficult to impart. Whenever
a text-book is written of real educational worth, you may
be quite certain that some reviewer will say that it will be
difficult to teach from it. Of course it will be difficult to
teach from it. If it were easy, the book ought to be burned;
for it cannot be educational. In education, as elsewhere, the
broad primrose path leads to a nasty place. This evil path is
represented by a book or a set of lectures which will
practically enable the student to learn by heart all the ques-
tions likely to be asked at the next external examination. And
I may say in passing that no educational system is possible
unless every, question directly asked of a pupil at any exam-
ination is either framed or modified by the actual teacher
of that pupil in that subject. The external assessor may report
on the curriculum or on the performance of the pupils, but
never should be allowed to ask the pupil a question which
has not been strictly supervised by the actual teacher, or at
least inspired by a long conference with him. There are a
few exceptions to this rule, but they are exceptions, and could
easily be allowed for under the general rule.


THE AIMS OF EDUCATION 17


We now return to my previous point, that theoretical ideas
should always find important applications within the pupil’s
curriculum. This is not an easy doctrine to apply, but a very
hard one. It contains within itself the problem of keeping
knowledge alive, of preventing it from becoming inert,
which is the central problem of all education.

The best procedure will depend on several factors, none
of which can be neglected, namely, the genius of the teacher,
the intellectual type of the pupils, their prospects in life, the
opportunities offered by the immediate surroundings of the
school, and allied factors of this sort. It is for this reason
that the uniform external examination is so deadly. We do
not denounce it because we are cranks, and like denouncing
established things. We are not so childish. Also, of course,
such examinations have their use in testing slackness. Our
reason of dislike is very definite and very practical. It kills
the best part of culture. When you analyse in the light of
experience the central task of education, you find that its
successful accomplishment depends on a delicate adjustment
of many variable factors. The reason is that we are dealing
with human minds, and not with dead matter. The evocation
of curiosity, of judgment, of the power of mastering a
complicated tangle of circumstances, the use of theory in
giving foresight in special cases—all these powers are not to
be imparted by a set rule embodied in one schedule of
examination subjects.

I appeal to you, as practical teachers. With good discipline,
it is always possible to pump into the minds of a class a
certain quantity of inert knowledge. You take a text-book
and make them learn it. So far, so good. The child then knows
how to solve a quadratic equation. But what is the point of
teaching a child to solve a quadratic equation? There is a
traditional answer to this question. It runs thus: The mind
is an instrument, you first sharpen it, and then use it; the
acquisition of the power of solving a quadratic equation is
part of the process of sharpening the mind. Now there is
just enough truth in this answer to have made it live through
the ages. But for all its half-truth, it embodies a radical error
which bids fair to stifle the genius of the modern world. I
do not know who was first responsible for this analogy of
the mind to a dead instrument. For aught I know, it may
have been one of the seven wise men of Greece, or a commit-
tee of the whole lot of them. Whoever was the originator, there
can be no doubt of the authority which it has acquired by


18 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


the continuous approval bestowed upon it by eminent per-
sons. But whatever its weight of authority, whatever the high
approval which it can quote, I have no hesitation in de-
nouncing it as one of the most fatal, erroneous, and dan-
gerous conceptions ever introduced into the theory of educa-
tion. The mind is never passive; it is a perpetual activity,
delicate, receptive, responsive to stimulus. You cannot post-
pone its life until you have sharpened it. Whatever interest
attaches to your subject-matter must be evoked here and
now; whatever powers you are strengthening in the pupil,
must be exercised here and now; whatever possibilities of
mental life your teaching should impart, must be exhibited
here and now. That is the golden rule of education, and a
very difficult rule to follow. :

The difficulty is just this: the apprehension of general
ideas, intellectual habits of mind, and pleasurable interest in
mental achievement can be evoked by no form of words,
however accurately adjusted. All practical teachers know that
education is a patient process of the mastery of details, min-
ute by minute, hour by hour, day by day. There is no royal
road to learning through an airy path of brilliant generalisa-
tions. There is a proverb about the difficulty of seeing the
wood because of the trees. That difficulty is exactly the point
which I am enforcing. The problem of education is to make
the pupil see the wood by means of the trees.

The solution which I am urging, is to eradicate the fatal
disconnection of subjects which kills the vitality of our
modern curriculum. There is only one subject-matter for
education, and that is Life in all its manifestations. Instead of
this single unity, we offer children—Algebra, from which
nothing follows; Geometry, from which nothing follows;
Science, from which nothing follows; History, from which
nothing follows; a Couple of Languages, never mastered;
and lastly, most dreary of all, Literature, represented by
plays of Shakespeare, with philological notes and short
analyses of plot and character to be in substance committed
to memory. Can such a list be said to represent Life, as it is
known in the midst of the living of it? The best that can be
said of it is, that it is a rapid table of contents which a deity
might run over in his mind while he was thinking of creating
a world, and had not yet determined how to put it together.

Let us now return to quadratic equations. We still have
on hand the unanswered question. Why should children be
taught their solution? Unless quadratic equations fit into


THE AIMS OF EDUCATION 19


a connected cirriculum, of course, there is no reason to teach
anything about them. Furthermore, extensive as should be the
place of mathematics in a complete culture, I am a little
doubtful whether for many types of boys algebraic solutions
of quadratic equations do not lie on the specialist side of
mathematics. I may here remind you that as yet I have not
said anything of the psychology or the content of the spe-
cialism, which is so necessary a part of an ideal education.
But all that is an evasion of our real question, and I merely
state it in order to avoid being misunderstood in my answer.

Quadratic equations are part of algebra, and algebra is the
intellectual instrument which has been created for rendering
clear the quantitative aspects of the world. There is no getting
out of it. Through and through the world is infected with
quantity. To talk sense, is to talk in quantities. It is no use
saying that the nation is large,—How large? It is no use
saying that radium is scarce,—How scarce? You cannot
evade quantity. You may fly to poetry and to music, and
quantity and number will face you in your rhythms and your

octaves. Elegant intellects which despise the theory of quan-
tity, are but half developed. They are more to be pitied than
blamed. The scraps of gibberish, which in their school-days
were taught to them in the name of algebra, deserve some
contempt.

This question of the degeneration of algebra into gib-
berish, both in word and in fact, affords a pathetic instance
of the uselessness of reforming educational schedules with-
out a clear conception of the attributes which you wish to
evoke in the living minds of the children. A few years ago
there was an outcry that school algebra was in need of reform,
but there was a general agreement that graphs would put
everything right. So all sorts of things were extruded, and
graphs were introduced. So far as I can see, with no sort of
idea behind them, but just graphs. Now every examination
paper has one or two questions on graphs. Personally, I am
an enthusiastic adherent of graphs. But I wonder whether as
yet we have gained very much. You cannot put life into any
schedule of general education unless you succeed in exhibiting
its relation to some essential characteristic of all intelligent or
emotional perception. It is a hard saying, but it is true; and I
do not see how to make it any easier. In making these little
formal alterations you are beaten by the very nature of
things. You are pitted against too skilful an adversary, who
will see to it that the pea is always under the other thimble.


20 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


Reformation must begin at the other end. First, you must
make up your mind as to those quantitative aspects of the
world which are simple enough to be introduced into general
education; then a schedule of algebra should be framed which
will about find its exemplification in these applications. We
need not fear for our pet graphs, they will be there in plenty
when we once begin to treat algebra as a serious means of
studying the world. Some of the simplest applications will
be found in the quantities which occur in the simplest study
of society. The curves of history are more vivid and more
informing than the dry catalogues of names and dates which
comprise the greater part of that arid school study. What
purpose is effected by a catalogue of undistinguished kings
and queens? Tom, Dick, or Harry, they are all dead. General
resurrections are failures, and are better postponed. The
quantitative flux of the forces of modern society is capable
of very simple exhibition. Meanwhile, the ideas of the varia-
ble, of the function, of rate of change, of equations and their
solution, of elimination, are being studied as an abstract
science for their own sake. Not, of course, in the pompous
phrases with which I am alluding to them, here, but with
that iteration of simple special cases proper to teaching.

If this course be followed, the route from Chaucer to
the Black Death, from the Black Death to modern Labour
troubles, will connect the tales of the medizval pilgrims
with the abstract science of algebra, both yielding diverse
aspects of that single theme, Life. I know what most of you are
thinking at this point. It is that the exact course which I
have sketched out is not the particular one which you would
have chosen, or even see how to work. I quite agree. { am
not claiming that I could do it myself. But your objection is
the precise reason why a common external examination sys-
tem is fatal to education. The process of exhibiting the appli-
cations of knowledge must, for its success, essentially depend
on the character of the pupils and the genius of the teacher.
Of course I have left out the easiest applications with which
most of us are more at home. I mean the quantitative sides of
sciences, such as mechanics and physics.

Again, in the same connection we plot the statistics of
social phenomena against the time. We then eliminate the
time between suitable pairs. We can speculate how far we
have exhibited a real casual connection, or how far a mere
temporal coincidence. We notice that we might have plotted
against the time one set of statistics for one country and


THE AIMS OF EDUCATION 21


another set for another country, and thus, with suitable
choice of subjects, have obtained graphs which certainly
exhibited mere coincidence. Also other graphs exhibit obvious
causal connections. We wonder how to discriminate. And so
are drawn on as tar as we will.

But in considering this description, I must beg you to
remember what I have been insisting on above. In the first
place, one train of thought will not suit all groups of chil-
dren. For example, I should expect that artisan children will
want something more concrete and, in a sense, swifter than I
have set down here. Perhaps I am wrong, but that is what I
should guess. In the second place, I am not contemplating one
beautiful lecture stimulating, once and for all, an admiring
class. That is not the way in which education proceeds. No}
all the time the pupils are hard at work solving examples,
drawing graphs, and making experiments, until they have a
thorough hold on the whole subject. I am describing the inter-
spersed explanations, the directions which should be given to
their thoughts. The pupils have got to be made to feel that
they are studying something, and are not merely executing
intellectual minuets.

Finally, if you are teaching pupils for some general ex-
amination, the problem of sound teaching is greatly com-
plicated. Have you ever noticed the zig-zag moulding round a
Norman arch? The ancient work is beautiful, the modern
work is hideous. The reason is, that the modern work is done
to exact measure, the ancient work is varied according to
the idiosyncrasy of the workman. Here it is crowded, and
there it is expanded. Now the essence of getting pupils
through examinations is to give equal weight to all parts of
the schedule. But mankind is naturally specialist. One man
sees a whole subject, where another can find only a few de-
tached examples. I know that it seems contradictory to allow
for specialism in a curriculum especially designed for a
broad culture, Without contraditions the world would be
simpler, and perhaps duller. But I am certain that in education
wherever you exclude specialism you destroy life.

We now come to the other great branch of a general mathe-
matical education, namely Geometry. The same principles ap-
ply. The theoretical part should be clear-cut, rigid, short, and
important. Every proposition not absolutely necessary to
exhibit the main connection of ideas should be cut out, but
the great fundamental ideas should be all there. No omission
of concepts, such as those of Similarity and Proportion. We


2294 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


must remember that, owing to the aid rendered by the visual
presence of a figure, Geometry is a field of unequalled
excellence for the exercise of the deductive faculties of
reasoning. Then, of course, there follows Geometrical Draw-
ing, with its training for the hand and eye.

But, like Algebra, Geometry and Geometrical Drawing must
be extended beyond the mere circle of geometrical ideas. In
an industrial neighbourhood, machinery and workshop prac-
tice form the appropriate extension. For example, in the
London Polytechnics this has been achieved with conspicu-
ous success. For many secondary schools I suggest that sur-
veying and maps are the natural applications. In particular,
plane-table surveying should lend pupils to a vivid apprehen-
sion of the immediate application of geometric truths. Simple
drawing apparatus, a surveyor’s chain, and a surveyor’s com-
pass, should enable the pupils to rise from the survey and
mensuration of a field to the construction of the map of a
small district. The best education is to be found in gaining
the utmost information from the simplest apparatus. The
provision of elaborate instruments is greatly to be depre-
cated. To have constructed the map of a small district, to
have considered its roads, its contours, its geology, its cli-
mate, its relation to other districts, the effects on the status of
its inhabitants, will teach more history and geography than
any knowledge of Perkin Warbeck or of Behren’s Straits. I
mean not a nebulous lecture on the subject, but a serious
investigation in which the real facts are definitely ascertained
by the aid of accurate theoretical knowledge. A _ typical
mathematical problem should be: Survey such and such a
field, draw a plan of it to such and such a scale, and find the
area. It would be quite a good procedure to impart the
necessary geometrical propositions without their proofs. Then,
concurrently in the same term, the proofs of the proposi-
tions would be learnt while the survey was being made.

Fortunately, the specialist side of education presents an
easier problem than does the provision of a general culture.
For this there are many reasons. One is that many of the
principles of procedure to be observed are the same in both
Cases, and it is unnecessary to recapitulate. Another reason
is that specialist training takes place—or should take place—
at a more advanced stage of the pupil’s course, and thus
there is easier material to work upon. But undoubtedly the —
chief reason is that the specialist study is normally a study of
peculiar interest to the student. He is studying it because,


THE AIMS OF EDUCATION 23


for some reason, he wants to know it. This makes all the dif-
‘ference. The general culture is designed to foster an activity
of mind; the specialist course utilises this activity. But it
does not do to lay too much stress on these neat antitheses.
As we have already seen, in the general course foci of special
interest will arise; and similarly in the special study, the
external connections of the subject drag thought outwards.

Again, there is not one course of study which merely gives
general culture, and another which gives special knowledge.
The subjects pursued for the sake of a general education are
special subjects specially studied; and, on the other hand, one
of the ways of encouraging general mental activity is to foster
a special devotion. You may not divide the seamless coat of
learning. What education has to impart is an intimate sense
for the power of ideas, for the beauty of ideas, and for the
structure of ideas, together with a particular body of knowl-
edge which has peculiar reference to the life of the being
possessing it.

The appreciation of the structure of ideas is that side of a
cultured mind which can only grow under the influence of a
special study. I mean that eye for the whole chessboard, for
the bearing of one set of ideas on another. Nothing but a
special study can give any appreciation for the exact formu-
lation of general ideas, for their relations when formulated,
for their service in the comprehension of life. A mind so
disciplined should be both more abstract and more concrete.
It has been trained in the comprehension of abstract thought
and in the analysis of facts.

Finally, there should grow the most austere of all mental
qualities; I mean the sense for style. It is an zsthetic sense,
based on admiration for the direct attainment of a foreseen
end, simply and without waste. Style in art, style in literature,
style in science, style in logic, style in practical execution
have fundamentally the same esthetic qualities, namely,
attainment and restraint. The love of a subject in itself and
for itself, where it is not the sleepy pleasure of pacing a
mental quarter-deck, is the love of style as manifested in that
study.

Here we are brought back to the position from which we
started, the utility of education. Style, in its finest sense, is
the last acquirement of the educated mind; it is also the most
useful. It pervades the whole being. The administrator with a
sense for style hates waste; the engineer with a sense for style
economises his material; the artisan with a sense for style


24 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


prefers good work. Style is the ultimate morality of mind.

But above style, and above knowledge, there is something,
a vague shape like fate above the Greek gods. That something
is Power. Style is the fashioning of power, the restraining of
_ power. But, after all, the power of attainment of the desired
end is fundamental. The first thing is to get there. Do not
bother about your style, but solve your problem, justify the
ways of God to man, administer your province, or do what-
ever else is set before you.

Where, then, does style help? In this, with style the end is
attained without side issues, without raising undesirable in-
flammations. With style you attain your end and nothing but
your end. With style the effect of your activity is calculable,
and foresight is the last gift of gods to men. With style your
power is increased, for your mind is not distracted with ir-
relevancies, and you are more likely to attain your object.
Now style is the exclusive privilege of the expert. Whoever
heard of the style of an amateur painter, of the style of an
amateur poet? Style is always the product of specialist study,
the peculiar contribution of specialism to culture.

English education in its present phase suffers from a lack
of definite aim, and from an external machinery which kills
its vitality. Hitherto in this address I have been considering
the aims which should govern education. In this respect Eng-
land halts between two opinions. It has not decided whether
to produce amateurs or experts. The profound change in the
world which the nineteenth century has produced is that
the growth of knowledge has given foresight. The amateur
is essentially a man with appreciation and with immense
versatility in mastering a given routine. But he lacks the
foresight which comes from special knowledge. The object
of this address is to suggest how to produce the expert with-
out loss of the essential virtues of the amateur. The machin-
ery of our secondary education is rigid where it should be
yielding, and lax where it should be rigid. Every school is
bound on pain of extinction to train its boys for a small set
of definite examinations. No headmaster has a free hand to
develop his general education or his specialist studies in ac-
cordance with the opportunities of his school, which are cre-
ated by its staff, its environment, its class of boys, and its
endowments. I suggest that no system of external tests which
aims primarily at examining individual scholars can result
in anything but educational waste.

Primarily it is the schools and not the scholars which


THE AIMS OF EDUCATION 25


should be inspected. Each school should grant its own leav-
ing certificates, based on its own curriculum. The standards of
these schools should be sampled and corrected. But the first
requisite for educational reform is the school as a unit, with
its approved curriculum based on its own needs, and evolved
by its own staff. If we fail to secure that, we simply fall from
one formalism into another, from one dung-hill of inert ideas
into another.

In stating that the school is the true educational unit in
any national system for the safeguarding of efficiency, I
have conceived the alternative system as being the external
examination of the individual scholar. But every Scylla is
faced by its Charybdis—or, in more homely language, there
is a ditch on both sides of the road. It will be equally fatal
to education if we fall into the hands of a supervising de-
partment which is under the impression that it can divide
all schools into two or three rigid categories, each type be-
ing forced to adopt a rigid curriculum. When I say that the
school is the educational unit, I mean exactly what I say, no
larger unit, no smaller unit. Each school must have the claim
to be considered in relation to its special circumstances.
The classifying of schools for some purposes is necessary.
But no absolutely rigid curriculum, not modified by its own
staff, should be permissible. Exactly the same principles ap-
ply, with the proper modifications, to universities and to
technical colleges.

When one considers in its length and in its breadth the
importance of this question of the education of a nation’s
young, the broken lives, the defeated hopes, the national
failures, which result from the frivolous inertia with which
it is treated, it is difficult to restrain within oneself a savage
rage. In the conditions of modern life the rule is absolute,
the race which does not value trained intelligence is doomed.
Not all your heroism, not all your social charm, not all your
wit, not all your victories on land or at sea, can move back
the finger of fate. To-day we maintain ourselves. To-morrow
science will have moved forward yet one more step, and
there will be no appeal from the judgment which will then
be pronounced on the uneducated.

We can be content with no less than the old summary of
educational ideal which has been current at any time from
the dawn of our civilisation. The essence of education is
that it be religious.

Pray, what is religious education?


26 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


A religious education is an education which inculcates duty
and reverence. Duty arises from our potential control over
the course of events. Where attainable knowledge could have
changed the issue, ignorance has the guilt of vice. And the
foundation of reverence is this perception, that the present
holds within itself the complete sum of existence, backwards
and forwards, that whole amplitude of time, which is eter-
nity.


Presidential address to the Mathematical Association of England,


2. The Rhythm of Education


By THE Rhythm of Education I denote a certain principle
which in its practical application is well known to everyone
with educational experience. Accordingly, when I remember
that I am speaking to an audience of some of the leading
educationalists in England, I have no expectation that I shall
be saying anything that is new to you. I do think, however,
that the principle has not been subjected to an adequate dis-
cussion taking account of all the factors which should guide
its application.

I first seek for the baldest statement of what I mean by
the Rhythm of Education, a statement so bald as to exhibit
the point of this address in its utter obviousness. The prin-
ciple is merely this—that different subjects and modes of
study should be undertaken by pupils at fitting times when
they have reached the proper stage of mental development.
You will agree with me that this is a truism, never doubted
and known to all. I am really anxious to emphasise the ob-
vious character of the foundational idea of my address; for
one reason, because this audience will certainly find it out
for itself. But the other reason, the reason why I choose this
subject for discourse, is that I do not think that this obvious
truth has been handled in educational practice with due at-
tention to the psychology of the pupils.


Oe Bie ie ee ee 8 cise e


THE RHYTHM OF EDUCATION 27


The Tasks of Infancy


I commence by challenging the adequacy of some prin-
ciples by which the subjects for study are often classified in
order. By this I mean that these principles can only be ac-
cepted as correct if they are so explained as to be explained
away. Consider first the criterion of difficulty. It is not true
that the easier subjects should precede the harder. On the
contrary, some of the hardest must come first because nature
so dictates, and because they are essential to life. The first
intellectual task which confronts an infant is the acquire-
_ ment of spoken language. What an appalling task, the corre-
lation of meanings with sounds! It requires an analysis of
ideas and an analysis of sounds. We all know that the infant
does it, and that the miracle of his achievement is explicable.
But so are all miracles, and yet to the wise they remain mir-
acles. All I ask is that with this example staring us in the
face we should cease talking nonsense about postponing the
harder subjects.

What is the next subject in the education of the infant
minds? The acquirement of written language; that is to say,
the correlation of sounds with shapes. Great heavens! Have
our educationists gone mad? They are setting babbling mites
of six years old to tasks which might daunt a sage after life-
long toil. Again, the hardest task in mathematics is the study
of the elements of algebra, and yet this stage must precede
the comparative simplicity of the differential calculus.

I will not elaborate my point further; I merely restate it
in the form, that the postponement of difficulty is no safe
clue for the maze of educational practice.

The alternative principle of order among subjects is that
of necessary antecedence. There we are obviously on firmer
ground. It is impossible to read Hamlet until you can read;
and the study of integers must precede the study of frac-
tions. And yet even this firnr principle dissolves under scruti-
ny. It is certainly true, but it is only true if you give an arti-
ficial limitation to the concept of a subject for study. The
danger of the principle is that it is accepted in one sense,
for which it is almost a necessary truth, and that it is applied
in another sense for which it is false. You cannot read
Homer before you can read; but many a child, and in ages
past many a man, has sailed with Odysseus over the seas of
Romance by the help of the spoken word of a mother, or of


28 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


some wandering bard. The uncritical application of the prin-
ciple of the necessary antecedence of some subjects to oth-
ers has, in the hands of dull people with a turn for organi-
sation, produced in education the dryness of the Sahara.


Stages of Mental Growth


The reason for the title which I have chosen for this ad-
dress, the Rhythm of Education, is derived from yet another
criticism of current ideas. The pupil’s progress is often con-
ceived as a uniform steady advance undifferentiated by
change of type or alteration in pace; for example, a boy may
be conceived as starting Latin at ten years of age and by a
uniform progression steadily developing into a classical
scholar at the age of eighteen or twenty. I hold that this con-
ception of education is based upon-a false psychology of the
process of mental development which has gravely hindered
the effectiveness of our methods. Life is essentially periodic.
It comprises daily periods, with their alternations of work
and play, of activity and of sleep, and seasonal periods,
which dictate our terms and our holidays; and also it is com-
posed of well-marked yearly periods. These are the gross
obvious periods which no one can overlook. There are also
subtler periods of mental growth, with their cyclic recur-
rences, yet always different as we pass from cycle to cycle,
though the subordinate stages are reproduced in each cycle.
That is why I have chosen the term “rhythmic,” as meaning
essentially the conveyance of difference within a framework
of repetition. Lack of attention to the rhythm and character
of mental growth is a main source of wooden futility in
education. I think that Hegel was right when he analysed
progress into three stages, which he called Thesis, Antithesis,
and Synthesis; though for the purpose of the application of
his idea to educational theory I do not think that the names
he gave are very happily suggestive. In relation to intellec-
tual progress I would term them, the stage of romance, the
stage of precision, and the stage of generalisation.


The Stage of Romance


The stage of romance is the stage of first apprehension.
The subject-matter has the vividness of novelty; it holds
within itself unexplored connexions with possibilities half-
disclosed by glimpses and half-concealed by the wealth of


THE RHYTHM OF EDUCATION 29 ©


material. In this stage knowledge is not dominated by sys-
tematic procedure. Such system as there must be is created
piecemeal ad hoc. We are in the presence of immediate
cognisance of fact, only intermittently subjecting fact to
systematic dissection. Romantic emotion is essentially the
excitement consequent on the transition from the bare facts
to the first realisations of the import of their unexplored re-
lationships. For example, Crusoe was a mere man, and the
sand was mere sand, the footprint was a mere footprint, and
the island a mere island, and Europe was the busy world of
men. But the sudden perception of the half-disclosed and
half-hidden possibilities relating Crusoe and the sand and
the footprint and the lonely island secluded from Europe
constitutes romance. J have had to take an extreme case
for illustration in order to make my meaning perfectly plain.
But construe it as an allegory representing the first stage in
a cycle of progress. Education must essentially be a setting
in order of a ferment already stirring in the mind: you can-
not educate mind in vacuo. In our conception of education
we tend to confine it to the second stage of the cycle; name-
ly, to the stage of precision. But we cannot so limit our task
without misconceiving the whole problem. We are concerned
alike with the ferment, with the acquirement of. precision,
and with the subsequent fruition.


The Stage of Precision


The stage of precision also represents an addition to
knowledge. In this stage, width of relationship is subordi-
nated to exactness of formulation. It is the stage of gram-
mar, the grammar of language and the grammar of science.
It proceeds by forcing on the students’ acceptance a given
way of analysing the facts, bit by bit. New facts are added,
but they are the facts which fit into the analysis.

It is evident that a stage of precision is barren without a
previous stage of romance: unless there are facts which have
already been vaguely apprehended in their broad generality,
the previous analysis is an analysis of nothing. It is simply a
series of meaningless statements about bare facts, produced
artificially and without any further relevance. I repeat that
in this stage we do not merely remain within the circle of
the facts elicited in the romantic epoch. The facts of ro-
mance have disclosed ideas with possibilities of wide sig-
nificance, and in the stage of precise progress we acquire


30 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


other facts in a systematic order, which thereby form both a
disclosure and an analysis of the general subject-matter of
the romance.


The Stage of Generalisation


The final stage of generalisation in Hegel’s synthesis. It
is a return to romanticism with added advantage of classi-
fied ideas and relevant technique. It is the fruition which
has been the goal of the precise training. It is the final suc-
cess. I am afraid that I have had to give a dry analysis of
somewhat obvious ideas. It has been necessary to do so be-
cause my subsequent remarks presuppose that we have
clearly in our minds the essential character of this three-
fold cycle.


The Cyclic Processes


Education should consist in a continual repetition of such
cycles. Each lesson in its minor way should form an ‘eddy
cycle issuing in its own subordinate process. Longer periods
should issue in definite attainments, which then form the
starting-grounds for fresh cycles. We should banish the idea
of a mythical, far-off end of education. The pupils must be
continually enjoying some fruition and starting afresh—if
the teacher is stimulating in exact proportion to his success
in satisfying the rhythmic cravings of his pupils.

An infant’s first romance is its awakening to the appre-
hension of objects and to the appreciation of their connex-
ions. Its growth in mentality takes the exterior form of oc-
cupying itself in the co-ordination of its perceptions with its
bodily activities. Its first stage of precision is mastering
spoken language as an instrument for classifying its con-
templation of objects and for strengthening its apprehension
of emotional relations with other beings. Its first stage of
generalisation is the use of language for a classified and en-
larged enjoyment of objects.

This first cycle of intellectual progress from the achieve-
ment of perception to the acquirement of language, and
from the acquirement of language to classified thought and
keener perception, will bear more careful study. It is the
only cycle of progress which we can observe in its purely
natural state. The later cycles are necessarily tinged by the
procedure of the current mode of education. There is a char-


}


THE RHYTHM OF EDUCATION 31


acteristic of it which is often sadly lacking in subsequent
education; I mean, that it achieves complete success. At the
end of it the child can speak, its ideas are classified, and its
perceptions are sharpened. The cycle achieves its object. This
is a great deal more than can be said for most systems of
education as applied to most pupils. But why should this be
so? Certainly, a new-born baby looks a most unpromising
subject for intellectual progress when we remember the dif-
ficulty of the task before it. I suppose it is because nature,
in the form of surrounding circurnstances, sets it a task for
which the normal development of its brain is exactly fitted. I
do not think that there is any particular mystery about the
fact of a child leaning to speak and in consequence thinking
all the better; but it does offer food for reflection.

In the subsequent education we have not sought for cyclic
processes which in a finite time run their course and
within their own limited sphere achieve a complete success.
This completion is one outstanding character in the natural
cycle for infants. Later on we start a child on some subject,
say Latin, at the age of ten, and hope by a uniform system
of formal training to achieve success at the age of twenty.


The natural result is failure, both in interest and in aquire-


ment. When I speak of failure, I am comparing our results
with the brilliant success of the first natural cycle. I do not
think that it is because our tasks are intrinsically too hard,
when I remember that the infant’s cycle is the hardest of all.
It is because our tasks are set in an unnatural way, without
rhythm and without the stimulus of intermediate successes
and without concentration.

I have not yet spoken of this character of concentration
which so conspicuously attaches to the infant’s progress.
The whole being of the infant is absorbed in the practice of
its cycle. It has nothing else to divert its mental development.
In this respect there is a striking difference between this nat-
ural cycle and the subsequent history of the student’s devel-
opment. It is perfectly obvious that life is very various and
that the mind and brain naturally develop so as to adapt
themselves to the many-hued world in which their lot is cast.
Still, after making allowance for this consideration, we will
be wise to preserve some measure of concentration for each
of the subsequent cycles. In particular, we should avoid.a
competition of diverse subjects in the same stage of their
cycles. The fault of the older education was unrhythmic
concentration on a single undifferentiated subject. Our mod-


32 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


ern system, with its insistence on a preliminary general
education, and with its easy toleration of the analysis of
knowledge, into distinct subjects, is an equally unrhythmic
collection of distracting scraps. I am pleading that we shall
endeavour to weave in the learner’s mind a harmony of pat-
‘terns, by co-ordinating the various elements of instruction
into subordinate cycles each of intrinsic worth for the im-
mediate apprehension of the pupil. We must garner our
crops each in its due season.


The Romance of Adolescence


We will now pass to some concrete applications of the
ideas which have been developed in the former part of my
address.

The first cycle of infancy is succeeded by the cycle of
adolescence, which opens with by far the greatest stage of
romance which we ever experience. It is in this stage that
the lines of character are graven. How the child emerges
from the romantic stage of adolescence is how the subse-
quent life will be moulded by ideals and coloured by imagi-
nation. It rapidly follows on the generalisation of capacity
produced by the acquirement of spoken language and of
reading. The stage of generalisation belonging to the in-
fantile cycle is comparatively short because the romantic
material of infancy is so scanty. The initial knowledge of
the world in any developed sense of the word “knowledge”
really commences after the achievement of the first cycle,
and thus issues in the tremendous age of romance. Ideas, facts,
relationships, stories, histories, possibilities, artistry in words,
in sounds, in form and in colour, crowd into the child’s life,
stir his feelings, excite his appreciation, and incite his im-
pulses to kindred activities. It is a saddening thought that
on this golden age there falls so often the shadow of the
crammer. I am thinking of a period of about four years of
the child’s life, roughly, in ordinary cases, falling between
the age of eight and twelve or thirteen. It is the first great —
period of the utilisation of the native language, and of de-
veloped powers of observation and of manipulation. The in-
fant cannot manipulate, the child can; the infant cannot
observe, the child can; the infant cannot retain thoughts by
the recollection of words, the child can. The child thus
enters upon a new world.


Of course, the stage of precision prolongs itself as re-


THE RHYTHM OF EDUCATION - 33


curring in minor cycles which form eddies in the great ro-


mance. The perfecting of writing, of spelling, of the ele-
ments of arithmetic, and of lists of simple facts, such as
the Kings of England, are all elements of precision, very
necessary both as training in concentration and as useful


- acquirements, However, these are essentially fragmentary


in character, whereas the great romance is the flood which
bears on the child towards the life of the spirit.

The success of the Montessori system is due to its recog-
nition of the dominance of romance at this period of growth.
If this be the explanation, it also points to the limitations in
the usefulness of that method. It is the system which in some
measure is essential for every romantic stage. Its essence is
browsing and the encouragement of vivid freshness. But it
lacks the restraint which is necessary for the great stages of
precision.


The Mastery of Language


As he nears the end of the great romance the cyclic course
of growth is swinging the child over towards an aptitude
for exact knowledge. Language is now the natural subject-
matter for concentrated attack. It is the mode of expression
with which he is thoroughly familiar. He is acquainted with
stories, histories, and poems illustrating the lives of other
people and of other civilisations. Accordingly, from the age
of eleven onwards there is wanted a gradually increasing
concentration towards precise knowledge of language. Fi-
nally, the three years from twelve to fifteen should be domi-
iated by a mass attack upon language, so planned that a
definite result, in itself worth having, is thereby achieved. I
should guess that within these limits of time, and given ade-
quate concentration, we might ask that at the end of that
period the children should have command of English, should
be able to read fluently fairly simple French, and should
have completed the elementary stage of Latin; I mean, a
precise knowledge of the more straightforward parts of Latin
grammar, the knowledge of the construction of Latin sen-
tences, and the reading of some parts of appropriate Latin
authors, perhaps simplified and largely supplemented by the
aid of the best literary translations so that their reading of
the original, plus translation, gives them a grip of the book
as a literary whole. I conceive that such a measure of at-
tainment in these three languages is well within the reach


34 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


of the ordinary child, provided that he has not been dis-
tracted by the effort at precision in a multiplicity of other
subjects. Also some more gifted children could go further.
The Latin would come to them easily, so that it would be
possible to start Greek before the end of the period, always
provided that their bent is literary and that they mean later
to pursue that study at least for some years. Other subjects
will occupy a subordinate place in the time-table and will
be undertaken in a different spirit. In the first place, it must
be remembered that the semi-literary subjects, such as his-
tory, will largely have been provided in the study of the
languages. It will be hardly possible to read some English,
French, and Latin literature without imparting some knowl-
edge of European history. I do not mean that all special
history teaching should be abandoned. I do, however, suggest
that the subject should be exhibited in what I have termed
the romantic spirit, and that the pupils should not be sub-
jected to the test of precise recollection of details on any
large systematic scale.

At this period of growth science should be in its stage of
romance. The pupils should see for themselves, and experi-
ment for themselves, with only fragmentary precision of
thought. The essence of the importance of science, both for
interest in theory or for technological purposes, lies in its
application to concrete detail, and every such application
evokes a novel problem for research. Accordingly, all train-


ing in science should begin as well as end in research, and in ~


getting hold of the subject-matter as it occurs in nature. The
exact form of guidance suitable to this age and the exact
limitations of experiment are matters depending on experi-
ence. But I plead that this period is the true age for the ro-
mance of science.


Concentration on Science


Towards the age of fifteen the age of precision in lan- —
guage and of romance in science draws to its close, to be |
succeeded by a period of generalisation in language and of ©


precision in science. This should be a short period, but one
of vital importance. I am thinking of about one year’s work,
and I suggest that it would be well decisively to alter the
balance of the preceding curriculum. There should be a con-
centration on science and a decided diminution of the lin-


guistic work. A year’s work on science, coming on the top of .


hoa
ee te


THE RHYTHM OF EDUCATION 35


the previous romantic study, should make everyone under-
stand the main principles which govern the development of
mechanics, physics, chemistry, algebra and geometry. Un-
derstand that they are not beginning these subjects, but they
are putting together a previous discursive study by an exact
formulation of their main ideas. For example, take algebra
and geometry, which I single out as being subjects with which
I have some slight familiarity. In the previous three years
there has been work on the applications of the simplest al-
gebraic formule and geometrical propositions to problems
of surveying, or of some other scientific work involving cal-
culations. In this way arithmetic has been carefully strength-
ened by the insistence on definite numerical results, and
familiarity with the ideas of literal formule and of geo-
metrical properties has been gained; also some minor meth-
ods of manipulation have been inculcated. There is thus no
long time to be wasted in getting used to the ideas of the
sciences. The pupils are ready for the small body of algebraic
and geometrical truths which they ought to know thorough-
ly. Furthermore, in the previous period some boys will have
shown an aptitude for mathematics and will have pushed
on a little more, besides in the final year somewhat empha-
sising their mathematics at the expense of some of the other
subjects. I am simply taking mathematics as an illustration.

Meanwhile, the cycle of language is in its stage of gen-
eralisation. In this stage the precise study of grammar and
composition is discontinued, and the language study is con-
fined to reading the literature with emphasised attention to
its ideas and to the general history in which it is embedded;
also the time allotted to history will pass into the precise
study of a short definite period, chosen to illustrate exactly
what does happen at an important epoch and also to show
how to pass the simpler types of judgments on men and
policies. .

I have now sketched in outline the course of education
from babyhood to about sixteen and a half, arranged with
some attention to the rhythmic pulses of life. In some such
way a general education is possible in which the pupil
throughout has the advantage of concentration and of fresh-
ness. Thus precision will always illustrate subject-matter al-
ready apprehended and crying out for drastic treatment.
Every pupil will have concentrated in turn on a variety of
different subjects, and will know where his strong points lie.


36 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


Finally—and this of all the objects to be attained is the
most dear to my heart—the science students will have ob-
tained both an invaluable literary education and also at the
most impressionable age an early initiation into habits of
thinking for themselves in the region of science.

After the age of sixteen new problems arise. For literary
students science passes into the stage of generalisation,
largely in the form of lectures on its main results and general
ideas. New cycles of linguistic, literary, and historical study
commence. But further detail is now unnecessary. For the
scientists the preceding stage of precision maintains itself to
the close of the school period with an increasing apprehen-
sion of wider general ideas.

However, at this period of education the problem is too
individual, or at least breaks up into too many cases, to
be susceptible of broad general treatment. I do suggest,
nevertheless, that all scientists should now keep up their
French, and initiate the study of German if they have not
already acquired it.


University Education


I should now like, if you will bear with me, to make some
remarks respecting the import of these ideas for a Univer-
sity education.

The whole period of growth from infancy to manhood
forms one grand cycle. Its stage of romance stretches across
the first dozen years of its life, its stage of precision com-
prises the whole school period of secondary education, and
its stage of generalisation is the period of entrance into man-
hood, For those whose formal education is prolonged be-
yond the school age, the University course or its equivalent
is the great period of generalisation. The spirit of generalisa-
tion should dominate a University. The lectures should be
addressed to those to whom details and procedure are fa-
miliar; that is to say, familiar at least in the sense of being so
congruous to pre-existing training as to be easily acquirable.
During the school period the student has been mentally
bending over his desk; at the University he should stand up
and look around. For this reason it is fatal if the first year at
the university be frittered away in going over the old work in
the old spirit. At school the boy painfully rises from the
particular towards glimpses at general ideas; at the Univer-


THE RHYTHM OF EDUCATION 37


sity he should start from general ideas and study their appli-
cations to concrete cases. A well-planned University course
is a study of the wide sweep of generality. I do not mean
that it should be abstract in the sense of divorce from con-
crete fact, but that concrete fact should be studied as illus-
trating the scope of general ideas.


Cultivation of Mental Power


This is the aspect of University training in which theoret-
ical interest and practical utility coincide. Whatever be the
detail with which you cram your student, the chance of his

meeting in after-life exactly that detail is almost infinitesimal;
and if he does meet it, he will probably have forgotten what
you taught him about it. The really useful training yields a
comprehension of a few general principles with a thorough
grounding in the way they apply to a variety of concrete
details. In subsequent practice the men will have forgotten
your particular details; but they will remember by an uncon-
scious common sense how to apply principles to immediate
circumstances. Your learning is useless to you till you have
lost your text-books, burnt your lecture notes, and forgotten
the minutiz which you learnt by heart for the examination.
What, in the way of detail, you continually require will stick
in your memory as obvious facts like the sun and moon; and
what you casually require can be looked up in any work of
reference. The function of a University is to enable you to
shed details in favour of principles. When I speak of prin-
ciples I am hardly even thinking of verbal formulations. A
principle which has thoroughly soaked into you is rather a
mental habit than a formal statement. It becomes the way
_ the mind reacts to the appropriate stimulus in the form of
illustrative circumstances. Nobody goes about with his knowl-
edge clearly and consciously before him. Mental cultivation
is nothing else than the satisfactory way in which the mind
will function when it is poked up into activity. Learning is
often spoken of as if we are watching the open pages of all
the books which we have ever read, and then, when occasion
arises, we select the right page to read aloud to the universe.

Luckily, the truth is far otherwise from this crude idea;
and for this reason the antagonism between the claims of pure
knowledge and professional acquirement should be much
less acute than a faulty view of education would lead us to


38 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


anticipate. I can put my point otherwise by saying that the
ideal of a University is not so much knowledge, as power. Its
business is to convert the knowledge of a boy into the power
of a man.


The Rhythmic Character of Growth


I will conclude with two remarks which I wish to make
by way of caution in the interpretation of my meaning. The
point of this address is the rhythmic character of growth.
The interior spiritual life of man is a web of many strands.
They do not all grow together by uniform extension. I have
tried to illustrate this truth by considering the normal un-
folding of the capacities of a child in somewhat favourable
circumstances but otherwise with fair average capacities.
Perhaps I have misconstrued the usual phenomena. It is very
likely that I have so failed, for the evidence is complex and
difficult. But do not let any failure in this respect prejudice
the main point which I am here to enforce. It is that the
development of mentality exhibits itself as a rhythm involv-
ing an interweaving of cycles, the whole process being domi-
nated by a greater cycle of the same general character as its
minor eddies. Furthermore, this rhythm exhibits certain
ascertainable general laws which are valid for most pupils,
and the quality of our teaching should be so adapted as to
suit the stage in the rhythm to which our pupils have
advanced. The problem of a curriculum is not so much the
succession of subjects; for all subjects should in essence be
begun with the dawn of mentality. The truly important order is
the order of quality which the educational procedure should
assume.

My second caution is to ask you not to exaggerate into
sharpness the distinction between the three stages of a cycle.
I strongly suspect that many of you, when you heard me de-
tail the three stages in each cycle, said to yourselves—How
like a mathematician to make such formal divisions! I assure
you that it is not mathematics but literary incompetence that
may have led me into the error against which I am warning
you. Of course, I mean throughout a distinction of emphasis,
of pervasive quality—romance, precision, generalisation, are
all present throughout. But there is an alternation of domi-
nance, and it is this alternation which constitutes the cycles.


——Address to the Training College Association of London, 1922.


3. The Rhythmic Claims of Freedom and
Discipline


Tue fading of ideals is sad evidence of the defeat of human
endeavour. In the schools of antiquity philosophers aspired
to impart wisdom, in modern colleges our humbler aim is to
teach subjects. The drop from the divine wisdom, which
was the goal of the ancients, to text-book knowledge of sub-
jects, which is achieved by the moderns, marks an educational
failure, sustained through the ages. I am not maintaining
that in the practice of education the ancient were more suc-
cessful than ourselves. You have only to read Lucian, and to
note his satiric dramatizations of the pretentious claims of
philosophers, to see that in this respect the ancients can boast
over us no superiority. My point is that, at the dawn of our
European civilisation, men started with the full ideals which
should inspire education, and that gradually our ideals
have sunk to square with our practice.

But when ideals have sunk to the level of practice, the
result is stagnation. In particular, so long as we conceive
intellectual education as merely consisting in the acquire-
ment of mechanical mental aptitudes, and of formulated
statements of useful truths, there can be no progress; though
there will be much activity, amid aimless re-arrangement of
syllabuses, in the fruitless endeavour to dodge the inevitable
lack of time. We must take it as an unavoidable fact, that God
has so made the world that there are more topics desirable
for knowledge than any one person can possibly acquire. It
is hopeless to approach the problem by the way of the
enumeration of subjects which every one ought to have
mastered. There are too many of them, all with excellent
title-deeds. Perhaps, after all, this plethora of material is
fortunate; for the world is made interesting by a delightful
ignorance of important truths. What I am anxious to impress
on you is that though knowledge is one chief aim of intellect-
ual education, there is another ingredient, vaguer but greater,
and more dominating in its importance. The ancients called
it “wisdom.” You cannot be wise without some basis of
knowledge; but you may easily acquire knowledge and remain


39


40 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


bare of wisdom.

Now wisdom is the way in which knowledge is held. It
concerns the handling of knowledge, its selection for the
determination of relevant issues, its employment to add
value to our immediate experience. This mastery of knowl-
edge, which is wisdom, is the most intimate freedom obtain-
able. The ancients saw clearly—more clearly than we do—
the necessity for dominating knowledge by wisdom. But, in
the pursuit of wisdom in the region of practical education,
they erred sadly. To put the matter simply, their popular
practice assumed that wisdom could be imparted to the young
by procuring philosophers to spout at them. Hence the crop
of shady philosophers in the schools of the ancient world.
The only avenue towards wisdom is by freedom in the pres-
ence of knowledge. But the only avenue towards knowledge
is by discipline in the acquirement of ordered fact. Free-
dom and discipline are the two essentials of education, and
hence the title of my discourse to-day, “The Rhythmic Claims
of Freedom and Discipline.”

The antithesis in education between freedom and disci-
pline is not so sharp as a logical analysis of the meanings of
the terms might lead us to imagine. The pupil’s mind is a
growing organism. On the one hand, it is not a box to be
ruthlessly packed with alien ideas: and, on the other hand,
the ordered acquirement of knowledge is the natural food
for a developing intelligence. Accordingly, it should be the
aim of an ideally constructed education that the discipline
should be the voluntary issue of free choice, and that the
freedom should gain an enrichment of possibility as the issue
of discipline. The two principles, freedom and discipline, are
not antagonists, but should be so adjusted in the child’s life
that they correspond to a natural sway, to and fro, of
the developing personality. It is this adaptation of freedom
and discipline to the natural sway of development that I have
elsewhere called The Rhythm of Education. I am convinced
that much disappointing failure in the past has been due to
neglect of attention to the importance of this rhythm. My
main position is that the dominant note of education at its
beginning and at its end is freedom, but that there is an
intermediate stage of discipline with freedom in subordina-
tion: Furthermore, that there is not one unique threefold
cycle of freedom, discipline, and freedom; but that all
mental development is composed of such cycles, and of cycles
of such cycles, Such a cycle is a unit cell, or brick; and the


THE RHYTHMIC CLAIMS OF FREEDOM AND DISCIPLINE 41


complete stage of growth is an organic structure of such
cells. In analysing any one such cell, I call the first period of
freedom the “stage of Romance,” the intermediate period of
discipline I call the “stage of Precision,” and the final period
of freedom is the “stage of Generalisation.”

Let me now explain myself in more detail. There can be
no mental development without interest. Interest is the sine
qua non for attention and apprehension. You may endeavour
to excite interest by means of birch rods, or you may coax it
by the incitement of pleasurable activity. But without interest
there will be no progress. Now the natural mode by which
living organisms are excited towards suitable self-development
is enjoyment. The infant is lured to adapt itself to its envi-
ronment by its love of its mother and its nurse; we eat be-
cause we like a good dinner: we subdue the forces of nature
because we have been lured to discovery by an insatiable
curiosity: we enjoy exercise: and we enjoy the unchristian
passion of hating our dangerous enemies. Undoubtedly pain
is one subordinate means of arousing an organism to action.
But it only supervenes on the failure of pleasure. Joy is the
normal healthy spur for the élan vital. I am not maintaining
that we can safely abandon ourselves to the allurement of
the greater immediate joys. What I do mean is that we should
seek to arrange the development of character along a path
of natural activity, in itself pleasurable. The subordinate
stiffening of discipline must be directed to secure some
long-time good; although an adequate object must not be too
far below the horizon, if the necessary interest is to be re-
tained.

The second preliminary point which I wish to make, is the
unimportance—indeed the evil—of barren knowledge. The
importance of knowledge lies in its use, in our active mastery
of it—that is to say, it lies in wisdom. It is a convention to
speak of mere knowledge, apart from wisdom, as of itself
imparting a peculiar dignity to its possessor. I do not share in
this reverence for knowledge as such. It all depends on who
has the knowledge and what he does with it. That knowledge
which adds greatness to character is knowledge so handled
as to transform every phase of immediate experience. It is
in respect to the activity of knowledge that an over-vigorous
discipline in education is so harmful. The habit of active
thought, with freshness, can only be generated by adequate
freedom. Undiscriminating discipline defeats its own objects
by dulling the mind. If you have much to do with the young


42 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


as they emerge from school and from the university, you
soon note the dulled minds of those whose education has
consisted in the acquirement of inert knowledge. Also the
deplorable tone of English society in respect to learning is
a tribute to our educational failure. Furthermore, this over-
haste to impart mere knowledge defeats itself. The human
mind rejects knowledge imparted in this way. The craving
for expansion, for activity, inherent in youth is disgusted by
a dry imposition of disciplined knowledge. The discipline,
when it comes, should satisfy a natural craving for the wis-
dom which adds value to bare experience.

But let us now examine more closely the rhythm of these
natural cravings of the human intelligence. The first pro-
cedure of the mind in a new environment is a somewhat dis-
cursive activity amid a welter of ideas and experience. It
is a process of discovery, a process of becoming used to
curious thoughts, of shaping questions, of seeking for an-
swers, of devising new experiences, of noticing what happens
as the result of new ventures. This general process is both
natural and of absorbing interest. We must often have no-
ticed children between the ages of eight and thirteen ab-
sorbed in its ferment. It is dominated by wonder, and cursed
be the dullard who destroys wonder. Now undoubtedly this
stage of development requires help, and even discipline. The
environment within which the mind is working must be
carefully selected. It must, of course, be chosen to suit the
child’s stage of growth, and must be adapted to individual
needs. In a sense it is an imposition from without; but in a
deeper sense it answers to the call of life within the child. In
the teacher’s consciousness the child has been sent to his
telescope to look at the stars, in the child’s consciousness he
has been given free access to the glory of the heavens. Un-
less, working somewhere, however obscurely, even in the
dullest: child, there is this transfiguration of imposed routine,
the child’s nature will refuse to assimilate the alien material.
It must never be forgotten that education is not a process
of packing articles in a trunk. Such a simile is entirely in-
applicable. It is, of course, a process completely of its own
peculiar genus. Its nearest analogue is the assimilation of
food by a living organism; and we all know how necessary
to health is palatable food under suitable conditions. When
you have put your boots in a trunk, they will stay there till
you take them out again; but this is not at all the case if
you feed a child with the wrong food.


THE RHYTHMIC CLAIMS OF FREEDOM AND DISCIPLINE 43


_ This initial stage of romance requires guidance in another
way. After all the child is the heir to long ages of civilisa-
tion, and it is absurd to let him wander in the intellectual


maze of men in the Glacial Epoch. Accordingly, a certain


pointing out of important acts, and of simplifying ideas,
and of usual names, really strengthens the natural impetus
of the pupil. In no part of education can you do without
discipline or can you do without freedom; but in the stage of
romance the emphasis must always be on freedom, to allow
the child to see for itself and to act for itself. My point is
that a block in the assimilation of ideas inevitably arises
when a discipline of precision is imposed before a stage of
romance has run its course in the growing mind. There is
no comprehension apart from romance. It is my strong belief
that the cause of so much failure in the past has been due to
the lack of careful study of the due place of romance. With-
out the adventure of romance, at the best you get inert knowl-
edge without initiative, and at the worst you get contempt
of ideas—without knowledge.

But when this stage of romance has been properly
guided another craving grows. The freshness of inexperience
has worn off; there is general knowledge of the groundwork
of fact and theory: and, above all, there has been plenty of
independent browsing amid first-hand experiences, involving
adventures of thought and of action. The enlightenment
which comes from precise knowledge can now be under-
stood. It corresponds to the obvious requirements of com-
mon sense, and deals with familiar material. Now is the time
for pushing on, for knowing the subject exactly, and for
retaining in the memory its salient features. This is the stage
of precision. This stage is the sole stage of learning in the
traditional scheme of education, either at school or univer-
sity. You had to learn your subject, and there was nothing
more to be said on the topic of education. The result of such
an undue extension of a most necessary period of develop-
ment was the production of a plentiful array of dunces, and
of a few scholars whose natural interest had survived the
car of Juggernaut. There is, indeed, always the temptation to
teach pupils a little more of fact and of precise theory than
at that stage they are fitted to assimilate. If only they could,
it would be so useful. We—I am talking of schoolmasters and
of university dons—are apt to forget that we were only
subordinate elements in the education of a grown man; and
that, in their own good time, in later life our pupils will


44 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


learn for themselves. The phenomena of growth cannot be
hurried beyond certain very narrow limits. But an unskilful
practitioner can easily damage a sensitive organism. Yet,
when all has been said in the way of caution, there is such
a thing as pushing on, of getting to know the fundamental
details and the main exact generalisations, and of acquiring
an easy mastery of technique. There is no getting away from
the fact that things have been found out, and that to be ef-
fective in the modern world you must have a store of definite
acquirement of the best practice. To write poetry you must
study metre; and to build bridges you must be learned in the
strength of material. Even the Hebrew prophets had learned
to write, probably in those days requiring no mean effort.
The untutored art of genius is—in the words of the Prayer
Book—a vain thing, fondly invented.

During the stage of precision, romance is the background.
The stage is dominated by the inescapable fact that there
are right ways and wrong ways, and definite truths to be
known. But romance is not dead, and it is the art of teaching
to foster it amidst definite application to appointed task. It
must be fostered for one reason, because romance is after
all a necessary ingredient of that balanced wisdom which is
the goal to be attained. But there is another reason: The
organism will not absorb the fruits of the task unless its
powers of apprehension are kept fresh by romance. The
real point is to discover in practice that exact balance between
freedom and discipline which will give the greatest rate of
progress over the things to be known. I do not believe that
there is any abstract formula which will give information
applicable to all subjects, to all types of pupils, or to each
individual pupil; except indeed the formula of rhythmic sway
which I have been insisting on, namely, that in the earlier
stage the progress requires that the emphasis be laid on
freedom, and that in the later middle stage the emphasis be
laid on the definite acquirement of alloted tasks. I freely admit
that if the stage of romance has been properly managed,
the discipline of the second stage is much less apparent, that
the children know how to go about their work, want to
make a good job of it, and can be safely trusted with the
details. Furthermore, I hold that the only discipline, im-
portant for its own sake, is self-discipline, and that this can
only be acquired by a wide use of freedom. But yet—so
many are the delicate points to be considered in education—
it is necessary in life to have acquired the habit of cheerfully


THE RHYTHMIC CLAIMS OF FREEDOM AND DISCIPLINE 45


_ undertaking imposed tasks. The conditions can be satisfied
_ if the tasks correspond to the natural cravings of the pupil at
his stage of progress, if they keep his powers at full stretch,
and if they attain an obviously sensible result, and if reason-
able freedom is allowed in the mode of execution.

The difficulty of speaking about the way a skilful teacher
will keep romance alive in his pupils arises from the fact
that what takes a long time to describe, takes a short time
to do. The beauty of a passage of Virgil may be rendered by
insisting on beauty of verbal enunciation, taking no longer
than prosy utterance. The emphasis on the beauty of a
mathematical argument, in its marshalling of general con-
siderations to unravel complex fact, is the speediest mode
of procedure. The responsibility of the teacher at this stage
is immense. To speak the truth, except in the rare case of
genius in the teacher, I do not think that it is possible to take
a whole class very far along the road of precision without
some dulling of the interest. It is the unfortunate dilemma
that initiative and training are both necessary, and that
training is apt to kill initiative.

But this admission is not to condone a brutal ignorance
of methods of mitigating this untoward fact. It is nota
theoretical necessity, but arises because perfect tact is unat-
tainable in the treatment of each individual case. In the past
the methods employed assassinated interest; we are discuss-
ing how to reduce the evil to its smallest dimensions. I merely
utter the warning that education is a difficult problem, to be
solved by no one simple formula.

In this connection there is, however, one practical con-
sideration which is largely neglected. The territory of ro-
mantic interest is large, ill-defined, and not to be controlled
by any explicit boundary. It depends on the chance flashes
of insight. But the area of precise knowledge, as exacted
in any general educational system, can be, and should be,
definitely determined. If you make it too wide you will kill
interest and defeat your own object: if you make it too nar-
row your pupils will lack effective grip. Surely, in every sub-
ject in each type of curriculum, the precise knowledge re-
quired should be determined after the most anxious inquiry.
This does not now seem to be the case in any effective way.
For example, in the classical studies of boys destined for a
scientific career—a class of pupils in whom I am greatly
interested—What is the Latin vocabulary which they ought
definitely to know? Also what are the grammatical rules and


46 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


constructions which they ought to have mastered? Why not
determine these once and for all, and then bend every exer-
cise to impress just these on the memory, and to understand
their derivatives, both in Latin and also in French and Eng-
lish. Then, as to other constructions and words which occur
in the reading of texts, supply full information in the easiest
manner. A certain ruthless definiteness is essential in educa-
tion. I am sure that one secret of a successful teacher is that he
has formulated quite clearly in his mind what the pupil has
got to know in precise fashion. He will then cease from half-
hearted attempts to worry his pupils with memorising a lot
of irrelevant stuff of inferior importance. The secret of suc-
cess is pace, and the secret of pace is concentration. But, in
respect to precise knowledge, the watchword is pace, pace,
pace. Get your knowledge quickly, and then use it. If you
can use it, you_will retain it.

We have now come to the third stage of the rhythmic
cycle, the stage of generalisation. There is here a reaction
towards romance. Something definite is now known; apti-
tudes have been acquired; and general rules and laws are
clearly apprehended both in their formulation and their de-
tailed exemplification. The pupil now wants to use his new
weapons. He is an effective individual, and it is effects that
he wants to produce. He relapses into the discursive adven-
tures of the romantic stage, with the advantage that his mind
is now a disciplined regiment instead of a rabble. In this
sense, education should begin in research and end in research.
After all, the whole affair is merely a preparation for battling
with the immediate experiences of life, a preparation by
which to qualify each immediate moment with relevant ideas
and appropriate actions. An education which does not begin
by evoking initiative and end by encouraging it must be
wrong. For its whole aim is the production of active wisdom.

In my own work at universities I have been much struck
by the paralysis of thought induced in pupils by the aimless
accumulation of precise knowledge, inert and unutilised. It
should be the chief aim of a university professor to exhibit
himself in his own true character—that is, as an ignorant
man thinking, actively utilising this small share of knowledge.
In a sense, knowledge shrinks as wisdom grows: for details
are swallowed up in principles. The details of knowledge
which are important will be picked up ad hoc in each avoca-
tion of life, but the habit of the active utilisation of well-
understood principles is the final possession of wisdom. The


THE RHYTHMIC CLAIMS OF FREEDOM AND DISCIPLINE 47


stage of precision is the stage of growing into the apprehen-
sion of principles by the acquisition of a precise knowledge
of details. The stage of generalisations is the stage of shedding
details in favour of the active application of principles, the
details retreating into subconscious habits. We don’t go about
explicitly retaining in our own minds that two and two
make four, though once we had to learn it by heart. We trust
to habit for our elementary arithmetic. But the essence of
this stage is the emergence from the comparative passivity of
being trained into the active freedom of application. Of
course, during this stage, precise knowledge will grow, and
more actively than ever before, because the mind has experi-
enced the power of definiteness, and responds to the acquisi-
tion of general truth, and of richness of illustration. But the
growth of knowledge becomes progressively unconscious,
as being an incident derived from some active adventure of
thought.

So much for the three stages of the rhythmic unit of de-
velopment. In a general way the whole period of education

is dominated by this threefold rhythm. Till the age of thir-
teen or fourteen there is the romantic stage, from fourteen
to eighteen the stage of precision, and from eighteen to two
and twenty the stage of generalisation. But these are only av-
erage characters, tinging the mode of development as a
whole. I do not think that any pupil completes his stages sim-
ultaneously in all subjects. For example, I should plead that
while language is initiating its stage of precision in the way
of acquisition of vocabulary and of grammar, science should
be in its full romantic stage. The romantic stage of language
begins in infancy with the acquisition of speech, so that it
passes early towards a stage of precision; while science is a
late comer. Accordingly a precise inculcation of science at an
early age wipes out initiative and interest, and destroys any
chance of the topic having any richness of content in the
child’s apprehension. Thus, the romantic stage of science
should persist for years after the precise study of language has
commenced.

There are minor eddies, each in itself a threefold cycle, run-
ning its course in each day, in each week, and in each term.
There is the general apprehension of some topic in its vague
possibilities, the mastery of the relevant details, and finally
the putting of the whole subject together in the light of the
relevant knowledge. Unless the pupils are continually sus-
tained by the evocation of interest, the acquirement of


48 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


technique, and the excitement of success, they can never make
progress, and will certainly lose heart. Speaking generally,
during the last thirty years the schools of England have been
sending up to the universities a disheartened crowd of young
folk, inoculated against any outbreak of intellectual zeal.
The universities have seconded the efforts of the schools and
emphasised the failure. Accordingly, the cheerful gaiety of
the young turns to other topics, and thus educated England is
not hospitable to ideas. When we can point to some great
achievement of our nation—let us hope that it may be some-
thing other than a war—which has been won in the class-
room of our schools, and not in their playing-fields, then
we may feel content with our modes of education.

So far I have been discussing intellectual education, and
my argument has been cramped on too narrow a basis. After
all, our pupils are alive, and cannot be chopped into separate
bits, like the pieces of a jig-saw puzzle. In the production of
a mechanism the constructive energy lies outside it, and
adds discrete parts to discrete parts. The case is far different
for a living organism which grows by its own impulse towards
self-development. This impulse can be stimulated and guided
from outside the organism, and it can also be killed. But for
all your simulation and guidance the creative impulse towards
growth comes from within, and is intensely characteristic of
the individual. Education is the guidance of the individual to-
wards a comprehension of the art of life; and by the art of
life I mean the most complete achievement of varied ac-
tivity expressing the potentialities of that living creature
in the face of its actual environment. This completeness
of achievement involves an artistic sense, subordinating the
lower to the higher possibilities of the indivisible personality.
Science, art, religion, morality, take their rise from this sense
of values within the structure of being. Each individual em-
bodies an adventure of existence. The art of life is the guid-
ance of this adventure. The great religions of civilisation in-
clude among their original elements revolts against the
inculcation of morals as a set of isolated prohibitions. Mo-
rality, in the petty negative sense of the term, is the deadly
enemy of religion. Paul denounces the Law, and the Gospels
are vehement against the Pharisees. Every outbreak of re-
ligion exhibits the same intensity of antagonism—an antag-
onism diminishing as religion fades. No part of education has
more to gain from attention to the rhythmic law of growth
than has moral and religious education. Whatever be the right


“THE RHYTHMIC CLAIMS OF FREEDOM AND DISCIPLINE 49


way to formulate religious truths, it is death to religion to in-
sist on a premature stage of precision. The vitality of relig-
ion is shown by the way in which the religious spirit has sur-
vived the ordeal of religious education.

The problem of religion in education is too large to be dis-
cussed at this stage of my address. I have referred to it to
guard against the suspicion that the principles here advocated
are to be conceived in a narrow sense. We are analysing
the general law of rhythmic progress in the higher stages of
life, embodying the initial awakening, the discipline, and the
fruition on the higher plane. What I am now insisting is
that the principle of progress is from within: the discovery
is made by ourselves, the discipline is self-discipline, and the
fruition is the outcome of our own initiative. The teacher
has a double function. It is for him to elicit the enthusiasm by
resonance from his own personality, and to create the en-
vironment of a larger knowledge and a firmer purpose. He is
there to avoid the waste, which in the lower stages of exis-
tence is nature’s way of evolution. The ultimate motive power,
alike in science, in morality, and in religion, is the sense of
value, the sense of importance. It takes the various forms of
wonder, of curiosity, of reverence, or worship, of tumul-
tuous desire for merging personality in something beyond it-
self. This sense of value imposes on life incredible labours,
and apart from it life sinks back into the passivity of its lower
types. The most penetrating exhibition of this force is the
sense of beauty, the esthetic sense of realised perfection.
This thought leads me to ask, whether in our modern educa-
tion we emphasise sufficiently the functions of art.

The typical education of our public schools was devised
for boys from well-to-do cultivated homes, They travelled in
Italy, in Greece, and in France, and often their own homes
were set amid beauty. None of these circumstances hold for
modern national education in primary or secondary schools,
or even for the majority of boys and girls in our enlarged
system of public schools. You cannot, without loss, ignore in
the life of the spirit so great a factor as art. Our zsthetic
emotions provide us with vivid apprehensions of value. If
you maim these, you weaken the force of the whole system
of spiritual apprehensions. The claim for freedom in educa-
tion carries with it the corollary that the development of the
whole personality must be attended to. You must not arbitrar-
ily refuse its urgent demands. In these days of economy, we
hear much of the futility of our educational efforts and of


50 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


=


the possibility of curtailing them. The endeavour to develop —


a bare intellectuality is bound to issue in a large crop of fail-
ure. This is just what we have done in our national
schools. We do just enough to excite and not enough to sat-
isfy. History shows us that an efflorescence of art is the
first activity of nations on the road to civilisation. Yet, in the
face of this plain fact, we practically shut out art from the
masses of the population. Can we wonder that such an educa-
tion, evoking and defeating cravings, leads to failure and dis-
content? The stupidity of the whole procedure is, that art in
simple popular forms is just what we can give to the nation
without undue strain on our resources. You may, perf-
haps, by some great reforms, obviate the worst kind of
sweated labour and the insecurity of employment. But
you can never greatly increase average incomes. On that
side all hope of Utopia is closed to you. It would, how-
ever, require no very great effort to use our schools to pro-
duce a population with some love of music, some enjoyment
of drama, and some joy in beauty of form and colour. We
could also provide means for the satisfaction of these emo-
tions in the general life of the population. If you think of
the simplest ways, you will see that the strain on material
resources would be negligible; and when you have done
that, and when your population widely appreciates what art
can give—its joys and its terrors—do you not think that
your prophets and your clergy and your statesmen will
be in a stronger position when they speak to the population of
the love of God, of the inexorableness of duty, and of the call
of patriotism?

Shakespeare wrote his plays for English people reared in
the beauty of the country, amid the pageant of life as the
Middle Ages merged into the Renaissance, and with a new
world across the ocean to make vivid the call of romance.
To-day we deal with herded town populations, reared in a
scientific age. I have no doubt that unless we can meet the
new age with new methods, to sustain for our populations
the life of the spirit, sooner or later, amid some savage out-
break of defeated longings, the fate of Russia will be the fate
of England. Historians will write as her epitaph that her fall


issued from the spiritual blindness of her governing classes, _


from their dull materialism, and from their Pharisaic attach-
ment to petty formule of statesmanship.


—Originally published in The Hibbert Journal, July, 1923.


4. Technical Education and Its Relation
to Science and Literature


Tue subject of this address is Technical Education. I wish
to examine its essential nature and also its relation to a lib-
eral education. Such an inquiry may help us to realise the
conditions for the successful working of a national system of
technical training. It is also a very burning question among
mathematical teachers; for mathematics is included in most
technological courses.

Now it is unpractical to plunge into such a discussion with-
out framing in our own minds the best ideal towards which
we desire to work, however modestly we may frame our .
hopes as to the result which in the near future is likely to be
achieved.

People are shy of ideals; and accordingly we find a formu-
lation of the ideal state of mankind placed by a modern dram-
atist } in the mouth of a mad priest: “In my dreams it is a
country where the State is the Church and the Church the
people: three in one and one in three. It is a commonwealth in
which work is play and play is life: three in one and one in
three. It is a temple in which the priest is the worshipper and
the worshipper the worshipped: three in one and one in three.
It is a god-head in which all life is human and all humanity
divine: three in one and one in three. It is, in short, the dream
of a madman.” :

Now the part of this speech to which I would direct at-
tention is embodied in the phrase, “It is a commonwealth in
which work is play and play is life.” This is the ideal of tech-
nical education. It sounds very mystical when we confront it
with the actual facts, the toiling millions, tired, discon-
tented, mentally indifferent, and then the employers I
am not undertaking a social analysis, but I shall carry you
with me when I admit that the present facts of society are a
long way off this ideal. Furthermore, we are agreed that an


1Cf, BERNARD SHAW: John Bull’s Other Island.
51


52 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


employer who conducted his workshop on the principle that
“work should be play” would be ruined in a week.

The curse that has been laid on humanity, in fable and in
fact, is, that by the sweat of its brow shall it live. But reason
and moral intuition have seen in this curse the foundation
for advance. The early Benedictine monks rejoiced in their
labours because they conceived themselves as thereby made
fellow-workers with Christ.

Stripped of its theological trappings, the essential idea re-
mains, that work should be transfused with intellectual and
moral vision and thereby turned into a joy, triumphing over
its weariness and its pain. Each of us will restate this ab-
stract formulation in a more concrete shape in accordance
with his private outlook. State it how you like, so long as you
do not lose the main point in your details. However you
phrase it, it remains the sole real hope of toiling humanity;
and it is in the hands of technical teachers, and of those who
control their spheres of activity, so to mould the nation that
daily it may pass to its labours in the spirit of the monks of
old.

The immediate need of the nation is a large supply of
skilled workmen, of men with inventive genius, and of em-
ployers alert in the development of new ideas.

There is one—and only one—way to obtain these admir-
able results. It is by producing workmen, men of science, and
employers who enjoy their work. View the matter practically
in the light of our knowledge of average human nature. Is
it likely that a tired, bored workman, however skilful his
hands, will produce a large output of first-class work? He will
limit his production, will scamp his work, and be an adept at
evading inspection; he will be slow in adapting himself to
new methods; he will be a focus of discontent, full of unprac-
tical revolutionary ideas, controlled by no sympathetic ap-
prehension of the real working of trade conditions. If, in the
troubled times which may be before us, you wish ap-
preciably to increase the chance of some savage upheaval, in-
troduce widespread technical education and ignore the Bene-
dictine ideal. Society will then get what it deserves.

Again, inventive genius requires pleasurable mental activ-
ity as a condition for its vigorous exercise. “Necessity is the
mother of invention” is a silly proverb. “Necessity is the
mother of futile dodges” is much nearer to the truth. The
basis of the growth of modern invention is science, and


TECHNICAL EDUCATION 53


‘science is almost wholly the outgrowth of pleasurable intellec-
tual curiosity.

The third class are the employers, who are to be enterpris-
ing. Now it is to be observed that it is the successful employ-
ers who are the important people to get at, the men with
business connections all over the world, men who are al-
ready rich. No doubt there will always be a continuous
process of rise and fall of businesses. But it is futile to
expect flourishing trade, if in the mass the successful houses
of business are suffering from atrophy. Now if these men
conceive their businesses as merely indifferent means for ac-
quiring other disconnected opportunities of life, they have no
spur to alertness. They are already doing very well, the mere
momentum of their present business engagements will carry
them on for their time. They are not at all likely to bother
themselves with the doubtful chances of new methods. Their
real soul is in the other side of their life. Desire for money
will produce hardfistedness and not enterprise. There is
much more hope for humanity from manufacturers who
enjoy their work than from those who continue in irksome
business with the object of founding hospitals.

Finally, there can be no prospect of industrial peace so long
as masters and men in the mass conceive themselves as en-
gaged in a soulless operation of extracting money from the
public. Enlarged views of the work performed, and of the
communal service thereby rendered, can be the only basis
on which to found sympathetic co-operation.

The conclusion to be drawn from this discussion is, that
alike for masters and for men a technical or technological
| education, which is to have any chance of satisfying the
_ practical needs of the nation, must be conceived in a liberal
spirit as a real intellectual enlightenment in regard to prin-
ciples applied and services rendered. In such an education
- geometry and poetry are as essential as turning laths.

The mythical figure of Plato may stand for modern lib-
eral education as does that of St. Benedict for technical
education. We need not entangle ourselves in the qualifica-
tions necessary for a balanced representation of the actual
thoughts of the actual men. They are used here as symbolic
- figures typical of antithetical notions. We consider Plato in the
light of the type of culture he now inspires.

In its essence a liberal education is an education for
thought and for esthetic appreciation. It proceeds by impart-
ing a knowledge of the masterpieces of thought, of imagina-


54 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


tive literature, and of art. The action which it contemplates


is command. It is an aristocratic education implying leisure.


-


4
!


This Platonic ideal had rendered imperishable services to Eu- —


ropean civilisation. It has encouraged art, it has fostered that
spirit of disinterested curiosity which is the origin of science,
it has maintained the dignity of mind in the face of ma-
terial force, a dignity which claims freedom of thought.
Plato did not, like St. Benedict, bother himself to be a fellow-
worker with his slaves; but he must rank among the eman-
cipators of mankind. His type of culture is the peculiar
inspiration of the liberal aristocrat, the class from which Eu-
rope derives what ordered liberty it now possesses. For cen-
turies, from Pope Nicholas V to the school of the Jesuits,
and from the Jesuits to the modern headmasters of English
public schools, this educational ideal has had the strenuous
support of the clergy.

For certain people it is a very good education. It suits their
type of mind and the circumstances amid which their life
is passed. But more has been claimed for it than this. All
education has been judged adequate or defective accord-
ing to its approximation to this sole type.

The essence of the type is a large discursive knowledge of
the best literature. The ideal product of the type is the man
who is acquainted with the best that has been written. He will
have acquired the chief languages, he will have considered
the histories of the rise and fall of nations, the poetic ex-
pression of human feeling, and have read the great dramas
and novels. He will also be well grounded in the chief
philosophies, and have attentively read those philosophic
authors who are distinguished for lucidity of style.

It is obvious that, except at the close of a long life, he will
not have much time for anything else if any approximation
is to be made to the fulfilment of this programme. One is re-
minded of the calculation in a dialogue of Lucian that, be-
fore a man could be justified in practising any one of the cur-
rent ethical systems, he should have spent a hundred and
fifty years in examining their credentials.

Such ideals are not for human beings. What is meant by
a liberal culture is nothing so ambitious as a full acquain-
tance with the varied literary expression of civilised man-
kind from Asia to Europe, and from Europe to America. A
small selection only is required; but then, as we are told, it is
a selection of the very best. I have my doubts of a selection


which includes Xenophon and omits Confucius, but then I


TECHNICAL EDUCATION 55


have read through neither in the original. The ambitious pro-
gramme of a liberal education really shrinks to a study of
some fragments of literature included in a couple of impor-
_ tant languages.

But the expression of the human spirit is not confined to lit-
erature. There are the other arts, and there are the sciences.
Also education must pass beyond the passive reception of the
ideas of others. Powers of initiative must be strengthened.
Unfortunately initiative does not mean just one acquire-
ment—there is initiative in thought, initiative in action, and
the imaginative initiative of art; and these three categories
require many subdivisions.

The field of acquirement is large, and the individual so
fleeting and so fragmentary: classical scholars, scientists, head-
masters are alike ignoramuses.

There is a curious illusion that a more complete culture
was possible when there was less to know. Surely the only
gain was, that it was more possible to remain unconscious of
ignorance. It cannot have been a gain to Plato to have read
neither Shakespeare, nor Newton, nor Darwin. The. achieve-
ments of a liberal education have in recent times not been
worsened. The change is that its pretensions have been
found out.

My point is, that no course of study can claim any position
of ideal completeness. Nor are the omitted factors of sub-
ordinate importance. The insistence in the Platonic culture
on disinterested intellectual appreciation is a psychological
error. Action and our implication in the transition of events
amid the inevitable bond of cause to effect are fundamental.
An education which strives to divorce intellectual or
esthetic life from these fundamental facts carries with it the
decadence of civilisation. Essentially culture should be for
action, and its effect should be to divest labour from the as-
sociation of aimless toil. Art exists that we may know the
deliverances of our senses as good. It heightens the sense-
world.

Disinterested scientific curiosity is a passion for an ordered
intellectual vision of the connection of events. But the goal
of such curiosity is the marriage of action to thought. This
essential intervention of action even in abstract science is
often overlooked. No man of science wants merely to know.
He acquires knowledge to appease his passion for discovery.
He does not discover in order to know, he knows in order
to discover. The pleasure which art and science can give to


56 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


toil is the enjoyment which arises from successfully directed
intention. Also it is the same pleasure which is yielded to
the scientist and to the artist.

The antithesis between a technical and a liberal education
is fallacious. There can be no adequate: technical education
which is not liberal, and no liberal education which is not
technical: that is, no education which does not impart both
technique and intellectual vision. In simpler language, edu-
cation should turn out the pupil with something he knows
well and something he can do well. This intimate union of
practice and theory aids both. The intellect does not work
best in a vacuum. The stimulation of creative impulse re-
quires, especially in the case of a child, the quick transition
to practice. Geometry and mechanics, followed by workshop
practice, gain that reality without which mathematics is ver-
biage.

There are three main methods which are required in a na-
tional system of education, namely, the literary curriculum,
the scientific curriculum, the technical curriculum. But each
of these curricula should include the other two. What I mean
is, that every form of education should give the pupil a tech-
nique, a science, an assortment of general ideas, and
esthetic appreciation, and that each of these sides of his
training should be illuminated by the others. Lack of time,
even for the most favoured pupil, makes it impossible to de-
velop fully each curriculum. Always there must be a dom-
inant emphasis. The most direct esthetic training naturally
falls in the technical curriculum in those cases when the
training is that requisite for some art or artistic craft. But it is
of high importance in both a literary and a scientific educa-
tion.

The educational method of the literary curriculum is the
study of language, that is, the study of our most habitual
method of conveying to others our states of mind. The tech-
nique which should be acquired is the technique of verbal
expression, the science is the study of the structure of lan-
guage and the analysis of the relations of language to the
states of mind conveyed. Furthermore, the subtle relations
of language to feeling, and the high development of the sense
organs to which written and spoken words appeal, lead to
keen esthetic appreciations being aroused by the success-
ful employment of language. Finally, the wisdom of the world
is preserved in the masterpieces of linguistic composition.

This curriculum has the merit of homogeneity. All its


*


TECHNICAL EDUCATION 57


various parts are co-ordinated and play into each other’s
hands. We can hardly be surprised that such a curriculum,
when once broadly established, should have claimed the
position of the sole perfect type of education. Its defect is
unduly to emphasise the importance of language. Indeed the
varied importance of verbal expression is so overwhelm-
ing that its sober estimation is difficult. Recent generations
have been witnessing the retreat of literature, and of literary
forms of expression, from their position of unique importance
in intellectual life. In order truly to become a servant and a
minister of nature something more is required than literary
aptitudes.

A scientific education is primarily a training in the art of
observing natural phenomena, and in the knowledge and
deduction of laws concerning the sequence of such phe-
nomena. But here, as in the case of a liberal education, we
are met by the limitations imposed by shortness of time.
There are many types of natural phenomena, and to each
type there corresponds a science with its peculiar modes of
observation, and its peculiar types of thought employed in
the deduction of laws. A study of science in general is im-
possible in education, all that can be achieved is the study
of two or three allied sciences. Hence the charge of narrow
specialism urged against any education which is primarily
scientific. It is obvious that the charge is apt to be well-
founded; and it is worth considering how, within the limits of
a scientific education and to the advantage of such an educa-
tion, the danger can be avoided.

Such a discussion requires the consideration of technical
education. A technical education is in the main a training
in the art of utilising knowledge for the manufacture of
material products. Such a training emphasises manual skill,
and the co-ordinated action of hand and eye, and judgment
in the control of the process of construction. But judgment
necessitates knowledge of those natural processes of which
the manufacture is the utilisation. Thus somewhere in tech-
nical training an education in scientific knowledge is re-
quired. If you minimize the scientific side, you will confine it
to the scientific experts; if you maximise it, you will impart
it in some measure to the men, and—what is of no less im-
portance—to the directors and managers of the businesses.

Technical education is not necessarily allied exclusively to


| science on its mental side. It may be an education for an


artist or for apprentices to an artistic craft. In that case


58 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


zsthetic appreciation will have to be cultivated in connec-
tion with it.

An evil side of the Platonic culture has been its total
neglect of technical education as an ingredient in the com-


plete development of ideal human beings. This neglect has ~


arisen from two disastrous antitheses, namely, that between
mind and body, and that between thought and action. I will
here interject, solely to avoid criticism, that I am well aware
that the Greeks highly valued physical beauty and physical
activity. They had, however, that perverted sense of values
which is the nemesis of slave-owning.

I lay it down as an educational axiom that in teaching you
will come to grief as soon as you forget that your pupils have
bodies. This is exactly the mistake of the post-renaissance
Platonic curriculum. But nature can be kept at bay by no
pitchfork; so in English education, being expelled from the
classroom, she returned with a cap and bells in the form of
all-conquering athleticism.

The connexions between intellectual activity and the body,
though diffused in every bodily feeling, are focused in the
eyes, the ears, the voice, and the hands. There is a co-ordina-
tion of senses and thought, and also a reciprocal influence
between brain activity and material creative activity. In
this reaction the hands are peculiarly important. It is a moot
point whether the human hand created the human brain, or
the brain created the hand. Certainly the connection is inti-
mate and reciprocal. Such deep-seated relations are not widely
atrophied by a few hundred years of disuse in exceptional
families.

The disuse of hand-craft is a contributory cause to the
brain-lethargy of aristocracies, which is only mitigated by
sport where the concurrent brain-activity is reduced to a
minimum and the hand-craft lacks subtlety. The necessity
for constant writing and vocal exposition is some slight
stimulus to the thought-power of the professional classes.
Great readers, who exclude other activities, are not distin-
guished by subtlety of brain. They tend to be timid conven-
tional thinkers. No doubt this is partly due to their excessive


knowledge outrunning their powers of thought; but it is —


partly due to the lack of brain-stimulus from the productive
activities of hand or voice.


In estimating the importance of technical education we


must rise above the exclusive association of learning with ~


book-learning. First-hand knowledge is the ultimate basis of |


TECHNICAL EDUCATION 59


intellectual life. To a large extent book-learning conveys
second-hand information, and as such can never rise to the
importance of immediate practice. Our goal is to see the im-
mediate events of our lives as instances of our general ideas.
What the learned world tends to offer is one second-hand
scrap of information illustrating ideas derived from another
second-hand scrap of information. The second-handedness of
the learned world is the secret of its mediocrity. It is tame
because it has never been scared by facts. The main impor-
tance of Francis Bacon’s influence does not lie in any pe-
culiar theory of inductive reasoning which he happened to
express, but in the revolt against second-hand information of
which he was a leader.

The peculiar merit of a scientific education should be,
that it bases thought upon first-hand observation; and the
corresponding merit of a technical education is, that it follows
our deep natural instinct to translate thought into manual
skill, and manual activity into thought.

The thought which science evokes is logical thought. Now
logic is of two kinds: the logic of discovery and the logic of
the discovered.

The logic of discovery consists in the weighing of proba-
bilities, in discarding details deemed to be irrelevant, in
divining the general rules according to which events occur,
and in testing hypotheses by devising suitable experiments.
This is inductive logic.

The logic of the discovered is the deduction of the special
events which, under certain circumstances, would happen
in obedience to the assumed laws of nature. Thus when the
laws are discovered or assumed, their utilisation entirely de-
pends on deductive logic. Without deductive logic science
would be entirely useless. It is merely a barren game to
ascend from the particular to the general, unless afterwards
we can reverse the process and descend from the general to
the particular, ascending and descending like the angels on
Jacob’s ladder. When Newton had divined the law of gravita-
tion he at once proceeded to calculate the earth’s attractions
on an apple at its surface and on the moon. We may note in
passing that inductive logic would be impossible without
deductive logic. Thus Newton’s calculations were an essen-
tial step in his inductive verification of the great law.

Now mathematics is nothing else than the more compli-
cated parts of the art of deductive reasoning, especially
where it concerns number, quantity, and space.


60 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


In the teaching of science, the art of thought should be
taught: namely, the art of forming clear conceptions apply-
ing to first-hand experience, the art of divining the general
truths which apply, the art of testing divinations, and the
art of utilising general truths by reasoning to more par-
ticular cases of some peculiar importance. Furthermore, a
power of scientific exposition is necessary, so that the relevant
issues from a confused mass of ideas can be stated clearly,
with due emphasis on important points.

By the time a science, or a small group of sciences, has
been taught thus amply, with due regard to the general art
of thought, we have gone a long way towards correcting the
specialism of science. The worst of a scientific education
based, as necessarily must be the case, on one or two par-
ticular branches of science, is that the teachers under the
influence of the examination system are apt merely to
stuff their pupils with the narrow results of these special
sciences. It is essential that the generality of the method be
continually brought to light and contrasted with the speciality
of the particular application. A man who only knows his
Own science, as a routine peculiar to that science, does not
even known that. He has no fertility of thought, no power of
quickly seizing the bearing of alien ideas. He will discover
nothing, and be stupid in practical applications.

This exhibition of the general in the particular is extremely
difficult to effect, especially in the case of younger pupils.
The art of education is never easy. To surmount its difficul-
ties, especially those of elementary education, is a task
worthy of the highest genius. It is the training of human
souls.

Mathematics, well taught, should be the most powerful
instrument in gradually implanting this generality of idea.
The essence of mathematics is perpetually to be discarding
more special ideas in favour of more general ideas, and
special methods in favour of general methods. We express
the conditions of a special problem in the form of an
equation, but that equation will serve for a hundred other
problems, scattered through diverse sciences. The general rea-
soning is always the powerful reasoning, because deductive
cogency is the property of abstract form.

Here, again, we must be careful. We shall ruin mathe-
matical education if we use it merely to impress general
truths. The general ideas are the means of connecting par-
ticular results, After all, it is the concrete special cases


TECHNICAL EDUCATION 61


which are important. Thus in the handling of mathematics
in your results you cannot be too concrete, and in your
methods you cannot be too general. The essential course of
reasoning is to generalise what is particular, and then to
particularise what is general. Without generality there is no
reasoning, without concreteness there is no importance.

Concreteness is the strength of technical education. I would
remind you that truths which lack the highest generality are
not necessarily concrete facts. For example, x+y=y+x is
an algebraic truth more general than 2+2=4. But “two and
two make four” is itself a highly general proposition lacking
any element of concreteness. To obtain a concrete proposi-
tion immediate intuition of a truth concerning particular
objects is requisite; for example, “these two apples and
those apples together make four apples” is a concrete proposi-
tion, if you have direct perception or immediate memory of
the apples.

In order to obtain the full realisation of truths as applying,
and not as empty formule, there is no alternative to
technical education. Mere passive observation is not sufficient.
In creation only is there vivid insight into the properties of
the object thereby produced. If you want to understand any-
thing, make it yourself, is a sound rule. Your faculties will
be alive, your thoughts gain vividness by an immediate
translation into acts. Your ideas gain that reality which
comes from seeing the limits of their application.

In elementary education this doctrine has long been put
into practice. Young children are taught to familiarise them-
selves with shapes and colours by simple manual operations
of cutting out and of sorting. But good though this is, it is
not quite what I mean. That is practical experience before
you think, experience antecedent to thought in order to
create ideas, a very excellent discipline. But technical educa-
tion should be much more than that: it is creative experi-
ence while you think, experience which realises your thought,
experience which teaches you to co-ordinate act and thought,
experience leading you to associate thought with foresight
and foresight with achievement. Technical education gives
theory, and a shrewd insight as to where theory fails.

A technical education is not to be conceived as a maimed
alternative to the perfect Platonic culture: namely, as a
defective training unfortunately made necessary by cramped
conditions of life. No human being can attain to anything
but fragmentary knowledge and a fragmentary training of his


62 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


capacities. There are, however, three main roads along which
we can proceed with good hope of advancing towards the
best balance of intellect and character: these are the way of
literary culture, the way of scientific culture, the way of
technical culture. No one of these methods can be exclusively
followed without grave loss of intellectual activity and of
character. But a mere mechanical mixture of the three cur-
ricula will produce bad results in the shape of scraps of infor-
mation never inter-connected or utilised. We have already
noted as one of the strong points of the traditional literary
culture that all its parts are co-ordinated. The problem of
education is to retain the dominant emphasis, whether
literary, scientific, or technical, and without loss of co-ordina-
tion to infuse into each way of education something of the
other two. ;

To make definite the problem of technical education fix
attention on two ages: one thirteen, when elementary educa-
tion ends; and the other seventeen, when technical education
ends so far as it is compressed within a school curriculum.
I am aware that for artisans in junior technical schools a
three-years’ course would be more usual. On the other hand,
for naval officers, and for directing classes generally, a longer
time can be afforded. We want to consider the principles to
govern a curriculum which shall land these children at


the age of seventeen in the position of having technical skill —


useful to the community.

Their technical manual training should start at thirteen,
bearing a modest proportion to the rest of their work, and
should increase in each year finally to attain to a substantial
proportion. Above all things it should not be too specialised.
Workshop finish and workshop dodges, adapted to one par-
ticular job, should be taught in the commercial workshop,
and should form no essential part of the school course. A
properly trained worker would pick them up in no time. In
all education the main cause of failure is staleness. Technical
education is doomed if we conceive it as a system for catch-
ing children young and for giving them one highly specialised
manual aptitude. The nation has need of a fluidity of labour,
not merely from place to place, but also within reasonable
limits of allied aptitudes, from one special type of work to
another special type. I know that here I am on delicate
ground, and I am not claiming that men while they are
specialising on one sort of work should spasmodically be set
to other kinds. That is a question of trade organisation with


TECHNICAL EDUCATION 63


which educationalists have no concern. I am only asserting
‘the principles that training should be broader than the ulti-
mate specialisation, and that the resulting power of adaptation
to varying demands is advantageous to the workers, to the
employers, and to the nation.

In considering the intellectual side of the curriculum
we must be guided by the principle of the co-ordination of
studies. In general, the intellectual studies most immediately
related to manual training will be some branches of science.
More than one branch will, in fact, be concerned; and even if
that be not the case, it is impossible to narrow down scientific
‘study to a single thin line of thought. It is possible, however,
provided that we do not press the classification too far,
roughly to classify technical pursuits according to the domi-
nant science involved. We thus find a sixfold division,
namely, (1) Geometrical techniques, (2) Mechanical tech-
niques, (3) Physical techniques, (4) Chemical techniques, (5)
Biological techniques, (6) Techniques of commerce and of
social service.

By this division, it is meant that apart from auxiliary
sciences some particular science requires emphasis in the
training for most occupations. We can, for example, reckon
carpentry, ironmongery, and many artistic crafts among geo-
metrical techniques. Similarly agriculture is a biological tech-
nique. Probably cookery, if it includes food catering, would
fall midway between biological, physical, and chemical sci-
ences, though of this I am not sure.

The sciences associated with commerce and social service
would be partly algebra, including arithmetic and statistics,
and partly geography and history. But this section is some-
what heterogeneous in its scientific affinities. Anyhow the
exact way in which technical pursuits are classified in rela-
tion to science is a detail. The essential point is, that with
some thought it is possible to find scientific courses which
illuminate most occupations. Furthermore, the problem is
well understood, and has been brilliantly solved in many of
the schools of technology and junior technical schools
throughout the country.

In passing from science to literature, in our review of the
intellectual elements of technical education, we note that
many studies hover between the two: for example, history
and geography. They are both of them very essential in
education, provided that they are the right history and the
right geography. Also books giving descriptive accounts of


~


64 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


general results, and trains of thought in various sciences fall
in the same category. Such books should be partly historical
and partly expository of the main ideas which have finally
arisen. Their value in education depends on their quality as
mental stimulants. They must not be inflated with gas on
the wonders of science, and must be informed with a broad
outlook.

It is unfortunate that the literary element in education has
rarely been considered apart from grammatical study. The
historical reason is, that when the modern Platonic curriculum
was being formed Latin and Greek were the sole keys which
rendered great literature accessible. But there is no necessary
connection between literature and grammar. The great age of
Greek literature was already past before the arrival of the


grammarians of Alexandria. Of all types of men to-day exist- —


ing, classical scholars are the most remote from the Greeks of
the Periclean times.

Mere literary knowledge is of slight importance. The only
thing that matters is, how it is known. The facts related are
nothing. Literature only exists to express and develop that
imaginative world which is our life, the kingdom which is
within us. It follows that the literary side of a technical educa-
tion should consist in an effort to make the pupils enjoy
literature. It does not matter what they know, but the enjoy-
ment is vital. The great English Universities, under whose
direct authority school-children are examined in plays of
Shakespeare, to the certain destruction of their enjoyment,
should be prosecuted for soul murder.

Now there are two kinds of intellectual enjoyment: the
enjoyment of creation, and the enjoyment of relaxation. They
are not necessarily separated. A change of occupation may
give the full tide of happiness which comes from the con-
currence of both forms of pleasure. The appreciation of litera-
ture is really creation. The written word, its music, and its
associations, are only the stimuli. The vision which they
evoke is our own doing. No one, no genius other than our
own, can make our own life live. But except for those en-
gaged in literary occupations, literature is also a relaxation.
It gives exercise to that other side which any occupation must
suppress during the working hours. Art also has the same
function in life as has literature.

To obtain the pleasure of relaxation requires no help. The
pleasure is merely to cease doing. Some such pure relaxation
is a necessary condition of health. Its dangers are notorious,


TECHNICAL EDUCATION 65


and to the greater part of the necessary relaxation nature has
affixed, not enjoyment, but the oblivion of sleep. Creative
enjoyment is the outcome of successful effort and requires
help for its initiation. Such enjoyment is necessary for high-
speed work and for original achievement.

To speed up production with unrefreshed workmen is a
disastrous economic policy. Temporary success will be at the
expense of the nation, which, for long years of their lives,
will have to support worn-out artisans—unemployables.
Equally disastrous is the alternation of spasms of effort with
periods of pure relaxation. Such periods are the seed-times
‘of degeneration, unless rigorously curtailed. The normal
recreation should be change of activity, satisfying the cravings
of instincts. Games afford such activity. Their disconnec-
tion emphasises the relaxation, but their excess leaves us
empty.

It is here that literature and art should play an essential
part in a healthily organised nation. Their services to economic
production would be only second to those of sleep or of food.
I am not now talking of the training of an artist, but of the
use of art as a condition of healthy life. It is analogous to
sunshine in the physical world.

When we have once rid our minds of the idea that knowl-
edge is to be exacted, there is no especial difficulty or expense
involved in helping the growth of artistic enjoyment. All
school-children could be sent at regular intervals to neigh-
bouring theatres where suitable plays could be subsidised.
Similarly for concerts and cinema films. Pictures are more
doubtful in their popular attraction; but interesting repre-
sentations of scenes or ideas which the children have read
about would probably appeal. The pupils themselves should
be encouraged in artistic efforts. Above all the art of reading
aloud should be cultivated. The Roger de Coverley essays of
Addison are perfect examples of readable prose.

Art and literature have not merely an indirect effect on
the main energies. of life. Directly, they give vision. The world
spreads wide beyond the deliverances of material sense,
with subtleties of reaction and with pulses of emotion. Vision
is the necessary antecedent to control and to direction. In
the contest of races which in its final issues will be decided
in the workshops and not on the battlefield, the victory will
belong to those who are masters of stores of trained nervous
energy, working under conditions favourable to growth. One
such essential condition is Art.


66 | THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


If there had been time, there are other things which I
should like to have said: for example, to advocate the inclu-
sion of one foreign language in all education. From direct
observation I know this to be possible for artisan children.
But enough has been put before you to make plain the prin-
ciples with which we should undertake national education.

In conclusion, I recur to the thought of the Benedictines,
who saved for mankind the vanishing civilisation of the an-
cient world by linking together knowledge, labour, and moral
energy. Our danger is to conceive practical affairs as the
kingdom of evil, in which success is only possible by the
extrusion of ideal aims. I believe that such a conception is a
fallacy directly negatived by practical experience. In educa-
tion this error takes the form of a mean view of technical
training. Our forefathers in the dark ages saved themselves
by embodying high ideals in great organisations. It is our task,
without servile imitation, boldly to exercise our creative ener-
gies.


Presidential address to the Mathematical Association of England,
ie


5. The Place of Classics in Education


THE future of classics in this country is not going mainly to
be decided by the joy of classics to a finished scholar, and by
the utility of scholarly training for scholarly avocations. The
pleasure and the discipline of character to be derived from an
education based mainly on classical literature and classical
philosophy has been demonstrated by centuries of experience.
The danger to classical learning does not arise because classi-
cal scholars now love classics less than their predecessors. It
arises in this way. In the past classics reigned throughout the
whole sphere of higher education. There were no rivals; and
accordingly all students were steeped in classics throughout
their school life, and its domination at the universities was
only challenged by the narrow discipline of mathematics,


THE PLACE OF CLASSICS IN EDUCATION 67


There were many consequences to this state of things. There


was a large demand for classical scholars for the mere pur-
poses of tuition; there was a classical tone in all learned walks
of life, so that aptitude for classics was a synonym for ability;
and finally every boy who gave the slightest promise in that
direction cultivated his natural or acquired interest in classi-
cal learning. All this is gone, and gone for ever. Humpty
Dumpty was a good egg so long as he was on the top of the
wall, but you can never set him up again. There are now
other disciplines each involving topics of widespread interest,
with complex relationships, and exhibiting in their develop-
ment the noblest feats of genius in its stretch of imagination
and its philosophic intuition. Almost every walk of life is now
a learned profession, and demands one or more of these dis-
ciplines as the substratum for its technical skill. Life is short,
and the plastic period when the brain is apt for acquirement is
still shorter. Accordingly, even if all children were fitted for
it, it is absolutely impossible to maintain a system of educa-
tion in which a complete training as a classical scholar is the
necessary preliminary to the acquirement of other intellectual
disciplines. As a member of the Prime Minister’s Committee
on the Place of Classics in Education it was my misfortune to
listen to much ineflectual wailing from witnesses on the mer-
cenary tendencies of modern parents. I do not believe that
the modern parent of any class is more mercenary than his
predecessors. When classics was the road to advancement,
classics was the popular subject for study. Opportunity has
now shifted its location, and classics is in danger. Was it not
Aristotle who said that a good income was a desirable adjunct
to an intellectual life? I wonder how Aristotle, as a parent,
would have struck a headmaster of one of our great public
schools. From my slight knowledge of Aristotle, I suspect
that there would have been an argument, and that Aristotle
would have got the best of it. I have been endeavouring to
appreciate at its full value the danger which besets classics in
the educational curriculum. The conclusion that I draw is that
the future classics will be decided during the next few years in
the secondary schools of this country. Within a generation the
great public schools will have to follow suit, whether they like
it or not.

The situation is dominated by the fact in the future ninety
per cent. of the pupils who leave school at the age of eighteen
will never again read a classical book in the original. In the
case of pupils leaving at an earlier age, the estimate of ninety


68 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION Ns


per cent. may be changed to one of ninety-nine per cent. I
have heard and read many a beautiful exposition of the value
of classics to the scholar who reads Plato and Virgil in his
armchair. But these people will never read classics either in


their armchairs or in any other situation. We have got to pro-.


duce a defence of classics which applies to this ninety per
cent. of the pupils. If classics is swept out of the curriculum
for this section, the remaining ten per cent. will soon vanish.
No school will have the staff to teach them. The problem is
urgent.

It would, however, be a great mistake to conclude that
classics is faced with a hostile opinion either in the learned
professions or from leaders of industry who have devoted at-


e ig A


tention to the relation between education and efficiency. The |


last discussion, public or private, on this subject at which I
have been present was a short and vigorous one at one of the
leading committees of a great modern university. The three
representatives of the Faculty of Science energetically urged
the importance of classics on the ground of its value as a
preliminary discipline for scientists. I mention this incident
because in my experience it is typical.

We must remember that the whole problem of intellectual
education is controlled by lack of time. If Methuselah was
not a well-educated man, it was his own fault or that of his
teachers. But our task is to deal with five years of secondary
school-life. Classics can only be defended on the ground that
within that period, and sharing that period with other sub-
jects, it can produce a necessary enrichment of intellectual
character more quickly than any alternative discipline directed
to the same object.

In classics we endeavour by a thorough study of language
to develop the mind in the regions of logic, philosophy, his-
tory and of exsthetic apprehension of literary beauty. The
learning of the languages—Latin or Greek—is a subsidiary
means for the furtherance of this ulterior object. When the
object has been obtained, the languages can be dropped unless
opportunity and choice lead to their further pursuit. There
are certain minds, and among them some of the best, for
which the analysis of language is not the avenue of approach
to the goal of culture. For these a butterfly or a steam-engine
has a wider range of significance than a Latin sentence. This
is especially the case where there is a touch of genius arising
from vivid apprehensions stimulating originality of thought.
The assigned verbal sentence almost always says the wrong


THE PLACE OF CLASSICS IN EDUCATION 69


thing for such people, and confuses them by its trivial irrele-
vance.

But on the whole the normal avenue is the analysis of
language. It represents the greatest common measure for the
pupils, and by far the most manageable job for the teachers.

At this point I must cross-question myself. My other self
asks me, Why do you not teach the children logic, if you want
them to learn that subject? Wouldn’t that be the obvious pro-
cedure? I answer in the words of a great man who to our
infinite loss has recently died, Sanderson, the late headmaster
of Oundle. His phrase was, They learn by contact. The mean-
ing to be attached to this saying goes to the root of the true
practice of education. It must start from the particular fact,
concrete and definite for individual apprehension, and must
gradually evolve towards the general idea. The devil to be
avoided is the cramming of general statements which have no
reference to individual personal experiences.

Now apply this principle to the determination of the best
method to help a child towards a philosophical analysis of
thought. I will put it in more homely style, What is the best
way to make a child clear-headed in its thoughts and its state-
ments? The general statements of a logic book have no ref-
erence to anything the child has ever heard of. They belong
to the grown-up stage of education at—or not far from—the
university. You must begin with the analysis of familiar Eng-
lish sentences. But this grammatical procedure, if prolonged
beyond its elementary stages, is horribly dry. Furthermore, it
has the disadvantage that it only analyses so far as the Eng-
lish language analyses. It does nothing to throw light upon
the complex significance of English phrases, and words, and
habits of mental procedure. Your next step is to teach the
child a foreign language. Here you gain an enormous advan-
tage. You get away from the nauseating formal drill for the
drill’s sake. The analysis is now automatic, while the pupil’s
attention is directed to expressing his wants in the language,
or to understanding someone who is speaking to him, or to
making out what an author has written. Every language em-
bodies a definite type of mentality, and two languages neces-
sarily display to the pupil some contrast between their two
types. Common sense dictates that you start with French as
early as possible in the child’s life. If you are wealthy, you
will provide a French nursery-governess. Less fortunate chil-
dren will start French in a secondary school about the age
of twelve. The direct method is probably used, by which the


70 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


child is immersed in French throughout the lesson and is
taught to think in French without the intervention of Eng-
lish between the French words and their significations, Even
an average child will get on well, and soon acquires the
power of handling and understanding simple French sen-
tences. As I have said before, the gain is enormous; and, in
addition, a useful instrument for after life is acquired. The
sense for language grows, a sense which is the subconscious
appreciation of language as an instrument of definite struc-
ture.

It is exactly now that the initiation of Latin is the best
stimulus for mental expansion. The elements of Latin exhibit
a peculiarly plain concrete case of language as a structure.
Provided that your mind has grown to the level of that idea,
the fact stares you in the face. You can miss it over English
and French. Good English of a simple kind will go straight
into slipshod French, and conversely good French will go into
slipshod English. The difference between the slipshod French
of the literal translation and the good French, which ought to
have been written, is often rather subtle for that stage of
mental growth, and is not always easy to explain. Both lan-
guages have the same common modernity of expression. But
in the case of English and Latin the contrast of structure is
obvious, and yet not so wide as to form an insuperable diffi-
culty.

According to the testimony of schoolmasters, Latin is rather
a popular subject; I know that as a schoolboy I enjoyed it
myself. I believe that this popularity is due to the sense of
enlightenment that accompanies its study. You know that you
are finding out something. The words somehow stick in the
sentences in a different way to what they do either in English
or French, with odd queer differences of connotation. Of
course in a way Latin is a more barbaric language than Eng-
lish. It is one step nearer to the sentence as the unanalysed
unit.

This brings me to my next point. In my catalogue of the
gifts of Latin I placed philosophy between logic and history.
In this connection, that is its true place. The philosophic in-
stinct which Latin evokes, hovers between the two and en-
riches both. The analysis of thought involved in translation,
English to Latin or Latin to English, imposes that type of
experience which is the necessary introduction to philosophic


tig, cose rae


logic. If in after life your job is to think, render thanks to


Providence which ordained that, for five years of your youth,


THE PLACE OF CLASSICS IN EDUCATION 71


you did a Latin prose once a week and daily construed some
Latin author. The introduction to any subject is the process
of learning by contact. To that majority of people for whom
the language is the readiest stimulus to thought-activity, the
road towards enlightenment of understanding runs from sim-
ple English grammar to French, from French to Latin, and
also traverses the elements of Geometry and of Algebra. I
need not remind my readers that I can claim Plato’s authority
for the general principle which I am upholding.

From the philosophy of thought we now pass to the
philosophy of history. I again recur to Sanderson’s great say-
ing, They learn by contact. How on earth is a child to learn
history by contact? The original documents, charters and
laws and diplomatic correspondence, are double Dutch to it.
A game of football is perhaps a faint reflection of the Battle
of Marathon. But that is only to say that human life in all
ages and circumstances has common qualities. Furthermore,
all this diplomatic and political stuff with which we cram
children is a very thin view of history. What is really neces-
sary is that we should have an instinctive grasp of the flux
of outlook, and of thought, and of zsthetic and racial im-
pulses, which have controlled the troubled history of man-
kind. Now the Roman Empire is the bottleneck through
which the vintage of the past has passed into modern life.
So far as European civilisation is concerned the key to his-
tory is a comprehension of the mentality of Rome and the
work of its Empire.

In the language of Rome, embodying in literary form the
outlook of Rome, we possess the simplest material, by con-
tact with which we can gain appreciation of the tides of
change in human affairs. The mere obvious relations of the
languages, French and English, to Latin are in themselves a
philosophy of history. Consider the contrast which English
presents to French: the entire break of English with the civi-
lised past of Britain and the slow creeping back of words and
phrases of Mediterranean origin with their cargoes of civilised
meaning: in French we have continuity of development, amid
obvious traces of rude shock. I am not asking for pretensious
abstract lectures on such points. The thing illustrates itself.
An elementary knowledge of French and Latin with a mother-
tongue of English imparts the requisite atmosphere of reality
to the story of the racial wanderings which created our
Europe. Language is the incarnation of the mentality of the
race which fashioned it. Every phrase and word embodies


Fp THE AIMS OF EDUCATION x


some habitual idea of men and women as they ploughed
their fields, tended their homes, and built their cities. For this
reason there are no true synonyms as between words and
phrases in different languages. The whole of what I have
been saying is merely an embroidery upon this single theme,
and our endeavour to emphasise its critical importance. In
English, French, and Latin we possess a triangle, such that
one pair of vertices, English and French, exhibits a pair of
diverse expressions of two chief types of modern mentality,
and the relations of these vertices to the third exhibit alterna-
tive processes of derivation from the Mediterranean civilisa-
tion of the past. This is the essential triangle of literary cul-
ture, containing within itself freshness of contrast, embracing
both the present and the past. It ranges through space and
time. These are the grounds by which we justify the assertion,
that in the acquirement of French and Latin is to be found
the easiest mode of learning by contact the philosophy of
logic and the philosophy of history. Apart from some such
intimate experience, your analyses of thought and your his-
tories of actions are mere sounding brasses. I am not claim-
ing, and I do not for a moment believe, that this route of
education is more than the simplest, easiest route for the
majority of pupils. I am certain that there is a large minority
for which the emphasis should be different. But I do believe
that it is the route which can give the greatest success for the
largest majority. It has also the advantage of having sur-
vived the test of experience. I believe that large modifications
require to be introduced into existing practice to adapt it for
present needs. But on the whole this foundation of literary
education involves the best understood tradition and the larg-
est corps of experienced scholarly teachers who can realise it
in practice.

The reader has perhaps observed that I have as yet said
nothing of the glories of Roman literature. Of course the
teaching of Latin must proceed by the means of reading Latin
literature with the pupils. This literature possesses vigorous
authors who have succeeded in putting across the footlights
the Roman mentality on a variety of topics, including its ap-
preciation of Greek thought. One of the merits of Roman
literature is its comparative lack of outstanding genius. There
is very little aloofness about its authors, they express their
race and very little which is beyond all differences of race.


With the exception of Lucretius, you always feel the limita-


tions under which they are working. Tacitus expressed the


oa .
’ .
a eae


THE PLACE OF CLASSICS IN EDUCATION 73


views of the Die-hards of the Roman Senate, and, blind to the
achievements of Roman provincial administration, could only
see that Greek freedmen were replacing Roman aristocrats.
The Roman Empire and the mentality which created it ab-
sorbed the genius of Romans. Very little of Roman literature
will find its way into the kingdom of heaven, when the events
of this world will have lost their importance. The languages
of heaven will be Chinese, Greek, French, German, Italian,
and English, and the blessed Saints will dwell with delight on
these golden expressions of eternal life. They will be wearied
with the moral fervour of Hebrew literature in its battle with
a vanished evil, and with Roman authors who have mistaken
the Forum for the footstool of the living God.

We do not teach Latin in the hope that Roman authors,
read in the original, may be for our pupils companions
through life. English literature is so much greater: it is
richer, deeper, and more subtle. If your tastes are philo-


_ sophic, would you abandon Bacon and Hobbes, Locke, Berke-


| ley, Hume, and Mill for the sake of Cicero? Not unless your


taste among the moderns would lead you to Martin Tupper.


| Perhaps you crave for reflection on the infinite variety of
| human existence and the reaction of character to circum-
' stance. Would you exchange Shakespeare and the English


novelists for Terence, Plautus, and the banquet of Trimalchio?
Then there are our humorists, Sheridan, Dickens, and others.
Did anyone ever laugh like that as he read a Latin author?
Cicero was a great orator, staged amid the pomp of Empire.
England also can show statesmen inspired to expound policies
with imagination. I will not weary you with an extended
catalogue embracing poetry and history. I simply wish to
justify my scepticism as to the claim for Latin literature that


| it expresses with outstanding perfection the universal element
_ in human life. It cannot laugh, and it can hardly cry.


You must not tear it from its context. It is not a literature in
the sense that Greece and England have produced literatures,


expressions of universal human feeling. Latin has one theme


and that is Rome—Rome, the mother of Europe, and the great


Babylon, the harlot whose doom is described by the writer of
the Apocalypse:


“Standing afar off for the fear of her torment, saying, Alas,


alas, that great city Babylon, that mighty city! for in one hour
| is thy judgment come. And the merchants of the earth shall
| weep and mourn over her; for no man buyeth their merchan-


| dise any more:


74 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


“The merchandise of gold, and silver, and precious stones, —
and of pearls, and fine linen, and purple, and silk, and scarlet, —
and all thyine wood, and all manner vessels of ivory, and all
manner vessels of most precious wood, and of brass, and iron,
and marble;

“And cinnamon, and odours, and ointments, and frankin-
cense, and wine, and oil, and fine flour, and wheat, and beasts,
and sheep, and horses, and chariots, and slaves, and souls of
men.”

This is the way Roman civilisation appeared to an early
Christian. But then Christianity itself is part of the outcrop of
the ancient world which Rome passed on to Europe. We in-
herit the dual aspect of the civilisations of the eastern Mediter-
ranean.

The function of Latin literature is its expression of Rome.
When to England and France your imagination can add Rome
in the background, you have laid firm the foundations of cul-
ture. The understanding of Rome leads back to that Mediter-
ranean civilisation of which Rome was the last phase, and it
automatically exhibits the geography of Europe, and the func-
tions of seas and rivers and mountains and plains. The merit of
this study in the education of youth is its concreteness, its
inspiration to action, and the uniform greatness of persons, in
their characters and their staging. Their aims were great, their
virtues were great, and their vices were great. They had the
Saving merit of sinning with cart-ropes. Moral education is
impossible apart from the habitual vision of greatness. If we
are not great, it does not matter what we do or what is the
issue, Now the sense of greatness is an immediate intuition and
not the conclusion of an argument. It is permissible for youth
in the agonies of religious conversion to entertain the feeling
of being a worm and no man, so long as there remains the
conviction of greatness sufficient to justify the eternal wrath
of God. The sense of greatness is the groundwork of morals.
We are at the threshold of a democratic age, and it remains to
be determined whether the equality of man is to be realised
on a high level or a low level. There was never a time in which
it was more essential to hold before the young the vision of
Rome: in itself a great drama, and with issues greater than
itself. We are now already immersed in the topic of esthetic
appreciation of literary quality. It is here that the tradition
of classical teaching requires most vigorous reformation for
adaptation to new conditions. It is obsessed with the formation
of finished classical scholars. The old tradition was remorse-


= 9


*


THE PLACE OF CLASSICS IN EDUCATION 75


tessly to devote the initial stages to the acquirement of the
-ianguages and then to trust to the current literary atmosphere
to secure enjoyment of the literature. During the latter part of
the nineteenth century other subjects encroached on the avail-
able time. Too often the result has been merely time wasted
in the failure to learn the language. I think that the ruck of
pupils from great English schools show a deplorable lack of
intellectual zest, arising from this sense of failure. The school


| course of classics must be planned so that a definite result is


clearly achieved. There has been too great a product of fail-
ures on the road to an ambitious ideal of scholarship.

In approaching every work of art we have to comport our-
selves suitably in regard to two factors, scale and pace. It is
not fair to the architect if you examine St. Peters at Rome
with a microscope, and the Odyssey becomes insipid if you
read it at the rate of five lines a day. Now the problem before
us is exactly this. We are dealing with pupils who will never


| know Latin well enough to read it quickly, and the vision to


be illumed is of vast scale, set in the history of all time. A
careful study of scale and pace, and of the correlative func-
tions of various parts of our work, should appear to be
essential. I have not succeeded in hitting upon any literature
which deals with this question with reference to the psychology
of the pupils. Is it a masonic secret?

I have often noticed that, if in an assembly of great scholars


| the topic of translations be introduced, they function as to


their emotions and sentiments in exactly the same way as do
decent people in the presence of a nasty sex-problem. A
mathematician has no scholastic respectability to lose, so I


will face the question.


It follows from the whole line of thought which I have been
developing, that an exact appreciation of the meanings of
Latin words, of the ways in which ideas are connected in


grammatical constructions, and of the whole hang of a Latin
sentence with its distribution of emphasis, forms the very


backbone of the merits which I ascribe to the study of Latin.


| Accordingly any woolly vagueness of teaching, slurring over


the niceties of language defeats the whole ideal which I have


| set before you. The use of a translation to enable the pupils


| to get away from the Latin as quickly as possible, or to avoid
the stretch of mind in grappling with construction, is erro-


| neous. Exactness, definiteness, and independent power of


analysis are among the main prizes of the whole study.
But we are still confronted with the inexorable problem of


716 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


pace, and with the short four or five years of the whole
course. Every poem is meant to be read within certain limits
of time. The contrasts, and the images, and the transition of
moods must correspond with the sway of rhythms in the
human spirit. These have their periods, which refuse to be@
stretched beyond certain limits. You may take the noblest —
poetry in the world, and, if you stumble through it at snail’s
pace, it collapses from a work of art into a rubbish heap.
Think of the child’s mind as he pores over his work: he reads
“as when,” then follows a pause with a reference to the dic-
tionary, then he goes on—‘“an eagle,” then another reference
to the dictionary, followed by a period of wonderment over
the construction, and so on, and so on. Is that going to help
him to the vision of Rome? Surely, surely, common sense
dictates that you procure the best literary translation you can,
the one which best preserves the charm and vigour of the
original, and that you read it aloud at the right pace, and
append such comments as will elucidate the comprehension.
The attack on the Latin will then be fortified by the sense that
it enshrines a living work of art.

But someone objects that a translation is woefully inferior
to the original. Of course it is, that is why the boy has to
master the Latin original. When the original has beeen mas-
tered, it can be given its proper pace. I plead for an initial
sense of the unity of the whole, to be given by a translation
at the right pace, and for a final appreciation of the full value
of the whole to be given by the original at the right pace.
Wordsworth talks of men of science who “murder to dissect.”
In the past, classical scholars have been veritable assassins
compared to them. The sense of beauty is eager and vehement,
and should be treated with the reverence which is its due. But
I go further. The total bulk of Latin literature necessary to
convey the vision of Rome is much greater than the students
can possibly accomplish in the original. They should read
more Virgil than they can read in Latin, more Lucretius than
they can read in Latin, more history than they can read in
Latin, more Cicero than they can read in Latin. In the study
of an author the selected portions in Latin should illumine a
fuller disclosure of his whole mind, although without the force
of his own words in his own language. It is, however, a grave
evil if no part of an author be read in his own original words.

The difficulty of scale is largely concerned in the presenta-
tion of classical history. Everything set before the young must
be rooted in the particular and the individual. Yet we want to


THE PLACE OF CLASSICS IN EDUCATION T7


illustrate the general characters of whole periods, We must
make students learn by contact. We can exhibit the modes of
life by visual representations. There are photographs of build-
ings, casts of statues, and pictures from vases or frescoes
illustrating religious myths or domestic scenes. In this way we
can compare Rome with the preceding civilisation of the
eastern Mediterranean, and with the succeeding period of the
Middle Ages. It is essential to get into the children’s minds
how men altered, in their appearance, their dwellings, their
technology, their art, and their religious beliefs. We must
imitate the procedure of the zoologists who have the whole of
animal creation on their hands. They teach by demonstrating
typical examples. We must do likewise, to exhibit the position
of Rome in history.

The life of man is founded on Technology, Science, Art


and Religion. All four are inter-connected and issue from his


total mentality. But there are particular intimacies between
Science and Technology, and betweeen Art and Religion. No
social organisation can be understood without reference to


these four underlying factors. A modern steam-engine does


the work of a thousand slaves in the ancient world. Slave-


raiding was the key to much of the ancient imperialism. A


modern printing-press is an essential adjunct to a modern
_ democracy. The key to modern mentality is the continued ad-


vance of science with the consequential shift of ideas and
progress of technology. In the ancient world Mesopotamia


and Egypt were made possible by irrigation. But the Roman
Empire existed by virtue of the grandest application of tech-


|


nology that the world had hitherto seen: its roads, its bridges,


_ its aqueducts, its tunnels, its sewers, its vast buildings, its
organized merchant navies, its military science, its metal-


lurgy, and its agriculture. This was the secret of the extension
and the unity of Roman civilisation. I have often wondered
why Roman engineers did not invent the steam-engine. They
might have done it at any time, and then how different would
have been the history of the world. I ascribe it to the fact that


_ they lived in a warm climate and had not introduced tea and
coffee. In the eighteenth century thousands of men sat by


fires and watched their kettles boil. We all know of course
that Hiero of Alexandria invented some slight anticipation.
All that was wanted was that the Roman engineers should
have been impressed with the motive force of steam by the
humble process of watching their kettles.

The history of mankind has yet to be set in its proper rela-


78 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


tion to the gathering momentum of technological advance.
Within the last hundred years, a developed science has
wedded itself to a developed technology and a new epoch has
opened.

Similarly about a thousand years before Christ the first
great literary epoch commenced when the art of writing was
finally popularised. In its earlier dim origins the art had been
used for traditional hieratic formule and for the formal pur-
poses of governmental record and chronicle. It is a great
mistake to think that in the past the full sweep of a new
invention has ever been anticipated at its first introduction.
It is not even so at the present day, when we are all trained
to meditate on the possibilities of new ideas. But in the past,
with its different directions of thought, novelty slowly ate its
way into the social system. Accordingly writing, as a stimulus


to the preservation of individual novelty of thought, was but |


slowly grasped on the borders of the eastern Mediterranean.


When the realisation of its possibilities was complete, in the


hands of the Greeks and the Hebrews, civilisation took a new


turn; though the general influence of Hebrew mentality was ,
delayed for a thousand years till the advent of Christianity. |
But it was now that their prophets were recording their in-

ward thoughts, when Greek civilisation was beginning to take ;


shape.


of history necessary for the background and the foreground


of the vision of Rome, the consecutive chronicle of political }


events on the scale traditional to our histories absolutely


vanishes. Even verbal explanations partly go into the back- ;
ground. We must utilise models, and pictures, and diagrams, |


and charts to exhibit typical examples of the growth of tech-


nology and its impact on the current modes of life. In the F
same way art, in its curious fusion with utility and with ©
religion, both expresses the actual inward life of imagination .


and changes it by its very expression. The children can see


What I want to illustrate is that in the large scale treatment ;


the art of previous epochs in models and pictures, and some- .
times the very objects in museums, The treatment of the >


history of the past must not start with generalised statements,
but with concrete examples exhibiting the slow succession of
period to period, and of mode of life to mode of life, and of
race to race.


The same concreteness of treatment must apply when we i


come to the literary civilisations of the eastern Mediterranean.
When you come to think of it, the whole claim for the impor-


a x )
K


3 THE PLACE OF CLASSICS IN EDUCATION 79
tance of classics rests on the basis that there is no substitute
for first-hand knowledge. In so far as Greece and Rome are
the founders of European civilisation, a knowledge of history
means above all things a first-hand knowledge of the thoughts
of Greeks and Romans. Accordingly, to put the vision of
Rome into its proper setting, I urge that the pupils should
read at first hand some few examples of Greek literature. Of
course it must be in translation. But I prefer a translation of
what a Greek actually said, to any talk about the Greeks
written by an Englishman, however well he has done it.
Books about Greece should come after some direct knowl-
edge of Greece.

The sort of reading I mean is a verse translation of the
Odyssey, some Herodotus, some choruses of plays translated


| by Gilbert Murray, some lives of Plutarch, especially the
| part about Archimedes in the life of Marcellus, and the defi-
| nitions and axioms and one or two propositions from Euclid’s


Elements in the exact scholarly translation of Heath. In all


this, just enough explanation is wanted to give the mental


environment of the authors. The marvellous position of Rome


| in relation to Europe comes from the fact that it has trans-


mitted to us a double inheritance. It received the Hebrew


| religious thought, and has passed on to Europe its fusion


| with Greek civilisation. Rome itself stands for the impress
of organization and unity upon diverse fermenting elements.
| Roman Law embodies the secret of Roman greatness in its


| Stoic respect for intimate rights of human nature within an
| iron framework of empire. Europe is always flying apart


because of the diverse explosive character of its inheritance,
and coming together because it can never shake off that im-
press of unity it has received from Rome. The history of
Europe is the history of Rome curbing the Hebrew and the
Greek, with their various impulses of religion, and of sci-
ence, and of art, and of quest for material comfort, and of
lust of domination, which are all at daggers drawn with each
other. The vision of Rome is the vision of the unity of civi-
lisation.


— Originally published in The Hibbert Journal, 1923.


6. The Mathematical Curriculum


THE situation in regard to education at the present time |
cannot find its parallel without going back for some centuries —
to the break-up of the medizval traditions of learning. Then,
as now, the traditional intellectual outlook, despite the au- —
thority which it had justly acquired from its notable triumphs,


had grown to be too narrow for the interests of mankind. The


result of this shifting of human interest was a demand for a ~


parallel shifting of the basis of education, so as to fit the


pupils for the ideas which later in life would in fact occupy ~


their minds. Any serious fundamental change in the intel-


lectual outlook of human society must necessarily be followed —
by an educational revolution. It may be delayed for a genera-


tion by vested interests or by the passionate attachment of
some leaders of thought to the cycle of ideas within which


they received their own mental stimulus at an impressionable |


age. But the law is inexorable that education to be living and
effective must be directed to informing pupils with those


ideas, and to creating for them those capacities which will


enable them to appreciate the current thought of their epoch,


Sinan


There is no such thing as a successful system of education ©


in a vacuum, that is to say, a system which is divorced from


immediate contact with the existing intellectual atmosphere. —


Education which is not modern shares the fate of all organic
things which are kept too long.

But the blessed word “modern” does not really solve our
difficulties. What we mean is, relevant to modern thought,


Fhe ey,


A


either in the ideas imparted or in the aptitudes produced. —
Something found out only yesterday may not really be mod- —
ern in this sense. It may belong to some by-gone system of |


thought prevalent in a previous age, or, what is very much
more likely, it may be too recondite. When we demand that ~


education should be relevant to modern thought, we are
referring to thoughts broadly spread throughout cultivated
society. It is this question of the unfitness of recondite sub-


80


:


THE MATHEMATICAL CURRICULUM 81


jects for use in general education which I wish to make the


| keynote of my address this afternoon.


It is in fact rather a delicate subject for mathematicians.
Autsiders are apt to accuse our subject of being recondite. Let
us grasp the nettle at once and frankly admit that in general
opinion it is the very typical example of reconditeness. By
this word I do not mean difficulty, but that the ideas involved
are of highly special application, and rarely influence thought.

This liability to reconditeness is the characteristic evil which
is apt to destroy the utility of mathematics in liberal educa-
tion, So far as it clings to the educational use of the subject,
so far we must acquiesce in a miserably low level of mathe-
matical attainment among cultivated people in general. I
yield to no one in my anxiety to increase the educational scope
of mathematics. The way to achieve this end is not by a mere


blind demand for more mathematics. We must face the real
| difficulty which obstructs its extended use.


Is the subject recondite? Now, viewed as a whole, I think


| it is. Securus judicat orbis terrarum—the general judgment of


mankind is sure.

The subject as it exists in the minds and in the books of
students of mathematics is recondite. It proceeds by deducing
innumerable special results from general ideas, each result
more recondite than the preceding. It is not my task this
afternoon to defend mathematics as a subject for profound
study. It can very well take care of itself. What I want to
emphasise is, that the very reasons which make this science
a delight to its students are reasons which obstruct its use as
an educational instrument—namely, the boundless wealth of
deductions from the interplay of general theorems, their com-
plication, their apparent remoteness from the ideas from
which the argument started, the variety of methods, and their
purely abstract character which brings, as its gift, eternal
truth.

Of course, all these characteristics are of priceless value to
students; for ages they have fascinated some of the keenest
intellects. My only remark is that, except for a highly selected
class, they are fatal in education. The pupils are bewildered
by a multiplicity of detail, without apparent relevance either
to great ideas or to ordinary thoughts. The extension of this
sort of training in the direction of acquiring more detail is the
last measure to be desired in the interests of education.

The conclusion at which we arrive is, that mathematics, if
it is to be used in general education, must be subjected to a


82 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


rigorous process of selection and adaptation. I do not mean, .
what is of course obvious, that however much time we devote ~


to the subject the average pupil will not get very far. But that,


however limited the progress, certain characteristics of the —


subject, natural at any stage, must be rigorously excluded. The
science as presented to young pupils must lose its aspect of
reconditeness. It must, on the face of it, deal directly and
simply with a few general ideas of far-reaching importance.

Now, in this matter of the reform of mathematical instruc-
tion, the present generation of teachers may take a very
legitimate pride in its achievements. It has shown immense
energy in reform, and has accomplished more than would
have been thought possible in so short a time. It is not always
recognised how difficult is the task of changing a well-estab-
lished curriculum entrenched behind public examinations.

But for all that, great progress has been made, and, to put
the matter at its lowest, the old dead tradition has been broken
up. I want to indicate this afternoon the guiding idea which
should direct our efforts at reconstruction. I have already
summed it up in a phrase, namely, we must aim at the elim-
ination of reconditeness from the educational use of the
subject.

Our courses of instruction should be planned to illustrate
simply a succession of ideas of obvious importance. All pretty
divagations should be rigorously excluded. The goal to be
aimed at is that the pupil should acquire familiarity with
abstract thought, should realise how it applies to particular
concrete circumstances, and should know how to apply gen-
eral methods to its logical investigation. With this educational
ideal nothing can be worse than the aimless accretion of
theorems in our textbooks, which acquire their position
merely because the children can be made to learn them and
examiners can set neat questions on them. The bookwork to
be learnt should all be very important as illustrating ideas.
The examples set—and let there be as many examples as
teachers find necessary—should be direct illustrations of the
theorems, either by way of abstract particular cases or by
way of application to concrete phenomena. Here it is worth
remarking that it is quite useless to simplify the bookwork,
if the examples set in examinations in fact require an extended
knowledge of recondite details. There is a mistaken idea that
problems test ability and genius, and that bookwork tests


cram. This is not my experience. Only boys who have been a
specially crammed for scholarships can ever do a problem ~


Le ON ee ae eee Tee


Be PIE ee ey eee


fea


-F
x
~


THE MATHEMATICAL CURRICULUM 83


paper successfully. Bookwork properly set, not in mere snip-
pets according to the usual bad plan, is a far better test of
ability, provided that it is supplemented by direct examples.
But this is a digressison on the bad influence of examinations
on teaching.

The main ideas which lie at the base of mathematics are
not at all recondite. They are abstract. But one of the main
objects of the inclusion of mathematics in a liberal education
is to train the pupils to handle abstract ideas. The science
constitutes the first large group of abstract ideas which natu-
raily occur to the mind in any precise form. For the purposes
of education, mathematics consists of the relations of number,
the relations of quantity, and the relations of space. This is
not a general definition of mathematics, which, in my opin-
| ion, is a much more general science. But we are now discussing
the use of mathematics in education. These three groups of
relations, concerning number, quantity, and space, are inter-
connected.

Now, in education we proceed from the particular to the
general. Accordingly, children should be taught the use of
these ideas by practice among simple examples. My point is
this: The goal should be, not an aimless accumulation of
special mathematical theorems, but the final recognition that
the preceding years of work have illustrated those relations of
| number, and of quantity, and of space, which are of funda-
mental importance, Such a training should lie at the base of
| all philosophical thought. In fact elementary mathematics
| rightly conceived would give just that philosophical discipline
of which the ordinary mind is capable. But what at all costs
| we ought to avoid, is the pointless accumulation of details. As
many examples as you like; let the children work at them for
terms, or for years. But these examples should be direct illus-
trations of the main ideas. In this way, and this only, can the
| fatal reconditeness be avoided.

I am not now speaking in particular of those who are to be
professional mathematicians, or of those who for professional
reasons require a knowledge of certain mathematical details.
We are considering the liberal education of all students,
including these two classes. This general use of mathematics
should be the simple study of a few general truths, well illus-
trated by practical examples. This study should be conceived
by itself, and completely separated in idea from the profes-
sional study mentioned above, for which it would make a
| most excellent preparation. Its final stage should be the recog-


84 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


nition of the general truths which the work done has
illustrated. As far as I can make out, at present the final stage ©


is the proof of some property of circles connected with tri- |
angles. Such properties are immensely interesting to mathe- —
maticians. But are they not rather recondite, and what is the ©
precise relation of such theorems to the ideal of a liberal ©
education? The end of all the grammatical studies of the
student in classics is to read Virgil and Horace—the greatest —
thoughts of the greatest men. Are we content, when pleading ©
for the adequate representation in education of our own ©
science, to say that the end of a mathematical training is that ~
the student should know the properties of the nine-point —


circle? I ask you frankly, is it not rather a “come down”?
This generation of mathematical teachers has done so much
strenuous work in the way of reorganising mathematical
instruction that there is no need to despair of its being able
to elaborate a curriculum which shall leave in the minds of |
the pupils something even nobler than “the ambiguous case.”
Let us think how this final review, closing the elementary
course, might be conducted for the more intelligent pupils.
Partly no doubt it requires a general oversight of the whole
work done, considered without undue detail so as to empha-


Be Lon,


sise the general ideas used, and their possibilities of impor-


tance when subjected to further study. Also the analytical
and geometrical ideas find immediate application in the
physical laboratory where a course of simple experimental
mechanics should have been worked through. Here the point
of view is twofold, the physical ideas and the mathematical
ideas illustrate each other.

The mathematical ideas are esssential to the precise formu-
lation of the mechanical laws. The idea of a precise law of
nature, the extent to which such laws are in fact verified in
our experience, and the role of abstract thought in their
formulation, then become practically apparent to the pupil.
The whole topic of course requires detailed development with
full particular illustration, and is not suggested as requiring
merely a few bare abstract statements.


es UD


It would, however, be a grave error to put too much


emphasis on the mere process of direct explanation of the
previous work by way of final review. My point is, that the


latter end of the course should be so selected that in fact the —


general ideas underlying all the previous mathematical work —
should be brought into prominence. This may well be done —
by apparently entering on a new subject. For example, the |


she


THE MATHEMATICAL CURRICULUM 85


ideas of quantity and the ideas of number are fundamental
to all precise thought. In the previous stages they will not
have been sharply separated; and children are, rightly
enough, pushed on to algebra without too much bother and
quantity. But the more intelligent among them at the end of
their curriculum would gain immensely by a careful consid-
eration of those fundamental properties of quantity in general
which lead to the introduction of numerical measurement.
This is a topic which also has the advantage that the necessary
books are actually to hand. Euclid’s fifth book is regarded by
those qualified to judge as one of the triumphs of Greek
mathematics. It deals with this very point. Nothing can be
more characteristic of the hopelessly illiberal character of the
traditional mathematical education than the fact that this
book has always been omitted. It deals with ideas, and there-
fore was ostracised. Of course a careful selection of the more
important propositions and a careful revision of the argu-
ment are required. The whole book would not be wanted, but
just the few propositions which embody the fundamental
ideas. The subject is not fit for backward pupils; but certainly
it could be made interesting to the more advanced class.
There would be great scope for interesting discussion as to
the nature of quantity, and the tests which we should apply
to ascertain when we are dealing with quantities. The work
would not be at all in the air, but would be illustrated at
every stage by reference to actual examples of cases where
the quantitative character is absent, or obscure, or doubtful,
or evident. Temperature, heat, electricity, pleasure and pain,
mass and distance could all be considered.

Another idea which requires illustration is that of func-
tionality, A function in analysis is the counterpart of a law


in the physical universe, and of a curve in geometry. Children


have studied the relations of functions to curves from the
first beginning of their study of algebra, namely, in drawing
graphs. Of recent years there has beeen a great reform in
respect to graphs. But at its present stage it has either gone
too far or not far enough. It is not enough merely to draw a
graph. The idea behind the graph—like the man behind the
gun—is essential in order to make it effective. At present
there is some tendency merely to set the children to draw
curves, and there to leave the whole question.

In the study of simple algebraic functions and of trigo-
nometrical functions we are initiating the study of the precise
expression of physical laws. Curves are another way of repre-


86 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


the inverse square and the direct distance—should be passed
under review, and the applications of the simple functions to
express important concrete cases of physical laws considered.
I cannot help thinking that the final review of this topic might
well take the form of a study of some of the main ideas of
the differential calculus applied to simple curves. There is
nothing particularly difficult about the conception of a rate
of change; and the differentiation of a few powers of x, such
as x”, x3, etc., could easily be effected; perhaps by the aid of
geometry even sin x and cos x could be differentiated. If we
once abandon our fatal habit of cramming the children with
theorems which they do not understand, and will never use,
there will be plenty of time to concentrate their attention on
really important topics. We can give them familiarity with
conceptions which really influence thought.

Before leaving this topic of physical laws and mathematical
functions, there are other points to be noticed. The fact that
the precise law is never really verified by observation in its
full precision is capable of easy illustration and of affording
excellent examples. Again, statistical laws, namely laws which
are only satisfied on the average by large numbers, can easily
be studied and illustrated. In fact a slight study of statistical
methods and their application to social phenomena affords
one of the simplest examples of the application of algebraic
ideas.

Another way in which the students’ ideas can be general-
ised is by the use of the History of Mathematics, conceived
not as a mere assemblage of the dates and names of men, but
as an exposition of the general current of thought which occa-
sioned the subjects to be objects of interest at the time of
their first elaboration. I merely draw attention to it now, to
point out that perhaps it is the very subject which may best
obtain the results for which'I am pleading.

We have indicated two main topics, namely general ideas
of quantity and of laws of nature, which should be an object
of study in the mathematical curriculum of a liberal educa-
tion. But there is another side to mathematics which must not
be overlooked. It is the chief instrument for discipline in
logical method.

Now, what .is logical method, and how can any one be
trained in it?

Logical method is more than the mere knowledge of valid
types of reasoning and practice in the concentration of mind


q
a


senting these laws. The simple fundamental Jaws—such as ©


THE MATHEMATICAL CURRICULUM 87


necessary to follow them. If it were only this, it would still be
yery important; for the human mind was not evolved in the
bygone ages for the sake of reasoning, but merely to enable
mankind with more art to hunt between meals for fresh food
supplies. Accordingly few people can follow close reasoning
without considerable practice.

More than this is wanted to make a good reasoner, or even
| to enlighten ordinary people with knowledge of what consti-
tutes the essence of the art. The art of reasoning consists in
getting hold of the subject at the right end, of seizing on the
few general ideas which illuminate the whole, and of persist-
ently marshalling all subsidiary facts round them. Nobody
can be a good reasoner unless by constant practice he has
realised the importance of getting hold of the big ideas and
of hanging on to them like grim death. For this sort of train-
ing geometry is, I think, better than algebra. The field of
thought of algebra is rather obscure, whereas space is an
obvious insistent thing evident to all. Then the process of
simplification, or abstraction, by which ali irrelevant prop-
erties of matter, such as colour, taste, and weight, are put
aside is an education in itself. Again, the definitions, and the
propositions assumed without proof, illustrate the necessity
of forming clear notions of the fundamental facts of the
subject-matter and of the relations between them. All this
_ belongs to the mere prolegomena of the subject. When we
come to its development, its excellence increases. The learner
is not initially confronted with any symbolism which bothers
| the memory by its rules, however simple they may be. Also,
| from the very beginning the reasoning, if properly conducted,
is dominated by well-marked ideas which guide each stage of
development. Accordingly the essence of logical method
receives immediate exemplification.

Let us now put aside for the moment the limitations intro-
duced by the dullness of average pupils and the pressure on
time due to other subjects, and consider what geometry has
- to offer in the way of a liberal education. I will indicate some
stages in the subject, without meaning that necessarily they
are to be studied in this exclusive order. The first stage is
the study of congruence. Our perception of congruence is in
practice dependent on our judgments of the invariability of
the intrinsic properties of bodies when their external circum-
stances are varying. But however it arises, congruence is in
essence the correlation of two regions of space, point by
point, so that all homologous distances and all homologous


88 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


the equality of lengths and angles is their congruence, and


all tests of equality, such as the use of the yard measure, k


are merely devices for making immediate judgments of con-
gruence easy. I make these remarks to suggest that apart
from the reasoning connected with it, congruence, both
as an example of a larger and very far-reaching idea and also
for its own sake, is well worthy of attentive consideration.
The propositions concerning it elucidate the elementary prop-
erties of the triangle, the parallelogram, and the circle, and
of the relations of two planes to each other. It is very desir-
able to restrict the proved propositions of this part within the
narrowest bounds, partly by assuming redundant axiomatic
propositions, and partly by introducing only those proposi-
tions of absolutely fundamental importance.

The second stage is the study of similarity, This can be
reduced to three or four fundamental propositions. Similarity
is an enlargement of the idea of congruence, and, like that
idea, is another example of a one-to-one correlation of points
of spaces. Any extension of study of this subject might well
be in the direction of the investigation of one or two simple
properties of similar and similarly situated rectilinear figures.
The whole subject receives its immediate applications in plans
and maps. It is important, however, to remember that trigo-
nometry is really the method by which the main theorems are
made available for use.

The third stage is the study of the elements of trigonom-
etry. This is the study of the periodicity introduced by rota-
tion and of properties preserved in a correlation of similar
figures. Here for the first time we introduce a slight use of
the algebraic analysis founded on the study of number and
quantity. The importance of the periodic character of the
functions requires full illustration. The simplest properties of
the functions are the only ones required for the solution of
triangles, and the consequent applications to surveying. The
wealth of formule, often important in themselves, but entirely
useless for this type of study, which crowd our books should
be rigorously excluded, except so far as they are capable of
being proved by the pupils as direct examples of the book-
work.

This question of the exclusion of formulz is best illustrated
by considering this example of Trigonometry, though of
course I may well have hit on an unfortunate case in which


my judgment is at fault. A great part of the educational —


4


angles are equal. It is to be noticed that the definition of —


THE MATHEMATICAL CURRICULUM 89


advantage of the subject can be obtained by confining study
to Trigonometry of one angle and by exclusion of the addi-
tion formule for the sine and cosine and the sum of two
angles. The functions can be graphed, and the solution of
iriangles effected. Thus the aspects of the science as (1)
embodying analytically the immediate results of some of the
theorems deduced from congruence and similarity, (2) as a
solution of the main problem of surveying, (3) as a study of
the fundamental functions required to express periodicity and
wave motion, will all be impressed on the pupils’ minds both
by bookwork and example.

If it be desired to extend this course, the addition formule

should be added. But great care should be taken to exclude
| specialising the pupils in the wealth of formule which comes
in their train. By “exclude” is meant that the pupils should
_ not have spent time or energy in acquiring any facility in
their deduction. The teacher may find it interesting to work
a few such examples before a class. But such results are not
among those which learners need retain. Also, I would
exclude the whole subject of circumscribed and inscribed
circles both from Trigonometry and from the previous geo-
| metrical courses. It is all very pretty, but I do not understand
| what its function is in an elementary non-professional cur-
_ riculum.
Accordingly, the actual bookwork of the subject is reduced
_ to very manageable proportions. I was told the other day of
| an American college where the students are expected to know
_ by heart ninety formulz or results in Trigonometry alone. We
are not quite so bad as that. In fact, in Trigonometry we
| have nearly approached the ideal here sketched out as far as
our elementary courses are concerned.

The fourth stage introduces Analytical Geometry. The
study of graphs in algebra has- already employed the funda-
mental notions, and all that is now required is a rigorously
pruned course on the straight line, the circle, and the three
types of conic sections, defined by the forms of their equa-
tions. At this point there are two remarks to be made. It is

often desirable to give our pupils mathematical information

which we do not prove. For example, in co-ordinate geom-

etry, the reduction of the general equation of the second

degree is probably beyond the capacities of most of the type

of students whom we are considering. But that need not pre-

vent us from explaining the fundamental position of conics,
as exhausting the possible types of such curves.


op


eer


vy


90 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


The second remark is to advocate the entire sweeping away
of “geometrical conics” as a separate subject. Naturally, on
suitable occasions the analysis of analytical geometry will be
lightened by the use of direct deduction from some simple
figure. But geometrical conics, as developed from the defini-
tion of a conic section by the focus and directrix property,
suffers from glaring defects. It is hopelessly recondite. The
fundamental definition of a conic, SP = e . PM, usual in
this subject at this stage, is thoroughly bad. It is very recon-
dite; and has no obvious importance. Why should such curves
be studied at all, any more than those defined by an indefinite
number of other formule? But when we have commenced
the study of the Cartesian methods, the equations of the first
and second degrees are naturally the first things to think
about.

In this ideal course of Geometry, the fifth stage is occupied
with the elements of Projective Geometry. The general ideas
of cross ratio and of projection are here fundamental. Projec-
tion is yet a more general instance of that one-to-one correla-
tion which we have already considered under congruence and
similarity. Here again we must avoid the danger of being led
into a bewildering wealth of detail.

The intellectual idea which projective geometry is to illus-
trate is the importance in reasoning of the correlation of all
cases which can be proved to possess in common certain
identical properties. The preservation of the projective prop-
erties in projection is the one important educational idea of
the subject. Cross ratio only enters as the fundamental
metrical property which is preserved. The few propositions
considered are selected to illustrate the two allied processes
which are made possible by this procedure, One is proof by
simplification. Here the simplification is psychological and
not logical—for the general case is logically the simplest.
What is meant is: Proof by considering the case which is in
fact the most familiar to us, or the easiest to think about. The
other procedure is the deduction of particular cases from
known general truths, as soon as we have a means of discov-
ering such cases or a criterion for testing them.

The projective definition of conic sections and the identity
of the results obtained with the curves derived from the gen-
eral equation of the second degree are capable of simple
exposition, but lie on the border-line of the subject. It is the
sort of topic on which information can be given, and the
proofs suppressed.


UNIVERSITIES AND THEIR FUNCTION 91


The course of geometry as here conceived in its complete
} sdeal—and ideals can never be realised—is not a long one.
The actual amount of mathematical deduction at each stage
in the form of bookwork is very slight. But much more expla-
nation would be given, the importance of each proposition
being illustrated by examples, either worked out or for stu-
dents to work, so selected as to indicate the fields of thought
to which it applies. By such a course the student would gain
an analysis of the leading properties of space, and of the’
chief methods by which they are investigated.

The study of the elements of mathematics, conceived in
this spirit, would constitute a training in logical method to-
gether with an acquisition of the precise ideas which lie at the
| base of the scientific and philosophical investigations of the
universe. Would it be easy to continue the excellent reforms
in mathematical instruction which this generation has already
achieved, so as to include in the curriculum this wider and
more philosophical spirit? Frankly, I think that this result
would be very hard to achieve as the result of single individual
| efforts. For reasons which I have already briefly indicated, all
| reforms in education are very difficult to effect. But the con-
_ tinued pressure of combined effort, provided that the ideal

is really present in the minds of the mass of teachers, can do
| much, and effects in the end surprising modification. Grad-
| ually the requisite books get written, still more gradually the
examinations are reformed so as to give weight to the less
technical aspects of the subject, and then all recent experience
has shown that the majority of teachers are only too ready to
' welcome any practicable means of rescuing the subject from
| the reproach of being a mechanical discipline.


——Presidential address to the London branch of the Mathematical
Association, 1913.


7. Universities and Their. Function


THE expansion of universities is one marked feature of the
social life in the present age. All countries have shared in this
movement, but more especially America, which thereby occu-


i


92 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION.


pies a position of honor. It is, however, possible to be over- '
whelmed even by the gifts of good fortune; and this growth |


of universities, in number of institutions, in size, and in


internal complexity of organisation, discloses some danger of |


destroying the very sources of their usefulness, in the absence
of a widespread understanding of the primary functions


which universities should perform in the service of a nation, |


These remarks, as to the necessity for reconsideration of the


function of universities, apply to all the more developed |
countries. They are only more especially applicable to |


_ America, because this country has taken the lead in a devel-
opment which, under wise guidance, may prove to be one of
the most fortunate forward steps which civilisation has yet
taken. j


This article will only deal with the most general principles, |
though the special problems of the various departments in any |


university are, of course, innumerable. But generalities re-


quire illustration, and for this purpose I choose the business |


school of a university. This choice is dictated by the fact that
business schools represent one of the newer developments of
university activity. They are also more particularly relevant
to the dominant social activities of modern nations, and for


that reason are good examples of the way in which the |


national life should be affected by the activities of its univer-
sities, Also at Harvard, where I have the honour to hold


Office, the new foundation of a business school on a scale :


amounting to magnificence has just reached its completion.
There is a certain novelty in the provision of such a school


of training, on this scale of magnitude, in one of the few |


leading universities of the world. It marks the culmination of


a movement which for many years past has introduced analo- !


gous departments throughout American universities. This is a


new fact in the university world; and it alone would justify
some general reflections upon the purpose of a university edu- |
cation, and upon the proved importance of that purpose for .


the welfare of the social organism.


The novelty of business schools must not be exaggerated. |
At no time have universities been restricted to pure abstract |


learning. The University of Salerno in Italy, the earliest of


European universities, was devoted to medicine. In England, »
at Cambridge, in the year 1316, a college was founded for the |


special purpose of providing “clerks for the King’s service.”


\
'
I


Universities have trained clergy, medical men, lawyers, engi- |
neers, Business is now a highly intellectualised vocation, so it |


:
)


im
% UNIVERSITIES AND THEIR FUNCTION 93
well fits into the series. There is, however, this novelty: the
curriculum suitable for a business school, and the various
modes of activity of such a school, are still in the experi-
mental stage. Hence the peculiar importance of recurrence to
general principles in connection with the moulding of these
schools. It would, however, be an act of presumption on my
part if I were to enter upon any consideration of details, or
even upon types of policy affecting the balance of the whole
training. Upon such questions I have no special knowledge,
and therefore have no word of advice.


0


The universities are schools of education, and schools of
research. But the primary reason for their existence is not to
be found either in the mere knowledge conveyed to the stu-
dents or in the mere opportunities for research afforded to
the members of the faculty.

Both these functions could be performed at a cheaper rate,
apart from these very expensive institutions. Books are cheap,
and the system of apprenticeship is well understood. So far as
the mere imparting of information is concerned, no university
has had any justification for existence since the popularisation
of printing in the fifteenth century. Yet the chief impetus to
the foundation of universities came after that date, and in
more recent times has even increased.

The justification for a university is that it preserves the
connection between knowledge and the zest of life, by uniting


the young and the old in the imaginative consideration of


learning. The university imparts information, but it imparts
it imaginatively. At least, this is the function which it should
perform for society. A university which fails in this respect
has no reason for existence. This atmosphere of excitement,
arising from imaginative consideration, transforms knowledge.
A fact is no longer a bare fact: it is invested with all its possi-


bilities. It is no longer a burden on the memory: it is ener-


gising as the poet of our dreams, and as the architect of our
purposes.

Imagination is not to be divorced from the facts: it is a
way of illuminating the facts. It works by eliciting the general
principles which apply to the facts, as they exist, and then by
an intellectual survey of alternative possibilities which are
consistent with those principles. It enables men to construct


94 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


an intellectual vision of a new world, and it preserves the zest ~


of life by the suggestion of satisfying purposes.


Youth is imaginative, and if the imagination be strength- |
ened by discipline this energy of imagination can in great


measure be preserved through life. The tragedy of the world
is that those who are imaginative have but slight experience,
and those who are experienced have feeble imaginations.
Fools act on imagination without knowledge; pedants act on
knowledge without imagination. The task of a university is to
weld together imagination and experience.

The initial discipline of imagination in its period of youth-
ful vigor requires that there be no responsibility for immediate
action. The habit of unbiased thought, whereby the ideal
variety of exemplifications is discerned in its derivation from
general principles, cannot be acquired when there is the daily
task of preserving a concrete organisation, You must be free
to think rightly and wrongly, and free to appreciate the
variousness of the universe undisturbed by its perils.

These reflections upon the general functions of a university
can be at once translated in terms of the particular functions
of a business school. We need not flinch from the assertion
that the main function of such a school is to produce men
with a greater zest for businesss. It is a libel upon human
nature to conceive that zest for life is the product of pedes-
trian purposes directed toward the narrow routine of material
comforts. Mankind by its pioneering instinct, and in a hun-
dred other ways, proclaims falsehood of that lie.

In the modern complex social organism, the adventure of
life cannot be disjoined from intellectual adventure. Amid
simpler circumstances, the pioneer can follow the urge of his
instinct, directed toward the scene of his vision from the
mountain top. But in the complex organisations of modern
business the intellectual adventure of analysis, and of imag-
inative reconstruction, must precede any successful reorgan-
isation. In a simpler world, business relations were simpler,
being based on the immediate contact of man with man and
on immediate confrontation with all relevant material circum-
stances. To-day business organisation requires an imaginative
grasp of the psychologies of populations engaged in differing
modes of occupation: of populations scattered through cities,
through mountains, through plains; of populations on the
ocean, and of populations in mines, and of populations in
forests. It requires an imaginative grasp of conditions in the
tropics, and of conditions in temperate zones. It requires an


= -s


UNIVERSITIES AND THEIR FUNCTION 95


imaginative grasp of the interlocking interests of great organ-
isations, and of the reactions of the whole complex to any
|change in one of its elements. It requires an imaginative
enderstanding of laws of political economy, not merely in the
abstract, but also with the power to construe them in terms
ef the particular circumstances of a concrete business. It re-
| quires some knowledge of the habits of government, and of
the variations of those habits under diverse conditions. It re-
j quires an imaginative vision of the binding forces of any

human organisation, a sympathetic vision of the limits of
human nature and of the conditions which evoke loyalty of
| service. It requires some knowledge of the laws of health, and
of the laws of fatigue, and of the conditions for sustained
reliability. It requires an imaginative understanding of the
| social effects of the conditions of factories. It requires a suf-
ficient conception of the réle of applied science in modern
‘society. It requires that discipline of character which can
say “yes” and “no” to other men, not by reason of blind
_obstinancy, but with firmness derived from a conscious eval-
uation of relevant alternatives.

The universities have trained the intellectual pioneers of
our civilisation—the priests, the lawyers, the statesmen, the
| doctors, the men of science, and the men of letters. They have
been the home of those ideals which lead men to confront the
confusion of their present times. The Pilgrim Fathers left
| England to found a state of society according to the ideals of
their religious faith; and one of their earlier acts was the
foundation of Harvard University in Cambridge, named after
that ancient mother of ideals in England, to which so many of
them owed their training. The conduct of business now re-
| quires intellectual imagination of the same type as that which
in former times has mainly passed into those other occupa-
tions; and the universities are the organisations which have
supplied this type of mentality for the service of the progress
of the European races.

In early medieval history the origin of universities was
obscure and almost unnoticed. They were a gradual and
natural growth. But their existence is the reason for the sus-
tained, rapid progressiveness of European life in so many
fields of activity. By their agency the adventure of action met
the adventure of thought. It would not have been possible
antecedently to have divined that such organisations would
have been successful. Even now, amid the imperfections of
ali things human, it is sometimes difficult to understand how


“


96 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


they succeed in their work. Of course there is much failure in —


the work of universities. But, if we take a broad view of his-


nf
tory, their success has been remarkable and almost uniform. |
The cultural histories of Italy, of France, of Germany, of —


Holland, of Scotland, of England, of the United States, bear


witness to the influence of universities. By “cultural history” —


I am not chiefly thinking of the lives of scholars; I mean the
energising of the lives of those men who gave to France, to
Germany, and to other countries that impress of types of
human achievement which, by their addition to the zest of
life, form the foundation of our patriotism. We love to be
members of society which can do those things.

There is one great difficulty which hampers all the higher
types of human endeavour. In modern times this difficulty has
even increased in its possibilities for evil. In any large organ-
isation the younger men, who are novices, must be set to jobs
which consist in carrying out fixed duties in obedience to
orders. No president of a large corporation meets his youngest
employee at his office door with the offer of the most respon-
sible job which the work of that corporation includes, The
young men are set to work at a fixed routine, and only occa-
sionally even see the president as he passes in and out of the
building. Such work is a great discipline. It imparts knowl-
edge, and it produces reliability of character; also it is the
only work for which the young men, in that novice stage, are
fit, and it is the work for which they are hired. There can be
no criticism of the custom, but there may be an unfortunate
effect—prolonged routine work dulls the imagination.

The result is that qualities essential at a later stage of a
career are apt to be stamped out in an earlier stage. This is


only an instance of the more general fact, that necessary tech- |
nical excellence can only be acquired by a training which is
apt to damage those energies of mind which should direct the -


technical skill. This is the key fact in education, and the
reason for most of its difficulties.


The way in which a university should function in the prep-


aration for an intellectual career, such as modern business —
or one of the older professions, is by promoting the imagina- —


tive consideration of the various general principles underlying |
that career. Its students thus pass into their period of tech-
nical apprenticeship with their imaginations already practised
in connecting details with general principles, The routine then
receives its meaning, and also illuminates the principles which |
give it that meaning. Hence, instead of a drudgery isssuing in


|
|


UNIVERSITIES AND THEIR FUNCTION 97


a blind rule of thumb, the properly trained man has some

hope of obtaining an imagination disciplined by detailed facts

and by necessary habits.

~ Thus the proper function of a university is the imaginative

acquisition of knowledge. Apart from this importance of the

imagination, there is no reason why business men, and other

professional men, should not pick up their facts bit by bit as |
they want them for particular occasions. A university is imag-

inative or it is nothing—at least nothing useful.


iil


Imagination is a contagious disease. It cannot be measured
by the yard, or weighed by the pound, and then delivered to
the students by members of the faculty. It can only be com-
municated by a faculty whose members themselves wear their
learning with imagination. In saying this, I am only repeating
one of the oldest of observations. More than two thousand
years ago the ancients symbolised learning by a torch passing
from hand to hand down the generations. That lighted torch
is the imagination of which I speak. The whole art in the
organisation of a university is the provision of a faculty
whose learning is lighted up with imagination. This is the
problem of problems in university education; and unless we
are careful the recent vast extension of universities in number
of students and in variety of activities—of which we are so
justly proud—will fail in producing its proper results, by the
mishandling of this problem.

The combination of imagination and learning normally
requires some leisure, freedom from restraint, freedom from
harassing worry, some variety of experiences, and the stim-
ulation of other minds diverse in opinion and diverse in equip-
ment. Also there is required the excitement of curiosity, and
the self-confidence derived from pride in the achievements of
the surrounding society in procuring the advance of knowl-
edge. Imagination cannot be acquired once and for all, and
then kept indefinitely in an ice box to be produced period-
ically in stated quantities. The learned and imaginative life is
a way of living, and is not an article of commerce.

It is in respect to the provision and utilisation of these con-
ditions for an efficient faculty that the two functions of educa-
tion and research meet together in a university. Do you want
your teachers to be imaginative? Then encourage them to
research, Do you want your researchers to be imaginative?


98 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION ee


Then bring them into intellectual sympathy with the young at |
the most eager, imaginative period of life, when intellects are 4
just entering upon their mature discipline. Make your re-
‘searchers explain themselves to active minds, plastic and with
the world before them; make your young students crown their —
period of intellectual acquisition by some contact with minds
gifted with experience of intellectual adventure. Education is
discipline for the adventure of life; research is intellectual ad-
venture; and the universities should be homes of adventure
shared in common by young and old. For successful educa-
tion there must always be a certain freshness in the knowledge
dealt with. It must either be new in itself or it must be in-
vested with some novelty of application to the new world of
new times. Knowledge does not keep any better than fish.
You may be dealing with knowledge of the old species, with
some old truth; but somehow or other it must come to the
students, as it were, just drawn out of the sea and with the
freshness of its immediate importance.

It is the function of the scholar to evoke into life wisdom
and beauty which, apart from his magic, would remain lost
in the past. A progressive society depends upon its inclusion
of three groups—scholars, discoverers, inventors. Its progress
also depends upon the fact that its educated masses are com-
posed of members each with a tinge of scholarship, a tinge of
discovery, and a tinge of invention. I am here using the term
“discovery” to mean the progress of knowledge in respect to
truths of some high generality, and the term “invention” to
_mean the progress of knowledge in respect to the application
of general truths in particular ways subservient to present
needs. It is evident that these three groups merge into each
other, and also that men engaged in practical affairs are prop-
erly to be called inventors so far as they contribute to the
progress of society. But any one individual has his own lim-
itation of function, and his own peculiar needs. What is
important for a nation is that there shall be a very close rela-
tion between all types of its progressive elements, so that the
study may influence the market place, and the market place
the study. Universities are the chief agencies for this fusion of
progressive activities into an effective instrument of progress.
Of course they are not the only agencies, but it is a fact that
to-day the progressive nations are those in which universities
flourish.

It must not be supposed that the output of a university in
the form of original ideas is solely to be measured by printed


\


UNIVERSITIES AND THEIR FUNCTION 99


papers and books labeled with the names of their authors.
Mankind is as individual in its mode of output as in the sub-
stance of its thoughts. For some of the most fertile minds
composition in writing, or in a form reducible to writing,
seems to be an impossibility. In every faculty you will find
that some of the more brilliant teachers are not among those
who publish. Their originality requires for its expression direct
intercourse with their pupils in the form of lectures, or of
personal discussion. Such men exercise an immense influence;
and yet, after the generation of their pupils has passed away,
they sleep among the innumerable unthanked benefactors of
humanity. Fortunately, one of them is immortal—Socrates.

Thus it would be the greatest mistake to estimate the value
of each member of a faculty by the printed work signed with
his name. There is at the present day some tendency to fall
into this error; and an emphatic protest is necessary against
an attitude on the part of authorities which is damaging to
efficiency and unjust to unselfish zeal.

But, when all such allowances have been made, one good
test for the general efficiency of a faculty is that as a whole it
shall be producing in published form its quota of contributions
of thought. Such a quota is to be estimated in weight of
thought, and not in number of words.

This survey shows that the management of a university fac-
ulty has no analogy to that of a business organisation. The
public opinion of the faculty, and a common zeal for the pur-
poses of the university, form the only effective safeguards for
the high level of university work. The faculty should be a
band of scholars, stimulating each other, and freely determin-
ing their various activities. You can secure certain formal
requirements, that lectures are given at stated times and that
instructors and students are in attendance. But the heart of
the matter lies beyond all regulation.

The question of justice to the teachers has very little to do
with the case. It is perfectly just to hire a man to perform any
legal services under any legal conditions as to times and sal-
ary. No one need accept the post unless he so desires.

The sole question is, What sort of conditions will produce
the type of faculty which will run a successful university? The
danger is that it is quite easy to produce a faculty entirely
unfit—a faculty of very efficient pedants and dullards. The
general public will only detect the difference after the univer-
sity has stunted the promise of youth for scores of years.

The modern university system in the great democratic coun-


100 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


tries will only be successful if the ultimate authorities exercise
singular restraint, so as to remember that universities cannot
be dealt with according to the rules and policies which apply
to the familiar business corporations. Business schools are no
exception to this law of university life. There is really —
nothing to add to what the presidents of many American uni-
versities have recently said in public on this topic. But
whether the effective portion of the general public, in America
or other countries, will follow their advice appears to be
doubtful. The whole point of a university, on its educational
side, is to bring the young under the intellectual influence of a
band of imaginative scholars. There can be no escape from
proper attention to the conditions which—as experience has
shown—will produce such a band.


ig iat ae


IV


The two premier universities of Europe, in age and in dig-

nity, are the University of Paris and the University of Oxford,
I will speak of my own country because I know it best. The
University of Oxford may have sinned in many ways. But, for
all her deficiencies, she has throughout the ages preserved one
supreme merit, beside which all failures in detail are as dust
in the balance: for century after century, throughout the long
course of her existence, she has produced bands of scholars
who treated learning imaginatively. For that service alone, no
one who loves culture can think of her without emotion.

But it is quite unnecessary for me to cross the ocean for
my examples. The author of the Declaration of Independence,
Mr. Jefferson, has some claim to be the greatest American.
The perfection of his various achievements certainly places
him among the few great men of all ages. He founded a uni- |
versity, and devoted one side of his complex genius to placing
that university amid every circumstance which could stimulate
the imagination—beauty of buildings, of situation, and every
other stimulation of equipment and organisation.

There are, many other universities in America which can
point my moral, but my final example shall be Harvard—the
representative university of the Puritan movement. The New
England Puritans of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries |
were the most intensely imaginative people, restrained in their
outward expression, and fearful of symbolism by physical
beauty, but, as it were, racked with the intensity of spiritual
truths intellectually imagined. The Puritan faculties of those


THE ORGANISATION OF THOUGHT 101


centuries must have been imaginative indeed, and they pro-
duced great men whose names have gone round the world. In
later times Puritanism softened, and, in the golden age of
literary New England, Emerson, Lowell, and Longfellow set
their mark upon Harvard. The modern scientific age then
gradually supervenes, and again in William James we find the
typical imaginative scholar.

To-day business comes to Harvard; and the gift which the
university has to offer is the old one of imagination, the
lighted torch which passes from hand to hand. It is a dan-
gerous gift, which has started many a conflagration. If we are
timid as to that danger, the proper course is to shut down our
universities. Imagination is a gift which has often been asso-
ciated with great commercial peoples—with Greece, with
Florence, with Venice, with the learning of Holland, and with
the poetry of England. Commerce and imagination thrive
together. It is a gift which all must pray for their country who
desire for it that abiding greatness achieved by Athens:—


Her citizens, imperial spirits,
Rule the present from the past.


For American education no smaller ideal can suffice.


—— Address to the American Association of the Collegiate Schools
of Business, 1927.


8. The Organisation of Thought


THE subject of this address is the organisation of thought, a
topic evidently capable of many diverse modes of treatment.
I intend more particularly to give some account of that depart-
ment of logical science with which some of my own studies
have been connected. But I am anxious, if I can succeed in so
doing, to handle this account so as to exhibit the relation with
certain considerations which underlie general scientific activi-
ties.

It is no accident that an age of science has developed into
an age of organisation. Organised thought is the basis of or-
ganised action. Organisation is the adjustment of diverse
‘elements so that their mutual relations may exhibit some pre-


102 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION |


determined quality. An epic poem is a triumph of organisa- ¥
tion, that is to say, it is a triumph in the unlikely event of its


being a good epic poem. It is the successful organisation of
multitudinous sounds of words, associations of words, pic-
torial memories of diverse events and feelings ordinarily
occurring in life, combined with a special narrative of great
events: the whole so disposed as to excite emotions which, as


defined by Milton, are simple, sensuous, and passionate. The 4


number of successful epic poems is commensurate, or rather,
is inversely commensurate, with the obvious difficulty of the
task of organisation.

Science is the organisation of thought. But the example of
the epic poem warns us that science is not any organisation of
thought. It is an organisation of a certain definite type which
we will endeavour to determine. :

Science is a river with two sources, the practical source and
the theoretical source. The practical source is the desire to
direct our actions to achieve predetermined ends. For exam-
ple, the British nation, fighting for justice, turns to science,
which teaches it the importance of compounds of nitrogen.
The theoretical source is the desire to understand. Now I am
going to emphasise the importance of theory in science. But


to avoid misconception I most emphatically state that I do not |


consider one source as in any sense nobler than the other, or
intrinsically more interesting. I cannot see why it is nobler to
strive to understand than to busy oneself with the right order-
ing of one’s actions. Both have their bad sides; there are evil
ends directing actions, and there are ignoble curiosities of the
understanding.

The importance, even in practice, of the theoretical side of
science arises from the fact that action must be immediate,
and takes place under circumstances which are excessively


complicated. If we wait for the necessities of action before we _


commence to arrange our ideas, in peace we shall have lost
our trade, and in war we shall have lost the battle. Success in
practice depends on theorists who, led by other motives of
exploration, have been there before, and by some good chance
have hit upon the relevant ideas. By a theorist I do not mean
a man who is up in the clouds, but a man whose motive for
thought is the desire to formulate correctly the rules accord-
ing to which events occur. A successful theorist should be
excessively interested in immediate events, otherwise he is not


at all likely to formulate correctly anything about them. Of |


course, both sources of science exist in all men.


= #
hr ‘


‘i
|


THE ORGANISATION OF THOUGHT 103


Now, what is this thought organisation which we call
science? The first aspect of modern science which struck
thoughtful observers was its inductive character. The nature
of induction, its importance, and the rules of inductive logic
have been considered by a long series of thinkers, especially
English thinkers: Bacon, Herschel, J. S. Mill, Venn, Jevons,
and others. I am not going to plunge into an analysis of the
process of induction. Induction is the machinery and not the
product, and it is the product which I want to consider. When
we understand the product we shall be in a stronger position
to improve the machinery.

First, there is one point which it is necessary to emphasise.
There is a tendency in analysing scientific processes to assume
a given assemblage of concepts applying to nature, and to
imagine that the discovery of laws of nature consists in select-


| ing by means of inductive logic some one out of a definite set
of possible alternative relations which may hold between the


things in nature answering to these obvious concepts. In a


sense this assumption is fairly correct, especially in regard to
_ the earlier stages of science. Mankind found itself in posses-
sion of certain concepts respecting nature—for example, the
concept of fairly permanent material bodies—and proceeded


to determine laws which related the corresponding percepts


in nature. But the formulation of laws changed the concepts,
sometimes gently by an added precision, sometimes violently.
| At first this process was not much noticed or at least was felt
_ to be a process curbed within narrow bounds, not touching


fundamental ideas. At the stage where we now are, the formu-


| lation of the concepts can be seen to be as important as the
| formulation of the empirical laws connecting the events in the
"universe as thus conceived by us. For example, the concepts
| of life, of heredity, of a material body, of a molecule, of an
atom, of an electron, of energy, of space, of time, of quantity,


and of number. I am not dogmatising about the best way of
getting such ideas straight. Certainly it will only be done by
those who have devoted themselves to a special study of the
facts in question. Success is never absolute, and progress in
the right direction is the result of a slow, gradual process of
continual comparison of ideas with facts. The criterion of
success is that we should be able to formulate empirical laws,
that is, statements of relations, connecting the various parts
of the universe as thus conceived, laws with the property that
we can interpret the actual events of our lives as being our
fragmentary knowledge of this conceived interrelated whole.


104 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION - Bins


But, for the purpose of science, what is the actual world?
Has science to wait for the termination of the metaphysical
debate till it can determine its own subject-matter? I suggest —
that science has a much more homely starting-ground. Its task
is the discovery of the relations which exist within that flux of —
perceptions, sensations, and emotions which forms our experi- —
ence of life. The panorama yielded by sight, sound, taste, —
smell, touch, and by more inchoate sensible feelings, is the —
sole field of activity. It is in this way that science is the —
thought organisation of experience. The most obvious aspect —
of this field of actual experience is its disorderly character. It
is for each person a continuum, fragmentary, and with ele- —
ments not clearly differentiated. The comparison of the —
sensible experiences of diverse people brings its own difficul- —
ties. I insist on the radically untidy, ill-adjusted character of
the fields of actual experience frony which science starts. To
grasp this fundamental truth is the first step in wisdom, when
constructing a philosophy of science. This fact is concealed
by the influence of language, moulded by science, which foists
on us exact concepts as though they represented the imme-
diate deliverances of experience. The result is, that we imagine 4
that we have immediate experience of a world of perfectly
defined objects implicated in perfectly defined events which,
as known to us by the direct deliverance of our senses, happen
at exact instants of time, in a space formed by exact points,
without parts and without magnitude: the neat, trim, tidy,
exact world which is the goal of scientific thought.

My contention is, that this world is a world of ideas, and
that its internal relations are relations between abstract con-
cepts, and that the elucidation of the precise connection
between this world and the feelings of actual experience is the
fundamental question of scientific philosophy. The question
which I am inviting you to consider is this: How does exact _
thought apply to the fragmentary, vague continua of experi- ©
ence? I am not saying that it does not apply: quite the con-
trary. But I want to know how it applies. The solution I am
asking for is not a phrase, however brilliant, but a solid
branch of science, constructed with slow patience, showing in
detail how the correspondence is effected.

The first great steps in the organisation of thought were
due exclusively to the practical source of scientific activity, |
without any admixture of theoretical impulse. Their slow
accomplishment was the cause and also the effect of the grad-
ual evolution of moderately rational beings. I mean the forma-


THE ORGANISATION OF THOUGHT 105


tion of the concepts of definite material objects, of the
determinate lapse of time, of simultaneity, of recurrence, of
definite relative position, and of analogous fundamental ideas,
according to which the flux of our experience is mentally
arranged for handy reference: in fact, the whole apparatus
of commonsense thought. Consider in your mind some definite
chair. The concept of that chair is simply the concept of all
the interrelated experiences connected with that chair—
namely, of the experience of the folk who made it, of the folk
who sold it, of the folk who have seen it or used it, of the man
who is now experiencing a comfortable sense of support, com-
bined with our expectations of an analogous future, terminated
finally by a different set of experiences when the chair col-
' lapses and becomes firewood. The formation of that type of
} concept was a tremendous job, and zoologists and geologists
tell us that it took many tens of millions of years. I can well
| believe it.
| I now emphasise two points. In the first place, science is
rooted in what I have just called the whole apparatus of com-
monsense thought. That is the datum from which it starts, and
| to which it must recur. We may speculate, if it amuses us, on
other beings in other planets who have arranged analogous
experiences according to an entirely different conceptual code
| —namely, who have directed their chief attention to different
_ relations between their various experiences. But the task is too
complex, too gigantic, to be revised in its main outlines. You

may polish up commonsense, you may contradict in detail,
| you may surprise it. But ultimately your whole task is to
satisfy it.

In the second place, neither commonsense nor science can
_ proceed with their task of thought organisation without de-
| parting in some respect from the strict consideration of what
is actual in experience. Think again of the chair. Among the
experiences upon which its concept is based, I included our
expectations of its future history. I should have gone further
and included our imagination of all the possible experiences
which in ordinary language we should call perceptions of the
chair which might have occurred. This is a difficult question,
and I do not see my way through it. But, at present, in the
construction of a theory of space and of time there seem
insuperable difficulties if we refuse to admit ideal experiences,
- This imaginative perception of experiences, which, if they
occurred, would be coherent with our actual experiences,
seems fundamental in our lives. It is neither wholly arbitrary,


106 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


nor yet fully determined. It is a vague background which is |
only made in part definite by isolated activities of thought.


Consider, for example, our thoughts of the unseen flora of
Brazil.


Ideal experiences are closely connected with our imagina- ©


tive reproduction of the actual experiences of other people,


and also with our almost inevitable conception of ourselves _
as receiving our impressions from an external complex reality


beyond ourselves. It may be that an adequate analysis of
every source and every type of experience yields demonstra-


tive proof of such a reality and of its nature. Indeed, it is —


hardly to be doubted that this is the case. The precise eluci-


dation of this question is the problem of metaphysics. One of |
the points which I am urging in this address is, that the basis —


of science does not depend on the assumption of any of the
conclusions of metaphysics; but that both science and meta-
physics start from the same given groundwork of immediate


experience, and in the main proceed in opposite directions on >


their diverse tasks. .

For example, metaphysics inquires how our perceptions of
the chair relate us to some true reality. Science gathers up
these perceptions into a determinate class, adds to them ideal
perceptions of analogous sort, which under assignable circum-
stances would be obtained, and this single concept of that set
of perceptions is all that science needs.

My immediate problem is to inquire into the nature of the
texture of science. Science is essentially logical. The nexus
between its concepts is a logical nexus, and the grounds for its
detailed assertions are logical grounds. King James said, “No
bishops, no king.” With greater confidence we can say, “No
logic, no science.” The reason for the instinctive dislike which
most men of science feel towards the recognition of this truth
is, I think, the barren failure of logical theory during the past
three or four centuries. We may trace this failure back to the
worship of authority, which in some respects increased in the
learned world at the time of the Renaissance. Mankind then
changed its authority, and this fact temporally acted as an
emancipation. But the main fact, and we can find complaints 1
of it at the very commencement of the modern movement, was
the establishment of a reverential attitude towards any state-
ment made by a classical author. Scholars became commenta-


1B. g. in 1551 by Italian schoolmen; cf. Scarpi’s History of the Coun-
cil of Trent, under that date.


THE ORGANISATION OF THOUGHT 107


tors on truths too fragile to bear translation. A science which
hesitates to forget its founders is lost. To this hesitation I
ascribe the barrenness of logic. Another reason for distrust of
logical theory and of mathematics is the belief that deductive
reasoning can give you nothing new. Your conclusions are
contained in your premises, which by hypothesis are known
to you.

In the first place this last condemnation of logic neglects the
fragmentary, disconnected character of human knowledge. To
know one premise on Monday, and another premise on Tues-
day, is useless to you on Wednesday. Science is a permanent
record of premises, deductions, and conclusions, verified all
along the line by its correspondence with facts. Secondly, it is
untrue that when we know the premises we also know the
conclusions. In arithmetic, for example, mankind are not cal-


| culating boys. Any theory which proves that they are conver-
‘gant with the consequences of their assumptions must be


wrong. We can imagine beings who possess such insight. But
we are not such creatures. Both these answers are, I think,
true and relevant. But they are not satisfactory. They are too
much in the nature of bludgeons, too external. We want some-
thing more explanatory of the very real difficulty which the


| question suggests. In fact, the true answer is embedded in the


discussion of our main problem of the relation of logic to


natural science.
It will be necessary to sketch in broad outline some relevant


features of modern logic. In doing so I shall try to avoid the
profound general discussions and the minute technical classi-
| fications which occupy the main part of traditional logic. It is
| characteristic of a science in its earlier stages—and logic has
| become fossilised in such a stage—to be both ambitiously pro-
found in its aims and trivial in its handling of details.


We can discern four departments of logical theory. By an


_ analogy which is not so very remote I will call these depart-


ments or sections the arithmetic section, the algebraic section,
the section of general-function theory, the analytical section.
I do not mean that arithmetic arises in the first section, algebra


in the second section, and so on; but the names are suggestive
| of certain qualities of thought in each section which are remi-


niscent of analogous qualities in arithmetic, in algebra, in the
general theory of a mathematical function, and in the mathe-


| matical analysis of the properties of particular functions.


- The first section—namely, the arithmetic stage—deals with


108 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


the relations of definite propositions to each other, just as |
arithmetic deals with definite numbers. Consider any definite |


proposition; call it “p.”” We conceive that there is always an-
other proposition which is the direct contradictory to “p”; call
it “not-p.” When we have got two propositions, p and g, we
can form derivative propositions from them, and from their
contradictories. We cay say, “At last one of p or q in true,


and perhaps both.” Let us call this proposition “p or gq.” I


may mention as an aside that one of the greatest living philos-
ophers has stated that this use of the word “or”—namely,
“p or q’ in the sense that either or both may be true—makes
him despair of exact expression. We must brave his wrath,
which is unintelligible to me.

We have thus got hold of four new propositions, namely,
“p or q,” and “not-p or q,” and “p or not-g,” and “not-p or
not-q.” Call these the set of disjunctive derivatives. There are,
so far, in all eight propositions, p, not-p, g, not-g, and the four
disjunctive derivatives. Any pair of these eight propositions
can be taken, and substituted for p and q in the foregoing
treatment. Thus each pair yields eight propositions, some of


which may have been obtained before. By proceeding in this —
way we atrive at an unending set of propositions of growing


complexity, ultimately derived from the two original propo-
sitions p or q. Of course, only a few are important. Similarly
we can start from three propositions, p, g, r, or from four
propositions, p, q, r, s, and so on. Any one of the propositions


of these aggregates may be true or false. It has no other alter- -


native. Whichever it is, true or false, call it the “truth-value”
of the proposition.

The first section of logical inquiry is to settle what we know
of the truth-values of these propositions, when we know the
truth-values of some of them. The inquiry, so far as it is worth


oe


while carrying it, is not very abstruse, and the best way of —


expressing its results is a detail which I will not now consider.
This inquiry forms the arithmetic stage.

The next section of logic is the algebraic stage. Now, the
difference between arithmetic and algebra is, that in arithmetic
definite numbers are considered, and in algebra symbols—
namely, letters—are introduced which stand for any numbers.
The idea of a number is also enlarged. These letters, standing
for any numbers, are called sometimes variables and some-
times parameters. Their essential characteristic is that they are
undetermined, unless, indeeed, the algebraic conditions which
they satisfy implicity determine them. Then they are some-


THE ORGANISATION OF THOUGHT 109


times called unknowns. An algebraic formula with letters is a
blank form. It becomes a determinate arithmetic statement
when definite numbers are substituted for the letters. The
importance of algebra is a tribute to the study of form. Con-
sider now the following proposition—


The specific heat of mercury is 0-033.


This is a definite proposition which, with certain limitations,
is true. But the truth-value of the proposition does not imme-
diately concern us. Instead of mercury put a mere letter which
is the name of some undetermined thing: we get—


The specific heat of x is 0-030.


This is not a proposition; it has been called by Russell a
propositional function. It is the logical analogy of an algebraic
| expression. Let us write f (x) for any propositional function.
| We could also generalise still further, and say,


The specific heat of x is y.


| We thus get another propositional function, F (x, y), of two
_ arguments x and y, and so on for any number of arguments.

Now, consider f (x). There is the range of values of x, for
| which f (x) is a proposition, true or false. For values of x out-
| side this range, f (x) is not a proposition at all, and is neither
| true nor false. It may have vague suggestion for us, but it has
no unit meaning of definite assertion. For example,


The specific heat of water is 0-033.
. is a proposition which is false; and—
The specific heat of virtue is 0-033.


is, I should imagine, not a proposition at all; so that it is
neither true nor false, though its component parts raise various
associations in our minds. This range of values, for which
~ (x) has sense, is called the “type” of the argument x.

But there is also a range of values of x for which f (x) is a
true proposition. This is the class of those values of the argu-
ment which satisfy f (x). This class may have no members, or,
in the other extreme, the class may be the whole type of the
arguments,


110 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


We thus conceive two general propositions respecting the |
indefinite number of propositions which share in the same i
logical form, that is, which are values of the same proposi- .


tional function. One of these propositions is,


f (x) yields a true proposition for each value
of x of the proper type;


the other proposition is,
There is a value of x for which f (x) is true.


Given two, or more, propositional functions f (x) and @ (x)


with the same argument x, we form derivative propositional —


functions, namely,
f (x) or > (x), f (x), or not p (x),


and so on with the contradictories, obtaining, as in the arith-
metical stage, an unending aggregate of propositional func-
tions. Also each propositional function yields two general
propositions. The theory of the interconnection between the
truth-values of the general propositions arising from any such
aggregate of propositional functions forms a simple and ele-
gant chapter of mathematical logic.

In this algebraic section of logic the theory of types crops
up, as we have already noted. It cannot be neglected without
the introduction of error, Its theory has to be settled at least
by some safe hypothesis, even if it does not go to the philo-
sophic basis of the question. This part of the subject is obscure


and difficult, and has not been finally elucidated, though Rus-


sell’s brilliant work has opened out the subject.


The final impulse to modern logic comes from the inde- —


pendent discovery of the importance of the logic variable by
Frege and Peano. Frege went further than Peano, but by an
unfortunate symbolism rendered his work so obscure that no
one fully recognised his meaning who had not found it out for
himself. But the movement has a large history reaching back
to Leibniz and even to Aristotle. Among English contributors
are De Morgan, Boole, and Sir Alfred Kempe; their work is
of the first rank.


ae


oe Se ae ee


The third logical section is the stage of general-function |
theory. In logical language, we perform in this stage the tran-


sition from intension to extension, and investigate the theory
of denotation, Take the propositional function f (x), There is


@
oy


THE ORGANISATION OF THOUGHT 111


the class, or range of values for x, whose members satisfy
f (x). But the same range may be the class whose members
satisfy another propositional function » (x). It is necessary to
investigate how to indicate the class by a way which is indif-
ferent as between the various propositional functions which
are satisfied by any member of it, and of it only. What has to be
done is to analyse the nature of propositions about a class—
namely, those propositions whose truth-values depend on the
class itself and not on the particular meaning by which the
class is indicated.

Furthermore, there are propositions about alleged individ-
uals indicated by descriptive phrases: for example, proposi-
tions about “the present King of England,” who does exist,
and “the present Emperor of Brazil,” who does not exist. More
complicated, but analogous, questions involving propositional
functions of two variables involve the notion of “correlation,”

just as functions of one argument involve classes. Similarly
_ functions of three arguments yield three-cornered correlations,
and so on. This logical section is one which Russell has made
peculiarly his own by work which must always remain funda-
mental. I have called this the section of functional theory, be-
cause its ideas are essential to the construction of logical
denoting functions which include as a special case ordinary
mathematical functions, such as sine, logarithm, etc. In each
of these three stages it will be necessary gradually to introduce
an appropriate symbolism, if we are to pass on to the fourth
stage.

The fourth logical section, the analytic stage, is concerned
with the investigation of the properties of special logical con-
structions, that is, of classes and correlations of special sorts.
The whole of mathematics is included here. So the section is
a large one. In fact, it is mathematics, neither more nor less,
but it includes an analysis of mathematical ideas not hitherto
included in the scope of that science, nor, indeed, contem-
plated at all. The essence of this stage is construction. It is by
means of suitable constructions that the great framework of
applied mathematics, comprising the theories of number,
quantity, time, and space, is elaborated.

It is impossible, even in brief outline, to explain how mathe-
matics is developed from the concepts of class and correlation,
including many-cornered correlations, which are established
in the third section. I can only allude to the headings of the
process, which is fully developed in the work, Principia
‘Mathematica, by Mr. Russell and myself. There are in this


112 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


process of development seven special sorts of correlations
which are of peculiar interest. The first sort comprises one-to- _
many, many-to-one, and one-to-one correlations. The second ©


sort comprises serial relations, that is, correlations by which p
the members of some field are arranged in serial order, so —
that, in the sense defined by the relation, any member of the —
field is either before or after any other member. The third ©


class comprises inductive relations, that is, correlations on


which the theory of mathematical induction depends. The —
fourth class comprises selective relations, which are required


for the general theory of arithmetic operations, and elsewhere.
It is in connection with such relations that the famous multi-
plicative axiom arises for consideration. The fifth class com-


prises vector relations, from which the theory of quantity —


arises. The sixth class comprises ratio relations, which inter-
connect number and quantity. The seventh class comprises
three-cornered and four-cornered relations which occur in
geometry.

A bare enumeration of technical names, such as the above,
is not very illuminating, though it may help to a comprehen-


sion of the demarcations of the subject. Please remember that —


the names are technical names, meant, no doubt, to be sug-


gestive, but used in strictly defined senses. We have suffered ~


much from critics who consider it sufficient to criticise our
procedure on the slender basis of a knowledge of the dic-
tionary meanings of such terms. For example, a one-to-one
correlation depends on the notion of a class with only one
member, and this notion is defined without appeal to the
concept of the number one. The notion of diversity is all that
is wanted. Thus the class « has only one member, if (1) the
class of values of x which satisfies the propositional function,


x is not a member of a


is not the whole type of relevant values of x, and if (2) the
propositional function,


x and y are members of a, and x is diverse from y


is false, whatever be the values of x and y in the relevant ©


type.
Analogous procedures are obviously possible for higher


finite cardinal numbers. Thus, step by step, the whole cycle of —
current mathematical ideas is capable of logical definition.
The process is detailed and laborious, and, like all science, |


THE ORGANISATION OF THOUGHT 113


knows nothing of a royal road of airy phrases, The essence of
the process is, first, to construct the notion in terms of the
forms of propositions, that is, in terms of the relevant propo-
sitional functions, and secondly, to prove the fundamental
truths which hold about the notion by reference to the results
obtained in the algebraic section of logic.

It will be seen that in this process the whole apparatus of
special indefinable mathematical concepts, and special a priori
mathematical premises, respecting number, quantity, and
space, has vanished. Mathematics is merely an apparatus for
analysing the deductions which can be drawn from any par-
ticular premises, supplied by common sense, or by more re-
fined scientific observation, so far as these deductions depend
on the forms of the propositions. Propositions of certain forms
are continually occurring in thought. Our existing mathematics
is the analysis of deductions which concern these forms and
in some way are important, either from practical utility or
theoretical interest. Here I am speaking of the science as it in
fact exists. A theoretical definition of mathematics must in-
clude in its scope any deductions depending on the mere
forms of propositions. But, of course no one would wish to
develop that part of mathematics which in no sense is of
importance.

This hasty summary of logical ideas suggests some reflec-
tions. The question arises, How many forms of propositions
are there? The answer is, An unending number, The reason
for the supposed sterility of logical science can thus be dis-
cerned. Aristotle founded the science by conceiving the idea
of the form of a proposition, and by conceiving deduction as
taking place in virtue of the forms. But he confined proposi-
tions to four forms, now named A, I, E, O. So long as logi-
cians were obsessed by this unfortunate restriction, real prog-
ress was impossible. Again, in their theory of form, both
Aristotle and subsequent logiciams came very near to the
theory of the logical variable. But to come very near to a true
theory, and to grasp its precise application, are two very dif-
ferent things, as the history of science teaches us. Everything
of importance has been said before by somebody who did not
discover it. Again, one reason why logical deductions are not
obvious is, that logical form is not a subject which ordinarily
enters into thought. Commonsense deduction probably moves
by blind instinct from concrete proposition to concrete propo-
sition, guided by some habitual association of ideas. Thus
commonsense fails in the presence of a wealth of material.


114 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION |


A more important question is the relation of induction, — |
based on observation, to deductive logic. There is a tradition


of opposition between adherents of induction and of deduc-


tion. In my view, it would be just as sensible for the two ends _
of a worm to quarrel. Both observation and deduction are —
necessary for any knowledge worth having. We cannot get at ©
an inductive law without having recourse to a propositional —


function. For example, take the statement of observed fact,
This body is mercury, and its specific heat is 0-033.

The propositional function is formed,
Either x is not mercury, or its specific heat is 0-033.


The inductive law is the assumption of the truth of the general
proposition, that the above propositional function is true for
every value of x in the relevant type.

But it is objected that this process and its consequences are
so simple that an elaborate science is out of place. In the same
way, a British sailor knows the salt sea when he sails over it.
What, then, is the use of an elaborate chemical analysis of
sea-water? There is the general answer, that you cannot know
too much of methods which you always employ; and there is
the special answer, that logical forms and logical implications
are not so very simple, and that the whole of mathematics is
evidence to this effect.

One great use of the study of logical method is not in the


region of elaborate deduction, but to guide us in the study of ©


the formation of the main concepts of science. Consider
geometry, for example. What are the points which compose
space? Euclid tells us that they are without parts and without
magnitude. But how is the notion of a point derived from the
sense-perceptions from which science starts? Certainly points
are not direct deliverances of the senses. Here and there we
may see or unpleasantly feel something suggestive of a point.
But this is a rare phenomenon, and certainly does not warrant
the conception of space as composed of points. Our knowl-
edge of space properties is not based on any observations of
relations between points. It arises from experience of relations
between bodies. Now a fundamental space-relation between
bodies is that one body may be part of another. We are
tempted to define the “whole and part” relation by saying that
the points occupied by the part are some of the points occu-
pied by the whole. But “whole and part” being more funda-


THE ORGANISATION OF THOUGHT 115


mental than the notion of “point,” this definition is really
circular and vicious.

We accordingly ask whether any other definition of “spatial
whole and part” can be given. I think that it can be done in
this way, though, if I be mistaken, it is unessential to my gen-
eral argument. We have come to the conclusion that an
extended body is nothing else than the class of perception of
it by all its percipients, actual or ideal. Of course, it is not
any class of perceptions, but a certain definite sort of class
which I have not defined here, except by the vicious method
of saying that they are perceptions of body. Now, the percep-
tions of a part of a body are among the perceptions which
compose the whole body. Thus two bodies a and b are both
classes of perceptions, and b is part of a when the class which
is b is contained in the class which is a. It immediately fol-
lows from the logical form of this definition that if b is part
of a, and c is part of 5, then c is part of a. Thus the relation
“whole to part” is transitive. Again, it will be convenient to
allow that a body is part of itself. This is a mere question of
how you draw the definition. With this understanding, the
relation is reflexive. Finally, if a is part of b, and 4 is part of
a, then a and b must be identical. These properties of “whole
and part” are not fresh assumptions, they follow from the
logical form of our definition.

One assumption has to be made if we assume the ideal
infinite divisibility of space. Namely, we assume that every
class of perceptions which is an extended body contains other
classes of perceptions which are extended bodies diverse from
itself, This assumption makes rather a large draft on the
theory of ideal perceptions. Geometry vanishes unless in some
form you make it. The assumption is not peculiar to my
exposition.

It is then possible to define what we mean by a point. A
point is the class of extended objects which, in ordinary lan-
guage, contain that point. The definition, without presupposing
the idea of a point, is rather elaborate, and I have not now
time for its statement.

The advantage of introducing points into geometry is the
simplicity of the logical expression of their mutual relations.
For science, simplicity of definition is of slight importance,
but simplicity of mutual relations is essential. Another ex-
ample of this law is the way physicists and chemists have
dissolved the simple idea of an extended body, say of a chair,
which a child understands, into a bewildering notion of a


116 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


complex dance of molecules and atoms and electrons and
waves of light. They have thereby gained notions with simpler —


logical relations.


Space as thus conceived is the exact formulation of the
properties of the apparent space of the commonsense world —


of experience. It is not necessarily the best mode of conceiv-
ing the space of the physicist. The one essential requisite is
that the correspondence between the commonsense world in
its and the physicists’ world in its space should be definite
and reciprocal.

I will now break off the exposition of the function of logic
in connexion with the science of natural phenomena. I have
endeavoured to exhibit it as the organising principle, analysing
the derivation of the concepts from the immediate phenom-
ena, examining the structure of the general propositions which
are the assumed laws of nature, establishing their relations to
each other in respect to reciprocal implications, deducing the
phenomena we may expect under given circumstances.

Logic, properly used, does not shackle thought. It gives
freedom, and above all, boldness. Illogical thought hesitates
to draw conclusions, because it never knows either what it
means, or what it assumes, or how far it trusts its own as-
sumptions, or what will be the effect of any modification of
assumptions. Also the mind untrained in that part of con-
structive logic which is relevant to the subject in hand will be
ignorant of the sort of conclusions which follow from various
sorts of assumptions, and will be correspondingly dull in
divining the inductive laws. The fundamental training in this
relevant logic is, undoubtedly, to ponder with an active mind
over the known facts of the case, directly observed. But where
elaborate deductions are possible, this mental activity requires
for its full exercise the direct study of the abstract logical
relations. This is applied mathematics.

Neither logic without observation, nor observation without
logic, can move one step in the formation of science. We may
conceive humanity as engaged in an internecine conflict be-
tween youth and age. Youth is not defined by years but by
the creative impulse to make something. The aged are those
who, before all things, desire not to make a mistake. Logic is
the olive branch from the old to the young, the wand which in
the hands of youth has the magic property of creating science,


-——-Presidential address to Section A at Newcastle meeting of the
Association for the Advancement of Science, 1916.


9. The Anatomy of Some Scientific Ideas
I. Fact


Tue characteristic of physical science is, that it ignores all
judgments of value: for example, xsthetic or moral judg-
ments. It is purely matter-of-fact, and this is the sense in
which we must interpret the sonorous phrase, “Man, the
servant and the minister of Nature.”

The sphere of thought which is thus left is even then too
wide for physical science. It would include Ontology, namely,
the determination of the nature of what truly exists; in other
words, Metaphysics. From an abstract point of view this
exclusion of metaphysical inquiry is a pity. Such an inquiry is
a necessary critique of the worth of science, to tell us what it
all comes to. The reasons for its careful separation from sci-
entific thought are purely practical; namely, because we can
agree about science—after due debate—whereas in respect to
metaphysics debate has hitherto accentuated disagreement.
These characteristics of science and metaphysics were unex-
pected in the early days of civilised thought. The Greeks
thought that metaphysics was easier than physics, and tended
to deduce scientific principles from a priori conceptions of the
nature of things. They were restrained in this disastrous tend-
ency by their vivid naturalism, their delight in first-hand
perception. Medieval Europe shared the tendency without the
restraint. It is possible that some distant generations may ar-
tive at unanimous conclusions on ontological questions,
whereas scientific progress may have led to ingrained opposing
veins of thought which can neither be reconciled nor aban-
doned. In such times metaphysics and physical science will
exchange their roles, Meanwhile we must take the case as
we find it.

But a problem remains. How can mankind agree about
science without a preliminary determination of what really is?
The answer must be found in an analysis of the facts which


117


118 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


form the field of scientific activity. Mankind perceives, and
finds itself thinking about its perceptions. It is the thought —
that matters and not that element of perception which is not —
thought. When the immediate judgment has been formed— —
Hullo, red!—It does not matter if we can imagine that in
other circumstances—in better circumstances, perhaps—the —


judgment would have been—Hullo, blue!—or even—Hullo,
nothing! For all intents and purposes, at the time it was red.
Everything else is hypothetical reconstruction. The field of
physical science is composed of these primary thoughts, and
of thoughts about these thoughts.

But—to avoid confusion—a false simplicity has been intro-
duced above into the example given of a primary perceptive
thought. “Hullo, red!” is not really a primary perceptive
thought, though it often is the first thought which finds verbal
expression even silently in the mind: Nothing is in isolation.
The perception of red is of a red object in its relations to the
whole content of the perceiving consciousness.

Among the most easily analysed of such relations are the
space relations. Again the red object is in immediate percep-
tion nothing else than a red object. It is better termed an
“object of redness.” Thus a better approximation to an imme-
diate perceptive judgment is, “Hullo, object of redness there!”
But, of course, in this formulation other more complex rela-
tions are omitted.

This tendency towards a false simplicity in scientific analy-
sis, to an excessive abstraction, to an over-universalising of
universals, is derived from the earlier metaphysical stage. It
arises from the implicit belief that we are endeavouring to
qualify the real with appropriate adjectives. In conformity
with this tendency we think, “this real thing is red.” Whereas
our true goal is to make explicit our perception of the appar-
ent in terms of its relations. What we perceive is redness
related to other apparents. Our object is the analysis of the
relations,

One aim of science is the harmony of thought, that is, to
secure that judgments which are logical contraries should not
be thought-expressions of consciousness. Another aim is the
extension of such harmonised thought.

Some thoughts arise directly from sense-presentation, and
are part of the state of consciousness which is perception.
Such a thought is, “An object of redness is there.” But in gen-
eral the thought is not verbal, but is a direct apprehension of
qualities and relations within the content of consciousness.


Te eee


THE ANATOMY OF SOME SCIENTIFIC IDEAS 119


Amid such thoughts there can be no lack of harmony. For
direct apprehension is in its essence unique, and it is impos-
sible to apprehend an object as both red and blue. Subse-
quently it may be judged that if other elements of the
consciousness had been different, the apprehension would
have been of a blue object. Then—under certain circum-
stances—the original apprehension will be called an error.
But for all that the fact remains, there was an apprehension
of a red object.

When we speak of sense-presentation, we mean these pri-
mary thoughts essentially involved in its perception. But there
are thoughts about thoughts, and thoughts derived from other
thoughts. These are secondary thoughts. At this point it is well
explicitly to discriminate between an actual thought-expres-
sion, namely, a judgment actually made, and a mere proposi-
tion which is a hypothetical thought-expression, namely, an
imagined possibility of thought-expression. Not that the actual
complete thought-content of the consciousness is explicitly
neither affirmed nor denied. It is just what is thought. Thus,
to think “two and two make four” is distinct from affirming
that two and two make four. In the first case the proposition
is thoughi-expression, in the second case the affirmation of the
proposition is the thought-expression, and the proposition has
been degraded to a mere proposition, namely to a hypothetical
thought-expression which is reflected upon.

A distinction is sometimes made between facts and thoughts.
So far as physical science is concerned, the facts are thoughts,
and thoughts are facts. Namely, the facts of sense-presentation
as they affect science are those elements in the immediate
apprehensions which are thoughts, Also, actual thought-
expressions, primary or secondary, are the material facts
which science interprets.

The distinction that facts are given, but thoughts are free,
is not absolute. We can select and modify our sense-presenta-
tion, so that facts—in the narrower sense of immediate
apprehension of sense-presentation—are to some degree sub-
ject to volition. Again, our stream of thought-expression is
only partially modified by explicit volition. We can choose
our physical experience, and we find ourselves thinking;
namely, on the one hand there is selection amid the dominant
necessity of sense, and on the other hand, the thought-content
of consciousness (so far as secondary thoughts are concerned)
is not wholly constituted by the selection of will.

Thus, on the whole there is a large primary region of


eee eon


120 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


secondary thought, as well as of the primary thoughts of —
sense-presentation, which is given in type. That is the way in
which we do think of things, not wholly from any abstract
necessity, so far as we know, but because we have inherited
the method from an environment. It is the way we find our- —
selves thinking, a way which can only be fundamentally laid —
aside by an immense effort, and then only for isolated short
periods of time. This is what I have called the “whole appa-
ratus of common-sense thought.”

It is this body of thought which is assumed in science, It is —
a way of thinking rather than a set of axioms. It is, in fact, |
the set of concepts which commonsense has found useful in 3
sorting out human experience. It is modified in detail, but —
assumed in gross. The explanations of science are directed to
finding conceptions and propositions concerning nature which
explain the importance of these commonsense notions. For
example, a chair is a commonsense notion, molecules and
electrons explain our vision of chairs.

Now science aims at harmonising our reflective and deriva-
tive thoughts with the primary thoughts involved in the
immediate apprehension of sense-presentation. It also aims at _
producing such derivative thoughts, logically knit together. —
This is scientific theory; and the harmony to be achieved is —
the agreement of theory with observation, which is the appre-
hension of sense-presentation.

Thus there is a two-fold scientific aim: (1) the production
of theory which agrees with experience; and (2) the explana- _
tion of commonsense concepts of nature, at least in their —
main outlines. This explanation consists in the preservation
of the concepts in a scientific theory of harmonised thought.

It is not asserted that this is what ‘scientists in the past
meant to achieve, or thought that they could achieve. It is
suggested as the actual result of scientific effort, so far as that
effort has had any measure of success. In short, we are here
discussing the natural history of ideas and not volitions of
scientists,


*


II, Objects


We perceive things in space. For example, among such
things are dogs, chairs, curtains, drops of water, gusts of —
air, flames, rainbows, chimes of bells, odours, aches and
pains. There is a scientific explanation of the origin of
these perceptions. This explanation is given in terms of


THE ANATOMY OF SOME SCIENTIFIC IDEAS 121


molecules, atoms, electrons, and their mutual relations, in
particular of their space-relations, and waves of disturb-


ance of these space-relations which are propagated through


space. The primary elements of the scientific explanation
—molecules, etc.—are not the things directly perceived.
For example, we do not perceive a wave of light; the sen-
sation of sight is the resultant effect of the impact of mil-
lions of such waves through a stretch of time. Thus the
object directly perceived corresponds to a series of events
in the physical world, events which are prolonged through
a stretch of time. Nor is it true that a perceived object
always corresponds to the same group of molecules. After
a few years we recognize the same cat, but we are thereby
related to different molecules.

Again, neglecting for a moment the scientific explana-


tion, the perceived object is largely the supposition of our


imagination. When we recognised the cat, we also recog-
nised that it was glad to see us. But we merely heard its


_mewing, saw it arch its back, and felt it rubbing itself


against us. We must distinguish, therefore, between the
many direct objects of sense, and the single indirect ob-
ject of thought which is the cat.

Thus, when we say that we perceived the cat and under-
stood its feelings, we mean that we heard a sense-object of
sound, that we saw a sense-object of sight, that we felt a
sense-object of touch, and that we thought of a cat and


_ imagined its feelings.


Sense-objects are correlated by time-relations and space-


| relations. Those simultaneous sense-objects which are also


spatially coincident, are combined by thought into the per-
ception of one cat. Such combination of sense-objects is an


| instinctive immediate judgment in general without effort of
| Teasoning. Sometimes only one sense-object is present. For


example, we hear mewing and say there must be a cat in the
room. The transition from the sense-object to the cat has then
been made, by deliberate ratiocination. Even the concurrence
of sense-objects may provoke such a self-conscious effort.
For example, in the dark we feel something, and hear mew-
ing from the same place, and think, Surely this is a cat. Sight
is more bold; when we see a cat, we do not think further.
We identify the sight with the cat, whereas the cat and the
mew are separate. But such immediate identification of a sight
object and an object of thought may lead to error; the birds
pecked at the grapes of Apelles.


122 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


A single sense-object is a complex entity. The sight-object
of a tile on the hearth may remain unchanged as we watch


it in a steady light, remaining ourselves unchanged in posi- |


tion. Even then it is prolonged in time, and has parts in.


space. Also it is somewhat arbitrarily distinguished from a


larger whole of which it forms part. But the glancing fire-


light and a change in our position alters the sight-object. We _
judge that the tile thought-object remains unchanged. The i
sight-object of the coal on the fire gradually modifies, though —


within short intervals it remains unchanged. We judge that


a
M


;
;
:
{


the coal thought-object is changing. The flame is never the —


Same, and its shape is only vaguely distinguishable.
We conclude that a single self-identical sight-object is


already a phantasy of thought. Consider the unchanging —


sight-object of the tile, as we remain still in a steady light.
Now a sense-object perceived at one time is a distinct object
from a sense-object seen at another time. Thus the sight of
the tile at noon is distinct from its sight at 12.30. But there
is no such thing as a sense-object at an instant. As we stare
at the tile, a minute, or a second, or a tenth of a second,


has flown by: essentially there is a duration. There is a_
stream of sight, and we can distinguish its parts. But the -
the parts also are streams, and it is only in thought that the —


stream separates into a succession of elements. The stream
may be “steady” as in the case of the unchanging sight-tile,
or may be “turbulent” as in the case of the glancing sight-
flame. In either case a sight-object is some arbitrarily small
part of the stream.

Again, the stream which forms the succession of sight-
tiles is merely a distinguishable part of the whole stream of
sight-presentation.

So, finally, we conceive ourselves each experiencing a
complete time-flux (or stream) of sense-presentation. This
stream is indistinguishable into parts. The grounds of dis-
tinction are differences of sense—including within that term,
differences of types of sense, and differences of quality and
of intensity within the same type of sense—and differences
of time-relations, and differences of space-relations. Also
the parts are not mutually exclusive and exist in unbounded
variety.

The time-relation between the parts raises the questions
of memory and recognition, subjects too complex for dis-


cussion here. One remark must be made. If it be admitted, 4


as stated above, that we live in durations and not in instants,


THE ANATOMY OF SOME SCIENTIFIC IDEAS 123


namely, that the present essentially occupies a stretch of time,
the distinction between memory and immediate presenta-
tion cannot be quite fundamental; for always we have with
us the fading present as it becomes the immediate past. This
region of our consciousness is neither pure memory nor
pure immediate presentation. Anyhow, memory is also a
presentation in consciousness.

Another point is to be noted in connection with memory.
There is no directly perceived time-relation between a pres-
ent event and a past event. The present event is only related
to the memory of the past event. But the memory of a past
event is itself a present element in consciousness. We assert
the principle that directly comparable relations can only exist
between elements of consciousness, both in that present
during which the perception occurs. All other relations be-
} tween elements of perception are inferential constructions. It
thus becomes necessary to explain how discriminations in
_the stream of events establish themselves and how the
_apparent world fails to collapse into one single present. The
| solution of the difficulty is arrived at by observing that the
| present is itself a duration, and therefore includes directly
| perceived time-relations between events contained within
it. In other words we put the present on the same footing
| as the past and the future in respect to the inclusion within
| it of antecedent and succeeding events, so that past, present,
| and future are in this respect exactly analogous ideas. Thus
there will be two events a and 5, both in the same present,
but the event a will be directly perceived to precede the
| event b, Again time flows on, and the event a fades into
the past, and in the new present duration events b and ¢
| occur, event b preceeding event c, also in the same present
duration there is the memory of the time-relation between
a and b, Then by an inferential construction the event a in
the past precedes the event c in the present. By proceeding
| according to this principle the. time-relations between ele-
ments of consciousness, not in the same present, are estab-
lished. The method of procedure here explained is a first
example of what we will call the Principle of Aggregation.
This is one of the fundamental principles of mental con-
struction according to which our conception of the external
physical world is constructed. Other examples will later on
be met with.

The space-relations between the parts are confused and
fluctuating, and in general lack determinate precision. The


124 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


master-key by which we confine our attention to such parts
as possess mutual relations sufficiently simple for our intel- |
lects to consider is the principle of convergence to simpli 4
ity with diminution of extent. We will call it the “principle
of convergence.” This principle extends throughout the whole |


“
‘


field of sense-presentation. %

The first application of the principle occurs in respect to |
time. The shorter the stretch of time, the simpler are the |
aspects of the sense-presentation contained within it. The |
perplexing effects of change are diminished and in many
cases can be neglected. Nature has restricted the acts of |
thought which endeavour to realise the content of the pres-
ent, to stretches of time sufficiently short to secure this
static simplicity over the greater part of the sense-stream.

Spatial relations become simplified within the approx- |
imately static sense-world of the short time. A further sim-
plicity is gained by partitioning this static world into parts
of restricted space-content. The various parts thus obtained —
have simpler mutual space-relations, and again the principle »
of convergence holds. “

Finally, the last simplicity is obtained by partitioning the
parts, already restricted as to space and time, into further
parts characterised by homogeneity in type of sense, and |
homogeneity in quality and intensity of sense. These three
processes of restriction yield, finally, the sense-objects which '
have been mentioned above. Thus the sense-object is the |
result of an active process of discrimination made in virtue ©
of the principle of convergence. It is the result of the quest
for simplicity of relations within the complete stream of
sense-presentation.

The thought-objects of perception are instances of a fun-
damental law of nature, the law of objective stability. It is °
the law of the coherence of sense-objects. This law of |
stability has an application to time and an application to
space; also it must be applied in conjunction with that other
law, the principle of convergence to simplicity from which —
sense-objects are derived.

Some composite partial streams of sense-presentation can
be distinguished with the following characteristics: (1) the
time-succession of sense-objects, belonging to a single sense,
involved in any such a composite partial stream, is com- |
posed of very similar objects whose modifications increase |
only gradually, and thus forms a homogeneous compotent
stream within the composite stream; (2) the space-relations


m=


_— *


_ THE ANATOMY OF SOME SCIENTIFIC IDEAS 125


of those sense-objects (of various senses) of such a com-
posite stream which are confined within any sufficiently
short time are identical so far as they are definitely appre-
tended, and thus these various component streams, each
homogeneous, “cohere” to form the whole composite partial
stream; (3) there are other sense-presentations occurring in
association with that composite partial stream which can
be determined by rules derived from analogous composite
partial streams, with other space and time relations, provided
that the analogy be sufficiently close. Call these the “associ-
ated sense-presentations.” A partial stream of this sort,
viewed as a whole, is here called a “first crude thought-object
of perception.”

For example, we look at an orange for half a minute,


handle it, and smell it, note its position in the fruit-basket,


and then turn away. The stream of sense-presentation of the
orange during that half-minute is a first crude thought-object


| of perception. Among the associated sense presentations are
| those of the fruit-basket which we conceive as supporting the
| orange.


The essential ground of the association of sense-objects


_ of various types, perceived within one short duration, into
a first crude thought-object of perception is the coincidence
of their space-relations, that is, in general an approximate


coincidence of such relations perhaps only vaguely appre-
hended. Thus coincident space-relations associate sense-ob-


jects into a first crude thought-object, and diverse space-


relations dissociate sense-objects from aggregation into a
first crude thought-object. In respect to some groups of sense-
objects the association may be an immediate judgment devoid
of all inference, so that the primary perceptual thought is
that of the first crude thought-object, and the separate sense-
objects are the result of reflective analysis acting on memory.
For example sense-objects of sight and sense-objects of
touch are often thus primarily associated and only second-
arily dissociated in thought. But sometimes the association
is wavering and indeterminate, for example, that between
the sound-object of the mew of the cat and the sight-object
of the cat. Thus to sum up, the partial stream of sense-
perceptions coalesces into that first crude thought-object
of perception which is the momentary cat because the sense-
perceptions belonging to this stream are in the same place,
but equally it would be true to say that they are in the
same place because they belong to the same momentary cat.


126 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


This analysis of the complete stream of sense-presentation —
in any small present duration into a variety of first crude -
thought-objects only partially fits the facts; for one reason |
because many sense-objects, such as sound for instance, have %
vague and indeterminate space-relations, for example vague- .
ly those space-relations which we associate with our organs —
of sense and also vaguely those of the origin from which —
(in the scientific explanation) they proceed. -
The procedure by which the orange of half a minute —
is elaborated into the orange in the ordinary sense of the
term involves in addition the two principles of aggregation
and of hypothetical sense-presentation.
The principle of aggregation, as here employed, takes the
form that many distinct first crude thought-objects of per-
ception are conceived as one thought-object of perception, if
the many partial streams forming these objects are sufficient-
ly analogous, if their times of occurrence are distinct, and if
the associated sense-presentations are sufficiently analogous.
For example, after leaving the orange, in five minutes we
return. A new first crude thought-object of perception pre-
sents itself to us, indistinguishable from the half-minute 4
orange we previously experienced; it is in the same fruit-
basket. We aggregate the two presentations of an orange —
into the same orange. By such aggregations we obtain “sec-
ond crude thoughts-objects of perception.” But however far —
we can proceed with aggregation of this type, the orange
is more than that. For example, what do we mean when
we say, The orange is in the cupboard, if Tom has not
eaten it?
The world of present fact is more than a stream of sense-_
presentation. We. find ourselves with emotions, volitions,
imaginations, conceptions, and judgments. No factor which
enters into consciousness is by itself or even can exist in
isolation. We are analysing certain relations between sense-
presentation and other factors of consciousness. Hitherto
we have taken into account merely the factors of concept
and judgment. Imagination is necessary to complete the
orange, namely, the imagination of hypothetical sense-pres- |
entations. It is beside the point to argue whether we ought |
to have such imaginations, or to discuss what are the .
metaphysical truths concerning reality to which they cor- |
responded. We are here only concerned with the fact that
such imaginations exist and essentially enter into the forma-
tion of the concepts of the thought-objects of perception


et?


et ee eee


Ry ee


THE ANATOMY OF SOME SCIENTIFIC IDEAS 127


which are the first data of science. We conceive the orange
aS a permanent collection of sense-presentations existing as
?f they were an actual element in our consciousness, which
they are not. The orange is thus conceived as in the cupboard
with its shape, odour, colour, and other qualities. Namely,
we imagine hypothetical possibilities of sense-presentation,
and conceive their want of actuality in our consciousness as
immaterial to their existence in fact. The fact which is essen-
tial for science is our conception; its meaning in regard to the
metaphysics of reality is of no scientific importance, so far as
physical science is concerned.

The orange completed in this way is the thought-object
of perception.

It must be remembered that the judgments and concepts
arising in the formation of thought-objects of perception are
in the main instinctive judgments, and instinctive concepts,
and are not concepts and judgments, consciously sought for
and consciously criticised before adoption. Their adoption is
facilitated by and interwoven with the expectation of the
future in which the hypothetical passes into the actual, and
-also with the further judgment of the existence of other
consciousnesses, so that much that is hypothetical to one
consciousness is judged to be actual to others.
| The thought-object of perception is, in fact, a device to

make plain to our reflective consciousness relations which
hold within the complete stream of sense-presentation. Con-
cerning the utility of this weapon there can be no question;
it is the rock upon which the whole structure of common-
sense thought is erected. But when we consider the limits
of its application the evidence is confused. A great part of
our sense-presentation can be construed as perception of
various persistent thought-objects. But hardly at any time
can the sense-presentations be construed wholly in that way.
Sights lend themselves easily to this construction, but sight
can be baffled: for example, consider reflections in looking-
glasses, apparently bent sticks half in and half out of water,
rainbows, brilliant patches of light which conceal the object
from which they emanate, and many analogous phenomena.
Sound is more difficult; it tends largely to disengage itself
from any such object. For example, we see the bell, but we
hear the sound which comes from the bell; yet we also say
that we hear the bell. Again, a toothache is largely by itself,
and is only indirectly a perception of the nerve of the tooth.


128 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION ~


Illustrations to the same effect can be accumulated from |


every type of sensation.


Another difficulty arises from the fact of change. The
thought-object is conceived as one thing, wholly actual at


each instant. But since the meat has been bought it has been
cooked, the grass grows and then withers, the coal burns in
the fire, the pyramids of Egypt remain unchanged for ages,


but even the pyramids are not wholly unchanged. The |
difficulty of change is merely evaded by affixing a technical |


Latin name to a supposed logical fallacy. A slight cooking


leaves the meat the same object, but two days in the oven |


burns it to a cinder. When does the meat cease to be? Now


the chief use of the thought-object is the concept of it as —


one thing, here and now, which- later can be recognised,


there and then. This concept applies sufficiently well to.


most things for short times, and to many things for long
times. But sense-presentation as a whole entirely refuses to be
patient of the concept.

We have now come to the reflective region of explana-
tion, which is science.


A great part of the difficulty is at once removed by apply-


ing the principle of convergence to simplicity. We habitu-
ally make our thought-objects too large; we should think
in smaller parts. For example, the Sphinx has changed by
its nose becoming chipped, but by proper inquiry we could
find the missing part in some private house of Western
Europe or Northern America. Thus, either part, the rest of the


Sphinx or the chip, regains its permanence. Furthermore, we -


enlarge this explanation by conceiving parts so small that
they can only be observed under the most favourable circum-
stances. This is a wide extension of the principle of converg-
ence in its application to nature; but it is a principle amply
supported by the history of exact observation.

Thus, change in thought-objects of perception is largely
explained as a disintegration into smaller parts, themselves
thought-objects of perception. The thought-objects of per-
ception which are presupposed in the common thought of
civilised beings are almost wholly hypothetical. The material
universe is largely a concept of the imagination which rests
on a slender basis of direct sense-presentation. But none the


=


os aa bee” te


ae OE Ae


less it is a fact; for it is a fact that actually we imagine it. |


Thus it is actual in our consciousness just as sense-pres-
entation also is actual there. The effort of reflective criticism
is to make these two factors in our consciousness agree


THE ANATOMY OF SOME SCIENTIFIC IDEAS 129


where they are related, namely, to construe our sense-pres-
} entation as actual realisation of the hypothetical thought-
objects of perception.

The wholesale employment of purely hypothetical thought-
objects of perception enables science to explain some of the
stray sense-objects which cannot be construed as perceptions
of a thought-object of perception: for example, sounds. But
the phenomena as a whole defy explanation on these lines
until a further fundamental step is taken, which transforms
the whole concept of the material universe. Namely, the
thought-object of perception is superseded by the thought-
object of science.
| The thought-objects of science are molecules, atoms, and
| electrons. The peculiarity of these objects is that they have
| shed all the qualities which are capable of direct sense-rep-
resentation in consciousness. They are known to us only by
| their associated phenomena, namely, series of events in
| which they are implicated are represented in our conscious-
hess by sense presentations. In this way, the thought-objects
| of science are conceived as the causes of sense-representation.
| The transition from thought-objects of perception to
| thought-objects of science is decently veiled by an elaborate
| theory concerning primary and secondary qualities of bodies.
| This device, by which sense-presentations are represented
| in thought as our perception of events in which thought-
| objects of science are implicated, is the fundamental means
| by which a bridge is formed between the fluid vagueness of
sense and the exact definition of thought. In thought a prop-
| osition is either true or false, an entity is exactly what it is,
| and relations between entities are expressible (in idea) by
definite propositions about distinctly conceived entities. Sense-
| perception knows none of these things, except by courtesy.
| Accuracy essentially collapses at some stage of inquiry.


UI. Time and Space


Recapitulation—Relations of time and relations of space
hold between sense-objects of perception. These sense-objects
are distinguished as separate objects by the recognition of
either (1) differences of sense-content, or (2) time-relations
between them other than simultaneity, or (3) space-relations
| between them other than coincidence. Thus sense-objects
arise from the recognition of contrast within the complete
Stream of sense-presentation, namely, from the recognition


=


130 4 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION —


of the objects as related terms, by relations which contrast.
them. Differences of sense-content are infinitely complex in
their variety. Their analysis under the heading of general
ideas is the unending task of physical science. Time-relations
and space-relations are comparatively simple, and the general
ideas according to which their analysis should proceed are
obvious. |
This simplicity of time and space is perhaps the reason
why thought chooses them as the permanent ground for
objectival distinction, throwing the various sense-objects |
thus obtainable into one heap, as a first crude thought-
object of perception, and thence, as described above, ob-.
taining a thought-object of perception. Thus a thought-object
of perception conceived as in the present of a short duration
is a first crude thought-object of perception either actual
or hypothetical. Such a thought-object of perception, con-»
fined within a short duration, takes on the space-relations
of its component sense-objects within that same duration. |
Accordingly thought-objects of perception, conceived in their
whole extents, have to each other the time-relationships of |
their complete existences, and within any small duration
have to each other the space-relationships of their component .
sense-objects which lie within that duration. ;
Relations bind together: thus thought-objects of percep-
tion are connected in time and in space. The genesis of the .
objectival analysis of sense-presentation is the recognition
of sense-objects as distinct terms in time-relations and space-
relations: thus thought-objects of perception are separated
by time and space.
Whole and Part.—A sense-object is part of the complete
stream of presentation. This concept of being a part is merely :
the statement of the relation of the sense-object to the com-
plete sense-presentation for that consciousness. Also a sense-
object can be part of another sense-object. It can be a part ©
in two ways, namely, a part in time and a part in space. It
seems probable that both these concepts of time-part and ~
Space-part are fundamental; that is, are concepts expressing
relations which are directly presented to us, and are not
concepts about concepts. In that case no further definition of |
the actual presentation is possible. It may even then be pos-
sible to define an adequate criterion of the occurrence of |
such a presentation. For example, adopting for the moment )
a Tealist metaphysic as to the existence of the physical world —
of molecules and electrons, the vision of a chair as occurring |
Lae


ee


i


THE ANATOMY OF SOME SCIENTIFIC IDEAS 131


for some definite person at some definite time is essentially
indefinable. It is his vision, though each of us guesses that
it must be uncommonly like our vision under analogous
circumstances. But the existence of the definable molecules
and waves of light in certain definable relations to his bodily
organs of sense, his body also being in a certain definable
state, forms an adequate criterion of the occurrence of the
vision, a criterion which is accepted in Courts of Law and
which physical science tacitly substitutes for the vision.
_ The connection between the relations “whole and part”
and “all and some” is intimate. It can be explained thus so
far as concerns directly presented sense-objects. Call two
sense-objects “separated” if there is no third sense-object
which is a part of both of them. Then an object A is com-
posed of the two objects B and C, if (1) B and C, are both
parts of A, (2) B and C are separated, and (3) there is no
part of A which is separated both from B and from C. In
such a case the class a which is composed of the two objects
B and C is often substituted in thought for the sense-object
A. But this process pre-supposes the fundamental relation
“whole and part.” Conversely the objects B and C amy be
| actual sense-objects, but the sense object A which corre-
sponds to the class « may remain hypothetical. For example,
the round world on which we live remains a conception
corresponding to no single sense-object at any time presented
| in any human being’s consciousness.

It is possible, however, that some mode of conceiving the
whole-and-part relation between extended objects as the all-
and-some relation of logical classes can be found. But in this
case the extended objects as here conceived cannot be the
true sense-objects which are present to consciousness. For
as here conceived a part of a sense-object is another sense-
object of the same type; and therefore one sense-object
cannot be a class of other sense-objects, just as a tea-spoon
cannot be a class of other tea-spoons. The ordinary way in
thought by which whole-and-part is reduced to all-and-some
is by the device of points, namely, the part of an object
occupies some of the points occupied by the whole object.

| If any one holds that in his consciousness the sense-presenta-
tion is a presentation of point-objects, and that an extended
object is merely a class of such point-objects collected to-
gether in thought, then this ordinary method is completely
satisfactory. We shall proceed on the assumption that this


132 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION ei
conception of directly perceived point-objects has no relations)
to the facts. g

In the preceding chapter on “The Organisation of |
Thought,” another mode is suggested. But this method would —
apply only to the thought-object of perception, and has no ~
reference to the primary sense-objects here considered. Ac-
cordingly it must reckon as a subordinate device for a later
stage of thought.

Thus the point-object in time and the point-object in space,
and the double point-object both in time and space, must be
conceived as intellectual constructions. The fundamental fact
is the sense-object, extended both in time and space, with
the fundamental relation of whole-to-part to other such
objects, to the law of convergence to simplicity as we proceed
in thought through a series of successively contained parts.

The relation whole-to-part is a temporal or spacial rela-
tion, and is therefore primarily a relation holding between
sense-objects of perception, and it is only derivatively as-
cribed to the thought-objects of perception of which they
are components. More generally, space and time relations
hold primarily between sense-objects of perception and
derivatively between thought- objects of perception.

Definition of Points—The genesis of points of time and of .
space can now be studied. We must distinguish (1) sense-
time and sense-space, and (2) thought-time of percepligg)
and thought-space of perception.

Sense-time and sense-space are the actually observed time-
relations and space-relations between sense-objects. Sense-
time and sense-space have no points except, perhaps, a few
sparse instances, sufficient to suggest the logical idea; also.
sense-time and sense-space are discontinuous and fragmen-
tary.

Thought-time of perception and thought-space of percep-,
tion are the time and space relations which hold between.
thought-objects of perception. Thought-time of perception,
and thought-space of perception are each continuous. By
“continuous” is here meant that all thought-objects of per-.
ception have to each other a time (or space) relation.

The origin of points is the effort to take full advantage of
the principle of convergence to simplicity. In so far as this:
principle does not apply, a point is merely a cumbrous way
of directing attention to a set of relations between a certain
set of thought-objects of perception, which set of relations,
though actual so far as a thought-object is actual, is (under


THE ANATOMY OF SOME SCIENTIFIC IDEAS 133


this supposition) of no particular importance. Thus the
proved importance in physical science of the concepts of
points in time and points in space is a tribute to the wide
applicability of this principle of convergence.

Euclid defines a point as without parts and without magni-
tude. In modern language a point is often described as an
ideal limit by indefinitely continuing the process of diminish-
ing a volume (or area). Points as thus conceived are often
called convenient fictions. This language is ambiguous. What
is meant by a fiction? If it means a conception which does not
correspond to any fact, there is some difficulty in under-
Standing how it can be of any use in physical science. For
example, the fiction of a red man in a green coat inhabiting
the moon can never be of the slightest scientific service,
simply because—as we may presume—it corresponds to no
fact. By calling the concept of points a convenient fiction,
it must be meant that the concept does correspond to some
important facts. It is, then, requisite, in the place of such
vague allusiveness, to explain exactly what are the facts to
which the concept corresponds.

We are not much helped by explaining that a point is an
_ ideal limit. What is a limit? The idea of a limit has a pre-
cise meaning in the theory of series, and in the theory of
the values of functions; but neither of these meanings ap-
ply here. It may be observed that, before the ordinary math-
ematical meanings of limit had received a precise explana-
tion, the idea of a point as a limit might be considered as
one among other examples of an idea only to be appre-
hended by direct intuition. This view is not now open to us.
Thus, again, we are confronted with the question: What
are the precise properties meant when a point is described
as an ideal limit? The discussion which now follows is an
attempt to express the concept of a point in terms of thought-
Objects of perception related together by the whole-and-part
relation, considered either as a time-relation or as a space-
relation. If it is so preferred, it may be considered that the
discussion is directed towards a precise elucidation of the
term “ideal limit” as often used in this connection.

The subsequent explanations can be made easier to follow
by a small piece of symbolism: Let aEb mean that “b is part
of a.” We need not decide whether we are talking of time-
parts or space-parts, but whichever choice is supposed to
be made must be conceived as adhered to throughout any
connected discussion, The symbol E may be considered as the


134 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


initial letter of “encloses,” so we read “aEb as “a encloses:
b.” Again the “field of E” is the set of things which eithe ; |
enclose or are enclosed, i.e. everything “a,” which is su :
that x can be found so that either aEx or " xEa. A member
of the field of E is called “an enclosure-object.”

Now, we assume that this relation of whole-to-part, whickl
in the future we will call “enclosure,” always satisfies the
conditions in that the relation E is (1) transitive. (2)
asymmetrical, and (3) with its domain including its converse }
domain. ;

These four conditions deserve some slight consideration;
only the first two of them embody hypotheses which enter
vitally into the reasoning. .

Condition (1) may be stated as the condition that aEb |
and bEc always implies aEc. The fact that an entity b can |
be found such that aEb and bEc may be conceived as a
relation between a and c. It is natural to write E* for this }
relation. Thus the condition is now written: If aE?c, then
AEc. This can be still otherwise expressed by saying that
the relation E? implies, whenever it holds, that the relation
E also holds.

Condition (2) is partly a mere question of trivial defini’
tion, and partly a substantial assumption. The asymmetrical |
relation (E) is such that a@Eb and bEa can never hold simul-—
taneously. This property splits up into two parts: (1) that
no instance of aEb and bEa and “a diverse from 6b,” can
occur, and (2) that aEa cannot occur. The first part is a
substantial assumption, the second part (so far as we are
concerned) reduces to the trivial convention that we shall
not consider an object as part of itself, but will confine at-"
tention to “proper parts.”

Condition (3) means that aEb always implies that c can
be found such that bEc. This condition, taken in conjunc-
tion with the fact that we are _ considering proper parts,
is the assertion of the principle of the indefinite divisibility
of extended objects, both in space and in time.

An. indivisible part will lack duration in time, and exten-
sion in space, and is thus an entity of essentially a different
character to a divisible part. If we admit such indivisibles
as the only true sense-objects, our subsequent procedure is’
an unnecessary elaboration. a

It will be found that a fourth condition is necessary owing
to logical difficulties connected with the theory of an infinite
number of choices. It will not be necessary for us to enter


THE ANATOMY OF SOME SCIENTIFIC IDEAS 135


further on this question, which involves difficult considera-
tions of abstract logic. The outcome is, that apart from
aypothesis we cannot prove the existence of the sets, each
containing an infinite number of objects, which are here
ealled points, as will be explained immediately.

Now consider a set of enclosure objects which is such
that (1) of any two of its members one encloses the other,
and (2) there is no member which is enclosed by all the
others, and (3) there is no enclosure-object, not a member
of the set which is enclosed by every member of the set.
Call such a set a “convergent set of enclosure-objects.” As
we pass along the series from larger to smaller members,
evidently we converge towards an ideal simplicity to any
degree of approximation to which we like to proceed, and
the series as a whole embodies the complete ideal along
that route of approximation. In fact, to repeat, the series is
@ route of approximation.
| We have now to inquire if the principle of convergence
ito simplicity may be expected to yield the same type of
simplicity for every such convergent route. The answer is,
as we might expect, namely, that this depends upon the
nature of the properties which are to be simplified.

‘For example, consider the application to time. Now, time
is one-dimensional; so when this property of one-dimensional-
ity has been expressed by the proper conditions, not here
istated, a convergent set of enclosure-objects must, considered
as a route of approximation, exhibit the properties of one
unique instant of time, as ordinarily conceived by the eucli-
dean definition. Accordingly, whatever simplicity is to be
achieved by the application to time of the principle of con-
vergence to simplicity must be exhibited among the prop-
erties of any such route of approximation.

For space, different considerations arise. Owing to its
multiple dimensions, we can show that different convergent
sets of enclosure-objects, indicating different routes of ap-
proximation, may exhibit convergence to different types of
simplicity, some more complex than others.

For example, consider a rectangular box of height h ft.,
breadth b ft., and thickness c ft. Now, keep h and b con-
stant, and let the central plane (height h, breadth b) per-
pendicular to the thickness be fixed, then make c diminish
indefinitely. We thus obtain a convergent series of an indef-
initely large number of boxes, and there is no smallest box.
Thus this convergent series exhibits the route of approxi-


136


mation towards the type of simplicity expresse :
plane area of height h, breadth b, and no thickness.
Again, by keeping the central line of height A fixed,
- by making b and c diminish indefinitely, the series con
to the segment of a straight line of length h.
Finally, by keeping only the central point fixed,
by making b and c diminish indefinitely, the series conve
to a point.
Furthermore, we have introduced as yet no concept which
would prevent an enclosure-object being formed of detached
fragments in space. Thus we can easily imagine a convergent
set which converges to a number of points in space. For
example, each object of the set might be formed of two not |
over-lapping spheres of radius 7, with centres A and : . |
Then by diminishing r indefinitely, and keeping A and 1
fixed, we have convergence to the pair of Points A and B
It remains now to consider how those convergent sets
which converge to a single point can be discriminated fron 1
all the other types of such sets, merely by utilising concep ts
founded on the relation of enclosure.
Let us name convergent sets by Greek letters; by Pi
ceeding “forward” along any such set let us understand a
process of continually passing from the larger to the sma
enclosure-objects which form the set. “4
The convergent set a will be said to “cover” the con-
vergent set B, if every member of a encloses some members
of 8. We notice that if an enclosure-object x encloses any
member (y) of 8, then every member of the “tail-end” of
B, found by proceeding forward along 8 from y, must be
enclosed by x. Thus if a covers 8, every member of a en-
closes every member of the tail-end of 8, starting from the
largest member of 8 which is enclosed by that member of a.
It is possible for each of two convergent sets to cover ~
the other. For example, let one set (a) be a set of co ne
centric spheres converging to their centre A, and the other
set B be a set of concentric cubes, similarly situated
converging to the same centre A. Then a and 8 will ea
cover the other. Pei
Let two convergent sets which are such that each covel
the other be called “equal.”
Then it is a sufficient condition to secure that a
vergent set a possesses the point type of convergen
every convergent set covered by it is also equal to it, :


THE ANATOMY OF SOME SCIENTIFIC IDEAS 137


2 is a convergent set with the punctual type of convergence,
if “a covers 8” always implies that 8 covers a.

It can easily be seen by simple examples that the other
types of convergence to surfaces or lines or sets of points
zannot possess this property. Consider, for example, the
taree convergent sets of boxes in the preceding illustration,
} which converge respectively to a central plane, a central
line in the central plane, and the central point in the central
| Zine. The first set covers the second and third sets, and the
| second set covers the third set, but no two of the sets are
equal.

It is a more difficult question to determine whether the
| condition here indicated as sufficient to secure the punctual
| type of convergence is also necessary. The question turns on
how far thought-objects of perception possess exact bound-
| aries prior to the elaboration of exact mathematical concepts
of space. If they are to be conceived as possessing such exact
boundaries, then convergent sets converging to points on
'such boundaries must be allowed for. The procedure neces-
| sary for the specification of the complete punctual condition
| becomes then very elaborate," and will not be considered
| here.

_ But such exact determination as is involved in the con-
ception of an exact spatial boundary does not seem to be-
long to the true thought-object of perception. The ascrip-
‘tion of an exact boundary really belongs to the transition
| stage of thought as it passes from the thought-object of
/perception to the thought-object of science. The transition
|from the sense-object immediately presented to the thought-
object of perception is historically made in a wavering
indeterminate line of thought. The definite stages here marked
out simply serve to prove that a logically explicable transi-
tion is possible.

| We accordingly assume that the condition laid down above
to secure the punctual convergence of a convergent set of
enclosure-objects is not only sufficient, but necessary.

It can be proved that, if two convergent sets of enclo-
sure-objects are both equal to a third convergent set, they


1Cf. Révue de Métaphysique et de Morale, May 1916, where this
}question is dealt with by the author at the end of an article. “La théorie
telationniste de l’espace.’”’ [Addendum, 1928: The article was written
in 1914, and read in Paris at a congress in May of that year. I do not
now consider that it evades the difficulty. The topic is reconsidered in
my Gifford lectures for 1928.]


138 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION a
are equal to each other. Consider now any punctual con-
vergent set (a). We want to define the “point” to which a is —
a route of approximation in a way which is neutral between ©
a and all the convergent sets which are equal to a. Each of ©


these sets is a route of approximation to the same “point” as |


a. This definition is secured if we define the point as the —
class formed by all the enclosure-objects which belong either —
to a or to any convergent set which is equal to a. Let P be ©
this class of enclosure-objects. Then any convergent set (2)


which consists of enclosure-objects entirely selected from — }


members of the class P must be a route of approximation to
the same “point” as does the original punctual set a; namely,
provided that we choose a small enough enclosure-object in _
8B, we can always find a member of a which encloses it; and —
provide that we choose a small enough enclosure-object in —
a, We can always find a member of 8 which encloses it. Thus
P only includes convergent sets of the punctual type, and the ©
route of approximation indicated by any two convergent —
sets selected from P converges to identical results.

The Uses of Points.—The sole use of points is to facilitate —
the employment of the principle of Convergence to Sim- —
plicity. By this principle some simple relations in appro- —
priate circumstances become true, when objects are consid-
ered which are sufficiently restricted in time or in space. The
introduction of points enables this principle to be carried
through to its ideal limit. For example, suppose g (a, b, c)
represents some statement concerning three enclosure-objects,
a, b, c, which may be true if the objects are sufficiently —
restricted in extent. Let A, B, C be three given points, then —
we define g (A, B, C) to mean whatever three enclosure- _
objects a, b, c are chosen, such that a is a member of A, _
b of B, and c of C, it is always possible to find three other —
members of A, B, C, namely, x a member of A, y, of B,
and z of C, such that aEx, bEy, cEz, and g (x, y, z,). So by
going far enough down in the tail-ends of A, B, C we can
always secure three objects x, y, z for which g (x, y, Zz)
is true.

For example, let g (A, B, C) mean “A, B, C are three
points in a linear row.” This must be construed to mean
that whatever three objects, a, b, c we choose, members of
A, B, C respectively, we can always find three objects x, y, Z
also members of A, B, C respectively, and such that a en-


closes x, b encloses y, c encloses z, and also such that Xs Vek
are in a linear row.


;


THE ANATOMY OF SOME SCIENTIFIC IDEAS 139


Sometimes a double convergence is necessary, namely,
& convergence of conditions as well as a convergence of
Objects. For example, consider the statement, “the points
A and B are two feet apart.” Now, the exact statement
“two feet apart” does not apply to objects. For objects x
and y we must substitute the statement, “the distance be-
tween xX and y lies between the limits (2 + e) feet.” Here
2 is some number, less than two, which we have chosen
for this statement. Then the points A and B are two feet
apart; if, however we choose the number e, whatever en-
closure-objects a and b, members of A and B respectively,
we consider, we can always find enclosure-objects x and y,
members of A and B respectively, such that a encloses x
and 5 encloses y, and also such that the distance between x
and y lies between the limits (2 + e) feet. It is evident, since
e can be chosen as small as we please, that this statement
exactly expresses the condition that A and B are two feet
apart.

Straight Lines and Planes.—But the problem of the in-
tellectual construction of straight lines and planes is not
yet sufficiently analysed. We have interpreted the meaning
of the statement that three or more points are collinear, and
can similarly see how to interpret the meaning of the state-


ment that four or more points are coplanar, in either case


deriving the exact geometrical statements from vaguer state-
ments respecting extended objects.
This procedure only contemplates groups of finite num-


bers of points. But straight lines and planes are conceived


|
|


as containing infinite numbers of points. This completion of
lines and planes is obtained by a renewed application of the
principle of aggregation, just as a set of first crude thought-
objects of perception are aggregated into one complete
thought-object of perception. In this way repeated judgments


of the collinearity of sets of points are finally, when certain


conditions of interlacing are fulfilled, aggregated in the
single judgment of all the points of the groups as forming


/one whole collinear group. Similarly for judgments of


coplanarity. This process of logical aggregation can be ex-
hibited in its exact logical analysis. But it is unnecessary here
to proceed to such details. Thus we conceive our points as
sorted into planes and straight lines, concerning which the
various axioms of geometry hold. These axioms, in so far


-as they essentially require the conception of points, are
capable of being exhibited as the outcome of vaguer, less


140. THE AIMS OF EDUCATION q


exact judgments respecting the relations of extended objects.
Empty Space.—It must be observed that the points, hither-
to defined, necessarily involve thought-objects of perception, —
and lie within the space-extension occupied by such objects. —
It is true that such objects are largely hypothetical, and
that we can bring into our hypotheses sufficient objects to
complete our lines and planes. But every such hypothesis
weakens the connection between our scientific concept of —
nature and the actual observed facts which are involved in —
the actual sense-presentations. al
Occam’s razor, Entia non multiplicanda preter necessi-
tatem, is not an arbitrary rule based on mere logical ele-
gancy. Nor is its application purely confined to metaphysical
speculation. I am ignorant of the precise reason for its meta- |
physical validity, but its scientific validity is obvious, namely,
every use of hypothetical entities diminishes the claim of
scientific reasoning to be the necessary outcome of a harmony
between thought and sense-presentation. As hypothesis in-
creases, necessity diminishes.
Commonsense thought also supports this refusal to con-
ceive of all space as essentially depending on hypothetical
objects which fill it. We think of material objects as filling —
space, but we ask whether any objects exist between the
Earth and the Sun, between the stars, or beyond the stars. —
For us, space is there; the only question is whether or not _
it be full. But this form of question presupposes the meaning
of empty space, namely, of space not containing hypothetical
objects. :
This brings up a wider use of the concept of points,
necessitating a wider definition. Hitherto we have conceived
points as indicating relations of enclosure between objects.
We thus arrive at what now we will term “material points.”
But the idea of points can now be transformed so as to
indicate the possibilities of external relations not those of Br
enclosure. This is effected by an enlargement of the concept A
of ideal points, already known to geometers. §
Define “material lines” to be complete collinear classes
of collinear points. Consider now the set of material lines
which contain a certain material point. Call such a set of
lines an ideal point. This set of lines indicates a possibility
of position, which is in fact occupied by that material point
common to all the material lines. So this ideal point is an
occupied ideal point. Now consider a set of three material
lines, such that any two are coplanar, but not the whole


THE ANATOMY OF SOME SCIENTIFIC IDEAS 141


three, and further consider the complete set of material lines
such that each is coplanar with each of the three material lines
first chosen. The axioms which hold for the material lines
will enable us to prove that any two lines of this set are
coplanar. Then the whole set of lines, including the three
original lines, forms an ideal point, according to the defini-
tion in its full generality. Such an ideal point may be oc-
cupied. In that case there is a material point common to all
the lines of the set, but it may be unoccupied. Then the ideal
point merely indicates a possibility of spatial relations which
has not beer realised. It is the point of empty space. Thus
the ideal points, which may or may not be occupied, are the
points of geometry viewed as an applied science. These points
are distributed into straight lines and planes. But any further
discussion of this question will lead us into the technical


: subject of the axioms of geometry and their immediate


consequences. Enough has been said to show how geometry
arises according to the relational theory of space.
Space as thus conceived is the thought-space of the ma-


_ terial world.


IV. Fields of Force


The thought-objects of science are conceived as directly
related to this thought-space. Their spatial relations are
among those indicated by the points of the thought-space.
Their emergence in science has been merely a further de-
velopment of processes already inherent in commonsense
thought.

Relations within the complete sense-presentation were rep-
resented in thought by the concept of thought-objects of
perception. All sense-presentation could not be represented
in this way; also the change and disappearance of thought-
objects occasioned confusion of thought. A reduction of this
confusion to order was attempted by the concepts of per-
manent matter with primary and secondary qualities. Finally,
this has issued in the secondary qualities being traced as per-
ception of events generated by the objects, but—as perceived
—entirely disconnected with them. Also the thought-objects
of perception have been replaced by molecules and electrons
and ether-waves, until at length it is never the thought-
object of science which is perceived, but complicated series of
events in which they are implicated. If science be right, no-
body ever perceived a thing, but only an event. The result is,


142 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION
that the older language of philosophy which still survives


in many quarters is now thoroughly confusing when brought j
into connection with the modern concepts of science. Philos- —


ophy—that is, the older philosophy—conceives the thing as
directly perceived. According to scientific thought, the ulti-


mate thing is never perceived, perception essentially issuing —
from a series of events. It is impossible to reconcile the two —


points of view.

The advantage of the modern scientific concept is that it
is enabled to “explain” the fluid vague outlines of sense-pres-
entation. The thought-object of perception is now conceived
as a fairly stable state of motion of a huge group of mole-


cules, constantly changing, but preserving a certain identity


of characteristics, Also stray sense-objects, not immediately
given as part of a thought-object of perception, are now
explicable: the dancing light-reflection, the vaguely heard


sound, the smell. In fact, the perceived events of the scien- ©
tific world have the same general definition and lack of —


definition, and the same general stability and lack of stability,
as the sense-objects of the complete sense-presentation or as
the thought-objects of perception.


The thought-object of science, namely, molecules, atoms, —


and electrons, have gained in permanence. The events are
reduced to changes in space-configuration. The laws deter-
mining these changes are the ultimate laws of nature.


The laws of change in the physical universe proceed on


the assumption that the preceding states of the universe


determine the character of the change. Thus, to know the -


configurations and events of the universe up to and including


any instant would involve sufficient data from which to de- —


termine the succession of events throughout all time.


But in tracing the antecedents of events, commonsense —


thought, dealing with the world of thought-objects of per-
ception, habitually assumes that the greater number of
antecedent events can be neglected as irrelevant. Considera-
tion of causes is restricted to a few events during a short
preceding interval. Finally, in scientific thought it has been
assumed that the events in an arbitrarily small preceding
duration are sufficient. Thus physical quantities and their
successive differential co-efficients up to any order at the
instant, but with their limiting values just before that
instant, are on this theory sufficient to determine the state
of the universe at all times after the instant. More particular
laws are assumed. But the search for them is guided by this


a Aa
RR A CARRIE Nera NER


Re ae Oe aN ee Y
eee erence eRe Ne


apa SUG PERE CARI AEE IES EME St


THE ANATOMY OF SOME SCIENTIFIC IDEAS 143


general principle. Also it is assumed that the greater number


of events in the physical universe are irrelevant to the pro-


duction of any particular effect, which is assumed to issue
from relatively few antecedents. These assumptions have
grown out of the experience of mankind. The first lesson of
life is to concentrate attention on few factors of sense-pres-
entations, and on still fewer of the universe of thought-
objects of perception.

The principle by which—consciously or unconsciously—
thought has been guided is that in searching for particular


causes, remoteness in time and remoteness in space are


evidences of comparative disconnection of influence. The
extreme form of this principle is the denial of any action
at a distance either in time or space. The difficulty in accept-
ing this principle in its crude form is, that since there are no
contiguous points, only coincident bodies can act on each
other. I can see no answer to this difficulty—namely, either
bodies have the same location and are thus coincident, or
they have different locations and are thus at a distance and
do not act on each other.

This difficulty is not evaded by the hypothesis of an
ether, continuously distributed. For two reasons: in the
first place, the continuity of the ether does not avoid the
dilemma; and secondly, the difficulty applies to time as well
as to space, and the dilemma would prove that causation
producing change is impossible, namely, no changed condi-
tion could be the result of antecedent circumstances.

On the other hand, a direct interaction between two bodies
separated in space undoubtedly offends the conception of
distance as implying physical disconnection as well as spatial
relation. There is no logical difficulty in the assumption of
action at a distance as in the case of its denial, but it is
contradictory to persistent assumptions of that apparatus
of commonsense thought which it is the main business of
science to harmonise with sense-presentation, employing only
the minimum of modification.

Modern science is really unconcerned with this debate.
Its (unacknowledged) conceptions are really quite differ-
ent, though the verbal explanations retain the form of a
previous epoch. The point of the change in conception is
that the old thought-object of science was conceived as
possessing a simplicity not belonging to the material uni-
verse as a whole. It was secluded within a finite region of
space, and changes in its circumstances could only arise from


144 E THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


forces which formed no essential part of its nature. An ether


was called into existence to explain the active relations be-
tween these passive thought-objects. The whole conception
suffers from the logical difficulties noted above. Also no clear
conception can be formed of the sense in which the ether
is explanatory. It is to possess a type of activity denied to
the original thought-object, namely, it carries potential energy,
whereas the atom possessed only kinetic energy, the so-
called potential energy of an atom belonging really to the
surrounding ether. The truth is, that ether is really excepted
from the axiom “no action at a distance,’ and the axiom
thereby is robbed of all its force.

The modern thought-object of science—not yet explicitly
acknowledged—has the complexity of the whole material
universe. In physics, as elsewhere, the hopeless endeavour
to derive complexity from simplicity has been tacitly aban-
doned. What is aimed at is not simplicity, but persistence
and regularity. In a sense regularity is a sort of simplicity.
But it is the simplicity of stable mutual relations, and not
the simplicity of absence of types of internal structure or of
type of relation. This thought-object fills all space. It is a
“field”; that is to say, it is a certain distribution of scalar
and vector quantities throughout space, these quantities
having each its value for each point of space at each point of
time, being continuously distributed throughout space
and throughout time, possibly with some exceptional dis-
continuities. The various types of quantity which form the
field have fixed relations to each other at each point of time
and space. These relations are the ultimate laws of nature.

For example, consider an electron. There is a scalar dis-
tribution of electricity, which is what is ordinarily called the
electron. This scalar distribution has a volume-density @
at the time ¢ at any point (x, y, z). Thus @ is a function of
(x, y, Z, t), which is zero except within a restricted region.
Furthermore, at any time ¢, as an essential adjunct, there is
a continuous space distribution at each point of the two
vectors (X, Y, Z), which is the electric force, and (a, B, y),
which is the magnetic force. Lastly, individuality is ascribed
to the scalar electric distribution, so that in addition to its
conservation of quantity—involved in the assumed laws—
it is also possible to assign the velocities with which the
various individual parts of the distribution are moving. Let
(u, v, w) be this velocity at (x, y, z,.t).

This whole scheme of scalar and vector quantities, namely,


|


THE ANATOMY OF SOME SCIENTIFIC IDEAS 145


2, (X, Y, Z), (a, B y), (4, Vv, w) is inter-connected by the
| slectromagnetic laws. It follows from these laws that the
| electron, in the sense of the scalar distribution, is to be con-
i ceived as at each instant propagating from @ itself an
emanation which travels outwards with the velocity of light
in vacuo, and from which (X, Y, Z) and (a, B, y) can be
calculated, so far as they are due to that electron. Thus the
field, at any time, due to the electron as a whole depends
on the previous history of the electron, the nearer to the
electron the more recent being the relevant history. The
whole scheme of such a field is one single thought-object of
science: the electron and its emanations form one essential
whole, namely one thought-object of science, essentially
complex and essentially filling all space. The electron proper,
| namely, the scalar distribution @, is the focus of the whole,
the essential focal property being that the field at any in-
stant is completely determined by the previous history of
| the focus and of its space relations through all previous
| time. But the field and the focus are not independent con-
| cepts, they are essentially correlated in one organised unity,
namely, they are essentially correlated terms in the field of
| one relation in virtue of which the entities enter into our
thoughts.

| The fields of a group of electrons are superposed accord-
| ing to the linear law for aggregation, namely, pure addition
| for analogous scalar quantities and the parallelogram law
| for analogous vectors. The changes in motion of each elec-
| tron depend entirely on the resultant field in the region it oc-
| cupies. Thus a field can be viewed as a possibility of action,
but a possibility which represents an actuality.

| It is to be noted that the two alternative views of causa-
| tion are here both included. The complete field within any
region of space depends on the past histories of all the
| electrons, histories extending backwards in proportion to
| their distances. Also this dependence can be conceived as a
| transmission. But viewing the cause which effects changes
on the electron within that region, it is solely that field
| within the region, which field is coincident with that electron
| both in time and in space.

| This process of conceiving the actuality underlying a
| possibility is the uniform process by which regularity and
permanence is introduced into scientific thought, namely,
| we proceed from the actuality of the fact to the actuality of
possibility.


140 2 THE AIMS OF EDUCALION —


In conformity with this principle, propositions are th
outgrowth from actual thought-expressions, thought-objects
of perceptions from crude  sense-objects, hypothetic:
thought-objects of perception from actual thought-objec
of perception, material points from hypothetical infinite |
suites of hypothetical thought-objects of perception, ide L
points from material points, thought-objects of science from
thought-objects of perception, fields of electrons from actu.
mutual reactions of actual electrons.

The process is a research for permanence, uniformi
and simplicity of logical relation. But it does not issue i
simplicity of internal structure. Each ultimate thought-obje
of science retains every quality attributed to the who
scientific universe, but retains them in a form characterised
by permanence and uniformity.


V. Conclusion


We commenced by excluding judgments of worth and ©
ontological judgments. We conclude by recalling them.
Judgments of worth are no part of the texture of physical
science, but they are part of the motive of its production.
Mankind have raised the edifice of science, because they
have judged it worth while. In other words, the motives
involve innumerable judgments of value. Again, there has
been conscious selection of the parts of the scientific field
to be cultivated, and this conscious selection involves judg-—
ments of value. These values may be esthetic, or moral,
or utilitarian, namely, judgments as to the beauty of the
structure, or as to the duty of exploring the truth, or a8
to utility in the satisfaction of physical wants. But what-
ever the motive, without judgments of value there would
have been no science. @

Again, ontological judgments were not excluded by reason —
of any lack of interest. They are in fact presupposed in every
act of life: in our affections, in our self-restraints, and in our
constructive efforts. They are presupposed in moral judg-_
ments. The difficulty about them is the absence of agreement
as to the method of harmonising the crude judgments of
commonsense. .

Science does not diminish the need of a metaphysic.
Where this need is most insistent is in connection with
what above has been termed “the actuality underlying a
possibility.” A few words of explanation may render the


THE ANATOMY OF SOME SCIENTIFIC IDEAS 147


# argument clearer, although they involve a rash approach to
metaphysical heights which it is not the purpose of this paper
20 explore.

The conception of subject and object in careless discus-
# sion covers two distinct relations. There is the relation of
the whole perceiving consciousness to part of its own content,
| for example, the relation of a perceiving consciousness to an
object of redness apparent to it. There is also the relation
of a perceiving consciousness to an entity which does not
y eXist in virtue of being part of the content of that con-
sciousness. Such a relation, so far as known to the per-
ceiving consciousness, must be an inferred relation, the
inference being derived from an analysis of the content
of the perceiving consciousness.

The bases for such inferences must be elements in con-
sciousness directly known as transcending their immediate
presentation in consciousness. Such elements are universal
logical truths, moral and esthetic truths, and truths embodied
in hypothetical propositions. These are the immediate ob-
|jects of perception which are other than the mere affections
} of the perceiving subject. They have the property of being
jparts of the immediate presentation for individual subjects
4and yet more than such parts. All other existence is inferred
i Existence.

In this chapter we are more directly concerned with truths
#emobodied in hypothetical propositions. Such truths must not
ibe confused with any doubtfulness which attaches to our
judgments of the future course of natural phenomena. A
hypothetical proposition, like a categorical judgment, may or
{may not be doubtful. Also like a categorical judgment, it ex-
| presses a fact. This fact is two-fold: as a presentation in con-
isciousness, it is just this hypothetical judgment; as expressing
a categorical fact, it states a relation which lies beyond con-
sciousness, holding between entities thereby inferred.

But this metaphysical analysis, short though it be, is prob-
jably wrong, and at the best will only command very partial
assent. Certainly; and this admission brings out the very point
which I wished to make. Physical science is based on elements
of thought, such as judgments registering actual perceptions,
and judgments registering hypothetical perceptions which
|under certain circumstances would be realised. These ele-
iments form the agreed content of the apparatus of common-
|sense thought. They require metaphysical analysis; but they
| are among the data from which metaphysics starts. A meta-


148 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION ©


physic which rejects them has failed, in the same ‘way as
physical science has failed when it is unable to harmonis e/
them into its theory. a

Science only renders the metaphysical need more urgent. In
itself it contributes little directly to the solution of the meta- j
physical problem. But it does contribute something, namely, |
the exposition of the fact that our experience of sensible |
apparent things is capable of being analysed into a scientifi
theory, a theory not indeed complete, but giving every promise §
of indefinite expansion. This achievement emphasises the in- |
timate relation between our logical thought and the facts of —
sensible apprehension. Also the special form of scientific theory |
is bound to have some influence, In the past false science has —
been the parent of bad metaphysics. After all, science em- -
bodies a rigorous scrutiny of one part of the whole evidence §
from which metaphysicians deduce their conclusions. 2


i.
——Chapter 7 of the original Williams and Norgate edition of this —
book entitled The Organization of Thought, Educational and
Scientific, 1917.


Fete Gite


—
re}


tyne he aid” oS a ae


z


10. Space, Time, Relativity


FUNDAMENTAL Problems concerning space and time have
been considered from the standpoints created by many differ-
ent sciences. The object of this paper is the humble one of
bringing some of these standpoints into relation with eacil]
other. This necessitates a very cursory treatment of each |
point of view. f
Mathematical physicists have evolved their theory of rela-
tivity to explain the negative results of the Morley-Michelson
experiment and of the Trouton experiment. Experimental .
psychologists have considered the evolution of spatial ideas
from the crude sense-data of experience. Metaphysicians have
considered the majestic uniformity of space and time, without —
beginning and without end, without boundaries, and without |
exception in the truths concerning them; all these qualities the


SPACE, TIME, RELATIVITY 149


more arresting to our attention from the confused accidental
nature of the empirical universe which is conditioned by them,
Mathematicians have studied the axioms of geometry, and
ean now deduce all that is believed to be universally true of
# space and of time by the strictest logic from a limited number
of assumptions.

_ These various lines of thought have been evolved with sur-
prisingly little interconnection. Perhaps it is as well. The
results of science are never quite true. By a healthy independ-
fence of thought perhaps we sometimes avoid adding other
| people’s errors to our own. But there can be no doubt that
the normal method of cross-fertilising thought is by consid-
ering the same, or allied problems to our own, in the form
which they assume in other sciences.
| Here I do not propose to enter into a systematic study of

these various chapters of science. I have neither the knowledge
nor the time.

First, let us take the ultimate basis of any theory of rela-
| tivity. All space measurement is from stuff in space to stuff
in space. The geometrical entities of empty space never ap-
f pear. The only geometrical properties of which we have any
direct knowledge are properties of those shifting, changeable ©
| appearances which we call things in space. It is the sun which
jis distant, and the ball which is round, and the lamp-posts
| which are in linear order. Wherever mankind may have got
its idea of an infinite unchangeable space from, it is safe to say
| that it is not an immediate deliverance of direct observation.
There are two antagonistic philosophical ways of recog-
| nising this conclusion.

| One is to affirm that space and time are conditions for
} sensible experience, that without projection into space and
i time sensible experience would not exist. Thus, although it
| may be true to say that our knowledge of space and time is
| given in experience, it is not true to say that it is deduced
from experience in the same sense that the Law of Gravitation
| is so deduced. It is not deduced, because in the act of experi-
encing we are necessarily made aware of space as an infinite
given whole, and of time as an unending uniform succession.
This philosophical position is expressed by saying that space
} and time are a priori forms of sensibility.

' The opposed philosophical method of dealing with the
} question is to affirm that our concepts of time and space are
| deductions from experience, in exactly the same way as the
| Law of Gravitation is such a deduction. If we form exact con-


150 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


cepts of points, lines and surfaces, and of successive instants
of time, and assume them to be related as expressed by
axioms of geometry and the axioms for time, then we find that
we have framed a concept which, with all the exactness of
which our observations are capable, expresses the facts of |
experience. y

These two philosophic positions are each designed to eX-
plain a certain difficulty. The a priori theory explains the abso-
lute universality ascribed to the laws of space and time,
universality not ascribed to any deduction from experience
The experiential theory explains the derivation of the space-
time concepts without introducing any other factors beyond
those which are admittedly present in framing the other con:
cepts of physical science. et

But we have not yet done with the distinctions which in any
discussion of space or time must essentially be kept in mind.
Put aside the above question as to how these space-time con=
cepts are related to experience—What are they when they 7
formed?

We may conceive of the points of space as self-subsisteai :
entities which have the indefinable relation of being occupied |
by the ultimate stuff (matter, I will call it) which is there. |
Thus, to say that the sun is there (wherever it is) is to affirm
the relation of occupation between the set of positive and
negative electrons which we call the sun and a certain set of |
points, the points having an existence essentially independent
of the sun. This is the absolute theory of space. The absolute
theory is not popular just now, but it has very respectable
authority on its side—Newton, for one—so treat it tenderly.

The other theory is associated with Leibniz. Our space con- |


!


cepts are concepts of relations between things in space. Thus
there is no such entity as a self-subsistent point. A point is”
merely the name for some peculiarity of the relations between
the matter which is, in common language, said to be in space, _
It follows from the relative theory that a point should be
definable in terms of the relations between material things. So
far as I am aware, this outcome of the theory has escaped
the notice of mathematicians, who have invariably assumed
the point as the ultimate starting ground of their reasoning,
Many years ago I explained some types of ways in which vat
might achieve such a definition, and more recently have added
some others. Similar explanations apply to time. Before the |
theories of space and time have been carried to a satisfacto: y
conclusion on the relational basis, a long and careful scrutiny


SPACE, TIME, RELATIVITY 151


ef the definitions of points of space and instants of time will
fnave to be undertaken, and many ways of effecting these defi-
nitions will have to be tried and compared. This is an un-
written chapter of mathematics, in much the same state as
} was the theory of parallels in the eighteenth century.
In this connection I should like to draw attention to the
| analogy between time and space. In analysing our experience
we distinguish events, and we also distinguish things whose
changing relations form the events. If I had time it would be
} interesting to consider more closely these concepts of events
# and of things. It must suffice now to point out that things
i have certain relations to each other which we consider as
relations between the space extensions of the things; for ex-
* ample, one space can contain the other, or exclude it, or
} overlap it. A point in space is nothing else than a certain set
| of relations between spatial extensions.
Analogously, there are certain relations between events
| which we express by saying that they are relations between the
| temporal durations of these events, that is, between the tem-
| poral extension of the events. [The durations of two events A
4 and B may one precede the other, or may partially overlap,
| Of may one contain the other, giving in all six possibilities.]
| The properties of the extension of an event in time are largely
| analogous to the extension of an object in space. Spatial exten-
i sions are expressed by relations between objects, temporal
extensions by relations between events.
| The point in time is a set of relations between temporal
extensions. It needs very little reflection to convince us that a
| point in time is no direct deliverance of experience. We live
in durations, and not in points. But what community, beyond
the mere game, is there between extension in time and exten-
4 sion in space? In view of the intimate connection between time
4 and space revealed by the modern theory of relativity, this
question has taken on a new importance.

I have not thought out an answer to this question. I suggest,
| however, that time and space embody those relations between
| objects on which depends our judgment of their externality to
| ourselves. Namely, location in space and location in time both
embody and perhaps necessitate a judgment of externality.
This suggestion is very vague, and I must leave it in this
crude form.


152 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION _


Diverse Euclidean Measure Systems


Turning now to the mathematical investigations on th
axioms of geometry, the outcome, which is most importan
for us to remember, is the great separation which it discloses”
between non-metrical projective geometry, and metrical geom- |
etry. Non-metrical projective geometry is by far the m ore |
fundamental. Starting with the concepts of points, straight
lines, and planes (of which not all three need be 7 as. 4
indefinable), and with certain very simple non-metrical prop= |
erties of these entities—such as, for instance, that two points.
uniquely determine a straight line—nearly the whole of “|
etry can be constructed. Even quantitative co-ordinates can |
be introduced, to facilitate the reasoning. But no mention
distance, area, or volume, need have been introduced. Poin
will have an order on the line, but order does not imply any
settled distance.

When we now inquire what measurements of distance
possible, we find that there are different systems of measures | 4
ment all equally possible. There are three main types of |
system: any system of one type gives Euclidean geometry,
any system of another type gives Hyperbolic (or Lobatchews- |
kian) geometry, any system of the third type gives Elliptic |
geometry. Also different beings, or the same being if he
chooses, may reckon in different systems of the same type, or |
in systems of different types. Consider the example which will
interest us later. Two beings, A and B, agree to use the same
three intersecting lines as axes of x, y, z. They both employ
a system of measurement of the Euclidean type, and (what
is not necessary the case) agree as to the plane at infinity. Th it |
is, they agree as to the lines which are parallel. Then with the
usual method of rectangular Cartesian axes, they agree that
the coordinates of P are the lengths ON, NM, MP. So far
all is harmony. A fixes on the segment OU,, on Ox, as bei
the unit length, and B on the segment OV,, on Ox. A
his coordinates (x,y,z), and B calls them (X,Y,Z). g

Then it is found [since both systems are Euclidean] that
whatever point P be taken, 3


|
“|


X = px, Y = vy, Z = oz. [BA y #5.)
They proceed to adjust their differences, and first take


SPACE, TIME, RELATIVITY 153


_ x-coordinates. Obviously they have taken different units of
length along Ox. The length OU,, which A calls one unit, B
calls 8 units. B changes his unit length to OU,, from its orig-

inal length OV,, and obtains X = x. But now, as he must use
the same unit for all his measurements, his other coordinates
are altered in the same ratio. Thus we now have


X = x, Y = yy/f, Z = 2/8.


The fundamental divergence is now evident. A and B agree
as to their units along Ox. They settled that by taking along
that axis a given segment OU, as having the unit length. But
they cannot agree as to what segment along Oy is equal to
OU,. A says it is OU,, and B that it is OU,. Similarly for
lengths along OZ.


The result is that A’s spheres
Cia i fla i bay tal
_ are B’s ellipsoids,


X2/p2 + Y2/y2 + 62Z2/82 = r?,
X2 + p2Y2/y2 + Z2/82 = 12/p.


Thus the measurement of angles by the two is hopelessly at
variance.

If B = Y = 88, there is one, and only one, set of common
rectangular axes at O, namely that from which they started.
If Y — 8, but B = Y, then there are a singly infinite number
of common rectangular axes found by rotating the axes
around Ox. This is, for us, the interesting case. The same
phenomena are reproduced by transferring to any parallel axes.
The root of the difficulty is, that A’s measuring rod, which
for him is a rigid invariable body, appears to B as changing
in length when turned in different directions. Similarly all
measuring rods, satisfactory to A, violate B’s immediate judg-
ment of invariability, and change according to the same law.
There is no way out of the difficulty. Two rods p and o coin-
cide whenever laid one on the other; p is held still, and both
men agree that it does not change. But o is turned around.
A says it is invariable, B says it changes. To test the matter
p is turned round to measure it, and exactly fits it. But while
A is satisfied, B declares that p has changed in exactly the


154 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


same way as did o. Meanwhile B has procured two material
rods satisfactory to him as invariable, and A makes exactly
the same objections.

We shall say that A and B employ diverse Euclidean
metrical systems.

The most extraordinary fact of human life is that all beings
seem to form their judgments of spatial quantity according to
the same metrical system. This statement, however, is only
true within the limits of accuracy obtained by human obser-
vation. When we endeavour to frame a self-consistent physical
theory we have to admit that diverse spatio-temporal systems
of measurement are relevant to the behaviour of things.

Thus estimates of quantity in space and time, and, to some
extent, even estimates of order, depend on the individual ob-
server. But what are the crude deliverances of sensible experi-
ence, apart from that world of imaginative reconstruction
which for each of us has the best claim to be called our real
world? Here the experimental psychologist steps in. We
cannot get away from him. I wish we could, for he is fright-
fully difficult to understand. Also, sometimes his knowledge
of the principles of mathematics is rather weak, and I some-
times suspect No, I will not say what I sometimes think:
probably he, with equal reason, is thinking the same sort of
thing of us.

I will, however, venture to summarise conclusions, which
are, I believe, in harmony with the experimental evidence,
both physical and psychological, and which are certainly sug-
gested by the materials for that unwritten chapter in mathe-
matical logic which I have already commended to your notice,
The concepts of space and time and of quantity are capable
of analysis into bundles of simpler concepts. In any given
sensible experience it is not necessary, or even usual, that the
whole complete bundle of such concepts apply. For example,
the concept of externality may apply without that of linear
order, and the concept of linear order may apply without that
of linear distance.

Again, the abstract mathematical concept of a space-
relation may confuse together distinct concepts which apply
to the given perceptions. For example, linear order in the
sense of a linear projections from the observer is distinct from
linear order in the sense of a row of objects stretching across
the line of sight.

Mathematical physics assumes a given world of definitely


| a :
‘a
teen


the SPACE, TIME, RELATIVITY 155 .


_ tive ways of expressing those relations as concepts in a form

_ which also applies to the immediate experience of observers.

Yet there must be one way of expressing the relations
between objects in a common external world. Alternative
methods can only arise as the result of alternative standpoints;
that is to say, as the result of leaving something added by the
observer sticking (as it were) in the universe.

But this way of conceiving the world of physical science, as
composed of hypothetical objects, leaves it as a mere fairy
tale. What is really actual are the immediate experiences. The
task of deductive science is to consider the concepts which
apply to these data of experience, and then to consider the

- concepts relating to these concepts, and so on to any neces-
sary degree of refinement. As our concepts become more
abstract, their logical relations become more general, and less
liable to exception. By this logical construction we finally ar-
rive at conceptions, (i) which have determinate exemplifica-
tions in the experience of the individuals, and (ii) whose
logical relations have a peculiar smoothness. For example,
conceptions of mathematical time, of mathematical space, are
such smooth conceptions. No one lives in “an infinite given

_ whole,” but in a set of fragmentary experiences, The problem
is to exhibit the concepts of mathematical space and time as
the necessary outcome of these fragments by a process of
logical building up. Similarly for the other physical concepts.
This process builds a common world of conceptions out of
| fragmentary worlds of experience. The material pyramids of
Egypt are a conception, what is actual are the fragmentary


_ related objects, and the various space-time systems are alterna-


experiences of the races who have gazed on them.

So far as science seeks to rid itself of hypothesis, it cannot
go beyond these general logical constructions. For science, as
thus conceived, the divergent time orders mentioned above
present no difficulty. The different time systems simply register,
the different relations of the mathematical construct to those
individual experiences (actual or hypothetical) which could
exist as the crude material’ from which the construct 1s
elaborated.

But after all it should be possible to elaborate the mathe-
- matical construct so as to eliminate specific reference to
particular experiences. Whatever be the data of experience,
‘there must be something which can be said of them as a

whole, and that something is a statement of the general prop-
erties of the common world. It is hard to believe that with


156 THE AIMS OF EDUCATION


proper generalisation time and space will not be found among ~ 3


such properties.


If I understand Kant rightly—which I admit to be very
problematical—he holds that in the act of experience we are
aware of space and time as ingredients necessary for the
occurrence of experience. I would suggest—rather timidly—
that this doctrine should be given a different twist, which in
fact turns it in the opposite direction—namely, that in the act
of experience we perceive a whole formed of related differen-
tiated parts. The relations between these parts possess certain
characteristics, and time and space are the expressions of
some of the characteristics of these relations. Then the gen-
erality and uniformity which are ascribed to time and space
express what may be termed the uniformity of the texture
of experience.

The success of mankind—modest though it is—in deducing
uniform laws of nature is, so far as it goes, a testimony that
this uniformity of texture goes beyond those characteristics
of the data of experience which are expressed as time and
space. Time and space are necessary to experience in the


sense that they are characteristics of our experience; and of


course, no one can have our experience without running into
them. I cannot see that Kant’s deduction amounts to much
more than saying that “what is, is’—true enough, but not
very helpful.


But I admit that what I have termed the “uniformity of the —


texture of experience” is a most curious and arresting fact.
I am quite ready to believe that it is a mere illusion; and later
on in the paper I suggest that this uniformity does not belong
to the immediate relations of the crude data of experience,
but is the result of substituting for them more refined logical


entities, such as relations between relations, or classes of rela- _


tions, or classes of classes of relations. By this means it can
be demonstrated—I think—that the uniformity which must be


ascribed to experience is of a much more abstract attenuated


character than is usually allowed. This process of lifting the
uniform time and space of the physical world into the status
of logical abstractions has also the advantage of recognising
another fact, namely, the extremely fragmentary nature of all
direct individual conscious experience.


My point in this respect is that fragmentary individual —


experiences are all that we know, and that all speculation
must start from these disjecta membra as its sole datum. It is


SPACE, TIME, RELATIVITY 157


“not true that we are directly aware of a smooth running
world, which in our speculations we are to conceive as given.
In my view the creation of the world is the first unconscious

_ act of speculative thought; and the first task of a self-conscious

philosophy is to explain how it has been done.

There are roughly two rival explanations. One is to assert
the world as a postulate. The other way is to obtain it as a
deduction, not a deduction through a chain of reasoning, but
a deduction through a chain of definitions which, in fact, lifts
thought on to a more abstract level in which the logical ideas
are more complex, and their relations are more universal. In
this way the broken limited experiences sustain that connected
infinite world in which in our thoughts we live. There are
three more remarks while on this point I wish to make—

(i) The fact that immediate experience is capable of this
deductive superstructive must mean that it itself has a certain
uniformity of texture. So this great fact still remains,

(ii) I do not wish to deny the world as a postulate. Speak-
ing without prejudice, I do not see how in our present ele-
mentary state of philosophical advance we can get on without
~ middle axioms, which, in fact, we habitually assume.

My position is, that by careful scrutiny we should extrude
such postulates from every part of our organised knowledge
in which it is possible to do without them.

Now, physical science organises our knowledge of the rela-
tions between the deliverances of our various senses, I hold
that in this department of knowledge such postulates, though
not entirely to be extruded, can be reduced to a minimum in
the way which I have described.

We note again that the relational theory of space from
another point of view brings us back to the idea of the funda-
mental space-entities as being logical constructs from the
relations between things. The difference is, that this paragraph
is written from a more developed point of view, as it im-
plicitly assumes the things in space, and conceives space as an
expression of certain of their relations. Combining this para-
graph with what has gone before, we see that the suggested
procedure is first to define “things” in terms of the data of
experience, and then to define space in terms of the relations
between things.

I emphasize the point that our only exact data as to the
_ physical world are our sensible perceptions. We must not slip
into the fallacy of assuming that we are comparing a given


——Address before Manchester meeting of the British A
for the Advancement of Science, 1915. =


The Mentor Philosophers


The entire range of Western speculative thinking from
the Middle Ages to modern times is presented in this
series of six volumes. Each book contains the basic writ-
ings of the leading philosophers of each age, with in-
troductions and commentary by noted authorities.


“A very important and interesting series.”
—Gilbert Highet


Tue Ace or Beier: The Medieval Philosophers
edited by Anne Fremantle. (#MD126—50¢)

“Highly commendable . . . provides an excellent begin-

ning volume.” —The Classical Bulletin


Tue Ace or ApventuRE: The Renaissance Philosophers
edited by Giorgio de Santillana. (44MD184—50¢)


“The most exciting and varied in the series.”
—New York Times


Tir Ace or REASon: The 17th Century Philosophers
edited by Stuart Hampshire (#MT367—15¢)

“His (Hampshire’s) book is a most satisfactory addition

to an excellent series.” —Saturday Review


Tue Ace or ENLIGHTENMENT: The 18th Century Phi-
losophers edited by Sir Isaiah Berlin.

(#4MD172—50¢)

“(Sir Isaiah) has one of the liveliest and most stimulat-


ing minds among contemporary philosophers.”
—N. Y. Herald Tribune


Tur AcE or Ipgotocy: The 19th Century Philosophers
edited by Henry D. Aiken. (4#MD185—50¢)

“ _. perhaps the most distinct intellectual contribution

made in the series.” —New York Times


Tue Ace or ANALYSIS: 20th Century Philosophers
edited by Morton White. (#{MT353—175¢)
“No other book remotely rivals this as the best available


introduction to 20th century philosophy.”
—WN. Y. Herald Tribune


To Our READERS: We welcome your request for our free
catalog of Sicnet and MenTor books. If your dealer does
not have the books you want, you may order them by
mail enclosing the list price plus 5¢ a copy to cover
mailing. The New American Library of World Literature,
Inc., P. O. Box 2310, Grand Central Station, New York
17, New York.


How To Build
A Low-Cost Library


You can build a personal library of the best
books for as little as 35 or 50 cents a vol-
ume. Choose from thousands of the classics
and best sellers in literature, biography,
poetry, art, history, religion, reference, and
science as listed in a new catalog:


Paperbound Books in Print


If you’ve often had trouble finding the paper-
backs you want—here are over 13,000 with in-
formation on how and where to get them. Here
you can locate all the low-priced paper books
available either by checking the thousands of
titles listed alphabetically by author and by title,
or by looking under any of the 90 categories
where selected titles are grouped under helpful
subject classification.


Order your copy of this unique buying guide
today—either from your dealer or direct from
RRB, New American Library of World Litera-
ture, 501 Madison Avenue, New York 22, N. Y.


If you order from New American Library
please make checks payable to: R. R. Bowker
Company. Single copies are $2 net prepaid,
or you can subscribe to the 4 quarterly issues
for just $6 a year and automatically be kept
up to date on available paperbacks.


THEAMS OF
EDUCATION ssmesct sic


tion is to stimulate and


guide their self-development . .. The whole book is


a protest against dead knowledge, that is to say,
against dead ideas.”


“Your learning is useless to you till you have lost
your text-books, burnt your lecture notes, and for-
gotten the minutiae which you learnt by heart for
the examination . .. The function of a university is
to enable you to shed details in favor of principles.”


“Culture is activity of thought, and receptiveness
to beauty and humane feeling. Scraps of informa-
tion have nothing to do with it.”,—From The Aims
of Education by Alfred North Whitehead


ALFRED NORTH WHITEHEAD, internation-
ally known philosopher, mathematician and educa:
tor, was born in England in 1861 and died at Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts in 1947. After many years of
teaching in his native country, he went to Harvard
University in 1924 as a professor of philosophy. One
of the most original thinkers and influential teachers
of our time, his popular writings include Science
and the Modern World, Adventures of Ideas,
and Process and Reality. The
Aims of Educationwas originally
published by The Macmillan Co.


MT


Ay
w
PUBLISE

BY THE IN
AMERIC 3
LIBRAR


TTT YA
