A History of the Warfare of Science with Theology in Christendom, Vol. 1 (Andrew Dickson White, 1896)
==========================================================
Cornell's founder documents theology's war on science, field by field; the conflict thesis's arsenal. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (historyofwarfare189701whit).

"HISTORY  OF  THE
\. WARFARE  OF  SCI-
iNCE  WITH  THEOLOGY
N  CHRISTENDOM ^1

ANDREW  D.  WHITE


tibrary  of  t:he  theological  Seminar;?

PRINCETON  •  NEW  JERSEY


•d^v-


PRESENTED  BY

The  ERtate  of

Rockwell  S.  Brank

r  _  \  o
BL  245  .W54  v.l

White,  Andrew  Dickson,  1832

1918.
A  history  of  the  warfare  of

science  with  theology  in


A   HISTORY   OF
THE   WARFARE   OF   SCIE
WITH  THEOLOGY


lAH  9    im


IN   CHRISTENDOM


BY

ANDREW    DICKSON    WHITE

LL.  D.  (Yale),   L.  H.  D.  (Columbia),   Ph.  Dr.  (Jena)

LATE    PRESIDENT    AND    PROFESSOR    OF    HISTORY    AT    CORNELL    UNIVERSITY


IN    TWO    VOLUMES
VOL.    I


NEW    YORK
D.    APPLETON    AND    COMPANY

i8q7


QLo  i\)c  Mcmoxx)  of
EZRA     CORNELL

I    DEDICATE   THIS    BOOK.


Thoughts  that  great  hearts  once  broke  for,  we
Breathe  cheaply  in  the  common  air. — Lowell.

Discipulus  est  prion's  posterior  dies. — Publius  Syrus.

Truth  is  the  daughter  of  Time. — Bacon.

The  Truth  shall  make  you  free. — St.  John,  viii,  32.


INTRODUCTION.


My  book  is  ready  for  the  printer,  and  as  I  begin  this
preface  my  eye  lights  upon  the  crowd  of  Russian  peasants
at  work  on  the  Neva  under  my  windows.  With  pick  and
shovel  they  are  letting  the  rays  of  the  April  sun  into  the
great  ice  barrier  which  binds  together  the  modern  quays
and  the  old  granite  fortress  where  lie  the  bones  of  the
Romanoff  Czars.

This  barrier  is  already  weakened  ;  it  is  widely  decayed,
in  many  places  thin,  and  everywhere  treacherous;  but  it  is,
as  a  whole,  so  broad,  so  crystallized  about  old  boulders,  so
imbedded  in  shallows,  so  wedged  into  crannies  on  either
shore,  that  it  is  a  great  danger.  The  waters  from  thou-
sands of  swollen  streamlets  above  are  pressing  behind  it;
wreckage  and  refuse  are  piling  up  against  it ;  every  one
knows  that  it  must  yield.  But  there  is  danger  that  it  may
resist  the  pressure  too  long  and  break  suddenly,  wrenching
even  the  granite  quays  from  their  foundations,  bringing
desolation  to  a  vast  population,  and  leaving,  after  the  sub-
sidence of  the  flood,  a  widespread  residue  of  slime,  a  fer-
tile breeding-bed  for  the  germs  of  disease.

But  the  patient  niujiks  are  doing  the  right  thing.  The
barrier,  exposed  more  and  more  to  the  warmth  of  spring
by  the  scores  of  channels  they  are  making,  will  break  away
gradually,  and  the  river  will  flow  on  beneficent  and  beau-
tiful.

My  work  in  this  book  is  like  that  of  the  Russian  miijik
on  the  Neva.  I  simply  try  to  aid  in  letting  the  light  of
historical  truth  into  that  decaying  mass  of  outworn  thought
which  attaches  the  modern  world  to  mediseval  conceptions


vi  INTRODUCTION.

of  Christianity,  and  which  still  lingers  among  iis — a  most
serious  barrier  to  religion  and  morals,  and  a  menace  to  the
whole  normal  evolution  of  society.

For  behind  this  barrier  also  the  flood  is  rapidly  rising
— the  flood  of  increased  kno\vledp:e  and  new  thousfht  ;  and
this  barrier  also,  though  honeycombed  and  in  many  places
thin,  creates  a  danger — danger  of  a  sudden  breaking  away,
distressing  and  calamitous,  sweeping  before  it  not  onl}-  out-
worn creeds  and  noxious  dogmas,  but  cherished  principles
and  ideals,  and  even  wrenching  out  most  precious  religious
and  moral  foundations  of  the  whole  social  and  political
fabric.

My  hope  is  to  aid — even  if  it  be  but  a  little — in  the
gradual  and  healthful  dissolving  away  of  this  mass  of  un-
reason, that  the  stream  of  *'  religion  pure  and  undefiled  "
may  flow  on  broad  and  clear,  a  blessing  to  humanity.

And  now  a  few  words  regarding  the  evolution  of  this
book.

It  is  something  over  a  quarter  of  a  century  since  I  la-
bored with  Ezra  Cornell  in  founding  the  university  wdiich
bears  his  honored  name.

Our  purpose  w^as  to  establish  in  the  State  of  New  York
an  institution  for  advanced  instruction  and  research,  in
which  science,  pure  and  applied,  should  have  an  equal  place
with  literature  ;  in  which  the  study  of  literature,  ancient
and  modern,  should  be  emancipated  as  much  as  possible
from  pedantry ;  and  which  should  be  free  from  various
useless  trammels  and  vicious  methods  which  at  that  period
hampered  many,  if  not  most,  of  the  American  universities
and  colleges.

We  had  especially  determined  that  the  institution  should
be  under  the  control  of  no  political  party  and  of  no  single
religious  sect,  and  with  Mr.  Cornell's  approval  I  embodied
stringent  provisions  to  this  effect  in  the  charter.

It  had  certainly  never  entered  into  the  mind  of  either
of  us  that  in  all  this  we  were  doing  anything  irreligious  or
unchristian.  Mr.  Cornell  was  reared  a  member  of  the  So-
ciety of  Friends;  he  had  from  his  fortune  liberally  aided
every  form  of  Christian  effort  which  he  found  going  on  about
him,  and  among  the  permanent  trustees  of  the  public  library


INTRODUCTION.  yii

which  he  had  already  founded,  he  had  named  all  the  clergy-
men of  the  town — Catholic  and  Protestant.  As  for  myself,
I  had  been  bred  a  churchman,  had  recently  been  elected  a
trustee  of  one  church  college,  and  a  professor  in  another ;
those  nearest  and  dearest  to  me  were  devoutly  religious  ;
and,  if  I  may  be  allowed  to  speak  of  a  matter  so  personal  to
myself,  my  most  cherished  friendships  were  among  deeply
religious  men  and  women,  and  my  greatest  sources  of  enjoy-
ment were  ecclesiastical  architecture,  religious  music,  and
the  more  devout  forms  of  poetry.  So  far  from  wishing  to
injure  Christianity,  we  both  hoped  to  promote  it  ;  but  we
did  not  confound  religion  with  sectarianism,  and  we  saw  in
the  sectarian  character  of  American  colleges  and  universities,
as  a  whole,  a  reason  for  the  poverty  of  the  advanced  instruc-
tion then  given  in  so  many  of  them.

It  required  no  great  acuteness  to  see  that  a  system  of
control  which,  in  selecting  a  Professor  of  Mathematics  or
Language  or  Rhetoric  or  Physics  or  Chemistry,  asked  first
and  above  all  to  what  sect  or  even  to  what  wing  or  branch  of
a  sect  he  belonged,  could  hardly  do  much  to  advance  the
moral,  religious,  or  intellectual  development  of  mankind.

The  reasons  for  the  new  foundation  seemed  to  us,  then,
so  cogent  that  we  expected  the  co-operation  of  all  good  citi-
zens, and  anticipated  no  opposition  from  any  source.

As  I  look  back  across  the  intervening  years,  I  know  not
whether  to  be  more  astonished  or  amused  at  our  sim-
plicity.

Opposition  began  at  once.  In  the  State  Legislature  it
confronted  us  at  every  turn,  and  it  was  soon  in  full  blaze
throughout  the  State— from  the  good  Protestant  bishop
who  proclaimed  that  all  professors  should  be  in  holy  orders,
since  to  the  Church  alone  was  given  the  command,  **  Go,
teach  all  nations,"  to  the  zealous  priest  who  published  a
charge  that  Goldwin  Smith— a  profoundly  Christian  scholar
— had  come  to  Cornell  in  order  to  inculcate  the  "  infidelity,
of  the  Westminster  Reviezv"  \  and  from  the  eminent  divine
who  went  from  city  to  city  denouncing  the  ''  atheistic  and
pantheistic  tendencies  "  of  the  proposed  education,  to  the
perfervid  minister  who  informed  a  denominational  synod
that  Agassiz,  the  last  great  opponent  of  Darwin,  and  a  de-


viii  INTRODUCTION.

vout  theist,  was  ''  preaching  Darwinism  and  atheism  "  in
the  new  institution.

As  the  struggle  deepened,  as  hostile  resolutions  were  in-
troduced into  various  ecclesiastical  bodies,  as  honored  cler-
gymen solemnly  warned  their  flocks  first  against  the  "athe-
ism," then  against  the  "  infidelity,"  and  finally  against  the
"indifferentism  "  of  the  university,  as  devoted  pastors  en-
deavoured to  dissuade  young  men  from  matriculation,  I
took  the  defensive,  and,  in  answer  to  various  attacks  from
pulpits  and  religious  newspapers,  attempted  to  allay  the
fears  of  the  public.  "  Sweet  reasonableness  "  was  fully  tried.
There  was  established  and  endowed  in  the  university  per-
haps the  most  effective  Christian  pulpit,  and  one  of  the  most
vigorous  branches  of  the  Christian  Association,  then  in  the
United  States ;  but  all  this  did  nothing  to  ward  off  the  at-
tack. The  clause  in  the  charter  of  the  university  forbid-
ding it  to  give  predominance  to  the  doctrines  of  any  sect,
and  above  all  the  fact  that  much  prominence  was  given  to
instruction  in  various  branches  of  science,  seemed  to  prevent
all  compromise,  and  it  soon  became  clear  that  to  stand  on
the  defensive  only  made  matters  worse.  Then  it  was  that
there  was  borne  in  upon  me  a  sense  of  the  real  difficulty —
the  antagonism  between  the  theological  and  scientific  view
of  the  universe  and  of  education  in  relation  to  it;  there-
fore it  was  that,  having  been  invited  to  deliver  a  lecture  in
the  great  hall  of  the  Cooper  Institute  at  New  York,  I  took
as  my  subject  The  Battlefields  of  Science,  maintaining  this
thesis  which  follows:

In  all  modern  history,  interference  with  science  in  the  sup-
posed interest  of  religion,  no  matter  hozv  conscientious  such  in-
terference may  have  been,  Jias  resulted  in  the  direst  evils  both  to
religion  and  to  science,  and  invariably  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,
all  untrammelled  scientific  investigation,  no  matter  how  danger-
ous to  religion  some  of  its  stages  may  have  seemed  for  the  time
to  be,  has  invariably  resulted  in  the  highest  good  both  of  religion
and  of  science.

The  lecture  was  next  day  published  in  the  New  York
Tribune  at  the  request  of  Horace  Greeley,  its  editor,
who  was  also  one  of  the  Cornell  University  trustees.  As
a  result  of  this  widespread  publication    and  of  sundry   at-


INTRODUCTION.  IX

tacks  which  it  elicited,  I  was  asked  to  maintain  my  thesis
before  various  university  associations  and  literary  clubs;
and  I  shall  always  remember  with  gratitude  that  among
those  who  stood  by  me  and  presented  me  on  the  lecture
platform  with  words  of  approval  and  cheer  was  my  re-
vered instructor,  the  Rev.  Dr.  Theodore  D wight  Wool-
sey,  at  that  time  President  of  Yale  College.

My  lecture  grew — first  into  a  couple  of  magazine  articles,
and  then  into  a  little  book  called  The  Warfare  of  Science,
for  which,  when  republished  in  England,  Prof.  John  Tyndall
wrote  a  preface.

Sundry  translations  of  this  little  book  were  published,
but  the  most  curious  thing  in  its  history  is  the  fact  that  a
very  friendly  introduction  to  the  Swedish  translation  was
written  by  a  Lutheran  bishop.

Meanwhile  Prof.  John  W.  Draper  pubHshed  his  book  on
The  Conflict  between  Science  and  Religion,  a  work  of  great
ability,  which,  as  I  then  thought,  ended  the  matter,  so  far
as  my  giving  it  further  attention  was  concerned.

But  two  things  led  me  to  keep  on  developing  my  own
work  in  this  field  :  First,  I  had  become  deeply  interested
in  it,  and  could  not  refrain  from  directing  my  observation
and  study  to  it ;  secondly,  much  as  I  admired  Draper's
treatment  of  the  questions  involved,  his  point  of  view  and
mode  of  looking  at  history  were  different  from  mine.

He  regarded  the  struggle  as  one  between  Science  and  j
Religion.  I  believed  then,  and  am  convinced  now,  that  it  ,
was  a  struggle  between  Science  and  Dogmatic  Theology.

More  and  more  I  saw  that  it  was  the  conflict  between
two  epochs  in  the  evolution  of  human  thought — the  theo-
logical and  the  scientific.

So  I  kept  on,  and  from  time  to  time  published  Neiv
Chapters  in  the  Warfare  of  Science  as  magazine  articles  in
The  Popular  Science  Monthly.  This  was  done  under  many
difficulties.  For  twenty  years,  as  President  of  Cornell  Uni-
versity and  Professor  of  History  in  that  institution,  I  was  im-
mersed in  the  work  of  its  early  development.  Besides  this,
I  could  not  hold  myself  entirely  aloof  from  public  affairs,
and  was  three  times  sent  by  the  Government  of  the  United
States  to  do  public  duty  abroad:    first  as  a  commissioner


X  INTRODUCTION.

to  Santo  Dominc^o,  in  1870;  afterward  as  minister  to  Ger-
many, in  1879;  finally,  as  minister  to  Russia,  in  1892;  and
was  also  called  upon  by  the  State  of  New  York  to  do  con-
siderable labor  in  connection  with  international  exhibitions
at  Philadelphia  and  at  Paris.  I  was  also  obliged  from  time
to  time  to  throw  off  by  travel  the  effects  of  overwork.

The  variety  of  residence  and  occupation  arising  from
these  causes  may  perhaps  explain  some  peculiarities  in  this
book  which  might  otherwise  puzzle  my  reader.

While  these  journeyings  have  enabled  me  to  collect  ma-
terials over  a  very  wide  range— in  the  New  World,  from
Quebec  to  Santo  Domingo  and  from  Boston  to  Mexico,
San  Francisco,  and  Seattle,  and  in  the  Old  World  from
Trondhjem  to  Cairo  and  from  St.  Petersburg  to  Palermo—
they  have  often  obliged  me  to  write  under  circumstances
not  very  favorable :  sometimes  on  an  Atlantic  steamer,
sometimes  on  a  Nile  boat,  and  not  only  in  my  own  library
at  Cornell,  but  in  those  of  Berlin,  Helsingfors,  Munich,  Flor-
ence, and  the  British  Museum.  This  fact  will  explain  to  the
benevolent  reader  not  only  the  citation  of  different  editions
of  the  same  authority  in  different  chapters,  but  some  itera-
tions which  in  the  steady  quiet  of  my  own  library  would
not  have  been  made.

It  has  been  my  constant  endeavour  to  write  for  the  gen-
eral reader,  avoiding  scholastic  and  technical  terms  as  much
as  possible  and  stating  the  truth  simply  as  it  presents  itself
to  me.

That  errors  of  omission  and  commission  will  be  found
here  and  there  is  probable — nay,  certain  ;  but  the  substance
of  the  book  will,  I  believe,  be  found  fully  true.  I  am  en-
couraged in  this  belief  by  the  fact  that,  of  the  three  bitter
attacks  which  this  work  in  its  earlier  form  has  already  en-
countered, one  was  purely  declamatory,  objurgatory,  and
hortatory,  and  the  others  based  upon  ignorance  of  facts  easilv.
pointed  out.

And  here  I  must  express  my  thanks  to  those  who  have
aided  me.  First  and  above  all  to  my  former  student  and
dear  friend.  Prof.  George  Lincoln  Burr,  of  Cornell  Univer-
sity, to  whose  contributions,  suggestions,  criticisms,  and
cautions  I  am   most  deeply  indebted  ;  also  to  my  friends  U.


INTRODUCTION.  xi

G.  Weatherly,  formerly  Travelling  Fellow  of  Cornell,  and
now  Assistant  Professor  in  the  University  of  Indiana, — Prof,
and  Mrs.  Earl  Barnes  and  Prof.  William  H.  Hudson,  of  Stan-
ford University, — and  Prof.  E.  P.  Evans,  formerly  of  the
University  of  Michigan,  but  now  of  Munich,  for  extensive
aid  in  researches  upon  the  lines  I  have  indicated  to  them,
but  which  I  could  never  have  prosecuted  without  their
co-operation.  In  libraries  at  home  and  abroad  they  have
all  worked  for  me  most  effectively,  and  I  am  deeply  grate-
ful to  them.

This  book  is  presented  as  a  sort  of  Festschrift— -Si  tribute
to  Cornell  University  as  it  enters  the  second  quarter-cen-
tury of  its  existence,  and  probably  my  last  tribute.

The  ideas  for  which  so  bitter  a  struggle  was  made  at  its
foundation  have  triumphed.  Its  faculty,  numbering  over
one  hundred  and  fifty ;  its  students,  numbering  but  little
short  of  two  thousand;  its  noble  buildings  and  equipment;
the  munificent  gifts,  now  amounting  to  millions  of  dollars,
which  it  has  received  from  public-spirited  men  and  women  ;
the  evidences  of  public  confidence  on  all  sides;  and,  above
all,  the  adoption  of  its  cardinal  principles  and  main  features
by  various  institutions  of  learning  in  other  States,  show  this
abundantly.  But  there  has  been  a  triumph  far  greater  and
wider.  Everywhere  among  the  leading  modern  nations  the
same  general  tendency  is  seen.  During  the  quarter-century
just  past  the  control  of  public  instruction,  not  only  in  Amer-
ica but  in  the  leading  nations  of  Europe,  has  passed  more
and  more  from  the  clergy  to  the  laity.  Not  only  are  the
presidents  of  the  larger  universities  in  the  United  States,
with  but  one  or  two  exceptions,  laymen,  but  the  same  thing
is  seen  in  the  old  European  strongholds  of  metaphysical
theology.  At  my  first  visit  to  Oxford  and  Cambridge,  forty
years  ago,  they  were  entirely  under  ecclesiastical  control.
Now,  all  this  is  changed.  An  eminent  member  of  the  pres-
ent British  Government  has  recently  said,  **  A  candidate  for
high  university  position  is  handicapped  by  holy  orders."  I
refer  to  this  with  not  the  slightest  feeling  of  hostility  to-
ward the  clergy,  for  I  have  none  ;  among  them  are  many  of
my  dearest  friends  ;  no  one  honours  their  proper  work  more
than  I  ;  but  the  above  fact  is  simply  noted  as  proving  the


xii  INTRODUCTION.

continuance  of  that  evolution  which  I  have  endeavoured  to
describe  in  this  series  of  monographs — an  evolution,  indeed,
in  which  the  warfare  of  Theology  against  Science  has  been
one  of  the  most  active  and  powerful  agents.  My  belief  is
that  in  the  field  left  to  them — their  proper  field — the  clergy
will  more  and  more,  as  they  cease  to  struggle  against  scien-
tific methods  and  conclusions,  do  work  even  nobler  and  more
beautiful  than  anything  they  have  heretofore  done.  And
this  is  saying  much.  My  conviction  is  that  Science,  though
it  has  evidently  conquered  Dogmatic  Theology  based  on
biblical  texts  and  ancient  modes  of  thought,  will  go  hand  in
hand  with  Religion ;  and  that,  although  theological  control
will  continue  to  diminish,  Religion,  as  seen  in  the  recognition
of  "  a  Power  in  the  universe,  not  ourselves,  which  makes  for
righteousness,"  and  in  the  love  of  God  and  of  our  neighbor,
will  steadily  grow  stronger  and  stronger,  not  only  in  the
American  institutions  of  learning  but  in  the  world  at  large.
Thus  may  the  declaration  of  Micah  as  to  the  requirements
of  Jehovah,  the  definition  by  St.  James  of  '*  pure  religion
and  undefiled,"  and,  above  all,  the  precepts  and  ideals  of  the
blessed  Founder  of  Christianity  himself,  be  brought  to  bear
more  and  more  effectively  on  mankind.

I  close  this  preface  some  days  after  its  first  lines  were
written.  The  sun  of  spring  has  done  its  work  on  the  Neva  ;
the  great  river  flows  tranquilly  on,  a  blessing  and  a  joy  ;  the
mujiks  are  foro^otten.

"  A.  D.  W.

Legation  of  the  United  States,  St.  Petersburg,
April  14,  i8g4.

P.  S. — Owing  to  a  wish  to  give  more  thorough  revision
to  some  parts  of  my  work,  it  has  been  withheld  from  the
press  until  the  present  date.

A.  D.  W.

Cornell  University,  Ithaca,  N,  Y.,
August  /J-,  i8g^.


CONTENTS   OF   THE   FIRST   VOLUME.


CHAPTER   I.
FROM   CREATION    TO    EVOLUTION.


PAGE


I.    The  Visible  Universe.

Ancient  and  mediaeval  views  regarding  the  manner  of  creation         .         •     i-4

Regarding  the  matter  of  creation 4-5

Regarding  the  time  of  creation 5-9

Regarding  the  date  of  creation 9

Regarding  the  Creator \o-\^

Regarding  light  and  darkness I2,  13

Rise  of  the  conception  of  an  evolution  :  among  the  Chaldeans,  the  He-
brews, the  Greeks,  the  Romans ^4

Its   survival    through   the    Middle    Ages,    despite  the  disfavour  of   the

Church ^4,15

Its  development  in  modern  times.— The  nebular  hypothesis  and  its  strug-
gle with  theology IS-IQ

The  idea  of  evolution  at  last  victorious 19-22

Our  sacred  books  themselves  an  illustration  of  its  truth    .         .         •  22-24

The  true  reconciliation  of  Science  and  Theology      .         .         .         .         .       24

II.    Theological  Teachings  regarding  the  Animals  and  Man.

Ancient  and  mediaeval  representations  of  the  creation  of  man  .
Literal  acceptance  of  the  book  of  Genesis  by  the  Christian  fathers

By  the  Reformers

By  modern  theologians,  Catholic  and  Protestant

Theological  reasoning  as  to  the  divisions  of  the  animal  kingdom

The  Physiologiis,  the  Bestiaries,  the  Exempla  ....

Beginnings  of  sceptical  observation

Development  of  a  scientific  method  in  the  study  of  Nature
Breaking  down  of  the  theological  theory  of  creation

III.    Theological  and  Scientific  Theories  of  an  Evolution  in  Animated  Nature.

Ideas  of  evolution  among  the  ancients 50-52

In  the  early  Church 52-54

In  the  mediaeval  Church 55.  5

Development  of  these  ideas  from  the  sixteenth  to  the  eighteenth  cen-

.     •                                                                                             .         .  57.  58

tunes -"'  ^


.  24

.     25

.     26

27, 28

28-30

32-36

37-40

40-44

44-49

xiv  CONTENTS   OF    THE    FIRST   VOLUME.

PAGE

The  work  of  De  Maillet 53,  59

Of  Linnceus     . 59-61

Of  Buffon 61

Contributions  to  the   theory  of   evolution   at  the  close  of  the  eighteenth

century .       62

The  work,  of  Treviranus  and  Lamarck      ......  62,  63

Geoffroy  Saint- Hilaire  and  Cuvier    .......  63,  64

Development  of  the  theory  up  to  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century     64-66

The  contributions  of  Darwin  and  Wallace 66-68

The  opposition  of  Agassiz 68,  69

IV.    The  Final  Effort  of  Theology.

Attacks  on  Darwin  and  his  theories  in  England       .         .         .         .  70,  71

In  America 71,  72

Formation  of  sacro-scientific  organizations  to  combat  the  theory  of  evolu-
tion      y2

The  attack  in  France 73

In  Germany •         •         ■         •       73

Conversion  of  Lyell  to  the  theory  of  evolution  ......       74

The  attack  on  Darwin's  Z>t^j-<:^;/^  £'/yJ/rt'«  .         .....  74-77

Difference  between  this  and  the  former  attack  .         .         .         .  77,  78

Hostility  to  Darwinism  in  America 7S-81

Change  in  the  tone  of  the  controversy. — Attempts  at  compromise   .  81,  82

Dying-out  of  opposition  to  evolution  .......       83

Last  outbursts  of  theological  hostility 83-85

Final  victory  of  evolution 86


CHAPTER   11.

GEOGRAPHY.

I.  The  Form  of  the  Earth.

Primitive  conception  of  the  earth  as  flat 89

In  Chaldea  and  Egypt 89

In  Persia 90

Among  the  Hebrews 90

Evolution,  among  the  Greeks,  of  the  idea  of  its  sphericity         ...       91
Opposition  of  the  early  Church         .         .         .         .        •.         .         .  91,92

Evolution  of  a  sacred  theory,  drawn  from  the  Bible  ....       92

Its  completion  by  Cosmas  Indicopleustes  .....  93-95

Its  influence  on  Christian  thought 95-97

Sui"vival  of  the  idea  of  the  earth's  sphericity — its  acceptance  by  Isidore

and  Bede 97

Its  struggle  and  final  victory 97,  98

II.  llie  Delineation  of  the  Earth.

Belief  of  every  ancient  people  that  its  own  central  place  was  the  centre

of  the  earth 98

Hebrew  conviction  that  the  earth's  centre  was  at  Jerusalem     .         .         -99


CONTENTS   OF    THE    FIRST   VOLUME.  xv


PAGE
lOO


Acceptance  of  this  view  by  Christianity 99

Influence  of  other   Hebrew   conceptions— Gog  and   Magog,  the    "  four

winds,"  the  waters  "  on  an  heap  " 101,102

III.  The  Inhabitants  of  the  Earth.

The  idea  of  antipodes 102

Its  opposition  by  the  Christian  Church— Gregory  Nazianzen,  Lactantius,
Basil,  Ambrose,  Augustine,  Procopius  of  Gaza,  Cosmas,  Isi-
dore          102-104

Virgil  of  Salzburg's  assertion  of  it  in  the  eighth  century    .         .         .      105,  106
Its  revival  by  William  of  Conches  and  Albert  the  Great  in  the   thir-
teenth   106

Surrender  of  it  by  Nicolas  d'Oresme 106

Fate  of  Peter  of  Abano  and  Cecco  d'AscoIi 106,  107

Timidity  of  Pierre  d'Ailly  and  Tostatus 107,  io3

Theological  hindrance  of  Columbus 108

Pope  Alexander  VI's  demarcation  line 108

Cautious  conservatism  of  Gregory  Reysch 109

Magellan  and  the  victory  of  science •      109,110

IV.  The  Size  of  the  Earth.

Scientific  attempts  at  measuring  the  earth no

The  sacred  solution  of  the  problem i  ^  i

Fortunate  influence  of  the  blunder  upon  Columbus 112

V.  The  Character  of  the  Earth's  Surface.

Servetus  and  the  charge  of  denying  the  fertility  of  Judea  .         .      112,  113

Contrast  between  the  theological  and  the  religious  spirit  in  their  effects

on  science  .         .         .         .         • -113


CHAPTER    III.
ASTRONOMY.

I.  The  Old  Sacred  Theory  of  the  Universe.

The  early  Church's  conviction  of  the  uselessness  of  astronomy  .         .114

The  growth  of  a  sacred  theory— Origen,  the  Gnostics,  Philastrius,  Cos-
mas, Isidore 114.  "5

The  geocentric,  or  Ptolemaic,  theory  :  its  origin,  and  its  acceptance  by  the

Christian  world -iiS

Development  of  the  new  sacred  system  of  astronomy — the  pseudo-Dio-

nysius,  Peter  Lombard,  Thomas  Aquinas 116,  117

Its  popularization  by  Dante       .         .         .  .         •         •  •         •         •      u?

Its  details 118-120

Its  persistence  to  modern  times 120

II.  The  Heliocentric  Theory.

Its  rise  among  the  Greeks — Pythagoras,  Philolaus,  Aristarchus         .         .      120
Its  suppression  by  the  charge  of  blasphemy       ,         .         .         .         •         .     i2i


xvi  CONTENTS   OF   THE   FIRST   VOLUxME.


PAGE


Its  loss  from  sight  for  six  hundred  years,  then  for  a  thousand  .  .  .121
Its  revival  by  Nicholas  de  Cusa  and  Nicholas  Copernicus         .         .      1 21-124

Its  toleration  as  a  hypothesis .         .124

Its  prohibition  as  soon  as  Galileo  teaches  it  as  a  truth  .  .  .  .124
Consequent  timidity  of  scholars — Acosta,  Apian  ....  125,126
Protestantism  not  less  zealous  in  opposition  than  Catholicism — Luther,

Melanchthon,  Calvin,  Turretin 126,  127

This  opposition    especially   persistent   in   England — Hutchinson,    Pike,

Home,  Horsley,  Forbes,  Owen,  Wesley    .....      127,  128

Resulting  interferences  with  freedom  of  teaching     .         .          .         .      128,  129

Giordano  Bruno's  boldness  and  his  fate     .         .         .         .         .         .         .130

The  truth  demonstrated  by  the  telescope  of  Galileo         ....     130

III.  The  War  upon  Galileo.

Concentration  of  the  war  on  this  new  champion 130

The  first  attack 131,  132

Fresh  attacks — Elci,  Busaeus,  Caccini,  Lorini,  Bellarmin  .         .       132-134

Use  of  epithets 135

Attempts  to  entrap  Galileo 136

His  summons  before  the  Inquisition  at  Rome 137

The  injunction  to  silence,  and  the  condemnation  of  the  theory  of  the

earth's  motion,  1616  .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .  .      137,  138

The  work  of  Copernicus  placed  on  the /«^t'x  ......     138

Galileo's  seclusion 138

Renewed  attacks  upon  Galileo — Inchofer,  Fromundus     .         .         .139,  140

IV.  Victory  of  the  Church  over  Galileo.

Publication  of  his  Dialogo,  1632         ........     140

Hostility  of  Pope  Urban  VIII 141

Galileo's  second  trial  by  the  Inquisition 141,  142

His  abjuration 143

Later  persecution  of  him .     143

Measures  to  complete  the  destruction  of  the  Copernican  theory        .      143-146
Persecution  of  Galileo's  memory        .......      146,  147

Protestant  hostility  to  the  new  astronomy  and  its  champions    .  .      147-152


V.  Results  of  the  Victory  over  Galileo.

Rejoicings  of  churchmen  over  the  victory

The  silencing  of  Descartes

Persecution  of  Campanella  and  of  Kepler

Persistence  and  victory  of  science     .

Dilemma  of  the  theologians

Vain  attempts  to  postpone  the  surrender  .


•  152

.     152

•  153

•  154
154,  155
155-157


VI.    The  Retreat  of  the  Church  after  its  Victoiy  over  Galileo.

The  easy  path  for  the  Protestant  theologians 158

The  difficulties  of  the  older  Church. — The  papal  infallibility  fully  com-
mitted against  the  Copernican  theory         .         .         .         .         .         .     15S

Attempts  at   evasion — first  plea:  that  Galileo  was  condemned  not  for

affirming  the  earth's  motion,  but  for  supporting  it  from  Scripture      .     159


CONTENTS   OF    THE    FIRST   VOLUME.


XVll


PAGE

II^  ^:isy  refutation      .         .         .         , 159,  160

Second  plea  :   that  he  was  condemned  not  for  heresy,  but  for  contumacy     160

Folly  of  this  assertion 160

Third  plea  :  that  it  was  all  a  quarrel  between  Aristotelian  professors  and

those  favouring  the  experimental  method 161

Fourth  plea  :  that  the  condemnation  of  Galileo  was  "  provisory  "  .  .  161
Fifth  plea  :  that  he  was  no  more  a  victim  of  Catholics  than  of  Protestants     161

Efforts  to  blacken  Galileo's  character 162

Efforts  to  suppress  the  documents  of  his  trial 162

Their  fruitlessness     ...........     163

Sixth  plea:  that  the  popes  as  popes  had  never  condemned  his  theory        .     163

Its  confutation  from  their  own  mouths 163,  164

Abandonment  of  the  contention  by  honest  Catholics  .  .  .  165,  166
Two  efforts  at  compromise — Newman,  De  Bonald    ....      166,  167

Effect  of  all  this  on  thinking  men 167,  168

The  fault  not  in  Catholicism  more  than  in  Protestantism — not  in  religion,

but  in  theology  . 168-170


CFIAPTER    IV.
FROM    "SIGNS   AND    WONDERS"   TO    LAW    IN   THE   HEAVENS.

The  Theological  Viezu.
Early  beliefs  as  to  comets,  meteors,  and  eclipses       ....      171-173

Their  inheritance  by  Jews  and  Christians  ......     173

The  belief  regarding  comets  especially  harmful  as  a  source  of  supersti-
tious terror 174

Its  transmission  through  the  Middle  Ages         .....       174-176

Its  culmination  under  Pope  Calixtus  III  .......     177

Beginnings  of  scepticism — Copernicus,  Paracelsus,  Scaliger      .         .  .     178

Firmness  of  theologians.  Catholic  and  Protestant,  in  its  support        .      178-183


Theological  Efforts  to  crush  the  Scientific  Vietv.

The  effort  through  the  universities. — The  effort  through  the  pulpits

Heerbrand  at  Tubingen  and  Dieterich  at  Marburg

Maestlin  at  Heidelberg     .....

Bii'ttner,  Vossius,  Torreblanca,  Fromundus

Father  Augustin  de  Angelis  at  Rome

Reinzer  at  Linz  ......

Celichius  at  Magdeburg     .....

Conrad  Dieterich's  sermon  at  Ulm    .

Erni  and  others  in  Switzerland

Comet  doggerel  ......

Echoes  from  New  England — Danforth,  Morton,  Increase  Mather


.  1S3

.  184

.  184

185,  186

186-188

188,  189

.  190

191-193

193,  194

•  193

194-196


III.    The  Invasion  of  Scepticisju.

Rationalism  of  Cotton  Mather,  and  its  cause 196,  197

Blaise  de  Vigenere 197

Erastus 198

Bekker,  Lubienitzky,  Pierre  Petit 198


XVlll


CONTENTS   OF   THE    FIRST   VOLUxME.


Bayle

Fontenelle

The  scientific  movement  beneath  ail  thi


PAGB

.       2CO

2CO,  201


IV.    Theological  Efforts  at  CoJ7ipromise.—  The  Final  Victory  of  Science.

The  admission  that  some  comets  are  supralunar 202

Difference  between  scientific  and  theological  reasoning   .         .         .      202,  203
Development  of  the   reasoning  of  Tycho  and   Kepler — Cassini,  Hevel,

Doerfel,  Bernouilli,  Newton 203

Completion  of  the  victory  by  Halley  and  Clairaut    ....      203,  204
Survivals  of  the  superstition — Joseph  de  Maistre,  Forster         .         .         .     205

Arago's  statistics 205

The  theories  of  Whiston  and  Burnet,  and  their  influence  in  Germany     .     206
The  superstition  ended  in  America  by  the  lectures  of  Winthrop      .         .     207

Helpful  influence  of  John  Wesley 207

Effects  of  the  victory 207,  208


CHAPTER   V.

FROM  GENESIS  TO  GEOLOGY.

Growth  of  Theological  Explanations.
Germs  of  geological  truth  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans
Attitude  of  the  Church  toward  science
Geological  theories  of  the  early  theologians
Attitude  of  the  schoolmen
Contributions  of  the  Arabian  schools
Theories  of  the  earlier  Protestants    .
Influence  of  the  revival  of  learning  .


.  209
.     209

210,  211
.  212
.     212

212,  213
.     214


II.  Efforts  to  Suppress  the  Scientific  View.

Revival  of  scientific  methods 214,215

Buffon  and  the  Sorbonne -215

Beringer's  treatise  on  fossils      .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .216,  217

Protestant  opposition  to  the  new  geology — the  works  of  Burnet,  Whis-

ton,  Wesley,  Clark,  Watson,  Arnold,  Cockburn,  and  others    .    .      217-225

III.  The  First  Great  Effort  at  Compromise,  based  on  the  Flood  of  Noah.

The  theory  that  fossils  were  produced  by  the  Deluge       .         .         .  .225

Its  acceptance  by  both  Catholics  and  Protestants — Luther,  Calmet  .     226

Burnet,  Whiston,  Woodward,  Mazurier,  Torrubia,  Increase  Mather  .     227

Scheuchzer        .......         22S

Voltaire's  theory  of  fossils         . •  •     229

Vain  efforts  of  enlightened  churchmen  in  behalf  of  the  scientific  view  229,  230

Steady  progress  of  science — the  work  of  Cuvier  and  Brongniart        .  230,  231

Granville  Penn's  opposition      .         .          .         .          .          .         •         •  .231

The  defection  of  Buckland  and  Lyell  to  the  scientific  side        .         .  232,233

Surrender  of  the  theologians 234-236

Remnants  of  the  old  belief 236,  237


CONTENTS   OF    THE    FIRST   VOLUiME.  xix

PAGE

Death-blow  given  to  the  traditional  theory  of  the  Deluge  by  the  discov-
ery of  the  Chaldean  accounts     .....  .      237,  238

Results  of  the  theological  opposition  to  science        ....      238,  239

I V.  Final  Efforts  at  Compromise —  The  Victory  of  Science  complete.

Efforts  of  Carl  von  Raumer,  Wagner,  and  others      ....      239,  240
The  new  testimony  of  the  caves  and  beds  of  drift  as  to  the  antiquity  of

man 240

Gosse's  effort  to  save  the  literal  interpretation  of  Genesis         .         .      241,  242
Efforts  of  Continental   theologians    .......      242,  243

Gladstone's  attempt  at  a  compromise         ......      243,  244

Its  demolition  by  Huxley  .         .  .         .  .         .         .         .         .     245

By  Canon  Driver 246

Dean  Stanley  on  the  reconciliation  of  Science  and  Scripture    .         .         .     247


CHAPTER   VI.

THE   ANTIQUITY   OF    MAN,    EGYPTOLOGY,    AND    ASSYRIOLOGY.

I.  The  Sacred  Chronology.

Two  fields  in  which  Science  has  gained  a  definite  victory  over  Theology      249
Opinions  of  the  Church  fathers  on  the  antiquity  of  man   .         .         .      249-251

The  chronology  of  Isidore 251

OfBede 251

Of  the  mediaeval  Jewish  scholars        . 252

The  views  of  the  Reformers  on  the  antiquity  of  man         .         .         .      252,253

Of  the  Roman  Church 253

Of  Archbishop  Usher 253

Influence  of  Egyptology  on  the  belief  in  man's  antiquity  .         .  .     2'-4

La  Peyr^re's  theory  of  the  Pre- Adamites 255

Opposition  in  England  to  the  new  chronology 255,256

II.  The  New  Chronology.

Influence  of  the  new  science  of  Egyptology  on  biblical  chronology  .  .     257

Manetho's  history  of  Egypt  and  the  new  chronology  derived  from  it      257-259
Evidence  of  the  antiquity  of  man  furnished  by  the  monuments  of

Egypt 259,260

By  her  art 260,  261

By  her  science 261   262

By  other  elements  of  civilization        . 262

By  the  remains  found  in  the  bed  of  the  Nile 263

Evidence  furnished  by  the  study  of  Assyriology 264


CHAPTER   VII.

THE  ANTIQUITY    OF   MAN    AND    PREHISTORIC    ARCH/EOLOGY.
The  Thutidei'-stones.

Early  beliefs  regarding  "  thunder-stones  " 266

Theories  of  Mercati  and  Tollius  regarding  them 267


XX  CONTENTS   OF    THE    FIRST   VOLUME.


PAGE


Their  identification  with  the  implements  of  prehistoric  man     .         .      267,  268

Remains  of  man  found  in  caverns 268,  269

Unfavourable  influence  on  scientific  activity  of  the  political  conditions  of

the  early  part  of  the  nineteenth  century     ......     269

Change  effected  by  the  French  Revolution  of  1830  .         ,         .         .         .     270
Rallying  of  the  reactionary  clerical  influence  against  science    .         .      270,  271

II.    The  Flint  Weapons  and  Implements.

Boucher  de  Perthes's  contributions  to  the  knowledge  of  prehistoric  man  271-273

•     273

273,  274

274.  275
276,  277
277-280
281-2S3


His  conclusions  confirmed  by  Lyell  and  others

Cave  explorations  of  Lartet  and  Christy    .

Evidence  of  man's  existence  furnished  by  rude  carvings

Cave  explorations  in  the  British  Islands   .

Evidence  of  man's  existence  in  the  Drift  period

In  the  early  Quaternary  and  in  the  Tertiary  periods


CHAPTER   VIII.

THE   "FALL   OF   MAN"   AND    ANTHROPOLOGY.

The  two  antagonistic  views  regarding  the  life  of  man  on  the  earth  .  .  284
The  theory  of  "  the  Fall  "  among  ancient  peoples    ....      285,  286

Inheritance  of  this  view  by  the  Christian  Church 286

Appearance  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans  of  the  theory  of  a  rise  of

man 286,  287

Its  disappearance  during  the  Middle  Ages        .         .         .         .         .         .     288

Its  development  since  the  seventeenth  century 288

The  first  blow  at  the  doctrine  of  "  the  Fall  "  comes  from  geology  .  .  289
Influence  of  anthropology  on  the  belief  in  this  doctrine  ....  289
The  finding  of  human  skulls  in  Quaternary  deposits  ....     lop

Their  significance 290,  29I

Results  obtained  from  the  comparative  study  of  the  remains  of  human

handiwork 291

Discovery  of  human  remains  in  shell-heaps  on  the  shores  of  the  Baltic  Sea  292
In  peat-beds      ...........      292,  293

The  lake-dwellers      . 294, 295

Indications  of  the  upward  direction  of  man's  development  .  .  .  295
Mr.  Southall's  attack  on  the  theory  of  man's  antiquity      ....     296

An  answer  to  it .         .         .         .     297

Discovery  of  prehistoric  human  remains  in  Egypt    ....      297-299

Hamard's  attack  on  the  new  scientific  conclusions 300

The  survival  of  prehistoric  implements  in  religious  rites  .  .  .      300,  301

Strength  of  the  argument  against  the  theory  of  "  the  Fall  of  Man  "  .         .     301


CHAPTER    IX.

THE   "  FALL   OF   MAN  "    AND    ETHNOLOGY.

The  beginnings  of  the  science  of  Comparative  Ethnology         .         .         .     303
Its  testimony  to  the  upward  tendency  of  man  from  low  beginnings .      303,  304


CONTENTS   OF    THE    FIRST   VOLUME.  xxi


PAGE


Theological  efforts  to  break  its  force — De  Maistre  and  Do  IjonalJ  .  .     304

Whately's  attempt 304,  305

The  attempt  of  the  Duke  of  Argyll .      305-307

Evidence  of  man's  upward  tendency  derived  from  Comparative  Philology     307

From  Comparative  Literature  and  Folklore 308

From  Comparative  Ethnography 308

From  Biology 308

CHAPTER    X.

THE    "  FALL    OF   MAN  "   AND    HISTORY.

Proof  of  progress  given  by  the  history  of  art 310

Proofs  from  general  history        .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .310

Development  of  civilization  even  under  unfavourable  circumstances      310,  311
Advancement  even  through  catastrophes  and   the   decay  of  civil-
izations  311,312

Progress  not  confined  to  man's  material  condition     .  .  ,         .  .312

Theological  struggle  against  the  new  scientific  view  ....     313

Persecution  of  Prof  Winchell    ........      313-315

Of  Dr.  Woodrow .      316-318

Other  interferences  with  freedom  of  teaching   .         .         .  .         .  .319

The  great  harm  thus  done  to  religion         .......     320

Rise  of  a  better  spirit 320

The  service  rendered  to  religion  by  Anthropology    ....      320-322


CHAPTER    XL

FROM    "THE   PRINCE   OF   THE   POWER   OF   THE    AIR  "   TO    METEOROLOGY.

L   Growth  of  a  Theological  Theory.

The  beliefs  of  classical  antiquity  regarding  storms,  thunder,  and  lightning     323
Development  of  a  sacred  science  of  meteorology  by  the  fathers  of  the

Church        .         .         .         .         .         .  .  .         .  .  .      323-3215

Theories  of  Cosmas  Lidicopleustes   ........     325

Of  Isidore  of  Seville  ...........     326

OfBede 326-328

Of  Rabanus  Maurus 328

Rational  views  of  Honorius  of  Autun        ......      328,  329

Orthodox  theories  of  John  of  San  Geminiano 329

Attempt  of  Albert  the  Great  to  reconcile  the  speculations  of  Aristotle

with  the  theological  views 329

The  monkish  encyclopedists      .........     330

Theories  regarding  the  rainbow  and  the  causes  of  storms  .         .      330,331

Meteorological  phenomena  attributed  to  the  Almighty     .         .         .      331-335

II.  Diabolical  Agency  ill  Storms.

Meteorological  phenomena  attributed  to  the  devil — "  the  prince  of

the  power  of  the  air  " 336,  337

Propagation  of  this  belief  by  the  mediaeval  theologians     .         .         .      337,338
Its  transmission  to  both  Catholics  and  Protestants — Eck,  Luther     .         .     339


xxii  CONTENTS   OF   THE    FIRST    VOLUME.

PAGE

The  great  work  of  Delrio 339

Guacci's  Compendium 340

The  employment  of  prayer  against  "  the  powers  of  the  air  "     .         .         .     340

Of  exorcisms 340-342

Of  fetiches  and  processions 342-344

Of  consecrated  church  bells 344-350

III.  The  Agency  of  Witches.

The  fearful  results  of  the  witch  superstition 350

Its  growth  out  of  the  doctrine  of  evil  agency  in  atmospheric  phenomena     351

Archbishop  Agobard's  futile  attempt  to  dispel  it 351

Its  sanction  by  the  popes -351,  352

Its  support  by  confessions  extracted  by  torture  ....      352,  353

Part  taken  in  the  persecution  by  Dominicans  and  Jesuits  .         .         .     353

Opponents  of   the  witch  theory — Pomponatius,   Paracelsus,  Agrippa  of

Nettesheim 354,  355

Jean  Bodin's  defence  of  the  superstition 355

Fate  of  Cornelius  Loos 356

Of  Dietrich  Flade 356,  357

Efforts  of  Spee  to  stem  the  persecution     .......     357

His  posthumous  influence 358

Upholders  of  the  orthodox  view — Bishop  Binsfeld,  Remigius  .         .         .     358

Vain  protests  of  Wier 359

Persecution  of  Bekker  for  opposing  the  popular  belief  ....  359
Effect  of  the  Refoi-mation  in  deepening  the  superstition  .  .  .  359,  360
The  persecution  in  Great  Britain  and  America  ....  360,  361
Development  of  a  scientific  view  of  the  heavens  .....  362
Final  efforts  to  revive  the  old  belief 362,  363

IV.  Franklin's  Lightning-Rod.

Franklin's  experiments  with  the  kite          .......  364

Their  effect  on  the  old  belief 364

Efforts  at  compromise  between  the  scientific  and  theological  theories       .  365

Successful  use  of  the  lightning-rod    . 5C5

Religious  scruples  against  it  in  America   .......  366

In  England 367

In  Austria 367

In  Italy 367,  368

Victory  of  the  scientific  theory  .........  368

This  victory  exemplified  in  the  case  of  the  church  of  the  monastery  of

Lerins 369-371

In  the  case  of  Dr.  Moorhouse 372

In  the  case  of  the  Missouri  droughts          .......  372

CHAPTER   XII.

FROM    MAGIC   TO    CHEMISTRY    AND    PHYSICS.

I.    The  Supremacy  of  Magic.

Primitive  tendency  to  belief  in  magic        .       • 373

The  Gi'eek  conception  of  natural  laws 374


CONTENTS   OF    THE    FIRST    VOLUME.


XXIU


375-377
•     377

377,378
.     378

379. 380
to  nought     381


PAGE

Influence  of  Plato  and  Aristotle  on  the  growth  of  science  .         .      374.  375

Effect  of  the  establishment  of  Christianity  on  the  development  of  the

physical  sciences         ....•••
The  revival  of  thought  in  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries

Albert  the  Great

Vincent  of  Beauvais

Thomas  Aquinas

Roger  Bacon's  beginnings  of  the  experimental  method  brought
The  belief  that  science  is  futile  gives  place  to  the  belief  that
gerous         ..•••••

The  two  kinds  of  magic

Rarity  of  persecution  for  magic  before  the  Christian

The  Christian  theory  of  devils  .  .         .         •

Constantine's  laws  against  magic

Increasing  terror  of  magic  and  witchcraft

Papal  enactments  against  them

Persistence  of  the  belief  in  magic

Its  effect  on  the  development  of  science    .

Roger  Bacon

Opposition  of  secular  rulers  to  science

John  Baptist  Porta

The  opposition  to  scientific  societies  in  Italy    .


In  England

The  effort  to  turn  all  thought  from  science  to  religion

The  development  of  mystic  theology

Its  harmful  influence  on  science

Mixture  of  theological  with  scientific  speculation

This  shown  in  the  case  of  Melanchthon    .

In  that  of  Francis  Bacon

Theological  theory  of  gases        ....
Growth  of  a  scientific  theory      ....
Basil  Valentine  and  his  contributions  to  chemistry
Triumph  of  the  scientific  theory

The  Tr'mmph  of  Chemistry  and  Physics.

New  epoch  in  chemistry  begun  by  Boyle

Attitude  of  the  mob  toward  science •

Effect  on  science  of  the  reaction  following  the  French  Revolution    .
Development  of  chemistry  since  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century

Development  of  physics

Modern  opposition  to  science  in  Catholic  countries  ,         .         .         •

Attack  on  scientific  education  in  France

In  England •         •

In  Prussia

Revolt  against  the  subordination  of  education  to  science  .
Effect  of  the  International  Exhibition  of  185 1  at  London
Of  the  endowment  of  State  colleges  in  America  by  the  Morrill  Act

of  1862

The  results  to  religion


.  381
.  381
.  382
.     3S2

•  383
383. 384
384,  385

.  385
385, 386
386-390
391.  392

•  392
.  393
.     394


•  394
.     395

395-397
397,  398

•  399
400,  401

.     402
.     402

•  403
.     403


.     404
.     405

405,  406
.     406

406,  407
.     408

409,  410
.  411
.     411

411,412
.     413

413,414
414,415


THE  WARFARE   OF  SCIENCE

WITH    THEOLOGY.


CHAPTER    I.

FROM   CREATION    TO   EVOLUTION.

I.    THE   VISIBLE    UNIVERSE.

Among  those  masses  of  cathedral  sculpture  which  pre-
serve so  much  of  mediaeval  theology,  one  frequently  recur-
ring group  is  noteworthy  for  its  presentment  of  a  time-
honoured  doctrine  regarding  the  origin  of  the  universe.

The  Almighty,  in  human  form,  sits  benignly,  making  the
sun,  moon,  and  stars,  and  hanging  them  from  the  solid  firma-
ment which  supports  the  "  heaven  above  "  and  overarches
the  "  earth  beneath."

The  furrows  of  thought  on  the  Creator's  brow  show  that
in  this  work  he  is  obliged  to  contrive;  the  knotted  muscles
upon  his  arms  show  that  he  is  obliged  to  toil ;  naturally,
then,  the  sculptors  and  painters  of  the  mediseval  and  early
modern  period  frequently  represented  him  as  the  writers
whose  conceptions  they  embodied  had  done — as,  on  the
seventh  day,  weary  after  thought  and  toil,  enjoying  well-
earned  repose  and  the  plaudits  of  the  hosts  of  heaven.

In  these  thought-fossils  of  the  cathedrals,  and  in  other
revelations  of  the  same  idea  through  sculpture,  painting,
glass-staining,  mosaic  work,  and  engraving,  during  the  Mid-
dle Ages  and  the  two  centuries  following,  culminated  a  be-
lief which  had  been  developed  through  thousands  of  years,
and  which  has  determined  the  world's  thought  until  our
own  time.

Its  beginnings  lie  far  back  in  human   history  ;  we  find

2  I


2  FROM   CREATION    TO    EVOLUTION.

them  among  the  early  records  of  nearly  all  the  great  civiliza-
tions, and  they  hold  a  most  prominent  place  in  the  various
sacred  books  of  the  world.  In  nearly  all  of  them  is  revealed
the  conception  of  a  Creator  of  whom  man  is  an  imperfect
image,  and  who  literally  and  directly  created  the  visible
universe  with  his  hands  and  fingers.

Among  these  theories,  of  especial  interest  to  us  are  those
which  controlled  theological  thought  in  Chaldea.  The  As-
syrian inscriptions  which  have  been  recently  recovered  and
given  to  the  English-speaking  peoples  by  La^^ard,  George
Smith,  Sayce,  and  others,  show  that  in  the  ancient  religions
of  Chaldea  and  Babylonia  there  was  elaborated  a  narrative
of  the  creation  which,  in  its  most  important  features,  must
have  been  the  source  of  that  in  our  own  sacred  books.  It
has  now  become  perfectly  clear  that  from  the  same  sources
Avhich  inspired  the  accounts  of  the  creation  of  the  universe
among  the  Chaldeo-Babylonian,  the  Assyrian,  the  Phoenician,
and  other  ancient  civilizations  came  the  ideas  which  hold  so
prominent  a  place  in  the  sacred  books  of  the  Hebrews.  In
the  two  accounts  imperfectly  fused  together  in  Genesis,  and
also  in  the  account  of  which  we  have  indications  in  the  book
of  Job  and  in  the  Proverbs,  there  is  presented,  often  with
the  greatest  sublimity,  the  same  early  conception  of  the
Creator  and  of  the  creation — the  conception,  so  natural  in
the  childhood  of  civilization,  of  a  Creator  who  is  an  enlarged
human  being  working  literally  with  his  own  hands,  and  of  a
creation  w^hich  is  "  the  work  of  his  fingers."  To  supplement
this  view  there  was  developed  the  belief  in  this  Creator  as

one  who,  having

.  .  .  "from  his  ample  palm
Launched  forth  the  rolling  planets  into  space,"

sits  on  high,  enthroned  ''upon  the  circle  of  the  heavens,"
perpetually  controlling  and  directing  them.

From  this  idea  of  creation  was  evolved  in  time  a  some-
what nobler  view.  Ancient  thinkers,  and  especially,  as  is
now  found,  in  Egypt,  suggested  that  the  main  agency  in
creation  was  not  the  hands  and  fingers  of  the  Creator,  but
his  voice.  Hence  w^as  mingled  with  the  earlier,  cruder  be-
lief regarding  the  origin  of  the  earth  and  heavenly  bodies
by  the  Almighty  the  more   impressive   idea  that  *' he  spake


THE   VISIBLE    UNIVERSE.  3

and  they  were  made  " — that  they  were  brought  into  exist-
ence by  his  word.'^

Among-  the  early  fathers  of  the  Church  this  general  view
of  creation  became  fundamental ;  they  impressed  upon
Christendom  more  and  more  strongly  the  belief  that  the
universe  was  created  in  a  perfectly  literal  sense  by  the  hands
or  voice  of  God.  Here  and  there  sundry  theologians  of
larger  mind  attempted  to  give  a  more  spiritual  view  regard-
ing some  parts  of  the  creative  work,  and  of  these  were  St.
Gregory  of  Nyssa  and  St.  Augustine.  Ready  as  they  were
to  accept  the  literal  text  of  Scripture,  they  revolted  against
the  conception  of  an  actual  creation  of  the  universe  by  the
hands  and  fingers  of  a  Supreme  Being,  and  in  this  they  were
followed  by  Bede  and  a  few  others;  but  the  more  material
conceptions  prevailed,  and  we  find  these  taking  shape  not
only  in  the  sculptures  and  mosaics  and  stained  glass  of  cathe-
drals, and  in  the  illuminations  of  missals  and  psalters,  but
later,  at  the  close  of  the  Middle  Ages,  in  the  pictured  Bibles
and  in  general  literature.

Into  the  Anglo-Saxon  mind  this  ancient  material  concep-
tion of  the  creation  was  riveted  by  two  poets  whose  works

*  Among  the  many  mediaeval  representations  of  the  creation  of  the  universe,  I
especially  recall  from  personal  observation  those  sculptured  above  the  portals  of
the  cathedrals  of  Freiburg  and  Upsala,  the  paintings  on  the  walls  of  the  Campo
Santo  at  Pisa,  and,  most  striking  of  all,  the  mosaics  of  the  Cathedral  of  Monreale
and  those  in  the  Cappella  Palatina  at  Palermo.  Among  peculiarities  showing  the
simplicity  of  the  earlier  conception  the  representation  of  the  repose  of  the  Almighty
on  the  seventh  day  is  very  striking.  He  is  shown  as  seated  in  almost  the  exact
attitude  of  the  "Weary  Mercury"  of  classic  sculpture — bent,  and  with  a  very
marked  expression  of  fatigue  upon  his  countenance  and  in  the  whole  disposition  of
his  body.

The  Monreale  mosaics  are  pictured  in  the  great  work  of  Gravina,  and  the  Pisa
frescoes  in  Didron's  Icotjogfaphie,  Paris,  1843,  p.  598.  For  an  exact  statement  of  the
resemblances  which  have  settled  the  question  among  the  most  eminent  scholars  in
favour  of  the  derivation  of  tlie  Hebrew  cosmogony  from  that  of  Assyria,  see  Jensen,
Die  Kosmologie  de)-  Bahylonier,  Strassburg,  1890,  pp.  304,  306  ;  also  Franz  Lukas,
Die  Gritndbegriffe  in  den  Kosmog7'aphien  der  altejt  Volker,  I  eipsic,  1893,  pp.  35-
46  ;  also  George  Smith's  Chaldean  Genesis,  especially  the  German  translation  with
additions  by  Delitzsch,  Leipsic,  1876,  and  Schrader,  Die  Keilinschriften  tmd  das
Alte  Testament,  Giessen,  18S3,  pp.  1-54,  etc.  See  also  Renan,  Histoire  du  peuple
d' Israel,  vol.  i,  chap,  i,  V antique  influence  bahylonienne.  For  Egyptian  views  re-
garding creation,  and  especially  for  the  transition  from  the  idea  of  creation  by  the
hands  and  fingers  of  the  Creator  to  creation  by  his  voice  and  his  "  word,"  see
Maspcro  and  Sayce,  The  Dazvft  of  Civilization,  pp.  145-146.


4  FROM  CREATION  TO  EVOLUTION.

appealed  especially  to  the  deeper  religious  feelings.  In  the
seventh  century  Casdmon  paraphrased  the  account  given  in
Genesis,  bringing  out  this  material  conception  in  the  most
literal  form  ;  and  a  thousand  years  later  Milton  developed
out  of  the  various  statements  in  the  Old  Testament,  mingled
with  a  theology  regarding  "  the  creative  Word  "  which  had
been  drawn  from  the  New,  his  description  of  the  creation  by
the  second  person  in  the  Trinity,  than  which  nothing  could
be  more  literal  and  material :

"  He  took  the  golden  compasses,  prepared
In  God's  eternal  store,  to  circumscribe
This  universe  and  all  created  things.
One  foot  he  centred,  and  the  other  turned
Round  through  the  vast  profundity  obscure,
And  said,  '  Thus  far  extend,  thus  far  thy  bounds :
This  be  thy  just  circumference,  O  world  ! ' "  *

So  much  for  the  orthodox  view  of  the  manner  oi  creation.

The  next  point  developed  in  this  theologic  evolution  had
reference  to  the  matter  of  which  the  universe  was  made,  and
it  was  decided  by  an  overwhelming  majority  that  no  ma-
terial substance  existed  before  the  creation  of  the  material
universe — that  '*  God  created  everything  out  of  nothing."
Some  venturesome  thinkers,  basing  their  reasoning  upon  the
first  verses  of  Genesis,  hinted  at  a  different  view — namely,
that  the  mass,  *'  without  form  and  void,"  existed  before  the
universe  ;  but  this  doctrine  was  soon  swept  out  of  sight.
The  vast  majority  of  the  fathers  were  explicit  on  this  point.
Tertullian  especially  was  very  severe  against  those  who
took  any  other  view  than  that  generally  accepted  as  ortho-
dox :  he  declared  that,  if  there  had  been  any  pre-existing
matter  out  of  which  the  world  was  formed.  Scripture  would
have  mentioned  it ;  that  by  not  mentioning  it  God  has  given
us  a  clear  proof  that  there  was  no  such  thing  ;  and,  after  a
manner  not  unknown  in  other  theological  controversies,  he
threatens  Hermogenes,  who  takes  the  opposite  view,  with

*  For  Gregory  of  Nyssa,  Augustine,  and  the  general  subject  of  the  development
of  an  evolution  theory  among  the  Greeks,  see  the  excellent  work  by  Dr.  Osborn,
From  the  Greeks  to  Darwin,  pp.  33  and  following  ;  for  Ccedmon,  see  any  edition —
I  have  used  Bouter.wek's,  Gutersloh,  1854;  for  Milton,  see  Paradise  Lost,  book  vii,
lines  225-231.


THE   VISIBLE    UNIVERSE.  5

''the  woe  which  impends  on  all  who  add  to  or  take  away
from  the  written  word."

St.  Augustine,  who  showed  signs  of  a  belief  in  a  pre-exist-
ence  of  matter,  made  his  peace  with  the  prevailing  belief  by
the  simple  reasoning  that,  ''  although  the  world  has  been
made  of  some  material,  that  vei-y  same  material  must  have
been  made  out  of  nothing."

In  the  wake  of  these  great  men  the  universal  Church
steadily  followed.  The  Fourth  Lateran  Council  declared
that  God  created  everything  out  of  nothing  ;  and  at  the
present  hour  the  vast  majority  of  the  faithful— whether
Catholic  or  Protestant— are  taught  the  same  doctrine;  on
this  point  the  syllabus  of  Pius  IX  and  the  Westminster
Catechism  fully  agree."^

Having  thus  disposed  of  the  manner  and  matter  of  crea-
tion, the  next  subject  taken  up  by  theologians  was  the  time
required  for  the  great  work.

Here  came  a  difficulty.  The  first  of  the  two  accounts
given  in  Genesis  extended  the  creative  operation  through
six  days,  each  of  an  evening  and  a  morning,  with  much  ex-
plicit detail  regarding  the  progress  made  in  each.  But  the
second  account  spoke  of  ''the  day  "  in  which  "  the  Lord  God
made  the  earth  and  the  heavens."  The  explicitness  of  the
first  account  and  its  naturalness  to  the  minds  of  the  great
mass  of  early  theologians  gave  it  at  first  a  decided  advan-
tage ;  but  Jewish  thinkers,  like  Philo,  and  Christ^ian  think-
ers, like  Origen,  forming  higher  conceptions  of  the  Creator
and  his  work,  were  not  content  with  this,  and  by  them  was
launched  upon  the  troubled  sea  of  Christian  theology  the
idea  that  the  creation  was  instantaneous,  this  idea  being
strengthened  not  only  by  the  second  of  the  Genesis  legends,
but  by  the  great  text,  ''  He  spake,  and  it  was  done ;  he  com-
manded, and  it  stood  fast  "—or,  as  it  appears  in  the  Vulgate
and  in  most  translations,  ''  He  spake,  and  they  were  made ;
he  commanded,  and  they  were  created."

*  For  Tertullian,  see  Tertullian  against  Hermogenes,  chaps,  xx  and  xxii  ;  for  St.
Augustine  regarding  "  creation  from  nothing,"  see  the  De  Genesi  contra  Manicluvos,
lib.  i,  cap.  vi ;  for  St.  Ambrose,  see  the  Hcxameron,  lib.  i,  cap.  iv  ;  for  the  decree
of  the  Fourth  Lateran  Council,  and  the  view  received  in  the  Church  to-day,  see
the  article  Creation  in  Addis  and  Arnold's  Catholic  Dictionary.


6  FROM  CREATION  TO  EVOLUTION.

As  a  result,  it  began  to  be  held  that  the  safe  and  proper
course  was  to  believe  literally  both  statements  ;  that  in  some
mysterious  manner  God  created  the  universe  in  six  days,
and  yet  brought  it  all  into  existence  in  a  moment.  In  spite
of  the  outcries  of  sundry  great,  theologians,  like  Ephrem
Syrus,  that  the  universe  was  created  in  exactly  six  days  of
twenty-four  hours  each,  this  compromise  was  promoted  by
St.  Athanasius  and  St.  Basil  in  the  East,  and  by  St.  Augus-
tine and  St.  Hilary  in  the  West.

Serious  difficulties  were  found  in  reconcilinof  these  two
views,  which  to  the  natural  mind  seem  absolutely  contra-
dictory ;  but  by  ingenious  manipulation  of  texts,  by  dexter-
ous play  upon  phrases,  and  by  the  abundant  use  of  meta-
physics to  dissolve  away  facts,  a  reconciliation  was  effected,
and  men  came  at  least  to  believe  that  they  believed  in  a
creation  of  the  universe  instantaneous  and  at  the  same  time
extended  through  six  days.*

Some  of  the  efforts  to  reconcile  these  two  accounts  were
so  fruitful  as  to  deserve  especial  record.  The  fathers,  East-
ern and  Western,  developed  out  of  the  double  account  in
Genesis,  and  the  indications  in  the  Psalms,  the  Proverbs,
and  the  book  of  Job,  a  vast  mass  of  sacred  science  bearing
upon  this  point.  As  regards  the  whole  work  of  creation,
stress  was  laid  upon  certain  occult  powers  in  numerals.
Philo  Judseus,  while  believing  in  an  instantaneous  creation,
had  also  declared  that  the  world  was  created  in  six  days
because  "  of  all  numbers  six  is  the  most  productive";  he
had  explained  the  creation  of  the  heavenly  bodies  on  the
fourth  day  by  ''the  harmony  of  the  number  four";  of  the
animals  on  the  fifth  day  by  the  five  senses ;  of  man  on  the
sixth  day  by  the  same  virtues  in  the  number  six  which  had
caused  it  to  be  set  as  a  limit  to  the  creative  work  ;  and,
greatest  of  all,  the  rest  on  the  seventh  day  by  the  vast  mass
of  mysterious  virtues  in  the  number  seven.

St.  Jerome  held  that  the  reason  why  God  did  not  pro-
nounce the  work  of  the  second  day  "good  "  is  to  be  found

*  For  Origen,  see  his  Contra  Ceisum,  cap.  xxxvi,  xxxvii  ;  also  his  De  Principi-

bus,  cap.  V  ;  for  St.  Augustine,  see  his  De  Genesl  contra  Manic/mos  and  De  Genesi
ad  Litteram^  passim  ;  for  Athanasius,  see  his  Discourses  against  the  Arians,  ii,
48,  49.


THE    VISIBLE    UNIVERSE.  7

in  the  fact  that  there  is  something  essentially  evil  in  the
number  two,  and  this  was  echoed  centuries  afterward,  afar
off  in  Britain,  by  Bede.

St.  Augustine  brought  this  view  to  bear  upon  the  Church
in  the  following  statement:  "  There  are  three  classes  of  num-
bers— the  more  than  perfect,  the  perfect,  and  the  less  than
perfect,  according  as  the  sum  of  them  is  greater  than,  equal
to,  or  less  than  the  original  number.  Six  is  the  first  perfect
number  :  wherefore  we  must  not  say  that  six  is  a  perfect
number  because  God  finished  all  his  works  in  six  days,  but
that  God  finished  all  his  works  in  six  days  because  six  is  a
perfect  number."

Reasoning  of  this  sort  echoed  along  through  the  medige-
val  Church  until  a  year  after  the  discovery  of  America,
when  the  Nuremberg  CJironiele  re-echoed  it  as  follows :  *'  The
creation  of  things  is  explained  by  the  number  six,  the
parts  of  which,  one,  two,  and  three,  assume  the  form  of  a
triangle."

This  view  of  the  creation  of  the  universe  as  instantaneous
and  also  as  in  six  days,  each  made  up  of  an  evening  and  a
morning,  became  virtually  universal.  Peter  Lombard  and
Hugo  of  St.  Victor,  authorities  of  vast  weight,  gave  it  their
sanction  in  the  twelfth  century,  and  impressed  it  for  ages
upon  the  mind  of  the  Church.

Both  these  lines  of  speculation — as  to  the  creation  of
everything  out  of  nothing,  and  the  reconciling  of  the  instan-
taneous creation  of  the  universe  with  its  creation  in  six  days
— were  still  further  developed  by  other  great  thinkers  of  the
Middle  Ages.

St.  Hilary  of  Poictiers  reconciled  the  two  conceptions
as  follows :  "  For,  although  according  to  Moses  there  is  an
appearance  of  regular  order  in  the  fixing  of  the  firmament,
the  laying  hare  of  the  dry  land,  the  gathering  together  of
the  waters,  the  formation  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  and  the
arising  of  living  things  from  land  and  water,  yet  the  creation  >
of  the  heavens,  earth,  and  other  elements  is  seen  to  be  the  \
work  of  a  single  moment."

St.  Thomas  Aquinas  drew  from  St.  Augustine  a  subtle
distinction  which  for  ages  eased  the  difificulties  in  the  case  :
he  taught  in  effect  that  God  created  the  substance  of  things


/


3  FROM  CREATION  TO  EVOLUTION.

in  a  moment,  but  gave  to  the  work  of  separating,  shaping,
and  adorning  this  creation,  six  days.*

The  early  reformers  accepted  and  developed  the  same
view,  and  Luther  especially  showed  himself  equal  to  the
occasion.  With  his  usual  boldness  he  declared,  first,  that
Moses  "  spoke  properly  and  plainly,  and  neither  allegorically
nor  figuratively,"  and  that  therefore  "■  the  world  with  all
creatures  was  created  in  six  days."  And  he  then  goes  on
to  show  how,  by  a  great  miracle,  the  whole  creation  was
also  instantaneous.

Melanchthon  also  insisted  that  the  universe  was  created
out  of  nothing  and  in  a  mysterious  way,  both  in  an  instant
and  in  six  days,  citing  the  text :  "  He  spake,  and  they  were
made."

Calvin  opposed  the  idea  of  an  instantaneous  creation,  and
laid  especial  stress  on  the  creation  in  six  days  :  having  called
attention  to  the  fact  that  the  biblical  chronology  shows  the
world  to  be  not  quite  six  thousand  years  old  and  that  it  is
now  near  its  end,  he  says  that  "  creation  was  extended
through  six  days  that  it  might  not  be  tedious  for  us  to
occupy  the  whole  of  life  in  the  consideration  of  it."

Peter  Martyr  clinched  the  matter  by  declaring:  '*  So  im-
portant is  it  to  comprehend  the  work  of  creation  that  we  see
the  creed  of  the  Church  take  this  as  its  starting  point.
Were  this  article  taken  away  there  would  be  no  original  sin,
the  promise  of  Christ  would  become  void,  and  all  the  vital
force  of  our  religion  would  be  destroyed."  The  West-
minster  divines    in    drawing  up  their  Confession  of  Faith


*  For  Philo  Judaeus,  see  his  Creation  of  the  World,  chap,  iii  ;  for  St.  Augustine
on  the  powers  of  numbers  in  creation,  see  his  De  Genesi  ad  Litter-am,  iv,  chap,  ii  ;
for  Peter  Lombard,  see  the  Sententice,  lib.  ii,  dist.  xv,  5  ;  and  for  Hugo  of  St.  Vic-
tor, see  De  Sacramentis,  lib.  i,  pars  i ;  also,  Annotat.  Elucidat.  in  Pentateuchtim,
cap.  V,  vi,  vii  ;  for  St.  Hilary,  see  De  Trinitate,  lib.  xii  ;  for  St.  Thomas  Aquinas,
see  his  Summa  Theologica,  quest.  Ixxxiv,  arts,  i  and  ii  ;  the  passage  in  the  N'urein-
berg  Chronicle,  1493,  is  in  fol.  iii ;  for  Bossuet,  see  his  Discows  sur  VHistoire  Uni-
verselle  ;  for  the  sacredness  of  the  number  seven  among  the  Babylonians,  see  espe-
cially Schrader,  Die  Keilinschriften  und  das  Alte  Testament,  pp.  21,  22  ;  also
George  Smith  et  al.  ;  for  general  ideas  on  the  occult  powers  of  various  numbers,
especially  the  number  seven,  and  the  influence  of  these  ideas  on  theology  and  sci-
ence, see  my  chapter  on  astronomy.  As  to  mediaeval  ideas  on  the  same  subject,
see  Detzel,  Christliche  Ikonographie,  Freiburg,  1894,  pp.  44  and  following.


THE   VISIBLE    UNIVERSE.  g

specially  laid  it  down  as  necessary  to  believe  that  all  things
visible  and  invisible  were  created  not  only  out  of  nothing-
but  in  exactly  six  days.

Nor  were  the  Roman  divines  less  strenuous  than  the
Protestant  reformers  regarding  the  necessity  of  holding
closely  to  the  so-called  Mosaic  account  of  creation.  As  late
as  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,  when  Buffon  at-
tempted to  state  simple  geological  truths,  the  theological
faculty  of  the  Sorbonne  forced  him  to  make  and  to  publish
a  most  ignominious  recantation  which  ended  with  these
words :  "  I  abandon  everything  in  my  book  respecting  the
formation  of  the  earth,  and  generally  all  which  may  be  con-
trary to  the  narrative  of  Moses."

Theologians,  having  thus  settled  the  manner  of  the  crea-
tion, the  matter  used  in  it,  and  the  time  required  for  it,  now
exerted  themselves  to  fix  its  date.

The  long  series  of  efforts  by  the  greatest  minds  in  the
Church,  from  Eusebius  to  Archbishop  Usher,  to  settle  this
point  are  presented  in  another  chapter.  Suffice  it  here  that
the  general  conclusion  arrived  at  by  an  overwhelming
majority  of  the  most  competent  students  of  the  biblical  ac-
counts was  that  the  date  of  creation  was,  in  round  numbers,
f^ur_thousand  years  before  our  era;  and  in  the  seventeenth
century,  in  his  great  work,  Dr.  John  Lightfoot,  Vice-Chan-
cellor  of  the  University  of  Cambridge,  and  one  of  the  most
eminent  Hebrew  scholars  of  his  time,  declared,  as  the  result
of  his  most  profound  and  exhaustive  study  of  the  Scriptures,
that  "heaven  and  earth,  centre  and  circumference,  were
created  all  together,  in  the  same  instant,  and  clouds  full  of
water,"  and  that  "  this  work  took  place  and  man  was  created
by  the  Trinity  on  October  23,  4004  B.  c,  at  nine  o'clock  in
the  morning."

Here  was,  indeed,  a  triumph  of  Lactantius's  method,  the
result  of  hundreds  of  years  of  biblical  study  and  theological
thought  since  Bede  in  the  eighth  century,  and  Vincent  of
Beauvais  in  the  thirteenth,  had  declared  that  creation  must
have  taken  place  in  the  spring.  Yet,  alas  !  within  two  cen-
turies after  Lightfoot's  great  biblical  demonstration  as  to  i
the  exact  hour  of  creation,  it  was  discovered  that  at  that
hour   an    exceedingly    cultivated    people,    enjoying   all   the


lO  FROM    CREATION    TO    EVOLUTION.

fruits  of  a  highly  developed  civilization,  had  long  been
swarming  in  the  great  cities  of  Egypt,  and  that  other  na-
tions hardly  less  advanced  had  at  that  time  reached  a  high
development  in  x\sia.*

But,  strange  as  it  may  seem,  even  after  theologians  had
thus  settled  the  manner  of  creation,  the  matter  employed  in
it,  the  time  required  for  it,  and  the  exact  date  of  it,  there
remained  virtually  unsettled  the  first  and  greatest  question
of  all ;  and  this  was  nothing  less  than  the  question,  Who
actually  created  the  universe  ?

Various  theories  more  or  less  nebulous,  but  all  centred
in  texts  of  Scripture,  had  swept  through  the  mind  of  the
Church.  By  some  theologians  it  was  held  virtually  that  the
actual  creative  agent  was  the  third  person  of  the  Trinity,
who,  in  the  opening  words  of  our  sublime  creation  poem,
"  moved  upon  the  face  of  the  waters."  By  others  it  was
held  that  the  actual  Creator  was  the  second  person  of  the
Trinity,  in  behalf  of  whose  agency  many  texts  were  cited
from  the  New  Testament.  Others  held  that  the  actual
Creator  was  the  first  person,  and  this  view  was  embodied  in
the  two  great  formulas  known  as  the  Apostles'  and  Nicene
Creeds,  which  explicitly  assigned  the  woi-k  to  "  God  the  Fa-
ther Almighty,  Maker  of  heaven  and  earth."  Others,  finding
a  deep  meaning  in  the  words  "  Let  t^s  make,"  ascribed  in
Genesis  to  the  Creator,  held  that  the  entire  Trinity  directly
created  all  things ;  and  still  others,  by  curious  metaphysical
processes,  seemed  to  arrive  at  the  idea  that  peculiar  com-
binations of  two  persons  of  the  Trinity  achieved  the  creation.

In  all  this  there  would  seem  to  be  considerable  courag^e


*  For  Luther,  see  his  Commentary  on  Genesis,  1545,  introduction,  and  his  com-
ments on  chap,  i,  verse  12  ;  the  quotations  from  Luther's  commentary  are  taken
mainly  from  the  translation  by  Henry  Cole,  D.  D.,  Edinburgh,  1858  ;  for  Melanch-
thon,  see  Loci  Theologici,  in  Melanchthon,  Opera,  ed.  IJretechneider,  vol.  xxi,  pp.
269,  270,  also  pp.  637,  638 — in  quoting  the  text  (Ps.  xxiii,  9)  I  have  used,  as  does
Melanchthon  himself,  the  form  of  the  Vulgate  ;  for  the  citations  from  Calvin,  see
his  Commentary  on  Genesis  {Opera  omnia,  Amsterdam,  1671,  tom.  i,  cap.  ii,  p.  8)  ;
also  in  the  Institutes,  AWen's  translation,  London,  1838,  vol.  i,  chap,  xv,  pp.  126,
127  ;  for  Peter  Martyr,  see  his  Commentary  on  Genesis,  cited  by  Zockler,  vol.  i,  p.
690  ;  for  the  articles  in  the  Westminster  Confession  of  Faith,  see  chap,  iv  ;  for
Buffon's  recantation,  see  Lyell,  Principles  of  Geology,  chap,  iii,  p.  57.  For  Light-
foot's  declaration,  see  his  works,  edited  by  Pitman,  London,  1822.


THE   VISIBLE    UNIVERSE.  II

in  view  of  the  fearful  condemnatigns  launched  in  the  Athana-
sian  Creed  against  all  who  should  "confound  the  persons"
or  "  divide  the  substance  of  the  Trinity."

These  various  stages  in  the  evolution  of  scholastic  the-
ology were  also  embodied  in  sacred  art,  and  especially  in
cathedral  sculpture,  in  glass-staining,  in  mosaic  working,
and  in  missal  painting.

The  creative  Being  is  thus  represented  sometimes  as  the
third  person  of  the  Trinity,  in  the  form  of  a  dove  brooding
over  chaos  ;  sometimes  as  the  second  person,  and  therefore
a  youth  ;  sometimes  as  the  first  person,  and  therefore  fa-
therly and  venerable  ;  sometimes  as  the  first  and  second  per-
sons, one  being  venerable  and  the  other  youthful;  and
sometimes  as  three  persons,  one  venerable  and  one  youthful,
both  wearing  papal  crowns,  and  each  holding  in  his  lips  a
tip  of  the  wing  of  the  dove,  which  thus  seems  to  proceed
from  both  and  to  be  suspended  between  them.

Nor  was  this  the  most  complete  development  of  the
mediceval  idea.  The  Creator  was  sometimes  represented
with  a  single  body,  but  with  three  faces,  thus  showing  that
Christian  belief  had  in  some  pious  minds  gone  through  sub-
stantially the  same  cycle  which  an  earlier  form  of  belief  had
made  ages  before  in  India,  when  the  Supreme  Being  was
represented  with  one  body  but  with  the  three  faces  of
Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Siva.

But  at  the  beginning  of  the  modern  period  the  older
view  in  its  primitive  Jewish  form  was  impressed  upon  Chris-
tians by  the  most  mighty  genius  in  art  the  world  has  known  ;
for  in  1 5 12,  after  four  years  of  Titanic  labour,  Michael
Ano-elo  uncovered  his  frescoes  within  the  vault  of  the  Sistine
Chapel.

They  had  been  executed  by  the  command  and  under  the
sanction  of  the  ruling  Pope,  Julius  II,  to  represent  the  con-
ception of  Christian  theology  then  dominant,  and  they  re-
main to-day  in  all  their  majesty  to  show  the  highest  point
ever  attained  by  the  older  thought  upon  the  origin  of  the
visible  universe.

In  the  midst  of  the  expanse  of  heaven  the  Almighty  Fa-
ther—the first  person  of  the  Trinity— in  human  form,  august
and  venerable,  attended   by  angels  and   upborne  by  mighty


12  FROM    CREATION    TO    EVOLUTION.

winds,  sweeps  over  the  abyss,  and,  moving  through  success-
ive compartments  of  the  great  vault,  accomplishes  the  work
of  the  creative  days.  With  a  simple  gesture  he  divides  the
light  from  the  darkness,  rears  on  high  the  solid  firmament,
gathers  together  beneath  it  the  seas,  or  summons  into  exist-
ence the  sun,  moon,  and  planets,  and  sets  them  circling
about  the  earth.

In  this  sublime  work  culminated  the  thought  of  thou-
sands of  years  ;  the  strongest  minds  accepted  it  or  pretended
to  accept  it,  and  nearly  two  centuries  later  this  conception,
in  accordance  Avith  the  first  of  the  two  accounts  given  in
Genesis,  was  especially  enforced  by  Bossuet,  and  received  a
new  lease  of  life  in  the  Church,  both  Catholic  and  Protestant."^

But  to  these  discussions  was  added  yet  another,  which,
beginning  in  the  early  days  of  the  Church,  was  handed
down  the  ages  until  it  had  died  out  among  the  theologians
of  our  own  time.

In  the  first  of  the  biblical  accounts  light  is  created  and
the  distinction  between  day  and  night  thereby  made  on  the
first  dav,  while  the  sun  and  moon  are  not  created  until  the
fourth  day.  Masses  of  profound  theological  and  pseudo-
scientific  reasoning  have  been  developed  to  account  for  this
— masses  so  great  that  for  ages  they  have  obscured  the  sim-
ple fact  that  the  original  text  is  a  precious  revelation  to  us
of  one  of  the  most  ancient  of  recorded  beliefs — the  belief
that  light  and  darkness  are  entities  independent  of  the  heav-
enly bodies,  and  that  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  exist  not
merely  to  increase  light  but  to  "  divide  the  day  from  the
night,  to  be  for  signs  and  for  seasons,  and  for  days  and
for  years,"  and  '*  to  rule  the  day  and  the  night."

*  For  strange  representations  of  the  Creator  and  of  the  creation  by  one,  two,  or
three  persons  of  the  Trinity,  see  Didron,  Iconographie  Chr^ticnne,  pp.  35,  178,
224,  483,  567-580,  and  elsewhere  ;  also  Detzel  as  already  cited.  The  most  naive  of
all  survivals  of  the  mediaeval  idea  of  creation  which  the  present  writer  has  ever
seen  was  exhibited  in  1894  on  the  banner  of  one  of  the  guilds  at  the  celebration  of
the  four-hundredth  anniversary  of  the  founding  of  the  Munich  Cathedral.  Jesus
of  Nazareth,  as  a  beautiful  boy  and  with  a  nimbus  encircling  his  head,  was  shown
turning  and  shaping  the  globe  on  a  lathe,  which  he  keeps  in  motion  with  his  foot.
The  emblems  of  the  Passion  are  about  him,  God  the  Father  looking  approvingly
upon  him  from  a  cloud,  and  the  dove  hovering  between  the  two.  The  date  upon
the  banner  was  1727.


THE    VISIBLE    UNIVERSE.


13


Of  this  belief  we  find  survivals  among  the  early  fathers,
and  especially  in  St.  Ambrose.  In  his  work  on  creation  he
tells  us  :  "  We  must  remember  that  the  light  of  day  is  one
thing  and  the  light  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  another — the
sun  by  his  rays  appearing  to  add  lustre  to  the  daylight.
For  before  sunrise  the  day  dawns,  but  is  not  in  full  reful-
gence, for  the  sun  adds  still  further  to  its  splendour."  This
idea  became  one  of  the  ''  treasures  of  sacred  knowledge
committed  to  the  Church,"  and  was  faithfully  received  by
the  Middle  Ages.  The  mediaeval  mysteries  and  miracle
plays  give  curious  evidences  of  this:  In  a  performance  of
the  creation,  when  God  separates  light  from  darkness,  the
stage  direction  is,  ''  Now  a  painted  cloth  is  to  be  exhibited,
one  half  black  and  the  other  half  white."  It  was  also  given
more  permanent  form.  In  the  mosaics  of  San  Marco  at
Venice,  in  the  frescoes  of  the  Baptistery  at  Florence  and  of
the  Church  of  St.  Francis  at  Assisi,  and  in  the  altar  carving
at  Salerno,  we  find  a  striking  realization  of  it — the  Creator
placing  in  the  heavens  two  disks  or  living  figures  of  equal
size,  each  suitably  coloured  or  inscribed  to  show  that  one
represents  light  and  the  other  darkness.  This  conception
was  without  doubt  that  of  the  person  or  persons  who  com-
piled from  the  Chaldean  and  other  earlier  statements  the
accounts  of  the  creation  in  the  first  of  our  sacred  books. "^

Thus,  down  to  a  period  almost  within  living  memory,  it
was  held,  virtually  "  always,  everywhere,  and  by  all,"  that
the   universe,  as  we   now   see  it,  was  created   literally  and

*  For  scriptural  indications  of  the  independent  existence  of  light  and  darkness,
compare  with  the  first  verses  of  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis  such  passages  as  Job
xxxviii,  19,  24  ;  for  the  general  prevalence  of  this  early  view,  see  Lukas,  Kosmo-
gonie,  pp.  31,  33,  41,  74,  and  passim  ;  for  the  view  of  St.  Ambrose  regarding  the
creation  of  light  and  of  the  sun,  see  his  Hcxameron,  lib.  4,  cap.  iii  ;  for  an  excellent
general  statement,  see  Huxley,  Mr.  Gladstone  and  Genesis,  in  the  Nineteenth  Cen-
tury, 1886,  reprinted  in  his  Essays  on  Controverted  Questions,  London,  i8q2,  note,
pp.  126  et  seq. ;  for  the  acceptance  in  the  miracle  plays  of  the  scriptural  idea  of
light  and  darkness  as  independent  creations,  see  Wright,  Essays  on  Archceological
Subjects,  vol.  ii,  p.  178  ;  for  an  account,  with  illustrations,  of  the  mosaics,  etc.,
representing  this  idea,  see  Tikkanen,  Die  Genesis-tnosaiken  von  San  Marco,  Hel-
singfors,  1889,  pp.  14  and  16  of  text  and  Plates  I  and  II.  Very  naively  the  Salerno
carver,  not  wishing  to  colour  the  ivory  which  he  wrought,  has  inscribed  on  one  disk
the  word  "LUX"  and  on  the  other  "  NOX."  See  also  Didron,  Iconographies
p.  482.


14


FROM    CREATION    TO    EVOLUTION.


directly  by  the  voice  or  hands  of  the  Ahnighty,  or  b}^  both
— out  of  nothing — in  an  instant  or  in  six  days,  or  in  both —
about  four  thousand  years  before  the  Christian  era — and  for
the  convenience  of  the  dwellers  upon  the  earth,  which  was
at  the  base  and  foundation  of  the  whole  structure.

But  there  had  been  implanted  along  through  the  ages
germs  of  another  growth  in  human  thinking,  some  of  them
even  as  early  as  the  Babylonian  period.  In  the  Assyrian
inscriptions  we  find  recorded  the  Chaldeo-Babylonian  idea
of  an  evolution  of  the  universe  out  of  the  primeval  flood  or
''great  deep,"  and  of  the  animal  creation  out  of  the  earth
and  sea.  This  idea,  recast,  partially  at  least,  into  mono-
theistic form,  passed  naturallv  into  the  sacred  books  of  the
neighbours  and  pupils  of  the  Chaldeans — the  Hebrews  ;  but
its  growth  in  Christendom  afterward  was  checked,  as  we
shall  hereafter  find,  by  the  more  powerful  influence  of  other
inherited  statements  which  appealed  more  intelligibly  to  the
mind  of  the  Church.

Striking,  also,  was  the  effect  of  this  idea  as  rewrought
by  the  early  Ionian  philosophers,  to  whom  it  was  probably
transmitted  from  the  Chaldeans  through  the  Phoenicians.
In  the  minds  of  lonians  like  Anaximander  and  Anaximenes
it  was  most  clearly  developed  :  the  first  of  these  conceiving
of  the  visible  universe  as  the  result  of  processes  of  evolution,
and  the  latter  pressing  further  the  same  mode  of  reasoning,
and  dwelling  on  agencies  in  cosmic  development  recognised
in  modern  science.

This  general  idea  of  evolution  in  Nature  thus  took  strong
hold  upon  Greek  thought  and  was  developed  in  many
ways,  some  ingenious,  some  perverse.  Plato,  indeed,  with-
stood it;  but  Aristotle  sometimes  developed  it  in  a  manner
which  reminds  us  of  inodern  views.

Anions:  the  Romans  Lucretius  cau2:ht  much  from  it,  ex-
tending  the  evolutionary  process  virtually  to  all  things.

In  the  early  Church,  as  we  have  seen,  the  idea  of  a  crea-
tion direct,  material,  and  by  means  like  those  used  by  man,
was  all-powerful  for  the  exclusion  of  conceptions  based  on
evolution.  From  the  more  simple  and  crude  of  the  views
of  creation  given  in  the  Babylonian  legends,  and  thence  in-
corporated into  Genesis,  rose  the  stream  of  orthodox  thought


THE   VISIBLE    UNIVERSE.  1 5

on  the  subject,  which  grew  into  a  flood  and  swept  on
through  the  Middle  Ages  and  into  modern  times.  Yet  here
and  there  in  the  midst  of  this  flood  were  high  grounds  of
thought  held  by  strong  men.  Scotus  Erigena  and  Duns
Scotus,  among  the  schoolmen,  bewildered  though  they  were,
had  caught  some  rays  of  this  ancient  light,  and  passed  on  to
their  successors,  in  modified  form,  doctrines  of  an  evolu-
tionary process  in  the  universe.

In  the  latter  half  of  the  sixteenth  century  these  evolu-  j
tionary  theories  seemed  to  take  more  definite  form  in  the  |  /
mind  of  Giordano  Bruno,  who  evidently  divined  the  funda-  ;
mental  idea  of  what  is  now  known  as  the  ''  nebular  hypothe-  j
sis";  but  with  his  murder  by  the  Inquisition  at  Rome  this
idea  seemed  utterly  to  disappear— dissipated  by  the  flames
which  in  1600  consumed  his  body  on  the  Campo  dei  Fiori.

Yet  within  the  two  centuries  divided  by  Bruno's  death
the  world  was  led  into  a  new  realm  of  thought  in  which  an
evolution  theory  of  the  visible  universe  was  sure  to  be  rap-
idly developed.  For  there  came,  one  after  the  other,  five
of  the  greatest  men  our  race  has  produced — Copernicus,
Kepler,  Galileo,  Descartes,  and  Newton— and  when  their
work  was  done  the  old  theological  conception  of  the  uni-
verse was  gone.  "The  spacious  firmament  on  high  " — "  the
crystalline  spheres  " — the  Almighty  enthroned  upon  "  the
circle  of  the  heavens,"  and  with  his  own  hands,  or  with
angels  as  his  agents,  keeping  sun,  moon,  and  planets  in  mo-
tion for  the  benefit  of  the  earth,  opening  and  closing  the
"  windows  of  heaven,"  letting  down  upon  the  earth  the  "  wa-
ters above  the  firmament,"  "setting  his  bow  in  the  cloud,"
hanging  out  "signs  and  wonders,"  hurling  comets,  "casting
forth  lightnings "  to  scare  the  wicked,  and  "  shaking  the
earth  "  in  his  wrath  :  all  this  had  disappeared.

These  five  men  had  given  a  new  divine  revelation  to  the
world  ;  and  through  the  last,  Newton,  had  come  a  vast  new
conception,  destined  to  be  fatal  to  the  old  theory  of  crea-
tion, for  he  had  shown  throughout  the  universe,  in  place  of
almighty  caprice,  all-pervading  law.  The  bitter  opposition
of  theology  to  the  first  four  of  these  men  is  well  known  ;  but
the  fact  is  not  so  widely  known  that  Newton,  in  spite  of  his
deeply  religious  spirit,  was  also  strongly  opposed.     It  was


l5  FROM   CREATION    TO    EVOLUTION.

vigorously  urged  against  him  that  by  his  statement  of  the
law  of  ofravitation  he  ''  took  from  God  that  direct  action  on
his  works  so  constantly  ascribed  to  him  in  Scripture  and
transferred  it  to  material  mechanism,"  and  that  he  "  sub-
stituted gravitation  for  Providence."  But,  more  than  this,
these  men  gave  a  new  basis  for  the  theory  of  evolution  as
distinguished  from  the  theory  of  creation.

Especially  worthy  of  note   is  it  that  the  great  work  of
Descartes,  erroneous  as  many  of  its  deductions  were,  and,
in  view  of  the  lack  of  physical  knowledge  in  his  time,  must
be,  had    done    much   to   weaken  the   old    conception.     His
theory  of  a  universe  brought  out  of  all-pervading  matter,
[   wrought  into  orderly  arrangement  by  movements  in  accord-
/  ance  with   physical  laws— though  it  was  but  a  provisional
)  hypothesis — had  done  much  to  draw  men's  minds  from  the
old  theological  view  of  creation  ;  it  was  an  example  of  intel-
lectual honesty  arriving  at  errors,  but  thereby  aiding  the
advent  of  truths.     Crippled  though  Descartes  was  by  his
almost  morbid  fear  of  the  Church,  this  part  of  his  work  was
no  small  factor  in  bringing  in  that  attitude  of  mind  which
led    to    a   reception    of   the    thoughts    of    more    unfettered
thinkers.

Thirty  years  later  came,  in  England,  an  effort  of  a  differ-
ent sort,   but  with   a  similar  result.     In   1678  Ralph   Cud-
worth  published  his  Intellectual  System  of  the  Universe.     To
this  day  he  remains,  in  breadth   of  scholarship,  in  strength
of  thought,  in  tolerance,  and  in  honesty,  one  of  the  greatest
glories  of  the  English  Church,  and  his  work  was  worthy  of
him.     He  purposed  to  build  a  fortress  which  should  protect
Christianity  against  all  dangerous  theories  of  the  universe,
ancient  or  modern.     The  foundations  of  the  structure  were
laid  with   old  thoughts  thrown  often  into  new  and  striking
forms;  but,  as  the  superstructure  arose  more  and  more  into
view,  while  genius    marked  every  part  of  it,  features  ap-
peared which  gave  the  rigidly  orthodox  serious  misgivings.
\  From  the  old  theories  of  direct  personal  action  on  the  uni-
I  verse  by  the  Almighty  he  broke  utterly.     He  dwelt  on  the
action  of  law,  rejected  the  continuous  exercise  of  miraculous
I  intervention,  pointed  out  the  fact  that  in  the  natural  world
■there  are  "errors"  and  ''bungles,"  and  argued  vigorously


THE   VISIBLE   UNIVERSE.  ly

in  favour  of  the  origin  and  maintenance  of  the  universe  as  a
slow  and  gradual  development  of  Nature  in  obedience  to  an
inward  principle.  The  Balaks  of  seventeenth-century  ortho-
doxy might  well  condemn  this  honest  Balaam.    '

Toward  the  end  of  the  next  century  a  still  more  profound
genius,  Immanuel  Kant,  presented  the  nebular  theory,  giv-
ing it,  in  the  light  of  Newton's  great  utterances,  a  consist-
ency which  it  never  before  had  ;  and  about  the  same  time
Laplace  gave  it  yet  greater  strength  by  mathematical  reason-
ings of  wonderful  power  and  extent,  thus  implanting  firmly
in  modern  thought  the  idea  that  our  own  solar  system  and
others— suns,  planets,  satellites,  and  their  various  move-
ments, distances,  and  magnitudes— necessarily  result  from
the  obedience  of  nebulous  masses  to  natural  laws.

Throughout  the  theological  world  there  was  an  outcry
at  once  against  "atheism,"  and  war  raged  fiercely.  Her-
schel  and  others  pointed  out  many  nebulous  patches  appar-
ently gaseous.  They  showed  by  physical  and  mathemat-
ical demonstrations  that  the  hypothesis  accounted  for  the
great  body  of  facts,  and,  despite  clamour,  were  gaining
ground,  when  the  improved  telescopes  resolved  some  of  the
patches  of  nebulous  matter  into  multitudes  of  stars.  The
opponents  of  the  nebular  hypothesis  were  overjoyed  ;  they
now  sang  pseans  to  astronomy,  because,  as  they  said,  it  had
proved  the  truth  of  Scripture.  They  had  jumped  to  the
conclusion  that  all  nebulce  must  be  alike  ;  that,  if  some  are
made  up  of  systems  of  stars,  all  must  be  so  made  up ;  that
none  can  be  masses  of  attenuated  gaseous  matter,  because
some  are  not.

Science  halted  for  a  time.  The  accepted  doctrine  be-
came this  :  that  the  only  reason  why  all  the  nebula  are  not
resolved  into  distinct  stars  is  that  our  telescopes  are  not
sufficiently  powerful.  But  in  time  came  the  discovery  of
the  spectroscope  and  spectrum  analysis,  and  thence  Fraun-
hofer's  discovery  that  the  spectrum  of  an  ignited  gaseous
body  is  non-continuous,  with  interrupting  lines  ;  and  Dra-
per's discovery  that  the  spectrum  of  an  ignited  solid  is  con-
tinuous, with  no  interrupting  lines.  And  now  the  spectro-
scope was  turned  upon  the  nebulas,  and  many  of  them  were
found  to  be  gaseous.  Here,  then,  was  ground  for  the  infer-
3


1 8  FROM  CREATION  TO  EVOLUTION.

ence  that  in  these  nebulous  masses  at  different  stages  of  con-
densation— some  apparently  mere  patches  of  mist,  some  with
luminous  centres — we  have  the  process  of  development  ac-
tually going  on,  and  observations  like  those  of  Lord  Rosse
and  Arrest  gave  yet  further  confirmation  to  this  view.  Then
came  the  great  contribution  of  the  nineteenth  century  to
physics,  aiding  to  explain  important  parts  of  the  vast  process
by  the  mechanical  theory  of  heat.

Again  the  nebular  hypothesis  came  forth  stronger  than
ever,  and  about  1850  the  beautiful  experiment  of  Plateau  on
the  rotation  of  a  fluid  globe  came  in  apparently  to  illustrate
if  not  to  confirm  it.  Even  so  determined  a  defender  of  ortho-
doxy as  Mr.  Gladstone  at  last  acknowledged  some  form  of  a
)  nebular  hypothesis  as  probably  true.

Here,  too,  was  exhibited  that  form  of  surrendering  theo-
logical views  to  science  under  the  claim  that  science  con-
curs with  theology,  which  we  have  seen  in  so  many  other
fields  :  and,  as  typical,  an  example  may  be  given,  which,  how-
ever restricted  in  its  scope,  throws  light  on  the  process  by
which  such  surrenders  are  obtained.  A  few  years  since  one
of  the  most  noted  professors  of  chemistry  in  the  city  of  New
York,  under  the  auspices  of  one  of  its  most  fashionable
churches,  gave  a  lecture  which,  as  was  claimed  in  the  public
prints  and  in  placards  posted  in  the  sti'eets,  was  to  show
that  science  supports  the  theory  of  creation  given  in  the
sacred  books  ascribed  to  Moses.  A  large  audience  assem-
bled, and  a  brilliant  series  of  elementary  experiments  with
oxygen,  hydrogen,  and  carbonic  acid  was  concluded  by  the
Plateau  demonstration.  It  was  beautifully  made.  As  the
coloured  globule  of  oil,  representing  the  earth,  was  revolved
in  a  transparent  medium  of  equal  density,  as  it  became  flat-
tened at  the  poles,  as  rings  then  broke  forth  from  it  and
revolved  about  it,  and,  finally,  as  some  of  these  rings  broke
into  satellites,  which  for  a  moment  continued  to  circle  about
the  central  mass,  the  audience,  as  well  they  might,  rose  and
burst  into  rapturous  applause.

Thereupon  a  well-to-do  citizen  arose  and  moved  the
thanks  of  the  audience  to  the  eminent  professor  for  "  this
perfect  demonstration  of  the  exact  and  literal  conformity  of
the  statements  given  in  Holy  Scripture  with  the  latest  re-


THE   VISIBLE    UNIVERSE.


19


suits  of  science."  The  motion  was  carried  unanimously  and
with  applause,  and  the  audience  dispersed,  feeling  that  a
great  service  had  been  rendered  to  orthodoxy.  Sancta  siui-
plicitas  !

What  this  incident  exhibited  on  a  small  scale  has  been
seen  elsewhere  with  more  distinguished  actors  and  on  a
broader  stage.  Scores  of  theologians,  chief  among  whom
of  late,  in  zeal  if  not  in  knowledge,  has  been  Mr.  Gladstone,
have  endeavoured  to  "  reconcile  "  the  two  accounts  in  Gene-
sis with  each  other  and  with  the  truths  regarding  the  origin
of  the  universe  gained  by  astronomy,  geology,  geography,
physics,  and  chemistry.  The  result  has  been  recently  stated
by  an  eminent  theologian,  the  Hulsean  Professor  of  Divinity
at  the  University  of  Cambridge.  He  declares,  ''  No  attempt
at  reconciling  Genesis  with  the  exacting  requirements  of
modern  sciences  has  ever  been  known  to  succeed  without
entailing  a  degree  of  special  pleading  or  forced  interpreta-
tion to  which,  in  such  a  question,  we  should  be  wise  to  have
no  recourse."^

The  revelations  of  another  group  of  sciences,  though
sometimes  bitterly  opposed  and  sometimes  "  reconciled  "  by


*  For  an  interesting  reference  to  the  outcry  against  Newton,  see  McCosh,  The
Religions  Aspect  of  Evolution,  New  York,  1890,  pp.  103,  104  ;  for  germs  of  an
evolutionary  view  among  the  Babylonians,  see  George  Smith,  Chaldean  Account  of
Genesis,  New  York,  1876,  pp.  74,  75  ;  for  a  germ  of  the  same  thought  in  Lucretius,
see  his  De  N^atura  Renc?n,  lib.  v,  pp.  187-194,  447-454  ;  for  Bruno's  conjecture  (in
1 591),  see  Jevons,  Fnncipks  of  Science,  London,  1874,  vol.  ii,  p.  299  ;  for  Kant's
statement,  see  his  Natiirgeschichte  dcs  Hi?nmels  ;  for  his  part  in  the  nebular  hy-
pothesis, see  Lange,  Geschichte  des  Materialismus,  vol.  i,  p.  266  ;  for  value  of  Pla-
teau's beautiful  experiment,  very  cautiously  estimated,  see  Jevons,  vol.  ii,  p.  36  ;
also  Elisee  Reclus,  The  Earth,  translated  by  Woodward,  vol.  i,  pp.  14-18,  for  an
estimate  still  more  careful  ;  for  a  general  account  of  discoveries  of  the  nature  of
nebulae  by  spectroscope,  see  Draper,  Conflict  between  Religion  atid  Science  ;  for  a
careful  discussion  regarding  the  spectra  of  solid,  liquid,  and  gaseous  bodies,  see
Schellen,  Spectrum  Atialysis,  pp.  100  et  seq.  ;  for  a  very  thorough  discussion  of  the
bearings  of  discoveries  made  by  spectrum  analysis  upon  the  nebular  hypothesis,  •
ibid.,  pp.  532-537  ;  for  a  presentation  of  the  difficulties  yet  unsolved,  see  an  article
by  Plummer  in  the  London  Popular  Science  Review  for  January,  1875  ;  for  an  ex-
cellent short  summary  of  recent  observations  and  thought  on  this  subject,  see  T.
Sterry  Hunt.  Address  at  the  Priestley  Ceiitennial,  pp.  7,  8  ;  for  an  interesting
modification  of  this  hypothesis,  see  Proctor's  writings  ;  for  a  still  more  recent  view,
see  Lockyer's  two  articles  on  The  Suns  Place  in  Nature,  in  Nature  for  February
14  and  25,  1895.


20  FROM  CREATION  TO  EVOLUTION.

theologians,  have  finally  set  the  whole  question  at  rest.
First,  there  have  come  the  biblical  critics — earnest  Christian
scholars,  working  for  the  sake  of  truth — and  these  have
revealed  beyond  the  shadow  of  a  reasonable  doubt  the  exist-
ence of  at  least  two  distinct  accounts  of  creation  in  our  book
of  Genesis,  which  can  sometimes  be  forced  to  agree,  but
which  are  generally  absolutely  at  variance  with  each  other.
These  scholars  have  further  shown  the  two  accounts  to  be
not  the  cunningly  devised  fables  of  priestcraft,  but  evidently
fragments  of  earlier  legends,  myths,  and  theologies,  accepted
in  good  faith  and  brought  together  for  the  noblest  of  pur-
poses by  those  who  put  in  order  the  first  of  our  sacred
books.

Next  have  come  the  archaeologists  and  philologists,  the
devoted  students  of  ancient  monuments  and  records ;  of
these  are  such  as  Rawlinson,  George  Smith,  Sayce,  Oppert,
Jensen,  Schrader,  Delitzsch,  and  a  phalanx  of  similarly  de-
voted scholars,  who  have  deciphered  a  multitude  of  ancient
texts,  especially  the  inscriptions  found  in  the  great  library
of  Assurbanipal  at  Nineveh,  and  have  discovered  therein
an  account  of  the  origin  of  the  world  identical  in  its  most
important  features  with  the  later  accounts  in  our  own  book
of  Genesis.

These  men  have  had  the  courage  to  point  out  these  facts
and  to  connect  them  with  the  truth  that  these  Chaldean  and
Babylonian  myths,  legends,  and  theories  were  far  earlier
than  those  of  the  Hebrews,  which  so  strikingly  resemble
them,  and  which  we  have  in  our  sacred  books ;  and  they
have  also  shown  us  how  natural  it  was  that  the  Jew^ish
accounts  of  the  creation  should  have  been  obtained  at  that
remote  period  when  the  earliest  Hebrews  were  among  the
Chaldeans,  and  how  the  great  Hebrew  poetic  accounts  of
creation  were  drawn  either  from  the  sacred  traditions  of
these  earlier  peoples  or  from  antecedent  sources  common  to
various  ancient  nations.

In  a  summary  which  for  profound  thought  and  fearless
integrity  does  honour  not  onl}-  to  himself  but  to  the  great
position  which  he  holds,  the  Rev.  Dr.  Driver,  Professor  of
Hebrew  and  Canon  of  Christ  Church  at  Oxford,  has  recently
stated  the  case  fully  and   fairl3\     Having  pointed   out  the


THE   VISIBLE    UNIVERSE.  21

fact  that  the  Hebrews  were  one  people  out  of  many  who
thouc^ht  upon  the  origin  of  the  universe,  he  says  that  they
''  framed  theories  to  account  for  the  beginnings  of  the  earth
and  man  "  ;  that  '*  they  either  did  this  for  themselves  or  bor-
rowed those  of  their  neighbours";  that  *' of  the  theories
current  in  Assyria  and  Phoenicia  fragments  have  been  pre-
served, and  these  exhibit  points  of  resemblance  with  the
biblical  narrative  sufficient  to  warrant  the  inference  that
both  are  derived  from  the  same  cycle  of  tradition."

After  giving  some  extracts  from  the  Chaldean  creation
tablets  he  says  :  "  In  the  light  of  these  facts  it  is  difficult  to
resist  the  conclusion  that  the  biblical  narrative  is  drawn
from  the  same  source  as  these  other  records.  The  biblical
historians,  it  is  plain,  derived  their  materials  from  the  best
human  sources  available.  .  .  .  The  materials  which  with
other  nations  were  combined  into  the  crudest  physical  theo-
ries or  associated  with  a  grotesque  polytheism  were  vivified
and  transformed  by  the  inspired  genius  of  the  Hebrew  his-
torians, and  adapted  to  become  the  vehicle  of  profound
religious  truth."

Not  less  honourable  to  the  sister  university  and  to  him-
self is  the  statement  recently  made  by  the  Rev.  Dr.  Ryle,
Hulsean  Professor  of  Divinity  at  Cambridge.  He  says  that
to  suppose  that  a  Christian  "  must  either  renounce  his  con-
fidence in  the  achievements  of  scientific  research  or  abandon
his  faith  in  Scripture  is  a  monstrous  perversion  of  Christian
freedom."  He  declares  :  "  The  old  position  is  no  longer
tenable  ;  a  new  position  has  to  be  taken  up  at  once,  prayer-
fully chosen,  and  hopefully  held."  He  then  goes  on  to
compare  the  Hebrew  story  of  creation  with  the  earlier
stories  developed  among  kindred  peoples,  and  especially
with  the  pre-existing  Assyro-Babylonian  cosmogony,  and
shows  that  they  are  from  the  same  source.  He  points  out
that  any  attempt  to  explain  particular  features  of  the  story
into  harmony  with  the  modern  scientific  ideas  necessitates
''  a  non-natural  "  interpretation  ;  but  he  says  that,  if  we  adopt
a  natural  interpretation,  ''  we  shall  consider  that  the  Hebrew
description  of  the  visible  universe  is  unscientific  as  judged
by  modern  standards,  and  that  it  shares  the  limitations  of
the  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  age  at  which  it  was  com-


22  FROM    CREATION    TO   EVOLUTION.

mitted  to  writing."  Regarding  the  account  in  Genesis  of
man's  physical  origin,  he  says  that  it  *'  is  expressed  in  the
simple  terms  of  prehistoric  legend,  of  unscientific  pictorial
description."

In  these  statements  and  in  a  multitude  of  others  made  by
eminent  Christian  investigators  in  other  countries  is  indi-
cated what  the  victory  is  which  has  now  been  fully  won
over  the  older  theology.

Thus,  from  the  Assyrian  researches  as  well  as  from  other
sources,  it  has  come  to  be  acknowledged  by  the  most  emi-
nent scholars  at  the  leading  seats  of  Christian  learning  that
the  accounts  of  creation  with  which  for  nearly  two  thousand
years  all  scientific  discoveries  have  had  to  be  *'  reconciled  "
— the  accounts  which  blocked  the  way  of  Copernicus,  and
Galileo,  and  Newton,  and  Laplace — were  simply  transcribed
or  evolved  from  a  mass  of  myths  and  legends  largely  derived
by  the  Hebrews  from  their  ancient  relations  with  Chaldea,
rewrought  in  a  monotheistic  sense,  imperfectly  welded  to-
gether, and  then  thrown  into  poetic  forms  in  the  sacred
books  which  we  have  inherited.

On  one  hand,  then,  we  have  the  various  groups  of  men
devoted  to  the  physical  sciences  all  converging  toward  the
)  proofs  that  the  universe,  as  we   at  present  know  it,  is  the
f  result  of  an  evolutionary  process — that  is,  of  the  gradual
)(  working  of  physical  laws  upon  an  early  condition  of  matter ;
on  the  other   hand,    we   have  other  great   groups    of  men
devoted  to  historical,  philological,  and  archseological  science
whose  researches  all   converge  toward  the  conclusion  that
our  sacred  accounts  of  creation  were  the  result  of  an  evolu-
tion from  an  early  chaos  of  rude  opinion.

The  great  body  of  theologians  who  have  so  long  resisted
the  conclusions  of  the  men  of  science  have  claimed  to  be
fighting  especially  for  *'  the  truth  of  Scripture,"  and  their
final  answer  to  the  simple  conclusions  of  science  regarding
the  evolution  of  the  material  universe  has  been  the  cry,
"  The  Bible  is  true."  And  they  are  right — though  in  a  sense
nobler  than  they  have  dreamed.  Science,  while  conquering
them,  has  found  in  our  Scriptures  a  far  nobler  truth  than
that  literal  historical  exactness  for  which  theologians  have
so  long  and  so  vainly  contended.     More  and   more  as  we


THE   VISIBLE    UNIVERSE.  23

consider  the  results  of  the  long  struggle  in  this  field  we  are
brought  to  the  conclusion  that  the  inestimable  value  of  the
great  sacred  books  of  the  world  is  found  in  their  revelation
of  the  steady  striving  of  our  race  after  higher  conceptions,
beliefs,  and  aspirations,  both  in  morals  and  religion.  Un-
folding and  exhibiting  this  long-continued  effort,  each  of  the
great  sacred  books  of  the  world  is  precious,  and  all,  in  the
highest  sense,  areftrue.)  Not  one  of  them,  indeed,  conforms
to  the  measure  of  what  mankind  has  now  reached  in  his-
torical and  scientific  truth  ;  to  make  a  claim  to  such  con-
formity is  folly,  for  it  simply  exposes  those  who  make  it
and  the  books  for  which  it  is  made  to  loss  of  their  just  in-
fluence.

That  to  which  the  great  sacred  books  of  the  world  con-
form, and  our  own  most  of  all,  is  the  evolution  of  the  high-
est conceptions,  beliefs,  and  aspirations  of  our  race  from  its
childhood  through  the  great  turning-points  in  its  history.
Herein  lies  the  truth  of  all  bibles,  and  especially  of  our  own.
Of  vast  value  they  indeed  often  are  as  a  record  of  historical
outward  fact ;  recent  researches  in  the  East  are  constantly
increasing  this  value  ;  but  it  is  not  for  this  that  we  prize
them  most :  they  are  eminently  precious,  not  as  a  record  of
outward  fact,  but  as  a  mirror  of  the  evolving  heart,  mind,
and  soul  of  man.  They  are  true  because  they  have  been
developed  in  accordance  with  the  laws  governing  the  evolu-
tion of  truth  in  human  history,  and  because  in  poem,  chroni-
cle, code,  legend,  myth,  apologue,  or  parable  they  reflect  this
development  of  what  is  best  in  the  onward  march  of  human-
ity. To  say  that  they  are  not  true  is  as  if  one  should  say
that  a  flower  or  a  tree  or  a  planet  is  not(t£ue);  to  scoff  at
them  is  to  scoff  at  the  law  of  the  universe.  In  welding  to-
gether into  noble  form,  whether  in  the  book  of  Genesis,
or  in  the  Psalms,  or  in  the  book  of  Job,  or  elsewhere,  the
great  conceptions  of  men  acting  under  earlier  inspiration,
whether  in  Egypt,  or  Chaldea,  or  India,  or  Persia,  the
compilers  of  our  sacred  books  have  given  to  humanity  a
possession  ever  becoming  more  and  more  precious  ;  and
modern  science,  in  substituting  a  new  heaven  and  a  new
earth  for  the  old — the  reign  of  law  for  the  reign  of  ca-
price, and  the  idea  of  evolution   for  that  of  creation— has


24


FROM   CREATION    TO    EVOLUTION.


'  added  and  is  steadily  adding  a  new  revelation  divinely  in-
'  spired.

In  the  light  of  these  two  evolutions,  then — one  of  the
1  visible  universe,  the  other  of  a  sacred  creation-legend — sci-
/  ence  and   theology,  if  the  master  minds  in  both  are  wise,
I  may  at  last  be  reconciled.    A  great  step  in  this  reconciliation
was  recently  seen  at  the  main  centre  of  theological  thought
among  English-speaking  people,  when,  in  the  collection  of
essays  entitled  Lux  Mundi,  emanating  from  the  college  estab-
lished in  these  latter  days  as  a  fortress  of  orthodoxy  at  Ox-
ford, the  legendary  character  of  the  creation  accounts  in  our
sacred  books  was  acknowledged,  and  when  the  Archbishop
of  Canterbury  asked,  ''  May  not  the   Holy  Spirit  at  times
have  made  use  of  myth  and  legend  ?  "  *


II.    THEOLOGICAL   TEACHINGS    REGARDING    THE    ANIMALS

AND    MAN.

In  one  of  the  windows  of  the  cathedral  at  Ulm  a  medicX-
val  glass-stainer  has  represented  the  Almighty  as  busily  en-
gaged in  creating  the  animals,  and  there  has  just  left  the
divine  hands  an  elephant  fully  accoutred,  with  armour,  har-
ness, and  housings,  ready  for  war.  Similar  representations
appear  in  illuminated  manuscripts  and  even  in  early  printed
books,  and,  as  the  culmination  of  the  whole,  the  Almighty
is  shown  as  fashioning  the  first  man  from  a  hillock  of  clay
and  extracting  from  his  side,  with  evident  effort,  the  first
woman.

This  view  of  the  general  process  of  creation  had  come
from  far,  appearing  under  varying  forms  in  various  ancient
cosmogonies.     In  the  Egyptian  temples  at  Philse  and  Den-

*  For  the  first  citations  above  made,  see  The  Cosmogony  of  Genesis,  by  the
Rev.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.  D.,  Canon  of  Christ  Church  and  Regius  Professor  of  He-
brew at  Oxford,  in  The  Expositor  for  January,  1886  ;  for  the  second,  series  of  cita-
tions, see  The  Early  Narratives  of  Genesis,  by  Herbert  Edward  Ryle,  Hulsean
Professor  of  Divinity  at  Cambridge,  London,  1892.  For  evidence  that  even  the
stiffest  of  Scotch  Presbyterians  have  now  come  to  discard  the  old  literal  biblical
narrative  of  creation  and  to  regard  the  declaration  of  the  Westminster  Confession
thereon  as  a  "  disproved  theory  of  creation,"  see  Principal  John  Tulloch,  in  Con-
temporary Review,  March,  1877,  on  Religious  Thought  in  Scotland — especially
page  550.


THEOLOGICAL   TEACHINGS.  25

derah  may  still  be  seen  representations  of  the  Nile  gods
modelling  lumps  of  clay  into  men,  and  a  similar  work  is
ascribed  in  the  Assyrian  tablets  to  the  gods  of  Baby-
lonia. Passing  into  our  own  sacred  books,  these  ideas  be-
came the  starting  point  of  a  vast  new  development  of  the-
ology.^

The  fathers  of  the  Church  generally  received  each  of  the
two  conflicting  creation  legends  in  Genesis  literally,  and
then,  having  done  their  best  to  reconcile  them  with  each
other  and  to  mould  them  together,  made  them  the  final  test
of  thought  upon  the  universe  and  all  things  therein.  At  the
beginning  of  the  fourth  century  Lactantius  struck  the  key-
note of  this  mode  of  subordinating  all  other  things  in  the
study  of  creation  to  the  literal  text  of  Scripture,  and  he  en-
forces his  view  of  the  creation  of  man  by  a  bit  of  philology,
saying  the  final  being  created  *'  is  called  man  because  he  is  /
made  from  the  gvound^iomo^x  ktimp.''  *

In  the  second  half  of  the  same  century  this  view  as  to
the  literal  acceptance  of  the  sacred  text  was  reasserted  by
St.  Ambrose,  who,  in  his  work  on  the  creation,  declared  that
"  Moses  opened  his  mouth  and  poured  forth  what  God  had
said  to  him."  But  a  greater  than  either  of  them  fastened
this  idea  into  the  Christian  theologies.  St.  Augustine,  pre-
paring his  Coninicntary  on  the  Book  of  Genesis,  laid  down  in
one  famous  sentence  the  law  which  has  lasted  in  the  Church
until  our  own  time  :  "  Nothing  is  to  be  accepted  save  on  the
authority  of  Scripture,  since  greater  is  that  authority  than
all  the  powers  of  the  human  mind."  The  vigour  of  the  sen-
tence in  its  original  Latin  carried  it  ringing  down  the  cen-
turies:  ''Major  est  Scriptiirce  anctoritas  quani  oninis  kumani
ingenii  capacitasT

Through  the  mediaeval  period,  in  spite  of  a  revolt  led
by  no  other  than  St.  Augustine  himself,  and  followed  bv  a


*  For  representations  of  Egyptian  gods  creating  men  out  of  lumps  of  clay,  see
Maspero  and  Sayce,  The  Dawn  of  History,  p.  156;  for  the  Chaldean  legends  of
the  creation  of  men  and  animals,  see  ibid.,  p.  543  ;  also  George  Smith,  Chaldean
Account  of  Genesis,  Sayce's  edition,  pp.  36,  72,  and  93  ;  also  for  similar  legends  in
other  ancient  nations,  Lenormant,  Origines  de  PHistoire,  pp.  i-jetseq.;  for  mediae-
val representations  of  the  creation  of  man  and  woman,  see  Didron,  Ico7iographie,
pp.  35,  178,  224,  537.


26  FROM  CREATION  TO  EVOLUTION.

series  of  influential  churchmen,  contending,  as  we  shall  here-
after see,  for  a  modification  of  the  accepted  view  of  creation,
this  phrase  held  the  minds  of  men  firmly.  The  great  Do-
minican encyclopaedist,  Vincent  of  Beauvais,  in  his  Mirror
of  Nature,  while  mixing  ideas  brought  from  Aristotle  with  a
theory  drawn  from  the  Bible,  stood  firmly  by  the  first  of  the
accounts  given  in  Genesis,  and  assigned  the  special  virtue  of
the  number  six  as  a  reason  why  all  things  were  created  in
six  days ;  and  in  the  later  Middle  Ages  that  eminent  author-
ity, Cardinal  d'Ailly,  accepted  everything  regarding  crea-
tion in  the  sacred  books  literally.  Only  a  faint  dissent  is
seen  in  Gregory  Reisch,  another  authority  of  this  later  pe-
riod, who,  while  giving,  in  his  book  on  the  beginning  of
things,  a  full  length  woodcut  showing  the  Almighty  in  the
act  of  extracting  Eve  from  Adam's  side,  with  all  the  rest  of
new-formed  Nature  in  the  background,  leans  in  his  writings,
like  St.  Augustine,  toward  a  belief  in  the  pre-existence  of
matter.

At  the  Reformation  the  vast  authority  of  Luther  was
thrown  in  favour  of  the  literal  acceptance  of  Scripture  as
the  main  source  of  natural  science.  The  allegorical  and  mys-
tical interpretations  of  earlier  theologians  he  utterly  rejected.
*'  Why,"  he  asks,  "  should  Moses  use  allegory  when  he  is
not  speaking  of  allegorical  creatures  or  of  an  allegorical
world,  but  of  real  creatures  and  of  a  visible  world,  which
can  be  seen,  felt,  and  grasped  ?  Moses  calls  things  by  their
right  names,  as  we  ought  to  do.  ...  I  hold  that  the  animals
took  their  being  at  once  upon  the  word  of  God,  as  did  also
the  fishes  in  the  sea."

Not  less  explicit  in  his  adherence  to  the  literal  account
of  creation  given  in  Genesis  was  Calvin.  He  warns  those
who,  by  taking  another  view  than  his  own,  "  basely  insult
the  Creator,  to  expect  a  judge  who  will  annihilate  them."
He  insists  that  all  species  of  animals  were  created  in  six
days,  each  made  up  of  an  evening  and  a  morning,  and  that
no  new  species  has  ever  appeared  since.  He  dwells  on  the
production  of  birds  from  the  water  as  resting  upon  certain
warrant  of  Scripture,  but  adds,  "  If  the  question  is  to  be
argued  on  physical  grounds,  we  know  that  water  is  more
akin  to  air  than  the  earth  is."    As  to  difficulties  in  the  scrip-


THEOLOGICAL   TEACHINGS.


27


tural  account  of  creation,  he  tells  us  that  God  ''  wished  by
these  to  give  proofs  of  his  power  which  should  fill  us  with
astonishment."

The  controlling-  minds  in  the  Roman  Church  steadfastly
held  this  view.  In  the  seventeenth  century  Bossuet  threw
his  vast  authority  in  its  favour,  and  in  his  Discourse  on  Uni-
versal History,  which  has  remained  the  foundation  not  only
of  theological  but  of  general  historical  teaching  in  France
down  to  the  present  republic,  we  find  him  calling  atten-
tion to  what  he  regards  as  the  culminating  act  of  creation,
and  asserting  that,  literally,  for  the  creation  of  man  earth
was  used,  and  "  the  finger  of  God  applied  to  corruptible
matter."

The  Protestant  world  held  this  idea  no  less  persistently.
In  the  seventeenth  century  Dr.  John  Lightfoot,  Vice-Chan-
cellor  of  the  University  of  Cambridge,  the  great  rabbinical
scholar  of  his  time,  attempted  to  reconcile  the  two  main  leg-
ends in  Genesis  by  saying  that  of  the  ''  clean  sort  of  beasts
there  were  seven  of  every  kind  created,  three  couples  for
breeding  and  the  odd  one  for  Adam's  sacrifice  on  his  fall,
which  God  foresaw  "  ;  and  that  of  unclean  beasts  only  one
couple  was  created.

So  literal  was  this  whole  conception  of  the  work  of  crea-
tion that  in  these  days  it  can  scarcely  be  imagined.  The
Almighty  was  represented  in  theological  literature,  in  the
pictured  Bibles,  and  in  works  of  art  generally,  as  a  sort  of
enlarged  and  venerable  Nuremberg  toymaker.  At  times
the  accounts  in  Genesis  were  illustrated  with  even  more
literal  exactness ;  thus,  in  connection  with  a  w^ell-known  pas-
sage in  the  sacred  text,  the  Creator  was  shown  as  a  tailor,
seated,  needle  in  hand,  diligently  sewing  together  skins  of
beasts  into  coats  for  Adam  and  Eve.  Such  representations
presented  no  difficulties  to  the  docile  minds  of  the  Middle
Ages  and  the  Reformation  period  ;  and  in  the  same  spirit,
when  the  discovery  of  fossils  began  to  provoke  thought,
these  were  declared  to  be  ''models  of  his  works  approved
or  rejected  by  the  great  Artificer,"  ''outlines  of  future  cre-
ations," "  sports  of  Nature,"  or  "  objects  placed  in  the  strata
to  brin^^  to  naught  human  curiosity  "  ;  and  this  kind  of  ex-
planation lingered  on  until  in  our  own  time  an  eminent  natu-


28  FROM   CREATION    TO   EVOLUTION.

ralist,  in  his  anxiety  to  save  the  literal  account  in  Genesis,
has  urged  that  Jehovah  tilted  and  twisted  the  strata,  scat-
tered the  fossils  through  them,  scratched  the  glacial  furrows
upon  them,  spread  over  them  the  marks  of  erosion  by  water,
and  set  Niagara  pouring— all  in  an  instant— thus  m3'stifying
the  world  ''for  some  inscrutable  purpose,  but  for  his  own
glory."  ^

The  next  important  development  of  theological  reason-
ing had  regard  to  the  divisions  of  the  animal  kingdom.

Naturally,  one  of  the  first  divisions  which  struck  the  in-
quiring mind  was  that  between  useful  and  noxious  creatures,
and  the  question  therefore  occurred.  How  could  a  good
God  create  tigers  and  serpents,  thorns  and  thistles?  The
answer  was  found  in  theological  considerations  upon  sin.
To  man's  first  disobedience  all  woes  were  due.  Great  men
for  eighteen  hundred  years  developed  the  theory  that  before
Adam's  disobedience  there  was  no  death,  and  therefore  nei-
ther ferocity  nor  venom.

Some  typical  utterances  in  the  evolution  of  this  doctrine
are  worthy  of  a  passing  glance.  St.  Augustine  expressly
confirmed  and  emphasized  the'view  that  the  vegetable  as
well  as  the  animal  kingdom  was  cursed  on  account  of  man's
sin.  Two  hundred  years  later  this  utterance  had  been
echoed  on  from  father  to  father  of  the  Church  until  it  was
caught  by  Bede  ;  he  declared  that  before  man's  fall  animals
were  harmless,  but  were  made  poisonous  or  hurtful  by
Adam's  sin,  and  he  said,  ''  Thus  fierce  and  poisonous  animals
were  created  for  terrifying  man  (because  God  foresaw  that


*  For  the  citation  from  Lactantius,  see  Divin.  Instit.,  lib.  ii,  cap.  xi,  in  Migne,
tome  vi,  pp.  311,  312  ;  for  St.  Augustine's  great  phrase,  see  the  De  Genes,  ad  lift.,
ii,  5  ;  for  St.  Ambrose,  see  lib.  i,  cap.  ii ;  for  Vincent  of  Beauvais,  see  the  Specu-
lum Naturale,  lib.  i,  cap.  ii,  and  lib.  ii,  cap.  xv  and  xxx  ;  also  Bourgeat,  Ehidex  sur
Vincent  de  Beauvais,  Paris,  1856,  especially  chaps,  vii,  xii,  and  xvi  ;  for  Cardinal
d'Ailly,  see  the  Iiriago  Mundi,  and  for  Reisch,  see  the  various  editions  of  the  Mar-
garita Philosophica  ;  for  Luther's  statements,  see  Luther's  Schriften,  ed.  Walch,
Halle,  1740,  Commentary  on  Genesis,  vol.  i  ;  for  Calvin's  view  of  the  creation  of  the
animals,  including  the  immutability  of  species,  see  the  Comm.  in  Gen.,  tome  i  of
his  Opera  omnia,  Amst.,  1671,  cap.  i,  v,  xx,  p.  5,  also  cap.  ii,  v,  ii,  p.  8,  and  else-
where ;  for  Bossuet,  see  his  Discours  sur  V Histoire  universale  (in  his  (Euvres,  tome
v,  Paris,  1846) ;  for  Lightfoot,  see  his  works,  edited  by  Pitman,  London,  1822  ;  for
Bede,  see  the  Hexa;meron,  lib.  i,  in  Migne,  tome  xci,  p.  21  ;  for  Mr.  Gosse's  mod-
ern defence  of  the  literal  view,  see  his  Omphalos^  London,  iSs7,  passim.


THEOLOGICAL   TEACHINGS.


29


he  would  sin),  in  order  that  he  might  be  made  aware  of  the
final  punishment  of  hell."

In  the  twelfth  century  this  view  was  incorporated  by
Peter  Lombard  into  his  great  theological  work,  the  Sentences,
which  became  a  text-book  of  theology  through  the  middle
ages.  He  affirmed  that  "  no  created  things  would  have  been
hurtful  to  man  had  he  not  sinned  ;  they  became  hurtful  for
the  sake  of  terrifying  and  punishing  vice  or  of  proving  and
perfecting  virtue  ;  they  were  created  harmless,  and  on  ac-
count of  sin  became  hurtful."

This  theological  theory  regarding  animals  was  brought
out  in  the  eighteenth  century  with  great  force  by  John  Wes-
ley. He  declared  that  before  Adam's  sin  "  none  of  these
attempted  to  devour  or  in  any  wise  hurt  one  another  "  ;  "  the
spider  was  as  harmless  as  the  fiy,  and  did  not  lie  in  wait
for  blood."  Not  only  Wesley,  but  the  eminent  Dr.  Adam
Clarke  and  Dr.  Richard  Watson,  whose  ideas  had  the  very
greatest  weight  among  the  English  Dissenters,  and  even
among  leading  thinkers  in  the  Established  Church,  held
firmly  to  this  theory  ;  so  that  not  until,  in  our  own  time,
geology  revealed  the  remains  of  vast  multitudes  of  carnivor-
ous creatures,  many  of  them  with  half-digested  remains  of
other  animals  in  their  stomachs,  all  extinct  long  ages  before
the  appearance  of  man  upon  earth,  was  a  victory  won  by
science  over  theology  in  this  field.

A  curious  development  of  this  doctrine  was  seen  in  the
belief  drawn  by  sundry  old  commentators  from  the  con-
demnation of  the  serpent  in  Genesis — a  belief,  indeed,  per-
fectly natural,  since  it  was  evidently  that  of  the  original
writers  of  the  account  preserved  in  the  first  of  our  sacred
books.  This  belief  was  that,  until  the  tempting  serpent  was
cursed  by  the  Almighty,  all  serpents  stood  erect,  walked,
and  talked.

This  belief  was  handed  down  the  ages  as  part  of  ''  the
sacred  deposit  oi  the  faith  "  until  Watson,  the  most  prolific
writer  of  the  evangelical  reform  in  the  eighteenth  century
and  the  standard  theologian  of  the  evangelical  party,  de^
clared  :  "  We  have  no  reason  at  all  to  believe  that  the  animal
had  a  serpentine  form  in  any  mode  or  degree  until  its  trans-
formation ;  that  he  was  then  degraded  to  a  reptile  to  go


30


FROM  CREATION  TO  EVOLUTION.


upon  his  belly  imports,  on  the  contrary,  an  entire  loss  and
alteration  of  the  original  form."  Here,  again,  was  a  ripe
result  of  the  theologic  method  diligently  pursued  by  the
strongest  thinkers  in  the  Church  during  nearly  two  thou-
sand years ;  but  this  "  sacred  deposit "  also  faded  away
wdien  the  geologists  found  abundant  remains  of  fossil  ser-
pents dating  from  periods  long  before  the  appearance  of  man.

Troublesome  questions  also  arose  among  theologians  re-
garding animals  classed  as  "  superfluous."  St.  Augustine
was  especially  exercised  thereby.  He  says :  "  I  confess  I
am  ignorant  why  mice  and  frogs  were  created,  or  flies  and
worms.  .  .  .  All  creatures  are  either  useful,  hurtful,  or  su-
perfluous to  us.  ...  As  for  the  hurtful  creatures,  we  are
either  punished,  or  disciplined,  or  terrified  by  them,  so  that
w^e  may  not  cherish  and  love  this  life."  As  to  the  "  superflu-
ous animals,"  he  says,  "  Although  they  are  not  necessary  for
our  service,  yet  the  whole  design  of  the  universe  is  thereby
completed  and  finished."  Luther,  who  followed  St.  Augus-
tine in  so  man}^  other  matters,  declined  to  follow  him  fully  in
this.  To  him  a  fly  was  not  merely  superfluous,  it  was  nox-
ious— sent  by  the  devil  to  vex  him  when  reading.

Another  subject  which  gave  rise  to  much  searching  of
Scripture  and  long  trains  of  theological  reasoning  was  the
difference  between  the  creation  of  man  and  that  of  other
living  beings.

Great  stress  w^as  laid  by  theologians,  from  St.  Basil  and
St.  Augustine  to  St.  Thomas  Aquinas  and  Bossuet,  and  from
Luther  to  Wesley,  on  the  radical  distinction  indicated  in
Genesis,  God  having  created  man  "  in  his  own  image."
What  this  statement  meant  was  seen  in  the  light  of  the  later
biblical  statement  that  "  Adam  begat  Seth  in  his  own  like-
ness, after  his  image."

In  view  of  this  and  of  w^ell-known  texts  incorporated
from  older  creation  legends  into  the  Hebrew  sacred  books
it  came  to  be  widely  held  that,  while  man  was  directly
moulded  and  fashioned  separately  by  the  Creator's  hand,  the
animals  generally  were  evoked  in  numbers  from  the  earth
and  sea  by  the  Creator's  voice.

A  question  now  arose  naturally  as  to  the  distinctions  of
species  among   animals.     The   vast   majority   of  theologians


THEOLOGICAL   TEACHINGS.  3 1

agreed  in  representing  all  animals  as  created  "  in  the  begin-  ]  /
ning,"  and  named  by  /Vdam,  preserved  in  the  ark,  and  con-  /
tinned  ever  afterward  under  exactly  the  same  species.  This
belief  ripened  into  a  dogma.  Like  so  many  other  dogmas
in  the  Church,  Catholic  and  Protestant,  its  real  origins  are
to  be  found  rather  in  pagan  philosophy  than  in  the  Chris-
tian Scriptures  ;  it  came  far  more  from  Plato  and  Aristotle
than  from  Moses  and  St.  Paul.  But  this  was  not  considered  :
more  and  more  it  became  necessary  to  believe  that  each  and
every  difference  of  species  was  impressed  by  the  Creator
"  in  the  beginning,"  and  that  no  change  had  taken  place  or
could  have  taken  place  since.

Some  difficulties  arose  here  and  there  as  zoology  pro-
gressed and  revealed  ever-increasing  numbers  of  species  ;
but  through  the  Middle  Ages,  and  indeed  long  after  the
Reformation,  these  difficulties  were  easily  surmounted  by
making  the  ark  of  Noah  larger  and  larger,  and  especially
by  holding  that  there  had  been  a  human  error  in  regard  to
its  measurement."^

But  naturally  there  was  developed  among  both  ecclesias-
tics and  laymen  a  human  desire  to  go  beyond  these  special
points  in  the  history  of  animated  beings — a  desire  to  know
what  the  creation  really  is.

Current  legends,  stories,  and  travellers'  observations,
poor  as  they  were,  tended  powerfully  to  stimulate  curiosity
in  this  field.

Three  centuries  before  the  Christian  era  Aristotle  had
made  the  first  really  great  attempt  to  satisfy  this  curiosity,
and  had  begun  a  development  of  studies  in  natural  history
which  remains  one  of  the  leading  achievements  in  the  story
of  our  race.

*  For  St.  Augustine,  see  De  Genesi  and  De  Trinitate,  passim  ;  for  Bade,  see
Hexcemeron,  lib.  i,  in  Migne,  tome  xci,  pp.  21,  36-38,  42  ;  and  De  Sex  Dierum
O'eatione^  in  Migne,  tome  xciii,  p.  215  ;  for  Peter  Lombard  on  "noxious  animals,"
see  his  Sententice,  lib.  ii,  dist.  xv,  3,  Migne,  tome  cxcii,  p.  682  ;  for  Wesley,  Clarke,
and  Watson,  see  quotations  from  them  and  notes  thereto  in  my  chapter  on  Geology  ;
for  St.  Augustine  on  "  superfluous  animals,"  see  the  De  Genesi,  lib.  i,  cap.  xvi,  26  ;
on  Luther's  view  of  flies,  see  the  Table  Talk  and  his  famous  utterance,  "  Odio
muscas  quia  sunt  imagines  diaboli  et  hccreticorum  "  ;  for  the  agency  of  Aristotle
and  Plato  in  fastening  the  belief  in  the  fixity  of  species  into  Christian  theology,  see
Sachs,  Geschichte  dcr  Botanik,  Miinchen,  1875,  p.  107  and  note,  also  p.  113.


32  FROM  CREATION  TO  EVOLUTION.

But  the  feeling  which  we  have  already  seen  so  strong  in
the  early  Church— that  all  study  of  Nature  was  futile  in
view  of  the  approaching  end  of  the  world— indicated  so
clearly  in  the  New  Testament  and  voiced  so  powerfully  by
Lactantius  and  St.  Augustine — held  back  this  current  of
thought  for  many  centuries.  Still,  the  better  tendency  in
humanity  continued  to  assert  itself.  There  was,  indeed,  an
influence  coming  from  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  themselves
which  wrought  powerfully  to  this  end  ;  for,  in  spite  of  all
that  Lactantius  or  St.  Augustine  might  say  as  to  the  futility
of  any  study  of  Nature,  the  grand  utterances  in  the  Psalms
regarding  the  beauties  and  wonders  of  creation,  in  all  the
glow  of  the  truest  poetry,  ennobled  the  study  even  among
those  whom  logic  drew  away  from  it.

But,  as  a  matter  of  course,  in  the  early  Church  and
throughout  the  Middle  Ages  all  such  studies  were  cast  in  a
theologic  mould.  Without  some  purpose  of  biblical  illustra-
tion or  spiritual  edification  they  were  considered  futile  ;  too
much  prying  into  the  secrets  of  Nature  was  very  generally
held  to  be  dangerous  both  to  body  and  soul  ;  only  for  show-
ing forth  God's  glory  and  his  purposes  in  the  creation  were
such  studies  praiseworthy.  The  great  work  of  Aristotle
was  under  eclipse.  The  early  Christian  thinkers  gave  little
attention  to  it,  and  that  little  was  devoted  to  transformino;  it
into  something  absolutely  opposed  to  his  whole  spirit  and
method;  in  place  of  it  they  developed  the  Physiologus  txw^
the  Bestiaries,  mingling  scriptural  statements,  legends  of  the
saints,  and  fanciful  inventions  with  pious  intent  and  childlike
simplicity.  In  place  of  research  came  authority — the  au-
thority of  the  Scriptures  as  interpreted  by  the  PJiysiologus
and  the  Bestiaries — and  these  remained  the  principal  source
of  thought  on  animated  Nature  for  over  a  thousand  years.

Occasionally,  indeed,  fear  was  shown  among  the  rulers
in  the  Church,  even  at  such  poor  prying  into  the  creation  as
this,  and  in  the  fifth  century  a  synod  under  Pope  Gelasius
administered  a  rebuke  to  the  PJiysiologus ;  but  the  interest  in
Nature  was  too  strong  :  the  great  work  on  Creation  by  St.
Basil  had  drawn  from  the  PJiysiologus  precious  illustrations
of  Holy  Writ,  and  the  strongest  of  the  early  popes,  Gregory
the  Great,  virtually  sanctioned  it.


THEOLOGICAL   TEACHINGS.  33

Thus  was  developed  a  sacred  science  of  creation  and  of
the  divine  purpose  in  Nature,  which  went  on  developing
from  the  fourth  century  to  the  nineteenth — from  St.  Basil  to
St.  Isidore  of  Seville,  from  Isidore  to  Vincent  of  Beauvais,
and  from  Vincent  to  Archdeacon  Paley  and  the  Bridgewater
Treatises.

Like  all  else  in  the  Middle  Ages,  this  sacred  science  was
developed  purely  by  theological  methods.  Neglecting  the
wonders  which  the  dissection  of  the  commonest  animals
would  have  afforded  them,  these  naturalists  attempted  to
throw  light  into  Nature  by  ingenious  use  of  scriptural  texts,
by  research  among  the  lives  of  the  saints,  and  by  the  plenti-
ful application  of  metaphysics.  Hence  even  such  strong
men  as  St.  Isidore  of  Seville  treasured  up  accounts  of  the
unicorn  and  dragons  mentioned  in  the  Scriptures  and  of  the
phoenix  and  basilisk  in  profane  writings.  Hence  such  con-
tributions to  knowledge  as  that  the  basilisk  kills  serpents  by
his  breath  and  men  by  his  glance,  that  the  lion  when  pur-
sued effaces  his  tracks  with  the  end  of  his  tail,  that  the  peli-
can nourishes  her  young  with  her  own  blood,  that  serpents
lay  aside  their  venom  before  drinking,  that  the  salamander
quenches  fire,  that  the  hyena  can  talk  with  shepherds,  that
certain  birds  are  born  of  the  fruit  of  a  certain  tree  when  it
happens  to  fall  into  the  water,  with  other  masses  of  science
equally  valuable.

As  to  the  method  of  bringing  science  to  bear  on  Scrip-
ture, the  Physiologus  gives  an  example,  illustrating  the  pas-
sage in  the  book  of  Job  which  speaks  of  the  old  lion  perish-
ing for  lack  of  prey.  Out  of  the  attempt  to  explain  an  un-
usual Hebrew  word  in  the  text  there  came  a  curious  devel-
opment of  error,  until  we  find  fully  evolved  an  account  of
the  "ant-lion,"  which,  it  gives  us  to  understand,  was  the  lion
mentioned  by  Job,  and  it  says  :  *'  As  to  the  ant-lion,  his  father
hath  the  shape  of  a  lion,  his  mother  that  of  an  ant ;  the  father
liveth  upon  flesh  and  the  mother  upon  herbs  ;  these  bring
forth  the  ant-lion,  a  compound  of  both  and  in  part  like  to
either;  for  his  fore  part  is  like  that  of  a  lion  and  his  hind
part  like  that  of  an  ant.  Being  thus  composed,  he  is  neither
able  to  eat  flesh  like  his  father  nor  herbs  like  his  mother,
and  so  he  perisheth."
4


^.  FROM  CREATION  TO  EVOLUTION.

In  the  middle  of  the  thirteenth  century  we  have  a  tri-
umph of  this  theological  method  in  the  great  work  of  the
English  Franciscan  Bartholomew  on  The  Properties  of  Tilings.
The  theological  method  as  applied  to  science  consists  largely
in  accepting  tradition  and  in  spinning  arguments  to  fit  it.
In  this  field  Bartholomew  was  a  master.  Having  begun
with  the  intent  mainly  to  explain  the  allusions  in  Scripture
to  natural  objects,  he  soon  rises  logically  into  a  survey  of
all  Nature.  Discussing  the  ''cockatrice"  of  Scripture,  he
tells  us :  "  He  drieth  and  burneth  leaves  with  his  touch,  and
he  is  of  so  great  venom  and  perilous  that  he  slayeth  and
wasteth  him  that  nigheth  him  without  tarrying  ;  and  yet  the
weasel  overcometh  him,  for  the  biting  of  the  weasel  is  death
to  the  cockatrice.  Nevertheless  the  biting  of  the  cockatrice
is  death  to  the  weasel  if  the  weasel  eat  not  rue  before.  And
though  the  cockatrice  be  venomous  without  remedy  while
he  is  alive,  yet  he  looseth  all  the  malice  when  he  is  burnt  to
ashes.  His  ashes  be  accounted  profitable  in  working  of
alchemy,  and  namely  in  turning  and  changing  of  metals."

Bartholomew  also  enlightens  us  on  the  animals  of  Egypt,
and  says,  ''  If  the  crocodile  findeth  a  man  by  the  water's
brim  he  slayeth  him,  and  then  he  weepeth  over  him  and
swalloweth  him."

Naturally  this  good  Franciscan  naturalist  devotes  much
thought  to  the  ''  dragons "  mentioned  in  Scripture.  He
says:  "The  dragon  is  most  greatest  of  all  serpents,  and  oft
he  is  drawn  out  of  his  den  and  riseth  up  into  the  air,  and
the  air  is  moved  by  him,  and  also  the  sea  swelleth  against
his  venom,  and  he  hath  a  crest,  and  reareth  his  tongue,  and
hath  teeth  like  a  saw,  and  hath  strength,  and  not  only  in
teeth  but  in  tail,  and  grieveth  with  biting  and  with  stinging.
Whom  he  findeth  he  slayeth.  Oft  four  or  five  of  them
fasten  their  tails  together  and  rear  up  their  heads,  and  sail
over  the  sea  to  get  good  meat.  Between  elephants  and
dragons  is  everlasting  fighting ;  for  the  dragon  with  his  tail
spanneth  the  elephant,  and  the  elephant  with  his  nose
throweth  down  the  dragon.  .  .  .  The  cause  why  the  dragon
desireth  his  blood  is  the  coldness  thereof,  by  the  which  the
dragon  desireth  to  cool  himself.  Jerome  saith  that  the
dragon  is  a  full  thirsty  beast,  insomuch  that  he  opencth  his


THEOLOGICAL    TEACHINGS.  35

mouth  against  the  wind  to  quench  the  burning  of  his  thirst
in  that  wise.  Therefore,  when  he  seeth  ships  in  great  wind
he  flieth  against  the  sail  to  take  the  cold  wind,  and  over-
throweth  the  ship."

These  ideas  of  Friar  Bartholomew  spread  far  and  struck
deep  into  the  popular  mind.  His  book  was  translated  into  the
principal  languages  of  Europe,  and  was  one  of  those  most
generally  read  during  the  Ages  of  Faith.  It  maintained  its
position  nearly  three  hundred  years ;  even  after  the  inven-
tion of  printing  it  held  its  own,  and  in  the  fifteenth  century
there  were  issued  no  less  than  ten  editions  of  it  in  Latin,
four  in  French,  and  various  versions  of  it  in  Dutch,  Spanish,
and  English.  Preachers  found  it  especially  useful  in  illus-
trating the  ways  of  God  to  man.  It  was  only  when  the  great
voyages  of  discovery  substituted  ascertained  fact  for  the-
ological reasoning  in  this  province  that  its  authority  was
broken.

The  same  sort  of  science  flourished  in  the  Bestiaries,
which  were  used  everywhere,  and  especially  in  the  pulpits,
for  the  edification  of  the  faithful.  In  all  of  these,  as  in  that
compiled  early  in  the  thirteenth  century  by  an  ecclesiastic,
William  of  Normandy,  we  have  this  lesson,  borrowed  from
the  Physiologus'.  ''The  lioness  giveth  birth  to  cubs  which
remain  three  days  without  life.  Then  cometh  the  lion,
breatheth  upon  them,  and  bringeth  them  to  life.  .  .  .  Thus
it  is  that  Jesus  Christ  during  three  days  was  deprived  of
life,  but  God  the  Father  raised  him  gloriouslv."

Pious  use  was  constantly  made  of  this  science,  especially
by  monkish  preachers.  The  phoenix  rising  from  his  ashes
proves  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  ;  the  structure  and
mischief  of  monkeys  proves  the  existence  of  demons ;  the
fact  that  certain  monkeys  have  no  tails  proves  that  Satan
has  been  shorn  of  his  glory  ;  the  weasel,  which  "  constantly
changes  its  place,  is  a  type  of  the  man  estranged  from  the
word  of  God,  who  findeth  no  rest."

The  moral  treatises  of  the  time  often  took  the  form  of
works  on  natural  histor}^  in  order  the  more  fully  to  exploit
these  religious  teachings  of  Nature.  Thus  from  the  book
On  Bees,  of  the  Dominican  Thoma'l^of  Cantimpre,  we  learn
that  "  wasps  persecute  bees  and  make  war  on  them  out  of


36


FROM  CREATION  TO  EVOLUTION.


natural  hatred  "  ;  and  these,  he  tells  us,  typify  the  demons
who  dwell  in  the  air  and  with  lightning  and  tempest  assail
and  vex  mankind — whereupon  he  fills  a  long  chapter  with
anecdotes  of  such  demonic  warfare  on  mortals.  In  like
manner  his  fellow-Dominican,  the  inquisitor  Nider,  in  his
book  The  Ant  Hill,  teaches  us  that  the  ants  in  Ethiopia,
which  are  said  to  have  horns  and  to  grow  so  large  as
to  look  like  dogs,  are  emblems  of  atrocious  heretics,  like
Wyclif  and  the  Hussites,  who  bark  and  bite  against  the
truth ;  while  the  ants  of  India,  which  dig  up  gold  out  of  the
sand  with  their  feet  and  hoard  it,  though  they  make  no  use
of  it,  symbolize  the  fruitless  toil  with  which  the  heretics  dig
out  the  gold  of  Holy  Scripture  and  hoard  it  in  their  books
to  no  purpose.

This  pious  spirit  not  only  pervaded  science ;  it  bloomed
out  in  art,  and  especially  in  the  cathedrals.  In  the  gargoyles
overhanging  the  walls,  in  the  grotesques  clambering  about
the  towers  or  perched  upon  pinnacles,  in  the  dragons  prowl-
ing under  archwa3^s  or  lurking  in  bosses  of  foliage,  in  the
apocalyptic  beasts  carved  upon  the  stalls  of  the  choir,
stained  into  the  windows,  wrought  into  the  tapestries,  illumi-
nated in  the  letters  and  borders  of  psalters  and  missals,  these
marvels  of  creation  suggested  ever3^where  morals  from  the
Physiologus,  the  Bestiaries,  and  the  Exempla.^

*  For  the  Physiologus,  Bestiaries,  etc.,  see  Berger  de  Xivrey,  Traditions  T/ra-
tologiqnes  ;  also  Hippeau's  edition  of  the  Bestiaire  de  Guillaume  de  N^ormatidie,
Caen,  1852,  and  such  medioeval  books  of  Exempla  as  the  Luffien  Natures;  also
Hoefer,  Ilistoire  de  la  Zoologie ;  also  Rambaud,  Histoire  de  la  Civilisation  Fran-
^aise,  Paris,  1885,  vol.  i,  pp.  368,  369  ;  also  Cardinal  Pitra,  preface  to  the  Spicile-
gium  Solismense,  Paris,  \%%^.  passim  ;  also  Cams,  Geschichte  der  Zoologie;  and,  for
an  admirable  summary,  the  article  Physiologus  in  the  Encyclopcrdia  Britannica.
In  the  illuminated  manuscripts  in  the  Library  of  Cornell  University  are  some  very
striking  examples  of  grotesques.  For  admirably  illustrated  articles  on  the  Besti-
aries, see  Cahier  and  Martin.  Melanges  d' Archeologie,  Paris,  1851,  1852,  and  1856,
vol.  ii  of  the  first  series,  pp.  85-232,  and  second  series,  volume  on  Curiosith  Mys-
tMeuses,  pp.  106-164  ;  also  J.  R.  Allen,  Early  Christian  Symbolism  in  Great  Brit-
ain and  Ireland  (London,  1S87),  lecture  vi  ;  for  an  exhaustive  discussion  of  the
subject,  see  Das  Thierbuch  des  normannischen  Dichters  Guillaume  le  Clerc,  heraus-
gegeben  von  Reinisch,  Leipsic,  1890  ;  and,  for  an  Italian  example,  Goldstaub  und
Wendriner,  Ein  Tosco-  Venezianischer  Bestiarius,  Halle,  1892,  where  is  given,  on
pp.  369-371,  a  very  pious  but  ve^  comical  tradition  regarding  the  beaver,  hardly
mentionable  to  ears  polite.  For  Friar  Bartholomew,  see  (besides  his  book  itself)
Medieval  Lore,  edited  by  Robert  Steele,  London,  1893,  pp.  118-138.


THEOLOGICAL   TEACHINGS.  37

Here  and  there  among  men  who  were  free  from  church
control  we  have  work  of  a  better  sort.  In  the  twelfth  and
thirteenth  centuries  Abd  AUatif  made  observations  upon  the
natural  history  of  Egypt  which  showed  a  truly  scientific
spirit,  and  the  Emperor  Frederick  II  attempted  to  promote
a  more  fruitful  study  of  Nature  ;  but  one  of  these  men  was
abhorred  as  a  Mussulman  and  the  other  as  an  infidel.  Far
more  in  accordance  with  the  spirit  of  the  time  was  the  ec-
clesiastic Giraldus  Cambrensis,  whose  book  on  the  topog-
raphy of  Ireland  bestows  much  attention  upon  the  animals
of  the  island,  and  rarely  fails  to  make  each  contribute  an
appropriate  moral.  For  example,  he  says  that  in  Ireland
'*  eagles  live  for  so  many  ages  that  they  seem  to  contend
with  eternity  itself;  so  also  the  saints,  having  put  off  the
old  man  and  put  on  the  new,  obtain  the  blessed  fruit  of  ever-
lasting life."  Again,  he  tells  us :  "  Eagles  often  fly  so  high
that  their  wings  are  scorched  by  the  sun ;  so  those  w^ho  in
the  Holy  Scriptures  strive  to  unravel  the  deep  and  hidden
secrets  of  the  heavenly  mysteries,  beyond  what  is  allowed,
fall  below,  as  if  the  wangs  of  the  presumptuous  imaginations
on  which  they  are  borne  were  scorched."

In  one  of  the  great  men  of  the  following  century  ap-
peared a  gleam  of  healthful  criticism  :  Albert  the  Great,  in
his  work  on  the  animals,  dissents  from  the  widespread  belief
that  certain  birds  spring  from  trees  and  are  nourished  by
the  sap,  and  also  from  the  theory  that  some  are  generated
in  the  sea  from  decaying  wood.

But  it  required  many  generations  for  such  scepticism  to
produce  much  effect,  and  we  find  among  the  illustrations  in
an  edition  of  Mandeville  published  just  before  the  Reforma-
tion not  only  careful  accounts  but  pictured  representations
both  of  birds  and  of  beasts  produced  in  the  fruit  of  trees.*

This  general  employment  of  natural  science  for  pious
purposes  went  on  after  the  Reformation.  Luther  frequently
made  this  use  of  it,  and  his  example  controlled  his  followers.

*  For  Giraldus  Cambrensis,  see  the  edition  in  the  Bohn  Library,  London,  1863,
p.  30  ;  for  Abd  Allatif  and  Frederick  II,  see  Hoefer,  as  above  ;  for  Albertus  Mag-
nus, see  the  De  Animalibus,  lib.  xxiii ;  for  the  illustrations  in  Mandeville,  see  the
Strasburg  edition,  1484  ;  for  the  history  of  the  myth  of  the  tree  which  produces
birds,  see  Max  Muller's  Lectures  on  the  Science  of  Language,  second  series,  lect.  xii.


38  FROM    CREATION   TO   EVOLUTION.

In  i6i2,  Wolfgang  Franz,  Professor  of  Theology  at  Luther's
university,  gave  to  the  world  his  sacred  history  of  animals,
which  went  through  many  editions.  It  contained  a  very  in-
genious classification,  describing  '*  natural  dragons,"  which
have  three  rows  of  teeth  to  each  jaw,  and  he  piously  adds,
*'  the  principal  dragon  is  the  Devil."

Near  the  end  of  the  same  century,  Father  Kircher,  the
great  Jesuit  professor  at  Rome,  holds  back  the  sceptical
current,  insists  upon  the  orthodox  view,  and  represents
among  the  animals  entering  the  ark  sirens  and  griffins.

Yet  even  among  theologians  we  note  here  and  there  a
sceptical  spirit  in  natural  science.  Early  in  the  same  seven-
teenth century  Eugene  Roger  published  his  Travels  in  Pales-
tine. As  regards  the  utterances  of  Scripture  he  is  soundly
orthodox :  he  prefaces  his  work  with  a  map  showing,  among
other  important  points  referred  to  in  biblical  history,  the
place  where  Samson  slew  a  thousand  Philistines  with  the
jawbone  of  an  ass,  the  cavern  which  Adam  and  Eve  inhab-
ited after  their  expulsion  from  paradise,  the  spot  where
Balaam's  ass  spoke,  the  place  where  Jacob  wrestled  with
the  angel,  the"  steep  place  down  which  the  swine  possessed
of  devils  plunged  into  the  sea,  the  position  of  the  salt  statue
which  was  once  Lot's  wife,  the  place  at  sea  where  Jonah
was  swallowed  by  the  whale,  and  "  the  exact  spot  where  St.
Peter  caught  one  hundred  and  fifty-three  fishes."

As  to  natural  history,  he  describes  and  discusses  wuth
great  theological  acuteness  the  basilisk.  He  tells  us  that
the  animcd  is  about  a  foot  and  a  half  long,  is  shaped  like  a
crocodile,  and  kills  people  with  a  single  glance.  The  one
which  he  saw  w^as  dead,  fortunately  for  him,  since  in  the
time  of  Pope  Leo  IV — as  he  tells  us— one  appeared  in  Rome
and  killed  many  people  by  merely  looking  at  them  ;  but  the
Pope  destroyed  it  with  his  prayers  and  the  sign  of  the  cross.
He  informs  us  that  Providence  has  wisely  and  mercifully
protected  man  by  requiring  the  monster  to  cry  aloud  two  or
three  times  whenever  it  leaves  its  den,  and  that  the  divine
wisdom  in  creation  is  also  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  mon-
ster is  obliged  to  look  its  victim  in  the  eye,  and  at  a  certain
fixed  distance,  before  its  glance  can  penetrate  the  victim's
brain  and  so  pass  to  his  heart.     He  also  gives  a  reason  for


THEOLOGICAL  TEACHINGS.


39


supposing  that  the  same  divine  mercy  has  provided  that  the
crowing:  of  a  cock  will  kill  the  basilisk.

Yet  even  in  this  good  and  credulous  missionary  we  see
the  influence  of  Bacon  and  the  dawn  of  experimental  sci-
ence ;  for,  having  been  told  many  stories  regarding  the  sala-
mander, he  secured  one,  placed  it  alive  upon  the  burning
coals,  and  reports  to  us  that  the  legends  concerning  its
power  to  live  in  the  fire  are  untrue.  He  also  tried  experi-
ments with  the  chameleon,  and  found  that  the  stories  told
of  it  were  to  be  received  with  much  allowance :  while,  then,
he  locks  up  his  judgment  whenever  he  discusses  the  letter
of  Scripture,  he  uses  his  mind  in  other  things  much  after
the  modern  method.

In  the  second  half  of  the  same  century  Hottinger,  in  his
Theological  Examination  of  the  History  of  Creation,  breaks
from  the  belief  in  the  phcenix  ;  but  his  scepticism  is  care-
fully kept  within  the  limits  imposed  by  Scripture.  He
avows  his  doubts,  first,  "  because  God  created  the  animals
in  couples,  while  the  phoenix  is  represented  as  a  single,  un-
mated  creature  "  ;  secondly,  ''  because  Noah,  when  he  en-
tered the  ark,  brought  the  animals  in  by  sevens,  while  there
were  never  so  many  individuals  of  the  phoenix  species " ;
thirdly,  because  "  no  man  is  known  who  dares  assert  that
he  has  ever  seen  this  bird";  fourthl3%  because  "  those  who
assert  there  is  a  phoenix  differ  among  themselves."

In  view  of  these  attacks  on  the  salamander  and  the
phoenix,  we  are  not  surprised  to  find,  before  the  end  of  the
century,  scepticism  regarding  the  basilisk :  the  eminent
Prof.  Kirchmaier,  at  the  University  of  Wittenberg,  treats
phoenix  and  basilisk  alike  as  old  wives'  fables.  As  to  the
phoenix,  he  denies  its  existence,  not  only  because  Noah
took  no  such  bird  into  the  ark,  but  also  because,  as  he
pithily  remarks,  ''  birds  come  from  eggs,  not  from  ashes."
But  the  unicorn  he  can  not  resign,  nor  will  he  even  con-
cede that  the  unicorn  is  a  rhinoceros  ;  he  appeals  to  Job
and  to  Marco  Polo  to  prove  that  this  animal,  as  usually
conceived,  really  exists,  and  says,  "  Who  would  not  fear  to
deny  the  existence  of  the  unicorn,  since  Holy  Scripture
names  him  with  distinct  praises?"  As  to  the  other  great
animals    mentioned    in    Scripture,    he    is   so  rationalistic  as


.Q  FROM  CREATION  TO  EVOLUTION.

to  admit  that  behemoth  was  an  elephant   and  leviathan  a
whale.

But  these  germs  of  a  fruitful  scepticism  grew,  and  we
soon  find  Dannhauer  going  a  step  further  and  declaring  his
disbelief  even  in  the  unicorn,  insisting  that  it  was  a  rhinoce-
i-QS — only  that  and  nothing  more.  Still,  the  main  current
continued  strongly  theological.  In  17 12  Samuel  Bochart
published  his  great  work  upon  the  animals  of  Holy  Scrip-
ture. As  showing  its  spirit  we  may  take  the  titles  of  the
chapters  on  the  horse :

''Chapter  VI.     Of  the  Hebrew  Name  of  the  Horse."

"Chapter  VII.  Of  the  Colours  of  the  Six  Horses  in
Zechariah."

"  Chapter  VIII.     Of  the  Horses  in  Job."

"  Chapter  IX.  Of  Solomon's  Horses,  and  of  the  Texts
wherein  the  Writers  praise  the  Excellence  of  Horses."

''  Chapter  X.     Of  the  Consecrated  Horses  of  the  Sun."

Among  the  other  titles  of  chapters  are  such  as :  Of  Ba-
laam's Ass  ;  Of  the  Thousand  Philistines  slain  by  Samson
with  the  Jawbone  of  an  Ass  ;  Of  the  Golden  Calves  of  Aaron
and  Jeroboam  ;  Of  the  Bleating,  Milk,  Wool,  External  and
Internal  Parts  of  Sheep  mentioned  in  Scripture  ;  Of  Nota-
ble Things  told  regarding  Lions  in  Scripture;  Of  Noah's
Dove  and  of  the  Dove  which  appeared  at  Christ's  Baptism.
Mixed  up  in  the  book,  with  the  principal  mass  drawn  from
Scripture,  were  many  facts  and  reasonings  taken  from  inves-
tigations by  naturalists  ;  but  all  were  permeated  by  the  theo-
logical spirit."^

The  inquiry  into  Nature  having  thus  been  pursued  nearly
two  thousand  years  theologically,  we  find  by  the  middle  of
the  sixteenth  century  some  promising  beginnings  of  a  differ-
ent method — the  method  of  inquiry  into  Nature  scientifically
— the  method  which  seeks  not  plausibilities  but  facts.     At


*  For  Franz  and  Kircher,  see  Perrier,  La  Philosophie  Zcologique  avant  Darwin,
Paris,  1884,  p.  29  ;  for  Roger,  see  his  La  Terre  Saincte,  Paris,  1664,  pp.  89-92,  139,
218,  etc.  ;  for  Hottinger,  see  his  Historice  Creationis  Examen  theologico-philologi-
cum,  Heidelberg,  1659,  lib.  vi,  quaest.  Ixxxiii  ;  for  Kirchmaier,  see  his  Disputationes
ZoologiccE  (published  collectively  after  his  death),  Jena,  1736  ;  for  Dannhauer,  see
his  Disputationes  Theologies,  Leipsic,  1707,  p.  14  ;  for  Bochart,  see  \i\i  Hierozoikon^
sive  De  Animalibiis  Sacra  Scriptura,  Leydcn,  171 2.


THEOLOGICAL   TEACHINGS.  4I

that  time  Edward  Wotton  led  the  way  in  England  and  Con-
rad Gesner  on  the  Continent,  by  observations  widely  ex-
tended, carefully  noted,  and  thoughtfully  classified.

This  better  method  of  interrogating  Nature  soon  led  to
the  formation  of  societies  for  the  same  purpose.  In  1560
was  founded  an  Academy  for  the  Study  of  Nature  at  Naples,
but  theologians,  becoming  alarmed,  suppressed  it,  and  for
nearly  one  hundred  years  there  was  no  new  combined  effort
of  that  sort,  until  in  1645  began  the  meetings  in  London  of
what  was  afterward  the  Royal  Society.  Then  came  the
Academy  of  Sciences  in  France,  and  the  Accademia  del  Ci-
mento  in  Italy  ;  others  followed  in  all  parts  of  the  world,
and  a  great  new  movement  was  begun.

Theologians  soon  saw  a  danger  in  this  movement.  In
Italy,  Prince  Leopold  de'  Medici,  a  protector  of  the  Floren.
tine  Academy,  was  bribed  with  a  cardinal's  hat  to  neglect
it,  and  from  the  days  of  Urban  VIII  to  Pius  IX  a  similar
spirit  was  there  shown.  In  France,  there  were  frequent
ecclesiastical  interferences,  of  which  Buffon's  humiliation  for
stating  a  simple  scientific  truth  was  a  noted  example.  In
England,  Protestantism  was  at  first  hardly  more  favourable
toward  the  Royal  Society,  and  the  great  Dr.  South  de-
nounced it  in  his  sermons  as  irreligious.

Fortunately,  one  thing  prevented  an  open  breach  be-
tween theology  and  science :  while  new  investigators  had
mainly  given  up  the  mediaeval  method  so  dear  to  the  Church,
they  had  very  generally  retained  the  conception  of  direct
creation  and  of  design  throughout  creation — a  design  hav-
ing as  its  main  purpose  the  profit,  instruction,  enjoyment,
and  amusement  of  man.

On  this  the  naturally  opposing  tendencies  of  theology
and  science  were  compromised.  Science,  while  somewhat
freed  from  its  old  limitations,  became  the  handmaid  of  the-
ology in  illustrating  the  doctrine  of  creative  design,  and  al-
ways with  apparent  deference  to  the  Chaldean  and  other
ancient  myths  and  legends  embodied  in  the  Hebrew  sacred
books.

About  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century  Came  a
great  victory  of  the  scientific  over  the  theologic  method.
At  that  time  Francesco  Redi  published  the  results  of  his


42


FROM    CREATION    TO   EVOLUTION.


inquiries  into  the  doctrine  of  spontaneous  generation.  For
ages  a  widely  accepted  doctrine  had  been  that  water,  filth,
and  carrion  had  received  power  from  the  Creator  to  gen-
erate worms,  insects,  and  a  multitude  of  the  smaller  animals;
and  this  doctrine  had  been  especially  welcomed  by  St.
Augustine  and  many  of  the  fathers,  since  it  relieved  the  Al-
mighty of  making,  Adam  of  naming,  and  Noah  of  living  in
the  ark  with  these  innumerable  despised  species.  But  to
this  fallacy  Redi  put  an  end.  By  researches  which  could
not  be  gainsaid,  he  showed  that  every  one  of  these  animals
came  from  an  egg;  each,  therefore,  must  be  the  lineal  de-
scendant of  an.  animal  created,  named,  and  preserved  from
"  the  beginning."

Similar  work  went  on  in  England,  but  under  more  dis-
tinctly theological  limitations.  In  the  same  seventeenth
century  a  very  famous  and  popular  English  book  was  pub-
lished by  the  naturalist  John  Ray,  a  fellow  of  the  Royal
Society,  who  produced  a  number  of  works  on  plants,  fishes,
and  birds  ;  but  the  most  widely  read  of  all  was  entitled  T/ie
]Visdojn  of  God  manifested  in  the  Works  of  Creation.  Between
the  years  1691  and  1827  it  passed  through  nearly  twenty
editions.

Ray  argued  the  goodness  and  wisdom  of  God  from  the
adaptation  of  the  animals  not  only  to  man's  uses  but  to  their
own  lives  and  surroundings.

In  the  first  years  of  the  eighteenth  century  Dr.  Nehemiah
Grew,  of  the  Royal  Society,  published  his  Cosniologia  Saera
to  refute  anti-scriptural  opinions  by  producing  evidences  of
creative  design.  Discussing  *' the  ends  of  Providence,"  he
says,  "  A  crane,  which  is  scurvy  meat,  lays  but  two  eggs  in
the  year,  but  a  pheasant  and  partridge,  both  excellent  meat,
lay  and  hatch  fifteen  or  twenty."  He  points  to  the  fact  that
"  those  of  value  which  lay  few  at  a  time  sit  the  oftener,  as
the  woodcock  and  the  dove."  He  breaks  decidedly  from  the
doctrine  that  noxious  things  in  Nature  are  caused  by  sin,
and  shows  that  they,  too,  are  useful  ;  that,  ''  if  nettles  sting,
it  is  to  secure  an  excellent  medicine  for  children  and  cat-
tle "  ;  that,  "  if  the  bramble  hurts  man,  it  makes  all  the  bet-
ter hedge  "  ;  and  that,  "  if  it  chances  to  prick  the  owner,  it
tears  the  thief."     ''  Weasels,  kites,  and  other  hurtful  animals


THEOLOGICAL    TEACHINGS.


43


induce  us  to  watchfulness  ;  thistles  and  moles,  to  good  hus-
bandry ;  lice  oblige  us  to  cleanliness  in  our  bodies,  spiders
in  our  houses,  and  the  moth  in  our  clothes."  This  very
optimistic  view,  triumphing  over  the  theological  theory  of
noxious  animals  and  plants  as  effects  of  sin,  which  prevailed
with  so  much  force  from  St.  Augustine  to  Wesley,  was
developed  into  nobler  form  during  the  century  by  various
thinkers,  and  especially  by  Archdeacon  Paley,  whose  Natu-
ral Tlieolog-y  exercised  a  powerful  influence  down  to  recent
times.  The  same  tendency  appeared  in  other  countries,
though  various  philosophers  showed  weak  points  in  the
argument,  and  Goethe  made  sport  of  it  in  a  noted  verse,
praising  the  forethought  of  the  Creator  in  foreordaining  the
cork  tree  to  furnish  stoppers  for  wine-bottles.

Shortly  before  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century  the
main  movement  culminated  in  the  Bridgcwatcr  Treatises.
Pursuant  to  the  will  of  the  eighth  Earl  of  Bridgewater,  the
President  of  the  Royal  Society  selected  eight  persons,  each
to  receive  a  thousand  pounds  sterling  for  writing  and  pub-
lishing a  treatise  on  the  "power,  wisdom,  and  goodness  of
God,  as  manifested  in  the  creation."  Of  these,  the  leading
essays  in  regard  to  animated  Nature  were  those  of  Thomas
Chalmers,  on  The  Adaptation  of  External  Nature  to  the  Moral
and  Intellectual  Condition  of  Man  ;  of  Sir  Charles  Bell,  on
TJie  Hand  as  evincing  Design  ;  of  Roget,  on  Animal  and  Vege-
table Physiology  zuith  reference  to  Natural  Theology,  and  of
Kir  by,  on  The  Habits'  and  Instincts  of  Animals  zvith  reference
to  Natural  TJieology.

Besides  these  there  were  treatises  by  Whewell,  Buck-
land,  Kidd,  and  Prout.  The  work  was  well  done.  It  was  a
marked  advance  on  all  that  had  appeared  before,  in  matter,
method,  and  spirit.  Looking  back  upon  it  now  we  can  see
that  it  was  provisional,  but  that  it  was  none  the  less  fruitful
in  truth,  and  we  may  well  remember  Darwin's  remark  on
the  stimulating  effect  of  mistaken  theories,  as  compared  with
the  sterilizing  effect  of  mistaken  observations :  mistaken  ob-
servations lead  men  astray,  mistaken  theories  suggest  true
theories.

An  effort  made  in  so  noble  a  spirit  certainly  does  not
deserve  the  ridicule  that,  in  our  own  day,  has  sometimes


4^  FROM   CREATION   TO    EVOLUTION.

been  lavished  upon  it.  Curiousl}^  indeed,  one  of  the  most
contemptuous  of  these  criticisms  has  been  recently  made  by
one  of  the  most  strenuous  defenders  of  orthodoxy.  No  less
eminent  a  standard-bearer  of  the  faith  than  the  Rev.  Prof.
Zoeckler  says  of  this  movement  to  demonstrate  creative
purpose  and  design,  and  of  the  men  who  took  part  in  it,
"  The  earth  appeared  in  their  representation  of  it  like  a
great  clothing  shop  and  soup  kitchen,  and  God  as  a  glorified
rationalistic  professor."  Such  a  statement  as  this  is  far  from
just  to  the  conceptions  of  such  men  as  Butler,  Paley,  and
Chalmers,  no  matter  how  fully  the  thinking  world  has  now
outlived  them.*

But,  noble  as  the  work  of  these  men  was,  the  foundation
of  fact  on  which  they  reared  it  became  evidently  more  and
more  insecure.

For  as  far  back  as  the  seventeenth  century  acute  theolo-
gians had  begun  to  discern  difficulties  more  serious  than  any
that  had  before  confronted  them.  More  and  more  it  was
seen  that  the  number  of  different  species  was  far  greater
than  the  world  had  hitherto  imagined.  Greater  and  greater
had  become  the  old  difficulty  in  conceiving  that,  of  these  in-
numerable species,  each  had  been  specially  created  by  the
Almighty  hand  ;  that  each  had  been  brought  before  Adam
by  the  Almighty  to  be  named  ;  and  that  each,  in  couples  or  in
sevens,  had  been  gathered  by  Noah  into  the  ark.  But  the
difficulties  thus  suggested  were  as  nothing  compared  tc
those  raised  by  the  distribution  of  animals.

Even  in  the  first  days  of  the  Church  this  had  aroused
serious  thought,  and   above   all  in    the   great   mind    of    St.

*  For  a  very  valuable  and  interesting  study  on  the  old  idea  of  the  generation  of
insects  from  carrion,  see  Osten-Sacken,  On  the  Oxen-born  Bees  of  the  Ancients,
Heidelberg,  1894;  for  Ray,  see  the  work  cited,  London,  1827,  p.  153;  for  Grew,
see  Cosmologia  Sacra,  or  a  Discourse  on  the  Universe,  as  it  is  the  Creature  and
Kingdom  of  God;  chiefly  written  to  demonstrate  the  Truth  and  Excellency  of  the
Bible,  by  Dr.  Nehemiah  Grew,  Fellow  of  the  College  of  Physicians  and  of  the
Royal  Society,  London,  1701  ;  for  Paley  and  the  Eridgewater  Treatises,  sec  the
usual  editions;  also  Lange,  History  of  Rationalism.  Goethe's  couplet  ran  as  fol-
lows :

"  Welche  Verchrung  verdicnt  der  Weltenerschopfer,  der  Gnadig,
Als  er  den  Korkbaum  crschuf,  gleich  auch  die  Stopfel  erfand."

For  the  quotation  from  Zoeckler,  see  his  work  already  cited,  vol.  ii,  pp.  74,  440.


THEOLOGICAL   TEACHINGS.  45

Augustine.  In  his  City  of  God  he  had  stated  the  difficulty
as  follows :  "  But  there  is  a  question  about  all  these  kinds  of
beasts,  which  are  neither  tamed  by  man,  nor  spring  from
the  earth  like  frogs,  such  as  wolves  and  others  of  that  sort,
...  as  to  how  they  could  find  their  way  to  the  islands  after
that  flood  which  destroyed  every  living  thing  not  preserved
in  the  ark.  .  .  .  Some,  indeed,  might  be  thought  to  reach
islands  by  swimming,  in  case  these  were  very  near ;  but
some  islands  are  so  remote  from  continental  lands  that  it
does  not  seem  possible  that  any  creature  could-  reach  them
by  swimming.  It  is  not  an  incredible  thing,  cither,  that
some  animals  may  have  been  captured  by  men  and  taken
with  them  to  those  lands  which  they  intended  to  inhabit,  in
order  that  they  might  have  the  pleasure  of  hunting;  and  it
can  not  be  denied  that  the  transfer  may  have  been  accom-
plished through  the  agency  of  angels,  commanded  or  allowed
to  perform  this  labour  by  God."

But  this  difficulty  had  now  assumed  a  magnitude  of
which  St.  Augustine  never  dreamed.  Most  powerful  of  all
agencies  to  increase  it  were  the  voyages  of  Columbus,  Vasco
da  Gama,  Magellan,  Amerigo  Vespucci,  and  other  navigators
of  the  period  of  discovery.  Still  more  serious  did  it  become
as  the  great  islands  of  the  southern  seas  were  explored.
Every  navigator  brought  home  tidings  of  new  species  of  ani-
mals and  of  races  of  men  living  in  parts  of  the  world  where
the  theologians,  relying  on  the  statement  of  St.  Paul  that
the  gospel  had  gone  into  all  lands,  had  for  ages  declared
there  could  be  none ;  until  finally  it  overtaxed  even  the  the-
ological imagination  to  conceive  of  angels,  in  obedience  to
the  divine  command,  distributing  the  various  animals  over
the  earth,  dropping  the  megatherium  in  South  America,  the
archeopteryx  in  Europe,  the  ornithorhynchus  in  Australia,
and  the  opossum  in  North  America.

The  first  striking  evidence  of  this  new  difficulty  was
shown  by  the  eminent  Jesuit  missionary,  Joseph  Acosta.
In  his  Natural  and  Moral  History  of  the  Indies,  published  in
1 590,  he  proved  himself  honest  and  lucid.  Though  entangled
in  most  of  the  older  scriptural  views,  he  broke  away  from
many ;  but  the  distribution  of  animals  gave  him  great
trouble.     Having  shown  the  futility  of  St.  Augustine's  other


46  FROM   CREATION    TO   EVOLUTION.

explanations,  he  quaintly  asks :  ''  Who  can  imagine  that  in  so
long  a  voyage  men  woulde  take  the  paines  to  carrie  Foxes
to  Peru,  especially  that  kinde  they  call  '  Acias,'  which  is  the
filthiest  1  have  scene?  Who  woulde  likewise  sa}^  that  they
have  carried  Tygers  and  Lyons  ?  Truly  it  w^ere  a  thing
worthy  the  laughing  at  to  thinke  so.  It  was  sufficient,  yea,
very  much,  for  men  driven  against  their  willes  by  tempest,
in  so  long  and  unknowne  a  voyage,  to  escape  with  their
owne  lives,  without  busying  themselves  to  carrie  Woolves
and  Foxes,  and  to  nourish  them  at  sea."

It  was  under  the  impression  made  by  this  new  array  of
facts  that  in  1667  Abraham  Milius  published  at  Geneva  his
book  on  T/ie  Origin  of  Animals  and  the  Migrations  of  Peo-
ples. This  book  shows,  like  that  of  Acosta,  the  shock  and
strain  to  which  the  discovery  of  America  subjected  the  re-
ceived theological  scheme  of  things.  It  was  issued  with
the  special  approbation  of  the  Bishop  of  Salzburg,  and  it
indicates  the  possibility  that  a  solution  of  the  whole  trouble
may  be  found  in  the  text,  "  Let  the  earth  bring  forth  the  liv-
ing creature  after  his  kind."  INIilius  goes  on  to  show  that
the  ancient  philosophers  agree  with  Moses,  and  that  "  the
earth  and  the  waters,  and  especially  the  heat  of  the  sun  and
of  the  genial  sky,  together  with  that  slimy  and  putrid  quality
which  seems  to  be  inherent  in  the  soil,  may  furnish  the  ori-
gin for  fishes,  terrestrial  animals,  and  birds."  On  the  other
hand,  he  is  very  severe  against  those  who  imagine  that  man
can  have  had  the  same  origin  with  animals.  But  the  subject
with  which  Milius  especially  grapples  is  the  distribntion  of
animals.  He  is  greatly  exercised  by  the  many  species  found
in  America  and  in  remote  islands  of  the  ocean — species  en-
tirely unknown  in  the  other  continents — and  of  course  he  is
especially  troubled  by  the  fact  that  these  species  existing  in
those  exceedingly  remote  parts  of  the  earth  do  not  exist  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Mount  Ararat.  He  confesses  that  to
explain  the  distribution  of  animals  is  the  most  difficult  part
of  the  problem.  If  it  be  urged  that  birds  could  reach  Amer-
ica by  flying  and  fishes  by  swimming,  he  asks,  "  What  of  the
beasts  which  neither  fly  nor  swim?"  Yet  even  as  to  the
birds  he  asks,  "  Is  there  not  an  infinite  variety  of  winged
creatures  who  fly  so  slowdy  and  heavily,  and  have  such   a


THEOLOGICAL   TEACHINGS.  47

horror  of  the  water,  that  they  would  not  even  dare  trust
themselves  to  fly  over  a  wide  river?"  As  to  fishes,  he  says,
"They  are  very  averse  to  wandering  from  their  native
waters,"  and  he  shows  that  there  are  now  reported  many
species  of  American  and  East  Indian  fishes  entirely  unknown
on  the  other  continents,  whose  presence,  th.erefore,  can  not
be  explained  by  any  theory  of  natural  dispersion.

Of  those  who  suggest  that  land  animals  may  have  been
dispersed  over  the  earth  by  the  direct  agency  of  man  for  his
use  or  pleasure  he  asks:  "  Who  would  like  to  get  different
sorts' of  lions,  bears,  tigers,  and  other  ferocious  and  noxious
creatures  on  board  ship?  who  would  trust  himself  with
them  ?  and  who  would  wish  to  plant  colonies  of  such  crea-
tures in  new,  desirable  lands?"

His  conclusion  is  that  plants  and  animals  take  their  ori-
gin in  the  lands  wherein  they  are  found  ;  an  opinion  which
he  supports  by  quoting  from  the  two  narrations  in  Genesis
passages  which  imply  generative  force  in  earth  and  water.

But  in  the  eighteenth  century  matters  had  become  even
worse  for  the  theological  view.  To  meet  the  dif^culty  the
eminent  Benedictine,  Dom  Calmet,  in  his  Coiiiincntary,  ex-
pressed the  belief  that  all  the  species  of  a  genus  had  origi-
nally formed  one  species,  and  he  dwelt  on  this  view  as  one
which  enabled  him  to  explain  the  possibility  of  gathering  all
animals  into  the  ark.  This  idea,  dangerous  as  it  was  to  the
fabric  of  orthodoxy,  and  involving  a  profound  separation
from  the  general  doctrine  of  the  Church,  seems  to  have  been
abroad  among  thinking  men,  for  we  find  in  the  latter  half  of
the  same  century  even  Linnseus  inclining  to  consider  it.  It
was  time,  indeed,  that  some  new  theological  theorv  be
evolved  ;  the  great  Linnceus  himself,  in  spite  of  his  famous
declaration  favouring  the  fixity  of  species,  had  dealt  a  death-
blow to  the  old  theory.  In  his  Systcma  Naturcc,  published
in  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,  he  had  enumerated
four  thousand  species  of  animals,  and  the  diflficulties  involved
in  the  naming  of  each  of  them  by  Adam  and  in  bringing  them
together  in  the  ark  appeared  to  all  thinking  men  more  and
more  insurmountable.

What  was  more  embarrassing,  the  number  of  distinct
species  went  on  increasing  rapidly,  indeed  enormously,  until.


48


FROM  CREATION  TO  EVOLUTION.


as  an  eminent  zoological  authority  of  our  own  time  has
declared,  *'  for  every  one  of  the  species  enumerated  by  Lin-
nseus,  more  than  fifty  kinds  are  known  to  the  naturalist  of
to-day,  and  the  number  of  species  still  unknown  doubtless
far  exceeds  the  list  of  those  recorded."

Already  there  were  premonitions  of  the  strain  made  upon
Scripture  by  requiring  a  hundred  and  sixty  distinct  miracu-
lous interventions  of  the  Creator  to  produce  the  hundred
and  sixty  species  of  land  shells  found  in  the  little  island  of
Madeira  alone,  and  fourteen  hundred  distinct  interventions
to  produce  the  actual  number  of  distinct  species  of  a  single
well-known  shell.

Ever  more  and  more  difficult,  too,  became  the  question
of  the  geographical  distribution  of  animals.  As  new  ex-
plorations were  made  in  various  parts  of  the  world,  this  dan-
ger to  the  theological  view  went  on  increasing.  The  sloths
in  South  America  suggested  painful  questions  :  How  could
animals  so  sluggish  have  got  away  from  the  neighbourhood
of  Mount  Ararat  so  completely  and  have  travelled  so  far?

The.  explorations  in  Australia  and  neighbouring  islands
made  matters  still  worse,  for  there  was  found  in  those  re-
gions a  whole  realm  of  animals  differing  widely  from  those
of  other  parts  of  the  earth.

The  problem  before  the  strict  theologians  became,  for
example,  how  to  explain  the  fact  that  the  kangaroo  can  have
been  in  the  ark  and  be  now  only  found  in  Australia :  his
saltatory  powers  are  indeed  great,  but  how  could  he  by  any
series  of  leaps  have  sprung  across  the  intervening  mountains,
plains,  and  oceans  to  that  remote  continent?  and,  if  the
theory  were  adopted  that  at  some  period  a  causeway  ex-
tended across  the  vast  chasm  separating  Australia  from  the
nearest  mainland,  why  did  not  lions,  tigers,  camels,  and
camelopards  force  or  find  their  way  across  it?

The  theological  theory,  therefore,  had  by  the  end  of  the
eighteenth  century  gone  to  pieces.  The  wiser  theologians
waited;  the  unwise  indulged  in  exhortations  to  **  root  out
the  wicked  heart  of  unbelief,"  in  denunciation  of '' science
falsely  so  called,"  and  in  frantic  declarations  that  ''the  Bible
i  is  true" — by  which  they  meant  that  the  limited  understand-
i  ing  of  it  which  they  had  happened  to  inherit  is  true.


THEOLOGICAL   TEACHINGS.  49

By  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century  the  whole  theo-
logical theory  of  creation— though  still  preached  everywhere
as  a  matter  of  form— was  clearly  seen  by  all  thinking  men  to
be  hopelessly  lost:  such  strong  men  as  Cardinal  Wiseman  in
the  Roman  Church,  Dean  Buckland  in  the  Anghcan,  and
Hugh  Miller  in  the  Scottish  Church,  made  heroic  efforts  to
save  something  from  it,  but  all  to  no  purpose.  That  sturdy
Teutonic  and  Anglo-Saxon  honesty,  which  is  the  best  legacy
of  the  Middle  Ages  to  Christendom,  asserted  itself  in  the
old  strongholds  of  theological  thought,  the  universities.
Neither  the  powerful  logic  of  Bishop  Butler  nor  the  nimble
reasoning  of  Archdeacon  Paley  availed.  Just  as  the  Kne  of
astronomical  thinkers  from  Copernicus  to  Newton  had  de-
stroyed the  old  astronomy,  in  which  the  earth  was  the  cen^
tre,  and  the  Almighty  sitting  above  the  firmament  the  agent
in  moving  the  heavenly  bodies  about  it  with  his  own  hands,
so  now  a  race  of  biological  thinkers  had  destroyed  the  old
idea  of  a  Creator  minutely  contriving  and  fashioning  all  ani-
mals to  suit  the  needs  and  purposes  of  man.  They  had  de-
veloped a  system  of  a  very  different  sort,  and  this  we  shall
next  consider.*


in.    THEOLOGICAL   AND   SCIENTIFIC    THEORIES   OF   AN
EVOLUTION    IN    ANIMATED    NATURE.

We  have  seen,  thus  far,  how  there  came  into  the  think-
ing of  mankind  upon  the  visible  universe  and  its  inhabitants
the  idea  of  a  creation  virtually  instantaneous  and  completCy
and  of  a  Creator  in  human  form  with  human  attributes,  who
spoke  matter  into  existence  literally  by  the  exercise  of  his
throat  and  lips,  or  shaped  and  placed  it  with  his  hands  and
fingers.

We  have  seen  that  this  view  came  from  far ;  that  it  ex-


*  For  Acosta,  see  his  Histona  natural y  moral  de  las  Indias,  Seville,  1590 — the
quaint  English  translation  is  of  London,  1604  ;  for  Abraham  Milius,  see  his  De
Ongine  Animalium  et  Migratione  Populorum,  Geneva,  1667  ;  also  Kosmos,  1877,
H.  I,  S,  36;  for  Linnffius's  declaration  regarding  species,  see  the  Philosophia
Botanica,  99,  157  ;  for  Calmet  and  Linnceus,  see  Zoeckler,  vol.  ii,  p.  237.  As  to
the  enormously  increasing  numbers  of  species  in  zoology  and  botany,  see  President
D.  S.  Jordan,  Science  Sketches,  pp.  176,  177  ;  also,  for  pithy  statement,  Laing's
Problems  of  the  Future,  chap.  vi.
5


50  FROM  CREATION  TO  EVOLUTION.

isted  in  the  Chaldgeo-Babylonian  and  Egyptian  civilizations,
and  probably  in  others  of  the  earliest  date  known  to  us  ;  that
its  main  features  passed  thence  into  the  sacred  books  of  the
Hebrews  and  then  into  the  early  Christian  Church,  by
whose  theologians  it  was  developed  through  the  Middle  Ages
and  maintained  during  the  modern  period.

But,  while  this  idea  was  thus  developed  by  a  succession
of  noble  and  thoughtful  men  through  thousands  of  years,
another  conception,  to  all  appearance  equally  ancient,  was
developed,  sometimes  in  antagonism  to  it,  sometimes  mingled
with  it — the  conception  of  all  living  beings  as  wholly  or  in
part  the  result  of  a  growth  process — of  an  evolution.

This  idea,  in  various  forms,  became  a  powerful  factor  in
nearly  all  the  greater  ancient  theologies  and  philosophies.
For  very  widespread  among  the  early  peoples  who  attained
to  much  thinking  power  was  a  conception  that,  in  obedience
to  the  divine  fiat,  a  watery  chaos  produced  the  earth,  and
that  the  sea  and  land  gave  birth  to  their  inhabitants.

This  is  clearly  seen  in  those  records  of  Chald^o-Baby-
lonian  thought  deciphered  in  these  latter  years,  to  which
reference  has  already  been  made.  In  these  we  have  a
watery  chaos  which,  under  divine  action,  brings  forth  the
earth  and  its  inhabitants ;  first  the  sea  animals  and  then  the
land  animals — the  latter  being  separated  into  three  kinds,
substantially  as  recorded  afterward  in  the  Hebrew  accounts.
At  the  various  stages  in  the  work  the  Chaldean  Creator
pronounces  it  "  beautiful,"  just  as  the  Hebrew  Creator  in
our  own  later  account  pronounces  it  "  good."

In  both  accounts  there  is  placed  over  the  whole  creation
a  solid,  concave  firmament;  in  both,  light  is  created  first,  and
the  heavenly  bodies  are  afterward  placed  "  for  signs  and  for
seasons  "  ;  in  both,  the  number  seven  is  especially  sacred,
giving  rise  to  a  sacred  division  of  time  and  to  much  else.
It  may  be  added  that,  with  many  other  features  in  the  He-
brew legends  evidently  drawn  from  the  Chaldean,  the
account  of  the  creation  in  each  is  followed  by  a  legend  re-
garding **the  fall  of  man"  and  a  deluge,  many  details  of
which  clearly  passed  in  slightly  modified  form  from  the
Chaldean  into  the  Hebrew  accounts.

It  would  have  been  a  miracle  indeed  if  these  primitive


THEOLOGICAL   AND   SCIENTIFIC    THEORIES.


51


conceptions,  wrought  out  with  so  much  poetic  vigour  in  that
earlier  civilization  on  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates,  had  failed
to  influence  the  Hebrews,  who  during  the  most  plastic  peri-
ods of  their  development  were  under  the  tutelage  of  their
Chaldean  neighbours.  Since  the  researches  of  Layard,
George  Smith,  Oppert,  Schrader,  Jensen,  Sa3^ce,  and  their
compeers,  there  is  no  longer  a  reasonable  doubt  that  this
ancient  view  of  the  world,  elaborated  if  not  originated  in
that  earlier  civilization,  came  thence  as  a  legacy  to  the  He-
brews, who  wrought  it  in  a  somewhat  disjointed  but  mainly
monotheistic  form  into  the  poetic  whole  which  forms  one  of
the  most  precious  treasures  of  ancient  thought  preserved  in
the  book  of  Genesis.

Thus  it  was  that,  while  the  idea  of  a  simple  material  crea-
tion literally  by  the  hands  and  fingers  or  voice  of  the  Crea-
tor became,  as  we  have  seen,  the  starting-point  of  a  powerful
stream  of  theological  thought,  and  while  this  stream  was
swollen  from  age  to  age  by  contributions  from  the  fathers,
doctors,  and  learned  divines  of  the  Church,  Catholic  and
Protestant,  there  was  poured  into  it  this  lesser  current,
always  discernible  and  at  times  clearly  separated  from  it —
a  current  of  belief  in  a  process  of  evolution.

The  Rev.  Prof.  Sayce,  of  Oxford,  than  whom  no  English-
speaking  scholar  carries  more  weight  in  a  matter  of  this
kind,  has  recently  declared  his  belief  that  the  Chaldaeo-
Babylonian  theory  was  the  undoubted  source  of  the  similar
theory  propounded  by  the  Ionic  philosopher  Anaximander —
the  Greek  thinkers  deriving  this  view  from  the  Babylonians
through  the  Phoenicians  ;  he  also  allows  that  from  the  same
source  its  main  features  were  adopted  into  both  the  accounts
given  in  the  first  of  our  sacred  books,  and  in  this  general
view  the  most  eminent  Christian  Assyriologists  concur.

It  is  true  that  these  sacred  accounts  of  ours  contradict
each  other.  In  that  part  of  the  first  or  Elohistic  account
given  in  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis  the  zvaters  bring  forth
fishes,  marine  animals,  and  birds  (Genesis,  i,  20) ;  but  in  that
part  of  the  second  or  Jehovistic  account  given  in  the  second
chapter  of  Genesis  both  the  land  animals  and  birds  are  de-
clared to  have  been  created  not  out  of  the  water,  but  "  out
of  the  ground''  (Genesis,  ii,  19).


52  FROM   CREATION    TO   EVOLUTION.

The  dialectic  skill  of  the  fathers  was  easily  equal  to  ex-
plaining away  this  contradiction ;  but  the  old  current  of
thought,  strengthened  by  both  these  legends,  arrested  their
attention,  and,  passing  through  the  minds  of  a  succession  of
the  greatest  men  of  the  Church,  influenced  theological  opin-
ion deeply,  if  not  widely,  for  ages,  in  favour  of  an  evolution
theory.

But  there  was  still  another  ancient  source  of  evolution
ideas.  Thoughtful  men  of  the  early  civilizations  which
were  developed  along  the  great  rivers  in  the  warmer  regions
of  the  earth  noted  how  the  sun-god  as  he  rose  in  his  fullest
might  caused  the  water  and  the  rich  soil  to  teem  with  the
lesser  forms  of  life.  In  Egypt,  especially,  men  saw  how
under  this  divine  power  the  Nile  slime  brought  forth  "  creep-
ing things  innumerable."  Hence  mainly  this  ancient  belief
that  the  animals  and  man  were  produced  by  lifeless  matter
at  the  divine  command,  "in  the  beginning,"  was  supple-
mented by  the  idea  that  some  of  the  lesser  animals,  espe-
cially the  insects,  were  produced  by  a  later  evolution,  being
evoked  after  the  original  creation  from  various  sources,  but
chiefly  from  matter  in  a  state  of  decay.

This  crude,  early  view  aided  doubtless  in  giving  germs
of  a  better  evolution  theory  to  the  early  Greeks.  Anaxi-
mander,  Empedocles,  Anaxagoras,  and,  greatest  of  all,  Aris-
totle, as  we  have  seen,  developed  them,  making  their  way  at
times  by  guesses  toward  truths  since  established  by  observa-
tion. Aristotle  especially,  both  by  speculation  and  observa-
tion, arrived  at  some  results  which,  had  Greek  freedom  of
thought  continued,  might  have  brought  the  world  long  since
to  its  present  plane  of  biological  knowledge ;  for  he  reached
something  like  the  modern  idea  of  a  succession  of  higher
organizations  from  lower,  and  made  the  fruitful  suggestion
of  "  a  perfecting  principle  "  in  Nature.

With  the  coming  in  of  Christian  theology  this  tendency
toward  a  yet  truer  theory  of  evolution  was  mainly  stopped,
but  the  old  crude  view  remained,  and  as  a  typical  example
of  it  we  may  note  the  opinion  of  St.  Basil  the  Great  in  the
fourth  century.  Discussing  the  work  of  creation,  he  de-
clares that,  at  the  command  of  God,  "  the  waters  were  gifted
with  productive  power";  "from  slime  and  muddy  places


THEOLOGICAL   AND    SCIENTIFIC    THEORIES.  53

frogs,  flies,  and  gnats  came  into  being  "  ;  and  he  finally  de-
clares that  the  same  voice  which  gave  this  energ}^  and  qual-
ity of  productiveness  to  earth  and  water  shall  be  similarly
efflcacious  until  the  end  of  the  world.  St.  Gregory  of  Nyssa
held  a  similar  view.

This  idea  of  these  great  fathers  of  the  Eastern  Church
took  even  stronger  hold  on  the  great  father  of  the  Western
Church.  For  St.  Augustine,  so  fettered  usually  by  the  let-
ter of  the  sacred  text,  broke  from  his  own  famous  doctrine
as  to  the  acceptance  of  Scripture  and  spurned  the  generally
received  belief  of  a  creative  process  like  that  by  which  a
toymaker  brings  into  existence  a  box  of  playthings.  In  his
great  treatise  on  Genesis  he  says :  "  To  suppose  that  God
formed  man  from  the  dust  with  bodily  hands  is  very  child-
ish. .  .  .  God  neither  formed  man  with  bodily  hands  nor
did  he  breathe  upon  him  with  throat  and  lips."

St.  Augustine  then  suggests  the  adoption  of  the  old  ema-
nation or  evolution  theory,  shows  that  "  certain  very  small
animals  may  not  have  been  created  on  the  fifth  and  sixth
days,  but  may  have  originated  later  from  putrefying  mat-
ter," arofues  that,  even  if  this  be  so,  God  is  still  their  creator,
dwells  upon  such  a  potential  creation  as  involved  in  the
actual  creation,  and  speaks  of  animals  ''  whose  numbers  the
after-time  unfolded."

In  his  great  treatise  on  the  Trinity — the  work  to  which
he  devoted  the  best  thirty  years  of  his  life — wx  find  the  full
growth  of  this  opinion.  He  develops  at  length  the  view
that  in  the  creation  of  living  beings  there  was  something
like  a  growth — that  God  is  the  ultimate  author,  but  works
through  secondary  causes;  and  finally  argues  that  certain
substances  are  endowed  by  God  with  the'  power  of  pro-
ducing certain  classes  of  plants  and  animals. ^^

*  For  the  Chaldean  view  of  creation,  see  George  Smith,  Chaldean  Accotmt  of
Genesis^  New  York,  1876,  pp.  14,  15,  and  64-86  ;  also  Lukas,  as  above  ;  also  Sayce,
Religion  of  the  Ancient  Babylonians,  Hibbert  Lectures  for  1887,  pp.  371  and  else-
where ;  as  to  the  fall  of  man,  Tower  of  Babel,  sacredness  of  the  number  seven,  etc.,
see  also  Delitzsch,  appendix  to  the  German  translation  of  Smith,  pp.  305  et  seq.  ;
as  to  the  almost  exact  adoption  of  the  Chaldean  legends  into  the  Hebrew  sacred
account,  see  all  these,  as  also  Schrader,  Die  Keilinschriften  und  das  Alte  Testa-
ment, Giessen,  1S83,  early  chapters  ;  also  article  Babylonia  in  the  Encyclopedia
Britannica  ;  as  to  the  similar  approval  of  creation  by  the  Creator  in  both  accounts,


54  FROM    CREATION    TO   EVOLUTION.

This  idea  of  a  development  by  secondary  causes  apart
from  the  original  creation  was  helped  in  its  growth  by  a
theological  exigency.  More  and  more,  as  the  organic  world
was  observed,  the  vast  multitude  of  petty  animals,  winged
creatures,  and  ''creeping  things"  was  felt  to  be  a  strain  upon
the  sacred  narrative.  More  and  more  it  became  difficult  to
reconcile  the  dignity  of  the  Almighty  with  his  work  in
bringing  each  of  these  creatures  before  Adam  to  be  named  ;
or  to  reconcile  the  human  limitations  of  Adam  with  his
work  in  naming  "every  living  creature";  or  to  reconcile
the  dimensions  of  Noah's  ark  with  the  space  required  for
preserving  all  of  them,  and  the  food  of  all  sorts  necessary
for  their  sustenance,  whether  they  were  admitted  by  twos,
as  stated  in  one  scriptural  account,  or  by  sevens,  as  stated
in  the  other.

The  inadequate  size  of  the  ark  gave  especial  trouble.
Origen  had  dealt  with  it  by  suggesting  that  the  cubit  was
six  times  greater  than  had  been  supposed.  Bede  explained
Noah's  ability  to  complete  so  large  a  vessel  by  supposing
that  he  worked  upon  it  during  a  hundred  years  ;  and,  as  to
the  provision  of  food  taken  into  it,  he  declared  that  there
was  no  need  of  a  supply  for  more  than  one  day,  since  God
could  throw  the  animals  into  a  deep  sleep  or  otherwise
miraculously  make  one  day's  supply  sufficient ;  he  also  les-
see George  Smith,  p.  73  ;  as  to  the  migration  of  the  Babylonian  legends  to  the
Hebrews,  see  Schrader,  Whitehouse's  translation,  pp.  44,  45  ;  as  to  the  Chaldsean
belief  in  a  solid  firmament,  while  Schrader  in  1883  thought  it  not  proved,  Jensen
in  1890  has  found  it  clearly  expressed — see  his  Kosmologie  der  Babylonier,  pp.  9  et
seq.,  also  pp.  304-306,  and  elsewhere.  Dr.  Lukas  in  1893  also  fully  accepts  this
view  of  a  Chaldean  record  of  a  "firmament  " — s.^^' Kosmologie,  pp.  43,  etc.  ;  see
also  Maspero  and  Sayce,  The  Dawn  of  Civilization,  and  for  crude  early  ideas  of
evolution  in  Egypt,  see  ibid.,  pp.  156  et  seq.

For  the  seven-day  week  among  Chaldeans  and  rest  on  the  seventh  day,  and  the
proof  that  even  the  name  "Sabbath"  is  of  Chaldean  origin,  see  Delitzsch,  Beiga-
ben  zu  SmitJis  Chald.  Genesis,  pp.  300  and  306  ;  also  Schrader  ;  for  St.  Basil,  see
Hexamrron  and  Homilies  vii-ix  ;  but,  for  the  steadfastness  of  Basil's  view  in  regard
to  the  immutability  of  species,  see  a  Catholic  writer  on  Evolution  and  Faith  in
the  Dublin  Review  for  July,  1S71,  p.  13  ;  for  citations  of  St.  Augustine  on  Genesis,
see  the  De  Genesi  contra  Manichaos,  lib.  ii,  cap.  14,  in  Migne,  xxxiv.  188, — lib.  v,
cap.  5  and  cap.  23, — and  lib.  vii,  cap.  i  ;  for  the  citations  from  his  work  on  the
Trinity,  see  his  De  Tjinitate,  lib.  iii.  cap.  8  and  9,  in  Migne,  xlii,  877,  878  ;  for  the
general  subject  very  fully  and  adequately  presented,  see  Osborn,  From  th:  Greeks
to  Darwin,  New  York,  1894,  chaps,  ii  and  iii.


THEOLOGICAL   AND    SCIENTIFIC    THEORIES.  55

sened  the  strain  on  faith  still  more  by  diminishing  the  num-
ber of  animals  taken  into  the  ark— supporting  his  view  upon
Augustine's  theory  of  the  later  development  of  insects  out
of  carrion.

Doubtless  this  theological  necessity  was  among  the  main
reasons  which  led  St.  Isidore  of  Seville,  in  the  seventh  cen-
tury, to  incorporate  this  theory,  supported  by  St.  Basil  and
St.  Augustine,  into  his  great  encyclopedic  work  which  gave
materials  for  thought  on  God  and  Nature  to  so  many  gen-
erations.    He  familiarized  the  theological  world  still  further
with  the  doctrine  of  secondary  creation,  giving  such  exam-
ples of  it  as  that  "  bees  are  generated  from  decomposed  veal,  j     /
beetles  from  horseflesh,  grasshoppers  from  mules,  scorpions  (
from  crabs,"  and,  in  order  to  give  still  stronger  force  to  the  I
idea  of  such  transformations,  he  dwells  on  the  biblical  ac-
count of    Nebuchadnezzar,   which    appears    to    have    taken
strong  hold  upon  mediseval  thought  in  science,  and  he  de-
clares that  other  human  beings  had  been  changed  into  ani-
mals, especially  into  swine,  wolves,  and  owls.

This  doctrine  of  after-creations  went  on  gathering
strength  until,  in  the  twelfth  century,  Peter  Lombard,  in  his
theological  summary.  The  Sentences,  so  powerful  in  moulding
the  thought  of  the  Church,  emphasized  the  distinction  be-
tween animals  which  spring  from  carrion  and  those  which
are  created  from  earth  and  water ;  the  former  he  holds  to
have  been  created  ''potentially,"  the  latter  "actually."

In  the  century  following,  this  idea  was  taken  up  by  St.
Thomas  Aquinas  and  virtually  received  from  him  its  final
form.  In  the  Summa,  which  remains  the  greatest  work  of)/
mediaeval  thought,  he  accepts  the  idea  that  certain  animals
spring  from  the  decaying  bodies  of  plants  and  animals,  and
declares  that  they  are  produced  by  the  creative  word  of
God  either  actually  or  virtually.  He  develops  this  view  by
saying,  "  Nothing  was  made  by  God,  after  the  six  days  of
creation,  absolutely  new,  but  it  was  in  some  sense  included
in  the  work  of  the  six  days  "  ;  and  that  "  even  new  species,
if  any  appear,  have  existed  before  in  certain  native  proper-
ties, just  as  animals  are  produced  from  putrefaction."

The  distinction  thus  developed  between  creation  "  caus-
ally "  or  "  potentially,"  and  "  materially  "  or  "  formally,"  was


56  FROM   CREATION    TO   EVOLUTION.

made    much    of   by  commentators  afterward.     Cornelius  a

Lapide  spread  it  by  saying  that  certain  animals  were  created

not  "  absolutely,"  but  only  "  derivatively,"  and  this  thought

was  still  further  developed  three  centuries  later  by  Augus-

\  tinus  Eugubinus,  who  tells  us  that,  after  the  first  creative

L  energy  had  called  forth  land  and  water,  light  was  made  by

I  the  Almighty,  the  instrument  of  all  future  creation,  and  that

;  the  light  called  everything  into  existence.

All  this  ''science  falsely  so  called,"  so  sedulously  devel-
oped by  the  master  minds  of  the  Church,  and  yet  so  futile
that  we  might  almost  suppose  that  the  great  apostle,  in  a
glow  of  prophetic  vision,  had  foreseen  it  in  his  famous  con-
demnation, seems  at  this  distance  very  harmless  indeed  ;
)'et,  to  many  guardians  of  the  "  sacred  deposit  of  doctrine  "
in  the  Church,  even  so  slight  a  departure  from  the  main
current  of  thought  seemed  dangerous.  It  appeared  to  them
like  pressing  the  doctrine  of  secondary  causes  to  a  perilous
extent ;  and  about  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century
we  have  the  eminent  Spanish  Jesuit  and  theologian  Suarez
denouncing  it,  and  declaring  St.  Augustine  a  heretic  for  his
share  in  it.

But  there  was  little  danger  to  the  older  idea  just  then;
the  main  theological  tendency  was  so  strong  that  the  world
kept  on  as  of  old.  Biblical  theology  continued  to  spin  its
own  webs  out  of  its  own  bowels,  and  all  the  lesser  theo-
logical f^ies  continued  to  be  entangled  in  them  ;  yet  here
and  there  stronger  thinkers  broke  loose  from  this  entangle-
ment and  helped  somewhat  to  disentangle  others.*


*  For  Bede's  view  of  the  ark  and  the  origin  of  insects,  see  his  Hexcemeron,  i
and  ii  ;  for  Isidore,  see  the  Etymologies,  xi,  4,  and  xiii,  22  ;  for  Peter  Lombard,  see
Sent.,  lib.  ii,  dist.  xv,  4  (in  Migne,  cxcii,  6S2) ;  for  St.  Thomas  Aquinas  as  to  the
laws  of  Nature,  see  Summa  Theologica,  i,  Qticcst.  Ixvii,  art.  iv  ;  for  his  discussion
on  Avicenna's  theory  of  the  origin  of  animals,  see  ibid.,  Qucest.  Ixxi,  vol.  i,  pp.
1184  and  1 185,  of  Migne's  edit.  ;  for  his  idea  as  to  the  word  of  God  being  the  active
producing  principle,  see  ibid.,  i,  Qucest.  Ixxi,  art.  i  ;  for  his  remarks  on  species,
see  ibid.,  i,  Qticcst.  Ixxii,  art.  i ;  for  his  ideas  on  the  necessity  of  the  procreation  of
man,  see  ibid.,  i,  Qucrst.  Ixxii,  art.  i  ;  for  the  origin  of  animals  from  putrefaction,
see  ibid.,  i,  Qucest.  Ixxix,  art.  i,  3  ;  for  Cornelius  a  Lapide  on  the  derivative  crea-
tion of  animals,  see  his  hi  Genesim  Comment.,  cap.  i,  cited  by  Mivart,  Genesis  of
Species,  p.  282  ;  for  a  reference  to  Suarez's  denunciation  of  the  view  of  St.  Augus-
tine, see  Huxley's  Essays.


THEOLOGICAL   AND    SCIENTIFIC   THEORIES.  57

At  the  close  of  the  Middle  Ages,  in  spite  of  the  devotion
of  the  Reformed  Church  to  the  letter  of  Scripture,  the  re-
vival of  learning  and  the  great  voyages  gave  an  atmosphere
in  which  better  thinking  on  the  problems  of  Nature  began
to  gain  strength.  On  all  sides,  in  every  f^eld,  men  were
making  discoveries  which  caused  the  general  theological
view  to  appear  more  and  more  inadequate.

First  of  those  who  should  be  mentioned  with  reverence
as  beginning  to  develop  again  that  current  of  Greek  thought
which  the  system  drawn  from  our  sacred  books  by  the  fa-
thers and  doctors  of  the  Church  had  interrupted  for  more
than  a  thousand  years,  was  Giordano  Bruno.  His  utterances
were  indeed  vague  and  enigmatical,  but  this  fault  may  well
be  forgiven  him,  for  he  saw  but  too  clearly  what  must  be  his
reward  for  any  more  open  statements.  His  reward  indeed
came— even  for  his  faulty  utterances— when,  toward  the  end
of  the  nineteenth  century,  thoughtful  men  from  all  parts  of
the  world  united  in  erecting  his  statue  on  the  spot  where
he  had  been  burned  by  the  Roman  Inquisition  nearly  three
hundred  years  before.

After  Bruno's  death,  during  the  first  half  of  the  seven-
teenth century,  Descartes  seemed  about  to  take  the  leader-
ship of  human  thought:  his  theories,  however  superseded
now,  gave  a  great  impulse  to  investigation  then.  His  genius
in  promoting  an  evolution  doctrine  as  regards  the  mechan-
ical formation  of  the  solar  system  was  great,  and  his  mode
of  thought  strengthened  the  current  of  evolutionary  doc-
trine generally  ;  but  his  constant  dread  of  persecution,  both
from  Catholics  and  Protestants,  led  him  steadily  to  veil  his
thoughts  and  even  to  suppress  them.  The  execution  of
Bruno  had  occurred  in  his  childhood,  and  in  the  midst  of
his  career  he  had  watched  the  Galileo  struggle  in  all  its
stages.  He  had  seen  his  own  works  condemned  by  univer-
sity after  university  under  the  direction  of  theologians,  and
placed  upon  the  Roman  Index.  Although  he  gave  new  and
striking  arguments  to  prove  the  existence  of  God,  and
humbled  himself  before  the  Jesuits,  he  was  condemned  by
Catholics  and  Protestants  alike.  Since  Roger  Bacon,  per-
haps, no  great  thinker  had  been  so  completely  abased  and
thwarted  by  theological  oppression.


58  FROM    CREATION    TO    EVOLUTION.

Near  the  close  of  the  same  century  another  great  thinker,
Leibnitz,  though  not  propounding  any  full  doctrine  on  evo-
lution, gave  it  an  impulse  by  suggesting  a  view  contrary  to
the  sacrosanct  belief  in  the  immutability  of  species — that  is,
to  the  pious  doctrine  that  every  species  in  the  animal  king-
dom now  exists  as  it  left  the  hands  of  the  Creator,  the  nam-
ing process  by  Adam,  and  the  door  of  Noah's  ark.

His  punishment  at  the  hands  of  the  Church  came  a  few
years  later,  when,  in  171 2,  the  Jesuits  defeated  his  attempt
to  found  an  Academy  of  Science  at  Vienna.  The  imperial
authorities  covered  him  with  honours,  but  the  priests — ruling
in  the  confessionals  and  pulpits— would  not  allow  him  the
privilege  of  aiding  his  fellow-men  to  ascertain  God's  truths
revealed  in  Nature.

Spinoza,  Hume,  and  Kant  may  also  be  mentioned  as
among  those  whose  thinking,  even  when  mistaken,  might
have  done  much  to  aid  in  the  development  of  a  truer  theory
had  not  the  theologic  atmosphere  of  their  times  been  so  un-
propitious ;  but  a  few  years  after  Leibnitz's  death  came  in
France  a  thinker  in  natural  science  of  much  less  influence
than  any  of  these,  who  made  a  decided  step  forward.

Early  in  the  eighteenth  century  Benoist  de  Maillet,  a
man  of  the  world,  but  a  wide  observer  and  close  thinker
upon  Nature,  began  meditating  especially  upon  the  origin
of  animal  forms,  and  was  led  into  the  idea  of  the  transforma-
tion of  species  and  so  into  a  theory  of  evolution,  which  in
some  important  respects  anticipated  modern  ideas.  He
definitely,  though  at  times  absurdly,  conceived  the  produc-
tion of  existing  species  by  the  modification  of  their  prede-
cessors, and  he  plainly  accepted  one  of  the  fundamental
maxims  of  modern  geology — that  the  structure  of  the  globe
must  be  studied  in  the  light  of  the  present  course  of  Nature.

But  he  fell  between  two  ranks  of  adversaries.  On  one
side,  the  Church  authorities  denounced  him  as  a  freethinker  ;
on  the  other,  Voltaire  ridiculed  him  as  a  devotee.  Feeling
that  his  greatest  danger  was  from  the  orthodox  theologians,
De  Maillet  endeavoured  to  protect  himself  by  disguising  his
name  in  the  title  of  his  book,  and  by  so  wording  its  preface
and  dedication  that,  if  persecuted,  he  could  declare  it  a  mere
sport  of  fancy ;  he  therefore  announced  it  as  the  reverie  of  a


THEOLOGICAL   AND    SCIENTIFIC    THEORIES.  59

Hindu  sage  imparted  to  a  Christian  missionary.  But  this
strategy  availed  nothing:  he  had  allowed  his  Hindu  sage  to
suggest  that  the  days  of  creation  named  in  Genesis  might
be  long  periods  of  time;  and  this,  with  other  ideas  of  equally
fearful  import,  was  fatal.  Though  the  book  was  in  type  in
1735,  it  was  not  published  till  1748 — three  years  after  his
death.

On  the  other  hand,  the  heterodox  theology  of  Voltaire
was  also  aroused ;  and,  as  De  Maillet  had  seen  in  the  pres-
ence of  fossils  on  high  mountains  a  proof  that  these  moun-
tains were  once  below  the  sea,  Voltaire,  recognising  in  this
an  argument  for  the  deluge  of  Noah,  ridiculed  the  new
thinker  without  mercy.  Unfortunately,  some  of  De  Mail-
let's  vagaries  lent  themselves  admirably  to  Voltaire's  sar-
casm ;  better  material  for  it  could  hardly  be  conceived  than
the  theory,  seriously  proposed,  that  the  first  human  being
was  born  of  a  mermaid.

Hence  it  was  that,  between  these  two  extremes  of  the-
ology, De  Maillet  received  no  recognition  until,  very  re-
cently, the  greatest  men  of  science  in  England  and  France
have  united  in  giving  him  his  due.  But  his  work  was  not
lost,  even  in  his  own  day ;  Robinet  and  Bonnet  pushed  for-
ward victoriously  on  helpful  lines.

In  the  second  half  of  the  eighteenth  centur}^  a  great  bar-
rier was  thrown  across  this  current — the  authority  of  Lin-
naeus. He  was  the  most  eminent  naturalist  of  his  time,  a
wide  observer,  a  close  thinker  ;  but  the  atmosphere  in  which
he  lived  and  moved  and  had  his  being  was  saturated  with
biblical  theology,  and  this  permeated  all  his  thinking.

He  who  visits  the  tomb  of  Linnaeus  to-day,  entering  the
beautiful  cathedral  of  Upsala  by  its  southern  porch,  sees
above  it,  wrought  in  stone,  the  Hebrew  legend  of  creation.
In  a  series  of  medallions,  the  Almighty — in  human  form —
accomplishes  the  work  of  each  creative  day.  In  due  order
he  puts  in  place  the  solid  firmament  with  the  waters  above
it,  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  within  it,  the  beasts,  birds,  and
plants  below  it,  and  finishes  his  task  by  taking  man  out  of
a  little  hillock  of  "  the  earth  beneath,"  and  woman  out  of
man's  side.  Doubtless  Linnaeus,  as  he  went  to  his  devotions,
often  smiled  at  this  childlike  portrayal.     Yet  he  was  never


6o  FROM   CREATION    TO   EVOLUTION.

able  to  break  away  from  the  idea  it  embodied.  At  times,  in
face  of  the   difficulties  which   beset  the  orthodox  theory,  he

{ventured  to  favour  some  slight  concessions.  Toward  the  end
of  his  life  he  timidly  advanced  the  hypothesis  that  all  the
species  of  one  genus  constituted  at  the  creation  one  species ;
and  from  the  last  edition  of  his  Systema  Natures  he  quietly
left  out  the  strongly  orthodox  statement  of  the  fixity  of  each
species,  which  he  had  insisted  upon  in  his  earlier  works.  But
he  made  no  adequate  declaration.  What  he  might  expect  if
he  openly  and  decidedly  sanctioned  a  newer  view  he  learned
to  his  cost ;  warnings  came  speedily  both  from  the  Catholic
and  Protestant  sides.

At  a  time  when  eminent  prelates  of  the  older  Church
were  eulogizing  debauched  princes  like  Louis  XV,  and  using
the  unspeakably  obscene  casuistry  of  the  Jesuit  Sanchez  in
the  education  of  the  priesthood  as  to  the  relations  of  men  to
women,  the  modesty  of  the  Church  authorities  was  so  shocked
by  Linngeus's  proofs  of  a  sexual  system  in  plants  that  for
many  years  his  writings  were  prohibited  in  the  Papal  States
and  in  various  other  parts  of  Europe  where  clerical  author-
ity was  strong  enough  to  resist  the  new  scientific  current.
Not  until  1773  did  one  of  the  more  broad-minded  cardinals
— Zelanda — succeed  in  gaining  permission  that  Prof.  Minasi
should  discuss  the  Linnsean  system  at  Rome.

And  Protestantism  was  quite  as  oppressive.  In  a  letter
to  Eloius,  Linnaeus  tells  of  the  rebuke  given  to  science  by
one  of  the  great  Lutheran  prelates  of  Sweden,  Bishop  Sved-
berg.  From  various  parts  of  Europe  detailed  statements
had  been  sent  to  the  Royal  Academy  of  Science  that  water
had  been  turned  into  blood,  and  well-meaning  ecclesiastics
had  seen  in  this  an  indication  of  the  wrath  of  God,  certainly
against  the  regions  in  which  these  miracles  had  occurred
and  possibly  against  the  whole  world.     A  miracle  of   this

'  sort  appearing  in  Sweden,  Linnaeus  looked  into  it  carefully
and  found  that  the  reddening  of  the  water  was  caused  by

\  dense  masses  of  minute  insects.  News  of  this  explanation
having  reached  the  bishop,  he  took  the  field  against  it ;  he
denounced   this  scientific  discovery  as  "  a  Satanic  abyss  "

I  {abyssum  Satance),  and  declared  "  The  reddening  of  the  water
is  7iot  natural,"  and   *'  when  God  allows  such    a  miracle  to


THEOLOGICAL   AND    SCIENTIFIC    THEORIES.  6l

take  place  Satan  endeavours,  and  so  do  his  ungodly,  self-
reliant,  self-sufficient,  and  worldly  tools,  to  make  it  signify
nothing."  In  face  of  this  onslaught  Linna3us  retreated  ;  he  ^  ^
tells  his  correspondent  that  "  it  is  difficult  to  say  anything  in
this  matter,"  and  shields  himself  under  the  statement  "  It  is
certainly  a  miracle  that  so  many  millions  of  creatures  can  be
so  suddenly  propagated,"  and  "it  shows  undoubtedly  the
all-wise  power  of  the  Infinite."

The  great  naturalist,  grown  old  and  worn  with  labours  for
science,  could  no  longer  resist  the  contemporary  theology;
he  settled  into  obedience  to  it,  and  while  the  modification  of
his  early  orthodox  view  was,  as  we  have  seen,  quietly  im-
bedded in  the  final  edition  of  his  great  work,  he  made  no
special  effort  to  impress  it  upon  the  world.  To  all  appear-
ance he  continued  to  adhere  to  the  doctrine  that  all  existing
species  had  been  created  by  the  Almighty  "in  the  begin-
ning," and  that  since  "  the  beginning  "  no  new  species  had
appeared.

Yet  even  his  great  authority  could  not  arrest  the  swell-
ing tide  ;  more  and  more  vast  became  the  number  of  species,
more  and  more  incomprehensible  under  the  old  theory  be-
came the  newly  ascertained  facts  in  geographical  distribu-
tion, more  and  more  it  was  felt  that  the  universe  and  ani-
mated beings  had  come  into  existence  by  some  process  other
than  a  special  creation  "  in  the  beginning,"  and  the  question
was  constantly  pressing,  "  By  what  process  ?  "

Throughout  the  whole  of  the  eighteenth  century  one
man  was  at  work  on  natural  history  who  might  have  con-
tributed much  toward  an  answer  to  this  question  :  this  man
was  Buffon.  His  powers  of  research  and  thought  were  re-
markable, and  his  gift  in  presenting  results  of  research  and
thought  showed  genius.  He  had  caught  the  idea  of  an  evo-
lution in  Nature  by  the  variation  of  species,  and  was  likely
to  make  a  great  advance  with  it;  but  he,  too,  was  made  to
feel  the  power  of  theology.

As  long  as  he  gave  pleasing  descriptions  of  animals  the
Church  petted  him,  but  when  he  began  to  deduce  truths  of
philosophical  import  the  batteries  of  the  Sorbonne  were
opened  upon  him  ;  he  was  made  to  know  that  "  the  sacred
deposit  of  truth  committed  to  the  Church  "  was,  that  "  in


62  FROM    CREATION    TO    EVOLUTION.

the  beginning  God  nnade  the  heavens  and  the  earth  ";  and
that  ''all  things  were  made  at  the  beginning  of  the  world."
For  his  simple  statement  of  truths  in  natural  science  which
are  to-day  truisms,  he  was,  as  we  have  seen,  dragged  forth
by  the  theological  faculty,  forced  to  recant  publicly,  and  to
print  his  recantation.  In  this  he  announced,  "  I  abandon
everything  in  my  book  respecting  the  formation  of  the  earth,
and  generall}^  all  which  may  be  contrary  to  the  narrative  of
Moses."*

But  all  this  triumph  of  the  Chaldeo-Babylonian  creation
legends  which  the  Church  had  inherited  availed  but  little.

For  about  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century  fruitful  sug-
gestions and  even  clear  presentations  of  this  or  that  part  of
a  large  evolutionary  doctrine  came  thick  and  fast,  and  from
the  most  divergent  quarters.  Especially  remarkable  were
those  which  came  from  Erasmus  Darwin  in  England,  from
Maupertuis  in  France,  from  Oken  in  Switzerland,  and  from
Herder,  and,  most  brilliantly  of  all,  from  Goethe  in  Ger-
many.

Two  men  among  these  thinkers  must  be  especiallv  men-
tioned— Treviranus  in  Germany  and  Lamarck  in  France ;
each  independently  of  the  other  drew  the  w^orld  more  com-
pletely than  ever  before  in  this  direction.

From  Treviranus  came,  in  1802,  his  work  on  biology,  and
in  this  he  gave  forth  the  idea  that  from  forms  of  life  origi-
nally simple  had  arisen  all  higher  organizations  b}'  gradual
development;  that  every  living  creature  has  a  capacity  for

*  For  Descartes  in  his  relation  to  the  Copernican  theory,  see  Saisset,  Descartes
et  ses  Pr^curseurs  ;  also  Fouillee,  Descaj'tes,  Paris,  1893,  chaps,  ii  and  iii ;  also
other  authorities  cited  in  my  chapter  on  Astronomy  ;  for  his  relation  to  the  theory
of  evolution,  see  the  Principes  de  Philosophie,  3eme  partie,  §  45.  For  De  Maillet,
see  Quatrefages,  Darwin  et  ses  Precurseurs  fratz^ais,  chap,  i,  citing  D'Archiac,
PaUontologie,  Stratigraphie,  vol.  i ;  also,  Perrier,  La  Philosophie  zoolugique  avant
Darwin,  chap,  vi ;  also  the  admirable  article,  Evolution ^  by  Huxley,  in  Encyc.
Bfit.  The  title  of  De  Maillet's  book  is,  'J elliamed,  on  Entretiens  d'un  Philosophe
indien  avec  tin  Afissionnaire  fran^ais  sur  la  Diminution  de  la  Mer,  1748  and  1756.
For  Buffon,  see  the  authorities  previously  given,  also  the  chapter  on  Geology  in
this  work.  For  the  resistance  of  both  Catholic  and  Protestant  authorities  to  the
Linnoean  system  and  ideas,  see  Alberg,  Life  of  Linncrtts,  London,  1SS8,  pp.  143-
147,  and  237.  As  to  the  creation  medallions  at  the  Cathedral  of  Upsala,  it  is  a
somewhat  curious  coincidence  that  the  present  writer  came  upon  them  while  visit-
ing that  edifice  during  the  preparation  of  this  chapter.


1^  -^


THEOLOGICAL   AND   SCIENTIFIC    THEORIES.  63

receiving  modifications  of  its  structure  from  external  influ-
ences ;  and  that  no  species  had  become  really  extinct,  but
that  each  had  passed  into  some  other  species.  From  La-
marck came  about  the  same  time  his  Researches,  and  a  little
later  his  Zoological  PJiilosopJiy,  which  introduced  a  new  factor
into  the  process  of  evolution — the  action  of  the  animal  itself
in  its  efforts  toward  a  development  to  suit  new  needs — and
he  gave  as  his  principal  conclusions  the  following :

1.  Life  tends  to  increase  the  volume  of  each  living  body
and  of  all  its  parts  up  to  a  limit  determined  by  its  own
necessities.

2.  New  wants  in  animals  give  rise  to  new  organs.

3.  The  development  of  these  organs  is  in  proportion  to
their  employment.

4.  New  developments  may  be  transmitted  to  offspring.
His  well-known  examples  to  illustrate  these  views,  such

as  that  of  successive  generations  of  giraffes  lengthening  their

necks  by  stretching  them  to  gather  high-growing  foliage,  )-^2^^-^^^

and  of  successive  generations  of  kangaroos  lengthening  and  \\JI(jiAi>y\

strengthening  their  hind  legs  by  the  necessity  of  keeping  liiha^cLtdl

themselves  erect  while  jumping,  provoked  laughter,  but  the  '

very  comicality  of  these  illustrations  aided  to  fasten  his  main  j

conclusion  in  men's  memories.  j

In  both  these  statements,  imperfect  as  they  were,  great
truths  were  embodied — truths  which  were  sure  to  grow.  I

Lamarck's  declaration,  especially,  that  the  development  j

of  organs  is  in  ratio  to  their  employment,  and  his  indications  i

of  the  reproduction  in  progeny  of  what  is  gained  or  lost  in
parents  by  the  influence  of  circumstances,  entered  as  a  most
effective  force  into  the  development  of  the  evolution  theory.

The  next  great  successor  in  the  apostolate  of  this  idea  of
the  universe  was  Geoffroy  Saint-Hilaire.     As  early  as   1795  !

he  had  begun  to  form  a  theory  that  species  are  various
modifications  of  the  same  type,  and  this  theory  he  devel-
oped, testing  it  at  various  stages  as  Nature  was  more  and
more  displayed  to  him.     It  fell  to  his  lot  to  bear  the  brunt  j

in  a  struggle  against  heavy  odds  which  lasted  many  years.  1

For  the  man  who  now  took  up  the  warfare,  avowedly  for  I

science  but  unconsciously  for  theology,  was  the  foremost
naturalist  then  living — Cuvier.     His  scientific  eminence  was


64


FROM  CREATION  TO  EVOLUTION.


deserved  ;  the  highest  honours  of  his  own  and  other  coun-
tries were  given  him,  and  he  bore  them  worthily.  An  Im-
perial Councillor  under  Napoleon  ;  President  of  the  Council
of  Public  Instruction  and  Chancellor  of  the  University  under
the  restored  Bourbons  ;  Grand  Officer  of  the  Legion  of  Hon-
our, a  Peer  of  France,  Minister  of  the  Interior,  and  President
of  the  Council  of  State  under  Louis  Philippe;  he  was  emi-
nent in  all  these  capacities,  and  yet  the  dignity  given  by  such
high  administrative  positions  was  as  nothing  compared  to  his
leadership  in  natural  science.  Science  throughout  the  world
acknowledged  in  him  its  chief  contemporary  ornament,  and
to  this  hour  his  fame  rightly  continues.  But  there  was  in
him,  as  in  Linnaeus,  a  survival  of  certain  theological  ways  of
looking  at  the  universe  and  certain  theological  conceptions
of  a  plan  of  creation ;  it  must  be  said,  too,  that  while  his
temperament  made  him  distrust  new  hypotheses,  of  which
he  had  seen  so  many  born  and  die,  his  environment  as  a  great
functionary  of  state,  honoured,  admired,  almost  adored  by
the  greatest,  not  only  in  the  state  but  in  the  Church,  his
solicitude  lest  science  should  receive  some  detriment  by
openly  resisting  the  Church,  which  had  recaptured  Europe
after  the  French  Revolution,  and  had  made  of  its  enemies  its
footstool — all  these  considerations  led  him  to  oppose  the  new
theory.  Amid  the  plaudits,  then,  of  the  foremost  church-
men he  threw  across  the  path  of  the  evolution  doctrines  the
whole  mass  of  his  authority  in  favour  of  the  old  theory  of
catastrophic  changes  and  special  creations.

Geoffroy  Saint-Hilaire  stoutly  withstood  him,  braving
non-recognition,  ill-treatment,  and  ridicule.  Treviranus,  afar
off  in  his  mathematical  lecture-room  at  Bremen,  seemed  sim-
ply forgotten.

But  the  current  of  evolutionary  thought  could  not  thus
be  checked  :  dammed  up  for  a  time,  it  broke  out  in  new
channels  and  in  ways  and  places  least  expected ;  turned
away  from  France,  it  appeared  especially  in  England,  where
great  paleontologists  and  geologists  arose  whose  work  cul-
minated in  that  of  Lyell.  Specialists  throughout  all  the
world  now  became  more  vigorous  than  ever,  gathering  facts
and  thinking  upon  them  in  a  way  which  caused  the  special
creation  theory  to  shrink   more   and   more.     Broader  and


THEOLOGICAL   AND    SCIENTIFIC    THEORIES.  65

more  full  became  these  various  rivulets,  soon  to  unite  in  one
great  stream  of  thought.

In  18 13  Dr.  Wells  developed  a  theory  of  evolution  by
natural  selection  to  account  for  varieties  in  the  human  race.
About  1820  Dean  Herbert,  eminent  as  an  authority  in  horti-
culture, avowed  his  conviction  that  species  are  but  fixed
varieties.  In  1831  Patrick  Matthews  stumbled  upon  and
stated  the  main  doctrine  of  natural  selection  in  evolution ;
and  others  here  and  there,  in  Europe  and  America,  caught
an  inkling  of  it.

But  no  one  outside  of  a  circle  apparently  uninfluential
cared  for  these  things :  the  Church  was  serene :  on  the  Con-
tinent it  had  obtained  reactionary  control  of  courts,  cabi-
nets, and  universities ;  in  England,  Dean  Cockburn  was  de-
nouncing Mary  Sonierville  and  the  geologists  to  the  delight
of  churchmen  ;  and  the  Rev.  Mellor  Brown  was  doing  the
same  thing  for  the  edification  of  dissenters.

In  America  the  mild  suggestions  of  Silliman  and  his  com-
peers were  met  by  the  protestations  of  the  Andover  theolo-
gians headed  by  Moses  Stuart.  Neither  of  the  great  English
universities,  as  a  rule,  took  any  notice  of  the  innovators  save
by  sneers.

To  this  current  of  thought  there  was  joined  a  new  ele-
ment when,  in  1844,  Robert  Chambers  published  his  Vestiges
of  Creation.  The  book  was  attractive  and  was  widely  read.
In  Chambers's  view  the  several  series  of  animated  beings,
from  the  simplest  and  oldest  up  to  the  highest  and  most  re-
cent, were  the  result  of  two  distinct  impulses,  each  given
once  and  for  all  time  by  the  Creator.  The  first  of  these  was
an  impulse  imparted  to  forms  of  life,  lifting  them  gradually
through  higher  grades ;  the  second  was  an  impulse  tending
to  modify  organic  substances  in  accordance  with  external
circumstances  ;  in  fact,  the  doctrine  of  the  book  was  evolu-
tion tempered  by  miracle — a  stretching  out  of  the  creative
act  through  all  time — a  pious  version  of  Lamarck.

Two  results  followed,  one  mirth-provoking,  the  other
leading  to  serious  thought.  The  amusing  result  was  that
the  theologians  were  greatly  alarmed  by  the  book :  it  was
loudly  insisted  that  it  promoted  atheism.  Looking  back
along  the  line  of  thought  which  has  since  been  developed,
6


66  FROM    CREATION    TO   EVOLUTION.

one  feels  that  the  older  theologians  ought  to  have  put  up
thanksgivings  for  Chambers's  theory,  and  prayers  that  it
might  prove  true.  The  more  serious  result  was  that  it  ac-
customed men's  minds  to  a  belief  in  evolution  as  in  some
form  possible  or  even  probable.  In  this  way  it  was  pro-
visionally of  service.

Eight  years  later  Herbert  Spencer  published  an  essay
contrasting  the  theories  of  creation  and  evolution — reason-
ing with  great  force  in  favour  of  the  latter,  showing  that
species  had  undoubtedly  been  modified  by  circumstances ;
but  still  only  few  and  chosen  men  saw  the  significance  of  all
these  lines  of  reasoning  which  had  been  converging  during
so  many  years  toward  one  conclusion.

On  July  I,  1858,  there  were  read  before  the  Linnsean
Society  at  London  two  papers — one  presented  by  Charles
Darwin,  the  other  by  Alfred  Russel  Wallace — and  with  the
reading  of  these  papers  the  doctrine  of  evolution  by  natural
selection  was  born.  Then  and  there  a  fatal  breach  was  made
in  the  great  theological  barrier  of  the  continued  fixity  of
species  since  the  creation.

The  story  of  these  papers  the  scientific  world  knows  by
heart:  how  Charles  Darwin,  having  been  sent  to  the  Uni-
versity of  Cambridge  to  fit  him  for  the  Anglican  priesthood,
left  it  in  1831  to  go  upon  the  scientific  expedition  of  the
Beagle  ;  how  for  five  years  he  studied  with  wonderful  vig-
our and  acuteness  the  problems  of  life  as  revealed  on  land
and  at  sea — among  volcanoes  and  coral  reefs,  in  forests  and
on  the  sands,  from  the  tropics  to  the  arctic  regions  ;  how,  in
the  Cape  Verde  and  the  Galapagos  Islands,  and  in  Brazil,
Patagonia,  and  Australia  he  interrogated  Nature  with  match-
less persistency  and  skill ;  how  he  returned  unheralded,
quietly  settled  down  to  his  work,  and  soon  set  the  world
thinking  over  its  first  published  results,  such  as  his  book
on  Coral  Reefs,  and  the  monograph  on  the  Cirripcdia\  and,
finally,  how  he  presented  his  paper,  and  followed  it  up  with
treatises  which  made  him  one  of  the  great  leaders  in  the
history  of  human  thought.

The  scientific  world  realizes,  too,  more  and  more,  the
power  of  character  shown  by  Darwin  in  all  this  great  career  ;
the  faculty  of  silence,  the  reserve  of  strength  seen  in  keep-


THEOLOniCAL    AND    SCIENTIFIC    THEORIES.


(>7


ing  his  great  thought— his  idea  of  evolution  by  natural  selec-
tion— under  silent  study  and  meditation  for  nearly  twenty
years,  giving  no  hint  of  it  to  the  world  at  large,  but  working
in  every  field  to  secure  proofs  or  disproofs,  and  accumulat-
ing masses  of  precious  material  for  the  solution  of  the  ques-
tions involved.

To  one  man  only  did  he  reveal  his  thought — to  Dr.  Joseph
Hooker,  to  whom  in  1844,  under  the  seal  of  secrecy,  he
gave  a  summary  of  his  conclusions.  Not  until  fourteen
years  later  occurred  the  event  which  showed  him  that  the
fulness  of  time  had  come — the  letter  from  Alfred  Russel
Wallace,  to  whom,  in  brilliant  researches  during  the  decade
from  1848  to  1858,  in  Brazil  and  in  the  Malay  Archipelago,
the  same  truth  of  evolution  by  natural  selection  had  been
revealed.  Among  the  proofs  that  scientific  study  does  no
injury  to  the  more  delicate  shades  of  sentiment  is  the  well-
known  story  of  this  letter.  With  it  Wallace  sent  Darwin  a
memoir,  asking  him  to  present  it  to  the  Linnsean  Society :
on  examining  it,  Darwin  found  that  Wallace  had  independ-
ently arrived  at  conclusions  similar  to  his  own — possibly
had  deprived  him  of  fame  ;  but  Darwin  was  loyal  to  his
friend,  and  his  friend  remained  ever  loyal  to  him.  He  pub-
licly presented  the  paper  from  Wallace,  Avith  his  own  con-
clusions;  and  the  date  of  this  presentation — July  i,  1858 —
separates  two  epochs  in  the  history,  not  merely  of  natural
science,  but  of  human  thought.

In  the  following  year,  1859,  cam*e  the  first  instalment  of
his  work  in  its  fuller  development — his  book  on  The  Origin
of  Species.  In  this  book  one  at  least  of  the  main  secrets  at
the  heart  of  the  evolutionary  process,  which  had  baffled  the
long  line  of  investigators  and  philosophers  from  the  days  of
Aristotle,  was  more  broadly  rev^ealed.  The  effective  mech-
anism of  evolution  was  shown  at  work  in  three  ascertained
facts  :  in  the  struggle  for  existence  among  organized  beings  ;
in  the  survival  of  the  fittest ;  and  in  heredity.  These  facts
were  presented  with  such  minute  research,  wide  observa-
tion,  patient  collation,  transparent  honesty,  and  judicial  fair-
ness, that  they  at  once  commanded  the  world's  attention.
It  was  the  outcome  of  thirty  years'  work  and  thought  by  a
worker  and  thinker  of  genius,  but  it  was  yet  more  than  that


68  FROM   CREATION   TO   EVOLUTION.

— it  was  the  outcome,  also,  of  the  work  and  thought  of  an-
other man  of  genius  fifty  years  before.  The  book  of  Mal-
thus  on  the  Principle  of  Population,  mainly  founded  on  the
fact  that  animals  increase  in  a  geometrical  ratio,  and  there-
fore, if  unchecked,  must  encumber  the  earth,  had  been  gen-
erally forgotten,  and  was  only  recalled  with  a  sneer.  But
the  genius  of  Darwin  recognised  in  it  a  deeper  meaning,
and  now  the  thought  of  Malthus  was  joined  to  the  new
current.  Meditating  upon  it  in  connection  with  his  own
observations  of  the  luxuriance  of  Nature,  Darwin  had  ar-
rived at  his  doctrine  of  natural  selection  and  survival  of
the  fittest.

As  the  great  dogmatic  barrier  betw^een  the  old  and  new
views  of  the  universe  was  broken  down,  the  f^ood  of  new
thought  pouring  over  the  world  stimulated  and  nourished
strong  growths  in  every  field  of  research  and  reasoning :
edition  after  edition  of  the  book  was  called  for  ;  it  was  trans-
lated even  into  Japanese  and  Hindustani ;  the  stagnation  of
scientific  thought,  which  Buckle,  only  a  few  years  before,
had  so  deeply  lamented,  gave  place  to  a  widespread  and
fruitful  activity  ;  masses  of  accumulated  observations,  which
had  seemed  stale  and  unprofitable,  were  made  alive  ;  facts
formerly  without  meaning  now  found  their  interpretation.
Under  this  new  influence  an  army  of  young  men  took  up
every  promising  line  of  scientific  investigation  in  every  land.
Epoch-making  books  appeared  in  all  the  great  nations.
Spencer,  Wallace,  Huxley,  Galton,  Tyndall,  Tylor,  Lubbock,
Bagehot,  Lewes,  in  England,  and  a  phalanx  of  strong  men
in  Germany,  Italy,  France,  and  America  gave  forth  works
which  became  authoritative  in  every  department  of  biology.
If  some  of  the  older  men  in  France  held  back,  overawed
perhaps  by  the  authority  of  Cuvier,  the  younger  and  more
vigorous  pressed  on.

One  source  of  opposition  deserves  to  be  especially  men-
tioned— Louis  Agassiz.

A  great  investigator,  an  inspired  and  inspiring  teacher,
a  noble  man,  he  had  received  and  elaborated  a  theory  of
animated  creation  w4uch  he  could  not  readily  change.  In
his  heart  and  mind  still  prevailed  the  atmosphere  of  the  little
Swiss  parsonage  in  which    he  was   born,  and  his  religious


THEOLOGICAL   AND    SCIENTIFIC   THEORIES.  69

and  moral  nature,  so  beautiful  to  all  who  knew  him,  was
especially  repelled  b}^  sundry  evolutionists,  who,  in  their
zeal  as  neophytes,  made  proclamations  seeming  to  have  a
decidedly  irreligious  if  not  immoral  bearing.  In  addition  to
this  was  the  direction  his  thinking  had  received  from  Cu-
vier.  Both  these  influences  combined  to  prevent  his  accept-
ance of  the  new  view.

He  was  the  third  great  man  who  had  thrown  his  influ-
ence as  a  barrier  across  the  current  of  evolutionary  thought.
Linnseus  in  the  second  half  of  the  eighteenth  century,  Cuvier
in  the  first  half,  and  Agassiz  in  the  second  half  of  the  nine-
teenth— all  made  the  same  effort.  Each  remains  great ;  but
not  all  of  them  together  could  arrest  the  current.  Agassiz's
strong  efforts  throughout  the  United  States,  and  indeed
throughout  Europe,  to  check  it,  really  promoted  it.  From
the  great  museum  he  had  founded  at  Cambridge,  from  his
summer  school  at  Penikese,  from  his  lecture  rooms  at  Har-
vard and  Cornell,  his  disciples  went  forth  full  of  love  and
admiration  for  him,  full  of  enthusiasm  which  he  had  stirred
and  into  fields  which  he  had  indicated  ;  but  their  powers,
which  he  had  aroused  and  strengthened,  were  devoted  to
developing  the  truth  he  failed  to  recognise  ;  Shaler,  Ver-
rill,  Packard,  Hartt^  Wilder,  Jordan,  with  a  multitude  of
others,  and  especially  the  son  who  bore  his  honoured  name,
did  justice  to  his  memory  by  applying  what  they  had  re-
ceived from  him  to  research  under  inspiration  of  the  new
revelation.

Still  another  man  deserves  especial  gratitude  and  honour
in  this  progress — Edward  Livingston  Youmans.  He  was
perhaps  the  first  in  America  to  recognise  the  vast  bearings
of  the  truths  presented  by  Darwin,  Wallace,  and  Spencer.
He  became  the  apostle  of  these  truths,  sacrificing  the  bril-
liant career  on  which  he  had  entered  as  a  public  lecturer,
subordinating  himself  to  the  three  leaders,  and  giving  him-
self to  editorial  drudgery  in  the  stimulation  of  research  and
the  announcement  of  results.

In  support  of  the  new  doctrine  came  a  world  of  new
proofs;  those  which  Darwin  himself  added  in  regard  to  the
cross-fertilization  of  plants,  and  which  he  had  adopted  from
embryology,  led   the  way,  and  these  were  followed  by  the


/O  FROM    CREATION    TO    EVOLUTION.

discoveries  of  Wallace,  Bates,  Huxley,  Marsh,  Cope,  Leidy,
Haeckel,  Muller,  Gaudry,  and  a  multitude  of  others  in  all
lands.^

IV.  THE  FINAL  EFFORT  OF  THEOLOGY.

Darwin's  Origin  of  Species  had  come  into  the  theological
world  like  a  plough  into  an  ant-hill.  Everywhere  those
thus  rudely  awakened  from  their  old  comfort  and  repose
had  swarmed  forth  angry  and  confused.  Reviews,  sermons,
books  light  and  heavy,  came  flying  at  the  new  thinker  from
all  sides.

The  keynote  was  struck  at  once  in  the  Quarterly  Review
by  Wilberforce,  Bishop  of  Oxford.  He  declared  that  Dar-
win  was  guilty  of  "a  tendency  to  limit  God's  glory  in  crea-
tion"; that  ''  the  principle  of  natural  selection  is  absolutely
incompatible  with  the  word  of  God";  that  it  "contradicts
the  revealed  relations  of  creation  to  its  Creator  "  ;  that  it  is
"inconsistent  with  the  fulness  of  his  glory";  that  it  is  "a
dishonouring  view  of  Nature  " ;  and  that  there  is  "  a  sim-
pler explanation  of  the  presence  of  these  strange  forms
among  the  \vorks  of  God  "  :  that  explanation  being—"  the
fall  of  Adam."  Nor  did  the  bishop's  efforts  end  here  ;  at  the
meeting  of  the  British  Association  for  the  Advancement  of
Science  he  again  disported  himself  in  the  tide  of  popular
applause.  Referring  to  the  ideas  of  Darwin,  who  was  ab-
sent on  account  of  illness,  he  congratulated  himself  in  a  pub-
lic speech  that  he  was  not  descended  from  a  monkey.  The
reply  came  from  Huxley,  who  said  in  substance:  "If  I  had
to  choose,  I  would  prefer  to  be  a  descendant  of  a  humble
monkey  rather  than  of  a  man  who  employs  his  knowledge


*  For  Agassiz's  opposition  to  evolution,  see  the  Essay  on  Classijication,  vol.  i,
1857,  as  regards  Lamarck,  and  vol.  iii,  i860,  as  regards  Darwin  ;  also  Sillimans
Journal,  July,  i860  ;  also  the  Atlantic  Monthly,  January,  1874  ;  also  his  Life  and
Correspondmce,  vol.  ii,  p.  647  ;  also  Asa  Gray,  Scientific  Papers,  vol  ii,  p.  484.
A  reminiscence  of  my  own  enables  me  to  appreciate  his  deep  ethical  and  religious
feeling.  I  was  passing  the  day  with  him  at  Nahant  in  1868,  consulting  him  re-
garding candidates  for  various  scientific  chairs  at  the  newly  established  Cornell
University,  in  which  he  took  a  deep  interest.  As  we  discussed  one  after  another
of  the  candidates  he  suddenly  said  :  "  Who  is  to  be  your  Professor  of  Moral
Philosophy  ?     That  is  a  far  more  important  position  than  all  the  others."


THE    FINAL   EFFORT    OF   THEOLOGY.  71

and  eloquence  in    misrepresenting  those   who  are  wearing
out  their  lives  in  the  search  for  truth."

This  shot  reverberated  through  England,  and  indeed
through  other  countries.

The  utterances  of  this  the  most  brilliant  prelate  of  the
Anglican  Church  received  a  sort  of  antiphonal  response
from  the  leaders  of  the  English  Catholics.  In  an  address  be-
fore  the  '' Academia,"  which  had  been  organized  to  combat
*'  science  falsely  so  called,"  Cardinal  Manning  declared  his
abhorrence  of  the  new  view  of  Nature,  and  described  it  as
''  a  brutal  philosophy— to  wit,  there  is  no  God,  and  the  ape
is  our  Adam."

These  attacks  from  such  eminent  sources  set  the  clerical
fashion  for  several  years.  One  distinguished  clerical  re-
viewer, in  spite  of  Darwin's  thirty  years  of  quiet  labour,  and
in  spite  of  the  powerful  summing  up  of  his  book,  prefaced  a
diatribe  by  saying  that  Darwin  "  might  have  been  more
modest  had  he  given  some  slight  reason  for  dissenting  from
the  views  generally  entertained."  Another  distinguished
clergyman,  vice-president  of  a  Protestant  institute  to  com-
bat "dangerous"  science,  declared  Darwinism  "an  attempt
to  dethrone  God."  Another  critic  spoke  of  persons  accept-
ing the  Darwinian  views  as  "  under  the  frenzied  inspiration
of  the  inhaler  of  mephitic  gas,"  and  of  Darwin's  argument
as  "a  jungle  of  fanciful  assumption."  Another  spoke  of
Darwin's  views  as  suggesting  that  "  God  is  dead,"  and  de-
clared that  Darwin's  work  "  does  open  violence  to  every-
thing which  the  Creator  himself  has  told  us  in  the  Scriptures
of  the  methods  and  results  of  his  work."  Still  another  the-
ological authority  asserted  :  "  If  the  Darwinian  theory  is
true,  Genesis  is  a  lie,  the  whole  framework  of  the  book  of
life  falls  to  pieces,  and  the  revelation  of  God  to  man,  as  we
Christians  know  it,  is  a  delusion  and  a  snare."  Another,
who  had  shown  excellent  qualities  as  an  observing  natural-
ist, declared  the  Darwinian  view  "  a  huge  imposture  from
the  beginning."

Echoes  came  from  America.  One  review,  the  organ  of
the  most  widespread  of  American  religious  sects,  declared
that  Darwin  was  "  attempting  to  befog  and  to  pettifog  the
whole  question " ;   another   denounced    Darwin's   views   as


72  FROM   CREATION   TO   EVOLUTION.

"  infidelity  "  ;  another,  representing  the  American  branch  of
the  Anglican  Church,  poured  contempt  over  Darwin  as
''  sophistical  and  illogical,"  and  then  plunged  into  an  exceed-
ingly dangerous  line  of  argument  in  the  following  words:
*'  If  this  hypothesis  be  true,  then  is  the  Bible  an  unbearable
fiction  ;  .  .  .  then  have  Christians  for  nearly  two  thousand
years  been  duped  by  a  monstrous  lie.  .  .  .  Darwin  requires
us  to  disbelieve  the  authoritative  w^ord  of  the  Creator."  A
leading  journal  representing  the  same  church  took  pains  to
show  the  evolution  theory  to  be  as  contrary  to  the  explicit
declarations  of  the  New  Testament  as  to  those  of  the  Old,
and  said  :  ''  If  we  have  all,  men  and  monkeys,  oysters  and
eagles,  developed  from  an  original  germ,  then  is  St.  Paul's
grand  deliverance — '  All  flesh  is  not  the  same  flesh  ;  there  is
one  kind  of  flesh  of  men,  another  of  beasts,  another  of  flshes,
and  another  of  birds' — untrue."

Another  echo  came  from  Australia,  where  Dr.  Perry,
Lord  Bishop  of  Melbourne,  in  a  most  bitter  book  on  Science
and  the  Bible,  declared  that  the  obvious  object  of  Chambers,
Darwin,  and  Huxley  is  *' to  produce  in  their  readers  a  dis-
belief of  the  Bible."'

Nor  was  the  older  branch  of  the  Church  to  be  left  be-
hind in  this  chorus.  Bayma,  in  the  Catholic  World,  declared,
"  Mr.  Darwin  is,  we  have  reason  to  believe,  the  mouth-
piece or  chief  trumpeter  of  that  infidel  clique  whose  well-
known  object  is  to  do  away  with  all  idea  of  a  God."

Worthy  of  especial  note  as  showing  the  determination  of
the  theological  side  at  that  period  was  the  foundation  of
sacro-scientific  organizations  to  combat  the  new  ideas.  First
to  be  noted  is  the  "  Academia,"  planned  by  Cardinal  Wise-
man. In  a  circular  letter  the  cardinal,  usually  so  moderate
and  just,  sounded  an  alarm  and  summed  up  by  saying,  '*  Now
it  is  for  the  Church,  which  alone  possesses  divine  certainty
and  divine  discernment,  to  place  itself  at  once  in  the  front
of  a  movement  which  threatens  even  the  fragmentary  re-
mains of  Christian  belief  in  England."  The  necessary  per-
mission was  obtained  from  Rome,  the  Academia  was  founded,
and  the  "divine  discernment"  of  the  Church  was  seen  in
the  utterances  which  came  from  it,  such  as  those  of  Cardinal
Manning,  which  every  thoughtful  Catholic  would  now  de-


THE  FINAL  EFFORT  OF  THEOLOGY.  73

sire  to  recall,  and  in  the  diatribes  of  Dr.  Laing,  Avhich  only
aroused  laughter  on  all  sides.  A  similar  effort  was  seen
in  Protestant  quarters ;  the  "  Victoria  Institute "  was  cre-
ated, and  perhaps  the  most  noted  utterance  which  ever
came  from  it  was  the  declaration  of  its  vice-president,  the
Rev.  Walter  Mitchell,  that  *'  Darwinism  endeavours  to  de-
throne God."*

In  France  the  attack  was  even  more  violent.  Fabre
d'Envieu  brought  out  the  heavy  artillery  of  theology,  and
in  a  long  series  of  elaborate  propositions  demonstrated  that
any  other  doctrine  than  that  of  the  fixity  and  persistence  of
species  is  absolutely  contrary  to  Scripture.  The  Abbe  De-
sorges,  a  former  Professor  of  Theolog}',  stigmatized  Darwin
as  a  ''  pedant,"  and  evolution  as  "  gloomy  "  ;  Monseigneur
Segur,  referring  to  Darwin  and  his  followers,  went  into  hys-
terics and  shrieked  :  "  These  infamous  doctrines  have  for
their  only  support  the  most  abject  passions.  Their  father  is
pride,  their  mother  impurity,  their  offspring  revolutions.
They  come  from  hell  and  return  thither,  taking  with  them
the  gross  creatures  who  blush  not  to  proclaim  and  accept
them."

In  Germany  the  attack,  if  less  declamatory,  was  no  less
severe.  Catholic  theologians  vied  with  Protestants  in  bitter-
ness. Prof.  Michelis  declared  Darwin's  theory  "  a  caricature
of  creation."  Dr.  Hagermann  asserted  that  it  "  turned  the
Creator  out   of   doors."     Dr.  Schund  insisted  that  *'  every

*  For  Wilberforce's  article,  see  Quarterly  Reviezv,  Jwly>  i860.  For  the  reply  of
Huxley  to  the  bishop's  speech  I  have  relied  on  the  account  given  in  Qiiatrefages,
who  had  it  from  Carpenter  ;  a  somewhat  different  version  is  given  in  the  Life  and
Letters  of  Darivin.  For  Cardinal  Manning's  attack,  see  Essays  oti  Religion  and
Literatzire,  London,  1865.  For  the  review  articles,  see  the  Quarterly  already  cited,
and  that  for  July,  1874;  ^^so  the  North  British  Review,  May,  i860  ;  also,  F.  O.
Morris's  letter  in  the  Record,  reprinted  at  Glasgow,  1870;  also  the  Addresses  of
Rev.  Walter  Mitchell  heioxQ  the  Victoria  Institute,  London,  1867  ;  also  Rev.  B.  G.
Johns,  Moses  not  Darwin,  a  Sermon,  March  31,  1871.  For  the  earlier  American
attacks,  see  Methodist  Quarterly  Review,  April,  1871  ;  The  American  Church  Re-
view, July  and  October,  1865,  and  January,  1866.  For  the  Australian  attack,  see
Science  and  the  Bible,  by  the  Right  Reverend  Charles  Perry,  D.  D.,  Bishop  of  Mel.
bourne,  London,  1869.  For  Bayma,  see  the  Catholic  World,  vol.  xxvi,  p.  782.  For
the  Academia,  see  Essays  edited  by  Cardinal  Manning,  above  cited  ;  and  for  the
Victoria  Institute,  see  Scientia  Scientiarum,  by  a  member  of  the  Victoria  Institute,
London,  1865.


74  FROM   CREATION    TO    EVOLUTION.

idea  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  from  the  first  to  the  last  page,
stands  in  diametrical  opposition  to  the  Darwinian  theory  "  ;
and,  ''  if  Darwin  be  right  in  his  view  of  the  development
of  man  out  of  a  brutal  condition,  then  the  Bible  teaching
in  regard  to  man  is  utterly  annihilated."  Rougemont  in
Switzerland  called  for  a  crusade  against  the  obnoxious
doctrine.  Luthardt,  Professor  of  Theology  at  Leipsic,  de-
clared :  "  The  idea  of  creation  belongs  to  religion  and  not
to  natural  science  ;  the  whole  superstructure  of  personal  re-
ligion is  built  upon  the  doctrine  of  creation  "  ;  and  he
showed  the  evolution  theory  to  be  in  direct  contradiction
to  Holy  Writ,

But  in  1863  came  an  event  which  brought  serious  confu-
sion to  the  theological  camp  :  Sir  Charles  Lyell,  the  most
eminent  of  living  geologists,  a  man  of  deeply  Christian  feel-
ing and  of  exceedingly  cautious  temper,  who  had  opposed
the  evolution  theory  of  Lamarck  and  declared  his  adherence
to  the  idea  of  successive  creations,  then  published  his  work
I  on  the  Antiquity  of  Man,  and   in   this  and  other  utterances
showed  himself  a  complete  though  unwilling  convert  to  the
fundamental   ideas    of    Darwin.     The  blow   was  serious  in
I  many  ways,  and  especially  so  in  two — first,  as  withdrawing
I  all  foundation  in  fact  from  the  scriptural  chronology,  and
I  secondly,  as  discrediting  the    creation   theory.     The    blow
was  not  unexpected  ;  in  various  review  articles  against  the
Darwinian  theory  there  had  been  appeals  to  Lyell,  at  times
almost  piteous,  ''  not  to  flinch  from  the  truths  he  had  for-
merly proclaimed."     But  Lyell,  like  the  honest  man  he  was,
yielded  unreservedly  to  the  mass  of  new  proofs  arrayed  on
the  side  of  evolution  against  that  of  creation.

At  the  same  time  came  Huxley's  Man's  Place  in  Nature,
giving  new  and  most  cogent  arguments  in  favour  of  evolu-
tion by  natural  selection.

In  1 87 1  was  published  Darwin's  Descent  of  Man.  Its  doc-
trine had  been  anticipated  by  critics  of  his  previous  books,
but  it  made,  none  the  less,  a  great  stir ;  again  the  opposing
army  trooped  forth,  though  evidently  with  much  less  heart
than  before.  A  few  were  very  violent.  The  Dublin  Univer-
sity Magazine,  after  the  traditional  Hibernian  fashion,  charged
Mr.  Darwin  with  seeking  "  to  displace  God   by  the  uner-


THE  FINAL  EFFORT  OF  THEOLOGY.  ^75

ring  action  of  vagary,"  and  with  being  *' resolved  to  hunt
God  out  of  the  world.''  But  most  notable  from  the  side  of
the  older  Church  was  the  elaborate  answer  to  Darwin's  book
by  the  eminent  French  Catholic  physician,  Dr.  Constantin
James.  In  his  work,  On  Darivinisin,  or  the  Man- Ape,  pub-
lished at  Paris  in  1877,  Dr.  James  not  only  refuted  Darwin
scientifically  but  poured  contempt  on  his  book,  calling  it  '*a
fairy  tale,"  and  insisted  that  a  work  '*so  fantastic  and  so
burlesque "  was,  doubtless,  only  a  huge  joke,  like  Eras-
mus's Praise  of  Folly,  or  Montesquieu's  Persian  Letters.  The
princes  of  the  Church  were  delighted.  The  Cardinal  Arch-
bishop of  Paris  assured  the  author  that  the  book  had  become
his  "  spiritual  reading,"  and  begged  him  to  send  a  copy  to
the  Pope  himself.  His  Holiness,  Pope  Pius  IX,  acknowl-
eds-ed  the  s^ift  in  a  remarkable  letter.  He  thanked  his  dear
son,  the  writer,  for  the  book  in  which  he  *'  refutes  so  well
the  aberrations  of  Darwinism."  ''A  system,"  His  Holiness
adds,  *'  which  is  repugnant  at  once  to  history,  to  the  tradi-
tion of  all  peoples,  to  exact  science,  to  observed  facts,  and
even  to  Reason  herself,  would  seem  to  need  no  refutation,
did  not  alienation  from  God  and  the  leaning  toward  ma-
terialism, due  to  depravity,  eagerly  seek  a  support  in  all  this
tissue  of  fables.  .  .  .  And,  in  fact,  pride,  after  rejecting  the
Creator  of  all  things  and  proclaiming  man  independent,
wishing  him  to  be  his  own  king,  his  own  priest,  and  his  own
God — pride  goes  so  far  as  to  degrade  man  himself  to  the
level  of  the  unreasoning  brutes,  perhaps  even  of  lifeless  mat-
ter, thus  unconsciously  confirming  the  Divine  declaration,
When  pride  conietk,  then  eometh  shame.  But  the  corruption
of  this  age,  the  machinations  of  the  perverse,  the  danger
of  the  simple,  demand  that  such  fancies,  altogether  absurd
though  they  are,  should — since  they  borrow  the  mask  of
science — be  refuted  by  true  science."  Wherefore  the  Pope
thanked  Dr.  James  for  his  book,  ''  so  opportune  and  so  per-
fectly appropriate  to  the  exigencies  of  our  time,"  and  be-
stowed on  him  the  apostolic  benediction.  Nor  was  this  brief
all.  With  it  there  came  a  second,  creating  the  author  an
officer  of  the  Papal  Order  of  St.  Sylvester.  The  cardinal
archbishop  assured  the  delighted  physician  that  such  a
double  honour  of  brief  and  brevet  was   perhaps  unprece-


^6  FROM  CREATION  TO  EVOLUTION.

dented,  and  suggested  only  that  in  a  new  edition  of  his  book
he  should  '*  insist  a  little  more  on  the  relation  existing^  be-
tween  the  narratives  of  Genesis  and  the  discoveries  of  mod-
ern science,  in  such  fashion  as  to  convince  the  most  incredu-
lous of  their  perfect  agreement."  The  prelate  urged  also  a
more  dignified  title.  The  proofs  of  this  new  edition  were
accordingly  all  submitted  to  His  Eminence,  and  in  1882  it
appeared  as  Moses  and  Darzvin  :  the  Man  of  Genesis  compared
with  the  Man- Ape,  or  Religions  Education  opposed  to  Atheistic.
No  wonder  the  cardinal  embraced  the  author,  thanking  him
in  the  name  of  science  and  religion.  "  We  have  at  last,"  he
declared,  *' a  handbook  which  we  can  safely  put  into  the
hands  of  youth."

Scarcely  less  vigorous  were  the  champions  of  English
Protestant  orthodoxy.  In  an  address  at  Liverpool,  Mr.
Gladstone  remarked  :  "  Upon  the  grounds  of  what  is  termed
evolution  God  is  relieved  of  the  labour  of  creation  ;  in  the
name  of  unchangeable  laws  he  is  discharged  from  governing
the  world  " ;  and,  when  Herbert  Spencer  called  his  attention
to  the  fact  that  Newton  with  the  doctrine  of  gravitation  and
with  the  science  of  physical  astronomy  is  open  to  the  same
charge,  Mr.  Gladstone  retreated  in  the  Contemporary  Review
under  one  of  his  characteristic  clouds  of  words.  The  Rev.
Dr.  Coles,  in  the  British  and  Foreign  Evangelical  Review,  de-
clared that  the  God  of  evolution  is  not  the  Christian's  God.
Burgon,  Dean  of  Chichester,  in  a  sermon  preached  before
the  University  of  Oxford,  pathetically  warned  the  students
that  "  those  who  refuse  to  accept  the  history  of  the  creation
of  our  first  parents  according  to  its  obvious  literal  intention,
and  are  for  substituting  the  modern  dream  of  evolution  in
its  place,  cause  the  entire  scheme  of  man's  salvation  to  col-
lapse." Dr.  Pusey  also  came  into  the  fray  with  most  earnest
appeals  against  the  new  doctrine,  and  the  Rev.  Gavin  Car-
lyle  was  perfervid  on  the  same  side.  The  Society  for  Pro-
moting Christian  Knowledge  published  a  book  by  the  Rev.
Mr.  Birks,  in  which  the  evolution  doctrine  was  declared  to
be  ''flatly  opposed  to  the  fundamental  doctrine  of  creation."
Even  the  London  Times  admitted  a  review  stigmatizing  Dar-
win's Descent  of  Man  as  an  *'  utterly  unsupported  hypothe-
sis," full  of  ''  unsubstantiated   premises,  cursory  investiga-


THE  FINAL  EFFORT  OF  THEOLOGY.


17


tions,  and  disintegrating  speculations,"  and  Darwin  himself
as  '*  reckless  and  unscientific."  *

But  it  was  noted  that  this  second  series  of  attacks,  on  the
Descent  of  Ma7i,  differed  in  one  remarkable  respect — so  far
as  England  was  concerned — from  those  which  had  been
made  over  ten  years  before  on  the  Origin  of  Species.  While
everything  was  done  to  discredit  Darwin,  to  pour  contempt
upon  him,  and  even,  of  all  things  in  the  world,  to  make  him
— the  gentlest  of  mankind,  only  occupied  with  the  scientific
side  of  the  problem — "a  persecutor  of  Christianity,"  while
his  followers  were  represented  more  and  more  as  charlatans
or  dupes,  there  began  to  be  in  the  most  influential  quarters
careful  avoidance  of  the  old  argument  that  evolution — even
by  natural  selection — contradicts  Scripture.  It  began  to  be
felt  that  this  was  dangerous  ground.  The  defection  of  Lyell
had,  perhaps,  more  than  anything  else,  started  the  question
among  theologians  who  had  preserved  some  equanimity,
"  What  if,  after  all,  the  Darivinian  theory  should  prove  to  be
true  f  Recollections  of  the  position  in  which  the  Roman
Church  found  itself  after  the  establishment  of  the  doctrines


*  For  the  French  theological  opposition  to  the  Darwinian  theory,  see  Pozzy
La  Terre  et  le  Recit  Biblique  de  la  Creation,  1874,  especially  pp  353,  363  ;  also,
Felix  Ducane,  Etudes  sur  le  Ti'ansformisme,  1876,  especially  pp.  107  to  iig.  As
to  Fabre  d'Envieu,  see  especially  his  Proposition  xliii.  For  the  Abbe  Desorges,
"  former  Professor  of  Philosophy  and  Theology,"  see  his  Errenrs  Modernes,  Paris,
1878,  pp.  677  and  595  to  598.  For  Monseigneur  Segur,  see  his  La  Foi  devant  la
Science  Moderne,  sixth  ed.,  Paris,  1874,  pp.  23,  34,  etc.  For  Herbert  Spencer's
reply  to  Mr.  Gladstone,  see  his  Study  of  Sociology ;  for  the  passage  in  the  Dublin
Revieiv,  see  the  issue  for  July,  1871.  For  the  review  in  the  London  Times,  see
Nature  for  April  20,  1871.  For  Gavin  Carlyle,  see  The  Battle  of  Unbelief,  1870,
pp.  86  and  171.  For  the  attacks  by  Michelis  and  Hagermann,  see  Nattir  und
Offcnbarung,  Miinster,  1861  to  1869.  For  Schund,  see  his  Darwin  s  Llypothese  und
ihr  Verhdltniss  zu  Religion  und  Moral,  Stuttgart,  1869.  For  Luthardt,  see  Funda-
mental Truths  of  Christianity,  translated  by  Sophia  Taylor,  second  ed.,  Edinburgh,
1869.  For  Rougemont,  see  his  D Hoimyie  et  le  Singe,  Neuchatel,  1863  (also  in
German  trans.).  For  Constantm  James,  see  his  Mes  Entretiens  avec  V Emp^reur
Don  FMro  sur  le  Darwinisme,  Paris,  18S8,  where  the  papal  briefs  are  printed  in
full.  For  the  English  attacks  on  Darwin's  Descent  of  Man,  see  the  Edinbziroh
Review  July,  1871,  and  elsewhere  ;  the  Dublin  Review,  July,  1871  ;  the  British
and  Foreign  Evangelical  Review,  April,  1^86.  See  also  The  Scripture  Doctrine  of
Creation,  by  the  Rev.  T.  R.  Birks,  London,  1873,  published  by  the  S.  P.  C.  K.
For  Dr.  Pusey's  attack,  see  his  Unscience,  not  Science,  adverse  to  Faith,  1878  ;  also,
Darwin's  Life  a?id  Letters,  vol.  ii,  pp.  411,  412.


78


FROM  CREATION  TO  EVOLUTION.


of  Copernicus  and  Galileo  naturally  came  into  the  minds  of
the  more  thoughtful.  In  Germany  this  consideration  does
not  seem  to  have  occurred  at  quite  so  early  a  day.  One
eminent  Lutheran  clergyman  at  Magdeburg  called  on  his
hearers  to  choose  between  Darwin  and  religion ;  Delitszch,
in  his  new  commentary  on  Genesis,  attempted  to  bring  sci-
ence back  to  recognise  human  sin  as  an  important  factor  in
creation  ;  Prof.  Heinrich  Ewald,  w^hile  carefully  avoiding
any  sharp  conflict  between  the  scriptural  doctrine  and  evo-
lution, comforted  himself  by  covering  Darwin  and  his  fol-
lowers with  contempt ;  Christlieb,  in  his  address  before  the
Evangelical  Alliance  at  New  York  in  1873,  simply  took  the
view  that  the  tendencies  of  the  Darwinian  theory  were  **  to-
ward infidelity,"  but  declined  to  make  any  serious  battle  on
biblical  grounds;  the  Jesuit,  Father  Pesch,  in  Holland,  drew
up  in  Latin,  after  the  old  scholastic  manner,  a  sort  of  gen-
eral indictment  of  evolution,  of  which  one  may  say  that  it
was  interesting — as  interesting  as  the  display  of  a  troop  in
chain  armour  and  with  cross-bows  on  a  nineteenth-century
battlefield.

From  America  there  came  new  echoes.  Among  the
myriad  attacks  on  the  Darwinian  theory  by  Protestants  and
Catholics  two  should  be  especially  mentioned.  The  first  of
these  was  by  Dr.  Noah  Porter,  President  of  Yale  College,
an  excellent  scholar,  an  interesting  writer,  a  noble  man,
broadly  tolerant,  combining  in  his  thinking  a  curious  mix-
ture of  radicalism  and  conservatism.  While  giving  great
latitude  to  the  evolutionary  teaching  in  the  university  under
his  care,  he  felt  it  his  duty  upon  one  occasion  to  avow  his
disbelief  in  it ;  but  he  was  too  wise  a  man  to  suggest  any
necessary  antagonism  between  it  and  the  Scriptures.  He
confined  himself  mainly  to  pointing  out  the  tendency  of  the
evolution  doctrine  in  this  form  toward  agnosticism  and  pan-
theism. To  those  who  knew  and  loved  him,  and  had  noted
the  genial  way  in  which  b}''  wnse  neglect  he  had  allowed  sci-
entific studies  to  flourish  at  Yale,  there  was  an  amusing:  side
to  all  this.  Within  a  stone's  throw  of  his  college  rooms  was
the  Museum  of  Paleontology,  in  which  Prof.  Marsh  had  laid
side  by  side,  among  other  evidences  of  the  new  truth,  that
wonderful  series  of  specimens  showing  the  evolution  of  the


THE  FINAL  EFFORT  OF  THEOLOGY.  ^g

horse  from  the  earliest  form  of  the  animal,  "  not  larger  than
a  fox,  with  live  toes,"  through  the  whole  series  up  to  his
present  form  and  size — that  series  which  Huxley  declared
an  absolute  proof  of  the  existence  of  natural  selection  as  an
agent  in  evolution.  In  spite  of  the  veneration  and  love  which
all  Yale  men  felt  for  F^resident  Porter,  it  was  hardly  to  be
expected  that  these  particular  arguments  of  his  would  have
much  permanent  effect  upon  them  when  there  was  con-
stantly before  their  eyes  so  convincing  a  refutation.

But  a  far  more  determined  opponent  was  the  Rev.  Dr.
Hodge,  of  Princeton  ;  his  anger  toward  the  evolution  doc-
trine was  bitter  :  he  denounced  it  as  thoroughly  "  atheistic  "  ;
he  insisted  that  Christians  "  have  a  right  to  protest  against
the  arraying  of  probabilities  against  the  clear  evidence  of
the  Scriptures  "  ;  he  even  censured  so  orthodox  a  writer  as
the  Duke  of  Argyll,  and  declared  that  the  Darwinian  theory
of  natural  selection  is  *'  utterly  inconsistent  with  the  Scrip-
tures," and  that  "an  absent  God,  who  does  nothing,  is  to  us
no  God  "  ;  that  "  to  ignore  design  as  manifested  in  God's
creation  is  to  dethrone  God  "  ;  that  "a  denial  of  desien  in
Nature  is  virtually  a  denial  of  God  " ;  and  that  ''  no  tele-
ologist  can  be  a  Darwinian."  Even  more  uncompromising
was  another  of  the  leading  authorities  at  the  same  university
— the  Rev.  Dr.  Duffield.  He  declared  war  not  only  against
Darwin  but  even  against  men  like  Asa  Gray,  Le  Conte,  and
others,  who  had  attempted  to  reconcile  the  new  theory  with
the  Bible :  he  insisted  that  "  evolutionism  and  the  scriptural
account  of  the  origin  of  man  are  irreconcilable  " — that  the
Darwinian  theory  is  "  in  direct  conflict  with  the  teaching  of
the  apostle,  '  All  scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God  '  " ;
he  pointed  out,  in  his  opposition  to  Darwin's  Descent  of  Man
and  Ly ell's  Antiquity  of  Man,  that  in  the  Bible  ''  the  gene-
alogical links  which  connect  the  Israelites  in  Egypt  with
Adam  and  Eve  in  Eden  are  explicitly  given."  These  utter-
ances of  Prof.  Duffield  culminated  in  a  declaration  which  de-
serves to  be  cited  as  showing  that  a  Presbyterian  minister
can  ''  deal  damnation  round  the  land  "  ex  cathedra  in  a  fashion
quite  equal  to  that  of  popes  and  bishops.  It  is  as  follows:
''  If  the  development  theoi-y  of  the  origin  of  man,"  wrote  Dr.
Duffield  in  the  Princeton  Review^  "  shall  in  a  little  while  take


go  FROM   CREATION    TO   EVOLUTION.

its  place — as  doubtless  it  will — with  other  exploded  scientific
speculations,  then  they  who  accept  it  with  its  proper  logical
consequences  will  in  the  life  to  come  have  their  portion  with
those  who  in  this  life  '  know  not  God  and  obey  not  the  gos-
pel of  his  Son.'  "

Fortunately,  at  about  the  time  when  Darwin's  Descent  of
Man  was  published,  there  had  come  into  Princeton  Univer-
sity a  "  dens  ex  niaeJiina  "  in  the  person  of  Dr.  James  McCosh.
Called  to  the  presidency,  he  at  once  took  his  stand  against
teachings  so  dangerous  to  Christianity  as  those  of  Drs.
Hodge,  Duffield,  and  their  associates.  In  one  of  his  personal
confidences  he  has  let  us  into  the  secret  of  this  matter.
With  that  hard  Scotch  sense  w^hich  Thackeray  had  ap-
plauded in  his  well-known  verses,  he  saw  that  the  most  dan-
gerous thing  which  could  be  done  to  Christianity  at  Prince-
ton was  to  reiterate  in  the  university  pulpit,  week  after
week,  solemn  declarations  that  if  evolution  by  natural  selec-
tion, or  indeed  evolution  at  all,  be  true,  the  Scriptures  are
false.  He  tells  us  that  he  saw  that  this  was  the  certain  way
to  make  the  students  unbelievers  ;  he  therefore  not  only
checked  this  dangerous  preaching  but  preached  an  opposite
doctrine.  With  him  began  the  inevitable  compromise,  and,
in  spite  of  mutterings  against  him  as  a  Darwinian,  he  carried
the  day.  Whatever  may  be  thought  of  his  general  system
of  philosophy,  no  one  can  deny  his  great  service  in  neutral-
izing the  teachings  of  his  predecessors  and  colleagues — so
dangerous  to  all  that  is  essential  in  Christianity.

Other  divines  of  strong  sense  in  other  parts  of  the  coun-
try began  to  take  similar  ground — namely,  that  men  could
be  Christians  and  at  the  same  time  Darwinians.  There  ap-
peared, indeed,  here  and  there,  curious  discrepancies :  thus
in  1873  the  Monthly  Religions  Magazine  of  Boston  congratu-
lated its  readers  that  the  Rev.  Mr.  Burr  had  ''  demolished
the  evolution  theory,  knocking  the  breath  of  life  out  of  it
and  throwing  it  to  the  dogs."  This  amazing  performance  by
the  Rev.  Mr.  Burr  was  repeated  in  a  very  striking  way  by
Bishop  Keener  before  the  CEcumenical  Council  of  Metho-
dism at  Washington  in  189 1.  In  Avhat  the  newspapers  de-
scribed as  an  **  admirable  speech,"  he  refuted  evolution  doc-
trines by  saying  that  evolutionists   had    '*  only  to  make  a


THE    FINAL   EFFORT   OF   THEOLOGY.  8l

journey  of  twelve  hours  from  the  place  where  he  was  then
standing  to  find  together  the  bones  of  the  muskrat,  the  opos-
sum, the  coprolite,  and  the  ichthyosaurus."  He  asserted
that  Agassiz — whom  the  good  bishop,  like  so  many  others,
seemed  to  think  an  evolutionist — when  he  visited  these  beds
near  Charleston,  declared  :  '*  These  old  beds  have  set  me
crazy  ;  they  have  destroyed  the  work  of  a  lifetime."  And
the  Methodist  prelate  ended  by  saying :  "  Now,  gentlemen,
brethren,  take  these  facts  home  with  you  ;  get  down  and
look  at  them.  This  is  the  watch  that  was  under  the  steam
hammer — the  doctrine  of  evolution;  and  this  steam  hammer
is  the  wonderful  deposit  of  the  Ashley  beds."

Exhibitions  like  these  availed  little.  While  the  good
bishop  amid  vociferous  applause  thus  made  comically  evi-
dent his  belief  that  Agassiz  was  a  Darwinian  and  a  coprolite
an  animal,  scientific  men  were  recording  in  all  parts  of  the
world  facts  confirming  the  dreaded  theory  of  an  evolution
by  natural  selection.  While  the  Rev.  Mr.  Burr  was  so
loudly  praised  for  ''  throwing  Darwinism  to  the  dogs,"
Marsh  was  completing  his  series  leading  from  the  five-toed
ungulates  to  the  horse.  While  Dr.  Tayler  Lewis  at  Union,
and  Drs.  Hodge  and  Dufifield  at  Princeton,  were  showing
that  if  evolution  be  true  the  biblical  accounts  must  be  false,
the  indefatigable  Yale  professor  was  showing  his  cretaceous
birds,  and  among  them  Hespcrornis  and  IcJitJiyornis  with  teeth.
While  in  Germany  Luthardt,  Schund,  and  their  compeers
were  demonstrating  that  Scripture  requires  a  belief  in  special
and  separate  creations,  the  ArcJiccopteryx,  showing  a  most
remarkable  connection  between  birds  and  reptiles,  was  dis-
covered. While  in  France  Monseigneur  Segur  and  others
were  indulging  in  diatribes  against  *'a  certain  Darwin,"
Gaudry  and  Filhol  were  discovering  a  striking  series  of
"  missing  links  "  among  the  carnivora.

In  view  of  the  proofs  accumulating  in  favour  of  the  new
evolutionary  hypothesis,  the  change  in  the  tone  of  control-
ling theologians  was  now  rapid.  From  all  sides  came  evi-
dences of  desire  to  compromise  with  the  theory.  Strict  ad-
herents of  the  biblical  text  pointed  significantly  to  the  verses
in  Genesis  in  which  the  earth  and  sea  were  made  to  bring
forth  birds  and  fishes,  and  man  was  created  out  of  the  dust
7


82  FROM    CREATION    TO    EVOLUTION.

i

of  the  ground.  Men  of  larger  mind  like  Kingsley  and  Far
rar,  with  English  and  American  broad  churchmen  generall}-
took  ground  directly  in  Darwin's  favour.  Even  Whewel
took  pains  to  show  that  there  might  be  such  a  thino-  as  i
Darwinian  argument  for  design  in  Nature  ;  and  the  Rev
Samuel  Houghton,  of  the  Royal  Society,  gave  interestino
suggestions  of  a  divine  design  in  evolution.

Both  the  great  English  universities  received  the  new
teaching  as  a  leaven :  at  Oxford,  in  the  very  front  of  the
High  Church  party  at  Keble  College,  was  elaborated  s
statement  that  the  evolution  doctrine  is  '*  an  advance  in  oui
theological  thinking."  And  Temple,  Bishop  of  London,  per
haps  the  most  influential  thinker  then  in  the  Anglican  epis
copate,  accepted  the  new  revelation  in  the  following  words

'  "  It  seems  something  more  majestic,  more  befitting  him  tc
whom  a  thousand  years  are  as  one  day,  thus  to  impress  his
will  once  for  all  on  his    creation,  and   provide  for  all  the

\  countless  varieties  by  this  one  original  impress,  than  by  spe
cial  acts  of  creation  to  be  perpetually  modifying  what  he
had  previously  made."

In  Scotland  the  Duke  of  Argyll,  head  and  front  of  the
orthodox  party,  dissenting  in  many  respects  from  Darwin's
full  conclusions,  made  concessions  which  badly  shook  the
old  position.

Curiously  enough,  from  the  Roman  Catholic  Church,
bitter  as  some  of  its  writers  had  been,  now  came  argument
to  prove  that  the  Catholic  faith  does  not  prevent  any  one
from  holding  the  Darwinian  theory,  and  especially  a  declara
tion  from  an  authority  eminent  among  American  Catholics
— a  declaration  which  has  a  very  curious  sound,  but  whicli

j  it  would  be  ungracious  to  find  fault  with — that  ''  the  doctrine
of  evolution  is  no  more  in  opposition  to  the  doctrine  of  the
Catholic  Church  than  is  the  Copernican  theory  or  that  of
Galileo."

Here  and  there,  indeed,  men  of  science  like  Dawson,
Mivart,  and  Wigand,  in  view  of  theological  considerations,
sought  to  make  conditions  ;  but  the  current  was  too  strorg,
and  eminent  theologians  in  every  country  accepted  natural
selection  as  at  least  a  very  important  part  in  the  mechanism
of  evolution.  !


THE    FINAL    EFFORT    OF    THEOLOGY.


83


At  the  death  of  Darwin  it  was  felt  that  there  was  but  one
place  in  England  where  his  body  should  be  laid,  and  that
this  place  was  next  the  grave  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton  in  West-
minster Abbey.  The  noble  address  of  Canon  Farrar  at  his
funeral  was  echoed  from  many  pulpits  in  Europe  and  Amer-
ica, and  theological  opposition  as  such  was  ended.  Occa-
sionally appeared,  it  is  true,  a  survival  of  the  old  feeling  :
the  Rev.  Dr.  Laing  referred  to  the  burial  of  Darwin  in
Westminster  Abbey  as  "  a  proof  that  England  is  no  longer  a
Christian  country,"  and  added  that  this  burial  was  a  desecra-
tion— that  this  honour  was  given  him  because  he  had  been
"  the  chief  promoter  of  the  mock  doctrine  of  evolution  of
the  species  and  the  ape  descent  of  man."

Still  another  of  these  belated  prophets  was,  of  all  men,
Thomas  Carlyle.  Soured  and  embittered,  in  the  same  spirit
which  led  him  to  find  more  heroism  in  a  marauding:  Vikino-
or  in  one  of  Frederick  the  Great's  generals  than  in  Wash-
ington, or  Lincoln,  or  Grant,  and  which  caused  him  to  see
in  the  American  civil  war  only  the  burning  out  of  a  foul
chimney,  he,  with  the  petulance  natural  to  a  dyspeptic
eunuch,  railed  at  Darwin  as  an  ''apostle  of  dirt  worship."

The  last  echoes  of  these  utterances  reverberated  between
Scotland  and  America.  In  the  former  country,  in  1885,  the
Rev.  Dr.  Lee  issued  a  volume  declaring  that,  if  the  Darwin-
ian view  be  true,  *'  there  is  no  place  for  God  "  ;  that  '*  by  no
method  of  interpretation  can  the  language  of  Holy  Scrip-
ture be  made  wide  enough  to  re-echo  the  orang-outang  the-
ory of  man's  natural  history";  that  ''Darwinism  reverses
the  revelation  of  God  "  and  "  implies  utter  blasphemy  against
the  divine  and  human  character  of  our  Incarnate  Lord  "  ;
and  he  was  pleased  to  call  Darwin  and  his  followers  "  gos-
pellers of  the  gutter."  In  one  of  the  intellectual  centres  of
America  the  editor  of  a  periodical  called  The  Christian  urged
frantically  that  "  the  battle  be  set  in  array,  and  that  men  find
out  who  is  on  the  Lord's  side  and  who  is  on  the  side  of  the
devil  and  the  monkeys."

To  the  honour  of  the  Church  of  England  it  should  be
recorded  that  a  considerable  number  of  her  truest  men  op-
posed such  utterances  as  these,  and  that  one  of  them— Far-
rar, Archdeacon  of  Westminster— made  a  protest  worthy  to


84  FROM    CREATION    TO   EVOLUTION.  !

be  held  in  perpetual  remembrance.  While  confessing  his
own  inability  to  accept  fully  the  new  scientific  belief,  he
said  :  *'  We  should  consider  it  disgracefuband  humiliating  tc
try  to  shake  it  by  an  ad  captandiim  argument,  or  by  a  clap
trap  platform  appeal  to  the  unfathomable  ignorance  anci
unlimited  arrogance  of  a  prejudiced  assem.bly.  We  shoulc'
blush  to  meet  it  with  an  anathema  or  a  sneer."

All  opposition  had  availed  nothing ;  Darwin's  work  and
fame  were  secure.  As  men  looked  back  over  his  beautiful
life — simple,  honest,  tolerant,  kindly — and  thought  upon  his
great  labours  in  the  search  for  truth,  all  the  attacks  faded
into  nothingness.

There  were  indeed  some  dark  spots,  which  as-  time  goes
on  appear  darker.  At  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  Whe-
well,  the  "  omniscient,"  author  of  the  History  of  the  Inductivt
Sciences,  refused  to  allow  a  copy  of  the  Origin  of  Species  to  be
placed  in  the  library.  At  multitudes  of  institutions  under
theological  control — Protestant  as  well  as  Catholic — attempts
were  made  to  stamp  out  or  to  stifle  evolutionary  teaching
Especially  was  this  true  for  a  time  in  America,  and  the  case
of  the  American  College  at  Beyrout,  where  nearly  all  the
younger  professors  were  dismissed  for  adhering  to  Darwin's
views,  is  worthy  of  remembrance.  The  treatment  of  Dr
Winchell  at  the  Vanderbilt  University  in  Tennessee  showec
the  same  spirit ;  one  of  the  truest  of  men,  devoted  to  science
but  of  deeply  Christian  feeling,  he  was  driven  forth  for  views
which  centred  in  the  Darwinian  theory.

Still  more  striking  was  the  case  of  Dr.  Woodrow.  He
had,  about  1857,  been  appointed  to  a  professorship  of  Natu-
ral Science  as  connected  with  Revealed  Religion,  in  the
Presbyterian  Seminary  at  Columbia,  South  Carolina.  He
was  a  devoted  Christian  man,  and  his  training  had  led  hin"
to  accept  the  Presbyterian  standards  of  faith.  With  great
gifts  for  scientific  study  he  visited  Europe,  made  a  mosi
conscientious  examination  of  the  main  questions  under  dis
cussion,  and  adopted  the  chief  points  in  the  doctrine  o\
evolution  by  natural  selection.  A  struggle  soon  began.  .^
movement  hostile  to  him  grew  more  and  more  determined
and  at  last,  in  spite  of  the  efforts  made  in  his  behalf  by  the
directors  of  the  seminary  and  by  a  large  and  broad-mindec


THE  FINAL  EFFORT  OF  THEOLOGY.  85

minority  in  the  representative  bodies  controlling  it,  an  ortho-
dox storm,  raised  by  the  delegates  from  various  Presbyterian
bodies,  drove  him  from  his  post.  Fortunately,  he  was  re-
ceived into  a  professorship  at  the  University  of  South  Caro-
lina, where  he  has  since  taught  with  more  power  than  ever
before.

This  testimony  to  the  faith  by  American  provincial  Prot-
estantism was  very  properly  echoed  from  Spanish  provincial
Catholicism.  In  the  year  1878  a  Spanish  colonial  man  of  sci-
ence, Dr.  Chil  y  Marango,  published  a  work  on  the  Canary
Islands.  But  Dr.  Chil  had  the  imprudence  to  sketch,  in  his
introduction,  the  modern  hypothesis  of  evolution,  and  to
exhibit  some  proofs,  found  in  the  Canary  Islands,  of  the  bar-
barism of  primitive  man.  The  ecclesiastical  authorities,  un-
der the  lead  of  Bishop  Urquinaona  y  Bidot,  at  once  grappled
with  this  new  idea.  By  a  solemn  act  they  declared  it  ''falsa,
impia,  scandalosa  "  ;  all  persons  possessing  copies  of  the  w^ork
were  ordered  to  surrender  them  at  once  to  the  proper
ecclesiastics,  and  the  author  was  placed  under  the  major
excommunication.

But  all  this  opposition  may  be  reckoned  among  the  last
expiring  convulsions  of  the  old  theologic  theor3\  Even  from
the  new  Catholic  University  at  Washington  has  come  an
utterance  in  favour  of  the  new  doctrine,  and  in  other  univer-
sities in  the  Old  World  and  in  the  New  the  doctrine  of
evolution  by  natural  selection  has  asserted  its  right  to  full
and  honest  consideration.  More  than  this,  it  is  clearly  evi-
dent that  the  stronger  men  in  the  Church  have,  in  these
latter  days,  not  only  relinquished  the  struggle  against  sci-
ence in  this  field,  but  have  determined  frankly  and  manfully
to  make  an  alliance  with  it.  In  two  very  remarkable  lec-
tures given  in  1892  at  the  parish  church  of  Rochdale,  Wil-
son, Archdeacon  of  Manchester,  not  only  accepted  Dar-
winism as  true,  but  wrought  it  with  great  argumentative
power  into  a  higher  view  of  Christianity  ;  and  what  is  of
great  significance,  these  sermons  were  published  by  the  same
Society  for  the  Promotion  of  Christian  Knowledge  which
only  a  few  years  before  had  published  the  most  bitter  at-
tacks against  the  Darwinian  theory.  So,  too,  during  the
year  1893,  Prof.  Henry  Drummond,  whose  praise  is  in  all


86  FROM   CREATION    TO   EVOLUTION.

the  dissenting  churches,  developed  a  similar  view  most  bril-
liantly in  a  series  of  lectui'es  delivered  before  the  American
Chautauqua  schools,  and  published  in  one  of  the  most  wide-
spread of  English  orthodox  newspapers.

Whatever  additional  factors  may  be  added  to  natural
selection — and  Darwin  himself  fully  admitted  that  there
might  be  others — the  theory  of  an  evolution  process  in  the
formation  of  the  universe  and  of  animated  nature  is  estab-
lished, and  the  old  theory  of  direct  creation  is  gone  forever.
In  place  of  it  science  has  given  us  conceptions  far  more
noble,  and  opened  the  way  to  an  argument  for  design  infi-
nitely more  beautiful  than  any  ever  developed  by  theology.*

*  For  causes  of  the  bitterness  shown  regarding  the  Darwinian  hypothesis,  see
Reusch,  Bibel  und  Natur,  vol.  ii,  pp.  46  et  seq.  For  hostility  in  the  United  States
toward  the  Darwinian  theory,  see,  among  a  multitude  of  writers,  the  following :  Dr.
Charles  Hodge,  of  Princeton,  monograph,  What  is  Darwinism?  New  York,  1874  ;
also  his  Systematic  Theology,  New  York,  1872,  vol.  ii,  part  2,  Anthropology  ;  also
The  Light  by  ivhich  we  see  Light,  or  Nature  and  the  Scriptures,  Vedder  Lectures,
1875,  Rutgers  College,  New  York,  1875  ;  also  Positivism  and  Evolutionism,  in
the  American  Catholic  Quarterly,  October,  1877,  pp.  607,  619  ;  and,  in  the  same
number.  Professor  Huxley  and  Evolution,  by  Rev.  A.  M.  Kirsch,  pp.  662,  664  ;
The  Logic  of  Evolution,  by  Prof.  Edward  F.  X.  McSweeney,  D.  D.,  July,  1879,  p.
56T  ;  Das  Hexcemeron  und  die  Geologie,  von  P.  Eirich,  Pastor  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,
Lutherischer  Concordia- Verlag,  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  1878,  pp.  81,  82,  84,  92-94  ;  Evolu-
tionism respecting  Man  and  the  Bible,  by  John  T.  Duffield,  of  Princeton,  January,
1878,  Princetoji  Review,  pp.  151,  153,  154,  158,  159,  160,  188  ;  A  Lecture  on  Evolu-
tion, before  the  Nineteenth  Century  Club  of  New  York,  May  25,  1886,  by  ex-Presi-
dent Noah  Porter,  pp.  4,  26-29.  For  the  laudatory  notice  of  the  Rev.  E.  F.  Burr's
demolition  of  evolution  in  his  book  Pater  Mundi,  see  Monthly  Religious  Maga-
zine, Boston,  May,  1873,  p.  492.  Concerning  the  removal  of  Rev.  Dr.  James  Wood-
row,  Professor  of  Natural  Science  in  the  Columbia  Theological  Seminary,  see
Evolution  or  Not,  art.  in  the  N'ew  York  Weekly  Sun,  October  24,  1888.  For  the
dealings  of  Spanish  ecclesiastics  with  Dr.  Chil  and  his  Darwinian  exposition,  see
the  Revue  d' Anthropologic,  cited  in  the  Academy  for  April  6,  1878  ;  see  also  the
Catholic  World,  xix,  433,  A  Discussion  with  an  Lnfidel,  directed  against  Dr.  Louis
Biichner  and  his  Kraft  und  Stoff ;  also  Alind  and  Matter,  by  Rev.  James  Tait,
of  Canada,  p.  66  (in  the  third  edition  the  author  bemoans  the  "  horrible  plaudits"
that  "have  accompanied  every  effort  to  establish  man's  brutal  descent)";  also  The
Church  Journal,  New  York,  May  28,  1874.  For  the  effort  in  favour  of  a  teleo-
logical  evolution,  see  Rev.  Samuel  Houghton,  F.  R.  S.,  Principles  of  Animal  Me-
chanics, London,  1873,  preface  and  p.  156  and  elsewhere.  For  details  of  the  persecu-
tion of  Drs.  Winchell  and  Woodrow,  and  of  the  Beyrout  professors,  with  authorities
cited,  see  my  chapter  on  The  Fall  of  Man  and  Anthropology.  For  more  liberal
views  among  religious  thinkers  regarding  the  Darwinian  theory,  and  for  efforts  to
mitigate  and  adapt  it  to  theological  views,  see,  among  the  great  mass  of  utterances,
the  following:  Charles  Kingsley's  letters  to  Darwin,  November  18,  1859,  i"  Dar-


THE    FINAL   EFFORT    OF   THEOLOGY.


87


win's  Life  and  Letters,  vol.  ii,  p.  82  ;  Adam  Sedgwick  to  Charles  Danvin,  Decem-
ber 24,  1859,  see  ibid.,  vol.  ii,  pp.  356-359  ;  the  same  to  Miss  Gerard,  January  2,
i860,  see  Sedgwick's  Life  and  Letters,  vol.  ii,  pp.  359,  360  ;  the  same  in  The  Spec-
tator, London,  March  24,  i860  ;    The  Rambler,  March,  i860,  cited  by  Mivart,  Gene-
sis of  Species y  p.  30  ;    The  Dublin  Revieiv,  May,  i860  ;    The  Christian  Examiner,
May,  i860:  Charles  Kingsley  to  F.  D.  Maurice  in  1863,  in  Kingsley's  Life,  vol.
ii,  p.  171  ;  Adam  Sedgwick  to  Livingstone  (the  explorer),  March  16,  1865,  in  Life
and  Letters  of  Sedgiuick,  vol.  ii,  pp.  410-412  ;  the  Duke  of  Argyll,   The  Reign  of
Lazv,  New  York,  pp.  16,  18,  31,  116,  117,  120,  159  ;  Joseph  F.  Thompson,  D.  D.,
LL.  D.,  A/an  in  Genesis  and  Geology,  New  York,  1870,  ]:ip.  48,  49,  82  ;  Canon  H.  P.
Liddon,  Sermojis  preached  before  the  University  of  Oxford,  1871,  Sermon  III ;  St.
George  Mivart,  £volutio)i  and  its  Consequences,  Contemporary  Reviezi),^2,\\\x^xy ,  1872;
British  and  Foreign  Evangelical  Review,  1872,  article  on  The  Theory  of  Evolu.
tion  ;   The  Lutheran  Quarterly,  Gettysburg,  Pa.,  April,  1872,  article  by  Rev.  Cyrus
Thomas,  Assistant  United  States  Geological  Sui-vey,  on  The  Descent  of  Man, '^^.
214.  239»  372-376  ;    The  Lutheran  Quarterly,  July,  1873,  article  on   Some  Asstimp-
tions  against  Christianity,  by  Rev.  C.  A.  Stork,  Baltimore,    Md.,  pp.  325,  326  ;
also,  in  the  same  number,  see  a  review  of  Dr.  Burr's  Pater  Mundi,  pp.  474,  475,
and  contrast  with  the  review  in  the  Andover  Review  of  that  period  ;  an  article  in
the  Religious  Magazine  and  Monthly  Review,  Boston,  on  Religion  and  Evolution,
by  Rev.  S.  R.  Calthrop,  September,  1873,  p.  200  ;   The  Poptdar   Scie7ice  Monthly,
January,  1874,  article  Genesis,  Geology,  a^id  Evolution,  hy  Rev.  George  Henslow^—
this  article   first  appeared  in  his  book  Evolution  and  Religion  ;    article  by  Asa
Gray,    Nature,    London,   June   4,    1874 ;    Materialism,  by  Rev.    W.    Streissguth,
Lutheran   Quarterly,  July,  1875,  originally  written  in   German,  and  translated  by
J.  G.  Morris,  D.  D.,  pp.  406,  408  ;  Darzvinismus  und  Christenthu7n,  von  R.  Steck,
Ref.   Pfarrer  in  Dresden,   Berlin,   1875,   pp.  5,  6,  and  26,  reprinted  from  the  Pro-
testantische  J'Circhenzeitung,  and  issued  as  a  tract  by  the  Protestantenverein  ;  Rev.
W.  E.  Adams,  article  in  the  Lutheran  Quarterly,  April,  1879,  on  Evolution  :  Shall
it  be  Atheistic?  John  Wood,  Bible  Anticipations  of  Modern  Science,  1880,  pp.  18,
19,  22  ;  Lutheran   Quarterly,  January,  1881,   Some  Postulates  of  the  New  Ethics,
by  Rev.  C.  A.  Stork,  D.  D.  ;  Lutheran   Quarterly,  January,  1882,  The  Religion  of
Evolution  as  against  the  Religion  of  Jesus,   by   Prof.  W.   H.  Wynn,   Iowa  State
Agricultural  College— this  article  was  republished  as  a  pamphlet ;  Canon  Liddon,
prefatory  note  to  sermon  on  The  Recovery  of  St.  Thomas,  pp.  4,  n,  12,  13,  and  26,
preached  in  St.  Paul's  Cathedral,  April  23,  1882  ;  Lutheran  Quarterly,  January,
1882,  Evolution  and  the  Scripture,  by  Rev.  John  A.  Earnest,  pp.  loi,  105  ;  Glimpses
in  the  Twilight,  by  Rev.  F.  G.  Lee,  D.  D.,  Edinburgh,  1885,  especially  pp.  18  and
19  ;  the  Hibbert  Lectures  for  1883,  by  Rev.  Charles  Beard,  pp.  392,  393,  et  seq.  ;
F.  W.  Farrar,  D.  D.,  Canon  of  Westminster,    The  History  of  Lntcrpretation,  being
the  Bampton  Lectures  for  1885,  pp.  426,  427  ;  Bishop  Temple,  Bampton  Lectures,
pp.   184-186  ;   article  Evolution,   in  the  Dictionary  of  Religion,  edited   by  Rev.
William  Benham,  1887  ;  Prof.  Huxley,  An  Episcopal  Trilogy,  Nineteenth  Century,
November,  18S7— this  article  discusses  three  sermons  delivered  by  the  Bishops  of
Carlisle,  Bedford,  and  Manchester,  in  Manchester  Cathedral,  during  the  meeting  of
the  British  Association,  September,  18S7— these  sermons  were  afterward  published
in  pamphlet  form  under  the  title  The  Advance  of  Science  ;  John  Fiske,  Darxuinisitt,
and  other  Essays,  Boston,  1888  ;  Harriet  Mackenzie,  Evolution  ilhwiinating  the
Bible,  London,  1891,  dedicated  to  Prof.  Huxley  ;  H.  E.  Ryle,  Hulsean  Professor  of
Divinity  at  Cambridge,  The  Early  Narratives  of  Genesis,  London,  1892,  preface.


38  FROM  CREATION   TO   EVOLUTION.  |

pp.  vii-ix,  pp.  7,  9,  II  ;  Rev.  G.  M.  Searle,  of  the  Catholic  University,  Washington,,
article  in  the  Catholic  World,  November,  1892,  pp.  223,  227,  229,  231.  For  the^
statement  from  Keble  College,  see  Rev.  Mr.  Illingworth,  in  Lux  Mundi.  For'
Bishop  Temple,  see  citation  in  Laing.  For  a  complete  and  admirable  acceptance
of  the  evolution  theory  as  lifting  Christian  doctrine  and  practice  to  a  higher  plane,
with  suggestions  for  a  new  theology,  see  two  Sermons  by  Archdeacon  Wilson,  of
Manchester,  S.  P.  C.  K.,  London,  and  Young  &  Co.,  New  York,  1893  ;  and  for  aj
characteristically  lucid  statement  of  the  most  recent  development  of  evolution  doc-|
trines,  and  the  relations  of  Spencer,  Weismann,  Galton,  and  others  to  them,  seq
Lester  F.  Ward's  Address  as  President  of  the  Biological  Society,  Washington,  1891  ;
also,  recent  articles  in  the  leading  English  reviews.  For  a  brilliant  glorification  of
evolution  by  natural  selection  as  a  doctrine  necessary  to  the  highest  and  truest
view  of  Christianity,  see  Prof.  Drummond's  Chautauqua  Lectures,  published  in
The  British  Weekly,  London,  from  April  20  to  May  11,  1893.  ,


CHAPTER    II.

GEOGRAPHY.

I.    THE    FORM    OF    THE    EARTH.

Among  various  rude  tribes  we  find  survivals  of  a  primi-
tive idea  that  the  earth  is  a  flat  table  or  disk,  ceiled,  domed,
or  canopied  by  the  sky,  and  that  the  sky  rests  upon  the
mountains  as  pillars.  Such  a  belief  is  entirely  natural  ;  it
conforms  to  the  appearance  of  things,  and  hence  at  a  very
early  period  entered  into  various  theologies.

In  the  civilizations  of  Chaldea  and  Egypt  it  was  very
fully  developed.  The  Assyrian  inscriptions  deciphered  in
these  latter  years  represent  the  god  Marduk  as  in  the  begin-
ning creating  the  heavens  and  the  earth  :  the  earth  rests
upon  the  waters ;  within  it  is  the  realm  of  the  dead  ;  above
it  is  spread  "  the  firmament  " — a  solid  dome  coming  down
to  the  horizon  on  all  sides  and  resting  upon  foundations  laid
in  the  *'  great  waters  "  which  extend  around  the  earth.

Pn  the  east  and  west  sides  of  this  domed  firmament  are
doors,  through  which  the  sun  enters  in  the  morning  and  de-
parts at  night ;  above  it  extends  another  ocean,  which  goes
down  to  the  ocean  surrounding  the  earth  at  the  horizon  on
all  sides,  and  which  is  supported  and  kept  away  from  the
earth  by  the  firmament.  Above  the  firmament  and  the  up-
per ocean  which  it  supports  is  the  interior  of  heaven.

The  Egyptians  considered  the  earth  as  a  table,  flat  and
oblong,  the  sky  being  its  ceiling — a  huge  "firmament"  of
metal.  At  the  four  corners  of  the  earth  were  the  pillars  sup-
porting this  firmament,  and  on  this  solid  sky  were  the  "  wa-
ters above  the  heavens."  They  believed  that,  when  chaos
was  taking  form,  one  of  the  gods  by  main  force  raised  the
waters  on  high  and  spread  them  out  over  the  firmament ;

89


go


GEOGRAPHY.


that  on  the  under  side  of  this  solid  vault,  or  ceiling,  or  firma-
ment, the  stars  were  suspended  to  light  the  earth,  and  that
the  rains  were  caused  by  the  letting  down  of  the  waters
through  its  windows.  This  idea  and  others  connected  with
it  seem  to  have  taken  strong  hold  of  the  Egyptian  priestly
caste,  entering  into  their  theology  and  sacred  science  :  ceil-
ings of  great  temples,  with  stars,  constellations,  planets,  and
signs  of  the  zodiac  figured  upon  them,  remain  to-day  as
striking  evidences  of  this.

In  Persia  we  have  theories  of  geography  based  upon
similar  conceptions  and  embalmed  in  sacred  texts.

From  these  and  doubtless  from  earlier  sources  common
to  them  all  came  geographical  legacies  to  the  Hebrews.
Various  passages  in  their  sacred  books,  many  of  them  noble
in  conception  and  beautiful  in  form,  regarding  *'  the  founda-
tion of  the  earth  upon  the  waters,"  ''  the  fountains  of  the
great  deep,"  *'  the  compass  upon  the  face  of  the  depth,"  the
"firmament,"  the  "corners  of  the  earth,"  the  "pillars  of
heaven,"  the  "  waters  above  the  firmament,"  the  "  windows
of  heaven,"  and  "  doors  of  heaven,"  point  us  back  to  both
these  ancient  springs  of  thought.*


*  For  survivals  of  the  early  idea,  among  the  Eskimos,  of  the  sky  as  supported  by
mountains,  and,  among  sundry  Pacific  islanders,  of  the  sky  as  a  firmament  or  vault
of  stone,  see  Tylor,  Early  History  of  Mankind,  second  edition,  London,  1870,
chap,  xi  ;  Spencer,  Sociology,  vol.  i,  chap,  viii  ;  also  Andrew  Lang,  La  ATyfhologie,
Paris,  1886,  pp.  68-73.  For  the  Babylonian  theories,  see  George  Smith's  Chaldean
Genesis,  and  especially  the  German  translation  by  Delitzsch,  Leipsic,  1876  ,  also,
Jensen,  Die  Kostnogonie  der  Babylonier,  Strasburg,  iSgo  ;  see  especially  in  the
appendices,  pp.  q  and  10,  a  drawing  representing  the  whole  Babylonian  scheme  so
closely  followed  in  the  Hebrew  book  Genesis.  See  also  Lukas,  Die  Griindbegriffe
in  den  Kosmogonien  der  alien  Volker,  Leipsic,  1893,  for  a  most  thorough  summing
up  of  the  whole  subject,  with  texts  showing  the  development  of  Hebrew  out  of
Chaldean  and  Egyptian  conceptions,  pp.  44,  etc.  ;  also  pp.  127  et  scq.  For  the
early  view  in  India  and  Persia,  see  citations  from  the  Vedas  and  the  Zend-Avesta
in  Lethaby,  Architecture,  Mysticism,  and  Myth,  chap.  i.  For  the  Egyptian  view,
see  Champollion  ;  also,  Lenormant,  Histoire  Ancienne,  Maspero,  and  others.  As
to  the  figures  of  the  heavens  upon  the  ceilings  of  Egyptian  temples,  see  Maspero,
Arch^ologie  Egyptienne,  Paris,  1890  ;  and  for  engravings  of  them,  see  Lepsius,
Denkmdler,  vol.  i,  Bl.  41,  and  vol.  ix,  Abth.  iv,  Bl.  35  ;  also  the  Description  de
V Egypte,  published  by  order  of  Napoleon,  tome  ii,  PI.  14  ;  also  Prisse  d'Avennes,
Art  Egyptien,  Atlas,  tome  i,  PI.  35  ;  and  especially  for  a  survival  at  the  Temple  of
Denderah,  see  Uenon,  Voyage  en  Egypte,  Planches  129,  130.  For  the  Eg^-ptian
idea  of  "pillars  of  heaven,"  as  alluded  to  on  the  stele  of  victory  of  Thotmes  HI,


THE    FORM    OF    THE    EARTH.


91


But,  as  civilization  was  developed,  there  were  evolved,
especially  among  the  Greeks,  ideas  of  the  earth's  sphericity.
The  Pythagoreans,  Plato,  and  Aristotle  especially  cherished
them.  These  ideas  were  vague,  they  were  mixed  with  ab-
surdities, but  they  were  germ  ideas,  and  even  amid  the  luxu-
riant growth  of  theology  in  the  early  Christian  Church  these
germs  began  struggling  into  life  in  the  minds  of  a  few  think-
ing men,  and  these  men  renewed  the  suggestion  that  the
earth  is  a  globe."

A  few  of  the  larger-minded  fathers  of  the  Church,  influ-
enced possibly  by  Pythagorean  traditions,  but  certainly  by
Aristotle  and  Plato,  w^ere  w-illing  to  accept  this  view,  but
the  majority  of  them  took  fright  at  once.  To  them  it  seemed
fraught  with  dangers  to  Scripture,  by  which,  of  course,
they  meant  tJicir  interpretation  of  Scripture.  Among  the
first  who  took  up  arms  against  it  was  Eusebius.  In  view  of
the  New  Testament  texts  indicating  the  immediately  ap-
proaching end  of  the  w^orld,  he  endeavoured  to  turn  off  this
idea  by  bringing  scientific  studies  into  contempt.  Speaking
of  investigators,  he  said,  ''  It  is  not  through  ignorance  of  the
thino-s  admired  by  them,  but  through  contempt  of  their  use-


in  the  Cairo  Museum,  see  Ebers,  Uarda^  vol.  ii,  p.  175,  note,  Leipsic,  1877.  For  a
similar  Babylonian  belief,  see  Sayce's  Herodotus,  Appendix,  p.  403.  For  the  belief
of  Hebrew  scriptural  writers  in  a  solid  "firmament,"  see  especially  Job,  xxxviii,  18  ;
also  Smith's  Bible  Dictionary.  For  engravings  showing  the  earth  and  heaven  above
it  as  conceived  by  Egyptians  and  Chaldeans,  with  "pillars  of  heaven  "  and  "  firma-
ment," see  Maspero  and  Sayce,  Dawn  of  Civilization,  London,  1894,  pp.  17  and  543.
*  The  agency  of  the  Pythagoreans  in  first  spreading  the  doctrine  of  the  earth's
sphericity  is  generally  acknowledged,  but  the  first  clear  and  full  utterance  of  it  to
the  world  was  by  Aristotle.  Very  fruitful,  too,  was  the  statement  of  the  new  the-
ory given  by  Plato  in  the  Timceus  ;  see  Jowett's  translation,  62,  c.  Also  the  Phcedo,
pp.  449  et  seq.  See  also  Grote  on  Plato's  doctrine  of  the  sphericity  of  the  earth ;
also  Sir  G.  C.  Lewis's  Astrono7ny  of  the  Ancients,  London,  1862,  chap,  iii,  section
i,  and  note.  Cicero's  mention  of  the  antipodes,  and  his  reference  to  the  passage  in
the  Timceus,  are  even  more  remarkable  than  the  latter,  in  that  they  much  more
clearly  foreshadow  the  modern  doctrine.  See  his  Academic  Qtiestions,  ii  ;  also
Ttisc.  Quest.,  i  and  v,  24.  For  a  very  full  summary  of  the  views  of  the  ancients  on
the  sphericity  of  the  earth,  see  Kretschmer,  Die physische  Erdkunde  im  christlichen
Mittelalter,  Wien,  1889,  pp.  35  et  seq.  ;  also,  Eicken,  Geschichte  der  mittelaltcrlichen
Weltanschauung,  Stuttgart,  1887,  Dritter  Theil,  chap.  vi.  For  citations  and  sum-
maries, see  Whewell,  Hist.  Induct.  Sciences,  vol.  i,  p.  189,  and  St.  Martin,  Hist,  de
la  Geog.,  Paris,  1873,  p.  96  ;  also,  Leopardi,  Saggio  sopra  gli  errori  popolari  degli
antichi,  Firenze,  1851,  chap,  xii,  pp.  \%^  et  seq.


92


GEOGRAPHY.


less  labour,  that  we  think  little  of  these  matters,  turning-  our
souls  to  better  things."  Basil  of  Csesarea  declared  it  "a
matter  of  no  interest  to  us  whether  the  earth  is  a  sphere  or
a  cylinder  or  a  disk,  or  concave  in  the  middle  like  a  fan."
Lactantius  referred  to  the  ideas  of  those  studying  astronomy
as  "  bad  and  senseless,"  and  opposed  the  doctrine  of  the
earth's  sphericity  both  from  Scripture  and  reason.  St.  John
Chrysostom  also  exerted  his  influence  against  this  scientific
belief;  and  Ephraem  Syrus,  the  greatest  man  of  the  old
Syrian  Church,  widely  known  as  the  "  lute  of  the  Holy
Ghost,"  opposed  it  no  less  earnestly.

But  the  strictly  biblical  men  of  science,  such  eminent
fathers  and  bishops  as  Theophilus  of  Antioch  in  the  second
century,  and  Clement  of  Alexandria  in  the  third,  with  others
in  centuries  following,  were  not  content  with  merely  oppos-
ing what  they  stigmatized  as  an  old  heathen  theory;  they
drew  from  their  Bibles  a  new  Christian  theory,  to  which  one
Church  authority  added  one  idea  and  another  another,  until
it  was  fully  developed.  Taking  the  survival  of  various  early
traditions,  given  in  the  seventh  verse  of  the  first  chapter  of
Genesis,  they  insisted  on  the  clear  declarations  of  Scripture
that  the  earth  was,  at  creation,  arched  over  with  a  solid
vault,  "a  firmament,"  and  to  this  they  added  the  passages
from  Isaiah  and  the  Psalms,  in  which  it  declared  that  the
heavens  are  stretched  out  "  like  a  curtain,"  and  again  "  like
a  tent  to  dwell  in."  The  universe,  then,  is  like  a  house :  the
earth  is  its  ground  floor,  the  firmament  its  ceiling,  under
which  the  Almighty  hangs  out  the  sun  to  rule  the  day  and
the  moon  and  stars  to  rule  the  night.  This  ceiling  is  also
the  floor  of  the  apartment  above,  and  in  this  is  a  cistern,
shaped,  as  one  of  the  authorities  says,  ''  like  a  bathing-tank,"
and  containing  *'  the  waters  which  are  above  the  firmament."
These  waters  are  let  down  upon  the  earth  by  the  Almighty
and  his  angels  through  the  "  windows  of  heaven."  As  to
the  movement  of  the  sun,  there  was  a  citation  of  various
passages  in  Genesis,  mixed  with  metaphysics  in  various  pro-
portions, and  this  was  thought  to  give  ample  proofs  from
the  Bible  that  the  earth  could  not  be  a  sphere.*

*  For  Eusebius,   see   the  Prccp.  Ev.,  xv,  6i.     For  Basil,  see   the  Ilcxccmeroti,


THE   FORM   OF   THE   EARTH.


93


In  the  sixth  century  this  development  culminated  in  what)
was  nothing  less  than  a  complete  and  detailed  system  of  the\
universe,  claiming  to  be  based  upon  Scripture,  its  author
being  the  Egyptian  monk  Cosmas  Indicopleustes.  Egypt
was  a  great  treasure-house  of  theologic  thought  to  various'
religions  of  antiquity,  and  Cosmas  appears  to  have  urged
upon  the  early  Church  this  Egyptian  idea  of  the  construc-
tion of  the  world,  just  as  another  Egyptian  ecclesiastic,
Athanasius,  urged  upon  the  Church  the  Egyptian  idea  of  a
triune  deity  ruling  the  world.  According  to  Cosmas,  the
earth  is  a  parallelogram,  flat,  and  surrounded  by  four  seas.
It  is  four  hundred  days'  journey  long  and  two  hundred
broad.  At  the  outer  edges  of  these  four  seas  arise  massive
walls  closing  in  the  whole  structure  and  supporting  the
firmament  or  vault  of  the  heavens,  whose  edges  are  cement-
ed to  the  walls.  These  w^alls  inclose  the  earth  and  all  the
heavenly  bodies.

The  whole  of  this  theologico-scientific  structure  was  built
most  carefully  and,  as  was  then  thought,  most  scripturally.
Starting  with  the  expression  applied  in  the  ninth  chapter  of
Hebrews  to  the  tabernacle  in  the  desert,  Cosmas  insists,
with  other  interpreters  of  his  time,  that  it  gives  the  key  to
the  whole  construction  of  the  world.  The  universe  is,  there-
fore, made  on  the  plan  of  the  Jewish  tabernacle — boxlike
and  oblong.  Going  into  details,  he  quotes  the  sublime
words  of  Isaiah  :  "  It  is  He  that  sitteth  upon  the  circle  of
the  earth  ;  .  .  .  that  stretcheth  out  the  heavens  like  a  cur-
tain, and  spreadeth  them  out  like  a  tent  to  dwell  in"  ;  and
the  passage  in  Job  which  speaks  of  the  "  pillars  of  heaven."
He  works  all  this  into  his  system,  and  reveals,  as  he  thinks,
treasures  of  science.

This  vast  box  is  divided  into  two  compartments,  one
above  the  other.  In  the  first  of  these,  men  live  and  stars
move  ;  and  it  extends  up  to  the  first  solid  vault,  or  firma-
ment, above  which  live  the  angels,  a  main  part  of  whose
business  it  is  to  push  and  pull  the  sun  and  planets  to  and

Horn.  ix.  For  I^actantius,  see  his  hist. '  Div.,  lib.  iii,  cap.  3  ;  also,  citations  in
Whewell,  Hist.  Induct.  Sciences,  London,  1857,  vol.  i,  p.  194,  and  in  St.  Martin,
Histoire  de  la  Geographic,  pp.  216,  217.  For  the  views  of  St.  John  Chrysostom,
Ephraem  Syrus,  and  other  great  churchmen,  see  Kretschmer  as  above,  chap.  i.


94


GEOGRAPHY.


fro.  Next,  he  takes  the  text,  "  Let  there  be  a  firmament  in
the  midst  of  the  waters,  and  let  it  divide  the  waters  from
the  waters,"  and  other  texts  from  Genesis;  to  these  he  adds
the  text  from  the  Psahns,  ''  Praise  him,  ye  heaven  of  heavens,
and  ye  waters  that  be  above  the  heavens  "  ;  then  casts  all
these  growths  of  thought  into  his  crucible  together,  and
finally  brings  out  the  theory  that  over  this  first  vault  is  a
vast  cistern  containing  "the  waters."  He  then  takes  the  ex-
pression in  Genesis  regarding  the  "  windows  of  heaven  "  and
establishes  a  doctrine  regarding  the  regulation  of  the  rain,
to  the  effect  that  the  angels  not  only  push  and  pull  the  heav-
enly bodies  to  light  the  earth,  but  also  open  and  close  the
heavenly  windows  to  water  it.

To  understand  the  surface  of  the  earth,  Cosmas,  follow-
ing the  methods  of  interpretation  which  Origen  and  other
earl)'  fathers  of  the  Church  had  established,  studies  the  table
of  shew-bread  in  the  Jewish  tabernacle.  The  surface  of  this
table  proves  to  him  that  the  earth  is  flat,  and  its  dimensions
prove  that  the  earth  is  twice  as  long  as  broad  ;  its  four
corners  symbolize  the  four  seasons  ;  the  twelve  loaves  of
bread,  the  twelve  months  ;  the  hollow  about  the  table  proves
that  the  ocean  surrounds  the  earth.  To  account  for  the
movement  of  the  sun,  Cosmas  suggests  that  at  the  north  of
the  earth  is  a  great  mountain,  and  that  at  night  the  sun
is  carried  behind  this  ;  but  some  of  the  commentators  ven-
tured to  express  a  doubt  here  :  they  thought  that  the  sun
w^as  pushed  into  a  pit  at  night  and  pulled  out  in  the  morning.

Nothing  can  be  more  touching  in  its  simplicity  than  Cos-
mas's  summing  up  of  his  great  argument.  He  declares,
''  We  say  therefore  with  Isaiah  that  the  heaven  embracing
the  universe  is  a  vault,  with  Job  that  it  is  joined  to  the
earth,  and  with  Moses  that  the  length  of  the  earth  is  greater
than  its  breadth."  The  treatise  closes  with  rapturous  asser-
tions that  not  only  Moses  and  the  prophets,  but  also  angels
and  apostles,  agree  to  the  truth  of  his  doctrine,  and  that  at
the  last  day  God  will  condemn  all  who  do  not  accept  it.

Although  this  theory  was  drawn  from  Scripture,  it  was
also,  as  we  have  seen,  the  result  of  an  evolution  of  theological
thought  begun  long  before  the  scriptural  texts  on  which  it
rested  were  written.     It  was  not  at  all  strange  that  Cosmas,


THE    FORM    OF   THE    EARTH.


95


Egyptian  as  he  was,  should  have  received  this  old  Nile-born
doctrine,  as  we  see  it  indicated  to-day  in  the  structure  of
Egyptian  temples,  and  that  he  should  have  developed  it  by
the  aid  of  the  Jewish  Scriptures  ;  but  the  theological  world
knew  nothing  of  this  more  remote  evolution  from  pagan
germs  ;  it  was  received  as  virtually  inspired,  and  was  soon
regarded  as  a  fortress  of  scriptural  truth.  Some  of  the  fore-
most men  in  the  Church  devoted  themselves  to  buttressing
it  with  new  texts  and  throwing  about  it  new  outworks  of
theological  reasoning  ;  the  great  body  of  the  faithful  con-
sidered it  a  direct  gift  from  the  Almighty.  Even  in  the  later
centuries  of  the  INliddle  Ages  John  of  San  Geminiano  made
a  desperate  attempt  to  save  it.  Like  Cosmas,  he  takes  the
Jewish  tabernacle  as  his  starting-point,  and  shows  how  all
the  newer  ideas  can  be  reconciled  with  the  biblical  accounts
of  its  shape,  dimensions,  and  furniture.*


*  For  a  notice  of  the  views  of  Cosmas  in  connection  with  those  of  Lactantius,
Augustine,  St  John  Chrysostom,  and  others,  see  Schoell,  Histoi7'e  de  la  Littdrature
Grecquey  vol.  vii,  p.  37.  The  main  scriptural  passages  referred  to  are  as  follows  :
(i)  Isaiah  xl,  22;  (2)  Genesis  i,  6;  (3)  Genesis  vii,  11  ;  (4.)  Exodus  xxiv,  10;  (5)
Job  xxvi,  II,  and  xxxvii,  18  ;  (6)  Psalm  cxlviii,  4,  and  civ,  9  ;  (7)  Ezekiel  i,  22-26.
For  Cosmas's  theory,  see  Montfaucon,  Collectio  Nova  Patrum,  Paris,  1706,  vol.  ii,
p.  188  ;  also  pp.  298,  299.  The  text  is  illustrated  with  engravings  showing  walls
and  solid  vault  (firmament),  with  the  whole  apparatus  of  "  fountains  of  the  great
deep,"  "  windows  of  heaven,"  angels,  and  the  mountain  behind  which  the  sun  is
drawn.  For  reduction  of  one  of  them,  see  Peschel,  Geschichte  der  Erdkunde,  p.
98  ;  also  article  Maps,  in  Knight's  Dictionary  of  Mechanics,  New  York,  1875.
For  curious  drawings  showing  Cosmas's  scheme  in  a  different  way  from  that  given
by  Montfaucon,  see  extracts  from  a  Vatican  codex  of  the  ninth  century  in  Garucci,
Storia  de  V Arte  Christiana,  vol.  iii,  pp.  70  et  seg.  For  a  good  discussion  of  Cos-
mas's ideas,  see  Santarem,  Hist,  de  la  Cosmoi^raphie,  vol.  ii,  pp.  8  et  seq.,  and  for  a
very  thorough  discussion  of  its  details,  Kretschmer,  as  above.  For  still  another
theory,  very  droll,  and  thought  out  on  similar  principles,  see  Mungo  Park,  cited  in
De  Morgan,  Paradoxes,  p.  309.  For  Cosmas's  joyful  summing  up,  see  Montfaucon,
Collectio  Nova  Patrum,  vol.  ii,  p.  255.  For  a  curious  survival  in  the  thirteenth
century  of  the  old  idea  of  the  "  waters  above  the  heavens,"  see  the  story  in  Gervase
of  Tilbury,  how  in  his  time  some  people  coming  out  of  church  in  England  found
an  anchor  let  down  by  a  rope  out  of  the  heavens,  how  there  came  voices  from  sail-
ors above  trying  to  loose  the  anchor,  and,  finally,  how  a  sailor  came  down  the  rope,
who,  on  reaching  the  earth,  died  as  if  drowned  in  water.  See  Gei-vase  of  Tilbury,
Otia  Imperialia,  edit.  Liebrecht,  Hanover,  1856,  Prima  Decisio,  cap.  xiii.  The
work  was  written  about  121 1.  For  John  of  San  Geminiano,  see  his  Summa  de
Exemplis,  lib.  ix,  cap.  43.  For  the  Egyptian  Trinitarian  views,  see  Sharpe,  His-
tory of  Egypt,  vol.  i,  pp.  94,  102.


96


GEOGRAPHY.


From  this  old  conception  of  the  universe  as  a  sort  of
house,  with  heaven  as  its  upper  story  and  the  earth  as  its
ground  floor,  flowed  important  theological  ideas  into  heath-
en, Jewish,  and  Christian  mythologies.  Common  to  them
all  are  legends  regarding  attempts  of  mortals  to  invade  the
upper  apartment  from  the  lower.  Of  such  are  the  Greek
legends  of  the  Aloidae,  who  sought  to  reach  heaven  by  pil-
ing up  mountains,  and  were  cast  down  ;  the  Chaldean  and
Hebrew  legends  of  the  wicked  who  at  Babel  sought  to  build
'*  a  tower  whose  top  may  reach  heaven,"  which  Jehovah
went  down  from  heaven  to  see,  and  which  he  brought  to
naught  by  the  "  confusion  of  tongues  "  ;  the  Hindu  legend
of  the  tree  which  sought  to  grow  into  heaven  and  which
Brahma  blasted  ;  and  the  Mexican  legend  of  the  giants  who
sought  to  reach  heaven  by  building  the  Pyramid  of  Cholula,
and  who  were  overthrown  by  fire  from  above.

Myths  having  this  geographical  idea  as  their  germ  devel-
oped in  luxuriance  through  thousands  of  years.  Ascensions
to  heaven  and  descents  from  it,  "translations,"  ''assump-
tions," "annunciations,"  mortals  ''caught  up"  into  it  and
returning,  angels  flying  between  it  and  the  earth,  thunder-
bolts hurled  down  from  it,  mighty  winds  issuing  from  its
corners,  voices  speaking  from  the  upper  floor  to  men  on  the
lower,  temporary  openings  of  the  floor  of  heaven  to  reveal
the  blessedness  of  the  good,  "signs  and  wonders"  hung  out
from  it  to  warn  the  wicked,  interventions  of  every  kind —
from  the  heathen  gods  coming  down  on  every  sort  of  errand,
and  Jehovah  coming  down  to  walk  in  Eden  in  the  cool  of
the  day,  to  St.  Mark  swooping  down  into  the  market-place
of  Venice  to  break  the  shackles  of  a  slave— all  these  are  but
features  in  a  vast  evolution  of  myths  arising  largely  from
this  geographical  germ.

Nor  did  this  evolution  end  here.  Naturally,  in  this  view
of  things,  if  heaven  was  a  loft,  hell  was  a  cellar;  and  if  there
were  ascensions  into  one,  there  were  descents  into  the  other.
Hell  being  so  near,  interferences  by  its  occupants  with  the
dwellers  of  the  earth  just  above  were  constant,  and  form  a
vast  chapter  in  mediaeval  literature.  Dante  made  this  con-
ception of  the  location  of  hell  still  more  vivid,  and  we  find
some  forms  of  it  serious  barriers  to  geographical  investiga-


THE    FORM    OF    THE    EARTH.  ^y

tion.  Many  a  bold  navigator,  who  was  quite  ready  to  brave
pirates  and  tempests,  trembled  at  the  thought  of  tumbling
with  his  ship  into  one  of  the  openings  into  hell  which  a
widespread  belief  placed  in  the  Atlantic  at  some  unknown
distance  from  Europe.  This  terror  among  sailors  was  one
of  the  main  obstacles  in  the  great  voyage  of  Columbus.  In
a  mediaeval  text-book,  giving  science  the  form  of  a  dialogue,
occur  the  following  question  and  answer:  *'  Why  is  the  sun
so  red  in  the  evening  ?  "  ''  Because  he  looketh  down  upon
hell."

But  the  ancient  germ  of  scientific  truth  in  geography

the  idea  of  the  earth's  sphericity— still  lived.  Although  the
great  majority  of  the  early  fathers  of  the  Church,  and  espe-
cially Lactantius,  had  sought  to  crush  it  beneath  the  utter-
ances attributed  to  Isaiah,  David,  and  St.  Paul,  the  better
opinion  of  Eudoxus  and  Aristotle  could  not  be  forgotten.
Clement  of  Alexandria  and  Origen  had  even  supported  it.
Ambrose  and  Augustine  had  tolerated  it,  and,  after  Cosmas
had  held  sway  a  hundred  years,  it  received  new  life  from  a
great  churchman  of  southern  Europe,  Isidore  of  Seville,
who,  however  fettered  by  the  dominant  theology  in  many
other  things,  braved  it  in  this.  In  the  eighth  century  a  simi-
lar  declaration  was  made  in  the  north  of  Europe  by  another
great  Church  authority,  Bede.  Against  the  new  life  thus
given  to  the  old  truth,  the  sacred  theory  struggled  long  and
vigorously  but  in  vain.  Eminent  authorities  in  later  ages,
like  Albert  the  Great,  St.  Thomas  Aquinas,  Dante,  and  Vin-
cent of  Beauvais,  felt  obliged  to  accept  the  doctrine  of  the
earth's  sphericity,  and  as  we  approach  the  modern  period
we  find  its  truth  acknowledged  by  the  vast  majority  of
thinking  men.  The  Reformation  did  not  at  first  yield  fully
to  this  better  theory.  Luther,  Melanchthon,  and  Calvin  were
very  strict  in  their  adherence  to  the  exact  letter  of  Scrip-
ture. Even  Zwingli,  broad  as  his  views  generally  were,  was
closely  bound  down  in  this  matter,  and  held  to  the  opinion
of  the  fathers  that  a  great  firmament,  or  floor,  separated  the
heavens  from  the  earth;  that  above  it  were  the  waters  and
angels,  and  below  it  the  earth  and  man.

The  main   scope  given  to   independent  thought  on  this
general  subject  among  the  Reformers  was  in  a  few  minor

8


98


GEOGRAPHY.


speculations  regarding  the  universe  which  encompassed
Eden,  the  exact  character  of  the  conversation  of  the  serpent
with  Eve,  and  the  like.

In  the  times  immediately  following  the  Reformation  mat-
ters were  even  worse.  The  interpretations  of  Scripture  by
Luther  and  Calvin  became  as  sacred  to  their  followers  as
the  Scripture  itself.  When  Calixt  ventured,  in  interpreting
the  Psalms,  to  question  the  accepted  belief  that  ''  the  waters
above  the  heavens  "  were  contained  in  a  vast  receptacle  up-
held by  a  solid  vault,  he  was  bitterly  denounced  as  he-
retical.

In  the  latter  part  of  the  sixteenth  century  Musasus  inter-
preted the  accounts  in  Genesis  to  mean  that  first  God  made
the  heavens  for  the  roof  or  vault,  and  left  it  there  on  high
swinging  until  three  days  later  he  put  the  earth  under  it.
But  the  new  scientific  thought  as  to  the  earth's  form  had
gained  the  day.  The  most  sturdy  believers  were  obliged  to
adjust  their  biblical  theories  to  it  as  best  they  could.*

II.   THE    DELINEATION    OF    THE    EARTH.

Every  great  people  of  antiquity,  as  a  rule,  regarded  its
own  central  city  or  most  holy  place  as  necessarily  the  centre
of  the  earth.

The  Chaldeans  held  that  their  ''holy  house  of  the  gods"
was  the  centre.  The  Egyptians  sketched  the  world  under
the  form  of  a  human  figure,  in  which  Egypt  was  the  heart,
and  the  centre  of  it  Thebes.  For  the  Assyrians,  it  was
Babylon;  for  the  Hindus,  it  was  Mount  Meru;  for  the
Greeks,  so  far  as  the  civilized  world  was  concerned,  Olym-
pus or  the  temple  at  Delphi;  for  the  modern  Mohammed-
ans, it  is  Mecca  and  its  sacred  stone  ;  the  Chinese,  to  this
day,  speak  of  their  empire  as  the  "  middle  kingdom."  It
was  in  accordance,  then,  with  a  simple  tendency  of  human


*  For  a  discussion  of  the  geographical  views  of  Isidore  and  Bede,  see  Santarem,
Cosmo^rap/iie,  vol.  i,  pp  22-24.  For  the  gradual  acceptance  of  the  idea  of  the
earth's  sphericity  after  the  eighth  century,  see  Kretschmer,  pp.  51  et  se^.,  v.here
citations  from  a  multitude  of  authors  are  given.  For  the  views  of  the  Reformers,
see  Zockler,  vol.  i,  pp.  679  and  693.  For  Calixt,  Musceus,  and  others,  ibid.,  pp.
673-677  and  761.


THE    DELINEATION    OF    THE    EARTH.  gg

thought  that  the  Jews  believed  the  centre  of  the  world  to
be  Jerusalem.

The  book  of  Ezekiel  speaks  of  Jerusalem  as  in  the  mid-
dle of  the  earth,  and  all  other  parts  of  the  world  as  set
around  the  holy  city.  Throughout  the  "ages  of  faith"  this
was  very  generally  accepted  as  a  direct  revelation  from  the
Almighty  regarding  the  earth's  form.  St.  Jerome,  the  great-
est  authority  of  the  early  Church  upon  the  Bible,  declared,
on  the  strength  of  this  utterance  of  the  prophet,  that  Jeru-
salem could  be  nowhere  but  at  the  earth's  centre;  in  the
ninth  century  Archbishop  Rabanus  Maurus  reiterated  the
same  argument ;  in  the  eleventh  century  Hugh  of  St.  Vic-
tor gave  to  the  doctrine  another  scriptural  demonstration  ;
and  Pope  Urban,  in  his  great  sermon  at  Clermont  urgino-
the  Franks  to  the  crusade,  declared,  '^  Jerusalem  is  the  mid-
dle point  of  the  earth  ";  in  the  thirteenth  century  an  ecclesi-
astical writer  much  in  vogue,  the  monk  Csesarius  of  Heister-
bach,  declared,  "As  the  heart  in  the  midst  of  the  body,  so  is

Jerusalem  situated  in  the  midst  of  our  inhabited  earth,"

"so  it  was  that  Christ  was  crucified  at  the  centre  of  the
earth."  Dante  accepted  this  view  of  Jerusalem  as  a  cer-
tainty, wedding  it  to  immortal  verse;  and  in  the  pious  book
of  travels  ascribed  to  Sir  John  Mandeville,  so  widely  read
in  the  Middle  Ages,  it  is  declared  that  Jerusalem  is  at  the
centre  of  the  world,  and  that  a  spear  standing  erect  at  the
Holy  Sepulchre  casts  no  shadow  at  the  equinox.

Ezekiel's  statement  thus  became  the  standard  of  ortho-
doxy to  early  map-makers.  The  map  of  the  world  at  Here-
ford Cathedral,  the  maps  of  Andrea  Bianco,  Marino  Sanuto,
and  a  multitude  of  others  fixed  this  view  in  men's  minds,  and
doubtless  discouraged  during  many  generations  any  scien-
tific statements  tending  to  unbalance  this  geographical  cen-
tre revealed  in  Scripture.*


*  For  the  beliefs  of  various  nations  of  antiquity  that  the  earth's  centre  was  in
their  most  sacred  place,  see  citations  from  Maspero,  Charton,  Sayce,  and  others  in
Lethaby,  Architecture,  Mysticism,  and  Myth,  chap.  iv.  As  to  the  Greeks,  we  have
typical  statements  in  the  Eutnenides  of  ^schylus,  where  the  stone  on  the  altar  at
Delphi  is  repeatedly  called  "the  earth's  navel"— which  is  precisely  the  expression
used  regarding  Jerusalem  in  the  Septuagint  translation  of  Ezekiel  (see  below\
The  proof  texts  on  which  the  mediceval  geographers  mainly  relied  as  to  the  form


100  GEOGRAPHY.

Nor  did   mediaeval  thinkers   rest   with  this  conception.

i    In  accordance  with  the  dominant  view  that  physical  truth

]  must  be  sought  by  theological  reasoning,  the  doctrine  was

I  evolved  that  not  only  the  site  of  the  cross  on  Calvary  marked

the  geographical  centre  of  the  world,  but  that  on  this  very

spot  had  stood  the  tree  which  bore  the  forbidden  fruit  in

1  Eden.     Thus  was  geography  made  to  reconcile  all  parts  of

the  great  theologic    plan.     This  doctrine   was   hailed   with

joy  by  multitudes ;  and  we  find  in  the  works  of  mediceval

pilgrims  to  Palestine,  again  and   again,  evidence  that  this

had  become  precious  truth  to  them,  both  in  theology  and

geography.     Even  as  late  as  1664  the  eminent  French  priest

Eugene  Roger,  in  his  published  travels  in  Palestine,  dwelt

upon  the  thirty-eighth  chapter  of  Ezekiel,  coupled  with  a

text  from  Isaiah,  to  prove  that  the  exact  centre  of  the  earth

is  a  spot  marked  on  the  pavement  of  the  Church  of  the  Holy

Sepulchre,  and  that  on  this  spot  once  stood  the  tree  which

bore  the  forbidden  fruit  and  the  cross  of  Christ."


of  the  earth  were  Ezekiel  v,  5,  and  xxxviii,  12.  The  progress  of  geographical
knowledge  evidently  caused  them  to  be  softened  down  somewhat  in  our  King
James's  version  ;  but  the  first  of  them  reads,  in  the  Vulgate,  ''  Ista  est  Hierusalem,
in  medio  gentium  posiii  cam  et  in  circuitu  ejus  terrcB  "  ;  and  the  second  reads,  in
the  Vulgate,  "  in  medio  terrce"  and  in  the  Septuagint,  kiii  rhy  dixfaXhy  ti]s  y^s.
That  the  literal  centre  of  the  earth  was  understood,  see  proof  in  St.  Jerome,  Corn-
men  tar.  in  Ezekiel,  lib.  ii ;  and  for  general  proof,  see  Leopardi,  Saggio  sopra  gli
errori  popolari  degli  antic  hi,  pp.  207,  208.  For  Rabanus  Maurus,  see  his  Be  Uni-
verso,  lib.  xii,  cap.  4,  in  Migne,  tome  cxi,  p.  339.  For  Hugh  of  St.  Victor,  see  his
De  Situ  Terrarum,  cap.  ii.  For  Dante's  belief,  see  Inferno,  canto  xxxiv,  112-115  :
"  E  se'  or  sotto  I'emisperio  giunto,

Ch'  e  opposito  a  quel  che  la  gran  secca
Coverchia,  e  sotto  il  cui  col  mo  consunto

Fu  I'uom  che  nacque  e  visse  senza  pecca."
For  orthodox  geography  in  the  Middle  Ages,  see  Wright's  Essays  on  Arche-
ology, vol.  ii,  chapter  on  the  map  of  the  world  in  Hereford  Cathedral ;  also  the
rude  maps  in  Cardinal  d'Ailly's  Y7nago  Miindi  ;  also  copies  of  maps  of  Marino
Sanuto  and  others  in  Peschel,  Erdkimde,  p.  210;  also  Munster,  Fac  Simile  dell'
Atlante  di  Andrea  Bianco,  Venezia,  1869.  And  for  discussions  of  the  whole  sub-
ject, see  Santarem,  vol.  ii,  p.  295,  vol.  iii,  pp.  71,  183,  184,  and  elsewhere.  For  a
brief  summary  with  citations,  see  Eicken,  Geschichte,  etc.,  pp.  622,  623.

*  For  the  site  of  the  cross  on  Calvary,  as  the  point  where  stood  "  the  tree  of
the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil"  in  Eden,  at  the  centre  of  the  earth,  see  various
Eastern  travellers  cited  in  Tobler  ;  but  especially  the  travels  of  Bishop  Arculf  in
the  Holy  Land,  in  Wright's  Early  Travels  in  Palestine,  p.  8  ;  also  Travels  of
Saeimilf  ibid.,  p.  38  ;  also,  Sir  Jolm  Mandeville,  ibid.,  pp.  166,  167.     For  Roger,


THE    DELINEATION    OF    THE    EARTH.  lOi

Nor  was  this  the  only  misconception  which  forced  its
way  from  our  sacred  writings  into  mediaeval  map-making:
two  others  were  almost  as  marked.

First  of  these  was  the  vague  terror  inspired  by  Gog  and
Magog.  Few  passages  in  the  Old  Testament  are  more
sublime  than  the  denunciation  of  these  great  enemies  by
Ezekiel ;  and  the  well-known  statement  in  the  Apocalypse
fastened  the  Hebrew  feeling  regarding  them  with  a  new
meaning  into  the  mind  of  the  early  Church  :  hence  it  was
that  the  mediaeval  map-makers  took  great  pains  to  delineate
these  monsters  and  their  habitations  on  the  maps.  For  cen-
turies no  map  was  considered  orthodox  which  did  not  show
them.

The  second  conception  was  derived  from  the  mention  in
our  sacred  books  of  the  "  four  winds."  Hence  came  a  vivid
belief  in  their  real  existence,  and  their  delineation  on  the
maps,  generally  as  colossal  heads  with  distended  cheeks,
blowing  vigorously  toward  Jerusalem.

After  these  conceptions  had  mainly  disappeared  we  find
here  and  there  evidences  of  the  difficulty  men  found  in  giv-
ing up  the  scriptural  idea  of  direct  personal  interference  by
agents  of  Heaven  in  the  ordinary  phenomena  of  Nature  :
thus,  in  a  noted  map  of  the  sixteenth  century  representing
the  earth  as  a  sphere,  there  is  at  each  pole  a  crank,  with  an
angel  laboriously  turning  the  earth  by  means  of  it:  and,  in
another  map,  the  hand  of  the  Almighty,  thrust  forth  from
the  clouds,  holds  the  earth  suspended  by  a  rope  and  spins
it  with  his  thumb  and  fingers.  Even  as  late  as  the  middle  of
the  seventeenth  century  Heylin,  the  most  authoritative  Eng-
lish geographer  of  the  time,  shows  a  like  tendency  to  mix
science  and  theology.  He  warps  each  to  help  the  other,  as
follows:  "Water,  making  but  one  globe  with   the  earth,  is

see  his  La  Te^-re  Saincte,  Paris,  1664,  pp.  89-218,  etc.  ;  see  also  Quaresmio,  Terra
SanctiB  Elucidatio,  1639,  for  similar  view  ;  and,  for  one  narrative  in  which  the  idea
was  developed  into  an  amazing  mass  of  pious  myths,  see  Pilgrimage  of  the  Rus-
sian Abbot  Daniel,  edited  by  Sir  C.  W.  Wilson,  London,  1885,  p.  14.  (The  pas-
sage deserves  to  be  quoted  as  an  example  of  myth-making  ;  it  is  as  follows:  "At
the  time  of  our  Lord's  crucifixion,  when  he  gave  up  the  ghost  on  the  cross,  the
veil  of  the  temple  was  rent,  and  the  rock  above  Adam's  skull  opened,  and  the
blood  and  water  which  flowed  from  Christ's  side  ran  down  through  the  fissure
upon  the  skull,  thus  washing  away  the  sins  of  men.")


JQ2  GEOGRAPHY.

yet  higher  than  it.  This  appears,  first,  because  it  is  a  body
not  so  heavy  ;  secondly,  it  is  observed  by  sailors  that  their
ships  move  faster  to  the  shore  than  from  it,  whereof  no  rea-
son can  be  given  but  the  height  of  the  water  above  the
land  ;  thirdly,  to  such  as  stand  on  the  shore  the  sea  seems  to
swell  into  the  form  of  a  round  hill  till  it  puts  a  bound  upon
our  sight.  Now  that  the  sea,  hovering  thus  over  and  above
the  earth,  doth  not  overwhelm  it,  can  be  ascribed  only  to
his  Providence  who  '  hath  made  the  waters  to  stand  on  an
heap  that  they  turn  not  again  to  cover  the  earth.' "  *


III.    THE    INHABITANTS    OF    THE    EARTH.

Even  while  the  doctrine  of  the  sphericity  of  the  earth"
was  undecided,  another  question  had  been  suggested  which
theologians  finally  came  to  consider  of  far  greater  impor-
tance. The  doctrine  of  the  sphericity  of  the  earth  naturally
led  to  thought  regarding  its  inhabitants,  and  another  ancient
I  germ  was  warmed  into  life — the  idea  of  antipodes :  of  human
'beings  on  the  earth's  opposite  sides.

In  the  Greek  and  Roman  world  this  idea  had  found  sup-
porters and  opponents,  Cicero  and  Pliny  being  among  the
former,  and  Epicurus,  Lucretius,  and  Plutarch  among  the
latter.  Thus  the  problem  came  into  the  early  Church  un-
solved.

Among  the  first  churchmen  to  take  it  up  was,  in  the
East,  St.  Gregory  Nazianzen,  who  showed  that  to  sail  be-


*  For  Gog  and  Magog,  see  Ezekiel  xxxviii  and  xxxix,  and  Rev.  xx,  8  ;  and
for  the  general  subject,  Toy,  Jtidaism  and  Christianity,  Boston,  1891,  pp.  373,
374.  For  maps  showing  these  two  great  terrors,  and  for  geographical  discussion
regarding  them,  see  Lelewel,  G^og.  du  Moyen  Age,  Bruxelles,  1850,  Atlas;  also
Ruge,  Gesch.  des  Zeita Iters  der  Entdeckungen,  Berlin,  1 881,  pp.  78,  79  ;  also  Pes-
chel's  Abhandlungen,  pp.  28-35,  and  Gesch.  der  Erdkunde,  p.  210.  For  representa-
tions on  maps  of  the  "Four  V^inds,"  see  Charton,  Voyagetirs,  tome  ii,  p.  11  ;  also
Ruge,  as  above,  pp.  324,  325  ;  also,  for  a  curious  mixture  of  the  scriptural  four
winds  with  the  classical  winds  issuing  from  the  bags  of  /Eolus,  see  a  map  of  the
twelfth  century  in  Leon  Gautier,  La  Chevalerie,  p.  153  ;  and  for  maps  showing  ad-
ditional  winds,  see  various  editions  of  Ptolemy.  For  a  map  with  angels  turning
the  earth  by  means  of  cranks  at  the  poles,  see  Grynseus,  Novus  Orbis,  Basilece,
1537.  For  the  globe  kept  spinning  by  the  Almighty,  see  J.  Hondius's  map,  1589;
and  for  Heylin,  his  first  folio,  1652,  p.  27.


THE    INHABITANTS   OF    THE    EARTH.  103

yond  Gibraltar  was  impossible  ;  and,  in  the  West,  Lactantius,
who  asked  :  **  Is  there  any  one  so  senseless  as  to  believe  that
there  are  men  whose  footsteps  are  higher  than  their  heads?
.  .  .  that  the  crops  and  trees  grow  downward  ?  .  .  .  that
the  rains  and  snow  and  hail  fall  upward  toward  the  earth  ?
...  I  am  at  a  loss  what  to  say  of  those  who,  when  they
have  once  erred,  steadily  persevere  in  their  folly  and  defend
one  vain  thing  by  another."

In  all  this  contention  by  Gregory  and  Lactantius  there
was  nothing  to  be  especially  regretted,  for,  whatever  their
motive,  they  simply  supported  their  inherited  belief  on
grounds  of  natural  law  and  probability.

Unfortunately,  the  discussion  was  not  long  allowed  to
rest  on  these  scientific  and  philosophical  grounds ;  other
Christian  thinkers  followed,  who  in  their  ardour  adduced
texts  of  Scripture,  and  soon  the  question  had  become  theo-
logical ;  hostility  to  the  belief  in  antipodes  became  dog-
matic. The  universal  Church  was  arrayed  against  it,  and
in  front  of  the  vast  phalanx  stood,  to  a  man,  the  fathers.

To  all  of  them  this  idea  seemed  dangerous ;  to  most  of
them  it  seemed  damnable.  St.  Basil  and  St.  Ambrose  were
tolerant  enough  to  allow  that  a  man  might  be  saved  who
thought  the  earth  inhabited  on  its  opposite  sides  ;  but  the
great  majority  of  the  fathers  doubted  the  possibility  of  sal-
vation to  such  misbelievers.

The  great  champion  of  the  orthodox  view  was  St.  Augus-
tine. Though  he  seemed  inclined  to  yield  a  little  in  regard
to  the  sphericity  of  the  earth,  he  fought  the  idea  that  men
exist  on  the  other  side  of  it,  saying  that  "  Scripture  speaks
of  no  such  descendants  of  Adam."  He  insists  that  men
could  not  be  allowed  by  the  Almighty  to  live  there,  since  if
they  did  they  could  not  see  Christ  at  his  second  coming
descending  through  the  air.  But  his  most  cogent  appeal,
one  which  we  find  echoed  from  theologian  to  theologian
during  a  thousand  years  afterward,  is  to  the  nineteenth
Psalm,  and  to  its  confirmation  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans;
to  the  words,  ''Their  line  is  gone  out  through  all  the  earth,
and  their  words  to  the  end  of  the  world."  He  dwells  with
great  force  on  the  fact  that  St.  Paul  based  one  of  his  most
powerful  arguments   upon    this    declaration    regarding   the


104  GEOGRAPHY.

preachers  of  the  gospel,  and  that  he  declared  even  more  ex-
plicitly that  "  Verily,  their  sound  went  into  all  the  earth,  and
their  words  unto  the  ends  of  the  world."  Thenceforth  we
find  it  constantly  declared  that,  as  those  preachers  did  not
go  to  the  antipodes,  no  antipodes  can  exist ;  and  hence  that
the  supporters  of  this  geographical  doctrine  *' give  the  lie
direct  to  King  David  and  to  St.  Paul,  and  therefore  to  the
Holy  Ghost."  Thus  the  great  Bishop  of  Hippo  taught  the
whole  world  for  over  a  thousand  years  that,  as  there  was  no
preaching  of  the  gospel  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  earth,
there  could  be  no  human  beings  there.

The  great  authority  of  Augustine,  and  the  cogency  of
his  scriptural  argument,  held  the  Church  firmly  against  the
doctrine  of  the  antipodes ;  all  schools  of  interpretation  were
now  agreed — the  followers  of  the  allegorical  tendencies  of
Alexandria,  the  strictly  literal  exegetes  of  Syria,  the  moi*e
eclectic  theologians  of  the  West.  For  over  a  thousand  years
it  was  held  in  the  Church,  "always,  ever3'where,  and  by  all,"
that  there  could  not  be  human  beings  on  the  opposite  sides  of
the  earth,  even  if  the  earth  had  opposite  sides  ;  and,  when
attacked  by  gainsayers,  the  great  mass  of  true  believers,
from  the  fourth  century  to  the  fifteenth,  simpl}-  used  that
opiate  which  had  so  soothing  an  effect  on  John  Henry  New-
man in  the  nineteenth  century — scciiriis  jiidicat  orbis  tcrraruni.

Yet  gainsayers  still  appeared.  That  the  doctrine  of  the
antipodes  continued  to  have  life,  is  shown  b}'  the  fact  that
in  the  sixth  centur}"  Procopius  of  Gaza  attacks  it  with  a
tremendous  argument.  He  declares  that,  if  there  be  men  on
the  other  side  of  the  earth,  Christ  must  have  gone  there  and
suffered  a  second  time  to  save  them  ;  and,  therefore,  that
there  must  have  been  there,  as  necessary  preliminaries  to  his
coming,  a  duplicate  Eden,  Adam,  serpent,  and  deluge.

Cosmas  Indicopleustes  also  attacked  the  doctrine  with
especial  bitterness,  citing  a  passage  from  St.  Luke  to  prove
that  antipodes  are  theologically  impossible.

At  the  end  of  the  sixth  century  came  a  man  from  whom
much  might  be  expected — St.  Isidore  of  Seville.  He  had
pondered  over  ancient  thought  in  science,  and,  as  we  have
seen,  had  dared  proclaim  his  belief  in  the  sphericitv  of  the
earth  ;  but  with  that  he  stopped.     As  to  the  antipodes,  the


THE    INHABITANTS   OF   THE    EARTH.


105


authority  of  the  Psalmist,  St.  Paul,  and  St.  Augustine  si-
lences him ;  he  shuns  the  whole  question  as  unlawful,  sub-
jects reason  to  faith,  and  declares  that  men  can  not  and
ought  not  to  exist  on  opposite  sides  of  the  earth.*

Under  such  pressure  this  scientific  truth  seems  to  have
disappeared  for  nearly  two  hundred  years  ;  but  by  the  eighth
century  the  sphericity  of  the  earth  had  come  to  be  generally
accepted  among  the  leaders  of  thought,  and  now  the  doc-
trine of  the  antipodes  was  again  asserted  by  a  bishop,  Virgil
of  Salzburg.

There  then  stood  in  Germany,  in  those  first  years  of  the
eighth  century,  one  of  the  greatest  and  noblest  of  men — St.
Boniface.  His  learning  was  of  the  best  then  known.  In
labours  he  was  a  worthy  successor  of  the  apostles  ;  his  genius
for  Christian  work  made  him  unwillingly  primate  of  Ger-
many ;  his  devotion  to  duty  led  him  willingly  to  martyr-
dom. There  sat,  too,  at  that  time,  on  the  papal  throne  a
great  Christian  statesman — Pope  Zachary.  Boniface  im-
mediately declared  against  the  revival  of  such  a  heresy  as
the  doctrine  of  the  antipodes  ;  he  stigmatized  it  as  an  asser-
tion that  there  are  men  beyond  the  reach  of  the  appointed
means  of  salvation;  he  attacked  Virgil,  and  called  on  Pope
Zachary  for  aid.

*  For  the  opinions  of  Basil,  Ambrose,  and  others,  see  Lecky,  FHstory  of  Ra-
tionalism in  Europe,  New  York,  1872,  vol.  i,  p.  279,  note.  Also  Lettonne,  in
Revue  des  Deux  Mondes,  March,  1834.  For  Lactantius,  see  citations  already  given.
For  St.  Augustine's  opinion,  see  the  De  Civitate  Dei,  xvi,  g,  where  this  great
father  of  the  Church  shows  that  the  existence  of  the  antipodes  '■^  nulla  ratione  cre-
dendum  est."  For  the  unanimity  of  the  fathers  against  the  antipodes,  see  Zockler,
vol.  i,  p.  127.  For  a  very  naive  summary,  see  Joseph  Acosta,  N^atural  and  Moral
History  of  the  Indies,  Grimston's  translation,  republished  by  the  Hakluyt  Soc,
chaps,  vii  and  viii  ;  also  citations  in  Buckle's  Posthumous  Works,  vol.  ii,  p.  645.
For  Procopius  of  Gaza,  see  Kretschmer,  p.  55.  See  also,  on  the  general  subject,
Peschel,  Geschichte  der  Erdkunde,  pp.  96,  97.  For  Isidore,  see  citations  already
given.  To  understand  the  embarrassment  caused  by  these  utterances  of  the  fa-
thers to  scientific  men  of  a  later  period,  see  letter  of  Agricola  to  Joachim  Vadia-
nus  in  1 5 14.  Agricola  asks  Vadianus  to  give  his  vicAVS  regarding  the  antipodes,
saying  that  he  himself  does  not  know  what  to  do,  between  the  fathers  on  the  one
side  and  the  learned  men  of  modern  times  on  the  other.  On  the  other  hand,  for
the  embarrassment  caused  to  the  Church  by  this  mistaken  zeal  of  the  fathers,  see
Kepler's  references  and  Fromund's  replies  ;  also  De  Morgan,  Paradoxes,  p.  58.
Kepler  appears  to  have  taken  great  delight  in  throwing  the  views  of  Lactantius
into  the  teeth  of  his  adversaries.


I06  GEOGRAPHY.

The  Pope,  as  the  infallible  teacher  of  Christendom,  made
a  strong  response.  He  cited  passages  from  the  book  of  Job
and  the  Wisdom  of  Solomon  against  the  doctrine  of  the
antipodes  ;  he  declared  it  "  perverse,  iniquitous,  and  against
Virgil's  own  soul,"  and  indicated  a  purpose  of  driving  him
from  his  bishopric.  Whether  this  purpose  was  carried  out
or  not,  the  old  theological  view,  by  virtue  of  the  Pope's
divinely  ordered  and  protected  "  inerrancy,"  was  re-estab-
lished, and  the  doctrine  that  the  earth  has  inhabitants  on  but
one  of  its  sides  became  more  than  ever  orthodox,  and  pre-
cious in  the  mind  of  the  Church.*

This  decision  seems  to  have  been  regarded  as  final,  and
five  centuries  later  the  great  encyclopedist  of  the  Middle
Ages,  Vincent  of  Beauvais,  though  he  accepts  the  sphericity
of  the  earth,  treats  the  doctrine  of  the  antipodes  as  dis-
proved, because  contrary  to  Scripture.  Yet  the  doctrine
still  lived.  Just  as  it  had  been  previously  revived  by  Wil-
liam of  Conches  and  then  laid  to  rest,  so  now  it  is  somewhat
timidly  brought  out  in  the  thirteenth  century  by  no  less  a
personage  than  Albert  the  Great,  the  most  noted  man  of
science  in  that  time.  But  his  utterances  are  perhaps  pur-
posely obscure.  Again  it  disappears  beneath  the  theological
wave,  and  a  hundred  years  later  Nicolas  d'Oresme,  geog-
rapher of  the  King  of  France,  a  light  of  science,  is  forced
to  yield  to  the  clear  teaching  of  the  Scripture  as  cited  by
St.  Augustine.

Nor  was  this  the  worst.  In  Italy,  at  the  beginning  of
the  fourteenth  century,  the  Church  thought  it  necessar}^  to
deal  with  questions  of  this  sort  by  rack  and  fagot.  In  1316
Peter  of  Abano,  famous  as  a  physician,  having  promulgated

*  For  Virgil  of  Salzburg,  see  Neander's  History  of  the  Christian  Church,  Tor-
rey's  translation,  vol.  iii,  p.  63  ;  also  Herzog,  Rcal-Encyklopddie,  etc.,  recent  edi-
tion by  Prof.  Hauck,  s.  v.  Virgilius  \  also  Kretschmer,  pp.  56-58  ;  also  Whewell,
vol.  i,  p.  197  ;  also  De  Morgan,  Budget  of  Paradoxes,  pp.  24-26.  For  very  full
notes  as  to  pagan  and  Christian  advocates  of  the  doctrine  of  the  sphericity  of  the
earth  and  of  the  antipodes,  and  for  extract  from  Zachary's  letter,  see  Migne,
Patrologia,  vol.  vi,  p.  426,  and  vol.  xli,  p.  487.  For  St.  Boniface's  part,  see  Boni-
facii  EpistolcE,  ed.  Giles,  i,  173.  Berger  de  Xivrey,  Traditions  T^ratologiques,
pp.  186-188,  makes  a  curious  attempt  to  show  that  Pope  Zachary  denounced  tlie
wrong  man  ;  that  the  real  offender  v/as  the  Roman  poet — in  the  sixth  book  of  the
^neid  and  the  first  book  of  the  Gcorgics,


THE    INHABITANTS   OF    THE    EARTH.  IO7

this  with  other  obnoxious  doctrines  in  science,  only  escaped
the  Inquisition  by  death  ;  and  in  1327  Cecco  d'Ascoli,  noted
as  an  astronomer,  was  for  this  and  other  results  of  thought,
which  brought  him  under  suspicion  of  sorcery,  driven  from
his  professorship  at  Bologna  and  burned  alive  at  Florence.
Nor  was  this  all  his  punishment :  Orcagna,  whose  terrible
frescoes  still  exist  on  the  walls  of  the  Campo  Santo  at  Pisa,
immortalized  Cecco  by  representing  him  in  the  flames  of
hell."-

Years  rolled  on,  and  there  came  in  the  fifteenth  century
one  from  whom  the  world  had  a  i^ight  to  expect  much.
Pierre  d'Ailly,  by  force  of  thought  and  study,  had  risen  to
be  Provost  of  the  College  of  St.  Die  in  Lorraine ;  his  ability
had  made  that  little  village  a  centre  of  scientific  thought  for
all  Europe,  and  finally  made  him  Archbishop  of  Cambray
and  a  cardinal.  Toward  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century
was  printed  what  Cardinal  d'Ailly  had  written  long  before
as  a  summing  up  of  his  best  thought  and  research — the  col-
lection of  essays  known  as  the  Yniago  Mundi.  It  gives  us
one  of  the  most  striking  examples  in  history  of  a  great  man
in  theological  fetters.  As  he  approaches  this  question  he
states  it  \vith  such  clearness  that  we  expect  to  hear  him
assert  the  truth  ;  but  there  stands  the  argument  of  St.  Au-
gustine ;  there,  too,  stand  the  biblical  texts  on  which  it  is
founded — the  text  from  the  Psalms  and  the  explicit  declara-
tion of  St.  Paul  to  the  Romans,  ''  Their  sound  went  into
all  the  earth,  and  their  words  unto  the  ends  of  the  world."
D'Ailly  attempts  to  reason,  but  he  is  overawed,  and  gives
to  the  world  virtually  nothing.

*  For  Vincent  of  Beauvais  and  the  antipodes,  see  his  Speculum  N'atiirale,  Book
VII,  with  citations  from  St.  Augustine,  De  Civitate  Dei,  cap.  xvi.  For  Albert  the
Great's  doctrine  regarding  the  antipodes,  compare  Kretschmer,  as  above,  with
Eicken,  Geschichte,  etc.,  p.  621.  Kretschmer  finds  that  Albert  supports  the  doc-
trine, and  Eicken  finds  that  he  denies  it — a  fair  proof  that  Albert  was  not  inclined
to  state  his  views  with  dangerous  clearness.  For  D'Oresme,  see  Santarem,  His-
toire  de  la  Cosmographie,  vol.  i,  p.  142.  For  Peter  of  Abano,  or  Apono,  as  he  is
often  called,  see  Tiraboschi ;  also  Ginguene,  vol.  ii,  p.  2g3  ;  also  Naude,  Histoire
des  Grands  Hommes  soup^onn^s  de  Magie.  F'or  Cecco  d'Ascoli,  see  Montucla,  His-
toire des  Mathimatiques,  i,  528  ;  also  Daunou,  Etudes  Historiqties,  vol.  vi,  p.  320  ;
also  Kretschmer,  p.  5g.  Concerning  Orcagna's  representation  of  Cecco  in  the
flames  of  hell,  see  Renan,  Averroes  et  V Averroisme,  Paris,  1S67,  p.  328.


I08  GEOGRAPHY.

Still,  the  doctrine  of  the  antipodes  lived  and  moved:  so
much  so  that  the  eminent  Spanish  theologian  Tostatus,  even
as  late  as  the  age  of  Columbus,  felt  called  upon  to  protest
against  it  as  ''  unsafe."  He  had  shaped  the  old  missile  of  St.
Augustine  into  the  following  syllogism  :  "  The  apostles  were
commanded  to  go  into  all  the  world  and  to  preach  the  gos-
pel to  every  creature ;  they  did  not  go  to  any  such  part  of
the  world  as  the  antipodes  ;  they  did  not  preach  to  any
creatures  there :  er^^o,  no  antipodes  exist."

The  warfare  of  Columbus  the  world  knows  well :  how
the  Bishop  of  Ceuta  worsted  him  in  Portugal;  how  sundry
wise  men  of  Spain  confronted  him  with  the  usual  quotations
from  the  Psalms,  from  St.  Paul,  and  from  St.  Augustine  ;
how,  even  after  he  was  triumphant,  and  after  his  voyage  had
greatly  strengthened  the  theory  of  the  earth's  sphericity,
with  which  the  theory  of  the  antipodes  was  so  closely  con-
nected, the  Church  by  its  highest  authority  solemnly  stum-
bled and  persisted  in  going  astray.  In  1493  Pope  Alexander
VI,  having  been  appealed  to  as  an  umpire  between  the
claims  of  Spain  and  Portugal  to  the  newly  discovered  parts  of
the  earth,  issued  a  bull  laying  down  upon  the  earth's  surface
a  line  of  demarcation  between  the  tw^o  powers.  This  line
was  drawn  from  north  to  south  a  hundred  leagues  west  of
the  Azores ;  and  the  Pope  in  the  plenitude  of  his  knowledge
declared  that  all  lands  discovered  east  of  this  line  should  be-
long to  the  Portuguese,  and  all  west  of  it  should  belong  to
the  Spaniards.  This  was  hailed  as  an  exercise  of  divinely
illuminated  power  by  the  Church  ;  but  difficulties  arose,  and
in  1506  another  attempt  was  made  by  Pope  Julius  II  to  draw
the  line  three  hundred  and  seventy  leagues  west  of  the  Cape
Verde  Islands.  This,  again,  was  supposed  to  bring  divine
wisdom  to  settle  the  question;  but,  shortly,  overwhelming
difficulties  arose;  for  the  Portuguese  claimed  Brazil,  and,  of
course,  had  no  difficulty  in  showing  that  they  could  reach  it
by  sailing  to  the  east  of  the  line,  provided  they  sailed  long
enough.  The  lines  laid  down  by  Popes  Alexander  and
Julius  may  still  be  found  upon  the  maps  of  the  period,  but
their  bulls  have  quietly  passed  into  the  catalogue  of  ludicrous
errors.

Yet  the  theological  barriers  to  this  geographical   truth


THE    INHABITANTS   OF   THE    EARTH.  IOq

yielded  but  slowly.  Plain  as  it  had  become  to  scholars,
they  hesitated  to  declare  it  to  the  world  at  large.  Eleven
hundred  years  had  passed  since  St.  Augustine  had  proved
its  antagonism  to  Scripture,  when  Gregory  Reysch  gave
forth  his  famous  encyclopeedia,  \\\^  Margarita  PJiilosopJiica.
Edition  after  edition  was  issued,  and  everywhere  appeared
in  it  the  orthodox  statements ;  but  they  were  evidently
strained  to  the  breaking  point;  for  while,  in  treating  of  the
antipodes,  Reysch  refers  respectfully  to  St.  Augustine  as
objecting  to  the  scientific  doctrine,  he  is  careful  not  to  cite
Scripture  against  it,  and  not  less  caretul  to  suggest  geo-
graphical reasoning  in  favour  of  it.

But  in  1 5 19  science  gains  a  crushing  victory.  Magellan
makes  his  famous  voyage.  He  proves  the  earth  to  be  round,
for  his  expedition  circumnavigates  it  ;  he  proves  the  doc-
trine of  the  antipodes,  for  his  shipmates  see  the  peoples  of
the  antipodes.  Yet  even  this  does  not  end  the  war.  Many
conscientious  men  oppose  the  doctrine  for  two  hundred
years  longer.  Then  the  French  astronomers  make  their
measurements  of  degrees  in  equatorial  and  polar  regions,
and  add  to  their  proofs  that  of  the  lengthened  pendulum.
When  this  was  done,  when  the  deductions  of  science  were
seen  to  be  established  by  the  simple  test  of  measurement,
beautifully  and  perfectly,  and  when  a  long  line  of  trust-
worthy explorers,  including  devoted  missionaries,  had  sent
home  accounts  of  the  antipodes,  then,  and  then  only,  this
war  of  twelve  centuries  ended.

Such  was  the  main  result  of  this  long  war;  but  there
were  other  results  not  so  fortunate.  The  efforts  of  Eusebius,
Basil,  and  Lactantius  to  deaden  scientific  thought;  the  ef-
forts of  Augustine  to  combat  it;  the  efforts  of  Cosmas  to
crush  it  by  dogmatism  ;  the  efforts  of  Boniface  and  Zachary
to  crush  it  by  force,  conscientious  as  they  all  were,  had  re-
sulted simply  in  impressing  upon  many  leading  minds  the
conviction  that  science  and  religion  are  enemies.

On  the  other  hand,  what  was  gained  by  the  warriors  of
science  for  religion  ?     Certainly  a  far  more  worthy  concep- 1  ;
tion  of  the  world,  and  a  far  more  ennobling  conception  of  !
that  power  which  pervades  and  directs  it.     Which  is  more
consistent  with  a  great  religion,  the  cosmography  of  Cosmas


no  GEOGRAPHY.

or  that  of  Isaac  Newton?  Which  presents  a  nobler  field  for
religious  thought,  the  diatribes  of  Lactantius  or  the  calm
statements  of  Humboldt?  -  j]

IV.    THE    SIZE    OF    THE    EARTH.

But  at  an  early  period  another  subject  in  geography  had
stirred  the  minds  of  thinking  men — tJie  eartJis  size.  Various
ancient  investigators  had  by  different  methods  reached  meas-
urements more  or  less  near  the  truth  ;  these  methods  were
continued  into  the  Middle  Ages,  supplemented  by  new
thought,  and  among  the  more  striking  results  were  those
obtained  by  Roger  Bacon  and  Gerbert,  afterward  Pope  Syl-
vester II.     They  handed    down  to  after-time  the  torch  of


*  For  D'Ailly's  acceptance  of  St.  Augustine's  argument,  see  the  Ymago  Altindi,
cap.  vii.  For  Tostatus,  see  Zockler,  vol.  i,  pp.  467,  468.  He  based  his  opposi-
tion on  Romans  x,  18.  For  Columbus,  see  Winsor,  Fiske,  and  Adams  ;  also
Humboldt,  Histoire  de  la  Ge'ographie  du  K'oiiveau  Continent,  For  the  bull  of
Alexander  VI,  see  Daunou,  Etudes  Historiques,  vol.  ii,  p.  417  ;  also  Peschel,  Zeit-
alter  der  Entdeckungen,  Book  II,  chap.  iv.  The  text  of  the  bull  is  given  with  an
English  translation  in  Aiber's  reprint  of  The  First  Three  English  Books  on  Amer-
ica^ etc.,  Birmingham,  1885,  pp.  201-204  ;  also  especially  Peschel,  Die  Thei-
lung  der  Erde  utiter  Papst  Alexander  VI  tend  Julius  II,  Leipsic,  1871,  pp.  14  et
seq.  For  remarks  on  the  power  under  which  the  line  was  drawn  by  Alexander  VI,
see  Mamiani,  Del  Papato  nei  Tre  Ultimi  Secoli,  p.  170.  For  maps  showing  lines
of  division,  see  Kohl,  Die  beiden  dltesten  Genera l-Karten  von  Amerika,  Weimar,
i860,  where  maps  of  1527  and  1529  are  reproduced  ;  also  Mercator,  Atlas,  tenth
edition,  Amsterdam,  1628,  pp.  70,  71.  For  latest  discussion  on  I'he  Demarcation
Line  of  Alexander  VI,  see  E.  G.  Bourne  in  Yale  Review,  May,  1892.  For  the
Margarita  Philosophica,  see  the  editions  of  1503,  1509,  1517,  lib.  vii,  cap.  48.  For
the  effect  of  Magellan's  voyages,  and  the  reluctance  to  yield  to  proof,  see  Henri
Martin,  Histoire  de  France,  vol.  xiv,  p.  395  ;  St.  Martin's  Histoire  de  la  Geographic,
p.  369  ;  Peschel,  Geschichte  des  Zeitalters  der  Entdeckungen,  concluding  chapters  ;
and  for  an  admirable  summary,  Draper,  Hist.  Int.  Devel.  of  Europe,  pp.  451-453  ;
also  an  interesting  passage  in  Sir  Thomas  Browne's  Vulgar  and  Conunon  Errors,
Book  I,  chap,  vi  ;  also  a  striking  passage  in  Acosta,  chap.  ii.  For  general  state-
ment as  to  supplementary  proof  by  measurement  of  degrees  and  by  pendulum,  see
Somerville,  Phys.  Geog.,  chap,  i,  par.  6,  note  ;  also  Humboldt,  Cosmos,  vol.  ii,  p.
736,  and  vol.  v,  pp.  16,  32  ;  also  Montucla,  iv,  138.  As  to  the  effect  of  travel,  see
Acosta's  history  above  cited.  The  good  missionary  says,  in  Grimston's  quaint
translation,  "  Whatsoever  Lactantius  saieth,  wee  that  live  now  at  Peru,  and  in-
habite  that  parte  of  the  worlde  which  is  opposite  to  Asia  and  their  Antipodes,  finde
not  ourselves  to  bee  hanging  in  the  aire,  our  heades  downward  and  our  feete  on
high."


THE    SIZE    OF    THE    EARTH.  Ill

knowledge,  but,  as  their  reward  among  their  contemporaries,
they  fell  under  the  charge  of  sorcery.

Far  more  consonant  with  the  theological  spirit  of  the
Middle  Ages  was  a  solution  of  the  problem  from  Scripture,
and  this  solution  deserves  to  be  given  as  an  example  of  a
very  curious  theological  error,  chancing  to  result  in  the
establishment  of  a  great  truth.  The  second  book  of  Esdras,
which  among  Protestants  is  placed  in  the  Apocrypha,  was
held  by  many  of  the  foremost  men  of  the  ancient  Church  as
fully  inspired  :  though  Jerome  looked  with  suspicion  on  this
book,  it  was  regarded  as  prophetic  by  Clement  of  Alexan-
dria, Tertullian,  and  Ambrose,  and  the  Church  acquiesced
in  that  view.  In  the  Eastern  Church  it  held  an  especially
high  place,  and  in  the  Western  Church,  before  the  Reforma-
tion, was  generally  considered  by  the  most  eminent  authori-
ties to  be  part  of  the  sacred  canon.  In  the  sixth  chapter  of
this  book  there  is  a  summary  of  the  works  of  creation,  and
in  it  occur  the  following  verses :

*'  Upon  the  third  day  thou  didst  command  that  the  wa-
ters should  be  gathered  in  the  seventh  part  of  the  earth  ;  six
parts  hast  thou  dried  up  and  kept  them  to  the  intent  that  of
these  some,  being  planted  of  God  and  tilled,  might  serve
thee."

*'  Upon  the  fifth  day  thou  saidst  unto  the  seventh  part
where  the  waters  were  gathered,  that  it  should  bring  forth
living  creatures,  fowls  and  fishes,  and  so  it  came  to  pass."

These  statements  were  reiterated  in  other  verses,  and
were  naturally  considered  as  of  controlling  authority.

Among  the  scholars  who  pondered  on  this  as  on  all
things  likely  to  increase  knowledge  was  Cardinal  Pierre
d'Ailly.  As  we  have  seen,  this  great  man,  while  he  denied
the  existence  of  the  antipodes,  as  St.  Augustine  had  done,
believed  firmly  in  the  sphericity  of  the  earth,  and,  interpret-
ing these  statements  of  the  book  of  Esdras  in  connection
with  this  belief,  he  held  that,  as  only  one  seventh  of  the
earth's  surface  was  covered  by  water,  the  ocean  between
the  west  coast  of  Europe  and  the  east  coast  of  Asia  could
not  be  very  wide.  Knowing,  as  he  thought,  the  extent  of
the  land  upon  the  globe,  he  felt  that  in  view  of  this  divinely
authorized  statement  the  globe  must  be  much  smaller,  and


112  GEOGRAPHY.

the  land  of  "  Zipango,"  reached  by  Marco  Polo,  on  the  ex-
treme east  coast  of  Asia,  much  nearer  than  had  been  gen-
erally believed.

On  this  point  he  laid  stress  in  his  great  work,  the  Yniago
Mundi,  and  an  edition  of  it  having  been  published  in  the
days  when  Columbus  was  thinking  most  closely  upon  the
problem  of  a  westward  voyage,  it  naturally  exercised  much
influence  upon  his  reasonings.  Among  the  treasures  of  the
library  at  Seville,  there  is  nothing  more  interesting  than  a
copy  of  this  work  annotated  by  Columbus  himself :  from
this  very  copy  it  was  that  Columbus  obtained  confirmation
of  his  belief  that  the  passage  across  the  ocean  to  Marco
Polo's  land  of  Zipango  in  Asia  was  short.  But  for  this  error,
based  upon  a  text  supposed  to  be  inspired,  it  is  unlikely
that  Columbus  could  have  secured  the  necessary  support
for  his  voyage.  It  is  a  curious  fact  that  this  single  theo-
logical error  thus  promoted  a  series  of  voyages  which  com-
pletely destroyed  not  only  this  but  every  other  conception
of  geography  based  upon  the  sacred  writings.^


V.    THE   CHARACTER    OF   THE    EARTH'S    SURFACE.

It  would  be  hardly  just  to  dismiss  the  struggle  for  geo-
graphical truth  without  referring  to  one  passage  more  in
the  history  of  the  Protestant  Church,  for  it  shows  clearly
the  difficulties  in  the  way  of  the  simplest  statement  of  geo-
graphical truth  which  conflicted  with  the  words  of  the  sacred
books.

In  the  year  1553  Michael  Servetus  was  on  trial  for  his
life  at  Geneva  on  the  charge  of  Arianism.  Servetus  had
rendered  many  services  to  scientific  truth,  and  one  of  these


*  For  this  error,  so  fruitful  in  discovery,  see  D'Ailly,  Yftiago  Mtmdi  ;  the
passage  referred  to  is  fol.  12  verso.  For  the  passage  from  Esdras,  see  chap,  vi,
verses  42,  47,  50,  and  52  ;  see  also  Zockler,  Geschichte  der  Bezichmigen  zwischen
Theologie  und  N'aturwissenschaft,  vol.  i,  p.  461.  For  one  of  the  best  recent  state-
ments, see  Ruge,  Gesch.  des  Zcitaiters  der  Entdecktingen,  Berlin,  1S82,  pp.  221  et
seq.  For  a  letter  of  Columbus  acknowledging  his  indebtedness  to  this  mistake  in
Esdras,  see  Navarrete,  Viajes  y  Desciibrimieyitos,  Madrid,  1825,  tome  i,  pp.  242,
264  ;  also  Humboldt,  Hist,  de  la  G^ographie  du  Nouveau  Continent^  vol.  i,  pp.
68,  69.


THE    CHARACTER    OF    THE    EARTH'S    SURFACE.  113

was  an  edition  of  Ptolemy's  Geography,  in  which  Judea  was
spoken  of,  not  as  '*  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,"  but,
in  strict  accordance  with  the  truth,  as,  in  the  main,  meagre,
barren,  and  inhospitable.  In  his  trial  this  simple  statement
of  geographical  fact  was  used  against  him  by  his  arch-enemy
John  Calvin  with  fearful  power.  In  vain  did  Servetus  plead
that  he  had  simply  drawn  the  words  from  a  previous  edition
of  Ptolemy;  in  vain  did  he  declare  that  this  statement  was  a
simple  geographical  truth  of  which  there  were  ample  proofs  ;
it  was  answered  that  such  language  ''  necessarily  inculpated
Moses,  and  grievously  outraged  the  Holy  Ghost."*

In  summing  up  the  action  of  the  Church  upon  geog-
raphy, we  must  say,  then,  that  the  dogmas  developed  in
strict  adherence  to  Scripture  and  the  conceptions  held  in  the
Church  during  many  centuries  ''always,  everywhere,  and
by  all,"  were,  on  the  whole,  steadil}^  hostile  to  truth ;  but  it
is  only  just  to  make  a  distinction  here  between  the  religious
and  the  theological  spirit.  To  the  religious  spirit  are  largely
due  several  of  the  noblest  among  the  great  voyages  of  dis-
covery. A  deep  longing  to  extend  the  realms  of  Christian-
ity influenced  the  minds  of  Prince  John  of  Portugal,  in  his
great  series  of  efforts  along  the  African  coast ;  of  Vasco  da
Gama,  in  his  circumnavigation  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope ;
of  Magellan,  in  his  voyage  around  the  world  ;  and  doubtless
found  a  place  among  the  more  worldly  motives  of  Columbus. f

Thus,  in  this  field,  from  the  supremacy  accorded  to  the-
ology, we  find  resulting  that  tendency  to  dogmatism  which
has  shown  itself  in  all  ages  the  deadly  foe  not  onl}^  of  scien-
tific inquiry  but  of  the  higher  religious  spirit  itself,  while
from  the  love  of  truth  for  truth's  sake,  which  has  been  the
inspiration  of  all  fruitful  work  in  science,  nothing  but  ad-
vantage has  ever  resulted  to  religion.

*  For  Servetus's  geographical  offense,  see  Rilliet,  Relation  du  Proch  criminel
centre  Michel  Servct  d'apres  les  Dociwients  origtjianx,  Geneva,  1S44,  pp.  42,  43  ;
also  Willis,  Servetus  and  Calvin,  London,  1877,  p.  325.  The  passage  condemned
is  in  the  Ptolemy  of  1535,  fol.  41.  It  was  discreetly  retrenched  in  a  reprint  of  the
same  edition.

f  As  to  the  mixture  in  the  motives  of  Columl:)us,  it  may  be  well  to  compare
with  the  earlier  biographies  the  recent  ones  by  Dr.  Winsor  and  President  Adams.


CHAPTER    III.
ASTRONOMY.

I.   THE    OLD    SACRED    THEORY   OF    THE    UNIVERSE.

The  next  great  series  of  battles  was  fought  over  the  rela-
tions of  the  visible  heavens  to  the  earth.

In  the  early  Church,  in  view  of  the  doctrine  so  promi-
nent in  the  New  Testament,  that  the  earth  was  soon  to  be
destroyed,  and  that  there  were  to  be  "new  heavens  and  a
new  earth,"  astronomy,  like  other  branches  of  science,  was
generally  looked  upon  as  futile.  Why  study  the  old  heavens
and  the  old  earth,  when  they  were  so  soon  to  be  replaced
with  something  infinitely  better?  This  feeling  appears  in
St.  Augustine's  famous  utterance,  "  What  concern  is  it  to
me  whether  the  heavens  as  a  sphere  inclose  the  earth  in  the
middle  of  the  world  or  overhang  it  on  either  side?"

As  to  the  heavenly  bodies,  theologians  looked  on  them
as  at  best  only  objects  of  pious  speculation.  Regarding
their  nature  the  fathers  of  the  Church  were  divided.  Ori-
gen,  and  others  with  him,  thought  them  living  beings  pos-
]  sessed  of  souls,  and  this  belief  was  mainly  based  upon  the
]  scriptural  vision  of  the  morning  stars  singing  together,  and
upon  the  beautiful  appeal  to  the '' stars  and  light"  in  the
song  of  the  three  children — the  Bencdicitc — which  the  Angli-
can communion  has  so  wisely  retained  in  its  Liturgy.

Other  fathers  thought  the  stars  abiding-places  of  the
angels,  and  that  stars  were  moved  by  angels.  The  Gnostics
j  thought  the  stars  spiritual  beings  governed  by  angels,  and
\  appointed  not  to  cause  earthly  events  but  to  indicate  them.

As  to  the  heavens  in  general,  the  prevailing  view  in  the
Church  was  based  upon  the  scriptural  declarations  that  a
solid  vault — a  **  firmament  " — was  extended  above  the  earth,

114


THE   OLD   SACRED    THEORY   OF    THE    UNIVERSE.  u^

and  that  the  heavenly  bodies  were  simply  lights  hung  within  )/
it.  This  was  for  a  time  held  very  tenaciously.  St.  Philas-
trius,  in  his  famous  treatise  on  heresies,  pronounced  it  a
heresy  to  deny  that  the  stars  are  brought  out  by  God  from
his  treasure-house  and  hung  in  the  sky  every  evening  ;  any
other  view  he  declared  "false  to  the  Catholic  faith."  This
view  also  survived  in  the  sacred  theor}^  established  so  firmly
by  Cosmas  in  the  sixth  century.  Having  established  his
plan  of  the  universe  upon  various  texts  in  the  Old  and
New  Testaments,  and  having  made  it  a  vast  oblong  box,
covered  by  the  solid  "  firmament,"  he  brought  in  additional
texts  from  Scripture  to  account  for  the  planetary  move-
ments, and  developed  at  length  the  theory  that  the  sun  and
planets  are  moved  and  the  "  windows  of  heaven  "  opened
and  shut  by  angels  appointed  for  that  purpose.

How  intensely  real  this  way  of  looking  at  the  universe
was,   we   find   in   the    writings  of   St.  Isidore,   the  greatest
leader  of  orthodox   thought  in   the   seventh   century.      He
affirms  that  since  the  fall  of  man,  and  on  account  of  it,  the
sun  and  moon  shine  with  a  feebler  light ;  but  he  proves  from
a  text  in  Isaiah  that  when  the  world  shall  be  fully  redeemed
these  "great  lights  "  will  shine  again  in  all  their  early  splen-
dour.    But,  despite  these  authorities  and  their  theological
finalities,  the  evolution  of  scientific  thought  continued,  its  J     /
main  germ  being  the  geocentric  doctrine — the  doctrine  that    ^
the  earth  is  the  centre,  and  that  the  sun  and  planets  revolve '
about  it.'^

This  doctrine  was  of  the  highest  respectability:  it  had
been  developed  at  a  very  early  period,  and  had  been  elabo-

*  For  passage  cited  from  Clement  of  Alexandria,  see  English  translation,  Edin-
burgh, 1869,  vol.  ii,  p.  36S  ;  also  the  Miscellanies,  Book  V,  cap.  vi.  For  typical
statements  by  St.  Augustine,  see  De  Genesi,  ii,  cap.  ix,  in  Migne,  Patr.  Lat.,  tome
xxxiv,  pp.  270,  271.  For  Origen's  view,  see  the  De  Principiis,  lib.  i,  cap.  vii ;  see
also  Leopardi's  Errori  Populari,  cap.  xi  ;  also  Wilson's  Selections  fro7n  the  Pro-
phetic Scriptures  in  Ante-Nicene  Library,  p.  132.  For  Philo  Jud^eus,  see  On  the
Creation  of  the  Woi-ld,  chaps,  xviii  and  xix,  and  On  Monarchy,  chap.  i.  For  St.
Isidore,  see  the  De  Ordine  Creaturartim,  cap.  v,  in  Migne,  Patr.  Lat.,  Ixxxiii,  pp.
923-925  ;  also,  1000,  looi.  For  Philastrius,  see  the  Dc  Ilceresibus,  chap,  cxxxiii,
in  Migne,  tome  xii,  p.  1264.  For  Cosmas's  view,  see  his  Topographia  Christiana,
in  Montfau9on,  Col.  Nov.  Patrum,  ii,  p.  150,  and  elsewhere  as  cited  in  my  chapter
on  Geography.


jl5  ASTRONOMY.

rated  until  it  accounted  well  for  the  apparent  movements  of
the  heavenly  bodies ;  its  final  name,  "  Ptolemaic  theory,"
carried  weight ;  and,  having  thus  come  from  antiquity  into
the  Christian  world,  St.  Clement  of  Alexandria  demon-
strated that  the  altar  in  the  Jewish  tabernacle  was  "a  sym-
bol of  the  earth  placed  in  the  middle  of  the  universe " :
nothing  more  was  needed ;  the  geocentric  theory  was  fully
adopted  by  the  Church  and  universally  held  to  agree  with
the  letter  and  spirit  of  Scripture."^

Wrought  into  this  foundation,  and  based  upon  it,  there
was  developed  in  the  Middle  Ages,  mainly  out  of  fragments
of  Chaldean  and  other  early  theories  preserved  in  the  He-
brew Scriptures,  a  new  sacred  system  of  astronomy,  which
became  one  of  the  great  treasures  of  the  universal  Church
— the  last  word  of  revelation.

Three  great  men  mainly  reared  this  structure.  First  was
the  unknown  who  gave  to  the  world  the  treatises  ascribed
to  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.  It  was  unhesitatingly  believed
that  these  were  the  work  of  St.  Paul's  Athenian  convert,
and  therefore  virtually  of  St.  Paul  himself.  Though  now
known  to  be  spurious,  they  were  then  considered  a  treasure
of  inspiration,  and  an  emperor  of  the  East  sent  them  to  an
emperor  of  the  West  as  the  most  worth}^  of  gifts.  In  the
ninth  centur}^  they  were  widely  circulated  in  western  Europe,
and  became  a  fruitful  source  of  thought,  especially  on  the
whole  celestial  hierarchy.  Thus  the  old  ideas  of  astronomy
were  vastly  developed,  and  the  heavenly  hosts  were  classed
and  named  in  accordance  with  indications  scattered  throusfh
the  sacred  Scriptures.

The  next  of  these  three  great  theologians  was  Peter
Lombard,  professor  at  the  University  of  Paris.  About  the
middle  of  the  twelfth  century  he  gave  forth  his  collection  of


*  As  to  the  respectability  of  the  geocentric  theory,  etc.,  see  Grote's  Plato,  vol.
iii,  p.  257  ;  also  Sir  G.  C.  Lewis's  Astronotny  of  the  Ancients,  chap,  iii,  sec.  I,  for  a
very  thoughtful  statement  of  Plato's  view,  and  differing  from  ancient  statements.
For  plausible  elaboration  of  it,  and  for  supposed  agreement  of  Scripture  with  it,
see  Fromundus,  Anti-Aristarchus,  Antwerp,  1631  ;  also  Melanchthon's  Initia
Doctrince  Physica:.  For  an  admirable  statement  of  the  theological  view  of  the
geocentric  theory,  antipodes,  etc.,  see  Eicken,  Geschichte  iind  System  dcr  /nittelalter-
lichen   Weltanschauung,  pp.  618  ^/  seq.


THE    OLD    SACRED    THEORY   OF    THE    UNIVERSE.         ny

Sentences,  or  Statements  by  the   Fathers,  and  this   remained
until  the  end  of  the  Middle  Ages  the  universal  manual  of
theology.     In   it  was  especially  developed   the  theological
view  of  man's  relation  to  the  universe.     The  author  tells  the
world  :  "  Just  as  man  is  made  for  the  sake  of  God — that  is,  ;
that  he  may  serve  Him, — so  the  universe  is  made  for  the  )
sake  of  man — that  is,  that  it  may  serve  him  ;  therefore  is  man  ;
placed  at  the  middle  point  of  the  universe,  that  he  may  both  )
serve  and  be  served."

The  vast  significance  of  this  view,  and  its  power  in  resist-
ing any  real  astronomical  science,  we  shall  see,  especially  in
the  time  of  Galileo.

The  great  triad  of  thinkers  culminated  in  St.  Thomas
Aquinas — the  sainted  theologian,  the  glory  of  the  mediaeval
Church,  the '*  Angelic  Doctor,"  the  most  marvellous  intellect  ]
between  Aristotle  and  Newton ;  he  to  whom  it  was  believed
that  an  image  of  the  Crucified  had  spoken  words  praising
his  writings.  Large  of  mind,  strong,  acute,  yet  just — even
more  than  just — to  his  opponents,  he  gave  forth,  in  the  latter
half  of  the  thirteenth  century,  his  Cyclopsedia  of  Theology,
the  Siunnia  Theologica.  In  this  he  carried  the  sacred  theory
of  the  universe  to  its  full  development.  With  great  power
and  clearness  he  brought  the  whole  vast  system,  material
and  spiritual,  into  its  relations  to  God  and  man.*

Thus  was  the  vast  system  developed  by  these  three  lead-
ers of  mediaeval  thought;  and  now  came  the  man  who
wrought  it  yet  more  deeply  into  European  belief,  the  poet
divinely  inspired  who  made  the  system  part  of  the  world's
life.  Pictured  bv  Dante,  the  empyrean  and  the  concentric
heavens,  paradise,  purgatory,  and  hell,  were  seen  of  all  men ;

*  For  the  beliefs  of  Chaldean  astronomers  in  revolving  spheres  carrying  sun,
moon,  and  planets,  in  a  solid  firmament  supporting  the  celestial  waters,  and  in
angels  as  giving  motion  to  the  planets,  see  Lenormant  ;  also  Lethaby,  13-21  ;  also
Schroder,  Jensen,  Tukas,  ^/«/.  For  the  contribution  of  the  pseudo-Dionysius  to
mediceval  cosmology,  see  Dion.  Areopagita,  De  Ccelesti  flicrarchia,  vers.  Joan.  Scoti,
in  Migne,  Pair.  Lat.,  cxxii.  For  the  contribution  of  Peter  Lombard,  see  Pet.
Lomb.,  Libr.  Sent.,  II,  i,  8, — IV,  i,  6,  7,  in  Migne,  tome  192.  For  the  citations
from  St.  Thomas  Aquinas,  see  the  Siimma,  ed.  Migne,  especially  Pars  I,  Qu.  70,
(tome  i,  pp.  1 1 74-1 1 84)  ;  also  Quaestio  47,  Art.  iii.  For  good  general  statement,
see  Milman,  Latin  Christianity^  iv,  igi  et  seq.  ;  and  for  relation  of  Cosmas  to  these
theologians  of  western  Europe,  see  Milman,  as  above,  viii,  228,  note.


Ilg  ASTRONOMY.

the  God  Triune,  seated  on  his  throne  upon  the  circle  of  the
heavens,  as  real  as  the  Pope  seated  in  the  chair  of  St.  Peter;
the  seraphim,  cherubim,  and  thrones,  surrounding  the  Al-
mighty, as  real  as  the  cardinals  surrounding  the  Pope  ;  the
three  great  orders  of  angels  in  heaven,  as  real  as  the  three
great  orders,  bishops,  priests,  and  deacons,  on  earth ;  and
the  whole  system  of  spheres,  each  revolving  within  the  one
above  it,  and  all  moving  about  the  earth,  subject  to  the
prhnum  mobile,  as  real  as  the  feudal  system  of  w^estern
Europe,  subject  to  the  Emperor.*

Let  us  look  into  this  vast  creation — the  highest  achieve-
ment of  theology — somewhat  more  closely.

Its  first  feature  shows  a  development  out  of  earlier  theo-
logical ideas.  The  earth  is  no  longer  a  flat  plain  inclosed  by
four  walls  and  solidly  vaulted  above,  as  theologians  of  pre-
vious centuries  had  believed  it,  under  the  inspiration  of  Cos-
mas  ;  it  is  no  longer  a  mere  flat  disk,  with  sun,  moon,  and
stars  hung  up  to  give  it  light,  as  the  earlier  cathedral  sculp-
tors had  figured  it;  it  has  become  a  globe  at  the  centre  of
the  universe.  Encompassing  it  are  successive  transparent
spheres,  rotated  by  angels  about  the  earth,  and  each  carry-
ing one  or  more  of  the  heavenly  bodies  wnth  it:  that  nearest
the  earth  carrying  the  moon  ;  the  next.  Mercury  ;  the  next,
Venus;  the  next,  the  sun;  the  next  three.  Mars,  Jupiter,  and
Saturn  ;  the  eighth  carrying  the  fixed  stars.  The  ninth  was
the  primum  mobile,  and  inclosing  all  was  the  tenth  heaven
— the  Empyrean.  This  was  immovable — the  boundary  be-
tween creation  and  the  great  outer  void  ;  and  here,  in  a  light
which  no  one  can  enter,  the  Triune  God  sat  enthroned,  the
"  music  of  the  spheres  "  rising  to  Him  as  they  moved.  Thus
was  the  old  heathen  doctrine  of  the  spheres  made  Christian.

In  attendance  upon  the   Divine   Majesty,  thus  enthroned,

*  For  the  central  sun,  hierarchy  of  angels,  and  concentric  circles,  see  Dante,
Faradiso,  canto  xxviii.  For  the  words  of  St.  Thomas  Aquinas,  showing  to  Virgil
and  Dante  the  great  theologians  of  the  Middle  Ages,  see  canto  x,  and  in  Dean
Plumptre's  translation,  vol.  ii,  pp.  56  et  seq. ;  also  Botta,  Dante,  pp.  350,  351.  As
to  Dante's  deep  religious  feeling  and  belief  in  his  own  divine  mission,  see  J.  R.
Lowell,  Among  my  Books,  vol.  i,  p.  36.  For  a  remarkable  series  of  coloured  en-
gravings showing  Dante's  whole  cosmology,  see  La  Materia  della  Divina  Corn-
media  di  Dante  dichiarata  in  vi  tavole,  da  Michelangelo  Caetani,  published  by  the
monks  of  Monte  Cassino,  to  whose  kindness  I  am  indebted  for  my  copy.


THE    OLD   SACRED    THEORY   OF   THE    UNIVERSE.         i  ig

are  vast  hosts  of  angels,  who  are  divided  into  three  hier-
archies, one  serving  in  the  empyrean,  one  in  the  heavens,
between  the  empyrean  and  the  earth,  and  one  on  the  earth.

Each  of  these  hierarchies  is  divided  into  three  choirs,  or
orders;  the  first,  into  the  orders  of  Seraphim,  Cherubim,
and  Thrones;  and  the  main  occupation  of  these  is  to  chant
incessantly — to  "  continually  cry  "  the  divine  praises.

The  order  of  Thrones  conveys  God's  will  to  the  second
hierarchy,  which  serves  in  the  movable  heavens.  This  sec-
ond hierarchy  is  also  made  up  of  three  orders.  The  first  of
these,  the  order  of  Dominions,  receives  the  divine  com-
mands ;  the  second,  the  order  of  Powers,  moves  the  heavens,
sun,  moon,  planets,  and  stars,  opens  and  shuts  the ''windows
of  heaven,"  and  brings  to  pass  all  other  celestial  phenomena;
the  third,  the  order  of  Empire,  guards  the  others.

The  third  and  lowest  hierarchy  is  also  made  up  of  three
orders.  First  of  these  are  the  Principalities,  the  guardian
spirits  of  nations  and  kingdoms.  Next  come  Archangels  ;
these  protect  religion,  and  bear  the  prayers  of  the  saints  to
the  foot  of  God's  throne.  Finally  come  Angels;  these  care
for  earthly  affairs  in  general,  one  being  appointed  to  each
mortal,  and  others  taking  charge  of  the  qualities  of  plants,
metals,  stones,  and  the  like.  Throughout  the  whole  system,
from  the  great  Triune  God  to  the  lowest  group  of  angels,
we  see  at  work  the  mystic  power  attached  to  the  triangle
and  sacred  number  three — the  same  which  gave  the  triune
idea  to  ancient  Hindu  theology,  which  developed  the  triune
deities  in  Egypt,  and  which  transmitted  this  theological  gift
to  the  Christian  world,  especially  through  the  Egyptian
Athanasius.

Below  the  earth  is  hell.  This  is  tenanted  by  the  angels
who  rebelled  under  the  lead  of  Lucifer,  prince  of  the  ser-
aphim— the  former  favourite  of  the  Trinity  ;  but,  of  these  re-
bellious angels,  some  still  rove  among  the  planetary  spheres,
and  give  trouble  to  the  good  angels  ;  others  pervade  the
atmosphere  about  the  earth,  carrying  lightning,  storm,
drought,  and  hail ;  others  infest  earthly  society,  tempting
men  to  sin  ;  but  Peter  Lombard  and  St.  Thomas  'Aquinas
take  pains  to  show  that  the  work  of  these  devils  is,  after  all,
but  to  discipline  man  or  to  mete  out  deserved  punishment.


J  20  ASTRONOMY.

All  this  vast  scheme  had  been  so  riveted  into  the  Ptole-
maic view  by  the  use  of  biblical  texts  and  theological  reason-
ino-s  that  the  resultant  system  of  the  universe  was  considered
impregnable  and  final.     To  attack  it  was  blasphemy.

It  stood  for  centuries.  Great  theological  men  of  science,
like  Vincent  of  Beauvais  and  Cardinal  d'Ailly,  devoted
themselves  to  showing  not  only  that  it  was  supported  by
Scripture,  but  that  it  supported  Scripture.  Thus  was  the
geocentric  theory  embedded  in  the  beliefs  and  aspirations,
in  the  hopes  and  fears,  of  Christendom  down  to  the  middle
of  the  sixteenth  century.*


II.    THE    HELIOCENTRIC    THEORY.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  there  had  been  planted,  long  be-
fore, the  germs  of  a  heliocentric  theory.  In  the  sixth  cen-
tury before  our  era,  Pythagoras,  and  after  him  Philolaus,
had  suggested  the  movement  of  the  earth  and  planets  about
a  central  fire ;  and,  three  centuries  later,  Aristarchus  had  re-
stated the  main  truth  with  striking  precision.  Here  comes
in  a  proof  that  the  antagonism  between  theological  and  sci-


*  For  the  earlier  sacred  cosmology  of  Cosmas,  with  citations  from  Montfaugon,
see  the  chapter  on  Geography  in  this  work.  For  the  views  of  the  mediaeval  theo-
logians, see  foregoing  notes  in  this  chapter.  For  the  passages  of  Scripture  on
which  the  theological  part  of  this  structure  was  developed,  see  especially  Romans
viii,  38  ;  Ephesians  i,  21  ;  Colossians  i,  16,  and  ii,  15  ;  and  innumerable  passages
in  the  Old  Testament.  As  to  the  music  of  the  spheres,  see  Dean  Plumptre's  Dante,
vol.  ii,  p.  4,  note.  For  an  admirable  summing  up  of  the  mediceval  cosmology  in  its
relation  to  thought  in  general,  see  Rydberg,  Magic  of  the  Middle  Ages,  chap,  i,
whose  summary  I  have  followed  in  the  main.  For  striking  woodcuts  showing  the
view  taken  of  the  successive  heavens  with  their  choirs  of  angels,  the  earth  being  at
the  centre  and  the  spheres  about  it,  and  the  Almighty  on  his  throne  above  all,  see
the  Nuremberg  Chronicle,  flf.  iv  and  v  ;  its  date  is  1493.  For  charts  showing  the
continuance  of  this  general  view  down  to  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century,
see  the  various  editions  of  the  Margarita  Philosophica,  from  that  of  1503  onward,
astronomical  part.  For  interesting  statements  regarding  the  trinities  of  gods  in
ancient  Egypt,  see  Sharpe,  History  of  Egypt,  vol.  i,  pp.  94  and  loi.  The  present
writer  once  heard  a  lecture  in  Cairo,  from  an  eminent  Scotch  Doctor  of  Medicine,
to  account  for  the  ancient  Hindu  and  Egyptian  sacred  threes  and  trinities.  The
lecturer's  theory  was  that,  when  Jehovah  came  down  into  the  garden  of  Eden  and
walked  with  Adam  in  "  the  cool  of  the  day,"  he  explained  his  triune  character  to
Adam,  and  that  from  Adam  it  was  spread  abroad  to  the  various  ancient  nations.


THE    HELIOCENTRIC    THEORY.  I2i

entific 'methods  is  not  confined  to  Christianity  ;  for  this  state-
ment brought  upon  Aristarchus  the  charge  of  blasphemy,
and  drew  after  it  a  cloud  of  prejudice  which  hid  the  truth
for  six  hundred  years.  Not  until  the  fifth  century  of  our  era
did  it  timidly  appear  in  the  thoughts  of  Martianus  Capella :
then  it  was  again  lost  to  sight  for  a  thousand  years,  until  in
the  fifteenth  century,  distorted  and  imperfect,  it  appeared  in
the  w^ritings  of  Cardinal  Nicholas  de  Cusa.

But  in  the  shade  cast  by  the  vast  system  which  had
grown  from  the  minds  of  the  great  theologians  and  from  the
heart  of  the  great  poet  there  had  come  to  this  truth  neither
bloom  nor  fruitage.

Quietly,  howev^er,  the  soil  was  receiving  enrichment  and
the  air  warmth.  The  processes  of  mathematics  were  con-
stantly improved,  the  heavenly  bodies  were  steadily  ob-
served, and  at  length  appeared,  far  from  the  centres  of
thought,  on  the  borders  of  Poland,  a  plain,  simple-minded
scholar,  who  first  fairly  uttered  to  the  modern  world  the
truth — now  so  commonplace,  then  so  astounding — that  the
sun  and  planets  do  not  revolve  about  the  earth,  but  that
the  earth  and  planets  revolve  about  the  sun :  this  man  was
Nicholas  Copernicus.

Copernicus  had  been  a  professor  at  Rome,  and  even  as
early  as  1500  had  announced  his  doctrine  there,  but  more  in
the  way  of  a  scientific  curiosity  or  paradox,  as  it  had  been
previously  held  by  Cardinal  de  Cusa,  than  as  the  statement
of  a  system  representing  a  great  fact  in  Nature.  About
thirty  years  later  one  of  his  disciples,  Widmanstadt,  had
explained  it  to  Clement  VII ;  but  it  still  remained  a  mere
hypothesis,  and  soon,  like  so  many  others,  disappeared  from
the  public  view.  But  to  Copernicus,  steadily  studying  the
subject,  it  became  more  and  more  a  reality,  and  as  this
truth  grew  within  him  he  seemed  to  feel  that  at  Rome
he  was  no  longer  safe.  To  announce  his  discovery  there
as  a  theory  or  a  paradox  might  amuse  the  papal  court,
but  to  announce  it  as  a  truth — as  the  truth — was  a  far  differ-
ent matter.  He  therefore  returned  to  his  little  town  in  Po-
land.

To  publish  his  thought  as  it  had  now  developed  was  evi-
dently dangerous  even  there,  and  for  more  than  thirty  years


122  ASTRONOMY.

it  lay  slumbering  in   the   mind   of  Copernicus  and    of   the
friends  to  whom  he  had  privately  intrusted  it.

At  last  he  prepared  his  great  work  on  the  Revolutions  of
the  Heavenly  Bodies,  and  dedicated  it  to  the  Pope  himself.
He  next  sought  a  place  of  publication.  He  dared  not  send  it
to  Rome,  for  there  were  the  rulers  of  the  older  Church
ready  to  seize  it ;  he  dared  not  send  it  to  Wittenberg,  for
there  were  the  leaders  of  Protestantism  no  less  hostile ;  he
therefore  intrusted  it  to  Osiander,  at  Nuremberg.*

*  For  germs  of  heliocentric  theory  planted  long  before,  see  Sir  G.  C.  Lewis-,
and  for  a  succinct  statement  of  the  claims  of  Pythagoras,  Philolaus,  Aristarchus,
and  Martianus  Capella,  see  Hoefer,  Histoire  de  VAstronotnie^  1873,  p.  107  et  seq. ;
also  Heller,  Geschichte  der  Physik,  Stuttgart,  1882,  vol.  i,  pp.  12,  13;  also  pp.  99
et  seq.  For  germs  among  thinkers  of  India,  see  Whewell,  vol.  i,  p.  277  ;  also
Whitney,  Oriental  and  Linguistic  Studies,  New  York,  1874  ;  Essay  on  the  Lutiar
Zodiac,  p.  345.  For  the  views  of  Vincent  of  Beauvais,  see  his  Speculum  Naturale^
lib.  xvi,  cap.  21.  For  Cardinal  d'Ailly's  view,  see  his  treatise  De  Concordia  Astro-
nomicce  Veritatis  cum  Theologia  (in  his  Ymago  Mundi  and  separately).  For
general  statement  of  De  Cusa's  work,  see  Draper,  Intellectual  Development  of
Europe,  p.  512.  For  skilful  use  of  De  Cusa's  view  in  order  to  mitigate  censure
upon  the  Church  for  its  treatment  of  Copernicus's  discovery,  see  an  article  in  the
Catholic  World  for  January,  1869.  For  a  very  exact  statement,  in  a  spirit  of
judicial  fairness,  see  Whewell,  Histojy  of  the  Inductive  Sciences,  p.  275  and  pp.
379,  380.  In  the  latter,  Whewell  cites  the  exact  words  of  De  Cusa  in  the  De
Docta  Ignorantia,  and  sums  up  in  these  words  :  "  This  train  of  thought  might  be  a
preparation  for  the  reception  of  the  Copernican  system  ;  but  it  is  very  different
from  the  doctrine  that  the  sun  is  the  centre  of  the  planetary  system."  Whewell
says :  "  De  Cusa  propounded  the  doctrine  of  the  motion  of  the  earth  more  as  a
paradox  than  as  a  reality.  We  can  not  consider  this  as  any  distinct  anticipation  of
a  profound  and  consistent  view  of  the  truth."  On  De  Cusa,  see  also  Heller,  vol.  i,
p.  216.  For  Aristotle's  views,  and  their  elaboration  by  St,  Thomas  Aquinas,  see
the  De  Cado  et  Mundo,  sec.  xx,  and  elsewhere  in  the  latter.  It  is  curious  to  see
how  even  such  a  biographer  as  Archbishop  Vaughan  slurs  over  the  Angelic  Doctor's
errors.     See  Vaughan's  Life  and  Labours  of  St.  Thomas  of  Aquin,  pp.  459,  460.

As  to  Copernicus's  danger  at  Rome,  the  Catholic  World  iox  January,  1869,  cites
a  speech  of  the  Archbishop  of  Mechlin  before  the  University  of  Louvain,  to  the
effect  that  Copernicus  defended  his  theory  at  Rome,  in  1500,  before  two  thousand
scholars  ;  also,  that  another  professor  taught  the  system  in  1528,  and  was  made
apostolic  notary  by  Clement  VIII.  All  this,  even  if  the  doctrines  taught  were
identical  with  those  of  Copernicus  as  finally  developed — which  is  simply  not  the
case — avails  nothing  against  the  overwhelming  testimony  that  Copernicus  felt  him-
self in  danger — testimony  which  the  after-history  of  the  Copernican  theory  renders
invincible.  The  very  title  of  Fromundus's  book,  already  cited,  published  within  a
few  miles,  of  the  archbishop's  own  cathedral,  and  sanctioned  expressly  by  the  theo-
logical faculty  of  that  same  University  of  Louvain  in  1630,  utterly  refutes  the
archbishop's  idea  that  the  Church  was  inclined  to  treat  Copernicus  kindly.     The


THE    HELIOCENTRIC    THEORY.  I23

But  Osiander's  courage  failed  him  :  he  dared  not  launch
the  new  thought  boldly.  He  wrote  a  grovelling  preface,  en-
deavouring to  excuse  Copernicus  for  his  novel  idea,  and  in
this  he  inserted  the  apologetic  lie  that  Copernicus  had  pro-
pounded the  doctrine  of  the  earth's  movement  not  as  a  fact,
but  as  a  hypothesis.  He  declared  that  it  was  lawful  for  an
astronomer  to  indulge  his  imagination,  and  that  this  was
what  Copernicus  had  done.

Thus  was  the  greatest  and  most  ennobling,  perhaps,  of
scientific  truths — a  truth  not  less  ennobling  to  religion  than
to  science — forced,  in  coming  before  the  world,  to  sneak  and
crawl.*

On  the  24th  of  May,  1543,  the  newly  printed  book  ar-
rived at  the  house  of  Copernicus.  It  was  put  into  his  hands  ;
but  he  was  on  his  deathbed.     A  few  hours  later  he  was  be-


title  is  as  follows  :  Ant-Aristarchiis  sive  Orbis-Terrcz  Immobilis,  in  quo  decretum
S.  Congregationis  S.  R.  E.  Cardinal,  an.  M.DC.XVI  adversus  Pythagorico-Coperni-
canos  editum  defenditur,  Antverpiae,  MDCXXXI.  L'Epinois,  GaliUe,  Paris,  1867,
lays  stress,  p.  14,  on  the  broaching  of  the  doctrine  by  De  Cusa  in  1435,  and  by
Widmanstadt  in  1533,  and  their  kind  treatment  by  Eugenius  IV  and  Clement  VII  ;
but  this  is  absolutely  worthless  in  denying  the  papal  policy  afterward.  Lange,
Geschichte  des  Materialismus,  vol.  i,  pp.  217,  218,  while  admitting  that  De  Cusa
and  Widmanstadt  sustained  this  theory  and  received  honours  from  their  respective
popes,  shows  that,  when  the  Church  gave  it  serious  consideration,  it  was  con-
demned. There  is  nothing  in  this  view  unreasonable.  It  would  be  a  parallel  case
to  that  of  Leo  X,  at  first  inclined  toward  Luther  and  others,  in  their  "squabbles
with  the  envious  friars,"  and  afterward  forced  to  oppose  ^hem.  That  Copernicus
felt  the  danger,  is  evident,  among  other  things,  by  the  expression  in  the  preface  ;
*'  Statim  me  explodendum  cum  tali  opinione  clamitanty  For  dangers  at  Witten-
berg, see  Lange,  as  above,  vol.  i,  p.  217.

*  Osiander,  in  a  letter  to  Copernicus,  dated  April  20,  1 541,  had  endeavoured
to  reconcile  him  to  such  a  procedure,  and  ends  by  saying,  "  Sic  enim  placidiores
reddideris  peripatheticos  et  tjieologos  quos  contradicturos  mctiiis"  See  Apologia
Tychonis  in  Kepler's  Opera  Omnia,  Frisch's  edition,  vol.  i,  p.  246.  Kepler  holds
Osiander  entirely  responsible  for  this  preface.  Bcrtrand,  in  his  Fondateurs  de
r Astronomic  modcrne,  gives  its  text,  and  thinks  it  possible  that  Copernicus  may
have  yielded  "  in  pure  condescension  toward  his  disciple."  But  this  idea  is  utterly
at  variance  with  expressions  in  Copernicus's  own  dedicatory  letter  to  the  Pcpe,
which  follows  the  preface.  For  a  good  summary  of  the  argument,  see  Figuier,
Savants  de  la  Renaissance,  pp.  378,  379  ;  see  also  citation  from  Gassendi's  Life
of  Copernicus,  in  Flammarion,  Vie  de  Copernic,  p.  124.  Mr.  John  Fiske,  accurate
as  he  usually  is,  in  his  Outlines  of  Cosmic  Philosophy  appears  to  have  followed
I  aplace,  Delambre,  and  Petit  into  the  error  of  supposing  that  Copernicus,  and  not
Osiander,  is  responsible  for  the  preface.  For  the  latest  proofs,  see  Menzer'a
translation  of  Copernicus's  work.  Thorn,  1879,  i^otes  on  pp.  3  and  4  of  the  appendix.


24


ASTRONOMY.


yond  the  reach  of  the  conscientious  men  who  would  have
blotted  his  reputation  and  perhaps  have  destro3'ed  his  life.

Yet  not  wholly  beyond  their  reach.  Even  death  could
not  be  trusted  to  shield  him.  There  seems  to  have  been
fear  of  vengeance  upon  his  corpse,  for  on  his  tombstone  w^as
placed  no  record  of  his  lifelong  labours,  no  mention  of  his
great  discovery;  but  there  was  graven  upon  it  simply  a
prayer :  "  I  ask  not  the  grace  accorded  to  Paul ;  not  that
given  to  Peter;  give  me  only  the  favour  which  Thou  didst
show  to  the  thief  on  the  cross."  Not  till  thirty  years  after
did  a  friend  dare  write  on  his  tombstone  a  memorial  of  his
discovery."^

The  preface  of  Osiander,  pretending  that  the  book  of
Copernicus  suggested  a  hypothesis  instead  of  announcing  a
truth,  served  its  purpose  well.  During  nearly  seventy  years
the  Church  authorities  evidently  thought  it  best  not  to  stir
the  matter,  and  in  some  cases  professors  like  Calganini  were
allowed  to  present  the  new  view  purely  as  a  hypothesis.
There  were,  indeed,  mutterings  from  time  to  time  on  the  theo-
logical side,  but  there  was  no  great  demonstration  against
the  system  until  1616.  Then,  when  the  Copernican  doctrine
was  upheld  by  Galileo  as  a  truth,  and  proved  to  be  a  truth
by  his  telescope,  the  book  was  taken  in  hand  by  the  Roman
curia.  The  statements  of  Copernicus  w^ere  condemned,
*'  until  they  should  be  corrcQted  "  ;  and  the  corrections  re-
quired were  simj^ly  such  as  would  substitute  for  his  conclu-
sions the  old  Ptolemaic  theory.

That  this  was  their  purpose  was  seen  in  that  year  when
Galileo  was  forbidden  to  teach  or  discuss  the  Copernican
theory,  and  when  were  forbidden  ''all  books  which  affirm
the  motion  of  the  earth."  Henceforth  to  read  the  work  of
Copernicus  was  to  risk  damnation,  and  the  world  accepted
the  decree.f     The  strongest  minds  were  thus  held  fast.     If


*  See  Flammarion,   Vie  de  Copernic,  p.  190.

f  The  authorities  deciding  this  matter  in  accordance  with  the  wishes  of  Pope
Paul  V  and  Cardinal  Bellarmine  were  the  Congregation  of  the  Index,  or  cardinals
having  charge  of  the  Iridex  Librortwi  Pi'okibitoriim.  Recent  desperate  attempts
to  fasten  the  responsibility  on  them  as  individuals  seem  ridiculous  in  view  of  the
simple  fact  that  their  work  was  sanctioned  by  the  highest  Church  authority,  and
required  to  be  universally  accepted  by  the  Church.     Eleven  different  editions  of


THE    HELIOCENTRIC    THEORY.  I2C

they  could  not  believe  the  old  system,  they  mu^i  pretend  that
they  believed  it ; — and  this,  even  after  the  great  circumnavi-
gation of  the  globe  had  done  so  much  to  open  the  eyes  of
the  world  !  V^ery  striking  is  the  case  of  the  eminent  Jesuit
missionar}'  Joseph  Acosta,  whose  great  work  on  the  Natural
anel  Moral  History  of  the  Indies,  published  in  the  last  quarter
of  the  sixteenth  century,  exploded  so  many  astronomical  and
geographical  errors.  Though  at  times  curiously  credulous,
he  told  the  truth  as  far  as  he  dared ;  but  as  to  the  movement
of  the  heavenl}'  bodies  he  remained  orthodox — declaring,
*'  I  have  seen  the  two  poles,  whereon  the  heavens  turn  as
upon  their  axletrees."

There  was,  indeed,  in  Europe  one  man  who  might  have
done  much  to  check  this  current  of  unreason  which  was  to
sweep  away  so  many  thoughtful  men  on  the  one  hand  from
scientific  knowledge,  and  so  many  on  the  other  from  Chris-
tianity. This  was  Peter  Apian.  He  was  one  of  the  great
mathematical  and  astronomical  scholars  of  the  time.  His
brilliant  abilities  had  made  him  the  astronomical  teacher
of  the  Emperor  Charles  V ;  his  work  on  geography  had
brought  him  a  world-wide  reputation  ;  his  work  on  astron-
omy brought  him  a  patent  of  nobility ;  his  improvements
in  mathematical  processes  and  astronomical  instruments
brought  him  the  praise  of  Kepler  and  a  place  in  the  history
of  science :  never  had  a  true  man  better  opportunity  to  do  a
great   deed.      When    Copernicus's    work    appeared,    Apian

the  Index  in  my  own  possession  prove  this.  Nearly  all  of  these  declare  on  their
title-pages  that  they  are  issued  by  order  of  the  pontiff  of  the  period,  and  each  is
prefaced  by  a  special  papal  bull  or  letter.  See  especially  the  Index  of  1664,  issued
under  order  of  Alexander  VII,  and  that  of  1761,  under  Benedict  XIV.  Coperni-
cus's statements  were  prohibited  in  the  Index  "  donee  corrigantur!'  Kepler  said
that  it  ought  to  be  worded  "  donee  explieetuj-y  See  Bertrand,  Fondatcu7's  dc
VAstronomie  moderne,  p.  57.  De  Morgan,  pp.  57-60,  gives  the  corrections  re-
quired by  the  Index  of  1620.  Their  main  aim  seems  to  be  to  reduce  Copernicus  to
the  grovelling  level  of  Osiander,  making  of  his  discovery  a  mere  hypothesis  ;  but
occasionally  they  require  a  virtual  giving  up  of  the  whole  Copernican  doctrine —
e.g.,  "correction"  insisted  upon  for  chap,  viii,  p.  6.  For  a  scholarly  account  of
the  relation  of  the  Prohibitory  and  Expurgatory  Indexes  to  each  other,  see  Mend-
ham,  Literaiy  Policy  of  the  Church  of  Rome  ;  also  Reusch,  Index  der  verbotenen
Bucher,  Bonn,  1855,  vol.  ii,  chaps,  i  and  ii.  For  a  brief  but  very  careful  state-
ment, see  Gebler,  Galileo  Galilei,  English  translation,  London,  1879,  chap,  i ;  see
also  Addis  and  Arnold's  Catholic  Dictionary,  article  Galileo,  p.  8.


126  ASTRONOMY.

was  at  the  height  of  his  reputation  and  power:  a  quiet,
earnest  plea  from  him,  even  if  it  had  been  only  for  ordinary
fairness  and  a  suspension  of  judgment,  must  have  carried
much  weight.  His  devoted  pupil,  Charles  V,  who  sat  on
the  thrones  of  Germany  and  Spain,  must  at  least  have  given
a  hearing  to  such  a  plea.  But,  unfortunately.  Apian  was  a
professor  in  an  institution  of  learning  under  the  strictest
Church  control — the  University  of  Ingolstadt.  His  foremost
duty  was  to  teach  safe  science — to  keep  science  within  the
line  of  scriptural  truth  as  interpreted  by  theological  pro-
fessors. His  great  opportunity  was  lost.  Apian  continued
to  maunder  over  the  Ptolemaic  theory  and  astrology  in  his
lecture-room.  The  attacks  on  the  Copernican  theory  he
neither  supported  nor  opposed  ;  he  was  silent ;  and  the  cause
of  his  silence  should  never  be  forgotten  so  long  as  any
Church  asserts  its  title  to  control  university  instruction.''^

Doubtless  many  will  exclaim  against  the  Roman  Catholic
Church  for  this ;  but  the  simple  truth  is  that  Protestantism
was  no  less  zealous  against  the  new  scientific  doctrine.  All
branches  of  the  Protestant  Church — Lutheran,  Calvinist,
Anglican — vied  with  each  other  in  denouncing  the  Coperni-
can doctrine  as  contrary  to  Scripture  ;  and,  at  a  later  period,
the  Puritans  showed  the  same  tendency.

Said  Martin  Luther:  ''People  gave  ear  to  an  upstart
astrologer  who  strove  to  show  that  the  earth  revolves,  not
the  heavens  or  the  firmament,  the  sun  and  the  moon.  Who-
ever wishes  to  appear  clever  must  devise  some  new  system,
which  of  all  systems  is  of  course  the  very  best.  This  fool
wishes  to  reverse  the  entire  science  of  astronomy  ;  but
sacred  Scripture  tells  us  that  Joshua  commanded  the  sun  to
stand  still,  and  not  the  Qarth."  Melanchthon,  mild  as  he  was,
was  not  behind  Luther  in  condemning  Copernicus.  In  his
treatise  on  the  Elcmnits  of  Physics,  published  six  3xars  after
Copernicus's  death,  he  says:  ''The  eyes  are  witnesses  that

*  For  Joseph  Acosta's  statement,  see  the  translation  of  his  History,  published
by  the  Hakluyt  Society,  chap.  ii.  For  Peter  Apian,  see  Madler,  Geschichte  der
Astrojiomie,  Braunschweig,  1S73,  vol.  i,  p.  141.  For  evidences  of  the  special  favour
of  Charles  V,  see  Delambre,  Histoire  de  I' A stronomie  ou  Moyen  Age,  p.  390  ;  also
Bruhns,  in  the  Allgemeine  deutsche  Biographic.  For  an  attempted  apology  for
him,  see  Gunther,  Peter  and  Philipp  Apian,  Prag,  1882,  p.  62.


THE    HELIOCENTRIC    THEORY.  I27

the  heavens  revolve  in  the  space  of  twenty-four  hours.  But
certain  men,  either  from  the  love  of  novelty,  or  to  make  a
display  of  ingenuity,  have  concluded  that  the  earth  moves;
and  they  maintain  that  neither  the  eighth  sphere  nor  the  sun
revolves.  .  .  .  Now,  it  is  a  want  of  honesty  and  decency  to
assert  such  notions  publicly,  and  the  example  is  pernicious.
It  is  the  part  of  a  good  mind  to  accept  the  truth  as  revealed
by  God  and  to  acquiesce  in  it."  Melanchthon  then  cites  the
passages  in  the  Psalms  and  Ecclesiastes,  which  he  declares
assert  positively  and  clearly  that  the  earth  stands  fast  and
that  the  sun  moves  around  it,  and  adds  eight  other  proofs  of
his  proposition  that  "the  earth  can  be  nowhere  if  not  in  the
centre  of  the  universe."  So  earnest  does  this  mildest  of  the
Reformers  become,  that  he  suggests  severe  measures  to  re-
strain such  impious  teachings  as  those  of  Copernicus.^

While  Lutheranism  was  thus  condemning  the  theory  of
the  earth's  movement,  other  branches  of  the  Protestant
Church  did  not  remain  behind.  Calvin  took  the  lead,  in  his
Commentary  on  Genesis,  by  condemning  all  who  asserted  that
the  earth  is  not  at  the  centre  of  the  universe.  He  clinched
the  matter  by  the  usual  reference  to  the  first  verse  of  the
ninety-third  Psalm,  and  asked,  "  Who  will  venture  to  place
the  authority  of  Copernicus  above  that  of  the  Holy  Spirit?"
Turretin,  Calvin's  famous  successor,  even  after  Kepler  and
Newton  had  virtually  completed  the  theory  of  Copernicus
and  Galileo,  put  forth  his  compendium  of  theology,  in  which
he  proved,  from  a  multitude  of  scriptural  texts,  that  the
heavens,  sun,  and  moon  move  about  the  earth,  which  stands
still  in  the  centre.  In  England  we  see  similar  theological
efforts,  even  after  they  had  become  evidently  futile.  Hutch-
inson's Moses's  Principia,  Dr.  Samuel  Pike's  Sacred  Philoso-
phy, the  writings  of  Home,  Bishop  Horsley,  and  President
Forbes  contain  most  earnest  attacks  upon  the  ideas  of  New-


*  See  the  Tischreden  in  the  Walsch  edition  of  Luther's  Works,  1743,  vol.  xxii,
p.  2260  ;  also  Melanchthon's  Initia  Doctrince  Physiav.  This  treatise  is  cited  under
a  mistaken  title  by  the  Catholic  World,  September,  1870.  The  correct  title  is
as  given  above  ;  it  will  be  found  in  the  Corpus  Reformatorutn,  vol.  xiii  (  ed.  Bret-
schneider,  Halle,  1846),  pp.  216,  217.  See  also  Madler,  vol.  i,  p.  176  ;  also  Lange,
Geschichte  des  Materialismus,  vol.  i,  p.  217  ;  also  Prowe,  Ueher  die  Abhdngi!:;keit
des  Copernicus,  Thorn,  1S65,  p.  4  ;  also  note,  pp.  5,  6,  where  text  is  given  in  full.


128  ASTRONOMY.

ton,  such  attacks  being  based  upon  Scripture.  Dr.  John
Owen,  so  famous  in  the  annals  of  Puritanism,  declared  the
Copernican  system  a  "  delusive  and  arbitrary  hypothesis,
contrary  to  Scripture  "  ;  and  even  John  Wesley  declared
the  new  ideas  to  "tend  toward  infidelity.""^

And  Protestant  peoples  were  not  a  whit  behind  Catholic
in  following  out  such  teachings.  The  people  of  Elbing  made
themselves  merry  over  a  farce  in  which  Copernicus  was  the
main  object  of  ridicule.  The  people  of  Nuremberg,  a  Prot-
estant stronghold,  caused  a  medal  to  be  struck  with  inscrip-
tions ridiculing  the  philosopher  and  his  theory.

Why  the  people  at  large  took  this  view  is  easily  under-
stood when  we  note  the  attitude  of  the  guardians  of  learn-
ing, both  Catholic  and  Protestant,  in  that  age.  It  throws
great  light  upon  sundry  claims  by  modern  theologians  to
take  charge  of  public  instruction  and  of  the  evolution  of
science.  So  important  was  it  thought  to  have  "  sound  learn-
ing "  guarded  and  "  safe  science  "  taught,  that  in  many  of
the  universities,  as  late  as  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  cen-
tury, professors  were  forced  to  take  an  oath  not  to  hold  the
'*  Pythagorean  " — that  is,  the  Copernican — idea  as  to  the
movement  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  As  the  contest  went  on,
professors  were  forbidden  to  make  known  to  students  the
facts  revealed  by  the  telescope.  Special  orders  to  this  effect
were  issued  by  the  ecclesiastical  authorities  to  the  universi-
ties and  colleges  of  Pisa,  Innspruck,  Louvain,  Douay,  Sala-
manca, and  others.  During  generations  we  find  the  authori-
ties of  these  universities  boasting  that  these  godless  doctrines
were  kept  aw^ay  from  their  students.  It  is  touching  to  hear
such  boasts  made  then,  just  as  it  is  touching  now  to  hear
sundry  excellent  university  authorities  boast  that  they  dis-
courage the  reading  of  Mill,  Spencer,  and  Darwin.  Nor
were  such  attempts  to  keep  the  truth  from  students  confined
to  the  Roman  Catholic  institutions  of  learning.  Strange  as
it  may  seem,  nowhere  were  the  facts  confirming  the  Coper-
nican theory  more  carefully  kept  out  of  sight  than  at  Wit-

*  On  the  teachings  of  Protestantism  as  regards  the  Copernican  theory,  see
citations  in  Canon  Farrar's  History  of  Interpretation,  preface,  xviii ;  also  Rev.
Dr.  Shields,  of  Princeton,  The  Final  Philosophy,  pp.  Co,  6i.


THE    HELIOCENTRIC    THEORY.  I2q

tenberg — the  university  of  Luther  and  Melanchthon.  About
the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century  there  were  at  that  centre
of  Protestant  instruction  two  astronomers  of  a  very  high
order,  Rheticus  and  Reinhold  ;  both  of  these,  after  thorough
study,  had  convinced  themselves  that  the  Copernican  sys-
tem was  true,  but  neither  of  them  was  allowed  to  tell  this
truth  to  his  students.  Neither  in  his  lecture  announcements
nor  in  his  published  works  did  Rheticus  venture  to  make
the  new  system  known,  and  he  at  last  gave  up  his  professor-
ship and  left  Wittenberg,  that  he  might  have  freedom  to
seek  and  tell  the  truth.  Reinhold  was  even  more  wretch-
edly humiliated.  Convinced  of  the  truth  of  the  new  theory,
he  was  obliged  to  advocate  the  old  ;  if  he  mentioned  the
Copernican  ideas,  he  was  compelled  to  overlay  them  with
the  Ptolemaic.  Even  this  was  not  thought  safe  enough,  and
in  1 571  the  subject  was  intrusted  to  Peucer.  He  was  emi-
nently *' sound,"  and  denounced  the  Copernican  theory  in
his  lectures  as  ''absurd,  and  unfit  to  be  introduced  into  the
schools."

To  clinch  anti-scientific  ideas  more  firmly  into  German
Protestant  teaching.  Rector  Hensel  wrote  a  text-book  for
schools  entitled  The  Restored  Mosaic  System  of  the  World,
which  showed  the  Copernican  astronomy  to  be  unscriptural.

Doubtless  this  has  a  far-off  sound  ;  yet  its  echo  comes
very  near  modern  Protestantism  in  the  expulsion  of  Dr.
Woodrow  by  the  Presbyterian  authorities  in  South  Caro-
lina ;  the  expulsion  of  Prof.  Winchell  by  the  Methodist
Episcopal  authorities  in  Tennessee  ;  the  expulsion  of  Prof.
Toy  by  Baptist  authorities  in  Kentucky  ;  the  expulsion  of
the  professors  at  Beyrout  under  authority  of  American  Prot-
estant divines — all  for  holding  the  doctrines  of  modern  sci-
ence, and  in  the  last  years  of  the  nineteenth  century.*

But  the  new  truth  could  not  be  concealed ;  it  could
neither  be  laughed  down  nor  frowned  down.     Many  minds

*  For  treatment  of  Copernican  ideas  by  the  people,  see  The  Catholic  World,  as
above;  also  Melanchthon,  tibi  supra\  also  Prowe,  Copernicus,  Berlin,  1883,  vol.  i,
p.  269,  note  ;  also  pp.  27c),  280  ;  also  Madler,  i,  p.  167.  For  Rector  Hensel,  see
Rev.  Dr.  Shield's  Final  Philosophy ,  p.  60.  For  details  of  recent  Protestant  efforts
against  evolution  doctrines,  see  the  chapter  on  The  Fall  of  Man  and  Anthropology
in  this  work.


I30  ASTRONOMY.

had  received  it,  but  within  the  hearing  of  the  papacy  only
one  tongue  appears  to  have  dared  to  utter  it  clearly.  This
new  warrior  was  that  strange  mortal,  Giordano  Bruno.  He
was  hunted  from  land  to  land,  until  at  last  he  turned  on
his  pursuers  with  fearful  invectives.  For  this  he  was  en-
trapped at  Venice,  imprisoned  during  six  years  in  the  dun-
geons of  the  Inquisition  at  Rome,  then  burned  alive,  and  his
ashes  scattered  to  the  winds.  Still,  the  new  truth  lived  on.
Ten  years  after  the  martyrdom  of  Bruno  the  truth  of  Coper-
nicus's  doctrine  was  established  by  the  telescope  of  Galileo.^
Herein  was  fulfilled  one  of  the  most  touching  of  prophe-
cies. Years  before,  the  opponents  of  Copernicus  had  said  to
him,  "  If  your  doctrines  were  true, Venus  would  show  phases
like  the  moon."  Copernicus  answered:  '' You  are  right ;  I
know  not  what  to  say  ;  but  God  is  good,  and  will  in  time
find  an  answer  to  this  objection."     The  God-given  answer

,  came  when,  in   i6ii,the  rude  telescope  of  Galileo  showed

]  the  phases  of  Venus. f


III.    THE    WAR    UPON    GALILEO.

On  this  new  champion,  Galileo,  the  whole  war  was  at
last  concentrated.  His  discoveries  had  clearly  taken  the
Copernican  theory  out  of  the  list  of  hypotheses,  and  had
placed  it  before  the  world  as  a  truth.  Against  him,  then,
the  war  was  long  and  bitter.  The  supporters  of  what  was
called  ''sound  learning"  declared  his  discoveries  deceptions
and  his  announcements  blasphemy.     Semi-scientific  profes-


*  For  Bruno,  see  Bartholm^ss,  Fie  de  Jordcifio  Bruno,  Paris,  1846,  vol.  i-,  p.  121
and  pp.  212  etseq. ;  also  Berti,  Vita  di  Giordano  Bruno,  Firenze,  1868,  chap,  xvi  ;
also  Whewell,  vol.  i,  pp.  272,  273.  That  Whewell  is  somewhat  hasty  in  attribut-
ing Bruno's  punishment  entirely  to  the  Spaccio  della  Bcstia  Trionjante  will  be
evident,  in  spite  of  Montucla,  to  any  one  who  reads  the  account  of  the  persecution
in  Bartholmess  or  Berti ;  and,  even  if  Whewell  be  right,  the  Spaccio  would  never
have  been  written  but  for  Bruno's  indignation  at  ecclesiastical  oppression.  See
Tiraboschi,  vol.  vii,  pp.  466  et  seq.

\  For  the  relation  of  these  discoveries  to  Copernicus's  work,  see  Delanibre,
Histoire  de  F Astronomic  moderne,  disconrs pr^liminaire,  p.  xiv  ;  also  Laplace,  Sys-
thne  du  Monde,  vol.  i,  p.  326  ;  and  for  more  careful  statements,  Kepler's  Opera
Omtiia,  edit.  Frisch,  tome  ii,  p.  464.  For  Copernicus's  prophecy,  see  Cantu,  His-
toire Universelle,  vol.  xv,  p.  473.     (Cantu  was  an  eminent  Roman  Catholic.)


THE    WAR    UPON    GALILEO.  I^j

sors,  endeavouring  to  curry  favour  with  the  Church,  at-
tacked him  with  sham  science;  earnest  preachers  attacked
him  with  perverted  Scripture  ;  theologians,  inquisitors,  con-
gregations of  cardinals,  and  at  last  two  popes  dealt'with
him,  and,  as  was  supposed,  silenced  his  impious  doctrine
forever.'^

I  shall  present  this  warfare  at  some  length  because,  so  far
as  I  can  find,  no  careful  summary  of  it  has  been  given  in  our
language,  since  the  whole  history  was  placed  in  a  new  light
by  the  revelations  of  the  trial  documents  in  the  Vatican
Library,  honestly  published  for  the  first  time  by  L'Epinois
in  1867,  and  since  that  by  Gebler,  Berti,  Favaro,  and  others.  \

The  first  important  attack  on  Galileo  began  in  16 10,  when  /
he  announced  that  his  telescope  had  revealed  the  moons  of
the  planet  Jupiter.  The  enemy  saw  that  this  took  the
Copernican  theory  out  of  the  realm  of  hypothesis,  and  they
gave  battle  immediatel}^  They  denounced  both  his  method
and  its  results  as  absurd  and  impious.  As  to  his  method,
professors  bred  in  the  ''  safe  science  "  favoured  by  the  Church
argued  that  the  divinely  appointed  way  of  arriving  at  the
truth  in  astronomy  was  by  theological  reasoning  on'^texts  of
Scripture;  and,  as  to  his  results,  they  insisted,  first,  that
Aristotle  knew  nothing  of  these  new  revelations;  and,' next,
that  the  Bible  showed  by  all  applicable  types  that  there
could  be  only  seven  planets ;  that  this  was  proved  by  the
seven  golden  candlesticks  of  the  Apocalypse,  by  the  seven-
branched  candlestick  of  the  tabernacle,  and  by  the  seven
churches  of  Asia;  that  from  Galileo's  doctrine  consequences
must  logically  result  destructive  to  Christian  truth.  Bishops
and  priests  therefore  warned  their  flocks,  and  multitudes  of
the  faithful  besought  the  Inquisition  to  deal  speedily  and
sharply  with  the  heretic. f


seen
a


*  A  very  curious  example  of  this  sham  science  employed  by  theologians  is
in  the  argument,  frequently  used  at  that  time,  that,  if  the  earth  really  moved,  2
stone  falling  from  a  height  would  fall  back  of  the  point  immediately  below  its
point  of  starting.  This  is  used  by  Fromundus  with  great  effect.  It  appears  never
to  have  occurred  to  him  to  test  the  matter  by  dropping  a  stone  from  the  topmast  of
a  ship.  Benzenburg  has  experimentally  demonstrated  just  such  an  aberration  in
falling  bodies  as  is  mathematically  required  by  the  diurnal  motion  of  the  earth.
See  Jevons,  Principles  of  Science,  pp.  388,  389,  second  edition,  1877.

t  See  Delambre  on  the  discovery  of  the  satellites  of  Jupiter  as  the  turning-point


132


ASTRONOMY.


In  vain  did  Galileo  try  to  prove  the  existence  of  satel-
lites by  showing  them  to  the  doubters  through  his  telescope :
they  either  declared  it  impious  to  look,  or,  if  they  did  look,
denounced  the  satellites  as  illusions  from  the  devil.  Good
Father  Clavius  declared  that  "  to  see  satellites  of  Jupiter,
men  had  to  make  an  instrument  which  would  create  them."
In  vain  did  Galileo  try  to  save  the  great  truths  he  had  dis-
covered by  his  letters  to  the  Benedictine  Castelli  and  the
Grand-Duchess  Christine,  in  which  he  argued  that  literal
biblical  interpretation  should  not  be  applied  to  science ;  it
w^as  answered  that  such  an  argument  only  made  his  heresy
more  detestable  ;  that  he  was  '*  worse  than  Luther  or  Calvin."

The  war  on  the  Copernican  theor}^  which  up  to  that
time  had  been  carried  on  quietly,  now  flamed  forth.  It  w^as
declared  that  the  doctrine  was  proved  false  by  the  standing
still  of  the  sun  for  Joshua,  by  the  declarations  that  '*  the
foundations  of  the  earth  are  fixed  so  firm  that  they  can  not
be  moved,"  and  that  the  sun  "  runneth  about  from  one  end
of  the  heavens  to  the  other."  *

But  the  little  telescope  of  Galileo  still  swept  the  heavens,
and  another  revelation  was  announced — the  mountains  and
valleys  in  the  moon.  This  brought  on  another  attack.  It
was  declared  that  this,  and  the  statement  that  the  moon
shines  by  light  reflected  from  the  sun,  directly  contradict
the  statement  in  Genesis  that  the  moon  is  *'  a  ereat  lis^ht."
To  make  the  matter  worse,  a  painter,  placing  the  moon  in  a
religious  picture  in  its  usual  position  beneath  the  feet  of  the


with  the  heliocentric  doctrine.  As  to  its  effects  on  Bacon,  see  Jevons,  p.  638,  as
above.  For  argument  drawn  from  the  candlestick  and  the  seven  churches,  see  De-
lambre,  p.  20.

*  For  principal  points  as  given,  see  Libri,  Histoire  des  Sciences  math^matiqties
en  Italie,  vol.  iv,  p.  211  ;  De  Morgan,  Paradoxes,  p.  26,  for  account  of  Father
Clavius.  It  is  interesting  to  know  that  Clavius,  in  his  last  years,  acknowledged
that  "  the  whole  system  of  the  heavens  is  broken  down,  and  must  be  mended,"
Cantu,  Histoire  Universelle,  vol.  xv,  p.  478.  See  Th.  Martin,  Galilee,  pp.  34,  208,
and  266  ;  also  Heller,  Geschichte  der  Physik,  Stuttgart,  1882,  vol.  i,  p.  366.  For  the
original  documents,  see  L'Epinois,  pp.  34  and  36  ;  or,  better,  Gebler's  careful  edi-
tion of  the  trial  {Die  Acten  des  Galileischen  Processes,  Stuttgart,  1S77),  pp.  47
et  seq.  Martin's  translation  seems  somewhat  too  free.  See  also  Gebler,  Galileo
Galilei,  English  translation,  London,  1879,  PP-  76-78  ;  also  Reusch,  Der  Process
Galilei's  und  die  Jesuiten,  Bonn,  1879,  chaps,  ix,  x,  xi.


THE   WAR    UPON    GALILEO.  t,^

Blessed  Virgin,  outlined  on  its  surface  mountains  and  val-
leys ;  this  was  denounced  as  a  sacrilege  logically  resulting
from  the  astronomer's  heresy.

Still  another  struggle  was  aroused  when  the  hated  tele-
scope revealed  spots  upon  the  sun,  and  their  motion  indicat-
ing the  sun's  rotation.  Monsignor  Elci,  head  of  the  Univer-
sity  of  Pisa,  forbade  the  astronomer  Castelli  to  mention  these
spots  to  his  students.  Father  Busaeus,  at  the  University  of
Innspruck,  forbade  the  astronomer  Scheiner,  who  had  also
discovered  the  spots  and  proposed  a  sa/c^  explanation  of
them,  to  allow  the  new  discovery  to  be  known  there.  At
the  College  of  Douay  and  the  University  of  Louvain  this
discovery  was  expressly  placed  under  the  ban,  and  this  be-
came the  general  rule  among  the  Catholic  universities  and
colleges  of  Europe.  The  Spanish  universities  were  espe-
cially intolerant  of  this  and  similar  ideas,  and  up  to  a  recent
period  their  presentation  was  strictly  forbidden  in  the  most
important  university  of  all— that  of  Salamanca.^

Such  are  the  consequences  of  placing  the  instruction  of
men's  minds  in  the  hands  of  those  mainly  absorbed  in  saving
men's  souls.  Nothing  could  be  more  in  accordance  with
the  idea  recently  put  forth  by  sundry  ecclesiastics,  Catholic
and  Protestant,  that  the  Church  alone  is  empowered  to  pro-
mulgate scientific  truth  or  direct  university  instruction.
But  science  gained  a  victory  here  also.  Observations  of
the  solar  spots  were  reported  not  only  from  Galileo  in  Italy,
but  from  Fabricius  in  Holland.  Father  Scheiner  then  en-
deavoured to  make  the  usual  compromise  between  theology
and  science.  He  promulgated  a  pseudo-scientific  theory,
which  only  provoked  derision.

The  war  became  more  and  more  bitter.  The  Dominican
Father  Caccini  preached  a  sermon  from  the  text,  "  Ye  men
of  Galilee,  why  stand  ye  gazing  up  into  heaven?"  and  this
wretched  pun  upon  the  great  astronomer's  name  ushered  in
sharper  weapons  ;  for,  before  Caccini  ended,  he  insisted  that
''geometry  is  of  the  devil,"  and  that"  mathematicians  should
be  banished  as  the  authors  of  all  heresies."  The  Church
authorities  gave  Caccini  promotion.


*  See  Ticknor,  History  of  Spanish  Literature,  vol.  iii.


134


ASTRONOMY.


Father  Lorini  proved  that  Galileo's  doctrine  was  not  only
heretical  but  '-atheistic,"  and  besought  the  Inquisition  to
intervene.  The  Bishop  of  Fiesole  screamed  in  rage  against
the  Copernican  system,  publicly  insulted  Galileo,  and  de-
nounced him  to  the  Grand-Duke.  The  Archbishop  of  Pisa
secretly  sought  to  entrap  Galileo  and  deliver  him  to  the  In-
quisition at  Rome.  The  Archbishop  of  Florence  solemnly
condemned  the  new  doctrines  as  unscriptural ;  and  Paul  V,
while  petting  Galileo,  and  inviting  him  as  the  greatest  astron-
omer of  the  world  to  visit  Rome,  was  secretly  moving  the
Archbishop  of  Pisa  to  pick  up  evidence  against  the  astron-
omer.

But  by  far  the  most  terrible  champion  who  now  ap-
peared was  Cardinal  Bellarmin,  one  of  the  greatest  theo-
logians the  world  has  known.  He  was  earnest,  sincere,
and  learned,  but  insisted  on  making  science  conform  to
Scripture.  The  weapons  which  men  of  Bellarmin's  stamp
used  were  purely  theological.  They  held  up  before  the
world  the  dreadful  consequences  w^hich  must  result  to
Christian  theology  were  the  heavenly  bodies  proved  to
revolve  about  the  sun  and  not  about  the  earth.  Their
most  tremendous  dogmatic  engine  was  the  statement  that
''  his  pretended  discovery  vitiates  the  whole  Christian  plan
of  salvation."  Father  Lecazre  declared  "  it  casts  suspicion
on  the  doctrine  of  the  incarnation."  Others  declared,  "  It
upsets  the  whole  basis  of  theology.  If  the  earth  is  a
planet,  and  only  one  among  several  planets,  it  can  not  be
that  any  such  great  things  have  been  done  specially  for  it  as
the  Christian  doctrine  teaches.  If  there  are  other  planets,
since  God  makes  nothing  in  vain,  they  must  be  inhabited  ;
but  how  can  their  inhabitants  be  descended  from  Adam?
How  can  they  trace  back  their  origin  to  Noah's  ark  ?  How
can  they  have  been  redeemed  by  the  Saviour?"  Nor  was
this  argument  confined  to  the  theologians  of  the  Roman
Church  ;  Melanchthon,  Protestant  as  he  was,  had  already
used  it  in  his  attacks  on  Copernicus  and  his  school.

In  addition  to  this  prodigious  theological  engine  of  war
there  was  kept  up  a  fire  of  smaller  artillery  in  the  shape  of
texts  and  scriptural  extracts.

But  the  war  grew  still  more  bitter,  and  some  weapons


THE   WAR    UPON   GALILEO.  t ->  c

used  in  it  are  worth  examining.  They  are  very  easily  ex-
amined, for  they  are  to  be  found  on  all  the  battlefields  of
science  ;  but  on  that  field  they  were  used  with  more  effect
than  on  almost  any  other.  These  weapons  are  the  epithets
"  infidel  "  and  *'  atheist."  They  have  been  used  against
almost  every  man  who  has  ever  done  anything  new  for  his
fellow-men.  The  list  of  those  who  have  been  denounced  as
''infidel"  and  "atheist"  includes  almost  all  great  men  of
science,  general  scholars,  inventors,  and  philanthropists.
The  purest  Christian  life,  the  noblest  Christian  character,
have  not  availed  to  shield  combatants.  Christians  like  Isaac
Newton,  Pascal,  Locke,  Milton,  and  even  Fenelon  and  How-
ard, have  had  this  weapon  hurled  against  them.  Of  all
proofs  of  the  existence  of  a  God,  those  of  Descartes  have
been  wrought  most  thoroughly  into  the  minds  of  modern
men  ;  yet  the  Protestant  theologians  of  Holland  sought  to
bring  him  to  torture  and  to  death  by  the  charge  of  atheism,
and  the  Roman  Catholic  theologians  of  France  thwarted  him
during  his  life  and  prevented  any  due  honours  to  him  after
his  death. ^

These  epithets  can  hardly  be  classed  with  civilized  weap-
ons. They  are  burning  arrows ;  they  set  fire  to  masses  of
popular  prejudice,  always  obscuring  the  real  question,  some-
times destroying  the  attacking  party.  They  are  poisoned
weapons.  They  pierce  the  hearts  of  loving  women  ;  they
alienate  dear  children  ;  they  injure  a  man  after  life  is  ended,
for  they  leave  poisoned  wounds  in  the  hearts  of  those  who
loved  him  best — fears  for  his  eternal  salvation,  dread  of  the
Divine  wrath  upon  him.  Of  course,  in  these  days  these  weap-
ons, though  often  effective  in  vexing  good  men  and  in  scar-
ing good  women,  are  somewhat  blunted  ;  indeed,  they  not
infrequently  injure  the  assailants  more  than  the  assailed.  So
it  was  not  in  the  days  of  Galileo  ;  they  were  then  in  all  their
sharpness  and  venom. f

*  For  various  objectors  and  objections  to  Galileo  by  his  contemporaries,  see
Libri,  Histoire  des  Sciences  mathe'matiques  eji  Italic,  vol.  iv,  pp.  233,  234 ;  also  Mar-
tin, Vie  de  Galilde.  For  Father  Lecazre's  argument,  see  Flammarion,  Mondes  irna-
ginaires  et  mo)ides  r^els,  6e  ed.,  pp.  315,  316.  For  Melanchthon's  argument,  see
his  Initia,  in  Opera^  vol.  iii,  Halle,  1846.

f  For  curious  exemplification  of  the  way  in   which  these  weapons  have  been


136  ASTRONOMY.

Yet  a  baser  warfare  was  waged  by  the  Archbishop  of
Pisa.  This  man,  whose  cathedral  derives  its  most  endurinof
fame  from  Galileo's  deduction  of  a  great  natural  law  from
the  swinging  lamp  before  its  altar,  was  not  an  archbishop
after  the  noble  mould  of  Borromeo  and  Fenelon  and  Cheve-
rus.  Sadly  enough  for  the  Church  and  humanity,  he  was
simply  a  zealot  and  intriguer:  he  perfected  the  plan  for  en-
trapping the  great  astronomer.

Galileo,  after  his  discoveries  had  been  denounced,  had
written  to  his  friend  Castelli  and  to  the  Grand-Duchess
Christine  two  letters  to  show  that  his  discoveries  migfht  be
reconciled  with  Scripture.  On  a  hint  from  the  Inquisition
at  Rome,  the  archbishop  sought  to  get  hold  of  these  letters
and  exhibit  them  as  proofs  that  Galileo  had  uttered  heretical
views  of  theology  and  of  Scripture,  and  thus  to  bring  him
into  the  clutch  of  the  Inquisition.  The  archbishop  begs
Castelli,  therefore,  to  let  him  see  the  original  letter  in  the
handwriting  of  Galileo.  Castelli  declines.  The  archbishop
then,  while,  as  is  now  revealed,  writing  constantly  and  bit-
terly to  the  Inquisition  against  Galileo,  professes  to  Castelli
the  greatest  admiration  of  Galileo's  genius  and  a  sincere  de-
sire to  know  more  of  his  discoveries.  This  not  succeeding:,
the  archbishop  at  last  throws  off  the  mask  and  resorts  to
open  attack.

The  whole  struggle  to  crush  Galileo  and  to  save  him
would  be  amusing  were  it  not  so  fraught  with  evil.  There
were  intrigues  and  counter-intrigues,  plots  and  counter-plots,
lying  and  spying;  and  in  the  thickest  of  this  seething,
squabbling,  screaming  mass  of  priests,  bishops,  archbishops,
and  cardinals,  appear  two  popes,  Paul  V  and  Urban  VIII.
It  is  most  suggestive  to  see  in  this  crisis  of  the  Church,  at
the  tomb  of  the  prince  of  the  apostles,  on  the  eve  of  the
greatest  errors  in  Church  policy  the  world  has  known,  in  all
the  intrigues  and  deliberations  of  these  consecrated  leaders


hurled,  see  lists  of  persons  charged  with  "infideh'ty"  and  "atheism,"  in  the  Dic-
tlonnaire  des  Ath^es,  Paris,  [1800]  ;  also  Lecky,  History  of  Rationalism,  vol.  ii,  p.
50.  For  the  case  of  Descartes,  see  Saisset,  Descartes  et  ses  Pr^curseurs,  pp.  103,
no.  For  the  facility  with  which  the  term  "atheist"  has  been  applied  from  the
early  Aryans  down  to  believers  in  evolution,  see  Tylor,  Primitive  Culture,  vol.  i,
p.  420.


THE   WAR    UPON    GALILEO.  1 37

of  the  Church,  no  more  evidence  of  the  guidance  or  pres-
ence of  the  Holy  Spirit  than  in  a  caucus  of  New  York  politi-
cians at  Tammany  Hall.

But  the  opposing  powers  were  too  strong.  In  161 5  Gali-
leo was  summoned  before  the  Inquisition  at  Rome,  and  the
mine  which  had  been  so  long  preparing  was  sprung.  Sun-
dry theologians  of  the  Inquisition  having  been  ordered  to
examine  two  propositions  which  had  been  extracted  from
Galileo's  letters  on  the  solar  spots,  solemnly  considered
these  points  during  about  a  month  and  rendered  their  unani-
mous decision  as  follows:  ''TJie  first  proposition,  that  the  sun
is  the  centre  and  does  not  revolve  about  the  earth,  is  foolish,
absurd,  false  in  theology,  and  heretical,  because  expressly  contrary
to  Holy  Scripture'' ;  and  "  tJie  second  proposition,  that  tJie  earth
is  not  the  centre  but  revolves  about  the  sun,  is  absurd,  false  in
philosophy,  and,  from  a  theological poiiit  of  viezv  at  least,  opposed
to  the  true  faith.''

The  Pope  himself,  Paul  V,  now  intervened  again  :  he
ordered  that  Galileo  be  brought  before  the  Inquisition.
Then  the  greatest  man  of  science  in  that  age  was  brought
face  to  face  with  the  greatest  theologian — Galileo  was  con-
fronted by  Bellarmin.  Bellarmin  shows  Galileo  the  error
of  his  opinion  and  orders  him  to  renounce  it.  De  Lauda,
fortified  by  a  letter  from  the  Pope,  gives  orders  that  the
astronomer  be  placed  in  the  dungeons  of  the  Inquisition
should  he  refuse  to  yield.  Bellarmin  now  commands  Gali-
leo, "  in  the  name  of  His  Holiness  the  Pope  and  the  whole
Congregation  of  the  Holy  Office,  to  relinquish  altogether
the  opinion  that  the  sun  is  the  centre  of  the  world  and  im-
movable, and  that  the  earth  moves,  nor  henceforth  to  hold,
teach,  or  defend  it  in  any  way  whatsoever,  verbally  or  in
writing."  This  injunction  Galileo  acquiesces  in  and  prom-
ises to  obey."

This  was  on  the  26th  of  February,  1616.     About  a  fort-

*  T  am  aware  that  the  theory  proposed  by  Wohlwill  and  developed  by  Gcbler
denies  that  this  promise  was  ever  made  by  Galileo,  and  holds  that  the  passage  was
a  forgery  devised  later  by  the  Church  rulers  to  justify  the  proceedings  of  1632  and
1633.  This  would  make  the  conduct  of  the  Church  worse,  but  authorities  as  emi-
nent consider  the  charge  not  proved.  A  careful  examination  of  the  documents  seems
to  disprove  it.


138


ASTRONOMY.


night  later  the  Congregation  of  the  Index,  moved  thereto,
as  the  letters  and  documents  now  brought  to  light  show,  by
Pope  Paul  V,  solemnly  rendered  a  decree  that  '*  the  doctrine
of  the  double  motion  of  the  earth  about  its  axis  and  about  the  sun
is  false ^  and  entirely  contrary  to  Holy  Scripture  "  ;  and  that
this  opinion  must  neither  be  taught  nor  advocated.  The
same  decree  condemned  all  writings  of  Copernicus  and  ''all
writings  ivhich  affirm  the  motion  of  the  earths  The  great
work  of  Copernicus  was  interdicted  until  corrected  in  ac-
cordance with  the  views  of  the  Inquisition  ;  and  the  works
of  Galileo  and  Kepler,  though  not  mentioned  by  name  at
that  time,  were  included  among  those  implicitly  condemned
as  **  affirming  the  motion  of  the  earth."

The  condemnations  were  inscribed  upon  the  Index;  and,
finall}',  the  papacy  committed  itself  as  an  infallible  judge
and  teacher  to  the  world  by  prefixing  to  the  Index  the  usual
papal  bull  giving  its  monitions  the  most  solemn  papal  sanc-
tion. To  teach  or  even  read  the  works  denounced  or  pas-
sages condemned  was  to  risk  persecution  in  this  world  and
damnation  in  the  next.  Science  had  apparently  lost  the
decisive  battle.

For  a  time  after  this  judgment  Galileo  remained  in  Rome,
apparently  hoping  to  find  some  way  out  of  this  difficulty  ;
but  he  soon  discovered  the  hollowness  of  the  protestations
made  to  him  by  ecclesiastics,  and,  being  recalled  to  Flor-
ence, remained  in  his  hermitage  near  the  city  in  silence,
working  steadily,  indeed,  but  not  publishing  anything  save
by  private  letters  to  friends  in  various  parts  of  Europe.

But  at  last  a  better  vista  seemed  to  open  for  him.  Car-
dinal Barberini,  who  had  seemed  liberal  and  friendl}^  be-
came pope  under  the  name  of  Urban  VIII.  Galileo  at  this
conceived  new  hopes,  and  allowed  his  continued  allegiance
to  the  Copernican  system  to  be  known.  New  troubles  en-
sued. Galileo  was  induced  to  visit  Rome  again,  and  Pope
Urban  tried  to  cajole  him  into  silence,  personally  taking  the
trouble  to  show^  him  his  errors  by  argument.  Other  op-
ponents were  less  considerate,  for  works  appeared  attacking
his  ideas — works  all  the  more  unmanly,  since  their  authors
knew  that  Galileo  was  restrained  by  force  from  defending
himself.     Then,  too,  as  if  to  accumulate  proofs  of  the  unfit-


THE   WAR   UPON   GALILEO.  1 30

ness  of  the  Church  to  take  charge  of  advanced  instruction,
his  salary  as  a  professor  at  the  Univ^ersity  of  Pisa  was  taken
from  him,  and  sapping  and  mining  began.  Just  as  the  Arch-
bishop of  Pisa  some  years  before  had  tried  to  betray  him
with  honeyed  words  to  the  Inquisition,  so  now  Father
Grassi  tried  it,  and,  after  various  attempts  to  draw  him  out
by  flattery,  suddenly  denounced  his  scientific  ideas  as  '*  lead-
ing to  a  denial  of  the  Real  Presence  in  the  Eucharist."

For  the  final  assault  upon  him  a  park  of  heavy  artillery
was  at  last  w^heeled  into  place.  It  may  be  seen  on  all  the
scientific  battlefields.  It  consists  of  general  denunciation  ;
and  in  163 1  Father  Melchior  Inchofer,  of  the  Jesuits,  brought
his  artillery  to  bear  upon  Galileo  with  this  declaration :
"  The  opinion  of  the  earth's  motion  is  of  all  heresies  the  most
abominable,  the  most  pernicious,  the  most  scandalous  ;  the
immovability  of  the  earth  is  thrice  sacred  ;  argument  against
the  immortality  of  the  soul,  the  existence  of  God,  and  the
incarnation,  should  be  tolerated  sooner  than  an  argument  to
prove  that  the  earth  moves."

From  the  other  end  of  Europe  came  a  powerful  echo.
From  the  shadow  of  the  Cathedral  of  Antwerp,  the  noted
theologian  Fromundus  gave  forth  his  famous  treatise,  the
Ant-AristarcJius.  Its  very  title-page  was  a  contemptuous
insult  to  the  memory  of  Copernicus,  since  it  paraded  the  as-
sumption that  the  new  truth  was  only  an  exploded  theory
of  a  pagan  astronomer.  Fromundus  declares  that  '■'  sacred
Scripture  fights  against  the  Copernicans."  To  prove  that
the  sun  revolves  about  the  earth,  he  cites  the  passage  in  the
Psalms  which  speaks  of  the  sun  "  w^hich  cometh  forth  as  a
bridegroom  out  of  his  chamber."  To  prove  that  the  earth
stands  still,  he  quotes  a  passage  from  Ecclesiastes,  *'  The
earth  standeth  fast  forever."  To  show  the  utter  futility  of
the  Copernican  theory,  he  declares  that,  if  it  were  true,  "  the
wind  would  constantly  blow  from  the  east " ;  and  that
''  buildings  and  the  earth  itself  would  fly  off  with  such  a
rapid  motion  that  men  would  have  to  be  provided  with  claws
like  cats  to  enable  them  to  hold  fast  to  the  earth's  surface."
Greatest  weapon  of  all,  he  works  up,  by  the  use  of  Aristotle
and  St.  Thomas  Aquinas,  a  demonstration  from  theology
and  science  combined,  that  the  earth  iiiiist  stand  in  the  cen-


40


ASTRONOMY.


tre,  and  that  the  sun  must  revolve  about  it.*  Nor  was  it
merely  fanatics  who  opposed  the  truth  revealed  b}^  Coper-
nicus ;  such  strong  men  as  Jean  Bodin,  in  France,  and  Sir
Thomas  Browne,  in  England,  declared  against  it  as  evidently
contrary  to  Holy  Scripture.


IV.   VICTORY   OF   THE   CHURCH    OVER   GALILEO.

While  news  of  triumphant  attacks  upon  him  and  upon
the  truth  he  had  established  were  coming  in  from  all  parts
of  Europe,  Galileo  prepared  a  careful  treatise  in  the  form  of
a  dialogue,  exhibiting  the  arguments  for  and  against  the
Copernican  and  Ptolemaic  systems,  and  offered  to  submit  to
any  conditions  that  the  Church  tribunals  might  impose,  if
they  would  allow  it  to  be  printed.  At  last,  after  discussions
which  extended  through  eight  years,  they  consented,  impos-
ing a  humiliating  condition — a  preface  written  in  accord-
ance with  the  ideas  of  Father  Ricciardi,  Master  of  the  Sacred
Palace,  and  signed  by  Galileo,  in  which  the  Copernican
theory  was  virtually  exhibited  as  a  play  of  the  imagination,
and  not  at  all  as  opposed  to  the  Ptolemaic  doctrine  reassert-
ed in  1616  by  the  Inquisition  under  the  direction  of  Pope
Paul  V.

This  new  work  of  Galileo — the  Dialogo — appeared  in  1632,
and  met  with  prodigious  success.  It  put  new  weapons  into
the  hands  of  the  supporters  of  the  Copernican  theory.  The
pious  preface  was  laughed  at  from  one  end  of  Europe  to  the
other.     This   roused   the   enemy ;    the  Jesuits,   Dominicans,

*  For  Father  Inchofer's  attack,  see  his  Tractatus  Sylleptictis,  cited  in  Galileo's
letter  to  Deodati,  July  28,  1634.  For  Fromundus's  more  famous  attack,  see  his
Ant-Aristarchics,  already  cited,  passim,  but  especially  the  heading  of  chapter  vi,
and  the  argument  in  chapters  x  and  xi.  A  copy  of  this  work  may  be  found  in  the
Astor  Library  at  New  York,  and  another  in  the  White  Library  at  Cornell  Univer-
sity. For  interesting  reference  to  one  of  Fromundus's  arguments,  showing,  by  a
mixture  of  mathematics  and  theology,  that  the  earth  is  the  centre  of  the  universe,
see  Quetelet,  Histoire  des  Sciences  math^matiques  et  physiques,  Bruxelles,  1S64,  p.
170;  also  Madler,  Geschichte  der  Astronomic,  vol.  i,  p.  274.  For  Bodin's  opposi-
tion to  the  Copernican  theory,  see  Hallam,  Literature  of  Europe  \  also  Lecky.
For  Sir  Thomas  Browne,  see  his  Vulgar  and  Common  Errors,  book  iv,  chap,  v  ;
and  as  to  the  real  reason  for  his  disbelief  in  the  Copernican  view,  see  Dr.  John-
son's preface  to  his  Life  of  Browne,  vol.  i,  p.  xix,  of  his  collected  works.


VICTORY   OF    THE    CHURCH    OVER    GALILEO.  141

and  the  great  majority  of  the  clergy  returned  to  the  attack
more  violent  than  ever,  and  in  the  midst  of  them  stood  Pope
Urban  VIII,  most  bitter  of  all.  His  whole  power  was  now
thrown  against  Galileo.  He  was  touched  in  two  points:
first,  in  his  personal  vanity,  for  Galileo  had  put  the  Pope's
arguments  into  the  mouth  of  one  of  the  persons  in  the  dia-
logue and  their  refutation  into  the  mouth  of  another ;  but,
above  all,  he  was  touched  in  his  religious  feelings.  Again
and  again  His  Holiness  insisted  to  all  comers  on  the  absolute
and  specific  declarations  of  Holy  Scripture,  which  prove
that  the  sun  and  heavenly  bodies  revolve  about  the  earth,
and  declared  that  to  gainsay  them  is  simply  to  dispute  rev-
elation. Certainly,  if  one  ecclesiastic  more  than  another
ever  seemed  not  under  the  care  of  the  Spirit  of  Truth,  it  was
Urban  VIII  in  all  this  matter.

Herein  was  one  of  the  greatest  pieces  of  ill  fortune  that
has  ever  befallen  the  older  Church.  Had  Pope  Urban  been
broad-minded  and  tolerant  like  Benedict  XIV,  or  had  he
been  taught  moderation  by  adversity  like  Pius  VII,  or  had
he  possessed  the  large  scholarly  qualities  of  Leo  XIII,  now
reio:ninor  the  vast  scandal  of  the  Galileo  case  would  never
have  burdened  the  Church  :  instead  of  devising  endless  quib-
bles and  special  pleadings  to  escape  responsibility  for  this
colossal  blunder,  its  defenders  could  have  claimed  forever
for  the  Church  the  glory  of  fearlessly  initiating  a  great
epoch  in  human  thought.

But  it  was  not  so  to  be.  Urban  was  not  merely  Pope  ;
he  was  also  a  prince  of  the  house  of  Barberini,  and  therefore
doubly  angry  that  his  arguments  had  been  publicly  con-
troverted.

The  opening  strategy  of  Galileo's  enemies  was  to  forbid
the  sale  of  his  work ;  but  this  was  soon  seen  to  be  unavail-
ing, for  the  first  edition  had  already  been  spread  throughout
Europe.  Urban  now  became  more  angry  than  ever,  and
both  Galileo  and  his  works  were  placed  in  the  hands  of
the  Inquisition.  In  vain  did  the  good  Benedictine  Castelli
urge  that  Galileo  was  entirely  respectful  to  the  Church;  in
vain  did  he  insist  that  "  nothing  that  can  be  done  can  now
hinder  the  earth  from  revolving."  He  was  dismissed  in  dis-
grace, and  Galileo  was  forced  to  appear  in  the   presence  of


J.2  ASTRONOMY.

the  dread  tribunal  without  defender  or  adviser.  There,  as
was  so  long-  concealed,  but  as  is  now  fully  revealed,  he  was
menaced  with  torture  again  and  again  by  express  order  of
Pope  Urban,  and,  as  is  also  thoroughly  established  from  the
trial  documents  themselves,  forced  to  abjure  under  threats,
and  subjected  to  imprisonment  by  command  of  the  Pope  ;
the  Inquisition  deferring  in  this  whole  matter  to  the  papal
authority.  All  the  long  series  of  attempts  made  in  the  sup-
posed interest  of  the  Church  to  mystify  these  transactions
have  at  last  failed.  The  world  knows  now  that  Galileo  was
subjected  certainly  to  indignity,  to  imprisonment,  and  to
threats  equivalent  to  torture,  and  was  at  last  forced  to  pro-
nounce publicly  and  on  his  knees  his  recantation,  as  follows :

*'  I,  Galileo,  being  in  my  seventieth  year,  being  a  prisoner
and  on  my  knees,  and  before  your  Eminences,  having  before
my  eyes  the  Holy  Gospel,  which  I  touch  with  my  hands,
abjure,  curse,  and  detest  the  error  and  the  heresy  of  the
movement  of  the  earth."  ^

He  was  vanquished  indeed,  for  he  had  been  forced,  in
the  face  of  all  coming  ages,  to  perjure  himself.  To  com-
plete his  dishonour,  he  was  obliged  to  swear  that  he  would
denounce  to  the  Inquisition  any  other  man  of  science  whom
he  should  discover  to  be  supporting  the  "  heresy  of  the  mo-
tion of  the  earth."

Many  have  wondered  at  this  abjuration,  and  on  account
of  it  have  denied  to  Galileo  the  title  of  martyr.  But  let  such
gainsay ers  consider  the  circumstances.  Here  was  an  old
man — one  who  had  reached  the  allotted  threescore  years
and  ten — broken  with  disappointments,  worn  out  with  la-
bours and  cares,  dragged  from  Florence  to  Rome,  with  the
threat  from  the  Pope  himself  that  if  he  delayed  he  should  be
**  brought  in  chains";  sick  in  body  and  mind,  given  over

*  For  various  utterances  of  Pope  Urban  against  the  Copernican  theory  at  this
period,  see  extracts  from  the  original  documents  given  by  Gebler.  For  punish-
ment of  those  who  had  shown  some  favour  to  Galileo,  see  various  citations,  and
especially  those  from  the  Vatican  manuscript,  Gebler,  p,  216.  As  to  the  text  of
the  abjuration,  see  L'Epinois  ;  also  Polacco,  Afiticopcrjiiciis,  etc.,  Venice,  1644  ;
and  for  a  discussion  regarding  its  publication,  see  Favaro,  Miscellanea  Galileana,
p.  804.  It  is  not  probable  that  torture  in  the  ordinary  sense  was  admiristered
to  Galileo,  though  it  was  threatened.  See  Th.  Martin,  Vie  de  GaliUe,  for  a  fair  sum-
ming up  of  the  case.


VICTORY    OF    THE    CHURCH    OVER    GALILEO.  143

to  his  oppressors  by  the  Grand-Duke  who  ought  to  have  pro-
tected him,  and  on  his  arrival  in  Rome  threatened  with  tor-
ture. What  the  Inquisition  was  he  knew  well  He  could
remember  as  but  of  yesterday  the  burning  of  Giordano  Bruno
in  that  same  city  for  scientific  and  philosophic  heresy  ;  he
could  remember,  too,  that  only  eight  years  before  this  very
time  De  Dominis,  Archbishop  of  Spalatro,  having  been
seized  by  the  Inquisition  for  scientific  and  other  heresies,
had  died  in  a  dungeon,  and  that  his  body  and  his  writings
had  been  publicl}^  burned.

To  the  end  of  his  life— nay,  after  his  life  was  ended— the
persecution  of  Galileo  was  continued.     He  was  kept  in  exile
from   his  family,  from  his  friends,  from   his  noble  employ-
ments, and  was  held  rigidly  to  his  promise  not  to  speak  of
his  theory.     When,  in  the  midst  of  intense  bodily  sufferings
from  disease,  and  mental  sufferings  from   calamities  in   his
family,  he   besought  some  little   liberty,   he   was   met   with
threats  of  committal  to  a  dungeon.     When,  at  last,  a  special
commission  had  reported  to  the  ecclesiastical  authorities  that
he  had  become  blind  and  wasted  with  disease  and  sorrow,
he  was  allowed  a  little  more  liberty,  but  that  little  was  ham'
pered   by  close  surveillance.     He  was  forced  to  bear  con-
temptible attacks  on  himself  and  on  his  works  in  silence ;  to
see  the  men  who  had  befriended   him   severely  punished  ;
Father   Castelli    banished ;    Ricciardi,    the    Master    of    the
Sacred  Palace,  and  Ciampoli,  the  papal  secretary,  thrown
out  of  their  positions  by  Pope  Urban,  and  the  Inquisitor  at
Florence  reprimanded  for  having  given  permission  to  print
Galileo's  work.     He  lived  to  see  the  truths  he  had  estab-
lished carefully  weeded  out  from  all  the  Church  colleges  and
universities  in   Europe  ;  and,  when  in  a  scientific  work  he
happened  to  be  spoken  of  as  "  renowned,"  the   Inquisition
ordered  the  substitution  of  the  word  "  notorious."  -

And  now  measures  were  taken  to  complete  the  destruc-
tion of  the  Copernican  theory,  with  Galileo's  proofs  of  it.
On  the  i6th  of  June,  1633,  the  Holy  Congregation,  with  the
permission  of  the  reigning  Pope,  ordered  the  sentence  upon

*  For  the  substitution  of  the  word  "  notorious  "  for  "  renowned  "  by  order  of  the
Inquisition,  see  Martin,  p.  227.


144


ASTRONOMY.


Galileo,  and  his  recantation,  to  be  sent  to  all  the  papal
nuncios  throughout  Europe,  as  well  as  to  all  archbishops,
bishops,  and  inquisitors  in  Italy  ;  and  this  document  gave
orders  that  the  sentence  and  abjuration  be  made  known  "  to
your  vicars,  that  you  and  all  professors  of  philosophy  and
mathematics  may  have  knowledge  of  it,  that  they  may  know
why  we  proceeded  against  the  said  Galileo,  and  recognise
the  gravity  of  his  error,  in  order  that  they  may  avoid  it,  and
thus  not  incur  the  penalties  which  they  would  have  to  suffer
in  case  they  fell  into  the  same."  *

As  a  consequence,  the  professors  of  mathematics  and
astronomy  in  various  universities  of  Europe  were  assem-
bled and  these  documents  were  read  to  them.  To  the  theo-
logical authorities  this  gave  great  satisfaction.  The  Rec-
tor of  the  University  of  Douay,  referring  to  the  opinion  of
Galileo, wrote  to  the  papal  nuncio  at  Brussels  :  "  The  profess-
ors of  our  university  are  so  opposed  to  this  fanatical  opin-
ion that  they  have  always  held  that  it  must  be  banished  from
the  schools.  In  our  English  college  at  Douay  this  paradox-
has  never  been  approved  and  never  will  be."

Still  another  step  was  taken :  the  Inquisitors  were  or-
dered, especially  in  Italy,  not  to  permit  the  publication  of  a
new  edition  of  any  of  Galileo's  works,  or  of  any  similar  writ-
ings. On  the  other  hand,  theologians  were  urged,  now  that
Copernicus  and  Galileo  and  Kepler  were  silenced,  to  reply
to  them  with  tongue  and  pen.  Europe  was  flooded  with
these  theological  refutations  of  the  Copernican  S3^stem.

To  make  all  complete,  there  was  prefixed  to  the  Index
of  the  Church,  forbidding  ''all  writings  which  afifirm  the
motion  of  the  earth,"  a  bull  signed  by  the  reigning  Pope,
which,  by  virtue  of  his  infallibility  as  a  divinely  guided
teacher  in  matters  of  faith  and  morals,  clinched  this  con-
demnation into  the  consciences  of  the  whole  Christian
world.

From  the  mass  of  books  which  appeared  under  the
auspices  of  the  Church  immediately  after  the  condemnation


*  For  a  copy  of  this  document,  see  Gebler,  p.  269,  As  to  the  spread  of  this
and  similar  documents  notifying  Europe  of  Galileo's  condemnation,  see  Favaro,
pp.  804,  805.


VICTORY   OF   THE   CHURCH    OVER    GALILEO.  j^r

of  Galileo,  for  the  purpose  of  rooting  out  every  vestige  of
the  hated  Copernican  theory  from  the  mind  of  the  world,
two  may  be  taken  as  typical.  The  first  of  these  was  a  work
by  Scipio  Chiaramonti,  dedicated  to  Cardinal  Barberini.
Among  his  arguments  against  the  double  motion  of  the
earth  may  be  cited  the  following :

''Animals,  which  move,  have  limbs  and  muscles ;  the
earth  has  no  limbs  or  muscles,  therefore  it  does  not  move.
It  is  angels  who  make  Saturn,  Jupiter,  the  sun,  etc.,  turn
round.  If  the  earth  revolves,  it  must  also  have  an  angel  in
the  centre  to  set  it  in  motion ;  but  only  devils  live  there ;  it
would  therefore  be  a  devil  who  would  impart  motion  to  the
earth.  .  .  .

"  The  planets,  the  sun,  the  fixed  stars,  all  belong  to  one
species — namely,  that  of  stars.  It  seems,  therefore,  to  be  a
grievous  wrong  to  place  the  earth,  which  is  a  sink  of  im-
purity, among  these  heavenly  bodies,  which  are  pure  and
divine  things."

The  next,  which  I  select  from  the  mass  of  similar  works,
is  the  Anticopernicus  CatJioliais  of  Polacco.  It  was  intended
to  deal  a  finishing  stroke  at  Galileo's  heresy.  In  this  it  is
declared :

'*  The  Scripture  always  represents  the  earth  as  at  rest,
and  the  sun  and  moon  as  in  motion  ;  or,  if  these  latter  bodies
are  ever  represented  as  at  rest.  Scripture  represents  this  as
the  result  of  a  great  miracle.  .  .  .

**  These  writings  must  be  prohibited,  because  the}^  teach
certain  principles  about  the  position  and  motion  of  the  ter-
restrial globe  repugnant  to  Holy  Scripture  and  to  the  Cath-
olic interpretation  of  it,  not  as  hypotheses  but  as  established
facts.  ..."

Speaking  of  Galileo's  book,  Polacco  says  that  it  "  smacked
of  Copernicanism,"  and  that,  "  when  this  was  shown  to  the
Inquisition,  Galileo  was  thrown  into  prison  and  was  com-
pelled to  utterly  abjure  the  baseness  of  this  erroneous
dogma."

As  to  the  authority  of  the  cardinals  in  their  decree,  Po-
lacco asserts  that,  since  they  are  the  ''  Pope's  Council  "  and
his  "  brothers,"  their  work  is  one,  except  that  the  Pope  is
favoured  with  special  divine  enlightenment.


i46


ASTRONOMY.


Having  shown  that  the  authority  of  the  Scriptures,  of
popes,  and  of  cardinals  is  against  the  new  astronomy,  he
gives  a  refutation  based  on  physics.  He  asks :  ''  If  we  con-
cede the  motion  of  the  earth,  why  is  it  that  an  arrow  shot
into  the  air  falls  back  to  the  same  spot,  while  the  earth  and
all  things  on  it  have  in  the  meantime  moved  very  rapidly
toward  the  east?  Who  does  not  see  that  great  confusion
'.  would  result  from  this  motion  ?  "

Next  he  argues  from  metaphysics,  as  follows  :  "  The  Co-
pernican  theory  of  the  earth's  motion  is  against  the  nature
of  the  earth  itself,  because  the  earth  is  not  only  cold  but
contains  in  itself  the  principle  of  cold  ;  but  cold  is  opposed
to  motion,  and  even  destroys  it — as  is  evident  in  animals,
which  become  motionless  when  they  become  cold."

Finally,  he  clinches  all  with  a  piece  of  theological  reason-
ing, as  follows  :  "  Since  it  can  certainly  be  gathered  from
Scripture  that  the  heavens  move  above  the  earth,  and  since
a  circular  motion  requires  something  immovable  around
which  to  move,  .  .  .  the  earth  is  at  the  centre  of  the  uni-
verse." "^

But  any  sketch  of  the  warfare  between  theology  and
science  in  this  field  would  be  incomplete  without  some  ref-
erence to  the  treatment  of  Galileo  after  his  death.  He  had
begged  to  be  buried  in  his  family  tomb  in  Santa  Croce  ;
this  request  was  denied.  His  friends  wished  to  erect  a
monument  over  him ;  this,  too,  was  refused.  Pope  Urban
said  to  the  ambassador  Niccolini  that  '*  it  would  be  an  evil
example  for  the  world  if  such  honours  were  rendered  to  a
man  who  had  been  brought  before  the  Roman  Inquisition
for  an  opinion  so  false  and  erroneous;  who  had  communi-
cated it  to  many  others,  and  who  had  given  so  great  a  scan-
dal to  Christendom."  In  accordance,  therefore,  with  the
wish  of  the  Pope  and  the  orders  of  the  Inquisition,  Galileo
was  buried  ignobly,  apart  from  his  family,  without  fitting
ceremony,  without  monument,  without  epitaph.  Not  until
forty   years   after  did    Pierrozzi    dare  write  an  inscription

*  For  Chiaramonti's  book  and  selections  given,  see  Gebler  as  above,  p.  271.
For  Polacco,  see  his  work  as  cited,  especially  Assertiones  i,  ii,  vii,  xi,  xiii,  Ixxiii,
clxxxvii,  and  others.  The  work  is  in  the  White  Library  at  Cornell  University.
The  date  of  it  is  1644.


VICTORY   OF    THE   CHURCH    OVER   GALILEO.  147

to  be  placed  above  his  bones  ;  not  until  a  hundred  years
after  did  Nelli  dare  transfer  his  remains  to  a  suitable
position  in  Santa  Croce,  and  erect  a  monument  above
them.  Even  then  the  old  conscientious  hostility  burst
forth  :  the  Inquisition  was  besought  to  prevent  such  hon-
ours to  ''a  man  condemned  for  notorious  errors"  ;  and  that
tribunal  refused  to  allow  any  epitaph  to  be  placed  above
him  which  had  not  been  submitted  to  its  censorship.  Nor
has  that  old  conscientious  consistency  in  hatred  yet  fully
relented  :  hardly  a  generation  since  has  not  seen  some  eccle-
siastic, like  Marini  or  De  Bonald  or  Rallaye  or  De  Gabriac,
suppressing  evidence,  or  torturing  expressions,  or  inventing
theories  to  blacken  the  memory  of  Galileo  and  save  the
reputation  of  the  Church.  Nay,  more:  there  are  school  his-
tories, widely  used,  which,  in  the  supposed  interest  of  the
Church,  misrepresent  in  the  grossest  manner  all  these  trans-
actions in  which  Galileo  was  concerned.  Sancta  simp  licit  as  !
The  Church  has  no  worse  enemies  than  those  who  devise
and  teach  these  perversions.  They  are  simply  rooting  out,
in  the  long  run,  from  the  minds  of  the  more  thoughtful
scholars,  respect  for  the  great  organization  which  such  writ-
ings are  supposed  to  serve.*

The  Protestant  Church  was  hardly  less  energetic  against
this  new  astronomy  than  the  mother  Church.  The  sacred
science  of  the  first  Lutheran  Reformers  was  transmitted  as
a  precious  legacy,  and  in  the  next  century  was  made  much
of  by  Calovius.  His  great  learning  and  determined  ortho-
doxy gave  him  the  Lutheran  leadership.  Utterly  refusing
to  look  at  ascertained  facts,  he  cited  the  turning  back  of  the
shadow  upon  King  Hezekiah's  dial  and  the  standing  still
of  the  sun  for  Joshua,  denied  the  movement  of  the  earth,
and  denounced  the  whole  new  view  as  clearly  opposed  to
Scripture,  To  this  day  his  arguments  are  repeated  by  sun-
dry orthodox  leaders  of  American  Lutheranism.

*  For  the  persecutions  of  Galileo's  memory  after  his  death,  see  Gebler  and
Wohlwill,  but  especially  Th.  Martin,  p.  243  and  chaps,  ix  and  x.  For  documentary
proofs,  see  L'Epinois.  For  a  collection  of  the  slanderous  theories  invented  against
Galileo,  see  Martin,  final  chapters  and  appendix.  Both  these  authors  are  devoted
to  the  Church,  but,  unlike  Monsignor  Marini,  are  too  upright  to  resort  to  the  pious
fraud  of  suppressing  documents  or  interpolating  pretended  facts.


148  ASTRONOMY.

As  to  the  Other  branches  of  the  Reformed  Church,  we
have  already  seen  how  Calvinists,  Anglicans,  and,  indeed,
Protestant  sectarians  generally,  opposed  the  new  truth. "^  In
England,  among  the  strict  churchmen,  the  great  Dr.  South
denounced  the  Royal  Society  as  "irreligious,"  and  among
the  Puritans  the  eminent  John  Owen  declared  that  New-
ton's discoveries  were  "  built  on  fallible  phenomena  and  ad-
vanced by  many  arbitrary  presumptions  against  evident
testimonies  of  Scripture."  Even  Milton  seems  to  have  hesi-
tated between  the  two  systems.  At  the  beginning  of  the
eighth  book  of  Paradise  Lost  he  makes  Adam  state  the  diffi-
culties of  the  Ptolemaic  system,  and  then  brings  forward  an
angel  to  make  the  usual  orthodox  answers.  Later,  Milton
seems  to  lean  toward  the  Copernican  theory,  for,  referring
to  the  earth,  he  says :

"  Or  she  from  west  her  silent  course  advance
With  inoffensive  pace,  that  spinning  sleeps
On  her  soft  axle,  while  she  faces  even
And  bears  thee  soft  with  the  smooth  air  along."

English  orthodoxy  continued  to  assert  itself.  In  1724
John  Hutchinson,  professor  at  Cambridge,  published  his
Moses  Principia,  a  system  of  philosophy'  in  which  he  sought
to  build  up  a  complete  physical  system  of  the  universe  from
the  Bible.  In  this  he  assaulted  the  Newtonian  theory  as
"atheistic,"  and  led  the  way  for  similar  attacks  by  such
Church  teachers  as  Home,  Duncan  Forbes,  and  Jones  of
Nayland.  But  one  far  greater  than  these  involved  himself
in  this  view.  That  same  limitation  of  his  reason  by  the  sim-
ple statements  of  Scripture  which  led  John  Wesley  to  de-
clare that,  "  unless  witchcraft  is  true,  nothing  in  the  Bible  is
true,"  led  him,  while  giving  up  the  Ptolemaic  theory  and
accepting  in  a  general  way  the  Copernican,  to  suspect  the
demonstrations  of  Newton.  Happily,  his  inborn  nobility  of
character*  lifted  him  above  an}'  bitterness  or  persecuting
spirit,  or  any  imposition  of  doctrinal  tests  which  could  pre-
vent those  who  came  after  him  from  finding  their  way  to
the  truth.


*  For  Calovius,  see  Zoeckler,  Geschichie,  vol.  i,  pp.  684  and  763.     For  Calvin
and  Turretin,  see  Shields,  The  Final  Philosophy,  pp.  60,  61.


VICTORY   OF    THE   CHURCH    OVER    GALILEO.


149


But  in  the  midst  of  this  vast  expanse  of  theologic  error
signs  of  right  reason  began  to  appear,  both  in  England  and
America.  Noteworthy  is  it  that  Cotton  Mather,  bitter  as
was  his  orthodoxy  regarding  witchcraft,  accepted,  in  1721,
the  modern  astronomy  fully,  with  all  its  consequences.

In  the  following  year  came  an  even  more  striking  evi-
dence that  the  new  scientific  ideas  were  making  their  way
in  England.  In  1722  Thomas  Burnet  published  the  sixth
edition  of  his  Sacred  Theory  of  tJie  Earth.  In  this  he  argues,
as  usual,  to  establish  the  scriptural  doctrine  of  the  earth's
stability  ;  but  in  his  preface  he  sounds  a  remarkable  warn-
ing. He  mentions  the  great  mistake  into  which  St.  Augus-
tine led  the  Church  regarding  the  doctrine  of  the  antipodes,
and  says,  *'  If  within  a  few  years  or  in  the  next  generation  it
should  prove  as  certain  and  demonstrable  that  the  earth  is
moved,  as  it  is  now  that  there  are  antipodes,  those  that  have
been  zealous  against  it,  and  engaged  the  Scripture  in  the
controversy,  would  have  the  same  reason  to  repent  of  their
forwardness  that  St.  Augustine  would  now,  if  he  were  still
alive."

Fortunately,  too.  Protestantism  had  no  such  power  to
oppose  the  development  of  the  Copernican  ideas  as  the  older
Church  had  enjoyed.  Yet  there  were  some  things  in  its
warfare  against  science  even  more  indefensible.  In  1772
the  famous  English  expedition  for  scientific  discovery  sailed
from  England  under  Captain  Cook.  Greatest  by  far  of  all
the  scientific  authorities  chosen  to  accompany  it  was  Dr.
Priestley.  Sir  Joseph  Banks  had  especially  invited  him.
But  the  clergy  of  Oxford  and  Cambridge  interfered.  Priest-
ley was  considered  unsound  in  his  views  of  the  Trinity  ;  it
was  evidently  suspected  that  this  might  vitiate  his  astro-
nomical observations ;  he  was  rejected,  and  the  expedition
crippled.

The  orthodox  view  of  astronomy  lingered  on  in  other
branches  of  the  Protestant  Church.  In  Germany  even  Leib-
nitz attacked  the  Newtonian  theory  of  gravitation  on  theo-
logical grounds,  though  he  found  some  little  consolation  in
thinking  that  it  might  be  used  to  support  the  Lutheran  doc-
trine of  consubstantiation.

In  Holland  the  Calvinistic  Church  was  at  first  strenuous


ISO


ASTRONOMY.


against  the  whole  new  system,  but  we  possess  a  comical
proof  that  Calvinism  even  in  its  strongholds  was  powerless
against  it;  for  in  1642  Blaer  published  at  Amsterdam  his
book  on  the  use  of  globes,  and,  in  order  to  be  on  the  safe
side,  devoted  one  part  of  his  work  to  the  Ptolemaic  and  the
other  to  the  Copernican  scheme,  leaving  the  benevolent
reader  to  take  his  choice.*  ,

Nor  have  efforts  to  renew  the  battle  in  the  Protestant
Church  been  wanting  in  these  latter  days.  The  attempt  in
the  Church  of  England,  in  1864,  to  fetter  science,  which  was
brought  to  ridicule  by  Herschel,  Bowring,  and  De  Morgan  ;
the  assemblage  of  Lutheran  clergy  at  Berlin,  in  1868,  to  pro-
test against  "  science  falsely  so  called,"  are  examples  of  these.
Fortunately,  to  the  latter  came  Pastor  Knak,  and  his  denun-
ciations of  the  Copernican  theory  as  absolutely  incompatible
with  a  belief  in  the  Bible,  dissolved  the  whole  assemblage
in  ridicule.

In  its  recent  dealings  with  modern  astronomy  the  wisdom
of  the  Catholic  Church  in  the  more  civilized  countries  has
prevented  its  yielding  to  some  astounding  errors  into  which
one  part  of  the  Protestant  Church  has  fallen  heedlessl3^

Though  various  leaders  in  the  older  Church  have  com-
mitted the  absurd  error  of  allowing  a  text-book  and  sundry
review  articles  to  appear  which  grossly  misstate  the  Galileo
episode,  with  the  certainty  of  ultimately  undermining  con-
fidence in  her  teachings  among  her  more  thoughtful  young
men,  she  has  kept  clear  of  the  folly  of  continuing  to  tie  her
instruction,  and  the  acceptance  of  our  sacred  books,  to  an
adoption  ot  the  Ptolemaic  theory.

Not  so  with  American  Lutheranism.  In  1873  was  pub-
lished in  St.  Louis,  at  the  publishing  house  of  the  Lutheran
Synod  of  Missouri,  a  work  entitled  Astro7toimsche   Untcrre-


*  For  the  attitude  of  Leibnitz,  Hutchinson,  and  the  others  named  toward  the
Newtonian  theory,  see  Lecky,  History  of  England  in  the  Eighteenth  Century,
chap.  ix.  For  John  Wesley,  see  his  Compendium  of  Natural  Philosophy,  being  a
Survey  of  the  Wisdom  of  God  in  the  Creation,  London,  1784.  See  also  Leslie
Stephen,  Eighteenth  Century,  vol.  ii,  p.  413.  For  Owen,  see  his  Works,  vol.  xix,
p.  310.  For  Cotton  Mather's  view,  see  The  Christian  Philosopher,  London,  1721,
especially  pp.  16  and  17.  For  the  case  of  Priestley,  see  Weld,  History  of  the  Royal
Society,  vol.  ii,  p.  56,  for  the  facts  and  the  admirable  letter  of  Priestley  upon  this
rejection.     Yox  Blaer,  see  his  V  Usage  des  Globes,  Amsterdam,  1642.


VICTORY    OF    THE    CHURCH    OVER    GALILEO.  151

dimg,  the  author  being  well  known  as  a  late  president  of  a
Lutheran  Teachers'  Seminary.

No  attack  on  the  whole  modern  system  of  astronomy
could  be  more  bitter.  On  the  first  page  of  the  introduction
the  author,  after  stating  the  two  theories,  asks,  '*  Which  is
right?"  and  says:  "  It  would  be  very  simple  to  me  which  is
right,  if  it  were  onl}^  a  question  of  human  import.  But.  the
wise  and  truthful  God  has  expressed  himself  on  this  matter
in  the  Bible.  The  entire  Holy  Scripture  settles  the  ques-
tion that  the  earth  is  the  principal  body  {Hanptkorpcr)  of  the
universe,  that  it  stands  fixed,  and  that  sun  and  moon  only
serve  to  light  it."

The  author  then  goes  on  to  show  from  Scripture  the
folly,  not  only  of  Copernicus  and  Newton,  but  of  a  long  line
of  great  astronomers  in  more  recent  times.  He  declares :
'*  Let  no  one  understand  me  as  inquiring  first  where  truth  is
to  be  found— in  the  Bible  or  with  the  astronomers.  No;
I  know  that  beforehand — that  my  God  never  lies,  never
makes  a  mistake ;  out  of  his  mouth  comes  only  truth,  when
he  speaks  of  the  structure  of  the  universe,  of  the  earth,  sun,
moon,  and  stars.  .  .  .

*'  Because  the  truth  of  the  Holy  Scripture  is  involved  in
this,  therefore  the  above  question  is  of  the  highest  impor-
tance to  me.  .  .  .  Scientists  and  others  lean  upon  the  miser-
able reed  {Rohrsiab)  that  God  teaches  only  the  order  of  sal-
vation, but  not  the  order  of  the  universe."

Very  noteworthy  is  the  fact  that  this  late  survival  of  an
ancient  belief  based  upon  text-worship  is  found,  not  in  the
teachings  of  any  zealous  priest  of  the  mother  Church,  but
in  those  of  an  eminent  professor  in  that  branch  of  Protes-
tantism which  claims  special  enlightenment.^"

Nor  has  the  warfare  against  the  dead  champions  of  sci-
ence been  carried  on  by  the  older  Church  alone.

On  the  loth  of  May,  1859,  Alexander  von  Humboldt  was


*  For  the  amusing  details  of  the  attempt  in  the  English  Church  to  repress  sci-
ence, and  of  the  way  in  which  it  was  met,  see  De  Morgan,  Paradoxes,  p.  42.  For
Pastor  Knak  and  his  associates,  see  the  Revue  des  Deux  Mondes,  1868.  Of  the
recent  Lutheran  works  against  the  Copernican  astronomy,  see  especially  the
Astrononiische  Unterredung  zwischen  einem  Liebhaber  der  Astronomie  und  mehr-
eren  beriihmten  Astronomer  der  Neuzeit,  by  J.  C.  W.  L.,  St.  Louis,  1873.


152


ASTRONOMY.


buried.  His  labours  had  been  among  the  glories  of  the  cen-
tury, and  his  funeral  was  one  of  the  most  imposing  that
Berlin  had  ever  seen.  Among  those  who  honoured  them-
selves by  their  presence  was  the  prince  regent,  afterward
the  Emperor  William  I ;  but  of  the  clergy  it  was  observed
that  none  were  present  save  the  officiating  clergyman  and  a
few  regarded  as  unorthodox.*


V.   RESULTS   OF   THE   VICTORY   OVER   GALILEO.

We  return  now  to  the  sequel  of  the  Galileo  case.

Having  gained  their  victory  over  Galileo,  living  and
dead,  having  used  it  to  scare  into  submission  the  professors
of  astronomy  throughout  Europe,  conscientious  churchmen
exulted.  Loud  was  their  rejoicing  that  the  "  heresy,"  the
*' infidelity,"  the  ''atheism"  involved  in  believing  that  the
earth  revolves  about  its  axis  and  moves  around  the  sun  had
been  crushed  by  the  great  tribunal  of  the  Church,  acting  in
strict  obedience  to  the  expressed  will  of  one  Pope  and  the
written  order  of  another.  As  we  have  seen,  all  books  teach-
ing this  hated  belief  were  put  upon  the  Index  of  books  for-
bidden to  Christians,  and  that  Index  was  prefaced  by  a  bull
enforcing  this  condemnation  upon  the  consciences  of  the
faithful  throughout  the  world,  and  signed  by  the  reigning
Pope.

The  losses  to  the  world  during  this  complete  triumph  of
theology  were  even  more  serious  than  at  first  appears :  one
must  especially  be  mentioned.  There  was  then  in  Europe
one  of  the  greatest  thinkers  ever  given  to  mankind— Rene
Descartes.  Mistaken  though  many  of  his  reasonings  were,
they  bore  a  rich  fruitage  of  truth.  He  had  already  done  a
vast  work.  His  theory  of  vortices — assuming  a  uniform
material  regulated  by  physical  laws — as  the  beginning  of
the  visible  universe,  though  it  was  but  a  provisional  hy-
pothesis, had  ended  the  whole  old  theory  of  the  heavens  with
the  vaulted  firmament  and  the  direction  of  the  planetary
movements  by  angels,  which  even  Kepler  had  allowed.    The

*  See  Bruhns  and  Lassell,  Life  of  Humboldt ,  London,  1873,  vol.  ii,  p.  411.


RESULTS   OF   THE   VICTORY   OVER   GALILEO.  153

scientific  warriors  had  stirred  new  life  in  him,  and  he  was
working  over  and  summing  up  in  his  mighty  mind  all  the
researches  of  his  time.  The  result  would  have  made  an
epoch  in  history.  His  aim  was  to  combine  all  knowledge
and  thought  into  a  Treatise  on  the  World,  and  in  view  of  this
he  gave  eleven  years  to  the  study  of  anatomy  alone.  But
the  fate  of  Galileo  robbed  him  of  all  hope,  of  all  courage  ;
the  battle  seemed  lost ;  he  gave  up  his  great  plan  forever."^

But  ere  long  it  was  seen  that  this  triumph  of  the  Church
was  in  reality  a  prodigious  defeat.  From  all  sides  came
proofs  that  Copernicus  and  Galileo  were  right;  and  although
Pope  Urban  and  the  Inquisition  held  Galileo  in  strict  seclu-
sion, forbidding  him  even  to  speak  regarding  the  double  mo-
tion of  the  earth ;  and  although  this  condemnation  of  "  all
books  which  affirm  the  motion  of  the  earth "  was  kept  on
the  Index-,  and  although  the  papal  bull  still  bound  the  hidex
and  the  condemnations  in  it  on  the  consciences  of  the  faith-
ful ;  and  although  colleges  and  universities  under  Church
control  were  compelled  to  teach  the  old  doctrine— it  was
seen  by  clear-sighted  men  everywhere  that  this  victory  of
the  Church  was  a  disaster  to  the  victors.

New  champions  pressed  on.  Campanella,  full  of  vagaries
as  he  was,  wrote  his  Apology  for  Galileo,  though  for  that  and
other  heresies,  religious  and  political,  he  seven  times  under-
went torture.

And  Kepler  comes :  he  leads  science  on  to  greater  vic-
tories. Copernicus,  great  as  he  was,  could  not  disentangle
scientific  reasoning  entirely  from  the  theological  bias  :  the
doctrines  of  Aristotle  and  Thomas  Aquinas  as  to  the  neces-
sary superiority  of  the  circle  had  vitiated  the  minor  features
of  his  system,  and  left  breaches  in  it  through  which  the
enemy  was  not  slow  to  enter ;  but  Kepler  sees  these  errors,
and  by  wonderful  genius  and  vigour  he  gives  to  the  world
the  three  laws  which  bear  his  name,  and  this  fortress  of  sci-


*  For  Descartes's  discouragement,  see  Humboldt,  Cosmos,  London,  1851,  vol.
iii,  p.  21  ;  also  Lange.  Geschichte  des  Materialismus,  English  translation,  vol.  i,  pp.
248,  249,  where  the  letters  of  Descartes  are  given,  showing  his  despair,  and  the
relinquishment  of  his  best  thoughts  and  works  in  order  to  preserve  peace  with  the
Church  ;  also  Saisset,  Descartes  et  ses  Pr^curseiirs,  pp.  100  et  s'q.;  also  Jolly,  His-
toire  du  Mouvement  intellecUiel  au  XVI^  Sikle,  vol.  i,  p.  390,


154


ASTRONOMY.


ence  is  complete.  He  thinks  and  speaks  as  one  inspired.
His  battle  is  severe.  He  is  solemnly  warned  by  the  Prot-
estant Consistory  of  Stuttgart  "  not  to  throw  Christ's  king-
dom into  confusion  with  his  silly  fancies,"  and  as  solemnly
ordered  to  "  bring  his  theory  of  the  world  into  harmony
with  Scripture  "  :  he  is  sometimes  abused,  sometimes  ridi-
culed, sometimes  imprisoned.  Protestants  in  Styria  and
WUrtemberg,  Catholics  in  Austria  and  Bohemia,  press  upon
him  ;  but  Newton,  Halley,  Bradley,  and  other  great  astrono-
mers follow,  and  to  science  remains  the  victory."^

Yet  this  did  not  end  the  war.  During  the  seventeenth
century,  in  France,  after  all  the  splendid  proofs  added  by
Kepler,  no  one  dared  openly  teach  the  Copernican  theory,
and  Cassini,  the  great  astronomer,  never  declared  for  it.  In
1672  the  Jesuit  Father  Riccioli  declared  that  there  were
precisely  forty-nine  arguments  for  the  Copernican  theory
and  seventy-seven  against  it.  Even  after  the  beginning  of
the  eighteenth  century— long  after  the  demonstrations  of
Sir  Isaac  Newton — Bossuet,  the  great  Bishop  of  Meaux,  the
foremost  theologian  that  France  has  ever  produced,  de-
clared it  contrary  to  Scripture.

Nor  did  matters  seem  to  improve  rapidly  during  that
century.  In  England,  John  Hutchinson,  as  we  have  seen,
published  in  1724  his  Moses'  Principia  maintaining  that  the
Flebrew  Scriptures  are  a  perfect  system  of  natural  phi-
losophy, and  are  opposed  to  the  Newtonian  system  of  gravi-
tation ;  and,  as  we  have  also  seen,  he  was  followed  by  a  long
list  of  noted  men  in  the  Church.  In  France,  two  eminent
mathematicians  pubhshed   in    1748   an  edition  of   Newton's


*  For  Campanella,  see  Amabile,  Fm  Tommaso  Campanella,  Naples,  1882,  espe-
cially vol.  iii ;  also  Libri,  vol.  iv,  pp.  149  et  seq.  Fromundus,  speaking  of  Kepler's
explanation,  says,  *'  Vix  teneo  ebullientem  ristwi"  This  is  almost  equal  to  the
Nezu  York  Church  Journal,  speaking  of  John  Stuart  Mill  as  "  that  small  sciolist,"
and  of  the  preface  to  Dr.  Draper's  great  work  as  "  chippering."  How  a  journal,
generally  so  fair  in  its  treatment  of  such  subjects,  can  condescend  to  such  weapons,
is  one  of  the  wonders  of  modern  journalism.  For  the  persecution  of  Kepler,  see
Heller,  Geschichte  der  Physik,  vol.  i,  pp.  281  et  seq. ;  also  Reuschle,  Kepler  und  die
Astronomie,  Frankfurt  a.  M.,  1871,  pp.  87  et  seq.  ;  also  Prof.  Sigwart,  Klcine  Schrif-
ten,  pp.  211  et  seq.  There  is  poetic  justice  in  the  fact  that  these  two  last-named
books  come  from  W^Urtemberg  professors.  See  also  The  New-Englander  for  March,
1884,  p.  178.


RESULTS  OF    THE    VICTORY   OVER    GALILEO.  155

Principia ;  but,  in  order  to  avert  ecclesiastical  censure,  they
felt  obliged  to  prefix  to  it  a  statement  absolutely  false.
Three  years  later,  Boscovich,  the  great  mathematician  of
the  Jesuits,  used  these  words :  "  As  for  me,  full  of  respect
for  the  Holy  Scriptures  and  the  decree  of  the  Holy  Inquisi-
tion, I  regard  the  earth  as  immovable  ;  nevertheless,  for  sim-
plicity in  explanation  I  will  argue  as  if  the  earth  moves ;  for
it  is  proved  that  of  the  two  hypotheses  the  appearances
favour  this  idea."

In  Germany,  especially  in  the  Protestant  part  of  it,  the
war  was  even  more  bitter,  and  it  lasted  through  the  first  half
of  the  eighteenth  century.  Eminent  Lutheran  doctors  of
divinity  flooded  the  countr}^  with  treatises  to  prove  that  the
Copernican  theory  could  not  be  reconciled  with  Scripture.
In  the  theological  seminaries  and  in  many  of  the  universities
where  clerical  influence  was  strong  they  seemed  to  sweep
all  before  them  ;  and  yet  at  the  middle  of  the  century  we
find  some  of  the  clearest-headed  of  them  aware  of  the  fact
that  their  cause  was  lost.*

In  1757  the  most  enlightened  perhaps  in  the  whole  line
of  the  popes,  Benedict  XIV,  took  up  the  matter,  and  the
Congregation  of  the  hidex  secretly  allowed  the  ideas  of  Co-
pernicus to  be  tolerated.  Yet  in  1765  Lalande,  the  great
French  astronomer,  tried  in  vain  at  Rome  to  induce  the
authorities  to  remove  Galileo's  works  from  the  Index.  Even
at  a  date  far  within  our  own  nineteenth  century  the  authori-
ties of  many  universities  in  Catholic  Europe,  and  especially
those  in  Spain,  excluded  the  Newtonian  system.  In  1771  the
greatest  of  them  all,  the  University  of  Salamanca,  being
urged  to  teach  physical  science,  refused,  making  answer  as
follows:  "  Newton  teaches  nothing  that  would  make  a  good


*  For  Cassini's  position,  see  Henri  Martin,  Histoire  de  France,  vol.  xiii,  p.  175.
For  Riccioli,  see  Daunou,  Etudes  Historiqties,  vol.  ii,  p.  439-  I' o^  Bossuet,  see
Bertrand,  p.  41.  For  Hutchinson,  see  Lyell,  Principles  of  Geology,  p.  48.  For
Wesley,  see  his  work,  already  cited.  As  to  Boscovich,  his  declaration,  mentioned
in  the  text,  was  in  1746,  but  in  1785  he  seemed  to  feel  his  position  in  view  of  his-
tory, and  apologized  abjectly  :  Bertrand,  pp.  60,  61.  See  also  Whewell's  notice  of
Le  Sueur  and  Jacquier's  introduction  to  their  edition  of  Newton's  Principia.  For
the  struggle  in  (iermany,  see  Zoeckler,  Geschichte  der  Beziehutigen  zivischen  Theo-
logie  und  Natur^vissenschaft,  vol.  ii,  pp.  45  et  seq.


156


ASTRONOxMY.


logician  or  metaphysician  ;  and  Gassendi  and  Descartes  do
not  agree  so  well  with  revealed  truth  as  Aristotle  does."

Vengeance  upon  the  dead  also  has  continued  far  into  our
own  century.  On  the  5th  of  May,  1829,  a  great  multitude
assembled  at  Warsaw  to  honour  the  memory  of  Copernicus
and  to  unveil  Thorwaldsen's  statue  of  him.

Copernicus  had  lived  a  pious,  Christian  life ;  he  had  been
beloved  for  unostentatious  Christian  charity  ;  with  his  re-
ligious belief  no  fault  had  ever  been  found  ;  he  was  a  canon
of  the  Church  at  Frauenberg,  and  over  his  grave  had  been
written  the  most  touching  of  Christian  epitaphs.  Naturally,
then,  the  people  expected  a  religious  service ;  all  was  under-
stood to  be  arranged  for  it ;  the  procession  marched  to  the
church  and  waited.  The  hour  passed,  and  no  priest  ap-
peared ;  none  could  be  induced  to  appear.  Copernicus,
gentle,  charitable,  pious,  one  of  the  noblest  gifts  of  God  to
religion  as  well  as  to  science,  was  evidently  still  under  the
ban.  Five  years  after  that,  his  book  was  still  standing  on
the  Index  of  books  prohibited  to  Christians.

The  edition  of  the  Index  published  in  18 19  was  as  inexo-
rable toward  the  works  of  Copernicus  and  Galileo  as  its
predecessors  had  been;  but  in  the  year  1820  came  a  crisis.
Canon  Settele,  Professor  of  Astronomy  at  Rome,  had  written
an  elementary  book  in  which  the  Copernican  system  was
taken  for  granted.  The  Master  of  the  Sacred  Palace,  An-
fossi,  as  censor  of  the  press,  refused  to  allow  the  book  to  be
printed  unless  Settele  revised  his  work  and  treated  the  Co-
pernican theory  as  merely  a  hypothesis.  On  this  Settele  ap-
pealed to  Pope  Pius  VII,  and  the  Pope  referred  the  matter
to  the  Congregation  of  the  Holy  Ofifice.  At  last,  on  the  i6th
of  August,  1820,  it  was  decided  that  Settele  might  teach  the
Copernican  system  as  established,  and  this  decision  was  ap-
proved by  the  Pope.  This  aroused  considerable  discussion,
but  finally,  on  the  nth  of  September,  1822,  the  cardinals  of
the  Holy  Inquisition  graciously  agreed  that  '*  the  printing
and  publication  of  works  treating  of  the  motion  of  the  earth
and  the  stability  of  the  sun,  in  accordance  with  the  general
opinion  of  modern  astronomers,  is  permitted  at  Rome."
This  decree  was  ratified  by  Pius  VII,  but  it  was  not  until
thirteen  years  later,  in  1835,  that  there  was  issued  an  edition


RESULTS   OF   THE   VICTORY   OVER   GALILEO.


157


of  the  Index  from  which  the  condemnation  of  works  defend-
inof  the  double  motion  of  the  earth  was  left  out.

This  was  not  a  moment  too  soon,  for,  as  if  the  previous
proofs  had  not  been  sufficient,  each  of  the  motions  of  the
earth  was  now  absolutely  demonstrated  anew,  so  as  to  be
recognised  by  the  ordinary  observer.  The  parallax  of  fixed
stars,  shown  by  Bessel  as  well  as  other  noted  astronomers  in
1838,  clinched  forever  the  doctrine  of  the  revolution  of  the
earth  around  the  sun,  and  in  185 1  the  great  experiment  of
Foucault  with  the  pendulum  showed  to  the  human  eye  the
earth  in  motion  around  its  own  axis.  To  make  the  matter
complete,  this  experiment  was  publicly  made  in  one  of  the
churches  at  Rome  by  the  eminent  astronomer,  Father  Sec-
chi,  of  the  Jesuits,  in  1852 — just  two  hundred  and  twenty
years  after  the  Jesuits  had  done  so  much  to  secure  Galileo's
condemnation.*


*  For  good  statements  of  the  final  action  of  the  Church  in  the  matter,  see
Gebler;  also  Zoeckler,  ii,  352.  See  also  Bertrand,  Fondateurs  de  T Astronomie
moderne,  p.  61  ;  Flammarion,  Vie  de  Copernic,  chap.  ix.  As  to  the  time  when  the
decree  of  condemnation  was  repealed,  there  have  been  various  pious  attempts  to
make  it  earlier  than  the  reality.  Artaud,  p.  307,  cited  in  an  apologetic  article  in
the  Dublin  Review,  September,  1865,  says  that  Galileo's  famous  dialogue  was  pub-
lished in  1714,  at  Padua,  entire,  and  with  the  usual  approbations.  The  same  article
also  declares  that  in  1818  the  ecclesiastical  decrees  were  repealed  by  Pius  VII
in  full  Consistory.  Whewell  accepts  this  ;  but  Cantu,  an  authority  favourable  to
the  Church,  acknowledges  that  Copernicus's  work  remained  on  the  Index  as  late  as
1835  (Cantu,  Histoire  universelle,  vol.  xv,  p.  483)  ;  and  with  this  Th.  Martin,  not
less  favourable  to  the  Church,  but  exceedingly  careful  as  to  the  facts,  agrees  ;  and
the  most  eminent  authority  of  all,  Prof.  Reusch,  of  Bonn,  in  his  Der  hidex  der
verbotenen  BUchcr,  Bonn,  1885,  vol.  ii,  p.  396,  confirms  the  above  statement  in  the
text.  For  a  clear  statement  of  Bradley's  exquisite  demonstration  of  the  Coperni-
can  theory  by  reasonings  upon  the  rapidity  of  light,  etc.,  and  Foucault's  exhibition
of  the  rotation  of  the  earth  by  the  pendulum  experiment,  see  Hoefer,  Histoire  de
I  Astronomie,  pp.  492  et  seq.  For  more  recent  proofs  of  the  Copernican  theory,  by
the  discoveries  of  Bunsen,  Bischoff,  Benzenburg,  and  others,  see  Jevons,  Principles
of  Science.


158  ASTRONOMY.

VI.    THE    RETREAT   OF    THE    CHURCH    AFTER    ITS   VICTORY
OVER   GALILEO.

Any  history  of  the  victory  of  astronomical  science  over
dogmatic  theology  would  be  incomplete  without  some  ac-
count of  the  retreat  made  by  the  Church  from  all  its  former
positions  in  the  Galileo  case.

The  retreat  of  the  Protestant  theologians  was  not  difficult.
A  little  skilful  warping  of  Scripture,  a  little  skilful  use  of
that  time-honoured  phrase,  attributed  to  Cardinal  Baronius,
that  the  Bible  is  given  to  teach  us,  not  how  the  heavens  go,
but  how  men  go  to  heaven,  and  a  free  use  of  explosive  rhet-
oric against  the  pursuing  army  of  scientists,  sufficed.

But  in  the  older  Church  it  was  far  less  easy.  The  re-
treat of  the  sacro-scientific  army  of  Church  apologists  lasted
through  two  centuries.

In  spite  of  all  that  has  been  said  by  these  apologists,
there  no  longer  remains  the  shadow  of  a  doubt  that  the  papal
infallibility  was  committed  fully  and  irrevocably  against  the
double  revolution  of  the  earth.  As  the  documents  of  Gali-
leo's trial  now  published  show,  Paul  V,  in  1616,  pushed  on
with  all  his  might  the  condemnation  of  Galileo  and  of  the
works  of  Copernicus  and  of  all  others  teaching  the  motion  of
the  earth  around  its  own  axis  and  around  the  sun.  So,
too,  in  the  condemnation  of  Galileo  in  1633,  and  in  all  the
proceedings  which  led  up  to  it  and  which  followed  it,  Urban
VIll  was  the  central  figure.  Without  his  sanction  no  action
could  have  been  taken.

True,  the  Pope  did  not  formall}^  sign  the  decree  against
the  Copernican  theory  tJicn;  but  this  came  later.  In  1664
Alexander  VII  prefixed  to  the  Index  containing  the  con-
demnations of  the  works  of  Copernicus  and  Galileo  and  ''  all
books  which  affirm  the  motion  of  the  earth  "  a  papal  bull
signed  by  himself,  binding  the  contents  of  the  Index  upon
the  consciences  of  the  faithful.  This  bull  confirmed  and  ap-
proved in  express  terms,  finally,  decisively,  and  infallibly,
the  condemnation  of  "  all  books  teaching  the  movement  of
the  earth  and  the  stability  of  the  sun."*

*  See  Rev.  William  W.  Roberts,  The  Pontifical  Decrees  against  the  Doctrine


THE    RETREAT    OF   THE    CHURCH.  jrg

The  position  of  the  mother  Church  had  been  thus  made
especially  difficult ;  and  the  first  important  move  in  retreat
by  the  apologists  was  the  statement  that  Galileo  was  con-
demned, not  because  he  affirmed  the  motion  of  the  earth,
but  because  he  supported  it  from  Scripture.  There  was  a
slight  appearance  of  truth  in  this.  Undoubted!}',  Galileo's
letters  to  Castelli  and  the  grand  duchess,  in  which  he  at-
tempted to  show  that  his  astronomical  doctrines  were  not
opposed  to  Scripture,  gave  a  new  stir  to  religious  bigotry.
For  a  considerable  time,  then,  this  quibble  served  its  pur-
pose ;  even  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  after  Galileo's  con-
demnation it  was  renewed  by  the  Protestant  Mallet  du  Pan,
in  his  wish  to  gain  favour  from  the  older  Church.

But  nothing  can  be  more  absurd,  in  the  light  of  the  origi-
nal documents  recently  brought  out  of  the  Vatican  archives,
than  to  make  this  contention  now.  The  letters  of  Gali-
leo to  Castelli  and  the  Grand-Duchess  were  not  published
until  after  the  condemnation;  and,  although  the  Archbishop
of  Pisa  had  endeavoured  to  use  them  against  him,  they  were
but  casually  mentioned  in  1616,  and  entirely  left  out  of  view
in  1633.  What  was  condemned  in  1616  by  the  Sacred  Con-
gregation held  in  the  presence  of  Pope  Paul  V,  as  ''absurd,
false  in  theology,  and  heretical,  because  absolutely  contrary  to
Holy  Scripture,''  was  the  proposition  that  ''  tJie  sun  is  the  cen-
tre about  ivhich  the  earth  revolves  "  ;  and  what  was  condemned
as  ''absurd,  false  in  pJiilosopJiy,  and  from  a  tJieologic  point  of
viezv,  at  least,  opposed  to  the  true  faith,''  was  the  proposition
that  "  the  earth  is  not  the  centre  of  the  universe  and  immovable,
but  has  a  diurnal  motion."

And  again,  what  Galileo  was  made,  by  express  order  of
Pope  Urban,  and  by  the  action  of  the  Inquisition  under
threat  of  torture,  to  abjure  in  1633,  was  "  tJie  error  and  heresy
of  the  movement  of  the  earth."

What  the  Index  condemned  under  sanction  of  the  bull


of  the  Earth's  Movement,  London,  1885,  p.  94  ;  and  for  the  text  of  the  papal  bull,
Speculatores  domtis  Israel,  pp.  132,  133,  see  also  St.  George  Mivart's  article  in
the  A'ineteenth  Century  for  July,  1885.  For  the  authentic  publication  of  the  bull,
see  preface  to  the  Index  of  1664,  where  the  bull  appears,  signed  by  the  Pope.  The
Rev.  Mr.  Roberts  and  Mr.  St.  George  Mivart  are  Roman  Catholics,  and  both
acknowledge  that  the  papal  sanction  was  fully  given.


l6o  ASTRONOMY.


issued  by  Alexander  VII  in  1664  was,  ''all  books  teaching  the
movement  of  the  earth  and  the  stability  of  the  stin^

What  the  Index,  prefaced  by  papal  bulls,  infallibly  bind-
ing its  contents  upon  the  consciences  of  the  faithful,  for
nearly  two  hundred  years  steadily  condemned  was,  ''all
books  which  affirm  the  motion  of  the  earths

Not  one  of  these  condemnations  was  directed  against
Galileo  ''for  reconciling  his  ideas  with  Scripture."-^

Having  been  dislodged  from  this  point,  the  Church  apol-
ogists sought  cover  under  the  statement  that  Galileo  was
condemned  not  for  heresy,  but  for  contumacy  and  want  of
respect  toward  the  Pope.

There  was  a  slight  chance,  also,  for  this  quibble:  no
doubt  Urban  VIII,  one  of  the  haughtiest  of  pontiffs,  was  in-
duced by  Galileo's  enemies  to  think  that  he  had  been  treated
with  some  lack  of  proper  etiquette:  first,  by  Galileo's  adhe-
sion to  his  own  doctrines  after  his  condemnation  in  1616;
and,  next,  by  his  supposed  reference  in  the  Dialogue  of  1632
to  the  arguments  which  the  Pope  had  used  against  him.

But  it  would  seem  to  be  a  very  poor  service  rendered  to
the  doctrine  of  papal  infallibility  to  claim  that  a  decision  so
immense  in  its  consequences  could  be  influenced  by  the
personal  resentment  of  the  reigning  pontiff.

Again,  as  to  the  first  point,  the  very  language  of  the
various  sentences  shows  the  folly  of  this  assertion  ;  for  these
sentences  speak  always  of  "heresy,"  and  never  of  ''con-
tumacy." As  to  the  last  point,  the  display  of  the  original
documents  settled  that  forever.  They  show  Galileo  from
first  to  last  as  most  submissive  toward  the  Pope,  and  patient
under  the  papal  arguments  and  exactions.  He  had,  indeed,
expressed  his  anger  at  times  against  his  traducers ;  but  to
hold  this  the  cause  of  the  judgment  against  him  is  to  de-
grade the  whole  proceedings,  and  to  convict  Paul  V,  Urban

*  For  the  original  trial  documents,  copied^  carefully  from  the  Vatican  manu-
scripts, see  the  Roman  Catholic  authority,  L'Epinois,  especially  p.  35,  where  the
principal  document  is  given  in  its  original  Latin  ;  see  also  Gebler,  Die  Aden  des
Galilei' schen  Processes,  for  still  more  complete  copies  of  the  same  documents.  For
minute  information  regarding  these  documents  and  their  publication,  see  Favaro,
Miscellanea  Galileana  Inedita,  forming  vol.  xxii,  part  iii,  of  the  Memoirs  of  the
Venetian  Institute  for  1887,  and  especially  pp.  891  and  following.


THE    RETREAT    OF    THE   CHURCH.  l6l

VIII,  Bellarmin,  the  other  theologians,  and  the  Inquisition,
of  direct  falsehood,  since  they  assigned  entirely  different  rea-
sons for  their  conduct.  From  this  position,  therefore,  the
assailants  retreated."^

The  next  rally  was  made  about  the  statement  that  the
persecution  of  Galileo  was  the  result  of  a  quarrel  between
Aristotelian  professors  on  one  side  and  professors  favouring
the  experimental  method  on  the  other.  But  this  position
was  attacked  and  carried  by  a  very  simple  statement.  If
the  divine  guidance  of  the  Church  is  such  that  it  can  be
dragged  into  a  professorial  squabble,  and  made  the  tool  of  a
faction  in  bringing  about  a  most  disastrous  condemnation  of
a  proved  truth,  how  did  the  Church  at  that  time  differ  from
any  human  organization  sunk  into  decrepitude,  managed
nominally  by  simpletons,  but  really  by  schemers?  If  that
argument  be  true,  the  condition  of  the  Church  was  even
worse  than  its  enemies  have  declared  it ;  and  amid  the  jeers
of  an  unfeeling  world  the  apologists  sought  new  shelter.

The  next  point  at  which  a  stand  was  made  was  the  asser-
tion that  the  condemnation  of  Galileo  was  "  provisory  "  ;  but
this  proved  a  more  treacherous  shelter  than  the  others.  The
wordinof  of  the  decree  of  condemnation  itself  is  a  sufficient
answer  to  this  claim.  When  doctrines  have  been  solemnly
declared,  as  those  of  Galileo  were  solemnly  declared  under
sanction  of  the  highest  authority  in  the  Church,  "  contrary
to  the  sacred  Scriptures,"  "  opposed  to  the  true  faith,"  and
"false  and  absurd  in  theology  and  philosophy  " — to  say  that
such  declarations  are  *'  provisory  "  is  to  say  that  the  truth
held  by  the  Church  is  not  immutable ;  from  this,  then,  the
apologists  retreated. t

Still  another  contention  was  made,  in  some  respects  more
curious  than  any  other :  it  was,  mainly,  that  Galileo  **  was
no  more  a  victim  of  Catholics  than  of  Protestants ;  for  they

*  The  invention  of  the  "  contumacy  "  quibble  seems  due  to  Monsignor  Marini,
who  appears  also  to  have  manipulated  the  original  documents  to  prove  it.  Even
Whewell  was  evidently  somewhat  misled  by  him,  but  Whewell  wrote  before  L'Epi-
nois  had  shown  all  the  documents,  and  under  the  supposition  that  Marini  was
an  honest  man.

f  This  argument  also  seems  to  have  been  foisted  upon  the  world  by  the  wily
Monsignor  Marini.
12


1 62  ASTRONOMY.

more  than  the  Catholic  theologians  impelled  the  Pope  to  the
action  taken."  ^

But  if  Protestantism  could  force  the  papal  hand  in  a
matter  of  this  magnitude,  involving  vast  questions  of  belief
and  far-reaching  questions  of  policy,  what  becomes  of  "in-
errancy " — of  special  protection  and  guidance  of  the  papal
authority  in  matters  of  faith  ?

While  this  retreat  from  position  to  position  was  going  on,
there  was  a  constant  discharge  of  small-arms,  in  the  shape  of
innuendoes,  hints,  and  sophistries  :  every  effort  was  made  to
blacken  Galileo's  private  character :  the  irregularities  of  his
early  life  were  dragged  forth,  and  stress  was  even  laid  upon
breaches  of  etiquette  ;  but  this  succeeded  so  poorly  that
even  as  far  back  as  1850  it  was  thought  necessary  to  cover
the  retreat  by  some  more  careful  strategy.

This  new  strategy  is  instructive.  The  original  docu-
ments of  the  Galileo  trial  had  been  brought  during  the
Napoleonic  conquests  to  Paris;  but  in  1846  they  were  re-
turned to  Rome  by  the  French  Government,  on  the  express
pledge  by  the  papal  authorities  that  they  should  be  pub-
lished. In  1850,  after  many  delays  on  various  pretexts,  the
long-expected  publication  appeared.  The  personage  charged
with  presenting  them  to  the  world  was  Monsignor  Marini.
This  ecclesiastic  was  of  a  kind  w^hich  has  too  often  afflicted
both  the  Church  and  the  world  at  large.  Despite  the  solemn
promise  of  the  papal  court,  the  wily  Marini  became  the  in-
strument of  the  Roman  authorities  in  evading  the  promise.
By  suppressing  a  document  here,  and  interpolating  a  state-
ment there,  he  managed  to  give  plausible  standing-ground
for  nearly  every  important  sophistry  ever  broached  to  save
the  infallibility  of  the  Church  and  destroy  the  reputation  of
Galileo.  He  it  was  who  supported  the  idea  that  Galileo
was  *'  condemned  not  for  heresy,  but  for  contumacy."

The  first  effect  of  Monsignor  Marini's  book  seemed  use-
ful in  covering  the  retreat  of  the  Church  apologists.  Aided
by  him,  such  vigorous  writers  as  Ward  were  able  to  throw

*  See  the  Rev.  A.  M.  Kirsch  on  Professor  Huxley  and  Evolution,  in  The  Amer-
ican Catholic  Quarterly,  October,  1877.  The  article  is,  as  a  whole,  remarkably
fair-minded,  and  in  the  main  just,  as  to  the  Protestant  attitude,  and  as  to  the
causes  underlying  the  whole  action  against  Galileo.


THE    RETREAT   OF   THE   CHURCH.


163


up  temporary  intrenchments  between  the  Roman  authori-
ties and  the  indignation  of  the  world.

But  some  time  later  came  an  investigator  very  different
from  Monsignor  Marini.  This  was  a  Frenchman,  M.  L'Epi-
nois.  Like  Marini,  L'Epinois  was  devoted  to  the  Church  ;
but,  unlike  Marini,  he  could  not  lie.  Having  obtained  ac-
cess in  1867  to  the  Galileo  documents  at  the  Vatican,  he
published  several  of  the  most  important,  without  suppres-
sion or  pious-fraudulent  manipulation.  This  made  all  the
intrenchments  based  upon  Marini's  statements  untenable.
Another  retreat  had  to  be  made.

And  now  came  the  most  desperate  effort  of  all.  The
apologetic  army,  reviving  an  idea  which  the  popes  and  the
Church  had  spurned  for  centuries,  declared  that  the  popes
as  popes  had  never  condemned  the  doctrines  of  Copernicus
and  Galileo  ;  that  they  had  condemned  them  as  men  simply  ;
that  therefore  the  Church  had  never  been  committed  to
them  ;  that  the  condemnation  was  made  by  the  cardinals  of
the  Inquisition  and  Index  ;  and  that  the  Pope  had  evidently
been  restrained  by  interposition  of  Providence  from  signing
their  condemnation.  Nothing  could  show  the  desperation
of  the  retreating  party  better  than  jugglery  like  this.  The
fact  is,  that  in  the  official  account  of  the  condemnation  by
Bellarmin,  in  1616,  he  declares  distinctly  that  he  makes  this
condemnation  "in  the  name  of  His  Holiness  the  Pope.""^

Again,  from  Pope  Urban  downward,  among  the  Church
authorities  of  the  seventeenth  century  the  decision  was  al-
ways acknowledged  to  be  made  by  the  Pope  and  the  Church.
Urban  VIII  spoke  of  that  of  1616  as  made  by  Pope  Paul  V
and  the  Church,  and  of  that  of  1633  as  made  by  himself  and
the  Church.  Pope  Alexander,  VII  in  1664,  in  his  bull  Speai-
latores,  solemnly  sanctioned  the  condemnation  of  all  books
affirming  the  earth's  movement. f

When  Gassendi  attempted  to  raise  the  point  that  the  de-

*  See  the  citation  from  the  Vatican  manuscript  given  in  Gebler,  p.  78.

f  For  references  by  Urban  VIII  to  the  condemnation  as  made  by  Pope  Paul  V
see  pp.  136,  144,  and  elsewhere  in  Martin,  who  much  against  his  will  is  forced  to
allow  this.  See  also  Roberts,  Pontifical  Decrees  against  the  Earth's  Movement,
and  St.  George  Mivart's  article,  as  above  quoted  ;  also  Reusch,  Index  der  verbo-
tenen  Bucher^  Bonn,  1885,  vol.  ii,  pp.  29  et  seq.


164  ASTRONOMY.

cision  against  Copernicus  and  Galileo  was  not  sanctioned  by
the  Church  as  such,  an  eminent  theological  authority,  Father
Lecazre,   rector  of  the  College    of    Dijon,  publicly  contra-
dieted  him,  and  declared  that  it  *'  was  not  certain  cardinals,
but  the  supreme   authority  of  the   Church,"  that  had  con-
demned Galileo ;  and  to  this  statement  the  Pope  and  other
Church  authorities  gave  consent  either  openly  or  by  silence.
When  Descartes  and   others   attempted   to   raise  the  same
point,  they   were   treated  with  contempt.     Father  Castelli,
who  had  devoted  himself  to  Galileo,  and  knew  to  his  cost
just  what  the  condemnation  meant  and  who  made  it,  takes
it  for  granted,  in  his  letter  to  the  papal  authorities,  that  it
was  made  by  the  Church.     Cardinal  Querenghi,  in  his  let-
ters ;  the  ambassador  Guicciardini,  in  his  dispatches;    Po-
lacco,  in   his  refutation ;  the  historian  Viviani,  in   his  biog-
raphy of  Galileo— all  writing  under  Church  inspection  and
approval  at  the  time,  took  the  view  that  the  Pope  and  the
Church  condemned  Galileo,  and   this  was  never  denied  at
Rome.     The   Inquisition  itself,  backed  by  the  greatest  the-
ologian of  the  time  (Bellarmin),  took  the  same  view.     Not
only  does  he  declare  that  he  makes  the  condemnation  **  in
the  name  of  His  Holiness  the  Pope,"  but  we  have  the  Roman
Index,  containing  the  condemnation  for  nearly  two  hundred
years,  prefaced  by  a  solemn  bull  of  the  reigning  Pope  bind-
ing  this   condemnation    on   the    consciences    of   the    whole
Church,  and  declaring  year  after  year  that  ''  all  books  which
affirm  the  motion  of  the  earth"  are  damnable.     To  attempt
to  face  all  this,  added  to  the  fact  that  Galileo  was  required
to  abjure  "the  heresy  of  the  movement  of  the  earth"  by
written  order  of  the  Pope,  was  soon  seen  to  be  impossible.
Against  the  assertion  that  the  Pope  was  not  responsible  we
have  all  this  mass   of  testimonv,  and  the  bull  of  Alexander
VII  in  1664.-^


For  Lecazre's  answer  to  Gassendi,  see  Martin,  pp.  146,  147.  For  the  attempt
to  make  the  crime  of  Galileo  a  breach  of  etiquette,  see  Dublin  Reviexv,  as  above.
Whewell,  vol.  i,  p.  283.  Citation  from  Marini :  "  Galileo  was  punished  for  trifling
with  the  authorities,  to  which  he  refused  to  submit,  and  was  punished  for  obstinate
contumacy,  not  heresy."  The  sufficient  answer  to  all  this  is  that  the  words  of  the
inflexible  sentence  designating  the  condemned  books  are  '' Libri  omnes  qtd  affir-
mant  telluris  motumr    See  Bertrand,  p.  59.    As  to  the  idea  that  "  Galileo  was  pun-


THE    RETREAT   OF    THE   CHURCH.  165

This  contention,  then,  was  at  last  utterly  given  up  by
honest  Catholics  themselves.  In  1870  a  Roman  CathoHc
clergyman  in  England,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Roberts,  evidently
thinking  that  the  time  had  come  to  tell  the  truth,  published
a  book  entitled  The  Pontifical  Decrees  against  the  Earth! s  Move-
inent,  and  in  this  exhibited  the  incontrovertible  evidences
that  the  papacy  had  committed  itself  and  its  infallibility
fully  against  the  movement  of  the  earth.  This  Catholic
clergyman  showed  from  the  original  record  that  Pope  Paul  V,
in  1616,  had  presided  over  the  tribunal  condemning  the  doc-
trine of  the  earth's  movement,  and  ordering  Galileo  to  give
up  the  opinion.  He  showed  that  Pope  Urban  VIII,  in  1633,
pressed  on,  directed,  and  promulgated  the  final  condemna-
tion, making  himself  in  all  these  ways  responsible  for  it.
And,  finally,  he  showed  that  Pope  Alexander  VII,  in  1664,
by  his  bull — Spccnlatores  donms  Ar^'r/— attached  to  the  Index,
condemning  "all  books  which  afiirm  the  motion  of  the
earth,"  had  absolutely  pledged  the  papal  infallibility  against
the  earth's  movement.  He  also  confessed  that  under  the
rules  laid  down  by  the  highest  authorities  in  the  Church,
and  especially  by  Sixtus  V  and  Pius  IX,  there  was  no  escape
from  this  conclusion.

Various  theologians  attempted  to  evade  the  force  of  the
.argument.  Some,  like  Dr.  Ward  and  Bouix,  took  refuge  in
verbal  niceties;  some,  like  Dr.  Jeremiah  Murphy,  comforted
themselves  with  declamation.  The  only  result  was,  that  in
1885  came  another  edition  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Roberts's  work,
even  more  cogent  than  the  first ;  and,  besides  this,  an  essay
by  that  eminent  Catholic,  St.  George  Mivart,  acknowledging
the  Rev.   Mr.  Roberts's    position   to    be   impregnable,  and


ished  not  for  his  opinion,  but  for  basing  it  on  Scripture,"  the  answer  may  be  found
in  the  Roman  Index  of  1704,  in  which  are  noted  for  condemnation  ''  Libri  omnes
docentes  mohilitatem  terrce  et  immohilitatem  solis"  For  the  way  in  which,  when  it
was  found  convenient  in  argument.  Church  apologists  insisted  that  it  was  "  the  Su-
preme Chief  of  the  Church  by  a  pontifical  decree,  and  not  certain  cardinals,"  who
condemned  Galileo  and  his  doctrine,  see  Father  Lecazre's  letter  to  Gassendi,  in
Flammarion,  Phiraliti  dcs  Mondes,  p.  427,  and  Urban  VHEs  own  declarations  as
given  by  Martin.  For  the  way  in  which,  when  necessary.  Church  apologists  as-
serted the  very  contrary  of  this,  declaring  that  "  it  was  issued  in  a  doctrinal  decree
of  the  Congregation  of  the  Index,  and  not  as  the  Holy  Father's  teaching,"  see
Dublin  Review,  September,  1865.


1 66  ASTRONOMY.

declaring  virtually  that  the  Almighty  allowed  Pope  and
Church  to  fall  into  complete  error  regarding  the  Copernican
theory,  in  order  to  teach  them  that  science  lies  outside  their
province,  and  that  the  true  priesthood  of  scientific  truth
rests  with  scientific  investigators  alone.*

In  spite,  then,  of  all  casuistry  and  special  pleading,  this
sturdy  honesty  ended  the  controversy  among  Catholics
themselves,  so  far  as  fair-minded  men  are  concerned.

In  recalling  it  at  this  day  there  stand  out  from  its  later
phases  two  efforts  at  compromise  especially  instructive,  as
showing  the  embarrassment  of  militant  theology  in  the  nine-
teenth century.

The  first  of  these  was  made  by  John  Henry  Newman  in
the  days  when  he  was  hovering  between  the  Anglican  and
Roman  Churches.  In  one  of  his  sermons  before  the  Univer-
sity of  Oxford  he  spoke  as  follows :

■"  Scripture  says  that  the  sun  moves  and  the  earth  is  sta-
tionary, and  science  that  the  earth  moves  and  the  sun  is
comparatively  at  rest.  How  can  we  determine  which  of
these  opposite  statements  is  the  very  truth  till  we  know
what  motion  is  ?  If  our  idea  of  motion  is  but  an  accidental
result  of  our  present  senses,  neither  proposition  is  true  and
both  are  true  :  neither  true  philosophically  ;  both  true  for
certain  practical  purposes  in  the  system  in  which  they  are
respectively  found."

In  all  anti-theological  literature  there  is  no  utterance
more  hopelessly  skeptical.  And  for  what  were  the  youth  of
Oxford  led  into  such  bottomless  depths  of  disbelief  as  to  any
real  existence  of  truth  or  any  real  foundation  for  it  ?  Sim-
ply to  save  an  outworn  system  of  interpretation  into  which
the  gifted  preacher  happened  to  be  born.

The  other  utterance  was  suggested  by  De  Bonald  and
developed  in  the  Dublin  Review y  as  is  understood,  by  one  of
Newman's  associates.  This  argument  was  nothing  less  than
an  attempt  to  retreat  under  the  charge  of  deception  against
the  Almighty  himself.     It  is  as  follows :  "  But  it  may  well

*  For  this  crushing  answer  by  two  eminent  Roman  Catholics  to  the  sophistries
cited — an  answer  which  does  infinitely  more  credit  to  the  older  Church  than  all
the  perverted  ingenuity  used  in  concealing  the  truth  or  breaking  the  force  of  it —
see  Roberts  and  St.  George  Mivart,  as  already  cited.


THE    RETREAT   OF   THE   CHURCH.  167

be  doubted  whether  the  Church  did  retard  the  progress  of
scientific  truth.  What  retarded  it  was  the  circumstance
that  God  has  thought  fit  to  express  many  texts  of  Scripture
in  words  which  have  every  appearance  of  denying  the
earth's  motion.  But  it  is  God  who  did  this,  not  the  Church  ;
and,  moreover,  since  he  saw  fit  so  to  act  as  to  retard  the
progress  of  scientific  truth,  it  would  be  little  to  her  dis-
credit, even  if  it  were  true,  that  she  had  followed  his  ex-
ample."

This  argument,  like  Mr.  Gosse's  famous  attempt  to  rec-
oncile geology  to  Genesis — by  supposing  that  for  some  in-
scrutable purpose  God  deliberately  deceived  the  thinking
world  by  giving  to  the  earth  all  the  appearances  of  develop-
ment through  long  periods  of  time,  while  really  creating  it
in  six  days,  each  of  an  evening  and  a  morning — seems  only
to  have  awakened  the  amazed  pity  of  thinking  men.  This,
like  the  argument  of  Newman,  was  a  last  desperate  effort
of  Anglican  and  Roman  divines  to  save  something  from  the
wreckage  of  dogmatic  theology.*

All  these  well-meaning  defenders  of  the  faith  but  wrought
into  the  hearts  of  great  numbers  of  thinking  men  the  idea
that  there  is  a  necessary  antagonism  between  science  and
relio-ion.  Like  the  landsman  who  lashes  himself  to  the
anchor  of  the  sinking  ship,  they  simply  attached  Christian-
ity by  the  strongest  cords  of  logic  which  they  could  spin


*  For  the  quotation  from  Newman,  see  his  Sermons  on  the  Theory  of  Religious
Beliefs  sermon  xiv,  cited  by  Bishop  Goodwin  in  Contemporary  Review  for  January,
1892.  For  the  attempt  to  take  the  blame  off  the  shoulders  of  both  Pope  and  car-
dinals and  place  it  upon  the  Almighty,  see  the  article  above  cited,  in  the  Dublin
Revieza,  September,  1865,  p.  419,  and  July,  1871,  pp.  i57  ^i  ^eq.  For  a  good  sum-
mary of  the  various  attempts,  and  for  replies  to  them  in  a  spirit  of  judicial  fairness,
see  Th.  Martin,  Vie  de  Galilee,  though  there  is  some  special  pleading  to  save  the
infallibility  of  Pope  and  Church.  The  bibliography  at  the  close  is  very  valuable-
For  details  of  Mr.  Gosse's  theory,  as  developed  in  his  Omphalos,  see  the  chapter  on
Geology  in  this  work.  As  to  a  still  later  attempt,  see  Wegg-Prosser,  Galileo  and
his  Judges,  London,  1889,  the  main  thing  in  it  being  an  attempt  to  establish,
against  the  honest  and  honourable  concessions  of  Catholics  like  Roberts  and  Mivart^
sundry  far-fetched  and  wire-drawn  distinctions  between  dogmatic  and  disciplinary
bulls— an  attempt  which  will  only  deepen  the  distrust  of  straightforward  reasoners.
The  author's  point  of  view  is  stated  in  the  words,  "  I  have  maintained  that  the
Church  has  a  right  to  lay  her  restraining  hand  on  the  speculations  of  natural
science  "  (p.  167).


l68  ASTRONOMY.

to  these  mistaken  ideas  in  science,  and,  could  they  have  had
their  way,  the  advance  of  knowledge  would  have  ingulfed
both  together.

On  the  other  hand,  what  had  science  done  for  religion?
Simply  this :  Copernicus,  escaping  persecution  only  by
death  ;  Giordano  Bruno,  burned  alive  as  a  monster  of  im-
piety ;  Galileo,  imprisoned  and  humiliated  as  the  worst  of
misbelievers;  Kepler,  accused  of  "throwing  Christ's  king-
dom into  confusion  with  his  silly  fancies " ;  Newton,
bitterly  attacked  for  "  dethroning  Providence,"  gave  to
religion  stronger  foundations  and  more  ennobling  concep-
tions.

Under  the  old  system,  that  princely  astronomer,  Al-
phonso  of  Castile,  seeing  the  inadequacy  of  the  Ptolemaic
theory,  yet  knowing  no  other,  startled  Europe  with  the  blas-
phemy that,  if  he  had  been  present  at  creation,  he  could
have  suggested  a  better  order  of  the  heavenly  bodies.
Under  the  new  system,  Kepler,  filled  with  a  religious
spirit,  exclaimed,  "  I  do  think  the  thoughts  of  God."  The
difference  in  religious  spirit  between  these  two  men  marks
the  conquest  made  in  this  long  struggle  by  Science  for
Religion.*

Nothing  is  more  unjust  than  to  cast  especial  blame  for
all  this  resistance  to  science  upon  the  Roman  Church.  The
Protestant  Church,  though  rarely  able  to  be  so  severe,  has
been  more  blameworthy.  The  persecution  of  Galileo  and
his  compeers  by  the  older  Church  was  mainly  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  seventeenth  century ;  the  persecution  of  Robert-
son Smith,  and  Winchell,  and  Woodrow,  and  Toy,  and  the
young  professors  at  Beyrout,  by  various  Protestant  authori-
ties, was  near  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century.  Those
earlier  persecutions  by  Catholicism  were  strictly  in  accord-
ance with  principles  held  at  that  time  by  all  religionists,
Catholic  and  Protestant,  throughout  the  world  ;  these  later
persecutions  by  Protestants  were  in  defiance  of  principles
which  all  Protestants  to-day  hold  or  pretend  to  hold,  and
none  make  louder  claim  to  hold  them  than  the  very  sects

*  As  a  pendant  to  this  ejaculation  of  Kepler  may  be  cited  the  words  of  Lin-
naeus :  '' Deum  dmnipotentem  a  tergo  transeunteni  vidi  et  obstupui,"


THE    RETREAT    OF    THE    CHURCH.  l6^

which  persecuted  these  eminent  Christian  men  of  our  day,
men  whose  crime  was  that  they  were  intelligent  enough  to
accept  the  science  of  their  time,  and  honest  enough  to
acknowledge  it.

Most  unjustly,  then,  would  Protestantism  taunt  Catholi-
cism for  excluding  knowledge  of  astronomical  truths  from
European  Catholic  universities  in  the  seventeenth  and  eight-
eenth centuries,  while  real  knowledge  of  geological  and
biological  and  anthropological  truth  is  denied  or  pitifully
diluted  in  so  many  American  Protestant  colleges  and  uni-
versities in  the  nineteenth  century.

Nor  has  Protestantism  the  right  to  point  with  scorn  to
the  Catholic  Indcx^  and  to  lay  stress  on  the  tact  that  nearly
every  really  important  book  in  the  last  three  centuries
has  been  forbidden  by  it,  so  long  as  young  men  in  so  many
American  Protestant  universities  and  colleges  are  nursed
with  "  ecclesiastical  pap "  rather  than  with  real  thought,
and  directed  to  the  works  of  "  solemnly  constituted  im-
postors," or  to  sundry  "  approved  courses  of  reading,"
while  they  are  studiously  kept  aloof  from  such  leaders  in
modern  thought  as  Darwin,  Spencer,  Huxley,  Draper,  and
Lecky.

It  may  indeed  be  justly  claimed  by  Protestantism  that
some  of  the  former  strongholds  of  her  bigotry  have  be-
come liberalized ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  Catholicism  can
point  to  the  fact  that  Pope  Leo  XIII,  now  happily  reign-
ing, has  made  a  noble  change  as  regards  open  dealing
with  documents.  The  days  of  Monsignor  Marini,  it  may
be  hoped,  are  gone.  The  Vatican  Library,  with  its  masses
of  historical  material,  has  been  thrown  open  to  Protestant
and  Catholic  scholars  alike,  and  this  privilege  has  been
freely  used  by  men  representing  all  shades  of  religious
thought.

As  to  the  older  errors,  the  whole  civilized  world  was  at
fault,  Protestant  as  well  as  Catholic.  It  was  not  the  fault
of  religion  ;  it  was  the  fault  of  that  short-sighted  linking  of
theological  dogmas  to  scriptural  texts  which,  in  utter  de-
fiance of  the  words  and  works  of  the  Blessed  Founder
of  Christianity,  narrow-minded,  loud-voiced  men  are  ever
prone  to  substitute  for  religion.     Justly  is  it  said  by  one  of


jyo  ASTRONOMY.

the  most  eminent  among  contemporary  Anglican  divines,
that  "  it  is  because  they  have  mistaken  the  dawn  for  a
conflagration  that  theologians  have  so  often  been  foes  of
li^ht."*


*  For  an  exceedingly  striking  statement,  by  a  Roman  Catholic  historian  of
genius,  as  to  the  popular  demand  for  persecution  and  the  pressure  of  the  lower
strata  in  ecclesiastical  organizations  for  cruel  measures,  see  Balmes's  Le  Protestan-
t'sme  compare  au  Catholicisme,  etc.,  fourth  edition,  Paris,  1855,  vol.  ii.  Archbishop
Spaulding  has  something  of  the  same  sort  in  his  Miscellanies.  L'Epinois,  Galilee,
pp.  22  ei  seq.,  stretches  this  as  far  as  possible  to  save  the  reputation  of  the  Church
in  the  Galileo  matter.  As  to  the  various  branches  of  the  Protestant  Church  in
England  and  the  United  States,  it  is  a  matter  of  notoriety  that  the  smug,  well-to-
do  laymen,  whether  elders,  deacons,  or  vestrymen,  are,  as  a  rule,  far  more  prone  to
heresy-hunting  than  are  their  better  educated  pastors.  As  to  the  cases  of  Messrs.
Winchell,  Woodrow,  Toy,  and  the  professors  at  Beyrout,  with  details,  see  the
chapter  in  this  series  on  The  Fall  of  Maft  and  Anthropology.  Among  Protestant
historians  who  have  been  recently  allowed  full  and  free  examination  of  the  treas-
ures in  the  Vatican  Library,  and  even  those  involving  questions  between  Catholi-
cism and  Protestantism,  are  Von  Sybel,  of  Berlin,  and  Philip  SchafT,  of  New  York.
It  should  be  added  that  the  latter  went  with  commendatory  letters  from  eminent
prelates  of  the  Catholic  Church  in  Europe  and  America.  For  the  closing  citation,
see  Canon  Farrar,  History  of  Interpretation,  p.  432.


ii


^


CHAPTER    IV.

FROM  ''SIGNS  AND   WONDERS''    TO  LAW  IN   THE

HE  A  VENS.

I.    THE   THEOLOGICAL  VIEW.

Few  things  in  the  evolution  of  astronomy  are  more  sug-
gestive than  the  struggle  between  the  theological  and  the
scientific  doctrine  regarding  comets — the  passage  from  the
conception  of  them  as  fire-balls  flung  by  an  angry  God  for
the  purpose  of  scaring  a  wicked  world,  to  a  recognition  of
them  as  natural  in  orio^in  and  obedient  to  law  in  movement.
Hardly  anything  throws  a  more  vivid  light  upon  the  dan-
ger of  wresting  texts  of  Scripture  to  preserve  ideas  which
observation  and  thought  have  superseded,  and  upon  the
folly  of  arraying  ecclesiastical  power  against  scientific  dis-
covery."^

Out  of  the  ancient  world  had  come  a  mass  of  beliefs  re-
garding comets,  meteors,  and  eclipses ;  all  these  were  held
to  be  signs  displayed  from  heaven  for  the  warning  of  man-
kind. Stars  and  meteors  were  generally  thought  to  presage
happy  events,  especially  the  births  of  gods,  heroes,  and
great  men.  So  firmly  rooted  was  this  idea  that  we  con-
stantly find  among  the  ancient  nations  traditions  of  lights  in
the  heavens  preceding  the  birth  of  persons  of  note.  The
sacred  books  of  India  show  that  the  births  of  Crishna  and  of
Buddha  were  announced   by  such    heavenly   lights.f     The

*  The  present  study,  after  its  appearance  in  the  Popular  Science  Monthly  as  a
"  new  chapter  in  the  Warfare  of  Science,"  was  revised  and  enlarged  to  nearly  its
present  form,  and  read  before  the  American  Historical  Association,  among  whose
papers  it  was  published,  in  1887,  under  the  title  of  A  History  of  the  Doctrine  of
Comets.

\  For  Crishna,  see  Cox,  Aryan  Mythology,  vol.  ii,  p.  133  ;  the  Vishnu  Purana
(Wilson's  translation),  book  v,  chap.  iv.     As  to  lights  at  the  birth,  or  rather  at  the

171


\J2  FROM    "SIGNS   AND   WONDERS"   TO   LAW.

sacred  books  of  China  tell  of  similar  appearances  at  the
births  of  Yu,  the  founder  of  the  first  dynasty,  and  of  the  in-
spired sage,  Lao-tse.  According  to  the  Jewish  legends,  a
star  appeared  at  the  birth  of  JNIoses,  and  was  seen  by  the
Magi  of  Egpyt,  who  informed  the  king ;  and  when  Abraham
was  born  an  unusual  star  appeared  in  the  east.  The  Greeks
and  Romans  cherished  similar  traditions.  A  heavenly  light
accompanied  the  birth  of  ^Esculapius,  and  the  births  of  va-
rious Ccesars  were  heralded  in  like  manner.^

The  same  conception  entered  into  our  Christian  sacred
books.  Of  all  the  legends  which  grew  in  such  luxuriance
and  beauty  about  the  cradle  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  none  ap-
peals more  directly  to  the  highest  poetic  feeling  than  that
given  by  one  of  the  evangelists,  in  which  a  star,  rising  in
the  east,  conducted  the  wise  men  to  the  manger  where  the
Galilean  peasant-child— the  Hope  of  Mankind,  the  Light  of
the  World— was  lying  in  poverty  and  helplessness.

Among  the  Mohammedans  we  have  a  curious  example  of
the  same  tendency  toward  a  kindly  interpretation  of  stars
and  meteors,  in  the  belief  of  certain  Mohammedan  teachers
that  meteoric  showers  are  caused  by  good  angels  hurling
missiles  to  drive  evil  angels  out  of  the  sky.
;  Eclipses  were  regarded  in  a  very  different  light,  being
i  I  supposed  to  express  the  distress  of  Nature  at  earthly  calami-
ties. The  Greeks  believed  that  darkness  overshadowed  the
earth  at  the  deaths  of  Prometheus,  Atreus,  Hercules,  ^^scu-
lapius,  and  Alexander  the  Great.     The  Roman  legends  held

conception,  of  Buddha,  see  Bunsen,  Angel  Messiah,  pp.  22,  23  ;  Alabaster,  Wheel
of  the  Law  (illustrations  of  Buddhism),  p.  102  ;  Edwin  Arnold,  Light  of  Asia  ;
Bp.  Bigandet,  Life  of  Gaudama,  the  Burmese  Buddha,  p.  30  ;  Oldenberg,  Buddha
(English  translation),  part  i,  chap.  ii.

*  For  Chinese  legends  regarding  stars  at  the  birth  of  Yu  and  Lao-tse,  see
Thornton,  History  of  China,  vol.  i,  p.  137  ;  also  Pingre,  Cometographie,  p.  245.
Regarding  stars  at  the  births  of  Moses  and  Abraham,  see  Calmet,  Fragments,
part  viii  ;  Baring-Gould,  Legends  of  Old  Testament  Characters,  chap,  xxiv  ;  Farrar,
Life  of  Christ,  chap.  iii.  As  to  the  Magi,  see  Higgins,  Anacalypsis  ;  Hooykaas,  Ort,
and  Kuenen,  Bible  for  Learners,  vol.  iii.  For  Greek  and  Roman  traditions,  see
Bell,  Pantheon,  s.  v.  ALsctdapius  and  Atreus;  Gibbon,  Decline  and  Fall,  vol.  i,  pp.
151,  590  ;  Farrar,  Life  of  Christ  (Amer.  ed.),  p.  52  ;  Cox,  Tales  of  Ancient  Greece,
pp.  41,  6r,  62  ;  Higgins,  Anacalypsis,  vol.  i,  p.  322  ;  also  Suetonius,  Caes.,  Julius,  p.
88,  Claud.,  p.  463  ;  Seneca,  Nat.  Quaest.,  vol.  i,  p.  i  ;  Virgil,  Fcl.,  vol.  ix,  p.  47  ;  as
well  as  Ovid,  Pliny,  and  others.


THE    THEOLOGICAL   VIEW.  jy^

that  at  the  death  of  Romulus  there  was  darkness  for  six
hours.  In  the  history  of  the  Caesars  occur  portents  of  all
three  kinds  ;  for  at  the  death  of  Julius  the  earth  was  shrouded
in  darkness,  the  birth  of  Augustus  was  heralded  by  a  star,
and  the  downfall  of  Nero  by  a  comet.  So,  too,  in  one  of  the
Christian  legends  clustering  about  the  crucifixion,  darkness
overspread  the  earth  from  the  sixth  to  the  ninth  hour.  Nei-
ther the  silence  regarding  it  of  the  only  evangelist  who
claims  to  have  been  present,  nor  the  fact  that  observers  like
Seneca  and  Pliny,  who,  though  they  carefully  described
much  less  striking  occurrences  of  the  same  sort  and  in  more
remote  regions,  failed  to  note  any  such  darkness  even  in
Judea,  have  availed  to  shake  faith  in  an  account  so  true  to
the  highest  poetic  instincts  of  humanity.

This  view  of  the  relations  between  Nature  and  man  con-
tinued among  both  Jews  and  Christians.  According  to  Jew-
ish tradition,  darkness  overspread  the  earth  for  three  days
when  the  books  of  the  Law  were  profaned  by  translation
into  Greek.  Tertullian  thought  an  eclipse  an  evidence  of
God's  wrath  against  unbelievers.  Nor  has  this  mode  of
thinking  ceased  in  modern  times.  A  similar  claim  was  made
at  the  execution  of  Charles  I ;  and  Increase  Mather  thought
an  eclipse  in  Massachusetts  an  evidence  of  the  grief  of  Nature
at  the  death  of  President  Chauncey,  of  Harvard  College.
Archbishop  Sandys  expected  eclipses  to  be  the  final  tokens
of  woe  at  the  destruction  of  the  world,  and  traces  of  this
feeling  have  come  down  to  our  own  time.  The  quaint  story
of  the  Connecticut  statesman  who,  when  his  associates  in  the
General  Assembly  were  alarmed  by  an  eclipse  of  the  sun,
and  thought  it  the  beginning  of  the  Day  of  Judgment,  quietly
ordered  in  candles,  that  he  might  in  any  case  be  found  doing
his  duty,  marks  probably  the  last  noteworthy  appearance  of
the  old  belief  in  any  civilized  nation.*


*  For  Hindu  theories,  see  Alabaster,  Wheel  of  the  Law,  ii.  For  Greek  and
Roman  legends,  see  Higgins,  Anacalypsis,  vol.  i,  pp.  616,617;  also  Suetonius,
Caes ,  Julius,  p.  88,  Claud.,  p.  46  ;  Seneca,  Quaest.  A'at.,  vol,  i,  p.  i,  vol.  vii,  p.  17  ;
Pliny,  Hist.  Nat.,  vol.  ii,  p.  25  ;  Tacitus,  Atifi.,  vol.  xiv,  p.  22  ;  Josephus,  Antiq.,  vol.
xiv,  p.  12  ;  and  the  authorities  above  cited.  For  the  tradition  of  the  Jews  regarding
the  darkness  of  three  days,  see  citation  in  Renan,  Histoire  du  Peuple  Israel,  vol.  iv,
chap.  iv.     For  Tertullian's  belief  regarding  the  significance  of  an  eclipse,  see  the  Ad


174


FROM    "SIGNS   AND   WONDERS"    TO   LAW.


In  these  beliefs  regarding  meteors  and  eclipses  there  was
little  calculated  to  do  harm  by  arousing  that  superstitious
terror  which  is  the  worst  breeding-bed  of  cruelty.  Far
otherwise  was  it  with  the  belief  regarding  comets.  During
many  centuries  it  gave  rise  to  the  direst  superstition  and
fanaticism.  The  Chaldeans  alone  among  the  ancient  peoples
generally  regarded  comets  without  fear,  and  thought  them
bodies  wandering  as  harmless  as  fishes  in  the  sea ;  the
Pythagoreans  alone  among  philosophers  seem  to  have  had
a  vague  idea  of  them  as  bodies  returning  at  fixed  periods  of
time  ;  and  in  all  antiquity,  so  far  as  is  known,  one  man  alone,
Seneca,  had  the  scientific  instinct  and  prophetic  inspira-
tion to  give  this  idea  definite  shape,  and  to  declare  that  the
time  would  come  when  comets  would  be  found  to  move  in
accordance  with  natural  law.  Here  and  there  a  few  strong
men  rose  above  the  prevailing  superstition.  The  Emperor
Vespasian  tried  to  laugh  it  down,  and  insisted  that  a  certain
comet  in  his  time  could  not  betoken  his  death,  because  it
was  hairy,  and  he  bald  ;  but  such  scoffing  produced  little
permanent  effect,  and  the  prophecy  of  Seneca  was  soon  for-
gotten. These  and  similar  isolated  utterances  could  not  stand
against  the  mass  of  opinion  which  upheld  the  doctrine  that
comets  are  "  signs  and  wonders."  ^

The  belief  that  every  comet  is  a  ball  of  fire  flung  from
the  right  hand  of  an  angry  God  to  warn  the  grovelling
dwellers  of  earth  was  received  into  the  early  Church,  trans-
mitted through  the  Middle  Ages  to  the  Reformation  period,
and  in  its  transmission  was  made  all  the  more  precious  by

Scapulam,  chap,  iii,  in  Migne,  Patrolog.  Lat.,  vol.  i,  p.  701.  For  the  claim  regard-
ing Charles  I,  see  a  sermon  preached  before  Charles  II,  cited  by  Lecky,  England
in  the  Eighteenth  Century,  vol.  i,  p.  65.  Mather  thought,  too,  that  it  might  have
something  to  do  with  the  death  of  sundry  civil  functionaries  of  the  colonies :  see
his  Discourse  concerning  Comets,  16S2.  For  Archbishop  Sandys's  belief,  see  his
eighteenth  sermon  (in  Parker  Soc.  Publications).  The  story  of  Abraham  Daven-
port has  been  made  familiar  by  the  poem  of  Whittier.

*  For  terror  caused  in  Rome  by  comets,  see  Pingre,  Co??i Olographic,  pp.  165,  166.
For  the  Chaldeans,  see  Wolf,  Geschichte  der  Astronomic,  p.  10  ct  scq.,  and  p.  181  et
seq. ;  also  Pingre,  chap.  ii.  For  the  Pythagorean  notions,  see  citation  from  Plutarch
in  Costard,  History  of  Astronomy,  p.  2S3.  For  Seneca's  prediction,  see  Guillemin,
World  of  Cotnets(\.x2.\\i\'xi&i\.  by  Glaisher),  pp.  4,  5  ;  also  Watson,  On  Cofncts,  p.  126.
For  this  feeling  in  antiquity  generally,  see  the  preliminary  chapters  of  the  two
works  last  cited.


THE    THEOLOGICAL  VIEW.


175


supposed  textual  proofs  from  Scripture.  The  great  fathers
of  the  Church  committed  themselves  unreservedly  to  it.  In
the  third  century  Origen,  perhaps  the  most  influential  of  the
earlier  fathers  of  the  universal  Church  in  all  questions  be-
tween science  and  faith,  insisted  that  comets  indicate  catas-
trophes and  the  downfall  of  empires  and  worlds.  Bede,  so
justly  revered  by  the  English  Church,  declared  in  the  eighth
century  that  "  comets  portend  revolutions  of  kingdoms,  pes-
tilence, war,  winds,  or  heat "  ;  and  John  of  Damascus,  his
eminent  contemporary  in  the  Eastern  Church,  took  the  same
view.  Rabanus  Maurus,  the  great  teacher  of  Europe  in
the  ninth  century,  an  authority  throughout  the  Middle  Ages,
adopted  Bede's  opinion  fully.  St.  Thomas  Aquinas,  the  great
light  of  the  universal  Church  in  the  thirteenth  century,  whose
works  the  Pope  now  reigning  commends  as  the  centre  and
source  of  all  university  instruction,  accepted  and  handed
down  the  same  opinion.  The  sainted  Albert  the  Great,  the
most  noted  genius  of  the  mediaeval  Church  in  natural  science,
received  and  developed  this  theory.  These  men  and  those
who  followed  them  founded  upon  scriptural  texts  and  the-
ological reasonings  a  system  that  for  seventeen  centuries
defied  every  advance  of  thought.*

The  main  evils  thence  arising  were  three :  the  paralysis
of  self-help,  the  arousing  of  fanaticism,  and  the  strengthen-
ing of  ecclesiastical  and  political  tyranny.  The  first  two  of
these  evils — the  paralysis  of  self-help  and  the  arousing  of
fanaticism — are  evident  throughout  all  these  ages.  At  the
appearance  of  a  comet  we  constantly  see  all  Christendom,
from  pope  to  peasant,  instead  of  striving  to  avert  war  by
wise  statesmanship,  instead  of  striving  to  avert  pestilence  by
observation  and  reason,  instead  of  striving  to  avert  famine
by  skilful  economy,  whining  before  fetiches,  trying  to  bribe
them  to  remove  these  signs  of  God's  wrath,  and  planning  to
wreak  this  supposed  wrath  of  God  upon  misbelievers.

As  to  the  third  of  these  evils — the  strenofthenino:  of  eccle-

*  For  Origen,  see  his  De  Princip.,  vol.  i,  p.  7  ;  also  Maury,  L^g.  Pieuses,  p.  203,
note.  For  Bede  and  others,  see  De  Nat.,  vol.  xxiv  ;  Joh.  Dam.,  De  Fid.  Of.,  vol.
ii,  p.  7;  Maury,  La  Magie  et  lAstronomie,  pp.  iSi,  182.  For  Albertus  Magnus,
see  his  Opera,  vol.  i,  tr.  iii,  chaps,  x,  xi.  Among  the  texts  of  Scripture  on  which
this  belief  rested  was  especially  Joel  ii,  30,  31.


1^6  FROM   "SIGNS   AND   WONDERS"   TO   LAW.

siastical  and  civil  despotism — examples  appear  on  every  side.
It  was  natural  that  hierarchs  and  monarchs  whose  births
were  announced  by  stars,  or  whose  deaths  were  announced
by  comets,  should  regard  themselves  as  far  above  the  com-
mon herd,  and  should  be  so  regarded  by  mankind  ;  passive
obedience  was  thus  strengthened,  and  the  most  monstrous
assumptions  of  authority  were  considered  simpl}^  as  mani-
festations of  the  Divine  will.  Shakespeare  makes  Calphurnia
say  to  Csesar:

"  When  beggars  die,  there  are  no  comets  seen  ;
The  heavens  themselves  blaze  forth  the  death  of  princes."

Galeazzo,  the  tyrant  of  Milan,  expressing  satisfaction  on
his  deathbed  that  his  approaching  end  was  of  such  impor-
tance as  to  be  heralded  by  a  comet,  is  but  a  type  of  many
thus  encouraged  to  prey  upon  mankind  ;  and  Charles  V,  one
of  the  most  powerful  monarchs  the  world  has  known,  ab-
dicating under  fear  of  the  comet  of  1556,  taking  refuge  in
the  monastery  of  San  Yuste,  and  giving  up  the  best  of  his
vast  realms  to  such  a  scribbling  bigot  as  Philip  II,  furnishes
an  example  even  more  striking.*

But  for  the  retention  of  this  belief  there  was  a  moral
cause.  Myriads  of  good  men  in  the  Christian  Church  down
to  a  recent  period  saw  in  the  appearance  of  comets  not
merely  an  exhibition  of  ''signs  in  the  heavens"  foretold  in
Scripture,  but  also  Divine  warnings  of  vast  value  to  human-
ity as  incentives  to  repentance  and  improvement  of  life —
warnings,  indeed,  so  precious  that  they  could  not  be  spared
without  danger  to  the  moral  government  of  the  world.  And
this  belief  in  the  portentous  character  of  comets  as  an  essen-
tial part  of  the  Divine  government,  being,  as  it  was  thought,
in  full  accord  with  Scripture,  was  made  for  centuries  a
source  of  terror  to  humanity.  To  say  nothing  of  examples
in  the  earlier  periods,  comets  in  the  tenth  century  especially
increased  the  distress  of  all  Europe.  In  the  middle  of  the
eleventh  century  a  comet  was  thought  to  accompany  the
death  of  Edward  the  Confessor  and  to  presage  the  Norman

*  For  CiEsar,  see  Shakespeare,  Julius  Casar,  act  ii,  so.  2.  For  Galeazzo,  see
Guillemin,  World  of  Comets,  p.  T9.  For  Charles  V,  see  Prof.  Wolf's  essay  in  the
Monatschrift  des  wissenschaf (lichen  Vereins,  Zurich,  1857,  p.  228.


THE   THEOLOGICAL   VIEW.


177


conquest;  the  traveller  in  France  to-day  may  see  this  belief
as  it  was  then  wrought  into  the  Bayeux  tapestry  *

Nearly  every  decade  of  years  throughout  the  Middle
Ages  saw  Europe  plunged  into  alarm  by  appearances  of
this  sort,  but  the  culmination  seems  to  have  been  reached  in
1456.  At  that  time  the  Turks,  after  a  long  effort,  had  made[  /
good  their  footing  in  Europe.  A  large  statesmanship  or
generalship  might  have  kept  them  out;  but,  while  different
religious  factions  were  disputing  over  petty  shades  of  dogma,
they  had  advanced,  had  taken  Constantinople,  and  were  evi-
dently securing  their  foothold.  Now  came  the  full  bloom
of  this  superstition.  A  comet  appeared.  The  Pope  of  that
period,  Calixtus  III,  though  a  man  of  more  than  ordinary
ability,  was  saturated  with  the  ideas  of  his  time.  Alarmed
at  this  monster,  if  we  are  to  believe  the  contemporary  his-
torian, this  infallible  head  of  the  Church  solemnly  **  decreed
several  days  of  prayer  for  the  averting  of  the  wrath  of  God,
that  whatever  calamity  impended  might  be  turned  from  the
Christians  and  against  the  Turks."  And,  that  all  might  join
daily  in  this  petition^there  was  then  established  that  midday
Angelus  which  has  ever  since  called  good  Catholics  to  prayer
against  the  powers  of  evil.i -^Then,  too,  was  incorporated
into  a  litany  the  plea,  "  From  the  Turk  and  the  comet,  good
Lord,  deliver  us."  Never  was  papal  intercession  less  effect-
ive ;  for  the  Turk  has  held  Constantinople  from  that  day  to
this,  while  the  obs^tinate  comet,  being  that  now  known  un-
der the  name  of  Halley,  has  returned  imperturbably  at  short
periods  ever  since.f

*  For  evidences  of  this  widespread  terror,  see  chronicles  of  Raoul  Glaber,  Guil-
laume  de  Nangis,  William  of  Malmesbury,  Florence  of  Worcester,  Ordericus  Vita-
\h,  et  aL,  passim^  and  the  Anglo-Saxon  Chronicle  (in  the  Rolls  Series).  For  very-
thrilling  pictures  of  this  horror  in  England,  see  Freeman,  Norman  Conquest,  vol.
iii,  pp.  640-644,  and  William  Rufus,  vol.  ii,  p.  118.  For  the  Bayeux  tapestry,  see
Bruce,  Bayeux  Tapestry  Elucidated,  plate  vii  and  p.  86  ;  also  Guillemin,  World  of
Comets,  p.  24.  There  is  a  large  photographic  copy,  in  the  South  Kensington  Mu-
seum at  London,  of  the  original,  wrought,  as  is  genei-ally  believed,  by  the  wife  of
William  the  Conqueror  and  her  ladies,  and  still  preserved  in  the  town  museum  at
Bayeux.

f  The  usual  statement  is,  that  Calixtus  excommunicated  the  comet  by  a  bull,
and  this  is  accepted  by  Arago,  Grant,  Hoefer,  Guillemin,  Watson,  and  many  his-
torians of  astronomy.  Hence  the  parallel  made  on  a  noted  occasion  by  President
Lincoln.  No  such  bull,  however,  is  to  be  found  in  the  published  Bullaria,  and
13


i;78  FROM    "SIGNS   AND   WONDERS"    TO   LAW.

But  the  superstition  went  still  further.  It  became  more
and  more  incorporated  into  what  was  considered  ''  scriptural
science"  and  "sound  learning."  The  encyclopedic  summa-
ries, in  which  the  science  of  the  Middle  Ages  and  the  Ref-
ormation period  took  form,  furnish  abundant  proofs  of  this.

Yet  scientific  observation  was  slowly  undermining  this
structure.  The  inspired  prophecy  of  Seneca  had  not  been
forgotten.  Even  as  far  back  as  the  ninth  century,  in  the
midst  of  the  sacred  learning  so  abundant  at  the  court  of
Charlemagne  and  his  successors,  we  find  a  scholar  protest-
ing against  the  accepted  doctrine.  In  the  thirteenth  cen-
tury we  have  a  mild  question  by  Albert  the  Great  as  to  the
supposed  influence  of  comets  upon  individuals;  but  the  pre-
vailing theological  current  was  too  strong,  and  he  finally
yielded  to  it  in  this  as  in  so  many  other  things.

So,  too,  in  the  sixteenth  century,  we  have  Copernicus
refusing  to  accept  the  usual  theory,  Paracelsus  writing  to
ZwingH  against  it,  and  Julius  Cassar  Scaliger  denouncing  it
as  "  ridiculous  folly."  ^

At  first  this  scepticism  only  aroused  the  horror  of  theo-
logians and  increased  the  vigour  of  ecclesiastics ;  both  as-
serted the  theological  theory  of  comets  all  the  more  strenu-
ously as  based  on  scriptural  truth.  During  the  sixteenth
century  France  felt  the  influence  of  one  of  her  greatest
men  on  the  side  of  this  superstition.  Jean  Bodin,  so  far
before  his  time  in  political  theories,  was  only  thoroughly
abreast  of  it  in  religious  theories :  the  same  reverence  for

that  establishing  the  Angelus  (as  given  by  Raynaldus  in  the  Annales  Eccl.)
contains  no  mention  of  the  comet.  But  the  authority  of  Platina  (in  his  Vitce
Pontijicum,  Venice,  1479,  sub  Calistus  III),  who  was  not  only  in  Rome  at  the  time,
but,  when  he  wrote  his  history,  archivist  of  the  Vatican,  is  final  as  to  the  Pope's
attitude.  Platina's  authority  was  never  questioned  until  modern  science  had
changed  the  ideas  of  the  world.  The  recent  attempt  of  Pastor  (in  his  Geschichte
der  Pdpste)  to  pooh-pooh  down  the  whole  matter  is  too  evident  an  evasion  to  cany

i  weight  with  those  who  know  how  even  the  most  careful  histories  have  to  be  modi-

\  fied  to  suit  the  views  of  the  censorship  at  Rome.

i  *  As  to  encyclopedic  summaries,  see  Vincent  of  Beauvais,  Specuhim  N'aturale,
and  the  various  editions  of  Reisch's  Margarita  Philosophica.  For  Charlemagne's
time,  see  Champion.  La  Fin  du  Monde,  p.  156  ;  Leopardi,  Errori  Popolan,  p.  165.
As  to  Albert  the  (treat's  question,  see  Heller,  Geschichte  der  Physik,  vol.  i,  p.
188.  As  to  scepticism  in  the  sixteenth  century,  see  Champion,  La  Fin  du  Monde,
pp.  155,  156  ;  and  for  Scaliger,  Dudith's  book,  cited  below.


THE    THEOLOGICAL   VIEW.  j-q

the  mere  letter  of  Scripture  which  made  him  so  fatally  pow-
erful in  supporting  the  witchcraft  delusion,  led  him  to  sup-
port this  theological  theory  of  comets — but  with  a  difference :
he  thought  them  the  souls  of  men,  wandering  in  space,
bringing  famine,  pestilence,  and  war.

Not  less  strong  was  the  same  superstition  in  England.
Based  upon  medij^val  theology,  it  outlived  the  revival  of
learning.  From  a  multitude  of  examples  a  few  may  be  se-
lected as  typical.  Early  in  the  sixteenth  century  Polydore
Virgil,  an  ecclesiastic  of  the  unreformed  Church,  alludes,  in
his  English  History,  to  the  presage  of  the  death  of  the  Em-
peror Constantine  by  a  comet  as  to  a  simple  matter  of  fact;
and  in  his  work  on  prodigies  he  pushes  this  superstition  to
its  most  extreme  point,  exhibiting  comets  as  preceding  al-
most every  form  of  calamity.

In  1532,  just  at  the  transition  period  from  the  old  Church
to  the  new,  Cranmer,  paving  the  way  to  his  archbishopric,
writes  from  Germany  to  Henry  VIII,  and  says  of  the  comet
then  visible  :  "  What  strange  things  these  tokens  do  signify
to  come  hereafter,  God  knoweth  ;  for  they  do  not  lightly
app)ear  but  against  some  great  matter."

Twenty  years  later  Bishop  Latimer,  in  an  Advent  ser-
mon, speaks  of  eclipses,  rings  about  the  sun,  and  the  like,  as
signs  of  the  approaching  end  of  the  world. ^'

In  1580,  under  Queen  Elizabeth,  there  was  set  forth  an
''order  of  prayer  to  avert  God's  wrath  from  us,  threatened
by  the  late  terrible  earthquake,  to  be  used  in  all  parish
churches."  In  connection  with  this  there  was  also  com-
mended to  the  faithful  "a  godly  admonition  for  the  time
present "  ;  and  among  the  things  referred  to  as  evidence  of
God's  wrath  are  comets,  eclipses,  and  falls  of  snow.

This  view  held  sway  in  the  Church  of  England  during
Elizabeth's  whole  reign  and  far  into  the  Stuart  period :
Strype,  the  ecclesiastical  annalist,  gives  ample  evidence  of
this,  and  among  the  more  curious  examples  is  the  surmise

*  For  Bodin,  see  Theatr.y  lib.  ii,  cited  by  Pingre,  vol.  i,  p.  45  ;  also  a  vague
citation  in  Baudrillart,  Bodin  et  son  Tevips,  p..  360.  For  Polydore  Virgil,  see  Eng-
lish History,  p.  97  (in  Camden  Society  Publications).  For  Cranmer,  see  Remains,
vol.  ii,  p.  535  (in  Parker  Society  Publications).  For  Latimer,  see  Sermons,  second
Sunday  in  Advent,  1552.


l8o  FROM    "SIGNS   AND    WONDERS"    TO    LAW.

that  the  comet  of  1572  was  a  token  of  Divine  wrath  pro-
voked by  the  St.  Bartholomew  massacre.

As  to  the  Stuart  period,  Archbishop  Spottiswoode  seems
to  have  been  active  in  carrying  the  superstition  from  the
sixteenth  century  to  the  seventeenth,  and  Archbishop  Bram-
hall  cites  Scripture  in  support  of  it.  Rather  curiously,  while
the  diary  of  Archbishop  Laud  shows  so  much  superstition
regarding  dreams  as  portents,  it  shows  little  or  none  regard-
ing comets ;  but  Bishop  Jeremy  Taylor,  strong  as  he  was,
evidently  favoured  the  usual  view.  John  Howe,  the  emi-
nent Nonconformist  divine  in  the  latter  part  of  the  century,
seems  to  have  regarded  the  comet  superstition  as  almost  a
fundamental  article  of  belief ;  he  laments  the  total  neglect
of  comets  and  portents  generally,  declaring  that  this  neg-
lect betokens  want  of  reverence  for  the  Ruler  of  the  world  ;
he  expresses  contempt  for  scientific  inquiry  regarding  com-
ets, insists  that  they  may  be  natural  bodies  and  yet  super-
natural portents,  and  ends  by  saying,  "  I  conceive  it  very
safe  to  suppose  that  some  very  considerable  thing,  either
in  the  way  of  judgment  or  mercy,  may  ensue,  according  as
the  cry  of  persevering  wickedness  or  of  penitential  prayer
is  more  or  less  loud  at  that  time."  ^

The  Reformed  Church  of  Scotland  supported  the  super-
stition just  as  strongly.  John  Knox  saw  in  comets  tokens  of
the  wrath  of  Heaven ;  other  authorities  considered  them  "  a
warning  to  the  king  to  extirpate  the  F^apists";  and  as  late  as
1680,  after  Halley  had  won  his  victory,  comets  were  an-
nounced on  high  authority  in  the  Scottish  Church  to  be
''prodigies  of  great  judgment  on  these  lands  for  our  sins,
for  never  was  the  Lord  more  provoked  by  a  people."

While  such  was  the  view  of  the  clergy  during  the  six-
teenth and   seventeenth    centuries,   the    laity   generally   ac-


*  For  Liturgical  Services  of  the  Reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  see  Parker  Society
Publicatiotis,  pp.  569,  570.  For  Strype,  see  his  Ecclesiastical  Memorials,  vol.  iii,
parti,  p.  472  ;  also  his  Annals  of  the  Ke formation,  vol.  ii,  part  ii,  p.  151  ;  and  his
Life  of  Sir  Thomas  Smith,  pp.  161,  162.  For  Spottiswoode,  see  LJistory  of  the
Church  of  Scotland  {^^va\i\xx^  reprint,  1851),  vol.  i,  pp.  185,  186.  For  Bramhall,
see  his  Works,  Oxford,  1844,  vol.  iv,  pp.  60,  "307,  etc.  For  Jeremy  Taylor,  see
his  Sermons  on  the  Life  of  Christ.  For  John  Howe,  see  his  Works,  London,
1862,  vol.  iv,  pp.  140,  141.


THE    THEOLOGICAL   VIEW.  l8l

cepted  it  as  a  matter  of  course.  Among  the  great  leaders
in  literature  there  was  at  least  general  acquiescence  in  it.
Both  Shakespeare  and  Milton  recognise  it,  whether  they
fully  accept  it  or  not.  Shakespeare  makes  the  Duke  of
Bedford,  lamenting  at  the  bier  of  Henry  V,  say  :

"  Comets,  importing  change  of  time  and  states.
Brandish  your  crystal  tresses  in  the  sky  ;
And  with  them  scourge  the  bad  revoking  stars.
That  have  consented  unto  Henry's  death."

Milton,  speaking  of  Satan  preparing  for  combat,  says :

"  On  the  other  side.
Incensed  with  indignation,  Satan  stood
Unterrified,  and  hke  a  comet  burned,
That  fires  the  length  of  Ophiuchus  huge
In  the  arctic  sky,  and  from  its  horrid  hair
Shakes  pestilence  and  war."

We  do  indeed  find  that  in  some  minds  the  discoveries  of
Tycho  Brahe  and  Kepler  begin  to  take  effect,  for,  in  162 1,
Burton  in  his  Anatomy  of  Melancholy  alludes  to  them  as
changing  public  opinion  somewhat  regarding  comets;  and,
just  before  the  middle  of  the  century,  Sir  Thomas  Browne
expresses  a  doubt  whether  comets  produce  such  terrible
effects,  **  since  it  is  found  that  many  of  them  are  above  the
moon."  *  Yet  even  as  late  as  the  last  years  of  the  seven-
teenth century  we  have  English  authors  of  much  power
battling  for  this  supposed  scriptural  view ;  and  among  the
natural  and  typical  results  we  find,  in  1682,  Ralph  Thoresby,
a  Fellow  of  the  Royal  Society,  terrified  at  the  comet  of  that
year,  and  writing  in  his  diary  the  following  passage  :  *'  Lord,
fit  us  for  whatever  changes  it  may  portend  ;  for,  though  I
am  not  ignorant  that  such  meteors  proceed  from  natural
causes,  yet  are  they  frequently  also  the  presages  of  immi-
nent calamities."  Interesting  is  it  to  note  here  that  this  was
Halley's  comet,  and  that  Halley  was  at  this  very  moment
making  those  scientific  studies  upon  it  which  were  to  free

*  For  John  Knox,  see  his  Historie  of  the  Reformation  of  Religion  within  the
Realm  of  Scotland  (Edmhxxrgh,  1732),  lib.  iv  ;  also  Chambers,  Domestic  Annals  of
Scotland,  vol.  ii,  pp.  410-412.  For  Burton,  see  his  Anatomy  of  Melancholy,  part
ii,  sect.  2.     For  Browne,  see  the  Vulgar  and  Cofnmon  Errors,  book  vi,  chap.  xiv.


1 82  FROM     'SIGNS   AND   WONDERS"   TO   LAW.

the  civilized  world  forever  from  such  terrors  as  distressed
Thoresby.

The  belief  in  comets  as  warnings  against  sin  was.  espe-
cially one  of  those  held  "  always,  every  where,  and  by  all,"
and  by  Eastern  Christians  as  well  as  by  Western.  One  of  the
most  striking  scenes  in  the  history  of  the  Eastern  Church  is
that  which  took  place  at  the  condemnation  of  Nikon,  the
great  Patriarch  of  Moscow.  Turning  toward  his  judges,
he  pointed  to  a  comet  then  blazing  in  the  sky,  and  said,
"  God's  besom  shall  sweep  you  all  away  !  "

Of  all  countries  in  western  Europe,  it  was  in  Germany
and  German  Switzerland  that  this  superstition  took  strong-
est hold.  That  same  depth  of  religious  feeling  which  pro-
duced in  those  countries  the  most  terrible  growth  of  witch-
craft persecution,  brought  superstition  to  its  highest  devel-
opment regarding  comets.  No  country  suffered  more  from
it  in  the  Middle  Ages.  At  the  Reformation  Luther  declared
strongly  in  favour  of  it.  In  one  of  his  Advent  sermons  he
said,  "  The  heathen  write  that  the  comet  may  arise  from
natural  causes,  but  God  creates  not  one  that  does  not  fore-
token a  sure  calamity."  Again  he  said,  "  Whatever  moves
in  the  heaven  in  an  unusual  way  is  certainly  a  sign  of  God's
wrath."  And  sometimes,  yielding  to  another  phase  of  his
belief,  he  declared  them  works' of  the  devil,  and  declaimed
against  them  as  "  harlot  stars."  *

Melanchthon,  too,  in  various  letters  refers  to  comets  as
heralds  of  Heaven's  wrath,  classing  them,  with  evil  conjunc-
tions of  the  planets  and  abortive  births,  among  the  "signs  "
referred  to  in  Scripture.  Zwingli,  boldest  of  the  greater
Reformers  in  shaking  off  traditional  beliefs,  could  not  shake
off  this,  and  insisted  that  the  comet  of  1531  betokened  calam.
ity.  Arietus,  a  leading  Protestant  theologian,  declared, ''  The
heavens  are  given  us  not  merely  for  our  pleasure,  but  also

*  For  Thoresby,  see  his  Diary  (London,  1830),  vol.  i,  p.  132.  Halley's  great  serv-
ice is  described  further  on  in  this  chapter.  For  Nikon's  speech,  see  Dean  Stan-
ley's History  of  the  Eastern  Church,  p.  485.  For  very  striking  examples  of  this
medicxval  terror  in  Germany,  see  Von  Raumer,  Geschichte  der  Hohenstatifen,  vol.
vi,  p.  538.  For  the  Reformation  period,  see  Wolf,  Gesch.  d.  Astronomie  ;  also
Prsetorius,  Ueber  d.  Cometstern  (Erfurt,  1580),  in  which  the  above  sentences  of
Luther  are  printed  on  the  title-page  as  epigraphs.  For  "  Huren-Sterncn,"  see  the
sermon  of  Celichius,  described  later.


EFFORTS   TO   CRUSH    THE    SCIENTIFIC  VIEW.  183

as  a  warning  of  the  wrath  of  God  for  the  correction  of  our
lives."  Lavater  insisted  that  comets  are  signs  of  death  or
calamity,  and  cited  proofs  from  Scripture.

Catholic  and  Protestant  strove  together  for  the  glory  of
this  doctrine.  It  was  maintained  with  especial  vigour  by
Fromundus,  the  eminent  professor  and  Doctor  of  Theology
at  the  Catholic  University  of  Louvain,  who  so  strongly  op-
posed the  Copernican  system ;  at  the  beginning  of  the
seventeenth  century,  even  so  gifted  an  astronomer  as  Kepler
yielded  somewhat  to  the  belief;  and  near  the  end  of  that
century  Voigt  declared  that  the  comet  of  161 8  clearly  pre-
saged the  downfall  of  the  Turkish  Empire,  and  he  stigma-
tized as  '*  atheists  and  Epicureans"  all  w^ho  did  not  believe
comets  to  be  God's  warnings.*


II.   THEOLOGICAL   EFFORTS    TO   CRUSH    THE   SCIENTIFIC

VIEW.

Out  of  this  belief  was  developed  a  great  series  of  efforts
to  maintain  the  theological  view  of  comets,  and  to  put  down
forever  the  scientific  view.  These  efforts  may  be  divided
into  two  classes:  those  directed  toward  learned  men  and
scholars,  through  the  universities,  and  those  directed  to-
w^ard  the  people  at  large,  through  the  pulpits.  As  to  the
first  of  these,  that  learned  men  and  scholars  might  be  kept
in  the  paths  of  "  sacred  science"  and  ''sound  learning,"  es-
pecial pains  was  taken  to  keep  all  knowledge  of  the  scien-
tific view  of  comets  as  far  as  possible  from  students  in  the
universities.  Even  to  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century
the  oath  generally  required  of  professors  of  astronomy  over
a  large  part  of  Europe  prevented  their  teaching  that  comets
are  heavenly  bodies  obedient  to  law.  Efforts  just  as  earnest
were  made  to  fasten  into  students'  minds  the  theological
theory.     Two  or  three  examples  out  of  many  may  serve  as


*  For  Melanchthon,  see  Wolf,  ubi  supra.  For  Zwingli,  see  Wolf,  p.  235.  For
Arietus,  see  Madler,  Geschichte  der  Himmelskunde,  vol.  ii.  For  Kepler's  supersti-
tion, see  Wolf,  p.  281.  For  Voigt,  see  Himmels-Magnaten  Reichstage,  Hamburg,
1676.  For  both  Fromundus  and  Voigt,  see  also  Madler,  vol,  ii,  p.  399,  and  Lecky,
Rationalism  in  Europe,  vol.  i,  p.  28.


1 84  FROM    "SIGNS   AND    WONDERS"   TO    LAW.

types.  First  of  these  may  be  named  the  teaching  of  Jacob
Heerbrand,  professor  at  the  University  of  Tubingen,  who  in
1577  illustrated  the  moral  value  of  comets  by  comparing  the
Almighty  sending  a  comet,  to  the  judge  laying  the  execu-
tioner's sword  on  the  table  between  himself  and  the  criminal
in  a  court  of  justice  ;  and,  again,  to  the  father  or  schoolmaster
displaying  the  rod  before  naughty  children.  A  little  later
we  have  another  churchman  of  great  importance  in  that
region,  Schickhart,  head  pastor  and  superintendent  at  Gop-
pingen,  preaching  and  publishing  a  comet  sermon,  in  which
he  denounces  those  who  stare  at  such  warnings  of  God  with-
out heeding  them,  and  compares  them  to  "  calves  gaping  at
a  new  barn  door."  Still  later,  at  the  end  of  the  seventeenth
century,  we  find  Conrad  Dieterich,  director  of  studies  at  the
University  of  Marburg,  denouncing  all  scientific  investiga-
tion of  comets  as  impious,  and  insisting  that  they  are  only
to  be  regarded  as  "signs  and  wonders."  ^

The  results  of  this  ecclesiastical  pressure  upon  science
in  the  universities  were  painfully  shown  during  generation
after  generation,  as  regards  both  professors  and  students ;
and  examples  may  be  given  typical  of  its  effects  upon  each
of  these  two  classes.

The  first  of  these  is  the  case  of  Michael  Maestlin.  He
was  by  birth  a  Swabian  Protestant,  was  educated  at  Tu-
bingen as  a  pupil  of  Apian,  and,  after  a  period  of  travel,  was
settled  as  deacon  in  the  little  parish  of  Backnang,  when  the
comet  of  1577  gave  him  an  occasion  to  apply  his  astronom-
ical studies.  His  minute  and  accurate  observation  of  it  is  to
this  day  one  of  the  wonders  of  science.  .  It  seems  almost  im-
possible that  so  much  could  be  accomplished  by  the  naked
eye.  His  observations  agreed  with  those  of  Tycho  Brahe,
and  won  for  Maestlin  the  professorship  of  astronomy  in  the
University  of  Heidelberg.  No  man  had  so  clearly  proved
the  supralunar  position  of  a  comet,  or  shown  so  conclusively
that  its  motion  was  not  erratic,  but  regular.  The  young  as-
tronomer, though  Apian's  pupil,  was  an  avowed  Copernican

*  For  the  effect  of  the  anti-Pythagorean  oath,  see  Prowe,  Copernicus ;  also
Madler  and  Wolf.  For  Heerbrand,  see  his  Von  dem  erschrockenlichen  Wunderzei-
chen,  Tilbingen,  1577.  For  Schickhart,  see  his  Predigt  vom  Wunderzeichen,  Stutt-
gart, 1621.     For  Dieterich,  see  his  sermon,  described  more  fjlly  below.


EFFORTS   TO   CRUSH    THE    SCIENTIFIC  VIEW.  185

and  the  destined  master  and  friend  of  Kepler.  Yet,  in  the
treatise  embodying  his  observations,  he  felt  it  necessary  to
save  his  reputation  for  orthodoxy  by  calling  the  comet  a
*'  new  and  horrible  prodigy,"  and  by  giving  a  chapter  of
''  conjectures  on  the  signification  of  the  present  comet,"  in
which  he  proves  from  history  that  this  variety  of  comet  be-
tokens peace,  but  peace  purchased  by  a  bloody  victory.
That  he  really  believed  in  this  theological  theory  seems  im-
possible ;  the  very  fact  that  his  observations  had  settled
the  supralunar  character  and  regular  motion  of  comets
proves  this.  It  was  a  humiliation  only  to  be  compared  to
that  of  Osiander  when  he  wrote  his  grovelling  preface  to  the
great  book  of  Copernicus.  Maestlin  had  his  reward  :  when,
a  few  years  later,  his  old  teacher.  Apian,  was  driven  from  his
chair  at  Tubingen  for  refusing  to  sign  the  Lutheran  Concord-
Book,  Maestlin  was  elected  to  his  place.

Not  less  striking  was  the  effect  of  this  theological  pres-
sure upon  the  minds  of  students.  Noteworthy  as  an  ex-
ample of  this  is  the  book  of  the  Leipsic  lawyer,  Buttner.
From  no  less  than  eighty-six  biblical  texts  he  proves  the  Al-
mighty's purpose  of  using  the  heavenly  bodies  for  the  in-
struction of  men  as  to  future  events,  and  then  proceeds  to
frame  exhaustive  tables,  from  which,  the  time  and  place  of
the  comet's  first  appearance  being  known,  its  signification
can  be  deduced.  This  manual  he  gave  forth  as  a  triumph
of  religious  science,  under  the  name  of  the  Comet  Hour-Bookr

The  same  devotion  to  the  portent  theory  is  found  in  the
universities  of  Protestant  Holland.  Striking  is  it  to  see  in
the  sixteenth  century,  after  Tycho  Brahe's  discovery,  the
Dutch  theologian,  Gerard  Vossius,  Professor  of  Theology  and
Eloquence  at  Leyden,  lending  his  great  weight  to  the  super-
stition. ''  The  history  of  all  times,"  he  says,  "  shows  comets
to  be  the  messengers  of  misfortune.  It  does  not  follow  that
they  are  endowed  with  intelligence,  but  that  there  is  a
deity  who  makes  use  of  them  to  call  the  human  race  to
repentance."  Though  familiar  with  the  works  of  Tycho
Brahe,  he  finds  it  '*  hard   to   believe  "  that  all  comets  are


*  For   Maestlin,   see  his  Observatio  et  Demonstratio  Cometcc,  Tiibingen,   1578.
For  BUttner,  see  his  Cometen  Stundbiichlein,  Leipsic,  1605.


1 86  FROM    "SIGNS   AND    WONDERS"    TO    LAW.

ethereal,  and  adduces  several  historical  examples  of  sublu-
nary ones.

Nor  was  this  attempt  to  hold  back  university  teaching  to
the  old  view  of  comets  confined  to  Protestants.  The  Roman
Church  was,  if  possible,  more  strenuous  in  the  same  effort.
A  few  examples  will  serve  as  types,  representing  the  ortho-
dox teaching  at  the  great  centres  of  Catholic  theology.

One  of  these  is  seen  in  Spain.  The  eminent  jurist  Torre-
blanca  was  recognised  as  a  controlling  authority  in  all  the
universities  of  Spain,  and  from  these  he  swayed  in  the  sev-
enteenth century  the  thought  of  Catholic  Europe,  especially
as  to  witchcraft  and  the  occult  powers  in  Nature.  He  lays
down  the  old  cometary  superstition  as  one  of  the  founda-
tions of  orthodox  teaching.  Begging  the  question,  after  the
fashion  of  his  time,  he  argues  that  comets  can  not  be  stars,
because  new  stars  always  betoken  good,  while  comets  be-
token evil.

The  same  teaching  was  given  in  the  Catholic  universities
of  the  Netherlands.  Fromundus,  at  Louvain,  the  enemy  of
Galileo,  steadily  continued  his  crusade  against  all  cometary
heresy."^

But  a  still  more  striking  case  is  seen  in  Italy.  The  rev-
erend Father  Augustin  de  Angelis,  rector  of  the  Clementine
College  at  Rome,  as  late  as  1673,  after  the  new  cometary
theory  had  been  placed  beyond  reasonable  doubt,  and  even
while  Newton  was  working  out  its  final  demonstration,  pub-
lished a  third  edition  of  his  Lectures  on  Meteorology.  It  was
dedicated  to  the  Cardinal  of  Hesse,  and  bore  the  express
sanction  of  the  Master  of  the  Sacred  Palace  at  Rome  and  of
the  head  of  the  religious  order  to  which  De  Angelis  be-
longed. This  work  deserves  careful  analysis,  not  only  as
representing  the  highest  and  most  approved  university
teaching  of  the  time  at  the  centre  of  Roman  Catholic  Chris-
tendom, but  still  more  because  it  represents  that  attempt  to
make  a  compromise  between  theology  and  science,  or  rather
the  attempt  to  confiscate  science  to  the  uses  of  theology,

*  For  Vossius,  see  the  De  Idololatria  (in  his  Opera,  vol.  v,  pp.  283-285).  For
Torreblanca,  see  his  De  Magia,  Seville,  161 8,  and  often  reprinted.  For  Fromun-
dus, see  his  Aleteorologica.


EFFORTS   TO   CRUSH   THE   SCIENTIFIC  VIEW


187


which  we  so  constantly  find   whenever  the  triumph  of  sci-
ence in  any  field  has  become  inevitable.

As  to  the  scientific  element  in  this  compromise,  De  Ange-
lis  holds,  in  his  general  introduction  regarding  meteorology,
that  the  main  material  cause  of  comets  is  "  exhalation,"  and
says,  *'  If  this  exhalation  is  thick  and  sticky,  it  blazes  into  a
comet."  And  again  he  returns  to  the  same  view,  saying
that  ''one  form  of  exhalation  is  dense,  hence  easily  inflam-
mable and  long  retentive  of  fire,  from  which  sort  are  espe-
cially generated  comets."  But  it  is  in  his  third  lecture  that
he  takes  up  comets  specially,  and  his  discussion  of  them  is
extended  through  the  fourth,  fifth,  and  sixth  lectures.  Hav-
ing given  in  detail  the  opinions  of  various  theologians  and
philosophers,  he  declares  his  own  in  the  form  of  two  conclu-
sions. The  first  of  these  is  that  '*  comets  are  not  heavenly
bodies,  but  originate  in  the  earth's  atmosphere  below  the
moon ;  for  everything  heavenly  is  eternal  and  incorruptible,
but  comets  have  a  beginning  and  ending — cr^-o,  comets  can
not  be  heavenly  bodies."  This,  we  may  observe,  is  levelled
at  the  observations  and  reasonings  of  Tycho  Brahe  and  Kep-
ler, and  is  a  very  good  illustration  of  the  scholastic  and  me-
diaeval method — the  method  which  blots  out  an  ascertained
fact  by  means  of  a  metaphysical  formula.  His  second  con-
clusion is  that  "  comets  are  of  elemental  and  sublunary  na-
ture ;  for  they  are  an  exhalation-  hot  and  dry,  fatty  and  well
condensed,  inflammable  and  kindled  in  the  uppermost  regions
of  the  air."  He  then  goes  on  to  answer  sundry  objections
to  this  mixture  of  metaphysics  and  science,  and  among  other
things  declares  that  "  the  fatty,  sticky  material  of  a  comet
may  be  kindled  from  sparks  falling  from  fiery  heavenly
bodies  or  from  a  thunderbolt";  and,  again,  that  the  thick,
fatty,  sticky  quality  of  the  comet  holds  its  tail  in  shape,  and
that,  so  far  are  comets  from  having  their  paths  beyond  the
moon's  orbit,  as  Tycho  Brahe  and  Kepler  thought,  he  him-
self in  1618  saw  ''  a  bearded  comet  so  near  the  summit  of
Vesuvius  that  it  almost  seemed  to  touch  it."  As  to  sorts
and  qualities  of  comets,  he  accepts  Aristotle's  view,  and
divides  them  into  bearded  and  tailed.*     He  goes  on  into

*  Barbata  et  caudata.


1 88  FROM   "SIGNS   AND   WONDERS"   TO   LAW.

long  disquisitions  upon  their  colours,  forms,  and  motions.
Under  this  latter  head  he  again  plunges  deep  into  a  sea  of
metaphysical  considerations,  and  does  not  reappear  until  he
brings  up  his  compromise  in  the  opinion  that  their  move-
ment is  as  yet  uncertain  and  not  understood,  but  that,  if  we
must  account  definitely  for  it,  we  must  say  that  it  is  effect-
ed by  angels  especially  assigned  to  this  service  by  Divine
Providence.  But,  while  proposing  this  compromise  be-
tween science  and  theology  as  to  the  origin  and  movement
of  comets,  he  will  hear  to  none  as  regards  their  mission  as
"  signs  and  wonders  "  and  presages  of  evil.  He  draws  up  a
careful  table  of  these  evils,  arranging  them  in  the  following
order:  Drought,  wind,  earthquake,  tempest,  famine,  pesti-
lence, war,  and,  to  clinch  the  matter,  declares  that  the  comet
observed  by  him  in  1618  brought  not  only  war,  famine,  pes-
tilence, and  earthquake,  but  also  a  general  volcanic  eruption,
''  which  would  have  destroyed  Naples,  had  not  the  blood  of
the  invincible  martyr  Januarius  withstood  it."

It  will  be  observed,  even  from  this  sketch,  that,  while  the
learned  Father  Augustin  thus  comes  infallibly  to  the  mediae-
val conclusion,  he  does  so  very  largely  by  scientific  and  es-
sentially modern  processes,  giving  unwonted  prominence  to
observation,  and  at  times  twisting  scientific  observation  into
the  strand  with  his  metaphysics.  The  observations  and
methods  of  his  science  are  sometimes  shrewd,  sometimes
comical.  Good  examples  of  the  latter  sort  are  such  as  his
observing  that  the  comet  stood  very  near  the  summit  of
Vesuvius,  and  his  reasoning  that  its  tail  was  kept  in  place  by
its  stickiness.  But  observations  and  reasonino-s  of  this  sort
are  always  the  first  homage  paid  by  theology  to  science  as
the  end  of  their  struggle  approaches.*

Equally  striking  is  an  example  seen  a  little  later  in  an-
other part  of  Europe  ;  and  it  is  the  more  noteworthy  because
Halley  and  Newton  had  already  fully  established  the  mod-
ern scientific  theory.  Just  at  the  close  of  the  seventeenth
century  the  Jesuit  Reinzer,  professor  at  Linz,  put  forth  his
Meteorologia  PhilosopJiico-Politica,  in  which  all  natural  phe-
nomena received  both  a  physical  and  a  moral  interpretation.

*  See  De  Angelis,  Lectiones  AIeteorologic<2,  Rome,  1669.


EFFORTS   TO   CRUSH    THE    SCIENTIFIC  VIEW.  189

It  was  profusely  and  elaborately  illustrated,  and  on  account
of  its  instructive  contents  was  in  1712  translated  into  Ger-
man for  the  unlearned  reader.  The  comet  receives,  of  course,
great  attention.  "  It  appears,"  says  Reinzer,  "  only  then  in
the  heavens  when  the  latter  punish  the  earth,  and  through
it  [the  comet]  not  only  predict  but  bring  to  pass  all  sorts  of
calamity.  .  .  .  And,  to  that  end,  its  tail  serves  for  a  rod,  its
hair  for  weapons  and  arrows,  its  light  for  a  threat,  and  its
heat  for  a  sign  of  anger  and  vengeance."  Its  warnings  are
threefold:  (i)  "Comets,  generated  in  the  air,  betoken  natu-
rally drought,  wind,  earthquake,  famine,  and  pestilence."
(2)  "  Comets  can  indirectly,  in  view  of  their  material,  be-
token wars,  tumults,  and  the  death  of  princes  ;  for,  being  hot
and  dry,  they  bring  the  moistnesses  {Fciichtigkeiten'\  in  the
human  body  to  an  extraordinary  heat  and  dryness,  increasing
the  gall;  and,  since  the  emotions  depend  on  the  tempera-
ment and  condition  of  the  body,  men  are  through  this  change
driven  to  violent  deeds,  quarrels,  disputes,  and  finally  to
arms :  especially  is  this  the  result  with  princes,  who  are
more  delicate  and  also  more  arrogant  than  other  men,  and
whose  moistnesses  are  more  liable  to  inflammation  of  this
sort,  inasmuch  as  they  live  in  luxury  and  seldom  restrain
themselves  from  those  things  which  in  such  a  dry  state  of
the  heavens  are  especially  injurious."  (3)  *'  All  comets,  what-
ever prophetic  significance  they  may  have  naturally  in  and
of  themselves,  are  yet  principally,  according  to  the  Divine
pleasure,  heralds  of  the  death  of  great  princes,  of  war,  and
of  other  such  great  calamities  ;  and  this  is  known  and  proved,
first  of  all,  from  the  words  of  Christ  himself:  '  Nation  shall
rise  against  nation,  and  kingdom  against  kingdom  ;  and
great  earthquakes  shall  be  in  divers  places,  and  famines,  and
pestilences ;  and  fearful  sights  and  great  signs  shall  there  be
from  heaven.'  "  ''^

While  such  pains  was  taken  to  keep  the  more  highly
educated  classes  in  the  **  paths  of  scriptural  science  and
sound  learning"  at  the  universities,  equal  efforts  were  made
to  preserve  the  cometary  orthodoxy  of  the  people  at  large

*  See  Reinzer,  Meteorologia  Philosophico-Politica  (edition  of  Augsburg,  1 712),
pp.  101-103.


IQO  FROM   "SIGNS   AND   WONDERS"   TO   LAW.

by  means  of  the  pulpits.  Out  of  the  mass  of  sermons  for
this  purpose  which  were  widely  circulated  I  will  select  just
two  as  typical,  and  they  are  worthy  of  careful  study  as  show-
ing some  special  dangers  of  applying  theological  methods  to
scientific  facts.  In  the  second  half  of  the  sixteenth  century
the  recognised  capital  of  orthodox  Lutheranism  was  Magde-
burg, and  in  the  region  tributary  to  this  metropolis  no
Church  official  held  a  more  prominent  station  than  the  "  Su-
perintendent," or  Lutheran  bishop,  of  the  neighbouring  Alt-
mark.  It  was  this  dignitary,  Andreas  Celichius  by  name,
who  at  Magdeburg,  in  1578,  gave  to  the  press  his  Theological
Reminder  of  the  Nezv  Comet.  After  deprecating  as  blasphe-
mous the  attempt  of  Aristotle  to  explain  the  phenomenon
otherwise  than  as  a  supernatural  warning  from  God  to  sinful
man,  he  assures  his  hearers  that  "  whoever  would  know  the
comet's  real  source  and  nature  must  not  merely  gape  and
stare  at  the  scientific  theory  that  it  is  an  earthy,  greasy,
tough,  and  sticky  vapour  and  mist,  rising  intO'  the  upper  air
and  set  ablaze  by  the  celestial  heat."  Far  more  important
for  them  is  it  to  know  what  this  vapour  is.  It  is  really,  in
the  opinion  of  Celichius,  nothing  more  or  less  than  *' the
thick  smoke  of  human  sins,  rising,  every  day,  every  hour,
every  moment,  full  of  stench  and  horror,  before  the  face  of
God,  and  becoming  gradually  so  thick  as  to  form  a  comet,
with  curled  and  plaited  tresses,  which  at  last  is  kindled  by
the  hot  and  fiery  anger  of  the  Supreme  Heavenly  Judge."
He  adds  that  it  is  probably  only  through  the  prayers  and
tears  of  Christ  that  this  blazing  monument  of  human  deprav-
ity becomes  visible  to  mortals.  In  support  of  this  theory,
he  urges  the  "  coming  up  before  God  "  of  the  wickedness  of
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  and  of  Nineveh,  and  especially  the
words  of  the  prophet  regarding  Babylon,  ''  Her  stench  and
rottenness  is  come  up  before  me."  That  the  anger  of  God
can  produce  the  conflagration  without  any  intervention  of
Nature  is  proved  from  the  Psalms,  ''  He  sendeth  out  his
word  and  melteth  them."  From  the  position  of  the  comet,
its  course,  and  the  direction  of  its  tail  he  augurs  especially
the  near  approach  of  the  judgment  day,  though  it  may  also
betoken,  as  usual,  famine,  pestilence,  and  war.  ''  Yet  even
in  these  days,"  he  mourns,  ''  there  are  people  reckless  and


EFFORTS   TO   CRUSH  THE    SCIENTIFIC   VIEW.  191

giddy  enough  to  pay  no  heed  to  such  celestial  warnings,  and
these  even  cite  in  their  own  defence  the  injunction  of  Jere-
miah not  to  fear  signs  in  the  heavens."  This  idea  he  ex-
plodes, and  shows  that  good  and  orthodox  Christians,  while
not  superstitious  like  the  heathen,  know  well  "  that  God  is
not  bound  to  his  creation  and  the  ordinary  course  of  Nature,
but  must  often,  especially  in  these  last  dregs  of  the  world,
resort  to  irregular  means  to  display  his  anger  at  human
guilt."*

The  other  typical  case  occurred  in  the  following  century
and  in  another  part  of  Germany.  Conrad  Dieterich  was,
during  the  first  half  of  the  seventeenth  century,  a  Lutheran
ecclesiastic  of  the  highest  authority.  His  ability  as  a  theo-
logian had  made  him  Archdeacon  of  Marburg,  Professor  of
Philosophy  and  Director  of  Studies  at  the  University  of
Giessen,  and  "  Superintendent,"  or  Lutheran  bishop,  in  south-
western Germany.  In  the  year  1620,  on  the  second  Sunday
in  Advent,  in  the  great  Cathedral  of  Ulm,  he  developed  the
orthodox  doctrine  of  comets  in  a  sermon,  taking  up  the  ques-
tions :  I.  What  are  comets?  2.  What  do  they  indicate  ?  3.
What  have  we  to  do  with  their  significance?  This  sermon
marks  an  epoch.  Delivered  in  that  stronghold  of  German
Protestantism  and  by  a  prelate  of  the  highest  standing,  it
was  immediately  printed,  prefaced  by  three  laudatory  poems
from  different  men  of  note,  and  sent  forth  to  drive  back  the
scientific,  or,  as  it  was  called,  the  "godless,"  view  of  comets.
The  preface  shows  that  Dieterich  was  sincerely  alarmed  by
the  tendency  to  regard  comets  as  natural  appearances.  His
text  was  taken  from  the  twenty-fifth  verse  of  the  twenty-first
chapter  of  St.  Luke :  *'  And  there  shall  be  signs  in  the  sun,
and  in  the  moon,  and  in  the  stars ;  and  upon  the  earth  dis-
tress of  nations,  with  perplexity;  the  sea  and  the  waves
roaring."  As  to  what  comets  are,  he  cites  a  multitude  of
philosophers,  and,  finding  that  they  differ  among  themselves,
he  uses  a  form  of  argument  not  uncommon  from  that  day  to
this,  declaring  that  this  difference  of  opinion  proves  that
there  is  no  solution  of  the  problem  save  in  revelation,  and
insisting  that  comets  are  "  signs  especially  sent  by  the  Al-


*  For  Celichius,  or  Celich,  see  his  own  treatise,  as  above.


92


FROM    "SIGNS   AND   WONDERS"    TO   LAW.


mig-hty  to  warn  the  earth."  An  additional  proof  of  this  he
finds  in  the  forms  of  comets.  One,  he  says,  took  the  form  of
a  trumpet;  another,  of  a  spear;  another,  of  a  goat;  another,
of  a  torch  ;  another,  of  a  sword  ;  another,  of  an  arrow  ;  an-
other, of  a  sabre ;  still  another,  of  a  bare  arm.  From  these
forms  of  comets  he  infers  that  we  may  divine  their  purpose.
As  to  their  creation,  he  quotes  John  of  Damascus  and  other
early  Church  authorities  in  behalf  of  the  idea  that  each
comet  is  a  star  newly  created  at  the  Divine  command,  out  of
nothing,  and  that  it  indicates  the  wrath  of  God.  As  to  their
purpose,  having  quoted  largely  from  the  Bible  and  from
Luther,  he  winds  up  by  insisting  that,  as  God  can  make
nothing  in  vain,  comets  must  have  some  distinct  object ;  then,
from  Isaiah  and  Joel  among  the  prophets,  from  Matthew,
Mark,  and  Luke  among  the  evangelists,  from  Origen  and
John  Chrysostom  among  the  fathers,  from  Luther  and  Me-
lanchthon  among  the  Reformers,  he  draws  various  texts  more
or  less  conclusive  to  prove  that  comets  indicate  evil  and
only  evil ;  and  he  cites  Luther's  Advent  sermon  to  the  effect
that,  though  comets  may  arise  in  the  course  of  Nature,  they
are  still  signs  of  evil  to  mankind.  In  answer  to  the  theory
of  sundry  naturalists  that  comets  are  made  up  of  "a  certain
fiery,  warm,  sulphurous,  saltpetery,  sticky  fog,"  he  declaims  :
"Our  sins,  our  sins:  they  are  the  fiery  heated  vapours,  the
thick,  sticky,  sulphurous  clouds  which  rise  from  the  earth
toward  heaven  before  God."  Throughout  the  sermon  Die-
terich  pours  contempt  over  all  men  who  simpl}^  investigate
comets  as  natural  objects,  calls  special  attention  to  a  comet
then  in  the  heavens  resembling  a  long  broom  or  bundle  of
rods,  and  declares  that  he  and  his  hearers  can  only  con-
sider it  rightly  "  when  we  see  standing  before  us  our  Lord
God  in  heaven  as  an  angry  father  with  a  rod  for  his  chil-
dren." In  answer  to  the  question  what  comets  signify,
he  commits  himself  entirely  to  the  idea  that  they  indicate
the  wrath  of  God,  and  therefore  calamities  of  every  sort.
Page  after  page  is  filled  with  the  records  of  evils  following
comets.  Beginning  with  the  creation  ot  the  world,  he  in-
sists that  the  first  comet  brouo:ht  on  the  delusfe  of  Noah,  and
cites  a  mass  of  authorities,  ranging  from  Moses  and  Isaiah
to  Albert  the  Great  and   Melanchthon,  in  support  of  the


EFFORTS   TO   CRUSH    THE    SCIENTIFIC  VIEW.  ig^

view  that  comets  precede  earthquakes,  famines,  wars,  pesti-
lences, and  every  form  of  evil.  He  makes  some  parade  of
astronomical  knowledge  as  to  the  greatness  of  the  sun  and
moon,  but  relapses  soon  into  his  old  line  of  argument.  Im-
ploring his  audience  not  to  be  led  away  from  the  well-estab-
lished belief  of  Christendom  and  the  principles  of  their
fathers,  he  comes  back  to  his  old  assertion,  insists  that  "our
sins  are  the  inflammable  material  of  which  comets  are  made,"
and  winds  up  with  a  most  earnest  appeal  to  the  Almighty  to
spare  his  people.*

Similar  efforts  from  the  pulpit  were  provoked  by  the
great  comet  of  1680.  Typical  among  these  was  the  effort
in  Switzerland  of  Pastor  Heinrich  Erni,  who,  from  the  Cathe-
dral of  Zurich,  sent  a  circular  letter  to  the  clergy  of  that
region  showing  the  connection  of  the  eleventh  and  twelfth
verses  of  the  first  chapter  of  Jeremiah  with  the  comet,
giving  notice  that  at  his  suggestion  the  authorities  had  pro-
claimed a  solemn  fast,  and  exhorting  the  clergy  to  preach
earnestly  on  the  subject  of  this  warning.

Nor  were  the  interpreters  of  the  comet's  message  con-
tent with  simple  prose.  At  the  appearance  of  the  comet  of
161 8,  Grasser  and  Gross,  pastors  and  doctors  of  theology  at
Basle,  put  forth  a  collection  of  doggerel  rhymes  to  fasten
the  orthodox  theory  into  the  minds  of  school-children  and
peasants.     One  of  these  may  be  translated :

"  I  am  a  Rod  in  God's  right  hand
Threatening  the  German  and  foreign  land."

Others  for  a  similar  purpose  taught :

"  Eight  things  there  be  a  Comet  brings,
When  it  on  high  doth  horrid  range  :
Wind,  Famine,  Plague,  and  Death  to  Kings,

War,  Earthquakes,  Floods,  and  Direful  Change."

Great  ingenuity  was  shown  in  meeting  the  advance  of
science,  in  the  universities  and  schools,  with  new  texts  of


*  For  Dieterich,  see  Ulmische  Cometen-Predigt,  von  dem  Cometen,  so  nechst  abm
gewischen  i6i8  Jahrs  im   Wintertnonat  erstenmahls  in  Schwabcn  sehcjt  lassen,  .   .  .
gehalten  zu  Uhn  .  .  .  ditrc/i  Conrad  Dieterich,  Ulm,  1620.     Yoi  a  life  of  the  author,
see  article  Dieterich  in  the  A  llgemeine  Deutsche  Biographic.     See  also  Wolf.
14


IQ4  FROM    "SIGNS   AND   WONDERS"    TO    LAW.

Scripture  ;  and  Stephen  Spleiss,  Rector  of  the  Gymnasium
at  Schaffhausen,  got  great  credit  by  teaching  that  in  the
vision  of  Jeremiah  the  *'  almond  rod  "  was  a  tailed  comet,
and  the  '*  seething  pot "  a  bearded  one.*

It  can  be  easily  understood  that  such  authoritative  utter-
ances as  that  of  Dieterich  must  have  produced  a  great  effect
throughout  Protestant  Christendom  ;  and  in  due  time  we
see  their  working  in  New  England.  That  same  tendency  to
provincialism,  which,  save  at  rare  intervals,  has  been  the
bane  of  Massachusetts  thought  from  that  day  to  this,  ap-
peared ;  and  in  1664  we  find  Samuel  Danforth  arguing  from
the  Bible  that  "  comets  are  portentous  signals  of  great  and
notable  changes,"  and  arguing  from  history  that  they  "  have
been  many  times  heralds  of  wrath  to  a  secure  and  impenitent
world."  He  cites  especially  the  comet  of  1652,  which  ap-
peared just  before  Mr.  Cotton's  sickness  and  disappeared
after  his  d^th.  Morton  also,  in  his  Memorial  recording  the
death  of  John  Putnam,  alludes  to  the  comet  of  1662  as  "a
very  signal  testimony  that  God  had  then  removed  a  bright
star  and  a  shining  light  out  of  the  heaven  of  his  Church  here
into  celestial  glory  above."  Again  he  speaks  of  another
comet,  insisting  that  "  it  was  no  fiery  meteor  caused  by  ex-
halation, but  it  was  sent  immediately  by  God  to  awaken  the
secure  world,"  and  goes  on  to  show  how  in  that  year  "  it
pleased  God  to  smite  the  fruits  of  the  earth — namely,  the
wheat  in  special — with  blasting  and  mildew,  whereby  much
of  it  was  spoiled  and  became  profitable  for  nothing,  and
much  of  it  worth  little,  being  light  and  empty.  This  was
looked  upon  by  the  judicious  and  conscientious  of  the  land
as  a  speaking  providence  against  the  unthankfulness  of  many,
...  as  also  against  voluptuousness  and  abuse  of  the  good
creatures  of  God  by  licentiousness  in  drinking  and  fashions
in  apparel,  for  the  obtaining  whereof  a  great  part  of  the
principal  grain  was  oftentimes  unnecessarily  expended."

But  in  1680  a  stronger  than  either  of  these  seized  upon
the  doctrine  and  wielded  it  with  power.     Increase  Mather,

*  For  Erni,  see  Wolf,  Gesch.  d.  Astronomie,  p.  239.  For  Crasser  and  Gross,  see
their  Christenliches  Bedencken  .  .  .  von  dem  crschrockenlichen  Cometeti,  etc.,  Zurich,
1664.  For  Spleiss,  see  Beilduftiger  Bericht  von  dem  jetzigen  Cometsternen,  etc.,
Schaffhausen,  1664.


EFFORTS    TO   CRUSH    THE    SCIENTIFIC  VIEW.   .  1^5

SO  open  always  to  ideas  from  Europe,  and  always  so  power-
ful for  good  or  evil  in  the  colonies,  preached  his  sermon  on
"  Heaven's  i\larm  to  the  World,  .  .  .  wherein  is  shown  that
fearful  sights  and  signs  in  the  heavens  are  the  presages  of
o-reat  calamities  at  hand."  The  texts  were  taken  from  the
book  of  Revelation:  "And  the  third  angel  sounded,  and
there  fell  a  great  star  from  heaven,  burning,  as  it  were  a
lamp,"  and  "  Behold,  the  third  woe  cometh  quickly."  In
this,  as  in  various  other  sermons,  he  supports  the  theolog-
ical cometary  theory  fully.  He  insists  that  "  we  are  fallen
into  the  dregs  of  time,"  and  that  the  day  of  judgment  is  evi-
dently approaching.  He  explains  away  the  words  of  Jere-
miah— "  Be  not  dismayed  at  signs  in  the  heavens  " — and
shows  that  comets  have  been  forerunners  of  nearly  every
form  of  evil.  Having  done  full  justice  to  evils  thus  presaged
in  scriptural  times,  he  begins  a  similar  display  in  modern
history  by  citing  blazing  stars  which  foretold  the  invasions
of  Goths,  Huns,  Saracens,  and  Turks,  and  warns  gainsayers
by  citing  the  example  of  Vespasian,  who,  after  ridiculing  a
comet,  soon  died.  The  general  shape  and  appearance  of
comets,  he  thinks,  betoken  their  purpose,  and  he  cites  Ter-
tullian  to  prove  them  "  God's  sharp  razors  on  mankind,
whereby  he  doth  poll,  and  his  scythe  whereby  he  doth  shear
down  multitudes  of  sinful  creatures."  At  last,  rising  to  a
fearful  height,  he  declares :  "  For  the  Lord  hath  fired  his
beacon  in  the  heavens  among  the  stars  of  God  there  ;  the
fearful  sight  is  not  yet  out  of  sight.  The  warning  piece  of
heaven  is  going  off.  Now,  then,  if  the  Lord  discharge  his
murdering  pieces  from  on  high,  and  men  be  found  in  their
sins  unfit  for  death,  their  blood  shall  be  upon  them."  And
again,  in  an  agony  of  supplication,  he  cries  out :  "  Do  we  see
the  sword  blazing  over  us?  Let  it  put  us  upon  crying  to
God,  that  the  judgment  be  diverted  and  not  return  upon  us
again  so  speedily.  .  .  .  Doth  God  threaten  our  very  heavens?
6  pray  unto  him,  that  he  would  not  take  away  stars  and
send  comets  to  succeed  them."  *

*  For  Danforth,  see  his  Astronomical  Description  of  the  Late  Comet  or  Blazitig
Star,  Together  with  a  Brief  Theological  Application  Thereof  1664.  For  Morton,
see  his  Memorial,  pp.  251,  252  ;  also  309,  310.  Texts  cited  by  Mather  were  Rev.
viii,  10,  and  xi,  14.


196


FROM    "SIGNS   AND   WONDERS"   TO   LAW.


Two  years  later,  in  August,  1682,  he  followed  this  with
another  sermon  on  "  The  Latter  Sign,"  "  wherein  is  showed
that  the  voice  of  God  in  signal  providences,  especially  when
repeated  and  iterated,  ought  to  be  hearkened  unto."  Here,
too,  of  course,  the  comet  comes  in  for  a  large  share  of  atten-
tion. But  his  tone  is  less  sure :  even  in  the  midst  of  all  his
arguments  appears  an  evident  misgiving.  The  thoughts  of
Newton  in  science  and  Bayle  in  philosophy  were  evidently
tending  to  accomplish  the  prophecy  of  Seneca.  Mather's
alarm  at  this  is  clear.  His  natural  tendency  is  to  uphold  the
idea  that  a  comet  is  simply  a  fire-ball  flung  from  the  hand  of
an  avenging  God  at  a  guilty  world,  but  he  evidently  feels
obliged  to  yield  something  to  the  scientific  spirit ;  hence,
in  the  Discourse  concerning  Comets,  published  in  1683,  he  de-
clares :  ''  There  are  those  who  think  that,  inasmuch  as  com-
ets may  be  supposed  to  proceed  from  natural  causes,  there
is  no  speaking  voice  of  Heaven  in  them  beyond  what  is  to
be  said  of  all  other  works  of  God.  But  certain  it  is  that
many  things  which  may  happen  according  to  the  course  of
Nature  are  portentous  signs  of  Divine  anger  and  prognostics
of  great  evils  hastening  upon  the  world."  He  then  notices
the  eclipse  of  August,  1672,  and  adds :  "  That  year  the  col-
lege was  eclipsed  by  the  death  of  the  learned  president
there,  worthy  Mr.  Chauncey ;  and  two  colonies — namely,
Massachusetts  and  Plymouth — by  the  death  of  two  gov-
ernors, who  died  within  a  twelvemonth  after.  .  .  .  Shall,
then,  such  mighty  works  of  God  as  comets  are  be  insignifi-
cant things?"^


III.    THE    INVASION    OF   SCEPTICISM.

Vigorous  as  Mather's  argument  is,  we  see  scepticism  re-
garding *'  signs  "  continuing  to  invade  the  public  mind  ;  and,
in  spite  of  his  threatenings,  about  twenty  years  after  we  find
a  remarkable  evidence  of  this  progress  in  the  fact  that  this

*  Increase  Mather's  Heaven  s  Alai-m  to  the  World  was  first  printed  at  Boston  in
1681,  but  was  reprinted  in  16S2,  and  was  appended,  with  the  sermon  on  lite  Latter
SigJi,  to  the  Discourse  on  Comets  (Boston,  1683).


THE    INVASION   OF    SCEPTICISM.  I^^

scepticism  has  seized  upon  no  less  a  personage  than  that
colossus  of  orthodoxy,  his  thrice  illustrious  son,  Cotton
Mather  himself;  and  him  we  find,  in  1726,  despite  the  argu-
ments of  his  father,  declaring  in  \\\'^  Maim  duct  io\  ''Perhaps
there  may  be  some  need  for  me  to  caution  3-ou  against
being  dismayed  at  the  signs  of  the  heavens,  or  having  any
superstitious  fancies  upon  eclipses  and  the  like.  ...  I  am
willing  that  you  be  apprehensive  of  nothing  portentous  in
blazing  stars.  For  my  part,  I  know  not  whether  all  our
worlds,  and  even  the  sun  itself,  may  not  fare  the  better  for
them."-^

Curiously  enough,  for  this  scientific  scepticism  in  Cotton
Mather  there  was  a  cause  identical  with  that  which  had
developed  superstition  in  the  mind  of  his  father.  The  same
provincial  tendency  to  receive  implicitly  any  new  Euro-
pean fashion  in  thinking  or  speech  wrought  upon  both,
plunging  one  into  superstition  and  drawing  the  other  out
of  it.

European  thought,  which  New  England  followed,  had  at
last  broken  away  in  great  measure  from  the  theological  view
of  comets  as  signs  and  wonders.  The  germ  of  this  emanci-
pating influence  was  mainly  in  the  great  utterance  of  Seneca  ;
and  we  find  in  nearly  every  century  some  evidence  that  this
germ  was  still  alive.  This  life  became  more  and  more  evi-
dent after  the  Reformation  period,  even  though  theologians
in  every  Church  did  their  best  to  destroy  it.  The  first  series
of  attacks  on  the  old  theological  doctrine  were  mainly
founded  in  philosophic  reasoning.  As  early  as  the  first
half  of  the  sixteenth  century  we  hear  Julius  C^sar  Scaliger
protesting  against  the  cometary  superstition  as  ''  ridiculous
folly."  t  Of  more  real  importance  was  the  treatise  of  Blaise
de  Vigenere,  published  at  Paris  in  1578.  In  this  little  book
various  statements  regarding  comets  as  signs  of  wrath  or
causes  of  evils  are  given,  and  then  followed  by  a  very  gentle
and  quiet  discussion,  usually  tending  to  develop  that  health-
ful scepticism  which  is  the  parent  of  investigation.  A  fair
example  of  his  mode  of  treating  the  subject  is  seen  in  his


*  For  Cotton  Mather,  see  the  Manuductio,  pp.  54,  55.
\  For  Scaliger,  see  p.  20  of  Dudith's  book,  cited  below.


198


FROM    "SIGNS   AND    WONDERS"    TO    LAW.


dealing  with  a  bit  of  *'  sacred  science."  This  was  simply
that  "  comets  menace  princes  and  kings  with  death  because
they  live  more  delicately  than  other  people ;  and,  therefore,
the  air  thickened  and  corrupted  by  a  comet  would  be  natu-
rally more  injurious  to  them  than  to  common  folk  who  live
on  coarser  food."  To  this  De  Vigenere  answers  that  there
are  very  many  persons  who  live  on  food  as  delicate  as  that
enjoyed  by  princes  and  kings,  and  yet  receive  no  harm  from
comets.  He  then  goes  on  to  show  that  many  of  the  greatest
monarchs  in  history  have  met  death  without  any  comet  to
herald  it.

In  the  same  year  thoughtful  scepticism  of  a  similar  sort
found  an  advocate  in  another  part  of  Europe.  Thomas
Erastus,  the  learned  and  devout  professor  of  medicine  at
Heidelberg,  put  forth  a  letter  dealing  in  the  plainest  terms
with  the  superstition.  He  argued  especially  that  there  could
be  no  natural  connection  between  the  comet  and  pestilence,
since  the  burning  of  an  exhalation  must  tend  to  purify  rather
than  to  infect  the  air.  In  the  following  year  the  eloquent
Hungarian  divine  Dudith  published  a  letter  in  which  the
theological  theory  was  handled  even  more  shrewdly  ;  for  he
argued  that,  if  comets  were  caused  by  the  sins  of  mortals,
they  would  never  be  absent  from  the  sky.  But  these  utter-
ances were  for  the  time  brushed  aside  by  the  theological
leaders  of  thought  as  shallow  or  impious.

In  the  seventeenth  century  able  arguments  against  the
superstition,  on  general  grounds,  began  to  be  multiplied.  In
Holland,  Balthasar  Bekker  opposed  this,  as  he  opposed  the
witchcraft  delusion,  on  general  philosophic  grounds  ;  and
Lubienitzky  wrote  in  a  compromising  spirit  to  prove  that
comets  were  aS  often  followed  by  good  as  by  evil  events.
In  France,  Pierre  Petit,  formerly  geographer  of  Louis  XIII,
and  an  intimate  friend  of  Descartes,  addressed  to  the  young
Louis  XIV  a  vehement  protest  against  the  superstition,
basing  his  arguments  not  on  astronomy,  but  on  common
sense.  A  very  effective  part  of  the  little  treatise  was
devoted  to  answering  the  authority  of  the  fathers  of  the
early  Church.  T6  do  this,  he  simply  reminded  his  readers
that  St.  Augustine  and  St.  John  Damascenus  had  also  op-
posed the  doctrine  of  the  antipodes.     The  book  did  good


THE    INVASION    OF   SCEPTICISM.  jog

service  in  France,  and  was  translated  in  Germany  a  few
years  later.*

All  these  were  denounced  as  infidels  and  heretics,  yet
none  the  less  did  they  set  men  at  thinking,  and  prepare  the
way  for  a  far  greater  genius  ;  for  toward  the  end  of  the
same  century  the  philosophic  attack  was  taken  up  by.  Pierre
Bayle,  and  in  the  whole  series  of  philosophic  champions  he
is  chief.  While  professor  at  the  University  of  Sedan  he  had
observed  the  alarm  caused  by  the  comet  of  1680,  and  he  now
brought  all  his  reasoning  powers  to  bear  upon  it.  Thoughts
deep  and  witty  he  poured  out  in  volume  after  volume.
Catholics  and  Protestants  were  alike  scandalized.  Catholic
France  spurned  him,  and  Jurieu,  the  great  Reformed  divine,
called  his  cometary  views  ''  atheism,"  and  tried  hard  to  have
Protestant  Holland  condemn  him.  Though  Bayle  did  not
touch  immediately  the  mass  of  mankind,  he  wrought  with
power  upon  men  who  gave  themselves  the  trouble  of  think-
ino;.  It  was  indeed  unfortunate  for  the  Church  that  theolo-
gians,  instead  of  taking  the  initiative  in  this  matter,  left  it
to  Bayle ;  for,  in  tearing  down  the  pretended  scriptural  doc-
trine of  comets,  he  tore  down  much  else :  of  all  men  in  his
time,  no  one  so  thoroughly  prepared  the  way  for  Voltaire.

Bayle's  whole  argument  is  rooted  in  the  prophecy  of
Seneca.  He  declares:  ''Comets  are  bodies  subject  to  the
ordinary  law  of  Nature,  and  not  prodigies  amenable  to  no
law."  He  shows  historically  that  there  is  no  reason  to  re-
gard comets  as  portents  of  earthly  evils.  As  to  the  fact  that
such  evils  occur  after  the  passage  of  comets  across  the  sky,
he  compares  the  person  believing  that  comets  cause  these
evils  to  a  woman  looking  out  of  a  window  into  a  Paris  street
and  believing  that  the  carriages  pass  because  she  looks  out.
As  to  the  accomplishment  of  some  predictions,  he  cites  the
shrewd  saying  of  Henry  IV,  to  the  effect  that  *'  the  public


*  For  Blaise  de  Vigen^re,  see  his  Traite  des  Cometes,  Paris,  1578.  For  Dudith,
see  his  De  Cometarum  Signijicatione,  Basle,  1579,  to  which  the  letter  of  Erastus  is
appended.  Bekker's  views  may  he  found  in  his  Onderzoek  van  de  Betekening  der
Cometen,  Leeuwarden,  1683.  For  Lubienitzky's,  see  his  Theatrum  Cometictim,  Am-
sterdam, 1667,  in  part  ii :  Historia  Cometarum,  preface  "  to  the  reader."  For  Petit,
see  his  Dissertation  stcr  la  A^ature  des  Cometes,  Paris,  1665  (German  translation,
Dresden  and  Zittau,  168 1).


200  FROM    "SIGNS   AND   WONDERS"    TO    LAW.

will  remember  one  prediction  that  comes  true  better  than
all  the  rest  that  have  proved  false."  Finally,  he  sums  up  by
saying  :  **  The  more  we  study  man,  the  more  does  it  appear
that  pride  is  his  ruling  passion,  and  that  he  affects  grandeur
even  in  his  misery.  Mean  and  perishable  creature  that  he
is,  he  has  been  able  to  persuade  men  that  he  can  not  die  with-
out disturbing  the  whole  course  of  Nature  and  obliging  the
heavens  to  put  themselves  to  fresh  expense  in  order  to  light
his  funeral  pomp.  Foolish  and  ridiculous  vanity  !  If  we
had  a  just  idea  of  the  universe,  we  should  soon  comprehend
that  the  death  or  birth  of  a  prince  is  too  insignificant  a  mat-
ter to  stir  the  heavens."  *

This  great  philosophic  champion  of  right  reason  was  fol-
lowed by  a  literary  champion  hardly  less  famous  ;  for  Fonte-
nelle  now  gave  to  the  French  theatre  his  play  of  The  Comet,
and  a  point  of  capital  importance  in  France  was  made  by
rendering  the  army  of  ignorance  ridiculous. f

Such  was  the  line  of  philosophic  and  literary  attack,  as
developed  from  Scaliger  to  Fontenelle.  But  beneath  and
in  the  midst  of  all  of  it,  from  first  to  last,  giving  firmness,
strength,  and  new  sources  of  vitality  to  it,  was  the  steady
development  of  scientific  effort ;  and  to  the  series  of  great
men  who  patiently  wrought  and  thought  out  the  truth  by
scientific  methods  through  all  these  centuries  belong  the
honours  of  the  victory.

For  generations  men  in  various  parts  of  the  world  had
been  making  careful  observations  on  these  strange  bodies.
As  far  back  as  the  time  when  Luther  and  Melanchthon  and
Zwingli  were  plunged  into  alarm  by  various  comets  from
1 53 1  to  1539,  Peter  Apian  kept  his  head  sufficiently  cool  to
make  scientific  notes  of  their  paths  through  the  heavens.
A  little  later,  when  the  great  comet  of  1556  scared  popes,
emperors,  and  reformers  alike,  such  men  as  Fabricius  at  Vi-
enna and  Heller  at  Nuremberg  quietly  observed  its  path.

*  Regarding  Bayle,  see  Madler,  Himmehkunde,  vol.  i,  p.  327.  For  special  points
of  interest  in  Bayle's  argument,  see  his  Fensees  Diverses  sur  les  Comkes,  Amsterdam,
1749,  pp.  79,  102,  134,  206.  For  the  response  to  Jurieu,  see  the  Contifiuation  des
Penshs,  Rotterdam,  1705  ;  also  Champion,  p.  164,  Lecky,  ttbi  j«/ra,  and  Guillemin,
pp.  29,  30.

f  See  Fontenelle,  cited  by  Champion,  p.  167.


THE   INVASION   OF   SCEPTICISM.  201

In  vain  did  men  like  Dieterich  and  Heerbrand  and  Celich
from  various  parts  of  Germany  denounce  such  observations
and  investigations  as  impious  ;  they  were  steadily  continued,
and  in  1577  came  the  first  which  led  to  the  distinct  founda-
tion of  the  modern  doctrine.  In  that  year  appeared  a  comet
which  again  plunged  Europe  into  alarm.  In  every  European
country  this  alarm  was  strong,  but  in  Germany  strongest  of
all.  The  churches  were  filled  with  terror-stricken  multi-
tudes. Celich  preaching  at  Magdeburg  was  echoed  by
Heerbrand  preaching  at  Tubingen,  and  both  these  from
thousands  of  other  pulpits.  Catholic  and  Protestant,  through-
out Europe.  In  the  midst  of  all  this  din  and  outcry  a  few
men  quietly  but  steadily  observed  the  monster;  and  Tycho
Brahe  announced,  as  the  result,  that  its  path  lay  farther  from
the  earth  than  the  orbit  of  the  moon.  Another  great  astro-
nomical genius,  Kepler,  confirmed  this.  This  distinct  be-
ginning of  the  new  doctrine  was  bitterly  opposed  by  theo-
logians ;  they  denounced  it  as  one  of  the  evil  results  of  that
scientific  meddling  with  the  designs  of  Providence  against
which  they  had  so  long  declaimed  in  pulpits  and  professors'
chairs ;  they  even  brought  forward  some  astronomers  am-
bitious or  wrong-headed  enough  to  testify  that  Tycho  and
Kepler  were  in  error.*

Nothing  could  be  more  natural  than  such  opposition ;
for  this  simple  announcement  by  Tycho  Brahe  began  a  new
era.  It  shook  the  very  foundation  of  cometary  superstition.
The  Aristotelian  view,  developed  by  the  theologians,  was
that  what  lies  within  the  moon's  orbit  appertains  to  the  earth
and  is  essentially  transitory  and  evil,  while  what  lies  beyond
it  belongs  to  the  heavens  and  is  permanent,  regular,  and
pure.  Tycho  Brahe  and  Kepler,  therefore,  having  by  means
of  scientific  observation  and  thought  taken  comets  out  of  the
category  of  meteors  and  appearances  in  the  neighbourhood
of  the  earth,  and  placed  them  among  the  heavenly  bodies,
dealt  a  blow  at  the  very  foundations  of  the  theological  argu-
ment, and  gave  a  great  impulse  to  the  idea  that  comets  are

*  See  Madler,  Himmelskunde,  vol.  i,  pp.  181,  197  ;  also  Wolf,  Gesch.  d.  Astrono-
mie,  and  Janssen,  Gesch.  d.  deutschen  Volkes,  vol.  v,  p.  350.  Heerbrand's  sermon,
cited  above,  is  a  good  specimen  of  the  theologic  attitude.  See  Pingre,  vol.  ii,
p.  81.


202  '  FROM    "SIGNS   AND   WONDERS"    TO    LAW.

themselves  heavenly  bodies  moving  regularly  and  in  obedi-
ence to  law.


IV.    THEOLOGICAL   EFFORTS   AT   COMPROMISE.— THE   FINAL
VICTORY   OF    SCIENCE.

Attempts  were  now  made  to  compromise.  It  was  de-
clared that,  while  some  comets  were  doubtless  supralunar,
some  must  be  sublunar.  But  this  admission  was  no  less
fatal  on  another  account.  During  many  centuries  the  theory
favoured  by  the  Church  had  been,  as  we  have  seen,  that  the
earth  was  surrounded  by  hollow  spheres,  concentric  and
transparent,  forming  a  number  of  glassy  strata  incasing  one
another  "  like  the  different  coatings  of  an  onion,"  and  that
each  of  these  in  its  movement  about  the  earth  carries  one  or
more  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  Some  maintained  that  these
spheres  were  crystal ;  but  Lactantius,  and  with  him  various
fathers  of  the  Church,  spoke  of  the  heavenly  vault  as  made
of  ice.  Now,  the  admission  that  comets  could  move  be-
yond the  moon  was  fatal  to  this  theory,  for  it  sent  them
crashing  through  these  spheres  of  ice  or  crystal,  and  there-
fore through  the  whole  sacred  fabric  of  the  Ptolemaic
theory.*

Here  we  may  pause  for  a  moment  to  note  one  of  the
chief  differences  between  scientific  and  theological  reasoning
considered  in  themselves.  Kepler's  main  reasoning  as  to
the  existence  of  a  law  for  cometary  movement  was  right ;
but  his  secondary  reasoning,  that  comets  move  nearly  in
straight  lines,  was  wrong.  His  right  reasoning  was  devel-
oped by  Gassendi  in  France,  by  Borelli  in  Italy,  by  Hevel
and  Doerfel  in  Germany,  by  Eysat  and  Bernouilli  in  Switz-
erland, by  Percy  and — most  important  of  all,  as  regards
mathematical  demonstration — by  Newton  in  England.  The
general  theory,  which  was  true,  they  accepted  and  devel-
oped ;  the  secondary  theory,  which  was  found  untrue,  they
rejected  ;  and,  as  a  result,  both  of  what  they  thus  accepted

*  For  these  features  in  cometary  theory,  see  Pingr^,  vol.  i,  p.  89  ;  also  Hum-
boldt, Cosmos  (English  translation,  London,  1868),  vol,  iii  p.  169.


THEOLOGICAL   EFFORTS   AT    COMPROMISE.


203


and  of  what  they   rejected,  was  evolved   the  basis  of  the  )
whole  modern  cometary  theory.  '

Very  different  was  this  from  the  theological  method.  As  ^
a  rule,  when  there  arises  a  thinker  as  great  in  theology  as
Kepler  in  science,  the  whole  mass  of  his  conclusions  ripens
into  a  dogma.  His  disciples  labour  not  to  test  it,  but  to  es-
tablish it ;  and  while,  in  the  Catholic  Church,  it  becomes  a
dogma  to  be  believed  or  disbelieved  under  the  penalty  of
damnation,  it  becomes  in  the  Protestant  Church  the  basis
for  one  more  sect.

Various  astronomers  laboured  to  develop  the  truth  dis-
covered by  Tycho  and  strengthened  by  Kepler.  Cassini
seemed  likely  to  win  for  Italy  the  glory  of  completing  the
great  structure  ;  but  he  was  sadly  fettered  by  Church  influ-
ences, and  was  obliged  to  leave  most  of  the  work  to  others.
Early  among  these  was  Hevel.  He  gave  reasons  for  be-
lieving that  comets  move  in  parabolic  curves  toward  the
sun.  Then  came  a  man  who  developed  this  truth  further —
Samuel  Doerfel ;  and  it  is  a  pleasure  to  note  that  he  was  a
clergyman.  The  comet  of  1680,  which  set  Erni  in  Switzer-
land, Mather  in  New  England,  and  so  many  others  in  all
parts  of  the  world  at  declaiming,  set  Doerfel  at  thinking.
Undismayed  by  the  authority  of  Origen  and  St.  John  Chrys-
ostom,  the  arguments  of  Luther,  Melanchthon,  and  Zwingli,
the  outcries  of  Celich,  Heerbrand,  and  Dieterich,  he  pon-
dered over  the  problem  in  his  little  Saxon  parsonage,  until
in  1 68 1  he  set  forth  his  proofs  that  comets  are  heavenly
bodies  moving  in  parabolas  of  which  the  sun  is  the  focus.
Bernouilli  arrived  at  the  same  conclusion  ;  and,  finally,  this
great  series  of  men  and  works  was  closed  by  the  greatest  of
all,  when  Newton,  in  1686,  having  taken  the  data  furnished
by  the  comet  of  1680,  demonstrated  that  comets  are  guided
in  their  movements  by  the  same  principle  that  controls  the
planets  in  their  orbits.  Thus  was  completed  the  evolution
of  this  new  truth  in  science.

Yet  we  are  not  to  suppose  that  these  two  great  series  of
philosophical  and  scientific  victories  cleared  the  field  of  all
opponents.  Declamation  and  pretended  demonstration  of
the  old  theologic  view  were  still  heard  ;  but  the  day  of  com-
plete victory  dawned  when  Halley,  after  most  thorough  ob-


204  FROM   "SIGNS   AND   WONDERS"    TO   LAW/

servation  and  calculation,  recognised  the  comet  of  1682  as
one  which  had  already  appeared  at  stated  periods,  and  fore-
told its  return  in  about  seventy-five  years  ;  and  the  battle
was  fully  won  when  Clairaut,  seconded  by  Lalande  and  Mme.
Lepaute,  predicted  distinctly  the  time  when  the  comet  would
arrive  at  its   perihelion,  and  this  prediction  was  verified  *
Then  it  was  that  a  Roman  heathen  philosopher  was  proved
more  infallible  and   more  directly  under  Divine  inspiration
than  a  Roman  Christian  pontiff;  for  the  very  comet  which
the  traveller  finds  to-day  depicted  on  the  Bayeux  tapestry
as  portending  destruction  to  Harold  and  the  Saxons  at  the
Norman  invasion  of  England,  and  which  was  regarded  by
Pope  Calixtus  as  portending  evil  to  Christendom,  was  found
six  centuries  later  to  be,  as  Seneca  had  prophesied,  a  heav-
enly body  obeying  the  great  laws  of  the  universe,  and  com-
ing at  regular  periods.     Thenceforth  the  whole  ponderous
enginery  of  this  superstition,  with  its  proof-texts  regarding
"  signs  in  the  heavens,"  its  theological  reasoning  to  show  the
moral  necessity  of  cometary  warnings,  and  its  ecclesiastical
fulminations  against  the  '*  atheism,  godlessness,  and  infidel-
ity "    of   scientific  investigation,    was    seen    by  all  thinking
men  to  be  as  weak  against  the  scientific  method  as  Indian
arrows  against  needle  guns.     Copernicus,  Galileo,   Cassini,
Doerfel,    Newton,    Halley,    and     Clairaut    had    gained    the
victor3^f

It  is  instructive  to  note,  even  after  the  main  battle  was
lost,  a  renewal  of  the  attempt,  always  seen  under  like  circum-
stances, to  effect  a  compromise,  to  establish  a  ''safe  science  "
on  grounds  pseudo-scientific  and  pseudo-theologic.  Luther,
with  his  strong  common  sense,  had  foreshadowed  this ;  Kep-
ler had  expressed  a  willingness  to  accept  it.  It  was  insisted
that  comets   might  be  heavenly  bodies  moving  in  regular


*  See  Pingre,  vol.  i,  p.  53  ;  Grant,  History  of  Physical  A strottomy,  p.  305,  etc.,
etc.  For  a  curious  partial  anticipation  by  Hooke,  in  1664,  of  the  great  truth  an-
nounced by  Halley  in  1682,  see  Pepys's  Diary  for  March  i,  1664.  For  excellent
summaries  of  the  whole  work  of  Halley  and  Clairaut  and  their  forerunners  and
associates,  see  Pingre,  Madler,  Wolf,  Arago,  et  al.

f  In  accordance  with  Halley's  prophecy,  the  comet  of  1682  has  returned  in
1759  and  1835.  See  Madler,  Guillemin,  Watson,  Grant,  Delambre,  Proctor,  article
Astronomy  in  Encycl.  Brit.,  and  especially,  for  details,  \\'olf,  pp.  407-412  and  701-
722.     For  clear  statement  regarding  Doerfel,  see  Wolf,  p.  411.


THEOLOGICAL   EFFORTS   AT   COMPROMISE.  205

orbits,  and  even  obedient  to  law,  and  yet  be  sent  as  "  signs  in
the  heavens."  Many  good  men  clung  longingly  to  this  phase
of  the  old  belief,  and  in  1770  Semler,  professor  at  Halle,  tried
to  satisfy  both  sides.  He  insisted  that,  while  from  a  scien-
tific point  of  view  comets  could  not  exercise  any  physical
influence  upon  the  world,  yet  from  a  religious  point  of  view
they  could  exercise  a  moral  influence  as  reminders  of  the
Just  Judge  of  the  Universe.

So  hard  was  it  for  good  men  to  give  up  the  doctrine  of
**  signs  in  the  heavens,"  seemingly  based  upon  Scripture  and
exercising  such  a  healthful  moral  tendency  !  As  is  always
the  case  after  such  a  defeat,  these  votaries  of  "  sacred  sci-
ence "  exerted  the  greatest  ingenuity  in  devising  statements
and  arguments  to  avert  the  new  doctrine.  Within  our  own
century  the  great  Catholic  champion,  Joseph  de  Maistre,
echoed  these  in  declaring  his  belief  that  comets  are  special
warnings  of  evil.  So,  too,  in  Protestant  England,  in  1818,
the  Gentleman  s  Magazine  stated  that  under  the  malign  influ-
ence of  a  recent  comet  "  flies  became  blind  and  died  early  in
the  season,"  and  ''  the  wife  of  a  London  shoemaker  had  four
children  at  a  birth."  And  even  as  late  as  1829  Mr.  Forster,
an  English  physician,  published  a  work  to  prove  that  comets
produce  hot  summers,  cold  winters,  epidemics,  earthquakes,
clouds  of  midges  and  locusts,  and  nearly  every  calamity
conceivable.  He  bore  especially  upon  the  fact  that  the
comet  of  1665  was  coincident  with  the  plague  in  London,
apparently  forgetting  that  the  other  great  cities  of  England
and  the  Continent  were  not  thus  visited  ;  and,  in  a  climax,
announces  the  fact  that  the  comet  of  1663  '*  made  all  the  cats
in  Westphalia  sick."

There  still  lingered  one  little  cloud-patch  of  superstition,
arising  mainly  from  the  supposed  fact  that  comets  had  really
been  followed  by  a  marked  rise  in  temperature.  Even  this
poor  basis  for  the  belief  that  they  might,  after  all,  affect
earthly  affairs  was  swept  away,  and  science  won  here  an-
other victory  ;  for  Arago,  by  thermometric  records  carefully
kept  at  Paris  from  1735  to  178 1,  proved  that  comets  had  pro-
duced no  effect  upon  temperature.  Among  multitudes  of
similar  examples  he  showed  that,  in  some  years  when  several
comets  appeared,  the  temperature  was  lower  than  in  other


2o6  FROM    "SIGNS   AND    WONDERS"    TO    LAW.

years  when  few  or  none  appeared.  In  1737  there  were  two
comets,  and  the  weather  was  cool;  in  1785  there  was  no
comet,  and  the  weather  was  hot ;  through  the  whole  fifty
years  it  was  shown  that  comets  were  sometimes  followed
by  hot  weather,  sometimes  by  cool,  and  that  no  rule  was
deducible.  The  victory  of  science  was  complete  at  every
point.*

But  in  this  history  there  was  one  little  exhibition  so  curi-
ous as  to  be  worthy  of  notice,  though  its  permanent  effect
upon  thought  was  small.  Whiston  and  Burnet,  so  devoted
to  what  they  considered  sacred  science,  had  determined  that
in  some  way  comets  must  be  instruments  of  Divine  wrath.
One  of  them  maintained  that  the  deluge  was  caused  by  the
tail  of  a  comet  striking  the  earth  ;  the  other  put  forth  the
theory  that  comets  are  places  of  punishment  for  the  damned
— in  fact,  "  frying  hells."  The  theories  of  Whiston  and  Bur-
net found  wide  acceptance  also  in  Germany,  mainly  through
the  all-powerful  mediation  of  Gottsched,  so  long,  from  his
professor's  chair  at  Leipsic,  the  dictator  of  orthodox  thought,
who  not  only  w^rote  a  brief  tractate  of  his  own  upon  the
subject,  but  furnished  a  voluminous  historical  introduction
to  the  more  elaborate  treatise  of  Heyn.  In  this  book,
which  appeared  at  Leipsic  in  1742,  the  agency  of  comets  in
the  creation,  the  flood,  and  the  final  destruction  of  the  world
is  fully  proved.  Both  these  theories  were,  however,  soon
discredited.

Perhaps  the  more  interesting  of  them  can  best  be  met  by
another,  which,  if  not  fully  established,  appears  much  better
based — namely,  that  in  1868  the  earth  passed  directl}'  through
the  tail  of  a  comet,  with  no  deluge,  no  sound  of  any  wailings
of  the  damned,  w^ith  but  slight  appearances  here  and  there,
onl}'  to  be  detected  by  the  keen  sight  of  the  meteorological
or  astronomical  observer.

In  our  own  country  superstitious  ideas  regarding  comets
continued  to  have  some  little  currency  ;  but  their  life  was

*  For  Forster,  see  his  Illustrations  of  the  Atmospherical  Origin  of  Epidemic
Diseases,  Chelmsford,  1829,  cited  by  Arago  ;  also  in  Quarterly  Review  for  April,
1835.  For  the  writings  of  several  on  both  sides,  and  especially  of  those  who  sought
to  save,  as  far  as  possible,  the  sacred  theory  of  comets,  see  Madler,  vol.  ii,  p.  384
et  seq.y  and  Wolf,  p.  186.


THEOLOGICAL   EFFORTS   AT   COMPROMISE.  207

short.  The  tendency  shown  by  Cotton  Mather,  at  the  be-
ginning- of  the  eighteenth  century,  toward  acknowledging
the  victory  of  science,  was  completed  by  the  utterances  of
Winthrop,  professor  at  Harvard,  who  in  1759  published  two
lectures  on  comets,  in  which  he  simply  and  clearly  revealed
the  truth,  never  scofhng,  but  reasoning  quietly  and  rever-
ently. In  one  passage  he  says :  "  To  be  thrown  into  a  panic
whenever  a  comet  appears,  on  account  of  the  ill  effects  which
some  few  of  them  might  possibly  produce,  if  they  were  not
under  proper  direction,  betrays  a  weakness  unbecoming  a
reasonable  being."

A  happy  influence  in  this  respect  was  exercised  on  both
continents  by  John  Wesley.  Tenaciously  as  he  had  held  to
the  supposed  scriptural  view  in  so  many  other  matters  of
science,  in  this  he  allowed  his  reason  to  prevail,  accepted
the  demonstrations  of  Halley,  and  gloried  in  them.^'"

The  victory  was  indeed  complete.  Happily,  none  of  the
fears  expressed  by  Conrad  Dieterich  and  Increase  Mather
were  realized.  No  catastrophe  has  ensued  either  to  religion
or  to  morals.  In  the  realm  of  religion  the  Psalms  of  David
remain  no  less  beautiful,  the  great  utterances  of  the  Hebrew
prophets  no  less  powerful ;  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  "  the
first  commandment,  and  the  second,  which  is  like  unto  it,"
the  definition  of  "  pure  religion  and  undefiled  "  by  St.  James,
appeal  no  less  to  the  deepest  things  in  the  human  heart.  In
the  realm  of  morals,  too,  serviceable  as  the  idea  of  firebrands
thrown  by  the  right  hand  of  an  avenging  God  to  scare  a
naughty  world  might  seem,  any  competent  historian  must
find  that  the  destruction  of  the  old  theological  cometary
theory  was  followed  by  moral  improvement  rather  than  by
deterioration.  We  have  but  to  compare  the  general  moral
tone  of  society  to-day,  wretchedly  imperfect  as  it  is,  with
that   existing   in    the    time   when  this   superstition    had   its

*  For  Heyn,  see  his  Versuch  einer  Betrachtung  iiber  die  Cometen,  die  Siindjluih
tind  das  Vor spiel  des  jiingsten  Geric/its,  Leipsic,  1742.  A  Latin  version,  of  the
same  year,  bears  the  title,  Specitnen  Coj7ietologi(e  Sacrce.  For  the  theory  that  the
earth  encountered  the  tail  of  a  comet,  see  Guillemin  and  Watson.  For  survival  of
the  old  idea  in  America,  see  a  Sermon  of  Israel  Loring,  of  Sudbury,  published  in
1722.  For  Prof.  J.  Winthrop,  see  his  Coviets.  For  Wesley,  see  his  N'atia-al  Phi-
hsophyy  London,  1784,  vol.  iii,  p.  303.


2o8  FROM    "SIGNS    AND   WONDERS"    TO   LAW.

Strongest  hold.  We  have  only  to  compare  the  court  of
Henry  VIII  with  the  court  of  Victoria,  the  reign  of  the
later  Valois  and  earlier  Bourbon  princes  with  the  present
French  Republic,  the  period  of  the  Medici  and  Sforzas  and
Borgias  with  the  period  of  Leo  XIII  and  Humbert,  the
monstrous  wickedness  of  the  Thirty  Years'  War  with  the
ennobling  patriotism  of  the  Franco-Prussian  struggle,  and
the  despotism  of  the  miserable  German  princelings  of  the
sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  with  the  reign  of  the
Emperor  William.

The  gain  is  not  simply  that  mankind  has  arrived  at  a
clearer  conception  of  law  in  the  universe ;  not  merely  that
thinking  men  see  more  clearly  that  we  are  part  of  a  system
not  requiring  constant  patching  and  arbitrary  interference  ;
but  perhaps  best  of  all  is  the  fact  that  science  has  cleared
away  one  more  series  of  those  dogmas  which  tend  to  debase
rather  than  to  develop  man's  whole  moral  and  religious
nature.  In  this  emancipation  from  terror  and  fanaticism,  as
in  so  many  other  results  of  scientific  thinking,  we  have  a
proof  of  the  inspiration  of  those  great  words,  "  The  truth

SHALL   MAKE   YOU    FREE."


CHAPTER  V.
FROM    GENESIS    TO    GEOLOGY.

I.    GROWTH    OF    THEOLOGICAL   EXPLANATIONS.

Among  the  philosophers  of  Greece  we  find,  even  at  an
early  period,  germs  of  geological  truth,  and,  what  is  of  vast
importance,  an  atmosphere  in  which  such  germs  could  grow.
These  germs  were  transmitted  to  Roman  thought ;  an  at-
mosphere of  tolerance  continued  ;  there  was  nothing  which
forbade  unfettered  reasoning  regarding  either  the  earth's
strata  or  the  remains  of  former  life  found  in  them,  and
under  the  Roman  Empire  a  period  of  fruitful  observation
seemed  sure  to  begin.

But,  as  Christianity  took  control  of  the  world,  there  came
a  great  change.  The  earliest  attitude  of  the  Church  toward
geology  and  its  kindred  sciences  was  indifferent,  and  even
contemptuous.  According  to  the  prevailing  belief,  the  earth
was  a  ''  fallen  world,"  and  was  soon  to  be  destroyed.  Why,
then,  should  it  be  studied  ?  Why,  indeed,  give  a  thought  to
it?  The  scorn  which  Lactantius  and  St.  Augustine  had  cast
upon  the  study  of  astronomy  was  extended  largely  to  other
sciences.*

But  the  germs  of  scientific  knowledge  and  thought  de-
veloped in  the  ancient  world  could  be  entirely  smothered
neither  by  eloquence  nor  by  logic ;  some  little  scientific  ob-

*  For  a  compact  and  admirable  statement  as  to  the  dawn  of  geological  concep-
tions in  Greece  and  Rome,  see  Mr.  Lester  Ward's  essay  on  paleobotany  in  the
Fifth  Annual  Report  of  the  United  States  Geological  Survey,  for  i883-'84.  As  to
the  reasons  why  Greek  philosophers  did  comparatively  so  little  for  geology,  see
D'Archiac,  GMogie,  p.  i8.  For  the  contempt  felt  by  Lactantius  and  St.  Augustine
toward  astronomical  science,  see  foregoing  chapters  on  Astronomy  and  Geography.
15  209


2IO


FROM  GENESIS  TO  GEOLOGY.


servation  must  be  allowed,  though  all  close  reasoning  upon
it  was  fettered  by  theology.  Thus  it  was  that  St.  Jerome
insisted  that  the  broken  and  twisted  crust  of  the  earth  ex-
hibits the  wrath  of  God  against  sin,  and  Tertullian  asserted
that  fossils  resulted  from  the  Ifood  of  Noah.

To  keep  all  such  observation  and  reasoning  wuthin  ortho-
dox limits,  St.  Augustine,  about  the  begirming  of  the  fifth
century,  began  an  effort  to  develop  from  these  germs  a
growth  in  science  which  should  be  sacred  and  safe.  With
this  intent  he  prepared  his  great  commentary  on  the  work
of  creation,  as  depicted  in  Genesis,  besides  dwelling  upon
the  subject  in  other  writings.  Once  engaged  in  this  work,
he  gave  himself  to  it  more  earnestly  than  any  other  of  the
earlier  fathers  ever  did  ;  but  his  vast  powers  of  research
and  thought  were  not  directed  to  actual  observation  or  rea-
soning upon  observation.  The  keynote  of  his  whole  method
is  seen  in  his  famous  phrase,  "  Nothing  is  to  be  accepted  save
on  the  authority  of  Scripture,  since  greater  is  that  authority
than  all  the  powers  of  the  human  mind."  All  his  thought
was  given  to  studying  the  letter  of  the  sacred  text,  and  to
making  it  explain  natural  phenomena  by  methods  purely
theological.^

Among  the  many  questions  he  then  raised  and  discussed
may  be  mentioned  such  as  these :  "  What  caused  the  crea-
tion of  the  stars  on  the  fourth  day  ?  "  ''  Were  beasts  of  prey
and  venomous  animals  created  before,  or  after,  the  fall  of
Adam  ?  If  before,  how  can  their  creation  be  reconciled
with  God's  goodness ;  if  afterward,  how  can  their  creation
be  reconciled  to  the  letter  of  God's  Word?"  ''Why  were
only  beasts  and  birds  brought  before  Adam  to  be  named,
and  not  fishes  and  marine  animals?"  *'  Why  did  the  Creator
not  say,  '  Be  fruitful  and  multiply,'  to  plants  as  well  as  to
animals  ?  "  t

Sundry  answers  to  these  and  similar  questions  formed
the  main  contributions  of  the  greatest  of  the  Latin  fathers  to

*  For  citations  and  authorities  on  these  points,  see  the  chapter  on  Meteorology.

f  See  Augustine,  De  Genesi,  ii,  13  ;  iii,  13,  15  ^/  set/.  ;  ix,  12  et  seq.  For  the  ref-
erence to  St.  Jerome,  see  Shields,  Final  Philosophy,  p.  iig  ;  also  Lyell,  Introduc-
tion to  Geology,  vol.  i,  chap.  ii.


GROWTH   OF   THEOLOGICAL    EXPLANATIONS.  21  I

the  scientific  knowledge  of  the  world,  after  a  most  thorough
study  of  the  biblical  text  and  a  most  profound  application
of  theological  reasoning.  The  results  of  these  contributions
were  most  important.  In  this,  as  in  so  many  other  fields,
Augustine  gave  direction  to  the  main  current  of  thought  in
western  Europe,  Catholic  and  Protestant,  for  nearly  thirteen

centuries.

In  the  ages  that  succeeded,  the  vast  majority  of  promi-
nent scholars  followed  him  implicitly.  Even  so  strong
a  man  as  Pope  Gregory  the  Great  yielded  to  his  influ-
ence, and  such  leaders  of  thought  as  St.  Isidore,  in  the
seventh  century,  and  the  Venerable  Bede,  in  the  eighth,
planting  themselves  upon  Augustine's  premises,  only  ven-
tured timidly  to  extend  their  conclusions  upon  lines  he  had
laid  down.

In  his  great  work  on  Etymologies,  Isidore  took  up  Augus-
tine's attempt  to  bring  the  creation  into  satisfactory  rela-
tions with  the  book  of  Genesis,  and,  as  to  fossil  remains,  he,
like  Tertullian,  thought  that  they  resulted  from  the  Flood  of
Noah.  In  the  following  century  Bede  developed  the  same
orthodox  traditions.^

The  best  guess,  in  a  geological  sense,  among  the  followers
of  St.  Augustine  was  made  by  an  Irish  monkish  scholar,
who,  in  order  to  diminish  the  difficulty  arising  from  the  dis-
tribution of  animals,  especially  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the
same  animals  are  found  in  Ireland  as  in  England,  held  that
various  lands  now  separated  were  once  connected.  But,
alas!  the  exigencies  of  theology  forced  him  to  place  their
separation  later  than  the  Flood.  Happily  for  him,  such  facts
were  not  yet  known  as  that  the  kangaroo  is  found  only  on  an
island  in  the  South  Pacific,  and  must  therefore,  according
to  his  theory,  have  migrated  thither  with  all  his  progeny,
and  along  a  causeway  so  curiously  constructed  that  none  of
the  beasts  of  prey,  who  were  his  fellow-voyagers  in  the  ark,
could  follow  him.

These  general  lines  of  thought  upon  geology  and  its  kin-
dred science  of  zoology  were  followed  by  St.  Thomas  Aqui-

*  For  Isidore,  see  the  Etymologies,  xi,  4,  xiii,  22.  For  Bede,  see  the  Ilcxcemeron,
i,  ii,  in  Migne,  tome  xci.


212  FROM   GENESIS   TO   GEOLOGY,

nas  and  by  the  whole  body  of  mediaeval  theologians,  so  far
as  they  gave  any  attention  to  such  subjects.

The  next  development  of  geology,  mainly  under  Church
guidance,  was  by  means  of  the  scholastic  theology.  Phrase-
making  was  substituted  for  investigation.  Without  the
Church  and  within  it  wonderful  contributions  were  thus
made.  In  the  eleventh  century  Avicenna  accounted  for  the
fossils  by  suggesting  a  "  stone-making  force  "  ;  *  in  the  thir-
teenth, Albert  the  Great  attributed  them  to  a  "formative
quality  ;"t  ^^  the  following  centuries  some  philosophers
ventured  the  idea  that  they  grew  from  seed  ;  and  the  Aris-
totelian doctrine  of  spontaneous  generation  was  constantly
used  to  prove  that  these  stony  fossils  possessed  powers  of
reproduction  like  plants  and  animals.  :j:

Still,  at  various  times  and  places,  germs  implanted  b}^
Greek  and  Roman  thought  w^ere  warmed  into  life.  The
iVrabian  schools  seem  to  have  been  less  fettered  by  the  letter
of  the  Koran  than  the  contemporary  Christian  scholars  by
the  letter  of  the  Bible;  and  to  Avicenna  belongs  the  credit  of
first  announcing  substantially  the  modern  geological  theory
of  changes  in  the  earth's  surface.  ||

The  direct  influence  of  the  Reformation  w^as  at  first  un-
favourable to  scientific  progress,  for  nothing  could  be  more
at  variance  with  any  scientific  theory  of  the  development  of
the  universe  than  the  ideas  of  the  Protestant  leaders.  That
strict  adherence  to  the  text  of  Scripture  which  made  Luther
and  Melanchthon  denounce  the  idea  that  the  planets  revolve
about  the  sun,  was  naturally  extended  to  every  other  scien-
tific statement  at  variance  with  the  sacred  text.  There  is
much  reason  to  believe  that  the  fetters  upon  scientific
thought  were  closer  under  the  strict  interpretation  of  Scrip-
ture by  the  early  Protestants  than  they  had  been  under
the  older  Church.  The  dominant  spirit  among  the  Reform-
ers is  shown  by  the  declaration  of  Peter  Martyr  to  the  effect
that,  if  a  wrong  opinion  should  obtain  regarding  the  crea-
tion as  described   in   Genesis,   "all   the  promises  of  Christ

*  Fis  lapidifica.

f  Virtus  formativa.

X  See  authorities  given  in  Mr.  Ward's  essay,  as  above.

I  For  Avicenna,  see  Lyell  and  D'Archiac.


GROWTH    OF   THEOLOGICAL    EXPLANATIONS.  213

fall  into  nothing,  and  all  the  life  of  our  religion  would  be
lost."^

In  the  times  immediately  succeeding  the  Reformation
matters  went  from  bad  to  worse.  Under  Luther  and  Me-
lanchthon  there  was  some  little  freedom  of  speculation,  but
under  their  successors  there  was  none  ;  to  question  any  in-
terpretation of  Luther  came  to  be  thought  almost  as  wicked
as  to  question  the  literal  interpretation  of  the  Scriptures
themselves.  Examples  of  this  are  seen  in  the  struggles  be-
tween those  who  held  that  birds  were  created  entirely  from
water  and  those  who  held  that  they  were  created  out  of  water
and  mud.  Li  the  city  of  Lubeck,  the  ancient  centre  of  the
Hanseatic  League,  close  at  the  beginning  of  the  seven-
teenth century,  Pfeiffer,  ''  General  Superintendent  "  or  bishop
in  those  parts,  published  his  PansopJiia  Mosaica,  calculated,  as
he  believed,  to  beat  back  science  forever.  In  a  long  series
of  declamations  he  insisted  that  in  the  strict  text  of  Genesis
alone  is  safety  ;  that  it  contains  all  wisdom  and  knowledge,
human  and  divine.  This  being  the  case,  who  could  care  to
waste  time  on  the  study  of  material  things  and  give  thought
to  the  structure  of  the  world  ?  Above  all,  who,  after  such  a
proclamation  by  such  a  ruler  in  the  Lutheran  Israel,  would
dare  to  talk  of  the  ''  days  "  mentioned  in  Genesis  as  "  periods
of  time";  or  of  the  **  firmament"  as  not  meaning  a  solid
vault  over  the  universe  ;  or  of  the  ''  waters  above  the  heav-
ens "  as  not  contained  in  a  vast  cistern  supported  by  the
heavenly  vault ;  or  of  the  "  window^s  of  heaven  "  as  a  figure

of  speech?  t

In  England  the  same  spirit  was  shown  even  as  late  as
the  time  of  Sir  Matthew  Hale.  We  find  in  his  book  on  the
Origination  of  Mankind,  published  in  1685,  the  strictest  devo-
tion to  a  theory  of  creation  based  upon  the  mere  letter  of
Scripture,  and  a  complete  inability  to  draw  knowledge  re-
garding the  earth's  origin  and  structure  from  any  other
source.

While  the  Lutheran,  Calvinistic,  and  Anglican  Reformers
clung  to  literal  interpretations    of    the    sacred    books,   and


*  See  his  Commentary  on  Genesis,  cited  by  Zoeckler,  Geschichte  der  Beziehungen
zwischen  Theologie  und  Naturwissenschaft,  vol.  i,  p.  690.
t  For  Pfeiffer,  see  Zoeckler,  vol.  i,  pp.  688,  689.


214


FROM   GENESIS   TO   GEOLOGY.


turned  their  faces  away  from  scientific  investigation,  it  was
among  their  contemporaries  at  the  revival  of  learning  that
there  began  to  arise  fruitful  thought  in  this  field.  Then  it
was,  about  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century,  that
Leonardo  da  Vinci,  as  great  a  genius  in  science  as  in  art,
broached  the  true  idea  as  to  the  origin  of  fossil  remains  ;
and  his  compatriot,  Fracastoro,  developed  this  on  the  modern
lines  of  thought.  Others  in  other  parts  of  Europe  took  up
the  idea,  and,  while  mixing  with  it  many  crudities,  drew
from  it  more  and  more  truth.  Toward  the  end  of  the  six-
teenth century  Bernard  Palissy,  in  France,  took  hold  of  it
with  the  same  genius  which  he  showed  in  artistic  creation ;
but,  remarkable  as  were  his  assertions  of  scientific  realities,
they  could  gain  little  hearing.  Theologians,  philosophers,
and  even  some  scientific  men  of  value,  under  the  sway  of
scholastic  phrases,  continued  to  insist  upon  such  explanations
as  that  fossils  were  the  product  of  *'  fatty  matter  set  into  a
fermentation  by  heat "  ;  or  of  a  "  lapidific  juice  "  ;  ^  or  of  a
''seminal  air  ";  t  or  of  a  "tumultuous  movement  of  terres-
trial exhalations  "  ;  and  there  was  a  prevailing  belief  that  fos-
sil remains,  in  general,  might  be  brought  under  the  head  of
"  sports  of  Nature,"  a  pious  turn  being  given  to  this  phrase
by  the  suggestion  that  these  "sports"  indicated  some  in-
scrutable purpose  of  the  Almighty.

This  remained  a  leading  orthodox  mode  of  explanation
in  the  Church,  Catholic  and  Protestant,  for  centuries.


II.   EFFORTS    TO   SUPPRESS   THE    SCIENTIFIC   VIEW.

But  the  scientific  method  could  not  be  entirely  hidden ;
and,  near  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century,  De
Clave,  Bitaud,  and  De  Villon  revived  it  in  France.  Straight-
way the  theological  faculty  of  Paris  protested  against  the
scientific  doctrine  as  unscriptural,  destroyed  the  offending
treatises,  banished  their  authors  from  Paris,  and  forbade
them  to  live  in  towns  or  enter  places  of  public  resort. :{:


*  Succics  lapidificus.  f  Aura  seminalis.

\  See  Morley,  Life  of  Palissy  the  Potter,  vol.  ii,  p.  315  ^'^  ^^Q'


EFFORTS   TO    SUPPRESS   THE   SCIENTIFIC   VIEW.  215

The  champions  of  science,  though  repressed  for  a  time,
quietly  laboured  on,  especially  in  Italy.  Half  a  century  later,
Steno,  a  Dane,  and  Scilla,  an  Italian,  went  still  further  in  the
right  direction  ;  and,  though  they  and  their  disciples  took
o-reat  pains  to  throw  a  tub  to  the  whale,  in  the  shape  of  sun-
dry vague  concessions  to  the  Genesis  legends,  they  developed
geological  truth  more  and  more.

In'  France,  the  old  theological  spirit  remained  exceed-
ingly powerful.  About  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  cen-
tury Buffon  made  another  attempt  to  state  simple  geological
truths;  but  the  theological  faculty  of  the  Sorbonne  dragged
him  at  once  from  his  high  position,  forced  him  to  recant
ignominiously,  and  to  print  his  recantation.  It  runs  as  fol-
lows:  "I  declare  that  I  had  no  intention  to  contradict  the
text  of  Scripture  ;  that  I  believe  most  firmly  all  therein  re-
lated about  the  creation,  both  as  to  order  of  time  and  matter
of  fact.  I  abandon  everything  in  my  book  respecting  the
formation  of  the  earth,  and  generally  all  which  may  be  con-
trary to  the  narrative  of  Moses."  This  humiliating  docu-
ment reminds  us  painfully  of  that  forced  upon  Galileo  a
hundred  years  before.

It  has  been  well  observed  by  one  of  the  greatest  of  mod-
ern authorities  that  the  doctrine  which  Buffon  thus ''aban-
doned "  is  as  firmly  established  as  that  of  the  earth's  rota-
tion upon  its  axis.^  Yet  one  hundred  and  fifty  years  were
required  to  secure  for  it  even  a  fair  hearing ;  the  prevailing
doctrine  of  the  Church  continued  to  be  that  "all  things
were  made  at  the  beginning  of  the  world,"  and  that  to  say
that  stones  and  fossils  were  made  before  or  since  *'  the  begin-
ning "  is  contrary  to  Scripture.  Again  we  find  theological
substitutes  for  scientific  explanation  ripening  into  phrases
more  and  more  hollow — making  fossils  *'  sports  of  Nature,"
or  "  mineral  concretions,"  or  "  creations  of  plastic  force,"  or
"models"  made  by  the  Creator  before  he  had  fully  decided
upon  the  best  manner  of  creating  various  beings.

Of  this  period,  when  theological  substitutes  for  science
were  carrying  all  before  them,  there  still  exists  a  monument

*  See  citation  and  remark  in  Lyell's  Principles  of  Geology,  chap,  iii,  p.  57  ;  also
Huxley,  Essays  on  Controverted  Questions,  p.  62.


2i6  FROM    GENESIS    TO   GEOLOGY.

commemorating  at  the  same  time  a  farce  and  a  tragedy.
This  is  the  work  of  Johann  Beringer,  professor  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Wlirzburg  and  private  physician  to  the  Prince-
Bishop — the  treatise  bearing  the  title  LitJwgraphicE  Wirce-
biirgensis  Specimen  Priimini,  "  illustrated  with  the  marvellous
likenesses  of  two  hundred  figured  or  rather  insectiform
stones."  Beringer,  for  the  greater  glory  of  God,  had  pre-
viously committed  himself  so  completely  to  the  theory  that
fossils  are  simply  ''  stones  of  a  peculiar  sort,  hidden  by  the
Author  of  Nature  for  his  own  pleasure,"^  that  some  of  his
students  determined  to  give  his  faith  in  that  pious  doctrine
a  thorough  trial.  They  therefore  prepared  a  collection  of
sham  fossils  in  baked  clay,  imitating  not  only  plants,  reptiles,
and  fishes  of  ever}^  sort  that  their  knowledge  or  imagination
could  suggest,  but  even  Hebrew  and  Syriac  inscriptions,
one  of  them  the  name  of  the  Almighty ;  and  these  they  buried
in  a  place  where  the  professor  was  w^ont  to  search  for  speci-
mens. The  joy  of  Beringer  on  unearthing  these  proofs  of
the  immediate  agency  of  the  finger  of  God  in  creating  fossils
knew  no  bounds.  At  great  cost  he  prepared  this  book,  w^hose
twenty-two  elaborate  plates  of  facsimiles  were  forever  to
settle  the  question  in  favour  of  theology  and  against  science,
and  prefixed  to  the  w^ork  an  allegorical  title  page,  wherein
not  only  the  glory  of  his  own  sovereign,  but  that  of  heaven
itself,  was  pictured  as  based  upon  a  pyramid  of  these  mirac-
ulous fossils.  So  robust  was  his  faith  that  not  even  a  pre-
mature exposure  of  the  fraud  could  dissuade  him  from  the
publication  of  his  book.  Dismissing  in  one  contemptuous
chapter  this  exposure  as  a  slander  by  his  rivals,  he  appealed
to  the  learned  world.  But  the  shout  of  laughter  that  wel-
comed the  work  soon  convinced  even  its  author.  In  vain
did  he  try  to  suppress  it ;  and,  according  to  tradition,  hav-
ing wasted  his  fortune  in  vain  attempts  to  buy  up  all  the
copies  of  it,  and  being  taunted  by  the  rivals  whom  he  had
thought  to  overwhelm,  he  died  of  chagrin.  Even  death  did
not  end  his  misfortunes.  The  copies  of  the  first  edition  hav-
ing been  sold  by  a  graceless  descendant  to  a  Leipsic  book-
seller, a  second  edition  was  brought  out  under  a  new  title,

*  See  Beringer's  Lithographic^^  etc  ,  p.  gi.


EFFORTS    TO   SUPPRESS    THE    SCIENTIFIC    VIEW.  217

and  this,  too,  is  now  much  sought  as  a  precious  memorial  of
human  credulity.^

But  even  this  discomfiture  did  not  end  the  idea  which
had  caused  it,  for,  although  some  latitude  was  allowed
among  the  various  theologico-scientific  explanations,  it  was
still  held  meritorious  to  believe  that  all  fossils  were  placed
in  the  strata  on  one  of  the  creative  days  by  the  hand  of  the
Almighty,  and  that  this  was  done  for  some  mysterious  pur-
pose, probably  for  the  trial  of  human  faith.

Strange  as  it  may  at  first  seem,  the  theological  war
against  a  scientific  method  in  geology  was  waged  more
fiercely  in  Protestant  countries  than  in  Catholic.  The  older
Church  had  learned  by  her  costly  mistakes,  especially  in
the  cases  of  Copernicus  and  Galileo,  what  dangers  to  her
claim  of  infallibility  lay  in  meddling  with  a  growing  science.
In  Italy,  therefore,  comparatively  little  opposition  was  made,
while  England  furnished  the  most  bitter  opponents  to  ge-
ology so  long  as  the  controversy  could  be  maintained,  and
the  most  active  negotiators  in  patching  up  a  truce  on  the
basis  of  a  sham  science  afterward.  The  Church  of  England
did,  indeed,  produce  some  noble  men,  like  Bishop  Clayton
and  John  Mitchell,  who  stood  firmly  by  the  scientific  meth-
od ;  but  these  appear  generally  to  have  been  overwhelmed
by  a  chorus  of  churchmen  and  dissenters,  whose  mixtures  of
theology  and  science,  sometimes  tragic  in  their  results  and
sometimes  comic,  are  among  the  most  instructive  things  in
modern  history. f


*  See  Carus,  Geschichte  der  Zoologie,  Munich,  1872,  p.  467,  note,  and  Reuscb,
Bibel  und  Natur,  p.  197.  A  list  of  the  authorities  upon  this  episode,  M'ith  the  text
of  one  of  the  epigrams  circulated  at  poor  Beringer's  expense,  is  given  by  Dr.  Reuss
in  the  Serapezim  for  1852,  p.  203.  The  book  itself  (the  original  impression)  is  in
the  White  Libraiy  at  Cornell  University.  For  Beringer  himself,  see  especially  the
encyclopaedia  of  Ersch  and  Gruber,  and  the  Allgemeiue  deiitsche  Biographie.

\  For  a  comparison  between  the  conduct  of  Italian  and  English  ecclesiastics  as
regards  geology,  see  Lyell,  Principles  of  Geology,  tenth  English  edition,  vol.  i,  p.
33.  For  a  philosophical  statement  of  reasons  why  the  struggle  was  more  bitter
and  the  attempt  at  deceptive  compromises  more  absurd  in  England  than  elsewhere,
see  Maury,  V Ancienne  Academic  des  Sciences,  second  edition,  p.  152.  For  very
frank  confessions  of  the  reasons  why  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  has  become  more
careful  in  her  dealings  with  science,  see  Roberts,  The  Pontifical  Decrees  against
the  Earth's  Movement,  London,  1885,  especially  pp.  94  and  132,  133,  and  St.
George  Mivart's  article  in  the  Nineteenth   Century  for  July,  1885.     The  first  of


2l8  FROM    GENESIS   TO   GEOLOGY.

We  have  'already  noted  that  there  are  generally  three
periods  or  phases  in  a  theological  attack  upon  any  science.
;  The  first  of  these  is  marked  by  the  general  use  of  scriptural
\  texts  and  statements  against  the  new  scientific  doctrine;  the
j  third  by  attempts  at  compromise  by  means  of  far-fetched  rec-
onciliations of  textual  statements  with  ascertained  fact ;  but
\  the  second  or  intermediate  period  between  these  two  is  fre-
;  quently  marked  by  the  pitting  against  science  of  some  great
doctrine  in  theology.    We  saw  this  in  astronomy,  when  Bel-
larmin  and  his  followers  insisted  that  the  scientific  doctrine
of  the  earth  revolving  about  the  sun  is  contrary  to  the  theo-
logical doctrine  of  the  incarnation.    So  now  against  geology
it  was  urged  that  the  scientific  doctrine  that  fossils  represent
animals  which  died  before  Adam  contradicts  the  theological
doctrine  of  Adam's  fall  and  the  statement  that  "death  en-
tered the  world  by  sin."

In  this  second  stage  of  the  theological  struggle  with  geol-
ogy, England  was  especially  fruitful  in  champions  of  ortho-
doxy, first  among  whom  may  be  named  Thomas  Burnet.
In  the  last  quarter  of  the  seventeenth  century,  just  at  the
time  when  Newton's  great  discovery  was  given  to  the  world
Burnet  issued  his  Sacred  Theory  of  tJie  EartJi.  His  position
was  commanding ;  he  was  a  royal  chaplain  and  a  cabinet
officer.  Planting  himself  upon  the  famous  text  in  the  second
epistle  of  Peter,*  he  declares  that  the  flood  had  destroyed
the  old  and  created  a  new  world.  The  Newtonian  theory
he  refuses  to  accept.  In  his  theory  of  the  deluge  he  lays
less  stress  upon  the  ''  opening  of  the  windows  of  heaven  "
than  upon  the  ''  breaking  up  of  the  fountains  of  the  great
deep."  On  this  latter  point  he  comes  forth  with  great
strength.  His  theory  is  that  the  earth  is  hollow,  and  filled
with  fluid  like  an  ^g^.  Mixing  together  sundry  texts  from
Genesis  and  from  the  second  epistle  of  Peter,  the  theological


these  gentlemen,  it  must  not  be  forgotten,  is  a  Roman  Catholic  clergyman,  and  the
second  an  eminent  layman  of  the  same  Church,  and  both  admit  that  it  was  the
Pope,  speaking  ex  cathedra,  who  erred  in  the  (^alileo  case  ;  but  their  explanation  is
that  God  allowed  the  Pope  and  Church  to  fall  into  this  grievous  error,  which  has
cost  so  dear,  in  order  to  show  once  and  for  all  that  the  Church  has  no  right  to
decide  questions  in  science.
*  See  11  Peter  iii,  6.


EFFORTS   TO   SUPPRESS   THE   SCIENTIFIC   VIEW.  219

doctrine  of  the  ''  Fall,"  an  astronomical  theory  regarding  the
ecliptic,  and  various  notions  adapted  from  Descartes,  he  in-
sisted that,  before  sin  brought  on  the  Deluge,  the  earth  was
of  perfect  mathematical  form,  smooth  and  beautiful,  "  like
an  Ggg,''  with  neither  seas  nor  islands  nor  valleys  nor  rocks,
"  with  not  a  wrinkle,  scar,  or  fracture,"  and  that  all  creation
was  equally  perfect.

In  the  second  book  of  his  great  work  Burnet  went  still
further.  As  in  his  first  book  he  had  mixed  his  texts  of  Gene-
sis and  St.  Peter  with  Descartes,  he  now  mixed  the  account
of  the  Garden  of  Eden  in  Genesis  with  heathen  legends  of
the  golden  age,  and  concluded  that  before  the  flood  there
was  over  the  whole  earth  perpetual  spring,  disturbed  by
no  rain  more  severe  than  the  falling  of  the  dew.

In  addition  to  his  other  grounds  for  denying  the  earlier
existence  of  the  sea,  he  assigned  the  reason  that,  if  there
had  been  a  sea  before  the  Deluge,  sinners  would  have  learned
to  build  ships,  and  so,  when  the  Deluge  set  in,  could  have
saved  themselves.

The  work  was  written  with  much  power,  and  attracted
universal  attention.  It  was  translated  into  various  lan-
guages, and  called  forth  a  multitude  of  supporters  and  oppo-
nents in  all  parts  of  Europe.  Strong  men  rose  against  it,
especially  in  England,  and  among  them  a  few  dignitaries  of
the  Church  ;  but  the  Church  generally  hailed  the  work  with
joy.  Addison  praised  it  in  a  Latin  ode,  and  for  nearly
a  century  it  exercised  a  strong  influence  upon  European
feeling,  and  aided  to  plant  more  deeply  than  ever  the  theo-
logical opinion  that  the  earth  as  now  existing  is  merely
a  ruin  ;  whereas,  before  sin  brought  on  the  Flood,  it  was
beautiful  in  its  ''  egg-shaped  form,"  and  free  from  every
imperfection.

A  few  years  later  came  another  writer  of  the  hi^-hest
standing — William  Whiston,  professor  at  Cambridge,  who
in  1696  published  his  Nt-zu  Theory  of  the  Earth.  Unlike  Bur-
net, he  endeavoured  to  avail  himself  of  the  Newtonian  idea,
and  brought  in,  to  aid  the  geological  catastrophe  caused  by
human  sin,  a  comet,  which  broke  open  ''  the  fountains  of  the
great  deep."

But,  far  more  important  than  cither  of  these  champions,


220  FROM    GENESIS    TO   GEOLOGY.

there  arose  in  the  eighteenth  centur}^  to  aid  in  the  subjec=
tion  of  science  to  theology,  three  men  of  extraordinary  power
— John  Wesley,  Adam  Clarke,  and  Richard  Watson.  All
three  were  men  of  striking  intellectual  gifts,  lofty  character,
and  noble  purpose,  and  the  first-named  one  of  the  greatest
men  in  English  history  ;  yet  we  find  them  in  geology  hope-
lessly fettered  by  the  mere  letter  of  Scripture,  and  by  a  tem-
porary phase  in  theology.  As  in  regard  to  witchcraft  and
the  doctrine  of  comets,  so  in  regard  to  geology,  this  theo-
logical view  drew  Wesley  into  enormous  error.^  The  great
doctrine  which  Wesley,  Watson,  Clarke,  and  their  compeers,
following  St.  Augustine,  Bede,  Peter  Lombard,  and  a  long
line  of  the  greatest  minds  in  the  universal  Church,  thought
it  especially  necessary  to  uphold  against  geologists  was,  that
death  entered  the  world  by  sin— by  the  first  transgression  of
Adam  and  Eve.  The  extent  to  which  the  supposed  neces-
sity of  upholding  this  doctrine  carried  Wesley  seems  now
almost  beyond  belief.  Basing  his  theology  on  the  declara-
tion that  the  Almighty  after  creation  found  the  earth  and  all
created  things  '*  very  good,"  he  declares,  in  his  sermon  on
the  Cause  and  Cure  of  Earthquakes,  that  no  one  who  believes
the  Scriptures  can  deny  that  "  sin  is  the  moral  cause  of  earth-
quakes, whatever  their  natural  cause  may  be."  Again,  he
declares  that  earthquakes  are  the  "  effect  of  that  curse  which
was  brought  upon  the  earth  by  the  original  transgression."
Bringing  into  connection  with  Genesis  the  declaration  of  St.
Paul  that  '*  the  whole  creation  groaneth  and  travaileth  to-
gether in  pain  until  now,"  he  finds  additional  scriptural  proof
that  the  earthquakes  were  the  result  of  Adam's  fall.  He  de-
clares, in  his  sermon  on  God^s  Approbation  of  His  Works,  that
"  before  the  sin  of  Adam  there  were  no  acritations  within
the  bowels  of  the  earth,  no  violent  convulsions,  no  concus-
sions of  the  earth,  no  earthquakes,  but  all  was  unmoved  as
the  pillars  of  heaven.  There  were  then  no  such  things  as
eruptions  of  fires  ;  no  volcanoes  or  burning  mountains."  Of
course,  a  science  which  showed  that  earthquakes  had  been
in  operation  for  ages  before  the  appearance  of  man  on  the


*  For  his  statement  that  "  the  giving  up  of  witchcraft  is  in  effect  the  giving  up
of  the  Bible,"  sec  Wesley's  Journal,  i766-'68.


EFFORTS    TO    SUPPRESS   THE    SCIENTIFIC    VIEW.  221

planet,  and  which  showed,  also,  that  those  very  earthquakes
which  he  considered  as  curses  resultant  upon  the  Fall  were
really  blessings,  producing  the  fissures  in  which  we  find  to-
day those  mineral  veins  so  essential  to  modern  civilization,
was  entirely  beyond  his  comprehension.  He  insists  that
earthquakes  are  "  God's  strange  works  of  judgment,  the
proper  effect  and  punishment  of  sin."

So,  too,  as  to  death  and  pain.  In  his  sermon  on  the  Fall
of  Man  he  took  the  ground  that  death  and  pain  entered  the
world  by  Adam's  transgression,  insisting  that  the  carnage
now  going  on  among  animals  is  the  result  of  Adam's  sin.
Speaking  of  the  birds,  beasts,  and  insects,  he  says  that,  be-
fore sin  entered  the  world  by  Adam's  fall,  ''  none  of  these
attempted  to  devour  or  in  any  way  hurt  one  another  "  ;  that
"  the  spider  was  then  as  harmless  as  the  fly  and  did  not  then
lie  in  wait  for  blood."  Here,  again,  Wesley  arrayed  his
early  followers  against  geology,  which  reveals,  in  the  fossil
remains  of  carnivorous  animals,  pain  and  death  countless
ages  before  the  appearance  of  man.  The  half-digested  frag-
ments of  w^eaker  animals  within  the  fossilized  bodies  of  the
stronger  have  destroyed  all  Wesley's  arguments  in  behalf  of
his  great  theory.*

Dr.  Adam  Clarke  held  similar  views.  He  insisted  that
thorns  and  thistles  were  given  as  a  curse  to  human  labour,
on  account  of  Adam's  sin,  and  appeared  upon  the  earth  for
the  first  time  after  Adam's  fall.  So,  too,  Richard  Watson,
the  most  prolific  writer  of  the  great  evangelical  reform
period,  and  the  author  of  the  Institutes,  the  standard  theo-
logical treatise  on  the  evangelical  side,  says,  in  a  chapter
treating  of  the  Fall,  and  especially  of  the  serpent  w^hich
tempted  Eve:  "  We  have  no  reason  at  all  to  believe  that  the
animal  had  a  serpentine  form  in  any  mode  or  degree  until
his  transformation.  That  he  was  then  degraded  to  a  reptile,
to  go  upon  his  belly,  imports,  on  the  contrary,  an  entire
alteration  and  loss  of  the  original  form."  All  that  admirable
adjustment  of  the  serpent  to  its  environment  which  delights
naturalists  was  to  the  Wesleyan  divine  simply  an  evil  result
of  the  sin  of  Adam  and  Eve.     Yet  here  again  geology  was

*  See  Wesley's  sermon  on  God  s  Approbation  of  His  IForks,  parts  xi  and  xii.


222  FROM    GENESIS   TO   GEOLOGY.

obliged  to  confront  theology  in  revealing  the  pytJwji  in  the
Eocene,  ages  before  man  appeared.*

The  immediate  results  of  such  teaching  by  such  men  was
to  throw  many  who  would  otherwise  have  resorted  to  ob-
servation and  investigation  back  upon  scholastic  methods.
Again  reappears  the  old  system  of  solving  the  riddle  by
phrases.  In  1733,  Dr.  Theodore  Arnold  urged  the  theory
of  "  models,"  and  insisted  that  fossils  result  from  "  infinitesi-
mal particles  brought  together  in  the  creation  to  form  the
outline  of  all  the  creatures  and  objects  upon  and  within  the
earth";  and  Arnold's  work  gained  wide  acceptance.!

Such  was  the  influence  of  this  succession  of  great  men
that  toward  the  close  of  the  last  century  the  English  oppo-
nents of  geology  on  biblical  grounds  seemed  likely  to  sweep
all  before  them.  Cramping  our  whole  inheritance  of  sacred
literature  within  the  rules  of  a  historical  compend,  they
showed  the  terrible  dangers  arising  from  the  revelations  of
geology,  which  make  the  earth  older  than  the  six  thousand
years  required  by  Archbishop  Usher's  interpretation  of  the
Old  Testament.  Nor  was  this  feeling  confined  to  ecclesias-
tics. Williams,  a  thoughtful  layman,  declared  that  such  re-
searches led  to  infidelity  and  atheism,  and  are  "nothing  less
than  to  depose  the  Almighty  Creator  of  the  universe  from
his  office."  The  poet  Cowper,  one  of  the  mildest  of  men,
was  also  roused  by  these  dangers,  and  in  his  most  elaborate

poem  wrote :

"  Some  drill  and  bore
The  solid  earth,  and  from  the  strata  there
Extract  a  register,  by  which  we  learn
That  He  who  made  it,  and  revealed  its  date
To  Moses,  was  mistaken  in  its  age  !  "

John  Howard  summoned  England  to  oppose  ''those  sci-
entific systems  which  are  calculated  to  tear  up  in  the  public
mind  every  remaining  attachment  to  Christianity."

With  this  special  attack  upon  geological  science  by  means
of  the  dogma  of  Adam's  fall,  the  more  general  attack  by  the  lit-

*  See  Westminster  Review ^  October,  1870,  article  on  John  Wesley  s  Cosmogony,
with  citations  from  Wesley's  Sermons,  Watson's  l7istitutcs  of  Theology,  Adam
Clarke's  Commentary  on  the  Holy  Scriptures,  etc.

\  See  citation  in  Mr.  Ward's  article,  as  above,  p.  390.


EFFORTS   TO   SUPPRESS   THE   SCIENTIFIC   VIEW.         223

eral  interpretation  of  the  text  was  continued.  The  legendary
husks  and  rinds  of  our  sacred  books  were  insisted  upon  as
equally  precious  and  nutritious  with  the  great  moral  and
religious  truths  which  they  envelop.  Especially  precious
were  the  six  days — each  "  the  evening  and  the  morning  " —
and  the  exact  statements  as  to  the  time  when  each  part  of
creation  came  into  being.  To  save  these,  the  struggle  be-
came more  and  more  desperate.

Difficult  as  it  is  to  realize  it  now,  within  the  memory  of
many  now  living  the  battle  was  still  raging  most  fiercely  in
England,  and  both  kinds  of  artillery  usually  brought  against
a  new  science  were  in  full  play,  and  filling  the  civilized  world
with  their  roar.

About  half  a  century  since,  the  Rev.  J.  Mellor  Brown,  the
Rev.  Henry  Cole,  and  others  were  hurling  at  all  geologists
alike,  and  especially  at  such  Christian  scholars  as  Dr.  Buck-
land  and  Dean  Conybeare  and  Pye  Smith  and  Prof.  Sedg-
wick, the  epithets  of  "  infidel,"  "  impugner  of  the  sacred
record,"  and  "assailant  of  the  volume  of  God."*

The  favourite  weapon  of  the  orthodox  party  was  the
charge  that  the  geologists  were  "  attacking  the  truth  of
God."  They  declared  geology  *'  not  a  subject  of  lawful  in-
quiry," denouncing  it  as  "  a  dark  art,"  as  "  dangerous  and
disreputable,"  as  "a  forbidden  province,"  as  "infernal  ar-
tillery," and  as  "an  awful  evasion  of  the  testimony  of  reve-
lation." f

This  attempt  to  scare  men  from  the  science  having  failed,
various  other  means  were  taken.  To  say  nothing  about
England,  it  is  humiliatino;-  to  human  nature  to  remember  the
annoyances,  and  even  trials,  to  which  the  pettiest  and  nar-
rowest of  men  subjected  such  Christian  scholars  in  our  own
country  as  Benjamin  Silliman  and  Edward  Hitchcock  and
Louis  Agassiz.

But  it  is  a  duty  and  a  pleasure  to  state  here  that  one
great  Christian  scholar  did  honour  to  religion  and  to  him-
self by  quietly  accepting  the  claims  of  science  and  making
the  best  of  them,  despite  all  these  clamours.     This  man  was

*  For  these  citations,  see  Lyell,  Principles  of  Geology,  introduction.
\  See  Pye  Smith,  D.  D.,  Geology  and  Scripture,  pp.  156,  157,  16S,  169.


224  FROM    GENESIS    TO   GEOLOGY.

Nicholas  Wiseman,  better  known  afterward  as  Cardinal
Wiseman.  The  conduct  of  this  pillar  of  the  Roman  Cath-
olic Church  contrasts  admirably  with  that  of  timid  Protes-
tants, who  were  filling  England  with  shrieks  and  denuncia-
tions."

And  here  let  it  be  noted  that  one  of  the  most  interestins:
skirmishes  in  this  war  occurred  in  New  England.  Prof.
Stuart,  of  Andover,  justly  honoured  as  a  Hebrew  scholar,
declared  that  to  speak  of  six  periods  of  time  for  the  creation
was  flying  in  the  face  of  Scripture  ;  that  Genesis  expressly
speaks  of  six  days,  each  made  up  of  "  the  evening  and  the
morning,"  and  not  six  periods  of  time.

To  him  replied  a  professor  in  Yale  College,  James  Kings-
ley.  In  an  article  admirable  for  keen  wit  and  kindly  temper,
he  showed  that  Genesis  speaks  just  as  clearly  of  a  solid  fir-
mament  as  of  six  ordinary  days,  and  that,  if  Prof.  Stuart  had
surmounted  one  difficulty  and  accepted  the  Copernican  the-
ory, he  might  as  well  get  over  another  and  accept  the  reve-
lations of  geology.  The  encounter  was  quick  and  decisive,
and  the  victory  was  with  science  and  the  broader  scholar-
ship of  Yale.f

Perhaps  the  most  singular  attempt  against  geology  was
made  by  a  fine  survival  of  the  eighteenth  century  Don —
Dean  Cockburn,  of  York— to  scold  its  champions  off  the
field.  Having  no  adequate  knowledge  of  the  new  science,
he  opened  a  battery  of  abuse,  giving  it  to  the  world  at  large
from  the  pulpit  and  through  the  press,  and  even  through
private  letters.  From  his  pulpit  in  York  Minster  he  de-
nounced Mary  Somerville  by  name  for  those  studies  in
physical  geography  which  have  made  her  name  honoured
throughout  the  world.

But  the  special  object  of  his  antipathy  was  the  British
Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science.  He  issued  a
pamphlet  against  it  which  went  through  five  editions  in  two
years,  sent  solemn  warnings  to  its  president,  and  in  various

*  Wiseman,  Twelve  Lectures  on  the  Connection  between  Science  and  Revealed
Religion,  first  American  edition,  New  York,  1837.  As  to  the  comparative  severity
of  the  struggle  regarding  astronomy,  geology,  etc.,  in  Catholic  and  Protestant
countries,  see  Lecky,  England  in  the  Eighteenth  Century,  chap,  ix,  p.  525.

f  See  Silliman''s  Journal,  vol.  xxx,  p.  114.


THE    FIRST    GREAT    EFFORT    AT    COMPROMISE.  225

ways  made  life  a  burden  to  Sedgwick,  Buckland,  and  other
eminent  investigators  who  ventured  to  state  geological  facts
as  they  found  them.

These  weapons  were  soon  seen  to  be  ineffective ;  they
were  like  Chinese  gongs  and  dragon  lanterns  against  rified
cannon  ;  the  work  of  science  went  steadily  on.*


III.    THE   FIRST    GREAT    EFFORT   AT    COMPROMISE,    BASED   ON
THE    FLOOD    OF    NOAH.

Long  before  the  end  of  the  struggle  already  described,
even  at  a  very  early  period,  the  futility  of  the  usual  scholastic
weapons  had  been  seen  by  the  more  keen-sighted  champions
of  orthodoxy;  and,  as  the  difficulties  of  the  ordinary  attack
upon  science  became  more  and  more  evident,  many  of  these
champions  endeavoured  to  patch  up  a  truce.  So  began  the
third  stage  in  the  war — the  period  of  attempts  at  compromise.

The  position  which  the  compromise  party  took  was  that
the  fossils  were  produced  by  the  Deluge  of  Noah.

This  position  was  strong,  for  it  was  apparently  based
upon  Scripture.  Moreover,  it  had  high  ecclesiastical  sanc-
tion, some  of  the  fathers  having  held  that  fossil  remains,  even
on  the  highest  mountains,  represented  animals  destroyed  at
the  Deluge.  TertuUian  was  especially  firm  on  this  point,
and  St.  Augustine  thought  that  a  fossil  tooth  discovered  in
North  Africa  must  have  belonged  to  one  of  the  giants  men-
tioned in  Scripture.f

*  Prof.  Goldwin  Smith  informs  me  that  the  papers  of  Sir  Robert  Peel,  yet  un-
published, contain  very  curious  specimens  of  the  epistles  of  Dean  Cockburn.  See
also  Personal  Recollections  of  Mary  Sonierville,  Boston,  1874,  pp.  139  and  375.
Compare  with  any  statement  of  his  religious  views  that  Dean  Cockburn  was  able
to  make,  the  following  from  Mrs.  Somerville  :  "Nothing  has  afforded  me  so  con-
vincing a  proof  of  the  Deity  as  these  purely  mental  conceptions  of  numerical  and
mathematical  science  which  have  been,  by  slow  degrees,  vouchsafed  to  man — and
are  still  granted  in  these  latter  times  by  the  differential  calculus,  now  superseded
by  the  higher  algebra — all  of  which  must  have  existed  in  that  sublimely  omniscient
mind  from  eternity."  See  also  The  Life  and  Letters  of  Adam  Sedgwick,  Cambridge,
1890,  vol.  ii,  pp.  76  and  following.

f  For   TertuUian,  see  his  De  Pallia,  c.  ii  (Migne,  Patr.  Lat.,  vol.  ii,  p.  1033).
For  Augustine's  view,  see  Cuvier,  Recherches  sur  les  Ossements  fossiles,  fourth  edi-
tion, vol.  ii,  p.  143.
16


226  FROM    GENESIS    TO    GEOLOGY.

In  the  sixteenth  century  especially,  weight  began  to  be
attached  to  this  idea  by  those  who  felt  the  worthlessness  of
various  scholastic  explanations.  Strong  men  in  both  the
Catholic  and  the  Protestant  camps  accepted  it ;  but  the  man
who  did  most  to  give  it  an  impulse  into  modern  theology
was  Martin  Luther.  He  easily  saw  that  scholastic  phrase-
making  could  not  meet  the  difficulties  raised  by  fossils,  and
he  naturally  urged  the  doctrine  of  their  origin  at  Noah's
Flood.^

With  such  support,  it  soon  became  the  dominant  theory
in  Christendom:  nothing  seemed  able  to  stand  against  it;
but  before  the  end  of  the  same  sixteenth  century  it  met
some  serious  obstacles.  Bernard  Palissy,  one  of  the  most
keen-sighted  of  scientific  thinkers  in  France,  as  well  as
one  of  the  most  devoted  of  Christians,  showed  that  it  was
utterly  untenable.  Conscientious  investigators  in  other
parts  of  Europe,  and  especially  in  Italy,  showed  the  same
thing;  all  in  vain.f  In  vain  did  good  men  protest  against
the  injury  sure  to  be  brought  upon  religion  by  tying  it
to  a  scientific  theory  sure  to  be  exploded ;  the  doctrine
that  fossils  are  the  remains  of  animals  drowned  at  the
Flood  continued  to  be  upheld  by  the  great  majority  of
theological  leaders  for  nearly  three  centuries  as  "  sound
doctrine,"  and  as  a  blessed  means  of  reconciling  science
with  Scripture.  To  sustain  this  scriptural  view,  efforts
energetic  and  persistent  were  put  forth  both  by  Catholics
and  Protestants.

In  France,  the  learned  Benedictine,  Calmet,  in  his  gfreat
works  on  the  Bible,  accepted  it  as  late  as  the  beginning  of
the  eighteenth  century,  believing  the  mastodon's  bones  ex-
hibited by  Mazurier  to  be  those  of  King  Teutobocus,  and
holding  them  valuable  testimony  to  the  existence  of  the
giants  mentioned  in  Scripture  and  of  the  early  inhabitants
of  the  earth  overwhelmed  by  the  Flood. :j:

*  For  Luther's  opinion,  see  his  Co}7imentary  on  Genesis.

f  For  a  very  full  statement  of  the  honourable  record  of  Italy  in  this  respect,
and  for  the  enlightened  views  of  some  Italian  churchmen,  see  Stoppani,  //  Dogma
e  k  Scienze  Positive,  Milan,  1886,  pp.  203  et  seq.

X  For  the  steady  adherence  to  this  sacred  theory,  see  Audiat,  Vie  de  Pa-
lissy, p.  412,   and  Cantu,  Ilistoire  Universelle,  vol.  xv,  p.  492.     For  Calmet,  see


THE    FIRST    GREAT    EFFORT    AT    COMPROMISE.  227

But  the  greatest  champion  appeared  in  England.  We
have  already  seen  how,  near  the  close  of  the  seventeenth
century,  Thomas  Burnet  prepared  the  way  in  his  Sacred
Theory  of  tJic  EartJi  by  rejecting  the  discoveries  of  Newton,
and  showing  how  sin  led  to  the  breaking  up  of  the  **  founda-
tions of  the  great  deep  "  ;  and  we  have  also  seen  how  Whis-
ton,  in  his  Neiv  Theory  of  the  Earth,  while  yielding  a  little
and  accepting  the  discoveries  of  Newton,  brought  in  a  comet
to  aid  in  producing  the  Deluge  ;  but  far  more  important
than  these  in  permanent  influence  was  John  Woodward,
professor  at  Gresham  College,  a  leader  in  scientific  thought
at  the  University  of  Cambridge,  and,  as  a  patient  collector
of  fossils  and  an  earnest  investigator  of  their  meaning,  de-
serving of  the  highest  respect.  In  1695  he  published  his
Natural  History  of  the  Earth,  and  rendered  one  great  service
to  science,  for  he  yielded  another  point,  and  thus  destroyed
the  foundations  for  the  old  theory  of  fossils.  He  showed
that  they  were  not  "  sports  of  Nature,"  or  "  models  inserted
by  the  Creator  in  the  strata  for  some  inscrutable  purpose,"
but  that  they  were  really  remains  of  living  beings,  as  Xenoph-
anes  had  asserted  two  thousand  years  before  him.  So  far,
he  rendered  a  great  service  both  to  science  and  religion  ;
but,  this  done,  the  text  of  the  Old  Testament  narrative  and
the  famous  passage  in  St.  Peter's  Epistle  were  too  strong
for  him,  and  he,  too,  insisted  that  the  fossils  were  produced
by  the  Deluge.  Aided  by  his  great  authority,  the  assault
on  the  true  scientific  position  was  vigorous  :  Mazurier  ex-
hibited certain  fossil  remains  of  a  mammoth  discovered  in
France  as  bones  of  the  giants  mentioned  in  Scripture  ;  Father
Torrubia  did  the  same  thing  in  Spain ;  Increase  Mather
sent  to  England  similar  remains  discovered  in  America,  with
a  like  statement.

For  the  edification  of  the  faithful,  such  "  bones  of  the
giants  mentioned  in  Scripture "  were  hung  up  in  public
places.  Jurieu  saw  some  of  them  thus  suspended  in  one  of
the  churches  of  Valence ;  and  Henrion,  apparently  under
the  stimulus  thus  given,  drew  up  tables  showing  the  size  of


his  Dissertation  sur  les  Grants,  cited   in  Berger  de  Xivrey,    Traditions    T^rato-
logiqiies,  p.  19  T.


228  FROM   GENESIS   TO   GEOLOGY.

our  antediluvian  ancestors,  giving  the  height  of  Adam  as
123  feet  9  inches  and  that  of  Eve  as  118  feet  9  inches  and  9
lines.*

But  the  most  brilliant  service  rendered  to  the  theolosfical
theory  came  from  another  quarter;  for,  in  1726,  Scheuchzer,
having  discovered  a  large  fossil  lizard,  exhibited  it  to  the
world  as  the  "  human  witness  of  the  Deluge  " :  f  this  great
discovery  was  hailed  everywhere  with  joy,  for  it  seemed  to
prove  not  only  that  human  beings  were  drowned  at  the  Del-
uge, but  that  "there  were  giants  in  those  days."  Cheered
by  the  applause  thus  gained,  he  determined  to  make  the
theological  position  impregnable.  Mixing  together  various
texts  of  Scripture  with  notions  derived  from  the  philosophy
of  Descartes  and  the  speculations  of  Whiston,  he  developed
the  theory  that  "  the  fountains  of  the  great  deep "  were
broken  up  by  the  direct  physical  action  of  the  hand  of  God,
which,  being  literally  applied  to  the  axis  of  the  earth,  sud-
denly stopped  the  earth's  rotation,  broke  up  "the  fountains
of  the  great  deep,"  spilled  the  water  therein  contained,  and
produced  the  Deluge.  But  his  service  to  sacred  science  did
not  end  here,  for  he  prepared  an  edition  of  the  Bible,  in
which  magnificent  engravings  in  great  number  illustrated  his
view  and  enforced  it  upon  all  readers.  Of  these  engravings
no  less  than  thirty-four  were  devoted  to  the  Deluge  alone.  :j:


*  See  Cuvier,  Reche7'ches  stir  les  Ossements  fossiles,  fourth  edition,  vol.  ii,  p.
56  ;  also  Geoffioy  St.-Hilaire,  cited  by  Berger  de  Xivrey,  Traditions  Teratolo-
giques,  p.  190.

•f  Homo  diliimi  testis.

X  See  Zoeckler,  vol.  ii,  p.  172  ;  also  Scheuchzer,  Physica  Sacra,  Augustre  Vin-
del.  et  Ulmse,  1732.  For  the  ancient  belief  regarding  giants,  see  Leopardi,  Saggio.
For  accounts  of  the  views  of  Mazurier  and  Scheuchzer,  see  Cuvier  ;  also  Biichner,
Man  in  Fast,  Present,  and  Future,  English  translation,  pp.  235,  236.  For  In-
crease Mather's  views,  see  Philosophical  Transactions,  vol.  xxiv,  p.  85.  As  to
similar  fossils  sent  from  New  York  to  the  Royal  Society  as  remains  of  giants,  see
Weld,  History  of  the  Royal  Society,  vol.  i,  p.  421.  For  Father  Torrubia  and  his
Gigantohgia  Espanola,  see  D'Archiac,  Introduction  a  V £tiide  de  la  PaUontologie
Stratigraphique,  Paris,  18C4,  p.  201.  For  admirable  summaries,  see  Lyell,  Prin-
ciples of  Geology,  London,  1867  ;  D'Archiac,  Geologie  et  Paltfontologie,  Paris,  1866;
Pictet,  Traits  de  PaTeontologie,  Paris,  1853  ;  Vezian,  Prodrome  de  la  Gthlogie,
Paris,  1863  ;  Haeclcel,  History  of  Creation,  English  translation,  New  York,  1876,
chap,  iii ;  and  for  recent  progress.  Prof.  O.  S.  Marsh's  Address  on  the  History  and
Methods  of  Paleontology.


THE   FIRST   GREAT   EFFORT   AT   COMPROMISE.  229

In  the  midst  all  this  came  an  episode  very  comical  but
very  instructive  ;  for  it  shows  that  the  attempt  to  shape  the
deductions  of  science  to  meet  the  exigencies  of  dogma  may
mislead  heterodoxy  as  absurdly  as  orthodoxy.

About  the  year  1760  news  of  the  discovery  of  marine  fos-
sils in  various  elevated  districts  of  Europe  reached  Voltaire.
He,  too,  had  a  theologic  system  to  support,  though  his  sys-
tem was  opposed  to  that  of  the  sacred  books  of  the  Hebrews  ;
and,  fearing  that  these  new  discoveries  might  be  used  to
support  the  Mosaic  accounts  of  the  Deluge,  all  his  wisdom
and  wit  were  compacted  into  arguments  to  prove  that  the
fossil  fishes  were  remains  of  fishes  intended  for  food,  but
spoiled  and  thrown  away  by  travellers ;  that  the  fossil  shells
were  accidentally  dropped  by  crusaders  and  pilgrims  re-
turning from  the  Holy  Land  ;  and  that  the  fossil  bones  found
between  Paris  and  Etampes  were  parts  of  a  skeleton  belong-
ing to  the  cabinet  of  some  ancient  philosopher.  Through
chapter  after  chapter,  Voltaire,  obeying  the  supposed  neces-
sities of  his  theology,  fought  desperately  the  growing  results
of  the  geologic  investigations  of  his  time.*

But  far  more  prejudicial  to  Christianity  was  the  con-
tinued effort  on  the  other  side  to  show  that  the  fossils  were
caused  by  the  Deluge  of  Noah.

No  supposition  was  too  violent  to  support  this  theory,
which  was  considered  vital  to  the  Bible.  By  taking  the
mere  husks  and  rinds  of  biblical  truth  for  truth  itself,  by
taking  sacred  poetry  as  prose,  and  by  giving  a  literal  inter-
pretation of  it,  the  followers  of  Burnet,  Whiston,  and  Wood-
ward built  up  systems  which  bear  to  real  geology  much  the
same  relation  that  the  Christian  Topography  of  Cosmas  bears
to  real  geography.  In  vain  were  exhibited  the  absolute  ge-
ological, zoological,  astronomical  proofs  that  no  universal
deluge,  or  deluge  covering  any  large  part  of  the  earth,  had
taken  place  within  the  last  six  thousand  or  sixty  thousand
years;  in  vain  did  so  enlightened  a  churchman  as  Bishop
Clayton   declare  that  the   Deluge  could  not  have  extended


*  See  Voltaire,  Dissertation  sur  les  Changements  arrives  dans  notre  Globe  ;  also
Voltaire,  Les  Singulaiites  de  la  Nature,  chap,  xii ;  also  Jevons,  Principles  of  Sci-
ence, vol.  ii,  p.  32S.


230  FROM    GENESIS    TO    GEOLOGY.

beyond  that  district  where  Noah  lived  before  the  Flood  ;  in
vain  did  others,  like  Bishop  Croft  and  Bishop  Stillingfleet,
and  the  nonconformist  Matthew  Poole,  show  that  the  Del-
uge might  not  have  been  and  probably  was  not  universal ;
in  vain  was  it  shown  that,  even  if  there  had  been  a  universal
deluge,  the  fossils  were  not  produced  by  it :  the  only  answers
were  the  citation  of  the  text,  *'  And  all  the  high  mountains
which  were  under  the  whole  heaven  were  covered,"  and,  to
clinch  the  matter,  Worthington  and  men  like  him  insisted
that  any  argument  to  show  that  fossils  were  not  remains  of
animals  drowned  at  the  Deluge  of  Noah  was  ''  infidelity."
In  England,  France,  and  Germany,  belief  that  the  fossils
were  produced  by  the  Deluge  of  Noah  was  widely  insisted
upon  as  part  of  that  faith  essential  to  salvation.^

But  the  steady  work  of  science  went  on  :  not  all  the  force
of  the  Church — not  even  the  splendid  engravings  in  Scheuch-
zer's  Bible— could  stop  it,  and  the  foundations  of  this  theo-
logical theory  began  to  crumble  away.  The  process  was,
indeed,  slow  ;  it  required  a  hundred  and  twenty  years  for
the  searchers  of  God's  truth,  as  revealed  in  Nature — such
men  as  Hooke,  Linnseus,  Whitehurst,  Daubenton,  Cuvier,
and  William  Smith — to  push  their  works  under  this  fabric  of
error,  and,  by  statements  which  could  not  be  resisted,  to  un-
dermine it.  As  we  arrive  at  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth
century,  science  is  becoming  irresistible  in  this  field.  Blu-
menbach.  Von  Buch,  and  Schlotheim  led  the  way,  but  most
important  on  the  Continent  was  the  work  of  Cuvier.  In  the
early  years  of  the  present  century  his  researches  among  fos-
sils began  to  throw  new  light  into  the  whole  subject  of  geol-
ogy. He  was,  indeed,  very  conservative,  and  even  more  wary
and  diplomatic;  seeming,  like  Voltaire,  to  feel  that  "among
wolves  one  must  howl  a  little."  It  was  a  time  of  reaction.
Napoleon  had  made  peace  with  the  Church,  and  to  disturb


*  For  a  candid  summary  of  the  proofs  from  geology,  astronomy,  and  zoology,
that  the  Noachian  Deluge  was  not  universally  or  widely  extended,  see  McClintock
and  Strong,  Cyclopcedia  of  Biblical  Theology  and  Ecclesiastical  J iteratiire,  article
Deluge.  For  general  history,  see  Lyell,  D'Archiac,  and  Vezian.  For  special  cases
showing  the  bitterness  of  the  conflict,  see  the  Rev.  Mr.  Davis's  Life  of  Rev.  Dr.
Pye  S7nith,  passim.  For  a  late  account,  see  Prof.  Huxley  on  The  Lights  of  the
Church  and  the  Light  of  Science,  in  the  Nineteenth  Century  for  July,  1S90.


•      THE    FIRST    GREAT    EFFORT   AT    COMPROMISE.  23 1

that  peace  was  akin  to  treason.  By  large  but  vague  conces-
sions Cuvier  kept  the  theologians  satisfied,  while  he  under-
mined their  strongest  fortress.  The  danger  was  instinctively
felt  by  some  of  the  champions  of  the  Church,  and  typical
among  these  was  Chateaubriand,  who  in  his  best-known
work,  once  so  great,  now  so  little — the  Genius  of  Christianity

grappled  with  the  questions  of  creation  by  insisting  upon

a  sort  of  general  deception  "  in  the  beginning,"  under  which
everything  was  created  by  a  sudden  fiat,  but  with  appear-
ances of  pre-existence.  His  words  are  as  follows :  ''  It  was
part  of  the  perfection  and  harmony  of  the  nature  which  was
displayed  before  men's  eyes  that  the  deserted  nests  of  last
year's  birds  should  be  seen  on  the  trees,  and  that  the  sea-
shore should  be  covered  with  shells  which  had  been  the
abode  of  fish,  and  yet  the  world  was  quite  new,  and  nests
and  shells  had  never  been  inhabited."  ^  But  the  real  victory
was  with  Brongniart,  who,  about  1820,  gave  forth  his  work
on  fossil  plants,  and  thus  built  a  barrier  against  which  the
enemies  of  science  raged  in  vain.f

Still  the  struggle  was  not  ended,  and,  a  few  years  later,  a
forlorn  hope  was  led  in  England  by  Granville  Penn.

His  fundamental  thesis  was  that  ''  our  globe  has  under-
gone only  two  revolutions,  the  Creation  and  the  Deluge,  and
both  by  the  immediate  fiat  of  the  Almighty";  he  insisted
that  the  Creation  took  place  in  exactly  six  days  of  ordinary
time,  each  made  up  of  "  the  evening  and  the  morning"  ;  and
he  ended  with  a  piece  of  that  peculiar  presumption  so  famil-
iar to  the  world,  by  calling  on  Cuvier  and  all  other  geolo-
gists to  *' ask  for  the  old  paths  and  walk,  therein  until  they
shall  simplify  their  system  and  reduce  their  numerous  revo-
lutions to  the  two  events  or  epochs  only — the  six  days  of
Creation  and  the  Deluge."  X  The  geologists  showed  no  dis-
position to  yield  to  this  peremptory  summons;  on  the  con-
trary, the  President  of  the  British  Geological  Society,  and
even  so  eminent  a  churchman  and  geologist  as  Dean  Buck-
land,  soon  acknowledged  that  facts  obliged  them  to  give  up

*  Gd.iie  dii  Christianisme,  chap,  v,  pp.  1-14,  cited  by  Reusch,  vol.  i,  p.  250.
\  For  admirable  sketches  of  Brongniart  and  other  paleobotanists,  see  Ward,  as
above.

X  See  the  works  of  Granville  Penn,  vol.  ii,  p.  273.


232  FROM    GENESIS   TO    GEOLOGY.

the  theory  that  the  fossils  of  the  coal  measures  were  de-
posited at  the  Deluge  of  Noah,  and  to  deny  that  the  Deluge
was  universal.

The  defection  of  Buckland  was  especially  felt  by  the  or-
thodox party.  His  ability,  honest}-,  and  loyalty  to  his  pro-
fession, as  well  as  his  position  as  Canon  of  Christ  Church
and  Professor  of  Geology  at  Oxford,  gave  him  great  author-
ity, which  he  exerted  to  the  utmost  in  soothing  his  brother
ecclesiastics.  In  his  inaugural  lecture  he  had  laboured  to
show  that  geology  confirmed  the  accounts  of  Creation  and
the  Flood  as  given  in  Genesis,  and  in  1823,  after  his  cave  ex-
plorations had  revealed  overwhelming  evidences  of  the  vast
antiquity  of  the  earth,  he  had  still  clung  to  the  Flood  theory
in  his  Rcliquicc  DiluviancE.

This  had  not,  indeed,  fully  satisfied  the  anti-scientific  party,
but  as  a  rule  their  attacks  upon  him  took  the  form  not  so
much  of  abuse  as  of  humorous  disparagement.  An  epigram
by  Shuttle  worth,  afterward  Bishop  of  Chichester,  in  imita-
tion of  Pope's  famous  lines  upon  Newton,  ran  as  follows :

"  Some  doubts  were  once  expressed  about  the  Flood  :
Buckland  arose,  and  all  was  clear  as  mud."

On  his  leaving  Oxford  for  a  journey  to  southern  Europe,
Dean  Gaisford  was  heard  to  exclaim  :  *'  Well,  Buckland  is
gone  to  Italy  ;  so,  thank  God,  we  shall  have  no  more  of  this
geology !  "

Still  there  was  some  comfort  as  long  as  Buckland  held  to
the  Deluge  theory  ;  but,  on  his  surrender,  the  combat  deep-
ened :  instead  of  epigrams  and  caricatures  came  bitter  at-
tacks, and  from  the  pulpit  and  press  came  showers  of  mis-
siles. The  worst  of  these  were  hurled  at  Lyell.  As  we
have  seen,  he  had  published  in  1830  his  Principles  of  Geology.
Nothing  could  have  been  more  cautious.  It  simply  gave  an
account  of  the  main  discoveries  up  to  that  time,  drawing  the
necessary  inferences  with  plain  yet  convincing  logic,  and  it
remains  to  this  day  one  of  those  works  in  which  the  Anglo-
Saxon  race  may  most  justly  take  pride, — one  of  the  land-
marks in  the  advance  of  human  thought.

But  its  tendency  was  inevitably  at  variance  with  the
Chaldean  and  other  ancient  myths  and  legends  regarding


THE    FIRST    GREAT    EFFORT   AT    COMPROMISE.  233

the  Creation  and  Deluge  which  the  Hebrews  had  received
from  the  older  civilizations  among  their  neighbours,  and  had
incorporated  into  the  sacred  books  which  they  transmitted
to  the  modern  world  ;  it  was  therefore  extensively  "  refuted."

Theologians  and  men  of  science  influenced  by  them  in-
sisted that  his  minimizing  of  geological  changes,  and  his
laying  stress  on  the  gradual  action  of  natural  causes  still  in
force,  endangered  the  sacred  record  of  Creation  and  left  no
place  for  miraculous  intervention ;  and  when  it  was  found
that  he  had  entirely  cast  aside  their  cherished  idea  that  the
great  geological  changes  of  the  earth's  surface  and  the  mul-
titude of  fossil  remains  were  due  to  the  Deluge  of  Noah,  and
had  shown  that  a  far  longer  time  was  demanded  for  Creation
than  any  which  could  possibly  be  deduced  from  the  Old
Testament  genealogies  and  chronicles,  orthodox  indignation
burst  forth  violently;  eminent  dignitaries  of  the  Church  at-
tacked him  without  mercy  and  for  a  time  he  was  under
social  ostracism.

As  this  availed  little,  an  effort  was  made  on  the  scientific
side  to  crush  him  beneath  the  weighty  authority  of  Cuvier ;
but  the  futility  of  this  effort  was  evident  w^hen  it  was  found
that  thinking  men  would  no  longer  listen  to  Cuvier  and  per-
sisted in  listening  to  Lyell.  The  great  orthodox  text-book,
Cuvier's  Theory  of  the  Earth,  h^c^imQ  at  once  so  discredited
in  the  estimation  of  men  of  science  that  no  new  edition  of  it
w^as  called  for,  while  Lyell's  work  speedily  ran  through
twelve  editions  and  remained  a  firm  basis  of  modern  thought."

As  typical  of  his  more  moderate  opponents  we  ma}^  take
Fairholme,  who  in  1837  published  his  Mosaic  Deluge,  and  ar-
gued that  no  early  convulsions  of  the  earth,  such  as  those
supposed  by  geologists,  could  have  taken  place,  because
there  could  have  been  no  deluge  "  before  moral  guilt  could
possibly  have  been  incurred  " — that  is  to  say,  before  the
creation  of  mankind.  In  touching  terms  he  bewailed  the
defection  of  the  President  of  the  Geological  Society  and
Dean  Buckland — protesting  against  geologists  who  "  persist


*  For  Buckland  and  the  various  forms  of  attack  upon  him,  see  Gordon,  Life  of
Buckland,  especially  pp.  10,  26,  136.  For  the  attack  on  Lyell  and  his  book,  see
Huxley,  The  Lights  of  the  Church  and  the  Light  of  Science.


234


FROM  GENESIS  TO  GEOLOGY.


in  closing"  their  eyes  upon  the  solemn  declarations  of  the
Almighty."

Still  the  geologists  continued  to  seek  truth  :  the  germs
planted  especially  by  William  Smith,  "  the  Father  of  Eng-
lish Geology,"  were  developed  by  a  noble  succession  of  in-
vestigators, and  the  victory  was  sure.  Meanwhile  those
theologians  who  felt  that  denunciation  of  science  as  *'  god-
less "  could  accomplish  little,  laboured  upon  schemes  for
reconciling  geology  with  Genesis.  Some  of  these  show
amazing  ingenuity,  but  an  eminent  religious  authority,  going
over  them  with  great  thoroughness,  has  well  characterized
them  as  "  daring  and  fanciful."  Such  attempts  have  been
variously  classified,  but  the  fact  regarding  them  all  is  that
each  mixes  up  more  or  less  of  science  with  more  or  less
of  Scripture,  and  produces  a  result  more  or  less  absurd.
Though  a  few  men  here  and  there  have  continued  these
exercises,  the  capitulation  of  the  party  which  set  the  literal
account  of  the  Deluge  of  Noah  against  the  facts  revealed  by
geology  was  at  last  clearly  made.*

One  of  the  first  evidences  of  the  completeness  of  this  sur-
render has  been  so  well  related  by  the  eminent  physiologist,
Dr.  W.  B.  Carpenter,  that  it  may  best  be  given  in  his  own
words  :  "  You  are  familiar  with  a  book  of  considerable  value.
Dr.  W.  Smith's  Dictionary  of  the  Bible.  I  happened  to  know
the  influences  under  which  that  dictionary  was  framed.  The
idea  of  the  publisher  and  of  the  editor  was  to  give  as  much
scholarship  and  such  results  of  modern  criticism  as  should
be  compatible  with  a  very  judicious  conservatism.  There
was  to  be  no  objection  to  geology,  but  the  universality  of
the  Deluge  was  to  be  strictly  maintained.  The  editor  com-
mitted the  article  Deluge  to  a  man  of  very  considerable  abil-
ity, but  when  the  article  came  to  him  he  found  that  it  was
so  excessively  heretical  that  he  could  not  venture  to  put  it
in.  There  was  not  time  for  a  second  article  under  that  head,
and  if  you  look  in  that  dictionary  you  will  find  under  the
word  Deluge  a  reference  to  Flood.     Before  Flood  came,  a  sec-


*  For  Fairholme,  see  his  Mosaic  Deluge,  London,  1837,  p.  358.  For  a  very
just  characterization  of  various  schemes  of  "  reconciliation,''  sec  Shields,  The  Final
Fhilosophy,  p.  340.


THE    FIRST    GREAT    EFFORT   AT   COMPROMISE.  235

ond  article  had  been  commissioned  from  a  source  that  was
believed  safely  conservative  ;  but  when  the  article  came
in  it  was  found  to  be  worse  than  the  first.  A  third  article
was  then  commissioned,  and  care  was  taken  to  secure  its
*  safety.'  If  you  look  for  the  word  Flood  in  the  dictionary,
you  will  find  a  reference  to  Noah.  Under  that  name  you
will  find  an  article  written  by  a  distinguished  professor  of
Cambridge,  of  which  I  remember  that  Bishop  Colenso  said
to  me  at  the  time,  *  In  a  very  guarded  way  the  writer  con-
cedes the  whole  thing.*  You  w^ill  see  by  this  under  what
trammels  scientific  thought  has  laboured  in  this  department
of  inquiry."  *

A  similar  surrender  was  seen  when  from  a  new  edition
of  Home's  Introduction  to  the  Scriptures,  the  standard  text-
book of  orthodox}^  its  accustomed  use  of  fossils  to  prove  the
universality  of  the  Deluge  was  quietly  dropped,  f

A  like  capitulation  in  the  United  States  was  foreshadowed
in  1 84 1,  when  an  eminent  Professor  of  Biblical  Literature
and  Interpretation  in  the  most  important  theological  semi-
nary of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church,  Dr.  Samuel  Turner,
showed  his  Christian  faith  and  courage  by  virtually  accept-
ing the  new  view ;  and  the  old  contention  was  utterly  cast
away  by  the  thinking  men  of  another  great  religious  body
when,  at  a  later  period,  two  divines  among  the  most  eminent
for  piety  and  learning  in  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church
inserted  in  the  Biblical  CyclopcEdia,  published  under  their  su-
pervision, a  candid  summary  of  the  proofs  from  geology,
astronomy,  and  zoology  that  the  Deluge  of  Noah  was  not
universal,  or  even  vvddely  extended,  and  this  without  pro-
test from  any  man  of  note  in  any  branch  of  the  American
Church.;}:

The  time  wdien  the  struggle  was  relinquished  by  enlight-


*  See  Official  Report  of  the  National  Conference  of  Unitarian  and  other  Chris-
tian Churches  held  at  Saratoga,  1882,  p.  97.

f  This  was  about  1856  ;  see  Tylor,  Early  History  of  Mankind,  p.  329.

X  For  Dr.  Turner,  see  his  Companion  to  the  Book  of  Genesis,  London  and  New
York,  1841,  pp.  2i6-2ig.  For  McClintock  and  Strong,  see  their  Cyclopaedia  of
Biblicdi  Knozvledge,  Qic,  o.v{\c\q  Deluge.  For  similar  surrenders  of  the  Dehigc  in
various  other  religious  encyclopaedias  and  commentaries,  sec  Huxley,  Essays  on
Controverted  Questions,  chap.  xiii.


236  FROM    GENESIS    TO    GEOLOGY.

ened  theologians  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  may  be
fixed  at  about  1862,  when  Reusch,  Professor  of  Theology  at
Bonn,  in  his  work  on  TJic  Bible  and  Nature,  cast  off  the  old
diluvial  theory  and  all  its  supporters,  accepting  the  conclu-
sions of  science.^

But,  though  the  sacred  theory  with  the  Deluge  of  Noah
as  a  universal  solvent  for  geological  difficulties  was  evidently
dying,  there  still  remained  in  various  quarters  a  touching
fidelity  to  it.  In  Roman  Catholic  countries  the  old  theory
was  widely  though  quietly  cherished,  and  taught  from  the
religious  press,  the  pulpit,  and  the  theological  professor's
chair.  Pope  Pius  IX  w^as  doubtless  in  sympathy  with  this
feehng  when,  about  1850,  he  forbade  the  scientific  congress
of  Italy  to  meet  at  Bologna,  f

In  1856  Father  Debreyne  congratulated  the  theologians
of  France  on  their  admirable  attitude:  ''Instinctively,"  he
says,  "  they  still  insist  upon  deriving  the  fossils  from
Noah's  Flood.":}:  In  1875  the  Abbe  Choyer  published
at  Paris  and  Angers  a  text-book  widely  approved  by
Church  authorities,  in  which  he  took  similar  ground  ;  and
in  1877  the  Jesuit  father  Bosizio  published  at  Mayence  a
treatise  on  Geology  and  the  Deluge ,  endeavouring  to  hold
the  w^orld  to  the  old  solution  of  the  problem,  allowing,
indeed,  that  the  "  days "  of  Creation  were  long  periods,
but  making  atonement  for  this  concession  by  sneers  at
Darwin.*

In  the  Russo-Greek  Church,  in  1869,  Archbishop  Ma-
carius,  of  Lithuania,  urged  the  necessity  of  believing  that
Creation  in  six  days  of  ordinary  time  and  the  Deluge  of
Noah  are  the  only  causes  of  all  that  geology  seeks  to  ex-
plain;  and.  as  late  as  1876,  another  eminent  theologian  of
the  same  Church  went  even  farther,  and  refused  to  allow
the  faithful  to  believe  that  any  change  had  taken  place  since
''  the  beginning  "  mentioned  in  Genesis,  when  the  strata  of
the  earth  were  laid,  tilted,  and  twisted,  and  the  fossils  scat-

*  See  Reusch,  Bibel  und  Natur,  chap.  xxi.

\  See  Whiteside,  Italy  in  the  Nineteenth  Century,  vol.  iii,  chap.  xiv.

X  See  Zoeckler,  vol.  ii,  p.  472.  ♦

*  See  Zoeckler,  vol.  ii,  p.  478,  and   Bosizio,  Geoiogie  und  die  Siindjluth,  May-
ence, 1877,  preface,  p.  xiv.


THE    FIRST    GREAT    EFFORT   AT   COMPROMISE.  237

tered  among  them  by  the  hand  of  the  Almighty  during  six
ordinary  days.*

In  the  Lutheran  branch  of  the  Protestant  Church  we  also
find  echoes  of  the  old  belief.  Keil,  eminent  in  scriptural
interpretation  at  the  University  of  Dorpat,  gave  forth  in
i860  a  treatise  insisting  that  geology  is  rendered  futile  and
its  explanations  vain  by  two  great  facts  :  the  Curse  which
drove  Adam  and  Eve  out  of  Eden,  and  the  Flood  that  de-
stroyed all  living  things  save  Noah,  his  family,  and  the  ani-
mals in  the  ark.  In  1867,  Phillippi,  and  in  1869,  Dieterich,
both  theologians  of  eminence,  took  virtually  the  same  ground
in  Germany,  the  latter  attempting  to  beat  back  the  scientific
hosts  with  a  phrase  apparently  pithy,  but  really  hollow— the
declaration  that  "  modern  geology  observes  what  is,  but  has
no  right  to  judge  concerning  the  beginning  of  things."  As
late  as  1876,  Zugler  took  a  similar  view,  and  a  multitude  of
lesser  lights,  through  pulpit  and  press,  brought  these  anti-
scientific  doctrines  to  bear  upon  the  people  at  large— the
only  effect  being  to  arouse  grave  doubts  regarding  Chris-
tianity among  thoughtful  men,  and  especially  among  young
men,  who  naturally  distrusted  a  cause  using  such  weapons.

For  just  at  this  time  the  traditional  view  of  the  Deluge
received  its  death-blow^  and  in  a  manner  entirely  unexpected.
By  the  investigations  of  George  Smith  among  the  xA^ssyrian
tablets  of  the  British  Museum,  in  1872,  and  by  his  discov-
eries just  afterward  in  Assyria,  it  was  put  beyond  a  reason-
able doubt  that  a  great  mass  of  accounts  in  Genesis  are
simply  adaptations  of  earlier  and  especially  of  Chaldean
myths  and  legends.  While  this  proved  to  be  the  fact  as
regards  the  accounts  of  Creation  and  the  fall  of  man,  it  was
seen  to  be  most  strikingly  so  as  regards  the  Deluge.  The
eleventh  of  the  twelve  tablets,  on  which  the  most  important
of  these  inscriptions  was  found,  was  almost  wholly  preserved,
and  it  revealed  in  this  legend,  dating  from  a  time  far  earlier
than  that  of  Moses,  such  features  peculiar  to  the  childhood
of  the  world  as  the  building  of  the  great  ship  or  ark  to  escape
the  flood,  the  careful  caulking  of  its  seams,  the  saving  of  a


*  See  Zoeckler,  vol.  ii,  pp.  472,  571,  and  elsewhere  ;  also  citations  in   Reusch
and  Shields.


238


FROM    GENESIS   TO   GEOLOGY.


man  beloved  of  Heaven,  his  selecting  and  taking  with  him
into  the  vessel  animals  of  all  sorts  in  couples,  the  impressive
final  closing  of  the  door,  the  sending  forth  different  birds  as
the  flood  abated,  the  offering  of  sacrifices  when  the  flood  had
subsided,  the  joy  of  the  Divine  Being  who  had  caused  the
flood  as  the  odour  of  the  sacrifice  reached  his  nostrils ;  while
throughout  all  was  shown  that  partiality  for  the  Chaldean
sacred  number  seven  which  appears  so  constantly  in  the
Genesis  legends  and  throughout  the  Hebrew  sacred  books.

Other  devoted  scholars  followed  in  the  paths  thus  opened
— Sayce  in  England,  Lenormant  in  France,  Schrader  in  Ger-
many— with  the  result  that  the  Hebrew  account  of  the  Del-
uge, to  which  for  ages  theologians  had  obliged  all  geological  re-
search to  conform,  was  quietly  relegated,  even  by  most  emi-
nent Christian  scholars,  to  the  realm  of  myth  and  legend."^

Sundry  feeble  attempts  to  break  the  force  of  this  dis-
covery, and  an  evidently  widespread  fear  to  have  it  known,
have  certainh^  impaired  not  a  little  the  legitimate  influence
of  the  Christian  clergy.

And  yet  this  adoption  of  Chaldean  myths  into  the  Hebrew
Scriptures  furnishes  one  of  the  strongest  arguments  for  the
value  of  our  Bible  as  a  record  of  the  upward  growth  of  man ;
for,  while  the  Chaldean  legend  primarily  ascribes  the  Deluge
to  the  mere  arbitrary  caprice  of  one  among  many  gods  (Bel),
the  Hebrew  development  of  the  legend  ascribes  it  to  the
justice,  the  righteousness,  of  the  Supreme  God  ;  thus  show-
ing the  evolution  of  a  higher  and  nobler  sentiment  which
demanded  a  moral  cause  adequate  to  justify  such  a  catas-
trophe.

Unfortunately,  thus  far,  save  in  a  few  of  the  broader  and
nobler  minds  among  the  clergy,  the  policy  of  ignoring  such
new  revelations  has  prevailed,  and  the  results  of  this  policy,
both  in  Roman  Catholic  and  in  Protestant  countries,  are  not
far  to  seek.  What  the  condition  of  thought  is  among  the
middle  classes  of  France  and   Italy  needs  not  to  be  stated

*  For  George  Smith,  see  his  Chaldean  Account  of  Genesis,  New  York,  1876,
especially  pp.  36,  263,  286  ;  also  his  special  work  on  the  subject.  See  also  Ler.or-
mant,  Les  Origincs  de  riJistoire,  Paris,  1880,  chap.  viii.  For  Schrader,  see  his
The  Ctineiforin  Inscriptions  and  the  Old  Testament,  Whitehouse's  translation,
London,  1885,  vol.  i,  pp.  47-49  and  58-60,  and  elsewhere.


FINAL   EFFORTS   AT    COMPROMISE.  239

here.  In  Germany,  as  a  typical  fact,  it  may  be  mentioned
that  there  was  in  the  year  1881  church  accommodation  in
the  city  of  Berlin  for  but  two  per  cent  of  the  population,
and  that  even  this  accommodation  was  more  than  was
needed.  This  fact  is  not  due  to  the  want  of  a  deep  religious
spirit  among  the  North  Germans:  no  one  who  has  lived
among  them  can  doubt  the  existence  of  such  a  spirit ;  but  it
is  due  mainly  to  the  fact  that,  while  the  simple  results  of
scientific  investigation  have  filtered  down  among  the  people
at  large,  the  dominant  party  in  the  Lutheran  Church  has
steadily  refused  to  recognise  this  fact,  and  has  persisted  in
imposing  on  Scripture  the  fetters  of  literal  and  dogmatic
interpretation  which  Germany  has  largely  outgrown.  A
similar  danger  threatens  every  other  country  in  which  the
clergy  pursue  a  similar  policy.  No  thinking  man,  whatever
may  be  his  religious  views,  can  fail  to  regret  this.  A  thought-
ful, reverent,  enlightened  clergy  is  a  great  blessing  to  any
country  ;  and  anything  which  undermines  their  legitimate
work  of  leading  men  out  of  the  worship  of  material  things
to  the  consideration  of  that  which  is  highest  is  a  vast  mis-
fortune.*


IV.    FINAL   EFFORTS    AT    COMPROMISE.— THE   VICTORY    OF
SCIENCE    COMPLETE.

Before  concluding,  it  may  be  instructive  to  note  a  few
especially  desperate  attempts  at  truces  or  compromises,  such
as  always  appear  when  the  victory  of  any  science  has  be-
come absolutely  sure.  Typical  among  the  earliest  of  these
may  be  mentioned  the  effort  of  Carl  von  Raumer  in  18 19.
With  much  pretension  to  scientific  knowledge,  but  wdth
aspirations  bounded  by  the  limits  of  Prussian  orthodoxy,  he
made  a  laboured  attempt  to  produce  a  statement  which,
by  its  vagueness,  haziness,  and  "depth,"  should  obscure  the
real  questions   at   issue.     This  statement   appeared    in    the


*  For  the  foregoing  statements  regarding  Germany  the  writer  relies  on  his  per-
sonal observation  as  a  student  at  the  University  of  Berlin  in  1856,  as  a  traveller  at
various  periods  afterward,  and  as  Minister  of  the  United  States  in  1879,  iSSo,  and
1881.


240  FROM   GENESIS    TO   GEOl  OGY.

shape  of  an  argument,  used  by  Bertrand  and  others  in  the
previous  century,  to  prove  that  fossil  remains  of  plants  in
the  coal  measures  had  never  existed  as  living  plants,  but  had
been  simply  a  **  result  of  the  development  of  imperfect  plant
embryos";  and  the  same  misty  theory  was  suggested  to
explain  the  existence  of  fossil  animals  without  supposing  the
epochs  and  changes  required  by  geological  science.

In  1837  VVagner  sought  to  uphold  this  explanation;  but
it  was  so  clearly  a  mere  hollow  phrase,  unable  to  bear  the
weight  of  the  facts  to  be  accounted  for,  that  it  was  soon
given  up.

Similar  attempts  were  made  throughout  Europe,  the
most  noteworthy  appearing  in  England.  In  1853  was  issued
an  anonymous  work  having  as  its  title  A  Brief  and  Complete
Refutation  of  the  Anti-Scriptiiral  TJieory  of  Geologists',  the
author  having  revived  an  old  idea,  and  put  a  spark  of  life
into  it — this  idea  being  that  "all  the  organisms  found  in  the
,  depths  of  the  earth  were  made  on  the  first  of  the  six  creative
^  days,  as  models  for  the  plants  and  animals  to  be  created  on
the  third,  fifth,  and  sixth  days."  ^

But  while  these  attempts  to  preserve  the  old  theory  as
to  fossil  remains  of  lower  animals  were  thus  pressed,  there
appeared  upon  the  geological  field  a  new  scientific  column
far  more  terrible  to  the  old  doctrines  than  any  which  had
been  seen  previously.

For,  just  at  the  close  of  the  first  quarter  of  the  nineteenth
century,  geologists  began  to  examine  the  caves  and  beds  of
drift  in  various  parts  of  the  world  ;  and  within  a  few  years
from  that  time  a  series  of  discoveries  began  in  France,  in
Belgium,  in  England,  in  Brazil,  in  Sicily,  in  India,  in  Egypt,
and  in  America,  which  established  the  fact  that  a  period  of
time  much  greater  than  any  which  had  before  been  thought
of  had  elapsed  since  the  first  human  occupation  of  the  earth.
The  chronologies  of  Archbishop  Usher,  Petavius,  Bossuet,
and  the  other  great  authorities  on  which  theology  had
securely  leaned,  were  found  worthless.  It  was  clearly  seen
that,  no  matter  how  well  based  upon  the  Old  Testament
genealogies  and   lives  of  the   patriarchs,   all   these  systems

*  See  Zoeckler,  vol.  ii,  p.  475.


FINAL   EFFORTS   AT   COMPROMISE.  24 1

must  go  for  nothing.  The  most  conservative  geologists  were
gradually  obliged  to  admit  that  man  had  been  upon  the
earth  not  merely  six  thousand,  or  sixty  thousand,  or  one
hundred  and  sixty  thousand  years.  And  when,  in  1863,  Sir
Charles  Lyell,  in  his  book  on  The  A^itiqiiity  of  Man,  retracted
solemnly  his  earlier  view — yielding  with  a  reluctance  almost
pathetic,  but  with  a  thoroughness  absolutely  convincing —
the  last  stronghold  of  orthodoxy  in  this  field  fell.*^

The  supporters  of  a  theory  based  upon  the  letter  of
Scripture,  who  had  so  long  taken  the  offensive,  were  now
obliged  to  fight  upon  the  defensive  and  at  fearful  odds.
Various  lines  of  defence  were  taken  ;  but  perhaps  the  most
pathetic  effort  w^as  that  made  in  the  year  1857,  in  England,
by  Gosse.  As  a  naturalist  he  had  rendered  great  services
to  zoological  science,  but  he  now  concentrated  his  energies
upon  one  last  effort  to  save  the  literal  interpretation  of
Genesis  and  the  theological  structure  built  upon  it.  In  his
work  entitled  Omphalos  he  developed  the  theory  previously
urged  by  Granville  Penn,  and  asserted  a  new  principle
called  "  prochronism."  In  accordance  with  this,  all  things
were  created  by  the  Almighty  hand  literally  within  the  six
days,  each  made  up  of  ''  the  evening  and  the  morning,"  and
each  great  branch  of  creation  was  brought  into  existence  in
an  instant.  Accepting  a  declaration  of  Dr.  Ure,  that  "  neither
reason  nor  revelation  will  justify  us  in  extending  the  origin
of  the  material  system  beyond  six  thousand  years  from  our
own  days,"  Gosse  held  that  all  the  evidences  of  convulsive
changes  and  long  epochs  in  strata,  rocks,  minerals,  and
fossils  are  simply  ^^appearances'' — only  that  and  nothing
more.  Among  these  mere  "  appearances,"  all  created  simul-
taneously, were  the  glacial  furrows  and  scratches  on  rocks,
the  marks  of  retreat  'on  rocky  masses,  as  at  Niagara,  the
tilted  and  twisted  strata,  the  piles  of  lava  from  extinct  vol-
canoes, the  fossils  of  every  sort  in  every  part  of  the  earth,
the  foot-tracks  of  birds  and  reptiles,  the  half-digested  re-
mains of  weaker  animals  found  in  the  fossilized  bodies  of  the

*  See  Prof.  Marsh's  address  as  President  of  the  Society  for  the  Advancement  of
Science,  in  1879  '»  ^"^  ^^^  ^  development  of  the  matter,  see  the  chapters  on  The
Antiquity  of  Man  and  Egyptology  and  The  Fall  of  Man  and  Anthropology,  in  this
work.

17


242


FROM    GENESIS   TO   GEOLOGY


stronger,  the  marks  of  hyenas'  teeth  on  fossilized  bones  found
in  various  caves,  and  even  the  skeleton  of  the  Siberian  mam-
moth at  St.  Petersburg  with  lumps  of  flesh  bearing  the  marks
of  wolves'  teeth — all  these,  with  all  gaps  and  imperfections,
he  urged  mankind  to  believe  came  into  being  in  an  instant.
The  preface  of  the  work  is  especially  touching,  and  it  ends
with  the  prayer  that  science  and  Scripture  may  be  reconciled
by  his  theory,  and  ''that  the  God  of  truth  will  deign  so  to
use  it,  and  if  he  do,  to  him  be  all  the  glory."  *  At  the  close
of  the  whole  book  Gosse  declared  :  "  The  field  is  left  clear
and  undisputed  for  the  one  witness  on  the  opposite  side,
whose  testimony  is  as  follows :  *  In  six  days  Jehovah  made
heaven  and  earth,  the  sea,  and  all  that  in  them  is.'"  This
quotation  he  placed  in  capital  letters,  as  the  final  refutation
of  all  that  the  science  of  geology  had  built.

In  other  parts  of  Europe  desperate  attempts  were  made
even  later  to  save  the  letter  of  our  sacred  books  by  the  re-
vival of  a  theory  in  some  respects  more  striking.  To  shape
this  theory  to  recent  needs,  vague  reminiscences  of  a  text  in
Job  regarding  fire  beneath  the  earth,  and  vague  conceptions
of  speculations  made  by  Humboldt  and  Laplace,  were  min-
gled with  Jewish  tradition.  Out  of  the  mixture  thus  obtained
Schubert  developed  the  idea  that  the  Satanic  ''  principalities
and  powers "  formerly  inhabiting  our  universe  plunged  it
into  the  chaos  from  which  it  was  newly  created  by  a  process
accurately  described  in  Genesis.  Rougemont  made  the
earth  one  of  the  "  morning  stars  "  of  Job,  reduced  to  chaos
by  Lucifer  and  his  followers,  and  thence  developed  in  ac-
cordance with  the  nebular  hypothesis.  Kurtz  evolved  from
this  theor}^  an  opinion  that  the  geological  disturbances  were
caused  by  the  opposition  of  the  devil  to  the  rescue  of  our
universe  from  chaos  by  the  Almighty.  Delitzsch  put  a  simi-
lar idea  into  a  more  scholastic  jargon  ;  but  most  desperate
of  all  w^ere  the  statements  of  Dr.  Anton  Westermeyer,  of
Munich,  in  T/ie  Old  Testament  viudieated from  Modern  Infidel
Objectio7is.     The  following  passage   will  serve   to  show  his


*  See  Gosse,  Omphalos,  London,  1857,  p.  5,  and  passim  ;  and  for  a  passage
giving  the  keynote  of  the  whole,  with  a  most  farcical  note  on  coprolites,  see  pp.
353,  354.


FINAL   EFFORTS   AT   COMPROMISE.  243

ideas:  *'  By  the  fructifying  brooding  of  the  Divine  Spirit  on
the  waters  of  the  deep,  creative  forces  began  to  stir;  the
devils  who  inhabited  the  primeval  darkness  and  considered
it  their  own  abode  saw  that  they  were  to  be  driven  from
their  possessions,  or  at  least  that  their  place  of  habitation
was  to  be  contracted,  and  they  therefore  tried  to  frustrate
God's  plan  of  creation  and  exert  all  that  remained  to  them
of  might  and  power  to  hinder  or  at  least  to  mar  the  new
creation."  So  came  into  being  "  the  horrible  and  destruc-
tive monsters,  these  caricatures  and  distortions  of  creation,"
of  which  we  have  fossil  remains.  Dr.  Westermeyer  goes  on
to  insist  that  "  whole  generations  called  into  existence  by
God  succumbed  to  the  corruption  of  the  devil,  and  for  that
reason  had  to  be  destroyed  "  ;  and  that  "  in  the  work  of  the
six  days  God  caused  the  devil  to  feel  his  power  in  all  ear-
nest, and  made  Satan's  enterprise  appear  miserable  and
vain."  *

Such  was  the  last  important  assault  upon  the  strongholds
of  geological  science  in  Germany  ;  and,  in  view  of  this  and
others  of  the  same  kind,  it  is  little  to  be  wondered  at  that
when,  in  1870,  Johann  Silberschlag  made  an  attempt  to  again
base  geology  upon  the  Deluge  of  Noah,  he  found  such  diffi-
culties that,  in  a  touching  passage,  he  expressed  a  desire  to
get  back  to  the  theory  that  fossils  were  ''  sports  of  Na-
ture." t

But  the  most  noted  among  efforts  to  keep  geology  well
within  the  letter  of  Scripture  is  of  still  more  recent  date.  In
the  year  1885  Mr.  Gladstone  found  time,  amid  all  his  labours
and  cares  as  the  greatest  parliamentary  leader  in  England,
to  take  the  field  in  the  struggle  for  the  letter  of  Genesis
against  geology.

On  the  face  of  it  his  effort  seemed  Quixotic,  for  he  con-
fessed at  the  outset  that  in  science  he  was  "  utterly  destitute
of  that  kind  of  knowledge  which  carries  authority,"  and  his
argument  soon  showed  that  this  confession  was  entirely
true.


*  See  Shields's  J^hm/  Philosophy,  pp.  340  et  seq.,  and  Reusch's  Nature  and  the
^/(5/t' (English  translation,  18S6),  vol.  i,  pp.  318-320.
f  See  Reusch,  vol.  i,  p.  264.


244  FROM    GENESIS    TO   GEOLOGY.

But  he  had  some  other  qualities  of  which  much  might  be
expected  :  great  skill  in  phrase-making,  great  shrewdness
in  adapting  the  meanings  of  single  words  to  conflicting
necessities  in  discussion,  wonderful  power  in  erecting  showv
structures  of  argument  upon  the  smallest  basis  of  fact,  and  a
facility  almost  preternatural  in  "  explaining  away  "  trouble-
some realities.  So  striking  was  his  power  in  this  last  respect,
that  a  humorous  London  chronicler  once  advised  a  bigamist,
as  his  only  hope,  to  induce  Mr.  Gladstone  to  explain  away
one  of  his  wives.

At  the  basis  of  this  theologico-geological  structure  Mr.
Gladstone  placed  what  he  found  in  the  text  of  Genesis :  ''  A
grand  fourfold  division  "  of  animated  Nature  "  set  forth  in
an  orderly  succession  of  times."  And  he  arranged  this  order
and  succession  of  creation  as  follows  :  ''  First,  the  water  popu-
lation ;  secondly,  the  air  population ;  thirdly,  the  land  popu-
lation of  animals  ;  fourthly,  the  land  population  consummated
in  man."

His  next  step  was  to  slide  in  upon  this  basis  the  appar-
ently harmless  proposition  that  this  division  and  sequence
**is  understood  to  have  been  so  affirmed  in  our  time  by  nat-
ural science  that  it  may  be  taken  as  a  demonstrated  conclu-
sion and  established  fact."

Finally,  upon  these  foundations  he  proceeded  to  build  an
argument  out  of  the  coincidences  thus  secured  between  the
record  in  the  Hebrew  sacred  books  and  the  truths  revealed
by  science  as  regards  this  order  and  sequence,  and  he  easily
arrived  at  the  desired  conclusion  with  which  he  crowned  the
whole  structure,  namel}^  as  regards  the  writer  of  Genesis,
that  "  his  knowledge  was  divine."  *

Such  was  the  skeleton  of  the  structure  ;  it  was  abun-
dantly decorated  with  the  rhetoric  in  which  Mr.  Gladstone
is  so  skilful  an  artificer,  and  it  towered  above  "  the  average
man  "  as  a  structure  beautiful  and  invincible — like  some  Chi-
nese fortress  in  the  nineteenth  century,  faced  with  porcelain
and  defended  with  crossbows.

Its  strength  was  soon  seen  to  be  unreal.     In  an  essay  ad-


*  See  Mr.  Gladstone's  Da7c>n  of  Creation  and  Worship,  a  reply  to  Dr.  Reville,
in  the  Nineteenth  Century  for  November,  1S85.


FINAL   EFFORTS   AT    COMPROMISE.  245

mirable  in  its  temper,  overwhelming  in  its  facts,  and  abso-
lutely convincing  in  its  argument,  Prof.  Huxley,  late  Presi-
dent of  the  Royal  Society,  and  doubtless  the  most  eminent
contemporary  authority  on  the  scientific  questions  con-
cerned, took  up  the  matter.

Mr.  Gladstone's  first  proposition,  that  the  sacred  writings
give  us  a  great  **  fourfold  division  "  created  "  in  an  orderly
succession  of  times,"  Prof.  Huxley  did  not  presume  to  gainsay.

As  to  Mr.  Gladstone's  second  proposition,  that  ''  this
great  fourfold  division  .  .  .  created  in  an  orderly  succession
of  times  .  .  .  has  been  so  affirmed  in  our  own  time  by  nat-
ural science  that  it  may  be  taken  as  a  demonstrated  con-
clusion and  established  fact,"  Prof.  Huxley  showed  that,  as
a  matter  of  fact,  no  such  ''  fourfold  division  "  and  '*  orderly
succession  "  exist ;  that,  so  far  from  establishing  Mr.  Glad-
stone's assumption  that  the  population  of  water,  air,  and  land
followed  each  other  in  the  order  given,  "  all  the  evidence  we
possess  goes  to  prove  that  they  did  not "  ;  that  the  distribu-
tion of  fossils  through  the  various  strata  proves  that  some
land  animals  originated  before  sea  •animals  ;  that  there  has
been  a  mixing  of  sea,  land,  and  air  "  population  "  utterly  de-
structive to  the  ''great  fourfold  division  "  and  to  the  creation
"  in  an  orderly  succession  of  times  "  ;  that,  so  far  is  the  view
presented  in  the  sacred  text,  as  stated  by  Mr.  Gladstone,
from  having  been  "  so  affirmed  in  our  own  time  by  natural
science,  that  it  may  be  taken  as  a  demonstrated  conclusion
and  established  fact "  that  Mr.  Gladstone's  assertion  is  "  di-
rectly contradictory  to  facts  known  to  every  one  who  is  ac-
quainted with  the  elements  of  natural  science  "  ;  that  Mr.
Gladstone's  only  geological  authority,  Cuvier,  had  died  more
than  fifty  years  before,  when  geological  science  was  in  its
infancy  [and  he  might  have  added,  when  it  was  necessary
to  make  every  possible  concession  to  the  Church] ;  and,
finally,  he  challenged  Mr.  Gladstone  to  produce  any  contem-
porary authority  in  geological  science  who  would  support
his  so-called  scriptural  view.  And  when,  in  a  rejoinder,  Mr.
Gladstone  attempted  to  support  his  view  on  the  authority  of
Prof.  Dana,  Prof.  Huxley  had  no  difficulty  in  showing  from
Prof.  Dana's  works  that  Mr.  Gladstone's  inference  was  ut-
terly unfounded.


246


FROM   GENESIS   TO   GEOLOGY.


But,  while  the  fabric  reared  by  Mr.  Gladstone  had  been
thus  undermined  by  Huxley  on  the  scientific  side,  another
opponent  began  an  attack  from  the  biblical  side.  The
Rev.  Canon  Driver,  professor  at  Mr.  Gladstone's  own  Uni-
versity of  Oxford,  took  up  the  question  in  the  light  of  scrip-
tural interpretation.  In  regard  to  the  comparative  table
drawn  up  by  Sir  J.  W.  Dawson,  showing  the  supposed
correspondence  between  the  scriptural  and  the  geological
order  of  creation.  Canon  Driver  said  :  *'  The  two  series  are
evidently  at  variance.  The  geological  record  contains  no
evidence  of  clearl}^  defined  periods  corresponding  to  the
*  days  '  of  Genesis.  In  Genesis,  vegetation  is  complete  two
days  before  animal  life  appears.  Geology  shows  that  they
appear  simultaneously — even  if  animal  life  does  not  appear
first.  In  Genesis,  birds  appear  together  with  aquatic  crea-
tures, and  precede  all  land  animals ;  according  to  the  evi-
dence of  geology,  birds  are  unknown  till  a  period  much  later
than  that  at  which  aquatic  creatures  (including  fishes  and
amphibia)  abound,  and  they  are  preceded  by  numerous  spe-
cies of  land  animals — in  particular,  by  insects  and  other
'  creeping  things.'  "  Of  the  Mosaic  account  of  the  existence
of  vegetation  before  the  creation  of  the  sun,  Canon  Driver
said,  *'  No  reconciliation  of  this  representation  with  the  data
of  science  has  yet  been  found  "  ;  and  again  :  "  From  all  that
has  been  said,  however  reluctant  we  may  be  to  make  the  ad-
mission, only  one  conclusion  seems  possible.  Read  without
prejudice  or  bias,  the  narrative  of  Genesis  i.  creates  an  im-
pression at  variance  with  the  facts  revealed  by  science."
The  eminent  professor  ends  by  saying  that  the  efforts  at
reconciliation  are  "  different  modes  of  obliterating  the  char-
acteristic features  of  Genesis,  and  of  reading  into  it  a  view
which  it  does  not  express."

Thus  fell  Mr.  Gladstone's  fabric  of  coincidences  between
the  "  o-reat  fourfold  division  "  in  Genesis  and  the  facts  ascer-
tained  by  geology.  Prof.  Huxley  had  shattered  the  scien-
tific  parts  of  the  structure.  Prof.  Driver  had  removed  its
biblical  foundations,  and  the  last  great  fortress  of  the
opponents  of  unfettered  scientific  investigation  w^as  in
ruins.

In  opposition  to  all  such  attempts  we  may  put  a  noble


FINAL   EFFORTS   AT   COMPROMISE.  24/

utterance  by  a  clergyman  who  has  probably  done  more  to
save  what  is  essential  in  Christianity  among  English-speak-
incr  people  than  any  other  ecclesiastic  of  his  time.  The  late
Dean  of  Westminster,  Dr.  Arthur  Stanley,  was  widely
known  and  beloved  on  both  continents.  In  his  memorial
sermon  after  the  funeral  of  Sir  Charles  Lyell  he  said  :  ''  It  is
now  clear  to  diligent  students  of  the  Bible  that  the  first  and
second  chapters  of  Genesis  contain  two  narratives  of  the
creation  side  by  side,  differing  from  each  other  in  almost
every  particular  of  time  and  place  and  order.  It  is  well
known  that,  when  the  science  of  geology  first  arose,  it  was
involved  in  endless  schemes  of  attempted  reconciliation  with
the  letter  of  Scripture.  There  were,  there  are  perhaps  still,
two  modes  of  reconciliation  of  Scripture  and  science,  which
have  been  each  in  their  day  attempted,  and  each  has  totally
and  deservedly  failed.  One  is  the  endeavour  to  wrest  the
words  of  the  Bible  from  their  natural  meaning  2ind  force  it  to
speak  the  language  of  scienee:'  And  again,  speaking  of  the
earliest  known  example,  which  was  the  interpolation  of  the
word  ""  not "  in  Leviticus  xi,  6,  he  continues :  **  This  is  the
earliest  instance  of  tJie  falsifieation  of  Scripture  to  meet  the  de-
mands of  science ;  and  it  has  been  followed  in  later  times  by
the  various  efforts  which  have  been  made  to  twist  the  earlier
chapters  of  the  book  of  Genesis  into  apparent  agreement  with
the  last  results  of  geology — representing  days  not  to  be
days,  morning  and  evening  not  to  be  morning  and  even-
ing, the  Deluge  not  to  be  the  Deluge,  and  the  ark  not  to  be
the  ark."

After  a  statement  like  this  we  may  fitly  ask,  Which  is
the  more  likely  to  strengthen  Christianity  for  its  work  in
the  twentieth  century  which  we  are  now  about  to  enter —
a  large,  manly,  honest,  fearless  utterance  like  this  of  Arthur
Stanley,  or  hair-splitting  sophistries,  bearing  in  their  every
line  the  germs  of  failure,  like  those  attempted  by  Mr.  Glad-
stone?

The  world  is  finding  that  the  scientific  revelation  of  crea-
tion is  ever  more  and  more  in  accordance  with  worthy  con-
ceptions of  that  great  Power  working  in  and  through  the
universe.  More  and  more  it  is  seen  that /inspiration  has
never  ceased,  and  that  its  prophets  and  priests  are  not  those


248


FROM  GENESIS  TO  GEOLOGY.


who  work  to  fit  the  letter  of  its  older  literature  to  the  needs
of  dogmas  and  sects,  but  those,  above  all  others,  who  pa-
tiently, fearlessly,  and  reverently  devote  themselves  to  the
search  for  truth  as  truth,  in  the  faith  that  there  is  a  Power  in
the  universe  wise  enough  to  make  truth-seeking  safe  and
good  enough  to  make  truth-telling  useful."^

"■  For  the  Huxley-Gladstone  controversy,  see  The  Nhieteenth  Century  for  1885-
'86.  For  Canon  Driver,  see  his  article.  The  Costnogony  of  Genesis,  in  7'he  Ex-
positor for  January,  1886.


CHAPTER   VI.

THE   ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN,  EGYPTOLOGY,  AND
ASSYRIOLOGY.


I.  THE    SACRED   CHRONOLOGY.

In  the  great  ranges  of  investigation  which  bear  most
directly  upon  the  origin  of  man,  there  are  two  in  which
Science  within  the  last  few  years  has  gained  final  victories.
The  significance  of  these  in  changing,  and  ultimately  in  re-
versing, one  of  the  greatest  currents  of  theological  thought,
can  hardly  be  overestimated  ;  not  even  the  tide  set  in  motion
by  Cusa,  Copernicus,  and  Galileo  was  more  powerful  to
bring  in  a  new  epoch  of  belief.

The  first  of  these  conquests   relates  to  the  antiquity  of  y
man  on  the  earth.

The  fathers  of  the  early  Christian  Church,  receiving  all
parts  of  our  sacred  books  as  equally  inspired,  laid  little,  if
any,  less  stress  on  the  myths,  legends,  genealogies,  and  tribal,
family,  and  personal  traditions  contained  in  the  Old  and  the
New  Testaments,  than  upon  the  most  powerful  appeals,  the
most  instructive  apologues,  and  the  most  lofty  poems  of
prophets,  psalmists,  and  apostles.  As  to  the  age  of  our
planet  and  the  life  of  man  upon  it,  they  found  in  the  Bible  a
carefully  recorded  series  of  periods,  extending  from  Adam
to  the  building  of  the  Temple  at  Jerusalem,  the  length  of
each  period  being  explicitly  given.

Thus  they  had  a  biblical  chronology — full,  consecutive,
and  definite— extending  from  the  first  man  created  to  an
event  of  known  date  well  within  ascertained  profane  his-
tory ;  as  a  result,  the  early  Christian  commentators  arrived
at  conclusions  varying  somewhat,  but  in  the   main  agree-

249


250  THE   ANTIQUITY   OF    MAN.

ing.  Some,  like  Origen,  Eusebius,  Lactantius,  Clement  of
Alexandria,  and  the  great  fathers  generally  of  the  first
three  centuries,  dwelling  especially  upon  the  Septuagint
version  of  the  Scriptures,  thought  that  man's  creation  took
place  about  six  thousand  years  before  the  Christian  era.
Strong  confirmation  of  this  vaew  was  found  in  a  simple
piece  of  purely  theological  reasoning :  for,  just  as  the  seven
candlesticks  of  the  Apocalypse  were  long  held  to  prove  the
existence  of  seven  heavenly  bodies  revolving  about  the  earth,
so  it  was  felt  that  the  six  da^'s  of  creation  prefigured  six
thousand  years  during  which  the  earth  in  its  first  form  was
to  endure  ;  and  that,  as  the  first  Adam  came  on  the  sixth
day,  Christ,  the  second  Adam,  had  come  at  the  sixth  millen-
nial period.  Theophilus,  Bishop  of  Antioch,  in  the  second
century  clinched  this  argument  with  the  text,  "  One  day  is
with  the  Lord  as  a  thousand  years."

On  the  other  hand,  Eusebius  and  St.  Jerome,  dwelling
more  especially  upon  the  Hebrew  text,  which  we  are  brought
up  to  revere,  thought  that  man's  origin  took  place  at  a  some-
what shorter  period  before  the  Christian  era ;  and  St.  Je-
rome's overwhelming  authority  made  this  the  dominant  view
throughout  western  Europe  during  fifteen  centuries.

The  simplicity  of  these  great  fathers  as  regards  chronol-
ogy is  especially  reflected  from  the  tables  of  Eusebius.  In
these,  Moses,  Joshua,  and  Bacchus,— Deborah,  Orpheus,  and
the  Amazons, — Abimelech,  the  Sphinx,  and  Oedipus,  appear
together  as  personages  equally  real,  and  their  positions  in
chronology  equally  ascertained.

^  At  times  great  bitterness  was  aroused  between  those
holding  the  longer  and  those  holding  the  shorter  chronology,

'   but  after  all  the  difference  between  them,  as  we  now^  see,

'  was  trivial ;  and  it  may  be  broadly  stated  that  in  the  early
Church,  **  alw^ays,  everywhere,  and  by  all,"  it  was  held  as
certain,  upon  the  absolute  warrant  of  Scripture,  that  man
was  created   from    four  to  six   thousand    years    before  the

,  Christian  era.

To  doubt  this,  and  even  much  less  than  this,  was  to  risk
damnation.  St.  Augustine  insisted  that  belief  in  the  antip-
odes and  in  the  longer  duration  of  the  earth  than  six  thou-
sand years  were  deadly  heresies,  equally  hostile  to  Scripture.


THE   SACRED   CHRONOLOGY.  25 1

Philastrius,  the  friend  of  St.  Ambrose  and  St.  Augustine,
whose  fearful  catalogue  of  heresies  served  as  a  guide  to  in-
tolerance throughout  the  Middle  Ages,  condemned  with  the
same  holy  horror  those  who  expressed  doubt  as  to  the  ortho-
dox number  of  years  since  the  beginning  of  the  world,  and
those  who  doubted  an  earthquake  to  be  the  literal  voice  of
an  angry  God,  or  who  questioned  the  plurality  of  the  heav-
ens, or  who  gainsaid  the  statement  that  God  brings  out  the
stars  from  his  treasures  and  hangs  them  up  in  the  solid
firmament  above  the  earth  every  night.

About  the  beginning  of  the  seventh  century  Isidore  of
Seville,  the  great  theologian  of  his  time,  took  up  the  subject.
He  accepted  the  dominant  view  not  only  of  Hebrew  but  of
all  other  chronologies,  without  anything  like  real  criticism.
The  childlike  faith  of  his  system  may  be  imagined  from  his
summaries  which  follow.     He  tells  us :

''  Joseph  lived  one  hundred  and  five  years.  Greece  be-
gan to  cultivate  grain."

"  The  Jews  were  in  slavery  in  Egypt  one  hundred  and
forty-four  years.     Atlas  discovered  astrology."

^'  Joshua  ruled  for  twenty -seven  years.  Ericthonius  yoked
horses  together."

*'  Othniel,  forty  years.  Cadmus  introduced  letters  into
Greece."

"  Deborah,  forty  years.  Apollo  discovered  the  art  of
medicine  and  invented  the  cithara."

"  Gideon,  forty  years.  Mercury  invented  the  lyre  and
gave  it  to  Orpheus."

Reasoning  in  this  general  way,  Isidore  kept  well  under
the  longer  date ;  and,  the  great  theological  authority  of
southern  Europe  having  thus  spoken,  the  question  was  vir-
tually at  rest  throughout  Christendom  for  nearly  a  hundred
years.

Early  in  the  eighth  century  the  Venerable  Bede  took  up
the  problem.  Dwelling  especially  upon  the  received  He-
brew text  of  the  Old  Testament,  he  soon  entangled  himself
in  very  serious  difficulties ;  but,  in  spite  of  the  great  fathers
of  the  first  three  centuries,  he  reduced  the  antiquity  of  man
on  the  earth  by  nearly  a  thousand  years,  and,  in  spite  of
mutterings  against  him  as  coming  dangerously  near  a  limit


252  THE   ANTIQUITY   OF    MAN.

which  made  the  theological  argument  from  the  six  days  of
creation  to  the  six  ages  of  the  world  look  doubtful,  his  au-
thority had  great  weight,  and  did  much  to  fix  western  Europe
in  its  allegiance  to  the  general  system  laid  down  by  Eusebius
and  Jerome.

In  the  twelfth  century  this  belief  was  re-enforced  by  a
tide  of  thought  from  a  very  different  quarter.     Rabbi  Moses
Maimonides  and  other  Jewish  scholars,  by  careful  study  of
the  Hebrew  text,  arrived  at  conclusions  diminishing  the  an-
tiquity of  man  still  further,  and  thus  gave  strength  through-
out the  Middle  Ages   to    the  shorter  chronology :    it   was
incorporated   into  the  sacred   science  of  Christianity  ;  and
Vincent  of  Beauvais,  in  his  great  Spcciihivi  Historialc,  forming
part  of  that  still  more  enormous  work  intended  to  sum  up
all  the  knowledge  possessed  by  the  ages  of  faith,  placed  the
creation  of  man  at  about  four  thousand  years  before  our  era.*
\        At  the  Reformation  this  view  was  not  disturbed.     The
same  manner  of  accepting  the  sacred  text  which  led  Luther,
,'  Melanchthon,  and  the  great  Protestant  leaders  generally,  to
V  oppose   the   Copernican   theory,   fixed    them   firmly   in   this
■biblical  chronology;  the  keynote  was  sounded  for  them  by
,  Luther  when  he  said, ''  We  know,  on  the  authority  of  Moses,
that  longer  ago  than  six  thousand  years  the  world  did  not
exist."     Melanchthon,  more  exact,  fixed  the  creation  of  man
,  at  3963  B.  c.


*  For  a  table  summing  up  the  periods,  from  Adam  to  the  building  of  the  Tem-
ple, explicitly  given  in  the  Scriptures,  see  the  admirable  paper  on  The  Pope  and
the  Bible,  in  The  Contemporary  Review  for  April,  1893.  For  the  date  of  man's
creation  as  given  by  leading  chronologists  in  various  branches. of  the  Church,  see
L'Art  de  VMfier  les  Dates,  Paris,  1819,  vol.  i,  pp.  27  et  seq.  In  this  edition  there
are  sundry  typographical  errors  ;  compare  with  Wallace,  True  Age  of  the  World,
London,  1844.  As  to  preference  for  the  longer  computation  by  the  fathers  of  the
Church,  see  Clinton,  Fasti  Hellenici,  vol.  ii,  p.  291.  For  the  sacred  significance  of
the  six  days  of  creation  in  ascertaining  the  antiquity  of  man,  see  especially  Eicken,
Gesahichte  der  mittelalterlichen  Weltanschauung ;  also  Wallace,  True  Age  of  the

World,  pp.  2,  3.  For  the  views  of  St.  Augustine,  see  Topinard,  Anthropologie,
citing  the  De  Civ.  Dei.,  lib.  xvi,  c.  viii,  lib.  xii,  c.  x.  For  the  views  of  Philastrius,
see  the  De  Hceresibus,  c.  102,  112,  et  passim,  in  Migne,  tome  xii.  For  Eusebius's
simple  credulity,  see  the  tables  in  Palmer's  Egyptian  Chronicles,  vol.  ii.  pp.  828,
829.     For  Bede,  see  Usher's  Chronologia  Sacra,  cited  in  Wallace,  True  Age  of  the

World,  p.  35.  For  Isidore  of  Seville,  see  the  Etyjnologia,  lib.  v,  c.  39  ;  also  lib.  iii,
in  Migne,  tome  Ixxxii.


THE   SACRED   CHRONOLOGY.


253


But  the  great  Christian  scholars  continued  the  old  en-
deavour  to  make  the  time  of  man's  origin  more  precise  :  there
seems  to  have  been  a  sort  of  fascination  in  the  subject  which
developed  a  long  array  of  chronologists,  all  weighing  the
minutest  indications  in  our  sacred  books,  until  the  Protestant
divine  De  VignoUes,  who  had  given  forty  years  to  the  study
of  biblical  chronology,  declared  in  1738  that  he  had  gathered
no  less  than  two  hundred  computations  based  upon  Scrip-
ture, and  no  two  alike.

As  to  the  Roman  Church,  about  1580  there  was  published,
by  authority  of  Pope  Gregory  XIII,  the  Roman  Marty rol-
ogy,  and  this,  both  as  originally  published  and  as  revised  in
1640  under  Pope  Urban  VIII,  declared  that  the  creation  of
man  took  place  5199  years  before  Christ.

But  of  all  who  gave  themselves  up  to  these  chronological
studies,  the  man  who  exerted  the  most  powerful  influence
upon  the  dominant  nations  of  Christendom  was  Archbishop
Usher.  In  1650  he  published  his  Annals  of  the  Ancient  and
Neiv  Testaments,  and  it  at  once  became  the  greatest  authority
for  all  English-speaking  peoples.  Usher  was  a  man  of  deep
and  wide  theological  learning,  powerful  in  controversy  ;  and
his  careful  conclusion,  after  years  of  the  most  profound  study
of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures,  was  that  man  was  created  4004
years  before  the  Christian  era.  His  verdict  was  widely  re-
ceived as  final ;  his  dates  were  inserted  in  the  marg^ins  of  the
authorized  version  of  the  English  Bible,  and  were  soon  prac-
tically regarded  as  equally  inspired  with  the  sacred  text
itself:  to  question  them  seriously  was  to  risk  preferment  in
the  Church  and  reputation  in  the  world  at  large.

The  same  adhesion  to  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  which  had
influenced  Usher  brought  leading  men  of  the  older  Church
to  the  same  view :  men  who  would  have  burned  each  other
at  the  stake  for  their  differences  on  other  points,  agreed  on
this :  Melanchthon  and  Tostatus,  Lightfoot  and  Jansen,  Sal-
meron  and  Scaliger,  Petavius  and  Kepler,  inquisitors  and
reformers,  Jesuits  and  Jansenists,  priests  and  rabbis,  stood
together  in  the  belief  that  the  creation  of  man  was  proved
by  Scripture  to  have  taken  place  between  3900  and  4004
years  before  Christ.

In  spite  of  the  severe  pressure  of  this  line  of  authorities.


254  THE   ANTIQUITY   OF   MAN.

extending  from  St.  Jerome  and  Eusebius  to  Usher  and  Pe-
tavius,  in  favour  of  this  scriptural  chronology,  even  devoted
Christian  scholars  had  sometimes  felt  obliged  to  revolt.
The  first  great  source  of  difficulty  was  increased  knowledge
regarding  the  Egyptian  monuments.  As  far  back  as  the  last
years  of  the  sixteenth  century  Joseph  Scaliger  had  done
what  he  could  to  lay  the  foundations  of  a  more  scientific
treatment  of  chronology,  insisting  especially  that  the  his-
torical indications  in  Persia,  in  Babylon,  and  above  all  in
Egypt,  should  be  brought  to  bear  on  the  question.  More
than  that,  he  had  the  boldness  to  urge  that  the  chronological
indications  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  should  be  fully  and
critically  discussed  in  the  light  of  Egyptian  and  other  rec-
ords, without  any  undue  bias  from  theological  considera-
tions. His  idea  may  well  be  called  inspired  ;  yet  it  had  little
effect  as  regards  a  true  view  of  the  antiquity  of  man,  even
upon  himself,  for  the  theological  bias  prevailed  above  all  his
reasonincrs,  even  in  his  own  mind.  Well  does  a  brilliant
modern  writer  declare  that,  ''among  the  multitude  of  strong
men  in  modern  times  abdicating  their  reason  at  the  com-
mand of  their  prejudices,  Joseph  Scaliger  is  perhaps  the
most  striking  example."

Early  in  the  following  century  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  in  his
History  of  the  World  (1603-1616),  pointed  out  the  danger  of
adhering  to  the  old  system.  He,  too,  foresaw  one  of  the  re-
sults of  modern  investigation,  stating  it  in  these  words,
which  have  the  ring  of  prophetic  inspiration  :  ''  For  in  Abra-
ham's time  all  the  then  known  parts  of  the  world  were  de-
veloped. .  .  .  Egypt  had  many  magnificent  cities,  .  .  .  and
these  not  built  with  sticks,  but  of  hewn  stone,  .  .  .  which
magnificence  needed  a  parent  of  more  antiquity  than  these
other  men  have  supposed."  In  view  of  these  considerations
Raleigh  followed  the  chronology  of  the  Septuagint  version,
which  enabled  him  to  give  to  the  human  race  a  few  more
years  than  were  usually  allowed.

About  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century  Isaac  Vos-
sius,  one  of  the  most  eminent  scholars  of  Christendom,  at-
tempted to  bring  the  prevailing  belief  into  closer  accordance
with  ascertained  facts,  but,  save  by  a  chosen  few,  his  ef-
forts were  rejected.     In  some  parts  of  Europe  a  man  holding


THE   SACRED   CHRONOLOGY.  255

new  views  on  chronology  was  by  no  means  safe  from  bodily
harm.  As  an  example  of  the  extreme  pressure  exerted  by
the  old  theological  system  at  times  upon  honest  scholars,  we
may  take  the  case  of  La  Peyrere,  who  about  the  middle  of
the  seventeenth  century  put  forth  his  book  on  the  Pre-
Adamites — an  attempt  to  reconcile  sundry  well-known  diffi-
culties in  Scripture  by  claiming  that  man  existed  on  earth
before  the  time  of  Adam.  He  was  taken  in  hand  at  once;
great  theologians  rushed  forward  to  attack  him  from  all
parts  of  Europe ;  within  fifty  years  thirty-six  different  refu-
tations of  his  arguments  had  appeared  ;  the  Parliament  of
Paris  burned  the  book,  and  the  Grand  Vicar  of  the  archdio-
cese of  Mechlin  threw  him  into  prison  and  kept  him  there
until  he  was  forced,  not  only  to  retract  his  statements,  but  to
abjure  his  Protestantism.

In  England,  opposition  to  the  growing  truth  was  hardly
less  earnest.  Especially  strong  was  Pearson,  afterward  Mas-
ter of  Trinity  and  Bishop  of  Chester.  In  his  treatise  on  the
Creed,  published  in  1659,  which  has  remained  a  theologic
classic,  he  condemned  those  who  held  the  earth  to  be  more
than  fifty-six  hundred  years  old,  insisted  that  the  first  man
was  created  just  six  days  later,  declared  that  the  Egyptian
records  were  forged,  and  called  all  Christians  to  turn  from
them  to  ''  the  infallible  annals  of  the  Spirit  of  God."

But,  in  spite  of  warnings  like  these,  we  see  the  new  idea
cropping  out  in  various  parts  of  Europe.  In  1672,  Sir  John
Marsham  published  a  work  in  which  he  showed  himself  bold
and  honest.  After  describing  the  heathen  sources  of  Orien-
tal history,  he  turns  to  the  Christian  writers,  and,  having
used  the  history  of  Egypt  to  show  that  the  great  Church
authorities  were  not  exact,  he  ends  one  important  argument
with  the  following  words :  **  Thus  the  most  interesting  an-
tiquities of  Egypt  have  been  involved  in  the  deepest  obscu-
rity by  the  very  interpreters  of  her  chronology,  who  have
jumbled  everything  up  {qui  omnia  siisqiic  deque pcrmisaierii7it\
so  as  to  make  them  match  with  their  own  reckonings  of  He-
brew chronology.  Truly  a  very  bad  example,  and  quite  un-
worthy of  religious  writers."

This  sturdy  protest  of  Sir  John  against  the  dominant  sys-
tem  and  against  the   **  jumbling"  by  which   Eusebius  had


2^6  THE   ANTIQUITY   OF    MAN.

endeavoured  to  cut  down  ancient  chronology  within  safe  and
sound  orthodox  limits,  had  little  effect.  Though  eminent
chronologists  of  the  eighteenth  century,  like  Jackson,  Hales,
and  Drummond,  gave  forth  multitudes  of  ponderous  vol-
umes pleading  for  a  period  somewhat  longer  than  that  gen-
erally allowed,  and  insisting  that  the  received  Hebrew  text
was  grossly  vitiated  as  regards  chronology,  even  this  poor
favour  was  refused  them  ;  the  mass  of  believers  found  it
more  comfortable  to  hold  fast  the  faith  committed  to  them
by  Usher,  and  it  remained  settled  that  man  was  created
about  four  thousand  years  before  our  era.

To  those  who  wished  even  greater  precision,  Dr.  John
Lightfoot,  Vice-Chancellor  of  the  University  of  Cambridge,
the  great  rabbinical  scholar  of  his  time,  gave  his  famous
demonstration  from  our  sacred  books  that  "heaven  and
earth,  centre  and  circumference,  were  created  together,  in
the  same  instant,  and  clouds  full  of  water,"  and  that  *'  this
work  took  place  and  man  was  created  by  the  Trinity  on  the
twenty-third  of  October,  4004  B.  c,  at  nine  o'clock  in  the
morning."

This  tide  of  theological  reasoning  rolled  on  through  the
eighteenth  century,  swollen  by  the  biblical  researches  of
leadine  commentators.  Catholic  and  Protestant,  until  it  came
in  much  majesty  and  force  into  our  own  nineteenth  century.
At  the  very  beginning  of  the  century  it  gained  new  strength
from  various  great  men  in  the  Church,  among  whom  may
be  especially  named  Dr.  Adam  Clarke,  who  declared  that,
*'  to  preclude  the  possibility  of  a  mistake,  the  unerring  Spirit
of  God  directed  Moses  in  the  selection  of  his  facts  and  the
ascertaining  of  his  dates."

All  opposition  to  the  received  view  seemed  broken  down,
and  as  late  as  1835 — indeed,  as  late  as  1850 — came  an  announce-
ment in  the  work  of  one  of  the  most  eminent  Egyptologists,
Sir  J.  G.  Wilkinson,  to  the  effect  that  he  had  modified  the
results  he  had  obtained  from  Egyptian  monuments,  in  order
that  his  chronology  might  not  interfere  with  the  received
date  of  the  Deluge  of  Noah.*

*  For  Lightfoot,  see  his  Prolegomena  relating  to  the  age  of  the  world  at  the  birth
of  Christ ;  see  also  in  the  edition  of  his  works,  London,  1822,  vol.  iv,  pp.  64,  112.
For  Scaliger,  see  the  De  Emendatione  Temporum,  1583  ;  also  Mark  Pattison,  Es-


THE  NEW  CHRONoLOGY.  257


II.  THE  NEW  CHRONOLOGY.

But  all  investigators  were  not  so  docile  as  Wilkinson,  and
there  soon  came  a  new  train  of  scientific  thought  which  rap-
idly undermined  all  this  theological  chronology.  Not  to
speak  of  other  noted  men,  we  have  early  in  the  present  cen-
tury Young,  ChampoUion,  and  Rosellini,  beginning  a  new
epoch  in  the  study  of  the  Egyptian  monuments.  Nothing
could  be  more  cautious  than  their  procedure,  but  the  evi-
dence was  soon  overwhelming  in  favour  of  a  vastly  longer
existence  of  man  in  the  Nile  Valley  than  could  be  made  to
ao-ree  with  even  the  longest  duration  then  allowed  by  theo-
logians.

For,  in  spite  of  all  the  suppleness  of  men  like  Wilkinson,
it  became  evident  that,  whatever  system  of  scriptural  chro-
nology was  adopted,  Egypt  was  the  seat  of  a  flourishing  civ-
ilization at  a  period  before  the  *'  Flood  of  Noah,"  and  that  no
such  flood  had  ever  interrupted  it.  This  was  bad,  but  worse
remained  behind  :  it  was  soon  clear  that  the  civilization  of
Egypt  began  earlier  than  the  time  assigned  for  the  creation
of  man,  even  according  to  the  most  liberal  of  the  sacred
chronologists.

As  time  went  on,  this  became  more  and  more  evident.
The  long  duration  assigned  to  human  civilization  in  the  frag-
ments of  Manetho,  the  Egyptian  scribe  at  Thebes  in  the  third
century  B.  c,  was  discovered  to  be  more  accordant  with  truth
than  the  chronologies  of  the  great  theologians ;  and,  as  the


says,  Oxford,  1889,  vol.  i,  pp.  162  et  seq.  For  Raleigh's  misgivings,  see  his  History
of  the  World,  London,  1614,  p.  227,  book  li  of  part  i,  section  7  of  chapter  i  ;  also  Clin-
ton's Fasti  Hellenici,  vol.  ii,  p.  293.  For  Usher,  see  his  Annates  Vet.  et  Nov.  Test.,
London,  1650.  For  Pearson,  see  his  Exposition  of  the  Creed,  sixth  edition,  London,
1692,  pp.  59  et  seq.  For  Marsham,  see  his  Chronicus  Canon  yEgypticus,  Ebraicus,
Gracus,  et  Disquisitiones,  London,  1672.  For  La  Peyrere,  see  especially  Quatre-
fages,  in  Remie  des  Deux  Mondes  for  1861  ;  also  other  chapters  in  this  work.  For
Jackson,  Hales,  and  others,  see  Wallace's  True  Age  of  the  World.  For  Wilkin-
son, see  various  editions  of  his  work  on  Egypt.  For  Vignolles,  see  Leblois,  vol.  iii,
p.  617.  As  to  the  declarations  in  favour  of  the  recent  origin  of  man,  sanctioned  by
Popes  Gregory  XIII  and  Urban  VTII,  see  Strauchius,  cited  in  Wallace,  p.  97.  For
the  general  agreement  of  Church  authorities,  as  stated,  see  LArt  de  Verifier  les
Dates,  as  above.  As  to  difficulties  of  scriptural  chronology,  see  Ewald,  History  of
Israel,  English  translation,  London,  1S83,  pp.  lOd^etseq.
18


258  THE   ANTIQUITY   OF    MAN.'

present  century  has  gone  on,  scientific  results  have  been
reached  absolutely  fatal  to  the  chronological  view  based  by
the  universal  Church  upon  Scripture  for  nearly  two  thou-
sand years.

As  is  well  known,  the  first  of  the  Egyptian  kings  of  whom
mention  is  made  upon  the  monuments  of  the  Nile  Valley  is
Mena,  or  Menes.  Manetho  had  given  a  statement,  accord-
ing to  which  Mena  must  have  lived  nearly  six  thousand
years  before  the  Christian  era.  This  was  looked  upon  for  a
long  time  as  utterly  inadmissible,  as  it  was  so  clearly  at  vari-
ance with  the  chronology  of  our  own  sacred  books  ;  but,  as
time  went  on,  large  fragments  of  the  original  work  of  Mane-
tho w^ere  more  carefully  studied  and  distinguished  from  cor-
rupt transcriptions,  the  lists  of  kings  at  Karnak,  Sacquarah,
and  the  two  temples  at  Abydos  were  brought  to  light,  and
the  lists  of  court  architects  were  discovered.  Among  all
these  monuments  the  scholar  who  visits  Egypt  is  most  im-
pressed by  the  sculptured  tablets  giving  the  lists  of  kings.
Each  shows  the  monarch  of  the  period  doing  homage  to  the
long  line  of  his  ancestors.  Each  of  these  sculptured  mon-
archs  has  near  him  a  tablet  bearing  his  name.  That  great
care  w^as  always  taken  to  keep  these  imposing  records  cor-
rect is  certain ;  the  loyalty  of  subjects,  the  devotion  of
priests,  and  the  family  pride  of  kings  were  all  combined  in
this ;  and  how  effective  this  care  was,  is  seen  in  the  fact  that
kings  now  known  to  be  usurpers  are  carefully  omitted.  The
lists  of  court  architects,  extending  over  the  period  from  Seti
to  Darius,  throw  a  flood  of  light  over  the  other  records.

Comparing,  then,  all  these  sources,  and  applying  an  av-
erage from  the  lengths  of  the  long  series  of  well-known
reigns  to  the  reigns  preceding,  the  most  careful  and  cautious
scholars  have  satisfied  themselves  that  the  original  fragments
of  Manetho  represent  the  work  of  a  man  honest  and  well  in-
formed, and,  after  making  all  allowances  for  discrepancies
and  the  overlapping  of  reigns,  it  has  become  clear  that  the
period  known  as  the  reign  of  Mena  must  be  fixed  at  more
than  three  thousand  years  B.  c.  In  this  the  great  Egyptolo-
gists of  our  time  concur.  Mariette,  the  eminent  French  au-
thority, puts  the  date  at  5004  B.  c. ;  Brugsch,  the  leading
German  authority,  puts  it  at  about  4500  B.  c.  ;  and  Meyer,


THE    NEW   CHRONOLOGY.


259


the  latest  and  most  cautious  of  the  historians  of  antiquity,  de-
clares 3180  B.  c.  the  latest  possible  date  that  can  be  assigned
it.  With  these  dates  the  foremost  English  authorities,  Sayce
and  Flinders  Petrie,  substantiall}^  agree.  This  view  is  also
confirmed  on  astronomical  grounds  by  Mr.  Lockyer,  the
Astronomer  Royal.  We  have  it,  then,  as  the  result  of  a
century  of  work  by  the  most  acute  and  trained  Egyptolo-
gists, and  with  the  inscriptions  upon  the  temples  and  papyri
before  them,  both  of  which  are  now  read  with  as  much
facility  as  many  mediaeval  manuscripts,  that  the  reign  of
Mena  must  be  placed  more  than  five  thousand  years  ago.

But  the  significance  of  this  conclusion  can  not  be  fully
understood  until  we  bring  into  connection  with  it  some
other  facts  revealed  b}-  the  Egyptian  monuments.

The  first  of  these  is  that  which  struck  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,
that,  even  in  the  time  of  the  first  dynasties  in  the  Nile  Val-
ley, a  high  civilization  had  already  been  developed.  Take,
first,  man  himself :  we  find  sculptured  upon  the  early  monu-
ments types  of  the  various  races^Egyptians,  Israelites,  ne-
groes, and  Libyans — as  clearly  distinguishable  in  these  paint-
ings and  sculptures  of  from  four  to  six  thousand  years  ago
as  the  same  types  are  at  the  present  day.  No  one  can  look
at  these  sculptures  upon  the  Egyptian  monuments,  or  even
the  drawings  of  them,  as  given  by  Lepsius  or  Prisse
d'Avennes,  without  being  convinced  that  they  indicate,  even
at  that  remote  period,  a  difference  of  races  so  marked  that
long  previous  ages  must  have  been  required  to  produce  it.

The  social  condition  of  Egypt  revealed  in  these    early
monuments  of  art  forces  us  to  the  same  conclusion.     Those
earliest  monuments  show  that  a  very  complex  society  had
even  then  been  developed.     We  not  only  have  a  separation  )
between   the    priestly  and    military  orders,   but  agricultur-  f
ists,  manufacturers,  and  traders,  with  a  whole  series  of  sub-
divisions in  each  of  these  classes.     The  early  tombs  show  us/
sculptured  and  painted  representations  of  a  daily  life  which)
even  then  had  been  developed  into  a  vast  wealth  and  variety  ^
of  grades,  forms,  and  usages.

Take,  next,  the  political  and  military  condition.  One  fact
out  of  many  reveals  a  policy  which  must  have  been  the  re-
sult of  long  experience.     Just  as  now,  at  the  end  of  the  nine-


26o  THE   ANTIQUITY   OF    MAN.

teenth  century,  the  British  Government,  having  found  that
they  can  not  rely  upon  the  native  Egyptians  for  the  protec-
tion of  the  country,  are  drilling  the  negroes  from  the  interior
of  Africa  as  soldiers,  so  the  celebrated  inscription  of  Prince
Una,  as  far  back  as  the  sixth  dynasty,  speaks  of  the  Maksi
or  negroes  levied  and  drilled  by  tens  of  thousands  for  the
Egyptian  army.

Take,  next,  engineering.  Here  we  find  very  early  opera-
tions in  the  way  of  canals,  dikes,  and  great  public  edifices,
so  bold  in  conception  and  thorough  in  execution  as  to  fill
our  greatest  engineers  of  these  days  with  astonishment.
The  quarrying,  conveyance,  cutting,  jointing,  and  polishing
of  the  enormous  blocks  in  the  interior  of  the  Great  Pyramid
alone  are  the  marvel  of  the  foremost  stone-workers  of  our
century.

As  regards  architecture,  we  find  not  only  the  pyramids,
which  date  from  the  very  earliest  period  of  Egyptian  his-
tory, and  which  are  to  this  hour  the  wonder  of  the  world
for  size,  for  boldness,  for  exactness,  and  for  skilful  contriv-
ance, but  also  the  temples,  with  long  ranges  of  colossal  col-
umns wrought  in  polished  granite,  with  wonderful  beauty
of  ornamentation,  with  architraves  and  roofs  vast  in  size  and
exquisite  in  adjustment,  which,  by  their  proportions  tax  the
imaofination,  and  lead  the  beholder  to  ask  whether  all  this
can  be  real.

As  to  sculpture,  we  have  not  only  the  great  Sphinx  of
Gizeh,  so  marvellous  in  its  boldness  and  dignity,  dating  from
the  very  first  period  of  Egyptian  history,  but  we  have  ranges
of  sphinxes,  heroic  statues,  and  bas-reliefs,  showing  that  even
in  the  early  ages  this  branch  of  art  had  reached  an  amazing
development.

As  regards  the  perfection  of  these,  Llibke,  the  most  emi-
nent German  authority  on  plastic  art,  referring  to  the  early
works  in  the  tombs  about  Memphis,  declares  that,  '*  as  monu-
ments of  the  period  of  the  fourth  dynasty,  they  are  an  evi-
dence of  the  high  perfection  to  which  the  sculpture  of  the
Egyptians  had  attained."  Brugsch  declares  that.*' every
artistic  production  of  those  early  days,  whether  picture,
writing,  or  sculpture,  bears  the  stamp  of  the  highest  perfec-
tion in  art."     Maspero,  the  most  eminent  French  authority


THE    NEW  CHRONOLOGY.  26 1

in  this  field,  while  expressing  his  belief  that  the  Sphinx  was
sculptured  even  before  the  time  of  Mena,  declares  that  "  the
art  which  conceived  and  carved  this  prodigious  statue  was
a  finished  art — an  art  which  had  attained  self-mastery  and
was  sure  of  its  effects";  while,  among  the  more  eminent
English  authorities,  Sayce  tells  us  that  "  art  is  at  its  best  in
the\ge  of  the  pyramid-builders,"  and  Sir  James  Fergusson
declares,  "  We  are  startled  to  find  Egyptian  art  nearly  as
perfect  in  the  oldest  periods  as  in  any  of  the  later."

The  evidence  as  to  the  high  development  of  Egyptian
sculpture  in  the  earlier  dynasties  becomes  every  day  more
overwhelming.  What  exquisite  genius  the  early  Egyptian
sculptors  showed  in  their  lesser  statues  is  known  to  all  who
have  seen  those  most  precious  specimens  in  the  museum  at
Cairo,  which  were  wrought  before  the  conventional  type
was  adopted  in  obedience  to  religious  considerations.

In  decorative  and  especially  in  ceramic  art,  as  early  as
the  fourth  and  fifth  dynasties,  we  have  vases,  cups,  and  other
vessels  showing  exquisite  beauty  of  outline  and  a  general
sense  of  form  almost  if  not  quite  equal  to  Etruscan  and  Gre-
cian work  of  the  best  periods.

Take,  next,  astronomy.  Going  back  to  the  very  earliest
period  of  Egyptian  civilization,  we  find  that  the  four  sides
of  the  Great  Pyramid  are  adjusted  to  the  cardinal  points
with  the  utmost  precision.  "  The  day  of  the  equinox  can  be
taken  by  observing  the  sun  set  across  the  face  of  the  pyra-
mid, and  the  neighbouring  Arabs  adjust  their  astronomical
dates  by  its  shadow."  Yet  this  is  but  one  out  of  many  facts
which  prove  that  the  Egyptians,  at  the  earliest  period  of
which  their  monuments  exist,  had  arrived  at  knowledge  and
skill  only  acquired  by  long  ages  of  observation  and  thought.
Mr.  Lockyer,  Astronomer  Royal  of  Great  Britain,  has  re-
cently convinced  himself,  after  careful  examination  of  various
ruined  temples  at  Thebes  and  elsewhere,  that  they  were
placed  with  reference  to  observations  of  stars.  To  state  his
conclusion  in  his  own  words:  ''There  seems  a  very  high
probability  that  three  thousand,  and  possibly  four  thousand,
years  before  Christ  the  Egyptians  had  among  them  men
with  some  knowledge  of  astronomy,  and  that  six  thousand
years  ago  the  course  of  the  sun  through  the  year  was  prac-


262  THE   ANTIQUITY   OF    MAN.

tically  very  well  known,  and  methods  had  been  invented
by  means  of  which  in  time  it  might  be  better  known  ;  and
that,  not  very  long  after  that,  they  not  only  considered  ques-
tions relating  to  the  sun,  but  began  to  take  up  other  ques-
tions relating  to  the  position  and  movement  of  the  stars."

The  same  view  of  the  antiquity  of  man  in  the  Nile  val-
ley is  confirmed  by  philologists.  To  use  the  words  of  Max
Duncker:  ''The  oldest  monuments  of  Egypt — and  the}^  are
the  oldest  monuments  in  the  world — exhibit  the  Egyptian  in
possession  of  the  art  of  writing."  It  is  found  also,  by  the  in-
scriptions of  the  early  dynasties,  that  the  Egyptian  language
had  even  at  that  early  time  been  developed  in  all  essential
particulars  to  the  highest  point  it  ever  attained.  What  long
periods  it  must  have  required  for  such  a  development  every
scholar  in  philology  can  imagine.

As  regards  medical  science,  we  have  the  Berlin  papyrus,
which,  although  of  a  later  period,  refers  with  careful  speci-
fication to  a  medical  literature  of  the  first  dynasty.

As  regards  archaeology,  the  earliest  known  inscriptions
point  to  still  earlier  events  and  buildings,  indicating  a  long
sequence  in  previous  history.

As  to  all  that  pertains  to  the  history  of  civilization,  no
man  of  fair  and  open  mind  can  go  into  the  museums  of  Cairo
or  the  Louvre  or  the  British  Museum  and  look  at  the  monu-
ments of  those  earlier  dynasties  without  seeing  in  them  the
results  of  a  development  in  art,  science,  laws,  customs,  and
language,  which  must  have  required  a  vast  period  before
the  time  of  Mena.  And  this  conclusion  is  forced  upon  us
all  the  more  invincibly  when  we  consider  the  slow  growth
of  ideas  in  the  earlier  stages  of  civilization  as  compared  with
the  later — a  slowness  of  growth  which  has  kept  the  natives
of  many  parts  of  the  world  in  that  earliest  civilization  to  this
hour.  To  this  we  must  add  the  fact  that  Egyptian  civiliza-
tion was  especially  immobile :  its  development  into  castes  is
but  one  among  many  evidences  that  it  was  the  very  opposite
of  a  civilization  developed  rapidly.

As  to  the  length  of  the  period  before  the  time  of  Mena,
there  is,  of  course,  nothing  exact.  Manetho  gives  lists  of
great  personages  before  that  first  dynasty,  and  these  extend
over  twenty-four  thousand  years.     Bunsen,  one  of  the  most


THE   NEW   CHRONOLOGY.  263

learned  of  Christian  scholars,  declares  that  not  less  than  ten
thousand  years  were  necessary  for  the  development  of  civili-
zation up  to  the  point  where  we  find  it  in  Mena's  time.  No
one  can  claim  precision  for  either  of  these  statements,  but
they  are  valuable  as  showing  the  impression  of  vast  antiquity
made  upon  the  most  competent  judges  by  the  careful  study
of  those  remains:  no  unbiased  judge  can  doubt  that  an  im-
mensely long  period  of  years  must  have  been  required  for
the  development  of  civilization  up  to  the  state  in  which  we
there  find  it.

The  investiofations  in  the  bed  of  the  Nile  confirm  these
views.  That  some  unwarranted  conclusions  have  at  times
been  announced  is  true  ;  but  the  fact  remains  that  again  and
again  rude  pottery  and  other  evidences  of  early  stages  of
civilization  have  been  found  in  borings  at  places  so  distant
from  each  other,  and  at  depths  so  great,  that  for  such  a
range  of  concurring  facts,  considered  in  connection  with  the
rate  of  earthy  deposit  by  the  Nile,  there  is  no  adequate  ex-
planation save  the  existence  of  man  in  that  valley  thousands
on  thousands  of  years  before  the  longest  time  admitted  by
our  sacred  chronologists.

Nor  have  these  investigations  been  of  a  careless  charac-
ter. Between  the  years  1851  and  1854,  Mr.  Horner,  an  ex-
tremely cautious  English  geologist,  sank  ninety-six  shafts  in
four  rows  at  intervals  of  eight  English  miles,  at  right  angles
to  the  Nile,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Memphis.  In  these
pottery  was  brought  up  from  various  depths,  and  beneath
the  statue  of  Rameses  II  at  Memphis  from  a  depth  of  thirty-
nine  feet.  At  the  rate  of  the  Nile  deposit  a  careful  estimate
has  declared  this  to  indicate  a  period  of  over  eleven  thou-
sand years.  So  eminent  a  German  authority  in  geography
as  Peschel  characterizes  objections  to  such  deductions  as
groundless.  However  this  may  be,  the  general  results  of
these  investigations,  taken  in  connection  with  the  other  re-
sults of  research,  are  convincing.

And,  finally,  as  if  to  make  assurance  doubly  sure,  a  series
of  archgeologists  of  the  highest  standing,  French,  German,
English,  and  American,  have  within  the  past  twenty  years
discovered  relics  of  a  savage  period,  of  vastly  earlier  date
than  the  time  of  Mena,  prevailing  throughout  Egypt.    These


264  THE   ANTIQUITY   OF    MAN.

relics  have  been  discovered  in  various  parts  of  the  country,
from  Cairo  to  Luxor,  in  great  numbers.  They  are  the  same
sort  of  prehistoric  implements  which  prove  to  us  the  early
existence  of  man  in  so  many  other  parts  of  the  world  at  a
geological  period  so  remote  that  the  figures  given  by  our
sacred  chronologists  are  but  trivial.  The  last  and  most  con-
vincing of  these  discoveries,  that  of  fiint  implements  in  the
drift,  far  down  below  the  tombs  of  early  kings  at  Thebes,
and  upon  high  terraces  far  above  the  present  bed  of  the
Nile,  will  be  referred  to  later.

But  it  is  not  in  Egypt  alone  that  proofs  are  found  of  the
utter  inadequacy  of  the  entire  chronological  system  derived
from  our  sacred  books.  These  results  of  research  in  Egypt
are  strikingly  confirmed  by  research  in  x^ssyria  and  Baby-
lonia. Prof.  Sayce  exhibits  various  proofs  of  this.  To  use
his  own  words  regarding  one  of  these  proofs :  "  On  the
shelves  of  the  British  Museum  you  may  see  huge  sun-dried
bricks,  on  which  are  stamped  the  names  and  titles  of  kings
who  erected  or  repaired  the  temples  where  they  have  been
found.  .  .  .  They  must  .  .  .  have  reigned  before  the  time
when,  according  to  the  margins  of  our  Bibles,  the  Flood  of
Noah  was  covering  the  earth  and  reducing  such  bricks  as
these  to  their  primeval  slime."

This  conclusion  was  soon  placed  beyond  a  doubt.  The
lists  of  kings  and  collateral  inscriptions  recovered  from  the
temples  of  the  great  valley  between  the  Tigris  and  Euphra-
tes, and  the  records  of  astronomical  observations  in  that
region,  showed  that  there,  too,  a  powerful  civilization  had
grown  up  at  a  period  far  earlier  than  could  be  made  con-
sistent with  our  sacred  chronology.  The  science  of  Assyri-
ology  was  thus  combined  with  Egyptology  to  furnish  one
more  convincing  proof  that,  precious  as  are  the  moral  and
religious  truths  in  our  sacred  books  and  the  historical  indi-
cations which  they  give  us,  these  truths  and  indications  are
necessarily  inclosed  in  a  setting  of  m3nh  and  legend."^

*  As  to  Manetho,  see,  for  a  very  full  account  of  his  relations  to  other  chronolo-
gists, Palmer,  Egyptian  Chronicles,  vol.  i,  chap.  ii.  For  a  more  recent  and  read-
able account,  see  Brugsch,  Egypt  under  the  Pharaohs,  English  edition,  London,
1879,  chap.  iv.  For  lists  of  kings  at  Abydos  and  elsewhere,  also  the  lists  of  archi-
tects, see  Brugsch,  Palmer,  Mariette,  and  others  ;  also  illustrations  in  Lepsius.     For


THE   NEW   CHRONOLOGY.


265


proofs  that  the  dynasties  given  were  consecutive  and  not  contemporaneous,  as  was
once  so  fondly  argued  by  those  who  tried  to  save  Archbishop  Usher's  chronology,
see  Mariette  ;  also  Sayce's  Herodotus,  appendix,  p.  316.     For  the  various  race  types
given   on   early  monuments,  see   the  coloured  engravings  in  Lepsius,  Denhndlcr  ;
also  Prisse  d'Avennes,  and  the  frontispiece  in  the  English  edition  of  Brugsch  ;  see
also  statement  regarding  the  same  subject  in  Tylor,  Anthropology,  chap.  i.     For  the
fulness  of  development  in  Egyptian  civilization  in  the  earliest  dynasties,  see  Raw-
linson's  Egypt,  London,   1881,  chap,   xiii  ;  also  Brugsch   and  other  works  cited.
For  the  perfection  of  Egyptian  engineering,  I  rely  not  merely  upon  my  own  ob-
servation, but  on  what  is  far  more  important,  the  testimony  of  my  friend  the  Hon.
J.  G.  Batterson,  probably  the  largest  and   most  experienced  worker  in  granite  in
the   United  States,  who  acknowledges,  from  personal  observation,  that  the  early
Egyptian  work  is,  in  boldness  and  perfection,  far  beyond  anything  known  since,
and  a  source  of  perpetual  wonder  to  him.     As  to  the  perfection  of  Egyptian  archi-
tecture, see  very  striking  statements  in  Fergusson,  History  of  Architecture,  \>oq\  i,
chap.  i.     As  to  the  pyramids,  showing  a  very  high  grade  of  culture  already  reached
under  the  earliest   dynasties,  see   Liibke,   Gesch.  der  Arch.,  book   i.     For  Sayce's
views,   see  his  Herodotus,  appendix,  p.  348.     As  to  sculpture,  see   for  representa-
tions photographs  published  by  the  Boulak  Museum,  and  such  works  as  the  Be-
scription  de  V Egypte,  Lepsius's  Denkmdler,  and  Prisse  d'Avennes  ;  see  also  a  most
valuable  small^work,  easy  of  access,  IMaspero,  Archceology,  translated  by  Miss  A.  B.
Edwards,  New  York  and  London,  1887,  chaps,  i  and  ii.     See  especially  in  Prisse,
vol.  ii,  the  statue  of  Chafre  the  Scribe,  and  the  group  of  "  Tea  "  and  his  wife.     As
to  the  artistic  value  of  the  Sphinx,  see  Maspero,  as  above,  pp.  202,  203.     See  also
similar  ideas  in  Liibke's  History  of  Sculpture,  vol.  i,  p.  24.     As   to  astronomical
knowledge  evidenced  by  the  Great  Pyramid,  see  Tylor,  as  above,  p.  21  ;  also  Lock-
yer,  On  Some  Points  in  the  Early  History  of  Astronomy,  in  Nature  for  1891,  and
especially  in  the  issues  of  June  4th  and  July  2d  ;  also  his  Dazvn  of  Astronomy,  pas-
sim.    For  a  recent  and  conservative  statement  as  to  the  date  of  Mena,  see  Flinders
Petrie,  History  of  Egypt,  London,  1894,  chap.  ii.     For  delineations  of  vases,  etc.,
showing  Grecian  proportion  and  beauty  of  form  under  the  fourth  and  fifth  dynasties,
see  Prisse,  vol.  ii,  Art  Industriel.    As  to  the  philological  question,  and  the  develop-
ment of  language  in  Egypt,  with  the  hieroglyphic  system  of  writing,  see  Rawlin-
son's  Egypt,  London,  1881,   chap,   xiii  ;  also  Lenormant  ;  also  Max  DUncker,  Ge-
schichtedes  Alterthums,  Abbott's  translation,  1877.     As  to  the  medical  papyrus  of
Berlin,  see  Brugsch,  vol.  i,  p.  58,  but  especially  the  Papyrus  Ebers.     As  to  the  cor-
ruption of  later  copies  of  Manetho  and  fidelity  of  originals  as  attested  by  the  monu-
ments,  see  Brugsch,  chap.  iv.     On   the  accuracy  of  the  present  Egyptian  chronol-
ogy as  regards  long  periods,  see  ibid.,  vol.  i,  p.  32.     As  to  the  pottery  found  deep
in  the  Nile  and  the  value  of  Horner's  discoveiy,  see  Peschel,  Races  of  Matt,  New
York,  1876,  pp.  42-44.     For  succinct  statement,  see  also  Laing,  Problems  of  the
Euture,  p.  94.     For  confirmatory  proofs  from  Assyriology,  see  Sayce,  Lectures  on
the  Religion  of  the  Babylonians  (Hibbert  Lectures  for  1887),  London,  1887,  intro-
ductory chapter,  and  especially  pp.  21-25.     See  also  Laing,  Hitman  Origins,  chap,
ii,  for  an  excellent  summary.     For  an  account  of  flint  implements  recently  found
in  gravel  terraces  fifteen  hundred  feet  above  the  present  level  of  the  Nile,  and  show-
ing evidences  of  an  age  vastly  greater   even  than   those  dug  out  of  the  gravel  at
Thebes,  see  article  by  Flinders  Petrie  in  London  Times  of  April  i8th,  1895.


CHAPTER   VII.

THE  ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN  AND   PREHISTORIC
ARCHAEOLOGY.


I.    THE   THUNDER-STONES.

While  the  view  of  chronology  based  upon  the  literal  ac-
ceptance of  Scripture  texts  was  thus  shaken  by  researches
in  Egypt,  another  line  of  observation  and  thought  was  slowly
developed,  even  more  fatal  to  the  theological  view.

From  a  very  early  period  there  had  been  dug  from  the
earth,  in  various  parts  of  the  world,  strangely  shaped  masses
of  stone,  some  rudely  chipped,  some  polished  :  in  ancient
times  the  larger  of  these  were  very  often  considered  as
thunderbolts,  the  smaller  as  arrows,  and  all  of  them  as
weapons  which  had  been  hurled  by  the  gods  and  other
supernatural  personages.  Hence  a  sort  of  sacredness  at-
tached to  them.  In  Chaldea,  they  were  built  into  the  wall
of  temples;  in  Egypt,  they  were  strung  about  the  necks  of
the  dead;  in  India,  fine  specimens  are  to  this  day  seen  upon
altars,  receiving  prayers  and  sacrifices.

Naturally  these  beliefs  were  brought  into  the  Christian
mythology  and  adapted  to  it.  During  the  Middle  Ages
many  of  these  well-wrought  stones  were  venerated  as  weap-
ons, which  during  the  *'  war  in  heaven  "  had  been  used  in
driving  forth  Satan  and  his  hosts  ;  hence  in  the  eleventh  cen-
tury an  Emperor  of  the  East  sent  to  the  Emperor  of  the  West
a  **  heaven  axe "  ;  and  in  the  twelfth  century  a  Bishop  of
Rennes  asserted  the  value  of  thunder-stones  as  a  divinely-
appointed  means  of  securing  success  in  battle,  safety  on  the
sea,  security  against  thunder,  and  immunity  from  unpleasant
dreams.     Even  as  late  as  the  seventeenth  century  a  French

266


THE    THUNDER-STONES.  267

ambassador  brought  a  stone  hatchet,  which  still  exists  in  the
museum  at  Nancy,  as  a  present  to  the  Prince-Bishop  of  Ver-
dun, and  claimed  for  it  health-giving  virtues.

In  the  last  years  of  the  sixteenth  century  Michael  Mer-
cati  tried  to  prove  that  the  "  thunder-stones "  were  weap-
ons or  implements  of  early  races  of  men  ;  but  from  some
cause  his  book  was  not  published  until  the  following  cen-
tury, when  other  thinkers  had  begun  to  take  up  the  same
idea,  and  then  it  had  to  contend  with  a  theory  far  more  ac-
cordant with  theologic  modes  of  reasoning  in  science.  This
was  the  theory  of  the  learned  Tollius,  who  in  1649  told  the
world  that  these  chipped  or  smoothed  stones  were  "  gener-
ated in  the  sky  by  a  fulgurous  exhalation  conglobed  in  a
cloud  by  the  circumposed  humour."

But  about  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century  a  fact
of  great  importance  was  quietly  established.  In  the  year
171 5  a  large  pointed  weapon  of  black  flint  was  found  in  con-
tact with  the  bones  of  an  elephant,  in  a  gravel  bed  near
Gray's  Inn  Lane,  in  London.  The  world  in  general  paid  no
heed  to  this :  if  the  attention  of  theologians  was  called  to  it,
they  dismissed  it  summarily  with  a  reference  to  the  Deluge
of  Noah ;  but  the  specimen  was  labelled,  the  circumstances
regarding  it  were  recorded,  and  both  specimen  and  record
carefully  preserved.

In  1723  Jussieu  addressed  the  French  Academy  on  TJie
Origin  and  Uses  of  Thundcr-stojies.  He  showed  that  recent
travellers  from  various  parts  of  the  world  had  brought  a
number  of  weapons  and  other  implements  of  stone  to  France,
and  that  they  were  essentially  similar  to  what  in  Europe  had
been  known  as  "  thunder-stones."  A  year  later  this  fact  was
clinched  into  the  scientific  mind  of  France  by  the  Jesuit
Lafitau,  who  published  a  work  showing  the  similarity  be-
tween the  customs  of  aborisrines  then  existins:  in  other  lands
and  those  of  the  early  inhabitants  of  Europe.  So  began,  in
these  works  of  Jussieu  and  Lafitau,  the  science  of  Compara-
tive Ethnography.

But  it  was  at  their  own  risk  and  peril  that  thinkers  drew
from  these  discoveries  any  conclusions  as  to  the  antiquity  of
man.  jNIontesquieu,  having  ventured  to  hint,  in  an  early  edi-
tion of  his  Persian  Letters,  that  the   world   might  be   much


268    ANTIQUITY   OF    MAN    AND    PREHISTORIC   ARCHyEOLOGY.

older  than  had  been  generally  supposed,  was  soon  made  to
feel  danofer  both  to  his  book  and  to  himself,  so  that  in  sue-
ceeding  editions  he  suppressed  the  passage.

In  1730  Mahudel  presented  a  paper  to  the  French  Acad-
emy of  Inscriptions  on  the  so-called  "  thunder-stones,"  and
also  presented  a  series  of  plates  which  showed  that  these
were  stone  implements,  which  must  have  been  used  at  an
early  period  in  human  histor}-.

In  1778  Buff  on,  in  his  Epoqucs  de  la  Nature,  intimated  his
belief  that  "  thunder-stones  "  were  made  by  early  races  of
men;  but  he  did  not  press  this  view,  and  the  reason  for  his
reserve  was  obvious  enough  :  he  had  already  one  quarrel
with  the  theologians  on  his  hands,  which  had  cost  him  dear
— public  retraction  and  humiliation.  His  declaration,  there-
fore, attracted  little  notice.

In  the  year  1800  another  fact  came  into  the  minds  of
thinking  men  in  England.  In  that  year  John  Frere  pre-
sented to  the  London  Society  of  Antiquaries  sundry  flint  im-
plements found  in  the  cla}'  beds  near  Hoxne  :  that  they  were
of  human  make  was  certain,  and,  in  view  of  the  undisturbed
depths  in  which  they  were  found,  the  theory  was  suggested
that  the  men  who  made  them  must  have  lived  at  a  very  an-
cient geological  epoch  ;  yet  even  this  discovery  and  theory
passed  like  a  troublesome  dream,  and  soon  seemed  to  be  for-
gotten.

About  twenty  years  later  Dr.  Buckland  published  a  dis-
cussion of  the  subject,  in  the  light  of  various  discoveries  in
the  drift  and  in  caves.  It  received  wide  attention,  but  the-
ology was  soothed  by  his  temporary  concession  that  these
striking  relics  of  human  handiwork,  associated  with  the  re-
mains of  various  extinct  animals,  were  proofs  of  the  Deluge
of  Noah.

In  1823  Boue,  of  the  Vienna  Academy  of  Sciences,
showed  to  Cuvier  sundry  human  bones  found  deep  in  the
alluvial  deposits  of  the  upper  Rhine,  and  suggested  that  they
were  of  an  early  geological  period  ;  this  Cuvier  virtually,  if
not  explicitly,  denied.  Great  as  he  was  in  his  own  field,  he
was  not  a  great  geologist ;  he,  in  fact,  led  geology  astray  for
many  years.  Moreover,  he  lived  in  a  time  of  reaction  ;  it
was  the  period  of  the  restored  Bourbons,  of  the  Voltairean


THE    THUNDER-STONES.  269

King  Louis  XVIII,  governing-  to  please  orthodoxy.  Boue's
discovery  was,  therefore,  at  first  opposed,  then  enveloped  in
studied  silence.

Cuvier  evidently  thought,  as  Voltaire  had  felt  under  simi-
lar circumstances,  that  '' among  wolves  one  must  howl  a
little  "  ;  and  his  leading  disciple,  Elie  de  Beaumont,  who  suc-
ceeded him  in  the  sway  over  geological  science  in  France,
was  even  more  opposed  to  the  new  view  than  his  great  mas-
ter had  been.  Boue's  discoveries  were,  therefore,  appar-
ently laid  to  rest  forever.*

In  1825  Kent's  Cavern,  near  Torquay,  was  explored  by
the  Rev.  Mr.  McEnery,  a  Roman  Catholic  clergyman,  who
seems  to  have  been  completely  overawed  by  orthodox  opin-
ion in  England  and  elsewhere ;  for,  though  he  found  human
bones  and  implements  mingled  with  remains  of  extinct  ani-
mals, he  kept  his  notes  in  manuscript,  and  they  were  only
brought  to  light  more  than  thirty  years  later  by  Mr.  Vivian.

The  coming  of  Charles  X,  the  last  of  the  French  Bour-
bons, to  the  throne,  made  the  orthodox  pressure  even  greater.
It  was  the  culmination  of  the  reactionary  period— the  time
in  France  when  a  clerical  committee,  sitting  at  the  Tuileries,
took  such  measures  as  were  necessary  to  hold  in  check  all
science  that  was  not  perfectly  "  safe  "  ;  the  time  in  Austria
when  Kaiser  Franz  made  his  famous  declaration  to  sundry
professors,  that  what  he  wanted  of  them  was  simply  to  train
obedient  subjects,  and  that  those  who  did  not  make  this  their
purpose  would  be  dismissed  ;  the  time  in  Germany  when
Nicholas  of  Russia  and  the  princelings  and  ministers  under
his  control,  from  the  King  of  Prussia  downward,  put  forth
all  their  might  in  behalf  of  ''  scriptural  science  "  ;  the  time  in
Italy  when  a  scientific  investigator,  arris'ing  at  any  conclu-

*  For  the  general  history  of  early  views  regarding  stone  implements,  see  the
first  chapters  in  Cartailhac,  La  France  Pr^historiqiie  ;  also  Joly,  V Homme  avant
les  Metaux  ;  also  Lyell,  Lubbock,  and  Evans.  For  lightning-stones  in  China  and
elsewhere,  see  ci'ation  from  a  Chinese  encyclopaedia  of  i652,  in  Tylor,  Early  His-
tory of  Mankind,  p.  209.  On  the  universality  of  this  belief,  on  the  surviving  use
of  stone  implements  even  into  civilized  times,  and  on  their  manufacture  to-day,  see
ibid.,  chapter  viii.  For  the  treatment  of  Boue's  discovery,  see  especially  Mortillet,
Le  Prdhistoriqi4e,  Paris,  1885,  p.  11.  For  the  suppression  of  the  passage  in  Mon-
tesquieu's Persian  Letters,  see  Letter  113,  cited  in  Schlosser's  History  of  the  Eight'
eenth  Century  (English  translation),  vol.  i,  p.  135.


2;o    ANTIQUITY   OF    MAN   AND   PREHISTORIC   ARCH.T:0L0GY.

sion  distrusted  by  the  Church,  was  sure  of  losing  his  place
and  in  danger  of  losing  his  liberty  ;  the  time  in  England
when  what  little  science  w^as  taught  was  held  in  due  submis-
sion to  Archdeacon  Paley  ;  the  time  in  the  United  States
when  the  first  thing  essential  in  science  was,  that  it  be  ad-
justed to  the  ideas  of  revival  exhorters.

Yet  men  devoted  to  scientific  truth  laboured  on ;  and  in
1828  Tournal,  of  Narbonne,  discovered  in  the  cavern  of  Bize
specimens  of  human  industry,  with  a  fragment  of  a  human
skeleton,  among  bones  of  extinct  animals.  In  the  following
year  Christol  published  accounts  of  his  excavations  in  the
caverns  of  Gard  ;  he  had  found  in  position,  and  under  condi-
tions which  forbade  the  idea  of  after-disturbance,  human  re-
mains mixed  with  bones  of  the  extinct  hyena  of  the  early
Quaternary  period.  Little  general  notice  was  taken  of  this,
for  the  reactionary  orthodox  atmosphere  involved  such  dis-
coveries in  darkness.

But  in  the  French  Revolution  of  1830  the  old  politico-
theological  system  collapsed :  Charles  X  and  his  advisers
fled  for  their  lives ;  the  other  continental  monarchs  got
glimpses  of  new  light;  the  priesthood  in  charge  of  educa-
tion were  put  on  their  good  behaviour  for  a  time,  and  a  better
era  began.

Under  the  constitutional  monarchy  of  the  house  of  Or-
leans in  France  and  Belgium  less  attention  was  therefore
paid  by  Government  to  the  saving  of  souls ;  and  we  have
in  rapid  succession  new  discoveries  of  remains  of  human  in-
dustry, and  even  of  human  skeletons  so  mingled  with  bones
of  extinct  animals  as  to  give  additional  proofs  that  the  origin
of  man  was  at  a  period  vastly  earlier  than  any  which  theolo-
gians had  dreamed  of.

A  few  years  later  the  reactionary  clerical  influence
against  science  in  this  field  rallied  again.  Schmerling  in
1833  had  explored  a  multitude  of  caverns  in  Belgium,  espe-
cially at  Engis  and  Engihoul,  and  had  found  human  skulls
and  bones  closely  associated  with  bones  of  extinct  animals,
such  as  the  cave  bear,  hyena,  elephant,  and  rhinoceros,  while
mingled  with  these  were  evidences  of  human  workmanship
in  the  shape  of  chipped  flint  implements  ;  discoveries  of  a
similar  sort  had  been  made  by  De  Serres  in  France  and  by


THE   FLINT   WEAPONS   AND    IMPLEMENTS.  27 1

Lund  in  Brazil ;  but,  at  least  as  far  as  continental  Europe
was  concerned,  these  discoveries  were  received  with  much
coolness  both  by  Catholic  leaders  of  opinion  in  France  and
Belgium  and  by  Protestant  leaders  in  England  and  Holland.
Schmerling  himself  appears  to  have  been  overawed,  and
gave  forth  a  sort  of  apologetic  theory,  half  scientific,  half
theologic,  vainly  hoping  to  satisfy  the  clerical  side.

Nor  was  it  much  better  in  England.  Sir  Charles  Lyell,
so  devoted  a  servant  of  prehistoric  research  thirty  years
later,  was  still  holding  out  against  it  on  the  scientific  side  ;
and,  as  to  the  theological  side,  it  was  the  period  when  that
great  churchman,  Dean  Cockburn,  was  insulting  geologists
from  the  pulpit  of  York  Minster,  and  the  Rev.  Mellor  Brown
denouncing  geology  as  "a  black  art,"  **  a  forbidden  prov-
ince "  ;  and  when,  in  America,  Prof.  Moses  Stuart  and  others
like  him  were  belittling  the  work  of  Benjamin  Silliman  and
Edward  Hitchcock.

In  1840  Godwin  Austin  presented  to  the  Royal  Geo-
logical Society  an  account  of  his  discoveries  in  Kent's  Cav-
ern, near  Torquay,  and  especially  of  human  bones  and  imple-
ments mingled  with  bones  of  the  elephant,  rhinoceros,  cave
bear,  hyena,  and  other  extinct  animals ;  yet  this  memoir,
like  that  of  McEnery  fifteen  years  before,  found  an  atmos-
phere so  unfavourable  that  it  was  not  published.


11.   THE    FLINT    WEAPONS   AND    IMPLEMENTS.

At  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century  came  the  begin-
ning of  a  new  epoch  in  science — an  epoch  when  all  these
earlier  discoveries  were  to  be  interpreted  by  means  of  in-
vestigations in  a  different  field:  for,  in  1847,  a  man  previ.
ously  unknown  to  the  world  at  large,  Boucher  de  Perthes,
published  at  Paris  the  first  volume  of  his  work  on  Celtic  and
Antcdihivian  Antiquities,  and  in  this  he  showed  engravings  of
typical  flint  implements  and  weapons,  of  which  he  had  dis-
covered thousands  upon  thousands  in  the  high  drift  beds
near  Abbeville,  in  northern  France.

The  significance  of  this  discovery  was  great  indeed — far
greater  than  Boucher  himself  at  first  supposed.     The  very


2^2    ANTIQUITY   OF    MAN   AND    PREHISTORIC    ARCHAEOLOGY.

title  of  his  book  showed  that  he  at  first  regarded  these  im-
plements and  weapons  as  having  belonged  to  men  over-
whelmed at  the  Deluge  of  Noah  ;  but  it  was  soon  seen  that
they  were  something  very  different  from  proofs  of  the  literal
exactness  of  Genesis :  for  they  were  found  in  terraces  at
great  heights  above  the  river  Somme,  and,  under  any  pos-
sible theory  having  regard  to  fact,  must  have  been  deposited
there  at  a  time  when  the  river  system  of  northern  France
was  vastly  different  from  anything  known  within  the  his-
toric period.  The  whole  discovery  indicated  a  series  of
great  geological  changes  since  the  time  when  these  imple-
ments were  made,  requiring  cycles  of  time  compared  to
which  the  space  allowed  by  the  orthodox  chronologists  was
as  nothing.

His  work  was  the  result  of  over  ten  3'ears  of  research
and  thought.  Year  after  year  a  force  of  men  under  his  di-
rection had  dug  into  these  high-terraced  gravel  deposits  of
the  river  Somme,  and  in  his  book  he  now  gave,  in  the  first
full  form,  the  results  of  his  labour.  So  far  as  France  was
concerned,  he  was  met  at  first  by  what  he  calls  ''  a  conspiracy
of  silence,"  and  then  by  a  contemptuous  opposition  among
orthodox  scientists,  at  the  head  of  whom  stood  Elie  de  Beau-
mont.

This  heavy,  sluggish  opposition  seemed  immovable  :  noth-
ing that  Boucher  could  do  or  say  appeared  to  lighten  the
pressure  of  the  orthodox  theological  opinion  behind  it ;  not
even  his  belief  that  these  fossils  were  remains  of  men  drowned
at  the  Deluge  of  Noah,  and  that  they  were  proofs  of  the  lit-
eral exactness  of  Genesis  seemed  to  help  the  matter.  His
opponents  felt  instinctively  that  such  discoveries  boded  dan-
ger to  the  accepted  view,  and  they  w^ere  right:  Boucher
himself  soon  saw  the  folly  of  trying  to  account  for  them  by
the  orthodox  theor3^

And  it  must  be  confessed  that  not  a  little  force  was  added
to  the  opposition  by  certain  characteristics  of  Boucher  de
Perthes  himself.  Gifted,  far-sighted,  and  vigorous  as  he  was,
he  was  his  own  worst  enemy.  Carried  away  by  his  own  dis-
coveries, he  jumped  to  the  most  astounding  conclusions.  The
engravings  in  the  later  volume  of  his  great  work,  showing
what  he  thought  to  be  human  features  and  inscriptions  upon


THE    FLINT  WEAPONS   AND    IMPLEMENTS.  273

some  of  the  flint  implements,  are  worthy  of  a  comic  almanac  ;
and  at  the  National  Museum  of  Archaeology  at  St.  Germain,
beneath  the  shelves  bearing  the  remains  which  he  discovered,
which  mark  the  beginning  of  a  new  epoch  in  science,  are
drawers  containing  specimens  hardly  worthy  of  a  penny
museum,  but  from  which  he  drew  the  most  unwarranted
inferences  as  to  the  language,  religion,  and  usages  of  prehis-
toric man.

Boucher  triumphed  none  the  less.  Among  his  bitter  op-
ponents at  first  was  Dr.  Rigollot,  who  in  1855,  searching
earnestly  for  materials  to  refute  the  innovator,  dug  into  the
deposits  of  St.  Acheul— and  was  converted:  for  he  found
implements  similar  to  those  of  Abbeville,  making  still  more
certain  the  existence  of  man  during  the  Drift  period.  So,
too,  Gaudry  a  year  later  made  similar  discoveries.

But  most  important  was  the  evidence  of  the  truth  which
now  came  from  other  parts  of  France  and  from  other  coun-
tries. The  French  leaders  in  geological  science  had  been
held  back  not  only  by  awe  of  Cuvier  but  by  recollections
ot  Scheuchzer.  Ridicule  has  always  been  a  serious  weapon  in
France,  and  the  ridicule  which  finally  overtook  the  supporters
of  the  attempt  of  Scheuchzer,  Mazurier,  and  others,  to  square
geology  with  Genesis,  was  still  remembered.  From  the
great  body  of  French  geologists,  therefore,  Boucher  secured
at  first  no  aid.  His  support  came  from  the  other  side  of  the
Channel.  The  most  eminent  English  geologists,  such  as
Falconer,  Prestwich,  and  Lyell,  visited  the  beds  at  Abbeville
and  St.  Acheul,  convinced  themselves  that  the  discoveries  of
Boucher,  Rigollot,  and  their  colleagues  were  real,  and  then
quietly  but  firmly  told  England  the  truth.

And  now  there  appeared  a  most  effective  ally  in  France.
The  arguments  used  against  Boucher  de  Perthes  and  some
of  the  other  early  investigators  of  bone  caves  had  been  that
the  implements  found  might  have  been  washed  about  and
turned  over  by  great  floods,  and  therefore  that  they  might
be  of  a  recent  period  ;  but  in  1861  Edward  Lartet  published
an  account  of  his  own  excavations  at  the  Grotto  of  Aurignac,
and  the  proof  that  man  had  existed  in  the  time  of  the  Quater-
nary animals  was  complete.  This  grotto  had  been  carefully
sealed  in  prehistoric  times  by  a  stone  at  its  entrance  ;  no
19


2^^    ANTIQUITY   OF    MAN   AND    PREHISTORIC    ARCHEOLOGY.

interference  from  disturbing  currents  of  water  had  been  pos-
sible ;  and  Lartet  found,  in  place,  bones  of  eight  out  of  nine
of  the  main  species  of  animals  which  characterize  the  Qua-
ternary period  in  Europe ;  and  upon  them  marks  of  cutting
implements,  and  in  the  midst  of  them  coals  and  ashes.

Close  upon  these  came  the  excavations  at  Eyzies  by  Lartet
and  his  English  colleague,  Christy.  In  both  these  men  there
was  a  carefulness  in  making  researches  and  a  sobriety  in
stating  results  which  converted  many  of  those  who  had  been
repelled  by  the  enthusiasm  of  Boucher  de  Perthes.  The
two  colleagues  found  in  the  stony  deposits  made  by  the
water  dropping  from  the  roof  of  the  cave  at  Eyzies  the
bones  of  numerous  animals  extinct  or  departed  to  arctic
regions — one  of  these  a  vertebra  of  a  reindeer  with  a  flint
lance-head  still  fast  in  it,  and  with  these  were  found  evi-
dences of  fire.

Discoveries  like  these  were  thoroughly  convincing ;  yet
there  still  remained  here  and  there  gainsayers  in  the  sup-
posed interest  of  Scripture,  and  these,  in  spite  of  the  con-
vincing array  of  facts,  insisted  that  in  some  way,  by  some
combination  of  circumstances,  these  bones  of  extinct  animals
of  vastly  remote  periods  might  have  been  brought  into  con-
nection with  all  these  human  bones  and  implements  of  human
make  in  all  these  different  places,  refusing  to  admit  that
these  ancient  relics  of  men  and  animals  were  of  the  same
period.  Such  gainsayers  virtually  adopted  the  reasoning  of
quaint  old  Persons,  who,  having  maintained  that  God  created
\  the  world  "  about  five  thousand  sixe  hundred  and  odde  yeares
I  agoe,"  added,  *'  And*  if  they  aske  what  God  was  doing  before
I  this  short  number  of  yeares,  we  answere  with  St.  Augustine
replying  to  such  curious  questioners,  that  He  was  framing
I  Hell  for  them."  But  a  new  class  of  discoveries  came  to
silence  this  opposition.  At  La  Madeleine  in  France,  at  the
Kessler  cave  in  Switzerland,  and  at  various  other  places,  were
found  rude  but  striking  carvings  and  engravings  on  bone
and  stone  representing  sundry  specimens  of  those  long-van-
ished species  ;  and  these  specimens,  or  casts  of  them,  were
soon  to  be  seen  in  all  the  principal  museums.  They  showed
the  hairy  mammoth,  the  cave  bear,  and  various  other  ani-
mals of  the  Quaternary  period,  carved  rudely  but  vigorously


THE    FLINT   WEAPONS   AND    IMPLEMENTS.  275

by  contemporary  men  ;  and,  to  complete  the  significance  of
these  discoveries,  travellers  returning  from  the  icy  regions
of  North  America  brought  similar  carvings  of  animals  now
existing  in  those  regions,  made  by  the  Eskimos  during  their
long  arctic  winters  to-day."

As  a  result  of  these  discoveries  and  others  like  them,
showing  that  man  was  not  only  contemporary  with  long-
extinct  animals  of  past  geological  epochs,  but  that  he  had
already  developed  into  a  stage  of  culture  above  pure  sav-
agery, the  tide  of  thought  began  to  turn.  Especially  was  this
seen  in  1863,  when  Lyell  published  the  first  edition  of  his
Geological  Evidence  of  the  Antiquity  of  Man;  and  the  fact  that
he  had  so  long  opposed  the  new  ideas  gave  force  to  the  clear
and  conclusive  argument  which  led  him  to  renounce  his
early  scientific  beliefs.

Research  among  the  evidences  ot  man's  existence  in  the
early  Quaternary,  and  possibly  in  the  Tertiary  period,  was
now  pressed  forward  along  the  whole  line.  In  1864  Gabriel
Mortillet  founded  his  review  devoted  to  this  subject;  and  in
1865  the  first  of  a  series  of  scientific  congresses  devoted  to
such  researches  was  held  in  Italy.  These  investigations
went  on  vigorously  in  all  parts  of  France  and  spread  rapidly

*  For  the  explorations  in  Belgium,  see  Dupont,  Le  Temps  Prehistorique  en  Bel-
gique.  For  the  discoveries  by  McEnery  and  Godwin  Austin,  see  Lubbock,  Pre-
historic Times,  London,  i86g,  chap,  x  ;  also  Cartailhac,  Joly,  and  others  above
cited.  For  Boucher  de  Perthes,  see  his  Ayitiquith  Celtiques  et  Ajttediluviennes,
Paris,  i847-'64,  vol.  iii,  pp.  526  et  seq.  For  sundry  extravagances  of  Boucher  de
Perthes,  see  Reinach,  Description  raisonnde  dti  Mzts^e  de  St.-Ger??iaift-en-Laye,
Paris,  i88g,  vol.  i,  pp.  16  et  seq.  For  the  mixture  of  sound  and  absurd  results  in
Boucher's  work,  see  Cartailhac  as  above,  p.  19.  Boucher  had  published  in  1838  a
work  entitled  De  la  Creation,  but  it  seems  to  have  dropped  dead  from  the  press.
For  the  attempts  of  Scheuchzer  to  reconcile  geology  and  Genesis  by  means  of  the
Homo  diluvii  testis,  and  similar  "  diluvian  fossils,"  see  the  chapter  on  Geology  in
this  series.  The  original  specimens  of  those  prehistoric  engravings  upon  bone  and
stone  may  be  best  seen  at  the  Archaeological  Museum  of  St.-Germain  and  the  British
Museum.  For  engravings  of  some  of  the  most  recent,  see  especially  Dawkins's
Early  Man  in  Britain,  chap,  vii,  and  the  Description  du  Musee  de  St.-Germain.  As
to  the  Kessler  etchings  and  their  antiquity,  see  D.  G.  Brinton,  in  Science,  August  12,
1892.  For  comparison  of  this  prehistoric  work  with  that  produced  to-day  by  the
Eskimos  and  others,  see  Lubbock,  Prehistoric  Times,  chapters  x  and  xiv.  For
very  striking  exhibitions  of  this  same  artistic  gift  in  a  higher  field  to-day  by  de-
scendants of  the  barbarian  tribes  of  northern  America,  see  the  very  remarkable
illustrations  in  Rink,  Danish  G^renlaftd,  London,  1877,  especially  those  in  chap.  xiv.


2;6    ANTIQUITY    OF    MAN    AND    PREHISTORIC   ARCHAEOLOGY.

to  Other  countries.  The  explorations  which  Dupont  began
in  1864,  in  the  caves  of  Belgium,  gave  to  the  museum  at
Brussels  eighty  thousand  flint  implements,  forty  thousand
bones  of  animals  of  the  Quaternary  period,  and  a  number
of  human  skulls  and  bones  found  mingled  with  these  remains.
From  Germany,  Italy,  Spain,  x^merica,  India,  and  Egypt
similar  results  were  reported.

Especially  noteworthy  were  the  further  explorations  of
the  caves  and  drift  throughout  the  British  Islands.  The
discovery  by  Colonel  Wood,  in  1861,  of  flint  tools  in  the  same
strata  with  bones  of  the  earlier  forms  of  the  rhinoceros,  was
but  typical  of  many.  A  thorough  examination  of  the  caverns
of  Brixham  and  Torquay,  by  Pengelly  and  others,  made  it
still  more  evident  that  man  had  existed  in  the  early  Quater-
nary period.  The  existence  of  a  period  before  the  Glacial
epoch  or  between  different  glacial  epochs  in  England,  when
the  Englishman  was  a  savage,  using  rude  stone  tools,  was
then  fully  ascertained,  and,  what  was  more  significant,  there
were  clearly  shown  a  gradation  and  evolution  even  in  the
history  of  that  period.  It  was  found  that  this  ancient  Stone
epoch  showed  progress  and  development.  In  the  upper  lay-
ers of  the  caves,  with  remains  of  the  reindeer,  who,  although
he  has  migrated  from  these  regions,  still  exists  in  more
northern  climates,  were  found  stone  implements  revealing
some  little  advance  in  civilization  ;  next  below  these,  sealed
up  in  the  stalagmite,  came,  as  a  rule,  another  layer,  in  which
the  remains  of  reindeer  were  rare  and  those  of  the  mammoth
more  frequent,  the  implements  found  in  this  stratum  being
less  skilfully  made  than  those  in  the  upper  and  more  recent
layers ;  and,  finally,  in  the  lowest  levels,  near  the  floors  of
these  ancient  caverns,  with  remains  of  the  cave  bear  and  others
of  the  most  ancient  extinct  animals,  were  found  stone  imple-
ments evidently  of  a  yet  ruder  and  earlier  stage  of  human
progress.  No  fairly  unprejudiced  man  can  visit  the  cave
and  museum  at  Torquay  without  being  convinced  that  there
were  a  gradation  and  an  evolution  in  these  beginnings  of
human  civilization.  The  evidence  is  complete  ;  the  masses
of  breccia  taken  from  the  cave,  with  the  various  soils,  im-
plements, and  bones  carefully  kept  in  place,  put  this  progress
beyond  a  doubt.


THE    FLINT  WEAPONS   AND    IMPLEMENTS.  277

All  this  indicated  a  great  antiquity  for  the  human  race,
but  in  it  lay  the  germs  of  still  another  great  truth,  even  more
important  and  more  serious  in  its  consequences  to  the  older
theologic  view,  which  will  be  discussed  in  the  following
chapter.

But  new  evidences  came  in,  showing  a  yet  greater  antiqui-
ty of  man.  Remains  of  animals  were  found  in  connection
with  human  remains,  which  showed  not  only  that  man  was
livins:  in  times  more  remote  than  the  earlier  of  the  new  in-
vestigators  had  dared  dream,  but  that  some  of  these  early
periods  of  his  existence  must  have  been  of  immense  length,
embracing  climatic  changes  betokening  different  geological
periods;  for  with  remains  of  fire  and  human  implements
and  human  bones  were  found  not  only  bones  of  the  hairy
mammoth  and  cave  bear,  woolly  rhinoceros,  and  reindeer,
which  could  only  have  been  deposited  there  in  a  time  of
arctic  cold,  but  bones  of  the  hyena,  hippopotamus,  sabre-
toothed  tiger,  and  the  like,  which  could  only  have  been  de-
posited when  there  was  in  these  regions  a  torrid  climate.
The  conjunction  of  these  remains  clearly  showed  that  man
had  lived  in  England  early  enough  and  long  enough  to  pass
through  times  when  there  was  arctic  cold  and  times  when
there  was  torrid  heat ;  times  when  great  glaciers  stretched
far  down  into  England  and  indeed  into  the  continent,  and
times  when  England  had  a  land  connection  with  the  European
continent,  and  the  European  continent  with  Africa,  allowing
tropical  animals  to  migrate  freely  from  Africa  to  the  middle
regions  of  England.

The  question  of  the  origin  of  man  at  a  period  vastly  ear-
lier than  the  sacred  chronologists  permitted  was  thus  abso-
lutely settled,  but  among  the  questions  regarding  the  exist-
ence of  man  at  a  period  yet  more  remote,  the  Drift  period,
there  was  one  which  for  a  time  seemed  to  give  the  cham-
pions of  science  some  difficulty.  The  orthodox  leaders  in
the  time  of  Boucher  de  Perthes,  and  for  a  considerable  time
afterward,  had  a  weapon  of  which  they  made  vigorous  use:
the  statement  that  no  human  bones  had  yet  been  discovered  ,
in  the  drift.  The  supporters  of  science  naturally  answered  |
that  few  if  any  other  bones  as  small  as  those  of  man  had  been
found,  and  that  this  fact  was  an  additional  proof  of  the  great


2y8    ANTIQUITY    OF    MAN   AND    PREHISTORIC   ARCHAEOLOGY.

length  of  the  period  since  man  had  lived  with  the  extinct
animals  ;  for,  since  specimens  of  human  workmanship  proved
man's  existence  as  fully  as  remains  of  his  bones  could  do,  the
absence  or  even  rarity  of  human  and  other  small  bones  sim-
ply indicated  the  long  periods  of  time  required  for  dissolv-
ing them  away.

Yet  Boucher,  inspired  by  the  genius  he  had  already
shown,  and  filled  with  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  declared  that
human  bones  would  yet  be  found  in  the  midst  of  the  flint
implements,  and  in  1863  he  claimed  that  this  prophecy  had
been  fulfilled  by  the  discovery  at  Moulin  Quignon  of  a  por-
tion of  a  human  jaw  deep  in  the  early  Quaternary  deposits.
But  his  triumph  was  short-lived  :  the  opposition  ridiculed
his  discovery  ;  they  showed  that  he  had  offered  a  premium
to  his  workmen  for  the  discovery  of  human  remains,  and
they  naturally  drew  the  inference  that  some  tricky  labourer
had  deceived  him.  The  result  of  this  was  that  the  men  of
science  felt  obliged  to  acknowledge  that  the  Moulin  Qui-
gnon discovery  was  not  proven.

But  ere  long  human  bones  were  found  in  the  deposits  of
the  early  Quaternary  period,  or  indeed  of  an  earlier  period,
in  various  other  parts  of  the  world,  and  the  question  regard-
ing the  Moulin  Quignon  relic  was  of  little  importance.

We  have  seen  that  researches  regarding  the  existence  of
prehistoric  man  in  England  and  on  the  Continent  were  at
first  mainly  made  in  the  caverns ;  but  the  existence  of  man
in  the  earliest  Quaternary  period  was  confirmed  on  both  sides
of  the  English  Channel,  in  a  way  even  more  striking,  by  the
close  examination  of  the  drift  and  early  gravel  deposits.
The  results  arrived  at  by  Boucher  de  Perthes  were  amply
confirmed  in  England.  Rude  stone  implements  were  found
in  terraces  a  hundred  feet  and  more  above  the  levels  at
w^hich  various  rivers  of  Great  Britain  now  flow,  and  under
circumstances  which  show  that,  at  the  time  when  they  were
deposited,  the  rivers  of  Great  Britain  in  many  cases  were
entirely  different  from  those  of  the  present  period,  and
formed  parts  of  the  river  system  of  the  European  continent.
Researches  in  the  high  terraces  above  the  Thames  and  the
Ouse,  as  well  as  at  other  points  in  Great  Britain,  placed
beyond  a  doubt  the  fact  that  man  existed  on   the  British


THE    FLINT  WEAPONS   AND   IMPLEMENTS.  279

Islands  at  a  time  when  they  were  connected  by  solid  land
with  the  Continent,  and  made  it  clear  that,  within  the  period
of  the  existence  of  man  in  northern  Europe,  a  large  portion
of  the  British  Islands  had  been  sunk  to  depths  between
fifteen  hundred  and  twenty-five  hundred  feet  beneath  the
Northern  Ocean,— had  risen  again  from  the  water,— had
formed  part  of  the  continent  of  Europe,  and  had  been  in
unbroken  connection  with  Africa,  so  that  elephants,  bears,
tigers,  lions,  the  rhinoceros  and  hippopotamus,  of  species
now  mainly  extinct,  had  left  their  bones  in  the  same  deposits
with  human  implements  as  far  north  as  Yorkshire.  More-
over, connected  with  this  fact  came  in  the  new  conviction,
forced  upon  geologists  by  the  more  careful  examination  of
the  earth  and  its  changes,  that  such  elevations  and  depres-
sions of  Great  Britain  and  other  parts  of  the  world  were  not
necessarily  the  results  of  sudden  cataclysms,  but  generally
of  slow  processes  extending  through  vast  cycles  of  years —
processes  such  as  are  now  known  to  be  going  on  in  various
parts  of  the  world.  Thus  it  was  that  the  six  or  seven  thou-
sand years  allowed  by  the  most  liberal  theologians  of  former
times  were  seen  more  and  more  clearly  to  be  but  a  mere
nothing  in  the  long  succession  of  ages  since  the  appearance
of  man.

Confirmation  of  these  results  was  received  from  various
other  parts  of  the  world.  In  Africa  came  the  discovery  of
flint  implements  deep  in  the  hard  gravel  of  the  Nile  Valley
at  Luxor  and  on  the  high  hills  behind  Esneh.  In  America
the  discoveries  at  Trenton,  N.  J.,  and  at  various  places  in
Delaware,  Ohio,  Minnesota,  and  elsewhere,  along  the  south-
ern edge  of  the  drift  of  the  Glacial  epochs,  clinched  the  new
scientific  truth  yet  more  firmly  ;  and  the  statement  made  by
an  eminent  American  authority  is,  that  **  man  was  on  this  '
continent  when  the  climate  and  ice  of  Greenland  extended  to
the  mouth  of  New  York  harbour."  The  discoveries  of  pre-
historic remains  on  the  Pacific  coast,  and  especially  in  Brit-
ish Columbia,  finished  completely  the  last  chance  at  a  rea-
sonable contention  by  the  adherents  of  the  older  view.  As
to  these  investigations  on  the  Pacific  slope  of  the  United
States,  the  discoveries  of  Whitney  and  others  in  California
had  been  so  made  and  announced  that  the  judgment  of  scien-


/


28o    ANTIQUITY    OF   MAN   AND    PREHISTORIC   ARCHEOLOGY.

tific  men  regarding  them  was  suspended  until  the  visit  of
perhaps  the  greatest  living  authority  in  his  department,  Al-
fred Russel  Wallace,  in  1887.  He  confirmed  the  view  of
Prof.  Whitney  and  others  with  the  statement  that  "  both  the
actual  remains  and  works  of  man  found  deep  under  the  lava-
flows  of  Pliocene  age  show  that  he  existed  in  the  New  World
at  least  as  early  as  in  the  Old."  To  this  may  be  added  the
discoveries  in  British  Columbia,  which  prove  that,  since  man
existed  in  these  regions,  "valleys  have  been  filled  up  by  drift
from  the  waste  of  mountains  to  a  depth  in  some  cases  of
fifteen  hundred  feet;  this  covered  by  a  succession  of  tufTs,
ashes,  and  lava-streams  from  volcanoes  long  since  extinct,
and  finally  cut  down  by  the  present  rivers  through  beds  of
solid  basalt,  and  through  this  accumulation  of  lavas  and
gravels."  The  immense  antiquity  of  the  human  remains  in
the  gravels  of  the  Pacific  coast  is  summed  up  by  a  most  emi-
nent English  authority  and  declared  to  be  proved,  "  first,  by
the  present  river  systems  being  of  subsequent  date,  some-
times cutting  through  them  and  their  superincumbent  lava-
cap  to  a  depth  of  two  thousand  feet ;  secondly,  by  the  great
denudation  that  has  taken  place  since  they  were  deposited,
for  they  sometimes  lie  on  the  summits  of  mountains  six  thou-
sand feet  high ;  thirdly,  by  the  fact  that  the  Sierra  Nevada
has  been  partly  elevated  since  their  formation."  *

*  For  the  general  subject  of  investigations  in  British  prehistoric  remains,  see  es-
pecially Boyd  Dawkins,  Early  Man  ht  Britain  and  his  Place  in  the  Tertiary  Pe-
riod^ London,  1880.  For  Boucher  de  Perthes's  account  of  his  discoveiy  of  the
human  jaw  at  Moulin  Quignon,  see  his  Antiquith  Celtiqiies  et  Antedilitviennes^  vol.
iii,  p.  542  et  seq.,  Appendix.  For  an  excellent  account  of  special  investigations  in
the  high  terraces  above  the  Thames,  see  J.  Allen  Brown,  F.  G.  S.,  Palaeolithic  Man
in  Northivest  Middlesex,  London,  1887.  For  discoveries  in  America,  and  the  cita-
tion regarding  them,  see  Wright,  The  Ice  Age  in  North  Affierica,  New  York,  1889,
chap.  xxi.  Very  remarkable  examples  of  these  specimens  from  the  drift  at  Trenton
may  be  seen  in  Prof.  Abbott's  collections  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  For
an  admirable  statement,  see  Prof.  Henry  W.  Haynes,  in  Wright,  as  above.  For
proofs  of  the  vast  antiquity  of  man  upon  the  Pacific  coast,  cited  in  the  text,  see
Skertchley,  F.  G.  S.,  in  the  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute  for  1887,  p.  336  ;
see  also  Wallace,  Darwinis?n,  London,  1890,  chap,  xv  ;  and  for  a  summary,  as  cited,
Laing,  Problems  of  the  Future,  London,  1889.  For  a  striking  summary  of  the
evidence  that  man  lived  before  the  last  submergence  of  Britain,  see  Brown,  Palceo-
lithic  Man  in  NortJnuest  Middlesex,  as  above  cited.  For  proofs  that  man  existed
in  a  period  when  the  streams  were  flowing  hundreds  of  feet  above  their  present
level,  see  ibid.,  p.  33.     As  to  the  evidence  of  the  action  of  the  sea  and  of  glacial  ac-


THE    FLINT   WEAPONS   AND    IMPLEMENTS.  28 1

As  an  important  supplement  to  these  discoveries  of  an-
cient implements  came  sundry  comparisons  made  by  emi-
nent physiologists  between  human  skulls  and  bones  found  in
different  places  and  under  circumstances  showing  vast  an-
tiquity.

Human  bones  had  been  found  under  such  circumstances
as  early  as  1835  at  Cannstadt  near  Stuttgart,  and  in  1856
in  the  Neanderthal  near  Dusseldorf ;  but  in  more  recent
searches  they  had  been  discovered  in  a  multitude  of  places,
especially  in  Germany,  France,  Belgium,  England,  the  Cau-
casus, Africa,  and  North  and  South  America.  Comparison
of  these  bones  showed  that  even  in  that  remote  Quaternary
period  there  were  great  differences  of  race,  and  here  again
came  in  an  argument  for  the  yet  earlier  existence  of  man  on
the  earth  ;  for  long  previous  periods  must  have  been  required

tion  in  the  Welsh  bone  caves  after  the  remams  of  extinct  animals  and  weapons  of
human  workmanship  had  been  deposited,  see  ibid.,  p.  198.  For  a  good  statement
of  the  slowness  of  the  submergence  and  emergence  of  Great  Britain,  with  an  illus-
tration from  the  rising  of  the  shore  of  Finland,  see  ibid.,  pp.  47,  48,  As  to  the  flint
implements  of  Pal^Eolithic  man  in  the  high  terraced  gravels  throughout  the  Thames
Valley,  associated  with  bones  of  the  mammoth,  woolly  rhinoceros,  etc.,  see  Brown,  p,
31.  For  still  more  conclusive  proofs  that  man  inhabited  North  Wales  before  the
last  submergence  of  the  greater  part  of  the  British  Islands  to  a  depth  of  twelve
hundred  to  fourteen  hundred  feet,  see  ibid.,  pp.  199,  200.  For  maps  showing  the
connection  of  the  British  river  system  with  that  of  the  Continent,  see  Boyd  Daw-
kins,  Early  Man  in  Britain,  London,  1880,  pp.  18,  41,  73  ;  also  Lyell,  Antiquity
of  Man,  chap.  xiv.  As  to  the  long  continuance  of  the  early  Stone  period,  see
James  Geikie,  The  Great  Ice  Age,  New  York,  1888,  p.  402.  As  to  the  impossibil-
ity of  the  animals  of  arctic  and  torrid  regions  living  together  or  visiting  the  same
place  at  different  times  in  the  same  year,  see  Geikie,  as  above,  pp.  421  et  seq.  ;  and
for  a  conclusive  argument  that  the  animals  of  the  period  assigned  lived  in  England
not  since,  but  before,  the  Glacial  period,  or  in  the  interglacial  period,  see  ibid.,  p.
459.  For  a  very  candid  statement  by  perhaps  the  foremost  leader  of  the  theo-
logical rear-guard,  admitting  the  insuperable  difficulties  presented  by  the  Old  Tes-
tament chronology  as  regards  the  Creation  and  the  Deluge,  see  the  Duke  of  Argyll's
Primeval  Man,  pp.  90-100,  and  especially  pp.  93,  124.  For  a  succinct  statement
on  the  general  subject,  see  Laing,  Problems  of  the  Future,  London,  1889,  chapters
V  and  vi.  For  discoveries  of  prehistoric  implements  in  India,  see  notes  by  Bruce
Foote,  F.  G.  S.,  in  the  British  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute  for  1886
and  1887.  For  similar  discoveries  in  South  Africa,  see  Gooch,  \n  Journal  of  the
Anthropological  Institute  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  vol,  xi,  pp.  124  et  seq.  For
proofs  of  the  existence  of  Palaeolithic  man  in  Egypt,  see  Mook,  Ilaynes,  Pitt-Riv-
ers, Plinders-Petrie,  and  others,  cited  at  length  in  the  next  chapter.  For  the  cor-
roborative and  concurrent  testimony  of  ethnology,  philology,  and  history  to  the  vast
antiquity  of  man,  see  Tylor,  Anthropology,  chap.  i.


282    ANTIQUITY   OF    MAN   AND    PREHISTORIC   ARCHAEOLOGY.

to  dev-elop  such  racial  differences.  Considerations  of  this
kind  gave  a  new  impulse  to  the  belief  that  man's  existence
might  even  date  back  into  the  Tertiary  period.  The  evi-
dence for  this  earlier  origin  of  man  was  ably  summed  up,
not  only  by  its  brilliant  advocate,  Mortillet,  but  by  a  former
opponent,  one  of  the  most  conservative  of  modern  anthro-
pologists, Quatrefages ;  and  the  conclusion  arrived  at  by
both  was,  that  man  did  really  exist  in  the  Tertiary  period.
The  acceptance  of  this  conclusion  was  also  seen  in  the  more
recent  work  of  Alfred  Russel  Wallace,  who,  though  very
cautious  and  conservative,  placed  the  origin  of  man  not  only
in  the  Tertiary  period,  but  in  an  earlier  stage  of  it  than  most
had  dared  assign — even  in  the  Miocene.

The  first  thing  raising  a  strong  presumption,  if  not  giving
proof,  that  man  existed  in  the  Tertiary,  was  the  fact  that
from  all  explored  parts  of  the  world  came  in  more  and  more
evidence  that  in  the  earlier  Quaternary  man  existed  in  dif-
ferent, strongly  marked  races  and  in  great  numbers.  From
all  regions  which  geologists  had  explored,  even  from  those
the  most  distant  and  different  from  each  other,  came  this
same  evidence — from  northern  Europe  to  southern  Africa ;
from  France  to  China ;  from  New  Jersey  to  British  Colum-
bia ;  from  British  Columbia  to  Peru.  The  development  of
man  in  such  numbers  and  in  so  many  different  regions,  with
such  differences  of  race  and  at  so  early  a  period,  must  have
required  a  long  previous  time.

This  argument  was  strengthened  by  discoveries  of  bones
bearing  marks  apparently  made  by  cutting  instruments,  in
the  Tertiary  formations  of  France  and  Italy,  and  by  the  dis-
coveries of  what  were  claimed  to  be  flint  implements  by  the
Abbe  Bourgeois  in  France,  and  of  implements  and  human
bones  by  Prof.  Capellini  in  Italy.

On  the  other  hand,  some  of  the  more  cautious  men  of
science  are  still  content  to  say  that  the  existence  of  man  in
the  Tertiary  period  is  not  yet  proven.  As  to  his  existence
throughout  the  Quaternary  epoch,  no  new  proofs  are  needed  ;
even  so  determined  a  supporter  of  the  theological  side  as
the  Duke  of  Argyll  has  been  forced  to  yield  to  the  evidence.

Of  attempts  to  make  an  exact  chronological  statement
throwing  light  on  the  length  of  the  various  prehistoric  peri-


THE    FLINT  WEAPONS   AND    IMPLEMENTS.  283

ods,  the  most  notable  have  been  those  by  M.  Morlot,  on  the
accumulated  strata  of  the  Lake  of  Geneva;  by  Gillieron,  on
the  silt  of  Lake  Neufchatel ;  by  Horner,  in  the  delta  deposits
of  Egypt ;  and  by  Riddle,  in  the  delta  of  the  Mississippi.
But  while  these  have  failed  to  give  anything  like  an  exact
result,  all  these  investigations  together  point  to  the  central
truth,  so  amply  established,  of  the  vast  antiquity  of  man,  and
the  utter  inadequacy  of  the  chronology  given  in  our  sacred
books.  The  period  of  man's  past  life  upon  our  planet,  which
has  been  fixed  by  the  universal  Church,  ''always,  every-
where, and  by  all,"  is  thus  perfectly  proved  to  be  insignifi-
cant  compared  with  those  vast  geological  epochs  during
which  man  is  now  known  to  have  existed.*


*As  to  the  evidence  of  man  in  the  Tertiary  period,  see  works  already  cited,
especially  Quatrefages,  Cartailhac,  and  Mortillet.  For  an  admirable  summary,
see  Laing,  Human  Origins,  chap.  viii.  See  also,  for  a  summing  up  of  the
evidence  in  favour  of  man  in  the  Tertiary  period,  Quatrefages,  Histoire  Gdn^rale
des  Races  Humaines/vo.  the  Bibliotheque  Ethnologique,  Paris,  1887,  chap.  iv.  As
to  the  earlier  view,  see  Vogt,  Lectures  on  Man,  London,  1864,  lecture  xi.  For  a
thorough  and  convincing  refutation  of  Sir  J.  W.  Dawson's  attempt  to  make  the  old
and  new  Stone  periods  coincide,  see  H.  W.  Haynes,  in  chap,  vi  of  the  History  of
America,  edited  by  Justin  Winsor.  For  development  of  various  important  points
in  the  relation  of  anthropology  to  the  human  occupancy  of  our  planet,  see  Topinard,
Anthropology,  London,  1890,  chap.  ix.


CHAPTER   VIII.
THE  ''FALL    OF  MAN''  AND   ANTHROPOLOGY.

In  the  previous  chapters  we  hav^e  seen  how  science,  es-
pecially within  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth  centuries,  has
thoroughly  changed  the  intelligent  thought  of  the  world  in
regard  to  the  antiquity  of  man  upon  our  planet ;  and  how
the  fabric  built  upon  the  chronological  indications  in  our
sacred  books — first,  by  the  early  fathers  of  the  Church,  after-
ward by  the  mediaeval  doctors,  and  finally  by  the  reformers
and  modern  orthodox  chronologists — has  virtually  disap-
peared before  an  entirely  different  view  forced  upon  us,
especially  by  Egyptian  and  Ass3^rian  studies,  as  well  as  by
geology  and  archaeology.

In  this  chapter  I  purpose  to  present  some  outlines  of  the
work  of  Anthropology,  especially  as  assisted  by  Ethnolog^^
in  showing  what  the  evolution  of  human  civilization  has
been.

Here,  too,  the  change  from  the  old  theological  view  based
upon  the  letter  of  our  sacred  books  to  the  modern  scientific
view  based  upon  evidence  absolutely  irrefragable  is  com-
plete. Here,  too,  we  are  at  the  beginning  of  a  vast  change
in  the  basis  and  modes  of  thought  upon  man— a  change  even
more  striking  than  that  accomplished  by  Copernicus  and
Galileo,  when  they  substituted  for  a  universe  in  which  sun
and  planets  revolved  about  the  earth  a  universe  in  which  the
earth  is  but  the  merest  grain  or  atom  revolving  with  other
worlds,  larger  and  smaller,  about  the  sun;  and  all  these
forming  but  one  among  innumerable  systems.

Ever  since  the  beginning  of  man's  effective  thinking  upon
the  great  problems  around  him,  two  antagonistic  views  have
existed  regarding  the  life  of  the   human  race  upon  earth.

284


THE   "FALL   OF    MAN"  AND    ANTHROPOLOGY.  285

The  first  of  these  is  the  belief  that  man  was  created  '*  in  the
beginning  "  a  perfect  being,  endowed  with  the  highest  moral
and  intellectual  powers,  but  that  there  came  a  "  fall,"  and,  as
its  result,  the  entrance  into  the  world  of  evil,  toil,  sorrow,
and  death.

Nothing  could  be  more  natural  than  such  an  explanation
of  the  existence  of  evil,  in  times  when  men  saw  everywhere
miracle  and  nowhere  law.  It  is,  under  such  circumstances,
by  far  the  most  easy  of  explanations,  for  it  is  in  accordance
with  the  appearances  of  things:  men  adopted  it  just  as  nat-
urally as  they  adopted  the  theory  that  the  Almighty  hangs
up  the  stars  as  lights  in  the  solid  firmament  above  the  earth,
or  hides  the  sun  behind  a  mountain  at  night,  or  wheels  the
planets  around  the  earth,  or  flings  comets  as  "signs  and
wonders  "  to  scare  a  wicked  world,  or  allows  evil  spirits  to
control  thunder,  lightning,  and  storm,  and  to  cause  diseases
of  body  and  mind,  or  opens  the  "  windows  of  heaven  "  to  let
down  "  the  waters  that  be  above  the  heavens,"  and  thus  to
give  rain  upon  the  earth.

A  belief,  then,  in  a  primeval  period  of  innocence  and
perfection — moral,  intellectual,  and  physical — from  which
men  for  some  fault  fell,  is  perfectly  in  accordance  with  what
we  should  expect.

Among  the  earliest  known  records  of  our  race  we  find
this  view  taking  shape  in  the  Chaldean  legends  of  war  be-
tween the  gods,  and  of  a  fall  of  man ;  both  of  which  seemed
necessary  to  explain  the  existence  of  evil.

In  Greek  mythology  perhaps  the  best-known  statement
was  made  by  Hesiod  :  to  him  it  was  revealed,  regarding  the
men  of  the  most  ancient  times,  that  they  were  at  first  '*a
golden  race,"  that  "  as  gods  they  were  wont  to  live,  with  a
life  void  of  care,  without  labour  and  trouble  ;  nor  was  wretch-
ed old  age  at  all  impending  ;  but  ever  did  they  delight  them-
selves out  of  the  reach  of  all  ills,  and  they  died  as  if  over-
come by  sleep  ;  all  blessings  were  theirs  :  of  its  own  will  the
fruitful  field  would  bear  them  fruit,  much  and  ample,  and
they  gladly  used  to  reap  the  labours  of  their  hands  in  quiet-
ness along  with  many  good  things,  being  rich  in  flocks  and
true  to  the  blessed  gods."  But  there  came  a  **fall,"  caused
by    human    curiosity.     Pandora,  the    first  woman    created,


286  THE    "FALL   OF    MAN"  AND   ANTHROPOLOGY.

received  a  vase  w^hich,  by  divine  command,  was  to  remain
closed ;  but  she  was  tempted  to  open  it,  and  troubles,
sorrow,  and  disease  escaped  into  the  world,  hope  alone  re-
maining.

So,  too,  in  Roman  mythological  poetry  the  well-known
picture  by  Ovid  is  but  one  among  the  many  exhibitions  of
this  same  belief  in  a  primeval  golden  age — a  Saturnian  cycle  ;
one  of  the  constantly  recurring  attempts,  so  universal  and  so
natural  in  the  early  history  of  man,  to  account  for  the  exist-
ence of  evil,  care,  and  toil  on  earth  by  explanatory  myths
and  legends.

This  view,  growing  out  of  the  myths,  legends,  and  the-
ologies of  earlier  peoples,  we  also  find  embodied  in  the  sacred
tradition  of  the  Jews,  and  especially  in  one  of  the  documents
which  form  the  impressive  poem  beginning  the  books  attrib-
uted to  Moses.  As  to  the  Christian  Church,  no  word  of  its
Blessed  Founder  indicates  that  it  was  committed  by  him  to
this  theory,  or  that  he  even  thought  it  worthy  of  his  atten-
tion. How,  like  so  many  other  dogmas  never  dreamed  of  by
Jesus  of  Nazareth  and  those  who  knew  him  best,  it  was  de-
veloped, it  does  not  lie  within  the  province  of  this  chapter  to
point  out ;  nor  is  it  worth  our  while  to  dwell  upon  its  evolu-
tion in  the  early  Church,  in  the  Middle  Ages,  at  the  Reforma-
tion, and  in  various  branches  of  the  Protestant  Church  :  suf-
fice it  that,  though  among  English-speaking  nations  by  far
the  most  important  influence  in  its  favour  has  come  from  Mil-
ton's inspiration  rather  than  from  that  of  older  sacred  books,
no  doctrine  has  been  more  universally  accepted,  ''always,
everywhere,  and  by  all,"  from  the  earliest  fathers  of  the
Church  down  to  the  present  hour.

On  the  other  hand  appeared  at  an  early  period  the  oppo-
site view — that  mankind,  instead  of  having  fallen  from  a  high
intellectual,  moral,  and  religious  condition,  has  slowly  risen
from  low  and  brutal  beginnings.  In  Greece,  among  the  phi-
losophers contemporary  with  Socrates,  we  find  Critias  de-
picting a  rise  of  man,  from  a  time  when  he  w^as  beastlike  and
lawless,  through  a  period  when  laws  were  developed,  to  a
time  when  morality  received  enforcement  from  religion  ;  but
among  all  the  statements  of  this  theory  the  most  noteworthy
is  that  given  by  Lucretius  in  his  great  poem  on  TJie  N'attire


THE   "FALL   OF   MAN"  AND   ANTHROPOLOGY.  287

of  Things.  Despite  its  errors,  it  remains  among  the  most  re-
markable examples  of  prophetic  insight  in  the  history  of  our
race.  The  inspiration  of  Lucretius  gave  him  almost  mirac-
ulous glimpses  of  truth  ;  his  view  of  the  development  of
civilization  from  the  rudest  beginnings  to  the  height  of  its
achievements  is  a  wonderful  growth,  rooted  in  observation
and  thought,  branching  forth  into  a  multitude  of  striking
facts  and  fancies ;  and  among  these  is  the  statement  regard-
ing the  sequence  of  inventions  :

"  Man's  earliest  arms  were  fingers,  teeth,  and  nails,
And  stones  and  fragments  from  the  branching  woods ;
Then  copper  next ;  and  last,  as  latest  traced.
The  tyrant,  iron."

Thus  did  the  poet  prophesy  one  of  the  most  fruitful
achievements  of  modern  science  :  the  discovery  of  that  series
of  epochs  which  has  been  so  carefully  studied  in  our  century.

V^ery  striking,  also,  is  the  statement  of  Horace,  though
his  idea  is  evidently  derived  from  Lucretius.  He  dwells
upon  man's  first  condition  on  earth  as  low  and  bestial,  and
pictures  him  lurking  in  caves,  progressing  from  the  use  of
his  fists  and  nails,  first  to  clubs,  then  to  arms  which  he  had
learned  to  forge,  and,  finally,  to  the  invention  of  the  names
of  things,  to  literature,  and  to  laws.*

During  the  mediaeval  ages  of  faith  this  view  was  almost

*  For  the  passage  in  Hesiod,  as  given,  see  the  Works  and  Days,  lines  109-120.
in  Banks's  translation.  As  to  Horace,  see  the  Satires,  i,  3,  99.  As  to  the  relation
of  the  poetic  account  of  the  Fall  in  Genesis  to  Chaldean  myths,  see  Smith,  Chal-
dean Account  of  Genesis,  pp.  13,  17.  For  a  very  instructive  separation  of  the
Jehovistic  and  Elohistic  parts  of  Genesis,  with  the  account  of  the  "  Fall  "  as  given
in  the  former,  see  Lenormant,  La  Gdnese,  Paris,  1883,  pp.  166-168  ;  also  Bacon,
Genesis  of  Genesis.     Of  the  lines  of  Lucretius —

"  Arma  antiqua,  manus,  ungues,  dentesque  fuerunt,
Et  lapides,  et  item  sylvarum  fragmina  rami,
Posterius  ferri  vis  est,  aerisque  reperta,
Sed  prior  aeris  erat,  quam  ferri  cognitus  usus  " —

the  translation  given  is  that  of  Good.  For  a  more  exact  prose  translation,  see
Munro's  Lucretius,  fourth  edition,  which  is  much  more  careful,  at  least  in  the
proof-reading,  than  the  first  edition.  As  regards  Lucretius's  prophetic  insight  into
some  of  the  greatest  conclusions  of  modern  science,  see  Munro's  translation  and
notes,  fourth  edition,  book  v,  notes  ii,  p.  335.  On  the  relation  of  several  pas-
sages in  Horace  to  the  ideas  of  Lucretius,  see  Munro  as  above.  For  the  passage
from  Luther,  see  the  Table  Talk,  Hazlitt's  translation,  p.  242.


288  THE    "FALL   OF    MAN"    AND   ANTHROPOLOGY.

entirely  obscured,  and  at  the  Reformation  it  seemed  likely  to
remain  so.  Typical  of  the  simplicity  of  belief  in  "  the  Fall"
cherished  among  the  Reformers  is  Luther's  declaration  re-
garding Adam  and  Eve.  He  tells  us,  *'  they  entered  into  the
garden  about  noon,  and  having  a  desire  to  eat,  she  took  the
apple  ;  then  came  the  fall — according  to  our  account  at  about
two  o'clock."  But  in  the  revival  of  learning  the  old  eclipsed
truth  reappeared,  and  in  the  first  part  of  the  seventeenth  cen-
tury we  find  that,  among  the  crimes  for  which  Vanini  was  sen-
tenced at  Toulouse  to  have  his  tongue  torn  out  and  to  be
burned  alive,  was  his  belief  that  there  is  a  gradation  extending
upward  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest  form  of  created  beings.

Yet,  in  the  same  century,  the  writings  of  Bodin,  Bacon,
Descartes,  and  Pascal  were  evidently  undermining  the  old
idea  of  ''  the  Fall."  Bodin  especially,  brilliant  as  were  his
services  to  orthodoxy,  argued  lucidly  against  the  doctrine
of  general  human  deterioration.

Early  in  the  eighteenth  century  Vico  presented  the  phi-
losophy of  history  as  an  upward  movement  of  man  out  of
animalism  and  barbarism.  This  idea  took  firm  hold  upon
human  thought,  and  in  the  following  centuries  such  men  as
Lessing  and  Turgot  gave  new  force  to  it.

The  investigations  of  the  last  forty  years  have  shown  that
Lucretius  and  Horace  were  inspired  prophets :  what  they
saw  by  the  exercise  of  reason  illumined  by  poetic  genius,  has
been  now  thoroughly  based  upon  facts  carefully  ascertained
and  arranged — until  Thomsen  and  Nilsson,  the  northern  ar-
chaeologists, have  brought  these  prophecies  to  evident  fulfil-
ment, by  presenting  a  scientific  classification  dividing  the  age
of  prehistoric  man  in  various  parts  of  the  world  between  an
old  stone  period,  a  new  stone  period,  a  period  of  beaten
copper,  a  period  of  bronze,  and  a  period  of  iron,  and  array-
ing vast  masses  of  facts  from  all  parts  of  the  world,  fitting
thoroughly  into  each  other,  strengthening  each  other,  and
showing  beyond  a  doubt  that,  instead  of  a  /a//,  there  has
been  a  rise  of  man,  from  the  earliest  indications  in  the  Qua-
ternary, or  even,  possibly,  in  the  Tertiary  period.*

*  For  Vanini,  see  Topinard,  EWnents  d'Anthropologie,  p.  52.  For  a  brief  and
eareful  summary  of  the  agency  of  Eccard  in  Germany,  Goguet  in  France,  Hoare  in
England,  and  others  in  various  parts  of  Europe,  as  regards  this  development  of  the


THE   "FALL   OF    MAN"   AND   ANTHROPOLOGY.


289


The  first  blow  at  the  full}-  developed  doctrine  of  ''the
Fall "  came,  as  we  have  seen,  from  geology.  According  to
that  doctrine,  as  held  quite  generally  from  its  beginnings
among  the  fathers  and  doctors  of  the  primitive  Church
down  to  its  culmination  in  the  minds  of  great  Protestants
like  John  Wesley,  the  statement  in  our  sacred  books  that
"death  entered  the  world  by  sin  "  was  taken  as  a  historic
fact,  necessitating  the  conclusion  that,  before  the  serpent
persuaded  Eve  to  eat  of  the  forbidden  fruit,  death  on  our
planet  was  unknown.  Naturally,  when  geology  revealed,  in
the  strata  of  a  period  long  before  the  coming  of  man  on
earth,  a  vast  multitude  of  carnivorous  tribes  fitted  to  destroy
their  fellow-creatures  on  land  and  sea,  and  within  the  fossil-
ized skeletons  of  many  of  these  the  partially  digested  remains
of  animals,  this  doctrine  was  too  heavy  to  be  carried,  and  it
was  quietly  dropped.

But  about  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century  the  doc-
trine of  the  rise  of  man  as  opposed  to  the  doctrine  of  his
''  fall "  received  a  great  accession  of  strength  from  a  source
most  unexpected.  As  we  saw  in  the  last  chapter,  the  facts
proving  the  great  antiquity  of  man  foreshadowed  a  new  and
even  more  remarkable  idea  regarding  him.  We  saw,  it  is
true,  that  the  opponents  of  Boucher  de  Perthes,  while  they
could  not  deny  his  discover}^  of  human  implements  in  the
drift,  were  successful  in  securing  a  verdict  of  "Not  proven  "
as  regarded  his  discovery  of  human  bones  ;  but  their  triumph
was  short-lived.  Many  previous  discoveries,  little  thought
of  up  to  that  time,  began  to  be  studied,  and  others  were
added  which  resulted  not  merely  in  confirming  the  truth
regarding  the  antiquity  of  man,  but  in  establishing  another
doctrine  which  the  opponents  of  science  regarded  w^h  vastly
greater  dislike — the  doctrine  that  man  has  not  fallen  from  an


scientific  view  during  the  eighteenth  century,  see  Mortillet,  Le  PrMstorique,  Paris,
1885,  chap.  i.  For  the  agency  of  Bodin,  Bacon,  Descartes,  and  Pascal,  see  Flint,
Philosophy  of  Histo?y,  introduction,  pp.  28  et  seq.  For  a  shorter  summary,  see
Lubbock,  Prehistoric  Man.  For  the  statements  by  the  northern  archaeologists,  see
Nilsson,  Worsaae,  and  the  other  main  works  cited  in  this  article.  For  a  generous
statement  regarding  the  great  services  of  the  Danish  archaeologists  in  this  field,  see
Quatrefages,  introduction  to  Cartailhac,  Les  Ages  Prdhistoriqites  de  VEspagne  et  die
Portugal.

20


290


THE    "FALL   OF    MAN"   AND   ANTHROPOLOGY.


original  high  estate  in  which  he  was  created  about  six  thou-
sand years  ago,  but  that,  from  a  period  vastly  earlier  than
any  warranted  by  the  sacred  chronologists,  he  has  been,  in
spite  of  lapses  and  deteriorations,  rising.

A  brief  review  of  this  new  growth  of  truth  may  be  use-
ful. As  early  as  1835  Prof.  Jaeger  had  brought  out  from  a
quantity  of  Quaternary  remains  dug  up  long  before  at  Cann-
stadt,  near  Stuttgart,  a  portion  of  a  human  skull,  apparently
of  very  low  type.  A  battle  raged  about  it  for  a  time,  but
this  finally  subsided,  owing  to  uncertainties  arising  from  the
circumstances  of  the  discovery.

In  1856,  in  the  Neanderthal,  near  Diisseldorf,  among  Qua-
ternary remains  gathered  on  the  fioor  of  a  grotto,  another
skull  was  found  bearing  the  same  evidence  of  a  low  human
type.  As  in  the  case  of  the  Cannstadt  skull,  this  again  was
fiercely  debated,  and  finally  the  questions  regarding  it  were
allowed  to  remain  in  suspense.  But  new  discoveries  were
made :  at  Eguisheim,  at  Brux,  at  Spy,  and  elsewhere,  human
skulls  were  found  of  a  similarly  low  type  ;  and,  while  each  of
the  earlier  discoveries  was  open  to  debate,  and  either,  had  no
other  been  discovered,  might  have  been  considered  an  ab-
normal specimen,  the  combination  of  all  these  showed  con-
clusively that  not  only  had  a  race  of  men  existed  at  that  «re-
mote  period,  but  that  it  was  of  a  type  as  low  as  the  lowest,
perhaps  below  the  lowest,  now  known.

Research  was  now  redoubled,  and,  as  a  result,  human
skulls  and  complete  skeletons  of  various  types  began  to  be
discovered  in  the  ancient  deposits  of  many  other  parts  of
the  world,  and  especially  in  France,  Belgium,  Germany,  the
Caucasus,  Africa,  and  North  and  South  America.

But  stoon  began  to  emerge  from  all  these  discoveries  a
fact  of  enormous  importance.  The  skulls  and  bones  found
at  Cro  Magnon,  Solutre,  Furfooz,  Grenelle,  and  elsewhere,
were  compared,  and  it  was  thus  made  certain  that  various
races  had  already  appeared  and  lived  in  various  grades  of
civilization,  even  in  those  exceedingly  remote  epochs;  that
even  then  there  were  various  strata  of  humanity  ranging
from  races  of  a  very  low  to  those  of  a  very  high  type  ;  and
that  upon  any  theory — certainly  upon  the  theory  of  the
origin  of  mankind  from  a  single  pair — two  things  were  evi-


THE   "FALL   OF    MAN"   AND   ANTHROPOLOGY.  29I

dent :  first,  that  long,  slow  processes  during  vast  periods  of
time  must  have  been  required  for  the  differentiation  of  these
races,  and  for  the  evolution  of  man  up  to  the  point  where
the  better  specimens  show  him,  certainly  in  the  early  Qua-
ternary and  perhaps  in  the  Tertiary  period  ;  and,  secondly,
that  there  had  been  from  the  first  appearance  of  man,  of
which  we  have  any  traces,  an  upward  tendency."^

This  second  conclusion,  the  upward  tendency  of  man
from  low  beginnings,  was  made,  more  and  more  clear  by
bringing  into  relations  with  these  remains  of  human  bodies
and  of  extinct  animals  the  remains  of  human  handiwork.  As
stated  in  the  last  chapter,  the  river  drift  and  bone  caves  in
Great  Britain,  France,  and  other  parts  of  the  world,  revealed
a  progression,  even  in  the  various  divisions  of  the  earliest
Stone  period  ;  for,  beginning  at  the  very  lowest  strata  of
these  remains,  on  the  floors  of  the  caverns,  associated  mainly
with  the  bones  of  extinct  animals,  such  as  the  cave  bear,  the
hairy  elephant,  and  the  like,  were  the  rudest  implements ;
then,  in  strata  above  these,  sealed  in  the  stalagmite  of  the
cavern  floors,  lying  with  the  bones  of  animals  extinct  but
more  recent,  stone  implements  were  found,  still  rude,  but,  as
a  rule,  of  an  improved  type ;  and,  finally,  in  a  still  higher
stratum,  associated  with  bones  of  animals  like  the  reindeer
and  bison,  which,  though  not  extinct,  have  departed  to  other
climates,  were  rude  stone  implements,  on  the  whole  of  a  still
better  workmanship.  Such  was  the  foreshadowing,  even  at
that  early  rude  Stone  period,  of  the  proofs  that  the  tendency

*  For  Wesley's  statement  of  the  amazing  consequences  of  the  entrance  of  death
into  the  world  by  sin,  see  citations  from  his  sermon  on  71ie  Fall  of  Man  in  the
chapter  on  Geology.  For  Boucher  de  Perthes,  see  his  Life  by  Ledieu,  especially
chapters  v  and  xix  ;  also  letters  in  the  appendix  ;  also  ^es  Antiquith  Celtiques  et
Antedilitviennes,  as  cited  in  previous  chapters  of  this  work.  For  an  account  of  the
Neanderthal  man  and  other  remains  mentioned,  see  Quatrefages,  Hitman  Species,
chap,  xxvi ;  also  Mortillet,  L"  Pr<fhistorique,  Paris,  1885,  pp.  232  et  seq.  \  also  other
writers  cited  in  this  chapter.  For  the  other  discoveries  mentioned,  see  the  same
sources.  For  an  engraving  of  the  skull  and  the  restored  human  face  of  the  Nean-
derthal man,  see  Reinach,  Antiquity  N'ationa/es,  etc.,  vol.  i,  p.  138.  For  the  vast
regions  over  which  that  early  race  spread,  see  Quatrefages  as  above,  p.  307.  See
also  the  same  author,  Histoire  G^n^rale  des  Races  Hiimaines,  in  the  Biblioth^qiie
Ethnologique,  Paris,  1887,  p.  4.  In  the  vast  mass  of  literature  bearing  on  this  sub
ject,  see  Quatrefages,  Dupont,  Reinach,  Joly,  Mortillet,  Tyler,  and  Lubbock,  in
works  cited  through  these  chapters.


292


THE    "FALL   OF    MAN"   AND   ANTHROPOLOGY.


of  man  has  been  from  his  earliest  epoch  and  in  all  parts  of
the  world,  as  a  rule,  upward.

But  this  rule  was  to  be  much  further  exemplified.  About
1850,  while  the  French  and  English  geologists  were  working
more  especially  among  the  relics  oi  the  drift  and  cave  pe-
riods, noted  archseologists  of  the  North — Forchammer,  Steen-
strup,  and  Worsaae — were  devoting  themselves  to  the  in-
vestigation of  certain  remains  upon  the  Danish  Peninsula.
These  remains  were  of  two  kinds :  first,  there  were  vast
shell-heaps  or  accumulations  of  shells  and  other  refuse  cast
aside  by  rude  tribes  which  at  some  unknown  age  in  the
past  lived  on  the  shores  of  the  Baltic,  principally  on  shell-
fish. That  these  shell-heaps  were  very  ancient  was  evident :
the  shells  of  oysters  and  the  like  found  in  them  were  far
larger  than  any  now  found  on  those  coasts ;  their  size,  so  far
from  being  like  that  of  the  corresponding  varieties  which
now  exist  in  the  brackish  waters  of  the  Baltic,  was  in  every
case  like  that  of  those  varieties  which  only  thrive  in  the
waters  of  the  open  salt  sea.  Here  was  a  clear  indication  that
at  the  time  when  man  formed  these  shell-heaps  those  coasts
were  in  far  more  direct  communication  with  the  salt  sea
than  at  present,  and  that  sufficient  time  must  have  elapsed
since  that  period  to  have  wrought  enormous  changes  in  sea
and  land  throughout  those  regions.

Scattered  through  these  heaps  were  found  indications  of
a  grade  of  civilization  when  man  still  used  implements  of
stone,  but  implements  and  weapons  which,  though  still  rude,
showed  a  progress  from  those  of  the  drift  and  early  cave
period,  some  of  them  being  of  polished  stone.

With  these  were  other  evidences  that  civilization  had
progressed.  With,  implements  rude  enough  to  have  sur-
vived from  early  periods,  other  implements  never  known  in
the  drift  and  bone  caves  began  to  appear,  and,  though  there
were  few  if  any  bones  of  other  domestic  animals,  the  remains
of  dogs  were  found  ;  everything  showed  that  there  had  been
a  progress  in  civilization  between  the  former  Stone  epoch
and  this.

The  second  series  of  discoveries  in  Scandinavia  was  made
in  the  peat-beds:  these  were  generally  formed  in  hollows  or
bowls  varying  in  depth  from  ten  to  thirty  feet,  and  a  section


THE   "FALL   OF    MAN"   AND    ANTHROrOLOGY.  293

of  them,  like  a  section  of  the  deposits  in  the  bone  caverns,
showed  a  gradual  evolution  of  human  culture.  The  lower
strata  in  these  great  bowls  were  found  to  be  made  up  chiefly
of  mosses  and  various  plants  matted  together  with  the  trunks
of  fallen  trees,  sometimes  of  very  large  diameter;  and  the
botanical  examination  of  the  lowest  layer  of  these  trees  and
plants  in  the  various  bowls  revealed  a  most  important  fact  :
for  this  layer,  the  first  in  point  of  time,  was  always  of  the
Scotch  fir — which  now  grows  nowhere  in  the  Danish  islands,
and  can  not  be  made  to  grow  anywhere  in  them — and  of
plants  which  are  now  extinct  in  these  regions,  but  have  re-
treated within  the  arctic  circle.  Coming  up  from  the  bot-
tom of  these  great  bowls  there  was  found  above  the  first
layer  a  second,  in  which  were  matted  together  masses  of
oak  trees  of  different  varieties ;  these,  too,  were  relics  of  a
bygone  epoch,  since  the  oak  has  almost  entirely  disappeared
from  Denmark.  Above  these  came  a  third  stratum  made  up
of  fallen  beech  trees ;  and  the  beech  is  now,  and  has  been
since  the  beginning  of  recorded  history,  the  most  common
tree  of  the  Danish  Peninsula,

Now  came  a  second  fact  of  the  utmost  importance  as  con-
nected with  the  first.  Scattered,  as  a  rule,  through  the  lower
of  these  deposits,  that  of  the  extinct  fir  trees  and  plants,  were  /
found  implements  and  weapons  of  smooth  stone ;  in  the
layer  of  oak  trees  were  found  implements  of  bronze  ;  and
among  the  layer  of  beeches  were  found  implements  and
weapons  of  iron.

The  general  result  of  these  investigations  in  these  two
sources,  the  shell  mounds  and  the  peat  deposits,  was  the
same:  the  first  civilization  evidenced  in  them  was  marked
by  the  use  of  stone  implements  more  or  less  smooth,  show-
ing a  progress  from  the  earlier  rude  Stone  period  made
known  by  the  bone  caves;  then  came  a  later  progress  to  a
higher  civilization,  marked  by  the  use  of  bronze  implements  ;
and,  finally,  a  still  higher  development  when  iron  began  to
be  used.

The  labours  of  the  Danish  archaeologists  have  resulted  in
the  formation  of  a  great  museum  at  Copenhagen,  and  on  the
specimens  they  have  found,  coupled  with  those  of  the  drift
and  bone  caves,  is  based  the  classification  between  the  main


2Q4  THE    "FALL   OF    MAN"   AND    ANTHROPOLOGY.

periods  or  divisions  in  the  evolution  of  the  human  race  above
referred  to.

It  was  not  merely  in  Scandinavian  lands  that  these  re-
sults were  reached  ;  substantially  the  same  discoveries  were
made  in  Ireland  and  France,  in  Sardinia  and  Portugal,  in
Japan  and  in  Brazil,  in  Cuba  and  in  the  United  States  ;  in
fact,  as  a  rule,  in  nearly  every  part  of  the  world  w^hich  w^as
thoroughly  examined.^

But  from  another  quarter  came  a  yet  more  striking  indi-
cation of  this  same  evolution.  As  far  back  as  the  year  1829
there  were  discovered,  in  the  Lake  of  Zurich,  piles  and
other  antiquities  indicating  a  former  existence  of  human
dwellings,  standing  in  the  water  at  some  distance  from  the
shore ;  but  the  usual  mixture  of  thoughtlessness  and  dread
of  new  ideas  seems  to  have  prevailed,  and  nothing  was  done
until  about  1853,  when  new  discoveries  of  the  same  kind
were  followed  up  vigorously,  and  Rutimeyer,  Keller,  Troy-
on,  and  others  showed  not  only  in  the  Lake  of. Zurich,
but  in  many  other  lakes  in  Switzerland,  remains  of  former
habitations,  and,  in  the  midst  of  these,  great  numbers  of
relics,  exhibiting  the  grade  of  civilization  which  those  lake-
dwellers  had  attained.

Here,  too,  were  accumulated  proofs  of  the  upward  tend-
ency of  the  human  race.  Implements  of  polished  stone,
bone,  leather,  pottery  of  various  grades,  woven  cloth,  bones


*  For  the  general  subject,  see  Mortillet,  Le  Pre'historiqtte,  p.  498,  et  passim.
For  examples  of  the  rude  stone  implements,  improving  as  we  go  from  earlier  to
later  layers  in  the  bone  caves,  see  Boyd  Dawkins,  Early  Man  in  Britain,  chap,  vii,
p.  186  ;  also  Quatrefages,  Himian  Species,  New  York,  1879,  pp.  305  et  seq.  An  in-
teresting gleam  of  light  is  thrown  on  the  subject  in  De  Baye,  Grottes  PreJiistoriques
de  la  Marne,  pp.  31  et  seq.  ;  also  Evans,  as  cited  in  the  previous  chapter.  For
the  more  recent  investigations  in  the  Danish  shell-heaps,  see  Boyd  Dawkins,  Early
Alan  in  Britain,  pp.  303,  304.  For  these  evidences  of  advanced  civilization  in  the
shell-heaps,  see  Mortillet,  p.  498.  He,  like  Nilsson,  says  that  only  the  bones  of
the  dog  were  found  ;  but  compare  Dawkins,  p.  305.  For  the  very  full  list  of  these
discoveries,  with  their  bearing  on  each  other,  see  Mortillet,  p.  499.  As  to  those  in
Scandinavian  countries,  see  Nilsson,  The  Primitive  Inhabitants  of  Scandinavia,
third  edition,  with  Introduction  by  Lubbock,  London,  1868  ;  also  the  Pre-History
of  the  North,  by  Worsaae,  English  translation,  London,  1886.  For  shell-mounds
and  their  contents  in  the  Spanish  Peninsula,  see  Cartailhac's  greater  work  already
cited.  For  summary  of  such  discoveries  throughout  the  world,  see  Mortillet,  Le
Prdhistorique,  pp.  497  et  seq.


THE   "  FALL   OF    MAN  "  AND   ANTHROrOLOGY.  295

of  several  kinds  of  domestic  animals,  various  sorts  of  grain,
bread  which  had  been  preserved  by  charring,  and  a  multi-
tude of  evidences  of  progress  never  found  among  the  earlier,
ruder  relics  of  civilization,  showed  yet  more  strongly  that
man  had  arrived  here  at  a  still  higher  stage  than  his  prede-
cessor of  the  drift,  cave,  and  shell-heap  periods,  and  had
gone  on  from  better  to  better.

Very  striking  evidences  of  this  upward  tendency  were
found  in  each  class  of  implements.  As  by  comparing  the
chipped  flint  implements  of  the  lower  and  earlier  strata  in
the  cave  period  with  those  of  the  later  and  upper  strata  we
saw  progress,  so,  in  each  of  the  periods  of  polished  stone,
bronze,  and  iron,  we  see,  by  similar  comparisons,  a  steady
progress  from  rude  to  perfected  implemei'fts ;  and  especially
is  this  true  in  the  remains  of  the  various  lake-dwellings,  for
amonof  these  can  be  traced  out  constant  increase  in  the  va-
riety  of  animals  domesticated,  and  gradual  improvements  in
means  of  subsistence  and  in  ways  of  living.

Incidentally,  too,  a  fact,  at  first  sight  of  small  account,
but  on  reflection  exceedingly  important,  was  revealed.  The
earlier  bronze  implements  were  frequently  found  to  imitate
in  various  minor  respects  implements  of  stone ;  in  other
words,  forms  were  at  first  given  to  bronze  implements
natural  in  working  stone,  but  not  natural  in  working
bronze.  This  showed  the  direction  of  the  development —
that  it  was  upward  from  stone  to  bronze,  not  downward
from  bronze  to  stone;  that  it  was  progress  rather  than
decline.

These  investigations  were  supplemented  by  similar  re-
searches elsewhere.  In  many  other  parts  of  the  world  it
was  found  that  lake-dwellers  had  existed  in  different  grades
of  civilization,  but  all  within  a  certain  range,  intermediate
between  the  cave-dwellers  and  the  historic  period,  To  ex-
plain this  epoch  of  the  lake-dwellers  History  came  in  with
the  account  given  by  Herodotus  of  the  lake-dwellings  on
Lake  Prasias,  which  gave  protection  from  the  armies  of  Per-
sia. Still  more  important,  Comparative  Ethnography  showed
that  to-day,  in  various  parts  of  the  world,  especially  in  New
Guinea  and  West  Africa,  races  of  men  are  living  in  lake-
dwellings  built  upon  piles,  and  with  a  range  of  implements


2q6  the    "FALL   OF    MAN"   AND   ANTHROPOLOGY.

and  weapons  strikingly  like   many  of   those  discovered   in
these  ancient  lake  deposits  of  Switzerland.

In  Great  Britain,  France,  Germany,  Italy,  Ireland,  Scot-
land, and  other  countries,  remains  of  a  different  sort  were
also  found,  throwing  light  on  this  progress.  The  cromlechs,
cranogs,  mounds,  and  the  like,  though  some  of  them  indicate
the  work  of  weaker  tribes  pressed  upon  by  stronger,  show,
as  a  rule,  the  same  upward  tendency.

At  a  very  early  period  in  the  history  of  these  discoveries,
various  attempts  were  made — nominally  in  the  interest  of
religion,  but  really  in  the  interest  of  sundr}^  creeds  and
catechisms  framed  when  men  knew  little  or  nothing  of  natu-
ral laws — to  break  the  force  of  such  evidences  of  the  progress
and  development  6f  the  human  race  from  lower  to  higher.
Out  of  all  the  earlier  efforts  two  may  be  taken  as  fairly  typ-
ical, for  they  exhibit  the  opposition  to  science  as  developed
under  two  different  schools  of  theology,  each  working  in  its
own  way.  The  first  of  these  shows  great  ingenuity  and
learning,  and  is  presented  by  Mr.  Southall  in  his  book,  pub-
lished in  1875,  entitled  The  Recent  Origin  of  the  World.  In
this  he  grapples  first  of  all  with  the  difficulties  presented  by
the  early  date  of  Egyptian  civilization,  and  the  keynote  of
his  argument  is  the  statement  made  by  an  eminent  Egyptol-
ogist, at  a  period  before  modern  archaeological  discoveries
were  well  understood,  that  "  Egypt  laughs  the  idea  of  a  rude
Stone  age,  a  polished  Stone  age,  a  Bronze  age,  an  Iron  age,
to  scorn."

Mr.  Southall's  method  was  substantially  that  of  the  late
excellent  Mr.  Gosse  in  geology.  Mr.  Gosse,  as  the  readers
of  this  work  may  remember,  felt  obliged,  in  the  supposed  in-
terest of  Genesis,  to  urge  that  safety  to  men's  souls  might  be
found  in  believing  that,  six  thousand  years  ago,  the  Almighty,
for  some  inscrutable  purpose,  suddenly  set  Niagara  pouring
very  near  the  spot  where  it  is  pouring  now  ;  laid  the  various
strata,  and  sprinkled  the  fossils  through  them  like  plums
through  a  pudding  ;  scratched  the  glacial  grooves  upon  the
rocks,  and  did  a  vast  multitude  of  things,  subtle  and  cunning,
little  and  great,  in  all  parts  of  the  world,  required  to  delude
geologists  of  modern  times  into  the  conviction  that  all  these
things  were  the   result  of  a  steady  progress  through  long


THE    "FALL   OF    MAN"   AND   ANTHROPOLOGY.  297

epochs.  On  a  similar  plan,  Mr.  Southall  proposed,  at  the
very  beginning  of  his  book,  as  a  final  solution  of  the  prob-
lem, the  declaration  that  Egypt,  with  its  high  civilization  in
the  time  of  Mena,  with  its  races,  classes,  institutions,  arrange-
ments, language,  monuments — all  indicating  an  evolution
through  a  vast  previous  history — was  a  sudden  creation
which  came  fully  made  from  the  hands  of  the  Creator.  To
use  his  own  words,  *'  The  Egyptians  had  no  Stone  age,  and
were  born  civilized."

There  is  an  old  story  that  once  on  a  time  a  certain  jovial
King  of  France,  making  a  progress  through  his  kingdom,
was  received  at  the  gates  of  a  provincial  town  by  the  may-
or's deputy,  who  began  his  speech  on  this  wise:  *' May  it
please  your  Majesty,  there  are  just  thirteen  reasons  why  His
Honour  the  Mayor  can  not  be  present  to  welcome  you  this
morning.  The  first  of  these  reasons  is  that  he  is  dead."  On
this  the  king  graciously  declared  that  this  first  reason  was
sufficient,  and  that  he  would  not  trouble  the  mayor's  deputy
for  the  twelve  others.

So  with  Mr.  Southall's  argument :  one  simple  result  of
scientific  research  out  of  many  is  all  that  it  is  needful  to
state,  and  this  is,  that  in  these  later  years  we  have  a  new  and
convincing  evidence  of  the  existence  of  prehistoric  man  in
Egypt  in  his  earliest,  rudest  beginnings  ;  the  very  same  evi-
dence which  we  find  in  all  other  parts  of  the  world  which
have  been  carefully  examined.  This  evidence  consists  of
stone  implements  and  weapons  which  have  been  found  in
Egypt  in  such  forms,  at  such  points,  and  in  such  positions
that  when  studied  in  connection  with  those  found  in  all
other  parts  of  the  world,  from  New  Jersey  to  California,
from  France  to  India,  and  from  England  to  the  Andaman
Islands,  they  force  upon  us  the  conviction  that  civilization
in  Egypt,  as  in  all  other  parts  of  the  world,  was  developed
by  the  same  slow  process  of  evolution  from  the  rudest  be-
ginnings.

It  is  true  that  men  learned  in  Egyptology  had  discour-
aged the  idea  of  an  earlier  Stone  age  in  Egypt,  and  that
among  these  were  Lepsius  and  Brugsch ;  but  these  men
were  not  trained  in  prehistoric  archaeology  ;  their  devotion
to  the  studv  of  the  monuments  of  Egyptian  civilization  had


298  THE   "FALL   OF   MAN"   AND   ANTHROPOLOGY.

evidently  drawn  them  away  from  sympathy,  and  indeed
from  acquaintance,  with  the  work  of  men  like  Boucher  de
Perthes,  Lartet,  Nilsson,  Troyon,  and  Dawkins.  But  a  new
era  was  beginning.  In  1867  Worsaae  called  attention  to  the
prehistoric  implements  found  on  the  borders  of  Egypt ;  two
3'ears  later  Arcelin  discussed  such  stone  implements  found
beneath  the  soil  of  Sakkara  and  Gizeh,  the  very  focus  of
the  earliest  Egyptian  civilization  ;  in  the  same  year  Hamy
and  Lenormant  found  such  implements  w^ashed  out  from
the  depths  higher  up  the  Nile  at  Thebes,  near  the  tombs  of
the  kings ;  and  in  the  following  year  they  exhibited  more
flint  implements  found  at  various  other  places.  Coupled
with  these  discoveries  was  the  fact  that  Horner  and  Linant
found  a  copper  knife  at  twenty-four  feet,  and  pottery  at  sixty
feet,  below  the  surface.  In  1872  Dr.  Reil,  director  of  the
baths  at  Helouan,  near  Cairo,  discovered  implements  of
chipped  fiint;  and  in  1877  Dr.  Jukes  Brown  made  similar
discoveries  in  that  region.  In  1878  Oscar  Fraas,  summing
up  the  question,  showed  that  the  stone  implements  were
mainly  such  as  are  found  in  the  prehistoric  deposits  of  other
countries,  and  that,  Zittel  having  found  them  in  the  Libyan
Desert,  far  from  the  oases,  there  was  reason  to  suppose  that
these  implements  were  used  before  the  region  became  a  des-
ert and  before  Egypt  was  civilized.  Two  years  later  Dr.
Mook,  of  Wurzburg,  published  a  work  giving  the  results  of
his  investigations,  with  careful  drawings  of  the  rude  stone
implements  discovered  by  him  in  the  upper  Nile  Valley,  and
it  was  evident  that,  while  some  of  these  implements  differed
slightly  from  those  before  known,  the  great  mass  of  them
were  of  the  character  so  common  in  the  prehistoric  deposits
of  other  parts  of  the  world.

A  yet  more  important  contribution  to  this  mass  of  facts
was  made  by  Prof.  Henry  Haynes,  of  Boston,  who  in  the
winter  of  1877  and  1878  began  a  very  thorough  investigation
of  the  subject,  and  discovered,  a  few  miles  east  of  Cairo,
many  flint  implements.  The  significance  of  Haynes's  dis-
coveries was  twofold  :  First,  there  were,  among  these,  stone
axes  like  those  found  in  the  French  drift  beds  of  St.  Acheul,
showing  that  the  men  who  made  or  taught  men  how  to
make  these  in  Egypt  were  passing  through  the  same  phase


THE    "FALL   OF    MAN"  AND   ANTHROPOLOGY.  299

of  savagery  as  that  of  Quaternary  France  ;  secondly,  he
found  a  workshop  for  making  these  implements,  proving  that
these  flint  implements  were  not  brought  into  Egypt  by  in-
vaders, but  were  made  to  meet  the  necessities  of  the'country.
From  this  first  field  Prof.  Haynes  went  to  Helouan,  north  of
Cairo,  and  there  found,  as  Dr.  Reif  had  done,  various  worked
flints,  some  of  them  like  those  discovered  by  M.  Riviere  in
the  caves  of  southern  France  ;  thence  he  went  up  the  Nile
to  Luxor,  the  site  of  ancient  Thebes,  began  a  thorough
search  in  the  Tertiary  limestone  hills,  and  found  multitudes
of  chipped  stone  implements,  some  of  them,  indeed,  of  origi-
nal forms,  but  most  of  forms  common  in  other  parts  of  the
world  under  similar  circumstances,  some  of  the  chipped
stone  axes  corresponding  closely  to  those  found  in  the  drift
beds  of  northern  France.

All  this  seemed  to  show  conclusively  that,  long  ages  be-
fore the  earliest  period  of  Egyptian  civilization  of  which  the
monuments  of  the  first  dynasties  give  us  any  trace,  mankind
in  the  Nile  Valley  was  going  through  the  same  slow  prog-
ress from  the  period  when,  standing  just  above  the  brutes,
he  defended  himself  with  implements  of  rudely  chipped
stone.

But  in  1 881  came  discoveries  which  settled  the  question
entirely.  In  that  year  General  Pitt-Rivers,  a  Fellow  of  the
Royal  Society  and  President  of  the  Anthropological  Insti-
tute, and  J.  F.  Campbell,  Fellow  of  the  Royal  Geographical
Society  of  England,  found  implements  not  only  in  alluvial
deposits,  associated  with  the  bones  of  the  zebra,  hyena,  and
other  animals  which  have  since  retreated  farther  south,  but,
at  Djebel  Assas,  near  Thebes,  they  found  implements  of
chipped  flint  in  the  hard,  stratified  gravel,  from  six  and  a
half  to  ten  feet  below  the  surface;  relics  evidently,  as  Mr.
Campbell  says,  "  beyond  calculation  older  than  the  oldest
Egyptian  temples  and  tombs."  They  certainly  proved  that
Egyptian  civilization  had  not  issued  in  its  completeness,  and
all  at  once,  from  the  hand  of  the  Creator  in  the  time  of
Mena.  Nor  was  this  all.  Investigators  of  the  highest  char-
acter and  ability — men  like  Hull  and  Flinders  Petrie — re-
vealed geological  changes  in  Egypt  requiring  enormous  pe-
riods of  time,  and  traces  of  man's  handiwork  datins;  from  a


po  THE   "FALL   OF    MAN"   AND   ANTHROPOLOGY.

period  when  the  waters  in  the  Nile  Valley  extended  hun-
dreds of  feet  above  the  present  level.  Thus  was  ended  the
contention  of  Mr.  Southall.

Still  another  attack  upon  the  new  scientific  conclusions
came  from  France,  when  in  1883  the  Abbe  Hamard,  Priest
of  the  Oratory,  published  his  A^-e  of  Stone  and  Primitive  Man.
He  had  been  especially  vexed  at  the  arrangement  of  pre-
historic implements  by  periods,  at  the  Paris  Exposition  of
1878;  he  bitterly  complains  of  this  as  having  an  anti-Chris-
tian tendency,  and  rails  at  science  as  "  the  idol  of  the  day."
He  attacks  Mortillet,  one  of  the  leaders  in  French  archae-
ology, with  a  great  display  of  contempt ;  speaks  of  the
''  venom  "  in  books  on  prehistoric  man  generally  ;  complains
that  the  Church  is  too  mild  and  gentle  with  such  monstrous
doctrines ;  bewails  the  concessions  made  to  science  by  some
eminent  preachers ;  and  foretells  his  own  martyrdom  at  the
hands  of  men  of  science.

Efforts  like  this  accomplished  little,  and  a  more  legitimate
attempt  was  made  to  resist  the  conclusions  of  archaeology
by  showing  that  knives  of  stone  were  used  in  obedience  to
a  sacred  ritual  in  Egypt  for  embalming,  and  in  Judea  for  cir-
cumcision, and  that  these  flint  knives  might  have  had  this
later  origin.  But  the  argument  against  the  conclusions
drawn  from  this  view  was  triple  :  First,  as  we  have  seen,  not
only  stone  knives,  but  axes  and  other  implements  of  stone
similar  to  those  of  a  prehistoric  period  in  western  Europe
were  discovered  ;  secondly,  these  implements  were  discov-
ered in  the  hard  gravel  drift  of  a  period  evidently  far  earlier
than  that  of  Mena ;  and,  thirdly,  the  use  of  stone  imple-
ments in  Egyptian  and  Jewish  sacred  functions  within  the.
historic  period,  so  far  from  weakening  the  force  of  the  argu-
ments for  the  long  and  slow  development  of  Egyptian  civili-
zation from  the  men  who  used  rude  flint  implements  to  the
men  who  built  and  adorned  the  great  temples  of  the  early
dynasties,  is  really  an  argument  in  favour  of  that  long  evolu-
tion. A  study  of  comparative  ethnology  has  made  it  clear
that  the  sacred  stone  knives  and  implements  of  the  Egyptian
and  Jewish  priestly  ritual  were  natural  survivals  of  that  pre-
vious period.  For  sacrificial  or  ritual  purposes,  the  knife  of
stone  was  considered  more  sacred  than  the  knife  of  bronze  or


THE   "FALL   OF   MAN"  AND   ANTHROPOLOGY.  30;

iron,  simply  because  it  was  ancient;  just  as  to-day,  in  India,
Brahman  priests  kindle  the  sacred  fire  not  with  matches  or
flint  and  steel,  but  by  a  process  found  in  the  earliest,  lowest
stages  of  human  culture — by  violently  boring  a  pointed  stick
into  another  piece  of  wood  until  a  spark  comes ;  and  just  as
to-day,  in  Europe  and  America,  the  architecture  of  the  Mid-
dle Ages  survives  as  a  special  religious  form  in  the  erection
of  our  most  recent  churches,  and  to  such  an  extent  that
thousands  on  thousands  of  us  feel  that  we  can  not  worship
fitly  unless  in  the  midst  of  windows,  decorations,  vessels,  im-
plements, vestments,  and  ornaments,  no  longer  used  for  other
purposes,  but  which  have  survived  in  sundry  branches  of
the  Christian  Church,  and  derived  a  special  sanctity  from
the  fact  that  they  are  of  ancient  origin.

Taking,  then,  the  whole  mass  of  testimony  together,  even
though  a  plausible  or  very  strong  argument  against  single
evidences  may  be  made  here  and  there,  the  force  of  its  com-
bined mass  remains,  and  leaves  both  the  vast  antiquity  of
man  and  the  evolution  of  civilization  from  its  lowest  to  its
highest  forms,  as  proved  by  the  prehistoric  remains  of  Egypt
and  so  many  other  countries  in  all  parts  of  the  world,  be-
yond a  reasonable  doubt.  Most  important  of  all,  the  recent
discoveries  in  Assyria  have  thrown  a  new  light  upon  the
evolution  of  the  dogma  of  ''the  fall  of  man."  Reverent
scholars  like  George  Smith,  Sayce,  Delitzsch,  Jensen,  Schra-
der,  and  their  compeers  have  found  in  the  Ninevite  records
the  undoubted  source  of  that  form  of  the  fall  legend  which
was  adopted  by  the  Hebrews  and  by  them  transmitted  to
Christianity.*


*  For  Mr.  Southall's  views,  see  his  Recent  Origin  of  Man,  p.  20,  and  elsewhere.
For  Mr.  Gosse's  views,  see  his  Omphalos  as  cited  in  the  chapter  on  Geology  in  this
work.  For  a  summary  of  the  work  of  Arcelin,  Hamy,  Lenormant,  Richard,  Lub-
bock, Mook,  and  ILaynes,  see  Mortillet,  Le  Prthistoriqice,  passim.  As  to  Zittel's
discovery,  see  Oscar  Fraas's  Aiis  dem  Orient,  Stuttgart,  187S.  As  to  the  striking
similarities  of  the  stone  implements  found  in  Egypt  with  those  found  in  the  drift
and  bone  caves,  see  Mook's  monograph,  Wurzburg,  1880,  cited  in  the  next  chap-
ter, especially  Plates  IX.  XI,  XII.  For  even  more  striking  reproductions  of  photo-
graphs showing  this  remarkable  similarity  between  Egyptian  and  European  chipped
stone  remains,  see  H.  W.  Haynes,  Paleolithic  Implements  in  Upper  Egypt,  Boston,
1881.  See  also  Evans,  Ancient  Stone  Implements,  chap,  i,  pp.  8,  9,  44,  102,  316,
329.     As  to  stone  implements  used  by  priests  of  Jehovah,  priests  of  Baal,  priests


302  THE    "FALL   OF    MAN"   AND   ANTHROPOLOGY.

of  Moloch,  priests  of  Odin,  and  Egyptian  priests,  as  religious  survivals,  see  Cartail-
hac,  as  above,  6  and  7  ;  also  Lartet,  in  De  Luynes,  Expedition  to  the  Dead  Sea  ;
also  Nilsson,  Primitive  Inhabitants  of  Scandinavia,  pp.  96,  97  ;  also  Sayce,  He-
rodotus, p.  171,  note.  For  the  discoveries  by  Pitt-Rivers,  see  the  Journal  of  the
A^ithropological  Institute  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  for  1882,  vol.  xi,  pp.  382
et  seq.  ;  and  for  Campbell's  decision  regarding  them,  see  ibid.,  pp.  396,  397.  For
facts  summed  up  in  the  words,  "  It  is  mdst  probable  that  Egypt  at  a  remote  period
passed  like  many  other  countries  through  its  stone  period,"  see  Hilton  Price,
F.  S.  A.,  F.  G.  S.,  paper  in  the  Journal  of  the  Archceological  Institute  of  Great  Brit-
ain and  Ireland  iox  1884,  p.  56.  Specimens  of  palaeolithic  implements  from  Egypt
— knives,  arrowheads,  spearheads,  flakes,  and  the  like,  both  of  peculiar  and  ordinary
forms — may  be  seen  in  various  museums,  but  especially  in  that  of  Prof.  Haynes,  of
Boston.  Some  interesting  light  is  also  thrown  into  the  subject  by  the  specimens
obtained  by  General  Wilson  and  deposited  in  the  Smithsonian  Institution  at  Wash-
ington. For  the  Abbe  Hamard's  attack,  see  his  L'Age  de  la  Pierre  et  V Homme
Primitif,  Paris,  1883 — especially  his  preface.  For  the  stone  weapon  found  in  the
high  drift  behind  Esneh,  see  Flinders  Petrie,  History  of  Egypt,  chap.  i.  Of  these
discoveries  by  Pitt-Rivers  and  others  Maspero  appears  to  know  nothing.


CHAPTER    IX.
THE  ''FALL    OF  MAN''  AND   ETHNOLOGY.

We  have  seen  that,  closely  connected  with  the  main  lines
of  investigation  in  archaeology  and  anthropology,  there
were  other  researches  throwing  much  light  on  the  entire
subject.  In  a  previous  chapter  we  saw  especially  that  La-
fitau  and  Jussieu  were  among  the  first  to  collect  and  com-
pare facts  bearing  on  the  natural  history  of  man,  gathered
by  travellers  in  various  parts  of  the  earth,  thus  laying  foun-
dations for  the  science  of  comparative  ethnology.  It  was
soon  seen  that  ethnology  had  most  important  bearings  upon
the  question  of  the  material,  intellectual,  moral,  and  religious
evolution  of  the  human  race;  in  every  civilized  nation,
therefore,  appeared  scholars  who  began  to  study  the  char-
acteristics of  various  groups  of  men  as  ascertained  from
travellers,  and  to  compare  the  results  thus  gained  with  each
other  and  with  those  obtained  by  archaeology.

Thus,  more  and  more  clear  became  the  evidences  that
the  tendency  of  the  race  has  been  upward  from  low  begin-
nings. It  was  found  that  groups  of  men  still  existed  possess-
ing characteristics  of  those  in  the  early  periods  of  develop-
ment to  whom  the  drift  and  caves  and  shell-heaps  and  pile-
dwellings  bear  witness;  groups  of  men  using  many  of  the
same  implements  and  weapons,  building  their  houses  in  the
same  way,  seeking  their  food  by  the  same  means,  enjoying
the  same  amusements,  and  going  through  the  same  general
stages  of  culture  ;  some  being  in  a  condition  correspond-
ing to  the  earlier,  some  to  the  later,  of  those  early  periods.

From  all  sides  thus  came  evidence  that  we  have  still
upon  the  earth  examples  of  all  the  main  stages  in  the  devel-
opment of  human  civilization  ;  that  from  the  period  when

303


304  THE   "FALL   OF    MAN"    AND    ETHNOLOGY.

man  appears  little  above  the  brutes,  and  with  little  if  any  re-
ligion in  any  accepted  sense  of  the  word,  these  examples  can
be  arranged  in  an  ascending  series  leading  to  the  highest
planes  which  humanity  has  reached  ;  that  philosophic  ob-
servers may  among  these  examples  study  existing  beliefs,
usages,  and  institutions  back  through  earlier  and  earlier
forms,  until,  as  a  rule,  the  whole  evolution  can  be  easily
divined  if  not  fully  seen.  Moreover,  the  basis  of  the  whole
structure  became  more  and  more  clear:  the  fact  that  **  the
lines  of  intelligence  have  always  been  what  they  are,  and
have  always  operated  as  they  do  now ;  that  man  has  pro-
gressed from  the  simple  to  the  complex,  from  the  particular
to  the  general."

As  this  evidence  from  ethnology  became  more  and  more
strong,  its  significance  to  theology  aroused  attention,  and
naturally  most  determined  efforts  were  made  to  break  its
force.  On  the  Continent  the  two  great  champions  of  the
Church  in  this  field  were  De  Maistre  and  De  Bonald  ;  but
the  two  attempts  which  may  be  especially  recalled  as  the
most  influential  among  English-speaking  peoples  were  those
of  Whately,  Archbishop  of  Dublin,  and  the  Duke  of  Argyll.

First  in  the  combat  against  these  new  deductions  of
science  was  Whatel\\  He  was  a  strong  man,  whose  breadth
of  thought  and  liberality  in  practice  deserve  all  honour;
but  these  very  qualities  drew  upon  him  the  distrust  of  his
orthodox  brethren  ;  and,  while  his  writings  were  powerful
in  the  first  half  of  the  present  century  to  break  down
many  bulwarks  of  unreason,  he  seems  to,  have  been  con-
stantly in  fear  of  losing  touch  with  the  Church,  and
therefore  to  have  promptly  attacked  some  scientific  rea-
sonings, which,  had  he  been  a  layman,  not  holding  a  brief
for  the  Church,  he  would  probably  have  studied  with  more
care  and  less  prejudice.  He  was  not  slow  to  see  the  deeper
significance  of  archaeology  and  ethnology  in  their  relations
to  the  theological  conception  of  "  the  Fall,"  and  he  set  the
battle  in  array  against  them.

His  contention  was,  to  use  his  own  words,  that  "  no  com-
munity ever  did  or  ever  can  emerge  unassisted  by  external
helps  from  a  state  of  utter  barbarism  into  anything  that  can
be   called  civilization "  ;  and  that,  in  short,  all  imperfectly


THE    "  FALL   OF    MAN  "   AND    ETHNOLOGY.  305

civilized,  barbarous,  and  savage  races  are  but  fallen  descend-
ants of  races  more  fully  civilized.  This  view  was  urged
with  his  usual  ingenuity  and  vigour,  but  the  facts  proved
too  strong  for  him  :  they  made  it  clear,  first,  that  many  races
were  without  simple  possessions,  instruments,  and  arts  which
never,  probably,  could  have  been  lost  if  once  acquired — as,
for  example,  pottery,  the  bow  for  shooting,  various  domesti-
cated animals,  spinning,  the  simplest  principles  of  agricul-
ture, household  economy,  and  the  like  ;  and,  secondly,  it  was
shown  as  a  simple  matter  of  fact  that  various  savage  and
barbarous  tribes  had  raised  themselves  by  a  development  of
means  which  no  one  from  outside  could  have  taught  them ;
as  in  the  cultivation  and  improvement  of  various  indigenous
plants,  such  as  the  potato  and  Indian  corn  among  the  Indians
of  North  America;  in  the  domestication  of  various  animals
peculiar  to  their  own  regions,  such  as  the  llama  among  the
Indians  of  South  America;  in  the  making  of  sundry  fabrics
out  of  materials  and  by  processes  not  found  among  other  na-
tions, such  as  the  bark  cloth  of  the  Polynesians  ;  and  in  the
development  of  weapons  peculiar  to  sundry  localities,  but
known  in  no  others,  such  as  the  boomerang  in  Australia.

Most  effective  in  bringing  out  the  truth  were  such  works
as  those  of  Sir  John  Lubbock  and  Tylor  ;  and  so  conclusive
were  they  that  the  arguments  of  Whately  were  given  up  as
untenable  by  the  other  of  the  two  great  champions  above
referred  to,  and  an  attempt  was  made  by  him  to  form  the
diminishing  number  of  thinking  men  supporting  the  old
theological  view  on  a  new  line  of  defence.

This  second  champion,  the  Duke  of  Argyll,  was  a  man  of
wide  knowledge  and  strong  powers  in  debate,  whose  high
moral  sense  was  amply  shown  in  his  adhesion  to  the  side  of
the  American  Union  in  the  struggle  against  disunion  and
slavery,  despite  the  overwhelming  majority  against  him  in
the  high  aristocracy  to  which  he  belonged.  As  an  honest
man  and  close  thinker,  the  duke  was  obliged  to  give  up
completely  the  theological  view  of  the  antiquity  of  man.
The  whole  biblical  chronology  as  held  by  the  universal
Church,  ''  always,  everywhere,  and  by  all,"  he  sacrificed,  and
gave  all  his  powers  in  this  field  to  support  the  theory  of
"  the  Fall."     Noblesse  oblioe:  the  duke  and  his  ancestors  had


oo6  THE    -FALL   OF    MAN"    AND    ETHNOLOGY.

been  for  centuries  the  chief  pillars  of  the   Church  of  Scot-
land, and  it  was  too  much  to  expect  that  he  could   break
away  from  a  tenet  which    forms  really   its    "  chief   corner-     /
stone."

Acknowledging  the  insufficiency  of  Archbishop  Whate-
ly's  argument,  the  duke  took  the  ground  that  the  lower,  bar-
barous, savage,  brutal  races  were  the  remains  of  civilized
races  which,  in  the  struggle  for  existence,  had  been  pushed
and  driven  off  to  remote  and  inclement  parts  of  the  earth,
where  the  conditions  necessary  to  a  continuance  in  their
early  civilization  were  absent ;  that,  therefore,  the  descend-
ants of  primeval,  civilized  men  degenerated  and  sank  in  the
scale  of  culture.  To  use  his  own  words,  the  weaker  races
were  ''driven  by  the  stronger  to  the  woods  and  rocks,"  so
that  they  became  "  mere  outcasts  of  the  human  race."

In  answer  to  this,  while  it  was  conceded,  first,  that  there
have  been  examples  of  weaker  tribes  sinking  in  the  scale  of
culture  after  escaping  from  the  stronger  into  regions  unfa-
vourable to  civilization,  and,  secondly,  that  many  powerful
nations  have  declined  and  decayed,  it  was  shown  that  the
men  in  the  most  remote  and  unfavourable  regions  have  not
always  been  the  lowest  in  the  scale ;  that  men  have  been  fre-
quently found  ''among  the  woods  and  rocks"  in  a  higher
state  of  civilization  than  on  the  fertile  plains,  such  examples
being  cited  as  Mexico,  Peru,  and  even  Scotland  ;  and  that,
while  there  were  many  examples  of  special  and  local  de-
cline, overwhelming  masses  of  facts  point  to  progress  as  a
rule.

The  improbability,  not  to  say  impossibility,  of  many  of
the  conclusions  arrived  at  by  the  duke  appeared  more  and
more  strongly  as  more  became  known  of  the  lower  tribes  of
mankind.  It  was  necessary  on  his  theory  to  suppose  many
things  which  our  knowledge  of  the  human  race  absolutely
forbids  us  to  believe:  for  example,  it  was  necessary  to  sup-
pose that  the  Australians  or  New  Zealanders.  having  once
possessed  so  simple  and  convenient  an  art  as  that  of  the  pot-
ter, had  lost  every  trace  of  it ;  and  that  the  same  tribes,  hav-
ing once  had  so  simple  a  means  of  saving  labour  as  the
spindle  or  small  stick  weighted  at  one  end  for  spinning,
had  given  it  up  and  gone  back  to  twisting  threads  with  the


THE   "FALL    OF    MAN"    AND    ETHNOLOGY.  307

hand.  In  fact,  it  was  necessary  to  suppose  that  one  of  the
main  occupations  of  man  from  *'  the  beginning  "  had  been
the  forgetting  of  simple  methods,  processes,  and  implements
which  all  experience  in  the  actual  world  teaches  us  are  never
entirely  forgotten  by  peoples  who  have  once  acquired  them.

Some  leading  arguments  of  the  duke  were  overthrown
by  simple  statements  of  fact.  Thus,  his  instance  of  the  Eski-
mo as  pushed  to  the  verge  of  habitable  America,  and  there-
fore living  in  the  lowest  depths  of  savagery,  which,  even
if  it  were  true,  by  no  means  proved  a  general  rule,  was  de-
prived of  its  force  by  the  simple  fact  that  the  Eskimos  are  by
no  means  the  lowest  race  on  the  American  continent,  and
that  various  tribes  far  more  centrally  and  advantageously
placed,  as,  for  instance,  those  in  Brazil,  are  really  inferior  to
them  in  the  scale  of  culture.  Again,  his  statement  that  ''in
Africa  there  appear  to  be  no  traces  of  any  time  when  the
natives  were  not  acquainted  with  the  use  of  iron,"  is  met  by
the  fact  that  from  the  Nile  Valley  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope
we  find,  wherever  examination  has  been  made,  the  same  early
stone  implements  which  in  all  other  parts  of  the  world  pre-
cede the  use  of  iron,  some  of  which  would  not  have  been
made  had  their  makers  possessed  iron.  The  duke  also  tried
to  show  that  there  were  no  distinctive  epochs  of  stone,  bronze,
and  iron,  by  adducing  the  fact  that  some  stone  implements
are  found  even  in  some  high  civilizations.  This  is  indeed  a
fact.  We  find  some  few  European  peasants  to-day  using
stone  mallet-heads  ;  but  this  proves  simply  that  the  old  stone
mallet-heads  have  survived  as  implements  cheap  and  effective.

The  argument  from  Comparative  Ethnology  in  support  of
the  view  that  the  tendency  of  mankind  is  upward  has  re-
ceived strength  from  many  sources.  Comparative  Philology
shows  that  in  the  less  civilized,  barbarous,  and  savage  races
childish  forms  of  speech  prevail — frequent  reduplications
and  the  like,  of  which  we  have  survivals  in  the  later  and
even  in  the  most  highly  developed  languages.     In  various

lansfuaofes,  too,  we  find  relics  of  ancient  modes  of  thought  in
00''  ^^

the  simplest  words  and  expressions  used  for  arithmetical  cal-
culations. Words  and  phrases  for  this  purpose  are  frequently
found  to  be  derived  from  the  words  for  hands,  feet,  fingers,
and  toes,  just  as  clearly  as  in  our  own  language  some  of  our


3o8


THE   "FALL   OF    MAN"    AND    ETHNOLOGY.


simplest  measures  of  length  are  shown  by  their  names  to
have  been  measures  of  parts  of  the  human  body,  as  the  cubit,
the  foot,  and  the  like,  and  therefore  to  date  from  a  time  when
exactness  was  not  required.  To  add  another  out  of  many
examples,  it  is  found  to-day  that  various  rude  nations  go
through  the  simplest  arithmetical  processes  by  means  of
pebbles.  Into  our  own  language,  through  the  Latin,  has
come  a  word  showing  that  our  distant  progenitors  reckoned
in  this  way :  the  word  calculate  gives  us  an  absolute  proof
of  this.  According  to  the  theory  of  the  Duke  of  Argyll,
men  ages  ago  used  pebbles  {calculi)  in  performing  the  sim-
plest arithmetical  calculations  because  we  to-day  ''calculated
No  reduction  to  absurdity  could  be  more  thorough.  The
simple  fact  must  be  that  we  "  calculate  "  because  our  remote
ancestors  used  pebbles  in  their  arithmetic.

Comparative  Literature  and  Folklore  also  show  among
peoples  of  a  low  culture  to-day  childish  modes  of  viewing
nature,  and  childish  ways  of  expressing  the  relations  of  man
to  nature,  such  as  clearly  survive  from  a  remote  ancestry ;
noteworthy  among  these  are  the  beliefs  in  witches  and  fairies,
and  multitudes  of  popular  and  poetic  expressions  in  the  most
civilized  nations.

So, too, Comparative  Ethnography,  the  basis  of  Ethnology,
shows  in  contemporary  barbarians  and  savages  a  childish  love
of  playthings  and  games,  of  which  we  have  many  survivals.

All  these  facts,  which  w^ere  at  first  unobserved  or  ob-
served as  matters  of  no  significance,  have  been  brought  into
connection  with  a  fact  in  biology  acknowledged  alike  by  all
important  schools ;  by  Agassiz  on  one  hand  and  by  Darwin
on  the  other — namely,  as  stated  by  Agassiz,  that  "  the  young
states  of  each  species  and  group  resemble  older  forms  of  the
same  group,"  or,  as  stated  b}^  Darwin,  that  ''  in  two  or  more
groups  of  animals,  however  much  they  may  at  first  differ
from  each  other  in  structure  and  habits,  if  they  pass  through
closely  similar  embryonic  stages,  we  may  feel  almost  assured
that  they  have  descended  from  the  same  parent  form,  and
are  therefore  closely  related."  '^


*  For  the  stone  forms  given  to  early  bronze  axes,  etc.,  see   Nilsson,  Primitive
Inhabitants  of  Scandijiavia,  London,    i86S,    Lubbock's  Introduction,  p.  31  ;  and


THE   "FALL   OF    MAN"   AND    ETHNOLOGY.  309

for  plates,  see  Lubbock's  Prehistoric  Man,  chap,  ii  ;  also  Cartailhac,  Les  Ages
Pr^historiqiies  de  F Espagne  et  du  Portugal,  p.  227  ;  also  Keller,  Lake  Dwellitigs  ;
also  Troyon,  Habitations  Lacustres;  also  Boyd  Dawkins,  Early  Alan  in  Great
Britain,  p.  292  ;  also  Lubbock,  p.  6  ;  also  Lyell,  Antiquity  of  Man,  chap.  ii.  For
the  cranogs,  etc.,  in  the  north  of  Europe,  see  Munro,  A?icient  Scottish  Lake  Dwell-
ings, Edinburgh,  1S82.  For  mounds  and  greater  stone  constructions  in  the  ex-
treme south  of  Europe,  see  Cartailhac's  work  on  Spain  and  Portugal  above  cited,
part  iii,  chap.  iii.  For  the  source  of  Mr.  Southall's  contention,  see  Brugsch,  Egypt
of  the  Pharaohs.  For  the  two  sides  of  the  question  whether  in  the  lowest  grades
of  savagery  there  is  really  any  recognition  of  a  superior  power,  or  anything  which
can  be  called,  in  any  accepted  sense,  religion,  compare  Quatrefages  with  Lubbock,
in  works  already  cited.  For  a  striking  but  rather  ad  captandum  effort  to  show  that
there  is  a  moral  and  religious  sense  in  the  very  lowest  Australian  tribes,  see  one  of
the  discourses  of  Archbishop  Vaughan  on  Science  and  Religion,  'QdXiimoxe,  l%^().
For  one  out  of  multitudes  of  striking  and  instructive  resemblances  in  ancient  stone
implements  and  those  now  in  use  among  sundry  savage  tribes,  see  comparison  be-
tween old  Scandinavian  arrowheads  and  those  recently  brought  from  Tierra  del
Fuego,  in  Nilsson  as  above,  especially  in  Plate  V.  For  a  brief  and  admirable
statement  of  the  arguments  on  both  sides,  see  Sir  J.  Lubbock's  Dundee  paper,
given  in  the  appendix  to  the  American  edition  of  his  Origin  of  Civilization,  etc.
For  the  general  argument  referred  to  between  Whately  and  the  Duke  of  Argyll  on
one  side  and  Lubbock  on  the  other,  see  Lubbock's  Dundee  paper  as  above  cited ;
Tylor,  Early  History  of  Mankind,  especially  p.  193  ;  and  the  Duke  of  Argyll,
Primeval  Man,  part  iv.  For  difficulties  of  savages  in  arithmetic,  see  Lubbock,  as
above,  pp.  459  ei  seq.  For  a  very  temperate  and  judicial  view  of  the  whole  ques-
tion, see  Tylor  as  above,  chaps,  vii  and  xiii.  For  a  brief  summary  of  the  scientific
position  regarding  the  stagnation  and  deterioration  of  races,  resulting  in  the  state-
ment that  such  deterioration  "  in  no  way  contradicts  the  theory  that  civilization
itself  is  developed  from  low  to  high  stages,"  see  Tylor,  Anthropology,  chap.  i.  For
striking  examples  of  the  testimony  of  language  to  upward  progress,  see  Tylor,
chap.  xii.


CHAPTER   X.
THE   ''FALL    OF  MAN''   AND   HISTORY.

The  history  of  art,  especially  as  shown  by  architecture,
in  the  noblest  monuments  of  the  most  enlightened  nations  of
antiquity,  gives  abundant  proofs  of  the  upward  tendency  of
man  from  the  rudest  and  simplest  beginnings.  Many  col-
umns of  early  Egyptian  temples  or  tombs  are  but  bundles  of
Nile  reeds  slightly  conventionalized  in  stone;  the  temples
of  Greece,  including  not  only  the  earliest  forms,  but  the  Par-
thenon itself,  while  in  parts  showing  an  evolution  out  of
Egyptian  and  Assyrian  architecture,  exhibit  frequent  remi-
niscences and  even  imitations  of  earlier  constructions  in
wood  ;  the  mediaeval  cathedrals,  while  evolved  out  of  Roman
and  Byzantine  structures,  constantly  show  unmistakable  sur-
vivals of  prehistoric  construction.*

So,  too,  general  history  has  come  in,  illustrating  the  un-
known from  the  known:  the  development  of  man  in  the
prehistoric  period  from  his  development  within  historic
times.  Nothing  is  more  evident  from  history  than  the  fact
that  weaker  .bodies  of  men  driven  out  by  stronger  do  not
necessarily  relapse  into  barbarism,  but  frequently  rise,  even
under  the  most  unfavourable  circumstances,  to  a  civilization


*  As  to  evolution  in  architecture,  and  especially  of  Greek  forms  and  ornaments
out  of  Egyptian  and  Assyrian,  with  survivals  in  stone  architecture  of  forms  ob-
tained in  Egypt  when  reeds  were  used,  and  in  Greece  when  wood  construction
prevailed,  see  Fergusson's  Handbook  of  Architecture,  vol.  i,  pp.  lOO,  228,  233,  and
elsewhere  ;  also  Otfried  Miiller,  Ancient  Art  and  its  Remains,  English  translation,
London,  1852,  pp.  219,  passim.  For  a  very  brief  but  thorough  statement,  see  A.
Mangnard's  paper  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  October,
1889,  entitled  Reminiscences  of  Egypt  in  Doric  Architecture.  On  the  general  sub-
ject, see  Hommel,  Babylonien,  ch.  i,  and  Meyer,  Alterthiun,  i,  §  igg.

310


THE   "FALL   OF    MAN"   AND    HISTORY.  3II

equal  or  superior  to  that  from  which  thej  have  been  ban-
ished. Out  of  very  many  examples  showing  this  law  of
upward  development,  a  few  may  be  taken  as  typical.  The
Slavs,  who  sank  so  low  under  the  pressure  of  stronger  races
that  they  gave  the  modern  world  a  new  w^ord  to  express  the
most  hopeless  servitude,  have  developed  powerful  civiliza-
tions peculiar  to  themselves ;  the  barbarian  tribes  who  ages
ago  took  refuge  amid  the  sand-banks  and  morasses  of  Hol-
land, have  developed  one  of  the  world's  leading  centres  of
civilization ;  the  wretched  peasants  who  about  the  fifth  cen-
tury took  refuge  from  invading  hordes  among  the  lagoons
and  mud  banks  of  Venetia,  developed  a  power  in  art,  arms,
and  politics  which  is  among  the  wonders  of  human  history  ;
the  Puritans,  driven  from  the  civilization  of  Great  Britain  to
the  unfavourable  climate,  soil,  and  circumstances  of  early
New  England, — the  Huguenots,  driven  from  France,  a  coun-
try admirably  fitted  for  the  highest  growth  of  civilization,  to
various  countries  far  less  fitted  for  such  growth, — the  Irish
peasantry,  driven  in  vast  numbers  from  their  own  island  to
other  parts  of  the  world  on  the  whole  less  fitted  to  them —
all  are  proofs  that,  as  a  rule,  bodies  of  men  once  enlightened,
when  driven  to  unfavourable  climates  and  brought  under  the
most  depressing  circumstances,  not  only  retain  what  en-
lightenment they  have,  but  go  on  increasing  it.  Besides
these,  we  have  such  cases  as  those  of  criminals  banished  to
various  penal  colonies,  from  whose  descendants  has  been
developed  a  better  morality  ;  and  of  pirates,  like  those  of
the  Bounty,  whose  descendants,  in  a  remote  Pacific  island,
became  sober,  steady  citizens.  Thousands  of  examples  show
the  prevalence  of  this  same  rule — that  men  in  masses  do  not
forget  the  main  gains  of  their  civilization,  and  that,  in  spite
of  deteriorations,  their  tendency  is  upward.

Another  class  of  historic  facts  also  testifies  in  the  most
striking  manner  to  this  same  upward  tendency  :  the  decline
and  destruction  of  various  civilizations  brilliant  but  hope-
lessly vitiated.  These  catastrophes  are  seen  more  and  more
to  be  but  steps  in  this  development.  The  crumbling  away
of  the  great  ancient  civilizations  based  upon  despotism,
whether  the  despotism  of  monarch,  priest,  or  mob — the  de-
cline and  fall  of  Roman  civilization,  for  example,  which,  in


312


THE    "FALL   OF    MAN"   AND    HISTORY.


his  most  remarkable  generalization,  Guizot  has  shown  to
have  been  necessary  to  the  development  of  the  richer  civili-
zation of  modern  Europe  ;  the  terrible  struggle  and  loss  of
the  Crusades,  which  once  appeared  to  be  a  mere  catastrophe,
but  are  now  seen  to  have  brought  in,  with  the  downfall  of
feudalism,  the  beginnings  of  the  centralizing,  civilizing  mo-
narchical period ;  the  French  Revolution,  once  thought  a
mere  outburst  of  diabolic  passion,  but  now  seen  to  be  an
unduly  delayed  transition  from  the  monarchical  to  the  con-
stitutional epoch  :  all  show  that  even  widespread  deteriora-
tion and  decline — often,  indeed,  the  greatest  political  and
moral  catastrophes — so  far  from  leading  to  a  fall  of  mankind,
tend  in  the  long  run  to  raise  humanity  to  higher  planes.

Thus,  then,  Anthropology  and  its  handmaids,  Ethnology,
Philology,  and  History,  have  wrought  out,  beyond  a  doubt,
proofs  of  the  upward  evolution  of  humanity  since  the  ap-
pearance of  man  upon  our  planet.

Nor  have  these  researches  been  confined  to  progress  in
man's  material  condition.  Far  more  important  evidences
have  been  found  of  upward  evolution  in  his  family,  social,
moral,  intellectual,  and  religious  relations.  The  light  thrown
on  this  subject  by  such  men  as  Lubbock,  Tylor,  Herbert
Spencer,  Buckle,  Draper,  Max  Miiller,  and  a  multitude  of
others,  despite  mistakes,  baitings,  stumblings,  and  occasional
following  of  delusive  paths,  is  among  the  greatest  glories  of
the  century  now  ending.  From  all  these  investigators  in
their  various  fields,  holding  no  brief  for  any  system  sacred
or  secular,  but  seeking  truth  as  truth,  comes  the  same  gen-
eral testimony  of  the  evolution  of  higher  out  of  lower.  The
process  has  been  indeed  slow  and  painful,  but  this  does  not
prove  that  it  may  not  become  more  rapid  and  less  fruitful  in
sorrow  as  humanity  goes  on.*

While,  then,  it  is  not  denied  that  many  instances  of  re-
trogression can  be  found,  the  consenting  voice  of  unbiased
investigators  in  all  lands  has  declared  more  and  more  that
the  beginnings  of  our  race  must  have  been  low  and  brutal,
and  that  the  tendency  has  been  upward.     To  combat  this

*  As  to  the  good  effects  of  migration,  see  Waitz,  Introduction  to  Anthropology^
London,  1863,  p.  345.


THE    "FALL    OF    MAN"   AND    HISTORY.  313

conclusion  by  examples  of  decline  and  deterioration  here
and  there  has  become  impossible  :  as  well  try  to  prove  that,
because  in  the  Mississippi  there  are  eddies  in  which  the  cur-
rents flow  northward,  there  is  no  main  stream  flowing  south-
ward  ;  or  that,  because  trees  decay  and  fall,  there  is  no  law
of  upward  growth  from  germ  to  trunk,  branches,  foliage,
and  fruit.

A  very  striking  evidence  that  the  theological  theory  had
become  untenable  was  seen  when  its  main  supporter  in  the
scientific  field,  Von  Martins,  in  the  full  ripeness  of  his  pow-
ers, publicly  declared  his  conversion  to  the  scientific  view.

Yet,  w^hile  the  tendency  of  enlightened  human  thought
in  recent  times  is  unmistakable,  the  struggle  against  the
older  view  is  not  yet  ended.  The  bitterness  of  the  Abbe
Hamard  in  France  has  been  carried  to  similar  and  even
greater  extremes  among  sundry  Protestant  bodies  in  Europe
and  America.  The  simple  truth  of  history  makes  it  a  neces-
sity, unpleasant  though  it  be,  to  chronicle  two  typical  exam-
ples in  the  United  States.

In  the  year  1875  a  leader  in  American  industrial  enter-
prise endowed  at  the  capital  of  a  Southern  State  a  university
which  bore  his  name.  It  was  given  into  the  hands  of  one  of
the  religious  sects  most  powerful  in  that  region,  and  a  bishop
of  that  sect  became  its  president.  To  its  chair  of  Geology
was  called  Alexander  Winchell,  a  scholar  who  had  already
won  eminence  as  a  teacher  and  writer  in  that  field,  a  pro-
fessor greatly  beloved  and  respected  in  the  two  universities
with  which  he  had  been  connected,  and  a  member  of  the
sect  which  the  institution  of  learning  above  referred  to  rep-
resented.

But  his  relations  to  this  Southern  institution  were  des-
tined to  be  brief.  That  his  lectures  at  the  Vanderbilt  Uni-
versity were  learned,  attractive,  and  stimulating,  even  his
enemies  were  forced  to  admit ;  but  he  was  soon  found  to  be-
lieve that  there  had  been  men  earlier  than  the  period  as-
sisrned  to  Adam,  and  even  that  all  the  human  race  are  not
descended  from  Adam.  His  desire  was  to  reconcile  science
and  Scripture,  and  he  was  now  treated  by  a  Methodist  Epis-
copal Bishop  in  Tennessee  just  as,  two  centuries  before,  La
Peyrere  had  been  treated,  for  a  similar  effort,  by  a  Roman


314  THE    "FALL    OF    MAN"    AND    HISTORY.

Catholic  vicar-general  in  Belgium.  The  publication  of  a
series  of  articles  on  the  subject,  contributed  by  the  pro-
fessor to  a  Northern  religious  newspaper  at  its  own  request,
brought  matters  to  a  climax  ;  for,  the  articles  having  fallen
under  the  notice  of  a  leading  Sou.th western  organ  of  the  de-
nomination controlling  the  Vanderbilt  Universit}^  the  result
was  a  most  bitter  denunciation  of  Prof.  Winchell  and  of  his
views.  Shortly  afterward  the  professor  was  told  by  Bishop
McTyeire  that  "our  people  are  of  the  opinion  that  such
views  are  contrary  to  the  plan  of  redemption,"  and  was  re-
quested by  the  bishop  to  quietly  resign  his  chair.  To  this
the  professor  made  the  fitting  reply  :  "  If  the  board  of  trus-
tees have  the  manliness  to  dismiss  me  for  cause,  and  declare
the  cause,  I  prefer  that  they  should  do  it.  No  power  on
earth  could  persuade  me  to  resign."

"  We  do  not  propose,"  said  the  bishop,  with  quite  gratui-
tous suggestiveness,  "  to  treat  you  as  the  Inquisition  treated
Galileo."

''  But  what  you  propose  is  the  same  thing,"  rejoined  Dr.
Winchell.  **  It  is  ecclesiastical  proscription  for  an  opinion
which  must  be  settled  by  scientific  evidence."

Twenty-four  hours  later  Dr.  Winchell  was  informed  that
his  chair  had  been  abolished,  and  its  duties,  with  its  salary,
added  to  those  of  a  colleague ;  the  public  were  given  to  un-
derstand that  the  reasons  were  purely  economic;  the  ban-
ished scholar  was  heaped  with  official  compliments,  evi-
dently in  hope  that  he  would  keep  silence.

Such  was  not  Dr.  Winchell's  view.  In  a  frank  letter  to
the  leading  journal  of  the  university  town  he  stated  the
whole  matter.  The  intolerance-hating  press  of  the  country,
religious  and  secular,  did  not  hold  its  peace.  In  vain  the
authorities  of  the  university  waited  for  the  storm  to  blow
over.  It  was  evident,  at  last,  that  a  defence  must  be  made,
and  a  local  organ  of  the  sect,  which  under  the  editorship  of
a  fellow-professor  had  always  treated  Dr.  Winchell's  views
with  the  luminous  inaccuracy  which  usually  characterizes  a
professor's  ideas  of  a  rival's  teachings,  assumed  the  task.  In
the  articles  which  followed,  the  usual  scientific  hypotheses
as  to  the  creation  were  declared  to  be  "  absurd,"  "  vague  and
unintelligible,"  "  preposterous   and    gratuitous."     This  new


THE    "FALL   OF    MAN"    AND    HISTORY.  315

champion  stated  that  **  the  objections  drawn  from  the  fossil-
iferous  strata  and  the  like  are  met  by  reference  to  the  anal-
ogy of  Adam  and  Eve,  who  presented  the  phenomena  of
adults  when  they  were  but  a  da}-  old,  and  by  the  Flood  of
Noah  and  other  cataclysms,  which,  with  the  constant  change
of  Nature,  are  sufficient  to  account  for  the  phenomena  in
question  " !

Under  inspiration  of  this  sort  the  Tennessee  Conference
of  the  religious  body  in  control  of  the  university  had  already,
in  October,  1878,  given  utterance  to  its  opinion  of  unsancti-
fied  science  as  follows :  "This  is  an  age  in  which  scientific
atheism,  having  divested  itself  of  the  habiliments  that  most
'adorn  and  dignify  humanity,  walks  abroad  in  shameless  den-
udation. The  arrogant  and  impertinent  claims  of  this  '  sci-
ence, falsely  so  called,'  have  been  so  boisterous  and  persist-
ent, that  the  unthinking  mass  have  been  sadly  deluded  ;  but
our  university  alone  has  had  the  courage  to  lay  its  young
but  vigorous  hand  upon  the  mane  of  untamed  Speculation
and  say,  *  We  will  have  no  more  of  this.'  "

It  is  a  consolation  to  know  how  the  result,  thus  devoutly
sought,  has  been  achieved  ;  for  in  the  "  ode  "  sung  at  the  lay-
ing of  the  corner-stone  of  a  new  theological  building  of  the
same  university,  in  May,  1880,  we  read  :

"  Science  and  Revelation  here
In  perfect  harmony  appear,
Guiding  young  feet  along  the  road
Through  grace  and  Nature  up  to  God."

It  is  also  pleasing  to  know  that,  while  an  institution  call-
ing itself  a  university  thus  violated  the  fundamental  princi-
ples on  which  any  institution  worthy  of  the  name  must  be
based,  another  institution  which  has  the  glory  of  being  the
first  in  the  entire  North  to  begin  something  like  a  university
organization— the  State  University  of  Michigan— recalled
Dr.  Winchell  at  once  to  his  former  professorship,  and  hon-
oured itself  by  maintaining  him  in  that  position,  where,  un-
hampered, he  was  thereafter  able  to  utter  his  views  in  the
midst  of  the  largest  body  of  students  on  the  American  con-
tinent.

Disgraceful  as  this  history  was  to  the  men  who  drove


3i6  THE   "FALL   OF    MAN"   AND   HISTORY.

out  Dr.  Winchell,  they  but  succeeded,  as  various  similar
bodies  of  men  making  similar  efforts  have  done,  in  advanc-
ing their  supposed  victim  to  higher  position  and  more  com-
manding influence. ^^

A  few  years  after  this  suppression  of  earnest  Christian
thought  at  an  institution  of  learning  in  the  western  part  of
our  Southern  States,  there  appeared  a  similar  attempt  in
sundry  seaboard  States  of  the  South.

As  far  back  as  the  year  1857  the  Presbyterian  Synod  of
Mississippi  passed  the  following  resolution :

"  Whereas,  We  live  in  an  age  in  which  the  most  insidious
attacks  are  made  on  revealed  religion  through  the  natural
sciences,  and  as  it  behooves  the  Church  at  all  times  to  have
men  capable  of  defending  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the
saints ;

'^Resolved,  That  this  presbytery  recommend  the  endow-
ment of  a  professorship  of '  Natural  Science  as  connected
with  revealed  religion  in  one  or  more  of  our  theological
seminaries."

Pursuant  to  this  resolution  such  a  chair  w^as  established
in  the  theological  seminary  at  Columbia,  S.  C,  and  James
Woodrow  was  appointed  professor.  Dr.  Woodrow  seems
to  have  been  admirably  fitted  for  the  position — a  devoted
Christian  man,  accepting  the  Presbyterian  standards  of  faith
in  which  he  had  been  brought  up,  and  at  the  same  time  giv-
ing every  effort  to  acquaint  himself  with  the  methods  and
conclusions  of  science.  To  great  natural  endowments  he
added  constant  labours  to  arrive  at  the  truth  in  this  field.
Visiting  Europe,  he  made  the  acquaintance  of  many  of  the

*  For  Dr.  Winchell's  original  statements,  see  Adamites  atid  Pre-Adajfiites,  Syra-
cuse, N.  Y.,  1878.  For  the  first  important  denunciation  of  his  views,  see  the  St.
Louis  Ch>istiaii  Advocate,  May  22,  1878.  For  the  conversation  with  Bishop  Mc-
Tyeire,  see  Dr.  Winchell's  own  account  in  the  A^ashville  American,  June  16,  1878.
For  the  curious  reply  from  Dr.  Winchell's  colleague,  see  the  N^ashville  Christian
Advocate,  July  12,  1878  ;  and  for  the  further  development  of  the  matter,  see  the
Nashville  A?7ierican  of  July  19,  1878.  For  the  further  course  of  the  attack  in  the
denominational  organ  of  Dr.  Winchell's  oppressors,  see  the  N^ashville  Christian
Advocate,  April  26,  1879.  For  the  oratorical  declaration  of  the  Tennessee  Confer-
ence upon  the  matter,  see  the  Nashville  American,  October  15,  1878  ;  and  for  the
"ode"  regarding  the  "harmony  of  science  and  revelation"  as  supported  at  the
university,  see  the  same  journal  for  May  2,  1880.


THE    "FALL   OF    MAN"   AND    HISTORY.


317


foremost  scientific  investigators,  became  a  student  in  univer-
sity lecture  rooms  and  laboratories,  an  interested  hearer  in
scientific  conventions,  and  a  correspondent  of  leading  men
of  science  at  home  and  abroad.  As  a  result,  he  came  to  the
conclusion  that  the  h3^pothesis  of  evolution  is  the  only  one
w^hich  explains  various  leading  facts  in  natural  science.  This
he  taught,  and  he  also  taught  that  such  a  view  is  not  incom-
patible with  a  true  view  of  the  sacred  Scriptures.

In  1882  and  1883  the  board  of  directors  of  the  theological
seminary,  in  fear  that  "  scepticism  in  the  world  is  using
alleged  discoveries  in  science  to  impugn  the  Word  of  God,"
requested  Prof.  Woodrow  to  state  his  views  in  regard  to
evolution.  The  professor  complied  with  this  request  in  a
very  powerful  address,  which  was  published  and  widely  cir-
culated, to  such  effect  that  the  board  of  directors  shortly
afterward  passed  resolutions  declaring  the  theory  of  evolu-
tion as  defined  by  Prof.  Woodrow  not  inconsistent  with  per-
fect soundness  in  the  faith.

In  the  year  1884  alarm  regarding  Dr.  Woodrow's  teach-
ings began  to  show  itself  in  larger  proportions,  and  a  minor-
ity report  was  introduced  into  the  Synod  of  South  Carolina
declaring  that  *'  the  synod  is  called  upon  to  decide  not  upon
the  question  whether  the  said  views  of  Dr.  Woodrow  con-
tradict the  Bible  in  its  highest  and  absolute  sense,  but  upon
the  question  whether  they  contradict  the  interpretation  of
the  Bible  by  the  Presbyterian  Church  in  the  United  States."

Perhaps  a  more  self-condemnatory  statement  was  never
presented,  for  it  clearly  recognized,  as  a  basis  for  intolerance,
at  least  a  possible  difference  between  "  the  interpretation  of
the  Bible  by  the  Presbyterian  Church  "  and  the  teachings  of
*'  the  Bible  in  its  highest  and  absolute  sense."

This  hostile  movement  became  so  strong  that,  in  spite  of
the  favourable  action  of  the  directors  of  the  seminary,  and
against  the  efforts  of  a  broad-minded  minority  in  the  repre-
sentative bodies  having  ultimate  charge  of  the  institution,
the  delegates  from  the  various  S3mods  raised  a  storm  of  or-
thodoxy and  drove  Dr.  Woodrow  from  his  post.  Happily,
he  was  at  the  same  time  professor  in  the  University  of  South
Carolina  in  the  same  city  of  Columbia,  and  from  his  chair  in
that  institution  he  continued  to  teach  natural  science  with


3i8  THE    "FALL   OF    MAN"   AND   HISTORY.

the  approval  of  the  great  majority  of  thinking  men  in  that
region  ;  hence,  the  only  effect  of  the  attempt  to  crush  him
was,  that  his  position  was  made  higher,  respect  for  him
deeper,  and  his  reputation  wider.

In  spite  of  attempts  by  the  more  orthodox  to  prevent  stu-
dents of  the  theological  seminary  from  attending  his  lectures
at  the  university,  they  persisted  in  hearing  him  ;  indeed,  the
reputation  of  heresy  seemed  to  enhance  his  influence.

It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  professor  thus  treated
had  been  one  of  the  most  respected  and  beloved  university
instructors  in  the  South  during  more  than  a  quarter  of  a
century,  and  that  he  was  turned  out  of  his  position  with  no
opportunity  for  careful  defence,  and,  indeed,  without  even
the  formality  of  a  trial.  Well  did  an  eminent  but  thoughtful
divine  of  the  Southern  Presbyterian  Church  declare  that  "  the
method  of  procedure  to  destroy  evolution  by  the  majority
in  the  Church  is  vicious  and  suicidal,"  and  that  *'  logical
dynamite  has  been  used  to  put  out  a  supposed  fire  in  the
upper  stories  of  our  house,  and  all  the  family  in  the  house  at
that."  Wisely,  too,  did  he  refer  to  the  majority  as  ''  sowing
in  the  fields  of  the  Church  the  thorns  of  its  errors,  and  cum-
bering its  path  with  the  (^e'dri's  and  ruin  of  its  own  folly."

To  these  recent  cases  may  be  added  the  expulsion  of
Prof.  Toy  from  teaching  under  ecclesiastical  control  at
Louisville,  and  his  election  to  a  far  more  influential  chair
at  Harvard  University;  the  driving  out  from  the  American
College  at  Beyrout  of  the  young  professors  who  accepted
evolution  as  probable,  and  the  rise  of  one  of  them,  Mr.  Nimr,
to  a  far  more  commanding  position  than  that  which  he  left
— the  control  of  three  leading  journals  at  Cairo;  the  driving
out  of  Robertson  Smith  from  his  position  at  Edinburgh,  and
his  reception  into  the  far  more  important  and  influential
professorship  at  the  English  University  of  Cambridge  ;  and
multitudes  of  similar  cases.  From  the  days  when  Henry
Dunster,  the  first  President  of  Harvard  College,  was  driven
from  his  presidency,  as  Cotton  Mather  said,  for  ''falling  into
the  briers  of  Antipedobaptism  "  until  now,  the  same  spirit  is
shown  in  all  such  attempts.  In  each  we  have  generally,  on
one  side,  a  body  of  older  theologians,  who  since  their  youth
have   learned   nothing  and   forgotten  nothing,   sundry  pro-


THE    "FALL   OF    MAN"   AND    HISTORY.  31Q

fessors  who  do  not  wish  to  rewrite  their  lectures,  and  a  mass
of  unthinking  ecclesiastical  persons  of  little  or  no  importance
save  in  making  up  a  retrograde  majority  in  an  ecclesiastical
tribunal ;  on  the  other  side  we  have  as  generally  the  think-
ing, open-minded,  devoted  men  who  have  listened  to  the
revelation  of  their  own- time  as  well  as  of  times  past,  and
who  are  evidently  thinking  the  future  thought  of  the  world.

Here  we  have  survivals  of  that  same  oppression  of  thought
by  theology  which  hias  cost  the  modern  world  so  dear;  the
system  which  forced  great  numbers  of  professors,  under
penalty  of  deprivation,  to  teach  that  the  sun  and  planets
revolve  about  the  earth  ;  that  comets  are  fire-balls  flung  by
an  angry  God  at  a  wicked  world  ;  that  insanity  is  diabolic
possession  ;  that  anatomical  investigation  of  the  human  frame
is  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost ;  that  chemistry  leads  to  sor-
cery ;  that  taking  interest  for  money  is  forbidden  by  Scrip-
ture ;  that  geology  must  conform  to  ancient  Hebrew  poetry.
From  the  same  source  came  in  Austria  the  rule  of  the  "  Im-
maculate Oath,"  under  which  university  professoi's,  long  be-
fore the  dogma  of  the  Immaculate  Conception  was  defined
by  the  Church,  were  obliged  to  swear  to  their  belief  in  that
dogma  before  they  were  permitted  to  teach  even  arithmetic
or  geometry  ;  in  England,  the  denunciation  of  inoculation
against  smallpox ;  in  Scotland,  the  protests  against  using
chloroform  in  childbirth  as  "vitiating  the  primal  curse
against  woman  "  ;  in  France,  the  use  in  clerical  schools  of  a
historical  text-book  from  which  Napoleon  was  left  out;  and,
in  America,  the  use  of  Catholic  manuals  in  which  the  In-
quisition is  declared  to  have  been  a  purely  civil  tribunal,  or
Protestant  manuals  in  which  the  Puritans  are  shown  to  have
been  all  that  we  could  now  wish  they  had  been.

So,  too,  among  multitudes  of  similar  efforts  abroad,  we
have  during  centuries  the  fettering  of  professors  at  English
and  Scotch  universities  by  test  oaths,  subscriptions  to  ar-
ticles, and  catechisms  without  number.  In  our  own  country
we  have  had  in  a  vast  multitude  of  denominational  colleges,
as  the  first  qualification  for  a  professorship,  not  abihty  in  the
subject  to  be  taught,  but  fidelity  to  the  particular  shibboleth
of  the  denomination  controlling  the  college  or  university.

Happily,  in  these  days  such   attempts  generally  defeat


320


THE    "FALL   OF    MAN"   AND    HISTORY.


themselves.  The  supposed  victim  is  generally  made  a  man
of  mark  by  persecution,  and  advanced  to  a  higher  and  wider
sphere  ol  usefulness.  In  withstanding  the  march  of  scientific
truth,  any  Conference,  Synod,  Board  of  Commissioners,
Board  of  Trustees,  or  Faculty,  is  but  as  a  nest  of  field-mice
in  the  path  of  a  steam  plough.

The  harm  done  to  religion  in  these  attempts  is  far  greater
than  that  done  to  science ;  for  thereby  suspicions  are  widely
spread,  especially  among  open-minded  young  men,  that  the
accepted  Christian  system  demands  a  concealment  of  truth,
with  the  persecution  of  honest  investigators,  and  therefore
must  be  false.  Well  was  it  said  in  substance  by  President
McCosh,  of  Princeton,  that  no  more  sure  way  of  making
unbelievers  in  Christianity  among  young  men  could  be
devised  than  preaching  to  them  that  the  doctrines  arrived
at  by  the  great  scientific  thinkers  of  this  period  are  opposed
to  religion.

Yet  it  is  but  justice  here  to  say  that  more  and  more  there
is  evolving  out  of  this  past  history  of  oppression  a  better
spirit,  which  is  making  itself  manifest  with  power  in  the  lead-
ing religious  bodies  of  the  world.  In  the  Church  of  Rome
we  have  to-day  such  utterances  as  those  of  St.  George  Mi-
vart,  declaring  that  the  Church  must  not  attempt  to  interfere
with  science ;  that  the  Almighty  in  the  Galileo  case  gave
her  a  distinct  warning  that  the  priesthood  of  science  must
remain  with  the  men  of  science.  In  the  Anglican  Church
and  its  American  daughter  we  have  the  acts  and  utterances
of  such  men  as  Archbishop  Tait,  Bishop  Temple,  Dean  Stan-
ley, Dean  Farrar,  and  many  others,  proving  that  the  deepest
religious  thought  is  more  and  more  tending  to  peace  rather
than  warfare  with  science ;  and  in  .the  other  churches,  espe-
cially in  America,  while  there  is  yet  much  to  be  desired,  the
welcome  extended  in  many  of  them  to  Alexander  Winchell,
and  the  freedom  given  to  views  like  his,  augur  well  for  a
better  state  of  things  in  the  future.

From  the  science  of  Anthropology,  when  rightly  viewed
as  a  whole,  has  come  the  greatest  aid  to  those  who  work  to
advance  religion  rather  than  to  promote  any  particular  sys-
tem of  theology;  for  Anthropology  and  its  subsidiary  sci-
ences show  more  and  more  that  man,  since  coming  upon  the


THE    "FALL   OF    MAN"    AND    HISTORY.  32 1

earth,  has  risen,  from  the  period  when  he  had  little,  if  any,
idea  of  a  great  power  above  him,  through  successive  stages
of  fetichism,  shamanism,  and  idolatry,  toward  better  forms  of
belief,  making  him  more  and  more  accessible  to  nobler  forms
of  religion.  The  same  sciences  show,  too,  within  the  historic
period,  the  same  tendency,  and  especially  within  the  events
covered  by  our  sacred  books,  a  progress  from  fetichism,  of
which  so  many  evidences  crop  out  in  the  early  Jewish
worship  as  shown  in  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures,  through
polytheism,  when  Jehovah  was  but  ''  a  god  above  all  gods,''
through  the  period  when  he  was  "  a  jealous  God,"  capri-
cious and  cruel,  until  he  is  revealed  in  such  inspired  utter-
ances as  those  of  the  nobler  Psalms,  the  great  passages  in
Isaiah,  the  sublime  preaching  of  Micah,  and,  above  all,
through  the  ideal  given  to  the  world  by  Jesus  of  Nazareth.

Well  indeed  has  an  eminent  divine  of  the  Church  of  Eng-
land in  our  own  time  called  on  Christians  to  rejoice  over  this
evolution,  ''  between  the  God  of  Samuel,  who  ordered  infants
to  be  slaughtered,  and  the  God  of  the  Psalmist,  whose  tender
mercies  are  over  all  his  works ;  between  the  God  of  the
Patriarchs,  who  was  always  repenting,  and  the  God  of  the
Apostles,  who  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  forever,
with  whom  there  is  no  variableness  nor  shadow  of  turning;
between  the  God  of  the  Old  Testament,  who  walked  in  the
garden  in  the  cool  of  the  day,  and  the  God  of  the  New  Tes-
tament, whom  no  man  hath  seen  nor  can  see  ;  between  the
God  of  Leviticus,  who  was  so  particular  about  the  sacrificial
furniture  and  utensils,  and  the  God  of  the  Acts,  who  dwelleth
not  in  temples  made  with  hands  ;  between  the  God  who
hardened  Pharaoh's  heart,  and  the  God  who  will  have  all
men  to  be  saved  ;  between  the  God  of  Exodus,  who  is  merci-
ful only  to  those  who  love  him,  and  the  God  of  Christ — the
heavenly  Father — who  is  kind  unto  the  unthankful  and  the
evil."

However  overwhelming,  then,  the  facts  may  be  which
Anthropology,  History,  and  their  kindred  sciences  may,  in
the  interest  of  simple  truth,  establish  against  the  theolog-
ical doctrine  of  "  the  Fall " ;  however  completely  they  may
fossilize  various  dogmas,  catechisms,  creeds,  confessions,
"  plans  of  salvation  "  and  ''  schemes  of  redemption,"  which
22


322


THE   "FALL   OF    MAN"   AND    HISTORY.


have  been  evolved  from  the  great  minds  of  the  theological
period  :  science,  so  far  from  making  inroads  on  religion,  or
even  upon  our  Christian  development  of  it,  will  strengthen
all  that  is  essential  in  it,  giving  new  and  nobler  paths  to
man's  highest  aspirations.  For  the  one  great,  legitimate,
scientific  conclusion  of  anthropology  is,  that,  more  and  more,
a  better  civilization  of  the  world,  despite  all  its  survivals  of
savagery  and  barbarism,  is  developing  men  and  women  on
whom  the  declarations  of  the  nobler  Psalms,  of  Isaiah,  of
Micah,  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  the  first  great  command-
ment, and  the  second,  which  is  like  unto  it,  St.  Paul's  praise
of  charity  and  St.  James's  definition  of  "  pure  religion  and
undefiled,"  can  take  stronger  hold  for  the  more  effective  and
more  rapid  uplifting  of  our  race.*

*  For  the  resolution  of  the  Presbyterian  Synod  of  Mississippi  in  1857,  see  Prof.
Woodrovv's  speech  before  the  Synod  of  South  Carolina,  October  27  and  28,  1884,
p.  6.  As  to  the  action  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Theological  Seminary  of
Columbia,  see  ibid.  As  to  the  minority  report  in  the  Synod  of  South  Carolina,
see  ibid.,  p.  24.  For  the  pithy  sentences  regarding  the  conduct  of  the  majority  in
the  synods  toward  Dr.  Woodrow,  see  the  Rev.  Mr.  Flinn's  article  in  the  Southern
Presbyterian  Review  for  April,  1885,  p.  272,  and  elsewhere.  For  the  restrictions
regarding  the  teaching  of  the  Copernican  theory  and  the  true  doctrine  of  comets  in
German  universities,  see  various  histories  of  astronomy,  especially  Madler.  For
the  immaculate  oath  {Immaculaten-Eid)  as  enforced  upon  the  Austrian  professors,
see  Luftkandl,  Die  Josephinischen  Ideen.  For  the  effort  of  the  Church  in  France,
after  the  restoration  of  the  Bourbons,  to  teach  a  history  of  that  country  from  which
the  name  of  Napoleon  should  be  left  out,  see  Father  Loriquet's  famous  Histoire  de
France  a  V  Usage  de  la  Jeunesse,  Lyon,  1820,  vol.  ii ;  see  especially  table  of  contents
at  the  end.  The  book  bears  on  its  title-page  the  well-known  initials  of  the  Jesuit
motto,  A.  M.  D.  G.  (Ad  Majorem  Dei  Gloriam).  For  examples  in  England  and
Scotland,  see  various  English  histories,  and  especially  Buckle's  chapters  on  Scot-
land. For  a  longer  collection  of  examples  showing  the  suppression  of  anything
like  unfettered  thought  upon  scientific  subjects  in  American  colleges,  %^q  hiaugural
Address  at  the  Opening  of  Cortiell  University,  by  the  author  of  these  chapters.  For
the  citation  regarding  the  evolution  of  better  and  nobler  ideas  of  God,  see  Church
and  Creed'.  Sermons  preached  in  the  Chapel  of  the  Foundling  Hospital,  London,
by  A.  W.  Momerie.  INT.  A.,  LL.  D.,  Professor  of  Logic  and  Metaphysics  in  King's
College,  London,  London,  1890.  For  a  very  vigorous  utterance  on  the  other  side,
see  a  recent  charge  of  the  Bishop  of  Gloucester.


CHAPTER   XI.

FROM  '^  THE  PRINCE  OF  THE  POWER  OF  THE  AIR  "
TO   METEOROLOGY.

I.   GROWTH    OF   A   THEOLOGICAL   THEORY.

The  popular  beliefs  of  classic  antiquity  regarding  storms,
thunder,  and  lightning,  took  shape  in  myths  representing
Vulcan  as  forging  thunderbolts,  Jupiter  as  flinging  them  at
his  enemies,  .^olus  intrusting  the  winds  in  a  bag  to  iEneas,
and  the  like.  An  attempt  at  their  further  theological  devel-
opment is  seen  in  the  Pythagorean  statement  that  lightnings
are  intended  to  terrify  the  damned  in  Tartarus.

But  at  a  very  early  period  we  see  the  beginning  of  a
scientific  view.  In  Greece,  the  Ionic  philosophers  held  that
such  phenomena  are  obedient  to  law.  Plato,  Aristotle,  and
many  lesser  lights,  attempted  to  account  for  them  on  natural
grounds ;  and  their  explanations,  though  crude,  w^ere  based
upon  observation  and  thought.  In  Rome,  Lucretius,  Seneca,
Pliny,  and  others,  inadequate  as  their  statements  were,  im-
planted at  least  the  germs  of  a  science.  But,  as  the  Chris-
tian Church  rose  to  power,  this  evolution  was  checked  ;  the
new  leaders  of  thought  found,  in  the  Scriptures  recognized
by  them  as  sacred,  the  basis  for  a  new  view,  or  rather  for  a
modification  of  the  old  view.

This  ending  of  a  scientific  evolution  based  upon  observa-
tion and  reason,  and  this  beginning  of  a  sacred  science  based
upon  the  letter  of  Scripture  and  on  theology,  are  seen  in
the  utterances  of  various  fathers  in  the  early  Church.  As
to  the  general  features  of  this  new  development,  Tertullian
held  that  sundry  passages  of  Scripture  prove  lightning  iden-
tical with  hell-fire ;  and  this  idea  was  transmitted  from  gen-
eration  to   creneration   of  later  churchmen,   who  found    an

323


324


FROM    "THE    PRINCE    OF    THE    POWER    OF    THE   AIR.'


especial  support  of  Tertullian's  view  in  the  sulphurous  smell
experienced  during  thunderstorms.  St.  Hilary  thought  the
firmament  very  much  lower  than  the  heavens,  and  that  it
was  created  not  only  for  the  support  of  the  upper  waters,
but  also  for  the  tempering  of  our  atmosphere."^  St.  Am-
brose held  that  thunder  is  caused  by  the  winds  breaking
through  the  solid  firmament,  and  cited  from  the  prophet
Amos  the  sublime  passage  regarding  "  Him  that  establisheth
the  thunders."  t  He  shows,  indeed,  some  conception  of  the
true  source  of  rain ;  but  his  whole  reasoning  is  limited  by
various  scriptural  texts.  He  lays  great  stress  upon  the  firma-
ment as  a  solid  outer  shell  of  the  universe :  the  heavens  he
holds  to  be  not  far  outside  this  outer  shell,  and  argues  regard-
ing their  character  from  St.  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians
and  from  the  one  hundred  and  forty-eighth  Psalm.  As  to
*'  the  waters  which  are  above  the  firmament,"  he  takes  up
the  objection  of  those  who  hold  that,  this  outside  of  the  uni-
verse being  spherical,  the  waters  must  slide  off  it,  especially
if  the  firmament  revolves  ;  and  he  points  out  that  it  is  b}^  no
means  certain  that  the  outside  of  the  firmament  is  spherical,
and  insists  that,  if  it  does  revolve,  the  water  is  just  what  is
needed  to  lubricate  and  cool  its  axis.

St.  Jerome  held  that  God  at  the  Creation,  having  spread
out  the  firmament  between  heaven  and  earth,  and  having
separated  the  upper  waters  from  the  lower,  caused  the  upper
waters  to  be  frozen  into  ice,  in  order  to  keep  all  in  place.
A  proof  of  this  view  Jerome  found  in  the  words  of  Ezekiel
regarding  **the  crystal  stretched  above  the  cherubim."  :j:

The  germinal  principle  in  accordance  with  which  all
these  theories   were  evolved  was  most  clearly  proclaimed

*  For  Tertullian,  see  the  Apol.  contra  gentes,  c.  47  ;  also  Augustiw  de  Ange-
lis,  Lectiones  Meteorologicc2,  p.  64.  For  Hilary,  see  hi  Psalm.  CXXXV  (Migne,
Pair.  Lat.y  vol.  ix,  p.  773).

f  "Firmans  tonitrua  "  (Amos  iv,  13) ;  the  phrase  does  not  appear  in  our  ver-
sion.

X  For  Ambrose,  see  the  Hexmneron,  lib.  ii,  cap.  3,  4  ;  lib.  iii,  cap.  5  (Migne,  Fair.
Lat.y  vol.  xiv,  pp.  148-150,  153,  165).  The  passage  as  to  lubrication  of  the  heavenly
axis  is  as  follows :  "  Deinde  cum  ipsi  dicant  volvi  orbem  coeli  stellis  ardentibus
refulgentem,  nonne  divina  providentia  necessario  prospexit,  ut  intra  orbem  coeli,  et
supra  orbem  redundaret  aqua,  quas  ilia  ferventis  axis  incendia  temperaret  ?  "  For
Jerome,  see  his  Epistola,  Ixix,  cap.  6  (Migne,  Patr.  Lat.,  vol.  xxii,  p.  659).


GROWTH    OF   A   THEOLOGICAL    THEORY.  325

to  the  world  by  St.  Augustine  in  his  famous  utterance:
"  Nothing  is  to  be  accepted  save  on  the  authority  of  Scrip-
ture, since  greater  is  that  authority  than  all  the  powers
of  the  human  mind."  '^  No  treatise  was  safe  thereafter
which  did  not  breathe  the  spirit  and  conform  to  the  letter  of
this  maxim.  Unfortunately,  what  was  generally  understood
by  the  "  authority  of  Scripture  "  was  the  tyranny  of  sacred
books  imperfectly  transcribed,  viewed  through  distorting  su-
perstitions, and  frequently  interpreted  by  party  spirit.

Following  this  precept  of  St.  Augustine  there  were  de-
veloped, in  every  field,  theological  views  of  science  which
have  never  led  to  a  single  truth — which,  without  exception,
have  forced  mankind  away  from  the  truth,  and  have  caused
Christendom  to  stumble  for  centuries  into  abvsses  of  error
and  sorrow.  In  meteorology,  as  in  every  other  science  with
which  he  dealt,  Augustine  based  everything  upon  the  letter
of  the  sacred  text ;  and  it  is  characteristic  of  the  result  that
this  man,  so  great  when  untrammelled,  thought  it  his  duty
to  guard  especially  the  whole  theory  of  the  "  waters  above
the  heavens."

In  the  sixth  century  this  theological  reasoning  was  still
further  developed,  as  we  have  seen,  by  Cosmas  Indicopleus-
tes.  Finding  a  sanction  for  the  old  Egyptian  theory  of  the
universe  in  the  ninth  chapter  of  Hebrews,  he  insisted  that
the  earth  is  a  flat  parallelogram,  and  that  from  its  outer
edges  rise  immense  walls  supporting  the  firmament;  then,
throwing  together  the  reference  to  the  firmament  in  Gene-
sis and  the  outburst  of  poetry  in  the  Psalms  regarding  the
"  waters  that  be  above  the  heavens,"  he  insisted  that  over
the  terrestrial  universe  are  solid  arches  bearing  a  vault  sup-
porting a  vast  cistern  ''  containing  the  waters  "  ;  finally,  tak-
ing from  Genesis  the  expression  regarding  the  *'  windows  of
heaven,"  he  insisted  that  these  windows  are  opened  and
closed  by  the  angels  whenever  the  Almighty  wishes  to  send
rain  upon  the  earth  or  to  withhold  it.


*  "  Major  est  quippe  Scripturae  hujus  auctoritas,  quam  omnis  humani  ingenii
capacitas," — Augustine,  De  Genesi  ad  Lit.,  lib.  ii,  cap.  5  (Migne,  Pair.  Lot.,  vol.
xxxiv,  pp.  266,  267).  Or,  as  he  is  cited  by  Vincent  of  Beauvais  {Spec.  Nat,  lib.  iv,
98):  "  Non  est  aliquid  temere  diffiniendum,  sed  quantum  Scriptura  dicit  accipien-
dum,  cujus  major  est  auctoritas  quam  omnis  humani  ingenii  capacitas."


326    FROM    THE    "  PRINCE    OF    THE    POWER    OF   THE  AIR "

This  was  accepted  by  the  universal  Church  as  a  vast
contribution  to  thought ;  for  several  centuries  it  was  the
orthodox  doctrine,  and  various  leaders  in  theology  devoted
themselves  to  developing  and  supplementing  it.

About  the  beginning  of  the  seventh  century,  Isidore,
Bishop  of  Seville,  was  the  ablest  prelate  in  Christendom,  and
was  showing  those  great  qualities  which  led  to  his  enrol-
ment among  the  saints  of  the  Church.  His  theological  view
of  science  marks  an  epoch.  As  to  the  "  waters  above  the
firmament,"  Isidore  contends  that  they  must  be  lower  than
the  uppermost  heaven,  though  higher  than  the  lower  heaven,
because  in  the  one  hundred  and  forty-eighth  Psalm  they  are
mentioned  after  the  heavenly  bodies  and  the  "  heaven  of
heavens,"  but  de/ore  the  terrestrial  elements.  As  to  their  pur-
pose, he  hesitates  between  those  who  held  that  they  were
stored  up  there  by  the  prescience  of  God  for  the  destruc-
tion of  the  world  at  the  Flood,  as  the  words  of  Scripture  that
"  the  windows  of  heaven  were  opened  "  seemed  to  indicate,
and  those  who  held  that  they  were  kept  there  to  moderate
the  heat  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  As  to  the  firmament,  he  is
in  doubt  whether  it  envelops  the  earth  "  like  an  eggshell,"
or  is  merely  spread  over  it  "like  a  curtain"  ;  for  he  holds
that  the  passage  in  the  one  hundred  and  fourth  Psalm  may
be  used  to  support  either  view.

Having  laid  these  scriptural  foundations,  Isidore  shows
considerable  power  of  thought;  indeed,  at  times,  when  he
discusses  the  rainbow,  rain,  hail,  snow,  and  frost,  his  theories
are  rational,  and  give  evidence  that,  if  he  could  have  broken
away  from  his  adhesion  to  the  letter  of  Scripture,  he  might
have  given  a  strong  impulse  to  the  evolution  of  a  true
science.*

About  a  century  later  appeared,  at  the  other  extremity
of  Europe,  the  second  in  the  trio  of  theological  men  of  sci-
ence in  the  earl}^  Middle  Ages — Bede  the  Venerable.  The
nucleus  of  his  theory  also  is  to  be  found  in  the  accepted  view

*  For  Cosmas,  see  his  Topographia  Christiana  (in  Montfaucon,  Ccllcctio  nova
patrum,  vol.  ii),  and  the  more  complete  account  of  his  theory  given  in  the  chapter
on  Geography  in  this  work.  For  Isidore,  see  the  Efymologiu:,  lib.  xiii,  cap.  7-9,  De
ordine  creaitirartim,  cap.  3,  4,  and  De  natura  rertcm,  cap.  29,  3o(Migne,  Fair.  Lat.»
vol.  Ixxxii,  pp.  476,  477,  vol.  Ixxxiii,  pp.  920-922,  icoi-1003).


GROWTH    OF   A   THEOLOGICAL    THEORY.  327

of  the  "  firmament  "  and  of  the  "  waters  above  the  heavens,"
derived  from  Genesis.  The  firmament  he  holds  to  be  spher-
ical, and  of  a  nature  subtile  and  fiery ;  the  upper  heavens,  he
says,  which  contain  the  angels,  God  has  tempered  with  ice,
lest  they  inflame  the  lower  elements.  As  to  the  waters  placed
above  the  firmament,  lower  than  the  spiritual  heavens,  but
higher  than  all  corporeal  creatures,  he  says,  "  Some  declare
that  they  were  stored  there  for  the  Deluge,  but  others,  more
correctly,  that  they  are  intended  to  temper  the  fire  of  the
stars."  He  goes  on  with  long  discussions  as  to  various  ele-
ments and  forces  in  Nature,  and  dwells  at  length  upon  the
air,  of  which  he  says  that  the  upper,  serene  air  is  over  the
heavens ;  while  the  lower,  which  is  coarse,  with  humid  exha-
lations, is  sent  off  from  the  earth,  and  that  in  this  are  light-
ning, hail,  snow,  ice,  and  tempests,  finding  proof  of  this  in  the
one  hundred  and  fort3^-eighth  Psalm,  where  these  are  com-
manded to  ''  praise  the  Lord  from  the  earth."  *

So  great  was  Bede's  authority,  that  nearly  all  the  anony-
mous 'speculations  of  the  next  following  centuries  upon  these
subjects  were  eventually  ascribed  to  him.  In  one  of  these
spurious  treatises  an  attempt  is  made  to  get  new  light  upon
the  sources  of  the  waters  above  the  heavens,  the  main  reli-
ance being  the  sheet  containing  the  animals  let  down  from
heaven,  in  the  vision  of  St.  Peter.  Another  of  these  treat-
ises is  still  more  curious,  for  it  endeavours  to  account  for
earthquakes  and  tides  by  means  of  the  leviathan  mentioned
in  Scripture.  This  characteristic  passage  runs  as  follows:
"Some  say  that  the  earth  contains  the  animal  leviathan,
and  that  he  holds  his  tail  after  a  fashion  of  his  own,  so  that
it  is  sometimes  scorched  by  the  sun,  whereupon  he  strives
to  get  hold  of  tlfe  sun,  and  so  the  earth  is  shaken  by  the  mo-
tion of  his  indignation;  he  drinks  in  also,  at  times,  such  huge
masses  of  the  waves  that  when  he  belches  them  forth  all  the
seas  feel  their  effect."  And  this  theological  theory  of  the
tides,  as  caused  by  the  alternate  suction  and  belching  of
leviathan,  went  far  and  wide.f


*  See  Bede,  De  natura  rerian  (Migne,  Patr.  Lat.,  vol.  xc).
f  See  the  treatise  De  ntundi  constitutione,  in  Bede's  Opera  (Migne,  Patr.  Lat.,
vol.  xc,  p.  884).


328   FROM    THE    "PRINCE    OF    THE    POWER    OF    THE    AIR."

In  the  writings  thus  covered  with  the  name  of  Bede
there  is  much  showing  a  scientific  spirit,  which  might  have
come  to  something  of  permanent  value  had  it  not  been  ham-
pered by  the  supposed  necessity  of  conforming  to  the  letter
of  Scripture.  It  is  as  startling  as  it  is  refreshing  to  hear  one
of  these  mediaeval  theorists  burst  out  as  follows  against  those
who  are  content  to  explain  everything  by  the  power  of
God  :  "  What  is  more  pitiable  than  to  say  that  a  thing  is,
because  God  is  able  to  do  it,  and  not  to  show  any  reason
why  it  is  so,  nor  any  purpose  for  which  it  is  so ;  just  as  if
God  did  everything  that  he  is  able  to  do!  You  talk  like
one  who  says  that  God  is  able  to  make  a  calf  out  of  a  log.
But  did  he  ever  do  it?  Either,  then,  show  a  reason  why  a
thing  is  so,  or  a  purpose  wherefore  it  is  so,  or  else  cease  to
declare  it  so."  *

The  most  permanent  contribution  of  Bede  to  scientific
thought  in  this  field  was  his  revival  of  the  view  that  the
firmament  is  made  of  ice ;  and  he  supported  this  from  the
words  in  the  twenty-sixth  chapter  of  Job,  ''  He  bindeth  up
the  waters  in  his  thick  cloud,  and  the  cloud  is  not  rent  under
them."

About  the  beginning  of  the  ninth  century  appeared  the
third  in  that  triumvirate  of  churchmen  who  were  the  oracles
of  sacred  science  throughout  the  early  Middle  Ages — Raba-
nus  Maurus,  Abbot  of  Fulda  and  Archbishop  of  Mayence.
Starting,  like  all  his  predecessors,  from  the  first  chapter  of
Genesis,  borrowing  here  and  there  from  the  ancient  phi-
losophers, and  excluding  everything  that  could  conflict  with
the  letter  of  Scripture,  he  follows,  in  his  work  upon  the  uni-
verse, his  two  predecessors,  Isidore  and  Bede,  developing
especially  St.  Jerome's  theory,  drawn  from  Ezekiel,  that  the
firmament  is  strong  enough  to  hold  up  the  "  waters  above
the  heavens,"  because  it  is  made  of  ice.

For  centuries  the  authorit}^  of  these  three  great  teachers
was  unquestioned,  and  in  countless  manuals  and  catechisms

*  For  this  remonstrance,  see  the  Elementa  philosophicB,  in  Bede's  Opera  (Migne,
Pair.  Lat.,  vol,  xc,  p.  1139).  This  treatise,  which  has  also  been  printed,  under  the
title  oi  De philosophia  mundi,  among  the  works  of  Honorius  of  Autun,  is  believed
by  modern  scholars  (Haur^au,  Werner,  Poole)  to  be  the  production  of  William  of
Conches.


GROWTH   OF   A   THEOLOGICAL   THEORY.  329

their  doctrine  was  translated  and  diluted  for  the  common
mind.  But  about  the  second  quarter  of  the  twelfth  centu-
ry a  priest,  Honorius  of  Autun,  produced  several  treatises
which  show  that  thought  on  this  subject  had  made  some
little  progress.  He  explained  the  rain  rationally,  and  mainly
in  the  modern  manner ;  with  the  thunder  he  is  less  success-
ful, but  insists  that  the  thunderbolt  "  is  not  stone,  as  some
assert."  His  thinking  is  vigorous  and  independent.  Had
theorists  such  as  he  been  many,  a  new  science  could  have
been  rapidly  evolved,  but  the  theological  current  was  too
strong.  "^

The  strength  of  this  current  which  overwhelmed  the
thought  of  Honorius  is  seen  again  in  the  work  of  the  Domin-
ican monk,  John  of  San  Geminiano,  who  in  the  thirteenth
century  gave  forth  his  Stunma  de  Exemplis  for  the  use  of
preachers  in  his  order.  Of  its  thousand  pages,  over  two
hundred  are  devoted  to  illustrations  drawn  from  the  heavens
and  the  elements.  A  characteristic  specimen  is  his  explana-
tion of  the  Psalmist's  phrase,  "  The  arrows  of  the  thunder."
These,  he  tells  us,  are  forged  out  of  a  dry  vapour  rising  from
the  earth  and  kindled  by  the  heat  of  the  upper  air,  which
then,  coming  into  contact  with  a  cloud  just  turning  into  rain,
"  is  conglutinated  like  flour  into  dough,"  but,  being  too  hot
to  be  extinguished,  its  particles  become  merely  sharpened  at
the  lower  end,  and  so  blazing  arrows,  cleaving  and  burning
everything  they  touch. f

But  far  more  important,  in  the  thirteenth  century,  was  the
fact  that  the  most  eminent  scientific  authority  of  that  age,
Albert  the  Great,  Bishop  of  Ratisbon,  attempted  to  reconcile
the  speculations  of  Aristotle  with  theological  views  derived
from  the  fathers.     In    one   very  important  respect  he  im-


*  For  Rabanus  Maurus,  see  the  Co77iment.  in  Getiesim  and  De  Universo  (Migne,
Pair.  Lat ,  vol.  cvii,  cxi.  For  a  charmingly  naive  example  of  the  primers  referred
to,  see  the  little  Anglo-Saxon  manual  of  astronomy,  sometimes  attributed  to  ^Ifric  ;
it  is  in  the  vernacular,  but  is  translated  in  Wright's  Popular  T?-eatises  07i  Science
during  the  Middle  Ages.  Bede  is,  of  course,  its  chief  source.  For  Honorius,  see
the  De  imagine  j?iundi  and  Nexcemeron  (Migne,  Pair.  Lat.y  vol.  clxxii).  The  Dc
philosophia  mundi,  the  most  rational  of  all,  is,  however,  believed  by  modern  schol-
ars to  be  unjustly  ascribed  to  him.     See  note  above.

f  See  Joannes  k  S.  Geminiano,  Summa,  c.  75.


330   FROM    THE    "PRINCE    OF    THE    POWER    OF    THE   AIR."

proved  upon  the  meteorological  views  of  his  great  master.
The  thunderbolt,  he  sajs,  is  no  mere  fire,  but  the  product  of
black  clouds  containing  much  mud,  which,  when  it  is  baked
by  the  intense  heat,  forms  a  fiery  black  or  red  stone  that
falls  from  the  sky,  tearing  beams  and  crushing  walls  in  its
course  :  such  he  has  seen  with  his  own  eyes."^

The  monkish  encyclopedists  of  the  later  Middle  Ao-es
added  little  to  these  theories.  As  we  glance  over  the  pages
of  Vincent  of  Beauvais,  the  monk  Bartholomew,  and  Wil-
liam of  Conches,  we  note  only  a  growing  deference  to  the
authority  of  Aristotle  as  supplementing  that  of  Isidore  and
Bede  and  explaining  sacred  Scripture.  Aristotle  is  treated
like  a  Church  father,  but  extreme  care  is  taken  not  to  9:0
beyond  the  great  maxim  of  St.  Augustine ;  then,  little  by
little,  Bede  and  Isidore  fall  into  the  background,  Aristotle
fills  the  whole  horizon,  and  his  utterances  are  second  in
sacredness  only  to  the  text  of  Holy  Writ.

A  curious  illustration  of  the  difficulties  these  mediaeval
scholars  had  to  meet  in  reconciling  the  scientific  theories  of
Aristotle  with  the  letter  of  the  Bible  is  seen  in  the  case  of
the  rainbow.  It  is  to  the  honour  of  Aristotle  that  his  con-
clusions regarding  the  rainbow,  though  slightl}^  erroneous,
were  based  upon  careful  observation  and  evolved  b}^  reason-
ing alone;  but  his  Christian  commentators,  while  anxious  to
follow  him,  had  to  bear  in  mind  the  scriptural  statement  that
God  had  created  the  rainbow  as  a  sign  to  Noah  that  there
should  never  again  be  a  Flood  on  the  earth.  Even  so  bold  a
thinker  as  Cardinal  d'Ailly,  whose  speculations  as  to  the
geography  of  the  earth  did  so  much  afterward  in  stimulating
Columbus,  faltered  before  this  statement,  acknowledo^ine
that  God  alone  could,  explain  it;  but  suggested  that  possibly
never  before  the  Deluge  had  a  cloud  been  suffered  to  take
such  a  position  toward  the  sun  as  to  cause  a  rainbow.

The  learned  cardinal  was  also  constrained  to  believe  that
certain  stars  and  constellations  have  something  to  do  in  caus-
ing the  rain,  since  these  would   best  explain  Noah's  fore-


*  See  Albertus  Magnus,//  Sent.,  Op.,  vol.  xv,  p.  137,  a.  (cited  by  Heller,  GescA.
d.  Physik,  vol.  i,  p.  184)  and  his  Liber  Methaurorum,  III,  iv,  18  (of  which  I  have
used  the  edition  of  Venice,  1488).


GROWTH    OF    A    THEOLOGICAL   THEORY.  331

knowledge  of  the  Deluge.  In  connection  with  this  scrip-
tural doctrine  of  winds  came  a  scriptural  doctrine  of  earth-
quakes :  they  were  believed  to  be  caused  by  winds  issuing
from  the  earth,  and  this  view  was  based  upon  the  passage  in
the  one  hundred  and  thirty-fifth  Psalm,  ''  He  bringeth  the
wind  out  of  his  treasuries."  *

Such  were  the  main  typical  attempts  during  nearly  four-
teen centuries  to  build  up  under  theological  guidance  and
within  scriptural  limitations  a  sacred  science  of  meteorology.
But  these  theories  were  mainly  evolved  in  the  effort  to  es-
tablish a  basis  and  general  theory  of  phenomena :  it  still  re-
mained to  account  for  special  manifestations,  and  here  came
a  twofold  development  of  theological  thought.

On  one  hand,  these  phenomena  were  attributed  to  the
Almighty,  and,  on  the  other,  to  Satan.  As  to  the  first  of
these  theories,  we  constantly  find  the  Divine  wrath  mentioned
by  the  earlier  fathers  as  the  cause  of  lightning,  hailstorms,
hurricanes,  and  the  like.

In  the  early  days  of  Christianity  we  see  a  curious
struggle  between  pagan  and  Christian  belief  upon  this  point.
Near  the  close  of  the  second  century  the  Emperor  Marcus
Aurelius,  in  his  effort  to  save  the  empire,  fought  a  hotly  con-
tested battle  with  the  Quadi,  in  what  is  now  Hungary.
While  the  issue  of  this  great  battle  was  yet  doubtful  there
came  suddenly  a  blinding  storm  beating  into  the  faces  of  the
Quadi,  and  this  gave  the  Roman  troops  the  advantage,  en-
abling Marcus  Aurelius  to  win  a  decisive  victory.  Votaries
of  each  of  the  great  religions  claimed  that  this  storm  was
caused  by  the  object  of  their  own  adoration.  The  pagans
insisted  that  Jupiter  had  sent  the  storm  in  obedience  to  their
prayers,  and  on  the  Antonine  Column  at  Rome  we  may  still
see  the  figure  of  Olympian  Jove  casting  his  thunderbolts
and  pouring  a  storm  of  rain  from  the  open  heavens  against
the  Quadi.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Christians  insisted  that
the  storm   had   been  sent  by  Jehovah  in  obedience  to  t/ieir


*  For  D'Ailly,  see  his  Concordia  astrono}7iica;ve7'itatis  cum  theolof^ia  (Paris,  1483
— in  the  Imago  numdi — and  Venice,  1490) ;  also  Eck's  commentary  on  Aristotle's
Meteorologica  (Augsburg,  15 19),  lib.  ii,  nota  2  ;  also  Reisch,  Margarita  philosophica,
lib.  ix,  c.  18.


332    FROM    THE    "PRINCE    OF    THE    POWER    OF    THE    AIR."

prayers ;  and  Tertullian,  Eusebius,  St.  Gregory  of  Nyssa,
and  St.  Jerome  were  among  those  w^ho  insisted  upon  this
meteorological  miracle ;  the  first  two,  indeed,  in  the  fer-
vour of  their  arguments  for  its  reality,  allowing  themselves
to  be  carried  considerably  beyond  exact  historical  truth.*

As  time  went  on,  the  fathers  developed  this  view  more
and  more  from  various  texts  in  the  Jewish  and  Christian
sacred  books,  substituting  for  Jupiter  flinging  his  thunder-
bolts the  Almighty  wrapped  in  thunder  and  sending  forth
his  lightnings.  Through  the  Middle  Ages  this  was  fostered
until  it  came  to  be  accepted  as  a  mere  truism,  entering  into
all  medieval  thinking,  and  was  still  further  developed  by  an
attempt  to  specify  the  particular  sins  which  were  thus  pun-
ished. Thus  even  the  rational  Florentine  historian  Vil-
lani  ascribed  floods  and  fires  to  the  "  too  great  pride  of  the
city  of  Florence  and  the  ingratitude  of  the  citizens  toward
God,"  which,  "of  course,"  says  a  recent  historian,  ''meant
their  insufficient  attention  to  the  ceremonies  of  religion."  f

In  the  thirteenth  century  the  Cistercian  monk,  Csesarius
of  Heisterbach,  popularized  the  doctrine  in  central  Europe.
His  rich  collection  of  anecdotes  for  the  illustration  of  re-
ligious truths  was  the  favourite  recreative  reading  in  the  con-
vents for  three  centuries,  and  exercised  great  influence  over
the  thought  of  the  later  Middle  Ages.  In  this  work  he  re-
lates several  instances  of  the  Divine  use  of  lightning,  both  for
rescue  and  for  punishment.  Thus  he  tells  us  how  the  stew-
ard {ccllcrariiis)  of  his  own  monastery  was  saved  from  the
clutch  of  a  robber  by  a  clap  of  thunder  which,  in  answer  to
his  prayer,  burst  suddenly  from  the  sky  and  frightened  the
bandit  from  his  purpose  :  how,  in  a  Saxon  theatre,  twenty
men  were  struck  down,  while  a  priest  escaped,  not  because
he  was  not  a  greater  sinner  than  the  rest,  but  because  the
thunderbolt  had  respect  for  his  profession  !  It  is  Ccesarius,
too,  who  tells  us  the  story  of  the  priest  of  Treves,  struck  by
lightning  in  his  own  church,  whither  he  had  gone  to  ring


*  For  the  authorities,  pagan  and  Christian,  see  the  note  of  Merivale,  in  his  His-
tory of  the  Romans  under  the  Empire,  chap.  Ixviii.  He  refers  for  still  fuller  cita-
tions to  Fynes  Clinton's  Fasti  Rom.,  p.  24.

f  See  Trollope,  History  of  Florence,  vol.  i,  p.  64.


GROWTH    OF    A   THEOLOGICAL    THEORY.  333

the  bell  against  the  storm,  and  whose  sins  were  revealed  by
the  course  of  the  lightning,  for  it  tore  his  clothes  from  him
and  consumed  certain  parts  of  his  body,  showing  that  the
sins  for  which  he  was  punished  were  vanity  and  unchastity.  ^

This  mode  of  explaining  the  Divine  interference  more
minutely  is  developed  century  after  century,  and  we  find
both  Catholics  and  Protestants  assigning  as  causes  of  un-
pleasant meteorological  phenomena  whatever  appears  to  them
wicked  or  even  unorthodox.  Among  the  English  Reform-
ers, Tyndale  quotes  in  this  kind  of  argument  the  thirteenth
chapter  of  I.  Samuel,  showing  that,  when  God  gave  Israel  a
king,  it  thundered  and  rained.  Archbishop  Whitgift,  Bishop
Bale,  and  Bishop  Pilkington  insisted  on  the  same  view.  In
Protestant  Germany,  about  the  same  period,  Plieninger  took
a  dislike  to  the  new  Gregorian  calendar  and  published  a  vol-
ume of  Brie/  Reflections,  in  which  he  insisted  that  the  ele-
ments had  given  utterance  to  God's  anger  against  it,  calling
attention  to  the  fact  that  violent  storms  raged  over  almost
all  Germany  during  the  very  ten  days  which  the  Pope  had
taken  out  for  the  correction  of  the  year,  and  that  great
floods  began  with  the  first  days  of  the  corrected  year.f

Early  in  the  seventeenth  century,  Majoli,  Bishop  of  Vol-
toraria,  in  southern  Italy,  produced  his  huge  work  Dies  Ca-
nicidarii,  or  Dog  Days,  which  remained  a  favourite  encyclo-
paedia in  Catholic  lands  for  over  a  hundred  years.  Treat-
ing of  thunder  and  lightning,  he  compares  them  to  bombs
against  the  wicked,  and  says  that  the  thunderbolt  is  "  an
exhalation  condensed  and  cooked  into  stone,"  and  that  *'  it
is  not  to  be  doubted  that,  of  all  instruments  of  God's  venge-
ance, the  thunderbolt  is  the  chief";  that  by  means  of  it
Sennacherib  and  his  army  were  consumed  ;  that  Luther  was
struck  by  lightning  in  his  youth  as  a  caution  against  depart-
ing from  the  Catholic  faith  ;  that  blasphemy  and  Sabbath-
breaking  are  the  sins  to  which  this  punishment  is  especially

*  See  Caesarius  Heisterhacensis,  Dialogiis  miractdortun,  lib.  x,  c.  28-30.

f  For  Tyndale,  see  his  Doctrinal  Treatises,  p.  194,  and  for  Whitgift,  see  his
Works,  vol.  ii,  pp.  477-483  ;  Bale,  Works,  pp.  244,  245  ;  and  Pilkington,  Works,
pp.  177,  536  (all  in  Par-ker  Society  Publications).  Bishop  Bale  cites  especially  Job
xxxviii,  Ecclesiasticus  xiii,  and  Revelation  viii,  as  supporting  the  theory.  For  Plie-
ninger's  words,  see  Janssen,  Geschichte  des  deutschen  Volkes,  vol.  v,  p.  350.


334   FROM    THE    "PRINCE    OF    THE    POWER    OF    THE    AIR."

assigned,  and  he  cites  the  case  of  Dathan  and  Abiram.  Fifty
years  later  the  Jesuit  Stengel  developed  this  line  of  thought
still  further  in  four  thick  quarto  volumes  on  the  judgments
of  God,  adding  an  elaborate  schedule  for  the  use  of  preachers
in  the  sermons  of  an  entire  year.  Three  chapters  were  de-
voted to  thunder,  lightning,  and  storms.  That  the  author
teaches  the  agency  in  these  of  diabolical  powers  goes  without
saying ;  but  this  can  only  act,  he  declares,  by  Divine  permis-
sion, and  the  thunderbolt  is  always  the  finger  of  God,  which
rarely  strikes  a  man  save  for  his  sins,  and  the  nature  of  the
special  sin  thus  punished  may  be  inferred  from  the  bodily  or-
gans smitten.  A  few  years  later,  in  Protestant  Swabia,  Pas-
tor Georg  Nuber  issued  a  volume  of  "  weather-sermons,"  in
which  he  discusses  nearly  every  sort  of  elemental  disturb-
ances— storms,  floods,  droughts,  lightning,  and  hail.  These,
he  says,  come  direct  from  God  for  human  sins,  yet  no  doubt
with  discrimination,  for  there  are  five  sins  which  God  espe-
cially punishes  with  lightning  and  hail — namely,  impenitence,
incredulity,  neglect  of  the  repair  of  churches,  fraud  in  the
payment  of  tithes  to  the  clergj-,  and  oppression  of  subordi-
nates, each  of  which  points  he  supports  with  a  mass  of  scrip-
tural texts. "^

This  doctrine  having  become  especially  precious  both
to  Catholics  and  to  Protestants,  there  were  issued  hand-
books of  prayers  against  bad  weather :  among  these  was  the
Spiritual  TJmndcr  and  Storm  Booklet,  produced  in  1731  by  a
Protestant  scholar,  Stoltzlin,  whose  three  or  four  hundred
pages  of  prayer  and  song,  ''sighs  for  use  when  it  lightens
fearfully,"  and  ''cries  of  anguish  when  the  hailstorm  is
drawling  on,"  show  a  wonderful  adaptability  to  all  pos-
sible meteorological  emergencies.  The  preface  of  this  vol-
ume is  contributed  by  Prof.  Dilherr,  pastor  of  the  great
church  of  St.  Sebald  at  Nuremberg,  who,  in  discussing  the
Divine  purposes  of  storms,  adds  to  the  three  usually  assigned
— namely,  God's  wish  to  manifest  his  power,  to  display  his
anger,  and  to  drive  sinners  to  repentance — a  fourth,  which,


*  For  Majoli,  see  Dies  Can.,  I,  i ;  for  Stengel,  see  the  Dc  judiciis  divinis,  vol.
ii,  pp.  15-61,  and  especially  the  example  of  the  impurtis  et  saltator  saccrdos,  ful-
mine  castratus,  pp.  26,  27.     For  Nuber,  see  his  Concio7ies  fueicoricie,  Ulm,  1661.


GROWTH    OF    A   THEOLOGICAL    THEORY.  335

he  says,  is  that  God  may  show  us  **  with  what  sort  of  a  storm-
bell  he  will  one  day  ring  in  the  last  judgment."

About  the  end  of  the  first  quarter  of  the  eighteenth  cen-
tury we  find,  in  Switzerland,  even  the  eminent  and  rational
Professor  of  Mathematics,  Scheuchzer,  publishing  his  Physica
Sacra,  with  the  Bible  as  a  basis,  and  forced  to  admit  that  the
elements,  in  the  most  literal  sense,  utter  the  voice  of  God.
The  same  pressure  was  felt  in  New  England.  Typical  are
the  sermons  of  Increase  Mather  on  The  Voice  of  God  in  Stormy
Winds,  He  especially  lays  stress  on  the  voice  of  God  speak-
ing to  Job  out  of  the  whirlwind,  and  upon  the  text, ''  Stormy
wind  fulfilling  his  word."  He  declares,  "  When  there  are
great  tempests,  the  angels  oftentimes  have  a  hand  there-
in, ..  .  yea,  and  sometimes  evil  angels."  He  gives  several
cases  of  blasphemers  struck  by  lightning,  and  says,  ''  Noth-
incr  can  be  more  dano^erous  for  mortals  than  to  contemn
dreadful  providences,  and,  in  particular,  dreadful  tempests."

His  distinguished  son.  Cotton  Mather,  disentangled  him-
self somewhat  from  the  old  view,  as  he  had  done  in  the
interpretation  of  comets.  In  his  Christian  Philosopher,  his
Thoughts  for  the  Day  of  Rain,  and  his  Sermon  preached  at  the
Time  of  the  Late  Storm  (in  1723),  he  is  evidently  tending  to-
ward the  modern  view.  Yet,  from  time  to  time,  the  older
view  has  reasserted  itself,  and  in  France,  as  recently  as  the
year  1870,  we  find  the  Bishop  of  Verdun  ascribing  the  drought
afBicting  his  diocese  to  the  sin  of  Sabbath-breaking.-

This  theory,  which  attributed  injurious  meteorological
phenomena  mainly  to  the  purposes  of  God,  was  a  natural  de-
velopment, and  comparatively  harmless  ;  but  at  a  very  early
period  there  was  evolved  another  theory,  which,  having
been  ripened  into  a  doctrine,  cost  the  earth  dear  indeed.
Never,  perhaps,  in  the  modern  world  has  there  been  a
dogma  more  prolific  of  physical,  mental,  and  moral  agony


*  For  Stoltzlin,  see  his  Geistliches  Donner-  U7id  Wetter-BiLhlein  (Zurich,  1731).
For  Increase  Mather,  see  his  The  Voice  of  God,  etc.  (Boston,  1704).  This  rare
vokime  is  in  the  rich  collection  of  the  American  Antiquarian  Society  at  Worces-
ter. For  Cotton  Mather's  view,  see  the  chapter  From  Signs  and  Wonders  to
Law,  in  this  work.  For  the  Bishop  of  Verdun,  see  the  Semaine  relig.  de  Lor-
raine, 1870,  p.  445  (cited  by  "  Paul  Parfait,"  in  his  Dossier  des  Pelerinages,  pp.
141-143).


336   FROM    THE    "PRINCE   OF   THE    POWER   OF    THE   AIR."

throughout  whole  nations  and  during  whole  centuries.  This
theory,  its  development  by  theology,  its  fearful  results  to
mankind,  and  its  destruction  by  scientific  observation  and
thought,  will  next  be  considered.


II.    DIABOLIC   AGENCY   IN    STORMS.

While  the  fathers  and  schoolmen  were  labouring  to  de-
duce a  science  of  meteorology  from  our  sacred  books,  there
oozed  up  in  European  society  a  mass  of  traditions  and  ob-
servances which  had  been  lurking  since  the  days  of  pagan-
ism ;  and,  although  here  and  there  appeared  a  churchman
to  oppose  them,  the  theologians  and  ecclesiastics  ere  long
began  to  adopt  them  and  to  clothe  them  with  the  authority
of  religion.

Both  among  the  pagans  of  the  Roman  Empire  and  among
the  barbarians  of  the  North  the  Christian  missionaries  had
found  it  easier  to  prove  the  new  God  supreme  than  to  prove
the  old  gods  powerless.  Faith  in  the  miracles  of  the  new
religion  seemed  to  increase  rather  than  to  diminish  faith  in
the  miracles  of  the  old  ;  and  the  Church  at  last  began  ad-
mitting the  latter  as  facts,  but  ascribing  them  to  the  devil.
Jupiter  and  Odin  sank  into  the  category  of  ministers  of
Satan,  and  transferred  to  that  master  all  their  former  powers.
A  renewed  study  of  Scripture  by  theologians  elicited  over-
whelming proofs  of  the  truth  of  this  doctrine.  Stress  was
especially  laid  on  the  declaration  of  Scripture,  ''  The  gods
of  the  heathen  are  devils."*  Supported  by  this  and  other
texts,  it  soon  became  a  dogma.  So  strong  was  the  hold  it
took,  under  the  influence  of  the  Church,  that  not  until  late
in  the  seventeenth  century  did  its  substantial  truth  begin  to
be  questioned.

With  no  field  of  action  had  the  sway  of  the  ancient  deities
been  more  identified  than  with  that  of  atmospheric  phenom-
ena. The  Roman  heard  Jupiter,  and  the  Teuton  heard  Thor,
in  the  thunder.  Could  it  be  doubted  that  these  powerful
beings  would  now  take  occasion,  unless  hindered  by  the
command  of  the  Almighty,  to  vent  their  spite  against  those

*  For  so  the  Vulgate  and  all  the  early  versions  rendered  Ps.  xcvi,  5.


DIABOLIC   AGENCY   IN    STORMS.  337

who  had  deserted  their  altars?  Might  not  the  Almighty
himself  be  willing  to  employ  the  malice  of  these  powers  of
the  air  against  those  who  had  offended  him  ?

It  was,  indeed,  no  great  step,  for  those  whose  simple
faith  accepted  rain  or  sunshine  as  an  answer  to  their  prayers,
to  suspect  that  the  untimely  storms  or  droughts,  which  baf-
fled their  most  earnest  petitions,  were  the  work  of  the  arch-
enemy, ''  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air."

The  great  fathers  of  the  Church  had  easily  found  war-
rant for  this  doctrine  in  Scripture.  St.  Jerome  declared
the  air  to  be  full  of  devils,  basing  this  belief  upon  various
statements  in  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah  and  in  the  Epistle  to
the  Ephesians.  St.  Augustine  held  the  same  view  as  be-
yond controversy.*

During  the  Middle  Ages  this  doctrine  of  the  diabolical
origin  of  storms  went  on  gathering  strength.  Bede  had  full
faith  in  it,  and  narrates  various  anecdotes  in  support  of  it.
St.  Thomas  Aquinas  gave  it  his  sanction,  saying  in  his  all-
authoritative  Summa,  ''  Rains  and  winds,  and  whatsoever
occurs  by  local  impulse  alone,  can  be  caused  by  demons."
*'  It  is,"  he  says,  '*  a  dogma  of  faith  that  the  demons  can  pro-
duce wind,  storms,  and  rain  of  fire  from  heaven."

Albert  the  Great  taught  the  same  doctrine,  and  showed
how  a  certain  salve  thrown  into  a  spring  produced  whirl-
winds. The  great  Franciscan — the  *'  seraphic  doctor  "—
St.  Bonaventura,  whose  services  to  theology  earned  him
one  of  the  highest  places  in  the  Church,  and  to  whom  Dante
gave  special  honour  in  paradise,  set  upon  this  belief  his  high
authority.  The  lives  of  the  saints,  and  the  chronicles  of  the
Middle  Ages,  were  filled  with  it.  Poetry  and  painting  ac-
cepted the  idea  and  developed  it.  Dante  wedded  it  to  verse,
and  at  Venice  this  thous^ht  mav  still  be  seen  embodied  in


*  For  St.  Jerome,  see  his  Com.  in  Ep.  ad  Ephesios  (lib.  iii,  cap.  6) ;  commenting
on  the  text,  "  Our  battle  is  not  with  flesh  and  blood,"  he  explains  this  as  mean-
ing the  devils  in  the  air,  and  adds  :  "  Nam  et  in  alio  loco  de  d?emonibus  quod  in
aere  isto  vagentur,  Apostolus  ait  :  In  qttilnts  ambnlastis  aliqiiando  jiixta  scrctdum
miindi  istitis,  secundum  principem  potestatis  aeris  spiritus,  qui  7itmc  operatur  in
filios  diffidentice  (Eph.  ii,  2).  Htec  autem  omnium  doctorum  opinio  est,  quod  aer
iste  qui  coelum  et  terram  medius  dividens,  inane  appellatur,  plenus  sit  contrariis
fortitudiiiibus."  See  also  his  Com.  in  Isaiam,  lib.  xiii,  cap.  50  (Migne,  Pair.
Lat.,  vol.  xxiv,  p.  477).  For  Augustine,  see  the  De  Civitate  Dei,  passim.
23


338    FROM    THE    "PRINCE    OF    THE    POWER    OF    THE    AIR."

one  of  the  grand  pictures  of  Bordone  :  a  shipload  of  demons
is  seen  approaching  Venice  in  a  storm,  threatening  destruc-
tion to  the  city,  but  St.  Mark,  St.  George,  and  St.  Nicholas
attack  the  vessel,  and  disperse  the  helHsh  crew.*

The  popes  again  and  again  sanctioned  this  doctrine,  and
it  was  amalgamated  with  various  local  superstitions,  pious
imaginations,  and  interesting  arguments,  to  strike  the  fancy
of  the  people  at  large.  A  strong  argument  in  favour  of  a
diabolical  origin  of  the  thunderbolt  was  afforded  by  the
eccentricities  of  its  operation.  These  attracted  especial  at-
tention in  the  Middle  Ages,  and  the  popular  love  of  marvel
generalized  isolated  phenomena  into  rules.  Thus  it  was
said  that  the  lightning  strikes  the  sword  in  the  sheath,  gold
in  the  purse,  the  foot  in  the  shoe,  leaving  sheath  and  purse
and  shoe  unharmed  ;  that  it  consumes  a  human  being-  inter-
nally  without  injuring  the  skin;  that  it  destroys  nets  in  the
water,  but  not  on  the  land  ;  that  it  kills  one  man,  and  leaves
untouched  another  standing  beside  him  ;  that  it  can  tear
through  a  house  and  enter  the  earth  without  moving  a  stone
from  its  place  ;  that  it  injures  the  heart  of  a  tree,  but  not  the
bark ;  that  wine  is  poisoned  by  it,  while  poisons  struck  by  it
lose  their  venom  ;  that  a  man's  hair  may  be  consumed  by  it
and  the  man  be  unhurt.f

These  peculiar  phenomena,  made  much  of  by  the  alle-
gorizing sermonizers  of  the  day,  were  used  in  moral  lessons
from  every  pulpit.  Thus  the  Carmelite,  Matthias  Farinator,
of  Vienna,  who  at  the  Pope's  own  instance  compiled  early  in
the  fifteenth  century  that  curious  handbook  of  illustrative
examples  for  preachers,  the  Lumen  AnimcE,  finds  a  spiritual
analogue  for  each  of  these  anomalies.];

This  doctrine  grew,   robust    and    noxious,  until,   in   the

*  For  Bede,  see  the  Hist.  Eccles.,  vol.  i,  p.  17  ;  Vita  Cuthberti,  c.  17  (Migne,
tome  xliv).  For  Thomas  Aquinas,  see  the  Summa,  pars  I,  qu.  Ixxx,  art.  2.  The
second  citation  I  owe  to  Rydberg,  Magic  of  the  Middle  Ages,  p.  73,  where  the
whole  interesting  passage  is  given  at  length.  For  Albertus  Magnus,  see  the  De
Poteniia  Dicmoniim  (cited  by  Maury,  Legendes  Pieiises),  For  Bonaventura,  see
the  Comp.  Thcol.  Veritat.,  ii,  26.  For  Dante,  see  Purgatorio,  c.  5.  On  Bordone's
picture,  see  Maury,  L^gendes  Pieuses,  p.  18,  note.

f  See,  for  lists  of  such  admira?tda,  any  of  the  early  writers — e.g.,  Vincent  of
Beauvais,  Reisch's  Margarita,  or  Eck's  Aristotle.

X  See  the  Lumen  Animce,  Eichstadt,  1479.


DIABOLIC   AGENCY   IN    STORMS.  339

fifteenth,  sixteenth,  and  seventeenth  centuries,  we  find  its
bloom  in  a  multitude  of  treatises  by  the  most  learned  of  the
Catholic  and  Protestant  divines,  and  its  fruitage  in  the  tor-
ture chambers  and  on  the  scaffolds  throughout  Christendom.
At  the  Reformation  period,  and  for  nearly  two  hundred
years  afterward.  Catholics  and  Protestants  vied  with  each
other  in  promoting  this  growth.  John  Eck,  the  great  oppo-
nent of  Luther,  gave  to  the  world  an  annotated  edition  of
Aristotle's  Physics,  which  was  long  authoritative  in  the  Ger-
man universities;  and,  though  the  text  is  free  from  this  doc-
trine, the  woodcut  illustrating  the  earth's  atmosphere  shows
most  vividly,  among  the  clouds  of  mid-air,  the  devils  who
there  reign  supreme.  *

Luther,  in  the  other  religious  camp,  supported  the  super-
stition even  more  zealously,  asserting  at  times  his  beUef  that
the  winds  themselves  are  only  good  or  evil  spirits,  and  de-
claring that  a  stone  thrown  into  a  certain  pond  in  his  native
reo-ion  would  cause  a  dreadful  storm  because  of  the  devils
kept  prisoners  there. f

Just  at  the  close  of  the  same  century.  Catholics  and  Prot-
estants welcomed  alike  the  great  work  of  Delrio.  In  this,
the  power  of  devils  over  the  elements  is  proved  first  from
the  Holy  Scriptures,  since,  he  declares,  ''  they  show  that
Satan  brought  fire  down  from  heaven  to  consume  the  ser-
vants and  flocks  of  Job,  and  that  he  stirred  up  a  violent
wind,  which  overwhelmed  in  ruin  the  sons  and  daughters  of
Job  at  their  feasting."  Next,  Delrio  insists  on  the  agreement
of  all  the  orthodox  fathers,  that  it  was  the  devil  himself  who
did  this,  and  attention  is  called  to  the  fact  that  the  hail  with
which  the  Egyptians  were  punished  is  expressly  declared  in
Holy  Scripture  to  have  been  brought  by  the  evil  angels.
Citing  from  the  Apocalypse,  he  points  to  the  four  angels
standing  at  the  four  corners  of  the  earth,  holding  back  the
winds  and  preventing  their  doing  great  damage  to  mortals  ;
and  he  dwells  especially  upon  the  fact  that  the  devil  is  called
by  the  apostle  a  ''  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air."     He  then

*  See  Eck,  Aristotelis  Meteorologica,  Augsburg,  1 5 19.

f  For  Luther,  see  the  Table  Talk;  also  Michelet,  Z?/^  ^/Zw/'/zcr  (translated
by  Hazlitt,  p.  321).


340   FROM    THE    'PRINCE   OF    THE    POWER   OF    THE   AIR."

goes  on  to  cite  the  great  fathers  of  the  Church — Clement,
Jerome,  Augustine,  and  Thomas  Aquinas."^

This  doctrine  was  spread  not  only  in  ponderous  treatises,
but  in  light  literature  and  by  popular  illustrations.  In  the
Compendium  Maleficariim  of  the  Italian  monk  Guacci,  perhaps
the  most  amusing  book  in  the  whole  literature  of  witchcraft,
we  may  see  the  witch,  in  propria  persona,  riding  the  diabolic
goat  through  the  clouds  while  the  storm  rages  around  and
beneath  her  ;  and  we  may  read  a  rich  collection  of  anecdotes,
largely  contemporary,  which  establish  the  required  doctrine
beyond  question.

The  first  and  most  natural  means  taken  against  this  work
of  Satan  in  the  air  was  prayer  ;  and  various  petitions  are  to
be  found  scattered  through  the  Christian  liturgies — some
ver_y  beautiful  and  touching.  This  means  of  escape  has  been
relied  upon,  with  greater  or  less  faith,  from  those  days  to
these.  Various  mediaeval  saints  and  reformers,  and  devoted
men  in  all  centuries,  from  St.  Giles  to  John  Wesley,  have
used  it  with  results  claimed  to  be  miraculous.  Whatever
theory  any  thinking  man  may  hold  in  the  matter,  he  will  cer-
tainly not  venture  a  reproachful  word  :  such  prayers  have  been
in  all  ages  a  natural  outcome  of  the  mind  of  man  in  trouble,  f

But  against  the  "  power  of  the  air  "  were  used  other  means
of  a  very  different  character  and  tendency,  and  foremost
among  these  was  exorcism.  In  an  exorcism  widely  used
and  ascribed  to  Pope  Gregory  XIII,  the  formula  is  given:
"  I,  a  priest  of  Christ,  ...  do  command  ye,  most  foul  spirits,
who  do  stir  up  these  clouds,  .  .  .  that  ye  depart  from  them,
and  disperse  yourselves  into   wild  and  untilled  places,  that

*  For  Delrio,  see  his  Disquisitiones  Magicce,  first  printed  at  Lic'ge  in  1599-
1600,  but  reprinted  again  and  again  throughout  the  seventeenth  century.  His  in-
terpretation of  Psalm  Ixxviii,  47-49,  was  apparently  shared  by  the  translators  of  our
own  authorized  version.  For  citations  by  him,  see  Revelation  vii,  i  ;  Ephesians  ii,
2.  Even  according  to  modem  commentators  (e.  g.,  Alford),  the  word  here  trans-
lated "power"  denotes  not  might,  but  government,  court,  hierarchy  ;  and  in  this
sense  it  was  always  used  by  the  ecclesiastical  writers,  whose  conception  is  best
rendered  by  our  plural — "  powers."  See  Delrio,  Disquisitiones  Magiae,  lib.  ii,
c.  II.

•f  For  Guacci,  see  his  Compendium  Maleficarum  (Milan,  1608),  For  the  cases
of  St.  Giles,  John  Wesley,  and  others  stilling  the  tempests,  see  Brewer,  Diction-
ary of  Miracles,  s.  v.  Prayer.


DIABOLIC   AGENCY   IN    STORMS.  34I

ye  may  be  no  longer  able  to  harm  men  or  animals  or  fruits
or  herbs,  or  whatsoever  is  designed  for  human  use."  But
this  is  mild,  indeed,  compared  to  some  later  exorcisms,  as
when  the  ritual  runs :  "  All  the  people  shall  rise,  and  the
priest,  turning  toward  the  clouds,  shall  pronounce  these
words :  '  I  exorcise  ye,  accursed  demons,  w^ho  have  dared  to
use,  for  the  accomplishment  of  your  iniquity,  those  powers
of  Nature  by  which  God  in  divers  ways  worketh  good  to
mortals ;  who  stir  up  winds,  gather  vapours,  form  clouds,
and  condense  them  into  hail.  ...  I  exorcise  ye,  .  .  .  that
ye  relinquish  the  work  ye  have  begun,  dissolve  the  hail,
scatter  the  clouds,  disperse  the  vapours,  and  restrain  the
winds.'  "  The  rubric  goes  on  to  order  that  then  there  shall
be  a  great  fire  kindled  in  an  open  place,  and  that  over  it  the
sign  of  the  cross  shall  be  made,  and  the  one  hundred  and
fourteenth  Psalm  chanted,  while  malodorous  substances,
among  them  sulphur  and  asafoetida,  shall  be  cast  into  the
frames.  The  purpose  seems  to  have  been  literally  to  "  smoke
out"  Satan.*

Manuals  of  exorcisms  became  important — some  bulky
quartos,  others  handbooks.  Noteworthy  among  the  latter
is  one  by  the  Italian  priest  Locatelli,  entitled  Exorcisms  most
Powerful  and  Efficacious  for  the  Dispelling  of  Aerial  Tempests,
whether  raised  by  Demons  at  their  own  Instance  or  at  the  Beck
of  some  Servant  of  the  Devil,  f

The  Jesuit  Gretser,  in  his  famous  book  on  Benedictions
and  Maledictions,  devotes  a  chapter  to  this  subject,  dismiss-
ing summarily  the  scepticism  that  questions  the  power  of
devils  over  the  elements,  and  adducing  the  story  of  Job  as
conclusive.  \.

Nor  was  this  theory  of  exorcism  by  any  means  confined
to  the    elder  Church.     Luther  vehemently  upheld    it,   and


*  See  Polidorus  Valerius,  Practica  exorcistarian  ;  also  the  Thesatcrus  exorcismo-
rum  (Cologne,  1626),  pp.  15S-162.

f  That  is,  Exo)cismi,  etc.  A  "corrected"  second  edition  was  printed  at  Lay-
bach,  1680,  in  24mo,  to  which  is  appended  another  manual  o{  Preces  et  co)7Jurationes
contra  aereas  tempestates,  omnilms  sacerdotibus  tt tiles  et  necessaria,  printed  at  the
monastery  of  Kempten  (in  Bavaria)  in  1667.  The  latter  bears  as  epigraph  the
passage  from  the  gospels  describing  Christ's  stilling  of  the  winds

X  See  Gretser,  De  benedictiojtibus  et  7naledictionibus,  lib.  ii,  c.  48.


342    FROM    THE   "PRINCE   OF    THE    POWER    OF    THE   AIR."

prescribed  especially  the  first  chapter  of  St.  John's  gospel
as  of  unfailing  efficacy  against  thunder  and  lightning,  de-
claring that  he  had  often  found  the  mere  sign  of  the  cross,
with  the  text,  ''  The  word  was  made  fiesh,"  sufficient  to  put
storms  to  flight. "^^

From  the  beginning  of  the  Middle  Ages  until  long  after
the  Reformation  the  chronicles  give  ample  illustration
of  the  successful  use  of  such  exorcisms.  So  strong  was
the  belief  in  them  that  it  forced  itself  into  minds  compara-
tively rational,  and  found  utterance  in  treatises  of  much  im-
portance.

But,  since  exorcisms  were  found  at  times  ineffectual,
other  means  were  sought,  and  especially  fetiches  of  various
sorts.  One  of  the  earliest  of  these  appeared  when  Pope
Alexander  I,  according  to  tradition,  ordained  that  holy
water  should  be  kept  in  churches  and  bedchambers  to  drive
away  devils,  t  Another  safeguard  was  found  in  relics,  and
of  similar  efficacy  were  the  so-called  "  conception  billets "
sold  by  the  Carmelite  monks.  They  contained  a  formula
upon  consecrated  paper,  at  w^hich  the  devil  might  well  turn
pale.  Buried  in  the  corner  of  a  field,  one  of  these  was
thought  to  give  protection  against  bad  weather  and  destruc-
tive insects.:]:

But  highest  in  repute  during  centuries  was  the  Agjius  Dei
— a  piece  of  wax  blessed  by  the  Pope's  own  hand,  and
stamped  with  the  well-known  device  representing  the  "  Lamb
of  God."  Its  powers  were  so  marvellous  that  Pope  Urban
V  thought  three  of  these  cakes  a  fitting  gift  from  himself  to
the  Greek  Emperor.  In  the  Latin  doggerel  recounting  their
virtues,  their  meteorological  efficacy  stands  first,  for  especial
stress  is  laid  on  their  power  of  dispelling  the  thunder.  The
stress  thus  laid  by  Pope  Urban,  as  the  infallible  guide  of
Christendom,  on  the  efficacy  of  this  fetich,  gave  it  great
value  throughout  Europe,  and  the  doggerel  verses  reciting

*  So,  at  least,  says  Gretser  (in  his  De  ben.  et  mal.,  as  above).

f  "  Instituit  ut  aqua  quam  sanctam  appellamus  sale  admixta  interpositis  sacris
orationibus  et  in  templis  et  in  cubiculis  ad  fugandos  dremones  retincretur." — Pla-
tina,  I'itce  Pontif.     But  the  story  is  from  the  False  Decretals.

\  See  Rydberg,  The  Magic  of  the  Middle  Ages,  translated  by  Edgren,  pp.
63-66.


DIABOLIC   AGENCY    IN    STORMS.  343

its  virtues  sank  deep  into  the  popular  mind.  It  was  con-
sidered a  most  potent  means  of  dispelling  hail,  pestilence,
storms,  conflagrations,  and  enchantments;  and  this  feeling
was  deepened  by  the  rules  and  rites  for  its  consecration.  So
solemn  was  the  matter,  that  the  manufacture  and  sale  of  this
particular  fetich  was,  by  a  papal  bull  of  147 1,  reserved  for
the  Pope  himself,  and  he  only  performed  the  required  cere-
mony in  the  first  and  seventh  years  of  his  pontificate.  Stand-
ing unmitred,  he  prayed:  "O  God,  .  .  .  we  humbly  beseech
thee  that  thou  wilt  bless  these  waxen  forms,  figured  with  the
image  of  an  innocent  lamb,  .  .  .  that,  at  the  touch  and  sight
of  them,  the  faithful  may  break  forth  into  praises,  and  that
the  crash  of  hailstorms,  the  blast  of  hurricanes,  the  violence
of  tempests,  the  fury  of  winds,  and  the  malice  of  thunder-
bolts may  be  tempered,  and  evil  spirits  flee  and  tremble  be-
fore the  standard  of  thy  holy  cross,  which  is  graven  upon
them."^

Another  favourite  means  with  the  clergy  of  the  older
Church  for  bringing  to  naught  the  "  power  of  the  air,"  was
found  in  great  processions  bearing  statues,  relics,  and  holy


*  These  pious  charms  are  still  in  use  in  the  Church,  and  may  be  found  described

in  any  ecclesiastical  cyclopaedia.     The  doggerel  verses  run  as  follows  :

"  Tonitrua  magna  terret,  Inimicos  nostros  domat,

Et  peccata  nostra  delet  ;  Praegnantem  cum  partu  salvat,

Ab  incendio  proeservat,  Dona  dignis  multa  confert,

A  submersione  servat,    *  Utque  malis  mala  defert.

A  morte  cita  liberat,  Portio,  quamvis  parva  sit,

Et  Cacodremones  fugat,  Ut  magna  tamen  proficit."

See  these  verses  cited  in  full  faith,  so  late  as  1743,  in  Father  Vincent  of  Berg's  En-
chiridium,  pp.  23,  24,  where  is  an  ample  statement  of  the  virtues  of  the  Agnus  Dei,
and  instructions  for  its  use.  A  full  account  of  the  rites  used  in  consecrating  this
fetich,  with  the  prayers  and  benedictions  which  gave  colour  to  this  theory  of  the
powers  of  the  Agnus  Dei,  may  be  found  in  the  ritual  of  the  Church.  I  have  used  the
edition  entitled  Sacrartim  ceremoniarum  sive  rituion  Sanctcv  Romance  Ecclesicz  lih'i
tres,  Rome,  1560,  in  folio.  The  form  of  the  papal  prayer  is  as  follows:  "  Deus,
.  .  .  te  suppliciter  deprecamur,  ut  ...  has  cereas  formas,  innocentissimi  agni
imagine  figuratas,  benedicere  .  .  .  digneris,  ut  per  ejus  tactum  et  visum  fideles  in-
vitentur  ad  laudes,  fragor  grandinum,  procella  turbinum,  impetus  tempestatum,  ven-
torum  rabies,  infesta  tonitrua  temperentur,  fugiant  atque  tremiscant  maligni  spiritus
ante  Sanct^e  Crucis  vexillum,  quod  in  illis  exsculptum  est.  .  .  ."  {Saci:  Cer.  Rom.
Eccl.y  as  above).  If  any  are  curious  as  to  the  extent  to  which  this  consecrated  wax
was  a  specific  for  all  spiritual  and  most  temporal  ills  during  the  sixteenth  and  sev-
enteenth centuries,  let  them  consult  the  Jesuit  Littem  annua,  passim.


344


FROM    THE    "PRINCE    OF    THE    POWER   OF    THE    AIR."


emblems  through  the  streets.  Yet  even  these  were  not
always  immediately  effective.  One  at  Liege,  in  the  thir-
teenth century,  thrice  proved  unsuccessful  in  bringing  rain,
when  at  last  it  was  found  that  the  image  of  the  Virgin  had
been  foi'gotten  !  A  new  procession  was  at  once  formed,  the
Salve  Rcgina  sung,  and  the  rain  came  down  in  such  torrents
as  to  drive  the  devotees  to  shelter."^

In  Catholic  lands  this  custom  remains  to  this  day,  and
very  important  features  in  these  processions  are  the  statues
and  the  reliquaries  of  p)atron  saints.  Some  of  these  excel  in
bringing  sunshine,  others  in  bringing  rain.  The  Cathedral
of  Chartres  is  so  fortunate  as  to  possess  sundry  relics  of
St.  Taurin,  especially  potent  against  dry  weather,  and
some  of  St.  Piat,  very  nearly  as  infallible  against  wet
weather.  In  certain  regions  a  single  saint  gives  protection
alternately  against  wet  and  dry  weather — as,  for  example,
St.  Godeberte  at  Noyon.  Against  storms  St.  Barbara  is
very  generally  considered  the  most  powerful  protectress ;
but,  in  the  French  diocese  of  Limoges,  Notre  Dame  de  Crocq
has  proved  a  most  powerful  rival,  for  when,  a  few  years
since,  all  the  neighbouring  parishes  were  ravaged  by  storms,
not  a  hailstone  fell  in  the  canton  which  she  protected.  In
the  diocese  of  Tarbes,  St.  Exupere  is  especially  invoked
against  hail,  peasants  flocking  from  all  the  surrounding
country  to  his  shrine,  f

But  the  means  of  baffling  the  powers  of  the  air  which
came  to  be  most  widely  used  was  the  ringing  of  consecrated
church  bells.

This  usage  had  begun  in  the  time  of  Charlemagne,  and
there  is  extant  a  prohibition  of  his  against  the  custom  of
baptizing  bells  and  of  hanging  certain  tags  %  on  their  tongues
as  a  protection  against  hailstorms  ;   but  even   Charlemagne


*  John  of  Winterthur  describes  many  such  processions  in  Switzerland  in  the
thirteenth  century,  and  all  the  monkish  chionicles  speak  of  them.  See  also  Ryd-
berg,  Magic  of  the  Middle  Ages,  p.  74.

f  As  to  protection  by  special  saints  as  stated,  see  the  Guide  du  iouf-iste  el  dti
phkrin  a  Chartres,  1867  (cited  by  "  Paul  Parfait,"  in  his  Dossier  des  P^lerinagcs)  ;
also  pp.  139-145  of  the  Dossier.

\  Perticce.  See  Montanus,  Hist.  Nachi-icht  von  den  Glocken  (Chemnitz,  1726),
p.  121  ;  and  Meyer,  Der  Aberglaube  des  Mittelalters,  p.  iS6.


DIABOLIC   AGENCY    IN    STORMS.  345

was  powerless  against  this  current  of  mediseval  superstition.
Theological  reasons  were  soon  poured  into  it,  and  in  the
year  968  Pope  John  XIII  gave  it  the  highest  ecclesiastical
sanction  by  himself  baptizing  the  great  bell  of  his  cathedral
church,  the  Lateran,  and  christening  it  with  his  own  name.*
This  idea  was  rapidly  developed,  and  we  soon  find  it
supported  in  ponderous  treatises,  spread  widely  in  sermons,
and  popularized  in  multitudes  of  inscriptions  cast  upon  the
bells  themselves.  This  branch  of  theological  literature  may
still  be  studied  in  multitudes  of  church  towers  throughout
Europe.  A  bell  at  Basel  bears  the  inscription,  "  Ad  fugan-
dos  demones."  Another,  in  Lugano,  declares  "  The  sound
of  this  bell  vanquishes  tempests,  repels  demons,  and  sum-
mons men."  Another,  at  the  Cathedral  of  Erfurt,  declares
that  it  can  "  ward  off  lightning  and  malignant  demons."  A
peal  in  the  Jesuit  church  at  the  university  town  of  Pont-a-
Mousson  bore  the  words,  "  They  praise  God,  put  to  flight
the  clouds,  affright  the  demons,  and  call  the  people."  This
is  dated  1634.  Another  bell  in  that  part  of  France  declares,
*'  It  is  I  who  dissipate  the  thunders  "  {Ego  sum  qui  dissipo  toiii-

Another,   in    one  of  the   forest  cantons  of  Switzerland,
bears  a  doggerel  couplet,  which  may  be  thus  translated  :

"  On  the  devil  my  spite  I'll  vent,
And,  God  helping,  bad  weather  prevent."  X

Very  common  were  inscriptions  embodying  this  doctrine  in
sonorous  Latin.

Naturally,  then,  there  grew  up  a  ritual  for  the  consecra-
tion of  bells.     KnoUys,  in  his  quaint  translation  of  the  old

*  For  statements  regarding  Pope  John  and  bell  superstitions,  see  Higgins's
Anacalypsis,  vol.  ii,  p.  70.  See  also  Platina,  Vitce  Fontif.,  s.  v.  John  XIII,  and
Paronius,  Annales  Ecclesiastici,  sub  anno  968.  The  conjecture  of  Baronius  that
the  bell  was  named  after  St.  John  the  Baptist,  is  even  more  startling  than  the  ac-
cepted tradition  of  the  Pope's  sponsorship,

f  For  these  illustrations,  with  others  equally  striking,  see  Meyer,  Der  Abcr-
glaube  des  Mittelalters,  pp.  185,  186.  For  the  later  examples,  see  Germain,  Aji-
ciennes  cloches  lor r aims  (Nancy,  1S85),  pp.  23,  27.

X  "  An  dem  Tiifel  will  ich  mich  rachen,

Mit  der  hilf  gotz  alle  bosen  wetter  zerbrechen."

(See  Meyer,  as  above.)


34^


FROM    THE    '*  PRINCE    OF    THE    POWER   OF    THE   AIR."


chronicler  Sleidan,  gives  us  the  usage  in  the  simple  English
of  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century  :

*'  In  lyke  sorte  [as  churches]  are  the  belles  used.  And
first,  forsouth,  they  must  hange  so,  as  the  Byshop  may  goe
round  about  them.  Whiche  after  he  hath  sayde  certen
Psalmes,  he  consecrateth  water  and  salte,  and  mingleth  them
together,  wherwith  he  washeth  the  belle  diligently  both
within  and  without,  after  wypeth  it  drie,  and  with  holy  oyle
draweth  in  it  the  signe  of  the  crosse,  and  prayeth  God,  that
whan  they  shall  rynge  or  sounde  that  bell,  all  the  disceiptes
of  the  devyll  may  vanyshe  away,  hayle,  thondryng,  lighten-
ing, wyndes,  and  tempestes,  and  all  untemperate  weathers
may  be  aswaged.  Whan  he  hath  wipte  out  the  crosse  of
oyle  wyth  a  linen  cloth,  he  maketh  seven  other  crosses  in
the  same,  and  within  one  only.  After  saying  certen  Psalmes,
he  taketh  a  payre  of  sensours  and  senseth  the  bel  within,  and
prayeth  God  to  sende  it  good  lucke.  In  man}^  places  they
make  a  great  dyner,  and  kepe  a  feast  as  it  were  at  a  solemne
wedding."  ^

These  bell  baptisms  became  matters  of  great  importance.
Popes,  kings,  and  prelates  were  proud  to  stand  as  sponsors.
Four  of  the  bells  at  the  Cathedral  of  Versailles  having  been
destroyed  during  the  French  Revolution,  four  new  ones
were  baptized,  on  the  6th  of  January,  1824,  the  Voltairean
King,  Louis  XVIII,  and  the  pious  Duchess  d'Angouleme
standing  as  sponsors.

In  some  of  these  ceremonies  zeal  appears  to  have  outrun
knowledge,  and  one  of  Luther's  stories,  at  the  expense  of  the
older  Church,  was  that  certain  authorities  thus  christened  a
bell  '*  Hosanna,"  supposing  that  to  be  the  name  of  a  woman.

To  add  to  the  efficacy  of  such  baptisms,  water  was  some-
times brought  from  the  river  Jordan,  f

The  prayers  used  at  bell  baptisms  fully  recognise  this
doctrine.  The  ritual  of  Paris  embraces  the  petition  that,
"  whensoever  this  bell  shall  sound,  it  shall  drive  away  the


*  Sleidan's  Commentaries,  English  translation,  as  above,  fol.  334  (lib.  xxi,  sub
anno  1549).

f  See  Montanus,  as  above,  who  cites  Beck,  Lutherthtim  vor  Lut/iej-o,  p.  294,
for  the  statement  that  many  bells  were  carried  to  the  Jordan  by  pilgrims  for  this
purpose.


DIABOLIC   AGENXY    IN    STORMS.


347


malign  influences  of  the  assailing-  spirits,  the  horror  of  their
apparitions,  the  rush  of  whirlwinds,  the  stroke  of  lightning,
the  harm  of  thunder,  the  disasters  of  storms,  and  all  the
spirits  of  the  tempest."  Another  prayer  begs  that  "  the
sound  of  this  bell  may  put  to  flight  the  fiery  darts  of  the
enemy  of  men";  and  others  vary  the  form  but  not  the  sub-
stance of  this  petition.  The  great  Jesuit  theologian,  Bellar-
min,  did  indeed  try  to  deny  the  reality  of  this  baptism  ;  but
this  can  only  be  regarded  as  a  piece  of  casuistry  suited  to
Protestant  hardness  of  heart,  or  as  strategy  in  the  warfare
against  heretics.  *

Forms  of  baptism  were  laid  down  in  various  manuals
sanctioned  directl}^  by  papal  authority,  and  sacramental  effi-
cacy was  everywhere  taken  for  granted,  f  The  development
of  this  idea  in  the  older  Church  was  too  strong  to  be  re-
sisted ; :{:  but,  as  a  rule,  the  Protestant  theologians  of  the  Ref-
ormation, while  admitting  that  storms  were  caused  by  Satan
and  his  legions,  opposed  the  baptism  of  bells,  and  denied  the
theory  of  their  influence  in  dispersing  storms.  Luther,  while
never  doubting  that  troublesome  meteorological  phenomena
were  caused  by  devils,  regarded  with  contempt  the  idea  that


*  For  prayers  at  bell  baptisms,  see  Arago,  CEtivres,  Paris,  1854,  vol  iv,  p.  322,
f  As  has  often  been  pointed  out,  the  ceremony  was  in  all  its  details — even  to
the  sponsors,  the  wrapping  a  garment  about  the  baptized,  the  baptismal  fee,  the
feast — precisely  the  same  as  when  a  child  was  baptized.  Magius,  who  is  no  scep-
tic, relates  from  his  own  experience  an  instance  of  this  sort,  where  a  certain
bishop  stood  sponsor  for  two  bells,  giving  them  both  his  own  name — William.  (See
his  De  Tintinnabulis^  vol.  xiv.)

\  And  no  wonder,  when  the  oracle  of  the  Church,  Thomas  Aquinas,  expressly
pronounced  chui-ch  bells,  "  provided  they  have  been  duly  consecrated  and  bap-
tized," the  foremost  means  of  "  frustrating  the  atmospheric  mischiefs  of  the  devil,"
and  likened  steeples  in  which  bells  are  ringing  to  a  hen  brooding  her  chickens,
"  for  the  tones  of  the  consecrated  metal  repel  the  demons  and  avert  storm  and
lightning";  when  pre-Reformation  preachers  of  such  universal  cun-ency  as  Jo-
annes Herolt  declared,  "  Bells,  as  all  agree,  are  baptized  with  the  result  that  they
are  secure  from  the  power  of  Satan,  terrify  the  demons,  compel  the  powers  "  ;  when
Geiler  of  Kaisersberg  especially  commended  bell-ringing  as  a  means  of  beating  ofT
the  devil  in  storms  ;  and  when  a  canonist  like  Durandus  explained  the  purpose  of
the  rite  to  be,  that  "  the  demons  hearing  the  trumpets  of  the  Eternal  King,  to  wit,
the  bells,  may  flee  in  terror,  and  may  cease  from  the  stirring  up  of  tempests."
See  Herolt,  Sermones  Discipuli,  vol.  xvii,  and  Durandus,  De  ritibus  ecclesicr,  vol.
ii,  p.  12.  I  owe  the  first  of  these  citations  to  Rydberg,  and  the  others  to  Mon-
tanus.     For  Geiler,  see  Dacheux,  Gcilcr  dc  Kaisersberg,  pp.  280,  281.


348


FROM    THE    "PRINCE   OF   THE   POWER   OF   THE   AIR."


the  demons  were  so  childish  as  to  be  scared  by  the  clang  of
bells ;  his  theory  made  them  altogether  too  powerful  to  be
affected  by  means  so  trivial.  The  great  English  Reformers,
while  also  accepting  very  generally  the  theory  of  diabolic
interference  in  storms,  reproved  strongly  the  baptizing  of
bells,  as  the  perversion  of  a  sacrament  and  involving  blas-
phemy. Bishop  Hooper  declared  reliance  upon  bells  to
drive  away  tempests,  futile.  Bishop  Pilkington,  while  argu-
ing that  tempests  are  direct  instruments  of  God's  wrath,  is
very  severe  against  using  *'  unlawful  means,"  and  among
these  he  names  "  the  hallowed  bell " ;  and  these  opinions
were  very  generally  shared  by  the  leading  English  clergy.*
Toward  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century  the  Elector  of
Saxony  strictly  forbade  the  ringing  of  bells  against  storms,
urging  penance  and  prayer  instead  ;  but  the  custom  was  not
so  easily  driven  out  of  the  Protestant  Church,  and  in  some
quarters  was  developed  a  Protestant  theory  of  a  rationalistic
sort,  ascribing  the  good  effects  of  bell-ringing  in  storms  to
the  calling  together  of  the  devout  for  prayer  or  to  the  sug-
gestion of  prayers  during  storms  at  night.  As  late  as  the
end  of  the  seventeenth  century  we  find  the  bells  of  Protes-
tant churches  in  northern  Germany  rung  for  the  dispelling
of  tempests.  In  Catholic  Austria  this  bell-ringing  seems  to
have  become  a  nuisance  in  the  last  century,  for  the  Emperor
Joseph  II  found  it  necessary  to  issue  an  edict  against  it;
but  this  doctrine  had  gained  too  large  headway  to  be  ar-
rested by  argument  or  edict,  and  the  bells  may  be  heard
ringing  during  storms  to  this  da}^  in  various  remote  dis-
tricts in  Europe,  f     For  this  was  no  mere  superficial  view.


*  The  baptism  of  bells  was,  indeed,  one  of  the  express  compl^nts  of  the  Ger-
man Protestant  princes  at  the  Reformation.  vSee  their  Gravatn.  Cent.  German.
Grav.,  p.  51.  For  Hooper,  see  his  Early  Writings,  p.  197  (in  Parker  Society
Publications).  For  Pilkington,  see  his  Works,  p.  177  (in  same).  Among  others
sharing  these  opinions  were  Tyndale,  Bishop  Ridley,  Archbishop  Sandys,  Becon,
Calfhill,  and  Rogers.    It  is  to  be  noted  that  all  these  speak  of  the  rite  as  "  baptism."

f  For  Elector  of  Saxony,  see  Peuchen,  Disp.  circa  tempestates,  Jena,  1697.  For
the  Protestant  theory  of  bells,  see,  e.  g.,  the  Condones  Selecta;  of  Superintendent
Conrad  Dieterich  (cited  by  Peuchen,  Bisp.  circa  tempestates).  For  Protestant
ringing  of  bells  to  dispel  tempests,  see  Schwimmer,  Physicalische  Lnftfragen,
1692  (cited  by  Peuchen,  as  above).  He  pictures  the  whole  population  of  a  Thu-
ringian  district  flocking  to  the  churches  on  the  approach  of  a  storm.


.     DIABOLIC   AGENCY   IN   STORMS.  340

It  was  really  part  of  a  deep  theolog-ical  current  steadily  de-
veloped through  the  Middle  Ages,  the  fundamental  idea  of
the  whole  being  the  direct  influence  of  the  bells  upon  the
**  Power  of  the  Air  "  ;  and  it  is  perhaps  worth  our  while  to  go
back  a  little  and  glance  over  the  coming  of  this  current  into
the  modern  world.  Having  grown  steadily  through  the
Middle  Ages,  it  appeared  in  full  strength  at  the  Reformation
period;  and  in  the  sixteenth  century  Glaus  Magnus,  Arch-
bishop of  Upsala  and  Primate  of  Sweden,  in  his  great  work
on  the  northern  nations,  declares  it  a  well-established  fact
that  cities  and  harvests  may  be  saved  from  lightning  by  the
ringing  of  bells  and  the  burning  of  consecrated  incense,
accompanied  by  prayers  ;  and  he  cautions  his  readers  that
the  workings  of  the  thunderbolt  are  rather  to  be  marvelled
at  than  inquired  into.  Even  as  late  as  1673  the  Franciscan
professor  Lealus,  in  Italy,  in  a  schoolbook  which  was  re-
ceived with  great  applause  in  his  region,  taught  unhesitat-
ingly the  agency  of  demons  in  storms,  and  the  power  of  bells
over  them,  as  well  as  the  portentousness  of  comets  and  the
movement  of  the  heavens  by  angels.  He  dwells  especially,
too,  upon  the  perfect  protection  afforded  by  the  waxen  Agnus
Dei.  How  strong  this  current  was,  and  how  difficult  even
for  philosophical  minds  to  oppose,  is  shown  by  the  fact  that
both  Descartes  and  Francis  Bacon  speak  of  it  with  respect,
admitting  the  fact,  and  suggesting  very  mildly  that  the
bells  may  accomplish  this  purpose  by  the  concussion  of  the
air.*

But  no  such  moderate  doctrine  sufficed,  and  the  re-
nowned Bishop  Binsfeld,  of  Treves,  in  his  noted  treatise  on
the  credibility  of  the  confessions  of  witches,  gave  an  entire
chapter  to  the  effect  of  bells  in  calming  atmospheric  dis-
turbances. Basing  his  general  doctrine  upon  the  first  chap-
ter of  Job  and  the  second  chapter  of  Ephesians,  he  insisted
on  the  reality  of  diabolic  agency  in  storms ;  and  then,  by
theological  reasoning,  corroborated  by  the  statements  ex-
torted in  the  torture  chamber,  he  showed  the  efficacy  of  bells

*  For  Olaus  Magnus,  see  the  De  gentibiis  septentrionalibtis  (Rome,  1555),  lib.
i,  c.  12,  13.  For  Descartes,  see  his  De  meteor.,  c.  7.  For  Bacon,  see  his  Nahiral
History^  cent.  2,  127.  In  his  Historia  Veniorum  he  again  alludes  to  the  belief,
and  without  comment.


350


FROM    THE    "  PRINCE    OF    THE    POWER    OF    THE    AIR."


in  putting  the  hellish  legions  to  flight.^  This  continued,
therefore,  an  accepted  tenet,  developed  in  every  nation,  and
coming  to  its  climax  near  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  cen-
tury. At  that  period — the  period  of  Isaac  Newton — Father
Augustine  de  Angelis,  rector  of  the  Clementine  College  at
Rome,  published  under  the  highest  Church  authority  his  lec-
tures upon  meteorology.  Coming  from  the  centre  of  Catho-
lic Christendom,  at  so  late  a  period,  they  are  very  important
as  indicating  what  had  been  developed  under  the  influence
of  theology  during  nearly  seventeen  hundred  years.  This
learned  head  of  a  great  college  at  the  heart  of  Christendom
taught  that  "  the  surest  remedy  against  thunder  is  that  which
our  Holy  Mother  the  Church  practises,  namely,  the  ringing
of  bells  when  a  thunderbolt  impends :  thence  follows  a
twofold  effect,  physical  and  moral — a  physical,  because  the
sound  variously  disturbs  and  agitates  the  air,  and  by  agita-
tion disperses  the  hot  exhalations  and  dispels  the  thunder  ;
but  the  moral  effect  is  the  more  certain,  because  by  the  sound
the  faithful  are  stirred  to  pour  forth  their  prayers,  by  which
they  win  from  God  the  turning  awa}^  of  the  thunderbolt."
Here  we  see  in  this  branch  of  thought,  as  in  so  many  others,
at  the  close  of  the  seventeenth  centur}^  the  dawn  of  rational-
ism. Father  De  Angelis  now  keeps  demoniacal  influence  in
the  background.  Little,  indeed,  is  said  of  the  efficiency  of
bells  in  putting  to  flight  the  legions  of  Satan  :  the  wise  pro-
fessor is  evidently  preparing  for  that  inevitable  compromise
which  we  see  in  the  history  of  every  science  when  it  is
clear  that  it  can  no  longer  be  suppressed  by  ecclesiastical  ful-
minations.f


III.    THE    AGENCY    OF   WITCHES.

But,  while  this  comparatively  harmless  doctrine  of  thwart-
ing the  powers  of  the  air  by  fetiches  and  bell-ringing  was
developed,  there  were  evolved  another  theory,  and  a  series
of  practices  sanctioned  by  the  Church,  which  must  forever
be  considered  as  among  the  most  fearful  calamities  in  human

*  See  Binsfeld,  De  Confcssionhus  Male/.,  pp.  308-314,  edition  of  1623.
f  For  De  Angelis,  see  his  Lectiones  Meteor ol„  p.  75.


THE    AGENCY    O'J   WITCHES.


351


history.  Indeed,  few  errors  have  ever  cost  so  much  shed-
ding- of  innocent  blood  over  such  wide  territory  and  during-
s:)  many  generations.  Out  of  the  old  doctrine — pagan  and
Christian — of  evil  agency  in  atmospheric  phenomena  was
evolved  the  belief  that  certain  men,  women,  and  children
may  secure  infernal  aid  to  produce  whirlwinds,  hail,  frosts,
floods,  and  the  like.

As  early  as  the  ninth  century  one  great  churchman,  Ago-
bard.  Archbishop  of  Lyons,  struck  a  heavy  blow  at  this
superstition.  His  work.  Against  the  Absurd  Opijiion  of  the
Vulgar  toiicJiiiig  Hail  and  Thunder,  shows  him  to  have  been
one  of  the  most  devoted  apostles  of  right  reason  whom  hu-
man history  has  known.  By  argument  and  ridicule,  and  at
times  by  a  lofty  eloquence,  he  attempted  to  breast  this  tide.
One  passage  is  of  historical  significance.  He  declares  :  "  The
wretched  world  lies  now  under  the  tyranny  of  foolishness;
things  are  believed  by  Christians  of  such  absurdity  as  no
one  ever  could  aforetime  induce  the  heathen  to  believe."  "^

All  in  vain  ;  the  tide  of  superstition  continued  to  roll  on  ;
great  theologians  developed  it  and  ecclesiastics  favoured  it ;
until  as  we  near  the  end  of  the  mediseval  period  the  infallible
voice  of  Rome  is  heard  accepting  it,  and  clinching  this  belief
into  the  mind  of  Christianity.  For,  in  1437,  Pope  Eugene
IV,  by  virtue  of  the  teaching  power  conferred  on  him  by
the  Almighty,  and  under  the  divine  guarantee  against  anv
possible  error  in  the  exercise  of  it,  issued  a  bull  exhorting
the  inquisitors  of  heresy  and  witchcraft  to  use  greater  dili-
gence against  the  human  agents  of  the  Prince  of  Darkness,
and  especially  against  those  who  have  the  power  to  produce
bad  weather.  In  1445  Pope  Eugene  returned  again  to  the
charge,  and  again  issued  instructions  and  commands  infal-
libly committing  the  Church  to  the  doctrine.  But  a  greater
than  Eugene  followed,  and  stamped  the  idea  yet  more  deeply
into  the  mind  of  the  Church.  On  the  7th  of  December,
1484,  Pope  Innocent  VIII  sent  forth  his  bull  Suniniis  Deside-
rantcs.     Of  all  documents  ever  issued  from  Rome,  imperial


*  For  a  very  interesting  statement  of  Agobard's  position  and  work,  with  cita-
tions from  his  Liber  contj-a  insulsatn  vulgi  opinionem  de  grandine  et  tonitriii<;,  see
Poole,  lllnstrations  of  the  History  of  Mediccval  Thought,  pp.  40  ct  seq.  The  works
of  Agobard  are  in  vol  civ  of  Migne's  Patrol.  Lat.


352    FROM    THE    "PRINCE   OF    THE    POWER   OF    THE    AIR."

or  papal,  this  has  doubtless,  first  and  last,  cost  the  greatest
shedding  of  innocent  blood.  Yet  no  document  was  ever
more  clearly  dictated  by  conscience.  Inspired  by  the  scrip-
tural command,  **  Thou  shalt  not  suffer  a  witch  to  live,"  Pope
Innocent  exhorted  the  clergy  of  Germany  to  leave  no  means
untried  to  detect  sorcerers,  and  especially  those  who  by  evil
weather  destroy  vinej-ards,  gardens,  meadows,  and  growing
crops.  These  precepts  were  based  upon  various  texts  of
Scripture,  especially  upon  the  famous  statement  in  the  book
of  Job ;  and,  to  carry  them  out,  witch-finding  inquisitors
were  authorized  by  the  Pope  to  scour  Europe,  especially
Germany,  and  a  manual  was  prepared  for  their  use — the
Witch-Hammer,  Malleus  Maleficarum.  In  this  manual,  which
was  revered  for  centuries,  both  in  Catholic  and  Protestant
countries,  as  almost  divinely  inspired,  the  doctrine  of  Satanic
agency  in  atmospheric  phenomena  was  further  developed,
and  various  means  of  detecting  and  punishing  it  were  dwelt
upon.*

With  the  application  of  torture  to  thousands  of  women,
in  accordance  with  the  precepts  laid  down  in  the  Malleus,  it
was  not  difficult  to  extract  masses  of  proof  for  this  sacred
theory  of  meteorology.  The  poor  creatures,  writhing  on
the  rack,  held  in  horror  by  those  who  had  been  nearest  and
dearest  to  them,  anxious  only  for  death  to  relieve  their  suf-
ferings, confessed  to  anything  and  everything  that  would
satisfy  the  inquisitors  and  judges.  All  that  was  needed  was
that  the  inquisitors  should  ask  leading  questions  f  and  sug-

*  For  the  bull  of  Pope  Eugene,  see  Raynaldus,  Annales  EccL,  pp.  1437,  T445-
The  Latin  text  of  the  bull  Stmnnis  Desiderantes  may  be  found  in  the  JMalleus
Maleficartim,  in  Binsfeld's  De  Confessionibus  cited  below,  or  in  Roskoff's  Geschichte
des  Teufels  (Leipsic,  i86g),  vol.  i,  pp.  222-225.  There  is,  so  far  as  I  know,  no
good  analysis,  in  any  English  book,  of  the  contents  of  the  Witch- HatJimer ;  but
such  may  be  found  in  Rcskofif's  Geschichte  des  Teufels,  or  in  Soldan's  Geschichte
der  Ilexenprozesse.  Its  first  dated  edition  is  that  of  1489  ;  but  Prof  Burr  has
shown  that  it  was  printed  as  early  as  i486.  It  was,  happily,  never  translated  into
any  modern  tongue.

•f-  For  still  extant  lists  of  such  questions,  see  the  Zcitschrift  fiir  deutsche  Cultiir-
geschichte  for  1858,  pp.  522-528,  or  Diefenbach,  Der  Hexefizuahn  in  Deutschlaud,
pp.  15-17.  Father  Vincent  of  Berg  (in  his  Enchiridium)  gives  a  similar  list  for
use  by  priests  in  the  confession  of  the  accused.  Manuscript  lists  of  this  sort  which
have  actually  done  service  in  the  courts  of  Baden  and  Bavaria  may  be  seen  in  the
library  of  Cornell  University.


THE   AGENCY   OF    WITCHES.


353


gest  satisfactory  answers:  the  prisoners,  to  shorten  the  tor-
ture, were  sure  sooner  or  later  to  give  the  answer  required,
even  though  they  knew  that  this  would  send  them  to  the
stake  or  scaffold.  Under  the  doctrine  of  "  excepted  cases,"
there  was  no  limit  to  torture  for  persons  accused  of  heresy
or  witchcraft;  even  the  safeguards  which  the  old  pagan
world  had  imposed  upon  torture  were  thus  thrown  down,
and  the  prisoner  must  confess.

The  theological  literature  of  the  Middle  Ages  was  thus
enriched  with  numberless  statements  regarding  modes  of
Satanic  influence  on  the  weather.  Pathetic,  indeed,  are  the
records ;  and  none  more  so  than  the  confessions  of  these
poor  creatures,  chiefly  women  and  children,  during  hundreds
of  years,  as  to  their  manner  of  raising  hailstorms  and  tem-
pests. Such  confessions,  by  tens  of  thousands,  are  still  to  be
found  in  the  judicial  records  of  Germany,  and  indeed  of  all
Europe.  Typical  among  these  is  one  on  which  great  stress
was  laid  during  ages,  and  for  which  the  world  was  first  in-
debted to  one  of  these  poor  women.  Crazed  by  the  agony
of  torture,  she  declared  that,  returning  with  a  demon  through
the  air  from  the  witches'  sabbath,  she  was  dropped  upon
the  earth  in  the  confusion  which  resulted  among  the  hellish
legions  when  they  heard  the  bells  sounding  the  Ave  Maria.
It  is  sad  to  note  that,  after  a  contribution  so  valuable  to
sacred  science,  the  poor  woman  was  condemned  to  the
flames.  This  revelation  speedily  ripened  the  belief  that,
whatever  might  be  going  on  at  the  witches'  sabbath— no
matter  how  triumphant  Satan  might  be — at  the  moment  of
sounding  the  consecrated  bells  the  Satanic  power  was  para-
lyzed. This  theory  once  started,  proofs  came  in  to  support
it,  during  a  hundred  years,  from  the  torture  chambers  in  all
parts  of  Europe.

Throughout  the  later  Middle  Ages  the  Dominicans  had
been  the  main  agents  in  extorting  and  promulgating  these
revelations,  but  in  the  centuries  following  the  Reformation
the  Jesuits  devoted  themselves  with  even  more  keenness  and
vigour  to  the  same  task.  Some  curious  questions  inciden-
tally arose.  It  was  mooted  among  the  orthodox  authorities
whether  the  damage  done  by  storms  should  or  should  not
be  assessed  upon  the  property  of  convicted  witches.     The

24


354    FROM    THE    "PRINCE   OF    THE    POWER   OF    THE   AIR."

theologians  inclined  decidedly  to  the  affirmative  ;  the  jurists,
on  the  whole,  to  the  negative.^

In  spite  of  these  tortures,  lightning  and  tempests  con-
tinued, and  great  men  arose  in  the  Church  throughout  Eu-
rope in  every  generation  to  point  out  new  cruelties  for  the
discovery  of  "  weather-makers,"  and  new  methods  for  bring-
ing their  machinations  to  naught.

But  here  and  there,  as  early  as  the  sixteenth  century,  we
begin  to  see  thinkers  endeavouring  to  modify  or  oppose
these  methods.  At  that  time  Paracelsus  called  attention  to
the  reverberation  of  cannon  as  explaining  the  rolling  of  thun-
der, but  he  was  confronted  by  one  of  his  greatest  contem-
poraries. Jean  Bodin,  as  superstitious  in  natural  as  he  was
rational  in  political  science,  made  sport  of  the  scientific  the-
ory, and  declared  thunder  to  be  ''  a  flaming  exhalation  set  in
motion  by  evil  spirits,  and  hurled  downward  with  a  great
crash  and  a  horrible  smell  of  sulphur."  In  support  of  this
view,  he  dwelt  upon  the  confessions  of  tortured  witches,
upon  the  acknowledged  agency  of  demons  in  the  Will-o'-the-
wisp,  and  specially  upon  the  passage  in  the  one  hundred  and
fourth  Psalm,  *'  Who  maketh  his  angels  spirits,  his  ministers
a  flaming  fire."

To  resist  such  powerful  arguments  by  such  powerful  men
was  dangerous  indeed.  In  15 13,  Pomponatius,  professor  at
Padua,  published  a  volume  of  Doubts  as  to  the  Fourth  Book  of
Aristotle  s  Mcteorologica,  and  also  dared  to  question  this  power
of  devils ;  but  he  soon  found  it  advisable  to  explain  that,
while  as  a  philosopher  he  might  doubt,  yet  as  a  Christimi  he
of  course  believed  everything  taught  by  Mother  Church —
devils  and  all — and  so  escaped  the  fate  of  several  others  who
dared  to  question  the  agency  of  witches  in  atmospheric  and
other  disturbances.

A  few  years  later  Agrippa  of  Nettesheim  made  a  some-
what similar  effort  to  breast  this  theological  tide  in  northern
Europe.  He  had  won  a  great  reputation  in  various  fields,
but  especially  in  natural  science,  as  science  was  then  under-
stood.    Seeing  the  folly  and  cruelty  of  the  prevailing  theory,

*  For  proofs  of  the  vigour  of  the  Jesuits  in  this  persecution,  see  not  only  the
histories  of  witchcraft,  but  also  the  Annua  litterce  of  the  Jesuits  themselves, /ajj/w.


THE   AGENCY    OF   WITCHES.  355

he  attempted  to  modify  it,  and  in  15 18,  as  Syndic  of  Metz,
endeavoured  to  save  a  poor  woman  on  trial  for  witchcraft.
But  the  chief  inquisitor,  backed  by  the  sacred  Scriptures,
the  papal  bulls,  the  theological  faculties,  and  the  monks,  was
too  strong  for  him  ;  he  was  not  only  forced  to  give  up  his
office,  but  for  this  and  other  offences  of  a  similar  sort  was  im-
prisoned, driven  from  city  to  city  and  from  country  to  coun-
try, and  after  his  death  his  clerical  enemies,  especially  the
Dominicans,  pursued  his  memory  with  calumny,  and  placed
over  his  grave  probably  the  most  malignant  epitaph  ever
written.

As  to  argument,  these  efforts  were  met  especially  by
Jean  Bodin  in  his  famous  book,  the  De'monomanic  des  Sorciers,
published  in  1580.  It  was  a  work  of  great  power  by  a  man
justly  considered  the  leading  thinker  in  France,  and  perhaps
in  Europe.  All  the  learning  of  the  time,  divine  and  human,
he  marshalled  in  support  of  the  prevailing  theory.  With  in-
exorable logic  he  showed  that  both  the  veracity  of  sacred
Scripture  and  the  infallibility  of  a  long  line  of  popes  and
councils  of  the  Church  were  pledged  to  it,  and  in  an  elo-
quent passage  this  great  publicist  warned  rulers  and  judges
against  any  mercy  to  witches — citing  the  example  of  King
Ahab  condemned  by  the  prophet  to  die  for  having  pardoned
a  man  worthy  of  death,  and  pointing  significantly  to  King
Charles  IX  of  France,  who,  having  pardoned  a  sorcerer,  died
soon  afterward.*

In  the  last  years  of  the  sixteenth  century  the  persecu-
tions for  witchcraft  and  magic  were  therefore  especially
cruel ;  and  in  the  western  districts  of  Germany  the  main  in-
strument in  them  was  Binsfeld,  Suffragan  Bishop  of  Treves.


*  To  the  argument  cited  above,  Bodin  adds  :  "  Id  certissimam  dsemonis  praesen-
tiam  significat :  nam  ubicunque  dsemones  cum  hominibus  nefaria  societatis  fide
copulantur,  foedissimum  semper  relinquunt  sulphuris  odorem,  quod  sortilegi  S3epis-
sime  experiuntur  et  confitentur."  Sec  Bodin's  Universce  Natiirce  Theatrum,Yx:vi\\.-
fort,  1597,  pp.  208-211.  The  first  edition  of  the  book  by  Pomponatius,  which  was
the  earhest  of  his  writings,  is  excessively  rare,  but  it  was  reprinted  at  Venice  just  a
half-century  later.  It  is  in  his  De  incantationibus,  however,  that  he  speaks  espe-
cially of  devils.  As  to  Pomponatius,  see,  besides  these,  Creighton's  History  of  the
Papacy  during  the  Reformation,  and  an  excellent  essay  in  Franck's  Moralistes  et
Philosophes.  For  Agrippa,  see  his  biography  by  Prof.  Henry  Morley,  London,  1856.
For  P>odin,  see  a  statement  of  his  general  line  of  argument  in  Lecky,  Rationalism
in  Europe,  vol.  i,  chap.  i.


356    FROM    THE    "PRINCE    OP^    THE    POWER    OF    THE    AIR."

At  that  time  Cornelius  Loos  was  a  professoi-  at  the  uni-
versity of  that  city.  He  was  a  devoted  churchman,  and  one
of  the  most  brilliant  opponents  of  Protestantism,  but  he
finally  saw  through  the  prevailing  belief  regarding  occult
powers,  and  in  an  evil  hour  for  himself  embodied  his  idea
in  a  book  entitled  True  and  False  Magic.  The  book,  though
earnest,  was  temperate,  but  this  helped  him  and  his  cause
not  at  all.  The  texts  of  Scripture  clearly  sanctioning  belief
in  sorcery  and  magic  stood  against  him,  and  these  had  been
confirmed  by  the  infallible  teachings  of  the  Church  and  the
popes  from  time  immemorial;  the  book  was  stopped  in  the
press,  the  manuscript  confiscated,  and  Loos  thrown  into  a
dungeon.

The  inquisitors  having  wrought  their  will  upon  him,  in
the  spring  of  1593  he  was  brought  out  of  prison,  forced  to
recant  on  his  knees  before  the  assembled  dignitaries  of  the
Church,  and  thenceforward  kept  constantly  under  surveil-
lance and  at  times  in  prison.  Even  this  was  considered  too
light  a  punishment,  and  his  arch-enemy,  the  Jesuit  Delrio,
declared  that,  but  for  his  death  by  the  plague,  he  would  have
been  finally  sent  to  the  stake."

That  this  threat  was  not  unmeaning  had  been  seen  a  few
years  earlier  in  a  case  even  more  noted,  and  in  the  same
city.  During  the  last  decades  of  the  sixteenth  century,  Die-
trich Flade,  an  eminent  jurist,  was  rector  of  the  University
of  Treves,  and  chief  judge  of  the  Electoral  Court,  and  in
the  latter  capacity  he  had  to  pass  judgment  upon  persons
tried  on  the  capital  charge  of  magic  and  witchcraft.  For
a  time  he  yielded  to  the  long  line  of  authorities,  ecclesi-
astical and  judicial,  supporting  the  reality  of  this  crime ;  but
he  at  last  seems  to  have  realized  that  it  was  unreal,  and
that  the  confessions  in  his  torture  chamber,  of  compacts
with    Satan,   riding   on    broomsticks    to   the  witch-sabbath,


*  What  remains  of  the  manuscript  of  Loos,  which  until  recently  was  supposed
to  be  lost,  was  found,  hidden  away  on  the  shelves  of  the  old  Jesuit  library  at  Treves,
by  Mr.  George  Lincoln  Burr,  now  a  professor  at  Cornell  University  ;  and  Prof
Burr's  copy  of  the  manuscript  is  now  in  the  library  of  that  institution.  For  a  full
account  of  the  discovery  and  its  significance,  see  the  New  York  Natioji  for  No-
vember II,  1886.  The  facts  regarding  the  after-life  of  Loos  were  discovered  by
Prof.  Burr  in  manuscript  records  at  Brussels.


THE    AGENCY    OF    WITCHES.  357

raising  tempests,  producing  diseases,  and  the  like,  were
either'^  the  results  of  madness  or  of  willingness  to  confess
anything  and  everything,  and  even  to  die,  in  order  to  shorten
the  fearful  tortures  to  which  the  accused  were  in  all  cases
subjected  until  a  satisfactory  confession  was  obtained.

On  this  conviction  of  the  unreality  of  many  at  least  of  the
charges  Flade  seems  to  have  acted,  and  he  at  once  received
his  reward.  He  was  arrested  by  the  authority  of  the  arch-
bishop and  charged  with  having  sold  himself  to  Satan— the
fact  of  his  hesitation  in  the  persecution  being  perhaps  what
suggested  his  guilt.  He  was  now,  in  his  turn,  brought  into
the  torture  chamber  over  which  he  had  once  presided,  was
racked  until  he  confessed  everything  which  his  torturers
suggested,  and  finally,  in  1589,  was  strangled  and  burnt.

Of  that  trial  a  record  exists  in  the  library  of  Cornell
University  in  the  shape  of  the  original  minutes  of  the  case,
and  among  them  the  depositions  of  Flade  when  under  tor-
ture, taken  down  from  his  own  lips  in  the  torture  chamber.
In  these  depositions  this  revered  and  venerable  scholar  and
jurist  acknowledged  the  truth  of  every  absurd  charge
brought  against  him— anything,  everything,  which  would  end
the  fearful  torture:  compared  with  that,  death  was  nothing.*

Nor  was  even  a  priest  secure  who  ventured  to  reveal  the
unreality  of  magic.  When  Friedrich  Spee,  the  Jesuit  poet
of  western  Germany,  found,  in  taking  the  confessions  of  those
about  to  be  executed  for  magic,  that  without  exception,  just
when  about  to  enter  eternity  and  utterly  beyond  hope  of
pardon,  they  all  retracted  their  confessions  made  under  tor-
ture, his  sympathies  as  a  man  rose  above  his  loyalty  to  his
order,  and  he  published  his  Caiitio  Criminalis  as  a  warning,
stating  with  entire  moderation  the  facts  he  had  observed
and  the  necessity  of  care.  But  he  did  not  dare  publish  it
under  his  own  name,  nor  did  he  even  dare  publish  it  in  a
Catholic  town;  he  gave  it  to  the  world  anonymously,  and,
in  order  to  prevent  any  tracing  of  the  work  to  him  through
the  confessional,  he  secretly  caused  it  to  be  published  in  the
Protestant  town  of  Rinteln.


*  For  the  case  of  Flade,  see  the   careful   study  by  Trof.  Burr,   The  Fate  of  Die-
tiich  Flade,  in  the  Papers  of  the  American  Historical  Association,  1S91.


358    FROM    THE    "PRINCE    OF    THE    POWER    OF    THE    AIR."

Nor  was  this  all.  Nothing  shows  so  thoroughly  the  hold
that  this  belief  in  magic  had  obtained  as  the  conduct  of
Spec's  powerful  friend  and  contemporary,  John  Philip  von
Schonborn,  later  the  Elector  and  Prince  Archbishop  of  May-
ence.

As  a  youth,  Schonborn  had  loved  and  admired  Spec,  and
had  especially  noted  his  persistent  melancholy  and  his  hair
whitened  even  in  his  young  manhood.  On  Schonborn's
pressing  him  for  the  cause.  Spec  at  last  confessed  that  his
sadness,  whitened  hair,  and  premature  old  age  were  due  to
his  recollections  of  the  scores  of  men  and  women  and  chil-
dren whom  he  had  been  obliged  to  see  tortured  and  sent  to
the  scaffold  and  stake  for  magic  and  witchcraft,  when  he  as
their  father  confessor  positively  knew  them  to  be  innocent.
The  result  was  that,  when  Schonborn  became  Elector  and
Archbishop  of  Mayence,  he  stopped  the  witch  persecutions  in
that  province,  and  prevented  them  as  long  as  he  lived.  But
here  was  shown  the  strength  of  theological  and  ecclesiastical
traditions  and  precedents.  Even  a  man  so  strong  by  family
connections,  and  enjoying  such  great  temporal  and  spiritual
power  as  Schonborn,  dared  not  openly  give  his  reasons  for
this  change  of  policy.  So  far  as  is  known,  he  never  uttered
a  word  publicly  against  the  reality  of  magic,  and  under  his
successor  in  the  electorate  witch  trials  were  resumed.

The  great  upholders  of  the  orthodox  view  retained  full
possession  of  the  field.  The  victorious  Bishop  Binsfeld,  of
Treves,  wrote  a  book  to  prove  that  everything  confessed  by
the  witches  under  torture,  especially  the  raising  of  storms
and  the  general  controlling  of  the  weather,  was  worthy  of
belief ;  and  this  book  became  throughout  Europe  a  stand-
ard authority,  both  among  Catholics  and  Protestants.  Even
more  inflexible  was  Remigius,  criminal  judge  in  Lorraine.
On  the  title-page  of  his  manual  he  boasts  that  within  fifteen
years  he  had  sent  nine  hundred  persons  to  death  for  this
imaginary  crime.*

*  For  Spec  and  Schonborn,  see  Soldan  and  other  German  authorities.  There
are  copies  of  the  first  editions  of  the  Cantio  Crhnhialis  in  the  library  of  Cornell
University.  Binsfeld's  book  bore  the  title  of  Tractatus  de  confessionibtis  maleji-
corum  et  sa^ariim.  First  published  at  Treves  in  1589,  it  appeared  subsequently
four  times  in  the  original  Latin,  as  well  as  in  two  distinct  German  translations,  and


THE    AGENCY   OF    WITCHES.


359


Protestantism  fell  into  the  superstition  as  fully  as  Cathol-
icism. In  the  same  century  John  Wier,  a  disciple  of
Agrippa,  tried  to  frame  a  pious  theory  which,  while  satisfy-
ing- orthodoxy,  should  do  something  to  check  the  frightful
cruelties  around  him.  In  his  book  De  PrcEstigiis  Dcemomun,
published  in  1563,  he  proclaimed  his  belief  in  'witchcraft,  but
suggested  that  the  compacts  with  Satan,  journeys  through
the  air  on  broomsticks,  bearing  children  to  Satan,  raising
storms  and  producing  diseases — to  which  so  many  women
and  children  confessed  under  torture — were  delusions  sug-
gested and  propagated  by  Satan  himself,  and  that  the  per-
sons charged  with  witchcraft  were  therefore  to  be  consid-
ered *'  as  possessed  " — that  is,  rather  as  sinned  against  than
sinning.*

But  neither  Catholics  nor  Protestants  would  listen  for
a  moment  to  any  such  suggestion.  Wier  was  bitterly  de-
nounced and  persecuted.  Nor  did  Bekker,  a  Protestant
divine  in  Holland,  fare  any  better  in  the  following  century.
For  his  World  BezvitcJicd,  in  which  he  ventured  not  only  to
question  the  devil's  power  over  the  weather,  but  to  deny
his  bodily  existence  altogether,  he  was  solemnly  tried  by  the
synod  of  his  Church  and  expelled  from  his  pulpit,  while  his
views  were  condemned  as  heresy,  and  overwhelmed  with  a
flood  of  refutations  whose  mere  catalogue  w^ould  fill  pages ;
and  these  cases  were  typical  of  many.

The  Reformation  had,  indeed,  at  first  deepened  the  super-
stition ;  the  new  Church  being  anxious  to  show^  itself  equally
orthodox  and  zealous  w^ith  the  old.  During  the  century
following  the  first  great  movement,  the  eminent  Lutheran
jurist  and  theologian  Benedict  Carpzov,  whose  boast  was
that  he  had  read  the  Bible  fiftj^-three  times,  especiall}^  dis-
tinguished himself  by  his  skill  in  demonstrating  the  reality
of  witchcraft,  and  by  his  cruelty  in  detecting  and  punishing
it.  The  torture  chambers  w^ere  set  at  work  more  vigorously
than  ever,  and  a  long  line  of  theological  jurists  followed  to
maintain  the  system  and  to  extend  it.

in  a  French  one.     Remigius's  manual  was  entitled  Danionolatreia,  and  was  first
printed  at  Lyons  in  1595.

*  For  Wier,  or  Weyer,  see,  beside  his  own  works,  the  excellent  biography  by
Prof.  Binz,  of  Bonn.


360    FROM    THE    "PRINCE    OF    THE    POWER    OF    THE    AIR."

To  argue  against  it,  or  even  doubt  it,  was  exceedingly
dangerous.  Even  as  late  as  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth
century,  when  Christian  Thomasius,  the  greatest  and  bravest
German  between  Luther  and  Lessing,  began  the  efforts
which  put  an  end  to  it  in  Protestant  Germany,  he  did  not
dare  at  first,  bold  as  he  was,  to  attack  it  in  his  own  name,
but  presented  his  views  as  the  university  thesis  of  an  irre-
sponsible student.*

The  same  stubborn  resistance  to  the  gradual  encroach-
ment of  the  scientific  spirit  upon  the  orthodox  doctrine  of
witchcraft  was  seen  in  Great  Britain.  Typical  as  to  the
attitude  both  of  Scotch  and  English  Protestants  were  the
theory  and  practice  of  King  James  I,  himself  the  author  of  a
book  on  Deinonology,  and  nothing  if  not  a  theologian.  As  to
theory,  his  treatise  on  Dcmonology  supported  the  worst  fea-
tures of  the  superstition ;  as  to  practice,  he  ordered  the
learned  and  acute  work  of  Reginald  Scot,  The  Discoverie  of
Witchcraft,  one  of  the  best  treatises  ever  written  on  the  sub-
ject, to  be  burned  by  the  hangman,  and  he  applied  his  own
knowledge  to  investigating  the  causes  of  the  tempests  which
beset  his  bride  on  her  voyage  from  Denmark.  Skilful  use
of  unlimited  torture  soon  brous^ht  these  causes  to  lis^ht.  A
Dr.  Fian,  while  his  legs  were  crushed  in  the  ''boots"  and
wedges  were  driven  under  his  finger  nails,  confessed  that
several  hundred  witches  had  gone  to  sea  in  a  sieve  from  the
port  of  Leith,  and  had  raised  storms  and  tempests  to  drive
back  the  princess.

With  the  coming  in  of  the  Puritans  the  persecution  was
even  more  largely,  systematically,  and  cruelly  developed.
The  great  witch-finder,  Matthew  Hopkins,  having  gone
through  the  county  of  Suffolk  and  tested  multitudes  of  poor
old  women  by  piercing  them  with  pins  and  needles,  declared
that  county  to  be  infested  with  witches.  Thereupon  Par-
liament issued  a  commission,  and  sent  two  eminent  Presby-
terian   divines    to    accompany    it,    with    the  result   that   in


*  For  Thomasius,  see  his  various  biographies  by  Luden  and  others  ;  also  the
treatises  on  witchcraft  of  Soldan  and  others.  Manuscript  notes  of  his  lectures,  and
co]nes  of  his  earliest  books  on  witchcraft  as  well  as  on  other  forms  of  folly,  are  to
be  found  in  the  library  of  Cornell  University.


THE    AGENCY   OF   WITCHES,  361

that  county  alone  sixty  persons  were  hanged  for  witchcraft
in  a  sing'le  year.  In  Scotland  matters  were  even  worse.
The  aiitodafif  of  Spain  was  celebrated  in  Scotland  under
another  name,  and  with  Presbyterian  ministers  instead  of
Roman  Catholic  priests  as  the  main  attendants.  At  Leith,
in  1664,  nine  women  were  burned  together.  Condemnations
and  punishments  of  women  in  batches  were  not  uncommon.
Torture  was  used  far  more  freely  than  in  England,  both  in
detecting  witches  and  in  punishing  them.  The  natural  argu-
ment developed  in  hundreds  of  pulpits  was  this  :  If  the  All-
wise  God  punishes  his  creatures  with  tortures  infinite  in
cruelty  and  duration,  why  should  not  his  ministers,  as  far  as
they  can,  imitate  him  ?

The  strongest  minds  in  both  branches  of  the  Protestant
Church  in  Great  Britain  devoted  themselves  to  maintaining
the  superstition.  The  newer  scientific  modes  of  thought,
and  especially  the  new  ideas  regarding  the  heavens,  revealed
first  by  Copernicus  and  Galileo  and  later  by  Newton,  Huy-
gens,  and  Halley,  were  gradually  dissipating  the  whole  do-
main of  the  Prince  of  the  Power  of  the  Air;  but  from  first
to  last  a  long  line  of  eminent  divines,  Anglican  and  Calvin-
istic,  strove  to  resist  the  new  thought.  On  the  x'\nglican
side,  in  the  seventeenth  century,  Meric  Casaubon,  Doctor
of  Divinity  and  a  high  dignitary  of  Canterbury, — Henry
More,  in  many  respects  the  most  eminent  scholar  in  the
Church, — Cudworth,  by  far  the  most  eminent  philosopher,
and  Dr.  Joseph  Glanvil,  the  most  cogent  of  all  writers  in
favour  of  witchcraft,  supported  the  orthodox  superstition  in
treatises  of  great  power;  and  Sir  Matthew  Hale,  the  great-
est jurist  of  the  period,  condemning  two  women  to  be  burned
for  witchcraft,  declared  that  he  based  his  judgment  on  the
direct  testimony  of  Holy  Scripture.  On  the  Calvinistic  side
were  the  great  names  of  Richard  Baxter,  who  applauded
some  of  the  worst  cruelties  in  England,  and  of  Increase  and
Cotton  Mather,  who  stimulated  the  worst  in  America  ;  and
these  marshalled  in  behalf  of  this  cruel  superstition  a  long
line  of  eminent  divines,  the  most  earnest  of  all,  perhaps,  be-
ing John  Wesley.

Nor  was  the  Lutheran  Church  in  Sweden  and  the  other
Scandinavian  countries  behind  its  sister  churches,  either  in


362     FROM    THE    "PRINCE    OF    THE    POWER    OF    THE   AIR."

persecuting-  witchcraft  or  in  repressing  doubts  regarding  the
doctrine  which  supported  it.

But  in  spite  of  all  these  great  authorities  in  every  land,
in  spite  of  such  summarj^  punishments  as  those  of  Flade,  Loos,
and  Bekker,  and  in  spite  of  the  virtual  exclusion  from
church  preferment  of  all  who  doubted  the  old  doctrine,
the  new  scientific  view  of  the  heavens  was  developed  more
and  more ;  the  physical  sciences  were  more  and  more  culti-
vated ;  the  new  scientific  atmosphere  in  general  more  and
more  prevailed  ;  and  at  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century
this  vast  growth  of  superstition  began  to  wither  and  droop.
Montaigne,  Bayle,  and  Voltaire  in  France,  Thomasius  in
Germany,  Calef  in  New  England,  and  Beccaria  in  Italy,  did
much  also  to  create  an  intellectual  and  moral  atmosphere
fatal  to  it.

And  here  it  should  be  stated,  to  the  honour  of  the  Church
of  England,  that  several  of  her  divines  showed  great  cour-
age in  opposing  the  dominant  doctrine.  Such  men  as  Hars-
net.  Archbishop  of  York,  and  Morton,  Bishop  of  Lichfield,
who  threw  all  their  influence  against  witch-finding  cruelties
even  early  in  the  seventeenth  century,  deserve  lasting  grati-
tude. But  especially  should  honour  be  paid  to  the  younger
men  in  the  Church,  who  wrote  at  length  against  the  whole
system  :  such  men  as  WagstafTe  and  Webster  and  Hutchin-
son, who  in  the  humbler  ranks  of  the  clergy  stood  manfully
for  truth,  with  the  certainty  that  by  so  doing  they  were  mak-
ing their  own  promotion  impossible.

By  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century  the  doctrine
was  evidently  dying  out.  Where  torture  had  been  abolished,
or  even  made  milder,  "  weather-makers  "  no  longer  confessed,
and  the  fundamental  proofs  in  which  the  system  was  rooted
were  evidently  slipping  away.  Even  the  great  theologian
Fromundus,  at  the  University  of  Louvain,  the  oracle  of  his
age,  who  had  demonstrated  the  futility  of  the  Copernican
theory,  had  foreseen  this  and  made  the  inevitable  attempt
at  compromise,  declaring  that  devils,  though  often,  are  not
always  or  even  for  the  most  part  the  causes  of  thunder.  The
learned  Jesuit  Caspar  Schott,  whose  Physica  Ciiriosa  was
one  of  the  most  popular  books  of  the  seventeenth  century,
also  ventured  to  make  the  same  mild  statement.     But  even


THE   AGENCY   OF    WITCHES.  363

such  concessions  by  such  great  champions  of  orthodoxy  did
not  prevent  frantic  efforts  in  various  quarters  to  bring  the
world  back  under  the  old  dogma:  as  late  as  1743  there  was
published  in  Catholic  Germany  a  manual  by  Father  Vincent
of  Berg,*  in  which  the  superstition  was  taught  to  its  fullest
extent,  with  the  declaration  that  it  was  issued  for  the  use  of
priests  under  the  express  sanction  of  the  theological  pro-
fessors of  the  University  of  Cologne  ;  and  twenty-five  years
later,  in  1768,  we  find  in  Protestant  England  John  Wesley
standing  firmly  for  witchcraft,  and  uttering  his  famous  dec-
laration, "  The  giving  up  of  witchcraft  is  in  effect  thegiving
up  of  the  Bible."  The  latest  notable  demonstration  in  Scot-
land was  made  as  late  as  1773,  when  "the  divines  of  the
Associated  Presbytery  "  passed  a  resolution  declaring  their
belief  in  witchcraft,  and  deploring  the  general  scepticism  re-
garding it.^


*  For  Carpzov  and  his  successors,  see  authorities  already  given.  The  best
account  of  James's  share  in  the  extortion  of  confessions  may  be  found  in  the  collec-
tion of  Curiotis  Tracts  published  at  Edinburgh  in  1820.  See  also  King  James's
own  Demonologie,  and  Pitcairn's  Criviinal  Trials  of  Scotland,  vol.  i,  part  ii,  pp.  213-
223.  For  Casaubon,  see  his  Credulity  and  Incredulity  in  Things  Natural,  pp.  66,
67.  For  Glanvil,  More,  Casaubon,  Baxter,  Wesley,  and  others  named,  see  Lecky,
as  above.  As  to  Increase  Mather,  in  his  sermons,  already  cited,  on  The  Voice  of
God  ijt  Stormy  Winds,  Boston,  1704,  he  says:  "When  there  are  great  tempests,
the  Angels  oftentimes  have  a  Hand  therein.  .  .  .  Yea,  and  sometimes,  by  Divine
Permission,  Evil  Angels  have  a  Hand  in  such  Storms  and  Tempests  as  are  very
hurtful  to  Men  on  the  Earth."  Yet  "for  the  most  part,  such  Storms  are  sent  by
the  Providence  of  God  as  a  Sign  of  His  Displeasure  for  the  Sins  of  Men,"  and
sometimes  "  as  Prognosticks  and  terrible  Warnings  of  Great  Judgements  not  far
off."  From  the  height  of  his  erudition  Mather  thus  rebukes  the  timid  voice  of
scientific  scepticism:  "There  are  some  who  would  be  esteemed  the  Wits  of  the
World,  that  ridicule  those  as  Superstitious  and  Weak  Persons,  which  look  upon
Dreadful  Tempests  as  Prodromous  of  other  Judgements.  Nevertheless,  the  most
Learned  and  Judicious  Writers,  not  only  of  the  Gentiles,  but  amongst  Chris-
tians, have  Embraced  such  a  Persuasion  ;  their  Sentiments  therein  being  Con-
firmed by  the  Experience  of  many  Ages."  For  another  curious  turn  given  to  this
theory,  with  reference  to  sanitary  science,  see  Deodat  Lawson's  famous  sermon  at
Salem,  in  1692,  on  Christ's  Fidelity  a  Shield  against  Satan  s  Malignity,  p.  21  of  the
second  edition.  For  Cotton  Mather,  see  his  biography  by  Barrett  Wendell,  pp.
91,  92  ;  also  the  chapter  on  Diabolism  and  Hysteria  in  this  work.  For  Fromundus,
see  his  Meteorologica  (London,  1656),  lib.  iii,  c.  9,  and  lib.  ii,  c.  3.  For  Schott,
see  his  Physica  Curiosa  (edition  of  Wiirzburg,  1667),  p.  1249.  For  Father  Vin-
cent of  Berg,  see  his  Enchiridiiim  quadripartitum  (Cologne,  1743).  Besides
benedictions  and  exorcisms  for  all  emergencies,  it  contains  full  directions  for  the


3^4


FROM    THE    "PRINCE   OF   THE    POWER   OF   THE   AIR."


IV.    FRANKLIN'S   LIGHTNING-ROD.


But  in  the  midst  of  these  efforts  by  Catholics  like  Father
Vincent  and  by  Protestants  like  John  Wesley  to  save  the  old
sacred  theory,  it  received  its  death-blow.  In  1752  Franklin
made  his  experiments  with  the  kite  on  the  banks  of  the
Schuylkill ;  and,  at  the  moment  when  he  drew  the  electric
spark  from  the  cloud,  the  whole  tremendous  fabric  of  the-
ological meteorology  reared  by  the  fathers,  the  popes,  the
mediseyal  doctors,  and  the  long  line  of  great  theologians,
Catholic  and  Protestant,  collapsed  ;  the  **  Prince  of  the  Pow-
er of  the  Air"  tumbled  from  his  seat;  the  great  doctrine
which  had  so  long  afflicted  the  earth  was  prostrated  forever.

The  experiment  of  Franklin  was  repeated  in  various  parts
of  Europe,  but,  at  first,  the  Church  seemed  careful  to  take
no  notice  of  it.  The  old  church  formulas  against  the  Prince
of  the  Power  of  the  Air  were  still  used,  but  the  theological
theory,  especially  in  the  Protestant  Church,  began  to  grow
milder.  Four  years  after  Franklin's  discovery  Pastor  Karl
Koken,  member  of  the  Consistory  and  official  preacher  to
the  City  Council  of  Hildesheim,  was  moved  by  a  great  hail-
storm to  preach  and  publish  a  sermon  on  The  Revelation
of  God  in  Weather.  Of  "  the  Prince  of  the  Power  of  the
Air  "  he  says  nothing ;  the  theory  of  diabolical  agency  he
throws  overboard  altogether;  his  whole  attempt  is  to  save
the  older  and  more  harmless  theory,  that  the  storm  is  the
voice  of  God.  He  insists  that,  since  Christ  told  Nicodemus
that  men  "  know  not  whence  the  wind  cometh,"  it  can  not
be  of  mere  natural  origin,  but  is  sent  directly  by  God  him-
self, as  David  intimates  in  the  Psalm,  "out  of  His  secret
places."  As  to  the  hailstorm,  he  lays  great  stress  upon  the
plague  of  hail  sent  by  the  Almighty  upon  Egypt,  and  clinches
all  by  insisting  that  God  showed  at  Mount  Sinai  his  purpose
to  startle  the  body  before  impressing  the  conscience.

manufacture  of  the  Agmis  Dei,  and  of  another  sacred  panacea  called  '^Heiligtkum,'*
not  less  effective  against  evil  powers, — gives  formulce  to  be  worn  for  protection
against  the  devil, — suggests  a  list  of  signs  by  which  diabolical  possession  may  be
recognised,  and  prescribes  the  questions  to  be  asked  by  priests  in  the  examination
of  witches.  For  Wesley,  see  \i\%  Jotimal  for  1768.  The  whole  citation  is  given  in
Lecky.


FRANKLIN'S    LIGHTNING-ROD.  365

While  the  theory  of  diabolical  agency  in  storms  was  thus
drooping  and  dying,  very  shrewd  efforts  were  made  at  com-
promise'!' The  first  of  these  attempts  we  have  already  noted,
in  the  effort  to  explain  the  efficacy  of  bells  in  storms  by  their
simple  use  in  stirring  the  faithful  to  prayer,  and  in  the  con-
cession made  by  sundry  theologians,  and  even  by  the  great
Lord  Bacon  himself,  that  church  bells  might,  under  the  sanc-
tion of  Providence,  disperse  storms  by  agitating  the  air.
This  gained  ground  somewhat,  though  it  was  resisted  by
one  eminent  Church  authority,  who  answered  shrewdly  that,
in  that  case,  cannon  would  be  even  more  pious  instruments.
Still  another  argument  used  in  trying  to  save  this  part  of
the  theological  theory  was  that  the  bells  were  consecrated
instruments  for  this  purpose,  "  like  the  horns  at  whose  blow-
ing the  walls  of  Jericho  fell."  *

But  these  compromises  were  of  little  avail.  In  1766
Father  Sterzinger  attacked  the  very  groundwork  of  the
whole  diabolic  theory.  He  was,  of  course,  bitterly  assailed,
insulted,  and  hated  ;  but  the  Church  thought  it  best  not  to
condemn  him.  More  and  more  the  "  Prince  of  the  Power
of  the  Air  "  retreated  before  the  lightning-rod  of  Franklin.
The  older  Church,  while  clinging  to  the  old  theory,  was
finally  obliged  to  confess  the  supremacy  of  Franklin's  theory
practically  ;  for  his  lightning-rod  did  what  exorcisms,  and
holy  water,  and  processions,  and  the  Ag-/ius  Dei,  and  the  ring-
ing of  church  bells,  and  the  rack,  and  the  burning  of  witches,
had  failed  to  do.  This  was  clearly  seen,  even  by  the  poorest
peasants  in  eastern  France,  when  they  observed  that  the
grand  spire  of  Strasburg  Cathedral,  which  neither  the  sacred-
ness  of  the  place,  nor  the  bells  within  it,  nor  the  holy  water
and  relics  beneath  it,  could  protect  from  frequent  injuries  by
lightning,  was  once  and  for  all  protected  by  Franklin's  rod.
Then  came  into  the  minds  of  multitudes  the  answer  to  the
question  which  had  so  long  exercised  the  leading  theologians
of  Europe  and  America,  namely,  '*  Why  should  the  Al-
mighty strike  his  own  consecrated  temples,  or  suffer  Satan
to  strike  them?"


*  For  Koken,  see  his  Offenbarmig  Gottes  in    Wetter,  Ilildesheim,  1756  ;  and
for  the  answer  to  Bacon,  see  Gretser's  De  benedictionibus,  lib.  ii,  cap.  46.


366


FROM  THE  "PRI^XE  OF  THE  POWER  OF  THE  AIR."


Yet  even  this  practical  solution  of  the  question  was  not
received  without  opposition.

In  America  the  earthquake  of  1755  was  widely  ascribed,
especially  in  Massachusetts,  to  Franklin's  rod.  The  Rev.
Thomas  Prince,  pastor  of  the  Old  South  Church,  published
a  sermon  on  the  subject,  and  in  the  appendix  expressed  the
opinion  that  the  frequency  of  earthquakes  may  be  due  to
the  erection  of  "iron  points  invented  by  the  sagacious  Mr.
Franklin."  He  goes  on  to  argue  that  "in  Boston  are  more
erected  than  anywhere  else  in  New  England,  and  Boston
seems  to  be  more  dreadfully  shaken.  Oh  !  there  is  no  get-
ting out  of  the  mighty  hand  of  God."

Three  years  later,  John -Adams,  speaking  of  a  conversa-
tion with  Arbuthnot,  a  Boston  physician,  says:  ''He  began
to  prate  upon  the  presumption  of  philosophy  in  erecting  iron
rods  to  draw^  the  lis^htnino^  from  the  clouds.  He  railed  and
foamed  against  the  points  and  the  presumption  that  erected
them.  He  talked  of  presuming  upon  God,  as  Peter  at-
tempted to  walk  upon  the  water,  and  of  attempting  to  con-
trol the  artillerj^  of  heaven."

As  late  as  1770  religious  scruples  regarding  lightning-
rods  were  still  felt,  the  theor}^  being  that,  as  thunder  and
lightning  were  tokens  of  the  Divine  displeasure,  it  was  im-
piety to  prevent  their  doing  their  full  work.  Fortunately,
Prof.  John  Winthrop,  of  Harvard,  show^ed  himself  wise  in
this,  as  in  so  many  other  things :  in  a  lecture  on  earthquakes
he  opposed  the  dominant  theology  ;  and  as  to  arguments
against  Franklin's  rods,  he  declared,  "  It  is  as  much  our  duty
to  secure  ourselves  against  the  effects  of  lightning  as  against
those  of  rain,  snow,  and  wind  b}^  the  means  God  has  put
into  our  hands."

Still,  for  some  years  theological  sentiment  had  to  be  re-
garded carefully.  In  Philadelphia,  a  popular  lecturer  on  sci-
ence for  some  time  after  Franklin's  discovery  thought  it  best
in  advertising  his  lectures  to  explain  that  "  the  erection  of
lightning-rods  is  not  chargeable  with  presumption  nor  in-
consistent with  any  of  the  principles  either  of  natural  or
revealed  religion."  *

'"■  Regarding  opposition   to  Franklin's  rods  in  America,  see  Prince's   Sermon,


FRANKLIN'S   LIGHTNING-ROD.  367

In  England,  the  first  lightning  conductor  upon  a  church
was  not  put  up  until  1762,  ten  years  after  Franklin's  discov-
ery. The  spire  of  St.  Bride's  Church  in  London  was  greatly
injured  by  lightning  in  1750,  and  in  1764  a  storm  so  wrecked
its  masonry  that  it  had  to  be  mainly  rebuilt;  yet  for  years
after  this  the  authorities  refused  to  attach  a  lightning-rod.
The  Protestant  Cathedral  of  St.  Paul's,  in  London,  was  not
protected  until  sixteen  years  after  Franklin's  discovery,  and
the  tower  of  the  great  Protestant  church  at  Hamburg  not
until  a  year  later  still.  As  late  as  1783  it  was  declared
in  Germany,  on  excellent  authority,  that  within  a  space
of  thirty-three  years  nearly  four  hundred  towers  had
been  damaged  and  one  hundred  and  twenty  bell-ringers
killed.

In  Roman  Catholic  countries  a  similar  prejudice  was
shown,  and  its  cost  at  times  was  heavy.  In  Austria,  the
church  of  Rosenberg,  in  the  mountains  of  Carinthia,  was
struck  so  frequently  and  with  such  loss  of  life  that  the  peas-
ants feared  at  last  to  attend  service.  Three  times  was  the
spire  rebuilt,  and  it  was  not  until  1778— twenty-six  years
after  Franklin's  discovery — that  the  authorities  permitted  a
rod  to  be  attached.     Then  all  trouble  ceased.

A  typical  case  in  Italy  was  that  of  the  tower  of  St.  Mark's,
at  Venice.  In  spite  of  the  angel  at  its  summit  and  the  bells
consecrated  to  ward  off  the  powers  of  the  air,  and  the  rehcs
in  the  cathedral  hard  by,  and  the  processions  in  the  adjacent
square,  the  tower  was  frequently  injured  and  even  ruined  by
lightning.  In  1388  it  was  badly  shattered;  in  1417,  and
again  in  1489,  the  wooden  spire  surmounting  it  was  utterly
consumed;  it  was  again  greatly  injured  in  1548,  1565,  1653,
and  in  1745  was  struck  so  powerfully  that  the  whole  tower,
which  had  been  rebuilt  of  stone  and  brick,  was  shattered  in
thirty-seven  places.  Although  the  invention  of  Franklin
had  been  introduced  into  Italy  by  the  physicist  Beccaria,
the  tower  of  St.  Mark's  still  went  unprotected,  and  was  again
badly  struck  in  1761  and  1762;  and  not  until  1766 — fourteen


especially  p.  23  ;  also  Quincy,  History  of  Harvard  University,  vol.  ii,  p.  219  ;  also
Works  of  John  Adams,  vol.  ii,  pp.  51,  52  ;  also  Parton's  Life  of  Franklin,  vol.  i,
p.  294.


368    FROM    THE    "PRINCE    OF    THE    POWER    OF    THE    AIR."

years  after  Franklin's  discover}' — was  a  lightning-rod  placed
upon  it;  and  it  has  never  been  struck  since. "^

So,  too,  though  the  beautiful  tower  of  the  Cathedral  of
Siena,  protected  by  all  possible  theological  means,  had  been
struck  again  and  again,  much  opposition  was  shown  to  plac-
ing upon  it  what  was  generally  known  as  "the  heretical
rod  " ;  but  the  tower  was  at  last  protected  by  Franklin's  in-
vention, and  in  1777,  though  a  very  heavy  bolt  passed  down
the  rod,  the  church  received  not  the  slightest  injury.  This
served  to  reconcile  theology  and  science,  so  far  as  that  city
was  concerned  ;  but  the  case  which  did  most  to  convert  the
Italian  theologians  to  the  scientific  view  was  that  of  the
church  of  San  Nazaro,  at  Brescia.  The  Republic  of  Venice
had  stored  in  the  vaults  of  this  church  over  two  hundred
thousand  pounds  of  powder.  In  1767,  seventeen  years  after
Franklin's  discovery,  no  rod  having  been  placed  upon  it,
it  was  struck  by  lightning,  the  powder  in  the  vaults  was
exploded,  one  sixth  of  the  entire  city  destroyed,  and  over
three  thousand  lives  were  lost.f

Such  examples  as  these,  in  all  parts  of  Europe,  had  their
effect.  The  formulas  for  conjuring  off  storms,  for  con-
secrating bells  to  ward  off  lightning  and  tempests,  and  for
putting  to  flight  the  powers  of  the  air,  were  still  allowed  to
stand  in  the  liturgies ;  but  the  lightning-rod,  the  barometer,
and  the  thermometer,  carried  the  day.  A  vigorous  line  of
investigators  succeeding  Franklin  completed  his  victory.
The  traveller  in  remote  districts  of  Europe  still  hears  the
church  bells  ringing  during  tempests ;  the  Polish  or  Italian
peasant  is  still  persuaded  to  pay  fees  for  sounding  bells  to
keep  off  hailstorms ;  but  the  universal  tendency  favours
more  and  more  the  use  of  the  lightning-rod,  and  of  the
insurance  offices  where  men  can  be  relieved  of  the  ruinous
results  of  meteorological  disturbances  in  accordance  with
the  scientific  laws  of  average,  based  upon  the  ascertained  re-
currence of  storms.  So,  too,  though  many  a  poor  seaman
trusts  to  his  charm  that  has  been  bathed  in  holy  water,  or


*  For  reluctance   in  England   to  protect  churches  with  Franklin's  rods,  see
Priestley,  History  of  Electricity,  London,  1775,  vol.  i,  pp.  407,  465  et  seq.
\  See  article  on  Lightning  in  the  Edinburgh  Review  for  October,  1844.


FRANKLIN'S    LIGHTNING-ROD.  369

that  has  touched  some  relic,  the  tendency  among  mariners
is  to  value  more  and  more  those  warnings  which  are  sent
far  and  wide  each  day  over  the  earth  and  under  the  sea  by
the  electric  wires  in  accordance  with  laws  ascertained  by
observation.

Yet,  even  in  our  own  time,  attempts  to  revive  the  old
theological  doctrine  of  meteorology  have  not  been  wanting.
Two  of  these,  one  in  a  Roman  Catholic  and  another  in  a
Protestant  country,  will  serve  as  types  of  many,  to  show
how  completely  scientific  truth  has  saturated  and  permeated
minds  supposed  to  be  entirely  surrendered  to  the  theological
view.

The  Island  of  St.  Honorat,  just  off  the  southern  coast
of  France,  is  deservedly  one  of  the  places  most  venerated  in
Christendom.  The  monastery  of  Lerins,  founded  there  in
the  fourth  century,  became  a  mother  of  similar  institutions
in  western  Europe,  and  a  centre  of  religious  teaching  for
the  Christian  world.  In  its  atmosphere,  legends  and  myths
grew  in  beauty  and  luxuriance.  Here,  as  the  chroniclers
tell  us,  at  the  touch  of  St.  Honorat,  burst  forth  a  stream
of  living  water,  which  a  recent  historian  of  the  monastery
declares  a  greater  miracle  than  that  of  Moses ;  here  he  de-
stroyed, with  a  touch  of  his  staff,  the  reptiles  which  infested
the  island,  and  then  forced  the  sea  to  wash  away  their  foul
remains.  Here,  to  please  his  sister,  Sainte-Marguerite,  a
cherry  tree  burst  into  full  bloom  every  month ;  here  he
threw  his  cloak  upon  the  waters  and  it  became  a  raft,  which
bore  him  safely  to  visit  the  neighbouring  island  ;  here  St.
Patrick  received  from  St.  Just  the  staff  with  which  he  imi-
tated St.  Honorat  by  driving  all  reptiles  from  Ireland.

Pillaged  by  Saracens  and  pirates,  the  island  was  made  all
the  more  precious  by  the  blood  of  Christian  martyrs.  Popes
and  kings  made  pilgrimages  to  it;  saints,  confessors,  and
bishops  went  forth  from  it  into  all  Europe ;  in  one  of  its  cells
St.  Vincent  of  Lerins  wrote  that  famous  definition  of  pure
religion  which,  for  nearly  fifteen  hundred  years,  has  virtually
superseded  that  of  St.  James.  Naturally,  the  monastery
became  most  illustrious,  and  its  seat  ''the  Mediterranean
Isle  of  Saints."

But  toward  the  close  of  the  last  century,  its  inmates  hav-
25


J/


O    FROM    THE    "  PRINCE    OF    THE    POWER   OF    THE    AIR.


ing  become  slothful  and  corrupt,  it  was  dismantled,  all
save  a  small  portion  torn  down,  and  the  island  became
the  property  first  of  impiety,  embodied  in  a  French  ac-
tress, and  finally  of  heresy,  embodied  in  an  English  clero-y.
man.

Bought  back  for  the  Church  by  the  Bishop  of  Frejus  in
1859,  there  was  little  revival  of  life  for  twelve  years.  Then
came  the  reaction,  religious  and  political,  after  the  humilia-
tion of  France  and  the  Vatican  by  Germany  ;  and  of  this
reaction  the  monastery  of  St.  Honorat  was  made  one  of
the  most  striking  outward  and  visible  signs.  Pius  IX  inter-
ested himself  directly  in  it,  called  into  it  a  body  of  Cistercian
monks,  and  it  became  the  chief  seat  of  their  order  in  France.
To  restore  its  sacredness  the  strict  system  of  La  Trappe  was
established — labour,  silence,  meditation  on  death.  The  word
thus  given  from  Rome  was  seconded  in  France  by  cardinals,
archbishops,  and  all  churchmen  especially  anxious  for  pro-
motion in  this  world  or  salvation  in  the  next.  Worn-out
dukes  and  duchesses  of  the  Faubourg  Saint-Germain  united
in  this  enterprise  of  pious  reaction  with  the  frivolous  young-
sters, \\vQ  petits  creves,  who  haunt  the  purlieus  of  Notre  Dame
de  Lorette.  The  great  church  of  the  monastery  was  hand-
somely rebuilt  and  a  multitude  of  altars  erected  ;  and  beau-
tiful frescoes  and  stained  windows  came  from  the  leaders
of  the  reaction.  The  whole  effect  w^as,  perhaps,  somewhat
theatrical  and  thin,  but  it  showed  none  the  less  earnestness
in  making  the  old  "  Isle  of  Saints "  a  protest  against  the
hated  modern  world.

As  if  to  bid  defiance  still  further  to  modern  liberalism,
great  store  of  relics  was  sent  in  ;  among  these,  pieces  of  the
true  cross,  of  the  w^hite  and  purple  robes,  of  the  crown  of
thorns,  sponge,  lance,  and  winding-sheet  of  Christ, — the  hair,
robe,  veil,  and  girdle  of  the  Blessed  Virgin  ;  relics  of  St.
John  the  Baptist,  St.  Joseph,  St.  Mary  Magdalene,  St.  Paul,
St.  Barnabas,  the  four  evangelists,  and  a  multitude  of  other
saints :  so  many  that  the  bare  mention  of  these  treasures
requires  twenty-four  distinct  heads  in  the  official  catalogue
recently  published  at  the  monastery.  Besides  all  this —
what  was  considered  even  more  powerful  in  warding  off
harm  from  the  revived  monastery — the  bones  of  Christian


FRANKLIN'S    LIGHTNING-ROD.  3;7l

martyrs  were  brought  from  the  RoQian  catacombs  and  laid
beneath  the  altars.*

All  was  thus  conformed  to  the  mediaeval  view;  nothing
was  to  be  left  which  could  remind  one  of  the  nineteenth
century  ;  the  "  ages  of  faith  "  were  to  be  restored  in  their
simplicity.  Pope  Leo  XIII  commended  to  the  brethren  the
writings  of  St.  Thomas  Aquinas  as  their  one  great  object
of  study,  and  works  published  at  the  monastery  dwelt  upon
the  miracles  of  St.  Honorat  as  the  most  precious  refuta-
tion of  modern  science.

High  in  the  cupola,  above  the  altars  and  relics,  were
placed  the  bells.  Sent  by  pious  donors,  they  were  solemnly
baptized  and  consecrated  in  1871,  four  bishops  officiating,  a
multitude  of  the  faithful  being  present  from  all  parts  of
Europe,  and  the  sponsors  of  the  great  tenor  bell  being  the
Bourbon  claimant  to  the  ducal  throne  of  Parma  and  his
duchess.  The  good  bishop  who  baptized  the  bells  conse-
crated them  with  a  formula  announcing  their  efficacy  in
driving  away  the  '*  Prince  of  the  Power  of  the  Air,"  and  the
lightning  and  tempests  he  provokes.

And  then,  above  all,  at  the  summit  of  the  central  spire,  !y
high  above  relics,  altars,  and  bells,  was  placed — a  ligJitniug-  i
^rod!\

The  account  of  the  monasterv,  published  under  the  direc-
tion of  the  present  worthy  abbot,  more  than  hints  at  the
saving,  by  its  bells,  of  a  ship  which  was  wrecked  a  few  years
since  on  that  coast;  and  yet,  to  protect  the  bells  and  church
and  monks  and  relics  from  the  very  foe  whom,  in  the  mediae-
val faith,  all  these  were  thought  most  powerful  to  drive
away,  recourse  was  had  to  the  scientific  discovery  of  that
*'  arch-infidel,"  Benjamin  Franklin  !

Perhaps  the  most  striking  recent  example  in  Protestant
lands  of  this  change  from  the  old  to  the  new  occurred  not

*  See  the  Guide  des  Visitejirs  d  U^ins,  published  at  the  monastery  in  1880,
p.  204  ;  also  the  Flistoire  de  Levins,  mentioned  below.

\  See  Guide,  as  above,  p.  84.  Les  Isles  de  Le'rins,  by  the  Abbe  Alliez  (Paris,
i860),  and  the  flistoire  de  LMns,  by  the  same  author,  are  the  authorities  for  the
general  history  of  the  abbey,  and  are  especially  strong  in  presenting  the  miracles
of  St,  Honorat,  etc.  The  Cartttlaire  of  the  monastery,  recently  published,  is
also  valuable.  But  these  do  not  cover  the  recent  revival,  for  an  account  of  which
recourse  must  be  had  to  the  very  interesting  and  naive  Guide  already  cited.


372    FROM    THE    "  PRINXE    OF    THE    POWER    OF    THE    AIR."

long  since  in  one  of  the  great  Pacific  dependencies  of  the
British  crown.  At  a  time  of  severe  drought  an  appeal  was
made  to  the  bishop,  Dr.  Moorhouse,  to  order  public  prayers
for  rain.  The  bishop  refused,  advising  the  petitioners  for
the  future  to  take  better  care  of  their  water  supply,  virtually
telling  them,  "  Heaven  helps  those  who  help  themselves."
But  most  noteworthy  in  this  matter  was  it  that  the  English
Government,  not  long  after,  scanning  the  horizon  to  find
some  man  to  take  up  the  good  work  laid  down  by  the  la-
mented Bishop  Eraser,  of  Manchester,  chose  Dr.  Moorhouse ;
and  his  utterance  upon  meteorology,  which  a  few  genera-
tions since  would  have  been  regarded  by  the  whole  Church
as  blasphemy,  was  universally  alluded  to  as  an  example  of
strong  good  sense,  proving  him  especially  fit  for  one  of  the
most  important  bishoprics  in  England.

Throughout  Christendom,  the  prevalence  of  the  convic-
tion that  meteorology  is  obedient  to  laws  is  more  and  more
evident.  In  cities  especially,  where  men  are  accustomed
each  da}^  to  see  posted  in  public  places  charts  which  show
the  storms  moving  over  various  parts  of  the  country,  and  to
read  in  the  morning  papers  scientific  prophecies  as  to  the
weather,  the  old  view  can  hardly  be  very  influential.

Significant  of  this  was  the  feeling  of  the  American  people
during  the  fearful  droughts  a  few  3-ears  since  in  the  States
west  of  the  Missouri.  No  days  were  appointed  for  fasting
and  prayer  to  bring  rain  ;  there  was  no  attribution  of  the
calamity  to  the  wrath  of  God  or  the  malice  of  Satan  ;  but
much  was  said  regarding  the  folly  of  our  people  in  allow-
ing the  upper  regions  of  their  vast  rivers  to  be  denuded  of
forests,  thus  subjecting  the  States  below  to  alternations  of
drought  and  deluge.  Partly  as  a  result  of  this,  a  beginning
has  been  made  of  teaching  forest  culture  in  many  schools,
tree-planting  societies  have  been  formed,  and  "Arbor  Day"
is  recognised  in  several  of  the  States.  A  true  and  noble
theology  can  hardly  fail  to  recognise,  in  the  love  of  Nature
and  care  for  our  fellow-men  thus  promoted,  something  far
better,  both  from  a  religious  and  a  moral  point  of  view,  than
any  efforts  to  win  the  Divine  favour  by  flattery,  or  to  avert
Satanic  malice  by  fetichism.


CHAPTER    XII,
FROM  MAGIC    TO    CHEMISTRY  AND   PHYSICS.


In  all  the  earliest  developments  of  human  thought  we
find  a  strong  tendency  to  ascribe  mysterious  powers  over
Nature  to  men  and  women  especially  gifted  or  skilled.  Sur-
vivals of  this  view  are  found  to  this  day  among  savages  and
barbarians  left  behind  in  the  evolution  of  civilization,  and
especially  is  this  the  case  among  the  tribes  of  Australia,
Africa,  and  the  Pacific  coast  of  America.  Even  in  the  most
enlightened  nations  still  appear  popular  beliefs,  observances,
or  sayings,  drawn  from  this  earlier  phase  of  thought.

Between  the  prehistoric  savage  developing  this  theory,
and  therefore  endeavouring  to  deal  with  the  powers  of  Na-
ture by  magic,  and  the  modern  man  who  has  outgrown  it,
appears  a  long  line  of  nations  struggling  upward  through  it.
As  the  hieroglyphs,  cuneiform  inscriptions,  and  various
other  records  of  antiquity  are  read,  the  development  of  this
belief  can  be  studied  in  Egypt,  India,  Babylonia,  Assyria,
Persia,  and  Phoenicia.  From  these  civilizations  it  came  into
the  early  thought  of  Greece  and  Rome,  but  especially  into
the  Jewish  and  Christian  sacred  books.  Both  in  the  Old
Testament  and  in  the  New  we  find  magic,  witchcraft,  and
soothsaying  constantly  referred  to  as  realities.*


*  For  magic  in  prehistoric  times  and  survivals  of  it  since,  with  abundant  cita-
tion of  authorities,  see  Tylor,  Primitive  Culture,  chap,  iv  ;  also  The  Early  History
of  Mankind,  by  the  same  author,  third  edition,  pp.  115  et  seq.,  also  p.  380;  also
Andrew  Lang,  Myth,  Ritual,  and  Religion,  vol.  i,  chap.  iv.  For  magic  in  Egypt,
see  Lenormant,  Chaldean  Magic,  chaps,  vi-viii  ;  also  Maspero,  Histoire  Ancienne
des  Peuples  de  I' Orient;  also  Maspero  and  Sayce,  The  Dawn  of  Civilization,  p.
282,  and  for  the  threat  of  the  magicians  to  wreck  heaven,  see  ibid.,  p.  17,  note,
and  especially  the  citations  from  Chabas,  Le  Papyrus  Magique  Harris,  in  chap.

373


374  FROM    MAGIC    TO    CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.

The  first  distinct  impulse  toward  a  higher  view  of  re-
search into  natural  laws  was  given  by  the  philosophers  of
Greece,  It  is  true  that  philosophical  opposition  to  ph3sical
research  was  at  times  strong,  and  that  even  a  great  thinker
like  Socrates  considered  certain  physical  investigations  as
an  impious  intrusion  into  the  work  of  the  gods.  It  is  also
true  that  Plato  and  Aristotle,  while  bringing  their  thoughts
to  bear  upon  the  world  with  great  beauty  and  force,  did
much  to  draw  mankind  away  from  those  methods  which  in
modern  times  have  produced  the  best  results.

Plato  developed  a  vv^orld  in  which  the  physical  sciences
had  little  if  any  real  reason  for  existing ;  Aristotle,  a  world
in  which  the  same  sciences  were  developed  largely  indeed
by  observation  of  what  is,  but  still  more  by  speculation  on
what  ought  to  be.  From  the  former  of  these  two  great  men
came  into  Christian  theology  many  germs  of  mediaeval
magic,  and  from  the  latter  sundry  modes  of  reasoning  which
aided  in  the  evolution  of  these;  yet  the  impulse  to  human
thought  given  by  these  great  masters  was  of  inestimable
value  to  our  race,  and  one  legacy  from  them  was  especially
precious — the  idea  that  a  science  of  Nature  is  possible,  and
that  the  highest  occupation  of  man  is  the  discover}-  of  its
laws.  Still  another  gift  from  them  was  greatest  of  all,  for
they  gave  scientific  freedom.  They  laid  no  interdict  upon
new  paths;  they  interposed  no  barriers  to  the  extension  of
knowledge ;  they  threatened  no  doom  in  this  life  or  in  the

vii  ;  also  Mauiy,  La  Magie  et  V Astrologie  dans  V Antiquity et  an  Moyen  Age.  For
magic  in  Chaldea,  see  Lenormant  as  above  ;  also  Maspero  and  Sayce,  pp.  7S0  et  scq.
For  examples  of  magical  powers  in  India,  see  Max  Miiller's  Sacred  Books  of  the
East,  vol.  xvii,  pp.  121  et  seq.  For  a  legendary  view  of  magic  in  Media,  see  the
Zend  Avesta,  part  i,  p.  14,  translated  by  Darmsteter  ;  and  for  a  more  highly  devel-
oped view,  see  the  Zend  Avesta,  part  iii,  p.  239,  translated  by  Mill.  For  magic
in  Greece  and  Rome,  and  especially  in  the  Neoplatonic  school,  as  well  as  in  the
Middle  Ages,  see  especially  Maury,  La  Magie  et  V Astrologie,  chaps,  iii-v,  F^or
various  sorts  of  magic  recognised  and  condemned  in  cur  sacred  books,  see  Deuter-
onomy xviii,  10,  II  ;  and  for  the  burning  of  magical  books  at  Ephesus  under  the
influence  of  St.  Paul,  see  Acts  xix,  14.  See  also  Ewald,  History  of  Lsracl,  Mar-
tineau's  translation,  fourth  edition,  vol.  ii,  pp.  55-63;  vol.  iii,  pp.  45-51-  For  a
very  elaborate  summing  up  of  the  passages  in  our  sacred  books  recognizing  magic
as  a  fact,  see  De  Haen,  De  Ma^ia,  Leipsic,  1775,  chaps,  i,  ii,  and  iii,  of  first  part.
For  the  general  subject  of  magic,  see  Ennemoser,  LListory  of  Magic,  translated  by
Howitt,  which,  however,  constantly  mixes  sorcery  v/ith  magic  proper.


FROM    MAGIC   TO   CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.  375

next  against  investigators  on  new  lines ;  they  left  the  world
free  to  seek  any  new  methods  and  to  follow  any  new  paths
which  thinking  men  could  find.

This  legacy  of  belief  in  science,  of  respect  for  scien-
tific pursuits,  and  of  freedom  in  scientific  research,  was
especially  received  by  the  school  of  Alexandria,  and  above
all  by  Archimedes,  who  began,  just  before  the  Christian
era,  to  open  new  paths  through  the  great  field  of  the
inductive  sciences  by  observation,  comparison,  and  experi-
ment."^

The  establishment  of  Christianity,  beginning  a  new  evo-
lution of  theology,  arrested  the  normal  development  of  the
physical  sciences  for  over  fifteen  hundred  years.  The  cause
of  this  arrest  was  twofold  :  First,  there  was  created  an  atmos-
phere in  which  the  germs  of  physical  science  could  hardly
grow— an  atmosphere  in  which  all  seeking  in  Nature  for
truth  as  truth  was  regarded  as  futile.  The  general  belief  de-
rived from  the  New  Testament  Scriptures  was,  that  the  end
of  the  world  was  at  hand  ;  that  the  last  judgment  was  ap-
proaching ;  that  all  existing  physical  nature  was  soon  to  be
destroyed  :  hence,  the  greatest  thinkers  in  the  Church  gen-
erally poured  contempt  upon  all  investigators  into  a  science
of  Nature,  and  insisted  that  everything  except  the  saving  of
souls  was  folly.

This  belief  appears  frequently  through  the  entire  period
of  the  Middle  x\ges ;  but  during  the  first  thousand  years  it  is
clearly  dominant.  From  Lactantius  and  Eusebius,  in  the
third  century,  pouring  contempt,  as  we  have  seen,  over
studies  in  astronomy,  to  Peter  Damian,  the  noted  chancellor
of  Pope  Gregory  VII,  in  the  eleventh  century,  declaring
all  worldly  sciences  to  be  ''  absurdities  "  and  ''  fooleries,"  it


*  As  to  the  beginnings  of  physical  science  in  Greece,  and  of  the  theological
opposition  to  physical  science,  also  Socrates's  view  regarding  certain  branches  as
interdicted  to  human  study,  see  Grote's  History  of  Greece,  vol.  i,  pp.  495  and  504,
505  ;  also  Jovvett's  introduction  to  his  translation  of  the  Timtstcs,  and  Whewell's
History  of  the  Inductive  Sciences.  For  examples  showing  the  incompatibility  of
Plato's  methods  in  physical  science  with  that  pursued  in  modern  times,  see  Zeller,
Plato  and  the  Older  Academy,  English  translation  by  AUeyne  and  Goodwin,  pp.
375  et  seq.  The  supposed  opposition  to  freedom  of  opinion  in  the  Laws  of  Plato,
toward  the  end  of  his  life,  can  hardly  make  against  the  whole  spirit  of  Greek
thought.


3;6  FROM    MAGIC    TO   CHEMISTRY   AND   PHYSICS.

becomes  a  very  important  element  in  the  atmosphere  of
thought.*

Then,  too,  there  was  established  a  standard  to  which  all
science  which  did  struggle  up  through  this  atmosphere  must
be  made  to  conform — a  standard  which  favoured  magic
rather  than  science,  for  it  was  a  standard  of  rigid  dogmatism
obtained  from  literal  readings  in  the  Jewish  and  Christian
Scriptures.  The  most  careful  inductions  from  ascertained
facts  were  regarded  as  wretchedly  fallible  when  compared
with  any  view  of  nature  whatever  given  or  even  hinted  at
in  any  poem,  chronicle,  code,  apologue,  myth,  legend,  alle-
gory, letter,  or  discourse  of  any  sort  which  had  happened
to  be  preserved  in  the  literature  which  had  come  to  be  held
as  sacred.

For  twelve  centuries,  then,  the  physical  sciences  were
thus  discouraged  or  perverted  by  the  dominant  orthodoxy.
Whoever  studied  nature  studied  it  either  openly  to  find
illustrations  of  the  sacred  text,  useful  in  the  "  saving  of  souls,"
or  secretly  to  gain  the  aid  of  occult  powers,  useful  in  secur-
ing personal  advantage.  Great  men  like  Bede,  Isidore  of
Seville,  and  Rabanus  Maurus,  accepted  the  scriptural  stand-
ard of  science  and  used  it  as  a  means  of  Christian  edification.
The  views  of  Bede  and  Isidore  on  kindred  subjects  have
been  shown  in  former  chapters  ;  and  typical  of  the  view
taken  by  Rabanus  is  the  fact  that  in  his  great  work  on  the
Universe  there  are  only  two  chapters  which  seem  directly  or
indirectly  to  recognise  even  the  beginnings  of  a  real  phi-
losophy of  nature.  A  multitude  of  less-known  men  found
warrant  in  Scripture  for  magic  applied  to  less  worthy  pur-
poses.f

*  For  the  view  of  Peter  Damian  and  others  through  the  Middle  Ages  as  to  the
futility  of  scientific  investigation,  see  citations  in  Eicken,  Geschichte  unci  System
der  mittelalterlichen  Weltanschauung,  chap.  vi.

f  As  typical  examples,  see  the  utterances  of  Eusebius  and  Lactantius  regarding
astronomers  given  in  the  chapter  on  Astronomy.  For  a  summary  of  Rabanus
Maurus's  doctrine  of  physics,  see  Heller,  Geschichte  der  Fhysik,  vol.  i.  pp.  172  et
seq.  For  Bede  and  Isidore,  see  the  earlier  chapters  of  this  work.  For  an  excel-
lent statement  regarding  the  application  of  scriptural  standards  to  scientific  re-
search in  the  Middle  Ages,  see  Kretschmer,  Z>?>///tw<-/^^  Erdkunde  im  christlichen
Mittelalter,  pp.  5  et  seq.  For  the  distinctions  in  magic  recognised  in  the  mediceval
Church,  see  the  long  catalogue  of  various  sorts  given  in  the  Abbe  Migne's  Encyclo-
p^die  ThSlogique,  third  series,  article  Magie.


FROM    MAGIC   TO   CHEMISTRY    AND    PHYSICS.  377

But  after  the  thousand  years  had  passed  to  which  vari-
ous thinkers  in  the  Church,  upon  supposed  scriptural  war-
rant, had  lengthened  out  the  term  of  the  earth's  existence,
"the  end  of  all  things"  seemed  further  off  than  ever;  and
in  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries,  owing  to  causes
which  need  not  be  dwelt  upon  here,  came  a  great  revival  of
thought,  so  that  the  forces  of  theology  and  of  science  seemed
arrayed  for  a  contest.  On  one  side  came  a  revival  of  re-
ligious fervour,  and  to  this  day  the  works  of  the  cathedral
builders  mark  its  depth  and  strength  ;  on  the  other  side
came  a  new  spirit  of  inquiry  incarnate  in  a  line  of  powerful
thinkers.

First  among  these  was  Albert  of  Bollstadt,  better  known
as  x\lbert  the  Great,  the  most  renowned  scholar  of  his  time.
Fettered  though  he  was  by  the  methods  sanctioned  in  the
Church,  dark  as  was  all  about  him,  he  had  conceived  better
methods  and  aims;  his  eye  pierced  the  mists  of  .scholasti-
cism ;  he  saw  the  light,  and  sought  to  draw  the  world  toward
it.  He  stands  among  the  great  pioneers  of  physical  and
natural  science  ;  he  aided  in  giving  foundations  to  botany
and  chemistry  ;  he  rose  above  his  time,  and  struck  a  heavy
blow  at  those  who  opposed  the  possibility  of  human  life  on
opposite  sides  of  the  earth  ;  he  noted  the  influence  of  moun-
tains, seas,  and  forests  upon  races  and  products,  so  that
Humboldt  justly  finds  in  his  works  the  germs  of  physical
geography  as  a  comprehensive  science.

But  the  old  system  of  deducing  scientific  truth  from
scriptural  texts  was  renewed  in  the  development  of  scholas-
tic theology  ;  and  ecclesiastical  power,  acting  through  thou-
sands of  subtle  channels,  was  made  to  aid  this  development.
The  old  idea  of  the  futility  of  physical  science  and  of  the
vast  superiority  of  theology  was  revived.  Though  Albert's
main  effort  was  to  Christianize  science,  he  was  dealt  with
by  the  authorities  of  the  Dominican  order,  subjected  to  sus-
picion and  indignity,  and  only  escaped  persecution  for  sor-
cery by  yielding  to  the  ecclesiastical  spirit  of  the  time,  and
working  finally  in  theological  channels  by  scholastic  methods.

It  was  a  vast  loss  to  the  earth  ;  and  certainly,  of  all  or-
ganizations that  have  reason  to  lament  the  pressure  of  eccle-
siasticism  which  turned  Albert  the  Great  from  natural  phi-


378  FROM    MAGIC    TO   CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.

losophy  to  theology,  foremost  of  all  in  regret  should  be  the
Christian  Church,  and  especially  the  Roman  branch  of  it.
Had  there  been  evolved  in  the  Church  during  the  thirteenth
century  a  faith  strong  enough  to  accept  the  truths  in  natural
science  which  Albert  and  his  compeers  could  have  given,
and  to  have  encouraged  their  growth,  this  faith  and  this  en-
couragement would  to  this  day  have  formed  the  greatest
argument  for  proving  the  Church  directly  under  Divine
guidance  ;  they  would  have,  been  among  the  brightest  jew-
els in  her  crown.  The  loss  to  the  Church  by  this  want  of
faith  and  courage  has  proved  in  the  long  run  even  greater
than  the  loss  to  science.*

The  next  great  man  of  that  age  whom  the  theological
and  ecclesiasacal  forces  of  the  time  turned  from  the  right
path  was  Vincent  of  Beauvais.  During  the  first  half  of  the
twelfth  century  he  devoted  himself  to  the  study  of  Nature
in  several  of  her  most  interesting  fields.  To  astronomy,  bot-
any, and  zoology  he  gave  special  attention,  but  in  a  larger
way  he  made  a  general  study  of  the  universe,  and  in  a  series
of  treatises  undertook  to  reveal  the  whole  field  of  science.
But  his  work  simply  became  a  vast  commentary  on  the  ac-
count of  creation  given  in  the  book  of  Genesis.  Beginning
with  the  work  of  the  Ti'inity  at  the  creation,  he  goes  on  to
detail  the  work  of  angels  in  all  their  fields,  and  makes  excur-
sions into  every  part  of  creation,  visible  and  invisible,  but
always  with  the  most  complete  subordination  of  his  thought
to  the  literal  statements  of  Scripture.     Could  he  have  taken


*  For  a  very  careful  discussion  of  Albert's  strength  in  investigation  and  weak-
ness in  yielding  to  scholastic  authority,  see  Kopp,  Ansichten  iiber  die  Anfgabe  der
Chefnie  von  Geber  bis  Sta/il,  Braunschweig,  1875,  pp.  64  et  seq.  For  a  very  extended
and  enthusiastic  biographical  sketch,  see  Pouchet.  For  comparison  of  his  work
with  that  of  Thomas  Aquinas,  see  Milman,  History  of  Latin  Christianity,  vol.  vi,
p.  461.  "  II  etat  aussi  tres-habile  dans  les  arts  mecaniques,  ce  que  le  fit  soup^onner
d'etre  sorcier  "  (Sprengel,  Histoire  de  la  Midecine,  vol.  ii,  p.  389).  For  Albert's  biog-
raphy treated  strictly  in  accordance  with  ecclesiastical  methods,  s,ee  Albert  the  Great,
by  Joachim  Sighart,  translated  by  the  Rev.  T.  A.  Dickson,  of  the  Order  of  Preach-
ers, published  under  the  sanction  of  the  Dominican  censor  and  of  the  Cardinal
Archbishop  of  Westminster,  London,  1876.  How  an  Englishman  like  Cardinal
Manning  could  tolerate  among  Englishmen  such  an  unctuous  glossing  over  of  his-
torical  truth  is  one  of  the  wonders  of  contemporary  history.  For  choice  specimens,
see  chapters  ii  and  iv.  For  one  of  the  best  and  most  recent  summaries,  see  Heller,
Geschichte  der  Physik,  Stuttgart,  1882,  vol.  i,  pp.  179  et  seq.


FROM    MAGIC    TO   CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.  370

the  path  of  experimental  research,  the  world  would  have
been  enriched  with  most  precious  discoveries ;  but  the  force
which  had  given  wrong  direction  to  Albert  of  Bollstadt,
backed  as  it  was  by  the  whole  ecclesiastical  power  of  his
time,  was  too  strong,  and  in  all  the  life  labour  of  Vincent
nothing  appears  of  any  permanent  value.  He  reared  a  struc-
ture which  the  adaptation  of  facts  to  literal  interpretations  of
Scripture  and  the  application  of  theological  subtleties  to  na-
ture combine  to  make  one  of  the  most  striking  monuments
of  human  error. '^"

But  the  theological  spirit  of  the  thirteenth  century  gained
its  greatest  victory  in  the  work  of  St.  Thomas  Aquinas.  In
him  was  the  theological  spirit  of  his  age  incarnate.  Al-
though he  yielded  somewhat  at  one  period  to  love  of  natu-
ral science,  it  was  he  who  finally  made  that  great  treaty  or
compromise  which  for  ages  subjected  science  entirely  to
theology.  He  it  was  who  reared  the  most  enduring  bar-
rier against  those  who  in  that  age  and  in  succeeding  ages
laboured  to  open  for  science  the  path  by  its  own  methods
toward  its  own  ends.

He  had  been  the  pupil  of  Albert  the  Great,  and  had
gained  much  from  him.  Through  the  earlier  systems  of  phi-
losoph3^  as  they  were  then  known,  and  through  the  earlier
theologic  thought,  he  had  gone  with  great  labour  and  vig-
our;  and  all  his  mighty  powers,  thus  disciplined  and  cul-
tured, he  brought  to  bear  in  making  a  truce  which  was  to
give  theology  permanent  supremacy  over  science.

The  experimental  method  had  already  been  practically
initiated  :  Albert  of  Bollstadt  and  Roger  Bacon  had  begun
their  work  in  accordance  with  its  methods  ;  but  St.  Thomas
gave  all  his  thoughts  to  bringing  science  again  under  the
sway  of  theological  methods  and  ecclesiastical  control.  In
his  commentary  on  Aristotle's  treatise  upon  Heaven  and
Earth  he  gave  to  the  world  a  striking  example  of  what  his
method  could  produce,  illustrating  all  the  evils  which  arise
in  combining  theological  reasoning  and  literal  interpretation
of  Scripture  with  scientific  facts  ;  and  this  work  remains  to

*  For  Vincent  de  Beauvais,  see  Etudes  sur  Vincent  de  Beauvais,  par  I'Abbe
Bourgeat,  chaps,  xii,  xiii,  and  xiv  ;  also  Pouchet,  Histoire  des  Sciences  Naturelles
au  Moyen  Age,  Paris,  1853,  pp.  470  ct  scq.  ;  also  other  histories  cited  hereafter.


380  FROM    MAGIC    TO   CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.

this  day  a  monument  of  scientific  genius  perverted  b}^  the-
olog3\'^

The  ecclesiastical  power  of  the  time  hailed  him  as  a  de-
liverer; it  was  claimed  that  miracles  were  vouchsafed,  prov-
ing that  the  blessing  of  Heaven  rested  upon  his  labours,  and
among  the  legends  embodying  this  claim  is  that  given  by
the  Bollandists  and  immortalized  by  a  renowned  painter.
The  great  philosopher  and  saint  is  represented  in  the  habit
of  his  order,  with  book  and  pen  in  hand,  kneeling  before  the
image  of  Christ  crucified,  and  as  he  kneels  the  image  thus
addresses  him  :  "  Thomas,  thou  hast  written  well  concerning
me;  what  price  wilt  thou  receive  for  thy  labour?"  The
myth-making  faculty  of  the  people  at  large  was  also  brought
into  play.  According  to  a  widespread  and  circumstantial
legend,  Albert,  by  magical  means,  created  an  android — an
artificial  man,  living,  speaking,  and  answering  all  questions
with  such  subtlety  that  St.  Thomas,  unable  to  answer  its
reasoning,  broke  it  to  pieces  with  his  staff.

Historians  of  the  Roman  Church  like  Rohrbacher,  and
historians  of  science  like  Pouchet,  have  found  it  convenient
to  propitiate  the  Church  by  dilating  upon  the  glories  of  St.
Thomas  Aquinas  in  thus  making  an  alliance  between  re-
ligious and  scientific  thought,  and  laying  the  foundations  for
a  **  sanctified  science";  but  the  unprejudiced  historian  can
not  indulofe  in  this  enthusiastic  view  :  the  results  both  for  the
Church  and  for  science  have  been  most  unfortunate.  It  was
a  wretched  delay  in  the  evolution  of  fruitful  thought,  for
the  first  result  of  this  great  man's  great  compromise  was  to
close  for  ages  that  path  in  science  which  above  all  others
leads  to  discoveries  of  value — the  experimental  method  —
and  to  reopen  that  old  path  of  mixed  theology  and  science
which,  as  Hallam  declares,  "  after  three  or  four  hundred
years  had  not  untied  a  single  knot  or  added  one  unequivocal
truth  to  the  domain  of  philosophy  " — the  path  which,  as  all
modern  history  proves,  has  ever  since  led  only  to  delusion
and  evil.f

*  For  citations  showing  this  subordination  of  science  to  theology,  see  Eicken,
chap.  vi.

■f  For  the  work  of  Aquinas,  see  his  Liber  de  Ccclo  et  Mnndo,  section  xx  ;  also,
Life  and  Labours  of  St.  Thomas  of  Aqtdn,  by  Archbishop  Vaughan,  pp.  459  et  seq.


FROM    MAGIC   TO   CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.


381


The  theological  path  thus  opened  by  these  strong  men
became  the  main  path  for  science  during  ages,  and  it  led
the  world  ever  further  and  further  from  any  fruitful  fact  or
useful  method.  Roger  Bacon's  investigations  already  begun
were  discredited :  worthless  mixtures  of  scriptural  legends
with  imperfectly  authenticated  physical  facts  took  their
place.  Thus  it  was  that  for  twelve  hundred  years  the  minds
in  control  of  Europe  regarded  all  real  science  as  futile,  and
diverted  the  great  current  of  earnest  thought  into  theology.

The  next  stage  in  this  evolution  was  the  development  of
an  idea  which  acted  with  great  force  throughout  the  Mid-
dle Ages — the  idea  that  science  is  dangerous.  This  belief
was  also  of  very  ancient  origin.  From  the  time  when  the
Egyptian  magicians  made  their  tremendous  threat  that
unless  their  demands  were  granted  they  would  reach  out  to
the  four  corners  of  the  earth,  pull  down  the  pillars  of  heav-
en, wreck  the  abodes  of  the  gods  above  and  crush  those  of
men  below,  fear  of  these  representatives  of  science  is  evi-
dent in  the  ancient  world.

But  differences  in  the  character  of  mastic  were  recosf-
nised,  some  sorts  being  considered  useful  and  some  baleful.
Of  the  former  was  magic  used  in  curing  diseases,  in  deter-

For  his  labours  in  natural  science,  see  Hoefer,  Histoire  de  la  Chimie,  Paris,  1843,
vol.  i,  p.  381.  For  theological  views  of  science  in  the  Middle  Ages,  and  rejoicing
thereat,  see  Pouchet,  Hist,  des  Sci.  Nat.  au  Moyen  Age,  ttbi  supra.  Pouchet  says :
"  En  general  au  milieu  du  moyen  age  les  sciences  sont  essentiellement  chretiennes,
leur  but  est  tout-a-fait  religieux,  et  elles  semblent  beaucoup  moins  s'inquieter  de
I'avancement  intellectuel  de  I'homme  que  de  son  salut  eternel."  Pouchet  calls  this
"  conciliation  "  into  a  "harmonieux  ensemble  "  "  la  plus  glorieuse  des  conquetes  in-
tellectuelles  du  moyen  age."  Pouchet  belongs  to  Rouen,  and  the  shadow  of  Rouen
Cathedral  seems  thrown  over  all  his  history.  See,  also,  I'Abbe  Rohrbacher,  Hist,
de  VEglise  Catholique,  Paris,  1858,  vol.  xviii,  pp.  421  et  seq.  The  abbe  dilates  upon
the  fact  that  "  the  Church  organizes  the  agreement  of  all  the  sciences  by  the  labours
of  St.  Thomas  of  Aquin  and  his  contemporaries."  For  the  complete  subordination
of  science  to  theology  by  St.  Thomas,  see  Eicken,  chap.  vi.  For  the  theological
character  of  science  in  the  Middle  Ages,  recognised  by  a  Protestant  philosophic  his-
torian, see  the  well-known  passage  in  Guizot,  History  of  Civilization  in  Europe  ;
and  by  a  noted  Protestant  ecclesiastic,  see  Bishop  Hampden's  Life  of  Thomas
Aquinas,  chaps,  xxxvi,  xxxvii  ;  see  also  Hallam,  Middle  Ages,  chap.  ix.  For  deal-
ings of  Pope  John  XXII,  of  the  Kings  of  France  and  England,  and  of  the  Repub-
lic of  Venice,  see  Figuier,  HAlchimie  et  les  Alchimistes,  pp.  140,  141,  where,  in  a
note,  the  text  of  the  bull  Spondet pariter  is  given.  For  popular  legends  regarding
Albert  and  St.  Thomas,  see  Eliphas  Levi,  Hist,  de  la  Magie,  liv.  iv,  chap.  iv.


382


FROM    MAGIC   TO   CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.


mining  times  auspicious  for  enterprises,  and  even  in  contrib-
uting to  amusement ;  of  the  latter  was  magic  used  to  bring
disease  and  death  on  men  and  animals  or  tempests  upon  the
growing  crops.  Hence  gradually  arose  a  general  distinction
between  white  magic,  which  dealt  openly  with  the  more
beneficent  means  of  nature,  and  black  magic,  which  dealt
secretly  with  occult,  malignant  powers.

Down  to  the  Christian  era  the  fear  of  magic  rarely  led  to
any  persecution  very  systematic  or  very  cruel.  While  in
Greece  and  Rome  laws  were  at  times  enacted  against  magi-
cians, they  were  onl}-  occasionally  enforced  with  rigour,  and
finally,  toward  the  end  of  the  pagan  empire,  the  feeling
against  them  seemed  dying  out  altogether.  As  to  its  more
kindly  phases,  men  like  Marcus  Aurelius  and  Julian  did  not
hesitate  to  consult  those  who  claimed  to  foretell  the  future.
As  to  black  magic,  it  seemed  hardl}'  w^orth  while  to  enact
severe  laws,  when  charms,  amulets,  and  even  gestures  could
thwart  its  worst  machinations.

Moreover,  under  the  old  empire  a  real  science  was  com-
ing in,  and  thought  was  progressing.  Both  the  theory  and
practice  of  magic  were  more  and  more  held  up  to  ridicule.
Even  as  early  a  writer  as  Ennius  ridiculed  the  idea  that
magicians,  who  were  generally  poor  and  hungry  themselves,
could  bestow  w^ealth  on  others;  Plin}^  in  his  Natural  PJiiloso-
phy,  showed  at  great  length  their  absurdities  and  cheatery  ;
others  followed  in  the  same  line  of  thought,  and  the  whole
theory,  except  among  the  ver}^  lowest  classes,  seemed  dying
out.

But  with  the  development  of  Christian  theology  came
a  change.  The  idea  of  the  active  interference  of  Satan  in
magic,  which  had  come  into  the  Hebrew  mind  with  especial
force  from  F^ersia  during  the  captivit}-  of  Israel,  had  passed
from  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  into  Christianity,  and  had  been
made  still  stronger  by  various  statements  in  the  New  Testa-
ment. Theologians  laid  stress  especially  upon  the  famous
utterances  of  the  Psalmist  that  "  all  the  gods  of  the  heathen
are  devils,"  and  of  St.  Paul  that  ''  the  things  which  the  Gen-
tiles sacrifice,  they  sacrifice  to  devils";  and  it  was  widely
held  that  these  devils  were  naturally  indignant  at  their  de-
thronement and   anxious  to   wreak  vengeance   upon  Chris-


FROM    MAGIC    TO   CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.


383


tianity.  Magicians  were  held  to  be  active  agents  of  these
dethroned  gods,  and  this  persuasion  was  strengthened  by
sundry  old  practitioners  in  the  art  of  magic — impostors  who
*  pretended  to  supernatural  powers,  and  who  made  use  of  old
rites  and  phrases  inherited  from  paganism.

Hence  it  was  that  as  soon  as  Christianity  came  into
power  it  more  than  renewed  the  old  severities  against  the
forbidden  art,  and  one  of  the  first  acts  of  the  Emperor  Con-
stantine  after  his  conversion  was  to  enact  a  most  severe  law
against  magic  and  magicians,  under  which  the  main  offender
might  be  burned  alive.  But  here,  too,  it  should  be  noted  that
a  distinction  between  the  two  sorts  of  magic  was  recognised,
for  Constantine  shortly  afterward  found  it  necessary  to
issue  a  proclamation  stating  that  his  intention  was  only  to
prohibit  deadly  and  malignant  magic  ;  that  he  had  no  inten-
tion of  prohibiting  magic  used  to  cure  diseases  and  to  pro-
tect the  crops  fFom  hail  and  tempests.  But  as  new  emperors
came  to  the  throne  who  had  not  in  them  that  old  leaven  of
paganism  which  to  the  last  influenced  Constantine,  and  as
theology  obtained  a  firmer  hold,  severity  against  magic  in-
creased. Toleration  of  it,  even  in  its  milder  forms,  was
more  and  more  denied.  Black  magic  and  white  were  classed
together.

This  severity  went  on  increasing  and  threatened  the  sim-
plest efforts  in  physics  and  chemistry  ;  even  the  science  of
mathematics  was  looked  upon  with  dread.  By  the  twelfth
and  thirteenth  centuries,  the  older  theology  having  arrived
at  the  climax  of  its  development  in  Europe,  terror  of  magic
and  witchcraft  took  complete  possession  of  the  popular
mind.  In  sculpture,  painting,  and  literature  it  appeared  in
forms  ever  more  and  more  striking.  The  lives  of  saints
were  filled  with  it.  The  cathedral  sculpture  embodied  it  in
every  part.  The  storied  windows  made  it  all  the  more  im-
pressive. The  missal  painters  wrought  it  not  only  into
prayer  books,  but,  despite  the  fact  that  hardly  a  trace  of  the
belief  appears  in  the  Psalms,  they  illustrated  it  in  the  great
illuminated  psalters  from  which  the  noblest  part  of  the  service
was  sung  before  the  high  altar.  The  service  books  showed
every  form  of  agonizing  petition  for  deliverv  from  this  dire
influence,  and  every  form  of  exorcism  for  thwarting  it.


384  FROM    MAGIC   TO   CHEMISTRY   AND   PHYSICS.

All  the  great  theologians  of  the  Church  entered  into  this
belief  and  aided  to  develop  it.  The  fathers  of  the  early
Church  were  full  and  explicit,  and  the  mediseval  doctors  be-
came more  and  more  minute  in  describing  the  operations  of
the  black  art  and  in  denouncing  them.  It  was  argued  that,
as  the  devil  afifiicted  Job,  so  he  and  his  minions  continue  to
cause  diseases;  that,  as  Satan  is  the  Prince  of  the  povv^er  of
the  air,  he  and  his  minions  cause  tempests ;  that  the  cases
of  Nebuchadnezzar  and  Lot's  wife  prove  that  sorcerers  can
transform  human  beings  into  animals  or  even  lifeless  mat-
ter ;  that,  as  the  devils  of  Gadara  were  cast  into  swine,  all
animals  could  be  afflicted  in  the  same  manner;  and  that,  as
Christ  himself  had  been  transported  through  the  air  by  the
power  of  Satan,  so  any  human  being  might  be  thus  trans-
ported to  ''  an  exceeding  high  mountain."

Thus  the  horror  of  magic  and  witchcraft  increased  on
every  hand,  and  in  13 17  Pope  John  XXII  issifcd  his  bull  Spon-
dent  paritcr,  levelled  at  the  alchemists,  but  really  dealing  a
terrible  blow  at  the  beginnings  of  chemical  science.  That
many  alchemists  were  knavish  is  no  doubt  true,  but  no  in-
fallibility in  separating  the  evil  from  the  good  was  shown  by
the  papac}^  in  this  matter.  In  this  and  in  sundr}^  other  bulls
and  briefs  we  find  Pope  John,  by  virtue  of  his  infallibility  as
the  world's  instructor  in  all  that  pertains  to  faith  and  morals,
condemning  real  science  and  pseudo-science  alike.  In  two
of  these  documents,  supposed  to  be  inspired  by  wisdom
from  on  high,  he  complains  that  both  he  and  his  flock  are  in
danger  of  their  lives  by  the  arts  of  the  sorcerers  ;  he  de-
clares that  such  sorcerers  can  send  devils  into  mirrors  and
finger  rings,  and  kill  men  and  women  by  a  magic  word  ;  that
they  had  tried  to  kill  him  by  piercing  a  waxen  image  of  him
with  needles  in  the  name  of  the  devil.  He  therefore  called
on  all  rulers,  secular  and  ecclesiastical,  to  hunt  down  the
miscreants  who  thus  afflicted  the  faithful,  and  he  especially
increased  the  powers  of  inquisitors  in  various  parts  of  Eu-
rope for  this  purpose.

The  impulse  thus  given  to  childish  fear  and  hatred
against  the  investigation  of  nature  was  felt  for  centuries;
more  and  more  chemistry  came  to  be  known  as  one  of  the
"  seven  devilish  arts."


FROM    MAGIC    TO   CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.  385

Thus  beg-an  a  long  series  of  demonstrations  against  magic
from  the  centre  of  Christendom.  In  1437,  and  again  in  1445,
Pope  Eugene  IV  issued  bulls  exhorting  inquisitors  to  be
more  diligent  in  searching  out  and  delivering  over  to  pun-
ishment magicians  and  witches  who  produced  bad  weather,
the  result  being  that  persecution  received  a  fearful  impulse.
But  the  worst  came  forty  years  later  still,  when,  in  1484,  there
came  the  yet  more  terrible  bull  of  Pope  Innocent  VIII,  known
Tis  Sitmniis  Dcsidcrantcs,  which  let  inquisitors  loose  upon  Ger-
many, with  Sprenger  at  their  head,  armed  with  the  Witch-
Hammer ,  the  tearful  manual  Malleus  Maleficariim,  to  torture
and  destroy  men  and  women  by  tens  of  thousands  for  sor-
cery and  magic.  Similar  bulls  were  issued  in  1504  by  Julius
II,  and  in  1523  by  Adrian  VI.

The  system  of  repression  thus  begun  lasted  for  hundreds
of  years.  The  Reformation  did  little  to  change  it,  and  in
Germany,  where  Catholics  and  Protestants  vied  with  each
other  in  proving  their  orthodox}^  it  was  at  its  worst.  On
German  soil  more  than  one  hundred  thousand  victims  are
believed  to  have  been  sacrificed  to  it  between  the  middle  of
the  fifteenth  and  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  centuries.

Thus  it  was  that  from  St.  Augustine  to  St.  Thomas
Aquinas,  from  Aquinas  to  Luther,  and  from  Luther  to  Wes-
ley, theologians  of  both  branches  of  the  Church,  with  hardly
an  exception,  enforced  the  belief  in  magic  and  witchcraft,
and,  as  far  as  they  had  power,  carried  out  the  injunction,
'*  Thou  shaft  not  suffer  a  witch  to  live."

How  this  was  ended  by  the  progress  of  scientific  modes
of  thought  I  shall  endeavour  to  show  elsewhere  :  here  we
are  only  concerned  with  the  effect  of  this  widespread  terror-
ism on  the  germs  and  early  growth  of  the  physical  sciences.

Of  course,  the  atmosphere  created  by  this  persecution
of  magicians  was  deadly  to  any  open  beginnings  of  experi-
mental science.  The  conscience  of  the  time,  acting  in  obe-
dience to  the  highest  authorities  of  the  Church,  and,  as  was
supposed,  in  defence  of  religion,  now  brought  out  a  missile
which  it  hurled  against  scientific  investigators  with  deadly
effect.  The  mediaeval  battlefields  of  thought  were  strewn
with  various  forms  of  it.  This  missile  was  the  charge  of  un-
lawful compact  with  Satan,  and  it  was  most  effective.  We
26


386


FROM    MAGIC   TO    CHEMISTRY   AND   PHYSICS.


find  it  used  against  every  great  investigator  of  nature  in
those  times  and  for  ages  after.  The  list  of  great  men  in
those  centuries  charged  with  magic,  as  given  by  Naude,  is
astounding ;  it  includes  every  man  of  real  mark,  and  in  the
midst  of  them  stands  one  of  the  most  thoughtful  popes,  Syl-
vester II  (Gerbert),  and  the  foremost  of  mediaeval  thinkers
on  natural  science,  Albert  the  Great.  It  came  to  be  the  ac-
cepted idea  that,  as  soon  as  a  man  conceived  a  wish  to  study
the  works  of  God,  his  first  step  must  be  a  league  with  the
devil..

It  was  entirely  natural,  then,  that  in  1163  Pope  Alexander
III,  in  connection  with  the  Council  of  Tours,  forbade  the
study  of  physics  to  all  ecclesiastics,  which,  of  course,  in  that
age  meant  prohibition  of  all  such  scientific  studies  to  the
only  persons  likely  to  make  them.  What  the  Pope  then  ex-
pressly forbade  was,  in  the  words  of  the  papal  bull,  "  the
study  of  physics  or  the  laws  of  the  world,"  and  it  was  added
that  any  person  violating  this  rule  ''  shall  be  avoided  by  all
and  excommunicated."*

The  first  great  thinker  who,  in  spite  of  some  stumbling
into  theologic  pitfalls,  persevered  in  a  truly  scientific  path,
was  Roger  Bacon.  His  life  and  works  seem  until  recently
to  have  been  generally  misunderstood :  he  was  formerly
ranked  as  a  superstitious  alchemist  who  happened  upon
some  inventions,  but  more  recent  investigation  has  shown
him.  to  be  one  of  the  great  masters  in  the  evolution  of  hu-
man thought.  The  advance  of  sound  historical  judgment
seems  likely  to  bring  the  fame  of  the  two  who  bear  the  name
of  Bacon  nearly  to  equality.  Bacon  of  the  chancellorship
and  of  the  Novum  Orgamnn  may  not  wane,  but  Bacon  of
the  prison  cell  and  the  Opus  JMajus  steadily  approaches  him
in  brightness.

More  than  three  centuries  before  Francis  Bacon  advo-
cated the  experimental  method,  Roger  Bacon  practised  it,
and  the  results  as  now  revealed  are  wonderful.    He  wrought

*  For  the  charge  of  magic  against  scholars  and  others,  see  Naude,  Apo  logic  pour
les  Grands  Honnnes  sotpi^onn^s  de  Magie,  passim  ;  also  Maury,"  Hist,  de  la  Magie,
troisi^me  edition,  pp.  214,  215  ;  also  Cuvier,  Hist,  des  Sciences  Nattcrelles,  vol.  i,
p.  396.  For  the  prohibition  by  the  Council  of  Tours  and  Alexander  III,  see  the
Acta  Conciliorum  (ed.  Harduin),  torn,  vi,  pars  ii,  p.  159S,  Canon  viii.


FROM    MAGIC    TO   CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.  387

with  power  in  many  sciences,  and  his  knowledge  was  sound
and  exact.  By  him,  more  than  by  any  other  man  of  the
Middle  Ages,  was  the  world  brought  into  the  more  fruitful
paths  of  scientific  thought — the  paths  which  have  led  to  the
most  precious  inventions ;  and  among  these  are  clocks,
lenses,  and  burning  specula,  which  were  given  by  him  to  the
world,  directly  or  indirectly.  In  his  writings  are  found
formulcE  for  extracting  phosphorus,  manganese,  and  bis-
muth. It  is  even  claimed,  with  much  appearance  of  justice,
that  he  investigated  the  power  of  steam,  and  he  seems  to
have  very  nearly  reached  some  of  the  principal  doctrines  of
modern  chemistry.  But  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  his
method  q{  investigation  was  even  greater  than  its  results.  In
an  age  when  theological  subtilizing  was  alone  thought  to
give  the  title  of  scholar,  he  insisted  on  real  reasoning  and
the  aid  of  natural  science  by  mathematics ;  in  an  age  when
experimenting  was  sure  to  cost  a  man  his  reputation,  and
was  likely  to  cost  him  his  life,  he  insisted  on  experimenting,
and  braved  all  its  risks.  Few  greater  men  have  lived.  As
we  follow  Bacon's  process  of  reasoning  regarding  the  refrac-
tion of  light,  we  see  that  he  was  divinely  inspired.

On  this  man  came  the  brunt  of  the  battle.    The  most  con-
scientious men  of  his  time  thought  it  their  duty  to  fight  him,
and  they  fought  him  steadily  and  bitterly.     His  sin  was  not
disbelief  in  Christianity,  not  want  of  fidelity  to  the  Church,
not  even  dissent  from  the   main  lines  of  orthodoxy  ;  on  the
contrary,  he  showed  in  all  his  writings  a  desire  to  strength-
en   Christianity,   to   build  up  the   Church,  and   to  develop
orthodoxy.     He  was  attacked    and    condemned    mainly  be-
cause he  did  not  believe  that  philosophy  had  become  com-      ,
plete,  and  that  nothing  more  was  to  be  learned  ;  he  was  con-,  /
demned,  as  his  opponents  expressly  declared,  *' on  account  \
of  certain  suspicious  novelties  " — ''propter  qiiasdam  novitates  ■
suspect  as!'

Upon  his  return  to  Oxford,  about  1250,  the  forces  of  un-
reason beset  him  on  all  sides.  Greatest  of  all  his  enemies  was
Bonaventura.  This  enemy  was  the  theologic  idol  of  the  pe-
riod :  the  learned  world  knew  him  as  the  '*  seraphic  Doctor  "  ;
Dante  gave  him  an  honoured  place  in  the  great  poem  of  the
Middle  Ages;  the  Church  finally  enrolled  him  among  the


388  FROM    MAGIC   TO   CHEMISTRY   AND   PHYSICS.

saints.  By  force  of  great  ability  in  theology  he  had  become,
in  the  middle  of  the  thirteenth  century,  general  of  the  Fran-
ciscan order :  thus,  as  Bacon's  master,  his  hands  were  laid
heavily  on  the  new  teaching,  so  that  in  1257  the  troublesome
monk  was  forbidden  to  lecture ;  all  men  were  solemnly
warned  not  to  listen  to  his  teaching,  and  he  was  ordered  to
Paris,  to  be  kept  under  surveillance  by  the  monastic  authori-
ties. Herein  was  exhibited  another  of  the  myriad  examples
showing  the  care  exercised  over  scientific  teaching  by  the
Church.  The  reasons  for  thus  dealing  with  Bacon  were
evident :  First,  he  had  dared  attempt  scientific  explanations
of  natural  phenomena,  which  under  the  mystic  theology  of
the  Middle  Ages  had  been  referred  simply  to  supernatural
causes.  Typical  was  his  explanation  of  the  causes  and  char-
acter of  the  rainbow.  It  was  clear,  cogent,  a  great  step  in
the  right  direction  as  regards  physical  science :  but  there,  in
the  book  of  Genesis,  stood  the  legend  regarding  the  origin
of  the  rainbow,  supposed  to  have  been  dictated  immediately
by  the  Holy  Spirit;  and,  according  to  that,  the  '*  bow  in  the
cloud  "  was  not  the  result  of  natural  laws,  but  a  "  sign  "  ar-
bitrarily placed  in  the  heavens  for  the  simple  purpose  of
assuring  mankind  that  there  was  not  to  be  another  universal
deluge.

But  this  was  not  the  worst :  another  theological  idea  was
arrayed  against  him — the  idea  of  Satanic  intervention  in
science ;  hence  he  was  attacked  with  that  goodly  missile
which  with  the  epithets  **  infidel"  and  **  atheist"  has  decided
the  fate  of  so  many  battles — the  charge  of  magic  and  com-
pact with  Satan.

He  defended  himself  with  a  most  unfortunate  weapon —
a  weapon  which  exploded  in  his  hands  and  injured  him
more  than  the  enemy  ;  for  he  argued  against  the  idea  of
compacts  with  Satan,  and  showed  that  much  which  is  as-
cribed to  demons  results  from  natural  means.  This  added
fuel  to  the  flame.  To  limit  the  power  of  Satan  was  deemed
hardly  less  impious  than  to  limit  the  power  of  God.

The  most  powerful  protectors  availed  him  little.  His
friend  Guy  of  Foulques,  having  in  1265  been  made  Pope  under
the  name  of  Clement  IV,  shielded  him  for  a  time;  but  the
fury  of  the  enemy  was  too  strong,  and  when  he  made  ready


FROM    MAGIC    TO   CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.


;89


to  perform  a  few  experiments  before  a  small  audience,  we
are  told  that  all  Oxford  was  in  an  uproar.  It  was  believed
that  Satan  was  about  to  be  let  loose.  Everywhere  priests,
monks,  fellows,  and  students  rushed  about,  their  garments
streaming  in  the  wind,  and  everywhere  rose  the  cry,  "  Down
with  the  magician  !  "  and  this  cry,  '*  Down  with  the  magi-
cian !  "  resounded  from  cell  to  cell  and  from  hall  to  hall.

Another  weapon  was  also  used  upon  the  battlefields  of
science  in  that  time  with  much  effect.  The  Arabs  had  made
many  noble  discoveries  in  science,  and  Averroes  had,,  in  the
opinion  of  many,  divided  the  honours  with  St.  Thomas
Aquinas ;  these  facts  gave  the  new  missile—it  was  the
epithet  "  Mohammedan  "  ;  this,  too,  was  flung  with  effect  at
Bacon.

The  attack  now  began  to  take  its  final  shape.  The  two
great  religious  orders,  Franciscan  and  Dominican,  then  in  all
the  vigour  of  their  youth,  vied  with  each  other  in  fighting
the  new  thought  in  chemistry  and  physics.  St.  Dominic
solemnly  condemned  research  by  experiment  and  obser-
vation ;  the  general  of  the  Franciscan  order  took  similar
ground.  In  1243  the  Dominicans  interdicted  every  member
of  their  order  from  the  study  of  medicine  and  natural  philos-
ophy, and  in  1287  this  interdiction  was  extended  to  the  study
of  chemistry.

In  1278  the  authorities  of  the  Franciscan  order  assembled
at  Paris,  solemnly  condemned  Bacon's  teaching,  and  the  gen-
eral of  the  Franciscans,  Jerome  of  Ascoli,  afterward  Pope,
threw  him  into  prison,  where  he  remained  for  fourteen
years.  Though  Pope  Clement  IV  had  protected  him,  Popes
Nicholas  III  and  IV,  by  virtue  of  their  infallibility,  decided
that  he  was  too  dangerous  to  be  at  large,  and  he  was  only
released  at  the  age  of  eighty — but  a  year  or  two  before
death  placed  him  beyond  the  reach  of  his  enemies.  How
deeply  the  struggle  had  racked  his  mind  may  be  gathered
from  that  last  affecting  declaration  of  his,  "  Would  that  I
had  not  given  myself  so  much  trouble  for  the  love  of
science !  "

The  attempt  has  been  made  by  sundry  champions  of  the
Church  to  show  that  some  of  Bacon's  utterances  against
ecclesiastical  and   other  corruptions   in   his  time   were  the


390  FROM    MAGIC    TO   CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.

main  cause  of  the  severity  which  the  Church  authorities  ex-
ercised against  him.  This  helps  the  Church  but  little,  even
if  it  be  well  based  ;  but  it  is  not  well  based.  That  some  of
his  utterances  of  this  sort  made  him  enemies  is  doubtless
true,  but  the  charges  on  which  St.  Bonaventura  silenced
him,  and  Jerome  of  Ascoli  imprisoned  him,  and  successive
popes  kept  him  in  prison  for  fourteen  years,  were  "  danger-
ous novelties  "  and  suspected  sorcery.

Sad  is  it  to  think  of  what  this  great  man  might  have  given
to  the  world  had  ecclesiasticism  allowed  the  gift.  He  held
the  key  of  treasures  which  would  have  freed  mankind  from
ages  of  error  and  miser}^  With  his  discoveries  as  a  basis,
with  his  method  as  a  guide,  what  might  not  the  world  have
gained  !  Nor  was  the  wrong  done  to  that  age  alone  ;  it  was
done  to  this  age  also.  The  nineteenth  century  was  robbed
at  the  same  time  with  the  thirteenth.  But  for  that  interfer.
ence  w^ith  science  the  nineteenth  century  w^ould  be  enjoying
discoveries  which  will  not  be  reached  before  the  twentieth
century,  and  even  later.  Thousands  of  precious  lives  shall
be  lost,  tens  of  thousands  shall  suffer  discomfort,  priva-
tion, sickness,  poverty,  ignorance,  for  lack  of  discoveries
and  methods  which,  but  for  this  mistaken  dealing  with
Roger  Bacon  and  his  compeers,  w^ould  now  be  blessing  the
earth.

In  two  recent  years  sixty  thousand  children  died  in  Eng-
land and  in  Wales  of  scarlet  fever ;  probably  quite  as  many
died  in  the  United  States.  Had  not  Bacon  been  hindered,
we  should  have  had  in  our  hands,  by  this  time,  the  means  to
save  two  thirds  of  these  victims  ;  and  the  same  is  true  of
typhoid,  typhus,  cholera,  and  that  great  class  of  diseases  of
whose  physical  causes  science  is  just  beginning  to  get  an
inkling.  Put  together  all  the  efforts  of  all  the  atheists  who
have  ever  lived,  and  they  have  not  done  so  much  harm  to
Christianity  and  the  world  as  has  been  done  by  the  narrow-
minded,  conscientious  men  who  persecuted  Roger  Bacon,
and  closed  the  path  which  he  gave  his  life  to  open.

But  despite  the  persecution  of  Bacon  and  the  defection
of  those  who  ought  to  have  followed  him,  champions  of  the
experimental  method  rose  from  time  to  time  during  the  suc-
ceeding centuries.     We  know  little  of  them  personally  ;  our


FROM    MAGIC    TO   CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.  391

main  knowledge  of  their  efforts  is  derived  from  the  endeav-
ours of  their  persecutors.

Under  such  guidance  the  secular  rulers  were  naturally
vi-'-orous.  In  France  Charles  V  forbade,  in  1380,  the  pos-
session of  furnaces  and  apparatus  necessar}^  for  chemical
processes ;  under  this  law  the  chemist  John  Barrillon  was
thrown  into  prison,  and  it  was  only  by  the  greatest  effort
that  his  life  was  saved.  In  England  Henry  IV,  in  1404,  is-
sued a  similar  decree.  In  Italy  the  Republic  of  Venice,  in
141 8,  foUow^ed  these  examples.  The  judicial  torture  and
murder  of  Antonio  de  Dominis  were  not  simply  for  heresy  ;
his  investigations  in  the  phenomena  of  light  w^ere  an  addi-
tional crime.  In  Spain  everything  like  scientific  research
was  crushed  out  among  Christians.  Some  earnest  efforts
were  afterward  made  by  Jews  and  Moors,  but  these  were
finally  ended  by  persecution  ;  and  to  this  hour  the  Spanish
race,  in  some  respects  the  most  gifted  in  Europe,  which  be-
gan its  career  with  everything  in  its  favour  and  with  every
form  of  noble  achievement,  remains  in  intellectual  develop-
ment behind  every  other  in  Christendom.

To  question  the  theological  view  of  physical  science  was,
even  long  after  the  close  of  the  Middle  Ages,  exceedingly
perilous.  We  have  seen  how  one  of  Roger  Bacon's  unpar-
donable offences  was  his  argument  against  the  ef^cacy  of
magic,  and  how^  centuries  afterward,  Cornelius  Agrippa,
Weyer,  Flade,  Loos,  Bekker,  and  a  multitude  of  other  inves-
tigators and  thinkers,  suffered  confiscation  of  property,  loss
of  position,  and  even  torture  and  death,  for  similar  views.^

*  For  an  account  of  Bacon's  treatise,  De  Nullitate  Magice,  see  Hoefer.  For
the  uproar  caused  by  Bacon's  teaching  at  Oxford,  see  Kopp,  Geschichte  der  Cheinie,
Braunschweig,  1869,  vol.  i,  p.  63  ;  and  for  a  somewhat  reactionary  discussion  of
Bacon's  relation  to  the  progress  of  chemistry,  see  a  recent  work  by  the  same  author,
Ansichteii  iiber  die  Atifgabe  der  Cheniic,  Braunschweig,  1874,  pp.  85  et  seq.  ;  also,
for  an  excellent  summary,  see  Hoefer,  I/ist  de  la  Chimie,  vol.  i,  pp.  368  et  seq.  For
probably  the  most  thorough  study  of  Bacon's  general  works  in  science,  and  for  his
views  of  the  universe,  see  Prof.  Werner,  Die  Kosmologie  tind  allgemeine  Natiirlehre
des  Roger  Baco,  Wien,  1S79.  For  summaries  of  his  work  in  other  fields,  see  Whew-
ell,  vol.  i,  pp.  367,  36S  ;  Draper,  p.  438  ;  Saisset,  Descartes  et  ses  Prdcurscurs,
deuxi^me  edition,  pp.  397  et  seq.  ;  Nourrisson,  Progres  de  la  Pens^e  hwnaine,  pp.
271,  272;  Sprengel,  Histoire  de  la  MMeciiie,  Paris.  1865,  vol.  ii,  p.  397;  Cuvier,
Histoire  des  Sciences  Naturelles,  vol.  i,  p.  417.  As  to  Bacon's  orthodoxy,  see  Sais-
set,  pp.  53,  55.     For  special  examination  of  causes  of  Bacon's  condemnation,  see


392


FROM    MAGIC    TO    CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.


The  theological  atmosphere,  which  in  consequence  set-
tled down  about  the  great  universities  and  colleges,  seemed
likely  to  stifle  all  scientific  effort  in  every  part  of  Europe,
and  it  is  one  of  the  great  wonders  in  human  history  that  in
spite  of  this  deadly  atmosphere  a  considerable  body  of  think-
ing men,  under  such  protection  as  they  could  secure,  still
persisted  in  devoting  themselves  to  the  physical  sciences.

In  Italy,  in  the  latter  half  of  the  sixteenth  century,  came
a  striking  example  of  the  difficulties  which  science  still  en-
countered even  after  the  Renaissance  had  undermined  the
old  beliefs.  At  that  time  John  Baptist  Porta  was  conduct-
ing his  investigations,  and,  despite  a  considerable  mixture
of  pseudo-science,  they  were  fruitful.  His  was  not  ''  black
magic,"  claiming  the  aid  of  Satan,  but  *'  white  magic,"  bring-
ing into  service  the  laws  of  nature — the  precursor  of  applied

Waddington,  cited  by  Saisset,  p.  14.  For  a  brief  but  admirable  statement  of  Roger
Bacon's  relation  to  the  world  in  his  time,  and  of  what  he  might  have  done  had  he
not  been  thwarted  by  theology,  see  Dollinger,  Studies  in  European  History,  Eng-
lish translation,  London,  1890,  pp.  178,  179.  For  a  good  example  of  the  danger  of
denying  the  full  power  of  Satan,  even  in  much  more  recent  times  and  in  a  Protes-
tant country,  see  account  of  treatment  of  Bekker's  Monde  Enchants  by  the  theolo-
gians of  Holland,  in  Nisard,  Histoire  des  Livres  Foptilaires,  vol.  i,  pp.  172,  173.
Kopp,  in  his  Ansichten,  pushes  criticism  even  to  some  scepticism  as  to  Roger
Bacon  being  the  discoverer  of  many  of  the  things  generally  attributed  to  him  ;  but,
after  all  deductions  are  carefully  made,  enough  remains  to  make  Bacon  the  greatest
benefactor  to  humanity  during  the  Middle  Ages.  For  Roger  Bacon's  deep  devotion
to  religion  and  the  Church,  see  citation  and  remarks  in  Schneider,  Roger  Bacon,
Augsburg,  1873,  p.  112  ;  also,  citation  from  the  Opus  Majus  in  Eicken,  chap.  vi.
On  Bacon  as  a  "  Mohammedan,"  see  Saisset,  p.  17.  For  the  interdiction  of  studies
in  physical  science  by  the  Dominicans  and  Franciscans,  see  Henri  Martin,  Histoire
de  France,  vol.  iv,  p.  283.  For  the  suppression  of  chemical  teaching  by  the  Parlia-
ment of  Paris,  see  ibid.,  vol.  xii,  pp.  14,  15.  For  proofs  that  the  world  is  steadily
working  toward  great  discoveries  as  to  the  cause  and  prevention  of  zymotic  dis-
eases and  of  their  propagation,  see  Beale's  Disease  Germs,  Baldwin  Latham's
Sanitary  Engineering,  Michel  Levy's  Traits  d Hygiene  Publiqtie  et  PrivSe.  For
a  summary  of  the  bull  Spondent  pariter,  and  for  an  example  of  injury  done  by  it,
see  Schneider,  Geschichte  der  Alchemie,  p.  160;  and  for  a  studiously  moderate
statement,  Milman,  Latin  Christianity,  book  xii,  chap.  vi.  For  character  and  gen-
eral efforts  of  John  XXII,  see  Lea,  Inquisition,  vol.  iii,  p.  436,  also  pp.  452  et  seq.
For  the  character  of  the  two  papal  briefs,  see  Rydberg,  p.  177.  For  the  bull  Sum-
mis  Desiderantes,  see  previous  chapters  of  this  work.  For  Antonio  de  Dominis,  see
Montucla,  Hist,  des  MatUmatiques,  vol.  i,  p.  705  ;  Humboldt,  Cosmos ;  Libri,  vol.
iv,  pp.  145  et  seq.  For  Weyer,  Flade,  Bekker,  Loos,  and  others,  see  the  chapters
of  this  work  on  Meteorology,  Demoniacal  Possession  and  Insanity,  and  Diabolism
and  Hysteria.


FROM    MAGIC    TO   CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.  393

science.  His  book  on  meteorology  was  the  first  in  which
sound  ideas  were  broached  on  this  subject ;  his  researches
in  optics  gave  the  world  the  camera  obscura,  and  possibly
the  telescope ;  in  chemistry  he  seems  to  have  been  the  first
to  show  how  to  reduce  the  metallic  oxides,  and  thus  to  have
laid  the  foundation  of  several  important  industries.  He  did
much  to  change  natural  philosophy  from  a  black  art  to  a
vio^orous  open  science.  He  encountered  the  old  ecclesias-
tical policy.  The  society  founded  by  him  for  physical  re-
search, ''I  Secreti,"  was  broken  up,  and  he  was  summoned
to  Rome  by  Pope  Paul  III  and  forbidden  to  continue  his


investigations.


So,  too,  in  France.  In  1624,  some  young  chemists  at
Paris  having  taught  the  experimental  method  and  cut  loose
from  Aristotle,  the  faculty  of  theology  beset  the  Parliament
of  Paris,  and  the  Parliament  prohibited  these  new  chemical
researches  under  the  severest  penalties.

The  same  war  continued  in  Italy.  Even  after  the  belief
in  magic  had  been  seriously  weakened,  the  old  theological
fear  and  dislike  of  physical  science  continued.  In  1657
occurred  the  first  sitting  of  the  Accademia  del  Cimento  at
Florence,  under  the  presidency  of  Prince  Leopold  de'  Med-
ici. This  academy  promised  great  things  for  science  ;  it
was  open  to  all  talent;  its  only  fundamental  law  was  "the
repudiation  of  any  favourite  system  or  sect  of  philosophy,
and  the  obligation  to  investigate  Nature  by  the  pure  light  of
experiment";  it  entered  into  scientific  investigations  with
energy.  Borelli  in  mathematics,  Redi  in  natural  history,
and  many  others,  enlarged  the  boundaries  of  knowledge.
Heat,  light,  magnetism,  electricity,  projectiles,  digestion,
and  the  incompressibility  of  water  were  studied  by  the  right
method  and  with  results  that  enriched  the  world.

The  academy  was  a  fortress  of  science,  and  siege  was
soon  laid  to  it.  The  votaries  of  scholastic  learning  de-
nounced it  as  irreligious,  quarrels  were  fomented,  Leopold
was  bribed  with  a  cardinal's  hat  and  drawn  away  to  Rome,
and,  after  ten  years  of  beleaguering,  the  fortress  fell :  Borelli
was  left  a  beggar ;  Oliva  killed  himself  in  despair.

So,  too,  the  noted  Academy  of  the  Lincei  at  times  in-
curred the  ill  will  of  the  papacy  by  the  very  fact  that  it


394


V
FROM    MAGIC    TO    CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.


included  thoughtful  investigators.  It  was  "  patronized  "  by
Pope  Urban  VIII  in  such  manner  as  to  paralyze  it,  and  it
was  afterward  vexed  by  Pope  Gregor}^  XVI.  Even  in  our
own  time  sessions  of  scientific  associations  were  discouraged
and  thwarted  by  as  kindly  a  pontiff  as  Pius  IX. "^

A  hostility  similar  in  kind,  though  less  in  degree,  was
shown  in  Protestant  countries.

Even  after  Thomasius  in  Germany  and  Voltaire  in  France
and  Beccaria  in  Italy  had  given  final  blows  to  the  belief  in
magic  and  witchcraft  throughout  Christendom,  the  tradi-
tional orthodox  distrust  of  the  physical  sciences  continued
for  a  long  time.

In  England  a  marked  dislike  was  shown  among  various
leadino^  ecclesiastics  and  theoloo:ians  towards  the  Roval  So-
ciety,  and  later  toward  the  Association  for  the  Advance-
ment of  Science ;  and  this  dislike,  as  will  hereafter  be  seen,
sometimes  took  shape  in  serious  opposition.

As  a  rule,  both  in  Protestant  and  Catholic  countries  in-
struction in  chemistry  and  physics  was  for  a  long  time  dis-
couraged by  Church  authorities;  and,  when  its  suppression
was  no  longer  possible,  great  pains  were  taken  to  subordi-
nate it  to  instruction  supposed  to  be  more  fully  in  accord-
ance with  the  older  methods  of  theological  reasoning.

*  For  Porta,  see  the  English  translation  of  his  main  summary,  N'atiiral  Magick,
London,  1658.  The  first  chapters  are  especially  interesting,  as  showing  what  the
word  "  magic  "  had  come  to  mean  in  the  mind  of  a  man  in  whom  mediaeval  and
modern  ideas  were  curiously  mixed  ;  see  also  Hoefer,  Histoire  de  la  Chimie,  vol.  ii,
pp.  102-106  ;  also  Kopp  ;  also  Sprengel,  Histoire  de  la  MdJecine,  vol.  iii,  p.  239  ;  also
Musset-Pathay.  For  the  Accademia  del  Cimento,  see  Napier,  Florentine  Histofy,
vol.  V,  p.  485  ;  Tiraboschi,  Storia  delta  Litteratura  ;  Henri  Martin,  Histoire  de
France ;  Jevons,  Principles  of  Science,  vol.  ii,  pp.  36-40.  For  value  attached  to
Borelli's  investigations  by  Newton  and  Huygens,  see  Brewster's  Life  of  Sir  Isaac
Newton,  London,  1875,  pp.  128,  129.  Libri,  in  his  Essai  si(r  Galilee,  p.  37,  says
that  Oliva  was  summoned  to  Rome  and  so  tortured  by  the  Inquisition  that,  to
escape  further  cruelty,  he  ended  his  life  by  throwing  himself  from  a  window.  For
interference  by  Pope  Gregory  XVI  with  the  Academy  of  the  Lincei,  and  with
public  instruction  generally,  see  Carutti,  Stona  delta  Accademia  del  Lincei,  p.  126.
Pius  IX,  with  all  his  geniality,  seems  to  have  allowed  his  hostility  to  voluntary
associations  to  carry  him  very  far  at  times.  For  his  answer  to  an  application  made
through  Lord  Odo  Russell  regarding  a  society  for  the  prevention  of  cruelty  to
animals  and  his  answer  that  "  such  an  association  could  not  be  sanctioned  by  the
Holy  See,  being  founded  on  a  theological  error,  to  wit,  that  Christians  owed  any
duties  to  animals,"  see  Frances  Power  Cobbe,  Hopes  of  the  Human  Race,  p.  207.


FROM    MAGIC    TO   CHEMISTRY    AND    PHYSICS.  393

I  have  now  presented  in  outline  the  more  direct  and  open
struggle  of  the  physical  sciences  with  theology,  mainly  as  an
exterior  foe.  We  will  next  consider  their  warfare  with  the
same  foe  in  its  more  subtle  form,  mainly  as  a  vitiating  and
sterilizing  principle  in  science  itself.

We  have  seen  thus  far,  first,  how  such  men  as  Eusebius,
Lactantius,  and  their  compeers,  opposed  scientific  investiga-
tion as  futile ;  next,  how  such  men  as  Albert  the  Great,  St.
Thomas  Aquinas,  and  the  multitude  who  followed  them,
turned  the  main  current  of  mediaeval  thought  from  science
to  theology  ;  and,  finally,  how  a  long  line  of  Church  author-
ities from  Popes  John  XXII  and  Innocent  VIII,  and  the
heads  of  the  great  religious  orders,  down  to  various  theolo-
gians and  ecclesiastics,  Catholic  and  Protestant,  of  a  very
recent  period,  endeavoured  first  to  crush  and  afterward  to
discourage  scientific  research  as  dangerous.

Yet,  injurious  as  all  this  was  to  the  evolution  of  science,
there  was  developed  something  in  many  respects  more  de-
structive ;  and  this  was  the  influence  of  mystic  theology,
penetrating,  permeating,  vitiating,  sterilizing  nearly  every
branch  of  science  for  hundreds  of  years.  Among  the  forms
taken  by  this  development  in  the  earher  Middle  Ages  we  find
a-  mixture  of  physical  science  with  a  pseudo-science  obtained
from  texts  of  Scripture.  In  compounding  this  mixture,  Jews
and  Christians  vied  with  each  other.  In  this  process  the
sacred  books  were  used  as  a  fetich  ;  every  word,  every  let-
ter, being  considered  to  have  a  divine  and  hidden  meaning.
By  combining  various  scriptural  letters  in  various  abstruse
ways,  new  words  of  prodigious  significance  in  magic  were
obtained,  and  among  them  the  great  word  embracing  the
seventy-two  mystical  names  of  God — the  mighty  word
''  Schcmhamphorasy  Why  should  men  seek  knowledge  by
observation  and  experiment  in  the  book  of  Nature,  when
the  book  of  Revelation,  interpreted  by  the  Kabbalah,  opened
such  treasures  to  the  ingenious  believer?

So,  too,  we  have  ancient  mystical  theories  of  number
which  the  theological  spirit  had  made  Christian,  usurping
an  enormous  place  in  mediseval  science.  The  sacred  power
of  the  number  three  was  seen  in  the  Trinity  ;  in  the  three
main  divisions  of  the  universe— the  empyrean,  the  heavens,


396  FROM    MAGIC   TO   CHEMISTRY   AND   PHYSICS.

and  the  earth  ;  in  the  three  angelic  hierarchies;  in  the  three
choirs  of  seraphim,  cherubim,  and  thrones;  in  the  three  of
dominions,  virtues,  and  powers  ;  in  the  three  of  principalities,
archangels,  and  angels ;  in  the  three  orders  in  the  Church-
bishops,  priests,  and  deacons ;  in  the  three  classes — the  bap-
tized, the  communicants,  and  the  monks;  in  the  three  de-
grees of  attainment — light,  purity,  and  knowledge;  in  the
three  theological  virtues— faith,  hope,  and  charity— and  in
much  else.  All  this  was  brought  into  a  theologico-scientific
relation,  then  and  afterward,  with  the  three  dimensions  of
space ;  with  the  three  divisions  of  time — past,  present,  and
future;  with  the  three  realms  of  the  visible  world— sky,
earth,  and  sea;  with  the  three  constituents  of  man— body,
soul,  and  spirit;  with  the  threefold  enemies  of  man— the
world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil ;  with  the  three  kingdoms  in
nature— mineral,  vegetable,  and  animal ;  with  *'  the  three
colours  "—red,  yellow,  and  blue;  with  ''the  three  eyes  of
the  honey-bee  "—and  with  a  multitude  of  other  analogues
equally  precious.  The  sacred  power  of  the  number  seven
was  seen  in  the  seven  golden  candlesticks  and  the  seven
churches  in  the  Apocalypse ;  in  the  seven  cardinal  virtues
and  the  seven  deadly  sins ;  in  the  seven  liberal  arts  and  the
seven  devilish  arts,  and,  above  all,  in  the  seven  sacraments.
And  as  this  proved  in  astrology  that  there  could  be  only
seven  planets,  so  it  proved  in  alchemy  that  there  must  be
exactly  seven  metals.  The  twelve  apostles  were  connected
with  the  twelve  signs  in  the  zodiac,  and  with  much  in  phys-
ical science.  The  seventy-two  disciples,  the  seventy-two  in-
terpreters of  the  Old  Testament,  the  seventy-two  mystical
names  of  God,  were  connected  with  the  alleged  fact  in
anatomy  that  there  were  seventy-two  joints  in  the  human
frame.

Then,  also,  there  w^ere  revived  such  theologic  and  meta-
physical substitutes  for  scientific  thought  as  the  declaration
that  the  perfect  line  is  a  circle,  and  hence  that  the  planets
must  move  in  absolute  circles — a  statement  which  led  astron-
omy astray  even  when  the  great  truths  of  the  Copernican
theory  were  well  in  sight ;  also,  the  declaration  that  nature
abhors  a  vacuum — a  statement  which  led  physics  astray
until  Torricelli  made  his  experiments ;  also,  the  declaration


FROM    MAGIC    TO   CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.  3Q7

that  we  see  the  lightning  before  we  hear  the  thunder  be-
cause **  sight  is  nobler  than  hearing."

In  chemistry  we  have  the  same  theologic  tendency  to
magic,  and,  as  a  result,  a  muddle  of  science  and  theology,
which  from  one  point  of  view  seems  blasphemous  and  from
another  idiotic,  but  which  none  the  less  sterilized  physical
investigation  for  ages.  That  debased  Platonism  which  had
been  such  an  important  factor  in  the  evolution  of  Christian
theology  from  the  earliest  days  of  the  Church  continued  its
work.  As  everything  in  inorganic  nature  was  supposed  to
have  spiritual  significance,  the  doctrines  of  the  Trinity  and
Incarnation  were  turned  into  an  argument  in  behalf  of  the
philosopher's  stone;  arguments  for  the  scheme  of  redemp-
tion and  for  transubstantiation  suggested  others  of  similar
construction  to  prove  the  transmutation  of  metals ;  the  doc-
trine of  the  resurrection  ot  the  human  body  was  by  similar
mystic  jugglery  connected  with  the  processes  of  distillation
and  sublimation.  Even  after  the  Middle  Ages  were  past,
strong  men  seemed  unable  to  break  away  from  such  reason-
ing as  this — among  them  such  leaders  as  Basil  Valentine  in
the  fifteenth  century,  Agricola  in  the  sixteenth,  and  Van
Helmont  in  the  seventeenth.

The  greatest  theologians  contributed  to  the  welter  of  un-
reason from  which  this  pseudo-science  was  developed.  One
question  largely  discussed  was,  whether  at  the  Redemption
it  was  necessary  for  God  to  take  the  human  form.  Thomas
Aquinas  answered  that  it  was  necessary,  but  William  Oc-
cam and  Duns  Scotus  answered  that  it  was  not ;  that  God
might  have  taken  the  form  of  a  stone,  or  of  a  log,  or  of  a
beast.  The  possibilities  opened  to  wild  substitutes  for  sci-
ence by  this  sort  of  reasoning  were  infinite.  Men  have  often
asked  how  it  was  that  the  Arabians  accomplished  so  much
in  scientific  discovery  as  compared  with  Christian  investiga-
tors ;  but  the  answer  is  easy  :  the  Arabians  were  compara-
tively free  from  these  theologic  allurements  w^hich  in  Chris-
tian Europe  flickered  in  the  air  on  all  sides,  luring  men  into
paths  which  led  no-whither.

Strong  investigators,  like  Arnold  of  Villanova,  Raymond
LuUy,  Basil  Valentine,  Paracelsus,  and  their  compeers,  were
thus  drawn  far  out  of  the  only  paths  which  led  to  fruitful


398


FROM    MAGIC    TO   CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.


truths.  In  a  work  generally  ascribed  to  the  first  of  these,
the  student  is  told  that  in  mixing  his  chemicals  he  must  re-
peat the  psalm  Exsitrge  Doinine,  and  that  on  certain  chemical
vessels  must  be  placed  the  last  words  of  Jesus  on  the  cross.
Vincent  of  Beauvais  insisted  that,  as  the  Bible  declares  that
Noah,  when  five  hundred  years  old,  had  children  born  to
him,  he  must  have  possessed  alchemical  means  of  preserving
life;  and  much  later  Dickinson  insisted  that  the  patriarchs
generally  must  have  owed  their  long  lives  to  such  means.
It  was  loudly  declared  that  the  reality  of  the  philosopher's
stone  was  proved  by  the  words  of  St.  John  in  the  Revela-
tion, "To  him  that  overcometh  I  will  give  a  white  stone."
The  reasonableness  of  seeking  to  develop  gold  out  of  the
baser  metals  was  for  many  generations  based  upon  the  doc-
trine of  the  resurrection  of  the  physical  body,  which,  though
explicitly  denied  by  St.  Paul,  had  become  a  part  of  the
creed  of  the  Church.  Martin  Luther  was  especially  drawn
to  believe  in  the  alchemistic  doctrine  of  transmutation  by
this  analogy.  The  Bible  was  everywhere  used,  both  among
Protestants  and  Catholics,  in  support  of  these  mystic  adul-
terations of  science,  and  one  writer,  as  late  as  1751,  based
his  alchemistic  arguments  on  more  than  a  hundred  passages
of  Scripture.  As  an  example  of  this  sort  of  reasoning,  we
have  a  proof  that  the  elect  will  preserve  the  philosopher's
stone  until  the  last  judgment,  drawn  from  a  passage  in  St.
Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  "  We  have  this  treasure  in
earthen  vessels."

The  greatest  thinkers  devoted  themselves  to  adding  new
ingredients  to  this  strange  mixture  of  scientific  and  theologic
thought.  The  Catholic  philosophy  of  Thomas  Aquinas,  the
Protestant  mysticism  of  Jacob  Boehme,  and  the  alchemistic
reveries  of  Basil  Valentine  were  all  cast  into  this  seethinor
mass.

And  when  alchemy  in  its  old  form  had  been  discredited,
we  find  scriptural  arguments  no  less  perverse,  and  even
comical,  used  on  the  other  side.  As  an  example  of  this,  just
before  the  great  discoveries  by  Stahl,  we  find  the  valuable
scientific  efforts  of  Becher  opposed  with  the  following  syl-
logism :  "King  Solomon,  according  to  the  Scriptures,  pos-
sessed the  united  wisdom  of  heaven  and  earth  ;  but  King


FROM    MAGIC    TO   CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.  3^9

Solomon  knew  nothing  about  alchemy  [or  chemistry  in  the
form  it  then  took],  and  sent  his  vessels  to  Ophir  to  seek  gold,
and  levied  taxes  upon  his  subjects  ;  ergo  alchemy  [or  chem-
istry] has  no  reality  or  truth."  And  we  find  that  Becher  is
absolutely  turned  away  from  his  labours,  and  obliged  to  de-
vote himself  to  proving  that  Solomon  used  more  money  than
he  possibly  could  have  obtained  from  Ophir  or  his  subjects,
and  therefore  that  he  must  have  possessed  a  knowledge  of
chemical  methods  and  the  philosopher's  stone  as  the  result
of  them."^

Of  the  general  reasoning  enforced  by  theology  regarding
physical  science,  every  age  has  shown  examples  ;  yet  out  of
them  all  I  will  select  but  two,  and  these  are  given  because

*  For  an  extract  from  Agrippa's  Occulta  Philosophia  giving  examples  of  the
way  in  which  mystical  names  were  obtained  from  the  Bible,  see  Rydberg,  Magic
of  the  Middle  Ages,  pp.  143  et  seq.  For  the  germs  of  many  mystic  beliefs  regard-
ing number  and  the  like,  which  were  incorporated  into  mediaeval  theology,  see
Zcller,  Plato  and  the  Older  Academy,  English  translation,  pp.  254  and  572,  and
elsewhere.  As  to  the  connection  of  spiritual  things  with  inorganic  nature  in  rela-
tion to  chemistry,  see  Eicken,  p.  634.  On  the  injury  to  science  wro  :ght  by  Plato-
nism  acting  through  mediceval  theology,  see  Hoefer,  Histoire  de  la  Chimie,  vol.  i,  p.
go.  As  to  the  influence  of  mysticism  upon  strong  men  in  science,  see  Hoefer  ;
also  Kopp,  Geschichte  der  Alchemie,  vol.  i.  p.  2ii.  For  a  very  curious  Catholic
treatise  on  sacred  numbers,  see  the  Abbe  Auber,  Symbolisme  Religieiix,  Paris,  .1870  ;
also  Detzel,  Christliche  Ikonographie,  pp.  44  et  seq.  ;  and  for  an  equally  important
Protestant  work,  see  Samuel),  Seven  the  Sacred  Nutnber,  London,  1887.  It  is  in-
teresting to  note  that  the  latter  writer,  having  been  forced  to  give  up  the  seven
planets,  consoles  himself  with  the  statement  that  "  the  earth  is  the  seventh  planet,
counting  from  Neptune  and  calling  the  asteroids  one  "  (see  p.  426).  For  the  elec-
trum  inagictim,  the  seven  metals  composing  it,  and  its  wonderful  qualities,  see  ex-
tracts from  Paracelsus's  writings  in  Hartmann's  Life  of  Paracelsus,  London,  1887,
pp.  169  et  seq.  As  to  the  more  rapid  transmission  of  light  than  sound,  the  follow-
ing expresses  the  scholastic  method  well  :  "  What  is  the  cause  why  we  see  sooner
the  lightning  than  we  heare  the  thunder  clappe?  That  is  because  our  sight  is  loth
nobler  and  sooner  perceptive  of  its  object  than  our  eare  ;  as  being  the  more  active
part,  and  priore  to  our  hearing :  besides,  the  visible  species  are  more  subtile  and
less  corporeal  than  the  audible  species." — Person's  Varieties,  Meteors,  p.  82.  For
Basil  Valentine's  view,  see  Hoefer,  vol.  i,  pp.  453-465  ;  Schmieder,  Geschichte  der
Alchemic,  pp.  197-209  ;  Allgemeine  deutsche  Biographic,  article  Basilius.  For  the
discussions  referred  to  on  possibilities  of  God  assuming  forms  of  stone,  or  log,  or  beast,
see  Lippert,  Chris  tent  hum,  Volksglaube,  und  Volksbraiuh,  pp.  372,  373,  where  cita-
tions are  given,  etc.  For  the  syllogism  regarding  Solomon,  see  Figuier,  L Alchimie
et  les  Alchimistes,  pp.  106,  107.  For  careful  appreciation  of  Becher's  position  in
the  history  of  chemistry,  see  Kopp,  Ansichten  fiber  die  Aufgabe  der  Chemie,  etc.,
von  Geber  bis  Stahl,  Braunschweig,  1875,  PP-  201  et  seq.  For  'the  text  proving  the
existence  of  the  philosopher's  stone  from  the  book  of  Revelation,  see  Figuier,  p.  22.


400


FROM    MAGIC    TO   CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.


they  show  how  this  mixture  of  theological  with  scientific  ideas
took  hold  upon  the  strongest  supporters  of  better  reasoning
even  after  the  power  of  mediagval  theology  seemed  broken.

The  first  of  these  examples  is  Melanchthon.  He  was  the
scholar  of  the  Reformation,  and  justly  won  the  title  '*  Pre-
ceptor of  Germany."  His  mind  was  singularly  open,  his
sympathies  broad,  and  his  usual  freedom  from  bigotry  drew
down  upon  him  that  wrath  of  Protestant  heresy-hunters
which  embittered  the  last  years  of  his  life  and  tortured  him
upon  his  deathbed.  During  his  career  at  the  University  of
Wittenberg  he  gave  a  course  of  lectures  on  physics,  and  in
these  he  dwelt  upon  scriptural  texts  as  affording  scientific
proofs,  accepted  the  interference  of  the  devil  in  physical  phe-
nomena as  in  other  things,  and  applied  the  mediaeval  method
throughout  his  whole  work.*

Yet  far  more  remarkable  was  the  example,  a  century
later,  of  the  man  who  more  than  any  other  led  the  world  out
of  the  path  opened  by  Aquinas,  and  into  that  through  which
modern  thought  has  advanced  to  its  greatest  conquests.
Strange  as  it  may  at  first  seem,  Francis  Bacon,  whose  keen-
ness of  sight  revealed  the  delusions  of  the  old  path  and  the
promises  of  the  new,  and  whose  boldness  did  so  much  to
turn  the  world  from  the  old  path  into  the  new,  presents  in
his  own  writings  one  of  the  most  striking  examples  of  the
evil  he  did  so  much  to  destroy.

The  Novum  Organon,  considering  the  time  when  it  came
from  his  pen,  is  doubtless  one  of  the  greatest  exhibitions  of
genius  in  the  history  of  human  thought.  It  showed  the
modern  world  the  way  out  of  the  scholastic  method  and
reverence  for  dogma  into  the  experimental  method  and
reverence  for  fact.  In  it  occur  many  passages  which  show
that  the  great  philosopher  was  fully  alive  to  the  danger  both
to  religion  and  to  science  arising  from  their  mixture.  He
declares  that  the  *'  corruption  of  philosophy  from  supersti-
tion and  theology  introduced  the  greatest  amount  of  evil
both  into  whole  systems  of  philosophy  and  into  their  parts."
He  denounces  those  who  *'  have   endeavoured   to  found  a

*  For  Melanchthon's  ideas  on  physics,  see  his  Initia  Docfrince  Physicce,  Witten-
berg, 1557,  especially  pp.  243  and  274  ;  also  in  vol.  xiii  of  Bretschneider's  edition
of  the  collected  works,  and  especially  pp.  339-343.


FROM    MAGIC    TO    CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.  401

natural  philosophy  on  the  books  of  Genesis  and  Job  and
other  sacred  Scriptures,  so  ^seeking  the  dead  among  the
living.'  "  He  speaks  of  the  result  as  "an  unwholesome  mix-
ture of  things  human  and  divine  ;  not  merely  fantastic  phi-
losophy, but  heretical  religion."  He  refers  to  the  opposition
of  the  fathers  to  the  doctrine  of  the  rotundity  of  the  earth,
and  says  that,  "thanks  to  some  of  them,  you  may  find  the
approach  to  any  kind  of  philosophy,  however  improved,  en-
tirely closed  up."  He  charges  that  some  of  these  divines
are  "afraid  lest  perhaps  a  deeper  inquiry  into  nature  should
penetrate  beyond  the  allowed  limits  of  sobriety  " ;  and  final-
ly speaks  of  theologians  as  sometimes  craftily  conjecturing
that,  if  science  be  little  understood,  "  each  single  thing  can
be  referred  more  easily  to  the  hand  and  rod  of  God,"  and
says,  "  TJiis  is  notJiing  more  or  less  than  ivisJiing  to  please  God
by  a  lieT

No  man  who  has  reflected  much  upon  the  annals  of  his
race  can,  without  a  feeling  of  awe,  come  into  the  presence
of  such  clearness  of  insight  and  boldness  of  utterance,  and
the  first  thought  of  the  reader  is  that,  of  all  men,  Francis
Bacon  is  the  most  free  from  the  unfortunate  bias  he  con-
demns ;  that  he,  certainly,  can  not  be  deluded  into  the  old
path.  But  as  we  go  on  through  his  main  work  we  are  sur-
prised to  find  that  the  strong  arm  of  Aquinas  has  been
stretched  over  the  intervening  ages,  and  has  laid  hold  upon
this  master-thinker  of  the  seventeenth  century  ;  for  only  a
few  chapters  beyond  those  containing  the  citations  already
made  we  find  Bacon  alluding  to  the  recent  voyage  of  Colum-
bus,  and  speaking  of  the  prophecy  of  Daniel  regarding  the
latter  days,  that  "  many  shall  run  to  and  fro,  and  knowledge
be  increased,"  as  clearly  signifying  "that  ...  the  circum-
navigation of  the  world  and  the  increase  of  science  should
happen  in  the  same  age.""^

In  his  great  work  on  the  Advancement  of  Learning  the
firm  grasp  which  the  methods  he  condemned  held  upon  him
is  shown  yet  more  clearly.  In  the  first  book  of  it  he  asserts
that  "  that  excellent  book  of  Job,  if  it  be  revolved  with  dili-


*  See  the  Novum   Orj^anon,  translated  by  the  Rev.  G.  W.   Kitchin,  Oxford,
1855,  chaps.  Ixv  and  Ixxxix.
27


.02  FROM    MAGIC   TO   CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.

gence,  will  be  found  pregnant  and  swelling  with  natural  phi-
losophy," and  he  endeavours  to  show  that  in  it  the  "round-
ness of  the  earth,"  the  ''  fixing  of  the  stars,  ever  standing  at
equal  distances,"  the  *'  depression  of  the  southern  pole,"  the
"  matter  of  generation,"  and  ''  matter  of  minerals  "are  ''  with
great  elegancy  noted."  But,  curiously  enough,  he  uses  to
support  some  of  these  truths  the  very  texts  which  the  fathers
of  the  Church  used  to  destroy  them,  and  those  for  which
he  finds  Scripture  warrant  most  clearly  are  such  as  science
has  since  disproved.  So,  too,  he  says  that  Solomon  was  en-
abled in  his  Proverbs,  "by  donation  of  God,  to  compile  a
natural  history  of  all  verdure."  *

Such  was  the  struggle  of  the  physical  sciences  in  general.
Let  us  now  look  briefly  at  one  special  example  out  of  many,
which  reveals,  as  well  as  any,  one  of  the  main  theories  which
prompted  theological  interference  with  them.

It  will  doubtless  seem  amazing  to  many  that  for  ages  the
weight  of  theological  thought  in  Christendom  was  thrown
against  the  idea  of  the  suffocating  properties  of  certain  gases,
and  especially  of  carbonic  acid.  Although  in  antiquity  we  see
men  forming  a  right  theory  of  gases  in  mines,  we  find  that,
early  in  the  history  of  the  Church,  St.  Clement  of  Alexan-
dria put  forth  the  theory  that  these  gases  are  manifestations
of  diabolic  action,  and  that,  throughout  Christendom,  suffo-
cation in  caverns,  wells,  and  cellars  was  attributed  to  the
direct  action  of  evil  spirits.  Evidences  of  this  view  abound
through  the  medieval  period,  and  during  the  Reformation
period  a  great  authority,  Agricola,  one  of  the  most  earnest
and  truthful  of  investigators,  still  adhered  to  the  belief  that
these  gases  in  mines  were  manifestations  of  devils,  and  he
specified  two  classes — one  of  malignant  imps,  who  blow  out
the    miners'   lamps,  and   the    other  of   friendly  imps,   who

*  See  Bacon,  Advancement  of  Learning,  edited  by  W.  Aldis  Wright,  London,
1873,  pp.  47,  48.  Certainly  no  more  striking  examples  of  the  strength  of  the  evil
which  he  had  all  along  been  denouncing  could  be  exhibited  than  these  in  his  own
writings.  Nothing  better  illustrates  the  sway  of  the  mediaeval  theology,  or  better
explains  his  blindness  to  the  discoveries  of  Copernicus  and  to  the  experiments  of
Gilbert.  For  a  very  contemptuous  statement  of  Lord  Bacon's  claim  to  his  position
as  a  philosopher,  see  Lange,  Geschichte  des  Materialismus,  Leipsic,  1S74,  vol.  i,  p.
219.  For  a  more  just  statement,  see  Brewster,  Life  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton.  See
also  Jevons,  Principles  of  Science,  London,  1874,  vol.  ii,  p.  298.


FROM    MAGIC    TO    CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.  403

simply  tease  the  workmen  in  various  ways.  He  went  so  far
as  to  say  that  one  of  these  spirits  in  the  Saxon  mine  of  Anna-
berg  destroyed  twelve  workmen  at  once  by  the  power  of  his
breath.

At  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century  we  find  a  writer  on
mineralogy  complaining  that  the  mines  in  France  and  Ger-
many  had  been  in  large  part  abandoned  on  account  of
the  '^evil  spirits  of  metals  which  had  taken  possession  of
them."

Even  as  late  as  the  seventeenth  century,  Van  Helmont,
after  he  had  broken  away  from  alchemy  and  opened  one  of
the  great  paths  to  chemistry— even  after  he  had  announced
to  the  world  the  existence  of  various  gases  and  the  mode  of
their  generation — was  not  strong  enough  to  free  himself  from
theologic  bias ;  he  still  inclined  to  believe  that  the  gases  he
had  discovered,  were  in  some  sense  living  spirits,  beneficent
or  diabolical.

But  at  various  periods  glimpses  of  the  truth  had  been
gained.  The  ancient  view  had  not  been  entirely  forgotten;
and  as  far  back  as  the  first  part  of  the  thirteenth  century
Albert  the  Great  suggested  a  natural  cause  in  the  possibility
of  exhalations  from  minerals  causing  a  "  corruption  of  the
air";  but  he,  as  we  have  seen,  was  driven  or  dragged  off
into  theological  studies,  and  the  world  relapsed  into  the
theological  view.

Toward  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century  there  had  come
a  great  genius  laden  with  important  truths  in  chemistry,  but
for  whom  the  world  was  not  ready — Basil  Valentine.  His
discoveries  anticipated  much  that  has  brought  fame  and  for-
tune to  chemists  since,  yet  so  fearful  of  danger  was  he  that
his  work  was  carefully  concealed.  Not  until  after  his  death
was  his  treatise  on  alchemy  found,  and  even  then  it  was  for
a  long  time  not  known  where  and  when  he  lived.  The  papal
bull,  Spondcnt  paritcr,  and  the  various  prohibitions  it  bred,
forcing  other  alchemists  to  conceal  their  laboratories,  led
him  to  let  himself  be  known  during  his  life  at  Erfurt  simply
as  an  apothecary,  and  to  wait  until  after  his  death  to  make
a  revelation  of  truth  which  during  his  lifetime  might  have
cost  him  dear.  Among  the  legacies  of  this  greatest  of  the
alchemists  was  the  doctrine  that  the  air  which   asphyxiates


404  FROM    MAGIC   TO   CHEMISTRY   AND   PHYSICS.

workers  in  mines  is  similar  to  that  which  is  produced  by  fer-
mentation of  malt,  and  a  recommendation  that,  in  order  to
drive  away  the  evil  and  to  prevent  serious  accidents,  fires
be  lighted  and  jets  of  steam  used  to  ventilate  the  mines —
stress  being  especially  laid  upon  the  idea  that  the  danger  in
the  mines  is  produced  by  ''  exhalations  of  metals."

Thanks  to  men  like  Valentine,  this  idea  of  the  interfer-
ence of  Satan  and  his  minions  with  the  mining  industry
was  gradually  weakened,  and  the  working  of  the  deserted
mines  was  resumed  ;  yet  even  at  a  comparatively  recent
period  we  find  it  still  lingering,  and  among  leading  divines
in  the  very  heart  of  Protestant  Germany.  In  171 5  a
cellar-digger  having  been  stifled  at  Jena,  the  medical
faculty  of  the  university  decided  that  the  cause  was  not  the
direct  action  of  the  devil,  but  a  deadly  gas.  Thereupon
Prof.  Loescher,  of  the  University  of  Wittenberg,  entered  a
solemn  protest,  declaring  that  the  decision  of  the  medical
faculty  was  "only  a  proof  of  the  lamentable  license  which
has  so  taken  possession  of  us,  and  which,  if  we  are  not  ear-
nestly on  our  guard,  will  finally  turn  away  from  us  the  bless-
ing of  God."*  But  denunciations  of  this  kind  could  not
hold  back  the  little  army  of  science  ;  in  spite  of  adverse  in-
fluences, the  evolution  of  physics  and  chemistry  went  on.
More  and  more  there  rose  men  bold  enough  to  break  away
from  theological  methods  and  strong  enough  to  resist  ec-
clesiastical bribes  and  threats.  As  alchemy  in  its  first
form,  seeking  for  the  philosopher's  stone  and  the  transmuta-
tion of  metals,  had  given  way  to  alchemy  in  its  second  form,
seeking  for  the  elixir  of  life  and  remedies  more  or  less
magical  for  disease,  so  now  the  latter  yielded  to  the  search
for  truth  as  truth.  More  and  more  the  "  solemnly  consti-
tuted impostors"  were  resisted  in  every  field.  A  great
line  of  physicists  and  chemists  began  to  appear.f

*  For  Loescher's  protest,  see  Julian  Schmidt,  GeschichL'  des  geistigen  Lebens,
etc.,  vol.  i,  p.  319.

\  For  the  general  view  of  noxious  gases  as  imps  of  Satan,  see  Hoefer,  Histoire
de  la  Chimie,  vol.  i,  p.  350  ;  vol.  ii,  p.  48.  For  the  work  of  Black,  Priestley,  Berg-
mann,  and  others,  see  main  authorities  already  cited,  and  especially  the  admirable
paper  of  Dr.  R.  G.  Eccles  on  The  Evolution  of  Chemistry,  New  York,  D.  Apple-
ton  &  Co.,  1891.  For  the  treatment  of  Priestley,  see  Spence's  Essays,  London,
1892  ;  also  Rutt,  Life  and  Correspondence  of  Priestley,  vol.  ii,  pp.  115  et  seq.


FROM    MAGIC    TO   CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.  405


11.


Just  at    the  middle  of  the   seventeenth   century,  and  at
the   very  centre   of  opposition  to   physical  science,   Robert
Boyle  began  the  new  epoch  in  chemistry.     Strongly  influ-
enced by  the  writings  of  Bacon  and  the  discoveries  of  Gali-
leo, he  devoted  himself  to  scientific  research,  establishing  at
Oxford  a  laboratory  and  putting  into  it  a  chemist  from  Stras-
burg.     For  this  he  was  at  once  bitterly  attacked.     In  spite  of
his  high  position,  his  blameless  life,  his  liberal  gifts  to  char-
ity and   learning,  the   Oxford   pulpit  was  especially  severe
against  him,  declaring  that  his  researches  were  destroying
religion  and   his   experiments   undermining  the   university.
Public  orators  denounced  him,  the  wits  ridiculed  him,  and
his  associates  in  the  peerage  were  indignant  that  he  should
condescend  to  pursuits   so  unworthy.     But   Boyle  pressed
on.     His  discoveries  opened  new  paths  in  various  directions
and  gave  an  impulse  to  a  succession  of  vigorous  investiga-
tors.    Thus  began  the  long  series  of  discoveries  culminating
in  those  of  Black,  Bergmann,  Cavendish,  Priestley,  and  La-
voisier, who  ushered   in  the  chemical  science   of  the  nine-
teenth century.

Yet  not  even  then  without  a  sore  struggle  against  un-
reason. And  it  must  here  be  noticed  that  this  unreason  was
not  all  theological.  The  unreasoning  heterodox  when  in-
trusted with  irresponsible  power  can  be  as  short-sighted  and
cruel  as  the  unreasoning  orthodox.  Lavoisier,  one  of  the
best  of  our  race,  not  only  a  great  chemist  but  a  true  man,
was  sent  to  the  scaffold  by  the  Parisian  mob,  led  by  bigoted
'*  liberals"  and  atheists,  with  the  sneer  that  the  republic
had  no  need  of  savants.  As  to  Priestley,  who  had  devoted
his  life  to  science  and  to  every  good  work  among  his  fel-
low-men, the  Birmingham  mob,  favoured  by  the  Anglican
clergymen  who  harangued  them  as  ''  fellow-churchmen,"
wrecked  his  house,  destroyed  his  library,  philosophical  in-
struments, and  papers  containing  the  results  of  long  years  of
scientific  research,  drove  him  into  exile,  and  would  have
murdered  him  if  they  could  have  laid  their  hands  upon  him.
Nor  was  it  entirely  his  devotion  to  rational  liberty,  nor


^06  FROM    MAGIC   TO   CHEMISTRY   AND   PHYSICS.

even  his  disbelief  in  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  which
brought  on  this  catastrophe.  That  there  was  a  deep  distrust
of  his  scientific  pursuits,  was  evident  when  the  leaders  of  the
mob  took  pains  to  use  his  electrical  apparatus  to  set  fire  to
his  papers.

Still,  though  theological  modes  of  thought  continued  to
sterilize  much  effort  in  chemistry,  the  old  influence  was  more
and  more  thrown  off,  and  truth  sought  more  and  more  for
truth's  sake.  "  Black  magic  "  with*  its  Satanic  machinery
vanished,  only  reappearing  occasionally  among  marvel-
mongers  and  belated  theologians.  **  White  magic  "  became
legerdemain.

In  the  early  years  of  the  nineteenth  century,  physical  re-
search, though  it  went  on  with  ever-increasing  vigour,  felt
in  various  ways  the  reaction  which  followed  the  French
Revolution.  It  was  not  merely  under  the  Bourbons  and
Hapsburgs  that  resistance  was  offered  ;  even  in  England  the
old  spirit  lingered  long.  As  late  as  1832,  when  the  British
Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science  first  visited  Ox-
ford, no  less  amiable  a  man  than  John  Keble — at  that  time  a
power  in  the  university — condemned  indignantly  the  con-
ferring of  honorary  degrees  upon  the  leading  men  thus
brought  together.  In  a  letter  of  that  date  to  Dr.  Pusey  he
complained  bitterly,  to  use  his  own  words,  that  ''  the  Oxford
doctors  have  truckled  sadly  to  the  spirit  of  the  times  in  re-
ceiving the  hotchpotch  of  philosophers  as  they  did."  It  is
interesting  to  know  that  among  the  men  thus  contemptu-
ously characterized  were  Brewster,  Faraday,  and  Dalton.

Nor  was  this  a  mere  isolated  exhibition  of  feeling ;  it
lasted  many  years,  and  was  especially  shown  on  both  sides
of  the  Atlantic  in  all  higher  institutions  of  learning  where
theology  was  dominant.  Down  to  a  period  within  the
memory  of  men  still  in  active  life,  students  in  the  sciences,
not  only  at  Oxford  and  Cambridge  but  at  Harvard  and
Yale,  were  considered  a  doubtful  if  not  a  distinctly  inferior
class,  intellectually  and  socially — to  be  relegated  to  different
instructors  and  buildings,  and  to  receive  their  degrees  on  a
different  occasion  and  with  different  ceremonies  from  those
appointed  for  students  in  literature.  To  the  State  Univer-
sity of  Michigan,  among  the  greater  American  institutions


FROM    MAGIC   TO   CHEMISTRY   AND   PHYSICS.  407

of  learning  which  have  never  possessed  or  been  possessed
by  a  theological  seminary,  belongs  the  honour  of  first  break-
ing down  this  wall  of  separation.

But  from  the  middle  years  of  the  century  chemical
science  progressed  with  ever-accelerating  force,  and  the
work  of  Bunsen,  Kirchhoff,  Dalton,  and  Faraday  has,  in  the
last  years  of  the  century,  led  up  to  the  establishment  of
Mendeleef's  law,  by  which  chemistry  has  become  predictive,
as  astronomy  had  become  predictive  by  the  calculations  of
Newton,  and  biology  by  the  discoveries  of  Darwin.

While  one  succession  of  strong  men  were  thus  develop-
ing chemistry  out  of  one  form  of  magic,  another  succession
were  developing  physics  out  of  another  form.

First  in  this  latter  succession  may  be  mentioned  that  line
of  thinkers  who  divined  and  reasoned  out  great  physical
laws— a  line  extending  from  Galileo  and  Kepler  and  Newton
to  Ohm  and  Faraday  and  Joule  and  Helmholtz.  These,  by
revealing  more  and  more  clearly  the  reign  of  law,  steadily
undermined  the  older  theological  view  of  arbitrary  influence
in  nature.  Next  should  be  mentioned  the  line  of  profound
observers,  from  Galileo  and  Torricelli  to  Kelvin.  These
have  as  thoroughly  undermined  the  old  theologic  substitu-
tion of  phrases  for  facts.  When  Galileo  dropped  the  differ-
ing weights  from  the  Leaning  Tower  of  Pisa,  he  began-  the
end  of  Aristotelian  authority  in  physics.  When  Torricelli
balanced  a  column  of  mercury  against  a  column  of  water
and  each  of  these  against  a  column  of  air,  he  ended  the  theo-
logic phrase  that  ''nature  abhors  a  vacuum."  When  New-
ton approximately  determined  the  velocity  of  sound,  he
ended  the  theologic  argument  that  we  see  the  flash  before
we  hear  the  roar  because  "  sight  is  nobler  than  hearing."
When  Franklin  showed  that  lightning  is  caused  by  elec-
tricity, and  Ohm  and  Faraday  proved  that  electricity  obeys
ascertained  laws,  they  ended  the  theological  idea  of  a  divin-
ity seated  above  the  clouds  and  casting  thunderbolts.

Resulting  from  the  labour  of  both  these  branches  of  phys-
ical science,  we  have  the  establishment  of  the  great  laws  of
the  indestructibility  of  matter,  the  correlation  of  forces,  and
chemical  affinity.  Thereby  is  ended,  with  various  other
sacred  traditions,  the    theological  theory   of  a   visible  uni-


4o8


FROM    MAGIC    TO    CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.


verse  created  out  of  nothing,  so  firmly  imbedded  in  the  the-
ological thought  of  the  Middle  Ages  and  in  the  Westmin-
ster Catechism.*

In  our  own  time  some  attempt  has  been  made  to  renew
this  war  against  the  physical  sciences.  Joseph  de  Maistre,
uttering  his  hatred  of  them,  declaring  that  mankind  has  paid
too  dearly  for  them,  asserting  that  they  must  be  subjected
to  theology,  likening  them  to  fire — good  when  confined  and
dangerous  when  scattered  about — has  been  one  of  the  main
leaders  among  those  who  can  not  relinquish  the  idea  that
our  body  of  sacred  literature  should  be  kept  a  controlling
text-book  of  science.  The  only  effect  of  such  teachings  has
been  to  weaken  the  legitimate  hold  of  religion  upon  men.

In  Catholic  countries  exertion  has  of  late  years  been
mainly  confined  to  excluding  science  or  diluting  it  in  univer-
sity teachings.  Early  in  the  present  century  a  great  effort
was  made  by  Ferdinand  VII  of  Spain.  He  simply  dismissed
the  scientific  professors  from  the  University  of  Salamanca,
and  until  a  recent  period  there  has  been  general  exclusion
from  Spanish  universities  of  professors  holding  to  the  New-
tonian physics.  So,  too,  the  contemporary  Emperor  of  Aus-
tria attempted  indirectly  something  of  the  same  sort ;  and  at
a  still  later  period  Popes  Gregory  XVI  and  Pius  IX  dis-
couraged, if  they  did  not  forbid,  the  meetings  of  scientific
associations  in  Italy.  In  France,  war  between  theology  and
science,  which  had  long  been  smouldering,  came  in  the  years
1867  and  1868  to  an  outbreak.  Toward  the  end  of  the  last
century,  after  the  Church  had  held  possession  of  advanced
instruction  for  more  than  a  thousand  ^^ears,  and  had,  so  far
as  it  was  able,  kept  experimental  science  in  servitude — after

*  For  a  reappearance  of  the  fundamental  doctrines  of  black  magic  among  theolo-
gians, see  Rev.  Dr.  Jevvett,  Professor  of  Pastoral  Theology  in  the  Prot.  Episc.  Gen.
Theolog.  Seminary  of  New  York,  Diabolology  :  The  Person  ajtd  Kingdom  of  Satan,
New  York,  1889.  For  their  reappearance  among  theosophists,  see  Eliphas  Levi,
Histoire  de  la  Magie,  especially  the  final  chapters.  For  opposition  to  Boyle  and
chemical  studies  at  Oxford  in  the  latter  half  of  the  seventeenth  century,  see  the
address  of  Prof.  Dixon,  F.  R.  S.,  before  the  British  Association,  1894.  For  the
recent  progress  of  chemistry,  and  opposition  to  its  earlier  development  at  Oxford,
see  Lord  Salisbury's  address  as  President  of  the  British  Association,  in  1894.  For
the  Protestant  survival  of  the  mediaeval  assertion  that  the  universe  was  created  out
of  nothing,  see  the  Westminster  Catechism,  question  15.


FROM    MAGIC    TO    CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.


409


it  had  humiliated  Buffon  in  natural  science,  thrown  its
weight  against  Newton  in  the  physical  sciences,  and  wrecked
Turgot's  noble  plans  for  a  system  of  public  instruction — the
French  nation  decreed  the  establishment  of  the  most  thor-
ough and  complete  system  of  higher  instruction  in  science
ever  known.  It  was  kept  under  lay  control  and  became  one
of  the  glories  of  France  ;  but,  emboldened  by  the  restoration
of  the  Bourbons  in  181 5,  the  Church  began  to  undermine
this  hated  system,  and  in  1868  had  made  such  progress  that
all  was  ready  for  the  final  assault.

Foremost  among  the  leaders  of  the  besieging  party  was
the  Bishop  of  Orleans,  Dupanloup,  a  man  of  many  winning
characteristics  and  of  great  oratorical  power.  In  various
ways,  and  especially  in  an  open  letter,  he  had  fought  the
"  materialism  "  of  science  at  Paris,  and  especially  were  his
attacks  levelled  at  Profs.  Vulpian  and  See  and  the  Minister
of  Public  Instruction,  Duruy,  a  man  of  great  merit,  whose
only  crime  was  devotion  to  the  improvement  of  education
and  to  the  promotion  of  the  highest  research  in  science."^

The  main  attack  was  made  rather  upon  biological  science
than  upon  physics  and  chemistry,  yet  it  was  clear  that  all
were  involved  together.

The  first  onslaught  was  made  in  the  French  Senate,  and
the  storming  party  in  that  body  was  led  by  a  venerable  and
conscientious  prelate,  Cardinal  de  Bonnechose,  Archbishop
of  Rouen.  It  was  charged  by  him  and  his  party  that  the
tendencies  of  the  higher  scientific  teaching  at  Paris  were
fatal  to  religion  and  morality.  Heavy  missiles  were  hurled
— such  phrases  as  *' sapping  the  foundations,"  ''breaking
down  the  bulwarks,"  and  the  like  ;  and,  withal,  a  new  missile
was  used  with  much  effect — the  epithet  "  materialist."

The  results  can  be  easily  guessed  :  crowds  came  to  the
lecture-rooms  of  the  attacked  professors,  and  the  lecture-
room  of  Prof.  See,  the  chief  offender,  was  crowded  to  suffo-
cation.

A  siege  was  begun  in  due  form.     A  young  physician  was


*  For  the  exertions  of  the  restored  Bourbons  to  crush  the  universities  of  Spain,
see  Hubbard,  Hist.  Contetnporaine  de  V Espagne,  Paris,  1878,  chaps,  i  and  iii.  For
Dupanloup,  Lettre  d  un  Cardinal^  see  the  Revue  de  Thirapcutique  of  1868,  p.  221.


4IO  FROM    MAGIC    TO   CHEMISTRY   AND   PHYSICS.

sent  by  the  cardinal's  party  into  the  heterodox  camp  as  a
spy.  Having  heard  one  lecture  of  Prof.  See,  he  returned
with  information  that  seemed  to  promise  easy  victory  to  the
besieging  party :  he  brought  a  terrible  statement — one  that
seemed  enough  to  overwhelm  See,  Vulpian,  Duruy,  and  the
whole  hated  system  of  public  instruction  in  France — the  state-
ment that  See  had  denied  the  existence  of  the  human  soul.

Cardinal  Bonnechose  seized  the  tremendous  weapon  at
once.  Rising  in  his  place  in  the  Senate,  he  launched  a  most
eloquent  invective  against  the  Minister  of  State  who  could
protect  such  a  fortress  of  impiety  as  the  College  of  Medi-
cine ;  and,  as  a  climax,  he  asserted,  on  the  evidence  of  his
spy  fresh  from  Prof.  See's  lecture-room,  that  the  professor
had  declared,  in  his  lecture  of  the  day  before,  that  so  long
as  he  had  the  honour  to  hold  his  professorship  he  would
combat  the  false  idea  of  the  existence  of  the  soul.  The
weapon  seemed  resistless  and  the  wound  fatal,  but  M.  Du-
ruy rose  and  asked  to  be  heard.

His  statement  was  simply  that  he  held  in  his  hand  docu-
mentary proofs  that  Prof.  See  never  made  such  a  declara-
tion. He  held  the  notes  used  by  Prof.  See  in  his  lecture.
Prof.  See,  it  appeared,  belonged  to  a  school  in  medical  sci-
ence which  combated  certain  ideas  regarding  medicine  as
an  art.  The  inflamed  imagination  of  the  cardinal's  heresy-
hunting  emissary  had,  as  the  lecture-notes  proved,  led  him
to  mistake  the  word  "  art  "  for  "■  dme^'  and  to  exhibit  Prof.  See
as  treating  a  theological  when  he  was  discussing  a  purely
scientific  question.  Of  the  existence  of  the  soul  the  pro-
fessor had  said  nothing.

The  forces  of  the  enemy  were  immediately  turned  ;  they
retreated  in  confusion,  amid  the  laughter  of  all  France  ;  and
a  quiet,  dignified  statement  as  to  the  rights  of  scientific  in-
structors by  Wurtz,  dean  of  the  faculty,  completed  their
discomfiture.  Thus  a  well-meant  attempt  to  check  science
simply  ended  in  bringing  ridicule  on  religion,  and  in  thrusting
still  deeper  into  the  minds  of  thousands  of  men  that  most
mistaken  of  all  mistaken  ideas  :  the  conviction  that  religion
and  science  are  enemies.*

*  For  a  general  account  of  the  Vulpian  and  See  matter,  see  Revue  des  Deux
Mondes,  31  mai,  1868,  "Chronique  de  la  Quinzaine,"  pp.  763-765.    As  to  the  result


FROM    MAGIC   TO   CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.  ah

But  justice  forbids  raising  an  outcry  against  Roman
Catholicism  for  this.  In  1864  a  number  of  excellent  men  in
England  drew  up  a  declaration  to  be  signed  by  students  in
the  natural  sciences,  expressing  *'  sincere  regret  that  re-
searches into  scientific  truth  are  perverted  by  some  in  our
time  into  occasion  for  casting  doubt  upon  the  truth  and  au-
thenticity of  the  Holy  Scriptures."  Nine  tenths  of  the  lead-
ing scientific  men  of  England  refused  to  sign  it ;  nor  was  this
all :  Sir  John  Herschel,  Sir  John  Bowring,  and  Sir  W.  R.
Hamilton  administered,  through  the  press,  castigations  which
roused  general  indignation  against  the  proposers  of  the  cir-
cular, and  Prof.  De  Morgan,  by  a  parody,  covered  memorial
and  memorialists  with  ridicule.  It  was  the  old  mistake,  and
the  old  result  followed  in  the  minds  of  multitudes  of  thought-
ful young  men.*

And  in  yet  another  Protestant  country  this  same  mistake
was  made.  In  1868  several  excellent  churchmen  in  Prus-
sia thought  it  their  duty  to  meet  for  the  denunciation  of
"science  falsely  so  called."  Two  results  followed  :  upon  the
great  majority  of  these  really  self-sacrificing  men — whose
first  utterances  showed  complete  ignorance  of  the  theories
they  attacked — there  came  quiet  and  widespread  contempt;
upon  Pastor  Knak,  who  stood  forth  and  proclaimed  views  of
the  universe  which  he  thought  scriptural,  but  which  most
schoolboys  knew  to  be  childish,  came  a  burst  of  good-na-
tured derision  from  every  quarter  of  the  German  nation,  f

But  in  all  the  greater  modern  nations  warfare  of  this
kind,  after  the  first  quarter  of  the  nineteenth  century,  became
more  and  more  futile.  While  conscientious  Roman  bishops,
and  no  less  conscientious  Protestant  clergymen  in  Europe
and  America  continued  to  insist  that  advanced  education,
not  only  in  literature  but  in  science,  should  be  kept  under
careful  control  in  their  own  sectarian  universities  and  col-
leges, wretchedly  one-sided  in  organization  and  inadequate

on  popular  thought,  may  be  noted  the  following  comment  on  the  affair  by  the
Revue^  which  is  as  free  as  possible  from  anything  like  rabid  anti-ecclesiastical  ideas  :
"  Elle  a  €i€  vraiment  curieuse,  instructive,  assez  triste  et  meme  un  peu  amusante."
For  Wurtz's  statement,  see  Revue  de  Th^rapeutique  for  1868,  p.  303.

*  De  Morgan,  Paradoxes,  pp.  421-428  ;  also  Daubeny's  Essays.

t  See  the  Berlin  newspapers  for  the  summer  of  1S68,  especially  Kladdcradatsch.


412  FROM    MAGIC    TO   CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.

in  equipment  ;  while  Catholic  clerical  authorities  in  Spain
were  rejecting  all  professors  holding  the  Newtonian  theory,
and  in  Austria  and  Italy  all  holding  unsafe  views  regarding
the  Immaculate  Conception,  and  while  Protestant  clerical
authorities  in  Great  Britain  and  America  were  keeping  out
of  professorships  men  holding  unsatisfactory  views  regard-
ing the  Incarnation,  or  Infant  Baptism,  or  the  Apostolic  Suc-
cession, or  Ordination  by  Elders,  or  the  Perseverance  of  the
Saints ;  and  while  both  Catholic  and  Protestant  ecclesiastics
were  openly  or  secretly  weeding  out  of  university  faculties
all  who  showed  willingness  to  consider  fairly  the  ideas  of
Darwin,  a  movement  was  quietly  in  progress  destined  to
take  instruction,  and  especially  instruction  in  the  physical
and  natural  sciences,  out  of  its  old  subordination  to  theology
and  ecclesiasticism.*

The  most  striking  beginnings  of  this  movement  had  been
seen  when,  in  the  darkest  period  of  the  French  Revolution,
there  was  founded  at  Paris  the  great  Conservatory  of  Arts
and  Trades,  and  when,  in  the  early  years  of  the  nineteenth
century,  scientific  and  technical  education  spread  quietly
upon  the  Continent.  By  the  middle  of  the  century  France
and  Germany  were  dotted  with  well-equipped  technical  and
scientific  schools,  each  having  chemical  and  physical  labora-
tories.

The  English-speaking  lands  lagged  behind.  In  England,
Oxford  and  Cambridge  showed  few  if  any  signs  of  this
movement,  and  in  the  United  States,  down  to  1850,  evi-
dences of  it  were  few  and  feeble.  Very  significant  is  it  that,
at  that  period,  while  Yale  College  had  in  its  faculty  Silliman
and  Olmsted — the  professor  of  chemistry  and  the  professor
of  physics  most  widely  known  in  the  United  States — it  had
no  physical  or  chemical  laboratory  in  the  modern  sense,  and

*  Whatever  may  be  thought  of  the  system  of  philosophy  advocated  by  Presi-
dent McCosh  at  Princeton,  every  thinking  man  must  honour  him  for  the  large  way
in  which  he,  at  least,  broke  away  from  the  traditions  of  that  centre  of  thought  ;  pre-
vented, so  far  as  he  was  able,  persecution  of  scholars  for  holding  to  the  Darwinian
view  ;  and  paved  the  way  for  the  highest  researches  in  physical  science  in  that  uni-
versity. For  a  most  eloquent  statement  of  the  opposition  of  modern  physical  sci-
ence to  mediceval  theological  views,  as  shown  in  the  case  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  see
Dr.  Thomas  Chalmers,  cited  in  Gore,  Art  of  Scientijic  Discovery,  London,  1S78,
p.  247.


FROM    MAGIC    TO   CHEMISTRY   AND    PHYSICS.  413

confined  its  instruction  in  these  subjects  to  examinations
upon  a  text-book  and  the  presentation  of  a  few  lectures.  At
the  State  University  of  Michigan,  >vhich  had  even  then  taken
a  foremost  place  in  the  higher  education  west  of  the  Great
Lakes,  there  was  very  meagre  instruction  in  chemistry  and
virtually  none  in  physics.  This  being  the  state  of  things  in
the  middle  of  the  century  in  institutions  remarkably  free
from  clerical  control,  it  can  be  imagined  what  was  the  posi-
tion of  scientific  instruction  in  smaller  colleges  and  univer-
sities where  theological  considerations  were  entirely  domi-
nant.

But  in  1 85 1,  with  the  International  Exhibition  at  London,
began  in  Great  Britain  and  America  a  movement  in  favour
of  scientific  education ;  men  of  wealth  and  public  spirit  be-
gan making  contributions  to  them,  and  thus  came  the  growth
of  a  new  system  of  instruction  in  which  Chemistry  and
Physics  took  just  rank.

By  far  the  most  marked  feature  in  this  movement  was
seen  in  America,  when,  in  1857,  Justin  S.  Morrill,  a  young
member  of  Congress  from  Vermont,  presented  the  project
of  a  law  endowing  from  the  public  lands  a  broad  national
system  of  colleges  in  which  scientific  and  technical  studies
should  be  placed  on  an  equality  with  studies  in  classical  lit-
erature, one  such  college  to  be  established  in  every  State  of
the  Union.  The  bill,  though  opposed  mainly  by  representa-
tives from  the  Southern  States,  where  doctrinaire  politics
and  orthodox  theology  were  in  strong  alliance  with  negro
slavery,  was  passed  by  both  Houses  of  Congress,  but  vetoed
by  President  Buchanan,  in  whom  the  doctrinaire  and  ortho-
dox spirit  was  incarnate.  But  Morrill  persisted  and  again
presented  his  bill,  which  was  again  carried  in  spite  of  the
opposition  of  the  Southern  members,  and  again  vetoed  in
1859  by  President  Buchanan.  Then  came  the  civil  war;
but  Morrill  and  his  associates  did  not  despair  of  the  repub-
lic. In  the  midst  of  all  the  measures  for  putting  vast  armies
into  the  field  and  for  saving  the  Union  from  foreign  interfer-
ence as  well  as  from  domestic  anarchy,  they  again  passed  the
bill,  and  in  1862,  in  the  darkest  hour  of  the  struggle  for  na-
tional existence,  it  became  a  law  by  the  signature  of  Presi-
dent Lincoln.


^14  FROM    MAGIC    TO   CHEMISTRY   AND   PHYSICS.

And  here  it  should  not  be  unrecorded,  that,  while  the  vast
majority  of  the  supporters  of  the  measure  were  laymen,  most
efficient  service  was  rendered  by  a  clergyman,  the  Rev.  Dr.
Amos  Brown,  born  in  New  Hampshire,  but  at  that  time  an
instructor  in  a  little  village  of  New  York.  His  ideas  were
embodied  in  the  bill,  and  his  efforts  did  much  for  its  passage.

Thus  was  established,  in  every  State  of  the  American
Union,  at  least  one  institution  in  which  scientific  and  tech-
nical studies  were  given  equal  rank  with  classical,  and  pro-
moted by  laboratories  for  research  in  physical  and  natural
science.  Of  these  institutions  there  are  now  nearly  fifty  :  all
have  proved  valuable,  and  some  of  them,  by  the  addition  of
splendid  gifts  from  individuals  and  from  the  States  in  which
they  are  situated,  have  been  developed  into  great  univer-
sities.

Nor  was  this  all.  Many  of  the  older  universities  and  col-
leges thus  received  a  powerful  stimulus  in  the  new  direction.
The  great  physical  and  chemical  laboratories  founded  by
gifts  from  public-spirited  individuals,  as  at  Harvard,  Yale,
and  Chicago,  or  by  enlightened  State  legislators,  as  in  Michi-
gan, Wisconsin,  Minnesota,  California,  Kansas,  and  Nebraska,
have  also  become  centres  from  which  radiate  influences
favouring  the  unfettered  search  for  truth  as  truth.

This  S3^stem  has  been  long  enough  in  operation  to  enable
us  to  note  in  some  degree  its  effects  on  religion,  and  these
are  certainly  such  as  to  relieve  those  who  have  feared  that
religion  was  necessarily  bound  up  with  the  older  instruction
controlled  by  theology.  While  in  Europe,  by  a  natural  re-
action, the  colleges  under  strict  ecclesiastical  control  have
sent  forth  the  most  powerful  foes  the  Christian  Church  has
ever  known,  of  whom  Voltaire  and  Diderot  and  Volney  and
Sainte-Beuve  and  Renan  are  types,  no  such  effects  have  been
noted  in  these  newer  institutions.  While  the  theological
way  of  looking  at  the  universe  has  steadily  yielded,  there  has
been  no  sign  of  any  tendency  toward  irreligion.  On  the
contrary,  it  is  the  testimony  of  those  best  acquainted  with
the  American  colleges  and  universities  during  the  last  forty-
five  years  that  there  has  been  in  them  a  great  gain,  not  only
as  regards  morals,  but  as  regards  religion  in  its  highest  and
best  sense.     The  reason  is  not  far  to  seek.     Under  the  old


FROM    MAGIC    TO   CHEMISTRY    AND    PHYSICS.  415

American  system  the  whole  body  of  students  at  a  university
were  confined  to  a  single  course,  for  which  the  majority
cared  little  and  very  many  cared  nothing,  and,  as  a  result,
widespread  idleness  and  dissipation  were  inevitable.  Under
the  new  system,  presenting  various  courses,  and  especially
courses  in  various  sciences,  appealing  to  different  tastes  and
aims,  the  great  majority  of  students  are  interested,  and  conse-
quently indolence  and  dissipation  have  steadily  diminished.
Moreover,  in  the  majority  of  American  institutions  of  learn-
ing down  to  the  middle  of  the  century,  the  main  reliance  for
the  religious  culture  of  students  was  in  the  perfunctory  pres-
entation of  sectarian  theology,  and  the  occasional  stirring
up  of  what  were  called  ''  revivals,"  which,  after  a  period  of
unhealthy  stimulus,  inevitably  left  the  main  body  of  students
in  a  state  of  religious  and  moral  reaction  and  collapse.  This
method  is  now  discredited,  and  in  the  more  important
American  universities  it  has  become  impossible.  Religious
truth,  to  secure  the  attention  of  the  modern  race  of  students
in  the  better  American  institutions,  is  presented,  not  by  ''  sen-
sation preachers,"  but  by  thoughtful,  sober-minded  scholars.
Less  and  less  avail  sectarian  arguments ;  more  and  more  im-
pressive becomes  the  presentation  of  fundamental  religious
truths.  The  result  is,  that  while  young  men  care  less  and
less  for  the  great  mass  of  petty,  cut-and-dried  sectarian  for-
mulas, they  approach  the  deeper  questions  of  religion  with
increasing  reverence.

While  striking  differences  exist  between  the  European
universities  and  those  of  the  United  States,  this  at  least  may
be  said,  that  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  the  great  majority
of  the  leading  institutions  of  learning  are  under  the  sway  of
enlightened  public  opinion  as  voiced  mainly  by  laymen,  and
that,  this  being  the  case,  the  physical  and  natural  sciences
are  henceforth  likely  to  be  developed  normally,  and  without
fear  of  being  sterilized  by  theology  or  oppressed  by  ecclesi-
asticism.

END   OF   VOLUME   ONE.


f^    V         /=     O'^


Date.,Diie


FACULTY


r^    -    '  r'-:.


