Religion in the Making (Alfred North Whitehead, 1926)
==========================================================
Process theology's source: religion as the vision of truth as it may be. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (religioninmaking0000alfr).

ic


SEN


sSseitiaet


ae


Se


ES]
farry sy


zh


$1
ait


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


CAMBRIDGE
UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON: Fetter Lane


A eat
Pee
miaeaheg


Bompay, CALcuTTA and
Mapras


Macmillan and Co.,Ltd.


TorRONTO


The Macmillan Co. of
Canada, Ltd.


Copyrighted in the
United States of America
by the Macmillan Co.


RELIGION
IN THE MAKING


by
ALFRED NORTH WHITEHEAD


F.R.S., Sc.D. (CAMBRIDGE), Hon. D.Sc. (MANCHESTER),
Hon. LL.D. (sT ANDREWs), Hon. D.Sc. (UNIV.
OF WISCONSIN), Hon. Sc.D. (HARVARD)


Fellow of Trinity College in the University of Cambridge
and Professor of Philosophy in Harvard University


LOWELL LECTURES
1926


CAMBRIDGE


AT THE UNIVERSITY: PRESS
1926


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA


To
E. W.


Kahle/Austin Foundation


Preface


This book consists of four lectures on religion de-
livered in King’s Chapel, Boston, during February, 1926.
The train of thought which was applied to science in
my Lowell Lectures of the previous year, since pub-
lished under the title, Science and the Modern World,
is here applied to religion. The two books are inde-
pendent, but it is inevitable that to some extent they
elucidate each other by showing the same way of
thought in different applications.

The aim of the lectures was to give a concise analysis
of the various factors in human nature which go to
form a religion, to exhibit the inevitable transformation
of religion with the transformation of knowledge, and
more especially to direct attention to the foundation of
religion on our apprehension of those permanent ele-
ments by reason of which there is a stable order in the
world, permanent elements apart from which there
could be no changing world.

A. N. W.


HarVARD UNIVERSITY
March 13, 1926


Contents


PREPACH ceo SL Ae our ae es


CHAPTER


I. RELIGION IN History.


. Religion Defined

. The Emergence of Belcan
. Ritual and Emotion

. Belief.

. Rationalism ,

. The Ascent of Man .

VII.


The Final Contrast


11. RELIGION AND Docma.


I.
II.


III.
IV.


The Religious Crecioleueen in stars
The Description of Religious Experi-
ence Saieel aor aa ee

God 3 '
The Quest of God


uz. Bopy AND SPIRIT


. Religion and Metaphysics :
. The Contribution of Religion to Meta-


physics


. A Metaphysical Desectaron

. God and the Moral Order .

. Value and the Purpose of God

1 AAOOVARG NING. lay 5a es se
. The Creative Process


CONTENTS


Iv. TRUTH AND CRITICISM . ere:
1. The Development of Dogma
i. Experience and Expression
mi. The Three Traditions .
Iv. The Nature of God .
v. Conclusion


123
123
131
139
149
158


I
RELIGION IN HISTORY


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


CHAPTER J
RELIGION IN HISTORY
I. RELIGION DEFINED


It is my purpose in the four lectures of
this course to consider the type of justifi-
cation which is available for belief in doctrines
of religion. This is a question which in some
new form challenges each generation. It is
the peculiarity of religion that humanity is
always shifting its attitude towards it.

The contrast between religion and the
elementary truths of arithmetic makes my
meaning clear. Ages ago the simple arithmeti-
cal doctrines dawned on the human mind, and
throughout history the unquestioned dogma
that two and three make five reigned whenever
it has been relevant. We all know what this
doctrine means, and its history is of no im-
portance for its elucidation.


[13]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


But we have the gravest doubt as to what
religion means so far as doctrine is concerned.
There is no agreement as to the definition of
religion in its most general sense, including
true and false religion; nor is there any agree-
ment as to the valid religious beliefs, nor even
as to what we mean by the truth of religion. It
is for this reason that some consideration of
religion as an unquestioned factor throughout
the long stretch of human history is necessary
to secure the relevance of any discussion of
its general principles.

There is yet another contrast. What is gen-
erally disputed is doubtful, and what is doubtful
is relatively unimportant—other things being
equal. J am speaking of general truths. We
avoid guiding our actions by general principles
which are entirely unsettled. If we do not know
what number is the product of 69 and 67, we
defer any action pre-supposing the answer, till
we have found out. This little arithmetical
puzzle can be put aside till it is settled, and it is
capable of definite settlement with adequate
trouble.


[14]


RELIGION IN HISTORY


But as between religion and arithmetic,
other things are not equal. You wse arithmetic,
but you are religious. Arithmetic of course
enters into your nature, so far as that nature
involves a multiplicity of things. But it is
there as a necessary condition, and not as a
transforming agency. No one is invariably
“justified” by his faith in the multiplication
table. But in some sense or other, justifi-
cation is the basis of all religion. * Your
character is developed according to your faith.
This is the primary religious truth from which
no one can escape. Religion is force of belief
cleansing the inward parts. For this reason the
primary religious virtue is sincerity, a pene-
trating sincerity.

A religion, on its doctrinal side, can thus be
defined as a system of general truths which
have the effect of transforming character
when they are sincerely held and vividly
apprehended.

In the long run your character and your
conduct of life depend upon your intimate
convictions. Life is an internal fact for its


[15]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


own sake, before it is an external fact relating
itself to others. ‘The conduct of external life
is conditioned by environment, but it receives
its final quality, on which its worth depends,
from the internal life which is the self-realiza-
tion of existence. Religion is the art and the
theory of the internal life of man, so far as it
depends on the man himself and on what is
permanent in the nature of things.

This doctrine is the direct negation of the
theory that religion is primarily a social fact.
Social facts are of great importance to religion,
because there is no such thing as absolutely
independent existence. You cannot abstract
society from man; most psychology is herd-
psychology. But all collective emotions leave
untouched the awful ultimate fact, which is
the human being, consciously alone with
itself, for its own sake.

Religion is what the individual does with
his own solitariness. It runs through three
stages, if it evolves to its final satisfaction.
It is the transition from God the void to God


[16]


RELIGION IN HISTORY


the enemy, and from God the enemy to God the
companion.

Thus religion is solitariness; and if you are
never solitary, you are never religious. Col-
lective enthusiasms, revivals, institutions,
churches, rituals, bibles, codes of behaviour,
are the trappings of religion, its passing forms.
They may be useful, or harmful; they may be
authoritatively ordained, or merely temporary
expedients. But the end of religion is beyond
all this.

Accordingly, what should emerge from re-
ligion is individual worth of character. But
worth is positive or negative, good or bad.
Religion is by no means necessarily good. It
may be very evil. The fact of evil, inter-
woven with the texture of the world, shows
that in the nature of things there remains
effectiveness for degradation. In your religious
experience the God with whom you have made
terms may be the God of destruction, the God
who leaves in his wake the loss of the greater
reality.


[17]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


In considering religion, we should not be
obsessed by the idea of its necessary goodness.
This is a dangerous delusion. ‘The point to
notice is its transcendent importance; and the
fact of this importance is abundantly made
evident by the appeal to history.


II. THE EMERGENCE OF RELIGION


Religion, so far as it receives external ex-
pression in human history, exhibits four fac-
tors or sides of itself. These factors are
ritual, emotion, belief, rationalization. There
is definite organized procedure, which is
ritual: there are definite types of emotional
expression: there are definitely expressed be-
liefs: and there is the adjustment of these
beliefs into a system, internally coherent and
coherent with other beliefs.

But all these four factors are not of equal
influence throughout all historical epochs. The
religious idea emerged gradually into human
life, at first barely disengaged from other
human interests. ‘The order of the emergence


[18]


RELIGION IN HISTORY


of these factors was in the inverse order of
the depth of their religious importance: first
ritual, then emotion, then belief, then ration-
alization.

The dawn of these religious stages is grad-
ual. It consists in an increase of emphasis.
Perhaps it is untrue to affirm that the later
factors are ever wholly absent. But certainly,
when we go far enough back, belief and
rationalization are completely negligible, and
emotion is merely a secondary result of
ritual. Then emotion takes the lead, and the
ritual is for the emotion which it generates.
Belief then makes its appearance as explana-
tory of the complex of ritual and emotion, and
in this appearance of belief we may discern
the germ of rationalization.

It is not until belief and rationalization are
well established that solitariness is discernible
as constituting the heart of religious impor-
tance. The great religious conceptions which
haunt the imaginations of civilized mankind
are scenes of solitariness: Prometheus chained


[19]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


to his rock, Mahomet brooding in the desert,
the meditations of the Buddha, the solitary
Man on the Cross. It belongs to the depth
of the religious spirit to have felt forsaken,
even by God.


III. RITUAL AND EMOTION


Ritual goes back beyond the dawn of his-
tory. It can be discerned in the animals,
in their individual habits and still more in
their collective evolutions. Ritual may be
defined as the habitual performance of definite
actions which have no direct relevance to the
preservation of the physical organisms of the
actors. ‘

Flocks of birds perform their ritual evolu-
tions in the sky. In Europe rooks and star-
lings are notable examples of this fact. Ritual
is the primitive outcome of superfluous energy
and leisure. It exemplifies the tendency of
living bodies to repeat their own actions.
Thus the actions necessary in hunting for
food, or in other useful pursuits, are repeated

[20]


RELIGION IN HISTORY


for their own sakes; and their repetition also
repeats the joy of exercise and the emotion of
success.

In this way emotion waits upon ritual; and
then ritual is repeated and elaborated for the
sake of its attendant emotions. Mankind
became artists in ritual. It was a tremendous
discovery—how to excite emotions for their
own sake, apart from some imperious biologi-
cal necessity. But emotions sensitize the
organism. Thus the unintended effect was
produced of sensitizing the human organism in
a variety of ways diverse from what would
have been produced by the necessary work of
life.

Mankind was started upon its adventures of
curiosity and of feeling.

It is evident that, according to this account,
religion and play have the same origin in
ritual. This is because ritual is the stimulus
to emotion, and an habitual ritual may diverge
into religion or into play, according to the
quality of the emotion excited. Even in


[21]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


comparatively modern times, among the
Greeks of the fifth century before Christ, the
Olympic Games were tinged with religion, and
the Dionysiac festival in Attica ended with a
comic drama. Also in the modern world, a
holy day and a holiday are kindred notions.
Ritual is not the only way of artificially
stimulating emotion. Drugs are equally effec-
tive. Luckily the range of drugs at the com-
mand of primitive races was limited. But
there is ample evidence of the religious use of
drugs in conjunction with the religious use of
ritual. For example Atheneus tells us that
among the Persians it was the religious duty
of the King, once a year, at some stated
festival in honour of Mithras, to appear in the
temple intoxicated. A relic of the religious
awe at intoxication is the use of wine in the
Communion service. It is an example of the
upward trend of ritual by which a widespread
association of thought is elevated into a great


symbolism, divested of its primitive grossness.


1Cf. The Deipnosophiste of Atheneus, Book X. I am indebted t
friend Professor J. H. Woods for this reference. See


[22]


RELIGION IN HISTORY


In this primitive phase of religion, domi-
nated by ritual and emotion, we are dealing
with essentially social phenomena. Ritual is
more impressive, and emotion more active,
when a whole society is concerned in the same
ritual and the same emotion. Accordingly, a
collective ritual and a collective emotion take
their places as one of the binding forces of
savage tribes. They represent the first faint
glimmerings of the life of the spirit raised
beyond concentration upon the task of supply-
ing animal necessities. Conversely, religion
in its decay sinks back into sociability.


IV. BELIEF


Mere ritual and emotion cannot maintain
themselves untouched by intellectuality. Also
the abstract idea of maintaining the ritual for
the sake of the emotion, though it may express
the truth about the subconscious psychology of
primitive races, is far too abstract to enter
into their conscious thoughts. A myth satis-
fies the demands of incipient rationality. Men

[23]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


found themselves practising various rituals,
and found the rituals generating emotions.
The myth explains the purpose both of the
ritual and of the emotion. It is the product
of the vivid fancy of primitive men in an un-
fathomed world.

To primitive man, and to ourselves on our
primitive side, the universe is not so much un-
fathomable as unfathomed—by this I mean
undiscriminated, unanalyzed. It is not a
complex of definite unexplained happenings,
but a dim background shot across by isolated
vivid effects charged with emotional excite-
ments. The very presuppositions of a co-
herent rationalism are absent. Such a ration-
alism presupposes a complex of definite facts
whose interconnections are sought. But the
prior stage is a background of indefiniteness
relieved by vivid acts of definition, inherently
isolated. One exception must be made in
favour of the routine of tribal necessities which
are taken for granted. But what lies beyond
the routine of life is in general void of definition;
and when it is vivid, it is disconnected.

[24]


RELIGION IN HISTORY


The myth which meets the ritual is some
exceptional vivid fancy, or recollection of
some actual vivid fact—probably distorted in
remembrance—which appears not only as ex-
planatory both of ritual and emotion, but also
as generative of emotion when conjoined with
the ritual. Thus the myth not only explains
but reinforces the hidden purpose of the ritual,
which is emotion.

Then rituals and emotions and myths
reciprocally interact; and the myths have
various grades of relationship to actual fact,
and have various grades of symbolic truth as
being representative of large ideas only to be
apprehended in some parable. Also in some
cases the myth precedes the ritual. But there
is the general fact that ritualism precedes
mythology. For we can observe ritualism
even among animals, and presumably they are
destitute of a mythology.

A myth will involve special attention to
some persons or to some things, real or imagi-
nary. Thus in a sense, the ritual, as per-

[25]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


formed in conjunction with the explanatory
purpose of the myth, is the primitive worship
of the hero-person or the hero-thing. But
there can be very little disinterested worship
among primitive folk—even less than now, if
possible. Accordingly, the belief in the myth
will involve the belief that something is to be
got out of him or it, or that something is to
be averted in respect to the evil to be feared
from him or it. Thus incantation, prayer,
praise, and ritual absorption of the hero
deity emerge.

If the hero be a person, we call the ritual,
with its myth, “religion”; if the hero be a
thing, we call it “magic.” In religion we in-
duce, in magic we compel. The important
difference between magic and religion is that
magic is unprogressive and religion sometimes
is progressive; except in so far as science can be
traced back to the progress of magic.

Religion, in this stage of belief, marks a new
formative agent in the ascent of man. For
just as ritual encouraged emotion beyond the

[26]


RELIGION IN HISTORY


mere response to practical necessities, so re-
ligion in this further stage begets thoughts
divorced from the mere battling with the
pressure of circumstances. Imagination se-
cured in it a machinery for its development;
thought has been thereby led beyond the
immediate objects in sight. Its concepts may
in these early stages be crude and horrible;
but they have the supreme virtue of being
concepts of objects beyond immediate sense
and perception.

This is the stage of uncoordinated beliefs.
So far as this is the dominant phase there
can be a curious tolerance, in that one cult
‘does not war upon another cult. Since there
lis a minimum of coordination, there is room
for all. But religion is still a thoroughly
social phenomenon. The cult includes the
tribe, or at least it includes some well-defined
body of persons within the social organism.
You may not desert your own cults, but
there need be no clash between cults. In the
higher stages of such a religion there are

[27]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


- tribal gods, or many gods within a tribe,
with the loosest coordination of cults and
myths.

Though religion can be a source of progress,
it need not be so, especially when its dominant
feature is this stage of uncriticized belief. It
is easy for a tribe to stabilize its ritual and
its myths, and there need be no external spur
to progress. In fact, this is the stage of
religious evolution in which the masses of
semi-civilized humanity have halted—the stage
of satisfactory ritual and of satisfied belief
without impulse towards higher things. Such
religion satisfies the pragmatic test: It works,
and thereby. claims that it be awarded the
prize for truth.


V. RATIONALISM


The age of martyrs dawns with the coming
of rationalism. The antecedent phases of
religion had been essentially sociable. Many
were called, and all were chosen. The final
phase introduces the note of solitariness:
“Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way,...

[28]


RELIGION IN HISTORY


and few there be that find it.” When a
modern religion forgets this saying, it is suffer-
ing from an atavistic relapse into primitive
barbarism. It is appealing to the psychology
of the herd, away from the intuitions of the
few.

The religious epoch which we are now con-
sidering is very modern. Its past duration is
of the order of six thousand years. Of course
exact dates do not count; you can extend the
epoch further back into the past in order to
include some faint anticipatory movement, or
you can contract its duration so as to exclude
flourishing survivals of the earlier phase. The
movement has extended over all the civilized
races of Asia and Europe. In the past Asia
has proved the most fertile in ideas, but with-
in the last two thousand years Europe has
given the movement a new aspect. It is to be
noted that the two most perfect examples of
rationalistic religions have flourished chiefly
in countries foreign to the races among which
they had their origin.

The Bible is by far the most complete ac-

[29]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


count of the coming of rationalism into
religion, based on the earliest documents
available. Viewed as such an account, it is
only relevant to the region between the Tigris
and the Nile. It exhibits the note of pro-
gressive solitariness in the religious idea:
first, types of thought generally prevalent;
then protesting prophets, isolated figures of
denunciation and exhortation stirring the Jew-
ish nation; then one man, with twelve dis.
ciples, who met with almost complete national
rejection; then the adaptation for popular
survival of this latter doctrine by another man
who, very significantly, had no first-hand
contact with the original teaching. In his
hands, something was added and something was
lost; but fortunately the Gospels also survive.

It is evident that I have drawn attention to
the span of six thousand years because, in
addition to being reasonable when we have
regard to all the evidence, it corresponds to
the chronology of the Bible. We—in Europe
and America—are the heirs of the religious

[30]


RELIGION IN HISTORY


movements depicted in that collection of
books. Discussion on the methods of religion
and their justification must, in order to be
relevant, base itself upon the Bible for illustra-
tion. We must remember, however, that Bud-
dhism and Mahometanism, among others, must
also be included in the scope of general state-
ments, even if they are not explicitly referred to.

Rational religion is religion whose beliefs
and rituals have been reorganized with the
aim of making it the central element in a co-
herent ordering of life—an ordering which
shall be coherent both in respect to the eluci-
dation of thought, and in respect to the
direction of conduct towards a unified purpose
commanding ethical approval.

The peculiar position of religion is that it
stands between abstract metaphysics and the
particular principles applying to only some
among the experiences of life. The relevance
of its concepts can only be distinctly discerned
in moments of insight, and then, for many of
us, only after suggestion from without. Hence


[31]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


religion bases itself primarily upon a small
selection from the common experiences of the
race. On this side, religion ranges itself as
one among other specialized interests of man-
kind whose truths are of limited validity. But
on its other side, religion claims that its con-
cepts, though derived primarily from special
experiences, are yet of universal validity, to be
applied by faith to the ordering of all ex-
perience.

Rational religion appeals to the direct intu-
ition of special occasions, and to the elucida-
tory power of its concepts for all occasions.
It arises from that which is special, but it
extends to what is general. The doctrines of
rational religion aim at being that metaphysics
which can be derived from the supernormal
experience of mankind in its moments of
finest insight. Theoretically, rational religion
could have arisen in complete independence of
the antecedent social religions of ritual and
mythical belief. Before the historical sense
had established itself, that was the way in

[32]


RELIGION IN HISTORY


which the apologetic theologians tended to
exhibit the origins of their respective religions,
But the general history of religion, and in par-
ticular that portion of its history contained in
the Bible, decisively negatives that view.
Rational religion emerged as a gradual trans-
formation of the preéxisting religious forms.
Finally, the old forms could no longer contain
the new ideas, and the modern religions of
civilization are traceable to definite crises in
this process of development. But the develop-
ment was not then ended; it had only acquired
more suitable forms for self-expression.

The emergence of rational religion was
strictly conditioned by the general progress
of the races in which it arose. It had to wait
for the development in human consciousness
of the relevant general ideas and of the rele-
vant ethical intuitions. It required that such
ideas should not merely be casually enter-
tained by isolated individuals, but that they
should be stabilized in recognizable forms of
expression, so as to be recalled and communi-

[33]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


cated. You can only speak of mercy among a
people who, in some respects, are already
merciful.

A language is not a universal mode of
expressing all ideas whatsoever. It is a limited
mode of expressing such ideas as have been
frequently entertained, and urgently needed,
by the group of human beings who developed
that mode of speech. It is only during a
comparatively short period of human history
that there has existed any language with an
adequate stock of general terms. Such general
terms require a permanent literature to define
them by their mode of employment.

The result is. that* the free “handling@or
general ideas is a late acquirement. I am not
maintaining that the brains of men were in-
adequate for the task. The point is that it
took ages for them to develop first the appli-
ances and then the habits which made general-
ity of thought possible and prevalent. For
ages, existing languages must have been ready
for development. If men had been in contact

[34] |


RELIGION IN HISTORY


with a superior race, either personally or by a
survival of their literature, a process which
requires scores or even hundreds of generations
might have been antedated, so as to have
been effected almost at once. Such, in fact,
was the later history of the development of
the races of Northern Europe. Again, a social
system which encourages developments of
thought can procure the advent. This is the
way in which the result was first obtained.
Society and language grew together.

The influence of the antecedent type of
religion, ceremonial, mythical, and sociable,
has been great; and the estimates as to its
value diverse. During the thousand years
preceding the Christian era, there was a pecul-
iarly intense struggle on the part of rational-
ism to transform the more primitive type.
The issue was a new synthesis which, in the
forms of the various great religions, has lasted
to the present day. A rational generality was
introduced into the religious ideas; and the
myth, when retained, was reorganized with

[35]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


the intention of making it an account of veri-
fiable historical circumstances which exem-
plified the general ideas with adequate
perfection.

Thus rational criticism was admitted in
principle. The appeal was from the tribal
custom to the direct individual intuition,
ethical, metaphysical, or logical: “For I
desired mercy, and not sacrifice; and the
knowledge of God more than burnt offerings,”
are words which Hosea ascribes to Jehovah;
and he thereby employs the principles of indi-
vidual criticism of tribal custom, and bases it
upon direct ethical intuition.

In this way the religions evolved towards
more individualistic forms, shedding their
exclusively communal aspect. The individual
became the religious unit in the place of the
community; the tribal dance lost its impor-
tance compared to the individual prayer; and,
for the few, the individual prayer merged into
justification through individual insight.

So to-day it is not France which goes to

[36]


RELIGION IN HISTORY


heaven, but individual Frenchmen; and it is
not China which attains nirvana, but China-
men.

During this epoch of struggle—as in most
religious struggles—the judgments passed by
the innovators on the less-developed religious
forms were very severe. The condemnation of
idolatry pervades the Bible; and there are
traces of a recoil which go further: “I hate,
I despise your feast days,’ writes Amos,
speaking in the name of Jehovah.

Such criticism is wanted. Indeed history,
down to the present day, is a melancholy
record of the horrors which can attend
religion: human sacrifice, and in particular
the slaughter of children, cannibalism, sensual
orgies, abject superstition, hatred as between
races, the maintenance of degrading customs,
hysteria, bigotry, can all be laid at its charge.
Religion is the last refuge of human savagery.
The uncritical association of religion with
goodness is directly negatived by plain facts.
Religion can be, and has been, the main

[37]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


instrument for progress. But if we survey the
whole race, we must pronounce that generally
it has not been so: ‘‘Many are called, but
few are chosen.”
VI. THE ASCENT OF MAN

At different epochs in history new factors
emerge and successively assume decisive im-
portance in their influence on the ascent, or
the descent, of races of mankind. Within the|
millennium preceding the birth of Christ, the
communal religions were ceasing to be engines
of progress. On the whole, they had served
humanity well. By their agency, the sense of
social unity and of social responsibility had
been quickened. The common cult gave ex-
pression to the emotion of being a hundred
per cent tribal. The explicit emotions of a
life finding its interest in activities not di-
rected to its own preservation were fostered by
them. Also they produced concrete beliefs
which embodied, however waveringly, the
justification for these emotions.

But at a certain stage in history, though

[38]


RELIGION IN HISTORY


still elements in the preservation of the social
structure, they ceased to be engines of prog-
ress. ‘Their work was done.

They were salving the old virtues which had
made the race the great society that it had
been, and were not straining forward towards
the new virtues to make the common life the
City of God that it should be. They were
religions of the average, and the average is at
war with the ideal.

Human thought had broken through the
limited horizon of the one social structure. The
world as a whole entered into the explicit
consciousness. The facility for individual
wandering in comparative safety produced
this enlargement of thought. A tribe which
is wandering as a unit amid dangers may
pick up new ideas, but it will strengthen its
sense of tribal unity in the face of a hostile
environment.

But an individual who travels meets stran-
gers on terms of kindliness. He returns home,
and in his person and by his example pro-

[39]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


motes the habit of thinking dispassionately
beyond the tribe. The history of rational
religion is full of tales of disengagement from
the immediate social routine. If we keep to
the Bible: Abraham wandered, the Jews were
carried off to Babylon and after two genera-
tions were allowed to return peacefully, St.
Paul’s conversion was on a journey, and his
theology was elaborated amid travels. This
millennium was an age of travel; among the
Greeks, Herodotus, Thucydides, Plato, Xeno-
phon, Aristotle, exemplify their times. The
great empires and trading facilities made travel-
ling easy; everyone travelled and found the
world fresh and new. A _ world-consciousness
was produced.

In India and China the growth of a world-
consciousness was different in its details, but
in its essence depended on the same factors.
Individuals were disengaged from their im-
mediate social setting in ways which promoted
thought.

Now, so far as concerns religion, the distinc-

[40]


RELIGION IN HISTORY


tion of a world-consciousness as contrasted
with a social consciousness is the change of
emphasis in the concept of rightness. A
social consciousness concerns people whom you
know and love individually. Hence, rightness
is mixed up with the notion of preservation.
Conduct is right which will lead some god to
protect you; and it is wrong if it stirs some
irascible being to compass your destruction.
Such religion is a branch of diplomacy. But
a world-consciousness is more disengaged. It
rises to the conception of an essential rightness
of things. The individuals are indifferent,
because unknown. The new, and almost
profane, concept of the goodness of God
replaces the older emphasis on the will of God.
In a communal religion you study the will of
God in order that He may preserve you; in a
purified religion, rationalized under the influ-
ence of the world-concept, you study his good-
ness in order to be like him. It is the
difference between the enemy you conciliate
and the companion whom you imitate.


[41]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


VII. THE FINAL CONTRAST


A survey of religious history has disclosed
that the coming of rational religion is the
consequence of the growth of a world-con-
sciousness. The later phases of the antecedent
communal type of religion are dominated by
the conscious reaction of human nature to the
social organization in which it finds itself.
Such reaction is partly emotion clothing itself
in belief and ritual, and partly reason justify-
ing practice by the test of social preservation.
Rational religion is the wider conscious reac-
tion of men to the universe in which they find
themselves.

Communal religion broadened itself to the
verge of rationalism. In its last stages in
the Western World we find the religion of the
Roman Empire, in which the widest possible
view of the social structure is adopted. The
cult of the Empire was the sort of religion
which might be constructed to-day by the Law
School of a University, laudably impressed by

[42]


RELIGION IN HISTORY


the notion that mere penal repression is not
the way to avert a crime wave. Indeed, if we
study the mentality of the Emperor Augustus
and of the men who surrounded him, this is
not far off from the true description of its
final step in evolution.

Another type of modified communal reli-
gion was reached by the Jews. Their religion
embodied general ideas as to the nature of
things which were entirely expressed in terms
of their relevance to the Jewish race. This
compromise was very effective, but very un-
stable. It is a type of religious settlement to
which communities are always reverting. In
the modern world it is the religion of emo-
tional statesmen, captains of industry, and
social reformers. In the case of the Jews the
crises to which it led were the birth of
Christianity, and the forcible dispersion of the
Jews by the military might of Rome. The
same type of religion in our generation was
one of the factors which led to the great war.
It leads to the morbid exaggeration of national

[43]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


self-consciousness. It lacks the element of
quietism. Generality is the salt of religion.

When Christianity had established itself
throughout the Roman Empire and its neigh-
bourhood, there were before the world two
main rational religions, Buddhism and Chris-
tianity. There were, of course, many rivals to
both of them in their respective regions; but
if we have regard to clarity of idea, generality
of thought, moral respectability, survival
power, and width of extension over the world,
then for their combination of all these quali-
ties these religions stood out beyond their
competitors. Later their position was chale
lenged by the Mahometans. But even to-day,
the two Catholic religions of civilization are
Christianity and Buddhism, and—if we are
to judge by the comparison of their position
now with what it has been—both of them are
in decay. They have lost their ancient hold
upon the world.


[44)


IT
RELIGION AND DOGMA


I]
RELIGION AND DOGMA


I. THE RELIGIOUS CONSCIOUSNESS
IN HISTORY


The great rational religions are the outcome
of the emergence of a religious consciousness
which is universal, as distinguished from tri-
bal, or even social. Because it is universal,
it introduces the note of solitariness. Reli-
gion is what the individual does with his
solitariness.

The reason of this connection between
universality and solitariness is that univer-
sality is a disconnection from immediate sur-
roundings. It is an endeavour to find
something permanent and intelligible by which
to interpret the confusion of immediate detail.

This element of detachment in religion is
more particularly exhibited in the great re-

[47]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


flective books of the Old Testament. In this
group of books we find a conscious search
after general principles. In other books,
current ideas are assumed and are applied to
the troubles of what was then the immediate
present. Such books exemplify the state of
thought of their times as in controversy, but they
do not exhibit a process of reflective formation.

In the reflective books the effort is not to
reform society, or even to express religious
emotion. There is a self-conscious endeavour
to apprehend some general principles.

In the book of Job we find the picture of a
man suffering from an almost fantastic array
of the evils characteristic of his times. He is
tearing to pieces the sophism that all is for
the best in the best of possible worlds, and
that the justice of God is beautifully evident
in everything that happens. ‘The essence of
the book of Job is the contrast of a general
principle, or dogma, and the particular circum-
stances to which it should apply. There is
also throughout the book the undercurrent of

[48]


RELIGION AND DOGMA


fear lest an old-fashioned tribal god might
take offense at this rational criticism.

No religion which faces facts can minimize
the evil in the world, not merely the moral
evil, but the pain and the suffering. The
book of Job is the revolt against the facile
solution, so esteemed by fortunate people,
that the sufferer is the evil person.

Both the great religions, Christianity and
Buddhism, have their separate set of dogmas
which deal with this great question. It is in
respect to the problem of evil that one great
divergence between them exists. Buddhism
finds evil essential in the very nature of the
world of physical and emotional experience.
The wisdom which it inculcates is, therefore,
so to conduct life as to gain a release from
the individual personality which is the ve-
hicle for such, experience. ‘The Gospel which
it preaches is the method by which this
release can be obtained.

One metaphysical fact about the nature of
things which it presupposes is that this re-

[49]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


lease is not to be obtained by mere physica]
death. Buddhism is the most colossal example
in history of applied metaphysics.

Christianity took the opposite road. It has
always been a religion seeking a metaphysic,
in contrast to Buddhism which is a meta-
physic generating a religion. The defect of a
metaphysical system is the very fact that it
is a neat little system of thought, which
thereby over-simplifies its expression of the
world. Christianity has, in its historical
development, struggled with another difh-
culty, namely, the fact that it has no clear-cut
separation from the crude fancies of the older
tribal religions.

But Christianity has one advantage. It is
dificult to develop Buddhism, because Bud-
dhism starts with a clear metaphysical notion
and with the doctrines which flow from it.
Christianity has retained the easy power of
development. It starts with a tremendous
notion about the world. But this notion is
not derived from a metaphysical doctrine, but
from our comprehension of the sayings and

[50]


RELIGION AND DOGMA


actions of certain supreme lives. It is the
genius of the religion to point at the facts and
ask for their systematic interpretation. In
the Sermon on the Mount, in the Parables,
and in their accounts of Christ, the Gospels
exhibit a tremendous fact. The doctrine may,
or may not, lie on the surface. But what is
primary is the religious fact. The Buddha
left a tremendous doctrine. The historical
facts about him are subsidiary to the doctrine.

In respect to its treatment of evil, Chris-
tianity is, therefore, less clear in its meta-
physical ideas, but more inclusive of the facts.
In the first place, it admits the evil as in-
herent throughout the world. But it holds
that such evil is not the necessary outcome
of the very fact of individual personality. It
derives the evil from the contingent fact of
the actual course of events; it thus allows
of an ideal as conceivable in terms of what is
actual.

Christianity, like Buddhism, preaches a
doctrine of escape. It proclaims a doctrine
whereby, through the treatment of evil, life is


[51]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


placed on a finer level. It overcomes evil
with good. Buddhism makes itself probable
by referring to its metaphysical theory. Chris-
tianity makes itself probable by referring to
supreme religious moments in history.

Thus in respect to this crucial question of
evil, Buddhism and Christianity are in entirely
different attitudes in respect to doctrine.
Buddhism starts with the elucidatory dogmas;
Christianity starts with the elucidatory facts.

The problem of evil is only one among the
interests of rational religious thought.
Another is the search after wisdom. In the
Book of Proverbs, in Ecclesiastes, and, among
the books of the Apocrypha, in the Wisdom of
Solomon, and in Ecclesiasticus, we find the
record of reflection upon general prin-
ciples embodied in proverbs, reflective, witty,
and homely.

The search after wisdom has its origin in
generalizations from experience:

Two things have I required of thee;
deny me them not before I die:
[52]


RELIGION AND DOGMA


Remove far from me vanity and lies:
give me neither poverty nor riches; feed
me with food convenient for me:

Lest I be full, and deny thee, and say,
Who is the Lord? or lest I be poor, and
steal, and take the name of my God in
vain!

(Proverbs xxx: 7,°8, 9;)

The habit of reading the more exciting
denunciations of the prophets is apt to conceal
from us the amount of detached, middle-class
common sense which also contributed to the
religious tradition of the Jews. There is a
keen appreciation of actual fact, even when
the moral is not over-clear. For example:

I returned, and saw under the sun,
that the race is not to the swift, nor the
battle to the strong, neither yet bread to
the wise, nor yet riches to men of under-
standing, nor yet favour to men of skill;
but time and chance happeneth to them
all.

(Ecclesiastes ix. 11.)


[53]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


These two quotations express incontestable
general truths, verified by the cynical wisdom
of ages; and yet they are religion at a very
low temperature. The point, thus illustrated,
is that a rational religion must not confine
itself to moments of emotional excitement.
It must find its verification at all tempera-
tures. It must admit the wisdom of the
golden mean, in its season and for those whom
it can claim by right of possession; and it
must admit “that time and chance happeneth
to them all.”

The collection of Psalms is not properly a
reflective book. It is an expressive book. It
expresses the emotions natural to states of
mind hovering between a universal and a
tribal religious conception. ‘There is joy in
the creative energy of a supreme ruler who is
also a tribal champion. There is the glori-
fication of power, magnificent and barbaric:

The earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness
thereof; the world, and they that dwell
therein.

[54]


RELIGION AND DOGMA


Who is this King of glory? The Lord
of hosts, he is the King of glory,
(Psalms xxiv.)
Magnificent literature! But there is no solu-
tion here of the difficulties which haunted Job.
This worship of glory arising from power is
not only dangerous: it arises from a barbaric
conception of God. I suppose that even the
world itself could not contain the bones of those
slaughtered because of men intoxicated by its
attraction. ‘This view of the universe, in the
guise of an Eastern empire ruled by a glorious
tyrant, may have served its purpose. In its
historical setting, it marks a religious ascent.
The psalm quoted gives us its noblest expres-
sion. The other side comes out in the psalms
expressing hate, psalms now generally with-
drawn from public worship. The glorification
of power has broken more hearts than it has
healed.
Buddhism and Christianity find their ori-
gins respectively in two inspired moments of


[55]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


history: the life of the Buddha, and the life
of Christ. The Buddha gave his doctrine to
enlighten the world: Christ gave his life. It
is for Christians to discern the doctrine. Per-
haps in the end the most valuable part of
the doctrine of the Buddha is its interpreta-
tion of his life.

We do not possess a systematic detailed
record of the life of Christ; but we do pos-
sess a peculiarly vivid record of the first
response to it in the minds of the first group
of his disciples after the lapse of some years,
with their recollections, interpretations, and
incipient formularizations.

What we find depicted is a thoroughgoing
rationalization of the Jewish religion carried
through with a boundless naiveté, and mo-
tived by a first-hand intuition into the na-
ture of things.

The reported sayings of Christ are not
formularized thought. ‘They are descriptions
of direct insight. The ideas are in his mind as


[56]


RELIGION AND DOGMA


immediate pictures, and not as analyzed
in terms of abstract concepts. He sees
intuitively the relations between good men
and bad men; his expressions are not cast
into the form of an analysis of the goodness
and badness of man. His sayings are actions
and not adjustments of concepts. He speaks
in the lowest abstractions that language
is capable of, if it is to be language at all
and not the fact itself.

In the Sermon on the Mount, and in the
Parables, there is no reasoning about the
facts. They are seen with immeasurable
innocence. Christ represents rationalism de-
rived from direct intuition and divorced from
dialectics.

The life of Christ is not an exhibition of
over-ruling power. Its glory is for those who
can discern it, and not for the world. Its
power lies in its absence of force. It has
the decisiveness of a supreme ideal, and that
is why the history of the world divides at
this point of time.

[57]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


II. THE DESCRIPTION OF RELIGIOUS
EXPERIENCE


The dogmas of religion are the attempts to
formulate in precise terms the truths dis-
closed in the religious experience of mankind.
In exactly the same way the dogmas of
physical science are the attempts to formu-
late in precise terms the truths disclosed in
the sense-perception of mankind.

In the previous section we have been con-
sidering religious experience in the concrete;
we have now to define its general character.
Some general descriptions of religion were
given in the former lecture. It was stated
that “Religion is force of belief cleansing
the inward parts”; and again, that ‘Religion
is the art and theory of the internal life of
man, so far as it depends on the man him-
self, and on what is permanent in the nature
of things”: and again, ‘“‘Religion is what the
individual does with his own solitariness.”

This point of the origin of rational religion
in solitariness is fundamental. Religion is

[58]


RELIGION AND DOGMA


founded on the concurrence of three allied
concepts in one moment of self-consciousness,
concepts whose separate relationships to fact
and whose mutual relations to each other are
only to be settled jointly by some direct
intuition into the ultimate character of the
universe.
These concepts are:
1. That of the value of an individual
for itself.
2. That of the value of the diverse
individuals of the world for each other.
3. That of the value of the objective
world which is a community derivative
from the interrelations of its component
individuals, and also necessary for the
existence of each of these individuals.
The moment of religious consciousness starts
from self-valuation, but it broadens into
the concept of the world as a realm of ad-
justed values, mutually intensifying or mu-
tually destructive. The intuition into the
actual world gives a particular definite con-
[59]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


tent to the bare notion of a principle deter-
mining the grading of values. It also exhibits
emotions, purposes, and physical conditions,
as subservient factors in the emergence of
value.

In its solitariness the spirit asks, What,
in the way of value, is the attainment of
life? And it can find no such value till it
has merged its individual claim with that of
the objective universe. Religion is world-
loyalty.

The spirit at once surrenders itself to this
universal claim and appropriates it for itself.
So far as it is dominated by religious ex-
perience, life is conditioned by this forma-
tive principle, equally individual and general,
equally actual and beyond completed act,
equally compelling recognition and_ permis-
sive of disregard.

This principle is not a dogmatic formula-
tion, but the intuition of immediate occasions
as failing or succeeding in reference to the
ideal relevant to them. There is a rightness

[60]


RELIGION AND DOGMA


attained or missed, with more or less com-
pleteness of attainment or omission.

This is a revelation of character, appre-
hended as we apprehend the characters of
our friends. But in this case it is an appre-
hension of character permanently inherent
in the nature of things.

There is a large concurrence in the nega-
tive doctrine that this religious experience
does not include any direct intuition of a
definite person, or individual. It is a char-
acter of permanent rightness, whose inherence
in the nature of things modifies both eff-
cient and final cause, so that the one con-
forms to harmonious conditions, and the
other contrasts itself with an harmonious
ideal. The harmony in the actual world
is conformity with the character.

It is not true that every individual item
of the universe conforms to this character
in every detail. ‘There will be some measure
of conformity and some measure of diversity.
The whole intuition of conformity and. di-


[61]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


versity forms the contrast which that item
yields for the religious experience. So far as
the conformity is incomplete, there is evil in
the world.

The evidence for the assertion of general,
though not universal, concurrence in the
doctrine of no direct vision of a _ personal
God, can only be found by a consideration
of the religious thought in the civilized
world. Here the sources of the evidence can
only be indicated.

Throughout India and China _ religious
thought, so far as it has been interpreted in
precise form, disclaims the intuition of any
ultimate personality substantial to the uni-
verse. This is true for Confucian philosophy,
Buddhist philosophy, and Hindoo philosophy.
There may be personal embodiments, but the
substratum is impersonal.

Christian theology has also, in the main,
adopted the position that there is no direct
intuition of such an ultimate personal sub-
stratum for the world. It maintains the


[62]


RELIGION AND DOGMA


doctrine of the existence of a personal God
as a truth, but holds that our belief in it is
based upon inference. Most theologians hold
that this inference is sufficiently obvious to
be made by all men upon the basis of their
individual personal experience. But, be this
as it may, it is an inference and not a direct
intuition. This is the general doctrine of
those traditionalist churches which more
especially claim the title of Catholic; and
contrary doctrines have, I believe, been offi-
cially condemned by the Roman Catholic
Church: for example, the religious philosophy
of Rosmini.

Greek thought, when it began to scrutinize
the traditional cults, took the same line. In
some form or other all attempts to formulate
the doctrines of a rational religion in ancient
Greece took their stand upon the Pythagorean
notion of a direct intuition of a righteousness
in the nature of things, functioning as a
condition, a critic, and an ideal. Divine
personality was in the nature of an inference


[63]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


from the directly apprehended law of nature,
so far as it was inferred. Of course, there
were many cults of divine persons within the
nature of things. The question in discussion
concerns a divine person, substrate to the
nature of things.

This question of the ultimate nature of
direct religious experience is very funda-
mental to the religious situation of the
modern world. In the first place, if you
make religious experience to be the direct
intuition of a personal being substrate to the
universe, there is no widespread basis of
agreement to appeal to. The main streams
of religious thought start with direct contra-
dictions to each other. For those who
proceed in this way, and it is a usual form of
modern appeal, there is only one hope—to
supersede reason by emotion. Then you can
prove anything, except to reasonable people.
But reason is the safeguard of the objectivity
of religion: it secures for it the general coher-
ence denied to hysteria.

- Another objection against this appeal to
[64]


RELIGION AND DOGMA


such an intuition, merely experienced in
exceptional moments, is that the intuition
is thereby a function of these moments.
Anything which explains the origin of such
moments, in respect to their emotional ac-
companiments, can then fairly be taken to
be an explanation of the intuition. Thus the
intuition becomes a private psychological
habit, and is without general evidential force.
This is the psychological interpretation which
is fatal to evidence unable to maintain
itself at all emotional temperatures amid
great variety of environment.

Here a distinction must be drawn. In-
tuitions may first emerge as distinguished in
consciousness under’ exceptional circum-
stances. But when some distinct idea has
been once experienced, or suggested, it should
then have its own independence of irrele-
vancies. Thus we may not know some
arithmetical truth, and require some excep-
tional help to detect it. But when known,
arithmetic is a permanent possession. ‘The
psychological interpretation, assigning a merely

[65]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


personal significance, holds when objective
validity is claimed for an intuition which is
only experienced in a set of discrete circum-
stances of definite specific character. The
intuition may be clearer under such circum-
stances, but it should not be confined to them.

The wisdom of the main stream of Christian
theology in refusing to countenance the notion
of a direct vision of a personal God is mani-
fest. For there is no consensus. ‘The sub-
ordinate gods of the unrationalized religions—
the religions of the heathen, as they are called
—are not to the point; and when the great
rationalized religions are examined, the major-
ity lies the other way. As soon, however,
as it comes to a question of rational interpre-
tation, numbers rapidly sink in importance.
Reason mocks at majorities.

But there is a large consensus, on the
part of those who have rationalized their
outlook, in favour of the concept of a right-
ness in things, partially conformed to and
partially disregarded. So far as there is

[66]


RELIGION AND DOGMA


conscious determination of actions, the at-
tainment of this conformity is an ultimate
premise by reference to which our choice of
immediate ends is criticised and swayed,
The rational satisfaction or dissatisfaction in
respect to any particular happening depends
upon an intuition which is capable of being
universalized. This universalization of what
is discerned in a particular instance is the
appeal to a general character inherent in
the nature of things.

This intuition is not the discernment of a
form of words, but of a type of character.
It is characteristic of the learned mind to
exalt words. Yet mothers can ponder many
things in their hearts which their lips cannot
express. These many things, which are thus
known, constitute the ultimate religious evi-
dence, beyond which there is no appeal.


III. GOD


To-day there is but one religious dogma in
debate: What do you mean by “God’?
[67]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


And in this respect, to-day is like all its
yesterdays. This is the fundamental reli-
gious dogma, and all other dogmas are sub-
sidiary to it.

There are three main simple renderings of
this concept before the world:

1. The Eastern Asiatic concept of an
impersonal order to which the world
conforms. This order is the self-ordering
of the world; it is not the world obeying
an imposed rule. The concept expresses
the extreme doctrine of immanence.

2. The Semitic concept of a definite
personal individual entity, whose exist-
ence is the one ultimate metaphysical
fact, absolute and underivative, and who
decreed and ordered the derivative ex-
istence which we call the actual world.
This Semitic concept is the rationaliza-
tion of the tribal gods of the earlier
communal religions. It expresses the
extreme doctrine of transcendence.

3. The Pantheistic concept of an entity

[68]


RELIGION AND DOGMA


to be described in the terms of the
Semitic concept, except that the actual
world is a phase within the complete
fact which is this ultimate individual
entity. The actual world, conceived
apart from God, is unreal. Its only
reality is God’s reality. The actual
world has the reality of being a partial
description of what God is. But in it-
self it is merely a certain mutuality of
“appearance,” which is a phase of the
being of God. This is the extreme doc-
trine of monism.


It will be noticed that the Eastern Asiatic
concept and the Pantheistic concept invert
each other. According to the former concept,
when we speak of God we are saying some-
thing about the world; and according to the
latter concept, when we speak of the world
we are saying something about God.


The Semitic concept and the Eastern Asi-


atic concept are directly opposed to each
other, and any mediation between them must


[69]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


lead to complexity of thought. It is evident
that the Semitic concept can very easily pass
over into the Pantheistic concept. In fact,
the history of philosophical theology in various
Mahometan countries—Persia, for instance—
shows that this passage has often been
effected.

The main difficulties which the Semitic
concept has to struggle with are two in
number. One of them is that it leaves God
completely outside metaphysical rationaliza-
tion. We know, according to it, that He is
such a being as to design and create this
universe, and there our knowledge stops. If
we mean by his goodness that He is the one
self-existent, complete entity, then He is
good. But such goodness must not be con-
fused with the ordinary goodness of daily
life. He is undeniably useful, because any-
thing baffling can be ascribed to his direct
decree.

The second difficulty of the concept is to
get itself proved. The only possible proof

[70]


RELIGION AND DOGMA


would appear to be the “ontological proof’
devised by Anselm, and revived by Descartes.
According to this proof, the mere concept of
such an entity allows us to infer its existence.
Most philosophers and theologians reject this
proof: for example, it is explicitly rejected by
Cardinal Mercier in his Manual of Scholastic
Philosophy.

Any proof which commences with the
consideration of the character of the actual
world cannot rise above the actuality of this
world. It can only discover all the factors
disclosed in the world as experienced. In
other words, it may discover an immanent
God, but not a God wholly transcendent.
The difficulty can be put in this way: by
considering the world we can find all the
factors required by the total metaphysical
situation; but we cannot discover anything
not included in this totality of actual fact,
and yet explanatory of it.

Christianity has not adopted any one of
these clear alternatives. It has been true to


[71]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


its genius for keeping its metaphysics sub-
ordinate to the religious facts to which it
appeals.

In the first place, it inherited the simple
Semitic concept. All its founders naturally
expressed themselves in those terms, and were
addressing themselves to an audience who
coutd only understand religion thus expressed.

But even here important qualifications have
to be made. Christ himself introduces them.
How far they were then new, or how
far he is utilizing antecedent thoughts, is im-
material. The point is the decisive emphasis
the notions receive in his teaching. The
first point is the association of God with the
Kingdom of Heaven, coupled with the expla-
nation that ‘The Kingdom of Heaven is
within you.” The second point is the con-
cept of God under the metaphor of a Father.
The implications of this latter notion are
expanded with moving insistence in the two
Epistles by St. John, the author of the

[72]


RELIGION AND DOGMA


Gospel. To him we owe the phrase, ‘‘God is
love.”

Finally, in the Gospel of St. John, by the
introduction of the doctrine of the Logos, a
clear move is made towards the modification


of the notion of the unequivocal personal
unity of the Semitic God. Indeed, for most


Christian Churches, the simple Semitic doc-
trine is now a heresy, both by reason of the
modification of personal unity and also by
the insistence on immanence.

The notion of immanence must be discrimi-
nated from that of omniscience. The Semitic
God is omniscient; but, in addition to that,
the Christian God is a factor in the uni-
verse. A few years ago a papyrus was
found in an Egyptian tomb which proved to
be an early Christian compilation called
“The Sayings of Christ.” Its exact authen-
ticity and its exact authority do not concern
us. I am quoting it as evidence of the
mentality of many Christians in Egypt during
the first few Christian centuries. At that

[73]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


date Egypt supplied the theological leaders of
Christian thought. We find in these Logia
of Christ the saying, ‘Cleave the wood, and
I am there.” This is merely one example
of an emphatic assertion of immanence, and
shows a serious divergence from the Semitic
concept.

Immanence is a well-known modern doc-
trine. The points to be noticed are that it
is implicit in various parts of the New Testa-
ment, and was explicit in the first theological
epoch of Christianity. Christian theology
was then Platonic; it followed John rather
than Paul.


IV. THE QUEST OF GOD


The modern world has lost God and is
seeking him. The reason for the loss
stretches far back in the history of Christi-
anity. In respect to its doctrine of God the
Church gradually returned to the Semitic
concept, with the addition of the threefold
personality. It is a concept which is clear,

[74]


RELIGION AND DOGMA


terrifying, and unprovable. It was supported
by an unquestioned religious tradition. It
was also supported by the conservative in-
stinct of society, and by a history and a
metaphysic both constructed expressly for
that purpose. Moreover, to dissent was
death.

On the whole, the Gospel of love was
turned into a Gospel of fear. The Christian
world was composed of terrified populations.

“The fear of the Lord is the beginning of
knowledge,” says the Proverb (1.7). Yet this is
an odd saying, if it be true that ‘“‘God is
love.”

“In flaming fire taking vengeance on
them that know not God, and that
obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ”; says Paul.

“Who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power.”
(IT Thessalonians 1. 8, 9.)

[75]


RELIGION AND DOGMA


The populations did well to be terrified at
such ambiguous good tidings, which lost no
emphasis in their promulgation.

If the modern world is to find God, it
must find him through love and not through
fear, with the help of John and not of Paul.
Such a conclusion is true and represents a
commonplace of modern thought. But it is
only a very superficial rendering of the facts.

As a rebound from dogmatic intolerance,
the simplicity of religious truth has been a
favorite axiom of liberalizing theologians. It
is dificult to understand upon what evidence
this notion is based. In the physical world
as science advances, we discern a complexity
of interrelations. ‘There is a certain sim-
plicity of dominant ideas, but modern physics
does not disclose a simple world.

To reduce religion to a few simple notions
seems an arbitrary solution of the problem
before us. It may be common sense; _ but
is it true? In view of the horrors produced
by bigotry, it is natural for sensitive thinkers
to minimize religious dogmas. But such
pragmatic reasons are dangerous guides.

[76]


RELIGION AND DOGMA


This procedure ends by basing religion on
those few ideas which in the circumstances of
the time are most effective in producing
pleasing emotions and agreeable conduct. If
our trust is in the ultimate power of reason
as a discipline for the discernment of truth,
we have no right to impose such a priori
conditions. All simplifications of religious
dogma are shipwrecked upon the rock of the
problem of evil.

As a particular application, we may believe
that the various doctrines about God have
not suffered chiefly from their complexity.
They have represented extremes of simplicity,
so far as they have been formulated for the
great rationalistic religions. The three ex-
tremes of simple notions should not represent
in our eyes mutually exclusive concepts, from
among which we are to choose one and reject
the others.

It cannot be true that contradictory no-
tions can apply to the same fact. ‘Thus
reconcilement of these cantrary concepts must

[77]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


be sought in a more searching analysis of the
meaning of the terms in which they are
phrased.

The man who refused to admit that two and
two make four, until he knew what use was to be
made of this premise, had some justification.
At a certain abstract level of thought, such
statements are absolutely true. But once you
desert that level, you admit fundamental
transformations of meaning. Language cloaks
the most profound ideas under its simplest
words. For example, in “two and two make
four,” the words “and” and “make” entirely
depend for their meaning upon the application
which you are giving to the statement.

Analogously, in expressing our conception of
God, words such as “personal” and ‘‘imper-
sonal,» “entity? “‘andividuality,” S“actual.
require the closest careful watching, lest in dif-
ferent connections we should use them in
different senses, not to speak of the danger of
failing to use them in any determinate sense.

But it is impossible to fix the sense of fun-
damental terms except by reference to some

[78]


RELIGION AND DOGMA


definite metaphysical way of conceiving the
most penetrating description of the universe.

Thus rational religion must have recourse
to metaphysics for a scrutiny of its terms. At
the same time it contributes its own inde-
pendent evidence, which metaphysics must
take account of in framing its description.

This mutual dependence is illustrated in all
topics. For example, J have mentioned above
that in modern Europe history and metaphys-
ics have been constructed with the purpose of
supporting the Semitic concept of God. To
some extent this is justifiable, because both
history and metaphysics must presuppose some
canons by which to guide themselves.

The result is that you cannot confine any
important reorganization to one sphere of
thought above. You cannot shelter theology
from science, or science from theology; nor
can you shelter either of them from meta-
physics, or metaphysics from either of them.
There is no short cut to truth.

Religion, therefore, while in the framing of
dogmas it must admit modifications from the

[79]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


complete circle of our knowledge, still brings
its own contribution of immediate experience.

That contribution is in the first place the
recognition that our existence is more than a
succession of bare facts. We live in a common
world of mutual adjustment, of intelligible
relations, of valuations, of zest after purposes,
of joy and grief, of interest concentrated on
self, of interest directed beyond self, of short-
time and long-time failures or successes, of
different layers of feeling, of life-weariness and
of life-zest.

There is a quality of life which lies always
beyond the mere fact of life; and when we
include the quality in the fact, there is still
omitted the quality of the quality. It is not
true that the finer quality is the direct associ-
ate of obvious happiness or obvious pleasure.
Religion is the direct apprehension that,
beyond such happiness and such pleasure,
there remains the function of what is actual
and passing, that it contributes its quality as
an immortal fact to the order which informs
the world.

[80]


III
BODY AND SPIRIT


“<> a4


< e


e eG
f


+


or th Oo
If
;


WAT
.
}
j


it


III
BODY AND SPIRIT


I. RELIGION AND METAPHYSICS


Religion requires a metaphysical backing;
for its authority is endangered by the intensity
of the emotions which it generates. Such
emotions are evidence of some vivid experi-
ence; but they are a very poor guarantee for
its correct interpretation.

Thus dispassionate criticism of religious be-
lief is beyond all things necessary. The foun-
dations of dogma must be laid in a rational
metaphysics which criticises meanings, and
endeavours to express the most general con-
cepts adequate for the all-inclusive universe,

This position has never been seriously
doubted, though in practice it is often evaded.
One of the most serious periods of neglect

[83]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


occurred in the middle of the nineteenth
century, through the dominance of the histori-
cal interest.

It is a curious delusion that the rock upon
which our beliefs can be founded is an histori-
cal investigation. You can only interpret the
past in terms of the present. ‘The present is
all that you have; and unless in this present
you can find general principles which interpret
the present as including a representation of
the whole community of existents, you cannot
move a step beyond your little patch of im-
mediacy.

Thus history presupposes a metaphysic. It
can be objected that we believe in the past
and talk about it without settling our meta-
physical principles. That is certainly the case.
But you can only deduce metaphysical dogmas
from your interpretation of the past on the
basis of a prior metaphysical interpretation of
the present.!


1By “‘metaphysics” I mean the science which seeks to discover the


general ideas which are indispensably relevant to the analysis of every-
thing that happens.


[84]


BODY AND SPIRIT


In so far as your metaphysical beliefs are
implicit, you vaguely interpret the past on the
lines of the present. But when it comes to
the primary metaphysical data, the world of
which you are immediately conscious is the
whole datum.

This criticism applies equally to a science or
to a religion which hopes to justify itself without
any appeal to metaphysics. The difference is
that religion is the longing of the spirit that the
facts of existence should find their justification
in the nature of existence. ‘‘My soul thirsteth
for God,” writes the Psalmist.

But science can leave its metaphysics im-
plicit and retire behind our belief in the prag-
matic value of its general descriptions. If
religion does that, it admits that its dogmas
are merely pleasing ideas for the purpose of
stimulating its emotions. Science (at least
as a temporary methodological device) can
rest upon a naive faith; religion is the longing
for justification. When religion ceases to seek
for penetration, for clarity, it is sinking back

[85]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


into its lower forms. The ages of faith are
the ages of rationalism.


II. THE CONTRIBUTION OF RELIGION TO
METAPHYSICS


In the previous lectures religious experience
was considered as a fact. It consists of a cer-
tain widespread, direct apprehension of a char-
acter exemplified in the actual universe. Such
a character includes in itself certain meta-
physical presuppositions. In so far as we
trust the objectivity of the religious intuitions,
to that extent we must also hold that the
metaphysical doctrines are well founded.

It is for this reason that in the previous
lecture the broadest view of religious experi-
ence was insisted on. If, at this stage of
thought, we include points of radical diver-
gence between the main streams, the whole
evidential force is indefinitely weakened. Thus
religious experience cannot be taken as contrib-
uting to metaphysics any direct evidence for

[86]


BODY AND SPIRIT


a personal God in any sense transcendent or
creative.

The universe, thus disclosed, is through and
through interdependent. The body pollutes
the mind, the mind pollutes the body. Physi-
cal energy sublimates itself into zeal; con-
versely, zeal stimulates the body. The bio-
logical ends pass into ideals of standards, and
the formation of standards affects the biologi-
cal facts. The individual is formative of the
society, the society is formative of the indi-
vidual. Particular evils infect the whole
world, particular goods point the way of
escape.

The world is at once a passing shadow and
a final fact. The shadow is passing into the
fact, so as to be constitutive of it; and yet
the fact is prior to the shadow. ‘There is a
kingdom of heaven prior to the actual pas-
sage of actual things, and there is the same
kingdom finding its completion through the
accomplishment of this passage.

But just as the kingdom of heaven trans-

[87]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


cends the natural world, so does this world
transcend the kingdom of heaven. For the
world is evil, and the kingdom is good. The
kingdom is in the world, and yet not of the
world.

The actual world, the world of experiencing,
and of thinking, and of physical activity, is a
community of many diverse entities; and
these entities contribute to, or derogate from,
the common value of the total community.
At the same time, these actual entities are, for
themselves, their own value, individual and
separable. ‘They add to the common stock
and yet they suffer alone. The world is a
scene of solitariness in community.

The individuality of entities is just as
important as their community. The topic of
religion is individuality in community.


Ili, A METAPHYSICAL DESCRIPTION


A metaphysics is a description. Its discus-
sion so as to elucidate its accuracy is neces-
sary, but it is foreign to the description. The

[88]


BODY AND SPIRIT


tests of accuracy are logical coherence, adequacy,
and exemplification. A metaphysical descrip-
tion takes its origin from one select field of
interest. It receives its confirmation by estab-
lishing itself as adequate and as exemplified in
other fields of interest! The following descrip-
tion is set out for immediate comparison with
the deliverances of religious experience.

There are many ways of analyzing the
universe, conceived as that which is compre-
hensive of all that there is. In a description
it is thus necessary to correlate these different
routes of analysis. First, consider the analysis
into (1) the actual world, passing in time;
and (2) those elements which go to its formation.

Such formative elements are not themselves
actual and passing; they are the factors
which are either non-actual or non-temporal,
disclosed in the analysis of what is both actual
and temporal.

They constitute the formative character of


1For the application to science of this description, cf. my Science and
the Modern World.


[89]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


the actual temporal world. We know nothing

beyond this temporal world and the formative

elements which jointly constitute its character.

The temporal world and its formative elements

constitute for us the all-inclusive universe.
These formative elements are:


1. The creativity whereby the actual
world has its character of temporal pas-
sage to novelty.

2. The realm of ideal entities, or forms,
which are in themselves not actual, but
‘are such that they are exemplified in
everything that is actual, according to
some proportion of relevance.

3. The actual but non-temporal entity
whereby the indetermination of mere
creativity is transmuted into a determi-
nate freedom. This non-temporal actual
entity is what men call God—the supreme
God of rationalized religion.


A further elucidation of the status of these
formative elements is only to be obtained by
[90]


BODY AND SPIRIT


having recourse to another mode of analysis of
the actual world.

The actual temporal world can be analyzed
into a multiplicity of occasions of actuali-
zation. These are the primary actual units of
which the temporal world is composed. Call
each such occasion an ‘epochal occasion.”
Then the actual world is a community of
epochal occasions. In the physical world
each epochal occasion is a definite limited
physical event, limited both as to space and
time, but with time-duration as well as with
its full spatial dimensions.

The epochal occasions are the primary
units of the actual community, and the com-
munity is composed of the units. But each


unit has in its nature a reference to every
other member of the community, so that


each unit is a microcosm representing in itself
the entire all-inclusive universe.

These epochal occasions are the creatures.
The reason for the temporal character of the
actual world can now be given by reference to


[91]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


the creativity and the creatures. For the
creativity is not separable from its creatures.
Thus the creatures remain with the creativity.
Accordingly, the creativity for a creature
becomes the creativity with the creature, and
thereby passes into another phase of itself.
It is now the creativity for a new creature.
Thus there is a transition of the creative
action, and this transition exhibits itself, in
the physical world, in the guise of routes of
temporal succession.

This protean character of the creativity
forbids us from conceiving it as an actual
entity. For its character lacks determinate-
ness. | It equally prevents us from considering
the temporal world as a definite actual crea-
ture. For the temporal world is an essential
incompleteness. It has not the character of a
definite matter of fact, such as attaches to an
event in past history, viewed from a present
standpoint.

An epochal occasion is a concretion. It is


[92]


BODY AND SPIRIT


a mode in which diverse elements come to-
gether into a real unity. Apart from that
concretion, these elements stand in mutual
isolation. Thus an actual entity is the out-
come of a creative synthesis, individual and
passing.

The various elements which are thus
brought into unity are the other creatures and
the ideal forms and God. ‘These elements are
not a mere unqualified aggregate. In such a
case there could only be one creature. In the
concretion the creatures are qualified by the
ideal forms, and conversely the ideal forms are
qualified by the creatures. Thus the epochal
occasion, which is thus emergent, has in its
own nature the other creatures under the
aspect of these forms, and analogously it
includes the forms under the aspect of these
creatures. It is thus a definite limited crea-
ture, emergent in consequence of the limitations
thus mutually imposed on each other by the
elements.


[93]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


IV. GOD AND THE MORAL ORDER

The inclusion of God in every creature
shows itself in the determination whereby a
definite result is emergent. God is that
non-temporal actuality which has to be taken
account of in every creative phase. Any such
phase is determinate having regard to its
antecedents, and in this determination ex-
hibits conformity to a common order.

The boundless wealth of possibility in the
realm of abstract form would leave each
creative phase still indeterminate, unable to
synthesize under determinate conditions the
creatures from which it springs. The definite
determination which imposes ordered balance
on the world requires an actual entity impos-
ing its own unchanged consistency of char-
acter on every phase.

Thus creative indetermination attains its
measure of determination. A simpler meta-
physic would result if we could stop at this
conclusion. A complete determinism would
thus mean the complete self-consistency of the

[94]


BODY AND SPIRIT


temporal world. This is the conclusion of all
thinkers who are inclined to trust to the ade-
quacy of metaphysical concepts.

The difficulty of this conclusion comes when
we confront the theory with the facts of the
world. If the theory of complete determinism,
by reason of the necessity of conformation
with the nature of God, holds true, then the
evil in the world is in conformity with the
nature of God.

Now evil is exhibited in physical suffering,
mental suffering, and loss of the higher
experience in favour of the lower experience.
The common character of all evil is that its
realization in fact involves that there is some
concurrent realization of a purpose towards
elimination. The purpose is to secure the
avoidance of evil. The fact of the instability
of evil is the moral order in the world.

Evil, triumphant in its enjoyment, is so far
good in itself; but beyond itself it is evil in its
character of a destructive agent among things
greater than itself. In the summation of the

[95]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


more complete fact it has secured a descent
towards nothingness, in contrast to the creative-
ness of what can without qualification be termed
good. Evil is positive and destructive; what
is good is positive and creative.

This instability of evil does not necessarily
lead to progress. On the contrary, the evil
in itself leads to the world losing forms of
attainment in which that evil manifests itself.
Either the species ceases to exist, or it sinks
back into a stage in which it ranks below the
possibility of that form of evil. For example,
a species whose members are always in pain
will either cease to exist, or lose the delicacy
of perception which results in that pain, or
develop a finer and more subtle relationship
among its bodily parts.

Thus evil promotes its own elimination by
destruction, or degradation, or by elevation.
But in its own nature it is unstable. It must
be noted that the state of degradation to
which evil leads, when accomplished, is not in
itself evil, except by comparison with what

[96]


BODY. AND SPIRIT


might have been. A hog is not an evil beast,
but when a man is degraded to the level of a
hog, with the accompanying atrophy of finer
elements, he is no more evil than a hog. The
evil of the final degradation lies in the com-
parison of what is with what might have been.
During the process of degradation the com-
parison is an evil for the man himself, and at
its final stage it remains an evil for others.

But in this last point respecting the evil for
others, it becomes plain that, with a suffi-
ciently comprehensive view, a stable state of
final degradation is not reached. For the
relationships with society and the indirect
effects have to be taken into account. Also
destruction when accomplished is not an evil
for the thing destroyed. For there is no such
thing. Again the evil lies in the loss to the
social environment. There is evil when things
are at cross purposes.

The contrast in the world between evil and
good is the contrast between the turbulence
of evil and the “peace which passeth all

[97]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


understanding.” There is a self-preservation
inherent in that which is good in itself. Its
destruction may come from without but not
from within. Good people of narrow sympa-
thies are apt to be unfeeling and unprogressive,
enjoying their egotistical goodness. Their case,
on a higher level, is analogous to that of the
man completely degraded to a hog. They have
reached a state of stable goodness, so far as
their own interior life is concerned. This
type of moral correctitude is, on a larger
view, so like evil that the distinction is
trivial.

Thus if God be an actual entity which
enters into every creative phase and yet is
above change, He must be exempt from
internal inconsistency which is the note of
evil. Since God is actual, He must include
in himself a synthesis of the total universe.
There is, therefore, in God’s nature the aspect
of the realm of forms as qualified by the
world, and the aspect of the world as quali-
fied by the forms. His completion, so that

[98]


BODY AND SPIRIT


He is exempt from transition into something
else, must mean that his nature remains
self-consistent in relation to all change.

Thus God is the measure of the aesthetic
consistency of the world. There is some
consistency in creative action, because it is
conditioned by his immanence.

If we trace the evil in the world to the
determinism derived from God, then the incon-
sistency in the world is derived from the con-
sistency of God. Also the incompletion in
the world is derivative from the completion
of God.

The temporal world exhibits two sides of
itself. On one side it exhibits an order in
matter of fact, and a self-contrast with ideals,
which show that its creative passage is subject
to the immanence of an unchanging actual
entity. On the other side its incompletion,
and its evil, show that the temporal world is
to be construed in terms of additional forma-
tive elements which are not definable in the
terms which are applicable to God.

[99]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


V. VALUE AND THE PURPOSE OF GOD

The purpose of God is the attainment of
value in the temporal world. An active
purpose is the adjustment of the present for
the sake of adjustment of value in the future,
immediately or remotely.

Value is inherent in actuality itself. To be
an actual entity is to have a self-interest.
This self-interest is a feeling of self-valuation;
it is an emotional tone. The value of other
things, not one’s self, is the derivative value
of being elements contributing to this ultimate
self-interest. This self-interest is the interest
of what one’s existence, as in that epochal
occasion, comes to. It is the ultimate enjoy-
ment of being actual.

But the actuality is the enjoyment, and
this enjoyment is the experiencing of value.
For an epochal occasion is a microcosm in-
clusive of the whole universe. This unification
of the universe, whereby its various elements
are combined into aspects of each other, is an
atomic unit within the real world.

[100]


BODY AND SPIRIT


Such an ultimate concrete fact is of the
nature of an act of perceptivity. But, if we
are speaking of the non-mental facts, such
perceptivity is blind. It is without reflective
consciousness; it is the self-value of its own
microcosmic apprehension. The self-value is
the unit fact which emerges. In calling it a
perceptivity, or an apprehension, we are
already analyzing it into the separate ingre-
dients which go to form the one emergent thing.
Each actual entity is an arrangement of the
whole universe, actual and ideal, whereby
there is constituted that self-value which is
the entity itself.

Thus the epochal occasion has two sides.
On one side it is a mode of creativity bringing
together the universe. ‘This side is the oc-
casion as the cause of itself, its own creative
act. We are here conceiving the creation as
the reverse of our analysis. For in our
description we are holding the elements apart;
whereas in the creation they are put together.

On the other side, the occasion is the

[101]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


creature. This creature is that one emergent
fact. This fact is the self-value of the creative
act. But there are not two actual entities,
the creativity and the creature. There is
only one entity which is the self-creating
creature.

The description of the variety of aspects,
under which the various actual occasions enter
into each other’s natures, is the description
of the various relationships within the real
physical and spiritual worlds.

The mental occasion is derivative from its
physical counterpart. It is also equally of the
character of a perceptivity issuing into value-
feeling, but it is a reflective perceptivity.

There are two routes of creative passage
from a physical occasion. One is towards
another physical occasion, and the other is
towards the derivative reflective occasion.
The physical route links together physical
occasions as successive temporal incidents in
the life of a body. The other route links
this bodily life with a correlative mental life.

[102]


BODY AND SPIRIT


A mental occasion is an ultimate fact in the
spiritual world, just as a physical occasion of
blind perceptivity is an ultimate fact in the
physical world. ‘There is an essential reference
from one world to the other.

There is no such thing as bare value.
There is always a specific value, which is the
created unit of feeling arising out of the
specific mode of concretion of the diverse
elements. These different specific value-feel-
ings are comparable amid their differences;
and the ground for this comparability is what
is here termed ‘“‘value.”

This comparability grades the various oc-
casions in respect to the intensiveness of
value. The zero of intensiveness means the
collapse of actuality. All intensive quantity
is merely the contribution of some one ele-
ment in the synthesis to this one intensiveness
of value.

Various occasions are thus comparable in
respect to their relative depths of actuality.
Occasions differ in importance of actuality. Thus

[103]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


the purpose of God in the attainment of value
is in a sense a creative purpose. Apart from
God, the remaining formative elements would
fail in their functions. There would be no
creatures, since, apart from harmonious order,
the perceptive fusion would be a confusion
neutralizing achieved feeling. Here “feeling”
is used as a synonym for “‘actuality.”

The adjustment is the reason for the world.
It is not the case that there is an actual
world which accidentally happens to exhibit
an order of nature. There is an actual world
because there is an order in nature. If there
were no order, there would be no world. Also
since there is a world, we know that there is
an order. The ordering entity is a necessary
element in the metaphysical situation pre-
sented by the actual world.

This line of thought extends Kant’s argu-
ment. He saw the necessity for God in the
moral order. But with his metaphysics he
rejected the argument from the cosmos. The
metaphysical doctrine, here expounded, finds

[104]


BODY AND SPIRIT


the foundations of the world in the esthetic
experience, rather than—as with Kant—in
the cognitive and conceptive experience. All
order is therefore esthetic order, and the
moral order is merely certain aspects of ss-
thetic order. The actual world is the outcome
of the aesthetic order, and the esthetic order
is derived from the immanence of God.


VI. BODY AND MIND


Descartes grounded his philosophy on an
entirely different metaphysical description of
the actual world. He started with cogitating
minds, and with extended bodies which are
the organic and inorganic bits of matter.

Now in some sense no one doubts but that
there are bodies and minds. The only point
at issue is the status of such bodies and minds
in the scheme of things. Descartes affirmed
that they were individual substances, so that
each bit of matter is a substance, and each
mind is a substance. He also states what he
means by a substance. He says:

[105]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


And when we conceive of substance, we
merely conceive an existent thing which
requires nothing but itself in order to
exist. To speak truth, nothing but God
answers to this description as being that
which is absolutely self-sustaining, for we
perceive that there is no other created
thing which can exist without being
sustained by his power... .

Created substances, however, whether
corporeal or thinking, may be conceived
under this common concept; for they are
things which need only the concurrence
of God in order to exist... . When we
perceive any attribute, we therefore con-
clude that some existing thing or sub-
stance to which it may be attributed, is
necessarily present.’

These sentences are a summary of the pre-
supposition of scientific thought in recent
centuries: that the world is composed of bits
of stuff with attributes. There are insuperable


’Principles of Philosophy, LI and LII. Translated by Haldane and Ross.
[106]


BODY AND SPIRIT


difficulties in Descartes’ view which have led
to attempts at simplification, keeping his
general supposition of stuff with attributes.

Note that Descartes presupposes three types
of substance—namely, God, bits of matter,
minds. Descartes’ proof of the existence of
God is accepted by very few philosophers,
religious or otherwise. Indeed, given his
starting point, it is difficult to see how any
proof can be found.

The simplifications all concern dropping
either one or two of these types of substances.
For example, dropping God, and retaining
only matter and mind; or dropping God and
minds, and retaining the matter, as with
Hobbes; or dropping matter, and retaining
God and minds, as with Berkeley; or dropping
matter and minds, and retaining God alone.
In this latter case, the temporal world be-
comes an appearance forming an attribute
of God.

But the main point of all such philosophies
is that they presuppose individual substance,

[107]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


either one or many individual substances,
“which requires nothing but itself in order to
exist.”” This presupposition is exactly what is
denied in the more Platonic description which
has been given in this lecture. ‘There is no
entity, not even God, “which requires nothing
but itself in order to exist.”

According to the doctrine of this lecture,
every entity is in its essence social and re-
quires the society in order to exist. In fact,
the society for each entity, actual or ideal, is
the all inclusive universe, including its ideal
forms.

But Descartes has the great merit that he
states facts which any philosophy must fit
into its scheme. There are bits of matter, and
there are minds. Both matter and mind have
to be fitted into the metaphysical scheme.

Now, according to the doctrine of this
lecture, the most individual actual entity is a
definite act of perceptivity. So matter and
mind, which persist through a route of such
occasions, must be relatively abstract; and

[108]


BODY AND SPIRIT


they must gain their specific individualities
from their respective routes. The character of
a bit of matter must be something common
to each occasion of its route; and analogously,
the character of a mind must be something
common to each occasion of its route. Each
bit of matter, and each mind, is a subordinate
community—in that sense analogous to the
actual world.

But each occasion, in its character of being
a finished creature, is a value of some definite
specific sort. ‘Thus a mind must be a route
whose various occasions exhibit some com-
munity of type of value. Similarly a bit of
matter—or an electron—must be a route
whose various occasions exhibit some com-
munity of type of value.

Again in such a route—material or mental—
the environment will also partially determine the
forms of the occasions. But that which the oc-
casions have in common, so as to form a route
of mind or a route of matter, must be derived
by inheritance from the antecedent members

[109]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


of the route. The environment may favour
this inheritance or may obstruct it. But such
influence must be in the background so that
there is a real transmission of the common
element along the route.

In the case of men and animals, there are
obviously routes of mind and routes of matter
in the very closest connection, which we will
consider more particularly in a moment. In
the case of a bit of inorganic matter, any
associate route of mentality seems to be
negligible.

A belief in purely spiritual beings means, on
this metaphysical theory, that there are routes
of mentality in respect to which associate
material routes are negligible, or entirely
absent. At the present moment the orthodox
belief is that for all men after death there are
such routes, and that for all animals after
death there are no such routes,

Also at present it is generally held that a
purely spiritual being is necessarily immortal.
The doctrine here developed gives no warrant

[110]


BODY AND SPIRIT


for such a belief. It is entirely neutral on the
question of immortality, or on the existence
of purely spiritual beings other than God.
There is no reason why such a question should
not be decided on more special evidence,
religious or otherwise, provided that it is
trustworthy. In this lecture we are merely
considering evidence with a certain breadth of
extension throughout mankind. Until that
evidence has yielded its systematic theory,
special evidence is indefinitely weakened in its
effect.
VII. THE CREATIVE PROCESS


This account of what is meant by the en-
during existence of matter and of mind
explains such endurance as exemplifying the
order immanent in the world. The solid
earth survives because there is an order laid
upon the creativity in virtue of which second
after second, minute after minute, hour after
hour, day after day, year after year, century
after century, age after age, the creative


[111]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


energy finds in the maintenance of that com-
plex form a centre of experienced perceptivity
focusing the universe into one unity.

It survives because the universe is a process
of attaining instances of definite experience
out of its own elements. Each such instance
embraces the whole, omitting nothing, whether
it be ideal form or actual fact. But it brings
them into its own unity of feeling under
gradations of relevance and of irrelevance,
and thereby by this limitation issues into
that definite experience which it is.

Accordingly, any given instance of experi-
ence is only possible so far as the antecedent
facts permit. For they are required in order
to constitute it. The maintenance, throughout
ages of life history, of a given type of experi-
ence, in instance after instance of its separate
occasions, requires, therefore, the stable order
of the actual world.

The creative process is thus to be discerned
in that transition by which one occasion,
already actual, enters into the birth of another

[112]


BODY AND SPIRIT


instance of experienced value. There is not
one simple line of transition from occasion to
occasion, though there may be a dominant
line. The whole world conspires to produce a
new creation. It presents to the creative proc-
ess its opportunities and its limitations.

The limitations are the opportunities. The
essence of depth of actuality—that is of vivid
experience—is definiteness. Now to be definite
always means that all the elements of a com-
plex whole contribute to some one effect, to
the exclusion of others. The creative process
is a process of exclusion to the same extent
as it is a process of inclusion. In this connec-
tion “‘to exclude” means to relegate to irrele-
vance in the esthetic unity, and “‘to include”
means to elicit relevance to that unity.

The birth of a new instance is the passage
into novelty. Consider how any one actual
fact, which I will call the ground, can enter
into the creative process. The novelty which
enters into the derivate instance is the in-
formation of the actual world with a new

[113]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


set of ideal forms. In the most literal sense
the lapse of time is the renovation of the
world with ideas. A great philosopher*® has
said that time is the mind of space. In
respect to one particular new birth of one
centre of experience, this novelty of ideal
forms will be called the “consequent.” Thus
we are now considering the particular rele-
vance of the consequent to the particular
ground supplied by one antecedent occasion.

The derivate includes the fusion of the
particular ground with the consequent, so far
as the consequent is graded by its relevance
to that ground.

In this fusion of ground with consequent,
the creative process brings together something
which is actual and something which, at its
entry into that process, is not actual. The
process is the achievement of actuality by the
ideal consequent, in virtue of its union with
the actual ground. In the phrase of Aristotle,
the process is the fusion of being with not-
being.

5Cf, Alexander, Mind, Space, and Deity, Vol. II, p. 43, et passim.

[114]


BODY AND SPIRIT


The birth of a new esthetic experience
depends on the maintenance of two principles
by the creative purpose:

1. The novel consequent must be
graded in relevance so as to preserve
some identity of character with the
ground.

2. The novel consequent must be
graded in relevance so as to preserve
some contrast with the ground in respect
to that same identity of character.

These two principles are derived from the
cectrine’ that: an actual fact is) a fact of
eesthetic experience. All esthetic experience
is feeling arising out of the realization of
contrast under identity.

Thus the consequent must agree with the
ground in general type so as to preserve defi-
niteness, but it must contrast with it in
respect to contrary instances so as to obtain
vividness and quality. In the physical world,
this principle of contrast under an identity
expresses itself in the physical law that vibra-
tion enters into the ultimate nature of atomic


[115]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


organisms. Vibration is the recurrence of
contrast within identity of type. The whole
possibility of measurement in the physical
world depends on this principle. ‘To measure
is to count vibrations. |

Thus physical quantities are aggregates of
physical vibrations, and physical vibrations
are the expression among the abstractions of
physical science of the fundamental principle
of esthetic experience.

Another example of this same principle is to
be found in the connection between body and
mind. Both mind and body refer to their
life-history of separate concrete occasions. So
the connection which we seek is to be found
in the creative process relating a physical
occasion, in the life of the body, to its corre-
sponding mental occasion in the life of the
mind.

The physical occasion enters into the mental
occasion, as already actual, and as contrib-
uting to its ground. The reversion from its
ground, which the consequent of ideal novelty

[116]


BODY AND SPIRIT


must exhibit, is now of the most fundamental
character. The reversion is the undoing of
the synthesis exhibited in the ground. ‘Thus
the transition from bodily occasion to mental
occasion exhibits a new dimension of transi-
tion from that exhibited in the transition from
bodily occasion to bodily occasion. In the
latter transition there is the novelty of
contrast within the one concept of synthesis.
In the former, the contrast is the contrast
of synthesis itself with its opposite, which is
analysis.

Thus in the birth of the mental occasion
the consequent of ideal novelty enters into
reality, and possesses an analytic force over
against the synthetic ground. Ideal forms
thus synthesized into a mental occasion are
termed concepts. Concepts meet blind experi-
ence with an analytic force. Their synthesis
with physical occasion, as ground, is the per-
ceptive analysis of the blind physical occasion
in respect to its degree of relevance to the
concepts.

[117]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


The phrase ‘‘immediate experience” can have
either of two meanings, according as it refers
to the physical or to the mental occasion. It
may mean a complete concretion of physical
relationships in the unity of a blind percep-
tivity. In this sense “immediate experience”
means an ultimate physical fact. But in a
secondary, and more usual, sense it means the
consciousness of physical experience. Such con-
sciousness is a mental occasion. It has the
character of being an analysis of physical expe-
rience by synthesis with the concepts involved
in the mentality. Such analysis is incomplete,
because it is dependent on the limitations of
the concepts. This limitation arises from the
grading of the relevance of the concepts in the
mental occasion. The most complete concrete
fact is dipolar, physical and mental. But, for
some specific purpose, the proportion of impor-
tance, as shared between the two poles, may
vary from negligibility to dominance of either
pole.

The value realized in the mental occasion is


[118]


BODY AND SPIRIT


knowledge-value. This knowledge-value is the
issue of the full character of the creativity
into the creature world. There is nothing in
the creativity which fails to issue into the
actual world. ‘Thus the creativity with a pur-
pose issues into the mental creature conscious
of an ideal. Also God, as conditioning the
creativity with his harmony of apprehension,
issues into the mental creature as moral judg-
ment according to a perfection of ideals.

The order of the world is no accident.
There is nothing actual which could be actual
without some measure of order. The religious
insight is the grasp of this truth: That the
order of the world, the depth of reality of the
world, the value of the world in its whole and
in its parts, the beauty of the world, the zest
of life, the peace of life, and the mastery of
evil, are all bound together—not accidentally,
but by reason of this truth: that the universe
exhibits a creativity with infinite freedom, and
a realm of forms with infinite possibilities;
but that this creativity and these forms are


[119]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


together impotent to achieve actuality apart
from the completed ideal harmony, which is


God.


[120]


IV
TRUTH AND CRITICISM


CHAPTER IV
TRUTH AND CRITICISM


I. THE DEVELOPMENT OF DOGMA


In human nature there is no such separate
function as a special religious sense. In mak-
ing this assertion, I am agreeing with the
following quotation:

Those who tend to identify religious
experience with the activity of some
peculiar organ or element of the mental
life have recently made much of the sub-
conscious. Here there seems to be a safe
retreat for the hard-pressed advocates of
the uniqueness of religious experience.’

Religious truth must be developed from
knowledge acquired when our ordinary senses
and intellectual operations are at their highest
pitch of discipline. ‘To move one step from
this position towards the dark recesses of


1Cf. Prof. E. S. Ames, The Psychology of Religious Experience, p. 291.
[123]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


abnormal psychology is to surrender finally
any hope of a solid foundation for religious
doctrine.

Religion starts from the generalization of
final truths first perceived as exemplified in
particular instances. These truths are ampli-
fied into a coherent system and applied to the
interpretation of life. They stand or fall—
like other truths—by their success in this in-
terpretation. ‘The peculiar character of reli-
gious truth is that it explicitly deals with
values. It brings into our consciousness that
permanent side of the universe which we can
care for. It thereby provides a meaning, in
terms of value, for our own existence, a mean-
ing which flows from the nature of things.

It is not true, however, that we observe
best when we are entirely devoid of emotion.
Unless there is a direction of interest, we do
not observe at all. Further, our capacity for
observation is limited. Accordingly, when we
are observing some things, we are in a bad
position for observing other things.

[124]


TRUTH AND CRITICISM


Thus there are certain emotional states
which are most favourable for a peculiar con-
centration on topics of religious interest, just
as other states facilitate the apprehension of
arithmetical truths. Also, emotional states are
related to states of the body. Most people are
more likely to make arithmetical slips when
they are tired in the evening. But we still
believe that arithmetic holds good from sun-
down to cockcrow.

Again, it is not true that all people are on a
level in respect to their perceptive powers.
Some people appear to realize continuously,
and at a higher level, types of emotional and
perceptive experience, which we _ recognize
as corresponding to those periods of our own
lives most worthy of confidence for that sort
of experience. In so far as what they say
interprets our own best moments, it is reason-
able to trust to the evidential force of their
experience.

These considerations are all commonplaces,
but it is necessary to keep them clearly in

[125]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


mind when we endeavour to form our philos-
ophy of religious knowledge.

A dogma is the precise enunciation of a gen-
eral truth, divested so far as possible from
particular exemplification. Such precise ex-
pression is in the long run a condition for
vivid realization, for effectiveness, for appre-
hension of width of scope, and for survival.

For example, when the Greeks, such as
Pythagoras or Euclid, formulated accurately
mathematical dogmas, the general truths
which the Egyptians had acted upon for more
than thirty generations became thereby of
greater importance.

It is not the case, however, that our ap-
prehension of a general truth is dependent
upon its accurate verbal expression. For it
would follow that we could never be dissatis-
fied with the verbal expression of something
that we had never apprehended. But this
consciousness of failure to express our accurate
meaning must have haunted most of us.

For example, the notion of irrational num-

[126]


TRUTH AND CRITICISM


ber had been used in mathematics for over
two thousand years before it received accurate
definition in the last quarter of the nine-
teenth century. Also, Newton and Leibnitz
introduced the differential calculus, which was
the foundation of modern mathematical phys-
ics. But the mathematical notions involved
did not receive adequate verbal expression for
two hundred and fifty years.

Such recondite examples are quite unneces-
sary. We know more of the characters of
those who are dear to us than we can express
accurately in words. We may recognize the
truth of some statement about them. It will
be a new statement about something which
we had already apprehended but had never
formulated.

This example brings out another fact: that
a one-sided formulation may be true, but may
have the effect of a lie by its distortion of
emphasis. Such distortion does not stand in
its character of a truth, but depends upon
those who are affected by it. So far as the

[127]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


make-up of an individual mind is concerned,
there is a proportion in truth as well as in art.

Thus an ill-balanced zeal for the propaga-
tion of dogma bears witness to a certain
coarseness of aesthetic sensitiveness. It shows
a strain of indifference—due perhaps to arro-
gance, perhaps to rashness, perhaps to mere
ignorance—a strain of indifference to the fact
that others may require a proportion of formu-
lation different from that suitable for our-
selves. Perhaps our pet dogmas require
correction: they may even be wrong.

The fate of a word has to the historian the
value of a document. The modern unfavour-
able implications of the kindred words, dogma,
dogmatic, dogmatist, tell the story of some
failure in habits of thought. The word
“dogma” originally means an “opinion,” and
thence more especially a “‘philosophic opinion.”
Thus, for example, the Greek physician, Galen,
uses the phrase “dogmatic physicians” to
mean “physicians who guide themselves by
general principles’—surely a praiseworthy

[128]


TRUTH AND CRITICISM


practice. The nearest Greek dictionary will
give this elementary information. But the
dictionary—and this is why I have quoted it—
gives an ominous addition to the information
about Galen. It says that Galen contrasts
“dogmatic physicians” with “empiric physi-
cians.” If you then refer to the word “em-
piric,” you will find that “empiric physicians’
contended that “experience was the one thing
needful.” In this lecture we have to investi-
gate the application to religion of this contrast
between “dogmatic”? and “empiric.”

The philosophy of expression is only now
receiving its proper attention.? In the fram-
ing of dogmas it is only possible to use ideas
which have received a distinct, well-recognized
signification. Also, no idea is determinate in a
vacuum: It has its being as one of a system
of ideas. A dogma is the expression of a fact
as it appears within a certain sphere of
thought. You cannot convey a dogma by


2Cf, Symbolism and Truth, by R. M. Eaton, Assistant Professor in
Harvard University. Harvard University Press, 1925.


[129]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


merely translating the words; you must also
understand the system of thought to which
it is relevant. To take a very obvious ex-
ample, “The Fatherhood of God” is a phrase
which would have a significance for a Roman
citizen of the early Republic different from
that which it has for a modern American—
stern for the one, tender for the other.

In estimating the validity of a dogma, it
must be projected against the alternatives to
it within that sphere of thought. You cannot
claim absolute finality for a dogma without
claiming a commensurate finality for the
sphere of thought within which it arose. If
the dogmas of the Christian Church from the
second to the sixth centuries express finally
and sufficiently the truths concerning the topics
about which they deal, then the Greek phi-
losophy of that period had developed a system
of ideas of equal finality. You cannot limit
the inspiration to a narrow circle of creeds.

A dogma—in the sense of a precise state-
ment—can never be final; it can only be ade-

[130]


TRUTH AND CRITICISM


quate in its adjustment of certain abstract
concepts. But the estimate of the status of
these concepts remains for determination.

You cannot rise above the adequacy of the
terms you employ. A dogma may be true in
the sense that it expresses such interrelations
of the subject matter as are expressible within
the set of ideas employed. But if the same
dogma be used intolerantly so as to check the
employment of other modes of analyzing the
subject matter, then, for all its truth, it will be
doing the work of a falsehood.

Progress in truth—truth of science and
truth of religion—is mainly a progress in the
framing of concepts, in discarding artificial
abstractions or partial metaphors, and in
evolving notions which strike more deeply into
the root of reality.


II. EXPERIENCE AND EXPRESSION


Expression is the one fundamental sacra-
ment. It is the outward and visible sign of
an inward and spiritual grace. It follows that,

[131]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


in the process of forming a common expression
of direct intuition, there is first a stage of
primary expression into some medium of sense-
experience which each individual contributes
at first hand. No one can do this for another.
It is the contribution of each to the knowledge
of all.

This primary expression mainly clothes
itself in the media of action and of words, but
also partly of art. Their expressiveness to
others arises from the fact that they are inter-
pretable in terms of the intuitions of the
recipients. Apart from such interpretation,
the modes of expression remain accidental,
unrationalized happenings of mere sense-experi-
ence; but with such interpretation, the recip-
ient extends his apprehension of the ordered
universe by penetrating into the inward nature
of the originator of the expression. There is
then a community of intuition by reason of
the sacrament of expression proffered by one
and received by the other.

But the expressive sign is more than inter-

[132]


TRUTH AND’ CRITICISM


pretable. It is creative. It elicits the intui-
tion which interprets it. It cannot elicit what
is not there. A note on a tuning fork can
elicit a response from a piano. But the piano
has already in it the string tuned to the same
note. In the same way the expressive sign
elicits the existent intuition which would not
otherwise emerge into individual distinctive-
ness. Again in theological language, the sign
works ex opere operato, but only within the
limitation that the recipient be patient of the
creative action.

There is very little really first-hand expres-
sion in the world. By this I mean that most
expression is what may be termed responsive
expression, namely, expression which expresses
intuitions elicited by the expressions of others.
This is as it should be; since in this way what
is permanent, important, and widely spread,
receives more and more a clear definition.

But there is need for something more than
this responsive expression. For it is not true
that there is easy apprehension of the great

[133]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


formative generalities. They are embedded
under the rubbish of irrelevant detail. Men
knew a lot about dogs before they thought of
backbones and of vertebrates. ‘The great intui-
tions, which in their respective provinces set all
things right, dawn but slowly upon history.

With this prevalence of responsive expres-
sion, we are used to a learned literature and to
imitative conduct. When we get anything
which is neither learned nor imitative, it is
often very evil. But sometimes it is genius.

The history of culture shows that originality
of expression is not a process of continuous
development. There are antecedent periods
of slow evolution. Finally, as if touched by a
spark, a very few persons, one, two, or three,
in some particular province of experience, ex-
press completely novel intuitions. Such intui-
tions can be responded to, analyzed in terms
of their relationships to other ideas, fused with
other forms of experience, but as individual
primary intuitions within their own province
of experience they are not surpassed.

[134]


TRUTH AND CRITICISM


The world will not repeat Dante, Shake-
speare, Socrates, or the Greek tragedians.
These men, in connection with the tiny groups
forming their immediate environments of as-
sociates and successors and perhaps of equals,
add something once and for all. We develop
in connection with them, but not beyond
them, in respect to those definite intuitions
which they flashed upon the world. These
examples are taken from the circle of litera-
ture merely for the sake of easy intelligibility.

There are two points to be noticed about
them. In the first place, they are associated
with a small stage fitted for their peculiar
originality. Standardized size can do almost
anything, except foster the growth of genius.
That is the privilege of the tiny oasis. Goethe
surveyed the world, but it was from Weimar;
Shakespeare is universal, but he lived in
Elizabethan England. We cannot think of
Socrates outside Athens.

The second characteristic is that their pecu-
liar originality is the very element in their

[135]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


expression which remains unformularized. They
deal with what all men know, and they make
it new. They do not bring to the world a
new formula nor do they discover new facts,
but in expressing their apprehensions of the
world, they leave behind them an element of
novelty—a new expression forever evoking its
proper response.

Some original men do express themselves
in formule: but the formula then expresses
something beyond itself. The formula is then
secondary to its meaning; it is, in a sense, a
literary device. The formula sinks in impor-
tance, or even is abandoned; but its meaning
remains fructifying in the world, finding new
expression to suit new circumstances. The
formula was not wrong, but it was limited to
its own sphere of thought.

In particular, the view that there are a few
fundamental dogmas is arbitrary. Every true
dogma which formulates with some adequacy
the facts of a complex religious experience is
fundamental for the individual in question

[136] |


TRUTH AND CRITICISM


and he disregards it at his peril. For formula-
tion increases vividness of apprehension, and
the peril is the loss of an aid in the diffi-
cult task of spiritual ascent.

But every individual suffers from invincible
ignorance; and a dogma which fails to evoke
any response in immediate apprehension stifles
the religious life. ‘There is no mechanical rule
and no escape from the necessity of complete
sincerity either way.

Thus religion is primarily individual, and
the dogmas of religion are clarifying modes
of external expression. The intolerant use of
religious dogmas has practically destroyed
their utility for a great, if not the greater part,
of the civilized world.

Expression, and in particular expression by
dogma, is the return from solitariness to
society. There is no such thing as absolute
solitariness. Each entity requires its environ-
ment. ‘Thus man cannot seclude himself from
society.

Even for individual intuitions outward ex-

[137]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


pression is necessary, aS a sacrament in which
the minister and recipient are one. But fur-
ther, what is known in secret must be enjoyed
in common, and must be verified in common.
The immediate conviction of the moment in
this way justifies itself as a rational principle
enlightening the objective world.

The great instantaneous conviction in this
way becomes the Gospel, the good news. It
insists on its universality, because it is either
that or a passing fancy. ‘The conversion of
the Gentiles is both the effect of truth and the
test of truth.

Thus the simplicity of inspiration has passed
from its first expression into responsive experi-
ence. It then disengages itself from particular
experience by formulation in precise dogmas,
and so faces the transformations of history.

In this passage a religion coalesces with
other factors in human life. It is expanded,
explained, modified, adapted. If it was origi-
nally founded upon truth, it maintains its
identity by its recurrence to the inspired sim-

[138]


TRUTH AND CRITICISM


plicity of its origin. The dogmas are state-
ments of how the complex world is to be
expressed in the light of the intuitions funda-
mental to the religion. They are not neces-
sarily simple in character or limited in
number.


Ill. THE THREE TRADITIONS


The divergence in the expression of dogmas
is most clearly shown in the two traditions of
Buddhism and Christianity. ‘This divergence
is important because it reaches down to the
most fundamental religious concepts, namely,
the nature of God, and the aim of life.

There are close analogies between the two
religions. In both there is, in some sense, a
saviour—Christ in the one, and the Buddha
in the other. But their functions differ, ac-
cording to the theologies of the two religions,
In both, the souls of the blessed return to
God. Again, this analogy cloaks a wide diver-
gence; for the respective concepts of God, and
the respective concepts of the meaning of the

[139]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


return of the soul, differ in both cases.

The moral codes have striking analogies.
But again there are divergencies which flow
naturally from the theological differences. To
put it briefly, Buddhism, on the whole, dis-
courages the sense of active personality,
whereas Christianity encourages it. For ex-
ample, modern European philosophy, which
had its origin in Plato and Aristotle, after
sixteen hundred years of Christianity reformu-
lated its problems with increased attention to
the importance of the individual subject of
experience, conceived as an abiding entity
with a transition of experiences. If Europe,
after the Greek period, had been subject to
the Buddhist religion, the change of philosoph-
ical climate would have been in the other
direction.

This reformation of philosophy has empha-
sized the divergence. For the. abiding individ-
ual substance, mind or matter, is now
conceived as the subject supporting the transi-
tion of experiences. Thus, according to preva-

[140]


TRUTH AND CRITICISM


lent Western notions, the moral aims of
Buddhism are directed to altering the first
principles of metaphysics.

The absolute idealism, so influential in
Europe and America during the last third of
the nineteenth century, and still powerful
notwithstanding the reaction from it, was un-
doubtedly a reaction towards Buddhistic meta-
physics on the part of the Western mentality.
The multiplicity of finite enduring individuals
were relegated to a world of appearances,
and the ultimate reality was centred in an
Absolute.

But meanwhile science had appeared as a
third organized system of thought which in
many respects played the part of a theology,
by reason of the answers which it gave to
current theological questions. Science sug-
gested a cosmology; and whatever suggests a
cosmology, suggests a religion.

From its very beginning in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries, science emphasized
ideas which modified the religious picture of

[141]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


the world. As the medieval picture dissolved,
religion and philosophy equally received shock
after shock, with a final culmination in the
middle of the nineteenth century.

Philosophy, by its nature, was less wedded
to its aboriginal picture of the world than was
religion. Accordingly it divided itself into two
streams of thought. One stream subordinated
itself entirely to science, and has asserted its
mission to be the discussion of the proper co-
ordination of notions employed in current
scientific practice. The other stream, which
is that of absolute idealism, side-tracked
science by proclaiming that science dealt with
finite truths respecting a world of appearances;
and that these appearances were not very real,
and that these truths were not very true. It
reserved for philosophy the determination of
all that was to be known concerning the
ultimate reality, and concerning our own partic-
ipation in that final absolute fact.

The importance of rational religion in the
history of modern culture is that it stands or

[142]


TRUTH AND CRITICISM


falls with its fundamental position, that we
know more than can be formulated in one
finite systematized scheme of abstractions,
however important that scheme may be in the
elucidation of some aspect of the order of
things.

The final principle of religion is that there is
a wisdom in the nature of things, from which
flow our direction of practice, and our pos-
sibility of the theoretical analysis of fact. It
grounds this principle upon two sources of
evidence, first upon our success in various
special theoretical sciences, physical and other-
wise; and secondly, upon our knowledge of a
discernment of ordered relationships, especially
in gesthetic valuations, which stretches far
beyond anything which has been expressed
systematically in words.

According to religion, this discernment of
relationships forms in itself the very substance
of existence. The formulations are the froth
upon the surface. Religion insists that the
world is a mutually adjusted disposition of

[143]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


things, issuing in value for its own sake. This
is the very point that science is always for-
getting.

Religions commit suicide when they find
their inspirations in their dogmas. The inspi-
ration of religion lies in the history of religion.
By this I mean that it is to be found in the
primary expressions of the intuitions of the
finest types of religious lives. The sources of
religious belief are always growing, though some
supreme expressions may lie in the past. Rec-
ords of these sources are not formule. They
elicit in us intuitive response which pierces
beyond dogma.

But dogmatic expression is necessary. For
whatever has objective validity is capable of
partial expression in terms of abstract con-
cepts, so that a coherent doctrine arises which
elucidates the world beyond the locus of the
origin of the dogmas in question.

Also exact statements are the media by
which identical intuitions into the world can
be identified amid a wide variety of circum-
stances.


[144]


TRUTH AND CRITICISM


But the dogmas, however true, are only
bits of the truth, expressed in terms which in
some ways are over-assertive and in other
ways lose the essence of truth. When exactly
understood in relation to an exact system of
philosophic thought, they may—or may not—
be exactly true.

But in respect to this exact truth, they are
very abstract—much more abstract than the
representations of them in popular thought.
Also in fact, there never has been any exact,
complete system of philosophic thought, and
there never has been any exact understanding
of dogmas, an understanding which has been
properly confined to strict interpretation in
terms of a philosophic system, complete or
incomplete.

Accordingly, though dogmas have their
measure of truth, which is unalterable, in
their precise forms they are narrow, limitative,
and alterable: in effect untrue, when carried
over beyond the proper scope of their utility.

A system of dogmas may be the ark within

[145]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


which the Church floats safely down the
flood-tide of history. But the Church will
perish unless it opens its window and lets out
the dove to search for an olive branch.’ Some-
times even it will do well to disembark on
Mount Ararat and build a new altar to the
divine Spirit—an altar neither in Mount
Gerizim nor yet at Jerusalem.

The decay of Christianity and Buddhism,
as determinative influences in modern thought,
is partly due to the fact that each religion has
unduly sheltered itself from the other. The
self-sufficient pedantry of learning and the
confidence of ignorant zealots have combined
to shut up each religion in its own forms of
thought. Instead of looking to each other for
deeper meanings, they have remained self-
satisfied and unfertilized.

Both have suffered from the rise of the
third tradition, which is science, because
neither of them had retained the requisite
flexibility of adaptation. Thus the real, prac-
tical problems of religion have never been

[146]


TRUTH AND CRITICISM


adequately studied in the only way in which
such problems can be studied, namely, in the
school of experience.

One most obvious problem is how to save
the intermediate imaginative representations
of spiritual truths from loss of effectiveness,
if the possibility of modifications of dogma are
admitted. The religious spirit is not identical
with dialectical acuteness. Thus these inter-
mediate representations play a great part in
religious life. ‘They are enshrined in modes of
worship, in popular religious literature, and in
art. Religions cannot do without them; but
if they are allowed to dominate, uncriticised
by dogma or by recurrence to the primary
sources of religious inspiration, they are prop-
erly to be termed idols. In Christian history,
the charge of idolatry has been bandied to and
fro among rival theologians. Probably, if
taken in its wide sense, it rests with equal
truth on all the main churches, Protestant and
Catholic. Idolatry is the necessary product
of static dogmas.

[147]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


But the problem of so handling popular
forms of thought as to keep their full reference
to the primary sources, and yet also to keep
them in touch with the best critical dogmas of
their times, is no easy one. The chief figures
in the history of the Christian Church who
seem to have grasped explicitly its central
importance were, Origen in the Church of
Alexandria, in the early part of the third
century, and Erasmus in the early part of the
sixteenth century. Their analogous fates show
the wavering attitude of the Christian Church,
culminating in lapses into dogmatic idolatry.
It must, however, be assigned to the great
credit of the Papacy of his time, that Eras-
mus never in his lifetime lost the support of the
courtof Rome.’ Unfortunately Erasmus, though
a good man, was no hero, and the moral atmos-
phere of the Renaissance Papacy was not
equal to its philosophic insight. In the phrase
of Leo X, the quarrel of monks began; and
yet another golden opportunity was lost,


*Erasmus received the offer of a Cardinalate in 1534, and died in 1536,
his works have since been placed on the Index.


[148]


TRUTH AND CRITICISM


while rival pedants cut out neat little dog-
matic systems to serve as the unalterable
measure of the Universe.


IV, THE NATURE OF GOD


The general history of religious thought, of
which the Reformation period is a particular
instance, is that of the endeavour of mankind
to interpret the great standard experiences as
leading to a more definite knowledge than can
be derived from a metaphysic which founds
itself upon general experience.

There can be nothing inherently illegitimate
in such an attempt. But if we attend to the
general principles which regulate all endeav-
‘ours after clear statement of truth, we must
be prepared to amplify, recast, generalize, and
adapt, so as to absorb into one system all
sources of experience.

The earlier statements will be not so much
wrong, as obscured by trivial limitations, and
as thereby implying an exclusion of comple-
mentary truths. The growth will be in the
proportion of truth.

[149]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


The doctrines—fundamental to religion—of
the nature of God must be construed in this
sense. It is in respect to this doctrine that
the great cleavages of religious thought arise.
The extremes are the doctrine of God as
the impersonal order of the universe, and the
doctrine of God as the one person creating
the universe.

A general concept has to be construed in
terms of a descriptive metaphysical system.
In this concluding section of this course, we
ask what can be said of the nature of God in
terms of the metaphysical description which
has been adopted as the basis of thought in
this course of lectures, and which was more
particularly described in the previous lecture.

To be an actual thing is to be limited. An
actual thing is an elicited feeling-value, which
is analyzable as the outcome of a graded
grasping of the elements of the universe into
the unity of one fact. This grasping together
may be called a perception. The grading
means the grading of relevance of the various

[150]


TRUTH AND CRITICISM


elements, so far as concerns their contribution
to the one actual fact.

The synthesis is the union of what is al-
ready actual with what is, for that occasion,
new for realization. I have called it the union
of the actual ground with the novel conse-
quent. The ground is formed by all the facts
of the world, already actual and graded in
their proportion of relevance. The consequent
is constituted by all the ideal forms of pos-
sibility, graded in their proportion. The
grading of the actual ground arises from the
creativity of some actual fact passing over
into a new form by reason of the fact itself.
The new creativity, under consideration, has
thus already a definite status in the world,
arising from its particular origin. We can
indifferently say that the grading arises from
the status, or the status from the grading.
They are different ways of saying the same
thing.

The grading of the ideal forms arises from
the grading of the actual facts. It is the

[151]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


union of the forms with the facts in such
measure as to elicit a renewed feeling-value,
of the type possible as a novel outcome from
the antecedent facts.

Depth of value is only possible if the ante-
cedent facts conspire in unison. Thus a meas-
ure of harmony in the ground is requisite for
the perpetuation of depth into the future.
But harmony is limitation. Thus rightness of
limitation is essential for growth of reality.

Unlimited possibility and abstract creativity
can procure nothing. The limitation, and the
basis arising from what is already actual, are
both of them necessary and interconnected.

Thus the whole process itself, viewed at
any stage as a definite limited fact which has
issued from the creativity, requires a definite
entity, already actual among the formative
elements, as an antecedent ground for the
entry of the ideal forms into the definite proc-
ess of the temporal world.

But such a complete aboriginal actuality
must differ from actuality in process of reali-

[152]


TRUTH AND CRITICISM


zation in respect to the blind occasions of
perceptivity which issue from process and
require process. These occasions build up
the physical world which is essentially in
transition.

God, who is the ground antecedent to
transition, must include all possibilities of
physical value conceptually, thereby holding
the ideal forms apart in equal, conceptual
realization of knowledge. Thus, as concepts,
they are grasped together in the synthesis of
omniscience.

The limitation of God is his goodness. He
gains his depth of actuality by his harmony of
valuation. It is not true that God is in all
respects infinite. If He were, He would be
evil as well as good. Also this unlimited fu-
sion of evil with good would mean mere
nothingness. He is something decided and is
thereby limited.

He is complete in the sense that his vision
determines every possibility of value. Such
a complete vision codrdinates and adjusts

[153]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


every detail. Thus his knowledge of the re-
lationships of particular modes of value is not
added to, or disturbed, by the realization in
the actual world of what is already concept-
ually realized in his ideal world. This ideal
world of conceptual harmonization is merely
a description of God himself. Thus the nature
of God is the complete conceptual realization
of the realm of ideal forms. The kingdom of
heaven is God. But these forms are not
realized by him in mere bare isolation, but as
elements in the value of his conceptual ex-
perience. Also, the ideal forms are in God’s
vision as contributing to his complete experi-
ence, by reason of his conceptual realization
of their possibilities as elements of value in
any creature. Thus God is the one system-
atic, complete fact, which is the antecedent
ground conditioning every creative act.

The depths of his existence lie beyond the
vulgarities of praise or of power. He gives to
suffering its swift insight into values which
can issue from it. He is the ideal companion

[154]


TRUTH AND CRITICISM


who transmutes what has been lost into a
living fact within his own nature. He is the
mirror which discloses to every creature its
own greatness.

The kingdom of heaven is not the isolation
of good from evil. It is the overcoming of
evil by good. This transmutation of evil into
good enters into the actual world by reason
of the inclusion of the nature of God, which
includes the ideal vision of each actual evil so
met with a novel consequent as to issue in the
restoration of goodness.

God has in his nature the knowledge of evil,
of pain, and of degradation, but it is there as
overcome with what is good. Every fact is
what it is, a fact of pleasure, of joy, of pain,
or of suffering. In its union with God that
fact is not a total loss, but on its finer side is
an element to be woven immortally into the
rhythm of mortal things. Its very evil be-
comes a stepping stone in the all-embracing
ideals of God.

Every event on its finer side introduces God

[155]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


into the world. Through it his ideal vision is
given a base in actual fact to which He
provides the ideal consequent, as a factor
saving the world from the self-destruction of
evil. The power by which God sustains the
world is the power of himself as the ideal. He
adds himself to the actual ground from which
every creative act takes its rise. The world
lives by its incarnation of God in itself.

He transcends the temporal world, because
He is an actual fact in the nature of things. He
is not there as derivative from the world;
He is the actual fact from which the other
formative elements cannot be torn apart.

But equally it stands in his nature that He
is the realization of the ideal conceptual
harmony by reason of which there is an actual
process in the total universe—an evolving
world which is actual because there is order.

The abstract forms are thus the link be-
tween God and the actual world. These forms
are abstract and not real, because in them-
selves they represent no achievement of actual

[156]


TRUTH AND CRITICISM


value. Actual fact always means fusion into
one perceptivity. God is one such conceptual
fusion, embracing the concept of all such
possibilities graded in harmonious, relative
subordination. Each actual occasion in the
temporal world is another such fusion. The
forms belong no more to God than to any one
occasion. Apart from these forms, no rational
description can be given either of God or of
the actual world. Apart from God, there
would be no actual world; and apart from the
actual world with its creativity, there would
be no rational explanation of the ideal vision
which constitutes God.

Each actual occasion gives to the creativity
which flows from it a definite character in two
ways. In one way, as a fact, enjoying its
complex of relationships with the rest of the
world, it contributes a ground—partly good
and partly bad—for the creativity to fuse with
a novel consequent, which will be the outcome
of its free urge. In another way, as trans-
muted in the nature of God, the ideal conse-

[157]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


quent as it stands in his vision is also added.
Thus God in the world is the perpetual vision
of the road which leads to the deeper realities.


V. CONCLUSION


God is that function in the world by reason
of which our purposes are directed to ends
which in our own consciousness are impartial
as to our own interests. He is that element in
life in virtue of which judgment stretches
beyond facts of existence to values of ex-
istence. He is that element in virtue of which
our purposes extend beyond values for our-
selves to values for others. He is that ele-
ment in virtue of which the attainment of
such a value for others transforms itself into
value for ourselves.

He is the binding element in the world.
The consciousness which is individual in us, is
universal in him: the love which is partial in
us is all-embracing in him. Apart from him
there could be no world, because there could
be no adjustment of individuality. His pur-

[158]


TRUTH AND CRITICISM


pose in the world is quality of attainment.
His purpose is always embodied in the partic-
ular ideals relevant to the actual state of the
world. ‘Thus all attainment is immortal in
that it fashions the actual ideals which are
God in the world as it is now. Every act
leaves the world with a deeper or a fainter
impress of God. He then passes into his next
relation to the world with enlarged, or dimin-
ished, presentation of ideal values.

He is not the world, but the valuation of
the world. In abstraction from the course of
events, this valuation is a necessary meta-
physical function. Apart from it, there could
be no definite determination of limitation
required for attainment. But in the actual
world, He confronts what is actual in it with
what is possible for it. Thus He solves all
indeterminations.

The passage of time is the journey of the
world towards the gathering of new ideas into
actual fact. ‘This adventure is upwards and
downwards. Whatever ceases to ascend, fails

[159]


RELIGION IN THE MAKING


to preserve itself and enters upon its inevitable
path of decay. It decays by transmitting its
nature to slighter occasions of actuality, by
reason of the failure of the new forms to
fertilize the perceptive achievements which
constitute its past history. The universe
shows us two aspects: on one side it is phys-
ically wasting, on the other side it is spirit-
ually ascending.

It is thus passing with a slowness, incon-
ceivable in our measures of time, to new
creative conditions, amid which the physical
world, as we at present know it, will be
represented by a ripple barely to be distin-
guished from non-entity.

The present type of order in the world.
has arisen from an unimaginable past, and it
will find its grave in an unimaginable future.
There remain the inexhaustible realm of ab-
stract forms, and creativity, with its shifting
character ever determined afresh by its own
creatures, and God, upon whose wisdom all
forms of order depend.

[160]


ira,
- )


f r eas | a \ & 7
Ae es
- t
s \ >
? \ , au
aa Be
: A ot =
j : r;
ap j 4
Le { -
oS a>


i)
Parr) ee


as
eas.


22h


wieee rele
siel


ati
SETAE
is able


in
3


tetra
Z


ih


:


resets


Talia
af


i


aif


Has
ta savas
othe


i


oa ait
3)
qe ae
ality t na ‘i
sakiths 1 datat


et


itthe


fateh
tay


=


a


shat


ait
are


is


it


i}
ih 0 an
f ay
itt
pele lore
ae


ste
asa


eis
bh


iietise:


a


arp


he


‘ali


Pons
ne
ae


srs


seis
seat


assy
anit


s


