George Whitefield's Journals (George Whitefield, 1740)
==========================================================
Whitefield's Journals — the Great Awakening evangelist's own record of his preaching tours across Britain and America. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

% 


From the RevzzenD 


ETTER from a Gent 
to her F EK IE N 


0 1 
#.. 


_ n J . - _— 
FI 14 $5 8 0 


Hee hrt fbes fallen from Heaven, Oh! Luci, 
the Morning / Iſalah xiy. 2 
Unſtabli as Water, thou ſpalt not excel. G 5 
Battucen Sin in general and Blaſpbemy this is the Difference, 

e that finneth tranſgreſſeth\the Lau: He that blaſphes 
"meth, committeth Impiety againſt the 8 77 


— 


* 
9 , j 
— = * 


, and ſold at u Parnpblet-Shops af 
and Weſtminſter. Mpcexin” 


- Saw WP. 


14 


wy 


A 


REMARKS 


On the RevzarREND 


— * A 


Mr. WY HITEFIELDs 


LE T N R. 


e i 3. 


N Compliance with your Requeſt I fend you 
my Thoughts at laſt concerning this 

'A. Letter, which you obſerve has made ſuch a 
Noiſe in Town; but before I make any Remarks 
on the Letter itſelf, I muſt take notice of its Publi- 
cation to the World; which, not to inſiſt upon the 
wonderful Abſence of good Senſe, good Manners, 
Friendſhip, and, above all, Chriſtian Charity in 
the Writer, is ſo exceeding ſhocking, that every 
well-tempered, honeſt, generous Mind, muſt look 
upon it with a juſt Abhorrence. 

Suppoling (but in no wiſe cxanting) that Mr. 

Weſley had fallen into any Error, did he take a pro- 
per Way to apprize him of it? If he had been the 
Chriſtian or Friend he pretended to be, he would 
never have appeared againſt Mr. V fey in Print, 
but would have much rather gone to him in pri- 
vate, and in a calm and friendly Manner have en- 
deaveared to ſhew him his Errors, and if he cou 


have convinced Mr, #7 "our of any Miſtake, "IJ 
hs id 4 1 


{the World, as to lay him under any Obligation al 
expoſing his Friend. Oh! but ſays Mr. Hie 
ap 4 ould never have. publiſhed this private J ranſats 


en we.to do it. He is not the firſt, by many 
Tho 


treacberous Men; Unto their Ajembly, mine Honour, -- 
Be not thou united. 


When Mr. Whitefield returned from Georgia, he © 


of his Writings, * might probably think his own 
Glory ſaffs 
their Reputation; beſides, he had held a cloſe Cor- 
reſpondence with the Diſſenters while he was abroad, 
and could not be ignorant of what they were not 
careful to conceal in England, that if Mr. Whitefield ' 
would return, and preach up Predeſtination in op- 


"ITY 


TY! 


if not. 15 Marter was not of ſuch Impor 


tion id the World, had not the Glory of God cal 


uſands, that have done the Dcvil's Work in the 


great and ſacred Name of God. But be it known o 


to him, and all the World, that it is an impious 
Profanation of that moſt holy Name to uſe it in 
Vindication of any Act of Treachery, in abuſing) 
the Confidence. of any Man, betraying a Truſt, re- 
vealing of Secrets, declaring what is fpoken by 
Friend to the Ear in private on the Houſe- top; cha, 
is a Practice which no Pretence can juſtify : For it is 
hot Religion, but the Want of it, that makes a Man i 
capable of doing a baſe, unworthy Action. 

Oh ! my Soul, come not thou into the Secret of fuck þ 


But I take the true State of the Caſe to be this: 


found the Mæſeys were Men of an eſtabliſhed Reputa- : 
tion among the better Sort of People, for the Purity 
of their Doctrine, and Integrity of their Lives, 


( the Spirit that is in us Iuſteth to Envy) and as he too 2 
much affected Popularity himſclf, as appears in ſome 


ered ſome Diminution by the Increaſe of 


poſition to the Weſleys, they would pave his Way 
with Gold. Intereſt hath an agreeable Way of put- 
ting out a Man's Eyes, and making him miſtake 
that for Good, which indeed is Evil. Had 1 8 5 2 
1 4 | n 


od 4 
[1 
£8 
ws - 

A > 


„ * 1 — ** Fa. - 
N $. S 


« . Has 
Pun: #4 


4 3 K „ OT ILSS? 


= 
P >» » ? * 
„ 


by Bs. WY > 
* * * 
1 Gd 
© \ 
: 


+ * UW ps Mr. peat cod not Rk, en *, 


ly have 3 his old faithful Friends to make his 
Court to the Diſſenters. 3 
But, after all, his Youth and. Inexperience ren». 
ders him ſomewhat pitiable. He appeared young 


in the World, and was not apprized that popular 


Applauſe had ſuch ar. intoxicating Quality, that few. 


Men have Heads ſtrong enough to bear it; nor did 
he conſider that Praiſe is the moſt contagious Breath, 
nor knew that the Sails of native Pride are ever rea- 
dy to receive ſuch Winds, Which frequently increaſe 
a Man's Sins, but never nad. one Cubit to the Sta- 
ture of his Wortn. 

As to his Compellations to Mr. 6 ey of Ho- 


noured and Dear, Sc. I look upon them only as fo, 


many cant Words which are of no Signification, cho“ 
poſſibly he might intend, by the frequent Uſe of 
them, to cut his Friend's Throat wich a Feather. 

Mr. Whitefield might well be aware, that the 


publiſhing his Letter would have different (tho no 


good) Effects 3 in the Minds of the Readers. Many 
of. my. Friends, ſays he, that are Advocates for uni- 
wverſal Redemption, will be offended, many, * that. are 
zealous on the other Side, will be much rg ojced.. 
Thus far he is right, but in what follows he mis; 


| both Sides, and are carried away with carnal Reaſons, 


| ing, will wiſh this Matter bad never been brouz ht un. 


ger Debate. Did ever Man think like "his 1. Als 


2 Friend, it is not the lukewarm and carnal Reas - 


ſoner on either Side; (for God is ſeldom in their 
Thoughts, neither are Yych zealous for his Glory.) 
ut it is the truly ſpiritual Man, it is he that loves 


Lord Jeſus Chriſt in Sincerity, who is grieved 


to ſee him again wounded in the Houſe of his 8 
that deeply mourns at obſerving the miſerable Dis 
viſions this unwary Man hath made in the Church, 
by renving a Controverſy which had been very 


8:3. - W 


+8 24 


7 


ſtakes the Truth totally. They that are lukewarm on 5 


— 


: *# 1 * 

i 1 8 — — FE 

2 A a0 wn” . 
NG 


oy 7 "aa = 4 bim. 1 
much bettet employed in exhorting his Followers to 
let Controverſy alone, and to mind the working out 
their own Salvation with Fear and Trembling,” ag). 

- $t. Paul directs. 

He begins his Letter with a Proteſtation ae 

Fact, of Which 1 ſhall ſay nothing. Then he g 

| ſes Mr. Niſey of having, by Preaching and 

ing, propagated the Doctrine of 3 Re. 

demption; which Doctrine, more than onet or 

twice, I kive heard Mr. Witefeld pr each himſelf 3 

but that was before he was ſo diy called upon to 
oppoſe Mr. Vece, and then he probably thought 

his own Intereſt would be better fupported by an Ui 

on with the Waſleys, and therefore preached the true 

Goſpel as they did then, and, bleffed be God, con- | 


tinue to do ſtill. - But now he finds his Intereſt 
lies another Way; then who ſhall blame him th his 
Mind alter with the Occaſion; tis a common aſe, . 

ſo let that pals alſo. | | 

Mr. Whitefield falls ſeverely enough on Mr. Wes | 
fey about caſting a Lot. I cannot ſay that I ap- 
prove of Lots in any trifling Matter, but to uſe 
them in a Caſe of Importance, as this gertaigiy was, 
is hot to be condemned, ſince we find them ſo uſed 
both in the Old and New Teſtament. * He tells Mr. 
Hs a due Exerciſe of religions Prudence, apjthout 

, —— have directed you in that Matter, And 

' muſt tell him, that a due Exerciſe of religigu$Pru- | 
dence, or common Honeſty, would have reftrahed | / 5 
Mr. Whitefield from publiſhing what paſt in prirate 
between him and Mr. Weſey. But Mr. feld 
goes on, Be/iges I never heard that Doi red of GER 

a, whether or not Election was a Ge. Mrine? 
I ſuppoſe he means that Doctrine of. EH bich 
he ſays muſt ſtand or fall with thiFof N en; 
and if ſo, what high Prefumption nee 2 
dr been guilty of, ha he brought hae? 


© 1 N * bas 4d bar: * * r 
a 4 — l * 4 N N 
* * . 


al 


at det 90 83 inte · it Gould in UU 
have given the Lie to all the merciful Declarations 
God hath vouchſafed to malte of his free Gre 
and univerfal Love to loft Mankind? | 
He then cavils at Mr. Nes Text, * fea 
ders that he ſhould chooſe a Text out of che eighth 7 
of the Romans to diſprove the Doctrine of Election. 
Now I cannot fee where Mr. Vgſey could have choſe 
a better. Is is plain indeed, that St. Paul, "throught 
out the whole Chapter, is ſpeaking of the Priviſe« 
ges of thoſe who are in Chit true Believers ; 
if we compare ſpiritual Things with ſpiritual, — 
obſerve how often the Word A, when uſed to de:. 
clare God's Grace, and Love to Mankind, muſt 
be taken in the largeſt and moſt comprehenſive 4A 
Senſe, unleſs we ſtrangely pervert the Text, we ſhall - 
not ſee Reaſon (notwithſtanding the Apoſtle did 
ſpeak chiefly to Believers here) to confine the Word 
AI} within foch narrow Limits as Mr. }bitehel4 has 
done. And I rather approve of Mr. }/:ficy's Choice 
| of this Text, becauſe the true Doctrine of Election 
; is more clearly and explicitely taught in the twenty 
ninth and thirtieth Verſes of this Chapter than any 
where elſe in Scripture. And theſe two Verſez al- „ 
ways preſerved me from the Errors of thoſe Pregas > 7 
dee with whom I frequently converſed. Verſe * i 
9. For whom he did foreknow, whom in bis eternal © l 
2 he' ſaw could accept of offered Mercy, / 
believe in Jeſus Cbriſt, as their Redeemer, their Sa- 
viour, &c. He approves, chooſes them for Heirs 
of his Kingdom, and appoints, or wills their Con- 
formity to the Image of his Son in Righteouſneſs 
and. true Holineſs. And to this they are called, ei- 
ther by the inward Voice of their Redeemer, or the 
| outward Voice of his Miniſters, and Providenee's., = 
; commonly by ali theſe Means. And wherever the . 7" 
Elect, the Children, -or. Sons: of God, Ec. are ſpo- * 5 
Kon. of in. 8 ä to be undceſt0ow of * 
ire 


3 N 


a — "4 S E Er &7 \ > = 1 n — NY 8 1 a 
| N : r X : * N 
* 1 
*. U 
: * | 
| i 


true Believers (Here i is not, a Word of Rem bbe⸗ 
tion.) Now ſince Preſcience doth not infer Caſuali- 

the Predeſtinarians, if they would ever ſo fain 
Bave all Men damned but themſelves, cannot con- 
clude that one ſingle Man is damned from this Place. 
But to go on, Your Diſcourſe (ſays Mr. Whitefield) is 
at little to the Purpoſe as your Text. T ſhall not men- 
tion how illogically you have proceeded. — Ha ayes wrote 
clearly, you” ſhould firſt have proved your Propoſition, 
that Gods Grace is free to all, — _ 

How inconſiſtent is this Man with himſelf !—A 
few Pages farther he adviſes Mr. Weſiey to down with 
bis carnal Reaſonings, —and here he blames him for 
not uſing carnal Reaſon, for logical P. aceeding, in 
not proving the Truth of this Propoſition, that God's 
Grace is free to all, —Is there then need of Logic 
to prove the Truth of any Thing that God hath fo 
often and clearly revealed throughout the whole Bi- 
ble ? For my Part, I always thought that God was 
Infinite, Original Truth! And if we were once ſe- 
cure that he had reyealed any thing tous, we might 
ſafely depend on his Authority for the Truth of it, 
whether we do, or do not underſtand it. 

But Mr. Whitefeld further adds, Paſſing by this, 
as alſo your equivocal Defmition of the Word Grace, 
end your falſe Definition of the Word Free, —Mr. 
Weſley's Definition of the Word Grace is good, and 
Mr. Whitefield muſt own it to be ſo, or elſe deny, 
that the Favour, or Grace (for the Words are of the 
ſame Signification) God hath ſhewed to Men,, in 
ſending his only Son into the World to fave them, 
proceeded from his infinite Love to Mankind! If 
he be hardy enough to deny this, our Lord will an- 
ſwer him by himſelf. 

As for the Word Free, as uſed in this Place, I 
challenge Mr. Wpitefield, and all his Adherents, to 
define 1t better than Mr. Veſe hath done; but this 
is mere trifling, as indeed is what follows, 1 1 


Y 


a 1 p 4 
*$Y * Ea * * * 
=. des 
3 1 
2) 
+ "Ie 
* 


- 
* | 
: 


ry 
7 


* 


* 1 9 | * Y "IJ =P * - * * * Ma 2 1 
, * R ”e 9 7 
2 A . 8 : 4 * 
= » 
* 
- 7 - = 
* * * 
. Fon, : 1 . = 
1 7 f'® * 
„ 
1 o 
. 


Mr. Weſley had juſtly inferred from the Caloiniffs 
Doctrine, Serm. p. 7th, (That by virtue of an Eternal, 
Unchangeable, Irreſiſtible Decree of God, one Part of 
| Mankind are infallibly ſaved, and the reſt are infalli- 

bly damned) < that if it be fo, then is all Preaching ' 
vain.” Mr. Weſley ſpeaks too modeſtly here, in on- 
ly faying Preaching is vain (for. certainly Infinite 
Wiſdom might have appointed ſome other Way to 
have called the Elect) he might have ſafely affirmed 
preaching the Goſpel to be a cruel Ordinance ; For 
if, as Calvin lays, God ſpeaketh by his Miniſters to Re- 
probates that they may be deafer ; he gives Light to 
them that they may be the blinder; be offers Inſtruftion 
to them that they may be the more ignorant; and uſes 
the Remedy that they may not be healed ; what good 
Man would not rather chooſe to be a Hangman than 
a Miniſter of the Goſpel ? For the former, as the 
Executioner of public Juſtice, is only employed to 
put an End to a Man's temporal Life, which may 
prove the Salvation of his Soul : But the Jatter muſt 
be employed to confirm and harden Men in Sin, 
and thereby inſure their Damnation, and increaſe 
their eternal Torments. Therefore it might well 


be ſaid (as before) that Mr. Weſley ſpake too mo- 


deſtly in only ſaying, that upon their Principles 
Preaching and Hearing are vain. . 

Mr. Whitefield ſeems to me to be beating the Air, 
ſometimes arguing againſt ſelf-evident Truth, at 
other Times he argues againſt the Truth- of- Gd 
himſelf. Mr. Weſley ſays, that the Doctrine of Elec- 
tion and Reprobation directly tends to deſtroy that 
Holineſs, which is the End of all the Ordinances of 
God: For it takes away theſe firſt Motives to fol- 
low after it, ſo frequently propoſed in Scripture, 
the Hope of future Reward, and Fear f Punifh- 
ment, the Hope of Heaven, and the Fear: of Hell, &c.“ 
+, One would think this is too clear to be denied: 
For fince this Doctrine hath a natural Tendency to 


N 
wy b P 
n 7 bake + 4 
5 + N 


N 
lead Men either into Preſumption or Deſpair,” it 
muſt take away thoſe firſt Matives to Chriſtian Ho- 
lineſs fo often propoſed in Scripture, wz. The Hope 

e Heaven, and Fear of Hell, &c. What Mr. 
1 Wefley ſays further under this Head (if duly conſi- 
1 dered) will appear to be very good arguing againſt 
14 Predeſtination. But Mr. Mbiteſield ſays, I thought 
ane that carries Perfection to ſuch an exalted Pitch 
34 as My. Weſley does, (Doth Mr. Vaſiey then ſet the 
15 Mark of Chriſtian Perfection one Jot higher than 
s& - Chriſt and his Apoſtles did? I wiſh Mr. Whitefield 
2 would attempt to prove that) would know that a 
N true Lover of the Lord Jeſus Chriſt would ſirive to 
be holy, for the ſake of being holy, I think alſo 
that Mr. Wh:tefield might know, that a Perſon muſt 
have made a good Progreſs in Chriſtianity before he 
can ſtrive to be holy, for the ſake of being holy; 
and mult have attained to a great Degree of Faith 
and Love, before he can act for Chriſt upon the 
pure Principles of Gratitude and Love, without-any 
Regard to the Rewards of Heaven, or Fear of Hell. 
Hope and Fear are the two great Principles of hu- 
man Action; no Man of. Senſe ever undertaking 
any Thing of Moment, but either out of Hope to 
get ſomething he thinks may do him Good, or elſe 
out of Fear of ſome Evil which otherwiſe may fall 
upon him; therefore he that made us, and indued 
us with theſe Principles, the better to keep us with- 
in the Compals of our Duty, hath been gracioufly 
pleaſed to promiſe the beſt Things we can ever hope 
tor, to thole who keep his Commandments z and to 
threaten the worſt we can ever fear, to thoſe who 
keep them not. | 
Here we may obſerve that God works on Man as 
Man, a rational, tree Agent, in that he propoſes 
Rewards and Puniſhments as Motives to Obedience. 
And indeed we muſt own Man has ſome Liberty, 8 
cor deny him to be a Subject capable of Reward or 


Puniſhment, 2 


C2 8 wag EX Bo — 
* A: * 48 1 4" 


Puniſhment. And if he be 'a neceſfity Agent. 
what becomes of the Reſurrection from the Dead, 
4 general Judgment, and a future State of Happi- 
neſs or Miſery ?—But of Man's Free- will more here= 
a FS WII! "£3 
Mr. Weſiey ſays, © this Doctrine (of Election) tends. 
to deſtroy the Comforts of Religion, the Happineſs 
of Chriſtianity, Sc.“ Now to him who hath a Zeal 
for the Glory of God according to Knowledge, and 
whoſe Heart is full of univerſal Benevolence to 
Mankind, this appears a ſelf-evident Truth. And 
thoſe that hold the Doctrine of Election and Repro- 
bation, even againſt their Wills, confirm this Truth, 
that they who hold the bleſſed Doctrine of univerſal 
Redemption are much happier than themſelves; for 
they cannot ſhake off their Doubts and Fears, but 
they will frequently return upon them, do what 
they can; which plainly ſhews that they are far from 
ſolid Happineſs. I have been well acquainted with 
many Predeſtinarians, and have obſerved two Sorts: 
of People amongſt them. The one were ſerious, - 
and, I believe, ſincerely deſirous of Salvation, and 
ſtriving to enter, by the ſtrait Gate, into the King- i 
dom of Heaven. Theſe were generally much de- 
jected, and (excepting a few) always ſeeking after 
Marks of Grace, being doubtful of their own Elec 
tion, often upon the Point of Deſpair, being 1g- 
norant of that true Goſpel Liberty which is attains, 
able in this Life, and which many, who hold uni- 
verſal Redemption, do actually enjoy. 5 
Others, and they far the greater Number, were 
very confident of their own Election, thought it 4 
great Sin to make any doubt of it, and could note 
2 hear it queſtioned. Theſe were commons -- 
y ſunk in carnal Security, and without Scruple gave 
in to all Manner of Self- indulgence, fancy ing that Net 
what would be Sin in a Reprobate, would bene 


- a - _. „ > a 
* N r a6 ; _ _ P % 
| 7 + Vs p 7 8 - 
.*% | 
N * 
* ” 
* N 8 
4 » Þ 
a 


K v7; 
| x 5 ny 
* 
* | 
: 21 


Cry = . : 
C 1 | 


S 

* 
4 no 
l _* 

2 9 


wy a 


[ 10 1 
e Of theſe 1 know ſeveral at this Time, 
and fo does Mn, Whitefield too. 

Mr. Whitefield ſays, I admire the Doftrine of Elec- 
tion, and am convinced that it ſhould have à Place in 
Goſpel A . and ſhould be inf ited on with Faith> 
falueſs and Care. 

Now, if Mr. Whitefield can prove, that without 
believing this Doctrine a Man cannot poſſibly be ſa- 
ved, he is in the right; but if he cannot prove this, 
he is palpably in the wrong. And conſidering what 
fierce Contentions and ſad Diviſions the Doctrine of 
Election and Reprobation hath occaſioned in the 
Church of Chriſt, wiſe and good Men can never 
come into his Way of thinking in this Particular. 

. Young Men, and Novices in Divinity, common- 
ly delight in Controverſy; but ſober, experienced 
Chriſtians, much abhor it ; well knowing, that it uſu- 
ally deſtroys the Vitals of true ſaving Religion ; and 
that while Men are diſputing the Way, the Power 
of Godlineſs is. loſt, And I very much fear, that 
Mr. Whitefield s reviving this pernicious Controver- 
ſy, is one Reaſon why our Lord hath permitted 
him to fall into that dangerous, moſt ſhocking 
Practice, of making public Oppoſition againſt Gol- 
pel Holineſs, which is the only Chriſtian Perfection 
the Weſeys ever taught; for abſolute Perfection they 
never preached. . 

If Men would have been content with the plain 
Account given in Scripture of the Creation of the 
World, and Redemption of Mankind by our Lord 
Jeſus Chriſt, and had not affected to be wiſe above 
what is written, there had never aroſe any-Contro- 
verſy in the Church about Election and Reproba- 
tion. Nor would the Predeſtinarians ſo vilely have 
blaſphemed the great and holy God as they have 
done, if they had believed, — reſted in the Ma- 
nifeſtations he hath vouchſafed to make of himſelf” 
to us in ſacred Writ, * paſt all Diſpute, That 

none 


Ca 17 1 
wont but God know what God is! nor can « Gini Be: 
ing poſſibly have any true Ne on T2008 un- 
leſs they be taught of God. + + 

If we look into holy Scripture, - we ſhall find, 
when Moſes enquired of God what he ſhould ſay to 
the Children of Iſrael when they aſked him what 
was the Name of God, God faid unto Moſes, I am © 
that I am; and he ſaid, thus ſhalt thou ſay unto 
the Children of Jrael, I am bath ſent me unto yon. 
We ſee God defines Himſelf by Himſelf; Jam 
that Tam; or as the Words alſo ſignify, © I will be 
that I will be. There is no doubt but Moſes, de- 
ſigning to know God's Name, intended by that to 
underſtand his Nature, who, and what he is. But 
that could not be; for there are no Words in any, 
or all the Languages on Earth, whereby to expreſs 
the Glory of an infinite Being, ſo as finite Crea- 
tures ſhould- be fully able to conceive it: Therefore 
God is pleaſed to return him this Anſwer, I am 
that I am, And if we could rightly apprehend 
what is couched under theſe Words, we ſhould cer- 
tainly have as high and true Conceptions of God- 
as 18 poſſible for Creatures to attain, However, we 
may learn from this awful Name what he would- 
have us think of his Nature, ſo as to diſtinguiſh 
Him from all Things befide. We are wont to con- 
ceive and ſpeak of the great God after the Manner 
of Men, and to call vim a powerful, a wiſe, a juſt, 
a true, a loving and holy God, c. whereas we 
ought rather to fay, He is Power, Wiſdom, "ES, 
nels, Juſtice, Truth, Love, Holineſs, Sc. 
as all theſe Perfections are in Him, they are 3 


diſtinguiſhed from one another, nor from his Na- f 


ture or Eſſence, in whom they are ſaid to be; for,” 
to ſpeak properly, they are not in Him, but are, 
his very Eſſence or Nature itſelf; which, acting 


ſeverally upon ſeveral Objects, ſeems to u to act — | 


from ſeveral Properties offPerfeCtions; waereas' ll 
C2 


9 
2 — 
7 Y, 4 
= 
1 
+ ÞP 
* 
. 4 
— 
I: $ FS. 


1 7 
the Difference is in our different A pprehenſions· r 
dhe fame Thing. God in himſelf is one moſt pure 


and ſimple Act; and therefore cannot have any 
Thing in Him but what 1s that moſt pure and ſim 
ple Act. We may obſerve, He admits nothing in- 
to the Manifeſtation of Himſelf but pure Eſſence, 
without any Mixture or Compoſition, , I am that I 
am! I am Jehovah ! Being itſelf ! To which Name 
nothing can be added, from which nothing can-be 
taken away. To add any Thing to it, would be 
a mere Tautollogy, or rather a Diminution from it, 
as limiting or confining it to one Perfection, mn 
as all are ſignified by it. 

Now it is inconceivable to me how any one, who 
believes God to be this All-great, All-glorious, in- 
finite Being, „that he hath declared himſelf to be, 
can poſſibly fink into ſuch low, vile, unworthy Con- 
ceptions of him as theſe Calviniſts do! How is it 
poſſible for them to think that Evil, which, pro- 

rly ſpeaking, hath no Being (tho? the Subject of 
Evil hath a Being) can proceed from Him, who is 
Being itſęlf! How Sin, the greateſt of Evils, could 
ever proceed from God, from Him that is tbe only 
Infinite, Supreme, original Good ! 

Now, it Mr, J/hitefield would have anſwered Mr, 
Weſley to any Purpoſe, the firſt Thing he had to do, 
was to vindicate the Honour and Glory of God, by, 
clearing the Predeſtinarian Scheme from thoſe mon- 
ſtrous Abſurdities and horrible Blaſphemies which 
neceſſarily attend it. He ſhould have tried to re- 
concile God's being the Author of Sin with his in- 
finite Holineſs; and his deceiving his Creatures by ſo 
many, and often repeated Declarations of his uni- 
verſal Love and free Grace for all that will accept of 


it, to his infinite Truth; and creating ſo many 


Millions of Souls on purpoſe to damn them, with 
his Infinite Joie, as and Love. 


Buy, 


* p 71 * I 1 4 " 
7 G 4 7 . * 
* 


1 
- But the Caloinifts very well know that their Do- 
trine is irreconcilable with the Perfections of the di- 
vine Nature; and therefore when they are hard 
preſſed with any . e taken from thence, they 
ſtrive to evade the Force of it, not by clearing their 
Doctrine from the Blaſphemy attending it, but. 
by having Recourſe to the Sovereignty of the Al- 
mighty, which, they ſay, may do whatever he 
pleaſeth; which, in ſome Senſe, is true, but in 
theirs abſolutely falſe. And they groſly betray their 
Ignorance, when they attempt to ſpeak of ſovereign 
Power as it is in God: For it is plain, the Authors 
Mr. Whitefield mentions, and recommends to Mr. 
Weſley, were very weak, injudicious Writers, and 
had no true Conceptions of the ſovereign Power of 
God, but took their Notion from the arbitrary Sway 
which thoſe, whom we call ſovereign Princes, exer- 
ciſe with in their Dominions; theſe abſolute Mo- 
narchs uſually act arbitrariouſly, and their Will is | 
commonly their Rule of Government. The fad Ef-. 
fects of ſuch Government are too well known, eſpe- 
cially to their unhappy Subjects. But true, infinite, 
ſovereign Power, never was, nor can be emp 
in any Acts of Oppreſſion, Injuſtice, or Cruelty © * 
Never acts arbitrariouſly, after the Manner of Men. 
but all his Works and Ways are in Number, 
Weight and Meaſure, moſt perfect! In that bleſſed 
; Being, Wiſdom and Power, Truth, Holineſs, uk 
| ſtice and Mercy, Sc. are one Act. And tho? He 
be the true, and only Potentate, King of Kings, 
and Lord of Lords, and none can ſtay his Hand, 
his Power) or ſay unto Him, What: doſt thou? 
Yet, notwithſtanding his infinite, abſolute Sove- 
reignty, which none can diſpute, and to which all 
mult ſubmit, we may, with humble Reverence, af- | 
firm, that there are Things which this Almighty, , 
All-glorious Being, cannot do. But ſome may ſays, 
how can this be? God knoweth no Superior, no 


| Equal; 


— 


* * 
0 — - + * __ "” mm 


FP 
©». * 2 p 3 - * 

u . * ** . 5 4 - —_ 1 — — JIN 

— * 4 — „ ade * = — — * 
* 1 2 1 ä — 


* of — E 12 
- 4 5 . 
— — a EG — a. 
- 


_— l e 
ror ICS 3 — 1 
* — „ þ. 


pw . - . > 2 
7 > — 8 2 
2 + es — — 


Py 
Equal; He dotir whatever pleaſeth Him in Heaven 
and Earth, who then can give Law to Him ? 
| Himſelf, the infinite Perfection ef his divine Na- 
ture, is the conſtant, unerring Rule of all his Ac- 
tions; therefore he is ſaid in Scripture to work ac- 


cording to the Counſel of his own Will, The Will of 


is the pure Origin or Fountain of all mo 

Goodneſs ! and therefore it is abſolutely impoſſib 

that he ſhonld will any Thing which is Evil. *Tis 
true, He permits many Things that are Evil; but 
tis Impiety to think, or ſay, he is pleaſed with any 
Thing that is ſo. He is of purer Eyes than to be- 
hold Iniquity with the leaſt Degree of Approbation z 
nor can he poſſibly decree, or act any Thing, that 
is inconſiſtent with the infinite Perfection of his 


moſt bleſſed Nature, which is his eſſential Glory ! 


- We have ſeen that this horrible Decree of Repro- 
bation is utterly. inconſiſtent with the Manifeſtations 


the great Jehovah hath condeſcended to make of 


himſelf to his unworthy Creatures; let us now con- 
ſiger whether this Doctrine be more agreeable to 
e gracious Declarations he hath been pleaſed to 


make of his univerſal Love and free Grace to fallen 


And here I ſhall follow the plain Account which 
holy Scripture gives of thoſe two great Events, 
namely, The Creation of Man, and his Redemption 

our Lord Feſus Chriſt. But firſt I ſhall obſerve, that 


before God made Man, he created the Angels, an 
Order of Spirits ſuperior to thoſe of Humankind. 


Theſe were the Morning Stars which ſang together, 
thoſe Sons of God that ſhouted tor Joy when he 
the Foundations of the Earth. Theſe were all free 


Agents, and conſequently were at firſt entred into a 


State of Probation, otherwiſe they muſt have been 
incapable of Rewards or. Puniſhments. Some of 


theſe, St. Jude tells us, kept. not their firſi Eſtate, but 


Ty, 


Left their. own Habitation ( hoes) baving falls —= N 

el temp a | 
Aide che ier of the 3 God . 
Man, a compound Being, having an immortal Spi- 
rit united to a material Body, formed of the Duſt 
of the Ground, and placed him in Paradiſe before 
prepared for them; and gave them Dominion over 
the Fiſh of the Sea, and over the Fowls of the Air, 
and over the Cattle, and over all the Earth, and 
over every creeping Thing that creepeth upon the 
Earth. 

Man alſo being a rational, free Agent, was put 
upon a Trial of his Obedience, as we read in the 
third of Genefis, And as God had created him in 
his own Image, while he retained his Integrity, there 
was a perfect Union between the Will of his Maker 
and his own. He had perfect Knowledge of his Du- 
ty, and ſufficient Strength to do it, and therefore 
perfect Obedience was juſtly required. How long 
our firſt Parents continued in their State of hap 
Innocence we know not, Scripture being ſilent about 
it; but this we know, and feel, that they alſo fell, 
and thereby broke the Union between the divine 
and human Nature, forfeited their Intereſt in God, 
became Servants to Satan, and ſubject to W tem- 
poral, ſpiritual and eternal. | 

Adam (or Man 1n.general, as the Word Adam 


ſignifie) being the map Spec of Mankind, in 
8 


whom the whole huma Species was virtually in- 
cluded, the whole human Nature was corrupted in 
him, and involved in the Conſequences of their aun 
Parents Fall. 

Bat here let us admire, praiſc and adore, the i in- 
comprehenſible Glory of God in his univerſal Love 
and Goodneſs to all Mankind! In providing (all 
Men) a ſecond Parent, or common Head, who, af- 
ter the Fall of the firſt, and the fallen State he had 
hevught upon his Poſterity, ſhould be a common 


Rellarer, 


- * . N 
"ne 1» EI 
: 
= + o 
E 


- 


© Refforer, and pat it in the Chbice of every indivi: 
Na 


dual Man to have Life or Death as the firſt Man 
had; that ſo they, who were loſt before they were 
born, and made Inheritors of a corrupt and miſera- 
ble Nature without their Choice, might have a di- 
vine Life reſtored to them in a ſecond Parent, which 
ſhould not be in the Power of any one to loſe for 
them. But I chooſe to ſpeak of this Matter in the 
Words of an excellent Man, Mr. Law, in a Book 
of his,  entituled, I Demonſtration of the groſs and 
fundamental Errors of a late Book, called, A plain 
Acroumt of the Nature and End of the Lord's Supper, 
&c. a Book much better worth reading than any 
Mr. Whitefield hath recommended to Mr. Weſley. 
His Words are theſe; | 
The Declaration which God made to Adam immedi- 
ately after his Fall, of a Seed of the Woman to bruiſe 
the Serpent*s Head, was a Declaration of Pardon and 
Redemption to Adam, and in him to all Mankind : 
For what be ſaid to Adam, that he ſaid to all that 
were in the Loins of Adam, who, as they fell in his 
Fall before they were born, without the Poſſibility of 
any one Man's being exempted from it; ſo were they 
all put into his State of Pardon and Redemption before 
they were born, without the Poſſibility of any one Man's 
being excluded, or left out of it. : 

Thus revealed Religion begins with an Offer of a ſe- 
cond Adam, and upon the Foot of an univerſal Par- 
don and Redemption to all Mankind. 

In that Inſtant that God declared the Seed of the 
1 Woman ſhould bruiſe the Serpent's Head (break the 
hl Poger of the Devil) our bleſſed Redeemer united 
1 his divine Power to the whole human Nature, and 
ſt thereby brought all Mankind into a falvable Condi- 
tion. And had he not thus healed the Breach be- 
tween the divine and human Nature, which Adam 
had made by his voluntary Diſobedience, neither 
Adam himſelf, or any one of his Poſterity, could 


poſſibly 


"a 
* a4 1 = 
8 . 

—_ * * 


| poltbly have been ſa ved. The 1 very IGG 


te Angels remain Devils is, becauſe our dear 


Lord paſſed them by: For He took not on Him the 
Native of Angels, but He took on Him the Seed of 


Abraham, 'For it is very probable, had our Savi- 
our aſſumed their Nature, as he did ours, very few, 

if any, of theſe unhappy Spirits had been loſt. But 
every Child of Adam is in the fame Covenant, hath * 
the ſame Saviour, and an equal Share in the firſt 
general Pardon that Adam himſelf had. To this 
Purpoſe the Apoſtle, As by the Offence of one, Fudg- 
ment came upon all to Condenmation; even ſo by the- 
Righteouſneſs of one, the free Gift came upon all Men 
unto Juſtification of Life. What becomes then of 
their Decree of Reprobation ? There is no Partia- 
lity in God; He bears equal Reſpect to all his Crea- 
tures, and if any one Soul be loſt, the Deſtruction 


of that Soul is from itſelf, The Soul of Judas was 


as much intereſted in the original Pardon and Re- 


demption as the Soul of St. Paul, and the Reaſon 
why the one was ſaved, and the other loſt, was not 
becauſe one was ordained to eternal Life, the other 
to eternal Death; but St. Paul accepted an offered 
Saviour, and was faithful to given Grace; whereas 
Judas rejected his offered Saviour, and deſpiſed his 
offered Mercy; he would not believe, therefore he 
could not be ſaved. Otherwiſe he was one of the 


a " 


human Nature as well as St. Paul, and had as much * 


Right to the firſt Covenant as he, but wanted Faith 
to lay hold of it. 


In God, as Parent to the Univerſe, we have our 


natural Life for in Him we live, and move, and 
have our Being. So in God the Son, as Redeemer . 


of Mankind, we live, and move, and have our ſpi- 
ritual Bring. He is cur ſecond Adam, from whonr 


we derive as real a Birth, Lite, and Nature, as we 


do from the firſt Adam : ; He is the Life of our Life, 
Om of our Spirit. He is the true Light, that light- 
D 


eth 


1 > 


* : 
Ky N T1 

eib every Man which cometh into the World; and 
doth impart to every Man ſò much Liberty, ſo much 
Strength and, Power againſt the Serpent, as; if 
carefully indproved, by the continual Succours of di- 
vine Grace, will enable him to work out his own 
Salvation. And the Aſſiſtance of the Spirit of Je- 
ſus ſhall never be wanting; for Chriſt hath ſaid, 70 
bim that hath ſhall be given.— But if a Man will 
not accept this Liberty, if he will not attend to 
What his Saviour inwardly ſpeaks to his Soul, if he 
will ſhut his Eyes againſt the Light, and quench 
that Spark of Life communicated to every Man by 
the Seed of the Woman; when the Body falls off 
by Death, he muſt find himſelf in his own Hell, 
and feel the Torments of a diabolical, ſelf-torment- 
ed Nature for ever, that would not ſuffer itſelf to 
be redeemed. - 

What hath been already ſaid, is ſufficient to con- 
vince any Man (who will be convinced) that the 
Doctrine of eternal Reprobation is contrary to the 
infinite Perfection of the Nature of God, and as 
contrary to all the Declarations Ne hath made of 
His univerſal Love and free Grace to all Mankind. 
Indeed, as Mr. Weſley hath obſerved, this Doctrine 
flatly contradicts the whole Scope and Tenor of 
—_— and therefore ought to be exploded and 
rejected by all Men. But to go on; Mr. Whitefield 
ſays, "The Principles of thoſe that hold univerſal Re- 
demption, has a natural Tendency to keep the Soul in 
Darkneſs for ever; becauſe the Creature is thereby 
taught, that his being kept in a State of Salvation is 
owing to bis own free Will. How well Mr. White- | 
field knows his own Principles, or their Tendencies, 
I don't know; but it is plain he knows very little 
of their Principles againſt whom he diſputes. Thoſe 
who believe Chriſt an Almighty, Univerſal Savi- 
our, arrogate nothing to themſelves, but give Him 
the Glory of all; and acknowledge that they "ronh 
9 2 


— "S 
— * 


1 19 4 
r will Foe coding to He nod Mutats 


lay 2 to any Merits or Righteouſneſs of their 
own. They have not ſo learned Corift. I think Mr. 
IVbitefield might well have ſpared. his invidious Re- 
flections on Mr. Weſley and his 4 « Hg for ſuppoſe 
he doth not in ſuch triumphant Language boaſt of 
his Privileges, or ſpeak of himſelf, as if, like Sr. 
Paul, he had been caught up into the third Hea- 
ven; and ſuppoſe his Followers ſhould be infected 
with the ſame Humility, and are not ſo profuſe in 
their Profeſſions,or ſo poſitive they can never fall from, 
Grace; can it be fairly inferred from thence, that 
he and his People are all dead and cold, and that 
having begun in the Spirit, they have all ended in 
the Fleſh? I wiſh Mr. Whitefield, and thoſe who 
follow him, would _—_ toa better Mind, that 
they alſo might be in that State of Goſpel Liberty 
which they enjoy whom he now deſpiſes. 8 
I ſhall take no farther Notice of what Mr. }/bite- 
field fays concerning the final Perſeverance of his. 
Saints, than to quote a Tha e I lately met with in 
a Diſſenter's Letter to his Friend, This. is certain, 
that there is ſuch a State of Perfection to be attained. 
in this Life, from which a Man ſhall never fall: But 
yet it is high Preſumption for a Mak to affirm of bim- 
ſelf,” or any other, that it is impoſſible for him to fall. 
Tig beſt for all People to follow the Apoſile*s Advice, 
Let him that thinketh he ſtandeth, | take heed leſt be 
all. 
1 Mr. Weſley had very juſtly obſerved, «how un- 
comfortable a Thought it 1s, that Thouſands and 
Millions of Men, without any preceding. Offence 


Ab 2s race preventing and aſſiſting them; 
no Exemption from original Sin, nor 


or Fault of theirs, were unchangeably doomed to 


everlaſting Burnings! FP 
To which Mr. /hitefield replies, Do not they 
wao believe God's dooming Men to cverlaſting 


— 


LD: „ 


th; * * * 


T 20 7. 
Burnings, alſo believe that God looked upon then 
as Men fallen in Adam, and that that Decree which 
ordained the Puniſnment, firſt regarded the Crime 
by which it was deſerved? How then are they 
doomed without any preceding Fault? Surely Mr. 
Weſiey will own God's Juſtice in imputing Adam's 
Sin to his Poſterity, and alſo, that after Adam fell, 
and his Poſterity in him, God might juſtly have pal. 
ſed them all by, without ſending his own Son to be 
a Saviour for any one.“ 
Now, all this Reply is juſt fo much of nothing 
to the Purpoſe, Tis Preſumption for any one to 
diſpute whether God might Juſtly have paſſed Adam 
and all his Poſterity by, fince *cis plain he did not 
is any one of them by, but provided a ſecond 
Head for Mankind, and called his Name Adam as 
the firſt; ſignifying thereby, that He ſhould not u- 
nite His divine Perſon to the Nature of this or that 
particular Man, but to the whole human Nature in 
general, that the Redemption might be equal to 
the Fall. But enough hath been aid of this alrea- 
dy, and I only mention it here to ſhew, that tho? 
God doth look upon all Men as an Order of fallen 
Spirits, yet in the ſame View he beholds them as 
an Order of redeemed Spirits too, Therefore it is 
highly unreaſonable (to ſay no more of it) for us 
to believe, that any ſingle Soul of Adam's Poſte- 
rity ever was, or ever will be damned, merely for 
their original Sin; therefore we may conclude that 
Infants and Ideots are certainly ſaved. 
I cannot forbear obſerving here, how incident it - 
is to Mankind to follow the Example of their firſt 
Parents. When God queſtioned Alam whether he 
had eaten of the forbidden Fruit, he replied, The 
Woman whom Thou gaveſt to be with me, ſhe gave 
me of . the Tree, and I did eat. And when the Lord 
God ſaid unto the Woman, bat is this that thou 
oſt done * ſhe ſaid, The Serpent e me, and 5 
| ar < 


_ 
: 
— : 
= 


1 


N 


* 


* 3 ol . 
de” | 1 * rn 8 
. } ST * 1 P * E - 
o * * — - by p CY TPO F * —_— 
\ * " * 2 
5 9 ws a 
. * ” ” . 4 EY 
| \ > : 
- ot * 
— 
| | | [ ] 
. 1 
4 - 21 N 
* 


Ad eat. How ready they were to excuſe themſelves, 


and lay the Blame upon another. The Wotan in- 
deed ſeemed more modeſt of the two; for ſhe only 


accuſes the Serpent, but Adam would have transferred 
his Guilt upon God Himſelf. n 
After this Manner do we charge all our volunta- 
ry Tranſgreſſions upon original Sin; and *tis a fad. 
Truth, that we were all conceived and born in Sin, 
and if, in this Caſe, we ſay that we have no Sin, we 


deceive ourſelves, and the Truth is not in us. And of 


this important Truth all are, or ought to be deeply 
ſenſible, in order to bring them to Chriſt, For he 
who ſees no Sin in himſelf, will ſeek no Saviour. 

But then we muſt not lay the Blame of all our per- 
fonal Sins upon Adam, rather let us forbear ſewing 
Fig-leaves together to hide our Nakedneſs, and 
take Shame to ourſelves, by confeſſing our Faults are 

all our own. We brought indeed a corrupted Na- 
ture into the World, but we had the Seed of the 
Woman too; and what every one, that calls himſelf 
a Chriſtian, ought principally to be grieved and 
humbled for is, that knowing the Diſeaſe, we ſhun- 

ed the Cure, and ſuffered either the Luſt of the 
Fleſh, or the Luſt of the Eye, or the Pride of Lite, 
to extinguiſh that Spark of divine Life we received 
from our bleſſed Redeemer. If we ſtill feel the 
Weight of our corrupt Nature, and that our origi- 
nal Sin hath Dominion over us, whoſe Fault is it? 
Is it not our own? Had we carefully liſtened to the 
ſtill ſmall Voice of Jefus within us; had we dili- 
gently improved each Degree of Light and Liber- 
ry He imparted to us, and obediently followed every 
Motion of His holy Spirit, the old Adam had been 
crucified long ago, and we had been fully born of 
God. Then there would be no Diſpute amongſt 


_ Chriſtians whether a Man can live without Sin; for 


every Chriſtian's Experience would anſwer tharQue-- 
ſtion in the Affirmative. 2s 27 1 
. Sufficient 


* 22 1 3 
Sofficient hath been ſaid to obviate Mr Whites 
hrs bjection, That the Dolirine of Univer(al Re- 
demption- makes Salvation depend, not on God's free 
Grace, but on Man's free Will. But this is a groſs 
. Miſtake ; for none, who believes "Univerſal Re- 
demption, but acknowledges alſo, that' we are not 
ſufficient of ourſelves to think or do any thing as of our- 
ſelves, but our Sufficiency is, of Gad. But then we 
caſt humbly believe, and dare boldly: 2 ert, that 
every Man receives ſo much Light and Liberty from 
the univerſal Redeemer, as will render him altoge- 
ther inexcuſable at the laſt great Day, if he has been 
unfaithful to the Grace he had, or might have re- 
ceived. Of which Truth this is a Proof, that God 
hath fixed a Conſcience in every Man's Heart as 
His Vicegerent, to which Men are accountable. 
Thus St. Paul, When the Gentiles (Heathens) which 
< have not the (written) Law, do, by Nature (re- 
c deemed Nature) the Things contained in the (writ- 
aten) Law, theſe having not the (written) Law, are 
te a Law unto themſelves ; which ſhew the Work of 
« the Law written in their Hearts (by the inward Re- 
* deemer) their Conſciences allo bearing Witneſs, and 
their Thoughts the mean while ( before the general 
judgment) acculing, or elſe excuſing one another.” 
I am very ſure our bleſſed Lord will fit as Judge on 
no Man for whom He hath done nothing as a Sa- 
viour. And tho*. our original Sin is that Root of 
Bitterneſs from whence all our evil. Thoughts, 
Words and Actions, took their Riſe, yet not one 
of thoſe wretched Creatures, which muſt ſtand at 
the Left-hand in the laſt Judgment, will dare, be- 
fore that awful Tribunal, to plead his original Sin 
in excuſe of his Unbelief, or any other Sin he ever 
committed; any more than he will dare to mention 
a Decree of Reprobation. No, no, all thoſc idle, 
prefumptuous Thoughts, will then be over, and 
Conſcience, which is more than a thouſand Witnef- 
les 


od * * XL * 


84 * 


2 
* 


8 beſide; will compel them to acquir their Judges * 


for cotidemning them; and force them to on bes 
fore God, Angels and Men, that their" Dekruction 


8 1 * ö 
1 
7 [es 
2 * TR 


i | 
15 * 
"=" 
4 
— Ke 
I 


is from chemſclves; Chriſt would have ſaved them 


| but they would not be ſavec. 

Mr. Whitefield ſeems much Aupleaſed with Mr. 
gi for ſaying, That their Doftrine hath a direſt and 
manifeſt Tendenc) to overthrow the whole Chriſtian Re 


wvelation.” "Ps Mf. Weſley hath well proved; read 


the twelfth, thirteeenth, and Part of the fourteenth 
Pages of his Sermon on Free-Grace. 


In anſwer to this Aﬀertion Mr. Whitefield fays f 


ſome Things true, but is wrong in the Application: 
For none has more clearly and ſtrongly proved the 
Neceſſity of uſing the divine Ordinances than the 
Weſleys have done; ſhewing, at the ſame Time, the 
Danger of reſting in outward Performances, and 
ho they ought to be uſed, in Obedience to God, as 
Means of bringing us to Chriſt, Their Judgment 
in theſe Caſes 1s beſt known by their Practice. Do 
_ they not labour more abundantly than they all? | 
I know no one that queſtions our Lord's having 
appointed preaching the Goſpel as a Means of con- 


verting Men to Himſelf ; but this divine Inſtitution Q 


ſtands upon the Foot of Univerſal Redemption, as 


apprars by the Commiſſion He gave His Diſciples 


a little before His Aſcenſion, which runs in theſe 
general Terms, Go ye (faith our bleſſed Saviour) into / 
all the World, and preach the Goſpel to every Creature; 
he that believeth, and is baptized, ſhall be ſaved; but: 


he that believeth not, ſhall be damned. This is che ir- 


revocable Decree which concerns us, as Mr. Weſley" 


lately proved in an excellent Sermon on this Text.” »  ..- 


After what Mr. Weſey hath faid upon this Head,. 


Mr. 7/bitefield had no Reaſon to ask, how heir © 2 


trine of Eleftion has a direft Tendency to vert g＋mñn 8 


the Chriſtian Revelation Doe he need to be tod 


again, chat 


overthrow 


= 
- - 
5 . . 
x \ 
% 


thcir Doctrine has a direct Tendency #0 + 4 


_ "7 TEL 


overchrow the Chriſtian Revelation, by undermins . 
ing the Foundation on which it ſtands, viz. The 
eternal Love and Truth of God. For if they can 
Prove. that God is not infinite Love, and that He 
| can lie; that He can deceive His Creatures, by de- 
= Cclaring one Thing, and meaning another; there is | 
| an End of all Revelation, of all revealed Religion at 
once. And they plainly join with, and encourage 
all Unbelievers, even thoſe who deny there is a God, * il 
by repreſenting the All- glorious Majeſty of Heaven, 
the Supreme and only Good, after ſuch a Manner as 
befits a Devil rather than a God. For who could 
believe in ſuch a God as they have made; for found 


ſuch a one they have not, either in Heaven above, or 
in the Earth beneath, or in the Waters under the F 
Earth; or who would not chooſe, rather than ac-. . 
knowledge, and pay Homage to ſuch a God, to ac- , 


knowledge none at all? But, bleſſed be God, their 

Doctrine is as falſe as the grand Artificer of Fraud 

who invented 1t. | 

Mr. Whitefield's ranking Mr. Weſiey with Infidels, 

Deiſts, Arians, Cc. puts me in mind of what 

Hugh Peters adviſed his Brethren to do; Let us, ſaid 
he, caſt Dirt enough upon him (King Charles I.) if | 

Jome ſhould fall off, more will ſtick, Thus Mr. 
Whitefield harangues the Populace with Mr. Weſley's | 
Joining with Infidels, Arians, Socinians, Deiſts, 
Sc. while perhaps not one in a hundred of his Hear- 
. ers underſtands what he means, any more than if he 
' fpake to them in Greek or Arabic; yet they think 
thoſe Mr. Weſley joins with are very bad Creatures, 
but whether they walk on four Feet, or two, they 
don't know; yet this is caſting Dirt, and ſome may Ml 
ſtick. But all perſonal Reflections are nothing to 
the Merits of the Cauſe; and what follows in the © |. 
23d, 24th, and 25th Pages, is as little to the Pur- 
poſe, tho* moſt of it hath been already anſwered. 


I ſhould here conchude, but that, in Juſtice 5 Mr. 
5 ; 79 


N > TOSS 


'N 


_ - 6 -—_ — "I 1 "was" a a 1 ——— 5 . 
. 4 —— — — — * - — a = \ 2x5 ve 
7 — — - *<- >. F< - «oe +0 — l LEY - = \ N 
> *. ym 5G 2 = — — — L , K — 2 . . — 7 . - —_ \ = = 
k K p- 4 7708 | - l K ä * - 7 = 
Y . A wy 4 ” R * —— _ 
F gw Wy 2 * 4 n 3 3 ho - , "cy 2 — * 2 3 „ — - . 
* 3 * 2 1 * * . F La * 4 — — 3 2 on — * a 
— W 7 g 7 "me N 6 . = ** 
a . 9 ” * "> 4 f 1 * 
- 


RF 2 TT $6 
3 think: —_ obliged to takte notciee bf . 


Queſtion, in ſaying, that Gad has declared that He will, 
jou all; 1. e. every-individual Perſon. + Now this is 


a great Miſtake (I would hope it is not wilfull in | 


Mr. Whitefield; for certainly Mr. Weſiey, either in 
Preaching or Print, did never ſay that God had de- 


clared He will ſave all Men. - Mr. Weſky has ad, 


(which. is true) that all might be ſaved; but Iam. 
ſure: he never ſaid, that all wil be ſaved , and I think 
there is a great Difference between thoſe two Words,. 
might, and ul. 

I pals by-his deals Advice to Mr. We ow: dock; 
as, To give himſelf to Reading, to ſtudy the Covenant | 
of Grace; down with your carnal Reaſoning ; be a 9 
ile Child,» and then, 2 F pauming (an 
Word) your . Salvation, as you have done in 4 


be not, true. I don't like the Word Mr. HH/hitefield 


uſes here; but if I hada thouſand Souls, I durſt ven- 
angeable Word of Gd. 
as well as Mr. Weſley hath his, and I am ſure they» 1 
would be very fafe too. Mr. V biteßeld goes ou, 
Inſiead of talking | of finleſs Perfection, as you h i 


ture them all upon-the unch 


done in the Preface to that Hymn Boot. Now Mir. 


Whitefield ſpeaks out, Plain dealing is beſt: 3 E: 


. I am verily)perſwaded, that many of the prede- 
Rinarians are more angry with the Weſteys for Preach-, 


ing up Goſpel Holineſs, than for their pleading. ſow ©; 1 


ſtrongly for Univerſal Redemption; and if they. - 
would kt the former alone; they would forgive them 


the latter. I/, inſtead of preaching right, they w 
preach to them ſmooth Things; if ' they would cauſe the. 


holy One of Iſrael (or Holinefs70f God) to ceaſe from- 


before them, they would be content to hear them. 


But to preſs People ſo carneſtly to endeavour to live | 


or three Things. in Page 26. Mr. Whitefield, after 
he had accuſed Mr. Weſley of uſing ſo much Sophi- 
ſtry in his Sermon, hath theſe Words, Yau beg the 


2 1 
Hymn Book, if the Dofirine of Univerſal Redemption; 


without , 


x e de Setenitaing 12 to "wal o dah E 
Wo Right-cyes, and ging off W to te! 
chen they muſt ſpare no evil Inclination, mdulgs! - 
0 worldly Temper, not to lem ve. them one Hero. 
a4, but tò inſiſt upon the Neceſſity of having cleaai 
Hearts, is Nrangely Fete hoare bard Ge | F 
þ ing, bb bun beur e en dee 5 
Mr. Walch, in the Begiun ning of Ais? rmon ot 
Free- Grace, hath theſe Words, Whatſopver God 1 
in Man, or is done by Man, Gad is the Anthor:and> - - © 
Doer of it. Now with hat Reaſon does Mr. H 1 
al ſay, as he does a little further, Mr. Weſley? --: - 
muabes Man's Salvation depend an his: d free Will it © © 
ii Sermon, unleſs it be to inſinuate to his Followers 3 
. Weſley is an Armiman, which Mr. A hitzt! 
e he is not. But I would hope, that ih a WHU '- 
Mr. Whitefield will know himſel better Than he does 
now, and that Mr. Maſey alſo. will have the Satiſ m 
I faction of ſeeing him retract his Errors, and W -Y 
ISS to preach the ſame Goſpel he did formerly. 
® In the mean time I cannot bur'oblerve how f | 
"ly God hath honoured thoſe two Brethren (che 
Hieſleys) by calling them forth, and enabling them, 
With great Power, to preach the Truth of Fs Go-: 
| ſpel as it is in Jeſus, and by ſetting His Seal to their 
M.iniſtry. And Jam. perſwaded yon will join with 
9 me in Prayer to out Lord, — — = 
: Me. and bleſs them more and more, and protect them 
from evil Men and evil Angels; and that they may 
E rhe Be ſtedfaſt, immoveable, always abounding in the ort. 
j * be Lord, foraſmuch as << 8 rr ee _— 
12 1 not in vain in n the ny | 1 


My dear Friend, Yours, 
* ' # 4 95
