Religion of the Ancient Egyptians (Wiedemann, 1897)
===================================================
Alfred Wiedemann — Religion of the Ancient Egyptians (London, 1897), public domain. The first systematic English study of Egyptian religion. Scan via Internet Archive (religionancient00wiedgoog). Raw OCR, not proofread.




:r'^ ^^ , ,__ 


jtrti- 


RELIGION OF THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. 


RELIGION OF THE ANCIENT 
EGYPTIANS.- 


ALFRED WIEDEMANN, Ph.D. 

Professor in the University of Bonn. 

AUTHOR OF *< AXGTPTISCHX GXSCHICHTE,*' *' HSRODOT'S ZWEITSS BUCH/' 

"amcixnt kgyptiam doctrink of immortality," etc. 


IVITH SEVENTY-THREE ILLUSTRATIONS FROM THE MONUMENTS. 


LONDON : 

H. GREVEL & CO., 
33, KING STREET, COVENT GARDEN, W.C. 

1897. 


• ••••••• 


Printed by Maxell, Watson, & Viney, Ld., Loudon and Aylesbury. 


PREFACE. 


T^ GYPT stands pre-eminent among all the nations 
^^ of antiquity as the land in which every civic 
and public interest was dominated by religion. The 
great prominence of the .gods in the known texts 
is doubtless in part due to the fact that temples 
and tombs are the chief remains in the country, 
and that it is from these sources that most of the 
documents in question have come down to us. Yet 
even when objects which had been intended for 
secular use only are discovered, they generally prove 
to be in some way or other connected with the 
worship of the higher powers ; and the assertion 
of Herodotus as to the exceptional piety of the 
Egyptians is fully ratified by the results of modern 
research. In Pagan times this singular national 
devoutness of a people regarded as worthy of pecu- 
liar reverence on account of their extreme antiquity 
moved Greek and Roman writers to devote more 
attention to the Egyptian religion than to that of 


298511 


VI PREFACE. 

any other nation : hence it is that we find much 
valuable information on this subject in the works of 
the classical writers, although we cannot utilize it 
for scientific purposes as it stands. When the 
fathers of the Church and the Christian apologists 
came to write of the doctrines of the Egyptian re- 
ligion, they singled out from them all that was most 
foolish and repulsive, in accordance with their object 
of pointing out the absurdities in which paganism 
necessarily involved even the most cultured of 
peoples. The classical writers, on the other hand, 
showed as little critical discrimination in this as in 
most other fields of scientific inquiry : they identified 
their own Greek and Roman divinities with those 
which they found in the Valley of the Nile, lightly 
transferred Greek doctrines into Egyptian teaching, 
and ascribed to the latter systems of religious belief 
really of their own devising, although the principal 
deities figuring in them were invested with Egyptian 
names. Thus it is that Plutarch's interesting work 
on I sis and Osiris ^ is in fact an exposition of the 
author's own conception of the universe, notwith- 
standing the large proportion of genuine Egyptian 
material which it contains. And though we find 
the names of Egyptian gods in the works of the 

' ircpl "Itribos Koi 'Oo-ipidoff— of which the best edition is that of 
Parthey, Berlin, 1850. 


PREFACE. Vll 

Neo-Platonists and of the Gnostics, everything is 

interpreted in accordance with the new philosophy, 

and the Ancient Egyptian classification ■ is entirely 

changed. But, in spite of these drawbacks, the 

information as to the Egyptian religion contained 

in the works of the Greek and Latin writers is both 

valuable and extensive,^ and it is to these that we 

are indebted for the preservation of many doctrines 

as to which the monuments are silent, but which 

are nevertheless undoubtedly of Ancient Egyptian 

origin. 

By the decipherment of the hieroglyphics materials 

fuller and unsophisticated were made accessible to 

students of the Egyptian religion, and, struck by 

the wealth of them, ChampoUion at once began to 

publish his Pantheon Egyptian (Paris, 1823-31), 

which, like many another work of that great scholar, 

was brought to a standstill by his early death. 

Wilkinson subsequently gave considerable attention 

to the same subject, and in the last volume of his 

Manners and Customs iX'On^on, 1841) we have an 

illustrated catalogue of Egyptian deities that is still 

valuable for reference, although Lanzone*s Dizio- 

nario di Mitologia egizia (Turin, 1881-6), with 

* The best collection of these references is in Jablonski, 
Pantheon Aegyptiorumf¥T2LnMoTif 1750-52. VKicvLASiTi's Analysts 
of the Egyptian Myt?wlogy, London, 1819, is less satisfactory 
though frequently quoted. 


Vlll PREFACE. 

respect to both the number of deities figured and 
the specification of texts referring to them, has 
thrown into the shade all similar works by his 
predecessors. 

As regards Egyptian dogma, the monotheistic, 
or rather henotheistic, factor has been emphasized 
by E, de Rouge, ^ Pierret,^ and Le Page Renouf;^ 
Tiele,* and, latterly, E. Meyer,^ have endeavoured 
to trace the evolution of the religion, and Brugsch ® 
to prove that the Egyptian religion was a coherent 
system of belief, corresponding somewhat to that 
imagined by Plutarch. But far weightier than any 
of these writings are the essays which Maspero has 
devoted to the subject, and which are now for the 
most part collected in his Etudes de Mythologie et 
de Religion (Paris, 1893). O"^ ^^ these essays is 
a criticism of Brugsch's treatise on the mythology, 
and is emphatically outspoken in condemnation of 
that distinguished scholar s point of view. A multi- 
tude of works of a more or less popular character by 
writers who draw all their information at second- 
hand need not here be noticed. If to one who knows 

' See his articles on this subject in the Revue Archiologique , 
N.S., I. 

* Essaisur la mythologie igy^tienne^ Paris, 1879. 

» Lectures on the Origin and Growth 0/ Religion, London, 1880. 
^ Histoire comparative des anciens religions t Paris, 1882. 

* Geschichte Aegyptens, Beriin, 1887. 

® Religion und Mythologie der alten Aegypter, Leipzig, 1885-90. 


PREFACE. IX 

the language there is imminent risk of reading his 
own ideas into the religious texts with which he is 
dealing, this danger is immeasurably increased for 
such as are unable to study the texts in the original, 
and who are thus thrown on translations for their 
authorities. Too easily they find statements in 
support of their theories when simply misled by 
some obscure rendering of the translator. It is 
especially true of Egypt that no original work 
in the study of the religion is possible without a 
knowledge of the language. Moreover many of 
the most important religious texts are still un- 
translated, or can be found only in obsolete and 
untrustworthy versions. 

The present work is based throughout on original 
texts, of which the most significant passages are 
rendered as literally as possible in order that the 
reader may test the justice of the conclusions drawn 
from them. And since, owing to the longwindedness 
of Egyptian scribes, it is altogether impracticable to 
give translations in full, references to complete 
publications of the inscriptions and papyri from 
which they are made will be found in the footnotes. 
The work makes no pretence to completeness in 
the sense of noting every single demon among the 
thousands which figure in Egyptian mythology, and 
each local myth to which any odd reference might 


X PREFACE. 

be found. Such a scheme would have resulted in 
a mere assemblage of names without connotation ; 
of titles with no distinguishable meaning ; of frag- 
mentary myths of which in the present state of 
Egyptology no clear account can possibly be given. 

Neither does the writer wish to enter into any 
discussion of current hypotheses as to the inner 
significance and origin of the Egyptian religion, 
nor yet to propound any views of his own on the 
subject : he is convinced that, however easy it may 
be to make assertions on these points, there is 
indeed little that can be proved with regard to them. 
His aim is a modest one : avoiding any attempt 
to interpret or to systematize, he has endeavoured 
to set before the reader the principal deities, myths, 
religious ideas and doctrines as they are to be found 
in the texts, more especially dwelling on such as 
have important bearings on the history of religion. 
The friendly reception accorded to the German 
edition of this book has testified to a certain 
demand on the part of the public for some account 
of Egyptian beliefs which should aim at establishing 
the facts of the case rather than at furnishing 
material in favour of any theory as to the philo- 
sophy or genesis of religion. 

The book has been carefully revised and aug- 
mented for the English edition, and it is hoped that 


PREFACE. xi 

it has thereby gained throughout both in clearness 
and in fulness of statement. This edition has, 
moreover, the advantage of illustrations, and these 
will convey to the reader a better idea of the forms 
attributed by the Egyptians to their gods than 
any mere description can do. Finally, the addition 
of a full Index will facilitate reference, especially 
as regards such deities as may have received but 
isolated or incidental notice in the following pages. 

In conclusion, I would here express my warmest 
thanks to my translator — who also recently placed 
before the English public my little treatise on 
The Ancient Egyptian Doctrine of the Immortality 
of the Soul — for the care and pains ungrudgingly 
bestowed upon the work. 

ALFRED WIEDEMANN. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER I. 

PACK 

INTRODUCTION I 

CHAPTER II. 
SUN WORSHIP 14 

CHAPTER III 
SOLAR MYTHS $2 

CHAPTER IV. 
THE PASSAGE OF THE SUN THROUGH THE UNDER- 
WORLD 81 

CHAPTER V. 
THE CHIEF DEITIES . IO3 

CHAPTER VI. 

FOREIGN DEITIES I48 

xiii 


XIV CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER VII. 

PAGE 

THE WORSHIP OF ANIMALS 1 72 

CHAPTER VIII. 
OSIRIS AND HIS CYCLE 20/ 

CHAPTER IX. 
THE OSIRIAN DOCTRINE OF IMMORTALITY . . 234 

CHAPTER X. 
MAGIC AND SORCERY 26 1 

CHAPTER XI. 
AMULETS 284 

INDEX 309 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 


riC. PAGB 


FIG. 


PAGE 


1. Ra,t Tafti 


15 


18. NG uplifting the Sun 


2. ObeUsk at Matarieh (He- 


Bark at the End of the 


liopolis) 


19 


Night . 


ICO 


3. Madet Boat 


22 


19. Amen Ra. 


118 


4. Sekti Boat 


23 


20. Amen Ra, his Sacred 


5. Bark of Ra . 


24 


Rams and Goose . 


119 


6. Ra 


26 


21. Amen Ra as Goose . 


121 


7. Heremkhati (Harmakhis) 


22. Mat 


123 


and iQsaas with 


23. Ment 


125 


Rameses II. . 


29 


24. Bakh, the Bull of Ment . 


126 


8. Khepera .... 


31 


25. Hekt 


129 


9. Sha .... 


33 


26. KhnQm, Satit, and AnGkt 


130 


10. Tefnat .... 


34 


27. Ptah (Hephaestos) . 


132 


II. The Aten, KhOenaten 


28. Ptah TatQnen . 


133 


and his Family 


37 


29. Sokar Osiris . 


135 


1 2. Sun God upliftingthe Disk 


46 


30. One of the KhnQmO 


136 


13. The Celestial Cow . 


65 


31. Sekhet . 


137 


14. Winged Sun Disk . 


75 


32. Nefer TGm 


138 


15. Journey of the Sun 


33. Imhetep (Imttthes) . 


139 


through the First Hour 


34. Neith 


. 140 


of the Night . 


86 


35. Nekhebit (Eileithyia) 


141 


16. Sun God entering the 


36. Oazit(Bato) . 


141 


Underworld . 


97 


37. Maat 


. 142 


17. Gate in the Underworld 


98 


38. Hathor . 


. 143 


XVI 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 


39. Seb&k (Sukhos), seated . 

40. H&pi . . . . 

41. Anta . . . . 

42. ReshpO . . . . 

43. Kedesh . . . . 

44. TQm, Safekht, and Thoth 

inscribing the King's 
Name on the Sacred 
Tree of Heliopolis 

45. Bes .... 

46. Bes, in decorative art 

47. Birth of Queen Hatshep- 

sOt . . . 

48. BesandHerpekhred(Har- 

pokrates) 

49. Sepd 

50. Taflrt and the Hathor 

Cow . 

51. The Apis Bull. 

52. An Apis Stela . 

53. Sukhos (Sebak) in ani- 

mal form 

54. The BennO Bird 

55. The Great Sphinx . 

56. Plan of small Temple of 

Amen at Karnak . 


144 

H5 
151 
152 

153 


156 
160 
161 

162 

164 
165 

169 

187 
190 

192 

193 
194 

201 


FIG. PACE 

57. Osiris enshrined . .216 

58. Osiris and Isis . .218 

59. Mummy on Funerary 

Couch, attended by Isis, 
Nephthys, and the four 
Funerary Genii . . 220 

60. Heremheb between Horns 

and Set ... 222 

61. Herpekhred (Harpo- 

krates) .... 223 

62. Horus and Amenophis II. 224 

63. The Ibis of Thoth . . 225 

64. Thoth .226 

65. Anubis .... 228 

66. Anubis and Mummy . 229 

67. Seb separated from NOt 

by Sha . .231 

68. Not pouring Water to the 

Dead from a Palm . 232 

69. The Mummy at the 

Tomb . . .237 

70. Shrines of the two Kh(in- 

sOs .... 275 

71. Personified Ankh . . 288 

72. An Hypocephalus . . 298 

73. The MehOrt Cow . . 305 


RELIGION OF THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. 


CHAPTER I. 

INTRODUCTION. 

THE attempt has often been made to hit off a national 
characteristic in some apt epithet ; the Romans have 
been denominated " brave," the Israelites " religious," the 
Assyrians "cruel." In like manner the Egyptians might 
be called " conservative " in the first and strictest sense of 
the word. While such appellations are only conditionally 
applicable to other nationalities, here we have a charac- 
teristic which the inhabitants of the Nile Valley invariably 
exhibit. The Egyptian people could never bring themselves 
to recognize any form of language, script, government, 
manners and customs as antiquated, and they steadfastly 
retained their hold upon every stage of their development 
during the whole course of a national history which lasted for 
thousands of years. Obviously there could be no denying 
that progress was made and that new views were attained 
to, either as the outcome of reflection or in consequence 
of foreign influence ; but, although the Egyptians could 
not hold aloof from change, their acceptance of it involved 


2 INTRODUCTION. 

no casting off of the old and cherished ideas, which were 
retained and allowed to subsist on equal footing with the 
new modes of thought This explains why the Egyptians, 
after having attained to an alphabetic system of writing, 
went on using the signs for words and syllables in which 
their script had originated. Hence also it came about 
that when the Egyptian monarchy had become absolute, 
titles and offices which prevailed in the feudal period, when 
the king was reckoned only as first among his peers, still 
continued to exist in connexion with the court and with 
official life. Innumerable incongruities were the natural 
result: titles did not correspond to offices, nor words to 
meanings. The Egyptian aversion to allowing anything 
to be lost of what had formed the possessions and institu- 
tions of their forefathers — of never losing connexion with 
the past, so that all might remain as it had been " since 
the times of the god R4 "—outweighed all practical con- 
siderations in their minds. 

In the natural course of things this sentiment must have 
received some modification from the changing aspects of 
civic life ; for though names and forms might be steadfastly 
retained, it could not be so with the substance when any 
change of circumstances had become general. But it was 
otherwise in the domain of the spiritual ; there contempla- 
tion and thought were governed by feeling alone, and no 
rude truth was permitted to disturb a system. It was 
pre-eminently in his religion that the Egyptian allowed 
full play to his conservative nature. The natural pheno- 
mena, the few general truths upon which that religion 
was based, could be so variously explained and trans- 


INCOHERENCE OF EGYPTIAN RELIGION. 3 

formed that no abandonment of old opinions for the sake 
of new — however desirable according to our ideas — was 
in the least necessary in Egyptian opinion. The national 
bent of the people towards mysticism helped them easily 
over such paradoxes as might arise ; and where these 
might seem insoluble to earthly reason their interpretation 
could be regarded as a profound mystery whose nature 
the godhead would reveal to the blessed in the life to 
come. 

On this account the Ancient Egyptian religion is of the 
deepest interest. Not only does it contain the simplest 
forms under which the nation on the banks of the Nile 
conceived of its gods, and the ceremonies with which it 
worshipped them in the days when very restricted means 
were at its disposal for the adornment of divine service; 
but side by side with these are the beliefs of later times, 
a constantly increasing number of divinities, a cult growing 
continually more refined and ornate, new modes of worship, 
and divinities of foreign origin. All the different systems 
of thought which grew out of Egyptian religious belief in 
the course of centuries are found together in the texts ; the 
earlier forms as well as those which succeeded them have 
all alike been retained. Hence it was inevitable that con- 
tradictions of all kinds should abound, but they did not 
disturb the Egyptian, for he never attempted to systematize 
his conceptions of the different divinities into a homo- 
geneous religion. It is open to us to speak of the religious 
ideas of the Egyptians, but not of an Egyptian religion ; 
and we must carefully bear in mind this fact, which cannot 
fail to obtrude itself upon every one who examines the 


4 INTRODUCTION. 

texts without prejudice, and which the reader will perceive 
clearly from such extracts as will be brought to his notice 
in the following pages. Again and again has the attempt 
been made to formulate the Egyptian religion into a 
consistent system, and thus to credit the nation with what 
never was theirs. All such performances, however brilliant 
in themselves, are now regarded as failures by scientific 
men ; they are based upon an arbitrary choice of passages 
in the texts which the writer has selected to support a 
preconceived view, while taking no account of the far 
greater number of passages which do not agree with it. 
Besides the impossibility of formulating any comprehen- 
sive system of this kind, there is that of deciding as to 
which was the oldest form of the Egyptian religion, and 
of demonstrating whether this was monotheistic — as on 
general grounds it has often been assumed — or whether, 
as others assert, it was based upon pantheism, polytheism, 
ancestor worship, worship of vegetable or animal life 
and their reproductive powers, belief in the divine power 
of the sun, or other religious ideas. All these forms of 
belief are to be found more or less clearly represented in 
Egyptian religion, but it cannot be proved historically 
which are the earlier and which the later. Set forth side 
by side in single sentences or at length, they are all extant 
in the oldest of the longer religious texts which have come 
down to us — namely, the Pyramid inscriptions of the Vth 
and Vlth dynasties. As far as our knowledge of Ancient 
Egypt has hitherto extended, research has determined 
nothing indisputable as to the origins of their national 
religion, their form of government, their writing, or their 


CHURCH AND STATE. 5 

racial descent On the contrary, the more material is made 
accessible and the more thoroughly it is studied, the more 
obscure do these questions of origin become. One theory 
is disproved after another without being supplanted by 
any demonstrable truth. In Egypt, as in other countries, 
history, in the widest sense of the word, knows nothing of 
its own beginnings. In the present state of our knowledge, 
all that the science of religion can do as regards Egypt is 
to follow the same course once traversed by the Egyptians, 
but in the reverse direction. Where they combined we must 
isolate. By study of the texts we must seek to disentangle 
the intermingled doctrines, to sort out the separate pieces 
composing that motley mosaic presented by the Egyptian 
belief in higher powers. In this way we shall find that 
we can obtain a series of separate and distinct doctrines, 
each of which comprises an independent sphere of thought ; 
the combination of these doctrines, however, though 
attempted by the Egyptians, could never be logical. 

Before proceeding to consider the most important of 
these circles of ideas, which partly centre round certain 
forms of deity and partly round some one fundamental 
idea, we must briefly examine into the origin of the 
Egyptian state. Many important points of her religious 
doctrine can thus be elucidated, as is always the case 
where religion and government are so closely coinci- 
dent as they were in the Valley of the Nile. 

The Ancient Egyptian state was formed by the union of 
many smaller states which occupied the Nile Valley in 
some prehistoric period These states were not merged 
at that unification of the kingdom which legend ascribes 


6 INTRODUCTION. 

tp the first human monarch of Egypt, Menes. In a certain 
sense they continued to exist, for they remained in posses- 
sion of their own religious, political, and military adminis- 
trations, acknowledging the king as their liege lord only so 
far as to assign him in most cases the part of confirming 
the princes in their rank, the post of commander in chief 
in case of war, the bestowal of posts of honour and of 
titles, and the receipt of certain taxes. It is doubtful 
whether he could by right depose the subordinate princes. 
As a matter of fact he did depose them, but only after 
overcoming them in war, and thus used the right of a 
conqueror rather than that of a Pharaoh. Nevertheless 
he was apparently not permitted to retain land so obtained 
as his private property, but was obliged to bestow it upon 
some one who entered upon the rights and duties of the 
deposed prince and could bequeath the province to his own 
successors. It was owing to this invariable transmission 
of the fief that the ancient territorial divisions lasted 
down to the latest times. Changes rarely occurred, but 
occasionally two provinces would be united by inheritance, 
or two which had been united would be again separated. 
From the Pyramid period until the times of the Ptolemies 
and of the Roman emperors certain districts are specified 
by the texts as substantially unchanged. The Ancient 
Egyptian name for these provinces was hesp} The 

^ In the transliterations of Egyptian words >^ is a hard h. kh^ sh, 
th, each represent a single alphabetic sign in the original. The 
signs rendered a, d, d, t, u, more nearly approach to the Semitic 
semi-vowels than to our vowels, but they are used as vowel signs 
in the rendering of foreign, and sometimes even in Egyptian words. 
Generally the Egyptian, like the Semite, did not write the vowels ; 


TERRITORIAL SUBDIVISIONS. / 

Greeks called them nomes (yofioi), a designation retained 
by the Romans, under whose rule they enjoyed so much 
independence as to be allowed to issue a coinage of their 
own. Each nome consisted of four subdivisions : the 
capital, which was the seat of authority and the residence 
of the nomarch and of the principal deity ; the regularly 
tilled arable land ; the marshes, which were mostly used 
as pasture and for the cultivation of water plants ; and 
lastly the canals, which were in charge of special officials. 
The control of the canals was necessarily far more 
centralized than that of the rest of the country, for the 
regular iiTigation of Egypt can only be secured when 
directed by a single authority which opposes in the com- 
mon interest any attempt to cut off and divert the water 
for the gratification of private ends. Such an attempt was 
regarded in Egyptian morals as a serious crime, which 
the godhead itself would punish in the life to come ; * but 
the need for such a threat testifies to the readiness with 
which an Egyptian gave himself to the practice. 

The effects of this division into nomes on the condition 

hence, where a vowel is to be inserted on phonetic or other grounds, 
it is here denoted generally by e, which may thus correspond to 
the most various vowel sounds in the ancient language. The true 
vocalization of the words is, as a rule, unknown, and in the fol- 
lowing pages the Greek transcriptions (but not the names of Greek 
deities identified with the Egyptian) are generally employed when 
such are to be found, Amm6n, however, being given in the usual 
English form of ** Amen." These correspond to the pronunciation 
more accurately than a mere transliteration of the Egyptian signs, 
which will be given once only in the case of proper names for which 
there is an adequate Greek equivalent. 

d stands throughout for the Egyptian radical ^.^-D — y. ii simply 
indicates that the u is to be pronounced as in " rule/' 

* Boo^ of the Dead, cxxv., 1. 28. 


8 


INTRODUCTION. 


and development of Egypt, as well as on its religion, were 
so important that a list of them is here given in tabular 
form, together with certain particulars. 

UPPER EGYPT. 


MOMS. 


CAPITAL. 


DKITY. 


I 


Ta-Kens 


Ab (Elephantine), later 
N(ib-t (Ombos) 


Khn^m 


2 


Tes-Hor 


Deb (ApoUinopolis magna, 
Edfd) 


Hor-beh4det 


3 


Ten 


Nekheb (Eileithyia), later 


Nekheb 


Sene (Latopolis, Esneh) 


. 


4 


t)s-t 


Cs-t (Thebes), later An-res 


Amen Ri, later 


(Hermonthis) 


Ment 


5 


Hor-(ii 


Kebti (Koptos) 


Khem 


6 


Aa-d(i 


Ta - en- terer (Tentyris, 
Denderah) 


Hat-hor 


7 


Sekhem 


Ha (Diospolis parva) 


Hat-hor 


8 


Abd 


AbdA(Abydos), Teni (This) 


Anher 


9 


Khem 


ApA (Panopolis) 


Khem 


10 


Oazt 


DebA (Aphroditopolis) 


Hat-hor 


Neter-6i 


D(i-ka (Antaeopolis) 


Hor (Horns) 


II 


Set 


Shas-hetep (Hypsele) 


Khn(im 


12 


DA-f 


NA-ent-bak (Antaeopolis) 


Hor (Horus) 


13 


Atef-khent 


SaA-t (Lycopolis, SiCt) 


Ap-Oat 


14 


Atef-peh, later Aa- 
tinoltes 


Kesi (Kusae) 


Hat-hor 


'5 


On 


Khemennd (Hermopolis) 


Thoth 


i6 


Meh-mahez 


Hebenn(i (Hipponon) 


Hor (Horns) 


17 


Andp 


Ka-sa (Kynopolis) 


AnQp (Anubis) 


i8 


Sep 


Ha-s{iten (Alabastronpolis) 


Anilp (Anubis) 


^9. 


Oab 


Pa-mazet (Oxyrynkhos) 


Set 


20 


Atef-khent 


Khenen-s6 (Heracleopolis 


Hor-shef(Arsa- 


magna) 


phes) 


21 


Atef-peh 


Semen-Hor 


Khnillip 


Ta-she 


Ta-shed (Krokodilopolis 
in the Faydm) 


Sebek 


22 


Miten 


Tep-ah (Aphroditopolis) 


Hat-hor 


NOMES AND DEITIES. 


LOWER EGYPT. 


NOME. 


CAPITAL. 


DEITY. 


I 


Aniib hez (white 
wall) 


Men-nefer (Memphis) 


Ptah 


2 


AA 


Sekhem (Letopolis) 


Hor-flr 


3 


Ament (the West) 


NA-ent-HApi (Apis) 


Hat-hor 


4 


Sepi-res 


Zek4 


Amen Ri 


5 


Sepi-em-het 


SaA (Sais) 


Neith 


6 


Ka-set 


Khas(i4 (Xois) 


Amen R4 


7 


ament 


Sent-nefer 


HA 


8 


abd 


ThAkot (Sukot) 


Tftm 


9 


Athi 


Pa-Asiri (Busiris) 


Osiris 


lO 


Ka-kem 


Ha-her-ab (Athribis) 


Hor (Honis) 


II 


Ka-hebes 


Ka-hebes (Kabasos) 


Isis 


12 


Ka-theb 


Theb-neter (Sebennytos) 


Anher 


13 


Hek-ad 


An-A (Heliopolis) 


R4 


H 


Khent-abd 


Z4n (Tanis) 


Hor (Horns) 


15 


Tehat 


Pa-Teh(iti (Hermopolis) 


Thoth 


i6 


Khar 


Pa-ba-neb-ded (Mendes) 


Ba-neb-ded 
(Osiris) 


17 


Sarn-hdt 


Pa-khen-en-Amen (Dios- 
polis) 


Amen R4 


18 


Am-khent 


Pa-Bast (Bubastis) 


Bast 


19 


Am-peh 


Pa-Oaz (Bftto) 


Oaz (BOto) 


20 


Sepd 


Kesem (Gosen, Phakussa) 


Sepd 


A glance at the above list shows that each nome had 
its own god. In its capital stood his principal temple, and 
there the college of priests vowed to the service of the 
nome god exercised their functions. The Egyptian priests 
bore the titles of db^ "the pure," hen neter, "servant of 
the god " — the latter title being translated by the Greeks 
as " prophet," though the official in question had nothing 
to do .with prediction — and others of a similar nature. 
At the head of each college was a high priest with a 


/ 


10 INTRODUCTION. 

specific title ; at Memphis he was " Chief of the Artificers," 
at Mendes " Director of the Soldiers," at Heliopolis the 
" Great Seer," ^ at Thebes in earlier times the " First 
Prophet of Amen," and later "Opener of the Gate of 
Heaven." In the later period a high priestess generally 
took rank beside the chief priest, who was surrounded by 
a staff of permanent officials, the number varying with the 
size and wealth of the temple. This staff was not so 
large as we might expect ; at Siiit, for example, it con- 
sisted of ten and at Abydos of only five persons. To 
these, however, must be added many minor officials of 
the temple, and many personages of the city who per- 
formed priestly functions at stated times and in addition 
to their other functions. The priests of each nome were 
independent and subject to no higher jurisdiction. If 
occasionally the idea arose of appointing a high priest 
for all Egypt who, living at court and being under its 
influence, should rule the priesthood in a sense friendly 
to the government, the attempt invariably failed, owing 
to the jealous independence of the different colleges. 
The kings were obliged to be content with appointing 
their own relations or men devoted to their interests as 
chief priests of the more important shrines, and thus to 
gain an indirect influence over the priesthood. But it was 
not only in regard to government that the independence 
of the various colleges was preserved ; it maintained itself 
also in religious matters. Each nome had its own religion 
which it developed regardless of neighbouring faiths, and 

^ This must be understood in the physical sense. The literal 
translation of the title is '* Great One of Seeings." 


HENOTHEISM — FUSION OF DEITIES. II 

which in almost every case became henotheistic from time 
to time. The god of a nome was within it held to be 
Ruler of the Gods, Creator of the World, Giver of all 
good things, and it mattered little to his adherents that 
another deity played a precisely similar part in some 
adjacent nome where their own god was relegated to a 
subordinate place. 

Quarrels between the nomes could not fail to arise 
from such isolation of interests. Some gods were 
enemies of others, according to the myths; and one 
deity being honoured in one province while his enemy 
was worshipped in another, their worshippers also took 
sides against one another. Even in Roman times this 
state of antagonism occasionally led to sanguinary con- 
flicts between the inhabitants of different districts. More- 
over, in the course of history, owing to the independent 
growth of local religions, divinities once the* same in cha- 
racter and origin took different shape in different nomes, 
and became at length entirely distinct ; while other gods 
which eventually appear identical in name and nature 
were originally and radically different. In historical times 
Horus of EdfQ no longer corresponded to the Horus of 
Letopolis. The former is the keen sighted god of the 
bright sun, and the latter a blind deity whose manifestation 
was in solar eclipse. Hence, in treating of any one god 
we cannot indiscriminately apply all references to him 
without running the risk of acquiring false notions ; we 
must carefully examine whether they originated in the 
same place and arose out of the same fundamental ideas. 

Occasionally indeed this isolation was intruded upon. 


12 INTRODUCTION. 

This would often happen on a small scale when an in- 
habitant of one nome had established himself in another, 
bringing with him his own gods, to whom he proceeded 
to erect shrines, after obtaining the necessary official 
permission. If such a shrine was richly endowed and 
magnificent festivals were solemnized there, it was only 
natural— especially in a place where the chief temple was 
poor — that more and more adherents should flock to the 
new deity, and gradually give him precedence over the 
original god. At Abydos, for instance, in course of time, 
Anher, god of the city and of the Thinite nome, was 
almost entirely displaced by Osiris. Such events trans- 
pired quietly and were of local importance only, but 
the religious revolution which the assumption of power 
by a new dynasty involved had far wider issues. The 
new dynasty always believed that it owed the crown to 
the god of its native nome ; hence it considered the 
worship of its tutelary deity of primary importance, and 
endeavoured to spread the cult over the whole kingdom. 
In this endeavour their sovereign was willingly met half- 
way by the people. To them the elevation of the king 
over the other nomarchs implied the exaltation of his god 
over all the other divinities, and to this god all henceforth 
made their offerings and addressed their prayers. It was 
to such considerations and to royal influence that the 
worship of Ptah and that of Amen Ri were indebted for 
their extension. Again, other gods were raised to power 
as the result of certain tendencies of thought. From the 
Hyksos period onwards the origin of all forms of religion 
was sought in sun worship ; nearly all the principal deities 


THE SOLAR BIAS. 1 3 

were thenceforth amalgamated with the Sun god, and 
hence arose composite forms like Amen Ri, KhnOm 
R^ and many others of the same kind. And although 
the train of ideas connected with the Osirian religion — 
to take only one example — could not logically be brought 
into harmony with the new doctrine, yet the solar bias 
which characterized Ancient Egyptian mythology from 
the beginning of the New Kingdom ultimately and in- 
evitably turned the whole scheme of faith into pantheism. 


CHAPTER II. 

SUN WORSHIP. 

T) A is the name by which the Sun god is generally 
-'-^ mentioned in the texts. Attempts have repeatedly 
been made to draw from his name far reaching conclusions 
as to the nature of his divinity, and it has been con- 
jectured that since " to give " and also occasionally " to 
order, to regulate" are among the meanings of the word 
rdy the god was so called as the being who created, 
ordered, and regulated all things, especially as, according 
to certain inscriptions, he was older than the firmament, 
and maker of gods and men. But this explanation 
is too far fetched. As a matter of fact, the name of 
the god has nothing to do with the word meaning 
"to give," but is derived from r4, the oldest and most 
common designation of the sun, afterwards extended to 
the god in whose figure the animating spirit of the sun 
was supposed to be embodied. Creative activity was of 
course ascribed to this being : the existence of life without 
the cooperation of the sun was inconceivable ; apart 
from its agency all would have remained lifeless. The 
sun, and light with it, must needs have been formed before 
any creatures could come into existence ; once it had 
been personified there was but a step from the accepted 

14 


RA.T TAUL 


IS 


idea of its prior existence to the belief that it was 
the sun which had called all things into being. 

Originally the sun was considered to be male ; and not 
until a comparatively late period did the idea occur to the 
Egyptians of resolving it into 
a masculine and a feminine 
being. The latter received 
the name RA.T, or RA.T taOi, 
" Rlt of the Two Lands," a 
name the late origin of which 
is indicated in its artificial 
formation by the addition of 
a feminine suffix to the prim- 
itive word.^ It was not easy, 
however, to assign any par- 
ticular function to the goddess. 
Often she is called the Lady 
of Heliopolis ; but she was 
also supposed to dwell in 
other places — e^, in the Si- 
naitic Peninsula — and to be 
included in the divine triad 
of Erment along with Month 
and Harpokrates. Nowhere 
did she attain to any stand- 
ing of her own. Her func- 
tions were those of Isis, and 
she is even represented as bearing the cow horns of that 
goddess. But she is never represented as hawk headed, 

* This feminine suffix, which often forms part of the names of 


FIG. I. 

rA.(t) taOi. (l. d. III. i88.) 

Great temple of Rameaes II. at AbQ 

Simbel. 


1 6 SUN WORSHIP. 

and this would not have been the case had she been one 
of the genuine 'solar deities of the olden time. 

Sun worship existed in Egypt from prehistoric times» 
and it held its place in popular favour until the latest 
period of Egyptian history. The obelisks which stood 
at the entrance of temples were dedicated to the sun, as 
were also the little votive objects of like form which were 
placed in tombs, particularly during the period of the 
Old Kingdom. During the New Kingdom the latter were 
superseded by small pyramids. These did not represent 
the sepulchral pyramids of the Old Kingdom (which were 
no more than geometrically formed tumuli of masonry, 
without any deep symbolical meaning), but are to be 
considered as representing the obelisks, the pointed tops 
of which are of the same form.^ Sometimes these 
votive pyramids are very small, and then are commonly 
flattened at the tops and furnished with a ring so as 
to be worn as amulets. A third kind of monument 
takes a place midway between these two forms.* This 
consists of a pyramid base without apex, thus producing 
the form of the so called " mastabas," the private tombs of 
the Old Kingdom ; from the flat upper surface an obelisk 

Egyptian goddesses, has been conjee turally vocalized as it In later 
times the pronunciation of the / was dropped, and such names of 
goddesses were pronounced, as the Greek transcriptions testify, 
Isi(s), Athyri, Anuki, etc. 

1 For an account and confutation of the numerous false hypotheses 
based on the form and size of the sepulchral pyramids, and 
especially of the great Pyramid of Glzeh, c£ Wiedemann, Globus^ 
1893, Ixiii., pp. 217, 242. 

' See Sethe, Aeg, Zett, 1889, pp. 11 1 ei seq. ; Schiaparelli, 
// Significato Simbolico delle ^ir amide, Rome, 1884. 


HELIOPOLIS. 17 

rises, generally surmounted by the solar disk. During 
the Vth Dynasty these were much in favour, and in the 
neighbourhood of Memphis several kings set up great 
monumental erections on this model, with temples in 
connexion with them, to which various orders of priests 
were attached. These edifices were dedicated to R4, or 
to R& Harmakhis ; occasionally also Horus and Hathor 
were worshipped in them. As to their sites, plans, and 
so forth, we have no positive data, but probably there 
was some connexion between them and the sepulchral 
pyramids ; at least this is suggested by the fact that the 
same priests who served the pyramids as ** prophets " 
occupied also official positions in these sanctuaries of KL 

The place round which the solar worship centred was 
An, Hebrew On. It was also called by the Egyptians 
Pa Rd, " the house of Rd," Bethshemesh by the Hebrews, 
and by the Greeks Heliopolis. The history of the city 
in detail cannot indeed be carried back very far. In texts 
of the Old Kingdom it is named but seldom, and the 
foundation of the great temple of Rd, so zealously adorned 
by later Pharaohs, dates only from the Xllth Dynasty 
(before 2500 B.C.), as is related in a poetically embellished 
description of the event written on leather and preserved 
at Berlin.^ This, however, was not the first sanctuary 
built in the city : the same manuscript mentions that on 
the occasion of the new foundation the great bouse of Tftm 
in Heliopolis was enlarged. Of the temple of Tftm no- 
thing remains, and only the peribolus and a single obelisk 

' Published and discussed by Stern, Aeg: Zeit, 1874, pp. 85 
et seq, 

2 


1 8 SUN WORSHIP. 

with the names of King Usertesen I., that stands near 
the little village of Matarieh, bear witness to the Xllth 
Dynasty foundation. The work of destruction was begun 
in ancient times. Under Rameses III. {circa 1200 B.C.) the 
temple was at the height of its power ; 12,963 persons are 
said to have been then engaged in its service.^ But, later, 
Herodotus can testify only to the learning and wisdom of 
its priesthood, and not to the splendour of its buildings ; 
and in Strabo's time* the place was almost entirely for- 
saken, although still visited frequently by travellers, both 
on account of the temple and of the college of learning con- 
nected with it. In Arab times the ruins were still extant ; 
the fall of the fellow obelisk to the one still standing took 
place only in the thirteenth century, and a magnificent 
statue of a deity was destroyed in the vicinity by Ahmed 
ibn TOlCln (868 — 883 A.D.). Excavations on the site have 
produced little or nothing, but it must be admitted that 
none have been carried out systematically as yet. 

The sacred spring of the god R4 has lasted longer than 
his monuments. About 730 B.C., when King Piankhi of 
Ethiopia arrived at HeliopoHs on his triumphal march 
through Egypt, he washed his face, as he himself relates,' 
in the pool of fresh water in which R4 was wont to lave 
his divine countenance. The Arabs still call it "The 
Spring of the Sun " ; and here, as the ancient legend tells, 
the mother of our Lord washed her child's swaddling 

1 Great Harris Papyrus ^ pi. 31, 1. 8. 

• xvii. 805. 

• Piankhi Stela, 1. 102, translated by Brugsch, Gesch. Aeg,, 
pp. 682 et seq, ; WIEDEMANN, Gesch, Aeg,, pp. 564 et seq. 


FIG. ?.- OBELISK OF USERTESEN I. AT MATARIEH (HELIOPOLIS). 


PIANKHI AT HELIOPOLIS. 21 

clothes after reaching Egypt in the flight from Herod, and 
from the water falling on the ground there sprang up 
a balsam shrub, which, according to Maqrizi's account, 
grows nowhere else in the world. Even to this day the 
traveller is shown the sycomore in the shade of which the 
Holy Family is said to have rested, and, although itself but 
a few centuries old, it is the latest successor of one which 
may have existed in the time of Christ. The site is still 
held sacred by Arabs and Copts alike. 

The Ancient Egyptian text to which we have already 
referred gives an account of the ritual observed by a 
Pharaoh who visited Heliopolis in person. After perform- 
ing his ablutions Fiankhi went in ceremonial procession to 
the sandhill at Heliopolis, and there offered a great offer- 
ing of white cattle, milk, balsam, incense, and all manner 
of sweet smelling woods before the god R4 at his rising. 
On his return to the temple of the Sun he was extolled 
by the chief of the temple ; the temple lector recited the 
formula warding off the king's enemies ; the ceremony of 
the " House of Stars " (a room in the temple) was com- 
pleted ; and the king assumed the sacred band. He then 
purified himself with fresh incense ; there were given unto 
him flowers of the Hat Benben — ix. those borne by the 
celebrant in this part of the temple when appearing before 
the god. " He bore the flowers, he ascended the steps to 
the great chamber (the Holy of Holies) to behold R4 in 
the Hat Benben, he the king himself. There stood the 
prince alone ; he loosed the bolts, he opened the doors, 
he beheld his father RA in the sacred Hat Benben, the 
Mad or M&det bark of Ra and the Sekti bark of TOm. 


22 


SUN WORSHIP. 


Then he closed the doors, placed sealing clay upon them, 
and sealed it with the royal seal. Then spake he and 
commanded the priests : * I have impressed the seal ; no 
man of the other kings {i.e. of his vassal princes) shall enter 


^^J^ 


FIG. 3. — MADET BOAT. (mAR., " DENDERAH," IV., PL. 64.) 

Upper chamber of temple of Denderah. Roman Period. 


into it (the sanctuary).' He stood, but they cast themselves 
down upon their bellies before his majesty and said : * May 
he endure and increase and never be destroyed, Horus who 
loveth Heliopolis ! ' {i.e. the king himself). Then Piankhi 
returned to the temple of Tdm, and with him was brought 


THE SOLAR BARKS. 


23 


the image of his father Tdm Khepera, prince of Heliopolis." 
After this the king left the city. 

The chief relics of the sanctuary visited by Piankhi were 
two barks. These were for the use of the Sun god in his 
daily course through the sky ; for, according to Egyptian 


FIG. 4* — SEKTI BOAT. (MAR., "dENDERAH," IV., PL. 64.) 

ideas, the movement of the heavenly bodies consisted in 
a navigation, either on the waters which were supposed 
to form the firmament, or else on the celestial Nile which 
was supposed to run through a sky of metal — according 
as either idea of the heavens prevailed. It was commonly 


24 SUN WORSHIP. 

understood that the Sun had two barks at his disposal : 
the M^d or M^det boat for the morning, and the Sekti 
boat for the afternoon. But there was another theory that 
the number of the barks was far larger, and that one 
was provided for every hour of the day. These barks were 
made on the model of the ordinary Nile boat : amidships 
was a cabin in which the god Rd installed himself; fore 
and aft were his attendant deities to fight his foes and 
navigate the boat, the watch being relieved hourly. TAm 
and Khepera, cognate forms of Ri himself, were generally 
represented as accompanying him. 


FIG. 5. — BARK OF rI. (lEPS., "TODT.," CAP. 16.) 

Book of the Dead. Ptolemaic? 

Within the temple Was also treasured a divine symbol 
in the form of a small obelisk, called benben^ probably of 
stone, from which the whole temple had received its name 
of Ijlat Benben^ " House of the Obelisk," or rather of the 
" pyramidion of the obelisk," a name more especially em- 
ployed in religious and magical texts. This benben was 
held to be an embodiment of Ri himself. The choice of 
an inanimate object for such a purpose may be traced to 
the influence of Asiatic ideas, as will be shown later. It 
is noteworthy that in Heliopolis not only is this mode 
of worship found even in the earliest period, but it con- 
tinued throughout the whole duration of Egyptian history. 


rA the sun god. 25 

This is the more remarkable since the worship of the 
phoenix as a second embodiment of Ri also prevailed 
at Heliopolis, and this was a purely Egyptian conception. 
A close connexion between Heliopolis and Asia seems to 
have existed even in prehistoric times, and the tradition 
of it long survived : Greek writers and travellers were 
aware of it, and erroneously concluded that Heliopolis 
was of Arabian foundation/ though as a matter of fact 
the only foundation made there by the Semites was that 
of a certain form of worship. 

The fact that in Heliopolis it was thought incumbent 
to worship two embodiments of the Sun god shows that 
this deity was not considered as one and indivisible, but 
could be resolved into separate^ parts, to each of which an 
independent existence might be ascribed. Originally each 
form of the deity would have its own separate sphere of 
activity, but gradually one encroached upon the domain 
of the other to such an extent that, though the ideal 
significance of each was still radically different, in other 
respects their natures and functions were almost identical. 
The following are the more important of these forms : — 

RA himself, whom the inscriptions designate as god of 
Heliopolis, of Xols, of ApoUinopolis Magna, and of the 
Hermopolite nome in Upper Egypt He is almost in- 
variably represented as a hawk headed man holding in 
one hand the sign of life, and in the other the symbol 
of sovereignty, the kingly sceptre ^as. Upon his head is 
the solar disk in the coil of the uraeus, that serpent being 
symbolic of power over life and death. It is the charac- 
* yuba, in Pliny, vi. 26. 


26 


SUN WORSHIP. 


teristic sign of all solar deities that they are hawk headed, 
many being supposed, according to Egyptian belief, to be- 
come incarnate in hawks ; when any god is so represented 
his solar nature may be confidently assumed. In times 
when it was sought to turn the whole Ancient Egyptian 
religion into a solar cult, the figure 
_ of the sparrow hawk proper ^. was 

O y^ — ^ 1 equivalent to the sign for n^ter^ 
"god," and was also its determina- 
*^ tive, in the same way as the figure of 
the uraeus serpent U^ was employed 
with regard to neterJ, "goddess." 
We have no information as to how 
the hawk came to be associated with 
\ x^» ^^^ sun. Bak, the Egyptian name 
1 1 \ of the bird, has no philological con- 

iZ \ nexion with the heavenly body. Pro- 

i/TTTi bably this bird of prey — which now 

hovering high in air seems to dis- 
appear into the blue heaven and to 
merge itself in the sun, and anon 
no, 6. shoots down suddenly to earth like 

rA. (l. d. III. 138 •.) a ray of light — was regarded as the 
steu of seti I. «t Rede.iyeh. ^^essenger and even as part of the Sun 
god, and hence it was concluded that he himself bore the 
form of a sparrow hawk. Even the Neo Platonists thought 
they had found a close connexion between the two ; Por- 
phyrius giving as the reason for it that the hawk is formed 
of blood and spirit (irvevfia). We must needs admit that 
such conclusions are natural when we remember that races 


HORUS. 27 

having no connexion with the Egyptian have associated 
sun and sparrow hawk. Homer, for instance, Od. xv. 525, 
calls the hawk the "swift messenger of Phoebus." In 
pursuance of this train of thought divine honours were 
accorded in the Valley of the Nile to various kinds of 
hawks ; the birds were kept in sacred groves, and after 
death their bodies were embalmed. 
, HoRUS , Her, — By the name of Horus at least two 
entirely distinct deities were originally denoted — Horus 
the son of Isis, and Horus the sun god. The attempted 
blending of the two divinities was a subsequent develop- 
ment : so also was the likening of the war which Horus 
the sun god waged against the powers of darkness to the 
prolonged combat of Horus the son of Isis with Set the 
murderer of his father. The primary significance of Horus 
the sun god, whom the Greeks identified with their Apollo, 
has nothing in common with that of the son of Isis. 
Generally speaking, the sun god may be distinguished 
from his namesake by the possession of certain cogno- 
mens varying with the nomes or cities in which he was 
worshipped. In course of time each of the different forms 
became an independent divinity, and we frequently find 
several such worshipped contemporaneously as distinct 
deities in the later periods of Egyptian history. Among 
these forms of Horus the sun god the following are 
especially important : — 

Her-(jr, "Horus the Elder," the Greek Aroeris, who 
was particularly worshipped at Letopolis in the neigh- 
bourhood of Memphis, his birthplace being supposed to 
be ApoUinopolis Parva, and his mother an Hathor. An 


28 SUN WORSHIP. 

extensive temple was also dedicated to him at Ombos in 
Upper Egypt. He was represented as a hawk headed 
man, or simply as a hawk. It is characteristic of the 
religious medley of later times that he then appears as 
Her-Or-ShO, the son of -Rd, although he himself and 
ShA and Rft were originally independent solar deities 
representing similar conceptions. 

Her-mer-ti, " Horus of the Two Eyes," ix. sun and 
moon, Lord of ShedennO, a city of Lower Egypt in the 
nome of Pharbaethus. In later times he was identified at 
Panopolis with Min, the generative power of nature, and 
with the moon, being thus changed from a solar to a lunar 
deity. 

Her-khent-An-ma, "Horus Lord of Not Seeing," a 
Letopolitan god who was supposed to be blind and to 
symbolize solar eclipse.^ Among the animals sacred to 
him was the shrew mouse, which, according to Plutarch,* 
received divine honours in Egypt because it was blind, 
and because darkness was older than light. 

Her-EM-khO-TI, the Harmakhis of the Greeks, " Horus 
on the Two Horizons," Le. the horizon of the east and 
the horizon of the west, Horus at his rising and at his 
setting. Sometimes he was designated simply Her-EM- 
KHU, " Horus on the Horizon," and then represents more 
especially the god of the rising sun. He was easily and 
frequently merged with R3,, and under these circumstances 
he was entitled " The Great God, the Lord of Heaven, Ri 

* On this point see Renouf in Proceedings of the Society of 
Biblical Archceology, vol. viii., p. 155. 
» Sym^., iv. 5. 


HARMAKHIS— HER nCb. 


29 


Harmakhis." In this form he appears as god of Heliopolis, 
occasionally bearing the additional name of Tdm, and there 
lO-S-AAS was accounted his wife. He played a prominent 
part also in the city of Tanis, in the far east of the Delta, 
on the Asiatic frontier. And the Great Sphinx of Gtzeh,* 
a monument which the inscriptions would have us believe 
had been in existence at the time of King Khephren 
(Khafri), was likewise dedicated to Harmakhis. 


TIG. 7. — RAMESES II. BETWEEN HARMAKHIS AND lO-S-iUs. (l. D. III. 1 78, a.) 

Temple of Gerf Hussein. 

HER-NtJB, " the Golden Horus/' is primarily the god of 
the morning sun, manifesting himself in the golden glory 
of the dawn. Hence he may be considered as being in 
a certain sense the counterpart of the Golden Hathor. 
The Golden Hathor had no connexion with the Golden 
Aphrodite of the Greeks, but was goddess of the western 

» See pp. 195, 197. 


30 SUN WORSHIP. 

sky which received the dying sun in the glow of sunset^ 
and hence was supposed likewise to receive the dead on 
their decease. In the latter capacity she was usually 
represented as emerging from the Mountain of the West. 
From of old the Pharaohs, who always sought to pose 
as the Sun on earth, greatly affected this title of "the 
Golden Horus," and their public appearances are commonly 
described as the breaking forth of light by the use of the 
word kh&y which also denotes the sunrise. 

Her-IJEKENnO, a hawk headed deity, known in Denderah 
as the husband of the goddess Bast, and of whom we find 
it often stated : " he shines in the sun disk." 

Her-behijdti corresponds to Her-dema, and plays 
the chief part in a solar myth of which more will .be 
said anon. 

Her-KA, " Horus the Bull," is the planet Saturn ; Her- 
DESHER, " the Red Horus," is the planet Mars ; and 
Her-AP-SHETA, " Horus the Opener of that which is 
Secret," is the planet Jupiter. Hence it would seem that 
the three planets were regarded as emanations of the sun. 

HER.T, the feminine form of Her^ is a goddess of purely 
grammatical origin. Under this name Hathor was wor- 
shipped at Sebennytos, being there accounted the daughter 
of Rd and the mother of An her, and in later times identified 
under her lioness form with Tefndt and also with Nephthys, 
goddesses with whom she had originally nothing but her 
.sex in common. It is easy to understand how there would 
be no natural place in the myths for this product of priestly 
speculations, any more than for Rit ; the titles and attri- 
butes with which Hert was endowed, the story of her birth 


KHEPERA— TOm. 3 1 

in Denderah, and the like were all transferred from other 
divinities. 

KheperA, " he who is (in process of) becoming," strictly 
the god of the rising sun. In a Turin 
papyrus * it is said, " I am Khepera in 
the morning, Ri at noon, TQm in the 
evening." But this distinction was not 
thoroughly carried out, and occasionally 
Khepera may indicate the sun in "g. 8.— khkperA. 

^ ' (LEPS., " TODT.," CAP. 1 7.) 

general The god is usually represented Book of the Dead. 

. , • , , . Ptolemaic? 

as a man with a scarabaeus on his 
head or in place of his head, the creature serving as an 
ideogram both for the divine name and for the word de- 
noting the god's chief attribute, viz. khepery " to become." 

TuM, AtOm, the Tomos of the Greeks, is properly the 
evening sun, in contradistinction to Khepera, He became 
a chief object of worship at Heliopolis as Lord of the 
World and the great Creator. In the Book of the Dead 
he is called "Creator of heaven, maker of beings, pro- 
creator of all that is ; who gave birth to the gods, self- 
created. Lord of Life, he who grants new strength to the 
gods." He himself came forth from NQ, the primeval 
waters, and his worship was intimately connected with the 
Egyptian doctrine of immortality. But as regards this 
life also he appears as a beneficent being : from before him 
went the north wind bringing cool airs to the people of 
the land during the hot Egyptian summer, and " to breathe 
its sweet breath " was reckoned one of the passionate 
desires of their dead. Besides Heliopolis, another centre 

^Cf.p.57. 


32 SUN WORSHIP. 

of the worship of TAm was Pa TUm, « the House of Tam," 
the Pithom of the Old Testament, the ruins of which were 
discovered by M. Naville in 1883, at Tell el Maskhdtah, 
east of the Delta.^ Tdm was generally represented as a 
man wearing the crowns of Upper and Lower Egypt, and 
when associated with other solar deities he is usually 
placed after R4 Harmakhis, but preceding Khepera,' 
Originally he was not accompanied by any divine consort ; 
it is only in one of the later texts, from Denderali, that we 
find mention of the goddess T6m.T, the feminine of T6m. 
The texts assert that she was worshipped at Bubastis. 

ShO, called Sos, Sosos, Sosis, by the Greeks, is the 
first-bom son of R^ and Hathor,* and the twin brother 
of the lioness headed goddess Tefnftt He stands third 
in the divine dynasties both of Thebes and of Memphis.* 
A text from the tombs of the kings at Thebes, speaking 

> The Store City of Piihem, Naville, First Memoir of Egypt 
Exploration Fund, London, 1885. 

' Cf. illustration on p. 24, and for Tftm see illustration on p. 156. 

' According to a remarkable cosmogonical m3rth, at the beginning 
of the creation, after heaven and earth were uplifted from out the 
primeval waters, Ri produced his children Shd and Tefh(lt of his 
own body alone, without the cooperation of any goddess. From Sh(i 
and Tefn^t were bom Seb and Ndt, and from these Osiris, Her- 
khent-an-ma (who here appears in the place of AroSris), Set, Isis, 
and Nephthys. This account is most completely preserved in the 
copy of a papyrus dating B.C. 306 — 305 [Nest Amsii^ BuDGB, 
ArckcBologia^ lii.. Col. 26 et seq, ; Col. 28 et seq.), but its main 
point is alluded to in texts of the Old Kingdom (Pyr. Pepi I., 
11. 465 ^/ j^^. = Merenr4, 11. 528 et seq, ; Pepi II., 1. 663), and of the 
beginning of the New Kingdom (Mariette, Abydos, i., p. 51, 
pi. 47^ ; Naville, Todtenbtu:h, ii., p. 39. Cf. also Ibid,, Turin text, 
chap, xvii., 1. 9; Brugsch, Thesaurus^ p. 634, 11. 25-6 (time of 
Darius), Diet. Geog,, p. 1387 (Ptolemaic period). 

* For an account of the divine dynasties, see p. 107. 


SHtj. 


33 


of him in his composite form of KhdnsA-nefer-hetep- 
Shfi, says: "He has divided the heaven from the 
earth ; he has uplifted the heaven in eternity above the 
earth." Other texts ascribe to him the uplifting of the 
primeval waters (N^), the pillars of heaven, and the like. 
He is represented as a man wearing a feather on his head, 
but frequently also as a Hon when 
portrayed along with Tefn^t Among 
the centres of his worship were the 
island of Biggeh near Philae, Lato- 
polis, Denderah, and Memphis. The 
radical meaning of his name can 
scarcely be other than ** the Uplifter," 
corresponding to the root sM^ "to 
uplift, to uplift oneself," and expresses 
the belief that he was the supporter 
of the heavens, or the divinity who 
had once uplifted them and thus sepa- 
rated them from the earth. In later 
texts he becomes the representative 
of the glowing heat of the sun, or 
the hot wind. This is a misplaced 
identification, doubtless brought about 
by the accidental assonance of the 
above-mentioned root sh'A^ with the 
roots signifying " to be hot, to be parched up," and " wind." 
In the Book of the Dead TefnOt, the divine consort of 
ShO, is classed together with him and with TOm as a ruler 
of Heliopolis. In Philae she was designated the daughter 
of R^, in Nubia she was considered the mother of Thoth, 

3 


FIG. 9. 

shO. (l. d. III. 124, a,) 

Kamak, HypoBtyle Hall, 

Rameaea I. 


34 


SUN WORSHIP. 


and in Elephantine she was identified with ISIS SOTHIS ; 
later texts transfer both Shtl and Tefndt to the zodiac 
as the Twins. It is clear that the goddess was very 
differently apprehended in the different localities which 


FIG. 10. — TEFnOt. (l.*D. III. 182, tf.) 

Temple of lUmeseB II. at Wady Sebfiah. 

were centres of her cult. To these, besides the above, 
belong Memphis, Lycopolis in Lower Egypt, Denderah, 
Eileithyia, etc. She is generally represented as lioness 
headed and wearing the sun disk, more rarely as human 
headed or simply as a lioness. In origin she was 


THE Aten. 35 

undoubtedly a solar deity or goddess of the sky, but 
ultimately she became as vague and shadowy a personality 
as most of the Egyptian goddesses. 

Aten primarily denotes the solar disk. There is no 
ground other than a certain assonance for the comparison 
of the word Aten either with the Semitic Adonai or with 
Adonis, the meaning of each of these names being radically 
distinct from that of Aten. Generally speaking, Aten is 
named only in connexion with R4, who is then called " Rk 
in his Aten " and the like ; yet occasionally, though rarely, 
worship seems to have been accorded to the Aten itself, 
even down to a comparatively late epoch. Such a cult 
apparently prevailed for some time in Heliopolis, where 
stood an Aten temple to which structural additions were 
made by kings of the XVII Ith and XlXth Dynasties. 
During one short period of Egyptian history the worship 
of the Ateo. became the religion of the state. This took 
place under King Amenophjs ly. (about 1450 B.C.), a 
monarch distinguished from other Egyptians by striking 
bodily peculiarities— the sharp advancing chin, the dispro- 
portionate length of limb, and the rolls of fat about the 
waist. The fact that his contemporaries are pictured in 
like fashion is no proof that they resembled him, but is 
due to the Egyptian artistic convention of representing 
the men of any period after the model of the reigning 
Pharaoh and as endowed with his characteristic features. 
Attempts have repeatedly been made to prove an Asiatic 
descent for this king, and thus to explain his idiosyn- 
crasies, but no evidence of any weight has ever yet 
been advanced in favour of the theory. On the other 


36 SUN WORSHIP. 

hand, many things in this royal Reformation rather 
indicate a deep seated working of Libyan influences, 
although no proof is forthcoming that there was any 
Libyan blood in the king's veins. So far as may be 
gathered from the inscriptions, his predecessor, Amen- 
ophis IIL, was an adherent of the old Egyptian customs 
and cult, and the temples raised by him were chiefly 
in honour of Amen R4 of Thebes. At his death the 
old conditions remained, for a time, unchanged ; the 
new king also bore a name compounded with that of 
Amen, and in the earliest of his monuments his likeness 
still resembles that of his predecessor. But about the 
fourth year of his reign his views changed ; he assumed 
a new name, KhU-en-dten^ "Glory of the Aten," and 
resolved to introduce the cult of the Aten throughout 
Egypt. The worship of the Aten was to be henotheistic, 
and, henceforth, of the other gods, only solar deities were 
to be acknowledged whose nature easily allowed of their 
being merged in the Aten. In this sense, that is, as parts 
of the one godhead, Horus, R4, TAm, and also Amen- 
ophis III. under his prenomen of Rd-neb-fnady "Rd, the 
Lord of Truth," appear in the inscriptions of this time. 
The change would seem to have been somewhat sudden. 
There is still preserved in Thebes a tomb begun in the 
first years of the king's reign, one part of it representing 
him as a follower of Amen, while another makes mention 
of the Aten, and the unfinished sepulchral chamber bears 
reference to the third stage in the evolution of this religious 
reformation.* Thus it appears that the king was desirous 
> Cf. Wiedemann, Aeg. Gesch.^ p. 397, Suppl. p. 46. 


nc. II. — KING khOenaten and his family dispensing rewards from a balcony: 

THE ATEN EXTENDING ITS RAYS OVER THEM. (L. D. III. IO3.) 

Tomb of A1, Tell el Amarna. 


TELL EL AMARNA. 39 

at first of following the example of his predecessors, and 
took up his residence in Thebes, where he intended to 
raise a great temple to R4 Harmakhis Aten, a Benben — v 
that is to say, an obelisk with its appropriate sacred 
buildings. But the opposition of the Theban priesthood 
prevailed; the king forsook the city, accompanied by all 
his court, and on the site of Tell el Amama in Middle 
'Egypt he founded a new capital wholly dedicated to the 
worship of the Sun. Thither were carried the national 
archives, and it is from among these that we have 
recovered the famous cuneiform inscriptions of the Tell el 
Amama tablets. There also are the tombs of the king's 
followers, the inscriptions and reliefs of which, together 
with the ruins of the temple and palaces,* have furnished 
all the scanty data which we possess concerning the 
worship of the Aten. 

The god was always represented under the form of the 
solar disk, with rays downspread towards earth and 
severally terminating in h^jids. These hands are often '^ 
depicted as presenting to the king, or shedding abroad 
upon the world, the symbols of life, power, or other 
blessings. The Aten is never represented as anthro- 
pomorphic. In this as in other Egyptian cults religious 
worship chiefly consisted in solemn processions, in which 
the king and his family took part, and the singing in whole 
or part of a hymn, which is in this case remarkable for 
the beauty of its style. One of the most characteristic 
and poetical versions is preserved in the tomb of Ar, a 

1 See chiefly Petrie, TellelAmarna, London, 1894. 


40 SUN WORSHIP. 

very exalted official of the time, at El Amama.* With a 
few unimportant omissions the hymn runs as follows : — 

HYMN TO THE ATEN. 

Beauteous is thy resplendent appearing on the horizon of heaven» 

O Aten, who livest and art the beginning of life I 

When thou risest on the horizon of the east thou fillest eveiy 

land with thy beauties; 
Fair shining art thou, great and radiant, high above the earth, 
Thy beams encompass the lands to the measure of all that thou 

hast made ; 
Thou art the sun, thou bringest what is needful to them by thy 

love; 
Thou stretchest out thy beams to the eaith. 
When thou art above [the earth] day follows thy steps; 
When thou settest on the western horizon then is the earth in 

darkness like unto one that is dead; 
They (men) repose in their dwellings, their heads are covered, 

none seeing his fellow. 
They are robbed of all the things beneath their heads and they 

know it not ; 
Every lion cometh forth out of his cave, all snakes bite ; 
Night darkens (?), earth becomes silent, their maker hath set on 

his horizon. 
Light is the earth when thou risest on the horizon and shinest 

as Aten by day ; darkness flees ; 
Thou sendest forth thy rays and the world is full of joy day by 

day. 
They (men) awake, standing on their feet ; 
They purify their limbs, they take their garments 
And uplift their hands in adoration, because thou illuminatest 

the whole earth. They perform their labours. 
All cattle rest in their pastures, the trees and the plants grow 

green; 


* Published by Bouriant in the Mimatres de la Mission au 
Catre, L, pp. 2 et seq, ; also with translation and commentary by 
J. H. Breasted, De Hymnis in Sokm sub rege Amenophide IV, 
concerns, Berlin, 1894. 


HYMN TO THE ATEN. 4 1 

The birds fly out of their nests, their outspread wings praise thee. 
All flocks leap on their feet, birds and all fowl live ; thou risest 

for them. 
Barks go up and down stream, thy road (the Nile) is opened at 

thy rising; 
The fish in the river rise to the surface towards thy face, and 

thy rays penetrate the great waters ; 
They cause women to be fruitful and men to beget. 
They quicken the child within the body of its mother. 
Thou soothest it that it cry not, 
Thou dost nourish it within the body of its mother. 
Thou gayest breath to give life to all its functions. 
It Cometh forth from the body of its mother ... on the day of 

its birth ; 
Thou openest its mouth that it may speak. 
The chick is in its egg, cheeping within its shell. 
Thou givest it breath therein that it may live ; 
Thou makest it complete (fully developed) that it may break out 

of the egg; 
It Cometh forth from the egg to cheep, to be made complete ; 
It runneth on its feet when it cometh forth [from the egg"]. 


Thou createdst the earth according to thy will when thou wast 

alone : 
Men, herds, all flocks, 
All that is upon earth and goeth upon feet. 
All that is on high and flieth with wings, 
The lands of Syria, of Kush, and of Egypt ; 
Thou settest each in its right place; 
Thou providest each with that which pertaineth to it. . . . 
Thou measurest (?) to them the duration of their lives, 
Their tongues are loosened that they speak, their forms are 

according to the complexions of their skins : 
Ordaining them, thou hast ordained the inhabitants of the lands. 

Thou makest the Nile in the Underworld (DCiat), thou conductest 

it hither at thy pleasure, 
That it may give life to men whom thou hast made for thyself. 

Lord of All ! 
Thou givest the Nile in heaven that it descendeth to them 


42 SUN WORSHIP. 

It causeth its waters to rise upon the rocks like the sea; it 

watereth their fields in their districts. 
So are thy methods accomplished, O Lord of Eternity ! thou who 

art thyself the celestial Nile ; 
Thou art the King of the inhabitants of the lands, 
And of the cattle going upon their feet in every land, which go 

upon feet. 
The Nile cometh out of the Underworld to Egypt. 

Thy [rays] nourish every field, thou risest and they live for thee. 
Thou makest the seasons of the year that they may bring into 

existence all that thou hast made : 
The winter to refresh them, the heat [to warm them]. 
Thou createdst the heaven which is outspread that thou mightest 

rise in it, 
That thou mightest see all which thou didst create. 

Thou art the Only One, when thou risest in thy form as the living 
Aten, splendid, radiant, fair-shining. 

Thou createdst [the forms] of the beings who are in thee. 

Thou art the Only One [in respect of] cities, fields, roads, water- 
ways [of the Nile]. 

All behold thee in their midst, for thou art the Aten of day 
above the earth. . . . 

At thy rising all live : at thy setting they die by thee ; 

But the duration of thy life is the life that is in thee. 

Eyes shine brightly until thou settest; ceaseth all labour when 
thou settest in the west. . . . 

Thou ordainest since thou createdst the earth, and raisedst them 
up {i,e, its inhabitants). 

For thy son who came forth from thy body, the King of Upper 
and Lower Egypt, 

Who liveth by truth, the lord of the two lands, KhQenaten ; 

And the great royal wife, whom he loveth, 

The lady of the two lands, Nefer-aiti-Nefer-neferd. 

As king of the world, the Aten was even invested with 
a cartouche, and is styled in the inscription " R4 Har- 
makhis, who rejoiceth on the horizon in his name of Shft, 
who is in the Aten"; and the expressions "Lord of 


PERMANENT EFFECTS OF ATEN HERESY. 43 

heaven" "Lord of earth," "He who giveth life for 
ever," " He who illuminateth the earth," " He who reigneth 
in Truth," frequently appear among his titles. 

Khiienaten seems to have tried to carry out his reform 
at first in a friendly spirit; the opposition which he 
encountered turned him into a fanatic. The name of 
Amen, in whom he recognized the chief rival of the Aten, 
was erased from the monuments and even in the tombs ; 
it was likewise sought out on smaller objects such as 
funerary stelae, and diligently effaced even when occurring 
in proper names. In spite of these violent measures the 
king did not succeed in attaining his end. His faith, 
though held by one or two of his immediate successors, 
was subsequently allowed to drop, and Aten worship was 
persecuted in its turn. The capital of the Sun king was 
abandoned, never again to be inhabited ; the temples of 
the Aten were destroyed ; the names of god and king 
alike were consistently effaced, and any mention of this 
particular form of solar deity was thereafter extremely 
rare. Heliopolis seems to have been the one spot in 
which an Aten sanctuary survived ; throughout the rest of 
the land the other solar gods again represented the Sun. 
But henceforth, even as it had been from the beginning 
of the New Kingdom up to the time of KhOenaten, the 
old solar deities seldom appeared singly and in their simple 
forms : they were generally fused with others, and became 
Amen Ril, Khnftm R4, etc. Of the more important gods 
Ptah was almost the only one to escape the common lot 
of fusion with the Sun, and this simply because he was 
already practically merged in Osiris, god and ruler of the 


44 SUN WORSHIP. 

realm of the dead, who stood in a certain contrast to R&, 
god of the world of the living. 

The cult of the Sun god in no way differed from that 
of the other deities. Food and drink were offered to him ; 
vegetable offerings and animal sacrifices were alike pre- 
sented. The assertion that blood and wine were not 
acceptable to him is based on error. In one thing only 
can the rites of his worship be said to differ from those of 
the other gods : more hymns were sung to Ri and longer 
prayers were addressed to him than to any other deity^ 
In the nature of things it was easier to extol and set forth 
the beneficent might of an activity so obvious to all as that 
of a deified power of nature, than to do the like by deities 
more ethical, who could not lay claim to such tangible 
results of their energy. Hence it is that poetical works 
dedicated to R4 and to his equivalents Harmakhis, Khepera^ 
Tdm, etc., are found in abundance on both stone and papy- 
rus, dating from the earliest times down to the rule of the 
Roman emperors. Especially numerous are the hymns from 
funerary texts which repeat with wearisome iteration the 
same reflexions on the creative and gladdening power of 
the sun and the blessings hoped for from it by the deceased. 
A good illustration is afforded by the following, which is 
preserved in many slightly varied forms : it is here trans- 
lated from Chapter XV. in the Turin copy of the Book of 
the Dead. 

" Speech of the Osiris N. (name of the deceased) : * Hail 
to R4, Lord of Rays, who shineth above the Osiris N. ! 
He extoUeth thee in the morning, he doeth homage to 
thee at evening ; his soul goeth forth to thee in heaven. 


BOOK OF THE DEAD, CHAPTER XV. 45 

journeying in the M4det bark, arriving in the Sekti bark, 
it entereth among the never resting stars in heaven/ 

"The Osiris N. saith, praising the Lord of Eternity: 
* Hail to thee, R4 Harmakhis, Khepera who art self-begotten ! 
Twice beautiful! When thou ascendest on the horizon, 
Egypt is enlightened by thy rays. All the gods rejoice 
when they behold the King of Heaven. The uraeus is erect 
upon thy head, and the crown of the South and the crown 
of the North are upright upon thy forehead ; they have 
prepared a seat for themselves on thy brow. Hail to the 
beneficent one who is at the prow of the bark,^ because 
he destroyeth for thee all thine enemies who tarry in DOat 
(the Underworld), he goeth forth defending thy majesty 
that he may see thy beauteous form. 

" * I come unto thee, I am with thee to see thy disk {dten) 
every day. Let me not be imprisoned, let me not be 
repulsed, for I renew my limbs at the sight of thy beauty, 
as do all who praise thee, because I am one of these thy 
devoted ones upon earth. I reach the Land of Eternity, 
I unite myself with the Land of Everlasting, with thee. 
Behold ! there shineth upon me Rst with all the gods ! ' 

** The Osiris N. saith : * Hail to thee when thou ascendest 
by day on the horizon ! Thou traversest the heavens in 
peace to cause trueness of voice.* All men rejoice at sight 
of thy coming, extolling thee (?) with the hand. Every 
morning thou causest growth and movement beneath thy 

^ Sh4 is here meant ; he is often represented as standing in the 
prow of the solar bark, armed with a lance and ready to strike the 
foes of the Sun god. 

' Mad kher. The meaning of this expression will be more fully 
considered later. 


46 


•SUN WORSHIP. 


majesty. Thy rays are upon men. As none may tell the 
splendour of dsem (an alloy of silver and gold),;so cannot 
thy splendour be told. The lands of the gods see all the 
colours of PQnt when thou dispersest the darkness which is 
over them. Thou alone art the creator when thou createst 
thine own forms there on Na (the primeval waters). 

" * May I advance as thou advances! May I, even as thy 
majesty, O R4, find no end. There is no prince so great 
that he passeth through endless water in one short moment 


fig. 12. — sun god uplifting the disk! cynocephali adoring, 
(leps., "todt.," cap. i6.) 
Book of the Dead. Ptolemaic ? 

Thou doest it. Thou settest, thou completest the hours — 
otherwise said:^ In like manner hast thou measured out 
day and night, thou completest them as thou hast ordained. 
— As the sun (Ra) thou enlightenest the earth with thy 
arms when thou risest on the horizon ! ' (This refers to 
the representations of the Sun god as a man uplifting the 
sun disk on high with both arms.) 

" The Osiris N. saith as he adoreth thee in the morning 

* This phrase introduces an alternative formula. 


BOOK OF THE DEAD, CHAPTER XV. 47 

when thou shinest ; he speaketh praises unto thee at thy 
rising : * Thou who exaltest thy forms shining — otherwise 
said : Great in this thy beauty ! — Thou beatest out and 
fashionest thy limbs (as a goldsmith). Thou bringest 
forth thyself without birth ; on the horizon thou ascendest 
on the high heaven. Let me attain unto the high heaven 
of eternity, unto the places of those who extol thee. I 
unite myself with the venerable, perfect, luminous spirits of 
the Underworld ; I go forth with them to see thy beauties 
at thy going forth at evening when thou traversest thy 
mother Nftt (the goddess of heaven) ; and when thou 
turnest thy face to the West, my arms are uplifted in 
adoration of thy setting in the Land of Life (the Under- 
world). Yea, thou didst create eternity ; thou art extolled 
at thy setting in NCk (the primeval waters). Thou hast 
established thyself in my heart without ceasing. Thou 
rejuvenatest (neier) thyself more than all the gods {neterHy 
" The Osiris N. saith : * Hail to thee when thou risest 
in the primeval waters enlightening the earth on the day 
of thy birth, when thy mother brought thee forth upon 
her hands. Thou art radiant, thou rejuvenatest thyself. 
Thou shinest as the Great One of Sunrise in the primeval 
waters. The dwellers thereby deck themselves as they 
hasten towards thee; festivals are solemnized in thine 
honour by the nomes, by all cities and temples which are 
illumined by thy beauties. Gifts are offered unto thee in 
abundance and excess. Valiant one! Exalted form of 
the exalted forms, who protectest all thy abodes against 
Evil ! Great one of glory in the Sekti bark, great one of 
that which is desired in the Mddet bark ! Thou givest 


48 SUN WORSHIP. 

splendour unto the Osiris N. in the Underworld ; thou 
grantest him to tarry in the West as lord over Wrong, 
protected against Evil. Place him among the venerable 
ones who have devoted themselves unto thee; let him 
unite himself with the souls {ba.H) in the Underworld ; 
after a joyful journey may he roam in the fields of AaW.' 

" The Osiris N. saith : * I go forth unto the heaven, I 
traverse the iron of the sky, my body is in the midst of 
the stars. Salutations are made unto me in the bark, 
I am invoked in the M&det bark ; I behold R& within his 
sanctuary when I pray daily unto his solar disk {aten), 
I see the Phagros fish when it riseth on the stream and 
emergeth from the green surface ; I see the turtle and its 
particles (?). If any wicked person appeareth he falleth to 
the ground before the proclamation of Rcl ; I hack him in 
pieces, cutting along his backbone. I open unto thee thy 
path, O Ril, when there is a favourable wind ; the Sekti 
boat reduceth her speed ; the crew of R& rejoice when they 
behold him, the Lord of Life, whose heart is refreshed, for 
all his enemies are overthrown. Behold ! I see Horus at 
the helm (?), and Thoth with Truth upon his hands. All 
the gods rejoice to see him who cometh in peace. The 
hearts of the glorified ones {kMC) are made luminous 
{kk(i) ; the Osiris N. is with them in the West, his heart 
is refreshed.' 

" Saith the Osiris N. :— . 

" * Hail to thee ! thou who comest as Tftm, thou who wast 
when thou createdst the Ennead of the gods. 

Hail to thee! thou who comest as spirit {pa) of the 
spirits ruling in the West. 


BOOK OF THE DEAD, CHAPTER XV. 49 

Hail to thee ! chief of the gods, who illuminatest the 
D{iat with thy beauties. 

Hail to thee! thou who comest as glorified one {khA\ 
journeying in thy solar disk (dten). 

Hail to thee! thou who art greater than all the gods, 
who shinest in heaven, who rulest in Diiat 

Thou givest sweet breath of the north wind to the 
Osiris N. 

Hail to thee! thou who openest up Ddat, thou who 
showest all doors. 

Hail to thee in the midst of the gods ! thou who weighest 
words in the Underworld 

Hail to thee in thy cradle ! thou who creating Greatest 
Dftat by thy glory. 

Hail to the great and mighty One ! thine enemies are 
flung down in the hall of execution. 

'Hail to thee who destroyest thy foes and annihilatest 
the Apep serpent (darkness). 

Thou givest sweet breath of the north wind to the 
Osiris N. 

" * Aroeris openeth the door (of the Underworld), he the 
great opener of the great Land of Rest in the mountain 
of the Underworld. The Dftat is illumined by thy glory. 
The souls {ba,ii) in their secret dwellings are illuminated in 
their caverns. Thou annihilatest Evil in dashing down 
and annihilating the foes.' 

" The Osiris N. saith, in adoring R4 Harmakhis at his 
setting in the Land of Life : ' Hail to thee, R& ! Hail to 
thee, Tillm, at thine arrival ! Beautiful, radiant, exalted 
One ! Thou passest along the heaven, thou traversest 

4 


50 SUN WORSHIP. 

the earth, thou unitest thyself with the upper heaven in 
incense.* The dwellers in the two halves of Egypt bow 
themselves before thee, they give adoration unto thee ; the 
gods and the dwellers in the Underworld rejoice over thy 
beauties, the dwellers in secret places extol thee. The 
princes whom thou hast created upon earth make offering 
unto thee. They who tarry on the horizon convey thee, 
and those who are in the Sekti bark guide thy wandering. 
They extol thee because of the victory of thy majesty, 
saying : ' Come 1 come I approach in peace I * To thee 
belonged! jo5^ul acclamation, Lord of Heaven, Ruler of the 
Underworld. Thy mother NCkt embraceth thee. She 
seeth in thee her son who is the fearful and the terrible 
One, who setteth in the Land of Life at the gloaming. 
Then uplifteth thee thy father Tanen (in this connexion 
the earth); he putteth his arms behind thee (to protect 
thee). There ensueth thy rejuvenation on the earth. 
Tanen placeth thee among the honoured before Osiris. 
The deceased N. is in peace, in peace ; he is R& himself.' 

" These are the words to be spoken before R4 when he 
setteth in the Land of Life ; both arms of the speaker 
must hang downwards. 

"The Osiris N. saith, extolling Tftm at his setting in 
the Land of Life, in the splendour of Dftat (in DOat which 
he fills with splendour) : ' Hail to thee ! thou who settest 
in the Land of Life, thou father of the gods ; thou unitest 
thyself with thy mother in the Land of the West ; her arms 
enfold thee daily. Thy majesty hath part in the abode of 

' A metaphor derived from the stoiy of the self immolation of the 
phoenix by fire at Heliopolis, on an incense strewn pyre. 


BOOK OF THE DEAD, CHAPTER XV. 5 1 

Sokaris.* Rejoiced art thou at the love which is borne thee. 
The gates upon the horizon are opened unto thee, thou 
settest in the Mountain of the West Thy rays traverse the 
earth to enlighten the lands of the dwellers in the Under- 
world. They who are in the Underworld and the 
acclaiming spirits are stirred in excitement at the sight 
of thee every day. Give peace to the gods upon earth, 
namely unto them which follow thee ; I am of those who 
follow in thy train. Exalted spirit {bd) who didst beget 
the gods, who didst equip them with his attributes, over 
whom no judgment is held (?) ! Prince ! thou who art 
great in secret things ! May thy beauteous face be gracious 
unto the Osiris N. Khepera, father of the gods ! 

" ' There is no destruction (for the deceased) to all eternity, 
because of (the existence of) this book ; I am established 
thereby. He who recites it or copies it is thereby in peace. 
Abundance was given unto me; mine arms are full of 
food and drink (literally, bread and beer). I united myself 
with this book after my lifetime. It was written to great 
comfort of heart' " 

It will be seen that the last sentences assure the reciter 
of the chapter (including any one who should have it copied 
for his use) that he should be united with the book, take 
it with him into the life beyond, and so attain to everlasting 
bliss. This assurance is often given in similar words in 
other religious, and more especially in magical texts. 

1 A diviaion of the nether world: of. p. 92. 


CHAPTER III. 

SOLAR MYTHS. 

"P A was regarded by the Egyptians, not only as the Sun 
-*-^ god, but also as the first King of Egypt. In early 
times the people seem to have held this conception with 
a fixity which no theological attempts of the priests to set 
other deities higher in the pantheon could shake. Not 
until later times did he yield his place in popular favour 
to Osiris, the archetype of Egyptian kings ; nor even then 
was he altogether deposed, but while Osiris was supposed 
to have ruled as a man over men only, the dominion of 
Rcl was relegated to a time when gods still sojourned 
among men and R4 bore rule over both. 

The reign of R4 was placed in remotest antiquity, 
" The like has not happened since the time of R4," was 
a common phrase in reference to any event such as had 
never been known within the memory of man. The god 
was regarded by the Egyptian people as purely anthro- 
pomorphic We find him appearing in popular tales, 
and — as in " The Story of the Two Brothers " ^ — walking 
upon earth along with other gods, conversing with mortals, 
granting to his favoured ones gifts which did not always 

* Paf, cTOrbtney, p. 9 : of. Maspero, Contes populaires, second 
edition, pp. i8 et seq, ; Petrie, Egyptian Tales, ii., pp. 36 etseq. 

52 


DIVINE DESCENT OF THE KINGS. 53 

minister to their permanent happiness, and imagined as a 
kindly old man. There is nothing remarkable in this ; 
parallel ideas can be adduced from the popular tales of 
the most diverse races and religions. But in Egypt this 
anthropomorphic and somewhat low conception of divinity 
prevailed even among the cultured classes. The king was 
held to be as literally the son of Ri as of the queen, 
materially begotten ; the preceding monarch, therefore, 
was but his reputed father. This belief was directly 
expressed in popular tales such as " The Story of King 
Khiifft," in which it is told how RSl was father of the first 
kings of the Vth Dynasty.^ We find the same belief still 
current in the tradition that Alexander the Great was 
bom of the union of Zeus Ammon and Olympias, a 
tradition which Alexander himself favoured, but which 
was afterwards interpreted to the effect that his father was 
not indeed a god but the magician Nectanebus, the last 
native King of Eg)T)t, who had assumed this disguise. 
The same idea is expressed repeatedly in official inscrip- 
tions: from the time of the Vth Dynasty the king 
systematically refers to himself as " Son of Ri," and there 
are also texts in which the god boasts of this paternal 
relation in no equivocal terms.* This anthropomorphic 
presentation of R4 also runs through the surviving myths 
concerning him, myths which usually relate to the time 

* Westcar Papyrus, Berlin, published and commented upon by 
Erman, DieM&rchen des Papyrus Westcar, Berlin, 1890. Cf. 
Maspbro, Contes pofulaires, 2nd Ed., pp. 74 et seq, ; Petrie, 
Egyptian Tales, vol. i., pp. 9 etseq,, especially p. 32. 

» Cf. Wiedemann, Le Rot dans Vancienne Egypte. Le Mtision, 
Mii., P- 372. 


54 SOLAR MYTHS. 

when, owing to his extreme old age, the reins of govern- 
ment began to fall from his hands, and gods and men 
became disobedient and rebelled against their lord. The 
three most important of these legends are : i. The 
Legend of Ri and Isis, preserved in a Turin papyrus 
dating from the XXth Dynasty ; 2. The L^end of 
the Destruction of Mankind, inscribed on the walls of 
the tombs of Seti I. and Rameses III.; 3. The Legend 
of the Winged Sun Disk, of which the text covers a wall 
of the Ptolemaic temple of EdfA. These texts are of 
profound significance as regards Egyptian thought and 
conceptions of deity, and hence it is desirable to give an 
approximately literal translation of them in their main 
portions. 

The Legend of RA and Isis.^ 

" Chapter of the divine god who created himself, maker 
of heaven and earth, of the breath of life, of the gods, of 
men, of the wild beasts, of cattle, of creeping things, of fowl 
and fish ; king of men and gods, to whom the centuries 
are years, who hath many names, whom none knoweth, 
whom even the gods know not 

" Isis was a woman, mighty of word ; her heart was tired 
of men, she preferred the gods. Then she thought in her 
heart whether she might not possess the world in heaven 
and upon earth even as Ri did, by means of the name 

» Plbytb and Rossi, Paf, de Turin, pis. 31, 77, 131-8 ; LbfAburb, 
Aeg, Zeitschri/tf 1883, pp. 27 et seq, ; Erman, Aegypten, pp. 359 
etseq, ; Maspbro, Les Origines^ pp. 162-4 ; Budgb, First Steps in 
Egyj^tian, pp. 241 etseq. 


LEGEND OF RA AND ISIS. 55 

of the august god " — ix. the secret name of R4, which no 
man knoweth, and to knowledge of which the god himself 
owed his power over gods and men. 

'' The god R& came daily at the head of his companions 
to sit upon his throtie ; he had grown old, his mouth ran 
and the drivelling flowed to earth, his spittle fell upon 
the ground. And Isis with her hand kneaded it together 
with the earth that was there ; she made thereof a sacred 
serpent unto which she gave the form of a spear. She 
wound it not about her face (as goddesses wore the uraeus 
coiled about the head), but cast it on the way which the 
great god traversed in his Double Kingdom whenever he 
would. 

" The venerable god advanced, the gods who served him 
as their Pharaoh followed him, he went forth as on every 
day. Then the sacred serpent bit him. The divine god 
opened his mouth, and his cry reached unto heaven. His 
cycle of gods cried, 'What is it?' and his gods cried, 
' Behold ! ' He could not answer ; his jaws chattered, his 
limbs trembled ; the poison seized on his flesh even as the 
Nile covers its domain (at the inundation). 

" When the great god had quieted his heart he cried unto 
his following : * Come unto me, ye children of my body, 
ye gods who went forth from me I Let Khepera know it. 
A painful thing hath injured me ; my heart feeleth it, but 
mine eyes see it not, my hand did it not I know not 
who hath done it to me ; never felt I pain like unto this, 
no evil is worse than it 

" ' I am a prince, son of a prince, the seed {jnH^ of a god ; 
I am the Great One, son of the Great One, my father 


S6 SOLAR MYTHS. 

excogitated my name ; I am he of many names, of many 
forms; my form is in every god. I called forth T0m, 
Horns, the gods who give praise. My name was pro- 
nounced by my father and by my mother, then it was 
hidden in me that no magician might arise who should 
use magic arts against me (which might be done by one 
knowing the secret name of the god). 

" ' I had come forth to look upon that which I had made, 
I was walking in the two lands which I had formed, when 
something which I knew not stung me. Fire it is not, 
water it is not My heart is burning, my limbs tremble, 
my members shudder. Let the children of the gods be 
brought unto me, with magic words, with an understanding 
mouth, whose might reaches unto heaven.' 

" The children of all the gods came full of mourning. 
Isis came with her magic arts, she whose mouth is full of 
breath of life, whose formulas destroy sufferings, whose word 
animateth the dead. She said, * What is it, divine father? 
what is it ? A serpent hath spread this evil in thee, one of 
thy creatures hath lifted up his head against thee. Verily 
it shall fall by mighty incantations ; I will cause it to 
recede at the sight of thy rays.' 

" The venerable god opened his mouth : * I went upon 
the way, I walked in the two lands of mine earth, it was 
the desire of my heart to see that which I formed ; then 
was I bitten of a serpent which I saw not. Fire it is not, 
water it is not I am colder than water, I am hotter than 
fire ; all my members sweat, I tremble, mine eye hath no 
power, I see not the heaven, and water runneth from my 
face as in the season of summer.' 


LEGEND OF RA AND ISIS. $7 

" Isis said unto R4 : * Oh tell me thy name, divine father 
for he shall live who is delivered from the ill by his own 
name/ Then spake R4 : * I have made the heaven and 
the earth, I have ordered the mountains and formed all 
that is thereon. I am he who made the water, creating 
the inundation. I created the husband of his mother (a 
title bestowed upon various deities [p. 104] ; in this instance 
it is probably Amen R& who is meant). I made the 
heaven and the secret of both horizons, and I placed the 
soul {ba) of the gods within them. I am he who at the 
opening of his eyes createth all light ; when he closeth his 
eyes he createth darkness. The water of the Nile riseth at 
his command ; the gods know not his name. I make the 
hours and create the days ; I send the festival of the New 
Year and form the river ; I make the living fire in order 
to regulate the tasks in the dwellings. I am Khepera 
in the morning, Rcl at noon, and TOm in the evening.' 

" The poison was not turned in its course, the great god 
was not healed. Isis spake unto Ri : ' Thy name was not 
mentioned in thy speech. Tell it unto me, that the poison 
may go hence, for he shall live whose name is repeated ' (in 
the incantation). 

" The poison burned with burning, stronger was it than 
the flame of fire. The god R4 said: *I grant that Isis 
search me, that my name pass from my bosom into her 
bosom.' The god hid himself from the gods, the bark of 
eternity was empty {ue. the bark in which the Sun god 
traversed the heavens). When the moment had come for 
the going forth from his heart, then said Isis to her son 
Horus : ' He shall bind himself with a sacred oath to give 


S8 SOLAR MYTHS. 

up his eyes ' (Sun and Moon, the visible signs of the Sun's 
power). 

" The great god's name was taken from him, and Isis, the 
great enchantress, said : * Flee, poison ! go forth from Ri f 
Eye of Horus,* depart out of the god, and flow forth 
glittering out of his mouth ! I it is who work ; I cause 
the vanquished poison to fall upon earth, for the name of 
the great god was taken from him. Let R4 live, but let 
the poison die ! ' So spake Isis the Great One, the mistress 
of the gods, she who knoweth R4 and his name itself." 

The concluding words of this text go on to say that it 
.s an excellent charm against snake poison to recite this 
story over an image of TOm, or Horus, or Isis ; or, having 
written it down, to dissolve the writing and drink the 
concoction ; or to inscribe it on a piece of linen and wear 
it suspended from the neck. 

The Destruction of Mankind.* 

" Ri is the god who created himself, and was king over 
gods and men alike. Mankind took counsel against his 
majesty and spake: 'Behold, his majesty the god R& is 
grown old ; his bones are become silver, his limbs gold, 
and his hair pure lapis lazuli.' His majesty heard the 
words which men spake concerning him. His majesty 

^ An expression denoting any god sent gift and here referring 
to the poison of which Isis was the cause. 

> L£f£buR£, Tambeau de Sett I., part iv., pis. 15-18 ; Tombeau 
de Ramses IIL^ pis. 2-5 : see also Bbrgmann, Hieroglyphische 
Inschri/ten, pis. 75-82 ; Naville, TYans, Soc. Bid, A re A., iv., pp. i 
e^ seq, ; viii., pp. 412 ei seq. ; Brugsch, Die neue Weltordnung^ 
Berlin, 1881 » and Religion der Alien Aegyj^ter^ pp. 436-7 ; Maspero, 
Les Origines, pp. 164-9. 


THE DESTRUCTION OF MANKIND. 59 

spake to those who were in his train : * Call unto me mine 
eye (the goddess Hathor Sekhet), and the god Sh(H and 
the goddess Tefndt, the god Seb and the goddess NOt, 
and the fathers and the mothers who were with me when 
I was in N(H (the primeval waters), and also N(H (the god 
of the primeval waters). Let him bring his companions 
with him ; let him bring them in all secrecy, that men 
may not see them and flee. Let him go with them to 
the great temple (the temple of Heliopolis), that they may 
give counsel, for I will go forth out of the primeval waters 
to the place at which I shall be : let these gods be brought 
to me.' 

" Now when these gods came to the place at which Ri 
was, they cast themselves down to earth before his majesty, 
and he spake before Nfl, the father of the oldest gods, he 
who created mankind, he who was king of the spirits that 
know. They spake before his majesty : * Speak unto us 
that we may hear thy words.' And R4 spake unto N(H : 
'O thou eldest god by whom I first had my being, and 
ye ancestral gods ! behold, mankind, who had their being 
from mine eye, hold counsel against me. Tell me what 
ye would do in face of this. Take ye counsel for me. I 
will not slay them until I have heard what ye say con- 
cerning it' 

" Then spake the majesty of the god N(H : * O my son 
R4, thou the god who art greater than his creator (N(H 
himself), and than those who formed him ! Thy throne 
standeth fast, great is the fear of thee. Turn thine eye 
against those who conspire against thee.' The god R4 
spake : * Behold, men flee unto the hills ; their heart is full 


6o SOLAR MYTHS. 

of fear because of that which they said.' Then spake the 
gods before his majesty (Ri the king) : * Send forth thine 
eye ; let it destroy for thee the people which imagined 
wicked plots against thee. There is no eye among 
mankind which can withstand thine eye when it de- 
scendeth in the form of the goddess Hathor.' 

"Then went forth this goddess, and she slew mankind 
upon the hills. Then spake the majesty of this god : 
' Approach in peace, Hathor I Never will I be parted (?) 
from thee.* Then spake the goddess : * Mayst thou live 
for me! When I took possession of mankind, then was 
my heart rejoiced.' Then spake the majesty of the god 
Ri : ' I will take possession of mankind as their king, and 
destroy (?) them.' And it came to pass that for several 
nights Sekhet waded in the blood of men, beginning at 
Heracleopolis Magna. 

" Then spake Ri : ' Call unto me swift messengers ; let 
them run like a blast of wind.' The messengers were 
forthwith brought The majesty of this god spake : ' Let 
them run to Elephantine; let them bring me many 
mandrakes'^ (?). These mandrakes (?) were brought to 
him. They were given to the god Sekti (the grinder), 
who dwells in Heliopolis, that he should grind these 
mandrakes. Behold, when the women slaves had crushed 
corn for beer, then these mandrakes were put in the jars 
[in which was the beer and also] human blood. Seven 
thousand beer jars of this were made. 

> See Brugsch, Aeg, Zeitschrift, 1891, pp. 31 ef seq,, on the name 
of this plant ; his translation, however, can be accepted only as an 
h3rpo thesis. 


THE DESTRUCTION OF MANKIND. 6 1 

" When the majesty of R4, King of Upper and Lower 
Egypt, came with the gods to see this beer, and day 
dawned, after this goddess had been slaughtering men as 
she went up stream, then spake the majesty of this god : 
'This is excellent I shall protect mankind against 
her/ 

" R4 spake : ' Let these jars be carried and brought (?) 
to the place at which men are being slaughtered/ The 
majesty of R4, King of Upper and Lower Egypt, com- 
manded that this soporific drink should be poured forth 
during the fine night The fields on all four sides were 
overflowed, as the majesty of this god had commanded. 

" And the goddess Sekhet came in the morning ; she 
found the fields inundated, she was rejoiced thereat, she 
drank thereof, her heart was rejoiced, she went about 
drunken and took no more cc^nisance of men. Then 
spake the majesty of Rl to this goddess : ' Approach in 
peace, thou charming goddess' {ami J), From this the 
pleasant damsels in Amft have their origin {i,e. because Rcl 
had called Sekhet dmiJ^ "charming," attractive damsels 
were installed as priestesses in the city of AmA in the 
western Delta, a city called Apis by the Greek writers)- 
And the majesty of R4 spake to this goddess : ' Soporific 
drinks shall be prepared for thee at every New Year's 
feast, and verily their number {ue. the number of the jars 
containing the drink) shall correspond to that of my hand- 
maidens.' Therefore from that day soporific drinks are 
made by all men at the feast of Hathor, according to the 
Clumber of the handmaidens.^ 

^ The feasts of Hathor were festivals at which drink flowed freely 


62 SOLAR MYTHS. 

" And the majesty of R4 spake to this goddess : * I suffer 
from a burning pain ; whence is this pain (?) ? ' The 
majesty of R4 spake : * Truly I am alive, but my heart is 
weary of being together with men ; I have not destroyed 
them, they are not destroyed as befits my might' Then 
spake the gods who were of his following: 'Let thy 
weariness alone ; thy might is according to thy desire.' 
But the majesty of this god spake unto the majesty of NO 
(the god of the primeval waters) : * For the first time my 
limbs ail; I will not wait until this weakness seizeth me 
a second time.' " 

Here the narrative is broken by considerable lacunae, 
and of the sequel only detached portions of sentences can 
be deciphered. According to these it would seem that 
N(H commanded Shfl, and the goddess NOt under her form 
of the celestial cow, to help R4 in his pain, in order that 
he might again feel inclined to reign ; and after somewhat 
long discussion NOt took the god Ri upon her back. 
At this juncture men once more ventured to show them- 
selves upon earth, and seeing Ri upon the back of NOt 
were seized with repentance for what they had done, and 
prayed R4 that he would slay his enemies, i,e. those who 
had conspired against him. Meanwhile Ri was carried 
onward until he came to the Abode of the Cow (a 
temple in the Libyan nome), and the men went with him. 
" He reached it while it was still night But when the earth 
grew light and it was morning, the men went forth with 

and much intoxication prevailed ; the inscriptions even make men- 
tion of a certain festival known as the Intoxication Festival held 
in her honour and celebrated at Denderah in the month of Thoth. 


THE DESTRUCTION OF MANKIND. 63 

their bows and marched to battle against the enemies of 
the god R4. Then spake the majesty of this god : * Your 
crime is forgiven you ; the slaughter (which ye have exe- 
cuted for me) atoneth for the slaughter (which the rebels 
had purposed against me).' And this god spake unto 
the goddess N(Ht: *I have determined to cause myself 
to be uplifted into the sky ' " {jx. to join the blessed gods 
and to renounce his rule of the world). His desire was 
fulfilled, and having reached the upper regions he inspected 
the territory which he had there chosen for his own, 
declared his purpose of gathering many men about him in 
it, and created for their future accommodation the various 
divisions of the heavenly world. " His majesty — to whom 
Life! Prosperity! Health!* — spake: * Let there be set (A^/^/) 
a great field,' and there appeared the Field of Rest (hetep) ; 
* I will gather {darad) plants in it,' and there appeared 
the Field of AarH {AalU) ; * Therein do I gather as its 
inhabitants things which hang from heaven, even the 
stars.' Then NAt trembled exceedingly (J.e. the vault of 
heaven shook so that the stars were dislodged and fell, 
as Rd had commanded, into the land which he had made). 
And the majesty of the god R4 spake : * I excogitated 
millions of beings that they may extol me.' And there 
appeared millions. And the majesty of R4 spake: *0 
my son Shfl, do thou unite thyself with my daughter Nttt, 
and there watch for me over the millions of millions who 
are there, who there tarry in darkness'"—/.^. ShO is 

> Compare this common Egyptian formula, used after naming the 
king, with "in health and wealth long to live" in Prayer for the 
Sovereign, Book of Common Prayer. (Trans.) 


64 SOLAR MYTHS. 

appointed by Ri to be a light to men upon earth : he is 
installed by the old Sun as the new. 

At this point in the narrative there follows a long text 
describing the celestial cow in very obscure terms of which 
the difficulty is enhanced by clerical errors. According 
to one scheme of Egyptian cosmogfraphy, this cow was 
supposed to form the celestial vault, and the sun to travel 
over the surface of its body, which was supported in its 
standing position above the earth by various divinities, 
and more especially by the god ShA. Sometimes the cow 
was identified with Hathor, and sometimes with NOt. It 
was upon her back that R4 abode after his retirement, 
and there he ruled the upper heaven, which, as the text 
relates, he had himself created, together with all its fields 
wherein the Egyptian hoped to find a dwelling place after 
death as one of the millions who there give praise unto 
the god who made them. 

After this reorganization of the heavens and the earth 
R& remembered that he was leaving existent upon earth 
creatures dangerous even to himself, and whose sting had 
brought about the first detriment to his strength. So 
before altogether relinquishing the kingly office he gave 
command concerning these creatures and constituted 
serpent charmers special favourites of the godhead. " The 
majesty of this god spake unto Thoth : * Call unto me the 
majesty of the god Seb and say unto him: Come thou 
forthwith.' When the majesty of Seb came to him, then 
spake the majesty of the god R& : * Complaint is made of 
the reptiles which are in thee ; may they be afraid of me 
as I now am! When thou hast learned their purpose 


■K 

-< 


A 


THE DESTRUCTION OF MANKIND. 67 

against me, then hasten to the place where my father 
Nd is and say unto him, ' Watch thou the reptiles of the 
earth and of the water, and make also writings for every 
hole in which the reptiles find place, saying: Beware 
of harming anything. Let them know that I go hence, 
but I shall shine upon them. Their father shall keep 
watch on them : thou art their father upon earth eternally. 
Let heed be taken to these creatures. They who know 
magic formulas shall charm them, armed with my peculiar 
magic formulas. I will give away mine own formulas, 
I will commend their possessors to thy son Osiris ; their 
children shall be protected ; they shall prosper ; they shall 
deal as they will with the whole earth, for they charm those 
who are in their holes.' 

" The majesty of the god R4 spake : * Let Thoth be 
called unto me.' He was forthwith brought The majesty 
of this god spake unto Thoth : * Let us go, leaving heaven 
and my dwelling, for I will make something shining and 
resplendent in Ddat and in the Land of the Deep. There 
shalt thou register those who did wicked deeds as in- 
habitants, and there shalt thou imprison them, . . . and 
the servants whom my heart hateth. But thou art in my 
place, the dweller in my place ; thou shalt be called Thoth, 
the Resident (representative) of R4, I give unto thee 
power to send forth thy messengers ' (AaQ — thereupon the 
ibis (Jtabt) of Thoth came into being. * I cause thee to 
uplift thine hand before the great Enneads of the gods : 
good is the deed {klien) which thou accomplishest ' — 
thereupon the sacred bird (Jtekhnt) of Thoth came into 
being. ' I cause thee to embrace {anft) the two heavens 


68 SOLAR MYTHS. 

(the day and the night sky) with thy beauties ' — thereupon 
the moon {ddh) of Thoth came into being. * I cause thee 
to turn (Andn) to the people of the North ' — thereupon the 
cynocephalus {dndn) of Thqth, who shall be my (r>. RA's) 
representative, came into being. *Thou, Thoth, dost 
now possess my place in the sight of all who turn them- 
selves towards thee; all creatures extol thee as a god.'" 
Thus, whenever throughout this speech R4 pronounces 
the word which phonetically corresponds to the name 
of a sacred animal, that moment the animal comes into 
being. 

After these words, in which Rcl designated the god of 
wisdom and of lawful order as his representative, and at 
the same time created for him his sacred animals, there 
follows a short notice quite irrelevant to the narrative, and 
concerned rather with the manner in which the myth must 
be recited in order to bring about magical results. " When 
a person pronounces these words for himself he shall rub 
himself with oil and unguent ; an incense burner full of 
incense shall be on his hands ; behind his two ears (?) shall 
be natron, sweet smelling unguent upon his lips. He 
shall be clothed with two new garments, he shall be puri- 
fied with water of the inundation, he shall wear white (?) 
shoes upon his feet, the figure of truth shall be painted 
upon his tongue with green paint. When the heart of 
Thoth desires to recite this book for RA, then shall he 
purify himself seven times in three days : priests and men 
shall do the like." 


LEGEND OF THE WINGED SUN DISK. 69 


The Legend of the Winged Sun Disk/ 

" In the year 363 of the reign of R4 Harmakhis, the 
ever living. Ri was in the land of Nubia with his 
warriors, but foes conspired (M) against him, and therefore 
to this day that country bears the name of Conspirators* 
Land {UaUdy Then the god Ri went on his way in his 
bark t(^ether with his following, and landed in the nome 
of Edffl. Here the god Horbehftdti * was in the bark of 
R&, and spake unto his father : ' O Harmakhis ! I see how 
foes conspire against their lord' Then spake the majesty 
of the god Harmakhis to the person of HorbehOdti : ' Thou 
son of Ri, Exalted One who didst come forth from me, 
slay the enemy who is before thee speedily.' Horbehftdti 
flew up to the sun' as a great winged disk ; therefore was 
he henceforth called the Great God, the Lord of Heaven. 
From heaven he saw the foe, he pursued them as a great 
winged disk. Because of the fierce onset of his face 
against them their eyes no longer saw, their ears no longer 
heard ; each man slew his neighbour speedily, not a head 
remained by which they could live. But Horbehftdti came 
in the bark of Ra Harmakhis in a many coloured form as 
a great winged disk. Then spake Thoth to Ri : * Lord 
of the gods ! there came the god of BehAdet (EdfO) in the 

^ Published by Naville, Mythe d'Harus^ pis. 12-19 ; translated 
by Brugsch in Abh. der GbtHnger Akad., xiv. (1870). 

* For the reading of this name designating Horns as a sparrow 
hawk of. Wiedemann, Pro. Sac, BibL Arch,^ xvii., pp. 196 etseq. 

* In this case it is evident that Rd is supposed to be dwelling 
upon earth rather than in the sun. 


^0 SOLAR MYTHS. 

form of a great winged disk. From this day forth he shall 
be called Horbehddti' (Horus of EdfA). And (Thoth) 
spake: 'From this day forth the city of Edf(i shall be 
called the city of Horbehddti.' And R4 embraced the 
form of Horus and spake to HorbehCidti : * Thou didst 
put grapes in the water which cometh forth from EdfO 
(/>. thou didst cause the red blood of the enemy to flow 
into it), and thereat thy heart rejoiceth.' This water of 
EdfO is called [Water of Grapes] from that day forth. 

" And HorbehAdti spake : * Advance, R^, that thou mayest 
see thine enemies lying beneath thee in this land/ Now 
when the majesty of RA had traversed the way, and with 
him the goddess Astarte, then saw he the foe lying upon 
the earth, each lay stretched out like a prisoner. Then 
spake Ret to Horbehddti: *That is a pleasant life.' There- 
fore from that day forth the place of Horbehftdti is called 
Pleasant Life. The god Thoth spake : * This was a 
stabbing {deb) of my foes.' The nome of Edfft is called 
Stabbing {deV) from that day. Thoth spake to HorbehOdti : 
' Thou art a great protector ' {mdk da). From that day the 
sacred bark of Horus is called Great of Protection {da mdk). 

" R4 spake unto the gods who were in his following : * Let 
us voyage {kheti) in our ship to the Nile ; we are glad, for 
our enemies lie upon the ground.' The [canal] in which 
the great god was is called Navigable Water {pe khen) 
from that day. 

** Thereupon the enemies of Ri went into the water ; 
they were changed into crocodiles and hippopotami. But 
Harmakhis sailed along on the water in his bark. Now 
when the crocodiles and hippopotami had reached him, then 


LEGEND OF THE WINGED SUN DISK. 7 1 

they opened their jaws with intent to harm the majesty 
of the god Harmakhis. Then came hither HorbehCldti; 
his servants were in his following as workers with weapons 
of metal (mesen) ; ^ each had an iron lance and a chain in 
his hand ; then they smote the crocodiles and the hippo- 
potami. There were brought in on the spot three hundred 
and eighty-one enemies who had been slain before the 
city of EdfCl. 

" Then spake Harmakhis to HorbehCidti : * Let mine image 
be in the south land» for that is a place where there was 
victory ' {tiekht dh). The abode of Horbehddti is called the 
Victorious (nekht dh) Abode from that day. Thoth spake 
after he saw the enemies lying upon the earth : * Joyful 
is your heart, ye gods of heaven ! Joyful is your heart, ye 
gods of earth ! The young Horus cometh in peace ; he 
hath performed wonders in his expedition, wherein he did 
according to the Book of Slaying the Hippopotamus/* 
And from that day there have been metal {mesen) statues 
of Horbehddti.^ 

" Horbehiidti changed his form into that of a winged sun 
disk, that which rests over the prow of the bark of R4. 
He took with him Nekhebit, the goddess of the South, and 
Oazit, the goddess of the North, in the form of two serpents, 

^ With regard to these meseniuy which are in the first place smiths 
and in the second place the armed companions of Horus, cf. Maspeko, 
Les Forgerons d* Horns , Etudes de Mythologie, ii., pp. 313 et seq, 

' Ijb, Horbehi^dti, when on this expedition, had duly made use of 
the magic formulas contained in that book and had thereby obtained 
his victory. 

' As a matter of fact Horus is very commonly represented in 
metal, and especially in bronze. 


72 SOLAR MYTHS. 

that they might destroy the enemies in their bodily forms 
of crocodiles and hippopotami at each place to which he 
came in the South Land and in the North Land. 

" Then his enemies turned from before him ; they turned 
their faces to the south (when they were overtaken, for, 
as the sequel shows, they had already set out northward 
in retreat) ; their courage had failed them for fear of him. 
But HorbehAdti was behind them in the bark of Rd ; a 
lance of iron and a chain were in his hand. With him 
was his following equipped with weapons and chains. 
Then he beheld the enemies on a plain to the south east 
of Thebes." And so on. Of course the foes were con- 
quered on this and successive occasions. They had 
already been driven back to the nineteenth nome of Upper 
Egypt and there beaten, when the leader and instigator 
of the rebellion decided to go out in person against 
Horbehftdti. 

"Behold, Set went forth and cried out horribly {nehd) 
as he flung forth curses for that which Horbehftdti had 
done when he slew the foes. Then spake R4 to Thoth : 
* The horrible one {nehaha) cries out aloud at that which 
Horbeh{idti hath done against him.' Then spake Thoth 
to R4 : * Therefore such cries shall be called horrible 
(nehaha) from this day forth.' HorbehCidti fought with 
Set ; he threw his iron at him ; he cast him down onto the 
ground of this city, which is called from that day forth 
Pa reheM} When Horbehftdti returned he brought Set 

^ I.e. place of the twin brethren Horus and Set, for such is the 
mutual relationship attributed to these gods in a myth to which 
we find frequent reference. 


LEGEND OF THE WINGED SUN DISK. 73 

v^th him ; his spear stuck in his neck, his chain was on 
his hand, the club of Horus had smitten him to shut his 
mouth. He brought him before his father R&. 

" R4 spake unto Thoth : * Let the companions of Set 
be given unto Isis and to Horus her son, that they may 
deal with them at their pleasure.' . . . Then Horus the 
son of Isis cut off the heads of Set and his confederates 
before his father RsL and the assembled great company 
of the gods. He drs^ged him at his heels through the 
land; he put the trident on his head and back" (an 
allusion to representations of Horus in which he is shown 
standing over Set, trident in hand). After a few lines the 
text goes on to say, "Thus did HorbehAdti on the 7th 
Tybi, together with Horus the son of Isis, who had made 
his form like unto that of Horbehddti, slaughter this 
wretched foe and his confederates." But still the issue 
of the conflict was indecisive. Set lived on notwith- 
standing his decapitation ; he changed himself into a 
roaring serpent that hid itself in a hole which it was 
forbidden to leave. The land was searched throughout, 
and the isolated adherents of Set were massacred. 
From time to time Set himself reappeared, and once it 
was even necessary to have recourse to the magic formulas 
of Isis against him. The last battle field was at the 
city of ThalA (Zaru) in the far east of Egypt. Here 
Horbehiidti " in the form of a lion slew one hundred and 
forty-two enemies ; with his talons he slew them, he tore 
out their tongues, and their blood streamed on the heights. 
Then the rest of the enemies fled to the sea. 

" Then spake RA to Horbehddti : * Stay, let us go upon 


74 SOLAR MYTHS. 

the sea to smite the enemies in their forms of crocodiles 
and hippopotami before the coast of Egypt.' Then 
spake HorbehOdti to the person of R4 : * O Lord of the 
gods ! the navigation is stopped because of the third 
part of the enemies which are still remaining and are 
in the sea.' Then Thoth recited the Chapter of Protecting 
the Ship ^ and the barks of the fighters in metal to calm 
the sea in the hour of its raging." The magic formulas 
were of course efficacious, any statement to this effect 
being omitted as altogether superfluous, and the enemies 
who stirred up the storm all disappeared. ** Then spake 
R4 to Thoth : * Have we not now traversed the whole 
land? Have we not now traversed (seked) the whole 
sea ? ' Thoth spake : ' From this day forth this water 
(the sea) shall be called Sea of Traversing (seked).* " 

Hereupon the gods turned back by night, for they saw 
no more enemies. As they drew near to Nubia and the 
city of ShaS'hery HorbehCidti beheld the enemies and their 
champions in the land CaOa, conspiring (jUaiid) against 
Horus their lord. The god again changed himself into a 
winged sun disk, and in this form he slew them. 

After this last victory the gods returned to their own 
country. Harmakhis came in his ship and landed at the 
Horus Throne {Tes ffer, Edfd). Thoth spake: "'The 
darter of rays who came forth from R&, he conquered the 
enemies in his form [of a winged sun disk] ; from this day 
he shall be called the Darter of Rays who emergeth from 

^ An analogous work is preserved containing the formulas for 
the protection of the bark neshemt, which played a great part at 
Abydos. Cf. Chassinat, Rec. de Trav., xvi., pp. 105 etseg. 


PUNNING IN MYTHOLOGY. 7$ 

the horizon.' Harmakhis spake unto Thoth : * Set this 
sun at every place at which I tarry, at the places of the 
gods in the South Land, at the places of the gods in the 
North Land, [at the places of the gods] in the Under- 
world, that it may banish Evil from their vicinity.' Thoth 
set this form at every spot, at every place, how many 
soever they were, at which any gods or goddesses might 
be. And this is the winged sun disk which is over the 
sanctuaries of all gods and goddesses in Egypt, for their 
sanctuary is also that of HorbehOdti." 

This legend as given above is translated for the most 


From drawing by R. E. F. Paget.] 

FIG. 14. — WINGED SUN DISK. 

From door to chapel of Thothmes I. at Deir el Bahri, XVIIIth Dynasty. 

part literally from the original. It is interesting in various 
aspects. It strikingly exemplifies what is already notice- 
able in the Legend of the Destruction of Mankind : the 
characteristic impulse of the Egyptians to explain the 
origin of certain designations by plays upon words.^ 
Because a god pronounced a word at a given juncture, 
therefore this word is said to have become the name of 
some thing connected with the occasion. This was of 
course an exact reversal of the real process by which these 
very trivial sayings were invented ; for they were attempts 
» Cf. Exodus, xvi. 15, 31. (Trans.) 


76 SOLAR MYTHS. 

to account for designations already existing by attributing 
to the gods utterances phonetically suggestive of the terms 
in question. Little respect was paid to grammar in the 
matter : as an instance, the group of signs signifying 
" Great Protection " is used to explain the name " Great 
One of Protection," ix. Greatest Protector. Still less regard 
was given to the meaning, and of this we have a flagrant 
instance in a Ptolemaic inscription of Philae,^ where the* 
name of Isis is explained as follows: "When Isis was 
bom, her mother NCit said on seeing her, * Behold I {ds\ 
that is r (/>. it is my ims^e), and therefore the name of 
Isis {As.i) was given to the goddess." Obviously such 
plays upon words have no more mythological significance 
than the etymologies advanced by the Greeks and Romans 
to account for the names of their divinities. But the 
prominence of such punning in these myths is a good 
indication of the comparative lateness of their origin, since 
it implies that it was thereby sought to explain the 
existence of sacred names which had already ceased to 
be comprehensible. The myths are also striking examples 
of the audacity of Egyptian conclusions in linguistic 
mythology, while yet their thoroughly prosaic form betrays 
a want of imagination and the absence of any sense of 
poetical construction. In the latter respect they present 
a marked contrast to the beautiful and imaginative 
explanations given by Greek and Roman poets in their 
day as to archaic terms of which the original significance 
had been lost. This suggested comparison of national 
genius is the more applicable since the Legend of the 
^ DIJMICHEN, KaL Insch,, y>\ 1. 2 : of. Aeg. Zeit., 1880, p. 42. 


SYNCRETIC MYTHOLOGY. TJ 

Winged Sun Disk was an essentially popular one. It 
outlived the fall of paganism and affected a series of Coptic 
texts which, in making use of the well known apocryphal 
account of Christ's journey through Egypt as a child, 
describe the triumphal march of the Saviour along the 
Valley of the Nile, and relate how He drove His foes from 
place to place, destroying them as He went. 

Finally, this text is valuable as an instance of that 
deliberate mythological syncretism which often confronts 
the reader in earlier texts. The gist of the story is a 
description of the conflict of the god Rd. with foes who, like 
mankind in the legend of their destruction, take advantage 
of his old age to conspire against him. R^ did not himself 
go forth to the conflict, but had recourse to the god 
. HorbehCldti, as incorporate in the form of a winged sun 
disk. Horbehftdti also was originally a solar deity, but 
in the fusion of different cults he came to be represented 
as subordinate to Rd. instead of his equivalent. To him 
fell the task of conquering the enemies of the Sun, and 
he accomplished it, traversing the whole of Egypt in 
company with RA and always warding off Evil from the 
king of the gods. It was therefore hoped and believed 
that he would everywhere and at all times exercise the 
same beneficent power, and hence the image of the 
winged sun disk was placed over the entrances to the inner 
chambers of a temple as well as over its gates, and on stelae 
and other objects, as a protection against all harm and 
especially against destruction. It is to this practice that 
the concluding words of the text refer. Sometimes this 
emblem is simply a winged sun disk, but we also find 


78 SOLAR MYTHS. 

it combined with two serpents, one on either side of the 
disk, which are occasionally crowned with the diadems of 
Upper and Lower Egypt. They represent the tutelary 
goddesses of the two divisions of the land, whom Horbe- 
hCldti had taken with him to the conflict, namely, Nekhebit 
and Uazit, called by the Greeks Eileithyia and BAto. 
Although seldom represented in the Old Kingdom, these 
winged disks were common in the New; and in later 
times a series would be placed one below the other on 
the same monument, in the hope that the efficacy of the 
sacred symbol might be strengthened by its repetition. 

The above form of the myth was a local legend of 
EdfO, where HorbehCidti was worshipped as the nome god, 
and it was only gradually that it obtained acceptance 
over the rest of Egypt ; for although similar legends 
of the passage of the Sun god are derived from other 
localities, yet these assign the part of his defender to 
other deities. Thus Anher, god of This, bore in Abydos 
the cognomen of Slayer of the Enemies, and it was his 
function to stand in the prow of the sun bark and strike 
down with his lance the creatures — especially the 
crocodiles and hippopotami — which impeded the progress 
of the boat, and therefore also that of R4. In other 
places a similar part was ascribed to the god ShO. 

The old myth of the conflict of Horbehttdti with the 
enemies of R4, who represent the powers of darkness, is 
fused in the EdfCi text with a second myth— namely, that 
of the expedition of Horus the son of Isis against Set 
the murderer, to avenge the death of his father Osiris. 
To the consideration of this second myth we shall return 


CONFLICT OF LIGHT AND DARKNESS. 79 

later. In outline it corresponds to the original form of the 
Horbehiidti legend, and according to it Horus traversed 
Egypt and everywhere conquered Set and his adherents. 
In this case, however, the foes are not the powers of 
darkness inimical to the God of Light ; they are the 
evil enemies of the Good Being. Hence the issue of the 
conflict is in both cases indecisive. In the Horbehddti 
myih the enemies of Rd, after being driven northward 
throughout the length of Egypt, suddenly reappear in 
the south, and so the whole war threatens to break out 
afresh, because although light can indeed conquer and 
repulse darkness, yet it cannot do away with it. So also 
in the Horus myth : good wins the victory over evil, but 
has no power to destroy it from out the world. Hence 
also in the story of the Horus expedition in the EdfA 
myth, Set is conquered and executed, but immediately 
he returns to life and attacks the deity in another form. 
Osiris himself is not mentioned in the inscription, but 
his legend is presupposed, and apart from it there would 
be no sense in handing over the punishment of Set to 
Isis, upon whom, as wife and sister of the murdered god, 
devolved the duty of avenging his blood.^ 

There were many lesser myths relating to the god R4 
besides the three chief ones which have been given in this 
chapter. One of them, however, is important as offering 
a mythological explanation of solar and lunar eclipse.^ 

* Cf. the myth on pp. 206 e^ seg. 

' Book of the Dead, ch. 112 : c£ GoODWiN, Aeg. Zeit, 1871, 
pp. 144 et seg, ; Naville, in Etudes did, d Leemans, pp. 75 et seg. ; 
Plutarch, De Iside, c. 55. 


80 SOLAR MYTHS. 

This tells how one day Horus desired to see all the beings 
which R& had created, and at length R& showed him a 
black hog, and at the same moment Horus felt a violent 
pain in his eye, for Set had changed himself into a hog 
in order to do hurt to Horus. Therefore Horus, after he 
was well again, would never more receive swine in offering. 
As related by the Greeks, the myth appears in a modified 
form, and states that Set injured the eye of Horus, tore 
it out, and swallowed it, but was afterwards compelled to 
restore it to Helios (RA). 


CHAPTER IV. 

THE PASSAGE OF THE SUN THROUGH THE 
UNDERWORLD. 

'THHE northernmost of the great Theban temples is that 
-^ of QAmah, built on the west bank of the river by 
Seti I. and Rameses II. about 1350 B.C. Leaving the plain 
and turning to the hills a little to the north of this temple, 
the traveller presently reaches a narrow opening in the 
rocks made by a prehistoric torrent seeking outlet to the 
Nile. A few hundred yards farther there is a fork in this 
ancient watercourse, but its two branches run behind the 
Libyan range, roughly parallel to each other, up to the 
heights above the Valley of the Assassif in the midst of the 
Theban necropolis. Just before the branch nearer to the 
Nile finds its abrupt termination in a steep cliff, its sides 
are pierced by some three-and-twenty rock cut passages lead- 
ing to tombs of New Kingdom kings, while in the second 
gorge only two such inscribed tombs have been discovered. 
Anciently many more of the royal sepulchres were still 
visible; Strabo* mentions some forty as worthy of in- 
spection; but now the entrances are in part hidden 
beneath the talus which has fallen from the weathered 
cliffs into the valley below, and are not likely to be redis- 
covered, unless by accident Indeed it was only the casual 
* xvii. 46, 816. 

81 6 


82 PASSAGE OF THE SUN THROUGH THE UNDERWORLD. 

observation that a rain torrent disappeared into the cliffs 
instead of flowing down into the valley which led to the 
discovery of the finest tomb among them all, that which 
was the resting place of the mummy of Seti I. 

These tombs belong to the XVIIIth, XlXth, and XXth 
Dynasties. From the entrance, a passage, which is some- 
times stepped, slopes downwards into the rock, occasionally 
widening into chambers, or having entrances to different 
rooms hewn in its walls, but keeping the same general 
direction and at length reaching the large chamber con- 
taining the royal sarcophagus. Further chambers may be 
connected with the sarcophagus chamber, or sometimes a 
blind passage only may be prolonged beyond it The 
varying plans of these tombs are thus accounted for : a 
king began to prepare his place of sepulture on his acces- 
sion by making a simple passage leading to a sepulchral 
chamber ; but if his life was spared he carried on the 
passage to a second chamber, and so on, until his death 
put an end to the extensions. And in this way the tomb 
of Seti I. attained to a length of nearly two hundred feet 

The walls of the passages and chambers, the ceilings, 
and the sarcophagus itself were adorned with scenes and 
inscriptions relating exclusively to the world beyond.^ 

^ The best publications of these scenes and inscriptions are : 
Lef^BURE, Les Hy^ogies royaux de Thhbes^ I. Tombeau de SetiL ; 
II. Notices des Hy fogies ; III. Tombeau de Ramses IV. (M^moires 
de la Mission Fran9aise au Caire, ii.-iii. 2). For the contents of 
the text of. Maspero, Les Hypogies royaux de Thebes, in Rev, de 
rhist, des ReL, 1888, also given in Jttudes de Mytfiologie, ii., pp. i 
et seq, A shorter version of the text has been well edited from the 
Berlin and Leyden papyri, with commentary, by Jequier, Le livre 
de ce qu*tl y a dans VHadis^ Paris, 1894. 


SEPULCHRAL TEXTS. 83 

One of these wall texts, that of the Legend of the Destruc- 
tion of Mankind, has been given already ; two others, the 
Negative Confession and the Funeral Ritual, will call for 
our attention when we come to consider the Osirian 
doctrine of Immortality. Many others must remain un- 
noticed, such as the litanies to the Sun,^ seventy-five 
invocations to the Sun god to be recited "at evening 
when Ri is made *true of voice' (mad kher) against his 
enemies in the Underworld," Le. formulas to be used when 
the dying Sun, overcoming all obstacles, enters the next 
world as a blessed god. In these litanies the god is 
invoked by all manner of secret titles, incomprehensible 
without detailed commentary, and which represent him as 
all embracing and as uniting in himself the most various 
divine functions. Thus they testify to the strong influence 
of syncretism even in 1300 B.C. But more important than 
these litanies for the understanding of the Egyptian religion 
are the two extensive texts which we shall now proceed 
to consider : the Book of Am DHat, and the Book of the 
Gates. 

In certain of the tombs which we have described the text 
of the Book of Am Ddat, " of that which is in the DOat 
(or Underworld)," is accompanied by scenes representing 
the divisions of the next world and its inhabitants. The 
text was also inscribed on sarcophagi, as on the sarcophagus 
of King Nekht-Her-heb't (Nectanebus I., died about 
369 B.C.), now preserved in London. It was written also 
upon papyrus, especially during the times of the XXth 
— XXIInd Dynasties, and in this form copies were 
* Naville, La Litaniedu Soleil, Leipzig, 1875. 


84 PASSAGE OF THE SUN THROUGH THE UNDERWORLD. 

placed in the graves of priests and priestesses of Amen. 
The copies which have come down to us fall into two 
classes, one class consisting of those which give the com- 
plete text and all its scenes, and the other of examples, 
generally on papyrus, which represent the first to the 
seventh Hours of the Night by a short epitome, while the 
remaining five are given at length. It is curious that the 
text should appear in both the perfect and abridged forms 
in the tomb of Seti I. : there was no inherent advantage 
in so giving it, the duplication is simply owing to the in- 
difference of Egyptian scribes, who copied out the various 
religious texts which might happen to be at their disposal 
without any regard to the contents, and hence ran the 
risk of giving duplicate texts on the same monument. 
Magnificent as was the tomb of Seti I., there is no order 
whatever among its inscriptions : the texts belonging to 
the different hours do not follow in regular progression, 
but have been disposed by the artist according to his 
convenience in the matter of space. 

In these texts there were twelve divisions of Diiat, and 
the journey of the night Sun through each of them 
occupied one hour. The divisions were designated fields 
cities, or dwellings, and each was entered by a door. They 
were connected by a river running through their midst, 
upon which the Sun god in his bark journeyed from West 
to East ; while upon its banks dwelt all manner of spirits 
and demons. The scenes relating to the river are divided 
into three rows, the top row representing the right bank, 
the middle one the stream, and the third the left bank. 
The demons themselves are far from homogeneous ; some 


DEMONS OF dOaT. 85 

were ancient gods, while others were later personifications 
endowed with forms adapted to the qualities which it was 
deemed necessary to ascribe to them. For example, some 
of the demons were represented as monkeys, because 
it was their function to worship the setting sun : the 
Egyptians having noticed how monkeys chattered together 
at sunset took this to be an expression of adoration of the 
Sun. Others, male and female, stabbed and rent the 
wicked, and therefore carried knives and lances and bore 
such names as Dentty "she who cuts"; Nekit, "she who 
tears to pieces " ; Shesri^ " the piercer," etc. Others again 
owe form and name entirely to the active imagination of 
the Egyptians, who took a truly Oriental pleasure in 
devising the impossible. A glance at the Am Diiat text 
will show that almost every conceivable combination of 
the animal with the human .form is given ; yet to the 
Egyptian all these creatures were really existent, and he 
hoped, or rather feared, to meet them after death. In 
these fancies the dwellers in the Nile Valley have outdone 
all other nations of antiquity of which we have record 

In its shorter and more comprehensible version the work 
begins with the words : " Beginning of the Opening of 
Amenti (that is the West, and hence the Underworld) of 
the limit of the gathered darkness" — ue. of the Under- 
world, and of the domain into which darkness retreats and 
collects during the day, and whence it threatens to break 
again over the earth so soon as the power of the sun 
begins to flag. 

" The god (the Sun) enters from the earth, from the Com- 
partment of the western horizon. A hundred and twenty 


86 PASSAGE OF THE SUN THROUGH THE UNDERWORLD. 

dterA ^ must be traversed in this Space before he comes to 
the gods of Diiat. Net Rd^ Stream of R^, is the name of 
the first field of Diiat R^ allots the fields of the territory 
to the gods who are in his train. He begins to speak 
words of command, ordaining the circumstances of the 
gods of Diiat as regards this field. If a man represents 
this according to the appearance which is in the Amenti 
of DQat {ix. if the condition of things really existent in 
DClat is duly portrayed), and knows these pictures which 
are the semblance of the great god himself, then shall he 
(who does this) be luminous upon earth, he shall be 
luminous in the great DClat. UsJtemt hdtu kheftiH RA 
(* Destroyer of the forefront of the enemies of Rft *) is the 
name of this first hour of the night which conducts this 
great god in this Compartment." 

The illustrated version gives the same text with unim- 
portant modifications, and also presents us with a view 
of the Compartment traversed by the Sun during the first 
hour of the night. A stream of water runs through the 
midst, with a bark floating upon it In the cabin stands 
the Sun god, with a sceptre in one hand, and the sign of 
life in the other ; his head is a ram's head surmounted by 
the solar disk. This god is Af Rd, " flesh of RA "—not RA 
himself, for the Sun is dead, but his flesh and blood — for 
even the body of RA is immortal. The sign of life which the 
figure is holding represents the life which remains to him 
even after death. The sceptre is the symbol of his rule over 
the Underworld. The ram's head serves to show that he 

The ater was a linear measure. A parallel text states that this 
division was 309 dterU long by 120 wide. 


r 

r 


rTfc~fc 


A.^. ' ' • -;-*- f^^^ -^=- ?^ f f Si 1^ **^ ' 


/=^ ■ 


If. / 


i^^'-i/ 


, :l. 


£X 


<^^^ .^ ^ '' 


I- 


To face p. 86.] pj^ 1 5. —COMPARTMENT OF THE UNDERWORLD 1 

(LEFtBURE, "T( 


FIRST HOUR OF THE NIGHT. 87 

is not simply RcL the Sun god, who is always represented 
as hawk headed, but that he is here manifest in his Theban 
form of Amen Rft, whose earthly embodiment was a ram. 
In front of the cabin stands Ap Hat, "Opener of the 
Ways," a form of Anubis, whose office it was to introduce 
the soul of Ra as well as the souls of departed men into 
the Underworld. Next come Sa, the god of taste and 
knowledge, and the figure of a woman crowned with the 
horns of a cow and with a sun disk. She is designated 
Lady of the Bark. Behind the cabin stand the hawk 
headed god Her hekenO, who is upon this journey the 
representative of R&; the Ka of ShCl ; Nehes, "the 
Watchman " ; HHy " the Striker " (?) ; and the steersman of 
the ship, rudder in hand. The Ka of Shii, that is the Ka 
of one form of the Sun god, is thus present ; for it, no less 
than the human Ka, must descend into the Underworld 
with the being to whom it belongs, there to remain with 
him and yet to lead an independent existence. 

Twelve divinities precede the bark, headed by the 
Watchman of the Hours with his knife in his hand. Be- 
hind them comes a serpent, and behind that are four 
chests, each surmounted by a human head and named 
respectively the Speech of Osiris, of Khepera, of Tiim, of 
R^ These must therefore have been regarded as personi- 
fied words of the four deities, existing independently of 
the gods themselves. Next is the great illuminator, ram 
headed and obviously a form of the Sun god, albeit 
detached from him. Beyond him is the Sun's faithful 
companion, the lioness headed goddess Sekhet— or, as she 
is here called, Sekhmet, "she who is exalted" — followed 


88 PASSAGE OF THE SUN THROUGH THE UNDERWORLD. 

by ** Him who Dwells in Amenti/* the mummiform figure 
of Osiris wearing the crown of Upper Egypt, by a god in 
human likeness armed with a knife and entitled "Cutter 
in pieces," and, finally, by the two goddesses of Truth — 
Truth and Justice. The text accompanying these scenes 
approximately repeats the introductory words, with only 
one noteworthy addition, which states that the river is 
Ornes,^ and that the solar bark is the Sekti bark; At 
this point in the text the dimensions of this division of 
the Underworld are estimated at 220 dterU in width by 
300 in length, a variation from the data given above 
which shows how little regard for consistency the Egyptians 
had in religious matters. It may be that these dimensions 
had been differently reckoned by the writers, and that 
the compilers of this text considered it better to place 
the two readings side by side rather than to run the 
risk of adopting the wrong measurements only. 

The row below shows those who awaited the god and 
his companions in the Compartment of the first hour, 
and accompanied him through it, remaining behind, how- 
ever, when he passed on to the next. They consist of 
ten divinities, some of which bear serpents as sceptres, 
and of three long spotted snakes. Then follows a bark 
in the midst of which hovers a scarabaeus, adored as 
" this R^ " by two men, each of whom is called an Osiris. 
The scene is evidently intended to represent the adoration 
of the Sun by the dead The line of inscription above 
runs somewhat as follows : " This god traverses this Com- 

^ Omes has, of course, no connexion whatever with the Greek 
Uranos. 


FIRST HOUR OF THE NIGHT. 89 

partment in the form of a ram. When he has traversed it, 
then the dead who are in his train do not rise with him 
(into the domains of the other hours) ; they remain in this 
Compartment. But R^ gives command (in favour of 
the deady to whom he grants fields) to the gods who 
dwell in this Compartment" The dead to whom reference 
is here made are those whose souls hastened at the 
moment of death to the opening in the western heaven 
through which R^ enters into the Underworld. Thus 
far they had followed in the train of the god, but here 
their journey ended, and only those specially favoured ones 
who knew the Book of that which is in Diiat might 
enter the solar bark and proceed with the Sun god. The 
rest remained behind, not even R^ himself having power 
to take them along with him. 

On the left bank of Cmes squatted nine cynocephali, 
** porters for this great soul," beings who, so soon as the 
Sun had reached the West, opened to him the gates of the 
Compartment of the first hour. Each of them is named 
by name : " Opener of the Earth," " Soul of the Earth," 
"Heart of the Earth," "Double Heart of the Earth," 
" He who beholdeth RA," etc. Then come twelve goddesses, 
" those who extol upon earth " — that is, who offer hymns 
of praise to the god at the moment of his leaving earth 
and entering the Underworld. Their names are those 
of the twelve hours of the day who take leave of R^ and 
return to the eastern sky, there to await the new Sun. 
Beyond these are nine squatting gods — three human, 
three jackal, and three hawk headed—" the gods who 
adore RA " ; and with them are twelve goddesses, " they 


90 PASSAGE OF THE SUN THROUGH THE UNDERWORLD. 

who lead the Great God." The latter are shown by their 
names to be the twelve hours of the night who now 
supersede the hours of the day in the guidance of the 
Sun. 

On the right bank of Umes are, first, other nine 
cynocephali, " they who speak the praises of Rft " ; then 
come twelve uraei spitting forth fire to lighten the gloom 
of the Underworld. They are "the goddesses who 
lighten the darkness in Diiat" The nine men following 
them " extol the lord of the cycle of the gods," />. Rft, 
and the twelve goddesses who accompany them "give 
praises to R^ when he traverses Urnes." 

Here ends the description of the first Compartment 
of the Underworld. When RSI has traversed the length 
of it, a door is opened at the end, and he enters into the 
domain of the second hour of the night, still continuing 
his way upon the river Urnes. The divinities who 
accompany him in his bark are, generally speaking, the 
same throughout the journey, but the attendant beings 
who are not on board, and especially the demons of both 
banks, change continually. It is needless to examine 
them one by one ; the description of the first hour may 
serve to show after what fashion his Dtlat was pictured 
to himself by the Egyptian. Only in one respect was 
there any important change as the god advanced from 
hour to hour : the number of the demons was hourly 
greater, while they were represented as more and more 
fantastic in appearance, and composite human and animal 
forms increasingly abounded. All had their names, which 
the deceased Egyptian was supposed to know by heart ; 


RA AND THE DEAD. 9 1 

in case he had failed to learn them he must be provided 
with a papyrus from which to read them ; unless, indeed, 
he had been careful during life to have the guidebook 
to D(iat inscribed upon the walls of his tomb, as was 
done by Seti I. 

As in the domain of the first hour, so in each division 
of the Underworld, RA left behind some of his companions 
whom he had brought with him from the earth above, 
making them grants of land to cultivate. In thus hand- 
ing over territory to his followers as a reward for services 
rendered, and as encouragement to future loyalty, Rk 
only acted after the manner in which earthly kings were 
wont to recompense their faithful subjects. The Pharaoh 
was constrained to this course as a means of preventing 
the separatist tendencies, which were never wholly subdued 
among the Egyptians, from issuing in rebellion, and 
also to secure for himself loyal and devoted dependents 
in each of the nomes. And in the same way Rk acted 
in his own interest, for although he gave light on his 
way to the dwellers in the Underworld, he could not 
unaided conquer the demons of darkness. To that end 
he needed allies, and these he found not only in a succes- 
sion of the good demons of D6at, but also in the dead 
whom he had established in the place, and who were 
bound to the land even as earthly vassals to the estates 
with which they were invested. Here they awaited Rk their 
lord to help him against the Apep serpent, the symbol of 
darkness. In some parts of the text Osiris is treated as 
interchangeable with Rk ; other references show that the 
two were distinguished, Osiris being regarded as the 


92 PASSAGE OF THE SUN THROUGH THE UNDERWORLD. 

permanent lord of the dead in Diiat. These contradictions 
testify to the fact that it was no longer a homogeneous 
doctrine that was embodied in these texts, but that in 
them we have a fusion of distinct theories. This is further 
made evident by the introduction, here and there, of yet 
another heterogeneous deity in the person of Sokaris, to 
whom were specially ascribed the domains of the fourth 
and fifth hours. On his journey through the last of the 
Compartments Rk met the scarabaeus Khepera, the god of 
the new morning Sun, who thereupon embarked with the 
dead god of the Sun of yesterday to give him escort as 
far as the eastern horizon, where his own reign would 
begin. 

The sixth and seventh Compartments were especially 
dedicated to Osiris. In the first of them were many 
beings connected with the Osirian myth : I sis, the ibis ; a 
Horus ; and various manifestations of Osiris himself. Here 
in a large room dwelt the kings of Upper Egypt, the rich 
in offerings— that is, the wealthy, to whom their survivors 
made many offerings — the kings of Lower Egypt, and the 
glorified spirits. To them the god assured the possession 
of their fields, the continued exercise of dominion, the 
power to use the magic formulas which they had learned, 
and the personal enjoyment of the offerings made to them. 
In the seventh hour the serpent MeAen, " the Enfolder," 
coiled round the cabin of Rk ; and now came the sharpest 
part of the conflict against the Apep serpent, which was 
at length overcome and pierced with knives, while at the 
incantations of Isis the sun bark proceeded self-impelled 
upon its way. Here in the seventh Compartment were 


THE LAST HOURS OF THE NIGHT. 93 

four chests partly filled with sand, but also containing the 
forms of Tftm, Khepera, R^, and Osiris. Being talismans 
of extraordinary efficacy in the next world, which would 
seem to have appeared to the help of R^ at his call, each 
was guarded by a goddess armed with a knife. Near 
by were serpents which cast forth flames against the foes 
of Osiris and devoured the souls of his enemies ; stellar 
divinities and gods of the hours were there also. 

In the ninth Compartment twelve uraei spat out 
fire to light the path of R^ so long as he might tarry 
there ; as soon as he had passed on they devoured and 
reabsorbed the flames, again to cast them up at the end of 
twenty-three hours. Their fires struck down the enemies 
of Ra, and they lived upon the blood of such as they 
slew daily. The tenth Compartment chiefly contained 
water, and aquatic creatures, and here the scene gives a 
representation of the birth of Khepera, thus contradicting 
the above mentioned assignment of his first appearance 
to the fifth hour. A secret way led from the eleventh 
Compartment to Sais, and was guarded by two forms of 
the goddess Neith, one wearing the crown of Upper and 
the other the crown of Lower Egypt. Neith of Sais being 
accounted the mother of R^, this road was doubtless 
intended to provide her with the means of reaching the 
Underworld from her own city and here giving birth to the 
Sun god. Near by it were great fires in which the enemies 
of Rk were consumed under the supervision of Horus. In 
the twelfth and last Compartment the new Sun at length 
appears in his earthly form ; he attains new life, and is 
uplifted at the horizon by the god ShQ ; and with him go 


94 PASSAGE OF THE SUN THROUGH THE UNDERWORLD. 

forth into the light of day those souls of the dead who had 
succeeded by means of their knowledge of magic formulas 
in remaining in the sun bark and therein traversing the 
whole of Diiat ; henceforth they are to remain for ever 
with Ri, inseparable from him and yet without loss of 
individuality. 

The idea of immortality and of the world to come pre- 
sented in this text is altogether peculiar to it. The doctrine 
centres in the dead god R«l, yet parts of doctrines belonging 
to the cults of Sokaris and Osiris are blended with it. 
But this Osiris is not the Osiris of the Book of the Dead, 
whom we shall consider later ; he, as also Sokaris, is here 
a Sun god, sometimes apprehended as a secondary form of 
R«i, and sometimes as ruler of a portion of the Underworld 
of which the whole belongs to R^. This doctrine indeed 
taught that immortality was the lot of all men, but also 
that only the friend of R^ could look forward to possessing 
fields in DClat, the produce of which should ensure him 
against hunger. For one hour daily would he behold the 
Sun, but the rest of the time he was plunged in darkness, 
which at best was only lightened by fire spitting 
serpents, or by the sea of flame in which the enemies of 
R^ were consumed. Shouting for joy, he greeted the light 
at the appearance of his god ; but his joy was short : at the 
end of one hour the door was closed behind his lord, and 
he again was left in darkness. Such was the lot even of 
kings and of the rich and great, except that in their case 
it was ameliorated inasmuch as they obtained their food 
without labour. Few were those who remained for ever 
with the Sun, and they were not necessarily the great ones 


BOOK OF THE GATES. 95 

of the earth, nor yet the very good, but those who 
possessed the most minute information as to the next 
world and who were best versed in magic. Thus the 
whole doctrine is based on a belief in the power of magic : 
by magic only could demons be worsted and everlasting 
bliss be won ; the idea of attaining to it by the virtuous 
conduct of earthly life is altogether in the background : 
the one thing needful in this respect was — not to have 
been in life an enemy of RA. 

The second work found in the tombs of the kings 
dealing with the progress of the Sun through the Under- 
world — the Book of the Gates — in the main corresponds 
to the above, especially in its presentation of the life of the 
dead as that of dwellers in a darkness penetrated by the 
light of the Sun for but one hour in the twenty-four. It 
has, however, supplied one omission of the Am D6at text 
by embodying the judgment of Osiris on the righteous and 
the wicked. The scene of this is a hall situate between 
the fifth and sixth hours, and here Osiris is seated upon his 
throne, upon the steps of which are the nine gods forming 
the Osirian cycle. In front of Osiris stand the scales in 
which a man is weighed against his deeds, and beyond 
stands Anubis, who is here present as spectator only, 
although, according to the Osirian rituat, it was his office 
to conduct the dead into the hall of judgment. The 
accompanying text states that all the enemies of Osiris 
are overthrown and destroyed, and this destruction is 
illustrated by a scene representing the god Thoth in a 
small bark as a cynocephalus armed with a stick, and 
driving forth from the hall and from the fellowship of the 


96 PASSAGE OF THE SUN THROUGH THE UNDERWORLD. 

righteous a hog which is called the "Devourer of the 
Arm," and which stands for Set, the enemy of Osiris. 

The sixth hour displays the outcome of the judgment 
scene : the righteous are at work in their fields, while, 
bound to stakes, the wicked are awaiting a punishment by 
fire and water which follows partially in the eighth hour. 
The agricultural scenes recall in many ways the Fields of 
Aald of the Osirian creed ; but Aald was flooded with 
light, while here there was little or none. 

A similar melancholy conception of the life after death 
is set forth in isolated texts as well as in the Book of 
the Gates ; but in many ways it differs from that of 
the latter, and is not without affinity to Greek feeling on 
the subject, picturing the life of the dead as a mere 
shadowy existence. In the inscription on a stela dating 
from the time of Cleopatra, and preserved in the British 
Museum,^ a dead woman thus calls upon her husband: 
"O my brother, my husband, cease not to drink and to 
eat, to be drunken, to enjoy the love of women, to make 
holiday. Follow thy desire by night and by day ; grant 
care no place in thine heart. For as for Amenti it is a 
land of sleep and of darkness, a dwelling wherein those 
who are there remain. They sleep in their mummy forms, 
they nevermore awake to see their fellows, they behold 
neither their fathers nor their mothers, their heart is 
careless of their wives and children. On earth each 


» Published by Sharpe, Egyptian Inscriptions, i. 4; Prisse, 
Monuments, pi. xxvi., his ; Lepsius, Auswahl, pL xvi. ; Reinisch, 
Chrest., i., pi. 20: cf. Renouf, Religion, pp. 242 et seqr, 
Maspero, Atiides Egyptiennes, i., p. 187. 


\y^ 


^^ 


^aa^ma^ III 


To fact p. 97-2 


BOOK OF THE GATES. 97 

tasteth of the water of life, but I suffer thirst. Water 
Cometh to him who is upon earth, but I thirst after the 
water that is by me. Since I came unto this valley I 
know not where I am. I long for the water that floweth 
by me. I desire the breeze on the bank of the river, 
that it may refresh my heart in its distress. For the 
name of the god who ruleth here is * Utter Death.' At his 
call, trembling with fear, all men come unto him. He 
maketh no distinction between gods and men ; before him 
the great are as the small. He showeth no favour to 
him who loveth him; he snatcheth the child from its 
mother, and the old man also. None cometh to worship 
him, for he is not gracious unto them who adore him ; he 
regardeth not him who presenteth him with offerings." 

The Book of the Gates begins with a description of the 
Sun's entrance into the Underworld. In his bark, and in 
the form of a disk round which a serpent is coiled, the 
Sun god approaches a valley bounded by two high sand- 
hills. On one of the banks is a standard with the head 
of a ram, and on the other a standard with the head of 
a jackal ; for in the Underworld the god will bear the 
head of a ram, while the jackal is symbolic of Anubis, 
his guide thither. Before each standard kneel two genii 
— ^the genius of Diiat, and the genius of the hills of earth, 
i.e. opf the regions of which the boundaries meet at the 
gates of the Underworld. The valley is closed by a 
simple door, which at a conjuration opens to RA, who 
through it enters the domain of the first hour in ram 
headed form. The demons are fully described here as in 
the other divisions, and throughout all the scenes flows the 

7 


98 PASSAGE OF THE SUN THROUGH THE UNDERWORLD. 


fig, 17. — gate in the underworld. 

(maspero, "Etudes de biythologie," ii. 167.) 

XlXth Dynasty. 

same river, on which the Sun travels accompanied by his 
companions ; while right and left upon its sandy banks 
stand the spirits. But although the general arrangements 


DIFFERENT IDEAS OF THE UNDERWORLD. 99 

correspond to those of the Am Dfiat text, yet details, names 
of demons, scenes, and texts are different throughout On 
similar foundations we have an altogether different super- 
structure. Two distinct conceptions of the next world 
had been formed by the Egyptians, and they found it so 
difficult to choose between them that both were sometimes 
represented in the same tomb. 

To begin with — the divisions between the twelve hourly 
spaces of the night are of a different kind. In "Am 
Ddat " a simple door suffices ; in the second text, except 
for the first hour, we have veritable fortifications. Each 
division is bounded by a wall in which a single narrow 
opening leads into a passage between two battlemented 
walls, and the passage bends at a right angle in order 
fiuther to increase the difficulty of forcing an entry. This 
method of construction may be actually seen in Egyptian 
fortifications still extant At each end of the passage is 
a mummiform figure, and at the corner there hangs over 
from either side a serpent spitting forth flames which flow 
in a fiery stream along the road. Besides these there are 
also nine gods standing with their backs against the wall 
to defend it. Only by means of conjurations could R4 
himself pass through; but when these were duly pro- 
nounced by his conductor the mummiform figures opened 
their arms to him, the serpents ceased to spit forth flames, 
and the great serpent keeping watch over the gate at the 
end of the passage gave him entrance into the next hour. 
Scarcely had RA passed before the demons were again on 
guard as before. Yet notwithstanding all these defensive 
measures the god was never in safety : everywhere enemies 


lOO PASSAGE OF THE SUN THROUGH THE UNDERWORLD. 

A 

met him, and especially the Apep serpent, which he was 
bound to conquer. 

And, finally, the conclusion of this text claims attention 


FIG. l8. — nO UPUFTING THE SUN BARK AT THE END OF THE NIGHT. 
(bONOMI and SHARPE, PL. XV.) 

Sarcophagus of Seti II. 

as dealing with the birth of the new Sun in far more detail 
than does the "Am Dfiat." When at the end of the 


FUSION OF SOLAR AND OSIRIAN CULTS. lOI 

twelfth hour the last door had swung to, then there was 
great mourning among the souls who dwell in Amenti 
and remain behind in darkness. But Isis and Nephthys, 
each in the form of a uraeus, sit by the gates to protect 
the young Sun god, even as they protected Horus the 
son of Isis. Before them stretches Nft, the primeval 
water, from which, as one myth tells us, all things came 
forth. From this R4 too must rise, and to effect his rising 
the god of the water uplifts him together with his M^det 
bark. R^ is in the midst of the bark, and beside him stand 
Isis and Nephthys as his guardians, while aft are Seb, 
Sh(i, the god Hek who knows the magic formulas, and 
two steersmen. Forward are the three porters who have 
opened the gates of day, and who will open also the various 
doors of the upper heaven. Nflt, goddess of the day sky, 
reaches from the other side to receive the Sun. She 
stands upon a figure which by touching its head with its 
feet forms a circle and is designated the '^ Osiris who 
encloses Ddat," the whole arrangement signifying that 
the day sky is here uplifted above the night sky, the 
realm of N6t above that of Osiris. 

As we have more than once had occasion to observe, 
the doctrine contained in these texts is no longer pure ; it 
comprises much that had been borrowed from the Osirian 
teaching and which was of independent origin. This 
influence was reciprocal. In the Book of the Dead, the 
text book of the Osirian faith, we are continually beset 
by passages and allusions which, strictly speaking, have 
nothing to do with the fundamental cult, and are indeed 
often in direct contradiction to its dogmas; these are in 


I02 PASSAGE OF THE SUN THROUGH THE UNDERWORLD. 

many instances taken from texts relating to the pass^e of 
the Sun through the Underworld. Thus in Chapter XV. 
of the Book of the Dead we find reference to the DAat 
which R4 enlightens, the appearance of the Apep serpent, 
together with other indications of a prevalent syncretic 
tendency. 


CHAPTER V. 

THE CHIEF DEITIES. 

T^HE Egyptian temple was dedicated, as a rule, to a 
-^ single deity, who inhabited the sanctuary in corporate 
form ; to him the chief offerings were made, and in his 
honour the great local festivals were celebrated. This is 
clearly set forth by the inscriptions on the walls. But 
these same inscriptions make it evident that the god was 
not regarded as standing alone ; in almost every case 
divine honours were also paid to his companion deities, the 
0€ol avpvaot of the Greeks. These, generally, were con- 
nected with the great god of the temple by close bonds 
of relationship, and, together with him, formed a cycle of 
divinities. The cycle being usually three in number the 
so called triads arose, which generally consisted of two 
gods and one goddess ; the goddess being the wife of the 
chief god, and the third member of the triad being their 
son. The son was the counterpart of the father, and 
destined to replace him when he should grow old and die, 
according to that law of nature to which even the gods 
were subject. Thus the son became the father, and the 
Egyptian texts could speak of the gods as eternal ; for so 
soon as the elder god vanished he would be succeeded by 

103 


104 THE CHIEF DEITIES. 

a divine personality precisely similar. In this sense also 
the god was self begotten, being father to the son who 
was as himself ; and he was " the husband of his mother " 
in that, after the death of his father, he had entered upon 
all rights as regards the goddess of the triad, and was in 
his turn by her the father of the new divine son who 
should one day replace him. This scheme of functions 
provided not only for the unfailing continuance of the 
divinity, but also for the independent existence of each of 
the divine individualities by means of which it was carried 
on. It is complete in all its parts exiie^KS regards the 
goddess ; for, a priori^ she also wotild grow old, and pass 
away, and be superseded. No explanation of this omission 
is given in Egyptian doctrine ; it must be accepted as 
arising from the fact that the part assigned in the divine 
world to the goddess of a triad is in general very insig- 
nificant She brings forth the young god and she brings 
him up, but she has no defined personality. This is the 
case with almost all the Egyptian goddesses : they are, as 
a rule, unnoticed in the myths and neglected in the cults ; 
the inscriptions, generally speaking, simply give their 
names and designate them mothers, nurses, guardians, 
without adding the mention of any characteristic traits. 
Isis is an exception, but she is scarcely to be classed 
among the goddesses of the triads. 

A triad of the kind just described was formed at Thebes, 
for instance, by Amen, M{it, and KhAnsfl ; at Memphis 
by Ptah, Sekhet, and Imuthes ; at Kom Ombo by Sebak, 
Hathor, and Kh{ins{i ; but in some places the triad was of 
another kind. In certain temples where the chief deity 


/ 

/ 

/ 


THE TRIAD— THE ENNEAD. IO5 

was without traditional family, it was still considered 
desirable to worship him in conjunction with two of the 
more important local divinities, even although the three 
formed a triad in number only and not in relationship. 
Thus, for example, the triad of the cataract district 
groups the goddesses Sati and An{iki with the god 
KhnAm simply because they were two of the chief deities 
of that vicinity, and it was therefore expedient that they 
should be worshipped in its temple. 

The triad appears to have been the earlier outcome of 
the effort after a systematic grouping of the deities. 
Later it was expanded into an ennead — a cycle of nine 
deities ; ^ but the members of an ennead were united rather 
by reasons of state than of kinship, the chief god being 
lord and king, while the other deities formed his court, 
assisted him in the government of the world, and therefore 
participated in the honours that were paid him. The 
conception of the ennead is also very ancient, but the 
expression early lost its numerical significance and became 
generally equivalent to a cycle of gods. In the tales it is 
said that the god went forth with his divine nine when 
the statement means simply that he was accompanied by 
his court ; and from several texts in which the ennead is 
specified it is clear that the members of the ennead referred 
to were eight only.* 

Some of the temples had two enneads— " the great and 

^ On the formation of the ennead see particularly Maspero, Sur 
rEnnSadei in Rev. de rHistgire des Religions, 1892, or Aiudes de 
Mythologie, ii., pp. 337 et seq, 

* CI Lepsius, Ueber die Cotter der vier Elemente, in Ab- 
handlungen of the Berlin Academy, 1858, pp. 227 etseq. 


I06 THE CHIEF DEITIES. 

the small," a higher and a lower — and enneads were even 
occasionally spoken of in the plural to denote the totality 
of divine beings. As a rule there is no evidence that 
the selection of the gods of an ennead was dictated by 
any profound philosophy : its members were simply the 
principal national deities headed by the god of the nome 
in question. There was perhaps one exception, however, 
in the ennead of Heliopolis, which occasionally influenced 
the formation of the ennead in other cities also. But it is 
difficult to determine whether the processes of thought 
exhibited in the Heliopolitan ennead were operative in its 
original constitution or imported during the course of 
subsequent systematizing. In Heliopolis TAm-R^ was 
held to be the creator of the world, from him came forth 
ShA and Tefnfit, and of this pair were born Seb and Nftt, 
who were the parents of Osiris and Isis, Set and Nephthjrs. 
The chief function of Shft was to separate the heavens 
from the earth (Nftt from Seb), in order to provide the path 
for the sun (RA). When this was accomplished there 
appeared upon earth Nile and desert, life and death, good 
and evil, these contrasts being personified in Osiris and 
Set. The creator had no consort, and of and by himself 
all his acts of creation were performed ; but the other 
members of the Great Ennead were grouped in pairs as 
god and goddess, and from the first pair, Shft and Tefniit, 
the rest proceeded. The members of the Lesser Ennead 
of Heliopolis (Horus son of Isis, Thoth, MaAt, and others) 
seem to have been specially concerned with the civil and 
moral organization of mankind ; but in the present state 
of our knowledge it is impossible to form any trustworthy 


AMEN, mOt, and KHOnsC. 10/ 

conception of the way in which their several functions 
came to be assigned to them. 

It often happened that gods of the same attributes 
were grouped together in the same cycle : the absurdity 
involved in this was avoided by the expedient of allowing 
them to have reigned in succession, as did the Pharaohs, 
attributing to each in turn the title of King of Upper and 
Lower Egypt. Thus, according to Heliopolitan tradition, 
Atm6 (Tiim) was succeeded by Rl, Shii, Seb, Osiris, Set, 
and Horus, while in Memphis Ptah, and in Thebes Amen 
Ra was considered as the founder of the divine dynasty. 
The new dogma did not find extended approval, for this 
pretended succession in the supremacy left untouched the 
main difficulty presented by the Egyptian faith, which 
r^arded the gods as eternally capable of exerting their 
several activities at any moment Hence the dogma was 
confined to certain schools of the priests and never pervaded 
the beliefs of the people. 

It is obvious that among the countless deities of the 
inscriptions we can here consider only those of which most 
frequent mention is made in the texts, and which were 
looked upon as chief by the Egyptians themselves ; even 
as regards these, only what is most salient can be noticed. 
An account of all the Egyptian deities and the discussion 
of their functions and attributes would fill volumes. 

Amen, MOt, and KhCnsO formed the triad of Thebes. 
This city, the Diospolis of the Greeks, was the capital of 
Egypt during nearly the whole of the period from the Xlth 
Dynasty until far on in the times of the New Kingdom ; 
and from it proceeded the greatest and most warlike kmgs 


I08 THE CHIEF DEITIES. 

of the land. Its temples and tombs have furnished by 
far the greater part of the material now at the service of 
Egyptian research. Thus we are in possession of a long 
series of texts relating to the worship of the Theban deities ; 
but we must carefully guard against the conclusion that 
the abundance of these texts argues the general predomin- 
ance of Amen in Egypt The Theban Pharaohs did 
indeed seek to introduce the cult of their god throughout 
the whole realm, and in so far succeeded that he was 
admitted into many of the great sanctuaries ; nevertheless 
it was not as principal god that he was so received, and he 
took, usually, minor rank beside the local deities. 

According to the received explanation in the time of 
the New Kingdom, the name of the god, Atnen, signifies 
" The Hidden One." In the pure and simple form of 
Amen he appears but seldom in the texts, where he is 
rather represented as a sun god in the composite form of 
Amen Ri. This was scarcely his original nature, but of 
that the Egyptians themselves seem to have lost all 
tradition. His name is derived from the same root as 
the word Afnentty which designated both the West and 
the Underworld, and thus suggests that he may have been 
considered a god of the dead ; while, on the other hand, 
there are texts, especially those referring to Amen in 
combination with Min, which would lead us to regard 
him as having been a deity personifying the continual 
self renewing power of nature. When Amen is spoken 
of in the later texts it is always Amen R4 who is 
meant. In the last millennium B.C. Amen R^ became a 
pantheistic deity, and much mystic philosophy was evolved 


TENDENCY TO MONOTHEISM. I09 

out of his name, ** The Hidden One," first by the Egyptians 
themselves and afterwards by the Greeks. He was held to 
be the secret, all creating, all sustaining power primarily 
incorporate in the Sun. Earlier texts, and especially 
hymns, deriving their arguments and comparisons from 
the sun that warms and enlightens all, had already praised 
Amen R^ in almost monotheistic style as Lord and 
Creator of the universe, and so prepared the way for the 
later and pantheistic conception. 

Besides such texts, many passages are found in Egyptian 
inscriptions and papyri where it is stated that " god *' — ix, 
"a god,** the indefinite article not being generally ex- 
pressed in Egyptian— is praised, "god" knows the 
wicked, "god" grants a field, "god" loves the obedient, 
etc., and from all these it has often been concluded that 
hereby is meant the one God who is from everlasting to 
everlasting, the God of the Jewish prophets and even of 
Christendom. Such an interpretation is, as a matter of 
fact, impossible. The same texts which make these 
assertions speak of other deities as coexistent, and show 
that in using the word "god" the scribe was thinking 
only of the god most near to him, the god of his nome, 
the neter nH^i, "the god belonging to the city," of the 
texts. This god was to the writer an all embracing power, 
yet one which did not exclude the existence of other 
powers that might, to other minds, hold the first place. 
Osiris, Horus, Thoth, R4 TAm Harmakhis, Ptah Tanen, 
the Nile, Amen R4, and others are each from time to 
time severally adored in the texts as one and only god ; 
but from this it is vain to draw far reaching conclusions 


no THE CHIEF DEITIES. 

as to the fundamental ideas of the Ancient Egyptian 
religion. Yet although such expressions afford no proof 
of an original and recurring monotheism held as a creed 
by the Egyptian people, it cannot be proved from the 
inscriptions that no such conception existed in Ancient 
Egypt. In view of the repeated attempts to bring the 
Egyptian religion forward in evidence, now on the one 
side and now on the other, in the discussion concerning 
an early monotheism, the fact must be emphasized again 
and again that no trustworthy evidence whatever is as yet 
afforded to either side by our knowledge of that religion. 
It must never be forgotten that only a small part of the 
material left to us by Ancient Eg>'pt is as yet at our 
disposal; much still lies beneath the soil, and much still 
rests undisturbed in private and public collections. For 
the religious texts especially, very little has been done. 
Until more of these have been published and carefully 
studied it is impossible to obtain any certainty as to the 
nucleus and origins of the motley confusion now known 
to us as the Egyptian religion. In the study of 
Egyptian religion, as in all other branches of Egyptology, 
our knowledge is as yet very imperfect. We must not 
therefore conclude that the extra Egyptian tradition of 
certain facts and systems of thought is untrustworthy 
because the inscriptions and papyri have hitherto yielded 
us no testimony on their behalf. Many such conclusions 
have been emphatically asserted only to be proved 
erroneous on a closer examination of the texts, and others 
may at any time be refuted by some crucial discovery. 
Our knowledge of the subject is advanced by the 


HYMN TO Amen rA. hi 

statements of the inscriptions, not by their accidental 
silence. 

The longest, finest, and at the same time most in- 
structive of the hymns to Amen R^ which have come 
down to us is now preserved in the Gizeh Museum, in a 
copy made on papyrus and dating from the XXth Dynasty.* 
It is written in what may be called verse, the close of each 
line being marked by a red point. In the following 
translation each line represents one line of the hymn 
in the original. The arrangement of ideas and the 
parallelism of the parts recall the style of the Hebrew 
psalms, with the wording of which many sentences of the 
hymn closely correspond; though the comparison does 
not, of course, extend to the conception of the godhead. 
The text runs as follows : — 

Praise to Amen R&! 
To the bull in Heliopolis, to the chief of all the gods. 
To the beautiful and beloved god, 
Who giveth life by all manner of warmth, by 
All manner of fair cattle. 

Hail to thee, Amen RSl, lord of the throne of the two lands. 
Dwelling in Thebes, 

Husband of his Mother,' dwelling in his fields, 
Wide-ranging, dwelling in the Land of the South, 
Lord of the Libyans {Md^aii), ruler of Arabia {F^nt), 
Prince of heaven, heir of earth, 
The lord who giveth duration to things, duration to all things. 


* Pap. Bfilak, No. 17; Mariette, Fap. de Boulaq, ii., pis. 11- 
13 ; Reinisch, Chrestomathiet ii., pis. 45-47. C£ also GRfesAUX, 
Hymne d Amfnon-JRd, Paris, 1874; the latter, however, imputes 
to the text a more profound religious perception than seems to me 
possible. 

' For the meaning of this title, see above, p. 104. 


112 THE CHIEF DEITIES. 

Alone in his forms (?) in the midst of the gods, 
The goodly bull of the Ennead of the gods, 
The chief of all the gods, 
Lord of truth, father of the gods, 
Maker of men, former of the flocks, 
Lord of the things which are, former of fruit trees, 
Maker of herbage, who maketh the cattle to live. 
Fair Power,* made by Ptah, youth fair of love. 

^he gods give praise unto him ; 
Maker of things below and things above, he illuminateth 
The two lands, he traverseth the upper heaven in peace ; 
King of Upper and Lower Egypt, R4 the true of voice {mad- 

kheril)^ chief of the two lands, 
Great one of valour, lord of awe, 
Chief, making the earth in all its forms, 
Making the attributes of every god(?). 
The gods rejoice by reason of his beauties ; 
Acclamations are given to him in the great house (the temple 

of Amen), 
Solemn manifestations in the house of flame {t.e. when he is led 
forth in solemn procession). 

The gods love his perfume 
When he cometh from Arabia {PUnt) ; 
Prince of the dew, he traverseth the land of the Libyans, 
Who cometh fair of face [from] the divine land {ta neter^ 

Arabia) ; 
The gods gather as dogs round his feet. 
When they recognize his majesty as their lord. 
Lord of fear, great one of terror, 
Great of soul, mighty .... (?), 
Causing offerings to flourish (?), maker of plenty. 

Praises to thee, maker of the gods, 
Thou who didst raise the heaven on high, thou who didst put 
down {lit strike down) the earth. 

Pause, 
Wake in health (?), Min Amen {t,e. Amen as creator). 
Lord of the Everlasting, maker of Eternity, 

* For the meaning of the word sekhem, "power," or rather, the 
power incarnate in the figure of a deity, compare Wiedemann 
in Le Musion, xv., pp. 46 et seq, Cf. also pp. 242-3. 


HYMN TO Amen rA. 113 

Lord of adorations dwelling in Thebes, 

Established with thy two horns, fair of face, 

Lord of the uraeus crown, exalted by the two feathers, 

Beautiful of diadem, [exalted one] of the white crown of Upper 

Egypt,^ the kingly land and the two uraei are his(?). 
He is adorned (?) in his palace with the Sekhet crown,' the 

Nemmes cap,' and the Kheperesh helmet.* 
Fair of face, he seizeth the Ate/ crown,* 
Loving its south and its north (;>. the two divisions of 

Egypt which are symbolized by the crown) ; 
Lord of power (?), he seizeth the Ames sceptre;* 
Lord of protection, who holdeth the scourge,'^ 
Beautiful ruler, appearing with the white crown, 
Lord of rays, making light. 

The gods give praises unto him ; 
His two hands give gifts to him that loveth him. 
He casteth down his enemies by flames of fire, 
His eye it is which overthroweth the wicked, 
It casteth its lance at the devourer of N4, it causeth the 

serpent (?) to spit forth what it hath eaten (?).^ 
Hail to thee, R&, lord of truth ! 
Hidden is thine abode, lord of the gods ! 
Khepera in his bark. 

He spake words and the gods were created. 
T4m, maker of intelligent beings, 
How many soever they be ; making them to live. 
Distinguishing their complexions (?) (>>. of the different races) 

one from the other, 

* The crown of Upper and Lower Egypt YT, called in later times 
Pschent ^ 

' A tall cap with a pair of horns and a pair of feathers. 

• This sceptre has the form of y , with a scourge fixed to it. 

'A 

' This somewhat unmtelligible passage refers to the serpent Apep, 
and, as it seems, to a myth according to which R4 pierced this mon- 
ster and so compelled him to eject the prey that he had swallowed : 
of. above, p. 80. 

8 


114 THE CHIEF DEITIES. 

Hearing the prayer of him who is in affliction, 

Kindly of heart towards him who calleth upon him. 

He delivereth the timid from him who is of a froward heart ; 

He judgeth the cause of the poor, between the poor and the 

mighty. 
He is the lord of understanding, plenty is on his lips. 
He Cometh as the Nile to those who love him. 
Lord of sweetness, a great one of love. 
He [maketh] to live intelligent beings, 
He giveth movement to every one (lit. to every eye). 
He is made out of N^, 
Creating the rays of light. 
The gods rejoice in his beauties, 
Their hearts live when they behold him. 

Pause. 

R& exalted in Thebes, great of splendour in the Benben 
house (at Heliopolis), 

Ani (stable one), lord of the festival of the ninth day of the 
month. 

To whom is celebrated the feast of the sixth day of the 
month, and the feast of the quarter month, 

Sovereign, to whom Life, Prosperity, Health 1 lord of all the 
gods. 

He is seen in the midst of the horizon, 

Chief over all beings that are beneath (the sky) ; 

Hidden {amen) is his name to his children 

In his name of Amen (the hidden one). 
Hail to thee who art in peace ! 

Lord of joy, mighty one of diadems, 

Lord of the uraeus crown, exalted by the two feathers, 

Fair by the frontlet, exalted by the white crown. 

The gods love the sight of thee, 

The Sekhet crown is established upon thy forehead. 

Thy graces are moving, traversing the two lands ; 

Thy rays are shining forth from [thy] two eyes ; fair for man- 
kind is thy rising; 

Weary are the flocks when thou shinest (in all thy strength). 

Thy graces are in the sky of the south, thy sweet pleasant- 
ness in the sky of the north. 

Thy beauties conquer hearts. 


HYMN TO Amen ra. us 

Thy graces make weary the arms. 

The fair things thou hast fashioned make the hands to fall ; ^ 

Hearts fail at the sight of thee. 

Only form, who didst make all that is, one and only one, 
maker of all that have being ! 
Mankind went forth from his two eyes, 
The gods were created on his lips. 

He roaketh the herbage which maketh the cattle to live,' 
The fruit trees for men ; 
He maketh to live the fishes [in] the river, 
The fowls beneath the sky (?). 
He giveth breath to that which is in the egg; 
He maketh the grasshoppers to live, 
He maketh the birds to live, 
The creeping things and the flying, as well as what belongeth 

to them. 
He maketh provision for the mice in [their] holes ; 
He maketh to live the birds in every tree. 

Hail to thee, maker of all these ! 
One and only one, he hath many arms (?). 
When resting he watcheth over all who repose, 
Seeking good for his creatures. 
Amen who establishest {men) all things, 
TAm Harmakhis ! 

Praises are to thee when they (the creatures of Amen) all say : 
'' Praises to thee, for thou restest in us ; 
Obeisance' to thee for that thou didst form us! " 

Hail to thee from all flocks. 
Acclamations to thee from every land, 
To the height of heaven, to the width of earth, 
To the depth of the sea.* 


* /,e. "It is impossible to praise thee enough," adoration being 
offered in Egypt by uplifting the arms. 

' The word has for determinatives the figures of an ox, an ass, 
a pig, and a sheep. 

^ Le. prostration, /i/. "smelling the earth," the Egyptian 
expression of profound reverence. 

* Lit. " great green " ; often used for the Mediterranean, but also 
for other large sheets of water. 


Il6 THE CHIEF DEITIES. 

The gods bow before thy majesty; 

They exalt the spirits {da.ii) of him who formed them, 

They rejoice at the comings of him who begat them ; 

They say unto thee : " Approach in peace, 

Father of the fathers of all the gods, 

Thou who upholdest the heaven and puttest down the earth." 

Maker of those which are, former of those which have being, 
Sovereign, to whom Life, Prosperity, Health ! chief of the gods. 
We adore thy spirits {da.f2) even as thou madest us; 
Thy. creatures are we because thou hast borne us (?) ; 
We give praises unto thee, for thou restest in us. 

Hail to thee who didst make all that is ! 
Lord of truth, father of the gods, 
Maker of men, former of the flocks, 
Lord of com. 

Making to live the herds of the desert. 
Amen, bull fair of face, 
Beloved in Thebes, 

Great one of splendours in the Benben house. 
Taking again (?) the diadem in Heliopolis, 
Thou who judgedst the dispute between the Twins * in the great 

hall, -" 

Chief of the Great Ennead of the gods. 

One and only one, without his peer, 
Dwelling in Thebes, 
Ani in his divine ennead. 
He liveth in truth every day. 
Harmakhis in the east. 
He fashioneth earth, the silver and the gold, 
Real lapis lazuli for those who love him ; 
Balsam (?) and incense together in the land of the Libyans 

Fresh incense for thy nostril ; 

Fair of face coming [to] the Libyans, 

Amen R&, lord of the throne of the two lands, 

Dwelling in Thebes (<i//-/-«a), 

Ani dwelling in his sanctuary (ji^t)\ 


^ A reference to the occasion on which, according to the legend, 
R& gave final judgment at Heliopolis in the quarrel between the 
twin adversaries, Horus and Set. 


HYMN TO Amen rA. 117 

Patise. 
King is he when alone even as in the midst of the gods ; 
Many are his names, none knoweth their number; he riseth 

in the horizon of the east, he setteth in the horizon of 

the west; 
He overthroweth his enemies, 
[Giving] provisions (?) the day of each day, 
The morning of the birth Q) of each day. 
Thoth raiseth his eyes; 
He droopeth them before his splendour. 
The gods rejoice at his beauties, 
Those who are worshipping* extol him. 
Lord of the Sekti and of the Midet bark. 
Which traverse for thee Nil in peace, 
Thy crew rejoice 

When they see the overthrow of the wicked. 
Whose limbs are tasted by the knife. 
The flame devoureth him. 
Punished is(?) his soul for his iniquity, 
This wicked one who is saved by his legs (?).* 
The gods are in exultation. 
The crew of Ri are in peace; 
Heliopolis is in exultation. 
The enemies of T(km are overthrown. Thebes is in peace, 

Heliopolis is in exultation. 
The heart of the mistress of life' is glad, 
The enemies of her lord are overthrown. 
The gods of Babylon^ are in acclamation. 
The dwellers in Letopolis are in obeisance;* 
They behold him mighty in his power, 
As the powerful one of the gods ; truth,* lord of Thebes, 
In thy name, "Maker of Truth, Lord of Plenty, Bull of 

Offerings,*' 

The cynocephali who give praise to Ri. 

• A reference to the Apep serpent, which was conquered but not 
destroyed, and worsted in the fight on one day only to renew his 
attack upon the Sun on the following. 

' Name of the uraeus serpent, worn by the king on his forehead. 

* The fort opposite Memphis, on the east bank of the Nile. 

* I.e, in the act of ** smelling the earth." 

• Apparently this is here one of the titles of Amen. 


1 


Ii8 


THE CHIEF DEITIES. 


In thy name, "Amen, Bull {t\e. Husband) of his Mother, 

Maker of men. 

Who createdst the making of all that is," 

In thy name, "TAm Khepera." 

Great hawk, celebrated is [his] body; 

Fair of face, celebrated is his eye ; * 

His image is made [many] ells high, 

The two uraei fly on wings before him. 

The hearts of men fawn (like dogs) before him, 

The glorified ones go forth towards him, 

The two lands celebrate feasts at his appearing. 

Hail to thee, Amen R&, lord of the throne of the two lands ! 
Whose city loveth his rising. 

[This work] is completed 

in peace, 

as it was found.' 

Amen Ra is generally figured in 
human form ; he holds the sceptre 
alone, or the sceptre and symbol of 
life in his hand, and is crowned with 
the sun disk and two long feathers 
il, which rise either from a stiff 
cap m|, or else from a pair of 
ram's horns Zf/. He was sometimes 
coloured blue, probably because that 
was the colour of the heavens in 
which he ruled as Sun god ; ^ and he 


FIG. 19. 

AMEN RA. (l. D. III. 22.) 

Obelisk of Hatshepsd, 

atKarnak. 


^ Here, as elsewhere, the sun is regarded as the eye of the god. 

* The orthodox conclusion of Egyptian texts, corresponding to 
the "explicit feliciter** of the Middle Ages. 

' It has been brought to my notice that Amen is coloured green 
in the tomb of Seti I., at any rate. The precise colouring of the 
deities on the monuments, at present very little studied, would form 
a profitable subject of inquiry by one on the spot in Egypt, leading 
to interesting results in regard to the nature of the several divinities. 


AMEN RA. 


119 


has the horns of a ram, because in Thebes he was supposed 
to be incarnate in a ram. It must, however, be noted that, 
strictly speaking, the horns represented as standing out at 
the sides are not those of Amen, but those of KhnOm, and 
that in representations of the god with these horns a com- 
bination has taken place of the gods Amen and KhnOm, 
originally distinct : the horns of Amen curl round the 


FIG. 20. — Amen ra, his sacred rams and goose, (stela 

IN BERLIN MUSEUM.) 

ear.* The dromos of the temple of Amen was flanked 
along its length on both sides by colossal rams with 
colled horns, which guarded the approach to his sanctuary 
as representing the animals sacred to him. In Thebes 
the reverence for the ram in which the god was supposed 
to be incarnate was extended in a modified form to all 
rams, and they were held exempt from slaughter ; for 

1 Cf. Lepsius, Aeg, Zeit., 1877, pp. 8 etseq. 


I20 THE CHIEF DEITIES. 

since the god had vouchsafed to clothe himself in this 
form Its destruction was a crime ; in other Egyptian cities 
the animal was slaughtered for food without scruple. The 
Theban cult of the ram headed god Amen penetrated to 
the Oasis of Jupiter Amm6n, probably about the beginning 
of the New Kingdom, and there blended with a worship 
centring round a sacred stone which was probably of 
Semitic origin. Thence, about a thousand years later, 
it passed across the sea to Greece, where several temples 
were erected to Amen. Alexander the Great caused 
himself to be hailed as the son of Zeus Amm6n, and 
assumed the characteristic incurvated horns of the god of 
Thebes on coinage and elsewhere, thus familiarizing the 
whole Graeco-Oriental world with that deity. The oracles 
on which the power of the god of the Oasis was founded 
in the Greek world were delivered also in his native 
Thebes. Here, from the XXth to the XXIInd Dynasty, 
his counsel was taken, not only as regards important 
matters of church and state, but also in connexion with 
such comparative trifles as the identification of a thief.* 
The Theban kings saw in him whom they invoked as the 
Lord of Heaven and. of the Thrones of the Two Lands 
and King of the Gods, one who was in an especial sense 
their constant companion and counsellor. He it was 
who sent them forth to war; he fought at their side in 
battle ; he it was who got them the victory ; and to him 
therefore was given a great portion of the spoil. In all 
serious matters, even in connexion with testamentary 

^ A British Museum papyrus relating to an inquiry of this nature 
is discussed by Pleyte, Proc. Soc, Bib, Arch,, x., pp. 41 etseq. 


Amen rA. 


121 


arrangements, it was sought to ascertain his views ; 
judgments were ratified by him, and whoso opposed his 
sentences, upon him fell the divine curse.^ 


FIG. 21. — Amen ra as a goose, (stela in author's possession.) 

According to the inscriptions, intercourse between king 

' C£ Naville, Inscription historique de Pinodjem III,, Paris, 
1883 ; and Maspero, Les Momies royales de Deir-el-Bahari 
{Mem. du Caire, i. 4). 


122 THE CHIEF DEITIES. 

and god was arranged as follows. The king presented 
himself before the god and preferred a direct question, 
so framed as to admit of an answer by simple yes or no ; 
in reply the god nodded an affirmative, or shook his 
head in negation. This has suggested the idea that 
the oracles were worked by manipulating statues of 
divinities mechanically set in motion by the priests. 
But as yet no such statues have been found in the Valley 
of the Nile, and contrivances of this kind could have had 
no other object than to deceive the people, a supposition 
apparently excluded in this case by the fact that it was 
customary for the king to visit the god alone and in 
secret. Probably the king presented himself on such 
occasions before the sacred animal in which the god 
was incarnate, believing that the divine will would be 
manifested by its movements. 

MCt was the wife of Amen R^, " mistress of the gods, 
lady of heaven, eye of R^ " ; and in the city of Samhdld 
she was held to be the daughter of Ra. The chief centre 
of her worship was Asher, a spot south of Karnak. 
Here Amenophis III. built a temple dedicated to the 
goddess M(it, with a sacred lake attached to it. Votive 
statues representing the goddess lioness headed, both 
standing and seated, were dedicated here by the founder 
and by Sheshonk I. (the Shishak of the Bible) in such 
numbers that even in ancient times many were transferred 
to other Egyptian sanctuaries ; almost every great museum 
of the world now possesses one or more of them. In wall 
scenes M(it is more commonly represented in human form. 
The word milt means "mother," and thus itself denotes 


mOt— Ament. 


123 


the maternal function of the goddess in the Theban triad. 
The ideographic sign used to write her name, the image 
of a vulture, a\> is at the 


same time in Egyptian 
the sign for the word 
"mother." This fact was 
recognized by HorapoUo* 
in his work on hierogly- 
phics, written as late as 
the fifth century A.D., of 
which excerpts have come 
down to us in Greek. 

Ament, another Theban 
divinity, is sometimes 
named in the place of 
M(it; she, however, was 
not one of the genuine 
and original deities, but, 
as the construction of her 
name implies, merely an 
artificial creation. Con- 
sidering her derivation it 
is not surprising to find 
that Ament was in even 
closer affinity to Amen 
than M6t herself, being 
represented with the head 
of a sheep, as correspond- 
ing to the ram's head of 


FIG. 22. — mOt. (L. D. III. 221, b.) 
Karnak, Hypostyle Hall, XXth Dynasty. 


^ The best publication of this work is by Leemans, Amsterdam, 1835. 


124 THE CHIEF DEITIES. 

her husband Notwithstanding the similarity of name 
this Ament has no connexion whatever with the goddess 
Amenti — the Greek Amenthes — the personification of the 
Underworld. 

KhunsO is in the first place a lunar deity, and as such 
corresponds almost completely to Thoth; at Hermopolis 
and EdfO the two deities were occasionally fused into one 
under the name of KhfinsO-Thoth. His name, too, which 
is derived from the root khens — " to traverse " — alludes 
to his connexion with the heavenly bodies. He was 
figured as a hawk headed god crowned with the lunar 
crescent and the solar disk ; both these symbols being 
proper to all lunar deities : to Thoth, to Ah, who is purely 
a moon god, and others. In its present form, his great 
temple at Thebes, situate between that of Amen and that 
of Mflt, was begun by Rameses HI., and completed and 
decorated by kings of the XX 1st Dynasty, About that 
time, as would appear from the Bentresht Stela,^ KhOnsA 
was definitely resolved into two distinct forms, the one 
person being KhfinsO, the Fair-resting One in Thebes, 
and the second KhOns<i, the Carrier out of Plans. The 
first is mentioned in ancient texts ; to the second no early 
reference is known, but he appears in inscriptions of the 
XXVIth Dynasty and of the Ptolemaic period.^ 

By the Greeks KhfinsQ was sometimes compared to 
Herakles, not that the latter had ever been apprehended 
as a lunar divinity, but possibly because KhOnsdl may have 
been regarded as a sun god. We have at least some 
testimony in favour of such a view, for at Kom Ombo 
* C£ pp. 275-7. • Froc. Soc. Bib, Arch,, xiii., p. 274, 


KHONsO— MENT. 


125 


Khftnsft took on the composite form of Khftnsft-Hor, and 
in Thebes that of Khftnsu-Shd and of Khftnsft-Ra. Thus 
it is clear that he could occasionally assume a solar 
character, as his hawk head would also indicate. 

Ment, Greek Month, ranked next in importance to Amen 
among the chief gods of the Theban 
nome. Here he was worshipped in 
a great temple near Karnak, in 
Medamot, in Tadd, and in Erment 
on the opposite bank, in fact in so 
many places as to suggest the idea 
that he was the true god of the 
nome and had preceded Amen in 
that capacity. Since, however, his 
name seems to be radically con- 
nected with dmetiy it is possible that 
both gods were originally identical 
and only subsequently differentiated. 
Ment was emphatically a god of 
war, fighting with the Egyptian 
army in their battles, and granting 
might and victory to the king. In 
later times he was often combined 
with the Sun god as Ment R&, and 
as such he stands in the prow of the 
solar bark armed with a lance and 
ready to pierce the enemies who oppose the progress of the 
Sun. In Erment Rlt Tafti was recognized as his wife, but 
in Tadd, AnIt or Hathor. Ment is represented as hawk 
headed and as wearing the headdress of Amen, ^. In 


FIG. 23. 

MENT. (l. D. III. 1 24, a.) 

Kamak, Hypostyle Hall, 

Rameaes I. 


126 


THE CHIEF DEITIES. 


Erment his sacred animal was a bull, Bakh, the Bacis of 
the classic writers ; and it appears as if the title " strong 
bull" borne by the kings of the Theban dynasties was 
borrowed from this animal. Bacis is designated by the 
texts as the "living soul of Ri," that is to say, an incarna- 
tion of the god ; thus proving that when this name was 


FIG. 24. — BAKH, THE BULL OF MENT. ( GRBBAUT, «* MUs£e," VI. I.) 

Stela fi:x>m Fimeiary Temple of Prince Uazmes, at Thebes. 

first bestowed the fusion of Ment with Rk had already 
been accomplished. The animal must have been wor- 
shipped also at Tadd, where the god is represented as 
wearing his usual headdress, but with the head and horns 
of a bull. The cult of Ment is prominent in many of the 
later texts ; for when Thebes had lost her political and 


MIN. 127 

social supremacy Erment became the capital of the district, 
and many inscriptions relating to Ment, or rather to Ment 
R&, were then placed in temples at Kamak originally 
dedicated to Amen and his cycle. The mention of Ment 
in the older texts is chiefly confined to figures of speech 
in which the king is said to be brave as Ment, to have 
conquered his foes like Ment, and the like ; but such 
expressions afford no data for the understanding of the 
nature and cult of the deity in question. As the Egyptian 
war god he is occasionally placed in a certain antithesis 
to the Semitic Baal, and the combined might of Ment 
and Baal, when granted to a king, was esteemed the very 
epitome of strength. 

MiN * was the nome god of PanopoHs and an important 
deity, more or less worshipped throughout the whole of 
Egypt He is represented as an ithyphallic figure : the 
right arm is upraised and waves a scourge above his 
head. Behind the god there is generally a shrine with 
trees upon or near it His sacred animal was the ram. 
He is the god of the generative power of nature : hence 
it was to him that the harvest festivals werel dedicated 
as a sign of gratitude for the abundance which he caused 
to spring forth from the earth ; and hence also certain 
gods — particularly Amen R4 — were identified with him 
when referred to as " husbands of their mothers," i.e. as 
begetters of their divine sons." 

^ The name, almost invariably written by an ideogram, has been 
read by Egyptologists as Khem or Amsi, as well as Miti. Variants 
of Greek times give the correct pronunciation, Min, 

* C£ p. 104. 


128 THE CHIEF DEITIES. 

Khnum or Khnef, the Khnumis or Kneph of the 
Greeks, who was specially worshipped in the neighbour- 
hood of the first cataract, was regarded, as his name would 
indicate, as the " Modeller." In many Egyptian texts 
he is set forth as being the creator, " he who created all 
that is, who formed that which is existent, the father of 
fathers, the mother of mothers " ; " he who constructed 
men, who made the gods, who was father in the be- 
ginning"; "the creator of the heaven, the earth, the 
Underworld, the water, the hills " ; " he who formed fowl, 
fish, wild animals, and all creeping things, in pairs, male 
and female." Man he had formed and turned upon a 
potter's wheel ; even under the New Kingdom it was 
sometimes believed that the Pharaoh had been so made, 
and in the " Tale of the Two Brothers " we read how, at 
the command of Ra Harmakhis, KhnClm made a beautiful 
woman, and "the essence of all the gods was in her."* 
According to other texts, he was also a cosmogonical 
deity; a late inscription at Esneh informs us that "he 
raised the sky upon its four pillars, he uplifted it from 
eternity." 

His sacred animal was a ram, and he is usually 
represented as ram headed, with horns horizontally ex- 
tended, ^. As time went on Khnftm was combined 
with Ra, and at Abaton, near Philae, the sacred ram was 
called the "living soul of RV while in Heliopolis he 
corresponded to Osiris and his ram was worshipped as 
an incarnation of that god. The association of these 
deities with this form of incarnation was in every case 

1 Pa^. d' Orbiney, p. 9. Cf. Petrie, Egyfiian Tales^ il, pp. 50-1. 


HEKT. 


129 


guided by the idea that the generative power in the 
animal was identical with the force by which life is re- 
newed in nature continually, and in man after death. 

Hekt, the frog headed goddess, was sometimes con- 
sidered to be the wife of the 
ram god ; she was also sup- 
posed to be a form of Hathor 
and the mother of Aroeris. 
Although frequent reference 
is made to her in the texts, 
we learn nothing as to her 
nature or functions: under 
the Old Kingdom great men 
prided themselves on being 
"prophets'* of truth and of 
Hekt The facts that she is 
mentioned and figured on sar- 
cophagi, and that lamps dating 
from Coptic times bear the 
image of a frog with the leg- 
end " I am the resurrection," 
show that she played some 
part in the doctrine of the 
resurrection. The line of 
thought which suggested this 
association probably had its rise in the old Egyptian belief, 
often mentioned by Greek writers, that frogs were bom of 
the mud which the Nile fertilized at the annual inundation. 
It was even asserted that animals had been observed when 
half their bodies still consisted of unformed mud. Hence 

9 


no. 25. — HXKT. (WILKINSON, 

NO. 502.) 

Ptolemaic or Roman. 


I30 


THE CHIEF DEITIES. 


the Egyptians came to believe, not only in the spontaneous 
generation of the frog, but further that this supposed 
phenomenon was a reason for considering that the first 
living beings originated in the Valley of the Nile. 

Sati is a goddess associated with KhnClm more com- 

&^ 

o 


no. 26.->KHnCm, SATX.T, AND AnCkT. (l. D. III. 63, d,) 
Temple ofThothmes III. at Ibrim. 

monly than Hekt: she, KhnClm, and AnClkt formed the 
triad of Elephantine. Her titles " Lady of Heaven, Mistress 
of the Two Lands, Chief of all the Gods," led the Greeks 
to identify her with Hera, to whom she had no other 
resemblance. She plays no part in the myths at present 


TRIAD OF ELEPHANTINE. 13I 

known to us, but is mentioned in several texts as the daughter 
of R^. She is represented as wearing the vulture head- 
dress, the horns of a cow, and the crown of Upper Egypt 

AnOkt, Greek Anuki, is compared to Hestia, for which 
again no intrinsic reason can. be discerned. The relation 
to the king sometimes attributed to her is characterized in 
a text by these words : " He was a son of KhnClm, born of 
Sati, nursed by AnOki." She appears on the monuments 
as a woman with the sign of life in her hand and a crown 
of feathers on her head, '^uj. This feather headdress sug- 
gests a negro divinity ; and indeed the high honour in 
which she was held from the cataracts southward and the 
rare occurrence of her worship in the north alike point 
to a Nubian origin. Her title " lady of Sati " has misled 
some writers into regarding her as an Asiatic goddess, but 
" Sati " as a place name denotes not Asia only, but also 
the island of Sehel near Philae, which was the chief centre 
of her worship and from which this title is derived 

Ptah, transliterated Phtha by the Greeks, and by them 
identified with Hephaestos, bore a name which is probably 
derived from the root ////, " to open," especially as used in 
the ritual term " opening of the mouth." In the inscrip- 
tions there is apparently no trace of any mythological 
event connected with this name, but Porphyrius,^ who 
was well informed in Egyptian matters, tells us that the 
god came forth from an egg which had issued from the 
mouth of Kneph. Ptah is represented as a bandaged 
mummy ; and the pedestal upon which his figure was 
placed was shaped like a cubit rod, which is the sign for 
' EUSEBIUS, Praefaraiio Evangelica^ iii. 11. 


132 


THE CHIEF DEITIES. 


truth and just measurement, |fl. Generally he wears a 
tassel hanging from the back of his neck, in form some- 
thing like a pendent bell shaped flower, ^. As to the 
significance of this there has been much idle conjecture, 
^^^^jj;;-:;:r=r===2;^ but an examination of the more 
r^~^ X^T^^JI^ V detailed representations shows it to 
^ """^ ^' be here nothing more than the 

so called mendt} generally used 
as a counterpoise to prevent the 
necklace from falling too low in 
front The inscriptions afford no 
warrant for ascribing to it any 
mythological significance in refer- 
ence to the god. 

In Memphis, where Ptah with 
Sekhet and Nefer Tdm or ImClthes 
formed the divine triad, he was 
held to have been the first King 
of Egypt and the creator of the 
world, and therefore bore the titles : 
" Father of the mighty fathers (the 
other gods), father of the begin- 
nings, he who created the sun egg 
and the moon egg." A bas relief 
at Philae, with an accompanying 
and explanatory inscription, dis- 
plays him in his composite form 
of Ptah TatOnen turning the egg 
of sun or moon upon a potter's wheel. He is also 
' Compare below, p. 295. 


FIG. 27. — PTA^. (l. d. hi. 

143. «•) 
Karnak, Hypostyle Hall, XiXth 

Dynasty. 


PTAH TATIJnEN. 


133 


called the "creator of his own image, he who created 
himself, who establishes truth, king of both lands, lord of 
heaven," etc. In the Book of the Dead it is stated that he 
performs the ceremony of "opening the mouth" for the 
dead, as he had once performed it for the dead gods ; 


no. 28. — PTAH TAT{h(EN. (R0SELLXNI| " MON. DKL CULTO/' PL. 21.) 
Philae, Roman. 

but in all likelihood this function of his was merely evolved 
out of his name. 

Ptah is often found in combination with other deities. 
Thus there were Ptah dten en pety " Ptah the sun disk of 
heaven," a sun god of whom it is said " he enlightens the 
earth with his rays"; Ptah NQ, "the father of the gods," a 
form of manifestation of the primeval waters; Ptah Hdpi, 


134 THE CHIEF DEITIES. 

" Ptah the Nile," who sent the inundation, and by its 
agency exhibited his creative powers. 

Ptaij Tanen is another of these composite deities, 
and combines Ptah with the somewhat rare god Tanen 
or TATt)NEN, who appears to have been an earth god, a 
counterpart of Seb. Ptah Tanen, however, is not infrequent 
We find him, for example, at Abd Simbel, where he is 
accounted the father of Rameses II., and an inscription 
says: "So saith Ptah Tanen, wearing the high feathers, 
equipped with two horns ; he who begets the gods every 
day, * I am thy {jx, Rameses II.'s) father, who begot thee 
as a god to make thee King of Upper and Lower Egypt 
in my place ; I gave unto thee the lands which I created.' " 
The figure of the god here referred to is that of Ptah, 
except for the addition of a headdress consisting of two 
horns and two ostrich feathers, i|;, symbols of the truth 
and justice ascribed to him as attributes. In his hand 
is a sceptre, or occasionally a scourge, ^\ but in the 
latter case we have to do with a further combination, in 
which the god is connected with the familiar forms — 

Pta^i Osiris, Ptah Sokaris, or Ptah Sokar Osiris, 
which were generally supposed to be incarnate in the Apis 
bull at Memphis, and are the subjects of innumerable 
texts. As to the elements of this composite deity, Osiris 
is the well known god of the dead, while of Sokaris — 
Egyptian Seker — to whom we have already referred on 
p. 92, in dealing with the Sun's passage through the 
Underworld, little is known. He seldom appears except 
in combination, and has then almost entirely lost his 
original nature. He was primarily a sun god, the incarna- 


SOKARIS. 


135 


tion of which was kept in the sacred bark hennH. The 

bark is represented as standing on a pedestal, ^SZ; the 

stem is adorned with the head of a gazelle, and a disk 

crowned hawk which represents Sokaris himself is perched 

upon the cabin. At the festival of the god ^ his bark was 

borne in solemn procession round the walls of the temple 

of Sokaris. It was, of course, in Memphis that this festival 

was celebrated with the greatest 

pomp, but it was also held in other 

religious centres with certain local 

modifications, such as adding the 

Sekti bark to the procession. The 

festival was connected with the 

winter solstice, with the "little 

sun," as the Egyptians called it 

at that time. In the Ptolemaic 

period it fell on the morning of 

the 26th Khoiak (22nd December), 

while in earlier times it would 

seem to have been held in the 

evening. An Egyptian text states, 

"The Sun is great as Horus, the 

Sun is little as Sokaris," but this 

idea was of later growth, and arose 

at a time when it was sought to 

safeguard the individualities of the various solar deities 

by associating each with an appearance of the sun at a 

particular lime of the day or year, whereas originally Ra, 

* For the festival see Brugsch in Revue ^gy^tologique, i., 
pp. 42 et seq. 


no. 29. 

SOKAR OSIRIS, (l. D. III. ^2.) 

From Stela of Amenophis III. 
at Thebes. 


136 


THE CHIEF DEITIES. 


Horus, and Sokaris had all the same significance and were 
simply sun gods. The sophistry in these attributions is 
moreover obvious from the fact that another distinction 
between Sokaris and RA was proposed, the former being 
differentiated as the god of the 3un at night It was this 
interpretation which led to the combination of Sokaris 
with Osiris, King of the Under- 
world. Moreover he gradually be- 
came the god Kar i^oxvv of the 
Memphite necropolis, where his 
name still survives in that of the 
village of Saqqarah. Sokaris is 
usually represented as hawk headed 
like R&, but without the solar disk, 
and bearing, besides the sceptre, 
the scourge and crook carried by 
Osiris as symbols of his rule. 

These forms of Ptah com- 
pounded with Osiris and Sokaris 
united the attributes of the three 
gods; the resulting deity was at 
once creator of the world. Sun god, 
and king of the dead, and became 
the centre of conceptions of a 
pantheistic ruling and embracing of 
all things, and of such thoughts as those expressed in the 
Hymn to Amen RSl (pp. 1 1 1 ^/ seg,). This Ptah was, how- 
ever, more closely associated with life in the world to come 
than with the characteristics of a solar deity, whereas the 
reverse was the case with Amen RA. Ptah has no essential 


pig. 30.— one of the khn^- 
mO. (arundale akd bo- 

NOMX, GALL. VIL lO.) 

From Sutuette in British 
Museum. 


THE KHNOmO. 


137 


connexion whatever with the Greek Hephaestos ; so far as 
the evidence of the inscriptions goes, he was never a fire god, 
as, arguing from this identification, it has been thought. 
The only grounds for the comparison appear to be that 
Ptah was described as a modeller, and that his close fitting 
cap is su^estive of that of a smith. 

In the work of creation Ptah had been helped by the 
KhnOmO, "the modellers," who 
were generally counted as his chil- 
dren, although later as those of R^. 
They were represented as dwarfs, 
with big heads, crooked legs, very 
long arms, and long moustaches ^ : 
grotesque figures which, as Hero- 
dotus tells us,' excited the derision 
of Kambyses in the temple of He- 
phaestos at Memphis. Countless 
little glazed earthenware figures of 
these gods are found in Egyptian 
tombs ; for even as once the 
Khndmd had helped in the mak- 
ing of the world, so would they 
help to reconstruct in all its 
members the body of the dead 
man in whose tomb they were laid. 

Sekhet was recognized in Memphis as the wife of 

Ptah and the mother of Nefer TOm or Im{ithes. She is 

represented as a lioness headed woman crowned with the 

' Query, snakes ? (Trans.) 

• Herodotus, ill. 37 : of. Wiedemann, Herodofs Zweites Buchy 
p. 236. 


FIG. 31. 
SEKHET. (L. D. III. 201, </.) 

Speos at Gebel Silaileh, XlXth 
Dynasty. 


138 


THE CHIEF DEITIES. 


solar disk and uraeus serpent. Broadly speaking, she is one 
in nature with other feline headed goddesses : the lioness 
headed Tefndt, Mdt of Thebes, Pakht of the Speos 
Artemidos, and the cat or sometimes lioness headed BAST 
of Bubastis — all of whom represented the variable power 
of the sun, from genial warmth to scorching heat Thus 
a Philae text states in reference to 
I sis Hathor, who there personified 
all goddesses in one : " Kindly is 
she as Bast, terrible is she as Sek- 
het" As conqueror of the enemies 
of the gods Sekhet carries a knife 
in her hand, for she it was who, 
under the name of the Eye of Ra, 
entered upon the task of destroying 
mankind.^ Other texts represent 
her as ancestress of part of the 
human race.* 

Nefer TCm, whom the local 
myths represent as the son of 
Sekhet, of Pakht, or of Bast, is 
in the Book of the Dead an 
unimportant deity mentioned in 
connexion with the doctrine of 
immortality. He was figured as a man crowned with 
an upspringing lotus flower, a symbol of the resurrection 
and of his power to grant continuance of life in the world 
to come. At a late epoch, from about the XX Vlth dynasty 


no. 32. 

NEFER TUB! . (L. D. III. 2O4, C.) 

TombofScUII. 


* See pp. 59 et seq, 

* Cf. LEFjiBURE, Tombeau de Seti /., ii., pis. 4, 5. 


IMHETEP. 


139 


onwards, large numbers of his statuettes were made in 
bronze and in glazed ware ; but beyond this fact we have 
no precise knowledge of the reasons for his special worship 
at this period. At any rate, the importance of Nefer TClm 
was much less than that of 
ImOthes, who more usually 
occupies his place in the 
Memphite triad. 

The name of Imhetep 
signifies "he who comes in 
peace " ; the Greeks tran- 
scribed it ImOthes, and 
likened him to Asklepios. 
He is represented as a young 
man wearing a close fitting 
cap. In the Underworld 
his functions also related to 
human immortality, while 
on earth he cured men of 
their diseases by means of 
medicine and of magic. He 
was generally regarded as 
a learned deity, and, in the 
attitude of reading a half 
opened papyrus roll spread (statuette in berlin museum.) 

out upon his knees, in which he is frequently depicted, he 
seems to be performing the office of chief kher heby z>. 
chief of those priests whose office it was to recite funerary 
prayers and formulas.^ Small bronze statuettes of the god 
* Cf. below, pp. 236-7. 


FIG. 33. — IMHETEP. 


140 


THE CHIEF DEITIES. 


are very often found, and are generally remarkable for taste- 
ful execution ; nearly all date from Saite and Greek times, 
when the worship of Im(ithes was much affected in Egypt 
Neith is a goddess frequently mentioned by the Greeks ; 
she, Osiris, and Horus formed the triad of Sais.* She is 
named in some of the oldest inscriptions, but did not attain 
to any prominence until the time 
of the XXVIth Dynasty, which 
originated from Sais ; but even then 
her real influence did not extend 
beyond the Delta. She is repre- 
sented as a woman with the green 
face and hands characteristic of 
deities of the Underworld. As a 
warrior she is generally figured 
with bow and arrows, and it was 
owing to this circumstance that 
the Greeks identified her with 
Athene. She wears the crown of 
Lower Egypt. The ideogram for 
her name is the weaver's shuttle, 
a device which the Libyans wove 
into their clothing and tattooed 
upon their arms, so that she would seem to have been 
originally a Libyan goddess.^ In Egyptian mythology she 
ranks as mother of the gods and of R^ in particular, and 
hence, even in the XVIIIth Dynasty, Sais is called the abode 
of the mother of the gods. Subsequently she was confused 

^ Cf. Mallet, Le Culte de Neit d Sais, Paris, 1889. 
' On the Libyan origin of Neith cf. Petrie, Nagada and Ballas, 
p. 64. (Trans.) 


FIG. 34. 

(WILKINSON, NO. 5 10.) 


NEKHEBIT AND UAZIT. 


141 


with Isis, and took the place of the latter in the Osirian 
myth. The monuments describe the festivals of Sais, of 
which Herodotus also gives an account, and which were 
dedicated principally to Neith, as the ordinary feasts 
of Isis. 


FIG. 35. — NEKHKBIT. (WILKINSON, PL. XU) 

Nekhebit and Cazit are often set over against each 
other in the inscriptions as tutelary goddesses of Upper 
and Lower Egypt ; little more is known of either goddess. 

The chief seat of the former was at El 

Kab, and the Greeks identified her with 

Eileithyia, the 

goddess of 
birth. She was usually re- 
presented as a vulture hover- 
ing over the king, tfazit 
was more particularly wor- 
shipped in the Delta; she 
was the Buto of the Greeks, 
who compared her to Leto 
and ascribed oracles to her. 
She is represented either as a winged serpent or as a 
woman. Occasionally, when Nekhebit and Oazit are 
named tc^ether, both take the same form : as winged uraei^ 


FIG. 36. 

UAZrr. (WILKINSON, PL. XLI.) 


142 


THE CHIEF DEITIES. 


vultures, or women. In the Osirian m5^h Buto was the 
guardian of Horus, whom Isis gave into her charge while 
she went forth to seek the body of Osiris.* 

MaA.T,' the daughter of R^, is the Themis of the Greeks. 
She was figured as a woman wearing upon her head an 
ostrich feather, the symbol of truth. She was the goddess 
of Truth and Justice, and hence was oc- 
casionally represented with bandaged eyes, 
since Justice judges without respect of 
persons. In the Underworld she was pre- 
sent at the weighing of the heart. She is 
mentioned in some of the oldest texts ; 
it was esteemed an honour to be one of 
her priests; and gods and kings of all 
periods professed that they lived by and 
from her. Yet she has no place in myth- 
ology. 

Hathor also was a goddess of whom 
much mention is made, but no distinct 
m5^h related. Her name means the 
** Abode of Horus," and is ideographically 
written by a sign consisting of the ground 
plan of a fortress and a standing hawk 
within it, 1^1. She was the goddess of 
love and joy, to whom many festivals were 
dedicated, and whose magnificent temple 
at Denderah is still comparatively uninjured. Here she was 
esteemed the sum and substance of feminine godhead, and 

» Wiedemann, Herodofs Zweites Buck, p. 558. 

• Wiedemann, Annales du Musee Guimet, x., pp. 581 etseq. 


FIG. 37. 

XAA.T. (l. D. 111. 

223,0 
SteU in Hammamat 
Valley, XXth Dyn- 
asty. 


^ATHOR. 


143 


all goddesses were considered as forms or attributes of 
Hathor worshipped under different names, so that, ac- 
cording to the priests of Denderah, ail prayers to them 
were in reality addressed to Hathor. 

(Another goddess bearing the same name and entitled 
Lady of the Underworld was of independent origin. She 
sometimes took the place of Niit in 
giving water to the souls of the dead 
from the midst of a sycomore. Of in- 
dependent origin were also the seven 
Hathors who are said in the inscrip- 
tions to help the queen at childbirth 
and who play the part of fairy god- 
mothers in the tales.) 

Hathor is generally represented as 
a woman, sometimes with the ears, 
the horns, or even the head of a cow, 
that being the animal sacred to her. 

Sebak, the Sukhos of the Greeks,* 
was represented either in the likeness 
of his sacred animal, the crocodile, or 
else as crocodile headed. Two distinct 
deities were comprised under this 
name. First, there was Sebak a sun 
god, who was usually combined with 
R^ and especially worshipped at 
Ombos, where the sun god Aroeris was the local deity. 
And, secondly, there was Sebak the counterpart of Osiris. 
According to certain texts at Denderah, Osiris was wor- 
* See illustration, p. 192. 


no. 38. 

I^ATHOR. (UD. III. 124,6.) 

Kamak, Hypostyle HaU, 
XlXth Dynasty. 


144 


THE CHIEF DEITIES. 


shipped under the name of Sebak in the Libyan nome, 
and especially in the city of Apis ; while a myth of Upper 
Egypt relates that it was upon the back of a crocodile that 
the body of Osiris was borne to Philae. But Sebak was 


FIG. 39. — SEBAk. (statuette IN BERLIN MUSEUM.) 

also occasionally reckoned as an evil deity. The croco- 
diles sacred to him were held to be the associates of Set 
in the Underworld, and men sought deliverance from 
them on earth by means of incantations. Although 


HAPI. 


145 


throughout a considerable part of the country fear of the 
god to whom the creatures belonged prevented their being 
regularly hunted down, nevertheless in districts where the 
worship of Sebak did not prevail, this sport was a favourite 
pastime, especially among the nobles of the Old Kingdom. 
Hapi, or the Nile, was the subject of one of the great 
national cults, and in his honour the 
largest number, or at any rate the 
most widely observed, of the Egyp- 
tian festivals were celebrated. As 
Libanius* tells us, the god was sup- 
posed to be so exacting in regard to 
these solemnities that, if his feast 
was not kept rightly, he refused 
to grant a favourable inundation. 
Magnificent temples were raised to 
him at Nilopolis, near Memphis, 
at Heliopolis, and other places, and 
were richly endowed by the kings. 
The god of the river was represented 
as a fat man with the breasts of a 
woman, to symbolize fertility, and 
his worshippers thought to honour 
him by their own effeminacy. On his 
head was a crown of flowers. Some- 
times he was resolved into the Nile of Upper and the Nile of 
Lower Egypt, the lotus being considered emblematic of the 


FIG. 40. 
[API. (l. D. III. 175, </.) 

StdaatGebelSiUUeh, 
Runesesll. 


» OroHo pro Templis. References to the Nile by the ancient 
writers are collected by Jablonski, Pantheon Aegyftiorum, iv., 
pp. 1^0 etseq, 

10 


146 THE CHIEF DEITIES. 

former and the papyrus of the latter ; a design consisting of 
both plants tied together formed a favourite subject for the 
decoration of the royal throne, as typifying the king's rule 
over Upper and Lower Egypt, ^^. Sometimes the person- 
ality of HApi was still further subdivided, and every nome 
had its Nile god with a more or less complete individuality. 
A recognized Egyptian method of presenting to the eyes 
a picture of all Egypt doing homage to Pharaoh was to 
draw a procession of the Nile gods following each other 
in single file and presenting their gifts to the king. Hclpi 
had as his associate deities the god Ka, "father of the gods," 
who bore a frog's head surmounted by a scarabaeus ; the 
gods HC, Zefa, and Resef, who collectively represented 
food or plenty ; NeperA, the goddess of grain ; and the 
snake headed or snake bodied Renni)t, goddess of the 
harvest 

There are many hymns in praise of the Nile god and 
all his benefactions to Egypt ; and more especially of his 
inundation. The texts are found on papyri, on stelae, and 
on the walls of cliffs, and their contents are often supposed 
to be spoken by the king. The following are some of the 
principal passages of one such hymn, which was engraved 
upon the rocks at Gebel Silsileh in Upper Egypt by com- 
mand of Rameses II. ; and in duplicate by command of his 
son and successor Merenptah ; and again by Rameses 1 11.^ 
They will serve to show the general manner and style of 
these hymns in their most interesting form. 

" The living and beautiful Nile who loveth Nfl, the father 
of the gods and of the divine cycle, he who dwelleth in the 
* Cf. Stern, Aeg. Zezt, 1873, PP- 129 etseq. 


HYMN TO THE NILE. 147 

river; Plenty (M), Riches (ka), Food (resef, — determined 
by the signs for fowl and fish — ) of Egypt, who maketh all 
men to live by his riches (ka), who is venerable upon his 
path, who hath plenty (M) at his fingers. Men rejoice at 
his coming. Thou art alone, thou createdst thyself, none 
knoweth the place in which thou art (the source or spring 
in which the Nile was supposed to dwell). On the day 
when thou comest forth from thyself (the beginning of the 
inundation), then is every one full of joy. Thou art lord 
of many fish and of gifts ; thou givest food (resef, — fowl 
and fish as determinative — ) unto Egypt. The divine cycle 
knoweth not where thou art Thou art its life, for at thy 
coming their offerings increase, their altar is filled with 
plenty, they shout for joy at thine appearing. Thou dost 
provide for us that which is needful that men may live, 
even as R^ when he ruled this land." 

Then follow a eulogy of the king and his command to 
institute two festivals in honour of the Nile, " father of all 
the gods, prince of the waters, who feedeth Egypt, from 
whose rising come plenty, and riches, and life to all." 


CHAPTER VI. 

FOREIGN DEITIES. 

'T^HE Egyptians did not exclude foreign deities from 
-*- their pantheon. They never questioned the divinity 
of the gods of the races with which they came in contact, 
but accepted it in each case as an established fact. To 
them an exceptionally powerful nation was in itself a 
proof of that nation's possession of an exceptionally 
mighty god, whom the dwellers in the Valley of the Nile 
were therefore eager to receive into the ranks of Egyptian 
deities, that they might gain his protection for themselves 
by means of prayers and offerings, and at the same time 
alienate his affections from his native land. The acquisition 
of a god necessarily involved the acquisition of his king- 
dom ; for to Egyptian thought, as indeed to that of the 
old Oriental world in general, a war between two nations 
was primarily a war between their gods, and the people 
without a powerful god was the sure prey of a neighbour 
more fortunate in this respect. Among the peoples whose 
gods the Egyptians had opportunities of appropriating, 
the Libyans, the Semitic Asiatics, and the Hamitic and 
negro races of Ethiopia were especially plundered. 

It is probable that certain Libyan gods had already 
been appropriated at the beginning of Egyptian history, 
in times of which we have no historical tradition ; among 

148 


LIBYAN AND ASIATIC DIVINITIES. 1 49 

them apparently were Bast and Neith. These two 
goddesses were worshipped in the western parts of the 
Delta, where the majority of the population were Libyan ; 
but even under the dynasties which sprang from Bubastis 
and Sais, the chief centres of their worship, they never 
attained to importance throughout the rest of the land, 
especially where the population was more purely Egyptian, 
as in Upper Egypt. 

For the Egyptian appropriation of Asiatic divinities * we 
have better historical evidence. Among such deities Baal, 
Astarte, Anta, Reshp<i, and Kedesh call for special notice. 

Baal, the Egyptian Bdl, first became known to the 
Egyptians as the chief god of nations with whom, at the 
beginning of the New Empire, they were at war for 
centuries: not with invariable success. It was in the 
course of these wars that the worship of Baal was intro- 
duced into Egypt, and the Ramessides had a special 
predilection for calling themselves as brave and as mighty 
as Baal in heaven. He had apparently no place in 
Egyptian mythology; but since his name in writing is 
usually followed by the image or by the sacred animal of 
the god Set, there would appear to have been a recognized 
affinity between the two gods, and, as a matter of fact, 
the name of Baal is substituted for that of Set in one of 
the texts of EdfCl relating to the legend of the Winged 

* The collection, elucidation, and comparison of all the information 
relating to these deities which is to be found in the texts is a great 
desideratum in Egyptology. The notices of Ed. Meter, Zeitschr. 
d, Deuisch, Morg, Gesch.t xxi., pp. "jitet seq., are too defective to be 
considered as forming an authoritative work on the subject (W. 
Max Mt^LLER, Asien undEuropa nach Altaegyj^tiscken Denkma- 
lern, pp. 311 et seq.j has specially dealt with this subject. — ^Trans.) 


ISO FOREIGN DEITIES. 

Sun Disk.^ In Egypt Baal was regarded as a god of 
the sky, — a conception which fairly corresponds to his 
original nature, — ^and as a great but essentially a destructive 
deity. Broadly speaking, his worship was confined to the 
eastern part of the Delta, where the Semitic population 
was proportionately large : his chief temple was in the 
fortified frontier city of Tanis. 

ASTARTE was worshipped in several Egyptian temples.* 
An inscription dating from the XXIst Dynasty mentions 
a priest of Memphis who served both her and the moon- 
god Ah ; and in Ptolemaic times a small chapel dedicated 
to her stood near the Serapeum. It must have been either 
this chapel or an earlier one on the same site to which, by 
a curious misconception, Herodotus refers as the temple of 
the " strange Aphrodite," whom he further confounds with 
the Helen of Homer. The western quarter of Tanis was 
dedicated to Amen, the southern to Sfttekh, the northern 
to Bftto, and the eastern to Astarte, to whom also a 
temple seems to have been established not far from Tanis, 
on the shores of the Serbonian lake. In magical texts she 
is mentioned along with Anta as a goddess who " conceives 
but never brings forth." In the treaty made between the 
Kheta (Hittites) and the Egyptians, she appears as a 
national goddess of the Syrian Kheta, and this at a time 
when her worship had become so far familiar to the 
dwellers by the Nile that Rameses II. called his son Mer- 
A(s)trott after her ; and several proper names compounded 
with her name were current She found but a late entrance 

» Naville, Tex^es rel, au Mythe cPHorus, pi. 4. 
» Cf. Wiedemann, Herodofs Zweites Buck, p. 433. 


ASTARTE — ANTA. 


151 


into Egyptian mythology : in the scenes illustrative of the 
legend of the Winged Sun Disk * she is lioness headed, and, 
mounted on a quadriga, drives her horses over the bodies of 
the foe. She is entitled " lady of horses and of chariots," 
and this designation betrays the late origin of the mytho- 
logical episode in which she figures, since the horse 
apparently was only 
introduced into Egypt TT^ (^ 

in the time of the i ^^ s' "-^ ^ 

Hyksds, and never " 

appears in any of the 
older myths. Refer- 
ence to Astarte is 
made in the Osirian 
myth as related by 
Plutarch, but there 
she is euhemeristi- 
cally explained to 
have been a queen 
of Byblos. 

Anta is named 
along with Astarte in 
the Kheta treaty, 


FIG. 41.— XntA. (PRISSE, "MON.," PL. 37.) 

StdA in British Museum. XXth Dynasty. 


whence it would seem that she also was a goddess of this 
Syrian people. She figures on Egyptian monuments as 
" lady of heaven and mistress of the gods," with helmet, 
shield, and lance, and swinging a battle axe in her left 
hand ; sometimes she is represented on horseback. She 
is often mentioned in the inscriptions of Rameses II. and 
* Naville, Tex^es reL au My the d^Horus, pi. 13. 


152 


FOREIGN DEITIES. 


Rameses III., both of them warlike princes, and the latter 
even gave to his favourite daughter the Semitic name of 
Bent dntdy " daughter of Anta." 

Reshpu is represented with helmet and lance. His 
Semitic origin is obvious from the outline of his profile, 
and he corresponds to the Phoenician Resef, who was 
worshipped both in Cyprus and in 
Carthage. His titles "great god, 
lord of heaven, ruler of eternity, 
lord of might in the midst of the 
divine cycle," are simply borrowed 
from Egyptian divinities, and are 
useless for determining his nature. 
Kedesh is the goddess repre- 
sented as accompanying ReshpCl. 
She holds flowers in her right 
hand and a serpent in her left ; 
usually she wears as her headdress 
the sun disk embraced by two 
horns, and she stands upon the 
back of a lion. She and R^, 
together with the Egyptian god 
FIG. 42.-RMHP6. (pRissE, ^^ grouped into a triad ; 

Stela in British Museum. but as a matter of fact she was 
xxth Dynasty. merely goddess of the city of 

Kadesh, the capital of the Syrian confederation of the 
Kheta, upon whose dominions Rameses II. in particular 
found himself obliged to make war. In all likelihood 
Kedesh was originally a local modification of Astarte. 
On Egyptian stelae of the XVIIIth and XlXth Dynasties 


SEMITIC INFLUENCE, 


153 


.s;^ 


she IS entitled " lady of heaven, mistress of all the gods, 
eye of R^, who has none like unto her, daughter of R^, 
HzaJ eye of T{im, beloved of the Sun god." On the 
same monuments prayers are also addressed to her for 
gifts of life and health, and after extreme old age a good 
burial in the west of Thebes, the latter request proving 
that the god was recognized 
in the capital of the country. 

The above named deities 
changed neither name nor 
identity by their transference 
to Egypt ; but the influ- 
ence of Semitic thought 
which occasionally prevailed 
there had a far wider and 
more profound importance, 
and effected organic trans- 
formations in the ideas of 
the Egyptians as to the 
natures of their own national 
gods. A conspicuous ex- 
ample of this influence is fig. 43. 

-. ., , . , ,,./.. KEDESH. (PRISSE, " MON.,** PL. 37.) 

discernible in the belief in Stela in British Museum. XXth Dynasty. 

sacred inanimate objects as incorporations of deity, par- 
ticularly stones, the Bethels or Betyls which are known 
to have been such important objects of adoration among 
the Semites that the worship of them was carried wherever 
Semitic colonists penetrated. They were set up in con- 
nexion with Astarte in Paphos, Apollo in Ambracia, 
Zeus Teleios in Tegea in Arcadia, and in many other 


1 54, FOREIGN DEITIES. 

places besides. The oracular image of the Oasis of 
Jupiter Ammon was a stone which in shape is said to have 
resembled a navel, and which at festivals was borne in 
procession, richly decorated with jewels. An Egyptian 
origin for this stone as the representative of Amen 
is impossible ; only the animal incarnation, in a ram, 
was derived from Egypt and characteristic of it The 
second symbol of the deity worshipped in the Oasis was 
introduced in all likelihood from one of the Phoenician 
settlements on the north African coast, between which 
and the Oasis an active connexion always subsisted. The 
population of the Oasis was, it is true, but half Egyptian. 
A similar form of worship, however, was established in 
Egypt, in Heliopolis, the most renowned of all her 
temples : one incorporation of the Sun god of Heliopolis 
was a stone (pp. 16-17, 24). The form of the stone seems 
to have varied with the course of time ; now it is spoken 
of as a pyramid or an obelisk, and again as a conven- 
tionalized column, fl or |, the hierc^lyphic sign which 
was used from earliest times as the ideogram for An, the 
name of the city of Heliopolis. As reference is also 
occasionally made to the presence of a similar column 
in other sanctuaries, this form of worship had evidently 
commended itself to the colleges of priests, owing to 
the influence of the temple at HeliopoKs. 

Another Egyptian god who was occasionally regarded 
as incorporate in a stone was Set. This is proved by 
the fact that the sign of an oblong stone, oniD, is the 
usual determinative of his name, although no specific 
statements on the point have been found in the in- 


TREE WORSHIP. 155 

scriptions. In this as in other matters relating to this 
god Semitic influences had undoubtedly prevailed. 

Trees were also worshipped in Egypt as well as stones, 
but there is no evidence that hill worship ever obtained 
there.^ The worship of springs could hardly come into 
consideration, since they were almost entirely lacking in 
the land, and the worship of water was necessarily confined 
to that of the Nile. One spring, however, there was : 
that near Heliopolis, and this was dedicated to the Sun 
god (p. 1 8). Special instances of tree worship are com- 
paratively rare. In Ptolemaic times a systematic attempt 
was made to introduce this form of cult into the temple of 
every nome : according to the contemporary lists relating to 
the subject, twenty-four nomes worshipped the Nile acacia, 
seventeen the Corda myxa (?), sixteen the Zizyphus spina 
Christty while other trees, such as the sycomore, the 
Juniperus phoenicea^ and the Tamarix nilotica^ are named 
but once or twice. Ten kinds of sacred trees are here 
mentioned in all, of which as many as three were sometimes 
worshipped in the same nome.^ But the connexion of 

' The Ethiopian kings of 800—700 B.C. speak of the hill of Gebel 
Barkal as the " sacred hill/' but it is not clear whether the hill 
was considered sacred in itself or only on account of the rock cut 
temple at its base. 

Lef^bure, Musion, xiv., pp. 3 16 f/ seq,, has endeavoured to prove 
that the Egjrptians were also fire worshippers, but the illustrations 
which he adduces only show that fire was sometimes regarded as 
an attribute of various deities whose functions were compared to the 
action of fire, especially in the case of the solar deities, and so on ; 
but that the Egyptians were genuine fire worshippers, in the same 
sense as the Iranians, is a conclusion which cannot be drawn firom 
Egyptian texts. 

' Cf. MOLDENKE, Ueber die in altaeg Texten erwaehnten 
Baeume, pp. 8 et seq. 


IS6 FOREIGN DEITIES. 

this cult with the main worship of the temple was very 
loose. The texts do occasionally mention the sacred tree 
of Heliopolis growing near the spot where the Apep 
serpent was slain by the solar cat ; out of which also the 


FIG. 44.— tOm, SAFEKHT, and THOTH INSCRIBING NAME OF RAMSSXS II. ON 
SACRED TREE OF HELIOPOUS. (l. D. III. 169.) 

Temple of Ramesea II. at GAmah. 

phoenix arose, and on its foliage Thoth, or else Safekht/ 
the goddess of learning, inscribed the name of the king, 

' For the reading of the name of this goddess of. Chassinat, 
JRec. de Travaux, xvii., p. 55. 


TREE WORSHIP. 1 57 

who by this act was endowed with eternal life. We also 
read of the sacred tree which grew over the chest con- 
taining the body of Osiris/ of the tree in the west in which 
dwelt the goddess N(it or the goddess Hathor (pp. 143, 
233)1 and of others. It is, however, a curious fact that 
the palm, a tree otherwise so intimately associated with 
Egyptian thought and feeling, may be said to have no 
place in this cult.^ The belief of Porphyrius' that the 
Egyptians deemed it wrong to injure vegetation was the 
outcome of a late idea founded on pantheistic views. 

Although the worship of vegetable life* did not, to any 
appreciable extent, affect the Egyptian religion as dis- 
played in the temple inscriptions, nevertheless I should 
hesitate to say that it was not indigenous. In the same 
way little account is taken of animal worship by the 
Egyptian texts, and yet we know from the testimony of 
Greek writers that it played a considerable, if not the 
principal, part in the popular religion. Now these writers 
were more familiar with the people than with the priest- 
hood and the upper classes, and in Egypt, as elsewhere, 
the beliefs of the great mass of the nation were not in 
precise accordance with the doctrine of the priests. Due 
reverence and tribute were paid to the gods of the great 

* Cf. Dev^RIA, MimoireSy i., pp. 123 etseq, 

' It is only very occasionally that the palm tree is substituted for 
the sycomore of N<it, as in the bas relief from the tomb of Naai, 
now in the Egyptian Museum at Berlin, No. 7322. 

* PORPHYRius, De Abst, i. 21. 

* For a comprehensive treatise on tree worship, or the cult of 
vegetable life, based primarily upon the well known investigations 
of Mannhardt, see J. G. Frazer : The Golden Bough, London, 
1890. 


IS8 FOREIGN DEITIES. 

temples, but it was to the minor divinities* that the 
people turned in their personal joys and sorrows, and to 
whom they addressed their prayers and their complaints. 
Recent investigations have shown how this condition of 
things developed among the Indo-Germanians, more par- 
ticularly among the Greeks and Romans ; ' and in Egypt 
it was not otherwise. Here too it was the first impulse 
of the peasant to present his humble petitions to his own 
rustic deity rather than to the god who dwelt within the 
city in his magnificent abode. Among such deities were 
many of the sacred animals,' and the sacred trees must 
also be placed in the same category. The shade giving 
sycomore was the special object of such homage, and 
it is peasants who are represented on the monuments as 
paying their devotions to that tree, even as it was the lower 
orders of the people who zealously offered their prayers and 
dedicated stelae to the sacred beasts. The upper classes 
among the Egyptians would look down upon these rustic 
and plebeian deities with the same contempt as was felt by 
the cultured Greeks and Romans for the uncouth gods of 
the countryfolk. Few of them were admitted within the 
great temples, and to such as gained admission very 
insignificant places were usually assigned : often they were 
deprived of their essential natures and merged in the god 

1 " Sondergotter " (isolated gods) is the present designation in 
Germany. 

' On this question of. more especially the excellent work by H. 
USBNER, Gotternamen, Bonn, 1896. 

' On this subject see Wiedemann, Zum Thierkult der alien 
Aegy^ter, in MilangeSt Charles de HarleZy Leyden, 1896, pp. 372 
el seq. 


DEITIES OF AFRICAN ORIGIN. 159 

of the temple, either as his incorporations, his attributes, 
or his symbols ; or they were relegated to inferior positions 
in his court or household. So far as we can judge, the 
reception of tree worship into temple service and mythology 
was always the result of a compromise : the priests were 
compelled to make concessions to the faith of the masses 
and admit into the temples the worship of the people's 
divinities ; but they did so grudgingly, and this explains 
the apparent insignificance of the official cult of vegetation 
in Egjrpt as compared with the worship of the. great gods 
and their cycles. 

The representations of Libyan and Asiatic deities' were 
almost entirely conformed to those of Egyptian gods, in 
physical appearance, attitude, and symbolism. It was 
otherwise with gods of African origin, which outwardly 
resembled the negro human fetish of to-day, and were 
figured as deformed, monstrously fat, hideous, and frightful; 
whereas, so far as the rules of Egyptian sacred art admitted, 
the true Egyptian gods were represented in conformity 
to the ideal. 

Bes ^ was the most important of the African gods. He 
was represented as a bearded dwarf with large ears and 
with crooked legs, on which he is sometimes resting his 
long arms, &. He is dressed in the hide of a beast 
with the tail hanging down behind him, and wears a crown 
of feathers recalling the headdress of Andlki, a goddess 
worshipped in Nubia (p. 131). A further distinction 
between Bes and the Egyptian gods is that he is generally 

' See an excellent treatise by Krall in the ^ahrh, d, Wiener 
kunsth. SammLy ix., pp. 'j2 et seq. 


l6o FOREIGN DEITIES. 

drawn in full face while they are ordinarily presented in 
profile. Many names were given him, such as Hait, Ahti, 
Sepd, KheraC, in later times especially, but these implied 


nc. 45, — BES. (l. d. IV. 83, c.) 
Birth House of Temple of Denderah. Roman Period. 

no change in the apprehension of his nature. His usual 
name was at all periods Bes, a name derived from the 
word besa, which designates one of the great felidaey the 


BES. l6l 

Cynaelurus guitatus. It was the skin of this beast which 
formed his clothing, and most probably, he was named after 
the animal in which, according to Egyptian ideas, he 


FIG. 46. — BES. (wooden SPOON IN BERLIN MUSEUM. ^ 

XVIIIth Dynasty. 

sometimes became incarnate. The worship of Bes was an 
ancient ; cult ; there are indications that it was known in 

II 


1 62 FOREIGN DEITIES. 

the Old Kingdom, and certainly it was in force at the 
beginning of the New Kingdom ; while from the time of 
the XXVIth Dynasty downward it became so popular that 
many proper names were compounded with his name ; and 
this fashion was transmitted both to the Greeks in Egypt 
and to the Copts. The Copts had lost all sense of the 
meaning of the word, and one of the Christian martyrs of 
Alexandria is still known to us as Besas. Bes was known 
in Roman times chiefly by means of his oracle at Abydos, 
which was often consulted even down to a late period. 
The figure of Bes supplied a subject to Alexandrian 
decorative art, and found besides somewhat extended 
application in the Hellenistic and Phoenician. This ex- 
plains sufficiently its later appearance on Anabian coins, 
which, however, affords no proof of any close connexion 
between the Arabians who used this money and the great 
centres of Bes worship.^ 

One of the oldest representations of the god Bes is 
found in a bas relief at Deir el Bahri, in a temple built by 
Queen R^m^ka, better known as Queen Hatshepsdlt, about 
1600 B.C. It occurs in a scene relating to the birth of the 
founder. In the middle of the top register is the royal 
mother, sitting in a chair, and holding the new born child 
in her arms. Left of her are five goddesses who have ap- 
parently assisted as midwives, each holding the sign of life 
in token that life has come to the child by their means ; 
among them are Isis and Nephthys. In front of the queen 
kneel four female forms waiting to attend to the infant, and 
to its ka^ born at the same time ; they are stretching out 

* Cf. Erman, Zeitschrift fur Numismatik, ix., pp. 296 et seq. 


■ " 


,-■ 


i 

■^■m- 


- 


iZ \ 


> 


.. . 


r 


<■ ! ,.- 


" 


1 


f 

i 


.c ;"' 


BES IN BIRTH SCENES. 1 63 

their hands in readiness to receive the former- In the middle 
row squat three human headed, four crocodile headed, and 
one ram headed demon, each of them presenting the sign of 
life to the child ; in their "midst are symbols signifying that 
life, stability, eternal duration, shall be its portion. Immedi- 
ately below these symbols, and in the lowest register, are 
others denoting divine protection, and the sovereignty to 
which the babe is destined ; on either side of them are 
divinities, mostly in attitude of invocation. Two are hawk 
headed ; and the figure of a third, together with that of a 
third jackal headed god, doubtless occupied the blank space 
to the right of the symbols. The hawk headed gods — 
Horus, Amset, and Hapi, according to the Book of the 
Dead — are the souls of Pe, the temple of Bdlto, and were 
held to be the spirits of the North ; the jackal headed 
figures— Horus, DOamOtef, and KebehsenOf— are the 
souls of Nekheb, that is the spirits of the South. Thus 
the homage of these divinities symbolically expresses the 
homage of Northern and Southern Egypt to the new born 
Pharaoh. Near them stand the god Bes and the goddess 
Taiirt. AH; is transacted in the presence of Meskhent, the 
goddess of birth, who is shown seated on her throne. The 
accompanying texts promise the new born princess life, 
stability, might, health, joy, and the rule over Upper and 
Lower Egypt on the throne of the god Horus. The subject 
of this scene is found, similarly treated, in a bas relief in 
the temple of Luxor which represents the birth of King 
Amenophis 1 11.^ There is a similar scene in a temple 
of Denderah,* dating from about the time of Trajan and 
* Lepsius, Denkmaler, iii. 74. ' Ibid,, iv. 82 b. 


164 


FOREIGN DEITIES. 


representing the birth of the Sun god. Here Bes is a 
seated divinity with the name Ahti. In like connexion 
the figure of Bes appears in all the "Birth Houses" of 
Egyptian temples. The " Birth House " of a temple was 
supposed to have been the birthplace of the god of the 
temple, and was long known as the Typhonium, because 
of the grotesque figure of Bes always 
to be found upon its walls, and which 
was held to represent Typhon, the 
god of evil. But this view was 
altogether unwarranted, and was 
necessarily relinquished after the 
decipherment of the hieroglyphics. 

In all these scenes Bes is one of 
the divinities attending the birth of 
the king, or of the Sun god. He 
is also shown holding Harpokrates, 

Wthe young Sun god, upon his left 
arm while giving him food with his 
right hand, or bearing the child on 
his shoulder. But his services to the 
child were not confined to supplying it 
with food ; he had also to provide for 
its amusement, and so he is represented 
as laughing at it, dancing grotesque dances, and playing 
on the harp before it. Thus, gradually he came to be con- 
sidered as the god of the dance, of music, and of jollity, 
a part to which he seemed predestined even by his 
absurd appearance. Another office also fell to him as 
guardian of the young Sun god : serpents being the 


FIG. 48.— BES AND HAR- 
POKRATES. (arundale 
AND BONOMI, PL. 2$, 
FIG. 82.) 

Bronze in British Museum. 
Roman Period. 


FIG. 49. — SEPD. (bronze STATUETTE IN BERUN MUSEUM.) 


THE SOLAR BES. 1 67 

chief enemies of the Sun god, Bes was therefore the foe 
of serpents. He is frequently represented as gripping 
and strangling them in his hands, or biting them to bits, 
as does the goddess Tadlrt. At the end of the New 
Kingdom he was fused with his ward, endowed with all 
the attributes of the young Sun god, and represented 
like him as sitting upon a lotus flower and wearing the 
side lock of youth. The solar lions also became connected 
with him, and he was regarded as one with the god 
Sepd, lord of the east, conqueror of the hill tribes of the 
Sinaitic peninsula. Ultimately he was entirely confused 
with the hawk headed Horus. This, as well as his identi- 
fication with Amen and even with Osiris Amen, was due 
to the prevailing syncretism of the Ptolemaic perio3. 

As a solar deity Bes was god of the east. He was 
therefore lord of PCint, i,e. of the southern countries on 
both shores of the Red Sea, and in later times of Arabia 
in particular, the supposed home of the Sun god and of 
his sacred bird the phoenix. This comparatively late con- 
nexion of Bes with the land of P^int is no argument for 
his Arabian origin. His whole appearance and attire 
point rather to an African and indeed a negro country 
to the south of Egypt as the place from which he sprang. 
In the early days of Egyptian history negroes appear 
to have dwelt on the southern frontiers of the kingdom, 
but afterwards a series of Hamitic peoples occupied large 
territories south of the Egyptian, the negroes having been 
enslaved or driven farther to the south. The civilization 
of these Hamitic peoples was dependent on that of the 
Egyptians ; they therefore venerated, not the original 


l68 FOREIGN DEITIES. 

African conception of Bes, but the form which was then 
adored in Egypt, only they often represented him as a 
full grown man instead of as a dwarf 

In the Underworld Bes appears in a somewhat different 
character. Here, though on purely Egyptian territory, his 
dwarf form was changed into that of a full grown man, 
or even of a giant. The Bes of the Underworld was an 
avenging deity : his distorted face inspired terror ; he 
menaced the wicked with his knife, threatening to tear 
out their hearts, and hence he was called the Warrior. 
Subsequently the attempt was made to ascribe this 
character to him on earth also, except that he was there 
to be regarded rather as the friend of the good than the 
enemy of the wicked, and as such he was represented 
bearing a shield and wielding a sword ready to smite 
down all who should dare to withstand those who were 
under his protection and wore his image as an amulet 

Taurt, "the great one," is generally figured as a 
female hippopotamus standing on her hind legs, with a 
disproportionately large belly and pendent breasts, her 
fore feet resting* on the amulet which represented the blood 
of Isis. Her headdress H is composed of the solar disk 
and two tall feathers, JqJ. Occasionally the figure is 
human headed, or altogether that of a woman, the 
head being surmounted with the cow horns which all 
Egyptian goddesses appear to have been at times en- 
titled to wear. TaClrt was regarded as the mother and 
nurse of the gods, and assisted at the births of gods 
and kings alike. She had a counterpart in APET, the 
hippopotamus goddess of Thebes, to whom a small 


taOrt. 


169 


temple was erected there in Ptolemaic times. Here Apet 
was supposed by some to have given birth to Osiris, while 
elsewhere the honour was claimed for the temple of 
Ombos. Later still TaClrt was known simply as Rert, 
the female hippopotamus, and represented as dwelling in 


FIG. 50.— TaOrT and HATHOR COW EMERGING FROM MOUNTAIN OF THE 
WEST. (U D. III. 231, &.) 

Rock tomb at Anibeh, Rameses VI. 

the "House of Suckling." Earlier than this, however, 
the prevailing syncretism had identified her with Isis 
Hathor, and again with Bast of Bubastis, BClto of Pelusium, 
the lioness headed Menht of Heliopolis, Renpt, ue. the 


170 FOREIGN DEITIES. 

year personified, of Memphis, and other goddesses. Her 
image in glazed earthenware formed a favourite amulet, 
which, like that of Bes, was held to be a great prophylactic 
at childbirth, and was one of the commonest of the many 
Egyptian amulets which passed into foreign lands. It 
also passed to a certain extent into foreign art, and there 
are reminiscences of the figure of TaClrt in Mykenaean 
wall scenes.* In the cult of the dead the functions of 
TaClrt coincided with those of the Hathor Cow, and she 
was supposed to be the guardian of the Mountain of the 
West through which the road to the realm of the dead lay. 
At the end of the New Kingdom she, as well as Bes, found 
her way back to Ethiopia, where it would seem that she 
had originated when that country was inhabited by negroes 
who knew nothing of Egyptian culture. In Egypt proper 
her popularity, like that of Bes, dates from the New 
Empire, and it greatly increased during the later period in 
the history of Egyptian religion, when there was a decided 
preference for all that was most extraordinary in the older 
texts, special significance being attached to it both in 
worship and in belief. 

It is a striking fact that at this time, when the tendency 
of the Egyptian religion to combine and utilize every 
religious phenomenon was so strong, there was apparently 
no inclination whatever to be influenced by the religion of 
the Greeks. The language, too, which had shown itself to be 
very receptive as regards Semitic words, was closed s^ainst 
both Greek and Latin, and rarely indeed made use of a 
term borrowed from either in place of any Egyptian word. 
* Cf. Ephemeris archaeologikey 1887, pi. 10. 


NO ADOPTION OF GREEK DEITIES. I7I 

In the same way the Egyptian religion remained apparently 
altogether uninfluenced by the faith of the Macedonian 
rulers of the land. Only very isolated indications of Greek 
ideas can be found, such, ^^., as the substitution of the 
name " Hades " for DClat (the Underworld) in the texts.* 
At the very time when the Hellenes were displaying the 
greatest zeal in appropriating the strange gods, simply 
accepting some of them and proclaiming others as counter- 
parts of their own deities, the Egyptian religion had 
renounced its former liberality and ceased to adopt foreign 
deities. 

The hatred and contempt of strangers which charac- 
terized the Egyptian of the decadence, and which he took 
pleasure in exhibiting even to his foreign rulers, were 
feelings which he also ascribed to his gods. They too had 
a like contempt for this young barbarian people from the 
north together with all its gods, gods which, as Plato 
would express it, were without history, and therefore 
without that trustworthy proof of their reality which ancient 
traditions afford. 

* Brugsch and DUMICHEN, Recueil, iv., pi. 50, no. 14. 


CHAPTER VII. 

THE WORSHIP OF ANIMALS. 


THE worship of animals has always been regarded as 
a striking phenomenon of the Egyptian religion : 
Fathers of the Church considered it one of the most 
frightful aberrations of the heathen spirit ; Christian 
apologists employed it as an illustration of the senseless 
follies of heathen worship ; while Greek philosophers, on 
the other hand, thought to see in it profound symbolic 
teaching. Among modern critics of Ancient Egypt also, 
a similar divergence of opinion prevails on this point. By 
some the Egyptian worship of animals has been adduced 
in proof of the existence of a carefully excogitated 
pantheism, and an appreciative sympathy with animal 
life ; by others it is likened to the fetishism of the negro, 
and advanced as evidence of the low plane upon which 
thought and feeling anciently moved in the Valley of the 
Nile ; others again take it for a survival of the prehistoric 
religion of the people, and yet others as the outcome of 
steady degradation in religious thought. 

^ Wiedemann, Le Culte des Animaux, in Le MusSon, viii., 211, 
309 et seq.; Herodot's Zweites Buck, pp. 271 et seq.; Zu dem 
Thierkult der alien Aegypter, in Milanges Charles de Harlez^ 
y^.^ietseq, 

172 


ANIMAL INCARNATIONS OF DEITY. 1 73 

Something may be said in support of each of these views, 
yet none is free from error. There is little likelihood now 
of any attempt being made to exalt animal worship and 
view it as a particularly noble phase of spiritual life in 
Egypt, but in this chapter we shall endeavour to show 
how the Egyptians came to adopt this form of worship 
by a logical development of belief in accordance with 
their whole habit of religious thought. In dealing with 
the subject a clear distinction must be made between 
two different points of view, subsequently associated and 
blended : the worship of individual animals, and the 
setting apart of certain species as sacred. 

The idea of an animal incarnation of deity is thoroughly 
Egyptian. ^ The Egyptian imagined the next world to be 
even as this, the life of the blessed dead to be as that of 
the living upon earth, and that the dead also ate and 
drank, hungered and thirsted, rejoiced and suffered, having 
in one thing only the advantage over the living : they were 
no longer tied to a single form, but could change their 
shapes into those of animals, or plants, or even of gods. 
Nor was there any essential distinction between gods and 
men. The life of a god was indeed longer than that of a 
man, but death put an end to the one as to the other ; and 
the power of a god, though greater than that of a man, 
was none the less limited. In every sphere of thought 
man, and man only, was to the Egyptians the measure 
pf all things. 

Since a body is necessary to the exercise of the functions 
of life, the soul of the dead could not be imagined as an 
intangible immaterial being, but only as something which 


174 THE WORSHIP OF ANIMALS. 

lived by means of a body. A god also was in like case ; 
and in order to associate with mankind he must of 
necessity become incarnate, otherwise he could not express 
himself in human speech, nor act with visible effect. We 
learn from the texts how, in the long conversations between 
god and king, the god would nod or extend his arms, and 
how the goddess would act as midwife at the birth of a 
prince and feed from her own breast the child who was 
born to rule on earth as representative of the god that 
had begotten him. To us such ideas are almost necessarily 
allegorical ; not so to the Egyptian. He was altogether 
lacking in any faculty for comprehending abstract thought, 
and could only apprehend what was presented as a 
concrete reality. The use made of ideograms in the 
Egyptian script testifies to this realistic state of mind : 
the Egyptian wished not only to gather the meaning from 
the characters, but to see it, and hence drew the picture of 
a crocodile after its written name, of a man drinking after 
the word " drink,*' of a figure in the act of striking after 
the word "strike," and so on. Even for ideas which 
admitted of no exact representation he devised ideograms, 
often by means of somewhat complex processes of thought ; 
for instance, the word meaning " to hunger " is followed by 
the sign of a man with his finger to his lips, a method of 
suggestion prompted by the same train of ideas as that 
which leads the modern Italian beggar to point to his 
mouth as he says, "Morio di fame!'' Again, the word 
"bad" is followed by the image of a small bird, birds 
being the commonest agricultural pest in the country, and 
the word " pure " by the sign for water, or by that of a man 


DESIRE FOR INTIMACY WITH THE GODS. 1 75 

over whom water is being poured ; while words expressing 
purely abstract ideas, such as "good," "beautiful," etc., 
were determined by the sign of a papyrus roll, because 
as written words they had a visible reality. The same 
impulse moulded the language as well as the script, and 
Egyptian sentences are so constructed and arranged 
as to read like the text descriptive of a series of 
pictures. 

This incapacity for abstract thought had its effect- 
upon the Egyptian religion also. The Egyptian was 
1 not content to pray trusting that his prayer might be 
heard by an unseen power, but sought rather to confide it 
[ to the very ears of his god. Led by instinctive impulse to 
picture the deity to himself in human form, he thought to 
have found this incarnation in the king, who was entitled 
" the beautiful god," " the great god," "the Horus," and to 
whom in this capacity petitions were addressed which he 
himself fulfilled or else transmitted to his parental deities, 
the celestial gods whose descendant upon earth he was, 
and with whom he held constant communication. " Thou, 
O King Merenptah! art as the image of thy father the 
Sun who riseth in heaven. Thy rays reach even unto the 
caverns. There is no place where thy goodnesses are not. 
Thou appointest the law in every land. As thou restest 
in thy palace thou hearest the words of all lands. Thou 
art provided with millions of ears. Thine eye is brighter 
than the star of heaven ; it knoweth to see better than the 
sun disk. If the mouth utter aught in a cavern, never- 
theless it Cometh to thine ears. Thine eye seeth that 
which was done in secret, merciful lord, creator of 


176 THE WORSHIP OF ANIMALS. 

breath!"^ This belief in the divinity of the king was 
maintained throughout Egyptian history : a special cult 
was instituted in his honour, specially appointed priests 
officiated in connexion with it, and offerings were made to 
him. At times the reverence for the divine person of 
Pharaoh was so excessive that even the kings themselves 
worshipped themselves, some attempt being made to 
mitigate the inherent absurdity of the proceeding by the 
supposition that the king's prayers were not addressed 
positively to himself, but to his ka^ — the ka of a man 
being one of the immortal constituents of his being— 
and no incongruity was felt in the idea of lengthy con- 
versations between the king and his own ka^ in which the 
ka graciously granted him Joy, Prosperity, Health, and 
Power at his heart's desire. 

But though looked upon as a god the king was by no 
means regarded as the only one: other members of the 
Pantheon ranked with him and above him. Nor was he 
omnipresent If the king resided in Tanis, then Memphis 
would be without visible deity, and so on : a state of matters 
intolerable to the Egyptian, who always desired the pos- 
sibility of daily and even hourly communion with his gods. 
\ The natural resource was to imagine other gods as dwelling 
\ on earth in human form besides the god incarnate in the 
\ king ; and indeed the historic titles of the nomarchs would 
seem to indicate that these princes also had been r^arded 
as gods in prehistoric times. But in later times we find 

' Anastasi FafyruSy iv., p. 5, 11. 6 et seq,=Anastast Papyrus j 
ii., p. 5, 11. 6 et seq. 
' For a definition of the ka see below, pp. 240-2. 


\ 


HUMAN AND ANIMAL INCARNATIONS OF DEITY. 1 77 

only isolated instances of such a practice. We see, for 
instance, from a funerary stela that a high official early in 
the XlXth Dynasty was entitled " the god," and worshipped 
as such by one of his subordinates ; and at a later date, 
according to some of the earliest Christian writers, it was 
the practice in Anabe — a place of which we know no 
other mention — to choose out a man for worship and 
to make offerings to him.^ But for the rest, and apart 
from the recognized divinity of the king, living human 
incarnations of deity were in historic times everywhere 
supplied by other, and particularly animal, incorporations. 

The cause of this change may doubtless be ascribed, in 
the first place, to considerations of practical expediency. 
If other men than the kings were regarded as gods 
incarnate, it might very well happen that the differences of 
opinion which would inevitably arise among them would 
set the gods at variance one with another, and thus bring 
about a condition of affairs highly dangerous to the 
stability of the state. The worship of animals involved no 
such dangers. On the one hand, through their sensibility 
and power of action they were able to express their desires 
by movements, and also to eat and drink ; and thus they 
exposed themselves to that material apprehension of which 
a deity must have been capable in order to suit the Ancient 
Egyptian mind. And, on the other hand, it was easy so to 
manage them that movements apparently made at their 
own impulse were in reality the response to given signals 
by means of which the priests, or even the king himself, 
brought about the supposed expression of the creatures' 
Wiedemann, Proc. Soc. Bib. Arch., xiv., p. 335. 

12 


178 THE WORSHIP OF ANIMALS. 

will. For in the strength of his belief in his own divinity 
the king would be blind to the absurdity of wilfully im- 
posing upon himself by extorting from the god consent to 
his own wishes and the answer which he had himself 
determined upon. The Egyptian was certainly not so 
consciously reverent as to subordinate his wishes to the will 
of his gods— nay rather, he sought to force his own views 
upon them. If the sacred beasts could not or would not 
help in emergency, they were beaten ; and if this measure 
failed to prove efficacious, then the creatures were punished 
by death. Similar superstitious practices are to be found 
among the lower classes of widely alien races. When 
Heaven does not fulfil the desires of the people, the offence 
is visited by them upon idols, or statues of the saints, 
according to nationality. But in the Valley of the Nile 
such ideas were not cherished by the people alone; it 
was particularly among the upper classes that these low 
conceptions of deity prevailed, and it was the priests 
themselves who condemned and executed the sacred 
animal. Afterwards, indeed, they sought to secure its 
immortality by the embalmment of the body, thereby 
hoping to appease the wrath of the god, lest he should 
avenge the killing of the creature in which he had been 
incarnate. 

In fixing upon certain animals as being respectively the 
incarnations of certain deities, the Egyptian was guided 
by what he considered the salient characteristics of the 
different divinities and of the different species of animal in 
question. To the gods of nature in its annual rejuven- 
escence were assigned animals supposed to be possessed 


ANIMALS REPRESENTING DIVINE ATTRIBUTES. 1 79 

of exceptional procreative vigour, such as the bull and 
ram ; while animals such as the cow were dedicated to 
the fertile and food producing deities ; and serpents owed 
their deification to their stealthy movements, to their 
deadly power, and also to an occasional trustful familiarity 
by which all nations have been impressed. The asso- 
ciation of the hawk with sun gods was obviously 
' suggested by the bird's soaring and hovering in high 
\ heaven ; and the crocodile, lying inert upon the bank, 
but terrible and devouring when roused, was the embodi- 
ment of the dignity and self conscious power which have 
always appealed to the reverence of Orientals. A list 
of the sacred animals of Egypt would contain not only 
all the more important representations of the Egyptian 
fauna — mammals, fish, reptiles, and insects, — but many 
imaginary creatures, such as the sphinx, the animal of 
the god Set, and the griffin. To the Egyptian these 
were no creatures of fancy, but real inhabitants of the 
desert, no matter how rarely they might be seen of men. 
A Xllth Dynasty representation of a hunting scene 
exhibits, side by side with gazelles and other animals, 
quadrupeds with heads of monsters, with heads growing 
out of their backs, etc. — creatures which the high 
official in whose tomb they are figured believed himself 
to have seen during his lifetime, although it might be 
only in the distance.^ They are, indeed, scarcely to 
be classed as mere creatures of imagination. To 
primitive man all things which his fancy paints or 

» Lepsius, Denkmaler^ ii. 131 ; Griffith and Newberry, 
Bent Hasafiy i., pi. xxx. 


l8o THE WORSHIP OF ANIMALS. 

a dream presents to him are realities, and a firm faith 
in the existence of fabulous monsters has always been 
characteristic of races dwelling in the desert ; they are 
convinced that these things have been seen either by 
themselves or by their forefathers. Alone and helpless in 
the darkness of night, and thus left a prey to impressions, 
they took the simplest occurrences for the most terrible 
phenomena, and afterwards felt no hesitation in announcing 
as facts the illusions of their fear. 

A sacred animal was "the renewed life" of the god 
incorporate in it : that is, it was a renewal of the life which 
had perished with the animal's immediate predecessor in 
the temple. It was distinguished from others of its 
species by certain marks known to the priests. The Apis 
is said to have had twenty-nine such marks, but they are 
differently specified by different writers. According to 
Herodotus the bull was "black, with a square spot of 
white upon his forehead, and on his back the figure of 
an eagle; the hairs on his tail are double, and there is 
a beetle on his tongue." But there is some uncertainty 
as to the accuracy of these data : we find, for example, in 
images of the Apis that the spot upon its forehead is 
triangular. When the right animal had been found and 
had passed through a certain training it was then solemnly 
' introduced into the temple. It was long assumed, and still 
the assumption is current, that the Egyptian temple centred 
■round a statue. This was not the case. The numerous 
statues set up in a temple were votive images dedicated 
either by kings or private individuals for the adornment 
of the building and the future welfare of the bestower ; 


THE SACRED ANIMAL IN THE TEMPLE. l8l 

the processions did indeed pass before them, but generally 
speaking it was not to them that the temple prayers and 
offerings were made, but to something alive — in short, to 
the sacred animal of the place.^ 

In a passage quoted by Origen' from the work of Celsus 
against Christianity we read : " If a stranger reaches Egypt 
he is struck by the splendid temples and sacred groves that 
he sees, great and magnificent courts, marvellous temples 
with pleasant walks about them, imposing and occult 
ceremonies ; but when he has entered into the innermost 
sanctuary he finds the god worshipped in these buildings 
to be a cat, or an ape, or a crocodile, or a he goat, or a 
d(^." With this statement Clemens of Alexandria and 
Lucian alike agree. Their testimony on this point is often 
rejected as a malicious invention, but such a man as Celsus 
would have been far more disposed to pass over in silence 
whatever might detract from the dignity of the Egyptians 
than to invent anything to their ridicule. His mention of 
such a thing is the best proof that it was a reference to a 
known fact, to an institution r^arded by the Egyptians 
as a matter of course. 

And in fact how could an Egyptian, believing that he 

^ This statement of course applies only to temples in which, accord- 
ing to Egyptian views, the godhead was supposed to dwell, and not 
to temples elsewhere dedicated to the same form of the same deity 
but only occasionally visited by him, and which must have contained 
an image of the god which should represent him in the intervals of 
his visits. Thus, for example, in Thebes Amen RSl of the great 
temple of Kamak as incarnate in a ram, could reside in his own 
temple only ; all other temples there dedicated to him could possess 
but his symbol, and this would generally be his statue. 

• iii. 17. 


1 82 THE WORSHIP OF ANIMALS. 

possessed his god himself in animal form, be ashamed to 
admit the possession so long as he retained any conviction 
of the existence and power of his gods ; and of these he 
never seriously doubted. However divergent the views 
which the Egyptians cherished concerning their gods, and 
however variously they pictured the life beyond death and 
the relationship to deity which man would assume in it, a 
genuinely atheistic attitude of mind was utterly foreign to 
the Egyptian race. It was not until they had come to 
know something of higher forms of religious belief that the 
people began to perceive the anomalous nature of the 
worship of animals, and to explain it as the mystic cult of 
mere symbols of deity, this change being due to the com- 
bined influences of Greek philosophy and of Christian 
teaching, influences which even Egyptian heathendom 
could not altogether evade. But in so far as the Egyptian 
religion remained intact the divine nature of certain 
animals never ceased to be one of the fundamental dogmas 
of its doctrine. 

The death of the sacred animal did not involve the 
death of the god whom it represented, nor the loss of its 
own personal identity. Though the dislodged deity at 
once sought fresh incarnation in another animal of the 
same species and appearance as that which had died, the 
soul of the latter was immortal. According to the doctrine 
which taught that the dead man became an Osiris, so did 
the dead Apis become an Osiris Apis, the dead ram of the 
temple an Osiris ram, etc. In all these cases the same 
rites were performed for the animal as for the human 
mummy : it was embalmed and provided with amulets for 


SACRED ANIMAL IMMORTAL; RARELY FIGURED. 183 

that world beyond death in which its soul would henceforth 
live for ever. The increasing number of the Apis bulls, of 
the divine rams and crocodiles which he was thus re- 
legating to the next world, suggested no embarrassments to 
the Egyptian, although he believed the soul of each sacred 
animal to be of unconditioned divinity ; for thus too the 
deceased Pharaoh was supposed to remain King of Upper 
and Lower Egypt in the next world, notwithstanding the 
presence there of his predecessors on the throne, who 
continued to hold the same rank and were rivals therefore 
for the same position. The Egyptians did not attempt 
to systematize their eschatological beliefs, and on such 
matters the illc^ical and absurd presented to them no 
occasions of stumbling in their processes of thought. 

Considering how great a part was assigned to the sacred 
animals in worship, we cannot fail to be struck by the 
comparative rareness with which they are represented in 
the wall scenes : among other representations of deity the 
images of animals occur scarcely in the proportion of one 
in a thousand, the gods being shown either in human form 
or as having human bodies and animal heads. A deity 
figured in human form generally bore the features of the 
reigning king or of his consort. The Egyptians, who laid 
special emphasis on the divine power of voluntary trans- 
formation, naturally supposed that the higher being would 
occasionally assume human form for the purpose of holding 
converse with the king on equal terms, and they further 
represented the god as exactly resembling the king because 
the latter was always accounted his son. But the com- 
posite figures, part animal and part human, were not 


1 84 THE WORSHIP OF ANIMALS. 

intended to present any real forms of the divinity : they 
were simply used as ideographic substitutes for the divine 
image, and this for artistic reasons. It was a strict canon 
of Egyptian art that in the composition of a scene all the 
figures should be drawn as of the same height ; excepting 
only that a deity among common men, a Pharaoh among 
his subjects, a master among his servants, is represented 
as greatly excelling his subordinates in stature, this being 
the pictorial expression of his superiority in rank. Since 
king and god were regarded as of equal rank, both 
must therefore be represented as of the same stature, and 
the effect would have been absurd had the god been 
figured altogether in the likeness of his sacred animal. 
Imagine the composition of a scene in which a crocodile 
stood as tall as the king, with its body drawn in full 
proportion ! Occasionally the expedient was adopted of 
placing the sacred animal on a pedestal and thus raising 
him to the required height ; but the style usually preferred 
was that in which the god was figured in human form and 
the animal signified by the head which he bore. This 
method of representation had the further advantage that 
the composite figure could be shown as in the act of 
moving hands and feet, of embracing the king, of pre- 
senting him with the sign of life ; or if a goddess were in 
question she might even be represented as suckling the 
sovereign, a situation which would at once strike the 
spectator as strange were she figured simply as her sacred 
animal.^ 

In considering some of the ideas connected with the 
' Such representations are, however, occasionally met with : for 


ANIMALS NOT WORSHIPPED AS SPECIES. 1 85 

worship of sacred animals which were counted as gods, 
and the slaughter of which by a layman was regarded as 
deicide and punished by death, it is to be noted that an 
animal thus honoured was always a single individual of its 
kind and differentiated from the rest of its species by 
certain outward marks. But the respect in which whole 
species of animals were held in the different nomes is 
quite another thing. In these cases the animals were 
not honoured as gods, but rather as specially favoured by 
the gods; because it was believed . that the animal form 
in question was that assumed by preference during his 
sojourn upon earth by the deity to whom it was sacred, 
and protection was extended to the whole species lest any 
one representative might happen to be killed at a moment 
in which it was serving as the incarnation of the god. 
In some places also uncertainty as to the marks dis- 
tinguishing the animal which was the incarnate god from 
the rest of its kind induced the inhabitants to spare the 
whole species in order to obviate any risk of injury to 
the one sacred animal. This respect for whole species 
of animals was but loosely connected with the prevalent 
religion of the land, and even down to the present day we 
may find similar instances of it among very various races : 
in many parts of Germany, for example, the peasant 
thinks it a serious crime to hurt a stork. Animals, as 
species, were not worshipped in Egypt, but they were in 

instance, a has relief at Florence, No. 1225 (Petrie, Photograj^hs , 
No. 2^2\ represents the king Horemheb sucking a cow, the embodi- 
ment of the goddess Hathor, and there is a similar scene in the 
Hathor Shrine at Deir el Bahri. 


1 86 THE WORSHIP OF ANIMALS. 

certain instances tended and held exempt from slaughter, 
and sometimes were also embalmed. The latter attention 
was bestowed apparently in order to assure to the 
creatures the full and perfect immortality to which 
mummification was essential ; and it was assumed that the 
god who favoured the particular species would show his 
gratitude to any who ensured complete immortality to 
one of his favourites. Deceased animals so treated also 
became Osiris animals, but they were not divinities of the 
next world like the Osiris Apis ; they took no higher rank 
there than here, even as the Osiris of a slave remained a 
slave, and the Osiris of a peasant a peasant. 

Different species were protected in different nomes, and 
down to the times of the Roman emperors these differences 
led to 'positive wars between nome and nome, the popu- 
lace of one nome refusing to tolerate that animals 
which to them were sacred should be killed and eaten 
in an adjacent district To the present time popular 
respect for certain kinds of animals has lingered on in 
Egypt So long as there were crocodiles in the Valley 
of the Nile, so long were they objects of reverence to 
the Egyptian ; and cats, which his forefathers believed 
to be favourites of several of the goddesses whom they 
worshipped, are regarded by him to this day with peculiar 
affection. In the case of the cats, the attempt to explain 
away this heathen survival of sentiment and practice as 
Muhammedan, by alleging Muhammed's fondness for cats 
as its origin, is obviously futile, since the creatures are if 
anything more respected by Copts than by Muhammedans. 

Among the sacred animals which were accorded divine 


THE APIS. 


187 


honours as individuals, and not merely respected as belong- 
ing to certain kinds, four are of exceptional importance 
and are often mentioned both by Greek writers and 
in the inscriptions. These are the Apis bull, the Sukhos 
crocodile, the Phoenix, and the Sphinx. The first and 


FIG. 51. — APIS BULL. (BRONZC IN FRANKFORT MUSEUM.) 

second of these were real animals actually dwelling in 
the temples, but Phoenix and Sphinx had their being only 
in the imaginations of their worshippers. 

Apis, Egyptian Hapi, was the name of the sacred bull 
of Memphis. The worship of the Apis is as old as 
Egyptian history, and was still practised in Roman times : 


1 88 THE WORSHIP OF ANIMALS. 

monuments dating from the time of the IVth Dynasty 
make mention of its priests, and we read of the dis- 
turbances which attended the discovery of a new Apis in 
the reign of Hadrian, and that a solemn induction of a 
sacred bull took place in Memphis even under Julian. 
The Apis was supposed to have been begotten by a 
deity descending as a ray of moonlight on the cow 
which was to become the mother of the sacred beast ; 
hence he was regarded as the son of the god. The 
bull elect was known by his marks, and when the old 
Apis died the priests sought among the Egyptain herds 
for its successor, traversing the whole land in their 
quest, but sometimes without much result for a year. 
When at length they succeeded a rich guerdon was 
bestowed upon the owner of the divine bull, great 
reverence was paid to the cow which had borne him, 
and a temple was raised in her honour. The discoverer 
of the new Apis also received large sums of money, 
sometimes amounting to as much as one hundred talents 
of gold. The animal itself was led to Nilopolis in Lower 
Egypt, and here its training was so far accomplished as 
to admit of its being duly brought into Memphis, whither 
it journeyed at moonrise in the gilded cabin of a sacred 
bark, henceforth to dwell in the temple of Ptah. Here, 
in Strabo's time, visitors who were not satisfied with 
gazing at the animal through a window in its stall might 
behold it bounding in the magnificent courtyard which 
had been built for it by King Psammetichus. 

Great honours were paid to the Apis : the Pharaohs ex- 
pended their riches lavishly on its 'cult, and Alexander 


THE APIS. 189 

the Great and even Titus deemed it necessary to present it 
with offerings. But chiefly it was renowned for its oracles^ 
which were imparted in very various ways. When the bull 
licked the garments of the celebrated Eudoxus of Cnidus 
this signified the astronomer's approaching death; a like 
fate was predicted to Germanicus when it refused to eat 
at his hand ; and the conquest of Egypt by Augustus was 
announced beforehand by its bellowing. Some inquiries 
were answered by the animal's passing into one or other 
of the two rooms placed at its disposition, and others by 
dreams which were vouchsafed to inquirers who slept in 
the temple and which were explained by the sacred inter- 
preters. Other inquiries, again, though presented to the 
creature itself, found their reply through the voices of 
children playing before the temple, whose words assumed 
to the believing inquirer the form of a rhythmic answer 
to his question. Prophecies of a general kind took place 
during the procession of the Apis. "Then the youths 
who accompanied him sang hymns in his honour, while 
the Apis appeared to understand all and to desire that 
he should be worshipped. Suddenly the spirit took pos- 
session of the youths and they prophesied."* 

Thus honoured, the Apis lived on in the temple until 
it died a natural death. This event was the occasion for 
a national mourning, and the body of the bull was 
solemnly embalmed and carried to its last resting place. 
The tombs of the sacred bulls of Memphis, at least from the 
middle pf the XVIIIth Dynasty, that is from about 1500 
B.C onward, were discovered by Mariette in 1851. The 
* Plinv, Hist. Nat., viii. 185. 


igo 


THE WORSHIP OF ANIMALS. 


gigantic and generally monolithic sarcophagi, weighing on 
an average fifty-eight tons each, stand singly in separate 


FIG. 52. — APIS STELA. (iN BERLIN MUSEUM.) 

rooms, which in some cases lie apart beneath small chapels, 
but in others are connected by an extended system of 
passages. Mariette found that some of the sarcophagi 
still contained the mummies of the bulls, and one of the 


SERAPIS — SUKHOS 191 

tombs which he opened had been left absolutely undis- 
turbed from the time that it had been closed after the 
interment of the Apis : the footprints of the last Egyptian 
who had left the chamber some three thousand years 
ago were still visible. Within and without the chapels 
were many votive stelae and statues, dedicated by pilgrims 
who had journeyed to the spot once more to do reverence 
to the Apis who had recently departed, in hopes of thereby 
gaining his favour and the fulfilment of their various 
wishes. The soul of the Apis was supposed to have been 
received into heaven as the Osiris Apis, and was regarded 
henceforth almost as a Double of Osiris. It was indeed 
in this form that Osiris was generally recognized by the 
Greeks, who, having endowed him with attributes derived 
from Pluto and Asklepios, named this half Greek, half 
Egyptian deity Sarapis or SerapiS. Under the Romans 
the worship of Serapis extended throughout the empire, 
having its devotees in every province; wherever Roman 
legions penetrated inscriptions making mention of his 
name have almost invariably been found, and he rather 
than Osiris himself was regarded as the consort of Isis. 
And since Egyptian symbols and amulets were considered 
necessary to a proper observance of this cult, both in 
temple and in home, genuine Egyptian antiquities of all 
sorts and sizes, from tallest obelisk to tiniest amulet, are 
found in abundance in all countries which once formed 
part of the Roman Empire. 

SUKHOS, the crocodile, was the incarnation of the god 
Sebdk^ and dwelt in a lake near Krokodilopolis, in the 
' See above, pp. 143-5. 


192 THE WORSHIP OF ANIMALS. 

FayOm. To its priests the creature was tame, and Strabo,* 
who was in Egypt during the reign of the Emperor 
Augustus, gives the following account of his own visit to 
the crocodile god : " Our host, a highly respected man 
who showed us the sacred things at Krokodilopolis, went 
with us to the lake, taking with him from the table a small 
cake of bread, roasted meat, and a flask of honey wine. 
We found the animal lying on the bank. The priests 
approached it, and while some opened its jaws another put 
into its mouth first the cake, and then the meat, and 


FIG. 53. — SEbAk (SUKHOS), THE CROCODILE GOD OF THE FAYUM. 
(PLEYTE, "papyrus OF LAKE MOERIS," PL. II.) 

Late Ptolemaic. 

afterwards poured in the honey wine. Then the animal 
plunged into the lake and swam to the opposite bank. 
Meanwhile there came another visitor bringing a like 
offering ; this the priests received and went round to the 
other side of the lake. When they had found the animal 
they gave it the fresh ofTering after the same manner as 
before." As with the worship of Apis, so also with that of 
Sukhos: it lasted far into Roman times, the god being 
then known by the name of PetesHkhoSy "the gift of its 
Sukhos " ; he is even mentioned in Faydm papyri of the 

* xvii. 812. 


THE PHOENIX. 1 93 

third century A.D. Sukhos also had his oracle : when on 
one occasion he would neither listen to King Ptolemacus 
nor give heed to his own priests, this signified the ap- 
proaching demise of the sovereign. After death the body 
of the sacred reptile was carefully embalmed and laid away 
in one of the subterranean chambers of the Labyrinth, and 
so sacred was the place of interment that Herodotus was 
not allowed to visit it. 

The Phoenix,^ Egyptian bennH, which classic and 
Christian artists often represented as an eagle, was 
imagined by the Egyptians rather as a heron, and was 
depicted with two long feathers 
growing out at the back of its 
head, and sometimes also with 
a tuft hanging from its breast, 
^S. The name bennH signifies 


€t 


' that which revolves " or " turns 

back." Myths told how the bird . 

was born from the midst of ^^^* 54- 

n , . , - , THE BENNd (PHOENIx). 

flames which arose from out , ,, „ J. 

(leps., "todt." ch. 83.) 

of the summit of a tree in Ptolemaic Papyrus. 

Heliopolis, and that it was known to men by the beauty 
of its song, to which even the Sun himself loved to listen. 
The Phoenix symbolized the morning sun arising out of 
that fiery glow of dawn which dies away as the new born 
luminary ascends the sky, and hence was regarded as 
the bird of RA. But since the dead Sun was held to 
become an Osiris and the new Sun to arise from the 
embalmed body of the old which had been duly brought to 
» Wiedemann, Aeg, Zeit., 1878, pp. 89 etseq, 

13 


194 THE WORSHIP OF ANIMALS. 

Heliopolis, in like manner also the Phoenix was supposed 
to be a form of Osiris in which the god returned to his 
own country. Further, as on the death of the Sun it was 
from the Osiris Sun that the Phoenix Sun arose, so it was 
taught in the case of humanity also that it was from his 
own Osiris that there sprang the new man of the resurrec- 
tion, and of this resurrection the Phoenix became a symbol 
from a very early date. Hence, even in funerary texts 
of the Old Kingdom the deceased was likened to the 
Phoenix : later it continued to serve as a symbol of the 
resurrection, and as such it is mentioned in patristic 
literature and figures in earliest Christian art. 

The Sphinx of the Egyptian had little in common with 
the Sphinx of the Greeks, beyond the name given to it by 
the latter people. When the Greeks first came into the 
Valley of the Nile and there saw figures of human headed 
quadrupeds, they remembered that at home also there was 
the tradition of such a creature, and that it was named 
"sphinx." This name they bestowed, therefore, not un- 
naturally, upon the creature of Egyptian myth, undisturbed 
by the fact that there was no real similarity between the 
two conceptions. The Egyptian sphinx plays the part of 
guardian of a temple or deity, and hence the god Aker, 
the watchman of the Underworld and the guardian of the 
god Ra during the hours of the night, is generally shown 
as a Sphinx with the body of a lion when represented as 
going forth to destroy the enemies of the Sun god. As the 
image of the Winged Solar Disk over the door of a temple 
by its mere presence prevented any evil thing from entering 
within the sacred halls, so the couchant sphinxes guarding 


FIG. 55.— GREAT SPHINX OF ctZEH. 

As excavated by Brugscb Bey in 1886-7. 


THE GREAT SPHINX. 1 97 

the approach served to keep back any enemy of the god 
of the place frpm the gates of the divine abode. In tombs 
also, especially those of later date, sphinxes were placed 
in the capacity of guardians. In one such instance the 
sphinx is made to address the deceased as follows : " I 
protect the chapel of thy tomb, I guard thy sepulchral 
chamber, I ward off the intruding stranger, I cast down 
the foes to the ground and their arms with them, I drive 
away the wicked one from the chapel of thy tomb, I 
destroy thine adversaries in their lurking place, blocking 
it that they no more come forth." * 

Primarily the sphinx represented an imaginary quadruped 
living in the desert, human headed, and supposed to be the 
favourite incarnation assumed by R^ the Sun god when 
he desired to protect his friends and adherents. This is 
the conception embodied in the gigantic Sphinx near the 
pyramids of Glzeh, hewn out of the living rock and standing 
seventy-five feet above the plain of the desert. Sculptured 
in remote antiquity, here it couched even in the time of 
Khephren, builder of the second pyramid, guarding the 
necropolis against the approach of evil genii. It faced the 
east and the rising sun, being itself one of the manifesta- 
tions of the Sun god, and more especially dedicated to the 
Sun of the morning, banisher of the mists of the night. 
Hence it bears the name of Khepera as well as R^ 
Harmakhis. Between the fore feet was a small temple 
approached by a flight of steps and containing stelae and 
inscriptions relating to the worship of the Sphinx ; but the 
temple was by no means always accessible, for in ancient 
1 Bergmann, Aeg, Zeit, 1880, p. 50. 


198 THE WORSHIP OF ANIMALS. 

times as now it was repeatedly buried by the whirling 
sands of the surrounding desert An extant stela ^ tells 
us how one day when Thothmosis IV. was out hunting and 
took his siesta in the shadow of the great Sphinx, the god 
RA Harmakhis himself appeared to him in a dream, 
ordering him to clear away the sand from the divine 
image. But the work of the king was of no lasting avail ; 
the sands soon drifted back again, covering the stela 
erected to commemorate the royal excavation. Later the 
Sphinx would seem to have been cleared by Rameses II., 
for his name frequently recurs in the inscriptions of 
its temple ; but again the sands swept back. No 
mention of the great image is to be found in Herodotus, 
although reference is made to it by later Greek writers. 
More than once in the present century the sand has 
been cleared away, only to return as of old. Nothing 
is now to be seen but the face, gazing out over the 
desert, still majestic, though sorely mutilated by the 
Arabs. To them the Sphinx is known as the " Father 
of Terror," as if in recollection of its ancient signifi- 
cance. And so obviously does the figure produce the 
impression which it was intended to convey that, long 
before its exact office was made known to us by the 
decipherment of the hieroglyphics, the great Sphinx of 
Gtzeh was described by travellers as the guardian of 
the necropolis near the pyramids. 

Few indications of the existence of sphinxes in the 
Old Kingdom remain ; the predilection for them prevailed 

^ Lepsius, Denk,t iii. 68, translated by Brugsch, Aeg. Zeit, 
1876, pp. Sge^se^, 


SPHINXES. 199 

chiefly from the time of the Xllth Dynasty to that of 
the Ptolemies. The face of this manifestation of the 
deity was generally modelled after that of the reigning 
sovereign, for similar reasons to those which led the 
Egyptians to represent their gods in the likeness of their 
Pharaohs (p. 183); and since the sovereign was usually a 
king, as a rule the sphinxes were male sphinxes, as in 
the case of the Amasis sphinxes at Sais mentioned by 
Herodotus. But the sphinxes of a temple founded by 
a queen might well be female sphinxes, more especially 
if they were also intended to serve as representations of a 
goddess. For a sphinx was not regarded as belonging 
exclusively to R^ : its form was not only adopted by 
the god Aker in his capacity of guardian to the Sun god, 
but also by various other tutelary deities, as, for example, 
occasionally by Isis when she appears as the guardian 
of her spouse Osiris. 

This fact further explains how it came to pass that a 
sphinx was sometimes sculptured with other than a 
human head — for example, the head of a hawk or of 
a jackal — ^the animal head substituted being that ascribed 
to the sacred animal of the deity who was supposed 
to have chosen the sphinx for his incorporation. But 
the stone rams, lions, etc., which we find as amulets, 
or which in many instances occupy the same position 
before Egyptian temples as the sphinxes, must by no 
means be confounded with the sphinxes :* each was 
simply an image of the sacred animal of the god of the 
place, of the creature in which he took incarnate form, 
and each was therefore the equivalent of the statue of the 


200 THE WORSHIP OF ANIMALS. 

god. There is no authority whatever for calling these 
objects by the name of sphinxes, and the mistaken 
nomenclature has arisen only from the fact that their 
office was the same, architecturally speaking. 

The Egyptian temple was built with a double end in 
view. It was, in the first place, the abode of the god, 
or rather of his sacred animal, and provided accommoda- 
tion for the assembling tc^ether of his worshippers with 
prayer or offerings. In the second place, from prehistoric 
times it was the fortress from which god and worshippers 
might defend themselves against the common foe in the 
days when nome strove against nome for the supremacy, 
and no Pharaoh had as yet appeared to compose their 
differences and prevent the opposition of individual 
interests and party passions from issuing in violent 
outbreaks. Then, as now, where savage races are con- 
cerned, the conquest of a country or district involved the 
destruction of the local deity and the slaughter of his 
sacred animal, and Kambyses and Okhus did no more 
than follow the example of the early Egyptians themselves 
when the one attempted to kill the Apis and the other 
commanded the slaughter of the sacred bull and of the 
ram of Mendes. It was to guard against such con- 
tingencies that the abode of the god was made the fortress 
of his domain, the citadel. into which his followers flocked 
together for their final stand against the foe. But the 
defensive character of such buildings was maintained in 
the Valley of the Nile even after the consolidation of the 
empire and the gradual formation of a national pantheon 
which included all local divinities had abolished or 


THE EGYPTIAN TEMPLE. 


201 


minimized this threatened danger to the temples of the 
gods. From earliest to latest times the ground plan of 
the Egyptian temple remained practically unchanged in 
its essential parts. 

The chief room of the temple 
was the sanctuary, and within 
this was the naos, a rectangular 
box opening in front, often with 
a door of lattice work, and 
serving in some cases as the 
cage of the sacred animal, and 
in others for whatever object 
was supposed to be the incor- 
poration of the god. But in 
those exceptional temples where 
several deities were alike 
honoured there might be several 
sanctuaries side by side instead 
of one only. The sanctuary was 
more or less surrounded by 
chambers, generally dark, and 
which served as storerooms for 
the temple furniture, sacred 
garments, processional barks, 
standards, and the like. In 
front of the sanctuary and its 
surroundings lay the hypostyle 
court, lighted dimly by windows 

near the roof and opening to the sanctuary by a narrow 
and somewhat low doorway. Opposite to this, on 


T , Jt ^ 

FIG. 56. — PLAN OF SMALL TEMPLE 
OF RAMESES II. TO AMEN, AT 
KARNAK. (WIEDEMANN, " GESCH. 
ALT. AEG./' P. 287.) 

A. Entrance Pylon. 

B. Hypaethrml Court. 

C. Hypostyle Hall. 

D. Sanctuary. 

£ & F. Store Chambers. 


202 THE WORSHIP OF ANIMALS. 

the Other side of the hypostyle hall, another and hardly 
larger doorway led into a second court, open to the sky. 
This court was as a rule colonnaded only on either side, 
but occasionally also a series of columns traversed the 
centre, as is the case in the temple of Karnak. It was 
entered from without through a colossal gateway mainly 
consisting of two great and wide towers, each tower having 
its four sides sloping regularly and slightly inward. The 
passage between the towers was but narrow and could 
easily be defended from their parapets. Such gateways 
are now known to us as pylons, and the entrance from 
the hypaethral to the hypostyle court was also, generally 
speaking, through a pylon. The passage of the great 
pylon was often fitted with wooden doors plated with 
precious metal and glittering in the sun. In addition to 
the chief entrance there were only small side posterns by 
which admission to the temple could be gained ; and these 
could easily be barred against a foe, and from them, if 
need were, sorties could be made. 

Generally an obelisk was erected before each tower of 
the pylon ; between either tower and its obelisk was 
placed a seated statue of the royal founder, and in front 
of the pylon were four or eight tall masts from which gaily 
coloured streamers waved,^ and which were intended to 
serve in some mystic way to ward off evil from the temple, 
as was also an image of the Winged Sun Disk over the 
doorway. The inner walls of the temple from pylon to 
sanctuary were adorned with scenes arranged, as it would 

1 Lepsius, Denkm., iii. 243 (teraple of KhQnsO at Karnak); 
Mariette, Mon, Div,, pi. 30a (temple of Ptah at Memphis). 


SCENES ON THE WALLS OF TEMPLES. 203 

seem, in a certain prescribed order. The whole series 
formed a kind of guide book for the use of the king 
on his visits to the temple, representing as they did the 
course of the various ceremonies which it was incumbent 
on him to perform on such occasions. The series 
commences at the outer pylon and extends to the inner- 
most chamber, the right and left walls always corresponding 
in subject Almost invariably the god of the place is 
represented as facing towards the entrance and the 
king as advancing into the building to meet him. The 
ceremonial order of the scenes was but rarely interrupted 
by historical texts, scenes of battle, or the like, these being 
more usually sculptured upon the outer walls of the temple. 
Yet they also were considered as being essentially temple 
texts and scenes, for to the Egyptian every war in which 
his country engaged was a holy war, counselled and planned 
by the great god himself, even in such details as a command 
that the king should not go out to fight in person — a com- 
mand, by the bye, which, when inculcated on Merenptah, 
was very favourably received by that king, who does not 
seem to have been remarkable for his personal valour. 
But if the king himself went forth to battle with his 
host, then the god hovered over him as a bird, protecting 
him, granting victory to his arms, and even assuming 
human form to fight at Pharaoh's side in his hour of peril. 
Since the god had conducted the war, it was to him that 
the victorious king made offering of all the best of the 
spoil — gold, slaves, and the revenues of cities — while inscrip- 
tions celebrating the main incidents of the war, and more 
especially the victory, were duly placed within his house. 


204 THE WORSHIP OF ANIMALS. 

For were not these in truth the deeds of the god, and the 
king the divine son who had acted throughout the war 
only as the instrument and in the interests of the god? 
The front walls of the pylon were almost invariably 
sculptured with a scene of victory. We see the king 
as he slays before his god a group of imploring prisoners, 
and this not only represented an actual occurrence — ^the 
human sacrifice celebrated by the Pharaoh before his god 
after a victorious return from war ^ — but also served as a 
terrible example to the enemies of that god, who might 
see depicted here the fate of all those who attempted to 
oppose the divine power. 

A wall, or more commonly an earthwork, surrounded 
the temple temenos, and occasionally included other 
temples, groves of trees in which birds made their nests, 
lakes upon which the temple barks floated, dwellings also 
for the priests, and sometimes even palaces, as it would 
seem. The only access to the temenos was through gates 
in the enclosure wall directly opposite to the pylons. 
Sacred ways led up to them, and along these funerals passed, 
images of the gods were borne in procession, and the king 
came to make offerings in the temple. These ways were 
connected with the Nile by flights of steps, at the foot 
of which the barks for the service of the temple and of 
the dead were anchored ; they were often flanked on either 
side by a row of sphinxes placed at regular intervals and 
confronting each other across the road, or more generally 
by images of the sacred animal of the temple inscribed 
in honour of the royal founder and occasionally holding 
1 Cf. Wiedemann, Le Musion^ xili., p. 455. 


POPULAR NATURE OF EGYPTIAN RELIGION. 20S 

his Statue between the outstretched paws. These stone 
figures of the sacred animals were numbered by thousands ; 
at Thebes, for example, there were whole avenues of rams. 
They guarded the Via Sacra and marked the boundaries 
of the sacred domain. Even in processions the god 
had no need to leave his own property, for sacred ways 
passed from temple to temple, through cities and fields, 
and also to the place of embalmment and to the tombs ; 
for the dead who were carried thither had themselves 
become as gods and were protected as far as possible 
from passing along unconsecrated ground. 

The barriers presented by the rows of sphinxes or sacred 
animals and by the enclosure wall of the temple were the 
only ones which separated god from man in the Valley 
of the Nile. He who had a pure heart and was a faithful 
follower of the gods might walk the sacred way at festivals 
and enter the temple in the train of the procession ; he 
might listen to the chant of the priests and reverently 
gaze into the mysterious and lamp lit darkness of the 
Holy of Holies, wherein the god himself moved in his 
animal form. No division of the people into Esoterics, 
with a knowledge of the hidden mysteries of the religion, 
and Exoterics, who assisted at the sacred rites only from 
without but might not enter into the temple, or at any 
rate into the sanctuary, is mentioned in Egyptian texts, 
whatever theories may have been advanced on the subject 
by modem scholars. Of course the Egyptians would no 
more have allowed than we ourselves should that any 
manner of man might enter a temple at his pleasure and 
pass without restrictions into the Holy of Holies. To this 


206 THE WORSHIP OF ANIMALS. 

end a certain preparation was exacted, chiefly consisting in 
prayers, fasting, and ablutions ; but no one was of necessity 
excluded from the mysteries of the Egyptian religion : 
these were as accessible to the people as to the nobility, 
however true it may be that the former troubled themselves 
but little on the subject, and left it to the priests to take 
thought for the offerings. The people would naturally 
have more faith in the power of amulets and magic than 
had the cultured classes, yet fundamentally the religious 
belief of all classes was the same. The rites of their 
religion presented mysteries only to the ignorant, or to 
such as were careless of inquiring into their meaning ; 
but necessarily the subject must always have been both 
difficult and tedious because of the involved complexity 
and abounding paradox of the doctrines. 


CHAPTER VIII. 

OSIRIS AND HIS CYCLE. 

OUR fullest account of the myth of Osiris and Isis is 
that given by Plutarch in a work composed about 
I GO A.D.^ Omitting unessential details and the author's 
remarks by the way, Plutarch's story may be rendered as 
follows : Rhea (Niit), the wife of Helios (Ra), had had 
secret commerce with Kronos (Seb). When this became 
known to Helios he cursed her with the curse that in no 
month and in no year should she give birth to her unborn 
children. But Hermes (Thoth) also had been the lover 
of Rhea, and playing at draughts with Selene he won from 
that goddess one seventieth of each day in the year, and 
out of these pieces of time made five whole days, which he 
intercalated at the end of the thrice hundred and sixty days 
of the Egyptian year. These new made days were o utsid e 
the range of the curse of Helios, and upon the first of them 
Osiris was born, a voice from heaven proclaiming that the 
lord of all things had appeared. It was also revealed to a 
certain Pamyles in Thebes that he should loudly announce 
the birth of the great king, the beneficent Osiris, whom 
Kronos forthwith entrusted to his care. On the second 
of the five new days Aroeris (//l^r-iir, " Horus the Elder ") 

^ De Iside et Osiride^ cap. 12-19 
207 


208 OSIRIS AND HIS CYCLE. 

was born, on the third day Typhon (Set), who tore his way 
through his mother's side, on the fourth Isis, and on the 
fifth Nephthys. Osiris and Aroeris were considered as the 
children of Helios, Isis as the child of Hermes, Typhon 
and Nephthys as the children of Kronos ; but some 
accounts state that Osiris and Isis had been lovers before 
birth, and that Aroeris was their son. All accounts, how- 
ever, agree in stating that Osiris and Isis were eventually 
married, as were Typhon and Nephthys. 

When Osiris came to his kingdom the Egyptians were 
living a life little better than that of animals ; but he 
changed their miserable existence, taught them the art of 
agriculture, gave them laws, and instructed them in the 
worship of the gods. Subsequently he traversed the whole 
world on a mission of civilization, and scarcely needed to 
employ force in furtherance of his ends, but won his way 
by persuasion and teaching, by song and music ; and it 
was for this that the Greeks identified him with Dionysos. 
During the absence of Osiris, Typhon was powerless to 
effect any changes, for Isis was continually on the watch 
and made a stout resistance ; but after the return of the 
king the evil one caught him by guile. Having secured 
the confederacy of seventy-two men and of Queen Aso of 
Ethiopia, Typhon privily took the measure of the body of 
Osiris, made ready a richly decorated chest of like dimen- 
sions, and brought it with him to a royal feast, at which 
it was greatly admired. Typhon, as if by way of a jest, 
promised it to any one present whose body should exactly 
fit it. One guest after another tried it in vain ; but at 
length Osiris stepped in and lay down. Then the 


LEGEND OF OSIRIS, PLUTARCH. 209 

confederates sprang forward, shut fast the lid, nailed it 
down, soldered it with melted lead, and carrying it to the 
river sent it forth to sea by the Tanitic mouth of the Nile. 
This befell on the 17th day of the month Athyr, in the 
twenty-eighth year of the life, or, according to other 
accounts, of the reign, of Osiris. 

When Isis learned what had happened her mourning 
was great; she wandered far and wide seeking for the 
body of her husband, until at length she heard from some 
children through which mouth of the Nile the chest had 
passed out to sea. She also learned that Osiris had once 
lain with her sister Nephthys, taking her for Isis, and 
seeking for their child she found it and cared for it. 
The child was known as Anubis, and became her guardian 
and companion in her wanderings. In the meantime the 
chest containing the body of Osiris had floated ashore at 
Byblos, where it was soon surrounded and overgrown by 
the stem of a magnificent Erica, The king of the land 
seeing the tree had it cut down, and set it up as a pillar 
of his house, not suspecting that within it was the chest. 
So Isis came to Byblos, and by reason of the sweet smell 
which emanated from her she found favour with the women 
servants of the palace, obtained entry there, and was 
appointed nurse to the king's child. The goddess nursed 
the child, placing her finger instead of her breast to his 
mouth, and by nights burned away all that was mortal 
from his body, while she herself flew mourning round the 
column, in the form of a swallow. But at length she was 
surprised by the queen, Astarte, who cried out when she 
saw the child in the midst of the flames and thus deprived 

14 


210 OSIRIS AND HIS CYCLE. 

him of immortality. Then the goddess revealed herself and 
asked for the column, drew it out easily from under the 
roof, and cut away the Erica from about the coffin. The 
column she wrapped up in a linen cloth, poured myrrh over 
it, and gave it to the king : thus it was that she made 
" the wood of Isis," worshipped by the people of Byblos 
down to a late date. Then she flung herself upon the 
coffin, sobbing aloud, and finally carried it away by ship. 
When at length she was alone she opened the chest, laid 
her face to that of the dead, and kissed him, and wept. 

Afterwards she concealed the coffin and journeyed to 
her son Horus, who had been brought up at BOto in Lower 
Egypt. Typhon, hunting by moonlight, found the coffin, 
recognized the body, tore it into fourteen pieces, and 
scattered them far and wide. As soon as Isis learned this 
she took a canoe and traversed the Delta in seai'ch of the 
scattered members of her husband's body. All but one she 
found, and at each place of discovery a tomb of Osiris was 
raised. In the meantime Horus had grown up ; he armed 
himself to fight against Typhon ; the combat lasted many 
days, and ended in his victory. Typhon was put in chains 
and delivered up to Isis, who, however, did not slay him, 
but let him go. At this Horus was enraged and tore the 
crown from off the head of Isis, or, rather, he cut off her 
head, which Hermes replaced by that of a cow. After the 
death of her husband Isis again became with child by him, 
and bore prematurely the boy Her-pe-khred^ " Horus the 
Child," whose lower limbs were dwarfed and stunted. 

This is Plutarch's account, but no such continuous story 
can be substantiated from the monuments. Nevertheless 


LEGEND OF OSIRIS, EGYPTIAN DATA. 211 

it is thoroughly Ancient Egyptian in character, and nearly 
all the incidents are mentioned incidentally in the texts and 
continual allusions are made to them : apparently the myth 
was so well known that it was considered unnecessary to 
give any complete account of it The falsity of the con- 
clusion based on certain statements of Herodotus that the 
Osirian myth was a religious M5rstery is best disproved 
by a popular story current in the XlXth Dynasty and 
known as the Tale of the Two Brothers. In this a 
number of incidents and particulars are derived from the 
myth, and in part at least the tale must have been unin- 
telligible to any hearer ignorant of the story of Osiris. 
In treating of the latter in detail, however,5we will confine 
ourselves to the incidents that are of most importance 
and vouched for by the inscriptions. 

The Old Egyptian year consisted of twelve months of 
thirty days each, and in order to bring this into closer 
conformity with the true year there were added to it 
the so called Epagomenal days, which even at an early 
period were celebrated in certain temples as those on 
which the five gods of the Osirian cycle werejbom. The 
third of these days, which was held to be the anniversary 
of the birth of Typhon, was reckoned unlucky, whereas 
the beneficent character ascribed to Osiris is marked 
even by his name of (jnnefer^ *' the Good Being " — which 
was at once his commonest title and one of his names 
as king. The statement that the 17th Athyr was kept as 
the anniversary of his murder is confirmed by a reference 
in a XlXth Dynasty papyrus,^ giving that date for the 
* IV. Sallier : see below, p. 264. 


212 OSIRIS AND HIS CYCLE. 

mourning for Osiris in Sais, a coincidence all the more 
noticeable since most Egyptian texts place both anniversary 
and mourning at the end of the month Khoiak. This 
striking divergence^ is explained by the fact that two 
divinities had been merged in Osiris : the dying and 
dead RA, and the god man and king Osiris. The former 
died at the end of Khoiak, on the shortest day of the 
year. Other races also have regarded this as the day 
of the Sun's death,^and of its new birth, which in the case 
of R4 too, followed immediately on his death. Different 
considerations should have determined the day upon 
which the death of Osiris was to be celebrated ; but none 
the less the Athyr date was discountenanced, especially 
in later times, when all the gods were more and more 
regarded as solar. It still, however, continued to be 
generally recognized, and is regularly quoted by the 
classical writers. The earliest allusion to the death of 
Osiris as occurring in the month Khoiak is found in an 
inscription of the XVIIIth Dynasty.* 

In other ways also the fusion of RA with Osiris affected 
the conception formed of the latter, and tended to obliterate 
its original character. The original Osiris was the ideal 
man, or rather king, whose life was the pattern life, whose 
death showed how all, even the best, must die, and whose 
life beyond death showed too, how by the exercise of 

• Occasionally the birth of the Osirian gods was fixed as having 
taken place: on other than the Epagomenal days, and indeed, 
generally speaking, the Ancient Egyptian dating of mythological 
events was very uncertain. Cf. Wiedemann, Rec. deTrav,, xviii.^ 
p. 126. 

« Wiedemann, Proc. Soc, Bib, Arch,, xi. 417. 


LEGEND OF OSIRIS, EGYPTIAN DATA. 213 

virtue all might attain to a like continuance of personal 
identity. Although of divine descent, Osiris was not 
supposed to have been a god while he lived, yet an 
inscription of the XVIIIth Dynasty asserts* that he is 
** the creator of the world, which he formed with his hand, 
of its water, its air, its plants, all its cattle, all birds, its 
reptiles, its quadrupeds," thus assigning to him the same 
work which, according to the usual acceptation, had been 
carried out by RA, and placing him in a position which 
is not in logical harmony with that which he occupies 
in the myth. But even this very text alludes to the 
myth at length, and says : " Isis the Shining One, the 
avenger of her brother (Osiris), sought him and rested 
not while full of mourning she roamed through the whole 
land ; she rested not until she had found him. She made 
light with her feathers, wind she made with her wings ; 
she gave unto him funeral panegyrics. She took his 
seed from the god and formed for him an heir, she 
suckled the child," etc.,* the child in question being he 
whom the Greeks called Harpokrates and supposed to 
have been conceived after the death of his father. 

In later times the wanderings of Isis were a favourite 
subject of Egyptian legend. It is related, for instance,' 
how after the death of Osiris Set shut up Isis and 
Horus in a house, but she, counselled by Thoth, fled forth 
together with her child. The episodes of the flight are 

> Ledrain, Mon. de la Bibl, Nat, pis. 21-7. Cf. Chabas, Hymne 
d Osiris, in Rev, Arch,, xiv«-ann6e (1857), pp. 65 et seq,, 193 et seq, 

* Hymne d Osiris, 11. 15, 16. 

» Metternichstele, ed. Golenischeff, Leipzig, 1877. Cf. Aeg. 
Zeitschr,, 1879, pp. i ff. 


214 OSIRIS AND HIS CYCLE. 

related in detail, and it is interesting to note that on 
one occasion I sis was changed into a cow and Horus 
into an Apis bull, that they might go together to the 
place of Apis in the Libyan nome "to see the god 
Osiris." Neither the change into this animal form nor 
the visit to the city, which lay outside the route of the 
goddess, has any meaning in the Osirian myth : both 
incidents are borrowed from the legend of R^. It was 
at this spot, known as "The Abode of the Cow," that 
Rk had retired on the back of a cow at his abdication. 

Incidents connected with the nurture and youth of 
Horus were also interwoven in these legends. While in 
quest of her husband's body Isis had committed Horus 
to the charge of the goddess Cazit (Leto), in the city of 
Buto, in the midst of the marshes of the Delta. Here, 
though safe from Set, the child was exposed to other 
perils, and one day suddenly fell lifeless to earth, stung 
by a scorpion.* Then Isis called the god R3L to her help, 
and the sun bark stayed in its course. The god Thoth 
disembarked in all the power of his magic, and re- 
stored to life the child, destined as a man to ascend 
the throne of his father Osiris and to avenge his death 
upon Set. The texts make frequent reference to the 
episodes of this long struggle between Horus and Set, 
which was carried on from one end of Egypt to the other, 
generally bringing it into connexion with the war of Hor- 
behadti against the enemies of R3L, among whom Set 
also appears. All the battles end in favour of Horus, 
but his victory is never final ; Set ever raises his head 
* MetternichsteU^ l.c. 


BURIAL OF OSIRIS. 21$ 

anew. The theory that Seb settled the strife by making 
Horus king of the north and Set king of the south of 
Egypt, placing their frontiers somewhat south of Memphis/ 
seems to have been a comparatively late invention. The 
strife was by nature interminable, for Horus, or rather 
Osiris whom he represented, wets the good, and Set the 
evil principle always coexistent in the world however 
often Evil may be overcome by Good. Set is likewise 
Death, which temporarily conquers Osiris ; but Good 
triumphs over death, and not only lives again in the world 
to come, but also remains upon earth, inasmuch as it leaves 
there as its representative, Horus, a being similar in all 
respects to itself. 

The burial of Osiris is the subject of long texts, and 
the laments which I sis and her sister Nephthys are sup- 
posed to have chanted at his coffin, and which represent 
him sometimes as a Sun god pure and simple, are pre- 
served in several examples varying in detail only.* The 
annual festivals in commemoration of his death, which 
were held in the month Khoiak and which set forth his 
burial and resurrection, are described minutely in a long 
text in the temple of Denderah,' and at the same time 
there is given an enumeration of the different places 
containing "graves of Osiris." Other texts amplify this 

» Stela of the time of King Sabako : of. Pleyte, Aeg. Zeit, 1876, 
pp. 51-2. 

* HOKRACK, Lamentations dists et de Nephthys, Paris, 1866 ; 
PiERRET, Etudes Egypt,, pp. 20 et seq, ; Budge, On the Hieratic 
Papyrus of Nesi^Amsu, Archoeologia, lii., pp. 11 et seq., 65 et 
seq, : cf. Proc. Soc. Bib. Arch., ix., pp. 13 et seq. 

» LORET, Rec. de Trav. rel. d PEgypte, iii., pp. 43 et seq. ; iv., 
pp. 21 etseq. ; v., pp. 85 etseq. 


2l6 OSIRIS AND HIS CYCLE. 

list and state also what portion of the god's body was 
preserved as a sacred relic in each of the sanctuaries 
named : thus, in Memphis it was the head, in Letopolis 


FIG. 57. — OSIRIS ^SAH ENSHRINED ON FRONT OF A SQUATTING FIGURE. 
(statue in BERUN MUSEUM.) 

the neck, in Athribis the heart. The inventories not 
being made on any uniform plan many relics appear twice 
over ; the head, for instance, is at Abydos as well as at 


OSIRIS, KING OF THE DEAD. 217 

Memphis, and legs enough to supply several men are 
duly accounted for. In Greek times there were forty-two 
of these Osirian temples, and the Greeks called them 
Serapeums, borrowing the name from the Serapeum at 
Memphis, without regard to the distinction between the 
tomb of a dead bull which had become an Osiris and 
the sepulchre of the god man Osiris himself. But to the 
Egyptians they were the sanctuaries of Osiris, of "him 
who dwells in the Underworld." , 

After his death Osiris became king of the world beyond 
the grave. This was the capacity in which he was wor- 
shipped by the Egyptians : he ruled over the dead, and 
it was in his presence that the judgment was given which 
decided on admission to his kingdom ; all must therefore 
seek to secure his favour. Hence it is that by far the 
greater number of prayers for the dead and the formulas 
of funerary offerings relate to him, and in thousands upon 
thousands of funerary inscriptions we may read : " May 
a royal offering be given to Osiris, that he may grant all 
manner of good things, food and drink to the ka of the 
deceased, M. or^ N." Other gods are named again and 
again in these texts, but Osiris is always invoked with 
them, or rather before them. The figure of the god ^ 
was drawn as that of a man, generally swathed in mummy 
wrappings to show that he was a god dead and buried ; 
only the hands, grasping a sceptre, were left free, and the 
green face adorned with the long stiff beard which denoted 
the dead who had become as gods. His headdress con- 
sists of the crown of Upper Egypt and the two feathers 
of Truth : it was originally peculiar to himself, and is worn 


2l8 OSIRIS AND HIS CYCLE. 

by any other god only if he had been merged in Osiris ; 
thus, for example, R^ has become Osiris when he is 
represented as a hawk with the Osirian crown.* 


FIG. 58. — ISlS, jiS.r, STANDING BEHIND OSIRIS, (l. D. III. 242, d,) 

Stela from tomb at Saqqarah, XlXth— XXth Dynasty. 

ISIS Egyptian ffesJ or AsJ, the wife and sister of 
Osiris, is represented as a woman holding the sign of 

* Cf. for Osiris, Lefebure, Ze My the Osirien, I. Les Yeux 
ePHorus, II. Osiris^ Paris, 1874-5. 


ISIS. 219 

life in her hand, or a papyrus stem, jj , the usual sceptre 
of a goddess ; ^ on her head is a throne. This throne or 
chair denotes nothing peculiar to the nature of the goddess, 
but is merely the ideogram used in writing her Egyptian 
name, the meaning of which is unknown. The Greeks 
imagined it to have some connexion with the word dSy 
" old," the Egyptians with the ejaculation as, " behold," * 
neither of these etymologies being a happy one. Isis was 
considered to be the true type of wife and mother, and 
also a most learned magician ; it is in the latter capacity 
that she appears in the legend of R^^ The cow was 
sacred to her as to all maternal deities, and hence she is 
occasionally represented as cow headed, but more generally 
as wearing the horns only, ^. Isis, like Osiris, had many 
centres of worship, but honour was more especially paid 
to her at Abydos and Mendes, or rather Busiris. The 
triad of Osiris, Isis, and Horus is a common one. In late 
times Philae was the centre of her cult ; here magnificent 
temples were raised to her, and we know from an in- 
scription that she was here still regarded as a goddess 
even in 453 A.D., that is, seventy years after the edict of 
Theodosius prohibiting the worship of Egyptian deities. 
Offerings were more particularly made to her then by 
the Blemmyes, savage nomad tribes who continually 
menaced Egypt, and were hardly held at bay and kept 
from pushing on to Lower Egypt by all the power of the 
Roman and Byzantine governors. 

' The Decree of Canopus, 1. 31, {naprrpov iramfpotidtst 6 i^tlaBaa-w 
ai $€a\ tfx^iv ev rais xcpc^- It has often been thought to be a con- 
ventionalized lotus. 

• DUMICHEN, ITai. Insch,y L. b. 2. ■ See above, pp. 54 et seq. 


220 


OSIRIS AND HIS CYCLE. 


Nephthys, Egyptian Neb-hat, the "Lady of the 
House," often appears in the texts, and is occasionally 
named as the mother of Anubis, the wife of Set, and the 
like. She was worshipped in several cities, but was really 
nothing more than the associate of Isis in her funeral 
lamentation for Osiris. Even as once she had protected 
the body of Osiris, so would she do for the pious dead 
among men ; and when engaged in this office she, like 
Isis, is represented standing with wings outspread in pro- 


Kebeh- Anuet NBPHTHVb. «. ^^ . Isi Hapl ] 

ScnOC FIG. 59.— MUMMY ON FUNERARY COUCH. * *^ 

(naville, "todt.," I. 208.) 

tection of the mummy. For the rest she is in human form 
and wears her ideogram as a headdress, ^ this being 
absolutely necessary, it alone distinguishing her from Isis, 
or indeed from any other goddess. Sometimes she wears 
the cow horns and sometimes a solar disk, but this affords 
no grounds for regarding her as a solar deity. 

Set, the brother and murderer of Osiris,* was in every 

^ Pleyte, La religion des Pre-Israelites, Utrecht, 1862 ; Lettre 
d Deveria, Leiden, 1863 ; Set dans la barqtie du Soletl, Leiden, 
1866; Meyer, Set-Typhon, Leipzig, 1875. 


SET. 221 

respect his opposite ; he was the personification of Evil as 
opposed to Grood, of the desert as against the fertile land, 
of drought as against the Nile, of darkness as against light, 
of foreign lands as against Egypt, of illness as against 
health. The evil of his nature favoured rather than 
hindered the prevalence of his worship. It was in love 
that offerings were made to Osiris, but Set was wor- 
shipped out of fear; for he was strong and mighty, a 
terror to gods and men. The kings were therefore anxious 
to secure his favour : in the Old Kingdom they describe 
themselves as being at once both Horus and Set, that is, 
the embodiment of the powers of Good and of Evil ; and 
Seti I. and other Pharaohs of the New Kingdom by their 
names marked themselves as adherents of Set. It was 
only in late times that the fear of him was overcome by 
aversion to his wickedness, execration taking the place 
of worship, and that he was persecuted in the persons of 
his adherents, viz. red haired men, who were devoted to 
him, and the animals sacred to him, such as crocodiles, 
asses, and hippopotami. He was also regarded as the 
god of foreign lands, and foreign deities, as for example 
Baal, were often represented in his figure, which was 
human and held a sceptre, td, but with the head taken 
from some animal. This head bears some resemblance to 
a camel's head, and is the s^me as that of the long tailed 
fabulous beast, the supposed incarnation of Set, pJl. 

In Tanis, and in several cities under Tanitic influence, 
the position of Set was peculiar. Here he was held to be 
a solar deity who pierced the Apep serpent with his lance, 
and was called " the beloved of RA," " the son of NOt " 


222 


OSIRIS AND HIS CYCLE. 


(who was almost invariably regarded as his mother), 
"mighty in the sun bark," etc. But according to the 
original conception of Set he was not so much the foe 
of the Apep serpent as that serpent itself: the new 
character in which he appeared at Tanis was undoubtedly 
the result of his equation with Baal. 


FIG. 60. — HEREMHEB BETWEEN HORUS AND SET. (L. D. III. 122, a.) 

Speos of Gebel Addeh, Nubia. 

In the New Kingdom Set is very commonly known as 
SUTEKH, and the legend as to the outbreak of the war of 
expulsion against the Hyksos states that Apepi, the 
Hyksos king, endeavoured to make this deity his sole 
god, not serving the other gods of the country. Under 


HORUiS, SON OF ISIS. 


223 


the XVIIIth and XlXth Dynasties we find Satekh 
spoken of as the god of the Kheta, and in this character 
he stood in a certain antagonism to R^ the god of the 
Egyptians. Radically the names Set and SCitekh are one, 
differentiated only by the addition of kh — a method of 
word formation of which there are other instances, and 
which is in harmony with 
the Egyptian, and indeed 
with the Semitic, tendency 
to develope stems contain- 
ing three radicals out of 
roots consisting originally 
of two. 

From early times Ombos 
in Upper Egypt was an 
important centre of the 
cult of Set. Here he was 
worshipped as lord of the 
South Land, and occasion- 
ally regarded as one with 
Sebak, the crocodile god. 
He had a temple at 

1 hebes, and several ^^^ 61.— horus the son op isis, her- 
temples in the Western pe-khred. (l. d. iv. 63, c.) 

TV 1^ • 11 • rri • Erment, Late Ptolemaic 

Delta — especially m Tanis 

—where he was generally worshipped under the name of 

Satekh. 

HORUS the son of Isis appears in the Osirian legend, first as 
the child Her-pe-KHRED, " Horus the child," Harpokrates, 
with his finger in his mouth ; secondly as the avenger 


224 


OSIRIS AND HIS CYCLE. 


i?? ^ E 


of his father ; and finally as his father's successor on the 
throne of Egypt His original nature can no longer be 
determined ; even in prehistoric times he had already been 
blended with Horus the Sun god, from whom there is no 
distinguishing him in the texts. Harpokrates is sometimes 

the young Sun, just 
risen, and his double, 
Aroeris, is almost purely 
a Sun god. Apart from 
the Osirian legend, little 
remains to show that 
Horus had not entirely 
lost his original nature : 
some few of its charac- 
teristics were still, how- 
ever, left to him ; thus, 
when the kings claim to 
have ascended the throne 
of Horus, the reference 
is to Horus the son of 
Isis, for Horus the Sun 
god was never reckoned 
as having been king of 
Egypt. In the lists of 
the divine dynasties this 
position is reserved for R^, ShQ, etc, and it was as their 
successors also that the Pharaohs ruled over the land. It 
is because of his equation with the Sun god that Horus 
the son of Isis is represented as hawk headed and wearing 
the disk, instead of being shown in human form, as 


FIG. 62.— HORUS AND AMENOPHIS II. 

(l. d. III. 63, rf.) 
Speos of AmcDophia II. at Ibrim. 


THOTH. 


225 


might have been expected for the son of an essentially 
anthropomorphic deity. 

Thoth/ in Egyptian DMtd, "belonging to the ibis," 
plays a comparatively small part in the Osirian myth, 
appearing only as a counsellor, or as one who can by 


FIG. 63.— IBIS OP THOTH. (nCURE IN BERUN MUSEUM.) 

magic make good wrong which has been done. Thus it 
was he who placed a cow's head upon Isis after Horus had 
cut off her own. Originally a lunar deity, he was often 
connected with KhflnsCi, and with the moon god Ah, and 

* Data concerning Thoth have to some extent been collected by 
PiETSCHMANN, Hermes Trismegistos^ Leipzig, 1875. 

15 


226 


OSIRIS AND HIS CYCLE. 


had for his sacred animal the cynocephalus, whose sexual 
life was supposed to be regulated by the phases of the 
moon. More usually, however, he was represented by 
the ibis. Ptah and Miit were considered as his parents, 
but not universally : in Thebes, for instance, where he 

was occasionally substituted 
for Set as the husband of 
Nephthys, he appears as the 
third member of a triad con- 
sisting of KhCinsi!^, Mat, and 
himself. Generally he was 
depicted in the form of an 
ibis headed man, ^, usually 
crowned with the solar disk 
and with the lunar crescent, 
inasmuch as he was a god 
of time.* It was owing to the 
importance of the moon in 
the measurement of time that 
Thoth gradually came to be 
considered as god of time, 
even in cases where the moon 
had nothing to do with his 
functions or with the divisions 
of time in question. Thus 
he, alone or together with 
SAFEKH.T, the goddess of writing, inscribes the king's name 

' Star worship in any strict sense of the term was extremely rare 
in Egypt; two references only are made to it on the monuments, 
and both date from the XlXth Dynasty. Cf. Wiedemann, Rec. de 
Trav.y xvii., pp. 1 1 e^ seq. 


FIG. 64. 
THOTH, mtr.i. (l. d. ni. 223, a.) 

Stela in Hamnuunmt Valley, XXth 
Djrnaaty. 


THOTR 227 

for its everlasting duration upon the sacred sycomore ;* it 
is he who promises the sovereign " the years of TAm, the 
dominion of Horus, and millions of years " ; and to him 
the first month of the Egyptian year and the sixth hour 
of the day were dedicated. 

Since the moon is a divider of time the lunar Thoth 
became also the god of just measurement. The cubit, which 
was dedicated to him, was the measure used in the planning 
of temples. Once, too, he had measured out the world and 
given it laws ; hence he is the g^uardian of all law, acting in 
this capacity both for himself and at the command of R^. 
Moreover he was the god of writing, the scribe of the 
gods, and the god of letters — especially of religious 
literature. Scribes regarded him as their tutelary deity 
and invoked his aid at their work. He was supposed 
to have written the most sacred books and formulas with 
his own hand, and therein to have set down his knowledge 
of magic, in which art Isis only was his rival. His pre- 
eminence in magic naturally led to his becoming the god of 
medicine, for magic was fully as important to the medical 
practitioners of the Nile Valley as knowledge of remedies. 

But it was after death that man most needed the help 
of Thoth. When Osiris died Thoth had undertaken to 
provide him with the correct magic formulas to use in 
fighting against his foes, the powers of darkness, and thus 
to make him king of the world beyond death. Each 
Egyptian hoped to receive like help in his own extremity : 
it was Thoth who would restore to him his speech, teach 
him to recite the true formulas, with Anubis conduct him 
^ See illustration on p. 156. 


228 


OSIRIS AND HIS CYCLE. 


to the Judgment Hall, note down the fin»l • ^ 
P-haps even speak for him as hra^'^^^e '"""' "' 

The Greeks identi- 
fied him with Hermes 
with whose nature 
as conceived by 
the Alexandrians and 
Neoplatonists his was 
not without affinity; 
and the Greek method' 
of marking the dis- 
tinction of their god 
by calling him Her- 
m e s Trismegistos, 
"Hermes the thrice 
great," is not unlike 
the Egyptian: in later 
times especially we 
find Thoth qualified 
in the inscriptions as 
" twice great." 

In the Ra legends 
also Thoth is promi- 
nent as the adviser 

nG.6s ■ ^"^^'="''6 of the gods. 

'^v^i^An^ ("°°»« IN BHRUN .USKU-.) "^ ^ ^ Popularity of 
nated at the becrm^; r . ^'^ worship culmi- 

Pharaohs we^e^^^ l'^ ""'^ ''•"^'°'"' ^^^^ *« 
'•Sonof Thoth "r1/.."' ''■"'"" (Thothmosis), 
'^' °' ^^'"^•^(Amasis), "Son of the Moon" 


ANUBIS. 


229 


after the planet which was his.^ Temples, however, were 
rarely raised in his honour. 

Anubis, Egyptian AnepA.lyf^s depicted in human form, 
but with the head of his sacred animal, the jackal, \||. This 
animal was mistaken by the Greeks for a dog, and hence 
it was as a dog that Anubis was introduced into Roman 
Isis worship. From time to time the Egyptians themselves 
had fallen into this mistake, and isolated mummies of 


FIG. 66. — ANUBIS AND MUMMY. (nAVILLE, 

"todt.," I. 174.) 

dogs have occasionally been found in the jackal cemeterj' 
at Lycopolis. Yet, generally speaking, the dog was not 
held sacred, although it was domesticated and kept both 
for hunting and in the house. Anubis was usually con- 
sidered the son of Osiris and Nephthys, but in a magical 
text* RA is named as his father, probably only because 


' The correct translation of these names is probably ** Thoth," 
or ** the Moon — ^has bom (a child)/' giving a sense analogous to the 
name Rameses = R4-mes-stk, '' the Sun god has borne him." 

• Chabas, Pap, magique Harris^ loi. 


230 OSIRIS AND HIS CYCLE. 

RA and Osiris were regarded by the writer as one. In 
the legend he is the assistant of Isis. According to 
Egyptian belief he was a special patron of the dead^ 
guarding them and superintending their embalmment, he 
or Thoth being their guide into the next world and 
leading them by the hand into the Hall of Judgment 
Temples were raised to him in many places, but the chief 
centre of his cult was Lycopolis in Upper Egypt, the 
Siflt of to-day. Here he was worshipped under the name 
or rather title of ApAat, " The Opener of the Way," U. 
of the Underworld. Lycopolis in the Delta was also 
dedicated to him, and probably these were the two places 
which the Egyptian had in mind when speaking of the 
Anubis of the South and the Anubis of the North, and 
placing upon funerary stelae two jackals as guardians 
of the deceased. This procedure illustrates the fact that 
though the Egyptians recognized that divinities of the 
same name in different centres of worship were distinct, 
yet this did not imply any belief in more than one Anubis. 
It was the Greek mythographers who from similar premisses 
first drew this inevitable conclusion: they assumed that 
there must be more than one Herakles, Hermes, etc> 
because it seemed impossible to unite into one biography 
all the m5^s relating to each. 

Seb, or, as his name was also written, Keb,* was god 
of the earth, for which his name was used as an equivalent 
in expressions such as " on the back of Seb." The Greeks 

* Cf. Brugsch, Aeg, Zeit, 1886, pp. i et seq.\ Renouf, Froc. 
Soc, Bib. Arch,, ix., pp. 83 etseq. ; also Aeg, Zeit, 1893, pp. 125 et 
seq, ; Rec, de Trav.^ xvii., pp. 94 et seq. 


SEB— NOT. 


231 


identified him with Kronos, probably only because as 
father of Osiris he might be considered as senior among 
the gods. ShCl was supposed to be his father, and NClt 
his wife. According to the lists of the divine d3niasties 
in Memphis and Thebes, he was the fourth king of Egypt, 
and therefore to be reckoned as one of the younger gods. 
But the mention of him in the texts does not seem to 
favour this view, for there he is called, not king, but 
nomarch {erp£) of 
the gods, as if at the 
time when his wor- 
ship arose there had 
as yet been no king 
in Egypt. His sa- 
cred animal was the 
goose, and some- 
times he is supposed 
to be connected or 
even identical with 
the goose which laid 

the egg whence issued the world. In the Legend of the 
Destruction of Mankind he is installed as king in imme- 
diate succession to Ra. His connexion with the cult of 
the dead is very slight ; nevertheless he is often named 
incidentally in the texts. 

Nu.T, usually represented as a woman, is the female 
personification of the sky, of which she forms the vault 
by arching her body over the earth and resting her weight 
upon her hands and feet ; ShO is sometimes seen standing 
below to support her in this uneasy posture. On her 


FIG. 67. — SEB (kEB) separated FROM nO.T BY 
ShO. (BRUGSCH, " MYTHOLOGIE," p. 210.) 


232 


OSIRIS. AND HIS CYCLE. 


travel the heavenly bodies, over which she also was supposed 
to exercise some control. She was "lady of heaven,'* 
" mistress and mother of the gods," " lady of earth." * 

This goddess must be distinguished carefully from the 
god named NO or NCn, who represents the celestial 
ocean, the water traversed by the solar bark, who was 


FIG. 68. — NU.T POURING WATER FROM A PALM TO DECEASED AND 
HIS SOUL, (stela in BERUN MUSEUM.) 

the father of the gods, the source of creation, and from 
whom all came forth. In late times he was sometimes 
considered the first of the falsely so called gods of the 
elements, and to represent, together with his feminine 
manifestation NO.T or NOn.T, the waters of the Nile. 
' For Not as a cow, see illustration p. 65, and pp. 62-4. 


nOn and nOn.t. 233 

This second NAt is sometimes figured as a woman 
seated within a palm or sycomore and pouring waters of 
refreshment from a libation vase on the hands of a soul 
(ba) crouched at the foot of the tree.* The remaining 
deities of the group to which Nftn and this NAt belong, 
and which bear the names Heh and Heq.t, Kek and 
KEK.T, NenO and NenO.t, would seem to be male and 
female forms of Eternity, Darkness, and the Inundation. 
This interpretation is, however, uncertain, although better 
substantiated than the older explanation that they were 
personifications of the four elements : Water, Fire, Earth, 
and Air.^ 

» Ct pp. 143, 157. 

' Cf. Lepsius, Ueber die Goiter der vier Elemente bet den 
Aegyptern, Abhandlungoi the Berlin Academy, Berlin, 1856, an 
article collecting all the data given in the inscriptions. 


CHAPTER IX. 

THE OSIRIAN DOCTRINE OF IMMORTALITY. 

WE have already seen one series of Ancient Egyptian 
ideas of a future state to be closely connected with 
the myth of the Sun god Ri, and his journey through 
the Underworld. These, however, formed the belief of a 
very restricted number: for the vast majority of Egyptians 
of all periods conviction of a life beyond death was bound 
up with the worship of Osiris, and on this groundwork 
they pictured for themselves in detail the fate of soul and 
body, and developed a doctrine of immortality which in 
precision and extent surpasses almost any other that has 
been devised. The scientific importance of the Osirian 
doctrine arises first from its extreme antiquity — ^for even 
in Pyramid times it was complete in all its essential parts — 
and also from its many points of affinity to Jewish and 
Christian dogma. 

A follower of the Osirian religion held that when a man 
had died, when his heart had ceased to beat and his body 
had become cold, nothing remained of him upon earth but 
a lifeless hulk : the corpse. This was named the Kha, and 
its ideogram was a dead fish,^^, the sign for any noisome, 
putrid thing. The preservation of the Kha was the first 
duty of the survivors, and shortly after death it was 

234 


EMBALMMENT. 235 

handed over to the embalmers that they might so mani* 
pulate it as to render it proof against corruption. But in 
the hot climate of Egypt it was impossible to preserve the 
body intact: the intestines, heart, lungs, and liver, and 
also the brain were removed, either to be buried or cast 
away, or else to be placed in vessels apart ; although in 
some exceptional cases they were thickly smeared with 
asphalt, and in this unnatural condition restored to the 
body. The body now consisted of bones, flesh, and skin 
only, and after being thoroughly dried and shrunk by 
means of natron, it was coated with asphalt and became 
what we call a mummy, a black corpse which might 
remain unchanged for thousands of years in the dry 
climate of the Nile Valley, but which gradually falls into 
decay when brought into the damp atmosphere of Europe. 
In the cavities of the body were laid all manner of 
amulets; others were placed on different parts of the 
body, especially about the neck, and all was then swathed 
in linen bands^es. Each rite which had to be performed, 
each prayer which had to be repeated, was exactly pre- 
scribed, and directions for them are contained in several 
papyri which have come down to us.* It is true that the 
same ceremonial was not observed in all cases ; the rites 
were more or less complicated in proportion to the sums 
which the survivors were able or willing to devote to the 
service of their dead. 
The swathed mummy was laid in a cofiin inscribed with 

1 Rhind Papyri, edited by BiRCH, London, 1863, and Brugsch, 
Leipzig, 1865 ; Hieratic Papyrus at Vienna in Bergmaxn, 
HieraHsche Texte, Vienna, 1887 ; others at BMak and Paris in 
Maspero, Mim, sur quelques pap, du Louvre, Paris, 1875. 


236 THE OSIRIAN DOCTRINE OF IMMORTALITY. 

prayers for the deceased together with his names and 
titles, and invocations of the different deities charged with 
his future welfare, all illustrated by vignettes. In the 
matter of coffins also, the difference between rich and 
poor was great, the latter having to make shift with few 
texts and often without coffin at all, while the wealthy 
found their last resting places within three and even four 
sarcophagi, placed one within another and adorned with 
innumerable inscriptions and vignettes. 

The body was returned to the family in its coffin ; 
sometimes, if the deceased had died in a foreign land, he 
was thus brought back to his native city to be laid in the 
tomb which it was the care of an Egyptian to prepare for 
himself during life. The mummy was borne in solemn 
funeral procession, accompanied by the family, the wailing 
women, and the priests, from the eastern shores of the 
Nile, where most of the cities were built, to the necropolis 
among the western hills. If city and necropolis both lay 
on the same side of the river, still the crossing was per- 
formed, at least symbolically, by traversing the sacred 
lake invariably attached to a city of the dead. When 
the tomb, the "eternal house," had been reached, the 
coffin was set up on end, with face turned towards the 
south, on a small sandhill intended to represent the 
Mountain of the West — the realm of the dead. There 
the deceased was approached by various persons who 
prayed before him and performed many sacred rites, 
the chief functionary being the Kher heb^ who may best 
be described as master of the ceremonies. He conducted 
the whole ritual ; papyrus roll in hand, he assigned to 


-I 


M 
P 


FUNERAL. 239 

each his place, and prompted each with the words he 
had to speak, or else recited them in his name. With the 
Kher heb stood a servant, a friend, and a son of the 
deceased, two mourning women, one representing Isis 
and the other Nephthys, the sacrificial priest, and other 
persons who seem to have been merely present at the 
proceedings without taking part in them. The whole 
ceremony was intended as a reproduction of what was 
supposed to have taken place round the coffin of Osiris. 

There is no occasion for entering into the details of 
these complicated proceedings : from full and precise 
descriptions of them which have come down to us^ it is 
evident that their main object was the restoration of all 
bodily functions to the mummy preparatory to the long 
journey which lay before it in the next world* The 
mouth was symbolically opened that it might speak and 
the eyes that it might see; a bull was slaughtered that 
the dead might have food to hand ; rites were performed 
to enable it to make use of garments, unguents, and many 
other things, in fact to make it in all things like a living 
human body. The mummy itself remained undisturbed ; 
the coffin only was manipulated. For the most part, 
the end in view was to be accomplished by reciting the 
right prayer and touching the mummy case with a wand 
shaped like the hieroglyph ^v— % ; sometimes the sym- 
bolical passes were made, with the same effect, upon a 
statue of the deceased instead of upon his coffin. After 

^ SCKIAPAKEJ.LI, Il£tdrodezFuneralt\Tunn, 1881-90; Maspero, 
J^ev. de VHist des Rels., xv., pp. 162 et seg. ; Etudes de Mythologies 
i., pp. 283 et seq. 


240 THE OSIRIAN DOCTRINE OF IMMORTALITY. 

this ceremony was completed the body was lowered into 
the grave and the shaft closed, and when all was over 
a funeral feast was held in the antechamber of the 
tomb.^ Henceforth there was nothing more that the 
friends and relatives of the deceased could do for him 
except to present him with offerings either directly or 
through the gods, and to constrain the gods with magic 
formulas to deal kindly by the dead. 

In addition to his body, thus made into a perfect 
iftummy, or, as the Egyptians would have called it, an 
Osiris, man had also an immortal soul. This was not 
considered, as among most races, a simple entity, but a 
composite one: in life the component parts had been 
united ; at death they parted, each to find its own way 
to the gods.* 

First among these parts was the so called Ka, imagined 
as similar to a man and yet not a man, and which stood 
to him somewhat in the same relation as the verbal ex- 
pression of some tangible reality to that reality itself, or 
as the name of any one to the person whom it designates. 
The notion of a Ka was probably suggested by the fact 
that the image of the dead or of one who is far away 
may be seen in thought or dreams. Hence it was believed 
that man was not simply a material being who could be 
in only one place at once, but that he included a second 
self, able to pass through walls or barriers, bound neither 

* An exceptional practice sometimes, however, prevailed of keep- 
ing the mummies in accessible chambers above ground. See Proc, 
Soc, Bib. Arch.^ xvii., p. 156. 

» Wiedemann, The Ancient Egyptian Doctrine of Immortality, 
London, 1895. 


THE KA. 241 

by time nor space, and which might exist for thousands 
of years. The Ka has thus several points of affinity with 
the Ren, or name of a man,* — the sound of which evokes 
an image of him in the mind of the hearer — and with a 
portrait statue. Similar conceptions of personality as 
apart from a person are found among the most divergent 
races, but an extreme development of the idea in one 
direction was peculiar to the Egyptians : they turned this 
abstraction back into the concrete, and endowed it with 
a tangible form dependent upon food for its continued 
existence. 

At death a man, as such, ceased to be. His body was 
made into a mummy and placed within a coffin, and 
this experience had shown that no mummy could ever 
leave. The Ka, which had been the companion of the 
body in life, at death attained to independent existence. 
It was to the Ka that funerary prayers and offerings were 
made ; to the mummy alone they were useless. But 
when the Ka returned to the mummy, entered into it, 
animated it, and became " the Ka living in its coffin," then 
the two united were able to lead something of the same 
life that they had led together on earth, eating, drinking, 
and going to and fro to visit the survivors and remind 
them of their duty in the matter of funerary offerings. 
This procedure was more incumbent upon the poor man's 
Ka than upon that of the rich, who could in his lifetime 
ensure for himself the needful supplies by entering into 
a contract with the priests of the dead in his own 
neighbourhood, making over to them land and property 
* See below, pp. 293-5. 

16 


242 THE OSIRIAN DOCTRINE OF IMMORTALITY. 

in exchange for their bond to present his Ka with care- 
fully specified offerings on certain feast days. The poor 
man could make no such provision for himself: he was 
dependent after death upon the piety of his family. 

A great proof of the firm root which this idea of the Ka 
had taken in the Egyptian mind is afforded by the fact 
that it was believed to be an indispensable constituent of 
every being which had life, Kas being ascribed to the gods 
themselves even in Pyramid times. 

The Ab, or heart, the second of these immortal parts, 
will be dealt with in the chapter on amulets. 

The third part was the Ba, which best corresponds to 
our idea of the soul. It was imagined as being in the 
form of a bird, usually with human head and hands. At 
death it flew to the gods ; but it was no more immaterial 
than the Ka, and equally dependent upon renewed supplies 
of food and drink. In Egyptian art the Ba is some- 
times shown perched on the coffin, tenderly caressing it, 
and taking farewell of the mummy within. 

In the fourth place we have the SahO, figured as the 
swathed mummy of the deceased, the empty form of him- 
self which, having come to him from the godhead, could 
therefore at death return to it. And there was the 
Khaib, or shadow of a man, which also passed for a 
separate entity that might be parted from its owner, 
and was indeed invariably parted from him when he 
died. The Khaib was usually symbolized as a sunshade. 
Again, there was the Khu, the Shining One, a con- 
ception apparently suggested by the idea of a glorified 
and luminous mummy, and the Sekhem, the personified 


THE OSIRIS. 243 

power or strength of the deceased/ not to mention other 
constituents of a man's being less frequently insisted upon. 
But far more important than any of these, and the chief 
immortal representative of man as a whole, was his Osiris. 

The Osiris was the immortal counterpart of the 
mummy. The equipment of the mummy was the equip- 
ment of the Osiris ; the amulets bestowed upon the 
mummy, the furniture placed in its tomb, all became 
possessions of the Osiris. But even as the other immortal 
parts of a man left him at death, so also did his Osiris. 

These supposed entities are obviously very similar 
in function ; several, such as Ka, Osiris, and S^hd, 
personify almost the same idea, and it would seem that 
in these cases we have to do with the different con- 
ceptions of an immortal soul which had arisen in separate 
places and prehistoric times, and were ultimately com- 
bined into one doctrine, the Egyptians not daring to set 
any aside for fear it should prove to be the true one. 
All, therefore, were retained, regardless of the logical 
embarrassments inevitably brought about by such a course. 
The fusion of these beliefs took place at a very early 
period and its history cannot now be traced : even in 
the times of the Pyramid builders it had already been 
accomplished, and there can be little profit in speculating 
as to how it came about until better evidence for the 
settlement of the question is forthcoming. One thing, 
however, is clear : the Osirian doctrine was that which 
obtained the largest following, for it put all other theories 
into the background. While little or nothing is stated 
' Cf. Wiedemann, Le Musion, xv., pp. 46 et seq. 


244 THE OSIRIAN DOCTRINE OF IMMORTALITY. 

in detail as to the fate of the other immortal parts of 
a man's being, and we are only told that at death they 
left the body and were dispersed, but were reunited in 
the Osiris after the Last Judgment, with the fate of the 
Osiris himself the texts deal at wearisome length. And 
this is because the Egyptian hope of eternal life was 
bound up in the god Osiris, and therefore preference 
was given to that conception of the soul which had such 
affinity to Osiris as to be called by his name. 

The most important and widely diffused of all Egyptian 
religious writings is the so called BOOK OF THE DEAD, 
which is specially devoted to the Osiris. It is a collection 
of prayers and formulas to be spoken by him in traversing 
the regions of the Underworld, and secured to him victory 
over evil demons and protection from good ones. The 
oldest copies of the work date from the Middle Kingdom ; 
these, however, are rare. Commoner use was made of 
it in the New Kingdom, and in later times a copy of at 
least some portion of the book was placed with every 
mummy of the better class.* The contents of the 

* The oldest of these texts are given by Lepsius, Aelteste Texte 
des Todienbuches, Berlin, i86; ; Maspero, Mim, de la Miss, au 
Caire, i. 155 ff. ; Lepsius, Denkm., il. 98, 99, 145-8. Later texts 
may be found in Naville, Das dgypt, Todtenbuch der 18 — 20 
Dyn.y Berlin, 1886 (cf. Maspero, Le Livredes Morts, in Rev. de 
VHisL des ReL, 1887) 5 ^^ Rouoi:, Rituel funiraire, Paris, 1867. 
Very late texts are given in Lepsius, Das Todtenbuch der 
Aegypter nach dem hieroglyphischen Papyrus in Turin, Berlin, 
1842 ; Fap, Cadet, in Descr, d*Ag, Ant., ii. ; etc. A translation 
of the whole work on the basis of the Turin text has been made by 
Birch in Bunsen, Egypfs Place in Universal History,^., pp. 123 
et seq, ; by Pierret, Le Livre des Morts^ Paris, 1881 ; and lastly, 
working from Naville's text, by Lepage Renouf, The Egyptian 


BOOK OF THE DEAD. 245 

different transcripts vary. The whole work consisted of 
separate chapters or books, each intended for some 
particular emergency ; the rich and pious Egyptian had 
as many of them as possible transcribed on the papyrus 
placed in his grave, or upon the walls of his tomb and on 
the inside and outside of his mummy cases : for the poor 
a few of the more important extracts had to suffice. The 
chapters altogether amount to over two hundred, but there 
is no one manuscript containing them all ; a selection was 
always made, partly at the choice of the purchaser, partly 
in accordance with the taste and tendencies of the time, 
sometimes one and sometimes another set of extracts being 
in favour. In the course of centuries the material for 
selection increased : the oldest of the transcripts are some- 
what short, but as time went on they grew longer and 
longer. It is not known at what period the work originated. 
The p5^amids contain comparatively few passages that 
were utilized later in the composition of the Book of the 
Dead : their texts do indeed provide magic formulas for use 
in the next world ; generally, however, these are worded 
differently. But as they presuppose a knowledge of all 
the main incidents in the Osirian legend, and also allude 
in detail to the doctrine of immortality based upon it, 
presumably these texts represent more especially the forms 
of belief prevailing at Memphis, and not the Osirian 
doctrine as taught even then at Heliopolis and Abydos. 
There is no systematic arrangement in the Book of 

Book of the Deady in Proc. Soc, BibL Arch,, xv., etc. Erman 
in Aeg. Zeit,y 1894, pp. 2 et seg., has given an example of how 
individual chapters arose. 


246 THE OSIRIAN DOCTRINE OF IMMORTALITY. 

the Dead any more than in other religious texts of the 
Egyptians. It is a rare thing to find two copies in which 
the chapters follow the same sequence ; the order of the 
chapters or groups of chapters seems to have been 
entirely optional. Nor was any attention paid to the 
logical and natural sequence of events ; for example, the 
prayers by means of which the beatified soul was enabled 
to take on various forms generally precede the chapter 
whereby it was to attain to beatification. And, though 
not quite so embarrassing, still it is inconvenient that the 
deceased should receive from the beginning the epithet 
to which he only becomes entitled later, and is invariably 
spoken of as mad kheru^ " true of voice " (or rather, accord- 
ing to the usage of the word in the Book of the Dead, 
"pronounced justified"*), although it is only the sequel 
that can show whether he possessed or even in the end 
attained the presupposed attribute. The practice was 
probably based on feelings akin to those with which the 
Germans habitually speak of their dead as selig^ "blessed," 
hoping that blessedness may indeed be their lot. 

The teachings of the Book of the Dead are supple- 
mented by many other texts, usually of a later date. 
In Ptolemaic times and even earlier there was a demand 
for compilations of passages from the Book of the Dead 
and other works which should contain only the most 
essential formulas, and which were intended for the private 
use of small circles of believers, or even for individuals, 
and not for the great majority, who still held fast by the 
Book of the Dead itself. Some of these collections had 

^ For the meaning of this word, see below, pp. 279-80, and note. 


BOOK OF THE DEAD. 247 

a comparatively wide circulation, as, for instance, "The 
Book of the Breath," " The Second Book of the Breath," 
"The Book of Journeying in Eternity," "The Book of 
'May my Name flourish,'" etc, while others are found 
in single examples only and probably never existed in 
duplicate.* 

The texts dealing with the Sun's journey through the 
Underworld yield a tolerably clear picture of a world to 
come, but this is not the case with the Book of the Dead, 
and it would be impossible to set down as in a map the 
regions which it describes. Mention is made of rivers, 
of several territories, of gates which must be passed, of 
chapels wherein dwell gods, of demons lying in wait for 
souls at various points, of lakes of fire, and of islands ; 
but how all these details fitted together was obviously 
outside the apprehension even of the Egyptian priests, 
otherwise there would be at least some thread of con- 
sistency running through the description of the journey- 
ings of the Osirian soul. In view of this confusion and 
because the isolated incidents are of comparatively slight 
importance in any attempt to deal with the Egyptian 
religion as a whole, we may here dismiss these journey- 
ings from our further consideration. Suffice it to note 
that by help of the formulas of the Book of the Dead 
the soul succeeded in overcoming all the evil spirits, 

* Brugsch, Sat en Sinsin, Berlin, 1851 ; de Horrack, Le 
Lfvre des Respirations, Paris, 1877 ; voN Bergmann, Das Buck 
vom Durchwandeln der Ewigkeit, Sitzungsber, of Vienna Akad., 
1886, pp. 369 et seq, ; Lieblein, Le Livre Egyptien : Que mon nam 
fleurisse, Leipzig, 1895 ; Paf. Louvre No. 3283, edited by Wiede- 
mann, Hierat. Texte, Leipzig, 1879. 


248 THE OSIRIAN DOCTRINE OF IMMORTALITY. 

constraining all the good ones to show it favour, in 
opening all doors, and eventually in coming to judgment 
in the Hall of the Two Truths, Le, Truth and Justice- 
Here, upon a chair beneath a canopy, sat "Osiris the 
Good Being, the Lord of Life, the Great God, the Lord 
of Abydos, the King of Eternity." In his hand he held 
a royal sceptre and a flail, and his crown was upon his 
head. Some representations of this scene place the 
symbol of Anubis in front of Osiris ; in others Anubis is 
engaged on the other side of the hall in introducing the 
soul, which must otherwise make its entry alone. Before 
Osiris sat the forty-two judges of the dead, each summoned 
from a different city in Egypt, each to pronounce sentence 
upon the dead with regard to some particular sin. There 
also stood before the god the four funerary genii : the 
human headed Amset, the ape headed Hapi, the jackal 
headed DOamOtef, and the hawk headed Kebehsenuf.* 
These had charge of the viscera of the dead and were 
bound to appear at the judgment, because, according to 
Egyptian belief, it was not the divine Ego of a man which 
sinned, but only his internal organs. The deceased was 
received by the goddess or goddesses of truth. He pro- 
ceeded to speak in his own justification, declaring that he 
had not committed any one of the forty-two sins, and 
then the truth of his words was tested by weighing his 
heart in the scales against the symbol of truth. Horus 
superintended the weighing, occasionally assisted by Anubis 
or Thoth, the latter being usually present as Scribe of 
the Gods to set down the result of the proceedings. 
' See illustration on p. 220. 


BOOK OF THE DEAD. 249 

If the dead was found to be righteous he received back 
his heart, the rest of the immortal parts of his soul were 
reunited in him, and he was again built up into the man 
who had walked the earth, but who now entered upon 
new and eternal life. What befell, according to the 
Osirian doctrine, if judgment went against him is un- 
certain. Presumably for such an one there was no re- 
edification, and the Osiris died a second death, followed 
by his complete annihilation. In many representations- 
the figure of a female hippopotamus may be seen in the 
judgment hall. She is indicated as the Devourer of the 
Underworld, and has often been supposed to be a monster 
to whom the unjustified dead were handed over : how far 
this interpretation is correct we cannot determine. Gener- 
ally the animal seems to have been placed there simply 
as guardian of the entrance to the Fields of the Blessed,, 
but sometimes it is likened to Set Elsewhere it is said 
that the judges of the dead slay the wicked and drink 
their blood. In brief, here also we have conflicting state- 
ments, and can only gather that there seems to have been 
no general agreement among the dwellers in the Valley 
of the Nile as to the ultimate lot of the wicked. 

The judgment before Osiris forms the subject of Chapter 
CXXV. in the Book of the Dead, and here we have 
specified the words which the deceased was to speak in 
the judgment hall. In the Turin text the first part of 
this chapter is as follows : — 

" Hail to you, ye lords of the Two Truths ! Hail ta 
thee. Great God (Osiris), Lord of the Two Truths ! I come 
unto thee, thou my lord ; I draw nigh unto thee to behold 


250 THE OSIRIAN DOCTRINE OF IMMORTALITY. 

thy beauties. I have learned and know thy name; I 
know the names of the forty-two gods who are with thee 
in the Hall of the Two Truths, who live and keep watch 
on the wicked, who eat of their blood on that day of 
trying words before the Good Being, the Justified (moA 
k/ierU) One (Osiris). Hail ! Twofold Spirit ! Lord of the 
Two Truths is thy name. Hail ! I know you, ye lords of 
the Two Truths ; I bring unto you Truth, I destroy Evil 
for you ! 

" I have not committed fraud and evil against men. 

I have not oppressed my fellow men (?)— otherwise said, 
my comrades. 

I have not diverted justice in the judgment hall. 

I have not known meanness. 

I have not committed wickedness. 

I have not (as overseer) caused a man to do more than 
his day's work. 

I approach the bark of the offering (?), I approach the 
place of him who offers the prescribed offerings. 

I have not given way to anxious care. 

I have not been empty (of good). 

I have not been weak. 

I have not been wretched (?). 

I have not done that which is an abomination to the gods. 

I have not caused a slave to be ill treated by his 
overseer. 

I have not brought any to hunger. 

I have not caused any to weep. 

I have not committed murder. 

I have not caused any to be guilefully murdered. 


BOOK OF THE DEAD, NEGATIVE CONFESSION. 251 

I have not wrought deceitfully against any man. 

I have not spoiled the bread of offering in the temples. 

I have not taken away from the bread of offering of 
the gods. 

I have not stolen the garments or wrappings of the 
glorified ones (the dead). 

I have not committed fornication. 

I have not defiled myself as priest of the god of my city. 

I have not added to, (and) 

I have not diminished the offerings. 

I have not added to the weight of the balance. 

I have not taken milk from the mouths of children. 

I have not taken cattle in their pasture. 

I have not taken in nets the birds of the gods. 

I have not taken the fish in their (the gods') fishponds. 

I have not turned aside the water (from a neighbour's 
field) at the time of inundation. 

I have not cut off an arm of the river in its course. 

I have not extinguished the fire in its season (J,e. the 
time during which it was to be kept alight). 

I have not defrauded the Ennead of the Gods of that 
which was theirs (?). 

I have not driven back (from my fields ?) the herds of 
the temple lands. 

I have not turned back a god at his coming forth (in 
procession from his temple)." 

After some intervening formulas in which the deceased 
•declares himself to be one of the blessed ones who have 
risen from the dead, there follows a second " Negative 
Confession." This is distinguished from the first in that 


252 THE OSIRIAN DOCTRINE OF IMMORTALITY. 

it is divided into forty-two lines, each opening with the 
invocation of a certain demon, genius, or spirit whose 
dwelling place is duly named, and concluding with the 
mention of a sin which the deceased asserts that he has 
not committed. The formula runs : " O thou Strider forth,, 
who proceedest from Heliopolis, I have not done evil " ;. 
" O thou Opener of the Mouth, who proceedest from 
Babylon (now Old Cairo), I have done no injury," eta 
The sins repudiated are on the whole the same as those 
enumerated in the first confession ; many of them are, 
however, specified in greater detail in order to bring up 
the number to forty-two. But let it be observed that 
here also the deceased claims that he has not robbed, 
nor been covetous, has slain no temple cattle, has not 
been an eavesdropper, has not been furious, has not been 
deaf to words of truth, has cursed none, and especially 
not the king, his own father, or a god. 

The significance of this Negative Confession lies in 
the fact that it gives us the standard of Egyptian morality, 
showing the nature and multiplicity of the misdeeds to 
be avoided by him who would enter into the realm of 
Osiris. This testimony to the emphasis which the 
Egyptians laid on morality is confirmed from the most 
various sources. We have several examples of papyri 
containing exhortations to good conduct, and strict 
injunctions as to the right course to pursue under vary-^ 
ing circumstances. The oldest of them dates from the 
Xllth Dynasty and is known as the Prisse Papyrus,, 
being called after the name of its discoverer ; the latest 
is written in demotic; and there are texts of similar 


EGYPTIAN MORALITY. 253 

import which are of intermediate date. In much of their 
matter, and sometimes even in verbal expression, these 
papyri recall the collection of proverbs in the Bible, the 
Wisdom of Solomon, the Proverbs of Jesus Sirach, and 
many of the other Biblical exhortations. For instance, in 
the Prisse Papyrus the Fourth Commandment is found in 
almost identical terms : " The son who hearkens to the 
word of his father, he shall grow old thereby." Other 
texts exhort to the study of wisdom, to regard and 
respect for parents and superiors, to mercifulness, gener- 
osity, discretion, integrity, sobriety, chastity, and the like. 
In the funerary inscriptions the dead often plead their 
good deeds. " I did that which was right," says one 
Egyptian ; " I hated evil ; I gave bread to the hungry 
and water to the thirsty, clothing to the naked, succour 
to him who was in need." "I harmed not a child, I 
injured not a widow ; there was neither beggar nor needy 
in my time ; none were anhungered, widows were cared 
for as though their husbands were still alive." " I did that 
which was pleasing to my parents ; I was the joy of my 
brethren, the friend of my companions, honourably minded 
towards all my fellow citizens. I gave bread to the 
hungry and shelter to the traveller ; my door stood open 
to him who entered from without, and I refreshed him." ^ 
The Confession was heard in silence by Osiris and his 

* Prisse, Facsimile (Tun Papyrus Egyptien, Paris, 1847 (^f* 
ViREY, Etude sur le Papyrus Prisse, Paris, 1887) ; Mariette, 
Pap. de Boulak, i., pis. 15-23 (cf. Chabas, L' Mgyptologie^ 1876-8) ; 
Pierret in Rec, de Trav., i., pp. 40 et seq, (cf. Lepage Renouf, 
Origin and Growth of Religion illustrated by the Religion of 
Ancient Egypt, London, 1880, pp. 71 etseg,). 


254 THE OSIRIAN DOCTRINE OF IMMORTALITY. 

assessors : they testified neither approval nor disapproval : 
the truth of the affirmations would be settled by the 
weighing of the heart This being concluded in his 
favour, the new man was conducted into the FIELDS OF 
AalC (or AarO), into the kingdom of the blessed followers 
of Osiris, which was a country modelled altogether on 
earthly lines, but especially resembling the Delta: a 
Nile ran through it divided into many branches and 
forming many islands. Here the dead ate and drank, 
went hunting, fought with their foes, enjoyed themselves 
with their friends at games of draughts, made offerings 
to the gods, and went out in their boats upon the canals. 
But the chief occupation was agriculture, which differed 
from that of earth only in that the harvest never failed, 
and the corn grew far more luxuriantly, its stems sur- 
passing the height of a man. 

The Fields of AaW were tilled to provide the dead with 
food, in so far as their wants were not met by offerings, and 
by magic formulas made and spoken for them on earth. 
The possibility of being obliged to till the ground in the 
world to come could hardly have been a pleasant prospect 
to Egyptians of rank or wealth who had never laboured 
upon earth, and so they tried to find means of averting 
this necessity. The earliest expedient seems to have been 
the sacrifice of human beings at the tomb, in order to send 
them after the deceased as servants of his to all eternity. 
Afterwards the idea was to secure the immortality of those 
who had been a man's servants upon earth ; their bodies 
were embalmed, their statues were placed in his tomb,, 
prayers were transcribed for them, and in gratitude for 


OSHEBTiC — FUNERARY FURNITURE. 255 

all this the servants were expected to work for their lord 
in the next world. But in time more humane influences 
prevailed ; it was felt that death knew no distinction of 
persons, and that hence the poorest and humblest might 
claim to lead a future life free from care and independent 
of the caprices of a master. So the rich man could no 
longer hope to keep his servants after death, and would 
have lived haunted with the fear that he might have to 
guide the plough himself, if a new expedient had not been 
devised for his relief. From the Xllth Dynasty onward 
the practice prevailed of making little mummiform statu- 
ettes, the so called USHEBTiO, inscribed with a magic 
formula by means of which it was hoped that they would 
attain to life in the world to come, and there by diligence 
in labour testify their gratitude to him who had evoked 
them into being. Their labours began immediately after 
his death, when they were expected to recite a lament for 
him ; but this they did only at the command of the god- 
head. In order to relieve the latter from the trouble of 
giving the order, it was set down in writing and the 
document laid in the tomb.* Afterwards the main task 
of the little figures was ploughing and reaping, and hence 
they are represented as carrying hoe and basket. 

It is to the working of the same idea which led to the 
use of these statuettes that we must ascribe the presence 
of the numerous articles of furniture, toys, weapons, etc., 
found in tombs. With these the dead could set up house, 
and thus escape the labour of procuring such things for 

' Maspero, Rec, de Trav,^ ii., pp. 13 et seq,; Mint, de la 
Miss, au Caire, i., pp. 594 ei seq. 


2 so THE OSIRIAN DOCTRINE OF IMMORTALITV'. 

liimself in his new abode. Provision was also made for his 
intellectual interests : papyri were buried with him for the 
entertainment of his Osiris, containing tales, love songs, 
and even rules for the game of draughts.^ But comfortable 
and pleasant as his life in the Fields of AbIOl might thus 
be made to the wealthy Egyptian, nevertheless he devoutly 
trusted not to be restricted to remaining there in his form 
of an Osiris. By help of magic formulas he expected to 
be able to visit at pleasure all his familiar earthly haunts ; 
to come forth as a crocodile, a hawk, a phoenix, a heron, 
a dove, a lotus flower, even as the god Ptah himself; or 
to enter and animate his mummy, and in this guise return 
to look upon the places dear to him in life. Thus he 
might still remain in touch with the life of this world, to 
^hich mankind has always clung ; and since to the 
Egyptian the life which he had led upon the banks of the 
Nile seemed an ideal existence, it was on this model that 
he pictured for himself the life of the world to come. 

On the whole, each chapter of the Book of the Dead 
appears to be complete in itself. These chapters were 
indeed modified in the course of time, but the alterations 
almost exclusively aflfected the wording rather than the 
-contents. The changes are rarely marked in the texts 
embodying them, and at most only by the phrase ** other- 

^ For instance, the papyri containing stories : Maspero, ConUs 
po^ulaires, 2nd edition, Paris, 1889, *"d Petrie, Egyptian 
Tales, London, 1895 > the love songs of Pap3rrus Harris 500, 
treated by Maspero, JSttides Agyptiennes, i., p. 217, and about 
to be published in Germany by W. Max Muller ; and the Games ' 
Papyri of Turin and BQlak discussed by Wiedemann, Actes du 
Congrhs des Orientalistes de Gentve, — all of which were found in 
tombs. 


BOOK OF THE DEAD, CHAPTER XVH. 257 

wise said," which is followed by a variant taken from 
another manuscript than that from which the rest of the 
text is copied. One chapter only forms an exception : 
Chapter XVII. in the Turin copy gives numerous variants 
apart from its own text, and provides commentaries to 
a whole series of passages, introducing each commentary 
by the words, " What does this mean ? " The chapter is 
found in the Middle Kingdom substantially in the same 
form as in late texts, except that the earlier versions are 
more briefly expressed. It used to be regarded as one 
of the oldest expositions of the Osirian doctrine, but this 
view is refuted by closer investigation. The chapter 
really represents a comparatively late stage of develop- 
ment in the Egyptian religion, and was manufactured 
with the definite purpose of advancing a syncretic treat- 
ment of the Egyptian gods and creeds. This will best 
be shown by giving a translation of the first section of it 
as found in the oldest known version, that on the coffin 
of Mentdhetep at Berlin, together with the more important 
additions from the Turin copy as published by Lepsius. 
These additions are here printed in italics and preceded 
by the letter T. The deceased says : — 

I AM TUM, I AM THE ONLY ONE, T. in tJie primeval 
water NH. 

I AM RA at HIS FIRST APPEARING, T. at his 
appearing at the beginning of his dominion which he 
exercised. Wliat is that? Rd in his appearing at the 
beginning of his dominion which he exercised is the be- 
ginning of Rd wlto appears in Heracleopolis magna^ when 
the god NH was uplifted; he was on the staircase in 

17 


258 THE OSIRIAN DOCTRINE ©F IMMORTALITY. 

Herackopolis magna^ he destroyed the children of the rebels 
on the staircase at Heracleopolis magna, 

I AM THE Great God who created himself, T. 
namely the water^ tJiat is tJte god NH^ the father of tlu 
gods, THE Creator of his Name, the Lord of the 
Divine Ennead. T. What does that mean? Rd, 
namely the creator of his limbs, t/iese gods arose who are 
in the train of Ed. NONE AMONG THE GODS MAY WARD 
HIM OFF. T. What does this mean? TUm is in his 
sun disk. Otherwise said: Rd is in his sun disk, which 
rises on the eastern Jicrizon of heaven. 
. I AM Yesterday, I know To-morrow, namely 
Osiris. T. (after the word " To-morrow ") What is that? 
Yesterday is Osiris, To-morrow is Rd. That day on which 
were destroyed the enemies of the Lord of All (Osiris) and 
on which he established his son Horus (as King). Ot/ter- 
wise said: That day on which is established the feast of 
his installation {i.e. as Lord of the Underworld), namely 
the burial of Osiris by his father Rd. 

There arose strife among the gods when I 
SPOKE. (Instead of these words T. has :) He (Rft ?) made 
strife among the gods when he commanded that Osiris should 
be Lord of the Mountain of t)u West. IT IS THE WEST 
WHICH WAS THE SCENE OF STRIFE. T. Wltat does that 
mean ? The West belonged to the spirits of the gods when 
Jie decreed that Osiris should be Lord of t)ie Mountain of 
tlie West. Otherwise said: The West marks the boundary 
to whicli Rd causes each god to attain. BeJtold! lie (i.e, 
that god) fghteth because of them {i.e. the various dead gods 
would not permit that Osiris should be King of tlie West, 


BOOK OF THE DEAD, CHAPTER XVII. 259 

of which they considered themselves to be the lords, and 
therefore they fought against him). 

I KNOW THE NAMES OF THIS GREAT GOD WHICH IS 
IN IT (the Underworld). T. What does that mean? 
Osiris. Variant : PRAISES OF RA IS HIS NAME. T. Soul 
of Rd is his name; he begat himself. 

I AM THAT Great Phoenix which is in Heliopolis, 

WHICH is there, T. / am THE ORDERING (?) OF ALL 
THAT IS AND EXISTS. WHAT DOES THAT MEAN ? T. // 
is the Phoenix. OsiRIS, T. which is in Heliopolis. It IS 
T. the Ordering (?) of that WHAT IS AND EXISTS, T. his 
body. Variant: ETERNITY AND UNENDING TIME. 
T. Eternity is the day^ Unending Time is the night. 

I AM MiN AT HIS APPEARING ; THERE ARE GIVEN 
UNTO ME HIS TWO FEATHERS ON MY HEAD. WHAT DOES 
THAT MEAN ? HiS TWO FEATHERS ARE THOSE OF HORUS, 

THE AVENGER OF HIS FATHER. (T. after "What does 
that mean ? " has :) Min is Horus, the avenger of his 
father, Osiris ; they are his manifestations, his birth. 
They are his two feathers. T. On his head the 
Coming of Isis and Nephthys who are placed behind him, 
that they may be the two Mourning Sisters. Behold, they 
stand on his head. Variant: The TWO Uraei, T. the 
Very Great, WHO ARE AT THE FOREHEAD OF HIS FATHER 
TOm. T. Variant : His two eyes (i,e. Sun and Moon) are 
the two feathers on his Itead. 

I AM IN MY LAND, I HAVE COME FROM MY CITY. 

What does that mean ? [From] the Sun Mountain 

OF MY FATHER TOm. 

So the text goes on. The deceased declares himself 


26o THE OSIRIAN DOCTRINE OF IMMORTALITY. 

to be one with each and all of the gods, thus postulating 
a general equation of deities of which pantheism would 
have been the logical outcome. This, however, never did 
result, for the Egyptian could not bring himself to sacrifice 
the distinct individualities of his deities, notwithstanding 
that he regarded them all as identical. Chapter XVII. 
held its place in spite of all its doctrinal deviations 
from the belief in anthropomorphic and individual deities 
which otherwise characterizes the Book of the Dead, and 
in spite of the contradiction between its fundamental 
theory, that the dead are merged in the gods and in the 
Universal Whole, with the leading doctrine of the rest of 
the work, which taught that the immortal life of man after 
death in all things but duration resembled his life on 
earth. 


CHAPTER X. 

MAGIC AND SORCERY. 

IN Egypt all was ruled by the godhead : not that there 
was any one supreme deity ; to each god of the 
Pantheon his own sphere was assigned, and nomes, cities, 
temples, all were dedicated to specific deities, though 
not altogether to the exclusion of other divinities. Some 
of the gods were also limited as to the times during which 
their functions were exercised Each month was pre- 
sided over by a certain deity, Thoth, for instance, being 
the god of the month Thoth, Hathor the goddess of 
Athyr, and KhflnsO the god of Pakhons, in certain cases 
at any rate the months being named after the gods. 
Late texts represent every day of the month as dedicated 
to a certain deity — the first to Thoth, the second to 
Horus the Avenger of his Father, the third to Osiris, the 
fourth to seventh to the four funerary genii, etc., the five 
epagomenal days being generally regarded as belonging 
to the five chief gods of the Osirian cycle, who were 
supposed to have been born on these days. In Ptolemaic 
times a day would sometimes be named after the reigning 
sovereign instead of after its god ; thus the 30th Mesori, 
which was the birthday of Ptolemy Epiphanes, and the 

261 


262 MAGIC AND SORCERY. 

17th Mekhir, which was the date of his accession, were 
both called after him. This division of time among divine 
beings was also carried out into still greater detail, and 
the hours of day and night were severally ruled by 
separate goddesses — ^not indeed those of the great cycles, 
but beings created to this end only. 

Besides the gods of time in its divisions there were 
also gods of the heavenly bodies which r^ulated these 
divisions — of the sun, the moon, the planets, certain of 
the fixed stars, and the constellations. All alike were 
supposed to have power over events which took place 
in the periods subject to their control, and to determine 
the fates of those born under their rule. Their powers, 
however, were not arbitrary, but exercised rather in 
accordance with laws of their own beings, and fates could 
be predicted by one to whom these laws were known. 
Hence arose the idea of horoscopes, calculations of which 
we find mention in Egyptian writings ; and in late papyri 
we have " spheres," that is, tables by means of which the 
fate of a man could be calculated from certain data, such 
as the hour of his birth, and the like. From the Egyptians 
and the Chaldeans, who also held similar ideas, these 
practices were passed on to the Greeks, and from them 
to the learned men of the Middle Ages ; and in their 
last outcome — far removed indeed from their original 
religious nature — they still play a great part in modem 
books of prophecy. It was not always necessary to make 
use of " spheres " and calculations to look into the future ; 
this could be done more readily by consulting calendars 
in which it was stated under each day whether it was 


AUSPICIOUS AND INAUSPICIOUS DAYS. 263 

auspicious or inauspicious, or both, what should be done 
or left undone on it, what would be the fate of those bom 
on that day, and other information of a similar nature. 
These statements were founded on the belief that on a 
given day some mythological event had taken place 
imparting a certain significance to the recurrence of the 
date for all time to come. In a XlXth Dynasty papyrus 
known as Sallier Papyrus IV. ^ we have a specimen of one 
of these calendars for several months of the year, and from 
this the following extracts are given : — 

4TH Paophi : Inauspicious, auspicious, auspicious {i.e. 
varying in influence). In no wise go forth from thine 
house on this day. He who is born on this day will die 
by the plague. 

5TH Paophi : Inauspicious, inauspicious, inauspicious. 
In no wise go out of thine house on this day ; approach not 
a woman. On this day men shall make offerings to the 
gods. The majesty of the god Ment was content on this 
day. He who is bom on this day shall die by love- 
making. 

6th Paophi : Auspicious, auspicious, auspicious. Day 
of rejoicing for R^ in heaven. The gods are in peace before 
the god R4; the Ennead of the gods completes the 
ceremonies before [R^]. He who is born on this day 
will die drunken. 

9TH Paophi : Auspicious, auspicious, auspicious. The 
gods rejoice, men are in exultation, the enemy of Ri is 

1 Published in Select Papyri of the British Museum^ i., pis. 144- 
168 ; discussed by Chabas, Le Calendrier des Jours Pastes et 
Nifastes de r Annie Egyptienne, Chalon, 1870. 


264 MAGIC AND SORCERY. 

overthrown. He who is bom on this day dies of the 
feebleness of old age. 

22ND PaoPHI : Inauspicious, inauspicious, inauspicious. 
Bathe in no water on this day. He who goes in a boat 
on the river on this day will be torn in pieces by the 
tongue of the crocodile. 

29TH Paophi : Auspicious, auspicious, auspicious. He 
who is bom on this day will die honoured of his fellow- 
citizens. 

17TH Athyr : Inauspicious, inauspicious, inauspicious. 
Arrival of the superior and inferior Great Ones in Abydos, 
of Those who shed many tears. Great lamentations of 
Isis and Nephthys for their brother Unnefer (Osiris, 
who, according to Plutarch, was murdered on the 17th 
Athyr) in Sais, a lament which may be heard even to 
Abydos. 

lOTH Khoiak : Auspicious, auspicious, auspicious. He 
who is bom on this day dies bread in hand, beer in mouth, 
his eyes looking upon food. 

13TH Mekhir: Inauspicious, inauspicious, inauspicious. 
In no wise go forth on this day. It is the day on which 
the eye of Sekhet was terrible and the fields were filled 
with devastation.^ Go not forth at sunset on this day. 

Similar prognostications were common down to the 
end of Egyptian history, and testify to the wide diffusion 
of the ideas on which they were based. Thus Cicero 
asserts that he was bom when the Dogstar was in the 
ascendant, and that he was therefore certain to be drowned 

^ Evidently an allusion to the Legend of the Destruction of 
Mankind ; see pp. 58 et seq. 


PROGNOSTICATION— DREAMS. 265 

at sea ; and Pliny states that whoever rubs himself with 
the juice of the plant called mouse-ear will not suffer from 
bloodshot eyes all the year. 

Many other races have held similar ideas, and believed 
that whatever natural phenomenon had followed on a 
supernatural event the recurrence of the one would always 
bring about the recurrence of the other, and in order to 
facilitate prophecies based on this assumption, lists of 
marvellous occurrences were made. Such lists have never 
yet been found in the Nile Valley, but Manetho, whose 
views were fundamentally Egyptian, repeatedly makes 
mention of marvels such as the Nile flowing with honey, 
the birth of an eight-legged lamb, and the like, and hence 
we may feel certain that the Egyptians also believed 
in the peculiar significance of supernatural or unusual 
phenomena. 

But if all lots were thus decreed they were not always 
and altogether inevitable. In the first place the gods 
might interfere to spare those whom they delighted to 
honour the melancholy fate before them, or to bring about 
the overthrow of their enemies. And by the help of 
magic man also could control fate; by the same means 
too he not only obtained power over his fellow men, but 
also over the dead, and even over the gods themselves, no 
matter how high their rank. One chief use of magic was 
to send or procure dreams. 

Among all peoples dreams have played a great part, 
their kaleidoscopic pictures seeming to be real things 
and the words apprehended in them to have been really 
spoken. In the case of so pious a people as the Egyptian, 


266 MAGIC AND SORCERY. 

whose chief interest throughout life was the worship of the 
gods, it was only natural that in dreams as when awake 
they should cling to communion with the higher powers, 
and believe themselves to enter into personal communi- 
cation with their deities and thus to receive counsel and 
reply in difficulty. 

According to the opinion of the Egyptians, god 
sent dreams might come to a man anywhere. Thus 
Thothmosis IV. was taking his siesta out hunting when 
R& Harmakhis appeared to him and commanded him to 
clear away the sand from the Great Sphinx, in the shadow 
of which he was sleeping. We have also a record later 
by some thousand years of how a dream opportunely 
commanded King NOt Amen of Ethiopia to march into 
Egypt But to make sure of a prophetic dream it was 
safer to sleep within a temple known to be the seat of 
an oracle, such as that of Serapis at Memphis. This 
oracle is often mentioned in Ptolemaic writings, and there 
are still in existence notes made by the anchorites who 
dwelt there of the dreams vouchsafed to them.^ As a 
rule these dreams could be interpreted by the dreamers, 
but sometimes the meaning was dark and recourse was 
had to the professional interpreters of whom we find 
mention in Genesis xli. 8. Their calling lasted late in 
Egyptian history, and a Greek stela refers to one of 
these officials as still established in the Serapeum at 
Memphis. The belief in prophetic dreams, and in dreams 
by which cures for diseases were made known, was not 
confined to Egypt ; it prevailed, for instance, in connexion 
1 Cf. Wiedemann, Herodofs Zweites Buck, p. 344. 


DREAMS. 267 

with the temple of Asklepios at Epidaurus; but Egypt 
was its main centre, and even towards the end of the 
fourth century A.D. the poet Claudian speaks of oracular 
dreams as " Egyptian." ^ 

The dreams were sent by the gods at their pleasure, 
and as a general thing men simply besought the gods 
for them. If this proved of no avail recourse might be 
had to magic, and the gods could be compelled to send 
not only such dreams as they might approve of but 
certain dreams specified by the applicant Many of the 
directions for thus coercing them have come down to us, 
and the following formula found in a Greek Gnostic 
Papyrus from the Leyden Museum is based throughout 
on Egyptian ideas, notwithstanding the comparative 
lateness of its date.* 

"Nostrum of Agathokles for producing 
Dreams. 

" Take a cat, black all over, and which has been killed ; 
prepare a writing tablet, and write the following with a 
solution of myrrh, and the dream which thou desirest to 
be sent, and put it in the mouth of the cat. [The text 
to be transcribed runs :] Keimi, keimi, I am the Great 
One in whose mouth rests Mommom, Thoth, Nanumbre, 
Karikha, Kenyro, Paarmiathon, the sacred lau iefi ieu afeoi 
who is above the heaven, Amekheumeu, Nennana, Sennana, 

^ Claudian, Entr,, i. 312. 

• Papyri Graeci Musei Lugduni-Bataviy edited by Leemans, 
ii., p. 16 : of. Dieterich, Papyrus Magica, Leipzig, 1888, p. 800 
(from FleckeisetCs Jahrbucher fur klassische Philologie), 


268 MAGIC AND SORCERY. 

Ablanathanalba, Akramm khamaria brasiua lampsor 
eieeieiei a6666 theuris 6. . . . Put thyself in connexion 
with N. N. in this matter (as to the substance of the 
dream named). But if it is (?) necessary, then secure 
(bring?) for me N. N. hither by thy power ; lord of the 
whole world, fiery god, put thyself in connexion with 
N. N. Tharthar thamara thatha mommom thanabotha 
apranu bamalea khr[a]thna basuleth rombru tharael 
albana brokhrex abranazukhel ! Hear me, for I shall 
speak the great name, Thoth! whom each god honours 
and each demon fears, by whose command every messenger 
performs his mission. Thy name answers to the seven 
(vowels) a, e, 6, i, o, y, 6, iaudtead oue6 6ia. I named thy 
glorious name, the name for all needs. Put thyself in 
connexion with N. N., Hidden One, God, with respect to 
this name, which Apollobex also used." 

As by means of this formula the magician could compel 
the god to send a certain dream to a certain person, in 
the same way he could cause the sending of a prophetic 
dream, or obtain for himself the answer to any stated 
question : some slight variation of formula made all the 
difference, but all the formulas were very much alike. 
They are preceded by a brief description of the preliminary 
proceedings, and special directions are given as to the 
material upon which the words are to be written, whether 
the manuscript is to be placed in anj^ particular spot or 
destroyed, or whether a simple repetition of the words will 
suffice. Then follows the formula itself, which, apart from 
prescribing the desired action of the divinity, contains little 
beyond invocations. An observation is generally appended 


FORMULAS OF INVOCATION. 269 

to the effect that the formula had once been employed 
successfully by a god, as in the example above given, where 
the god in question is named Apollobex. "ApoUobex" 
is compounded of the Greek " Apollo," corresponding to 
the Egyptian solar Horus, and of the syllable "bex," 
probably derived from the Egyptian bak^ "a hawk." 
Hence the name denotes Horus the hawk, that is the son 
of Isis in the form of a sparrow hawk, who appears in 
other texts also as a god well versed in magic. In the 
invocation proper there are few genuine divine names, such 
as the name Thoth in the above ; generally it is a string 
of syllables apparently utterly destitute of meaning, but 
which sounded mysterious and incomprehensible and was 
on that account credited with all the greater significance. 
Like the Ancient Egyptians, the Gnostics attached much 
value to such combinations, and they have always been 
in favour with magicians. The succession of syllables was 
supposed to convey the hidden name of a god, and after 
they had been pronounced the god was bound to do the 
will of the magician who had spoken them. It was long 
believed that the knowledge of these essential names lay 
chiefly with the Egyptians, and Synesius of Cyrene, who 
lived about 400 A.D., remarks in one of his writings* 
composed while he was still a heathen, that he had heard 
that "the Egyptians knew how to employ a certain method 
against the gods and a certain sorcery, so that as often 
as they pleased they mumbled a few incomprehensible 
words, and so drew to themselves all that was divine, 
which is apt to follow certain drawings." And because 
' Calvitiae encomion, cap. 10. 


2JO MAGIC AND SORCERY. 

of this frequent intercourse with their gods their outward 
forms also were familiar to the Egyptians. 

Nonsensical as these invocations now sound, they were 
not originally without meaning ; for the most part they 
consisted of versions of the names and titles of gods of 
foreign nations. Writers on ancient magic, as for instance 
Origen, state emphatically that it was considered of the 
utmost importance to invoke a god by his right name. 
Thus the word " Sabaoth " borrowed from the Jewish 
sacred writings was thought to be of exceptional efficacy ; 
but if "Lord of Power" or "Lord of Hosts" was sub- 
stituted for it, the power of the spell was gone. This lay, 
therefore, not in the sense of the words, but in their sound, 
and any attempt at translating them not only made the 
invocation inoperative, but was attended with the gravest 
peril ; for, in Egypt as elsewhere, the demons were believed 
to obey the commands of the sorcerer only on compulsion, 
and always to be on the watch for any opportunity which 
might place it in their power to destroy him. Most of this 
apparent gibberish, therefore, originally meant something, 
although this is difficult to prove in detail. However 
careful the attempt to reproduce foreign words, it was 
never quite successful, and as time went on the right 
pronunciation was forgotten more and more, for the oral 
tradition of unintelligible sounds never could be accurate, 
and the transcription of magical texts seems to have been 
singularly careless. As an instance of this debasement we 
may take the word " Paarmiathon." This is apparently 
Egyptian, and a corruption of pa Her m dlM^ " the Horus 
in the marsh," a common designation of Horus the son of 


MEDICINE. 271 

I SIS, who had dwelt during his youth in the marshes of 
the Delta.* 

Magic played an extensive part in Egyptian medicine. 
The Egyptians were not great physicians ; their methods 
were purely empirical and their remedies of very doubtful 
value, but the riskiness of their practice arose chiefly from 
their utter inability to diagnose because of their ignorance 
of anatomy. That the popular respect for the human 
body was great we may gather from the fact that the 
Paraskhistai who opened the body for embalmment were 
persecuted and stoned as having committed a sinful 
although necessary deed. The prescribed operations in 
preparing a body for embalmment were never departed 
from, and taught but little anatomy, so that until Greek 
times the Egyptians had only the most imperfect and 
inaccurate ideas of the human organism. They under- 
stood nothing about most internal diseases, and especially 
nothing about diseases of the brain, never suspecting them 
to be the result of organic changes, but assuming them 
to be caused by demons who had entered into the sick. 
Under these circumstances medicines might be used to 
cause the disappearance of symptoms, but the cure was 
the expulsion of the demon. Hence the Egyptian 
physician must also practise magic. 

According to late accounts, his functions were com- 
paratively simple, for the human body had been divided 
into thirty-six parts, each presided over by a certain 
demon, and it sufficed to invoke the demon of the part 
affected in order to bring about its cure — a view of matters 
' See pp. 210, 214. 


272 MAGIC AND SORCERY. 

fundamentally Egyptian. In the Book of the Dead^ we 
find that different divinities were responsible for the well- 
being of the bodies of the blessed ; thus NO had charge of 
the hair, R4 of the face, Hathor of the eyes, ApOat of the 
ears, Anubis of the lips, while Thoth was guardian of all 
parts of the body together. This doctrine was subse- 
quently applied to the living body, with the difference that 
for the great gods named in the Book of the Dead there 
were substituted as gods of healing the presiding deities 
of the thirty-six decani, the thirty-six divisions of the 
Egyptian zodiac, as we learn from the names given to 
them by Celsus and preserved by Origen.* In earlier 
times it was not so easy to determine which god was to 
be invoked, for the selection depended not only on the 
part affected but also on the illness and symptoms and 
remedies to be used, etc. 

Several Egyptian medical pap5m which have come down 
to us contain formulas to be spoken against the demons 
of disease as well as prescriptions for the remedies to be 
used in specified cases of illness. In papyri of older date 
these conjurations are comparatively rare, but the further 
the art of medicine advanced, or rather receded, the more 
numerous they became. Take, for example, the following 
formula to be spoken while preparing certain drugs; it 
dates from about the year 1700 B.C. and is from a medical 
papyrus in the Leipzig collection.' " May Isis deliver, 
deliver ; Horus was delivered by Isis from all ill that was 
inflicted upon him by his brother Set when he slew his 

* See Chapter XLII. * Pa^. Ebers^ i. iz.etseq, 

* Con, Celsum^ viii. 58. 


MEDICINE— CONJURATION. 273 

father Osiris. O Isis, mistress of sorceries, deliver me, set 
me free from all bad, evil, red things,* from the power 
of illness coming from god or goddess, from death male 
and female, from plague male and female that taketh 
hold upon me, even as thou didst set free, even as thou 
didst deliver thy son Horus ! [Do this] because I enter 
into the fire and rise forth from the water, and fall not into 
the snare on that day {ue. because I possess magic power), 
etc. Oh save me from the power of all bad, evil, red things, 
from the power of illness coming from god or goddess, 
from death male and female ! " 

The above formula might be used at the preparation of 
any drug; others were intended for use only in certain 
illnesses. Thus, for inflammations there was a remedy 
compounded with the milk of a woman who had borne a 
man child, and over this was to be said:' "O my son 
Horus ! it burns on the hills ; no water is there, no helper 
is there ; bring water over the flood (i.e. the water of the 
inundation) to put out the fire." These words refer to the 
myth of a universal conflagration, to which the texts often, 
but only incidentally, refer, and of which even Plato had 
heard ; ' and as Horus had on that occasion extinguished the 
flames, so he was to subdue the burning of the inflammation. 

It might even be the proper thing to threaten a god who 
refused his aid. Thus, in one conjuration,* a woman in 

^ Red being the colour of Set, red things were equivalent to evil 
things. 

' Pa^. Ebers, pi. Ixix., 1. 3, eiseq. 

» Plato, Timaeus, 22. 

* Magical papyrus, discussed by Plbytb, Ehtdes Egyj^t, pp. 176 
et seq. 

18 


274 MAGIC AND SORCERY. 

labour declares herself to be Isis, and summons the gods 
to her help. Should these refuse to come, "Then shall 
ye be destroyed, ye nine gods ; the heaven shall no longer 
exist, the earth shall no longer exist, the five days over and 
above the year shall cease to be, offerings shall no more 
be made to the gods, the lords of Heliopolis. The firma- 
ment of the South shall fall, and disaster shall break forth 
from the sky of the North. Lamentations shall resound 
from the graves, the midday sun shall no longer shine, 
the Nile shall not bestow its waters of inundation at the 
appointed time." Such formulas were used until Roman 
times, and philosophers, as for instance Porphyry,* still 
found occasion to mock at the presumption of magicians 
who threatened to desti'oy the heavens and the earth if 
their will was not accomplished. 

It was not always enough to speak the formulas once ; 
even their repeated recitation might not be successful, 
and in that case recourse must be had to other ex- 
pedients : secret passes were made, various rites were 
performed, the formulas were written upon papyrus, which 
the sick person had to swallow, etc., etc. But amulets were 
in general found to be most efficacious, and the personal 
intervention of a god called up, if necessary, by prayers or 
sorcery. In an inscription originally written in honour of 
the god Khiinsd of Thebes, about looo B.C., we have a story 
which shows how such a cure by means of the divine touch 
might be brought about ; the following is an abstract of it* 

» In EusEBius, Praep. «/., v. lo. 

' Ledrain, Mon. Mgypt. de la BtbL Naty pis. 36-44 : cL de 
ROUG^, Etude sur utie Stile Egypt, in the Journal Asiat^ 1856-8. 


THE POSSESSED PRINCESS OF BEKHTEN. 


275 


FIG. 70. — SHRINES OF THE TWO KH^NsOs, THE KING BETWEEN THEM. 
(PRISSE, "MONUMENTS," PL. XXIV.) 

From the Bekhten Stela. 

Once an Egyptian king went to Asia to take tribute. 
The prince of Bekhten brought him his daughter as a 
gift, and the king loved her and raised her to be his wife. 
Long years after, when the king of Egypt had returned 
and was holding a feast in Thebes, there came thither a 
messenger from Bekhten, who said to him : " I come to 
thee, O prince, my lord, because of Bentresht, who is thy 
sister in law through the royal wife. A plague hath entered 
into her members. Let thy majesty send a learned scribe 
that he may see her." The king despatched the very 
learned royal scribe Thothemheb ; but when he came to 
Bekhten he found Bentresht in the condition of one 
possessed by a demon, and that he himself was not 
strong enough to oppose the demon. Then the prince of 
Bekhten sent again unto Pharaoh and said: "O prince* 
my lord! let a god come (to fight the demon)." And 
Pharaoh went to Khdnsii the Fair-resting One in Thebes, 
and said : " O thou my beauteous lord ! again I come 
unto thee because of the daughter of the prince of 
Bekhten." Then Kh{ins{i the Fair-resting One in Thebes 
was brought to Khiinsd the Carrier out of Plans, the 


2/6 MAGIC AND SORCERY. 

great god who overcomes the wicked (/>. the form of 
Khdnsfl known as the "Fair-resting One in Thebes," 
which always remained in the temple and which devised 
plans, was taken to the other form of the god which was 
known as the " Carrier out of Plans/' and which executed 
the designs of the former). The king spoke before KhdnsQ 
the Fair-resting One : " My beauteous lord, oh turn thy face 
hither to Kh{ins{i the Carrier out of Plans that he may go 
to Bekhten 1 " Then the god nodded twice. And the king 
said: "Let thy talisman be with him when I cause him 
to go to Bekhten to save the daughter of the prince of 
Bekhten." Then Khiinsd the Fair-resting One nodded 
twice. He invested KhdnsA the Carrier out of Plans four 
times with his amulet 

So Pharaoh sent the god to Bekhten, where he was 
received in state. Then the god went to the place where 
Bentresht was ; he invested with his amulet the daughter 
of the prince of Bekhten, and immediately she was well. 
But the demon that had been in her said before Kh(ins{i 
the Carrier out of Plans : " Approach in peace, thou great 
god, overthrower of the wicked ; Bekhten is thy city, its 
inhabitants are thy slaves, I myself am thy servant ! I 
will go to the place whence I came that I may satisfy thy 
heart in relation to the matter on account of which thou 
art come hither. But let thy Majesty command that a 
feast shall be established for me and for the prince of 
Bekhten." Then the god bowed twice to his priest, in 
consent, and said : " Let the prince of Bekhten make a 
great offering to this demon." While the god Khiinsu was 
negotiating with the demon, the prince of Bekhten and 


FORMULAS AGAINST WILD BEASTS. 277 

his soldiers stood by in great fear. The offering was 
made, and the demon went forth in peace to the place 
whither he would go, at the command of the god Khiinsfi 
the Carrier out of Plans. 

The prince of Bekhten rejoiced greatly, and thought 
within himself that he would do well to keep in Bekhten 
the god who had thus evinced his power, that he might 
in emergency make use of him again ; and he withheld 
Kim from returning to Thebes for three years and nine 
months. But when this time had gone by, one day when 
the prince was resting on his couch he saw the god coming 
forth from his chapel in the form of a golden sparrow 
hawk, and fly away through the high heavens towards 
Egypt. On awakening he felt ill, and thereupon called 
to him the priest of the god, and sent them back to 
Thebes laden with rich presents. "Now when Kh{ins(i 
the Carrier out of Plans had come into the temple of 
Khiinsd the Fair-resting One, he gave unto him the gifts 
which he had received from the prince of Bekhten, and 
kept back none of them for himself." 

Magic availed not only against illness, but also against 
accidents and perils from without, and especially against 
dangerous animals. Of these there were many in Egypt, 
and even at the time of the Xllth Dynasty herdsmen knew 
formulas for frightening away the crocodiles which lay in 
wait in the shallows to fall upon the cattle.^ The magical 
pap)nns of the Harris collection, which dates from the 
New Kingdom, also contains conjurations by means of 
which men could protect themselves from amphibious 
* L. D., vi., pL 112, 11. 156 etseq. 


278 MAGIC AND SORCERY, 

animals. All that was needed was to call out : * "I am 
the Chosen One of millions, who goeth forth from D{iat, 
whose name is not known. If my name is spoken on the 
bank of the river, the river is dried up ; if my name is 
spoken on the land, it begetteth fire. I am Shii, the image 
of R^, which hath its seat in his eye (ilzaJy the sun disk). 
When a water monster openeth its mouth, when it moveth 
its legs, then I cause the earth to fall into the flood (?), the 
South to become the North, and the earth to turn round." 
Hearing these words the crocodile thought the speaker 
the god whom he announced himself to be, and speedily 
dived below. The crocodile in particular was supposed to 
stand in dread of the gods and all belonging to them : to 
attack, for instance, no one who might be in a papyrus 
bark in the Delta, because Isis had once made use of one 
when there. 

Still more fearsome to the Egyptians than the crocodiles 
were snakes, from which they were always threatened 
with sudden death, and which even in the world to come 
were a continual peril. The formulas for use against 
them werQ many, and a long series are given in pyramid 
texts of the Vlth Dynasty. * These were chiefly intended 
for use in the next world, but might also be used here. 
A man must say : " The snake curleth itself, it curleth itself 
round the calf. O hippopotamus that wentest forth out 
of the nome of the earth, thou atest what went forth 
from thee ! Snake, thou who descendest, lie down, go 

* Harris Magical Papyrus, edited by Chabas, Chalon-sur- 
Saone, i860, pl.\vii., IL 1-4. 
« Sec, e.g,y Pyramid of Unas, 11. 300-340. 


"maA kheru." 279 

back ! The god Hen-PE-SEZET is in the water ; the snake 
is overthrown, thou beholdest the god Rl" Or else : 
** Fall, body which came forth from the earth ! Flame 
which came forth from the celestial ocean, fall ! go back ! " 
The second of these formulas simply contains the conjura- 
tion of the snake to force it to retreat, but the first is 
full of mythological allusions which we cannot understand. 

Formulas against all kinds of hurtful creatures, such 
as scorpions or hippopotami, may be classed with those . 
against crocodiles and snakes. Some of them might even 
undo the hurt which had been done ; thus we have the 
formula by means of which Isis called her son Horus 
back to life after he had been killed by a scorpion, and 
instructions are appended as to the manner in which 
the formula is to be used for a man in like case.^ 

In the next world a correct knowledge of magic words 
and formulas was absolutely essential. There no door 
would open to him who knew not its name ; no demon 
would allow the passage of the dead who did not call 
upon him correctly, nor would any god come to his 
help unless invoked by the right name ; no food could 
be had so long as the exactly prescribed prayers were 
not uttered with the true intonations. But the dead 
who knew these formulas and who knew how to speak 
them correctly at the proper moment, who was mad kherU^ 
"right speaking," might rest assured of immortality and 
of eternal blessedness. Hence there was added to the 
names of the dead, and even occasionally to those of living 
persons, this epithet, in order to characterize them as 
* Metternich Stela : of. Aeg. Zeit,^ 1879, PP- ^ ^tseq. 


28o MAGIC AND SORCERY. 

rightly prepared and perfect for entering into eternity, 
there to have dominion over both gods and men.* The 
number of the magic formulas was incalculable ; still they 
accumulated as the world to come was pictured in greater 
complication and refinement of detail, and such was their 
potency that they inevitably constrained the demons to 
the aid of those who knew them. At the words, "O 
door ! I know thy name, which is so-and-so," straightway 
the door sprang open. So too it was with every divinity : 
the secret name of a god was scarcely uttered before he was 
at the disposal of the dead who invoked him, and whom he 
was bound to help to the full extent of his power and 
capacity. The firm belief cherished by the Egyptians as 
to the efficacy of formulas and magic in the next world 
prevented any doubt as to the possibility of practising 
sorcery here. Sorcerers were in demand on every hand, 
and well understood how to fortify the faith of their clients 
by the display of conjuring tricks : in the Bible we have 
an allusion to feats of this kind performed before Pharaoh 
in opposition to Moses and Aaron. 

Hitherto we have considered Egyptian magic only on 
what we may call its good side, as being helpful to man in 
life, in sickness, in affliction, and also after death ; but far 
greater was the harm feared from it than any pretended 
good hoped for. The power of the sorcerer was prodigious. 

1 Cf. Maspero, Etudes de Myth,,, i., pp. 93 et seq, \ ii., pp. ^*ji et 
seq. Sometimes it appears as if the Egyptians had used the epidiet 
fnad kherU in a more passive sense. Thus it is applied to a person 
who had been declared by the godhead to speak right, to be mad 
kherUt, and therefore worthy of immortality, as, for instance, the 
judgment before Osiris. 


PERILS OF SORCERY. 28 1 

Thus in the Ptolemaic Story of Setna^ two formulas are 
mentioned, and " if a man recite the first he will enchant 
the heaven, the earth, the Underworld, the mountains, and 
the waters; he will know the birds of the sky and all 
reptiles ; he will see the fishes of the deep, for a divine 
power will cause them to come to the surface of the water. 
And if a man read the second formula, then, although 
he lay in the grave, he shall take again the form which 
he had on earth ; he shall see the Sun god rising in the 
sky, and his divine cycle ; he shall see the Moon god in 
his true form which he takes at his appearing.'* It was 
not indeed easy to get possession of such formulas ; those 
above mentioned lay in a golden box, which was in a 
silver box, which was in an ivory and ebony box, which 
was in a wooden box, which was in a bronze box, which 
was in an iron box. Round that was coiled a deathless 
snake, and there was a swarm of snakes and scorpions 
and all manner of creeping things which must be van- 
quished before a man could secure the formulas for his 
own. But, as the Story of Setna shows, this was not 
considered an impossible thing to do ; and if the possession 
of the formulas brought Setna to grief, it was not because 
of their intrinsic nature, but because he had been guilty of 
wrong doing, and had thus put himself in the power of 
the spirits which he thought to have controlled. 

According to the texts, the magicians of Egypt were 
guilty of turning their science to the injury of their fellow 
men. It is related that a man was sentenced to death for 

* For the Story of Seina see Egyptian Tales, W. M. Flinders 
Petrie, London, 1895. 


282 MAGIC AND SORCERY. 

trying to harm Pharaoh himself by means of magic, and in 
the papyri we have repeated instances of hurtful formulas- 
The sending of dreams, as described above, might be the 
means of producing most unpleasant effects ; but, worse 
still, a woman at a distance might be compelled by means 
of intricate rites to fall so desperately in love that she no 
longer ate or drank, no longer anointed herself or sat 
down, and took no thought for anything about her until 
she came to the man whom she loved. Love charms have 
been familiar to many nations. Theocritus, in his second 
idyllj gives a highly poetical description of how such 
sorcery was practised by the Hellenes in Alexandrian 
times. In Roman times it was considered necessary 
solemnly to forbid it. Paulus the jurist decreed that any 
one guilty of having presented a love philtre should be 
sent to the mines if he belonged to the lower classes, and 
if to the upper should be banished to an island, as a warn- 
ing to others ; but if be had thereby caused the death of 
either man or woman he should be executed. During 
the Middle Ages, too, belief in love spells and charms 
and philtres was rife, yet after all it is to the Egyptians 
that the doubtful credit belongs of having been the first 
to systematize such practices. 

Magic could not only cause very disagreeable incon- 
venience, but it might also bring about death : there is a 
set of directions for visiting your enemy with shivering 
and fever — probably ague — until he is undone ; in another 
place we are told how a man may be made to die of 
insomnia, and there is much more of the same kind 
Absurd as the pretensions of the magicians may seem, 


MAGIC AND RELIGION. 283 

the multitude thoroughly believed in them, and great was 
the fear of sorcerers and of sorcery. In Egypt magical 
doctrines were not mere popular superstitions ; they were 
part of the religion of the land, which was largely based 
on magic, and always intimately connected with it. 


CHAPTER XI. 

AMULETS. 

TN Egyptian texts of all periods amulets and their 
^ uses are prominent. They are represented in the 
scenes as borne in the hands or worn on the bodies of 
all sorts and conditions of men, and even of gods ; and 
as minor Eg3^tian antiquities they abound. Some of 
these objects were regarded as amulets simply on account 
of their ideographic value as hieroglyphs. Others were 
closely connected with doctrines sometimes formulated 
to explain the shape of the amulets, and sometimes 
representing forms of belief otherwise rarely mentioned 
in the texts, but which must nevertheless have prevailed 
extensively, judging both by the diffusion of the amulets 
themselves and by the frequent allusions to them. Any 
sketch of the Egyptian religion must therefore necessarily 
contain some account of these objects. 

I. The commonest and most important of all Egyptian 
amulets is in the shape of a scarabaeus; generally it is 
modelled with the wings closed, ||, but in later times it 
also represented the beetle with wings outspread, ^^P. 
The insect is the Ateuchus sacer^ common in Mediter- 
ranean countries and especially in Egypt The female 
Ateucfius lays her egg in a cake of dung, rolls this in 

284 


THE SCARAB. 285 

the dust and makes it smooth and round so that it will 
keep moist and serve as food for her young ; and finally 
she deposits it in a hole which she has scooped out 
in the ground, and covers it with earth. This habit had 
not escaped the observation of the Egyptians, although 
they had failed to understand it, for scientific knowledge 
of natural history was very slight among all peoples 
of antiquity. The Egyptian supposed the scarabaeus 
to be male, that it was itself bom anew from the egg 
which it alone had made, and thus lived an eternal life. 
The idea of the phoenix as arising from its own ashes 
was a similar one; and as the phoenix subsequently 
became a symbol of human immortality, so was it also 
with the scarabaeus : the scarabaeus came forth reanimate 
from within its egg, and so the human soul, ix, the ba^ 
would emerge from its mummy into new life, and, winged 
like the scarabaeus, fly upwards to heaven and the sun. 

Thus the scarabaeus became a symbol of the resur- 
rection, like butterflies and flowers in later times ; but the 
Egyptians were confirmed. in the use of such symbolism 
by their devotion to the verbal suggestions of their own 
language. The Egyptian name of the beetle was kheper^ 
a word which also means "to become," "to come into 
being " ; so the picture of the scarabaeus became the 
ideographic sign for that verb, especially when used in 
the sense of renewed life after death. And it was believed 
that for the man who was buried with a scarab upon 
him this immortality was already to some extent secured, 
or that at least the gods might be constrained to grant it. 

Besides being guarantees of immortality, scarabs served 


286 AMULETS. 

a second purpose, in common with another class of amulets 
consisting of conventional images of the jar in which 
the heart of the dead was usually placed when taken 
out of the body at embalmment, O. But since to the 
Egyptian the heart was the seat of life, it was evident 
that, as many of the religious texts imply and declare, 
there could be no resurrection of the dead who were 
without heart. Hence a distinct doctrine was gradually 
formulated as to the part played by the heart in the next 
world and how it was to be recovered by its owner. This 
taught that after death the heart led an independent 
existence, journeying alone through the Underworld until 
it met the deceased in the Hall of Judgment 

The doctrine was simple in itself, but to the Egyptian 
it presented great difficulty; for during the time inter- 
vening between death and judgment the Osiris was sup- 
posed to be without heart, and yet to be alive. The 
expedient was therefore devised of providing the mummy 
with a provisional heart for this intermediate period by 
means of an inscribed amulet of stone or earthenware, 
either of heart-jar shape or in the form of a large scarab, 
both being pledges of immortality. The inscription on 
these scarabs ^ related to the significance of the heart, and 
in it the dead desires that his heart may be with him 
when he assumes his different forms in the Underworld, 
that it may not give evidence against him in the Hall of 
Judgment, but may take his part at the momentous weigh- 
ing scene. For the heart, as he emphatically asserts, is a 

1 Birch, Aeg, Zetischr,, 1866 and 1867 : of. Book of the Dead, 
chaps, xxvi.— XXX., Ixiv., IL 34-6. 


THE HEART AND THE TET AMULET. 287 

distinct personality within him : it is the god Khn{im, the 
creator, strengthening and making sound his limbs. It 
is also independent, able to find its own way, and to open 
the path to the gods both for the dead and for his name. 
In conclusion, the deceased assumes that his wishes are 
already granted ; his heart has been favourable to him, 
there is joy at the Judgment, and he lives, ue, he is 
pronounced worthy of immortality. 

This formula and its explanatory texts teach the curious 
doctrine that it is not the heart which sins, but only its 
fleshly envelope. The heart was and still remained pure, 
and in the Underworld accused its earthly covering of 
any impurities contracted. Only if the latter was pure 
did it return to its place ; otherwise it probably dwelt in a 
place set apart as the Abode of Hearts, and so devoted 
its former possessor to destruction. Like all amulets, 
the heart scarab was only of temporary efficacy; once 
the judgment had taken place it was powerless to prevent 
destruction. 

2. Generally there are found with any carefully interred 
mummy one or two examples of an amulet in the form 
of a knot, flL and made of gold, red stone, or glazed 
ware: this amulet is called teL According to the texts 
with which it is sometimes inscribed,* it represents the 
blood of Isis, which, together with her conjurations and 
formulas, protected the dead and destroyed all that was 
harmful to him. If such an object was placed with a 
man in his grave it enabled him to become one of the 

' Book of the Dead, chap. clvi. : of. Maspero, Mim. sur 
guelques Pap. du Louvre, pp. i ei seg. 


288 AMULETS. 

followers of Osiris ; the doors of the Underworld and the 
ways of heaven and of earth were open to him, and a corn- 
field was granted to him in the Fields of Aald. The amulet 
was most efficacious when made of carnelian and hung 
about the neck of the dead ; but, judging from the various 
positions in which it is found on mummies, no particular 
weight seems to have been attached to the latter direction. 
3. The sign nr is found as an amulet; this too 
represents a knot. Since dnkk was the name of the 
knot and also a word meaning "life," the picture of 

it served as the ideogram for the 
letter. It has nothing whatever to 
do with a cross ; the name of crux 
ansata has no more relation to its 
origin or nature than the countless 
conjectures as to its hidden mean- 
^T^ -/' „^^„"„,„ *„„ ing made before the decipherment 

FIG. 71. — PERSONIFIED ANKH. ** * 

(l. d. III. 207, b.) of the hieroglyphics and even at 

placed in the hands of gods and 
kings to show that they were living ; and in some cases 
they are represented as using it to "give life," as the 
Egyptians called it, by touching with the symbol the 
mouth of the being to whom they are imparting their 
gift In very early times an independent existence had 
been ascribed to the dnkh ; there is an inscription on 
an altar dedicated to King Pepi of the Vlth Dynasty* 
which names the dnkh and the symbol of stability {ded)^ 
together with joy, day, the year, and eternity, as beings 
* Now in Turin. Published by BoNOMi and BiRCH in the Trans- 


THE DED AMULET. 289 

to receive divine honours. In scenes we may also find a 
sort of pictorial personification of the sign, furnished with 
arms and legs. 

4. The ded amulet, n, has been much misunderstood. 
It has been taken for a fourfold altar, a stand on which 
sculptors put down their tools, a representation of the 
universe showing four superimposed worlds, a disbranched 
tree trunk, and more especially for a Nilometer ; but none 
of these identifications has been proved. The inscriptions 
show that the Egyptians themselves considered that the 
symbol stood for the backbone of the god Osiris, that 
part of his body which was kept as a sacred relic in 
the city of Busiris in Lower Egypt The backbone gives 
stability and firmness ; and the setting up of the back- 
bone of Osiris was one of the most important functions 
at the restoration of his body after its dismemberment. 
This was annually celebrated at Busiris on the 30th 
Khoiak, at the end of that part of the Egyptian year 
devoted to the Osirian festivals, and was kept with 
strange rites ; e.g, the priests of the different sanctuaries 
fought together with fists and cudgels. This was 
probably the same feast as that described by Herodotus * 

actions of the Soc, Bibl. Arch,^ iii., pp. 1 10 ^/ seq. An attempt has 
lately been made to show that a long series of monuments inscribed 
with names of sovereigns of the Old Kingdom — this monument 
included — are forgeries of the end of the New Empire. I must 
confess that in by far the greater number of instances this attempt 
seems to me to have failed : in the case of this altar there seems 
no reasonable motive why any Egyptian should have taken the 
trouble to forge either the altar itself, the king's name upon it, or 
the list of divinities. 
* Cf. Wiedemann, Herodofs Zweites Btich, pp. 265-6. 

19 


290 AMULETS. 

as celebrated at Papremis, another city of the Delta, and 
which was supposed to show how once the followers of 
Set had opposed the restoration of Osiris. 

The ded amulet was a memorial of the resurrection of 
Osiris, and by virtue of its name it acquired a further 
significance. Ded means " firm," " established," and this 
quality or condition was greatly desired by the Egyptians 
for their dead. Chapter CLV. in the Book of the Dead 
is devoted to this amulet. The picture of the symbol is 
given, and the deceased speaks : " Thy back (backbone) 
is thine, thou who art of the still heart (Osiris) ; it is granted 
in thy place. I give unto thee thy needful humour (inii\ 
I bring unto thee the ded^ whereupon thou rejoicest These 
are the words to speak over a gilded ded made from the 
heart of a sycomore and placed on the neck of the glorified 
one. Then he shall enter through the door of Diiat This 
shall be done in his place on that day on which begins the 
year of the followers of Osiris {i.e. on the first day of the 
god's new life). If a man knows this chapter he is a 
perfect glorified one in the Underworld, who shall not be 
turned back at the gate of Amenti, to whom shall be 
given bread, cakes, quantities of flesh on the altars of Ri 
(Variant : of Osiris the Good Being) ; right are his (the 
deceased's) words {mad kherff) against his enemies in the 
Underworld, in true wise." As the text shows, this amulet 
also procured for the dead entrance in the Underworld, and 
sufficed to provide him with needful food there. The Egyp- 
tians, however, judged it more prudent not to trust to one 
amulet alone, but rather to be buried with many, so that in 
case any one failed in its object others might take its place. 


THE PAPYRUS COLUMN — THE USEKH. 29 1 

5. The significance of the papyrus column | * as an 
amulet was chiefly owing to its ideographic value : its name 
was Haz^ a word which means " to be green," " to sprout 
up." Here, as in many other languages, a metaphor 
derived from plant life became transferred to the life of 
the soul. A Ptolemaic relief shows plants growing out of 
the body of Osiris ; this represents the new life of the 
dead as evolved from his own body : " growing green '* be- 
comes a paraphrase for "resurrection." Chapter CLIX. of 
the Book of the Dead was devoted to this amulet, and was 
to be spoken over a little felspar model on which the 
words were inscribed, and which was to be hung round the 
neck of the deceased. It begins with the invocation : " O 
thou who goest forth on that day from the house of the 
god, great-speaking mistress of potent magic formulas, 
who comest forth by the gate of the palace and seizest 
the magic formulas of her father ! " this being evidently 
an allusion to the legend of R^ and Isis, and the magic 
power which Isis had guilefully acquired from him. 

6. The Usekh amulet ^^ was supposed to ensure free- 
dom of movement after death. In derivation the word 
iisekh means " to be wide " ; it is specially employed in 
connexion with the formula, "Thy legs are wide" — 
ix, thou movest freely.^ This is the attribute symbolized 
by the amulet, which was a gold necklace and was 
placed on the neck of the " glorified one." According to 
Chapter CLVIII. of the Book of the Dead, the words 

^ Cf. p. 219. 

• Cf. the name of the first jud^e in the hall of Osiris, *' He 
whose legs are wide coming from Heliopolis ** {Book of the Dead, 
chap, cxxv., 1. 14). 


292 AMULETS. 

inscribed on it should be : " My father, my brother, my 
mother, and thou, I sis, I am freed from my mummy 
wrappings and I see. I am one of those who are freed 
from their mummy wrappings and who see the god Seb." 
As in most similar Egyptian texts, the deceased assumes 
that his prayer is fulfilled, for this could not fail to 
be the case if he had spoken the correct formula in 
the right way. 

7. The amulet representing the human eye, with in- 
dications of the lines and modellings about it, was in 
Egyptian named AzaJ. Some of these amulets represented . 
the right ^^, and others the left eye '^g of the god R^. 
But as the right represented the sun and the left the 
moon, Ra is in this connexion considered as the god of 
the light giving heavenly bodies rather than as the Sun 
god only. The eye of day was usually called the eye 
of Horus, and was regarded as the source of all things 
good. Many useful and agreeable products, such as wine 
oil, and honey, were said to come from it, and were 
ultimately confounded with it ; sometimes they were 
said to come from its tears. The eye of day, and also 
the eye of night, were again and again in peril from the 
attacks of Set, and in solar or lunar eclipse often seemed 
to have been conquered by him. But the eye always 
in the end came out victorious, and hence it was that 
the dead were placed under its protection, in the hope 
that they too would triumph over the powers of darkness 
and of death. Besides, the word iiza means " flourishing," 
" healthy," and as an ideogram the amulet had also this 
significance. It was bound on the knuckles, neck, or 


SACRED EYES— EMBLEMS OF RULE — THE NAME. 293 

breast of the mummy, or placed within the abdomen. 
The material of which it was to be made is not prescribed, 
and it is found in gold, lapis lazuli, felspar, wood, and 
glazed ware : next to the scarab it is the commonest of 
all Egyptian amulets. 

8. One series of amulets was connected with somewhat 
different ideas : they represented the insignia of king- 
ship, especially the kingship of Osiris. In the first place 
there were net V, the red crown of Lower Egypt; hes 
Qy the white crown of Upper Egypt ; and Yl, the 
pshenty which was a combination of the two, and by 
assuming which Pharaoh proclaimed himself lord over 
the whole land. In the second place there were 
sceptres : the amulet of the royal sceptre, Us j , which 
gave dominion over heaven and earth ; Juk f, the 
shepherd's crook, also used as the ideogram of the word 
heky " to rule " ; and neklukh A , the scourge. The 
hek and nekhekh symbolized the twofold power of the 
king : to restrain and moderate, and to incite to progress. 
These and other similar amulets were given to the dead 
with the idea that he would not merely continue the same 
kind of life which he had led here, but that he would 
become an Osiris, a ruler of the Underworld. The 
necessary badges of his dominion were therefore placed 
ready to his hand, and their intrinsic magic efficacy was 
a further guarantee that he would surely attain to the 
power which they symbolized. 

9. The amulet CZDI represents the so-called " cartouche," 
or " royal oval," which enclosed the names of the kings 
and of the kings of the gods, so that even in writing 


294 AMULETS. 

such names should be obviously distinguished. This 
amulet stood for the name of the dead ; for the Egyp- 
tians regarded the name not only as part of a man, 
but also as part of his immortal ego: no being could 
exist without a name. Hence it was a man's supreme 
wish that his name might live, for if his name continued 
that which it expressed would also live on. This 
was the main object of the careful reiteration of the 
name in inscriptions on the walls of temples, stelae, and 
other monuments : that it might be spoken and kept alive 
by the readers. Even in Pyramid times a formula had 
been compounded, which remained in use to the end 
of Egyptian history, constraining the gods to cause the 
name of the dead to flourish.* But it was also needful 
to protect the name, since to know the true name of any 
being was to be master of the owner and of his powers. 
No risk was involved if the name were inscribed upon 
something in itself sacred, for the sacredness of the object 
protected the name also ; but if it were written on any- 
thing not so protected, such as the amulet in question, 
he who obtained possession of the latter had power over 
the name, and power therefore over the owner of the 
name. Thus, most of these amulets were uninscribed: 
so long as there was nothing on them to steal, a demon 
had no profit in possessing himself of them. This doctrine 
of names did not, however, remain in force throughout 
the whole duration of the Egyptian monarchy : under 

^ LlEBLEiN, Le Livre Egyptien, Que nton nomfleurissey Leipzig, 
1895 : of. Wiedemann, Le Livre des Morts, in Le Museon, xv., 
pp. 40 et seq. 


THE MENA.T. 295 

Amenophis III., for instance, names were freely inscribed 
on these talismans. 

10. The mend J (^ was worn hung at the back of 
the neck, serving as a kind of counterpoise to the neck- 
lace ; it was worn by certain goddesses, and also by Ptah. 
It served a symbolic as well as a practical purpose ; the 
sight of the mendt drove away care, even as the sight 
and sound of the sistrum brought peace and joy to the 
heart It was also a sign of divine protection, and as 
such we see it presented by goddesses to the king; as 
such too it was laid with the dead, especially in Saite 
times.* Generally it was made in glazed ware. 

11. The following amulets should here be mentioned 
and briefly described. Their wide diffusion testifies to the 
esteem in which they were held ; but their exact signifi- 
cance is undetermined. The rarer amulets we shall not 
consider. 

T, nefcTy represents originally a heart and trachea ; 
afterwards it appears to have been taken for a stringed 
instrument. It is the ideogram for "beautiful," "good," 
and as an amulet was meant to secure these qualities to 
the dead. 

^, sam, signifies " union. This amulet was supposed 
to secure union with the earth in "good" and orthodox 
burial, and also union with the gods, a pantheistic deification. 

•=[], neh^ the figure of a right angle. The sign seems 
to have the meaning of its phonetic value neh^ " protection," 
ue, divine protection to the soul. 

^ For this amulet see Lef^bure, Proc, Soc, BibL Arch,, xiii., 
PP- 333^^-5^^^- 


296 AMULETS. 

/T^, k/iekh, sekhekhy represents a level, to which, how- 
ever, the plummet is usually lacking. It symbolized the 
justice and moderation hoped for on behalf of the dead. 

cQd, khU, the image of the sun rising on the hilly 
horizon, and the symbol of the god RA Harmakhis. The 
dead man provided with this amulet was assured of union 
with the sun ; he might rise with the sun in the morning 
and sink with it to rest at night: in short, he would be 
as a god in the next world. 

12. Statuettes of gods or figures of their insignia were 
laid with the dead in their coffins and abound in Egyptian 
tombs ; generally they are of glazed ware and furnished 
with a ring- for suspension. Necklaces of these alone, or 
in combination with other amulets, were hung round the 
necks of mummies. By taking with him the statuette of 
any god the deceased placed himself under the special 
protection of that deity, who would help him according 
to its power in the world to come: Osiris would up- 
hold him at the Last Judgment; Isis and Nephthys 
would recite potent formulas in singing his funeral 
lament ; KhnOm would help him to build up his new 
body, etc. The greater the number and variety of such 
statuettes a man took with him, the more certain might 
he feel that, where the power of one god for his help 
and protection ceased, it would be supplemented by that 
of another. 

The same purpose might be served by drawing pictures 
of the gods in question on mummy wrappings or on the 
coffin ; pictures or statuettes alike were supposed to be 
changed into the real gods, who in the Underworld 


MODELS OF FOOD. 297 

hastened to the service of the dead as soon as he invoked 
them by the correct formulas. 

13. Other counterfeits placed with the dead might in 
the same way be changed into corresponding realities in 
the next world : an expedient which greatly reduced the 
cost of funerals. These votive objects were, in the first 
place, tiny models of useful articles, such as shirt like 
garments finished off with a fringe round the bottom, 
A ; this was generally made in stone. There were 
also stone or earthenware models of seals, Q, and of 
head rests, ^, which the Ancient Egyptian, like the 
present Soudanese, placed under his head to preserve the 
arrangement of his hair during sleep ; and of tools, etc., 
of all kinds. Food also was thus symbolically represented, 
a custom to which Herodotus alludes when he tells how 
poor Egyptians, at the feast of the full moon, made votive 
swine of dough to take the place of real swine as offer- 
ings.* Funerary offerings, however, were often made, not 
of perishable bread, but of stone or of glazed ware, and 
by virtue of magic formulas these produced the foods 
which they represented, at the desire of the dead. The 
process might even be carried so far that not only, for 
instance, one ox but thousands of oxen might be made 
from the one image. Generally images of oxen bound 
down for slaughter were made of red earthenware. There 
were also tiny models of different kinds of fruits and 
many of loaves of bread, ==>. These so called " funerary 
cones " have been the subject of many false explanations. 
Almost invariably they are of unbaked clay, the name 

1 ii. 47- 


298 


AMULETS. 


of the dead for whom they were intended being written 
on the flat base to prevent any misappropriation of the 
supply. And there were models of libation vases 5 for 
the Nile water, which they kept fresh and cool, besides 
many other things of the kind. Sometimes several 
offerings were combined in the shape of a little altar 
piled with provisions for the use of the dead ; one of 


FIG. 72. — HYPOCEPHALUS IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM. (DRAWN BY 
W. H. RYLANDS, ESQ.) 

these little altars, now in my possession, is scarcely | in. 
wide by f in. long, and displays two libation vases, four 
loaves of different forms, and two fruits. Other similar 
altars are still more richly furnished. 

14. Finally, there is an amulet differing essentially from 
all which we have hitherto considered, and known as a 
hypocephalus because usually it is found under the head 


THE HYPOCEPHALUS. 299 

of the mummy. The hypocephalus ^ is generally a disk 
of stuccoed linen ; sometimes it is found in bronze. One 
side is blank, but the upper side, that upon which the 
head rested, is covered with figures and inscriptions, which 
do not seem to have been strictly prescribed but rather 
to have varied in detail acccording to taste. On the 
whole, however, the purport of the texts is much the 
same, and a description of the hypocephalus figured in 
the accompanying illustration may stand for a general 
description of all such objects.* 

A line of inscription runs round the disk and reads : 
*' O thou shrine in jF/a^ benben. Exalted One, Exalted 
One ! Glorious One, Glorious One ! Husband [of thy mother], 
great, living God ! Chief of the gods, come thou to the 
Osiris Hor (name of the owner of this hypocephalus), 
viad klierU, Grant that there be warmth under his head, 
for he is one of thy followers." A central band of figures 
crosses the field of the disk ; the central figure is a 
squatting god with four rams' heads, two turning one 
way and two another, and crowned. This god is Amen ; 
the four heads represent the four winds, and show that 
he is lord of the winds and of the four quarters of the 
world. On either side of him stand three cynocephali, 
each wearing the solar disk. These are the spirits of 
the East and of the West, of sunset and sunrise, doing 

* It may be remarked that the Mormon religion is largely founded 
on a fantastic interpretation of such a hypocephalus . 

' Published, Proc. Soc. BibL Arch,, vi., p. 52 : cf. Lc, pp. ^I* ^o^, 
126, 129, 170, 185 ; vii., p. 213 ; Pleyte, Cha^itres SuppUmentaires 
du Livre des Morts, 162-163, pp. 60 et seq.\ Leemans in Mem, du 
Congr, des Orientalistes at Leyden, iv. 3, pp. 91 et seq. 


3CX) AMULETS. 

homage to Amen, who is also Amen R^, the god of 
the Sun. 

Directly over the figure of Amen is the figure of a god 
with two human heads, of which one is turned to the 
right and the other to the left This also is Amen, 
striding from West to East, lighting and looking upon 
the whole world. On his head he wears the plumes of 
Amen, the sun disk, and the usual ram's horns. The 
head of a jackal grows from either shoulder, emblematic 
of the two forms of Anubis as Opener of the path of 
the North and Opener of the path of the South, and 
on the god's sceptre Anubis, in the form of a jackal, 
is carried as his guide. To his right is an inscription : 
"Thou (Amen) art in the eight souls of thy gods," i.e, 
thou appearest in all the divine manifestations which thou 
animatest. Beneath the inscription the Sun god, RA, sits 
in his bark, in the form of a sparrow hawk with outspread 
wings. On the other side of Amen are two barks, one 
drawn above the other ; on the middle of the upper boat is 
perched the soul {bd) of the deceased, the name of Isis 
being inscribed on one side of it and the name of Nephthys 
on the other, in allusion to the deceased as an Osiris, 
bewailed and protected by the two divine sisters. At one 
end of the lower boat squats the hawk headed R& ; at the 
opposite end is written the word ba^ " soul " (of the deceased) ; 
between them is a scarabaeus coming towards R& : that is, 
the soul of the deceased in the form of a scarabaeus, of the 
god Khepera, approaches the Sun to become one with him 
and with the universe. 

Turning the disk upside down, on the other side of 


PANTHEISTIC TENDENCY. 3OI 

the central band, below an inscription referring to the 
inundation of the Nile, we find a scene with a cow in the 
middle. This is the MeijOrt, or Hathor cow, upon whose 
thighs, as we are told in a very ancient text,^ the sun of 
yesterday was born, other inscriptions explaining that by 
this is meant not the sun of the previous day, but the night 
sun which had been born on the evening of that day, for 
this cow was one of the forms supposed to dwell in the 
western sky. MehQrt, or rather the iizat which is born of 
her, is the sun, or the moon, and therefore behind the cow 
is drawn a female figure with an Hzat eye for a head. In 
front of the cow stand the four funerary genii which have 
charge of the viscera of the dead, while behind the Hzat 
headed figure is a scene of adoration. Here an ithyphalHc 
snake god figured with arms and legs, the cosmic deity 
Nehebka, is adoring a winged god who is seated upon a 
throne, crowned with the solar disk and bearing a scourge. 
This is intended for Amen Min, i.e, for Amen as the god 
of procreation. 

The fundamental idea of these scenes and inscriptions 
is pantheistic : they express a belief in an all embracing 
power of nature, especially as manifest in the Sun. This 
deity was the source of the gods, and they were mani- 
festations of him ; this was the power which protected the 
dead, and their hope it was to be merged in him. None 
the less this universal god had his abode in HeliopoHs, in 
the sanctuary of the temple of the Sun, and to Heliopolis 
therefore the doctrine must be traced. These Heliopolitan 

* Book of the Dead, chap, xvii., 1. 29 : of. Lepsius, Aelteste Texte, 
pi. ii., 1. 24 ; pi. xxxii., 1. 36. 


302 AMULETS. 

views, however, found expression on the hypocephalus, 
not as a confession of faith on the part of its owner, 
but only because he hoped to induce Amen R^ in his 
pantheistic form to grant him the warmth needful even to 
the dead. 

The texts which most clearly set forth this pantheistic 
tendency, expressed principally in late Egyptian texts, are 
found on the walls of the temple at El Khargeh, which was 
built during the Persian rule. Here we have a long hymn 
placed in the mouths of eight gods which have been con- 
sidered erroneously as gods of the elements ; and it is from 
this that the following passages are taken ^ : — 

" The gods salute his Majesty as their lord, who revealeth 
himself in all that is, and whose name is in all, in the hills 
as in the river. Amen is in all things. This venerable 
god was from the beginning, the earth was according to his 
plans ; he is Ptah, the greatest among the gods. . . . The 
heaven is upon his head, the water containeth thy secret. 
All beings praise thee when thou settest at evening in the 
Underworld (Dtlat). Thou awakenest Osiris by the glory 
of thy rays. They who rest in their graves hail thee. . . . 
Thou art lord, thine is the dominion. Lord ofheaven, the 
earth is subject to thy will. The gods are in thine hand 
and mankind lieth at thy feet What god is like unto thee ? 
The land of Memphis openeth to thee as Ptah ; like Amen 
thou hast made thy throne in Ankh-ta-Cli (Memphis). 
Thy soul is the support of both heavens. Thy form went 

* Published by Brugsch, Reise nach der Oase Khargeh, pis. 25- 
27 : of. Birch, Trans, Soc, Bibl, Arch,, v., pp. 293 etseq, ; Renouf, 
Lectures on the Origin of Religion, pp. 231 et seq. 


PANTHEISTIC TENDENCY. 3O5 

forth at first ; thou shinest as Amen, Ra, and Ptah. . . . 
ShO, Tefndt, N6t, and KhClnsii are thy forms in thy 
sanctuary under the forms of Min who Hfteth his feathers 
on high. . . . Thou art Ptah, thou appearest as the Nile. 
Thou art the old, thou art the young. Thou givest life to 
the earth by thy flood ; thou art the heaven, thou art the 
earth ; thou art Diiat, thou art the air, and all that in 
them is." 

Such ideas of the entering of the god into all things, or 
rather of the entering of all things into the god, were of 
great antiquity in Egypt: in the Pyramid texts we 
find the same views applied to the deified dead and elabo- 
rately set forth in very crude concrete terms.^ There we 
read that " the sky weeps, the archers (the constellations) 
flee away, the bones of the guardian of the gods tremble 
and their subjects flee, when they see the dead king whose 
soul appeareth as a god, who liveth on his fathers and 
feedeth on his mothers ; he is the lord of magic wisdom, 
whose name his own mother knoweth not" He devours 
men, and lives on the gods whom he hunts with the assist- 
ance of several demons ; he eats their magic formulas and 
consumes their magic power ; the great gods serve him 
for breakfast, the medium gods for his noonday meal, 
the little ones for supper ; the old gods, male and female, 
he uses for his oven, t.e. for fuel. He eats the crown of 
Upper and Lower Egypt that he may be lord of the whole 
land. 

These pantheistic views found their way into the Book 

^ Pyramid of Unas^ 11. 496 et seq, ; Pyramid of Teta, 11. 319 
et seq. 


304 AMULETS. 

of the Dead. Chapter CLXII./ "The chapter of giving 
warmth under the head of a glorified one," is devoted to 
the hypocephalus and is characterized by a long series of 
passages of similar import to those given above. 

" Hail to thee, mighty lion (sacred animal of Ra), Ex- 
alted One with the two feathers, Lord of the Diadem, 
thou who wieldest the scourge. Thou art lord of virility 
growing in shining rays, to the splendour of which there 
is no limit. Thou art the lord of many bright coloured 
forms, who embraceth them in his Hzat (the sun) for his 
children (mankind). Thou protectest those who are 
separated from the circle of the Ennead of the gods 
(? probably beings of the Underworld). Thou runner, 
striding far forth with his legs. Thou art the god of 
salvation, coming to him who calleth upon him, saving the 
wretched from the hand of his oppressor. 

"Come at my call. I am the cow (Mehiirt). Thy 
name is in my mouth; I will speak it: Penhakahakaher 
is thy name, A^ldHadkresaank-Lebatt is thy name, Khailh 
mdu-serdu (" shadow of the lion of the ram ") is thy name, 
Khalsatd is thy name. 

" I praise thy name, I the cow. Hearken unto my 
prayer on this day ; give warmth under the head of R^. 
Protect him in DClat, renewing him in Heliopolis. Grant 
that he may be even as one who is upon earth. He is 
thy soul. Forget not his name. 

" Come unto the Osiris N. N. Grant that there be 
warmth under his head. Oh ! he is the soul of the great 

1 Cf. Pleyte, Chapitres SuppUmentaires du Livre des Moris, 
chaps. 162-3, PP- 6 ^^ ^^S' ^^ 


BOOK OF THE DEAD, CHAPTER CLXII. 305 

corpse which rested in Heliopolis, (R^,) the Radiant One, 
He who becometh, the Great One (or the Ancient One) 
is his name. BarekatdthaHa is his name. Come ! Grant 
that he may be like unto one of thy followers. Oh ! he 
is thyself. 

" [These are the] words for a young cow which is made 
out of beautiful gold and placed on the neck of a glorified 
one, and which are written upon a new papyrus leaf which 
is placed under his head. Henceforth there is much 
warmth in all his forms, even as it was upon earth. This 
is a very great talisman which was made by the cow for 
her son R4 at his setting. Then 
was his throne surrounded by 
comrades, to protect him from 
the fire (?) ; .he was renewed 
in the Underworld, nor was 
he shut out by any gate of 
Diiat, conformably to order ™- ^^•~™^ "^^^'^^ "^^- ^'^- 

, -r ;r tw V* ,ati NETTE OF CHAP. CLXII. OF BOOK 

(the result being inevitable o^ the dead, (leps., 'todt.") 
for one who wore this amulet). '** *"***^ 

"Words which thou hast to speak when thou placest 
this goddess (the cow) on the neck of a glorified one : 
*0 Hidden One {Amen) among beings. Amen, who 
dwellest in heaven, mayest thou turn thy face hither 
towards the corpse of thy son (the deceased) ; restore him 
to health in the Underworld.* 

"This book is a great secret. Let it not be seen of 
any eye. It is a sin to know it, to hide it, to make it, 
this book of the Lady of the Temple (the cow) whose 
name is hidden." A Leyden text has an appendix to 

20 


306 AMULETS. 

the effect that the writing was made by the cow (Isis, as 
identified with MehCkrt) for her son Horus, and concludes 
with the invocation : " O Osiris, and ye dwellers in the 
Underworld, may you protect the Osiris N. N., may his 
well being be your well being, and inversely ! " 

It is obvious from this text that the fusion of the R^ 
myth with the Osirian myth was complete. Amen, who 
is as Ra, is called to the help of the dead because the god 
too had suffered death ; the same plea which was formerly 
addressed to Osiris. Just as in the Osirian faith it was 
held that the most potent amulets had first proved their 
efficacy in the case of Osiris himself, so it was held that 
the hypocephalus had first been used for the dead Ra. 

The Leyden text still further connects the hypocephalus 
with the Osirian myth by stating that the amulet was used 
by Isis for Horus, who appears in the later versions of the 
myth as a dead god restored to life. Notwithstanding the 
fundamental pantheism of this formula, it is full of traces 
of the effort to preserve the distinct individualities and 
fates of different gods from absorption in the universal 
deity. To this end the gods are explained as equivalents 
of that deity, which is shorn of its all embracing nature 
and imagined in the form of a man in order that to it also* 
a life history may be attributed. The above text is 
thus an interesting example of the absurdities in which 
the Egyptians were necessarily landed whenever they 
attempted to express deep philosophic thought in terms 
of their religion. It was inevitable : far from resigning any 
article of their ancient faith, they invariably sought to turn 
every single characteristic of it to account, and in the 


DECAY AND DEATH OF THE NATIONAL RELIGION. 307 

ensuing absurdities lay the germs of the decay and death 
of the national religion. The thoughtful Egyptian must 
have recognized its impossibilities ; he must have admitted 
to himself that gods such as he was taught to worship 
could in nowise be co-existent ; he must have known that 
his religion was not true. 

When Christian evangelists came into the Valley of 
the Nile, apparently the people in general gave up 
their heathen faith without struggle. Until the third 
century A.D. mention was indeed made of the ancient 
gods on the walls of temples and in inscriptions ; but 
these were official documents of the heathen authorities : 
to the people, and especially to the upper classes, their 
gods no longer appealed. In the course of a few decades 
Christian doctrines had penetrated deeply into the con- 
sciousness of the nation. Among all the translations of 
the books of the Bible the Coptic translation is the 
oldest ; and Coptic — the spoken language of the country 
from the first century A.D. — was the daughter tongue of 
Ancient Egyptian. The Coptic version was no learned 
book intended only for a restricted circle of adherents to 
the new faith ; it was a popular work issued almost 
contemporaneously in different dialects of the country. 
Full of the courage of faith the Christians by the Nile 
endured the storm of persecution which broke over them 
under Diocletian, and with burning zeal took part in the 
fierce strife concerning dogmas which rent the Christian 
world of the fourth century. Isolated at length through 
rigid adherence to doctrine, to this day the Coptic Church 
stands aloof from the rest of Christendom. 


I NDEX 


adh, 68. See Ah. 
AaM, AarH, Field of, 63. 
Aala, Fields of, 48, 96, 251, 288. 
da mdk, 70. 

fLb, the, 242. 

Ab, doctrine and amulets of the, 
242, 286-7. 

Abaton, 128-9. 

*• Abode of Hearts," 287. 

of Horus," 142. 

of the Cow," 62, 214. 

Abstract thought, Egyptian inca- 
pacity for, 174-5. 

Aba Simbel, 134. 

Abydos, 10, 78, 162, 219, 248, 264. 

Acacia, the Nile, 155. 

Adonai, Adonis, 35. 

AfRd, 86. 

Aifrican (Hamitic and Negro) 
deities, 148, 159-70. 

Agathokles, 267. 

Ah, 124, 150, 225. 

AhmeSy 228. 

Ahti (Bes), 160, 164. 

AT, tomb of, 39. 

Aker, 194, 199. 

Alexander the Great, 53, 120, 188-9. 

Altars, funerary, models of, 298. 

Amasis, 199. 


Ambracia, 153. 
Am DOat. See Book of. 
Amen, 43, 108, 125, 302, 303, 305. 
Amen, importance of, 108, 107-9- 
fusion with Min and RA, 108, 

112, 300, 301. 

See Amen Ri. 

Amenophis III., 163. 

Amenophis IV. (Khdenaten), 35-9. 

Amen Ra, 12, 13, 87, 107, 108, 109, 

118-22, 300- 
and Aten worship, 36-9, 


43. 


• hymn to, 111-18, 136. 

• oracles of, 120. • 

- sacred animals of, 87, 


119. 

Ament, goddess, 1234. 

Amenthes (Amenti), 1 24. 

Amenti, 85, 86,88, 96, loi, 108, 290. 

Ames sceptre, 113. 

amity 61. 

Amset, funerary genius, 248. 

a " soul of Pe," 163. 

Amsi, 127 (note). S^e Min. 

AmQ (Apis), priestesses of city of, 
61. 

Amulet of KhCnsQ, 276. 

Am ulets, diffusion of , 1 9 1 , 284 ; kinds 
of, 284; dnkh, 288-9; cartouche, 
293-5 ; ded, 289-90 ; figures of 
deities, 168, 170, 296 ; hek, 293 ; 


309 


310 


INDEX. 


hez, 293; hypocephalus, 298 et 
seq.\ khekh, 296; khU, 296; 
Mehart cow, 305; menat, 295; 
nefer, 295 ; nek, 295 ; nekhekh, 
293 ; net, 293 ; psheni, 293 ; 
sacred animals, 199 ; sam, 295 ; 
scarabs, 284-7; iet, 287; Haz, 
291 ; Us, 293 ; iJj^M, 291-2 ; HzaJ, 
292. 

An (Heliopolis), 17, 154. 

<ZM, column, 1 54. 

Anabe, 177. 

dttdn, cynocephalus of Thoth, 68. 

Anatomy, ignorance of, 271. 

Ancestor worship, 4. 

AnepQ (Anubis), 229. 

Anher, 12, 30, 78. 

Ani, 114, 116. 

Animal incarnations, idea of, essen- 
tially Egyptian, 173, 182. 

Animals, worship of, 4, I57t i5^f 
172-87. 

couchant stone figures of, 199- 

200, 205. 

Animals, sacred, Egyptian theory of, 
180. 

immortality of, 178, 182-3. 

- place of, in temples, 122, 


181. 

punished and killed, 178. 

rarely represented in 

scenes, 183-4, 

representing divine attri- 


butes, 179. 

■ worship of individual, 


173» 185-7. 

• as species, 119-20, 145, 


I73» 185-7. 
Anit, 125. 
dnkh, 288. 

amulet, 86, 288-9. 

Ankh taai, 302. 
Anta, 149, 150, 151-2. 


Anthropomorphic conception of 

divinity, 173*4- 
Anubis (AnepO), 87, 97, 209, 220, 

229-30, 248, 272, 300. 

of the North, 230, 300. 

of the South, 230, 300. 

sacred animal of, 229. 

AnOkt (Anflki), 105, 130, 131. 
Apep serpent, 49, 91, 92, 100, 102. 
Apet, 168-9. 
"Aphrodite, The Golden," 29. 

The Strange," 150. 

Apis (AmQ), the city, 61, 144, 214. 
Apis, the (Hapi), 180, 182, 183, 

187-91. 

Horus as the, 214. 

miraculous birth of, 188. 

oracles of, 189. 

antiquity of worship of, 188. 

ApoUinopolis Magna (Edfa), 25. 

Parva, 27. 

Apollo, 153. 

and Horus, 27, 269. 

" Apollobex," 268, 269. 

Apt-t-Q (Thebes), 116. 

ApUai, 87, 272. 

Arabian coins, Bes on, 162. 

Arcadia, 153. 

Arogris (Her-Or), 27-8, 49» 129, I43» 

207, 208, 224. 
asem, 46. 

Asher, temple of, 122. 
Asiatic deities, 148, i^f^etseq., 159. 
Asklepios as ImOthes, 139. 

and dreams, 267. 

and Pluto, 191. 

Aso, queen of Ethiopia, 208. 
Assunilation of deities, lit 25, 27, 

77. See Syncretism. 
Ast (Isis), 76, 218-19. 
Astarte, goddess, 70, 149, 150-1, 

153- 
queen of Byblos, 209. 


INDEX. 


311 


Atef crown, the, 113. 
Aten, the, cartouche of, 42. 

hymn to, 39-42. 

worship of, 3S-44- 

€Uer^ linear measure, 86, 88. 
Ateuchus sacer, the, 284. 
Athene as Neith, 140. 
Athyr, festival of 17th, 209, 211-12, 
264. 

goddess of, 261. 

Atom (Atma TCm Tomos), 31-2, 107. 
Augustus, 189, 192. 

B 

^«, the, 233, 242, 285, 300. 
Baal (Bai), 127, 149-50. 

and Ment, 127. 

Babylon (at Memphis), 117- 

Back of Seb, 230. 

'• Backbone of Osiris," 289-90. 

bak, 26, 269. 

Bakh (Bacis), 126. 

Bark of Eternity, S7. 

of Horns, 70. 

of Ra, 23-4, 72, 78, 89» 90. 97, 

loi, 135. 

of Sokaris, 135. 

Bast, 30, 138, 169. 

baU (souls), 48 eipass. 

Bekhten (or Bentresht) Stela, 124, 

274-7. 
Benben^ 24, 39, 116. 
bennU, 193. 

Benna, the, 1934. See Phoenix. 
Bent-anta, 152. 
Bentresht, 124, 274-7. 
Bes, 159-68. 

African origin of, 159, 167-8. 

and Harpokrates, 164. 

and Horus, 67. 

animal of, 160-1. 

in decorative art, 162. 


Bes in birth scenes, 162-4. 

in the Underworld, 168. 

on Arabian coins, 162. 

I oracle of, 162. 

besa, 160. 

Besas, Christian martyr, 162. 

Bethels, betyls, 153-4. 

Bethshemesh (Heliopolis), 17. 

Biggeh. 33. 

" Birth House," the, 164. 

Birth scenes and deities, 162-4, 

168-70. 
Blemmyes, the, and Isis worship, 

219. 
Blood and wine offerings, 44. 
" Blood of Isis," the, 287. 
Book of Am DHat, 83 et seg. 

of Journeying in Eternity, 147. 

of " May my name flourish 1 " 

247. 
of Slaying the Hippopotamus, 

71. 

of the Breath, 247. 

second, 247. 

Book of the Dead, 31, 133, 244 eiseg. 

confusion in, 247. 

permanent character of, 


256. 


. supplementary texts, 246. 
- Chap. XV., 44-51, 102. 

xvii., 257-60. 

cxxv , 249-52. 

civ., 290. 

clviii.t 291-2. 

dix., 291. 

. clxii., 304-6. 


of the Gates, 83, 95-6, 97-101. 

Bubastis, 32, 138, 169. 
Bull of Erment. See Bakh. 

of Memphis. See Apis. 

" Bull fair of face," 116. 
of his mother." See " Hus- 
band of his mother." 


312 


INDEX. 


Bull of offering, 117. 

strong, 126. 

Busiris, 219, 289. 

festivals of, 289. 

Bato (Oazit), goddess, Ul-2, 169. 

city, 163, 210, 214. 

Byblos, Isis at, 209-10. 
queen of, 151, 209. 


Calendars of lucky and unlucky 

days, 262-5. 
*• Carrier out of Plans " (KhfinsQ), 

124, TTj^-T passim, 
" Cartouche " or name amulet, 293-5. 
Cat, black, in sorcery, 267. 
Cats, continued Egyptian reverence 

for, 186. 
Celsus, 181, 272. 
Ceremonial fighting at festival of 

Osiris, 289. 
" Chapter of Protecting the Ship," 

74. 
Character of Ancient Egyptians, i et 

pass. 
of Ancient Egyptian religion, 

3-4. 
Chests, talismanic, 93. 
•' Chief of the Artificers," 10. 
Christ in Egypt, 18-21, 77. 
Christianity in Egypt, 76-7, 182, 194, 

307. 
Cicero, 264. 

Ciaudian, poet, on dreams, 267. 
Clemens of Alexandria, 181. 
Colours of deities, 1 18 (and note). 
Composite figures of deities, 183-4. 
Conservatism, i ei seq. etpass. See 

Syncretism. 
Consistency, absence of, 3, 5, 88, 

99, 107 etpass, 
Corda myxa, 155. 
Cosmography, Egyptian, 23, 64, 128. 


Cow, Abode of the, 62, 214. 

of Hathor or Isis, 64, 143. 

of Nat, 62-4. 

of Rat, 15. 

Crocodile and Set, 70-4 etpass. 

god. See Sebak, Sukhos. 

Crocodiles, formulas against, 277-8. 
Cruxansata, 288. 
Cubit of Ptah, 131-2. 

of Thoth, 227. 

" Cutter in pieces," 88. 
Cynaelurus guttatus^ 161. 
Cynocephali in DOat, 89, 90, 95. 

of Amen Ril, 299. 

of Thoth, 95, 226. 


Darkness (Kek and Kekt), 233. 
and Light, conflict between, 

79. 91 etpass. 
Days, auspicious and inauspicious, 

211, 262-5. 
Dead, the. See Chaps. IV. and IX.* 

et pass. 
Death, Egyptian conception of, 96-7 

etpass. 
deb, 70. 
Decadence of Egyptian religion, 

170-1, 300-7. 
ded, 290. 

amulet, 289-90. 

Deir el Bahri, sculptures at, 62-3, 

184 (note). 
Demons of disease, 271-7. 

of DQat, 84, 99 etpass.^ 247. 

Denderah, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. 

goddess of, 142. 

scenes and texts from, 32, 163. 

Denit, 85. 

Determinatives, 26. 

" Devourer of the Arm," 96. 

of the Underworld," 249. 

DkUti (Thoth), 225. 


INDEX. 


313 


Differentiation of deities, 11, 27. 
Diocletian, 307. 
Dionysos as OsiriSi 208. 
Diospolis (Thebes), 107. 
"Director of the Soldiers," 10. 
Dirge on Ptolemaic stela, 96-7. 
Disease, theory of health and, 271-2. 

demons of, 271-7. 

conjurations against, 272 etseq. 

Dog, the, and Anubis, 229. 

" Double Heart of the Earth," 89. 

Dreams, 265-8, 277. 

interpreting of, 266. 

Dflat, the Underworld, 45, 83, 

Chap. IV. etpass, 

demons of, 84 etpass, 

divisions of, 84, 99 etpass, 

DQamatef, funerary genius, 248. 
one of the *• souls of Nekheb," 

163. 
Dynasty, the divine, 32 (note), 63, 

107 

IV ., 188. 

v., 4, 17, 53. 

VI., 4. 

XL, 107. 

XII., 17, 18, 179. 

XVIIL, 35, 82, 140^ 152, 212, 

213. 

XIX., 35, 82, 152, 177. 

XX., 82, 83, III, 120. 

XXL, 83, 120, 124, 150. 

XXIL, 83, 120. 

XXVI., 124, 140, 162. 


/ Eagle for phoenix, 193. 

Eclipse, solar and lunar, 79-80. 

god of solar, 1 1, 28. 

Edfa, 54, 124, 

Horus of, 30, 69 ei seq. 

Egg of moon, 132. 


Eggof Ptah, 131. 

of sun, 132. 

of world, 231. 

Eileithyia, city, 34. 

goddess (Nekhebit), 141. 

Elements, gods of the, 233, 302. 
Elephantine, 34, 60. 

triad of, 130. 

El Kab, 141. 
El Khargeh, 302. 
Embalmment, 235, 271. 
Ennead, 48. 

formation of, 105. 

Enneads of Heliopolis, 106. 
Epagomenal days, 207, 211, 261. 
Erment, 15, 127. 

bull of, 126. 

god of, 125-6. 

triad of, 15. 

erpdt 231. 

Esneh, 128. 

Esoterics and exoterics, 205-6. 

" Eternal House," the, 236. 

Eternity, *• King of," 248. 

" Land of," 45. 

" Lord of," 42, 1 12. 

Heh and Heht, 233. 

Eudoxus of Cnidus, 1 89. 

Euhemerism, 151. 

Eye of Horus, 58 and note, 292. 

ofRa (as Hathor Sekhet), 59 

etpass.t 292. 
sacred, 292. See Ozat. 


"Fair-resting One in Thebes" 
(KhOnsO), 124, 2yyj passim. 

" Father of Terror " (Great Sphinx), 
198. 

Feather of Maat, 217. 

of Sha, 33. 

Feathers, crown of, 131, 159. 


3H 


INDEX. 


Feathers, two, 113 etpass., 217, 259, \ 

303, 304. ! 

Feline goddesses, 32, 33, 34, 87, 

122, 138, 151, 186. 
Festivals, harvest, 127. 

local, 12. 

of Busiris, 289. 

of Hapi, 145, 147. 

of Hathor, 61 and note, 142. 

of Isis, 141. 

of Osiris, 289. 

of quarter month, 1 14. 

of sixth day of month, 1 14. 

of Sokaris Osiris, 135. 

of the New Year, 57. 

•• Field of Rest," 63. 
Fields of Aaia. See AalQ. 
Fire of Dttat, 93, 94. 

lakes of, 247. 

living, 57. 

spitting serpents of DOat, 93, 

94,99- 

worship, 137, 155 (note). 

" First Prophet of Amen," 10. 
Formulas, magic, 56, 67, 73, 101, 

272-4, 279 etpass, 

against disease, 56, 271-7. 

wild beasts, snakes, and 

crocodiles, 58, 67, 277-9. 
for use of the dead, 92, 279-80. 

See Book of the Dead. 
— ^ of invocation, 267-70, 
written and swallowed, 58, 

274. 
Frog, symbol of resurrection, 129, 

headed deities, 129, 146. 

Funeral, 236-40. 

ritual, 83, 234-40. 

Funerary cones, 297. 
•— ^ feast, 240. 

■ furniture, 255-6. 

genii, the four, 248. 

offerings. See Offerings. 


Genii, funerary, 248. 

tutelary and of Ddat, Chap. 

IV., etpass. 

Germanicus, 189. 

Gnostic formulas, 267-9. 

papyri, 267. 

God, " the " and " a," 109-1 1. 

Goddess, Egyptian, general charac- 
ter of the, 104. 

Goddesses of priestly manufacture, 

I5» 30» 32, 123- 
Gods of the human body, 271- 
Good and Evil, conflict between, 79, 

220-21. 
Goose of Amen RA, 121. 

ofSeb, 231. 

"Great Green, the," 115 (note). 
"Great Seer," "Great One of 

Seeings," 10 and note. 
Greek influence, 96, 1 70-1, 182, 191, 

194. 

inscriptions, 266. 

Green-faced deities, 118 (note), 140, 

217. 
Green paint, 68. 
Groves, sacred, 27, 181, 204. 

H 

Ao^'ofThoth, 67. 

Hades, for Dfiat, 171. 

Hadrian, 188. 

Hait (Bes), 160. 

Hamitic deities, 148, 167-8. 

Hftpi, the Nile, 109, 145-7. 

Hapi, the sacred bull of Memphis, 

187. 5^^ Apis. 

fimerary genius, 248. 

one of the " souls of Pe," 163. 

Harmakhis, 28-9, 44> 70t 7if 109, 1 16. 

See Rfl Harmakhis. 


INDEX. 


3IS 


Harpokrates (Herpekhred), 1 5 

223-5. 

and Bes, 164. 

Harvest festivals, 127-8. 1 

goddess of, 146. 

Hat benben, 21, 24, 1 16. | 

Hathor, 17, 27, 32, 60, 104, 125, I 

142-3, 184 (note), 272. | 
and Mountain of the West, 30, , 

170. 

festivals of, 61-2 and note. 

" Golden, The," 29, 30. 

month of, 261. 

sacred animal of, 143, 170, 

184 (note). 

tree goddess, 143, 157. 

Hathors, the Seven, 143. 

Hathor Sekhet, 59, 60, 61. 

Hawks as incarnations of solar 

deities, 15-16, 25-7, 28, 179. 
*' He who beholdeth Ra," 89. 
" He who dwells in Amenti," 88. 
■*' He who reigneth in Truth," 43. 
Heart amulets, 286-7. 

doctrine of, 242, 286-7. 

weighing of, 142, 248. 

" Heart of the Earth," 89. 
Hearts, Abode of, 287. 
Heh (god of Eternity), 233. 
Heht, 233. 
hek, 293. 

amulet, 293, 

Hek (god), loi. 

Hekt, 129-30. 

Helen of Homer, 150. 

Heliopolis, 17-25, 30» 59. 60, 128, 

145.274,304,305. 

and Asia, 25. 

Aten worship at, 35, 43. 

Enneads of, 106. 

high priest of, 10. 

"lady of," 15. 

theology of, 106-7, 245, 301-2. 


Helios as Rfl, 80, 207, 208. 

Hen neter, 9. 

hennU bark, the, 135. 

Henotheism, 11, 36. 

Hephaestos as Ptah, 131, 137. 

Her, 27. See Horus. 

Hera as Satit, 130. 

Heracleopolis Magna, 60. 

Herakles as KhansD, 124. 

Herapsheta, 30. 

Hcrbehadti, 30, 69 et seq. 

Herdema, 30. 

Herdesher, 30. 

HeremkkU, 28. See Harmakhis. 

HeremkhUH^ 28-9. See Harmakhis. 

HerhekennQ, 30, 87. 

Herka, 30. 

Herkhentanma^ 28, 32 (note). 

sacred animal of, 28. 

HefTneriit 28. 

Hermes as Thoth, 207, 228. 

Trismegistos, 228. 

Hermopolis, 124. 

Hermopolite Nome, 25. 

HemUby 29-30. 

Herodotus, 18, 137, 141, 150, 199, 
211, 289. 

Heron, the bennU bird, 193. 

Herpekhred, 210, 223-5. See Har- 
pokrates and Horus Son of 
Isis. 

Hert, 30-1. 

Herflr, 27, 207. See Arofiris. 

HerarshQ, 28. 

Hespy 6. 

Hest (Isis), 218. 

" Hidden One," the, 108, 109. 

Hill worship, 155 (note). 

Hippopotamus and Set, 70-4. 

sacred to Tattrt, 168. 

Hog as Set, 80, 96. 

Homer, 27, 150. 

HorapoUo, 123. 


3i6 


INDEX. 


Horoscopes, 262. 

Horse, 151. 

Horus (Her), 17, 27, 36, 56, 58, 93. 

109. 
Son of Isis, 27, 73, 78, loi, 106, 

223-6, 261, 272, 273, 306. 

the King, 22, 175. 

distinction between " Horus 

Son of Isis " and " Horus the Sun 

God," 27, 224-5. 

Eye of, 58 and note. 

"lord of not seeing" (Her- 

khentanma), 28. 
of Edfa (Herbehadti), 30, 69 

et seq, 
of Letopolis (Herkhentanma), 

II, 28. 
"of the Two Eyes" (Hermerti), 

28. 
"on the Horizon" (Heremkhft), 

28-9. 
" on the Two Horizons " (Her- 

emkhQti), 28. 
" Opener of that which is 

Secret" (Herapsheta), 30. 

the Bull (Herka), 30. 

the Elder (Herar), 27-8, 207. 

the Golden (HernOb), 29-30. 

the Red (Herdesher), 30. 

Hours, deities of, 89-90, 262. 

" House of Birth," 164. 

of the Obelisk." See Hat 

benben. 

of Stars," 21. 

of Suckling," 169. 

hn, 147. 

Ha, 87, 146. 

Human incarnations of deity, 175-7. 

sacrifice, 204. 

" Husband (or Bull) of his mother," 

57.104, III. 
Hyksos, the, and the horse, 151. 
and the solar cult, 12-13. 


Hymn from El Khargeh, 302-3. 

to Amen Ril, 11 1-18, 136. 

to Aten, 40-2. 

to the Nile, 146-7. 

toRa, 44-51. 

Hymns in worship, 39, 44, 146. 
Hypocephalus, 298-306. 
description of a, 299-301. 


Ibis of Thoth, 67, 92, 225. 

Ideograms, 31, 174-5. 

Imhetep (Imflthes), 139. 

ImCithes (Imhetep), 104, 132, 137,. 

139-40. 
Inundation, god of the, 233. 
Invocations, magic, 268-9 ^t pass. 
Irrigation, 7, 251. 
Isis (Ast, Hest). 15, 73, 76, 79. 92r 

loi, 106, 191, 218-19. 
and Nephthys as mourners, 

215, 239; present at birth, 162. 

and Rat, 15. 

, as magician, 54-8, 75, 92, 219, 

227, 273, 306. 
her head replaced by a cow's^ 

225. 

I myth of, 207-15. 

sacred animal of, 219. 

I worship, Roman, and the dog^ 

I 229- 
I lOsdas, 29. 

I J 

Jackal, sacred to Anubis, 229, 230. 

I headed deities, 89, 163. 

I Judgment before Osiris, 248-52. 

Julian, 188. 

Juniperus phoenicea^ 155. 

Jupiter (planet), 30. 

Justice. See Truth and Justice. 


INDEX. 


317 


K 
Ka, the, 87, 240-2. 

of Sha, the, 87. 

^ the king's, 176. 

Ka (god), 146. 

Kambyses, 137, 200. 

Kamak, 125, 127. 

Kebehsendf, funerary genius, 248. 

one of the souls of Nekheb, 

163. 
Kedesh, 152-3. 
Kek (darkness), 233. 
Kekt, 233. 
Kha (sunrise), 30. 
JCha (corpse), 234. 
Khafra, 29. 
Khaibfii^^ 242. 
khekh amulet, 296. 
khenSy 124. 
kheper, 31, 285. 
Khepera, 24, 31, 32, 44, 45» 5^ 55» 

113, 197.300. 

in Daat, 92, 93. 

Khepersh helmet, 1 13. 

KheraO (Bes), 160. 

Kherheb, the, 139, 236-7. 

Kheta treaty, 150, 151. 

Khoiak, feasts in, 135, 212, 215, 289. 

loth, 264. 

KhnOm, Khnef (KhnOmis), 105, 

128-9, 287. 
Khnam Ra, 13, 43. 
Khndm, sacred animal of, 119, 

128-9. 
KhnHmU, the, 137. 
KhU (glorified dead), 48 etpass., 242. 
kha amulet, 296. 
KhQenaten (Amenophis IV.), 36-9, 

43. 
KhiifQ, 53. 

KhOnsa, 104, 107, 124-5, 225, 303. 
Carrier out of Plans, 124, 275 

ctpass. 


KhunsO, Fair-resting One in Thebes, 

124, 275 eipass. 

Her, 125. 

month of, 261. 

nefer hetep ShQ, 33. 

Ra, 125. 

Shfi, 125. 

Thoth, 124. 

King, the, as incarnate deity, 175-6. 

in temple, 203. 

the son of the god, 53, 175, 

183.4. 
Kora Ombo, 124-5. 

triad of, 104, 

Krokodilopolis, 192. 

Kronos, as Seb, 207, 208, 231. 


Labyrinth, the, crocodile cemetery 

in, 193. 
'* Lady of the Bark," 87. 

of the Temple," 305. 

Lake of necropolis, 236. 

of temple, 204. 

" Land of Life," 49, 50. 

of Rest," 49. 

of the Deep," 67. 

Latin, 170. 

Latopolis, 33. 

Legend or myth of Isis and Osiris, 

206-218. 
of Ra and Isis, 54-8, 214, 

291. 


• of the Destruction of Man- 
kind, 58-88, 138, 231. 

Winged Sun Disk, 69-79. 


Leto (Cazit), 141, 214. 
Letopolis, 27, 28, 117. 
Libanius, 145. 
Libyan deities, 140, 148-9, 159. 

influence, 36. 

Libyans, the, in, 112. 
Light and darkness, 78-9. 


3i8 


INDEX. 


Lion and Kedesh, 152. 

Lion, solar. 167. 

Litanies of the Sun, 83. 

'• Living Soul of Ra," 126, 128. 

Local cults, 10-12, 105, 108, 186. 

Lotus and papyrus, I4S-6- 

Bes on, 167. 

symbol of resurrection, 138. 

Love charms and philtres, 282. 

Lucian, 181. 

Lunar deities, 28, 124, 225-7. 

Luxor, 163. 

Lycopolis (Delta), 34, 230. 

(Upper Egypt), 229, 230. 

M 

mad kherU, 45, 83, 112, 246, 279-80. 
Mait, 106, 142. 

Madet boat, the, 23, 47, 48, loi. 
Magic and medicine. See Medicine. 
-T— and religion, 92, 94, 95. 99, 

279-80, 283. 

hurtful, 55, 281-2. 

practice of, 58, 68, 267 etpass. 

See Formulas. 
Mandrakes, 60 and note. 
Manetho, 265. 
Maqrizi, 21. 
Mars (planet), 30. 
Marvels, 265. 
Mastabas, i6« 

Matarieh (Heliopolis), 18, 19. 
MtUoAy III, 116. 
Medamot, 125. 
Medicine and magic, 56 et pass., 

271-7. 
mehen serpent, 92. 
Mehurt cow, 301, 304, 306. 
Mekhir, 13th of, 264. 
Memphis, 32, 33, 34, 170, 188, 302. 

high priest of, 10. 

triad of, 132. 

Menat amulet, 132, 295. 


Mendes, high priest of, 10, 219. 

Menes, 6. 

Menht, 169. 

Ment (M6nth), 15, 125-6, 263. 

sacred animal of, 126. 

Ment Ra, 12$, 126. 

Mentahetep, coffin of, 257. 

Merftstrot.t, 150. 

Merenptah, 146, 175-6, 203. 

mesen and meseniU^ 71 and note, 74. 

Meskhent, 163. 

Min. 28, 108, 127-8, 152, 303. 

Min Amen, 108, 112. 

"Modeller, the," 128. 

Monkeys as genii of Ddat, 85. 

Monotheism, question of, in Egyp- 
tian religion, 109-10. 

Monsters, fabulous, 90, 179-80, 187. 

Mdnth, 125. 

Morality, Egyptian, 95, 252-3. 

Mountain of the West, 30, 51, 170, 
236. 

Muhammed and cats, 186. 

Multiplication of the same divine 
personality, 230. 

Mummy, the, 235. 

mUt, 122-3. 

MOt, 107, 122-a 

Mysticism, Egyptian bent towards, 3. 

Mythology, deities without place in, 
104, 142, 149. 

Syncretic, 77 etpass. 

N 

Name amulet, 2M-5. 

the doctrine of the, 155-8, 241, 

294-5. 

Nebhat (Nephthys), 220. 

Nectenebus L (Nekhtherhebt), 83. 

IL, reputed father of Alexan- 
der, 53. 

nefer, 295. 

amulet, 295. 


INDEX. 


319 


Nefcraiti Neferneferft, 42. 
NeferTQm, 132, 137, 138-9. 
" Negative Confession," 83, 250-3. 
neh, 295. 

amulet, 295. 

Nehaha, 72, 

Nehebka, 301. 

Nehes, 87. 

Neith, 93, 140-1. 

Nekhtah.ji, 

Nekheb, 163. 

Nekhebit (Eileithyia), 7I1 78, 141. 

nekhekh amulet, 293. 

Nekit, 85. 

Nemmes cap, 113. 

NenQ (inundation god), 233. 

NenQt, 233. 

Nepera, 146. 

Nephthys (Nebhat), loi, 106, 208, 

209, 215, 220,239. 
ff^/ amulet, 293. 
neter, 26. 
neternUti, 109. 
netert^ 26. 
net Rd, 86. 
Nile as god (HApi), 145-7. 

gods, 146. 

Nilopolis, 188. 

Nomarch as a deity, 176-7. 

Nomes, cults of, 8-12, 106, 155. 

list of, 8-9. 

nature of, 7. 

religious jealousy of, 11, 186. 

Nostrum for producing dream, 267-8. 
NQ, Nftn, the primeval water, 31, 33, 

46, 59, 62, 67, loi, 113, 114, 117, 

133, 146, 232, 257, 258. 
Nubia, 33, 69. 
Nubian deities, 131, 159. 
Nat, NClnt, water and tree goddess, 

143,157,232. 
Ntit, goddess of the sky, 50, 59, 62, 

63, 76, loi, 106, 221, 231-2, 303. 


Oasis of Ammon, 120, 154. 

Obelisk temples, 17. 

Obelisks and Sun worship, 16-17, 

154. 6)?^Benben. 
Offerings, funerary, 217, 239, 241^ 

297.8. 

to gods, 44. 103, 254 

*• Ofiferings, rich in," 92. 

Okhus, 200. 

Old Kingdom texts, 17. 

Olympias, 53. 

Ombos, 28, 143, 223. 

On (An, Heliopolis), 17. 

** Opener of the Earth," 89. 

of the Ways," 230. 

** Opening of the Mouth," 131. 
Oracle of Amen, 120-2. 

of Apis, the, 189. 

of Bes, 162. 

of Serapis, 266. 

of Sukhos, 193. 

Origen, 181, 270, 272. 

Osirian doctrine, 13, 234 etpass. 

antiquity of, 243, 245. 

as taught in di£ferent 

centres, 245. 
Osiris (Aser), 12, 43, 67, 79, 88, 

9^ 92» 93. 106, 107, 109. 207 et 

pass. 
and Ra, 43-4, 91-3, 94, 101-2, 

212, 214-15, 218, 306. 

and Sebak, 143. 

archetype of a king, 52. 

as Sebak, 143. 

backbone of, 289^ 290. 

t festivals of, 215, 289-90. 

I human nature of, 213. 

I king of the dead, 43, 91-3, 217. 

legend of, 78-9, 92, 207-11. 

mourning for, 212, 213, 215. 

relics of, 216-17. 


320 


INDEX. 


Osiris, tombs of, 210, 215-17. 

tree of, 157, 209. 

who encloses DQat, loi. 

Osiris, the (animal), 182, 186, 194. 
the (human), 44 et pass,, 340, 

243, 244. 247. 
Osiris Amen, 167. 
Osiris Hor, hypocephalus of one, 

299. 


*' Paarmiathon," 267, 270. 

Pakhons, god of the month, 261. 

Pakht, 138. 

Palm, the, 157. 

Pamyles, 207. 

Panopolis, 28, 127. 

Pantheism, tendency to, 4, 109, 136, 

260, 301-6. 
Paophi, 4th, 5th, 6th, 9th, 22nd, 

29th of, 263-4. 
Paphos, 153. 
Papremis, 289-90. 

Papyrus sceptre, 219 and note, 291. 
PaRd, 17. 
Paraskhistai, 271. 
Pa rehehU, 72 and note. 
Pa TUm, 32. 
Paulus the jurist, 282. 
Pe, 163. 

Peasant cults, 158-9. 
Pe kken, 70. 
PetesHkhos, 192. 
Pharaoh. See King. 
PhUae, 33, 76, 131, 132, 138, 144- 
Phoenicians, 152, 162. 
Phoenix, 25, 50 and note, 167, 187, 

103^, 285. 
Phtha (Ptah), 131. 
Piankhi at Heliopolis, 18-23. 
Pictured objects as amulets, etc, 

296-7. 
Pithom, 32. 


Planets, 30. 
Plato, 171. 
"Pleasant Life," 70. 
Pliny, 189, 265. 
Plutarch, 28, 151. 

on Osiris, 207-11, 264. 

Pluto and Serapis, 191. 
Porphyry, 131, 157.274. 
Priestess, high, 10. 
Priests, 9-10. 

high, 10. 

of Amen, 84. 

Prisse papyrus, 252-3. 
"Prophet," 9, 17, 129. 
Psalms, the Hebrew, ill. 
Psammetichus, king, 188. 
pshent zmyAtX^ 293. 

crown, 1 1 3 and note. 

Ptah, 12, 43, 104, 107, 112, 131-3, 

188, 302, 303. 
Ptah aten en pet, 133. 
Ptah Hapi, 133-4. 

NQ, 133. 

Osiris, -Sokaris, -Sokar-Osiris, 

134-6. 
— - Tanen, 109, 134. 

TatQnen, 132, 134. 

Ptolemaic tearts, 54, 76, 96, 124, 266, 

281. 
Ptolemy Epiphanes, 261-2. 
pth, 131. 
Punning and mythology, 61, 63, 67, 

68, 69 etpass., 75-6. 
POnt, III, 112. 
Pylons, 202. 
F^amids as amulets, 16-17. 

priests of, 17. 

sepulchral nature of, 16. 

Pyramid texts, 4, 242, 243, 245, 278, 

294, 303- 


QQrnah, temple of, 81. 


INDEX. 


321 


R 
rd, 14. 
Ra, 14, 25-7, 30, 33. 36, 44, 52 et 

Pass,^ 83 etpass. 

and Isis, 54-8. 

and Osiris, 43-4, 91-3, 94, 

101-2, 212, 214-5, 218, 306. 

and Sebak, 143. 

and the dead, 88-9, 91. 

as Pharaoh, 52, 91. 

barks of, 23-4 etpass. 

fusion of, with other gods, 17, 

43, 108, 306. See Amen and 

Osiris. 

hymns to, 44. 

in Dtiat, 84 et seq. 

in his Aten, 35. 

name and nature of, 14-15. 

old age of, 55, 58. 

sacred name of, 56-8. 

Ra, Son of," or " Son of the Sun," 

S3. 

See Amen Ra. 

Ra Harmakhis, 17, 32, 42, 49, 69, 197, 

266, 296. 
Ra Harmakhis Aten, 39. 
Ram of Amen Ra, 86 etpass.^ 1 18-20. 

of KhnQm, 119, 128-9. 

of Min, 127. 

Ramaka (Hatshepsat), birth of; 

162-3. 
Rameses II., 81, 134, 146, 150-2, 

198. 

III., 18, 54, 124, 146, 152. 

Rd-neb-mad (Amenophis IV.), 36. 

Ra.t taOi, 15-16, 30, 125. 

Relics of Osiris, 216-17. 

ren, 241. See Name. 

RennQt, 146. 

Renpt, 169-70. 

Reptiles, formulas against, 64-7. 

Rert, 169, 

Resef, 146. 


Resef (Phoenician), 152. 
ReshpQ, 152. 
Rhea as NOt, 207. 


Sa, 87. 

Sacred Ways, 204-5. 
Safekht, 156, 226. 
Saha, the, 242, 243. 
Sais, 93, 199. 

festivals of, 141. 

triad of, 140. 

sam, 295. 

amulet, 295. 

Samhad, 122. 

Saqqarah, god of the necropolis of, 

136. 
Satit, 105, 130. 
Saturn (planet), 30. 
Scarabaeus, the, 284-5. 

and deities, 31, 88, 92, 146, 30a 

Scarabs, 284-7. 

Scribes, carelessness of Egyptian, 

64,84. 
Seb (Keb), 59, 64, 106, 107, 134, 

230-1. 
Sebak, 143-5, 223. See SOkhos. 
Sebennytos, 30. 
Sehel, 131. 
Seked, 74. 

Seker (Sokaris), 134. 
Sekkem, the, 1 12 (note), 242-3. 
Sekhet, 60, 61, 132, 137-8, 264. 

crown, 113, 114. 

Sekhmet (Sekhet), 87. 
Sekti, 6a 

bark, 24, 47, 48, 51, 88, 135. 

Selene in Plutarch's Osirian legend, 

207. 
Semitic deities and influence, 25^ 

149-55, 223. 
Sepd, 160, 164-7. 
Sepulchral texts, 83. 


322 


INDEX. 


Serapeum, 217. 

discovery of, 189-91. 

Serapis, 191, 266. 

Serbonian lake, 150. 

Seq>ent headed deities, 301 ptissim. 

Serpents and Bes, 164. 

and Taflrt, 167. 

charms against. See Formulas. 

fire spitting, 93, 99. 

See also Apep and Uraeus. 

Set, 72 et pass., 96, 208 el pass., 

220-3, 272, 292. 

as Baal, 149. 

his conflict with Horus, 78-9, 

214-5. 
sacred animals of, 144, 149, 

221, 223. 

stone emblems of, 1 54. 

Seti I., 54, 81, 221. 

tomb and sarcophagus of, 82, 

84, 9<- 
Skas her, 74. 
Shedenna, 28. 
Sheshonk, 122. 
Shesri, 85. 
Shrew mouse, 28. 
shU, 33. 
Sha, 32-3, 4S (note), 59, 62, 63, 78, 

93, loi, 106, 303. 
Sinaitic peninsula, 15. 
Sitit, 230. 

•' Slayer of the enemies," 78. 
Sokaris, 51, 92, 94, 134-6. 
Solar bias, 12-13, 43» 212-13, 304- 
"Son of Ra," or " Son of the Sun," 

53. 
Sorcery, perils ot, 281. 
Soul of the Earth, 89. 
Souls of Nekheb and Pe, 163. 
Speech of Osiris, of Khepera, of 

TQm, of Ra, 87. 
*• Spheres," 262. 
Sphinx, the, 194-7. 


Sphinx, the Great, 29, 197-8. 
Sphinxes, 187, 194, 199-200. 
Spontaneous generation, 129-30. 
Spring of the Sun, 18, 155. 
Springs, sacred, 155. 
Star worship, 226 (note). 
State, the Egyptian, 5-7. 
Statues in temples, 180. 

worked by mechanism, 122. 

Stones, worship of, 153-4. 
Story of King KhafO, 53. 

of Setna, 281. 

of Two Brothers, 52, 128, 211, 

Strabo, 81, 188, 192. 

Suffix, the feminine, in names of 

goddesses, 15 and note. 
Sakhos (Sebak), 143, 187, 191-3. 

See Sebak. 
Satekh, 150, 222-3. See Set. 
Sycomore, sacred. See Trees. 
Syncretism, ^^, 83, 92, 167, 169, 212,. 

243. 257, 260. 
Synesius of Cyrene, 269. 
Syntax, Egyptian, 175. 

T 

Talismans, 93. See Amulets. 
Tamarix nilotica, 155. 
Tanen, 134. 

as earth god, 50. 

Ta neter^ 112. 

Tanis, 29, 150, 221, 222, 223. 

Tatftnen, 134. 

Taud, 125, 126. 

Tattrt, 163, 168-70. 

as deity of Dftat, 170. 

— r- in Mykenaean art, 170. 
TefnQt, 33-5, 106, 303. 
Tegea, 153. 
Tell el Amarna, 39. 
Temple, the Egyptian, 200-6. 

approaches to, 204-5. 

free access to, 205-6. 


INDEX. 


323 


Temple, the Egyptian, original nature 
of, 200. 

plan of, 204-5. 

sacred animal in, 180-1. 


■ staff of, 9-10. 

- temenos of, 204. 

• wall scenes of, 203-4. 


Tes Her, 75. 

tet amulet, 287-8. 

Thaia, 73. 

Thebes, 32, 72, 124, 153. 

high priest of, 10. 

necropolis of, 81. 

preponderance of remains of, 

108. 

triad of, 104, 107. 

Themis as Ma&, 142. 

Theocritus, 282. 

Theodosius, edict of, 219. 

Ocol avwaoit 103. 

This, 78. 

••Those who extol upon earth," 

89. 
ThotJij^33, 64 et pass,, 70 et pass,, 

109, 156, 207, 214, 225-9, 272. 

as friend of the dead, 227-8. 

as god of magic, 214, 227. 

as god of time, 227. 

- as scribe of the gods and god 


of writing, 156, 227, 228, 248. 
in XVIIIth and XlXth dynasties, 

228. 

month of, 227, 261. 

Thothmosis IV., 198, 266. 

Time deities, 89-90, 261-2. 

Titus, 189. 

Tomb, the, 16, 137, 236, 245. 

Tombs of the kings, 32, 81 etpass. 

Tomos, 31. 

Transformation, power of voluntary, 

I73» 256. 
Transliteration of Egyptian words, 

6-7 (note), 15 (note). 


Tree worship, 4, 155-9. 

Trees, sacred, 21, 143, 193, 209, 227, 

233- 
Triad, formation of the, 103-5. 

two kinds of, 105. 

Thebes, 104, 107. 

Truth, lord of, 36, 113. 

living by, 42, 142. 

maker of, 1 17. See Ma&t. 

Truth and Justice (Ma^t), 88, 134, 

142, 217, 249, 250. 

figure of, 48, 68. 

TQm (Atom), 17, 29, 31-2, 36, 44. 49» 

S6, 58. 

temple of, 17-18. 

TQm Harmakhis, 1 1 5. 

Turn Khepera, 23, n8. 

TOmt, 32. 

Turin papyri, 54, 257 et seq. 

Twins, Horns and Set, 116. w 

of the zodiac, 34. 

ShQ and Tefnfit, 32-5. 

Tybi, 7th of, 73. 

Typhon as Set, 208 etpass. 

•• Typhonium," 164. 

U 
Oas sceptre, 25, 293. 
tiaAa, 69, 74. 
Haz, 291. 

amulet, 291. 

Oazit, 71, 78, 141, 214. 

Onnefer, loi, 211, 264. 

Uraeus, 25, 55, 90, 93. 113, 138, 141. 

Uranos, 88 (note). 

Crnes, 88 and note etpass, 

Usekh, 291. 

amulet, 291-2. 

Csertesen I., 18. 

Oshebtift, 254-5. 

IJshemt hata khefUH Rd, 86. 

iizat, 292. 

amulet, 292-3. 


324 


INDEX. 


Czat eye, born of MehOrt, 301. 
eye of TGm, 1 53. 


Verse, Egyptian, iii. 
Vulture as ideogram, 123. 
headdress, 131. 

W 

War, religious, 11, 148, 186, 200, 

203-4- 

gods, 125, 127. 

scenes in temples, 203. 

Watchman, the, 87. 

" of the hours," 87. 

** Water of grapes,** 70. 

Wicked, or "unjustified," 67, 85, 89, 

96, 249, 250. 
Winged Sun Disk, 69 et seq. 


Winged Sun Disk as amulet, 75, 

j'j'Z, 194, 202. 
•* Wood of Isis," 210. 
Words of power in magic, 27a 

plays on, 67-8, 75-6. 

Writing, Egyptian system of, 2, 4, 

174-5- 
in magic, 58, 267. 

X 

Xois, 25. 


Year, the Egyptian, 207, 211. 

Z 

ZarQ, 73. 

Zefa, 146. 

Zeus Teleios, 1 53. 

Zizy^hus spina ChrisU, 155. 

Zodiac, gods of the Egyptian, 272. 


(J\ 


Printed by Hazell, Watson, & Vioey, Ld., London and Aylesbury. 


i 


