Manners and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians, Vol. 1 (Wilkinson, 1837)
======================================================================
John Gardner Wilkinson — Manners and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians, Vol. 1 (London, 1837), public domain. The first comprehensive English Egyptology. Scan via Internet Archive (mannersandcusto10wilkgoog). Raw OCR, not proofread.




ZJ^'^^^'' ■^ ""'" 


ft^l^a '^^ 


H-l-VI 


I 


E.BIBL.RADCL. 

/. 

r . /. 


MANNERS AND CUSTOMS 


OF 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS, 

INCLUDING 

THEIR PRIVATE LIFE^ 

GOVERNMENT, LAWS, ARTS, MANUFACTURES, 

RELIGION, AND EARLY HISTORY ; 

DERIVED FROM A C0HFARZ80N OF 

THE PAINTINGS, SCULPTURES, AND MONUMENTS STILL EXISTING, 
WITH THE ACCOUNTS OF ANCIENT AUTHORS. 

3(nu0ttaten ht ^DtsMnan of t^ogt ibnhjtttg^ 
By J. G. WILKINSON, F.R.S. M.R.S.L. &c. 

AUTHOR OF '<A GENERAL VIEW OP EGYPT, AND 
TOPOGRAPHY OF THEBES,** &C. 


IN THREE VOLUMES. 

VOL. I. 


LONDON: 
JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET. 


MDCCC3CXXVII. 


London : 

Printed by A. Spottiswoode, 
New- Street- Square. 


TO 
HIS GRACE 

HUGH DUKE OF NORTHUMBERLAND, K.G. 


My Lord Duke, 

In dedicating to your Grace the accom- 
panying Work, 1 am anxious to show how 
fully I appreciate the encouragement you 
have always given to science and literature, 
as well as the interest you take in Egyptian 
researches ; and to offer a testimony of my 
respect, and of the gratitude I feel for much 
personal kindness and attention. 

I have the honour to subscribe myself 

Your Grace's 

yery obedient humble Servant, 

THE AUTHOR. 


London, 
September 1. 1836. 


A 2 


PREFACE. 


In order to form an accurate opinion of the man- 
ners of an ancient people, it is of paramount im- 
portance to inquire into their origin and history, 
and to trace the progress of those steps which 
gradually led to their improvement and civiUsation. 
To judge impartially of their character, we must 
examine the comparative state of other neigh- 
bouring and contemporary nations, and measure it 
by the standard of the era in which they lived. 
We should also bear in mind the general habits of 
that portion of the globe whence they derived 
their origin, or which they inhabited, and, in con- 
templating the customs of an Eastern people, avoid 
as much as possible the invidious comparison of 
European and Oriental manners. Many of those 
laws or customs which are wise and beneficial to 
society in one part of the world, are deemed su- 
perfluous, and even injurious, in another ; and the 
same system, which by some is looked upon as in- 
dispensable for their welfare and happiness, would 

A 3 


VI PREFACE. 

be rejected by others, as incompatible with the 
feelings of an independent spirit. 

The necessity of discrimination on this point 
must, therefore, be evident to every one, who con- 
siders the subject with a view to truth and im- 
partiality; and, in order to enable the reader to 
form a just opinion of the character of the Egyp- 
tians, I commence the present work with a brief 
account of the general history and early advance- 
ment of that ancient state. But if, as must 
necessarily be the case, this account is deficient 
and unsatisfactory, I plead as my excuse the 
scanty means of information afforded either by the 
writers of antiquity, or by monumental record; 
and trust that the reader will indulgently consider 
the difficulties which present themselves in so in- 
tricate a question. 

If, too, in the date assigned for the accession of 
Menes, and the era of the 18th dynasty, as well 
as some other points of chronology, I differ 
from the learned Professor Rosellini, it should be 
remembered that many doubts and discrepancies 
occur both in chronology and the details of events, 
even in what is considered the known history of 
other nations. 

It would doubtless be satisfactory both to the 
reader and themselves, if all writers on the subject 
of hieroglyphics, and of ancient Egypt, were 
agreed, and if all their investigations were at- 
tended with the same results ; but, since a diversity 


PREFACE. VU 

of opinion on a difficult question has a tendency 
to elicit truth, and finally to establish accurate and 
impartial evidence, we may cease to regret that it 
prevails at the commencement of these inquiries. 
And, indeed, it is highly satisfactory to find that 
the researches of Dr. Young, ChampoUion, Rosel* 
lini. Major Felix, and my own, have, in most in- 
stances, led to similar conclusions. 

Professor Rosellini is a man of erudition and a 
gentleman, and one whose enthusiastic endeavours, 
stimulated by great perseverance, are tempered by 
judgment, and that modesty which is the cha« 
racteristic of real merit. To be engaged in the 
same pursuits with him must, therefore, be highly 
satisfactory, from the persuasion that, however we 
may differ on some questions, our opposite opinions 
will be maintained with those feelings which ought 
to actuate men who labour in the same field, and 
for the same object. 

Egyptian history, and the manners of one of the 
most ancient nations, cannot but be interesting to 
every one ; and so intimately connected are they 
with the scriptural accounts of the Israelites, and 
the events of succeeding ages relative to Judasa, 
that the name of Egypt need only be mentioned 
to recall the early impressions we have received 
from the study of the Bible. 

Another striking result derived from the ex- 
amination of Egyptian history, is the conviction, 
that, at the most remote period into which we have 

A 4 


VIU PREFACE. 

been able to penetrate^ civilised communities al- 
ready existed, and society possessed all the features 
of later ages. We have been enabled, with a suf- 
ficient degree of precision, to fix the bondage of 
the Israelites and the arrival of Joseph ; and though 
these events took place at an age when nations are 
generally supposed to have been in their infancy, 
and in a state of barbarism, yet we perceive that 
the Egyptians had then arrived at as perfect a de- 
gree of civilisation as at any subsequent period of 
their history. They had the same arts, the same 
manners and customs, the same style of archi- 
tecture, and were in the same advanced state of 
refinement, as in the reign of Remeses II. ; and no 
very remarkable changes took place, even in ever 
vaiying taste, between the accession of the first 
Osirtasen and the death of that conqueror, who 
was the last monarch of the 18th dynasty. What 
high antiquity does this assign to civilisation I 
The most remote point, to which we can see, opens 
with a nation possessing all the arts of civilised 
life already matured ; and though penetrating so 
far into the early history of the world, we find that 
the infancy of the Egyptian state is placed consider- 
ably beyond our reach. And, if Egypt presents 
no other attractions, the certainty of its being the 
oldest state, of which we have any positive and 
tangible records, must awaken feelings of interest, 
to which no contemplative mind can remain in- 
different. 


PREFACE. IX 

It is to be regretted that the partial details, re- 
lating to the reigns of the early Pharaohs, given 
by Herodotus and Diodorus, do not sufficiently 
agree with the more authentic information derived 
from the monuments, so as to be embodied with 
this last, as a continuous history ; but, in order not 
to omit the accounts of those two writers, I have 
introduced them separately ; which, though in 
some measure it breaks in upon the thread of the 
history, does not perplex the reader by the exa- 
mination of controverted points, and he is enabled 
to form his own opinion respecting their state- 
ments, and the information derived from other 
sources. 

I cannot conclude without expressing the obli- 
gations I owe to the valuable assistance afforded 
me by Lord Prudhoe, Mr. W. Hamilton, and Sir 
William Gell. But, while it is a pleasure to offer 
my acknowledgments for their kindness, it is me- 
lancholy to be obliged to accompany them with 
feelings of deep regret at the death of so excellent 
a friend as Sir W. Gell. In him the literary world 
ha^ sustained a great loss : but friendship and gra- 
titude combine to increase my son'ow ; and I can 
never forget that, for all the satisfaction I have 
derived from the prosecution of researches to which 
he first directed my attention, — however unim- 
portant their results, — I am indebted to his kindness 
and instruction. To many has he lent his powerful 
assistance in those studies, whose advancement his 


"classic" talents so ably promoted : no distinction 
of nation ever prevented his generous mind from 
aiding otliers in investigating subjects of wbich 
he possessed such an extensive knowledge, and 
no deficiency of good feeling and liberality checked 
his exertions, or damped his zeal, in furthering 
the object of those who followed the same pur- 
suits. 

" MultiB iUe bonis flebilis occidit" 


No. S06. Sort DfliArp and tambourine fjtim Dstderi 


INTRODUCTION. 


It was originally intended that this work should 
not exceed two volumes ; until finding the mate- 
rials accumulate much beyond my expectations, I 
was under the necessity of extending it to three ; 
and have, even now, been obliged to omit many 
subjects, and to defer the mention of them to a 
future occasion. 

This will, I trust, plead my excuse for not describ- 
ing the religious ceremonies of the Egyptians, the 
agriculture of the country, and some details, that 
could not have been comprised within the limits 
of these volumes, unless treated in an imperfect 
and brief manner, which their importance would 
not sanction. 

The first chapter contains remarks on the early 
state of Egypt, with the lists of kings given by 
Manetho, Herodotus, Diodorus, and other authors ; 
and a conjecture is offered on the origin of the 
Shepherd Kings. I suppose them to have come 
from Assyria, and to have invaded and taken posses- 
sion of Lower Egypt ; and suggest, that this event 

VOL. I. [a 6] 


[Vlii] INTRODUCTION. 

happened about the period of Semiramis's reign. 
Some objection, however, may be offered to this 
conjecture, especially on the plea of the invaders 
having been a pastoral people, while the Ass3Tians 
were an agricultural nation, with all the institu- 
tions and customs of a civilisation, already far 
advanced, in the time even of Semiramis. We 
might, therefore, look for them among the wander- 
ing hordes of Asia ; and rather suppose them to 
have been a Scythian tribe, who, at that early epoch, 
already commenced the casual inroads, which they 
are known to have made in the same direction at 
subsequent periods. 

The decision of this question I leave to the 
learned reader ; all that can be positively asserted 
on the point is, that they have left no traces of their 
occupation of the country in the existing monu- 
ments, and the notion of their having been the 
founders of the pyramids is devoid of every shadow 
of probability. 

The second chapter comprises the history of 
the country from the accession of the first king 
Menes, to the conquest of Egypt by Alexander ; 
in which, after showing the great obscurity which 
prevails in the early part of Egyptian history, 
previous to the reign of Osirtasen I., I have drawn 
up an account of the monarchs, who ruled the 
country, from the existing monuments, and the 
authority of ancient writers ; and, at the same time, 
introduced separately that part of the same period. 


INTRODUCTION. [ix] 

given by Herodotus and Diodorus, which cannot be 
made to accord with the monuments. 

In the third chapter, after some remarks on the 
nature of the country, its population, and some of 
its productions, I show that the people were divided 
into four great classes, with numerous subdivisions, 
according to the peculiar occupations of each ; in 
which a strong resemblance may be traced to the 
castes of India. 

The king, his duties, the respect paid him by 
his subjects, their regard for his memory ; the 
priests and their peculiar habits ; the military class ; 
the army ; the weapons they used in battle ; and 
their mode of warfare are then noticed ; and the 
enemies with whom they fought, their prisoners 
and slaves, conclude this chapter, and the first 
volume. 

The fourth chapter treats of the husbandmen, 
with other members of the second caste; the laws 
and government of Egypt in early times, and un- 
der the Romans. In the next, the houses, villas, 
gardens, vineyards, and the process of making 
wine and beer are described. The sixth contains 
an account of the furniture of their rooms, the 
entertainment of guests, their musical instru- 
ments, and dances; and, in the last chapter of 
the second volume, their vases, the preparation 
and serving of dinner, their games, exercises, and 
amusements, in the house and out of doors, are 
described. 


[x] INTRODUCTION. 

The eighth chapter contains the chase of wild 
animals, fowling, and fishing. 

The ninth treats of the arts of the Egyptians ; 
the early use of glass, and those manufactures, 
in which the sculptures and ancient writers show 
them to have excelled ; the mode of engraving and 
sculpturing hard stones ; their fine linen and other 
stuffs ; the papyrus, and manufacture of paper j 
potteries ; boats and ships employed in war, and on 
the Nile ; and the use of tin and other metals. 

In chapter the tenth, the style of art at various 
epochs, the early use of the arch, the mechanical skill 
of the Egyptians, some inventions of an early period, 
their dresses, the study of medicine, and numerous 
customs are introduced ; and the Appendix, con- 
taining an account of the principal objects of 
antiquity deserving a visit in the Valley of the 
Nile, terminate the third volume. 

The Appendix is preceded by a wood-cut, giving 
a topographical survey of the pyramids, and the 
tombs in their immediate vicinity, constructed by 
me in 1826; with the names of two Ethiopian 
kings ; one of whom, Ergamenes, is mentioned by 
Diodorus as a cotemporary of Ptolemy Philadel- 
phus. 


CONTENTS 


OF 


THE FIRST VOLUME. 


CHAPTER I. 

P«ge 

Egypt tbe Land of Ham or Khem - 2 

Egyptians and other Inhabitants of the Valley of the 

Nile not African Races - - - - ib» 

Asiatic Origin of the Egyptians. Eg3rpt considered by some 

to be in Asia. - - - - - 3 

Ethiopia or Cush - - - - 4 

The Thebai'dy the Parent of Egyptian Science, whence the 

Precedence of the Upper Country. Herodotus's Theory 

of the Delta's Formation requiring an immeasurable Time 5 
Foundation of Tanis and other Places near the Sea, at the 

earliest Periods. Upper Egypt not peopled while the 

Delta was a Marsh - - - . . g 

Meaning of the ^gyptus of Homer, and the Position of 

Pharos - - - - - 7 

The Changes caused by the Deposit of the Nile, vary in 

Lower Egypt and the Delta. Obelisk of Osirtasen I. at 

Heliopolls - - - - - - 9 

The Deltas of other Rivers differ from that of the Nile. The 

Delta formed long before Egypt was inhabited - - 10 
Ethiopia frequently used for Upper Egypt or the Thebaid 1 1 


XU CONTENTS. 

Page 

£ar]j State of Egypt, when Joseph arrived. Man m the 

infant State of Society - - - - 13 

The Hunter, Shepherd, and Agriculturist - - 14 

The Richness of the SoD of Egypt tended to its early Civil- 
isation. Primeval History of States uncertain and fa- 
bulous - - - - - 15 
Original Form of Grovemment in Egypt, a Hierarchy and 
afterwards a Monarchy. No Egyptian Deity ever sup- 
posed to have reigned on Earth - « - 16 
The Story of Osiris purely allegorical, and a profound and 
curious Mystery. Mistake of Herodotus in the Word 
Piromi - - - - - 17 
The Djmasties of Manetho. The 18th partially agrees 
with the Monuments. Number of Kings between Menes 
and the Persian Invasion, and the Time elapsed - 18 
The Pyramids, the oldest Monuments in Egypt. Their 

probable Date. Little known before Osirtasen I. - 19 

Shepherd Kings uncertain, not the Jews - - 20 

Foreign Conquests of the Egyptians date as early as the 

Reign of Osirtasen !• - - - - 21 

Monuments before Osirtasen's Reign. The Invasion of the 

Shepherds, previous to the 17th Dynasty - - 22 

List of Kings from Herodotus and Diodorus - - 24 

Dynasties of Manetho - - - - 25 

Great Uncertainty in Manetho's Dynasties - - 35 

Theban Kings according to Eratosthenes - - 37 

The Shepherds probably Assyrians - - - 38 

CHAP. IL 

History of Egypt and List of Kings from Menes to the End 

of the 17th Dynasty - - - . 40 

Accession of Osirtasen I., 1740 B.C. - - 43 
State of Civilisation and the Arts at that Period. Game of 

Draughts, and other Amusements - - - 44 

Early Wars. Mines in the Desert - - - 45 

Ports on the Red Sea, for Commerce with Arabia - 46 

List of the Kings of the 18th Dynasty - - - 47 


CONTENTS. XIU 

Amasis, the Leader of that Dynasty, the << new .King" of 

Scripture - - • - - 48 

Cause of the Treatment of the Jews - - - 49 

Crude Brick Remains in Egypt - - - 50 

Birth of Moses. Amunoph I. married an Ethiopian Princess 51 
A Queen contemporary of Thothmes II. and III. Glass 

already invented - - • • - 52 

The Shadoof for Irrigation. Conquests of Thothmes III. 53 

Pharaohy according to Moses, not drowned in the Red Sea 54 

The Exodus - - - ^ ^ S5 
Monuments of Thothmes III. The Sphinx bears the Name 

of his Successor - - - " S6 
Amunoph III.> and his Brother, whom I suppose to be Da- 

naus - - - - - - 57 

Conquests of the Egyptians in Ethiopia and Asia. Use of 

Iron - - - - - --59 

The Tombs of Kings before Amunoph III. are not met with GO 

Revolt of Syria, and the March of Osirei into Asia - 62 
Remeses the Great ; his Son supposed to be Sesostris. Origin 

of the Confusion respecting that Monarch - - 64 
His March through Syria, and hieroglyphical Record of that 

Fact - - - - - - 65 

Fought with the Scythians. Cavalry (vide p. 289.) - GS 
Egyptian Chariots, the Testudo, and Scaling Ladder 

(vide p. 360.) - - - - - 67 

Battle Pieces at Karnak. Alliances of the Egyptians - 68 

Canal of the Red Sea - - - - - 69 

Commenced by Remeses the Great - - - 71 

Duties of Children in the East. Office of Fanbearer - 72 

Length of Remeses' Reign. Buildings erected by him - 73 

Distribution of Lands. Geometry. Land Tax - 74 
Pthahmen his Son ; erected Two Obelisks. The last King 

of the 18th Dynasty - - - - 75 

19th Dynasty - - - - - 76 
Lord Prudhoe's Opinion respecting the Kings in whose 

Reign the Bondage and Exodus took place - - 77 
The Exodus placed by him under Pthahmen. Pthahmen- 

Septhah the Sethos of Manetho - - - 81 


XIV CONTENTS. 

Page 

His Name excluded from the Lists of Kings ; probable 
Reason of this. His reign inglorious, like those of his 
Two Successors. Succession and warlike Preparations 
of Remeses III. - - - - - 82 

Extent of his Conquests . - - - 83 

Change in the Style of the Sculptures - - - 85 

Close of the most glorious Era of Egyptian History. Con- 
quests of the Egyptian Kings not mentioned in the Bible 86 
Successors of Remeses III. Comparative View of Eg3rp- 
tian History, from Menes to Sethos, from Herodotus and 
Diodorus - - - . .88 

Menes diverts the Course of the Nile and founds Memphis 89 
This Bend in the River may be traced near Kafr-el-Iyat. 
The Lake at Memphis and Temple of Vulcan, the Work 
of Menes. Change he introduced in the Habits of the 
People and Curse of his Memory, by Tnephachthus, at 
Thebes - - - - - 90 

Queen Nitocris revenges her Brother's Death - - 91 

Moeris, the Lake or Canal, and Labyrinth he made - 92 

The Canal perhaps commenced by Menes. The Bathen of 

D'Anville conjectural. Strabo's Account - - 94 

Mnevis and Sasyches, Egyptian Lawgivers. Shepherds - 95 
Sesostris. fleet in the Red Sea. His Conquests and Stelae 96 
The Colchians, an Egyptian Colony. His Steles in Asia 

Minor - - - - - 97 

One of them still seen in Syria near Beiroot. Diodorus's 

Account. Foundation of Thebes - - - 98 

Children educated with Sesostris. His Army and March 100 
Fleet of Sesostris. Treachery of his Brother - - 101 

Erects Statues and Obelisks at Memphis and Thebes - 102 
Darius admits that Sesostris surpassed him, having van- 
quished the Scythians. Work of his Captives - - 103 
Canals he cut, and Wall along the Edge of the Desert - 104« 
Cruelty of Sesostris. Loses his Sight. Pheron his Son 

succeeds. Recovers from Blindness - - - 106 

Amasis deposed by Actisanes. Commutes Capital Punish- 
ments. Sends Culprits to Rhinocolura - - 107 


CONTENTS. XV 

Pagtt 
Ismandes, Mendes, Osymandyas. Tomb of Osjmandyas 109 
Colodsal Statue - - - - 1 10 

Revolt of the Bactrians. His Lion - • - 1 1 1 

Great Hall or Hypos tyle. Figure of Truth and Judges - 112 
Gold and Silver from the Mines of Egypt. The Library 

and Planisphere taken away by the Persians - - 113 

This Tomb apparently the Memnonium - - - 114 

Plan of the Memnonium compared with it - - 116 

Story of Helen's Arrival with Paris in Egypt - - 118 

Her Detention and Restoration to Menelaus. Proteus - 120 
Rhampsinitus ; his Monuments; his Riches - - 121 

The Robbery of his Treasury, and a Thief taken in a Trap 122 
The Artifice of his Brother - • - -123 

Pardoned and rewarded by the King. Rhampsinitus's 

Visit to the Lower Regions - - - •* 125 

Cheops builds a Pyramid. Cephren. Mycerinus. Myce- 

rinus's Affliction at the Loss of his Daughter - - 127 

The Courtesan Rhodopis : Different Opinions of Historians 
respecting the Successors of Mycerinus. Tnephachthus's 
Curse of Menes> now not met with in any Temple of 
Thebes - ----- 129 

Bocchoris the Wise. Asychis and Any sis . - 130 

Asychis introduces a Law respecting Debt. Builds a Py- 
ramid of crude BricL Brick Pyramids now remaining 131 
Sabaco the Ethiopian. Different Opinions of his Character. 

Retires after Fifty Years from the Throne of Egypt - 133 
End of the comparative Chronology of Herodotus andDiodo- 

rus, and Return to the 20th, 21st, 22d, and 23d Dynasties 134 
Sheshonk, or Shishak, plunders Jerusalem. His Captives 
at Thebes. The Name of Yooda Melchi, or the Kingdom 
of Judah - - - - - - 136 

Construction of my Chronological Table. Astronomical 

Ceiling at the Memnonium. Zerah, King of Ethiopia - 137 
24th and 25th Dynasties. Bocchoris - - - 138 

Sabaco could not have put Neco to death ; he is the So of 

S. S. Shebek, or Sabaco II. Sethos - - 139 

Tirhakahy Contemporary of Sethos. Sethos's Treatment of 


XVI CONTENTS, 

Page 

the Military Class. Marches to attack Sennacherib by the 
Command of the God Pthah ... 141 

Tirhakah defeats Sennacherib. The Story of the Priests 
of Memphis about the Miracle of Rats. Extrayagant 
Dates of ancient Authors .... 142 

Tirhakah's Name at Thebes. His Conquests. The Twelve 
Kings according to Herodotus - - - 143 

Their Friendship and the Accidents which led to their Con- 
duct towards Psamaticus, one of their Number • 144 

Psamaticus banished to the Low Lands of Egypt ; consults 
the Oracle of Buto (Latona) ... 145 

Enters into a Treaty with somd lonians and Carians^ and de- 
thrones the Eleven Kings. Rewards their Services. The 
Ancestors of the Interpreters taught Greek by them - 146 

Diodorus's Account more probable. According to it, Psama- 
ticus, having the District near the Mediterranean, es- 
tablished commercial Relations with the Greeks and 
Phoenicians, and afterwards availed himself of their Aid 
in dethroning his Colleagues - - - 147 

The Title Melek given to the Twelve Kings - - 149 

26th Dynasty. Reign of Psamaticus. Edifice where Apis 
was shown ..... 1^0 

240,000 Soldiers desert from Psamaticus, and retire to 
Ethiopia - - - - - - 152 

Name of the Part of the Country they inhabited. Azotus 
taken - - ... 154 

Experiment to ascertain the oldest Language - - 155 

Liberal Policy of Psamaticus towards Foreigners, followed 
by Amasis and Nectanebo. The advance of the Scythians 
stopped by Psamaticus. Neco IL - - - 157 

Neco's Fleets in the Mediterranean and Red Seas. Voyage 
of Discovery round Africa. Other Expeditions for the 
same Purpose - - - - 158 

Neco, the first who sent Persons to double the Cape of 
Good Hope. An Objection offered by Herodotus, a 
strong Confirmation of the Truth of the Information he 
had received - - - - - 160 

Canal to the Red Sea from the Nile - - - 161 


CONTENTS. XVli 

Page 

Expedition of Neco against Carchemish on the Euphrates 162 

Interference and Defeat of Josiah not alluded to on the 
Monuments - - - - - 164 

Defeat of Neco by the Babylonians ; consequent Capture of 
Jerusalem by them . . . . - 166 

Jehoiachin deposed by Nebuchadnezzar. Captives taken to 
Babylon. Message to Psamaticus II. from the Eleans 
respecting the Olympic Games - . - 167 

Apries or Pharaoh-Hophra obliges the Chaldeans to raise 
the Siege of Jerusalem .... 168 

Prophecies relating to this Period. Prosperous Commence- 
ment of Apries's Reign - . - . 169 

Recovers Phcenicia and Palestine. Expedition against the 
Cyreneans. Revolt of the Army - - 170 

Amasis sent to recall the Troops to their Duty ; is chosen 
King by them ----- 171 

Cruel Treatment of Patarbemis by Apries. Amasis defeats 
and takes Apries prisoner, and succeeds to the Throne 172 

Apries put to death - - - - - 173 

Prophecy concerning him and others, in Jeremiah and Eze- 
kiel, relating to the Events which followed his Dethrone- 
ment and Death - - - -176,177 

Nebuchadnezzar probably placed Amasis on the Throne of 
Apries - - - - - 178 

Title of Melek given to Amasis. Psamaticus III. and Apries, 
if the same. Amasis married the Daughter of Psama- 
ticus III. Herodotus, Athenaeus, and Diodorus's Ac- 
count of his Rise - - - - - 179 

Flourishing Condition of Egypt under Amasis ; how recon- 
ciled with Prophecy - - - - 180 

Amasis takes Cyprus. Settlement of Greeks at Naucratis, 
and his Liberality to the Greeks - - - 182 

Amasis and Polycrates. Their Friendship. Amasis writes 
a Letter to him - - • - 184 

Polycrates follows his Advice, and throws his Ring into the 
Sea. Story of the Fisherman - - - 186 

His Ring discovered on opening the Fish. Amasis dis- 
claims all Friendship with him - - - 187 

VOL. I. a 


XVni CONTENTS. 

Page 

Dlodorus gives another Reason for this Step. Poljcrates _ 
an Encourager of Learning. Visit of Pythagoras and 
Solon to Egypt - - - - 188 

Monolith and other Works of Amasis - - - 190 

The Sphinx. Tomb of Amasis at Sais - - 192 

Quarrel between Cambyses and Amasis. Amasis sends 
the Daughter of Apries to Persia - - - 193 

Invasion of Egypt by Cambyses. Causes of this War. 
Death of Amasis. Phanes - - •*• 195 

Victory of Cambyses. The Treatment of his Heralds at 
Memphis. Takes Psammenitus Prisoner • - 197 

Psammenitus pardoned. Conspires against Cambyses, and is 
put to death. 27th Dynasty. Name of Cambyses - 198 

Names of other Persian Monarchs found in Egypt. Darius's 
Rule mild - - ... 199 

First Revolt of the Egyptians. Reconquered by Xerxes. 
Second Revolt . - - . . 200 

Inarus and Amyrtseus elected Kings. Defeat of the Per- 
sians. A second Army sent by Artaxerxes, who 
reconquers Egypt - - - - 201 

Inarus crucified. Amyrtaeus flies. Project of Rebellion 
abandoned till the tenth Year of Darius Nothus. Con- 
cessions of the Persians. Discontent of the Egyptians 202 

Third Revolt. Amyrtaeus reinstated. The 28th Dynasty is 
of this King alone. His Buildings. Treaty with the 
Arabians. Succeeded by Nepherites, first King of the 
29th Dynasty - - - - - 203 

Psamaticus mentioned by Diodorus. His Cruelty to Tamus. 
Not noticed by Manetho - - - - 204? 

Manethos, 28th and 29th Dynasties - . - - 205 

Acoris succeeds Nepherites. Short Reigns of Psammoutis, 
Nepherites II., and Mouthis - - - 207 

30th Dynasty, in Nectanebo's Reign. Vain Attempt of the 
Persians to recover Egypt - - - - 208 

Nectanebo's Edifices. His Dream preserved in a curious 
Papyrus. Succeeded by Tachos - - « 209 

Agesilaus arrives in Egypt to assist Tachos. Is treated 


CONTENTS. XIX 

Page 
with contempt. Deserts the King, and aids Nectanebo 
to dethrone him - . -> - - 210 

Nectanebo II. obtains the Throne. Ochus or ArtaxerxesIII. 
succeeds Artaxerxes Mnemon, and leads an Army into 
Egypt -211 

The Persians are yictorious. Nectanebo flies into Ethiopia. 
Cruelties of Ochus - - - - - 212 

Apis served up at a Banquet. Ochus represented as a 
Sword in the Catalogue of Egyptian Kings. The 31st 
Dynasty. Conquest of Egypt by Alexander - - 213 


CHAP. III. 

Egypt properly so called . - - - 215 

Extent of Egypt - - - -216 

Number of Towns in Egypt ; and Population in former 

Times • - - - - - 217 

Accumulation of Soil in the Valley of the Nile. Increasing 
extent E. and W. Cause of its Downfall. Position of 
Towns on the Edge of the Desert - - 219 

Supposed Encroachments of the Sand. M. de Luc's No- 
tions respecting this and the Oases - - - 221 
Narrow Tract of Land in Nubia - - - 223 
Revenues and Commerce of Ancient Egypt - - 224 
Trade with Arabia and India. Seaports on the Red Sea 226 
The Leucos Portus, and Portus Multi of Pliny. Imports. 

Emerald Mines - - - - 231 

Riches of Egypt. Gold Mines. Their Position known - 232 
Silver and other Mines. Produce of Egypt sufficing for 

great Population. Lower Classes ; their Condition - 234 
Eg3rpt happy under the Pharaohs. Discontented under 

foreign Rulers - - « - - 235 

Castes of Egypt. How divided according to different Au- 
thors ----- 236 
Difference of Opinion ; probable Division into four great 
Castes. The first, or Sacerdotal Order. Different Grades 
of Priests - - - - - 237 

a 2 


XX CONTENTS. 

Page 
Second Caste, the Military and others. Third and fourth 

Caste. Subdivisions of the Classes - - - 238 

Swineherds held in great contempt. Soldiers with the 

Husbandmen. The four Hindoo Castes - - 239 

Megasthenes on the Indian Castes - - - 240 

Megasthenes's Account continued. The Egyptian Nobles 244 
All the Egyptians equally noble. The King chosen from 
the Sacerdotal or Military Orders. Chief of Religion 
and State - . - - . - 245 

Hereditary Succession. Queens - - - 246 

Usurpations by a powerful Chief. Synesius's Account of a 
Royal Election ----- 24,7 

The Kings obliged to conform to the Law of the Land - 248 
A Military Prince on ascending the Throne instructed in 
the Mysteries of the Religion. Care of their Education, 
and Choice of their Associates - - - 249 

Duties of the King. Rules for his Conduct and daily Oc- 
cupation - - - - • - - 250 

Prayer for the King. His Praises - - - 251 

The Priest reviewed the Character of Kings. Responsible 
Ministers - . - - - - 252 

Regulations concerning the Conduct of the King and his 

Moderation in living « - - - 253 

Respect for the King. Their Gratitude and Reverence for 
the Memory of a good King. Public Mourning at his 
Death - - - - - - - 255 

The Funeral. Any Person might accuse the deceased, and 
prevent his receiving the customary Funeral Honours; 
The first Caste, the Priests - - - - 257 

Colleges of Priests. Priestesses. Pallacides of Amun - 258 
The Tombs mentioned by Diodorus. Error of the Greeks 259 
Women versed in religious Matters. Priestesses men- 
tioned in the Rosetta Stone - - - - 261 

The Office of Priest descending from Father to Son. Pri- 
vileges of the Priests - - - - 262 

Portion of the Land allotted to the Priests. Different 
Grades of Priests - - ... 263 


CONTENTS. XXI 

Page 

Chief Priests. Precedence of Priests in different Towns. 
Prophets - - - . « . 264? 

The Mysteries; greater and less. Not every Priest initiated 
into them ..... 266 

In later Times even Greeks admitted. Education of the 
Egyptians. Geometry. Arithmetic. Astronomy - 268 

Exclusiveness of the Priests. Their Conduct perhaps il- 
liberal in this Respect - - - - 271 

Some Excuse for them to be made, considering the Cha- 
racter of the Egyptians - - - - 272 

Aurelian's Remark on the Egyptian Character in his Time. 
The Priests might have instructed the People in the 
Principles of their Religion - - - 27S 

The abstemious Habits of the .Priests - - - 274 

Beans, Onions, and some other Vegetables forbidden. 
Onions among the Offerings .... 276 

Ablutions. Purification. Dresses. High Priest clad in 
a Leopard Skin ... - 278 

Linen, Cotton, and Woollen Dresses. Sandals. Beds - 280 

Extent of their Possessions. Acted as Judges and Legis- 
lators. The Military Order - - - 282 

Provisions made for the Soldier in Land. Military Edu- 
cation - - - - - - 283 

Obliged to be ready for Service. Garrisons. Allowance 
of Land and Rations ... . 284 

Could not be arrested for Debt. Standing Army of 
410,000 Men, who inhabited certain Nomes of Egypt 285 

Their Right in the Soil a political Measure. Forbidden 
mechanical Pursuits. Exercises tending to strengthen 
the Body - - - - - 286 

Auxiliaries, disciplined. Retaining their Arms and Cos- 
tume. Hired to serve - - . 287 

Relieved the native Troops in Garrison Duty at Home. 
The Strength of the Army consisted in Archers. Regi- 
ments of Heavy Infantry. Egyptian Cavalry - - 288 

One Instance of an Egyptian on Horseback - - 289 

Egyptian Infantry divided into Regiments. Phalanx - 292 

a 3 


XXU CONTENTS. 

Page 
Standards belonging to different Corps - - - 294 

Bearers of Flabella near the King's Person. Troops sumo 

moned by Trumpet. Arms - - - 297 

Their defensive Arms. The Shield - - - 298 

Shield suspended by a Thong - - - 300 

The Handle how placed - - - - 301 

A lighter Kind of Buckler, of rare Occurrence .. 302 

Some cumbrous Shields, seldom used - - 303 

The Bow. String how fixed ; differing from that of some 

Asiatic People - - - • 304? 

Mode of stringing the Bow - - - - 305 

Another Method of stringing it. Guard on the Wrist, and 

a Groove of Metal on the fore Knuckle in which the 

Arrow rested - - - , 306 

Sometimes a Chasseur carried spare Arrows in his Hand, 

while shooting. Mode of drawing the Bow . - 307 

Greek Method. Use of the Bow among the Scythians and 

Persians. Egyptian Bow String. Arrows of Wood and 

Reed - - - - - 308 

Arrows tipped with Stone ; used also by the Persians, and 

even by the Greeks. Metal Heads of Arrows - - 310 
Quivers; how carried. Bow Case attached to Chariots 311 
Archers of Infantry had a different Bow Case. Their 

Weapons. The Spear - - - - 312 

The Javelin - - - - 313 

Slings looked upon with contempt by the Greeks - - 316 
Swords; how used. Daggers - - - 318 

Dagger of Berlin Museum. Elasticity of its Bronze Blade 320 
Knife. Falchion ; a favourite Weapon. Officers, how 

Armed - - - - - 321 

The Hatchet - - - - 322 

The Battle-axe, varied in Form ; some with long, others with 

very short Handles. One in Mr. Salt's Collection - 324 
The Pole-axe. The Mace. One Kind armed with a Ball 326 
The great Execution done by such Weapons in early Times. 

Another Kind of Mace or Stick - - - 328 

The curved Stick or Zman, still used in Ethiopia^ and by 


CONTENTS. xxiii 

Page 

the Ababdeh and Bisharieen. The Helmet quilted, and 
of Metal - - . . 329 

The Origin of Crests. The Cuirass or Coat of Armour of 

Metal Plates, or quilted . . .334 

Hempen Armour used by the Greeks. Arms of different 

Egyptian Corps. Heavy and light Troops - . 8SS 

The Chariot Corps. Chariots, each carried Two Persons. 

Curricles of Towns. Attendants, or running Footmen 335 
Charioteers ; their Post honourable - - . 337 

Whips. A Hero often dismounted and fought on foot - 339 
No Seats in their Chariots - . - . 34.x 

Chariots of Wood. The different Parts - -342 

Ornamental Appendages of the Chariot. Egyptian Citi- 
zens unarmed - - ... 347 
Framework of Wood. Binding and Ornamental Parts of 

Leather - - . . 343 

War Chariots had Wheels of Six Spokes. Curricles fre- 
quently Four. No scythed Cars - - - 350 
The Harness .... . 35^ 
The Traces. Greek and Roman Cars, Parts of. Note - 353 
Egyptian Chariot and Horses, according to European Mode 

of drawing . .... 354, 

Housings and Ornaments of the Horses - - 355 

No Blinkers. The Bridles. No Egyptian Car with more 

than two Horses ... 355 

Cars of foreign Nations - - - 357 

Persepolitan Chariot. Egyptian Chariot Corps, heavy 

and light - . . . . 353 

Light-armed Chariot Corps. The Shield connected with 

the Idea of a Siege. Sieges - - . . 359 

Use of the Teatudo or x«^«»"7. Attack of a fortified Place 361 
Warlike Engines used in Sieges - - . 363 

Use of Stones in Battle, a primitive Custom not common to 

the Egyptians. Enemies with whom they fought - 364 

Helmets. Crests when first used. The Shairetana. Their 

Arras and Costume - - - - . 366 

Allies of the Pharaohs, at a very early Period. The Tok- 

a 4 


XXIV CONTENTS. 

Page 
kari. Their Head-dress much like that of some Perse- 
politan Figures - - - - - 367 

Used Carts, which accompanied their Army, like the 

Tartars - - - - - 369 

Other Enemies. Peculiar Features of some of them - 370 
The Rebo, a powerful People of Asia. Long Wars with 

them - - - - - 371 

The Pount or Pouont, an Asiatic Nation. Early Wars 

with them - - - - - 374? 

The Shari, not Bishari, also Asiatics - - 375 

The Rot-h-no ; long Wars with this People of Asia - 376 

Their Tribute, their Costume, and that of their Women. 

The Toersha - - - - - 378 

The Mashoash and Kufa ... . 379 

The Kheta or Sheta, supposed to be Scythians ; a formi- 
dable Enemy. Had strongly fortified Towns, on a great 
River, with Bridges over the Fosses - - 381 

Their disciplined Troops and large Bodies of Infantry and 

Chariots. They were composed of two distinct Tribes 383 
Probably Scythians. Other Asiatic Tribes. Some of Syria 384* 
Distinction maintained by the Egyptian Artists in their 
Costumes and Arms. The Face was often Characteristic 
of the four general Divisions of the People of the N. 
and E. Ethiopia and the Interior of Africa - - 386 

Lemanon^ probably Lebanon, and Kanana, Canaan. Black 

Nations. The Cush or Ethiopians - - 387 

Their Dresses. The Tribute they paid to Egypt - - 388 
The Allies of the Egyptians - - - 389 

March of the Egyptian Army. Generally commanded by 

the King in Person ... . . 399 

Mode of commencing the Attack. Bodies of Archers - 391 
Prisoners, Booty, and Encampments. Their Humanity 392 
Treatment of the conquered. Occasional Harshness, of 

frequent Occurrence among other civilised People - 396 
Return and Triumph. Passing through tributary Coun- 
tries. Reception in Egypt ... 399 
Thanksgiving for Victory. The Troops required to attend 400 


CONTENTS. XXV 

They presented themselves without Shields, carrying a 
Twig. The Bay Tree. The Olive - - - 401 

The Egyptian Soldier not armed, except on Duty. Cap- 
tives ----- 402 

Women as well as Men Slaves. Black and White Slaves 403 

Traffic in Slaves. Joseph sold into Egypt Military Laws 
and Punishments . - - . . 404 


LIST AND EXPLANATION 


OF THE 


PLATES, WOOD-CUTS, AND VIGNETTES OF VOL. I. 


Frontispiece, or Plate 2. Supposed appearance of the court, 
built by Psamaticus at Memphis, where Apis was kept 
when exhibited in public. Herodotus describes it as 
having figures instead of columns; but as there is no 
authority for figures on all the four sides of a court, I 
have been obliged to suggest and introduce columns, 
and confine the figures, in accordance with the rules of 
Egyptian architecture, to the upper and lower ends of 
the court. Herodotus says it stood before the pro- 
pylaea of the Temple of Pthah. Strabo would lead us 
to suppose it was before that of Apis, a building lying 
contiguous to the Temple of Pthah or Vulcan, which is 
certainly more probable. Herod, ii. 153. Strabo, 17. 
Vide p. 151. of this volume. 

CHAP. L 

Page 

1. Vignette A. View of the Pyramids, during the inun- 
dation, from near the fork of the Delta. On the hill, 
in the right-hand corner of the vignette, is a ruined 
pyramid of very ancient date, but not noticed by any 
ancient author. Vide Egypt and Thebes, p. 336. 
23. Wood-cut, No. 1. A dagger from Mr. Salt's collection, 
referred to in p. 321. The handle is covered with silver, 


LIST AND EXPLANATION OF THE PLATES, ETC. XXVil 

Page 

Studded with nails of the same metal, the pommel being 
of bone. 

39. Female shooting at three targets : referred to at the end 

of chap. V. Vol. II. 

CHAP. II. 

40. Vignette B. Feasants rescuing cattle and goats from 

the inundation, a scene witnessed by me in the Delta, 
and very similar to a painting at Beni Hassan repre- 
senting the same subject. 
44. Wood-cut, No. 3. Men playing at draughts and mora. 

This will be more fully described in chap. vii. 
46. No. 4. Chariot, with an attendant holding the horses : re- 
ferred to in p. 335. Vol. I. 

106. Plate 1. Remeses III. bringing his captives to Thebes, 
others being bound beneath his chariot, and followed 
by his sons in the capacity of fanbearers : referred to in 
p. 72. Vol. I. 

116. Wood-cut, No. 5. Flan of the Memnonium, or Palace- 
temple, of Remeses the Great at Thebes, showing its 
resemblance to the description of Osymandyas' tomb 
in Diodorus. 

214. No. 6. Alabaster pillow for the head: referred to in 

p. 281., and in chap. vi. on the furniture of their 
houses. 

CHAP. III. 

215. Vignette C. View of the ruins of Philae, above the first 

cataract of the Nile, from the N. W. 
256. Wood-cut, No. 7. Feople throwing dust upon their heads 

in token of grief. Herodot. ii. 85. Diodor. i. 91. 
260. No. 8. Sacred offices held by women. 
277. No. 9. Mode of tying up onions for some offerings^ and 

priest clad in a leopard skin. 
279. No. 10. Priests in leopard-skin dress. 
287. No. 11. Asiatic allies of the Egyptians. 


XXVm LIST AND EXPLANATION 

Page 

289. Wood-cut, No. 12. Egyptian on horseback; the only in- 
stance in the sculptures. 

291. No. 13. Disciplined troops. Part 1. Bowmen. Part 2. 
Spearmen and Trumpeter, with an officer in the rear 
holding a stick. 

293. No. 14?. Phalanx of heavy infantry. 

294. No. 15. Different standards. Fig. 1. A king's name. 

Fig. 12. A boat. Fig. 17. A boat, in which is the king 
seated, and a sphinx before him. This is the oldest in« 
stance of a sphinx, being of the time of the king whose 
name is given in fig. 1., a predecessor or a contem- 
porary of Thothmes III. 
296. No. 16. Officers of the royal household. Fig. 1. is a son 

of the king. 

298. No. 17. Shields covered with bull's hide. Figs. 1, 2, 

and 3. are bound with metal. 

299. No. 18. The boss of an Egyptian shield, if a depression 

in it can be so called. 

300. No. 19. The thong or belt of the shield for suspending 

it ; and the prow of an Egyptian galley. 
No. 20. Instance of a concave shield, suspended by the 
throng. 

301. A No. 21. Grasping a spear, while the shield is supported 
on the arm, or by the thong. 

. No. 22. Handle of the shield, how placed. 

302. No. 23. Bucklers of unusual form. 

303. No. 24. Large shields, which only occur in one place. 

304. No. 25. Nut at the two extremities of the bow belonging 

to the Koofa, an Asiatic people. 

{No. 26. Egyptian bows found in the tombs,. and re- 
presented in the sculptures. 
No. 27. Mode of stringing the bow. 
r No. 28. Another mode. 
I No. 29. A guard worn on the bowman's wrist. 
307. No. 30. Spare arrows sometimes held in the hand. 

r No. 31. Arrows made of reed and tipped with stone. 
t No. 32. Arrows of this kind found in the tombs. 
310. No. 33. Metal heads of arrows found in the tombs. 


OF THE PLATES, ETC. XXIX 

Page 

{Wood-cut, No. 34. Javelins and javelin head. 
No. 34 a. Spearhead and drumstick found in the tombs. 

315. No. 35. Heads of small javelins in the Alnwick Mu- 

seum, and a javelin represented at Thebes. 

316. No. 36. Slingers. Fig, 1. carries a bag across his 

breast containing the stones. Fig, 2. is in the shrouds 
of an Egyptian vessel. 
^1 8 J ^^* ^'^* Mode of using the dagger, in stabbing an enemy. 
* I No. 38. Daggers in their sheaths, from the paintings. 

319. No. 39. Mode of wearing a dagger. 

320. No. 40. Dagger with its sheath, in the Berlin Museum, 

found at Thebes. 
323. No. 41. Axes or hatchets : vide others at the end of 
chap, iii., wood-cut. No. 73 a. No. 4. bears the name 
of king Thothmes III. 

325. No. 42. Battle axes. Fig, 1 . in Mr. Salt's collection. 

Figs, 3, 4, 5, 6. from the paintings. 

326. No. 43. Pole-axes from the sculptures. 

327. No. 44. Maces, with and without the ball at their lower 

extremity. 
329. No. 45. Curved stick, club, or lissan, 
331. No. 46. Quilted helmets, from the paintings. 

333. Plate 3. Arms and armour. Figs, 1. and 2. Quivers. 

Fig. 3. A knife. Figs, 4 and 5. Falchions. Figs, 
3, 4, and 5. appear to be of steel from their colour ; they 
are of the early time of Remeses III., or b. c. 1230. 
Fig. 6. Coat of armour. Figs, 7, 8, and 9. Other coats 
of armour, perhaps quilted. Fig, 10. Probably another 
kind of covering for the body. 

334. Wood-cut, No. 47. Soldiers of different corps, with their 

various arms and dresses. 
336. No. 48. Princes in their chariots. In Jig, 1. two persons 
are represented in the chariot besides the charioteer. 

338. No. 49. The son of Remeses the Great conversing with 

his charioteer, his insignia of office being suspended be- 
hind him. Vide p. 72. Vol. I. 

339. No. 50. Whips. 

340. No. 51. Whip suspended to the hand of the archer. 


■{ 


XXX LIST AND EXPLANATION 

Page 

343. Woodocut, No. 52. Making the pole and other parts of 

a chariot, showing the pole to be of wood. 
^4.^ N f^ f ^^^' ^» ^ Chariots drawn in perspective. 
* l Figs. 3, 4. Saddles and part of the yoke. 

No. 53 a. A war chariot with bow cases and complete 
346. -{ furniture. 

No. 536. A chariot of .the Rot-n-no, an Asiatic people. 

349. No. 54. Bending and preparing the woodwork of a 

chariot. 

350. No. 55. Cutting leather, and binding a chariot. The 

knife Cy held by Jig. 2., is precisely similar to that used 
by us for cutting leather, a, a stand. 6, the body of 
the car. d^ a stand and board for cutting upon, e, stand 
over which they bent the leather, g^ soles of a pair of 
sandals, and /, an entire skin, the usual emblems of the 
trade, t, A, o, quiver and bow-cases. 

352. No. 56. Saddle of a horse yoked to a Persian car. 

354. No. 57. An Egyptian car and horses in perspective, de- 
rived from a comparison of different sculptures. The 
spokes of the wheels in this are squared, but they are 
generally round. 

357. No. 58. Car and bow, in the collection at Florence, sup- 
posed to be of a Scythian people ; from Professor Rosel- 
lini's work. 

858. No. 59. Persepolitan car. 

360. No. 60. Attacking a fort under cover of the testudo, or 
XtKuvn : covered by a body of archers, represented by 
the figs, b h. 

362. No. 61. Assault of a fort. The testudo and scaling 
ladder. Figs. 1, 2, 3, and 4. are four of the sons of king 
Remeses the Great, each commanding a testudo, a, by c, 
and d. 5. One of the Shairetana allies of the Egyptians 
climbing up the rock by means of a short spike of metal, 
forced into the fissures of the stone. 6. Another of the 
same nation, with the round shield. 7, 8, 9. Eg3rptian 
light infantry and archers. 10. Two of the royal princes 
scaling the walls : one is apparently thrown down, and 
the ladder is falling, alluding, perhaps, to some accident 


OF THE PLATES, ETC. XXXI 

Page 

which really occurred. 11, 12. Heralds sent out of the 
fort to treat with the Egyptians, t, A, m, towers of the 
fort. If the keep on which is hoisted the standard, n, 
pierced with arrows, the sign of their defeat. 
365. Wood-cut, No. 62. Some of the people of Asia, with 
whom the Egyptians were at war. Fig. 1. The Shaire- 

tana. Fig. 2. The TokkarL Fig. 3. The Sha the 

rest of the name being lost. These three were at one 
time allies of the Egyptians. Fig. 4. The Rebo. a 
appears to be tattooed or branded; the custom of 
branding themselves was said to have been common to 
the Assyrians. Fig. 5. The Fount. Fig. 6. The Shari. 
Fig. 7. The Rot-n-no with their women, e. 

367. No. 63. Persian head-dress resembling that of the Tok- 

kari. 

368. No. 64. Persepolitan figures. Fig. I. The head-dresses of 

this and oi Jig. 7. are very similar to that of the Tokkari. 
Fig. 2. has a round shield like many Asiatic tribes re- 
presented in the Egyptian sculptures. Fig. 4. The kelt, 
similar to those frequently seen in the sculptures of 
Thebes. Fig. 6. Dress with sleeves : the cap like that 
of the Shari and others. 

368. No. 64a. Other Persepolitan figures, with similar caps. 

369. No. 65. Carts of the Tokkari, which followed their army, 

and in which they are seen carrying off the women and 
children, at the moment of their defeat. Carts or waggons 
in like manner attended the Scythian and Tartar armies. 

377. No. 66. Prisoners of Tirhaka, represented at Thebes, 
probably after the defeat of Sennacherib. 

379. No. 67. The Toersha and Mashoash, other Asiatic tribes 
at war with the Egyptians. 

382. No. 68. Phalanx of the Sheta, probably Scythians, drawn 
up as a corps de reserve on the opposite bank, to oppose 
the army of Remeses the Great. The town is sur- 
rounded by a double fosse, over which bridges, figs. 
2 and 3. are thrown : the earliest indication of their use, 
dating about 1350 b. c. 


XXXU LIST AND EXPLANATION OF THE PLATES, ETC. 

Page 

385. Wood-cuty No. 69. Other enemies of the EgjpiianJB. 
Fig. 1. The Koofa. Figs. % 3, 4, 5. The two tribes of 
the Sheta, or Scythians, distinguished by the forms 
of their shields. Fig. 6. The Asmaor, perhaps of Sa- 
maria. Fig^ 7. Lemanon, probably Mount Lebanon. 
Fig. 8. Kanana, probably Canaan. These eight are 
. Asiatic people. Fig. 9. Blacks of the interior of Africa. 
Fig. 10. The Toreses, and fig. 11. the Tareao, African 
tribes. The name oifig. 12. is lost, andj^. 13. a, 6, c, d^ 
are Cush or Ethiopians, a is clad in a skin, like fig. 12. 

and c, c^ are chiefs, as the hieroglyphics, j9, above them, 
state. 

391. No. 70. A body of archers acting in line. 

394. No. 71. A guard mounted at the gates of an encamp- 
ment, a a, are representations of shields, indicative of 
a battled wall. 6 6, a wicker gateway. 

403. No. 72. Men and women of the Rot-d-no, an Asiatic 

people, sent to Egypt, probably as slaves. 

404. No. 73. Black slaves with their women and children. 
406. No. 73 a. Arms of the Egyptians, from the collections of 

Mr. Salt and S. D'Athanasi, and from Thebes. The 
man on horseback in^;^. la. or 2. is the only instance of 
it in early times : that of the wood-cut, No. 12^ being 
of Roman date. Fig^ 3. A dagger, probably of Roman 
time. The handle of fig. 7., which is all bronze, was 
probably inlaid. They are referred to in pp. 313, 314. 
316.319, 321.323. 


DIRECTIONS FOR PLACING THE 

PLATES. 


VOLUME L 

Plate 2. Supposed appearance of the Court where Apis was 

exhibited in Public - frontispiece. 

Pate 1. Remeses III. returning with his Prisoners Page 106 
Plate 3. Arms and Armour ... - 332 

Plate 4. Tributes brought to king Thothmes III., at the end of 
Vol. L 


VOLUME IL 


Plate 13. 


The Harpers of Bruce's Tomb - Frontispiece. 


Plate 5. 


Plan of a House - to face page 94 


Plate 6. 


Plan of the Town of Alabastron - 106 


Plate 7- 


Patterns of Egyptian Ceilings - - 125 


Plate 8. 


Ground Plan of a Villa - - 132 


Plate 9. 


Egyptian Elevation Plan from which it is taken 132 


Plate la 


Wine-presses - - - 152 


Plate 11. 


Fauteuils from the Tomb of Remeses III. at 


Thebes - - - 196 


Plate 12. 


A Party of Guests - - - 222 


Plate 14. 


Arrival of Foreigners in Egypt • 296 


VOLUME IIL 


Plate 17. Painted Capitals of Columns, and piece of Coloured 

Glass - - - Frontispiece. 

Plate 15. Chase of the Hippopotamus - Page 71 

Plate 16. Boats with coloured Sails, from the Tomb of Re- 
meses III. at Thebes - - 21 1 


MANNERS AND CUSTOMS 


ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. 


TnntKni A. Ttii FTnaidi, diirini Ibe InundiUon, Ifa 


CHAPTER I. 


Oriffin of the Egyptiana, — SImo Inereate of the D^ia. — The 
JEgyptiu of Homer, — JEthity»a aometimet put for the Thdimd, 
— Early State (jfSoeietg. — The HtaUer, Shepherd, and Agri- 
cuUurvt. — Hierarchy rf Egypt. — Mmes the firtt King. — 
Neither Oriris nor any other Deity ever tuppoied by the Egyp- 
Hmu to have lived on Earth. — Period elapted from Steneg to 
the Periian Inmuum. — Oldm ManunurOt of Egypt. — TKt 
Pyramidt. — Otincuen CotUemporary of Joeqih. — 7Ke Potior 
Kings not the Jews, — Early Advatuxment of Egypt, from the 
Manumatts and Scripture History. — Nothing certain b^ort 
Osirtasen J, 

The oldest and most authentic record of the 
primeval state of the world is unquestionably the 
Scripture history j and, though the origin of its 
early inhabitants is only traced in a general and 
comprehensive manner^ we have sufficient data for 
conjecture on some interesting points. 

VOL. I. B 


2 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. I. 

I am fully aware of the profound metaphysical 
import of the first book of Moses, but the allusions 
to real events are no less obvious and important ; 
and it is to these alone that I shall have occasion 
to advert in the present inquiry. 

Every one who considers the features, the' 
language, and other peculiarities of the ancient 
Egyptians, will feel convinced that they are not 
of African extraction, but that, like the Abyssi- 
nians and many inhabitants of the known valley 
of the Nile*, they bear the evident stamp of an 
Asiatic origin; and Juba, according to Pliny t, af- 
firms that " the people of the banks of the Nile, 
from Syene to Meroe, were not Ethiopians t, biit 
Arabs.** And if feature and other external ap- 
pearances are insufficient to establish this fact, the 
formation of the skull, which is decidedly of the 
Caucasian variety, must remove all doubt of their 
valley having been peopled from the East : and some 
may even consider it ditectly alluded to in the book 
of Genesis §, where Ham, the son of Noah, and his 
immediate descendants, are said to have inhabited 
the lands (^Ethiopia, Egypt ||, Libya, and Canaan. 
The name of Ham^ is, in fact, the same as that 
of Egypt, Khem, or Cham; and Moses may have 
pointed out the eastern origin of the Egyptians 

* That is, the Neel-el-Azrek, *the Blue,' or more properly *thc 
Black Nile/ in contradistinction to the Neel-el-Abiad, 'the White 
(River) Nile.' Azrek is commonly used to signify black as well as blue. 

+ Plin. lib. yi. 34. t That is, Blacks. § Gen. x. 1—6. 

ll Mizraim, or Mizrim, a plural word applied to Egypt (Qen« 1. IL 
et pauim), is the Hebrew mode of expressing the ' two regions of Egypt"* 
{so commonly met with in the (lierc^lyphics), or the ' two Misr,' a name 
still used by the Arabs, who call aU Egypt, as well as Cairo, Musr or 
Misr. Thummim or Thmim is in like manner ' the tivo truths.' 

T Ham is also put for Egypt, as in Psalm Ixxviii. 51. and other parts 
of Scripture. 


CHAP, I, ORIGIN OF THR EGYPTIANS. 9 

by introducing him as a son of Noah. But it 
is more reasonable to suppose that a colony of 
Asiatics settled in Egypt at a subsequent period^ 
and that to this cause we ought to attribute the 
marked distinction between the head of the Egyp** 
tians and the Blacks. Conjecturie, however, is un- 
able to fix the time when the event took place ; 
and though it may be ascribed to an era when parts 
of the earth were already thickly peopled, yet 
probability suggests that it occurred when nations 
were in their infancy, and at a period far beyond 
the reach of history. 

There has always been a striking resemblance 
between the Egyptians and Asiatics, both as to 
their manners, customs, language, and religion ; 
and some authors have considered the valley they 
inhabited to belong to Asia rather than to Africa* : 
others, again, have divided the country into two 
parts, the east and west banks of the Nile, assign- 
ing the former to Asia, the latter to Africa, and 
taking the river as the boundary line of the two 
continents. In manner, language, and many other 
respects, Egypt was certainly more Asiatic than 
African ; and though there is no appearance of the 
Hindoo and Egyptian religions having been bor* 
rowed from one another, which many might be 
induced to conclude from their great analogy in 
some points, yet it is not improbable that those 
two nations may have proceeded from the sairie 
original stock, and have migrated southwards from 
their parent country in central Asia, 

* Plin. V. 9. 
B 2 


> 


4 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. I. 

It has been the opinion of many that colonisation 
and civilisation descended the Nile from Ethiopia, 
and that the parents of Egyptian science came 
from the land of Cash. But this notion appears 
from modern investigation to be totally at variance 
with fact ; and the specimens of art that remain 
in Ethiopia are not only inferior in conception 
to those of the Egyptian school, but are deficient 
in that character which evinces originality. In- 
deed, I question if the name Ethiopians was 
exclusively applied to the inhabitants of the coun- 
try lying beyond Syene ; and there is abundant 
reason to believe, as I shall presently show, that 
Ethiopia, when mentioned in the sacred history 
and by many profane authors, in conjunction with 
Egypt, frequently signified the Thebaid, the school 
of learning and the parent of Egyptian science. 

Ethiopia, though a vague name, was applied to 
that country, lying beyond the cataracts, which in 
the Scriptures, and in the Egyptian language, is 
called Cush; and black people*, designated as 
natives of "the foreign land of Cush,** are gene- 
rally represented on the Egyptian monuments, 
either as captives, or as the bearers of tribute to 
the Pharaohs. 

That civilisation advanced northwards from the 
Thebaid to Lower Egypt is highly probable j and 
the custom of giving precedence to the title 
"Upper Country,*' in the hieroglyphic legends, 

* Plutarch says Egypt was called Cfaemi {xwO ^^^ ^^^ blackness 
(^X^l^ of its soil. May not Ethiopia, Hhe black country/ have been a 
translation of Chemi ? 


HAP. I. SLOW PROGRESS OF THE DELTA. 5 

may be adduced as an argument in &vour of this 
opinion. But the period at which this civilisation 
commenced is not within the limits of history; 
and neither this nor its gradual descent north- 
wards are subjects on which we can speculate 
with certainty or satisfaction. And, indeed, if we 
listen to Herodotus, and other writers who main- 
tain that the Delta is of recent date, we are led 
to the necessity of allowing an immeasurable time 
for the total formation of that space, which to 
judge from the very little accumulation of its soil, 
and the small distance it has encroached on the 
sea, since the erection of the ancient cities within 
it, would require numerous ages, and throw back 
its origin far beyond the Deluge, or even the 
Mosaic era of the Creation. 

Tanis, now San, and in Hebrew Zan or Tzan 
(Zoan), at a very remote period of Egyptian his- 
tory was already founded upon a plain or " field ♦,'* 
at some distance from the sea shore ; and the ves- 
tiges of its ruins are still traced within a few miles 
of the coast. t The lapse of 3190 years, from the 
days of the great Remeses, has neither made any 
sensible alteration in the circumjacent levels, nor 
protruded' the land to any distance beyond it into 
the sea ; and if in such a length of time the allu- 
vial deposit of the Nile has been unable to work a 


* Psalm Ixxviii. 12. and 43. ' In the field of Zoan/ p^ mxoi, 
f That is, of the lake M^nzaleh. Thenesns (Thennesi) stood m 
that lake, or marsh, and consequently much nearer the sea. Again, 
Canopus, and many other towns and buildings of which vestiges remain, 
were, as at present, immediately on the sea shore, in the time of the 
Ptolemies and Pharaohs, upwards of 2000 years ago. 

B 3 


6 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CfHAP, 1. 

sensible change; how can it for a moment be sup^ 
posed that a period of a thousand years^ wliich 
elapsed between the Deluge and the early part of 
that king's reign, would suffice for the formation 
of the whole Delta ? Remarks which apply with still 
greater force to Pelusium, Taposiris, and Canopus, 
which actually stood upon the sea shore : for, as 
the learned Bochart justly observes, since the 
Egyptians themselves reported the Tanitic Mouth, 
and the towns of Busiris, Taphosiris, Biitus, and 
Pelusium, to have existed even in the early time 
of Osiris and Horus, they must have known them 
tiot to be of recent date ; and Homer allows Me- 
nelaus to have come to Canopus.* And that Tanis 
was already built in the age of Remeses the 
Great, we have evidence from the sculptured 
inonuments now existing in its ruins, in addition 
to the positive authority of Scripture, Moses him- 
self assuring us that it was founded long before the 
Exodus, seven years after the town of Hebron.t 

It is, then, evident that neither was the period 
elapsed between the Deluge and the building of 
Tanis sufficient to form the Delta, nor the con- 
stant accumulation of the alluvial deposit of the 
Nile capable of making so perceptible a change 
in the extent of that district, as to authorise us to 
suppose the upper parts of the country peopled 
and civilised, while the Delta was a marsh ; how 

* Bochart's Sacra, lib. iv. c. 24. 

f Numbers, xiii. 22. ' Hebron was built seven years before Zoan.' 
It already existed in tbe days of Abraham. ' And Sarah died in Kirjath* 
arba: the same is Hebron.' Gen, xxiii. 2. conf. Josh. xv. 13. and 
Judg. i. 10. 


CHAP. !• PHAROS OF HOM£R» 7 

much less then can we suppose Ethiopia to have 
been already inhabited by the ancestors of the 
future colonisers of Egypt, while that part of the 
valley lying below the cataracts of Syene was un- 
dergoing its formation ? 

Much consequence has been attached to an 
expression of Homer, that " the distance from the 
Isle of Pharos to Aiywrros was as much as a vessel 
with a fair wind could perform in one day i '' and 
this is constantly adduced as a decisive proof of the 
great accumulation of alluvial soil in the Delta*, 
and of its rapid advances into the Mediterranean, 
since the era of the Trojan war. But a very im- 
perfect acquaintance with the situation of the Isle 
of Pharos, and the nature of the ground on which 
Alexandria is built, ought to have prevented so 
erroneous a conclusion ; and if we readily account 
for the misconstruction of the Aiytiwrrou v^oTapoidei' 
of the poet, we are surprised at the notion which 
extends the river and its alluvial deposit over the 
tpace between the Canopic mouth and the Pharos, 
hitherto unwashed by the fertilising waters of the 
rising Nile» And if a certain deposit does take place 
in the harbour of Alexandria, it is very trifling, and 
hy no means capable of having united Pharos to 
the shore, which was done artificially by means of 
the Heptastadium, whose increased breadth, owing 
to many subsequent additions, now forms the base 
t>f the chief part of the modem city. Ancient 

* Plutarch de Iside. s. 40< ' 

f Odyss. A. 355. By the harbour and fresh water at the I., of 
Pharos, Homer, evidently alludes to the site of the modern Alexandria, 
close to the island. 

B 4 


8 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. I. 

Alexandria, the successor of the town of Rac6tis 
stood on the rock of the Libyan desert, Which k 
still beyond the reach and above the level of the 
inundation ; and the distance from the line of 
the coast to Pharos is the same as in the days 
of Homer. The error respecting its having been 
a day's journey from Egypt originated in the 
misinterpretation of the word Aiyuorrop^ which is 
used by the poet to designate both the Nile and 
Egypt ; and that the rivei: was so called in ancient 
times is testified by the authority of Diodorus, who 
states that Nileus, one of the ^arly monarchs* of 
the country, transferred his name to the stream^ 
*' which previously bore that of iEgyptus."t 
Arriant again justly observes, that "the river, 
now called by the Egyptians and others Nile, is 
shown by Homer to have been named iEgyptus, 
when he relates § that Menelaus anchored his fleet 
at the mouth of the jEgyptus ; '* and the bare in- 
spection of the verse to which he alludes suffices 
to prove his remark to be correct. It is, then, to 
the Nile, not to the coast of Egypt, that Homer 
alludes : and thus the argument derived from his 
authority must cease to be brought forward in sup- 
port of the great encroachmeilts of the Delta, and 


* Diodorus places him as the predecessor of Chembres, who erected 
the great pyramid* 

f Manetho says Eg}'pt took its name from Sethosis, who was also 
called iBgyptus^andwas brother of Armai's. Josephus contra Ap.lib.L 
c. 15. Aulus Geilius tells us Egypt was formerly named Aeria. (xiy. 6.} 

t Arr. Exped. Alex. lib. v. and lib. vi. 

§ Odyss. A. 477. and Z, 257. : -^ 

* HiHirraioi S* Aiyvyrrop tvpptirtiv iKOfiitrBaf 


CHAP.;!. ALLUVIAL DEPOSIT OF THB NILE. 9 

o£ the constant advance of the land into the re- 
ceding sea. 

To any person who has examined the levels of 
the alluvial deposit of the Nile in various parts of 
its course, as from the first cataract to its mouth at 
Rosetta*, it is well known that the perpendicular 
stratum of soiU if I may so call it» decreases in 
thickness as it approaches the sea; and thus at 
Elephantine the land has been raised about nine 
feet in I7OO years, at Thebes about seven, and so 
on, gradually diminishing to the mouth. There, 
indeed, the deposit is lessened in a v^ remarkable 
degree, much more than in the same decreasing 
ratio, in consequence of the greater extent of the 
land, east and west, over which the inundation 
spreads ; so that, in a section representing the ac-* 
cumulated soil and the level of the low Nile, the 
angle of inclination would be much smaller from the 
fork of the Delta to the sea, than from the Thebaid 
to the Delta. And this is satisfactorily proved by the 
increase of the banks and the surface of the country 
at Elephantine, Thebes, Heliopolis, the viciqity of 
old Cairo, and other places, where the positions of 
ancient monuments attest the former levels of the 
land's surface, and enable us to ascertain the in* 
crease within a known period. Around the base 
of the obelisk at Heliopolis, erected by Osirtasen I. 
about 1700 years before our era, the alluvial soil 
has accumulated to the height of five feet ten 


* The banks during the low Nile are upwards of 30 feet high in 
parts of Nubia, in middle Egypt 20, and decrease as they are nearer the 
mouth. 


'10 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS* CHAP. I. 

inches * ; and, comparing this with Elephantine, 
we shall find that a monument placed there at the 
same period would have been buried to the depth 
of about nineteen feet. Heliopolis stood to the 
south of the Delta ; and the diminution northwards, 
for every mile, in an expanse of increasing breadth, 
must have been proportionably greater as it ap- 
proached the sea, till at the shore it became almost 
imperceptible, even after the lapse of many ages. 

Having endeavoured to show that no argument 
can be derived from the appearance of the Delta, 
to favour the supposition of this district having 
been formed at a period when the upper part of 
the coimtry was already inhabited, it is necessary 
to observe that I limit my remarks exclusively to 
the Nile, whose nature is very different from that 
of most rivers, and particularly those whose deltas 
have been created and rapidly increased by mate- 
rials brought down by their waters, and deposited 
at their mouths. These, consisting of trees and 
other vegetable productions, have tended to form 
here and there a nucleus for the construction of 
islands, afterwards connected with the mainland, 
and consolidated by alluvial deposit and fresh 
materials constantly adhering to them; but this 
peculiarity is totally unknown at the mouth of the 
Egyptian Nile. 

It is not my present intention to enter into any 
speculation upon the formation of the alluvial land 

* In my Hgypt and Thebes fp. 313.) I have said ' between seven and 
dght feet. This was from inrormation I received at Cairo, and, sus- 
pecting it to be erroneous, I sent to have it ascertained, and found it to 
be as stated above. 


CHAP. I. EGYPTIANS AND ETHIOPIANS. 11 

of Egypt, and its Delta; and much less shall I 
attempt to fix the time required for such an event. 
This would be irrelevant and presumptuous, even if 
we were not limited to the period elapsed between 
the Deluge and the age of those early Pharaohs, in 
whose time all the country, as it now exists, was 
densely ptopled. Nor would any one be permitted 
to assert the priority of a nation from the apparent 
antiquity of the soil which clothes the rocks of the 
<;ountry. But of this we may be asssured, that the 
formation of Egypt and its extensive Delta are 
beyond the reach of our inquiry, and of a date 
long anterior to the epoch at which that country 
6t Ethiopia were inhabited. 

, With regard to the word Ethiopia, used by 
^cient authors, we have many reasons for sup« 
posing it was sometimes intended to designate, 
or was confounded with, the Thebai'd or Upper 
Egjrpt. The expression of Pliny, "Ethiopia was 
evidently renowned and powerful, even to the 
time of the Trojan war, . . . and extended its em- 
pire over Syria*," though he is speaking of Ethiopia 
Proper, can only have been borrowed from a tradi- 
tion relating to the Thebaid, since the Diospolite 
monarchs ruled and received tribute from Ethiopia, 
and actually did extend their dominion over Syria ; 
which the Ethiopians could not have done with- 
out first obtaining possession of Egypt, and that, 
too, at a period when the Pharaohs were in the 
zenith of their power. Nor is the assertion of the 
prophet Nahum, that Ethiopia and Egypt were the 

* Plin. vi. 35. 


12 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. I. 

Strength of N6y less remarkable ; N6, or, as the 
Hebrew gives it, Na-Ainiin, being the name of 
Thebes.* According to Herodotus t, "the The- 
bai'd was formerly called Egypt;" the rest of 
the country being deemed of minor importance, 
and the Thebaid bearing this name par excellence : 
and Aristotle says, that " Egypt in ancient times 
was called Thebes.** t Whence it may be supposed 
that Lower Egypt was conquered by, or annexed 
to, the Thebai'd, or, as it was then styled, Egypt ; 
and, if this be true, we can have no hesitation 
in ascribing to it the precedence of the upper 
country. 

The question respecting the comparative anti- 
quity and civilisation of the Egyptians and Ethio- 
pians has now become obsolete. I do not, therefore, 
detain the reader by any mention of the numerous 
arguments to be adduced from the monuments of 
both countries, to decide the priority of the Egyp- 
tians, which even those ancient writers, whose au- 
thority some have supposed to militate against that 
opinion, do not fail to prove : Diodorus § allowing 


* Nahum, iii. 8, 9. This passage is very interesting. ' Art thou better 
than populous No, that was situate among the waters, that had the 
waters round about it ; whose rampart was the sea, and her wall was 
from the sea ? Ethiopia and Egypt were her strength : Put and Lubin 
were thy helpers.' The word Dn«» Jartm, * the rivers,' is the Hebrew 
plural of the Egyptian word lAPO, ' river,' applied to the Nile. The 
word sea is, in the Hebrew, water or waters, and does not apply exclu- 
sively to the sea. 'Populous No' should be No or Na-Amun, taken 
from the Egyptian HI N AMOYN, or AMOYN-HI, < the abode of Amilkn,' 
or Diospolis. 

+ Herod, ii. 16. 

% Aristot. Meteorol. lib. L 14.-—" Apx^^^ V A.ty wtoc Of^tai leaXov* 

§ Diod. i. 50. 


CHAP. !• EARLY STATE OF SOCIETY. 13 

that ** the Thebans consider themselves the oldest 
of men^ and affirm that philosophy and astrology 
were invented by them/* in no way acknowledging 
the Ethiopians as their predecessors : and Hero- 
dotus* distinctly stating that the manners of the 
Egyptian troops who deserted from Psamaticus had 
a very sensible effect in civilising the Ethiopians. 

Of the state of Egypt at the epoch when the 
arrival of Joseph, or the Exodus of the Israelites, 
took place, some little information may be obtained 
from the Bible, and from the monuments that re- 
main, both of which bespeak a people already far 
advanced in the arts and customs of civilised life. 
And though we must remain ignorant of their 
origin, and of the form of government at the com- 
mencement of Egyptian history, we may venture to 
explain, from reason and probability, some of the 
causes of their early and rapid progress. 

The wants of man in the infant stage of society 
are simple and easily satisfied, and he desires little 
more than what suffices for his maintenance and 
self-preservation. The rudest state is that of the 
hunter j and the produce of the chase affi^rds him 
all that he requires for food and raiment. His 
arms, or some ingenious contrivance for seizing 
his prey, are almost the sole objects for which any 
effort of the mind is roused ; and, contented with 
that land in which he chances to have been born, 
he seldom quits it in search of a more eligible spot. 

The shepherd, on the contrary, is frequently a 

* Herod. 11. 30. 


14 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. I. 

wanderer, and the choice of his temporary abode 
depends on the abundance of food or superiority 
of pasture it affords to his flocks. This, and the 
means required for his own subsistence, are his 
chief care ; and he seeks not to improve his con- 
dition, or to advance beyond the state in which 
his forefathers have lived. Like the liunter, he 
makes no progress in civiUsation ; and we ob- 
serve, that, though surrounded by opulent and 
industrious nations, the Arab, to the present day, 
despises customs which he feels not the inclination 
to adopt. 

Accidental circumstances generally have a 
tendency to form the different states of society ; 
and that country which, from its nature, was 
adapted to the chase, would be inhospitable to 
the shepherd, and totally unsuited to the pur« 
suits of the agriculturist. This last is the state 
most capable of improvement. In it, civilisation 
is encouraged, the industry of each individual is 
beneficial to the whole community, and the facility 
of providing for their wants enables a great num* 
ber of persons to employ themselves in other occu- 
pations. And, since the mere tillage of the soil 
may be performed by a small portion of the popu- 
lation, the surplus is led to devise some method of 
profiting by their spare time and labour ; and the 
energies of the mind are called forth, both to 
create and to supply numerous artificial wants;. 
Mechanism, the division of lands, the rights of 
property, the exchange of commodities, and many 
other steps toward^ the improvement of society. 


CHAP. 1. ?ARLY STATE OF SOCIETY. 15 

are the result of this mode of living ; and various 
institutions, unknown to the hunter and the shep- 
herd, succeed each other in proportion to the 
advancement of the rising state. It is, then, 
evident, that those countries, where argiculture is 
the chief occupation of the people, must make 
rapid progress in civilisation, and, consequently, 
rise to opulence and power ; and we may reason- 
ably suppose Egypt was one of the first to benefit 
by the advantages of its fruitful soil. • 

Assyria is another notable instance of the same 
fact ; and its fertility was unquestionably the cause 
of its early improvement and prosperity. 

But the primeval history of states, especially at 
so remote an epoch, must necessarily be a matter 
of pure conjecture, since they are beyond the reach 
of authentic records ; and if those nations them- 
selves had handed down to us what they deemed 
their real annals, we should find them so compli- 
cated and improbable, that it would be out of our 
power to separate truth from fiction. Such is the 
character of the uncertain fragments of Manetho, 
preserved by later writers; and even the early 
history of the Greeks is so encumbered with alle- 
gory, and a mysterious system of mythology, that 
it is difficult to distinguish between real events and 
religious fable : a mode of uniting history and 
metaphysical theory not peculiar to the Greeks, 
but adopted by other, perhaps by all, nations of 

* The exchange of commodities with other nations not only tends to 
))enefit each in a commercial, but in a moral, point of view ; and it is 
probable that Egypt trafficked with the Tynans^ as well as with the 
people of Arabia, at a very remote period. 


16 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. I. 

antiquity; and, wherever we have been able ta 
examine the basis on which it was constructed, a 
striking similarity is observable in its general outline. 
Whether Egypt was originally governed by an 
hierarchy or a monarchy, is still a question ; yet, 
from the circumstance of the earliest names en- 
closed in ovals being precedecl by the title priest 
instead of king, we might infer the possibility of 
a priestly form of government ; and the account of 
Manetho, and other writers who mention the rule 
of the gods, would seem to sanction, or even re- 
quire, such a construction. The succession of the 
different gods to the sovereignty of the country 
would then be explained by that of the respective 
colleges of priests ; though the duration of their 
reigns is totally inconsistent with truth or proba- 
bility. It is true that infant states are more usually 
governed by some individual, pre-eminent for his 
abilities either as a statesman or a warrior, than by 
a body of persons with equal authority ; but, as the 
former opinion appears to be less at variance with 
what history has imparted to us, it is more reason* 
able to conclude that, like Judaea before the time of 
Saul, Egypt was ruled by an hierarchy, until the 
accession of its first king, Menes. 

Any attempt to fix the precise era of this politi- 
cal change must be fruitless and unsatisfactoiy : if, 
however, it is beyond our reach, there are positive 
grounds for the conviction, that no Egyptian deity 
was ever supposed to have lived on earth * ; and the 

* Vide Herod. iL 143. The priests also assured him that no deity had 
ever lived on earth (ii. 14*2^; and Plutarch (de Isid. v. 21.) observes 
that the inhabitants of the Thebaid entertained the same opinions. 


CHAP. I. NO GODS LIVED ON EARTH. 17 

Mtory of Osiris's rule in this world is purely alle- 
gorical, and intimately connected with the most 
profound and curious mystery of their religion. 
And so great was their respect for the important 
secret, and for the name of Osiris, that Herodotus * 
scrupled to mention him j and Plutarch t says the 
Egyptian priests talked witTgreat reserve even of 
his well-known character as ruler of the dead* 

The Egyptians justiy ridiculed the Greeks for 
pretending to derive their origin from deities. 
They showed Hecataeus and Herodotus a series of 
three hundred and forty-five high priests, each of 
whom, they observed, was "a man, son of a 
man," but in no instance the descendant of a 
god : thus censuring the folly of Hecataeus, who 
claimed a deity as his sixteenth ancestor. Such is 
the meaning of the expression in Herodotus t, ^'a 
piromis, son of a piromis:" and it is singular 
that the historian should not have understood the 
signification of the word r6mi (man, or pir6mi, 
the man), as the sense alone suffices to point it 
out; and his translation proves how ignorant he 
was of the language of the country in which he 
travelled. Indeed, the information of Herodotus 
Avas frequently of a very imperfect kind, owing 
sometimes to an excess of credulity, of which the 
humorous Egyptians gladly took advantage in a 
Greek, and sometimes to a want of scrutiny, as 
may be seen in the account he gives of the sources 
of the Nile. § 

* Herod, iu 86. et alibi. f Piqt. de Is. s. 79. 

X Herod, ii. 143. § Herodot. ii. 88. 

VOL. I. C 


18 THE ANTCIEMT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. I. 

The kings of Egypt are arranged by Manetho 
in twenty-six dynasties, from the time of Menes 
to the invasion of Cambyses, which happened 
B.C. 525; but whether any dependence can be 
placed on the names and number of the kings be- 
fore the accession of the eighteenth dynasty, is a 
matter of great doubt; and some of the authors 
to whom we are indebted for the fragments of his 
work disagree in their arrangement. Nor do the 
monuments render us any assistance in this portion 
of the early history ; though the grfeat similarity 
in the names and order of the monarchs, in the 
eighteenth and some of the succeeding dynasties, 
suggests the probability of the original work of Ma- 
netho having been derived from authentic sources. 

One great difficulty arises from the long duration 
assigned to the Egyptian monarchy : the sum of 
years from Menes to the Persian invasion being, 
according to Manetho, about 4750 years, without 
reckoning the fourteenth dynasty ; and Herodotus 
account, who was assured by the priests that 330 
kings succeeded that prince*, requires, on an ave- 
rage of fifteen years to a reign, about 4950 years 
for the same period. A similar objection applies 
to the statements of Diodorus and other writers ; 
but, as the examination of controverted questions 
can offer little interest to the reader, I shall only 
venture a few remarks on the period previous to 
the arrival of Joseph. 

* L. ii. 8. 100. He may mean 530 kings from Menes to Amasis, 
though he says to Moeris; and in s. 1 43. he speaks of 345 kings and high 
priests, and in s. 142. of 341 generations before Sethos. He confounds 
reigns with generations. 


CHAP. I. THE PYRAMIDS. 19 

The oldest monuments of Egypt, and probably 
of the world, are the pyramids to the north of 
Memphis ; but the absence of hieroglyphics and of 
every trace of sculpture precludes the possibility of 
ascertaining the exact period of their erection, or 
the names of their founders. From all that can be 
collected on this head, it appears that Suphis and 
his brother Sensuphis* erected them about the 
year 2120 9. c. t ; and the tombs in their vicinity 
may have been bmlt, or cut in the rock, shortly 
after their completion. These present the names 
of very ancient kings, whom we are still unable to 
refer to any certain epoch, or to place in the series 
of d3niasties ; but whether they were cotemporary 
with the immediate predecessors of Osirtasent, or 
ruled the whole of Egypt, is a question that I do 
not as yet pretend to answer. 

Previous to the accession of the first Osirtasen, 
who probably lived about 1740 b. c. and was there* 
fore cotemporary with Joseph, we have little to 
guide us upon the monuments of Egypt ; but we 
may safely conjecture, from the state of those erected 
during his reign, that the Egyptians were abready far 

* Sensuphis signifies the brother of Suphis, agreeing with the rela- 
tionship mention^ by Herodotus between Cheops and Cephren. They 
were succeeded by Moscheris or Mencheres, the Mycerinus of the 
Greek historian. Suphis, according to Manetho, was the second king 
in the fourth dynasty of Memphites. 

f This b following Eratostnenes, who places Suphis or Saophis the 
fourth before Apappus, whom I suppose to have been the cotemporary 
of Abraham, b. c. 1920. For if Jacob's arrival, b. c. 1706, is referred 
to the rejsn of Apappus, the antiquity of these monarchs is unnecessarily 
increasec^ and the additional 214 years augment our perplexities on the 
subject. 

f If we may believe Josephus, Manetho speaks of kings of the 
Thebfud and the rest of Egypt uniting in a common cause; and 
thereby shows the existence of cotemporary dynasties. 

c 2 


20 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. I. 

advanced in the arts of civilised life, and had arrived 
nearly at the same state in which they continued 
during what may be styled the Augustan era of the 
eighteenth dynasty. This is further confirmed by 
the scriptural sketchv of Egyptian manners in the 
time of Joseph j but we have nothing to lead to 
any conclusion respecting the exact duration of 
the previoui^ reigns, the organisation and progress 
of the political state of the country, or the period 
from which its civilisation dates its commencement. 

Nor can any thing satisfactory be derived from 
the imperfect history * of the shepherd kings given 
by Manetho, or at least by his copyists : and his 
account of their aggressions is not sufficiently clear 
to enable us to determine whether he alludes to 
the Assyrians, Phoenicians, or Arabs, t That they 
were not Jews is evident; though, as I have 
already observed in a former work, the Exodus of 
the Israelites may possibly, through the inattention 
of some authors, have been confounded with the 
expulsion of the Pastor tribes : and their abomin-^ 
ation of shepherds necessarily originating in serious 
injuries received from them, as it already existed in 
the time of Joseph, proves their hostile invasions to 
have happened before that period. 

About the epoch of the Jewish captivity, Egjrpt 
must have been engaged in a war with some 
powerful enemies, since the reason of the oppress 

* Many histories of Egypt were written at different periods, by 
native as well as foreign authors, which have unfortunately been lost. 
Conf. Cicero, de Republ. iii. 8. MUa incorrupta gente Egyptiorum, 
quas pliirimorutn et s^culorum et eventorum memoriam Uteris continet.' 

f Herodotus calls Sennacherib ' king of Arabia and Assyria/ (lib, ii. 
141.) 


CHAP. I. THK SHEPHERD KINGS. 21 

sion exercised against the unresisting Hebrews is 
stated to- have been the fear of their uniting with 
them * ; and, indeed, it aippears from the sculptures 
of Beni Hassan, that the Egyptians already, as early 
as the reign of Osirtasen, had extended their arms 
into Asia, had thence brought many captives to 
Egypt, and had perhaps enrolled some of the con- 
quered people in their army, as was frequently the 
case at a later period. This war with foreign na- 
tions is another strong argument against the opi- 
nion of Josephus that the Jews were the Shepherds, 
and the pretended power of his countrymen at so 
early an epoch is inconsistent with reason and pro- 
bability. The Jews, even in the most flourishing 
state, when in firm possession of the promised land, 
and united under one king, never did arrive at the 
degree of power which he has ascribed to them 
in Egypt; and the whole is at variance with Scrip- 
ture history. 

There is great difficulty in assigning a date 
to the irruption of those invaders, and their occu- 
pation of Lower Egypt. The forty-three Pastor 
or Shepherd kings, placed by Manetho as cotem- 
poraries of the same number of Theban princes, 
who composed the seventeenth dynasty, ill agree 
with the monuments that remain ; since Osirtasen 
I., who must have been one of the cotemporary 
Egyptian monarchs, ruled the lower as well as the 

* Exodus i. 10. * Lest .... when there falleth out any war, they 
join also unto our enemies, and fight against us * According to Ma- 
netho, the Egyptians had obtained possession of Libyia long before this 
epoch, since he speaks of the Libyans revolting from the first king of the 
third dynasty. Vide infrct^ p. 26. 

C S 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP* I. 

upper country. What may have happened before 
his accession, I do not pretend to decide ; but the 
pyramids, and the tombs in their vicinity, which I 
conceive to have been much anterior to his reign, 
are evidently Egyptian ; and as this circumstance 
requires a long period of tranquillity and freedom 
from aggression, previous to the reign of Osirtasen, 
the seventeenth dynasty of shepherds is rendered 
still more doubtfiil. It is, however, remarkable, 
that no buildings of a date prior to the reign of 
Osktaflen I., excepting the pyramids, some tombs 
and grottos, now exist in Upper or Lower Egypt : 
and hence these questions naturaUy arise: -Did 
Osirtasen expel the invaders from Lower Egypt, and 
afterwards erect the edifices to which the obelisks 
at Heliopolis and in the Fyoom once belonged? 
and if so, why have we not pointed allusions to 
those battles and welcome victories in the tombs of 
Beni Hassan ? Or are we to attribute the absence 
of monuments before the reign of Osirtasen to 
their great antiquity and consequent dilapidation ? 
The last is more probable, since those bearing the 
name of Osirtasen only consist of a few broken 
columns at Karnak and the two obelisks above 
mentioned ; the grottos of Beni Hassan being hewn 
in the imperishable rock: and, indeed, without 
them his name would have been almost as little 
known as those of other kings who preceded him. 
Nor could the loss of the early monuments have 
been the result of the irruption of the Pastors j 
since we do not even find any remammg at Thebes, 
which is beyond the point whither the invaders ap- 


CHAP. I. BEPOBE THE 17TH DTNASTT. 33 

pear to have penetrated, and, consequently, out c£ 
the reach of destruction. 

I iun, therefore, of opinion that the irruption of 
the Pastors was anterior to the erection of any 
huilding now extant in Egypt, and long before the 
accession of the seventeenth dynasty* ; but, until 
some further light is thrown on the subject, either 
by the monuments or some equally authentic source, 
it will be better to commence our history of Egypt 
ivith the reign of that monarch whose records exist, 
and from whom we can establish a regular succes- 
sion. I shall, however, first introduce the names 
and order of the sovereigns mentioned by Hero- 
dotus, Diodorus, Manetho, and Eratosthenes, with 
a few remarks on the probable origin of the shep- 
herd kings ; and then proceed, in the next chap- 
ter, to a comparison of the names occurring on 
the monuments, with the catalogues of the priest 
of Sebennytus, and other ancient authors. 

And in order to present a comparative view of 
the succession from Menes to the invasion of Cam- 
byses, according to Herodotus and Diodorus, I 
shall arrange the names given by those historians 
separately in opposite columns. 

* The o\d chronicle gires four Memphiles to the seTenteeath djniiBty, 
and eight Tanites ta the Mxteenth, which I haTc followed in preference 
to the foity-thre« of Manetho. 


S4 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. 


CHAP. I. 


JBg^piianJBng$,ttecimlmgtoHierodoiu$, 

rMenes. 

''IS EthiopiaDS and 

Queen Nitocris. (The Nitocris 

of Manetho is placed in the 6th 

Dynasty, and after Suphis the 

founder of the great pyramid.) 


i 


J1 


0« 

^ o 

1 

w 

Sesostris, the great conqueror. 


Maris, built the Labyrinth and 
^ excavated the lake Msris. 


3 Fheroui his son. 

00 

^ A Memphite, whose name according 
2 to the Greeks is Proteus. 
'g Rhampsinitus. 


8* 


o 

if 

I 


Cheopsy built the great pyramid and 
reigned 50 years. 

Cephren, his brother, built the 2d pyra- 
mid and reigned 36 years. 

Mycierinus, son of Cheops, left a pyra- 
mid. 

Asychis. 

Anysis, who was blind. The l^gypt- 

ian crown passed to an Ethiopian 

line. 
Sabaco, the Ethiopian, retired after 50 

years. 
Anysis restored. 

Sethos (Se-phtha) the priest of Vulcan 
' (Phtba or Pthab) ootemporary of 

Sennacherib and Tirbaka. 


According to Dioikru».* 

Menes, or Menas. 

Hien S of his de- "j During a period of 
scendants. I more than l,40O 

Then 52 Kings. J years. 

Busiris. 

Then 8 of his descendants; the last of 
whom bore the same name as the 
first f , and was said to have founded 
Thebes. His 8th descendant, who 
bore the name of his father, Ucho- 
reus, iieputed to be the founder of 
Memphis. 

Then 12 generations of Kings. 

Myris, dug the lake above Memphis. 

Seven generations of Kings. 

Seso6sis I. the great conqueror. 

Sesodais II. 

Many kings succeeded him. 

Amasis, who was conquered by Acti- 
sanes. 

Actisanes the Ethiopian. 

Mendes, or Manrhus, an Egyptian, 
who built the labyrinth as a tomb 
for himself. 

All interregnum for 5 generations. 

Cetna, or Cetes, who is Proteus. 

Rhemphis. 

Seven Kings of no note, from one of 
whom, Nileus, the river was called 
Nilus, baring formerly borne 
name of iBgyptus. 

The eighth was Cbembes, or Chemmis, 
the Memphite. H e reigned 50 years 
and built the great pyramid. 

Cephren, his brother, reigned 56 years ; 
others say he was his son, and call 
him Chabryis. 

Mycerinus, or Cherinus, son of the 
founder of the great pyramid. He 
began a third, and died before it was 
finished. 

Tnephachtbus, the Tecbnatis of Plu- 
tarch. 

Bocchoris the Wise, his son. 

After a long time, Sabac6n the Ethio- 
pian. 

An interregnum of 2 years. 


* It is singular that Diodorus does not introduce the name of Osymandyas in this list 
of kings, though he mentions him as a Tbeban monarch in his description of that city, 
t &me suppose him to have been Busiris J I. 


CHAP. I. 


MANETMO'S DYNASTIES. 


25 


IfgjfpHan Kmgtf according to Herodotus, 

The 12 Kinf^ reigned OTer E|^pt, 
dmded into 12 parts * (or nomes.) 

PBammitichus, one of the 12» 54 yean. 

Necos, his son, reigned 1 1 years. 

Psammis, his son, 6 years. 

Apries, bis son, 25 years. 

Amasis, having usurped the throne, 44 
years. 

Ptammenitus, his son, reigned 6 
months. 


Aeeordhg io Diodorui, 

Twelve chiefs (nomarchs) 18 yean. 

Pttunmetichus the Saite, one of them, 

54 yean. 
After 4 generations, came 
Apries, who reigned 22 yean. 
Amasis, 55 years. 


The Dynasties of Egyptian Monarchs, according to 
Manetho (on the authority of Africanus and Eu- 
sebius), are as follow : — 


IsiDynastif of 8 Kingsy either ThiniUee w 

ThdKim. 

Name. Duration of Reign. 

yn. 

1. Menes, the Thinite, succeeded the 

Demigods, killed by a hippopotamus 62 

2. Ath6thi8, his son, built the palace at 

Memphis, and wrote the anatomical 
books, being a physician - - 57 

3. Cencenes (Kenkenes), his son - 31 

4. Venephes (Enephes or Venephres)» 

his son^ raised the pyramids near 
the town of Cochone (Cochoma or 
Choe). A great plague in Egypt 
during his reign - - 23 

5. Usaphaedus (Saphaidos or Usaphaes)> 

his son - - - - 20 

6. Miebidus (Niebes or Niebais), his 

son - - - - 26 

7. Sememp8es(Semenp8esorMemp8es)9 

his son. A terrible pestilence raged 

in Egjrpt - - - 18 

8. Bi^naches (Ubiendies or Vibethis), 

his son - - - 26 


Obmrvationt, 


Total 


- 253 


Called a Tbeban by 
Eralostbenes, and 
apparently so ac- 
cording to the ma- 
numents. Euse- 
bius mentions 7 or 
17 sons of Menes. 


According to Africa- 
nus 253, Eusebius 
252; tbesnm being 
really 263. 


* The same division of Egypt into 12 provinces, or beyliks, was retained to 
the time of the Memlooks. 


26 


THE ANCIENT JBGYPTIANS. 


CHAP. r. 


^ Ds^uufy of 9 ThinUe Kingi. 

Name. Duration of Reign. 

yrs. 

1. Boethus the first (or B6chus). In his 

reign the earth opened at Bubastisy 
and many were killed - - 38 

2. Csechos (Chous or Cechous), under 

him the buUs Apis in Memphis, and 
Mnevis in Heliopolis, and the Men- 
desian goat were appomted to be 
gods - - - 

3. Binothris (or Biophis), under whom 

it was enacted that women might 
hold the reins of government 

{According to Eusebius, these "I 
three, and their four aiicces- I 17 
sors, did nothing worthy of [.41 
commemoration, and he omits I yj 
their names. J 

6. Nephercheres (the seventh successor 
of Biophis, according to Eusebius). 
Fabulists reported the Nile to have 
flowed with honey during eleven 
days - - - - 25 

8. Sesdchris, who was 5 cubits (7 ft. 

6 in.) in height, and 3 in breadth ; 
or, according to Eusebius, 3 palms - 48 

9. Cheneres (or Keneres). Name omit- 

ted by Eusebius 


- 39 


- 47 


ObtertxUiaru, 


This introduction of 
the worship of sa- 
cred animals is re- 
markable. 


. SO 


Altogether 


- 302 


Sd Dynasty y of 9 Memphiie Kings. 

1. Necherdphes (Echerophes or Neche- 

rdchis). In his reign the Uhycms 
revoked from the Egyptians; but 
alarmed by an unexpected increase 
of the moon submitted 

2. Tosorthrus (or Sesorthus), called 

Asclepius by the Eg3rptians, from his 
medical skill. He introduced the 
, mode of building with heum sione^ 
and patronised Uterature 


28 


29 


Eusebius gives 297 
years. 


CHAF« I. 


MANETHO'S DYNASTIES. 


27 


Name. 

3. Tyris 

4*. Mesdchris 

5. Sdyphis (Souphis 

or Zouphis) - . 

6. Tosertasis - ] 
7- Aches - - I 

8. Sephuris - - I 

9. Cerpheres - - L 


Duration of Reign. 

yn. 

7 

Eusebius mentions 17 
six others after Se- 
sorthusy who were 
not famed for any 
memorable exploit : 
and he omits their 
names. 


16 
19 
42 
80 
26 


Altogether 


- 214 


iith Dynasty^ of 8 Memphite Kings of a dif- 

ferent branch. 

1. S6ris - - - - 29 

2. Suphis. Built the largest pyramid. 

which Herodotus says was con-> 
structed by Cheops. He was arro- 
gant towards the gods, and wrote 
the sacred booky which is regarded 
by the Egyptians as a very precious 
work* ... 

3. Suphis (the 2d) 

4. Mencheres 

5. Rhatoeses 

6. Bicheris 
7- Sebercheres <• 
8. Thampthis *• 


The names of these are 
omitted by Eusebius. 


63 
66 
63 
25 
22 
7 
9 


Altogether 


- 284 


5 A Dynasty^ of 9 Blephantine Kings 

1. Usercheres 

2. Sephres 

3. Nephercheres (or 

Nerchepheres) 

4. Sisires (Sisichis or 

Sisiris) 

5. Cheres (or Echeres) 

6. Rathures (or Rathu- 

rig) - . -t 

7. Mencheres (or Mercheres) 

8. Tancheres (or Tacheres) 

9. Obnus (Unus or Onnus) 


Eusebius reckons 
SI Elephantine 
kings, but omits 
all their names, 
and introduces 
Othius and Phi- 
ops into this Dy- 
nasty. 


28 
13 

20 

7 
20 

44 
9 

44 
33 


Altogether 


248 


This name reminds us 
of 


Eusebius gives the to- 
tal 197 years. 


Eusebius omits the 
name of Soris, and 
considers Suphis the 
Sd of this |]^asty. 


Accordingto Eusebius 
448 years. 


The sum is 218. 


* This is very contradictory. 


28 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. 


CHAP. I. 


6ih Dynasbfy of 6 MempkUe Kings* 


Name* 


Duration of Reign. 


1. Oth6e8 (Othius or Thd^s) killed by his 

guards ... 

2. Phius • - . - 

3. Methusuphis ... 

4. Phiops (or Aphiops), who began to 

reign at the age of 6 years, and 
reigned until he completed his 100th 
year - . • 

5. Menthesuphis 

6. Nitocris.* The handsomest woman of 

her time, of a florid complexion and 
flaxen hair, built the third pyramid 


y«. 

30 
53 

7 


94 
1 


12 


Total 


- 203 


1th Dynasty^ of 70 Men^hiie Kings, who 
reigned 70 days; or, according to JEusdnus, 
5 Kings, who reigned 75 days or years* 

Sth Dynasty, of 27 Men^hite Kings, who 
reigned 156 years, EtuMus gives 5 Kings 
and 106 years* 

9th Dynasty, of\9 Herachopoiite Kings, who 
reigned 409 years ; or, according to Euse- 
bitts, 4> who ruled 100 years* 

1. The first was Achthoes (Achthros, 
Ochthovis, or Ochitois). More cruel 
than all his predecessors ; and, hav- 
ing perpetrated many crimes in 
Egypt, he was seized with madness, 
and afterwards killed by a croco- 
dile. 

\Oth Dynasty, of 19 Herachopoiite Kings, 
who reigned 185 years. 


ObterifoHofu. 
Omitted by Eusebius. 


As Eusebius calls 
Phiops the 4th 
King, he evidently 
intends to place him 
in the Sixth Dy- 
nasty. Is he not Uie 
same as Apophis ? 

Nitocris, or Minerva 
victrix (potens?). 


Should be 197. 


* This name is either Neit-gori, orNeit-acri. The Queen of Psama- 
ticus Sd was also called Neit-acri. 


CHAP. I. 


MAKETHO'S DYNASTIES. 


29 


llth jyywuly^ of 16 Diaspoliie Kinffs, who 

r&gned \S years. 


Name. 


Duration of Reign. 


Of these, Ammenemes reigned - - 16 
[The whole of the above-mentioned kings 
is 192, who reigned during Uie space of 
2300 years, and 70 days. ♦ This termi- 
nates Manetho's first book.] 

SECOND BOOK. 07 MANBTHO. 

\9ih Dynasty 9 of*] DiospolUe Kings, 

1. Sesonchosis (Geson-Goses, or Seson- 

choris), son of Ammanemes • 46 

2. Ammanemes (or Ammenemes), slain 

by his eunachs • - 38 

3. Ses6stris conquered all Asia in nine 

years, and Europe as far as Thrace, 
every where erecting monuments 
of his conquest over those nations. 
Among the people who had acted 
bravely, he set up memorials of a 
phallic nature; but among the de* 
generate, female emblems engraved 
on stelae. He is considered by the 
Egyptians to be the first afler Osiris. 
His stature was 4 cubits, S palms, 
and 2 digits (about 6 feet 10 inches) 48 

4. Lachares(Labaris, Lamaris, or Lam- 

bares), built the labyrinth in the Ar- 
sinoite nome as a tomb for himself - 8 

5. Ammeres (or 

Ameres) 

6. Ammenemes - 
?• Scemiophris 

(Skemiophris), 
his sister 


Eusebitts omits the 
namea of these three, 
and says the succes- 
sors of Lambaris 
reigned 42 years. 


8 
8 


Observaikms. 


Altogetlier 


- 160 


According to Euse- 
bitts these 16 years 
are not included in 
the total of 4S. 


If this is the Moeris of 
Herodotus, he is per- 
haps correct in mak- 
ing him the imme- 
diate successor of 
Sesostris. 


According to Euse- 
bius 245. 


* The total of the sums given by Africanus is only 2287 years 70 
days; or, corrected, 2261 years 70 days. Eusebius has omitted two of 
these sums; but, assuming them the same as those of Africanus, his total 
of years would be 2059 and 75 days. 


80 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. 


CHAP. I. 


13i4 DywMy^ of 60 DtMpolUe ESngSj who 

45S years* 


14M Dynasiy^ of 16 Xoite KingSy who reigned 
134 years. Eusebius says 484; another 
reading gives 184. 

15^ Dyfiosfyy of the Shepherds. Aooordrng to 
JSusMus of IHo^Utans^ who reigned 250 
years. 

Name. Duration of Reign. 

These were 6 foreign Phoenician Kings, 
who took Memphis* 

1. The first was Saites, from whom the 

Saite* nome borrowed its name. 
The Shepherds founded a city in 
the Sethroite nome, from whence 
they invaded and conquered all 
Egypt - - - - 19 

2. Bdon (Bn6n, Andn, or Byon) - - 44 

3. Pachnan (or Apachnas) - - 61 

4. Staan - - - - 50 

5. Archies (or Anchles) - - 49 

6. Apdphis (or Aphobis) - - 61 


(Hiservatkms. 


Altogether 


- 284 


16^ Dynasty y of 32 HeOenic Shq)herd Kings, 
who reigned 518 years. EtisMus gives 5 
Thdfan Kings, who reigned 190 years. 

nth Dynasty, of^S Shepherd Kings and 43 
Thiban DiospoUtes. Eusdnus introduces 
the Kings oftim \5ith Dynasty ofAfricanus, 
whom he calls Phoenician Shepnerds. 


nth Dynasty of ./ffiicanus. 

The cotemporary reigns 
of the Shepherds and 


1 7 th Dynatty cf Eutebius, 

1. Saites - - 19 

2. Bnon (Anon) - 40 


Tbebans histed - 151 i 3. Archies (Aphophis) SO 
(He omits their names.) 4. Apophis (Archies) - 14 

Total - - 103 


Pi'obably meaning 
Lower Egypt, which 
even in the time 
of the Romans was 
distinguished from 
the Thebiudbythe 
name £gyptas. 


Aphoph signifies a 
giant. 

According to Euse- 
bius 250. 


Differing from the to- 
tal of the 15 Dyn. 
oi Africanus. 


* Very improbable. 


CHAP. I. 


MANETHO'S DTNA8TIE8. 


SI 


1. Amotes ( Amosis) - 25 


- IS 


18M Dynatiy. 

According to Afiicantu, of According to EusebhUf ^ 
16 IHotpolUe JHngs. 14 DiotpoUte JRngs, 

1. Amo8,in whose time 
Moaes went out of 
Egypt 

5. Chebros - - 13 

3. Amenophtliis - 24, 

4. Amenis (Amensis) 22 
5* Misaphris (Mi»> 

phris) 

6. Misphragmathosis 

( Misphiagmutbd- 
sis), in whose time 
happened the de- 
luge of Deucalion 26 

7. Tuthmosis • « 9 

8. Amenophisy sup- 

posed to be Mem* 
non of the musical 
slone - * 31 


. 13 


9. Horns 
10. Acherrhes 


11. Rathds 

12. Chebres - 


13. Acberres 

14. Anneses 


- 37 
• 32 


. 6 


- 12 


- 12 


- 5 


2. Chebnm 

3. Amophis (Amen5- 
phis) - 

4. Miphris (Mem- 

phres, Mephres) - 

5. Misphragmutfa6si8 

( Mysphannutho- 
sis, or Misphrag- 
muthds) - 


- 21 


12 


. 26 


Ohiervaiunt. 


IS. Kamesses (Ameses 
or Armesis) 


16. Amenopbath 
Amenoph) 
(262) 

Total 


- 1 


(or 
- 19 


. 263 


18 

8 

15 


- 5 


6. Tuthmosis - . 9 
7* Am^dphis (Am- 
nophis). It is he 
who is siq[»posed to 
be Memnon of the 
musical stone - 31 , 

8. Orus - 36, 27, or 37 i 

9. Achencheres ' 
(Achencherses* or | 
Achencherres) 1 6 or 1 2 

[la Athens, 39, (A- > 
choris) ] • - 7 

[11. Chencherres.] In 
his time Moses led 
the Jews out of 

10. [12.] Acberres - 

11. [13.1 Cherras 

12. [I'^-J Armais, who 

was also called Da- 
naus, reigned 
After which he was 
expelled by his 
brother ^gyptus, 
and fled to Greece. 
He took Argos, of 
which he became 
King. 

13. Ramesses (Am- 

meses) called also 
iBgyptus,[ 15. Re- 
messes] - - 68 

14. Amenophu (or Me- 
mophis). [16. Me- 
nofrfies] - - 40 


is omitted by 
Eusebius, being a 
Queen. 
▼• lliothmes 9d In my 
list of KIngSy agree- 
ing with the d^ of 
the deluge of Deu- 
calion. 


In the Armenian text 
Achoris and Chen- 
cherres are omitted, 
and the Exodus fol- 
lows the name of 
Achencheres. 


Total 


- 348 


The real name appears 
to be Amunophth. 


Or 380, 369, 378, 384, 
or 337. 


32 


TH£ AKCIENT EGYPTIANS- 


CHAP. I. 


19A D^naHy. 


According to AfiicanuSf (f 7 

JXospo&te £ingt, 

yr». 

1. Sethos - » 51 

2. Rapsaces - - 61 

3. Ammenepthes - 20 

4. Rameses - - 60 

5. Ammonemnea - 5 

6. Thuoris, called by 

Homer Polybus, 
the husband of Al- 
candra, in whose 
reign Troy was 
taken - - 7 

Total - 209 


According to Eusebitu, cf b 

Duupolite JRngs, 

yrt. 

1. Sethos ^ - 55 

2. Ramp8es(orRap8es) 66 
S. Amenephthis (or 

Amen^phthis) - 8 

4. Ammenemes - 26 

5. ThuorisytfaePolybus 
of Homer - - 7 


Total - 194 


In this 2d book of Manetho are 96 Kings, 
who ruled 2121 years. 


THIRD BOOK OF MANETHO. 

90ih Dynagttfy of 12 DiospoHie Kings^ who 
reigned 135 yearSj or according to Euselnus 
] 72 j^ears. Their names are omitted, 

2\st Dynasty^ of^ Tanite Kings, 


According to Afiicanus. 

yrt. 

1. Smendes (Smerdes, 

or Smedes) - - 26 

2. Fsusenes (Psuneses, 

or Psusennes) - 46 

3. Nephelcheres - 4 

4. Amenophtbis (or 

Amenenophthis) - 9 

5. Osochor (Osochon) 6 

6. Psinache8(Finaches) 9 

7. Psusennes (Susen- 

nes) - - 14 


Total 


130 


1. 

2. 

S. 

4. 

5. 
6. 
7. 


According to EuseUm, 

yra. 
Smendis (or Amen- 
dis) - -26 

Psusennus - 41 

Nephercheres (Ne- 
pherchenes) . . 4 
Amenophtbis - 9 


Obtervaiioni, 


Osochor 

Psinnaches 

Psosennes 


- 6 

- 9 

- 35 


Total - 130 


V. Remeses 5, in my 
list of Kings. 


Scaliger omits this Dy- 
nasty, and introduces 
the same Kings in 
the 20th Dynasty. 

Syncellus gives in the 
20th Dynasty : 

Nechepsos, 1 9 years. 

Psammuthis, 13 years. 
> 4 years. 


Certus, 16 years. 

Rhampsis, 45 years. 

Amenses, or Amme* 
nemes, 26 years. 

Ochyras, 14 years. 

And in one version 
Amenophtbis is 
placed before Ne- 
phercheres, in the 
21st Dynasty. 


CHAP. I. 


MANETHO^S DTKASTIE8. 


33 


yn. 


22d Dytuu^. 

According to jifricantu, of9\ According to EtuMuaf ofS 

BubaOUe JRngs. \ BvSagHie JRngt, 

jn. 

1. Sescmchu (Seson- 
chosis) - - 21 

2. Osorthon (Osdr6th) 15 

3. r Three names not 1 

4. < given, of kings I 25 

5. I, who reigned J 

6. Tacel6tliis (Tacello- 
this) - - IS 


* J Names omitted, I 
^ signed j 


42 


1. Sesonchuiis (Seson- 

chosu) - - 21 

2. O8orthos.(08orthfto) 15 


OhttfwtiiotUt 


3. Tacellothi8(TakelkH 
this) - . 13 


Total - l: 


Total - 44 


2Sd Dynasty. 


According to ^^ricanuSf of 4 
Tamteiings, 

yn. 

1. Petoubates TPetu- 
bastes). In his time 
the Olympiads be- 
gan - - 40 

2. Osorch6(08orch6n), 

whom the Egypt- 
ians call Hevcttles - 8 

3. Psammus - - 10 

4. Zet - (34 or) 31 

Total . 28 


According to Etuefnut^ of 3 

Tanite £ing8, 

yn. 


1. Petubastis 


2. Osorthon 


3. P&ammus - 


. 25 


9 


- 10 


Toul - 44 


2i!th Dynasty, 


Bocchdris, the Saite, in whose reign a 

sheep spoke I - - - 6 

25ih Dynasty y ofS Ethiopian Exngs. 


Pet-FHht? 


yn. 

1. Sabaco (Sabbac6n), 

who took Bocchoris 
and burnt him alive, 
reigned ' - - 8 

S. Sebichus (Sebich6sy 
or Sevechus) his son 14 

S. Tarcus - - 18 


According to Etuebius. 


yw. 


12 


Taracus 


Total - 40 
VOL. 1. 


- 12 

- 20 

Total - 44 


Called the Wise. No 
mention is made of 
his father Tnephao- 
tus. 


D 


34 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. 


CHAP. I. 


1. Slephinates • 


- 7 


2. Nechepsos . (Nerep- 

bos) - - 6 

S. Nechao I. (Nachao) 8 

4. P&ammeticus(P8am- 

meticbus, Psamme- 
tychufly or Psammi- 
tictts) - - 54 

5. Nechao II. Took 

Jerusalem, and car- 
ried Joachai the 
King captive to 
Egypt - - 6 

6. Psammuthis - 6 

?• Vaphris, to whom the 
remainder of the 
Jews fled when Je- 
rusalem was taken 
by the Assyrians <- 19 

8. Amosis 

9* Psammecherites 
( Psanmiacherites) 
reigned - 6 months 


]. Ammeres the Ethio- 
pian - 18 

3. Stephinadiis (Ste- 

phanathes) - -7 
S. Nechepsos - . 6 

4. Nechao I. - - 6 

5. Pfeammetichus - - 44 


6. Nechao II. - - 6 


7. Psammuthea, called 

also Psammatichus 17 

8. Vaphres - - 25 


9. Amosis 


- 42 


Total - 150yr8. 6 months} 


Total - 167 


Dynasty^ 


Name. 


Duration of Reign, 
yrs. 


1. Cambyses reigned over Persia 5 (9?) 


years, and over Egypt 
% Darius, son of Hystaspes 

3. Xerxes the Great 

4. Artabanus 

5. Artaxerxes 

6. Xerxes 

?• Sogdianus 

8» Darius the son of Xerxes 


7 months 


6 
361 
21 


- 41 


2 months 
7 months 


. 19 


Total 


124 years 4 months 


28eA Dynasty. 


yrs. 


Amyrteus of Sais (Amyrtseus, Amyrteos) 6 


O&wrtMtfiofM. 


Eusebius gives 15N) 
yean and four 
months. 


CHAP. I. 


MANETHO'S DYNASTIES. 


35 


99th Dynasty y of^ Mendesian Kings. 

JT9. 


1. Nepherites (Neche- 

rites) - - 6 

2. Achoris - - 13 

3. Psammutfais * 1 

4* Nephorites (Nepho- 
rotis, or Nepho- 
rotes) - 4 months 


Total - SOyrs. 4 mouths 


1. Nepherites 


yri" 
- 6 


2. Achoris - - 13 

3. Psammuthes - 1 

4. Muthes - - 1 

5. Nepherites (or Ane^ 

pherites) •> 4 months 


Oiuervaiions. 


One ▼ersioa places 
Muthes after Ne- 
pherites II. 


Total - 21 yn, 4 months 


SOC^ Dynasty^ qf^ Sebenmyie Kings. 


yn. 

1. Nectanebes - - 18 

2. Teos - - 2 

3. Nectanebes (Necta- 

nebus) - - 18 

Total - 38 

31^^ Dynasty 

jn. 
1. Ochus (Artaxerzes 
III.) ruled Persia 
20 years, and Egypt 2 


- 10 

- 2 

- 8 
Total - 20 


2. Arses 

3. Darius 


- 3 
• 4 


Total 


yn. 

1. Ochus, who in his 

20th year obtained 
possession of Egypt, 
and reigned - 6 

2. Arses, son of Ochus 4 

3. Darius, conquered 
by Alexander - 6 


Total 


- 16 


(The whole number of years in the thu'd book 
of Manetho is 1050.)* 


Such is the imperfect list of Kings given by the 
copyists of Manetho ; but though many of the 
Dynasties are questionable, yet from a comparison 
with the old Chronicle and the Canon of Theban 
Kings from Eratosthenes, some general conclusions 
may be obtained respecting their succession and 
the different families who enjoyed the sovereign 


* Vide Mr. Ck>rry's very useful collection of '' Ancient Fragments. 

D 2 


9> 


36 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. I. 

power. From Menes to the 18th, or at least to 
the 1 6th Dynasty, there is great obscurity; and 
Manetho's work is unsatisfactory, both in the number 
of monarchs who reigned and in the names of the 
Djoiasties. Major Felix conjectures, with great 
probability, that the 16th and lyth Dynasties, ac- 
cording to our lists derived from the monuments, are 
the 12th, or the 12th and 13th of Manetho. The 
names in the former are given, but those of the 13th 
are omitted. The 15th, which I suppose to have 
but one king, will then be the 11th of Manetho, in 
which too only one is introduced, and a Diospolitan, 
Ammenemes, a name not very unlike Menmoph ; 
though he states there were 15 others, whose names 
are not mentioned. If so, the intermediate Dy- 
nasties between the 13th and 18th have been inter- 
polated, or were contemporary in Lower Egypt. 

In the Old Egyptian Chronicle, after the demi- 
gods are enumerated 15 generations of the Cynic 
cycle, which occupied 443 years. The 

16th Dynasty is of Tanites, eight descents, during - 190 

17. Of MemphiteSy 14* in descent - - - 103 

1 8. Of Memphites, 4 in descent - - - 348 

19. Of DiospoHtes, 5 in descent - - - 194 
90. Of Diospolites, 8 in descent ... 228 

21. Of Tanites, 6 in descent - - - - 121 

22. Of Tanites, 3 in descent - - - - 48 

23. Of Diospolites, 2 in descent - - - 19 

24. Of Sai'tes, 3 in descent - - . - 44 

25. Of Ethiopians, 3 in descent - . - 44 

26. Of Memphites, 7 in descent - - - 177 

27. Of Persians, 5 in descent - - - 124 

28. - 

29. Of Tanites, .... in descent - - - - 39 

30. A Tanite, 1 in descent - - - - - 18 
Total 30 Dynasties and 36,525 years, including 3984 of the 

reigns of Cronus and the other 12 Deities. 


CHAP. I. THEBAN KINGS. 37 

7%« Kings of ThtheSy according to Eraiosthenesy are — 

1. Menes the Theban, which is by interpretation Dionius: 

he reigned - - - - - 62 

2. Athothes the son of Menes, by interpretation Hermo- 

genes - - • - - 59 

S. Athothes II. - - - - S2 

4. Diabies, the son of Athothes, signifying Philetsrus • 19 

5. Pemphos (or Semph6s), the son of Athothes, called 

Heraclides - • - - 18 

6. Toegar-amachus Momchiri the Memphite, called a man 

redundant in his members (or Yoigaramos) - •79 

7. Stoechus his son, who is Ar6s the Senseless - - 6 

8. Gosormies, called Etesipantos - - - 30 

9. Mares his son, signifying Heliodorus - - 26 
10. Anoyphis, which is ** a common son," - - - 20 
11^ Sirius, or <" the Son of the Cheek,*' or << Abascantus ** - 18 

12. Chnubus Gneurus, which is Chryses the son of Chryses 22 

13. Rauosis, which is Archicrator - - - 13 
I*. Biyris - - - - - . 10 

15. Saophi8"Comastes,"or accord- Lhe^phis 1**^^7. and 

ingtOSOme '< Chrematistes." J Mencheres of Manetho; 

16. Saophis the 2d - 'the Cheops, Cephrenes, . 

17. Moscheres or « Heliodotus," ""^^ Mycerinus of Hero- 1 »* 

(^ dotus. 

18. Musthis - - - - * "- 33 

19. Pammus (Pammes or Pamnus) Archondes - - 35 

20. Apappus or " Maximus '' (a^w<p '* the giant "), one 

hour less than - - - . . 100 

21. Achescus Ocaras (Exco-xo^ o %a^a<-) - - - 1 

22. Nitocris or " Athena Nicephora " (Minerva Victrix, 

or potens?), instead of her husband - - . 6 

23. Myrtaeus " Ammonodotus " (Amuntaeus? more pro- 

bably) - - - - - - 22 

24'. Thyosimares (Ouosimares) '< the robust," who is 

called " the Sun " - - - - 12 

25. Thinillus (Th3rri]lus or Sethinilus), which signifies the 

augmentor of his country's strength - - 8 

26. Semphucrates, which is Hercules Harpocrates - 18 

27. Chuther Taurus (Chusthertaurus) the tyrant - 7 

28. Meures Philoscorus ^Meres philosophus; more pro- 

bably Mares or Maires), *<Uie beloved of the Sun '' 12 

29. Chomaephtha (Kahi-mai-phthah, or Tho-mai-phthah), 

** Cosmus Phil*hephsestus " - - - 1 1 

SO. Scecuniosochus (Sykunius ochy-tyrannus, Scunios- 

ochus^ or Ancunius ochy-tyrannus) the tyrant - 60 
31. Pente-athyres - - - - - 16 

D 3 


\ 


2Y 
29 


38 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS, CHAP. I. 

yrs. 

32. Stamenemes II. - - - . - 23 

33. Sistosichennes, " Hercules the Strong " - ~ 55 
34?. Maris (or Mares) - - - - - 43 

35. Siphoas (probably Se-phthas), <' Hermes the son of Vul- 

can *' - - - - - - 5 

36. - - - - - -.14 

87- Fhruron or Nilus (f la^o, " the river ") - - 5 

38. Amuthantseus - . - - - 63 


On the Origin of the Shepherds^ or Pastor Kings. 

From the preceding extracts of Manetho, as from 
other passages in his work, it appears reasonable to 
conchide that Egypt was at one time invaded and 
occupied by a powerful Asiatic people, who held 
the country in subjection ; and viceroys being ap- 
pointed to govern it, these obtained the title of 
Pastor or Shepherd Kings. I have already shown 
there is authority for believing this event to have 
taken place in the early periods of Egyptian his- 
tory, previous to the era of Osirtasen the First ; 
and the monuments satisfactorily prove that in the 
reign of this monarch and of his second successor, 
the Eg)rptians had already extended their con- 
quests over some of the tribes of Asia, and were 
consequently free from any enemies within their 
own valley. And this war was not only carried on 
without much interruption to the age of Remeses 
the Third, but was afterwards continued at a later 
period until the reign of Neco. If we inquire 
what nation had suflScient power to obtain posses- 
sion of Egypt at so remote an era, history ftir- 
nishes us with no authority for supposing any other 
than Assyria to have been capable of making so 


CHAP. I. 


SH£PH£RD KINGS. 


39 


difficult a conquest : and the Assyrians under 
Semiramis are even believed by some to have ex- 
tended their arms into that country. But the 
weakness of the successors of Ninyas prevented 
their keeping possession of a territory daily in- 
creasing in power ; and the Egyptians were enabled 
to throw off the yoke, to extend in turn their con- 
quests into the heart of Asia, and to obtain posses- 
sion of the provinces lying between Egypt and 
the Euphrates, which had been previously annexed 
to the Assyrian empire, thus gratifying the am- 
bition natural to a rising state, and retaliating the 
affront offered by the invader. Their first attempts 
were upon the neighbouring districts of Syria, and 
finding their efforts attended with success, they 
proceeded onward to the N. and E. till they had 
not only deprived the enemy of his conquests, but 
carried the war into Assyria itself; and they con- 
tinued to enjoy the fruits of these victories until 
the arms of Babylon once more wrested the whole 
of the vanquished territory from the declining 
power of Egjrpt, at the close of the reign of Neco. 


No. 2. 


Shooting at a Target. 
D 4 


Tkebes, 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. 


Hittory of Eg;/pt. 

Is the previous chapter, I have shown the dii^ 

ficulty of elucidating the early period of Egyptian 
history, owing to the want of monumental records 
and the deficiency of authentic historical inform- 
ation : a slight difference of opinion may also 
exist respecting the age of Osirtasen I., and even 
that of the glorious princes of the 18th Dynasty : 
it will, however, be proper to accompany my his- 
torical notice with a chronological table of kings, 
and the inquiring reader will not consider it un- 
interesting to compare the successi(H) of those 
whose names occur on the monuments with the 
accounts of ancient authors. Many of the first 
monarchs are omitted, from the persuasion that 
conjecture unsupported by positive authority is 
unnecessary and presumptuous, and I am less 
anxious to introduce them into the following 
series, as the lists of Muietho and Eratosthenes 
have been already given. 


CHAP* II. 


CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE. 


41 


Supposed Succession of Egyptian Kings. 


Nameflrom 
ancient Authom 


Name from the 
MoDumenti. 


Erentt. 


l8t Xhfwutyy cf 1 Thhan. 


Menes. 

Minaeus of Jose- 
phus 


:} 


Menai. 


"First King of Egypt Ac- 
cording to Joiephus, Me- 
nes lived uptmircb of 1 SOO 
years before Solomon, 
(who was born in lOSS, 
and ascended the throne 
in 101 5>) and founded 
Memphis. Anttq.viii. c.6. 


Dynastyy 


Athothis, his son - 


His successors uncertain. 


Suphis§, or Saophis 


{Builds the palace at Mem- 
phis |y and transfers the 
court to it. This 2d Dy- 
nasty was perhaps in conse- 
quence odled Memphite. 


the 


1.0. 

a320» 


2300 


2123 


Foundation of the kingdom 
of Assyria by Nimrod, 
2204. Eratosdienes gives 
569 years for the 19 kings 
who preceded Apappus. 
^Foundation of die king- 
dom of Sicyon, 2089. He 
built the great pyramid. 
These three kings should 
be the Cheops, Cephren 
(Jkii brother), and Myce- 
rinus of Herodotus, 
whom he has strangely 
misplaced, making them 
posterior to Sesostris and 
Moeris. Diodonis calls 
Cheops Chemmis, or 
Chembes. 

* I extend the date of his ascendme the throne from 2201 of my 
former table to 2320, on the authority of Josephus. 

f The number of Manetho's Dynasties from Athothis to Menmoph 
IS probably too great. 

X Manetho, according to Africanus. Menes is said to have reigned 
60 years, ^lian, on the authority of Apion, mentions (Enis, a son of 
Menes, as having been king of Egypt. Nat. Hist. lib. ii. 40. 

§ The name of this Pharaoh was probably Shofo, op Khof, the th and 
kk being frequently used indifferently in Egyptian names. They are 
easily converted into Suphis or Cheops by addmg the Greek termination s. 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTrANS. 


-JSTa'SEU 


*'r"^r 


Emin. 


Um 


SupUa ad, or! 
ien SMpbii, 
Le. S>0[>fai<<'> 
bratber 


r-i " 

1.^ 


r En of the CUiwu empe. 
tBuihtbeucondpjnmid. 


E08!) 


Meocberis - 
Hindrii? 
nunmu. Ar-I 

cbondei? -. 


s 


Built the third prnrnkL 


8043 

soil 


Apappus, or' 

Apboph 
AclwflcusOcitnu? 
Nitocris 
Myrtou.? 
Thjosimare.? - 
Thinillui? 


1 

III 


r A qiieen, called Nicsuleby 
1. J<Kepbua. Antiq. liii. 6. 

: 

r Kingdom of Ai^^ found- 


8001 
1901 
1900 

1890 
1880 
1866 


,Q iDeluge of Ogyge. m Attic* 


1848 


IBA Dynasty, of IDioi^te King? 


(Uncertun.) -1 Henmoph- . |- 


1830 


16rt Dynattffi^, Tamtegf 


CUr^eruIn.) ■ 


FJrfe (be lirt of 
lungsinPIalel. 


0«rt«ei.I. - 


Arri.alof Joseph, I70fi - 


1740 


Amunm-gorl? 


1696 


Aniun-ni-gori ? 


. 


1686 


(Uncert«n.t) 


(Mrt-seo II. 

Nofiri-Fwp,or"l 

Osirtuenlll.J 


Joieph died 1635 


1651 
I63e 


goriMII. 1 


16S1 


^L'^%r-} 


1J80 


* In the list of the ancestors of Remeses II. at tbe Memnonium, no 
kia^ intervenes between Menes and the 18th Dynasty but Menmopb, 
whtcfa I suppose to be in consequence of his having been tbe only 
Thebon monarcji before the time of Amosb (vide mjra, note on 
Aoiosia). 

f The error in this name arose from the w having been mistaken for /■■ 

t Vide ttiprd, p. 10. 


CHAP. 11. RETGN OF OSIRTASEN I. 43 

The accession of the first Osirtasen I conceive 
to date about the year 1740 b. c, and the length of 
his reign must have exceeded 43 years. If the 
name of this monarch was not ennobled by mili* 
tary exploits equal to those of the Remeses, the 
encouragement given to the arts of peace, and 
the flourishing state of Egjrpt during his rule, 
evince his wisdom ; and his pacific character satis- 
factorily accords with that of the Pharaoh * who so 
generously rewarded the talents and fidelity of a 
Hebrew stranger. 

Some insight into Egyptian customs during his 
reign is derived from the story of Joseph, with 
whom I suppose him to have been coeval ; and 
the objects taken thither by the Ishmaelites, con- 
sisting in spices, balm, and myrrh, which were 
intended for the purposes of luxury as well as of 
religion ; the subsequent mention of the officers of 
Pharaoh's household ; the state allowed to Josepht ; 
the portion of lands allotted to the priesthood, 
and other similar institutions and customs — tend 
to show the advanced state of society at this early 
epoch. 

* I have frequently had occasion to notice the true reading and pur- 
port of this name : I shall, therefore, only observe, that it is written in 
Hebrew Phrah, rwno, and is taken from the Egyptian word Pire or 
Phre (pronounced Phra), signifying the sun, and represented in hiero- 
glyphics by the hawk and globe, or sun, over the royal banners. It 
was through the well-known system of analogies that the king obtained 
this title, being the chief of earthly as the sun was of heavenly bodies. 
But the word is not derived from or related to ouro, " king," as 
Josephus supposes (Antiq. viii. c. 6.). Phouro is like Pharaoh ; but the 
name is Phrali in Hebrew, and Pharaoh is an unwarranted corruption. 
Vide my Egypt and Thebes, p. 5. note. 

t Gen. xli. 42, 43. 


44 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

From the sculptures of Beni Hassan *, we learn 
that the Egyptians were acquamted with the ma- 
nufacture of linen, glass, cabinet work, gold orna- 
ments, and numerous objects indicative of art and 
refinement; and various gymnastic exercises, the 
games of draughts t, ball, moray and other well- 
known modern amusements, were common at the 
same period. 


a bed 

Na 3. Games of DraugbU and Mora. Beni Hassan. 


The style of architecture was grand and chaste, 
and the fluted columns of Beni Hassan are of a 
character calling to mind the purity of the Doric, 
which indeed seems to have derived its origin from 
Egypt. 

It was during the reign of Osirtasen that the tem- 
ple of Heliopolis was either founded or received ad- 
ditions, and one of the obelisks bearing his name 
attests the skill to which they had attained in the 
difficult art of sculpturing granite. Another of 
the same materials indicates the existence of a 
temple erected or embellished by this monarch 

* Grottoes on the east bank of the Nile, near the Speos Artemidos. 

f There are other instances of this game ; one of the time of Re- 
meses III., where the king himself is playing; the other of Psama» 
ticus II. ; both at Thebes. 


CHAP. 11. EARLY WARS. 45 

in the province of Crocodilopolis, afterwards known 
by the names of Arsinoite nome and el Fyoom ; 
and the remains of a colonnade in the great temple 
of Kamak prove, as well as the title " lord of the 
upper and lower country," accompan3dng his name, 
that he was sole monarch of the Thebaid and Lower 
Egypt 

Of the Pharaohs in the two last Dynasties, 
Amun-m-gori II. and Osirtasen II. were the most 
remarkable after Osirtasen I. Independent of the 
encouragement given by them to the agricultural 
interests of the country, they consulted the welfare 
of those who were employed in the inhospitable 
desert ; and the erection of a temple, and a station 
to command the wells and to serve for their abode 
in the Wadee Jasoos*, proved that they were 
mindful of their spiritual as well as temporal pro- 
tection. The breccia quarries of the Kossayr 
road were already opened, and probably also the 
emerald mines of Gebel Zabara ; and the wars 
with the foreigners of Fount are recorded in a 
tablet t at Wadee Jasoos, bearing the date of the 
28th year of Amun-in-gori II. This last is a very 
important fact, as it shows that the arms of Egypt 
already extended into some of the very same coun- 
tries afterwards noticed among the conquests of the 
Pharaohs, and satisfactorily establishes two facts — 
that the occupation of Egypt by the Shepherds 
could not have happened during the 17th Dynasty, 
and that these prisoners are not the Jews. 

* Or Gasoos : the g in Arabic being properly always soft. This is 
the modem name of the valley, 
f It has now been brought to England by Mr. Burton. 


46 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. 


CHAP. II. 


It is highly probable that the port of Philoteras, 
or iEnnum, on the Red Sea, was already founded, 
since the station at Wadee Jasoos appears to have 
been principally intended to protect the wells which 
then supplied and still continue to supply that 
port* with water : and thus we have an additional 
reason for concluding the commerce with Arabia 
to have commenced at a very early period; and 
that its gums and spices found a ready market in 
the opulent Egypt, is sufficiently proved by the 
Ishmaelites or Arabs of those days bringing them 
for sale into the lower country. 

No monument now remains of Nofri-Ftep t or 
Osirtasen III., though his name frequently occurs 
in tablets sculptured on the rocks of Upper Egypt 
and Mount Sinai ; and we learn nothing of interest 
concerning these monarchs, either from sacred or 
profane records, till the accession of the 18th Dy- 
nasty. 

* The modern town of Kossayr is a short distance to the south of 
Philoteras Portus, or Old Kossayr, and consequently a Utde fiurther 
from Wadee Jasoos. 

t Vide my Egypt and Thebes, p. 500., note on No6ri-Ftep. 


No. 4. 


^n Attendant bedding the Car. 


Aladadrom. 


CHAP. II. 


THE 18th dynasty. 


47 


NameArom 
ancient Authors. 


Name ftom tbe 
Monuments. 


Erents.* 


18^ Dynasty^ of Theban or Diospolitan IRngs. 


Amosis (Chebron) 


Amenoph 
Amesses, or Amen- 

ses, his sbter 
Mephres, Mesphris, 

or Mespbra-Tuth- 

mosis 
MIsphra* Tummosis 

or Tothmofib 

Thammosis, or 
Tothmosis 

Amenophis 
Horns 

Achenchres (a 
queen) 

Ratbotis 

Achencheres, or "I 

Chebres -J 

Achencheres, or 
Acfaenres 


{(Chebron) 
Amesf 


Amunoph I. 
Amense, hk 
sister || 

Tbothmes I. 
Thotfames II. 

I Tbothmes III. 

Amunoph II. 
Tbothmes IV. 
1 Maut-m Shoi 
J (Regency) - 

Amunoph III. 

Amun-men. . . ? 

{Remesso, on 
Remeseft I. 


^" There arose a new (dy- 
nasty, or) king, who knew 
not Joseph." Exod. i. 8. 
Moses bom, 1571. Jo- 
sephus says Pharaoh's 
daughter was called Ther- 
mutbis, \ Cecrops leads a 
colony from Sais§, and 
founds the kingdom of 
Athens, B.c. 1556. 


{Included in the reign of 
Tbothmes I. 

{His 14th year found on 
the monuments. 

{The reign of Amun-neit- 
gori included in this. 

r Exodus of the Israelites, 
-| 1491, 430 years after the 
(_ arrival of Abraham. 

- Moses died 1451. 


Included in the reign of 
her son, Amunoph III. 
'The supposed jVlemnon 
of tbe vocal statue. His 
brother ^ not admitted in- 
to the list of kings. 


1 


}■ 


the 
Throne 


1575 


1550 

1538 
1505 
1495 


1456 
1446 


14S0 


1408 
1395 


* For a more detailed chronological table, vide my Egypt and Thebes, 
p. 510. 

-|* I have given my reasons for considering these two the same king 
in my Hieroglyphicai Extracts, p. 10. 12. 

X Josq>h. Andq. ii. 9. 

§ Neith or Net, Minerva, was the deity of Sai's, and her name seems 
to have led to that of the Greek goddess, and of the new city. In 
]^yptian it was written from right to lef);, 9HN, and the Greeks, by 
aiming an A at either end, would make it A9HNA; reading from left to 
right. 

II Vide my Materia Hieroglyphica, PL I. of the Kings. Syncellus 
gives Amenses. 

% Amun-Toonh ? probably Danaus, who Hved at this time, vide p. 58. 


48 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 


Nameftom 
andent Autbon. 


Annais 


Remeses Miamun 


Amenophis 


Name firom the 
MonumentB. 


Osirei ? I. 


{Amun-mai 
Remeses, Re- 
meses II., or 
the Great. 

rPthahmen- 
•j Thmeioftep ? 
(_ his son 


Events. 


Calculating 900 years from 
the time of Herodotus, 
Moeris should have lived 
at this period. The simi- 
larity of Mceris (Mai*re) 
and Armais is singular. 

The supposed Sesostris of 
the Greeks. The date of 
his 44th and 62d year 
found on the monuments. 
Manetho allows him 66* 


Aacended 

the 
Throne. 


B.C. 

IS85 


1355 


1289 


Amosis or Ames was the leader of the 18th Dy- 
nasty, and the period of his accession and this change 
in the reigning &,mily strongly confirm the opinion 
of his being the ** new king who knew not Joseph.'* 
And if we consider that he was from the distant 
province of Thebes, it is reasonable to expect that 
the Hebrews* would be strangers to him, and that 
he was likely to look upon them with the same 
distrust and contempt with which the Egyp- 
tians usually treated foreigners. They stigmatised 
them with the name of impure Gentiles t ; and 
the ignoble occupation of shepherds was for 
the Jews an additional cause of reproach^ In- 
deed it is possible that the Jews, who had come 
into Egypt on the occasion of a famine, finding 

* Or the people of Joseph ; for ** Joseph was dead, and all his 
brethren, and all that generation." Exod. i 6. He had been dead about 
60 years. 

f *' Nations," an expression adopted by the Jews. The hieroglyphi- 
cal character refers to a hilly country in contradistinction to the plains 
of Egypt. 

% ** Every shepherd is an abomination unto the Egyptians." 
Gen. xlvi. 31. — ** Thy servants are shepherds, both we and also our 
fisithers," xlvii. 3. 


CHAP. ir. THE JEWISH BONDAGE. 49 

the great superiority of the land of Egypt both for 
obtaining the necessaries of life, and for feeding 
their flocks, may have asked and obtained a grant 
of land * from the Egyptian monarch, on condition 
of certain services being performed by them and 
their descendants. As long as the Memphite 
Dynasty continued on the throne, this grant was 
respected, and the only service required of them 
was that agreed upon in the original compact. But 
on the accession of the Theban family the grant 
being rescinded, and the service still required, 
they were reduced to a state of bondage ; and as 
despotism seldom respects the rights of those it 
injures, additional labour was imposed upon this 
unresisting people, t And Pharaoh's pretended 
fear, lest in the event of war they might make 
common cause with the enemy, was a sufficient 
pretext with his own people for oppressing the 
Jews, at the same time that it had the effect of 
exciting their prejudices against them. Affecting 
therefore some alarm at their numbers, he suggested 
that so numerous a body might avail themselves of 
the absence of the Egyptian troops, and endanger 
the tranquillity and safety of the country t, and 


* Some of them were tillers of land as Well as shepherds ; for be- 
sides their labour " in mortar and in brick," they were employed *' in 
all manner of service in the field/' (Exod. i. 14.) Aiid in Deut. x. 11., 
we find this expression, '^ Egypt . . . where thou sowedst thy seed, and 
wateredst it." 

f The Arabs, whenever they become settled in villages on the banks 
of the Nile, meet with much vexation from the Turkbh authorities, and 
the Turks are always anxious that they should fix themselves in villages, 
in order to get them within their power. 

J •* Lest when there falleth out any war they join also unto our 
enemies and fight against us, and so get theni out of the hnd,^* Exod. i . 10. 

VOL. 1. E 


50 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

that prudence dictated the necessity of obviating 
the possibility of such an occurrence. With this 
view they were treated like the captives taken in 
war, and were forced to undergo the gratuitous 
labour of erecting public granaries and other build- 
ings for the Egyptian monarch.* These were 
principally constructed of crude brick, and that 
such materials were commonly used in Egypt, we 
have sufficient proof from the walls and other 
buildings of great size and solidity found in various 
parts of the country, many of which are of a very 
early period : and the bricks themselves, both at 
Thebes and in the vicinity of Memphis, frequently 
bear the names of the monarchs who ruled Egypt 
during and prior to the epoch to which I am now 
alluding. The crude brick remains about Memphis 
are principally pyramids ; those at Thebes consist of 
walls enclosing sacred monuments and tombs, and 
some are made with and others without straw. 
Many have chopped barley and wheat straw, others 
bean halm and stubble t j and in the tombs we find 
the process of making them represented among the 
sculptures. But it is not to be supposed that any 
of these bricks are the work of the Israelites, who 
were never occupied at Thebes ; and though Jo- 
seph us affirms they were engaged in building 
pyramids, as well as in making canals and em- 


He evidently did not fear their obtaining possession of any part of 
£gypt ; but of their committing depredations, and then escaping out of 
the country. 

* They built " treasure cities, Pithom and Raamses." Exod. i. 11. 

f Exod. V. 12. Some bricks were made " with stubble instead of 
fttrawr" 


CHAP. II, BIRTH OF MOSES. 51 

bankments, it is very improbable that the crude 
brick pyramids of Memphis, or of the Arsinoite 
Home, were the work of the Hebrew captives. 

Towards the latter end of Amosis* reign hap- 
pened the birth of Moses. His flight must have 
taken place in the second year of Thothmes I., and 
his return to Egypt after the death * of this and 
the succeeding prince. 

Amosis, the leader of the 18th Dynasty of Dios- 
politans, appears to have derived his right to the 
throne from his ancestor Menmoph, the last The- 
ban prince who preceded him, and sole member of 
the 15th Dynasty.t Few monuments remain of 
his reign ; but a tablet at the Trojan mountain t, 
behind el Maasara, shows that the stone of those 
quarries was used by him for the erection of some 
building at Memphis or in the vicinity. § 

Amosis was succeeded by Amunoph I., a prince 
whose name occurs in numerous parts of Thebes, 
and who seems to have been a great encourager 
of the arts of peace. He married an Ethiopian 


* Exod. iv. 19. " All the men are dead which sought thy life.'* 
f My conjecture seems strongly confirmed by the position of the 
names in the chamber of Amosis' and Amunoph's family, where the 
name of Amosis follows that of Menmoph, as of the king from whom 
he claimed his right to the throne, his Diospolite ancestor. Amunoph I., 
the monarch in whose rei^ the sculptures were executed, occurs in the 
upper line as the then existing sovereign, but succeeding to the throne 
in uninterrupted order, therefore not deducing his claims from any 
distant predecessor. Vide my Extracts, Plate V. 

J The Troici lapidis Mons of Strabo and Ptolemy. It is about nine 
5S to the south of Cairo. 
§ Some may suppose it to have been for the pyramids, but his era 
does not agree witn the time of their erection. It is, however, from 
these quarries that the stone used for the outer tier, or casing, was taken, 
which is alluded to by Strabo and other authors. 

E 2 


62 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS, CHAP. II. 

princess, called Nofri-are, a name common to 
many Eg3rptian queens.* 

Some buildings of the time of Thothmes I.t still 
exist, but the second of that name has left little to 
mark the history of his reign. Between these two 
monarchs appears to have intervened a queen, 
whom 1 have ventured to call Amun-neit-gori, 
and who has hitherto given lise to more doubts 
and questions than any other sovereign of this 
Dynasty. But whether she was only regent during 
the minority of Thothmes II. and III., or suc- 
ceeded to the throne in right of Thothmes I., in 
whose honour she erected several monuments, is 
still uncertain, and some have doubted her being 
a queen.t Her name has been generally erased, 
dnd those of the 2d and 3d Thothmes are placed 
over it ; but sufficient remains to prove that the 
small temple of Medeenet Haboo, the elegant 
edifice under the Qoomeh rocks, and the great 
obelisks of Karnak, with many other handsome 
monuments, were erected by her orders, and the 
attention paid to the military caste is testified by 
the subjects of the sculptures. That the invention 
of glass was known at this time, is satisfactorily 
proved by the discovery of a large bead bearing 

* I was led by the similarity of name into the error of supposing her 
the daughter of Amosis. Materia Hieroglyphic, p. 78. 

f Thothmes L, as I am assured by Lord Prudhoe, penetrated into 
Ethiopia as far as the Isle of Argo, where he left an inscription. The 
2d Thothmes' name is found at Napata (Berkel), and the 3d pro- 
bably went still farther south. Did they possess this country by right 
of the marriage of A munoph I. with an Ethiopian princess ? 

^ The constant use of the female sign, and the title Daughter of the 
Sun, seem to require it to be so, notwithstanding the dress, which 
is that of a king. Fide my Egypt and Thebes, p. 92. 


CHAP. 11. EARLY INVENTIONS. 53 

the name of this queen ; and I shall have occasion 
to show that we have evidence of the use of it in 
the early time of the first Osirtasen. The mode 
of irrigation was by the shadoofs or pole and bucket 
of the present day; and it is remarkable that the 
modern Egyptians have a tradition that it was de- 
rived from their Pharaonic* predecessors. The 
manufacture of linen cloth, the arch, and other 
notable inventions are also represented in the 
sculptures of the same reign ; but as I shall notice 
them in their proper place, it is unnecessary here 
to enter into any detail concerning those interest- 
ing subjects. 

The reign of Thothmes III. is one of the most 
remarkable that occurs in the history of Egypt, 
He was a prince who aspired to the merit of bene- 
fiting his country by an unbounded encouragement 
of the arts of peace and war. But whether his 
military expeditions were conducted by himself in 
person, or whether he confided the management of 
the war to expert generals, we have ample testi- 
mony of the extent of his power by the tributes 
•laid at his feet by " the chiefs of foreign coun- 
tries,** who present him with the riches of " Fount,** 
of " Kufa,** of " Rot-h-no,** and of " the south- 
em districts of western Ethiopia.**! 

* Ebn Phara6oi], ^* son of a Pharaoh," is however a great term of 
reproach with the modern Egyptians, and almost equivalent to '* son 
of a Frank," But the climax is '* a Jew's dog." 

f From the monuments of Thebes ; where deputies from those 
nations bear the tribute to the monarch seated on his throne. Kufa 
and Rot-h-no are two northern people, of which the latter is the more 
distant from Egypt. They were long at war with the Egyptians 

E 3 


54 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP, II. 

It was in the 4th year* of his reign that I sup- 
pose the exodus of the Israelites to have taken 
place, and the wars he undertook and the monu- 
ments he erected must date subsequently to that 
event. Indeed there is no authority in the writings 
of Moses for supposing that Pharaoh was drowned 
in the Red Seat ; and from our finding that where- 
ever any fact is mentioned in the Bible history we 
do not discover any thing on the monuments which 
tends to contradict it, we may conclude that these 
two authorities will not here be at variance with 
each other. And in order to show that in this 
instance the same agreement exists between them, 
and to prevent a vulgar error, perpetuated by 
constant repetition t, from being brought forward 
to impugn the accuracy of the Jewish historian, 
it is a pleasing duty to examine the account given 
in the book of Exodus. According to it, Pharaoh 
led his army in pursuit of the fugitives, and over- 
took the Israelites ** encamping by the sea, beside 
Pi-Hahiroth, before Baal-zephon.''J The Israelites 
having entered the channel of the sea, the army of 
Pharaoh, ** his chariots and horsemen ||,'' pursued 
them, and all those who went in after them were 
overwhelmed by the returning waters. This how- 


* We find the date of his 34th year on the monuments. 

f Vide my Materia Hieroglyphica, Remarks, at the end of p. 4. The 
Arabs have a tradition that the exodus happened under King Amioos, a 
name very like Amosis or Thothmosis (Ames orThothmes), both which 
have a similar import. 

j: Among many others are the two humps of a dromedary, and the 
inability of a crocodile to turn round quickly, both in direct opposition 
to truth. 

§ Exod. xiv. 9. II Exod. xiv. 23. 


CHAP, II. THOTHMES III. AND THE EXODUS. 55 

^ver is confined to the " chariots and the horse- 
men and all the host of Pharaoh, that came into 
the sea after them*," and neither here nor in the 
Song, which Moses sang on the occasion of their 
deliverance, is any mention made of the king's 
death t, an event of sufficient consequence at least 
to have been noticed^ and one which would not 
have been omitted. The authority of a Psalm can 
scarcely be opposed to that of Moses, even were 
the death of Pharaoh positively asserted, but this 
cannot even be argued from the expression, he 
" overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red 
Seat," since the death of a monarch is not the ne- 
cessary consequence of his defeat and overthrow. 

The departure of the Israelites enabled Thothmes 
to continue the war with the northern nations be- 
fore mentioned with greater security and success, 
and it is not impossible that its less urgent pro- 
secution after the time of Amun-m-gori II. was 
owing partly to the sojourn of the Jews in Egypt. $ 
At all events we find evidence of its having been 
carried on by this monarch with more than usual 
vigour ; and in consequence of the encouragement 

* Exod. xiv. 28. 

f Exod. XV. 4. ** Pharaoh's chariots and his host hath he cast into 
the sea : his chosen captains also are drowned in the Red Sea." 

± Psalm cxxxvi. 15. 

J The failure of historical monuments of this period prevents our 
deciding the question. I had formerly supposed the Jews and Pastors 
the same people (Materia Hieroglyphic, p. 84.), and that the expul- 
sion of the latter happened under Thothmes IIL This last must have 
occurred long before, and I believe the two events and the two people 
to have been confounded by historians, or by the copyists of Manetho. 
The captives represented in the tombs of Thebes are not Jews, as I 
have observed in my Egypt and Thebes, but rather of those nations 
bordering on Assyria. Vide also supra, p. 21. and 38. 

E 4 


56 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. U. 

given to the arts of peace, the records of his suc- 
cesses, sculptured on the monuments he erected, 
have been preserved to the present day. He 
founded numerous buildings in Upper and Lower 
Egypt, and in those parts of Ethiojpia into which his 
arms had penetrated ; he made extensive additions 
to the temples of Thebes ; and Coptos, Memphis, 
Heliopolis, and other cities in different parts of 
the country, benefited by his zeal for architectural 
imp«.vemints. In n,Jy of .he mo„„™e.... he 
founded, the style is pure and elegant ; but in the 
reversed capitals and cornices of a columnar hall 
behind the granite sanctuary at Kamak, he has 
evinced a love of change consistent neither with 
elegance or utility, leaving a lasting memorial of 
his caprice, the more remarkable as he has else- 
where given proofs of superior taste. 

After a reign of about thirty-nine years t he was 
succeeded 1: by his son Amunoph II., who. besides 
some additions to the great pile of Karnak, 
founded the small temple of Amada in Nubia, 
which was completed by his son and successor 
Thothmes IV. The great sphinx at the pyramids 
also bears the sculptures of the son of Amunoph ; 
but whether it was commenced by him or by the 


• Several obelisks were cut by his order, as the two now at Alex- 
andria, others at Rome, and one at Constantinople. More scarabaei 
and small objects have been found bearing the name of this king, than 
of any one who reigned before or after him, not excepting Remeses the 
Great. 

+ According to Eratosthenes. Vide note ♦, p. 54<. 

j: The return of the Shepherds or Pastors durmg'his reien, mentioned 
by Manetho, is very doubtful. They are out of place liere, and we 
know that the Jews did not revisit Bgypt. 


CHAP, II. AMUN-TOONH SUPPOSED DANAUS. SJ 

Sd Thothmes, is a question which it would be 
curious to ascertain. At all events, the similarity 
of the names may have given rise to the error of 
Pliny, who considers it the sepulchre of Amasis. 

Amunoph III, and his elder brother Amun- 
To6nh succeeded to the throne on the death of the 
4th Thothmes ;. but as they were both young, the 
office of regent and tutor during their minority 
was confided to their mother, the queen Maut-m- 
shoi. She is perhaps the Achencheres or Acherres 
of Manetho, who according to his list is introduced 
as a reigning queen. They appear to have ruled 
with equal authority and in perfect harmony, till 
some event caused the secession of Amun-Toonh, 
who left to Amunoph the undivided possession of 
the throne, and retired from Egypt, And so 
anxious was the younger brother to obliterate every 
recollection ofhis having ruled conjointly with him, 
that he not only prevented the mention of his name 
in the lists of kings, but caused it to be erased from 
all the monuments of Upper and Lower Egypt 
That Amunoph III. was the younger brother, I 
am inclined to believe, from the circumstance of 
his prenomen being alone admitted on the buildings 
erected during their combined reign, while both the 
prenomen and nomen of Amun-Toonh are always 
introduced. The departure of the elder brother 
was the signal for changing all the second preno- 
mens of Amunoph into a phonetic nomen, as may 
be observed on every monument sculptured during 
the early part of his reign, some of which are in the 
British Museum and other European collections. 


58 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

The reason of his secession it is now difficult to 
detennine ; however, the similarity of his name 
with that of Danaus, and the time at which he 
lived, are strong arguments in favour of his having 
been the colonizer of Argos * : and the following 
is another remarkable coincidence. Amunoph had 
been already engaged in several military expedi- 
tions, and the expulsion of Danaus is also re- 
ported to have happened after the return of his 
brother from war ; nor is it improbable that the 
influence acquired by a warlike prince over the 
army during these campaigns should suggest to an 
ambitious mind the facility as well as the desire of 
obtaining sole possession of the throne, and lead to 
the expulsion of his colleague ; and the only point 
of disagreement is the name of Danaus's brother, 
which is not stated to have resembled Amunoph. 

During the early part of their reign, stations on 
the road to the emerald mines were either built 
or repaired ; and the care bestowed on their con- 
struction is proved by our finding hewn stones 
carved with hieroglyphics, and the name of Amun- 
Toonh, within their precincts. 

The palace-temple of Luqsor and that behind 


* Danaus left Egypt and founded Argos, of which be became king, 
and died b. c. 1425. I have noticed this change of the prenomen of 
Amunoph more fully in a paper on Lord Prudhoe's lions now at the 
British Museum, which bear a convincing proof of what I here ad- 
vance. Vide also my Materia Hierog. p. 87, 88. Some say Inachus or 
Phoroneus led the colony from Egypt to Argos, and it is remarkable 
that in one of these names we trace the word onh, which forms part of 
that of Amunoph's brother, and in the other that of Pharaoh. These 
accounts make Danaus one of the successors to the throne of Ai^os by 
right of lo. 


CHAP. II, USE OP IRON, 69 

the vocal statue* were also founded by them at 
Thebes, and the sculptures in a side chamber of 
the former seem to refer to the birth and early- 
education of the young princes. Many other 
buildings were erected in different parts of the 
country t during this reign ; extensive additions 
were made to the temple of Kamak, and the name 
and monuments of Amunoph III. are found in 
Ethiopia, and even at the distant city of Napata.t 
The conquests of the Egyptians in Ethiopia and 
Asia were also continued by this monarch, and 
some of the enemies § with whom they fought 
under Thothmes III. again appear in the sculptures 
of Amunoph. 

It was about the same period, b. c. 1406, that 
some suppose the use of iron || to have been first dis- 
covered in Greece ; but whether it was already 
known in Egypt or no, is a question hitherto un- 
answered. We are surprised at the execution of 


* The vocal statue of the supposed Memnon is of Amunoph III. I 
have already noticed this error m my Egypt and Thebes, p. 33. ; Ex- 
tracts, p. 11.; and Materia Hierog. p. 88. With the Romans every 
thing curious or striking in Egypt was given to Memnon, as with the 
Arabs every large grotto is the stabl (stable of) Antar. English sailors 
in like manner nx upon another remarkable person. 

f I do not here notice all the monuments erected by the Pharaohs. 
They will be found in the description of the different towns of ancient 
Egypt given in my E^pt and Thebes. 

% I suppose Gebel Berkel to mark the site of Kapata. From this 
place were brought Lord Prudhoe's beautiful lions. They were sculp- 
tured at the early part of his reign, and immediately before the seces- 
sion of his brother. 

f Those of Pouont, who are among the number of northern nations. 

11 Hesiod (in his Opera et Dies) makes the use of iron a much later 
discovery. In Theseus' time, who ascended the throne of Athens in 
1235, iron is conjectured not to have been known, as he was found 
buried with a brass sword and spear. Homer generally speaks of brass 
arms, though he mentions iron. 


60 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

hieroglyphics cut in hard granite and basaltic 
stone, to the depth of two inches, and naturally 
inquire what means were employed, what tools 
were used ? If the art of tempering steel was 
unknown to them, how much more must our 
wonder increase I and the difficulty of imagining 
any mode of appljdng copper to this purpose adds 
to our perplexity. 

The era of Amunoph III. was noted for the 
great spirit and beauty of its sculptures, which 
seem gradually to have improved from the reign 
of Osirtasen to that of Remeses the Great, though 
without any great change, the general character 
being already established even at that early period, 
and only undergoing certain modifications of style. 

The features * of this monarch cannot fail to strike 
every one who examines the portraits of the Egyp- 
tian kings, having more in common with the negi*o 
than those of any other Pharaoh; but it is difficult to 
say whether it was accidental, or in consequence 
of his mother having been of Ethiopian origin. 

It is singular that the sepulchres of the kings 
who preceded him are not met with, and that he is 
the first of the 18th Dynasty t whose tomb occurs 
at Thebes. But it is not in the same valley as 

* I was wrong in saying in my Materia Hierog. that '* Egyptian 
sculpture does not offer portraits." On a subsequent visit to Thebes, 
I took some pains to set this question at rest, and have become con- 
vinced (as stated in my Egypt and Thebes, p. 1 16.) that the represent- 
ations of the kings are intended as likenesses ; and I am happy to have 
an opportunity of acknowled^ng the truth of M. Champollion s observ- 
ation and my own misconception on this point. 

-|- There is another tomb in the same valley of an ancient king, who 
may have preceded the 18th Dynasty, as his name occurs on a block 
used by Remeses II. in repairs of the temple of Kamak. 


CHAP. ir. REVOLT OF THE SYRIANS. 61 

those of his successors; and the next monarch 
whose tomb has been discovered is Remeses I., 
grandfather of the great conqueror of the same 
name. The tomb of Taia^ the queen of Amunoph, 
is in company with many others in a valley behind 
the temple of Medeenet Haboo at Thebes ; a cir- 
cumstance which proves that they were not gene- 
rally buried in the same sepulchres with the kings, 
though some exceptions may occasionally have been 
made.* 

His successor has recorded his lineal descent 
from the 3d Thothmes on a block of stone used 
in the wall of a temple at Thebes in thet following 
manner, — " the father of his father's father, Thoth- 
mes III. ;" but the monuments of his reign are few 
and inconsiderable, consisting chiefly of additions 
to the previously existing buildings. 

Remeses I. has left little to elucidate the history 
of the era in which he lived, nor does he appear 
to have been conspicuous for any successes abroad, 
or the encouragement of the arts at home. It is 
probable that both he and his predecessor were 
pacific monarchs, and to this neglect of their fo- 
reign conquests we may ascribe the rebellion of 
the neighbouring provinces of Syria, which Osirei 
was called upon to quell in person on his accession 
to the throne. That the revolt of those countries 
is alluded to in the sculptures of Osirei I feel 
persuaded, from his being the only king who is 

* As in the tomb No. 10^ of Biban-el-Moldok at Thebes, and 
perhaps in No. 14. 
t ride Materia Hierog^ Ph L name d. d^ 


62: THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. 11. 

represented attacking any country in the immediate 
vicinity of E^^t, and from the remarkable fact 
that some of the people through whose territory he 
passes are on friendly terms, and come forward to 
pay the stipulated tribute*, or to bring presents to 
the monarch. And the names of Cananat and Le- 
manon t, added to the circumstance of its being at 
the commencements of his reign, tend strongly to 
confirm this opinion. 

Osirei was the son and successor of Remeses I., 
and father of the second of that name. He ex- 
tended his conquests to a considerable distance in 
the "north and south countries;" but the destruc- 
tion of the upper part of the walls of Karnak has 
unfortunately deprived us of great part of the 
interesting historical bas reliefs which describe 
them. Among the people against whom the 
war was principally directed we distinguish the 
Rot-h-no, who, from their colour and dress, as 


* The tributes levied on the countries conquered by the Egyptians, 
are not only mentioned in the sculptures of Thebes, but also by Taci- 
tus : ** Legebantur indicta gentibus tributa baud minus magnifica quam 
nunc vi Parthorum, aut potentia Romana jubentur." An. ii. 60. 

-f* The Pharaoh, whose daughter Solomon married, destroyed " the 
Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer, and burnt it with fire;" probably for the 
same reason — neglect in paying the tribute they owed — which brought 
the vengeance of Osirei upon them on this occasion. 1 Kings, ix. 16. 

j: The common custom of substituting m for 6 in Coptic, and the re- 
presentation of a mountainous and woody country in which the chariots 
could not pass, convince me of this being intended for Mount Lebanon. 
In the compartment immediately below it is the " land of Canana." 
Vide Egypt and Thebes, p. 190. 192. The modern Greeks write mp for 
by as Phamprika, for Fabrica, and the sound of m may be detected when 
a person having an impediment in his speech attempts to pronounce a 
word commencmg with 6. Another remarkable instance of the use of 
t» for b is met with in the name of Nimrod, which is written Nebrod in 
the list of Chaldee kings. Vitle Corry's Ancient Fragments, p. 67. 

§ In his first year, according to the hieroglyphics. 


CHAP. IX. MARCH OF OSIREI. 6S 

well as the productions of their country, appear 
to have lived in a colder climate than Egypt,* which 
produced elephants and bears.** The march of the 
monarch is described with great spirit on the walls 
of Karnak. Leaving Egypt with a considerable 
force, he advanced into the heart of the enemy's 
country; attacked and routed them in the field; 
and following up his successes, he laid siege to 
their fortified cities, and obliged them to surrender 
at discretion. And in order to indicate the per- 
sonal courage of the hero, he is represented alighting 
from his car, and, having laid aside his bow, en- 
gaging hand to hand with the hostile chiefs. Having 
established his dominion in the conquered coun- 
tries he returned to Egypt, and dedicated the rich 
booty and numerous captives he had made to the 
deity of Thebes. 

The subsequent part of his reign was employed 
in erecting the monuments which still serve to 
commemorate his victories, and the glory he ac- 
quired ; and the splendour of Egypt at this period 
is sufficiently demonstrated by the magnificence 
and grandiose scale of the buildings, and by the 
sculptures that adorn his splendid tomb, t 

Osirei was succeeded by his son, Remeses the 
Greatt, who bore the name of Amun-mai-Reme- 

* From a tomb at Thebes. Vide Bgypt and Thebes, p. 153. 

+ Discovered and opened by Belzoni at Thebes. 

J. M. ChampoUion and Sig. Rosellini are of opinion that there inter 
vened another king between this and Osirei, to whom they give the 
name of Remeses II. Lord Prudhoe, Miyor Felix, and myself think 
them to have been one and the same monarch, and that the variation in 
the mode of writing the name was owing to bis bavins altered it some 
time after he ascended the throne. If they were two Kings, they must 
have been brothers, and both sons of Osirei, and the reign of the first 


64 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAJP. !!• 

ses, or RemeseS'-mi-amun *, and was reputed to be 
the fatoous Sesostris of antiquity. The origin of 
the confusion regarding Sesostris may perhaps be 
explained. He is mentioned by Manetho in the 
12th Dynasty, and Herodotus learned that he 
preceded the builders of the pyramids : I there- 
fore suppose that Sesostris was an ancient king 
famed for his exploits, and the hero of early 
Egyptian history; but that after Remeses had 
surpassed them, and become the &vourite of his 
country, the renown and name of the former 
monarch were transferred to the more conspicuous 
hero of a later age; and it is remarkable that when 
Germanicus went to Egypt, the Thebans did not 
mention Sesostris, but Rhamses, as the king who 
had performed the glorious actions ascribed in 
olden times to their great conqueror. Nothing, 
however, can justify the supposition that Sesostris, 
or, as Diodorus calls him, Sesoosis, is the Shishak 
of Scripture. 

The reign of Remeses was conspicuous as the 
Augustan era of Egypt, when the arts attained a 
degree of perfection which no after age succeeded 
in imitating t, and the arms of Egypt were ex- 


could only be of ver^ short duration. It is to be hoped that time and 
future discoveries will settle the question. 

* I have noticed the synonymous use of these titles, Amun-mai and 
Mai-amun ^Mi-amun), in the names of Remeses III. and others, when 
written horizontally and vertically. 

f The head now in the British Museum, and erroneously called of 
the Young Memnon, is of Remeses II. We smile at the name young 
applied to a statue because it was smaller than a colossus in the 
same temple ; a distinction formerly adopted at the Louvre, where a 
statue was called lejeune Apollon, because it had not yet attained th« 
jrize of the Belvedere. 


CHAP. II. MARCH THROUGH SYRIA. 63 

tended by this prince considerably farther into 
the heart of Asia than during the most successful 
invasions of his predecessors. He had no sooner 
ascended the throne than he zealously devoted 
himself to military affairs; and we find that in his 
fourth year he had already waged a successful war 
against several distant nations.* His march lay 
along the coast of Palestine, and the record of that 
event is still preserved on the rocks of the Lycus 
near Beir6ot, where his name and figure present 
the singular circumstance of a Pharaonic monu- 
ment without the confines of Egypt. But that 
this nation extended its arms and dominion far 
beyond the valley of the Nile, is abundantly 
proved by the monuments and by Scripture 
history, and some of their northern possessions 
were retained by the Egyptians until Nebuchad- 
nezer king of Babylon took from Pharaoh Neco all 
that belonged to him, "from the Euphrates to the 
river of Egypt.** t From Syria their march pro- 
bably extended towards the N. E. ; but I do not 
pretend to decide the exact nations they invaded, 
or the names of the people over whom the vic- 
tories of the great Remeses are recorded on the 
walls of the Memnonium.t M. ChampoUion sup- 

* Vide my Egypt and Thebes, p. 193. 

•j- 2 Kings, xxiv. 7. This river of Egypt is not the Nile, but the 
" rivulet" or " torrent of Egypt;" and is mentioned by Joshua (xv. 4.) 
as the boundary line, a little to the south of the modern Gaza (Ghuz- 
zeh). bna (nahl) is a rivulet, and not a river, as some have supposed, 
which is nn: (nahr), as in Arabic. Much less is nahl related to the Nile. 
Neco also " went up to fight against Carchemish by Euphrates." 
2 Chron. xxxv. 20. For the first copy of the name of Remeses on the 
Lycus we are indebted to Mr. W3se. 

J I use this name for the palace-temple of Remeses II., because it is 
better known than any other. 

VOL. I. F 


66 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

poses them the Scythians, and perhaps the hiero- 
glyphics may admit of such a reading ; but let it 
suffice for the present that they were a northern 
nation, skilful in the art of war, and possessing 
strong towns and a country traversed by a large 
river. Indeed, from their general appearance and 
the mode of fortifying their towns, we may con- 
clude them to have been far above the level of a 
barbarous state; and the double fosses that sur- 
rounded their walls, the bridges* over them, and 
the mode of drawing up their phalanxes of infantry, 
suggest a considerable advancement in civilisation, 
and the art of war. Their offensive and defensive 
arms, consisting ^ of spears and swords, helmets, 
shields t, and coats of mail, were light and effective; 
and two-horsed chariots, containing each three men, 
formed a well constituted and powerful body of 
troops. Some fought on horses, which they guided 
by a bridle, without saddles t ; but the far greater 
part in cars ; and these instances of the use of the 
horse seem to be introduced to show a peculiarity 
of Asiatic people. 

I do not find the Egyptians thus represented ; 
and though it is probable they had cavalry as well 
as chariots, mention being made of it in ancient 
authors § , the custom of employing large bodies of 

* As they are seen from above, it is not possible to ascertain how 
they were constructed, 
f In form bearing a slight resemblance to the Theban Greek buckler. 


t The Numidian cavalry had neither. 


We read of the Egyptian horsemen in Isaiah, xxxvi. 9., " put thy 
trust in Egypt for chariots and horsemen;" and in Miriam's Song, 
** the horse and his rider." Exod. xv. 21. Shishak had with him 1200 
chariots and 60,000 horsemen, 2 Chron. xii 3. Fide my Egypt and 
Thebes, p* 194. note. 


CHAP. II. THE TESTUDO AND LADDER. Gj 

horsemen does not appear to have been so usual 
in Egypt as in some Eastern countries. * 

The Egyptian cars contained but two persons t, 
the warrior and his charioteer ; and to the great 
number of their chariots, and their skill in ar- 
chery, may be attributed the brilliant successes of 
this people in a long suite of wars waged against 
populous nations : and it is remarkable that their 
mode of drawing the bow was similar to that of 
our ancestors, who, for the glorious victories they 
obtained over armies *far exceeding them in nu- 
merical force, were principally indebted to their 
dexterity in the use of this arm. 

Great light is thrown on the mode of warfare at 
this early period, by the sculptures of the Mem- 
nonium, where a very satisfactory representation is 
introduced of the scaling ladder and testudot; and 
it is highly probable that the Egyptians, accus- 
tomed as they were to subterraneous excavations, 
adopted the latter as coverts while mining the 
besieged towns, as well as for facilitating the ap- 
proach of their men. Indeed, since they are not 
formed of shields, but of a covering or framework 
supported by poles, and are unaccompanied, in 
this instance, by the battering-ram, we may con- 
clude that the men posted beneath them were 

* Homer's heroes are also mounted in cars. He mentions one 
cavalier (Iliad, vi. 684.) using two horses. The Greeks did not em- 
ploy much cavalry till after the Persian war. 

f The Indian chariots, according to Megasthenes, contained each two 
persons, besides the charioteer. Vide infra, on the Castes, in Chap. iii. 

t It was already in use 400 years before this period, in the reign of 
Osirtasen I., as well as a sort of battering ram. The Aries, or Ram, is 
said by Vitruvius to have been invented by the Carthaginians at the 


siege of Oades. lib. x. 19. 


F 2 


68 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP, II.. 

SO employed, especially as they appear, in no osten- 
sible manner, to be connected with the fight. * In 
some instances, however, they served as a cover 
to those who directed the ramt against the walls, 
and were then very similar in use and principle to 
the testudo arietaria of the Romans. 

The wars and successes of the great Remeses are 
again recorded on the walls of Karnak, and in the 
temples of Nubia ; and the number of nations he 
subdued, and the extent of his arms in the north 
and south, are the subjects of many historical pic- 
tures. The Egyptians had already formed alliances 
with some of the nations they subdued, and the 
auxiliary troops enrolled in their army assisted in 
extending the conquests of the Pharaohs. Their 
principal allies, at this period, were the Shairetana, 
a maritime people, and the same who afterwards 
continued to assist the Egyptians in the time of 
Remeses III. Other alliances were also formed 
by the last-mentioned monarch, many distant tribes 
were subdued by him, and the reigns of Osirei 
and the second and third Remeses appear to have 
been the most remarkable for the extent of foreign 
conquest. 

According to Herodotus, ^Sesostrist, whom I as- 

* The wooden horse is, perhaps, the first hint of a mine in ancient 
history. Remeses II. lived about 150 years before the taking of Troy. 

f Their ram was a long pike armed with a metal point, by which they 
loosened the stones of the wall : the terebra of the Romans, and the 
Tpviravov of the Greeks. 

J Sesostris, or Sesoosis, according to Diodorus, during his father's 
reign, had led an expedition into Arabia^ as well as' Libya; and we may, 
perhaps, trace some indication of this fact in the sculptures of Karnak, 
where the son of Osirei returns from the war with his father. Diod. i. 53. 
Can Ses-Osirei, or Se-Osirei, the " son of Osirei," bear any relation to 
the name of Sesostris? 


CHAP. II. CANAJ. OF THE RED SEA. 69 

sume to be the same as Retneses II., fitted out 
long vessels* on the Red Sea, and was the first 
who went beyond the straits into the Indian 
Ocean. Diodorus says they amounted to no less a 
number than 400, and the historian supposes him 
to have been the first monarch who built ships 
of war ; though merchant vessels, as I have before 
observed, were probably used by the Egyptians at 
a much earlier period. And we may reasonably 
conclude the fleet to have been connected with 
the Indian trade, as well as the canal he cut from 
the Nile to what is now called the Gulf of Sooez.t 
This canal commenced about twelve miles to 
the N.E. of the modern town of Belbays, called 
by the Romans Bubastis Agria, and after following 
a direction nearly E. for about thirty-three miles, 
it turned to the S. S. E., and continued about 
sixty-three more in that line to the extremity of the 
Arabian Gulf. Several monarchs are reputed to 
have been the authors of this grand and useful 
undertaking j some writers attributing it to Sesos- 
tris, others to Neco, and its completion to Darius 
and Ptolemy Philadelphus. Pliny, indeed, sup- 
poses it never to have been finished, and states, 
that after it had reached the bitter springs (lakes), 
the canal was abandoned from fear of the greater 
height of the Red Seat: but it is evident that it 

* Or ships of war. 

f Straboy PUny, and Aristotle attribute its commencement to 
Sesostris. 

X Plin. vi. c. 29. s. 33., and Aristot. Meteorol. lib. i. c. 14. Diodorus 
says that Darius was prevented from completing it, owing to the greater 
height of the Red Sea ; but that the 2d Ptolemy obviated this objection 
by means of sluices, (i. 33.) Vide Egypt and Thebes, p. 320, 321. 

F 3 


70 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

was completed, and there is reason to believe even 
as early as the reign of the second Remeses ; nor 
is it improbable that the captives he had taken in 
war assisted in the construction* of this noble 
work. But the vicinity of the sands, amidst which 
it was excavated, necessarily prevented it from 
remaining in a proper condition without constant 
attention ; and we can easily conceive that, in the 
time of Neco and of the Ptolemies, it was found 
necessary to re-open it, before it could be again 
applied to the use for which it was intended, t 

Herodotus sayst, it was commenced by Neco, 
who lived about the year 610 before our era; 
that it was four days* journey in length, and 
broad enough to admit two triremes abreast ; 
and that it began a little above Bubastis, and 
entered the sea near the town of Patumos 
(Pa or Pi-Thom); and since Diodorus§ says its 
mouth was close to the port of ArsinoeH, this 
last may have succeeded to the old town men- 
tioned by Herodotus. Some have reckoned its 
length at upwards of 1000 stadia ; its breadth at 
100 cubits, or, according to Pliny ^, 100 feet, and 
its depth forty ; and he reckons thirty-seven Ro- 
man miles from its western entrance to the bitter 
lakes. Six-score thousand Egyptians were said to 
have perished in the undertaking **: but this is very 

* Herodotus (ii. 108.) says that Sesostris employed his prisoners to 
cut the canals of Egypt* 

f It is evident that it entered the sea very near the modern town of 
Sooez. 

t Herodot.ii. 158. 

§ Diod. i. 33. 

jj Strabo call? it <' Arsinoe, or, as some style it, Cleoimtris." lib. xvii* 

% Plin. vi. s. 33. ♦* Diodor. loc. cit. 


CHAP. ir. RE-OPENING OF THE CANAL. 71 

incredible ; nor can we even believe that the lives 
of the captives taken in war, who were probably 
employed in the more arduous parts of this as of 
other similar works, were so inhumanly and un- 
necessarily thrown away. At the mouth <^the canal 
were sluices, by which it was opened or closed ac- 
cording to circumstances ; and thus, at one period 
of the year, the admission of the sea water into the 
canal was regulated, as the Nile water was prevented, 
during the inundation, from discharging itself too 
rapidly from the canal into the sea. Though filled 
with sand, its direction is still easily traced, as well 
from the appearance of it§ channel, as from the 
mounds and vestiges of ancient towns upon its 
banks, in one of which I found a monument bearing 
the sculptures and name of Remeses II.— the more 
satisfactory, as being a strong proof of its having ex- 
isted at least as early as the reign of that monarch. 
After the time of the Ptolemies and Caesars, it 
was again neglected, and suffered to go to decay ; 
but on the revival of trade with India, this line of 
communication from the Red Sea to the Nile was 
once more proposed, the canal was re-opened by 
the Caliphs, and it continued to be used and kept in 
repair till the commerce of Alexandria was ruined 
by the discovery of the passage round the Cape. 

Herodotus also tells us that Sesostris was the 
only king who ruled in Ethiopia*, but his assertion 
is contradicted by the monuments which still 
exist there. 

The family of Remeses II., by his two wives, 

* This may refer to the original Sasostris, above mentioned. There 
is, perhaps, some analogy between this name and that of Osirtasen. 

F 4 


72 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP- IX. 

was numerous, consisting of twenty-three sons and 
three daughters, whose names * and figures are in- 
troduced in the Memnonium. 

The duties of children were always more severe 
in the East than among any European people, and 
to the present day a son is not expected to sit in 
the presence of his father without express per- 
mission. Those of the Egyptian princes were 
equally austere. One of their offices was " fan- 
bearer on the left of the king,'* and they were 
also obliged to carry the monarch in his palanquin 
or chair of state. As fanbearers, they attended 
him while seated on his throne, or in processions 
to the temples ; and in this capacity they followed 
his chariot on foot as he celebrated his triumphant 
return from battle.t Nor did they lay aside their 
insignia of office in time of war ; and sometimes in 
the heat of battle, whether mounted in cars or 
engaged on foot, they carried them in their hand 
or slung behind them: and, as a distinguishing 
mark of princely rank, they wore a badge depend- 
ing from the side of the head, .perhaps intended 
to cover and enclose the lock of hair, which, among 
the Egyptians, was the sign of extreme youth, and 
the usual emblem of the god Harpocrates. 

The. reign of Remeses the Great was long and 
prosperous ; nor does the period of sixty-six 
years appear too much, when we consider the 
extent of his conquests, and the many grand 
monuments he erected in every part of Egypt, 

* The names of the daughters are omitted. The families in the East 
are frequently mentioned by ancient authors as being very numerous. 
Artaxerxes had 153 children ; Rehoboam begat 28 sons and 60 daughters. 

t ra^ Plate L 


CHAP. II. MONUMENTS OF REMESES II. 73 

after his victorious return. Indeed, the number 
I have stated is derived from the authority of Ma- 
netho; and in the monuments, we have already 
met with the date of his 62d year. The exten- 
sive additions to the great temples of Karnak 
and Luqsor, where two beautiful obelisks of red 
granite, bearing his name, proclaim the wonder- 
ful skill of the Egyptians in sculpturing* those 
hard materials : the elegant palace-temple of the 
Memnonium, and many other edifices at Thebes 
and Abydus : the temples hewn in the hard grit- 
stone rock of Aboosimbel : those erected at Dayr, 
Sabooa, and Gerf Hossayn in Nubia : the obeHsks 
at Tanis, and vestiges of ruins there and in other 
parts of the Delta, — bear ample -testimony to the 
length of time required for their execution : and 
from these we may infer a proportionate number 
founded or enlarged by him at Memphis t, and 
other of the principal cities, whose sites are now 
unknown or concealed by mounds. 

Besides his military exploits, another very re- 
markable event is said t to have distinguished his 
reign ; the partition of the lands among the pea- 
sants §, who were required to pay a fixed tax to the 
government, according to the extent of the property 
they obtained. But that this division could have 
been the origin of land surveying, as Herodotus sup- 

♦ Many of the hieroglyphics are two inches deep. One of the 
obelisks has been removed to Paris ; the other is said to be ceded to 
the city of Marseilles. 

f At Memphis, a Colossus, and fragments of several statues, bearing 
his name, are still met with. 

t Fide injrd. Chap. iii. under " Different Lawgivers." ^ ^ 

* Herodot. ii. 109. (Hp^^.c 

^ \'% .' ' 


.:.^H»' 


74 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IK 

poses, is contrary to probability, and the evidence of 
the Bible as well as of the sculptures, both which 
show the rights and limits of landed property to have 
been long since well defined ; and the necessity of 
ascertaining the quantity of land irrigated by the 
Nile, or changed by the effect of the inundation, 
must have led a people already highly civilised be- 
fore the accession of this prince, to the practice of 
geometry at least some centuries previous to his era. 
The Bible informs us, that a Pharaoh, the contem- 
porary of Joseph, bought all the land (except that 
of the priests) from the Egyptian landholders : the 
partition of land, mentioned by the historian, could 
not therefore have been the first instance of such 
a system in the country ; and he may either 
allude to a new regulation made subsequently to 
the time of Joseph, or to the very change that 
took place by his advice. In this case, the tax 
imposed refers to the fifth part * annually paid to 
the government by the Egyptian peasant, which 
continued to be the law of the country long after 
the time of Joseph t; and hence some may derive 
an argument in favour of the idea before sug- 
gested, that the original Sesostris (so often con- 
founded with Remeses II.) was Osirtasen I.t, the 
Pharaoh in whose reign Joseph arrived in Egypt § 

* Gen. xlvii. 24. 

-I* Gen. xlvii. 26., " a law over the land of Egypt unto this day, that 
Pharaoh should have the Jlfth part, except the land of the priests, which 
became not Pharaoh's." 

X Osirtasen's living posterior to the erection of the pyramids is an 
objection. 

§ I must, however, confess, that Herodotus's statement does not 
agree exactly with that mentioned in Genesis ; the people then selling 
their lands for corn, and afterwards farming it from tne king. 


CHAP. n. END OF THE 18TH DYNASTY. 75 

His thirteenth son, Fthahmen, succeeded him ; 
and, from the kingly oval accompanying his name 
at the Memnonium, it is highly probable that the 
first prenomen he took on ascending the throne 
was afterwards changed to that by which he is 
known in the lists of the Egyptian monarchs. But 
his reign was not marked by any military event of 
consequence, nor by any particular encouragement 
given to the arts of peace. He may be the Se- 
soosis II. of Diodorus, and the Pheron of Hero- 
dotus, — a title mistaken by the latter historian for 
the name of the monarch, and evidently corrupted 
from Phra or Pharaoh. • Two obelisks are re- 
ported t to have been erected by him, at Helio- 
polis, in honour of the sun ; but they no longer 
remain ; and though his name appears on some of 
the monuments of his father and of his predecessors, 
those founded by him were comparatively few, at 
least in Upper Egypt ; and the additions he made 
to those buildings are neither numerous nor re- 
markable for their magnificence. 

In Pthahmen terminated the eighteenth dy- 
nasty, and a second family of Diospolitan or 
Theban t monarchs succeeded to the dominion of 
Upper and Lower Egypt, and reigned eighty-nine 
years. 


* The Arabs now call Phrah, or Pharaoh, Pbara6on. 

f Pliny calls him Nuncoreus, and says that he dedicated two obelisks 
to the sun on the recovery of his sight. Herodotus states the same of 
Pheron. Plin.xvi. 16. Herodot.ii. 111. 

J Sethos, or Pthah-men-Se-pthah, appears to have been an exception, 
and was, perhaps, a Memphite, or from Lower Egypt, as his name is 
omitted in the lists of Thebes and Abydus. It also seems to indicate 
a Memphite ongin. 


76 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. 


CHAP. II. 


19tk Dynasty^ of 1 Memphite f and 6 Diospolite Kings, 


Name flrom 
ancient Authon. 


Name from the 
Monuments. 


iSethos 


■{ 


Rampses 

Amenophthis 

Ramesses 
Ammenemes 

Thuoris 

? 


m • 


Pthah-men-Se- 
pthah 

Osirei IL, or 

Osiri-men* 

pthah 

Osirita? Reme- 
rer? Amun-mai 
Remeses III. 

Mi^amun or 

Amun-mai 
Remeses IV. 

Remeses V. 

Remeses VI. 


Eventi. 


Was probably either a 
Memphite, or succeeded 
to the throne by right of 
marriage with the Prin- 
cess Taosiri 


Ascended 

the 
Throne. 


B.C« 


>1269 


Troy taken 1 184 (Arundel" 
marbles), and in the reign 
of a Remeses, according 
to Pliny 


1255 

1245 

1235 
1205 

1195 

1180 


Thus far I have stated my own opinions respect- 
ing the accordance of the monuments with some 
of the historical data furnished by Manetho ; par- 
ticularly about the period of his eighteenth dynasty. 
I have placed the arrival of Joseph in the reign of 
Osirtasen I. ; the birth of Moses in that of Amosis, 
the leader of this Theban succession, whom I 
suppose to be the " new king who knew not 
Joseph ;** and the Exodus of the Israelites in that 
of the third Thothmes. I have assigned the date 
of 1355 for the accession of the great Remeses, 
and have had the satisfaction of finding the period 
thus fixed for his reign fully accords with, and 
is confirmed by, the astronomical ceiling of the 
Memnonium. But as another opinion, which 
ascribes to these events a higher antiquity, may 


CHAP. II. QUESTION RESPECTING THE EXODUS. ^^ 

also be maintained by many forcible arguments, and 
my object is to examine the question impartially, 
and to be guided by what appears most probable, I 
gladly avail myself of this opportunity of intro- 
ducing Lord Prudhoe's view of the subject, which 
he has done me the favour to embody in the fol- 
lowing remarks: — ** It is extremely difficult to • 
determine the date of the Exodus in Egyptian his- 
tory, from the want of sufficient data in the Bible, 
and from the incorrectness of names given by an- 
cient historians; but the event is so important, 
that even an attempt to ascertain that date must 
be interesting. 

" The first text bearing on the subject is *, 
* Pharaoh spake unto Joseph, saying. Thy father 
and thy brethren are come unto thee, the land of 
Egypt is before thee, in the best of the land make 
thy father and brethren to dwell 2 in the land of 
Goshen let them dwell. — And Joseph t gave them a 
possession in the land of Egypt, in the best of the 
land, in the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh had com- 
manded.' In this quotation it does not appear that 
the land was called Rameses when Pharaoh gave it 
to Jacob : his words are, give them the best of the 
land : the remainder of the text is in the form of 
a narration by Moses. But the land was called 
Rameses when Moses wrote, and consequently it 
was so called before the Exodus. It probably 
received its name from one of the Pharaohs j we 
may therefore conclude the Exodus did not take 
place until after the reign of a Remeses ; and 

• Gen. xlvii, 5, 6. f Gen. xlvii. 11. . 


78 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

the earliest king of that name* is distinguished 
among students in hieroglyphics by the title of 
Remeses I. 

" * Now there arose up a new king over Egypt, 
which knew not Joseph.' t This text would agree 
with Remeses I., who appears to have been the 
first king of a new dynasty, and might well be 
ignorant of the benefits conferred on Egypt by 
Joseph. * Therefore t they did set over them 
(the children of Israel) taskmasters to afflict them 
with their burdens, and they built for Pharaoh 
treasure-cities, Fithom and Raamses. The last 
was the name of the Pharaoh ; and it is remarkable, 
that the prefix used to designate Remeses II. was 
compounded of Pi * the,* and Thme * Justice.' 
And though the figure of the goddess Thme is 
introduced into the names of his father and of other 
Pharaohs, he is the first Remeses in whose prefix 
it occurs, and we may therefore conclude it was 
for this monarch that the Hebrews built the trea- 
sure-cities. 

** Another instance of the name so used, is con- 
firmed by the testimony of Strabo and Aristotle, 
who attribute the making of the Suez canal to 
Sesostris } and Herodotus says, that it entered the 
sea near the town of Patumos. Sesostris is now ge- 
nerally considered to be Remeses II., and the cir- 
cumstance of his name . being found on buildings 
near the canal, gives another Pithom built by this 
king. 

* Private individuals bore the name long before : but it is uncertain 
whether there was any older king Remeses. 

t Exod.i. 8. X Exod. i. It. 


CHAP. II. EXPULSION OF THE JEWS. 79 

** Lysimachus mentions, * that in the reign of 
Boccoris, king of Egypt, the Jewish people, being 
infected with leprosy, scurvy, and sundry other 
diseases, took shelter in the temples, where they 
begged for food; and that in consequence of the 
vast number of persons who were seized with 
the complaint, there became a scarcity in Egypt. 
Upon this, Boccoris sent persons to inquire of the 
oracle of Ammon, respecting the scarcity : and 
the God directed him to cleanse the temples of all 
polluted and impious men, and to cast them out 
into the desert, when the land would recover its 
fertility.* This the king did with much cruelty. 

" If Boccoris could be a mistake for the Coptic 
name OCIPI, with the article 11 prefixed, it was 
Osiri, the father of Remeses II., who thus op- 
pressed them. Again, the son of Remeses II. was 
called Pthamenoph. Josephus states, that * the 
king Amenophis was desirous of beholding the 
Gods, as Orus, one of his predecessors in the king* 
dom, had done. And having communicated his 
desire to the priest Amenophis, the son of Papis, 
the priest returned for answer, that it was in his 
power to behold the Gods, if he would cleanse the 
whole country of the lepers and other unclean 
persons who abounded in it ; upon which the king 
gathered them together, and sent them to work in 
the quarries.' Josephus relates, in continuation, 
that a revolt was the consequence of this measure : 
and after some delays and difficulties, king Ame^ 
nophis marched with 300,000 Egyptians against 
the enemy, defeated them, and pursued them to 


80 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP, II. 

the bounds of Syria, having previously placed his 
son Sethos under the care of a faithful adherent. 

"It is probable, that by Amenophis, Joseph us 
meant Fthamenoph ; and this opinion is twice 
confirmed: 1. by his son Sethos, the Se-ptha of 
the hieroglyphics, which is the only instance of a 
king so called in the known series of the Pha- 
raohs ; and, 2. when he describes Horus as one of 
his predecessors : for the grandfather of Pthame- 
noph succeeded to Horus, who was the only 
Egyptian monarch who bore that name. 

** If these corrections of names be permitted, 
six Pharaohs, who succeeded each other in regular 
succession, are mentioned, either as a direct or a 
collateral evidence of the Exodus having taken 
place at this aera : 1. Horus, one of the predeces- 
sors of Amenophis : 2. Remeses I„ the new king, 
who knew not Joseph : 3. Osiri I., or Boccoris, 
who oppressed the Jews : 4. Remeses II., who 
built Pithom and Raamses : 5. Pthamenoph, the 
Pharaoh of the Exodus : 6. Sethos, his son, who 
was placed with an attendant. 

** From the many complaints of oppression in the 
Bible, it appears that the bondage was both severe 
and of some duration ; these two reigns may there- 
fore not be too long : but what, may be inquired, 
would be the effect in Egypt of an oppression of 
so numerous a population, and of their subsequent 
Exodus ? for even if the number of * 600,000 men, 
besides children,* had not been mentioned, it is 
evident, from the previous account of their in- 
creased numerical force, that the Jews were a very 


CHAP. II, 19th dynasty. 81 

large body. 1. To oppress and keep them in 
bondage required a powerful monarch, and a war- 
rior ; and such were in an eminent degree Osiri I. 
and Remeses II. 2. The labours of so great a 
population could not fail to be distinguished ; and 
no Pharaohs have left finer buildings, nor in greater 
numbers, than these two kings. 3. A successful 
revolt could only take place under a feeble mon- 
arch, and such was Pthamenoph : and the loss of 
so great a population would inflict a blow on the 
prosperity of Egypt, and cause a lasting debility. 
Such was the state of Egypt after the reign of Re- 
meses II., when a sudden decline of the arts and 
power of the country ensued ; and if at the acces- 
sion of Remeses III. they for a time re-appeared, 
and in great splendor, yet with this monarch the 
gloiy of ancient Egypt departed for ever.'* 

From the preceding statement, it is evident that 
Lord Prudhoe places the Exodus in the reign of 
Pthahmen (or, as he writes it, Pthamenoph), the 
last king of the 18th Dynasty ; and that con- 
sequently the dates of those monarchs are all 
thrown back about 200 years. The decision of 
this interesting question I leave to the learned 
reader ; and shall feel great satisfaction, when the 
subject becomes so well understood as to enable a 
positive opinion to be pronounced upon it. I now 
return to the 19th Dynasty. 

Pthahmen Septhah appears to have been the 
Sethos* of Manetho and other authors, and the 

* So often mistaken for Sesostris. This rests on the authority of 
Josephus's version of Manetho : " 2«0wr tov Vajufrtrfiv iovojxaafKvov,* 

VOL. I. G 


82 • THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

second part of his phonetic nomen may have been 
the origin of the name it so much resembles. His 
right to the sceptre and admission into this dy- 
nasty were probably derived from his wife Taosiri, 
while his Memphitic origin excluded him from 
the privilege of being inserted in the list of Dios- 
polite monarchs, unless this was owing to his expul- 
sion from the throne.* Nothing of note occurred 
during his reign ; and whatever buildings he may 
have founded at Memphis, and in Lower Egypt, few 
bear even his name at Thebes, or in any other city 
of the Upper provinces. Those of his two succes- 
sors are equally obscure in the history of their 
country, and little else remains of the monuments 
they erected except the avenue of Sphinxes, and the 
small chambers in the front area of Karnak, which 
the first of them added to that splendid edifice. 
But the name of the third Remeses is conspicuous 
in the annals of his country, as a conqueror, and as 
a zealous encourager of the arts. The war of Asia 
had been neglected subsequently to, and perhaps 
in consequence of, the decisive successes of Re* 
meses the Great, and the usual tribute from the 
conquered provinces was deemed a sufficient ac- 
knowledgment of their submission. But either 
some remissness in its payment, or his own am- 
bition, stimulated the new king to a renewal of 
hostilities, and great preparations were made at 
Thebes and other parts of Egypt for a formidable 
expedition. Large bodies of chariots, and of ar- 

* It would account for his name being erased in the tomb No. 14. at 
Thebes, which M. Champollion supposed to be an instance of a king 
refused the right of burial for his bad conduct. 


CHAP. II. MILITARY COLONIES. 83 

chers, spearmen, and other corps of infantry were 
collected *, and the usual route was taken to the 
intended seat of war. 

During their previous invasions t, the Egyptians 
had overrun several provinces f, in what I suppose 
to be the vicinity of the Caspian Sea; and in order 
to secure their possessions, and the fidelity of those 
who had entered their service as allies, they took 
the precaution to leave military colonies in the 
places where their presence was most essential, or 
which proved most suitable to the purpose; and 
proper officers were appointed to urge and accom- 
pany § the annual tribute paid to the Egyptian 
king. We may hence account for the readiness 
shown by the allies to join the Pharaohs when 
invading the hostile countries ; and they are repre« 
sented in the historical bas reliefs united with the 
Egyptians in the field of battle. 

Some of the people attacked by the third Re- 
meses are frequently alluded to on various monu- 
ments, as the enemies || of Egypt ; but others 
appear to be situated farther in the interior, and to 

• Represented at Medeenet Haboo. 

•)• I was wrong in saying (in my Materia Hierog. p. 91.), " it does 
not appear to have been the object of the Egyptians to maKe any per- 
manent settlements in these countries :" I since find reason to alter 
that opinion ; and feel persuaded that they not only lefb colonies, as at 
Colchis (according to Herodotus), but enrolled the troops of the van- 
quished people in their own disciplined legions, allowing them to retain 
their own arms and dress. Fide Diodorus's Account (lib. L 28.) of the 
Egyptian Colonies. 

:|: Diodorus (i. 71.) says, ^ many nations were conquered by them." 
Vide also Tacit. Ann. ii. 60. 

J According to the pictures in the tombs at Thebes. 

II Some of the allies at Medeenet Haboo are also a new people. 
They may have been represented on earlier monuments, now destroyed. 
Medeenet Haboo has been better preserved even than the Memnonuim. 

G 2 


84 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

have been previously unknown to, or unassailed by, 
the Egyptians. This last would, indeed, argue that 
ambition or the love of spoil were the main objects 
of the monarch who planned the expedition ; and it 
was, probably, owing to some injustice on his part, 
that two of the nations who fought under his banners 
in the capacity of allies, were induced to quit their 
allegiance, and unite against the aggressions of the 
invader. These were the Shairetana and the Tok- 
kari * ; and that the costume of the latter bears a 
remarkable analogy to those of the vicinity of Per- 
sia, may be seen by comparing it with the figures 
brought from Persepolis. t But whether the con- 
quests, or any of the captives represented in the 
sculptures of the tombs and temples, can be re- 
ferred to the rebellion and defeat of the Bactrians, 
is a question which I do not intend to discuss, 
since it would lead to arguments uninteresting to 
the general reader- 
It is possible that this monarch extended his 
conquests in one direction, even farther than 
his predecessor Remeses II. ; but the people 
represented at the Memnonium, and who have 
been supposed by M. ChampoUion to be the Scy- 
thians, do not appear to have been invaded to the 
same extent by the third Remeses. t 

After subduing several nations, whose troops he 
had defeated in the open field, in fortified towns, 

• The Tokkari rebelled first, and were then joined by the Shairetana, 
who had been allies of the Egyptians at least from the time of Re- 
meses II. 

+ Vide infra, Chap. iii. Enemies of Egypt. 

J Or perhaps gave no cause for the renewal of war; and their 
names may only be noticed at Medeenet Haboo, as among the nations 
tributary to Egypt. 


CHAP. II. GLORIES OF REMESES III. 85 

and by water, he returned with immense booty* to 
the valley of the Nile, and distributed rewards to 
his troops, whose courage and superior discipline 
had added so much to his glory, and to the power 
of their native country. And the latter part of his 
reign t was occupied, like those of his victorious an- 
cestors, in erecting or embellishing many of the 
noblest monuments of Egypt. 

The sculptures of this period were elegant, as 
the architecture was magnificent; but a peculiar 
innovation, introduced into the style of the hiero- 
glyphics, was the forerunner, though not the cause, 
of the decline and downfall of Egyptian art. The 
hieroglyphics had ceased to be executed in relief 
from the accession of the second Remeses; but 
the change made in the reign of his fifth successor, 
was by carving the lower side of the characters to a 
great depth, while the upper face inclined gradually 
fi'om the surface of the wall till it reached the in- 
nermost part of the intaglio, so that the hierogly- 
phics could be distinguished by a person standing 
immediately beneath, and close to the wall on which 
they were sculptured. It was a style not generally 
imitated by his successors ; and the presence of 
hieroglyphics of this kind may serve to fix the 
monuments in which they occur to the era of the 
third Remeses. Some attempt was made by the 
monarchs of the 26th Dynasty to revive the beauty 

* If this king is the same as the Rhampsinitus of Herodotus, his 
successful wars may have been one of the great sources of the immense 
wealth he is said to have possessed. 

-|- Among the Turks, it was long an established rule that no mosk 
could be founded by a Soltan who bad not defeated the infidels, the 
enemies of their religion, of which he was the chief. 

G 3 


86 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

of ancient sculpture; and so great was the care 
bestowed on the execution of the hieroglyphics 
and small figures, that a person unacquainted with 
the purity of the more ancient style feels inclined, 
at first sight, to consider them the most elegant 
productions of this school. But on more careful 
consideration, and judging with a full under- 
standing of true Egyptian design, they will be 
found to derive their effect from the minuteness 
of their detail, rather than from the boldness or 
superiority of their execution. 

At the close of his reign we bid adieu to the 
most glorious era of Egj^tian history. But what 
was done by the labours of individuals zealous 
in the prosecution of the arts of peace, or what 
advances science and general knowledge under- 
went previous and subsequently to his era, still 
remains a secret; though it is probable, judging 
from similar events in other countries, that the 
epoch of conquest and military renown was ac 
companied by a proportionate development of in- 
tellectual powers. 

That the Bible history makes no mention of the 
conquests of the Eg3rptian monarchs of the 18th 
Dynasty is not surprising, when we consider the 
state of the newly occupied land at the epoch in 
question ; and, as the history of the Jews only re- 
lates to themselves, or to those people with whom 
they were at war, we readily perceive the reason 
of their silence. They had not, in fact, become 
settled in the promised territory ; they were en- 
gaged in war with neighbouring tribes; and the 


CHAP. II. BIBLE HISTORY. 87 

passage of the Egyptian army along the sea-coast 
of Palestine could in no way disturb or alarm them. 
Nor could they have had any object in imprudently 
provoking the hostilities of a nation far more pow- 
erful than those petty states, whose aggressions they 
found so much difficulty to resist : and we observe 
that, at a subsequent period, the insolent interfer- 
ence of Josiah on a similar occasion cost him his 
kingdom and his life *, and had the additional ef- 
fect of rendering his country tributary to l^gypt. 

Whether the successors of Remeses III. pre- 
ferred the encouragement of the arts of peace and 
the improvement of the internal administration of 
the country, or, contented with the annual pay- 
ment of that tribute which the arms of their war- 
like predecessors had imposed on the vanquished 
states, ceased to thirst for further conquest, mili- 
tary expeditions on the grand scale of those equip- 
ped by the two Remeses and Osirei were now 
abandoned ; and the captives represented in their 
sculptures may be referred to the tributary people, 
rather than to those brought from any newly ac- 
quired territory. 

The immediate successors of the third Remeses 
were his sons. They all bore the name of their 
father, and completed the series of the 19th Dy- 
nasty. To them succeeded five other Remeses ; 
but the total of th^ 20th and 21st Dynasties is 
yet uncertain j nor can the arrangement of their 
names be ascertained with any degree of precision, 

* 2 Kings, xxiii. 30. 34. 2 Chron. xxxv. 20. et seq., and xxxvi. S. 

O 4 


88 * THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP, lU 

owing to their having erected few buildings, at 
least in those cities whose monuments remain. 
Nor do the Dynasties of Manetho assist in the 
history of this period ; and, indeed, the unsatisfac- 
tory form in which they have been transmitted to 
us, precludes the possibility of our using them, in 
any instance, without some confirmation or as- 
sistance from the more trustworthy records of the 
monuments. 

Of the same epoch, h'ttle information is to be 
obtained either from Herodotus or Diodorus ; 
nor can we place much confidence in the accounts 
given by those authors of any portion of Egyp- 
tian history. Previous to the reign of Psamati- 
cus, the names of nearly all the sovereigns they 
mention are questionable, and great confusion is 
caused by their misplacing Sesostris^ or by their 
ascribing events of the later reign of a Remeses to 
that conqueror. The cause of this error I have 
already endeavoured to explain, by supposing Se- 
sostris to have been the original hero of Egypt, 
and the conquests of the second Remeses to have 
been attributed to the former monarch, whose ex- 
ploits he had eclipsed ; the two persons thus 
becoming confounded together. However, as 
Herodotus and Diodorus mention some amusing 
details of the reigns of the early Pharaohs, I shall 
introduce them as a collateral, account of the his-^ 
tory of the Egyptian kings. • 

♦ The History of Eg^pt, written by the Authors of the Universal 
History, has been compiled chiefly from those two historians; I there- 
fore avail myself occasionally of some extracts from that work, adding 
my own remarks on the events there detailed. 


CHAP. II. COURSE OF THE NILE CHANGED. , 89 

Menes, or Menas, as already stated, is allowed 
by universal consent to have been the first sove- 
reign of the country; and was the reputed founder 
of Thebes, as well as Memphis. 

Having diverted the course* of the Nile, 
which formerly washed the foot of the sandy moun- 
tains of the Libyan chain, he obliged it to run 
in the centre of the valley, nearly at an equal dis- 
tance between the two parallel ridges of moun- 
tains which border it on the east and west j and 
built the city of Memphis in the bed of the ancient 
channel. This change was effected by construct- 
ing a dyke about a hundred stadia above the site 
of the projected city, whose lofty mounds and 
strong embankments turned the water to the east- 
ward, and effectually confined the river to its new 
bed. The dyke was carefully kept in repair by 
succeeding kings ; and even as late as the Persian 
invasion, a guard was always maintained there, to 
overlook the necessary repairs, and to watch over 
the state of its embankments. For, adds Hero- 
dotus, if the river was to break through the dyke, 
the whole of Memphis would run a risk of being 
overwhelmed with water, especially at the period 
of the inundation. Subsequently, however, when 
the increased deposit of the alluvial soil had 
heightened the circumjacent plains, these pre* 
cautions became unnecessary; and though we 
may still trace the spot where the diversion of 
the Nile was made, owing to the great bend it 

* If this is true, it shows great scientific knowledge at that early 
period. 


90 . THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

takes, about fourteen miles * above the site of an- 
cient Memphis, the lofty mounds once raised there 
are no longer visible. The accumulated deposit 
of the river has elevated the bank about Kafr- 
el-Iyat to a level with their summit ; and a large 
canal runs, during the inundation, close to the vil- 
lages of Saqqara and Mit-rahenny, which occupy 
part of tlie old city, without endangering their 
security. Nor, judging from the great height of 
several mounds still existing at Memphis, could 
that city have been overwhelmed t at any period 
by the rising Nile, though much damage might 
have been done to some of the lower portions of it, 
which may have stood on less elevated ground. 

On the north and west of Memphis, Menes 
excavated a lake, which stood without the town, 
and communicated with the Nile by a canal; it 
did not, however, extend to the east, because the 
river itself was on that side, t He also erected at 
Memphis a large and magnificent temple to Vul- 
can, who was called by the Egyptians Fhthah, — 
the demiurgos, or creative power. 

Menes was the first who instructed the Egyp- 
tians in religious matters, introduced domestic 
magnificence and luxury, and instituted the pomp 
of feasts ; and the change he made in the primitive 
simplicity of the Egyptians was, in after times, 
so much regretted by Tnephachtus, the father of 
Bocchoris surnamed " the Wise," that he ordered 

♦ I have noticed this in my Egypt and Thebes, p. 34 1. 
•(• Herodotus says, " JiivSvvii vaay MefJitpi KaraKkvaOtjvat fcn." lib. 
ii. 99. 
t But apparently at some distance from it. 


CHAP. II. QUEEN NITOCRIS. Ql 

a curse against the memory of Menes to be en- 
graved, and set up in the temple of the Theban 
Jupiter. 

A great blank is left after the death of Menes, 
both in Herodotus and Diodorus. The former re- 
lates, that 330 sovereigns succeeded him ; among 
whom were eighteen Ethiopians, and one queen, 
a native of Egypt, whose name was Nitocris. He 
fails to inform us if she preceded or followed the 
Ethiopian princes ; and we are lefl in ignorance of 
the events which led to their obtaining possession 
of the country — whether it was from conquest, or in 
consequence of intermarriages with the royal family 
of Egypt. Nitocris was a woman of great beauty; 
and, if we may believe Manetho, she had a fkir 
complexion, and flaxen hair. Her immediate pre- 
decessor was her brother, who was put to death by 
his subjects ; but neither his name nor the cause 
of that event are mentioned by Herodotus. Re- 
solved on revenging herself upon the authors of 
this outrage, Nitocris had no sooner ascended the 
throne, than she invited those she suspected of 
having been privy to it to a festival. A large sub- 
terraneous hall was prepared for the occasion; 
and though it had the appearance of being fitted 
up with a view to celebrate the proposed feast, it 
was in reality designed for a very different pur- 
pose: for when the guests were assembled, the 
water of the Nile was introduced by a secret canal 
into the apartment ; and thus by their death she 
gratified her revenge, without giving them an op- 
portunity of suspecting her designs. But she did 


92 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

not live long to enjoy the satisfaction she had 
anticipated ; and fearing the indignation of the 
people, she put an end to herself by suffocation. 

No one monarch of the long suite above 
mentioned was distinguished by any act of mag- 
nificence or renown, except Moeris, who was 
the last of them. He built the northern pro- 
pylaeum of the temple of Vulcan at Memphis ; 
and excavated a lake called after him : a work 
of great splendour and utility, near* which he 
erected two pyramids, and the most wonderful 
of all buildings t either in Egypt or in any part 
of the world. This was the famous labyrinthl:; 
from whose model that of Crete was afterwards 
copied by Dasdalus§ ; and in which, says Pliny 11^ 
not a single piece of wood was used, being entirely 
constructed of stone. Herodotus attributes its 
foundation to the twelve kings, in the time of 
Fsamaticus ; but tradition seems to have ascribed 
it to Moeris ; though it is possible that the son of 
Neco and his colleagues may have completed and 
enlarged it. Pliny says % it was first built by king 
Petesuccus * *, or Tithoes; though others affirm 


* Herodotus (ii. 149.) says the pyramids stood m the lake, 200 
cubits above the surface of the water, and the same below it ; and on 
each of them was a colossus of stone, seated on a throne. 

+ Herodot, ii. 148. 

4: Pliny (xxxvii. 19.) mentions an emerald in this building, of which 
a statue of the god Sarapis was made, nine cubits in height. Another 


stone of the same quality was sent to Egypt by a king of Babylon, four 

ippose to m 
smaragdite, or root of emerald, but even then their dimensions are 


cubits long and three broad. These I suppose to nave been of the 


extraordinary. His smaragdus is here evidently not the real emerald. 

§ Plin. xxxvi. 19. || Plin. v. 11. 

*^ Plin. xxxvi. 19. 

** Or Peteseuces. The commencement of his name bears an 
Egyptian character. 


CHAP. IL THE LABYRINTH, 93 

it to have been the palace of Motherus, or the 
sepulchre of Moerls ; and received opinion main* 
tains that it was dedicated to the Sun. Diodorus 
mentions Mendes, or, as some call him, Maron or 
Marrus, as the founder ; and others have put forth 
the claims of Ismandes * and various other mon« 
archs. 

The entrance and some of the courtst were 
made of white stone resembling marble t ; and the 
columns with which several of the corridors were 
adorned, as well as many other parts of the build* 
ing, were of red granite of Syene.§ It was divided 
into sixteen parts, d^ccording to the number of the 
nomes of Egypt, and contained a temple to each 
of the deities : and with such remarkable solidity If 
was the whole constructed, that time, says Pliny, 
could not destroy it, though assisted by the He- 
racleopolites, from whose ill-will it sustained con« 
siderable damage. 

Whether the lake Moeris was really commenced 
by, and owed its origin to, this monarch, it is dif- 
ficult to determine j but from the name still given 
by the Egyptians to the canal which carries the 
water of the Nile to the Fyoom^ and its lake, 
and from traditions concerning it, I am inclined 
to attribute its commencement to Menes, from 

* Probably, as I have elsewhere suggested, the same as Mendes and 
Osymandyas, in which we trace the name of the god Mandoo, from 
which that of the king was derived. 

f Herod, ii, 148. 

J Pliny says, " of Parian marble.^' The stones which I found 
amidst the ruins on its site are, a hard white limestone, which takes a 
polish almost like marble, and red granite. 

§ Plin, loc. cit. II Plin. loc. cit. Strabo, 17. 

t The modern name of the Arsinoite, or Crocodilopolite, nome. 


94 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

whom the modern appellation El Menhi appears 
to have been borrowed. That the lake Moeris was 
in reality a name applied to the canal, as well 
as to the lake itself, we have the authority of 
Pliny, who asserts that " the lake McEris * was a 
large canal j'* and the great difficulty which has 
arisen on the subject is owing to the imperfect 
description of Herodotus, who has confounded 
the two : omitting to designate the canal as an ar- 
tificial work, and the lake as a natural formation. 
It has not only perplexed many of his readers, 
but has even misled the learned geographer D* An- 
ville, who, in order to account for his statement, 
suggested the existence of the Bath en; an hy- 
pothesis entirely disproved by an examination of 
its supposed site : and of all authors who have 
written on this lake and canal, or the position of 
the labyrinth, none can be consulted with greater 
satisfaction than Strabo f, in whose valuable work 
we only regret too much conciseness. 

During the period which elapsed from Menes to 
Sesostris, no monarch of note reigned in Egypt, if 
we except those above mentioned, and the Mnevis 
and Sasyches of Diodorust, who held a conspicu- 
ous place among the legislators of their country. 
But the exact period of their reigns is uncer- 
tain, and the historian has failed to inform us if 
Sasyches was the immediate successor of the for- 

* ** Mceridus lacus, hoc est, fossa grandis/' Plin. xxxvi. 16. 

f V. Strabo's account of the lake and its canal, as well as the posi* 
tion of the labyrinth, lib. xvii. 

J Diodor. i. 94. The name calls to mind Susachis, or Shishak ; 
though Diodorus places him before Sesostris (Sesoosis). 


CUAP. !!• LAWGIVERS. 95 

mer, and whether they both preceded or followed 
Moeris. Mnevis is represented to have been the 
first to teach the people to obey and respect the 
laws, and to have derived his sanction as a law- 
giver from Mercury himself; a fable which, with 
the name of the prince, argues strongly in support 
of the opinion that Diodorus has confounded him 
with Menes, the founder of the Egyptian mon- 
archy. Sasyches, a man of great learning, made 
numerous and important additions to the existing 
code, and introduced many minute regulations re- 
specting the service of the Gods. He was also 
the reputed inventor of geometry ; and ordained 
that astronomy should be taught, as an important 
branch of education. 

With the exception of these few reigns, Egyp- 
tian history presents a blank from the found- 
ation of the monarchy to the era of Sesostris : it 
is, however, probable that a portion of it may 
be filled by an event, which, though not fixed 
to any precise time by historians, is universally 
allowed to have occurred; the occupation of the 
country by the Shepherds. If this and the so- 
journ of the Israelites in Egypt have been con- 
founded by Josephus, perhaps intentionally, and 
by other writers accidentally, the exploits of Se- 
sostris and of Remeses the Great have experienced 
the same treatment from Herodotus and others; 
as the following extracts from his writings cannot 
fail to prove, with which I continue my compara- 
tive view ol Egyptian history. 

" Sesostris was the first who, passing the Ara^ 


96 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

bian Gulf in a fleet of long vessels, reduced 
under his authority the inhabitants of the coasts 
bordering on the Mare ErytJueum* ; and pro- 
ceeding still farther, he came to a sea which, 
from the great number of its shoals, was not navi- 
gable. On his return to Egypt, according to the 
authority of the priests, he levied a mighty army, 
and made an expedition by land, subduing all the 
nations he met with on his march. Whenever he 
was opposed by a people who proved themselves 
brave, and who discovered an ardour for liberty, 
he erected tablets t (stelcB) in their country, on 
which he inscribed his name, and that of his nation, 
and how he had conquered them by the force of 
his arms : but where he met with little or no op- 
position, upon similar tablets, which he erected, 
was added a symbol emblematic of their pusilla- 
nimity. Continuing his progress, he passed from 
Asia to Europe t, and subdued the countries of 
Scythia and Thrace ; there, however, I believe his 
army to have been stopped, since monuments of his 
victories only appear thus far, and none beyond that 
country. On his return he came to the river Phasis; 
but I am by no means certain whether he left a 
detachment of his force as a colony in that district, 
or whether some of his men, fatigued with their 

* The Mare Erythraeum, or Red Sea, was that part of the Indian 
Ocean without the Straits ofBab-el-Mandeb; and in later times was 
applied to the Arabian Gulf, or Sinus Arabicus. 

f No doubt, similar to those about E'Souan and other places, many 
of which are commemorative of victories of the Pharaohs. That on 
the Lvcus, near Beiroot, is probably one of the stelae alluded to by 
Herodotus. 

X Conf. Valer. Flac. Argon. 5. 418. . . , "ut prima Sosostris. In- 
tulerit rex bella Getis." 


CHAP. II. STELiE: OF SESOSTRIS. 97 

laborious service, rema ined there of their own ac- 
cord.* The Colchians, indeed, appear to be of 
Egyptian origin ; and a strong argument in sup- 
port of this conjecture, is derived from the fact of 
their being the only people, except the Egyptians 
and Ethiopians, and, I may add, the Phoenicians 
and Syrians of Palestine, who use circumcision ; 
and these two last acknowledge that they bor- 
rowed the custom from Egypt. The Colchians 
have also another point of resemblance to the 
Egyptians : the manufacture of linen is alike in 
both countries, and peculiar to them ; and, more- 
over, their manners and language are similar. 

" The greater part of the stelae erected by Sesos- 
tris in the places he conquered, are no longer to 
be found. I have myself seen some in Palestine of 
Syria, with the disgraceful emblem and insciiptions 
above mentioned ; and in Ionia are two figures of 
the same king hewn in the rock, one on the way 
from Ephesus to Phocaea, the other between Sardis 
and Smyrna. They both represent a man, five palms 
in height, holding in his right hand a javelin, and 
, in his left a bow j the rest of his armour being partly 
Egyptian and partly Ethiopian. Across his breast, 
from shoulder to shoulder, is this inscription, in 
the sacred or hieroglyphic writing of Egypt— * I 
conquered this country by the force of my arms.'t 
Who or whence he is, are not specified j both 
being mentioned elsewhere t; and though some 

* Rather as a garrison for one of the military posts he established, in 
order to secure the conquered territory, and the exaction of tribute. 

f Or "shoulders": conf. Claudian, Bell. Gild., 114. "Terras 
humeris pontumque subegi." 

J Probably in the lines of hieroglyphics on the tablet accompanying 
the figure. 

VOL. I. H 


98 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

who have examined it, suppose it to be Memnon, 
I am persuaded they are mistaken in the name 
of the monarch.'* 

There is little doubt that one of the tablets or 
stelae alluded to by the historian still exists in Syria, 
bearing the name of Remeses II. It is at the side 
of the road leading to Beiroot, close to the river 
Lycus, now Nahr-el-Kelb ; and though the hiero- 
glyphics are much erased, sufficient remains to 
show by whose order it was sculptured. Near it is 
another, accompanied by the figure of a Persian 
king, and inscribed with the arrow-headed cha- 
racter, copies of which have been lately made by 
Mr. Bonomi ; and thus the memorials of the pas- 
sage of the Egyptian army, marching triumphant 
over Asiatic nations, and that of the Persians vic- 
torious over Syria and Egypt, are recorded in a 
similar manner at the same spot. 

Diodorus mentions several princes who reigned 
in Egypt between Menes and Sesostris, some of 
whom preceded, and others followed, Moeris, or, 
as he calls him, Myris. Menes, according to that 
historian, was succeeded by two of his descendants, 
who in Manetho are his son Athothes and his 
grandson Cencenes, or, as Eratosthenes states, 
Athothes I. and II. Fifty-two kings, whose 
names are omitted, succeeded them ; then Busiris, 
who was followed by eight of his descendants, the 
last of whom bore the same name as the first, and 
was said to have been the founder of Thebes. 
This honour, we have seen above, has also been 
claimed for Menes ; but it is more probable, as I 
have elsewhere shown, that the city existed even 


CHAP. !!• EDUCATION OF SESOSTRIS. 99 

before his era, especially as he is said to have 
been a native of Thebes. Nor can we agree with 
Diodorus in ascribing the foundation of Memphis 
to Uchoreus II., who is said to have borne the 
same name as his father, and was tlie eighth in de- 
scent from the monarch he supposes to have been 
the builder of Thebes. Uchoreus was followed by 
twelve generations of kings, after whom came Myris, 
who excavated the lake above Memphis, and is the 
Moeris of Herodotus. If we admit the authority of 
Diodorus, seven generations intervened between 
Moeris and Sesostris; but Herodotus seems to 
place the latter as his immediate successor. 

Sesostris, or, as Diodorus calls him, Sesoosis, was 
reputed by some to have been the son of Amenophis; 
and about the period of his birth, the god Vulcan 
appeared to his father in a dream, informing him 
that his child should become lord of the whole 
earth. Impressed with the truth of this vision, and 
anxious to profit by the admonition of the deity, 
he ordered all the male children throughout Egypt, 
who were born on the same day as his son*, to be 
brought to him, and having appointed nurses and 
proper persons to take charge of them, he gave in- 
structions that they should be educated and treated 
in every respect as the young prince : being per- 
suaded that those who were his constant com- 
panions in childhood and youth would prove his 
most faithful adherents and affectionate fellow sol- 


* Of about the same age as his son, would have been more consistent 
with probability. Voltaire ridicules this account very severely. Phil, 
de THist. p. 50. 

H 2 


100 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

diers. They were abundantly furnished with every 
thing needful : as they grew up, they were by 
degrees inured to laborious and manly exercises, 
and were even forbidden to taste any food till they 
had performed a course of 180 stadia, or nearly 
twenty-three Roman miles. By this severe train- 
ing of the body, and by a suitable cultivation of 
the mind, they were equally fitted to execute and 
to command. And at length, resolving to give 
him and his companions an opportunity of proving 
themselves worthy of the pains bestowed upon 
their education, the monarch sent them with an 
army into Arabia: and as soon as they had sub- 
dued that unconquered country, they passed into 
Africa*, great part of which they overran. 

Sesostris having ascended the throne, turned 
his attention to the internal administration of the 
country, and having divided all Egypt into thirty- 
six nomes, or provinces, he appointed a governor 
over each. He then prepared to put his military 
designs into execution, and to extend the conquests 
of Egypt into the most remote countries. With 
this view he collected an army of 600,000 foot, 
24,000 horse, and 27,000 chariots, and appointed 
the companions of his youth, in number upwards 
of lyOOj to the chief command, t Leaving his 
brother Armais regent in his absence, he invested 
him with supreme power, forbidding him only the 

* Libya was always considered to form part of the territories of 
Egypt, even to the time of the Ptolemies. Thus Ptolemy, the son of 
Lagus, was deputed by Alexander to preside over Egypt and Africa, 
as well as part of Arabia. Justin, xiii. 4. 

•(• Diod. i. 54. 


CHAP. II. HIS CONQUESTS AND RETURN. 101 

use of the diadem, and commanding him to respect 
and defend the queen, the royal family, and the 
household : and having marched into Ethiopia, and 
exacted from that country a tribute of gold, ebony, 
and ivory, he proceeded to the promontory of 
Dira, near the straits of the Arabian Gulf, where 
he erected a stela, with an inscription in the 
sacred character, to commemorate his successes; 
and advancing to the country that produces cin- 
namon, he raised other monuments there, which 
were seen many ages after his time. 

The fleet of Sesostris consisted of 400 sail, and 
by having ships of war in the Mediterranean as well 
as the Arabian Gulf, he commanded the coast 
of Phoenicia, and made himself master of many 
of the Cyclades. Having vanquished numerous 
southern and eastern nations, he returned to Egypt ; 
and on his arrival at Daphne of Pelusium, he was 
met by his brother, who, with the plea of celebrating 
and welcoming this joyful event, invited him to 
a feast. Sesostris, little suspecting his designs, 
repaired to the house fitted up for his reception, 
accompanied by his principal friends and the 
diflferent members of his family. The house had 
been previously filled with combustibles, which, by 
the command of his brother, were ignited as soon 
as they all retired to rest. Sesostris, roused from 
his sleep, perceived the imminent danger to which 
they were exposed, and seeing no other means 
of escape but by placing two of his children 
across the parts which were burning, he came to 
the resolution of making this sacrifice for the pre- 

H 3 


l(yi THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. TI. 

servation of himself and the rest of his family. 
According to other accounts, his brother, having 
seized the throne during his absence, openly re- 
belled against him, and even offered violence to the 
queen ; and they ascribe his hurried return to the 
anxiety he felt on receiving intelligence of his 
perfidy. 

Sesostris was no sooner delivered from the si- 
nister attempt5 of his brother, than he returned 
thanks to the gods for his escape, and raised six 
colossal marble statues before the temple of 
Pthah, or Vulcan, at Memphis ; two of himself 
and the queen, which were thirty cubits in 
height, and four of twenty cubits, each represent- 
ing one of his children. Many splendid monu- 
ments were also erected by him in different parts 
of Egypt, in token of his gratitude to the gods 
for the great victories he had obtained ; and the 
captives he took in war were employed in transport- 
ing the immense blocks of stone used in the con- 
struction of the temple at Memphis, and in other 
ornamental and useful works. He also set up 
two splendid obelisks * , and dedicated a ship 280 
cubits in length to the god of Thebes; and his 
statue, which was erected in the temple of Vulcan, 
together with those of his predecessors, in order 
to show the esteem in which he was held by his 
countrymen, had the first and most conspicuous post 
assigned to it, nor did any succeeding monarch ob- 
tain permission to place his own before that of Se- 

* Diodorus says 120 cubits ; 180 feet high ! i. 57. 


CHAP. II. PUBLIC WORKS OF SESOSTRIS. 103 

sostris. Darius, indeed, claimed this honour, upon 
the plea that his conquests had equalled those of his 
Egyptian precursor ; but, after they had weighed 
his claims, the priests of Memphis declared him to 
have been eclipsed by Sesostris, inasmuch as he had 
vanquished the Scythians, who had never yielded 
to the arms of Darius. This candid remonstrance 
of the priests was far from displeasing the Persian 
monarch, who, in acknowledging the justice of his 
precedence, expressed a hope that, if he lived as 
long as Sesostris, he should be enabled to equal 
his exploits. 

In every building erected by his captives he put 
up an inscription, purporting that it was the wrok 
of those he had taken in war, and that no native* 
was employed in the laborious part of the under- 
taking ; and in every city of Egypt he dedicated 
a monument to the presiding deity of the place. 
The same captives were also employed in digging 
large canals, and in raising dykes and embankments, 
for the purposes of irrigation, the protection of the 
towns t and lands, and the distribution of the water 
of the Nile during the inundation ; and though these 
had been previously established throughout the 
country by his predecessors, the superior scale 
on which they w^ere now constructed, the many 
wise regulations he introduced relative to landed 
property, and the accurate surveys he ordered to 
be made, in order to ascertain the levels and extent 

* Diod. i. 56. 

f Herodotus in another place (ii. 137.) says, the towns were elevated 
in the reign of Sesostris when the canals were made. 

H 4t 


104 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

of every person's estate, obtained for Sesostris the 
credit of having been the first to intersect the 
plains of Egypt with canals, and of having intro- 
duced the science of mensuration and land sur- 
veying, Herodotus supposes that Egypt, " previous 
to his reign, was conveniently adapted to those 
who travelled on horses or in carriages," and that 
afterwards it became disagreeable to traverse the 
country^ on horseback, and utterly impossible in 
chariots; but as many dykes were raised, as at 
present, to facilitate the communication from one 
town to another, and as the journey along the edge 
of the desert is not only more commodious, but 
shorter, for those who go by land from Lower to 
Upper Egypt, neither Sesostris nor his predecessors 
were guilty of the great impediments complained 
of by the historian. Nor is it probable that this 
monarch was the first to suggest the expediency 
of ascertaining the quantity of land irrigated by 
the rising Nile, or the justice of proportioning 
the taxes to the benefits derived from its fertilis- 
ing influence; and however we may be inclined 
to believe that geometry may have originated in 
Egypt, in consequence of the necessity of ascer- 
taining the changes which annually take place on the 
banks of the Nile, we cannot suppose that no means 
were devised for this purpose previous to his reign. 

Sesostris is reported to have raised a wall on 
the east side of Egypt*, extending from Pelusium 


* In my Egypt and Thebes (p. 368.) I have shown that Voltaire is 
wrong in the inference he draws from this fact. 


CHAP. II. THE WALL OF SESOSTRIS. 105 

along the edge of the desert by Heliopolis*, 1500 
stadia in length, or about 187 Roman miles ; and 
that such a wall was actually made by one of the 
Egyptian monarchs, we have positive proof from the 
vestiges which remain in different parts of the 
valley. It was not confined to Lower Egypt, or to 
the east of the Delta, from Pelusium to Heliopolis, 
but continued to the Ethiopian frontier at Syene ; 
and though the increase of the alluvial deposit has 
almost concealed it in the low lands overflowed 
during the inundation by the waters of the Nile, 
it is traced in many of the higher parts, espe- 
cially when founded upon the rocky eminences 
bordering the river. The modern Egyptians have 
several idle legends respecting this wall, some of 
which ascribe it to a king anxious to prevent an 
obnoxious stranger from intruding on the retire- 
ment of his beautiful daughter : and the name ap- 
plied to it is Gisr el Ago6s, or "the old man's dyke." 
It is of crude brick ; the principal portion that 
remains may be seen at Gebel e'Tayr t, a little 
below Minyeh ; and I have even traced small frag- 
ments of the same kind of building on the western 
side of the valley, particularly in the Fyoom. 

Of the humane character of the ancient Egyp- 
tians, we have several strong proofs ; but, if we 
may trust the authority of Diodorust and Pliny §, 


* Diod. (i. 57.) says to Heliopolis. 

* * I have already noticed it in my Egypt and Thebes, p. 367. 
: : Diod. i. 58. 

§ Plin. xxxiii. 15. " Sesostri .£gypti rege, tarn superbo, ut pro- 
datur annis quibusc^ue sorte reges singulos e subjectb jungere ad currum 
solitus, atque ita tnumphare." 


106 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

Sesostris tarnished his glory by an act of great 
oppression, compelling captive monarchs to draw 
his chariot as he proceeded to celebrate his 
triumph. And the Theban artists have not been 
ashamed to introduce a similar instance of cruelty 
in the sculptures of the temple at Medeenet Haboo, 
representing the triumphal return of RemesesIII.*, 
after his conquests in the Eastern war: where 
three captives are tied beneath the axle of his cha- 
riot, while others bound with ropes walk by his 
horse's side, to be presented to the deity of the 
placet 

The latter days of Sesostris were embittered by 
the misfortune of losing his sight, which so affected 
him that he put a period to his existence : an act 
far from being considered unworthy of a pious and 
good man, but looked upon by his subjects, and 
even by the priests themselves, as becoming a hero 
admired by men and beloved by the gods, whose 
merited gifts of eternal happiness he had hastened 
to enjoy. 

He was succeeded by his son, the Pheron of 
Herodotus, the Sesoosis H. of Diodorus, and the 
Nuncoreus of Pliny. Like his father, he was 
affected by a weakness of the eyes, which termi- 
nated in total blindness : but though it continued 
during eleven years, he at length recovered, owing 
more probably to some operation which the noted 
skill of the Egyptian surgeons had suggested, than 
to the ridiculous cause assigned by Herodotus. 
Diodorus and Pliny both agree with the historian 

* And of Osirei, at Karnak. f Vide Plate I, 


CHAP. II. ACTISANES THE ETHIOPIAN. IO7 

of Halicarnassu3) that he dedicated two obelisks to 
the sun at Heliopolis, in token of gratitude for the 
recovery of his sight ; and this I suppose to refer 
to the son of Remeses II., as I have observed in 
noticing the reign of Pthahmen. 

Many ages after him, according to Diodorus, 
Amasis ascended the throne. He is represented 
to have been a cruel and despotic prince; and 
having oppressed his people for some time, he was 
deposed by Actisanes, an Ethiopian, who made 
war upon him, probably in consequence of the 
representations of his subjects, and who succeeded 
to the throne of Egypt. Actisanes proved himself 
worthy of the confidence reposed in him and of 
the choice made by the Egyptians. He behaved 
with great moderation and impartiality, and in- 
troduced some beneficial laws. Instead of punish- 
ing theft with death, he caused all robbers to 
be banished and confined in the most remote 
part of Egypt, on the edge of the desert bor- 
dering Syria; their noses having been previously 
cut off, as an eternal stigma, and as a means 
of recognising them in the event of their 
escape. And the town of Rhinocolura*, where 
they lived, was said to have received its name 
from this mutilation of the inhabitants. The spot 
was dreary and unproductive. On one side was 
the sea, on the E., W., and S. all was desert, 
and the torrent or dry " river of Egypt," the 
boundary line of the Syrian frontier, afforded no 
water but during the partial rains which some- 

* Dlod, i. 60. 


108 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

times fell in winter. The wells were salt or 
brackish ; nothing could be cultivated without 
excessive labour, and so destitute were they of 
the necessaries of life, that they gladly availed 
themselves of any opportunity of providing them- 
selves with food. At one season numerous quails 
visited the district, which they caught in long nets 
made with split reeds * ; but this temporary relief 
only acted as a contrast to their wants during the 
remainder of the year, when they depended prin- 
cipally on the fish of the neighbouring sea. 

Actisanes was succeeded by Mendes, or Mar- 
rhus, the sceptre now returning to the Egyptian 
line. This Mendes, according to Diodorus, built 
the labyrinth in the Crocodilopolite nome, ascribed 
by Herodotus to Moeris : whence it is evident 
that he considers Mendes a different person from 
Moeris, who excavated the lake, and is called by 
him Myris.t Mendes, indeed, may have continued 
the building, as the twelve kings are supposed to 
have done, at a later period, and thereby have 
obtained the title of its founder : nor is it impro- 
bable that Mendes is the Ismandes of Strabo, who 
was also reputed to be the builder of the laby- 
rinth, and the same as the Mandoof or Mandoof- 
tep of the hieroglyphics. And the circumstance 
of there being two towns in the vicinity still 
bearing the name Isment is very remarkable. 
Diodorus does not fix the exact epoch at which 
Osymandyas, whose tomb he describes at Thebes, 

* The frame-work of some nets, in the Egyptian paintings, seems to 
be made of reeds. 

f The oi and u of the Greeks had the sound of our ee. 


CHAP. II. TOMB OF OSYMANDYAS. 109 

reigned in Egypt ; but, if we may be allowed to 
infer the identity of Ismandes and Mendes*, we 
are enabled to assign him a position in the series 
given by the historian, Ismandes being unques- 
tionably the same as Osymandyas. 

Osymandyas signalised himself both for the 
victories he obtained in the East, and for the 
monuments with which he adorned the cities of 
Egypt. In his reign the Bactrians, who had been 
subdued by Sesostris, rebelled, and threw off their 
allegiance to the Egyptians. Resolving to punish 
their defection, and recover the conquered coun- 
try, he levied a formidable army and marched 
against them. He was victorious ; he again re- 
duced them under the dominion of Egypt, and 
returning triumphant to Thebes, he erected a 
magnificent monument, supposed by Hecataeus to 
have been afterwards used as his tomb, on which 
he commemorated his victory, and his gratitude to 
the god Amun, and the co-templar deities. It is 
thus described by Diodorus t, on the authority of 
that ancient author : " Ten stadia from the first 
sepulchres in the Theban Necropolis, where the 
paliacides of Jove are buried, stood the tomb of 
Osymandyas. Its entrance was by a propylon of 
variously coloured stone t two plethra in length § , 

* Strabo says, " If, as some suppose, Memnon is called by the 
Egyptians Ismandes, the labyrinth must be Memnonian, the work of 
the same person who erected the buildings at Abydus and Thebes, 
which are there styled Memnoneia." lib. xvii. 


IDiodor. i. 47. et teq. 
This appears to a 
Egyptian builaings, or to granite. 


This appears to allude to the painted sculptures usual on 


§ The plethrum, according to some, was 100 feet, others reckon it 


Diet 
feet, 


about 92 feet, English ^ 


110 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

and forty-five cubits in height. * Behind was a 
square area, surrounded internally by an avenue 
of columns t , each side measuring four plethra, 
and having a (partial) roof supported by figures of 
animalst of solid stone, sixteen cubits high, sculp- 
tured in the antique fashion. The ceiling, which 
was of compact masonry § (covering the space be- 
tween the outer walls and the columns), was up- 
wards of two orgyids (twelve feet) in breadth, and 
was ornamented with stars studded on an azure 
ground. [I At the upper end of this, you came 
to a doorway leading to a second area, with a 
propylon, similar in all respects to the former, but 
sculptured with a greater variety of subjects ; and 
close to the entrance was a colossal group of three 
figures (the workmanship) of Memnon of Syene.if 
One of them was in a sitting posture, and was re- 
puted to be the largest statue in Egypt, whose foot 
exceeded seven cubits in length. The other two, 
very inferior in size, reached only to its knees (and 
were attached in an upright position to the front of 
the throne), one on the right, the other on the left 
side, and represented the daughter and mother of the 

♦ Or 67i feet, which can only apply to the pyramidal towers. 

f Literally, '' after you passed through this, was a square peristyle of 
stone." 

X He evidently alludes to the Osiride figures, not of animals, but of 
men, in the areas of Egyptian temples. 

} MovoKiQov signifies here, as in Strabo's description of the labyrinth, 
'' of solid masonry," not of a single stone. The Osiride pillars, said 
also to have been monolithic, were no doubt built, as usual, of several 
blocks. 

jl These ceilings are very commonly met with in ancient Egyptian 
edifices. 

T In this mav have originated the idea of its being the statue of 
Memnon, as well as the name Memnonium attached to the building 
here described. 


CHAP. II. REBELLION OF THE BACTRIAKS. Ill 

king. It was a monument remarkable as well for the 
excellence of its workmanship as for the dimensions 
and nature of the stone, in which no crack or even 
flaw could be found ; and upon it was this inscrip- 
tion : ^ I am Osymandyas» king of kings ; if any one 
wishes to know what I am and where I lie, let 
him surpass me in some of my exploits.' Near 
it was a statue of his mother, twenty cubits in 
height, and of a single stone, bearing three crowns 
upon her head, which purported that she was the 
daughter, wife, and mother of a king. * Behind 
the propylon was another peripteral area, adorned 
with a variety of sculpture. On it was represented 
a war waged by the monarch in the country of the 
Bactrians, who had revolted from him, and against 
whom he led an army of 400,000 foot and 20,000 
horse, in four divisions, each commanded by one of 
his sons. On the first wall the king was seen be- 
sieging a fortress, surrounded by a river, and con- 
tending in the foremost ranks with the enemy, 
accompanied by a lion, which appeared to aid him 
in the fight. Some indeed affirm that the sculp- 
tor intended to represent a real lion, which the 
king had brought up, and was accustomed to take 
with him to battle, to intimidate his foes : but 
others are of opinion that it merely alludes to the 
courage of the monarch, of which it was deemed 
an apjMTopriate emblem. On the second wall, cap- 
tives were conducted without hands, or the signs 

* Hieroglyphics bearing the same import are found to precede the 
names of queens who were similarly circumstanced, as Neitacri,th6 wife 
of Psamaticus IIL, and others* 


112 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

of virility, purporting them to be men destitute of 
courage and the power of resistance : and the third 
wall presented various subjects and appropriate 
sculptures, indicating the sacrifices and triumph of 
the king. In the centre of the open court was an 
altar of very beautiful stone, admirable for its size 
as well as for its workmanship ; and close to the 
end wall were two sitting statues, of a single block 
each, measuring twenty-seven cubits* in height. 
Three entrances led from tiie area to a hall sup- 
ported throughout by columns, and built in the 
manner of an odSunif which measured on each 
side two plethra. Here were several wooden sta- 
tues, representing persons engaged in lawsuits, 
and judges listening to the causes. These last 
were thirty in number, with the chief justice in the 
centre, who had many books lying near him, and 
wore an image of Truth, with her eyes closed, 
suspended from his neck : an emblematic figure, 
purporting that the duty of a judge was to re- 
ceive nothing t, and that the chief justice should 
have his mind intent on truth alone. After this 
was a corridor filled with numerous chambers, 
where all kinds of food most agreeable to the 

* 40 feet 6 inches. He evidently alludes to the two small colossi 
of the Memuonium, which stood on each side of the steps leading 
from the second court of that building. The head of one is in the 
British Museum, and was formerly called of the young Memnon. From 
this court, three entrances lead to the hall of assembly, agreeing well 
with the description of Diodorus in his account of the tomb. 

f Diodorus has omitted to mention their being *' without hands ;'* 
which, however, we learn from Plutarch : " The statues of judges at 
Thebes without hands, with their chief or president at their head, with 
his eyes turned downwards, signify that justice ought neither to be ac- 
cessible to bribes, nor guided by favour and affection." De Isid. s. 10. 


CHAP. II. LIBRARY AND PLANISPHERE. 113 

palate were introduced. The king also appeared 
in the sculptures, painted in elegant colours, dedi- 
cating to the deity the gold and silver he annually 
received from the mines throughout Egypt, which 
in silver alone amounted to 8200 myriads of minae.* 
To these chambers succeeded the sacred library, 
over which was inscribed "The balsam of the 
soul;** and contiguous to it were figures of all the 
gods of Egypt, to each of whom the Monarch pre- 
sented a suitable offering ; in order that Osiris, and 
the deities who attended beneath him, might know 
that through life he had acted with piety towards 
the gods and benevolence towards men. Adjacentt 
to the library was a chamber elegantly fitted up 
with twenty couches, where the statues of Ju- 
piter, Juno, and the king were placed ; and here 
it was supposed that the body of the prince 
reposed. Around were several rooms, having 
beautiful paintings of all the sacred animals of the 
country, and from them an ascent t to the whole 
tomb ; beyond which, and immediately over 
the sepulchre, was a golden planisphere, car- 
ried away in later times by Cambyses when the 
Persians invaded Egypt. It measured 365 cubits § 
in circumference, and one in thickness, and was 
divided and marked at every cubit with the days 
of the year, the rising and setting of the stars 
according to their natural revolutions, and the 

* The Egyptian mina was lib. 5oz. 6dwts. English. 
+ Ofioroixov, having a common wall with the library, 
j: From the position of the Memnonium on a rising rock, you 
ascend towards the upper end of the building. 
§ 547^ feet, or about 182 feet in diameter. 

VOL, I. I 


114 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

signs ascertained from them by Egyptian astrolo- 
gers.*** 

In re-examining this description of Diodorus, I 
am still more inclined to the opinion I before stated 
of his having in view the Memnonium, or palace- 
temple of Remeses 11. 1. The distance from the 
first tombs, where the pallacides of Jove were bu- 
ried, agrees very satisfactorily with that from the 
tombs of the queens t to the Memnonium. 2. Its 
having the largest statue in Egypt, which is the sit- 
ting colossus of Remeses, in that building. 3. The 
plan of the tomb, its three entrances from the se- 
cond area, and the succeeding hall of columns, 
agree perfectly with those of the Memnonium ; 
and if the dimensions of the areas exceed the 
truth, or appear inconsistent, the objection is one 
which equally applies to any other Egyptian edi- 
fice. I had supposed the word TruXtova to refer 
to an entrance court or propylseum ; but I per- 
ceive that he alludes to the pyramidal towers of 
the propylon, to which he gives the length of two 
plethra. The area behind them was four plethra 
square, and we must therefore conclude the towers 
to be each two plethra, without including the in- 
termediate gateway, which will accord very well 
with the proportions of an Egyptian temple. How- 
ever, his measurements may be exaggerated, and 

* Another astronomical ceiling is met with at the Memnonium, in 
the central chamber, immediately behind the ^and hall, in which all 
the Egyptian months, and yarious stars, are mtroduced, with figures 
and hieroglyphic legends. 

f The Egyptian princesses and queens held that office in the service 
of Amun or Jove. Vide my Egypt and Thebes, p. 80. 


CHAP. II. THIS TOMB THE MEMNONIUM. 115 

I consider it better to leave his plethrum of inde- 
terminate length. And in order that the reader 
may perceive the relative dimensions and usual ar- 
rangement of these courts, and compare Diodorus* 
description with the Memnonium, I insert a plan 
of that building, and leave him to form his own 
opinion.* 

That two Theban buildings, the palace of Re- 
meses III. at Medeenet Haboo and the Mem- 
nonium, are united in this description of the his- 
torian appears not altogether improbable, from a 
comparison of the plans and sculptures of those 
edifices. And the revolt of an Eastern people, 
the lion accompanying Remeses III., and the muti- 
lation of the bodies of the enemy slain in the fight, 
which occur at Medeenet Haboo in the sculptures 
of the inner and outer walls, as well as the fortified 
town surrounded by a river at the Memnonium, 
and the presence of his sons in the battle, show a 
striking resemblance to the circumstances detailed 
by Diodorus. 

After Mendes, or Osymandyas, ensued an inter- 
regnum, which lasted five generations, until Cetes 
or Cetna, a Memphite, " who in the Greek lan- 
guage was called Proteus," ascended the throne. 
The shrine of this monarch was still visible at 
Memphis in the time of Herodotus. It stood on 
the south of the temple of Vulcan, and was mag- 
nificently ornamented. The Phoenicians of Tyre, 
who had settled in Egypt, lived in its vicinity, 

* See Woodcut in next page. 

1 2 


116 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. 


CHAP. II. 


z 


f 


•#•• ••oof 
oir*l y Q Q Q [I 


A B A 


Plan of the Memnonium, showing its great resemblance to the description of 
the Tomb of Osymandyas, given by Diodorus : • — 

A, ▲, Towers of the Propylon, " irv\wva , . . ro fA€V fviiKos Zi:w\e0pov, ro 
y tnjws rtfrrapoKovia koi itcktc wtix^v.*' b, the entrance, " rnv turo^ov. 
C c, the Area, " di^Xdoyri Sc avrov eivcu \i0ivov trtpurrvhov rerpayuvoy, 
MKomis v\€vpas ovotis rerrapotv irXtdpcov,** ..." avri rav Kuavcov, ^»5*o . . 
fiOPoKiBa,** as at h, h, in the next court; the area was open in the centre and 
covered at the sides, " rriv opo^/nv . . €irt vKarot 8a««v opryvuav,** ..." e^s 8« 
rov ire/MOTvAov romov vtiKuf erepav ciaodov xai w\uya** . . " irapo 8c rnv 
€uyo^y (e) avipuurras rptis €{ €V05 KiOov . . , rovrap fva /ncv naBrififVov (d) 
vTrapx^i-yf^^iffrov vavriaif t(op kot* *AiyvTrhv." d, is the large sitting Colossus 
of Remeses the Great, close to the second entrance e. " i^era Se top iruAowa 
(F,r) irfpiffTvKoy rov wportpov a^ioKoyorrtpoy (o, o) ev (p y\v<t>as . . . SijXowoj 
TOP xoXtfioy, The battle scenes occur on these walls, and at i are traces of 
sculptures relating to the war ; but that part, as well as j, is now in ruins. 
At K, the Jirst wall on the right entering, the king is besieging a city sur- 


CHAP. II. THE STORY OF HELEN. II7 

when the historian visited the country, and the 
whole of the environs thence obtained the name of 
the Tyrian camp. There was also in the same spot 
a small temple dedicated to Venus the stranger*; 
and this goddess, Herodotus, with the vanity of a 
Greek, conjectures to be the Grecian " Helen t, 
who was said to have lived some time at the 
court of Proteus." " On inquiring,*' he continues, 

* Probably alluded to by Horace: 

'' Oh quae beatam. Diva, tenes Cyprum, et 
Memphin carentem Sithonia nive.'* — Od. lib. iii. 26. 10. 

Strabo also mentions it. Lib. xvii. 

f Strabo says some consider this Venus to be a Greek goddess, and 
others suppose the temple to be dedicated to the moon. • 


rounded by a river, ** Kara rov vpoyrov ray toik6iv (r) top /3ao'(^ca . . 
iroKiopKowra ruxos wo rrorafjLov repippmoy," On the second wall were the 
captives led by the king, ** to t€ ouSota km ras X^^P^^ ^^f^ exoi^a^,** as at 
Medeenet Haboo ; and in the centre of the area was an altar in the open 
air *< vwaiOpiovt" showing this court was also hypeethral in the centre. *< Kara 
S€ TOP rc\€vraiov roixov vrapx^w oySpiavras Kc^fuyovs 8vo,^ l and ic, — the 
head of the latter of which is now in the British Museum ; " trap* ois turo' 
^vs rp€ts (n, o, r) «« rov irepKrrvXov, Kaff as oiKoy vwapx^iv VKoarvXoy (q) 
w$ciov rpoiroy KortaKeveuriMyoy, tKaoTTjy wXtvpav ^xoma BixK^Bpoy,** a and s 
are pedestals, perhaps belonging to some of the statues he mentions. ** t^ris 
8* i/wapx^^ wepnraroy ouccov wayroBwtray v^riprj,** perhaps referring to the 
whole space containing the chambers u, v, y, 2. ** e^Tjs ^vxdpxfiv njv lepav 
fite\io0TiK7pf ** (u or v) " (Tvvcxcts Se ravrp ray ^tcoy airayruy tucoyas, rov 
fiaffiXtwSf ofioias Hapotpopovyros a vpoatiKoy i\y eKoaroiSy** which is referred 
to in the sculptures of w and x. Whether his description of the parts 
beyond this are correct we cannot decide, as the chambers are entirely de- 
stroyed, and the general plan is scarcely to be traced ; and, as it is probable 
Hecataeus, who is his authority, was not admitted beyond the great Hall q, 
the information obtained of this part must have rested solely on report. 
Indeed, in this portion, he appears to have united or confounded two buildings, 
the temple of Remeses the Great, and that of Remeses III. at Medeenet 
Haboo ; though with the exception of the measurement of the areas (four 
plethra square), his description of the first part of the Tomb of Osymandyas 
agrees very closely with the edifice before us ; but we may be allowed to 
question its having been a tomb, or having been erected by that monarch. 
T, Battle scene, where the tcstudo occurs. 

I 3 


118 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

" concerning her, the prieste gave me the follow- 
ing information : — Paris (or Alexander) having 
carried off Helen from Sparta, was returning home, 
when, meeting with contrary winds in the ^gean, 
he was driven into the Egyptian sea ; and as they 
continued unfavourable, he proceeded to Egypt, and 
putting into the Canopic mouth of the Nile, landed 
at the Tarichaea*, near a temple of Hercules, 
which still exists there. If on any occasion a slave 
fled for refuge to this shrine, and, in testimony of 
his consecrating himself to the service of the god, 
submitted to be marked with certain characters, 
on one was permitted to molest him ; and the same 
custom has been strictly observed, from its first 
institution to the present period. The servants 
of Paris, aware of the privileges of the temple, 
fled thither from their master, and with a view 
of injuring him became suppliants to the deity. 
They revealed the whole affair concerning Helen, 
and the wrong he had done to Menelaus ; and they 
not only related it to the priests, but also to Thonis, 
who was governor of that mouth of the river. 

Thonis instantly despatched a courier to Mem- 
phis, with this message to the king : — "A certain 
Trojan is arrived here, who has perpetrated an 
atrocious crime in Greece. He has seduced the 
wife of his host, and has carried her away, with a 
quantity of treasure. Adverse winds have forced 
him hither: shall I suffer him to depart without 
molestation, or shall I seize his person and pro- 

♦ Or the Salt- pans. 


CHAP. II. HELEN AND PARIS IN EGYPT. IIQ 

perty ? " Upon this, Proteus gave an order that 
whoever the man was, who had thus violated the 
rights of hospitality, he should be arrested and 
brought before him. Thonis therefore sent Paris, 
with Helen and all his wealth, to Memphis, and 
detained his ships. As soon as he was admitted 
into the presence of the king, Proteus inquired 
who he was and whence he came. Paris faithfully 
related the name of his family and country, and 
from what place he had set sail. But when he was 
questioned concerning Helen, and how he had 
obtained possession of her person, he hesitated in 
his answers, and endeavoured to conceal the truth, 
till the slaves who had deserted him explained all 
the circumstances of his guilt. Proteus thereupon 
pronounced this sentence, * If I did not consider 
it a very heinous crime to put any stranger to 
death, who may have been driven on my coast by 
contrary winds, I would assuredly, thou worst of 
men, avenge the Greek whose hospitality thou 
hast betrayed in a most treacherous manner: 
thou hast seduced his wife ; and not contented 
with this, thou hast carried her off by stealth, and 
still detainest h^r ; and, as if this crime was not 
sufficient, thou hast robbed his house. However, 
as I think it rigTit^Tpot to put a stranger to death, 
I suffer thee to depart ; but this woman and the 
wealth thou hast brought I forbid thee to take: 
these shall remain with me till the Greek himself 
shall come and demand them. In three days 
leave my coast with thy companions, or expect to 
be treated as enemies.' 

I 4 


120 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

Helen was therefore detained by Proteus till the 
arrival of Menelaus, who, finding at the capture of 
Troy, that his wife was not in the possession of 
Paris, but had been left by him in Egypt, re- 
paired to the court of the Egj^tian king. On 
his arrival, he related the object of his journey. He 
was received with great hospitality, and Helen, 
who had been treated with respect, was restored 
to him with all his treasure. He then returned to 
the coast, intending to set sail immediately : but the 
winds were contrary ; and Menelaus, forgetting 
the gratitude he owed to his benefactors, clandes- 
tinely seized two children of the country, and offered 
them as a sacrifice.* This was no sooner made 
known to the Egyptians than they resolved on 
punishing the perpetrator of so great an outrage; 
but as he fled by sea to Africa, they were unable 
to overtake him, and Menelaus escaped their indig- 
nation, and the punishment his perfidy deserved." 

The fable related by the Greeks of the won- 
derful powers of Proteus, in assuming a multi- 
plicity of shapes, is thought by Diodorust to be 
explained from a custom common to the Egyptian 
kings of adorning their heads with various figures 
and emblematic devices, intended to strike the be- 
holders with awe ; but this is neither satisfactory 
nor probable. The head-dresses of the kings re- 
presented in the sculptures, when offering to the 

* Conf. Virg. JEnAl 116. 

" Sanguine placastis ventOB^ et virgine caesa." 
t Diodor. i. 62, 


CHAP. II. ROBBERY OF THE TREASURY. 121 

gods, are numerous and varied (especially in the 
later times of the Ptolemies and Caesars) : yet such 
slight changes could never account for a similar 
fable among the Egyptians, who were fully ac- 
quainted with the intention of every vesture and 
crown of ceremony. 

Rhemphis, or Rhampsinitus, succeeded Proteus. 
He does not appear to have been distinguished for 
the extent of his conquests abroad, but he sur- 
passed all his predecessors in the immense wealth 
he possessed, and in his fondness for riches. Dio- 
dorus considers him of so avaricious a character 
that he was unwilling to employ any of the trea- 
sure he had amassed either for the service of the 
gods or the benefit of his subjects ; but the monu- 
ments he erected at Memphis disprove this state- 
ment, and claim for him a place among the patrons 
of religion, and the encouragers of art. " The 
western vestibule of the temple of Vulcan," says 
Herodotus, " was added by his order, as were 
two colossal statues, twenty-five cubits in height, 
which stand in front of it. The northern statue 
(or that on the left entering) is called by the 
Egyptians summer, the other to the south winter; 
and though they treat the latter with no manner 
of respect, they reverence the former, and even 
worship it." 

Herodotus concurs in representing Rhampsini- 
tus as the most opulent of all the Egyptian kings 
who reigned before or after him ; and if he does 
not state the amount of his wealth, which the 
former historian calculates at no less than 400,000 


122 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

talents, he relates the great care he took in its 
preservation. " For this purpose he constructed a 
stone edifice, one side of which was attached to 
the wall of his palace. But the architect he em- 
ployed, with a dishonest view, so disposed one of 
the stones of the outer wall that two or even one 
man might easily remove it. The building being 
completed, the king there deposited his treasures 
in supposed security. Some time afterwards, the 
architect finding his end approaching, sent for his 
two sons, and told them how their future prosperity 
was provided for by an artifice he had adopted in 
building the king's treasury. He then explained 
all the secret of the stone ; its dimensions and po- 
sition ; the mode of removing it ; and, if they used 
proper caution, the certainty of participating in 
the royal wealth. After the death of their father, 
they were not long before they availed themselves 
of the advice he had given them ; and repairing 
by night to the palace, they found the stone as 
described, and having easily removed it, they carried 
away a large sum of money. When the king en- 
tered the apartment he observed a sensible dimi- 
nution of the gold in the vases ; but as he had no 
suspicions of any person, and the lock and its seals 
were intact, he was greatly perplexed. At length, 
finding the same diminution continue, the thieves 
constantly repeating their visits, he resolved on 
placing traps round the vases which contained the 
money. They returned as usual, and one of them 
on going to the spot was caught in the trap. He 
instantly called to his brother; and explaining his 


CHAP. II. ARTIFICE OF THE THIEF. 123 

situation, he requested him without loss of time to 
cut off his head, as the only means of prevent- 
ing detection and preserving his own life. The 
advice appeared good ; and having overcome his 
scruples, he complied, replaced the stone, and ran 
home, carrying with him the head of his brother. 

As soon as it was light, the king entered the 
apartment ; and seeing the body of a person with- 
out a head secured in the trap, the walls entire, and 
showing no place of exit or ingress, he was more 
astonished than ever. Still he hoped to unravel the 
mystery ; and ordering the body to be exposed 
from the wall, he stationed guards on the spot, 
and directed them to seize and bring before him 
whoever should discover any symptoms of sorrow 
or compassion at the sight. The mother, exas- 
perated at this treatment of her son's body, threat- 
ened the surviving brother if he did not contrive 
some means of removing and bringing it away, 
she would go herself to the king and accuse him 
as an accomplice in the robbery. In vain did he 
endeavour to excuse himself; at length, finding 
her determined, he had recourse to the following 
artifice : — He loaded some asses with skins of 
wine, and drove them to the place where the 
guards were stationed to watch the body of his 
brother. As soon as he approached them, he 
secretly drew the pegs from the mouths of two or 
three of the skins, and when the wine gushed out, 
he began to beat his head and to cry vehemently, 
running to and fro with pretended confusion, as if 
uncertain to which of the asses he should go ' first. 


121 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

The soldiers perceiving the accident, ran with 
vessels ; but instead of assisting him, all the wine 
they could save they considered themselves entitled 
to as their own. At first he abused them in ap- 
parent anger ; then, feigning to be pacified by their 
endeavours to console him, he led his asses aside 
out of the road, put the skins in order, and began 
to enter into conversation with them. ^ Affecting 
to be pleased with the drollery of one of them, 
he gave him a skin of wine ; and having accepted 
their invitation to stay and drink with them, he 
sat down, and, to reward their civility, he added 
another. It was not long before the wine had its 
effect: the soldiers became intoxicated and fell 
asleep, and as soon as night came on, he took down 
the body of his brother ; and having shaved the right 
cheek * of the guards, in derision, he put the body 
into a sack on one of his asses and drove home. 

When Rhampsinitus heard what had happened 
he was enraged beyond measure; but being re- 
solved on discovering the robber, he is said to 
have had recourse to this stratagem, which to me 
appears very improbable. He commanded his 
daughter to receive every man indiscriminately, 
on condition he would tell her the most artful 
as well as the most wicked thing he had ever 
done; and if any one confessed the crime of 
which this robber had been guilty, she was to seize 

* This, like the rest of the story, is very questionable. The 
Egyptian soldiers had no beards, and Herodotus himself allows that 
the Egj'ptians shaved, and only allowed " the hair of their head and 
beard to grow in mourning." ii.36. That this last is true, is proved 
by the sculptures representing soldiers and other individuals. 


CHAP. 11. PARDONED BY THE KING. 125 

him and prevent his escape. The daughter obeyed 
the orders of her father ; and the thief guessing 
what was intended, prepared to thwart the artful 
scheme of the king. He cut off the arm of a 
body recently dead, which he concealed under his 
cloak during his visit to the princess ; and when 
asked the same question as the rest, he replied 
* that the most wicked thing he had ever done was 
to cut off the head of his brother who had been 
caught in a trap in the king's treasury, — the most 
artful thing, his making the guards drunk and 
removing the body.* She immediately endea- 
voured to apprehend him ; but as it was dark, he 
held out the dead arm, and on her seizing it 
effected his escape. This being reported to the 
king, he was still more astonished at the art and 
audacity of the man, and issued a proclamation that 
if the offender would declare himself he should 
not only be pardoned, but rewarded handsomely. 
Trusting to his word, the thief presented himself 
before him, and Rhampsinitus, being much pleased 
with his address, gave him his daughter in marriage ; 
for knowing the Egyptians to be superior in in- 
genuity to all other people, and finding he had sur- 
passed even the Egyptians, he looked upon him as 
infinitely more clever than any other human being." 
Such is the story told by Herodotus ; but we 
must do him the justice to say he expresses his dis- 
belief of it, as well as of the same king's visit to the 
lower regions, where Rhampsinitus was reported 
to have played at dice with the goddess Ceres, 
alternately winning and losing, and to have been 


126 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. 11. 

presented on leaving her with a napkin embroidered 
with gold. The period of his supposed return 
was celebrated by the Egyptians as a solemn 
festival, and continued even to the time of Hero- 
dotus : but what the real origin or import of the 
ceremony may have been, the historian is unable 
to inform us. ** The ministers," he adds, " who 
officiate on that occasion, wear a vest woven within 
the space of a day ; and this is put on by one of 
them, whose eyes are blinded, and who is conducted 
to a path leading to the temple of Ceres, where 
he is left, and whence two wolves are said to take 
him to the temple, distant twenty stadia from the 
city, bringing him back to the same spot when the 
ceremony is concluded. But I leave every reader 
to judge for himself regarding the credibility of 
what I here relate." 

" Till the reign of Rhampsinitus, Egypt was for- 
tunate, as well in the tranquillity and justice it 
enjoyed, as in the blessings of abundance. But 
Cheops*, his successor, abandoned himself to every 
kind of depravity. He closed all the temples, for- 
bade the Egyptians to offer sacrifices, and ordered 
their labours to bie confined to his own purposes. 
Having the project of building a pyramid, he com- 
pelled some to hew stones in the quarries of the 
Arabian mountains t, and to drag them to the bank 
of the Nile ; others were appointed to receive them 

♦ The Chemmis, Chembes, or Chemnis of Diodorus. This ana- 
chronism, of placing Cheops after the Trojan war, must be obvious to 
every one. 

f Conf. Plin. xxxvi. 17. " Pyramis amplissima ex Arabicis lapi- 
cidinis constat ;" and Strabo, lib. xvii., Twv Xi&wv, e^ tov at UvpafuSec 
yiyovaffiv . . . . ev ry Apati^ Tpoxicov rt KoKfirai nerpiodee . . . opog. 


CHAP. II. THE PYRAJVIID OF CH£OPS. 127 

from the boats and transport them to the mountain 
of Libya; and for this service 100,000 men* were 
employed, who were relieved every three months. 
In the operation of forming the road, by which 
the stones were carried, ten years were consumed ; 
and this arduous undertaking appears scarcely in- 
ferior to the pyramid itself, which, independent of 
the time employed in preparing the hill where it 
stands, occupied twenty years." The historian 
then proceeds to describe the pyramids : but as I 
have given an account of them in a previous 
workt, I think it unnecessary to repeat it here, 
and resume my history of the successors of this 
monarch. 

After a reign of fifty years, Cheops, who, as I 
have already stated, appears to have been the 
Suphis of Manetho, and the Chembres of Diodo- 
rus, was succeeded by Cephren his brother. He 
reigned fifty-six years, and erected a pyramid 
similar to that of his brother, but of rather less di- 
mensions. 

Mycerinus, the son of Cheops, was his successor. 
He was a good and religious prince; and his 
memory was revered by the Egyptians beyond that 
of all his predecessors, not only because of the 
equity of his decisions, but because his love of 
justice was so great that if complaint was made of 
his conduct he always showed a willingness' to 
redress the injury. He had an only daughter, 

* PHn " Trecenta LX. hominum millia annis XX. earn con- 
struxisse produntur. Tres vero factae annis LXXVIII. et men- 
sibus IV. 

t Egypt and Thebes, p. 323. 


128 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IJ. 

who died some time after he ascended the throne, 
which was the first misfortune he experienced ; 
and being much afflicted by her death, and wish- 
ing to honour her funeral with more than ordinary 
splendour, he enclosed her body in a heifer made of 
wood, richly ornamented with gold. It was not 
buried, but remained even to the time of Herodotus 
in the palace at Sais, in a magnificent chamber, 
where exquisite perfumes burnt before it every 
day, and brilliant illuminations continued through- 
out the night. * 

Mycerinus aafterwards met with a second cala- 
mity. The oracle of Buto sent to inform him he 
should live six years and die the seventh; and 
though he represented his piety and upright con- 
duct, the same answer was returned, with this addi- 
tion, that his early death was in consequence of his 
virtues. 

During this period of his reign t he occupied him- 
self in constructing a pyramid ; and if we may be- 
lieve Diodorus, he died before its completion. It 
stands near those of his father and his uncle ; and 
though much smaller, was considered, when entire, 
far more elegant than the other two, being cased 
with red granite.t On the northern face he inscribed 

* It is very questionable if this heifer referred to the daughter of 
Mycerinus ; and judging from what the historian adds of the Egyptians 
flagellating themselves in honour of a certain god (Osiris), it would 
rather seem to belong to Isis, or to Athor. 

f Herodotus mentions a ridiculous story of his passing the night in 
revelry, and endeavouring to convict the oracle of falsehood, by turn- 
ing night into day, and thus doubling the number of years. 

J Pliny says, ** Tertia minor praedictis, sed multo spectatio ^thi- 
opicis lapidibus." xxxvi. 17. Herodotus says, it was of iBthiopiau 
stone, as far as the middle of its height. 


CHAP. II. TNEPHACHTHUS* CURSE OF MENES. 129 

his name ; and the entrance, though still closed 
and undiscovered, may be looked for on this side, 
like those of the other two pyramids. The Greeks 
erroneously attributed its erection to the courtesan 
Rhodopis; but, as Herodotus observes, it is im- 
probable that a monument, which cost several 
thousand talents, should have been erected by her, 
and even impossible, since she did not live at the 
same epoch, but during the reign of Amasis. 

The immediate successor of Mycerinus is un- 
certain. According to Herodotus, it was Asychis, 
who appears to have been a Memphite. Diodo- 
rus, however, here introduces the names of Tne- 
phachthus, and his son Bocchoris, both omitted 
by Herodotus, as Asychis and Anysis are in his 
catalogue of kings. 

Tnephachthus, or as Plutarch calls him Technatis, 
is only known as being the father of Bocchoris, and 
as having led an expedition into Arabia, where he 
endured great privations and hardships, owing to 
the loss of his baggage in so inhospitable a country. 
And being obliged to put up with the poor and 
slender diet he there met with, and finding his sleep 
in consequence much more sound and refreshing, 
he felt persuaded of the. ill effects resulting from a 
luxurious mode of living, and was resolved on his 
return to Thebes to record his abhorrence of the 
conduct of Menes, who had induced the Egyptians 
to abandon their frugal and simple habits : he, 
therefore, erected a stela, with an inscription to 
that purpose, in the temple of Amun at Thebes, 

VOL. I. K 


ISO THE jlNCIENT EGYPTIANS, CHAP. II, 

where his son also made considerable additions to 
the sacred buildings dedicated to the deity. 

While examining the ruins of Kamak, I met 
with one tablet, which appeared at first sight to 
resemble a monument of this kind; but on further 
examination I altered my opinion, and was obliged 
to relinquish all hope of finding it there, or, in-> 
deed, in any other building at Thebes. 

Bocchoris, his son, a Saite by birth, succeeded 
him. He is represented to have been despicable 
in his person, but the qualities of his mind fully 
compensated for any imperfections of the body ; 
and so far did he surpass all his predecessors in 
wisdom and prudence, that he obtained the dis* 
tinctive sirname of " the Wise.*' He is reputed 
to have been one of the Egyptian lawgivers, and 
in this capacity to have introduced many useful 
regulations in the ancient code respecting debt *, 
and fiscal matters; though some have supposed 
his care of the revenue to proceed from a feeling 
of avarice, rather than from a desire to benefit 
the state, f He was said to have been taken 
prisoner by Sabaco the Ethiopian, and to have 
been burnt alive; but this assertion is destitute 
of probability, and there is great doubt whether 
Sabaco was his immediate successor, or whether, 
as I have already observed, several kings inter- 
vened between Bocchoris and that monarch, t To 
enable us to solve these questions, we require 
more positive authority, either from the monu- 

* Diodor. i. 79. Vide infrh on the Laws of Egypt. f' Ibid., i. 94!« 

X This is also the opinion of Diodorus, i. 65. 


CHAP. II. BRICK PYRAMIDS. 131 

ments, or from history, and it is equally useless to 
inquire if Asychis was the same as Bocchoris. I 
therefore proceed to notice the reigns of Asychis 
and Any sis, as given by Herodotus. 

The former was not only an encourager of art, 
but a benefactor to his country by the introduction 
of some salutary laws respecting debt. " Finding 
that commercial interests suffered from an extreme 
want of money, he passed an ordinance that any 
one might borrow money, giving the body of his 
deceased father as a pledge : by which law the 
sepulchre of the debtor fell into the power of the 
creditor; for if the debt was not discharged, he 
could neither be buried with his family in that or in 
any other tomb, nor was he suflTered to inter any of 
his children.'* 

Among the monuments erected by Asychis was 
a pyramid of brick, with this inscription engraved 
on a marble slab, ** Compare me not with the stone 
pyramids, for I am as superior to them as Jove is to 
the other gods. Thus was I made : men probing 
with poles the bottom of a lake drew forth the mud 
which adhered to them, and formed it into bricks." 

Four pyramids built of these materials still re- 
main in Lower Egypt, independent of several 
smaller ones at Thebes, and it is probable that 
one of them is that alluded to by Herodotus as 
having been erected by Asychis. Two are close to 
Memphis and the modern town of Dashoor ; the 
others stand at the entrance of the Fyoom. Near 
the former are two pyramids of stone ; and this 
circumstance, and their vicinity to Memphis, in- 

K 9. 


13? THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. 11. 

duce me to believe one of them to be the crude 
brick monument in question ; for it is reason- 
able to suppose it would be erected near the city 
where the prince resided, and in the vicinity of 
stone pyramids, to which it forbade the spectator to 
compare it. In what its superiority consisted, we 
are unable to decide. Dr. Richardson ingeniously 
ascribes it to the vaulted roofs of its chambers^ 
whose construction was the result of the novel in- 
vention of the arch. But though chambers did 
exist in the brick pyramids, vestiges of which I 
have myself seen in one of those at Dashoor, and 
their roofs, as he justly concludes, were vaulted, 
other pyramids of similar materials had long before 
been erected at Thebes, with roofs of the same 
construction, and the arch was invented and used 
in Upper Egypt many centuries before the acces- 
sion of this monarch. 

According to Herodotus, Asychis was succeeded 
by Anysis, a native of a town of the same name, 
who was blind. In his reign, Sabaco, the Ethiopian, 
invaded and conquered Egypt, of which he con- 
tinued in possession fifty years; and during the 
whole of that period Anysis remained concealed in 
the lowlands of the Delta, at a place called the Isle 
of Elbo, which he is said to have formed for him- 
self of ashes and earth, neither daring nor having the 
power to dispute the authority of the invader. 

** Sabaco, while he ruled Egypt, refrained from 
punishing any crime with death ; but, according to 
the magnitude of their offence, he condemned all 
criminals to raise the ground around the place to 


CHAP. II. SECESSION OF SABACO. 133 

which they belonged : in order to elevate the dif- 
ferent towns throughout the country, and to place 
them above the reach of the inundation* This had 
been previously done during the reign of Sesostris, 
when the canals were made ; but the mounds now 
added by order of the Ethiopian were much more 
extensive: so that every city was raised at this 
period, and particularly Bubastis.*' Manetho differs 
from the historian of Halicarnassus in his character 
of Sabaco, and in the name of the prince whose 
throne he usurped, since he affirms that he took 
Bocchoris captive and burnt him alive ; nor is 
Herodotus's own account consistent, when he men- 
tions his having put to death " Necos, the father 
of Psammitichus.'* * Again, Manetho limits his 
reign to eight or eighteen years, while Herodotus 
allows him fifty; and states that he relinquished 
the throne of Egypt, and returned to Ethiopia, in 
consequence of a dream, in which " a person ap- 
peared advising him to assemble all the priests of 
Eg3rpt, and to inflict upon them the cruel death of 
cutting them asunder . . . but, rather than perpetrate 
such a deed, he resolved to retire from the throne, 
especially as the duration of his reign over Egypt, 
according to the oracles, was now fulfilled ; for 
Sabaco, while in Ethiopia, having consulted them, 
was informed he -irfiould reign fifty years in Egypt ; 
and thi^'period being accomplished, the vision so 
alarmed-him that he voluntarily withdrew." 

On the secession of Sabaco, Anysis was re- 
' caHfcdfrom his place of concealment, and assumed 

* This I shall presently show to have been impossible. Herod.ii. 152, 

.r K 3 


1S4 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

the reins of government ; but for what length of 
time Herodotus fails to inform us. . He was suc- 
ceeded by Sethos, a priest of Vulcan, who, as I 
shall presently have occasion to observe, was co- 
temporary of Tirhakah, and who, in consequence 
of the contempt with which he treated the mili- 
tary class, endangered the safety of the whole of 
Lower Egypt, when Sennacherib king of Assyria 
threatened to invade it. This, and the events 
which occurred in the reigns of Sabaco, Psamati- 
cus, and succeeding monarchs, will also be noticed 
in my account of the 25th and 26th Dynasties ; 
and having, as I proposed, introduced a compar- 
ative view of the history of the early Egyptian 
princes, from Menes to Sethos, from the works of 
Herodotus and Diodorus, I resume my chrono- 
logical inquiry, which I had carried down to the 
end of the 19th Dynasty*, and consequently now 
return to the kings who succeeded the sons of the 
third Remeses, and who composed the 20th, 21st, 
and the following Dynasties. 

T7ie 20th and 9,\8t Dynastiesy on the Authority of the MonumentSy 

were composed of 


Name from the 


Ascended 


Monuments. 


the Throne. 


Remeses VII. 


^ « 


B. C. 

- 1170 


Remeses VIII. 


M m 


- 1155 


Remeses IX. 


m •* 


- 1140 


Remeses X. 


. 


- 1125 


Remeses XI. 


m mt 


- JllO 


Amun-mai-Pouee ? 


m 


- 1095 


Amun-meses ? 


m 


- 1080 


reigned till about 1068 


♦ Firfrp. §7. 


CHAP. !!• 


22d and 23d dynasties. 


135 


The succession is doubtful for a period of 
about 90 years, when a more interesting period 
opens to view, in the 22d Dynasty, where we re- 
cognise a great similarity between the names* of 
Manetho's list and those on the monuments. 

The 22dDynas^ of DiospoHians. 


Namefhnn 
Ancient AutborfL 


Name fW>m the 
Monuments. 


Events. 


Ascended 

the 
Throne. 


Sesonchis - 

Osorthon 
Tacellotbis 


Sheshonk I. • 

Osorkon I. 
Takelothe 


Shisbak of S.S., who plun- "j 
dered the temple of Jem- r 
salem, b«c. 971 - -J 
^ Cotemporary of Zerah/ 
the Ethiopian King, 
who foaght with Asa, | 
B. c. 941 - -J 


B. c. 
981 

945 
925 


2Sd Dynasty. 


Name firom 


Name firom the 


Ascended 

the 
Throne. 


. Ancient Authors. 


Monuments. 


Events. 


B. c. 


(Uncertain) 


Osorkon II. 


Homer flourished about 907. 


908 


. . • 


Sheshonk II. 


• * • 


890 


(Then, probably, 


to about 


' 


one or more 


860, 


kings, occupy. 


then a 


ing a space of 


blank till 


about 50 years.) 


the reign 


Tnephachthua, the 


of Boc- 


father of Boc- 


chorisy 


choris, according 


who as- 


to Diodorus, the 


cended the 


Technatis of Plu- 


throne in 


tarch, ought to be 


812. 


one of this Dy- 


nasty? 


* Manetho begins with Sesonchosis or Sesonchis^ and Osorthon, but 
places three other uncertain kings between this last and Tacellotbis, and 
with three others completes the 22d Dynastyt In the 23d, Manetho 
begins with Petubastes (Pet-Pasht), a name not yet met with, then 
Osorthon or Osorchon, and two other kings. Vide his cataloguei 
in p. 33i 

K 4 


136 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP* II. 

Sheshonk • was supposed by the learned Sir I. 
Marsham, and other distinguished chronologists, to 
be the same as Sesostris ; but this untenable hypo- 
thesis has long since been abandoned, and Sesotris 
has resumed his place among the monarchs of an 
earlier dynasty. He was the Shishak of Scripture, 
who, in the fifth year of Rehoboam (b. c. 971 )> 
marched against Judea with 1200 chariots and 
60,000 horse, and a numerous body of infantry, 
composed of Lybians, Sukkiimst, and Ethiopians ; 
took all the walled towns of Judah ; and pillaged 
the temple of Jerusalem^; and though no very 
extensive buildings remain erected by him, the 
sculptures he added on the walls of Karnak suffice 
to show that this campaign is recorded with the 
names of the captured places. The king, as usual, 
presents his prisoners to the deity of the temple, 
and to each figure is attached an oval, indicating 
the town or district he represents : one of which 
M. Champollion concludes to be the Yooda Melchi, 
or kingdom of Judah, a name whose component 
letters agree with the hieroglyphics, though the 

* It was to this king that Jeroboam fled in 980. Solomon had 
married the daughter of Pharaoh, probably his immediate predecessor, 
about the year 1014. Josephus says that Egypt and Ethiopia were 
at that time under the same monarch ; but he commits a great error in 
supposing that " no Egyptian king bore the title of Pharaoh after the 
father-in-law of Solomon," the reverse being proved by the Jewish 
books which he pretends to quote. Witness Pharaoh-Necho and 
Hophra. Joseph. Antiq. lib. viii. 6. 

f Some have supposed the Sukkiims to be the fabulous Troglo- 
dytes, and have placed them near the Red Sea. Others bring them 
from Central Egypt. Some who have seen or heard of the sepul- 
chral grottoes hewn in the rocks at Thebes, have innocently fixed on 
these as the habitations of the live Troglodytes, previous to their 
appropriation for the dead Thebans. 

{ 2 Chron. xii. 9. 


CHAP. IK SHESHONK OR SHISHAK. IS? 

place it holds is not sufficiently marked to satisfy, 
the scruples of a rigid sceptic. 

The era of Sheshonk is the first fixed point for 
the establishment of chronological data ; and we 
have been enabled, by reckoning backwards to the 
Exodus, and from inscriptions on the monuments, 
to fix the probable duration and date of each reign. 
From the accession of Thothmes III., about 
1495 B. c, to the year 1068, twenty-three kings 
succeeded to the throne of Egypt, which gives about 
eighteen years to each reign ; and the ninety years 
intervening at the end of the 21st Dynasty, may 
readily be accounted for by assigning them to 
sovereigns whose names are lost. 

A very favourable argument in support of the 
dates I have given, is derived from the astronomi- 
cal subject on the ceiling of the Memnonium at 
Thebes, erected by Remeses the Great : where 
the heliacal rising of Sothis is found to coincide 
with the beginning of Thoth, which could only 
have happened in the year 1822 b. c; and this 
falls, according to my table, in the middle of his 
reign. But whatever I offer on such intricate 
questions is given with much deference, and I 
shall willingly yield to the sounder judgment of the 
scientific reader. 

The aggressions of the Egyptian monarch in 
Juda^ do not appear to have been repeated ; and 
the Jewish Chronicles show that previous to the 
battle with Zerah, king of Ethiopia*, the land of 

* This indefinite name Ethiopia, the counti'y of burnt or black 
faces, always perplexes. Zerah could not have come fh>m Ethiopia to 


138 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. 


CHAP. II. 


Judah was free from foreign invasion, '< and had no 
war * in those years," which gave Asa an oppor- 
tunity of repairing and building fortified towns, for 
the protection of his country. Nor do we find the 
successors of Sheshonk undertaking any important 
military expedition; and little remains on the 
monuments, relating to the other kings of the 2Sd 
and 33d D3aiasties, except some tablets and reli- 
gious subjects in the temple of Karnak. 

24^ Dynasty of 1 Satte. 


Kana from Ancient Author* 


Name from the Monumenti. 


Ascended 
the Throne. 


Bocchoris (die Wise) 
son of Tnephachtbus J 


Pebor, Bakhor, or Amun-se-Pehor 


a. G. 

812 


The 25th Dynasty consisted rf an Ethiopian Family. 


Name fVom Ancient 
Authors. 


Name Aou the 
Monument*. 


Events. 


Aaoendcd 

the 
Throne. 


Sobacok So of Sa - 
Sebechon, Sevechus 
Teraces, Tearcbus»1 
Tcsrcon of Strabo, > 
TErhaksh of SS. J 


Sabakoph 
Shebek . 

Tehrak - 


Rome founded 753 b. c. 
Captivity of the ten tribes^ 721 

Sennacherib attacks Judah 


B. c. 
77S 
723 
710 
to 
689 


Bocchoris and his father Tnephachtbus have 
been already mentioned ; and if we are unable to 
decide whether this last should be introduced into 
the 23d or 24th Dynasties, the same diflSculty 
exists in the position of Asychis and Anysis. 


the south of the Cataracts while Sheshonk or Osorkon ruled Egypt, in 
the Arabic version be is styled King of India, and his name in the 
Septuagiiit is written Zare. In 2 Chron. xvi. 8. mention is made of 
the Ethiopians with the Lubims (Lybians^. The oval supposed by 
Mr. Salt of Zerah is of a much more ancient king. 
2 Chron. xiv. 1. 6, 7. 


CHAP. ir. SABACO THE SO OF SCRIPTURE. ISQ 

The reign of Sabaco has also been noticed ; and 
Herodotus, as we have seen, supposes Anjrsis to 
have been restored to the throne after the seces- 
sion of the invader, and to have been succeeded 
by Sethos (Se-pthah), a priest of Pthah or Vulcan, 
who was cotemporary with Sennacherib and Tirha- 
kah. ManethOr on the contrary, states that Sabaco 
usurped the throne of Bocchoris, and Diodorus 
introduces other monarchs between this last and 
the Ethiopian. That he was not the Sabaco who 
put Neco to death is evident, from a comparison 
of the eras of Psamaticus and the Ethiopian mo- 
narch; nor could the flight of Psamaticus have 
taken place during his reign ; and, unless we sup- 
pose the son of Neco to have lived to the age of 
more than 120 years, he could not have fled even 
fron^ the second of that name, or Shebek, the pre- 
decessor of Tirhakah. 

Sabaco is generally supposed to be the So * of 
Scripture, who made a treaty with Hosea king of 
Israel t ; an event which led to the taking of Sa- 
maria, and to the captivity of the ten tribes by 
Shalmaneser king of Assyria ; and this I believe to 
have happened a few years before the close of his 
reign. Of Shebek, or Sabaco II., the name occurs 
only on the monuments of Thebes, and in the cata- 
logue of Manetho. By some he has been con- 
sidered the Sethos of Herodotus ; but this name, 
which is properly Se-pthah (or the "Son of Pthah"), 
bears so strong a stamp of Memphitic origin that 

* So, Soa, or Sua ; the Si^ycup of the Septuagint. 
f 2 Kings, xvii. 4. 


140 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS, CHAP. II. 

we cannot feel disposed to assign it to the Ethio- 
pian monarch. 

With Tirhakah we are acquainted, both from 
sacred and profane records; and his successful 
opposition to the power of Assyria is noticed in 
the Bible*, may be traced in Herodotus t, and 
is recorded on the walls of a Theban temple, t It 
is possible that in the early part of his reign 
Sethos shared the kingdom with him, and ruled 
in Lower Egypt, while the Ethiopian monarch 
possessed the dominion of the upper country; 
and this would account for the absence of the 
name of Sethos on the monuments of Thebes. 
Whether Tirhakah and Sabaco's claims to the 
throne of ISigypt were derived from any right ac- 
quired by intermarriage with the royal family of that 
country, and whether their dominion was at first 
confined to the Thebaid, it is difficult to determine ; 
but the respect paid by their Egyptian successors 
to the monuments § they erected argues the proba- 
bility of their having succeeded to the throne by 
right, rather than by usurpation, or the force of 
arms. 

During the reign of Tirhakah, Sennacherib king 
of Assyria threatened an incursion into Lower 
Egypt ; and owing to the disaffection of the troops 

* 2 Kin^, xix. 9. ** And when he (Sennacherib) heard say of 
Tirhakah king of Ethiopia, behold he is come out to fight against 
thee." Isaiah, xxxvii. 9. El Berkel (formerly Napata) was his Ethio- 
pian capital, where his name and monuments are found. 

f Herod, ii. 141. 

:|^ At Med^enet H&boo are the figure and name of this king, and the 
captives he took. 

§ Sabaco*s name is found at Abydus. 


CHAP. IT. DEFEAT OF SENNACHERIB. 141 

of Sethos, Memphis and all that part of the coun- 
try was in danger of falling a prey to the invader. 
Sethos, who had been a priest of Pthah, was more 
solicitous, even after his elevation to the throne, 
for the observance of religious ceremonies than 
the welfare of the state ; and induced by fana- 
ticism to consider the services of the soldier unne- 
cessary for the security of a country entrusted to the 
protection of the gods, " he treated that class with 
extreme contempt, and, among other indignities 
deprived them of their arurcBj or fields, which, by 
way of reward, his predecessors had allowed to each 
soldier. They, therefore, refused to march against 
the Assyrians ; and in this dilemma the priest-king 
retired to the shrine of the god, before which he 
lamented his danger and misfortunes. He there sunk 
into a profound sleep ; and the deity, appearing to 
him in a dream, promised that if he marched to meet 
the enemy he should experience no injury, for that 
he would furnish him with assistance. Inspired with 
confidence from this vision, he put himself at the 
head of his adherents, and advanced to Pelusium, 
the entrance of Egypt, unaccompanied by a single 
soldier, his army being entirely composed of trades- 
men and artisans.'* * Nor was it long before this 
assistance arrived. Tirhakah, having heard of the 
approach of Sennacherib, marched with a numerous 
army from the Thebaid, and entering Palestine, de- 
feated the Assyrians ; thus delivering Lower Egypt 
as well as Judaea from the arms of this powerful 

• Herodot. ii. 141. It might be supposed that the sections 164— 
168. of the same book were intended to have been introduced here. 


142 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

invader. But the ingratitude, perhaps the jea- 
lousy of the Memphites, disguised the truth from 
the Greek historian, and the miraculous interpo- 
sition of Pthah was affirmed to have been the cause 
of Sennacherib's defeat Concealing the assistance 
received from the army of Tirhakah, the priests 
assured Herodotus, that when the Assyrians or 
Arabians and the feeble party commanded by Sethos 
were encamped opposite each other, a prodigious 
number of rats infested the enemy's camp by night, 
and gnawed in pieces their quivers and bows, as well 
as the handles of their shields ; so that in the morn- 
ing, finding themselves without arms, they fled in 
confusion, and lost great numbers of their men. 
And in order to commemorate the event, a marble 
statue of Sethos was erected in the temple of 
Pthah at Memphis, representing the king holding 
a rat in his hand, with this inscription — " Who- 
ever thou art, learn from my fortune to reverence 
the gods." 

** From Menes to this prince,'' adds the historian, 
" was a period of 341 generations, in which there 
had been as many high-priests, and the same num- 
ber of kings. And as three generations are equal 
to 100 years, the total of these may be estimated 
at 11,340 years." Such are the extravagant dates 
given by ancient writers. 

That Tirhakah ruled at Napata and in the The- 
baid at the same period, is sufficiently proved by 
the additions he made to the temples of Thebes, 
and by the monuments he built in Ethiopia ; nor 
did the Egyptians effiice his records, or forget the 


CHAP. II. THE TWELVE KINGS. 143 

gratitude they owed to the defender of their country. 
The name of Nectanebo has indeed usurped the 
place of Tirhakah's ovals in one or two instances 
among the sculptures at Thebes ; but such substitu- 
tions are not uncommon, and the name of the Ethio- 
pian has not been erased from any ill* will, so often 
evinced when an obnoxious monarch had ceased to 
reign* That he was a very potent prince, is .evi- 
dent from his defeat of the numerous army of Senna- 
cherib*, as well as from the monuments he has 
left both in Egypt and Ethiopia, and his main*^ 
tenance of the Egyptian possessions in Asia ; and 
however Strabo may have exaggerated his power 
when he affirms that he extended his conquests, 
like Sesostris, into Europe, even as far as the 
Pillars of Hercules, yet his authority is of use, as 
it leads to the conclusion that Tirhakah, or, as 
he calls him, Tearcont, ruled Lower as well as 
Upper Egypt, to which he, perhaps, succeeded on 
the death of the priest-king Sethos. 

According to Herodotus, twelve kings, or rather 
monarchsl:, succeeded to the dominion of all Egypt ; 
but it is probable they did not assume the title of 
Pharaoh, being only governors of the twelve 
provinces or nomes into which the country was 
divided. On this occasion the historian sarcas- 
tically observes, that " as the Egyptians were 
not capable of existing a single instant without 
a king, they elected twelve," each enjoying equal 

* In the Syriac and Arabic versions he is called Sanherib. 

J Strabo, lib. xv. 
Herodotui, ii. 147. 


144 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

rank and authority. "They connected them- 
selves by intermarriages, solemnly promising to 
promote their common interests, and never to 
engage in any acts of separate policy: their 
principal motive in this union being to guard 
against the declaration of an oracle, which had 
predicted that whoever among them should offer 
a libation in the temple of Vulcan from a brazen 
vessel, should be sole sovereign of Egypt.** For 
many years they continued the management of 
affairs in perfect amity and mutual confidence, and 
no administration was more eminent for justice and 
impartiality. An accident at length occurred to 
interrupt their friendship. "On a certain occa- 
sion they were called upon to offer sacrifice in the 
temple of Vulcan ; and when the last day of the 
festival came, they prepared to make the accustomed 
libation. For this purpose the chief priest pre- 
sented the golden cups used on those solemnities ; 
but having mistaken the number, he brought only 
eleven. Psammitichus*, who was the last, not having 
a cup, took off his helmet, which was of brass, and 
poured from it the libation. The other princes 
had similar helmets, and wore them on the present 
occasion ; so that the circumstance of this one 
king using his was accidental and unpremedi- 
tated ; but when they observed what Psammiti- 
chus had done, and remembered the prediction 
of the oracle, they examined him, suspecting he 
had acted designedly. Finding, however, that 

* This is Herodotu8*s mode of writing the name of Psamatik, or 
Psamaticus. 


CHAP. II. FULFILMENT OF THE ORACLE. 145 

it was purely accidental, they did not think him 
worthy of death, but were satisfied with depriving 
him of his regal power; and, confining him to the 
low lands of Egypt, they forbade him to leave that 
district, or to hold any communication with the rest 
of the country." 

Things continued in this state for some time ; 
the eleven kings having taken the whole direction 
of affairs, and the dethroned prince still remaining 
in exile. Psamaticus, however, could not pas- 
sively submit to this uncalled-for treatment ; and 
feeling the strongest resentment for the injury, he 
determined to be revenged upon his oppressors. 
With this view he sent to consult the oracle of 
Latona at Butos, which had among the Egyptians 
the highest character for veracity, and received 
for answer that the sea should avenge his cause 
by producing brazen men. He was little inclined 
to believe that such an event could ever occur ; 
but some time afterwards a body of lonians and 
Carians, who had been engaged in a voyage of 
plunder, were compelled by stress of weather to 
touch at Egypt, and landed there, clad in brazen 
armour. Some Egyptians, alarmed at their appear- 
ance, hastened to carry the news to Psamaticus ; and 
as they had never before seen persons so armed, they 
described them as brazen men*, who had arisen 
from the sea, and were plundering the country. 
He instantly conceived this to be the accomplish- 

* The surprise of the Egyptians on seeing men clad in bronze or 
brass armour would seem to miply. that they used iron for the same 
purpose. But can we trust this statement of Herodotus? Psaraa- 
ticus's helmet was also of bronze, according to the same author 

VOL. I. L 


146 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

ment of the oracular prediction ; and having entered 
into an alliance with the strangers, and engaged 
them by splendid promises to unite with his Egyp- 
tian adherents, he vanquished the eleven kings, and 
made himself master of the whole country. 

Previous to this event, the twelve kings are said 
by Herodotus to have erected the famous labyrinth 
in the nome of Crocodilopolis, afterwards called 
Arsinoe ; but since the prior claims of Moeris *, as 
the builder of that monument, appear to be fully 
established, we can only suppose that Psamaticus 
and his coadjutors completed a work commenced 
many ages previously by one of their early pre- 
decessors. 

"In acknowledgment,** continues the historian, 
** of the assistance he had received from the Ionian 
and Carian strangers, Psammitichus conferred upon 
them certain lands, termed the camp, which were 
situated opposite each other, on either bank of the 
river ; and having fulfilled all his engagements with 
them, he entrusted to their care some Egyptian 
children, to be instructed in the Greek language ; 
and from those the present interpreters of Egypt are 
said to be descended. The district they inhabited 
was near the sea coast, a short distance below 
Bubastis, on the Pelusian branch of the Nile, and 
the same Greek settlers continued in possession 
of it for a considerable period ; till Amasis, wishing 
to avail himself of their services against the Egyp- 
tians, removed them to Memphis. They were the 

• rtWrp.92. 


CHAP. ir. DIODORUS*S ACCOUNT. 147 

first foreigners whom the Egyptians received among 
them J*' and Herodotus* affirms that, even in his 
time, " the places they formerly occupied, the 
docks of their ships, and the vestiges of their 
houses, might still be seen." Such is his account 
of the temporary reign of the twelve kings, and of 
the accession of Psamaticus to the throne. 

According to Diodorust, the anarchy which pre- 
vailed in Egypt, during two whole years, after the 
rule of the Ethiopian princes, and the commotions 
excited by popular phrensy, suggested to the chief 
men erf the country the expediency of assuming 
the reins of government, and restoring order to 
the state. With this view, twelve of the most in- 
fluential persons were chosen to preside with regal 
power. Each had a peculiar province allotted to 
him, in which his authority was paramount ; and 
though independent of on^ another, they bound 
themselves by oaths of mutual concord and fidelity. 

During fifteen years their relations were main* 
tained with the greatest harmony ; but as Psama- 
ticus, whose sway extended to the Mediterranean, 
had availed himself of the opportunities offered by 
the seaports within his province of establishing 
commercial intercourse with the Phoenicians and 
Greeks, and had amassed considerable wealth by 
these means, his colleagues, jealous of his increas- 
ing power, and fearing lest he should eventually 
employ it against them, resolved to prevent his sup- 
posed designs, and to dispossess him of his province. 

* Herodot ii. 154. t Diod. i. 66. 

L 2 


148 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

They therefore prepared to attack him, and by this 
step obliged Psamaticus to adopt measures which 
his ambition might not have contemplated. Ap- 
prised of their resolutions, and finding himself 
threatened by the formidable army of all the upper 
provinces, he sent to Arabia, Caria, and Ionia, and, 
having succeeded in raising a considerable body of 
mercenaries, he was soon in a fit state to oppose 
them; and, putting himself at the head of these and 
his native troops, he gave them battle at Momem- 
phis, routed their combined forces, and obliging 
those of the princes who had escaped the slaughter 
to fly to Libya, became' possessed of an undivided 
throne. This account is more consistent with rea- 
son than that of Herodotus, which Diodorus after- 

• 

wards notices, and which he had the good judgment 
not to adopt. The fortuitous arrival of any great 
number of Greeks is in itself improbable ; but 
the necessity of believing that a party of pirates, 
driven upon the coast by adverse winds, paralysed a 
country so powerful and well garrisoned as Egypt 
then was, and uniting with the few adherents of the 
exiled Psamaticus, overcame the combined forces of 
the eleven kings, is alarming even to the credulous. 

No mention is made of the accession and de- 
thronement of the twelve kings in the catalogue of 
Manetho; and some might feel inclined to doubt 
the veracity of the two historians, did not some 
traces of these events appear in the sculptures. 

The titles " Pharaoh," *^Souten," "king of men," 
and ** lord of the upper and lower country," were 
applied to those sovereigns who had the sole direc- 


CHAP. II. TITLE OF MELEK. 149 

tion of affairs while Egypt was an independent 
state : the term " Melek*' denoted an inferior grade 
of " king/* or was reserved for those who governed 
as tributaries or viceroys of a more powerful 
prince, of which Egypt afforded some examples 
after the Persian conquest. To the twelve kings, 
each possessing a limited share in the sovereignty of 
Egypt, the honours conferred on the sole monarchs 
of the country was necessarily refused, and Melek 
was deemed a title of sufficient consequence to 
precede their names : and while this accounts for 
Psamaticus being designated in some instances 
** Melek," and in others ** king of the upper and 
lower country,** we have the satisfaction of finding 
history confirmed by the sculptures. Psamaticus 
then, and his eleven coadjutors, had, during the 
period of their joint reign, the title of Melek; and 
all monuments on which his name, with this prefix, 
is met with, may be ascribed to that epoch. 

Psamaticus was son of that Neco who is said by 
Herodotus to have been put to death by Sabaco *, 
and perhaps the same who occurs as the third king 
in the 26th Dynasty of Manetho : but there is no 
reason to suppose him one of the twelve kings ; 
and if he. really enjoyed the sovereign power^and 
ruled the whole of Upper and Lower Egypt, it is 
probable that his reign preceded the accession of 
those princes. 

♦ Vide supra. 


L 3 


150 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. 


CHAP. II. 


26th Dynasty of Scnie Kings. 


Nameflrom 
Ancient Authors. 


Name flrom the 
Sculptures. 


Obaenratiooa. 


Ascended 

the 
Tlirone. 


Stephinathis 
Nechepsus - • 
Nechao I. 
Psammiticbus - j^ 

Necbao II. 

Psammitichns 
Psammutis, or > 
Paammiv 

YaphreSy or Apries 

AmasiB, or Amons 

PMnntnicherites, l 
or Psammeni- l 
tus -J 


Psamatik I. - 
Neco 

Psamatik II. 
Psamatik III. 

Aines-Neit-s€ 


The TweWe Kings. 

' Josiah defeated and slain, 
610 B.C. 

'Neco*8 defeat by Nebu* 
chadnezzar, 606. A stela 
in the museum of Flo- 
rence gives 71 years from 
the Sd of Neco to the 
35th of Amasis. 

r Captivity of Jehoiakim, 
\ 599 B.C. 

r Pharaoh Hopbra of S. S. ; 

probably not the same as 

Psamatik III. 
'Babylon taken by Cyrus, 
• 538. Date of his 44th 

year, on the monuments. 


B. c. 

664 
610 

600 
596 

571 

525 


Psamaticus had no sooner become sole master of 
Egypt than he turned his attention to the internal 
administration of the country, and the suppression 
of party feeling consequent upon the late events. 
With this view he endeavoured to ingratiate him- 
self with the priesthood and the people, by erect- 
ing many splendid monuments, and beautifying the 
sacred edifices in the principal cities of Upper and 
Lower Egypt. At Thebes he made considerable 
additions to the great temple of Amun, now called 
Kamak ; and at Memphis the southern vestibule 
of the temple of Pthah was erected by him, and 
opposite to it a magnificent edifice for Apis, where 


CHAP. II. THE HOUSE OF APIS. 151 

he was kept when publicly exhibited. The walls 
were richly decorated with sculpture, and its roof 
was supported by colossal figures twelve cubits in 
height, which served the purpose of columns, and 
represented the king himself in the character of 
Osiris, whose emblems he bore in either hand; 
and in order to give the reader some idea of this 
building, I have introduced a view of the interior, 
restored according to the style and proportions of 
similar courts in the temples of Thebes. 

In the meantime, a strong feeling of jealousy 
was excited among the troops, in consequence of 
the marked favour shown by the king'to the foreign 
auxiliaries ; and though they submitted patiently 
for many years, at length their secret discontent was 
openly manifested. That Psamaticus should have 
been indebted for the possession of his crown to 
the aid and interposition of strangers, who, viewed 
through the unfavourable medium of strong .pre- 
judice, appeared an inferior and impure race, was 
in the highest degree humiliating to the Egyptian 
army, however disposed they might have been to 
acknowledge his claims and the injustice of his pre- 
vious exile ; and more tact was required to soothe 
the ruffled feelings of the soldier than of the people 
or the priests. The precautions necessary under 
these circumstances were altogether neglected by 
the king, who either failed to observe their growing 
disaffection, or totally disregarded it, " discovering 
on all occasions a preference of the foreigners, to 
the disparagement of his native troops * : '* and he 

* Diodorus, lib. i. Ixvii, 
L 4 


152 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. IK 

was not only guilty of injustice towards many of 
them, by prolonging their usual time of garrison 
duty*, in the frontier towns of Marea, Daphne 
of Pelusium, and Elephantine, where they con- 
tinued three years without being relieved, but he 
even deprived them of the post of honour in the 
Syrian war, and assigned the right wing to the 
Greek troops, and the left to the Egyptians, t 
Upon this, their indignation knew no bounds; 
and, quitting the camp, they, joined by other regi- 
ments which had remained in Egypt, abandoned 
the service of Psamaticus, and, to the number 
of 240,(XX), retired into Ethiopia. As soon as the 
king received intelligence of it, he endeavoured 
to dissuade them from their project; and having 
followed them himself as far as Elephantine^, he 
sent forward the Greek auxiliaries, and some of 
his most faithful Egyptian adherents, with instruc- 
tions, if possible, to prevail on them to return. 
It was not till after they had passed Aboccis § in 
Ethiopia, that these emissaries of the Egyptian 
monarch overtook them; and using every kind ot 
of remonstrance and entreaty, they solemnly con- 
jured them not to desert the gods of their country, 
their wives and families : but all without effect ; 
and one of them tauntingly observed, that, where- 

♦ Herodot. ii. 30. f Diod. i. 67. 

j: Diodorus says he first sent to them, and then followed by water 
to the confines of Kgypt. The inscription at Aboosimbel, written by 
the Greeks who accompanied him, confirms this, stating positively that 
** King Psamaticus went as far as Elephantine :"-— " BASI AEOS EA0ON- 
TOS ES EAE*ANTINAN ^AMATIXO." 

§ Aboccis I suppose to have stood near Aboosimbel. They must 
have gone beyond this place before they overtook them. 


CHAP. II. DESERTION OF THE TROOPS. 153 

ever they went, provided they had their arms, and 
proved themselves to be men, they could always 
obtain both wives and children. 

Continuing their march into Upper Ethiopia, 
" they entered the service of the monarch of that 
country, and in return received a considerable ex- 
tent of territory upon the confines, from which the 
Ethiopian prince ordered them to expel a tribe of 
people at that time in rebellion against him : and 
this migration of the Egyptian troops introducing 
the arts and manners of a refined nation, had a very 
sensible effect in civilising the Ethiopians." * 

The exact position of the country they occupied 
is unknown. Herodotus places it on the Nile, at 
about the same distance beyond Meroe as this last 
is from Elephantine, or fifty days* journey t; and 
adds, that these Automoli (deserters) "are known 
by the name of Asmach, which being translated 
signifies * standing on the left hand * of the king." 
Strabot states that " they settled near Meroe, 
which was afterwards governed by their queen j** 
and calls them "Sebritae, a name implying stran- 
gers :" but Pliny §, on the authority of Aristocreon, 
reckons "seventeen days from Meroe to Esar, a 
city II of the Egyptians who fled from Psammaticus, 
and who are reported to have lived there 300 
years." 

A singular connection may be observed between 
the names given by different writers to this people 

♦ Herodot. ii. 30. + This distance is unreasonable. 

t Strabo, 16. § Plin. vi. 30. 

II Strabo calls their country Tenesis. 


154 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

and their country. ** Esar/' says Pliny, " is called 
by Bion Sapen, and is supposed to mean stran- 
gers ;*• and the neighbouring Symbari, Semberitae, 
Sambri, and Sembolitis, cannot fail to recall the 
Sebrites of Strabo, or the great similarity of the 
words shemmoy " a stranger/* and beri, "new," in 
the ancient Egyptian language. It is not less re- 
markable that Esar is the pure Arabic word sig- 
nifying * the left hand/ synonymous with shemal ; 
and this last is plainly pointed out in the oLo-fut^ of 
Herodotus, where the letter x has been accidentally 
changed for the X it so much resembles. It is 
highly improbable that 240,000 men could have 
had any duty ** on the left hand of the king j" a 
post, moreover, reserved for the sons of the mo- 
narch, or the chief persons of the country'; and we 
may rather conclude this name to have been 
assumed in commemoration of the affront offered 
them by Psamaticus, and the cause of their de- 
sertion ; or to have been given these strangers * in 
consequence of their coming from the left, or north, 
which was considered the leftt of the world, and 
is still so called (ShemcU) by the Arabs of the 
present day. 

The reign of Psamaticus continued fifty-four 
years, twenty-nine of which he employed in the 
siege and capture of a large town of Syria called 
Azotus 1 9 and since Diodorus tells us that the 

* They had, perhaps, the two names — ** strangers," and "people 
from the left." 

■I* The east was the front, the west the back, of the world. Plutarch 
supposes the north to be the right side of the world. De Isid. s. 32. 

j: Now Ezdod, or Eshddod. Azotus (Ashdod) was on the coast 
between Gaza and Joppa. 


CHAP. II. EXPERIMENT ON LANGUAGE. 155 

defection of his troops happened during the Syrian 
war, it is probable that the taking of Azotus pre- 
ceded that event. 

It was in his reign, and by his order, that an idle 
experiment, since repeated in later times, was made 
to discover the language of nature, or at least to 
ascertain the oldest nation, and the oldest tongue. 
The account is thus given by Herodotus. * " Be- 
fore the reign of Psammitichus, the Egyptians con- 
sidered themselves the most ancient of men ; but 
this prince having taken considerable pains to 
investigate the truth of the matter, the result was, 
that they reckoned the Phrygians more ancient 
than themselves, and themselves than the rest of 
mankind. Psammitichus himself suggested the fol- 
lowing method of solving the question. A shep- 
herd was ordered to take two children just born, 
of humble parentage, and to pay particular atten- 
tion to their early habits, and the mode of bringing 
them up. He was strictly enjoined never to speak 
in their presence, to place them in a sequestered 
hut, and at proper intervals to allow them to suck 
the milk of goats, whilst he was attending to other 
employments. By this means the king expected 
to ascertain what word they would of their own 
accord first articulate. The experiment succeeded 
to his wish: the shepherd complied with every 
particular of his instructions ; and at the end of two 
years, on paying his usual morning visit, and open- 
ing the door of their apartment, both the children 

* Herod, ii. 2. 


156 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS* CHAP. lU 

extended their arms towards him, in an attitude of 
supplication, and pronounced the word *becos.** 
It did not at first excite his attention ; but, on their 
repeating the same expression whenever he ap- 
peared, he thought it right to mention the cir- 
cumstance to his master, who ordered the children 
to be brought before him. When Psammidchus 
heard them repeat the same word, he sought to dis- 
cover among what people it was used, and found it 
was the Phrygian name for bread ; and on this 
account the Egyptians, after they had seriously 
considered the matter, were led to the conclusion 
that the Phrygians were of greater antiquity than 
themselves. That this experiment was really 
made, I myself heard at Memphis from the priests 
of Vulcan ; but the Greeks, in order to embellish 
the story, relate that Psammitichus caused the 
children to be nursed by women whose tongues 
had been previously cut out." 

During the whole of his reign, Psamaticus main- 
tained a direct intercourse with the Greeks, and 
established commercial relations with them as well 
as the Phoenicians t ; and so much encouragement 
was given to foreigners that many settled in Lower 
Egypt ; and by means of the constant communica- 
tion between Europe and Egypt, the Greeks be- 
came acquainted with a country whose history and 
internal administration had been previously un- 
known to them. And the liberal policy of this 

* Or Bee; the 04 being a Greek termination. M. Larcher inge- 
niously supposes it to have been in imitation of the cry of the goats, 
t Diodor. i. 56. 


€HAP. II. INCURSIONS OF THE SCYTHIANS. 157 

monarch continued to be followed at a subsequent 
period, particularly by Amasis, who reigned before, 
and by Nectanebo who lived after, the Persian 
invasion. 

In the reign of Psamaticus, the Scythians* 
having subjugated the whole of Asia, advanced 
towards Egypt with the intention of invading that 
country. They had expelled the Cimmerians from 
Europe ; and led by their valiant king Madyas, 
they over-ran the provinces to the left of Mount 
Caucasus on their way from the Palus Maeotis, and 
defeated C^axares, the Median monarch, who was 
besieging Ninus (Nineveh), the capital of Assyria. 
They then penetrated into Syria ; and Psamaticus, 
alarmed at their approach, went forward to meet 
them, and partly by presents, and partly by entreaty, 
prevailed upon them to desist from their project; 
thus saving Egypt from the aggressions of a dan- 
gerous foe. 

Psamaticus was succeeded by his son Neco II., 
whose wars and successes in Syria are recorded by 
sacred as well as profane writers. Studious of 
military renown and the promotion of commerce, 
he had no sooner ascended the throne than he ap- 
plied himself to the re-organisation of the army and 
the equipment of a powerful fleet j and, recollect- 
ing the imprudent conduct of his father, he avoided 
all innovations which might tend to alienate the 
good will of his people, or sow the seeds of discord 
among his troops ; and while he courted the friend- 
ship of the Greeks, and appreciated the important 

* Herodot. i. 104, 105. 


158 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

services he received from auxiliaries of that nation, 
he laid aside every appearance of partiality, treating 
them with proper consideration, and giving them a 
post next to the Egyptian troops, as his wise prede- 
cessors had done to their allies in the wars of Asia. 
In the Mediterranean* he fitted out a fleet of 
triremes, and another in the Red Sea ; and having 
engaged some expert Phoenician pilots and ma- 
riners, he sent them on a voyage of discovery 
along the coast of Africa. " They were ordered 
to start from the Arabian Gulf, and come round 
through the Pillars of Hercules (now the Straits of 
Gibraltar) into the North Sea, and so return to 
Egypt. Sailing, therefore, down the Gulf, they 
passed into the Southern Ocean ; and when autumn 
arrived they laid up their ships, and sowed the 
land. Here they remained till harvest time ; and, 
having reaped the comt, -they continued their 
voyage. In this manner they occupied two years ; 
and the third having brought them by the Pillars of 
Hercules to Egypt, they related (what to me appears 
incredible, however others may be disposed to be- 
lieve it), that they had the sun on their right hand ; 
and by these means was the form of Africa first 
known.** The historian t then relates, on the au- 
thority of the Carthaginians, a second attempt to 
circumnavigate that continent, under Sataspes, the 


* Herodotus calls it the North Sea. The Arabs now style it the 
White Sea. 

-f* It may appear singular that they should carry grain for this pur- 
pose; but the same was done by Tuniir in his march to China, who 
had with his army waggons laden with seed com. 

t Herod, iv. 42, 43. 


CHAP. II. VOYAGES ROUND AFRICA. 159 

son of Teaspes, a Persian, who, being alarmed at the 
length of the voyage and the dreary solitude of those 
regions, returned without accomplishing his task* 
He had been condemned to the cross by Xerxes for 
offering violence to the daughter of Zopyrus, the son 
of Megabyzus ; but his mother, the sister of Darius, 
obtained his pardon on condition of his going round 
Africa. He therefore repaired to Eg3rptj and 
having there engaged a ship and crew, he bailed 
to the Pillars of Hercules, entered the ocean, and 
passed the promontory of Soloeis on the coast of 
Africa. * He thence continued southwards ; but, 
after spending several months at sea, he returned to 
Egypt, and endeavoured to exculpate himself to 
the king, saying he found it impossible to proceed. 
Xerxes, however, rejected this excuse, and inflicted 
upon him the punishment to which he had been 
previously condemned. 

That similar expeditions round Africa were per- 
formed by other people is testified by ancient au- 
thors ; and that of the Carthaginians under Hanno 
was described in Punic by the commander himself, 
and afterwards translated into Greek. Pliny states t 
that *^ Hanno, a Carthaginian, circumnavigated 
the continent of Africa, from Gades to the ex- 
tremity of the Arabian Gulf, and wrote all the 
details of his voyage, which was undertaken at the 
period when Carthage was most flourishing ; *' and 


* The promontory of Soloeis, or Soloentia, called also the Libyan 
headland ; and supposed by some to be the Cape Cantin of modem 
Africa, at the western extremity of Mount Atlas. 

f Plin. lib. ii. 67.> and lib. v. 1. ; and Arrian's Rerum Indie, ad fin. 


160 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

" founded several towns on the coast,'* none of 
^hich remained in the reign of Vespasian. He 
also mentions a certain Eudoxus, a cotemporary of 
Cornelius Nepos and of Ptolemy Lathyrus *, who 
went round Africa from the Arabian Gulf to 
Gades: and others before him were reported to 
have performed the same journey for the purposes 
of commerce, t 

The voyage of Hanno happened some time after 
that undertaken by order of Necoj the honour, 
therefore, of being the first to equip an expedition 
for the purpose of making this discovery belongs to 
the Egyptian monarch, who thereby ascertained 
the peninsular form of Africa, about twenty-one 
centuries before the Cape of Good Hope was seen 
by Diazt, or doubled by Vasco de Gama. 

In mentioning the expedition sent by Neco, 
Herodotus makes one remark which is singular, 
from its confirming the truth of the statements 
detailed to him by the Egyptians : for it is evident 
they could not have passed the Cape of Gt)od 
Hope without observing the phenomenon he men- 
tions ; and the assertion that the sun (when rising) 
was on their right hand, though so improbable 
to Herodotus, is highly satisfactory to his modern 


♦ Pliny says he fled from that king, " cum Lathurum regem fiigeret ;" 
but forcibly sent by him is more probable. Plin. ii. 67. 

JPlin. loc. cit. lib. ii. 
Bartholemew Diaz discovered it in 1487, in the reign of John II., 
King of Portugal, but did not land. He named it Capo Tormen- 
toso, from the storms he experienced there; but the king after- 
wards changed its name to Cape of Good Hope; and Emanuel, his 
successor, sent Vasco de Gama, in 14:97, with orders to double it and 
proceed to India. 


CHAP. II. CANAL TO THE RED SEA. l6l 

readers, who are indebted to him for thus express- 
ing his doubts, and the proofs of a fact which might 
otherwise have been called in question. 

Previous to projecting this voyage of discovery, 
Neco had commenced re-opening the canal from 
the Nile to the Red Sea, which had been cut 
many years before by Sesostris, or Remeses the 
Great. The work, however, if we may believe 
Herodotus, was abandoned ; an oracle warning the 
Egyptian monarch that he was labouring for the 
barbarian.* This may be true ; but we cannot 
attach any credit to the statement that 120,000 
Egyptians perished before he desisted from the 
undertaking; or, that he was the first who com- 
menced the canal t ; and not only do Pliny 1:, 
Strabo§, and Aristotle attribute it to Sesostris, but 
the monuments which remain in the towns upon 
its banks afford a satisfactory testimony of the 
accuracy of those writers ||, and of the erroneous 
information of Herodotus and Diodorus. 

Neco also turned his attention to the Egyptian 
conquests in Asia ; and fearing lest the growing 
power of the Babylonians should endanger the 
territories acquired by the arms of his victorious 
predecessors, he determined to check their pro- 

* The same may be applied to the projected communication by the 
Euphrates. 

-f Vide supra, p. 70. Herodotus and Diodorus mention Neco as 
the projector of the canal. 

X Plin. vi. 33. ** Navigabilem aiveum perducere in Nilum . . . primus 
omnium Sesostris . . . cogitavit, mox Darius , . . deinde Ptolemseus 


sequens." 


$ Strabo (17.) says, ''The canal was commenced by Sesostris, be- 
fore the Trojan war. Some suppose by Psammitichus, the son, who 
only began the work, and died. It was afterwards finished by Darius." 

If Assuming him to be Remeses 11. 

VOL. I. H 


16« THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

gress^ and to attack the enemy on his own frontier* 
With this view he collected a powerful army, and 
entering Palestine, followed the route along the 
sea-coast of Judsea, previously taken by the Egyp- 
tians under various kings, who had penetrated 
into Asia, intending to besiege the town of Car- 
chemish* on the Euphrates.! But Josiah, king of 
Judah, offended at the passage of the Egyptian army 
through his territories, resolved to impede, if he 
was unable to prevent, their march. Neco t learn- 
ing the approach of the Jewish monarch, and ap- 
prised of his intentions, sent messengers to engage 
him to desist from his uncalled-for interference^ 
assuring him he had no hostile intentions against 
Judaea, but against an enemy with whom he was at 
war; that his expedition was undertaken by the 
sanction, and at the express command of God ; and 
warning Josiah lest his imprudence should be fatal 
to him.§ This conciliatory message was of no avail ; 
and Josiah having posted himself in the valley of 
Megiddo, prepared to oppose the Egyptians. 

Megiddo was a city in the tribe of Manasseh, 
between forty and fifty miles to the north of Jeru- 
salem, and within three hours of the coast, and is 
called by Herodotus Magdolus. In this valley the 

* Called Manbeg g^^^*^ in the Arabic, and Mabog in the Syriac 
versions. 

•\^ 2 Chron. xxxv. 20. " Necho, king of Egypt, came up to fight 
against Carchemish, by Euphrates." 

J In the Targum, or Chaldee Paraph ; and the Syriac and Arabic 
Tersions, Neco is called " the lame Pharaoh." 

§ 2 Chron. xxx. 21. " But he (Necho) sent ambassadors to him, 
saying, what have I to do with thee, thou king of Judah ? I come 
not against thee this day, but against the house wherewith I have 
war : for God commanded me to make haste. Forbear then from med- 
dling with God, who is with me, that he destroy thee not." 


GHAF. 11. DEFEAT OF JOSIAH. 163 

feeble forces of the Jewish king attacked the Egyp- 
tians ; but they were routed with great slaughter, 
and Josiah being wounded in the neck with an 
arrow*, ordered his attendants to take him from the 
field. Escaping from the heavy showers of arrows 
with which their broken ranks were overwhelmed, 
they removed him from the chariot in which he had 
been wounded, and placing him in " a second one 
that he had,** they conveyed him to Jerusalem, 
where he died, t 

Intent upon his original project, Neco did not stop 
to revenge himself upon the Jews for the affront 
they had offered him; but continued his march 
to the Euphrates. Three months had scarcely 
elapsed, when, returning victorious from the cap- 
ture of Carchemish and the defeat of the Babylo- 
nians, he learned that, though Josiah had left 
an elder son, Jehoahaz had caused himself to be 
proclaimed king on the death of his father, without 
intimating his intention, or soliciting him to sanc- 
tion his election ; and, considering this neglect as 
a token of hostile feeling, he was highly incensed, 
and resolved on punishing his insolence. With this 
view he ordered Jehoahaz to meet him ** at Riblaht 

* On the authority of the Arabic version ; which also says he was 
killed at Megiddo, being wounded by Pharaoh with two arrows. 

f 2 Chron. xxxv. 22. et seq, " Josiah would not turn his face from 
him, but disguised himself, that he might fight with him, and heark- 
ened not unto the words of Necho from the mouth of God, and came 
to fight in the valley of Megiddo. And the archers shot at king 
Josiah : and the king said to his servants, Have me away, for I am 
sore wounded. His servants therefore took him out of tnat chariot, 
and put him in the second chariot that he had : and they brought him to 
Jerusalem, and he died." 

iThe Syriac and Arabic versions have Deblath. The Hebrew d 
r are easily mistaken. 

M 2 


l64 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP, II. 

in the land of Hamath * ;" and having deposed 
him, and condemned the land to pay a tribute of 
100 talents of silver t, and a talent of gold t, he 
carried him a prisoner to Jerusalem. On arriving 
there, Neco made Eliakim, the eldest son of Josiah, 
king, in the room of his father, and changed his 
name to Jehoiakim ; and, taking the silver and gold 
which had been levied upon the Jewish people, 
returned to Egypt, with the captive Jehoahaz, 
who there terminated his short and unfortunate 
caieer. 

The victories and triumphant return of Osirei, 
the Remesejs, and many Egyptian monarchs, are 
represented on the walls of the Theban temples, 
or in other parts of Egypt and Nubia ; and the 
conquerors are seen to present their prisoners to 
the deity, to whose special favour they supposed 
themselves indebted for the success of their arms. 
We might, therefore, reasonably expect to find some 
indication of the victory, gained over the Baby- 
lonians and Jews, especially as the name of Neco 
occurs among the hieroglyphics in the great hall 
of Karnak : but this is the sole record of him at 
Thebes, and merely tends to show that he ruled 
both the upper and lower country. And though 
his ovals occur on vases, and some small objects of 
art, no sculptures record his victories, or the glories 
of his reign ; and a subject of such great interest as 

* 2 Kings, xxiii. 33. Now Hamah. 

f Reckoning the Hebrew silver talent at 353/. 1 Is, 10J(/., this sum is 
35^59/. 7*. 6</, 

% 5075/. 15*. Hd. The total being 40,435/. 3*. ^d. 


CHAP. 11. JERUSALEM OR CADYTIS. l65 

the defeat of the Jewish king is in vain looked for 
on the monuments of Egypt. 

The success of Neco, in his conflict with Josiah 
at Megiddo, and the taking of Jerusalem, are 
noticed by profane as well as by sacred writers. 
Herodotus*, who includes the Jews under the 
general name of Syrians, says, that he routed them 
at Magdolus, and afterwards took Cadytis, a large 
city of Syria, in Palestine, which, he adds, in his 
opinion, " is very little less than Sardis.*'t And 
that by Cadytis he means Jerusalem is evident, 
from the ancient Jewish as well as the modern 
Hebrew and Arabic name of that city ; Kadushat* 
" the holy," being an epithet applied by the He- 
brews to Jerusalem, as el Qods or Cots is the name 
by which it is known to the Arabs at the present 
day. This title it received after the building of 
the Temple by Solomon. 

Pleased with his successes, the Egyptian monarch 
dedicated the dress he wore in the campaign to 
the deity who was supposed to have given him 
the victory, whom Herodotus, with the prejudices 
natural to a Greek, believed to be the Apollo of 
Miletus. § But Neco did not long enjoy the ad- 
vantages he had obtained ; and in the fourth year 

* Herod, ii. 159. f Herod, iii. 5. 

J The sh is easily converted into M, even in Eastern dialects, and 
still more readily ia t substituted for sh by the Greeks, who had not the 
sound of the Hebrew and Arabic sh, £1 Qods also signifies '* the 
holy." 

§ " The vest he consecrated to Apollo, and sent to the Milesian 
Branchidae," ii. 159. Nothing can be more improbable, considering 
the contempt in which the Greeks and their religious notiona were held 
by the £g}'ptians, than that Neco should have preferred a Greek deity 
to the whole Pantheon of his own gods. 

M 3 


166 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

after that expedition, alarmed at the increasing 
power of the Babylonians, and desirous to check 
their incursions into those provinces which had 
long been tributary to Egypt, and had cost his 
predecessors much trouble to suSdue, he again 
marched into Syria, and advanced to the Euphrates. 
The Babylonians were prepared for his approach : 
Nebuchadnezzar opposed him with a powerful army, 
completely routed the Egyptians, recovered the 
town of Carchemish, and, pushing his conquests 
through Palestine, took from the Egyptian monarch 
all the territory belonging to the Pharaohs, from 
the Euphrates to the southern extremity of Syria. * 
Nor was it in the power of Neco to recover the 
provinces thus wrested from him ; and he was 
obliged patiently to submit to these losses, and 
to content himself with the defence of his own 
frontier, t 

Jerusalem now became subject to the victorious 
Babylonian ; and some time after, being displeased 
with the Jewish king, Nebuchadnezzar carried away 
the sacred vessels from the temple, and led many 
noble youths, with Jehoiakim himself, prisoners to 
Babylon. The calamities of the Jews did not ter- 
minate here. The ensuing year Nebuchadnezzar t 

* 2 Kings, xxiv. 7. "And the king of Egypt came not again any 
more out of his land, for the king of Babylon had taken from the river 
of Egypt unto the river Euphrates all that pertained to the king of 
Egypt." 

f This defeat of Neco " happened in the fourth year of Jehoiakim/' 
when ** Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, smote him by the river 
Euphrates in Carchemish." Jerem. xlvi. 2. 

j: Or Nabuchodonosor II., the son of Nabopolazzar, who bad asso* 
ciated him in the kingdom. The Arabs call him Bokhtonusr. The 
commencement of the name is the title " Lord,^* which is found in the 


CHAP. II. MESSAGE FROM THE ELiBANS. l67 

sent for Jehoiachin, the son of the deposed monarch, 

who, though only eight years of age*, had been 

chosen to succeed him, and appointed Zedekiah, 

" his father's brother," king in his stead. Ten 

thousand captives, among whom were the principal 

people of Jerusalem, 7000 fighting men, and 1000 

smiths and artificers, with the treasures of the 

temple and the palace, were carried to Babylon ; 

and Zedekiah became a vassal of the Chaldean 

monarch. 

A short time previous to the captivity of Jeho- 

iakim Neco died, and was succeeded by Psama- 
ticus II., whom Herodotus calls Psammis. Little 
worthy of remark took place during his reign, 
except an expedition into Ethiopia, and the arrival 
of an embassy from the Elaeans.f ** These people 
boasted that the regulations of the Olympic games 
were the most just and unobjectionable that had ever 
been instituted ; and that even the Egyptians, who 
were considered the wisest of men, could not invent 
any of a more perfect kind. On their arrival in 
Egypt^they explained the object of their mission ; 
the king, therefore, convoked an assembly of men 
reputed for their wisdom and experience, before 
whom the Elaeans stated the rules of their games, in- 
quiring at the same time if they could suggest any 
improvements. After some consultation, the Egyp- 
tians asked whether any of their fellow-citizens 


ancient Egyptian Neb, the Indian Neeb, Nowab, and the Arab N&ib. 
Nusr implies " victory." 

* 2 CnroH. xxxvi. 9., diifering from the account in 2 Kings, xxiv. 8. 

f Herod, ii. 160. Diodoms (i. 95.) says they sent to ^asis. 

M 4 


168 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CIJAP. II, 

were permitted to contend at the games ; and upon 
being informed that every one, either of their own 
or any other Greek state, was at liberty to enter 
the lists, they decided that such regulations were 
directly at variance with every notion of justice; 
since it was impossible for them not to favour their 
fellow-citizens, to the prejudice of a candidate from 
another place. 

" And they concluded by saying, * If you are 
really anxious for impartiality, and have come to 
Egypt to learn our opinion, we recommend you 
to exclude the Elaeans, and to confine the games to 
foreign competitors.' " 

Psamaticus II. was succeeded by the third of 
that name ; but whether he was the same as Apries 
remains uncertain. Of Apries, or Vaphres, we have 
some account in Herodotus and Diodorus, and he is 
styled in the Bible history Pharaoh Hophra.* His 
contemporary in Judaea was Zedekiah, who had been 
made king by Nebuchadnezzar, and who, thinking 
that a favourable opportunity now presented itself 
for throwing off the Babylonian yoke, made a treaty 
with the king of Egypt. But the war in which 
Apries was engaged with the Syrians, and after- 
wards with the Cyreneans, prevented his affording 
any great assistance to his ally; and though his 
" army" by entering Judaea, obliged " the Chal- 
deans** to raise the siege of Jerusalem f, and 
retire from their positions, the king of Babylon, 
having again advanced to that capital, succeeded 

* Phrah Hophra, r^Dn wnD. In the Chaldee Paraph. Mvan. 
f Jeremiah, xxxvii. 8. 11. 


CHAP. II. PROPHECIES. — REIGN OF APRIES. l69 

in taking it in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, rased 
it to the ground, and carried away the remainder 
of the people captives. And this momentary 
aid, and the inutility of placing reliance on the 
protection of Apries, led Ezekiel to compare the 
Egyptians to a broken reed *, which was to pierce 
the hand of him who leaned upon it. 

Many other prophecies respecting the calamities 
consequent upon this treaty with Egypt, and the 
rebellion of the Jews against the Babylonians, are 
met with in the Bible ; and Egypt itself was threat- 
ened by the arms of the victorious Nebuchadnezzar. 
But it is difficult to determine in what time and in 
what manner the last prophecy was accomplished, 
or to discover the extent of the calamities which 
happened to Egypt from the conquests of the Ba- 
bylonians, though the scriptural account appears 
to fix those events to the time of Nebuchadnezzar. 
They may, however, refer to the reverses of Apries, 
and to the subsequent confusion which prevailed in 
Egypt after the rebellion of Amasis. 

The commencement of the reign of Apries was 
prosperous, and he was considered "the most 
fortunate monarch who had hitherto ruled in 
Egypt t, next to his grandfather Psammitichus/* 
He sent an expedition against the island of Cyprus ; 
besieged and took Gazal: and the city of Sidon ; 
engaged and vanquished the king of Tyre by 
sea ; and, being uniformly successful, he made 

* Ezek. xxix. 6, 7. f Herod, ii. 161. 

i This is foretold by Jeremiah, xlvii. 1., " Before that Pharaoh took 
Graze," or Azah ; properly Ghazah, or Ghuzzeh, which is the modern 
name. 


170 THE ANCIBNT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

himself master of Phcenicia and Palestine, recover- 
ing much of the territory, and that influence in 
Syria which bad been taken from Egypt by the 
victories of Nebuchadnezzar. He next sent an 
army against the C3rreneans of Libya; but h^e 
fortune deserted him: his troops were defeated, 
and, mortified by this severe and unexpected check, 
they attributed their disgrace to Apries himself, 
imagining that so disastrous a project could only 
have been devised by one who was desirous of thdr 
destruction. They felt persuaded that his views 
were to y^esken the power of the military class, 
and thus to remove the only barrier to that am- 
bition which aimed at nothing less than absolute 
dominion, and the subversion of the liberty of his 
subjects : and excited by these feelings, and medi- 
tating revenge for the sufferings and disgrace they 
had already endured, the recurrence of which could 
only be prevented by a timely declaration of their 
sentiments, they refused to acknowledge his autho- 
rity ; and being joined by the friends of those 
who had been slain, they openly raised the standard 
of revolt. The news of this event greatly surprised 
and exasperated the king; but deeming it more 
prudent to adopt mild and conciliatory measures, 
he sent Amasis, one of his ablest generals, with 
orders to use every endeavour to appease the 
tumult, and to persuade the mutineers to return to 
their duty. 

Amasis, having arrived at the camp, addressed 
the soldiers in an appropriate speech ; begging them 
to desist from their purpose, and to pay respect to 


CHAP. II. AMASIS REBELS AGAINST HIM. I?! 

the royal authority, as they had previously done, 
and as was due to one who had their interest at 
heart. While he was speaking, an Egyptian, who 
stood behind him, placed a helmet on his head, pro- 
claiming him king, and affirming, in the name of his 
comrades, that they were willing to acknowledge him 
as their master, and the ruler of Egypt. Though 
fer from expecting such a proceeding, Amasis 
required little persuasion to accept the honour 
conferred upon him by so powerful a body ; and 
being sensible that further attempts to recall their 
allegiance to Apries would be fruitless, and to 
sacrifice his own advantage would not benefit his 
sovereign, he acquiesced in the resolutions of those 
who had elected him as their chief, and put himself 
at their head. 

Apries, on receiving intelligence of what had 
happened, despatched Patarbemis, one of the most 
eminent men g£ his court, with directions to bring 
Amasis alive to his presence. Having arrived at 
the camp, he told Amasis the purport of his mission, 
and the order of the king to appear before him. 
Amasis, who was seated on horseback, treated 
Patarbemis with indignity, and sent an insulting 
message to his master ; adding, that he intended 
to go of his own accord, and hoped Apries would 
not take any trouble in looking for him, as he 
should soon present himself to his majesty with 
several companions. Patarbemis, fully compre- 
hending his intention, from his manner of speaking, 
and seeing the preparations he was making, re- 
turned without loss of time to acquaint his sove- 


172 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

reign with the state of affairs. No sooner had he 
arrived than Apries, finding he had failed to bring 
Amasis, without either inquiring the reason or 
listening to his statement, commanded his nose 
and ears to be cut off: an order which was imme- 
diately carried into execution. This barbarous 
and uncalled-for outrage, committed upon one so 
much esteemed by all classes, exasperated even 
those who had hitherto sided with Apries, and the 
greater part without hesitation deserted him, and 
went over to Amasis. Finding himself thus aban- 
doned by the Egyptians, he collected the auxiliary 
troops who were about him, consisting of 30,000 
lonians and Carians, and prepared to oppose the 
enemy. The hostile armies met at Momemphis, 
Apries leading his small band of Greeks and the 
few Egyptians who had remained faithful to him, 
and Amasis at the head of the native troops. The 
foreigners fought bravely, but, greatly inferior in 
numbers, they were obliged at length to give way ; 
and Apries, falling alive into the hands of the 
Egyptians, was carried prisoner to Sais, where he 
was -confined in the palace he had previously in- 
habited as king, which now belonged to his rival. 

Amasis did not show himself unworthy of the 
success he had obtained, and the singular favour of 
fortune. He treated his royal prisoner with great 
kindness, and used all his influence to preserve his 
life, in opposition to the representations and wishes 
of the Egyptians ; nor did he yield to their ur- 
gent request, till they accused him of treating 
them with injustice, by showing favour to one who 


CHAP, ir. DEATH OF APRIES FORETOLD IN S. S, 173 

was their enemy. Unable, therefore, to oppose 
demands put forth under colour of a right, Amasis 
consented, with reluctance, to deliver up his cap- 
tive to their resentment : and "having strangled 
the unfortunate Apries, they buried him in the 
tomb of his ancestors, which was in the sacred 
inclosure of Minerva's temple, very near the prin- 
cipal edifice, on the left, entering. In this build- 
ing all the princes of the Saite house were interred, 
and among the number Amasis also ; but his se- 
pulchre is more remote from the principal build- 
ing than those of Apries and his predecessors.*' 

Such, according to Herodotus, was the tragical 
end of Apries ; a monarch who, in the zenith of 
his glory, felt persuaded it was not in the power 
of a deity to dispossess him of the kingdom, or 
to shake the stability of his sway.* And this ac- 
count of his arrogance satisfactorily accords with 
the Bible, where Ezekiel f speaks of the " king of 
Egypt" as " the great dragon that lieth in the midst 
of the rivers, which hath said. My river is mine own, 
and I have made it for myself;" and his overthrow 
and subsequent captivity and death are foretold by 
Jeremiah, with remarkable precision, in the follow- 
ing words t : — " I will give Pharaoh Hophra, king 
of Egypt, into the hands of his enemies, and into 
the hands of them that seek his life." 

The slight acquaintance we are able to obtain of 
the state of Egypt prevents our discovering the 
precise mode in which the fulfilment of the other 

* Herod, ii. 169. /^^i \ t Ezek. xxix. 3. 

\ Jerem. xliv. 30. 


174 THE AKCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

predictions took place. Amun-No*, or Thebes, 
and Egypt, with their gods and kings, were to be 
punished, and Pharaoh, and all that trusted in him, 
to be delivered into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar, 
and of his servants ; Egypt was to be given into 
the hands of the people of the north t, and after- 
wards to be inhabited as in the days of old. 

Still more severely is it denounced in the pro- 
phecies of Ezekiel. t 

The Deity threatens to make the land of Egypt 
*• utterly waste and desolate, from the tower of 
Syene § even unto the border of Ethiopia. || No 
foot of man shall pass through it, nor foot of beast 
shall pass through it, neither shall it be inhabited 
forty years. And I will make the land of Egypt 
desolate in the midst of the countries that are deso- 
late, and her cities among the cities that are laid 
waste shall be desolate forty years ; and I will scatter 
the Egyptians among the nations, and will disperse 
them through the countries. Yet .... at the end 
of forty years will I gather the Egyptians from the 
people whither they were scattered; and I will 

* Jerem. xlvi. 25, In the Hebrew version it is ** Amun of No," or 
Na ; in the Syriac, " Amun of the waters ;" in the Targum, or Ohaldee 
Paraph., " Alexandria," which was not yet founded. 

+ Jerem. xlvi. 24, 25, 26. J Ezek. xxix. 10. et seq. 

9 In the Septuagint and Arabic versions it is ** from Migdol and 
Syene (E'Sooan) unto the borders of Ethiopia." The Hebrew and 
Syriac, 'as well as the Targum, have "from the tower of Syene," or, 
" from Migdol to Syene Cji^id), and to the confines of Ethiopia" (Cash). 
Syene being on the borders of Ethiopia, the sense seems to require 
" from the towers of Syene," or, " from Migdol to Syene," (which is), 
on the confines of Ethiopia. 

II Syene, Elephantine, and Philae continued to be the frontier towns 
of Egypt, even in the time of the Romans, though their dominions 
in the Pharaonic time extended beyond. *' Regni claustra Phils.'* 
Lucan, x. 313.; vide also Strabo and Procopius. 


CHAP. II, PROPHECIES AGAINST EGYPT. 175 

bring again the captivity of Egypt, and will cause 
them to return into the land of Pathros, into the 
land of their habitation, and they shall be there a 
base kingdom. It shall be the basest of kingdoms ; 
neither shall it exalt itself any more above the 
nations : for I will diminish them, that they shall 
no more rule over the nations, and it shall no 
more be the confidence of the house of Israel.**. . . 
" And the sword shall come upon Egypt .... 
Ethiopia, Libya, and Lydia*, and all the mingled 
people t, and Chub t, and the men of the land 
that is in league shall fall with them, by the sword. 
.... I will also make the multitude of Egypt to 
cease by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of 
Babylon .... they shall draw their swords against 
Egypt, and fill the land with slain. § .... I will 
also destroy their idols, and cause their images to 
cease out of Noph ||, and there shall be no more a 
prince of the land of Egypt, .... and I will make 
Pathros % desolate, and will set fire in Zoan •*, and 

* In Hebrew, Cush, Phut, and Lud. 

I In Hebrew any, arab. The same word is used for the " mixed 
titude " which went out with Moses at the Exodus. 

f Hebrew, Cub. Probably the Cubii of Ptolemy, a people who 
lived in Mareotis. 

§ Ezek. XXX. 4. et seq, 

II Noph was Memphis; called by the Egyptians Memfi, Mefi, Menfi, 
or Menbe, and Men-nofri, or Ma-nofri, " the place of good,*' as well as 
Pthah-ei, " the abode of Pthah." In Hosea (ix. 6.) it is styled Moph. 
The Arabs call it Ma-nouf, or Menouf. In hieroglyphics it is written 
Men-nofri, followed by a pyramid, 

t Pathros or Pathures, in the Septuagint ^aBiopng, is Pa-athyris, 
" belonging to Athor," or Aphrodite. It might be supposed to refer 
to Aphroditopolis, or Athrilns, or Atarbeckis ; but there is more reason 
to believe it to be Pathyris, or the district of western Thebes, which 
was afterwards made into a separate nome of that name, and so called 
from the same goddess. 

** Tanis. 


176 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS, CHAP. IT. 

will exercise my judgments in No. * And I will 
pour out my fury upon Sint, the strength of 
Egypt ; and I will cut off the multitude of No. . . . 
The young men of Aven t and of Pibeseth § shall 
fall by the sword, and these cities shall go into 
captivity. At Tehaphnehes II also the day shall 
be darkened, when I shall break there the yokes of 
Egypt ; and the pomp of her strength shall cease 
in her • . . and her daughters shall go into captivity ; 
. . . and I will scatter the Egyptians among the 
nations, and disperse them among the countries.**^ 

I shall now endeavour to show how these pre- 
dictions were accomplished, and to explain the 
probable reason of Herodotus's silence upon the 
subject of Nebuchadnezzar's invasion. 

The defeat and death of Apries, before men- 
tioned, are given on the authority of Herodotus ; 
who represents Amasis as a rebel chief, taking ad- 
vantage of the disaffection of the army to dethrone 
his sovereign. This information he received from 
the Egyptian priests ; but no mention was made of 
the signal defeat their army experienced, or of that 
loss of territory in Syria which resulted from the 


* No, or No Amun, Thebes, Diospolis Proper, on the east bank. It 
is also written Na-Amun [or Amun-na] ; the Egyptian, Amun-ei, the 
abode of Amun. Vide Nahum, iii. 8. The Septuagint gives (v Aioo-ttoXcc. 

f The Septuagint has " Saic ;" the Latin translation of the Hebrew, 
** Pelusium ;" the Arabic, " San ;" the Hebrew version and Targum, 
" Sin." Pelusium, which was the bulwark of Egypt on the N. E. 
frontier, is to be preferred. It is now called Tineh. 

j: Aon pM, Heliopolis, or On, as in Gen. xli. 45. 

§ Bubastis, Pi-Pasht. 

II In the Septuagint ev Ta^tvaic; or, as Herodotus calls it, Aa(l>vri(n 
TffOi UiKamrim. Herod, ii. 107. and 30. Daphne was a little distance 
from Pelusium, and higher up that branch of the Kile. 

t Ezek. XXX. 13. et seq. 


CHAP. ir. NEBUCHADNEZZAR. 177 

successes of the victorious Nebuchadnezzar. It 
is therefore reasonable to conclude they disguised 
the truth from the Greek historian ; and, without 
mentioning the disgrace which had befallen their 
country, and the interposition of a foreign power, 
attributed the change in the succession, and the 
elevation of Amasis to the throne, solely to his 
ambition and the choice of the Egyptian soldiery. 
Megasthenes and Berosus affirm that Nebuchad- 
nezzar conquered a great part of Africa, and, having 
invaded Egypt, took many captives, who were com- 
mitted to the charge of persons appointed to con- 
duct them after him to Babylon. But as this is 
said to have happened at the period of his father's 
death, and consequently in the reign of Neco, it 
cannot refer to the point in question. Josephus, 
however, expressly states, that the Assyrian mo- 
narch " led an army into Coelo-Syria, of which he 
obtained possession, and then waged war on the 
Ammonites and Moabites. These being subdued, 
he invaded and conquered Egypt; and, having 
put the king of that country to death, he appointed 
another in his stead.*** If Josephus be correct in 
this statement, there is reason to suppose he alludes 
to Apries being deposed and succeeded by Amasis ; 
and we can readily imagine that the Assyrians, 
having extended their conquests to the extremity of 
Palestine, would, on the rumour of intestine com- 
motions in Egypt, hasten to take advantage of the 
opportunity thus afforded them of attacking the 

• Joseph. Antiq. lib. x. c. ix. 7. 
VOL. 1. • N 


178 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. 11. 

country. And the civil war, and the fatal conse- 
quences of the disturbed state of Egypt, appear to be 
noticed |?y Isaiah * in the following prophecy : " I 
will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians, and 
they shall fight every one against his brother, and 
every one against his neighbour ; city against city, 
and kingdom against kingdom ; . . • and they shall 
seek to the idols, and to the charmers, and to them 
that have familiar spirits, and to the wizards, t 
And the Egyptians will I give over into the hand 
of a cruel lord, and a fierce king shall rule over 
them." 

From a comparison of all these authorities, I 
conclude that the civil war between Aprles and 
Amasis did not terminate in the single conflict at 
Momemphis, but lasted several years; and that 
either Amasis solicited the aid and intervention of 
Nebuchadnezzar, or this prince, availing himself of 
the disordered state of the country, of his own 
accord invaded it, deposed the rightful sovereign, 
and placed Amasis on the throne, on condition of 
paying tribute to the Assyrians. The injury done 
to the land and cities of Egypt by this invasion, and 
the disgrace with which the Egyptians felt them^ 
selves overwhelmed after such an event, would 
justify the account given in the Bible of the fall of 
Egypt : and to witness many of their compatriots 
taken captive to Babylon, and to become tributary 

* Isaiah, xix. 2. et teq, 

\ That is, consult the oracles, as Amasis is said to have done pre- 
vious to his obtaining the sovereignty of Egypt. The account given by 
Herodotus ^ii. 174.J of Amasis' early conduct, and the answers of 
the oracles^ is ridiculous. 


CHAP. IT. MARRIAGE OF AMASIS. 179 

to an enemy* whom they held in abhorrence, 
would be considered by the Egyptians the greatest 
calamity, as though they had for ever lost their sta- 
tion in the scale of nations, t And this last would 
satisfactorily account for the title Melek, given to 
inferior or to tributary kings, being applied to 
Amasis t in some of the hieroglyphic legends ac- 
companying his name. 

It still remains a matter of uncertainty, whether 
Psamaticus III. and Apries are the same person ; 
but the marriage of Amasis with the daughter of 
Psamaticus is no objection to their identity, since 
ambition, or many other causes, might have urged 
him to rise against his father-in-law, and dispossess 
him of the throne. That this marriage actually 
took place we have abundant testimonies from the 
sculptures of Thebes ; and it goes far to disprove 
the statement of Herodotus, relative to the " ple- 
beian origin " of Amasis. Athenaeus attributes his 
previous rise to the circumstance of his having pre- 
sented Apries with a beautiful chaplet of flowers on 
his birthday, which so delighted the king that he 
invited him to the feast, and admitted him among 
the number of his friends. Diodorus, however, 
who is more to be depended upon in this instance, 
asserts that Amasis was a person of considerable con- 
sequence, which accords with his rank as a general, 
and a distinguished member of the military caste, as 

* Ammianus Marcellinus says, the Carthaginians also invaded 
Egypt ; but this statement is very improbable. 

• • Vide my Materia Hierogl. p. 100. 

: ; He is generally styled, like the other Pharaohs, king of the upper 
and lower country ; a rharaoh, a^d an independent sovereign. 

N 2 


180 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. ir. 

well as with monumental record, and his marriage 
with the daughter of his sovereign. And the idle 
tales told by the priests respecting his rise and the 
fall of Apries seem only to have been intended to 
deceive Herodotus, and to conceal from him the 
real state of Egypt at that period. 

According to the same historian, th e reign of 
Amasis was the epoch at which Egypt was most 
flourishing, both '^ with regard to the advantages 
conferred by the river on the soil, and by the soil 
on the inhabitants ;" and that country ** could 
boast no less than 20,000 well inhabited cities.** * 
The former assertion, indeed, if not fully proved, 
gains considerable weight, from the appearance of 
public and private buildings raised during the reigns 
of this monarch and his two predecessors, from the 
number of splendid monuments erected by Anmsis, 
and from the immense booty carried out of Egypt 
by the Persians. That private persons enjoyed 
unusual affluence is evident from the style and rich- 
ness of their sepulchres, far exceeding in extent 
and ornamental detail any of those executed during 
the flourishing era of the 18th Dynasty: and this 
can only be attributed to an increase of wealth. In 
order, therefore, to reconcile that fact with the 
state of Egypt, mentioned in the prophecies, we 
may suppose the tributary condition to which it 
was reduced by the Babylonian conqueror, though 
severely wounding the pride of the Egyptians, 
and degrading them as a nation, did not affect the 

• Herodot. ii. 177. Plin. v. 11, 


CHAP. II. PROPHECIES. 181 

riches of individuals, which might continue to 
increase through the immense resources of a fer* 
tile country, or, to repeat the words of Herodotus, 
through " the advantages conferred by the river on 
the soil, and by the soil on the inhabitants:" 
and the historian may refer to the latter end of 
Amasis' reign, when he had been freed from the 
humiliating necessity of paying tribute to the Baby- 
lonians, themselves at length conquered by the 
arms of Cyrus. It is very possible that the pro- 
phecies may partly relate to the intervention of 
Nebuchadnezzar, and the degraded condition of 
Egypt, as tributary to the Babylonians ; and partly 
to the final downfall of the country, when the Per- 
sians invaded it under Cambyses : for so remark- 
able an event would scarcely be omitted in a 
prophecy announcing the ** desolation of Egypt;'* 
and, if this last and the previous invasion of the 
Babylonians are not distinctly described, we may 
conclude that both are included in the general 
prediction.* 

Nor was the military power of Egypt annihilated 
by the civil war between Apries and Amasis, or by 
the unfortunate intervention of Nebuchadnezzar; 
and though Amasis did not think it prudent, by re- 
fusing the tribute he had promised to pay, and by 
invading Syria, to provoke a powerful enemy, or to 
engage in a doubtful struggle with that prince, yet 

* Xenophon pretends that Cyrus even invaded Egypt ; but his mode 
of expressing hunself is as vague as the circumstance is improbable. 
Xen. Cyropaed. preliminary section. 

N 3 


J82 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

he was sufficiently strong to make himself feared 
and respected by his neighbours, and to extend his 
arms beyond the frontiers of Egypt. And so con- 
fident was he of his power towards the close of his 
reign, that he defied the mighty Persia, little ex- 
pecting he would thereby entail great and real cala- 
mities upon his country. 

After remedying the evils which civil commotion 
and the other events already alluded to had caused^ 
at the close of his predecessor's reign, his attention 
was directed to the improvement of the military 
strength, as well as the commercial interests of 
Egypt ; and having fitted out a formidable expe- 
dition against Cyprus, he succeeded in taking the 
cities of that island *, and subjecting it to his 
power } being the first who had made it tributary t 
to the Pharaohs. He also gave great encourage- 
ment to foreigners who were willing to trade with 
his subjects ; and as an inducement to them he fa- 
voured their interests, and showed them marked 
indulgence upon all occasions. " Such Greeks as 
wished to maintain a regular communication with 
Egypt, he permitted to have a settlement at Nau- 
cratis : and to others, who did not require a fixed 
residence, being only engaged in occasional com- 
merce, he assigned certain places for the con- 
struction of altars, and the performance of religious 
rites ; and the Greeks,*' says Herodotus, " still 
possess a very spacious and celebrated temple in 
Egyptl^, called Hellenium. It was built at the joint 

* Diodor. i. 68. f Herodot. ii. 182. 

X Herodot. ii. 178. 


CHAP. II. THE GREEKS IN EGYPT. 183 

expense of the lonians of Chios, Teos, Phoc8ea» 
and Clazomenae ; of the Dorians of Rhodes, Cnidus, 
Halicarnassus, and Phaselis ; and of the vEolians 
of Mitylene. Hellenium is the common property of 
all these cities, who appoint proper officers for the 
regulation of their commerce ; and the claims of 
other cities to these distinctions and privileges are 
totally unfounded. The ^ginetae, however, con- 
structed for themselves a temple to Jupiter, as did 
the Samians to Juno, and the Milesians to Apollo. 

Naucratis soon became a flourishing town, in 
consequence of the exclusive privileges it enjoyed, 
being the sole emporium of the Greeks in Egypt ; 
and not only was every merchant required to un- 
load his cargo there, but if he came to any other 
than the Canopic mouth of the Nile, he was obliged 
to swear it was entirely accidental, and was com* 
pelled to go thither in the same vessel ; or, if 
contrary winds prevented his making that passage, 
his goods were taken out and conveyed in boats of 
the country by inland navigation, through or round 
the Delta to Naucratis." 

*^ Many other marks of favour and liberality were 
bestowed by Amasis on the Greeks. When th^ 
temple of Delphi was consumed by fire, he presented 
the Delphians with a very large contribution to- 
wards rebuilding it ; and, having made an amicable 
confederacy with the Cyrenians, he sent a golden 
statue of Minerva, with a portrait of himself, to their 
city. To a temple of that goddess at Lindus he 
gave two marble statues, with a linen corselet, de- 
serving of admiration :" and a thorax df the same 

N 4 


184 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. !!• 

materials was dedicated by him to the Minerva of 
Rhodes, which according to Pliny was of remarkably 
fine texture. * He also presented two figures of 
himself, carved in wood, to the temple of Juno at 
Samos ', which were placed immediately behind the 
gates, where they remained till the time of Hero- 
dotus.t 

** The kindness shown by Amasis to Samos was 
owing,** says the historian, ** to the friendship which 
subsisted between him and Poly crates, the son of 
jiEaces ; but he had no such motive of attachment 
to Lindus, and was only moved by the report of the 
temple of Minerva having been erected there by the 
daughters of Danaus, when they fled from the sons 
of jiEgyptus ;" and his affection for the Cyrenians, 
according to the same author, arose from his having 
married Ladice t, a native of that country, who 
was afterwards sent back by Cambyses to her 
parents, when he conquered Egypt. 

The friendship of Amasis and Polycrates com- 
menced at the period of the war between the 
Lacedaemonians and the latter, who had forcibly 
possessed himself of Samos. It had been cemented 
by various presents on both sides, and appeared to 
promise a long continuance; " but the wonderful 
prosperity and uninterrupted successes of Poly- 
crates excited the attention and anxiety of Amasis ; 
and as they were observed by him invariably to in- . 
crease, he was induced to write him the following 
letter § : — 

* " cccLxv filis singula fila constare." Plin. xix. 2. 
Herodot. ii. 182. t Ibid. ii. 181. 


I 


Ibid. iii. 40. 


CHAP, II. AMASIS AND POLYCRATES. 185 

** * Amasis to Poly crates. 

" * To learn that a friend and ally is blessed 
with prosperity, cannot fail to give me the greatest 
satisfaction; but, knowing the invidiousness of 
fortune, your extraordinary success excites my ap- 
prehension. For my own part, if I might be 
allowed to choose for myself or those I regard, I 
should prefer prosperity on some occasions, and 
on others disappointment ; and thus pass through 
life with an alternation of good and evil, rather 
than be fortunate in every undertaking. For I 
never remember to have heard of a man blessed 
with unceasing felicity, who did not end his career 
overwhelmed with calamities. Take, therefore, 
my advice, and apply this counterpoise to your 
prosperity : endeavour to discover some favourite 
object whose loss would occasion you the deepest 
regret; and as soon as this has been ascertained 
remove it from you, in such a manner that it can 
never be recovered. If then your good fortune 
still continues unchequered by adversity, I strongly 
recommend you to rej^eat the remedy I propose.' " 

Polycrates, having received his letter, and de- 
liberated on its contents, felt persuaded that Amasis 
had given him excellent advice, and therefore de- 
termined to follow it. Accordingly, he searched 
among his treasures for something whose loss would 
most afflict him, and at length fixed upon a signet- 
ring, which he was in the habit of wearing. It 


186 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP, II. 

was an emerald, set in gold, the work of Theodoras 
the Samian, beautifully engraved.* Resolved on 
sacrificing this precious jewel, he went on board a 
fifty-oared vessel, and ordered the men to pull out 
into the open sea j and when they were a consider- 
able distance from land, Folycrates, taking off the 
ring, in the presence of his attendants, cast it into 
the sea, and then gave orders for their return to 
Samos. 

The sacrifice he had made, though voluntary, 
afilicted him much ; and returning to his palace, 
he gave way to an excess of grief. Five or six days 
after, a fisherman having caught a fish of very great 
size and beauty, repaired to the palace, and re- 
questing admission into his presence, presented it 
to Folycrates in these words: — "Although, Sir, I 
live by the produce of my industry, I thought so 
fine a fish ought not to be exposed for sale in 
the public market place; and deeming it worthy 
of your majesty's table, I have brought it for your 
acceptance.*' Pleased with his conduct, Folycrates 
replied, " My good man, not only is your present, 
but the manner in which you have expressed your- 
self, highly gratifying to me ; and I invite you to 

* The word o^gfiyiq answers exactly to the Khatom of the Arabs; a 
ring, with an engraved stone, or entirely of gold, with a name or device 
cut upon it. jPliny and Solinus say the ring of Folycrates was a 
sardonyx ; and the former adds, that in his time they showed one at 
Rome, in the Temple of Concord, given by Augustus, which was said 
to be of the Samian king. Clement of Alexandria supposes a lyre 
was figured upon it. The Arabs have the story of Polycrates's ring, 
but they omit his name, and the reason of its loss ; relating that it 
fell into the sea by accident. Vide Plin. xxxvii. 2., and Solin. c. xxxiii. 
p. 63. 


CHAP, II. THE RING OF POLYCRATES. 187 

supper at the palace."* The fisherman, delighted 
with this mark of favour, returned home. 

Shortly after, the servants, on opening the fish, 
discovered the ring, and with great eagerness and 
joy carried it to the king, relating in what manner 
it had been found. Polycrates, concluding that 
such a circumstance could only be the effect of 
Divine interposition, carefully noted down every 
particular, and sent it to Egypt. Amasis no sooner 
perused his letter, than he felt convinced it was out 
of the power of one mortal to deliver another from 
the fate which awaited him ; and that Polycrates, 
who had been so uniformly lucky, and who had 
even recovered what he had taken pains to lose, 
could not terminate his days in tranquillity. He 
therefore sent a herald to Samos, disdaiming all 
connection with him for the future, in order that, 
when any grievous calamity befell Polycrates, he 
might not have to bewail the misfortunes of a 
friend. 

Such is the account given by Herodotus of 
Amasis's desertion of Polycrates ; which took place 
previous to the difficulties he experienced from the 
disaffection of his subjects, and the intervention of 
the Lacedaemonians, and some time before his cruel 
murder by the treacherous Oraetes.t Diodorust, 
however, assigns a different reason for the conduct 

* It is not necessary th^t the fisherman should have eaten at the 
same table as his royal host. Herodotus uses the expression, *' I 
invite you to supper," ac 67re dtiTrvov KoXeofitv, Many persons are 
invited to sup at tne house of a great man in the East without sitting 
^t table with nim. 

Herodot. iii. 125. Valer. Max. calls him Orontes, vi. 9. 
Diod. i. 95. 


I 


188 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP, II. 

of Amasis. He affirms that the Egyptian monarch 
was offended with the tyrannical conduct of Poly- 
cratesy and foresaw, from the feeUng excited against 
him, both amongst his subjects and foreigners, 
that his fate was inevitable ; and, indeed the flight 
of many Samians to Crete*, and numerous in- 
stances of their discontent and of his oppression, 
are recorded by Herodotus and many ancient 
writers, t 

Polycrates has been represented as a great en- 
courager of learning, and the patron of eminent 
men, spending great part of his time in the company 
of persons of talent, among whom were Anacreon 
and Pythagoras. And his friendship with Amasis 
enabled him to recommend the latter to that mo- 
narch $, when he visited Egypt, and to obtain for 
him those facilities in studying the mysterious 
sciences and profound secrets of the Egyptians, 
which few foreigners were permitted to enjoy. 
Some§, however, deny that his journey was under- 
taken at the suggestion, or even with the approba- 
tion, of Polycrates ; and affirm, on the contrary, 
that Pythagoras abandoned his native country, 

♦ Herodot. in. 44. 

+ Valer. Max. vi. 9. ** Samos amara servitute(Polycratis)pre8sa." 
Plin. xxxvii. 2. " Polycrati Samio, severo insularum ac litoruin ty- 
ranno." Diogenes, Porphyry, Gellius, Eusebius, Diodorus, &c. 

X Pliny says the name of the king who reigned in Egypt when Py- 
thagoras visited it was Senneserteus. Can this have been corrupted 
from Neit-se, or Se-Neit, " the Son of Neith," which was the cogno- 
men of Amasis, Ames-Neit-se, or Ames-se-Neit ? It rather re- 
sembles the name Sen->Osiri. Plin. xxxvi. 14. Another reading gives 
SemneserteuSy perhaps mistaken for, or corrupted from, the name of 
Psammenitus, the son of Amasis. 

§ The authors mentioned in a preceding note. 


CHAP. II. PYTHAGORAS AND SOLON. 189 

being unable to endure the tyranny of his sove- 
reign. 

Solon also visited Egypt during the reign of 
Amasis* ; and being much pleased with the laws of 
the Egyptians, which, through the liberality of the 
king, he had every fecility of studying, he intro- 
duced many of them into the code established by 
him at Athens. 

That Amasis was a great encourager of art, we 
have ample testimony from the monuments which 
remain, as well as from the statements of ancient 
writers ; and being a native of Sais, or, as Hero- 
dotus affirms, of Siuph, in the Saite nome, his at- 
tention, as is reasonable to suppose, was directed 
more particularly toward the embellishment of that 
city. With this view he erected at Sais a magnifi- 
cent propylteum in honour of Minerva ; a splendid 
building, far excelling any other of the kind, as 
well in size and grandeur, as in the quality and 
magnitude of the stones used in its construction ; 
and before it were placed several large colossi, with 
a series of immense androsphinxes, which formed 
the avenue or dromos leading to the main en- 
trance. The propylaeum was a large court, open 
in the centre, and surrounded in the inside by 
rows of columns, with the usual pyramidal towers 
in front, forming one of the approaches to the 
temple of Minerva, in the same manner as the 
propytea attached to the temples at Thebes consti- 

* Herodot. i. 30. Thales is said, b^ Plutarch, in his Banquet of the 
Seven Sages, to have been in Egypt m the reign of Amasis ; and he 
mentions the improbable story of his showing the Egyptians how to 
measure the height of the pyramid by its shadow. 


190 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

tute the entrance halls of those edifices.* Portions 
of the same building, which had been erected by 
bis predecessors, requiring some repairs, Amasis 
collected for this purpose a quantity of stones of 
amazing thickness, part of which were brought 
from the quarries of Memphis t, and part from the 
cataracts of Syene. " But what, in my opinion," 
says Herodotus, " deserves the greatest admiration 
is an edifice of a single stone, brought from the 
city of Elephantine, a distance of about twenty days* 
journey, t Two thousand men, chosen from the 
class of boatmen, were employed for the space of 
three years in transporting it to Sais. Its external 
length is twenty-one cubits, its breadth fourteen, 
and height eight: and in the inside it measures 
eighteen cubits and twenty digits in length, twelve 
in breadth, and five in height. It stands near tlie 
entrance of the temple ; and the reason of its being 
left in this spot was that the architect, wearied with 
the tedious duration of the imdertaking, had been 
heard to fetch a deep sigh, while they were em- 
ployed in dragging it forward ; upon which Amasis, 
who happened to be present, gave orders they should 
stop, and carry it no further. Some, however, affirm 
that one of the men while moving it with a lever 

♦ At Karaak, in Thebes, are some instances of the avenues of 
sphinxes ; they only differ in being criosphinxes, or surmounted with 
the head of a ram instead of a man. 

t Herodotus means the mountains opposite Memphis, of the 
Troici lapidis mons, which he mentions in the same manner on ano- 
ther occasion, when speaking of the canal to the Red Sea. Lib. ii. 
s. 158. 

J From Elephantine or E'Souan, where the granite quarries may 
still be seen, to Sais, is about 700 miles by land. It must hare crossed 
the river once at least. 


CHAP. II. MONUMENTS OF AMASIS. 191 

was crushed to death, and that on this account 
they were ordered to desist. 

" Amasis made many and magnificent presents 
to other temples, both in Upper and Lower Egypt. 
At Memphis, he placed a colossal recumbent figure, 
seventy-five feet long, before* the temple of Vul- 
can i and on the same basement two other colossi 
of Ethiopic stones, or granite, each twenty feet in 
height, one on either side of the principal partt of 
the building. There is at Sais another statue 
similar to that of Memphis, and lying in the same 
position t : and this prince erected the grand 
temple of Isis at Memphis, which deservedly claims 
universal admiration.** 

Many monuments still exist in different parts of 
Egypt, bearing the name of Amasis, one of which, 
a red granite monolith, at Tel-et-mai, resembles in 
form § that described by Herodotus as having been 
brought from Elephantine to Sais. Thebes and 
other places also present memorials of the encour- 
agement he gave to architecture and other branches 
of art; and at the quarries of Syene several inscrip- 
tions indicate the removal of granite blocks for the 

* Strabo says^ *^ Before the dromos of the temple lies a colossus of 
a single stone; and in this dromos are held the bull-fights." Strabo, 
lib. xvii. 

f Probably by the fityapov Herodotus means the temple, properly 
speaking, independent of the outer courts : or the isolated sanctuary 
in the centre of the temple, which was independent of the inner ady- 
tum, as at Luqsor, and the smaller temple of Medeenet Haboo at 
Thebes. 

± They were very uncommon in Egypt. 

§ I am indebted to Mr. Burton for its dimensions, which are 21 (i. 
9 in. high, 13 ft. broad, and 11 ft. 7 in. deep, outside; and 19 ft. 3 in., 
8 ft., and 8 ft. 3 in. inside. 


192 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP, IK 

construction or decoration of edifices raised by him 
in the valley of the Nile. 

Pliny* affirms that some imagined him to have 
been buried in the celebrated Sphinx; but this 
erroneous notion arose from the similarity of the 
names, Amosis and Thothmosist, and readily ob- 
tains that indulgence which cannot be extended to 
an assertion of Lucaq, burying Amasis in the pyra- 
mids themselves.^ To Lucan, however, accuracy 
was never imputed; and no one after reading his 
extravagant description of the cataracts at Philae § 
is surprised to find him deposit the remains of the 
Ptolemies in the same monuments. || 

The situation of Amasis* tomb is mentioned by 
Herodotus.^ It stood, like all those of the Saite 
monarchs, within the precincts of the temple of 
Minerva, in the chief city of that nome ; which, 
during the reign of the princes of the 26th dynasty, 
had become the royal residence and nominal metro- 
polis of Egypt ; though Thebes and Memphis still 
retained the titles of capitals of the upper and lower 
countries. 

* Plin.xxxvi. 17. *' Amasinregem putantinea(sphiDge) conditum." 
f This is still more striking when we consider that A, or loh, the 
moon, and Thoth, are the same deity ; and that Amosis, the leader of 
the 18th dynasty, has been called by some Tethmosis. Amosis, or 
Amasis, are the same ; the real name being Ames. Thoth is also the 
first month. 

{ " Pyramidum tumulis evulsis Amasis." Lucan. Phars. ix. 155. 
Diodorus ^i. 64.) says some attribute the second pyramid to Amasis, 
the first to Armaeus, and the third to Inaron, as well as to Rhodope. 


^ Lucan, lib. x. 315. et teq, 

II ' " 


** Cum Ptolemaeorum manes pyramides claudant." viii. 

696. 

Y The lake mentioned by Herodotus still exists at SaTs (now Sa-el- 
Hagar), as well as its extensive and solid crude brick walls. Herodot. 
ii. 170. 


CHAP. II. HIS QUARREL WITH CAMBYSES. 193 

Towards the latter end of the reign of this 
monarch, Cambyses sent to Egypt to demand his 
daughter in marriage, a step to which he had been 
prompted by a certain Egyptian, an enemy of 
Amasis. This man was a physician ; and when 
Cyrus had requested of the Egyptian king the best 
medical advice he could procure, for a disorder in 
his eyes, Amasis forced him to leave his wife and 
family, and go into Persia. Meditating revenge 
for this treatment, he instigated his successor to 
require the daughter of Amasis, that he might 
either suffer affliction at the loss of his child, or by 
refusing to send her, provoke the resentment of 
Cambyses. Amasis detested the character of the 
Persian monarch ; and persuaded that his treatment 
of her would neither be honourable nor worthy of 
a princess, he was unwilling to accept the overture : 
but fearing to give a positive refusal, he determined 
on sending the daughter of the late king. Her 
name was Neitatis, or, as Herodotus calls her, 
Nitetis. She was possessed of great personal at- 
tractions ; and Amasis, having dressed her in the 
most splendid attire, sent her into Persia as his own 
child. Not long after, Cambyses happening to 
address her as the daughter of Amasis, she ex- 
plained the manner in which he had been deceived, 
by a man who had dethroned and put Apries her 
father to death, and had seized upon the throne, 
through the assistance of a rebellious faction: 
upon which Cambyses was so enraged that he re- 
solved to make war upon the usurper, and im- 

VOL. I. o 


194 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

mediately prepared to lead an expedition into 
Egypt. * 

Such is the principal cause alleged by Hero- 
dotus for his invasion of that country ; but it will 
not bear the test of examination. Nitetis is re- 
presented to have been sent to Persia towards 
the close of the reign of Amasis, which, according 
to the historian, lasted forty-four years ; and allow- 
ing her to have been bom immediately before 
Apries was dethroned, she would have been of an 
age which in Egypt and Persia is no longer a re- 
commendation, or the associate of beauty, t 

But whatever may have been the real motive for 
this war, it is certain that Cambyses was greatly 
exasperated against Amasis ; and Egypt, when m- 
vaded by the Persian monarch, was treated with un- 
usual barbarity. 

Temples and public buildings were destroyed ; 
tombs were violated, and the bodies bumtt ; reli- 
gion was insulted, private property pillaged or 
destroyed, and every thing which could tempt the 
avarice, or reward the labour, of the spoiler, was 
seized and appropriated either by the chief or his 
troops. Gold and silver statues and other objects 

* Other reasons are given by Herodotus, (iii. 2.) That of Cam- 
byses being born of the daughter of Apries is quite eastern, and re- 
sembles the Persian account of Alexander the Great. 

-f* For Nitetis to be^tr would have been agreeable to Cambyses ; not 
so to bejbrtif, 

% It IS remarkable that the officers of the French frigate Luxor, who 
removed the obelisk from Thebes, found the sarcophagus of the queen 
of Amasis in a pit at £1 Qoorneh, the body entirely burnt, though 
placed in its original repository. The tomb had been violated, pro- 
bably, by the Persians, who burnt the body, and was afterwards re- 
closed by the Egyptians with masonry. The body had been gilded. 


CHAJP. li. INVASION OF CAMBYSES. 195 

of value were sent to Persia ; and it appears that 
numerous Egyptian captives were also transported 
to that country. 

The death of Amasis, which happened six 
months before the arrival of the Persians, pre- 
vented Cambyses from satiating his meditated re- 
venge on the Egyptian monarch; and judging from 
the savage rage which the Persian conqueror vented 
upon his body, it was fortunate for Amasis that he 
had not fallen alive into his hands, and had died 
unconscious of what was about to happen. 

Many circumstances occurred to induce Cam- 
byses to undertake the invasion of Egypt and the 
overthrow of Amasis, independent of any insult he 
may have offered him, or the ambition of a rising 
empire ; one of which is thus detailed by Hero- 
dotus * : — Among" the auxiliaries of Amasis was a 
man named Phanes, a native of Halicarnassus, 
greatly distinguished by his mental as well as his 
military accomplishments. This person being for 
some reason incensed against Amasis, fled in a vessel 
from Egypt, for the purpose of having a conference 
with Cambyses. As he possessed considerable 
influence, and was perfectly acquainted with the 
afiairs of Egypt, it was of paramount importance 
that his designs should be prevented. Amasis, 
therefore, despatched the most faithful of his 
eunuchs in a trireme, with orders to overtake and 
bring him back. The pursuit was successful, and 
Phanes was taken in Lycia; but having circum- 
vented his guards, he effected his escape, and fled 

* Herodot. iii. 4. 

o 2 


196 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

to Persia. Cambyses readily accepted his services, 
and listened to the valuable information and ad- 
vice he gave respecting the affairs of Egypt, and 
the precautions necessary for passing the desert 
on the frontier. At his suggestion a treaty was 
made with the Arabians, to supply the Persians 
with guides, and abundance of water, and thus 
enable the army to pass a barren and inhospitable 
tract which would have been fatal to numbers of 
the invaders : " and the Arabian prince having 
ordered all his camels to be laden with .skins, filled 
with water, retired into the desert, and there 
awaited the arrival of Cambyses and his army." * 

At the death of Amasis, Psammenitus, his son, 
succeeded to the throne. Conscious of the great 
danger to* which his empire was exposed, from the 
threatened invasion of Cambyses, he made great 
preparations for the defence of the frontier, and 
advancing with his Egyptian troops, and the Ionian 
and Carian auxiharies, to Pelusium, he encamped 
in a plain near the mouth of the Nile. The 
Persians, having passed the desert, took up a po- 
sition opposite the Egyptian army, and both sides 
prepared for battle. The Greeks, irritated with 
the treachery of " Phanest, who had introduced 
a foreign invader into Egypt,** and wishing to show^ 
their resentment against him, brought his two sons 
forward into a conspicuous place, and slew them 
over a large vase in the sight of their father. This 
being done, they mingled wine and water with 
the blood ; and having all drank of it they rushed 

# Herodot. iii. 9, f Ibid, iii, 11. 


CHAP. II. DEFEAT OF THE EGYPTIANS. 197 

against the enemy. The conflict soon became 
general throughout the whole line, and the battle 
was for a long time obstinately disputed ; till at 
length, a considerable slaughter having been made 
on both sides, the Egyptians gave way, and fled. 

From Pelusium to Memphis was now open to 
the invader, and with rapid marches he hastened 
towards the ancient capital of Lower Egypt. 
Hoping, however, to obtain advantageous terms 
without the necessity of another battle, Cambyses 
sent a Persian up the river in a Mitylenian vessel, 
to treat with the Egyptians : but as soon as they 
saw the vessel enter Memphis, they rushed in a 
crowd from the citadel, destroyed it, and tore the 
crew to pieces. At the news of this outrage, the 
indignation of Cambyses was excessive : he imme- 
diately laid siege to Memphis, and having suc- 
ceeded in reducing the place, he indulged his 
resentment by putting many of the inhabitants to 
the sword * : the king was taken prisoner, and 2000 
Egyptians of the same age as the son of Psam- 
menitus, preceded by the young prince, being com- 
pelled to march in procession before the conqueror, 
were condemned to death as a retaliation for the 
murder of the Persian and Mitylenian heralds ; 
ten of the first rank among the Egyptians being 
chosen for every one of those who suffered on that 
occasion.! Psammenitus himself was pardoned; 

* Diodorus (i. 46.) says that at this time numerous artificers' 
and immense wealth, were carried off to Persia ; and that the palaces 
and splendid buildings of Persepolis, Susa, and the cities of Media, 
were erected by them at the command of the victors. 

f There were, therefore, 200 Mitylenians in the vessel destroyed at 
Memphis. 

o 3 


198 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. 


CHAP. II. 


and such was the respect entertained by the Persians 
for the persons of kings * that he would in all pro- 
bability have been restored to a tributary throne, if 
he had not entered into an ill-timed conspiracy 
against the monarch who had spared his life. 

Egypt now became a province of Persia; and 
Cambyses and his seven successors compose the 
27th Djmasty. 


Name from 
Ancient Authors. 


Name from the 
Monuments. 


Events. 


Ascended 

the 
Throne. 


Cambyses - - 

Darius, son of 1 
Hystaspcs - J 

Xerxes thel 
Great - - J 

Artabanus ' 
Artaxerzes 

Xerxes II. 

Sogdianus 

Darius No- 1 
thus, the son • 
of Xerxes -J 


Kanbosh 

Ntareeosh, 
Ndareosh 

Khsheersh 

• 

Artkhsheshes 


/Conquers Egypt in his 
1 4th year - - - 
* Battle of Marathon, 490 ; 
Egypt revolts, 486 
Xerxes reconquers Egypt, 
- 484; Birth of Hero- 
dotus 
Artabanus reigns 7 months 
"Egypt revolts, and Inaros 
and Amyrtaeus are elected 
kings, 463 ; Herodotus 
visits Egypt, 46U 
Reigns -2 months 
Reigns 7 months 


|525 
521 

•485 
472 

► 472 

425 

425 

r424 

1 *° 
1,414 


The name of Cambyses, as may be easily ima- 
gined, is never met with on Egyptian monuments j 
but a visiter to the slate and breccia quarries on the 
road from Coptos to the Red Sea has, at a later 
period, recorded the name of this monarch in hiero- 
glyphics, adding to it the date of his sixth year. 

• Herodot. iii. 14, 15. " The Persians," says the historian, " are 
accustomed to honour the sons of kings, and to restore the throne to 
those whose parents have rebelled against them." The same feeling is 
evinced by the Turks and other Asiatics ; and respect for the person 
of a king was strongly marked in the case of Charles XII. 


CHAP. 11. NAME OF DARIUS. 199 

Two other ovals also occur : one of Darius, with the 
number 36 ; the other of Xerxes, with the year 
twelve : showing the inscription to have been 
written in the twelfth of Xerxes ; and the date 36, 
intended as the full extent of Darius's reign, ac- 
cords with the authority of ancient history. On 
another rock, at the same place, are the sixteenth 
year of Xerxes and the fifth of Artaxerxes (Longi- 
manus) ; and these four are the only monarchs of 
the 27th Dynasty whose names I have seen in Egypt. 
In the principal temple at El Khargeh, in the Great 
Oasis, that of Darius again occurs, a considerable 
portion of the building having been erected by him ; 
and it is remarkable that he is the only Persian 
king whose phonetic name is accompanied by a 
prenomen, like those of the ancient Pharaohs of 
Egypt; a circumstance satisfactorily confirming 
the remark of Diodorus, " that he obtained while 
living the appellation of Divus *, which was applied 
to no other of the (Persian) kings, and received 
after death the same honours which it had been 
customary to bestow upon the ancient sovereigns 
of the country, "t 

The rule of Darius was mild and equitable ; and 
he was not only careful to avoid every thing that 
might offend the religious prejudices, or hurt the 
feelings, of his foreign subjects, but having made 


• The title ** Good God " was given by the Egyptians to all the 
Pharaohs. 

+ Diodor. i. 35. This appears singular, since they were in open re- 
bellion at the time of his death. They did not, however, destroy his 
monuments or efface his name on that occasion ; which seems to indi- 
cate more than usual respect for a foreign mler. 

O 4 


200 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II 

diligent inquiry respecting the jurisprudence and 
constitution of the Egyptians, he corrected some 
abuses, and introduced many salutary laws, which 
continued to form part of their code, until, in 
common with many of those enacted by his Pha- 
raonic predecessors, they were altered or abrogated 
by the Ptolemies, after the Macedonian conquest. * 

Impatient, however, of foreign rule, and anxi- 
ous to free their country from the presence of a 
people whose cruelties at the time of Cambyses's 
invasion they could never pardon or forget, the 
Egyptians, thinking the reverses of Persia during 
the Greek war offered a favourable opportunity 
for throwing off the yoke, revolted towards the 
close of Darius's reign t, and succeeded in expelling 
the Persians from the whole valley of the Nile. 
For upwards of a year they continued in open rebel- 
lion, and defied the power of his successor ; but in 
the second year of Xerxes they were again subdued, 
and treated with increased severity, Achaemenes, 
the brother of the king, being appointed governor 
of the country. 

Affairs remained in this state one and twenty 
years, until the death of Xerxes, when considerable 
confusion took place in Persia ; which being aug- 
mented by the intrigues of Artabanust, and the 
rebellion of Bactria, afforded the Egyptians another 
opportunity for asserting their independence ; and 

♦ Diodor. loc. cit. 

-I- Herodotus (vii. 1. 7.) says Darius reigned 36 years, and that the 
revolt of the Egyptians took place in the fourth year afler the battle 
of Marathon, the year before his death. 

X Ctesias, in Persicis, calls him Artapanus, and makes Achsemenes 
a brother of Artaxerxes. 


CHAP. II. REVOLT OF THE EGYPTIANS. 201 

prevailing on the Athenians to assist them with a 
fleet of forty sail, they attacked and overwhelmed 
the Persian garrisons. Upon intelligence of this, an 
army of 400,000 foot and a fleet of 200 sail* were 
equipped by Artaxerxes, and placed under the com- 
mand of Achaemenes. Inarus the son of Fsama- 
ticus, a native of Libya, and Amyrtaeust of Sais, 
who had been invested with sovereign power, and 
were charged with the defence of the country, made 
every effort to resist him ; and the two armies having 
met, the Persians were defeated with the loss of 
100,000 men, and Achaemenes received a mortal 
wound from the hand of Inarus, of which he died. 

Enraged at the failure of an expedition which 
he had undertaken contrary to the advice of his 
friends t, Artaxerxes resolved on sending an over- 
whelming force, under the combined command of 
Megabyzus and Artabazus, consisting of 200,000 
men, and a fleet of SOO sail, independent of the 
remnant of the former army, which swelled the 
amount to 500,000. Both armies fought valiantly, 
and many were slain on either side ; at length 
Megabyzus having wounded Inarus in the thigh, 
obliged him to leave the field, and the rout became 
general. Inarus, with a body of Greek auxiliaries, 
having taken refuge in Byblus, which was strongly 
fortified, obtained for himself and companions a 

* Ctesias says 80 ships. Diodorus considers Achaemenes the son of 
Darius, lib. xi. 

t Ctesias only says, " Inarus the Lydian and another Egyptian." 
Thuc3'dides (lib. i.^ and other authors mention Amyrtaeus. Some 
consider Inarus a Libyan ; and Thucydides styles him ** King " of that 
country. 

X Ctesias, in Persic. 


202 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

promise of pardon from Megabyzus, upon condition 
of their surrendering themselves to the Persian mo- 
narch ; but the remembrance of Achaemenes' death 
overcame the regard he owed to the promise of his 
general, and Inarus, by the command of Artaxerxes, 
was treacherously crucified. Amyrtasus was more 
fortunate : he escaped to the Isle of Elbo, and re- 
maining concealed there, awaited better times ; the 
Persian troops again taking possession of the for- 
tified towns, and Sarsamas being appointed satrap 
or governor of Egypt. 

No attempts to throw off the Persian yoke were 
made by the Egyptians during the remainder of 
this reign ; and though the Athenians sent them a 
fleet of sixty sail*, in the fifteenth year of Arta- 
xerxes, and some hopes were entertained of restoring 
Amyrtaeus to the throne, these projects were aban- 
doned, and the Persians continued in undisturbed 
possession of the country till the tenth year of 
Darius Nothus. 

Perceiving that the Egyptians bore with great 
reluctance the presence of a foreign governor, and 
anxious to allay as much as possible the turbulent 
spirit and prejudices of that people, the Persians 
had permitted Thannyrus the son of Inarus, and 
Pausiris the son of Amyrtaeus t, to hold the office 
and nominal power of governors, or tributary kings ; 
but nothing could conciliate the Egyptians. They 
beheld their fortified towns garrisoned by Persian 

* Thucyd. lib. i. The same sixty ships are mentioned by Plutarch in 
his Life of Cimon, as having been sent by him to the coast of Egypt. 

f Herodot. iii. 15. This must have happened previous to tne year 
445, since Herodotus had then completed his history. 


CHAP. II. REIGN OF AMYRTiEUS. 203 

troops ; the degradation of paying tribute to a people 
they detested was insupportable ; and nothing but 
the restoration of an independent monarch could 
satisfy theoi. They therefore made secret prepar- 
ations for expelling the Persians ; and Amyrtaeus 
being invited to put himself at their head, advanced 
from his place of concealment, routed the Persians, 
and finally succeeded in obtaining possession of 
Memphis and the whole country. 

Amyrtfieus now became independent master of 
Egypt i and he is stated in Manetho's list to have 
been the only monarch of the 28th Dynasty. 
His reign continued six years, during which pe- 
riod he laboured ,to repair the many losses sus- 
tained by his country from the hostile aggressions 
of Persia. Numerous restorations* were made to 
the temples of Thebes and other cities, many of 
which had suffered from the sacrilegious fury of 
Cambyses j and in order still further to weaken their 
power, and to remove the Persians to a distance from 
his territories, he engaged the Arabians, by a treaty, 
to assist him, and advanced into Phoenicia. His 
conquests, however, in that quarter were not ex- 
tensive, and his efforts were chiefly confined to the 
defence of his own frontier. 

According to Manetho, he was succeeded by 
Nepherites, the first king of the 29th Dynasty : 
though Diodorus mentions another, called Psam- 
aticus, descended from the first of that name. 


* Some gateways and other monuments bearing his name still re- 
main. The sarcophagus in the British Museum, called of Alexander, 
is of this Pharaoh. 


204 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

whom he supposes to have preceded Nepherites or 
Nephreus; but it is uncertain whether he really 
ruled at this time, or whether he was confounded 
by the historian with the father of Inarus.* 

Of the character of Psamaticus, Diodorus draws 
a very unfavourable picture, representing t him to 
have been guilty of an act of cruelty and mean* 
ness unequalled in the history of his country. 
Tamus, a Memphite by birth, had been appointed 
by the Persians prefect of Ionia ; and having 
held that post some time, he was obliged to leave 
his province, in order to avoid the resentment of 
Tissaphemes, and fly to his own country. Feeling 
persuaded he had nothing to fear from Psamaticus, 
whom he had formerly obliged by many friendly 
ofiices, he scrupled not to take with him all his 
riches, and to confide in the protection of the Egyp- 
tian monarch ; but no sooner had Psamaticus be- 
come acquainted with this circumstance, than, 
regardless of the laws of humanity, and of the in- 
dulgence he owed to a friend, he perfidiously seized 
his treasures, and deprived him of life, t 

For the name § of this Psamaticus it is needless 
to look on Egyptian monuments ; nor do the sculp- 
tures of Inarus appear on any of the temples at 
Thebes, or in the lower country : and Manetho 
omits the mention of Inarus || in his catalogue of 
kings. But that he was an independent, though 

* Herodot. vii. 7. f Diodor. lib. xiv. 

j: His quitting the Persian service in the possession of such treasures 
does not argue in favour of Tarous ; and the kin^ may have had some 
motive for this extraordinary conduct besides avarice. 

§ Manetho makes no mention of this Psamaticus. 

II Diodorus omits Amyrtsetis. 


CHAP. II. 


THE 28th dynasty. 


205 


not the sole, monarch of Egypt, during the short 
period which elapsed between the commencement 
of their second revolt and the victory of Mega- 
byzus, is proved by the authority of several ancient 
historians ; and as the unsettled state of affairs 
during the whole of his reign, and the preparations 
required in order to resist the expected attack of 
the Persians, deprived the Egyptians of that tran- 
quillity necessary for the encouragement of art, the 
absence of monuments bearing the name of Inarus 
is readily accounted for. By some writers he is 
supposed to have been a king of Libya, by others 
an individual of Libyan origin ; but as Libya was 
included within the dominions of Egypt, it appears 
more probable that he was the rightful heir to the 
throne, and had taken refuge there to avoid the 
tyranny of the Persians, and await an opportunity, 
which afterwards offered, of liberating his country 
from a foreign yoke. And the fact of his being a 
native of Egypt is still farther confirmed by the 
name of his father, Psamaticus, which is purely 
Egyptian. 

The 28th and 29th Dynasties, according to Ma- 
netho, and the monuments, are as follows : — 


28/A Dynasty y of\SdUe King, 


Name from 
Ancient Aathon, 


Name flrom the 
Monumenta* 


Eventt. 


Ascended 

the 
Throne. 


Amyrteus 
Amyrtaeus - J 


Ao-ma-hor-te ? 


. 


B. c. 
414 


206 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. 


CHAP. II. 


29th Dynasty, of Mendesian Kings. 


Kamefirom 
Ancient Authon. 


Name from the 
Monuments 


Erents. 


Ascended 

tho 
Throne: 


Nepheiites "| 
Nephreus of Di- V 
odorus - J 
Achoris - 
Acoris 
Fsammoutis 

Nepherites 
Mouthis - 


Nefaorot 
Hak6ri 

t 

Pse-maut 

fnot met with 1 
on the mo- I 
numents J 


/Death of Cyrus the 
\ Younger, 401 


B.C. - 

408 

I402 

389 

(388 
(388 


Few monuments of this period occur in Egypt. 
The arts, which had long been on the decline, 
received a severe blow from the Persian invasion ; 
and many of the finest buildings were mutilated or 
destroyed. Numerous artificers were sent to Persia, 
and, with the encouragement required for the very 
existence of art, Egypt had lost the skill for which 
she was once so conspicuous. Of Nepherites the 
phonetic name once occurs amidst the ruins of 
Thebes ; and if some additions were made by his 
two successors to the temples * there and in Lower 
Egypt f, the styje of the sculpture, like the scale 
of their monuments, was degraded, and unworthy 
of a Pharaonic era. Egypt, however, free from a 
foreign yoke, enjoyed that tranquillity which had 
been so long denied, and Nepherites was even en- 
abled to join in active hostilities against the enemies 

* The name of Acoris occurs in the temple of Medeenet Haboo. 

•f During his reign many stones were taken from the quarries of the 
Troici lapidis Mons, opposite Memphis, probably for the erection of 
buildings in that city. 


CHAP. II. REIGN OF ACORIS. 207 

of his country. He therefore entered into a con- 
federacy with the Lacedaemonians, and sent a fleet 
of 100 ships to their aid, with a supply of com for 
their army : though this last fell into the hands of 
the]]enemy, in consequence of the transports putting 
into Rhodes, which had lately submitted to the 
Persians. 

Ac6ris, who succeeded Nepherites, reigned 
thirteen years. He made a treaty with Euagoras, 
king of Cyprus, against the Persians, and endea- 
voured, by every means in his power, to weaken the 
strength and thwart the schemes of his adversary ; 
and the defection of Gaus, the son of Tamus*, 
who had been for some time commander of the Per- 
sian fleet, and now, abandoning their service, had 
entered into a league with Ac6ris and the Lacedae- 
monians, added to the intrigues of Orontes, so 
embarrassed the affairs of Artaxerxes, that Eg3rpt 
was enabled to enjoy perfect security, and to defy 
his threatened projects of invasion. 

Nothing of consequence transpired during the 
reign of Psammoutis, which lasted only one year ; 
and, as might be expected, his name rarely occurs 
on any edifice, either of Upper or Lower Egyptt 
Of the short period occupied by his two suc- 
cessors, Nepherites II. and Mouthis, little can be 
learned either from the monuments, or from the 
accounts of ancient writers, but that the Persians, 
intent upon the recovery of a country they had 

* Who was put to death by Psamaticus. Diodor. xiv. 

t It is found at the temple of Kamak in Thebes. Vide Egypt and 
Thebes, pp. 185. 517., and Plate XL, and my Topographical Survey of 
Thebes. 


208 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. 


CHAP. II. 


long possessed, prepared to make a descent upon 
Eg3rpt, which was attempted without success in the 
reign of the succeeding monarch. 

Mouthis was the last of the 29th or Mendesian 
Dynasty : and the 30th was composed* according to 
Manetho, of three kings from Sebennytus. 

30^ Dynasty y of Sebermyie Eingt, 


Name from 
Ancient Authon. 


Name frmn the 
Monument!. 


Erenta. 


Aaoendad 

the 
Throne. 


Nectanebes, 
Nectabis of 

PUny . - 
Teos, 1 
TacbosofDio- ^ 

dorus - 
Nectanebes, 
Nectanabis of > 

Plutarch 


Nectanebo, or\ 
Nakht.nebo J 


r Defeated by the Persians, 
• and flies to Ethiopia, 
1^ B. c. 340 


B.C.< 

387 

369 

1362 

• to 

J 340 


In the commencement of Nectanebo*s reign, the 
Persian monarch equipped a formidable expedition, 
by land and sea, and sent it to Egypt under the 
command of Pharnabazus and Iphicrates. He con- 
fidently expected that so imposing a force would 
speedily reduce the strongholds, and firmly establish 
his authority throughout the country ; but the 
jealousy of the two commanders prevented that 
union which was necessary to insure success. Pe- 
lusium was found to be impregnable, and all the 
fortified towns had been put into a proper state of 
defence. Pharnabazus, therefore, despairing of 
making any impression upon them, advanced into 
the interior ; but being opposed by the Egyptian 
king with a considerable force, and, in consequence 


CHAP. II. NECTANEBO'S DREAM. 209 

of the want of boats, being constantly impeded in 
his movements by the various channels of the rising 
Nile, he was obliged to retreat, and relinquish the 
hope of driving Nectanebo from his throne, and of 
subjecting his country to the yoke of Persia. 

The Egyptian monarch, now free from the dread 
of foreign aggression, directed his attention towards 
the internal administration of affairs and the en- 
couragement of art. Many temples in various parts 
of the country, 'from Philae to the sea-coast, were 
repaired or enlarged ; a fine obelisk was cut, and 
transported from the quarries of Syene*; and the 
name of Nectanebo still occurs, in Upper and 
Lower Egypt, as a lasting testimony of his muni- 
ficence in the erection of public buildings. If he 
was censured, in a dream, by the god Mars, for 
allowing his temple at Sebennytus to remain unre- 
paired during the early part of his reign, he made 
ample amends for this unintentional neglect by the 
manner in which the commands of the deity were 
obeyed, the building being restored with great 
splendour; and this circumstance, unnoticed by 
any ancient writer, is recorded in a curious Greek 
papyrus, which chance has preserved and modem 
researches have discovered in an Egyptian tdmb.t 

Nectanebo, after a reign of eighteen years, was 
succeeded by Teos or Tachos. He had scarcely 
ascended the throne when he was alarmed by the 
warlike preparations of the Persian monarch, who 


* Pliny says it was without hieroglyphics. He calls him Nectabis. 
f This highly interestine document is in the possession of S' 
D'Anastasy, Swedish Consul-general at Alexandria. 

VOL. I. P 


210 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. II. 

threatened once more to invade his country. He 
therefore applied to Sparta for assistance; and 
Agesilaus, eager to assist a nation which had pre- 
viously befriended the Lacedaemonians, repaired 
himself to Egypt with a strong force of Greek 
auxiliaries. 

On the arrival of the Spartan prince, Tachos, 
whose expectations had been raised by his high 
military reputation, and who looked for a person of 
striking exterior, was greatly disappointed by the 
appearance of a little old man, whose figure and 
habits seemed contemptible, and unworthy of a 
king. Treating him, therefore, with scorn and 
disrespect, he refused him the post of generalis- 
simo, which had been promised ; and reserving it 
for himself, appointed Agesilaus to the command of 
the auxiliaries, and entrusted the fleet to Chabriaa 
the Athenian. Nor did he regard the counsels of 
the Spartan general relative to the movements of 
the army ; and contrary to his advice, led his 
troops in person into Phoenicia, committing the 
whole direction of affairs at home to the hands of a 
viceroy. He had no sooner quitted the country, 
than Nectanebo, his uncle, aided by one of his 
principal generals, conspired against him * ; and 
Agesilaus, partly from resentment at his previous 
conduct, and partly from an interested motive, 
having basely deserted hin^ the Egyptian monarch 
was obliged to fly to Sidon. Mendesius, however, 

* According to Plutarch. This is differently related by Diodorus ; 
who says that, instigated by the viceroy he had left, his son Nectanebo 
conspired against him, and was defeated by Agesilaus, who thus restored 
Tachos to the throne. 


CHAP. II. USURPATION OF NECTANEBO II. 211 

whom Tachos had designed as his successor, re- 
solved on opposing the usurper, and marched to 
attack him with an army of 100,000 men. In 
number they were very superior to the troops of 
Nectanebo, but, being composed principally of 
townsmen and artificers, were inferior in military 
skill : and being opposed by the experience of Age- 
silaus, they were routed at the first onset ; and thus, 
through the Spartan general, Nectanebo obtained 
undisputed possession of the Egyptian throne.* 

On the death of Artaxerxes Mnemon, which 
happened aboiit the second year of Nectanebo Il.t, 
Ochus or Artaxerxes III. ascended the throne of 
Persia. 

During his reign, the Sidonians and Phoenicianis 
having revolted from the Persians, entered into a 
confederacy with the Egyptians, and assisted by 
4000 Greeks, sent by Nectanebo under Mentor 
the Rhodkn, succeeded in expelling the Persians 
from their territories. This event seemed to 
have removed the enemy, and every prospect of 
an attack, to a convenient distance from the 
frontier, and the Egyptian monarch felt secure 
against their aggressions. Shortly after, a formi- 
dable army, led by Ochus in person, having reduced 
all Phoenicia, and Mentor treacherously desert- 
ing to the enemy, the affairs of Nectanebo began 

* Cornelius Nepos (in A^silao) says Agesilaus received 220 talents 
firom Nectanebo, tor his aid in obtaining tne kingdom. According to 
the same author, Chabrias was recalled by the Athenians, in conse- 


quence of a representation made to them by the Persian monarch (in 
Uhabria). He calls Tachus Thamus, and, in another place, Thacus. 
f Diodorus only allows 43 years for the reign of Artaxerxes II. 

P 2 


212 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHi^P. It. 

to wear an alarming aspect, and Egypt was itself 
invaded. Every precaution which skill or courage 
could suggest was taken by^the Egyptian monarch ; 
the passes were well guarded ; all the fortified towns 
were strongly garrisoned ; and, though inferior in 
numbers, his troops, both natives and Greek auxi- 
liaries, were animated with that enthusiasm which 
valour, confidence, and a good cause can alone 
impart. The soldiers were eager to meet the 
enemy, and boldly rushed to battle. The fight 
was obstinate; but numbers prevailed. After a 
severe contest, the Persians were victorious ; and 
Nectanebo, having abandoned his positions, in 
order to retire upon and secure Memphis, his army 
became dispirited, Pelusium surrendered, and re- 
sistance was no longer offered to the arms of Ochus. 
Flying, therefore, from Memphis, Nectanebo re^- 
tired into Upper Egypt» and at length withdrew to 
Ethiopia : the Delta and all Lower Egypt falling a 
prey to the conqueror, who finally succeeded in 
reducing the whole country, about the year 340, in 
the 21st of his reign. 

During the previous occupation of Egypt by the 
Persian troops the inhabitants had been exposed to 
cruel persecutions. They were now doomed to 
greater sufferings. If Cambyses had committed un- 
heard-of enormities ; if he had derided the religion 
and insulted the deities of Egypt ; if he had ordered 
the bull Apis to be brought before him, and had 
stabbed it with his dagger*, and been guilty of 
every species of oppression, — these were trifling 

* Herodot. iii. 29« 


CHAP. II. 


CRUELTIES OF OCHUS. 


213 


compared with the enormities of Ochus« Wanton 
injustice, murders, profanation of religious rites» 
and continual persecutions, seemed to delight him. 
The sacred Apis was slain, and served up at a ban- 
quet, of which Ochus and his friends partook ; and 
all Egypt groaned under the tjrranny of this in- 
human despot. Two years, however, fortunately 
relieved them ifrom his caprices; and the Egyp- 
tians, to show their abhorrence for him, and their 
hatred of his name, substituted for it the represent- 
ation of a sword, the emblem of destruction, in 
their catalogue of kings.* 

Ochus and his two successors constituted the 
31st Dynasty of Manetho : during which period 
nothing happened worthy of notice ; and the inva- 
sion of the Macedonians in the year 332 put an end 
to the dominion of the Persians in Egypt. 

Slst Dynasty^ of Persians. 


Name from 
Ancient Authors. 


Ochus (or Arta- 
xerxes III.) - 
Arses 


Darius Codo- 
manus 


:} 


Name from the 
Monuments. 


''Not met with" 
on the mo- 
numents. 


I 


Events. 


In his 20tb year, 
of Philip, 3S8 


Death 


Alexander makes himself 
master of Egypt, 332; 
dies, 323 : Ptolemy La- 
gus becomes governor and 
kingof £gypt, 322—305. 


Began to 
reign. 


B. c. 
340 

338 


-336 


The arrival of Alexander was greeted with uni- 
versal satisfaction. Their hatred of the Persians, and 
their frequent alliances with the Greeks, who had 


* Plut. de Iside et Osiride, s. ii. 

p 3 


214 THE ANCIKNT EGYPTIANS, CHAP. II. 

fought under the same banners against a common 
enemy, naturally taught the Egyptians to welcome 
the Macedonian army with the strongest demon-, 
strations of friendship, and to consider their coming 
as a direct interposition of the gods ; and so wise and 
concihatory was the conduct of the early Ptolemies, 
that they almost ceased to regret the period when 
they were governed by native princes. 

To detail the events of the Ptolemaic history is 
not my present intention, nor is it necessary to in- 
troduce any account of their reigns in a work which 
purposes to relate solely to the history and man- 
ners of the ancient Egyptians ; but if the reader 
is desirous of consulting a chronological notice of 
those princes, I refer him to that work' from which 
I have taken the dynasties inserted in the preceding 
pages. 

• My Egypt and Thebes, p. 506. ei leq. 


AlnbuterplUownnthelwiHL MhbMI Miurmm. 


CHAP. III. EXTENT OF EOYRr. 


VicworiheRuIr 


CHAP. III. 

ExUnl of the Country. — Revenue and Commerce. — Seaports. 

— 7it« Ctales o^ the Egypttaiia. — The Sacerdotal Order. — 
Kingg.— First Caste. — TXe Priests. — SecondCatte. — Military 
Class. — Troops. — AuxiUaries. — Arms. — The Enemies and 
Conquestsrf^ Egyptians. — March to War.— Their Humanity. 

— Triumph. ■ — Captives, — Miliiary Laws and Punishments. 

— Other MeaAers <^ the Second Caste. — Third Caste. — 
Fourth Catte. — Laws and Government. — The Kings. — 
Judges. — Laws. — Passports. — Mvrder. — Right of Fathers. 

— Minor Offences. — Th^. — D^. — Deeds. — Marriages. 

— Slaves. — Children. — Respect for Old Age, and for their 
Kings. — Gratitude of the Egyptians. — Uniformity o^ Aeir 
Laws. — Different Lawgivers. — Governors of Provinces. 

Egypt, properly so called, is that portion of the 
valley of the Nile lying between latitude 24.° 3' 
and 31° 37', or between the island of Philie at the 
cataracts of E'Sooan • and the Mediterranean Sea.t 

* According to the Oracle of Arnmon, all those who drank the water 
of the Nile and lived to the north of Elephantine were Efyptiant, 
Herodot. ii. IB. f At Cnpe BooiTos. 


216 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

With the exception of the northern part about 
the Delta, its breadth is very limited, and the 
cultivated, and consequently inhabited portion, is 
frequently confined to less than half the distance 
between the eastern and Libyan chains* The 
average breadth of the valley from one mountain 
range to the other, between Cairo in Lower and 
Edfoo in Upper Egypt, is only about seven miles ; 
and that of the cultivable land, whose limits depend 
on the inundation, scarcely exceeds five and a half, 
being in the widest part ten and three quarters, and 
in the narrowest two miles, including the river.* 

The extent in square miles of the northernmost 
district between the pyramids and the sea is con- 
siderable, and that of the Delta alone, which forms 
a portion of it, may be estimated at 1976 square 
miles ; for though it is very narrow about its apex, 
at the junction of the modem Rosetta and Dami- 
etta branches, it gradually widens on approaching 
the coast, where the base of this somewhat irre- 
gular triangle is eighty-one miles. And as much 
irrigated land stretches on either side E. and W. 
of the two branches, the northern district, with 
the intermediate Delta included, will be found to 
contain about 4500 square miles, or double the 
whole arable land of Egypt, which may be com- 
puted at 2255 square miles, exclusive of the Fyoom, 
a small province consisting of about 340. 

* That is in Middle Egypt, and to the north of Edfoo ; between 
which town and E'Sooan the valley is so narrow that in some places 
there is scarcely any soil on either side of the river,, so that this part 
does not enter into the general average I have given. 


CHAP, III. POPULATION OF EGYPT. gl^ 

The number of towns and villages reported to 
have stood on this tract, and in the upper parts of 
the valley of the Nile, appears almost incredible j 
and Herodotus affirms that 20,000 populous cities 
existed in Egypt during the reign of Amasis.* 
Diodorus, with more caution and judgment, cal- 
culates 18,000 large villages and towns ; and states 
that, under Ptolemy Lagus, they amounted to up- 
wards of 30,000, a number which remained even at 
the period when he wrote, or about forty-four years 
before our era. But the population was already 
greatly reduced, and of the seven millions who once 
inhabited Egypt, about three t only remained in the 
time of the historian. 

Josephusi:, in the reign of Vespasian §, still 
reckons seven millions and a half in the valley of 
the Nile, besides the population of Alexandria, 
which amounted to more than 300,000 souls j and, 
according to Theocritus ||, the number of towns at 
an earlier period was 33,339 : we may here how- 
ever include some of the neighbouring provinces 
belonging to Egypt, as he comprehends Ethiopia, 
Libya, Syria, Arabia, Pamphylia, Cilicia, Caria, 

* Herodot. ii, 177. 

f Diod. i. 31. There are two readings of this passage: according 
to the other, Diodorus reckons 7,000,000, and in his own time a no less 
number. 

jl Josephus makes Agrippa say, *' Aiywrov .... i^tiq eicTtivofitvri 
fitxpi^ AiOtowuv Kcu rrjc tvdaifiovog Apattac, ofnopoc re ovaa tiiq IvSiKtfgy 
irtVTiKovTa npOQ tcuq nrTaKotriouQ e^^ot/cra fivpiadac avOptairutv,** Alexandria, 
he adds, is thirty stadia in length, and ten in breadth. De Bello Jud^ 
ii. 16. 4. 

§ Or he may allude to the period when Egypt was conquered by the 
Komans. 

II Theocr. Id. xvii. 82. 


218 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

and Lycia within the dominions of Ptolemy Phila- 
delphus : and other authors may occasionally have 
extended the name of Egypt to its possessions in 
Libya, Ethiopia, and Syria; since, making every 
allowance for the flourishing condition of this 
highly fertile country, the number of towns they 
mention is too disproportionate for the sole valley of 
Egypt lying between the cataracts and the sea. 

The produce of the land was doubtless much 
greater in the earlier periods of its history than at 
the present day, owing as well to the superior 
industry of the people as to a better system of 
government, and sufficed for the support of a very 
dense population ; yet Egypt, if well cultivated, 
could now maintain many more inhabitants than at 
any former period, owing to the increased extent 
of the irrigated land : and if the ancient Egyptians 
enclosed those portions of the uninundated edge of 
the desert which were capable of cultivation, the 
same expedient might still be resorted to; and 
a larger proportion of soil now overflowed by the 
rising Nile ofiers additional advantages. That 
the irrigated part of the valley was much less ex- 
tensive than at present, at least wherever the 
plain stretches to any distance E. and W., or to 
the right and left of the river, is evident from the 
fact of the alluvial deposit constantly encroaching 
in a horizontal direction upon the gradual slope of 
the desert ; and, as a very perceptible elevation 
of the river's bed, as well as of the land of Egypt, 
has always been going on, it requires no argument 
to prove that a perpendicular rise of the water must 


CHAP. III. INCREASED EXTENT OF LAND. 219 

cause it to flow to a considerable distance over an 
open space to the £• and W. 

Thus the plain of Thebes, in the time of Amu- 
noph III., or about 1430 before our era, was not 
more than two thirds of its present breadth ; and 
the statues of that monarch, around which the al- 
luvial mud has accumulated to the height of nearly 
seven feet, are based on the sand that once extended 
some distance before them.* How erroneous, 
then, is it to suppose the drifting sands of the en- 
croaching desertt threaten the welfare of this coun- 
try, or have in any way tended to its downfall; 
and how much more reasonable is it to ascribe the 
degraded condition, to which Egypt is reduced, 
to causes of a far more baneful nature, — foreign 
despotism, the insecurity of property, and the effects 
of that old age which it is the fate of every country,, 
as well as every individual, to undergo. 

Besides the numerous towns and villages in the 
plain, many were prudently placed by the ancient 
Egyptians on the slope of the desert, at a short 
distance from the irrigated land, in order not to 
occupy more than was necessary of soil so valuable 


* The ancient Egyptians were constantly obliged to raise mounds 
round the old towns to prevent th^r being overwhelmed by the inun- 
dation of the Nile, from the increased height of its rise after the lapse 
of a certain number of years. Herodot. ii. 137. Videmnrd, p. 9. 

f It is true that the sand has accumulated about fiahnasa, and the 
edge of the irrigated land in its vicinity, as well as about Kerdasseh 
and a few other places, owing to the form of the valleys which open on 
those spots from the Libyan desert, but it is not general throughout 
the valley of the Nile, even oa this side of the river ; and the progress 
of the sand can never be very great in any oart of Egypt, however it 
raav extend itself in Nubia over the exposed and narrow strip of land, 
which the west bank presents above the cataracts of E'Sooan. 


220 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

for its productions ; and frequently with a view of 
encouraging some degree of cultivation in the desert 
plain, which, though above the reach of the inun- 
dation, might be irrigated by artificial ducts, or by 
water raised from inland wells. Mounds and ruined 
walls still mark the sites of these villages in different 
parts of Egypt ; and in a few instances the remains 
of magnificent temples, or the authority of ancient 
authors, attest the existence of large cities in similar 
situations. Thus Abydus, Athribis, Tentyi*is, parts 
of Memphis * and Oxyrinchus, stood on the edge of 
the desert; and the town that once occupied the 
vicinity of Qasr Khar6on, at the western extremity 
of the Fyoom, was far removed from the fertilizing 
influence of the inundation. 

When towns or villages were surrounded with 
sand, the constant attention of the inhabitants pre- 
vented their being encumbered by it ; but, so soon 
as they were deserted, it began to accumulate 
around them, and we sometimes find their monu- 
ments half buried in large drifts collected by the 
wind, t As population and industry decreased, the 
once cultivated spots of land on the desert plain 
were gradually abandoned, and the vestiges of canals 
or artificial water-courses, the indication of fields 
once portioned into squares, or the roots of fruit 
trees, only now serve to attest the unremitting ex- 
ertions of a civilised people. It is not, however, to 

* Strabo says the Serapeum was '* in a very sand^ spot." 

i* As at Abydus ; but considering the length of time this city has 

been deserted, and its position, the state of tbo ruins there is not 

surprising. 


CHAP. III. NOTIONS RESPECTING THE SANDS. 221 

be inferred that the irresistible encroachments of 
moving downs have curtailed the limits, or threat- 
ened the existence, of this fertile country ; and the 
fearful picture drawn by M. De Luc* must rather 
be looked upon as a composition than a study 
from nature. " The sands of Egypt,'* he observes, 
" were formerly r^mofefrom that country : and the 
OdseSf or habitable spots, still appearing in the 
midst of them, are the remains of soil which formerly 
extended the whok way to the Nile; the sand, 
transported thither by the western winds, having 
overwhelmed and buried this extensive tract, and 
doomed to sterility a land once remarkable for 
its fruitfulness.*' This singular statement is partly 
founded on the report of Denon, who, in his visit 
to Bahnasat (Oxyrinchus), observed some builds 
ings near the town so much encumbered with sand 
that their summits were scarcely visible above it, 
and who consequently concluded the Libyan desert 
had made proportionate encroachments along the 
whole of the western side of the valley. The 
opening here formed by the accidental position 
of the hills and neighbouring ravines, and the 
quantity of drifted sand in the interior of the desert 
to the westward, have been the cause of its accu- 
mulation, and of the partial formation of downs in 


* In the Mercure de France, September 1809, on the Moving Sands 
of Africa. 

+ The proper orthography of this name is Bahnasa, Behnasa, or 
Benneseh, and is said to have been given it from one of its queens (or 
the wife of the governor of the place% signifying Bahanissa, '* the beauty 
of woman," or the most beautiful of women. Such is the account 
given in an Arabic MS. history of that city, written by Aboo Abdillah, 
Mohammed, Ebn Mohammed el Mukkari. 


222 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

the vicinity ; but neither these, nor any other isand 
drifts in similar exposed situations, could, after a 
careftil examination of the whole valley, be deemed 
of such a nature as to endanger the fertility of 
Egypt ; though it is possible that, if no inundation 
of the Nile counteracted its effects, or if the alluvial 
deposit did not continue to increase in height, the 
sand might then interfere with the extent of the 
arable land, and gradually tend to narrow its limits. 
For the satisfaction of those who are contented 
with simple facts, it will be sufficient to state that 
the breadth of the irrigated portion of the valley is 
much more extensive than it was at any farmer 
period, and this increase will continue in spite of 
the very few local impediments which the drifted 
sand may accidentally offer ; and it may not be irre- 
levant to observe that no soil is better suited to 
many kinds of produce than the irrigated edge of 
the desert *, even before it is covered by the fertil- 
izing deposit of the inundation. 

M. De Luc's idea respecting the Oases is novel 
and amusing ; and if Egypt once extended to that 
distance westward, instead of considering the ac- 
counts of ancient writers on its former populous- 
ness at all exaggerated, we should be inclined to 
think they had failed to ascribe an adequate num- 
ber of inhabitants to so extensive a region. So 
far from being the remains of a once cultivated 
and level tract, extending to the valley of the Nile, 
the Oases are surrounded by limestone mountains, 

* It generally consists of a clay mixed with sand. 


CHAP, III, NARROW TRACT OF flUBIA. 223 

rising to the height of several hundred feet, and 
generally bounding them on all sides ; whose level 
summit is part of the same table land, or mountain 
plain, extending to and bordering the western side 
of Egypt, which is overlooked by these precipitous 
cliffs in the same manner as the similarly depressed 
though less extensive tract of the Oases. * Like 
other provinces of Egypt, they were much more 
densely peopled than at present; and remsuns of 
towns and villages attest their flourishing condition, 
even to the late period of the Roman dominion. 

Nubia, or that part of Ethiopia lying between 
the cataracts of E'Sooan and Wadee Halfeh, was 
at all times a thinly inhabited and unproductive 
province ; and the vicinity of mountains, frequently 
reaching to the water's edge, prevented its receiv- 
ing those benefits from the inundation, which the 
very great rise of the water would have afforded 
to a more level and extensive tract, t It is in this 
narrow strip of land that the noxious approach of 
moving sand is more particularly felt, since its ad- 
vances are more sudden and overwhelming than 
on a gradual slope ; and the ancient towns and 
temples on the west side of the Nile are therefore 
frequently surrounded or partially buried by its 
accumulating drifts. They are mostly built on 
this bank ; and it is not improbable that the 

* The Oases look very much like a portion of the valley of the Nile 
surrounded by the same kind of limestone mountains, but without any 
river. 

f The more southward the greater the perpendicular rise of the 
Nile. It decreases, of course, gradually towards ^the mouth ; and while 
in Nubia it is upwards of ten yards, at Rosetta it is only a very few 
feet. 


224 TH£ ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

unprodilctive nature of the soil was the principal 
reason for placing the towns there; the land on 
one side, which they were taught to consider so 
valuable, not being thus unnecessarily wasted, and 
the religious respect due to the abode of their gods, 
and regard for their own comfort, being sufficient 
motives for industriously striving to prevent the 
encroachments of the desert on the other. For that 
they were aware of the danger threatened by the 
sand is evident from the crude brick walls fre- 
quently erected there as a protection to the monu- 
ments ; and the fall of one of those barriers gave 
ingress to the torrent which has overwhelmed 
and concealed the entrance of the great temple at 
Aboosimbel. 

REVENUES AND COMMERCE. 

That the conquests of the ancient Egyptians ex- 
tended beyond the limits of their valley, is abun- 
dantly proved by ancient authors and monumental 
records ; but as I have already noticed this fact in 
the foregoing chapter, I shall proceed to the consi- 
deration of the revenues arising from them, as 
well as the commerce and other fiscal resources of 
the country. 

Judging from the sculptures of Thebes, the 
tribute annually received by the Egyptians from 
nations they had subdued in Asia and Northern 
Ethiopia was of immense value, and tended greatly 
to enrich the coffers of the state ; and the quantity 
of gold and silver in rings and ingots, the various 
objects of luxury, vases of porcelain and different 


CHAP. III. THE REVENUE AND EXPORTS. 225 

metals, ivory, rare woods, precious stones, horses, 
dogs, wild animals, trees, seeds, fruits, gums, 
perfumes, spices, and other foreign productions 
there described, perfectly accord with the state- 
ments of ancient authors.* And though they are 
presented to the king, as chief of the nation, we 
may conclude they formed part of the public 
revenue, and were not solely intended for his use ; 
especially in a country where royalty was under the 
restraint and guidance of salutary laws, and where 
the welfare of the community was not sacrificed to 
the caprice of a monarch. 

According to Strabo, the taxes, even under 
Ptolemy Auletes, the father of Cleopatra, the most 
negligent of monarchs, amounted to 12,500 talents, 
or between three and four millions sterling t ; and 
the constant influx of specie resulting from com- 
mercial intercourse with foreign nations, who pur- 
chased the cornt and manufactures of Egypt, 
during the very careful administration of its native 
sovereigns, necessarily increased the riches of the 
country, and greatly augmented the revenue at that 
period. 

Among the exports were yarn §, fine linen cloth. 


* Tacitus (Ann. ii. 60.) says, " The tribute paid by conquered 
nations was recorded at Thebes, as well as the specific weight of gold 
and silver, the quantity of arms, the number of horses, the offerings 
of ivory and rich perfumes presented to the temples of Egypt, the 
measures of grain, and the various supplies administered by every na- 
tion, making altogether a prodigious revenue." 

f The present revenue of Egypt has been variously stated : at 2J 
.3, 4, and even near 5 millions sterling. 

:|: *' All countries came into Egypt to buy corn," in the time of the 
famine of Joseph. Gen. xli. 57. 

§ " Linen yarn out of Egypt." 1 Kings, x. 28. ; 2 Chron. i. 16. 


VOL. I. 


226 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP« III. 

and embroidered work*, purchased by the Tynans 
and Jews ; chariots and horses t, bought by the 
merchants of Judaea in the time of Solomon at 
600 1 and 150 § shekels of silver; and other com- 
modities, produced or manufactured in the country. 

The Egyptians also derived important advan- 
tages fi-om their intercourse with India and Arabia; 
and the port of Philoteras, which, there is reason to 
believe, was constructed at a very remote p eriod II, 
long before the exodus of the Israelites, was pro- 
bably the emporium of that trade. It was situated 
on the eastern coast of the Red Sea, in latitude 
26® 9^ ; and though small, the number of ships its 
basin would contain sufficed for a constant traffic 
between Egypt and Arabia, no periodical winds 
there interfering with the navigation, at any season 
of the year. 

Whether they had a direct communication with 
India at the same early epoch, or were supplied 
through Arabia with the merchandise of that coun- 
try, it is not possible now to determine ; but even 
an indirect traded was capable of opening to them 
a source of immense wealth ; and that the produc- 

* ** Fine linen, with broidered work from Egypt," was purchased by 
the Tyrians. Ezek. xxvii. 7. That painted or embroidered sail-cloth 
was used by the Egyptians for their pleasure-boats, at least those be- 
longing to the kings and chief persons of the country, is proved by the 
sculptures of Thebes. 

f2 Chron. i. 16, 17.; and 1 Kings, x. 
70/. sterling. § 17/. 10*. 

Already noticed in Chap. II. p. 45. It was previousl^r called 
^nnum, " oppidum parvum est Annum, pro quo alii Philoteram 
scribunt." Strabo says it received the name of ** Philoteras from the 
sister of the second Ptolemy." lib. xvii. Plin. vi. 29. 

T Strabo thinks that in former times a fleet of twenty ships never 
passed the Straits of Babelmandeb ; but the Indian trade might have 
been carried on through Arabia. Strabo (lib. xvii.) on Alexandria. 


CHAP. III. TRADE WITH INDIA. 2^ 

tions of India did actually reach Egypt we have 
positive testimony from the tombs of Thebes. 

The Scripture history shows the trafific esta- 
blished by Solomon with India, through the Red 
Sea, to have been of very great consequence, pro- 
ducing, in one voyage, no less than 450 talents of 
gold*, or 3,240,000/. sterling; and to the same 
branch of commerce may be ascribed the main 
cause of the flourishing condition of Tyre itself. 
And if the Egyptian trade was not so direct as that 
of Solomon and the Tyrians, it must still be ad- 
mitted that any intercourse with India at so remote 
a period would be higlily beneficial to the country, 
since it was enjoyed without competition, and con- 
. sequently afforded increased advantages. 

The other harbours in this part of the Arabian 
Gulf, — MyosHormos, Berenice, Arsinoe, Nechesia, 
and Leucos Portus, — were built in later times ; and 
the lucrative trade they enjoyed was greatly in- 
creased after the conquest of Egypt by the Romans: 
120 vessels annually leaving the coast of Egypt for 
India, at midsummer, about the rising of the dog- 
start, and returning in the month of December or 
January. " The principal objects of oriental traffic,'* 
says Gibbon, " were splendid and trifling : silk (a 
pound of which was esteemed not inferior in value 
to a pound of gold), precious stones, and a variety 
of aromatics.** When Strabo visited Egypt the Myos 
Hormos seems to have superseded Berenice, and 

* 2 Chron. viii. 1 8. ; 1 Kings, ix. 26. 

f The Periplus gives " the month of July, which is Epiphi ; " and 
Pliny (lib. vi. 26.), " ante Canis prtum," about July 26, 

q2 


228 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS, CHAP. III. 

all the other maritime stations on the coast ; and 
indeed it possessed greater advantages than any 
other, except Philoteras and Arsinoe, in its overland 
communication with the Nile : yet Berenice, in the 
later age of Pliny, was again preferred to its rival. 
From both ports the goods were taken on camels by 
an almost level road across the desert to Goptos*, 
and thence distributed over different parts of 
Egypt; and, in the time of the Ptolemies and 
Ca&sars, those particularly suited for exportation to 
Europe went down the river to Alexandria, where 
they were sold to merchants who resorted to that 
city at a. stated season. 

At a subsequent period, during the reigns of the 
Arab caliphs, ApoUinopolis Parva, or Qoos, sue- . 
ceeded Coptos, as the rendezvous of caravans from 
the Red Sea ; and this town flourished so rapidly, 
in consequence of the preference it enjoyed, that in 
Aboolfidda's time it was second only to Fostat, the 
capital of Egypt ; until it ceded its place to Qeneh, 
as Myos Hormos was destined to do iii favour of 
Kossayr. Philoteras, however, continued to be 
resorted to after the Arab conquest; and it was 
during the reigns of the Egyptian caliphs that the 
modern Kossayr t took the place of that ancient port. 

The Myos Hormos, called also Aphrodite t, stood 

*■ ** CoptOB Indicarum Arabicarumque mercium Nilo proximum 
emporium." Plin. v. 9. '' All the Indian and Arabian goods, and 
even those that come from Ethiopia by the Red Sea, are brought to 
Coptos." Strabo, xvii. 

■f PhiloteraA, now in ruins, is known by the name of Old Kossayr. 

4; Now called Abooshar. Strabo, '* Eira Mvo^ opfiov xai A^podirtf^ 
opfiov KoktwOat \ifitva fnyav" lib. xvii* Agatharcides says, it was 
afterwards called the Port of Venus. 


CHAP. iir. PORTS OF THE RED SEA. 229 

in latitude 27** 22', upon a flat coast, backed by 
low mountains, distant from it about three miles ; 
where a well, the Fons Tadnos*, supplied the 
town and ships with water. The port was more 
capacious than those of Berenice and Philoteras ; 
and though exposed to the winds, it was secure 
against the force of a boisterous sea. Several roads 
united at the gates of the town, from Berenice and 
Philoteras on the south, from Arsinoe on the north, 
and from Coptos on the west ; and stations supplied 
those who passed to and from the Nile with water 
and other necessaries. 

Berenice owed its foundation to Ptolemy Phila- 
delphus, who called it after the name of his mother, 
the wife of Lagus or Soter.t The town was exten- 
sive, and was ornamented with a small but elegant 
temple of Sarapis ; and though the harbour was 
neither deep nor spacious, its position in a receding 
gulf t tended greatly to the safety of the vessels 
lying within it, or anchored in the bay. A road 
led thence direct to Coptos, furnished with the 
usual stations, or hydreumas ; and another, which 
also went to the emerald mines, joined, or rather 
crossed it, from ApoUinopolis Magna. 

* " Mdx deserta ad Myos Hormon, ubi Fons Tadnos." Plin. vi. 29. 

f '' Berenice oppidum matris Philadelphi nomine, ad quod iter a 
Copto diximus." Plin. vi. 29. 

J Strabo says, ** Berenice placed in a deep bay." The headland of 
Cape Nose stretches out on the east of it to the distance of 21 miles 
from the line of the shore, agreeing with another remark of the geogra- 
pher, that " an isthmus projects into the Red Sea near the city of 
Berenice, which, though without a port, affords a convenient shelter, 
from the vicinity of the headland." 

Q 3 


230 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS, CHAP. Ill, 

Arsinoe, which stood at the northern extremity 
of the Red Sea, near the modem town of Sooez, 
was founded by the second Ptolemy, and so named 
after his sister.* Though vessels anchored there 
rode secure from the violence of the sea, its ex- 
posed situation, and the dangers they encountered 
in working up the narrow extremity of the gulf, 
rendered its position t less eligible for the Indian 
trade than either Myos Hormos or Berenice ; and 
had it not been for the convenience of establishing 
a communication with the Nile by a canal, and the 
shortness of the journey across the desert in that 
part, it is probable it would not have been chosen 
for a seaport. 

The small towns of Nechesia and the Leucos 
Portus were probably of Roman date, though the 
natural harbours they possess may have been used 
at a much earlier period. Their positions are still 
marked by the ruins on the shore, in latitude 24** 54' 
and 25° 87', where I discovered them in 1826, 
while making a survey of this part of the coast 
from Sooez to Berenice. The former stands in, and 
perhaps gave the name to, the Wadee Nukkaree ; 


* ** Arsinoen .... conditam sororis nomine in sinu charandra, a 
Ptolemaeo Philadelpho." Plin. vi. 29. 

f It probably succeeded to some more ancient town. It is not cer- 
tain that Clysma stood there ; but Qolzim appears to have occupied 
the site of Arsinoe and part of the modern Sooez. Vide my Egypt 
and ThebeSy p. 540. note f. Herodotus (ii. 158.) says the canal 
entered the Ked Sea near to Patumos ; we may therefore conclude 
that town stood on the same spot as Arsinoe. We again trace in Pa- 
tumos the name Pi-thom. It was common to many towns. Thomu, 
Thmiii, and others are evidently derived, like Thummim, from Thmei, 
the goddess of Truth or Justice* In Egyptian pi is '* the/' and pa 
•* bewnging to." 


CHAP. III. IMPORTS. EMERALDS. 231 

the latter is called E'Shoona, or ** the Magazine */' 
and, from being built of very white limestone, was 
readily indicated by the Arabs when I inquired of 
them the site of the White Harbour. 

Many other ports, the " Portus multi '* of Pliny t, 
occur along the coast, particularly between Berenice 
and Kossayr ; but though they all have landmarks 
to guide boats in approaching their rocky entrances, 
none of them have any remains of a town, or the 
vestiges of habitations. 

The principal objects introduced in early times 
into Egypt, from Arabia and India, were spices 
and various oriental productions t, required either 
for the service of religion, or the purposes of 
luxury ; and a number of precious stones, lapis 
lazzuli, and other things brought from those coun- 
tries, are frequently discovered in the tombs of 
Thebes, bearing the names of Pharaohs of the 
18th Dynasty. The mines of their own desert 
did, indeed, supply the emeralds they used ; and 
these were worked as early, at least, as the reign of 
Amunoph III., or 1425 b. c, but many other 
stones must have come from India; and some 
plants, as the Nymphaea Nelumbo, could only have 
been introduced from that country. § 

Though we cannot ascertain the extent or exact 

* This word is takea from the Arabic Mukhzen, of similar import. 

f Plin. vi* 29. 

^ Chinese bottles, with inscriptions in that language, are found 
in ancient tombs at Thebes, but oi what date I am uncertain* 

§ It was evidently not indigenous to Egypt) from the care that was 
necessary in planting it, and is now totally unknown in the valley of the 
Nile. Before they introduced it, would they not have seen the plant? 
and who was likely to bring the roots but some of their own people ? 

Q 4 


232 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

quality of the various imports, of goods re-exported 
from Egypt, or the proportion which these last bore 
to the internal consumption, it is reasonable to 
conclude that every article of luxury was a source 
of revenue to the government; and that both 
native and foreign productions coming under this 
denomination, whether exported or sold in Egypt, 
tended to enrich the state, to which they belonged, 
or paid a duty. 

That the riches of the country were immense is 
proved by the appearance of the furniture and do- 
mestic utensils, and by the great quantity of jewels 
of gold, silver, precious stones, and other objects of 
luxury in use among them in the earliest times : 
their treasures became proverbial throughout the 
neighbouring states*, and a love of pomp and 
splendour continued to be the ruling passion of the 
Egyptians till the latest period of their existence as 
an independent state, which is fully demonstrated 
by the history of the celebrated Cleopatra. 

Another source of wealth was derived from the 
gold mines in the desert of the upper country. 
Their position t, still known to the Arabs, is about 
s. E. from Bahayreb, a village opposite the town of 
Edfoo tj or Apollinopolis Magna, and at a distance 
of nearly ten days' journey from that place, in the 

* ** Greater riches, than the treasures in Egypt." Ep. Hebr. xi. 
26. " The pomp of Egypt." Ezek. xxxii. 12. Conf. also the jewels 
of silver and gold which tne Jews borrowed of the Egyptians. Exod. 
xii. 35. 

f They have lately been visited by Monsieur Linant and Mr. Bono- 
mi, who have found the account of the Arabs to agree very well with 
their position. 

J Edfoo is in latitude Zi/" 58'. 


CHAP. III. GOLD AND SILVER MINES. 233 

mountains of the Bishareeh. The Arab authors, 
Edrisi, Ebn-Said, and Aboolfidda, place them at 
Gebel OUagee, a mountain situated in the land 
of Bega ; and this last word at once points out the 
Bisharee desert, being still used by the tribe as 
their own name. The gold lies in veins of quartz *, 
in the rocks bordering an inhospitable valley and 
its adjacent ravines : but the small quantity they 
are capable of producing by immense labour, 
added to the difficulty of procuring water, and 
other local impediments, would probably render 
the re-opening of them at the present day an un- 
profitable speculation ; and indeed in the time of 
Aboolfidda t they only just covered their ex- 
penses, and have never been worked since they 
were abandoned by the Arab caliphs. According 
to Agatharcides* account, the toil of extracting 
the gold was immense : it was separated from the 
pounded stone by frequent washings, arid this pro- 
cess appears to be represented in the paintings of 
tombs executed during the reign of Osirtasen, and 
other ancient Pharaohs. We have no positive notice 
of their first discovery, but it is reasonable to suppose 
they were worked at the earliest periods of the 
Egyptian monarchy ; and the total of their annual 
produce is stated by Hecataeus t to have been re- 

* Mohammed All had an idea of re-^ opening them, but I believe the 
project has been abandoned. Wherever the ancients met with veins 
of quartz id the desert, I observe they invariably broke up portions of 
it, doubtless to try if it contained gold. 

f Or Omad-e'deen-Aboolfeda, Ismail-ben-Nasser. He was king of 
Hamah in Syria, and lived about the year 730 of the Hegira, a. d. 
1334. 

J Diodorus, i. 49., on his authority. 


234 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

corded in a temple founded by a monarch of the 
18th Dynasty* He also notices an immense sum 
annually produced from the silver mines of Egypt, 
which amounted to 3,200 myriads of minae.* Be- 
sides these were valuable mines of copper, lead, iron, 
and emeralds, ail of which still exist in the deserts 
of the Red Sea ; and the sulphur, which abounds 
in the same districts, was not neglected by the an- 
cient Egyptians. 

The riches, then, of the country were principally 
derived from taxes, foreign tribute, monopolies, 
commerce, mines, and above all from the produc- 
tions of a fruitful soil. The wants of the poorer 
classes were easily satisfied; the abundance of 
grain, herbs, and esculent plants afforded an ample 
supply to the inhabitants of the valley of the Nile, 
at a trifling expense, and with little labour ; and so 
much com was produced in this fertile country, that 
after sufficing for the consumption of a very exten- 
sive population, it offered a great surplus for the 
foreign markett ; and the quantity on hand en- 
abling the peasant to sell it at a low rate necessarily 
aflforded considerable profit to the government, 
being exported to other countries, or sold to the 
traders who visited Egypt for commercial purposes. 

Though the lower classes of the people appear 
to have been contented with their condition, there 
is no evidence of their having participated in 

* Vide supra, p. 1 13. 

f An idea may be formed of the quantity produced in Egypt from 
the account of the famine of Joseph, when they were enabled to lay up 
from the superabundance of seven plenteous years enough corn to 
suffice for seven years of dearth. Gen. xli. 47. 


CHAP. Ill* EGYPT HAPPY UNDER THE PHARAOHS. 235 

the affluence enjoyed by the higher orders; and 
the very great distinction between them and the 
richer classes is remarkable, as well in the sub- 
missive obeisance to their superiors as in their 
general appearance, their dress, and the style of 
their houses. Some, indeed, seem to have been 
little better lodged and fed than those of the pre- 
sent day* ; and the degrading custom of prostra- 
tion before those in authority argues that they 
were subject to severe discipline and punishment, 
though, doubtless, only administered according 
to the rules of justice. That they were happy 
under their native princes, and contented with the 
laws and early institutions of the Pharaohs, is 
strongly argued by the constant feeling of dissatis- 
faction evinced by them against foreign rule, not 
only in the time of the despotic Persians, but of the 
Ptolemies, who sought, on many occasions, to flatter 
their religious prejudices, to content the priesthood, 
and even to court the good will of the people. 
And though some allowance must be made in 
these cases for the effect of change, the influence 
of the priests, and the impatience common to all 
people under a foreign master, we may fairly 
conclude, that the spirit of their laws, under the 
original system, w^as dictated by a scrupulous re- 
gard to justice and the benevolence of a paternal 
government. 

* Herodotus (ii. 47.) speaks of poor people in Egypt who had 
scarcely any thing to live upon. I do not, however, imagine they suf- 
fered from hunger like the modem peasants, nor could the taxes have 
been as numerous or as oppressive. Diod. i. 80. 


236 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 


CASTES. 

The great distinction of classes * maintained in 
Egypt was characteristic of the East, and custom 
naturally removed every unpleasing impression 
which so readily occurs to men educated with dif- 
ferent habits and ideas ; and provided justice was 
regarded, it offered no cause of discontent in an 
eastern nation. The division of Egyptian society 
into separate classes, or castes, has been noticed 
by many authors. Herodotus t says they were 
divided into seven tribes, one of which was the 
sacerdotal, another of the soldiers, and the remain- 
ing five of the herdsmen, swineherds, shopkeepers, 
interpreters, and boatmen. Diodorust states that, 
like the Athenians, who being an Egyptian colony 
derived this institution from the parent country, 
they were distributed into three classes, the priests, 
the peasants, or husbandmen, from whom the 
soldiers were levied, and the artizans, who were 
employed in handicraft and other similar occu- 
pations, and in common offices among the people § ; 
but in another place || he extends the number to 
five, and reckons the pastors, husbandmen, and 
artificers, independent of the soldiers and priests. 

* The Etruscans were also divided into four castes ; but this insti- 
tution appears rather to have been derived from the East than to have 
taken its rise in Italy. They were, 1. the Larthes, Tyrani, or lords : 
2. the Tusci, or priesthood : 3. the Hasenae, or warriors ; and, 4. the 
people, or popular caste. 

f Herod, ii. 164. J Diodorus, i. 28. 

§ As public weighers, notaries, and other of the usual avocations of 
large towns. 

IJ Diod. i. 74. 


CHAP. Iir. CASTES. THEIR NUMBER. 237 

Strabo limits them to three, the military, husband- 
men, and priests; and Plato* divides them into 
six bodies, the priests, artificers, shepherds, hunts- 
men, husbandmen, and soldiers ; each peculiar art, 
or occupation, he observes, being confined to a cer- 
tain subdivision of the caste, and every one engaged 
in his own branch, without interfering with the 
occupation of another: as in India and China, where 
tlie same trade or employment is followed in suc- 
' cession by father and son. 

From the statements above noticed, the exact 
number of classes into which the Egyptians were 
divided appears uncertain ; but as there is reason 
to conclude that some authors have subdivided the 
main castes into several of their minor branches, 
while others have been contented with the collec- 
tive divisions, I shall endeavour to point out (as I 
have already had occasion to do in a former workt) 
the four great comprehensive classes, and the prin- 
cipal subdivisions of each. 

The first caste was the sacerdotal order; the 
second, the soldiers and peasants, or agricultural 
class ; the third was that of the townsmen ; and the 
fourth, the plebSy or common people. The first was 
composed of the chief priests or pontiflTs t, as well 
as minor priests of various grades belonging to dif- 
ferent deities, prophets, judges, hierophants, magi- 
strates, hierogrammats or sacred scribes, basilico- 

♦ Plato in Timaeo, near the beginning. 

f Egypt and Thebes, p. 230. 

:}: *' £ach deity has several priests and a high-priest." Herod, ii.37. 


238 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

grammats or royal scribes, sphragistas *, hierostoli f 
or dressers and keepers of the sacred robes, doctors, 
embalmers, hierophori t, pterophori§, praecones, 
who appear to have been the same as the pasto- 
phorill, keepers of the sacred animals^, hierolaotomi 
or masons of the priestly order, sacred sculptors 
and draughtsmen, beadles, sprinklers of water, and 
aTrofxmoif mentioned by Hesychius, who drove 
away the flies with chowries, and several inferior 
functionaries attached to the temples. 

The second was divided into the military, farm- 
ers, husbandmen, gardeners, huntsmen, boatmen, 
and others : the third consisted of artificers, trades- 
men, shopkeepers, musicians, builders, carpenters, 
masons, sculptors, and probably potters, public 
weighers**, and notaries ; and in the fourth may 
be reckoned pastors, poulterers, fowlers, fishermen, 
labourers, servants, and, generally speaking, the 
common people. Many of these were again sub- 
divided, as the artificers and tradesmen, according 
to their peculiar trade or occupation, and as the 


* Plutarch (de Isid. s. xxxi.) says the Sphragistas were a class of 
priests whose office was to examine the victims, and to put a seal upon 
them, previous to their being sacrificed. Vide Herod, u. 38. 

•)- Plutarch, de Is. s. iii. *' Those who have access to the adytum 
to clothe the statues of the gods." Rosetta stone. 

t The bearers of sacred emblems in the religious processions. 

} Those who bore the flabelia and fans in the processions in which 
the statues of the gods were carried. 

II Bearers of the small statues, or shrines, of the gods. Vide Diod. 
i. 29. 

T Herod, ii. 68. " There are certain persons, both men and wo- 
men, whose business it is to take care of the sacred animals, and of 
each peculiar species: it is an honourable employment, and the son suc- 
ceeds his father in the office." 

** The Gabbdneh of the present day : who arealso public scribes. 


CHAP. III. HINDOO CASTES. 239 

pastors, into oxherds, shepherds, goatherds, and 
swineherds ; which last were, according to Hero- 
dotus, the lowest grade, not only of the class but of 
the whole community, since no one would either 
marry their daughters or establish any family con- 
nection with them ; and so degrading was the 
occupation of tending swine, that they were looked 
upon as impure, and were even forbidden to enter 
a temple without previously undergoing a purifi- 
cation. Herodotus, indeed, affirms*, **they could 
not enter a temple ;" and the prejudices of the 
Indians against this class of persons almost justify 
our belief of the historian. 

In my division of the Egyptian castes I have 
been guided by Diodorus, and have classed the 
soldiers with the husbandmen ; though, I confess, 
to have placed them in a caste by themselves ap- 
pears preferable, or with the magistrates who were 
not priests, as among the Hindoos. If they really 
were a class of the same caste as the peasants, that 
class must have ranked far above the others, and 
.have been almost as distinct as a separate caste ; 
nor did the fact of their occasionally following agri- 
cultural pursuits reflect upon them any disgrace : 
and in like manner, a Hindoo soldier, or even a 
brahmin, may cultivate land without the fear of 
reproach. 

Among the Indians are four castes: 1. Brah- 
mins ; 2. Cshatriyas ; 3. Vaisyas ; 4. Sudras. The 
first is taken from the mouth, the organ of the 
intellectual part; the second, from the arms, or 

* Herod, ii. 47. 


240 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

defending part ; the third, from the thigh, or sup- 
porting part; and the fourth, from the feet, or 
labouring part : comprising the priests and philoso- 
phers, the magistrates and soldiers, the husband- 
men and merchants, and the artizans, labourers, 
and common people. Some ancient authors, 
among whom is Megasthenes, divide the Indians 
differently ; and as it is interesting to compare his 
account of the ancient Indian system with that of 
the Egyptians, I shall here introduce it.* 

According to Megasthenes, the whole popula- 
tion of India is distributed into seven castes; 
among which, that of the philosophers is held in 
estimation as the first, notwithstanding their num- 
ber is the smallest. 

Whenever any one sacrifices, or prepares the 
feasts of the dead in private, it is usual for him to 
make use of the service of one of them ; but the 
kings publicly gather them together in an assem- 
bly, which is called synod, held at the commence- 
ment of each new year, in the gatet of the king, 
where all the philosophers assemble, in order that 
whatever useful information they have collected 
relative to the increase of the fruits and animals, 
or to the state, may be produced in public. And 
it is a law, that if any among them be three 
times convicted of falsehood, he shall be doomed to 
silence during life : but the upright, they release 
from tax and tribute. The second division is the 


* From Strabo, lib. xv. Cory. p. 216. 

t This is an oriental expression. Thus "the Sublime Porte. 
Conf. Psalm cxxviL 5. and c. 4. Ruth, iv. 1. Deut. xxi. 19. 


99 


CHAP. III. MEGASTHENES' ACCOUNT. 241 

caste of the agriculturists, who are the most 
numerous and worthy. They pursue their occu- 
pation free from military duties and fear ; neither 
concerning themselves with civil, public, or any 
other business; and it often happens that, at the 
same time and place, the military class is arrayed 
and engaged with an enemy, whilst the agricultural 
population, depending upon the other for protec- 
tion, plough and dig without any sort of danger ; 
and since the land is all held of the king, they cul- 
tivate upon hire, paying a rent of one fourth of the 
produce. 

The third caste is that of the shepherds and 
huntsmen, whose sole occupation is hunting, graz- 
ing, and selling cattle, for which they give a pre- 
mium and stipend: and for clearing the land of 
wild beasts and birds which destroy the grain, they 
are entitled to a portion of corn from the king, and 
lead a wandering life, dwelling in tents. 

After the huntsmen and shepherds, the fourth 
race is that of the innholders, artisans, and bodily 
labourers of all kinds ; of whom some bring tribute, 
or, instead of it, perform stated service in the 
public works. But the manufacturers of arms and 
builders of ships are entitled to pay and sustenance 
from the king, as they labour only for him. The 
keeper of the military stores gives out arms to the 
soldiers, and the governor of the docks lets ships 
for hire to the sailors and merchants. 

The fifth caste is the military, who, when disen- 
gaged, spend the rest of their time at ease in 
stations properly provided by the king; in order 

VOL. I. R 


242 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

that, whenever occasion requires, they may be 
ready to march immediately, carrying with them 
nothipg else than their bodies. The sixth are the 
inspectors, whose business it is to pry into all mat- 
ters that are carried on, and report them privately 
to the king ; for which purpose, in the cities they 
employ women of the town, and in the army the 
followers of the camp. They are chosen from the 
most upright and honourable men. The seventh 
class are the counsellors and assessors of the king, 
by whom the government laws and administration 
are conducted. 

It is unlawful either to contract marriages from 
another caste, or to change one profession or occu- 
pation for another, or for one man to undertake 
more than one, unless the person so doing shall be 
one of the philosophers, which is permitted on 
account of their dignity. 

Of the governors, some preside over rural, others 
over civil, others again over military affairs. To 
the first class is intrusted the inspection of the 
rivers, and the admeasurements of the fields, after 
the inundations as in Egypt, and the covered aque- 
ducts by which the water is distributed into chan- 
nels for the equal supply of all according to their 
wants. The same have the care of the huntsmen, 
with the power of dispensing rewards and punish- 
ments according to their deserts. They collect 
also the tribute, and inspect all the arts which are 
exercised upon the land, as of wrights and carpen- 
ters, and the workers of brass and other metals. 
They also construct the highways, and at every ten 


CHAP. III. OF THE CASTES IN INDIA. 243 

stadia place a milestone, to point out the turnings 
and distances. 

The civil governors are divided into six pentads, 
some of whom overlook the operative works, and 
others have charge of all aliens, distributing to 
them an allowance, and taking cognizance of their 
lives, if they give them habitations ; some they send 
away, but they take care of the goods of such as 
happen to die, or are unwell, and bury them when 
dead. The third class registers the births and 
deaths, how and when they take place ; and this 
for the sake of the tribute, that no births either of 
good or evil, nor any deaths, may be unnoticed. 
The fourth has the care of the iavern keepers and 
exchanges : these have charge also of the measures 
and qualities of the goods, that they may be sold 
according to the proper stamps. Nor is any one 
permitted to barter more, unless he pay a double 
tribute. The fifth class presides over the manu- 
factured articles, arranging them, and separating 
the stamped from the common, the old from the 
new, and laying a fine upon those who mix them. 
The sixth and last exacts the tithe of all things 
sold, with the power of inflicting death on all 
such as cheat. Each, therefore, has his private 
duties. But it is the public business of them all 
to control the private as well as civil affairs of the 
nation, and to inspect the repairs of the public 
works, the prices, markets, ports, and temples. 

After the civil governors, is the third college, 
which presides over military affairs, and this in like 
manner is divided into six pentads, of which the 

R 2 


244 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

first is associated with the governor of the fleet ; 
the second, with him who presides over the yokes 
of oxen, by which the instruments are conveyed, the 
provisions for themselves and the oxen, and all the 
other baggage of the army : they have with them, 
moreover, attendants who play upon drums and 
bells, together with grooms, smiths, and their under- 
workmen : and they send forth their foragers to the 
sound of bells, recompensing their speed with 
honour or punishment, and attending to their 
safety. The third class has the charge of the in- 
fantry. The fourth, of the cavalry. The fifth, of 
the chariots. The sixth, of the elephants. More- 
over, there are royal stables for the horses and 
beasts, and a royal arsenal, in which the soldier 
deposits his accoutrements when he has done with 
them, and gives up his horse to the master of the 
horse, and the same with respect to his beasts. 
They ride without bridles : the oxen draw the 
chariots along the roads ; while the horses are led 
in halters, that their legs ^ may not be injured, nor 
their spirit impaired by the draught of the chariots. 
In addition to the charioteer, each chariot contains 
two riders ; but in the equipment of an elephant its 
conductor is the fourth, there being three bowmen 
also upon it. 

Such is the account given by Megasthenes of 
the Indian castes. 

The Egyptian nobles were of the upper classes, 
either of the priestly or military orders ; and though 
Diodorus* tells us all the Egyptians were equally 

♦ Diod. i. 92. 


CHAP. III. EGYPTIAN CASTES. — THE KING. 245 

noble, it is not to be supposed that this applied to 
their rank in society, during life, since in no coun- 
try, except perhaps India, does the distinction of 
castes appear to have been so arbitrarily maintained 
as with the ancient Egyptians. After death, how- 
ever, no grade was regarded, and every good soul 
was supposed to become united to that essence 
from which it derived its origin ; and the title of 
Osiris was applied indiscriminately to men and 
women of every rank. 

THE KING. 

It was also from one or other of those two orders 
that the king was obliged to be chosen ; and if he 
had been a member of the military class, previous 
to his ascending the throne, it was peremptorily 
required by the laws * that he should then be ad- 
mitted into the sacerdotal order, and be instructed 
in all the secret learning of the priests. 

He was the chief of the religion and of the 
state t, he regulated the sacrifices in the temples, 
and had the peculiar right of offering them to the 
godsl: upon grand occasions ; the title and office of 

* Plutarch, de Is. ix. ** If the choice fell on a soldier, he was im> 
mediately initiated into the order of priests, and instructed in their 
abstruse and hidden philosophy." 

•f Like the caliphs and Moslem sultans. 

X In the absence of the kings, the priests officiated.^ Psammaticus 
offered libations with the other eleven kings. Herod, ii. 151. In the 
sculptures tibe kings always make the offerings in the temples. At Rome, 
the soyereigp held the office of Pontifex maximus. Conf. also Aris- 
tode, '* VTpaTfiyog ifv koi ^ucaortfc 6 /SaffiXcv^, kcu rtav rrpof tovq diovg 
Kvgtjoi/* Arist. Polit. iii. 14. Melchizedec was king, priest, and prophet. 
Among the Indians of America, the soverdgn was also a priest. The 
Lacedsemonian monarchs were consecrated, at thdr coronation, priests 
of Jupiter Uranius. The kings of Athens were intrusted with the 

VOL. I. * R 3 


246 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. HI. 

** president of the assemblies** belonged exclu-* 
sively to him^ and he superintended the feasts and 
festivals in honour of the deities. He had the 
right of proclaiming peace and war ; he commanded 
the armies of the state, and rewarded those whose 
conduct in the field, or on other occasions, merited 
his approbation ; and every privilege was granted 
him which was not at variance with good policy 
or the welfare of his people. 

The sovereign power descended from father to 
son ; but in the event of an heir failing, the claims 
for succession were determined by proximity of 
parentage, or by right of marriage.* Nor were 
queens forbidden to undertake the management of 
af&irs t ; and on the demise of their husbands they 
assumed the office of regent ; but, though intro- 
duced into the annals of Manetho, and Nitocris is 
mentioned by Herodotus as a queen, their names 
do not appear in the lists of sovereigns sculptured 
in the temples of Thebes aud Abydus. 

In some instances the kingdom was usurped by 


care of divine worship and the performance of the sacred rites ; and 
many ancient monarchs are mentioned, as uniting the office of priest 
and king: thus Virgil, ''Rex Anius, rex idem hominum, Phoebique 
sacerdos." With the Jews, the King provided the offering, add the 
priest officiated. Ezek. xlv. 17. 2 Chron. xxix. 24. Numb. iii. 10. 
and xvi. 40. It was imputed to Saul a sin for having offered a burnt 
offering in the place of Samuel. 1 Sam. xiii. 9. 13. 

* This I conclude from the mode of deriving their right from ancient 
kings, sometimes passing over many intennediate nam&s, when they 
mention their predecessors. 

f The Egyptians, at a later period, do not seem to have been favour- 
able to femue government, and obliged Cleopatra to marry her younger 
brother, on the death of the elder Ptolemy ; and even afterwards we 
find the name of her son, Neocaesar, introduced into the sculptures 
with her own. v. voL ii. p. 59. 


CHAP. Iir. RIGHT OF SUCCESSION. 24? 

a powerful chief, as in the case of Amasis, or by 
some Ethiopian prince, who either claiming a right 
to the Egyptian crown from relationship with the 
reigning family, or taking advantage of a disturbed 
state of the country, secured a party there, and ob- 
tained possession of it by force of arms ; but there 
are no grounds for supposing that the Egyptian 
monarchy was elective, as Synesius would lead us 
to conclude. He affirms that the candidates for 
the throne of Egypt repaired to a mountain at 
Thebes, on the Libyan side of the Nile, where all 
the voters assembled, and according to the show 
of hands and the proportionate consequence of 
each voter, who was either of the sacerdotal or 
military order, the election of the king was de- 
cided. But his authority is not of sufficient weight 
on so doubtful a question, and from being at va- 
riance with all that history and monumental record 
have imparted to us, cannot possibly be admitted. 

We find the kings recorded on the monuments 
as having succeeded from father to son for several 
generations ; and if the election of a king ever took 
place in Egypt it could only have been when all 
lawful aspirants were wanting. Diodorus* says, 
" In ancient times kings, instead of succeeding 
by right of inheritance, were selected for their 
merits:" but whether this really was the case at 
the commencement of the Egyptian monarchy it 
is difficult to determine. Indeed, both Herodotus 
and Diodorus mention the first kings being suc- 
ceeded by their children; and we have positive 

♦ Diod. i. 43. 
R 4 


248 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. Ill, 

authority from the sculptures that this was the case 
during the eighteenth and succeeding dynasties: 
nor did Plutarch*, in saying "the kings were 
chosen from the priests or the warriors/' mean that 
the monarchy was elective, except when an heir was 
wantmg. And this is further confirmed by the for- 
mula in the Rosetta stone : " The kingdom being 
established unto him and unto his children for ever.** 
But they did not presume, in consequence of the 
right of succession, to infringe the regulations 
enacted for their public and private conduct ; and 
the laws of Egypt, which formed part of the sacred 
books, were acknowledged to be of divine origin, 
and were looked upon with superstitious reverence. 
To have called them in question, or to have dis- 
obeyed them, would have been considered re- 
bellion against the Deity, and the offender would 
have paid the forfeit of his presumption and im- 
piety. 

That their laws were framed with the greatest 
regard to the welfare of the community is abun- 
dantly proved by all that ancient history has im- 
parted to us; andDiodorust observes, "this un- 
paralleled country could never have continued 
throughout ages in such a flourishing condition, 
if it had not enjoyed the best of laws and customs, 
and if the people had not been guided by the most 
salutary regulations." Nor were these framed for 
the lower orders only ; and their kings, says the 
same author t, so far from indulging in those acts 

• Plut. de Is. 9. t Diod, i. 69. 

J Piod. i. 70. 


CHAP. III. DUTIES OP THE KINGS. 249 

of arbitrary will, unrestrained by the fear of cen- 
sure, which stain the character of sovereigns in 
other monarchical states, were contented to sub- 
mit to the rules of public duty, and even of private 
life, which had been established by law from the 
earliest times. Even their daily food was regulated 
by prescribed rules, and the quantity of wine was 
limited with scrupulous exactitude. 

When a sovereign, having been brought up in 
the military class *, was ignorant of the secrets of 
his religion, the first step, as 1 have already ob- 
served, on his accession to the throne, was to make 
him acquainted with those mysteries, and to enrol 
him in the college of the priests. He was in- 
structed in all that related to the gods, the service 
of the temple, the laws of the country, and the 
duties of a monarch ; and, in order to prevent any 
intercourse with improper persons, who might in- 
stil into his mind ideas unworthy of a prince, or at 
variance with morality, it was carefully provided 
that no slave or hired servant should hold any 
office about his person, but that the children, of the 
first families of the priestly order t, who had ar- 
rived at man's estate, and were remarkable for 
having received the best education and profited by 
it, should alone be permitted to attend him. And 
this precautionary measure was dictated by the 
persuasion that no monarch gives way to the im- 

* The greater part of the kings, if we may judge from the sculptures, 
appear to have been of the mihtary caste, at least during the glorious 
era of the 18th dynasty. 

f This agrees very well with the sculptures. The king^s sons also 
held the offices of pages and fan- bearers. Diod. i. 70. 


250 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

pulse of evil passions, unless he finds those about 
him ready to serve as instruments to his caprices, 
and to encourage his excesses. 

It was not on his own will that his occupations 
depended, but on those rules of duty and pro- 
priety which the wisdom of his ancestors had 
framed, with a just regard to the welfare of the 
king and of his people.* They argued that he was 
an officer of the state ; that the situation he held 
had not been made for his sole benefit, but for that 
of the nation, which he was bound to serve as well 
as to govern ; and the king was thought rather to 
belong to the nation than the nation to the king. 
Impressed with these ideas, the Egyptian monarchs 
refused not to obey those lessons which the laws 
had laid down for their conduct : their occupations, 
both by day and night, were regulated by prescribed 
rules ; a time was set apart for every duty, and a 
systematic method of transacting business was found 
to lead to those results which a disregard of order 
usually fails to produce. At break of day t public 
business commenced, all the epistolary correspond- 
ence was then examined, and the subject of each 
letter was considered with the attention it required. 
The ablutions for prayer were then performed, and 
the monarch, having put on the robes of ceremony, 
and attended by proper officers, with the insignia 
of royalty, repaired to the temple to superintend 

* A few injunctions for the conduct of a Jewish king are given in 
Deut. xvii. 16. 

f Diod. i. 70. Herodotus (ii. 173.) says that Amasis employed him- 
self about public business from daybreak till market time, or about the 
third hour of day. 


CHAP. III. EULOGY AND PRAYER FOR THE KING. 251 

the customary sacrifices to the gods of the sane-* 
tuary. The victims being brought to the altar, it 
was usual for the high priest to place himself close 
to the king, while the whole congregation* present 
'on the occasion stood round at a short distancel 
from them, and to offer up prayers for the mo- 
narch t, beseeching the gods to bestow on him 
health and all other blessings 4:, in return for his 
respect to the laws, his love of justice, and his 
general conduct towards the people he ruled. His 
qualities were then separately enumerated ; and the 
high priest particularly noticed his piety towards 
the gods, and his clemency and affable demeanour 
towards men. He lauded his self-command, his 
justice, his magnanimity, his love of truth, his 
munificence and generosity, and, above all, his en- 
tire freedom from envyS and covetousness. He 

* This ceremony must have taken place in the court of the temple 
and not in the sanctuary, since the people were admitted to it. The en- 
trance into the holy of holies, or the sanctuary, was only on particular 
occasions, as with the Jews. Ezek. xlii. 13, 14., in speaking of the 
temple, and Exod. xxviii. 29. 

-t* As in the Moslem mosks, from the times of the caliphs to the pre- 
sent day. On the conquest of Egj'pt by Soltan Seleem, the aristocracy 
of the Memlooks was left, on condition of annual tribute to the Os- 
manlis, obedience in matters of faith to the Mooftee of Constantinople, 
and the insertion of the name of the soltan in the public prayers and 
on the coin. Mohammed Ali had an idea of introducing his own 
instead of Soltan Mahmood's name during the war of Syria in 1833 
—1833. 

% Conf. the Rosetta stone : " In return for which, the gods have 
given him health, victory, power, and all other good things, the kingdom 
being established unto nim and unto his children for ever,'* which is, 
perhaps, the real formula here alluded to by Diodorus. 

§ Some of the king's names seem even to bear a similar meaning, if 
we may believe the Laterculus of Eratosthenes, where one is trans- 
lated Abascantus, t. e. iuvidia carens, though I confess Sirios does not 
appear to admit of that interpretation. Many of these eulogistic epi- 
thets occur in the obelisk inscription of Hermapion ; as, " the mighty 
lover of truth," ** whom the Sun has preferred;" " to whom the gods 
have given a life free from satiety," &c. 


252 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

exalted his moderation in awarding the most lenient 
punishment to those who had transgressed, and 
his benevolence in requiting with unbounded 
liberality those who had merited his favours. 
These and other similar encomiums having been 
passed on the character of the monarch, the priest 
proceeded to review the general conduct of kings, 
and to point out those faults which were the 
result of ignorance and misplaced confidence. 
And it is worthy of remark, that this ancient 
people had already adopted the principle, that the 
king should be exonerated from blame*, while 
every curse and evil was denounced against his 
ministers, and those advisers who had given him 
injurious counsel. The object of this oration, 
says Diodorus, was to exhort the sovereign to 
live in fear of the Deity, and to cherish that up- 
right line of conduct and demeanour, which was 
deemed pleasing to the gods; and they hoped, 
that, by avoiding the bitterness of reproach and 
by celebrating the praises of virtue, they might 
stimulate him to the exercise of those duties which 
he was expected to fulfil. The king then pro- 
ceeded to examine the entrails of the victim, and 
to perform the usual ceremonies of sacrifice ; and 
the hierogrammateus, or sacred scribe, read those 
extracts from the holy writings which recorded the 
deeds and sayings of the most celebrated men. 
It was recommended, that the prince should 

* That the king could do no wrong is a much older notion than we 
generally imagine. Vide Diod. i. 70. rov fiev fiamXta nav eyKktifianav 
t^aipovfxivoQ, &c. The title given to them, " living for ever," seems also 
to bear analogy to the idea of the king never dying. 


CHAP. III. RULES FOR HIS PRIVATE LIFE. 253 

listen to that good advice which was dictated by 
experience, and attend to those lessons which were 
derived from the example or history of former 
monarchs; and he was particularly enjoined to 
conform to a line of conduct which in other in- 
stances had proved beneficial to the state. But 
it was not in public alone that he was warned of 
his duty ; and the laws subjected every action of 
his private life to as severe a scrutiny as his be- 
haviour in the administration of affairs. The 
hours for washing, walking, and all the amuse^ 
ments and occupations of the day, were settled with 
precision, and the quantity as well as the quality 
of his food were regulated by law : simplicity was 
required both in eating and drinking, and Diodorus 
affirms that their table only admitted the meat of 
oxen and geese. * A moderate allowance of wine 
was also permitted ; but all excess was forbidden 
and prevented, upon the principle that food was 
designed for the support of the body, and not for 
the gratification of an intemperate appetite. And, 
though we cannot admit the opinion of Plutarch t, 
who, on the authority of Eudoxus, affirms that 
winet was not allowed to the kings previous to the 
time of Psamaticus, this statement of Diodorus 
derives from it an additional testimony that the 
kings at all times conformed to the laws in private 

* They were the most usual meats ; but they had also the wild goat, 
gazelle, oryx, and wild fowl of variou? kinds, as we learn from the 
sculptures. 

f De Isid. et Osir. s. vi. 

% We find that as early as the time of Joseph the Egyptian kings 
drank wine ; since the chief butler of Pharaoh is mentioned m virtue of 
his office pouring out wine to the monarch. Gen. xl. 11. 


254 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

as well as in public life. In short, he adds, the 
regulations concerning food and temperance were 
of such a salutary nature, that one would rather 
imagine them the regimen of some learned phy- 
sician, who anxiously consulted the health of the 
prince, than an extract from a legislative code. 

But the most admirable part of their institutions, 
says the same historian, did not consist in sanatory 
regulations, which forbade the sovereign to trans- 
gress the rules of temperance, nor has the conduct 
of the princes, who submitted themselves to such 
laws, the chief claim upon our admiration ; our 
praise is mainly due to those wise ordinances which 
prevented the chief of the state from judging or 
acting thoughtlessly, and from punishing any one 
through the impulse of anger, revenge, or any 
other unjust motive. And as he was thus con- 
strained to act in obedience to the laws, all punish- 
ments were inflicted according to real justice and 
impartiality. 

To persons habituated to the practice of virtue, 
these duties became at length a source of gratifi- 
cation, and they felt convinced that they tended as 
well to their own happiness as to the welfare of the 
state. They acknowledged the mischief which 
would arise from allowing the passions of men to 
be unbridled, and that love, anger, and other vio- 
lent impulses of the mind, being stronger than the 
recollection of duty, were capable of leading away 
those even who were well acquainted with the pre- 
cepts of morality. They, therefore, willingly sub- 
mitted to those rules of conduct already laid down 


CHAP. III. FUNERAL OF THE KING. 255 

and sanctioned by competent legislators ; and by 
the practice of justice towards their subjects, they 
secured to themselves that good will which was 
due from children to a parent j whence it followed 
that not only the college of priests but the whole 
Eg3^tian nation was as anxious for the welfare of 
the king as for that of their own wives and chil- 
dren, or whatever was most dear to them. And 
this, as Diodorus observes, was the main cause of 
the duration of the Egyptian state, which not only 
lasted long, but enjoyed the greatest prosperity, 
waging successful wars on distant nations, and 
enabled by immense riches, resulting from fo- 
reign conquest, to display a magnificence, in its 
provinces and cities, unequalled by that of any 
other country. 

Love and respect were not merely shown to 
the sovereign during his lifetime, but were con- 
tinued to his memory after his demise; and the 
manner in which his funeral obsequies were cele- 
brated tended to show, that, though their bene- 
factor was no more, they retained a grateful sense 
of his goodness, and admiration for his virtues. 
And what, says the historian, can convey a greater 
testimony of sincerity, free from all colour of dis- 
simulation, than the cordial acknowledgment of 
a benefit, when the person who conferred it no 
longer lives to witness the honour done to his 
memory ? 

On the death of every Egyptian king, a general 
mourning was instituted throughout the country 


^6 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

for seventy-two days*, hymns commemorating his 
virtues were sung, the temples were closed, sacri- 
fices were no longer offered, and no feasts or fes- 
tivals were celebrated during the whole of that 
period. The people tore their garmentst, and, 
covering their heads with dust and mud, formed a 


Ho. 7, People thniwlngduit on (heir head), In token of grieE ncict' 

procession of 200 or 300 persons of both sexes, 
who met twice a day in public to sing the funeral 
dirge. A general fast was also observed, and they 
neither allowed themselves to taste meat or wheat 
bread, and abstained, moreover, from wine and 
every kind of luxury. 

• Conf. the custom of the Jews, and Gen. I. 3. " The Egyptians 
mourned for Jacob threescore and ten days," for " so are fulfilled the 
days of those which are embalmed." 

t A common custom to the present day in rage and grief. Conf. 
the Scriptures, passim. They have different modes of rending their 
garments, according to the degree of anger, the excess of grief, or the 
disjilay of feeling requisite upon each occasion ; and thus, when be- 
wailing the loss of a parent, the rent is proportionably greater than 
when mourning the death of an acquaintance. 


CHAP. Iir. FIRST CASTE. — PRIESTS. 257 

In the meantime, the funeral was prepared, and 
on the last day the body was placed in state within 
the vestibule of the tomb, and an account was then 
given of the life and conduct of the deceased* It 
was permitted to any one present to offer himself 
as an accuser, and the voice of the people might 
prevent a sovereign enjoying the customary funeral 
obsequies ; a worldly ordeal, the dread of which 
tended to stimulate the Egyptian monarchs to the 
practice of their duty far more than any feeling 
inculcated by respect for the laws or the love of 
virtue. 


FIRST CASTE : THE PRIESTS. 

The Eg)^tians, as I have already observed, were 
divided into four principal castes: the sacerdotal 
order, the peasants*, the townsmen, and the com- 
mon people. Next to the king, the priests held 
the first ranky and from them were chosen his 
confidential and responsible advisers t, the judges, 
and all the principal officers of state. They asso- 
ciated with the monarch, whom they assisted in 
the performance of his public duties, and to whom 
they explained, from the sacred books, those moral 
lessons which were laid down for his conduct, and 
which he was required to observe ; and by their 


* I have included the military under this genera] denomination on 
the authority of Diodorus ; but I suppose a great distinction existed 
in the subdivisions of the caste, and the military order^ which was one of 
them, must have held a rank far above the others. 

f ^' The wise counsellors of Riaraoh." Isaiah, xix. 11. Diodorus, 
i. 73. 

VOL. I. S 


258 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

great experience, their knowledge of the past, and 
their skill in augury and astronomy, they were sup* 
posed to presage future events, and to foresee an 
impending calamity, or the success of any under- 
taking. It was not one man or one woman, as 
Diodorus observes, who was appointed to the 
priesthood, but many were employed together in 
performing sacrifices and other ceremonies ; and 
each college of priests was distinguished according 
to the deity to whose service it belonged, or ac- 
cording to the peculiar office held by its members. 

The principal classes into which the sacerdotal 
order was divided have been already enumerated ; 
there were also many minor priests of various 
deities, as well as the scribes and priests of the 
kings*, and numerous other divisions of the caste. 
Nor should we omit the priestesses of the gods^ 
or of the kings and queens, each of whom bore a 
title indicating her peculiar office. Of the former, 
the Pellices, or Pallacides, of Amun, are the most 
remarkable, as the importance of their post suffi- 
ciently proves ; and if we are not correctly in- 
formed of the real extent and nature of their duties, 
yet, since females of the noblest families, and prin- 
cesses, as well as the queens themselves, esteemed 
it an honour to perform them, we may conclude 
th^ post was one of the highest to which they could 
aspire in the service of religion. 

They are the same whom Herodotus mentions 


* Conf. the Rosetta stone and the sculptures, as well as the papyri 
mentioned by Dr. Young, Hierog. Lit. p. 72. 


CHAP. III. THE PALLACIDES OF AMUN. 259 

as yupaixoLg ipvfiag^^ consecrated to the Theban 
Jove, whose sepulchres, said by Diodorus to have 
been about ten stadia from the tomb of Osyman- 
dyast, are still seen at Thebes, in a valley 3000 feet 
behind the ruins of Medeenet Haboo : and this 
fact strongly confirms, and is confirmed by, the 
evidence of the sculptures, which show them to 
have been females of the highest rank, since all the 
occupants of those tombs were either the wives or 
daughters of kings. 

Besides this class of priestesses, was another of 
similar rank, apparently a subdivision of the same, 
who fulfilled certain duties entrusted only to the 
wives and daughters of priests, and not unusually 
to members of the same family as the Pallacides. 
They had also the privilege of holding the sacred 
sistra in religious ceremonies, before the altar and 
on other occasions, and were attached to the service 
of the same deity. X 

The ridiculous story of their prostitution could 
only have originated in the depraved notions and 
ignorance of the Greeks, fond of the marvellous, 
and notorious as they were for a superficial ac- 
quaintance with the customs of foreign nations ; 
and it is unnecessary to request a sensible person 
to consider, whether it is more probable that 
women, who devoted themselves tq the service of 
religion, among the most pious people of anti- 
quity §, and who held the rank and consequence 


ii. 54. t Diod. i. 47. 

X See wood<cut> p. 260. 
§ I mean, of course, of profane nations. 

s 2 


)860 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. 


- i 


. s i 

VI 


I 

E 


CHAP. Iir. PRIESTESSES. 26l 

necessarily enjoyed by the wives and daughters of 
a monarch, and of the principal nobles of a country, 
should have sacrificed every feeling of delicacy and 
virtue, or that the authors of the story were de- 
ceived, and perhaps intended to deceive others. 

Herodotus states that women were not eligible 
to the priesthood, either of a male or female deity, 
and that men were alone admitted to this post* ; 
but his remark evidently applies to the office of 
pontifi^, or at least to some of the higher sacerdotal 
orders, from his referring in another placet to 
women devoted to the service of Amun, as well as 
from the authority of other writers. Diodorust, 
indeed, describes Athyrtis, the daughter of Sesos- 
tris, so well versed in divination that she foretold 
to her father the future success of his arms, and en- 
gaged him to prosecute his designs of conquest : 
her knowledge in these matters being sufficient 
to influence the conduct of the monarch, who 
was himself, in the capacity of high priest, well 
versed in all the secrets of religion : and her 
visions and omens were observed in the temple 
itself. Again, in the Rosetta stone, and the pa- 
pyri of Paris and Sig. D'Anastasy§, we find direct 
mention made of the priestesses of the queens. 
In the former, " Areia, the daughter of Diogenes, 
being priestess of Arsinoe, the daughter of Phila- 
delphus: and Eirene, the daughter of Ptolemy, 
priestess of Arsinoe, the daughter of Philopator : 

* Herod, ii. 39. t Herod, ii. 54. 

J Diod.L 53. 

§ Dr. Young's Hierog. Literature, p. 72. and 65. 

S 3 


262 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

and Pyrrha, the daughter of Philinus, being 
canefora (or basket-bearer) of Berenice, the daugh- 
ter of Euergetes;" and in the latter, are "the 
priestess of Arsinoe, the father-loving :** and ** the 
prize-bearer of Berenice Euergetes : the basket- 
bearer of Arsinoe Philadelphus : and the priestess 
of Arsinoe Eupator :*' and those of the three Cleo* 
patras.* 

The same office usually descended from father 
to sont, but the grade was sometimes changed; 
and it is probable that even, when a husband was 
devoted to the service of one deity, a wife might 
perform the duties of priestess to another. They 
enjoyed important privileges, which extended 
to their whole family. They were exempt from 
taxes ; they consumed no part of their own income 
in any of their necessary expenses t ; and they had 
one of the three portions into which the land of 
Egypt was divided, free from all duties. They 
were provided for from the public stores, out of 
which they received a stated allowance of com 
and all the other necessaries of life ; and we find that 
when Pharaoh, by the advice of Joseph, took all 
the land of the Egyptians in lieu of com§, the 
priests were not obliged to make the same sacrifice 
of their landed property, nor was the tax of the 
iifth part of the produce entailed upon it, as on 

* In p. 72. of Dr. Young. 

f Diod. i. 73. Proofs of this are frequently met with in the sculp- 
tures ; but I believe that though a priest was son of a priest, the peculiar 
office held by a son may sometimes have been different in point of 
rank from that of his father. 

J Herodot. ii. 37. § Gen. xlviL 20. 22. 


CHAP. III. LANDED PROPERTY OF THE PRIESTS. 263 

that of the other people.* Diodorus states, that 
the land was divided into three portions, one of 
which belonged to the king, the other to the 
priests, and the third to the military order ; and I 
am inclined to think this exclusive right of free- 
hold property is alluded to in the sculptures of the 
Egyptian tombs. And if the only persons there 
represented as landed proprietors are the kings> 
priests, and military ment, this accordance of the 
sculptures with the scriptural account is peculiarly 
interesting, as it recalls the fact of Pharaoh's 
having bought all the land of the Egyptians, who 
farmed it afterwards for the proprietor of the soil, 
on condition of paying him a fifth of the annual 
produce; though Herodotus would lead us to 
infer that Sesostris divided the lands among the 
people t, and having allotted to each a certain por- 
tion, received an annual rent from the peasant by 
whom it was cultivated. 

In the sacerdotal, as among the other classes, a 
great distinction existed between the different 
grades, and the various orders of priests ranked 
according to their peculiar office. The chief and 
high priests held the first and most honourable 
station ; but he who offered sacrifice in the temple 
appears to have had, at least for the time, the 

* Gen. Ixvii. 26. ' 

f The priests and soldiers had an allowance from the government ; 
though the latter are not mentioned as having profited by this during 
the&mine of Joseph. 

X Herodot. ii. 189. Vide infra, on the lawgivers ; and supra, p. 74. 
Unless he means that the crown lands were portioned out, and given 
to the peasants to farm, on payment of a certain rent, or a fifth of the 
produce, as mentioned in Genesis, xlvii. 26. 

s 4 


264 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS, CHAP. III. 

highest post, and one that was usually filled by 
the kings themselves. It is, however, probable 
that the chief priests took it by turns to officiate 
on those occasions, and that the honour of doing 
sacrifice was not confined to one alone ; but the 
priests of one deity were not called upon to per- 
form the ceremonies in the temple of another, 
though no injunction prevented any of them 
making ofierings to the contemplar gods, and still 
less to Osiris in his capacity of judge of AmentL 
Some also, who were attached to the service of 
certain divinities, held a rank fiir above the rest ; 
and the priests of the great gods were looked upon 
with far greater consideration than those of the 
minor deities. In many provinces and towns, those 
who belonged to particular temples were in greater 
repute than others; and it was natural that the 
priests who were devoted to the service of the pre- 
siding deity of the place should be preferred by the 
inhabitants, and be treated with greater honour. 
Thus the priests of Amun held the first rank at 
Thebes, those of Pthah at Memphis, of Re at 
Heliopolis, and the same throughout the nomes of 
which these were the chief cities. 

One of the principal grades of the priesthood 
was the prophets. They were particularly versed 
in all matters relating to religion, the laws, the 
worship of the gods, and the discipline of the 
whole order ; and they not only presided over the 
temple and the sacred rites, but directed the ma- 
nagement of the priestly revenues.* In the solemn 

* Clem. Alex, strom. i. p. 758, 


CHAP. III. PROPHETS. PRIVILEGES OF PRIESTS. 265 

processions, their part was conspicuous ; they bore 
the holy hydria, or vase, which was frequently 
carried by the king himself on similar occasions ; 
and when any new regulations were introduced in 
affairs of religion, they, in conjunction with the 
chief priests, were the first whose opinion was con- 
sulted, as we find in the Rosetta stone, where, 
in passing a decree regarding the honours to be 
conferred on Ptolemy Epiphanes, " the chief priests 
and prophets" headed the conclave assembled in 
the temple of Memphis.* 

The sacred office of the priests, by giving them 
the exclusive right to regulate all spiritual matters, 
as well as to announce the will, threaten the wrath, 
and superintend the worship, of the gods, was cal- 
culated to ensure them universal respect ; and they 
were esteemed for a superior understanding, and 
for that knowledge which could only be acquired 
by the peculiar nature of their education. In con- 
sideration of the services they were bound to per- 
form in the temples, for the welfare of the country 
and of its inhabitants, they were provided with 
ample revenues, besides numerous free gifls ; for 
the Egyptians deemed it right that the administra- 
tion of the honours paid to the gods should not be 
fluctuating, but be conducted always by the same 
persons, in the same becoming manner, and that 
those, who were above all their fellow-citizens 


* '' The chief priests and prophets, and those who have access to 
the adytum, to clothe the gods, and the pterophorae, and the sacred 

scribes, and all the other priests assembled in the temple at 

Memphis, established the following decree." Ros. St. line 6. 


266 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III» 

in wisdom and knowledge, ought not to be below 
any of them in the comforts and conveniences of 
life. With a similar view, a stated portion was as- 
signed also to the kings, in order that they might 
be enabled to reward the services of those who 
merited well of their country, and that by having 
ample means for supporting their own splendour 
and dignity, they might not burthen their subjects 
with oppressive and extraordinary taxes.* 

The chief cause of the ascendency they acquired 
over the minds of the people was the importance 
attached to the mysteries, to a thorough under- 
standing of which the priests could alone arrive ; 
and so sacred did they hold those secrets that many 
members of the sacerdotal order were not admitted 
to a participation of them, and those alone were 
selected for initiation who had proved themselves 
virtuous and deserving of the honour : a fact, satis* 
factorily proved by the evidence of Clement of 
Alexandria, who says, " the Egyptians neither 
entrusted their mysteries to every one, nor degraded 
the secrets of divine matters by disclosing them to 
the profane, reserving them for the heir apparent 
of the throne t, and for such of the priests as ex- 
celled in virtue and wisdom.'* t 

From all we can learn on the subject, it appears 
that the mysteries consisted of two degrees, deno- 
minated the greater and the less § ; and in order to 

* Diod. i. 73. 

f If of the priestly order. 

j Clem. Alex, strom. i. p. 670. He adds, " Therefore, in their 
hidden character^ the enigmas of the Egyptians are very similar to those 
of the Jews." 

§ Like the Eleiisinian, which were borrowed from Egypt. 


CHAP, in. THE GREATER AND LESS MYSTERIES. 267 

become qualified for admission into the higher class^ 
it was necessary to have passed through those of the 
inferior degree : and each of them was probably 
divided into ten different grades. It was necessary 
that the character of the candidate for initiation 
should be pure and unsullied ; and novitiates were 
commanded to study those lessons which tended to 
purify the mind, and to encourage morality. The 
honour of ascending from the less to the greater 
mysteries was as highly esteemed as it was difficult 
to obtain: no ordinary qualification recommended 
the aspirant to this important privilege ; and inde« 
pendent of enjoying an acknowledged reputation 
for learning and morality, he was required to un- 
dergo the most severe ordeal*, and to show the 
greatest moral resignation ; but the ceremony of 
passing under the knife of the Hierophantt, wa3 
merely emblematic of the regeneration of the 
neophyte. 

That no one except the priests was privileged to 
initiation into the greater mysteries, is evident from 
the fact of a prince, and even the heir apparent, if 
of the military order, not being made partaker of 
those important secrets, nor instructed in them until 
his accession to the throne, when, in virtue of his 
kingly office, he became a member of the priest- 
hood and the head of the religion. It is not, how- 

• I do not allude to the method of frightening the novice, which I 
do not suppose to have been practised on these occasions, especially 
in the initiation of the members of the priestly order; if, indeed, this 
was ever done in Egypt before the time of the Romans. 

f I suppose some of the headless figures in the tombs of the kings, 
at Thebes, refer to this ceremony. 


268 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

ever, less certain that, at a later period, many 
besides the priests, and even some Greeks, were 
admitted to the lesser mysteries ; yet in these cases 
also their advancement through the different grades 
must have depended on a strict conformance to pre- 
scribed rules. 

On the education of the Egyptians Diodorus * 
makes the following remarks : — " The children of 
the priests are taught two different kinds of wri- 
ting t, — what is called the sacred, and the more 
general ; and they pay great attention to geometry 
and arithmetic For the river, changing the ap- 
pearance of the country very materially every 
year, is the cause of many and various discussions 
among neighbouring proprietors about the extent 
of their property ; and it would be difficult for any 
person to decide upon their claims without geo- 
metrical reasoning, founded on actual observation. 

Of arithmetic they have also frequent need, both 
in their domestic economy, and in the application 
of geometrical theorems, besides its utility in the 
cultivation of astronomical studies ; for the orders 
and motions of the stars are observed at least as 


* Diodor. L 81. Conf. Herod, ii. 36. ** They have two sorts of 
writing, the sacred and the demotic." 

f Perhaps Diodorus and Herodotus both refer to the hieratic and 
enchorial, or demotic, without considering the hieroglyphic ; but Por- 
phyry and Clement of Alexandria are more explicit. The former states 
that Pythagoras (when in Egypt) became acquainted with the three 
kinds of writing, the epistolic, the hieroglyphic, and the symbolic ; and 
the latter says, '< that in the education of the Egyptians three styles 
of writing are taught : the first is called the epistolary (enchorial, or 
demotic) ; the second, the sacerdotal (hieratic), which the sacred scribes 
employ; and the third, the hieroglyphic. Porph. in Vita Pythag., 
p. 15. Clem. Alex, strom. 5. vol. ii. p. 657. The Egyptian languages 
and characters I shall have occasion to notice hereafter. 


CHAP, in. EDUCATION OF THE EGYPTIANS. 269 

industriously by the Egyptians as by any people 
whatever ; and they keep record of the motions of 
each for an incredible number of years, the study 
of this science having been, from the remotest 
times, an object of national ambition with them« 
They have also most punctually observed the mo- 
tions, periods, and stations of the planets, as well 
as the powers which they possess with respect to 
the nativities of animals, and what good or evil in- 
fluences they exert; and they frequently foretel 
what is to happen to a man throughout his life, and 
not uncommonly predict the failure of crops, or an 
abundance, and the occurrence of epidemic dis- 
eases among men and beasts : foreseeing also earth- 
quakes and floods, the appearance of comets, and 
a variety of other things which appear impossible 
to the multitude. It is said that the Chaldaeans 
in Babylon are derived from an Eg3q)tian colony, 
and have acquired their reputation for astrology by 
means of the information obtained from the priests^ 
in Egypt 

But the generality of the common people learn 
only from their parents or relations that which is 
required for the exercise of their peculiar profes- 
sions, as we have already shown ; a few only being 
taught anything of literature, and those principally 
the better classes of artificers." 

Hence it appears they were not confined to any 
particular rules in the mode of educating their chil- 
dren, and it depended upon a parent to choose the 
degree of instruction he deemed most suitable to 
their mode of life and occupations, as among other 
civilized nations. 


S70 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

In their minute observations respecting every 
event of consequence, Herodotus states that the 
Egyptians surpassed all other men ; and *^ when 
any thing occurs,*' says the historian*, "they put 
it down in writing, and pay particular attention to 
the circumstances which follow it ; and if in pro- 
cess of time any similar occurrence takes place, 
they conclude it will be attended with the same 
results.** 

If the outward show and pomp of religion, for 
which the ancient Egyptians were so noted^ ap* 
pear to us unnecessary, and inconsistent with real 
devotion, we must make suitable allowance for the 
manners of an eastern nation, and bear in mind 
that the priests were not guilty of inculcating max« 
ims they did not themselves follow ; but on the 
contrary, by their upright conduct, and by im- 
posing on themselves duties far more severe than 
those required from any other class of the com* 
munity, they set an example to the people by 
which they could not fail to benefit. And the 
strict purification of body and mind they were 
bound to undergo, both as members of those sacred 
institutions, and as persons devoted to the service 
of the gods, not only obtained for them the esteem 
of the rest of the Egyptians, but tended also to 
ameliorate their own character ; and their piety and 
virtue t were as conspicuous as their learning. 


* Herod, ii. 32. 

f Though many enjoyed the comforts and luxuries of this world, it 
does not follow that they failed, on this account, in the practice of 
morality. 


CHAP. III. CONDUCT OF PRIESTS TO THE PEOPLE. 271 

We may, perhaps, feel disposed to blame the 
Egyptian priests for their exclusiveness in the 
study of religion, and in keeping concealed from the 
people those secrets which it imparted ; but it was 
argued that being fully engaged in the temporal 
occupations of the world, the theories of metaphy- 
sical speculation were unnecessary for their welfare, 
and incompatible with their employments. They 
deemed it suflScient to warn them of their duty, 
and urge them to conform to the rules laid down 
for the encouragement of morality ; and the dread 
both of a temporal, and a future, ordeal, was held 
out to them as ah inducement to lead a just and 
virtuous life. Restrained by the fear of punishment 
hereafter, and by the hope of a happier state, and 
dreading the displeasure of their rulers and the 
severity of the laws, they were necessarily taught 
to command their passions, and to practise, or at 
least to appreciate, virtue ; and respect for their 
spiritual pastors being heightened by the idea of 
their possessing superior talents, they obeyed their 
commands with deference and submission. 

It appears to have been the object of the priests 
to enhance the value of their knowledge, and 
thereby more easily to gain an ascendency over 
the minds of a superstitious people; a measure 
which naturally strikes us as illiberal and despotic : 
but if we remember how much the force of habit 
and the sanctity of estabUshed laws serve to recon- 
cile men to the. form of government under which 
they have long lived, we cease to be surprised at 
the fondness of the Egyptians for their ancient in- 


272 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

stitutions ; and if they were so well satisfied with 
them that every innovation was resisted, and the 
Ptolemies and Caesars vainly endeavoured to sug- 
gest improvements in their laws, we may conclude 
that the system and regulations of the Egyptian 
priests were framed with wisdom, and tended to 
the happiness as well as to the welfare of the 
people. And when the members of the legislative 
body are possessed of superior talents, even though 
their measures are absolute, they frequently govern 
with great benefit to the community; and this 
paternal authority is certainly more desirable in the 
ruling power than physical force. * 

Some will also question the policy or the 
justice of adopting such exclusive measures in the 
study of religion ; but we may be allowed to doubt 
the prudence of allowing every one, in a nation * 
peculiarly addicted to speculative theory, to dabble 
in so abstruse a study. We have observed the 
injury done to the morals of society in Greece, at 
Rome, and in other places, by the fanciful inter- 
pretation of mysteries and hidden truths, which 
being misunderstood, were strangely perverted; 
and licence in religious speculation has always been 
the cause of schism, and an aberration from the 
purity of the original. At a later period, when 
every one was permitted to indulge in super- 
stitious theories, the £g3rptians of all /^lasses be- 

* Ammianus Marcellinus (lib. xxii. c. xvi.) says, *' Homines 
JGgyptii plerique subfusculi sunt, et atrati» mag:isque meestiores, graci* 
lenti et aridi, ad singulos motus excandescentes, controverti, et repot- 
cones acenimi,*' 


CHAP. Iir. THEIR SYSTEM CARRIED TOO FAR. 273 

came notorious for their wild and fanciful notions, 
which did not fail eventually to assail Christianity, 
for a time tainting the purity of that religion ; and 
we find from Vopiscus, that the Emperor Aurelian 
considered them " smatterers in abstruse science, 
prophecy, and medicine ; eager for innovation, 
which formed the subject of their songs and 
ballads ; always turning their talents for poetry and 
epigram against the magistrates, and ready to assert 
their pretended liberties." 

There is therefore less reason to censure the 
Egyptian priests for their conduct in these mat- 
ters, though a little insight into the foundation of 
their theological system would have been more 
beneficial to the people than the blind creed of an 
imaginary polytheism, which was contrary to the 
spirit of the religion they themselves professed, but 
which the people were taught or left to believe. 
For it was unjust and cruel to conceal under the 
fabulous guise of a plurality of gods that knowledge 
of the attributes and omnipotence of the Deity 
which the priests themselves possessed*; and it 
was iniquitous to degrade the nature of the divinity 
by bringing it down to the level of the gross im- 
aginations of the people, when they had the means 
of raising their minds, by giving them an insight 
into some of those truths which have merited the 
name of "the wisdom of the Egyptians." The 
unity of the Deity would have been a doctrine 
which all classes might have been taught ; and the 

* I allude to the priests of an early epoch, and not in the time of the 
Romans. 

VOL. I. T 


274 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

eternal existence and invisible power of th6ah* 
would have offered a higher notion of the Cause 
and Ruler of all things than any mention of his 
attributes, or the fanciful representation of a god 
in the sculptures of their temples. It would have 
been unnecessary to explain the nature or peculiar 
occupation of a trinity, the mysterious connection 
between truth and the creative power (which is 
referred to in their sculptures); and imprudent 
to confuse their ideas with the notion of interme- 
diate temporal and intellectual agents, or with 
the abstruse science of numbers and geometrical 
emblems. 

If the priests were anxious to establish a cha- 
racter for learning and piety, they were not less 
so in their endeavours to excel in propriety of 
outward demeanour, and to set forth a proper ex- 
ample of humility and self-denial; and if not in 
their houses, at least in their mode of living, they 
were remarkable for simplicity and abstinence. 
They committed no excesses either in eating or 
drinking; their food was plain, and in a stated 
quantity t, and wine t was used with the strictest 
regard to moderation. And so fearful were they 
lest the body should not " sit light upon the soul§,*' 

• I use the Hebrew name of the deity in unity, ** the Being of 
Beings," " who is and was ; " Jehovah (Yehouah) ; this word has been 
still further changed by our custom of giving J the force of G: of 
which there are many instances, as Jacob, Judah, jot, and others. 

t Herodot. ii. 37. 

± During the fasts, which were frequent, Plutarch says they ab- 
stained from it entirely. (Plut. de Is. s. vi.) The Jewish priests were 
not permitted to drink wine when they went '' into the tabernacle of 
the congregation." Levit. x. 9. . 

§ Plut. de Is. s. V. ; on the principle of plus de carps, mains d^ esprit. 


CHAP. III. FOOD OF THE PRIESTS. 875 

and excess should cause a tendency to increase ** the 
corporeal man," that they paid a scrupulous atten. 
tion to the most trifling particulars of diet : and 
similar precautions were extended even to the dei« 
fled animals : Apis, if we may believe Plutarch ♦, 
not being allowed to drink the water of the Nile, 
since it was thought to possess a fattening property. 
They were not only scrupulous about the quan* 
tity, but the quality of their food; and certain 
viands were alone allowed to appear at table. 
Above all meats, that of swine was particularly 
obnoxious ; and fish both of the sea and the Nile 
was forbidden them t, though so generally eaten by 
the rest of the Egyptians. And indeed, on the 
9th of the month Thotht, when a religious cere- 
mony obliged all the people to eat a fried fish be-* 
fore the door of their houses, the priests were not 
even then expected to conform to the general 
custom, and they were contented to substitute 
the ceremony of burning theirs at the appointed 
time. Beans they held in utter abhorrence ; and 
Herodotus affirms § that "they were never sown 
in the country; and if they grew spontaneously, 
they neither formed an article of food, nor even 
if cooked were ever eaten by the Eg3rptians." 
But this aversion, which originated in a supposed 
sanitary regulation, and which was afterwards so 

* Plut. de Is. 8. V. 

t Pythagoras borrowed his aversion to fish from Egypt. Piut. 
Symp. viii. 8. 

J Plutarch says, " the first month," which was Thoth. The 1st of 
Thoth coincided, at the time of the Roman conquest, with the 29th of 
August. Plut. de Is. s. vii. Fide Herodot ii. 37. 

J Herodot. ii. 37. 

T 2 


276 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

scrupulously adopted by Pythagoras, " did not,*' as 
I have already had occasion to observe*, " preclude 
their cultivation j*' and Diodorust expressly states, 
that some only abstained from them, as from 
others of the numerous pulse and vegetables which 
abounded in TSigypt Of these, lentils, peas, gar- 
lick, leeks, and onions t were the most objection- 
able, and no priest was permitted to eat them 
under any pretence ; but that the prohibition re- 
garding them, as well as certain meats, was con- 
fined to the sacerdotal order, is evident from the 
statements of many ancient writers ; and even 
swine were§, if we may believe Plutarch ||, not for- 
bidden to the other Egyptians at all times : "for 
those who sacrifice a sow to Typho once a year, at 
the full moon, afterwards eat its flesh." 

It is a remarkable fact that onions, as well as 
the first fruits of their lentils T, were admitted 
among the offerings placed upon the altars of the 
gods, together with gourds**, cakes, beef, goose, 
or wild fowl, grapes, figs, wine, and the head of 
the victim ; and they were sometimes arranged in 
a hollow circular bunch, which, descending upon 
the table or altar, enveloped and served as a cover 

* In my Egypt and Thebes, p. 216. 
+ DioA i. 89. 

I Plut. s. viii. Diod. i.81. Juv. sat. xv. " Porrum et cepe nefas 
violare ac frangere morsu." 

§ On the day of the full moon, says Herodotus, the people eat part 
of the victim they have sacrificed to that deity, but on no other occa- 
sion do they taste the meat of swine, ii. 47. 

II Plut. de Is. s. viii. 

T They were offered in the month of Mesore (August). Plut. de Is. 
s. Ixviii. 

** Cucurbita lagenaria, y, fructu longiore, eduli, of Linn. Arab, 
qarra toweel. 


CHAP. in. ABSTINENCE OF THE PRIESTS. 277 

to whatever was placed upon it And the privilege 
of presenting them in this form appears to have 
been generally enjoyed by that class of priests who 
wore the leopard-skin dress. • 

A'- 3.-. A. 1. 


In general, "the priests abstained from most 
sorts of pulse, from mutton, and swine's flesh ; 
and in their more solemn purifications, even ex- 
cluded salt from their meals f j " but some vegetables 
were considered lawful food, being preferred by 
them for their wholesome nature, and it is certain 
that the leguminous productions and fruits of Egypt 
are frequently introduced into the sculptures, and 
are noticed by Pliny and other authorsj as abun- 
dant, and of the most excellent quality. 

In their ablutions as in their diet, they were 

* This Bpotted skin has been mistaken for that of the vi^pic, or 
fawn. Plut. de Is. s. sxxv. 

+ Plut. de Is. B. ?. 

J When Alexandria was taken by Amer, 4000 persons were engaged 
in selling vegetables in that city. 

T 3 


878 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

equally severe, and they maintained the strictest 
observance of numerous religious customs. They 
bathed twice a day and twice during the night* ; 
and some who pretended to a more rigid ob* 
servance of religious duties, washed themselves 
with water which had been tasted by the ibis, sup- 
posed in consequence to bear an unquestionable 
evidence of its purity j and shaving the head and 
the whole body every third day, they spared no 
pains to promote the cleanliness of their persons, 
without indulging in the luxuries of the bath.t A 
grand ceremony of purification took place previous 
and preparatory to their fasts, many of which lasted 
from seven to forty- two dayst, and sometimes even 
a longer period : during which time they abstained 
entirely from animal food, from herbs and vegetables, 
and above all from the indulgence of the passions. 

DRESSES. 

Their dress was simple ; but the robes of cere- 
mony were grand and imposing, and each grade 
was distinguished by its peculiar costume. 

The high priest who superintended the immol- 
ating of the victims, the processions of the sacred 
boats or arks, the presentation of the offerings at 
the altar §, or at funerals, and the anointing of the 

* Herodot. ii. 37. Porphyry says thrice a day, and the nocturnal 
ablutions were only required on certain occasions. 

f It is supposed that Homer alludes to this when speaking of the 
priests of Jove (Ii. xvi. 238.), though he describes them with unwashed 
feet: — 

Soi vawv^ vTTOiptjrai aviirroirodtc, xafiauvvat^^ 

1 Porphyr. de Abstinentia, 1. iv. 8.7. 

$ Probably in the capacity of priest to the king. 


DRESS OF THE PBIESTS. S79 


king, was covered with a sort of mantle made of 

an entire leopard skin ; and this badge was also 

attached to the dress of the monarch when en- 

T 4 


280 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

gaged in a similar office. Various insignia were 
worn by them, according to their rank or the 
ceremony in which they were engaged ; and neck- 
laces, bracelets, garlands, and other ornaments 
were put on during the religious ceremonies in the 
temples. Their dresses were made of linen, which, 
as Plutarch observes, is perfectly consistent with the 
customs of men anxious to rid themselves of all na- 
tural impurities ; for certainly, he adds, it would be 
absurd for those who take so much pains to remove 
hair and all other superfluities from the body, to 
wear clothes made of the wool or hair of animals. 

Their prejudice, however, against woollen gar- 
ments was confined to the under robes, it being 
lawful for them to put on a woollen upper garment 
for the purpose of a cloak ; and cotton dresses were 
sometimes worn by the priests, to whom, if we may 
believe Pliny*, they were particularly agreeable. 
But no one was allowed to be buried in a woollen 
robe, from its engendering worms, which would in- 
jure the body ; nor could any priest enter a temple 
without previously taking off this part of his 
dress, t Their sandals were made of the papyrus t 
and palm leaves, and the simplicity of their habits 
extended even to the bed on which they slept. It 
was sometimes a simple skin extended upon the 
bare ground § ; sometimes it consisted of a sort of 
wicker work made of palm branches ||, on which 

* Plin. xix. 1. Herodotus says they only wore linen, iii. 37. 

f Herod, ii. 81. J Conf. Herod, ii. 37. 

§ Eustath. in Homer II. xvi. 235. 

II No doubt the same as the caffass of the present day, which is so 
generally used for bedsteads in Egypt. Porphyry is right in saying 
the palm branch (in Arabic gereet) was called bai. Lib. iv. s. 7. 


CHAP. III. HABITS OF THE PRIESTS.' 281 

they spread a mat or skin ; and their head, says 
Porphyry, was supported by a half cylinder of 
wood, in lieu of a pillow.* 

The same mode of resting the head was common 
to all the Egyptians, and a considerable number of 
these stools t have been found in the tombs of 
Thebes : generally of sycamore, acacia, or tama- 
risk wood ; or of alabaster, not inelegantly formed, 
and frequently ornamented with coloured hiero- 
glyphics, t In Abyssinia, and in parts of Upper 
Ethiopia, they still adopt the same support for the 
head ; and the materials of which they are made 
are either wood, stone, or common earthenware. 
Nor are they peculiar to Abyssinia and the valley of 
the Nile : the same custom prevails in far distant 
countries ; and we find them used in Japan, China, 
and Ashantee §, and even in the island of Otaheite, 
where they are also of wood, but longer and less 
concave than those of Africa. 

Of the peculiar dresses worn by the different 
classes of priests I shall speak hereafter in describ- 
ing the costume of the Egyptians, the preceding 
remarks being merely introduced in connection 
with the habits and character of the sacerdotal 
caste. 

Though excesses in their mode of living, and 
all external display of riches were avoided by the 

♦ Vide infra, on the furniture of the houses. 

t It is remarkable that the ancient Egyptians denominated them 
koorsee (korsi), a name still applied by the Arabs to a stool, ur 
chair. 

J Vitie tuprd, p. 214. 

§ Those of the Chinese and Japanese are also of wood, but they are 
furnished with a small cushion. 


282 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

priests, we cannot reconcile the great distinction 
maintained between the different classes of society, 
or the disproportionate extent of their possessions, 
with the boasted simplicity of their habits; and 
judging from the scale of their villas, and the wealth 
they enjoyed, we feel disposed to withhold much 
of that credit we should otherwise have bestowed 
upon the Egyptian priesthood. 

Besides their religious duties, the priests fulfilled 
the important offices of judges* and legislators, as 
well as counsellors of the monarch ; and the laws, 
as among many other nations of the Eastt, forming 
part of the sacred books, could only be adminis- 
tered by members of their order. But as the office 
of judge and the nature of their laws will be 
mentioned in another part of this work, it is un- 
necessary to enter upon the subject at present, and 
I therefore proceed to notice the military class, 
which was the first subdivision of the succeeding 
or second caste. 

SOLDIERS. 

Next in rank to the priests were the military. 
To them was assigned one of the three portions 
into which the land of Egypt was divided by an 
edict ofSesostrist, in order, says Diodorus§,"that 
those who exposed themselves to danger in the field 
might be more ready to undergo the hazards of 


• Elien. Hist. Var. 1. xiv. c. 34. 

f The Jews, Moslems, and others* 

J Diodor. i. 54. § Diodor. i. 73. 


CHAP. III. THE MILITARY CLASS. 283 

war, from the interest they felt in the country as 
occupiers of the soil; for it would he absurd to 
commit the safety of the community to those who 
possessed nothing which they were anxious to 
preserve. Besides, the enjoyment of comfort has 
a great tendency to increase population ; and the 
result being that the military class becomes more 
numerous, the country does not stand in need of 
foreign auxiliaries : and their descendants receiv- 
ing privileges handed down to them from their 
forefathers, are thus encouraged to emulate their 
valour ; and studying from their childhood to follow 
the advice and example of their fathers, they be- 
come invincible by the skill and confidence they 
acquire.'* For it was forbidden that a child should 
follow a different profession from that of his father, 
or that the son of a soldier should belong to any 
other profession than that of arms. * 

Whether the Egyptians had any military schools, 
where their youth were instructed in the science 
of war, is uncertain ; though in the account given 
by Diodorus of the early education of Sesostris, 
there is distinct allusion to a system, which, from 
its having succeeded so satisfactorily, may have 
been continued by that monarch and his suc- 
cessors. And when we consider that the sole edu- 
cation required for the children of soldiers was such 
as prepared them for their future duties, and that 
they were obliged to follow the profession of their 
father, we shall find much stronger reasons for 
believing those establishments to have been set on 

* Herodot. ii. 166. 


284 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

foot by the Egyptians, than by any other people 
of antiquity. 

Each man was obliged to provide himself with 
the necessary arms, offensive and defensive, and 
every thing requisite for a campaign; and they 
were expected to hold themselves in readiness 
for taking the field when requu'ed, or for garrison 
duty. The principal garrisons were posted in the 
fortified towns of Pelusium, Marea, Eilethyas*, 
Hieraconpolisf, Syene, Elephantine, and other in- 
termediate places ; and a large portion of the army 
was frequently called upon by their warlike mo- 
narchs to invade a foreign country, or to suppress 
those rebellions 1: which occasionally broke out in 
the conquered provinces. 

Herodotus tells us each soldier, whether on duty 
or no, was allowed 12 arourae of land §, free from all 
charge and tribute ; which was, probably the mode 
of dividing the portion mentioned by Diodorusll, 
though it may of course be inferred that every one 
obtained a share proportionate to his rank. And 
this system of portioning out land (but more par- 
ticularly of a conr^uered country), and making 
allotments for soldiers, has been prevalent at all 
times throughout the East. 

Another important privilege was that no soldier^ 

* So I conclude, from the fortified enclosures that remain there, dis- 
tinct from the walls of the town. 

f This and Eilethyas are nearly opposite each other, and command 
the passage of the valley. 

X Diodor. i. 47., and the sculptures. 

§ Herodot. ii. 168. The aroura was a square measure^ containing 
10,000 cubits. 

II Diodor. i. 54«. 73. 

IF Diod. i. 79. 


CHAP. HI. AMOUNT OF ARMY. — THE GUARDS. 285 

could be cast into prison for debt ; and this law, 
though it extended to every Egyptian citizen, was 
particularly provided by Bocchoris in favour of the 
military, who, it w^as urged, could not be arrested 
by the civil power without great danger to the 
state, of which they were the chief defence. 

The whole military force, consisting of 410,000*, 
was divided into two corps, the Calasiries and 
Hermotybies. They furnished a body of men to 
do the duty of royal guards, 1000 of each being 
annually selected for that purpose; and each 
soldier had an additional allowance of five minae of 
bread t, with two of beef t, and four arusters of 
wineS, as daily rations, during the period of his 
service. 

The Calasiries were the most numerous, and 
amounted to 250,000 men, at the time that Egypt 
was most populous. They inhabited the nomes of 
Thebes, Bubastis, Aphthis, Tanis, Mendes, Seben- 
nytus, Athribis, Pharbaethis, Thmuis, Onuphis, 
Anysis, and the Isle of Myecphoris, which was op- 
posite Bubastis; and the Hermotybies, who lived in 
those of Busiris, Sai's, Chen;imis, Papremis, and the 
Isle of Prosopitis, and half of Natho, made up the 
remaining 160,000. It was here that they abode 
while retired from active service, and in these 
nomes the farms or portions of land before alluded 

* Herodot. ii. 165, 166. Diodorus (i. 54.) gives a much larger 
amount to the army of Sesostris, which, he says, consisted of 600,000 
foot, besides 24,000 horse, and 27,000 chariots. He must have in- 
cluded the auxiliaries. 

f 5 lbs. 5 oz. 1 dwt. t 2 lbs. 2 oz. 8 grs. 

$ If the aruster is the same as the cotyla, these four will be little less 
than 2 pints English. 


286 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. HI. 

to were probably situated: which were not only 
a substitute for regular pay*, but tended to en- 
courage habits of industry, and to instil a taste 
for the occupations of a country life. For the 
Egyptians justly considered that such employments 
promoted the strength of the body, as much as 
the idleness of a town life injured the physical 
and moral constitution, and the soldier was taught 
to look upon the pursuits of a mechanic as unmanly 
and contemptible. Indeed they were absolutely 
forbidden to engage in any such occupation ; as in 
Sparta, they made war their profession, and deemed 
it the most worthy pursuit of generous and free- 
bom souls. They did not, however, confine the 
exercise of trades to slaves, like the Lacedaemo- 
nians, because the number of the military class 
alone, in a country so well peopled as Egypt, 
sufiiced for all the purposes of defence ; but their 
prejudices against mechanical employments, as far 
as regarded the soldier, were equally strong as in 
the rigid Sparta. 

The sports of the field, and gymnastic exercises 
were recommended, as beneficial to their physical 
force, and as diversions peculiarly suited to the 
active habits of a soldier; and mockfights, wrest- 
ling, leaping, cudgelling, and numerous feats of 
strength t, and agility, were their constant amuse- 
ment. 

* The military chiefs, like the kings and priests, let out their lands 
to husbandmen. 

•\^ According to Diodorus (i. 53), when Sesostris was a boy he was 
obhged, like all the others educated with him, to run 180 stadia, or 
between 22 and 23 miles, every morning before breakfast. The heat 
of an Egyptian climate must have added greatly to the unpleasant part 
of this feat. 


CHAP. III. 


MERCENARY TROOPS. 


287 


AUXILIARIES. 


Besides the native corps they had also mercenary 
troops, who were enrolled either from the nations 
in alliance with the Egyptians, or from those who 
had been conquered by them. They were divided 
into regiments, sometimes disciplined in the same 
manner as the Egjrptians, though allowed to retain 
their arms and costume j but they were not on the 


^.i< 


Ko. 11. 


M' 2. J^. 3. 

Allies of the Egyptians. 


^.4. 


Thebei, 


same footing as the native troops ; and instead of 
land theyhad regular pay, like other hired soldiers. 
Strabo speaks of them as mercenaries * ; and the 
million of men he mentions must have included 


* Strabo> lib. xvii. 


288 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. HI. 

these foreign auxiliaries. When formally enrolled 
in the army they were considered as part of it, 
and accompanied the victorious legions on their 
return from foreign conquest ; and it is not impro- 
bable that they assisted in performing garrison duty 
in Egypt, in the place of those Egyptian troops 
which were left to guard the conquered provinces. 

THE EGYPTIAN ARMY. 

The strength of the army consisted in archers, 
whose skill appears to have contributed mainly to 
to the success of the Egyptian arms, as it did in 
the case of our own ancestors during the wars waged 
by them in France. They fought either on foot 
or in chariots, and may therefore be classed under 
the separate heads of a mounted and unmounted 
corps ; and they probably constituted the chief part 
of both wings. Several bodies of heavy infantry, 
divided into regiments, each distinguished by its 
peculiar arms, formed the centre ; and the cavalry, 
which according to the scriptural accounts was 
numerous, covered and supported the foot. 

Though we have no representation of Egyptian 
horsemen in the sculptures, we find them too 
frequently and positively noticed in sacred and 
profane history to allow us to question their em- 
ployment; and it is reasonable to suppose them 
well acquainted with the proper mode of using this 
serviceable force. In the battle scenes of the 
temples in Upper Eg3rpt, we meet with five or six 
instances of men fighting on horseback ; but they 


CHAP. III. 


CAVALRY. 


289 


are part of the enemy's troops, and I can therefore 
only account for their exclusive introduction, and 
the omission of every notice of Egyptian cavalry, 
by supposing that the artists intended to show how 
much more numerous the horsemen of those na- 
tions were than of thek own people. 

Once indeed, and once only, we find an instance * 
of an Egyptian mounted on horseback ; but it is in 
the hieroglyphics of the portico at Esneh, which 
are of a Roman era, and unconnected with any 
historical bas-relief. It, however, appeared to Mr. 
Salt and myself so singular, jfrom the action of the 
man and from being the only one so represented, 
that we took an impression of it, a copy of which 
I have here introduced. 


No. 12. 


^n^tian on horseback. 


Fsneh. 


* In the collection of S D* Athanasi, is a hatchet, having a man on 
horseback upon the blade, which is apparently of an ancient epoch. 
Vide end of this chapter. 

VOL. T. U 


290 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

The Greeks before the Persian war had little 
cavalry, the country of Attica and the Peloponnesus 
being ill suited for the einplo3rment of that arm ; 
and it was not till they were called upon to cope 
with an enemy like the Persians, that they became 
aware of its utility. The same argument may be 
urged in the case of the Egyptians ; and their dis- 
tant expeditions into Asia, and the frequent en- 
counters with troops which served on horseback, 
would necessarily teach them the expediency of 
employing cavalry, even if they had not done so 
previously.* Egypt was in fact famous for its 
breed of horses, which were not less excellent than 
numerous, and we find they were even exported 
to other countries.! 

At Jacob's funeral a great number of chariots and 
horsemen are said to have accompanied Joseph t j 
horsemen as well as chariots § pursued the Israelites 
on their leaving Egypt || ; the song of Moses men- 
tions in Pharaoh's army the " horse and his rider ^;" 
Herodotus also** represents Amasis "on horse- 

* All nations noted for great progress in the art of war have made 
the main force of their army consist of infantry ; others, less skilful in 
military tactics, have depended upon cavalry. This has always been 
the case in the East ; and even in Europe, till the later wars in Spain 
against the Moors, foot soldiers were in no repute as an effective corps : 
and the name of infantry records their Spanish origin, and is derived 
from the mjanieu or princes of that country. Light infantry has only 
been in use in modem Europe since 1656. According to Kobertson 
(in his Charles V. p. 105.), modern infantry originated in Switzerland ; 
and during the wars of the Swiss against the Austrians the utility and 
force of these troops were so fully shown, that they were afterwards in- 
troduced into Germany and Spam, in which latter country great im-. 
provements were suggested. Their example was afterwards followed in 
Italy and France. 

f 2Chron.i. 17. J Gen. 1. 9. 

§ Conf. 2 Kings, iviii. 24. *' Put thy trust in Egypt for chariots 
and for horsemen." 

1) Gen. xiv. 9. 28. t Gen. xv. 21. 

*• Herod, ii. 162. 


292 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

back'* in his interview with the messenger of 
Apries ; and Diodorus speaks of 24,000 horse in 
the army of Sesostris, besides 27,000 war chariots. 
Shishak, the Egyptian Sheshonk, had with him 
60,000 horsemen when he went to fight against 
Jerusalem * ; and mention is made of the Egyptian 
cavalry in other parts of sacred and profane history : 
nor are the hieroglyphics silent on the subject ; 
and we learn from them that the "command of 
the cavalry ** was a very honourable and important 
post, and generally held by the most distinguished 
of the king's sons. 

The Egyptian infantry was divided into regi- 
ments, very similar, as Plutarch observes, to the 
Xo;fo< and ra^eig of the Greeks ; and these were 
formed and distinguished according to the arms 
they bore. They consisted of bowmen, spearmen, 
swordsmen, clubmen, slingers, and other corps, dis^ 
ciplined according to the rules of regular tactics t; 
and the regiments being probably divided into 
battalions and companies, each officer had his 
peculiar rank and command, like the chiliarchs, 
hecatontarchs, decarchs, and others among the 
Greeks, or the captains over thousands, hundreds, 
fifties, and tens, among the Jews.t Masses of heavy 
infantry, armed with spears and shields, and a fal- 
chion, or other weapon, moved sometimes in close 
array in the form of an impregnable, phalanx §; 
sometimes they deployed, and formed into long 
columns or small distinct bodies ; and the bowmen 

* 2 Chron. xii. 3. Vide also Isaiah» xxxvi. 9. 

+ See wood-cut preceding page. J Deut. i. 15. 

§ See wood-cut next page. 


CHAF. 111. HEAVY INFANTRY. 2^3 


Tkilia. 


as well as the light infantry were taught either to 
act in line, or to adopt more open movements, ac- 
cording to the nature of the ground, or the state of 
the enemy's battle. 

u 3 


a9* THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 


STANDARDS. 


Nd. 15. I:^TI>tiui StaudnnU. Tlicia. 

Each battalion, and indeed each company, had 
its particular standard, which represented a sacred 
subject, — a king's name, a sacred boat, an animal*, 

inie of the Greek banners. Those ol' 


CHAP. III. STANDARDS. UQS 

or some emblematic device ; and the soldiers either 
followed or preceded it, according to the service 
on which they were employed, or as circumstances 
required. The objects chosen for their standards 
were such as were regarded by the troops with a 
superstitious feeling of respect ; and it is natural to 
suppose they must have contributed greatly to the 
success of their arms*, since every soldier was ready 
to stand by and defend what prejudice as well as 
duty forbade him to abandon ; and their wonderful 
effects in rallying desponding courage, and in urging 
men to court danger for their preservation, have not 
only been recorded in the history of Roman battles, 
where a general frequently ordered a standard to 
be thrown into the opposing ranks to stimulate his 
troops to victory, but are witnessed in every age. 

And being raised, says Diodorust, on a spear (or 
staff), which an officer bore aloftt, each standard 
served to point out to the men their respective 
regiments, enabled them more effectually to keep 
their ranks, encouraged them to the charge, and 
offered a conspicuous rallying point in the confu- 
sion of battle. And though we cannot agree with 
Plutarch §, that the worship of animals originated 
in the emblem chosen by Osiris to designate the 
different corps into which he divided his army, it 
is satisfactory to have his authority for concluding 

* Solomon, in his Song, says, " Terrible as an army with banners.'* 
vi. 4. They were used by the Jews. Ps. xx. 5. Isaiah, xiii. 2. 

t Diodor. i. 86. 

i Fide wood-cut No. 1.3. 

9 Plut. de Isid. s. 72. His argument is merely that the animal was 
adored by the band to which it belonged. This could not aflect the 
worship paid them by the cities of Egypt. 

U 4 


296 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. 


CHAP. III. 


that the custom of using these standards was of an 
early date in the history of Egypt. 

The post of standard-bearer was at all times of 
the greatest importance. He was an officer, and a 
man of approved valour; and in the Egyptian 
army he was sometimes distinguished by a peculiar 
badge suspended from his neck, which consisted of 
two lions, the emblems of courage, and other two 
devices apparently representing flies, so poetically 
described by Homer as characteristic of an un- 
daunted hero, who, though frequently repulsed, as 
eagerly returns to the attack. * 

Besides the ordinary standards of regiments I 
ought to mention the royal banners, and those 
borne by the principal persons of the household 


Na 1& 


1 S 

Officers of the bousdioKL 


TkOes. 


* Homer, II. p, 570. : — 

** Kai oi livifiQ dapooQ tvi UTrfBitnnv tvijKiVf 
'Hr< Kat eipyofievtf iJuiKa irep XP^^S avSpofuoto, 
Itrxtivaa SaKitivJ'* 


CHAP. III. ARMS. 297 

near the king himself. The peculiar office of 
carrying these and the Rubella was reserved for the 
royal princes or the sons of the nobility, who may 
be considered the staff corps. They had the rank 
of generals, and were either despatched to take 
command of a division, or remained in attendance 
upon the monarch ; and their post during the royal 
triumph, the coronation, or other grand ceremonies, 
was close to his person. Some bore the fans of 
state behind the throne, or supported the seat on 
which he was carried to the temple ; others held 
the sceptre, and waved flabella before him ; and 
the privilege of serving on his right or left hand 
depended on the grade they enjoyed. But as the 
processions in which the flabella were carried apper- 
tain more properly to the ceremonies than to the 
military affairs of the Egyptians, I shall defer the 
description of them for the present. 

The troops were summoned by sound of trum- 
pet * ; and this instrument, as well as the long drum, 
was used by the Egjrptians at the earliest period 
into which the sculptures have given us an insight: 
trumpeters being frequently represented in the 
battle scenes of Thebes, sometimes standing still, 
and summoning the troops to form, and at others 
in the act of leading them to a rapid charge.t 

ARMS. 

The offensive weapons of the Egyptians were 
the bow, spear, two species of javelin, sling, a short 


• Vide tufjrdf wood-cut No. 13. 
-{* Vide infrdy on military music. 


298 TMK ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

and stnught sword, da^;er, knife, falchion, or £?>■ 
sit JulcatuSf axe or hatchet, battle-axe, pole-axe, 
mace or club, and the litsdn *, a curved stick similar 
to that still in use among the Ababdeh and modem 
Ethiopians. Their defensive arms consisted of a 
helmet c£ metal, or quilted a headpiece ; a cuirass, 
or coat of armour, made of metal plates, or quilted 
with metal bands; and an ample shield. But they 
had no greaves ; and the only coverings to the arms 
were a part of the cuirass, forming a short sleeve, and 
extending about half way to the elbow. 

The soldier's chief defence was his shield, 
which, in length, was equal to about half his height, 
and generally double its own breadth. It was most 
commonly covered with bull's hide, having the 


* ZiuuH id the modem name of thii weapon, and signifies, in Arabic, 
a tongue, which it is supposed in form to resemble. 


CHAP. Itl. 


SHIELDS. 


299 


hair outwards, like the Xaio-ijiov of the Greeks, 
sometimes strengthened by one or more rims of 
metal *, and studded with nails or metal pins ; the 
inner part being probably wicker-work t, or a 
wooden frame, like many of those used by the 
Greeks and Romans, which were also covered with 
hide, t 

The form of the Egyptian shield was similar to 
the ordinary funereal tablets § found in the tombs, 
circular at the summit and squared at the base, 
frequently with a slight increase or swell towards 
the top; and near the upper part of the outer 
surface was a circular cavity in lieu of a boss. 


No. 1& 


Boss of the Shield. 


• Conf, Horn. II. r, 406. : — 

" (A<T7rt^a} 6y* tp pivoiffi ^iav km vutpont ;^aXiCY» 
Aivwrriv 0opt«(Tjc€." 

And II. V, 161. 163.: — 

" Anirtda Tavputiv" 

And II. 9r, 360. ; and /a, 425. 

f Those of their enemies were in many instances wicker, and not 
covered with any hide. Conf. Virg. ^n. vii. 632. : — 

" Flectuntque salignas 

Umbonum crates.'* 

1 That of Ajax had seven folds, that of Achilles nine folds, of bull's 
hide. 

§ They probably borrowed their form from the shield, owing, per- 
haps, to a military custom of making the shield a monument in honour 
of a deceased soldier. 


300 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. 111. 

This cavity was deeper at tlie sides than at its 
centre, where it rose nearly to a level with the 
&ce of the shield^ but there is great difficulty in 
ascertaining for what purpose it was intended, nor 
does its appearance indicate either an offensive or 
defensive use. To the inside of the shield was 
attached a thong", by which they suspended it 
upon their shoulders ; and an instance occurs of a 
shield so supported, which is concave within, and, 
what is singular, the artist has shown a knowledge 


19. Ttaong liiiide (be Shield. 

* The TiXaftui' of the Greeks. 

Atfinc miv rtXnjtupi x"/"" ""(-" HoiU. II. ir, I 
" 'iSfiuiau ftiv Tfu TtKopaiv a/ip orijflfOBiv 
Aawiiae afif,epOTiis." Horn. U. /J, 388. 
" Tp pa ItHii riXaiHiivi ripi onjfldTcit rfraffSijc, 
Hrm /Hu aatios, u St faajavoB apyvpoiiXav." 
a n. o, 179/; 1, 149. ; /<, 400. ; y, 334., el aBbi. 


of perspective in his mode of representing it.* 
Sometimes the handle was so situated that they 


might pass their arm through it and grasp a spear : 
but this may be another mode of representing the 
shield slung at their back, the handle being fre- 
quently fixed in a position which would prevent 
their holding the spear in that manner ; and though 
instances occur of the horizontal as well as the per- 
pendicular handle t, the latter appears to have been 
the more usual of the two. 


• Wooil-cul, No. 80. 


t Wood-cufa, Nor. 19. and 28. 


309 THE AKCIENT EGTPTIAKR. CHAP, III. 

Some of the lighter bucklers were furnished 
with a wooden bar, placed across the up[ier part, 
which was held with the hand ; not intended, as 
in some round Greek shields*, for passing the 
arm through, while the hand was extended to the 
thong encircling the cavity of the inside, but solely 
as a handle ; and irom their general mode of holding 
it, we may conclude this bar was sometimes placed 
longitudinally, an indication of which is even traced 
in that of fig. 4. They are, however, seldom re- 
presented, except at Beni-Hassmi, having been 
either peculiar to certain troops, and employed 
solely on particular occasions, or confined to 
foreigners in the pay of Egypt ; like those of a 


V 


^ 


V 


• 


^ 


• 
• 


^ 


^ 


A 


, 


10 
nucklenoruni»<u.l 


Ihrnu 


Fu 


i^H 


npe's Coatum 


% P 


hvii 


CHAP. III. SHIELDS. 303 

still more unusual appearance figured in the same 
paintings.* 

Some Egyptian shields were of extraordinary 
dimensions, and varied in form from those generally 
used, being pointed at the summit, not unlike some 
Gothic arches ; but as we seldom find any instances 


Na dl Lai«e shields. E'Sioof. 

of themy we may conclude they were rarely of such 
an unwieldy and cumbrous size.f Indeed, the 
common Egyptian shield was as large as was con- 
sistent with convenience, and if not constructed 
of light materials, would have been an encumbrance 
in long marches, or even in the field j and we may 

* Firfeffigs. 10, 11. Wood-cut, No. 23. 

f Tbey are met with in a tomb at E'Sioot (Lycopolis), of very an- 
cient date. To them the description of Tyrtseus would apply : — 

" VtipovQ T(y KvrifAaQ re Kana^ cat aTipvaf Kai wfiovs 
A(riFc^O£ tvpttiiQ yaoTpi leaXv^fAtvog,** 

And the expression of Virgil^ 

** Clypeique sub orbe teguntur.*' ^n. ii. 287. 

Conf. Horn. II. v, 405.; 9, 266.; and p, 128. Ajax* shield, rjvre 
vvpyov. 


304 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

even doubt if it etoer was covered with a surface of 
metal. 

The Egyptian bow was not unlike that used in 
later times by European archers. The string was 
either fixed upon a projecting piece of horn, or in- 
serted into a groove or notch in the wood, at either 
extremity, differing in this respect from that of the 
Koofa and some other Asiatic people, who secured 
the string by passing it over a small nut which pro- 
jected from the circular heads of the bow. 


Na 85. String of bow belonging to the Koofa. ThAet. 

The Ethiopians and Libyans, who were famed 
for their skill in archery, adopted the same method 
of fastening the string as the Egyptians, and their 
bow was similar in form and size to that of their 
neighbours: and so noted were the latter for 
their dexterity in its use that their name is accom- 
panied in the hieroglj^phics by a representation of 
this weapon. 

The Egyptian bow was a round piece of wood, 
from five to five feet and a half in length, either 
almost straight, and tapering to a point at both 
ends, some of which are represented in the sculp- 
tures, and have even been found at Thebes, or 
curving inwards in the middle, when unstrung, as 


CHAP. -III. MODE OF STEINOING THE BOW. 


505 


in the paintings of the tombs of the kings ; and in 
some instances a piece of leather or wood was 
attached to or let into it, above and below the 
centre. 


In strin^g it, the Egyptians fixed the lower 
point in the groimd, and, standing or seated, the 
knee pressed against the inner side of the bow, 
they bent it widi one hand, and then passed the 
string with the other into the notch at the upper 
extremity ; and one instance occurs of a man rest- 


Vfi-mBtnlH. 


306 THE ANCIENT EOTPTtANS. CHAP. III. 

ing the bow on his shoulder, and bracing it in 
that position. While shooting they frequently 


wore a guard on the left arm, to prevent its receiv- 
ing an injuiy from the string ; and this was not 
only festened round the wrist, but was secured by a 
thong tied above the elbow. Sometimes a groove 


cHAP.nr. 


MODE OF DRAWING THE BOW. 


307 


of metal was fixed upon the fore knuckle, in which 
the arrow rested and ran when discharged * ; and 
the chasseur, whose bow appears to have been less 
powerful than those used in war, occasionally held 
spare arrows in his right hand, while he pulled the 
string.t 


"». 


No.sa 


Caffying tpara anrowt in the hand. 


Tkebes. 


Their mode of drawing it was either with the 
forefinger and thumb, or the two forefingers ; and 
though in the chase they sometimes brought the 
arrow merely to the breast, instances of which oc- 
cur in the two preceding wood-cuts, their custom 
in war, as with the old English archers, was to carry 


* I found an instance of this in a tomb at Thebes; the person was 
a chasseur. I regret my being unable to give a copy of it, having 
mislaid the drawing. • 

f This is rare; I have only met with it twice so represented. 

X 2 


308 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

it to the eart the shaft of the arrow passing very 
nearly in a line with the eye. 

The ancient Greeks, on the contrary, adopted the 
less perfect mode of placing the bow immediately 
before them, and drawing the string to the body * ; 
whence the Amazonian women are reported to have 
cut off the right breast, lest it should be an impedi- 
ment in its use. And if the Greeks, in later times, 
abandoned that ineflScient method, and handled the 
bow in the same manner as the Egyptians, they 
never did attach much importance to it t, and few 
only excelled in archery, with the exception of the 
Cretans, who, from their skill, were supposed by 
some to have been the original inventors of the 
bow. The Scythians, Persians, and other oriental 
nations, also placed their principal reliance on this 
arm, whose power was often severely felt by the 
disciplined troops of Greece and Rome ; and our 
own history furnishes ample testimony to the ad- 
vantages it presented throughout the whole course 
of a battle, and in every species of conflict. 

The Egyptian bow-string was of hide t, catgut, 
or string; and so great was their confidence in 
the strength of it and of the bow, that an archer 
from his car sometimes used them to entangle his 
opponent, whilst he smote him with a sword. 

Their arrows varied from twenty-two to thirty- 
four inches in length ; some were of wood, others 

* Conf. Horn. II. ^, 123. ** Ncvpifv /uv /laZtp ircXa<rtv." 
-|- Thus Homer says : — 

** O^tn ^e ircXccc<r(rc cat a^Ai<n naxovro, 
Kai (<^<riv fUyaXotfrt, koi tyx^mv 'oji^yvoim^ D. o, 71 1. 

X Conf. Horn. H. ^, 122. ** vtvpa fiona.'* 


CHAP. III. ARROWS TIPPED WITH STONE. 


309 


a 


8 

JS 

o 

a 

3 


'J 

■g 


o 


I 

Pi 


of reed * ; frequently tipped with a metal 
head, and winged with three feathers t. 


I 


©I 


•8? 


op 

s 


o 

o 

I 

s 
at 


1 


c 

»4 


Nasi. 


Arrows made of rccd. 


TkeUM. 


glued longitudinally, and at equal dis- 
tances, upon the other end of the shaft, 
as on our own arrows. Sometimes, in- 
stead of the metal head, a piece of hard 
wood was inserted into the reed, which 
terminated in along tapering points ; but 
these were of too light and powerless a 
nature to be employed in war, and could 
only have been intended for the chase ; 
in others, the place of the metal was sup- 
plied by a small piece of flint, or other 


* Hfifff wood-cut8» No9<31. and 32, 
Fide wood-cut» No. 30, p.307« 
Vide wood-cut. No 32. Jig» 1. 

X 3 


t 


310 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. 


CHAP. III. 


sharp stonei secured by a firm black paste * ; and- 
though used occasionally in battle, they appear 
from the sculptures to have belonged more particu- 
larly to the huntsman ; and the arrows of archers 
are generally represented with bronze heads t, some 
barbed, others triangular, and many with three or 
four projecting blades, placed at right angles, and 
meeting in a common point. Stone-tipped arrows 


M* J 


^•3. 


fig'^* 


A- 4. 


N0.39L 


Metal heads of arrowi. 


AlpmkJt Miaeymt and Tk^et, 


were not confined to an ancient era, nor were they 
peculiar to the Egyptians alone ; the Persians and 
other eastern people frequently used them, even in 
war i and recent discoveries have ascertained that 
they were adopted by the Greeks themselves, 
several having been found in places unvisited by 
the troops of Persia t> as well as on the plain of 
Marathon, and other fields of battle where they 
fought 

* Vide wood-cut, No. 32. Jig. 2. page 309. 
+ FMiff wood-cut, No. 30. p. 307. 

:^ I am indebted for this curious fact to Colonel Leake, whose valu- 
able researches are known to every reader. 


CHAP. III. QUIVERS AND BOW-CASES. 311 

Each bowman was furnished with a capacious 
quiver, about four inches in diameter, and con- 
sequently containing a plentiful supply of arrows, 
which was supported by a belt, passmg over the 
shoulder, and across the breast, to the opposite 
side. Their mode of carrying it differed from that 
of the Greeks, who bore it upon their shoulder *» 
and from that of some Asiatic people, who sus- 
pended it vertically at their back, almost on a level 
with the elbow; the usual custom of the Egyptian 
soldier being to fix it nearly in a horizontal position, 
and to draw out the arrows from beneath his arm. 
Many instances also occur in the sculptures of 
the quiver placed at the back, and projecting above 
the top of the shoulder ; but this appears to have 
been only during the march, or at a time when the 
arrows were not required. It was closed by a lid 
or cover, which, like the quiver itself, was highly 
decorated, and, when belonging to a chief, sur- 
mounted with the head of a lion, or other omar 
ment ; and this, on being thrown open, remained 
attached by a leather thong.f 

They had also a case for the bowt, intended to 
protect it against the sun or damp, and to preserve 
its elasticity ; which was opened by drawing off a 

* Apollo is 80 represented by Homer» B. a» 45. : — 

** To^ utfioifftv txf*fVf afA^ltfipe^Ba re ^piTprivJ* 

Vide Hope's Costumes, pi. ccxx. Vide also mfrd, plate 3. 

+ Vide infra, on the march of the Egyptian army. Wood-cut, No. 70. 

J. The Greeks sometimes had the bow-case attached to the quiver, 
but open at the top. Vide Hope's Costumes, pi. Ixxvi. and cxxvi. 

X 4 


312 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP; III. 

moveable cap of soft leather sewed to tiie upper 
end. It was always attached to the war chariots ; 
and across it inclined, in an opposite direction, 
another large case, containing two spears and an 
abundant stock of arrows * ; and besides the quiver 
he wore, the warrior had frequently three others 
attached to his car. 

Archers of the infantry were furnished with a 
smaller sheath for the bow t, of which it covered 
the centre, leaving the two ends exposed ; and being 
of a pliable substance, probably leather, it was put 
round the bow. as they held it in their hand d Jng 
a march. Besides the bow, their principal weapon 
of offence, they, like the mounted archers, who 
fought in cars, were provided with a falchion, 
dagger, curved stick, mace, or battle-axe, for close 
combat, when their arrows were exhausted ; and 
their defensive arms were the helmet, or quUted 
headpiece, and a coat of the same materials ; but 
they were not allowed a shield, being considered 
an impediment to the free use of the bow. 

The spear, or pike, was of wood $, between five 
and six feet in length, with a metal head, into 
which the shaft was inserted and fixed with nails : 
and one of them preserved in the Berlin Museum § 
satis&ctorily accords with the general appearance 
of those represented in the sculptures* The head 

• Fide mfrd, the Egyptian chariot. Wood-cut, No. 53. a. 

f Vide wood-cut, No, 13. 

:p Homer mentions spears of ash, with brass or bronze heads. Vide 
wood-cuts, Nos. 13, 14. 21. 

§ This spear is about five feet and a half long, but the shank of its 
bronze head is much longer than usual. Vide wood-cut, 34. a.^. 1. 


CHAP. in. SPEARS AND JAVELINS. 313 

was of bronze or iron, sometimes very large, usually 
with a double edge, like that of the Greeks * ; but 
the spear does not appear to have been furnished 
with a metal point at the other extremity, called 
a-auptoTTip by Homer t, which is still adopted in 
Turkish, modem Egyptian, and other spears, in 
order to plant them upright in the ground, as the 
spear of Saul was fixed near his head, while he 
" lay sleeping within the trench. ''t Spears of this 
kind should perhaps come under the denomination 
of javelins, the metal being intended as well for a 
counterpoise in their flight as for the piupose above 
alluded to ; and such an addition to those of the 
heavy-armed infantry would neither be requisite 
nor convenient. 

The javelin, lighter and shorter than the spear, 
was also of wood, and similarly armed with a strong 
two-edged metal head, generally of an elongated 
diamond shape, either flat, or increasing in thick- 
ness at the centre, and sometimes tapering to a 
very long point § ; and the upper extremity of its 
shail terminated in a bronze knob, surmounted by 
a ball, to which were attached two thongs or tassels, 
intended both as an ornament and a counterpoise 


♦ Horn. E. 0, 712, ** Eyxt<nv aft^iyvourt, 
t Horn. U.K, 151. 

OpO' fWi aavpwrrfpoQ tXjiXaro." 

t 1 Sam. xxvi. 7. Conf. Vii^. Mn. xii. 130: — 

" Defigunt tellure hastas, et scuta reciinant." 
§ Vide wood-cut at end of Chap. III.^. 9. 


S14 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. Ill* 


to the weight of its point.* It was sometimes used 


/«. 2 


No. 3L a. 


Spear head and drum-ftick. 


ArrSa MM$eiim» 


as a spear, for thrusting, being held with one or 
with two hands ; and sometimes, when the adver- 
sary was within reach, it was darted, and still re- 
tained in the warrior^s grasp, the shall being 
allowed to pass through his hand till stopped by 
the blow, or by the fingers suddenly closing on the 
band of metal at the end ; a custom I have often 
observed among the modern Nubians and Ababdeh. 
They had another javelin apparently of wood, taper- 
ing to a sharp point, without the usual metal headt; 
and a still lighter kind, armed with a small bronze 
point t, which was frequently four-sided, three- 


* It resembles the Parthian javelm. Vide Hope's CostumeSy vol. i. 
pi. xni. 


+ Wood-cut, No. 34!. Jig. 3. 


/g.8. 


Wood-cut, No. 35. jig. I.; and wood-cut at end of Chap. III. 


CHAP. III. 


JAVELINS. 


315 


bladed* » or broad and nearly flat ; and from the 
upper end of the shaft being destitute of any 
metal counterpoise t» it resembled a dart now used 
by the people of Dar-Foor, and other African 
tribes, who, without any scientific knowledge of 
projectiles, or the curve of a parabola, dexterously 
strike their enemy with its falling point. 
fg. 1. 


NaSS. 


Heads of small Javelins. 


Alnwick Museum and Tkcbet. 


Another inferior kind of javelin was made of reed, 
with a metal head ; but this can scarcely be con- 
sidered a military weapon, nor would it hold a high 
rank among those employed by the Egyptian chas- 
seur, most of which were of excellent workmanship, 
and adapted to ail the purposes of the chase, whe- 
ther in the river or the field. Of these last, the 
most remarkable was one used for spearing fish : 
it was propelled by the hand with the assistance 
of a thin cord t passing over its notched summit, 
and extending down the shaft : but being solely 
intended for sportsmen, and not among the arms 

• Wood-cut, No. 35.^. 2. f Wood-cut, No. 35.^. 4. 

:tl I do not find any instance of the amentum, mentioned by Seneca, 
Vir^, and other writers, which was a thong bound round the middle 
of a heavy dart. ^n. ix. 665. ^ Amentaque torquent.** 


316 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. HI* 


borne by the soldier, it is unnecessary here to de- 
scribe it more minutely. 

The sling was a thong, of leather*, or string 
plaited t, broad in the middle, and having a loop 
at one end, by which it was fixed upon and firmly 
held with the hand ; the other extremity terminat- 
ing in a lash, which escaped from the fingers as 
the stone was thrown : and when used, the slinger 
whirled it two or three times over his head, to 
steady it, and to increase the impetus.1: 


fS' ' 


/^•2 


NaSG. 


Slingen. 


Beni Boston and Tkebet. 


It was an arm looked upon by many of the 
Greeks with great contempt, especially by heavy- 
infantry, though generally carried by some of the 
light troops ; and Q. Curtius tells us that Alex- 

* Homer mentions one made of a sheep's fleece, and describes 
Agenor binding the wounded hand of Helenas with itj — 

^' Avr)|v St ^vvidii<rtv evvrpo^ oioc aci>r^ 

S^ev^ovy^ ijv apa ok dtpavufp ex« ^oiiAcvi XatapJ* H, y, 599, 

f As that still used in Egypt to drive away birds from the com 
fields. Vide wood-cut at end of Chap. 111. Jigs, 4 and 5. 
X Conf. Virg. ^n. ix. 587. : — 

'' Ipse ter adducta circum caput ^t habena." 


CHAP. III. SLINGS. 817 

ander, wishing to picture an enemy in a despi^ 
cable light, represented them armed with javelins 
and slings. The Acamanians, however, were proud 
of their skill in managing it, and were surpassed by 
the Achaeans alone, of all the Greeks, who even 
vied with the natives of the Balearic Islands ; and 
so expert were these 'last, and of such importance 
did they consider the sling, that the principal care 
of a parent was to instruct a boy in its use : and 
it has been afiSrmed that, in those islands, young 
children were not permitted to taste their food 
until they had dislodged it from a beam with the 
sling. This unpleasant alternative does not appear 
to have been imposed on the more fortunate sons of 
an Egyptian family, nor was the same consequence 
attached to the sling as to the bow and many other 
weapons. 

Besides stones and arrows, the Greeks threw 
leaden plummets from the sling, called ]u.oXt>6SiSg^ or 
ftoXtiSSiyai (T^aipai, which were of an elongated sphe- 
rical shape, or, rather, like an olive, pointed at each 
end, frequently with three or four sides; sometimes 
weighing as much as an Attic pound, or one hun-i 
dred drachms. Some had a single or winged thunder^ 
bolt represented upon them ; and others bore the 
name of the person tp whom they belonged, or a 
word, as AFCNIS, or AEEAI,— "Take this.'* 

Similar plummets were generally used by the 
Macedonians ; those of the Achaeans were simple 
roimd pebbles found on the sea-shore, where they 
were in the habit of practising the sling : and the 
Egyptians employed round stones for this purpose. 


318 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. 


CHAP. III. 


which they carried in a small bag, hanging from a 
belt over the shoulder. * 

The Egyptian sword was straight and short, 
from two and a half to three feet in length, having 
apparently a double edge, and tapering to a sharp 
point. It was used for cut and thrust; but on some 
occasions they held it downwards, and stabbed as 
with a dagger. The handle was plain, hollowed in 


• No. 37. 


SUbUng an enemy. 


Tkcba. 


to 

the centre, and gradually increasing in thickness 
at either extremity, sometimes inlaid with costly 
stones, precious woods, or metals ; and the pom- 


Rs, 2. 


No. 3S. 


Tktggen in their iheathi, with inlaid bandlet. 
* Vide wood-cut. No. 36. J!g. 1. 


Tkebet. 


CHAP. Iir. SWORDS AND DAGGERS. 819 

mel of that worn by the king in his girdle was fre- 
quently surmounted by one or two heads of a hawk, 
the sjnnbol of Phrah, or the sun, a Pharaonic title 
given to the monarchs of the Nile. Strictly speak- 


Ko. 99. Mode of wearing the dagger. ThtAes. 

ing, the short sword, so worn, should come under 
the denomination of a dagger, which was also a 
common £g3rptian weapon, as is proved by those 
fbund in the excavated ruins of Thebes. It was 
much smaller than the sword : its blade was about 
ten or seven inches in length, tapering gradually in 
breadth, from one inch and a half to two thirds of, 
an inch, towards the point ; and the total length, 
with the handle, only completed a foot or sixteen 
inches. The handle, like that of the sword, was 
generally inlaid * : the blade was bronze, thicker in 
the middle than at the edges, and slightly grooved 

* Vide also wood-cut at end of Chap. III. J!g. 7. 


s«o 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. 


CHAP. III. 


in that part} and so exquisitely was the metal 
worked, that some of those I have examined retain 
their pliability and spring after a period of several 
thousand years, and almost resemble steel in elas- 
ticity. Such is the dagger of the Berlin collection, 
which was discovered by Sig. Passalacqua in a 
Theban tomb ; and, in noticing it, I avail myself 
of the opportunity of acknowledging his kindness, 
which has enabled me to introduce a representation 
of it, in the actual state in which it was found, en- 


Dagger out of the sheath, 
fig' 2. 


Backofthetbeatta. 
Na 40. I>a<ger, with iu iheath. 


BerUm Miueum. 


closed in a leathern sheath. • The handle is partly 
covered with metal, and adorned with numerous 
3mall pins and studs of gold t> which are purposely 
shown through suitable openings in the front part 
of the sheath; but the upper extremity consists 
solely of bone, neither ornamented, nor covered 
with any metal casing : other instances of which 

♦ Wood-cut, No. 40. ^.2. 

f Like the swords mentioned by Homer : -*- 

" |i0oc apyvporiXov xaKKfovJ'* II. ir, 135. ; and r, 372. 


CHAP. Iir. FALCHIONS, AND OTHER WEAPONS. 821 

have elsewhere been found*, offering, in this respect^ 
remarkable exceptions to the usual inlaid handles 
of Egyptian daggers t, already noticed. 

The knife was also shorter than the sword, and had 
a single edge, intended only for cutting, as was the 
falchion^ a species of ensisjalcatus. This last was 
called Shopsh, or Khopsh ; and the resemblance of 
its form and name to the xoTr^gt of the Greeks sug^ 
gesta that the people of Argos, an Egyptian colony, 
by whom it was principally adopted, originally 
derived that weapon from the falchion of Egypt. 
It was more generally used than either the knife 
or the sword, being borne by light as well as 
heavy ailued troops ; and that such a weapon must 
have inflicted a severe wound is evident, as well 
from the size and form of the blade as from the 
great weight it acquired by the thickness of the 
back, which was sometimes cased with brass, the 
blade itself being of bronze or iron. § 

Officers as well as privates carried the falchion ; 
and the king himself is frequently represented in 
close combat with the enemy, armed with it, or with 
the hatchet, battle-axe, pole-axe, or mace. A simple 
stick is more usually seen in the hand of officers 
commanding corps of in&ntry, though we cannot 

* Vide also wood-cut, No. 1. page 23., a dagger in Mr« Salt's collec- 
tion. 

f Another dagger with a simple unomamented handle is given in the 
wood-cut at the end of Chap. llLyig, 3.; but I am not certain about its 
date. 

X Q- Curtius says, '* Copides yocant gladios leniter curvatos^ falcibus 
similes, quibus appetebant belluarum manus." lib. 3. conf. ApuL 
Metam. lib. 11. '* copides et venabula." 

§ From the colour of those in the tombs of the kings, we may con- 
chide iron or steel. Vide plate 3. 

VOL. I. Y 


9SS THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. HI. 

thence infer that they were not always provided 
with some other more efficient weapon; and in 
leading their troops to the charge, we see them 
armed in the same manner as the king when he 
fought on foot. In chariots they had the bow ; 
and every chief prided himself upon his dexterity 
in archery, and emulated the skill as well as the 
valour of the monarch. 

The axe, or hatchet*, was small and simple, 
seldom exceeding two, or two feet and a half^ in 
length : it had a single blade, and no instance is met 
with of a double axe resembling the bipennis of the 
Romans. Of the same form was that used by the 
Egyptian carpenters ; and not only did the soldiers 
carry it as a serviceable weapon in close combat, 
but even for breaking down the gates of a town, 
and felling trees to construct engines for an assault. 
Independent of bronze pins which secured the 
blade, the handle was bound in that part vdth 
thongs of hide, in order to prevent the wood, split 
to admit the metal, from openmg when exposed to 
the sun ; and the same precaution was adopted in 
those belonging to joiners and others, who worked 
in their own shops. 

The axe was less ornamented than other wea-t 
pons ; some bore the figure of an animal, a boat, or 
fancy device, engraved upon the blade : and the 
handle frequently terminating in the shape of a 
gazelle's foot, was marked with circular and dia- 
gonal lines, representing bands, as on the pro- 

* A hatchet in Coptic is kelebin ; but it does not appear whether it 
was applied to this weapon. The name kelebin calls to mind the Saxon 
cleofan, to cleave ; as tne words Korrrat and khopsh, or uhopsh, to chop. 


CHAP. Hf. HATCHETS AND BATTLE-AXES. 323 

jecting torus of an Egyptian tein{Je, or like the 
ligature of the Roman Pisces.* The soldier, on his 
march, either held it in his hand, or suspended it at 
his back, with the blade downwards ; but it does 
not appear from the sculptures whether it was 
covered by a sheath, nor is any mode of wearing 
a sword indicated by them, except as a da^;er in 
the girdle, the handle sloping to the rightt 


""■ *'■ AHMorhmlcheU. JUditi, ami Salt'l OUrctlo*. 

The blade of the battle-axe was, in form, not un- 
like the Parthiant shield; a segment of a circle, 

• Fide wood-cut, No, 41., and et the eod of Chap. IlL^. I. 

{As in wood-cut. No. 39. 
yide Hope'a CostunieB, vol. L pi. xz. 
Y g 


324 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. Ill, 

divided at the back into two smaller segments, 
whose three points were fastened to the handle with, 
metal pins» It was of bronze, and sometimes, if 
we may be allowed to judge from the colour of 
those in the paintings at Thebes, of steel ; and the 
length of the handle was equal to, or more than 
double that of, the blade. Mr. Salt's last collec- 
tion, part of which was purchased by the British 
Museum, contained a portion of one of these wea- 
pons*, whose bronze blade was thirteen inches and 
a half long, and two and a half broad, inserted into 
a silver tube, secured with nails of the same metal. 
The wooden handle once fixed into this tube was 
wanting ; but, judging from those represented at 
Thebes, it was considerably longer than the tube, 
and even protruded a little beyond the extremity 
of the blade, where it was sometimes ornamented 
with the head of a lion or other device, reced- 
ing slightly t, so as not to interfere with the blow; 
and the total length of the battle-axe may have 
been from three to four feet. In some battle-axes, 
the handles were very short t, scarcely exceeding the 
length of the silver tube, above-mentioned, which 
in this specimen is only eleven inches and a half 
longer than the blade, and may have been the en- 
tire handle ; the small aperture at the lower end § 
serving equally for admitting the pin which secured 
the wood inserted into it, whether this extended 
beyond, or merely filled, the tube. 

The blades of the battle-axes represented in the 

* Vide vf 006 -cut. No. 42.^. 1. f As^. 3. 

t ^^J^S' ^'9 which is from the sculptures. } Fig, 2, 


CHAP. 111. 


BATTLE-AXfi AND POLE*AXK. 


325 


paintings of Thebes offer two forms, one of which 
is more circular * than that of Mr. Salt's ; from 
the excellence, however, of its workinanship and 
materials, we may conclude that this last was of the 


=3 


No. iS. 


Battle-axes, flrom the sculptures. Tkebes and Bent Ilastan. 


most general and approved shape, and perhaps 
belonged to some military chief, or to the king 
himself; and it is singular that an axe very similar 
to this was formerly used by the Germans, and 
other European infantry. 

The battle-axe may answer to the TreXext;^, as the 
pole-axe to the ol^ivti of the Greeks. 

The pole-axe was about three feet in length, but 
apparently more difficult to wield than the preced- 
ing, owing to the great weight of a metal ball to 
which the blade was fixed : and if this increased its 
force, and rendered the blow more destructive, it 
required, like the mace, a powerful as well as a 

* Figs, 3. and 4. 
Y 3 


326 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. 


CHAP. III. 


skilfiil ann to use it with success, and to make it 
as efficient a weapon as the battle-axe. 

We rarely find an entire corps of men armed 
with it ; the only instance I remember occurring 
at E'Sioot, where the same soldiers bear the cum- 
brous shields already noticed*; it may, therefore, 
have been peculiar to certain troops, and to the 
chiefs, in whose hand it is usually represented. 
The handle was generally about two feet in length, 
sometimes much longer ; the ball four inches in 
its greatest diameter t, and the blade varied from ten 
to fourteen inches, by two and three in breadth. 


No. 43. 


rote>axe 


Tkebcs. 


The mace was very similar to the pole-axe, with- 
out a blade, and appears to correspond to the 
xopovTi of the Greeks, which was frequently of 
iron. That used by the Egjrptians was of wood, 
bound with bronze, about two feet and a half 
in length, and ftunished with an angular piece of 
metal, projecting from the handle, which may 

• Vide wood-cut. No. 34. 

t I suppose it to have been a ball, rather than a flat circular piece of 
metal. 


CHAP. Ill, 


MACES. 


327 


have been intended as a guard, though in many 
instances they represent the hand placed above it, 
while the blow was given. * 


No. 44. 


Maces. 


Thebes. 


They had another macet, similar in many respects 
to this, without the ball, and, to judge from its fre- 
quent occurrence in the sculptures, more generally 
used, and evidently far more manageable ; but the 
former was a most formidable weapon against ar- 
mour, like that used for the same purpose by the 
MemlooksJ and the modern people of Cutch; and 
no shield, helmet, or cuirass, could have been a suf- 
ficient protection against the impetus given it by a 
powerful arm. Neither of these was peculiar to the 
chiefs: all the soldiers in some infantry regiments 
were armed with them ; and a charioteer was fur- 
nished with one or more, which he carried in a case 
attached with the quiver to the side of his car. § 

In ancient times, when the fate of a battle was 
frequently decided by personal valour, the dex-. 
terous management of such arms was of primary 

* Wood-cut, No. 44.>%. 2. 

f Wood-cut, No. 44.^«. 3. and 4. 

i Called daboss, or dabb6os. 

^ Vt(te Egyptian chariot, in wood-cut. No. 53. a. p. 34G. 

Y 4 


328 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

importance; and a band of resolute veterans^ beaded 
by a gallant chief, spread dismay among the ranks 
of an enemy ; as Homer describes Areithous alone 
breaking through an opposing phalanx with his 
iron mace*: and notwithstanding the great im. 
provements which have taken place in the art of 
war, by the introduction of artillery and the 
musket, and by the machinery of modem armies, 
physical strength and individual courage ai^e still 
considered the highest recommendation in close 
combat ; and thus the £g3rptians, though they 
placed their chief reliance in the skill of their 
archers, failed not to attach great importance to 
heavy infantry, and paid particular attention to 
the nature of their oflTensive as well as defensive 
arms. And the variety of weapons used by dif- 
ferent corps, as well as the care they took in allotting 
to each its respective duties during action, in se- 
lecting those best suited for a peculiar service, and 
in the judicious arrangement of the army and its 
component parts, argue the great experience ac- 
quired by the Egyptians in the art of war. 

They had another kind of mace, sometimes of 
uniform thickness through its whole length, some- 
times broader at the upper endt, without either the 
ball or guard, and many of their allies carried a 
rude heavy club t ; but no body of native troops was 

♦ Homer, H. v, 138. : — 

*' Aiov AprfiOooVy top CTricXijertv, icopvviirtiv 
Ai/^pC£ Kuc\ti<tKOV KoKKi^iavoi re yvvauet£y 
OvviK* ap^ ov ToKoiffi ftaxfOKiro, Sovpi re fiaicp^^ 
AXXa aiSripeiy Kopwy prjyvvffKe ^oiKayyaQ^* 

\ Vide wood-cut, No. 4t7,^s, I. and 2. 
J Fide wood-cut. No. II. J^, 3. 


CHAP* III, CLUBS. — HELMETS. ^ 329 

armed with the last, and indeed it cannot be con-^ 
sidered an Egyptian weapon. 

The curved stick, or club, (now called lissari)*^ 
was used by heavy and light-armed troops as well as 
archers ; and if it does not appear a formidable arm. 


us: 


No. 4>5. Cun'cd stick or clulx Tiifbcs 

yet the experience of modern times bears ample 
testimony to its efBcacy in close combat. To the 
Bisharieen it supplies the place of a sword \ and the 
Ababdeh, content with this, their spear, and shield, 
fear not to encounter the hostile Maazy, whom they 
frequently defeat, though armed with the matchlock 
and the atagan. t In length that of the ancient 
Egyptians was probably the same, about two feet 
and a half, and made of a hard thorn wood, as 
the mimosas, seUenij and sumr ; which are still used 
for the same purpose, as well as for the shafts of the 
Ababdeh lance. 

The shield, their principal defence, I have already 
noticed. The helmet was usually quilted, but rarely 
of metal ; and though bronze helmets are said to 
have been worn by the Egyptians t, we may con- 

• i, e. " tonguey" io Arabic. 

f A long knife, or straight sword, worn in the girdle, and called 
gembeeh (side arm) by the Arabs, 
t Vide Herod, ii. 151. 


330 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

elude that, in accordance with the authority of the 
sculptures, they preferred and generally adopted 
the former, which being thick, and well padded, 
served as an excellent protection to the head, with- 
out the inconvenience resulting from the metal in 
so hot a climate.* « Some of them descended to the 
shoulder t, others only a short distance below the 
level of the eart; and the summit, terminating in 
an obtuse point, was ornamented with two tassels. § 
They were of a green, red, or black colour ; and 
the long helmet, which fitted less closely to the back 
of the head, was fringed at the lower edge with a 
broad border ||, and in some instances consisted of 
two parts, or an upper and under fold.^ Another, 
worn also by the spearmen, and many corps of in- 
fantry and charioteers, varied slightly from these, 
though very similar in many respects, being quilted, 
and descending to the shoulder with a fringe ; but 
it had no tassels, and fitting close to the top of the 
head, it widened towards the base, the front, which 
covered the forehead, being made of a separate 
piece** attached to the other part. 

If there is no representation of an Egyptian hel- 
jnet with a crest, we are less surprised, since even 
the ancient Greeks did not always adopt ittt; but 

* This alone would not be a sufficient objection, since metal hel- 
mets are still worn even in the far hotter climates, of Darfoor and 
Kprdofan. 

t Wood-cut, No. 46., A*. 1. and 3. ± Figs, 5, 6, 7. 

i Figs. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. fl Figs. 2, 3. 

i Fig. 4. ♦* Fig. 2. 

f f This helmet was called KarairvK* 

....'* afiifn dk 01 Kvvtriv icc^aXif^iv iBriKi 

TavpettiVf a^aXovTif fcai aXo^v, tin KarairvK 

K«icX iirai." Homer, II. k, 258. 


CHAP. JIT. 


HELMETS. — CUIRASS. 


331 


that of the Shairetana, once enemies and afterwards 
allies of the Pharaohs, is particularly interesting. 


Na46. 


Helmets or head-picces. 


Thebes. 


since it shows the existence of a custom, as early 
as two hundred years before the Trojan war, which 
was afterwards introduced by the Greeks, of adorn- 
ing the helmet with horns ; whence the name keras 
(horn) was sometimes chosen to signify a crest.* 

The outer surface of the cuirass, or coat of ar- 
mour, consisted of about eleven horizontal rows of 
metal plates, well secured by bronze pins ; and at 
the hollow of the throat a narrower range of plates 
was introduced, above which were two more, com- 
pleting the collar or covering of the neck. The 
breadth of each plate or scale was little more than an 
inch, twelve of them sufficing to cover the front of 
the body ; and the sleeves, which were sometimes 
so short as to extend less than half way to the elbow, 
consisted of two rows of similar plates, t Many, 

* According to Suidas. Our word crest bears a strong resemblance 
to the Greek. Vide Hope's Costumes, plate cxxx. ; and infrdy on tlie 
enemies of the Egyptians, p. 366. 

f rt(/^plate3. 


SB'S THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. Ill, 

indeed most, of the cuirasses were without collars ; 
in some the sleeves were rather longer, reaching 
nearly to the elbow, and they were worn both 
by heavy infantry and bowmen. The ordinary 
cuirass may have been little less than two feet and 
a half in length : it sometimes covered the thighs 
nearly to the knee ; and in order to prevent its 
pressing heavily upon the shoulder, they bound 
their girdle over it, and tightened it at the waist. 
But the thighs, and that part of the body below the 
girdle, were usually covered by a kelt*, or other 
robe, detached from the cuirass ; and many of the 
light and heavy infantry were clad in a quilted vest 
of the same form as the coat of armour, for which 
it was intended to be a substitute ; and some wore 
corselets, reaching only from the waist to the upper 
part of the breast, and supported by straps over the 
shoulder, which, to judge from the sculptured re- 
presentations of them, appear to have been faced 
with metal plates, t 

Among the arms painted in the tomb of Re- 
meses III., at Thebes, is a piece of defensive 
armour t, which, from the hollowed space left for 
the arm, seems to have been a sort of coat, or cover- 
ing for the body ; and were it not so highly oma-: 
mented, might be considered a vest, or jttiTpij, worn 
beneath the cuirass. It is made of a rich stuff, 
worked, or painted, with the figures of lions and 
other animals, devices common upon the shield and 
other parts of Greek armour, and is edged with a 

♦ The ^(li^a, or ^^wcmyp, of the Greeks. 

t riflfe wood-cut, iVb. 47. /g*. 10, 11, 12. J Kwfc fig. 8. plate 3. 


tiX c* 


~-^f 


— V 


CHAP. III. ARMS OF DIFFERENT CORPS. 333 

neat border, terminating below in a broad fringe ; 
and though there is no appearance of metal plates, 
it may have been intended as a substitute for the 
more weighty coat of mail, which was not worn on 
all occasions either by infantry or charioteers. Tlie 
Greeks in like manner made some thoraces of hide, 
hemp, linen, or twisted cord. Ajax, the son of 
Oileus, from his having worn ojie of these, is styled 
by Homer * Linothorex : Alexander, according to 
Plutarch, had a double thorax of linen ; and Cor- 
nelius Nepos tells us that Iphicrates ordered his 
soldiers to lay aside their heavy metal cuirass, and 
to go to battle in hempen armour. 

ARMS OF DIFFERENT CORPS. 

Heavy-armed troops were furnished with a shield 
and spear ; some with a shield and mace ; and 
others, though rarely, with a battle-axe, or a pole- 
axe, and shield. They also carried a sword, falchion, 
curved stick or lissan^ simple mace, or hatchet, 
which may be looked upon as their side-arms, t 

The light troops, who were not archers, had nearly 
the same weapons, but their defensive armour 
was lighter; and some were without the incum- 
brance of a shield, as the slingersl^, and a few 
others, whose duty required great agility, and who 
fought in scattered parties, like the Velites of the 
Romans. The arms of the bowmen have been al- 

* Homer, II. /3, 529. : — 

**0iXi|0c Ta^vQ Aiaq 

.... oXiyof HIV €i|v, XivoOiapri^** 

\- n<fc wood-cut, No. 47. % F3W<? wood-cut, No. 36. 


THE Ascatn BGTrriAjrs. 


ready meatioQed : of the Egyptian cavalry we are 
unable to obtain any satis&ctory infbnnatioo ; and 
It now remains to notice the corps of chariots. 


CHAP. III. CHARIOTS, ETC. 335 

which constituted a very large and effective por- 
tion of the Eg3rptian army. 

Each car contained two persons, like the di- 
phros (8i<J)go^*) of the Greeks. On some occasions 
it carried three, the charioteer or driver and two 
chiefs ; but this Was rarely the case, except in tri- 
umphal processions, when two of the princes or 
noble youths accompanied the king in their chariot, 
bearing the regal sceptre, or the flabelUij and re- 
quired a third person to manage the reins, t In 
the field each had his own car, with a charioteer ; 
and the insignia of his office being attached behind 
him by a broad belt t, his hands were free for the 
use of the bow and other arms. When on an ex- 
cursion for pleasure, or on a visit to a friend, an 
Egyptian gentleman, or even the king, mounted 
alone, and drove himself, footmen and other at- 
tendants running before and behind the car, (like 
the syis or grooms of modern Egypt and India,) 
who, when the carriage stopped, were ready to take 
the reins, and walked the horses till their master 
returned, continuing, however, on foot§, and not 
venturing to step into it ; a custom equally observed 
by those who wished to show marked respect to 
the king, when passing before or following him, 
in state processions. 

* A name which implies carrying two. The Roman war chariot 
also contained two persons ; the bellator, or warrior, and the auriga, or 
driver. Yirg. Mn. ix. 330., ii. 469. 624.737. Conf. Ihaiah, xi. 7. 
" A chariot with a couple of horsemen." Or rather 1 Kings, xxii. 34., 
and 2 Chron. xviii. 33. ; since the former appears to refer to men riding 
on horses, D»«nD. Fares, is also in Arabic, a horseman (or a Persian); 
and &rras» the nutre, is the horse par excellence. 

t yide wood-cut, No. ^.^g> 1. t ^'^^ wood-cut. No. 49. 

j) Wood -cut. No. 4. p. 46. 


THE ANCTENT EGYPTIANS. 


In battle also, many attendants were always in 
readiness*} and whenever a general dismounted 


from his car, to lead his troops over hilly and pre- 
cipitous heights inaccessible to chariots, to the 


" Conr. Horn. II. 0, 109. 113. 


CHAP, in. CHARIOTS AND CHARIOTEERS. 337 

assault of a fortified town, or for any other purpose, 
they took charge of the horses, and keeping them 
in some secure place they awaited his return, or 
followed at a short distance; and a second car* 
with fresh horses was always ready in the rear, 
in order to provide against accident, or the still 
less welcome chance of a defeat. 

In the battle scenes of the Egyptian temples, 
the king is represented alone in his car, unattend- 
ed by any charioteer t, the reins fastened round 
his body, while engaged in bending his bow against 
the enemy; but it may be doubted whether we 
are to infer the absence of that person : and he may 
have been omitted, in order not to interfere wi^ 
the principal figure and feature of the picture,* 
which, with a similar notion of exclusiveness, 
they were accustomed to draw of colossal dimen- 
sions. 

The cars of the whole chariot corps contained 
each two warriors, comrades of equal rank, both 
joining in the labours and glory of the fight; and if 
the charioteer who accompanied a chief t did not 
hold the same high station, he was probably ap- 
pointed to the post as a mark of distinction ; and 
from the familiar manner in which one of them is 
represented conversing with a son of th^ great 
Remeses, we may conclude the office was filled by 
persons of consideration, who were worthy of the 
friendship they enjoyed. § 

* Conf. 2 Chron. xxxv, 24, 
f Conf. Homer, gods and heroes, passim. 
I Conf. Hom. lU X, 399. ; and ^, 84. 
§ Conf. Horn. II. 0, 120. ; and X, 518. 

VOL. I. Z 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. 


As with the Greeks, the employment was neither 
servile nor ignoble; and if Hector*, Nestort, 
Ulyssest, and others were not ashamed to act in 
this capacity, Egyptian officers of note, in like 
manner, undertook the management of their own 
cars, and prided themselves on their skill in driving, 
as in wielding the javelin and bow : but whether 
the chariot race was instituted in Egypt does not 
appear; and we may conclude from the absence 
of the subject in their sculptures, and of the hip- 
podrome in the precincts of towns of early date, 
that the celebration of games similar to those of 
Greece was unknown there, previous to the Mace- 
donian conquest: the only hippodromes being at 

• II. o, 358. " (Bcrwp) naaTijt raTiaiiaSov ijXaiHK iirjroue ! " and the 

gods frequently. 

f 11. 9, 1 16. Nestor mounts the car of Diomed, nnd takee the 
reins and whip. 


CHAP. ill. 


WHIPS. 


389 


Alexandria, and at the Roman town of Antinoe, 
founded by Hadrian, in Upper Egypt. 

In driving, the Egyptians used a whip, like the 
heroes and charioteers of Homer ; and this, or a 
short stick, was generally employed even for beasts 
of burden, and for oxen at the plough, in pre- 
ference to the goad. The whip consisted of a 


/:> 


mB 


=SS 


3 


No. 50. 


Whips. 


Thebu. 


smooth round wooden handle, and a single or 
double thong : it sometimes had a lash of leather, 
or string, about two feet in length, either twisted or 
platted ; and a loop being attached to the lower 
end, the archer was enabled to use the bow, while 
it hung suspended from his wrist* 

When a hero encountered a hostile chief, he 
sometimes dismounted from his car, and substituting 
for his bow and quiver the spear, battle-axe, or fal- 
chion, he closed with him hand to hand, like the 


* Vide wood-cut, No. 51., next page. 

z 2 


340 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP^ HI. 


Na St Whip lufpended from the wrist ot the archer. T^ebet. 

Greeks and Trojans described by Homer : and the 
lifeless body of the foe being left upon the field, 
was stript of its arms by his companions. Some- 
times a wounded adversary, incapable of further 
resistance, having claimed and obtained the mercy 
of the victor, was carried from the field in his 
chariot*; and the ordinary captives, who laid 
down their arms and }delded to the Egyptians, 
were treated as prisoners of war, and were sent 
bound to the rear under an escort, to be presented 
to the monarch, and to grace his triumph, after 
the termmation of the conflict. The hands of the 
slain were then counted before him t ; and this 

* At Karnak king Osirei is represented carrying under each arm two 
vanquished chiefs ; and many inferior captives, bound with cords, follow 
him to his car. 

f In 2 Kings, x. 8., the heads of the seventy sons of the king were 
brought in baskets to Jehu, who ordered them to be put *' in two heaps 
at the entering in of the gate.*' 


CHAP. III. NO SEAT IN THE CAR. 341 

return of the enemy's killed was duly registered, to 
commemorate his success, and the glories of his 
reign ; a subject which occurs more than once on 
the walls of Medeenet Haboo ; and the great pic- 
ture, sculptured in the inner area of that building, 
represents Remeses seated in his car, while the 
tellers, taking the hands by the thumb, place them 
in a heap before him, and count them to the 
miUtary scribes. 

From the position of the king in this picture, 
the Eg3rptian chariot might appear to be furnished 
with a seat, but judging from the usual represent- 
ations in the Theban sculptures, and from the 
nature of other ancient cars*, it is more probable 
that he is seated on the side or front. Indeed, for 
persons frequently accustomed to forego the use of 
seats, there could be little necessity for its intro- 
duction ; and though the Egyptian rooms were 
furnished with chairs and raised sofas, it was not 
unusual for persons of all ranks to sit upon the 
ground, crouched like the Nubians on a pedestrian 
journey, or cross-legged like the modem inhabit- 
ants of Eastern countries, when in the house, and 
even in their carriages, t The same remark applies 
to the chariots of those enemies with whom they 
fought ; and the representation of wounded war- 


* As of the Greeks. The Romans placed seats, or cnairs, in their 
town cars, and the magistrates took with them the sella curulis when 
going to the senate house. This last folded like our camp stools, and 
many of the Egyptian chairs. 

f Witness the Birmese carriage brought to England, which differs 
principally from those of Europe in the absence of seats. 

Z H 


342 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

riors falling backwards out of their car, frequently 
occurring in the battle scenes of Thebes, and so 
forcibly calling to mind the descriptions of Homer *, 
may be adduced as an additional argument to prove 
the absence of any seat or bench within it. 

In some £gyptian chariots, the bottom part con- 
sisted of a frame interlaced with thongs or rope, 
forming a species of network, in order, by its 
elasticity, to render the motion of a carriage with* 
out springs more easy : and this custom is very 
prevalent at the present day in Italy and other 
countries, in carts and carriages used by the lower 
orders ; but it is difficult to determine whether it 
was adopted in every Egyptian car. 

That the chariot was of woodt is abundantly 
proved by the sculptures, wherever workmen are 
seen employed in making it ; and the fact of 
their having, at the earliest period of their known 
history, already invented and commonly used a 
form of pole, whose introduction into our own 
country dates only between thirty and forty 
years t, is a remarkable instance of the truth of 
Solomon's assertion, " there is no new thing under 
the sun§," and shows the advancement they had 

• niad, lib. 9, 122. ; and t, 585. : — 

** Avrop oy* curOfiaiviav evtpyfo^ tKTTitrt Si^pov, 
KvfttaxoQ ev coviiforiv, ewt ppi-jQJLOv re Kai tafiovg** 

+ In Joshua, we read of the Canaanites having *' chariots of iron." 
XYU. 16. Solomon made a chariot of the wood of Lebanon. Sol. 
Song, iii. 9. 

% The pole of the Greek chariots was usually straight; but instances 
are met with of it curved, as in those of Egypt. 

^ Ecclesiast. i. 9. 


CHARIOTS OF WOOD. 


Ko. 51. KnUng tha pole ind other pun of * chiriot. Jteta. 

made at that very remote era, and the skill of 
their workmen. And that this last was of wood, 
and not, as some have imagined, of bronze or other 
metal, we have a decided proof, from the repre- 
sentations of workmen, cutting and fashioning it 
with an axe." 

The body of the car was exceedingly light, con- 
sisting of a wooden framework, strengthened and 
ornamented with metal and leather binding, like 
many of those mentioned by Homer t: the bottom 
part, on which the charioteer stood, was flat, whe- 
ther of an entire piece, or of the thongs already 
alluded to, the whole resting on the axle-tree and 
lower extremity of the pole, which was itself inserted 
into the axle. Its centre was not placed directly 
over the axle, in order to be on an equilibrium, 
but much more forward, the back part seldom ex- 
-tending behind the middle of the wheel, so that 
the body pressed considerably upon the pole, to 

• Wood-cut, No. 52. Jig. 3. 

f Homer, II. t, 438. Resus' car was bound with gold and silver : 
that of Diomed with gold and tin . 


SH THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. UK 

which also the upper rim of its front was con- 
nected by means of thongs or straps. The weight 
was therefore divided between the wheels and the 
horses ; but as a chariot was easily carried by one 
man *, we may conclude that even with the addi- 
tion of two persons it was not such as to fatigue 
the horses, and this mode of placing it had the ad- 
vantage of rendering the motion far more easy to 
the driver.t When the horses were taken out, the 
pole, unless propped up in some manner, fell to 
the ground ; they therefore rested it on a support, 
which was sometimes a wooden figure of a man, 
intended to represent a captive, or enemy, who 
was considered fitted for this degrading office. 

The greater portion of the sides, and the whole of 
the back, were open ; the latter indeed entirely so, 
without any rim or framework above ; and the hinder 
part of the lateral framework commenced nearly in a 
line with the centre of the wheel, and rising perpen- 
dicularly, or slightly inclined backwards, from the 
base of the car, extended with a curve, at the height 
of about two feet and a half, to the front, serving as 
well for a safeguard to the driver, as a support for 
his quivers and bow-case. To strengthen it, three 
thongs of leather were attached at either side, and 
an upright of wood connected it with the base of 
the front part immediately above the pole, where 
the straps before mentioned were fastened ; as may 
be seen in those I have already given from the an- 


* In the sculptures. Another supports the pole and traces, 
f The body of the Greek car was also placed very forward, less so 
than that of Egypt ; but it must have been much heavier. 


CHAP. III. CHARIOTS. 345 

cient paintings and sculptures of Thebes, and in the 
accompanying view of the simple body of a car, re- 
presented according to our European mode of draw- 


No. GS. Jtfi. 1 £ CharlnU. In penpcdlTe, 

l^t.i.*. SiddlaiuiiliiuiiifUtgyote. Fnm iHgtrml SculpUiTri. 

ing. It is, however, i-easonable to suppose that they 
sometimes varied slightly in form, and that the car 
of war was of a ditFerent construction in some re- 
spects from ihQ plaustnvm* , or from the curricle of 

* The Roman plmufmra had two, Bometimes four, wheels. The 
waggons, or rather carts, !<cnt by Pharaoh for Jacob are called, in 


346 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAKS. 


CHAP. III. CHARIOTS. BOW-CASE. 347 

towns ; and we not only find the two last destitute 
of all the cases for weapons except that of the bow, 
aud sometimes of that also, but the solid portion of 
their sides was generally lower than in the former, 
where greater protection was required for those 
within ; and on this account the Greek cars were 
entirely closed, except at the back.* 

The bow-case, frequently richly ornamented, 
with the figure of a lion or other devices, was 
placed in an inclined position, pointing forwards ; 
its upper edge, immediately below the flexible 
leather cover, being generally on a level with the 
summit of the framework of the chariot ; so that 
when the bow was drawn out, the leather cover fell 
downwards, and left the upper part on an uninter- 
rupted level. In battle this was of course a matter 
of no importance ; but in the city, where the bow- 
case was considered an elegant part of the orna- 
mental hangings of a car, and continued to be att 
tached to it t, they paid some attention to the posi^ 
tion and fall of the pendent cover, deprived as 
it there was of its bow, since, as I have elsewhere 
observed, the civilized state of Egyptian society 
required the absence of all arms, except on service. 


Hebrew, mb», wheeled carriages ; the chariot was naDiD, or aan (une 
monture). 1 use plausirum for a two-wheeled chariot drawn by oxen. 

* In pi. iii. of Hope's Costumes is a car less closed than usual. 

-j- The following passage of Homer shows that the bow was sus- 
pended to the car, and exemplifies what I have before remarked (p. 72.), 
the severity of filial duties in those times. 

*' Avrap Of* viag afia^av evrpo^ov rifiioveiTiv, 
'OirXitrai, tjvwye*, vtipivOa Si Sfitrai eir' avrtjQ^ 

U. o>, 189. ; vide also lines 253. 267. 


>» 


348 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

The quivers and spear-cases were suspended in a 
contrary direction, pointing backwards ; sometimes 
an additional quiver was attached close to the bow- 
case, with a mace and other arms, and every war 
chariot containing two men was furnished with 
the same number of bows. 

The framework, as I have stated, was of wood, 
like the pole, wheels, and other parts of the chariot ; 
and we even find the mode of bending the wood 
for that purpose represented in the sculptures.* In 
the ornamental trappings,hangings, and binding of 
the framework and cases, leather was principaUy 
used, dyed of various hues, and afterwards adorned 
with metal edges and studs, according to the taste 
of the workman or purchaser ; and the wheels, 
strengthened at the joints of the felly with bronze 
or brass bands, were bound with a hoop of metal, t 
The Egjrptians themselves have not failed to point 
out what parts were the peculiar province of the 
carpenter and the currier. The body and frame- 
work of the car, the pole, yoke, and wheels, were 
the work of the former ; the cases for the bows and 
other arms, the saddle and harness, the binding of 
the framework, and the coverings of the body, were 
finished by the currier ; and lest it should not be 
sufficiently evident that they are engaged in cutting 
and bending the leather for this purpose, the artist 
has distinctly pointed out the nature of the sub- 


* Vide wood-cut, No. 54., next page, 
t Conf. Horn. U, f, 724. : — 

" Twv jyrot xpvffei} irug atpOiroQy avrap vntpOev 
XoXjci' fvuTffurpaf Trporrapripora* 


»» 


CHAP. 111. THE VARIOUS PARTS OF A CHARIOT. 


=c 


stance they employed, by figuring an entire skin, 
and the soles of a pair of shoes*, or sandals, sus- 
pended in the shop ; and no European can look at 

* Fide wood-cut, No. 55. 1 and g. 


350 THE ANCIENT EOTPTIANS. CHAP. 111. 

the subject without remarking that the semicircular 
knife * used by the Egyptians to cut leather was 
precisely simitar to our own, even in the remote 
age of king Amimoph II., who lived 14>50 years be- 
fore our era. 


In war chariots, the wheels had six spokes t, in 
many curricles, or private cars, employed in towns, 
only four 1: ; and the wheel was fixed to the axle 
end by a small linch-pin, sometimes surmounted 
with a fanciful head, and secured by a thong which 
passed through the lower end : plainly proving 
that the axletree itself did. not turn, as some have 
imagined. There are no instances of chariots with 
more than two wheels § ; currus ^alcati, or cars 
armed with scythes, were unknown in Egypt, being 

• It occurs very rrequently. Vide wood-cut. No. 55., c. 

f The Hpokes appear to have been generally round. 

% Homer gives the car of Juno wheels with dght spokes, " ojtKa . . . 
oKTanviiita" (II. (, 723,), whith ia the usual number in the Greek 
sculptures; instances, however, occur of four, six, and twelve, fide 
Hope's Coatumee, pi. iii. 805. and 236. 

§ There ia only one representation of a carriflge with four wbeda. 
yide wood-cut at the end of Ch^. V. 


CHAP. UK CHARIOT HAUNESS. 351 

probably contemned by them as by all nations who 
made any great advances in military tactics ; nor 
was it their custom to use camels, or elephants, in 
war, like the Indians and some other nations of 
antiquity * ; and it is probable that the former were 
only employed in their army for the transport of 
baggage and provisions, much of which was carried 
upon asses t, in those parts where water was 
abundant. 

The harness of curricles and war chariots was 
nearly similar ; and the pole in either case was 
supported on a curved yoke fixed to its extremity 
by a strong pin, and bound with straps or thongs 
of leather. The yoke, resting upon a small well 
padded saddle, was firmly fitted into a groove of 
metal; and the saddle, placed upon the horses*' 
withers, and furnished with girths and a breast- 
band, was surmounted by an ornamental knob ; 
and in front of it a small hook secured the 
bearing rein. The other reins passed through a 
thong or ring at the side of the saddle, and 
thence over the projecting extremity of the yoke ; 
and the same thong secured the girths, and even 
appears in some instances to have been attached 
to them. In the war chariots, a large ball, placed 
upon a shaft, projected above the saddle, which is 
generally supposed to have been connected with 
the reins, and to have been intended to give a 

* And even by the Greeks after the time of Alexander. 

-|* Baggage carried by asses is represented at Thebes and other 
places, but no caraels have yet been met with, either in the sculptures 
or the hieroglyphics ; a remark which has been made even by Abd-el 
Azees, the Arab historian. For this I can give no reason, since we know 
that animal existed in Egypt in the time or Abraham. Gen. xii. 16. 


35i TH£ ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

greater power to the driver *, by enabling him to 
draw them over a groove in its centre ; but there 
is reason to believe it was added solely for an orna- 
mental purpose, like the fancy head-dresses of the 
horses, and fixed to the yoke immediately above 
the centre of the saddle t, or to the head of a pin 
which connected the yoke to the pole.:t The same 
kind of ornament §, though of a different form, is 
met with in Persian cars ; and that it was not a 


Na 56L Saddle of a hone yoked in a Penian car. Britisk Museum, 

necessary part of the harness is shown by the many 
instances of its omission in Eg3rptian curricles, and 
even in some of the chariots of war. || 

The traces were single, one only on the inner 
side of each horse, fastened to the lower part of the 
pole, and thence extending to the saddle ; but no 
exterior trace was thought necessary : and no provi- 
sion was made for attaching it to the car. Indeed the 


* Such was mj own opinion ; but on further examination of numerous 
drawings of chanots, I am inclined to believe it stood on the yoke or 
the pole. 

+ Vide wood-cut^ lio. 53. Jig. 2. 

X Vide wood-cut. No. 53. j%. 1. § Vide wood-cut, No. 56., at e. 

11 Vide wood-cuts, Nos.48. and 49. 


CHAP. III. THE TRACES. 353 

yoke sufficed for all the purposes of draught as well 
as for backing the chariot ; and being fixed to the 
saddle, it kept the horses at the same distance and 
in the same relative position, and prevented their 
breaking outwards from the line of draught, a re- 
mark which applies equally to the Greek car ; and 
the description given of it by Homer ♦ agrees very 

♦ II. f, 722. et teq. : — 


'' 'll€fi ^ afi^* oxii<T<ft. ^oiog Pake KafivvXa kvkXo, 
XaXKia, OKTaKVfifia^ oi^tipufi aXovi afiil>i^' 
Tiov fiTOi xpv^'? ^^^C a^BiTos, avrap {nrtpOev 
XaXxi' tiri<r<rti>Tpap irpocrapiypora, Sravfia iStaOai* 
nXj}/ivat d' apyvpov iuri irepidpofioi afi^TtptitOiv* 
At^pog dt xpvoteuTi Kat apyvptowtv Ifiamv 
Evrerarai* doiai dt trepiSpofioi avrvytg tioi' 
Tov S* «! apyvptoQ pvfioe vbKev avrap tir*cuep<p 
Jiiiioi xpvtrttov KaXov 2[vyoi/, tv Se Xtiradva 
KaX' cl^aXe, ^^pvcrec'* iiwo di l^vyov riyaytv Hpi| 
*linrovg iOKViroSag, fie/iavt epidog Kai avrijg** 

Where the poet mentions the kvkXq, wheels, with eight spokes ; the 
aKtav^ axle ; the irvc, wooden fellies of the wheel ; the ivifTtrutTpa, metal 
hoops ; the ttXi^/xvi}, its box or nave ; the avrvyig, sides or framework 
of the car ; pvjiog^ the pole, sometimes nine cubits, or 13 J ft. in length, 
(n. <u, 270.), with the ^vyov, yoke, fastened at its extremity ; and the 
Xfn-a^va, or Straps over the horse's breast. In another place (II. tn, 268.) 
he describes the mode of fixing the yoke to the pole, by a ring passing 
over a peg at its extremity, and by a strap nine cubits in length, lashed 
thrice backwards and forwards across a prominent boss in the centre of 
the yoke, the end of the strap being tied in a knot below : -— 


«( 


Tiuyov • . 


. . « • oji^cCXotv • . 

Eff ^ t^epov KvyodEfffiov ana Kvy*p evveairijxv' 
Kat ro fuv tv KaTtOijKav evKi^yrtp em pvyapj 
Ilc^y CTTi TTpcury, ctti ^c KpiKOv karopi jSoXXo]/* 
Tpig S* iKarepOiv tSrieav tit ofujxiXov' avrap tvttTa 
*£|€ii|c KartdrifraVf vvo -yXwxii/a S* eyvafi^fav^* 

but as this refers to a moveable yoke, taken off the pole when the 
animals were released, it bears less resemblance to that of the Egyptian 
chariot than of the plough or cart, as I shall have occasion to remark 
hereafter, when comparing it with an ox-yoke found by Signor d'Anas- 
tasy in a tomb at Thebes. 

It may not be uninteresting, while examining the subject, to notice 
the Roman carriages. Besides litters or palanquins, and other modes of 
conveyance, they had carriages called unarotuvi, with one wheel, drawn 

VOL. I, A A 


354 THE ANCIEHT EGTPTfANS. CHAP. III. 

nearly with that used by the ^yptians. In order 
to render this more intelligiUe* I sh^ introduce 
a pair (^ horses yoked to a chariot according to 


'U 


I s 


CHAP. Iir. . HOUSINGS, ETC. 355 

the rules of European drawing, derived from a 
comparison of the numerous representations in the 
sculptures, omitting only their housings and head- 
dress, which may be readily understood in an Egyp- 
tian picture. 

On grand occasions the Egyptian horses were 
decked * with fancy ornaments : a rich striped or 
checkered housing t, trimmed with a broad border 
and large pendent tassels, covered the whole body, 
and two or more feathers t inserted in lions' heads, 
or some other device of gold, formed a crest upon 
the summit of the head-stall. But this display was 
confined to the chariots of the monarch, or the 
military chiefs ; and it was thought sufficient, in 


quadriga with four : we even read of six horses yoked abreast ; and Nero 
once drove a chariot with ten horses at the Olympic games. The two- 
wheeled quadriga was most generally used, and preferred for the circus ; 
the biga was commonly employed in war ; it had also two wheels, and 
contained a warrior and the driver. The pilentum was a carriage prin> 
cipally intended for matrons, when going to the games; it had four 
wheels, like the rheda, a large travelhng coach, and the petorritum, an 
open town carriage. The essedum was a light swift car, driven in the city, 
and adopted from the Gauls; and the plaustrum, properly a cart, with 
two, and occasionally four, wheels, was intended for heavy burdens, 
though less cumbrous than the four-wheded carrus, or waggon. The 
parts of the chariot were the wheels (rotse), the body (capsum or ploxe- 
roum), the pole (temo), and the voke (jugum). The nave (modiolus), 
the fellies (apsides^ the spokes (radii), and the metal hoop (canthus), 
were the parts of tne wheel. The yoke was usually of wood, extending 
over the back of the two horses, of a crooked shape to fit the neck ; and 
it was tied to the pole with leathern thongs, frequently with a pin or 
ring, as in the Greek and Egyptian cars« yide Hope*s Costumes, 
plate 271. 

* Conf, Virg. JEn, vii. 275. : — • 

*' Instratos ostro alipedes pictisque tapetis, 
Aurea pectoribus demissa moniiia pendent." 

And Hom. II. (i>, 230. 
j* Vide plate 1. 
J Probably peacock's feathers. 

A A 2 


356 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. 111. 

the harness of other cars, and of the town curricle, 
to adorn the bridles with rosettes, which resemble, 
and cannot &il to call to mind, those used in £ng* 
land at the present day.* 

Blinkers t were deemed unnecessary, as in many 
countries of modem Europe; but a severe bit 
appears to have been employed by the £g}rptians1: 
as by other ancient people § ; though, from their 
mode of representing it, we should rather feel dis- 
posed to consider it a sort of snaffle than a curb. 

The head and upper part of the neck were fre- 
quently enveloped in a rich covering similar to the 
housing, trimmed with a leather fringe ; and the 
bridle, consisting of two cheek pieces, a throatlash, 
head-stall, and the forehead and nose straps, though 
simple, was not unomamental. 

No instance occurs of Egyptian chariots with 
more than two horses, nor of any carriage fur- 
nished with shafts and drawn by one horse ; they 
therefore resembled those in general use among 
the early Greeks, as described by Homer ||; though 
the poet occasionally mentions the four-horsed 
car, answering to the quadriga of the Latins, so 

♦ Vide wood-cut. No. 57. 

t In one or two instances we find something projecting above and 
at the side of the eyes, which may be intended to represent blinkers. 

:]: This I conclude from the appearance of their mouths; and a 
simple bit may be made very severe. 

§ Conf. Hor. lib. i. Od. 8. : — 

*' Oallica nee lupatis 
Temperat ora frenis." 

II Hom. U. r, 195.: — 

'E(rra<Tiv" 
Like the biga of the Romans. 


CHAP. III. 


CARS OF OTHER PEOPLE, 


357 


frequently represented in sculpture and on ancient 
coins. Those used by contemporary eastern nations, 
with whom the Egyptians were at war, were not 
dissimilar in their general form or in the mode of 
yoking the horses, even if they differed in the num- 
ber of persons they contained, having usually three 
instead of the two in Egyptian and Greek cars : as 
may be seen from an examination of those repre- 
sented in the paintings of Thebes *, particularly 
that which is brought with its two unyoked horses, 
as a present to the Egyptian monarch, by the con- 
quered people of Rot-ii-not, and one actually found 
in Egypt, and now preserved in the museum at 
Florence, supposed by some to have been taken 


Na 58. Car and bow, in the collection at Florence (firom the great work of Professor 

Rosellini). 

from the Scythians by the Egyptian victors^ The 
harness of the Persian chariots figured at Persepolis 


♦ Vide wood-cut. 


•f- Vide woo<}-cut, No. 53. b, and plate 4. 
A A d 


358 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. 


CHAP. III. 


is equally simple ; and as it is interesting to com- 
pare the customs of different ancient nations, it 
may not be irrelevant to the subject to introduce 
a copy of one taken from the work of Sir R. Ker 
Porter. * 


NaSgi 


Persian car (Axim Sir R. Ker Porter). 


The Egyptian chariot corps, like the infantry, 
were divided into light and heavy troops, both 
armed with bows : the former chiefly employed in 
harassing the enemy with missiles, and in evolu- 
tions requiring rapidity of movement ; the latter 
called upon to break through opposing masses of 
infantry, after having galled them during their 
advance with a heavy shower of arrows ; and in 
order to enable them to charge with greater security 
they were furnished with a shield, which was not 
required for the other mounted archers, and a long 
spear was substituted on these occasions fol* the 

* It may be seen in the Britbh Museum. Fide also wood-cut» 
No. 56. 


CHAP. III. SIEGES. 369 

missiles they had previously employed. The light- 
armed chariot corps were also supplied with wea- 
pons adapted to close combat, as the sword, club, 
and javelin ; but they had neither the spear nor 
shidd ; and indeed this last was confined to cer- 
tain corps, even of infantry, as the spearmen and 
others, already mentioned. But the heavy foot, 
and light troops employed in the assault of fortified 
towns, were all provided with shields, under cover 
of which they made approaches to the place ; and 
so closely was the idea of a siege connected with 
this arm*, that a figure of the king, who is some- 
times introduced in the sculptures, as the repre- 
sentative of the whole army, advancing with his 
shield before him, is intended to show that the 
place was taken by assault. 

SIEGES. 

In attacking a fortified town, they advanced 
under cover of the arrows of the bowmen ; and 
either instantly applied the scaling ladder to the 
ramparts, or undertook the routine of a regular 
siege : in which case, having advanced to the walls, 
they posted themselves under cover of testudos, 
and shook and dislodged the stones of the parapet 
with a species of battering ramt, directed and 
impelled by a body of men expressly chosen 
for this service : but when the place held out 
against these attacks, and neither a coup de main^ 

* Conf. 2 Kings, xix. 32. <* Nor come before it (the city) with 
shield, nor cast a bank against it." Isaiah, xxxvii. 33. 
f See wood-cut, No. 60. 

A A 4 


CHAP, III. USE OF THE TESTUDO. 361 

the ladder, nor the ram, were found to succeed, they 
probably used the testudo for concealing and pro- 
tecting the sappers, while they mined the place* ; 
and certainly, of all people, the Egyptians were the 
most likely to have recourse to this stratagem of 
war, from the great practice they had in under- 
ground excavations, and in directing shafts through 
the solid rock. 

The testudo was of frame-^work, sometimes sup- 
ported by poles having a forked summit, and 
covered, in all probability, with hides ; it was suffi- 
ciently large to contain several men, and so placed 
that the light troops might mount upon the out- 
side, and thus obtain a footing on more elevated 
ground, apply the ladders with greater precision, or 
obtain some other important advantage ; and each 
party was commanded by an officer of skill, and 
frequently by those of the first rank.t 

The rpuTravov or pike of the testudo arietaria of 
the Greeks and Romans, and the covering or vinea 
which protected the men while they worked the 
battering-ram, were nearly on the same principle, 
and the Greeks most probably borrowed theirs 
originally from Egypt. 

They also endeavoured to force open the gates 
of the town, or hew them down with axes ; and 
when the fort was built upon a rock, they escaladed 
the precipitous part by means of the testudo, or by 

* The testudo ad fodiendum of Vitruvius, which, he says^ the 
Greeks call opvl^ opvycc Lib. x. c. 21. There was another, quae ad 
congestionem fossarum paratur. Lib. x. c. 20. Vide Egypt and Thebes,. 
p. 235. note f , and supruy p. 67. 

f Wood-cut, No. 61. Four of the king's sons command the four 
testudos, a, 6, c, d, 

VOL. I. * A A 5 


THE ANCIENT ECTPTIANS. 


AHUilt oT ■ lot. The t 


short spikes of metal, which they forced into the 
crevices of the stone *, and then applied the ladder 
to the ramparts. 

' rufcwood-cut. No.ei,^. 5. 


CHAP. III. WARLIKE ENGINES. 363 

It is reasonable to conclude that several other 
engines were employed in sieges with which the 
sculptures * have not made us acquainted ; and the 
bulwarks used by the Jewst, on thqir march to 
the promised land, were doubtless borrowed 'from 
those of Egypt, where they had lived until they 
became a nation, and from whence they derived 
the greater part of their knowledge upon every sub- 
ject. These bulwarks being only constructed in 
the case of a siege, appear to have been similar to 
some of the mounds or towers employed by the 
Greeks in later times : they were of wood, and 
made on the spot during the siege, the trees of 
the neighbouring country being cut down for the 
purpose : but the Jews deemed it unlawful to 
fell a fruit tree for the construction of warlike 
engines, nor were they permitted to use any other 
than those which grew wild, or in an uncultivated 
spot, t 

Besides bulwarks or moveable towers, we may 
also suppose the Eg3rptians adopted destructive 
missiles, for burning the houses and works of 
the besieged, like the fire-balls, ^t>go^oXol Xifloi, of 
the Greeks, or the erxaraXaia, wooden staves, armed 
with an iron point, and carrying with them lighted 
fire-brands ; and the same mode of protecting their 
own works, from the assaults of the besieged, was 
probably resorted to by the Egjqptians as by that 
people. 

* The scaling ladder is most frequently represented, ritnd seems to 
have been very generally used. 
+ Deut. XX. 20. 
j: " For the tree of the field is man's life." Deut. xx. 19. 


S64f THfi ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

The northern and eastern tribes, against whom 
the Egyptuins fought, were armed in many instances 
with the same weapons as the disciplined troops of 
the Pharaohs, as bows and spears ; they had besides 
long' swords, rude massive clubs, and knives ; and 
their coats of mail, helmets, and shields, varied in 
form, according to the custom of each nation. They 
also used stones, which were thrown with the hand, 
while defending the walls of a besieged town ; but 
it does not appear that either the Egyptians or their 
enemies threw them on any other occasions, except 
with a sling. Indeed we seldom find any people 
armed with stones, except those who have not yet 
advanced beyond their infancy in the art of war * ; 
and the same remark applies to the Greeks, during 
the siege of Troy, some of whom are introduced by 
Homer, fighting with these rude weapons, — an era, 
when Grecian manners, and military tactics, were 
only beginning to emerge from a state of primitive 
simplicity. 

THE ENEMIES WITH WHOM THEY FOUGHT. 

The most distinguishing peculiarities of some of 
the nations at war with the Egyptians, were the 

* Horace says, Sat. i. 3. 101. :-^ 

** Unguibus, et pugnis, dein fustibus .... 
Pugnabant ; " 

and Lucretius mentions the hands, nails, teeth, stones, and branches of 
trees, as the earliest weapons : — 

** Arma antiqua, manus, ungues, dentesque fuerunt, 
£t lapides, et item sylvarum fragmina rami. 

Posterius ferri vis est, srisque reperta, 

Sed prior sris erat qoam ferri cognitus usus." Lib. v. ver* 1283. 


ENEMIBS OF THE EGYPTIANS. 


forms of the head-dress and shield. One of these, 
the Shairetana, a people inhabiting a maritime 


366 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

country of Asia *, wore a helmet ornamented with 
homSy projecting from its circular summit, and 
frequently surmounted by a crest, consisting of a 
ball raised upon a small shaft, which, as I have 
before observed t, is remarkable, from being the 
earliest instance of a crest, and bears testimony to 
the accuracy of Herodotus in ascribing to it an 
Asiatic origin. He mentions it as an invention of 
the Carians, from whom it was borrowed by the 
Greeks, together with the custom of introducing cer- 
tain figures upon the exterior, and of fixing handles 
to the interior, of the shield ; " for previously those 
who were in the habit of using shields carried them 
without handles, supporting them by means of 
leather thongs, which passed over the neck and 
the left shoulder." t 

The Shairetana were also distinguished by a 
round shield §, and the use of long spears and 
javelins, with a pointed sword ; they were clad in 
a short dress, and frequently had a coat of mail, or 
rather a cuirass, composed of broad metal plates 
overlaying each other, adapted to the form of the 
body, and secured at the waist by a girdle. Some 
allowed their beards to grow ; and they very gene- 
rally adopted a custom, common to most early 
nations, of wearing large ear-rings. || 

* Or a country situated near some large piece of water, as a lake : 
those who lived near a river had not the same distinction, as the Sheta. 

t Vide supra, p. 331. 

i Fk/e Herod, i. 171. 

} The Oreeks had usually round shields ; this kind was called a<rxic, 
the clypeus of the Romans. They also used the Amazonian buckler, 
or ircXrif : the Theban buckler : and an oblong concave shield, ^vpco^, 
the scutum of the Romans. 

II Vide wood-cut. No. 62.J!g, \.a,b. 


CHAP. III. ASIATIC NATIONS. 367 

Their features were usually large, the nose 
prominent and aquiline ; and in their complexion 
as well as their hair, they were of a far lighter hue 
than the Egyptians. At one time they were the 
enemies, at another the allies*, of the Pharaohs; 
and the duration of their friendship and subsequent 
rupture with the Eg3rptians, I have already alluded 
to t, and shall have occasion again to notice. 

The Tokkari wore a helmet in form and appear- 
ance very similar to those represented in the sculp- 
tures of Persepolis, some of which have been 


No. as. Persian head-dress (firom Sir R. Ker Porter). 

brought to England, and are now in the British 
Museum, t It appears to have been made of a kind 
of cloth, marked with coloured stripes § ; the rim 
adorned with a row of large beads or other oma* 
mental devices, and it was secured by a thong 
or riband tied below the chin. They had also a 
round shield and short dress, frequently with a 

Vide wood-cut, No. 61.^^. 5. and 6. 

Pages 68. and 84. 

Vidi wood-cuts, No. 63. and 64., andy^#. 1. and 7. 

Vide wood-cut, No. 62. Jig. 2. a, b. 


CHAP. MI. ASIATIC NATIONS. — THE TOKKARI. SOf) 

coat of a^our dinilar to that of their neighbours, 
the Shairetana ; !md their offensive weapons con> 
sisted principally of a spear, and a large pointed 
knife, or straight sword. They sometime, though 
rarely, had a beard, which was still more unusual 
with the chiefs : their features were regular, the 
nose slightly aquiline ; and whenever the Egyptifui 
artists have represented them on a large scale, 
their &ce presents a more pleaang outline than 
the generality of these Asiatic people. They 
fought, like the Egyptians, in chariots ; and had 
carts or waggons, with two solid wheels similar to 
the tympana of the Romans, drawn by a pair of 
oxen, which appear to have been placed in the 


rear, as in the Scythian and Tartar armies. This 
circumstance, and that of their women carrying 
off the children in these carts at the moment of a 
defeat, might lead us to infer them to have been a 
roving people, who did not live in towns ; which 
is still farther argued by their taking refuge, when 
routed by RemesesIII., in the ships of theirneigh- 
bours, the Shairetana, above mentioned ; but their 

VOL. I. B B 


370 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

civilised appearance argue9 against this opinion. 
They were also at one time allies of the Pharaohs* 
and assisted them in their long wars against the 
Rebo. 

Another people, whose name is lost *, were dis- 
tinguished by a costume of a very oriental cha* 
racter, consisting of a high fur cap, not unlike 
one worn by the ancient Persians, and that of the 
modem Tartars and Dellee Turks ; a tight dress, 
with the usual girdle ; and a short kelt, common to 
many Asiatic nations, which, apparently divided, 
and folding over in front, was tied at the bottom 
with strings. Round their neck, and falling upon 
the breast, was a large round amulet t, very similar 
to those of agate worn by the dervishes of the east, 
in which they resembled the Assyrian captives of 
Tirhakah, represented on the walls of Medeenet 
Haboo.t Their features were remarkable; and 
though in the sculptures they occasionally vary in 
appearance, from the presence or the absence of a 
beard, the strongly defined contour of the face and 
the high bridge of their prominent nose sufficiently 
distinguish them from other people, and show that 
the artist has intended to convey a notion of these 
peculiar characteristics. 

Their arms consisted of two javelins, a club, and 
falchion, and a shield like that of the Egyptians, 
with a round summit. They were on terms of friend- 
ship with the third Remeses, and assisted him in 

• It begins with the letters Sha .... W^ wood-cut. No. 62. ^j^, 3. 

J Fide wood-cut. No. 62. Jig, 3. «. 
Vide wood-cuty No. 66. J^, k 


CHAP. Ill, THE REBO, A POWERFUL PEOPLE, 371 

his wars against the Kebo ; and though they occur 
among the foreigners who had been conquered by 
the arms of Egypt, the same feeling of inveterate 
enmity, resulting from a repeated succession of con- 
flicts, did not exist towards them as towards many 
other Asiatic tribes. The same remark applies to 
another people, represented at Medeenet Haboo*, 
as allies of the Egyptians, whose name has been 
unfortunately lost : they were clad in a short tight 
dress, and carried a shield, like the former, with a 
bow and a heavy club ; but of their features we 
have little or no knowledge, owing to the imperfect 
state of the sculptures. 

One of the most formidable Asiatic enemies en- 
countered by the Egyptians were the Rebot, — a 
fact attested by the frequent representations of 
severe contests ; the large masses of troops they 
brought into the field ; the great duration of a war 
which, commencing at a very remote era, con- 
tinued long after the accession of the nineteenth 
dynasty; and by their having been selected in 
the Egyptian paintings t as the type of Asia, or 
the representation, par excellence^ of the nations 
of the East. 

One of the principal military events in the 
glorious reign of the great Remeses was his suc- 
cess against these powerful enemies ; and three 
victories over the Rebo, won with great slaughter, 
by Remeses III. about a century later, added afar 

♦ Vide the allies, in wood-cut, No. 1 l.^g. 3. 
+ Vide wood-cut. No. 62. /g. 4. 

\ As in the procession of figures — emblematic of the four quarters of 
the world, north, east, south, and west — in Belzoni*s tomb. 

B B ^2 


372 THE ANCIENT f^GYPTlANS. CHAP. 111. 

brighter lustre to his name, than the numerous 
defeats of other Asiatic people, though they en- 
riched him with immense booty, and considerably 
increased the extent of the Egyptian conquests. 
In these encounters several thousand of the enemy 
were killed, as reported in the Egyptian returns ; 
and die obstinacy of the fight, and the firm resist- 
ance they opposed to the highly disciplined and 
numerous forces of their antagonists, distinctly 
prove them to have been a nation both powerful 
and skilled in the art of war. They were defeated, 
but not conquered ; nor would any portion of 
them submit to be<!ome allies of the Egyptians: 
and from the long duration of the war, the repeated 
attempts made by the Pharaohs to subjugate their 
country, their marked hatred of them, and their 
eagerness to commemorate each victory, we may 
conclude the Egyptians had also suffered during 
these campaigns; and though, as might be ex- 
pected, the sculptured history in the Theban tem- 
ples merely relates the victories of the Pharaohs, 
the Rebo themselves had probably reason to record 
their own successful resistance, and sometimes even 
the defeat of the invaders. 

From the style of their costume, and the lightness 
of their complexion, it is evident they inhabited a 
northern * as well as an Asiatic country, very dis- 

* Besides colour, we have always a distinguishing mark in the termin- 
ation of the bands that secure the prisoners ; which have an entire edged 
flower, supposed to be the papyrus, to denote those nations living to the 
north of Egypt, and the three-leaved flower of another water plant, to 
point out the African or southern tribes, as may be seen in tne wood- 
cut. No. 69.^. 6. of the Asmaor, and^. 10. of a black captive from 


CHAP. III. DRESS OF THE REBO. S'JS 

tant from Egypt, and of a far more temperate 
climate. Their dress consisted of an under gar- 
ment, with the usual short kelt, and a long outer 
robe, highly coloured, and frequently ornamented 
with fancy devices, or a broad rich border, which 
descended to the ankles, and was fastened at 
the neck with a large bow, or by a strap over 
the shoulder, the lower part being open in front. 
It was not boiind by a girdle: this was worn 
beneath it; though the Egyptian artists occasion- 
ally represent it as if worn above, or seen through 
the transparent robe : but the substance of the 
latter was generally too thick to admit of this, being 
sometimes of bulls' hide or leather, and sometimes 
of a woollen stuff. Their girdle was highly orna- 
mented, and the extremity falling down in front 
terminated in a large tassel * ; and so fond were 
•they of decorating their persons, that besides ear- 
rings, necklaces, and trinkets, common to Asiatic 
and other tribes, the chiefs decked their heads 
with feathers, and some painted or tattooed their 
arms and legs. 

If the costumes of several foreign nations met 
with in the Egyptian sculptures call to mind those 
of Persia and Parthia, none perhaps resemble them 
more than that of the Rebo, or of the Rot-n-no, 
whom I shall presently describe. The hair of the 
Rebo was not less singular than their dress : it was 


Africar These two plants, in like manner, are chosen as emblems of 
the lower or northern, and upper or southern, divisions of Egypt. 
* Very like that of a Persepolitan figure in wood-cut. No. 64. Jig, 3. 

B B 3 


374 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. 111. 

divided into separate parts, one of which fell in 
ringlets over the forehead, and the other over the 
back of the head ; and a plaited lock of great 
length, passing nearly over the ear, descended to 
the breast, and terminated in a curled point. In 
feature they were as remarkable as in costume; 
and the Egyptians have not fiuled to indicate their 
most striking peculiarities, as blue eyes, aquiline 
-nose, and small red beards. Their arms consisted 
principally of the bow, and a long straight sword 
with an exceedingly sharp point ; and it is probable 
that to their skill in the use of the former we may 
attribute their effectual resistance to the repeated 
invasions of the Egyptians. 

Another Eastern nation, with whom the Egyp- 
tians were already at war in the remote age of 
Amun-m-gori II. *, or about 1680 years before our 
era, was the Pountt ; who were subsequently com«> 
pelled to pay tribute to Egypt in the reign of the 
third Thothmes. Proud of their liberty, they 
neglected no opportunity to throw off the yoke, 
and the records of the repeated invasion of their 
country by successive Pharaohs prove their inde- 
pendent spirit, and their courage in expelling the 
invaders. 

Their features were less marked than those of 
many Oriental people represented in the sculp- 
tures: they shaved their beards, and wore their 
hair enveloped in a large cap, bound with a fillet^ 

* Mentioned on a stone found by Mr. Butron in the desert of the 
Red Sea ; where I met with the small temple and station of Wadee 
Gasoos, mentioned in my Egypt and Thebes, p. 364. 

f Or, Pouont. Vide wood-cut. No. 62.^^5. 


CHAP. in. THE FOUNT AND SHARI. 375 

like many of the tribes of the interior, and the 
SyriaQs who bordered upon Egypt Their dres3 
consisted chiefly of a short kelt, secured with the 
usual girdle : and though of a lighter hue than the 
Egyptians, the^r appear to have inhabited a region 
lying more to the south than the Rot-n-no or the 
Koofa, who were also tributary at the same period 
to Thothmes III. Among the presents brought 
by them to the Egyptian monarch were the ibex, 
leopard*, baboon, ape, ostrich eggs and feathers, 
dried fruits and skins ; and exotic shrubs, with 
ebony and ivory, seem to prove that they lived in a 
cultivated country as well as a warm climatct 

The Sharil: were another Eastern or Northern 
people, against whom the Egyptians waged a suc- 
cessful war, principally in the reigns of Osirei and 
his son, the great Remeses ; and I am inclined to 
think them either an Assyrian tribe, or the inhabit- 
ants of some part of Arabia* The former appears 
more probable, though the fact of the Arabian 
Gulf having been called by the Egyptians the Sea 
of Shari may argue in favour of the latter. Their 
features were marked by a prominent aquiline nose 
and high cheek bones : they had a large beard ; 
and their head-dress consisted either of a cap 
bound, like that of the Fount, with a fillet, or a 
skull-cap fitting loosely to the head, secured by a 

* Very like the hunting leopard of India, or felis jubata. 

+ Vide upper line of figures in plate 4. 

^ M. Champollion was mistaken in supposing them the Bishari, who 
inhabit the deserts of Nubia, as I have already observed in my Egypt 
and Thebes, p. 484. I mention this again, because the respectable 
name of a person like M. Champollion is likely to perpetuate an error 
wiiich can only have been accidental. 

B B 4 


S76 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. Ill, 

band, and terminating at the end, which fell down 
behind, in a ball or tassel.* Their dress con- 
sisted of a long loose robe reaching to the ankks, 
and listened at the waist by a girdle, the upper 
part furnished with ample sleeves. #The girdle was 
sometimes highly ornamented: men as well as 
women wore ear-rings ; and they frequently had a 
small cross suspended to a necklace, or to the 
collar of their dress. The adoption of this last 
was not peculiar to them ; it was also appended to, 
or figured upon, the robes of the Rot-fi-no ; and 
traces of it may be seen in the fancy ornaments of 
the Rebo, showing that it was already in use as 
early as the 15th century before the Christian enu 

Their principal arms were the bow, spear, two 
javelins, and a sword or club ; and their country 
was defended by several strongly fortified towns. 
But no want of courage prevented their resisting 
the Egyptian invaders in the open field ; and it was 
only afler severe struggles that they retired to those 
strong-holds, which were bravely, though^unsuc- 
cessfully, defended. Some wore a sort of double 
belt, crossing the body and passing over each 
shoulder, and this, together with the pointed cap, 
so much resembling the dress of Tirhaka's cap- 
tives t» cannot fail to remind us of the Syrians or 
Assyrians, whose name bears a strong analogy to 
the one before us. 

The Rot-h-no t, supposed by M. Champollion to 

* Vide wood-cut. No. 68. fig. 6. c. 

t Vide wood-cut, No. 66. The same may be observed in the Per- 
sian figures of the beautiful tesselated pavement lately discovered at 
Pompeii. 

t Vide wood-cut. No. 62. Jig. 7. 


CHAP, III. THE ROT-N-NO. THEIR COSTUME. 377 


No. 66. 


1 S 

Friaoners of Tirhaka. 


Thebes. 


be Lydians *, were a nation with whom the Egyp- 
tians waged a long war, commencing at least as 
early as, and perhaps prior to, the reign of the third 
Thothmes. Their white complexion, tight dresses, 
and long gloves t, decide them to have been natives 
of a much colder climate than Eg}^pt or Syria ; and 
the productions of their country, which they bring 
as a tribute to the victorious Pharaoh, pronounce 
them to have lived in the East. These consist of 
horses, and even chariots, with four spoked wheels tf 

* It is difficult to decide upon the real naraes of these people, 
unacquainted as we are with the ancient geography of Asia ; and the 
indiscriminate use of L for R and D for T, and other letters, in hiero- 
glyphics, increases the uncertainty. Until I can fix the name from 
theur position, or any other reason, I repeat the one I had previously 
adopted. 

f Vide plate 4. There are other instances of gloves in Egyptian 
sculptures; but they are very rare. The expression shoe, in Ruth, 
iv. 7., is in the Targum ** right-hand glove.*' 

% Vide suprdf wood-cut. No. 53. b. The Egyptian town curricle had 
four spokes ; the war-c^ six. 


378 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

very similar to the Egyptian curricle, rare woods, 
ivory, elephants and bears, a profusion of elegant 
gold and silver vases, with rings of the same pre- 
cious metals, porcelain, and jars filled with choice 
gums and resins used for making incense, of which 
a greater quantity was derived from their country 
than from any other tributary to Egypt. Their fea- 
tures were regular, without the very prominent nose 
that characterises some Eastern people represented 
in the sculptures ; and they were of a very light 
colour, with brown or red hair, and blue eyes. 
Their long dress, usually furnished with tight 
sleeves *, and fastened by strings round the neck, 
either closed or folded over in front, and was some- 
times secured by a girdle. Beneath the outer 
robe they wore a kelt : and an ample cloak, pro- 
bably woollen like the modem herdmj or blanket, 
of the coast of Barbary, was thrown over the whole 
dress t : the head being generally covered with a 
close cap, or a fuller one bound with a fillet. 

The women wore a long garment secured with a 
girdle, and trimmed in the lower part with three 
rows of flounces; the sleeves sometimes large and 
open, sometimes fastened tight round the wrist : 
and the hair was either covered with a cap, to which 
a long tassel was appended, or descending in ring- 
lets was encircled with a simple band, t 

The Toersha §, a maritime people, are also men- 
tioned among the enemies of Egypt; and their close 

* A dress with sleeves is seen in wood-cut. No. 64.^g. 6. 
+ Vide wood-cut, No. 72., and No. 62. Jig. 7. d. 
X Vide woodcut. No. 72., and No. 62.^. 7. e. 
§ Vide wood-cut, No.67.j%. I. 


CHAP. III# 


THE MASHOASH AND KUFA. 


379 


cap, from whose pointed summit a crest of hair 
falls to the back of the neck, readily distinguishes 
them from other Eastern tribes. Their features 
offer no peculiarity; and we have not sufficient 
data from the sculptures to form any opinion re- 
specting their wars with the Egjrptians, though 
they are introduced among the tribes conquered 
by the third Remeses. The same applies to the 
Mashoash*, another Asiatic nation : who resemble 
the former in their general features, and the 
shape of their beards; but their head*dress is 
low, and rather more like that of Tirhaka's pri- 
soners, already mentioned t, descending in two 
points at the side and back of the head* and bound 
with a fiUeb 


No. 67. 


Other cnemiei of the EgyiAiaiia. 


Thebe$, 


The people of Kufa appear to have inhabited a 
part of Asia lying considerably north of the latitude 
of Palestine ; and their long hair, rich dresses, and 
sandals of the most varied form and colour, render 
them remarkable among the nations represented in 
Egyptian sculpture, t In complexion they were 
much darker than the Rot-h-no, but far more fair 

« Vide wood-cut. No. 67. Jig. 2. 

f Fide wood-cut. No. 66. 

1^ Vide plate 4,^ second line from the top. 


S80 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

than the Egyptians ; and to judge from the tribute 
they brought to the Pharaohs, they were a rich 
people, and, like the Rot-ii-no, far advanced in the 
arts and customs of civilised life. This tribute, 
which is shown to have been paid to the Egyptians 
as early as the reign of Thotbmes III., consisted 
almost entirely of gold and silver, in rings and bars, 
and vases of the same metals. Many of the latter 
were silver, inlaid with gold, tastefully ornamented, 
of elegant form, and similar to many already in use 
among the Egjrptians; and from the almost ex- 
clusive introduction of the precious metals, and 
the absence of animals, woods, and such produc- 
tions as were brought to Egypt by other people, 
we may suppose the artist intended to convey a 
notion of the great mineral riches of their country : 
and they are occasionally represented carrying 
knives or daggers, beads, a small quantity of ivory, 
leathern bottles, and a few bronze and porcelain 
cups. Their dress was a simple kelt, richly worked 
and of varied colour, folding over in front, and 
fastened with a girdle; and their sandals, which, 
being closed like boots, differed entirely from those 
of the Egyptians, appear to have been of cloth or 
leather, highly ornamented, and reaching consider- 
ably above the ankle. Their long hair hung loosely 
in tresses, reaching more than half way down the 
back ; and from the top of the head projected three 
or four curls, either of real or artificial hair. 

The Kheta or Sheta* were a warlike people 

* Kheta, Sheta, Getae, or Skeetlue ((ricvOai), Scythians, are the 
same name. Kh and Sh were sometimes used synonymously by the 
Egyptians. 


CtiAP. Ill* THE SHETA. 381 

of Asia, who had made considerable progress in 
military tactics, both with regard to manoeuvres in 
the field, and the art of fortifying towns, some of 
which they surrounded with a double fosse. It is 
worthy of remark, that in these cases the approach 
to the place led over a bridge; and the sculptures 
acquainting us with the fact are highly interesting, 
as they offer the earliest indication of its use, having 
been executed in the reign of the great l^emeses, 
about 1 350 years before our era. But whether the 
bridges were supported on arches, or simply of 
wooden rafters resting on piers of the same 
materials, we are unable to decide, since the view 
is given as seen from above, and is therefore con- 
fined to the level upper surface.* Their troops 
appear to have been disciplined; and the close 
array of their phalanxes of infantry, the style of 
their chariots, and the arms they used, indicate 
a great superiority in military tactics, compared 
with other Eastern nations of that early- period. 
The wars waged against the Sheta by the Egyp- 
tians, and the victories obtained over them by the 
great Remeses, are pictured on the walls of his 
palace at Thebes t, and are again alluded to in the 
sculptures of Remeses III., at Medeenet Haboo, 
where this people occurs in the list of nations 
conquered by the Pharaohs. Their arms were 
the bow, sword, and spear; and their principal 
defence was a wicker shield, either rectangular or 


• Wood-cut, No. 68. figs, 2 and 3. 
f Usually called the Memnonium. 


THE AKCIBHT EGYPTIANS. 


.with thcAxtJItcclto 


concave at the sides, and convex at each end, ap- 
proaching in form the Theban buckler. 

Their dress consisted of a long robe, reaching 
to the ankles, with short sleeves, open, or folding 
over in front, and secured by a girdle round the 
waist ; but though frequently made of a very thick 
stuff, and perhaps even quilted, it was by no means 


CHAP. III. THE SHETA. THEIR ARMY. 383 

an effectual substitute for armour, nor could it 
resist the spear or the metal-pointed arrow. They 
either wore a close or a full cap ; and their arms 
were occasionally decked with bracelets, as their 
dresses with brilliant colours. Their cars were 
drawn by two horses, like those of Egypt, but 
they each contained three men, and some had 
wheels with four instead of six spokes ; in both 
which respects they differed from those of their 
opponents. They had some cavalry : but large 
masses of infantry, with a formidable body of 
chariots, constituted the principal force of their 
numerous and well appointed army ; and if, from 
the manner in which they posted their corps de 
reserve^ we may infer them to have been a people 
skilled in war, some idea may also be formed of the 
strength of their army from the numbers compos- 
ing that division, which amounted to 24,000 men *, 
drawn up in three close phalanxes, consisting each 
of 8000. 

The nation of Sheta seems to have been composed 
of two distinct tribes t, both comprehended under 
the same name, uniting in one common cause, and 
probably subject to the same government. They 
differed in their costume and general appearance ; 
one having a large cap, and the long loose robe, 
with open sleeves or capes covering the shoulders, 
worn by many Asiatic people already mentioned, 
a square or oblong shield tj and sometimes a 


At the Memnoniuin. Vide my Egypt and Thebes, p. 19. 
Vide wood-cut. No. 69. Jigt, 2, 3, 4, and 5. 

The Persian shield was square or oblong, or of the form of a dia- 
mond, called yeppov by the Greeks. Strabo, xv. 


I 


384 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. Ilf. 

large beard; the other the dress and shield be* 
fore described, and no beard. They both fought 
in cars and used the same weapons; and we even 
find they lived together, or garrisoned the same 
towns. 

Whether or no they were Scythians, or a nation 
inhabiting the banks of the Euphrates, I do not yet 
pretend to decide : the name strongly argues in 
fitvour of the former opinion, which is that of the 
much regretted ChampoUion ; and if any confirm- 
ation can be obtained from the sculptures of the 
accounts given by Herodotus, Diodorus, Tacitus, 
and other historians, relating to the march of Ses- 
ostris or Rhamses *, it is certainly to be looked 
for in those of the second and third Remeses ; and 
the possibility of such extended conquests is not 
inconsistent with the known power and resources 
of ancient Egypt 

Several other nations and tribes, who inhabited 
parts of Asia, are shown by the monuments f to 
have been invaded and reduced to subjection by 
the arms of the Pharaohs ; and in the names of 
somet we recognise towns or districts of Syria, 
as in Asmaori, Lemanon §, Kanana, and Ascalon. 

* Vide my Egypt and Thebes, p. 22., and the Introduction. Taci- 
tus says, the E^ptians ** over-ran all Libya and Ethiopia, and subdued 
the Medes and Fersians, the Bactrians and Scythians, with the exten- 
sive regions inhabited by the Syrians, the Armenians, and the Cappado- 
cians ; and by this conquest a tract of country, extending from Bitnynia 
on the Pontic Sea, to the coast of Lycia on the Mediterranean, was 
reduced to subjection." Ann. ii. 60. 

Vide wood-cut. No. 69. opposite page. 

Vide wood-cut. No. 69, ^gs. 6, 7, and 8. 

I have noticed the frequent use of M for B in Coptic and other 
languages. Vide Egypt and Thebes, p. 192. note 3. 


386 TH£ ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. 111. 

The inhabitants of the two first are figured with a 
round full head-dress, bound with a fillet: and 
those of Kanana are distinguished by a coat of mail 
and helmet, and the use of spears, javelins, and 
a battle-axe similar to that of Egypt.* 

Thus we find that the Theban sculptors inten- 
tionally maintained a marked difference in the 
arms and costume peculiar to many of these people, 
though the same attention was not always extended 
to their faces. They were frequently conven- 
tional; a certain general style being adopted for 
Eastern nations t, another for those of the Norths a 
third for the Ethiopians, and a fourth for the 
Blacks of the interior of AfKca ; and accuracy in 
portraying the features was dispensed with, except 
in the larger and more detailed sculptures, or when 
any remarkable difference was observable, as in the 
prominent nose of one of their allies, t 

Some are clad in loose, others in tight dresses, 
some have shields of a square, others of an oblong, 
round, or other form, which are merely held by a 
single handle in the centre, like those now used by 
the Ababdeh and modem Ethiopians. 

The country of Lemanon is shown by the artist 
to have been mountainous, inaccessible to chariots, 
and abounding in lofly trees, which the afiiighted 
mountaineers are engaged in felling, in order to im- 
pede the advance of the invading army. Having 
taken by assault the fortified towns on the frontier, 

* Wood-cut, No. 69.^. 8. In Joshua, xvii. 16. The Canaanites 
are said to '* have chariots of iron.'* 

-t- They are sometimes represented tattooed or branded. The 
Assyrians had this custom. 

J Vide wood-cut. No. 1 1. Jig. 2., and wood-cut. No. 62. Jig, 3. 


CHAP. III. BLACK NATIONS THEY SUBDUED. 387 

the Egyptian monarch advances with the light in- 
fantry in pursuit of the fugitives, who had escaped, 
and taken refuge in the woods; and sending a 
herald to offer terms on condition of their sur- 
render, the chiefs are induced to trust to his 
clemency, and return to their allegiance; as are 
those of Kanana, whose strong-holds yield in like 
manner to the arms of the conqueror. 

That these two names point out the inhabitants 
of Mount Lebanon and Canaan is highly probable, 
sitice the campaign is said to have taken place in 
the first year, or soon after the accession, of Osirei, 
the father of the great Remeses ; and the events 
which previously occurred in Egypt, during the 
reign of Amunoph III., and the unwarlike cha- 
racter of his two successors, may have given an op- 
portunity to these people, though so near Egypt, 
to rebel, and assert their independence. 

Many black nations were also conquered by 
the early monarchs of the 18th and 19th dynasties, 
as the Toreses, the Taredo, and another whose 
name is lost*, as well as the Cusht, or Ethiopians. 
These last were long at war with the Egyptians ; 
and part of their country, which was reduced at a 
very remote period by the arms of the Pharaohs, 
was obliged to pay an annual tribute to the con- 
querors : but whether the name of Cush was ap- 
plied merely to the lower districts of Ethiopia, or 
comprehended the whole of the southern portion 
of that country, I am unable to determine. 

* Ffcip wood-cut. No. 69. y^. 12. 

f It is the scriptural as well as the hieroglyphical name. Wood- 
cut, No. 69.^. 13. a, by c, and d, 

c c 2 


388 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

The Blacks, like the Ethiopians, wore short 
aprons of bulls' hides, or the skins of wild beasts, 
frequently drawn by the Egyptian artists with the 
tail projecting from the girdle, for the purpose 
of adding to their grotesque appearance by this 
equivocal addition: the chiefs, decked with os- 
trich and other feathers, had large circular gold 
ear-rings, collars, and bracelets ; and many of the 
Ethiopian grandees were clad in garments of fine 
linen, with leathern girdles highly ornamented, a 
leopard skin being occasionally thrown over the 
shoulder. * It is reasonable to suppose that the linen 
was purchased from the Egyptians, whose conquests 
in the country would naturally lead to its introduc- 
tion among them; and this is rendered more 
probable, from its transparent fineness being re- 
presented in the same manner as in the dresses of 
the Egyptians, and from its being confined to the 
chiefs as an article of value, indicative of their rank. 

The Ethiopian tribute consisted of gold and 
silver, precious stones, ostrich feathers, skins, 
ebony, ivory, apes, oxen of the long-horned breed 
still found in Abyssinia, lions, oryxes, leopards, 
giraffes, and hounds ; and they were obliged to 
supply the victors with slaves, which the Egyptians 
sometimes exacted even from the conquered coun- 
tries of Asia. Their chief arms were the bow, 
spear, and club : they fought mostly on foot, and 
the tactics of a disciplined army appear to have 
been unknown to them. 

* Vide wood-cut, No. 09. Jig, 13. c, d. 


CHAP, III. NATIONS IN ALLIANCE WITH EGYPT. 389 

The names of foreign nations who acted as 
auxiliaries of the Egjrptians I have already no- 
ticed. The first unequivocal mention of these 
alliances* are in the sculptures of the great Re^ 
mesest, where the Shairetana unite with him in 
an expedition against the Sheta. They had been 
previously conquered by the Pharaohs, with whom 
they entered into a treaty, agreeing to furnish 
troops and to assist them in their future wars : and 
firm to their engagements, they continued to main- 
tain a friendly intercourse with the Egyptians for 
a considerable length of time, and joined the army 
of the third Remeses, when, about a century later, 
he marched into Asia, to attack the Tokkari and 
the Rebo. In the war against the Rebo, Remeses 
was assisted by another body of auxiliaries, whose 
high fur cap sufficiently denotes their Oriental 
origin t; and a third tribe, whose name is likewise 
lost, aided the Egyptians in the same campaign. 

It is evident that the Tokkari also united with 
the invaders against the Rebo, and contributed 
to the successes of the third Remeses ; but either 
a portion of their tribe still remained hostile to the 
Egyptians, or some cause of complaint alienated 
their friendship, and we find that the}'^ were soon 
afterwards engaged in war with that monarch. 
Being joined by many of the Shairetana, to whose 
country they fled for refuge after their first defeat; 

* Perh^s we may also trace them in the time of Osirtasen L 

f At the Memnoniiim and Aboosimbel. Vide wood-cut. No. 61. 

Jigs. 5. and 6. 

J Vide wood-cut, No. 1 1 . Jig, 2., the same as Jig. 3. in wood-cut 

No. 62. 

C C 3 


S90 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

and relying on the protection promised them by 
the fleet of that maritime people, they offered 
battle to the Egyptians : but their combined efforts 
were ineffectual ; they were again reduced to sub- 
jection ; and Remeses, loaded with booty and a 
considerable number of captives, returned to Egypt, 
accompanied by the auxiliary legions of those of 
the Shairetana, Tokkari, and the other allies, who 
had remained faithful to him. 


MARCH OF THE EGYPTIAN ARMY. 

When an expedition was resolved. upon against 
a foreign nation, the necessary preparations were 
made throughout the country, each province fur- 
nishing its quotum of men ; and the members of 
the military class were summoned to muster in 
whatever numbers the monarch deemed it neces- 
sary to require. The troops were generally 
commanded by the king in person ; but in some 
instances a general was appointed to that post, 
and intrusted with the sole conduct of the war.* 
A place of rendezvous was fixed, in early times 
generally at Thebes, Memphis, or Pelusium ; and 
the troops having assembled in the vicinity, re- 
mained encamped there, awaiting the leader of the 
expedition. As soon as he arrived, the neces- 
sary preparations were made ; and orders having 
been issued for their march, a signal was given by 
sound of trumpet ; the troops fell in, and with a 

* This was the case when the army was sent by Apries against the 
Cyrencans. Herod, ii. 161. 


CHAP. III. MARCH OF THE AEMY. 391 

profound bow each soldier in the ranks siduted 
the royal general, and acknowledged his readi- 
ness to receive his orders, and to follow him to 
the field. The march then commenced* j the 
chariots led the van ; and the king, mounted in 
iiis car of war, and attended by his chief ofBcerst 
carrying fiabella, took his post in the centre, pre- 
ceded and followed by bodies of infantry armed 
with bows, spears, or other weapons, according to 
their respective corps. 

On commencing the attack in the open field, 
a signal was again made by sound of trumpet The 
archers drawn up in line first discharged a shower 


* It is repreienled at Hedeenet Haboo. IT the whole of the 
back port of that temple were cleared, much more might be obtained 
from those interesting sculptures. 

t If he had sons, they held this office, which was considered a very 
honourable post. 

C C 1 


39i THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

of arrows on the enemy's front, and a considerable 
mass of chariots advanced to the charge ; the heavy 
infantry, armed with spears or clubs, and covered 
with their shields, moved forwards at the same time 
in close array, flanked by chariots and cavalry*, 
and pressed upon the centre and wings of the 
enemy, the archers still galling the hostile columns 
with their arrows, and endeavouring to create 
disorder in their ranks, f 

PRISONERS, BOOTY, AND ENCAMPMENTS. 

Their mode of warfare was not like that of na- 
tions in their infancy, or in a state of barbarism ; 
and it is evident, from the number of prisoners 
they took, that they spared the prostrate who 
asked for quarter : and the representations of per- 
sons slaughtered by the Egyptians who have 
overtaken them, are intended to allude to what 
happened in the heat of action, and not to any 
wanton cruelty on the part of the victors. Indeed 
in the naval fight of Remeses Ill.t, the Egyptians, 
both in the ships and on the shore, are seen res- 
cuing the enemy, whose galley has been sunk, from 
a watery grave j and the humanity of that people 
is strongly argued, whose artists deem it a virtue, 
worthy of being recorded among the glorious ac- 
tions of their countrymen. 

* The chariots are represented in this position, the cavalry I sug- 
gest from probability, though not indicated in the sculptures. 
I At Medeenet Haboo, in Thebes. 
At Medeenet Haboo. 


^J 


CHAP. Ill, THEIR CONDUCT IN WAR. SQS 

Those who sued for mercy and laid down their 
arms, were spared and sent bound firom the field ; 
and, as I have already observed, the hands of the 
slain being cut off, and placed in heaps before 
the king, immediately after the action, were counted 
by the military secretaries in his presence, who 
thus ascertained and reported to him the amount 
of the enemy's slain. Sometimes their tongues, 
and occasionally other members, were laid before 
him in the same manner ; in all instances being 
intended as authentic returns of the loss of the 
foe : for which the soldiers received a proportionate 
reward, divided among the whole army : the cap- 
ture of prisoners probably claiming a higher pre- 
mium, exclusively enjoyed by the captor. 

The arms, horses, chariots, and booty, taken in 
the field, or in the camp, were also collected, and the 
same ofiicers wrote an account of them, and pre- 
sented it to the monarch. The booty was some- 
times collected in an open space, surrounded by a 
temporary wall, indicated in the sculptures by 
the representation of shields placed erect, with a 
wicker gate *, on the inner and outer fece of which 
a strong guard was posted, the sentries walking to 
and fro with drawn swords. The subject, from 
which this is taken t, may serve to show their mode 
of encamping; for though, after they had been 
victorious, and no longer feared an attack, the 
strongly fortified camp was unnecessary, its general 

* Vide wood-cut. No. 71., next page. 

f On the N. E. tower of the Memnonium, at Thebes. 


39^ THE ANCIENT EGTrXUNS. CHAP. III. 

form may be hence infeired ; and the only dif- 
ference between this and a permanent station, or 


regular encampment, (the castra stativa of the 
Romans) prol^bly consisted in the latter being 
constructed with greater attention to the principles 
of defence, and furnished with ditches and a strong 
efficient rampart. Judging from those of El Kab, 
Hieracon, and other fortified places in the valley 
of the Nile, distinct from the towns themselves, 
their fixed stations were surrounded by a massive 
and lofty wall of brick, whose broad rampart, 
having a wide staircase, or inclined way, was fur- 
nished with a parapet wall, for the protection of 
the soldiers ; and though, from the nature of the 
ground, or other accidental causes, they were not 


CHAP, in. MODE OF ENCAMPING. 395 

strictly confined to the figure of a square, the 
quadrangular form was always preferred, and no 
histance occurs of a round camp like that of the 
Lacedaemonians. 

It was forbidden to the Spartan soldier, when on 
guard, to have his shield, in order that, being de- 
prived of this defence, he might be more cautious 
not to fall asleep ; and tlie same custom appears to 
have been common also to the Egjrptians, since we 
find the watch on duty at the camp gates are only 
armed with swords and maces, though belonging to 
the heavy-armed corps, who, on other occasions, 
were in the habit of carrying a shield. * 

The field encampment was either a square or 
a parallelogram, with a principal entrance in one 
of the faces ; and near the centre were the general's 
tent, and those of the principal officers. In form, 
it resembled a Roman camp ; but the position of 
the general's tent agreed with the Greek custom 
mentioned by Homert, and difiered from that of 
the Romans, who placed the praetoriumt on the 
side most distant, or least exposed to attack, from 
the enemy. The general's tent was sometimes 
surrounded by a double rampart or fosse, enclosing 

* Vide wood-cut. No. 71. 
f Horn. H. 0, 222. : — 

** Sry i' €ir' 0^w<T<n|oc fityoKfiTtX vrfi fuXaivy 
H p* €V fuoaaTifi c<rjce, ytytavtfuv aftportpwrt" 

" High on the midmott bark the king appeared : 
There, from Ulysses' deck, his voice was heard." 

Pope^ viii. 270. 

X Or general's tent. 


396 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

two distinct areas, the outer one containing thre6 
tents, probably of the next in command, or of the 
officers on the staff; and the guards, like the 
Roman excubias, slept or watched in the open 
air. Other tents were pitched without these en- 
closures ; and near the external circuit, a space 
was set apart for feeding horses and beasts of 
burthen, and another for ranging the chariots and 
baggage. It was probably near the general's tent, 
and within the same area, that the altars of the 
gods, or whatever related to religious matters, the 
standards, and the military chest, were kept ; and 
we find an instance of persons kneeling before cer- 
tain sacred emblems beneath a canopy, within an 
enclosure similar to that where the tent stood. 

To judge from the mode of binding their pri- 
soners, we might suppose they treated them with 
unnecessary harshness and even cruelty, at the 
moment of their capture, and during their march 
with the army ; and the contempt with which 
they looked upon all foreigners, whom they stig- 
matised by the name of impure gentiles, did 
probably lead many of the soldiers to commit acts 
of brutal severity. They tied their hands behind 
their backs, or over their heads, in the most 
strained positions, and a rope passing round their 
neck fastened them to each other ; and some had 
their hands enclosed in an elongated fetter of 
wood *, made of two opposite segments, nailed to- 

* Vide wood-cut. No. 92. at the end of Chap. IV. 


CHAP. III. TREATMENT OF THE CONQUERED. 397 

gether at each end ; such as are still used for 
securing prisoners in Egypt, at the present day. 
In the capture of a town some were beaten with 
sticks*, in order to force from them the secret of 
the booty that had been concealed; many were 
compelled to labour for the benefit of the victors ; 
and others were insulted by the wanton soldiery, 
who pulled their beards and derided their ap- 
pearance. But when we remember how frequently 
instances of harsh treatment have occurred, even 
among civilised Europeans, at an epoch which 
deemed itself much more enlightened than the 
fourteenth century before our era, we are dis- 
posed to excuse the occasional insolence of an 
Egyptian soldier ; and the un&vourable impres- 
sions conveyed by such scenes are more than coun- 
terbalanced by the proofs of Egyptian humanity, as 
in the sea-fight above mentioned. Indeed, I am 
inclined to think the captives bound beneath the 
chariot of the conqueror in his triumph t a licence 
of the sculptors, who, as Gibbon t observes, " in 
every age have felt the truth of a system, which 
derives the sublime from the principle of terror.** 

The custom of dragging behind a chariot the 
murderers of a friend was usual among the Thes- 
salians ; and the early Greeks insulted the dead on 
the field of battle, and mutilated their bodies to 

* This is the usual mode in the East'of eliciting the truth at th^ pre- 
sent day. 
f At Medeenet Haboo and Kamak. 
j: Gibbon, vol. ii. 64. note. 


398 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. III. 

satiate their revenge. But this shameful practice 
was afterwards abandoned; and though the Per- 
sians had treated the body of Leontdas in a bar- 
barous manner, the Spartans refused to retaliate 
the insult on a subsequent occasion, when Mar- 
donius was defeated and slain at Platasa. And if 
Alexander imitated the ungenerous conduct oi 
Achilles, and dragged the body of Bessus behind 
his chariot, it was a singular instance : and, gene- 
rally speaking, none but barbarous nations were 
guilty of similar enormities. I cannot therefore 
suppose that the Egyptians, who surpassed all 
others in the practices of civilised life, were in the 
habit of indulging in wanton cruelty, and much 
less do I believe that the captives represented on 
the fa9ades of their temples, bound at the feet of 
the king, who holds them by the hair of the head, 
and with an uplifted arm appears about to immolate 
them in the presence of the deity, were intended 
to refer to a human sacrifice * : but rather that the 
subject was a religious allegory, purporting to be 
an acknowledgment of the victory he had obtained 
by the assistance of the Deity, — in short, an em- 
blematic record of his successes over the enemies 
of Egypt ; and this is strongly confirmed by the 
fact of our finding the same subject on monuments 
erected by the Ptolemies and Csesars.t 

* Herodotus justly blames the Greeks for their ignorance of the 
Egyptian character, in taking literally their allegorical tales of human 
sacrifices, ii. 45. 

t At E'Dayr, near E'sn^, at Dendera, and other places. 


CHAP, III, TRIUMPHAL RETURN OF THE ARMY. 399 


RETURN, AND TRIUMPH. 

On returning from war, the troops inarched ac- 
cording to the post assigned to each regiment, 
observing the same order and regularity as during 
their advance through the enemy's country: and 
the alHes who came with them occupied a position 
towards the rear of the army, and were followed 
by a strong corps of Egyptians. Rewards were 
afterwards distributed to the soldiers, and the 
triumphant procession of the conqueror was graced 
by the presence of the captives, who were con- 
ducted in bonds beside his chariot. 

On traversing countries tributary to, or in al- 
]iance with, Egypt, the monarch received the 
homage of the friendly inhabitants, who, greet- 
ing his arrival with joyful acclamations and rich 
presents, complimented him on the victory he 
had obtained ; and the army, as it passed through 
Egypt, was met at each of the principal cities by 
a concourse of people, who, headed by the priests, 
and chief men of the place bearing bouquets of 
flowers, green boughs, and palm branches, received 
them with load acclamations, and welcomed their 
return. * Then addressing themselves to the king, 
the priests celebrated his praises ; and, enumerat- 
ing the many benefits he had conferred on Egypt 

* Vide Mr. Burton's Excerpta, plate 36. 


400 THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP* III. 

by the conquest of foreign nations, the enemies 
of his country, they aflSrmed that his power was 
exalted in the world like the sun in the heavens, 
and his beneficence only equalled by that of the 
deities themselves.* 

Having reached the capital, preparations com- 
menced for a general thanksgiving in the principal 
temple : and suitable offerings were made to the 
presiding deity, the guardian of the city, by whose 
special favour and intercession the victory was 
supposed to have been obtained. The prisoners 
were presented to him, as well as the spoils taken 
from the enemy, and the monarch acknowledged 
the manifest power of his all-protecting hand, and 
his own gratitude for so distinguished a proof of 
heavenly favour to him and to the nation. And 
these subjects, represented on the walls of the 
temples, not only served as a record of the victory, 
but tended to impress the people with a religious 
veneration for the Deity, towards whom their sove- 
reign set them so marked an example of respect. 
The troops were also required to attend during 
the performance of the prescribed ceremonies, and 
to return thanks for the victories they had ob- 
tained, as well as for their personal preservation ; 
and a priest offered incense, meat-offerings, and 
libations, in their presence, t Each soldier carried 
in his hand a twig of some tree, probably olive, 

* Conf. Rosetta Stone, where King Ptolemy is compared to Ho- 
rns, the son of Isis and Osiris, and is called a beneficent deity. 

f Such is the sut^ect of a procession I met with at the small 
temple in the Assaseef, at Thebes. 


I.I. 


if 


CHAP. III. RETURNING THANKS TO THE GODS. 401 

ivith the arms of his peculktr corps ; and being 
summoned by sound of trumpet, they marched 
forwards to the temple, to the beat of drum. 

Not only the light infantry, but even the heavy 
armed troops, presented themselves on this occasion 
without shields ; and we may infer from their ab- 
sence, and the substitution of a green branch, em- 
blematic either of peace or victory, that the artist 
intended to convey an idea of the security they felt, 
under the protecting influence of the Deity, to 
whose presence they were summoned. It is difficult 
to decide whether this was a twig of olive, or what 
peculiar tree among the Egjrptians was symbolic o£ 
peace or of victory ; and if the bay tree was cul- 
tivated in Egypt, there is no reason to suppose it 
bore the same emblematic force as in Greece.* 

A judicious remark has been madef respecting 
the choice of the olive as the emblem of peace. 
After the devastation of a country by hostile in- 
vasion, and the consequent neglect of its culture, 
no plantation requires a longer period to restore 
its previously flourishing condition than the olive 
grove ; and this tree may therefore have been ap- 
propriately selected as the representative of peace, t 
There is, however, reason to suppose that its em- 
blematic character did not originate in Greece j 

* I have seen garlands from Thebes apparently of bay leaye3 ; but 
though cultivated there, the tree is not indigenous to Egypt. 

j> By Mr. Bankes. 

^ *' Pacifeneque manu ramum prsetendit olivse." Virg. ^n. viii. 
116. 

VOL. I. D D 


Wi TH£ ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. CHAP. Ill* 

but that it dated from a far more remote period ^ 
and the tranquilHty and halMtable state of the 
earth * were announced to the ark through the 
same token. 

It was not customary for the Egyptian soldier 
to wear arms except on service, when on garri- 
son duty, or in attendance upon the king : nor did 
the private citizen at any time carry offensive 
weapons about his person, either in the house or 
in the street ; and this circumstance, as I have 
ah*eady observed, goes far to prove the advanced 
state of civilisation in that country, at a time when 
the rest of the world was immersed in barbarism. 
In Greece, the Athenians were the first to adopt 
the custom of going out unarmed ; but many years 
elapsed before they were induced to welcome the 
innovation generally ; and it was only finally es- 
tablished as an universal custom by the laws of 
Solon, six hundred years before our era. 

CAPTIVES. 

The captives, being brought to Egypt, were 
employed in the service of the monarch, in build- 

* The Arabs have an amusing legend respecting the dove, or pigeon. 
The first time, it returned wilii the olive branch, but without any indi- 
cation of the state of the earth itself; but on its second visit to the 
ark, the red appearance of its feet proved that the red mud, on which 
it had walked, was already freed from the waters ; and to record the 
event, Noah prayed that the feet of those birds might for ever continue 
of that colour, which marks them to the present day. The similarity 
of the Hebrew words adoom (Dn«), red, admeh (no'tN), earth, and 
Adm (O'lM), Adam, is remarkable. A " man" is stiU called '* Adam" 
iu Turkish. 


k:iw; 


i, f[£ CHAP, ni. CAPTIVES. 403 

s-'.:«!.i' '"S temples*, cutting canals, raising dykes and 
,y,j; embankments, and other public works: and some, 
^. -: who were purchased by the grandees, were em- 

ployed in the same capacity as the Memlooks of 
lai *h^ present day. Women slaves were also en- 
nij; gag^d in the service of families, like the Greeks 
and Circassians in modern Egypt, and other parts 
of the Turkish empire ; and from finding them 
' 1 - represented in the sculptures of Thebes, accom- 

, ■ , panying men of their own nation, who bear tribute 

. . to the Egyptian monarch, we may conclude that 
. ■ a certain number were annually sent to Egypt 

from the conquered provinces of the North and 

»/."* 

03 


East, as well as from Ethiopia.. It is evident that 
both white and black slaves were employed as ser- 

* Herodotus and Diodorus state that the prisoners of Sesostrii 
were- condemned to perrom all the Jaborious part of the works he un- 
dertook onhis return to Egypt- Herod, li. 108. Diod, i. 56. Diodorux 
' ' \s some BabyloniHD captives. 

D D ^ 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAKS. 


vants : they attended on the guests when invited 
to the house of their master ; and firom their 
being in the &tnilies of priests, as well as of the 
military chiefs, we may infer that they were pur- 
chased with money, and that the right of possess- 
ing slaves was not confined to those who had 
taken them in war. The traffic in slaves was 
tolerated by the Egyptians ; and it is reasonable to 
suppose that many persons were engaged, as at 
present, in bringing them to Egypt for public sale, 
independent of those who were sent as part of the 
tribute, and who were probably at first the property 
of the monarch : nor did any difficulty occur to the 
Ishmaelites* in the purchase of Joseph from his 
brethren, nor in his subsequent sale to Potiphar 
on arriving in Egypt. 

MILITARY LAWS AND PUNISHMENTS. 

According to Diodorus, the Egyptians were not 

• Geo. Mxvii. 28. Conf. bIbo Gen. xliv, 9. 


CHAP. III. MILITARY PUNISHMENTS. 405 


'0 


It- 


actuated in the administration of punishments by 
any spirit of vengeance ; but solely by the hope of 
reclaiming an offender, and of preventing for the 
;^ future the commission of a similar crime. Im- 

pressed with this feeling, they were averse to 
making desertion and insubordination capital of- 
fences : the soldier was degraded, and condemned 
publicly to wear some conspicuous mark of igno- 
miny, which rendered him an object of reproach 
to his comrades ; and, without fixing any time 
for his release, he was doomed to bear it *, till 
his contrition and subsequent good conduct had 
retrieved his character, and obtained for him the 
forgiveness of his superiors. " For," says the 
historian f, " by rendering the stigma a more 
odious disgrace than death itself, the legislator 
hoped to make it the most severe of punishments, 
at the same time that it had a great advantage 
in not depriving the state of the services of the 
offender; and deeming it natural to every one, 
who had been degraded from his post, to desire 
to regain the station and character he had lost, 
they cherished the hope that he might eventually 
reform, and become a worthy member of the society 
to which he belonged.** For minor offences, it 
may be presumed, they inflicted the bastinado t, 
which was commonly employed for punishing 
servants and other people ; but the soldier who 

* Many officers regret the discontinuance of similar punishments in 
our army. 

t Diodor. i. 78. 

i The Greeks flogged their sailors with cords ; and deserters had both 
their hands cut off. 


THE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. 


treacherously held communication with the enemy 
was sentenced to the excision of his tongue. • 

• The ancient practice of punishing the oReoding member. 


ItcHimi o/S. D'AUatmiimil Mr.SaU : and/ram nOa. 


Flf. I.a, huchet, 1 ftwtSincha inlength. Fig. 1. dagger I0| inchalong. 

E% 3- du|«l^ inchu In IsngKh. Fig. B. h«d ordart,3 inchu. 

Fin. 4 u3 S. ■Unn, from lb* iculpwca. Fig. 9. jiieltn h«d 14 inchn iDiig. 
FIc tL 1* tnniftit«l to woDd^t, iSo. m. 


END OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 


London : — Printed by A. SrorriKroonit, New-Street- Square. 


^l::jj[^j.ruu.u 


T\ 


J 


