The examination, confession, triall, and execution, of Joane Williford, Joan Cariden, and Jane Hott: who were executed at Feversham in Kent, for being witches, on Munday the 29 of September, 1645. Being a true copy of their evill lives and wicked deeds, taken by the Major of Feversham and jurors for the said inquest. With the examination and confession of Elizabeth Harris, not yet executed. All attested under the hand of Robert Greenstreet, major of Feversham.

[Transcribed from the EEBO-TCP keyboarded edition (CC0 1.0, textcreationpartnership). Original spelling retained.]

[page 2]

[page 1]

The Confeſsion of Joan Williford, Septemb. 24. 1645. made before the Major, and other Jurates.

Shee confeſſed:

THat the divell about ſeven yeeres agoe did appeare to her in the ſhape of a little dog, and bid her to forſake God and leane to him: who replied, that ſhe was loath to forſake him. Shee confeſſed alſo that ſhee had a deſire to be revenged upon Thomas Letherland and Mary Woodr [...] • fe now his wife. She further ſaid that the divell promiſed her, that ſhe ſhould not lacke, and that ſhe had money ſometimes brought her ſhe knew not whence, ſometime one ſhilling, ſometimes eight pence, never more at once; ſhee called her Divell by the name of Bunne. She further ſaith, that her retainer Bunne carried Thomas Gardler out of a window, who fell into a backſide. She further ſaith, that neere twenty yeeres ſince ſhe promiſed her ſoule to the divell. She further ſaith, that ſhe gave ſome of her blood to the Divell· who wrote the covenant betwixt them. She further ſaith that the Divell promiſed to be her ſervant about twenty yeeres,

[page 2]

and that the time is now almoſt expired. She further ſaith that Iane Hot, Elizabeth Harris, Ioan Argoll were her fellowes. She further ſaith that her Divell told her that Elizabeth Harris about ſix or ſeven yeeres ſince curſt the Boat of one Iohn Woodcott, and ſo it came to paſſe. Shee further ſaith, that the Divell promiſed her that ſhee ſhould not ſinke being throwne into the water. She further ſaid Goodwife Argoll curſed Mr. Major, and alſo Iohn Mannington, and ſaid that he ſhould not thrive, and and ſo it came to paſſe. She likewiſe ſaith, that the Divell ſucked twice ſince ſhe came into the priſon, he came to her in the forme of a Muce.

She being brought to the Barre, was asked, Guilty or not guilty, ſhe anſwered, guilty.

When ſhe came to the place of execution Mr. Major asked her if ſhe thought ſhe deſerved death? to whom ſhe anſwered, that ſhe had; and that ſhe deſired all good people to take warning by her, and not to ſuffer themſelves to be deceived by the Divell, neither for lucre of money, malice, or any thing elſe, as ſhe had done: but to ſticke faſt to God, for if ſhe had not firſt forſaken God, God would not have forſaken her.

The Examination of Joan Cariden widdow, taken Septemb. 25. 1645.

THis Examinant ſaith, that about three quarters of a yeere agoe, as ſhe was in the bed about twelve or one of the clocke in the night there lay a rugged ſoft

[page 3]

thing upon her boſome which was very ſoft, and ſhe thruſt it off with her hand; and ſhe ſaith that when ſhe had thruſt it away ſhe thought God forſooke her, for ſhe could never pray ſo well ſince as ſhe could before; and further ſaith, that ſhee verily thinkes it was alive.

The ſecond Examination of the ſaid Joan Cariden, alias Argoll, taken the ſame day before the Major.

THis Examinant ſaith, that in the ſame yeere that this Major was formerly Major the Divell came to her in the ſhape of a blacke rugged Dog, in the night time, and crept into the bed to her, and ſpake to her in mumbling language; The next night it came to her againe, and required this examinant to deny God and leane to him, and that then he would revenge her of any one ſhe owed ill will to, and thereupon this examinant promiſed him her ſoule upon thoſe conditions; And that about that time the Divell ſucked this examinant, and hath divers times ſince ſucked her, and that it was no paine to her.

September 27. 1645.

COnfeſt upon the examination of Ioan Carriden before Maſter Major, that Goodwife Ho [...] • t told her within theſe two daies that there was a great meeting at Goodwife Panterys houſe, and that Goodwife Dadſon was there, and that Goodwife Gardner ſhould have been there, but did not come, and the Divell ſat at the upper end of the Table.

[page 4]

The Examination of Jane Hott widdow, taken before the Major and Jurates the 25 of September, 1645.

THis examinant confeſſeth that a thing like a hedghog had uſually viſited her, and came to her a great while agoe, about twenty yeares agoe, and that if it ſucked her it was in her ſleep, and the paine thereof awaked her, and it came to her once or twice in the moneth and ſucked her, and when it lay upon her breaſt ſhe ſtrucke it off with her hand, and that it was as ſoft as a Cat.

At her firſt comming into the Goale ſhe ſpake very much to the other that were apprehended before her, to confeſſe if they were guilty; and ſtood to it very perverſely that ſhe was cleare of any ſuch thing, and that if they put her into the Water to try her ſhe ſhould certainely ſinke. But when ſhe was put into the Water and it was apparent that ſhe did flote upon the water, being taken forth, a Gentleman to whom before ſhe had ſo confidently ſpake, and with whom ſhe offered to lay twenty ſhillings to one that ſhe could not ſwim, asked her how it was poſſible ſhe could be ſo impudent as not to confeſſe herſelfe, when ſhe had ſo much perſwaded the other to confeſſe: to whom ſhe anſwered, That the Divell went with her all the way, and told her that ſhe ſhould ſinke; but when ſhe was in the Water he ſate upon a Croſſe-beame and laughed at her.

Theſe three were executed on Munday laſt.

[page 5]

The Examination of Elizabeth Harris the 26 of September, 1645. before Maſter Major.

THis examinant ſaith, that about 19 yeeres agoe the Divell did appeare to her in the forme of a Muſe: ſhe further ſaith, that ſhe had a deſire to be revenged, and the divell told her that ſhe ſhould be revenged; ſhe called the Divell her Impe. She further ſaith, Goodman Chilman of Nuenham ſaid that ſhe ſtole a Pigge, then ſhe deſired that God would revenge her of him, and the man pined away and dyed, and ſhe ſaw it apparent that her Impe was the cauſe of that mans death; ſhe further ſaith, that the Divell bid her to forſake Chriſt and leane to him, whereupon ſhe ſaith that ſhe ſcratched her ſelfe with her nailes and fetched blood from her breaſt, and ſhe wiped it with her finger and gave it to her Impe who wrote the covenant with it: ſhe further ſaith, that a fortnight after the divell ſucked her, but ſhe felt no paine. Being demanded how many Witches were in Town? ſhe anſwered, that were a heavy ſentence. She further ſaith that Goodwife Dadſon, Ioan Argoe, William Argos wife, Goodwife Cox have very bad tongues; She further ſaith that her Impe did ſucke her every three or foure nights; ſhe further ſaith that her ſonne being drowned in Goodman Woodcots High ſhe wiſhed that God might be her revenger, which was her watchword to the Divell, and this High was caſt away, and ſhe conceives that her wiſh was the cauſe of its being caſt away: ſhe further ſaith, that Ioan Williford told her, that her Impe ſaid

[page 6]

on Wedneſday laſt, that though the Boate, (ſhe not knowing what Boat,) went chearfully out, it ſhould not come ſo chearfully home; She ſaith further, that Goodwife Pantery did many times make meetings with Goodwife Williford and with Goodwife Hott; She further ſaith, that Goodwife Gardner hath a very ill tongue.

ALL theſe are true coppies of Examination, one whereof is not yet executed, and were taken before me,

Robert Greenſtreet, Major.

FINIS.
