In the American Grain (William Carlos Williams, 1925)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1925 Boni & Liveright edition (https://archive.org/details/bwb_Y0-AES-101)
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

: 
© oe a6 eo” ss 
Me nd fl 

oe oa, 

a 

fl 
oe 
sn! ih RP Os 
5 em foe P i” 
eee or ee 
et a or a es ee 

7 
« 
- 
i 
Pa 
~ 
> 

~ Lat Swe é 
ten fey ee 
a « tae 

* fee 
“ik 

in Southern 
PREF... 

4 { H 
i 
: fi 
Mii 
i 
AM) 
, 
4 
J 
: 
: 
os 
t 

| THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

IN THE 
AMERICAN GRAIN 

BY 
WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS 

NEW YORK 
ALBERT & CHARLES BONI 
1925 

Copyright, 1925, by Albert § Charles Boni 

Printed in the United States of America by 
J. J. LITTLE AND IVES COMPANY, NEW YORK 

CONTENTS 

PAGH 
PR SNPYSUEREQHE CUE Nat Vets tig eye NUL ges 

e e J . ° J e oO e 1 
Tue Discovery or THE INDINS . .. 
Christopher Columbus 

Tue Destruction or TENOCHTITLAN . . . . 2. 6 fe) 24 
Cortez and Montezuma 

Tue Fountain or Erernat Youtu . 
Juan Ponce de Leon 

De Soro anp tHE New Worip mrarhe 
Prime UNO rae ERATION. 5 4 eke le at ee Sek 59 
VoyaGcre or ror “MAvFLowEr’. . . . » © «© «© « « 68 

Remo POUNDING OF QUmBEC. . 5 «6 6 6 8 eo ew > 6S 
Samuel de Champlain 

Tue May-pote at MerryMounT . . . . . 2. « « ew) COB 
Thomas Morton 

Corron Marner’s WonprERS oF THE INvisIBLE WoRLD. . . 
I Enchantments Encountered . . . «© «© «© «© «© 81 
II The Trial of Bridget Bishop at Salem. . ... « « 85 
The Trial of Susanna Martin . =. «- 0 ‘© © eveo us 92 
etemrtnirinikies Sw so OO Sen lene 6 Ce eee 
MER ROSEBRASTIAN TLASTNG ¢ 5 9550 3 we a po ew we ROS 

Tur Discovery or KentucKY . . . «+ + « « e« «+ 180 
Daniel Boone 

Peano WASGINGION 5 . 9.) « «v6 8) & ale , 180 

ite o tenn se ce Re ge el ae oe gel ot ae 
Benjamin Franklin 

: Barrie Between THE Bon Homme RicHarD AND THE Srrapis 158 
John Paul Jones 

a te ie i 8 ie oe Mie igo on Pale US 

Tuer VIRTUE OF History e ° ° e ° ° e e e e e 188 
Aaron Burr 

Apvent or THE SLAVES. «. + © © © © © © © @ *& 208 
Tintin ALtAMYeOP < «8s 6 Fe 8 ot 8 Pe kee KG 3 
OReAMee LINCOLN «0 2 4 © we o # ee ee 234 

ee = 
TPs of 

1 

2 

hele he 

at 
ee 

¥. 

A 

ae ee | 
Sitges Ft 9k.” i 

Ay 

IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

RED ERIC 

by single strength, theirs by the crookedness of their 

law. But they have marked me—even to myself. Be- 
cause I am not like them, I am evil. I cannot get my hands 
on it: I, murderer, outlaw, outcast even from Iceland. Be- 
cause their way is the just way and my way—the way of the 
kings and my father—crosses them: weaklings holding to- 
gether to appear strong. But I am alone, though in Green- 
land. 

The worst is that weak, still, somehow, they are strong: 
they in effect have the power, by hook or by crook. And 
because I am not like them—not that I am evil, but more 
in accord with our own blood than they, eager to lead—this 
very part of me, by their’ trickery must not appear, unless 
in their jacket. Eric was Greenland: I call it Greenland, that 
men will go there to colonize it. 

I, then, must open a way for them into the ice that they 
- follow me even here—their servant, in spite of myself. Yet 
they must follow. 

It was so from the beginning. They drove me from 
Jaederen, my father and me. Who was this Christ, that he 
should come to bother me in my own country? His bishops 
that lie and falsify the records, make me out to be what I am 
not—for their own ends—because we killed a man. 

Was he the first man that was ever killed, that they must 
sour over it? That he was important to their schemes, that 
he meant much to them—granted: one of their own color, we 

1 

R iy sxe the ice than their way: to take what is mine 

2 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

who altered him must be driven from Norway. ‘Their courts 
and soft ways. Not that we killed him. One or the other of 
us had to die, under the natural circumstance. He or we. 
But that if we had been killed, would he then have been driven 
from his country? They would have made him Archbishop. 

To Iceland, then. Forget Norway. What there? My 
father dead. Land to the north cleared. A poor homestead. 
Manslaughter had driven me there. Then I married 'Thor- 
hild, removed from the north and cleared land at Haukadal. 
Must I-be meek because of that? If my slaves cause a land- 
slide on Valthioff’s farm and Valthioff’s kinsman slays them, 
shall I not kill him? Is it proper for me to stand and to 
be made small before my slaves? I am not a man to shake 
and sweat like a thief when the time comes. 

Rather say I killed two men instead of the one. They 
tried me among themselves and drove me out once more. 
To the north, then. Iceland wilderness. 

There Thorgest comes to me and asks if I will lend him 
my outer dais-boards: ready to take me at a loss. Why 
else? For Eric the Red is a marked man, beyond the law, 
so it would seem: from that man one steals at will—being 
many in the act against his one. Thorgest keeps the decorated 
woodpieces. I go to his house and remove my property. He 
gives chase and two of his sons are killed in the encounter. 

This time they have done the thing. They search for us 
among the islands—me and my people. 

This is the way of it, Thorhall, this has always been the 
way with me from the first. Eric loves his friends, loves bed, 
loves food, loves the hunt, loves his sons. He is a man that 
can throw a spear, take a girl, steer a ship, till the soil, plant, 
care for the cattle, skin a fox, sing, dance, run, wrestle, climb, 
swim like a seal. A man to plan an expedition and pay for 
it, kill an enemy, take his way through a fog, a snowstorm, 
read a reckoning by the stars, live in a stench, drink foul 
water, withstand the fierce cold, the black of winter and come 
to a new country with a hundred men and found them there. 

RED ERIC 3 

But they have branded me. They have separated murder 
_ into two parts and fastened the worse on me. It rides in the 
air around me. What is it to be killed? They have had their 
fling at me. Is it worse, so much worse, than to be hunted 
about the islands, chased from Norway to Iceland, from 
south to north, from Iceland to Greenland, because—I am I, 
and remain so. 

Outlaws have no friends. Murderers are run down like 
rabbits among the stones. Yet my ship was built, fitted, 
manned, given safe conduct beyond the reefs. To Thorbiorn 
I owe much. And so to Greenland—after bitter days fighting 
the ice and rough seas. Pestilence struck us. The cattle 
sickened. Weeks passed. The summer nearly ended before 
we struck land. This is my portion. I do not call it not to 
my liking. Hardship lives in me. What I suffer is myself 
that outraces the water or the wind. But that it only should 
be mine, cuts deep. It is the half only. And it takes it out 
of my taste that the choice is theirs. I have the rough of it 
not because I will it, but because it is all that is left, a rem- 
nant from their coatcloth. This is the gall on the meat. Let 
the hail beat me. It is a kind of joy I feel in such things. 

Greenland then. So be it. Start over again. It turns 
out always the one way. A wife, her two sons and a daughter. 
So my life was split up. The logic of it also. This is my 
proof. We lived at our homestead, well rid of the world. 
Traders visited us. ‘Then Lief, Eric’s son, sails to Norway, a 
thousand miles, in one carry. But on his return, Lief the 
Lucky, he is driven westward upon a new country, news of 
which he brings to Brattahlid. At the same stroke he brings 
me back pride and joy-in-his-deed, my deed, Eric moving 
up, and poison: an edict from Olaf—from my son’s mouth— 
solid as an axe to cut me, half healed, into pieces again. 

Not that it was new. Only that here in Greenland I had 
begun to feel that I had left the curse behind. Here through 
the winters, far to the west, I had begun to look toward sum- 
mer when I should be whole again. My people at work, my 

4 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

wife beside me, the boys free from my smear, growing in 
strength and knowledge of the sea. Here was an answer to 
them all: Thorstein and Lief Erickson, sons of Red Eric, 
murderer! Myself in the teeth of the world. 

So they chopped me up. The Pope wins Olaf. Lief at 
court—Olaf commissions him to carry the thing back to 
Greenland. It grows like fire. Why not? Promise the weak 
strength and have the strength of a thousand weak at your 
bidding. Thorhild bars me, godless, from her bed. Both sons 
she wins to it. Lief and Thorstein both Christians. And 
this is what they say: Eric, son of evil, come and be forgiven.— 
Let her build a church and sleep in it. 

e+ * # 

With the years there began to be much talk at Brattahlid 
of Vinland the Good that Lief had first seen, that it should 
be explored. And so Karlsefni and Snorri fitted out a ship. 
Eric, too old to go with them, watches the ship depart. But 
Eric is in the ship, with the men, Eric the bedless, the sonless. 
Fate has pulled him out at the holes of his eyes and flung him 
again to sea as the ship steers southward. Now the glass — 
darkens as the sea takes them to the New World. . 

They found wild rice, they built booths and palisades. 
First they traded with the Skrellings, whose cheekbones were 
high, whose eyes wide, then fought them. Whereas Karlsefni 
and his men had shown white shields before, now they took 
red shields and displayed them. The Skrellings sprang from 
their canoes and they fought together. Karlsefni and Snorri 
were beaten. ‘They fell back. Then it was that Freydis, 
Eric’s natural daughter, came out from her cabin. Seeing — 
that the men were fleeing, she cried: Why do you flee from 
these wretches, when ye should slaughter them like cattle? 
Had I a weapon I would fight better than any of you. 

Lagging behind the rest as they ran, because of her belly, 
she being with child, she found a dead man in front of her. 
It was Snorri’s son, with his head cleft by a stone, his naked 

RED ERIC 5 

sword beside him. This she took up and prepared to defend 
herself. The Skrellings then approached her, whereupon she 
stripped down her shirt and slapped her breast with her 
bare sword. At this the Skrellings were terrified and ran 
down to their boats. 

So, thinning out, more and more dark, it ran: Eric in 
Freydis’ bones: Freydis now, mistress of her own ship, per- 
suades two brothers, Helgi and Finnbogi, to sail with her 
again to Vinland: all to share equally the good things that 
might there be obtained. Lief to lend her his house there. 
Two ships, each to have thirty able-bodied men besides the 
women, but at the start Freydis violated the compact by con- 
cealing five men more. Karlsefni feared her. 

Now they put out to sea, the brothers in one ship and 
Freydis and Karlsefni in the other, having agreed that they 
would sail in company. But although they were not far apart 
from each other the brothers arrived somewhat in advance 
and carried their belongings up to Lief’s house. Freydis 
comes and does the same. The brothers withdraw and build 
a new house nearby. Within a month, the two houses are at 
odds and winter comes on. 

Spring. Freydis, one night, after long thinking, arose 
early from her bed and dressed herself, but did not put on 
shoes and stockings. A heavy dew had fallen. She took 
up her husband’s cloak, wrapped it about her and walked 
in the dark to the brothers’ house and up to the door, which 
had been only partly closed by one of the men, who had gone 
out only a short time earlier. She pushed open the door and. 
stood silently in the doorway for a moment. Finnbogi was 
awake and said: What dost thou wish here, Freydis? She 
answered: I wish thee to arise and go with me for I would 
speak with thee. They walked to a tree which lay close by the 
wall of the house and seated themselves upon it. How art 
thou pleased here, she said. He answered that he was well 
pleased with the place, except for the quarrel which had come 
up between them. They talked. 

6 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

It was the brothers’ boat—it seemed—she wanted, larger 
than her own. Finnbogi slow, thickheaded, or asleep, con- 
sents to let her have it. Freydis, split with anger or bad blood, 
returns home and Finnbogi to his bed. 

The woman climbed into bed and awakened her husband 
with her cold feet. Why so cold and wet? I have been to 
the brothers to buy their ship, but they refused and beat me! 

Thorvard roused his men. ‘They went to the brothers’ 
house, took them and all their people, and slaughtered them 
one by one as they were brought from within. Only the 
women were left. These no man would kill. What? said 
Freydis. Hand me an axe! This done, she fell upon the five 
women and left them dead. . 

In Greenland, Lief, now head of the family, has no heart 
to punish his sister as she deserves: But this I predict of 
them, that there is little prosperity in store for their offspring. 
Hence it came to pass that no one from that time forward 
thought them worthy of aught but evil. Eric in his grave. 

THE DISCOVERY OF THE INDIES 

HE New World, existing in those times beyond the 
sphere of all things known to history, lay in the fifteenth 
century as the middle of the desert or the sea lies now 

and must lie forever, marked with its own dark life which 
goes on to an immaculate fulfillment in which we have no 
part. But now, with the maritime successes of that period, 
the western land could not guard its seclusion longer; a 
predestined and bitter fruit existing, perversely, before the 
white flower of its birth, it was laid bare by the miraculous 
first voyage. For it is as the achievement of a flower, pure, 
white, waxlike and fragrant, that Columbus’ infatuated course 
must be depicted, especially when compared with the acrid 
and poisonous apple which was later by him to be proved. 

No more had Columbus landed, the flower once ravished, 
than it seemed as if heaven itself had turned upon this man 
for disturbing its repose. But the initiative taken, the course 
broached, the story must goon. He left a handful of colonists 
in the islands while he, himself, returned to Spain with the 
news and for aid. 

As the outward journey had been pleasant “like April in 
Andalucia”—still seas, clear, fine weather and steady winds, 
so now the return was difficult. Through tempest, assault, 
trickery among the Portuguese Azores, capture and despair, 
he fought his way. But as he neared the home coast at last his 
trials grew worst of all. Everything hung on the point of 
being lost: 

* * & 

. . . daylight until sunset, great trouble with the wind, high 
and tempestuous seas. Lightning three times to the N.N.E. 
—sign of a great storm coming from that quarter or its op- 
posite. We lay to most of the night, afterwards showing a 

7 

8 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

little sail. In the day the wind moderated a little, but soon 
increased again and during the night the waves were ter- 
rible, rising against each other and so shaking and straining 
the Nifia that she was in danger of being stove in. We car- 
ried the mainsail very closely reefed, so as just to give her steer- 
way. 

Meanwhile the sea and wind increased, and we began to 
run before it, there being nothing else to do. The caravel 
Pinta began to run before it at the same time, and Martin 
Alonzo ran her out of sight, although we kept showing lanterns 
all night and they answered us. 

Sunrise the wind blew still harder, and the cross seas were 
terrific. Continued to show the closely reefed mainsail to en- 
able her to rise between the waves, or she would otherwise 
have been swamped. Now I feared that we should perish. 
I should have borne this misfortune with less distress had 
my life alone been in peril, but what caused me boundless 
grief and trouble was the thought that just now when our 
gainsayers were to be convinced and the discovery of a New 
World victoriously to be announced, that just now the Divine 
Will should wish to block it with my destruction. 

Of this mind I resolved, that even if I should die, the ship 
be lost, to find a means of not losing a victory already won. 
I wrote on a parchment, with that brevity which the time de- 
manded, how I had discovered the lands I had promised to 
find, describing the route I had followed and how your High- 
ness had possession of all that had been found by me. 

This folded and sealed, I had a cask brought, and having 
wrapped the writing in waxed cloth surrounded by a large 
cake of wax, I enclosed all in a barrel stoutly hooped, which 
I threw into the sea. All believed it some act of devotion. 

Later amid showers and squalls, the wind veered to the 
west and we sailed before it, in a very confused sea, for five 
hours. We had taken in the reefed mainsail, for fear that the 
wind would carry all away. That night at the time of re- 
peating the Salve, some of the men saw a light to leeward. 

THE DISCOVERY OF THE INDIES 9 

During the night a terrible storm, expecting to be overwhelmed 
by the cross seas, while the wind seemed to raise the caravel 
into the air. In these straits, not knowing whether there was 
any port for shelter, I set the mainsail... . 

* * * 

Forced by the storm into Lisbon harbor, the turn of his 
destiny quickly multiplied his misfortunes. In Spain, when 
he finally arrived there, they immediately accused him of play- 
ing traitor to Castile, of having tried to ere with the 
Portuguese sovereign. 

But that passed; there was too much still for him to en- 
dure for catastrophe to have overtaken him so early; some 
savage power had him in its care, preserving him for its 
later pleasure. Now his triumph was acclaimed, his captives 
were paraded in Madrid, his gold was witnessed, his birds, 
monkeys and native implements were admired. This over, 
immediately the urge was on him once more. He must re- 
turn at once to the New World. Never content would he be 
for the balance of his whole life, following his fortune, whose 
flower, unknown to him, was past. | 

But now he saw before him the illusive bright future of a 
great empire founded, coupled with a fabulous conquest of 
heathendom by the only true church. Much had been prom- 
ised him. He had succeeded in the sternest hazard, the great 
first step; should not the rest prove easy and natural? It 
rose before him like a great gilded mountain. Again and again 
he calls before his mind their agreements: 

* *+ * 

. . . that henceforth I should be called Don, and should 
be Chief Admiral of the Ocean Sea, perpetual Viceroy and 
Governor of all the islands and continents that I should dis- 
cover and gain in the Ocean Sea, and that my eldest son 
should succeed, and so from generation to generation for- 
ever. 

10 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

Item: that of all and every kind of merchandise, whether 
pearls, precious stones, gold, silver, spices, etc., of whatever 
kind, name and sort which may be bought, bartered, discov- 
ered within the said Admiralty, your Highnesses grant from 
henceforth to the said Don Cristébal, the tenth part of the 
whole . . . granted, in the town of Santa Fe de la Granada 
on the 17th day of April, in the year of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
1492. I, the King. I, the Queen. 

* & # 

Unhappy talk. What power had such ridiculous little 
promises to stay a man against that terrific downpour on the 
brink of which they were all floating? How could a king 
fulfill them? Yet this man, this straw in the play of the 
elemental giants, must go blindly on. More and more he 
threw everything he had into the contest, his sons, his brothers, 
in the hope that his fortunes would be retrieved in the end. 
How could he have realized that against which he was op- 
posed? His instinctive enemies, however, were not so back- 
ward on their part. With malicious accuracy, finding him 
more and more alone, they sensed everything and turned it 
to their own advantage, being closer to that curious self-in- 
terest of natural things than he. 

Heroically, but pitifully, he strove to fasten to himself 
that enormous world, that presently crushed him among its 
multiple small disguises. 

With its archaic smile, America found Columbus its first 
victim. This was well, even merciful. As for the others, who 
shall say?—when riding a gigantic Nature and when through 
her heat they could arrogate to themselves a pin’s worth of 
that massive strength, to turn it against another of their 
own kind to his undoing,—even they are natural and as much 
a part of the scheme as any other. 

There is no need to argue Columbus’ special worth. As 
much as many another more successful, everything that is 
holy, brave or of whatever worth there is in a man was con- 
tained in that body. Let it have been as genius that he made 

THE DISCOVERY OF THE INDIES 11 

his first great voyage, possessed of that streamlike human 
purity of purpose called by that name—it was still as a man 
that he would bite the bitter fruit that Nature would offer 
him. He was poisoned and his fellows turned against him 
like wild beasts. 

Bewildered, he continued, voyage after voyage, four times, 
out of his growing despair; it seemed that finally by sheer 
physical effort a way must be found—till the realization of 
it all at last grew firmly upon him: 

* * * ‘ 

Seven years passed in discussion and nine in execution, the 
Indies discovered, wealth and renown for Spain and great 
increase to God and to his Church. And I have arrived at and 
am in such condition that there is no one so vile but thinks 
he may insult me. 

What have I not endured? ‘Three voyages undertaken 
and brought to success against all who would gainsay me; 
islands and a mainland to the south discovered; pearls, gold, 
and, in spite of all, after a thousand struggles with the world 
and having withstood them all, neither arms nor counsels 
availed, it cruelly kept me under water. 

If I were to steal the Indies or the land which lies beyond 
them from the altar of St..Peter and give them to the Moors, 
they could not have greater enmity toward me in Spain. 

When on my last voyage, having turned homeward, I had 
left Paria (Brazil) and come again to Espajiola (Porto 
Rico), I found half the people in revolt; and the Indians on 
the other side grievously harassed me. It was at this time 
that Bobadilla came to Santo Domingo. I was at La Vega. 
He took up his abode in my house and, just as he found it, so 
he appropriated everything to himself. Well and good; per- 
haps he was in want of it. On the second day after his ar- 
rival he created himself Governor. 

I thought the affair would end like that of Hojeda and the 
others, but I restrained myself when I learned for certain 
from the friars that your Highnesses had sent him. I wrote 

12 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

to him that his arrival was welcome, that I was prepared to 
hand it over to him as smooth as my palm. But he gave me 
no answer. On the contrary, he put himself in a warlike at- 
titude and compelled all who were there to take an oath to him 
as Governor. Together with them, he ordered inquisitions 
concerning me, the like whereof were never known in hell. I 
was made prisoner and returned to Spain in the condition of 
which you know. 

I should have freed myself forever from this affair and 
undertaken that holy pilgrimage which has long been in my 
heart had it been honorable to my Queen to do so. But the sup- 
port of Our Lord and Her Highness made me persevere. I 
undertook a fresh voyage to the new Heaven and Earth. And 
if this, the most honorable and profitable of all, is held in 
small esteem in Spain, it is because it has been looked upon 
as my work. 

Up to the period of reaching these shores, I experienced 
most excellent weather, but the night of my arrival came on 
with a dreadful tempest, and the same bad weather has con- 
tinued ever since. On reaching the island of Espajfiola, I 
despatched a packet of letters, by which I begged as a favor 
that a ship be supplied me at my own cost in lieu of one of 
those that I had brought with me, which had become unsea- 
worthy, and could no longer carry sail. The letters were 
taken, and your Highnesses will know if a reply has been given 
them. For my part I was forbidden to go on shore. 

The tempest was terrible throughout the night, all the 
ships were separated, and each one driven to the last extremity 
without hope of anything but death; each of them also looked — 
upon the loss of the rest as a matter of certainty. What man 
was ever born, not even excepting Job, who would not have 
been ready to die of despair at finding himself as I then was, in 
anxious fear for my own safety, and that of my son, my 
brother and my friends, and yet refused permission either 
to land or to put into harbor on the shores which by God’s 
mercy I had gained for Spain sweating blood? 

THE DISCOVERY OF THE INDIES 18 

And this is the thing which calls most loudly for redress 
and remains inexplicable to this moment. The lands in this 
part of the world, which are now under your Highnesses’ 
sway, are richer and more extensive than those of any other 
Christian power, and yet, after that I had, by the Divine 
Will, placed them under your high and royal sovereignty, 
and was on the point of bringing your Majesties into receipt 
of a very great and unexpected revenue; and while I was wait- 
ing for ships to convey me to safety, and with a heart full of 
joy, to your royal presence, victoriously to announce the news 
of the gold that I had discovered, I was arrested and thrown 
with my two brothers, loaded with irons, into a ship, stripped, 
and very ill treated without being allowed any appeal to 
justice. | 

Who could believe that a poor foreigner would have risen 
against your Highnesses, in such a place without any motive 
or argument on his side; without even the assistance of any 
other Prince upon whom to rely; but on the contrary amongst 
your own vassals and natural subjects, and with my sons stay- 
ing at the royal court? I was twenty-eight years old when I 
came into your Highnesses’ service, and now I have not a hair 
upon me that is not gray; my body is infirm, and all that was 
_ left me, as well as to my brothers, has been taken away and 
sold, even to the frock that I wore. 

I would implore your Highnesses to forgive my com- 
plaints. I am indeed in as ruined condition as I have re- 
lated. With regard to temporal things, I have not even a 
blanca for an offering; and in spiritual things, I have ceased 
here in the Indies from observing the prescribed forms of re- 
limon... 

But to return to the ships: although the tempest had so 
completely separated them from me as to leave me single, 
yet the Lord restored them to me in His good time. The ship 
for which we had the greatest fear, had put out to sea to escape 
being blown toward the island. The Gallega lost her boat and 
a part of her provisions, which latter loss indeed all of the 

14 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

ships suffered. With this tempest I struggled on till I reached 
Jamaica, and there the sea became calm, but there was a 
strong contrary current which carried me as far as the Queen’s 
Garden without seeing land. Hence, as opportunity offered, 
I pushed on for the mainland, in spite of the wind and a fear- 
ful contrary current, against which I contended for sixty 
days. All this time I was unable to get into harbor, nor was 
there any cessation of the tempest, which was one continua- 
tion of rain, thunder and lightning. I at length reached the 
Cape of Gracias a Dios, and after that the Lord granted me 
fair wind and tide; this was on the twelfth of September. 
Twenty-eight days did this fearful tempest continue, during 
which I was at sea and saw neither sun nor stars, my ships lay 
exposed, with sails torn, and anchors, rigging, cables, boats 
and a great quantity of provisions lost. Other tempests have 
been experienced, but never of so long a duration as this. I 
myself had fallen sick, and was many times on the point of 
death, but from a little cabin that I had caused to be con- 
structed on deck, I directed our course. My brother was in 
the ship that was in the worst condition and the most ex- 
posed to danger; and my grief on this account was the greater 
that I had brought him with me against his will. 

Such is my fate, that the twenty years of service through 
which I have passed with so much toil and danger, have profited 
me nothing, and at this very day I do not possess a roof in 
Spain that I can call my own; if I wish to eat or sleep, I have 
nowhere to go but to the inn or tavern, and most times lack 
wherewith to pay the bill. 

I reached the land of Cariay, where I stopped to repair my 
vessels and take in provisions, as well as to afford relaxation 
to my men, who had become very weak. There I gained in- 
formation respecting the gold mines of which I was in search 
and two Indians conducted me to Carambaru, where the peo- 
ple, who go naked, wear golden mirrors round their necks, 
which they will neither sell, give, nor part with for any con- 

‘THE DISCOVERY OF THE INDIES 15 

sideration. They named to me many places on the sea-coast 
where there were both gold and mines. I started with the in- 
tention of visiting all of them. It was on the eve of St. Simon 
and St. Jude, which was the day fixed for our departure; but 
that night there arose so violent a storm, that we were forced 
to go wherever it drove us. I ran before the wind without 
power to resist it. Never was the sea seen so high, so terrific 
and so covered with foam; not only did the wind oppose our 
proceeding onward, but it also rendered it highly dangerous 
to run in for any headland, and kept me in that sea, which 
seemed to me as a sea of blood, seething like a cauldron on 
a mighty fire. Never did the sky look more fearful; during 
day and night it burned like a furnace and every instant I 
looked to see if my masts and my sails were not destroyed. 
These flashes came with such alarming fury that we all thought 
the ships must have been destroyed. All this time the waters 
from heaven never ceased, not to say that it rained, for it was 
like a repetition of the deluge. Twice had the ships suffered 
loss in boats, anchors, rigging, and were now lying bare with- 
out sails . . . still raining. The sea very tempestuous and I 
was driven backward under bare poles. . . . 

I anchored at an island, where I lost, at one stroke, three 
anchors; and at midnight, when the weather was such that 
the world appeared to be coming to an end, the cables of the 
other ship broke, and it came down upon my vessel with such 
force that it was a wonder we were not dashed to pieces; the 
single anchor that remained to me was our only preservation. 
_ After six days, when the weather became calm, I resumed my 
journey, having already lost all my tackle; my ships were 
pierced with borers more than a honeycomb and the crew en- 
tirely paralyzed with fear and in despair. There the storm 
returned to drive me back . . . I continued beating against 
contrary winds, and with the ships in the worst possible con- 
dition. With three pumps. and the use of pots and kettles, 
we could scarcely clear the’ water that came into the ship, 
there being no remedy but this, against the shipworm, I deter- 

16 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

mined on keeping the sea, in spite of the weather, when we 
miraculously came upon land. 

Weep for me whoever has charity, truth and justice. I 
did not come out on this voyage to gain to myself honor and 
wealth; for at that time all hope of such a thing was dead. I 
do not lie when I say, that I went to your Highnesses with 
honest purpose of heart, and sincere zeal in your cause. I 
humbly beseech your Highnesses, that if it please God to 
rescue me from this place, you will graciously sanction my 
pilgrimage to Rome and other holy places. May the holy 
Trinity protect your Highnesses’ lives, and add pros- 
perity. ... 

* *x* * 

Storms and men; the very worms of the sea were opposed 
to him. But if, as he instinctively, but for his insane dogged- 
ness, would have done, he had undertaken that holy pilgrimage 
of which he had spoken, the flower might again, in that 
seclusion, often have appeared to him in all its old-time loveli- 
ness, as when he himself floated with luck and in sunshine on 
that tropic sea toward adventure and discovery: 

*% * * 

. at the third hour of Saturday night it began to blow 
from the N. E. and I shaped my course to the west. We 
took in much water over the bows, which retarded our prog- 
ress and nine leagues were made during the day and night. 

Sunday we made nineteen leagues, and I decided to reckon 
less than the number run, for should the voyage prove of long 
duration, the people would not be so terrified and disheartened. 
This day we lost sight of land, and many fearful of not seeing 
it again sighed and shed tears. The sailors steered badly, 
letting the ships fall off to N. E. and even more, of which I was 
forced to complain several times. 

Monday . . . Tuesday we sailed on our course which was 

west and made twenty leagues or more. We saw a large 

piece of the mast of a ship of one hundred and twenty tons, 
but were unable to get it. . 

THE DISCOVERY OF THE INDIES 1% 

Wednesday . . . On this day, Thursday, thirteenth Sep- 
tember, at the commencement of the night, the needles turned 
a half point to the north-west, and in the morning still more 
so. This I took to be due to a movement of the North Star 
which must have an orbit like the others howbeit less than 
they. 

Friday, on the westerly course, day and night, twenty 
leagues, counting a little less: Here those on the caravel 
Nifia reported that they had seen a tern, a bird which is 
never far from land. 

Saturday, we made twenty-seven leagues on the west 
course; and in the early part of the night there fell into the 
sea a marvelous flame of fire, at a distance of about four or 
five leagues from the ship. 

Sunday, the sixteenth, day and night, I steered the course 
west, making thirty-nine leagues but counted only thirty- 
six. There were some clouds and small rain. From this day 
and ever afterward very temperate breezes, so that there was 
- great pleasure in enjoying the mornings, nothing being wanted 
but the song of nightingales. It was like April in Andalucia. 
Here we began to see many tufts of grass that were very green 
and appeared to have been quite recently torn from the land. 
All this I called to the attention of the men and from this I 
judged that we were near land, but not the mainland which I 
make to be more distant. 

The seventeenth of September, Monday, I proceeded on 
the west course and made over fifty leagues in the day and 
night, counting only forty-seven. A favorable current aided 
us on our way. There was very much fine grass and herbs 
from rocks, which came from the west, so that it seemed for 
certain that land must be near. This day the pilots observed 
the north point and found, for the first time, that the needles 
turned a full point to the west of north. All this day the 
mariners were alarmed and dejected and would not give their 
reason. But I knew that it was because of the needle. At 
dawn I ordered that the north should be again observed. 

18 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

They then found that the needles were true for the cause was 
that the star makes the movement and not the needles. At 
dawn we observed much more weed appearing, like herbs from 
a river, in which one of the men discovered a live crab. This 
I kept that all might see it and believe on the land. The 
sea water was found to be less salt than it had been since 
leaving the Canaries. This I caused many to taste. The 
breezes were always soft. Every one was pleased and the best 
sailors went ahead to sight the first land. Many tunnyfish 
passed on all sides of us and the crew of the Nifia killed one. 
All these signs came from the west in which direction I trust 
in that high God in whose hands are all victories that very 
soon we shall see land. On that morning there appeared a 
white bird, called boatswainbird, which is not in the habit of 
sleeping on the sea. 

Tuesday, we made forty-five leagues, counting only thirty- 
eight. The sea was like the river of Seville. Martin Alonzo, 
with the Pinta, which was a fast sailer, did not wait, but said 
to me from his caravel, that he hoped to see land that night. 
A great cloud appeared to the north, a sign of the nearness 
of land. 

Wednesday, twenty-five leagues, but it was calm, and 
counted only twenty-two. This day, at ten o’clock, a booby 
came to the ship and in the afternoon another, these birds 
not generally going more than twenty leagues from the land. 
There was also some drizzling rain without wind, which is a 
sure sign of land. I felt it to be certain that there were islands 
both to the north and south of our position and that we 
were passing through them. This I explained to all saying that 
my desire was to press on to the Indies, the weather being 
fine, as such it was, and that on the return we should see all. 
Here the pilots found their position. He of the Nifia made 
the Canaries four hundred and forty leagues distant, the Pinta 
four hundred and twenty. But he of my own ship made the 
distance exactly four hundred leagues, which I gave out to be 
the true. . 

THE DISCOVERY OF THE INDIES 19 

Thursday, twentieth of September, the course was W. by 
N. and-as her head was all round the compass, owing to the 
calm that prevailed, the ship made only seven or eight leagues. 
Two boobies came to the ship, and afterwards another, a sign 
of the proximity of land. One of the men caught a bird with 
the hand, which was like a tern. But it was a riverbird, not 
a seabird, the feet being like those of a gull. At dawn two or 
three land birds came singing to the ship and they disappeared 
before sunset. 

Twenty-first of September, most of the day was calm, later 
a little wind. During the day and night we made only thir- 
teen leagues. At dawn we saw so much weed that the sea 
appeared to be covered with it. And it came from the west. 
A booby was seen. The sea was very smooth, like a river, and 
the air the best in the world. ‘Toward midday a whale was 
sighted, which is a sign of land, because they always keep near 
the shore. 

Saturday, September eer I shaped my course 
W. N. W. more or less, her head turning from one to the 
other point and made thirty leagues. This contrary wind was 
very necessary to me, because my people had become much ex- 
cited at the thought that in these seas no wind ever blew in 
the direction of Spain. In the morning there was no weed 
but in the afternoon it was very thick. 

This day, Sunday, the twenty-third of September, I 
shaped a course N. W. and at times more northerly; some- 
times getting upon our course, which was west, and made 
about twenty-two leagues. A dove was seen and also another 
booby, another riverbird and some white birds. Great quan- 
tities of weed and crabs in it. The sea being calm and smooth, 
the crews began to murmur, saying that here there was no 
great sea and the wind would never blow so that they could 
return to Spain. Many were in great despair and torment of 
mind thinking that they would never be able to return. After- 
ward the sea arose very much and later adverse winds ap- 
peared. The adverseness of the wind and the high sea were 

20 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

very helpful to me since they freed the crew of the idea 
that there would be no favorable sea and winds for their re- 
turn. Yet even then some objected, saying that the wind 
would not last. 

Monday, on the west course all day and night making four- 
teen leagues. I counted only twelve. 

Tuesday, calm and afterwards wind. On the west course 
till night. This day I signaled that the Pinta should draw 
near and conversed with Martin Alonzo Pinzon respecting a 
chart which I had sent to the caravel three days before on 
which I had depicted certain islands in that sea. Martin 
Alonzo said that the ships were in the position on which the 
islands were placed, with which I agreed but added that it 
might be that we had not fallen in with them due to the cur- 
rents which had always set the ships to the N. E. and that 
we had not made so much as the pilots had reported. At my 
request the chart was sent back on a line. “hereat I plotted 
our position on it with the aid of the pilot and mariners that 
they might be reassured. At sunset Martin Alonzo went up 
on the poop of his ship and with joy called out that he had 
sighted land. I fell on my knees and gave thanks to the Lord, 
so heavy had been my burdens these latter days at the despair 
among the men and the murmurs going among them, that I 
should have to turn back. And Martin Alonzo said the Gloria 
im Excelsis with his people. My own crew did the same. 
Those of the Nifia all went up on the mast and into the rigging 
and declared that it was land. It seemed distant twenty-five 
leagues. So it appeared until night. I ordered the course 
to be altered from west to S. W. in which direction the land 
had appeared. Four leagues that day on a west course and 
seventeen S. W. during the night, in all twenty-one, but I 
told the men that thirteen was the distance made good. The 
sea was very smooth so that many sailors bathed alongside. 
We saw many giltheads and other fish. 

Wednesday, what had been said to be land was only clouds 
and I continued on the west course till afternoon, then al- 

THE DISCOVERY OF THE INDIES a1 

tered to S. W. Day and night thirty-one leagues counting 
twenty-four for the people. The sea was like a river, the air 
pleasant and mild. The despair of the crew redoubled at 
this disappointment but I comforted them as best I could, 
begging them to endure a while longer for all that would be 
theirs in the end. 

Thursday, the course west, and distance made good day 
and night twenty-four leagues, twenty being counted for the 
people. Many giltheads came. One was killed. A boat- 
swainbird came. 

Twenty-eighth September, Friday, the course was west 
and the distance, owing to calms, only fourteen leagues, count- 
ing only thirteen. Little weed but more giltheads. Caught 
one. 

Saturday, the course was west, twenty-four leagues, count- 
ing only twenty-one. Calm, not much distance made good 
during day and night. Today we saw a man-o-war bird, which 
makes the boobies vomit what they have swallowed, and eats 
it, maintaining itself on nothing else. It is a seabird but does 
not sleep on the sea, and does not go more than twenty leagues 
from land. The sea smooth as a river. Much weed. 

Sunday, the last day of September, west fourteen leagues, 

eleven being counted. Four boatswainbirds came to the ship 
_ which I considered a great sign of land. 

Monday, first of October, west twenty-five leagues, counted 
twenty. A heavy shower of rain. At dawn the pilot of our 
ship made the distance from Hierro five hundred eighty-four 
leagues to the west. The reduced reckoning which I showed 
to the crew made it five hundred seventy-eight leagues, but the 
truth which I kept secret was seven hundred seven. Thus the 
wisdom of the double reckoning was confirmed. 

Tuesday, west, day and night thirty-nine leagues, counted 
for the crew thirty. The weed, many thanks to God, coming 
from east to west, contrary to the usual course. Many fish 
seen and one killed. A white bird like a gull. 
Wednesday, still the west course, and made good forty- 

22 | IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

seven leagues, counted forty. Sandpipers appeared, and 
much weed, some old and some quite fresh and having fruit. 
No birds. So I gave it out that we had left the islands be- 
hind that were depicted on the chart. Here many called upon 
me to turn about and search for the land but I did not wish 
to keep the ships beating about, although I had certain in- 

formation of islands in this region. It would not have been — 

good sense to do this since the weather was favorable and the 
chief intention was to go in search of the Indies by way of the 
west. This was what I had promised to the King and Queen, 
and they had sent me for this purpose. 

Thursday, west sixty-three leagues, counted forty-six. 
More than forty sandpipers came to the ship in a flock and 
two boobies. A shipsboy hit one with astone. There also came 
a man-o-war bird and a white bird like a gull. The crew here 
became ever louder in their complaints but I gave as little 
heed as I was able though many were now openly mutinous 
and would have done me harm if they dared. 

Peter Gutierrez: So that, virtually, you have staked your 
life and the lives of your companions, upon the foundation of a 
mere speculative opinion. 

Columbus: So it is: I cannot deny it. But consider a lit-« _ 

tle. If at present you and I, and all our companions, were’ 

not in this vessel, in the midst of this sea, in this unknown’ 

solitude, in a state as uncertain and perilous as you please; in 
what other condition of life should we pass these days? Per- 
haps more cheerfully? or should we not rather be in some 
greater trouble or solicitude, or else full of tedium? I care 
not to mention the glory and utility we shall carry back, if 
the enterprise succeeds according to our hope. Should no 
other fruit come from this navigation, to me it appears most 
profitable inasmuch as for a time it preserves us free from 
tedium, makes life dear to us, makes valuable to us many 
things that otherwise we should not have in consideration. 
Friday, fifth of October, fifty-seven leagues, but counted 
forty-five. ‘The sea smooth and quiet. To God be given 

| 
j 

THE DISCOVERY OF THE INDIES 93 

thanks, the air being pleasant and temperate, with no weed, 
many sandpipers, and flying fish coming on the deck in 
numbers. | 

Saturday, continued the west course, forty leagues, thirty- 
three being counted. Martin Alonzo said that it would be 
best to steer west by south, that night, for the island’ of Ci- 
pango which the map showed but I thought it best to go at 
once to the continent and afterwards to the island. 

Sunday, seventh October, west twenty-three leagues, count- 
ing eighteen. This day the Nifia hoisted a flag at the mast- 
head, and fired a gun, which was the signal I had ordered that 
land had been sighted. At this time also, I ordered that at 
sunrise and sunset, all the ships should join me, because at 
these times things are most proper for seeing the greatest 
distance, the haze clearing away. No land was seen during 
the afternoon as reported by the Nifia. But we passed great 
numbers of birds flying from N. to S. W. This I believed 
to be due either to the birds going to sleep on land or that 
they were flying from the winter which might be supposed to 
be near in the land from which they were coming. And this 
in some measure consoled the men from their disappointment 
‘over the false news from the Nifia since it is known that most 
of the islands held by the Portuguese were discovered by the 
flight of birds. For this reason I resolved to give up the west 

- course and to shape a course W. S. W. for two days. We 
began the new course an hour before sunset, expecting to see 
land soon and this served to encourage the crew with renewed 
hope. fe 

_ Monday, the course W. S. W. and twelve leagues were’ 

made during the day and night. Thanks be to God the air 
is very soft like April at Seville; and it is a pleasure to be 
here, so balmy are the breezes. The weed this day is very 
fresh, there are many land birds and one was taken that was 
flying S. W., terns, ducks and a booby. 

Tuesday, ninth October, the course S. W. The wind then 

24 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

changed and I steered W. by N. four leagues. Throughout 
the night birds were heard passing. 

Wednesday, fifty-nine leagues, W. S. W.., but counted no 
more than forty-four. Here the people cpuld endure no 
longer. All now complained of the length of the voyage. But 
I cheered them as best I could, giving them good hopes of 
the advantages they might gain by it. Roused to madness 
by their fear, the captains declared they were going back but 
I told them then, that however much they might complain, — 
I had to go to the Indies and they along with me, and that I 
would go on until I found them, with the help of our Lord. 
And so for a time it passed but now all was in great danger 
from the men. 

Thursday, eleventh of October. The course was W. S. W. 
More sea than there had been during the whole of the voy- 
age. Sandpipers and a green reed near the ship. And for 
this I gave thanks to God as it was a sure sign of land. Those 
of the Pinta saw a cane and a pole, and they took up another 
small pole which appeared to be worked with iron; also an- 
other bit of cane, a land plant and a small board. The crew of 
the caravel Nifia also saw signs of land, and a small plant 
covered with berries. 

After sunset I returned to the west course. Up to two 
hours past midnight we had gone ninety miles, when the Pinta, 
which was the fastest sailer and had gone ahead, found the 
land and gave the signals. The land was first seen by Rodrigo 
de Triana. 

Though on the night before, at ten o’clock, I saw a light 
and called Peter Gutierrez and said that there seemed to be a 
light, and that he should look at it. He did so and saw it. | 
The same to Rodrigo Sanchez who at first could see nothing 
but afterward saw the light once or twice like a wax candle 
rising and falling. When they said the Salve, which all the 
sailors are accustomed to sing in their way, I admonished the 
men to keep a good lookout on the forecastle and to watch 

well for land and to him who should first cry out that he had 

THE DISCOVERY OF THE INDIES 25 

seen land I would give a silk doublet besides the other rewards 
promised by the Sovereigns which were ten thousand mara- 
vedis to him who should first see it. Two hours past midnight, 
the moon having risen at eleven o’clock and then shining 
brightly in the sky, being in its third quarter and a little 
behind Rodrigo de Triana, the land was sighted at a distance 
of about two leagues. At once I ordered them to shorten sail 
and we lay under the mainsail without the bonnets, hove to 
waiting for daylight. 

On Friday, the twelfth of October, we anchored before the 
land and made ready to go on shore. Presently we saw naked 
people on the beach. I went ashore in the armed boat and 
took the royal standard, and Martin Alonzo and Vincent 
Yariez, his brother, who was captain of the Nif#a. And we 
saw the trees very green, and much water and fruits of divers 
kinds. Presently many of the inhabitants assembled. I gave 
to some red caps and glass beads to put round their necks, 
and many other things of little value. They came to the 
ships’ boats afterward, where we were, swimming and bring- 
ing us parrots, cotton threads in skeins, darts—what they 
had, with good will. As naked as their mothers bore them, 
and so the women, though I did not see more than one young 
girl. All I saw were youtlis, well made with very handsome 
bodies and very good countenances. Their hair short and 
coarse, almost like the hairs of a horse’s tail. They paint 
themselves some black, some white, others red and others of 
what color they can find. Some paint the faces and others 
the whole body, some only round the eyes and others only on 
the nose. They are themselves neither black nor white. 

' On Saturday, as dawn broke, many of these people came 
to the beach, all youths. Their legs are very straight, all in 
one line and no belly. They came to the ship in canoes, made 
out of the trunk of a tree, all in one piece, and wonderfully 
worked, propelled with a paddle like a baker’s shovel, and go 
at a marvelous speed. 

Bright green trees, the whole land so green that it is a 

26 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

pleasure to look on it. Gardens of the most beautiful trees I 
ever saw. Later I came upon a man alone in a canoe going 
from one island to another. He had a little of their bread, 
about the size of a fist, a calabash of water, a piece of brown 
earth, powdered then kneaded, and some dried leaves which 
must be a thing highly valued by them for they bartered with 
it at San Salvador. He also had with him a native basket. 
The women wore in front of their bodies a small piece of cotton 
cloth. I saw many trees very unlike those of our coun- 
try. Branches growing in different ways and all from 
one trunk; one twig is one form and another is a different 
shape and so unlike that it is the greatest wonder in the world 
to see the diversity; thus one branch has leaves like those of 
a cane, and others like those of a mastic tree; and on a single 
tree there are five different kinds. The fish so unlike ours 
that it is wonderful. Some are the shape of dories and of the 
finest colors, so bright that there is not a man who would not 
be astounded, and would not take great delight in seeing them. 
There are also whales. I saw no beasts on land save parrots 
and lizards. 

On shore I sent the people for water, some with arms, and 
others with casks; and as it was some little distance, I waited 
two hours for them. 

During that time I walked among the trees which was the 
most beautiful thing which I had ever seen. . Be 

Eia ergo, advocata nostra, illos tuos misericordes oculos 
ad nos converte. Et J esum, benedictum fructum ventris tut, 
nobis post hoc exsiliwm ostende. O clemens, o pia, o dulces 
Maria. 

THE DESTRUCTION OF TENOCHTITLAN 

PON the orchidean beauty of the new world the old 
rushed inevitably to revenge itself after the Italian’s 
return. Such things occur in secret. Though men 

may be possessed by beauty while they work that is all they 
know of it or of their own terrible hands; they do not fathom 
the forces which carry them. Spain cannot be blamed for the 
crassness of the discoverers. They moved out across the seas 
stirred by instincts, ancient beyond thought as the depths they 
were crossing, which they obeyed under the names of King 
or Christ or whatever it might be, while they watched the 
recreative New unfolding itself miraculously before them, 
before them, deafened and blinded. Steering beyond familiar 
horizons they were driven to seek perhaps self-justification for 
victorious wars against Arab and Moor; but these things are 
the surface only. At the back, as it remains, it was the evil 
of the whole world; it was the perennial disappointment which 
follows, like smoke, the bursting of ideas. It was the spirit 
of malice which underlies men’s lives and against which noth- 
ing offers resistance. And bitter as the thought may be that 
Tenochtitlan, the barbaric city, its people, its genius wherever 
found should have been crushed out because of the awkward 
names men give their emptiness, yet it was no man’s fault. It 
was the force of the pack whom the dead drive. Cortez was 
neither malicious, stupid nor blind, but a conqueror like other 
conquerors. Courageous almost beyond precedent, tactful, 
resourceful in misfortune, he was a man of genius superbly 
suited to his task. What his hand touched went down in spite 
of him. He was one among the rest. Velasquez, the Cuban 
Governor who sent him out, traitorously attacked him from 

the rear a week afterward. His own captains would have 
27 

28 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

deserted him, so hard was he to follow. But the entire enter- 
prise lived for many years on the verge of being allowed 
to languish, ruin to succeed destruction, because of the for- 
tuitous anger which blossomed so naively, so mysteriously in 
Fonseca, Bishop of Burgos, President of the Council of the 
Indies. This the man, Cortez’ most powerful enemy, already 
so notorious for the spiteful malevolence with which he 
thwarted the views of Columbus—a logic clearer had there 
been two Fonsecas instead of the one. After a rough voyage 
from Cuba, across the gulf, Cortez landed his small force 
safely before what is now Vera Cruz, near the native city of 
Cempoal. There, lest his men should desert him in view of 
the hardships which lay ahead, he had his vessels beached, un- 
der pretext of their being no longer seaworthy, and destroyed 
them. 

Montezuma immediately sent gifts, at the same time beg- 
ging the Spaniard not to risk coming up into the back coun- 
try: a gold necklace of seven pieces, set with many gems like 
small rubies, a hundred and eighty-three emeralds and ten 
fine pearls, and hung with twenty-seven little bells of gold— 
Two wheels, one of gold like the sun and the other of silver 
with the image of the moon upon it, made of plates of those 
metals, twenty-eight hands in circumference, with figures of 
animals and other things in bas relief, finished with great skill 
and ingenuity.—A headpiece of wood and gold, adorned with 
gems, from which hung twenty-five little bells of gold, and, 
on it, instead of plume, a green bird with eyes, beak and feet 
of gold—Several shoes of the skin of deer, sewed with gold 
thread, the soles of which were made of blue and white stones 
of a brilliant appearance.—A shield of wood and leather, with 
little bells hanging to it and covered with plates of gold, in — 
the middle of which was cut the image of the god of war be- 
tween four heads of a lion, a tiger, an eagle and an owl rep- 
resented alive with their hair and feathers.—Twenty-four curi- 
ous and beautiful shields of gold, of feathers and very small 
pearls, and four of feathers and silver only.—Four fishes, two 

DESTRUCTION OF TENOCHTITLAN Qg9 

ducks and some other birds of molten gold.—A large mirror 
adorned with gold, and many small.—Miters and crowns of 
feathers and gold ornamented with pearls and gems.—Sev- 
eral large plumes of beautiful feathers, fretted with gold and 
small pearls.—Several fans of gold and silver mixed together ; 
others of feathers only, of different forms and sizes.—A va- 
riety of cotton mantles, some all white, others chequered with 
white and black, or red, green, yellow and blue; on the out- 
side rough like shaggy cloth and within destitute of color and 
nap.—A number of underwaistcoats, handkerchiefs, counter- 
panes, tapestries and carpets of cotton, the workmanship 
superior to the materials of which they were composed.—And 
books made of tablets with a smooth surface for writing, 
which being joined might be folded together or stretched out 
to a considerable length, “the characters inscribed thereon 
resembling nothing so much as Egyptian hieroglyphics.”—But 
Cortez was unwilling to turn back; rather these things whet- 
ted his appetite for the adventure. Without more ado he 
sent letters to his king advising him that having come to these 
lands to conquer them, in the royal name and that of the true 
church, he would forthwith proceed to take Montezuma, dead 
or alive, unless he should accept the faith and acknowledge 
himself a subject to the Spanish throne. 

The advance was like any similar military enterprise: it 
accomplished its purpose. Surmounting every difficulty Cor- 
tez went his way into the country past the quiet Cempoalan 
maizefields, past the smoking summit of Popocatepetl, until, 
after weeks of labor, he arrived upon the great lakes and 
the small cities in them adjoining Tenochtitlan itself. Mon- 
tezuma seeing that there was nothing else for it, sent envoys 
accompanied by three hundred warriors, who met the Spaniard 
_ advancing on the lake road and there welcomed him to the 

district with great ceremony and show of friendliness. No- 
ticeable among them was one young man of magnificent ap- 
pearance who descended from his litter and walked to meet 
the Conqueror while his followers ran before him, picking up 

30 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

stones and other small obstructions which lay in his path. 
Cortez now passed over his first causeway into one of the 
lesser lake cities, built of well-hewn stone sheer from the water. 
He was overcome with wonder. ‘The houses were so excel- 
lently put together, so well decorated with cloths and carven 
wood, so embellished with metalwork and other marks of a 
beautiful civilization; the people were so gracious; there were 
such gardens, such trees, such conservatories of flowers that 
nothing like it had ever been seen or imagined. At the house 
where the Conqueror was entertained that day and night he 
especially noted a pool built of stone into the clear waters 
of which stone steps descended, while round it were paven 
paths lined with sweet-smelling shrubs and plants and trees 
of all sorts. Also he noted the well-stocked kitchen garden. 
The following day at noon he arrived at the end of his journey. 

There it lay! a city as large as Cordova or Seville, entirely 
within the lake two miles from the mainland: Tenochtitlan. 
Four avenues or entrances led to it, all formed of artificial 
causeways. Along the most easterly of these, constructed of 
great beams perfectly hewn and fitted together, and measuring 
two spears-lengths in width, the Christian advanced. Run- 
ning in at one side of the city and out at the other this avenue 
constituted at the same time its principal street. As Cortez 
drew nearer he saw, right and left, magnificent houses and 
temples, close to the walls of which, each side, moved parallel 
rows of priests in black robes, and, between them, supported 
by two attendants, Montezuma, on foot, down the center of 
the roadway. Cortez stepped forward but the attendants in- 
terceded. The Emperor then advanced alone and with great 
simpleness of manner placed a golden chain about the Chris- 
tian’s neck. Then taking him by the hand, and the whole 
procession following, he conducted him to the quarters which 
had been chosen for the visitors, a great building close to the 
royal palaces in the center of the city. Everything had been 
prepared in advance: all the material needs together with 
rich gifts, as before: precious metals, gems, male and female 

re a pa le + 
OO ee 

DESTRUCTION OF TENOCHTITLAN 81 

apparel of remarkable elegance, ornamental hangings for bed- 
chambers, tapestries for halls and temples, counterpanes 
composed of feathers interwoven with cotton, and many beauti- 
ful and curious artifices “of so costly and unusual workman- 
ship that considering their novelty and wonderful beauty no 
price could be set on them.” Here in this large building whose 
great hall was to serve the Spaniards for barracks from that 
time until the end, Montezuma and Cortez found themselves 
seated at last face to face. Montezuma spoke: ‘They have 
told you that I possess houses with walls of gold and many 
other such things and that I am a god or make myself one. 
The houses you see are of stone and lime and earth.”—'Then 
opening his robe: “You see that I am composed of flesh and 
bone like yourselves and that I am mortal and palpable to the 
touch.”—To this smiling sally, so full of gentleness and 
amused irony, Cortez could reply nothing save to demand that 
the man declare himself a subject of the Spanish King forth- 
with and that, furthermore, he should then and there announce 
publicly his allegiance to the new power.—Whatever the Aztec 
may have felt during the weeks of Cortez’ slow advance upon 
his capital from the seashore, nothing at the present moment 
_ seemed to disturb his aristocratic reserve. He had thought 
and he had made up his mind. Without semblance of anger, 
fear or impatience; without humility or protest but with the 
force bred of a determination to face at any cost a situation 
fast going beyond his control, he spoke again. He explained 
that his people were not the aborigines of the land but that 
_ they had emigrated there in times past and ended by accepting 
the Spanish Monarch as his rightful and hereditary master. 
After due announcements and explanations had been made to 
the people Cortez became the acknowledged regent, in the name 
_ of Castile and the true church, for all that country. 

Streets, public squares, markets, temples, palaces, the city 
spread its dark life upon the earth of a new world, rooted 
there, sensitive to its richest beauty, but so completely removed 
from those foreign contacts which harden and protect, that 

32 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

at the very breath of conquest it vanished. The whole world 
of its unique associations sank back into the ground to be 
reénkindled, never. Never, at least, save in spirit; a spirit 
mysterious, constructive, independent, puissant with natural 
wealth; light, if it may be, as feathers; a spirit lost in that soil. 
Scarcely an element in the city’s incredible organization but 
evidenced an intellectual vigor full of resource and delicacy 
which had given it distinction. Half land and half water the 
streets were navigated by canoes and bridged at the intersec- 
tions by structures of great timbers over which ten horses 
could go abreast. For water supply a masonry pipe, two paces 
broad and five feet high, ran from the mainland over one of 
the great causeways, carrying excellent drinking water. There 
were two such aqueducts, side by side, each to be used alter- 
nately while the other was cleaning. There were public 
squares, and one of great size surrounded by porticoes where 
daily sixty thousand souls engaged in buying and selling under 
the supervision of twelve central magistrates and numbers of 
inspectors. Here “everything which the world affords” was 
offered for purchase, from the personal services of laborers 
and porters to the last refinements of bijouterie; gold, silver, 
lead, brass, copper, tin; wrought and unwrought stone, bricks 
burnt and unburnt, timber hewn and unhewn, of ‘different 
sorts; game of every variety, fowls, quails, partridges, wild 
ducks, parrots, pigeons, reed-birds, sparrows, eagles, hawks, 
owls, likewise the skins of some birds of prey with their feath- 
ers, head, beak and claws; rabbits, hares, deer and little dogs, 
which they raised for eating; wood and coals in abundance and 
brasiers of earthenware for burning coals; mats of various 
kinds; all kinds of green vegetables, especially onions, leeks, 
watercresses, nasturtium, sorrel, artichokes and golden thistle; 
fruits, fish, honey, grain—either whole, in the form of flour 
or baked into loaves; different kinds of cotton thread of all 

colors; jars, jugs, pots and an endless variety of vessels, all — 

made of fine clay, most of them glazed and painted; eggs, 
cakes, patés of birds and fish; wine from the maguey;; finally 

ee eee 

DESTRUCTION OF TENOCHTITLAN 33 

everything that could be found throughout the whole country 
was sold there, each kind of merchandise in a separate street 
or quarter of the market assigned to it exclusively, and thus 
the best order was preserved. There was an herb street, there 
were shops where they shaved and washed the head, and res- 
taurateurs who furnished food and drink at a price. 

Large numbers of temples existed throughout the great 
city, but for grandeur and excellence of architectural detail 
one far surpassed the rest. Forty towers, lofty and well built, 
rose from within its sacred precinct, the largest of which, con- 
structed of hewn stone remarkably hard in texture, had fifty 
steps leading to its main body. A mass higher than the ca- 
thedral of Seville. Three halls of wonderful extent and height, 
adorned with figures sculptured in wood and stone, contained 
the principal idols. And from these, through very small 
doors, opened the chapels, to which no light was admitted, nor 
any person except the priests, and not all of them. Decorated 
with curious imagery in stone, the woodwork carved in relief 
and painted with figures of monsters and other things, un- 
paved, darkened and bloodstained, it was in these chapels that 
the religious practices which so shocked the Christian were 
performed. Here it was that the tribe’s deep feeling for a 
reality that stems back into the permanence of remote origins 
had its firm hold. It was the earthward thrust of their logic; 
_ blood and earth; the realization of their primal and continuous 
identity with the ground itself, where everything is fixed in 
darkness. The priests in black robes, tribal men, never cutting 
or combing the hair; the instinctive exclusion of women from 
all places of worship; the debarring of priests from female 
society: it was a ceremonial acknowledgment of the deep sex- 
less urge of life itself, the hungry animal, underlying all other 
power; the mysterious secret of existence whose cruel beauty 
they, the living, inherited from the dead. The same for their 
sculpture. It is the mystery of the past which monsters, gro- 
tesques, beasts combined with the human, truly signify—gen- 
tle animal associations distorted by the invasions of night— 

34 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

and not a debased instinct whose reliance is necessarily upon 
oppression and fear. The earth is black and it is there: only 
art advances. The figures of the idols themselves were of 
extra-human size and composed, significantly, of a paste of 
seeds and leguminous plants, commonly used for food, ground 
and mixed together and kneaded with human blood, the whole 
when completed being consecrated with a bath of blood from 
the heart of a living victim. The chief of these idols Cortez 
precipitated from their pedestals and cast down the temple 
steps; an act of extraordinary daring; at the same time puri- 
fying the chapels and setting up in them images of Our Lady 
and the saints. Such a stroke could not fail to have proved 
of the most serious consequence to all had not Montezuma 
again displayed his tact, self-control and remarkable grasp of 
the changing situation. The new state of affairs was accepted, 
human sacrifice was abolished and the orderly significance of 
the events taking place was publicly made evident. In per- 
son, together with many of the principal citizens, he, Monte- 
zuma, assisted at the final purification of the chapels. 
Whether or not this be evidence on the Aztec’s part of weak- 
ness or the deepest forbearance, surely nothing like it for quiet 
flexibility of temper and retained dignity has ever been re- 
corded. Perhaps by a sudden, daring stroke this man might 
have rid himself of the intestine enemy who was each day, each 
week, striking deeper at the nation’s life. Perhaps fear had 
unmanned him. Perhaps what we call forbearance was no 
more than the timidity which is an overwhelming agony of 
heart inspired by the sight of a resistless force aimed at our 
destruction. Still, if this be so, Montezuma has left no trace 
of cowardice upon the records. But weakling or genius, about 
the suave personality of this barbaric chieftain the liveliest, 
most airily expansive moods of the race did flower, just as the 
black permanence of tribal understanding stood rooted in the 
priesthood. Perhaps it was a conscious knowledge of this 
that inspired and moved Montezuma in the present action. 
Surely no other prince has lived, or will ever live, in such 

es a. ee 

a 

™ 
Oe a Ta 

DESTRUCTION OF TENOCHTITLAN 35 

state as did this American cacique. The whole waking aspira- 
tions of his people, opposed to and completing their religious 
sense, seemed to come off in him and in him alone: the drive 
upward, toward the sun and the stars. He was the very per- 
son of their ornate dreams, so delicate, so prismatically color- 
ful, so full of tinkling sounds and rhythms, so tireless of in- 
vention. Never was such a surface lifted above the isolate 
blackness of such profound savagery. It is delightful to know 
that Montezuma changed his clothes four times a day, donning 
four different suits, entirely new, which he never wore again; 
that at meals he was served in a great clean-swept chamber on 
mats upon the floor, his food being kept warm in chafing dishes 
containing live coals; that at meals he sat upon a small cushion 
“curiously wrought of leather.” But nowhere in his state was 
the stark power of beauty, the refined and the barbaric, so 
exquisitely expressed as in his smaller palaces and places of 
amusement. ‘What can be more wonderful than that a bar- 
barous monarch, as he is, should have every object in his do- 
main imitated in gold, silver, precious stones and feathers; the 
gold and silver being wrought so naturally as not to be sur- 
passed by any smith in the world; the stonework executed 
with such perfection that it is difficult to conceive what instru- 
ments could have been used, and the feather work superior 
tothe finest production in wax and embroidery.” “There is 
one palace inferior to the rest, attached to which is a beautiful 
garden with balconies extending over it supported by marble 
columns and having a floor formed of jasper elegantly inlaid. 
Belonging to it are ten pools, in which are kept the different 
- species of water birds found in the country, all domesticated: 
for the sea birds there are pools of salt water and for the 
river birds, fresh water. Each species being supplied with the 
food natural to it when wild. Over the pools are corridors and 
galleries, to which Montezuma resorts, and from which~he 
can look out and amuse himself with the sight of the birds 
there.” “In an apartment of the same palace there are men, 
women and children whose faces, bodies, hair, eyebrows and 

86 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

eyelashes were white from birth.” “The Emperor has another 
very beautiful palace, with a large courtyard, paved with 
handsome flags in the style of a chessboard. ‘There are cages 
about nine feet in height and six paces square, each of which 
is half covered with a roof of tiles, and the other half has 
over it a wooden grate, skilfully made. Every cage contains 
a bird of prey, of all species.” “In the same palace there 
are several large halls on the ground floor, filled with im- 
mense cages built of heavy pieces of timber, well put together, 
in which are kept lions, wolves, foxes and a great variety of 
other animals of the cat kind.” “The care of these animals 
and birds is assigned to three hundred men.” Daily the Em- 
peror’s wine cellar and larder were open to all who wished to 
eat and drink. His meals were served by three or four hundred 
youths who brought on an infinite variety of dishes; mdeed, 
whenever he dined or supped, the table was loaded with every 
kind of fish, flesh, fruits and vegetables which the country 
afforded. Both at the beginning and end of every meal they 
furnished water for the hands, and the napkins used « on these 
occasions were never employed a second time. 

And then the end: Cortez had demanded gold from the 
first. To satisfy him, small groups of two Spaniards and two 
Indians, bearing the proper credentials, had been despatched 
about the Aztec’s domain, to distances in some cases of several 
hundred miles, that the tribute be collected. On one of these 
forays the two Christians were killed. Cortez immediately 
seized the person of Montezuma, together with his daughters 
and sons, imprisoning them in the garrison-fortress. From 
that time on, it was merely a matter of detail and of time as 
to what form the final catastrophe would take. Events shifted 
back and forth until in May, seven months after the Span- 
iards’ first entrance to the city, the people laid siege to the 
intolerable intruders, determined to have done with them. In 
answer to shouts from outside, Montezuma, a prisoner within, 
had appeared on the ramparts of the besieged fortress whence 
he implored his people to give over their attacks. In reply he 

a 

: 

DESTRUCTION OF TENOCHTITLAN 37 

was struck on the head by a stone which killed him, Only the 
horse and the ordnance saved the Christians on that memorable 
retreat across the great causeway. Fighting madly to escape 
with some remnant of his forces through the masses of the 
enemy, and to retain at the same time his prisoners and treas- 
ure, Cortez lost everything. The children of Montezuma, the 
gold, everything perished over the sides of the breached and 
beleaguered avenue across the lake down which the Spaniards 
retreated, foot by foot, with swarms of Indians flinging them- 
selves continually upon them. They escaped. Some months 
later they returned and continued the destruction, this time 
deliberately and with calculated malintention. Tenochtitlan 
surrounded, the water supply cut off, the augmented Spanish 
forces began to burrow forward and after weeks of desperate 
effort they succeeded in their plans. It was the horses the 
Indians feared most. At one time they had Cortez in their 
very hands only to have them cut off at the wrists by his fol- 
lowers. But nothing could bemuse them now. They knew 
now what it all meant and they opposed themselves to the 
intruder inflexibly and without murmur until the end. Neither 
the overwhelming means used against them, their desertion 
by friends of the nearby tribes, the lack of water, starvation, 
nor attempts to inspire them with fear, made the slightest im- 
pression. ‘To every advance made inviting them to parley 
they had but the one answer: no! Cortez, dejected, seeing 
that it would be necessary to exterminate them before.he could 
succeed in taking the city and dreading the horror of such a 
course, decided with reluctance, in order to impress them, to 
burn the noble edifices in the great square which had served 
Montezuma for aviaries. “It grieved me much but it grieved 
the enemy more.” Each day he heard mass and returned to 
the city to renew the attack upon the now nearly starved in- 
habitants who had retreated to the market quarter and there 
still held out. At one time during a successful sally the In- 
- dians had killed two of the Spanish horses and in great spirits 
had sent the severed heads by messengers in canoes to the sur- 

38 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

rounding tribes for them to come to the rescue, but none dared. 
Most had already joined the Christian in his irresistible pur- 
pose. But Guatemotzin, the young nephew of Montezuma, 
would not give in. Women and children reduced to the last 
extremity by hunger and privation were wandering dazed 
about the streets when the Spaniards had made their final 
charge. But Guatemotzin, taken captive from a boat in an 
effort to get to the mainland, still maintained his pride and 
integrity of spirit. He had done all that he could and he 
was beaten. Placing his hand upon the hilt of Cortez’ dagger, 
he asked the Spaniard to draw it and plunge it into his heart. 
Cortez refused. Later the Conqueror tried to rebuild the city. 
Viva quien vence! 

THE FOUNTAIN OF ETERNAL YOUTH 

ISTORY, history! We fools, what do we know or 
care? History begins for us with murder and en- 
slavement, not with discovery. No, we are not In- 

dians but we are men of their world. The blood means noth- 
ing; the spirit, the ghost of the land moves in the blood, moves 
the blood. It is we who ran to the shore naked, we who cried, 
“Heavenly Man!” These are the inhabitants of our souls, our 
murdered souls that lie... agh. Listen! I tell you it was 
lucky for Spain the first ship put its men ashore where it did. 
If the Italian had landed in Florida, one twist of the helm 
north, or among the islands a hair more to the south; among 
the Yemasses with their sharpened bones and fishspines, or 
among the Caribs with their poisoned darts—it might have 
begun differently. 

When in the later years Ponce found his plantations go- 
ing under for lack of slaves—no more to be trapped in Puerto 
Rico, rico! all ruined—he sought and obtained a royal patent 
to find more in the surrounding islands. He was granted the 
right to hunt out and to take the Caribs; the Caribs whom The 
Great Maker had dropped through a hole in the sky among 
their islands; they whose souls lived in their bodies, many 
souls in one body; they who fought their enemies, ate them; 
whose gods lived, Mabouya, in the forest, Oumekon, by the 
sea—there were other gods— 

His ship came into Guadeloupe—the great sulphur cone 
back of the water. He had arrived straight from Spain, hot 
foot after niggers. Having much soiled linen aboard from the 
long trip, he ordered his laundresses ashore, with a body of 
troops to guard them, where a stream could be observed com- 

ing down to the sea. 
39 

40 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

It was a paradise. A stream of splashing water, the lux- 
uriant foliage. A gorge, a veritable tunnel led upstream be- 
tween cliffwalls covered by thick vines in flower attended by 
ensanguined hummingbirds which darted about from cup to 
cup in the green light. But the soul of the Carib was on the 
alert among the leaves. It was too late. 

Fierce and implacable we kill them but their souls domi- 
nate us. Our men, our blood, but their spirit is master. It 
enters us, it defeats us, it imposes itself. We are moderns— 
madmen at Paris—all lacking in a ground sense of cleanliness. 
It is the Caribs leaping out, facing the arquebuses, thinking 
it thunder, looking up at the sky: No rain! No clouds! Then 
the second volley. Their comrades bleeding, dead. Kill! 
Not a Spaniard but they stretched out in the streambed. 
Hagh, I can hear the laundresses squeal on the shore—run 
hither and thither. The devils had them safe. Let old Ponce 
sit up in his hammock on the poop of his ship. Let him send 
other boats ashore. The Indians have grabbed up the women. 
Three naked savages shot through the chest from behind be- 
fore they could gain the forest rolled over and gripped the 
females they had been carrying by the throat with their teeth. 
Worth being a laundress to be carried off that way, eh? Nice 
psychologic study, those women. And the damned blood- 
hound, Berrescien. Ponce had got his belly full. They out- 
flanked him in canoes, ridiculed his strategy, took his chain- 
shot in the chest and came back for more. They drove him 
off, so much so that they made him forget his dog, the pre- 
cious Berrescien, of whom he thought more, that and his hidal- 
gan pride, than—a population. The hound had been left 
behind in their scared flight. They saw him, they in the re- 
treating boats, leap from the woods in pursuit of a flying 
Carib. Listen to this. The Indian swam out, the Spaniards 
in the boats turned back for the beast. The dog was steadily 
gaining on his victim. But, O Soul of the New World, the 
man had his bow and arrow with him as he swam. ‘Tell that 
to Wilson. He stopped, turned, raised his body half out of 

FOUNTAIN OF ETERNAL YOUTH 4 

the water, treading it, and put a bolt into the damned hound’s 
throat—whom sharks swallowed. Then to shore, not forget- 
ting—leaping to safety—to turn and spit back the swallowed 
_chainshot, a derisive yell at the Christians. 

They had the women and the dog. They left what they 
had defeated, to—us. 

* 8 & 

If men inherit souls this is the color of mine. We are, 
too, the others. Think of them! ‘The main islands were 
thickly populated with a peaceful folk when Christ-over found 
them. But the orgy of blood which followed, no man has 
written. We are the slaughterers. It is the tortured soul of 
our world. Indians have no souls; that was it. That was 
what they said. But they knew they lied—the blood-smell 
proof. Ponce had been with the discoverer on his second trip. 
He became a planter. Sugar cane was imported from the 
Canaries, maize was adopted from the Indian souls. But 
revenues dwindled where none would work save in the traffic 
in girls: nine years old, reads the Italian’s journal. Slaves. 
The Indians having no souls knew what freedom means. The 
Spaniards killed their kings, betrayed, raped, murdered their 
women and children; hounded them into the mountains. 
Ponce with wife and children in the Casa Blanca was one of the 
bloodthirstiest. ‘They took them in droves, forced them to 
labor. It was impossible to them—not having been born to 
baptism. How maddening it is to the spirit to hear:—Bands 
of them went into the forests, their forests, and hanged them- 
selves to the trees. What else? Islands—paradise. Sur- 
rounded by seas. On all sides “heavenly man” bent on murder. 
Self-privilege. Two women and one man on a raft had got- 
ten one hundred and fifty miles out to sea—such seamen were 
they—then luck again went against the Indian. Captured and 
back to slavery. Caravels crept along the shore by night. 
Next morning when women and children came down to the 
shore to fish—fine figures, straight black hair, high cheek- 
bones, a language—they caught them, made them walk in 

42 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

bands, cut them down if they fainted, slashed off breasts, arms 
—women, children. Gut souls— 
* & # 

Thus the whole free population was brought into slavery 
or killed off. Aboujoubo, greatest chief in the island of San 
Ion, retreated in anguish to a rocky height. Ponce, now Gov- 
ernor, since he dare not economically murder every one, sallies 
out and is received by a native queen, girls dancing, gives 
one a gold crucifix, legend says. ‘Two years later finds her 
under a bush, both hands hacked off. Belly-hurt he digs a 
shallow grave with his sword for her and shoves the gold sym- 
bol into his wallet. He exchanges names with a chief, sacred 
symbol of Indian faith and friendship. Hounds him out later: 
I am Juan Ponce de Leon! says the savage, standing before 
his followers—hanged nevertheless. The hound, Berrescien, 
gone ahead into a rocky place, comes spinning back, tumbling 
down, knocking against rocks, a gash in his forehead. Ponce 
defeated, embittered has the dog stretched upon a litter of 
leaves and branches and carried to the ship. 

Do these things die? Men who do not know what lives, are 
themselves dead. In the heart there are living Indians once 
slaughtered and defrauded—Indians that live also in subtler 
ways: Ponce at fifty-two was rich, the murderous campaigns 
of his youth had subjugated the island—allayed his lust of 
common murder. The island was, in any case, mostly con- 
quered. 

An old Indian woman among his slaves, began to tell him 
of an island, Bimini, a paradise of fragrant groves, of all 
fruits. And in the center of it a fountain of clearest water 
of virtue to make old men young. Think of that! Picture 
to yourself the significance of that—as revenge, as irony, as 
the trail of departing loveliness, fata morgana. Yet the real, 
the thing destroyed turning back with a smile. Think of the 
Spaniard listening. Gold. Gold. Riches. And figure to 
yourself the exquisite justice of it: an old woman, loose 
tongued—loose sword—the book, her soul already half out 

FOUNTAIN OF ETERNAL YOUTH 48 

of her with sorrow: abandoned by a Carib who had fled back 
to his home having found Borequien greatly overrated. Her 
children enslaved— 

The man, fifty-two, listened. Something has escaped him. 
At that moment rich, idle, he was relieved of his governorship. 
Vessels, three. He fitted them up at his own cost. Men 
enough, eager to serve the old master, rushed to his banner. 
Let the new governor complain that he was taking away too 
many able soldiers. Ponce smiled. Men whose terms of 
service had expired do as they please. 

Por donde va la mar 
Vayan las arenas— 

They sailed north. It was March. In the wind, what? 
Beauty the eternal. White sands and fragrant woods, fruits, 
riches, truth! The sea, the home of permanence, drew them 
on into its endless distances. Again the new! Do you feel 
it? The murderer, the enslaver, the terror striker, the de- 
stroyer of beauty, drawn on by beauty across the glancing 
tropical seas—before Drake, before the galleons. The rhythm 
of the waves, birds, fish, seaweed as on the first voyage. They 
even put in at Guanahani for water—Columbus’ first land- 
fall; then populous, inviting ; now desolate, defeated, murdered 
—unpeopled. 

March! Spring! to the north. The argosy of the New 
World! In search of eternal youth. In search of the island 
of Bimini—an old woman’s tale. The destroyer. Admon- 
ished that he had done enough, still there floated a third world 
to discover: no end—away from the beginning—tail chaser. 

A Carne de lobo 
Diente de perro 

he could not halt—no end. Curious that Amino—the boy 
of Palos who watched Columbus prepare his vessels for the 
first voyage and went on the second—should be his pilot. Sea 
scud. ‘The same piloted Cortez to Mexico. 

44 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

Let them go. They found nothing but a row of white 
islands called “The Martyrs,” a catch of turtles, Las Tortugas, 
a sandy coastline, a devil of a current that shoved them 
about and devilish Indians who drove them back from the 
watering places—flamingoes, pelicans, egrets, herons—Rous- 
seau has it. Thickets with striped leaves, ferns emerging from 
the dark, palms, the heat, the moon, the stars, the sun in a 
pool of swampwater. Fish fly. In the water seals—back to 
Cuba. 

Old now, heavy at heart over the death of his bloody pet, 
Ponce retired to his Casa Blanca and sulked for three years. 
Then came the news of Cortez’ triumph and the wealth of 
Montezuma. 

Ponce— 
de Leon 
en nombre y podesta 
—the victor, 
now defeated, must stir again. Back to Florida thinking 
to find on the continent, he only then found that he had dis- 
covered, another Tehuantepec. 

But this time the Yamasses put an arrow into his thigh at 
the first landing—and let out his fountain. They flocked to 
the beach, jeered him as he was lifted to the shoulders of his 
men and carried away. Dead. 

ee ae 

DE SOTO AND THE NEW WORLD 

HE—Courage is strength—and you are vigilant, saga- 
cious, firm besides. But I am beautiful—as “a cane box, 
called petaca, full of unbored pearls.” I am beautiful: a 

city greater than Cuzco; rocks loaded with gold as a comb with 
honey. Believe it. You will not dare to cease following me—at 
Apalchi, at Cutifachiqui, at Mabilla, turning from the sea, 
facing inland. And in the end you shall receive of me, nothing 
—save one long caress as of a great river passing forever 
upon your sweet corse. Balboa lost his eyes on the smile of 
the Chinese ocean ; Cabeca de Vaca lived hard and saw much; 
Pizarro, Cortez, Coronado—but you, Hernando de Soto, 
keeping the lead four years in a savage country, against odds, 
“without fortress or support of any kind,” you are mine, Black 
Jasmine, mine.— 
* * & 

On Friday, the thirtieth day of May, in the year 1548, the 
army, fresh from Cuba, landed in Florida, on the west coast, 
two leagues from the town of an Indian chief named Ucita. 
The ground was very fenny and encumbered with dense 
thickets and high trees. 

From this place, Espiritu Santo, they began their event- 
ful journey, having first sent a small squadron north to find 
a base toward which they might travel. And they waited 
two months for its return “which seemed like a thousand years,” 
but finally the ships appeared and with good news. De Soto 
divided his forces, sending a few back to Cuba and leaving 
some others as a garrison at the place they then occupied. 
With the rest he set out paralleling the coast toward Anhaica 

Apalachi where they were to spend the winter that year. The 
45 

46 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

course was north and west, a march of about a hundred leagues 
—through obscure and intricate parts: native villages in the 
swamps, Caliquen, Napateca, Hurripacuxi, Paracoxi, Tocaste, 
Cale—outlandish names. 

She—Who will recognize them? None but you. To the 
rest without definition but to you each a thing in itself, deli- 
cate, pregnant with sudden meanings. 

* #* * 

The way had been difficult: through a great morass, mis- 
led, ambuscaded at the fords, fighting, swimming, starving for 
a month at a.time, thankful for a little parched corn, not even 
ripe, the cob and all being eaten as it was, and the stalk, too, 

for want of better. 
* * #& 

She—It is de Soto! all goes forward somehow. But I am 
before you. It is my country. Everything is in accordance 
with my wish. Eight men start from a thicket, naked and 
tattooed, your lancers rush upon them, but one falls to his 
knees crying out, “Do not kill me. I am a Christian! It is 
Juan Ortiz, relic of Narvaez’ forces, whom I have nursed 
tenderly for you these twelve years, teaching him the wild 
language. Witness my love. But I shall take him from you 
when he is most needed.”— 

* £ @ 
At Anhaica Apalachi, through the winter, they lived with 

difficulty on game and other stores, such as they could take 
from the natives, miserably, as best they were able. 

On Wednesday, the third of March, 1549, the Governor 

left his winter quarters at Apalachi to seek Yupaha, of which 
a young slave had told them: a country toward the rising sun, 
governed by a woman, where there was gold in quantity. 
Now the second year was starting. Led by the youth they 
continued to bear east and north in the hope of finding the 
country of which he had spoken: days, weeks, a month—with 

So ee a ee 

DE SOTO AND THE NEW WORLD 4W 

small food, such want of meat and salt that oftentimes, in 
many places, a sick man would say, “Now, if I had but a slice 
of meat, or only a few lumps of salt, I should not thus die.” 
But the Indians, skillful with the bow, would get abundance of 
deer, turkeys, rabbits and other game. Crossing a stream 
after nine last days of forced marching they came out into a 
pine grove on the far bank. Here all direction was lost. “He 
went about for the road and returned to us desperate.” 

The Governor had brought thirteen sows to Florida, which 
had increased to three hundred swine; and the maize having 
failed for three days, he ordered killed daily, for each man, 
half a pound of pork, on which small allowance, and some 
boiled herbs, the people with much difficulty lived. 

From Apalachi in Florida to Cutifachiqui, on the Savanna 
River, two days march from the sea, where presently after the 
greatest hardships they arrived, they had traveled northeast 
it may be four hundred and thirty leagues. At this place, it 
appeared well to all to make a settlement; but Soto, as it was 
his object to find another treasure like that of Atabalipa, lord 
of Peru, would not be content to stay. The natives were 
asked if they had knowledge of any great lord further on, to 
which they answered that twelve days’ travel thence was a 
province called Chiaha, subject to a chief of Coca. 

The Governor then resolved, having rested his army, to go 
at once in quest of that country, taking with him a quantity 
of pearls which the cacique had given him; and being an in- 

flexible man, and dry of word, who, although he liked to 
know what the others all thought and had to say, after he had 
once made up his mind he did not like to be opposed, and as he 
ever acted as he thought best, all bent to his will. So they 
turned north and continued forward until the fall, bending 
about through a quiet country. 

* * * 

She—For you I come severally as envoys from the chief 
men upon the road, bearing baskets of mulberries, a honey 
comb, marten skins and the hides of deer, and in calabashes 

48 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

the oil of walnuts and bear fat, drawn like olive oil, clear and 
of good taste.— 
* & * 

And what? Silences, death, rotting trees; insects “so that 
the sails were black with them and the men laughed, in spite 
of their forlorn condition, to see each others’ faces so swollen 
and out of shape in the morning;” alligators, reptiles, a wild 
rose “like that of Spain, but with less leaves, because it grew 
in the woods.” Sun, moon, stars, rain, heat, snow; water to 
the neck for days; blue-butterflies among the green palmetto 
leaves; grapes and others that grow on vines along the ground ; 
plums of two sorts, vermillion and gray, of the form and size 
of walnuts, having three or four stones in them; wolves, deer, 
jackals, rabbits,— 

* & # 
She—To make you lonesome, ready for my caresses. 
* & # 

‘“Unprepared, we believed ourselves on a footing of peace, 
so much so that some of us, putting our arms in the luggage, 
had gone without any.” 

Then to battle! It is Mabilla, the staked town. 

x oe # 

She—lIt is I, in my son, Tuscaloosa; tall of person, muscu- 
lar, lean and symmetrical. All is you; I, too, am all—one 
either side. Men, horses, hogs—all goes down in our fury. 
Now you feel me. Many times I shall drive you back from 
the palisades. But you come again. What shall I do to 
govern that lust—which if it break, I am the most defeated? 
Those in chains having set down their burdens near the fence, 
my people lift them on their backs and bring them into the 

town. Thus, to anger you, I have possession of all the bag- 
gage, the clothes, pearls and whatever else you had besides— 
lost in the conflagration. I am strong! I shall possess you. 

Oh, but I lie. I am weak. I fail. I cannot take you. 
What are they but savages—who know nothing? they wound 
you, they wound you, and every arrow has upon its barbs a 

DE SOTO AND THE NEW WORLD 49 

kiss from my lips. There is one in your thigh, between the 
edges of the armor. Thrice you fall before reaching the gate! 
The fools, madmen. It is into my own flesh, fifty, a hundred 
times deeper than into yours. And me it kills—but you, though 
you cannot grip the saddle because of it, you fight standing 
all day in the stirrups. I divide myself to take you and it is 
myself that wounds myself, jealous even of your injuries, 
furious at that sweet touch of your flesh which my tools en- 
joy but I have—not yet. It is all you. The young Syl- 
vestre fainting on the back track; Pedro Moron diving from 
the bridge with a shower of arrows about him—swimming to 
safety ; Don Carlos, alighting to pull an arrow from his horse’s 
breast at the stockade, receives one himself, in at the neck, 
out behind—and falls prostrate. 
* # 8 

After heaviest losses in men, beasts and possessions they 
prevailed and of the Indians all were killed, two thousand 
five hundred more or less, all having fought with the utmost 
bravery and devotion. 

The Governor now learning that Francisco Maldonado 
was waiting for him at the port of Ochuse, six days’ travel 
distant to the southward, he caused Juan Ortiz to keep the 
news secret, that he might not be interrupted in his purpose; 
because the pearls he wished to send to Cuba for show, that 
their fame might raise the desire of coming to Florida, had 
been lost, and he feared that, hearing of him without seeing 
_ gold or silver or other thing of value from that land, it would 
come to have such a reputation that no one would be found 
willing to go there when men would be wanted; so he deter- 
mined to send no news of himself until he should discover a 
rich country. So that to Tuscaloosa must be given credit, in 
effect, for a great victory. 

On Sunday, the eighteenth of November, the sick being 
found to be getting well, the Governor again set out, moving 
west, to Chicaca, a small town of twenty houses, but well 
stocked with maize. There he determined to pass the second 

50 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

winter. The Indians, at peace, came frequently with turkeys 
and rabbits and other food—but secretly they were plotting 
other matters. 

Suddenly, on a certain night, the air above the straw 
roofs is filled with flame. Sentries and the enemy arrive in the 
town together; a terrific confusion, four columns converging 
upon the same point. Indians moving about freely in the 
town, because of the peace that existed, had that night brought 
the fire in little pots, not to be seen. Everything is aflame. 
Men come out naked from their. beds. The horses strive to 
free themselves, some succeed. 'The hogs squeal and perish. 
Soto and one other are all that are able to mount. He drives 
upon an Indian with his lance and transpierces him. His 
saddle girth, hastily adjusted, slips and he falls. Who will 
straighten out the confusion in the night? Who will gather 
the naked and disarmed soldiers, among the smoke, the flames, 
the noise? The Governor is up. He directs as best he can. 
But, by luck, the horses dashing about through the smoke, 
spread terror to the savages who think it the cavalry forming 
for an attack. Alarmed they escape from the stockade. 

* * & 

She—Naked, armless, acold you draw off, in the morning, 
to Chicacilla, protecting yourself as best you can—there to 
retemper the swords and await what will happen. Some are 
reduced to straw mats for their only cover, lying now this 
way, now that to the fire, keeping warm as they are able. 

And for this your people begin to hate you. It is my 
work. But again I am defeated, your last thought shall be for 
their safety. Because you have found no gold, only increas- 
ing hardships; because of your obstinacy, unexplained, in- 
credible to them—you will be compared meanly with far lesser 

spirits. It is their revenge, making you solitary—ready for 

my caresses. ~ 

And if, to survive, you yourself in the end turned native, 
this victory is sweetest of all. Bitter the need that at Nilco 
will cause that horrid slaughter: You already sick, in grave 

ee a 

— OY 

ee 

DE SOTO AND THE NEW WORLD 51 

danger, thinking of the men. Let them talk, my Indian: I 
will console you. None but you, the wise, the brave, could 
have answered. 

* & & 

At Chicacilla, the balance of the winter over, once more 
they gathered their strength and again set out to the west- 
ward, beginning the third summer. There was a town Quiz- 
quiz. Here, after struggling seven days through a wilder- 
ness having many pondy places, with thick forests, they came 
out upon the Great River. 

He went to look at the river: swift and very deep; the 
water, flowing turbidly, bringing from above many trees and 
much timber, driven onward by its force. 

The next day the chief of that country arrived. 

. * * #& 

She—It is I. 

* * * 

Two hundred canoes filled with men having weapons. 
They were painted with ochre, wearing great bunches of 
white and other plumes of many colors, having feathered 
shields in their hands, with which they sheltered the oarsmen 
on either side, the warriors standing erect from bow to stern, 
holding bows and arrows. The barge in which the chief came 
had an awning at the poop under which he sat; and there, from 
under the canopy, where the chief man was, the course was 
directed and orders issued to the rest. All came down together, 
and arrived within a stone’s throw of the ravine, whence the 
chief said to the Governor, who was walking along the river 
bank, with others who bore him company, that he had come to 
visit, serve and obey him. The Governor expressed his pleas- 
ure, and besought him to land, that they might the better con- 
fer; but the chief gave no reply, ordering three barges to 
draw near, wherein were great quantity of fish, and loaves like 
bricks, made of pulp of plums, which Soto receiving, gave 
him thanks and again entreated him to land. 

Making the gifts had been a pretext, to discover if any 

52 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

harm might be done; but finding the Governor and his people 
on their guard, the chief began to draw off from the shore, 
when the crossbowmen, who were in readiness, with loud cries 
shot at the Indians, and struck down five or six of them. 

* * # 

She—Well done, Spaniard! like an Indian. Witness then 
my answer: 

* # # 

They retired with great order, not one leaving the oar, 
even though the one next to him might have fallen, and cover- 
ing themselves they withdrew. These were fine lookmg men, 
very large and well formed; and what with the awnings, the 
plumes, and the shields, the pennons, and the number of peo- 
ple in the fleet, it appeared like a famous armada of galleys. 

During the thirty days that were passed there, four 
piraguas were built, into three of which one morning, three 
hours before daybreak, the Governor ordered twelve cavalry 
to enter, four in each, men in whom he had confidence that 
they would gain the land notwithstanding the natives and 
secure passage or die. So soon as they had come ashore the 
piraguas returned and when the sun was two hours high, the 
people had all got over. The distance was nearly half a 
league: a man standing on the shore could not be told whether 
he were a man or something else, from the far side. 

* # 8 

She—Now you are over, you have straddled me, this is my 
middle. Left to right, the end is the same. But here in the 
center I am not defeated. Go wander. Aquixo, Casqui, 
Pacaha. Take what you will. Clothe your men, yourself 
you will never clothe save as I clothe you, in my own way. 

They have suffered, they have gone nearly bare. At Pacaha 

I have provisioned them in advance. 
* & 
Shawls, deer skins, lion and bear skins, and many cat 
skins were found. Numbers who had been a long time badly 

DE SOTO AND THE NEW WORLD 33 

covered here clothed themselves. Of the shawls they made 
mantles and cassocks. Of the deer skins were made jerkins, 
shirts, stockings and shoes; and from the bear skins they made 
very good cloaks, such as no water could get through. They 
found shields of raw cowhide out of which armor was made 
for the horses. 

* € & 

She—tLook, then, Soto, upon this transformed army.— 
Here forty days and at the end I am beside you once more. 
Where is she now, Dofia Ysobel, your helpmate, years since, 
in Cuba? 

* * & 

The chief of Pacaha bestowed on him two of his sisters 
telling him that they were tokens of love, for his remembrance, 
to be his wives. The name of one was Macanoche, that of the 
other Mochila. They were symmetrical, tall and full; Maca- 
noche bore a pleasant expression; in her manners and features 
appeared the lady, the other was robust. 

She—Ride upon the belly of the waters, building your 
boats to carry all across. Calculate for the current; the boats 
move with a force not their own, up and down, sliding upon 
that female who communicates to them, across all else, herself. 
And still there is that which you have not sounded, under the 
boats, under the adventure—giving to all things the current, 
the wave, the onwash of my passion. So cross and have done 
with it, you are safe—and I am desolate. 

But you are mine and I will strip you naked—Jjealous of 
everything that touches you. Down, down to me—in and un- 
der and down, unbeaten, the white kernel, the flame—the 
flame burning under water, that I cannot quench. 

I will cause it to be known that you are a brute. Now 
it is no sea-ringed island, now it is no city in a lake: Come, 
here is room for search and countersearch. Come, black- 
beard, tireless rider, with an arrow in the thigh. I wait for 
you—beyond the river, Follow me—if you can. Follow me, 

54 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

Sefior, this is your country. I give it to you. Take it. Here 
are carriers for your burdens; here are girls for your beds; 
my best men for adversaries. You have beaten them all. My 
time is coming: you have seen how they defend their palisades 
for me; they have driven trees into the ground about their 
villages. They are men, tall, slim, full of strategies; they 
come against you naked, with their bows and arrows; they die 
at the paddles but none quivers. It is me they defend. I am 
for the brave, for the wise, for the victor. Watch yourself at 
the fords, at the porches of houses. 

See how I have fled you, dashing into a lake there to freeze 
all night, coming forth at dawn, half drowned, my brows 
hidden in lily leaves. At the sight of your boats, at the breath 
of your name, the villages are left empty. Nothing can in- 
duce the chief to show himself. All have gone upstream to an 
island, carrying their goods with them. At the sight of your 
men in armor, terror strikes them; they plunge into the 
stream, pushing their possessions on little rafts, that escap- 
ing in the haste, float downstream. I have fled, a single man, 
among my own people but your hounds scenting me out have 
dragged me down. 

* * 8 

Now it begins to change. The third winter past, at Ali- 
mamu, it is the fourth year. 

At Alimamu, where they learned to catch rabbits with In- 
dian snares, Juan Ortiz died, a loss the Governor greatly re- 
gretted; for, without an interpreter, not knowing whither he 
was traveling, Soto feared to enter the country, lest he might 
get lost. The death was so great a hindrance to our going, 
whether on discovery or out of the country, that to learn of 
the Indians what would have been rendered in four words, it 
now became necessary to have the whole day; and oftener 
than otherwise the very opposite was understood to what was 
asked; so that many times it happened the road traveled one 
day, or sometimes two or three days would have to be returned 
over, wandering up and down, lost in the thickets. 

DE SOTO AND THE NEW WORLD _ 55 

For four days marching was impossible because of the 
snow. When that ceased to fall, he traveled three days 
through a desert, a region so low, so full of lakes and bad 
passages, that at one time, for a whole day, the travel lay 
through water up to the knees at places, in others to the 
stirrups; and occasionally, for the distance of a few paces 
there was swimming. And he came to Tutelpinco, a town un- 
tenanted and found to be without maize, seated near a lake 
that flowed into the river with a great current. 

* * * 
She—Nearer, nearer. 

=e ee 

Cayas, Quigaltam, Guachoya—thither the Governor de- 
termined to go in a few days to learn if the sea was near. He 
had not over three hundred efficient men, nor more than forty 
horses. Some of the beasts were lame, and useful only in 
making out a show of a troop of cavalry. 

At Guachoya he sent Juan de Anasco with eight of the 
cavalry down the river to discover what population might be 
there and get what knowledge there was of the sea. He was 
gone eight days and stated, when he got back, that in all that» 
time he could not travel more than fourteen or fifteen leagues, 
on account of the great bogs that came out of the river, the 
canebrakes and thick shrubs that were along the margin, and 
that he had found no inhabited spot. 

The river, the river. 

The Governor sank into a deep despondency at sight of the 
difficulties that presented themselves to his reaching the sea; 
and, what was worse, from the way in which the men and 
horses were diminishing in numbers, he could not sustain 
himself in the country without succor. Of that reflection he 
pined. 

But before he took to his pallet, he sent a message to the 
eacique of Quigaltam to say that he was the child of the 
sun, and whence he came all obeyed him, rendering him trib- 

56 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

ute; that he besought him to value his friendship, and to come 
where he was. By the same Indians the chief replied: 

“As to what you say of your being the child of the sun, 
if you will cause him to dry up the great river, I will believe 
you; as to the rest, it is not my custom to visit any one, but 
rather all, of whom I have ever heard, have come to visit me, 
to serve and obey me, and pay me tribute, either voluntarily 
or by force. If you desire to see me, come where I am; if for 
peace, I will receive you with especial good will; if for war, I 
will await you in my town; but neither for you nor for any 
man, will I set back one foot.” 

When the messenger returned the Governor was already 
low, being very ill of fevers. He grieved that he was not in a 
state to cross the river at once to see if he could not abate 
that pride; though the stream was already flowing very power- 
fully, was nearly half a league broad, sixteen fathoms deep, 
rushing by in a furious torrent, and on either shore were many 
Indians; nor was his power any longer so great that he might 
disregard advantages, relying on his strength alone. 

Every day the Indians of Guachoya brought fish, until 
they came in such plenty that the town was covered with 
them. 

Now the Governer feared to repair the palisades that they 
might not suppose he stood in awe of them; and, lest the 
Indians rise, he ordered the slaughter at Nilco, to strike dread 
into the rest. 

Conscious that the hour approached in which he should 
depart this life, Soto commanded that all the king’s officers 
should be called before him, the captains and principal per- 
sonages, to whom he made a speech. He told them that he 
was about to go into the presence of God, to give account of 
all his past life; and since He had been pleased to take him 
away at such a time, he, His most unworthy servant, rendered 
Him hearty thanks. He confessed his deep obligations to 
them all, for their great qualities, their love and loyalty to 

his person, well tried in suffering of hardship. He begged 

DE SOTO AND THE NEW WORLD 357 

that they would pray for him. He asked that they would 
relieve him of the charge he had over them as well as of the 
indebtedness he was under to them all, and to forgive him any 
wrongs they may have suffered at his hands. To prevent any 
divisions that might arise, as to who should command, he 
begged that they elect a principal person to be governor, and 
_ being chosen, they would swear before him to obey; that this 
would greatly satisfy him, abate somewhat the pains he suf- 
fered, and moderate the anxiety of leaving ene in a country, 
they knew not where. 

Baltasar de Gallegos responded in behalf of all, consoling 
him with remarks on the shortness of the life of this world, at- 
tended as it was by so many toils and afflictions, saying that 
whom God earliest called away, He showed particular favor; 
with many other things appropriate to such an occasion; and 
finally since it pleased the Almighty to take him to Himself, 
amid the deep sorrow which they not unreasonably felt, it was 
necessary and becoming in him, as in them, to conform to the 
Divine Will; that as respected the election of a governor, 
which he ordered, whomsoever his Excellency should name to 
the command, him would they obey. Thereupon the Governor 
nominated Luis Moscosco de Alvarado to be his captain-gen- 
eral; when by all those present was he straightway chosen 
and sworn Governor. 

The next day, the twenty-first of May, departed this life 
the magnanimous, the virtuous, the intrepid captain, Don 
Hernando de Soto, Governor of Cuba and Adelantado of 
Florida. He was advanced by fortune, in the way she is 
wont to lead others, that he might fall the greater depth; he 
died in a land, and at a time, that could afford him little com- 
fort in his illness, when the danger of being no more heard 
from stared his companions in the face, each one himself hav- 
ing need of sympathy, which was the cause why they neither 
gave him companionship nor visited him, as otherwise they 
would have done. 

Some were glad. 

58 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

It was decided to conceal what had happened, lest the In- 
dians might venture on an attack when they should learn that 
he whom they feared was no longer opposed to them. 

So soon as death had taken place, the body was put 
secretly in a house, where it remained three days: thence it 
was taken by night to the gate of the town and buried within. 
The Indians having seen him ill, finding him no longer, sus- 
pected the reason; and passing by where he lay, they observed 
the ground loose and looking about talked among themselves. 
This coming to the knowledge of Luis de Moscosco he ordered 
the corpse to be taken up at night, and among the shawls that 
enshrouded it having cast abundance of sand, it was taken out 
in a canoe and committed to the middle of the stream. 

Down, down, this solitary sperm, down into the liquid, the 
formless, the insatiable belly of sleep; down among the fishes: 
there was one called bagre, the third part of which was head, 
with gills from end to end, and along the sides were great 
spines, like very sharp awls; there were some in the river that 
weighed from a hundred to a hundred and fifty pounds. There 
were some in the shape of barbel; another like bream, with the 
head of a hake, having a color between red and brown. There 
was likewise a kind called peel-fish, the snout a cubit in length, 
the upper lip being shaped like a shovel. Others were like a 
shad. ‘There was one called pereo the Indians sometimes 
brought, the size of a hog and had rows of teeth above and 
below. 

Luis de Moscosco ordered the property of the Governor 
to be sold at public cry. It consisted of two male and three 
female slaves, three horses, and seven hundred swine. From 
that time forward most of the people owned and raised hogs. 

SIR WALTER RALEIGH 

F the pursuit of beauty and the husk that remains, per- 
versions and mistakes, while the true form escapes in 
the wind, sing O Muse; of Raleigh, beloved by majesty, 

plunging his lust into the body of a new world—and the deaths, 
misfortunes, counter coups, which swelled back to certify that 
ardor with defeat. Sing! and let the rumor of these things 
make the timid more timid and the brave desperate, careless of 
monuments which celebrate the subtle conversions of sense and 
let truth go unrecognized. Sing! and make known Raleigh, 
who would found colonies; his England become a mouthful of 
smoke sucked from the embers of a burnt weed. And if the 
nations, well founded on a million hindrances, taxes, laws and 
laws to annul laws must have a monument, let it be here im- 
plied: this undersong, this worm armed to gnaw away lies and 
to release—Raleigh: if it so please the immortal gods. 

Sing of his wisdom, O Muse: The truth is that all nations, 
how remote soever, being all reasonable creatures, and enjoy- 
ing one and the same imagination and fantasy, have devised, 
according to their means and materials, the same things. 

They all have lighted on the invention of bows and ar- 
rows; all have targets and wooden swords, all have instru- 
ments to encourage them to fight, all that have corn beat it in 
mortars and make cakes, baking them upon slate stones; all 
devised laws without any grounds had from the scriptures or 

from Aristotle’s Politick, whereby they are governed; all that 
dwell near their enemies impale their villages, to save them- 
selves from surprise. Yea, besides the same inventions, all 
have the same natural impulsions; they follow nature in the 
choice of many wives; and there are among them which, out of 

a kind of wolfish ferocity, eat man’s flesh; yea, most of them 
59 

, 

60 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

believe in a second life, and they are all of them idolators in 
one kind or another.—— 

These things, still chewing, he chewed out. And as an 
atheist, with Marlow, they would have burned him. It was his 
style! To the sea, then! mixed with soundest sense—on sell- 
ing cannon to one’s enemies. 

But through all else, O Muse, say that he penetrated to the 
Queen ! 

Sing! O Muse and say, he was too mad in love, too clear, 
too desperate for her to trust upon great councils. He was 
not England, as she was. She held him, but she was too 
shrewd a woman not to know she held him as a woman, she, 
the Queen; which left an element. Say that he was made and 
cracked by majesty, knew that devotion, tasted that wisdom 

‘and became too wise—and she all eyes and wit looking 

through until her man, her Raleigh became thin, light, a spirit. ~ 
He was the whetter, the life giver through the Queen—but 
wounded cruelly. In this desperate condition, willless, inspired, 
the tool of a woman, flaming, falling, being lifted up, robbed 
of himself to feed her, caught, dispatched, starting, held again, 
giving yet seeking round the circle for an outlet: this was, 
herself; but what, O Muse, of Raleigh, that proud man? 

Say, first, he was the breath of the Queen—for a few 
years; say, too, that he had traveled much before he knew 
her, that he had seen the tropics and explored the Orinoco 
River for a hundred miles. Then say, O Muse, that now he 
saw himself afar, that he became—America! that he con- 
ceived a voyage from perfection to find—an England new 
again; to found a colony; the outward thrust, to seek. But 
it turned out to be a voyage on the body of his Queen: Eng- 
land, Elizabeth—Virginia! 

He sent out colonists, she would not let him go himself; 
nothing succeeded. It was a venture in the crook of a lady’s q 
finger, pointing, then curving in. Virginia? It was the nail 
upon that finger. O Raleigh! nowhere, everywhere—and noth- 7 
ing. Declare, O Muse, impartially, how he had gone with the 

SIR WALTER RALEIGH 61 

English fleet to strike at Spain and how she called him back— 
Sire, do you not know, you!? These women are my person. 
What have you dared to do? How have you dared, without 
my order, to possess yourself of what is mine? Marry this 
woman! 

Sing, O Muse, with an easy voice, how she, Elizabeth, she 
England, she the Queen—deserted him; Raleigh for Leicester, 
Essex now for Raleigh; she Spencer whom he friended, she 
“The Faery Queen,” she Guiana, she Virginia, she atheist, she 
“my dear friend Marlow,” she rents, rewards, honors, influ- 
ence, reputation, she “the fundamental. laws of human knowl- 
edge,” she prison, she tobacco, the introduction of potatoes to 
the Irish soil: It is the body of the Queen stirred by that 
plough—now all withdrawn. 

O Muse, in that still pasture where you dwell amid the 
hardly noticed sounds of water falling and the little cries of 
crickets and small birds, sing of Virginia floating off: the 
broken chips of Raleigh: the Queen is dead. 

O Virginia! who will gather you again as Raleigh had you 
gathered? science, wisdom, love, despair. O America, the 
deathplace of his son! It is Raleigh, anti-tropical. It is the 
cold north, flaring up in ice again. 

What might he have known, what seen, O Muse?—Shoal 
water where we smelt so sweet and so strong a smell, as if we 
had been in the midst of some delicate garden; and keeping 
good watch and keeping but slack sail—we arrived upon the 
coast; a land so full of grapes as the very beating and surge 
of the sea overflow them, such plenty, as well there as in all 
places else, on the sand and on the green soil on the hills, as 
well as every little shrub, as also climbing towards the tops 
of high cedars, that in all the world I think a like abundance 
is not to be found. And from below the hill such a flock of 
cranes, mostly white, arose with such a cry as if an army of 
men had shouted all together.—He might have seen the brother 
of the king, Granganimo, with copper cap, whose wife, comely 
and bashful, might have come aboard the ship, her brows bound 

62 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

with white coral; or running out to meet them very cheerfully, 
at Roanoak, plucked off his socks and washed his feet in 
warm water. A people gentle, loving, faithful, void of all 
guile and treason. Earthen pots, large, white and sweet and 
wooden platters of sweet timber. 

Sing, O Muse and say, there is a spirit that is seeking 
through America for Raleigh: in the earth, the air, the waters, 
up and down, for Raleigh, that lost man: seer who failed, 
planter who never planted, poet whose works are questioned, 
leader without command, favorite deposed—but one who yet 
gave title for his Queen, his England, to a coast he never saw 
but grazed alone with genius. 

Question him in hell, O Muse, where he has gone, and when 
there is an answer, sing and make clear the reasons that he 
gave for that last blow. Why did he send his son into that 
tropic jungle and not go himself, upon so dangerous an er- 
rand? And when the boy had died why not die too? Why 
England again and force the new King to keep his promise 
and behead him? 

VOYAGE OF THE MAYFLOWER 

HE Pilgrims were seed of Tudor England’s lusty blos- 
soming. The flamboyant force of that zenith, spent, be- 
came in them hard and little. Among such as they its 

precarious wealth of petals sank safely within bounds to lie 
dreaming or floating off while the Restoration throve, a swel- 
tering seclusion of the hothouse, surrounded by winter’s cold. 

In those little pips a nadir, sure as the sun, was reached, 
in which lay the character of beginnings in North America. 
As particles stripped of wealth, mortifying as they were mor- 
tified, “predicateurs,” greatly suffering, greatly prepared to 
suffer, they were the perfect sprout for the savage continent 
God had driven them to. But Puritans, as they were called, 
if they were pure it was more since they had nothing in them 
of fulfillment than because of positive virtues. 

By their very emptiness they were the fiercest element in 
the battle to establish a European life on the New World. The 
first to come as a group, of a desire sprung within themselves, 
they were the first American democracy—and it was they, in 
the end, who would succeed in making everything like them- 
selves. No man led them; there was none. The leaders had 
_ failed long since for them at home—if there ever had been any 
—and those still at home were still more removed from them 
' than ever. Stripped and little they came resting on no author- 
ity but the secret warmth of their tight-locked hearts. But, 
unhappily, never had they themselves nor has any one pene- 
trated there to see what was contained. The emptiness about 
them was sufficient terror for them not to look further. The 
jargon of God, which they used, was their dialect by which 

they kept themselves surrounded as with a palisade. They 
63 

64 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

pleaded weakness, they called continually for help (while work- 
ing shrewdly with their own hands all the while), they asked 
protection—but the real help had been to make them small, 
small and several, several and each as a shell for his own “soul.” 
And the soul? a memory (or a promise), a flower sheared away 
—nothing. 

Theirs is the secret of fairy tales, the descent of the “soul” 
into picturesque smallness: children, dwarfs, elves; the diminu- 
tive desires of the lowly for—they scarcely know what. ‘The 
“God” of the Pilgrims is redolent of these mysteries. All their 
fears, their helplessness, the uncertainty of their force—have 
the quality of such lore. The pathetic detail of the rough 
sailor who cursed the poor people and what happened to him is 
strongly in this mood. It shows also the collective sense of the 
destiny common to lowly people. i 

From the outset they had had trouble, then the account 
goes on:—“These troubles being blowne over, and now all be- 
ing compacte together in one shipe, they put to sea again with 
a prosperous winde, which continued diverce days together, 
which was some incouragement unto them; yet according to ye 
usuall maner many were afflicted with sea sickness. And I 
may not omit here a spetial worke of God’s providence. Ther 
was a proud and very profane younge man, one of ye sea- 

men, of a lustie body, which made him the more hauty; he 
_ would allway be contemning ye poore people in their sickness, _ 
and cursing them dayly with greeous execrations, and did not 
let to tell them, that he hoped to cast halfe of them over board — 

before they came to their journey’s end, and to make merry 

with what they had; and if he were by any gently reproved he ~ 
would curse and swear most bitterly. But it pleased God be- — 
fore they came halfe seas over, to smite this yong man with 
a greeveous disease, of which he dyed in a desperate maner, — 
and so was himself ye first yt was throwne overboard. Thus — 
his curses light on his owne head; and it was an astonishment 
to all his fellows for they noted it to be ye just hand of God 
upon him.” 4 

VOYAGE OF THE MAYFLOWER 65 

_ The dreadful and curious thing is that men, despoiled and 
having nothing, must long most for that which they have not 
and so, out of the intensity of their emptiness imagining they 
are full, deceive themselves and all the despoiled of the world 
into their sorry beliefs. It is the spirit that existing nowhere 
in them is forced into their dreams. The Pilgrims, they, the 
seed, instead of growing, looked black at the world and damn- 
ing its perfections praised a zero in themselves. The inver- 
sion of a Gothic Calvin. 

For the Puritans there had been a decline of which it was 
their miserable fate never to know, while they raised their holy 
incantations. 'These are not the great flower of the spirit. 
Purged by hard experience (worn bodies from which a white 
dove springs), they are not all soul as they and we have 
imagined. JBodily suffermg was more an alleviation than 
otherwise, a distraction that kept them mercifully blinded. 
They were condemned to be without flower, to sow themselves 
basely that after them others might know the end. Each 
shrank from an imagination that would sever him from the 
rest. 

And so they stressed the “spirit”—for what else could 
_ they do?—and this spirit és an earthly pride which they, pride- 
less, referred to heaven and the next world. And for this we 
praise them, instead of for the one thing in them that was 
valuable: their tough littleness and weight of many to carry 
through the cold; not their brokenness but their projection 
of the great flower of which they were the seed. 

The Pilgrims were mistaken not in what they did, because 
they went hard to work with their hands and heads, but in what 
they imagined for their warmth. It could not have been 
otherwise. But it is sordid that a rich world should follow 
apathetically after. Their misfortune has become a mal- 
feasant ghost that dominates us all. It is they who must have 
invented the “soul,” but the perversion is for this emptiness, 
this dream, this pale negative to usurp the place of that which 
really they were destined to continue. 

66 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

This stress of the spirit against the flesh has produced a 
race incapable of flower. Upon that part of the earth they 
occupied true spirit dies because of the Puritans, except 
through vigorous revolt. They are the bane, not the staff. 
Their religious zeal, mistaken for a thrust up toward the 
sun, was a stroke in, in, in—not.toward germination but the 
confinements of a tomb. 

/ Everything attests their despoiled condition: the pitiful 
care for each one, the talk of the common wealth (common to 
all alike, so never the proud possession of any one) and the 
church—that secret inversion of loveliness; their lost posi- 
tion, itself, in the new land, the cold, disease, starvation—in- 
explicable, unavoided troubles; their committing themselves 
not to any plan but floating on the ocean as a seed to God— 
to the sea and the winds—trustful, in a leaky boat. It is the 
weakling in us all that finds this beautiful. So with the low 
condition of their words themselves, the bad spelling of their 
journal; treated with contempt by the least of those they had 
to do with, so contemned that no one would lend them money 
“so they were forst to selle of some provisions to stop this 
gape”; their continually expressed love of each other, “Be- 
loved friends, sory we are that there should be occasion of 
writing at all unto you,” etc. 

x * & 

“So they comited them selves to ye will of God and re- 
‘solved to proceed. In sundrie of these storms the winds were 
so feirce and ye seas so high, as they could not beare a knote 
of saile, but were forced to hull, for diverce days together. 
And in one of them, as they thus lay at hull in a mighty storm, 
a lustie young man (called John Howland) coming upon some 
occasion above ye gratings, was, with a seel of ye shipe thrown 
into ye sea: but it pleased God yt he caught hold of ye tope- 
saile halliards, which hung over board, and ran out at great 
length: yet he held his hould (though he was sundrie fadomes 
under water) till he was hold up by ye same rope to ye brim 
of ye water, and then with a boat hooke and other means got 

VOYAGE OF THE MAYFLOWER 67 

into ye shipe again, and his life saved; and though he was 
something ill with it, yet he lived many years after, and be- 
came a profitable member both in church and comone wealth.” 

This passage is perfect: the one man of it, at sea, in the 
merciful guardianship of God, (washed away, howbeit), rely- 
ing on his own hands and feet saves himself by force of him- 
self, is hauled back by others like himself; the minute care 
for detail, the note of his subsequent illness, and yet, the 
moral at the end. 

And this moral? As with the deformed sop, morals are 

the memory of success that no longer succeeds. 
But the enjoyment of the lust, the hidden flower, they 
martyrized as the spirit or the soul, has curious turns. Pri- 
marily despoiled by providence; clinging with the doggedness 
of a northern race, cold, close and slow to that; they become 
unfit, except where there exists the same sort of stress which 
brought them into being; the hard, repressive pioneer soil of 
the mind. They must have relied on vigorous hypocrisy to 
save them—which they did. But this they could not revere. 

If the “puritan” in them could have ended with their 
entry into the New World and the subtle changes of growth at 
once have started, (See Cotton Mather’s “Wonders of the 
Invisible World,” the prefatory remarks) everything would 
have been different, but the character of the land was not 
favorable. They did try to land further south. 

In fear and without guidance, really lost in the world, it is 
they alone who would later, at Salem, have strayed so far— 
morbidly seeking the flame,—that terrifying unknown image 
- to which, like savages, they too offered sacrifices of human 
flesh. It is just such emptiness, revulsion, terror in all ages, 
which in fire—a projection still of the truth—finds that 
which lost and desperate men have worshiped. And it is 
still to-day the Puritan who keeps his frightened grip upon 
the throat of the world lest it should prove him—empty. 

Such would the New World become. Their strength made 
it, but why, why the perpetual error of remaining at that low 

68 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

point? It is that at which the soul, dying in them, not liber- 
ated by death, but dead—is sad. 

The result of that brave setting out of the Pilgrims has 
been an atavism that thwarts and destroys. The agonized 
spirit, that has followed like an idiot with undeveloped brain, 
governs with its great muscles, babbling in a text of the dead 
years. Here souls perish miserably, or, escaping, are bent 
into grotesque designs of violence and despair. It is an added 
strength thrown to a continent already too powerful for men. 
One had not expected that this seed of England would come 
to impersonate, and to marry, the very primitive itself; to 
creep into the very intestines of the settlers and turn them 
against themselves, to befoul the New World. 

It has become “the most lawless country in the civilized 
world,” a panorama of murders, perversions, a terrific un- 
governed strength, excusable only because of the horrid beauty 
of its great machines. To-day it is a generation of gross know- 
nothingism, of blackened churches where hymns groan like 
chants from stupefied jungles, a generation universally eager 
to barter permanent values (the hope of an aristocracy) in 
return for opportunist material advantages, a generation hat- 
ing those whom it obeys. 

What prevented the normal growth? Was it England, the 
northern strain, the soil they landed on? It was, of course, the 
whole weight of the wild continent that made their condition 
of mind advantageous, forcing it to reproduce its own like- 
ness, and no more. 

THE FOUNDING OF QUEBEC 

J HY cannot I sit here lovingly, quietly and simply 
thinking of that most delightful man, Champlain, 

without offending you? Samuel de Champlain, of 
Brouage, on the Bay of Biscaye, if you remember. His father 
was an admiral in the navy of Henry of Navarre. Here was a 
man. Here és a man after my own heart. Is it merely in a 
book? So am I then, merely in a book. You see? Here at 
least I find the thing I love. I mean here is the thing, ac- 
curately, my own world, the world in which I myself breathe 
and walk and live—against that which you present. No, no! 
I insist. We live in different worlds. _ | 

There is a place among the works of Machiavelli where 
he says that coming home at evening from the fields dusty and 
tired out he doffs his outdoor clothes, dresses himself for a 
new part and entering his study becomes a king. It is not 
too rare a feeling but at least I understand it. Not that I’m 
a great reader; I tire of books too easily. Can anything tire 
like a book? But to me this Champlain is the perfection of 
what we lack, here. And sometimes, you know, well—it’s a 
godsend to read a book—about such as he. 

Parkman says, “Champlain was a man all for the theme 
and purpose, nothing for himself.” Good Lord, these his- 
torians! By that I understand the exact opposite of what is 
written: a man all for himself—but gently, with love, with 
patience, unwilling to endure the smallest fracture of his way 
of doing. He knew Champlain and followed Champlain in 
everything. See if I am not right. 

At the time of which I speak he had already spent three 
years in North America, penetrating as far as the location 

‘of the city he would found, trading, making maps, charting 
69 

710 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

the coast and drawing colored pictures of everything. And 
now, in France, he is ready to make his real essay. To sup- 
port his project he asks one favor only of the king, a monopoly 
of the fur trade for three years. Good! He gets Pont Gravé 
to sponsor him and, all in proper time, sets out with two ves- 
sels for New France, a country almost invented, one might 
say, out of his single brain. 

First the sea. The two ships heading for Cape St. Law- 
rence had lost track of each other, Pont Gravé’s, as it turned 
out later, being in the van. Then the northern coast. It is a 
new world this time sure enough: high mountains with little 
soil, rocks and sand covered with firs and birches, icy winds, 
hard currents and treacherous tides. But presently he ar- 
rived at the harbor of Tadoussac, their rendezvous, outside of 
which he anchored in a storm. 

But what has happened? Where is Pont Gravé and the 
other ship? The New World presses on us all; there seems 
no end to it—and no beginning. So too with him. They see 
a ship’s boat coming. So Pont Gravé has gained the harbor. 
Good. But there’s a stranger in the skiff. A Basque. There’s 
been trouble. 

To me there is a world of pleasure in watching just that 
Frenchman, just Champlain, like no one else about him, watch- 
ing, keeping the thing whole within him with almost a woman’s 
tenderness—but such an energy for detail—a love of the ex- 
act detail—watching that little boat drawing nearer on that 
icy bay. This is the interest I see. It is this man. This— 
me; this American; a sort of radio distributor sending out 
sparks to us all. 

Well, here’s the boat. What’s happened? Ah, Pont Gravé 
is here, of course. Well? ‘There was a Basque ship in the 
bay before him, they refused to stop their trade in furs at the 
King’s order. A short battle. Pont Gravé wounded. This 
Basque with us has come to make a truce. Champlain was 
“oreatly annoyed,” his records say, at such a beginning. 
Greatly annoyed! , Isn’t that a treasure? 

THE FOUNDING OF QUEBEC 71 

Well, what? What to do? Well, what’s first? To plant 
the colony this year, this year, you understand. Everything 
else—aside. To begin with, he must see Pont Gravé. He is 
hurt but will recover. The Basque is content to temporize. 
There is a truce. The carpenters are set to work and since 
the ships are too unwieldy for the river a small barque is soon 
completed. In this, not waiting for a second one, Champlain, 
the gentleman, the adventurer, the enthusiast, drawer of col- 
ored pictures—is ready to go and found the City of Quebec. 

_ Is that weakness, not to have destroyed the Spaniard on 
the spot, or to have died himself? Yes. Drake would not 
have done it, nor would Raleigh. Columbus, yes. Yes, it was 
a kind of weakness I suppose—a thing priceless, miraculous 
in that age and in such a place. It is a pride as separate from 
the ordinary as—Well, these things are costly. 

See what it entailed. For these things show in a man. 
And who cares so long as a man leads, leads? I mean here is a 
fine energy that penetrated Canada, the cold, the isolation, 
the savages, but the fineness of it is all personal. It is all a 
fire, a lost—something that the ship, the sailors, the very theme 
itself does not need. It disturbs, torments, undermines the 
way, it is a fine difficulty to success. But you shall see. 

The river ascended, they arrive at the selected place. Here 
Quebec shall stand. But how carefully he has noted every 
island, every tree almost upon the way and how his imagina- 
tion has run west and south and north with the stories of the 
Indians, surmising peoples, mountains, lakes, some day to be 
discovered, with the greatest accuracy. And what care he 
takes, what fastidious pains to establish beyond point of con- 
troversy the exact place where Jacques Cartier wintered for- 
merly, that it was not where popular misconception had sup- 
posed but in another place—beyond the scientific possibility 
of a doubt. This is Champlain. 

Do not mistake me though. This was a great adventurer, 
a tremendous energy, one of the foremost colonizers of our 

continent. He knew our North Atlantic coast from end to 

42 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

end, had been in Boston Harbor, noted the islands and what 
trees grew on them, had been at Plymouth—or where it should 
be—fifteen years before the Pilgrims. -And, in addition, had 
left charts, maps, colored drawings, as I told you, that are 
priceless now. 

You remember, he had left Pont Gravé recovering from 
his wound at Tadoussac and the Basque there with him; one 
watching the other ; while he himself had gone up in the barque 
to the place selected for his city. Immediately he set the 
men to work, some digging a cellar, some sawing logs and 
making boards of them and some doing the construction. He 
speaks of their energy and good spirits, saying that with 
such a fine ensemble the supplies would soon be under cover. 
But now the second barque comes up the river with its sup- 
port. What devil is it in this land? What special hell has had 
this country assigned to it as a province? 

“T was in a garden that I was having prepared,” he writes. 
In a garden! that’s wonderful to me. He was in this garden 
when the pilot of the second barque came to him with a story 
—for his private ear. Champlain drew the fellow off into a 
little wood, and there he heard: From the very day of setting 
out from France, it seems, there had been one at least who’d 
planned to murder him. That’s how Quebec was planted: 
from the first day. It is the genius of such men as Cham- 
- plain to attract such dooms. A locksmith, one Jean de Val, 

was the chief culprit, but by this time almost the whole com- 
pany had been subverted, only the unexpected arrival of the 
second barque having saved the Master from his death that 
night. One of the company had confessed. 

Is it not clarity itself? The man absorbed in his work, 
eager, riding ahead of his plans—and fate dogging him 
behind. . 
But now he is awakened, what does he do? What? It is 
too amusing! Mind you his life is threatened. He gets the 
pilot, his informer, to send the four chief felons two bottles 
of wine from the second barque, a gift, we'll say, from their 

2 

THE FOUNDING OF QUEBEC 78 

friends, the Basques, and will they come to dinner at the barque 
that night? 

They come, of course, and there he seizes them. What 
then? But first he has had a session with the man himself 
who first disclosed the plot. I can sce that puzzled face. Why? 
Why? Why have they wished to kill him, him Champlain? 
He’d pardon every one, except those four, if he could learn 
the motive. 

Nothing, except that they had imagined that by giving up 
the place into the hands of the Basques and Spaniards, they 
might all become rich, and that they did not want to return 
to France. 

How’s that for a simple answer? Think what Champlain 
must have thought at that, he bred on the sea, a Frenchman 
—probably nowhere so much at home as by himself, out of 
France, carrying his own head about prying curiously into 
the wilderness. And now that he had them handcuffed, those 
four, imagine what comes next. He took them personally 
down the river in the barque to Tadoussac and called a coun- 
cil: Pont Gravé, the Captain of the vessel, the surgeon, the 
mate and other sailors—and himself. Can you beat it? 

They decided that to kill the one man Jean de Val would 
be sufficient, and necessary to intimidate the Spanish who were 
everywhere about. The other three should be returned to 
France for trial. So they strangled and hanged de Val and 
stuck his head upon a pike. To me the whole thing’s marvel- | 
~ lous—all through. 

Then he, Champlain, returned up river, carefully took 
stock of the provisions which the knaves had badly wasted— 
and goes on with his city. 

(His friend replies) 

To hell with all that: collecting pictures for France—or 
science—or art! What for the New World? No. I know 
what you mean. A spirit of resignation. Literature. Books 
—a library. Good night, then. That’s not you. You! 

It is why France never succeeded here. It is the Latin, 

14 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

or Gaelic or Celtic sense of historic continuity. Let it go 
back, Roman, Greek, Phoenician, Egyptian, Arab—Jew; let 
it go back with roots in every culture of the world. Chinese. 
It is the weakness of you French—planting a drop of your 
precious blood in outlandish veins, in the wilderness and fancy- 
ing that that addition makes them French—that by this the 
wilderness is converted! civilized, a new link in the chain. 
Never. Great as your desire may be. 

Rebellion, savagery; a force to leap up and wrench you 
from your hold and force you to be part of it; the place, the 
absolute new without a law but the basic blood where the 
savage becomes brother. That is generous. Open. A break 
through. 

Champlain couldn’t. The place (that more vulgar men 
sensed as the strength in their arms) was outraged, that is— 
if you are right—and I think you are. These men struck at 
him as an impertinence. He with his maps, for France, for 
science, for civilization—his gentleness, his swoons. I say, it 
is marvelous—if you want it, but as against a New World— 
it is inconceivable. 

It claims you, you! and you resign the office for the sake 
of—history. Quite so, you say. 

The land! don’t you feel it? Doesn’t it make you want to 
go out and lift dead Indians tenderly from their graves, to 
steal from them—as if it must be clinging even to their corpses 
—some authenticity, that which— 

Here not there. 

THE MAY-POLE AT MERRY MOUNT 

read it, is the nearly universal lack of scale. This 
parochialism is helped by such balanced statement as 

A. C. Adams’ preface to Thomas Morton’s The New English 
Canaan—in which the incident of the May-pole at Merry 
Mount is related. Adams has compared that “vulgar royalist 
libertine,” Morton, and the Puritans of the Plymouth Colony 
too closely. He has seen the time too near. He has accepted 
the mere chance presence of Morton in the neighborhood of 
Plymouth as the outstanding fact, letting his mind dwell upon 
that, trying one party against the other, as they quarreled in 
the flesh—till both are worn, in our eyes, to some unrecog- 
nizable, indifferent proportion. The description, “a vulgar 
royalist libertine, thrown by accident into the midst of a Puri- 
tan Community, an extremely reckless but highly amusing old 
debauchee and tippler,” is not adequate to describe a man 
living under the circumstances that surrounded Morton; its 
tone might do for a London clubman but not a New World 
pioneer taking his chances in the wilderness. It lacks scale. 
Adams’ pretty scholar humor can be very annoying. “Had 
Morton lived in Virginia or even in the vicinity of New York,” 
he says, “he would not have been noticed.” What of it? He 
did not live in either Virginia or New York and he was noticed ; 
so he was brought to write the Canaan, so he has come down 
to us and so we recognize him. Instead of quarreling with 
his luck, Adams should have given us a better picture. Not 
that one expects or should expect, in the preface to a book of 
slight importance, more than a simple exposition of the facts 
relating to it. But Thomas Morton was unique in our his- 
tory and since Adams does attempt an evaluation of his book 

75 

\ MOST confusing thing in American. History, as we 

76 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

it is a pity he did not realize that, in history, to preserve things 
of “little importance” may be more valuable—as it is more 
difficult and more the business of a writer—than to champion 
a winner. It is not so much good history to present Morton 
with sly amusement in mortal and unmannerly combat with his 
betters, as it would be to relieve him from that imposition of 
his time and seriously to show up that lightness, his essential — 
character, which discloses the Puritans themselves as maimed, 
to their advantage, for survival, the converse of which—in a 
crooked way, perhaps, but in a way—Morton presented. 

No use, merely because he lived that way, to joi Morton 
with the Puritans; comment upon him and his book should be 
laid mainly elsewhere, upon the more general scene of the 
New World, in his relationship with its natives—to which the 
Puritans so violently objected. And they were dead right in 
that, Adams convinces us. Such a place as Morton kept at 
‘“Ma-re Mount,” the yearly rendezvous of a rough and law- 
less class of men, selling liquor and firearms to the savages 
“was a terror unto them, who lived stragglingly, and were of no 
strength in any place;” and it was unfair of Morton—seeing 
how the Indians valued guns and liquor—to use them for bar- 
ter when the other settlers were not permitted to do so. This 
was the practical side of the desire to rid the colony of this 
man. But since the whites were armed with guns and had 
liquor, was it in the eyes of history wrong for Morton to use 
them for his trade? Another side of Puritan disgust with this 
brazen fellow was the moral one of his consorting with the 
Indian girls. It was upon this count, not the first, that they 
chose finally to attack him. 

.Lasses in beaver coats come away 
Ye shall be welcome to us night and day. 

Some of the earlier writers on the New England Indians — 
have spoken of the modesty of the women; Wood, in his Pros- 
pect, for mstance, and Josselyn, in the second of his “Two 
Voyages.” “Morton however is significantly silent on this 

MAY-POLE AT MERRY MOUNT (17 

point, and the idea of female chastity in the Indian mind, in 
the rare cases where it existed at all, seems to have been of the 
vaguest possible description. Morton was not a man likely to 
be fastidious, and his reference to the ‘lasses in beaver coats,? 
Is suggestive.” This is as near as Adams ever gets to a full 
statement of the facts. 

In Parkman, “Jesuits in North America,” (ch. iv) there 
is a very graphic account of the missionary Le Jeune’s ex- 
perience among the Algonquins, in which he describes the in- 
terior of a wigwam on a winter’s evening. “Heated to suffo- 
cation, the sorcerer, in the closest possible approach to nudity, 
lay on his back, with his right knee planted upright and his 
left leg crossed on it, discoursing volubly to the company, who, 
on their part, listened in positions scarcely less remote from 
decency.” Le Jeune says, “Les filles et les jeunes femmes sont 
a l’exterieur trés honnestement couvertes, mais entre elles leurs 
discours sont puants, commes des cloaques.” 

Parkman says that “chastity in women was recognized as a 
virtue by many tribes.” Of the New England Indians Wil- 
liams remarks,—“Single fornications they count no sin, but 
after marriage they count it heinous for either of them to be 
false.’ Judging by an incident mentioned by Morton, how- 
ever, adultery does not seem to have been looked upon as a 
very grave offense among the Indians of the vicinity in which 
he lived. “The colour of their eies being so generally black 
made a salvage, that had a young infant whose eies were gray, 
showed him to us, and said they were English mens eies; I tould 
the Father that his son was nan weeteo, which is a bastard; hee 
replied tita cheshetue squaa, which is, he could not tell, his 
wife might play the whore; and his childe the father desired 

“might have an English name, because of the liteness of his 
eies, which his father had in admiration because of the novelty 
amongst their nation.” 

Strachey (Historie p. 65) says of the Virginians: “Their 
young women goe not shadowed (clothed) amongst their own 
companie, until they be nigh eleven or twelve returns of the 

18 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

leafe old, nor are they much ashamed thereof, and therefore 
would the before remembered Pocahuntas, a well featured, but 
wanton yong girle, Powhatan’s daughter, sometymes resorting 
to our fort, of the age of eleven or twelve years, get the boyes 
forth with her into the market place, and make them wheele, 
falling on their hands, turning up their heels upwards, whome 
she would followe, and wheele so her self, naked as she was, 
all the fort over; but being over twelve years, they put on a 
kind of semecinctum lethern apron before their bellies, and are 
very shamefaced to be seen bare. | 

‘“‘_wantons before marriage and household drudges after, 
it is extremely questionable whether they had any conception 
of it.” (i. e. female chastity.) From conflicting reports from 
many sources the truth seems to be that the state of affairs 
with respect to this trait of female chastity was a matter 
largely of individual inclination. Some would be chaste and 
others wanton as the blood ruled them or the local fashion of 
the moment seemed to warrant. Were a wife too flagrantly 
adulterous no husband would want her; thus, the case would 
decide itself. 

And so—“Morton’s inclination to boisterous revelry cul- 
minated at last inethat proceeding which scandalized the Ply- 
mouth elders and passed into history.” Book III, Chapter 
14, of “The New English Canaan” presents it as follows:-“The 
Inhabitants of Pasonagessit having translated the name of 
their habitation from the ancient Salvage name to Ma-re 
Mount, and being resolved to have the new name confirmed 
for a memorial to after ages, did devise amongst themselves to 
have it performed in a solemn maner, with Revels and merri- 
ment after the old English custome; (they) prepared to sett 
up a Maypole upon the festivall day of Philip and Jacob 
(1627), and therefore brewed a barrell of excellent beare and 
provided a case of bottles, to be spent, with other good cheare, 
for all commers of that day. And because they would have it 
in compleat forme, they had prepared a song fitting to the 
time and present occasion. And upon May day they brought 

MAY-POLE AT MERRY MOUNT 19 

the Maypole to the place appointed, with drumes, gunnes, pis- 
tols and other fitting instruments, for the purpose; and there 
erected it with the help of Salvages, that came thether to see 
the manner of our Revels. A goodly pine tree of 80 foot 
longe was reared up, with a peare of buckshorns nayled one 
somewhat neare unto the top of it: where it stood, as a faire 
sea mark for directions how to finde out the way to mine Hoste 
of Ma-re Mount.” 

Bradford’s account was very different—“They also set up 
a May-pole, drinking and dancing about it many days to- 
gether, inviting the Indian women, for their consorts, dancing 
and frisking together, (like so many fairies, or furies rather) 
and worse practices. As if they had anew revived and cele- 
brated the feasts of the Roman Goddes Flora, or the beastly 
practieses of the madd Bacchinalians. Morton likewise (to 
shew his poetrie) composed sundry rimes and verses, some 
tending to lasciviousnes, and others to the detraction and scan- 
dall of some persons, which he affixed to this idle or idoll May- 
polle.” . 

This gambol on the green brought matters to a head with 
a vengeance. Although, as Adams says, it would not have 
been sufficient in itself to have caused the Puritan Elders to 
take action had there not been the graver matter of the sale 
of firearms behind it—yet it was the direct cause of Miles 
Standish going with eight men to arrest Morton. He was 
taken, his plantation destroyed, after the good, round for- 
mula: “to please the Indians”—and he himself put in the 
stocks, where the Indians came to look at him very much in 
amazement to know what it was all about. 

Morton was scandalously maltreated while in the care of 
his captors and, due to their failure to provide food, he nearly 
died on the vessel which transported him back to England 
for trial. But as Adams smilingly remarks, had it been later 
in our history and on a more westerly frontier, they would 
just have shot him. In England, an acquaintance of Ben 
Jonson and others at T'he Mermaid, Morton wrote his book. 

80 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

It was no great literary feat. It is, in a great measure, 
trivial and obscure, but as a piece from American History it 
has its savor which Adams dulls rather than heightens— 
which is too bad. 

It seems impossible for Adams to get clearly in mind what. 
Morton means when he expostulates—“this harmless mirth by 
younge men (that lived in hope to have wifes brought over to 
them, that would save them a laboure to make a voyage to 
fetch any over) was much distasted by the precise Separatists 
those moles. .. But marriage and hanging, (they say) 
comes by destiny and Scogan’s choice, tis better (than) none 
atall. He that played Proteus (with the help of Priapus) put 
their noses out of joynt, as the Proverb is—” 

Or: as Scogan, (famous court buffoon attached to the 
household of Edward IV) ordered to be hanged, but allowed 
the privilege of choosing the tree, escaped hanging by being 
unable to find a tree to his liking—trying many; so Morton 
and his men, awaiting wives from England, escaped marriage 
by varying (Proteus) among (Priapus) the Indian girls they 
took to bed with them. } 

This in its simplicity the Puritans lacked spirit to explain. 
But spiritless, thus without grounds on which to rest their 
judgments of this world, fearing to touch its bounties, a fis- 
sure takes place for the natural mouth—and everything’s per- 
verse to them. Forced by Morton’s peccadillo they countered 
with fantastic violence—and some duplicity—having the trade 
in beaver skins in view. 

Then their own true perversions enter in; for “ignorance 
of the law is no excuse.” As Morton laid his hands, roughly 
perhaps but lovingly, upon the flesh of his Indian consorts, so 
the Puritans laid theirs with malice, with envy, msanely, not 
only upon him, but also—one thing leading to another—upon 
the unoffending Quakers. 

Trustless of humane experience, not knowing what t 
think, they went mad, lost all direction. Mather defends the 
witchcraft persecutions. | 

COTTON MATHER’S WONDERS OF THE INVISIBLE 
WORLD 

I 

ENCHANTMENTS ENCOUNTERED 

1 

T was as long ago, as the year 1637, that a Faithful 
Minister of the Church of England, whose name was Mr. 
Edward Symons, did in a Sermon afterwards printed, 

thus express himself: At New England now the Sun of Com- 
fort begins to appear, and the glorious Day-Star to show 
itself ;—Sed Venient Annis Saecule Seris, there will come 
Times in after Ages, when the Clouds will overshadow and 
darken the Sky there. Many now promise to themselves 
nothing but successive Happiness there, which for a time 
through God’s Mercy they may enjoy; and I pray God, they 
may a long time; but in this World there is no Happiness 
perpetual. An Observation, or I had almost said an Inspira- 
tion, very dismally now verify’d upon us! It has been affirm’d 
by some who best knew New England, That the World wil! do 
New England a great piece of Injustice, if it acknowledge not 
a measure of Religion, Loyalty, Honesty and Industry, in 
the People there, beyond what is to be found with any other 
People ior the number of them. When I did a few years ago, 
_ publish a Book, which mentioned a few memorable Witch- 
crafts, committed in this Country; the excellent Bazter, 
graced the second edition of that Book, with a kind Preface, 
wherein he sees cause to say, If any are scandalized, that New 
England, a place of as serious Piety, as any I can hear of, 
under Heaven, should be troubled so much with Witches; I 
think, ’tis ne wonder; Where will the Devil show most malice, 
81 

82 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

but where he is hated, and hateth most; and I hope, the Coun- — 
try will still deserve and answer the Charity so expressed by 
that Reverend man of God. Whosoever travels over this Wil- 
derness, will see it richly bespangled with Evangelical 
Churches, whose Pastors are holy, able, and painful Overseers 
of their Flocks, lively Preachers, and vertuous Livers; . . 

We are still so happy, that I suppose there is no Land in 
the Universe more free from the debauching, and the debasing 
Vices of Ungodliness. The Body of the People are hitherto 
so disposed, that Swearing, Sabbath-breaking, Whoring, 
Drunkenness, and the like, do not make a Gentleman, but a 
Monster, or a Goblin, in the vulgar Estimation. All this 
notwithstanding, we must humbly confess to our God, that 
we are miserably degenerated from the first Love of our 
Predecessors; however we boast ourselves a_ little, when 
Men would go to trample upon us, and we venture to say, 
wheremsoever any is bold (we speak foolishly) we are bold 
also. The first Planters of these Colonies were a chosen 
Generation of Men, who were first so pure, as to disrelish 
many things, which they thought wanted Reformation Else- 
where; and yet withal so peaceable, that they embraced 
a voluntary Exile in a squallid, horrid American Des- 
art, rather than to live in Contentions with their Brethren. 
Those good Men imagined that they should leave their Pos- 
terity in a place, where they should never see the Inroads of 
Profanity, or Superstition: And a famous Person returning 
hence, could in a Sermon before the Parliament, profess, J 
have now been seven Years in a Country, where I never saw 
one Man drunk, or heard one oath sworn, or beheld one Beggar 
im the Streets all the while. Such great Persons as 
Budaeus, and others, who mistook Sir Thomas More’s 
Uroprra, for a Country really existent, and stirr’d up some 
Divines charitably to undertake a Voyage thither, might now 
have certainly found a Truth in their Mistake; New England 
was a true Utopia. But, alas, the Children and Servants of 
those old Planters must needs afford many, degenerate Plants, 

COTTON MATHER’S WONDERS 33 

and there is now risen up a Number of People, otherwise in- 
clined than our Joshwa’s, and the Elders that out-liv’d them. 
Those two things our holy Progenitors, and our happy Ad- 
vantages make Omissions of Duty, and such Spiritual Disor- 
ders as the whole World abroad is overwhelmed with, to be as 
provoking in us, as the most flagitious Wickedness committed 
in other places; and the Ministers of God are accordingly 
severe in their Testimonies: But in short, those Interests of 
the Gospel, which were the Errand of our Fathers into these 
Ends of the Earth, have been too much neglected and post- 
poned, and the Attainments of an handsome Education, have 
been too much undervalued, by Multitudes that have not fallen 
into Exorbitances of wickedness; and some, especially of our 
young Ones, when they have got abroad from under the Re- 
straints here laid upon them, have become extravagantly and 
abominably Vicious. Hence ’tis, that the Happiness of New 
England has been but for a time, as it was foretold, and not 
for a long time, as has been desir’d for us. A Variety of 
Calamity has long follow’d this Plantation; and we have all 
the Reason imaginable to ascribe it unto the Rebuke of Heaven 
upon us for our manifold A postasies; we make no right use of 
our Disasters: If we do not, Remember whence we are fallen, 
and. repent, and do the first Works. But yet our Afflictions 
may come under a further Consideration with us: There is 
a further Cause of our Afflictions, whose due must be given him. 

2 

~The New Englanders are a People of God settled in those, 
‘which were once the Devil’s Territories; and it may easily be 
supposed that the Devil was exceedingly disturbed, when he 
perceived such a People here accomplishing the Promise of 
old made unto our Blessed Jesus, That He should have the 
Utomost parts of the earth for his Possession. ‘There was not 
a greater Uproar among the Ephesians, when the Gospel was 
first brought among them, than there was among, T'he Powers 

84 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

of the Air. (after whom those Ephesians walked) when first 
the Silver Trwmpets of the Gospel here made the Joyful 
Sound. The Devil thus Irritated, immediately try’d all sorts 
of Methods to overturn this poor Plantation: and so much of 
the Church, as was Fled into this Wilderness, immediately 
found, The Serpent cast out of his Mouth a Flood for the 
carrying of it away. I believe, that never were more Satanical 
Devices used for the Unsetling of any People under the Sun, 
than what have been Employ’d for the Extirpation of the Vine 
which God has here Planted, Casting out the Heathen, and 
preparing a Room before it, and causing tt to take deep root, 
and fill the Land, so that it sent its Boughs unto the Atlantic 
Sea Eastward, and its Branches unto the Connecticut River 
Westward, and the Hills were covered with the shadow thereof. 
But, All those Attempts of Hell, have hitherto been Abortive, 
many an Ebenezer has been Erected unto the Praise of God, 
by his Poor People here; and, Having obtained Help from 
God, we continue to this Day. Wherefore the Devil is now 
making one Attempt more upon us; an Attempt more Difficult, 
more Surprizing, more snarl’d with unintelligible Circum- 
stances than any that we have Encountered; an Attempt so 
Critical, that if we get well through, we shall soon Enjoy 
Halcyon Days with all the Vultures of Hell T'rodden under 
our Feet. He has wanted his Incarnate Legions to Persecute 
us, as the People of God have in the other Hemisphere been 
persecuted: he has therefore drawn forth his more Spiritual 
ones to make an attacque upon us. We have been advised by 
some Credible Christians yet alive, that a malefactor, accused 
of Witchcraft as well as Murder, and Executed in this place 
more than Forty Years ago, did then give Notice of, An Hor- 
rible PLOT against the Country by Wrircucrart, and a 
Foundation of Wircucrart then laid, which if it were not 
seasonably discovered, would probably Blow wp, and pull down 
all the Churches in the Country. And we have now with 
Horror seen the Discovery of such a Witchcraft! An Army 
of Devils is horribly broke in upon the place which is the Cen- 

COTTON MATHER’S WONDERS 85 

ter, and after a sort, the First-born of our English Settle- 
ments: and the Houses of the Good People there are fill’d with 
the doleful Shrieks of their Children and Servants, Tormented 
by Invisible Hands, with Tortures altogether preternatural. 

II 

Tue Tri or Briocer Bisnop, Animas Oniver, At Tur 
Court or OryerR anp TrEerMiner, Hetp at 
SaLem, June 2, 1692. 

1. She was Indicted for Bewitching of several Persons in 
the Neighbourhood, the Indictment being drawn up, according 
to the Form in such Cases usual. And pleading, Not Guilty, 
there were brought in several persons, who had long under- 
gone many kinds of Miseries, which were preternaturally in- 
flicted, and generally ascribed unto an horrible Witchcraft. 
There was little occasion to prove the Witchcraft, it being 
evident and notorious to all beholders. Now to fix the Witch- 
craft on the Prisoner at the Bar, the first thing used was the 
Testimony of the Bewitched; whereof several testifi’d That the 
Shape of the Prisoner did oftentimes very grievously Pinch 
them, Choak them, Bite them, and afflict them; urging them to 
write their Names in a Book, which the said Spectre called 
Ours. One of them did further testifie, that it was the Shape 
of this Prisoner, with another, which one day took her from 
her wheel, and carrying her to the Riverside, threatened there 
to Drown her, if she did not Sign to the Book mentioned ; which 
yet she refused. Others of them did also testifie, that the said 
Shape did in her Threats brag to them that she had been the 
Death of sundry Persons, then by her named; that she had 
Ridden a Man then likewise named. Another testifi’d, the 
Apparition of Ghosts unto the Spectre of Bishop, crying out, 
You Murdered us! About the Truth whereof there was in 
the Matter of Fact but too much Suspicion. 

86 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

2, It was testifi’d, That at the Examination of the Prisoner 
before the Magistrates, the Bewitched were extremely tor- 
tured. If she did but cast her Eyes on them, they were pres- 
ently struck down; and this in such a manner as there could 
be no collusion in the Business. But upon the Touch of her 
Hand upon them, when they lay in their Swoons, they would 
immediately Revive; and not upon the Touch of any ones 
Else. Moreover, upon some Special Actions of her Body, as 
the shaking of her Head, or the turning of her Eyes, they 
presently and painfully fell into the like postures. And many 
of the like Accidents now fell out, while she was at the Bar, 
One at the same time testifying, That she said, She could not 
be troubled to see the afflicted thus tormented. 

3. There was Testimony likewise brought in, that a Man 
Striking once at the place, where a bewitched person said, 
the Shape of this Bishop stood, the bewitched cried out, That 
he had tore her Coat, in the place then particularly specifi’d ; 
and the Woman’s Coat was found to be Torn in that very 
place. 

4. One Deliverance Hobbs, who had confessed her being a 
Witch, was now tormented by the Spectres, for her Confes- 
sion. And she now testifi’?d, That this Bishop tempted her to 
Sign the Book again, and to deny what she had confess’d. She 
affirm’d, That it was the Shape of this Prisoner, which whipped 
her with Iron Rods, to compel her thereunto. And she af- 
firmed, that this Bishop was at a General Meeting of the 
Witches, in a Field at Salem-Village, and there partook of a 
Diabolical Sacrament in Bread and Wine then administered. 

5. To render it further unquestionable, that the Prisoner 
at the Bar, was the Person truly charged in Tuts Witchcraft 
there were produced many Evidences of Orner Witchcrafts, 
by her perpetrated. For Instance, John Cook testifi?d, That 
about five or six Years ago, one Morning, about Sun-Rise, he 
was in his Chamber assaulted by the Shape of this Prisoner ; 

COTTON MATHER’S WONDERS 87 

which look’d on him, grinn’d at him, and very much hurt him 
with a Blow on the Side of the Head; and that on the same day, 
about Noon, the same Shape walked in the Room where he 
was, and an Apple Strangely flew out of his Hand, into the 
Lap of his Mother, six or eight Foot from him. 

6. Samuel Gray testifi?d, That about fourteen Years ago, 
he wak’d on a Night, and saw the Room where he lay full of 
Light; and that he then saw plainly a Woman between the 
Cradle, and the Bed-side, which look’d upon him. He rose, 
and it vanished; tho’ he found the Doors all fast. Looking 
out at the Entry-door, he saw the same Woman in the same 
Garb again; and said, In God’s Name, what do you come for? 
He went to Bed, and had the same Woman again assaulting 
him. The Child in the Cradle gave a great Screech, and the 
Woman disappeared. It was long before the Child could be 
quieted; and tho it pined away, and, after divers months, 
died in a sad condition. He knew not Bishop, nor her Name; 
but when he saw her after this, he knew by her Countenance, 
and Apparel, and all Circumstances, that it was the Appari- 
tion of this Bishop, which had thus troubled him. 

7. John Bly and his Wife testifi’d, That he bought a sow 
of Edward Bishop, the Husband of the Prisoner; and was to 
pay the Price agreed, unto another person. This Prisoner 
being angry that she was hindred from figuring the Mony 
quarrell’d with Bly. Soon after which, the Sow was taken with 
strange Fits; Jumping, Leaping, and Knocking her Head 
against the Fence; she seem’d Blind and Deaf, and would 
neither Eat nor be Suck’d. Whereupon a Neighbor said, she 
believed the Creature was Over-looked; and sundry other Cir- 
cumstances concurred, which made the Deponents believe that 
Bishop had bewitched it. 

8. Richard Corvan testifi?d, That Eight Years ago, he lay 
awake in his Bed, with a Light burning in the Room, he was 
annoy’d with the Apparition of this Bishop, and of two more 

88 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

that were Strangers to him, who came and oppressed him so, 
that he could neither stir himself, nor wake anyone else, and 
that he was the Night after, molested again in the like man- 
ner; the said Bishop, taking him by the Throat, and pulling 
him almost out of the Bed. His Kinsman offered for this 
cause to lodge with him; and that Night, as they were awake, 
discoursing together, this Corvan was once more visited by 
the Guests which had formerly been so troublesome; his Kins- 
man being at the same time struck speechless, and unable to 
move Hand or Foot. He had laid his Sword by him, which 
these unhappy Spectres did strive much to wrest from him; 
only he held too fast for them. He then grew able to call 
the People of his House; but altho’ they heard him, yet they 
had not power to stir or speak; until at last, one of the People 
crying out, What’s the matter? The Spectres all vanished. 

9. Samuel Shattock testifi?d, That in the Year 1680, this 
Bridget Bishop, often came to his House upon such frivolous 
Errands, that they suspected she came indeed with a pur- 
pose of mischief. Presently, whereupon, his Eldest Child, 
which was of as promising Health and Sense, as any Child of 
its Age, began to droop exceedingly; and the oftener that 
Bishop came to the House, the worse grew the Child. As the 
Child would be standing at the Door, he would be thrown 
and bruised against the Stones, by an invisible Hand, and in 
like sort knock his Face against the sides of the House, and 
bruise it after a miserable manner. Afterwards this Bishop 
would bring him things to Dye, whereof he could not imagin 
any use; and when she paid him a piece of Mony, the Purse 
and Mony were unaccountably conveyed out of a lock’d Box, 
and never seen any more. The Child was immediately, here- 
upon, taken with terrible Fits, whereof his Friends thought 
he would have dyed; Indeed he did almost nothing but Cry 
and Sleep for several Months together; and at length his 
understanding was utterly taken away. Among other Symp- 
toms of an Inchantment upon him, one was, That there was 

COTTON MATHER’S WONDERS 89 

a Board in the Garden, whereon he would walk; and all the 
Invitations in the World could never fetch him off. About 
17 or 18 years after, there came a Stranger to Shatiock’s 
House, who seeing the Child, said, This poor Child is Be- 
witched; and you have a Neighbor liwing not far off, who is a 
Witch. He added, Your Neighbor has had a falling out with 
your Wife; and she said, in her Heart, your Wife is a proud 
Woman, and she would bring down her Pride in this Child. 
He then remembered, that Bishop had parted from his Wife 
in muttering and menacing Terms, a little before the Child 
was taken Ill. The abovesaid Stranger would needs carry the 
bewitched Boy with him, to Bishop’s House, on pretense of 
buying a pot of Cyder. The Woman entertained him in 
furious manner; and flew also upon the Boy, scratching his 
Face till the Blood came; and saying, Thou Rogue, what dost 
thow bring this Fellow here to plague me? Now it seems the 
Man said, before he went, That he would fetch Blood for her. 
Ever after the Boy was follow’d with grievous Fits, which the 
Doctors themselves generally ascribed unto Witchcraft; and 
wherein he would be thrown still into the Fire or the Water, 
if he were not constantly look’d after; and it was verily be- 
lieved that Bishop was the cause of it. 

10. John Louder testify’d, That upon some little Contro- 
versy with Bishop about her Fowls, going well to Bed, he did 
awake in the Night by Moonlight, and did see clearly the like- 
ness of this Woman grievously oppressing him; in which miser- 
able condition she held him, unable to help himself, till near 
Day. He told Bishop of this; but she deny’d it, and threatened 

-him very much. Quickly after this, being at home on a Lord’s 
day, with the doors shut about him, he saw a black Pig ap- 
proach him; at which, he going to kick, it vanished away. Im- 
mediately after, sitting down, he saw a black Thing jump 
in at the Window, and come to stand before him. The Body 
was like that of a Monkey, the Feet like a cocks, but the Face 
much like a Mans. He being so extremely affrighted, that he 

90 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

could not speak; this Monster spoke to him, and said, I am a 
Messenger sent unto you, for I understand that you are in 
some Trouble of Mind, and if you will be ruled by me, you 
shall want for nothing in this World. Whereupon he endeay- 
oured to clap his Hands upon it; but he could feel no sub- 
stance; and it jumped out of the Window again; but imme- 
diately came in by the Porch, tho’ the Doors were shut, and 
said, You had better take my Counsel! He then struck at it 
with a Stick, but struck only the Ground-sel, and broke the 
Stick: _The Arm with which he struck was presently Dis- 
enabled, and it vanished away. He presently went out at the 
Back-door, and spied this Bishop in her Orchard, going to- 
ward her House; but he had not power to set one foot forward 
unto her. Whereupon, returning into the House, he was 
immediately accosted by the Monster he had seen before; 
which Goblin was now going to fly at him; whereat he cry’d 
out, The Whole Armour of God be between me and you! So 
it sprang back, and flew over the Apple-tree; shaking many 
Apples off the Tree, in its flying over. At its leap, it flung 
Dirt with its Feet against the Stomach of the Man; where- 
on he was then struck Dumb, and so continued for three 
Days together. Upon the producing of this Testimony, 
Bishop deny’d that she knew this Deponent: Yet their two 
Orchards joined; and they had often had their little Quarrels 
for some years together. 

11. William Stacy testify’d, That receiving Mony of this 
Bishop, for work done by him; he had gone but a matter of 
three Rods from her, and looking for his Mony, found it un- 
accountably gone from him. Sometime after, Bishop asked 
him, whether his Father would grind her Grist for her? He 
demanded why? She reply’d, Because Folks count me a 
Witch. He answered, No question but he will grind it for 
you. Being then gone about six Rods from her, with a small 
Load in his Cart, suddenly the Off wheel stump’d, and sunk 
down into an hole, upon plain Ground; so that the Deponent 

COTTON MATHER’S WONDERS 91 

was forced to get help for the recovering of the Wheel: But 
stepping back to look for the hole, which might give him this 
Disaster, there was none at all to be found. Some time after, 
he was waked in the Night; but it seem’d as light as day; and 
he perfectly saw the shape of the Bishop in the Room, trou- 
bling of him; but upon her going out, all was dark again. 
He charg’d Bishop afterwards with it, and she deny’d it not; 
but was very angry. Quickly after, this Deponent having been 
threatened by Bishop, as he was in a dark Night going to the 
Barn, he was suddenly taken or lifted from the Ground, and 
thrown against a Stonewall: After that, he was again hoisted 
up and thrown down a Bank, at the end of his House. After 
this again, passing by this Bishop, his Horse with a small 
Load, striving to draw, all his Gears flew to pieces, and the 
Cart fell down; and this Deponent going then to lift a Bag 
of Corn, of about two Bushels, could not budge it with all his 
Might. 

Many other Pranks of this Bishop’s this Deponent was 
ready to testify. He also testify’d, That he verily believ’d the 
said Bishop was the Instrument of his Daughter Priscilla’s 
Death; of which suspicion, pregnant Reasons were assigned. 

12. To crown all, John Bly and William Bly testify’d, 
That being employ’d by Bridget Bishop, to help to take down 
the Cellar-wall of the old House wherein she formerly lived, 
they did in holes of the said old Wall, find several Poppets, 
made up of Rags and Hogs-bristles, with headless Pins in 
them, the Points being outward; whereof she could give no 
Account unto the Court, that was reasonable or tolerable. 

13. One thing that made against the Prisoner was, her be- 
ing evidently convicted of gross Lying im the Court, several 
times, while she was making her Plea; but besides this, a Jury 
of Women found a preternatural Teat upon her Body: But 
upon a second search, within 3 or 4 hours, there was no such 
thing to be seen. There was also an Account of other People 

92 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

whom this Woman had Afflicted; and there might have been 
many more, if they had been enquired for; but there was no 
need of them. 

14. There was one very strange thing more, with which the 
Court was newly entertained. As this Woman was under a 
Guard, passing by the great and spacious Meeting-house of 
Salem, she gave a look towards the House: And immediately 
a Daemon invisibly entring the Meeting-house, tore down a 
part of it; so that tho’ there was no Person to be seen there, 
yet the People, at the noise, running in, found a Board, which 
was strongly fastned with several Nails, transported unto 
another quarter of the House. 

* + * 

Tur Triat or Susanna Martin, At Tue Court or Over 
AND TERMINER HELD By ADJOURNMENT AT 
SaLem, JuNE 29, 1692. 

1. Susanna Martin, pleading Not Guilty to the Indict- 
ment of Witchcraft, brought in against her, there were pro- 
duced the Evidences of many Persons very sensibly and griev- 
ously Bewitched; who all complained of the Prisoner at the 
Bar, as the Person whom they believed the cause of their 
Miseries. And now, as well as in the other Trials, there was an 
extraordinary Endeavour by Witchcrafts, with Cruel and fre- 
quent Fits, to hinder the poor Sufferers from giving in their 
Complaints, which the Court was forced with much Patience to 
obtain, by much waiting and watching for it. 

2. There was now also an account given of what passed at 
her first Examination before the Magistrates. The Cast of 
her Eye, then striking the afflicted People to the Ground, 
whether they saw that Cast or no; there were these among 
other Passages between Magistrates and the Examinate. 

Magistrate: Pray, what ails these People? 

baits 

COTTON MATHER’S WONDERS 93 

Martin: I don’t know. 

Magistrate: But what do you think ails them? 

Martin: I don’t desire to spend my Judgement upon it. 

Magistrate: Don’t you think they are bewitch’d? 

Martin: No, I do not think they are. 

Magistrate: Tell us your thought about them then. 

Martin: No, my thoughts are my own, when they are in, 
but when they are out they are anothers. Their Master 

Magistrate: Their Master? -Who do you think is their 
Master? 

Martin: If they be dealing in = Black Art, you may 
know as well as I. 

Magistrate: Well, what have you done towards this? 

Martin: Nothing at all. 

Magistrate: Why, ’tis you or your Appearance. 

Martin: I cannot help it. 

Magistrate: Is it not your Master? How comes your 
Appearance to hurt these? 

Martin: How do I know? He that appeared in the 
shape of Samuel, a glorified Saint, may appear in any ones 
Shape. 

It was then also noted in her, as in others like her, that if 
the Afflicted went to approach her, they were flung down to 
the Ground. And, when she was asked the reason of it, she 
said, I cannot tell; it may be, the Devil bears me more Malice 
than another. 

3. The Court accounted themselves, alarum’d by these 
Things, to enquire further into the Conversation of the Pris- 
-oner ; and see what there might occur, to render these Accusa- 
tions further credible. Whereupon, John Allen of Salisbury, 
testify’d, That he refusing, because of the weakness of his 
Oxen, to Cart some Stones at the request of this Martin, she was 
displeased at it; and said, It had been as good that he had; 
for his Oxen should never do him much more service. Where- 
upon, this Deponent said, Dost thow threaten me, thow old 

94 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

Witch?. I’l throw thee in the Brook. Which to avoid, she 
flew over the Bridge, and escaped. But as he was going home, 
one of his Oxen tired, so that he was forced to Unyoke him, 
that he might get him home. He then put his Oxen, with 
many more, upon Salisbury Beach, where Cattle did use to get 
Flesh. In a few days, all the Oxen upon the Beach were 
found by their Tracks, to have run unto the Mouth of Merri- 
mack-River, and not returned; but the next day they were 
found come ashore upon Plum Island. They that sought them, 
used all imaginable gentleness, but they would still run away 
with a violence, that seemed wholly Diabolical, till they came 
near the Mouth of Merrimack-River; when they ran right 
into the Sea, swimming as far as they could be seen. One of 
them swam back again, with a swiftness, amazing to the Be- 
holders, who stood ready to receive him, and help up his tired 
Carcass: But the Beast ran furiously up into the Island, 
and from thence, through the Marshes, up into Newbury 
Town, and so up into the Woods; and there after a while 
found near Amesbury.. So that, of fourteen good Oxen, there 
was only this saved: The rest were all cast up, some in one 
place, and some in another, Drowned. 

4. John Atkinson testifi’d, That he exchanged a Cow with 
a Son of Susanna Martin’s, whereat she muttered, and was un- 
willing he should have it. Going to receive this Cow, tho’ he 
Hamstring’d her, and Halter’d her, she, of a Tame Creature, 
grew so mad, that they could scarce get her along. She broke 
all the Ropes that were fastned unto her, and though she 
were ty’d fast unto a Tree, yet she made her escape, and gave 
them such further trouble, as they could ascribe to no cause 
but Witchcraft. 

5. Bernard Peache testifi’d, That being in Bed, on the 
Lord’sday Night, he heard a scrabbling at the Window, where- 
at he then saw Susanna Martin come in, and jump down upon 
the Floor. She took hold of this Deponent’s Feet, and drawing 

COTTON MATHER’S WONDERS 95 

his Body up into an Heap, she lay upon him near Two Hours, 
in all which time he could neither speak nor stir. At length, 
when he could begin to move, he laid hold on her Hand, and 
pulling it up to his Mouth, he bit three of her Fingers, as 
he judged, unto the Bone. Whereupon she went from the 
Chamber, down the Stairs, out at the Door. This Deponent, 
thereupon called unto the People of the House, to advise them 
of what passed; and he himself did follow her. The People 
saw her not; but there being a Bucket at the Left-hand of the 
Door, there was a drop of Blood found upon it; and several 
more drops of Blood upon the Snow newly fallen abroad: 
There was likewise the print of her 2 Feet just without the 
Threshold; but no more sign of any Footing further off. 

At another time this Deponent was desired by the Pris- 
oner, to come unto an Husking of Corn, at her House; and she 
said, If he did not come, it were better that he did! We went 
not, but the Night following, Susanna Martin, as he judged, 
and another came towards him. One of them said, Here he is! 
but he having a Quarterstaff, made a Blow at them. The Roof 
of the Barn, broke his Blow; but following them to the Win- 
dow, he made another Blow at them, and struck them down; 
yet they got up, and got out, and he saw no more of them. 

About this time, there was a Rumour about the Town, 
that Martin had a Broken Head; but the Deponent could say 
nothing to that. 

‘The said Peache also testifi’d, the Bewitching the Cattle to 

Death, upon Martin’s Discontents. 

6. Robert Downer testified, That this Prisoner being some 
Years ago prosecuted at Court for a Witch, he then said unto 
her, He believed she was a Witch. Whereat she being dissat- 
isfied, said, That some She Devil would shortly fetch him 
away! which words were heard by others as well as himself. 
The Night following, as he lay in his Bed, there came in at 
the Window, the likeness of a Cat, which flew upon him, and 
fast hold of his Throat, lay on him a considerable while, and 

96 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

almost killed him. At length he remembered what Susanna 
Martin had threatened the Day before; and with much striv- 
ing he cried out, Avoid, thou She-Devil! In the Name of God 
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Avoid! Whereupon 
it left him, leap’t on the Floor, and flew out at the Window. 
And there also came in several Testimonies, that before 

ever Downer spoke a word of this Accident, Susanna Martm _ 

and her family had related, How this Downer had been 
handled! 

”. John Kembal testified, that Susanna Martm, upon a 
causeless Disgust, had threatned him, about a certain Cow of 
his, That she would never do him any more Good: and it came 
to pass accordingly. For soon after the Cow was found stark 
dead on the dry Ground, without any Distemper to be dis- 
cerned upon her. Upon which he was followed with a strange 
Death upon more of his Catéle, whereof he lost in one Sprmg 
to, the value of Thirty Pounds. But the said John Kembal 
had a further Testimony to give in against the Prisoner which 
was truly abominable. 

Being desirous to furnish himself with a Dog, he applied 
himself to buy one of this Martin, who had a Bitch with 
Whelps in her House. But she was not letting him have his 
choice, he said, he would supply himself then at one Blezdels. 
Having mark’d a Puppy, which he lik’d at Blezdel’s, he met 
George Martin, the Husband of the Prisoner, going by, who 
asked him, Whether he would not have one of his Wife’s Pup- 
pies? and he answered, No. The same Day, one Edmond 
Eliot, being at Martin’s House, heard George Martin relate, 
where this Kembal had been, and what he had said, where- 
upon Susanna Martin replied, If I live, Pll give him Puppies 
enough! Within a few days after, this Kembal, coming out 
of the Woods, there arose a little Black Cloud in the North 
West and Kembal immediately felt a force upon him, which 
made him not able to avoid running upon the stumps of Trees, 
that were before him, albeit he had ‘a broad, plain Cart-way, 

~—— 

COTTON MATHER’S WONDERS 97 

before him; but tho’ he had his Az also on his Shoulder, to en- 
danger him in his Falls, he could not forbear going out of his 
way to stumble over them. When he came below the Meet- 
ing House, there appeared unto him, a little thing like a 
Puppy, of a Darkish Colour; and it shot backwards and for- 
wards between his Legs. He had the Courage to use all pos- 
sible Endeavours of Cutting it with his Ax; but he could not 
Hit it: the Puppy gave a jump from him, and went, as to him 
it seem’d into the Ground. Going a little further, there ap- 
peared unto him a Black Puppy, somewhat bigger than the 
first, but as Black as a Cole. Its Motions were quicker than 
those of his Ax; it flew at his Belly, and away; then at his 
Throat; so, over his Shoulder one way, and then over his 
Shoulder another way. His Heart now began to fail him, 
and he thought the Dog would have tore his Throat out. But 
he recovered himself, and called upon God in his Distress; 
and naming the Name of Jrsus Curist, it vanished away at 
once. ‘The Deponent spoke not one Word of these Accidents, 
for fear of affrighting his Wife. But the next Morning, 
Edmond Eliot, going into Martin’s House, this Woman 
asked him where Kembal was? He replied, At home a Bed 
for ought he knew. She returned, They say, he was frighted 
last Night. Eliot asked, With what? She answered, With 
Puppies. Eliot asked, Where she heard of it, for he had heard 
nothing of it? She rejoined, About the Town. Altho? Kem- 
bal had mentioned the Matter to no Creature living. 

8. William Brown, testifi?d, That Heaven having blessed 
him with a most Pious and Prudent Wife, this Wife of his, one 
day met with Susanna Martin; but when she approach’d just 
unto her, Martin vanished out of sight, and left her extremely 
affrighted. After which time, the said Martin often appear’d 
unto her, giving her no little trouble; and when she did come, 
she was visited with Birds, that sorely peck’d and prick’d her; 
and sometimes, a Bunch, like a Pullet’s Egg, would rise in 
her Throat, ready to choak her, till she cry’d out, Witch, you 

98 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

shan’t choak me! While this good Woman was in this ex- 
tremity, the Church appointed a Day of Prayer, on her be- 
half; whereupon her Trouble ceas’d; she saw not Martin as 
formerly ; and the Church, instead of their Fast, gave Thanks 
for her Deliverance. But a considerable while after, she being 
Summoned to give in some Evidence at the Court, against this 
Martin, quickly thereupon, this Martin came behind her, while 
she was milking her Cow, and said unto her, For thy defaming 
her at Court, I'll make thee the miserablest Creature im the 
World. Soon after which, she fell into a strange kind of dis- 
temper, became horribly frantick and uncapable of any rea- 
sonable Action; the Physician declaring, that her Distemper 
was preternatural, and that some Devil had certainly be- 
witched her; and in that condition she now remained. 

9. Sarah Atkinson testify’d, That Susanna Martm came 
from Amesbury to their House at Newbury, in an extraordi- 
nary Season, when it was not fit for any to Travel. She came 
(as she said, unto Atkinson) all that long way on Foot. She 
brag’d and shew’d how dry she was; nor could it be perceived 
that so much as the Soles of her Shoes were wet. Atkinson 
was amazed at it; and professed, that she should herself have 
been wet up to the knees, if she had then come so far; but 
Martin reply’d, She scorn’d to be Drabbled! It was noted, 
that this Testimony upon her Trial, cast her in a very singular 
Confusion. 

10. John Pressy testify’d, That being one Evening very 
unaccountably Bewildered, near a Field of Martins, and several 
times, as one under an Enchantment, returning to the place 
he had left, at length he saw a marvellous Light, about the 
bigness of an Half-bushel, near two Rod, out of the way. He 
went, and struck at it with a Stick, and laid it on with all his 
might. He gave it near forty blows; and felt it a palpable sub- 
stance. But going from it, his Heels were struck up, and he 
was laid with his Back on the Ground, sliding, as he thought, 
into a Pit; from whence he recover’d by taking hold on the 

COTTON MATHER’S WONDERS 99 

Bush; altho’ afterwards he could find \no such Pit in the place. 
Having, after his Recovery, gone five or six Rod, he saw 
Susanna Martin standing on his Left-hand, as the Light had 
done before; but they changed no words with one another. He 
could scarce find his House in his Return, but at length he got 
home extremely affrighted. The next day, it was upon En- 
quiry understood, that Martin was in a miserable condition by 
pains and hurts that were upon her. 

It was further testify’d by this Deponent, That after he 
had given in some Evidence against Susanna Martin, many 
years ago, she gave him foul words about it; and said He 
should never prosper more; particularly, That he should never 
have more than two Cows; that tho’ he was never so likely to 
have more, yet he should never have them. And that from 
that very day to this, namely twenty years together, he could 
never exceed that number; but some strange thing or other 
still prevented his having any more. 

11. Jervis Ring testify’d, That about seven years ago, he 
was oftentimes and grievously oppressed in the Night, but saw - 
not who troubled him; until at last he Lying perfectly Awake, 
plainly saw Susanna Martin approach him. She came to him, 
and forceably bit him by the Finger; so that the Print of the 
bite is now, long after, to be seen upon him. 

12. But besides all these Evidences, there was a most won- 
derful Account of one Joseph Ring, produced on this occasion. 

This Man has been strangely carried about by Daemons, 
from one Witch-meeting to another, for near two years to- 
gether; and for one quarter of this time, they have made him, 
and keep him Dumb, tho’ he is now again able to speak. There 
was one T'. H. who having, as ’tis judged, a design of engaging 
this Joseph Ring in a snare of Devillism, contrived a while, 
to bring this Ring two Shillings in Debt unto him. 

Afterwards, this poor Man would be visited with unknown 
shapes, and this T. H. sometimes among them; which would 
force him away with them, unto unknown Places, where he 

100 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

saw Meetings, Feastings, Dancings; and after his return, 
wherein they hurried him along through the Air, he gave 
Demonstrations to the Neighbors, that he had indeed been so 
transported. When he was brought unto these hellish Meet- 
ings, one of the first Things they still did unto him, was to 
give him a knock on the Back, whereupon he was ever as if 
bound with Chains, uncapable of stirring out of the place, till 
they should release him. He related, that there often came 
to him a Man, who presented him a Book, whereto he would 
have him set his Hand; promising to him, that he should then 
have even what he would; and presenting him with all the 
delectable Things, Persons, and Places, that he could imagin. 
But he refusing to subscribe, the business would end with 
dreadful Shapes, Noises and Screeches, which almost scared 
him out of his Wits. Once with the Book, there was a Pen 
offered him, and an Ink-horn with Liquor in it, that seemed 
like Blood: But he never toucht it. 

This Man did now affirm, That he saw the Prisoner at sev- 
eral of those hellish Rendezvouzes. 

Note, this Woman was one of the most impudent, scur- 
rilous, wicked Creatures in the World; and she did now 
throughout her whole Tryal, discover herself to be such an 
one. Yet when she was asked, what she had to say for her self? 
Her chief Plea was, That she had lead a most virtuous and holy 
Life. 

III 

Having thus far done the Service imposed upon me; I will 
further pursue it, by relating a few of those Matchless Curi- 
osities, with which the Witchcraft now upon us, has enter- 
tained us. All I shall Report Nothing but with Good Author- 
ity, and what I would invite all my Readers to examine, while 
*tis yet Fresh and New, that if there be found any mistake, 
it may be as willingly Retracted, as it was unwillingly Com- 
mitted. 

COTTON MATHER’S WONDERS 101 

1. Tue First Coriosrrm 

*Tis very Remarkable to see what an Impious and Impu- 
dent imitation of Divine Things, is Apishly affected by the 
Devil, in several of those matters, whereof the Confessions of 
our Witches, and the Afflictions of our Sufferers have in- 
formed us. . 

That Reverend and Excellent Person, Mr. John Higgin- 
son, in my Conversation with him, Once invited me to this Re- 
flection ; that the Indians which came from far to settle about 
Mexico, were in their Progress to that Settlement, under a 
Conduct of the Devil, very strangely Emulating what the 
Blessed God gave to Israel in the Wilderness. 

Acosta, is our Author for it, that the Devil in their Idol 
’Vitzlipultzli, governed that mighty Nation. He commanded 
them to leave their Country, promising to make them Lords 
over all the Provinces possessed by Sia other Nations of In- 
dians, and give them a Land abounding with all precious 
things. They went forth, carrying their Idol with them, in 
a Coffer of Reeds, supported by Four of their Principal 
Priests ; with whom he still Discoursed in secret, Revealing to 
them the Successes, and Accidents of their way. He advised 
them, when to March, and where to Stay, and without his 
Commandment they moved not. The first thing they did, © 
wherever they came, was to Erect a Tabernacle, for their false 
god; which they set always in the midst of their Camp, and 
they placed the Ark upon an Alter.. When they, Tired with 
pains, talked of, proceeding no further in their Journey, than 
a certain pleasant Stage, whereto they were arrived, this Devil 
in one Night, horribly kill’d them that had started this Talk, 
by pulling out their Hearts. And so they passed on till they 
came to Mezico. 

The Devil which there thus imitated what was in the 
Church of the Old Testament, now among Us would Imitate 
the Affairs of the Church in the New. The Witches do say, 
that they form themselves much after the manner of Congre- 

102 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

gational Churches; and that they have a Baptism and a Sup- 
per, and Officers among them, abominably Resembling those of 
our Lord. 

But there are many more of these Bloody Imitations, if 
the Confessions of the Witches are to be Received; which I 
confess, ought to be but with very much Caution. 

What is their stricking down with a fierce Look? What 
is their making of the Afflicted Rise, with a touch of their 
Hand? What is their Transportation thro’ the Air? What 
is their Travelling in Spirit, while their Body is cast into a 
Trance? What is their Causing of Cattle to run mad and 
perish? What is their Entring their Names in a Book? What 
is their coming together from all parts, at the Sound of a 
Trumpet? What is their Appearing sometimes Cloathed with 
Light or Fire upon them? What is their Covering of them- 
selves and their Instruments with Invisibility? But a Blas- 
phemous Imitation of certain Things recorded about our 
Saviour or His Prophets, or the Saints in the Kingdom of 
God. 

2. A Seconp CuRIOSITIE 

In all the Witchcraft which now Grievously Vexes us, I 
know not whether anything be more unaccountable, than the 
Trick which the Witches have to render themselves, and their 
Tools Invisible. Witchcraft seems to be the Skill of Applying 
the Plastic Spirit of the World, unto some unlawful pur- 
poses, by means of a Confederacy with Evil Spirits. Yet one 
would wonder how the Evil Spirits themselves can do some 
things; especially at Invisibilizing of the Grossest Bodies. I 
can tell the Name of an Ancient Author, who pretends to show 
the way, how a man may come to walk about Invisible, and I 
can tell the Name of another Ancient Author, who pretends 
to Explode that way. But I will not speak too plainly Lest I 
_ should unawares Poison some of my Readers, as the pious 

Herningius did one of his Pupils, when he only by way of Di- 
version recited a Spell, which, they had said, would cure Agues. 

COTTON MATHER’S WONDERS 103 

This much I will say; The notion of procuring Invisibility by 
any Natural Expedient, yet known, is, I Believe, a meer 
Purnyism; How far it may be obtained by a Magical Sacra- 
ment, is best known to the Dangerous Knaves that have try’d 
it. But our Witches do seem to have got the knack; and this 
is one of the Things, that make me think, Witchcraft will not 
be fully understood, until the day when there shall not be one 
Witch in the World. | 

There are certain people very Dogmatical about these 
matters; but I’ll give them only three Bones to pick. 

First, One of our bewitched people, was cruelly assaulted 

by a Spectre, that, she said, ran at her with a spindle: tho’ no 

body else in the Room, could see either the Spectre or the 
spindle. At last, in her miseries, giving a snatch at the 
S'pectre, she pull’d the spindle away, and it was no sooner got 
into her hand, but the other people then present, behold, that 
it was indeed a Real, Proper, Iron spindle, belonging they 
knew to whom; which when they lock’d up very safe, it was 
nevertheless by Demons unaccountably stole away, to do fur- 
ther mischief. ; 

Secondly, Another of our bewitched people, was haunted 
with a most abusive spectre, which came to her, she said, with 
a sheet about her. After she had undergone a deal of Teaze, 
from the Annoyance of the Spectre, she gave a violent snatch 
at the sheet, that was upon it; wherefrom she tore a corner, 
which in her hand immediately became Visible to a Roomful of 
Spectators; a palpable Corner of a Sheet. Her Father, who 
was now holding her, catch’d that he might keep what his 
Daughter had so strangely seized, but the unseen Syectre 
had like to have pull’d his hand off, by endeavoring to wrest 
it from him; however he still held it, and I suppose has it, still 

_ to show; it being but a few hours ago, namely about the be- 
ginning of this October, that this Accident happened; in the 
family of one Pitman, at Manchester. 

Thirdly, A young man, delaying to procure Testimonials 
for his Parents, who being under confinement on suspicion of 

104 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

Witchcraft, required him to do that service for them, was 
quickly pursued with odd Inconveniences. But once above 
the Rest, an officer going to put his Brand on the Horns of 
some Cows, belonging to these people, which tho’ he had seiz’d 
for some of their debts, yet he was willing to leave in their 
possession, for the subsistance of the poor Family; this young 
man help’d in holding the Cows to be thus branded. The 
three first Cows he held well enough: but when the Brand 
entered the Cow’s Horn, exactly the like burning Brand was 
clap’d upon his own Thigh; where he has exposed the lasting 
marks of it, unto such as asked to see them. 

Unriddle these Things, . . . Et Eris mihi Magnus A pollo. 

PERE SEBASTIAN RASLES 

ICASSO (turning to look back, with a smile), Braque 
(brown cotton), Gertrude Stein (opening the doors 
of a cabinet of MSS.), Tzara (grinning), André Ger- 

main (blocking the door), Van der Pyl (speaking of St. 
Cloud), Bob Chandler (prodding Marcel), Marcel (shout- 
ing), Salmon (in a corner) and my good friends Philip and 
Madam Soupault; the Prince of Dahomi, Clive Bell (dressed), 
Nancy, Sylvia, Clotilde, Sally, Kitty, Mina and her two 
lovely daughters; James and Norah Joyce (in a taxi at the 
Place de Etoile), McAlmon, Antheil, Bryher, H. D. and dear 
Ezra who took me to talk with Léger; and finally Adrienne 
Monnier—these were my six weeks in Paris. Adrienne is last 
since it was she who by her insistence brought me one of my 
best moments among those days of rushing about and talking 
and seeing, while my bronzed faculties strove to right them- 
selves—among the scenes and fashions of this world where all 
the world comes, from time to time, to shed its nerves—after 
my brutalizing battle of twenty years to hear myself above 
the boilermakers in and about New York, where I had em- 
barked so precariously upon my literary career. 

I was, during that time, with antenne fully extended, but 
nothing came of it save an awakened realization within myself 
of that resistant core of nature upon which I had so long been 
driven for support. I felt myself with ardors not released 
but beaten back, in this center of old-world culture where 
everyone was tearing his own meat, warily conscious of a new- 
comer, but wholly without inquisitiveness—No wish to know; 
they were served. I saw exhibitions and sat at a few tables, 
here and there. “Gaite” told us of her sailor lover whom she 

105 

1066 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

would marry if she found that he really came from a large 
city, as he said. Brancusi sat us by his fire, the sheep slept 
about us while by constant rubbing his fingers carved the 
neck of his staff. This was a relief but like a fairy tale. It 
was not easy for me to be drunk; I had only a few weeks dur- 
ing which to see. I enjoyed the ballets, Dérain— But it 
was no more than a kind of quickened sullenness. Could I 
have shouted out in the midst of it, could I have loosed myself 
to embrace this turning, shouting, rustling, colored thing, my 
mind would have been relieved. I could not do it. Could I 
have been Nancy to imagine myself a kitten and fall from 
a tree. I could not. It infuriated my meanness. Was it 
not my vanity and impotence? We did this, we did that, we 
drank at the Ritz bar. What did I presume? ‘These ques- 
tions made me shy. Marcel knows New York, I said, I shall 
investigate his drunken leer. 

Adrienne Monnier pointed to a box at the Cigale. Look, 
she said, how enheartening. You will see that now in Paris 
everywhere. Look! there is a member of the Chamber of 
Deputies, there is a lawyer, there is a man of science, there is 
Cocteau, a few beautiful women and two or three pederasts. 
Is it not cheering? It makes me believe again that we are 
taking hold. H. D. listened. Adrienne Monnier seemed to 
be inviting my mood. It was she who, during the dark days 
of the war, had written her invitation to us all to come bor- 
row and buy books of her; to read. A delicious savor it gave 
to the dinner she served us to have her lock the kitchen door 
and remain alone with her secret task of preparing the chicken 
—a la Adrienne Monnier, in the purest tradition of the 
Parisian art. To eat, to drink; wines, the delicious flesh, the 
poets—all good things of the world—these we must learn again 
to enjoy. Had she not wished to do with books, she would 
have enjoyed most to be a butcher, to kill a pig, to hear it 
squeal, eeeeHEEE! Bryher’s eyes snapped darkly. We 
looked at prints of Brughel; the great fish, cut open, dis- 
charging from its slit belly other fish and each fish, slit in 

PERE SEBASTIAN RASLES 107 

turn, discharging other smaller fish, and so on to the smallest. 
She laughed with glee. Secretly my heart beat high. Here 
was invitation. When you come again, she said, I shall take 
you to le désert. You must talk to Valéry Larbaud, she told 
me. He wants to see you. Why should I? I insist that 
you go. 7 

Already from the pot of my brain the odors of foods cook- 
ing had begun to rise. This encouraged me to move. One 
afternoon I mounted a bus and let it drag me through the 
rain. Some laborers were taking their overcoats out of a 
kiosk to put them on; one of the younger of the men had a 
mirror between his hands which he kept holding before an 
old fellow who had to laugh, in spite of himself, but shyly, 
like an embarrassed boy, at his own silly face which he saw 
there. Who is this man Larbaud who has so little pride that 
he wishes to talk with me? The lump in my breast hardened 
and became like the Aztec calendar of stone which the priests 
buried because they couldn’t smash it easily, but it was dug 
up intact later. At least, so I prided myself that I felt. But 
after a few moments, seeing the man himself, I was un- 
expectedly confused. He is a student, I am a block, I thought. 
I could see it at once: he knows far more of what is written of 
my world than I. But he is a student while I am—the brutal 
thing itself. 

At the bottom of an alley which opened out into a court, 
as of a decayed cloister, was the doorway which bore the num- 
ber upon the card in my hand. It was a small room, nearly 
filled by a great table. He excused himself a moment to ac- 
company a lady to the bus. We sat and looked at each other. 
So it was a pleasure to be sitting in this small room, in this 
secluded court, with this man whose totem is the hippopotamus 
—slumped down in his chair, smiling and looking. He knew 
what I had attempted. Almost at once he began to speak 
out of my imagination. He presumed too much. I am not a 
student; presently he will ask me questions I cannot answer! 
He spoke of Bolivar (he was engaged with a treatise upon the 

108 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

great Venezuelan patriot and liberator) bringing four fat 
volumes from the Spanish history upon the subject, out of 
his bookcase for me to see, and piling them one upon the other. 
Frightened I began to heal nevertheless—The English ap- 
praised the New World too meanly. It was to them a carcass 
from which to tear pieces for their belly’s sake, a colony, a 
place to despise a little. They gave to it parsimoniously, in 
a slender Puritan fashion. But the Spaniard gave magnifi- 
cently, with a generous sweep, wherever he was able. (This 
tallies with the bounty of the New World, I said to myself.) 
They sought to make it in truth a New Spain, to build fine 
cathedrals, to found universities, to establish great estates. 
For this I like them, he said. They came as from the King 
himself to transport nobility, learning, refinement thither in 
one move.—Valéry Larbaud seemed cultivating my intimate 
earth with his skillful hands, a gracious gesture (lost perhaps 
in its own shadows, I thought) ; here is one at least of this 
world, moving to meet that other which is straming for re- 
lease under my confining ribs—not wishing so much to under- 
stand it as to taste, perhaps, its freshness—Its freshness! 

— if it exist! (John Barrymore’s “Hamlet” wins first night 
ovation in London.) A herd of proofs moved through my 
mind like stumbling buffalo: ornaments of woven moosehair! 
There is the Indian. We are none. Who are we? Degraded 
whites riding our fears to market where everything is by 
accident and only one thing sure: the fatter we get the duller 
we grow; only a simpering disgust (like a chicken with a 
broken neck, that aims where it cannot peck and pecks only 
where it cannot aim, which a hog-plenty everywhere prevents 
from starving to death) reveals any contact with a possible 
freshness—and that only by inversion. Shall I never bring a 
look to bear which is not tawdry? Recruits to Pavlova’s 
corps de ballet, from Montclair and Sacramento, fillers-in. 
There are—so many things, there’s Edison, there’s—Must I 
make a choice between to scream like a locomotive or to speak 
not at all? If it be a day of delirious heat, leave your cool 

PERE SEBASTIAN RASLES 109 

retreat, rush about to find a sufferer and carry ice tohim. In 
the din we die—and rot into the magazines and newspapers— 
and books by the million—Books. We had mentioned books. 
We have no books, I said. 

__ There you are wrong. ‘Two or three are enough, to have 
shown a beginning. Have you not yourself proven that there 
is meat 

Yes (so he had read what I intended !), the early records— 
to try to find—something, a freshness; if it exist. 

I said, It is an extraordinary phenomenon that Americans 
have lost the sense, being made up as we are, that what we 
are has its origin in what the nation in the past has been; that 
there is a source iv America for everything we think or 
do; that morals affect the food and food the bone, and that, 
in fine, we have no conception at all of what is meant by moral, 
since we recognize no ground our own—and that this rude- 
ness rests all upon the unstudied character of our beginnings ; 
and that if we will not pay heed to our own affairs, we are 
nothing but an unconscious porkyard and oilhole for those, 
more able, who will fasten themselves upon us. And that we 
have no defense, lacking intelligent investigation of the 
changes worked upon the early comers here, to the New World, 
the books, the records, no defense save brute isolation, pro- 
hibitions, walls, ships, fortresses—and all the asininities of 
ignorant fear that forbids us to protect a doubtful freedom 
by employing it. That unless everything that is, proclaim a 
ground on which it stand, it has no worth; and that what has 
been morally, xsthetically worth while in America has rested 
upon peculiar and discoverable ground. But they think they 
get it out of the air or the rivers, or from the Grand Banks 
or wherever it may be, instead of by word of mouth or from 
records contained for us in books—and that ssthetically, 
morally we are deformed unless we read. j 

You mean such books as the Magnalia of Cotton Mather. 
What! Startled but thrilling with pleasure, I found that 
he had read the Magnalia. No. He had read it. I had seen 

110 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

the book and brushed through its pages hunting for some- 
thing I wished to verify. Un grand prédicateur. Tus in 
Paris. 'Tiresome, I said I had found him. Yes, he assented, 
but very strong, very real. (My French became inspired, 
it was like a fountain when it is first turned on in the spring 
and all the moss and rust and loosened mud and sand are flung 
up with the water—I could see grotesque shapes of my desire 
escaping from me—and I laughed to myself in my intense 
pleasure.) 

He saw my pleasure and he likewise smiled. Quelle rire 
omnivore @herbes sousmarins! He had read the India Christi- 
ana with its two silver trumpets crying, “a joyful sound.” 
“The American savages were men Satan had whished away 
(via Asia) at the beginning sound of the two silver trumpets 
calling from the tabernacle, announcing the advent of the 
gospel.” 

It is the Puritan.— 

By the strength of religion alone, they surmounted all 
difficulties in which science has degraded us again today; all 
things they explain, with clarity and distinction. It is firm, 
it is solid, it holds the understanding in its true position, not 
beneath the surface of the facts, where it will drown, but 
up, fearlessly into a clear air, like science at its best, in a cer- 
tain few minds. For our taste, it is perhaps a little grotesque, 
this explanation—but firm. There is vigor there—and by 
that, a beauty. 

True enough, I said, there is abundant vigor. But to 
them it was, America, “the seat of them that shall think an evil 
thought” ; the savages were men lost in the devil’s woods, miser- 
able in their abandonment and more especially, damned. 
Fiery particles, the Puritans, I said, acquainting him with my 
rigid tenet, seeds of Elizabethan vigor, few against the wilder- 
ness. Their sureness which you praise is of their tight tied 
littleness which, firm as it was, infuriates me today. It is 
their littleness that explains their admirable courage, close 
to the miraculous. It was good when through that first De- 

PERE SEBASTIAN RASLES 111 

cember they were going about in small boats in Cape Cod 
Bay, through rain and cold, under attack, when save for the 
finding of corn buried in the sand, they might not have had 
seed for the spring planting. Going about from place to 
place, seeking a lodgment, drowned, frozen, awaking to the 
howls of savages, dawn and the attack, rushing to the boat 
for their arquebuses, arrows in their hanging coats, at the 
mercy of chance and the wind, they were themselves the corn 
I speak of. The things they did were of highest order, per- 
mitted only by lack of full knowledge, things which would 
have been terrifying to them beyond endurance had they not > 
been reduced to bear them. 

Their courage, had they been gifted with a full knowledge 
of the New World they had hit upon, could not have stood 
against the mass of the wilderness; it took the form, then, 
for the mysterious processes of their implantation here, of a 
doctrinaire religion, a form, that is to say, fixed—but small. 
For the great task God had destined them to perform, they 
were clipped in mind, stripped to the physical necessities. 
They could not afford to allow their senses to wander any 
more than they could allow a member of their company to 
wander from the precinct of the church, even from Boston to 
Casco Bay, ror woritpLy prorir. This their formula con- 
demned. For that Hannah: Swanton was punished by captivity 
and TEMPTATION among the Catholics in Quebec.—I mean, that 
this form, this rorm rrseLF, such a religion upon our lips, 
though it have an economic, biologic basis in truth, neverthe- 
_ less it is bred of brutality, inhumanity, cruel amputations and 
that THis is the sum of its moral effect. You speak of 
Mather’s books—? Yes, they were the flower of that religion, 
that unreasonable thing, on which they prided themselves for 
its purity. That is, its rigid clarity, its inhwman clarity, 
its steel-like thrust from the heart of each isolate man straight 
into the tabernacle of Jehovah without embellishment or soft- 
ening. Its firmness is its beauty, it seems austere but limpid. 
Its virtue is to make each map stand alone, surrounded by 

112 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

a density as of the Lord: a seed in its shell. The Kingdom 
of God; the Devil at fault fighting for souls; Christ the Divine 
sacrifice; the Bible the guide; the Church its apostle. ‘There 
it is, concise, bare, purE: blind to every contingency, mash- 
ing Indian, child and matron into one safe mold. 

They must have closed all the world out. It was the enor- 
mity of their task that enforced it. Having in themselves 
nothing of curiosity, no wonder, for the New World—that is 
nothing official—they knew only to keep their eyes blinded, 
their tongues in orderly manner between their teeth, their 
ears stopped by the monotony of their hymns and their flesh 
covered in straight habits. Is there another place than Amer- 
ica (which inherits this tradition) where a husband, after 
twenty years, knows of his wife’s body not more than neck 
and ankles, and four children to attest to his fidelity ; where 
books are written and read counselling women that upon mar- 
riage, should they allow themselves for one moment to enjoy 
their state, they lower themselves to the level of the whore? 
Such is the persistence of this abortion of the mind, this purity. 
These were the modes of a people, small in number, beset by 
dangers and in terror. They dared not think. If frightened 
by Indians or the supernatural, they shook and committed 
horrid atrocities in the name of their creed, the cost of empti- 
ness. All that they saw they lived by but denied. And this 
is overlooked. 

There was a book written at that time attacking them: 
New England Judged by the Spirit of the Lord: it contains 
a relation of the Quakers in New England, from the time of 
their first arrival there, in 1656, to the year 1660. Wherein 
their merciless whippings, chainings, finings, imprisonments, 
starvings, burnings in the hands, cuttings off of ears and put- 
ting to death, with other cruelties, inflicted upon the bodies of 
innocent men and women only for conscience’ sake, are de- 
scribed. And a further relation of the Quakers’ cruel and 
bloody suffering in New England, continued from 1660 to 
1665, beginning with the sufferings of one William Leddra, 

PERE SEBASTIAN RASLES 118 

whom they put to death. There is also an appendix attack- 
ing Cotton Mather. . 

Why does one not hear Americans speak more often of 
these important things? 
_ Because the fools do not believe that they have sprung 
from anything: bone, thought and action. They will not see 
that what they are is growing on these roots. They will not 
look. They float without question. Their history is to them 
an enigma. 

What superb beauty! As with all histories, it begins with 
giants—cruel, but enormous, who eat flesh. They were giants. — 

No, no. True they had their magnificent logic but it 
was microscopic in dimensions—against the flamboyant mass 
of savagery. This disproportion has no representation in the 
contemporary Puritan imagination. The Puritan, finding one 
thing like another in a world destined for blossom only in 
“Eternity,” all soul, all “emptiness” then here, was precluded 
from sEEING the Indian. They never realized the Indian 
in the least save as an unformed Purrran. The immorality 
of such a concept, the inhumanity, the brutalizing effect upon 
their own minds, on their sprrrrs—they never suspected. 

And Mather, a flower in mail, inhuman 

—a bee that stabs a bear. Blind seeds, I said, 
filled with the baleful beauty of their religion: an mmmoraL 
source—— 

A source at any rate, immoral or moral, religion, a blind- 
ing fury for the most part. They were seeds, a fiery concen- 
trate of great virtues—dwarfed; the genus indistinguishable 
in the egg. It is that hidden, unacknowledged bias (that they 
were Elizabethans) that IS their strength. It is that violent 
bias that as with mocking, hellish whips would drive them 
still to change, to grow. But the direction, the objective has 
been lost in the mass of the new. 

Never could they have comprehended that it would be, 
that it was, black deceit for them to condemn Indian sins, 
while they cut the ground from under the Indian’s feet without 

114 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

acknowledging so much as his existence. The immorality, I 
say, of such an attitude never becomes apparent to them. Or, 
yes, up to a certain point it does: they brought their land in- 
stead of frankly stealing it and set up palisades to mark the two 
parts from each other; they instituted courts—but in them- 
selves they were like pebbles. To them it was as nothing to 
desecrate the chief’s mother’s grave, in the name of sanctity 
pulling up the stakes, to shock the spirit of native reverence. 
Yet it cannot be said it was the time. For there was a French- 
man further north, a Jesuit, of different understanding. 
There was a maggot in them. It was their beliefs. 

This rurne and its effects you will detect in Mather, in 
him a curious blend of learning and intolerance that’s illus- 
trated when he says, “there are, they say, two hundred thou- 
sand books in: the library which Ptolemy erected at Alex- 
andria: but it was the addition of the scriptures which made 
it a truly LeaRNep library.” The turn of the word “learned” 
is the image of their sophistry. 

Puritans, we name them, but they were not so called be- 
cause of moral qualities. They were not blessed with that 
name by virtue of a stern but just conception of the world. 
That is a misconception of the name. They were called Puri- 
tans from a stripped dogma of four noncorrosive links, they 
thought, a saving bond in their desolation and abandonment 
between themselves and God. 

He smiled and begged me to distinguish in my mind be- 
tween the rugged English pioneers and a theoretic dogma that 
clung to them unevenly, doubtful how much any of it was a 
part of any one of them. But that is it, I answered. That 
is exactly what I pretend to do, to separate it out, to isolate 
it. It is an immorality that IS America. Here it began. 

You see the cause. There was no ground to build on, with 
a ground all blossoming about them—under their noses. 
Their thesis is a possession of the incomplete—like senseless 
winds or waves or the fire itself. I wish to drag this ruine 
out by itself to annihilate it. He answered, That one cannot 

PERE SEBASTIAN RASLES 115 

do. Yes, I insisted, it musr be done, you do not know 
America. There is a “puritanism’”—of which you hear, of 
course, but you have never felt it stinking all about you— 
that has survived to us from the past. It is an atrocious thing, 
a kind of mermaid with a corpse for tail. Or it remains, a 
bad breath in the room. This rune, strange, inhuman, 
powerful, is like a relic of some died out tribe whose practices 
were revolting. 

But the relic will be beautiful, he answered, sometimes. I 
have enjoyed the books. 

Against his view I continually protested. I cannot separate 
myself, I said, from this ghostly miasm. It grips me. I 
cannot merely talk of books, just of Mather as if he were 
some pearl.—I began to be impatient of my friend’s cultured 
tolerance, the beauties he saw. I grant you, I said, the stench 
of their narrowing beliefs has been made to cling too closely 
to the men of that time, but the more reason then to lift it 
out, to hold it apart, to sacrifice them if necessary, in order to 
disentangle this “thing.” 

Very well, he assented, you are from that place. You are 
caught by asmell. It is good that you struggle to appreciate 
it. Proceed. Mather. What a force, still to interest you; 
it is admirable. But I find your interest “trés théorique.” 

What! I cried. Wait a bit. These men are not the only 
ones of these times. 

It is of books that we were speaking. 

It is of books that I wish to tell you. 

Then they live still, those books? 

I could not assure him that they did, those books of 
Mather’s. As books, no, I said to him. But what is in them 
lives and there hides, as in a lair from whence it sallies now 
_ and then to strike terror through the land. 

And you would be the St. George? Are they then in such 
a bad state in America, in such a swamp? I thought 

As always, I answered him. This fiery breath, as of a 
dragon, is to us a living thing. Our resistance to the wilder- 

116 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

ness has been too strong. It has turned us anti-American, 
anti-literature. As a violent “puritanism” it breathes still. 
In these books is its seed. I cannot discuss Mather with you 
like that! I must grow angry. I must be disturbed. It lies 
in wait there to defeat a beginning to morality. Cotton 
Mather’s books, to you an enchanting diversion, a curious 
study, to me they are a vessel that vomits up a thing that 
obsesses my quiet, that allows me no tranquillity, a broken, a 
maimed, a foul thing—that they tell me is sweet, PURE. 

This interests me greatly because I see you brimming— 
you, yourself—with those three things of which you speak: a 
puritanical sense of order, a practical mysticism as of the 
Jesuits, and the sum all those qualities defeated in the savage 
men of your country by the first two. These three things 
I see still battling in your heart. This interests me greatly— 
and it pleases me still more that you show a taste for books. 
Does this indicate, I say to myself, a new force.in your coun- 
try? Are you today presenting me with a new spectacle, 
a man, no matter what his qualities may be, who has begun to 
reach a height but who still retains his warmth; that moment 
when all greatness is conceived. It is no more than a moment, 
it is the birth of a civilized interest in the world. 

No, no, no, I cried. I speak only of sources. I wish only 
to disentangle the obscurities that oppress me, to track them 
to the root and to uproot them 

Continue, he said. Adding, with a smile, You wish to up- 
root history, like those young men of the Sorbonne. 

No, I seek the support of history but I wish to understand 
it aright, to make it snow itself. 

Continue, continue. 7 

There was, to the north, another force, equal to the Puri- 
tans but of opposite character, the French Jesuits; two parties 
with the Indians between them, two sources opposite. 

But first, can you enlighten me, he now broke in, what 
was in the middle? Who were these Indians of whom you 

PERE SEBASTIAN RASLES 17 

speak? What sort of men were they? What were their 
qualities? 

Good, I said, take Brookfield, then, scene of the famous 
Massacre, in 1680. The history (which we do not know) says 
first the whites and natives lived peaceably in this lovely, 
fertile valley, side by side cultivating and breeding cattle. 
Only after repeated evidence to the Indian of perfidy on the 
part of the white man—that he intended “by peaceful 
methods” to take and hold the land—to supplant the Indian, 
did he gradwally withdraw, later to strike, in fair battle, for 
his country. But even so, even granted, as a consequence of 
all this, that “King Philip” erred—if he did, it was war, open 
and above board on the Indians’ part and according to their 
methods, fairly begun, fairly prosecuted—had it not been for 
white savagery, a determination to exterminate man, woman 
and child of the disaffected natives—and ended by a proper 
treaty. Terror killed more of King Philip’s people than Puri- 
tan bullets. Shocking scenes took place. Indian women found 
lying naked on the ground, heads cut off and stuck on poles, 

_a relentless lust for extermination of the “bad” savages— 
because they fought, believing the whites had, in time of peace, 
tricked them. It was true. 

And there is the story of the capture of a group of French 
Indians under a Sachem Bommaseen who being brought to 
Boston, prisoners, asked that they might see an English 
Divine. Questioned as to what the French had taught them, 
the Indian replied, that the French had taught them that the 
Lord Jesus Christ was of the French nation; that his mother, 
the Virgin Mary, was a French lady; that they were the Eng- 
lish who had murdered him; and that, whereas he rose from 
the dead, and ascended into heaven, all who would recommend 
themselves to his favor, must avenge him on the English as 
far as they could. 

Told that this was not so, the Indians replied that if what 
the French taught them was false, what then had the English 
to offer them that was good in its place? 

118 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

The minister knowing their custom to use much similitude 
in their talk, looked about for some agreeable object. His eye 
lit upon a tankard of drink which happened to be standing 
on the table. He said: Christ has given us a good religion 
which might be compared to the good drink in the cup on the 
table. If we take that good drink into our hearts it will do 
us good and preserve us from death. That God’s Book, the 
Bible, is the cup. The French having the cup of good drink, 
put poison in it and had made the Indians drink poison liquor, 

by which they run mad and begin to kill the English. 
It was plain that the English had not put poison in it for 
they had set the cup wide open and invited all men, for they 
had translated the Bible into the Indian language. But the 
French kept the cup shut fast, the Bible in an unknown 
tongue, the Latin, and so kept their hands on the eyes of the 
Indians when they put it to their mouths to drink. 

At this the Indian asked for him to show-what was the 
good drink in the cup and what the poison the French put 
into it. . 

He then stated to them distinctly the chief articles of the 
Christian religion, “with all the simplicity and sincerity of a 
Protestant” ; adding upon each, “This is the good drink in the 
Lord’s cup of life.’ He further demonstrated to them how 
the Papists had, “in their idolatrous papery,” in some way or 
other depraved every one of these articles, with base ingredi- 
ents of their own invention, adding upon each, This is the 
poison which the French have put into the cup. 

You need confess your sins to none but God and none but 
God can forgive them, said the minister. To confess your sins 
to a priest and submit to penance enjoined by a priest—there 
is no need of all this ceremony. It is nothing but French 
poison, all of it. 

The Indians, in a rapture of admiration and surprise to 
find one who had put them in the way of obtaining “pardon 
for their sins” without paying beaver skins for it, fell on 
their knees, and, taking the minister’s hand in theirs, began 

PERE SEBASTIAN RASLES 119 

to kiss it in an extreme show of affection. But he shook them 
off with marked dislike of their posture. 

He would not suffer the contrite Indians to lay their hands 
upon him, as the Catholic fathers in the north had done, but 
drew back and told them to address themselves to God alone. 
Ah, very fine, you say. But it is very ugly—and it is that 
which has persisted: afraid to touch! But being forced to it 
every day by passion, by necessity—a devil of duplicity has 
taken possession of us. 

You know, I asked him, do you not, how other means being 
denied them, the Puritans ran madly to orricran sexual 
excess—during the long winters? It was a common thing for 
men to have had as many as seven wives. Few had less than 
three. The women died under the stress of bearing children, 
they died like flies under the strains and accidents of child- 
birth prus the rigors of primitive labors: carrying water, 
wood, etc., lugging brats up and down. 

Add to this the fury against unofficial sexual indulgence 
and the plight of the women, at least, is heavily shadowed. 
It is pleasant to think of the beginning decadence of the cruel 
régime when some years later at Groton, I think it was—the 
lady who unearthed the record lives in Chicago—the women 
had begun to put ribbons in their hitherto plain bonnets. The 
elders met in solemn conclave and forbade the practice but 
the women met in another church and as solemnly told the men, 
in a word, to hush! They continued to wear their ribbons. 
One young lady, of this time, went to her wedding upon a white 
horse and in a dress of scarlet satin with a purple velvet 
shoulder cloak over it, bless her unknown pride. 

What a beautiful country where all these simple forces 
have so much weight and vitality—but you were speaking of 
the Indians. 

Yes, but I shall tell you more of that along with the story 
of “those terrible priests” to the north of whom the English 
were so afraid and whom they accused of all evil while they 
themselves practiced hypocrisy, bigotry, encroachment, fraud, 

120 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

violence and bloodshed. “When we fought we were driven 
back and when peace returned we multiplied.” 

There was Pére Rasles, a spirit, rich, blossoming, generous, 
able to give and to receive, full of taste, a nose, a tongue, a 
laugh, enduring, self-forgetful in beneficence—a new spirit in 
the New World. 

All that will be new in America will be anti-Puritan. It 
will be of another root. It will be more from the heart of 
Rasles, in the north. There the French priests, good and bad, 
had penetrated a border ground, Maine, disputed between the 
English to the south and the French in Canada. The Indians 
were caught between the two factions, Catholic and Protestant. 
The English were at the mouths of the rivers, as in the case of 
Hannah Swanton at Casco bay. Pére Rasles was in the In- 
terior, living with his “cher troupeau.” It is from the Lettres 
Edifiantes that I am speaking. 

Contrary to the English, Rasles recognized the New World. 
It stands out in all he says. It is a living flame compared to 
their dead ash. 

But the Puritans were infuriated at the progress the 
Priests were making and cried out against “the true character 
of Catholic bigotry” about them and “the danger experienced 
by the first settlers of Maine from this spirit.” 

Rasles lived thirty-four years, October 13, 1689 to Octeber 
12, 1723, with his beloved savages, drawing their sweet like 
honey, Toucuine them every day. 

A Catholic, a Jesuit, he was of those by whom the head 
of logic is beautifully relegated to its place—in heaven. To 
mystery, rightly reasoned, logic is consigned. Thus we put 
that all aside. The Church remains. Relieved of dogmatic 
bitterness, the priest with a fresh mind could open eyes and 
heart to the New World. 

Nothing shall be ignored. All shall be included. The 
world is parcel of the Church so that every leaf, every vein in 
every leaf, the throbbing’ of the temples is of that mysterious 
flower. Here is richness, here is color, here is form. Consign- 

PERE SEBASTIAN RASLES 191 

ing his creed to a worldly flower in Rome whose perfume should 
draw all bees, Rasles labored to have them know that garden. 
Contrasted with the Protestant acts, dry and splitting, those 
of Pére Rasles were striking in their tenderness, devotion, in- 
sight and detail of apprehension. This was luscious fruit. 
The deed was for humanity,—his passion held him a slave to 
the New World, he strove to sound its mettle. 

He was a great man. Reading his letters, it is a river that 
brings sweet water to us. Tuts is a moral source not reck- 
oned with, peculiarly sensitive and daring in its close embrace | 
of native things. His sensitive mind. For everything his 
fine sense, blossoming, thriving, opening, reviving—not shut- 
ting out—was tuned. He speaks of his struggles with 
their language, its peculiar beauties, “je ne sais quot d’éner- 
gique,” he cited its tempo, the form of its genius with gusto, 
with admiration, with generosity. Already the flower is turn- 
ing up its petals. It is this to be moral: to be positive, to be 
peculiar, to be sure, generous, brave—ro marry, to touch 
—to give because one was, not because one has nothing. And 
to give to him who nas, who will join, who will make, who will 
fertilize, who will be like you yourself: to create, to hybridize, 
to crosspollenize,—not to sterilize, to draw back, to fear, to 
dry up, to rot. Itis the sun. In Rasles one feels raz INDIAN 
emerging from within the pod of his isolation from eastern 
understanding, he is released an INpIan. He exists, he is— 
it is an AFFIRMATION, it is alive. Pére Rasles, often suffering 
_ the tortures of the damned as the result of an early accident— 
fracture of both thighs, badly mended—lived with his village 
—alone, absorbed in them, Lost in them, swallowed, a hard 
yeast 

For his presentation of the Indian point of view toward 
the raids on the English settlements alone, his letters are in- 
valuable. If the Puritans feared the savage—his admirable 
enthusiasm for their high merit as warriors is very beautiful. 
“The way they make war, these people, renders a handful of 
their warriors more redoubtable than would be a corps of two 

122 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

or three thousand European soldiers.” During the war they 
carried desolation to all the country inhabited by the English. 
It is an enthusiasm that possesses him. I care not for the 
injury. 

And you want to make Americans see that, you want to 
make them comprehend this generous spirit, as you call it? 
Well, come to France and make us understand it.—He laughed. 

(It is the quality of this impact upon the native phase 
that is the moral source I speak of, one of the sources that has 
shaped America and must be recognized.) 

The Indians in Maine at that time were no more than a 
few thousand, the Abnaki tribe. Their life was hard. Some- 
times they had little to eat, often, in certain seasons, nothing. 
The hardships that Hannah Swanton endured following her 
captivity, were little more than those of any Indian woman on 
the march. Speed, speed, or disaster. She must walk or die. 
So it was with them too. Walk, carry, fight or die. The wild 
world touched them, always, under their cloaks. She tells of her 
agony, under a heavy load; she crossed swamps on logs, step- 
ping for an hour always from one to two feet from the ground. 
On this trip they had little to eat for days at a time. Once 
she had part of a turtle they had killed. Once an Indian gave 
her a piece of moose liver. Once, on an island in the river 
with her Indian mistress, she had hailed a passing canoe filled 
with squaws, who, seeing her condition, gave her a roast eel to 
feed upon. Whortleberries, roots, and acorns were her fare, 
“or fish if they could catch any.” But this was the life of the 
savage. It was also his habit, his school. By it he grew 
round, he grew tough. The wounded were killed. To accept 
- torture with equanimity was a proof of virtue. Skill and 
courage were revered. 

These things Pére Rasles accepted and shared, with diffi- 
culty in some respects at first but in the end with admiration 
and enthusiasm. “Ce qui me revolta le plus,” etc. 

A price sterling was offered by the English for his head; 
his village—two days march from Portland—was burned and 

PERE SEBASTIAN RASLES 123 

the church along with it. He stuck staunchly to his tribe and 
they to him. ‘Twice he was rescued from assassination by his 
followers, once there was a false alarm and already the braves 
were on their way to attack the English fort when the mistake 
and his safety were discovered. It is a new picture. Vous 
jugerez sans doute, que c’est de la part de Messieurs les 
Anglais de notre voisinage, que j’ai le plus & craindre.. Il est 
vrai que depuis longtemps ils ont conjuré ma porte; mais ni 
leur mauvaise volonté pour moi, ni la mort dont ils me 
ménacent ne pourront jamais me séparer de mon cher Trou- 
peau. Jele récommande & vos saintes Priéres. 

Once when the English would have captured him two of his 
young men came to the chapel-tent in the night and whisked 
him away. It was winter, they had not had time to provide 
themselves with sufficient provisions. It was several days to 
the village. The three suffered side by side. They ate the 
dog that was with them. Then they ate their sacks of loup 
marims, boiled at a fire, though Rasles had great trouble to 
swallow his share, tripes des rocher, excréscences de bois. They 
ate a certain sort of wood that was cooked and so made partly 
soft in the center,—as Hannah had found and eaten wild - 
pusley at another season. ‘Crossing a lake that had begun to 
thaw, their snowshoes became waterlogged. He himself sank 
up to the knees in the mushy ice. His companion on the right 
went in to his hips. Going to help each other all managed to 
- flounder through. He was at their side—— 

These were his children. He tells of how they laughed at 
his early attempts at the language. Failing to catch certain 
gutturals at first, he pronounced but half the words. He 
speaks of the comparative beauty of the Huron tongue. 

In the spring the fish come up the river solidly packed, 
two feet deep—with flesh of a most delicious taste. They 
gather the fish, eat all they can and dry the rest—that serves 
them until the corn is ready to harvest. In the spring also, 
celebrating the Eucharist, Rasles saw the corn planted. In 

124 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

August this was ready to be plucked. When that was finished 
there must be other food. 

For this it was the habit of the Indians to go to the sea- 
shore. It was always, says Rasles, the same formula. He 
knew what was about to happen. They would gather about 
their spiritual counselor and offer him a speech, saying that 
the corn was low, that the tribe must have food and that they 
begged him to come with them to the shore that they might 
not be deprived of his spiritual comfort while they were gone. 
Always he answered with the one word,— 

Kekiberba (1 am listening, my children). 

When all cried together, 8ri8rie! (We thank you). (Note, 
the figure 8 is used by Rasles in his alphabet of the Abnaki 
language to signify the unique guttural sound characteristic 
of the Indian dialects.) Then they would break camp. 
Leaving the church he had built, he would take up his altar of 
a pine board with him and all would set out upon the trail. 

He complains to his Jesuit brothers that the reason he is 
not a more constant correspondent is that he never has a mo- 
ment to himself among his duties to the tribe; not only must 
he carry on his religious duties but they demand that he com- 
fort them when they are ill, he must bleed them, advise them, 
settle their disputes, and he must hear their confessions. 

In the hallowed, tender light of Rasles’ love for him, the 
Indian stands out strangely revealed as a child, a passionate 
friend, a resourceful man and—a genius in attack, another 
music than the single horror of his war-whoop terrifying the 
invader. 

But we are used only to the English attitude bred of the 
Indian raid. This is rrxep in us without realization of the 
EFFEcT that such a story, such a tradition, entirely the 
product of the state of mind that it records, has had upon us 
and our feeling toward the country. We scarcely know that 
there can be errects—that anything has a cause. It is of 
this our moral fiber has been made up in the past—we do not 
know even that moral fiber nas a quality that is caused by 

Se a 

ro 

ee ee ee ee 

eee 

PERE SEBASTIAN RASLES 195 

something, something almost pure tradition. It is of this our 
conception of the New World has been fabricated. 

The English, with an eye upon Maine, did everything to 
detach Rasles from his children, knowing that he, by keeping 
them in the Catholic faith, kept them united to France. They 
offered them everything to kill him or to send him back to 
Quebec and to take one of their own ministers in his stead. 
No success. 

About this time war between France and England was 
threatening. The English and the Indians being at peace the 
new Governor of Massachusetts, envoy of the King, sought an 
interview with the men of Rasles’ tribe. The place appointed 
was an island a short distance off the coast. The English 
were there in a barque of war when the Indians, in canoes, 
arrived and drew their craft up on the beach. Rasles was with 
them, at their request, to advise. them—though not once 
throughout the following proceedings did he take part. 

All this occurred, I wish you to observe, before an act of 
war on either side. But the English came armed with one of 
their Ministers, for what purpose Rasles well knew, though 
upon sight of the Jesuit, the English preacher was kept strictly 
in the background. 

As the Indians stepped from their canoes, Rasles was 
caught in the press and forced up the beach before them, in 
spite of himself, he says. The English, seeing him, were taken 
aback; but the Governor, advancing, greeted him and then 
_ prepared to address the savages. 

He told them that before long it was expected that Eng- 
land and France would be at war. He pleaded with the 
Indians to remain neutral should this war arrive. The Indians 
listened. Having heard his words, they drew off to talk 
among themselves before giving a reply—inadvertently 
leaving Rasles alone, facing the English at the head of the 
beach. 

At this the English Governor, speaking to Rasles in pri- 
vate, asked him, should there be war, if he would send his 

126 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

savages against them.—Je lui repondis, says the J esuit, que 
mon réligion et mon caractére de Prétre, ne m’engageomt a ne 
leur donner que des conseils de paix.—But suddenly while 
speaking, he saw himself surrounded by twenty young braves, 
who feared the English might attempt to do him an injury. — 

And now the tribe returned with their reply: Know that 
the Frenchman is my brother, we have the same prayer, he and 
I, and we live in the same cabin of two fires. If I see you 
come into the cabin near the fire of my brother, I watch you 
from my mat. If I see that you carry a hatchet, I would think, 
what does this Englishman want to do with that hatchet? I 
get up from my mat to consider what you will do. If he 
raise the hatchet to strike my brother, I will run to help him. 

A short time after this, a French, man-of-war came up the 
river to Quebec announcing that France and England had 
commenced hostilities. At once the two hundred and fifty of 
Rasles’ men “killed the dogs” and prepared to take the war 
path. Kindling the traditional fire, they performed their wild 
dance and then, next morning, came to him for his blessing 
and advice. He says: I told them to remember their prayers 
and to do no cruelty, to kill no one save in the heat of battle 
and to treat humanely all those taken prisoners.—After that 
he thinks of them as soldiers. 

Were England and France at it, what then exceptional 
that the savages should wish also to indulge themselves in 
battle? Rasles’? measured pride of them, his unexpected can- 
dor, is most refreshing. Frontier villages will suffer from an 
enemy. If the English waste their time blaming the priests 
for setting the savages upon them, Rasles does not even think 
of such excuses. Instead he thinks of quatirizs. 

He speaks with enthusiasm of the Indian as a fighter. He 
outlines their mode of approach upon a doomed village.—When 
they have drawn near to the point of attack they say, twenty 
here, thirty there. To this party that village is given to be 
eaten! It is their term. (He speaks with appreciation of 
their term.) What relief here from the reverent duplicity of 

PERE SEBASTIAN RASLES 197 

the English, with their surprise and horror that ever THEY 
should suffer. And still the Puritans would poke the heads of 
dead Indian women on poles outside their villages. ‘When we 
fight we are beaten, at peace we multiply.” At whose expense? 
Did one expect the Indians not to be fighters? Not Rasles 
at any rate. 

The war finished with the peace of Ryswick; the Indians, 
as soon as they heard of it, ceased to battle. The English 
sought a new parley and that peace also was concluded. But 
the English, to appease the savages, sought to rebuild the 
church at Norridgewock, which they had burned during hos- 
tilities, in the hope of getting Indians to work in Boston as 
laborers. Yet in secret, they tried without ceasing to kill the 
offending Jesuit. 

He was killed by them at last—at the foot of his rude cross 
which he had erected in the center of his village—seeking to 
draw the fire of the enemy upon himself in order that the 
women and the children might escape—and they mangled him 
besides, leaving him disfigured and with his bones all crushed 
within him. 

What a curious thing it is, this American religion which 
we have inherited so largely from the Puritans. I find, I said, 
so many sources traceable today. But Pére Rasles was, of 
course, a good man. Let it be said that all he did was due to 
that, as Eliot was a good man on the other side. Let it be 
acknowledged that much the Puritans complained of in the 
Jesuits was justified. And let us say that much that Pére 
Rasles might have said against the Puritan-English was also 
true. 

So one thing cancels the other. A good man is a good man. 

This leaves two things, two flaming doctrines. As con- 
trasting influences, I said, in shaping the esthetic and the 

moral fiber of the growing race they must be weighed (not for 
| themselves) the Catholic and Protestant, the qualities each one 
has lent in forming our morale.—I think these early battles 
have a great importance for the student of today. 

128 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

They are remote, he answered. 

One should read the Lettres Edifiantes, I think one would 
understand better how much we are like the Indians and how 
nicely Catholicism fits us. What would Mather think today 
of Catholic Boston? It is inevitable, I said. Tus is America. 
If the Puritans have damned us with their abstinence, re- 
moval from the world, denial, slowly we are forced within 
ourselves upon an emptiness which cannot be supplied,—this 
IS the soul, according to their tenets. Lost, in this (and its 
environments) as in a forest, I do believe the average American 
to be an Indian, but an Indian robbed of his world unless 
we call machines a forest in themselves. It would be diverting 
to believe, if it were so, as I think it’s proving, that despite its 
obvious benefits, such Protestantism, in America, would have 
Catholicism, as its consequence. ‘This and the accumulation 
of great staying wealth. 

From lack of touch, lack of belief. Steadily the individual 
loses caste, then the local government loses its authority; the 
head is more and more removed. Finally the center is reached 
—totally dehumanized, like a Protestant heaven. Everything 
is Federalized and all laws become prohibitive in essence. 

Such, the trail of Puritanism, is the direct cause of the 
great growth of the Catholic Church with us today, this de- 
humanization. It offers to a headless mob a government, and 
THAT is its appeal (to take immediately the place of that lost 
local one that used to touch), a government in opposition to 
the general evil of our civil one; that is at least humane against 
the other (morally) that’s merely stupid. 

Only the negro, with a keen necessity to find an equivalent, 
for the voodooism, the mystery of his African jungles, where 
one cannot see far, has been able to make a vital thing of our 
religion. For the rest of us the influence is degenerative. It 
is largely a persistence of the stasis of the early beliefs, to- 
gether with their vigor. 

If enamored of the gospel, the Puritans in a wild New 
World by that pure stare into the center of their souls ex- 

i eS a Be 

PERE SEBASTIAN RASLES _ 129 

cluded terrors each for himself, and so, in effect, blocked all 
ingress and all egress (in theory) to the tenderer humanities, 
the frailties in which beauty lives entangled, rendering their 
lives hard, unproductive of that openness which would have 
been to them as a flower to the stalk; so the Catholics to the 
north, equally lost, would achieve the same end of escape by 
the equivalent of a blow on the head at the start, that relieved 
them of responsibility. Thus stunned and benumbed to terror, 
the Church comes at least with gentleness to aid. So that they 
could approach the Indians who, if they were lost, still had 
their apt sensual touch which the Puritan occluded. 

And so America is become the greatest proselytizing 
ground for the Catholic in the world today—in spite of every- 
thing. The difficulty, from lack of sensual application, re- 
moved from without by an authority that represents the mys- 
tery itself—leaves hands freed for embraces, a field where 
tenderness may move, love may awaken and (save by the one 
blocked door) a way is offered. 

Certain it is that the New World suffered greatly from 
both Puritans and Catholics; but as Pére Rasles touched it 
nearer than his southern neighbors, and as the ghost of Puri- 
tanism still binds us by its horrid walls, so, as a corollary, 
Catholicism gains in that it offers us aLLEviaTION from 
the dullness, the lack of touch incident upon the steady with- 
drawal of our liberty. 

THE DISCOVERY OF KENTUCKY 

HERE was, thank God, a great voluptuary born to the 
American settlements against the niggardliness of the 
damming puritanical tradition; one who by the single 

logic of his passion, which he rested on the savage life about 
him, destroyed at its spring that spiritually withering plague. 
For this he has remained since buried in a miscolored legend 
and left for rotten. Far from dead, however, but full of a 
rich regenerative violence he remains, when his history will 
be carefully reported, for us who have come after to call upon 
him. 

Kentucky, the great wilderness beyond the western edge 
of the world, “the dark and bloody ground” of coming years, 
seemed to the colonists along the eastern North-American sea- 
board as far away, nearly, and as difficult of approach as had 
that problematical world itself beyond the western ocean to 
the times prior to Columbus. “A country there was, of this 
none could doubt who thought at all; but whether land or 
water, mountain or plain, fertility or barrenness, preponder- 
ated; whether it was inhabited by men or beasts, or both or 
neither, they knew not.” But if inhabited by men then it was 
the savage with whom the settlers had had long since experi- 
ence sufficient to make them loth to pry further, for the mo- 
ment, beyond the securing mountain barrier. 

Clinging narrowly to their new foothold, dependent still 
on sailing vessels for a contact none too swift or certain with 
“home,” the colonists looked with fear to the west. They 
worked hard and for the most part throve, suffering the ma- 
terial lacks of their exposed condition with intention. But 
they suffered also privations not even to be estimated, cramp- 

ing and demeaning for a people used to a world less primi- 
‘ 130 

THE DISCOVERY OF KENTUCKY 131 

tively rigorous. A spirit of insecurity calling upon thrift 
and self-denial remained their basic mood. Opposed to this 
lay the forbidden wealth of the Unknown. 

Into such an atmosphere, more or less varied, more or less 
changed for better or worse in minds of different understand- 
ing, was born Daniel Boone, the foremost pioneer and fron- 
tiersman of his day. A man like none other about him Boone 
had for the life of his fellow settlers, high or low, no sympa- 
thy whatever. Was it his ancestry, full of a rural quietness 
from placid Dorset or the sober Quaker training of his early 
associations that bred the instinct in him, made him ready to 
take desperate chances with his mind for pleasure, certainly 
he was not, as commonly believed, of that riff-raff of hunters 
and Indian killers among which destiny had thrown him—the 
man of border foray—a link between the savage and the 
settler. 

His character was not this. Mild and simple hearted, 
steady, not impulsive in courage—bold and determined, but 
always rather inclined to defend than attack—he stood im- 
mensely above that wretched class of men who are so often 
the preliminaries of civilization. Boone deliberately chose 
the peace of solitude, rather than to mingle in the wild wrang- 
lings and disputings of the ‘society around him—from whom 
it was ever his first thought to be escaping—or he would never 
have penetrated to those secret places where later his name 
became a talisman. 

Three years the junior of George Washington, Boone was 
taken while still a child from his birthplace on the upper 
waters of the Schuylkill River near Philadelphia to the then 
comparatively wild country of western Pennsylvania. Here he 
grew up. Soon a hunter, even as a boy men stepped back to 
contemplate with more than ordinary wonder the fearlessness 
with which he faced the fiercer wild beasts that prowled around. 
It was the early evidence of his genius. At eighteen, with his 
love of the woods marked for good, and his disposition for 
solitude, taciturnity and a hunter’s life determined, the family 

132 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

moved again this time from the rapidly settling country of 
Pennsylvania to the wild Yadkin, a river that takes its rise 
among the mountains that form the western boundary of 
North Carolina. 

With his arrival on the Yadkin, Daniel Boone married a 
neighbor’s daughter, Rebecca Bryan, and together the young 
couple left the world behind them. Boone at once traversed 
the Yadkin Valley at a point still more remote from the sea- 
board and nearer the mountain; here he placed his cabin. 
It was a true home to him. Its firelight shone in welcome to 
the rare stranger who found that riverside. But he was not 
to remain thus solitary! The lands along the Yadkin at- — 
tracted the notice of other settlers, and Boone, at thirty, found 
the smoke of his cabin no longer the only one that floated in 
that air. These accessions of companionship, however con- 
genial to the greatest part of mankind, did not suit Boone. 
He soon became conscious that his time on the Yadkin was 
limited. 

The fields for adventure lay within his reach. The moun- 
tains were to be crossed and a new and unexplored country, 
invested with every beauty, every danger, every incident that 
could amuse the imagination or quicken action, lay before him, 
the indefinite world of the future. Along the Clinch River 
and the Holston River hunting parties pursued their way. As 
they went, the mysteries of forest life grew more familiar. 
Boone learned even better than before that neither roof, nor 
house, nor bed was necessary to existence. There were, of 
_ course, many things to urge him on in his natural choice. It 

was the time just preceding the Revolution. The colonial — 
system of taxation was iniquitous to the last degree; this the 
pioneer could not fathom and would not endure. Such things 
Boone solved most according to his nature by leaving them 
behind. eR = 

At this point Boone’s life may be said really to begin. 
Facing his first great adventure Boone was now in his best 

years. His age was thirty-six. He is described by various - 

THE DISCOVERY OF KENTUCKY 138 

writers as being five feet ten inches high, robust, clean limbed 
_and athletic, fitted by his habit and temperament, and by his 

physique, for endurance—a bright eye, and a calm determi- 
nation in his manner. In 1769, John Finley returned from a 
hunting trip beyond the mountain. He talked loud and long 
of the beauty and fertility of the country and Daniel Boone 
was soon eagerly a listener. It touched the great keynote of 
his character, and the hour and the man had come. 

“It was on the first of May, in the year 1769, that I re- 
signed my domestic happiness for a time and left my family 
and peaceful habitation on the Yadkin River in North Caro- 
lina, to wander through the wilderness of America, in quest 
of the country of Kentucky, in company with John Finley, 
John Stewart, Joseph Holden, James Monay, and William 
Cool. We proceeded successfully and after a long and fatigu- 
ing journey through a mountain wilderness, in a westward di- 
rection on the seventh day of June following, we found our- 
selves on Red River, where John Finley had formerly been 
trading with the Indians, and from the top of an eminence, saw 
with pleasure the beautiful level of Kentucky.” 

Thus opens the so-called autobiography, said to have been 
written down from Boone’s dictation, late in his life by one 
John Filson. But the silly phrases and total disregard for 
what must have been the rude words of the old hunter serve 
only, for the most part, to make it a keen disappointment to 
the interested reader. But now, from everything that is said, 
all that Boone is known to have put through and willingly suf- 
fered during the next two years, there ensued a time of the 
_ most enchanting adventure for the still young explorer. For 
a time the party hunted and enjoyed the country, seeing buf- 
falo “more frequent than I have seen cattle in the settlements, 
browsing on the leaves of the cane, or cropping the grass on 
those extensive prairies, . . . abundance of wild beasts of all 
sorts through this vast forest; and the numbers about the salt 
springs were amazing.” Here the party practised hunting 
till the twenty-second day of December following. 

134 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

“On this day John Stewart and I had a pleasant ramble; 
but fortune changed the scene in the close of it. We had 
passed through a great forest, Nature was here a series of 
wonders and a fund of delight, and we were diverted with 
innumerable animals presenting themselves perpetually to our 
view. In the decline of the day, near the Kentucky River, as 
we ascended the brow of a small hill, a number of Indians 
rushed out of a thick canebrake upon us and made us prison- 
ers.” Escaping later the two returned to their camp to find 
it plundered and the others of their party gone. 

But now, by one of those determining chances which occur 
in all great careers Squire Boone, Daniel’s brother, who with 
another adventurer had set out to get news of the original 
party if possible, came accidentally upon his brother’s camp in 
the forest. It was a meeting of greatest importance and un- 
bounded joy to Daniel Boone. For a short time there were 
now four together, but within a month, the man Stewart was 
killed by Indians while Squire Boone’s companion, who had 
accompanied him upon his quest, either wandered off and 
was lost or returned by himself to the Colonies. Daniel and 
Squire were left alone. 

‘We were then in a dangerous and helpless situation, ex- 
posed daily to perils and death amongst the savages and wild 
beasts—not a white man in the country but ourselves. Thus 
situated many hundred miles from our families, in the howling 
wilderness, I believe few would have equally enjoyed the happi- 
ness we experienced. We continued not in a state of indolence 
but hunted every day, and prepared to defend ourselves 
against the winter’s storms. We remained there undisturbed 
during the winter. . . . On the first day of May, following, 
my brother returned home to the settlement by himself, for a 
new recruit of horses and ammunition, leaving me by myself, 
without bread, salt or sugar, without company of my fellow 
creatures, or even a horse or a dog. 

“I confess I never was under greater necessity of exercis- 
ing philosophy and fortitude. A few days I passed uncom- 

THE DISCOVERY OF KENTUCKY 135 

fortably: The idea of a beloved wife and family, and their 
anxiety upon the account of my absence, and exposed situation, 
made sensible impressions on my heart. A thousand dread- 
ful apprehensions presented themselves to my view and had 
undoubtedly disposed me to melancholy if indulged. One day 
I undertook a tour through the country, and the diversity and 
beauty of nature I met with in this charming season expelled 
every gloom and vexatious thought. Not a breeze shook the 
most tremulous leaf. I had gained the summit of a command- 
ing ridge, and looking around with astonishing delight, beheld 
the ample plain, the beauteous tracts below. All things were 
still; I kindled a fire near a fountain of sweet water and 
feasted on a loin of a buck which a few hours before I had 
killed. Night came and the earth seemed to gasp after the 
hovering moisture. » But only impatience is kindled by 
the silly language of the asinine chronicler. 

_ But when Filson goes on to declare Boone’s loneliness “an 
uninterrupted scene of sylvan pleasures” it is a little too much 
to bear. Constant exposure to danger and death, a habitation 
which he states had been discovered by the savages, the neces- 
sity of such stratagems as the resort to the canebrake rather 
than to take the risk of being found in his cabin, have nothing 
of sylvan pleasures in them. Boone had too much strong 
sense to feel anything but patience amidst the scenes of his 
solitude. And yet, having sounded the depth of forest life, and 
having considered and weighed all it had to offer, he felt 
secure enough to brave the perils of an exploring tour. He 
saw the Ohio, and unquestionably, from the results of this ex- 
cursion, strengthened his determination to establish himself in 
such a land of delight. 

For three months he was alone. It was an ordeal through 
which few men could have passed. Certain it is that nothing 
but a passionate attachment of the most extraordinary inten- 
_ sity could have induced even him to undergo it. If there 
were perils there was a pleasure keener, which bade him stay 
op, even in solitude, while his day was lasting. Surely he 

136 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

must have known that it was the great ecstatic moment of his 
life’s affirmation. 

By instinct and from the first Boone had run past the 
difficulties encountered by his fellows in making the New 
World their own. As ecstasy cannot live without devotion and 
he who is not given to some earth of basic logic cannot enjoy, 
so Boone lived to enjoy ecstasy through his single devotion 
to the wilderness with which he was surrounded. The beauty 
of a lavish, primitive embrace in savage, wild beast and forest 
rising above the cramped life about him possessed him wholly. 
Passionate and thoroughly given he avoided the half logic 
of stealing from the immense profusion. 

Some one must have taken the step. He took it. Not that 
he settled Kentucky or made a path to the west, not that he 
defended, suffered, hated and fled, but because of a descent to 
the ground of his desire was Boone’s life important and does 
it remain still loaded with power,—power to strengthen every 
form of energy that would be voluptuous, passionate, possessive 
in that place which he opened. For the problem of the New 
World was, as every new comer soon found out, an awkward 
one, on all sides the same: how to replace from the wild land 
that which, at home, they had scarcely known the Old World 
meant to them; through difficulty and even brutal hardship to 
find a ground to take the place of England. They could not 
do it. They clung, one way or another, to the old, striving 
the while to pull off pieces to themselves from the fat of the 
new bounty. | 

Boone’s genius was to recognize the difficulty as neither ma- 
terial nor political but one purely moral and esthetic. Filled 
with the wild beauty of the New World to overbrimming so 
long as he had what he desired, to bathe in, to explore always 
more deeply, to see, to feel, to touch—his instincts were con- 
tented. Sensing a limitless fortune which daring could make 
his own, he sought only with primal lust to grow close to it, 
to understand it and to be part of its mysterious movements— 
like an Indian. And among all the colonists, like an Indian, 

THE DISCOVERY OF KENTUCKY 187 

the ecstasy of complete possession of the new country was his 
alone. In Kentucky he would stand, a lineal descendant of 
Columbus on the beach at Santo Domingo, walking up and 
down with eager eyes while his men were gathering water. 

With the sense of an Indian, Boone felt the wild beasts 
about him as a natural offering. Like a savage he knew that 
for such as he their destined lives were intended. As an In- 
dian to the wild, without stint or tremor, he offered himself 
to his world, hunting, killing with a great appetitie, taking 
the lives of the beasts into his quiet, murderous hands as they 
or their masters, the savages, might take his own, if they were 
able, without kindling his resentment; as naturally as his own 
gentle son, his beloved brother, his nearest companions were 
taken—without his rancor being lifted. Possessing a body at 
once powerful, compact and capable of tremendous activity 
and resistance when roused, a clear eye and a deadly aim, 
taciturn in his demeanor, symmetrical and instinctive in un- 
derstanding, Boone stood for his race, the affirmation of that 
wild logic, which in times past had mastered another wilder- 
ness and now, renascent, would master this, to prove it potent. 

There must be a new wedding. But he saw and only he 
saw the prototype of it all, the native savage. To Boone the 
Indian was his greatest master. Not for himself surely to be 
an Indian, though they eagerly sought to adopt him into their 
tribes, but the reverse: to be himself in a new world, Indian- 
like. If the land were to be possessed it must be as the Indian 
possessed it. Boone saw the truth of the Red Man, not an 
_ aberrant type, treacherous and anti-white to be feared and ex- 
terminated, but as a natural expression of the place, the In- 
dian himself as “right,” the flower of his world. 

Keen then was the defeat he tasted when, having returned 
safe to the Colonies after his first ecstatic sojourn, and when 
after long delay having undertaken to lead a party of forty 
settlers to the new country, his eldest son, among five others 
of his own age, was brutally murdered by the savages at the 
very outset. It was a crushing blow. Although Boone and 

138 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

others argued against it, the expedition turned back and with 
his sorrowing wife Boone once more took up his homestead on 
the Yadkin. And this is the mark of his personality, that even 
for this cruel stroke he held no illwill against the Red Men. 

Disappointed in his early hopes and when through subse- 
quent years of battle against the wild tribes, when through 
losses and trials of the severest order, he led at last in the 
establishment of the settlers about the fort and center of 
Boonesborough, he never wavered for a moment in his clear 
conception of the Indian as a natural part of a beloved con- 
dition, the New World, in which all lived together. Captured 
or escaping, outwitted by or outwitting the savages, he ad- 
mired and defended them always, as, implacable and remorse- 
less enemy to the Red Man that he proved, they admired and 
respected him ‘to the end of his days. 

You have bought the land, said an old Indian who acted 
for his tribe in the transaction which now made Kentucky 
over to the white man, but you will have trouble to settle it. 
It proved true. An old lady who had been in the forts was 
describing the scenes she had witnessed in those times of peril 
and adventure, and, among other things, remarked that-during 
the first two years of her residence in Kentucky, the most 
comely sight she beheld, was seeing a young man die in his bed 
a natural death. She had been familiar with blood, and car- 
nage, and death, but in all those cases the sufferers were the 
victims of the Indian tomahawk and scalping knife; and that 
on an occasion when a young man was taken sick and died, 
after the usual manner of nature, she and the rest of the 
women sat up all night, gazing upon him as an object of 
beauty. 

‘It was against his own kind that Boone’s lasting resent- 
ment was fixed, “those damned Yankees,” who took from him, 
by the chicanery of the law and in his old age, every last acre 
of the then prosperous homestead he had at last won for 
himself after years of battle in the new country. 

Confirmed in his distrust for his “own kind,” in old age 

THE DISCOVERY OF KENTUCKY 1839 

homeless and quite ruined, he must turn once more to his 
early loves, the savage and the wild. Once more a wanderer 
he struck out through Tennessee for “more elbowroom,” de- 
termined to leave the young nation which he had helped to 
establish, definitely behind him. He headed for Spanish ter- 
ritory beyond the Mississippi where the Provincial Governor, 
having gotten wind of the old hunter’s state of mind, was glad 
to offer him a large tract of land on which to settle. There 
he lived and died, past ninety, serving his traps as usual. 

In the woods he would have an Indian for companion 
even out of preference to his own sons, and from these men, the 
Indians, he had the greatest reverence, enjoying always when 
afield with them the signal honor of disposing them in the order 
of the hunt. 

Too late the American Congress did follow him with some 
slight recognition. But that was by then to him really a 
small matter. He had already that which he wanted: the 
woods and native companions whom, in a written statement of 
great interest, he defends against all detractors and in that 
defense establishes himself in clear words: the antagonist of 
those of his own blood whose alien strength he felt and de- 
tested, while his whole soul, with greatest devotion, was given 
to the New World which he adored and found, in its every 
expression, the land of heart’s desire. 

GEORGE WASHINGTON 

ASHINGTON was, I think, the typically good man: 
take it as you please. But, of course, a remarkable 
one. No doubt at all he, personally, was ninety per- 

cent of the force which made of the American Revolution a 
successful issue. Know of what that force consisted, that is, 
the intimate character of its makeup, that is, Washington 
himself, and you will know practically all there is to under- 
stand about the beginnings of the American Republic. You 
will know, also, why a crown was offered this great hero at 
the conclusion of hostilities with Great Britain, and with 
what a hidden gesture he rejected the idea. Therein you have 
it: it was unthinkable—or he might have taken it. 

Here was a man of tremendous vitality buried in a mas- 
sive frame and under a rather stolid and untractable exterior 
which the ladies somewhat feared, I fancy. He must have 
looked well to them, from a distance, or say on horseback— 
but later it proved a little too powerful for comfort. And he 
wanted them too; violently. One can imagine him curiously 
alive to the need of dainty waistcoats, lace and kid gloves, in 
which to cover that dangerous rudeness which he must have 
felt about himself. His interest in dress at a certain period of 
his career is notorious. 

The surveying contract which took him to Duquesne and 
_ the wilderness thereabouts was, however, the other side of the 
question. In this he must have breathed a more serious air 
which cannot but have penetrated to the deepest parts of his 
nature. ‘The thing is, however, that in his case it did not, as 
it might have done, win him permanently to that kind of an 
existence. There was in his nature a profound spirit of resig- 

nation before life’s rich proposals which disarmed him. As he 
» 140 

GEORGE WASHINGTON 141 

expressed it, to him it was always his “vine and figtree,” home 
_and quiet, for which he longed. Stress he could endure but 
peace and regularity pleased him better. ‘There must have 
been within him a great country whose wild paths he alone 
knew and explored in secret and at his leisure. 

Patience, horses or a fine carriage, a widow to wive, a 
sloping lawn with a river at the bottom, a thriving field, an 
adopted daughter—that was as far as his desire wandered. 
All the rest he accepted as put upon him by chance. 

Resistance was, I believe, his code. Encitadeled. A pro- 
tector of the peace, or at least, keeper of the stillness within 

himself. He was too strong to want to evade anything. That’s 
_ his reputation for truthtelling. It was a good scratching to 
him to take it on and see himself through. He knew he would 
come through. 

There was his club life in Alexandria, as a Mason; the 
ten-mile ride to Church: it warmed him up a little. 

As for rebellion, I don’t think it entered his mind. I don’t 
see how it could, except from the rear, subconsciously—that 
fire was too subdued in him. As commander of the troops he 
resisted, struck and drew back, struck and doubled on his 
tracks and struck and struck again, then rested. 

He couldn’t give in. He couldn’t give in without such a 
ruffling within himself that he had no choice but to continue. 
That’s the secret of Valley Forge and the valor and patience 
of his battle, as great as the other, against an aimless, waver- 
ing Congress at Philadelphia. He couldn’t give in. I be- 
lieve he would have gone out and battled it alone if he had 
felt his army wasted from under him or even left the country. 
Or else— ; 

Well, there is the night he wandered off alone near Morris- 
town, I think, off toward the British lines on horseback, impa- 
tient of warning—to air himself, so to speak, under the stars. 
Something angry was stirred there. 

But seven days in the week it was for him: resist, be pru- 
dent, be calm—with a mad hell inside that might rise, might 

1442 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

one day do something perhaps brilliant, perhaps joyously 
abandoned—but not to be thought of. 

Such men suffering thus a political conversion of their 
emotions are, I suppose, always the noteworthy among us. 
Battle to them must be the expression of that something in 
themselves which they fear. Washington’s calmness of de- 
meanor and characteristics as a military leader were of that 
cloth. 

Some girl at Princeton, was it? had some joke with him 
about a slipper at a dance. He was full of it. And there was 
the obscene anecdote he told that night in the boat crossing the 
Delaware. | 

But apparently the one man who got it full, who saw him 
really roused was General Lee—the one who wanted to replace 
him in command. That was all right. Washington could 
understand that and forgive it in another. He forgave Lee 
and restored him to his division with full trust after his re- 
turn from capture by the British. But when, subsequently, 
Lee, in direct disobedience of orders, forgetting his position 
and risking his own whim on an important decision before 
Monmouth, lost the chance for an important victory—that 
was different. Immediately after, Washington met him by 
chance at a country cross road and Lee got it. 

It is said no man, before or after, saw Washington in such 
a rage. This sort of thing Lee had done, he, Washington, 
knew from top to bottom. It was the firmly held part of him- 
self which had broken loose—in another. Should he, Wash- 
ington, stop that resistance in himself. What would happen? 

No use to ask that now. Here it was: disaster. To Lee 
then in a fury, he opened the gates of his soul and Lee saw 
such hell fire that it was the end of him—retired muttering and 
half silly to his farm in Virginia where he stayed. 

The presidency could not have meant anything to Wash- 
ington. I think he spoke the candid truth about it when he 
said he neither desired it nor sought it. He merely did his 
duty. He did it with wisdom since he couldn’t do it any 

tn — 

GEORGE WASHINGTON 143 

other way. He wasn’t enough interested to be scheming. Re- 
sist and protect: that was the gist of most that he said. Don’t 
go looking for trouble. Stay home. In his very face, even, 
it was said in Congress he had turned monster under the name 
of prudence: “a sort of a non-describable chameleon-colored 
thing called prudence.” Alexander Hamilton, a type that 
needed power, found all this quite to his liking. Washington 
let him do. He wanted to get back to Mt. Vernon. 

America has a special destiny for such men, I suppose, 
great wench lovers—there is the letter from Jefferson attesting 
it in the case of Washington, if that were needed—terrible 
leaders they might make if one could release them. It seems a 
loss not compensated for by the tawdry stuff bred after 
them—in place of a splendor, too rare. They are a kind of 
American swan song, each one. > 

The whole crawling mass gnaws on them—hates them. He 
was hated, don’t imagine he was not. The minute he had se- 
cured their dung heap for them—he had to take their dirt in 
the face. 

From deep within, you may count upon it, came those final 
words when, his head in his friend’s lap, he said with difficulty: 
“Doctor, I am dying, and have been dying for a long time, 

. ” adding to reassure them, “but I am not afraid to die.” 

He is the typical sacrifice to the mob—in a great many 

ways thoroughly disappointing. 

POOR RICHARD 

Information to Those Who Would Remove to America: | 

the writer of this, who is well acquainted with North 

America, their desire of transporting and establishing 
themselves in that country, but who appear to have formed, 
through ignorance, mistaken ideas and expectations of what 
is to be obtained there, he thinks it may be useful, and prevent 
inconvenient, expensive, and fruitless removals and voyages of 
improper persons, if he gives some clearer and truer notions 
of that part of the world than appear to have hitherto pre- 
vailed. 

He finds it is imagined by numbers that the inhabitants 
of North America are rich, capable of rewarding, and dis- 
posed to reward, all sorts of ingenuity; that they are at the 
same time ignorant of all the sciences, and, consequently, that 
strangers possessing talents in the belles-lettres, fine arts, etc., 
must be highly esteemed, and so well paid as to become easily 
rich themselves, that there are also abundance of profitable 
offices to be disposed of, which the natives are not qualified to 
fill; and that, having few persons of family among them, 
strangers of birth must be greatly respected, and of course 
easily obtain the best of those offices, which will make all their 
fortunes; that the governments too, to encourage emigration 
from Europe, not only pay the expense of personal transpor- 
tation, but give lands gratis to strangers, with negroes to work 
for them, utensils of husbandry, and stocks of cattle. These 
are all wild imaginations; and those who go to America with 
expectations founded upon them will surely find themselves dis- 
appointed. 

Mite: persons in Europe having by letters expressed to 

144 

a 

——" 
ee 

POOR RICHARD 145 

The truth is, that though there are in that country few 
people so miserable as the poor of Europe, there are also very 
few that in Europe would be called rich 3 It is rather a general 
happy mediocrity that prevails. There are few great proprie- 
tors of the soil, and few tenants; most people cultivate their 
own lands, or follow some handicraft or merchandise; very few 
rich enough to live idly upon their rents or incomes, or to pay 
the highest prices given in Europe for painting, statues, archi- 
tecture, and the other works of art that are more curious than 
useful. Hence the natural geniuses that have arisen in Amer- 
ica with such talents have uniformly quitted that country for 
Europe, where they can be more suitably rewarded. It is true 
that letters and mathematical knowledge are in esteem there; 
but they are at the same time more common than is appre- 
ciated; there being already existing nine colleges or univer- 
sities, viz. four in New England, and one in each of the 
provinces of New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Mary- 
land, and Virginia, all furnished with learned professors; be- 
sides a number of smaller academies. These educate many 
of their youth in the languages, and those sciences that qualify 
men for the professions of divinity, law or physic. Strangers 
indeed are by no means excluded from exercising those pro- 
fessions; and the quick increase of inhabitants everywhere 
gives them a chance of employ, which they have in common . 
with the natives. Of civil offices, or employments, there are 
few; no superfluous ones, as in Europe; and it is a rule estab- 
lished in some states, that no office shall be so profitable as to 
make it desirable. The thirty-sixth article of the Constitution 
of Pennsylvania runs expressly in these words: “As every free- 
man, to preserve his independence (if he has not a sufficient 
estate) ought to have some profession, calling, trade or farm, 
whereby he may honestly subsist, there can be no necessity for, 
nor use in, establishing offices of profit, the usual effects of 
which are dependence and servility unbecoming freemen, in 
the possessors and expectants; faction, contention, corruption, 
and disorder among the people; Wherefore, whenever an of- 

146 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

fice, through increase of fees or otherwise, becomes so profit- 
able as to occasion many to apply for it, the profits ought to 
be lessened by the Legislature.” 

These ideas prevailing more or less in all the United States, 
it cannot be worth any man’s while, who has a means of living 
at home, to expatriate himself, in hopes of obtaining a profit- 
able civil office in America; and as to military offices, they are 
at an end with the war, the armies being disbanded. Much 
less is it advisable for a person to go thither who has no 
other quality to recommend him but his birth. In Europe it 
has indeed its value; but it is a commodity that cannot be 
carried to a worse market than that of America; where people 
do not inquire of a stranger, What is he? but, What can he 
do? If he has any useful art he is welcome; and if he exer- 
cises it, and behaves well, he will be respected by all that know 
him; but a mere man of quality, who, on that account, wants 
to live upon the public, by some office or salary, will be de- 
spised and disregarded. ‘The husbandman is in honor there, 
and even the mechanic; because their employments are useful. 
The people have a saying, that God Almighty is himself a 

mechanic, the greatest in the universe; and he is respected and 

more admired for the variety, ingenuity, and utility of his 
handiworks, than for the antiquity of his family. They are 
pleased with the observation of a negro, and frequently men- 
tion it, that Boccarora (meaning the white man) make de 
black man workee, make de horse workee, make de ox workee; 
make ebery ting workee, only the hog. He, de hog, no workee; 
he eat, he drink, he walk about, he go to sleep when he please, 
he live like a gempleman. According to these opinions of the 
Americans one would think himself more obliged to a geneal- 
ogist, who could prove for him that his ancestors and relations 
for ten generations had been ploughmen, smiths, carpenters, 
turners, weavers, tanners, or even shoemakers, and consequently 
that they were useful members of society, than if he could only 
prove that they were gentlemen, doing nothing of value, but 

—— on ee — | 

ii ae 

POOR RICHARD 147 

living idly on the labor of others, mere fruges conswmere nati,* 
and otherwise good for nothing, till by their death their es- 
tates, like the carcass of the negro’s gentleman-hog, come to 
be cut up. 

_ With regard to encouragements for strangers from gov- 
ernment, they are really only what are derived from good laws 
and liberty. Strangers are welcome, because there is room 
enough for them all, and therefore the old inhabitants are not 
jealous of them; the laws protect them sufficiently, so that 
they have no need of the patronage of great men; and every 
one will enjoy securely the profits of his industry. But, if he 
does not bring a fortune with him, he must work and be indus- 
trious to live. One or two years’ residence gives him all the 
rights of a citizen; but the government does not, at present, 
whatever it may have done in former times, hire people to be- 
come settlers, by paying their passages, giving land, negroes, 
utensils, stock, or any other kind of emolument whatsoever. 
In short, America is the land of labor, and by no means 
_ what the English call Lubberland, and the French Pays de 
Cocagne, where the streets are said to be paved with half- 
peck loaves, the houses tiled with pancakes, and where the 
fouls fly about ready to be roasted, crying, Come eat me! 

Who then are the kind of persons to whom an emigration 
to America may be advantageous? And what are the advan- 
tages they may reasonably expect? 

Land being cheap in that country, from the vast forests 
still void of inhabitants, and not likely to be occupied in an age 
to come, insomuch that the propriety of a hundred acres of 
fertile soil full of wood may be obtained near the frontiers, 
in many places, for eight or ten guineas, hearty young labor- 
ing men, who understand the husbandry of corn and cattle, 
which is nearly the same in that country as in Europe, may 
easily establish themselves there. A little money saved of 

me eve born 
Merely to eat up the corn.” 
—Warts, 

148 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

the good wages they receive there, while they work for others, 
enables them to buy the land and begin their plantation, in 
which they are assisted by the good will of their neighbors, and 
some credit. Multitudes of poor people from England, Ire- 
land, Scotland and Germany, have, by this means, in a few 
years become wealthy farmers, who, in their own countries, 
where all the lands are fully occupied, and the wages of labor 
low, could never have emerged from the poor condition wherein 
they were born. 

From the salubrity of the air, the healthiness of the cli- 
mate, and plenty of good provisions, and the encouragement 
to early marriages by the certainty of subsistence in cultivat- 
ing the earth, the increase of inhabitants by natural genera- 
tion is very rapid in America, and becomes still more so by the 
accession of strangers; hence there is a continual demand for 
more artisans of all the necessary and useful kinds, to supply 
those cultivators of the earth with houses, and with furniture 
and. utensils of the grosser sorts, which cannot so well be 
brought from Europe. Tolerably good workmen in any of 
those mechanic arts are sure to find employ, and to be well 
paid for their work, there being no restraints preventing 
strangers from exercising any art they understand, nor any 
permission necessary. If they are poor, they begin first as 
servants or Journeymen; and if they are sober, industrious, and 
frugal, they soon become masters, establish themselves in 
business, marry, raise families, and become respectable citi- 
zens. 

Also, persons of moderate fortunes and capitals, who, hav- 
ing a number of children to provide for, are desirous of bring- 
ing them up to industry, and to secure estates for their 
posterity, have opportunities of doing it in America, which Eu- 
rope does not afford. There they may be taught and practise 
profitable mechanic arts, without incurring disgrace on that 
account, but, on the contrary, acquiring respect by such abili- 
ties. There small capitals laid out in lands, which daily be- 
come more valuable by the increase of people, afford a solid 

POOR RICHARD 149 

prospect of ample fortunes thereafter for those children. The 
writer of this has known several instances of large tracts of 
land, bought, on what was then the frontier of Pennsylvania, 
for ten pounds per hundred acres, which when the settlements 
had been extended far beyond them, sold readily, without any 
improvement made upon them, for three pounds per acre. 
The acre in America is the same with the English acre, or the 
acre of Normandy. 

Those who desire to understand the state of government in 
America, would do well to read the Constitutions of the sev- 
eral States, and the Articles of Confederation that bind the 
whole together for general purposes, under the direction of 
one assembly, called the Congress. These Constitutions have 
been printed, by order of Congress, in America; two editions 
of them have also been printed in London; and a good trans- 
lation of them into French has lately been published in Paris. 

Several of the princes of Europe, of late, from an opinion 
of advantage to arise by producing all commodities and manu- 
factures within their own dominions, so as to diminish or 
render useless their importations, have endeavored to entice 
workmen from other countries by high salaries, privileges, 
ete. Many persons, pretending to be skilled in various great 
manufactures, imagining that America must be in want of 
them, and that the Congress would probably be disposed to 
imitate the princes above mentioned, have proposed to go over, 
on condition of having their passage paid, lands given, sala- 
ries appointed, exclusive privileges for terms of years, etc. 
Such persons, on reading the Articles of Confederation, will 
find that the Congress have no power committed to them, nor 
money put into their hands, for such purposes; and that, if 
any such encouragement is given, it must be by the govern- 
_ ment of some separate State. This, however, has rarely been 
done in America; and when it has been done, it has rarely 
succeeded, so as to establish a manufacture, which the country 
‘was not yet so ripe for as to encourage private persons to set 
it up; labor being generally too dear there, and hands difficult 

| 150 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

to be kept together, every one desiring to be a master, and 
the cheapness of lands inclining many to leave trades for 
agriculture. Some, indeed, have met with success, and are car- 
ried on to advantage; but they are generally such as require 
only a few hands, or wherein great part of the work is per- 
formed by machines. Goods that are bulky, and of so small 
value as not well to bear the expense of freight, may often be 
made cheaper in the country than they can be imported; and 
the manufacture of such goods will be profitable wherever 
there isa sufficient demand. The farmers in America produce, 
indeed, a good deal of wool and flax; and none is exported, it 
is all worked up; but it is in the way of domestic manufac- 
ture, for the use of the family. ‘The buying up quantities 
of wool and flax, with the design to employ spinners, weavers, 
etc., and form great establishments, producing quantities of 
linen and woolen goods for sale, has been several times at- 
tempted in different provinces; but those projects have gen- 
erally failed, goods of equal value being imported cheaper. 
And when the governments have been solicited to support such 
schemes by encouragements in money, or by imposing duties 
on importation of such goods, it has been generally refused, 
on this principle, that, if the country is ripe for the manu- 
facture, it may be carried on by private persons to advan- 
tage; and if not, it is a folly to think of forcing nature. 
Great establishments of manufacture require great numbers 
of poor to do the work for small wages; those poor are to be 
found in Europe, but will not be found in America till the 
lands are all taken up and cultivated, and the excess of people, 
who cannot get land, want employment. The manufacture of 
silk, they say, is natural in France, as that of cloth in Eng- 
land, because each country produces in plenty the first ma- 
terial ; but if England will have a manufacture of silk as well as 
that of cloth, and France of cloth as well as that of silk, these 
unnatural operations must be supported by mutual prohibi- 
tions, or high duties on the importation of each other’s goods; 
by which means the workmen are enabled to tax the home con- 

Ye 

POOR RICHARD 151 

sumer by greater prices, while the higher wages they receive 
makes them neither happier nor richer, since they only drink 
more and work less. Therefore, the governments in America 
do nothing to encourage such projects. The people, by this 
means, are not imposed on, either by the merchant or by the 
mechanic. If the merchant demands too much profit on im- 
ported shoes, they buy of the shoemaker; and if he asks too 
high a price, they take them of the merchant; thus the two 
professions are checks on each other. The shoemaker, how- 
ever, has, on the whole, a considerable profit upon his labor in 
America, beyond what he had in Europe, as he can add to his 
price a sum nearly equal to all the expenses of freight and 
commission, risk or insurance, etc., necessarily charged by the 
merchant. And the case is the same with the workmen in every 
other mechanic art. Hence it is that artisans generally live 
better and more easily in America than in Europe; and such 
as are good economists make a comfortable provision for age, 
and for their children. Such may, therefore, remove with ad- 
vantage to America. 

In the long-settled countries of Europe, all arts, trades, 
professions, farms, etc., are so full, that it is difficult for a 
poor man, who has children, to place them where they may 
gain, or learn to gain a decent livelihood. The artisans, wha 
_ fear creating future rivals in business, refuse to take appren- 
tices, but upon conditions of money, maintenance, or the like, 
which the parents are unable to comply with. Hence the youth 
are dragged up in ignorance of every gainful art, and obliged 
to become soldiers, or servants, or thieves, for subsistence. In 
America, the rapid increase of inhabitants takes away that 
‘fear of rivalship, and artisans willingly receive apprentices 
from the hope of profit by their labor, during the remainder 
of the time stipulated, after they shall be instructed. Hence 
it is easy for poor families to get their children instructed; 
for the artisans are so desirous of apprentices, that many of 
them will even give money to the parents, to have boys from 
ten to fifteen years of age bound apprentices to them till the 

152 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

age of twenty-one; and many poor parents have, by that 
means, on their arrival in the country, raised money enough 
to buy land sufficient to establish themselves, and to subsist the 
rest of their family by agriculture. ‘These contracts for ap- 
prentices are made before a magistrate, who regulates the 
agreement according to reason and justice, and, having in 
view the formation of a future and useful citizen, obliges the. 
master to engage by a written indenture, not only that, dur- 
ing the time of service stipulated, the apprentice shall be duly 
provided with meat, drink, apparel, washing, and lodging, 
and, at its expiration, with a complete new suit of clothes, but 
also that he shall be taught to read and write and cast ac- 
counts; and that he shall be well instructed in the art or pro- 
fession of his master, or some other, by which he may gain a 
livelihood, and be able in his turn to raise a family. A copy 
of this indenture is given to the apprentice or his friends, and 
the magistrate keeps a record of it, to which recourse may be 
had, in case of failure by the master in any point of perform- 
ance. This desire among the masters, to have more hands 
employed in working for them, induces them to pay the pas- 
sages of young persons, of both sexes, who, on their arrival, 
agree to serve them one, two, three, or four years; those who 
have already learned a trade agreeing for a shorter term, 
in proportion to’ their skill and the consequent immediate 
value of their service; and those who have none agreeing for a 
longer term, in consideration of being taught an art their 
poverty would not permit them to acquire in their own 
country. 

The almost general mediocrity of fortune that prevails 
in America obliging its people to follow some business for sub- 
sistence, those vices that arise usually from idleness are in a 
great measure prevented. Industry and constant employment 
are great preservatives of the morals and virtue of a nation. 
Hence bad examples to youth are more rare in America, which 
must be a comfortable consideration to parents. To this may 
be truly added, that serious religion, under its various de- 

POOR RICHARD 153 

nominations, is not only tolerated, but respected and prac- 
tised. Atheism is unknown there; infidelity rare and secret; 
so that persons may live to a great age in that country, with- 
_ out having their piety shocked by meeting with either an 
atheist or an infidel. And the Divine Being seems to have 
manifested his approbation of the mutual forbearance and 
kindness with which the different sects treat each other, by the 
remarkable prosperity with which He has been pleased to 
favor the whole country. 
(B. Franxuin) 

Notes FoR A CoMMENTARY on F RANKLIN 

““He’s sort of proud of his commonness, isn’t he?” 

He was the balancer full of motion without direction, the 
gyroscope which by its large spinning kept us, at that early 
period of our fate, upon an even keel. 

The greatest winner of his day, he represents a voluptu- 
ousness of omnivorous energy brought to a dead stop by the 
rock of New World inopportunity. His energy never at- 
tained to a penetrant gist; rather it was stopped by and 
splashed upon the barrier, like a melon. His “good” was 
scattered about him. This is what is called being “practical.” 
At such “success” we smile to see Franklin often so puffed up. 

In the sheer mass of his voluptuous energy lies his chief 
excuse—a trait he borrowed without recognition from the 
primitive profusion of his surroundings. 

Relaxed in a mass of impedimenta he found opportunity 
for thought. 

Franklin, along with all the responsible aristocrats of his 
period, shows the two major characteristics of a bulky, crude 
energy, something in proportion to the continent, and a colos- 
sal restraint equalizing it. The result must have been a com- 
plete cancellation, frustration or descent to a low plane for 
release, which latter alternative he chose shiningly. 

He played with lightning and the French court. 

154 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

The great force (which was in him the expression of the 
New World) must have had not only volume but a quality, the 
determination of which will identify him. It was in Franklin, 
as shown characteristically in this letter, a scattering to recon- 
noitre. 

Poor Richard’s Almanac was as important in founding the 
nation as Paine’s Age of Reason—he adaged them into a kind 
of pride in possession. 

By casting scorn at men merely of birth while stressing the 
foundation of estates which should be family strongholds he 
did the service of discouraging aristocracy and creating it— 
the qualifying condition being that he repelled that which 
was foreign and supported that which was native—on a lower 
level roR THE TIME BEING. He sparred for time: he was 
a diplomat of distinction with positive New World char- 
acteristics. 

His mind was att out of the New World. Feeling a 
strength, a backing which was the New itself, he could afford 
to be sly with France, England or any nation; since, to live, 
he had to be sly with the massive strength of that primitive 
wilderness with whose conditions he had been bred to battle: 
thus, used to a mass EquaL to them, he could swing them too. 
So again he asserted his nativity. 

Strong and New World in innate strength, he is without 
beauty. The force of the New World is never in these men 
open; it is sly, covert, almost cringing. It is the mass that 
forces them into praise of mediocrity to escape its compul- 
sions: so there is a kind of nastiness in his Toucuine the 
hand of the Marchioness, in his meddling with the lightning, 
a resentment against his upstart bumptiousness in 2 
London how to light its stupidly ill-lit streets. 

There has not yet appeared in the New World any one 
with sufficient strength for the open assertion. So with Frank- 
lin, the tone is frightened and horribly smug—at his worst; 
it flames a little in de Soto; it is necessary to Boone to lose 
himself in the wilds; there,are no women—Houston’s bride is 

POOR RICHARD 155 

frightened off; the New Englanders are the clever bone-men. 
Nowhere the open, free assertion save in the Indian: this is 
the quality. Jones has to leave the American navy, we feel, to 
_ go to Russia, for release. 

It is necessary in appraising our history to realize that the 
nation was the offspring of the desire to huddle, to protect— 
of terror—superadded to a new world of great beauty and 
ripest blossom that well-nigh no man of distinction saw save 
Boone. 

Franklin is the full development of the timidity, the 
strength that denies itself. 

Such is his itch to serve science. 

“Education” represented to these pioneers an obscure 
knowledge of the great beauty that was denied them, but of 
the great beauty under their feet no man seems to have been 
conscious, to appreciable degree; the foundation they must 
first appraise. 

Nowhere does the full assertion come through save as a 
joke, jokingly, that masks the rest. 

The terrible beauty of the New World attracts men to 
their ruin. Franklin did not care to be ruined—he only 
wanted to touch. 

“I wish he hadn’t gone fooling with lightning; I wish he’d 
left it alone—the old fool.” Sure enough, he didn’t dare let 
it go in at the top of his head and out at his toes, that’s it; 
he had to fool with it. He sensed the power and knew only 
enough to want to run an engine with it. His fingers itched to 
be meddling, to do the little concrete thing—the barrier 
against a flood of lightning that would inundate him. Of 
‘course he was the most useful, “the most industrious citizen 
that Philadelphia or America had ever known.” He was the 
dike keeper, keeping out the wilderness with his wits. Fear 
drove his curiosity. 

Do something, anything, to keep the fingers busy—not 
to realize—the lightning. Be industrious, let money and com- 
fort increase; money is like a bell that keeps the dance 

156 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

from terrifying, as it would if it were silent and we could hear 
the grunt,—thud—swish. It is small, hard; it keeps the at- 
tention fixed so that the eyes shall not see. And such is humor: 
pennies—that see gold come of copper by adding together, 
shrewd guesses hidden under the armament of an humble jest. 

Poor Richard. 

Don’t offend. 

His mighty answer to the New World’s offer of a great 
embrace was THRIFT. Work night and day, build up, penny 
by penny, a wall against that which is threatening, the terror 
of life, poverty. Make a fort to be secure in. . 

The terrific energy of the new breed is its first character; 
the second is its terror before the NEW. 

As a boy, he had tentatively loosed himself once to love, to 
curiosity perhaps, which was the birth of his first son. But 
the terror of that dare must have frightened the soul out of 
him. Having dared that once, his heart recoiled; his teaching 
must have smitten him. But Franklin, shrewd fellow, did not 
succumb to the benumbing judgment and go branded, repen- 
tant.or rebellious. He trotted off gaily to Philly and noticed ~ 
Bettsy in the shop on Arch Street, the first day. 

He is our wise prophet of chicanery, the great buffoon, 
the face on the penny stamp. 

The shock his youth got went into the fibre of the Consti- 
tution: he joked himself into a rich life—so he joked the coun- 
try into.a good alliance: to fortify, to buckle up—and reserve 
a will to be gay, to BE—(on the side). 

Poor Richard: Save, be rich—and do as you please— 
might have been his motto, with an addendum: provided your 
house has strong walls and thick shutters. 

Prince Richard in the lamb’s skin: with a tongue in the 
cheek for aristocracy, humbly, arrogantly (that you may wish 
to imitate me) touching everything. . , 

To want to touch, not to wish anything to remain clean, 
aloof—comes always of a kind of timidity, from fear. 

POOR RICHARD 157 

The character they had (our pioneer statesmen, etc.) was 
that of giving their fine energy, as they must have done, to 
the smaller, narrower, protective thing and not to the great, 
New World. Yet they cannot quite leave hands off it but must 
_ ToucH it, in a “practical” way, that is a joking, shy, nasty 
Way, using “science” etc., not with the generosity of the say- 
age or scientist but in a shameful manner. The sweep of the 
force was too horrible to them; it would have swept them into 
chaos. They wap to do as they could but it can be no offense 
that their quality should be named. They could have been 
inspired by the new auatity about them to yield to loveliness 
in a fresh spirit. . bite Ios 
It is the placing of his enthusiasm that characterizes the 
man. 
It is not to mark Franklin, but to attempt to appraise the 
nature of the difficulties that molded him, the characteristic 
weight of the mass; how nearly all our national heroes have 
been driven back—and praised by reason of their shrewdness 
in making walls: not in bursting into flower. 
To discover the New Wortp: that there is something 
there: what it has done to us, its quality, its weight, its 
prophets, its—horrible temper. 
The niggardliness of our history, our stupidity, sluggish- 
ness of spirit, the falseness of our historical notes, the com- 
plete missing of the point. Addressed to the wrong head, the 
_ tenacity with which the fear still inspires laws, customs,—the 
suppression of the superb corn dance of the Chippewas, 
since it symbolizes the generative processes,—as if morals have 
but one character, and that,—srx: while morals are deformed 

in the name of Purity; till, in the confusion, almost nothing 
remains of the great American New World but a memory 
of the Indian. 

BATTLE BETWEEN THE BON HOMME RICHARD 
AND THE SERAPIS 

N board the ship “Serapis,” at anchor without the 
Texel, in Holland, October 3d, 1779. 

His Exce,tuency BenszamMin FRANKLIN. 

Honored and Dear Sir :—When I had the honor of writing 
to you on the 11th of August, previous to my departure from 
the Road of Groaix, I had before me the most flattering pros- 
pect of rendering essential service to the common cause of 
France and America. I had a full confidence in the voluntary 
inclination and ability of every captain under my command 
to assist and support me in my duty with cheerful emulation; 
and I was persuaded that every one of them would pursue 
glory in preference to interest. 

Whether I was or was not deceived will best appear by a 
relation of circumstances. 

The little squadron under my orders, consisting of the 
Bon homme Richard of 40 guns, the Alliance of 36 guns, the 
Pallas of 32 guns, the Cerf of 18 guns, and the Vengence of 
12 guns, joined by two privateers, the Monsieur and the Gran- 
ville, sailed from the Road of Groaix at daybreak on the 14th 
of August. ‘The same day we spoke with a large convoy bound 
from the southward to Brest. 

On the 23d we saw Cape Clear and the S.W. part of Ire- 
land. That afternoon, it being calm, I sent some armed boats 
to take a brigantine that appeared in the N.W. quarter. Soon 
after in the evening it became necessary to have a boat ahead 
of the ship to tow, as the helm could not prevent her from 
laying across the tide of flood, which would have driven us 

into a deep and dangerous bay, situated between the rocks 
“158 

THE BATTLE 159 

on the south called the Skallocks and on the north called the 
Blaskets. The ship’s boats being absent, I sent my own barge 
ahead to tow the ship. The boats took the brigantine. She 
was called the Fortuned, and bound with a cargo of oil, blub- 
ber, and staves from Newfoundland for Bristol. This vessel I 
ordered to proceed immediately for Nantes or St. Malo. Soon 
after sunset the villains who towed the ship cut the tow rope, 
and decamped with my barge. Sundry shots were fired to 
bring them to without effect. In the mean time the master of 
the Bon homme Richard, without orders, manned one of the 
ship’s boats, and with four soldiers pursued the barge in order 
to stop the deserters. The evening was clear and serene, but 
the zeal of that officer, Mr. Cutting Lunt, induced him to pur- 
sue too far; and a fog, which came on soon afterward, pre- 
vented the boats from rejoining the ship, although I caused 
signal guns to be frequently fired. The fog and calm con- 
tinued the next day till toward evening. In the afternoon 
‘Captain Landais came on board the Bon homme Richard, and 
behaved towards me with great disrespect, affirming in the 
most indelicate manner and language that I had lost my boats 
and people through my imprudence in sending boats to take 
a prize! He persisted in his reproaches, though he was as- 
sured by Messrs. de Weibert and de Chamillard that the barge 
was towing the ship at the time of elopement, and that she 
had not been in pursuit of the prize. He was affronted be- 
- cause I would not the day before suffer him to chase without 
my orders and to approach the dangerous shore I have already 
mentioned, where he was an entire stranger and when there 
was not sufficient wind to govern a ship. He told me he was 
the only American in the squadron, and was determined to 
follow his own opinion in chasing when and where he thought 
proper, and in every other matter that concerned the service, 
and that, if I continued in that situation three days longer, 
the squadron would be taken, &c. By the advice of Captain de 
Cottineau, and with the free consent and approbation of M. 
de Verage, I sent the Cerf in to reconnoitre the coast, and en- 

160 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

deavor to take the boats and people the next day, while the 
squadron stood off and on in the S.W. quarter, in the best 
possible situation to intercept the enemy’s merchant ships, 
whether outward or homeward bound. The Cerf had on board 
a pilot well acquainted with the coast, and was ordered to 
join me again before night. I approached the shore in the 
afternoon but the Cerf did not appear. This induced me 
to stand off again in the night in order to return and be 
rejoined by the Cerf the next day; but to my great con- 
cern and disappointment, though I ranged the coast along and 
hoisted our private signals, neither the boats nor the Cerf 
joined me. The evening of that day, the 26th, brought with it 
stormy weather, with an appearance of a severe gale from the 
S.W., yet I must declare I did not follow my own judgment, 
but was led by the assertion that had fallen from Captain 
Landais, when I in the evening made a signal to steer to the 
northward and leave that station, which I wished to have occu- 
pied a week longer. The gale increased in the night with thick 
weather. To prevent separation, I carried a top light, and 
fired a gun every quarter of an hour. I carried, also, a very 
moderate sail, and the course had been clearly pointed out by a 
signal before night; yet, with all this precaution, I found my- 
self accompanied only by the brigantine Vengence in the morn- 
ing, the Granville having remained astern with a prize. As I 
have since understood the tiller of the Pallas broke after mid- 
night, which disabled her from keeping up, but no apology 
has yet been made in behalf of the Alliance. 

On the 3lst we saw the Flamie Islands situated near the 
Lewis, on the N.W. coast of Scotland; and the next morning, 
off Cape Wrath, we gave chase to a ship to windward, at the 
same time two ships appearing in the N.W. quarter, which 
proved to be the Alliance and a prize ship which she had taken, 
bound, as I understood, from Liverpool to Jamaica. The ship 
which I chased brought to at noon. She proved to be the 
Union letter of marque, bound from London to Quebec, with 
a cargo of naval stores on account of government, adapted: 

THE BATTLE 161 

for the service of the British armed vessels on the lakes. The 
public despatches were lost, as the Alliance very imprudently 
hoisted American colors, though English colors were then 
flying on board the Bon homme Richard. Captain Landais 
sent a small boat to ask whether I would man the ship or he 
should, as in the latter case he would suffer no boat nor per- 
son from the Bon homme Richard to go near the prize. Ridic- 
ulous as this appeared to me, I yielded to it for the sake of 
peace, and received the prisoners on board the Bon homme 
Richard, while the prize was manned from the Alliance. In 
the afternoon another sail appeared, and I immediately made 
the signal for the Alliance to chase; but, instead of obeying, 
-he wore and laid the ship’s head the other way. The next 
morning I made signal to speak with the Alliance, to which no 
attention was shown. I then made sail with the ships in 
company for the second rendezvous, which was not far distant, 
and where I fully expected to be joined by the Pallas and the 
Cerf. 

The second of September we saw a sail at daybreak, and 
gave chase. That ship proved to be the Pallas, and had met 
with no success while separated from the Bon homme Richard. 

On the 3d the Vengence brought to a small Irish brigantine, 
bound homeward from Norway. The same evening I sent 
the Vengence in the N.E. quarter to bring up the two prize 
ships that appeared to me to be too near the islands of Shet- 
land. While with the Alliance and Pallas, I endeavored to 
weather Fair Isle, and to get into my second rendezvous, where 
I directed the Vengence to join me with the three prizes. The 
next morning, having weathered Fair Isle, and not seeing the 
Vengence nor the prizes, I spoke the Alliance, and ordered her 
to steer to the northward, and bring them up to the rendez- 
vous. 

On the morning of the 4th the Alliance appeared again, and 
had brought to two very small coasting sloops in ballast, but 
without having attended properly to my orders of yesterday. 
The Vengence joined me soon after, and informed me that in 

162 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

consequence of Captain Landais’ orders to the commanders of 
the two prize ships they had refused to follow him to the rendez- 
vous. I am to this moment ignorant of what orders these 
men received from Captain Landais, nor know I by virtue of 
what authority he ventured to give his orders to prizes in my 
presence and without either my knowledge or approbation. 
Captain Ricot further informed me that he had burnt the 
prize brigantine because that vessel proved leaky; and I was 
sorry to understand afterward that, though the vessel was 
Irish property, the cargo was property of the subjects of 
Norway. 

In the evening I sent for all the captains to come on board 
the Bon homme Richard to consult on future plans of opera- 
tion. Captains Cottineau and Ricot obeyed me, but Captain 
Landais obstinately refused, and, after sending me various 
uncivil messages, wrote me a very extraordinary letter in an- 
swer to a written order which I had sent him on finding that he 
had trifled with my verbal orders. The next day a pilot boat 
came on board from Shetland, by which means I received such 
advices as induced me to change a plan which I otherwise meant | 
to have pursued; and, as the Cerf did not appear at my sec- 
ond rendezvous, I determined to steer towards the third in 
hopes of meeting her there. 

In the afternoon a gale of wind came on, which continued 
four days without intermission. In the second night of that 
gale the Alliance, with her two little prizes, again separated 
from the Bon homme Richard. I had now with me only the 
Pallas and the Vengence, yet I did not abandon the hopes of 
performing some essential service. The winds continued con- 
trary, so that we did not see the land till the evening of the 
13th, when the hills of Cheviot in the S.E. of Scotland ap- 
peared. The next day we chased sundry vessels, and took a 
_ ship and a brigantine, both from the Firth of Edinburgh, 

laden with coal. Knowing that there lay at anchor in Leith 
road an armed ship of 20 guns, with two or three fine cutters, 
I formed an expedition against Leith, which I purposed to lay 

THE BATTLE 163 

under a large contribution, or otherwise to reduce it to ashes. 
Had I been alone, the wind being favorable, I would have 
proceeded directly up the Firth, and must have succeeded, as_ 
they lay there in a state of perfect indolence and security, 
which would have proved their ruin. Unfortunately for me, 
the Pallas and Vengence were both at a considerable distance 
in the offing, they having chased to the southward. This 
obliged us to steer out of the Firth again to meet them. The 
captains of the Pallas and Vengence being come on board the 
Bon homme Richard, I communicated to them my project, to 
which many difficulties and objections were made by them. At 
last, however, they appeared to think better of the design 
after I had assured them that I hoped to raise a contribution of 
200,000 pounds sterling on Leith, and that there was no bat- 
tery of cannon there to oppose our landing. So much time, 
however, was unavoidably spent in pointed remarks and sage 
deliberations that night that the wind became contrary in the 
morning. 

We continued working to windward up the Firth without 
being able to reach the road of Leith, till on the morning 
of the 17th, when being almost within cannon-shot of the 
town, having everything in readiness for a descent, a very 
severe gale of wind came on, and being directly contrary, 
obliged us to bear away, after having in vain endeavored for 
some time to withstand its violence. The gale was so severe 
that one of the prizes that had been taken on the 14th sunk 
to the bottom, the crew being with difficulty saved. As the 
alarm by this time had reached Leith by means of a cutter that 
had watched our motions that morning, and as the wind con- 
tinued contrary (though more moderate in the evening), I 
thought it impossible to pursue the enterprise with a good pros- 
pect of success, especially as Edinburgh, where there is al- 
ways a number of troops, is only a mile distant from Leith, 
therefore I gave up the project. 

On the 21st we saw and chased two sail off Flamborough 
Head, the Pallas in the N.E. quarter, while the Bon homme 

164 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

Richard followed by the Vengence in the S.W. The one I 
chased, a brigantine collier in ballast belonging to Scarbor- 
ough was soon taken, and sunk immediately afterward, as a 
fleet then appeared to the southward. It was so late in the 
day that I could not come up with the fleet before night. At 
length, however, I got so near one of them as to force her to 
run ashore between Flamborough Head and the Spurn. Soon 
after I took another, a brigantine from Holland, belonging to 
Sunderland; and at daylight the next morning, seeing a fleet 
steering toward me from the Spurn, I imagined them to be a 
convoy, bound from London for Leith, which had been for 
some time expected. One of them had a pendant hoisted, and 
appeared to be a ship of force. They had not, however, cour- 
age to come on, but kept back, all except the one which seemed 
to be armed, and that one also kept to windward very near the 
land and on the edge of dangerous shoals, where I could not 
with safety approach. This induced me to make a signal for 
a pilot, and soon afterward two pilot boats came off. They 
informed me that the ship that wore a pendant was an armed 
merchant ship, and that a king’s frigate lay there in sight 
at anchor within the Humber, waiting to take under convoy a 
number of merchant ships bound to the northward. The 
pilots imagined the Bon homme Richard to be an English ship 
of war, and consequently communicated to me the private 
signal which they had been required to make. I endeavored 
_ by this means to decoy the ships out of the port, but the wind 
then changing, and with the tide becoming unfavorable for 
them, the deception had not the desired effect, and they wisely 
put back. The entrance of the Humber is exceedingly diffi- 
cult and dangerous; and, as the Pallas was not in sight, I 
thought it not prudent to remain off the entrance. I therefore 
steered out again to join the Pallas off Flamborough Head. In 
the night we saw and chased two ships until 3 o’clock in the 
morning, when, being at a very small distance from them, I 
made the private signal of recognizance which I had given to 
each captain before I sailed from Groaix; one-half of the 

THE BATTLE 165 

answer only was returned. In this position both sides lay to 
till daylight, when the ships proved to be the Alliance and the 
Pallas. 

_ On the morning of that day, the 23d, the brig from Hol- 
land not being in sight, we chased a brigantine that appeared 
laying to to windward. About noon we saw and chased a large 
ship that appeared coming around Flamborough Head from 
the northward, and at the same time I manned and armed one 
of the pilot boats to sail in pursuit of the brigantine, which 
now appeared to be the vessel that I had forced ashore. Soon 
after this a fleet of 41 sail appeared off Flamborough Head, 
bearing N.N.E. This induced me to abandon the single 
ship which had then been anchored in Burlington Bay. I 
also called back the pilot boat, and hoisted a signal for a 
general chase. When the fleet discovered us bearing down, all 
the merchant ships crowded sail toward the shore. The two 
ships of war that protected the fleet at the same time steered 
from the land, and made the disposition for the battle. In 
approaching the enemy, I crowded every possible sail, and 
made the signal for the line of battle, to which the Alliance 
showed no attention. Earnest as I was for the action, I could 
not reach the commodore’s ship until seven in the evening. 
Being then within pistol shot, when he hailed the Bon homme 
Richard, we answered him by firing a whole broadside. 

The battle, being thus begun, was continued with unre- 
mitting fury. Every method was practised on both sides to 
gain an advantage and rake each other; and I must confess 
that the enemy’s ship, being much more manageable than the 
Bon homme Richard, gained thereby several times an advan- 
tageous situation, in spite of my best efforts to prevent it. As 
I had to deal with an enemy of greatly superior force, I was 
under the necessity of closing with him, to prevent the advan- 
tage which he had over me in point of mancuvre. It was my 
intention to lay the Bon homme Richard athwart the enemy’s 
bow, but, as that operation required great dexterity in man- 
agement of both sail and helm, and some of our braces being 

166 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

shot away, it did not exactly succeed to my wishes. ‘The 
enemy’s bowsprit, however, came over the Bon homme Richard’s 
poop by the mizzen mast, and I made both ships fast together 
in that situation which by the action of the wind on the 
enemy’s sails forced her stern close to the Bon homme Richard’s 
bow, so that the ships lay square alongside of each other, the 
yards being all entangled, and the cannon of each ship touch- ~ 
ing the opponent’s side. When this position took place, it was 
8 o’clock, previous to which the Bon homme Richard had _re- 
ceived sundry eighteen-pound shots below the water, and leaked 
very much. My battery of 12-pounders, on which I had placed 
my chief dependence, being commanded by Lieut. Dale and 
Col. Weibert, and manned principally with American seamen 
and French volunteers, were entirely silenced and abandoned. 
As to the six old eighteen-pounders that formed the battery of 
the lower gun-deck, they did no service whatever. Two out of 
three of them burst at the first fire, and killed almost all the 
men who were stationed to manage them. Before this time, 
too, Col. de Chamillard who commanded a party of 20 soldiers 
on the poop, had abandoned that station after having lost 
some of his men. ‘These men deserted their quarters. I had 
now only two pieces of cannon, nine-pounders, on the quarter 
deck, that were not silenced; and not one of the heavier cannon 
was fired during the rest of the action. The purser, Mr. 
Mease, who commanded the guns on the quarter deck, being 
dangerously wounded in the head, I was obliged to fill his 
place, and with great difficulty rallied a few men, and shifted 
over one of the quarterdeck guns, so that we afterward played 
three pieces of 9-pounders upon the enemy. The tops alone 
seconded the fire of this little battery, and held out bravely 
during the whole of the action, especially the main top, where 
Lieut. Stack commanded. I directed the fire of one of the — 
three cannon against the main-mast, with double-headed shot, 
while the other two were exceedingly well served with grape 
and canister shot to silence the enemy’s musketry, and clear her 
decks, which was at last effected. The enemy were, as I have 

THE BATTLE 167 

since understood, on the instant of calling for quarters when 
the cowardice or treachery of three of my under officers in- 
duced them to call to the enemy. The English commodore 
asked me if I demanded quarters; and, I having answered him 
in the most determined negative, they renewed the battle with 
double fury. They were unable to stand the deck; but the 
fire of their cannon, especially the lower battery, which was 
entirely formed of 18-pounders, was incessant. Both ships 
were set on fire in various places, and the scene was dreadful 
beyond the reach of language. To account for the timidity of 
my three under officers,—I mean the gunner, the carpenter, 
and the master-at-arms,—I must observe that the two first 
were slightly wounded; and, as the ship had received various 
shots under water and one of the pumps being shot away, the 
carpenter expressed his fear that she would sink, and the other 
two concluded that she was sinking, which occasioned the 
gunner to run aft on the poop without my knowledge to strike 
the colors. Fortunately for me, a cannon ball had done that 
before by carrying away the ensign staff. He was therefore 
reduced to the necessity of sinking as he supposed, or of call- 
ing for quarter; and he preferred the latter. 

All this time the Bon homme Richard had sustained the 
action alone, and the enemy, though much superior in force, 
would have been very glad to have got clear, as appears by 
their own acknowledgments, and by their having let go an 
anchor the instant that I laid them on board, by which means 
they would have escaped, had I not made them well fast to the | 
Bon homme Richard. 

At last, at half-past nine o’clock, the Alliance appeared, 
and I now thought the battle at an end; but, to my utter 
astonishment, he discharged a broadside full into the stern 
of the Bon homme Richard. We called to him for God’s sake 
to forbear firing into the Bon homme Richard; yet he passed 
along the off side of the ship and continued firing. There 
was no possibility of his mistaking the enemy’s ship for the 
_ Bon homme Richard, there being the most essential difference 

168 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

in their appearance and construction; besides, it was then 
full moonlight, and the sides of the Bon homme Richard were 
all black, while the sides of the prizes were yellow; yet, for the 
greater security, I showed the signal of our reconnoissance 
by putting out three lanthorns, one at the head (bow), another 
at the stern (quarter), and the third in the middle in a horizon- 
tal line. Every tongue cried that he was firing into the wrong 
ship, but nothing availed. He passed round, firing into the 
Bon homme Richard’s head, stern, and broadside; and by one 
of his volleys killed several of my best men, and mortally 
wounded a good officer on the forecastle. My situation was 
really deplorable. The Bon homme Richard received various 
shot under the water from the Alliance, the leak gained on the 
pumps, and the fire increased much on both ships. Some of- 
ficers persuaded me to strike, of whose courage and good sense 
I have high opinion. My treacherous master-at-arms let loose 
all my prisoners without my knowledge and my prospect be- 
came gloomy indeed. I would not, however, give up the point. 
The enemy’s main-mast began to shake, their firing decreased, 
ours rather increased, and the British colors were struck at 
half an hour past 10 o’clock. 

This prize proved to be the British ship of war the Serapis, 
a new ship of 44 guns, built on their most approved construc- 
tion, with two complete batteries, one of them of 18-pounders, 
and commanded by the brave Commodore Richard Pearson. I 
had yet two enemies to encounter far more formidable than the 
Britons,—I mean fire and water. The Serapis was attacked 
only by the first, but the Bon homme Richard was assailed by 
both. There were five feet of water in the hold, and though it 
was moderated from the explosion of so much gunpowder, yet 
the three pumps that remained could with difficulty only keep 
the water from gaining. The fire broke out in various parts 
of the ship, in spite of all the water that could be thrown to 
quench it, and at length broke out as low as the powder maga- 
zine, and within a few inches of the powder. In that dilemma 
I took out the powder upon deck, ready to be thrown over- 

THE BATTLE 169 

board at the last extremity; and it was ten o’clock the next 
day, the 24th, before the fire was entirely extinguished. With 
respect to the situation of the Bon homme Richard, the rudder 
was cut entirely off the stern frame, and the transoms were 
almost entirely cut away; the timbers, by the lower deck 
especially, from the main-mast to the stern, being greatly de- 
cayed with age, were mangled beyond my power of description ; 
and a person must have been an eye-witness to form a just idea 
of the tremendous scene of carnage, wreck, and ruin that 
everywhere appeared. Humanity cannot but recoil from the 
prospect of such finished horror, and lament that war should 
produce such fatal consequences. 

After the carpenters, as well as Capt. de Cottineau, and 
other men of sense, had well examined and surveyed the ship 
(which was not finished before five in the evening), I found 
every person to be convinced that it was impossible to keep the 
Bon homme Richard afloat so as to reach a port if the wind 
should increase; it being then only a moderate breeze. I had 
but little time to remove my wounded, which now became un- 
avoidable, and which was effected in the course of the night 
and the next morning. I was determined to keep the Bon 
homme Richard afloat, and, if possible, to bring her into port. 
For that purpose the first lieutenant of the Pallas continued 
on board with a party of men to attend the pumps, with boats 
In waiting ready to take them on board in case the water 
should gain on them too fast. The wind augmented in the 
night and the next day, on the 25th, so that it was impossible 
to prevent the good old ship from sinking. They did not 
abandon her till after 9 o’clock. The water was then up to 
the lower deck, and a little after ten I saw with inexpressible 
grief the last glimpse of the Bon homme Richard. No lives 
were lost with the ship, but it was impossible to save the stores 
of any sort whatsoever. I lost even the best part of my clothes, 
books, and papers; and several of my officers lost all their 
clothes and effects, 

170 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

Having thus endeavored to give a clear and simple rela- 
tion of the circumstances and the events that have attended the 
little armament under my command, I shall freely submit my 
conduct therein to the censure of my superiors and the im- 
partial public. I beg leave however, to observe that the force 
that was put under my command was far from being well 
composed; and, as the great majority of the actors in it have 
appeared bent on the pursuit of interest only, I am exceed- 
inly sorry that they and I have been at all concerned. I am 
in the highest degree sensible of the singular attentions which 
I have experienced from the Court of France, which I shall 
remember with perfect gratitude until the end of my life, and 
will always endeavor to merit while I can, consistent with my 
honor, continue in the public service. I must speak plainly. 
As I have been always honored with the full confidence of Con- 
gress, and as I also flattered myself with enjoying in some 
measure the confidence of the Court of France, I could not but 
be astonished at the conduct of M. de Chaumont, when, in the 
moment of my departure from Groaix, he produced a paper, a 
concordat, for me to sign in common with the officers whom I 
had commissioned but a few days before. Had that paper, or 
even a less dishonorable one, been proposed to me at the be- 
ginning, I would have rejected it with just contempt, and 
the word deplacement among others should have been neces- 
sary. I cannot, however, even now suppose that he was 
authorized by the court to make such a bargain with me, nor 
can I suppose that the minister of the marine meant that M. 
de Chaumont should consider me merely as a colleague with 
the commanders of the other ships, and communicate to them 
not only all he knew, but all he thought, respecting our destina- 
tion and operations. M. de Chaumont has made me various 
reproaches on account of the expense of the Bon homme 
Richard, wherewith I cannot think I have been justly charge- 
able. M. de Chamillard can attest that the Bon homme 
Richard was at last far from being well fitted or armed for 
war. If any person or persons who have been charged with 

THE BATTLE 171 

the expense of that armament have acted wrong, the fault must 
not be laid to my charge. 

I had no authority to superintend that armament, and the 
persons who had authority were so far from giving me what I 
thought necessary that M. de Chaumont even refused among 
other things, to allow me irons for securing the prisoners of 
war. 

In short, while my life remains, if I have any capacity to 
render good and acceptable services to the common cause, no 
man will step forth with greater cheerfulness and alacrity than 
myself; but I am not to be dishonored, nor can I accept of the 
half confidence of any man living. Of course, I cannot, con- 
sistent with my honor and a prospect of success, undertake 
future expeditions, unless when the object and destination is 
communicated to me alone, and to no other person in the 
marine line. In cases where troops are embarked, a like con- 
fidence is due alone to their commander-in-chief. Qn no other 
condition will I ever undertake the chief command of a private 
expedition; and, when I do not command in chief, I have no 
desire to be in the secret. 

Captain Cottineau engaged the Countess of Scarborough, 
and took her after an hour’s action, while the Bon homme 
Richard engaged the Serapis. The Countess of Scarborough 
is an armed ship of 20 six-pounders, and was commanded by 
a king’s officer. In the action the Countess of Scarborough 
and the Serapis were at a considerable distance asunder; and 
the Alliance, as I am informed, fired into the Pallas, and killed 
some men. If it should be asked why the convoy was suffered 
to escape, I must answer that I was myself in no condition to 
pursue, and that none of the rest showed any inclination, not 
even M. Ricot, who had held off at a distance to windward 
during the whole action, and withheld by force the pilotboat 
with my lieutenant and 15 men. The Alliance, too, was in a 
state to pursue the fleet, not having had a single man wounded 
or a single shot fired at her from the Serapis, and only three 
that did execution from the Countess of Scarborough, at such 

172 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

a distance that one stuck in the side, and the other two just 
touched and then dropped into the water. The Alliance killed 
one man only on board the Serapis. As Captain de Cottineau 
charged himself with manning and securing the prisoners of 
the Countess of Scarborough, I think the escape of the Baltic 
fleet cannot so well be charged to his account. 

I should have mentioned that the main-mast and the mizzen- 
top-mast of the Serapis fell overboard soon after the captain 
had come on board the Bon homme Richard. 

Upon the whole, the captain of the Alliance has behaved 
so very ill in every respect that I must complain loudly of his 
conduct. He pretends that he is authorized to act independ- 
ent of my command. I have been taught to the contrary; 
but, supposing it to be so, his conduct has been base and un- 
pardonable. M. de Chamillard will explain the particulars. 
Either Captain Landais or myself is highly criminal and one 
or the other must be punished. I forbear to take any steps 
with him until I have the advice and approbation of your ex- 
cellency. I have been advised by all the officers of the squad- 
ron to put M. Landais under arrest; but, as I have postponed 
it so long, I will bear with him a little longer until the return 
of my express. 

We this day anchored here, having since the action been 
tossed to and fro by contrary winds. I wished to have gained 
the road of Dunkirk on account of our prisoners, but was 
overruled by the majority of my colleagues. I shall hasten 
up to Amsterdam; and there, if I meet with no orders for my 
government, I will take the advice of the French ambassador. 
It is my present intention to have the Countess of Scarborough 
ready to transport the prisoners from hence to Dunkirk, un- 
less it should be found more expedient to deliver them to the 
English ambassador, taking his obligation to send to Dunkirk, 
&c., immediately an equal number of American prisoners. I 
am under strong apprehensions that our object here will fail, 
and that through the imprudence of M. de Chaumont, who has 
communicated everything he knew or thought on the matter 

THE BATTLE 173 

to persons who cannot help talking of it at a full table. This 
is the way he keeps state secrets, though he never mentioned 
the affair to me. 

I am ever, &c., 

John P. Jones. 

JACATAQUA 
ERROR enlarges the object, as does joy. “The whole 

forest seemed to open,”’ says the hunter of his first tiger, 

“T don’t know what its exact size may have been; but, to 
me, it seemed thirty feet high.” So, by emotional grandeur, 
were the heroes of antiquity conceived; and so, to the joyful 
eye of the lover seems the object of his delight, bringing such 
wonder and awe, that each motion—each look—is exagger- 
ated, filled with power and significance, intensified to a degree 
that puts colder measurements aside. From this, the lore of 
romance has grown. In America, the legend of a horror 
before the war-whoops of the Indians gives some inkling of 
a great dread the colonists experienced—but there is rarely 
a countering legend of joy. 

We believe that life in America is compact of violence and 
"he shock of immediacy. This is not so. Were it so, there 
would be a corresponding beauty of the spirit—to bear it 
witness; a great flowering, simple and ungovernable as the 
configuration of a rose—that should stand with the gifts of 
the spirit of other times and other nations as a standard to 
humanity. There is none. . 

“The United States, without self-seeking, has given more 
of material help to Europe and to the world in the last ten 
years in time of need, than have all other nations of the world 
put together in the entire history of mankind. It has stamped 
out yellow fever from the coasts of South America, etc.” 

It is our need that is crying out, that and our immense 
wealth, the product of fear,—a torment to the spirit; we sell— 
but carefully—to seek blessings abroad. And this wealth, all 
that is not pure accident—is the growth of fear. 

Ii is this which makes us the flaming terror of the world, 

“174 

OS 

JACATAQUA 175 

a Titan, stupid (as were all the giants), great, to be tricked 
or tripped (from terror of us) with hatred barking at us by 
every sea—and by those most to whom we give the most. In 
the midst of wealth, riches, we have the inevitable Coolidge 
platform: “poorstateish”—meek. T'uts is his cure before the 
world: our goodness and industry. Tus will convince the 
world that we are ricut. It will not. Make a small mouth. 
It is the acme of shrewdness, of policy. It will work. We 
shall have more to give. Logical reasoning it is: generous to 
save and give. It is bred of fear. It is as impossible for a 
rich nation to convince any one of its generosity as for a camel 
to pass through the eye of a needle.’ Puritanical; pioneer; 
“out of the small white farm-house”—the product of delay. 
The characteristic of American life is that it holds off from 
embraces, from impacts, gaining, by fear, safety and time in 
which to fortify its prolific carcass—while the spirit, with 
tongue hanging out, bites at its bars—its object just out of 
reach. Wilson grazed heaven by his lewdness; the door stood 
open till it was slammed close. I relish the back door gossip 
that made him impossible. 

Delay, all through youth, halt and cessation, not of effort, 
but of touch, all through life as it is learned: no end save 
accumulation, always upon the way to BiccER opportunity; 
we keep realization from the mind with a purpose till men are 
trained never to possess fully but just to SEE. This makes 
scientists and it makes the masochist. Keep it cold and small 
and under the cold lens. It is bastardization as of astronomy 
that has no counterpart with us in the aspirations or the con- 
ceits of the flesh; a passion equal to the straining of a tele- 
scope. Digressions—The American character is acquisitive, 
but mediate, like the Morgan interests, Mr. Franklin at the 
helm, the International Mercantile Marine that owns, as mort- 
gager, the White Star, the Red Star, the Atlantic Transport 
lines, ete. American lines but English ships. We own them. 
But who nas them? A more practical race used to holding 
India. Crude as iron. 

176 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

What would be better to-night than a long hour of music, 
at ease and away from disturbance, a friend or two of the 
same humor with a little talk now and again when the musi- 
cian, since it should be a woman, rested,—the pause before 
the sexual act, that interruption from desire that piles up a 
weight of energy behind it like stones do a river. The im- 
possibility to attain is the source of all good in the world, the 
real reason for the Puritan. No, not all good, though so it 
seems to Americans. There is a kind of piling of experience 
upon experience that is not bound to satiety, but to wisdom, 
the highest knowledge of all, to Buddha, if one,like, to release, 
to relief, to the dangerous ground of pleasure: Jenseits des lust 
princip, Freud sees it, beyond the charmed circle. It is no 
matter, since it is unknown in the province I am discussing. 
Here, through terror, there is no direct touch; all is cold, little 
and discreet:—save just under the hide. 

There are no American servitors. An American will not 
serve another man. This is a fear. Nothing is so delightful 
as to serve another. Instead of that, we have “service,” the 
thing that Rabindranath Tagore so admired, telling us we did 
not know we had it: Sending supplies to relieve the cyclone 
sufferers in Indiana. It is a passion. But to serve another, 
with a harder personal devotion is foreign to us: a trick for 
foreigners, a servant’s trick. We are afraid that we couldn’t 
do it and retain our self-esteem. We couldn’t. Thus we see 
of what our self-esteem is made. 

“Don’t let’s have any poor,” is our slogan. And we do 
not notice that the chief reason for this is that it offends us to 
believe that there are the essentially poor who are far richer 
than are we who give. The poor are ostracized. Cults are 
built to abolish them, as if they were cockroaches, and not 
human beings who may not want what we have in such abun- 
dance. THat would be an offense an American could not 
stomach. So down with them. Let everybody be rich and so 
ErquaL. What a farce! But what a tragedy! It rests upon 
false values and fear to discover them. Do not serve another 

JACATAQUA 1v7 

for you might have to roucn him and he might be a Jew or 
a NiccER. 

Do you realize the fascination the story of the white 
woman who had twin nigger babies has for us? They accused 
the woman of having had intercourse with the apartment’s 
colored elevator boy. Her husband abandoned her at once, 
of course,—charming man. But you know Mendel’s law; they 
discovered there had been a darky in his family six generations 
before! There’s the dénouement for every good American. 
Be careful whom you marry! Be careful for you can NEVER 
know. Watch, wait, study. 

Deanimated, that’s the word; something the sound of “met- 
ronome,” a mechanical means; Yankee inventions. Machines 
were not so much to save time as to save dignity that fears the 
animate touch. It is miraculous the energy that goes into 
inventions here. Do you know that it now takes just ten min- 
utes to put a bushel of wheat on the market from planting 
to selling, whereas it took three hours in our colonial days? 
That’s striking. It must have been a tremendous force that 
would do that. That force is fear that robs the emotions; a 
mechanism to increase the gap between touch and thing, not 
to have a contact. 

America adores violence, yes. It thrills at big fires and 
explosions. This approaches magnificence! The finest fire- 
fighters in the world. We live not by having less fires but 
more, by the excitement of seeing torturing things done well, 
with light ease even. But we have violence for service, mark 
it. Battleships for peace. The force of enterprise for bring- 
ing bananas to the breakfast table. Massive mining opera- 
tions to transport us—whither? Bathrooms, kitchens, hos- 
pitals with a maximum of physical convenience and a minimum 
of waste to spare us—for what? We never ask. It is all a 
bar to more intimate shocks. Everything is for “generosity” 
and “honor.” It has to be for us to get away with it. There- 
fore, we cannot acknowledge, really, downright, thievery in our 

178 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

friends. We can’t get to it. Did we do so, we should know 
many things most disturbing to our peace of mind. 

Atlanta, Georgia, is far worse than Paris for girls on the 
streets soliciting, but there is no good in it,—I don’t suppose 
there has ever been an American woman like Kiki or that 
delightful Baroness who paraded Fifth Avenue one day with 
a coal-scuttle for a chapeau. Naturally they arrested her. 
Naturally. She would have been arrested in any city, but 
not, I imagine, with quite such a sense of duty as in America. 
To permit such a thing would cast a very awkward light on 
us all. 

The impact of the bare soul upon the very twist of the 
fact which is our world about us, is un-American. T'hat we 
shun and rush off to the laboratory, the wheatfield (hiding 
our indecent passion in meddling, playing) in a spirit of serv- 
ice—our chemistry is all that—salt away the profits, and boast 
of our saving, stabilizing Constitution in dread, as of a glass 
heart, fiercely aligning ourselves in its defense as if it were 
something else than a mechanical shift. 

Men weaving women, women spouting men—colleges and 
streets torturing and annealing the machinery to cure cancer 
and kill mosquitoes, to carry fish in proper cars and fruit in 
others, to kill the Aides Egyptus in the domestic water supply 
of Quito by the use of minnows in the house tanks—Our life 
is tortuous and grotesque, huge fetishes by which we are 
ruled in utter darkness—or we fly abroad for sensation: Any- 
thing to escape—we fear simplicity as the plague. Nurver 
to allow touch. What are we but poor doomed carcasses, any 
one of us? Why then all this fury, this multiplicity we push 
between ourselves and our desires? Twisting and bending; 
that nervous habit of wanting to be thought pleasant—tor- 
tuous and grotesque. 

It is the women above all—there never have been women, 
save pioneer Katies; not one in flower save some moonflower 
Poe may have seen, or an unripe child. Poets? Where? 
They are the test. But a true woman in flower, never. Emily 

JACATAQUA 179 

Dickinson, DIRS of passion in her father’s garden, is the 
very nearest we have ever been—starving. 

Never a woman: never a poet. That’s an axiom. Never 

a poet saw sun here. 
_ Oh, men have had women, millions of them, of course: 
good, firm Janes. But one that spouted any comprehensive 
joy? Never. Dolly Madison was a bright doll. At best 
they want to be men, sit and be a pal. It’s all right. How 
could they do anything else with the men brutally beaten by 
the life— 

Do you know that the old town-records in Massachusetts 
show few men without two and many with as many as seven 
wives? Not at all uncommon to have had five. How? The first 
ones died shooting children against the wilderness like cannon 
balls. There’s a reason for traditional cleverness! And we 
talk about the wilderness with affection. We are blind asses, 
with our whole history unread before us and helpless if we 
read it. Nothing noticed. Nothing taught in the academies. 
You’d think that rHat would force us into some immediacy. 
Never. We write books deploring the post-war hilarity of our 
present-day girls. Mr. Hungerford assures me the girls are 
no different now than they were before the Rebellion. But 
shh! Ben Franklin, who started black with an illegitimate 
son, was forced to turn white, poor Richard, to save himself 
later. He saw the hell and warned us, warned us to save our 
pennies. So, too, spendthrift Cleveland who became economist. 

Our life drives us apart and forces us upon science and 
invention—away from touch. Or if we do touch, our breed 
knows no better than the coarse fiber of football. Though 
Bill Bird says that American men are the greatest business 
men in the world: the only ones who understand the passion 
of making money: absorbed, enthralled in it. It’s a game. 
To me, it is because we fear to wake up that we play so well. 
Imagine stopping money making. Our whole conception of 
reality would have to be altered. But to keep a just balance 
between business and another object, is to spoil the intoxica- 

180 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

tion, the illusion, the unity even. It’s very hard on the poet 
who must be something or other in order to live. To live 
against that stream, Emily Dickinson, about the only woman 
one can respect for her clarity, lived in her father’s back yard. 

Our breed knows no better than the coarse fibre of football, 
the despair we have for touching, the cheek, the breast—drives 
us to scream in beaten frenzy at the great spectacle of violence 
—or to applaud coldness and skill. 

Who is open to injuries? Not Americans. Get hurt; 
you're a fool. The only hero is he who is not hurt. We have 
no feeling for the tragic. Let the sucker who fails get his. 
What’s tragic in that? That’s funny! To hell with him. 
He didn’t make good, that’s all. 

It’s a kind of celluloid of gayety (I am speaking of the 
theaters), a numbing coat that cuts us off from touch. Did 
you see the expression on Coolidge’s face when Al Jolson did 
his stuff before him on the White House lawn? embarrassment, 
shame, fear to seem not to be amused, desire to get away— 
very bad taste on everybody’s part. But it was really funny 
to see. That jazz dose and the Puritan: something akin: both 
removed from simplicity, really, and touch: each his own way, 
that shaky shimmy and the—shame. 

What is the result? The result is the thing that results, 
of course. 

Anyhow, it’s curious to pick up results, you'll find tail 
ends of New England families—all burnt out; charming 
people: an old man marries a girl: male sons aplenty who 
sew and wash and make pies; embroider, select their mother’s 
hats and dress fabrics—and paint pictures: long skinny men 
with emotional wits who have smelt losses. A bastard aris- 
tocracy. Men who, when their friends disappoint them, grow 
nervous and cry all night. It is because there are no women. 
These men are more out of place in pushing young Aer 
than a Chinaman—or a Tibetan. 

Women—givers (but they have been, as reservoirs, empty) 
perhaps they are being filled now, Hard to deal with in busi- 

JACATAQUA 181 

ness, more conservative, closer to earth—the only earth. They 
are our cattle, cattle of the spirit—not yet come in. None 
yet has raised benevolence to distinction. Not one to “wield 
her beauty as a scepter.” It is a brilliant opportunity.—But 
the esthetic shown by American artists (the test of the 
women) is discouraging: the New England eunuchs,—“no 
more sex than a tapeworm”—faint echoes of England, per- 
haps of France, of Rousseau, as Valéry Larbaud insists,— 
Rider: no detail in his foregrounds just remote lusts, fiery 
but “gone,”—Poe: moonlight. It is the annunciation of the 
spiritual barrenness of the American woman. 

Violence—the newspapers are full of murder, but it is for 
the papers: that’s not immediacy but rear. It is the hysteria 
of cheated folk, similar to the outbreaks of murder and suicide 
in the Germanic countries after the war—The old man that 
murdered the woman with a Polish name in Perth Amboy. 
It is so clear: A man without a woman finds one. She imme- 
diately starts to torture him. It’s all they can do. “Take 
it out of the son of a bitch”—he’s put himself in a compro- 
mising position and deserves to be castrated. Every force is 
piled against him. So he murders her. But is rat a deed 
of passion? Surely not. Or the motion picture murders. It’s 
the shriek of starvation. As Charlot said after his first abor- 
tive attempt to get a wife: “Such is life in the Great West,” 
that land of wealth and promise. As Roosevelt said of Roose- 
velt after this last gubernatorial campaign in New York: 
“He’s a promising young man.” Yes, it’s a promising coun- 
try. It’s what the French say of our women in Paris: prom- 
ising young women. 

Dr. Gaskins sensed it cynically: The ideal woman should 
end at the eyebrows and have the rest filled in with hair. It 
is the practical answer to the immediate American need. Prag- 
matism. It’s inevitable that men shall go down the scale until 
they strike what they want—or can get. There was the young 
medical fellow, a New Englander, in the State Asylum at 
Worcester, a periodic maniac; his history fascinated me. He 

182 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

is a clever physician, and a man of excellent antecedents. 
Shortly after college (and a medical education takes so long 
that a man is in his late twenties before he can afford to 
marry) he married a woman far below his class,—he had to 
to get her. Shortly realizing his fatal error, he promptly, 
being a sensitive man, went insane,—and was as promptly di- 
vorced and committed to the asylum by his wife, proving the 
soundness of his mind—fundamentally. He has married three 
times since and has always gone mad: a little like Strindberg. 
But the reasoning here is truly American. Trained a Puritan, 

he was bursting for lack of sexual satisfaction. Unwilling - 

to commit the sin of fornication and being unable to get a 
wife of his own class, due to poverty, or what not—he mar- 
ried someone below his scale of esthetic or emotional relief. 
Thus the greater was sacrificed to the lesser. Now he was 
overcome with anguish. His life was ruined. He bitterly 
assailed himself for his folly and lost all control. In the hos- 
pital, he worked well in the laboratory—but he was truly 
insane. 'There is no class to absorb this stress. 

There is a story told of George Moore the last time he 
was in New York. Meeting at a tea some well shaped Ameri- 
can woman, who was apparently intent upon showing herself 
to the world (though the poor thing probably didn’t mean 
it), Moore asked her to go upstairs and undress for him that 
he might see her naked. She indignantly refused of course. 

But I like his gesture. Naturally she didn’t nave to do as he | 

wanted her to; yet he nailed her. And he nailed us. I think 
he was sufficiently distinguished for her to have satisfied him. 

Or, if a girl is—(not generous, bah!) but discerning with 
her whole body—that’s it, a woman must see with her whole 
body to be benevolent.—If in the eighth grade she begins to 
discern the depth of her necessity—she is made to feel that 
there is something wrong about her, not reckless but finde 
mentally wrong. In contradistinction, a woman from Adri- 
anople might be taught not that it is wrong to give herself but 
that murder will follow it, or that it is a dangerous gift to be 

ee 

JACATAQUA : 183 

given rarely, but a GIFT. So she is shut up, like a French girl 
of better family, say; as we do wheat or a case of fine fruit. 
But the American girl who can run free must be protected 
in some other way so she is frightened—if possible. She is a 
low thing (they tell her), she is made to feel that she is vi- 
cious, evil—It really doesn’t do anything save alter the color 
of her deed, make it unprofitable, it scrapes off the bloom of 
the gift—it is puritanical envy. When she gives, it will be 
probably to the butcher boy—since she has been an apt pupil 
and believes that she is evil, believes even that her pleasure is 
evil. | 

It’s the central lie! but she is sure of it and gives her vir- 
ginity to the butcher boy instead of having at least a decent 
romance. As Ken. says: we get (that is, presuming we are 
poets) the daughters of the butcher. In the boarding school 
at Burlington, my friend, a teacher, was on the alert. The 
tension was horrible in this fashionable school. Several of the 
women were watching at points of vantage—with what feel- 
ings in their own hearts it would be easy to say. Soon a soft 
whistle, then the window opened and the conventional knotted 
sheet ladder dropped out. There was a buggy down the road. 
Just as the second of the two girls reached the ground, they 
were both seized. In a wild scramble the young fellows es- 
caped. Yes, the butcher boy and his pal. Of course, these 
things cannot be permitted. 

Our girls have excellent physiques, really superb. I have 
often watched, as who has not—for they are coming out— 
some bather in the little stuff they wear to-day with acid 
passion. And there you are. They are fit only to be seen in 
shows, or, in the train of a launch, on aquaplanes, six at a 
time, the swift motion only serving to give the authentic sense 
of slipperiness, pseudo-naiads without the necessary wildness 
and the chill—fit only to be seen by the box, like Oregon 
apples, bright and round but tasteless—wineless, wholesale. 

Why one of the hottest women that I know, lascivious in 
what might have been the sense in which I speak of it, but too 

184 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

timid, unable to stem the great American tide inimical to 
women, spent almost the whole war period in Washington. 
She was a yeomanette but employed her spare time spying on 
middle-aged men, Majors with wives in Omaha, who were giv- 
ing the nights to their stenographers—as it was done during 
the war. This girl’s passion was horrible to behold. It 
turned slightly later, though she didn’t perhaps perceive it, 
to other women. She wrote to me from time to time of her 
experiences. I liked her and enjoyed her letters. In one let- 
ter, among other things, she said that no one could imagine 
what it meant to a girl to lose her virginity. But yes, I could 
imagine it, better than she. It means everything in America. 
Well, of course, it has meant more than it does today but I 
am tracing the tendency. It means that she gets such a vio- 
lent jolt from her past teaching and such a sense of the hatred 
of the world (as she conceives it must be) against her that 
she is ready to commit suicide. Or “go to the dogs.” That 
it might be the opening of wonders, of freedom to “save the 
nation,” that it might at least be an opportunity for practical 
use to the half of humanity that needs just that, never occurs 
to her. She is crushed. Or one imagines she is. As a matter 
of fact, Wally Gould tells of the two Lewiston girls who were 
coming home by moonlight from a rendezvous in the woods 
with two boy friends; one was crying, but the other sighed, 
and said, “Well, that’s over with”—and next day when the 

old fool of a neighbor was sending a box of candy to the widow, — 

she dumped the sweets out and filled the box with horse 
manure. 

Intelligent, our girls are, their minds are whip-like, if 

they don’t rot, as did Martha’s, she who beat the record of all 
years at Cornell; was secretary to Altman; was graduated as a 
trained nurse and, what a volcano of energy !—taught Greek 
in a school till she went mad at the slowness of the pupils— 
and married that marvelous little lame Irishman, Darby—who 
has the moods of a rose. What a woman! spending her life now 
as seryitor to women in the Insane Hospital on Ward’s Island 

—— _ 

JACATAQUA 185 
—after being an inmate for years there herself—and recover- 
ing. What an energy wasted there! No place for it in the 
world save among the insane. Especially no place for it in the 
United States. 

Whip-like intelligences, lost after a few years. Perverse, 
they “deraille,” as Brancusi says, too easily. To them, Paris 
is bizarre, a “place to spill the nerves,” a bewildering surprise. 
They cannot carry a weight, as French women do their men; 
under the release of Paris, they are just useless, often coarse, 
lewd, drunk. What’s that but unsatisfying. I salute them, 
because only for American women, have I any deep fellow 
feeling, or at least they are the only ones that seem to me 
satisfying. Great experimenters with the emotions, “Paris” 
appears in so many literatures and there are so many appear- 
ances that are “‘Paris,” heaven knows whom they are influenc- 
ing. I wish they could live at home. Imagine fleeing from 
the world to a woman—and leaving her—strengthened, forti- 
fied, above all free to GO! That costs money here! Of course 
men should spend money upon women, especially American 
men. 

Of course, our history has been short and comparatively 
obscure, for the most part. There must be character in out- 
of-the-way places, naturally, but none has raised the point 
of which I speak, to distinction. They existed, we know, de- 
graded and demeaned in the pioneer camps, as in Maine— 
discredited save in a few bad narrative verses and short stories 
—oh, any number of stories: drunk and waking up ina whore’s 
bed, etc. Many men tell of that primitive kindness and savoir 
faire in the frontier camps, the purse returned with money 
intact. To that understanding one must bow. But there has 
been no genius in a woman, to see a man’s talent and coax it 
up, as did Miss Li, let us say, in the Chinese legend. Never a 
character to raise into story. 

The incidents of our lives are too completely surrounded 
by delays—the violence of our athletic games is mostly a de- 
lay. Of course, it is fortunate that we are so active and fear- 

186 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

less. The youth must be “taken up” somehow. It is taken 
up completely in a great many cases, though. A good many 
college athletes are “burnt out” in their three years of com- 
petition; it is too much. They frequently find it impossible 
to breed, if that were all. 

Poets, through their energy, receive such a stamp of the 
age upon their work, that they are marked, in fact, even in 
the necessities of their defeat, as having lived well in their 
time. Poets are defeated but in an essential and total defeat 
at any time, that time is stamped in character upon their work, 
they give shape to the formless age as by a curious die,—and 
so other times recognize them, the positives that created the 
forms which give character and dignity to the damp mass of 
the overpowering but characterless resistance. So Jacataqua 
gave to womanhood in her time, the form which bitterness of 
pioneer character had denied it. 

At the left, with the company but not of it, silent in the 
midst of noise and laughter, one group accorded well with the 
wooded hill and quiet river, twenty or more Abenaki braves 
from Swan Island, picturesque in hunting garb. Perhaps 
none of all the company felt more interest and curiosity than 
did those dusky warriors, but their stolid faces and occasional 
guttural ejaculations gave no sign of the fire within. 

Three paces in front of these silent braves stood their 
Sachem, Jacataqua, a girl scarce eighteen, in whom showed 
the best traits of her mixed French and Indian blood. 

“These Anglese for whom we watch, who are they?” she 
asked Squire Holworth, near her. 

“Soldiers who go to fight the English at Quebec under 
Arnold.” 

As the transports began to arrive and the eleven hundred 
disembarked, Captain Howard, commandant of Fort West- 
ward, came up from the landing with the most notable of the 
guests. It was upon the reckless, dashing Arnold that all 
eyes were turned. Jacataqua’s Abenakis stood in the same 
stolid silence, still a group apart, but the maiden herself, for 

JACATAQUA 187 

once yielding to the wild pulses of her heart, stepped between 
the sturdy squires to a point of vantage whence she might 
gaze upon the warrior whom all men seemed to honor. 

One swift glance she gave the hero, then her black eyes 
met a pair as dark and flashing as her own, met and were held. 
She turned to the man at her side. 

“That, that Anglese! Who?” 

“Thet? Thet’s young Burr, the one Cushing said got off 
a sick bed to come.” 

Startled, she stepped back among her people. 

Young Burr but waited to gain his genial host’s attention 
to ask, excitedly: 

“Who is that beauty?” 

“Jacataqua, Sachem of the Indians of Swan Island; you 
passed the wigwams of her people on the way up the river.” 

In a moment, Burr was standing before the Indian prin- 
cess, for the first and last time at a loss before a woman. 
Primitive and direct, it was she who opened the conversation 
and opened it with a challenge: © 

“These,” with a wave of her brown hand toward Howard 
and the group of officers, “these want meat. You hunt with 
me? I win.” 

THE VIRTUE OF HISTORY | 

beasts, so in writing, or better, speaking of Aaron 
Burr, one could not begin better than by saying, “there 
is nothing on earth divine beside humanity.” 

And more especially the female part of it. 

He was admired by women; yet, even his most violent de- 
tractors acknowledge him a great soldier; he had men’s ad- 
miration also. 

If distrust, jealousy and hatred can be called so, yes. 

A secret admiration appears often under those names. 
But you speak there of other things than military reputation. 
I say, in matters of war, he was widely acknowledged a leader. 

A pity, then, he did not stick to soldiermg instead of 
entering politics. 

That’s the question. 

I think not. On that his critics are to a man agreed. 

Then just there one should look closest. 

Not so. 

Indeed it is so, for if there is agreement on one point in 
history, be sure there’s interest there to have it so and that’s 
not truth. 

In governments, at least, I shall agree with you—nothing 
is divine. 

A S in writing of some men it should be a pageant of wild 

But history follows governments and never men. It por- 

trays us in generic patterns, like effigies or the carvings on 
sarcophagi, which say nothing save, of such and such a man, 
that he is dead. That’s history. It is concerned only with 
the one thing: to say everything is dead. Then it fixes up the 
effigy: there that’s finished. Not at all. History must stay 
open, it is all humanity. Are lives to be twisted forcibly about 

events, the mere accidents of geography and climate? 
188 

THE VIRTUE OF HISTORY 189 

It is an obscenity which few escape—save at the hands of 
the stylist, literature, in which alone humanity is protected 
against tyrannous designs. 

__ But how small is the sum of good writing against the mass 
of poisonous stuff that finds its way into the history books; 
for the dead can be stifled like the living. 

That’s metaphysical. 

Never. That of the dead which exists in our imaginations 
has as much fact as have we ourselves. The premise that 
serves to fix us fixes also that part of them which we remember. 

If history could be that which annihilated all memory of 
past things from our minds it would be a useful tyranny. 

But since it lives in us practically day by day we should 
fear it. But if it is, as it may be, a tyranny over the souls 
of the dead—and so the imaginations of the living—where 
lies our greatest well of inspiration, our greatest hope of free- 
dom (since the future is totally blank, if not black) we should 
guard it doubly from the interlopers. 

You mean, tradition. Yes, nothing there is metaphysical. 
It is the better part of all of us. 

‘It is the fountain! But men, never content in the malice 
with which they surround each living moment, must extend 
their illwill backward, jealous even of a freedom in the past, 
to maim and to destroy there too. Better to be a Mexican 
and take food to the graves on feast days. 

When a man dies what can remain to us, even from the 
_ best records, save a few facts—and a mass of prejudice since 
he, though he were the greatest man in the world, was only 
one among the others of his time? 

History that should be a left hand to us, as of a violinist, 
we bind up with prejudice, warping it to suit our fears as 
Chinese women do their feet. 

What can we do? Facts remain but what is the truth? 

We can begin by saying: No opinion can be trusted; even 
the facts may be nothing but a printer’s error ; but if a verdict 
be unanimous, it is sure to be a wrong one, a crude rush of the 

190 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

herd which has carried its object before it like a helpless con- 
doning image. If we cannot make a man live again when he 
is gone, it is boorish to imprison him dead within some narrow 
definition, when, were he in his shoes before us, we could not 
do it. It’s lies, such history, and dangerous. Just there 
may lie our one hope for the future, beneath that stone of 
prejudice. Perhaps Burr 

A prophet? 

Perhaps Burr carried into politics an element of demo- 
cratic government, even a major. element, those times were 
slighting—no matter what, an element so powerful and so rare 
that he was hated for it, feared—and loved. 

“‘A dangerous man, one who ought not to be trusted with 
the reins of government,” said Hamilton. 

How dangerous, and to whom? ‘To usurpers? Why did 
the Senate weep so uncontrolledly at his farewell address? 
Perhaps he had somebody’s number. The hateful deed he 
spoke of had been done already, and, in their subtler appre- 
hensions, they wept a vital loss. 

“As to Burr,” it says, “these things are admitted and in- 
deed cannot be denied, that he is a man of extreme and irregu- 
lar ambition,—” 

He wanted to be President, an ambition both extreme and 
—to his enemies—irregular. 

*‘__that he is selfish to a degree which excludes all social 
affection and that he is decidedly profligate.” 

Hamilton again. But the man is'a balloon of malice. 
What has this slatternly talk to do with Burr’s ability in mat- 
ters of public trust? It is an attempt to maim the man by 
loose talk of his traits and private life where his reputation 
cannot be attacked by pat facts marshaled in the open. 

Not his ability but his reliability is questioned. 

But where are the facts? 

His enterprise in Mexico. 

Not yet. That one thorn on which they did impale him 
was a later growth. It did not come until the end of years 

THE VIRTUE OF HISTORY 191 

of vicious enmity by Hamilton and might well be called a deed 
of desperation. 

It proved the soundness of their logic. 

They hounded him to it to prove their logic. So for the 
rest of the denunciation: Burr, seldom talkative in public 
(a rare point in a politician and one dangerous to an oppo- 
nent) but a marvelous listener (most disquieting) becomes, 
out of malice, “selfish to a degree that excludes all social 
affection,”—but the accusation falls apart itself in the last 
of it, that Burr was profligate—which hardly goes with one 
devoid of all social affection. In fact the last is a pure lie, 
proven fifty times over by the man’s life. Incurably generous 
he was dearly loved by his friends. No. It is all loose talk. 
Or rather talk well aimed to do a damage. They feared him. 
Or he was out of their control; out of their aula 
most likely. 

“A brilliant lawyer, ranked by nearly all men of his time,” 
it says, “only second to their favorite, his friends placed him 
_at the head. Calm, a persuasive speaker with an unusual 
power of condensation, he never spoke long but swiftly to the 
point. He knew no fatigue. As long as an enterprise ap- 
peared not impossible he was never discouraged but his insu- 
perable fortitude accomplished what others conceived utterly 
impracticable.” 

Is this a man to be thrown lightly into the discard? It 
looks mightily as if there were something there a government 
might conserve. 

“A eon man in little things while he is really small 1 in 
great ones.’ 

That’s Jeffersonian rhetoric: a well turned aye but 
what does it mean? It means that in the things Burr set his 
hand to they found him great—he had no chance for more, 
they would not give him way. Would he be Governor of New 
York? No. Would he be Ambassador in Paris? No, though 
the committee three times unanimously recommended his ap- 
pointment. Would he be Brigadier General when in 1798 the 

192 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

war with France threatened? Again, no. No, no; they were 
envious of this courteous, well-bred, able silent man whom no 
enemy could down and so they sought to do away with him 
by any means. We should suspect the motives of those who 
malign him. | | 

Did they, or did they speak the truth of a relentless enem 
to law and order? 

They malign him, I assert, because of something strange 
in his composition, a weighty element—that in democracies is 
often called an enemy to law and order. 

They suspected him. 

Of what? 'They never can quite say. They say, this man 
must not be trusted. That is all. And that is ALL. So 
“history” has recorded him a blackguard. 

And that women loved him. 

Royally, yes; especially his daughter, his Theodosia. But 
that’s a sop, a trick of history— | 

Wait. Here’s splendid reading. “I contemplate you,” 
she says, “with such a mixture of humility, admiration, rever- 
ence, love and pride that very little superstition would be 
necessary to make me worship you as a superior being.” 

By all that is divine on earth, by children, women, soldiers, 
he was loved. 

An infatuated woman. . 

And by half the population to boot, since so they voted. 
There was something there, an element—hated and loved; 
suppressed; resurgent. What will history reveal? Little, 
count upon it, save through violent means: an egg, you must 
smash it to have it. . 

The shell only you will break. 

The rigid part.. 

Come, then, let’s look inside; to most of us, I think, Burr’s 

life presents a travesty on greatness. 

We'll take the whole period to begin with. But if we ex- 
amine it, not as history, that lie! but as a living thing, some- 
thing moving, undecided, swaying—Which way will it goP— 

Se eee 

a 

THE VIRTUE OF HISTORY 193 

something on the brink of the Unknown, as we are today,— 
shall we not see it (not as history has pictured it)—in no sense 
a period of revolution—such uprisings are for old states where 
senility has become ingrained—but as a half-wild colony, 
young, shooting out green wood? England? A dry skin to be 
cast off, an itch, that’s all. There was a deeper matter, a 
yeast in the sap, an untracked force that might lead anywhere; 
it was springtime in a new world when all things were pos- 
sible. 

Freedom of conscience, a new start, and to be quit of 
Europe. 

The Revolution came with Washington, the pin about 
which all hearts revolved. Most were satisfied with the obvi- 
ous: England the oppressor, from whom freedom must be 
won. So when the war is over, why—there you are! But 
where were they? Sooner or later it must have been the same 
awakening without the Revolution. The war was nothing. 

It was a war to the death that absorbed all loyal hearts. 

And nearly all wits. 

They were at their wits’ ends. 

But there were some saving minds. I say, compared to 
the great burst of a reawakened sense of life in the spirit of 
the New World, the war was nothing. But in those agonies 
that spirit nearly died! It had been a sense of rebirth, not 
so much a declaration of independence against little England 
as an announcement to heaven itself, full of pride and of deep 
feeling. England must be beaten; but, under that, there was 
a deeper and a stronger force passing through the moment. 

There would be few to realize that undersong. 

’ England, by chance, stood in the way. But the defeat of 
England was the obvious false end. And now, a race in the 
making, America must remember what in its hour of excite- 
ment it had promised, its declarations, its pronouncements, its 
Patrick Henry speeches. Were these just expedients of war 
te spur to battle or was it serious? There will be two opinions; 
and, if the small attempt to absorb the great— 

194 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

Much will be left over... 

The most perhaps,—two parts, a greater and a less, the 
lesser biting on the larger. The war won, all fatigued, would 
not the way be smoothed for the easy deception that—the ob- 
vious thing—liberty had triumphed? | 

And so it had. 

And would there not be a shrewd party, one way or an- 
other, to step in and profit by the moment to say it had; and 
still another, opposite, to see a eine liberty not won but 
lost anew in the mélée? 

Shea’s rebellion. 

Shea was an inspired ass. Our fate is in the air wavering 
which way it will go, a Junto on one side, Burr (maybe) on 
the other. 

This is a philosophical division to be admitted if it present 
the facts. 

I speak of fiercely contested things, practical in the ex- 
treme, that tortured the souls of the founders: “the original 
principle of state vitality, the most important element in our 
Constitution, and one steadily undermined by Federal en- 
croachment.” ‘The sense of the individual, the basis on which 
the war was fought, instantly the war was over began to be 
debauched. .Randolph sensed it. Burr sensed it. Hamilton 
was the Federalist champion. Washington, as President, “a 
monster of prudence,” was the helpless mother. 

All very well, yet let us recognize that there are those 
in the world who will throw themselves into any subversive act 
for sheer love of violence. 

We are admonished to seek nothing but the good. 

Seek, yes, but how if you do not find it? 

I say, unless a land conserve this yeast, it will not raise 
much bread. 

Burr was a subversive force. 

Granted, granted. 

Then? } 

He was a subversive force where liberty was waning. 

THE VIRTUE OF HISTORY 195 

They nearly hanged him for it. 

Hang him? They tried to torture him to death with their 
small slanders on his private life and would have done so had he 
not known how to make them fail. So now they laugh and 
say his genius was to keep himself amused. They could not 
kill it in him. 

His vanity they could not. 

His profound refinement, his sense of the deeper forces 
working in his world that demanded freedom; things the others 
were beginning to stamp out, to whittle away, down to the 
common level. Gutted by their own phrases, 

Is this the nation that made Washington? 

It made him a cripple. 

Protector of liberty. 

Whose, Hamilton’s?—to harness the whole, young, aspir- 
ing genius toa treadmill? Paterson he wished to make capital 
of the country because there was waterpower there which to 
his time and mind seemed colossal. And so he organized a 
company to hold the land thereabouts, with dams and sluices, 
the origin today of the vilest swillhole in christendom, the 
Passaic River ; impossible to remove the nuisance so tight had 
he, Hamilton, sewed up his privileges unto kingdomcome, 
through his holding company, in the State legislature. His 
company. His United States: Hamiltonia—the land of the 
company. 

You violate your own concept of what history should be 
when you speak so violently. 

The pendulum must swing. Is it not time that it swung 
back? 

~ But was Burr really better who founded Tammany? 

Child’s play. 

So you have raised the point that once the Revolution 
over the New World instead of being freed slipped into a tyr- 
anny as bad as or worse than the one it left behind; that, of 
this tyranny, Hamilton was the agent; and that—perhaps— 
in Burr reposed the true element, liberty, which a party in 

a 

196 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

power tried to smother. What basis, other than the one 
adopted under the Constitution, could the new Government 
have taken firmer? Burr proposed none. 'This is the charge 
against him: that he proposed nothing yet refused to abide 
loyally by the established order. | 

In that man there burned a springtime of the soul, a 
mounting desire that makes him seem, beside the harness 
' animals of that dawning period like a bird in flight. But 
they, the others, wanting to escape their load, each puts his 
harness on a lesser nag,—the government on top, after the 
text, perhaps— 

Set thy servant to work, and thou shalt find rest: 

Leave his hands idle, and he will seek liberty. 

And for an evil servant (that’s Burr) there are 
racks and tortures. 

The Colonial Government was not perfect, but can the 
oyster live without his shell? They did what they were able. 
Whai did Burr propose? 

I say that what Burr stood for—and that this is typical of 
us—is lost sight of in the calumny that surrounds his name, 
through which the truth is not so easily to be discovered. 
Let us dig and we shall see what is turned up—and name it 
if we can. 

Go on. 

A new world, that’s what we were. It was a springtime that 
the colonists, at their most impassioned were attempting. 
But as it is a winter we are now in, and the more ordered the 
more wintry—dulled values, stereotyped effects of bygone 
_adventures—so it began to be after the Revolution; a sense 

of life killed, systematically, as with school children— 

Under a cruel eye outworn. 

But some one must rule, even children know that and ac- 
cept it with pleasure and relief. 

What matter who rule? to rule is without sense. There 

OS a ee 

THE VIRTUE OF HISTORY 197 

can be no rule. Burr saw America in his imagination, free. 
His spirit leaped to it—and his body followed out of a sick 
bed. But his spark was not preserved. He saw America, or he 
had seen America, as a promise of delight and it struck fine 
earth, that fancy. Now he saw a sombre Washington—with 
shrewd dog Hamilton at his side—locking the doors, closing 
the windows, building fences and providing walls. He dreaded 
this. He saw that they would only lock up themselves, and 
he rebelled. | 

Inspired by devil or angel, Burr was a frightful danger 
to the young state and needed to be curbed. 

So much the worse for the young state then. But it’s the 
malice I decry. Burr’s account in history is a distortion. 
The good which history should have preserved, it tortures. A 
country is not free, is not what it pretends to be, unless it 
leave a vantage open (in tradition) for that which Burr pos- 
sessed in such remarkable degree. This is my theme. 

But has he not that place? He’s there in history just as 
you design him. 

He’s in myself and so I dig through lies to resurrect him. 
We are deceived by history. America had a great spirit given 
to freedom but it was a mean, narrow, provincial place; it was 
NOT the great liberty-loving country, not at all. Its choice 
spirits died. 

Ah, my friend, you are an enthusiast, rash guesses and 
the same loose talk of which you complain. 

The Federal Government was slipping in its fangs. The 
banks were being organized. 

A central power is strength. 

-“Morals and happiness will always be nearest to per- 
fection in small communities.” In big ones men are theorists 
and outlaws. Make it big enough and it becomes a wood where 
thieves protect each other from the more general evil— 

Oh balderdash, anarchy, exploded theory— 

One thing was sure, he used to say, no one would steal his 
hat, it would fit no one else he had so big a head. 

198 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

All very well, but let me hear you tell the story now, how 
his life, in its detail, supports your roseate view of him. I 
doubt if you can do it. 

He had a good beginning. He was a brilliant student 
while at Princeton—howbeit there were stories of a wild life 
there. Jonathan Edwards was his grandfather on the moth- 
er’s side and his father was President of the University. He 
was wealthy and of a pleasing personal appearance,—though 
short. After the university an interest in theology took him 
to Connecticut for private study— 

Now the mill begins. 

To the consternation of his friends he did a rightaboutface, 
_ threw the whole mass of religious dogma from him and declared 
himself a disbeliever. 

He was twenty at that time, if I remember. 

If his world believed in freedom he came out with it. This 

fits in with my design. Unlike a schemer, he stood from the 

first in the open. Then, rising from a sickbed, he rushed off 
with Arnold to Quebec. The thing that offers to the eye is 
his enthusiasm ; headlong he goes. On that campaign, through 
direst hardships he returned a brilliant record; he led, he sup- 
ported, he adventured by himself. When there was difficult 
work he did it. He carried his commander from the field 
through snow kneedeep before the British guns. Fearless, he 
offered himself without stint. He was frail; it weakened him. 
He paid no heed. When he returned, still nothing but a boy, 
Washington claimed him for his staff. 

It was a startling opportunity for him. 

Burr stayed six weeks. 

They say that to the personal dislike between the boy and 
Washington that followed, much of Burr’s later unsuccess is 
to be traced. 

In fairness to them both, if there was ever an antithesis 
between two men, both good in essence, it was here, both fine 
but one the earth itself, the other—air, Somehow they should 
have joined. 

ae 

THE VIRTUE OF HISTORY 199 

It is a fascinating moment, many chapters could be written 
just upon this meeting. 

No need of that. There was a plain reason for what took 
place. Burr could not stomach the restraint and the perfunc- 
tory nature of his work. Hamilton, himself, had not been 
able to do it. The General’s aides were merely clerks to him; 
he himself did all the planning. This was no place for a high- 
spirited young man demanding action. Washington fell from 
high hopes into disappointment, and, reading Burr’s impa- 
tience in his looks, distrusted him. A fixed dislike sprang up 
between them. 5 

I do believe you sometimes when you speak of a natural 
malice of events; here truly there was no need for such an 
outcome.. 

At least the break was clean; there was no flattery, no 
carping. 

Burr no doubt found the General slow-witted. He could 
not see the power in Washington or else resented it. He 
chaffed at his superior’s dignity and deliberation. It made 
him restless. 

But, transferred to Putnam’s staff, he had brilliant service 
till through ill health he had to quit. 

A humbler devotion, such as the time required, he could 
not stomach. He was self-willed, rash in judgment and un- 
bridled in both speech and deed. 

Yet how clearly in everything he des his virtues and his 
faults stand out. Admit that he was rash: Mrs. Washington, 
he said, knit well; Mrs. Putnam was a wondrous spinner! 
Well enough; he looked at that, rejected it as passing and 
looked for more. The simpler manners of the time did not 
encircle him. He wanted other things of women. But, right or 
wrong, he must have known such preferences could not bring 
him popularity. It is evidence of the man’s sincerity and open 
disregard for the opinion of the world. He was no schemer. 
Washington, he said, should have retired after the war,—he 

200 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

would have made a picturesque figure as a country gentleman. 
_ As President, Burr did not fancy him. 

A very shallow judgment. 

At least it followed his logic candidly. What cause had 
he to praise the everlasting prudence of the President that 
negated so much of value in order to conserve that which he, 
Burr, thought nothing? Three times the committee unani- 
mously recommended him for the post in Paris and each time 
Washington vetoed the choice. 

Three times right then. 

Well, maybe; but—here’s still a young man, dashing, rich 
—a proven soldier. The Clintons, the Livingstons, the Van 
Rensselaers all had eligible daughters. Let young Burr marry 
one of them. Did he? It would have been a shrewd move 
if one were the man avid for political ascendency. He 
married whom? A nobody, a widow of Paramus, New Jersey, 
older than himself and with two sons; unbeautiful, a scar on 
her face—but the most refined, courteous, gracious creature 
he had ever laid his eyes upon. He loved these things, as in 
all he does, openly—in the teeth of the world. He found her 
an inspiration, one who opened his eyes to the blessed pages 
of literature, to the deeper values that he sought—and she 
gave him his Theodosia. This constant evidence of the man’s 
clarity and disrespect for the applause of the world is in every- 
thing he does. 

Immoral virtues— 

He loved and straight he went to the mark. It was an 
impossible plane in that world. That sort of independence 
was bound to bring him into disrepute with the rulers of the 
colonies. Never though with the people, whom he knew, lovers 
of the senses, as was he. Men believed in him. He tied for 
the presidency in spite of nearly all the upper ten against 
him. Jefferson succeeded. He hated Burr. Overbearing 

toward the Vice President he told him—to look in the papers — 

for the news. The Vice Presidency was never better served, 
however. And when he ran for Governor of New York, with 

a ee 

¢ 
; 
y 
: 
. 
4 
q 

THE VIRTUE OF HISTORY 201 

every daily paper hounding him, is that like a clever schemer, 
not to have support?—the lowest gossip was not too low for 
the New York Post. They poured their venom on him from 
every side. He was defeated, thanks to this, not a single paper 
backed him, a very awkward schemer that, and yet he nearly 
got it. That’s why they hated him: they feared his power. 
It was the dread and the love of his free spirit. 

And then the duel— 

Hamilton had hounded him for years. At length he openly 
called Burr “politically dangerous.” What did he mean? 
Burr wrote demanding an explanation. To the party in 
power, yes, dangerous he may have been, but to the country— 
How? Hamilton refused to answer. Then let it be pinned 
down. Either it must be one or the other. Burr was not 
angry. If any one feared it was not he. His head was clear, 
he slept well, he was refreshed and went to the place of the 
duel. 

Hamilton was fifty-seven. Burr somewhat younger. 

Hamilton fired first, the bullet clipping a twig above 
Burr’s head. His hand was trembling. Did he fire wild, as 
his seconds say he did, on purpose? Burr’s seconds said no, 
and stuck to it; the bullet came too close to their man’s head 
to have been anything but a’plain miss due to a shaking hand. 
Then Burr fired. He shot coolly, seriously and with convic- 
tion. He killed his man, logically and as he meant to do and 
knew he must. For a moment, as he saw his adversary fall, 
he was overcome with compassion, then he turned away. Ham- 
ilton, before he died, dictated his astonishing testament, in 
which he says—imagine the flimsy nature of his lifelong enmity _ 
toward the man—that, regarding Burr, he “might have been 
misinformed of his intentions.”” Good God, what an answer! 
Work till you are fifty-seven to ruin a man, insult him, malign 
him and then say, dying: I may have been misinformed. 

May it not have been so? 

It may, but that’s a poor excuse for Hamilton. No, Burr 
was not tractable; but, the villain they imagine him, he was 

202 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

not either. It was his hatred of the Virginia Junto and their 
success against him that undid him. 

Did he intend an empire in the west? 

Sam Houston was later to be called a hero for that, if he 
did. Perhaps he did dream: a man whose schemes, if they were 
so, were so poor they never once succeeded. He was a bad 
scholar of his betters—whose schemes succeeded. His expedi- 
tion into the west was, in effect, his hatred of the Junto. It was 
his protest against the major fault of tyranny with which he 
accused the Federalist Party. If his wild scheme, whatever 
it may have been, was traitorous, it was no more so than theirs 
was subtly sinister. He hated them. ‘They knew it. He 
sought new worlds. 

The trial— 

A farce. No one believed in it. It’s most noteworthy inci- 
dent was John Marshall’s graciousness in permitting the de- 
fense to subpoena Jefferson, the real accuser, though he was 
President. Tea was served in the afternoons. Nothing was 
proved. But now, yes, all hope of power was ended. For 
twenty-five years he fought that party; in the end, he broke 
them backing Andrew Jackson whom he ardently admired. 
But he, himself, was ended. 

How then did he deport himself? 

They exiled him to Europe where his journal shows him 
never much depressed—a lover of his brilliant daughter. After 
four years he returned to meet the bitterest tragedy experience 
could deal him, the death of his small grandson whom he loved 
tenderly; then, on top of that, the death at sea of Theodosia 
herself. He felt at last “cut off from humanity.” 

His Theodosia— 

He had taught her everything he knew, hoping in his last 
years to enjoy with her a rare companionship. Now even that 
hope was lost. 

Did he intend his gross journal for her eyes as it is said? 

Every word of it. He had told her everything; he had 

created her into his free world where he lived in unconstraint. 

— 

4 

a ee 

THE VIRTUE OF HISTORY 203 

She was as far above the women of her time as he would have 
had himself above the men. 

They say he paid to keep ten women. 

And there were, perhaps, an hundred bastard children—for 
the legend’s sake. But what I would drag out to the light 
is this: If they were wrong, those who judged him in his time, 
the intent was deliberate and malicious—and that this is typ- 
ical of us. 

I can see how you would wish to prove that so but not how 
you will prove it. 

Knowing in the marrow what they must lose, the self-styled 
“free and independent,” to become a nation— 

That is, what they must give up of personal liberty for 
the general good— 

What they must sacrifice of hard-won freedom, whittling 
themselves down—it was dispiriting—they realized with a 
nostalgic tremor that Burr had KEPT. An unbecoming jeal- 
ousy sprang up instanter, as with pioneers in a bad country 
who know that one of them is hoarding up his sugar. Burr 
would not give in. Let others shift and scheme and draw 
away, he would not. 

He proved himself, by ae measure, wanting in good feel- 
ing for his fellows. 

Nothing of the sort. By any measure that you choose, 
what we find good our virtue is to cling to it. The common 
good he found common—and did not hesitate to show it. The 
common good he found lacking, in no matter what—but lack- 
ing. He would not stand for its tyrannical assertions. The 
rare thing—liberty—he saw disappearing in the dreadful lev- 
eling, the machinations of a Junto, no matter how well inten- 
tioned, were seeking to negate for themselves by seizing power. 

Was he so great a rock of liberty? 

They knew they must give up much, he refused—and de- 
manded still a place for himself, whole. They yielding to the 
crowd, yet felt regret to take its dust. The degradation which 
they suffered and he refused to suffer brought their hatred 

204 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

down on him with double force. It was all in that feeling. He 
gave it vent. The loss to Jefferson of a glass candlestick, and 
more later, which he imagined he could sacrifice; Washington 
retiring disheartened to his farm to breathe the air; Burr 
carried into politics. 

At last we have it! 

A humanity, his own, free and independent, unyielding to 
the herd, practical, direct. That was his violent party that, 
based on the rock, could not be moved. 

Did he present it in that light? 

What light? Who shall name that thing? It is the hid- 
den flame, but like all that’s universal it cannot be packed 
into three common words. 

They called him frivolous. 

Because he was serious, because he gave himself wholly 
where they played and ducked and hedged and took their 
sorrow off into the parlor or among the cattle. He stood up 
and was arrogant, unyielding. They strutted pompously— 
shyly, great liberals; he struck straight for liberty and did not 
kid himself that he had it, he who believed in himself and his 
teaching and his blood, when he was smothering it in pretty 
fancies and high-sounding phrases and dung. Either they 
had what they were fighting for or they did not have it. 
England or the mob, it made small difference to him. He 
WAS serious, they were the triflers—their own dupes. 

They said he was immoral. 

He was, safely so, by the flesh. He found safety in that 
flesh and among its sturdy guardians—women. Were they 
too idle in recognizing him? They loved him. Frivolous? 
He was perhaps the only one of the time who saw women, in 
the flesh, as serious, and they hailed and welcomed with deep 
gratitude and profound joy his serious knowledge and regard 
and liberating force—for them. Freedom? 'Then for women 
also—but such a freedom that the one defense must be—im- 
moral. He laughed at that and dug in the deeper. 

He treated them lightly. 

ee ee ee 

i. 

THE VIRTUE OF HISTORY 205 

Never. He kept their secrets; no man has a better record. 
Asked his opinion he could say of women: all seriousness, yet 
you must speak light nothings to them. The rest were frivo- 
lous with women. The rest denied them, condoned the female 
flesh, found them helpmates at the best and at the worst, 
horses, cattle, provincial accessories, useful workers to make 
coffee and doughnuts—and to be left to go crazy on the farms 
for five generations after—that’s New England, or they’d 
hide the bull behind the barn, so that the women would not 
think it knew the cows were—Bah, feudal dolls gone 
wrong, that’s Virginia. Women? necessary but not noble, 
not the highest, not deliciously a free thing, apart, feminine, 
a heaven;—afraid to delve in it save like so much dough. 
Burr found the spirit living there, free and equal, independ- 
ent, springing with life. Or did he? I say if he did he was 
before his time. Surely they drank of him like water. 

Of children he was passionately fond, and they of him. 

Those little images of freedom, children, fascinated him. 
They, loving seriousness and openness and all things with 
light m them—loved him. He adored them, his stepsons 
among the first, and after them, that little grandson, Theodo- 
sia’s baby who died—and broke the old man’s heart. 

He was immoral as a satyr. 

It is a cry of fear and disappointment—and perverse pleas- 
ure. The acute delight Americans have always got from de- 
nying themselves joy and maiming others that they might be 
“saved” from some obliquity of moral carriage is only lately 
understood. One step further and it leads to persecutions. 
The world is made to eat, not leave, that the spirit may be 
full, not empty. 

It is every licentious man’s excuse for his excesses. Free- 
dom is not so easy. There is no tyranny save ignorance and 
no escape from it save clear and persistent moral achievement, 
deeply followed. Doubtful of an advance the mere sensualist 
flaps and flounders. 

Burr knew what a democracy must liberate. 

206 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

What then? 

Men intact—with all their senses waking. He had, raised 
to a different level, the directness of “common people” which 
reformers, that is to say, schemers, commonly neglect, mis- 
name, misapprehend as if it were anything but to touch, to 
hear, to see, to smell, to taste. 

Transcendental theory, my dear countryman. 

What is ; the delicious sincerity of pioneer people? In Burr 
this aristocratic strain, straight out of the ground, was seeing 
its own ground belied. To maintain that truth up through 
the scale is the hard thing. A while ago, just here, I heard a 
Polish woman saying to her daughter: “You bust your coat 
with your fifty sweaters.” 

What’s that: You bust your coat with your fifty sweaters? 

Its immediacy, its sensual quality, a pure observation, its 
lack of irritation, its lack of pretense, its playful exaggera- 
tion, its repose, its sense of design, its openness, its gayety, its 
unconstraint. It frees, it creates relief. In the great it is 
the same, or would be if ever it existed, a delicious sincerity (in 
greater things of course) not a scheme, nor a system of pro- 
cedure—but careless truth. 

A second China you would have. 

Burr’s life was of that stuff. It is this that is trying to 
escape in a democracy. 

Traitors have it, maybe; also the incapable. 

Yes, they have (maybe); it saves them. And if it has 
not appeared in the great rulers of the world it is because 
they lack power of the spirit and it is yet to appear. It is 
difficult but itis IT, | 

Not too enlightening, that. 

What does it matter on this earth about scientists, philoso- 
phers or saints? Snake charmers. An amusement. Their 
schemes amount to nothing. But to the men themselves every 
moment, every detail, the devotion, the clarities are vital—and 
so we value them, in short, by their style. They must ponder 
deeply, pass hours of suspense, give themselves wholly, seri- 

ee 

ae a — a 

SS aera 

— 

= 

% 

THE VIRTURE OF HISTORY 207 

ously that they may have the authenticity of a shepherd—or 
a clown, without which their lives, are so much paper. 

Well, yes. But how is Burr concerned in this? 

If politics could be the science of humanity, I think his 
place was there. He was the essence of the schemes the others 
made. 

Granted that the value of all things—and men—is purely 
spiritual, a devotion in themselves to painstaking truthfulness, 
with no interfering, yet how will Burr—? 

Such things have an aspect, on the world’s side, that be- 
wilders us. That obscene flesh in which we dig for all our 
good, man and woman alike, Burr knew and trusted. Here 
he lived, giving and receiving to the full of his instinctive 
nature. 

But passion will obscure our sense so that we eat sad stuff 
and call it nectar. Burr was heavily censured by his time, 
immoral, traitorous and irregular. What they say of him, I 
still believe. 

Believe it if you will but listen to this story: Near the 
end of his life a lady said to him: “Colonel, I wonder if you 
were ever the gay Lothario they say you were.” The old man 
turned his eyes, the lustre still undiminished, toward the lady 
—and lifting his trembling finger said in his quiet, impressive 
whisper: “They say, they say, they say. Ah, my child, how 
long are you going to continue to use those dreadful words? 
Those two little words have done more harm than all others. 
Never use them, my dear, never use them.” 

ADVENT OF THE SLAVES) 

HE colored men and women whom I know intimately 
add a quality, that is delightful, to the life about 
me. 

There is little use, after all—save in a title—of speaking 
of the advent of the slaves; these were just men of a certain 
mettle who came to America in ships, like the rest. 'The minor 
differences of condition were of no importance—the mere con- 
dition of their coming is of no importance— 

The colored men and women whom I have known intimately 
have a racial character which has impressed me. I have not 
much bothered to know why, exactly, this has been so— 

The one thing that never seems to occur to anybody is 
that the negroes have a quality which they have brought to 
America. It is not important that it is available or not to us 
for any special use— 

Poised against the Mayflower is the slave ship—manned 
by Yankees and Englishmen—bringing another race to try 
upon the New World, that will prove its tenacity and ability 
to thrive by seizing upon the Christian religion—a thing to 
replace their own elephant-, snake- and gorilla-filled jungles— 
on which to fasten for stability, blowing into it the soul of 
their own darkness, where, as were the Aztecs in ‘their bloody 
chapels, they are founded— 

They helped to build “a society that was rich and in some 
ways sumptuous and curiously oriental”. ‘Puritan Massa- 
chusetts unable to rid itself of the idea of man’s essential 

wickedness, could not envision this earthly paradise, Geor- 

gia—’ 

great gentlemen almost openly kept their concubines; great 

ladies half dozed through the long summer afternoons on their 
; 208 

> “In many families every child had his individual slave; 4 

ADVENT OF THE SLAVES 209 

shaded piazzas mollified by the slow fanning of their black 
attendants, and by the laving of their feet in water periodically 
fetched anew from the spring house”—it is a sunken quality, 
or it is a living quality—it is no matter which. 

All the rest is to keep from having to say anything more 
—like a nigger: it is their beauty. When they try to make 
their race an issue—it is nothing. In a chorus singing T'rova- 
tore, they are nothing. But saying nothing, dancing nothing, 
“NOBODY”, it is a quality— 

Bert Williams, author of a Russian ballet, The Kiss; that’s 
worse than nothin’. But “Somewhere the sun am shinin’—for 
ME...” That’s somernin’. Taking his shoes off; that’s 
SOMETHIN’. 

. . . dancing, singing with the wild abandon of being 
close, closer, closest together ; waggin’, wavin’, weavin’, shakin’ ; 
or alone, in a cabin, at night, in the stillness, in the moonlight 
—hein’ nothin’—with gravity, with tenderness—they arrive 
and “walk all over God’s heaven—” 

There is a solidity, a racial irreducible minimum, which 
gives them poise in a world where they have no authority— 

Or a ramshackle “castle”, peaked with doll’s house gables, 
all awry, by the railroad; where the boys came with their 
“brides” in those good old. days sust before the war; old 
shoes and a shambling independence: a tigerish life, lived in 
defiance over a worthless son, by virtue of fierce courage, a 
heavy fearless voice and a desperate determination to be let 
alone—with two reminiscent, shrewd, remembering eyes 
stamping authenticity upon her words—and long gorilla arms 
to deal a heavy blow upon man or woman who may threaten 
her, with a shouted threat of knife-thrust or hatchet stroke 
if that fails. She was knocked down, bellowing like a buffalo, 
maltreated—by whom? You wouldn’t get it out of her. But 
she announced to whoever has ears, in this place or the next, 
that it wouldn’t happen another time,—and it hasn’t. On a 
Saturday night shuffling along absorbed, with slow, swinging 
gait, or staring into odd corners, or settling back on her heels 

210 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

with a belligerent scowl if greeted—ready to talk: “Why how 
are ya?”—anywhere. “Go ahead, kill me, I ain’t afraid of 
a. 

I remember with thrilling pleasure and deep satisfaction 
E. K. Means’ tale, Diada Daughter of Discord, an outstanding 
story of a wild nigger wench, billeted upon a friend’s family 
by her owner while he went for a short boat trip without her. 
Read Diada—cutting cane stalks, sharpening them with light- 
ning speed and driving them through the attacking hounds. 

“faces like 
old Florentine oak. 

Also 

the set pieces 

of your faces stir me— 
leading citizens— 

but not 

in the same way.” 

Nothin’ makes much difference—to Otie: Butcher knife, 
butcher knife, Mr. Gould wants you. 

It’s a quality, the same as “Sweet everlasting voices be 
still”. 

Of the colored men and women whom I have known inti- 
mately, the most loquacious is M.—who can’t eat eggs because 
it gives him the hives. Language grows in the original from _ 
his laughing lips, “You know that bloom of youth stuff”, his 
shy crooked smile, weary, slow, topping his svelt figure, his — 
straight, slim six feet of willowy grace, drooping from the 
shoulders, smiling sleepy eyes. ‘White blood and colored blood _ 
don’t mix,” said he nursing his injury, “Doc, I got a hemor- _ 
rhage of the riute,” he said. “Cocaine for horses, cocaine — 
for mules, IN THE TRENCHES!” he yelled as I removed — 
the bandage. “I’m going to feed this to the ducks,” he said. _ 
The relief is never ending, never failing. It is water froma 

ADVENT OF THE SLAVES 211 

spring to talk with him—it is a quality. I wish I might write 
a book of his improvisations in slang. I wish I might write a 
play in collaboration with him. 

His old man is a different sort: I once ale several pages 
of notes upon his conversation—but I lost them; he was an 
able fisherman along the North Atlantic shore, resistant as an 
eel. In the hold of the vessel when they were packing porgies, 
ice and fish filling the hold of the schooner in heavy layers, 
it was he who could stay down there at work longest— 

For sheer sordidness we never touch them, the desperate 
drunkenness, upon foul stuff, in which they nearly die in a 
heap of rags under the eaves in the attic of some revolting, dis- 
ease-ridden female’s dump—fly-covered, dazed— 

For purity of religious devotion, in the simplicity of their 
manceuvres, they exceed our greatest application. Personal 
cleanliness becomes them with an oriental grace before which 
our ablutions pale to insignificance. 

They wear the pest fabrics that money can buy, man and 
woman alike. 

It is nothing, nothing. 

There was Georgie Anderson whom I remember as some 
female who walked upon air and light—in her wild girlhood. 

And there was “Dudu”, gentle as the dew or rain in April, 
—but I knew she had a temper for those who offended her— 

And there are many others. 

Put them on a ship, under any circumstances you may 
fancy and you have them coming, coming. Why for? 

Nothin’— 

As old man Hemby said to me at the door: “I’m here. I 
come after you yesterday but I couldn’t find yous. Doctor, 
I’m in a bad fix; I want you to do something for me.’ 

DESCENT 

Scotch-Irish, ran away from his brothers of whom he 

was a charge and joined the Cherokee Indians of West- 
ern Tennessee. He lived with them until eighteen, then re- 
ascended to the settlements for school. . . . The primitive 
destiny of the land is obscure, but it has been obscured further 
by a field of unrelated culture stuccoed upon it that has made 
that destmy more difficult than ever to determine. ‘To this 
latter nearly all the xsthetic adhesions of the present day 
occur. Through that stratum of obscurity the acute but frail 
genius of the place must penetrate. The seed is tough but the 
chances are entirely against a growth. It is possible for every 

A T fifteen years of age Samuel Houston, born 1793, 

vestige of virtue from the New World to be lost, like the wood 

pigeon. 

Houston was one of the few men of his time suited men- 
tally, morally, physically for dominant achievement. Gov- 
ernor of Tennessee, 1829, he married Eliza Allen of a promi- 
nent family of Sumner County, of that state. After three 
months she left him. None knows the reason, both remained 
silent. He wrote, “Eliza stands acquitted by me.” The brief 
duration of the marriage, the violence and permanence of the 
separation, the prominence of Houston and the lack of all in- 
formation forthcoming concerning the incident give it an 
arresting character. Surmise will suit the fancy: he accused 
her of a romantic attachment; she accused him of worse; or 
there was, more likely, a disproportion between them; a man 
of primitive vigors loosed upon her in private, she was over- 
borne by him in some manner, or she refused to be overborne. 

He, swept off his feet by the emotional recoil from the mis- 
fortune, first pleaded with her father to intercede for him that 

"212 

DESCENT 213 

his wife might return; failing in this, he resigned the gover- 
norship of Tennessee, left everything behind him and took 
the descent once more, to the ground. He rejoined the Chero- 
kees, now removed to Arkansas. The state was in an uproar, 
people spoke badly of him; there was nothing too bad for them 
to say. His wife divorced him and remarried. For a while he 
took to drink. . . . He turned back to the Indians, it is the 
saving gesture—but a gesture of despair. Poe can be under- 
stood only in a knowledge of his deep roots. The quality of 
the flower will then be seen to be normal, in all its tortured 
spirituosity and paleness, a desert gore with roots under 
_ the sand of his day. 

Whitman had to come from under. All have to come from 
under and through a dead layer. 

But this primitive ordeal, created by a peculiar condition 
of destiny (the implantation of an already partly cultured 
race on a wild continent) has a plant in its purpose, in its 
lusts’ eye, as gorgeous as Montezuma’s gardens of birds, wild 
beasts and albino natives in wooden cages. 

But he who will grow from that basis must sink first. 

If he goes to France, it is not to learn a do re mi fa sol. 
He goes to see a strange New World. 

If not definitely a culture new in every part, at least a sat- 
isfaction. He wants to have the feet of his understanding 
on the ground, his ground, the ground, the only ground that 
he knows, that which is under his feet. I speak of esthetic 
satisfaction. This want, in America, can only be filled by 
‘knowledge, a poetic knowledge, of that ground. Since this is 
difficult, due to the hardships which beset the emergence of a 
poet: A poet is one related to a basis of material, esthetic, 
spiritual, hypothetical, abnormal—satisfaction, . . . since 
this is so, the want goes for the most part unsatisfied in 
America or is satisfied by a fillgap. The predominant picture 
of America is a land esthetically satisfied by temporary fill- 
gaps. But the danger remains: Taste is so debauched in the 
end that everything of new will be forgotten and— 

214 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

In spite of size its genius is shy and wild and frail, the 
loveliest, to be cherished only by the most keen, courageous 
and sensitive. It may die. 

Meanwhile, taste is pandered to somehow. . . . Among 
the Indians Houston lived, from the time of his separation 
from his wife, eleven years. He was adopted into the tribe; 
he, maintaining silence upon the calamity which had overtaken 
him, preferred to be among those who accepted him for what 
he was and let no rumor of his past affect them. It was a 
courtesy he knew how to find as they to proffer. It came 
from the ground like water. He took an Indian woman for 
his wife. 7 

The instigation to invasion is apparent: ready profit. The 
excuse also is apparent: progress. The refusal of these things 
is like feathered darts on armor. We are tyros in what we 
are glad to believe are the fundamentals of artistic under- 
standing. We crave filling and eagerly grab for what there is. 
The next step is, floating upon cash, to wish to be like the 
others. Now come in the Universities, the conformists of all 
colors from the arch-English to the Italian peasant and his 
goats. 

It is imperative that we sink. But from a low position it is 
impossible to answer those who know all the Latin and some 
of the Sanskrit names, much French and perhaps one or two 
other literatures. Their riposte is: Knownothingism. But 
we cannot climb every tree in that world of birds. But where 
foreign values are held to be a desideratum, he who is buried 
and speaks thickly—ais lost. 

There is nothing for a man but genius or despair. We 
cannot answer in the smart language, certainly it would be a 
bastardization of our own talents to waste time to learn the 
language they use. I would rather sneak off and die like a sick 

dog than be a well known literary person in America—and no 

doubt Til do it in the end. Our betters we may bitterly ad- 

vise: Know nothing (i.e., the man on the street), make no 

attempt to know. With a foreign congeries of literary clap- 

eee 

i 
i 

ee ee ee ee Se 

a 

DESCENT 215, 

trap, come without courtesy to a strange country and make 
for yourself a smooth track to the pockets of the mob by cater- 
_ ing to a “refined” taste and soiling that which you do not 
know how to estimate. Courtesy would at least bid him be 
informed or keep still. ... 

Those who come up from under will have a mark on them 
that invites scorn, like a farmer’s filthy clodhoppers. They 
will be recognized only from abroad, being so like the mass 
out of which they come as to be scorned from anear, etc., etc., 
etc. . . . After the many years with the Cherokees, having 
settled down thoroughly, this time, Houston rose again: de- 
feated Santa Ana at San Jacinto and: received the soubri- 
quet, “Sam Jacinto,” Governor of Texas, U. S. Senator dur- 
ing a long term, several times mentioned for the presidency, 
married again, several children, when in deep thought whit- 
tled pine sticks, tigerskin vest, blanket, sombrero, joined Bap- 
tist Church, opposed secession of southern states, lived to have 
Lincoln recognize him by offer of a Major-Generalship, which 
he refused. 

However hopeless it may seem, we have no other choice: 
we must go back to the beginning; it must all be done over; 
everything that is must be destroyed. 

EDGAR ALLAN POE 

I OE was not “a fault of nature”, “a find for French eyes”, _ 

ripe but unaccountable, as through our woollyheaded- 

ness we’ve sought to designate him, but a genius inti- 
mately shaped by his locality and time. It is to save our faces 
that we’ve given him a crazy reputation, a writer from whose 
classic accuracies we have not known how else to escape. 

The false emphasis was helped by his Parisian vogue and 
tonal influence on Baudelaire, but the French mind was deeper 
hit than that. Poe’s work strikes by its scrupulous originality, 
not “originality” in the bastard sense, but in its legitimate 
sense of solidity which goes back to the ground, a conviction 
that he can judge within himself. These things the French 
were ready to perceive and quick to use to their advantage: a 
new point from which to readjust the trigonometric measure- 
ments of literary form. 

It is the New World, or to leave that for the better term, 
it is anew locality that is in Poe assertive; it is America, the 
first great burst through to expression of a re-awakened genius 
of place. 

Poe gives the sense for the first time in America, that liter- 
ature is serious, not a matter of courtesy but of truth. (See 
Maria Lucretia Davidson). 

The aspect of his critical statements as a whole, from their 
hundred American titles to the inmost structure of his sen- 
tences, is that of a single gesture, not avoiding the trivial, to 
sweep all worthless chaff aside. It is a movement, first and last 
to clear the crounp. : 

There is a flavor of provincialism that 1s provincialism 
in the plainness of his reasoning upon elementary grammatical, 

syntactical and prosodic grounds which awakened Lowell’s 
216 

: 
| 

i sa als Se 

— a 

es. 

EDGAR ALLAN POE | 217 

derision. But insistence upon primary distinctions, that seems 
coldly academic, was in this case no more than evidence of a 
strong impulse to begin at the beginning. Poe was unsophis- 
ticated, when contrasted with the puerile sophistications of a 
Lowell. It is a beginning he has in mind, a juvenescent local 
literature. By this he avoids the clownish turn of trying to 
join, contrary to every reasonable impulsion, a literature (the 
English) with which he had no actual connection and which 
might be presumed, long since, to have passed that beginning 
which to the new condition was requisite. 

But Mr. Lowell’s comment had to be answered: 

“Here comes Poe with his Raven, like Barnaby Rudge— 
Three fifths of him genius, and two fifths sheer fudge; 
Who talks like a book of iambs and pentameters 

In a way to make all men of common sense damn meters 
Who has written some things far the best of their kind; 
But somehow the heart seems squeezed out by the mind.” 

It brings a technical retort from Poe upon the grounds 
that, “We may observe here that profound ignorance on any 
particular topic is always sure to manifest itself by some allu- 
sion to ‘common sense’ as an all-sufficient instructor.” Then 
he tears L.’s versification to pieces, adding, “Mr. L. should 
not have meddled with the anapestic rhythm: it is exceedingly 
awkward in the hands of one who knows nothing about it and 
who will persist in fancying that he can write it by ear.” But, 
previously, he had nailed the matter in a different vein. Lo- 
well “could not do a better thing than to take the advice of 
those who mean him well, and leave prose, with satiric verse, 
to those who are better able to manage them; while he contents 
himself with that class of poetry for which, and for which 
alone, he seems to have an especial vocation—the poetry of 
sentiment.” But Poe might have added finally, in his own 
defense, what he says elsewhere, concerning the accusation in 
L.’s last two lines: “The highest order of the imaginative intel- 
lect is always preeminently mathematical—” 

Pry 

218 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

The whole passage is noteworthy not only for the brilliance 
of such a statement as that, but also because of its use of the 
provincial “we” (Mr. Griswold and the Poets): “That we are 
not a poetical people has been asserted so often and so roundly, 
both at home and abroad that the slander, through mere dint 
of repetition, has come to be received as truth. Yet nothing 
can be farther removed from it. The mistake is but a portion, 
or corollary, of the old dogma, that the calculating faculties 
are at war with the ideal; while, in fact, it may be demonstrated 
that the two divisions of mental power are never to be found 
in perfection apart. The highest order of the imaginative in- 
tellect is always preéminently mathematical ; and the converse.” 

“The idiosyncrasy of our political position has stimulated 
into early action whatever practical talent we possessed. Even 
in our national infancy we evinced a degree of utilitarian abil- 

ity which put to shame the mature skill of our forefathers, 

While yet in leading strings we proved ourselves adepts in all 
the arts and sciences which promoted the comfort of the animal 
man. But the arena of exertion, and of consequent distinction, 
into which our first and most obvious wants impelled us, has 
been regarded as the field of our deliberate choice. Our neces- 
sities have been taken for our propensities. Having been 
forced to make railroads, it has been deemed impossible that 
we should make verse. Because it suited us to construct an 
engine in the first instance, it has been denied that we could 
compose an epic in the second. Because we are not all Homers 
in the beginning, it has been somewhat rashly taken for 
granted that we shall be all Jeremy Benthams to the end.” 

“But this is purest insanity . . .” 

In the critical note upon Francis Marryat, the distinction 
between “nationality in letters”, which Poe carefully slights, 
and the preéminent importance, in letters as in all other 
branches of imaginative creation, of the lecal, which is his con- 
stant focus of attention, is to be noted. — 

Poe was Not, it must be repeated, a Macabre genius, essen- 

EDGAR ALLAN POE © 219 

tially lost upon the grotesque and the arabesque. If we have 
appraised him a morass of “lolling lilies”, that is surface only. 

The local causes shaping Poe’s genius were two in charac- 
ter: the necessity for a fresh beginning, backed by a native 
vigor of extraordinary proportions,—with the corollary, that 
all “colonial imitation” must be swept aside. This was the 
conscious force which rose in Poe as innumerable timeless in- 
sights resulting, by his genius, in firm statements on the char- 
acter of form, profusely illustrated by his practices; and, 
second the immediate effect of the locality upon the first, upon 
his nascent impulses, upon his original thrusts; tormenting 
the depths into a surface of bizarre designs by which he’s 
known and which are noé at all the major point in question. 

Yet Boru influences were determined by the locality, which, 
in the usual fashion, finds its mind swayed by the results 
of its stupidity rather than by a self-interest bred of greater 
wisdom. As with all else in America, the value of Poe’s genius 
TO OURSELVES must be wncovered from our droppings, or at 
least uncovered from the “protection” which it must have 
raised about itself to have survived in any form among us— 
where everything is quickly trampled. | 

Poe “saw the end”; unhappily he saw his own despair at 
the same time, yet he continued to attack, with amazing genius 
seeking to discover, and discovering, points of firmness by 
which to stanp and grasp, against the slipping way they 
had of holding on in his locality. Either the New World must 
be mine as I will have it, or it is a worthless bog. There can 
be no concession. His attack was from the center out. Either 
I exist or I do not exist and no amount of pap which I hap- 
pen to be lapping can dull me to the loss. It was a doctrine, 
anti-American. Here everything was makeshift, everything 
was colossal, in profusion. The frightened hogs or scared 
birds feeding on the corn— It left, in 1840, the same mood 
as ever dominant among us. Take what you can get. What 
you lack, copy. It was a population puffed with braggadocio, 
whom Poe so beautifully summarizes in many of his prose tales. 

200 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

To such men, all of them, the most terrible experience in the 
world is to be shown up. This Poe did, in his criticisms, with 
venomous accuracy. It was a gesture to BE cLEAN. It 
was a wish to HAvE the world or leave it. It was the truest 
instinct in America demanding to be satisfied, and an end to 
makeshifts, self deceptions and grotesque excuses. And yet 
the grotesque inappropriateness of the life about him forced 
itself in among his words. 

One is forced on the conception of the New World as a 
woman. Poe was a new De Soto. The rest might be content 
with little things, not he. : 

‘Rather the ice than their way.” 

His attack upon the difficulty which faced him was bril- 
liantly conceived, faultlessly maintained and successful. The 
best term is perhaps: immaculate. 

What he wanted was connected with no particular place; — 
therefore it must be where he was. 

“We have at length arrived at that epoch when our litera- 
ture may and must stand on its own merits, or fall through its 
own defects. We have snapped asunder the leading-strings of 
our British Grandmama, and, better still, we have survived 
the first hours of our novel freedom,—the first licentious hours 
of hobbledehoy braggadocio and swagger. At last, then, we 
are in a condition to be criticized—even more, to be ne- 
glected ; 

What Poe says gains power by his not diminishing his 
force for the slightness of the object; it is a sense of an inevit- 
able, impartial tide. “We have no design to be bitter. We 
notice this book at all, only because it is an unusually large one 
of its kind, because it is lying here upon our table, and be- 
cause, whether justly or unjustly, whether for good reason or 
for none, it has attracted some portion of the attention of 
the public.” There is no softening for the department of 
names, old or new, but a sense of the evidence examined, as it 
lies on the page, by a faultless mechanism which he brings 
from the rear of his head for the trial. 

EDGAR ALLAN POE 221 

Lowell, Bryant, etc., concerned poetry with literature, Poe 
concerned it with the soul; hence their differing conceptions of 
the use of language. With Poe, words were not hung by usage 
with associations, the pleasing wraiths of former masteries, 
this is the sentimental trap-door to beginnings. With Poe 
words were figures; an old language truly, but one from which 
he carried over only the most elemental qualities to his new 
purpose; which was, to find a way to tell his soul. Sometimes 
he used words so playfully his sentences seem to fly away from 
sense, the destructive! with the conserving abandon, fore- 
shadowed, of a Gertrude Stein. The particles of language 
must be clear as sand. (See Diddling.) 

This was an impossible conception for the gluey imagina- 
tion of his day. Constantly he labored to detach someTHING 
from the inchoate mass—That’s it: 

His concern, the apex of his immaculate attack, was to 
detach a “method” from the smear of common usage—it is the 
work of nine tenths of his criticism. He struck to lay low the 
“niaiseries” of form and content with which his world 
abounded. It was a machine-gun fire; even in the slaughter 
of banality he rises to a merciless distinction. (See Rufus 
Dawes.) He sought by stress upon construction to hold the 
loose-strung mass off even at-the cost of an icy coldness of ap- 
pearance; it was the first need of his time, an escape from the 
formless mass he hated. It is the very sense of a beginning, as 
it is the impulse which drove him to the character of all his 
tales; to get from sentiment to form, a backstroke from the 
swarming “population.” 

He has a habit, borrowed perhaps from algebra, of balanc- 
ing his sentences in the middle, or of reversing them in the later 
clauses, a sense of play, as with objects, or numerals which he 
has in the original, disassociated, that is, from other literary 
habit; separate words which he feels and turns about as if he 
fitted them to his design with some sense of their individual 
quality: “those who belong properly to books, and to whom 
books, perhaps, do not quite so properly belong.” 

2922 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

The strong sense of a beginning in Poe is in no one else 
before him. What he says, being thoroughly local in origin, 
has some chance of being universal in application, a thing they 
never dared conceive. Made to fit a place it will have that 
actual quality of things anti-metaphysica | 

About Poe there is— 

No supernatural mystery— 

No extraordinary eccentricity of fate—— 

He is American, understandable by a simple exercise of reason; 
a light in the morass—which must appear eerie, even to him- 
self, by force of terrific contrast, an isolation that would nat- 
urally lead to drunkenness and death, logically and simply— 
by despair, as the very final evidence of a too fine seriousness 
and devotion. 

It is natural that the French (foreigners, unacquainted 
with American conditions) should be attracted by the sur- 
Face of his genius and copy the wrong thing, (but the ex- 
_ pressive thing), the strange, the bizarre (the recoil) without 
sensing the actuality, of which that is the complement,—and 
we get for Poe a REPuTATION for eccentric genius, maimed, the 

curious, the sick—at least the unexplainable crop-up, unre- 

lated to his ground—which has become his inheritance. 
*  # * * * * * * * 

“The fiery serpent that bit the children of Israel when — 

they wandered through the wilderness was possibly the guinea 
worm, which enters the body as a water flea, develops, and 
ultimately, lies coiled under the skin, from one to six feet in 
length. It formerly was coaxed out by winding it on a stick 

little by little each day. Then the zoologist found that it seeks — 
water in which to lay its eggs, and will naively crawl out if — 
the affected leg or arm is simply submerged in water for a few _ 

hours. 
“The mysterious is so simple when revealed by science!” 
* * * * * * % bd * 

On him is FOUNDED A LITERATURE—typical; an anger to 
sweep out the unoriginal, that became ill-tempered, a mono- — 

q 
7 

EDGAR ALLAN POE 293 

maniacal driving to destroy, to annihilate the copied, the slav- 
ish, the rauseE literature about him: this is the major impulse 
in his notes—darkening as he goes, losing the battle, as he feels 
himself going under—he emerges as the ghoulish, the driven 
back. It is the crudeness with which he was attacked in his 
own person, scoffed at— 

He declares, maintains himself, pre-supposes himself and 
1s first rate. First!—madly, valiantly battling for the right 
to BE first—to hold up his orreinaLiry— 

“Tf a man—if an Orphicist—or srEER—or whatever else he 
may choose to call himself, while the rest of the world calls 
him an ass—if this gentleman have an idea which he does not 
understand himself, the best thing he can do is to say nothing 
about it; ... but if he have any idea which is actually intelligi- 
ble to himself, and if he sincerely wishes to render it intelligible 
to others, we then hold it as indisputable that he should employ 
those forms of speech which are the best adapted to further his 
object. He should speak to the people in that people’s ordi- 
nary tongue. He should arrange words such as are habitually 
employed for the preliminary and introductory ideas to be 
conveyed—he should arrange them in collocations such as 
those in which we are accustomed to see those words arranged.” 
“Meantime we earnestly ask if bread-and-butter be the vast 
IDEA in question—if bread-and-butter be any portion of this 
vast wea? for we have often observed that when a sEER has to 
speak of even so usual a thing as bread-and- eee he can 
never be induced to mention it outright. . a 

The language of his essays is a peiarieatle HISTORY 
of the locality he springs from. There is no aroma to his 
words, rather a luminosity, that comes of a disassociation from 
anything else than thought and ideals; a coldly nebulous, side 
to side juxtaposition of the words as the ideas—It seems to fall 
back continuously to a bare surface exhausted by having 
reached no perch in tradition. Seldom a long or sensuous sen- 
tence, but with frequent reduplication upon itself as if holding 
itself up by itself. 

094 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

Thought, thought, mass—and the sense of soMETHING 
over the heads of the composite particles of the logic, the im- 
significance of the details, wu1cH HE DID acTUALLY achieve. 
A “childlike,” simple, deductive reasoning IS his criticism—a 
sense of BEGINNINc—of originality that presupposes an in- 
trinsic wortH in the reasoner—a sense of stripped, being 
clothed, nevertheless. 

Unwilling to concede the necessity for any prop to his 
logical constructions, save the locality upon which originality 
is rested, he is the diametric opposite of Longfellow—to say 
the least. But Longfellow was the apotheosis of all that had 
preceded him in America, to this extent, that he brought over — 
the most from “the other side.” In “Longfellow and Other 
Plagiarists,” Poe looses himself to the full upon them. But 
what had they done? No more surely than five hundred archi- 
tects are constantly practicing. Longfellow did it without 
genius, perhaps, but he did no more and no less than to bring 
the tower of the Seville Cathedral to Madison Square. 

This is the expression of a “good” spirit. It is the desire 
to have “culture” for America by “finding” it, full blown— — 
somewhere. But we had wandered too far, suffered too many 
losses for that. Such a conception could be no more than a 

pathetic reminiscence. It had noruine of the New World in ~ 

it. Yet, it was bred of the wish to bring to the locality what it 
lacked. 

What it lacked, really, was to be cultivated. So they build 
an unrelated copy upon it; this, as a sign of intelligence,— 
vigor. ‘That is, to bring out its qualities, they cover them. 
Culture is still the effect of cultivation, to work with a thing 

until it be rare; as a golden dome among the mustard fields. 

It implies a solidity capable of cultivation. Its effects are 
marble blocks that lie perfectly fitted and aligned to express — 
by isolate distinction the rising lusts which threw them off, 
regulated, in moving through the mass of impedimenta which 
is the world. a 
This is culture; in mastering them, to burst through the — 

EDGAR ALLAN POE 225 

peculiarities of an environment. It is nor culture to oppress 
a novel environment with the stale, if symmetrical, castoffs of 
another battle. They are nearly right when they say: Destroy 
the museums! But that is only the reflection, after all, of 
minds that fear to be slavish. Poe could look at France, Spain, 
Greece, and nor be impelled to copy. He could do this sr- 
cause he had the sense within him of a locality of his own, 
capable of cultivation. 

Poe’s use of the tags of other cultures than his own man- 
ages to be novel, interesting, useful, wnaffected, since it suc- 
ceeds in giving the impression of being not in the least dragged 
in by rule or pretence but of a fresh purpose such as I have 
indicated. There is nothing offensively “learned” there, noth- 
ing contemptuous, even in the witty tricks with bogus Latin 
which he plays on his illiterate public, which by its power, in 
turn, permits him an originality, allows him, even when he is 
satiric, an authenticity since he is not seeking to destroy 
but to assert, candidly, and to defend his own. 

He was the first to realize that the hard, sardonic, trucu- 
lent mass of the New World, hot, angry—was, in fact, not 
a thing to paint over, to smear, to destroy—for it wouLp not 
be destroyed, it was too powerful,—it smiled! That it is nor 
a thing to be slighted by men.’ Difficult, its very difficulty was 
their strength. It was in the generous bulk of its animal 
_erudity that their every fineness would be found safely im- 
bedded. 

Poe conceived the possibility, the sullen, volcanic inevita- 
bility of the place. He was willing to go down and wrestle with 
its conditions, using every tool France, England, Greece could 
give him,—but to use them to original purpose. 

This is his anger against Longfellow. 

The difficulty is in holding the mind down to the point 
of seeing the beginning difference between Poe and the rest. 
One cannot expect to see as wide a gap between him and the 
others as exists between the Greek and the Chinese. It is 
only in the conception of a possibility that he is most dis- 

226 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

tinguished. His greatness is in that he turned his back and 
faced inland, to originality, with the identical gesture of a 
Boone. 

And for that reason he is unrecognized. Americans have 
never recognized themselves. How can they? It is impos- 
sible until someone invent the oricrnat terms. As long as 
we are content to be called by somebody’s else terms, we are 
incapable of being anything but our own dupes. 

Thus Poe must suffer by his originality. Invent that 
which is new, even if it be made of pine from your own yard, 
and there’s none to know what you have done. It is because 
there’s no name. This is the cause of Poe’s lack of recogni- 
tion. He was American. He was the astounding, inconceiy- 
able growth of his locality. Gape at him they did, and he at 
them in amazement. Afterward with mutual hatred; he in ~ 
disgust, they in mistrust. It is only that which is under your 
nose which seems inexplicable. 

_ Here Poe emerges—in no sense the bizarre, isolate writer, 
the curious literary figure. On the contrary, in him Ameri- 
can literature is anchored, in him alone, on solid ground. J 

In all he says there is a sense of him surrounded by his 
time, tearing at it, ever with more rancor, but always at battle, 
taking hold. | 

But Poe—differing from pioneers in other literatures, the — 
great beginners—due to the nature of the people, had first 7 
to lift his head through a successful banality. ‘This was a 
double impost. But he did it, wor by despising, ignoring, 
slighting the work that preceded him but by attacking it. 
“Among all the pioneers of American literature, whether prose 
or poetical, there is not one (Note: In his own estimate even, | 
he begins.) whose productions have not been much overrated 
by his countrymen.” ; 

“But originality, as it is one of the highest, is ee one 
of the rarest of merits. In America it is especially, and very | 
remarkably, rare—this through causes sufficiently well un-— 
derstood.” 7 . 

EDGAR ALLAN POE Q27 

He abhorred the “excessively opportune.”—Of course, he 

says, to write of the Indians, the forests, the great natural 
beauty of the New World will be attractive and make a hit— 
so he counsels writers to avor it, for reasons crystal clear 
and well chosen. (See Fenimore Cooper.) His whole in- 
sistence has been upon method, in opposition to a nameless 
rapture over nature. He admired Claude Lorraine. Instead 
of to hog-fill the copied style with a gross rural sap, he wanted 
a lean style, rapid as a hunter and with an aim as sure. One 
way, in the New World, men must go. Bust gut or acute wit. 
Find the ground, on your feet or on your belly. It is a fight. 
He counsels writers to borrow nothing from the scene, but to 
put all the weight of effort into the writinc. Put aside the 
GRAND scene and get to work to express yourself. Method, 
punctuation, grammar— 
The local condition of literature rorcED Poe’s hand. It 
is necessary to understand this if his names are to be grasped. 
By avoiding, of necessity, the fat country itself for its ex- 
pression; to originate a style that does spring from the local 
conditions, not of trees and mountains, but of the “soul”— 
here starved, stricken by loss of liberty, ready to die—he is 
forced in certain directions for his subjects. 

But this left him in difficulties. When he had narrowed 
himself down to a choice of method and subject, when all the 
meaningless lump of the lush landscape and all that that m- 
plies had been swept away, THEN, and only then will he 
begin to search for a subject. A voluntary lopping off of a 
NATURAL landscape, forced him into a field which he must 
have searched for, a field of cold logic, of invention, to which 
his work must still present a natural appearance: into his 
imaginative prose. 

His criticism paves the way for what must be his prose— 
illustrating his favorite theory that the theory includes the 
practice. 

No better means of transit from the criticism to the tales 
could be imagined than his discussion of the merits and de- 

228 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

merits of Hawthorne as a proseist. He expresses his delight 
and surprise at finding Hawthorne’s work of such excellence, 
but then he finds a fault: | 

“He has the purest style, the finest taste, the most available 
scholarship, the most delicate humor, the most touching pathos, 
the most radiant imagination, the most consummate ingenuity, 
and with these varied good qualities he has done well as a 
mystic. But is there any one of these qualities which would 
prevent his doing doubly as well in a career of honest, up- 
right, sensible, prehensible, and. comprehensible things? Let 
him mend his pen, get a bottle of visible ink, come out from 
the Old Manse, cut Mr. Alcott, hang (if possible) the Editor 
of The Dial, and throw out of the window to the pigs all his — 
odd numbers of The North American Review.” 

Hawthorne has no repugnance for handling what Poe pur- — 
posely avoids, the contamination of the UNFORMED LUMP, 
the “monstrum, horrendum, informe, ingens, cui lumen ademp- 
tum.” And it is precisely here that lies Hawthorne’s lack of — 
importance to our literature when he is compared with Poe; 
what Hawthorne loses by his willing closeness to the life of 
his locality in its vague humors; his lifelike copying of ‘the 
New England melancholy ; his reposeful closeness to the town — 
pump—Poe gains by abhorring; flying to the ends of the 
earth for “original” material— 

By such a simple, logical twist does Poe succeed in being . 
the more American, heeding more the local necessities, the 
harder structural imperatives—by standing off to srr instead — 
of forcing himself too close. Whereas Hawthorne, in his tales, 
by doing what everyone else in France, England, Germany 
was doing for his own milieu, is no more than copying their 
method with another setting; does not ortcrnaTE; has not a 
beginning literature at heart that must establish its own rules, — 
own framework,—Poe has realized by adopting a more clea 
mien. 

This feeling in Poe’s tales, that is, the hidden, under, un-— 
apparent part, gives him the firmness of rnsicHT into the con- — 

EDGAR ALLAN POE 229 

ditions upon which our literature must rest, always the same, 
a local one, surely, but not of sentiment or mood, as not of 
trees and Indians, but of original fibre, the normal toughness 
which fragility of mood presupposes, if it will be expressive 

of anything— It is the expression of Poe’s clearness of 
insight into the true difficulty, and his soundness of judgment. 
% * * * # % * 

To understand what Poe is driving at in his tales, one 
should read first nor the popular, perfect—Gold Bug, Mur- 
ders in the Rue Morgue, etc., which by their brilliancy de- 
tract from the observation of his deeper intent, but the less 
striking tales—in fact all, but especially those where his 
humor is less certain, his mood lighter, less tightly bound by 
the incident, where numerous illuminating faults are allowed 
to become expressive, The Business Man, The Man That 
Was Used Up, Loss of Breath, BonBon, Diddling, The Angel 
of the Odd—and others of his lesser Tales. 

It should be noted how often certain things take place— 
how often there is death but not that only; it is the Pay 
broken apart, dismembered, as in Loss of Breath— 

Then, as in Hop Frog, The System of Dr. Tarr and Pro- 
fessor Fether and the Murders in the Rue Morgue—the re- 
current image of the ape. Is it his disgust with his immed- 
iate associates and his own fears, which cause this frequent 
use of the figure to create the emotion of extreme terror?— 
“Your majesty cannot conceive of the effect produced, at a 
masquerade, by eight chained orang-outangs, imagined to be 
real ones by the most of the company; and rushing in with 
savage cries, among the crowd of delicately and gorgeously 
habited men and women. The contrast is inimitable.” 

Note, in Silence—a Fable: “sorrow and weariness and dis- 
gust with mankind and a longing for solitude.” 

Many colloquial words could be detached from Poe’s usage 
if it were worth while, to show how the language he practices 
varies from English, but such an exercise would be of little 
value—hipped, crack, etc.—it does not touch bottom. 

230 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

The Tales continue the theories of the criticism, carrying 
out what they propose: 

1. In choice of material, abstract. 2. In method, a logi- 
cal construction that clips away, in great part, the “scenery” 
near at hand in order to let the real business of composition 
show. 3. A primitive awkwardness of diction, lack of polish, 
colloquialism that is, unexpectedly, especially in the dialogues, 
much in the vein of Mark Twain. 

One feels that inthe actual composition of his tales there 
must have been for him, as they embody it in fact, a fascina- 
tion other than the topical one. The impulse that made him 
write them, that made him enjoy writing them—cannot have 
been the puerile one of amazement, but a deeper, logical en- 
joyment, in keeping with his own seriousness: it is that of 
PROVING even the most preposterous of his inventions plausible 
—that py His METHOD he makes them worx. They go: 
they prove him potent, they confirm his thought. And by 
the very extreme of their play, by so much the more do they 
hold up the actuality of that which he conceives. 

If there ever had been another American to use his Greek, 
Sanscrit, Hebrew, Latin, French, German, Italian and Span- 
ish—in the text—with anything like the unspoiled mastery of 
Poe, we should have known, long since, what it meant to have 
a literature of our own. 

It is to have a basis, a local stanchion, by which to bridge 
over the gap between present learning and the classical; that 
asserts the continuity of the common virtues of style; that 
asserts their aristocratic origin, or their democratic origin, the 
same, as it has been pointed out recently, since an aristocracy 
is the flower of a locality and so the full expression of a 
democracy. 

Of his method in the Tales, the significance and the secret 
' is: authentic particles, a thousand of which spring to the 
mind for quotation, taken apart and reknit with a view to em- 
phasize, enforce and make evident, the method. 'Their qual- 
ity of skill in observation, their heat, local verity, being over- 

EDGAR ALLAN POE 231 

shadowed only by the detached, the abstract, the cold phil- 
osophy of their joining together ; a method springing so freshly 
from the local conditions which determine it, by their em- 
phasis of firm crudity and lack of coordinated structure, as 
to be worthy of most painstaking study— The whole pe- 
riod, America 1840, could be rebuilt, psychologically (phreno- 
logically) from Poe’s “method.” 

* * * * * * = 2 * 

It is especially in the poetry where “death looked gigan- 
tically down” that the horror of the formless resistance which 
opposed, maddened, destroyed him has forced its character into 
the air, the wind, the blessed galleries of paradise, above a 
morose, dead world, peopled by shadows and silence, and 
despair— It is the compelling force of his isolation. 

The one earthly island he found where he might live in 
something akin to the state he imagined, the love of his wife, 
had to be single and inviolate. Failing of a more compre- 
hensive passion, which might have possessed him had the 
place been of favorable omen, only in this narrow cell could 
he exist at all. Of this the poems are the full effect. He is 
known as a poet, yet there are but five poems, possibly three. 

When she died, there was nothing left. In his despair 
he had nowhere to turn. It is the very apotheosis of the place 
and the time. 

He died imploring from those about him a love he could 

‘not possess, since his own love, as his poems, had been SO 
mingled in character with the iron revenge which completely 
surrounded him that it could not be repeated once its single 
object had been lost. 

But here, in his poetry least of all, is there a mystery. 
It is but the accumulation of all that he has expressed, in the 
criticism, in the prose tales, but made as if so shaken with 
desire, that it has come off as a flame, destroying the very vial 

that contained it—and become, against his will almost it 

would seem,—himself. 

232 IN THE AMERICAN GRAIN 

It is not by a change in character but by its quickened 
motion that it has turned from mere heat into light—by its 
power of penetration that it has been brought to dwell upon 
love. By its acid power to break down truth that it has been 
forced upon love— | 

I mean that though in this his “method” has escaped him, 
yet his poems remain of the single stuff of his great “theory”: 
to grasp the meaning, to understand, to reduce all things to 
method, to control, lifting himself to power— 

And failing, truth turning to love, as if metamorphosed 
in his hands as he was about to grasp it—now the full horror 
of his isolation comes down— 

In his prose he could still keep a firm hold, he still held the 
“arrangement” fast and stood above it, but in the poetry he 
was at the edge—there was nothing 

Here in poetry, where it is said “we approach the gods,” 
Poe was caught, instead, in his time. 

Now, defenseless, the place itself attacked him. Now the 
thinness of his coat, the terror of his isolation took hold. 

Had he lived in a world where love throve, his poems might — 
have grown differently. But living where he did, surrounded 
as he was by that world of unreality, a formless “population” 
—drifting and feeding—a huge terror possessed him. 

His passion for the refrain is like an echo from a hollow. 
It is his own voice returning— 

His imagery is of the desperate situation of his mind, thin 
as a flame to mount unsupported, successful for a moment in 
the love of—not so much his wife—but in the escape she filled 
for him with her frail person, herself afflicted as by “ghouls.” 

Disarmed, in his poetry the place itself comes through. 
This is the New World. It is this that it does, as if 

It is in this wraithlike quality of his poems, of his five 
poems, that Poe is most of the very ground, hard to find, as 
if we walked upon a cushion of light pressed thin beneath our 
feet, that insulates, satirises—while we lash ourselves up and 
down in a fury of impotence. 

oe ele 2 ek See > \ i a ele oe - en i: “wets be 
or fl 7 A AA TS ee eR ee hee, A 4 eee 
r > i . P ery, Ae ‘ [3 ee ss ! 

fe oe eee ey = Dh eine ’ ae Aen 1 
Te) eee HDGAR ALLAN POR 233 
e tay : zainst the thin edge, driven to be heard by 
> bat ring racket about him to a distant screaming—the oe 

essence of his locality. aes “f 
The best poem is T'o One in Paradise. 

ae 

f 
 - 

ABRAHAM LINCOLN 

HE Great Railsplitter’s, “All I am or ever hope to be 

I owe to my angel mother”; the walking up and down in 

Springfield on the narrow walk between the two houses, 

day after day, with a neighbor’s baby, borrowed for the occa- 

sion, sleeping inside his cape upon his shoulder to give him 

stability while thinking and composing his coming speeches; 

and apart from its cowardice, the blinding stupidity of his 

murderer’s sic semper tyrannis, after he had shot him in the 

back—in this trinity is reflected the brutalizing desolation 
of life in America up to that time; yet perversely flowering. 

Mengelberg, a great broad hipped one, conducts an or- 
chestra in the same vein. It is a woman. He babies them. 
He leans over and floods them with his insistences. It is a 
woman drawing to herself with insatiable passion the myriad 
points of sound, conferring upon each the dignity of a suc- 
cessful approach, relieving each of his swelling burden (but 
particularly, by himself), in the overtowering symphony— 
It is the balm of command. The violins, surrounded, yet feel 
_ that they have come alone, in silence and in secret, singly to be 
heard. 

It is Lincoln pardoning the fellow who slept on sentry 
duty. It is the grace of the Bixby letter. The least private 
would find a woman to caress him, a woman in an old shawl— 
with a great bearded face and a towering black hat above it, 
to give unearthly reality. 

Brancusi should make his statue—of wood—after the man- 
ner of his Socrates, with the big hole in the enormous mass 
of the head, save that this would be a woman— 

The age-old torture reached a disastrous climax in Lin- 

234 

ABRAHAM LINCOLN 235 

coln. Failing of relief or expression, the place tormented it- 
self into a convulsion of bewilderment and pain—with a woman, 
born somehow, aching over it, holding all fearfully together. 
It was the end of THar period. 

ao <k 

Va) ae 

los ial eS tee ar ® a 

/ -—— ae 

as {Oma m4 SAS t. a. 4 id an a oo i | > 
=| ms * F Pes ay, 4 Soh oot se he 
‘Mates. ‘ '. r S po anes ei k & 
a ott 

| 
ae 
eC a 

* 

§ 

AAS 
way ee 
Hite 
ae 
.
