Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


PREHISTORIC   MAN. 


VOLUME   I. 


G 


PREHISTORIC   MAN 


RESEARCHES  INTO  THE  ORIGIN  OF  CIVILISATION 
IN  THE  OLD  AND  THE  NEW  WORLD 


BY 


DANIEL   WILSON,  LL.D. 

PROFB880B  OF  HISTORY  AND  ENGLISH  LITERATURE  IN  UNIYXBSITT  OOLLBGB,  TORONTO  ; 
AUTHOR  OF  THE  ''  ARdLOOLOGT  AND  PREHISTORIC  ANNALS  OF  SCOTLAND/'  ETC. 


IN    TWO    VOLUMES. 
VOLUME   L 


MACMILLAN   AND    CO., 

AND  23,  HENRIETTA  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN, 

1862. 

[  Tht  right  of  Translation  is  reserved.  ] 


IN    FOND    MEMORIAL 


OF   A   BROTHER'S   LIFE-LONG   SYMPATHY 


IN   MANY   FAVOURITE  RESEARCHES 


THESE   VOLUMES 


DEPRIVED  BY   DEATH  OF  THEIR  PURPOSED  DEDICATION 


ARE  INSCRIBED  WITH   THE   LOVED   NAME   OF 


GEORGE    WILSON,    M.D.    F.B.S.E. 

LATE  BBOIUS  PSOFB880B  OF  TBCHKOLOOY  IN  THE  UNITBBSITY  OF  EDIKBUBGU 
AND  DIRECTOB  OF  THE  INDUSTRIAL  MUSEUM  OF  SCOTLAND. 


PREFACE. 

• 

The  object  aimed  at  in  the  following  work  is  to  view 
Man^  as  far  as  possible,  unaflFected  by  those  modifying 
influences  which  accompany  the  development  of  nations 
and  the  maturity  of  a  true  historic  period,  in  order 
thereby  to  ascertain  the  sources  from  whence  such  de- 
velopment and  maturity  proceed.  These  researches  into 
the  origin  of  civilisation  have  accordingly  been  pursued 
under  the  belief  which  influenced  the  author  in  previous 
inquiries,  that  the  investigations  of  the  archaeologist, 
when  carried  on  in  an  enlightened  spirit,  are  replete 
with  interest  in  relation  to  some  of  the  most  important 
problems  of  modem  science.  To  confine  our  studies  to 
mere  antiquities  is  like  reading  by  candle-light  at  noon- 
day ;  but  to  reject  the  aid  of  archaeology  in  the  progress 
of  science,  and  especially  of  ethnological  science,  is  to 
extinguish  the  lamp  of  the  student  when  most  dependent 
on  its  borrowed  rays.  This  is  impressed  on  the  mind 
with  renewed  force  by  the  novel  phases  in  which  the 
problems  affecting  man's  being  are  reproduced.  We 
are  no  longer  permitted  to  discuss  merely  the  diversities 
of  existing  races.  It  seems  as  if  the  whole  comprehen- 
sive question  of  man's  origin  must  be  reopened,  and 
determined  afresh  in  its  relations  to  modem  science. 
To  the  naturalist  who  turns  from  the  study  of  inferior 


xvi  PREFACE, 

orders  of  life,  man  civilized,  or  even  brought  into  close 
contact  with  civilisation,  seems  an  essentially  artificial 
product  of  many  extraneous  influences  :  a  being  "  from 
nature  rising  slow  to  art/'  Nor  has  the  verdict  of  the 
philosopher  invariably  conflicted  with  the  fancy  of  the 
poet,  that  man  devoid  of  all  civilisation  is  in  a  state  of 
nature,  and  the  true  type  of  man  primeval.  Against 
such  an  idea,  however,  all  the  higher  attributes  of  his 
nature  seem  to  cry  out  Tested  by  every  moral  standard 
he  is  found  to  have  deteriorated  far  below  his  normal 
capacities,  and  "  the  noble  savage ''  proves  at  last  but  a 
poet's  dream. 

But  have  we  then  no  alternative  between  man  plus 
the  artificialities  of  civilisation,  and  man  minus  the  in- 
fluential operation  of  moral  laws  which  have  their  efii- 
cient  equivalents  in  the  instincts  of  all  other  animals ; 
or  can  we  not  realize  even  in  theory  an  intermediate 
normal  condition?  Such  questions  are  replete  with 
interest  whatever  be  the  value  of  answers  rendered 
here  to  some  of  the  difficulties  they  suggest.  The 
ethnologist  does  indeed  study  man  fi:om  the  same 
point  of  view  as  the  mere  naturalist ;  but  to  do  so 
to  any  good  purpose  this  essential  difference  between 
man  and  all  other  animals  must  be  kept  in  view: 
that  in  him  a  being  appears  for  the  first  time  among 
the  multitude  of  animated  organizations,  subject  to 
natural  laws  as  they  are,  but  including  within  himself 
the  power  of  interpreting  and  controlling  the  opera- 
tion of  those  laws;  of  accumulating  and  transmitting 
experience;  and,  above  all,  of  looking  in  upon  the 
workings  of  his  own  mind,  and  recognising  as  part  of 
his  nature  a  system  of  moral  government  which  he  may 


PREFACE.  ix 

obey  or  resist,  though  not  with  impunity.  Our  aim, 
therefore,  is  to  isolate  him  from  extraneous  influences, 
and  look,  if  possible,  on  man  per  se ;  or  at  least  where 
he  can  be  shown  to  have  attained  maturity,  exposed 
only  to  such  influences  as  are  the  ofispring  of  his  own 
progress.  In  so  far  as  this  is  possible  may  we  hope  to 
recover  some  means  of  testing  man's  innate  capacity, 
and  of  determining  by  comparison  what  is  common  to 
the  race. 

Where,  then,  is  man  to  be  thus  found  ?  In  the  days 
of  Herodotus,  Transalpine  Europe  was  a  greater  mystery 
to  the  nations  on  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean  than 
Central  Africa  is  to  us.  To  the  Komans  of  four  cen- 
turies later,  Britain  was  still  almost  another  world ;  and 
the  great  northern  hive  from  whence  the  spoilers  of  the 
dismembered  empire  of  the  Caesars  were  speedily  to 
emerge,  was  so  entirely  unknown  to  them,  that,  as  Dr. 
Arnold  has  remarked  in  his  inaugural  lecture :  "  The 
Eoman  colonies  along  the  banks  of  the  Rhine  and  the 
Danube  looked  out  on  the  coimtry  beyond  those  rivers 
as  we  look  up  at  the  stars,  and  actually  see  with  our 
eyes  a  world  of  which  we  know  nothing."  Nevertheless, 
the  civilisation  of  the  historic  centres  of  the  ancient  world 
aroimd  the  Mediterranean  was  not  without  some  in- 
fluence on  the  germs  of  modem  nations,  then  nursing 
the  hardihood  of  a  vigorous  infancy  beyond  the  Danube 
and  the  Baltic.  The  shores  of  the  Atlantic  and  German 
oceans,  and  the  islands  of  the  British  seas,  had  long 
before  jdelded  tribute  to  the  Phoenician  mariner ;  and  as 
the  archaeologist  and  the  ethnologist  pursue  their  re- 
searches, and  restore  to  light  memorials  of  Europe^s  in- 
fancy and  early  youth,  they  are  more  frequently  startled 


X  PREFACE. 

with  affinities  to  the  ancient  historic  nations,  in  lan- 
guage, arts,  and  rites,  than  by  the  recovery  of  evidence 
of  a  wholly  unfamiliar  past. 

But  it  is  altogether  different  with  the  New  World 
which  Columbus  revealed.  Superficial  students  of  its 
monuments  have  indeed  misinterpreted  intellectual  char- 
acteristics pertaining  to  the  infantile  instincts  common  to 
human  thought  into  fancied  analogies  with  the  arts  of 
Eg3rpt;  and  more  than  one  ingenious  philosopher  has 
traced  out  affinities  with  the  mythology  and  astronomi- 
cal science  of  the  ancient  East :  but  the  western  conti- 
nent still  stands  a  world  apart,  with  a  peculiar  people, 
and  with  languages,  arts,  and  customs  essentially  its 
own.  To  whatever  source  the  American  nations  may  be 
traced,  they  had  remained  shut  in  for  unnumbered  cen- 
turies by  ocean  barriers  from  all  the  influences  of  the 
historic  hemisphere.  Yet  there  the  first  European  ex- 
plorers found  man  so  little  dissimilar  to  all  with  which 
they  were  already  familiar,  that  the  name  of  Indian 
originated  in  the  belief,  retained  by  the  great  cosmo- 
grapher  to  the  last,  that  the  American  continent  was  no 
new  world,  but  only  the  eastern  confines  of  Asia. 

Such,  then,  is  a  continent  where  man  may  be  studied 
under  circumstances  which  seem  to  furnish  the  best 
guarantee  of  his  independent  development.  No  reflex 
light  of  Grecian  or  Eoman  civilisation  has  guided  him 
on  his  way.  The  great  sources  of  religious  and  moral 
suasion  which  have  given  form  to  medisBval  and  modem 
Europe,  and  so  largely  influenced  the  polity  and  culture 
of  Asia,  and  even  of  Africa,  were  effectually  excluded  ; 
and  however  prolonged  the  period  of  occupation  of  the 
western  hemisphere  by  its  own  American  nations  may 


PREFACE,  xi 

have  been,  man  is  still  seen  there  in  a  condition  which 
seems  to  reproduce  some  of  the  most  familiar  phases 
ascribed  to  the  infancy  of  the  unhistoric  world.  The 
records  of  its  childhood  are  not  obscured,  as  in  Europe, 
by  later  chroniclings ;  where,  in  every  attempt  to  de- 
cipher the  traces  of  an  earUer  history,  we  have  to  speU 
out  a  nearly  obliterated  palimpsest.  Amid  the  simpli- 
city of  its  palaeography,  the  aphorism,  by  which  alone 
the  Roman  could  claim  to  be  among  the  world^s  an- 
cient races,  acquires  a  new  force :  "  antiquitas  seculi, 
juventus  mundi.''  The  revolutions  of  modem  history, 
and  the  frequent  intercourse  of  the  nineteenth  cen- 
tury, have  indeed  conjoined  the  western  continent  to 
ancient  Christendom ;  and  attracted  attention  to  it 
most  frequently  as  an  arena  whereon  old  political  sys- 
tems and  religious  theories  are  reproduced  and  tested 
anew  by  nations  of  European  descent.  But  in  the  six- 
teenth century  the  absolute  isolation  of  this  "world 
apart"  was  strongly  felt.  Sir  Thomas  More  was  already 
in  the  household  of  Cardinal  Morton,  to  which  he  was 
admitted  in  1495,  when  the  first  rumours  of  the  dis- 
covery of  America  reached  his  ears ;  and  within  twenty 
years  thereafter  he  produced  his  platonic  commonwealth 
of  Utopia,  an  imaginary  island  visited  by  Eaphael  Hyth- 
loday,  a  companion,  as  he  feigned,  of  Amerigo  Ves- 
pucci, from  whom  the  wondrous  narrative  was  derived 
during  a  visit  to  Antwerp.  Another  century  had  nearly 
completed  its  cycle  since  the  eye  of  Columbus  beheld 
the  long-expected  land,  when  in  1590,  Edmund  Spenser 
crossed  the  Irish  Channel,  bearing  with  him  the  first 
three  books  of  the  "  Faerie  Qiieen,"  in  the  introduction 
to  the  second  of  which  he  thus  defends  the  verisimili- 


xii  PREFACE. 

tude  of  the  fairy-land  in  which  the  scenes  of  his  "  famous 
antique  history"  are  laid  : — 

"  Who  ever  heaid  of  th*  Indian  Peru  ? 
Or  who  in  venturous  vessel  measured 
The  Amazon  huge  river,  now  found  true  ? 
Or  fruitfullest  Vii^ginia  who  did  ever  view  ? 

Yet  all  these  were,  when  no  man  did  them  know, 

Yet  have  from  wisest  ages  hidden  been ; 
And  later  times  things  more  unknown  shall  show ; 

Why  then  should  witless  man  so  much  misween 

That  nothing  is  but  that  which  he  hath  seen  ? 
What  if  within  the  moon's  fair  shining  sphere  ; 

What  if  in  every  other  star  unseen, 
Of  other  worlds  he  happily  should  hear  ? 
He  wonder  would  much  more  ;  yet  such  to  some  appear." 

It  was  by  the  advice  of  Ealeigh,  his  "shepherd  of 
the  ocean/'  that  the  poet  visited  England  with  the  un- 
published poem  ;  yet  it  is  obvious  that  to  his  fancy  the 
western  hemisphere  was  stiU  almost  as  much  a  world 
apart,  as  if  the  discoverers  of  Virginia  had  sailed  up 
the  blue  vault  of  heaven,  and  brought  back  the  story  of 
another  planet  on  which  it  had  been  their  fortime  to 
alight. 

Here  then  appears  to  be  a  point  from  whence  it 
seems  possible  to  obtain,  as  it  were,  a  parallax  of  man, 
already  viewed  in  Europe's  prehistoric  dawn ;  to  look 
on  him  as  on  the  stars  seen  from  Teneriffe  above  the 
clouds ;  and  to  test  anew  what  essentially  pertains  to 
him,  and  what  has  been  artificially,  or  even  acci- 
dentally superadded  by  external  circumstances.  Such, 
at  least,  has  been  the  author's  aim  in  turning  to  account 
the  opportunities  afibrded  by  a  prolonged  residence  on 
some  of  the  newest  sites  of  the  New  World ;  and  to  the 


PREFACE,  xiii 

use  made  of  these  must  be  mainly  due  whatever  value 
pertains  to  the  glimpses  of  a  remote  past  which  the 
following  pages  attempt  to  disclose.  But  though  thus 
far  dependent  on  American  researches,  they  refer  no  less 
to  the  origin  of  man  and  the  beginnings  of  his  history 
in  the  Old  World  than  in  the  New.  The  author  had 
already  familiarized  himself  with  the  unwritten  chron- 
icles of  Europe's  infancy  and  youth,  when  unexpectedly 
transplanted  among  the  colonists  of  another  continent, 
and  within  reach  of  aboriginal  tribes  of  the  American 
forests.  "The  eye  sees  what  it  brings  the  power  to 
see;"  and  in  these  he  discovered  objects  of  interest  on 
many  grounds,  but  chiefly  from  the  fact  that  he  soon 
perceived  he  had  already  realized  much  in  relation  to  a 
long  obliterated  past  of  Britain's  and  Europe's  infancy, 
which  was  here  reproduced  in  Hving  reality  before 
his  eyes.  In  1853,  he  received  the  appointment  to  the 
chair  of  History  and  English  literature  in  University 
CoUege,  Toronto,  and  before  the  year  drew  to  a  close 
had  commenced  observations,  the  results  of  which  are 
embodied  in  these  volumes.  Whatever  may  be  their 
worth,  they  set  forth  the  fruits  of  patient  and  con- 
scientious investigation,  and  concentrate  into  brief  space 
deductions  arrived  at  after  much  labour  and  research. 
His  vacations  have  afforded  opportunities  for  witnessing 
the  Ked  Man  as  he  is  still  to  be  seen  beyond  the  out- 
skirts of  modern  civiUsation,  and  for  exploring  the 
buried  memorials  of  extinct  nations  on  older  sites.  He 
has  also  twice  visited  Philadelphia,  and  minutely  studied 
the  collections  formed  by  the  author  of  the  Crania 
Americana,  with  the  additions  made  to  that  valuable 
ethnological   department   of  the   Academy  of  Natural 


xiv  PREFACE, 

Sciences.  Repeated  references  in  the  following  pages  in- 
dicate other  American  collections  in  Washington,  Phila- 
delphia, Boston,  New  York,  Albany,  etc.,  as  well  as  those 
of  Canada^  which  have  also  famished  useful  materials. 

In  carrying  out  his  researches,  the  author  has  been 
placed  under  many  obligations  to  scientific  friends.  To 
Dr.  Henry,  the  learned  Secretary  of  the  Smithsonian 
Institution  at  Washington;  Dr.  J.  Aitken  Meigs,  the 
Librarian  of  the  Academy  of  Natural  Sciences  of  Phila- 
delphia ;  Dr.  J.  C.  White,  the  Secretary  of  the  Boston 
Natural  History  Society ;  Mr.  Thomas  Fenwick  and  Dr. 
E.  H.  Davis  of  the  American  Ethnological  Society ;  and 
the  Hon.  George  Folsom  of  the  Historical  Society  of 
New  York :  he  is  specially  indebted  for  the  liberality 
with  which  Museums  and  Libraries  have  been  placed  at 
his  command.  On  two  different  visits  to  Philadelphia 
to  examine  the  Collection  of  Crania  formed  by  Dr. 
Morton,  the  keys  of  the  cases  were  freely  intrusted  to 
him,  and  some  of  the  many  liberal  services  rendered  in 
fortherance  of  his  investigations  by  their  experienced 
curator,  Dr.  J.  Aitken  Meigs,  are  acknowledged  in  the 
following  pages.  With  equally  unrestricted  freedom,  the 
collections  of  the  Historical  Society  of  New  York,  and 
the  cabinets  of  the  Natural  History  Society  of  Boston, 
as  well  as  the  private  collections  of  Dr.  J.  Mason  War- 
ren, Mr.  J.  H.  Blake,  Dr.  E.  H.  Davis,  and  others  re- 
ferred to,  were  thrown  open  to  him  ;  and  repeated  expe- 
rience confirms  him  in  the  belief,  that  in  no  country  in 
the  world  are  public  and  private  libraries  and  collections 
made  available  to  the  scientific  inquirer  with  the  same 
unrestricted  freedom  as  in  the  United  States.  To  J.  H. 
Blake,  Esq.  of  Boston,  the  author  is  specially  indebted 


PREFACE.  XV 

for  the  liberaUty  with  which  he  haa  placed  at  his  disposal 
notes  of  travel  in  Peru ;  drawings  of  objects  observed 
there ;  and  the  valuable  collection  of  mummies,  crania, 
and  Peruvian  antiqmties  brought  home  by  him,  and  re- 
peatedly referred  to  in  the  following  pages.  To  Dr.  E.  H. 
Davis,  one  of  the  authors  of  the  Ancient  Monuments  of 
the  Mississippi  Valley^  he  is  under  great  obligations, 
not  only  for  access  to  the  collections  from  which  the 
illustrations  of  that  work  were  derived,  but  for  casts  and 
photographs  of  special  objects  calculated  to  aid  him  in 
his  researches.  Among  his  Canadian  friends^  he  owes 
special  thanks  to  his  colleague,  Professor  Croft,  for 
careftiUy  executed  analyses  of  Peruvian  bronzes ;  to  Dr. 
Bovell  and  Dr.  Hodder,  for  free  use  of  their  collec- 
tions of  Indian  crania ;  to  Mr.  Paul  Kane,  the  author 
of  Wanderings  of  an  Artist  among  the  Indians  of 
North  America^  for  sketches  made  during  his  travels, 
as  well  as  for  information  derived  from  recollections 
of  the  incidents  and  observations  of  a  highly-privileged 
sojourner  among  the  Indian  tribes  of  the  Hudson^s  Bay 
territory ;  and  to  the  Hon.  G.  W.  AUan,  whose  ethno- 
logical collections  now  include  the  numerous  objects 
obtained  by  Mr.  Kane  during  his  wanderings.  Older 
friends  at  home,  and  especially  Mr.  T.  B.  Johnston,  the 
Treasurer  of  the  Society  of  Antiquaries  of  Scotland,  and 
Mr.  Kobert  Cox,  W.S.,  of  the  Edinburgh  Phrenological 
Society,  have  largely  aided  in  renewed  references  to  the 
familiar  collections  of  those  Societies. 

To  the  sympathy  manifested  in  the  author's  researches 
by  his  Excellency  Sir  Edmund  W.  Head,  Bart.,  while 
Governor-General  of  the  Province,  he  is  indebted  for 
instructions  forwarded  to  the  various  officers  and  super- 


xvi  PREFACE, 

intendents  of  the  Indian  Department,  whereby  he  has 
been  able  to  obtain  valuable  statistics  illustrating  ques- 
tions which  affect  the  present  condition  and  future  pro- 
spects of  the  Indians  of  British  North  America,  and  which 
are  discussed  here  in  their  relations  to  the  main  subject 
of  investigation. 

It  only  remains  to  be  added,  that  while  the  facilities 
for  research  into  the  origin  of  civilisation  and  the  condi- 
tion of  primitive  races,  afforded  by  a  residence  in  the 
New  World,  are  great,  they  are  accompanied  by  one 
important  drawback,  in  the  want  of  adequate  libraries 
or  books  of  reference,  inevitable  in  a  young  colony.  As, 
moreover,  the  author  has  been  prevented,  by  the  impedi- 
ments which  the  Atlantic  interposes  between  liim  and 
his  publishers  from  revising  the  proof-sheets  of  the  fol- 
lowing pages,  he  must  crave  the  intelligent  forbearance 
of  the  critic  should  any  notable  blunders  escape  the  eye 
of  the  press-reader ;  and  if,  as  may  not  improbably  prove 
to  be  the  case,  some  of  his  observations  have  been  antici- 
pated or  disproved  in  recent  publications,  or  even  by  the 
mere  lapse  of  time,  it  may  be  added  that  the  MS.  was  in 
the  hands  of  the  publishers  in  January  1861,  and  the 
subsequent  delay  in  the  publication  of  these  volumes  has 
originated  in  causes  lying  beyond  his  control. 


University  College,  Tobonto, 
\2th  March  1862. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  L 


ENTRODUCrnOX, 


PAGE 


CHAPTER  n. 
THE  OLD  WORLD  AND  THE  NEW, 17 

CHAPTER  HL 
THE  PRIMEVAL  OOCUPATIOX  :  SPEECH,     ....  44 

CHAPTER  IV. 
THE  PRIMEVAL  TRANSITIOX :  INSTINCT,  ....  86 

CHAPTER  V. 
THE  PR03fETHEAN  INiyriNCT:  FIRE, 119 

CHAPTER  VL 
THE  MARITDfE  INSHTINCT :  THE  CANOE,  ....         140 

CHAPTER  VIL 
THE  TECHNOLOGICAL  INiiTINCT :  TOOL^  .        .        .        .         17« 

CHAITER  VIIL 
THE  METALLURGIC  INSTINCT :  COPPER,    .         .         ,         .         231 

CHAPTER  IX 
THE  METALLUROIC  ARlh :  ALLOY.%   .  ,280 

WOt^  I.  h 


xviii  CONTENTS, 


CHAPTER  X. 

PAGE 

THE  ARCHITECTURAL  INSTINCT  :  EARTHWORKS,    .  315 


CHAPTER  XI. 
THE  HEREAFTER:  SEPULCHRAL  MOUNDS,         ...         360 

CHAPTER  Xn. 
PROPITIATION :  SACRIFICL^L  MOUNDS,      ....         370 

CHAPTER  Xin. 
COMMEMORATION  :  SYMBOLIC  MOUNDS,    ....         386 

CHAPTER  XIV. 
PROGRESS :  NATIVE  CIVILISATION, 408 

CHAPTER  XV. 
THE  ARTISTIC  INSTINCT :  IMITATION,         ....         449 


/ 


PREHISTORIC   MAN. 


CHAPTER  I. 


INTEOD  UGTION. 


In  the  history  of  modem  ages  the  important  results 
which  have  sprung  from  men  merely  changing  their  place 
of  habitation  are  not  the  least  remarkable.  The  Euro- 
pean transferred  to  America  looked  on  all  things  frofti  a 
new  point  of  view ;  and  though  he  could  not  divest  him- 
self at  once,  or  entirely,  of  the  traditional  habits  and 
thoughts  of  the  father-land,  yet  Europe  begins  to  recog- 
nise the  value  of  some  great  social  truths  discovered  by 
the  free  outlook  which  that  new  world  afforded.  But 
there  are  other  sciences  besides  those  of  political  and 
social  economy  which  may  gain  an  accession  of  many 
important  truths  by  the  wise  use  of  that  same  free  out- 
look; and  none  more  so  than  that  new  science  which 
makes  man  its  subject,  and  searches  earnestly  into  the 
secret  truths  of  his  nature,  the  history  of  his  infancy  and 
youth,  and  the  true  attributes  of  his  full  development. 
In  the  forests  and  on  the  prairies  of  America  we  see  the 
free  savage  in  what  it  has  been  customary  to  call  a  state 
of  nature.  We  witness  the  same  free  savage  brought 
into  contact  with  some  of  the  highest  phases  of  European 
civilisation  ;  while  the  inheritor  of  that  same  civilisation, 

VOL.  I.  A 


2  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

divested  of  its  inevitable  control,  has  been  left  amid  the 
widening  inheritance  of  his  new  clearings  to  develop 
whatever  tendencies  lay  dormant  in  the  artificial  Euro- 
pean man.  The  horse,  transported  to  the  new  world, 
roams  in  magnificent  herds  over  the  boundless  pampas  ; 
and  the  hog,  restored  to  a  state  of  nature,  has  exchanged 
the  grovelling  degradation  of  the  stye  for  the  fierce 
courage  of  the  wild  boar.  Strange  and  interesting  pro- 
blems in  natural  history  have  there  been  solved  for  us  ; 
and  they  help  to  give  an  added  interest  to  the  question, 
"  What  is  man's  natural  state  ?  '^  while  they  seem  to  offer 
some  novel  materials  fitted  for  its  solution. 

"  The  friendly  and  flowing  savage,  who  is  he  ? 
Is  he  waiting  for  civilisation,  or  past  it  and  mastering  it  ?"i 

So  asks  one  of  the  freest  among  the  poets  of  the  New 
World,  after  more  than  three  centuries  of  contact  and 
collision  between  the  two  extremes.  For  the  problem  is 
a  most  complicated  one ;  and  the  materials  for  its  solu- 
tion have  to  be  gathered  from  a  complex  accumulation, 
whereof  we  know  not  as  yet  what  to  accept  as  native,  or 
reject  as  foreign,  to  the  fully  developed  man. 

In  Europe  we  study  man  only  as  he  has  been  moulded 
by  a  thousand  external  circumstances,  foreign  to  his 
blood,  his  stock,  or  the  social  conditions  of  his  being. 
The  arts  and  intellectual  civilisation,  bom  at  the  very 
dawn  of  history  in  the  great  river-valley  of  Egypt,  give 
fonn  to  the  social  life  of  England  in  her  nineteenth 
century.  The  Divrae  law  given  forth  from  the  light- 
nings of  Sinai,  and  the  faith  and  morals  nurtured  among 
the  hills  of  Judah,  while  yet  the  British  Isles  were 
savage-haunted  wastes ;  the  intellect  of  Greece,  the 
military  prowess  of  Kome,  with  the  phases  of  mediaeval 
Christendom  and  enfranchised  modem  Europe,  have  all 

1  Leaves  of  Grass.     By  Walt.  Whitman. 


I.]  INTRODUCTION.  3 

inwoven  themselves  into  the  warp  and  woof  of  the 
Saxon  Englishman  and  the  Gallic  Frenchman.  Celt  and 
Frank,  Eoman,  Breton,  and  Saracen,  Saxon,  Dane,  and 
UiTorman,  have  intermingled  their  blood,  their  institutions, 
their  physical,  moral,  and  intellectual  being ;  till  in  the 
European  of  the  nineteenth  century  it  becomes  a  curious 
question  how  much  pertains  to  the  man,  and  how  much 
to  this  strange  development  we  term  civilisation,  of 
which  he  is  in  part  the  author  and  in  part  the  offspring  ? 
In  vain  we  strive  to  detach  the  European  man  from 
elements  foreign  to  him,  that  we  may  look  on  him  as  he 
is  or  was  by  nature ;  for  he  only  exists  for  us  as  the 
product  of  all  those  multifarious  elements  which  have 
accumulated  along  the  track  by  which  the  generations  of 
nineteen  centuries  have  swept  "  into  the  younger  day/' 
The  very  serf  of  the  Russian  steppes  cannot  grow  freely, 
as  his  nomade  brother  of  Asia  does ;  but  must  don  the 
unfamiliar  fashions  of  the  Frank,  as  strange  to  him  as 
the  armour  of  Saul  upon  the  youthful  Ephrathite.  Yet 
grow  he  must  in  some  way,  in  that  seething  caldron  of 
European  civilisation,  with  its  ceaseless  change. 

Is,  then,  civilisation  natural  to  man,  or  is  it  only  a 
habit  or  condition  artificially  superinduced,  and  as  foreign 
to  his  nature  as  the  bit  and  bridle  to  the  horse,  or  the 
truck-cart  to  the  wild  ass  of  the  desert  ?  Such  questions 
involve  the  whole  ethnological  problem  reopened  by 
Lamarck,  Agassiz,  Darwin,  and  others.  Whence  is  man  ? 
What  are  his  antecedents  ?  What — within  the  compass 
of  this  terrestrial  arena,  with  which  alone  science  deals, 
— are  his  future  destinies  ?  Does  civilisation  move  only* 
through  limited  cycles,  repeating  in  new  centuries  the 
work  of  the  old ;  attaining,  under  some  varying  phase, 
but  to  the  same  maximum  of  our  imperfect  humanity, 
and  then,  like  the  wandering  comet,  returning  from  the 
burning  splendour  of  its  perihelion  back  to  night  ? 


4  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

To  some  of  those  profoundly  interesting  questions  the 
social  life  alike  of  the  forests  and  the  cleariags  of  the 
New  World  seems  to  offer  fresh  replies.  There  at  least 
old  problems  are  being  wrought  out  under  entirely  new 
conditions.  The  very  elements  of  Britain's  greatness 
seem  to  lie  in  her  slow  maturity,  in  her  progressive  col- 
lision with  races  only  a  little  in  advance  of  herself,  in  the 
natural  transition  through  all  the  stages  from  infancy  to 
vigorous  manhood.  But  that  done,  the  old  Englander 
becomes  the  New  Englander ;  starts  from  his  matured 
vantage-ground  on  a  fresh  career,  and  displaces  the 
American  red-man  by  the  American  white-man,  the  free 
product  of  the  great  past  and  the  great  present. 

The  history  of  civilisation  is,  in  one  sense  at  least,  an 
inquiry  into  the  development  of  society,  and  the  progres- 
sive growth  of  man,  in  his  social  condition,  towards  an 
ideal  perfection  of  civil  life.  In  the  calm,  ever-present 
eye  of  God,  each  whole  race  is  a  unit.  To  the  individual 
man 

'*  The  drift  of  the  Maker  is  dark,  an  Isis  hid  by  the  veiL" 

It  would  have  been  poor  consolation  to  the  Saxon  sub- 
jects of  the  Conqueror  to  learn  that  coming  generations 
should  look  back  on  the  Norman  William  as  the  founder 
of  England's  greatness  and  England's  freedom.  But 
from  the  sufferings  of  the  individual  have  sprung  the 
triumphs  of  the  race,  alike  in  Old  and  New  England ; 
though  still,  in  both,  the  march  of  civilisation  is  over  the 
graves  of  many  victims  that  perish  by  the  way.  Chris- 
tianity indeed  lifts  for  us  the  veil  of  Isis,  tells  of  the 
Kighter  of  all  the  wrongs  of  ages ;  the  Divine  one,  to 
whom  man  is  no  scientific  abstraction  of  races,  but  each 
individual  the  offered  heir  of  an  inheritance  the  worth 
of  which  will  make  life's  greatest  sufferings  lighter  than 
forgotten  infant-tears.     Science   cannot   supersede  the 


I.]  INTRODUCTION.  5 

work  of  the  great  Consoler ;  but  in  seaxching  into  those 
lesser  truths  with  which  alone  it  has  to  deal,  it  may 
grope  and  peer  hopefully,  if  still  darkly,  gladdened  by 
the  faith  which  rests  on  "the  evidence  of  things  not 
seen/^  Looking,  then,  meanwhile,  on  the  race  as  a  unit : 
for  modem  Europe  no  less  than  for  the  young  aspiring 
communities  of  the  New  World,  this  is  the  great  pro- 
blem. But  hitherto  we  have  been  looking,  as  it  were, 
from  within  on  the  system  of  which  we  form  a  part ; 
gauging  Europe  as  our  world,  and  the  product  of 
Europe's  past,  or,  at  most,  of  the  world's  historic  past,  as 
though  it  were  the  absolute  ethnic  universe ;  while  in 
reality  we  can  no  more  accurately  determine  the  orbit  of 
man's  social  course  and  ethnic  destiny  from  such  a  view, 
than  we  can  judge  of  the  external  form  of  a  building 
while  stiU  within  its  walls. 

While  the  sanguine  students  of  social  science  are  gaz- 
ing into  that  cloud-land  of  their  visible  horizon,  wherein, 
as  they  fancy,  they  can  already  discern  the  dawn  of  a 
golden  age  of  perfected  subjection  of  physical  causes  to 
the  higher  moral  nature  of  man,  there  lies  behind  us  a 
long-trodden  track,  in  which  are  still  visible  many  un- 
heeded footprints  of  the  past  pointing  towards  the  same 
goal.  Out  of  what  ^seemingly  insignificant  causes,  lying 
far  behind  the  times  of  Komanized  Britons  or  Pagan 
Saxons,  has  the  social  life  of  the  British  Islands  sprung  ! 
The  simplest  germs  of  their  allophylian  arts  bear,  it 
may  be,  just  such  a  relation  to  their  present  civilisation, 
as  the  imsightly  grub  does  to  the  perfected  beauty  of 
winged  life.  But  prehistoric  researches  are  slow  to  com- 
mend themselves  to  the  conservative  Briton.  He  can 
follow  the  geologist  now,  with  honest  faith,  far  behind 
the  birth  of  history  into  the  protozoic  dawn,  or  the  azoic 
night ;  but  with  the  ethnologist  he  insists  on  pausing 
where  alone  he  feels  a  firm  foothold,  among  the  Komans 


6  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

of  the  Christian  era.  He  is  content  still,  from  within, 
and  in  one  of  its  narrow  aisles,  to  determine  the  form  and 
proportions  of  the  vast  but  incompleted  structure ;  anil 
by  what  he  can  see  from  thence  to  ascertain  its  future 
compass  and  final  plan« 

It  was  with  a  strange  and  fascinating  pleasure  that, 
after  having  striven  to  resuscitate  the  Allophylian  of 
Britain^s  prehistoric  ages,  by  means  of  his  buried  arts,  I 
found  myself  face  to  face  with  the  aborigines  of  the  New 
World.  Much  that  had  become  familiar  to  me  in  fancy, 
as  pertaining  to  a  long  obliterated  past,  was  here  the 
living  present ;  while  around  me,  in  every  stage  of  transi- 
tion, lay  the  phases  of  savage  and  civilized  life.  The 
nature  of  the  forest,  the  art  of  the  city ;  the  God-made 
country,  the  man-made  town  ;  each  in  the  very  process 
of  change,  extinction,  and  re-creation.  Here,  then,  was 
a  new  field  for  the  study  of  civihsation  and  all  that  it 
involves.  The  wild  beast  is  in  its  native  state,  and  has- 
tens,  when  relieved  from  artificial  constraiuts,  to  return 
to  the  forest  wilds  as  to  its  natural  condition.  The  wild 
forest-man, — is  he  too  in  his  natural  condition  ?  for 
Europe's  sons  have,  for  upwards  of  three  centuries,  been 
levelling  his  forests,  and  planting  their  civilisation  on  the 
clearings,  yet  he  accepts  not  their  civilisation  as  a  higher 
goal  for  him.  He,  at  least,  thinks  that  the  white  man 
and  the  red  are  of  diverse  natures  ;  that  the  city  and  the 
cultivated  field  are  for  the  one,  but  the  wild  forest  and 
the  free  chase  for  the  other.  He  does  not  envy  the  white 
man,  he  only  wonders  at  him  as  a  being  of  a  difierent 
nature.  "  Broken  Arm,"  the  Chief  of  the  Crees,  receiv- 
ing the  traveller  Paul  Kane  and  his  party  into  his  lodge, 
at  their  encampment  in  the  valley  of  the  Saskatchewan 
River,  told  him  the  following  tradition  of  the  tribe  : — 
One  of  the  Crees  became  a  Christian.  He  was  a  very 
good  man,  and  did  what  was  right ;  and  when  he  died 


L]  INTRODUCTION.  7 

he  was  taken  up  to  the  white  man's  heaven,  where  every- 
thing was  very  beautiful.  All  were  happy  amongst  their 
friends  and  relatives  who  had  gone  before  them  ;  but  the 
Indian  could  not  share  their  joy,  for  everything  was 
strange  to  him.  He  met  none  of  the  spirits  of  his  ances- 
tors to  welcome  him  ;  no  hunting  nor  fishing,  nor  any 
of  those  joys  in  which  he  was  wont  to  delight.  Then 
the  Great  Manitou  called  him,  and  asked  him  why  he 
was  joyless  in  His  beautiful  heaven  ;  and  the  Indian  re- 
plied that  he  sighed  for  the  company  of  the  spirits  of  his 
own  people.  So  the  Great  Manitou  told  him  that  he 
could  not  send  him  to  the  Indian  heaven,  as  he  had, 
whilst  on  earth,  chosen  this  one ;  but  as  he  had  been  a 
very  good  man,  he  would  send  him  back  to  earth  again. 
The  Indian  does  not  even  believe  in  the  superiority  of 
the  white  man.  The  difierence  between  them  is  only 
such  as  he  discerns  between  the  social,  constructive  beaver, 
and  the  solitary,  cunning  fox.  The  Great  Spirit  im- 
planted in  each  his  peculiar  faculties ;  why  should  the 
one  covet  the  nature  of  the  other  ?  Hence  one  of  the 
great  elements  of  the  unhopeful  Indian  future.  The 
progress  of  the  white  man  offers  even  less  incentive  to 
his  ambition  than  the  wary  cunning  of  the  fox,  or  the 
architectural  instincts  of  the  beaver.  He,  at  least,  does 
not  overlook,  in  his  sylvan  philosophy,  that  feature  in 
the  physical  history  of  mankind,  which  Agassiz  com- 
plains of  having  been  entirely  neglected  by  those  who 
have  studied  the  subject,  viz.,  the  natural  relations  be- 
tween the  different  types  of  man,  and  the  animals  and 
plants  inhabiting  the  same  regions.  The  American 
philosopher  has  wrought  out,  as  his  own  scientific  creed, 
the  homely  faith  of  the  forest  Indian.  "  The  coincidence 
between  the  circumscription  of  the  races  of  man,  and  the 
natural  limits  of  different  zoological  provinces,  charac- 
terized by  pecuHar  distinct  species  of  animals,  is  one  of 


8  PREHISTORIC  MAS,  [Chap. 

the  moBt  important  and  unexpected  features  in  the 
natural  history  of  mankind,  which  the  study  of  the 
geographical  distribution  of  all  the  organized  beings  now 
existing  upon  earth  has  disclosed  to  us.  It  is  a  fact 
which  cannot  fail  to  throw  lights  at  some  future  time^ 
upon  the  very  origin  of  the  differences  existing  among 
men ;  since  it  shows  that  man's  physical  nature  is  modi- 
fied by  the  same  laws  as  that  of  flnimftlR,  and  that  any 
general  results  obtained  from  the  animal  kingdom 
regarding  the  organic  differences  of  its  various  types, 
must  also  apply  to  man."* 

We  call  this  western  hemisphere  the  New  World,  and 
fancy  that,  in  its  savage  Indians,  whom  we  designate 
A  borigines,  we  are  looking  on  a  primitive  condition  of 
life.  But  the  Indian  of  the  American  wilds  is  no  more 
primeval  than  his  forests.  Beneath  the  roots  of  their 
oldest  giants  lie  chronicled  the  memorials  of  older  phases 
of  a  native  civilisation ;  and  while  the  naturalists  of  this 
continent  dwell  with  peculiar  interest  on  the  persistency 
of  a  common  type,  and  of  specific  and  almost  instinctive 
habits  throughout  aU  its  widely  scattered  tribes,  they 
have  been  studying  only  the  temporary  supplanter  of 
nations  strange  to  us  as  the  generations  of  extinct  life  in 
geological  periods  elder  than  our  own. 

In  that  old  East,  to  which,  nevertheless,  science  as 
well  as  revelation  still  points  as  the  cradle-land  of  the 
human  family,  vast  areas  exist  where  the  physical 
characteristics  of  the  earth^s  surface  seem  to  stamp  with 
unprogressive  endurance  the  inheritors  of  the*  soU.  We 
owe  to  the  Asiatic  Researches  of  Humboldt  a  clear 
understanding  of  the  physical  elements  which  have  so 
materially  influenced  the  history  and  progress  of  that 
ancient  continent.  Along  the  shores  of  the  Indian 
Ocean  and  the  Levant,  and  stretchiug  fi:om  the  Persian 

*  "  Natural  Provinces  of  the  Animal  World,"  etc.,  Types  of  Mankind,  p.  75. 


L]  INTRODUCTION.  9 

GuE  into  the  fertile  valleys  of  the  Euphrates  and  the 
Tigris,  are  still  found  the  seats  of  ancient  civilisation  and 
human  progress  coexistent  with  the  earliest  dawn  of 
man's  history.  But  beyond  these  lies  the  elevated  table- 
land of  Central  Asia^  stretching  away  northward,  and 
pouring  its  waters  into  inland  seas,  or  directing  their 
uncivilizing  courses  into  the  fix)zen  waters  of  the  Arctic 
circle.  Abrupt  mountain-chains  subdivide  this  elevated 
plateau  into  regions  which  have  been  for  unrecorded  ages 
the  great  hives  of  wild  pastoral  tribes,  manifesting  appa- 
rently no  intrusion  of  civilizing  arts  or  settled  social 
habits  on  their  rude  nomade  life ;  until,  compelled  by 
unknown  causes  to  overflow,  they  have  poured  southward 
over  the  seats  of  primitive  Asiatic  civilisation,  or  west- 
ward into  the  younger  continent  of  Europe ;  as,  ako, 
eastward  towards  the  straits  that  present  such  obvious 
facilities  for  migration  to  a  new  continent ;  and  there, 
subjected  to  novel  influences,  a  change  of  manners  and 
new  modes  of  life  have  been  the  results. 

The  moimtain-chains  which  enclose  and  subdivide  the 
great  table-land  of  Asia,  and  stretch  westward  into  Europe, 
have  manifestly  exercised  an  important  influence  on  the 
distribution  of  the  entire  fauna  of  the  two  continents, . 
including  man  himself.  A  remarkable  simplicity  of 
structure  is  discernible  in  the  arrangement .  of  the  con- 
tinuous lines  of  greatest  elevation,  coinciding  with  such 
traces  as  are  recoverable  of  the  routes  pursued  by  succes- 
sive waves  of  population  which  have  flowed  from  Asia  to 
Europe ;  and  also  indicating  the  eastern  route  by  which 
a  similar  overflow  would  be  guided  towards  the  Okhotsk 
Sea,  and  the  outlying  groups  of  volcanic  islands  which 
stretch  away  continuously  towards  the  Kamschatkan 
peninsula,  and  the  Aleutian  Island-chain,  one  supposed 
and  probable  route  of  migration  to  the  American  con- 
tinent.    The  Altai,  the  TJiian-shan,  and  the  Kuen-lun, 


10  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

constitute  continuous  lines  of  abrupt  elevation  that  ap- 
pear to  have  served  as  natural  tracks,  within  the  limits 
of  which  the  nomade  races  were  urged  onward  by  as 
natiiral  a  law  as  the  river  is  borne  seaward  in  its  channel, 
so  long  as  the  overflow  of  the  unfailing  fountain  presses 
behind. 

But,  besides  the  great  table-land  of  Central  Asia,  there 
is  also  the  lesser  table-land  of  Sjrria  and  the  Arabian 
peninsula.  From  the  wandering  hordes  of  the  great 
Asiatic  steppes  have  come  the  Huns,  the  Magyars,  and 
the  Turks,  as  well  as  a  considerable  portion  of  the  Bul- 
garians of  modern  Europe.  But  the  sterile  peninsula  of 
Arabia^  and  its  wild  desert  nomades,  have  given  birth  to 
the  germs  of  the  most  influential  moral  revolutions  on 
mankind  :  the  Hebrew  monotheism,  with  the  ampler  and 
nobler  system  begotten  by  it  in  the  fulness  of  time ;  and 
also  that  Mohammedanism  which  taught  the  Ottoman 
Turk  the  way  to  conquest,  and  stimulated  the  Semitic 
Saracen  to  an  intellectual  progress  which  revolutionized 
mediaeval  Europe.  Yet  the  capacity  for  civilisation  of  the 
Magyar  or  Turk,  when  transferred  to  new  physical  con- 
ditions, and  subjected  to  higher  moral  and  intellectual 
influences,  or  the  wondrous  intellectual  vigour  of  the 
Arab  of  Bagdad  or  Cordova^  affords  no  scale  by  which  to 
gauge  the  immobility  of  the  Tartar  on  his  native  steppe, 
or  the  Arab  in  his  desert  wilderness.  Without  agricul- 
ture or  any  idea  of  property  in  land,  destitute  of  the 
very  rudiments  of  architecture,  knowing  no  written  law 
or  any  form  of  government  save  the  patriarchal  expan- 
sion to  the  tribe  of  the  primitive  family  ties :  we  can 
discern  no  change  or  progress  in  the  wild  nomade,  though 
we  trace  him  back  for  three  thousand  years.  Even  the 
numerical  progression  is  so  partial  and  intermittent,  that 
had  we  no  other  knowledge  to  guide  us,  it  would  be  as 
easy  to  beHeve  that  these  nomades  had  wandered  over 


I.]  IN  TROD  UGTIOK  1 1 

their  desert  homes  for  thirty  thousand  as  for  three  thou- 
sand years.  Migratory  offshoots  of  the  hordes  of  Central 
Asia,  and  of  the  wanderers  of  the  Arabian  desert,  have 
gone  forth  to  prove  the  capacity  for  progress  of  the  least 
progressive  races ;  but  the  great  body  tarries  still  in  the 
wilderness  and  on  the  steppe,  to  prove  what  an  enduring 
capacity  man  also  has  to  live  as  a  mere  gregarious  mem- 
ber of  the  wild  fauna  of  the  waste. 

The  Indian  of  the  New  World,  whencesoever  he  derived 
his  origin,  presents  to  us  just  such  a  tjrpe  of  unprogres- 
sive  life  as  the  wild  nomades  of  the  Asiatic  steppe.  The 
Ked-Indian  of  the  forest  of  the  North- West  exhibits  no 
change  from  his  precursors  of  the  fifteenth  century  ;  and 
for  aught  that  appears  in  him  of  a  capacity  for  develop- 
ment, the  forest  of  the  American  continent  may  have 
sheltered  the  wild  hunting  and  warring  tribes  of  Indians, 
just  as  it  has  sheltered  and  pastured  its  wild  herds  of 
buffalos,  for  countless  centuries  since  the  continent  rose 
from  its  ocean  bed.  -  That  he  is  no  recent  intruder  is 
indisputably  proved  alike  by  physical  and  intellectual 
evidence.  On  any  theory  of  human  origin,  the  blended 
gradations  of  America's  widely  diversified,  indigenous 
races,  demand  a  lengthened  period  for  their  development ; 
and  equally,  on  any  theory  of  the  origin  of  languages, 
.  must  time  be  prolonged  to  admit  of  the  multiplication  of 
mutually  unintelligible  dialects  and  tongues  in  the  New 
World.  It  is  estimated  that  there  are  nearly  six  hun- 
dred languages,  and  dialects  matured  into  independent 
tongues,  in  Europe;  the  known  origin  and  growth  of 
some  of  which  may  supply  a  standard  whereby  to  gauge 
the  time  which  such  linguistic  multiplications  of  tongues 
imply.  But  the  languages  of  the  American  continents 
have  been  estimated  to  exceed  twelve  hundred  and  sixty : 
elaborate,  highly  inflected,  and  peculiar  in  structure  ; 
demanding  centuries  for  their  development,  but  at  the 


12  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Ohap. 

same  time  singularly  suggestive  of  centuries  of  nomade 
isolation  :  of  a  savage  condition  of  society,  multipljdng 
petty  tribes,  and  fostering  the  tendency  of  separated 
dialects  to  become  mutually  unintelligible.  Of  the  gram- 
mar of  the  Lenni-Lenap^  Indians,  Duponceau  remarks  : 
"  It  exhibits  a  language  entirely  the  work  of  the  children 
of  nature,  unaided  by  our  arts  and  sciences^  and,  what 
is  most  remarkable,  ignorant  of  the  art  of  writing.  Its 
forms  are  rich,  regular,  and  methodical,  closely  following 
the  analogy  of  the  ideas  which  they  are  intended  to  ex- 
press ;  compounded,  but  not  confused ;  occasionally  eUip- 
tical  in  their  mode  of  expression,  but  not  more  so  than 
the  languages  of  Europe,  and  much  less  so  than  those  of 
a  large  group  of  nations  on  the  eastern  coast  of  Asia. 
The  terminations  of  their  verbs,  expressive  of  number, 
person,  time,  and  other  modifications  of  action  and  pas- 
sion, while  they  are  richer  in  their  extension  than  those 
of  the  Latin  and  Greek,  which  we  call  emphatically  the 
learned  languages,  appear  to  have  been  formed  on  a 
similar  but  enlarged  model,  without  other  aid  than  that 
which  was  afibrded  by  nature  operating  upon  the  intel- 
lectual faculties  of  man.^'^  At  the  same  time  it  is  no 
less  important  to  note,  along  with  a  highly  elaborate 
structure,  the  limited  range  of  vocabulary  in  many  of  the 
American  languages.  These  characteristics,  taken  along 
with  their  peculiar  holophrastic  power  of  inflecting  com- 
plex word-sentences,  so  as  to  express  by  their  means 
delicate  shades  of  meaning,  exhibit  the  phenomena  of 
human  speech  in  some  of  their  most  remarkable  phases. 
But  the  range  of  the  vocabularies  furnishes  a  true  gauge 
of  the  intellectual  development  of  the  Indian ;  incap- 
able of  abstract  idealism,  realizing  few,  if  any,  generic 
relations,  and  multiplying  his  words  by  comparisons  and 
descriptive  compounds. 

'   *  American  Philosophkai  Tratiaaclions,  N.  S.  vol.  iii.  p.  248. 


L]  INTRODUCTION.  13 

To  whatever  cause  we  attribute  such  phenomena,  much 
is  gained  by  being  able  to  study  them  apart  from  the 
complex  derivative  elements  which  trammel  the  study  of 
European  philology.  Assuming  the  unity  of  the  human 
race,  not  in  the  ambiguous  sense  of  a  common  typical 
structure,  but  literally,  as  the  descendants  of  one  primal 
pair :  in  the  primitive  scattering  of  infant  nations,  the 
Mongol  and  the  American  went  eastward,  while  the  Indo- 
European  began  his  still  uncompleted  wanderings  towards 
the  far  west.  The  Mongol  and  the  Indo-European  have 
repeatedly  met  and  mingled.  They  now  share,  unequally, 
the  Indian  peninsula  and  the  continent  of  Europe.  But 
the  American  and  the  Indo-European  only  met  after  an 
interval  measurable  by  thousands  of  years,  coming  from 
opposite  directions,  and  having  made  the  circuit  of  the 
globe.    ' 

The  Red  Man,  it  thus  appears,  is  among  the  ancients 
of  the  earth.  How  old  he  may  be  it  is  impossible  to 
determine ;  but  among  one  American  school  of  ethnolo- 
gists, no  historical  antiquity  is  sufficient  for  him.  The 
contributions  of  the  New  World  to  the  evidences  of 
man's  antiquity  have  been  of  a  singularly  startling 
nature.  The  island  of  Guadaloupe,  one  of  the  Lesser 
Antilles,  discovered  by  Columbus  in  1493,  furnished  the 
first  examples  of  fossil  man,  and  of  his  works  of  art,  em- 
bedded in  the  solid  rock.  They  seemed  to  the  wonder- 
ing naturalist  to  upset  all  his  preconceived  ideas  of  the 
origin  of  the  human  race  ;  but  later  investigations  have 
greatly  diminished  the  wonder.  The  rock  proves  to  be 
a  modem  concretionary  limestone,  of  common  formation 
along  the  tropical  coasts  from  the  detritus  of  corals  and 
shells.  The  skeletons  themselves  are  probably  by  no 
means  ancient,  even  according  to  the  reckoning  of 
American  history;  though  justly  valued  among  the 
geological  treasures  both  of  the  British  Museum  and  the 


14  PREIITSTORTC  MAX,  [Chap. 

Jardin  des  Plantes.  The  Academy  of  Sciences  of  Phila- 
delphia treasures  a  fossil  fragment  of  disputed  antiquity, 
the  OS  innominatum  of  a  human  skeleton,  found  beneath 
the  skeletons  of  the  megalonyx  and  other  fossil  manmials. 
Dr.  Lund,  the  Danish  naturalist,  has  described  fossil 
human  bones,  bearing,  as  he  believed,  marks  of  geolo- 
gical antiquity,  found,  along  with  many  extinct  mam- 
mals, in  the  calcareous  caves  of  Brazil.  But  since  his 
discoveries  were  recorded,  European  geologists  have  be- 
come familiar  with  similar  phenomena,  whatever  be  the 
ultimate  solution  of  the  diflSculties  they  create. 

From  those,  and  other  discoveries  of  a  like  kind,  this 
at  least  becomes  apparent  to  us,  that  in  the  New  World, 
as  in  the  Old,  the  closing  epoch  of  geology  must  be  turned 
to  for  the  initial  chapters  alike  of  archaeology  and  ethno- 
logy. According  to  geological  reckoning,  much  of  the 
American  continent  has  but  recently  emerged  from  the 
ocean.  Among  the  organic  remains  of  our  Canadian 
post-tertiary  deposits  are  found  the  Phoca,  Balcena,  and 
other  existing  marine  mammals  and  fishes,  along  with 
the  Elephas  primigenius,  the  Mastodon  Ohioticus  and 
other  long-extinct  species ;  thus  proving  that  the  latter 
belong  to  that  period  in  which  our  planet  was  passing 
through  its  very  latest  transitional  stage,  and  the  New 
World,  as  weU  as  the  Old,  was  undergoing  its  final  pre- 
paration prior  to  its  occupation  by  man.  To  the  geo- 
logist who  deals  with  phenomena  of  the  most  gigan- 
tic character,  this  post-tertiary  period,  mingling  the 
bones  of  strangest  preadamite  giants  with  contemporary 
traces  of  famihar  life,  is  apt  to  appear  of  very  inferior 
interest.  But  to  the  archaeologist  and  ethnologist  its 
records  have  a  profounder  significance.  Looking  on  the 
fossil  human  skeleton  of  the  Guadaloupe  limestone  in 
the  Museums  of  London  and  Paris, — the  first  examples 
of  the  bones  of  man  in  a  fossil  state, — we  cannot  fail  to 


L]  INTRODUCTION.  15 

be  impressed  with  the  feeling  that,  judged  of  by  such 
remains,  the  gradation  in  form  between  man  and  other 
animals  is  such  as  to  present  no  very  important  contrast 
to  the  uninstructed  eye.  Modem,  to  all  appearance, 
those  rock-embedded  skeletons  are  ;  but  they  lessen  our 
increduUty  as  to  older  traces  of  fossil  human  bones 
mingling  with  those  of  the  extinct  mammals  of  the  drift, 
and  present  both  alike  as  sharers  in  a  common  sepulclire. 
But  the  novel  phenomenon  of  fossil  human  bones  is 
the  pregnant  index  of  the  mightiest  change  which  has 
transpired  upon  our  planet  since  first  it  became  the 
theatre  of  life.  Genera  and  species  have  come  into  being, 
multiplied  through  countless  ages,  and  then  given  place 
to  others.  But  now,  for  the  first  time,  there  appears 
among  the  fossil  relics  of  former  existence  the  traces  of 
that  latest  creation,  when  God  introduced  into  earth's 
varied  life  a  reasonable  soul,  the  heir  of  immortality. 
That  latest  creation,  man,  with  his  beginning  constituting 
the  oldest  conceivable  range  of  historical  antiquity,  en- 
tered on  the  occupation  of  this  New  World  in  centuries 
which  stretch  backward,  as  we  strive  to  explore  them, 
towards  such  beginnings  of  time.  His  early  history  lies 
buried  among  the  treasures  of  oblivion,  for  it  is  not  yet 
four  centuries  since  the  Ked  man  and  his  western  world 
were  made  known  to  us ;  and  he  still  exists  as  he  did 
then,  a  being  apart  from  all  that  specially  distinguishes 
either  the  cultivated  or  the  uncultured  man  of  Europe. 
His  continent  too,  has  become  the  stage  whereon  are 
being  tested  great  problems  in  social  science,  in  politics, 
and  in  ethnology.  Here  the  civilized  man  and  the  savage 
have  been  brought  face  to  face,  and  have  striven  to 
coalesce,  to  share  together  the  bounties  of  nature  and 
art,  to  prove  that  God  "  giveth  to  all  life,  and  breath, 
and  all  things  ;  and  hath  made  of  one  blood  all  nations 
of  men  for  to  dweU  on  all  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  hath 


16  PREHISTORTC  MAN.  [Chap. 

determined  the  times  before  appointed,  and  the  bounds 
of  their  habitation/'  Here,  too,  the  black  man  and  the 
red,  whose  destinies  seemed  to  separate  them  wide  as  the 
world's  hemispheres,  have  been  brought  together  to  try 
whether  the  African  is  more  enduring  than  the  Ameri- 
can even  on  his  own  soil ;  to  try  for  us,  also,  as  could 
no  otherwise  be  tried,  questions  of  amalgamation  and 
hybridity,  of  development  and  perpetuity  of  varieties  of 
a  dominant,  a  savage,  and  a  servile  race.  In  all  ways : 
in  its  recoverable  past,  m  its  comprehensible  present,  in 
its  conceivable  future,  the  New  World  is  a  great  mystery ; 
and  even  glimpses  into  its  hidden  truths  reflect  some 
clearer  light  on  secrets  of  the  older  world. 


II.]  THE  OLD  WORLD  AND  THE  NEW.  17 


CHAPTER  11. 

THE  OLD  WORLD  AND  THE  NEW. 

The  contrast  which  exists,  in  a  thousand  ways,  be- 
tween the  Old  World  and  the  New,  cannot  be  described. 
Words  may  picture  the  manifold  associations  entwined 
with  every  historic  scene,  but  they  cannot  awaken  the 
spirit  that  steals  over  the  least  thoughtful  mind  which 
has  been  nurtured  amid  the  inspirations  of  a  landscape 
vital  with  the  memories  of  his  country's  history,  or 
haunted  with  the  poetry  of  its  legends  and  songs. 
Neither  can  words  convey  to  the  old  dweller  amid 
Europe's  thousandfold  associations  and  inherited  ideas, 
the  strange  sense  of  freedom  that  stirs  the  blood  in 
the  New  World's  clearings,  where  there  is  nothing  to 
efface,  to  undo,  to  desecrate.  The  very  forests  of  the 
New  World  have  nothing  sacred  or  venerable  about 
them.  The  consecrating  touch  of  time  is  rarely  trace- 
able on  the  tall  crowded  trunks  that  struggle  upwards 
to  catch  the  sunshine  on  their  spare  topmost  boughs. 
They  seem  made  for  the  woodman  and  the  lumberer's 
axe  ;  and  the  freshest  wanderer  from  the  silvan  haunts 
of  England  sees  without  a  pang  the  leafy  monarchs 
of  the  primeval  forest  bow  before  their  stroke.  There 
is  even  an  exulting  sense  of  triumph  as  the  lofty  pine 
crashes  through  the  dry  branches  of  the  wintry  forest, 
and  lays  prone  the  stately  stem.  The  mind  is  in  a 
new  atmosphere  no  less  than  the  body.     All  old  motives 

VOL.  I.  B 


18  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

and  impulses  have  suffered  a  change.  It  is  indeed  a 
new  world,  and  the  contrast  between  the  Old  World 
and  the  New  must  be  felt  to  be  fully  understood. 

Much  that  awaits  the  world's  future  is  to  be  bom  of 
this  fresh  freedom,  hewn  out  of  America's  forest  wastes ; 
but  it  is  not  to  be  forgotten  that  along  with  this  the 
associations  of  the  Old  World  still  assert  their  hold  on 
the  new  settler.  In  spite  of  himself,  the  American,  even 
on  his  annual  Independence-day,  speaks  of  Old  England 
as  "  home."  Under  the  yews  of  its  ancient  grave-yards 
his  fathers  sleep  ;  around  its  wild  ruins  linger  the  storied 
memories  of  his  past ;  and  its  common  law  is  the  code 
of  his  civil  wellbeing.  He,  too,  is  the  child  of  the  past, 
and  the  Old  World  as  well  as  the  New  has  helped  to 
make  him  what  he  is.  Ere  we  attempt  to  unravel  the 
mysteries  of  both  hemispheres  in  relation  to  their  pre- 
historic centuries,  let  us  try  to  picture  some  of  the 
strange  elements  that  render  so  diverse  two  separate 
spots  of  our  common  mother-earth :  to  contrast  the 
present  before  attempting  to  compare  their  past. 

Standing  on  the  vantage-ground  of  Europe's  old  his- 
toric soil,  the  student  of  antiquity  seems  to  lay  hold  on 
the  last  link  of  an  unbroken  chain  stretching  away  into 
the  remote  and  mysterious  centuries  that  lie  behind  him. 
In  that  insular  microcosm  of  Britain,  he  finds  on  every 
hand  an  epitome  of  the  whole,  and  can  select  for  his 
special  purpose  spots  rich  in  their  connected  series  of 
pregnant  disclosures  of  the  past.  And  singularly  fas- 
cinating is  it  to  linger  over  such  favourite  haunts  of  the 
memories  of  other  times,  and  trace  out  the  footprints  of 
long-forgotten  ages,  following  the  trail  until  it  is  lost 
amid  the  vestiges  of  preadamite  life  ;  fascinating  is  it  to 
dwell  on  any  scene  of  history,  and  feel  there  that  the 
past  is  present  to  the  mind.  Five  years  of  colonial  life 
had  passed  over  me,  busily  and  pleasantly  occupied  in 


II.]  THE  OLD  WORLD  AND  THE  NEW.  19 

the  unstoried  capital  of  Upper  Canada,  when  I  first 
visited  Quebec,  and  traced  out  the  scenes  of  Wolfe's  and 
Montcalm's  last  days,  and  the  older  haunts  of  la  Nouvelle 
France  under  the  vicegerents  of  its  Bourbon  kings.  It 
was  like  the  recovery  of  a  lost  sense,  the  revival  of  a 
long-forgotten  delight.  But  what  are  all  the  heart - 
stirring  associations  of  Quebec  when  placed  alongside  of 
the  memories  clustered  around  some  favourite  spots,  or 
the  strange  associations  with  ages  beyond  the  reach  of 
memory  which  add  an  interest  to  other  scenes  ?  Take, 
for  example,  the  famous  Kent's  Hole  of  Torbay.  That 
weU-known  Devonshire  cavern  is  a  huge  chasm  some 
six  hundred  feet  in  length,  which  has  proved  the  most 
productive  ossiferous  cave  in  England.  Some  of  the 
choicest  specimens  of  extinct  camivora,  the  Ursics  spe- 
IcBuSy  the  Machairod/us  latidens,  etc.,  now  enriching  the 
geological  galleries  of  the  British  Museum,  were  pro- 
cured from  beneath  its  stalagmitic  paving,  along  with 
bones  of  the  fossil  elephant,  rhinoceros,  and  other  memo- 
rials of  preadamite  times  :  when  the  British  isles  were 
stiQ  a  prolongation  of  the  neighbouring  continent,  and 
the  seas  had  not  yet  made  of  their  inhabitants  Virgil's 

'*  Penitus  toto  divisos  orbe  Britannos." 

But  SO  far  Kent's  Hole  difiers  in  no  very  essential  point 
from  the  ossiferous  caves  of  BrazU.  Its  skeletons  are 
the  relics  of  a  world  of  life  which,  for  the  most  part, 
came  to  an  end  before  our  race  had  its  beginning ;  yet 
to  the  geologist  they  are  among  the  most  modem  of 
organic  remains,  and  have  lost  their  chief  interest  since 
the  late  Dean  of  Westminster  read  his  recantation  of 
the  ReliquicB  DiluviancB ;  so  relative  a  thing  is  anti- 
quity to  man  with  his  own  span  of  threescore  years  and 
ten.  But  Kent's  Hole  has  other  disclosures  not  less  in- 
teresting to  us ;  for  the  same  stalagmitic  incrustations 


20  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

had  enclosed  memorials  of  primitive  art  of  the  British 
Troglodyte,  belonging  to  a  period  when  the  precursors 
of  Watt  and  Stevenson  had  not  yet  acquired  the  rudi- 
ments of  metallurgic  arts,  or  even  the  knowledge  of 
metals,  but  employed  their  constructive  instinct  on  bone 
or  flint,  and  fashioned  clay  into  hand-made  pottery  as 
rude  as  any  gathered  on  the  sites  of  Indian  wigwams  in 
the  Canadian  clearings.  Thus  linking  together  the  last 
preadamite  and  the  first  of  human  periods,  the  chrono- 
metry  of  the  Devonshire  cavern  descends  by  a  regular 
gradation  to  modem  centuries.  Situated  at  a  peculiarly 
attractive  spot  on  the  southern  coast^  Kent's  Hole  ap- 
pears to  have  been  a  favourite  haunt  of  England's  ^er^F 
naturcB  during  a  long  transition  between  the  geological 
period  of  the  drift  and  the  primeval  era  of  the  archaeo- 
logist, when  it  became  a  scarcely  less  favourite  resort  of 
man.  Succeeding  to  rudest  primitive  weapons  and  im- 
plements of  flint  and  bone,  come  the  more  ingenious 
fictUe  ware  of  Celtic  times ;  the  artistic  pottery  of  the 
Roman  of  the  second  and  third  centuries  ;  the  iron  spear- 
heads and  other  products  of  the  Saxon  artificer  of  the 
sixth  and  subsequent  centuries  ;  untU  at  length,  turning 
to  the  lettered  memorials  of  more  recent  times  graven 
on  the  cavern  walls,  we  trace  out  from  among  those  of 
various  dates  this  simple  inscription — "w.  hodges  of 
IRELAND,  1688."  For  we  are  on  historic  ground.  In  a 
mild  autumnal  noon,  on  the  5th  of  November  1688,  the 
Dutch  fleet,  sailing  under  the  genial  southern  breeze, 
which  so  opportunely  sprang  up  to  the  discomfiture  of 
Dr.  Burnet's  predestinarian  doubts,  rounded  the  lofty 
cape  Qf  Berry  Head,  and  cast  anchor  in  the  harbour  of 
Torbay.  The  spot  where  William  of  Orange  landed  is 
still  a  just  object  of  interest ;  and  so,  too,  in  its  own 
degree,  is  that  record  of  some  protestant  Irish  follower 
of  the  Prince,  who,  straying  into  Kent's  Hole  Cave,  left 


IL]  THE  OLD  WORLD  AND  THE  NEW.  21 

there  the  graven  memorial  of  his  presence  at  so  momen- 
tous a  time.  "  Since  William  looked  on  that  harbom-/' 
writes  Macaulay,  "  its  aspect  has  greatly  changed.  The 
amphitheatre  which  surromids  the  spacious  basin  now 
exhibits  ever3rwhere  the  signs  of  prosperity  and  civilisa- 
tion. At  the  north-east  extremity  has  sprung  up  a  great 
watering-place,  to  which  strangers  are  attracted  from  the 
most  remote  parts  of  the  island  by  the  Italian  softness 
of  the  air ;  for  in  that  cUmate  the  myrtle  flourishes  un- 
sheltered, and  even  the  winter  is  milder  than  the  North- 
•  umbrian  April.  The  inhabitants  are  about  ten  thousand 
in  number.  The  newly-built  churches  and  chapels,  the 
baths  and  libraries,  the  hotels  and  public  gardens,  the 
infirmary  and  the  museum,  the  white  streets,  rising  ter- 
race above  terrace,  the  gay  villas  peeping  from  the  midst 
of  shrubberies  and  flower-beds,  present  a  spectacle  widely 
different  from  any  that,  in  the  seventeenth  century,  Eng- 
land could  show.  But  Torbay,  when  the  Dutch  fleet 
cast  anchor  there,  was  known  only  as  a  haven  where 
ships  sometimes  took  refuge  from  the  tempests  of  the 
Atlantic.  Its  quiet  shores  were  undisturbed  by  the 
bustle  of  either  commerce  or  pleasure  ;  and  the  huts  of 
ploughmen  and  fishermen  were  thinly  scattered  over 
what  is  now  the  site  of  crowded  marts  and  of  luxurious 
pavilions.''  Thus  it  is  amid  the  storied  haunts  of  the 
Old  World.  Looking  down  here  into  one  of  its  little 
eddies,  we  catch  a  glimpse  of  the  unresting  stream  of 
Time ;  and  tracing  it  upward  by  the  historic  memorials 
along  its  banks,  as  we  leave  the  last  of  these  behind  us, 
we  find  them  to  pertain  to  the  same  mighty  river  which 
flows  continuously  from  that  mysterious  past,  teeming 
with  the  palseontological  organizations  of  ages  seemingly 
too  coimtless  for  the  puny  reckonings  of  man. 

America  has  her  ossiferous  caverns,  with  their  mum- 
mied inheritors ;  but  only  on  the  historic  sites  of  the 


22  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

Old  World  can  we  look  for  such  a  curious  epitome  of 
the  past  as  is  thus  presented  to  us  in  that  narrow  inden- 
tation of  the  English  Channel  Or  let  us  pause  again 
over  one  other  and  not  less  familiar  scene.  When  the 
lamented  Hugh  Miller,  in  that  last  work  of  his  pen,  the 
Testimony  of  the  Rocks,  aims  at  reproducing  before  the 
mental  eye  the  actual  submei^ence  of  man's  antediluvian 
world,  he  places  the  reader  on  the  top  of  Arthur's  Seat, 
bids  him  watch,  in  fancy,  the  encroaching  ocean-tide 
reach  its  summit,  then  gather  till  the  highest  peaks  of 
the  Pentlands,  and  then  the  still  visible  crest  of  Ben 
Lomond,  successively  disappear :  and  the  drifting  ark 
floats  away,  through  a  seemingly  shoreless  sea,  towards 
the  unsubmerged  height  of  the  distant  Ben  Nevis.  It  is 
a  scene  which  has  made  many  geologists ;  and  on  which 
the  eyes  of  the  poet,  the  historian,  and  the  philosopher 
gaze  with  kindred  rapture.  On  the  slopes  of  that  pic- 
turesque hill,  from  which  the  geologist  assumes  his 
diluvial  observer  to  look  forth,  have  been  dug  up,  in 
very  recent  years,  the  stone  implements  and  pottery  of 
Britain's  primeval  human  era,  and  the  beautiful  leaf- 
shaped  swords,  and  other  specimens  of  bronze  workman- 
ship, the  artistic  products  of  Britain's  infantile  metal- 
lurgic  arts.  In  the  vaUey  below  lie  the  Rood  Well,  the 
ruined  Abbey,  and  the  Palace  of  Holyrood,  pregnant 
with  a  thousand  scenes  of  historic  romance  ;  and  in  the 
long  picturesque  thoroughfare  which  climbs  toward  the 
height  crowned  by  the  ancient  castle  of  Edinburgh — 
still  bearing  on  its  summit  the  little  oratory  of  the 
Saxon  princess,  St.  Margaret,  nearly  coeval  with  the 
Norman  Conquest ; — ^may  be  seen  the  Roman  sculptures 
of  Severus  and  his  Empress  Julia,  separated  by  an 
inscription  of  later  times,  borrowed  from  Gutenberg's 
first  Mentz  Bible,  of  1455. 

Looking  abroad  over  the  same  landscape  towards  Ben 


IL]  THE  OLD  WORLD  AND  THE  NEW.  23 

Lomond's  lofty  summit,  but  with  other  eyes  than  those 
of  the  geologist,  the  observer  catches,  on  a  clear  day,  the 
distant  ramparts  of  Stirling  Castle,  with  the  silver  links 
of  the  Forth  winding  through  the  broad  level  carse 
between.  And  on  no  richer  historic  landscape  did  eye 
ever  gaze.  Far  back,  in  distant  prehistoric  ages — ^as 
modem  discoveries  have  disclosed  to  us, — the  allophylian 
savage  pursued  there  the  gigantic  cetacean  monsters  of 
the  deep,  armed  with  his  rude  lance  of  deer's  horn,  and 
his  harpoon  tipped  with  flint.  The  Roman  only  saw  a 
very  modem  generation  compared  with  that  primeval 
Caledonian  fisherman,  whose  harpoon — ^found  beside  the 
stranded  whale  at  the  foot  of  the  Grampians,  which  no 
tide  has  laved  for  three  thousand  years, — is  now  pre- 
sehred,  with  the  bones  of  the  long-stranded  whale,  in 
the  museum  of  Edinburgh  University.  Time  had  wrought 
his  silent  changes  on  that  scene.  The  bed  of  the  broad 
estuary  had  been  slowly  upheaved,  until  it  became  the 
alluvial  carse-land  which  now  stretches  its  fertile  fields 
between  the  Campsie  and  the  Ochil  hills  ;  where,  in  the 
first  century  of  our  era  (a.d.  84),  Agricola  led  the  Roman 
legions  across  the  fords  of  the  Forth,  to  the  camp  at 
Ardoch,  and  the  famed  battle-field  of  Mons  Grampius. 
The  flint  arrowhead  and  the  stone  battle-axe  of  primeval 
times,  as  well  as  the  horn  lance  and  harpoon,  have  been 
turned  up  on  the  Carse  of  Stirling,  and  many  an  older 
hero  than  the  Caledonian  Galgacus  may  have  there  done 
deeds  of  valour  which  were  not  always  unsung  ;  but  for 
us  that  year,  A.D.  84,  marks,  as  it  were,  the  baptism 
of  blood  which  consecrated  the  scene  to  gallant  deeds 
of  arms. 

And  so,  the  eye  of  the  favoured  onlooker,  ranging  over 
that  level  carse-land,  paled  in  with  its  grand  fringe  of 
hills,  leaves  behind  the  old  scenes  of  Roman  conquest, 
the  subject  Damnonii  of  Ptolemy's  times,  and  the  mythic 


24  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

warfare  of  Picts  with  Scots,  in  the  dim  dawn  of  later 
centuries ;  till  it  rests  once  more  on  the  authentic  frag- 
ment of  Cambuskenneth  Abbey,  founded  by  David  i.  in 
1147,  and  then  on  to  the  thirteenth  century,  where  once 
more  it  revels  in  the  rich  succession  of  historical  memo- 
ries. There,  beyond  Cambuskenneth  Tower,  is  the  Field 
of  Stirling  Bridge,  where  the  army  of  the  English 
Edward,  under  Warenne  and  Surrey,  was  utterly  routed 
by  Wallace  with  an  inferior  force  ;  and  there  the  Field 
of  Falkirk,  where,  in  the  following  year,  Edward  was  the 
victor,  at  the  head  of  eighty-seven  thousand  men.  There, 
too,  lies  the  world-famous  Field  of  Bannockbum,  where, 
in  the  succeeding  century,  the  Bruce  was  victor  over 
another  Edward ;  the  Field  of  Stirling,  where,  in  the 
fifteenth  century,  James  iii.  perished  :  his  own  son,  l!he 
chivalrous  James  of  Flodden,  among  the  rebellious  vic- 
tors. The  following  centuries  have  each  their  battle- 
field, haunting  the  same  glorious  landscape  with  the 
memories  of  other  times :  Montrose's  last  victory,  in  his 
brilliant  campaign  on  behalf  of  the  descendants  of  those 
Scottish  Jameses  in  1645  ;  and  Prince  Charles  Edward's 
bootless  triumph  a  century  thereafter,  when,  on  the  old 
Field  of  Falkirk,  in  1746,  fortune  gleamed,  for  the  last 
time,  a  parting  smile  on  the  fallen  Stuarts. 

Those  only  who  have  dwelt  amid  scenes  without  a 
history  can  fully  appreciate  the  unconscious  influences  of 
such  a  vital  historic  page.  It  is  the  mould  from  which 
the  national  mind  takes  shape,  be  it  for  good  or  evil ;  the 
inheritance  in  trust,  which  fashions  from  the  cradle  the 
moral  being  of  the  future  man. 

**  We  read  the  dictate  in  the  infant's  eye ; 
In  the  wife's  smile ;  and  in  the  placid  sky  ; 
And  at  our  feet,  amid  the  silent  dust 
Of  them  that  were  before  us."^ 

We  cannot  overlook  the  silent  influences  of  a  neio  world, 

^  Wordsworth  :  Sonnets  to  Liberty,  xi. 


U.]  THE  OLD  WORLD  AND  THE  NEW.  25 

in  making  another  man  out  of  the  old  English  stock. 
They  are  strong  and  ever  present ;  nor  unperceived  by 
the  inteUigent  American,  who  yearns  for  the  fond  asso- 
ciations of  the  fatherland,  amid  all  his  pride  in  that  new 
kingdom  won  for  himself  from  nature.  This,  too,  is  a 
lesson  from  the  new  worid  to  the  old.  These  are  ele- 
ments of  change  for  the  ethnologist  to  ponder,  before 
lending  himself  to  that  fatal  error  which  assumes  that, 
in  treating  of  the  natural  history  of  man,  the  intellectual 
element  is  of  no  more  account  than  in  the  history  of  the 
ape  or  the  hog.  The  ox  transported  from  the  old  Scottish 
carse-land  seeks  only  as  rich  pastures  as  he  left  in  that 
alluvial  vaUey ;  but  the  herd-boy  feels  that  they  left 
behind  them  other  things  besides  a  fertile  soil  The 
landscape,  teeming  with  such  rare  historical  associations^ 
would  be  a  glorious  one  were  it  barren  as  the  rawest 
clearing  of  the  west,  that  unveils  its  rough  acres  to  the 
strange  brightness  of  the  sunshine,  and  spreads  abroad 
its  widening  area,  like  a  clear  parchment,  for  the  history 
of  the  future.  But  the  associations  of  the  scene  become, 
to  them  to  whom  it  is  their  birthright,  a  part  of  their 
being.  The  very  earth  beneath  their  feet  is  as  the  ashes 
scattered  from  some  sacred  urn,  with  which  in  time  they 
may  be  well  content  their  own  shall  mingle,  to  rest  in 
kindred  earth. 

To  gaze  on  scenes  like  those,  not  with  the  mere  curious 
look  of  the  passing  tourist,  but  fondly,  as  day  by  day 
their  famiHar  associations  intertwine  with  the  heart  as 
weU  as  the  soul,  is  to  be  elevated  by  a  teaching  better 
than  all  the  wisdom  of  the  schools.  But  the  country  so 
rich  in  manly  lessons  for  her  children,  grows  men  to 
send  them  wherever  such  are  needed;  and  when,  ds 
with  a  step-dame's  voice,  she  tells  the  young  adven- 
turer : 

*•  Then  not  in  Britain  must  you  bide  !  " 


26  PEE  HISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

it  is  with  somewliat  of  the  fond  loving  irony  of  Imogen 
that  he  replies  : 

"  Where  then  ? 
Hath  Britain  all  the  buh  that  shineB  ?    Day,  night, 
Are  they  not  but  in  Britain  ?     In  the  worid^s  volume 
Our  Britain  seems  as  of  it,  but  not  in  it ; 
In  a  great  pool  a  swan*s  nest.     Prithee  think 
There's  livers  out  of  Britain  !  *' 

« 

And  so  the  wanderer  goes  forth  to  help  to  sow  in  other 
soils  what  makes  historic  lands.  Taking  our  stand  with 
him  amid  one  of  the  newest  scenes  of  the  new  worid,  let 
us  see  what  it  has  to  offer  for  the  mind  as  weU  as  the 
eye.  Nor  could  a  greater,  or  more  striking  contrast  to 
the  old  Scottish  metropolis  be  anywhere  foimd,  than  is 
presented  by  the  young  and  flourishing  capital  of  the 
most  flourishing  colonial  province  of  the  empire. 

Built  along  tihe  margin  of  a  bay,  enclosed  by  a  penin- 
sular spit  of  land  running  out  from  the  north  shore  of 
Lake  Ontario,  Toronto,  the  political  and  commercial 
capital  of  Upper  Canada,  rests  on  a  drift  formation  of 
sand  and  clay,  only  disturbed  in  its  nearly  level  uni- 
formity by  the  rain-gullies  and  ravines  which  mark  the 
courses  of  the  rivulets  that  drain  its  surface.  This  the 
original  projectors  of  the  city  mapped  off  into  regular 
parallelograms,  by  streets  uniformly  intersecting  each 
other  at  right  angles ;  and  in  carrying  out  their  plan 
every  ravine  and  undulation  is  smoothed  and  levelled, 
as  with  the  indiscriminating  precision  of  the  mower's 
scythe.  On  a  clear  day  the  observer  sees  directly  to  the 
south  a  curious  vapoury  cloud  hanging  on  the  horizon, 
which  marks  the  scene  of  Niagara's  imresting  plunge 
into  the  abyss  of  waters.  A  slightly  undulating  coast 
line  indicates  the  State  of  New  York,  stretching  along 
the  southern  shore  of  the  lake  ;  but  no  mountain,  nor 
height  high  enough  even  to  overtop  the  lofty  pines,  which 
here  and  there  linger  as  solitary  survivors  of  the  natural 


n.]  THE  OLD  WORLD  AND  THE  NEW.  27 

forest,  exists  nearer  than  the  distant  shores  of  Georgian 
Bay.  The  country  rises  to  the  north  for  about  twenty 
miles,  by  a  gradual  slope,  to  the  water-shed  between 
Ontario  and  Lake  Simcoe,  and  then  descends  by  a  still 
more  gentle  inclination  to  the  level  of  the  northern  lake, 
and  the  old  hunting-grounds  of  the  Hurons.  It  is  a 
nearly  unvarying  expanse,  a  blank  :  with  its  Indian  tra- 
ditions effaced  ;  its  colonial  traditions  uncreated.  But 
industry  already  plies  there  the  willing  hand.  Sturdy 
enterprise  enlivens  its  rivers  with  the  noise  of  the  busy 
wheel,  and  fashions  anew  its  forest  glades  into  smiling 
villages  and  rising  towns.  Its  history  is  not  only  all  to 
write,  it  is  all  to  act.  No  country  could  present  a  more 
striking  contrast  to  that  magnificent  panorama  of  firth, 
and  mountain,  and  fertile  plains,  amid  which  rises  the 
acropolis  of  the  North.  The  cities  of  the  old  world  have 
their  mythic  founders  and  quaint  legends,  still  com- 
memorated in  heraldic  blazonry.  But  there  is  no  mys- 
tery about  the  beginnings  of  Toronto,  and  little  romance 
in  its  childhood  and  youth.  Upper  Canada  was  erected 
into  a  distinct  province  in  1791,  only  eight  years  after, 
by  the  Treaty  of  Fontainebleau,  France  had  finally  re- 
nounced all  claim  on  the  province  of  Quebec ;  and  a 
few  months  thereafter  we  have  record  of  the  arrival  of 
General  Simcoe,  the  first  governor  of  the  new  province, 
at  the  old  French  fort,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Niagara 
river,  and  his  selection  of  the  Bay  of  Toronto  as  the 
site  of  the  future  capital.  Governor  Simcoe  visited  the 
chosen  spot  in  the  month  of  May  1793  ;  explored  the 
swamps  and  uncleaxed  pine  forest,  amid  which  his  saga- 
cious  eye  saw  in  anticipation  the  city  rise,  which  already 
numbers  upwards  of  50,000  inhabitants;  and  gave  a 
name  to  the  place  of  his  chx)ica  To  his  practical  mind 
the  Indian  name  of  the  locaUty  had  no  charm.  Himself 
a  Yorkshire  man,  as  well  as  a  soldier  under  the  Duke  of 


28  PREHISTOEIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

York,  he  called  his  new  capital  York  ;  and  to  the 
streams  which  bound  its  area  east  and  west,  he  gave  the 
familiar  names  of  the  Humber  and  the  Don  :  dear,  per- 
chance, to  the  rough  soldier  by  the  associations  of  other 
days.  Colonel  Bouchette,  Surveyor-General  of  Lower 
Canada,  was  selected  to  lay  out  the  new  city  and  har- 
bour ;  and  from  his  pen  we  have  a  graphic  account  of 
the  locality  as  it  existed  before  the  spade  of  the  builder 
first  wounded  its  virgin  soil  The  rites,  too,  by  which 
the  founder  consecrated  the  site  of  the  destined  city  are 
recorded  by  its  surveyor  in  courdy  style.  No  plough 
with  brazen  share  was  guided  round  its  limits  by  the 
founder,  incinctus  ritu  Gdbino,  with  careful  hand  dis- 
arming the  mystic  ploughshare  at  the  destined  entrance 
to  the  city's  gates  ;  but  with  rites  approved  by  ancient 
Saxon  usage,  the  first  clearing  fi-om  the  wild  forest  was 
dedicated  to  the  amenities  of  civilisation.  "It  fell  to 
my  lot,'*  says  Colonel  Bouchette,  "  to  make  the  first  sur- 
vey of  York  harbour  in  1793.  lieut-Govemor  the  late 
General  Simcoe,  who  then  resided  at  Niagara,  having 
formed  extensive  plans  for  the  improvement  of  the 
colony,  had  resolved  on  laying  the  foundations  of  a  pro- 
vincial capital.  I  still  distinctly  recollect  the  untamed 
aspect  which  the  country  exhibited  when  first  I  entered 
the  beautiful  basin.  Dense  and  trackless  forests  lined  the 
margin  of  the  lake,  and  reflected  their  inverted  images 
in  its  glassy  surface.  The  wandering  savage  had  con- 
structed his  ephemeral  habitation  beneath  their  luxu- 
riant foliage,  the  group  then  consisting  of  two  families 
of  Mississagas ;  and  the  bay  and  neighbouring  marshes 
were  the  hitherto  uninvaded  haunts  of  immense  coveys 
of  wild-fowl ;  indeed,  they  were  so  abundant  as  in  some 
measure  to  annoy  us  during  the  night.  In  the  spring 
following,  the  Lieutenant-Governor  removed  to  the  site 
of  the  new  capital,  attended  by  the  regiment  of  Queen's 


IL]  THE  OLD  WORLD  AND  THE  NEW,  29 

SaDgerSy  and  commenced  at  once  the  realization  of  his 
favourite  project  His  Excellency  inhabited,  during  the 
summer  and  through  the  winter,  a  canvas  house,  which 
he  imported  expressly  for  the  occasion ;  but,  frail  as 
was  its  substance,  it  was  rendered  exceedingly  comfort- 
able, and  soon  became  as  distinguished  for  the  social  and 
urbane  hospitality  of  its  venerated  and  gracious  host, 
as  for  the  peculiarity  of  its  structare."! 

The  vicissitudes  attending  the  progress  of  the  Canadian 
city  have  been  minutely  chronicled ;  for  already  it  has 
its  local  historians,  who  have  recorded  how  many  dwell- 
ings of  round  logs,  of  squared  timber,  or  more  ambitious 
frame-houses,  the  latter  alone  exceeding  a  single  storey, 
were  in  existence  at  various  dates.  The  first  vessel 
which  belonged  to  the  town,  and  turned  its  harbour  to 
account ;  the  first  brick  house,  the  earliest  stone  one  ; 
and  even  the  first  gig  of  an  ambitious  citizen,  subse- 
quent to  1812  :  are  each  and  all  chronicled  with  pious 
cara  Could  we  but  learn  with  equal  truthfulness  the 
first  years  of  the  city  built  by  Komulus  on  the  Palatine 
Hill,  its  annals  would  tell  no  less  homely  truths,  even 
now  dimly  hinted  to  us  in  the  legend  of  the  scornful 
Kemus  leaping  over  its  infant  ramparts.  Tiber's  hill 
was  once  the  site  only  of  the  solitary  herdsman's  hut ; 
and  an  old  citizen  has  described  to  me  his  youthful  re- 
collections of  Toronto,  as  consisting  of  a  few  log-huts  in 
the  clearing,  and  a  small  Indian  village  of  birch-bark 
wigwams,  near  the  Don,  with  a  mere  trail  through  the 
woods  to  the  old  French  fort,  on  the  line  where  now 
upwards  of  two  miles  of  costly  stores,  hotels,  and  public 
buildings  mark  the  principal  street  of  the  busy  city. 
Another  Indian  trail  trended  northward  from  the  bay, 
nearly  on  the  line  where  Yonge  Street  now  stretches  its 
undeviating  thoroughfare,  like  the  old  Saxon  Witlinga- 

*  The  British  Dominions  in  North  America,     Lond.  1832.     Vol.  i.  p.  89. 


30  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

straet,  some  forty  miles  to  Lake  Simcoe.  The  unfathom- 
able sloughs  of  mud  in  the  unpaved  streets,  are  still  a 
byword  among  all  who  remember  little  York.  But  in 
1813  a  great  historical  event  occurred.  General  Dear- 
bom  at  the  head  of  an  army  of  American  heroes,  num- 
bering some  two  thousand  five  hundred  men,  embarked 
on  board  their  fleet  at  Sacket's  Harbour,  on  the  southern 
shore  of  the  lake.  Their  object  was  the  siege  of  York, 
and  the  conquest  of  Canada.  The  little  capital,  with 
its  round  log,  squared  timber,  and  frame-houses,  num- 
bered scarcely  an  hundred  dwellings  in  all.  These  the 
heroic  invaders  set  fire  to,  carried  oflF  the  solitary  fire- 
engine  of  the  poor  little  village,  and  the  latter  is  reported 
to  be  still  among  the  trophies  of  victory  preserved  in 
the  Navy  Yard  of  the  United  States  I 

After  such  a  disastrous  erasure  of  all  that  the  first 
twenty  years  of  the  infant  capital  had  laboriously  ac- 
complished, it  is  easy  to  see  how  the  abortive  city  might 
have  been  resigned  ere  this  to  forest  and  swamp,  and 
scarcely  a  trace  have  remained  to  tell  that  civilisation 
had  ever  meditated  making  the  site  her  own.  The  very 
year  before  York,  on  being  incorporated  as  a  city,  re- 
sumed its  older  name  of  Toronto,  M.  Theodore  Pavi 
recorded  in  his  Souvenirs  AtkintiqueSt  published  at  Paris 
in  1833,  that  it  was  still  in  the  woods,  a  mere  advanced 
post  of  civilisation  on  the  outskirts  of  a  boundless  forest 
waste.  "To  the  houses  of  York,"  says  he,  "succeed 
immediately  the  forests,  and  how  profound  must  be  those 
immense  forests,  when  we  reflect  that  they  continue 
without  interruption  till  they  lose  themselves  in  the  icy 
regions  of  Hudson's  Bay  near  the  Arctic  Pole.'' 

A  ftdl  quarter  of  a  century  has  elapsed  since  M.  Pavi 
noted  the  growing  city  of  the  forest,  and  that  for  New- 
World  cities  is  an  aeon.  Every  year  has  witnessed  more 
rapid  strides,  alike  in  the  progress  of  Toronto,  and  in  the 


II.]  THE  OLD  WORLD  AND  THE  NEW.  31 

dealing  and  settUng  of  the  surrounding  country.  EaU- 
ways  have  opened  up  new  avenues  of  trade  and  com- 
merce, and  borne  troops  of  sturdy  pioneers  into  the 
wild  wilderness  behind.  So  rapid  has  been  the  clearing 
of  the  forest,  and  so  great  the  rise  in  the  price  of  labour, 
that  fuel,  brought  from  the  distant  coal-fields  of  Ohio, 
already  undersells  the  cord-wood  hewn  in  Canadian 
forests  ;  and  even  Newcastle  coal  warms  many  a  luxu- 
rious Canadian  winter  hearth.  All  is  rife  with  progress. 
"  Onward ! "  is  the  cry ;  a  distant  and  boundless  future 
is  the  goal.  The  new  past  is  despised ;  the  old  past  is 
altogether  unheeded  ;  and  for  antiquity  there  is  neither 
reverence  nor  faith.  These  are  beginnings  of  history ; 
and  are  full  of  significance  to  those  who  have  wrought 
out  some  of  the  curious  problems  of  an  ancient  past,  amid 
such  rich  historic  scenes  as  are  here  contrasted  with  this 
unhistoric  but  vigorous  youth  of  the  New  World.  And 
yet,  as  we  shall  see,  it  is  not  altogether  new ;  though 
we  thus  witness  the  seeds  of  future  empires  taking  root 
on  its  virgin  soil.  The  ancient  forests  which  give  way 
before  the  axe  of  the  new  settler,  are  not  primeval. 
Beneath  their  roots  lie  the  memorials  of  a  living  world  of 
man,  not  even  now  so  thoroughly  efiaced  that  we  must 
abandon  aU  hope  of  recovering  the  chronicles  of  that 
world  before  Colimibus,  and  learning  something  of  what 
man  was,  utterly  disassociated  from  everything  which 
has  made  of  us  what  we  are.  It  is  with  the  old  things 
of  the  New  World  that  we  propose  to  deal ;  and  how  old 
some  of  these  are  is  as  yet  very  partially  appreciated, 
even  by  some  who  seek  to  antedate  the  birth  of  the  red 
man  before  the  first  Adam  was  placed  in  his  eastern 
Garden,  or  "  there  went  up  a  mist  from  the  earth,  and 
watered  the  whole  face  of  the  groimd.'^ 

But  recent  as  is  the  growing  capital  of  Upper  Canada, 
it  is  not  one  of  those  chance-formed  cities  so  common  in 


32  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

the  New  World,  dropped  seemingly  wherever  the  clear- 
ing made  room  for  them,  and  left  to  grow  and  thrive 
like  seeds  scattered  by  the  wind.  Its  site  was  selected 
with  sagacious  foresight  by  the  first  governor  of  the  pro- 
vince ;  and  the  advantages  which  then  oflFered  themselves 
to  his  observant  eye,  had  existed  ages  before,  with  the 
same  ready  facilities  for  a  civic  centre  of  civilisation ; 
though  the  tangled  thickets  of  the  forests  revealed  only 
the  haunts  of  the  wild  bear,  or  the  fragile  lodges  of  the 
savage.  But  many  a  scene  as  waste  and  desolate  covers 
the  graves  of  populous  cities  ;  and  firom  underneath  the 
tread  of  busier  thoroughfares  than  the  streets  of  Toronto 
have  been  disentombed  the  civic  and  national  chronicles 
of  empires  that  attained  their  prime,  and  wasted  and 
disappeared,  while  yet  the  world  of  man  was  in  its 
youth.  To  such  disclosures  the  attention  of  the  British 
stnident  of  antiquities  haa  been  recentiy  directed  with 
peculiar  interest.  For  nearly  twenty  years,  previous 
to  1840,  an  extensive  system  of  drainage  carried  out 
within  the  ancient  limits  of  the  city  of  London,  and  be- 
yond these  throughout  the  widening  area  of  the  modem 
British  metropolis,  disclosed  a  remarkable  series  of  me- 
morials of  the  Boman  Lonbinium  of  the  first  centuries 
of  the  Christian  era,  as  well  as  many  remains  of  the  Saxon 
LuNDEN-BURH,  and  the  mediaeval  London.  A  succes- 
sion of  archaeological  strata  told  the  tale  of  London's 
early  British,  Roman,  Saxon,  and  English  history,  by 
disclosures  akin  to  those  whereby  the  geologist  is  enabled 
to  decipher  the  records  of  a  more  ancient  Hfe.  Digging 
down  in  the  very  centre  of  Londinium  Augusta,  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  Exchange,  the  excavator  lays  bare  an 
artificial  soil  of  nearly  fourteen  feet,  the  Tertiary  Strata, 
as  we  may  designate  it,  of  its  archaeological  formations. 
Beneath  this,  which  consists  of  the  accumulated  factitious 
soil  and  embedded  relics  of  more  than  a  thousand  years. 


n.]  THE  OLD  WORLD  AND  THE  NEW.  33 

lie  the  diverse  strata  of  the  Upper  Secondary  formation, 
some  two  feet  thick ;  composed  chiefly  of  brick,  the 
buried  ruins  of  a  city  long  forgotten.  Underneath  this 
again  lie  the  Carboniferous  Strata  of  the  London  archae- 
ologist :  the  memorials,  of  a  toMm  built  of  wood,  and 
desolated  by  fire ;  and  below  all  these  are  found,  what 
constitute,  in  the  estimation  of  Roman  antiquaries  at 
least,  their  Primary  Strata^  enclosing  in  the  rich  dSbris, 
the  relics  of  the  arts  and  civilisation  of  the  true  Lon- 
dinium  Augusta.  And  beautiful  and  full  of  interest  are 
the  varied  disclosures  of  those  Roman  strata.  Tesse- 
lated  pavements ;  architectural  and  sculptured  marbles ; 
frescoed  plaster,  stiU  bright  with  the  pigments  of  sixteen 
centuries  ago;  inscribed  altars  and  tablets,  and  im- 
pressed bricks ;  coins,  bronzes,  glass,  and  pottery ;  the 
skulls  and  bones  of  the  Bos  longifrons,  the  domesticated 
ox  of  the  Anglo-Romans ;  the  tusks  of  the  boar ;  the 
accumulated  shells  of  the  oyster,  and  other  edible  mol- 
luscs ;  with  many  another  relic  of  long-buried  genera- 
tions :  the  easily  deciphered  hieroglyphics  of  a  series  of 
chapters  of  England^s  early  domestic  and  social  life,  such 
as  Tacitus  never  dreamt  of  recording,  yet  which  to  us 
have  an  interest  far  beyond  what  the  lost  books  of  Livy 
could  possess.  So  numerous  have  such  relics  proved, 
that  the  collections  of  one  indefatigable  antiquary  alone, 
Charles  Roach  Smith,  have  been  secured  for  the  British 
Museum  at  a  cost  of  £2000,  and  embrace  upwards  of  a 
thousand  articles  :  the  memorials  of  many  recorded,  but 
of  still  more  unrecorded  events ;  of  that  terrible  cata- 
strophe in  the  reign  of  Nero,  when  70,000  of  the  inhab- 
itants of  Roman  London  perished  in  its  ruins ;  of  later 
sack  and  conflagration,  imder  Celt,  Saxon,  Dane,  and 
Norman,  tiU  nearly  every  relic  of  an  old  British  me- 
tropolis was  once  more  swept  away,  in  the  wake  of  a 
devastating  pestilence,  by  the  Great  Fire  of  1666.  Yet 
VOL.  I.  c 


34  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

even  this  large  collection  very  imperfectly  illustrates  the 
wealth  of  historic  treasure  inhumed  in  the  buried  cUhris 
of  ancient  London.  Four  other  large  collections  of 
Boman^  Saxon,  Norman,  and  mediaeval  articles  are  re- 
ferred to  in  Mr.  C.  R  Smith's  Catalogue,  as  having  been 
formed  during  the  same  excavations  of  recent  years. 

Thousands  of  coins,  Boman,  Saxon,  and  mediaeval,  tell 
in  chronological  sequence  the  annals  of  the  British  me- 
tropolis. Bronzes  and  marbles  of  rare  beauty  show  how 
the  arts  of  the  Tiber  found  a  home  on  the  Thames ; 
and  inscribed  altars,  tablets,  and  sepulchral  slabs^  reveal 
the  evidences  of  a  long-extinct  faith,  and  of  griefs  and 
triumphs  stilled  alike  in  the  silence  of  long-buried  cen- 
turies. Yet  what  is  London's  archaeological  history, 
when  compared  with  the  story  inumed  beneath  the 
streets  of  modem  Bome  or  Jerusalem,  or  hidden  under 
the  shapeless  mounds  still  unexplored  in  the  old  eastern 
cradle-land  of  our  race  ?  When  the  sculptures  were 
hewn,  and  the  marble  palaces  built,  that  lie  there  en- 
tombed, the  island-home  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  was,  in  all 
probability,  a  tangled  forest,  trackless  as  the  wilds  of 
America's  unexplored  west;  the  centre  of  the  world's 
commerce  on  the  Thames,  was  a  savage  jungle  where  the 
wild-boar  and  the  wolf  disputed  possession.  Certain  it 
is  that,  a  thousand  years  thereafter,  the  Anglo-Saxon 
race  was  not  yet  in  being.  Over  one  of  those  cities  of 
the  East,  already  a  ruined  grave-mound,  Xenophon  led 
his  ten  thousand  Greeks,  four  centuries  before  our  era 
began  ;  and,  from  the  same  heap  of  reedy  and  sepulchral 
clay,  twenty-two  centuries  thereaffcer,  have  been  exhumed 
the  buried  arts  of  that  "  exceeding  great  city  "  Nineveh, 
to  which  the  prophet  Jonah  was  sent,  some  two  thousand 
seven  hundred  years  before,  to  proclaim  its  threatened 
doom.  That  doom,  though  averted  for  a  time,  was  most 
fully  accomplished.      Nineveh,  and  the  vast  power  of 


IL]  THE  OLD  WORLD  AND  THE  NEW.  85 

Assyria  felL  Empire  moved  westward  from  the  Tigris 
to  tlie  Euphrates  ;  and  centuries  ere  that  British  London 
had  its  beginning — on  the  novel  scenes  of  which  the 
human-headed  lions  of  Nineveh  now  gaze  forth  from 
their  strange  stony  eyes, — ^the  Euphrates  and  the  Tigris 
alike  swept  southward  through  desolate  wastes.  The 
great  plain  which  stretches  between  these  ancient  rivers, 
naturally  one  of  the  most  fertile  areas  of  the  globe,  has 
been  abandoned  to  the  wild  Arab  nomade,  who  still 
pastures  his  steed  on  the  grave-mounds  of  the  world's 
eldest  empires.  And  he,  too,  has  dropped  there  some 
faint  traces  of  his  presence.  Turkish  Islamite  has 
feebly  struggled  with  the  desolation ;  the  ancient  Greek, 
the  Hebrew,  the  Arab,  and  the  modem  Tartar,  have 
alike  passed  across  the  waste  scene,  each  leaving  some 
footprint  behind  him ;  and  thus  have  been  recovered 
from  its  choicest  spots  the  accumulated  traces  of  many 
successive  geneiations,  from  times  not  greatly  more 
modem  than  that  of  the  first  "  mighty  hunter,"  down 
to  the  recent  centuries  of  Turkish  acquisition  and 
misrule. 

So  relative  a  thing  is  antiquity  1  The  ossiferous 
cavern  relics,  and  the  diluvial  disclosures  of  the  geolo- 
gist, are  his  modem  formations.  To  the  archaeologist, 
they  are  so  old  as  scarcely  to  be  admitted  within  his 
most  ancient  eras.  And  so  that  buried  Eoman  London, 
disclosed  in  recent  years  in  draining  its  modem  suc- 
cessor, becomes  itself  a  very  modem  thing  when  placed 
alongside  of  the  excavated  mound-heaps  on  the  banks  of 
the  Tigris.  Yet  for  us  it  has  an  interest  such  as  the 
marbles  of  Nineveh  cannot  possess.  They  indeed  be- 
long to  that  strangely  interesting  cradle-land  of  the 
human  family;  but  the  old  Roman  Londinium,  the 
Saxon  London-burgh,  and  the  later  mediaeval  London, 
each   and  all  pertain  to  the  little  island-home  of  the 


36  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

Anglo-Celtic  and  Saxon  race,  where  it  was  cradled,  and 
nursed,  and  trained  for  conquering  and  colonizing  con- 
tinents of  unknown  western  and  southern  seas. 

Turning  from  the  history  of  the  old  world's  infancy  to 
the  modem  scenes  of  the  new  world,  we  seem  to  return 
to  primeval  times,  and  to  witness  anew  the  birth  of 
human  society.  During  recent  years  passed  in  Toronto, 
it  has  been  my  fortune  to  witness  on  its  own  scale,  the 
inauguration  of  the  same  process  which  has  revealed 
to  modem  eyes  the  buried  London  of  Boman  times. 
Within  that  period  the  first  works  projected  and  carried 
out  to  any  extent  for  the  purpose  of  drainage  have  been 
in  progress ;  and  at  the  same  time  an  esplanade  and 
railway  track  have  been  cut  and  embanked  along  the 
bay,  throughout  the  entire  length  of  the  city's  lake  shore. 
Already  familiar  with  historic  disclosures  derived  from 
similar  excavations  on  older  sites,  I  have  watched  such 
trenching  of  the  young  city's  virgin  soil  with  singular 
interest.  True  it  is,  that  the  city  itself  is  of  most  modem 
growth, — younger  indeed  than  many  of  its  inhabitants  ; 
that  its  history  is  known  in  all  its  simple  details,  and 
that  its  precursor  was  but  a  group  of  Mississaga  wig- 
wams in  the  tangled  pine  forest.  But  the  Arab  who 
reared  his  tent  unconsciously  over  the  graves  of  Assyria's 
and  Babylonia's  mighty  empires,  is  not  so  greatly  the 
superior  of  the  Indian  of  the  New  World.  Humboldt, 
indeed,  draws  the  comparison  between  the  roaming  Indian 
of  the  Orinoco,  and  the  wandering  Arab,  as  severally  the 
tjrpes  of  a  nomade  agricultural  and  pastoral  people,  each 
occupying  a  like  rank  in  the  social  scale.  The  ephemeral 
tents  of  the  Arabs  on  the  Nimroud  mounds  gave  no 
indication  of  the  gigantic  sculptures  below,  which  so 
astonished  and  terrified  them  when  first  brought  to  light. 
The  winged  human-headed  lion,  the  symbolic  type  of 
the  divine  intellect,  strength,  and  ubiquity,  had  awed 


IL]  THE  OLD  WORLD  AND  THE  NEW.  37 

and  instructed  races  that  flourished  there  three  thousand 
years  before :  to  the  rude  Arabs  it  was  an  accursed 
"  Jin,^'  which  they  spat  on  and  defiled  :  "  One  of  the 
idols  which  Noah — ^peace  be  with  him ! — cursed  before 
the  flood ! ''  It  was  not,  therefore,  an  altogether  incon- 
ceivable thing  that  here  too,  where  so  recently  the  ephe- 
meral wigwam  of  the  Mississaga  stood,  the  modem 
Canadian  city  had  but  resumed  a  deserted  site  of  older 
civilisation.  But  the  world  before  the  Flood  is  the  only 
one  which  the  trenches  made  by  the  fresh  civilisation  of 
Canadian  cities  disclose.  A  solitary  Indian  stone  axe 
and  a  few  flint  arrow-heads  are  all  that,  after  minute 
inquiry,  I  can  learn  have  been  found.  Eepeatedly,  at  but 
a  few  inches  beneath  th%  public  thoroughfare,  the  charred 
or  hewn  stump  of  the  forest  pine  reveals  itself ;  or,  in 
the  lower  and  older  parts  of  the  city,  towards  the  lake, 
the  prostrate  trunk  and  the  black  swampy  soil,  show 
where  the  persevering  energy  of  the  European  settler 
has  already  reclaimed  hundreds  of  acres  from  the  marsh 
and  the  lake. 

This  land  conquered  from  river,  lake,  and  sea  is  a 
singularly  significant  feature  of  the  change  that  has  come 
over  the  New  World  since  its  soil  passed  from  the  hands 
of  its  autochthones  to  the  strangers  by  whom  such  re- 
clamation has  been  already  wrought.  So  common  and 
characteristic  of  the  energy  of  the  European  colonist  is 
this  process,  that  "  water-lots "  is  a  term  of  universal 
acceptance  among  Anglo-Americans,  in  reference  to  spots 
mapped  off"  for  redemption  from  river  or  lake  ;  and  acres 
of  such  freely  change  hands  at  constantly  increasing 
prices ;  though,  to  the  inexperienced  European,  an  acre 
in  dreamland  or  a  bag  of  moonshine  would  seem  equally 
marketable.  During  the  summer  of  1855  a  long  western 
ramble,  far  beyond  the  regions  reclaimed  from  the  wild 
forest,  terminated  at  Fond  du  Lac,  at  the  head  of  Lake 


38  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

Superior.  Here,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Nemadji  river,  on 
a  large  bay  into  which  the  St.  Louis  and  Aloues  rivers 
also  debouche,  the  site  of  the  future  city  of  Superior 
has  been  selected.  I  had  traversed  nearly  four  hundred 
miles  since  leaving  the  Sault  Ste.  Marie,  itself  a  remote 
outpost  of  civilisation  ;  and  had  noted  with  curious  in- 
terest, in  proof  of  our  wandering  into  imcultivated  wilds, 
that  part  of  the  freight  of  the  steamer  to  Eagle  Harbour 
consisted  of  compressed  bundles  of  hay,  brought  from 
Detroit  on  Lake  St.  Clair,  upwards  of  three  hundred 
miles  off,  for  the  use  of  the  cattle  employed  at  the 
copper  mines  on  Keweenaw  Point.  Hundreds  of  miles 
of  unoccupied  land  lay  between  the  Nemadji  river  and 
the  nearest  settlements  of  Wiscdhsin  or  Minnesota,  and 
coimtless  millions  of  acres  stretched  away  westward  and 
northward  towards  the  Kocky  Mountains  and  the  pole. 
Yet  here,  on  the  wild  hunting-grounds  of  the  Chippewas, 
the  future  Superior  City  was  being  laid  off  with  a  large 
expanse  of  water-lots,  to  be  redeemed  from  the  Lake. 
A  plan,  already  completed,  showed  them  encroaching  on 
the  channel  of  the  Nemadji  Kiver,  and  abridging  the 
wide  expanse  of  Superior  Bay :  a  singularly  characteristic 
t3rpe,  as  it  appeared  to  me,  of  the  intrusive  race  which 
is  everywhere  supplanting  the  aboriginal  Indian  on  his 
native  soiL  A  party  of  Saultaux  Indians  had  con- 
structed a  Httle  group  of  birch-bark  wigwams  on  Minne- 
sota Point,  and  their  slight  canoes  glided  noiselessly 
over  the  bay.  Such  the  Indian  of  the  Fond  du  Lac  may 
have  been  a  thousand  years  ago  ;  as  unprogressive  and 
ephemeral  in  aU  his  characteristics  as  he  there  appeared, 
totally  indifferent  to  the  schemes  of  the  supplanter,  who 
was  already  marking  off  his  birthright  for  transference 
to  new  heirs.  The  little  spot  on  which  his  wigwam 
stands  suffices  for  him,  as  it  has  done  for  all  his  fathers ; 
and,  for  the  rest,  he  claims  only  a  small  tribute  from  the 


II.]  THE  OLD  WORLD  AUTD  THE  NEW,  39 

denizens  of  lake  and  forest,  wild  as  himsell  But  for 
the  aggressive  aspirations  of  the  intruder  nothing  is  too 
great;  and  it  fails  to  suffice  him,  though  standing  at 
such  a  point  he  can  look  abroad  and  hear  in  no  uncertain 
voice  the  fiat  which  proclaims  :  "  lift  up  now  thine  eyes, 
and  look  from  the  place  where  thou  art,  northward  and 
southward,  and  eastward  and  westward ;  for  all  the  land 
which  thou  seest,  to  thee  will  I  give  it,  and  to  thy 
seed/^ 

The  sagacity  and  experience  of  Anglo-American  enter- 
prise has  thus  ^'  dipped  into  the  future,  far  as  human 
eye  could  see  f  and  indeed  such  is  the  faith  in  the  great 
future  which  awaits  this  most  western  embryo  metro- 
polis of  the  lakes,  that  two  rival  cities  were  already  pro- 
jected within  a  mile  or  two  of  each  other.  One  of 
these,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Nemadji  river,  consisting 
of  an  imfinished  frame  house  and  two  or  three  log- 
shanties,  was  named  Supebiob;  the  other,  if  possible 
in  a  still  more  rudimentary  condition  of  development, 
had  ah'eady  engrossed  the  more  ambitious  name  of 
Superior  City.  Yet  one  or  other  of  these  is  unques- 
tionably the  nucleus  of  a  great  metropolis,  destined  ere 
another  generation  passes  away,  to  number  its  inhabit- 
ants by  thousands,  where  now  only  the  wigwam  of  the 
Indian  and  the  bivouac  of  the  hunter  are  to  be  seen. 
In  the  coarse  realities  of  conflict  between  rival  specula- 
tors and  scheming  projectors,  it  is  difficult  for  us  to 
realize  what  may  be  abundantly  manifest  to  other  gene- 
rations :  that  here,  in  the  wild  west  of  the  New  World, 
is  an  event  akin  to  that  when  Nimrod,  the  primeval 
hunter,  began  to  be  a  mighty  one  before  the  Lord,  and 
the  beginning  of  his  kingdom  was  Babel  in  the  land  of 
Shinar. 

With  such  ideas  present  to  my  mind,  intermingled 
with  recollections  of  many  pleasant   explorations  on 


40  PREHISTORtC  MAN,  [Chap. 

ancient  civic  sites,  it  was  with  a  peculiar  interest  that  I 
scanned  this  locality  as  the  virgin  soil  ahready  dedicated 
to  an  unborn  history ;  and  seemed  in  it  to  realize  the 
primeval  aspect  of  sites  on  the  Nile  and  the  Tigris^  ere 
human  hands  selected  them  for  the  arenas  of  histories 
now  so  rich  in  mystery  and  grandeur  for  all  time.  Nor 
is  the  chosen  site  of  the  civic  queen  of  Lake  Superior 
devoid  of  remarkable  features,  individualizing  it  from 
among  the  future  areas  of  urban  settlement.  The  ter- 
races and  ancient  beaches  of  Lake  Superior  abundantly 
prove  the  vast  changes  which  have  taken  place  in  the 
relative  levels  of  land  and  water  on  this  great  inland 
sea.  But  besides  this,  the  lake  shores  present  another 
series  of  striking  phenomena.  The  Pictured  Rocks,  near 
the  eastern  end  of  the  south  shore,  extend  for  upwards 
of  ten  miles  in  a  range  of  lofty  cMs  rarely  surpassed 
in  picturesque  magnificence.  The  north  shore  is  also 
marked  by  many  features  of  great  boldness  and  gran- 
deur ;  but  the  general  character  of  the  southern  shore  is 
an  undulating  coast  line,  covered  with  the  natural  forest 
down  to  the  water^s  edge.  The  rivers  and  streams  ac- 
cordingly, of  which  two  hundred  and  twenty  of  varying 
size  and  volume  are  tributaries  to  this  great  inland  sea, 
generally  enter  it  over  sandy  or  alluvial  flats ;  and  the 
parallel  walls  of  loose  materials  formed  by  the  opposing 
action  of  the  river  currents,  and  those  driven  by  the  pre- 
vailing winds  against  the  descending  flood,  present  a 
series  of  concentric  river-belts,  extending  over  several 
miles  of  the  embouchure.  Breaking  through  these  bar- 
riers at  various  points,  some  of  the  larger  rivers  have 
repeatedly  changed  their  courses,  and  now  wind  their 
way,  among  the  irregular  breaches  thus  effected  by  their 
swollen  spring-torrents,  to  the  lake.  Another  class  of 
formations  with  which  the  settlers  on  the  shores  of  the 
great  lakes  are  familiar,  are  the  "hooks''  and  "spits'' 


IL]  THE  OLD  WORLD  AND  THE  NEW.  41 

formed  by  the  waves  and  currents  under  the  action  of 
winds  in  certain  prevailing  directions.  The  peninsula, 
or  island,  enclosing  Toronto  Bay,  which  determined  the 
site  of  the  chief  city  and  harbour  of  Upper  Canada,  is 
an  example  of  the  latter  class.  The  more  remarkable 
site  of  Superior  City  has  been  formed  by  a  combination 
of  the  two  formations  on  an  unusually  gigantic  scale. 
At  the  extreme  western  point  of  Lake  Superior  the 
northern  and  southern  shores  meet  in  the  Fond  du  Lac ; 
within  which  the  swollen  spring  and  autumnal  torrents 
of  the  Nemadji  and  the  Aloues  rivers  combine  with  the 
greater  volume  of  the  St  Louis  to  build  up  with  their 
annual  deposits  the  remarkable  system  of  spits  and 
river-belts  referred  to.  From  the  converging  shores  of 
the  lake  two  long  and  narrow  tongues  of  land  project 
towards  each  other,  enclosing  an  area  nearly  ten  miles  in 
length,  and  leaving  between  their  extreme  points  only  a 
narrow  channel  for  the  exit  of  the  waters  of  a  vast  terri- 
tory, drained  by  the  rivers  that  empty  themselves  into 
this  bay.  One  of  the  river-formations,  already  marked 
off  for  wharf  and  warehouse  lots  by  the  far-sighted  city 
speculators,  forms  an  irregular  projection  from  the  west- 
em  bank  of  the  Nemadji  far  across  the  bay  of  Superior, 
and  detaching  its  western  portion,  which  has  received 
the  separate  name  of  Aloues  Bay.  The  large  estuary  of 
the  St.  Louis,  again,  is  fenced  off  by  inner  peninsular 
spits  and  river-belts  of  great  extent.  All,  indeed,  is  on 
a  scale  of  magnitude  far  surpassing  anything  to  be  met 
with  elsewhere  along  the  shores  of  the  great  lakes  j 
and  in  some  of  its  features  is  rather  to  be  compared 
with  such  oceanic  structures  as  those  which,  through 
long  centuries,  the  Atlantic  currents  bmlt  up  on  the 
New  England  coast,  that  they  might  at  length  shelter 
the  little  "  Mayflower "  with  its  precious  seeds  of 
empire. 


42  PSBBISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

Here,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Nemadji  River,  id  the  site 
of  the  future  city.  Already  the  axe  of  the  pioneer  is 
levelling  the  forest^  and  clearing  out  its  destined  tho- 
roughfares;  whUe  plans  have  been  matured  and  are  in 
progress  for  making  it  the  starting-point  of  a  railway 
to  the  Mississippi,  where  it  rolls  its  mighty  volume  of 
waters  uninterruptedly  to  the  Gulf  of  Florida.  The 
scheme  cannot  fail ;  for  it  is  only  restoring,  with  all  the 
added  facilities  which  civilisation  brings  in  its  train,  the 
ancient  route  by  which,  as  will  be  seen,  the  metallic 
treasures  of  Lake  Superior  were  distributed  of  old  through 
the  vast  regions  watered  by  the  Mississippi  and  its  tri~ 
butaries;  and  the  gigantic  tropical  shells,  and  other 
rare  products  of  southern  latitudes,  were  transferred 
to  the  shores  of  the  great  northern  lakes.  It  is  impos- 
sible to  look  with  indifference  on  such  an  initial  stage  of 
one  of  the  great  revolutions  begot  by  civilisation  amid 
the  western  wilds.  We  can  only  guess  at  the  beginnings 
of  aacient  cities  and  empires ;  but  here  we  are  present 
at  the  actual  birth,  and  look  on  the  first  clearings,  the 
rude  shanty,  the  temporary  pier  and  corduroy  road  for 
the  city  in  embryo,  destined  to  be  what  Chichago  has 
proved  for  Lake  Michigan,  perchance  what  St.  Petersburg 
has  been  for  the  Neva  and  the  Baltic,  or  Alexandria  once 
was,  and  may  yet  again  be,  for  the  Nile. 

Viewed  in  this  light,  the  remarkable  features  of  Su- 
perior Bay  and  its  tributary  rivers  possessed  a  peculiar 
charm,  thus  seen,  as  it  were,  at  the  close  of  one  great 
cycle  of  their  history,  in  their  natural  state,  the  gradual 
formation  of  ages,  and  all  untouched  by  the  hand  of 
man.  The  frail  village  of  wigwams  and  the  tiny  fleet 
of  birch-bark  canoes^  only  added  a  characteristic  feature 
to  the  wild  face  of  nature.  La  this,  as  in  so  many  other 
respects,  no  more  striking  contrast  could  be  presented  to 
the  ancient  historic  rivers  of  Europe,  with  their  dykes, 


n.]  THE  OLD  WORLD  AND  THE  NEW.  43 

and  piersy  and  breakwaters,  the  monuments  of  enterprise 
and  engineering  skill :  pertaining,  like  the  dykes  of  the 
Essex  marshes  on  Old  Father  Thames,  to  a  date  nearly 
coeval  with  the  Christian'  era ;  or  reaching  back,  like 
those  of  the  Delta  of  the  African  Nile,  to  the  birth-time 
of  history  and  the  infancy  of  the  human  race.  The 
contrast  between  the  new  and  the  old  here  is  sufficiently 
striking ;  yet  the  old  also  was  once  new  ;  had  even  such 
beginnings  as  this ;  and  was  as  devoid  of  history  as  Ae 
rawest  clearing  of  the  Far  West.  Guided  by  the  dis- 
closures of  a  New  World  just  entering  on  the  dawn  of 
its  historic  life,  may  we  not  hope  to  read  more  clearly 
the  traditions  of  ancient  primitive  history,  and  to  recover 
new  light  wherewith  to  illuminate  the  Old  World's  pre- 
historic times  ? 


44  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 


CHAPTER    III. 

THE  PRIMEVAL  OCCUPATION :  SPEECH. 

On  the  busy  scene  of  the  Western  Canadian  capital, 
little  more  than  half  a  century  ago,  stood,  as  we  have 
seen,  the  primitive  wigwams  of  the  Red  Man,  in  a  state 
of  nature  ;  and  the  primeval  forest  swept  like  a  leafy 
sea  back  from  the  shores  of  the  great  lakes  to  the  Arctic 
circle.  At  times  a  little  more  remote,  within  the  last 
three  centuries,  the  same  was  the  case  on  every  civic  site 
of  the  New  World.  We  call  the  forest  primeval,  and  we 
speak  of  the  savage  as  the  child  of  nature.  But  we  do 
neither  in  any  very  strict  or  scientific  sense.  What,  in- 
deed, is  the  natural  condition  of  man,  is  even  now  by 
no  means  a  settled  point.  Nevertheless  we  have  very 
varied  sources  to  which  we  may  turn  for  a  reply.  With- 
out looking  for  systems  of  science  in  the  Bible,  which  it 
was  never  designed  to  furnish,  either  in  relation  to  the 
organic  or  inorganic  world,  or  to  man  himself :  we  never- 
theless derive  from  thence  incidental  notices  of  the 
highest  value  in  reference  to  the  suggested  inquiry.  The 
geologist  may  turn  aside  from  the  Mosaic  record  as  a 
book  never  designed  for  his  aid,  but  the  ethnologist 
cannot  do  so,  imless  he  is  prepared  entirely  to  reject  its 
authority;  for  man  is  its  theme,  and  the  earth's  crea- 
tion is  only  considered  there  in  so  far  as  it  relates  to 
him.  Moreover,  there,  and  there  only,  can  he  turn  for 
any  authoritative  information  relative  to  the  origin  of 


in.]         THE  PRIMEVAL  OCCUPATION:  SPEECH.  45 

our  race.  If  that  is  rejected,  there  remaiiis  for  us  only 
the  vague  inductions  of  science  on  a  point  beyond  its 
ken  ;  or  the  childish  fables  of  tradition,  in  which  the 
intellectual  Greek  and  the  untutored  savage  are  on  a 
par.  There,  then,  we  learn,  in  the  one  written  record 
possessed  of  the  slightest  value,  of  man  primeval  as  no 
savage,  but  a  being  of  intellectual  power  and  moral 
purity;  and  aU  other  records  of  later  origin  seem  to 
point  towards  the  same  eastern  area,  there  indicated  as 
the  cradle  of  the  world's  civilisation,  and  the  birthplace 
of  the  nations.  But,  also,  the  farther  our  investigations 
are  pursued,  the  more  evidence  do  we  find,  tending  to 
confirm  our  belief  in  certain  analogies  between  the 
modem  savage,  conventionaDy  designated  the  child  of 
nature,  and  primeval  man.  "  Geology  is  the  archaeology 
of  the  globe ;  ethnology  that  of  its  human  inhabit- 
ants f^  and  the  more  closely  the  two  have  been  brought 
in  contact,  the  more  clearly  does  it  seem  to  be  forced  on 
our  acceptance,  that  the  primitive  condition  of  man  in- 
cluded none  of  those  physical  appliances  of  inventive 
skill  indissolubly  associated  with  all  our  modern  ideas  of 
civilisation  and  inteUectual  progress. 

The  investigation  of  the  underlying  chronicles  of 
Europe's  most  ancient  human  history,  have  placed  be- 
yond question  that  its  historic  period  was  preceded  by 
an  unhistoric  one  of  long  duration,  marked  by  a  slow 
progression  from  arts  of  the  most  primitive  kind  to 
others  which  involved  the  germs  of  all  later  develop- 
ments. From  Europe,  and  the  historic  lands  of  Asia 
and  the  Nile  VaUey,  we  derive  all  our  ideas  of  man ;  and 
of  the  youngest  of  these  continents,  on  which  he  has 
thus  advanced  from  savage  artlessness  to  the  highest 
arts  of  civilisation,  we  have  history,  written  or  tradi- 

^  Pricliard,   "Anniyersary  Address  before  the  Ethnological   Society  of 
London."     1847. 


46  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

tional,  for  at  least  2000  years.  But  in  the  year  1492, 
a  New  World  was  discovered,  peopled  with  its  own 
millions,  for  the  most  part  in  no  degree  advanced  beyond 
that  primeval  starting-point  which  lies  far  behind  Europe's 
oldest  traditions.  The  significance  of  such  a  state  of 
things  is  worth  inquiring  into,  if  it  be  for  nothing  else 
than  the  light  which  the  analogies  of  such  a  Kving  present 
may  throw  on  that  curious  infancy  of  Europe's  ancient 
past ;  and  beyond  that,  on  the  primal  infancy  of  the 
human  race. 

Recent  discoveries  of  rude  traces  of  primeval  art  in 
the  diluvial  formations  both  of  France  and  England, 
have  tended  to  add  a  fresh  interest  to  the  investigation 
of  that  "primeval  stone-period"  which  underlies  the 
most  ancient  memorials  of  Europe's  civilisation.  We 
know  from  that  oldest  of  aU  written  chronicles,  the  first 
book  of  the  Mosaic  pentateuch,  that  there  existed  a 
period  of  some  duration  in  the  history  of  the  human 
race,  during  which  man  tilled  the  ground,  pursued  the 
chase,  and  made  garments  of  its  spoils,  without  any 
knowledge  of  the  working  in  metals,  on  which  the 
simplest  of  all  our  known  arts  depend.  Through  such  a 
stage  of  primitive  art,  it  had  already  appeared  to  me 
most  probable,  that  all  civilized  nations  had  passed ; 
before  those  disclosures  of  a  human  stone-period  in  the 
chroniclings  of  the  drift  added  new  and  seemingly  in- 
disputable confirmation  of  the  term  primeval^  in  its 
application  to  the  non-metallurgic  era  of  Britaiu's  and 
Europe's  arts. 

The  incredulity  and  even  contempt  with  which  the 
appKcations  of  a  system  of  archaeological  periods  to  the 
antiquities  of  Britain  was  received,  a  few  years  ago,  by 
a  certain  class  of  critics,  was  inevitable,  from  the  almost 
exclusive  attention  previously  devoted  to  Roman  and 
mediaeval  remains.     "  When  wiU  Druidical  archaeologists 


m.]         THE  PRIMEVAL  OCXUPATION :  SPEECH.  47 

be  convinced,'^  exclaims  the  black-letter  antiquary,  **  that 
menzhir  and  peul-ven,  cromlech  and  kistvaen,  tell  us 
nothing;  and  from  nothing  nothing  comes.  You  can 
no  more  judge  of  their  age,  than  the  eye  can  estimate 
the  height  of  the  clouds.  These  shapeless  masses  impart 
but  one  lesson,  the  impossibility  of  recovering  by  in- 
duction any  knowledge  of  the  speechless  past  Waste 
not  your  oiL  Give  it  up,  that  speechless  past ;  whether 
feet  or  chronology,  doctrine  or  mythology ;  whether  in 
Europe,  Asia,  Africa,  or  America  ;  at  Thebes  or  Palenque, 
on  Lycian  shore  or  Salisbury  plain :  lost  is  lost ;  gone 
is  gone  for  ever/'^  So  exclaims  the  enthusiastic  black- 
letter  scholar,  in  words  alike  daunting  to  geologist  and 
archaeologist :  while  himself  patiently  expending  his  oU 
in  the  laborious  eiOTort  to  recover  some  chance  grarns 
of  historical  truth  from  the  credulous  but  courtierly 
chroniclings  of  Dudon  de  Saint-Quentin  ;  or  from  such 
tardy  miscellanies  of  yoimger  tradition  as  served  to 
beguile  the  tedium  of  St.  Evroul's  cloisters  to  that  gentle, 
but  most  uncritical  of  monkish  penmen,  Ordericus  Vi- 
talis.  Cromlech  and  kistvaen  have  already  disclosed  to 
us  the  physical  characteristics  and  the  primitive  arts  of 
Europe's  allophylian  races,  in  ages  long  prior  to  letters. 
We  may,  at  times,  misread  their  chroniclings,  but  they 
never  wilfully  mislead,  never  blunder,  never  whisper 
flattery  over  the  dead  whose  memory  they  have  in  trust ; 
and  that  is  mere  than  can  be  said  of  Dudon  de  Saint- 
Quentin,  or  any  monkish  chronicler. 

The  Roman  antiquary  has  next  his  fling  at  the  syste- 
matizing of  primitive  archaeological  explorations  and  in- 
ductions, as  an  attempt  "specious  and  attractive  in 
appearance,  but  without  foundation  in  trutk^'  "  Such,'' 
accordingly  proceeds  the  explorer  of  Roman  Britain ; 
"  such,  I  am  convinced,  is  the  system  of  archaeological 

^  Palgrave's  Histary  of  Normandy,  vol,  i.  p.  469. 


48  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

periods  wHch  has  been  adopted  by  tiie  antiquaries  of 
the  North,  and  which  a  vain  attempt  has  been  made  to 
introduce  into  tMs  country.  There  is  sometiiing  we  nmy 
perhaps  say  poetical,  certainly  imaginative,  in  talking  of 
an  age  of  stone,  or  an  age  of  bronze,  or  an  age  of  iron ; 
but  such  divisions  have  no  meaning  in  history,  which 
cannot  be  treated  as  a  physical  science,  and  its  objects 
arranged  in  genera  and  species.  We  have  to  do  with 
races  of  mankind,  and  we  can  only  arrange  the  objects 
which  come  under  our  examination  according  to  the 
peoples  to  whom  they  belonged,  and  as  they  illustrate 
their  manners  and  history.  In  fact,  the  divisions  al- 
luded to  are  themselves  incorrect,  and  so  far  is  the 
discovery  of  implements  of  stone,  or  of  bronze,  or  of 
iron,  from  being  proof  of  any  particular  age,  that  we 
often  find  them  together."'^  So  says  the  Eoman  anti- 
quary, adding  in  explanation  of  such  a  condition  of 
things  that,  "  in  the  early  period  to  which  the  volume 
refers,  intercommunication  was  slow  and  difficult.  ...  It 
was  then  necessary  to  use  such  materials  as  came  to 
hand,  and  there  is  no  possible  reason  why  one  man 
should  not  possess  a  weapon  or  a  tool  formed  of  stone^ 
while  his  richer  or  more  fortunate  contemporary  had  one 
of  iron  or  bronze  f  aU  which  only  serves  to  prove  the 
difficulty  of  persuading  the  classic  antiquary  how  very 
modem  a  thing  that  Eoman  world  was  with  which  alone 
he  is  disposed  to  deal.  That  which  he  here  calls  "  the 
early  period,^'  refers,  at  the  earliest,  to  the  century  before 
the  Christian  era  ;  for  the  most  part  the  materials  for  its 
illustration,  which  Britain  supplies,  belong,  like  those  of 
Herculaneum  and  Pompeii,  to  the  younger  era,  and  even 
to  dates  two  or  three  centuries  later.  Instead  of  being 
an  early  period  in  the  history  of  man,  it  is  not  even  an 
early  period  in  that  of  Eome.     It  belongs  rather  to  what 

1  The  Cdtf  the  Romaic,  and  the  Saxon,  pp.  vi.  vii. 


Ill]  THE  PRIMEVAL  OCCUPATION :  SPEECH.  49 

St.  Paul  expressively  styled  "these  last  days."  The 
whole  national  history  of  Greece  was  already  completed, 
and  among  the  things  of  former  generations ;  the  elder 
eaatem  monarchies  were  in  being  two  thousand  yeai^ 
before,  and  the  world  had  been  the  arena  of  human 
history,  according  to  the  lowest  computation,  for  upwards 
of  four  thousand  years. 

It  is  no  disparagement  of  the  labours  of  the  classic 
antiquary  to  renund  him  that  there  were  heroes  even 
before  Agamemnon.  The  researches  alike  of  the  Roman 
and  mediaeval  archaeologist  are  replete  with  value,  sup- 
plementing history  in  a  thousand  ways,  and  throwing 
hght  on  many  puzzling  obscurities  and  errors ;  but  where 
either  attempts,  from  his  own  recent  point  of  view,  to 
challenge  that  remoter  past  which  the  archaeologist  is 
striving  in  some  faint  degree  to  elucidate,  it  might  not 
be  unmeet  to  recall  the  terms  of  Horace  Smith's  quaint 
address  to  Belzoni's  mummy, — no  antediluvian  patri- 
arch, but  a  mere  Theban  of  the  Nile,  who  may  have 
dropped  an  obolus  when  Homer  sung  : — 

**  I  need  not  ask  thee  if  that  hand,  when  armed. 
Has  any  Roman  soldier  mauled  or  knuckled. 

For  thou  wert  dead,  and  buried,  and  embalmed 
Ere  Romulus  and  Remus  had  been  suckled  ; 

Antiquity  appears  to  have  begun 

Long  after  thy  primeval  race  was  run  ! " 

But  the  attention  of  the  antiquary,  as  well  as  the 
geologist,  is  now  being  directed  to  the  inevitable  conclu- 
sions forced  on  both  by  the  discoveries  of  the  rudely 
fashioned  flint  hatchet  and  spear-head  in  the  stratified 
gravel  of  post-pliocene  formations.  Of  the  artificial 
origin  of  these  it  seems  no  longer  possible  to  doubt,  and 
the  circumstances  attending  their  repeated  discovery 
seem  equally  to  place  their  remote  antiquity  beyond 
question.     Sir  Charles  Lyell  has  cautiously  summed  up 

VOL.  I.  D 


60  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

the  evidence  in  a  manner  singularly  applicable  to  our 
present  purpose,  when  referring  to  the  fossU  implements 
and  weapons  of  Abbeville  and  Amiens.  "Although 
the  accompanying  shells  are  of  living  species/'  he  ob- 
serves in  his  address  from  the  chair  of  the  Geological 
Section  of  the  British  Association,  "  I  believe  the  anti- 
quity of  the  Abbeville  and  Amiens  flint  instruments 
to  be  great  indeed,  if  compared  to  the  times  of  history 
or  tradition.  I  consider  the  gravel  to  be  of  fluviatile 
origin,  but  I  could  detect  nothing  in  the  structure  of  its 
several  parts  indicating  cataclysmal  action ;  nothing  that 
might  not  be  due  to  such  river-floods  as  we  have  wit- 
nessed in  Scotland  during  the  last  half  century.  It 
must  have  required  a  long  period  for  the  wearing  down 
of  the  chalk  which  supplied  the  broken  flints  for  the 
formation  of  so  much  gravel  at  various  heights,  some- 
times one  hundred  feet  above  the  present  level  of  the 
Somme,  for  the  deposition  of  fine  sediment,  including 
entire  shells,  both  terrestrial  and  aquatic,  and  also  for 
the  denudation  which  the  entire  mass  of  stratified  drift 
has  undergone :  portions  having  been  swept  away,  so 
that  what  remains  of  it  often  terminates  abruptly  in  old 
river  clifis,  besides  being  covered  by  a  newer  unstratified 
drift.  To  explain  these  changes,  I  should  infer  consider- 
able oscillations  in  the  level  of  the  land  in  that  part 
of  France ;  slow  movements  of  upheaval  and  subsidence, 
deranging,  but  not  wholly  displacing,  the  course  of  the 
ancient  river.  Lastly,  the  disappearance  of  the  elephant, 
rhinoceros,  and  other  genera  of  quadrupeds  now  foreign 
to  Europe,  implies,  in  like  manner,  a  vast  lapse  of 
ages,  separating  the  era  in  which  the  fossil  implements 
were  framed  and  that  of  the  invasion  of  Gaul  by  the 
Romans.^' 

Subsequent  investigation  by  experienced  geologists 
has  somewhat  modified  the  ideas  here  expressed.     Prof. 


Ill]         THE  PRIMEVAL  OCCUPATION:  SPEECH.  51 

J.  S,  Henslow,  after  minute  observations,  comes  to  the 
conclusion  that  "  no  one  can  doubt  the  evidence  to  be  in 
favour  of  a  cataclysmic  action,  and  rapid  deposition  of 
the  lower  and  larger  portion  of  the  gravel,  at  the  spot 
near  St.  Acheul  -where  the  hatchets  occur/'  Neither 
does  he  suppose  that  the  facta  witnessed  by  him,  indi- 
cate of  necessity  that  the  bones  of  extinct  mammals 
found  alongside  of  the  flint  implements  were  contem- 
porary with  the  unskilled  workmen  by  whom  these  were 
wrought ;  or  that  the  evidence  carries  man  altogether 
out  of  the  range  of  human  history.  The  fossil  bones 
and  the  human  implements  are  mingled  in  a  gravel, 
formed  as  a  redisposition  by  fresh- water  agency,  out  of 
older  materials  probably  belonging  to  very  difierent 
periods,  though  the  most  modem  of  them  undoubtedly 
pertain  to  a  period  long  prior  to  the  oldest  dates  of 
Gaulish  history/  The  most  improbable  feature  about 
this  discovery  of  traces  of  human  art  in  the  drift  has 
been  the  number  of  specimens  found  within  so  limited 
an  area,  in  complete  contradiction  to  the  experience  of 
archaeologists,  with  reference  to  more  recent  deposits. 
But  the  incredulous  wonder  with  which  one  reads  that 
"  it  is  estimated  that  the  total  number  of  worked  flints 
exhumed  by  their  eminent  discoverer,  M.  Boucher  de 
Perthes,  of  Abbeville,  exceeds  1500,  and  may  even  ap- 
proach 2000  specimens,^'  is  considerably  lessened  by  au 
examination  of  the  numerous  plates  illustrating  these 
discoveries,  in  the  "Antiquit^s  Celtiques  et  Ant^dilu- 
viennes/'  Certainly  ninety  per  cent,  appear  to  the  ordi- 
nary eye  mere  flint  chips  such  as  may  be  gathered  from 
any  gravel  heap.  But  after  rejecting  every  doubtful 
specimen  there  still  remain  indisputable  evidences  of 
human  art,  startling  us  with  the  remote  antiquity  to 
which,  on  any  system  of  interpretation,  we  must  refer 

1  Athenmim,  Oct.  20,  1860. 


52  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

Buch  traces  of  the  presence  of  man  in  the  north  of 
Europe. 

Yet,  after  all,  this  is  only  an  old  truth  confirmed  by 
additional  proofs.  Precisely  similar  evidences  of  oscil- 
lation, upheaval,  and  derangement  of  the  course  of  an- 
cient rivers  had  accompanied  the  attempts  to  illustrate 
a  primeval  British  stone-period  before  the  discoveries  of 
Abbeville  and  Amiens  were  heard  of.^  In  the  year 
1819  there  was  disclosed  in  the  alluvium  of  the  carse- 
land,  where  the  river  Forth  winds  its  circuitous  course 
through  ancient  historic  scenes  already  referred  to,  the 
skeleton  of  a  gigantic  whale,  with  a  perforated  lance  or 
harpoon  of  deer's  horn  beside  it.  They  lay  together 
near  the  base  of  Dunmyat,  one  of  the  Ochil  Hills,  and 
twenty  feet  above  the  highest  tide  of  the  neighbouring 
estuary.  Over  this  was  an  accumulation  of  five  feet  of 
alluvial  soil,  covered  with  a  thin  bed  of  moss.  The 
locality  was  examined  at  the  time,  and  the  levels  noted 
by  scientific  observers  peculiarly  competent  to  the  task ; 
and  at  the  same  time  sufl&cient  traces  of  the  old  Roman 
causeway  were  observed,  leading  to  one  of  the  fords  of 
the  Forth,  to  prove  that  no  important  change  had  taken 
place  on  the  bed  of  the  river,  or  the  general  level  of  the 
strath,  during  the  era  of  authentic  history.^  Nor  was 
the  example  a  solitary  one ;  remains  of  those  gigantic 
Balsense  have  been  repeatedly  found ;  and  one  skeleton 
discovered  in  1824,  seven  miles  further  inland  than  the 
earlier  example,  now  lies  in  the  Natural  History  Museum 
of  Edinburgh  University,  along  with  the  primitive  har- 
poon of  deer's  horn  found  beside  it. 

With  such  well-authenticated  and  altogether  indis- 
putable evidence  abeady  in  our  possession,  what  addi- 
tion is  made  to  our  grounds  for  belief  in  the  antiquity 

*  Prehistoric  Annala  of  Scotland,  p.  33. 

"^  Edinburgh  Philosophical  Journal,  vol.  i.  p.  395. 


III.]         THE  PRIMEVAL  OCCUPATION :  SPEECH.  53 

of  the  prehistoric  human  era  of  Britain  or  Europe? 
Whatever  difficulties  may  seem  to  arise  from  the  dis- 
coveries at  Abbeville  and  Amiens,  or  the  older  ones  at 
Hoxne  in  Suffolk,  in  relation  to  the  age  of  man,  the 
chronology  which  suffices  to  embrace  the  ancient  Cale- 
donian whaler  within  the  period  of  human  history  will 
equally  answer  for  the  more  recently  discovered  allo- 
phylian  arts  of  the  French  diluvium.  And  lying,  as 
the  Scottish  relics  did,  almost  beneath  the  paving  of  the 
Roman  causeway :  what,  it  may  fairly  be  asked,  have 
the  discoveries  of  the  Eoman  antiquary  relative  to  the 
British  Celt  of  Julius  Caesar's  time,  or  to  the  Romanized 
Britain  of  Claudius  or  Nero,  to  do  with  an  archaeological 
period  to  which  the  Dunmyat  and  Blair-Drummond 
Moss  harpoons  belong?  They  have  somewhat  less  to 
do  with  it  than  the  American  aborigines  of  the  fifteenth 
century  have  to  do  with  the  primeval  race  and  period 
of  the  New  World  ;  for  Celtic  Britain,  though  insular, 
had  been  subject  to  no  such  isolation  as  the  American 
Continent.  The  very  question  raised  anew  by  the  cri- 
tical examination  of  such  disclosures  as  the  British  drift, 
ossiferous  caves,  gravel  mounds,  and  chance  deposits 
reveal,  is  whether  the  ancient  British  Celt,  on  whom 
Roman  and  Saxon  intruded,  was  not  himself  an  intruder 
on  older  aJlophylian  occupants  ?^  If  he  was  not,  we 
must  ascribe  to  the  language  and  race  of  the  Celtic 
Briton  an  antiquity  without  a  parallel  in  the  history  of 
nations ;  for  when  the  Roman  intruded  on  his  insular 
home  it  was  at  the  close  of  an  epoch  which  had  wit- 
nessed such  protracted  changes  as  those  that  elevated 
the  ancient  estuary  of  the  Forth  from  the  ocean-bed,  and 
buried  its  giant  mammals  beneath  an  accumulation  of 

^  This  question  was  first  brought  forward  by  the  author  in  an  Inquiry  into 
the  Evidence  qf  the  Existence  of  Primitive  Races  in  ScoUand  prior  to  the  Celtic. 
— British  Association  Report^  1850. 


54  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap.  ^ 

alluvial  soil  and  peat  moss,  which  had  spread  the  broad 
carse  along  the  base  of  the  Ochils  at  the  same  level  as 
now,  before  Agrieola,  in  the  first  century  of  our  era,  led 
his  Koman  legions  against  the  northern  Caledonians. 
To  the  mediaeval  or  the  Koman  antiquary,  such  traces 
of  primeval  man  may  be  of  no  account,  but  to  the 
ethnologist  they  are  of  the  profoimdest  interest  and 
value. 

There  is  a  certain  remote  epoch  in  most  men's  ideas 
of  the  past,  by  no  means  uniformly  defined,  beyond 
which  all  becomes  vague  antiquity,  and  whatever  it  may 
disclose  is  assumed  to  have  been  contemporaneous  ;  just 
as  the  Indian  of  Central  America  is  content  to  ascribe 
its  ruins  to  the  antiguos,  and  the  old  geologist  referred 
all  organic  remains  to  the  Deluge.  But  this,  which  was 
inevitable  at  an  earlier  stage  of  inquiry,  when  all  our 
means  for  the  recovery  of  a  knowledge  of  the  past  his- 
tory of  man  seemed  exhausted,  will  resolve  itself  into 
a  definite  recognition  of  relative  antiquity,  in  no  degree 
calculated  to  diminish  the  just  estimation  of  those  more 
modern  researches  of  the  Eoman  or  mediaeval  antiquary 
which  are  essential  to  the  completeness  of  the  whole. 
Each  new  accession  of  evidence  seems  to  confirm  the  pro- 
bability that  all  tribes  and  nations  of  the  human  family 
have  passed  through  the  same  preliminary  and  infantile 
stage  of  arts  ;  and  at  a  period  when  the  exploded  theory 
of  man's  development  from  some  inferior  organized  type 
seems  to  be  revived  with  renewed  favour,  whatever 
tends  to  harmonize  our  ideas  of  primeval  man  as  dis- 
closed to  us  in  the  records  of  nature  and  revelation,  is 
worthy  of  the  most  earnest  study.  But  in  this  as  in  so 
many  other  branches  of  scientific  inquiry,  the  premature 
efibrts  to  harmonize  the  first  vague  glimpses  of  a  half- 
seen  revelation  of  science  with  preconceived  interpre- 
tations of  the  sacred  cosmogony,  threaten  to  retard  the 


IIL]         THE  PRIMEVAL  OCCUPATION:  SPEECH.  55 

inevitable  discovery  of  scientific  truths  which,  when  fully 
known  and  appreciated,  cannot  fail  to  harmonize  with 
all  other  truths,  and  even  to  throw  new  light  upon  them. 
One  such  investigator  of  the  traces  of  art  in  the  super- 
ficial drift,  in  his  anxiety  lest  any  modification  of  the 
popular  opinion  of  the  recentness  of  man's  introduction 
on  the  earth  should  seem  to  conflict  with  the  truths  of 
sacred  Scripture  relative  to  his  creation,  exclaims  : — 
"  We  have  more  positive  evidence  that  his  first  appear- 
ance was  characterized  by  many  proofs  of  high  intellec- 
tual condition  which  our  sacred  beliefs  attach  to  his 
origin,  and  that  he  was  not  primarily  the  ignoble  crea- 
ture that  arrow-heads  and  flint-knives,  and  ossiferous 
caverns  would  so  lamentably  indicate.  The  mighty 
ruins  spread  over  the  plains  and  great  river  water-sheds 
of  the  East  clearly  indicate  his  Oriental  cradle-land, 
when,  in  conjunction  with  the  traditions  of  all  nations 
in  the  most  remote  times,  he  dwelt  in  palaces,  luxuriated 
in  gardens,  worshipped  in  temples  of  solemn  grandeur, 
and  reared  towers  and  pyramids  enduring  as  the  rocks 
firom  which  they  were  hewn.  The  arts  and  sciences 
and  commerce  accompanied  the  progress  of  his  terres- 
trial occupation,  bringing  in  their  train  the  elegancies, 
luxuries,  and  perfected  implements  of  defence  or  attack 
which  the  highest  stages  of  civilisation  imply."  ^  Such 
arguments — advanced  not  in  a  mere  popular  lecture, 
but  submitted  to  the  section  of  the  British  Association 
to  which  Lyell  had  communicated  the  observations  and 
restdts  of  himself  and  other  well-qualified  investigators 
on  the  same  profoundly  interesting  and  important  in- 
quiry,— are  urged  as  something  more  significant  than  a 
mere  rhetorical  generalization.  Yet  their  author  was 
well  aware  that  neither  Botta,  Layard,  Rawlinson,  nor 

*  Rev.  John  Anderson,  D.D.     "  The  Geologic  Age  of  Man  in  its  Present 
Aspects,"  AthencBum,  Oct.  1,  1859. 


56  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

any  other  explorer  of  the  mighty  ruins  of  the  East,  pre- 
tends to  have  discovered  the  works  of  antedUuvian 
builders,  or  even  the  ruins  of  very  early  postdiluvian 
generations.  The  Mosaic  narrative,  instead  of  justifying 
any  such  statements  as  to  the  intellectual  proofs  that 
characterized  man's  appearance  on  earth,  tells  us  ex- 
plicitly of  the  first  beginning  of  kingdoms  by  the  nomade 
hunter,  Nimrod,  at  the  very  lowest  computation  nearly 
two  thousand  years :  or,  according  to  others,  still  re- 
garded as  probably  erring  in  deficiency  rather  than  ex- 
cess, more  nearly  four  thousand  years  after  the  creation 
of  man.  The  world's  early  historic  chronology  has  yet 
to  be  revised  ;  but  meanwhile  such  arguments  retard 
science,  while  they  do  a  greater  wrong  to  revealed  truth : 
marshalling  the  loyal  defenders  of  the  sacredness  of 
the  Scriptures,  in  defence  of  human  interpretations,  as 
worthy  of  such  misguided  loyalty  as  the  zeal  of  the 
Roman  Inqidsition  on  behalf  of  the  Ptolemaic  system 
and  orthodox  astronomy,  in  its  crusade  against  Galileo 
and  the  Copemicans  of  the  seventeenth  century.  What 
then  are  the  intellectual  conditions  pertaining  to  prim- 
eval man,  in  so  far  as  we  can  deduce  them  from  the 
joint  records  of  science  and  revealed  truth  ? 

The  whole  reasoning  alike  of  the  antiquary  and  the 
theologian  against  the  characteristics  which  archaeological 
discoveries  tend  to  assign  to  man  in  his  primeval  condi- 
tion, originates  in  an  illogical  association  of  the  con- 
comitants of  modem  intellectual  and  social  progress  with 
the  indispensable  requisites  of  man's  primary  condition 
as  created  in  the  Divine  image,  a  being  of  iutellectual 
and  moral  purity.  It  is  not  necessary  for  the  confirma- 
tion of  a  primeval  stone-period  for  man,  that  we  degrade 
him  from  that  majestic  genesis  of  our  race,  when  he 
heard  the  voice  of  tiie  Lord  God  amongst  the  trees  of 
Paradise  and  was  not  afraid.     Still  less  is  it  requisite 


m.]         THE  PRIMEVAL  OCGUFATIOlf :  SPEECH,  57 

that  we  make  of  him  that  "  extinct  species  of  anthropoid 
animal''  hastily  invented  by  over-sensitive  Mosaic  geo- 
logists to  meet  the  problematic  case  of  pleistocene 
products  of  art.  In  that  primeval  transition  of  the 
ethnologist  in  which  geology  draws  to  a  close  and 
archaeology  has  its  beginning,  when  the  old  orders  of 
organic  hfe  were  disappearing,  to  make  way  for  a  new 
and  far  higher  order  of  beings  :  amid  strange  beasts  of 
the  earth,  cattle,  and  creeping  things,  we  discern 

**  Two  of  far  nobler  shape,  erect  and  tall. 
Godlike  erect,  with  native  honour  clad 
In  naked  majesty,  seem'd  lords  of  all ; 
And  worthy  seem'd  :  for  in  their  looks  divine 
The  image  of  their  glorious  Maker  shone. 
Truth,  wisdom,  sanctitude,  severe  and  pure. 
Severe,  but  in  true  filial  freedom  placed  ; 
Whence  true  authority  in  men." 

But  if  our  modem  technological  standards  are  to  be  the 
only  received  tests  of  intellectual  nobility,  "  his  fair  large 
front  and  eye  sublime,"  with  all  the  grand  suggestive 
picturings  of  Milton's  primeval  man,  are  vain.  His 
arts,  though  ample  enough  for  all  his  wants,  by  such 
modem  standards  declare  him  no  better  than  *^the 
ignoble  creature  that  arrow-heads  and  flint  knives 
would  indicate."  He  needed  no  weapons  for  war  or  the 
chase ;  implements  of  husbandry  were  scarcely  more 
superfluous,  amid  a  profusion  far  ampler  than  the  luxu- 
riant plenty  of  the  islands  of  the  Southern  Ocean.  The 
needle  and  the  loom  were  as  foreign  to  his  wants 
as  the  printing-press  or  the  electric  telegraph.  What 
did  he  want  with  the  potter's  wheel,  or  the  sculptor's 
chisel,  or  the  mason's  tools  ?  And  if  his  simple  wants 
did  suggest  the  need  of  some  cutting  implements,  the 
flint  knives,  or 

**  Such  other  gardening  tools  as  art,  yet  rude", 
Guiltless  of  fire,  had  formed," 


58  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

harmonize  with  the  simplicity  of  that  primeval  life,  and 
its  easy  toils,  far  more  naturally  than  the  most  artistic 
Sheffield  cutlery  could  do,  with  all  its  requisite  prelimi- 
nary processes  of  mining,  smelting,  forging,  grinding, 
and  hafting  the  needless  tool. 

The  idea  which  associates  man's  intellectual  elevation 
with  the  accompaniments  of  mechanical  skill,  as  though 
they  stood  somehow  in  the  relation  of  cause  and  eflFect ; 
and  with  the  intellectual  as  the  offspring,  instead  of  the 
parent  of  the  mechanical  element :  is  the  product  of 
modem  thought.  The  very  element  which  begets  the 
unintellectual  condition  of  the  ignoble  savage  is  that 
his  whole  energies  are  expended,  and  all  his  thoughts 
are  absorbed,  in  providing  daily  food  and  clothing,  and 
the  requisite  tools  by  which  those  are  to  be  secured ;  or 
where,  as  in  the  luxuriant  islands  of  Polynesia,  nature 
seems  to  provide  all  things  to  his  hand,  his  degraded 
moral  nature  unparadises  the  Eden  of  the  bread-fruit 
tree.  Keasoning  without  any  aid  from  revelation,  it 
seems  difficult  to  conceive  of  man  primeval  as  a  being 
starting  into  existence  with  artificial  wants  supplied  by 
fictile,  plastic,  and  metallurgic  arts.  Looking  on  him 
merely  from  the  palaeontologist's  point  of  view,  we  should 
be  more  apt  to  conceive  of  him  as  the  infantile  Hesiodic 
savage,  for  whom  the  Titan  Prometheus  compassionat- 
ingly  sinned  the  sin  of  Lucifer,  that  he  might  teach  him 
mechanical  inventions,  and  the  obedient  service  of  fire. 
But  the  true  primeval  man,  clothed  in  his  own  inno- 
cence, and  eating  "  angel's  food,"  derived  his  moral  and 
intellectual  nobility  from  far  different  characteristics  than 
those  of  the  classical  proto-metallurgists,  Hephaestos  or 
Vulcan.  In  such  a  condition  of  moral  purity  and  free- 
dom, a  Socrates  or  Plato,  a  Bacon  or  Newton,  might 
have  wrought  out  their  grandest  problems. 

The  sacred  narrative  is  singularly  minute  in  its  record 


IIL]         THE  PRIMEVAL  OCCUPATION :  SPEECH,  59 

of  the  introduction  of  the  metallnrgic  arts  to  the  human 
race,  doubtless  in  full  recognition  of  the  mighty  revolu- 
tions to  be  wrought  by  their  means.  Such  is  the  brevity 
of  the  whole  antediluvian  record  that  it  may  be  doubted 
if  many  have  reflected  on  the  great  lapse  of  time  that 
intervened  between  the  creation  of  man  and  his  intro- 
duction to  a  knowledge  of  metallurgy.  It  is  not  until 
towards  the  close  of  the  antediluvian  era,  fully  a  thousand 
years  after  the  expulsion  from  paradise,  that  Zillah  bare 
unto  Lamech,  Tubal-Cain,  the  instructor  of  every  artificer 
in  brass  and  iron.  It  might  seem  from  the  tragic  song 
of  Lamech — ^that  most  ancient  of  all  human  lyrics, — 
which  immediately  follows,  as  if  the  first  use  of  the 
newly-discovered  art  had  been  for  homicide.  The  newly- 
created  man  had  other  ends  to  accomplish  for  himself 
and  his  race,  than  those  which  seem  so  pre-eminently 
essential  in  this  era  of  such  wonderful  mechanical 
triumphs.  When  at  length  the  mechanical  skiU  of  the 
first  great  ship -builder  was  called  into  requisition,  it  was 
not  for  the  development  of  maritime  enterprise  and  dis- 
covery, or  the  creation  of  a  world-wide  commerce  :  but 
because  God  looked  on  the  earth,  and  it  repented  him 
that  he  had  made  man,  and  he  said  to  Noah,  "  The  end 
of  all  flesh  is  come  before  me ;  for  the  earth  is  filled  with 
violence  through  them,  and  behold  I  will  destroy  them 
from  the  earth." 

"  And  the  whole  earth  was  of  one  language,  and  of 
one  speech  ;"  but  what  was  the  language  and  speech  of 
man  at  the  beginning  of  that  previous  non-mechanical 
epoch  ?  The  development  of  speech  into  language  wais, 
I  conceive,  a  fitter  and  more  needful  occupation  for 
primeval  man,  than  anticipating  the  wants  of  remote 
generations  by  a  premature  birth  of  mechanical  arts,  as 
superfluous  to  him  as  the  luxuries  of  modem  fashionable 
life.     In  reopening  the  question  of  the  origin  of  Ian- 


60  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

guage,  I  am  well  aware  that .  I  deal  here,  once  more, 
with  a  question  which  has  found  its  solution  in  hypo- 
theses and  deductions  ranging  through  the  widest  con- 
ceivable extremes.  Nevertheless  the  remarkable  pheno- 
mena connected  with  the  languages  of  the  New  World, 
the  elaborate  and  highly  complex  grammatical  structure 
of  the  speech  of  savage  tribes,  devoid  of  lettera,  or  any 
trace  of  past  or  present  civilisation  ;  and  even  the  very 
existence  of  language,  and  its  extremely  diversified  sub- 
divisions and  peculiar  forms  as  met  with  on  the  Western 
Continent :  all  combine  to  present  this  subject  in  novel 
aspects,  not  without  their  value  as  helps  towards  the 
solution  of  a  problem  so  profound  as  the  origin  of 
language. 

Was  language  then,  like  the  living  soul,  a  divine  gift 
to  the  first  man,  and  therefore  created  a  mature  and 
self-consistent  whole :  latent,  but  ready  without  ejffort 
for  every  new  occasion  of  speech  ?  Or  was  man  simply 
indued  with  organs  of  speech,  and  with  an  innate  per- 
ception of  relations  between  specific  ideas  and  articulate 
sounds,  and  thus  left,  with  his  mature  intellectual  powers, 
to  create  words  as  he  stood  in  need  of  them  ?  The 
answer  seems  even  more  explicitly  provided  to  these  ques- 
tions than  to  that  of  the  origin  of  metallurgic  arts.  The 
first  evidence  we  have  of  the  existence  and  use  of  human 
speech  is  derived  from  the  exceedingly  simple,  yet  sug- 
gestive narrative  which  inmiediately  follows  the  genesis 
of  man  :  "  And  out  of  the  ground  the  Lord  God  formed 
every  beast  of  the  field,  and  every  fowl  of  the  air,  and 
brought  them  unto  Adam,  to  see  what  he  would  call 
them :  and  whatsoever  Adam  called  every  living  crea- 
ture, that  was  the  name  thereof.  And  Adam  gave 
names  to  all  cattle,  and  to  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  to 
every  beast  of  the  field ;  but  for  Adam  there  was  not 
found  an  help  meet  for  him."     He  was,  therefore,  alone, 


III.]         THE  PRIMEVAL  OCCUPATION:  SPEECH  Gl 

without  need  of  speech  for  the  interchange  of  thoughts, 
and  devoid  as  yet  of  a  companion  with  whom  he  could 
hold  inteUigent  converse. 

The  sacred  narrative  fully  accords,  in  its  description 
of  the  first  use  of  speech,  with  all  experience  as  to  the 
primary  elements,  and  the  indigenous  or  purely  native 
portions  of  language.  Among  these  wiU  certainly  be 
found  the  names  of  the  most  familiar  fauna  and  flora 
pertaining  to  the  habitat  of  the  race  speaking  the  lan- 
guage. Abstract  or  generic  terms,  like  the  class  of  ideas 
they  express,  are  of  late  growth  in  every  language  ;  and 
in  our  own  are  chiefly  borrowed  from  foreign  tongues. 
The  names  of  individual  animals  are  needed  before  any 
want  of  the  generic  word,  animal^  is  felt.  Even  the 
abstract  idea  of  number  is  difficult  to  be  conceived  by 
the  uncultured  mind,  apart  from  specific  objects  enu- 
merated ;  nor  does  the  mind  necessarily  perceive  any 
common  relation  between  forms,  colours,  odours,  or 
other  qualities  of  objects,  noted  only  for  their  diversity; 
so  that  even  the  Anglo-Saxon,  after  providing  an  ample 
native  vocabulary  for  the  reds,  blues,  blacks,  browns, 
and  whites,  familiar  to  his  eye  by  their  differences,  has 
at  length  to  borrow  the  Latin  coloVy  when  he  makes  the 
tardy  discovery  of  their  common  relation ;  as  he  takes 
from  the  same  foreign  source  that  of  crime  as  the 
generic  term  for  the  crimes  with  which  his  own  vocabu- 
lary is  replete.  This  absence  of  such  abstract  terms,  com- 
mon to  all  primitive  stages  of  language,  is  as  singularly 
characteristic  of  the  American  Indian  vocabularies,  as 
of  the  undeveloped  and  unprogressive  Indian  mind.  In 
this  view  of  language,  the  first  recorded  use  of  speech, 
in  the  naming  of  the  living  creatures,  is  fall  of  signifi- 
cance, and  strikingly  contrasts  with  the  Miltonic  dia- 
logues of  our  great  English  epic,  between  Raphael  and 
Adam.     A  single  example  will  suffice,  where  the  arch- 


62  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

angel  describes  to  the  first  man  the  Satanic  artillery,  b) 
the  help  of  sinules  derived  from  modem  architecture, 

"  Which  to  our  eyes  discovered,  new  and  strange, 
A  triple-mounted  row  of  pillars,  laid 
On  wheels  ;  for  like  to  pillars  most  they  seemed." 

The  poet's  fancy  of  the  invention  of  cannon,  gun- 
powder, balls,  and  bombshells,  by  rebel  hosts  of  angelic 
combatants,  ere  our  terrestrial  planet  was  evoked  from 
chaos,  is  not  more  extravagant  than  the  idea  that  the 
speech  of  primeval  man  embraced  in  its  vocabulary  such 
words  as  wheels^  pillars^  and  all  other  t^rms  of  me- 
chanical, artistic,  and  scientific  discovery  and  invention 
of  later  times. 

In  the  slow  migrations  of  the  human  family  from  its 
great  central  hives,  language  imperceptibly  adapted  itself 
to  the  novel  acquirements  of  man.  But  with  the  dis- 
covery of  America  a  new  era  began  in  the  history  of 
migration  and  all  its  attendant  phenomena.  Suddenly, 
in  the  maturity  of  Europe's  fifteenth  century,  another- 
world  burst  upon  it,  and  the  nations  hastened  to  pos-  . 
sess  themselves  of  the  land.  But  in  its  novel  scenes 
language  was  at  fault.  Beast,  bird,  and  fish  ;  flower  and 
tree ;  art,  nature,  and  man  himself,  were  all  strange  ; 
and  it  seemed  as  if  language  had  its  work  to  do  anew, 
as  when  first  framed  amid  the  life  of  Eden.  The  same 
has  been  the  experience  of  every  new  band  of  invading 
colonists  ;  and  it  can  scarcely  fail  to  strike  the  European 
naturalist  on  his  first  arrival  in  the  New  World,  that  its 
English  settlers,  after  occupying  the  continent  for  up- 
wards of  three  centuries,  instead  of  originating  root- 
words  wherewith  to  designate  plants  and  animals,  as 
new  to  them  as  the  nameless  living  creatures  were  to 
Adam  in  Paradise  :  apply  in  an  irregular  and  unscien- 
tific manner,  the  old  names  of  British  and  European 


Ill]         THE  BRIMEVAL  OCCUPATION:  SPEECH.  63 

fauna  and  flora.  Thus  the  name  of  the  English  par- 
tridge (Perdicidce)  is  applied  to  one  American  tetranoid 
{Tetrao  umbellus),  the  pheasant  {Phasianidce)  to  an- 
other, Tetrao  cupido ;  and  that  of  our  familiar  British 
warbler,  the  robin,  to  the  Turdus  migratorius^  a  totally 
diflferent  American  thrusL  It  is  only  in  a  few  instances 
that  anything  like  a  distinct  popular  nomenclature  has 
been  attempted,  as  in  the  designation  of  the  cat  bird, 
the  mocking-bird,  the  blue-bird,  or  the  snow-bird ;  while 
in  other  cases  the  native  Indian  name  has  been  bor- 
rowed. 

This  belongs,  in  part,  to  the  condition  of  vitality 
manifested  by  languages  at  a  late  stage  of  development, 
when  the  power  of  originating  primary  radicals  has  long 
been  dormant.  But  it  also  leads  to  other  ethnological 
inquiries,  in  reference  to  all  names  of  animals,  to  which 
we  shall  recur  at  a  later  stage.  This  much,  however, 
may  be  noted  meanwhile,  that  looking  to  names  of  the 
most  familiar  animals  and  plants,  as  they  occur  in  lan- 
guages of  the  Indo-European  or  Semitic  stock,  each 
nation,  appears  to  have  native  etymons  for  such,  only 
in  so  far  as  they  were  themselves  native  to  the  original 
habitat  of  the  race  ;  and  thus  there  are,  to  a  certain 
extent,  philological  centres  of  creation,  coincident  with 
the  supposed  zoological  ones ;  though  these  greatly 
vary  in  their  compass.  The  beaver,  for  example,  though 
now  seemingly  hastening  to  extinction  alike  in  the  Old 
World  and  the  New,  has  once  been-  a  very  widely  dif- 
fused native,  as  its  remains  prove  ;  and  this  the  philo- 
logical indications  of  its  name  confirm,  egr.,  Sanscrit, 
bahhru,  in  aU  probability  an  onomatopoeic  root-word  of 
the  ck^  refeired  to  hereafter,  derived  from  a  cry  of  Oxe 
animal.  In  the  Pehlevi  branch  of  the  Persian  it  becomes 
baovara ;  Sclavonic,  baber,  and  bobr ;  Lithuanic,  bebru, 
bebris;  Icelandic,  bifr;  Danish,  bosver;  Swedish,  ba/ver; 


64  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

German,  hiher ;  Anglo-Saxon,  hefoVy  boefer.  The  trans- 
posed Latin  form,  Jiher^  returns  in  the  Italian  to  be- 
vero ;  Spanish,  bibaro ;  French,  bidvre.  The  totally 
diverse  Koartop  of  the  Greeks,  is  a  remarkable  exception 
to  this  general  imiformity.  Again  the  Welsh  has  its 
own  independent  avangh,  which,  as  pronounced,  bears 
a  sufficient  resemblance  to  the  Chippewa  ahmeck,  and 
the  Odahwah  ahmik,  to  suggest  the  same  origin  :  not 
from  any  ancient  root- word  common  to  British  Celt  and 
American  Indian,  but  independently  borrowed  from  the 
animal's  own  cry.  The  Irish,  again,  has  its  doubly- 
derived  beavar  and  kastar ;  but  all  the  Celts  of  the 
British  Isles,  Welsh,  Gaelic,  and  Erse,  agreed  in  a  pre- 
ference for  a  descriptive  term  suggestive  of  little  fami- 
liarity with  the  animal  in  its  native  haunts.  Welsh, 
Llosthlydan ;  Gaelic,  dobhran  leds-leaihan ;  and  Erse, 
davarbn-lois4eaihan,  the  broad-tailed  otter. 

In  every  great  migration,  or  abrupt  transition  from 
one  country  to  another  and  diverse  one,  the  emigrant  is 
placed  once  more  in  relation  to  the  nomenclature  of  its 
strange  fauna  and  flora,  in  a  position  analogous  to  that 
in  which  we  recognise  the  first  origin  of  speech.  But 
both  the  language  which  he  uses,  and  the  intellectual 
faculties  employing  it,  are  in  a  totally  different  condi- 
tion from  those  in  which  the  linguistic  instincts  of  man 
first  gave  form  and  utterance  to  language.  As  lan- 
guages in  a  late  stage  give  birth  to  few  root-words,  so 
nations  do  not  as  a  rule,  create  original  names  for 
foreign  animals  or  plants,  and  no  voyager  or  colonist 
is  found  to  have  invented  them  even  for  such  strange 
objects  as  the  omithorhynchus  of  New  Holland,  or  the 
orycteropus  of  the  Cape.  They  either  apply  to  them 
such  modifications  of  a  native  term  as  suffice  to  express 
certain  fancied  analogies  ;  or  more  rarely  they  borrow 
the  unfamiliar  foreign  name,  as  alone  applicable  to  the 


Ill]         THE  PRIMEVAL  OCCUPATION:  SPEECH.  ^5 

unfamiliar  object.  Hence  the  strange  quadruped  to 
which  Blumenbach  gave  the  name  of  OniithorhynchuSy 
is  the  mallangong  and  the  tambreet  of  the  natives  of 
New  South  Wales,  while  it  is  the  duck-billed  platypus  of 
Dr.  Shaw,  'and  the  water-mole  of  the  English  colonists. 
So  also  the  Orycteropus  Caperma  is  the  goup  of  the 
Hottentot,  and  the  innagu  of  the  Caflfre,  while  it  is 
the  aard-vark,  or  earth-pig  of  the  Dutch  boer  and  the 
English  settler  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope. 

But  one  remarkable  class  of  exceptions  to  this  law  of 
language  in  its  later  stage  of  growth,  finds  illustration  in 
certain  names  of  the  faima  of  new  countries,  the  etymo- 
logies of  which  are  clearly  traceable  to  onomatopoeia,  as 
in  the  suggested  origin  of  the  beaver's  name.  In  this 
nearest  approximation  to  verbal  creations,  the  colonist  of 
the  New  World  carries  us  back  to  the  very  foundations  of 
language,  and  helps  to  solve  one  of  the  profoundest  pro- 
blems in  philology.  The  simplest  of  such  names  are 
mere  mimetic  voice-descriptions ;  but  they  recal  to  us 
that  natural  significance  of  sound  which  seems  to  lie  at 
the  foimdation  of  all  primary  intelligent  speech.  Arti- 
culate sounds  have,  within  a  certain  range,  an  inevitable 
association  with  certain  specific  ideas.  In  the  compli- 
cated structure  of  modem  languages,  the  natural  signi- 
ficance of  articulate  sounds  has  been  so  overlaid  with  the 
artificial  growth  of  later  times,  that  it  can  only  be  detected 
in  firagments.  Yet  all  languages  have  their  onomatopoeic 
terms,  and  a  certain  adaptation  of  sound  to  sense  and 
association.  The  word  thunder^  like  its  equivalents  in 
other  languages,  had  its  origin  in  the  idea  of  the  sound, 
the  monosyllable  light  in  that  of  its  appearance ;  and  the 
mimetic  sound  is  present  in  a  thousand  words  describing 
sensible  objects,  operations,  and  cries.  Clash,  whet,  cut, 
grunt,  buzz,  snore,  cough,  squeak,  laugh,  screech,  scream, 

VOL.  I.  E 


66  *  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

cry,  roaVy  etc.,  all  have  a  significance,  which  in  the  infancy 
of  language  must  have  been  traceable  over  a  large  por- 
tion of  the  vocabulary,  and  seems  to  lie  at  the  very  root 
of  the  distinction  between  the  vocal  utterances  of  the 
lower  animals,  and  the  intelligent  speech  of  man.  Even 
now  it  pervades  the  most  refined  and  artificial  languages, 
like  our  own  highly  complex  and  composite  English  ;  so 
that  the  nice  discrimination  of  the  true  orator  manifests 
itself  in  part  in  the  choice  of  words  harmonious  to  his 
thoughts,  and  the  law  of  the  poet  is  universally  re- 
cognised : — 

*'  'Tis  not  enough  no  haralmess  gives  offence, 
The  sound  must  seem  an  echo  to  the  sense.  "^ 

By  the  simplest  adaptation  of  this  imitative  association 
of  ideas,  the  European  settlers  in  the  New  World  have 
added  to  the  stock  of  root-words.  Thus  the  sloths  of 
South  America  {Bradypus  communis^  and  Bradypus 
collaris)y  have  received  from  the  Spaniard  the  name  of 
ai,  in  imitation  of  the  plaintive  cry  they  emit  when  in 
motion  in  the  forests.  So  also  the  Brazilian  eagle  {Poly- 
horns  vulgaris)  y  is  called  the  caracara,  from  its  hoarse, 
peculiar  utterance ;  and  the  boruardi,  or  large  toucan 
{Ramphdstos  toco),  is  the  piapoco  wherever  its  voice  has 
rendered  that  sound  familiar.  The  whip-poor-will  {Cam- 
primulgus  vociferus)  is  heard  very  distinctly,  in  the 
Canadian  and  American  forests,  to  utter  throughout  a 
whole  summer's  night  the  name  by  which  it  is  desig- 
nated. The  pewee  {Musicapa  rapax),  the  towhee  {Em- 
heriza  erythroptera),  the  kittawake  {Lams  tridactylus)^ 
and  many  other  animals  of  the  New  World,  have  received 
local  or  generally  accepted  names,  aU  clearly  illustrative 
of  words  originating  in  the  simplest  primitive  source  of 
imitation. 

*  Pope's  Essay  on  Criticism,  1.  365. 


in.]         THE  PRIMEVAL  OCCUPATION:  SPEECH  67 

Such  is  an  interesting  illustration  of  the  natural  growth 
of  a  vocabulary,  consequent  on  migration,  which  the  New 
World  supplies  ;  and  in  this  direction  we  may  look  for 
one,  at  leasts  of  the  primitive  sources  of  language.  De- 
scriptive names,  such  as  may  be  represented  for  our 
present  purpose  by  modem  terms,  like  the  tumstone, 
kingfisher,  fly-catcher  ;  or  the  white  bear,  red-poll,  indigo 
bird,  scarlet  tanagee,  or  golden  eagle  ;  or,  again,  by  the 
hairy  woodpecker,  passenger  pigeon,  trumpeter  swan,  or 
tell-tale  tattler, — those,  with  corresponding  names  in  any 
ancient  or  modem  language,  as  in  the  Sanscrit,  where 
they  abound, — manifestly  imply  the  previous  existence 
of  names  of  colour  and  metals,  and  the  development  of 
descriptive  epithets  of  various  kinds.  In  no  sense  can 
such  names  be  regarded  as  primitives  ;  but  such  was  not 
the  characteristic  of  the  earliest  animal  names,  as  may 
perhaps  be  illustrated  by  the  familiar  word  lion^  common 
to  nearly  all  the  languages  of  Europe.  It  appears  to  be 
an  onomatopoeic  primitive,  whether  we  seek  its  earliest 
root-form  in  the  Greek  Xeoji/,  or  elsewhere.  The  lion  was 
a  native  of  Macedonia  within  historic  times,  and  there- 
fore needed  no  borrowed  name  in  a  Pelasgic  or  Hellenic 
tongue.  The  word,  though  of  independent  origin,  has 
the  same  natural  derivation  as  our  English  loWy  A.-S. 
hleovxin,  the  cry  or  bellowing.  (A.-S.  beJIan)  of  a  cow,  as 
in  the  Sanscrit  go^  an  ox  ;  and  also  our  halloo^  as  well  as 
the  verb  to  hollo,  A.-S.  ahlowan :  all  imitations  of  na- 
tural sounds.  Nor  is  our  gain  slight  in  such  a  process 
of  analysis,  when  we  thus  trace  a  word  to  a  simple 
natural  origin.  It  is  the  only  finality  that  is  entirely 
satisfactory  in  etjrmology ;  contrasting  in  this  respect 
with  many  a  derivation  hunted  through  English,  Anglo- 
Saxon,  and  all  intermediate  stages,  to  a  supposed  San- 
scrit Tooty  still  as  arbitrary  to  us  as  the  latest  form  with 
its  associated  significance.     Such  pure  root-words,  more- 


68  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

over,  are  fonned  like  primitive  points  of  crystallization 
in  language ;  for  the  capacity  of  a  living  language  of 
multiplying  offshoots  of  the  simplest  roots  is  incalculable. 
Take,  as  an  example,  the  hawk,  A.-S.  hafoc :  its  name 
has  a  common  origin  with  havoc,  a  cry  of  encouragement 
to  capture  and  slaughter  ;  it  is  related  to  our  primitive 
auxiliary  verb  have^  A.-S.  habban,  to  have,  to  hold ;  to 
haft,  a  handle,  that  by  which  a  thing  is  held  ;  and  hence, 
in  A.-S.  hceft,  one  held,  i.e.,  a  captive,  a  slave.  As  still 
used  in  the  south  of  Scotland,  a  haft  is  a  dwelling ;  to 
ha/i,  to  settle  in  a  dwelling,  as  in  another  sense  we  still 
use  a  holdingy  a  hold,  a  stronghold.  Hence,  also,  a  haven, 
A.-S.  hcefen,  from  which  we  return  to  our  original  root- 
word,  in  its  Anglo-Saxon  equivalent  of  hcefen-blcet,  liter- 
ally, a  haven-bleater,  which  was  applied  both  to  the 
sea-gull  and  the  hawk.  But  the  offshoots  of  this  simple 
root-word  have  not  yet  been  exhausted.  The  relation  of 
hehban,  to  heave,  elevate,  or  hold  up,  to  the  more  primi- 
tive habban,  to  have,  to  hold,  is  not  difficult  to  discern. 
From  thence,  by  regular  gradations  of  change,  we  trace 
our  way  to  hectfig,  heavy,  difficult  to  hold  up  ;  and  so, 
tropically,  heaJHc,  heavy,  sorrowful ;  heavignes,  sorrow  ; 
while  in  anotixer  direction  the  same  hebban,  to  elevate, 
gives  origin  to  he/en,  the  eaves  or  elevated  part  of  a 
house,  and,  finally,  to  heben,  heofen,  i.e.,  heaven,  the 
highest ;  just  as  in  Scotland  the  Danish  lofter  has 
been  converted  into  the  lift,  ie.,  the  sky,  the  visible 
heavens. 

If  the  links  in  this  chain  are  not  forged  by  fancy,  they 
serve  as  the  clue  to  a  range  of  etymological  wanderings 
as  widely  contrasting  the  opening  with  the  close,  as  those 
through  which  the  great  Italian  ranges  in  the  visions 
of  his  Divine  Comedy,  and  ending  as  if,  madder  than 
Hamlet,  we  did  not  "  know  a  hawk  from  a  handsaw"' 
{i.e.,  hemshaw,  a  heron)  ;   for  the  hawking  cry  with 


III.]         THE  PRIMEVAL  OCCUPATION:  SPEECH.  69 

which  we  set  out  is  unquestionably  the  same  which 
Antony  introduces  in  his  apostrophe  to  the  "  bleeding 
piece  of  earth,"  when  he  exclaims  : — 

'*  And  GsBsar's  Bpirit,  ranging  for  revenge. 
With  Ate  by  hia  side,  come  hot  from  hell, 
ShaD  in  these  confines,  with  a  monarch's  voice, 
C17,  Havoc!  and  let  slip  the  dogs  of  war." 

Returning  from  this  illustrative  digression,  and  the 
reflections  which  the  primitive  XeW  has  suggested  :  with 
slightly  varying  forms^  the  same  word  belongs  to  the 
oldest  and  most  modem  of  the  European  languages^  and 
has  supplied  to  our  own  such  tropical  offshoots  as  leonine^ 
lionize^  and  lions  of  that  modem  breed  for  which  Carlyle 
suggests  that,  "  in  such  Uon-soirSeSy  might  not  each  lion 
be  ticketed,  as  wine-decanters  are  V  But  the  lion  was 
also  native  to  the  area  of  the  Semitic  languages,  and  has 
its  separate  names,  as  though  it  had  become  known  to 
them  apart  from  those  Eastern  localities  in  which  the 
Indo-European  parent  race  and  language  had  their  origin. 
The  Hebrew  aryeh  or  art,  Syriac  aryo,  are  descriptive, 
according  to  their  derivation  from  the  Hebrew  verb, 
arah,  to  tear,  to  rend  ;  though  this  might  seem  a  need- 
less process  of  inversion,  where  the  sound  is  not  without 
its  suggestive  mimicry.  But  of  the  origin  of  the  Coptic 
mouee,  a  lion,  there  can  be  no  doubt  It  is  the  same 
designation  as  has  had  ite  independent  origin  in  the 
English  nursery,  from  the  lowing  of  a  cow ;  and  is  indeed 
nearly  the  repetition  of  the  mimetic  Xecov,  with  the  labial 
instead  of  the  dental.  Traces  of  a  similar  independent 
origin  of  many  words  of  the  Coptic  vocabulary  are  fuU 
of  interest  for  us  ;  for  some  of  these  are  recovered  from 
the  most  ancient  graven  records  on  the  monuments  of 
Egypt.  When  Thoth,  who  was  the  god  of  letters,  first 
appeared  on  the  earth,  there  was  a  tradition,  according 
to  Plutarch,  that  the  inhabitants  of  Egypt  had  no  Ian- 


70  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

goage,  but  only  uttered  the  cries  of  animaH  until  lie 
taught  them  Bpeech,  as  well  as  writing.  The  ciy  of  the 
Egyptian  ibis  still  repeats  its  ancient  name  of  hippep. 
By  some  curious  association  of  ideas,  it  furnished  to  the 
Egyptian  the  symbol  of  speech.  Thoth,  the  god  of  letters, 
had  the  ibis  for  his  sacred  animal,  and  is  represented  as 
the  ibis-headed  deity  ;  and  fix)m  its  name  come  the  Coptic 
hap^  judgment,  Ao/>,  to  conceal,  in  reference  to  wisdom, 
secret  or  hidden  knowledge.  The  illustrations  of  names 
imitating  the  cries  of  animals,  which  the  language  of  an- 
cient E^rpt  supplies,  are  equally  numerous  and  striking. 
Take  as  examples  :  moueey  a  lion  ;  e%e,  a  cow ;  htor^  a 
horse  ;  eoo^  an  ass ;  Mhor^  a  dog  ;  chaoo,  a  cat ;  rurr  and 
eshau,  a  pig  ;  phin,  a  mouse  ;  croor,  a  frog  ;  petepep,  a 
hoopoo ;  meni,  a  swallow ;  djadj,  a  sparrow ;  hoff,  a  ser- 
pent. Many  other  words  expressive  of  actions  or  qualities 
had  their  origin  in  the  Egyptian  language  by  the  same 
natural  process  of  imitation,  as :  ojvodjivedj,  to  masticate ; 
thophthephy  to  spit ;  omk,  to  swallow  ;  hradjkradj,  to 
grind  the  teeth ;  rodjredjy  to  rub ;  teltely  to  let  water 
drip ;  sensen,  to  sound,  etc. 

Huch  illustrations  are  of  peculiar  interest  to  us,  derived 
as  they  are  from  the  language  of  the  Egyptian  monu- 
ments, and  one  of  the  most  primitive  of  all  known  human 
tongues.  They  might  be  multiplied  from  many  sources ; 
anrl  in  the  comparison  of  languages,  the  independent 
origin  of  words  of  closely  corresponding  soimd  and  ap- 
proximating significance,  serves  to  illustrate  how  all  lan- 
guage may  have  had  its  being.  The  Latin  tonitru  and 
taixrus  are  both  imitations  of  grave  prolonged  sounds, 
though  the  latter  is  derived  and  has  its  counterpart, 
whether  independently  or  not,  in  various  languages, — 
Greek,  ravpo^;  Syriac,  tauro;  Chaldee,  tora;  Arabic,  taur. 
The  Sanscrit  fvan  may  be  assigned  to  a  like  origin,  and 
thereby  also  its  Latin  form  canis.     So  also,  as  we  have 


Ill]        TUB  PRIMEVAL  OCCUPATION:  SPEECH.  71 

the  primitive  Sanscrit  ma,  for  mother,  Prescott  remarks 
on  the  Mama  Oello,  or  Eve  of  the  Peruvians,  among 
whom  mama  signified  mother,  mamaconos  matron ;  as 
among  the  Greeks  we  find  the  corresponding  irdmra  if>ike 
of  Nausikaa,  in  the  Odyssey.  Nor  is  the  Peruvian  mama 
a  soKtary  example  of  the  first  simple  word  of  the  Eng^ 
lish  nursery,  independently  employed  in  centuries  and 
regions  equally  remote.  Among  the  Tlatskani,  an  Atha- 
pascan tribe,  mxxma  signifies  father,  and  ncea  mother ;  but 
in  otiier  languages  the  former  retains  the  feminine  signifi- 
cation.  The  Navajo,  mah  or  sho-mah ;  the  Weitspek,  ma- 
mus ;  the  Arapahoe,  nanah ;  the  Sioux,  enah ;  Tuscarora, 
ena ;  Kenay,  anna ;  Adahi,  amanie ;  Guinau,  amm^ ; 
and  the  Esquimaux,  amama^  are  all  suggestive  of  the 
same  primitive  origin  as  the  English  mamma ;  for  they 
are  not  mere  dialectic  changes  of  one  root- word.  The 
Guinaus  are  of  South  America,  the  Navajo  Indians  belong 
to  New  Mexico,  the  Sioux  to  the  remote  North-west,  and 
the  Esquimaux  to  the  Arctic  circle,  while  totally  diverse 
vocabularies  intervene.  The  natural  connexions  which 
the  mind  still  perceives  between  certain  sounds  and  sen- 
sations, were  doubtless  greatly  more  numerous  in  the 
earliest  condition  of  language ;  and  are  more  readily  per- 
ceived where  man  lives  chiefly  in  direct  connexion  with 
the  external  world.  Unimpressible  as  the  Indians  appear, 
I  have  been  interested  in  observing  that  the  interjectional 
value  of  the  long  and  short  vowel  sounds,  which  seems 
to  be  instinctively  appreciated  in  all  languages,  is  fully 
recognised  by  them.  Ah !  Eh !  Oh !  Oo !  helas,  alas  ; 
bah,  pah,  ha-ha,  he -he,  pshaw,  ho-ho,  so-so,  poh,  umph, 
ugh,  hugh,  etc. ;  these,  and  the  like  inarticulate  sounds, 
in  which  the  Indians  largely  indulge  when  excited,  as  in 
their  dances,  are,  as  it  were,  the  raw  material  of  language, 
with  an  instinctively  recognised  and  unvarying  signifi- 
cance.    Some,  at  least,  of  the  consonantal  sounds  have 


73  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

their  distinctive  significances  no  less  clearly  traceable  in 
the  comparison  of  the  representative  utterances  of  whoUy 
independent  languages. 

In  the  illustrations  derived  from  the  nomenclature 
adopted  by  the  European  colonists  of  the  New  World,  we 
see  the  re-adaptation  of  the  vocabularies  of  one  continent 
to  the  natural  objects  peculiar  to  another  and  essentially 
different  one.  This  process  is  seen  reversed,  when  we 
turn  to  the  native  Indian  languages.  In  them  the  ani- 
mals introduced  from  Europe  have  almost  invariably 
received  a  descriptive  name.  The  horse  is  called,  in  the 
Cherokee,  sawquili,  the  pack-carrier,  from  Vrsawqui-la^ 
he  carries  a  pack.  In  the  Delaware  it  is  nanayanges, 
the  animal  that  carries  on  its  back;  in  the  Chippewa, 
paibaizhikogunzhif  the  animal  with  united  hoofs ;  and  in 
the  Dakota  it  is  rendered  by  a  compound  of  'sunghXy  a 
dog,  the  only  native  beast  of  burden.  Hence  it  becomes 
^sungha-wakang^  the  spirit-dog,  or  marvellous  beast  of 
burden.  In  such  terms  the  contrast  is  obvious  to  the 
simple  original  forms,  all  probably  traceable  to  an  ono- 
matopoeic root,  e.gr.,  Sanscrit,  afvah,  tmro^y  equuSy  horse. 
We  thus  perceive  how,  by  such  a  process,  a  number  of 
words  may  be  called  into  existence  by  the  presence  of  a 
single  new  object.  The  Indian  languages  abound  in  de- 
scriptive names,  as  is  the  case  with  many  of  those  of  Asia, 
and  indeed  none  more  so  than  the  Sanscrit,  which  has  a 
multitude  of  names  for  animals  descriptive  of  their  ap- 
pearance, habits,  cries,  etc.  But  examples  of  self-origi- 
ginated  words,  derived  from  the  observation  of  natural 
sounds,  no  less  clearly  prove  that  the  New  World  has  its 
own  native  root-words  also.  The  following  examples  of 
Chippewa,  Ottawa,  and  Mississaga  onomatopoeia  will 
suffice  to  illustrate  this  part  of  the  subject,  as  developed 
in  the  Algonquin  dialects  : — 


IIL]        THE  PRIMEVAL  OCCUPATION :  SPEECH,  73 

Shirtheeby  the  duck. 

Eem-m-wiriy  the  duck.     This  ciy  is  heard  duriog  spring  from  great 

flocks  of  ducks  which  then  frequent  the  lakes. 
Ahroh'VKm,  a  diver,  a  kind  of  duck. 
Chee-chish-koo-toariy  the  plover. 
Koo-koo-hoo-oOy  the  owL 
Oo-oo-meseej  the  screech-owL 
Mai-maiy  the  red-crested  woodpecker,  which  repeats  this  sound  about 

ten  times  in  quick  succession. 
Pau-pau-myy  the  common  spotted  woodpecker ;  so  called  from  the 

sound  it  makes  in  striking  a  tree  with  its  bill. 
Gahkatirbdn,  a  small  owl,  which  repeats  the  cry  gah-kdu  in  the  woods 

at  night. 
Tchin-deesy  the  blue  jay. 
Aundra-goth-hwdny  the  crow. 
Gahrgau-ge-shiriy  the  raven. 
Gnh-yatuh-ko-shdn,  the  gulL 
Basliky  a  night-hawk. 
MooshrkaJir-oos,  a  kind  of  crane  which  frequents  marshy  places,  and 

makes  this  sound,  with  a  choking  cry,  in  the  evening. 
No-no-no  cau-see,  the  humming-bird. 
Shtrshirgway  the  rattlesnake. 
Pe-zheWy  the  lynx,  or  wild-cat. 
Koo-kooshy  the  sow. 
PcJirkahr^hrJcwdny  the  cock  or  hen. 
Avr-ko-gesany  the  frog. 
Dend-daiy  the  bull-frog. 
Pau-panrkirnayy  the  grasshopper. 

In  all  those  names  the  n  has  the  French  pronunciation, 
as  in  matin.  The  corresponding  evidence  of  the  origin 
of  expressions  for  inanimate  things  by  the  same  process 
of  imitation,  is  still  more  interesting,  as  illustrative  of  the 
independent  growth  and  expansion  of  languages.  Thus 
pwahy  to  smoke  tobacco,  only  occurs  in  compound  words, 
as  pwah-gnUy  a  tobacco-pipe ;  muh-na-pwahy  I  am  out  of 
tobacco.  The  noise  of  waves,  on  the  water,  or  dashing 
themselves  against  the  rocks,  is  called  mdh-dvxt-yaiish- 
haJiy  ie.y  the  lake  roars.     The  imitative  sound,  yavsh,  is 


74  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

suflSciently  apparent.  It  is  made  to  form  a  part  of  the 
name  of  the  gull,  the  cry  of  which  is  generally  accom- 
panied by  the  somid  of  the  waves ;  and  is  modified  to 
express  other  noises,  as  pausTi-he,  it  bmsts  with  heat.  As 
the  wind  travels  through  the  forest,  it  produces  difierent 
sounds,  according  to  the  character  of  the  trees.  In  the 
pine  forest  it  is  a  melancholy,  prolonged  gush,  and  is 
thus  expressed  :  mah-dworyawid'ah-gahrshi.  This  is 
applied  to  the  wind  when  sweeping  through  all  trees  the 
foliage  of  which  is  perpetually  green,  as  the  hemlock, 
cedar,  and  pine ;  but  when  it  sways  the  forest  branches 
of  the  maple,  beech,  and  oak,  it  is  mah-dwahi-mah-gah- 
shi.  So  also  the  Indian  says,  gaus-hway  it  makes  a  rust- 
ling noise ;  tchuh-tchvrmo,  he  sneezes ;  gweesh-gwa-shi, 
he  whistles ;  he  makes  a  noise  with  the  hand  on  the 
mouth,  is  sah'Sah-qua ;  it  hails,  sah'Sah-gu?i ;  he  coughs, 
oO'SOO'SOO'dum.  To  laugh  is  haJir-pih,  to  crj^,  muh-wih ; 
and  many  sounds  pertaining  to  the  arts  and  usages  of  the 
European  intruders  have  given  rise,  in  like  manner,  to 
the  requisite  additions  to  the  Indian  vocabulary  ;  as  ut- 
tO'tah-gun,  a  beU  ;  pavsh-ske-zi-gun,  a  gun. 

These  examples  of  self-originated  elements  of  language 
may  suffice  to  illustrate  the  peculiar  force  of  that  earliest 
notice  of  the  divine  gift  of  speech  to  man,  when  every- 
thing that  had  life  received  from  him  its  name.  In  this 
first  employment  of  human  speech,  one  primeval  source 
of  the  root-words  of  language  seems  to  find  its  illustra- 
tion in  full  accordance  alike  with  d  priori  probabilities 
and  with  later  experience.  For  in  whatever  form  that 
intellectual  endowment  was  bestowed,  it  is  inconsistent 
with  all  philological  analyses  to  conceive  that  the  pro- 
genitors of  our  race  received  at  the  beginning  a  latent 
vocabulary  of  arbitraiy  but  definite  vocal  utterances,  fitted 
for  intuitive  adaptation  to  every  subsequent  revelation, 
alike  of  the  external  universe  and  the  world  of  thought. 


III.]        THE  PRIMEVAL  OCCUPATION:  SPEECH.  15 

But  a  very  different  line  of  reasoning  has  been  sug- 
gested to  the  mind  of  the  most  philosophical  of  the  natur- 
alists who  have  found  an  adopted  home  in  the  New 
World.  "  As  for  languages,"  says  Agassiz,  "  their  com- 
mon structure,  and  even  the  analogy  in  the  sounds  of 
different  languages,  far  from  indicating  a  derivation  one 
from  another,  seem  to  us  rather  the  necessary  result  of 
that  similarity  in  the  organs  of  speech  which  causes  them 
naturally  to  produce  the  same  sound.  Who  would  now 
deny  that  it  is  as  natural  for  men  to  speak  as  it  is  for  a 
dog  to  bark,  for  an  ass  to  bray,  for  a  lion  to  roar,  for  a 
wolf  to  howl,  when  we  see  that  no  nations  are  so  barbar- 
ous, so  deprived  of  all  human  character,  as  to  be  unable 
to  express  in  language  their  desires,  their  fears,  their 
hopes  ?  And  if  a  unity  of  language,  any  analogy  in 
sound  and  structure  between  the  languages  of  the  white 
races,  indicate  a  closer  connexion  between  the  different 
nations  of  that  race,  would  not  the  difference  which  has 
been  observed  in  the  structure  of  the  languages  of  the  wild 
races — would  not  the  power  the  American  Indians  have 
naturally  to  utter  gutturals  which  the  white  can  hardly 
imitate,  afford  additional  evidence  that  these  races  did 
not  originate  from  a  conmion  stock,  but  are  only  closely 
allied  as  men,  endowed  equally  with  the  same  intellectual 
powers,  the  same  organs  of  speech,  the  same  sympathies, 
only  developed  in  slightly  different  ways  in  the  different 
races,  precisely  as  we  observe  the  fact  between  closely 
allied  species  of  the  same  genus  among  birds  ?"^  Here 
the  writer  faces  boldly  the  extremest  conclusions  to  which 
such  premises  lead.  Race  is  employed  as  the  equivalent 
of  species,  and  philological  affinities  in  languages  are 
viewed  only  as  equivalent  to  the  similarity  of  intonation 
in  the  notes  of  closely  allied  species  of  birds  or  beasts. 
They  did  not  acquire  such  corresponding  utterances  by 

'  Boston  ChrUtian  Examiner,  art.  Types  o/Mankindy  p.  282. 


f 


76  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

leaxning  each  oliier^s  notes ;  and  so  the  writer  proceeds  : 
"  Why  should  it  be  different  with  men  ?  Why  should  not 
the  different  races  of  men  have  originally  spoken  distinct 
languages  as  they  do  at  present,  differing  in  the  same 
proportions  as  their  organs  of  speech  are  variously  modi- 
fied ?  And  why  should  not  these  modifications  in  their 
turn  be  indicative  of  primitive  differences  among  them  V* 
That  man  has  within  himself  not  only  the  faculty  of 
vocal  utterance,  which  is  the  true  equivalent  of  the  voice 
of  the  lower  animals  :  but  also  that  power  of  evolution 
of  an  intelligent  language  by  which  to  communicate  his 
thoughts  to  other  men,  which  is  his  grand  distinction 
among  animated  beings,  is  unquestionable.  It  has  been 
attempted  to  be  shown,  in  previous  pages,  that  language 
is  not  primarily  the  arbitrary  association  of  articulate 
sounds  with  specific  ideas,  but  that  probably  aU  primitive 
root- words  had  a  recognised  relation  between  sound  and 
sense.  This  even  extends  to  the  separate  phonetic  elements 
of  words ;  so  that  the  choice  of  these  appears  to  have  a 
certain  fitness,  only  now  preserved  to  us  in  the  mutilated 
fragments  of  primitive  speech  surviving  in  existing  lan- 
guages. From  the  ideas  set  forth  above,  it  further  fol- 
lows that  many  root-words  have  been  independently 
added  at  later  stages,  and  in  younger  languages  under 
process  of  development.  The  innate  and  primary  sig- 
nificance of  articulate  sounds,  however,  maintains  its 
influence  throughout ;  and  in  innumerable  cases  corre- 
sponding sounds  have  been  chosen  to  express  independ- 
ent, yet  related  ideas,  in  different  languages.  But  it  is 
a  grave  error  to  confound  this  unity  of  sound  with  the 
analogies  of  grammatical  structure  by  which  the  affinities 
of  languages  have  been  traced  ;  and  it  is  no  less  a  mistake 
to  assume  that  the  contrast  between  the  harsh  gutturals 
of  the  Red  Indian,  and  the  soft  vocal  modulations  of 
the  cultured  European,  presents  any  true  analogy  to  the 


IIL]        THE  PRIMEVAL  OCCUPATION:  SPEECH.  77 

organic  diflFerences  which  produce,  on  the  one  hand,  the 
rough  harsh  cry  of  the  eagle,  and  on  the  other  the  melo- 
dious trilling  of  the  thrush.  And  here  the  mediaeval 
antiquary  comes  to  our  aid.  No  Indian  savage  ever  ex- 
ceeded in  ferocity  the  old  Norse  vikingr  Regner  Lodbrok, 
or  Sidroc  the  Dane.  By  such,  England  and  the  Scottish 
Lowlands,  from  the  Humber  to  the  Forth,  were  chiefly 
settled  under  the  Dane-lah  conceded  by  Alfred  to  Guth- 
run ;  and  by  the  same  fierce  sons  of  Odin  was  that  land 
recolonized  where,  under  the  Normans  of  a  later  genera- 
tion, the  Langue  cPoil  acquired  its  greatest  polish  and 
regularity.  The  rough  gutturals  of  the  Norseman  still 
give  character  to  the  Northumbrian  and  Scottish  dialects, 
where  they  had  no  such  mellowing  element  to  subdue 
them  as  wooed  the  continental  Norman  to  the  harmoni- 
ous language  of  the  Trouvferes.  The  change  was  doubt- 
less in  part  an  organic  one,  such  as  unfits  the  White  for 
imitating  the  harsh  gutturals  of  the  Red  Indian.  We 
see  this  illustrated  in  the  familiar  alteration  of  voice 
which  a  slight  inflammation  of  the  bronchial  glands  pro- 
duces ;  in  the  permanent  change  of  the  male  voice  at 
puberty ;  and  also  in  its  arrestment  by  emasculation. 
But  if  the  supposed  analogies  between  the  notes  of  the 
wild  bird  of  prey  and  the  language  of  the  wild  Indian 
were  true,  the  organic  change  should  be  accompanied  not 
by  the  mere  roughening  of  vocal  modulations,  but  by 
the  development  of  Indian  speech.  In  England,  where 
the  Danish  settlers  long  retained  their  native  language, 
Thorshy,  Askerhy,  Coningshy,  and  many  another  colo- 
nist's name,  coupled  with  his  Danish  "  bye"  or  abiding- 
place,  stiU  attest  his  former  presence.  In  France,  the 
corresponding  Tourville,  Tancerville,  Hagueville,  etc., 
show  how  speedily  the  rough  Thor,  Tancred,  and  Haeo, 
accepted  the  Romano-French  of  their  adopted  country. 
What  followed  shows  what  change  of  language  can  effect 


78  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

on  the  organs  of  speech ;  and  once  more  illustrates  how 
indispensable  it  is  to  keep  the  intellectual  elements  ever 
before  us  aa  an  essential  part  in  the  natural  history,  as 
weU  as  in  the  civil  history  of  man.  "  The  phenomenon 
of  the  organs  of  speech  yielding  to  social  or  moral  influ- 
ences, and  losing  the  power  of  repeating  certain  sounds, 
was  prominently  observable  amongst  the  Normana  No 
modem  French  Gazette  writer  «ould  disfigure  English 
names  more  whimsically  than  the  Doomsday  Commis- 
sioners of  William  the  Conqueror.  To  the  last,  the  Nor- 
mans never  could  learn  to  say,  *  Lincoln ;  *  they  never 
could  get  nearer  than  *  Nincol '  or  '  NicoleJ  "  ^ 

Nevertheless  the  phenomena  presented  to  the  natural- 
ist by  the  American  variety  of  man,  as  weU  as  by  the 
allied  species  of  animals  suggesting  comparisons  with 
others  of  the  same  genus  in  Europe  and  Asia,  have  taten 
strong  hold  on  the  mind  of  the  gifted  American  student 
of  science  above  referred  to :  in  whose  processes  of 
induction,  philological  afl^ities  and  the  grammatical 
structure  of  languages  are  of  small  account.  As  one 
curious  collateral  illustration  of  a  phase  in  the  organic 
elements  of  language,  the  arguments  of  Agassiz  claim 
special  notice  here,  as  the  ingenious  speculations  of  the 
most  distinguished  among  the  scientific  naturalists  of 
America.  In  his  latest  contribution  on  this  subject  he 
observes  :  "  Much  importance  is  attached  to  the  affinity 
of  languages,  by  those  who  insist  on  the  primitive  unity 
of  man,  as  exhibiting  in  their  opinion,  the  necessity  of  a 
great  affiliation  between  all  men.  But  the  very  same 
thing  might  be  shown  of  any  natural  family  of  animals  : 
even  of  such  famiHes  as  contain  a  large  number  of  dis- 
tinct genera  and  species.  Let  any  one  follow  upon  a  map 
exhibiting  the  geographical  distribution  of  the  bears,  the 
cats,  the  hoUow-homed  ruminants,  the  gallinaceous  birds, 

*  Palgrave,  History  of  Normandy  and  England^  vol.  i.  p.  703. 


III.]        THE  PRIMEVAL  OCCUPATION:  SPEECH.  79 

the  ducks,  or  of  any  other  families,  and  he  may  trace  as 
satisfectorily  as  any  philological  evidence  can  prove  it 
for  the  human  language,  and  upon  a  much  larger  scale, 
that  the  brumming  of  the  bears  of  Kamschatka  is  akin 
to  that  of  the  bears  of  Thibet,  of  the  East  Indies,  of  the 
Sunda  Islands,  of  Nepal,  of  Syria,  of  Europe,  of  Siberia^ 
of  the  United  States,  of  the  Rocky  Mountains,  and  of  the 
Andes ;  though  all  these  bears  are  considered  as  distinct 
species,  and  have  not  any  more  inherited  their  voice  one 
from  the  other,  than  the  different  races  of  man.''^  The 
same  argument  is  applied  throughout  the  different  species 
referred  to,  down  to  the  gay  and  harmonious  notes  of  the 
thrushes,  uttered  by  all  "  in  a  distinct  and  independent 
dialect,  neither  derived  nor  inherited  one  from  the  other, 
even  though  all  sing  thntshish." 

So  far  as  this  ingenious  analogy  affects  the  question  of 
innate  or  inherited  voice,  it  amounts  to  no  more  than 
this,  tiiat  bears  are  bears,  and  men,  men.  No  philologist 
imagines  the  human  voice  to  be  inherited  in  any  other 
sense  than  every  part  of  man's  organic  structure  is  in- 
herited. But  neither  does  any  philologist  doubt  that  the 
language  which  his  organs  of  speech  enable  him  to  ex- 
press is  inherited,  that  is,  derived  from  others  by  imita- 
tion and  memory,  in  a  way  that  no  inferior  animal's 
utterances  are  acquired.  The  affinities  thus  noted  by 
the  observant  naturalist  relative  to  such  closely  allied 
systems  of  intonations  running  through  each  whole 
family  are  full  of  interest ;  though  not  from  any  an^alo- 
gies  they  present  to  the  affinity  of  languages.  They 
rather  seem  to  illustrate  the  striking  contrast  between 
the  gift  of  speech  and  the  origin  of  languages.  Each 
living  being  was  created  with  its  special  organs  of  voice 
and  utterance,  and  has  peipetuated  these  with  all  the 
other  specialities  of  its  peculiar  organization.     The  mew 

^  Indigenous  Races  of  the  Earth,  p.  xv. 


80  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

of  the  cat  embraces  along  with  a  labial  consonant  the 
whole  range  of  vocalic  sounds,  wi-o-e-o-i^,  but  so  also 
does  the  familiar  noise  of  the  door  swinging  slowly  on 
its  hinges.  The  vocal  sounds  of  the  human  voice  can  be 
executed  with  an  organ  stop,  for  they  are  produced 
mainly  by  the  breath  being  expelled  through  the 
throat  and  mouth,  lengthened  or  shortened  by  the 
lips  according  to  the  required  note.  So  also  the  same 
organs  of  sound,  when  employed  in  whistling,  can  be 
made,  like  the  artificial  pipe,  to  imitate  all  the  varied 
notes  of  singing-birds.  But  the  finch  transferred  to  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  lark,  or  the  cuckoo  reared  in  the 
nest  of  the  linnet,  does  not  lose  its  own  notes  for  those 
of  its  companions ;  as  the  English  child  reared  in  France 
er  Italy,  or  stolen  by  the  wild  Indian  of  the  American 
forests,  acquires  the  speech  of  its  nurse,  and  unless 
trained  in  its  utterances,  loses  its  own  mother  tongue. 

The  bray  of  the  ass,  though  an  act  of  voHtion,  is  no 
intellectual  effort,  such  as  the  most  foolish  of  human 
speech  is.  If  the  ass  will  utter  its  voice  it  cannot  choose 
but  bray  ;  and  no  training,  but  only  a  complete  change 
of  its  organs  of  sound,  could  enable  it  to  low  like  the  ox, 
or  mew  like  the  cat.  There  are  indeed  well-known  ex- 
ceptions, for  we  can  teach  the  parrot,  the  starling,  and 
one  or  two  other  birds,  to  imitate  certain  words,  and 
even  sentences  :  that  is,  to  utter  a  few  consecutive  sounds 
of  the  human  voice.  In  other  words,  we  can  so  far  super- 
add speech,  in  its  narrowest  sense,  to  the  inarticulate 
utterances  of  their  vocal  organs ;  but  we  cannot  give 
theni  language.  Language  pertains  alone  to  him  who  is 
not  only  divinely  endued  with  the  breath  of  life,  but  the 
inspiration  of  the  Almighty  giveth  him  understanding. 
"According  to  my  fullest  conviction,"  says  WiUiam  Hum- 
boldt, "  language  must  be  regarded  as  naturally  inherent 
in  man,  for  it  is  altogether  inexplicable  as  a  work  of  his 


Ill]         TUE  PRIMEVAL  OCCUPATION:  SPEECH.  81 

understanding  in  its  simple  consciousness.  We  are  none 
the  better  for  allowing  thousands  and  thousands  of  years 
for  its  invention.  There  could  be  no  invention  of  lan- 
guage, unless  its  type  already  existed  in  the  human 
understanding.  Man  is  man  only  by  means  of  speech^ 
but  in  order  to  invent  speech,  he  must  be  already  man." 
It  is  only  by  conceiving  an  inevitable  relation  between 
the  innate  faculties  or  intellectual  instincts  of  the  human 
mind,  and  the  constructional  elements  pervading  all  lan- 
guages, that  we  can  account  for  the  remarkable  structural 
consistency  and  comprehensive  subjection  to  grammatical 
law,  recognisable  in  the  languages  of  rude  unlettered 
tribes.  The  vocabularies  of  languages  are  complex,  in- 
consistent, and  frequently  lawless,  and  as  we  trace  them 
back,  they  are  found  to  proceed  from  very  diverse 
sources ;  but  the  further  we  follow  up  any  language 
towards  a  conceivable  beginning,  the  more  full,  com- 
plete, and  consistent  its  grammatical  forms  prove  to  be. 
This  alone  seems  sufficient  to  confute  the  idea  of  man's 
origin  by  development  from  any  inferior,  unintelligent 
order  of  animated  beings.  Such  a  conception,  to  which 
some  modem  theories  of  science  so  strongly  tend,  pre- 
supposes an  animal  devoid  of  speech ;  and  as  intellect 
dawns  on  it  in  its  first  stage  of  development  into  the 
reasoning  and  reflecting  being,  its  originally  limited 
powers  of  utterance  gradually  extend  their  compass,  and 
language  would  thus  be  the  slow  product  of  effort,  prac- 
tice, and  culture.  On  such  a  theory  the  detached  ele- 
ments of  a  vocabulary  would  be  the  first  product ;  and 
the  scientific  relations  of  the  grammatical  forms  of  lan- 
guage would  pertain  only  to  its  latest  stages,  and  in  their 
most  perfected  condition,  to  written  languages.  But  the 
very  opposite  is  the  case  ;  justifying  the  inference  that 
an  intelligent  mind,  and  an  understanding  endowed 
with  the  forms  and  laws  of  structure  involved  in  the 

VOL.  I.  F 


83  PEEHISTORIG  MAN,  [Chap. 

most  perfect  condition  of  language,  were  endowmente 
of  primeval  man  :  fitting  him  for  developing  the 
associative  relations  of  sound  into  a  vocabulary  ex- 
panding  with  his  growing  knowledge  and  intellectual 
requirements. 

Such,  then,  appears  to  be  a  reasonable  conception  of 
the  primeval  occupation  of  man.  Preeminent  among 
created  beings,  with  the  full  compass  of  vocal  utterance, 
the  type  of  language  present  in  the  human  understand- 
ing, and  the  most  delicate  sense  of  association  between 
his  ideas  of  the  external  world,  ite  forms  and  aspects,  and 
articulate  sounds  :  it  was  an  intellectual  instinct  for  him, 
replete  with  deUght,  thus  to  associate  his  ideas,  by  a  fine 
sense  of  fitness,  with  articulate  speech.  Such,  accord- 
ingly,  is  the  work  in  which  we  find  the  first  man  engaged, 
^the  sacred  narrative  discloses  to  us  the  eaxUest  gUrf pse 
of  him,  entering  on  his  teirestrial  domam  as  the  lord  of 
the  whole  inferior  creation ;  before  the  solitude  of  Eden 
presented  to  him  a  companion  endowed  with  correspond- 
ing  gifts,  with  whom  he  could  exchange  inteUectual  con- 
verse. Such,  as  it  seems  to  me,  is  no  unmeet  occupation 
for  him  who  there,  surrounded  by  the  exhaustless  supplies 
of  a  luxurious  climate,  needing  no  superfluous  ornament 
of  dress,  no  busy  loom,  nor  weapons  for  war  or  the 
chase ;  no  palace  wherein  to  dwell ;  no  temple  made 
with  hands  wherein  to  worship  : 

**  In  naked  majesty  seemed  lord  of  all. 
And  worthy  seemed." 

Looking  at  the  origin  of  language  by  the  natural  pro- 
cess here  suggested,  it  is  obvious  that  its  unity  may  be 
too  strongly  insisted  on  as  an  inevitable  consequence  of 
unity  of  race ;  for  the  perception  of  the  natural  signifi- 
cance of  articulate  sounds,  though  blunted,  is  by  no 
means  lost.  The  exclamatory  use  of  nearly  all  the  vowel 
sounds  has  a  universally  recognised  significance.     The 


III.]         THE  PRIMEVAL  OCCUPATION:  SPEECH.  83 

instinctive  and  involuntary  human  utterances,  of  which 
kughing  and  crying  are  the  most  noticeable,  though  by 
no  means  the  only  ones,  are  in  like  manner  universal ; 
and  all  ears  respond  to  the  cultivated  utterances  of  do- 
mesticated animals,  and  especially  to  the  varpng  tones 
of  man's  universal  companion,  the  dog.  There  it  is,  if 
at  all,  that  we  find  any  analogy  to  human  language.  Its 
whine,  its  bay,  its  whimper,  its  bark,  its  yelp,  its  growl, 
its  snarl,  its  snap,  its  howl,  are  each  distinct  utterances  ; 
and  every  one  of  these  names  is  a  word  directly  derived 
from  this  dog-language.  An  intelligent  dog  can  be 
spoken  to,  and  catches  many  ideas  from  the  sounds  of 
its  master's  voice  ;  while  he,  again,  can  tell  by  the  tone 
of  his  dog^s  bark,  when  it  is  greeting  an  acquaintance, 
threatening  an  intruder,  repelling  a  beggar  ;  or  whether 
it  is  only  indulging  in  that  liberty  of  speech  which  is  the 
birthright  of  every  civilized  dog,  and  taking  an  abstract 
bark  at  things  in  general  By  the  process  thus  referred 
to,  many  considerable  portions  of  national  vocabularies 
must  have  originated  independently ;  nor  is  the  corre- 
spondence of  words  of  this  clafis  in  diflFerent  languages 
aiy  proof  of  a  common  derivation.  They  coSte 
what  may  be  called  a  distinct  species  of  words,  and  be- 
long primarily  to  far  older  formations  than  the  supple^ 
mentary  additions  borrowed  from  foreign  languages  to 
supply  the  growing  necessities  which  the  progress  of 
civilisation  creates  ;  though  they  may  have  their  origin 
at  any  period  of  the  growth  of  a  language.  Derived^ 
however,  from  such  natural  sources,  eaxjh  locality  aod 
region  wiU  thus  have  certain  distinctive  features  of  its 
own.  The  very  cries  of  animals,  and  the  modulated 
rhythms  of  the  wood--songsters,  as  well  as  the  natural 
sounds  peculiar  to  mountain,  sea^oadt,  forest,  and  prairie, 
give  origin  to  terms  which  become  peculiar  native  root- 
words  of  certain  localities.     And,  given  a  single  new 


84  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

root-word,  we  have  seen  to  how  great  an  extent  the  lan- 
guage may  be  enriched  by  its  oflFshoots. 

But  while  this  theory  of  the  primary  origin  of  language 
is  at  variance  with  that  idea  of  unity,  which  would  seek 
to  trace  back  the  whole  multiform  vocabularies  of  the 
world  to  one  common  source  ;  it  by  no  means  conflicts 
with  the  scientific  recognition  of  the  grammatical  afianities 
of  languages,  whereby  the  closest  relations  may  be  trace- 
able in  their  construction,  with  only  a  small  percentage 
of  words  in  common.  Such  is  the  relationship  subsisting 
between  the  Anglo-Saxon  and  Sanscrit,  though  the  latter 
was  a  dead  language  before  the  former  acquired  its  in- 
sular life  ;  or  again,  the  contrasting  correspondence  trace- 
able between  certain  of  the  languages  of  India,  with  a 
grammatical  structure  purely  Tamul,  and  vocabularies 
chiefly  Sanscritic.  Names  of  things  and  the  vocal  equi- 
valents of  ideas  are  transitory,  when  compared  with  the 
grammatical  construction  of  a  language.  The  vocabulary 
is  exposed  to  every  arbitrary  change  and  foreign  intru- 
sion. Whatever  affects  the  use  of  the  organs  of  speech, 
be  it  climate,  acquired  habits,  or  imitation  of  novel  arti- 
culations, inevitably  leads  to  some  change  in  the  words  ; 
so  that  instances  are  common,  of  mutually  intelligible 
dialects  of  one  language  becoming  in  a  few  generations 
independent  foreign  tongues.  The  vocabulary  has  broken 
down,  witii  trifling  resistance  to  the  transforming  influ- 
ence of  external  forces.  Among  the  American  Indian 
languages  this  is  peculiarly  noticeable ;  and  is  commented 
upon  by  the  French  Jesuit  Fathers,  as  occurring  within 
their  own  knowledge  among  Canadian  tribes.  But  amid 
aU  this  instability  of  the  vocabulary,  and  the  seemingly 
chance  and  lawless  changes  of  a  language  adapting  itself 
to  the  commonest  wants  of  the  uncultured  savage  :  yet 
the  grammatical  structure  survives,  as  in  that  of  the 
Lenni-Lenap^  or  Delaware  Indians,  with  its  rich,  regular. 


III.]         THE  PRIMEVAL  OCCUPATION:  SPEECH.  85 

and  systematic  forms  closely  following  the  analogy  of  the 
ideas  they  are  intended  to  express  ;  and  adapting  them- 
selves to  the  most  delicate  modulations  of  thought  Here 
is  an  element  of  language,  to  which  the  sweetest  har- 
monies of  modulated  wood-note  rh3rthms  present  no  ana- 
logy. By  inflections  as  truly  regulated  by  the  science 
of  grammatical  laws  as  the  language  in  which  Plato 
wrote  and  Pindar  sung,  the  wild,  amlettered  Indian  mo- 
difies each  root-word,  or  complex  word-sentence,  so  as  to 
express  number,  time,  quality,  or  passion,  as  if  guided 
by  an  intellectual  instinct  operating  upon  the  reasoning 
faculty  conmion  to  man. 


86  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

THE  PRIMEVAL  TRANSITION:  INSTINCT 

A  PHIMKVAL  "stone  period,"  preceding  the  earliest  dia- 
covery  of  metalkirgic  arts,  appears  to  underlie  the  most 
ancient  traces  of  European  civilisation,  and  accordiug  to 
recent  discoveries  carries  back  the  evidence  of  man's 
presence  in  Europe  to  ages  long  prior  to  the  earliest 
glimmering  of  a  historic  dawn.  Some  "  invisible  things 
from  the  creation  of  the  world,  are  thereby  clearly  seen, 
being  understood  by  the  things  that  are  made."  And 
how  grand  are  the  promises  of  coming  revelations  in  re- 
ference to  man,  which  such  glimpses  disclose.  "  To  every 
thing  there  is  a  season,  and  a  time  to  every  purpose 
under  heaven.''  Through  the  unmeasured  vistas  of  the 
past  they  move  onward  with  measured  and  beautiful 
progression.  Man  existed  in  the  purposes  of  God  through 
countless  ages,  before  the  world,  with  all  its  teeming  life, 
was  animated  with  new  life  by  his  presence  ;  and  know- 
ledge also  for  man  has  tarried  its  appointed  time.  Let- 
ters, arts,  numbers,  maritime  discovery,  the  invention  of 
the  great  mechanical  powers,  the  evolution  of  the  great 
inteUectual  disclosures,  astronomy,  gravitation,  geology, 
and  ethnology  itself,  have  each  had  their  time  to  be  bom, 
and  were  each  an  impossibility  till  then.  And  what  are 
these  but  glimpses  of  what  is  yet  to  be  revealed  ;  stimu- 
lants to  exertion,  encouragements  to  hope  :  and  also 
fresh  proofs  of  man's  immortality,  since  time  is  so  inade- 


IV.]       THE  PRIMEVAL  TRANSITION:  INSTINCT,         87 

quate  for  the  study  of  the  universe  of  God.  "  I  know 
that  whatever  God  doeth,  it  shall  be  for  ever.  Nothing 
can  be  put  to  it,  nor  anything  taken  from  it ;  and  God 
doeth  it,  that  men  should  fear  before  him/^^  Like  chil- 
dren, we  receive  each  new  gift  of  knowledge,  each  fresh 
acquisition  of  power,  withheld  from  us  till  we  were  able 
to  turn  them  to  some  wise  account.  And  why  then 
should  we  despair  of  any  conceivable  compass  of  the 
revelations  that  shaU  be  ? 

Human  intelligence  and  research  have  already  accom* 
pUshed  so  much,  that  ignorance  alone  can  presume  to 
resign  any  past  event  to  utter  oblivion.  Between  "  the 
Beginning/'  spoken  of  in  the  first  verse  of  the  book  called 
Genesis,  and  the  creation  of  man,  the  most  humble  and 
devout  of  Biblical  students  now  acknowledge  the  inter- 
vention of  ages,  compared  with  which  man  is  indeed  but 
of  yesterday.  Our  whole  written  materials  concerning 
aU  those  ages  are  comprehended  in  the  few  introductory 
words  of  the  Mosaic  narrative,  and  for  thousands  of  years 
man  knew  no  liiore.  Yet  all  the  while,  the  geological 
record  lay  there  open  before  him,  awaiting  God's  ap- 
pointed time.  What  so  inconceivable  as  the  recovery  of 
L  world's  hitoxy  prior  to  .nan's  oreaHon  ;  bu.,  indeed 
is  not  everything  impossible  until  it  is  done  ?  and  the 
history  of  man  himself,  though  so  much  less  inconceiv- 
able, also  an  impossibility  until  it  has  been  accomplished  ? 

But  ethnological  science  bears  a  much  closer  relation 
to  the  researches  of  the  geologist  than  to  the  investiga- 
tions of  the  antiquary.  Hence  the  value  and  significance 
of  its  system  of  classification.  In  studying  the  natural 
history  of  man,  a  great  point  is  gained  if  we  can  estab- 
lish the  fact  that  in  certain  stages  of  his  social  develop- 
ment he  existed  without  any  knowledge  of  metallurgic 
arts,  and  to  these  stages  we  give  the  name  of  the  "  Stone  : 

^  Ecclesiastes  iii.  14. 


88  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

Period.''  Also,  it  is  of  value  to  note  the  characteristics 
developed  by  the  introduction  of  metallurgy ;  and  as  a 
very  important  stage  is  chiefly  marked  by  the  use  of 
copper  and  its  simplest  alloy,  this  is  designated  the 
"  Bronze  Period."  Finally,  the  most  abundant  and  prac- 
tically useful  of  all,  iron,  is  discovered  and  brought  into 
use ;  and  the  period  of  transition  between  that  of  eth- 
nological archaeology  and  authentic  written  history  is 
termed  the  "  Iron  Period."  But  these  are  ethnological, 
not  geological  periods,  and  diflfer  widely  in  their  applica- 
tion from  the  latter  ;  and  it  is  desirable  that  this  should 
be  fully  perceived,  in  order  to  avoid  needless  conflict 
with  the  labours  of  the  antiquary,  or  any  appearance  of 
slighting  his  valuable  but  diverse  researches.  Each  study 
has  its  own  legitimate  functions,  though  also  they  have 
necessarily  somewhat  in  common.  The  Eoman  antiquary, 
as  we  have  seen,  admits  that  there  is  something  poetical 
"  in  talking. of  an  age  of  stone,  or  an  age  of  bronze,  or 
an  age  of  iron,  but  such  divisions  have  no  meaning  in 
history,  which  cannot  be  treated  as  a  physical  science." 
But  neither  ethnology  nor  archaeology  advance  any  pre- 
tence to  being  history ;  nor,  indeed,  can  Eoman  antiqui- 
ties claim  to  be  so,  though  they  have  a  more  direct 
relation  with  it  in  such  limited  sense. 

When  we  turn  to  the  learned  volumes  of  the  classical 
antiquary,  the  main  subjects  of  investigation  are  inscrip- 
tions :  reUgious,  military,  sepulchral,  and  misceUaneous. 
The  very  brick  has  its  written  record  stamped  on  it. 
Then  comes  the  ruined  viUa,  with  its  personal  ornaments, 
domestic  utensils,  mural  paintings,  and  fictile  ware,  all 
of  them  occasionally  inscribed.  Next  follow  the  rich 
stores  of  the  numismatist,  supplying  a  consecutive  chron- 
icle of  illustrated  historical  incidents.  These  are  just  as 
much  written  chronicles  as  any  mediaeval  manuscript. 
For  the  most  part  they  are  more  minute,  accurate,  and 


IV.]        THE  PRIMEVAL  TRANSITION:  INSTINCT.         89 

free  from  the  obscurities  begot  by  credulity  or  prejudice. 
Moreover,  these,  along  with  the  minuter  relics  which  the 
Eoman  antiquary  catalogues  and  describes^  are  merely 
illustrative  appendices  and  commentaries  on  histories 
already  familiar  to  him.  But  the  ethnologist,  and  the 
primitive  archBeologist  as  such,  aim  at  different  results, 
and  by  an  essentially  different  kind  of  evidence.  The 
object  alike  of  ethnology  and  archaeology  is  to  investi- 
gate the  physical  history  of  man,  in  part  as  the  highest 
branch  of  natural  history,  but  also  as  no  unimportant  in- 
troduction to  the  details  of  civil  and  personal  history. 
The  language  of  all  critical  inquiry,  prior  to  the  very 
recent  period  when  the  example  and  deductions  of  the 
geologist  had  expanded  the  views  of  the  archaeologist, 
and  enlarged  his  means  of  investigation  relative  to  pri- 
mitive history,  may  be  aptly  summed  up  in  the  words 
of  a  distinguished  literary  antiquary  already  referred  to. 
"  We  have  no  choice,^'  says  Sir  Francis  Palgrave,  in  his 
History  of  Normandy  and  England,  "save  between  the 
light  and  the  darkness ;  for  with  respect  to  the  pristine 
ages  of  the  world  we  know  nothing  historically  true  be- 
yond the  facts  whereunto  Holy  Scriptures  bear  their 
witness.  The  same  ineffable  wisdom,  speaking  in  them, 
has  also  annihilated  every  other  authentic  record  of  those 
remote  eras  ;  or  covered  the  memorials,  if  any  exist,  with 
an  obscurity  which  no  acuteness  can  dispel"  But  is  it 
indeed  so  ?  This  so-called  "  light  '^  is,  with  the  student 
of  mediaeval  history,  the  era  of  chroniclers  who  often 
lie,  still  oftener  blunder,  and  not  imfrequently  add  to  all 
an  obscurity  which  acuteness  is  very  apt  to  darken  in 
the  attempt  to  dispel 

The  whole  religion  and  philosophy  of  man  are  com- 
prehended in  the  two  great  questions.  Whence  ?  and 
Whither  ?  To  the  one  of  these  Keligion  alone  responds 
with  her  divinely-authenticated  revelations  ;  to  the  other 


90  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

History  attempts  to  reply,  with  her  imperfect  and  frag- 
mentary  additions  to  the  sacred  record  of  pristine  ages ; 
but  for  the  world's  primeval  history  Nature  also  has  her 
recorded  revelations,  though  for  weU-nigh  six  thousand 
years  they  lay  imheeded  or  misread.  Yet  the  records  of 
that  geological  history,  pertaining  to  epochs  long  prior 
to  the  chronologist's  date  of  the  beginning  of  time,  axe 
not  less,  but  more  trustworthy  than  the  great  mass  of 
historical  chronicle& 

It  is  not  the  attribute  of  a  large  and  Hberal-minded 
student  to  disparage  other  branches  of  study,  because 
they  differ  from  his  own.  Geology  and  archeology  are 
but  successive  links  in  the  same  great  chain  of  reasoning. 
The  earliest  data  of  the  archaeologist  are  found,  where 
those  of  the  geologist  draw  to  a  close,  in  the  debatable 
land  of  the  later  alluvial  formations ;  and  in  so  far  as 
history  is  the  social  biography  of  nations^  these  chapters 
of  our  race's  childhood  and  early  youth,  which  thus  fol- 
low in  uninterrupted  sequence  after  the  closing  pages  of 
the  geologist,  are  no  less  interesting  and  important  to  us, 
as  a  race,  than  the  youthful  records  of  the  individual 
poet,  philosopher,  or  hero,  which  often  supply  the  key  to 
all  that  renders  biography  most  worthy  of  study.  The 
further,  indeed,  our  researches  are  pursued  into  the  pre- 
sent, the  more  are  we  impelled  to  aim  at  an  ampler 
knowledge  of  the  past ;  for  ethnology  and  history  alike 
affirm,  with  an  Authority  that  will  not  be  gainsaid,  that 
some  races  of  the  human  family  prove  themselves  bom 
to  dominion ;  while  others  seem  to  have  been  ever  de- 
stined to  the  yoke  of  servitude^  or  but  to  hold  possession 
of  their  appointed  lease  of  earth,  until  some  chosen  De 
Gama  or  Columbus  has  revealed  their  secret,  and  the 
supplanter  summons  them  to  give  place. 

Into  some,  at  least,  of  the  questions  which  ethnology 
and  archsBology  are  originating,  it  must  be  the  province 


IV.]        THE  PRIMEVAL  TRANSITION:  INSTINCT.         91 

of  the  historian  to  inquire.  The  national  individuality 
of  Eg3rpt,  India^  or  Greece  cannot  be  separated  from  the 
grand  results  which  their  histories  disclose ;  for  on  these 
the  ethnological  peculiarities  of  each  stamped  some  of 
their  most  marked  distinctions.  The  diverse  elements 
commingled  in  our  British  race,  and  their  illustrative 
arts,  languages,  and  memorials  of  many  kinds,  ore  re- 
ceiving an  ample,  if  not  always  a  wise  or  discriminating 
study.  Nor,  while  the  ethnic  specialities  of  the  ancient 
world  engage  attention,  can  it  be  overlooked  that  Ame- 
rica still  presents  for  us  a  singularly  interesting  phase  of 
primitive  social  life :  the  life  of  the  forest  savage,  in- 
herited from  an  aucient  past ;  whHe  beyond  it  he,  half 
obliterated,  monuments  of  an  extinct  civilisation,  with 
memorials  of  rites  and  mythology,  which  still  tempt 
many  bold  comparisons  with  the  oldest  chronicles  of 
social  life  in  the  African  birth-land  of  arts  and  polity. 
It  is  not  altogether  for  the  direct  truths  which  he  may 
glean,  that  the  historian  finds  encouragement  in  pursu* 
ing  his  investigations  beyond  the  limits  of  written  and 
graven  annals,  to  the  earliest  eflForts  of  intellect  and  the 
primitive  traces  of  human  arts.  These  prehistoric  annals 
are  guides  to  secondary  yet  all  important  truths,  show- 
ing how  deeply  the  sources  of  human  action  lie  implanted 
in  the  nature  of  man ;  and  how  essential  to  the  just  in- 
terpretation of  the  external  life  of  a  nation  is  the  know- 
ledge of  the  ethnic  elements,  and  the  intellectual  germs, 
pure  or  mingled,  out  of  which  it  has  been  evolved.  For 
such  ethnic  elements  are  not  peculiar  to  ancient  nations, 
nor  have  they  wrought  only  in  primitive  times.  They 
survive  as  vigorously  and  as  vividly  now  as  when  they 
puzzled  the  observant  credulity  of  Herodotus,  or  dignified 
to  Tacitus  the  chroniclings  of  Eome's  despised  barbarian 
conquests. 

Reasons  have  been  advanced  in  the  previous  chapter, 


92  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

appeaxmg  to  justify  the  belief  that  the  earliest  and 
true  primeval  condition  of  man  was  a  stone-period  : 
that  is  to  say,  one  devoid  of  metallurgy  ;  and  that  his 
mechanical  arts  were  of  the  simplest  kind.  But  that 
he  was,  therefore,  of  necessity,  a  savage,  is,  as  we  have 
seen,  very  far  from  being  a  legitimate  conclusion.  The 
degradation  of  his  moral  nature,  and  not  the  absence  of 
the  arts  which  we  associate  with  modem  luxury  and 
enterprise,  made  him  a  savage.  The  Arab  sheikh,  wan- 
dering with  his  flocks  over  the  wild  pa3tm-es  of  the 
desert,  is  not  greatly  in  advance  of  the  Indian  of  the 
American  forests,  either  in  mechanical  skiU  or  artistic 
refinement ;  yet  the  Idumean  Job  was  just  such  a  pas- 
toral Arab,  but,  nevertheless,  a  philosopher  and  a  poet, 
fax  above  any  who  dwelt  amid  the  wondrous  develop- 
ments of  mechanical  and  artistic  progress,  in  the  ancient 
cities  of  the  Tigris  or  the  Euphrates.  It  is  not  to  be 
inferred,  however,  afl  appears  by  some  writers  to  be  done, 
that  the  whole  history  of  the  human  race,  and  each  of 
it8  separate  divisions,  is  affirmed  to  disclose  a  regular 
succession  of  periods — Stone,  Bronze,  and  Iron,  or  how- 
ever otherwise  designated, — akin  to  the  organic  dis- 
closures of  geology ;  or  that  where  their  traces  are 
found,  they  necessarily  or  invariably  imply  such  an 
order  in  their  succession.  The  only  true  analogy  be- 
tween the  geologist  and  the  archaeologist  lies  in  this, 
that  both  find  their  evidence  imbedded  in  the  earth's 
superficial  crust,  and  deduce  the  chronicles  of  an  other- 
wise obliterated  past  by  legitimate  induction  therefrom. 
The  essential  and  radical  difference  between  the  palaeon- 
tologist and  the  ethnologist  lies  in  this,  that  the  one 
aims  at  recovering  the  history  of  an  unintelligent  and 
purely  instinctive  division  of  extinct  organic  life ;  the 
other  investigates  aU  that  pertains  to  a  still  existent, 
intelligent  being,  capable  of  advancing  from  his  own 


IV.]        THE  PRIMEVAL  TRANSITION:  INSTINCT.         93 

past  condition,  or  returning  to  it,  under  the  most  diverse 
external  circumstances.  Excepting,  therefore,  the  na- 
ture of  their  evidence,  and  their  mode  of  using  it,  all  is 
contrast  rather  than  comparison. 

Amid  that  wondrously  diversified  series  of  organic 
beings  which  pertains  to  the  studies  of  the  geologist, 
there  appears  at  length  one,  "  the  beauty  of  the  world, 
the  paragon  of  animals,"^  made  in  the  image  of  God ; 
a  being  capable  of  high  moral  and  intellectual  elevation, 
of  wondrous  design,  and  with  a  capacity  for  transmitting 
experience,  and  working  out  comprehensive  plans  by 
the  combined  labours  of  many  successive  generations. 
In  all  this  there  is  no  analogy  to  any  of  the  inferior 
orders  of  being.  The  ant  and  the  beaver,  the  coral 
zoophyte  and  the  bee,  display  singular  ingenuity  and 
powers  of  combination ;  and  each  feathered  songster 
builds  its  nest  with  wondrous  forethought,  in  nature's 
appointed  season.  But  the  instincts  of  the  inferior 
orders  of  creation  are  in  vain  compared  with  the  devices 
of  man,  even  in  his  savage  state.  Their  most  ingenious 
works  cost  them  no  iatellectual  effort  to  acquire  the 
craft,  and  experience  adds  no  improvements  in  aU  the 
continuous  labours  of  the  wonderful  mechanicians.  The 
beaver  constructs  a  dam  more  perfectly  than  all  the 
best  achievements  of  human  ingenuity  in  the  formation 
of  breakwaters,  and  builds  for  itself  a  hut  which  the 
author  of  the  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire 
justly  contrasts  in  architectural  skill  with  the  ruder 
dwelling  of  the  Asiatic  Tartar.  The  bee,  in  forming  its 
cell,  solves  a  mathematical  problem  which  has  tasked 
the  labours  of  acutest  analysts.  But  each  ingenious 
artificer  is  practising  a  craft  which  no  master  taught, 
and  to  which  it  has  nothing  to  add.  The  wondrous,  in- 
stinctive, living  machine  creates  for  itself  the  highest 

^  Hamlet,  Act  ii.  sc.  2. 


94  PREBISTORIG  MAN.  [Chap. 

pleasure  it  is  capable  of,  in  working  out  the  art  with 
which  it  is  divinely  endowed  ;  and  accomplishes  it  with 
infallible  accuracy,  aa  all  its  untaught  predecessors  did, 
and  as,  without  teaching,  each  new-bom  successor  will 
do.  To  such  wondrous  architects  and  artists  history 
does  not  pertain,  for  their  arts  knew  no  primeval  con- 
dition of  imperfection,  and  witness  no  progress.  Of 
their  works,  as  of  their  organic  structure,  one  example 
is  a  sufficient  type  of  the  whole.  The  palseontologisf  s 
relics  of  preadamite  life  have  been  designated  by  one 
popular  geologist,  "  The  Medals  of  Creation ;"  and  the 
term,  though  borrowed  from  the  antiquary,  has  a  signi^ 
ficance  which  peculiarly  marks  the  contrast  now  referred 
to  between  the  objects  of  study  of  the  geologist  and  the 
archaeologist.  Like  the  several  medals  struck  in  the 
same  die,  the  multitude  of  examples  of  an  extinct 
species,  each  exquisitely  sculptured  coral  and  every 
It  of  a  »ynu.e«cd  I^  repeat  lie  ^e  ^W 
characteristics.  One  perfect  example  is  an  unfailing 
type  of  all,  and  the  cabinets  of  a  thousand  collectors 
may  present  the  like  illustrations  of  extinct  organic  life. 
The  palaeontologist's  one  perfect  example  of  an  extinct 
species,  is  for  every  purpose  of  science  a  specimen  of 
all  examples  of  such ;  even  as  the  naturalist's  history 
of  one  specific  zoophyte,  ant,  or  beaver,  is  the  history  of 
all ;  and  the  poet's  fancy  may  be  accepted  as  literally 
true,  that — 

"  All  tlie  winged  habitants  of  paradise^ 
Whose  songs  once  mingled  with  the  songs  of  angels, 
Wove  their  first  nests  as  curiously  and  well 
Aa  the  wood  minatrel  in  o«r  evU  day 
After  the  labour  of  six  thousand  years."  ^ 

But  with  the  relics  of  humaa  art,  even  in  its  most  primi- 
tive and  rudimentary  forms,  it  is  far  otherwise.     Each 

*  Montgomery,  Pdiccm  Island. 


IV.]       THE  PRIMEVAL  TRANSITION:  INSTINCT         95 

example  possesses  an  individuality  of  its  own,  for  it  is 
the  product  of  an  intelligent  will,  capable  of  develop- 
ment, and  profiting  by  experience. 

But  what  experience  was,  we  know  not,  nor  to  what 
results  it  led,  in  the  generations  of  that  antediluvian 
world,  the  brief  biographies  of  whose  patriarchs  sum  up 
the  records  of  weU-nigh  a  thousand  years  in  such  words 
as  these :  '^  And  all  the  days  of  Methuselah  were  nine 
hundred  sixty  and  nine  years ;  and  he  died.''  What- 
ever its  intellectual  and  artistic  results  were,  the  dose 
of  that  first  human  era  indicated  a  moral  d^radation, 
which  experience  only  tended  further  to  corrupt ;  and 
when  we  look  on  the  descendants  of  the  postdiluvian 
fathers  of  a  renovated  earth,  man  is  still  the  same  in 
intellectual  and  moral  capacity,  but  the  days  of  his  years 
had  been  made  as  an  handbreadth.  And  yet  even  with 
his  brief  threescore  years  and  ten,  how  wonderful  is  the 
accumulated  knowledge  and  experience  of  a  lifetime; 
and  with  how  mournful  a  sense  of  irreparable  loss  do 
we  often  look  upon  the  gathered  knowledge  of  years 
dissipated  in  a  moment  by  the  hand  of  death  :  the 
casket  broken,  and  the  jewels  scattered  and  for  ever 
lost  I  had  a  brother  once,  a  man  of  noble,  genial 
nature,  and  high  intellectual  capacity,  just  ripsning  to 
maturity.  What  he  did  is  not  insignificant,  in  a  career 
so  brief  and  checkered.  But  what  could  he  not  have 
done  had  God  spared  him  ?  But  what  is  the  accumu- 
lated experience  of  an  Edward  Forbes  or  a  George 
Wflson,  just  attaining  their  prime,  or  a  Hamilton  or 
Humboldt,  hoary  with  the  weight  of  years  and  honours, 
when  we  attempt  to  realize  the  progress  of  those  prim- 
eval centuries,  the  history  of  wHch  comes  to  us  in  bio- 
graphies of  its  great  and  good  men,  such  as  this  :  "  And 
Adam  lived  an  hundred  and  thirty  years,  and  Eve  bare 
him  a  son  in  his  own  likeness  after  his  image,  and  they 


96  PRE  HISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

called  his  name  Setk  And  to  Seth,  to  him  also,  after 
he  had  lived  an  hundred  and  five  years,  there  was  bom 
a  son,  and  he  called  his  name  Enos.  Then  began  men 
to  call  themselves  by  the  name  of  the  Lord.  And  Seth 
lived  after  he  begat  Enos  eight  hundred  and  seven 
years,  and  begat  sons  and  daughters.  And  all  the 
days  of  Seth  were  nine  hundred  and  twelve  years :  and 
he  died/^ 

It  is  the  world  before  the  flood :  a  mystery  to  us  ; 
yet  not  altogether  perhaps  without  its  existing  records. 
The  apparent  antiquity  of  the  disclosures  of  human  art 
in  the  drift  point  to  some  unperished  memorials  of  a 
time  coeval  with  the  generations  of  antediluvian  pa- 
triarchs ;  and  when  science  has  recovered  so  much  in 
reference  to  protozoic  life,  who  shall  pretend  to  limit 
the  possible  disclosures  relative  to  eras  thus  compara- 
tively modem !  Works  wrought,  like  the  ark,  in  gopher 
wood,  and  the  fragile  beauties,  perchance,  of  a  luxu- 
riously developed  art,  such  as  the  sensuous  refinement 
of  later  generations  has  begotten  amid  the  grossest 
sensualities,  have  perchance  all  perished ;  but  hidden 
chronicles  have  recently  been  revealed  to  us,  so  amply 
displacing  a  seemingly  triumphant  oblivion  of  old  cen- 
turies, that  the  oldest  cannot  be  undoubtingly  asserted 
to  be  utterly  beyond  recall. 

But  let  us  now  glance  at  some  of  those  various  and 
very  diverse  disclosures  relative  to  man's  primitive  con- 
dition of  undeveloped  ingenuity  in  mechanical  science 
and  metaUurgic  knowledge.  And  first,  in  seeming 
chronological  order  are  those  discoveries  pertaining  to 
the  transitional  common  ground  of  geology  and  archaeo- 
logy :  the  human  arts  in  the  drift,  or  in  ossiferous  caves, 
among  the  bones  of  strange  orders  of  beings  hitherto 
supposed  to  have  been  extinct  long  anterior  to  the  ex- 
istence of  man.     In  the  ancient  alluvial  depiosits — most 


IV.]        THE  PRIMEVAL  TRANSITION :  INSTINCT,         97 

modern  among  the  strata  of  the  geologist, — lie  abundant 
traces  of  extinct  animal  life,  belonging  to  that  recent 
transitional  era  of  the  globe  in  which  man  was  intro- 
duced to  his  terrestrial  inheritance.  Nevertheless,  these 
present  in  nearly  all  respects  a  contrast  to  everything 
we  are  familiar  with  in  the  history  of  our  earth  as  the 
theatre  of  human  action,  scarcely  less  striking  than  that 
old  geological  epoch  when  the  liassic  ocean  of  southern 
England  swarmed  with  strange  ammonites,  belemnites, 
and  other  cephalopoda ;  and  the  reptilian  saurians 
sported  in  its  waters,  or  monstrous  pterodactyles  glided 
over  the  surface  on  their  huge  bat-like  wings. 

To  the  archaeologist  those  diluvial  strata  are  his  pre- 
historic chronicles,  rich  in  precious  records  of  that  prim- 
eval transition  in  which  the  beginnings  of  his  own  history 
lie.  In  a  zoological  point  of  view  these  post-tertiary 
formations  include  man  and  the  existing  races  of  ani- 
mals, as  well  as  the  extinct  races  which  appear  to  have 
been  contemporaneous  with  indigenous  species.  How 
early  in  that  closing  geological  epoch  man  appeared, 
or  how  late  into  that  archaeological  era  the  extinct 
fossil  mammals  survived,  are  the  two  independent  pro- 
positions which  the  sister  sciences  have  to  establish  and 
reconcile. 

The  insular  character  of  Great  Britain  renders  it  a 
peculiarly  interesting  epitome  of  archaeological  study,  a 
microcosm  complete  in  itself,  and  little  less  ample  in  the 
variety  of  ite  records  than  the  great  continent,  divorced 
from  it  by  the  ocean  ;  yet  the  question  may  be  reopened. 
Was  it  already  insular  when  its  earliest  allophylian 
nomade  first  trod  its  unhistoric  soil  1  The  Caledonian 
aUophylian,  as  we  now  know,  pursued  the  gigantic  Balaena 
in  an  estuary  which  swept  along  the  base  of  the  far- 
inland  Ochils,  and  guided  his  tiny  canoe,  above  an  ocean 
bed,  which  had  to  be  upheaved  into  the  sunshine  of  long 

VOL.  I.  G 


98  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

centuries  before  it  could  become  the  grand  arena  of 
deeds  that  live  associated  on  the  historic  page  with  the 
names  of  Agricola,  Edward,  Wallace  and  Bruce,  of  Mon- 
trose, Cromwell,  and  Mar.  Its  history  dawns  in  an  era 
of  geological  mutation  ;  yet  not  more  so  than  such  as  is 
now  at  work,  in  the  grand  solemn  march  of  unwearying 
Time  in  other  and  neighbouring  historic  lands.  It  is  a 
type  of  the  changes  which  were  working  elsewhere,  and 
gradually  transforming  that  strange  post-tertiary  micro- 
cosm into  the  familiar  historic  Britain  of  this  nineteenth 
century. 

From  an  examination  of  its  detritus  and  included 
fossils,  and  from  the  disclosures  of  the  peat-mosses,  we 
learn  that,  at  the  period  when  the  British  Isles  were 
taken  possession  of  by  their  first  colonists,  the  country 
must  have  been  almost  entirely  covered  with  forests, 
and  overrun  by  numerous  and  strange  races  of  animals 
long  extinct.  In  the  deposits  of  marl  that  underlie  the 
accumulated  peat-bogs  of  Scotland  and  Ireland,  are  found 
abundant  remains  of  the  fossil  elk,  an  animal  far  ex- 
ceeding in  magnitude  any  existing  species  of  elk  or  deer. 
Its  bones  have  been  found — at  Walton,  in  Essex,  for 
example, — associated  with  skeletons  of  the  mastodon, 
and  in  the  diluvium  at  Folkstone,  with  numerous  teeth, 
jaws,  and  detached  bones  of  the  extinct  rhinoceros,  hip- 
popotamus, hyena,  fossil  ox,  etc. ;  yet  Httle  doubt  is  now 
entertained  that  the  elk  was  contemporaneous  with  prim- 
eval man  in  the  British  Isles.  Groups  of  skeletons  have 
been  discovered  crowded  together  in  a  small  area,  as  at 
Curragh,  in  Ireland,  with  the  antlers  lying  thrown  back 
on  the  shoulders,  as  if  a  herd  of  elks  had  sought  refuge 
in  the  marshes,  and  perished  floundering  in  the  morass. 
Some  of  their  bones  are  stiU  in  so  fresh  a  condition,  that 
the  marrow  in  them  has  been  described  as  having  the 
appearance  of  fresh  suet,  and  burning  with  a  clear  flame. 


IV.]        TUE  PRIMEVAL  TRANSITION:  INSTINCT.         99 

Stone  hatchets,  flint  arrow-heads,  and  fragments  of  pot- 
tery have  been  found  with  these  skeletons,  under  circum- 
stances that  have  abundantly  satisfied  geologists,  as  well 
as  archaeologists,  of  their  contemporaneous  deposition ; 
and  still  further  evidence  seems  to  exhibit  this  gigantic 
elk  as  an  object  of  the  chase,  and  a  source  of  primitive 
food  and  clothing.  Professor  Owen,  in  his  British  Fossil 
Mammals,  has  disputed  Dr.  Hart's  supposed  example  of 
an  elk  rib  marked  with  the  wound  of  an  arrow ;  but 
Professor  Jamieson  and  Dr.  Mantell  note  the  more  inter- 
esting discovery,  in  the  county  of  Cork,  of  a  human 
body  exhumed  from  a  marshy  soil,  beneath  a  peat-bog 
eleven  feet  thick.  The  soft  parts  were  converted  into 
adipocire,  and  the  body,  which  was  thus  still  in  good 
preservation,  was  enveloped  in  a  deer-skin  of  such  large 
dimensions,  as  to  lead  to  the  opinion  that  it  belonged  to 
the  extinct  elk.  Whether  or  not  the  latter  conclusion 
can  be  regarded  as  more  than  a  probability,  there  appear 
to  be  little  just  grounds  for  doubt  that  this  now  extinct 
species  was  coeval  with  the  aborigines  of  the  British. 
Islands.  In  the  same  recent  formation  have  been  found 
abundant  traces  of  animals  having  a  special  interest  in 
relation  to  our  present  subject,  as  not  only  adapted  for 
the  chase,  but  suitable  for  domestication.  Of  the  ancient 
British  BovicUe,  the  remains  of  the  great  fossil  ox  {Bos 
primigenius)  are  of  frequent  occurrence,  especially  in 
the  alluvial  deposits  of  Scotland.  One  skull,  in  the 
British  Museum,  from  Perthshire,  measures  a  yard  in 
length,  and  the  span  of  the  horns  is  forty-two  inches. 
Sir  Henry  de  la  Beche  refers,  in  the  Geological  Observer, 
to  the  discovery,  in  various  submarine  forests,  of  foot-, 
prints  mingling  with  those  of  the  deer,  and  which  he 
conceives  may  have  been  those  of  the  great  fossil  ox. 
Of  its  existence  contemporaneously  with  the  British  abo- 
rigines no  doubt  can  be  entertained,  for  its  bones  have 


100  PRE  HISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

been  found  in  British  tumuli,  and  even  mingling  with 
Roman  remains. 

The  evidence  supplied  by  the  ossiferous  caves  of  Eng- 
land, as  of  the  continents  of  Europe  and  America,  is  full 
of  interest  from  corresponding  revelations.  Eorkdale 
Cave,  near  Kirkby  Moorside,  Yorkshire,  has  acquired  a 
special  celebrity  from  the  description  and  illustration  of 
its  contents,  given  by  Dr.  Buckland  in  his  ReliquicB 
DiluviancB,  in  connexion  with  a  diluvial  theory  subse- 
quently abandoned.  But  Kent's  Hole,  near  Torbay,  has 
been  already  referred  to,  not  only  as  one  of  the  richest 
depositories  of  British  fossil  camivora,  but  also  as  having 
yielded  no  less  remarkable  traces  of  primitive  human 
arts.  When  first  examined,  its  roof  was  clustered  with 
the  pendant  cones  of  stalactite,  and  the  floor  thickly 
paved  with  concretions  of  stalagmite,  beneath  which  lay, 
hermetically  sealed,  the  prized  relics  of  the  geologist  and 
arch^ologist,  safe  alike  from  disturbance  and  decay. 
These  have  been  minutely  described  in  the  Cavern  Re- 
searches of  the  Kev.  J.  MacEnery,  by  whom  it  was  first 
explored.  From  the  accumulated  relics  of  this  ossiferous 
cavern,  so  rich  in  evidence  of  that  common  transitional 
ground  on  which  the  geologist  and  the  archaeologist  meet, 
have  been  recovered  many  of  the  later  palseontological 
specimens  which  now  enrich  the  British  Museum ;  and 
to  its  disclosures  both  Buckland  and  Owen  have  acknow- 
ledged obligations  for  some  of  their  most  important  data. 
But  the  archaeological  evidence  is  not  less  important. 
Intermingled  with  fossil  remains  of  species  of  the  rhino- 
ceros, cave-hyena,  great  cave-tiger,  cave-bear,  and  other 
extinct  mammalia  in  unusual  abundance,  lay  numerous 
relics  of  human  art,  not  only  indicating  the  ancient 
presence  of  man,  but  proving  that  he  also,  as  well  as 
some  of  these  extinct  camivora,  had  found  there  a  home. 
His  tools  of  bone,  like  others  found  on  many  primitive 


IV.]        THE  PRIMEVAL  THANSITION :  INSTINCT.       101 

Britash  sites,  exhibit  the  most  infantile  stage  of  rudi- 
mentary art.  Fragments  of  aun-baked  ums,  and  rounded 
slabs  of  slate  of  a  plate-Hke  form,  were  associated  with 
the  traces  of  rude  culinary  practices,  UlustratiTe  of  the 
habits  and  tastes  of  the  primeval  sav^e.  Broken  pottery, 
calcined  bones,  charcoal,  and  ashes,  showed  where  the 
hearth  of  the  aUophylian  Briton  had  stood ;  and  along 
with  these  lay  dispersed  the  flints,  in  all  conditions,  &om 
the  rounded  mass  as  it  came  out  of  the  chalk,  through 
the  various  stages  of  progress,  on  to  the  finished  arrow- 


Fio.  1.— British  Bone  Imptt 


heads  and  hatchets ;  while  small  flint-chips,  and  partially 
used  flint-blocks,  thickly  scattered  through  the  soil,  served 
to  indicate  that  the  ancient  Britidi  troglodyte  had  there 
his  workshop,  as  well  as  his  kitchen,  and  wrought  the 
raw  material  of  that  primeval  stone-period  into  the  re- 
quisite took  and  weapons  of  the  chase.  Nor  were  indi- 
cations wanting  of  the  specific  food  of  man  in  the  remote 
era  thus  recalled  for  us.  Besides  accumulated  bones, 
some  at  least  the  spoils  of  the  chase,  near  the  mouth  of 
the  cave  a  number  of  shells  of  the  mussel,  limpet,  and 


102  PBEUISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

oyster,  with  a  palate  of  the  scarus,  lay  heaped  together, 
indicating  that  the  British  aborigines  found  their  preca- 
rious subsistence  jfrom  the  alternate  products  of  the  chase 
and  the  spoils  of  the  neighbouring  sea. 

Such  tra<5es  of  aboriginal  life  in  the  British  cave- 
dwellers  of  Torbay,  closely  correspond  with  those  ob- 
served in  exploring  some  of  the  remarkable  artificial 
caverns,  or  Scottish  Weems.  They  are  minutely  de- 
scribed in  the  Prehistoric  Annals,  and  need  not  be 
further  referred  to  here,  except  for  one  more  index 
they  serve  to  furnish  of  primitive  tastes.  A  remarkable 
example  of  these  subterranean  stone-dwellings  at  Sav- 
rock,  near  Eorkwall,  in  Orkney,  was  situated,  like  the 
natural  Torbay  cavern,  close  to  the  sea-shore.  The  ac- 
cumulated remains  of  the  charcoal  and  peat  ashes  of  the 
long-extinguished  hearth  lay  intermingled  with  bones  of 
the  small  northern  sheep,  the  horse,  ox,  deer,  and  whale, 
and  also  with  some  rude  implements  illustrative  of  primi- 
tive Orcadian  arts ;  while  a  layer  of  shells  of  the  oyster, 
escallop,  and  periwinkle,  the  common  whelk,  the  pur- 
pura^ and  the  limpet,  covered  the  floor  and  the  adjacent 
ground,  in  some  places  half  a  foot  deep.  Of  these,  the 
limpet,  though  common  on  the  coast,  formed  only  a  very 
small  proportion  of  the  whole,  while  the  periwinkle  was 
the  most  abundant.  The  relative  accumulations  of  the 
other  shells — differing  as  they  did  from  the  present  ratio 
of  the  various  mollusca  on  the  neighbouring  shores, — in 
like  manner  furnished  some  slight  index  of  the  culinary 
taste  of  the  aboriginal  Briton  in  those  long-forgotten 
centuries. 

It  is  curious  and  instructive  thus  to  note  even  so  small 
a  matter  as  the  tastes  of  the  rude  barbarian  Briton,  for 
they  supply  a  means  of  comparison  between  the  very 
diverse  races  of  the  British  Islands  in  remotely  ancient 
and  modern   times.      The  periwinkle  is  now  annually 


IV.]       THE  PRIMEVAL  TRANSITION;  INSTINCT       103 

shipped  in  large  quantities  from  the  Scottish  coasts  to 
supply  the  markets  of  the  British  metropolis ;  and  at  the 
meeting  of  the  British  Association  at  Dublin  in  1857,  a 
paper  was  read  before  the  zoological  section,  tending  to 
show  that  such  is  the  demand  for  that  favourite  mollusc, 
that  it  is  in  danger  of  being  extirpated  on  the  Irish 
coasts. 

By  such  facts  the  remote  past  is  brought  once  more 
into  intimate  relation  with  the  present;  and  even  in 
matters  so  apparently  trivial  as  the  nice  discrimination 
of  the  palate  between  the  Patella  vulgata  and  the  Turbo 
littoralis,  we  detect  a  correspondence  between  the  tastes 
of  the  rude  aboriginal  savage  and  the  civilized  Anglo- 
Saxon  of  the  British  metropolis ;  though  even  now  it  is 
as  a  popular  favourite,  and  not  as  a  coveted  delicacy, 
that  the  periwinkle,  and  also  the  larger  Buccinum  unda- 
turn  or  waved  whelk,  are  imported  into  London,  and 
gathered  on  the  Scottish  and  Irish  coasts. 

At  Skara,  near  the  house  of  Skaill,  in  the  west  main- 
land of  Orkney,  one  of  a  singular  class  of  early,  though 
probably  only  comparatively  ancient  stone  structures, 
designated  Pict^s  hoicses,  is  remarkable  for  an  immense 
accumulation  of  ashes  round  it,  several  feet  in  thickness, 
plentifully  mixed  with  shells,  and  the  horns  and  bones  of 
deer  and  other  animals.  The  building  itself  has  been 
only  very  partially  explored,  but  many  curious  relics  have 
been  recovered  from  the  surrounding  debris.  Among 
these  are  circular  disks  of  slate,  similar  to  those  found  in 
Kent's  Hole  Cave,  a  large  tusk  of  a  wild  boar,  horns  of 
the  red-deer,  and  numerous  implements  made  of  horn 
and  bone.  But  not  the  least  curious  of  those  primitive 
relics  was  a  box,  constructed  of  stones  laid  together  in 
the  form  of  a  miniature  cist,  within  which  were  about 
two  dozen  oyster-shells,  each  pierced  in  the  centre  with 
a  hole  large  enough  to  admit  the  finger.    Oysters,  it  may 


104  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

be  remarked,  are  rare  in  Orkney.  They  now  occur  only 
at  two  places,  Deersound  and  Frith,  the  nearest  of  which 
is  eight  miles  distant  from  Skaill ;  while  the  osteological 
remains  which  accompanied  them  are  those  of  long  ex- 
tinct Orkney  mammals.  There  is  no  tradition  either  of 
the  deer  or  the  boar  in  the  Orkney  Islands,  imless  the 
names  of  the  Deemess  headland  and  the  neighbouring 
sound  be  assumed  as  topographical  memorials  of  the 
presence  of  the  former  within  Norse  or  Saxon  times.  It 
is  scarcely  possible,  indeed,  to  conceive  of  the  existence 
of  such  fercB  naturcB  for  any  length  of  time,  within  so 
small  an  area,  after  the  occupation  of  these  islands  by  a 
human  population. 

Such  are  mere  indications  of  a  class  of  evidence  ahke 
abundant,  and  now  readily  accessible,  relative  to  the 
ancient  traces  of  man  and  his  arts,  in  the  British  drift. 
To  those  have  now  to  be  added,  without  materially 
affecting  the  bearings  of  the  evidence  as  a  whole,  dis- 
coveries made  by  Mr.  Frere  in  Suffolk,  so  long  ago  as  in 
1797,  of  flint  weapons  in  conjunction  with  elephant  re- 
mains, imbedded  in  gravel  overlaid  by  sand  and  brick- 
earth,  at  a  depth  of  eleven  to  twelve  feet  from  the  surface. 
Some  of  these  weapons  are  preserved  in  the  British  Mu- 
seum, and  in  the  collection  of  the  Society  of  Antiquaries, 
and  are  described  in  a  recent  communication  to  that 
Society  by  Mr.  Evans,  as  identical  in  form  with  those  on 
the  Continent.  "  They  present  no  analogy  in  form,''  he 
observes,  "  to  the  weU-known  implements  of  the  so-called 
Celtic  or  stone-period,  which,  moreover,  have  for  the 
most  part  some  portion,  if  not  the  whole,  of  their  surface 
ground  or  polished,  and  are  frequently  made  from  other 
stones  than  flint.  They  have  indeed  every  appearance 
of  having  been  fabricated  by  another  race  of  men,''  and 
it  may  be  added  are  on  a  much  larger  scale,  as  well  as 
of  ruder  workmanship.      Since  renewed  attention  has 


IV.]        THE  PRIMEVAL  TRANSITION:  INSTINCT       105 

been  directed  to  the  curious  but  little  heeded  discovery 
in  the  post-pliocene  beds  of  Suffolk,  by  the  disclosures 
at  Abbeville  and  Amiens,  the  researches  of  Mr.  Joseph 
Prestwich  and  others  have  been  rewarded  by  the  recovery 
of  additional  primeval  flint  implements  on  other  English 
sites,  in  the  same  diluvial  gravel  and  clay  in  which  teeth 
and  bones  of  the  Elephas  primigenms,  the  Rhinoceros 
tichorhinuSy  the  Hippopotamus  major ^  and  other  extinct 
fossil  manunals  abound.  They  have  been  recently  found 
at  Icklingham,  a  second  Suffolk  locality,  near  to  Cam- 
bridgeshire ;  in  Kent,  on  the  coast  between  Heme  Bay 
and  the  Keculvers,  and  at  Swalecliff,  near  Whitstable ; 
at  Biddenham  in  Bedfordshire ;  and  in  other  post-plio- 
cene deposits  of  the  south  of  England.  All  of  the 
specimens  present  the  same  remarkable  contrast  to  the 
small  and  more  finished  implements  pertaining  to  the 
earliest  sepulchral  deposits.  Compared  with  these,  they 
seem  to  be  the  memorials  of  an  age  of  ruder  strength 
and  still  more  infantile  skill.^  This  at  least  they  place  be- 
yond all  question,  that  the  occupation  of  Britain  and  the 
north  of  Europe  by  its  earliest  human  population  must 
be  referred  to  a  period,  compared  with  which  the  era 
radicated  by  Roman,  or  the  earliest  ascertained  Celtic 
arts,  is  but  of  yesterday.  Let  us  now  leave  behind  us 
that  old  continent  with  its  confusing  elements  pertaining 
to  times  when  the  ambition  of  Eome's  "laurel-locked, 
high-ghosted  Caesars^'  so  overrode  all  nationalities,  and 
obliterated  the  memories  of  histoiy,  that  even  now  it  is 
hard  to  persuade  men  there  was  a  European  world  before 
that  of  the  Caesars. 

The  city  of  Toronto,  on  the  northern  shore  of  the  great 
Lake  Ontario,  is  built  on  the  drift  clays  which  have  accu- 
mulated above  the  rocks  of  the  Lower  Silurian  formation 
to  an  average  depth  of  upwards  of  thirty  feet,  and  in 

^  QtLorterly  Journal  o/Geol.  Soc.,  vol.  xvii.  p.  362. 


106  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

some  places  are  more  than  seventy  feet  deep.  The  con- 
struction of  an  esplanade  along  the  lake  shore  of  the  city, 
during  recent  years,  has  exposed  a  cutting  of  upwards 
of  two  miles  in  length,  and  averaging  seventeen  feet  in 
depth.  The  operations  thus  carried  on  have  laid  bare 
the  virgin  soil  of  the  most  populous  site  now  devoted 
to  the  civilizing  processes  of  European  colonization  in 
Upper  Canada.  In  one  case  only,  so  far  as  I  have  been 
able  to  ascertain,  did  any  trace  of  prior  human  presence 
appear.  At  the  depth  of  nearly  two  feet  from  the  sur- 
face, in  front  of  the  Parliament  buildings,  the  bones  and 
horn  of  a  deer  lay  amid  an  accumulation  of  charcoal  and 
wood  ashes,  and  with  them  a  rude  stone  chisel  or  hatchet. 
There  were  no  precise  indications  that  these  rehcs  were 
of  great  antiquity,  or  indeed,  that  they  were  other 
than  modem ;  possibly  they  may  be  as  old  as  the  time 
of  Jacques  Cartier's  discovery  of  Canada ;  not  impossibly 
they  may  date  beyond  the  era  of  Columbus,  and  the 
intrusion  of  European  aggressors  on  Indian  hunting- 
grounds.  But  the  travelled  fossils  of  the  Toronto  drift 
are  of  a  very  different  era,  and  belong  to  the  Hudson 
river  group  of  the  Lower  Silurian,  like  the  rocks  on 
which  it  is  superimposed.  These  casts  of  Lower  Silurian 
fossils,  however,  are  no  index  of  the  date  of  the  greatly 
more  modern  drift  in  which  they  are  now  enclosed ;  and 
which,  with  very  varying  organic  remains  embedded  in 
its  clay  and  gravel,  overlies  the  true  fossiliferous  rocks 
of  Western  Canada;  and  seems  to  make  of  its  long 
stretch  of  wooded  levels  and  gentle  undulations,  a  coun- 
try fitted  to  slumber  through  untold  centuries  under  the 
shadow  of  its  pine-forests,  until  the  new-bom  mechanical 
science  of  Europe,  with  its  novel  apphcations  of  the 
metaUm^gic  arts,  provided  for  it  the  railway  and  the 
locomotive,  and  made  its  vast  chain  of  rivers  and  lakes 
a  highway  for  the  steamboat.    With  such  novel  facihties 


IV.]        THE  PRIMEVAL  TRANSITION:  INSTINCT        107 

added  to  the  indomitable  energy  of  the  intruding  occu- 
pants, the  whole  face  of  the  continent  is  in  rapid  process 
of  transformation  ;  and  it  is  well,  ere  the  change  is  com- 
pleted, that  some  note  be  made  of  every  decipherable 
index  of  the  characteristics  of  a  past  thus  destined  to 
utter  obliteration. 

From  the  uncleared  wilds  that  still  occupy  the  shores 
of  Lake  Superior,  south-eastward  through  the  great  lakes 
and  rivers  to  the  valley  of  the  St.  Lawrence,  those  drift 
deposits  reveal  to  the  geologist  marvellous  changes  that 
have  transpired  in  that  extensive  area  of  the  North 
American  continent,  through  a  greatly  prolonged  period 
of  what  to  him  are  recent  times.  Along  the  low  shores 
stretching  away  from  the  rapids  of  Sault  Ste.  Marie  to 
the  virgin  forest  of  Lake  Superior,  the  huge  granitic 
boulders  lie  strewed  like  the  wreck  of  some  Titanic 
Babel ;  and  wherever  the  waves  of  the  St.  Lawrence  re- 
open the  deposits  along  the  lower  portion  of  the  valley 
in  which  they  now  lie,  the  sea-bottoms  of  an  ancient 
ocean  are  revealed,  frequently  with  littoral  or  deep-sea 
shells  imbedded  at  different  levels  in  the  stratified  drift. 
But  remote  as  is  the  antiquity,  according  to  all  human 
chronology,  to  which  the  fauna  of  these  beds  of  marine 
detritus  belong,  the  palaeontologist  detects  among  their 
post-tertiary  fossils  the  phoca,  balsenae  of  more  than  one 
species,  fishes,  articulata,  and  the  shells  of  many  mol- 
lusca  still  inhabiting  the  neighbouring  ocean  along  the 
northern  Atlantic  coasts.  The  period,  therefore,  which 
embraces  those  relics  of  ancient  life  is  the  same  to  which 
man  belongs,  and  they  mark  for  it  one  of  the  phases  of 
that  last  transitional  era  during  which  the  earth  was 
being  prepared  for  his  entrance  upon  it.  Since  the 
natica,  fusus,  turritella,  and  other  marine  animals  of  the 
post-pliocene  period,  were  the  living  occupants  of  the 
St.  Lawrence  valley,  vast  changes  have  been  wrought 


108  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

on  the  physical  geography  of  the  continent.  The  rela- 
tive levels  of  the  sea  and  land  have  altered,  so  as  to 
elevate  old  sea-margins  to  the  slopes  of  lofty  hills,  and 
leave  many  hundred  miles  inland  the  escarpments 
wrought  by  the  waves  of  that  ancient  sea.  The  con- 
ditions of  climate  have  undergone  no  less  important 
changes,  developing  in  a  corresponding  degree  the  new 
character  and  conditions  of  life  pertaining  to  this  bed 
of  an  extinct  ocean :  covered  with  successive  deposits 
of  marine  detritus,  and  then  elevated  into  the  regions 
of  Sim  and  rain,  to  be  clothed  with  the  umbrageous 
forest,  and  to  become  the  dwelling-place  through  an- 
other dimly-measured  period,  of  the  wapiti,  the  beaver, 
and  the  bison;  and  with  them,  of  the  Iroquois,  the 
Huron,  and  the  Chippewa :'  aU  alike  the  fauna  of  condi- 
tions of  life  belonging  to  a  transitional  period  of  the 
New  World  preparatory  to  our  own. 

Marvellous  as  are  those  cosmical  revolutions  belonging 
to  the  period  of  emergence  of  the  northern  zone  of  Ame- 
rica from  the  great  Arctic  Ocean  :  when  we  look  on  each 
completed  whole  the  process  appears  to  have  been  cha- 
racterized by  no  abnormal  violence.  Slowly  through 
long  centuries  the  ocean  shallowed.  The  deep  sea 
organisms  of  a  former  generation  were  overlaid  by  the 
littoral  shells  of  a  newer  marine  life,  and  then  the  tidal 
waves  retreated  from  the  emerging  sea-beach ;  until  now 
we  seek  far  down  in  the  gulf  of  the  St.  Lawrence  and 
on  the  coast  of  Labrador  for  the  living  descendants  of 
species  gathered  from  the  post-pliocene  drift.  Thus  we 
see  in  the  living  natica,  fusus,  or  turritella  of  the  At- 
lantic coasts,  the  lineal  representative  of  an  ancestry 
reaching  back  to  such  antiquity  as  renders  ephemeral 
the  boasted  pedigrees  of  Europe's  oldest  Norman  'or 
Roman  blood ;  while  by  the  corresponding  fossils  of  the 
post-tertiary  drift: — ^which  to  the  common  eye  seem  in- 


IV.]       THE  PRIMEVAL  TRANSITION:  INSTINCT,        109 

significant  enough, — the  closing  epoch  of  geology  in  the 
New  World  is  brought  into  contact  with  that  in  which 
its  archaeology  begins;  and  we  look  upon  the  North 
American  continent  as  at  length  prepared  for  the  pre- 
sence of  man. 

Such  records  are  here  noted  among  the  disclosures  of 
the  great  valley  of  the  St.  Lawrence,  which  drains  well- 
nigh  half  a  continent ;  for  it  is  in  the  valleys  by  which 
the  present  drainage  of  historic  areas  takes  place,  that 
not  only  such  deposits  of  recent  shells  and  fossil  relics  of 
existing  fauna  are  found  :  but  also  that  the  most  exten- 
sive remains  of  extinct  mammalian  fauna  are  disclosed, 
in  association  with  objects  serving  to  link  them  with 
those  of  modem  eras.  In  formations  of  this  character 
have  been  found,  in  the  lower  valley  of  the  Mississippi, 
the  Elephas  primigenius,  the  Mastodon  Ohioticus^  the 
Megahnyx,  Megalodmi^  Ereptodon,  and  the  Equips  curvi- 
dens,  or  extinct  American  horse  ;  with  many  other  traces 
of  an  unfamiliar  fauna,  and  also  a  flora,  contemporaneous 
with  those  gigantic  mammifers,  but  which  also  include 
both  marine  aad  terrestrial  representatives  of  existing 
species.  Corresponding  in  its  great  geographical  out- 
lines very  nearly  to  its  present  condition,  the  American 
continent  must  have  presented  in  nearly  aU  its  other 
characteristics  a  striking  conta-ast  to  its  modem  aspect : 
clothed  though  it  seems  to  us  in  primeval  forests,  and 
scarcely  modified  by  the  presence  of  man.  In  the  post- 
pliocene  formations  of  South  Carolina,  exposed  along  the 
bed  of  the  Ashley  Kiver,  remains  of  the  megatherium, 
megalodon,  and  other  gigantic  extinct  mammals  occur, 
not  only  associated  with  existing  species  peculiar  to  the 
American  continent,  but  also  apparently  with  others, 
hitherto  believed  to  have  been  domesticated  and  intro- 
duced for  the  first  time  by  modem  European  colonists. 
But  still  more  interesting  for  our  present  purpose,  as 


110  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

possibly  indicating  the  contemporaneous  existence  of 
some  of  those  strange  extinct  mammals  with  man,  are 
notices  of  remains  of  human  art  in  the  same  formation. 
Professor  Holmes,  in  exhibiting  a  collection  of  fossils 
from  the  post-pliocene  of  South  Carolina,  before  the 
Academy  of  Natural  Sciences  of  Philadelphia,  remarked  : 
"  Dr.  Klipstein,  who  resides  near  Charleston,  in  digging 
a  ditch  for  the  purpose  of  reclaiming  a  large  swamp, 
discovered  and  sent  to  me  the  tooth  of  a  mastodon,  with 
the  request  that  I  should  go  down  and  visit  the  place,  as 
there  were  indications  of  the  bones  and  teeth  of  the 
animal  still  remaining  in  the  sands  which  underlie  the 
peat-bed.  Accordingly,  with  a  small  party  of  gentlemen, 
we  visited  the  doctor,  and  succeeded  not  only  in  obtain- 
ing several  other  teeth  and  bones  of  this  animal,  but 
nearly  one  entire  tusk,  and  immediately  alongside  of  the 
tusk  discovered  the  fragment  of  pottery  which  I  hold  in 
my  hand,  and  which  is  similar  to  that  manufactured  at 
the  present  time  by  the  American  Indians."^  It  would  not 
be  wise  to  found  hasty  theories  on  such  strange  juxtaposi- 
tion of  rehcs,  possibly  of  very  widely  separated  periods. 
The  Ashley  Kiver  has  channeled  for  itself  a  course  through 
the  eocene  and  post-pliocene  formations  of  South  Carolina, 
and  where  these  are  exposed  on  its  shores  the  fossils  are 
washed  from  their  beds,  and  become  mingled  with  the 
remains  of  recent  indigenous  and  domestic  animals,  and 
objects  of  human  art.  But  the  discovery  of  Dr.  Klip- 
stein was  made  in  excavating  an  imdisturbed,  and  geo- 
logically speaking,  a  comparatively  recent  formation. 
The  tusk  of  the  mastodon  lay  alongside  of  the  fragment 
of  pottery,  in  a  deposit  of  the  peat  and  sands  of  the  post- 
pliocene  beds.  Immediately  underneath  lie  marine  de- 
posits, rich  with  numerous  and  exceedingly  varied  groups 

*  Proceedings^  Academy  of  Natural  Sciences^  Philadelphia ^  July  1859,  pp. 
178,  186. 


IV.]       THE  PRIMEVAL  TRANSITION :  INSTINCT.        Ill 

of  mollusca,  corresponding  to  the  recent  species  now 
living  on  the  sea-coast  of  Carolina,  but  also  including  two 
fossil  species  no  longer  to  be  met  with  there,  though  com- 
mon in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  and  the  West  Indian  seaa. 

Here  too,  in  such  singular  juxtaposition,  the  palaeon- 
tology of  the  New  World  discloses  to  us  types  of  a  fauna 
pertaining  to  its  latest  transitional  period,  which  serve 
to  illustrate  the  marvellous  contrast  between  its  com- 
mencement and  its  close.  Until  the  recent  discovery  of 
teeth  of  the  megatherium  in  the  post-pliocene  bed  of  the 
Ashley  Kiver,  remains  of  that  extinct  mammal  had  been 
found  only  in  the  state  of  Georgia,  in  North  America, 
while  the  Mastodon  Ohioticus  and  Elephas  primigenius 
are  already  among  the  well-known  fauna  of  the  Canadian 
drift.  Of  these,  some  North  American  localities  have 
furnished  the  remains  in  remarkable  profusion,  but  none 
more  so  than  the  celebrated  morass  in  Kentucky,  known 
by  its  homely  but  most  expressive  name  of  the  Big-bone 
Lick.  Imbedded  in  the  blue  clay  of  this  ancient  bog, 
entire  skeletons,  or  detached  bones,  of  not  less  than  one 
hundred  mastodons  and  twenty  mammoths,  have  been 
found,  besides  remains  of  the  megalonyx  and  other  ex- 
tinct quadrupeds.  A  magnificent  skeleton  of  the  Mas- 
todon OMoticuSy  now  in  the  British  Museum,  was  dis- 
covered, with  teeth  and  bones  of  many  others,  near  the 
banks  of  La  Pomme  de  Terre,  a  tributary  of  the  Osage 
Kiver,  Missouri ;  and  there  once  more  we  seem  to  come 
upon  contemporaneous  traces  of  man.  "The  bones,'' 
says  Mantell,  who  examined  them  in  the  presence  of  Mr. 
Albert  Koch,  their  discoverer,  "  were  imbedded  in  a 
brown  sandy  deposit  full  of  vegetable  matter,  with  re- 
cognisable remains  of  the  cypress,  tropical  cane,  and 
swamp-moss,  stems  of  the  palmetto,  etc.,  and  this  was 
covered  by  beds  of  blue  clay  and  gravel  to  a  thickness 
of  about  fifteen  feet.    Mr.  Koch  states,  and  he  personally 


1 1 2  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap- 

assured  me  of  the  correctness  of  the  statement,  that  an 
Indian  flint  arrow-head  was  found  beneath  the  leg-bones 
of  this  skeleton,  and  four  similar  weapons  were  imbedded 
in  the  same  stratum."^  Another  remarkable  account 
preserved  in  the  A  merican  Journcd  of  Sciencey  describes 
the  bones  of  a  mastodon,  with  considerable  portions  of 
the  skin,  found  in  Missouri,  associated  with  stone  spear- 
heads, axes,  and  knives,  under  circumstances  which  sug- 
gest the  idea  that  it  had  been  entangled  in  a  bog,  and 
there  stoned  to  death  and  partially  consumed  by  fire.* 
Such  contiguity  of  the  works  of  man  with  those  extinct 
diluvial  giants,  warns  us  at  least  to  be  on  our  guard 
against  any  supercilious  rejection  of  indications  of  man's 
ancient  presence  in  the  New  World  as  well  as  the  Old. 
If  the  evidence  is  inconsequential  or  untruthful,  future 
discoveries  will  not  fail  to  bring  it  to  nought ;  if,  on  the 
contrary,  it  involves  glimpses  of  an  unseen  truth,  no 
organized  scepticism  wiU  prevent  the  ultimate  disclosure 
of  its  amplest  revelations. 

As  with  the  perished  herd  of  the  Irish  fossil  elk  in  the 
Curragh  bog,  the  remains  of  the  American  mastodon  have 
been  repeatedly  found  as  if  they  lay  undisturbed  since 
the  death  of  the  extinct  giant.  None  of  their  bones 
recovered  from  the  Big-bone  Lick  appear  to  have  been 
roUed  or  exposed  to  friction ;  while  others,  discovered  at 
the  great  Osage,  which  runs  into  the  Missouri,  a  little 
above  its  confluence  with  the  Mississippi,  were  in  a  ver- 
tical position,  as  if  the  animal  had  been  engulfed  in  the 
mud.  Whether  or  not  those  huge  mammals  had  been 
known  to  man,  during  his  occupation  of  the  American 
continent,  as  his  living  contemporaries,  their  remains 
were  objects  of  sufficiently  striking  magnitude  to  awaken 
the  curiosity  even  of  the  unimpressible  Indian  ;  and  tra- 

^  Mantell's  Foasila  of  the  British  Museurriy  p.  473. 

2  American  Journ.  of  Science  and  Arts,  vol.  xxxvi.  p.  199,  First  Series. 


IV.]       THE  PRIMEVAL  TRANSITION:  INSTINCT        113 

ditions  were  common  among  the  aborigines  of  the  forests 
relative  to  the  existence  and  destruction  of  the  strange 
monster,  whose  bones  lie  scattered  over  the  continent 
from  Canada  to  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  M.  Fabri,  a  French 
officer,  informed  Buflfon  that  they  ascribed  these  bones 
to  an  animal  which  they  named  the  Pire  aux  Bceufs. 
Among  the  Shawnees,  and  other  southern  tribes,  the 
belief  was  current  that  the  mastodon  once  occupied  the 
continent  along  with  a  race  of  giants  of  corresponding 
proportions,  and  that  both  perished  together  by  the  thun- 
derbolts of  the  Great  Spirit.  Another  Indian  tradition 
of  Virginia  told  that  these  monstrous  quadrupeds  had 
assembled  together,  and  were  destroying  the  herds  of 
deer  and  bisons,  with  the  other  animals  created  by  the 
Great  Spirit  for  the  use  of  his  red  children ;  when  he 
slew  them  all  with  his  thunderbolts,  excepting  the  big 
bull,  who  defiantly  presented  his  enormous  forehead  to 
the  bolts,  and  shook  them  ofi"  as  they  feU,  until,  being  at 
length  wounded,  he  fled  to  the  region  of  the  great  lakes, 
where  he  is  to  this  day. 

The  first  notice  in  an  English  scientific  journal,  of  the 
fossil  mammals  of  the  American  drifts,  furnishes  such  a 
counterpart  to  the  Shawnee  traditions  of  the  extinct 
giants  of  the  New  World,  as  might  teach  a  lesson  to 
modem  speculators  in  science,  when  it  is  borne  in  re- 
membrance that  the  difficulty  now  is  to  reconcile  the 
discovery  of  works  of  human  art  alongside  of  the  fossil 
TYiaTYiTYiflla  of  the  drift.  In  1712,  certain  gigantic  fossil 
bones,  which  would  now  most  probably  be  referred  to 
the  mastodon,  were  found  near  Cluverack,  in  New  Eng- 
land. The  famous  Pr.  Increase  Mather  soon  after  com- 
municated the  discovery  to  the  Royal  Society  of  London  ; 
and  an  abstract  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions  duly 
sets  forth  his  opinion  of  there  having  been  men  of  pro- 
digious stature  in  the  antediluvian  world,  as  proved  by 

VOL,  I.  H 


1 1 4  PREHISTORIC  MA  N.  [Chap. 

the  bones  and  teeth,  which  he  judges  to  be  human,  "  par- 
ticularly a  tooth,  which  was  a  very  large  grinder,  weighing 
four  pounds  and  three  quarters,  with  a  thigh-bone  seven- 
teen feet  long."^  They  were  doubtless  looked  upon  with 
no  little  satisfaction  by  Dr.  Mather,  as  a  striking  confir- 
mation of  the  Mosaic  record,  that  "  there  were  giants  in 
those  days/'  To  have  doubted  the  New  England  philo- 
sopher's conclusions  might  have  been  even  more  danger- 
ous then,  than  to  believe  them  now.  Possibly,  after  the 
lapse  of  another  century  and  a  half,  some  of  our  own 
confused  minglings  of  religious  questions  with  scientific 
investigations  wiU  not  seem  less  foolish  thaa  the  ante- 
diluvian giants  of  the  New  England  divine. 

In  all  that  relates  to  the  history  of  man  in  the  new 
world,  we  have  ever  to  reserve  ourselves  for  further  truths. 
There  are  languages  of  living  tribes,  of  which  we  have 
neither  vocabulary  nor  grammar.  There  are  nations,  of 
whose  physical  aspect  we  scarcely  know  anything ;  and 
areas  where  it  is  a  moot  point  even  now,  whether  the 
ancient  civilisation  of  central  America  may  not  be  there 
a  living  thing.  The  ossiferous  caves  of  England  have 
only  revealed  their  Wonders  during  the  present  century, 
and  the  works  of  art  in  the  French  drift  lay  concealed  till 
our  own  day.  We  cannot,  therefore,  even  guess  what 
America's  disclosures  shall  be.  Discoveries  in  its  ossifer- 
ous caverns  have  already  pointed  to  the  same  conclusions 
as  those  of  Europe.  A  cabinet  of  the  British  Museum  is 
filled  with  a  valuable  collection  of  fossil  bones  of  mam- 
malia, iQcluding  those  of  the  scelidotherium,  glyptodon, 
and  chlamydotherium,  as  well  as  of  extinct  camivora, 
obtained  by  Dr.  Lund  and  M.  Claussen  from  certaiQ  lime- 
stone caverns  in  the  Brazils,  closely  resembling  the  ossi- 
ferous caves  of  Europe.  The  relics  were  imbedded  in  a 
reddish  coloured  loam,  covered  over  with  a  thick  stalag- 

^  PhUosojyhical  TransactioiMy  vol.  xxiv.  x>.  8«^. 


IV.]       THE  PRIMEVAL  TRANSITION :  INSTINCT        1 1 5 

mitic  flooring ;  and  along  with  them,  in  the  same  ossi- 
ferous bed,  lay  numerous  bones  of  genera  still  iahabiting 
the  continent,  with  shells  of  the  large  bulimus,  a  common 
terrestrial  mollusc  of  South  America.  No  clear  line  of 
demarqation  can  therefore  be  traced  here  between  the  era 
of  the  extinct  carnivora  and  edentata,  and  those  of  exist- 
ing species,  and  there  is  therefore  no  greater  cause  of 
wonder,  than  in  the  analogous  examples  of  Europe,  to 
learn  that  iq  the  same  detritus  of  these  Brazilian  caves, 
Dr.  Lund  found  relics  of  human  skeletons,  which,  from 
their  condition  and  the  circumstances  in  which  they  were 
discovered,  he  was  led  to  conclude  belonged  to  an  ancient 
tribe  coeval  with  some  of  the  extinct  mammaUa.  Nor 
have  the  first  disclosures  of  works  of  art  in  the  American 
drift  still  to  be  made.  I  have  in  my  possession  an  im- 
perfect flint  knife,  an  unquestionable  relic  of  human  art, 
given  me  by  P.  A.  Scott,  an  intelligent  Canadian,  who 
found  it  at  a  depth  of  upwards  of  fourteen  feet,  among 
the  rolled  gravel  and  gold-bearing  quartz  of  the  Grinell 
Leads,  in  Kansas  Territory,  while  engaged  in  digging  for 
gold.  The  spot  is  in  the  Blue  Range  of  the  Rocky  Moun- 
tains, IQ  an  alluvial  bottom,  and  distant  several  hundred 
feet  from  a  small  stream  called  Clear  Creek.  A  shaft 
was  sunk,  passing  through  four  feet  of  rich  black  soil, 
and  below  this,  through  upwards  of  ten  feet  of  gravel, 
reddish  clay,  and  rounded  quartz.  Here  the  flint  imple- 
ment was  found,  and*  its  unmistakably  artificial  origin 
so  impressed  the  finder,  that  he  secured  it,  and  carefully 
noted  the  depth  at  which  it  lay. 

Such  then  are  some  of  the  indications  of  the  earliest 
appearance  of  man  in  that  transitional  era,  during  which 
the  earth  was  undergoing  its  final  preparation  for  his 
presence,  as  a  being  endowed  not  only  with  the  highest 
form  of  organic  life,  but  with  a  rational  soul  and  an  im- 
mortal spirit.     The  evidences  of  his  ancient  presence  on 


1 1 6  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap 

the  American  continent,  accord  with  the  proofs  furnished 
by  the  multitude  of  independent  languages,  and  the 
diversity  of  types  of  race,  ranging  from  the  Arctic  circle 
to  the  most  southern  cape  of  Terra  del  Fuego.  But  it 
would  be  rash  to  assume  from  the  partial  evidence  yet 
obtained,  that  the  juxtaposition  of  the  flint  arrow-heads 
with  the  mastodon  of  Missouri,  the  pottery  with  the  bones 
and  tusk  of  the  same  animal  in  the  post-pliocene  of  South 
Carolina,  the  human  bones  in  the  rich  ossiferous  caverns 
of  the  Brazils,  or  the  flint  implement  recovered  from  the 
drift  of  the  Eocky  Mountains,  are  unquestionable  evi- 
dences of  man's  existence  on  the  American  continent 
contemporaneously  with  the  extinct  mastodon  or  mega- 
therium. Antiquaries  of  England,  and  still  more  of  the 
continent  of  Europe,  having  found  tobacco-pipes  of  the 
sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  on  Koman  sites, 
along  with  pottery  and  other  undoubted  remains  of 
Roman  art,  have  hastily  concluded  that  the  peculiar 
American  custom  of  tobacco-smoking  was  a  classical  in- 
stitution ;  and  on  the  like  evidence  it  might  be  carried 
into  far  remoter  ages.  One  example,  specially  noted, 
records  the  discovery  of  a  tobacco-pipe,  in  sinking  a  pit 
for  coal  at  Misk,  in  Ayrshire,  after  digging  through  many 
feet  of  sand.  On  evidence  not  greatly  more  conclusive, 
a  New  Orleans  essayist  conceives  himself  justified  in  an- 
nouncing the  startling  statement,  that  "  from  these  data 
it  appears  the  human  race  existed  in  the  delta  of  the 
Mississippi  more  than  57,000  years  ago."*  On  the  con- 
trary, even  the  startling  disclosure  of  works  of  art  in  the 
drift  of  France  and  England,  whatever  may  be  the  pre- 
cise antiquity  they  are  finally  destined  to  indicate,  still 
point  to  man  as  the  latest  among  the  works  of  creation. 
But  looking  at  the  primeval  traces  of  man  in  another 
aspect,  they  all  concur  in  indicating  his  earliest  arts  to 

*  Dr.  Bennet  Dowler,  Types  of  Mankind^  p.  272. 


IV.]        THE  PRIMEVAL  TRANSITION:  INSTINCT       117 

have  been  of  the  most  primitive  kind,  and  in  confirming 
the  idea  that  our  modem  standards  of  mechanical  and 
artistic  ingenuity  are  not  to  be  accepted  as  the  sole  tests 
of  his  intellectual  development  They  show  also  that 
we  can  no  longer  conceive  of  him  as  the  occupant,  until 
recent  historic  times,  of  one  little  central  cradle-land,  but 
must  recognise  in  such  widely  diflFused  relics  of  prim- 
eval art  in  periods  so  remote,  indications  of  the  dispersion 
of  the  human  family  at  the  earliest  times  "when  men 
began  to  multiply  on  the  face  of  the  earth."  The  brevity 
of  the  comprehensive  narrative  contained  in  the  intro- 
ductory chapters  of  Grenesis  helps  to  exclude  from  the 
minds  of  ordinary  readers  any  just  estimate  of  the  extent 
of  time  that  it  embraces ;  and  conflicting  versions  lend 
additional  countenance  to  long-cherished  doubts  as  to 
whether  the  received  chronology,  deduced  from  their 
genealogical  data,  does  not  greatly  abridge  the  actual 
antediluvian  human  era.  But  even  at  the  lowest  com- 
putation, the  interval  between  the  creation  of  man  and 
the  deluge  was  not  very  much  less  than  the  whole  Chris- 
tian era ;  it  was  longer  than  the  whole  mediaeval  period 
marked  by  the  rise  of  Mahometanism,  Feudalism,  and  the 
Crusades ;  and  the  brief  interval  since  the  discovery  of 
North  America,  during  which  our  little  insular  Britain  has 
proved  the  nursery  of  nations,  is  little  more  than  a  third 
of  the  allotted  years  of  one  of  the  antediluvian  patriarchs. 
That  throughout  the  whole  of  that  period  the  human 
family  continued  to  cluster  around  one  central  nucleus 
of  its  old  eastern  birth-land  is  a  wholly  gratuitous  as- 
sumption. Centuries  before  the  Babel  builders  were 
foUed  in  their  ambitious  plans,  men  may  have  been  scat- 
tered abroad  upon  the  face  of  all  the  earth.  Many  readers 
have  been  charmed  by  the  graphic  and  beautiful  scene  in 
which  Hugh  Miller  calls  up  before  the  mind's  eye  the 
supposed  phenomena  of  the  deluge,  as  limited  to  a  com- 


118  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

paratively  circumscribed  area ;  for,  as  he  says,  "  It  is  not 
in  the  least  a  matter  of  moral  significancy  whether  or  no 
the  deluge  by  which  the  judgment  was  eflFected  covered 
not  only  the  parts  of  the  earth  occupied  by  man  at  the 
time,  but  extended  also  to  Terra  del  Fuego,  Tahiti,  and 
the  Falkland  Islands."  But,  probably  more  have  been 
charmed  than  convinced  by  the  eloquent  ingenuity  alike 
of  his  "Mosaic  vision '^  and  "Noachian  deluge/'  And 
now  that  it  seems  almost  certainly  demonstrable  on 
archaeological,  and  also  on  geological  grounds,  that  the 
human  family  was  widely  dispersed  over  the  face  of  the 
earth  at  the  earUest  possible  date  at  which  we  can  recon- 
cile chronologies  of  science  and  revelation,  possibly  some 
may  be  tempted  to  return  to  their  old  convictions,  that 
when  "  all  the  fountains  of  the  great  deep  were  broken 
up,  and  the  windows  of  heaven  were  opened,  and  the  rain 
was  upon  the  earth  forty  days  and  forty  nights ;  and  the 
waters  prevailed  exceedingly  upon  the  earth ;  and  all 
the  high  hills  that  were  under  the  whole  heaven  were 
covered,"  that  it  actually  was  so.  In  reality,  however, 
we  must  be  content  meanwhile  to  accept  some  only  of 
the  most  obvious  deductions  from  what  are  as  yet  but 
partial  glimpses  of  a  half-revealed  truth. 


v.]  TUE  PROMETHEAN  INSTINCT:  FIRE.  119 


CHAPTER   V. 

THE  PROMETHEAN  INSTINCT:  FIRE. 

No  incident  attending  the  discovery  of  the  New 
World  is  more  significant  than  the  simple  evidence 
which  first  satisfied  Columbus  that  his  trackless  path 
into  the  mysterious  western  ocean  had  not  been  in  vain. 
The  sun  had  once  more  descended  beneath  the  waves 
as  Columbus  took  his  station  on  the  poop,  and  his  eye 
ranged  along  the  dark  horizon,  when  suddenly  a  light 
glimmered  in  the  distance,  once  and  again  reappeared 
to  the  eyes  of  Pedro  Gutierrez,  and  others  whom  he 
summoned  to  confirm  his  vision,  and  then  darkness  and 
doubt  resumed  their  reign.  But  to  Columbus  all  was 
clear.  Not  only  did  these  flitting  gleams  of  light 
reveal  to  him  certain  signs  of  the  long-wished-for 
land ;  they  told  him  no  less  clearly  that  the  land  was 
inhabited.  There  is  something  singularly  significant 
in  the  old  Greek  myth  which  represents  the  Titanic 
son  of  lapetus  stealing  the  fire  of  Zeus  that  he  might 
confer  on  the  human  race  a  power  over  the  crude  ele- 
ments of  nature.  Man  is  peculiarly  fire-using.  The 
element  which  becomes  in  his  hands  a  power  that  con- 
trols all  the  others,  and  subjects  them  to  his  use,  is  an 
object  of  dread  to  the  lower  animals,  alike  amid  arctic 
snows  and  the  shadows  of  a  night-camp  in  the  tropics. 
The  practice  of  fire-using  is,  moreover,  so  universal  that 
it  may  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  primitive  instincts  of 


120  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

man.  It  is  not  indeed  an  indispensable  assumption 
that  man  was  from  the  first  familiar  with  its  use,  or 
had  devised  for  himself  the  art  of  producing  fire.  On 
the  contrary,  his  supposed  ignorance,  during  the  primi- 
tive ages  of  the  world,  of  this  important  achievement 
of  human  intelligence,  has  been  employed  as  an  argu- 
ment in  confirmation  of  the  fact  that  the  cradle-land  of 
the  human  race  must  have  been  situated  in  a  climate 
where  his  unclothed  body  experienced  no  discomfort  in 
the  changing  seasons,  and  food  was  found  in  sufiicient 
abundance  to  supply  all  his  wants  without  being  sub- 
jected to  artificial  preparation.  The  more  elevated 
regions  of  the  tropics  appear  to  supply  those  requisite 
conditions  alike  in  the  Old  and  New  World ;  and  the 
traces,  in  the  primitive  arts  of  the  stone-period,  of  a  con- 
dition in  the  early  stages  of  many  nations,  during  which 
the  simplest  application  of  fire  for  any  purposes  of 
metallurgy  was  unknown,  has  been  thought  to  confirm 
the  idea  that  lengthened  periods  elapsed  before  man 
acquired  the  art  of  producing  fire.  M.  Flourens,  in 
reasoning  on  the  age  of  man,  affirms  that  his  primi- 
tive, natural,  and  instinctive  diet  is  frugivorous ;  and 
from  this  he  also  infers  that  his  original  habitat  was  in 
warm  climates,  where  fruit  is  abundant  at  all  seasons. 
But  such  a  condition  of  life  was  incompatible  with  the 
diffusion  of  man  beyond  the  extremely  limited  regions 
which  supply  those  requisites  of  primitive  life.  Human 
intelligence  accordingly  achieved  the  art  of  producing 
fire,  and  learned  its  many  uses.  By  its  means  both 
vegetable  and  animal  productions  could  be  adapted  to 
his  wants  and  tastes ;  and  thus,  by  the  introduction  of 
the  art  of  cooking,  man  acquired  an  artificial  and  omni- 
vorous diet/  When,  however,  we  turn  to  the  sacred 
narrative  for   the   first   glimpses  of  the   condition   of 

'  Flourens,  De  la  Longiviti  Humainey  p.  127. 


v.]  THE  PROMETHEAN  INSTINCT:  FIRE.  121 

primeval  man,  we  find  Abel  laying  the  firstlings  of  his 
flock  on  the  altar  of  sacrifice ;  as  once  more,  when  an 
undeluged  world  became  the  new  theatre  of  human 
life,  burnt-oflFerings  smoked  on  the  altar,  and  the  sweet 
savour  of  a  typical  sacrifice  rose  up  with  the  ascending 
flames,  while  the  covenant  of  earth's  harmonious  cycles 
and  seasons  was  guaranteed  to  man. 

The  wide  interval  which  separates  man  from  the 
lower  animals  is  scarcely  less  strikingly  manifest  when 
we  draw  the  comparison  between  them  and  the  most 
degraded  savage,  than  when  we  contrast  the  wondrous 
operations  of  animal  instinct,  with  the  most  matured 
achievements  of  human  intelligence.  It  is  the  interval 
between  instinct  and  reason,  which  we  cannot  measure 
from  clearly  defined  points  where  we  can  assuredly  say 
the  domain  of  the  one  ends  and  the  other  assumes  its 
place ;  but  the  distinctions  between  which  we  cannot 
mistake,  in  the  unerring  but  unprogressive  rectitude 
of  instinctive  skill,  and  the  erring,  blundering,  and 
wayward,  but  tentative  and  finally  progressive  efforts 
of  experience  and  reason.  We  wonder  at  the  Grave 
Creek  Mound,  an  artificial  earth-pyramid  of  seventy  feet 
in  height,  wrought  by  the  concerted  labour  of  man  in 
America's  prehistoric  times;  and  the  great  pyramids 
of  Gizeh,  most  stupendous  among  the  structures  that 
human  labour  has  ever  accomplished,  have  been  ranked 
among  the  world's  wonders  from  the  age  of  Herodotus 
to  our  own.  But  what  are  the  largest  of  those  works 
of  which  man  is  vain  compared  to  the  ant-hills  of 
tropical  countries,  twelve  and  fifteen  feet  high,  which, 
in  comparison  with  their  builders,  are  as  if  men  were 
to  make  a  building  the  height  of  the  Andes  or  Himalaya 
mountains.^  In  his  savage  state,  indeed,  "  from  nature 
rising  slow  to  art,"  man  appears  at  each  succeeding  step 

^  Brougham^s  Dialogues  an  Instinct,  y.  100. 


122  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

but  as  the  pupil  and  poor  imitator  of  instinctive  skill, 
with  blunted  perceptions  and  a  scantily  developed  imi- 
tative faculty  obeying  the  voice  of  nature  : — 

"  Go,  from  the  creatures  thy  instruction  take  : 
Thy  arts  of  building  from  the  bee  receive. 
Learn  of  the  mole  to  plough,  the  worm  to  weave  ; 
Learn  of  the  little  nautilus  to  sail, 
Spread  the  thin  oars,  and  catch  the  driving  gale  ; 
Here  too  all  forms  of  social  union  find. 
And  hence  let  reason,  late,  instruct  mankind.'*^ 

Yet  when  we  have  exhausted  all  our  admiration  of  the 
inimitable  arts  of  the  bee,  the  ant,  the  spider,  and  silk- 
worm ;  or  even  of  that  which  we  recognise  as  intelligence 
in  the  dog,  the  fox,  the  horse,  or  the  elephant :  we  are 
nevertheless  as  fuUy  prepared  as  ever  to  concur  in  the 
decision  of  Columbus  that  the  flaming  night-torch  of 
the  Guanahanfe  savage  was  indisputable  evidence  that 
the  unknown  world  which  dawn  was  about  to  reveal 
was  the  habitation  of  man. 

The  lowest  form  of  humanity,  alike  intellectually  and 
physically,  has  been  thought  to  be  found  amodg  the 
Australian  aborigines,  yet  there  human  intelligence  had 
achieved  the  discovery  which  lies  at  the  very  foimda- 
tions  of  all  possible  civilisation ;  though  it  may  be  ac- 
cepted as  a  proof  of  his  degraded  intellectual  condition, 
that  of  the  gift  which  the  ancient  Greek  believed  to 
have  been  stolen  from  heaven,  the  Australian  is  content 
to  trace  the  derivation  from  the  bandicoot,  a  small, 
sharp-nosed  animal,  not  unlike  the  Guinea  pig.  Accord- 
ing to  the  inconsequential  account  furnished  by  a  native 
Australian  of  the  first  acquisition  of  fire  by  man : — 
"  A  long,  long  time  ago  a  little  bandicoot  was  the  sole 
owner  of  a  fire-brand,  which  he  cherished  with  the 
greatest  jealousy,  carrying  it  about  with  him  wherever 

'  Pope's  Essay  on  Man,  Epistle  iii. 


v.]  THE  PEOMETHEAX  INSTINCT:  FIRE.  123 

he  went,  and  never  allowing  it  out  of  his  own  special 
care ;  so  selfish  was  he  in  the  use  of  his  prize,  that  he 
obstinately  refused  to  share  it  with  the  other  animals, 
his  neighbours ;  and  so  they  held  a  general  council, 
where  it  was  decided  that  the  fire  must  be  obtained 
fix)m  the  bandicoot  either  by  force  or  strategy.  The 
hawk  and  pigeon  were  deputed  to  carry  out  this  resolu- 
tion ;  and  after  vainly  trying  to  induce  the  fire-owner 
to  share  its  blessings  with  his  neighbours,  the  pigeon, 
seizing,  as  he  thought,  an  unguarded  moment,  made  a 
dash  to  obtain  the  prize.  The  bandicoot  saw  that  affairs 
had  come  to  a  crisis,  and,  in  desperation,  threw  the  fire 
towards  the  water,  there  to  quench  it  for  ever.  But, 
fortunately  for  the  black  man,  the  sharp-eyed  hawk  was 
hovering  near  the  river,  and  seeing  the  fire  falling  into 
the  water,  he  made  a  dart  towards  it,  and  with  a  stroke 
of  his  wing  knocked  the  brand  far  over  the  stream  into 
the  long  dry  grass  of  the  opposite  bank,  which  imme- 
diately ignited,  and  the  flames  spread  over  the  face  of 
the  country.  The  black  man  then  felt  the  fire,  and  said 
it  was  good.''^ 

The  discovery  of  the  art  of  producing  fire  by  artificial 
means  may  be  considered  as  one  of  the  earliest  achieve- 
ments of  the  untutored  intellect  of  man  ;  and  as  this  is 
effected  among  various  tribes  in  diverse  ways,  it  may 
supply  one  clue  whereby  to  trace  affinities  among  tribes 
widely  separated,  in  so  far  as  the  process  pursued  is  in- 
dependent of  any  special  local  peculiarities.  The  docile 
service  of  fire  is  one  of  the  very  first  means  by  which 
man  achieves  his  triumphs  over  nature.  With  its  aid 
his  range  is  no  longer  limited  to  latitudes  where  the 
spontaneous  fruits  of  the  earth  abound  at  every  season. 
The  use  of  fire  Ues  at  the  root  of  all  the  industrial  arts. 
The  friendly  savages  found  by  Columbus  on  the  first- 

^  Mr.  James  Browne,  Canadian  Journal,  vol.  i.  p.  509. 


124  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

discovered  island  of  the  New  World  were  armed  with 
mere  wooden  lances,  hardened  at  the  end  by  fire.  The 
most  civilized  among  the  nations  conquered  on  its  soil 
by  Cortes  and  Pizarro,  had  learned  by  the  same  means 
to  smelt  the  ores  of  the  Andes,  and  make  of  their  alloys 
the  tools  with  which  to  quarry  and  hew  their  rocks,  to 
sculpture  the  statues  of  the  gods  of  Anahuac,  and  the 
palaces  and  temples  of  the  Peruvian  children  of  the  sun. 
Without  fire  the  imperfect  implements  of  the  stone-period 
would  be  altogether  inadequate  to  man's  necessities.  By 
its  means  he  fells  the  lofty  trees,  against  which  his  un- 
aided stone-hatchet  would  be  powerless,  and  he  must 
have  been  left  to  gaze  with  envy  on  the  superior  skill  of 
the  beaver's  woodcraft.  It  plays  a  no  less  important  part 
in  preparing  the  log-canoe  of  the  savage,  than  in  pro- 
pelling the  wonderful  steamship,  by  means  of  which  the 
great  lakes  and  rivers  of  the  New  World  have  become 
the  highways  of  migrating  nations.  Yet  fire  is  not  an 
indispensable  thing.  Men  have  lived  in  ignorance  of 
the  power  that  lay  within  their  reach,  or  of  the  means  of 
calling  forth  this  fire-demon,  when  known  to  them,  and 
making  him  their  obedient  slave.  The  islanders  of  the 
Ladrones,  discovered  by  Magellan  in  1521,  could  not 
have  been  in  ignorance  of  fire,  for  their  islands  are  mostly 
of  a  volcanic  character,  and,  like  the  Terra  del  Fuego  of 
the  same  discoverer,  their  volcanoes  have  been  in  activity 
in  modem  times  ;  yet  the  savages  of  the  Ladrones,  ac- 
cording to  some  of  the  early  Spanish  voyagers,  thought 
fire,  which  they  had  never  seen  before,  a  devil  or  god 
that  bit  fiercely  when  it  was  touched,  and  lived  on  wood, 
which  they  saw  it  devour. 

The  fire-worship  of  the  Ghebirs  is  but  a  degraded  form 
of  that  homage  to  visible  divinity  with  which  man  wor 
ships  the  glorious  god  of  day,  and  bows  down  before  the 
heavenly  host.     Among  the  Aztecs  and  the  Peruvians, 


v.]  THK  PROMETHEAN  INSTINCT:  FIRE.  12o 

the  civilized  nations  of  the  New  World,  accordingly,  a 
peculiar  sanctity  was  associated  with  the  familiar  service 
of  fire.  At  the  close  of  the  great  cycle  of  the  Aztecs, 
when  the  calendar  was  corrected  to  true  solar  time,  at  the 
end  of  the  fifty-second  year,  a  high  religious  festival  was 
held,  on  the  eve  of  which  they  broke  in  pieces  their 
household  gods,  destroyed  their  furniture,  and  extin- 
guished every  fire.  In  the  reconstruction  of  the  ritual 
calendar  which  then  took  place,  the  intercalated  days 
were  regarded  as  belonging  to  no  month  or  year.  They 
were  held  as  though  non-existent,  and  were  dedicated  to 
no  gods,  on  which  account  they  were  reputed  unfortunate. 
It  was  a  period  of  fasting  and  penitence,  during  which 
no  fire  smoked,  and  no  warm  food  could  be  eaten 
throughout  the  whole  land.  At  the  close  of  that  dreary 
interval,  during  which  they  dreaded  the  final  extinction 
of  the  sun,  the  ceremony  of  the  new  fire  was  celebrated. 
After  simset  the  priests  of  the  great  temple  went  forth 
to  a  neighbouring  mountain,  and  there,  at  midnight,  the 
sacred  flame  was  rekindled,  which  was  to  Hght  up  the 
national  fires  for  another  great  cycle.  The  process  by 
which  the  fire  was  procured,  by  revolving  one  piece  of 
dry  wood  in  the  hollow  of  another,  is  repeatedly  illus- 
trated in  the  Mexican  paintings  of  Lord  Eangsborough's 
great  work.  But,  true  to  the  bloody  rites  of  the  national 
faith,  the  fire  on  this  sacred  festival  was  kindled  on  the 
breast  of  a  human  victim,  from  whence  the  reeking 
heart  was  immediately  afterwards  torn  out,  and  cast  as 
a  bloody  offering  to  the  gods.  The  period  from  the  ex- 
tinction to  the  rekindling  of  the  sacred  fire  was  one  of 
great  suspense.  With  a  superstitious  feeling,  strikingly 
in  accordance  with  the  customs  and  ideas  of  the  northern 
Indians,  the  women  remained  confined  to  their  houses, 
with  their  faces  covered,  under  the  belief  that  if  they 
witnessed  the  ceremony  they  would  be  forthwith  trans- 


126  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

fonned  into  beasts.  Meanwhile,  the  men  gathered  on 
the  terraced  roofs,  and  looked  forth  in  dread  suspense 
into  the  darkness.  The  flames  on  the  summits  of  the 
great  teocallis,  which  lighted  up  the  city  at  all  other 
seasons,  had  been  extinguished ;  and  if  the  priests  failed 
to  rekindle  them,  it  was  beUeved  that  the  night  must 
be  eternal,  and  the  world  would  come  to  an  end.  But 
dimly,  through  the  darkness,  a  spark  was  seen  to  glimmer 
on  the  summit  of  the  distant  mountains,  and  from  thence 
it  was  swiftly  borne  to  the  great  temple,  towards  which 
the  gladdened  worshippers  turned  with  renewed  hope. 
As  the  sacred  flame  again  blazed  up  on  the  high  altar, 
and  was  distributed  to  the  other  teocallis,  and  thence 
among  the  people  at  large,  shouts  of  joy  and  triumph 
ascended  with  it  to  the  sky.  Feasts,  joyous  processions, 
and  oblations  at  the  temples,  were  prolonged  through  a 
festival  of  thirteen  days,  devoted  to  a  national  jubilee  for 
the  recovered  flame,  the  type  of  a  regenerated  world.^ 
The  long  interval  which  transpired  between  this  closing 
rite  of  the  great  cycle  was  of  itself  sufficient  to  give  it 
an  impressive  sanctity  in  the  eyes  of  the  Aztec  wor- 
shipper. He  who  witnessed  it  in  youth  saw  it  only  once 
again  as  life  drew  towards  a  close  ;  whilst  few  indeed  of 
all  who  rejoiced  at  the  renewed  gift  of  fire  could  expect 
to  look  again  on  the  strangely  significant  and  awful 
rite.  Compared  with  the  annual  miracle  of  the  Greek 
Church  in  the  crypt  of  the  holy  sepulchre,  to  which 
it  bears  some  resemblance,  the  great  festival  of  the 
Aztecs  was  replete  with  significance  and  solemn  gran- 
deur, though  stained  with  the  blood  of  their  hideous 
sacrifices. 

The  Peruvian  sun-worshippers  preserved  the  harmony 
between  their  recurrent  festivals  and  the  true  solar  time, 
by  a  ruder  process  of  adjustment  than  that  which  was 

*  Clavlgero,  vol.  ii.  j).  84. 


v.]  THE  PROMETHEAN  INSTINCT:  FIRE.  121 

devised  by  the  remarkable  proficiency  of  the  Aztec  priests 
in  astronomical  science.  Nevertheless,  they  too  had  their 
great  secular  festival  of  Raymi,  held  annually  at  the 
period  of  the  summer  solstice.  For  three  days  previous 
a  general  fast  prevailed,  the  fire  on  the  great  altar  of  the 
sun  went  out,  and  in  all  the  dwellings  of  the  land  no 
hearth  was  kindled.  As  the  dawn  of  the  fourth  day 
approached,  the  Inca,  surroimded  by  his  nobles,  who 
came  from  all  parts  of  the  country  to  join  in  the  solemn 
celebration,  assembled  in  the  great  square  of  the  capital 
to  greet  the  rising  sun.  The  temple  of  the  national 
deity  presented  its  eastern  portal  to  his  earliest  rays, 
emblazoned  with  his  golden  image,  thickly  set  with  eme- 
ralds and  other  precious  stones  ;  and  as  the  first  beams 
of  the  morning  were  reflected  back  from  this  magnificent 
emblem  of  the  god  of  day,  songs  of  triumph  mingled 
with  the  jubilant  shout  of  his  worshippers.  Then,  after 
various  rites  of  adoration,  preparations  were  made  for 
rekindling  the  sacred  fire.  But  this,  with  the  Peruvians, 
was  done  by  a  process  far  in  advance  of  that  retained  by 
the  Aztec  priests.  The  rays  of  the  sun,  coDected  into  a 
focus  by  a  concave  spherical  mirror  of  polished  metal, 
were  made  to  inflame  a  heap  of  dried  cotton,  and  a 
Uama  was  sacrificed  as  a  bumt-ofiering  to  the  sun.  Only 
in  the  case  of  the  sky  being  overcast  did  the  priests 
resort  to  friction  for  rekindling  the  altar  ;  but  the  hiding 
of  his  countenance  on  that  occasion  by  the  god  of  day 
was  only  regarded  as  less  ominous  than  the  extinction  of 
the  sacred  fire,  which  it  became  the  sacred  duty  of  the 
virgins  of  the  sun  to  guard  throughout  the  year.  A 
general  slaughter  of  the  llama  flocks  of  the  sun  furnished 
a  universal  banquet ;  and,  while  the  god  was  propitiated 
by  offerings  of  fi'uit  and  flowers,  there  appear  to  have 
been  some  rare  occasions  on  which  the  sacrifice  of  a 
human  victim, — a  beautiful  maiden  or  a  child,— gave  to 


1 28  PREHISTORIC  MA N.  [Chap. 

this  graceful  anniversary  a  nearer  resemblance  to  the 
appalling  rites  of  Aztec  worship. 

Among  the  northern  Indian  tribes  some  faint  traces 
of  the  annual  festival  of  fire  are  discernible.  At  the 
sacrifice  of  the  white  dog,  which  was  the  New  Year's 
festival  and  great  jubilee  of  the  Iroquois,  the  proceed- 
ings extended  over  six  days  ;  and  such  were  the  obliga- 
tions which  these  rites  imposed  on  all,  that  if  any 
member  of  a  family  died  during  the  festival,  the  body 
was  laid  aside,  and  the  relatives  participated  in  the 
games  as  well  as  the  religious  ceremonies.  The  strang- 
ling of  the  white  dog  destined  for  sacrifice  was  the  chief 
feature  of  the  first  day's  proceedings ;  while  on  the 
second  the  two  keepers  of  the  faith  visited  each  house, 
after  which  it  was  open  to  all,  and  the  significant  cere- 
mony of  the  day  consisted  in  stirring  the  ashes  on  the 
hearth,  accompanied  with  a  thanksgiving  to  the  Great 
Spirit.  On  the  morning  of  the  fifth  day  the  white 
dog  was  offered  up  as  a  burnt-sacrifice.  The  fire  was 
kindled  by  swiftly  revolving,  by  means  of  a  bow  and 
cord,  an  upright  shaft  of  wood  with  a  perforated  stone 
attached  to  it  as  a  fly-wheeL  The  lower  point  rested  on 
a  block  of  dry  wood  surrounded  by  tinder,  which  was 
speedily  ignited.  This  is  the  ordinary  process  still  in 
use  among  many  of  the  Indian  tribes,  and  also  by  the 
Esquimaux.  The  flame  being  thoroughly  enkindled,  the 
sacrifice  was  borne  in  procession  on  a  bark  litter,  until 
the  officiating  leaders  halted,  facing  the  rising  sun,  when 
the  white  dog  was  laid  on  the  flaming  wood  and  con- 
sumed, during  a  solemn  address,  which  included  a  special 
thanksgiving  to  the  sun,  for  having  looked  on  the  earth 
with  a  beneficent  eye/ 

There  is,  perhaps,  no  connexion  traceable  between  the 
various  rites  and  services  thus  described ;  for  it  would 

1  League  of  the  Iroquois^  pp.  207-221. 


v.]  THE  PROMETHEAN  INSTINCT:  FIRE.  129 

be  easy  to  find  their  parallels  among  many  ancient  and 
modem  tribes  and  nations.  They  pertain  to  the  reli- 
gions practices  of  the  ancient  Chaldeans^  to  the  rites  of 
Baal,  and  to  the  earliest  and  simplest  forms  of  idolatry. 
Sabaism  is  indeed  the  most  natural,  and  at  the  same 
time  the  most  elevated  form  of  false-worship,  commend- 
ing itself  by  many  visible  tokens,  as  of  a  divine  in- 
fluence and  power,  to  uninstructed  man ;  and  tiie  asso- 
ciation of  fire  with  the  sun  as  its  source  is  scarcely  less 
natural.  "Take  ye  good  heed  imto  yourselves,''  ex- 
claims the  lawgiver  of  Israel  to  the  tribes  in  the  wilder- 
ness, **'for  ye  saw  no  manner  of  similitude  on  the  day 
that  the  Lord  spake  imto  you  in  Horeb  out  of  the  midst 
of  the  fire ;  lest  thou  lift  up  thine  eyes  unto  heaven, 
and  when  thou  seest  the  sim,  and  the  moon,  and  the 
stars,  even  all  the  host  of  heaven,  shouldest  be  driven 
to  worship  them."  This  worship  of  the  sun,  though 
associated  with  the  ancient  rites  of  Asiatic  nations,  is 
not  therefore  necessarily  an  evidence  of  the  eastern 
origin  either  of  the  faith  or  the  nations  of  the  New 
World.  But,  in  the  services  to  which  it  gave  rise  there, 
we  have,  at  least,  suggestive  hints  of  the  links  that  bind 
together  its  own  ancient  and  modem  tribes ;  and  per- 
haps some  clue  also  to  the  interpretation  of  the  obscure 
sculptures,  with  their  mysterious  hierogljrphics,  still  re- 
maining on  the  sites  of  the  extinct  native  civilisation  of 
America ;  and  of  the  strange  rites  once  practised  amid 
the  sacred  enclosures  and  altar-grounds  which  give  such 
peculiar  interest  to  the  river-terraces  of  the  Mississippi 
valley.  Among  the  remarkable  stractures  of  the  ancient 
Mound-Builders,  which  will  come  under  review  in  a  sub- 
sequent chapter,  their  explorers  have  been  struck  by 
the  peculiarities  of -a  certain  -  class  of  mounds,  erected 
on  the  most  elevated  summits  of  the  outlying  hills. 
Concerning  these   "there   can  be   no  doubt  that   the 

VOL.  I.  1 


130  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

ancient  people  selected  prominent  and  elevated  positions 
upon  which  to  build  large  fires,  which  were  kept  burn- 
ing for  long  periods,  or  renewed  at  frequent  intervals. 
The  traces  of  these  fires  are  only  observed  upon  the 
brows  of  the  hills ;  they  appear  to  have  been  built 
generally  upon  heaps  of  stones,  which  are  broken  up 
and  sometimes  partially  vitrified.  In  all  cases  they 
exhibit  marks  of  intense  and  protracted  heat.*^^  It  has 
been  attempted  to  account  for  these  as  signal-stations 
by  a  reference  to  the  primitive  telegraphic  system  still 
in  use  among  the  native  tribes,  of  sending  up  columns 
of  smoke  as  signals  that  enemies  are  at  hand.  .Lieu- 
tenant Fremont,  as  he  penetrated  into  the  fastnesses  of 
Upper  California,  where  his  presence  excited  great  alarm, 
saw  the  fire-signal  send  up  its  column  of  smoke  at  scat- 
tered intervals  ;  and  the  very  same  practice  was  noticed 
during  the  Canadian  exploring  expedition  to  the  Assi- 
naboine  and  Saskatchewan  in  1 8  5  8.  But  this  "  putting 
out  fire,'^  as  it  is  called  among  the  Indians  of  the  north- 
west, for  the  purposes  of  signal,  is  accomplished  by  the 
simple  process  of  setting  the  short-tufted  buffalo  grass  in, 
flame ;  and  presents  no  analogy  to  the  traces  of  intense 
fires  on  the  ancient  hiU-mounds,  where  the  amount  of 
scoriaceous  material  often  covers  a  large  space  several 
feet  deep.  Fire,  as  we  shall  see,  was  extensively  used  ,in 
the  sacred  as  well  as  the  sepulchral  rites  of  the  Mound- 
Bmlders.  Their  strange  buried  altars  have  glowed  re- 
peatedly with  the  sacred  fires,  and  consumed  the  offer- 
ings of  their  most  costly  treasures,  ere  they  were  finally 
covered  up,  to  lie  concealed  during  the  long  night  of 
intervening  centuries.  Accompanied  as  they  are  by 
traces  suggestive  of  the  probability  of  human  sacrifices, 
they  present  analogies  to  the  cruel  worship  of  the  Phoe- 
nician and  Carthaginian  Baal,  whose  temples  and  altars 

^  Ancient  Monuments  af  the  Mississippi  Vallei/t  p.  183. 


v.]  THE  PROMETHEAN  INSTINCT:  FIRE.  131 

were  chiefly  built  on  the  tops  of  hills,  or  on  the  summits 
of  artificial  piles.  That  the  Phoenicians  and  Syrians 
worshipped  the  sun  is  directly  stated  by  Herodian,  and 
confirmed  by  the  occurrence  of  the  name  of  Baal  with 
that  of  the  sun  on  Carthaginian  coins  and  Palmyrene 
inscriptions,  as  Boutl^Jmrmrwin^  Baal-shemeshy  Baal-sha- 
mayim.  But  there  is  no  need  to  assume  the  presence 
of  Phoenician  voyagers  and  colonists  in  the  New  World, 
to  account  for  the  origin  of  rites  and  practices  which 
rather  point  to  that  essential  unity,  throughout  the 
whole  family  of  nations,  traceable  in  the  independent 
origin  of  the  same  practices,  and  the  instinctive  develop- 
ment of  like  arts  and  customs  wherever  man  is  found 
subject  to  corresponding  influences. 

Perhaps  greater  importance  is  due  to  the  abundant 
proofs  of  the  employment  of  the  very  same  method  of ' 
fire-making  at  the  present  day  among  the  Indians  of  the 
north'West,  as  we  see  illustrated  in  the  ancient  Aztec 
paintings ;  whUe  the  sun-worshippers  of  the  southern 
continent  had  devised  a  totally  distinct  method,  and  one 
corresponding  to  that  by  which  the  ancient  Komans 
kindled  the  sacred  fire.  Mr.  Paul  Kane  thus  describes 
the  process  employed  by  the  Chinooks  on  the  Columbia 
Eiver.  "  The  fire  is  obtained  by  means  of  a  flat  piece 
of  dry  cedar,  in  which  a  small  hollow  is  cut  with  a 
channel  for  the  ignited  charcoal  to  run  over ;  this  piece 
the  Indian  sits  on  to  hold  it  steady,  while  he  rapidly 
twirls  a  round  stick  of  the  same  wood  between  the 
palms  of  his  hands,  with  the  point  pressed  into  the 
hollow  of  the  flat  piece.  In  a  very  short  time  sparks 
begin  to  fall  through  the  channel  upon  finely  fi^ayed 
cedar-bark  placed  underneath,  which  they  soon  ignite. 
There  is  a  great  deal  of  knack  in  doing  this,  but  those 
who  are  used  to  it  wiU  light  a  fire  in  a  very  short  time. 
The  men  usually  carry  these  sticks  about  with  them,  as 


132  FREHI8T0RIG  MAN.  [Chap. 

after  they  have  been  once  used  they  produce  the  fire, 
more  quickly/'^  The  punk  employed  in  the  similar 
process  of  the  Iroquois,  and  in  constant  use  with  the 
flint  and  steel,  by  the  Backwoodsman,  is  a  species  of. 
fungus  which  grows  on  the  maple.  Another  fungus,  of 
inferior  quahty,  found  on  the  birch,  is  made  use  of  when 
the  other  cannot  be  procured.  When  lighted,  by  a. 
spark,  either  from  a  flint  and  steel,  or  by  means  of 
friction,  the  punk  smoulders  but  wiU  not  burst  into  a, 
flame.  It  is  therefore  wrapped  in  a  quantity  of  cedar 
bark,  wrought  in  the  hand  to  the  consistency  of  tow,, 
which  readily  ignites.  The  method  of  procuring  fire, 
among  the  Dacotahs  or  Sioux  is  thus  described  by 
Philander  Prescott,  an  Indian  interpreter  : — "A  piece  of 
wood  was  squared  or  flattened  so  as  to  make  it  lie 
steadily,  a  small  hole  was  commenced  with  the  point  of 
a  stone,  then  another  small  stick  was  made,  round  and 
tapering  at  one  end.  This  end  being  placed  in  the 
hole,  the  Indian  put  one  hand  on  each  side  of  the  round 
stick  and  commenced  turning  it  as  fast  as  possible,  back 
and  forward.  Another  held  the  wood  with  one  hand, 
and  a  piece  of  punk  in  the  other,  so  that  when  there 
was  the  least  sign  of  fire,  he  was  ready  to  touch  the , 
punk,  and  put  it  when  ignited  into  a  bunch  of  dry 
grass  that  had  been  rubbed  fine  in  the  hands."  With 
shght  variations  in  the  application  of  the  principle,  tMs 
appears  to  be  the  recognised  Indian  mode  ;  and  there 
is  no  question  that  among,  all  the  Indian  tribes  not  only 
was  a  certain  superstitious  sanctity  attached  tp  fire,  but 
they  look  with  some  distrust  on  the  novel  methods 
employed  by  Europeans  for  its  production.  Among  the 
Dacotahs,  as  with  other  tribes,  at  the  recurrence  of  cer- 
tain sacred  feasts,  all  the  fires  are  extinguished,  and  the 
ashes  removed  from  the   lodge,  and  no  food  is  taken.. 

^  Wanderinga  of  an  Artist  among  the  Indiana  of  North  America^  p.  188. 


v.]  THE  PROMETHEAN  INSTINCT:  FIRE.  133 

iihtil  the  fires  have  been  rekindled,  with  many  minute 
rites  and  observances.  The  Indian  council-fire  is  also 
lit  on  certain  great  occasions,  with  ceremonies  that  have 
Bome  remote  resemblance  to  those  of  the  Mexican  sun- 
worship  ;  and  the  peculiar  significance  which  attaches 
to  the  council-fire  is  aptly  illustrated  by  the  name  of  the 
Pottawattomies  or  fire-makers,  a  nation  of  the  Algon- 
quin stock.  They  received  this  name  fi^om  the  jealousy 
of  their  rivals,  who  thereby  intimated  that  they  were 
severers  of  the  unity  of  the  Algonquin  nation,  as  a 
people  who  were  setting  up  an  independent  government, 
and  kindling  their  own  council-fire.  When,  in  1811, 
Elksatowa,  the  prophet  of  the  Wabash,  and  the  brother 
of  Tecumseh,  the  Shawliee  warrior,  was  exhorting  his 
tribe  to  resist  the  deadly  encroachments  of  the  white  ' 
man,  he  concluded  one  of  his  eloquent  warnings  by  ex- 
claiming, "  Throw  away  your  fire-steels,  aiid  aWaken  the 
sleeping  flame  as  your  fathers  did  before  you ;  fling 
away  your  wrought  coverings  and  put  on  skins  won 
for  yourself  as  was  their  wont,  if  you  would  escape 
the  anger  of  the  Great  Spirit.^  Nor  is  there  wanting 
among  many  Indians  a  conviction  that  the  Ishkodai- 
waubo,  or  fire-liquid,  is  a  malignant  form  of  the  same 
mysterious  element,  an  evil  medicine  wrought  for  their 
destruction  by  the  white  Manitou.  But  the  fire-steel, 
which  the  Shawnee  orator  associated  with  the  foreign 
novelties  distasteful  to  the  Great  Spirit,  is  a  native  pro- 
duct in  use  among  the  Fuegians  in  the  far  southern 
Terra  del  Fuego,  or  so-called  Land  of  Fire.  There  Dr. 
Pickering  foimd  the  Magellanic  watermen,  as  he  styles 
them,  occupying  a  coast  indented  with  a  labyrinth  of 
sounds  and  channels,  which  afford  unusually  favourable 
opportunities  for  the  development  of  maritime  skiU. 
But  their  canoeS  are  smaller  and  inferior  in  construc- 
tion to  those  of  the  northern  shores,  and  they  neither 


134  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

venture  into  the  open  sea,  nor  attempt  the  easy  passage 
to  the  neighbouring  Falkland  Islands.  The  rude  hut 
of  the  Fuegian  corresponds  with  his  canoe.  In  shape  it 
is  hemispherical,  having  the  apex  unfinished  for  the 
escape  of  smoke.  A  heap  of  mussel  and  limpet  shells 
uniformly  encimiber  the  entrance,  and  indicate  the 
principal  food  of  its  architect ;  and  the  only  footpath 
traceable  led  from  the  rude  hut  to  the  water's  edge. 
As  Dr.  Pickering  observes  :  the  face  of  nature  has  there 
undergone  no  change  from  the  presence  of  man ;  and 
he  adds,  "  by  what  means  the  Fuegians  procure  fire,  so 
precious  in  this  chilly  and  humid  climate,  I  am  unin- 
formed; but  the  process  would  seem  to  be  dijficult, 
since  they  are  careful  always  to  take  a  supply  in  their 
canoes."  This,  however,  an  earlier  voyager  had  already 
noted.  At  Terra  del  Fuego,  Weddell  produced  the 
tinder-box  in  presence  of  a  party  of  Fuegians,  in  order 
to  ascertain  how  fire  is  produced  by  them,  and  pre- 
sently he  discovered  that  his  steel  had  been  purloined 
by  one  of  the  party.  .  This  however  he  recovered,  and 
after  sending  the  culprit  to  his  canoe  with  threats  of 
punishment,  he  learned  that  they  procure  fire  by  rubbing 
iron  pyrites  and  a  flinty  stone  together,  catching  the 
sparks  in  a  dry  substance  resembling  moss,  which  is 
quickly  ignited.^ 

Thus  we  trace  throughout  the  western  hemisphere 
various  methods  for  calling  into  existence  the  wondrous 
element,  so  peculiarly  distinctive  of  man.  Even  in  the 
simple  processes  employed,  traces  of  certain  common  re- 
lations of  a  very  wide  embracing  character  are  apparent ; 
whne  the  Peruvian,  with  his  solar  mirror,  stands  apart 
alike  from  the  rude  forest  Indian  and  the  cultivated 
native  of  the  Mexican  plateau ;  and  far  to  the  south  of 
both,  the  rude  Fuegian  finds  in  the  natural  products  of 

1  Weddell's  Voyage  towards  the  South  Pole  in  1822-24,  p.  167.     - 


v.]  TEE  PROMETHEAN  INSTINCT:  FIRE.  135 

his  inhospitable  clime,  a  means  of  fire-making  analogous 
to  that  which  the  Shawnee  prophet  taught  his  people  to 
regard  as  one  of  the  unhallowed  practices  of  the  white 
man. 

The  rude  Indian  of  the  forests  and  islands  of  the  New 
World  has  learned  for  himself  that  grand  invention  of 
jire^  which  lies  at  the  root  of  all  arts,  and  is  the  true 
Tubal -Cain,  Hephsestos,  Vulcan,  and  Wayland  Smith; 
the  Quetzalcoatl,  divine  instructor  of  the  Aztecs  in  the 
use  of  metals,  and  in  other  arts ;  and  the  Manco  Capac, 
chUd  of  the  sun,  with  his  golden  wedge,  the  germ  of  all 
Peruvian  civilisation.  He  had  made  slave  of  the  heaven- 
bom  element,  the  brother  of  the  lightning,  the  grand 
alchymist  and  artificer  of  all  times,  though  as  yet  he 
knew  not  all  the  worth  and  magical  power  that  was  in 
him.  By  his  means  the  sturdy  oak,  the  birth  of  cen- 
turies, which  flung  abroad  its  stalwart  arms,  and  waved 
its  leafy  honours  defiant  in  the  forest,  was  made  to  bow 
to  the  behest  of  the  simple  Aborigines.  The  massive 
trunk  shaped  itself  into  a  canoe,  hollowed  out  by  the 
magical  touch  of  this  artificer.  The  clay,  kneaded  into 
%he  simple  gourd-like  caldron  or  jar,  became  the  parent 
of  all  later  ceramic  art ;  or  burnt  into  the  builder's  brick 
gave  birth  to  aU  triumphs  of  architecture.  Copper,  the 
Peruvian  Ania^  which  is  supposed  to  have  given  name 
to  the  South  American  Cordilleras,  where  it  is  found 
native  in  as  rich  abundance  as  along  the  shores  of  Lake 
Superior,  and  which  had  appeared  but  a  ductile  stone : 
became  liquid  as  the  limpid  streams  bom  of  the  snows 
of  the  copper-bearing  Andes,  and  took  shape  of  use  or 
beauty  at  the  will  of  the  ingenious  modeller.  The  white 
tin,  pliant  and  of  little  account,  assumed  a  new  power  in 
the  hands  of  the  metallurgist,  and  wedded  to  the  soft  and 
ductile  copper,  produced  the  beautiful  and  useful  alloy 
•which   marks  the   grand  transitional   eras   of  the  Old 


136  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

World  as  well  as  the  New :  the  symbol  of  that  age  of 
bronze  which  mingles  in  the  dreams  of  Hesiod's  Theogony, 
and  illumines  the  dawn  of  the  prehistoric  centuries  of 
Scandinavia  and  Britain.  Nor  could  poet  long  for  a  more 
suggestive  allegory  than  that  of  bronze,  the  many-gifted 
daughter  of  copper  and  tin,  tracing  back  her  ancestry 
to  the  Cyclopean  sons  of  Uranos,  the  fabricators  of  the 
thunder  of  Zeus.  But  the  magic  power  of  the  heaven- 
descended  artificer  was  seen  only  in  its  infantile  sports, 
when  such  feats  had  been  accomplished.  The  iron  ore 
lay  in  mountain  heaps,  a  dark,  unsightly,  and  inert  mass ; 
and  alongside  of  it,  in  many  contemporaneous  strata  of 
the  carboniferous  period,  the  fire-heat  of  centuries  long 
buried  in  the  forgotten  eras  of  geological  time  had  been 
compacted  into  vegetable  coaL  The  gjrmnosperms, 
equisetaceae,  and  sigillaria,  the  gigantic  fems  and  palms 
of  palaeozoic  epochs,  had  been  compacted  into  fuel,  and 
buried  there  to  await  the  uncreated  intelligences  of 
coming  tin^e.  And  now  Jire  was  to  accomplish  its 
triumphs,  and  make  the  great  levels  and  grand  river- 
courses  of  the  New  World  the  scenes  of  a  revolution 
unequalled  since  time  itself  was  bom.  Coal  and  iron  are 
wedded  together.  The  new  forgers  of  the  thunderbolts 
toil  in  the  roaring  forges  of  Birmingham,  Glasgow,  Wol- 
verhampton, and  Woolwich.  Watt,  Arkwright,  Brunei, 
Stephenson,  are  the  new  Tubal- Cains  and  Wayland 
Smiths  of  our  modem  age.  The  Atlantic  is  bridged  by 
their  ocean  steamers ;  and,  where  the  genius  of  Europe's 
solitary  believer  in  a  Far  West  guided  the  caravels  of 
Spain  through  the  dread  mysteries  of  the  ocean  to  another 
world  beyond  :  the  merchant  navies  of  the  nations  speedy 
defiant  of  wind  and  waves,  propelled  by  new  powers 
that  slumbered,  abiding  their  waking  time,  in  that  tiny 
spark  lit  by  the  forest- Prometheus.  Tended  by  this 
willing  slave,  mechanic  skill  toils,  throbbing  and  panting^ 


v.]  THE  PROMETHEAN  INSTINCT:  FIRE.  1^7 

yet  unwearied,  at  its  great  task.  The  work  of  old  cen- 
turies is  outsped  in  single  years.  Everywhere,  and  in  all 
shapes,  the  new  developments  of  this  primitive  element 
of  science  startle  us  with  their  novel  and  exhaustless 
powers : — 

**  The  labouring  fires  come  out  against  the  dark. 
Innumerable  furnaces  and  pits, 
And  gloomy  holds,  in  which  that  bright  slave,  Eire, 
Doth  pant  and  toil  aU  day  and  night  for  man."  ^ 

In  elder  times  that  seem  to  us  now  as  though  they 
were  before  the  very  days  of  old,  but  in  which,  even 
then,  it  was  said,  "  the  place  where  we  dwell  is  too  strait 
for  us,"  a  band  of  pioneers  went  forth  into  the  wilder- 
ness, and  with  their  axes  hewed  down  the  forests,  even 
as  now  in  Americans  far  west,  to  make  for  themselves  a 
place  where  they  might  dwell ;  and  there  Ehsha»  the 
Israelitish  prophet,  put  forth  his  power,  and  the  waters 
of  the  Jordan  gave  back  the  axe  of  the  woodman,  and 
"the  iron  did  swim/^*  But  now  amid  the  blast  and 
the  roar  of  a  hundred  forges,  and  the  clang  of  a 
thousand  sledge-hammers,  there  rises  on  the  banks  of 
the  Thames  an  iron  ship,  vast  in  its  proportions  as  the 
ark  that  rested  of  old  on  the  peak  of  Ararat,  freighted 
with  the  life  of  the  emerged  world.  The  huge  leviathan 
grows  apace,  with  strange  toils,  whereat  the  world  looks 
on  in  suspense.  Its  vast  bulk  is  thrust  into  the  waters, 
and  the  mighty  hulk  of  iron  swims.  The  great  fire- 
powers  contribute  their  engines,  evolve  their  new  ally, 
steam,  and,  breasting  the  waves  of  the  Atlantic,  the  iron 
ship,  that  could  carry  a  whole  fleet  of  the  tiny  caravels 
of  Columbus,  moves  proudly  westward  till  it  drops 
anchor  in  the  waters  of  the  Hudson.  And  at  the  very 
time  when  thousands  crowd  to  gaze  on  the  vast  leviathan 

^  Alexan4er  Smith,  Drama  of  Life,  *  2  Kings  vi.  6. 


138  FBEHISTORTG  MANl  [Chap. 

that  commerce  has  thus  commissioned  to  follow  in  the 
wake  of  the  old  Santa  Maria  of  Palos ;  and  while  there 
lies  inert  beneath  its  keel  the  dumb  Atlantic  cable,  yet 
destined,  we  trust,  to  annihilate  time  and  space  with  the 
aid  of  new  forms  of  the  ethereal  fire  :  the  fleets  of  Eng- 
land are  bearing  the  heir  of  her  crown  to  inaugurate  the 
Victoria  Bridge,  another  of  the  triumphs  of  mechanical 
power  and  genius,  spanning  the  broad  St.  Lawrence  with 
its  free  highway,  where  once  the  little  birch-bark  of  the 
Indian  sufficed  for  all  its  traffic.  For  the  great  fire-slave 
has  wrought  out  still  other  mighty  elements  of  change. 
Northward,  southward,  and  far  into  the  wilds  on  the 
western  horizon  of  civilisation,  run  the  new  iron  high- 
ways, rush  the  new  iron-horses,  snorting  and  shrieking  as 
they  hasten  onward  to  the  Pacific,  and  pant  till,  with 
the  ocean  steam-ships  of  commerce,  they  shall  engirdle 
the  world. 

Thus  far  has  time  already  realized  the  fond  dream  of 
Columbus,  which,  as  he  believed,  he  read  foretold  in  holy 
writ,  and  shadowed  forth  darkly  in  the  mystic  revela- 
tions of  the  prophets.  The  ends  of  the  earth  were  to  be 
brought  together,  and  all  nations,  and  tongues,  and  lan- 
guages, united  under  the  banners  of  the  Redeemer.^  Thus 
far  also  has  experience  confirmed  his  absolute  deduction. 
That  faint  glimmering  of  light,  seen  once  and  again  in 
passing  gleams,  was  in  reality  the  flashing  of  intellect  in 
that  stiU  unrevealed  world  which  was  to  gladden  the 
weary  eyes  of  the  ocean-watchers  with  the  morrow's 
dawn.  The  inhabitants  of  that  western  continent  had 
already  achieved  the  wondrous  art  of  fire-making,  and 
all  else  was  conceivable  of  them.  They  were  intelligent 
beings,  fashioned  in  the  same  divine  mould  as  those  who 
ihen  flattered  themselves  they  were  carrying  the  light  of 

^  Washington  Irving's  Life  of  Colunihus,  book  i.  chap.  v. 


v.]  THE  PROMETHEAN  INSTINCT :  FIRE.  139 

the  true  faith  into  benighted  lands ;  men  within  whom 
lay,  inert  or  in  fullest  vigour,  the  germs  of  all  later  tri- 
umphs of  chemistry,  electricity,  mechanics :  the  steam- 
engine,  the  railway,  the  electric  telegraph,  and  the  greater, 
grander,  mightier  things  than  these  that  exist  in  unde- 
veloped thought  for  the  generations  yet  to  be. 


HO  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 


CHAPTER    VI. 

THE  MARITIME  INSTINCT:  THE  CANOE. 

Speech  is  one  of  the  instincts  of  man,  but  it  is  by 
the  voluntary  exercise  of  his  intellectual  faculties,  as  we 
conceive,  that  he  is  enabled  to  develop  it  into  language  ; 
and  by  the  accumulated  wealth  gathered  from  the  expe- 
rience of  many  generations  that  it  becomes  the  compre- 
hensive vehicle  of  thoughts  that  compass  the  bounds  of 
his  immortal  destiny.  Made,  therefore,  only  *'a  littie 
lower  than  ,the  angels,"  and  separated  by  an  immeasur- 
able interval  from  the  inferior  orders  of  being  in  which 
reason,  mind,  and  will,  are  all  controlled  by  an  infallible 
but  unprogressive  instinct :  it  has  seemed  credible  on 
various  grounds,  already  set  forth,  that  the  chief  occupa- 
tion of  man^s  primal  integrity  was  in  the  exercise  of  that 
human  instinct  of  speech,  out  of  which  language  neces- 
sarily grew.  Joy  is  eyer  vocal,  and  the  clear  virgin  in- 
tellect, revelling  in  the  world  of  wonders  that  burst  on 
the  delighted  gaze,  gave  articulate  utterance  to  the 
wondrous  world  of  thought  within. 

If  science  can  conceive  of  man,  unendowed  with  the 
experience  and  the  wisdom  of  ages,  but  dowered  with 
intellectual  and  moral  purity,  —  surely  even  for  the 
theories  of  science  not  an  impossible  thing, — it  may  then 
picture  to  itself  the  crisis  of  that  transitional  period  iu 
which  geology  draws  to  a  close,  when 


VI]        THE  MARITIME  INSTINCT:  THE  CANOE.        141. 

**  There  wanted  yet  the  master-woi^  the  end 
Of  all  yet  done ;  a  creature,  who,  not  prone 
And  brute  as  other  creatures,  but  endued 
With  sanctity  of  reason,  might  erect 
Hia  stature,  and  upri^^t  with  front  serene 
Govern  the  rest,  self-knowing." 

But  man  is  not  merely  a  reasoning  animal,  endowed., 
with  the  instinct  of  speech.     He  is  also  a  tool-using,  or  . 
as  Franklin  defined  him,  a  tool-making  animal     Whilst, 
however,  an  innate  instinct  seems  to  prompt  him  to 
supplement  his  helplessness  by  means  of  the  helpfulness : 
of  mechanical  appliances  :  mechanical  science,  the  indus- 
trial and  the  fine  pxts,  are  all  progressive  developments 
which  his  intellect  superinduces  on  that  tool-using  in- 
stinct.    And  through  all  the  coimtlesa  ages  revealed  to 
the  geologist,  with  ever  new  orders  of  successive  life  ; ; 
with  beast,  bird,  crustacean,  insect,  and  zoophyte,  en- 
dowed with  wonderful  constructive  instincts,  and  per- 
petuating memorials  of  architecture  and  sculpture,  of 
which  the  microscope  is  alone   adequate  to.  reveal  the . 
exquisite  beauty  and  infinite  variety  of  design :  yet  so . 
thoroughly  is  the  use  of  tools  the  exclusive  attribute  of 
man,  that  the  discovery  of  a  single  artificial  shaped  flint 
in  the  drift  or  cave-breccia,  is  sufficient  to  lead  the  geo- 
logist to  infer  indisputably  that  man  has  been  there. 
The  flint  implement  or  weapon  lies  beside  bones  reveal- 
ing a  kindred  species  to  the  sagacious  elephant,  or  to 
those  of  camivora  allied  to  the  dog,  with  its  wonderful 
instincts  bordering  on  reason  and  the  forethought  of 
experience ;    yet  no  theorist  dreams  of  the  hypothesis 
that  some  wiser  Elephas  primigeniiLSy  in  advance  of  his 
age,  devised  the  flint  spear  wherewith  to  oppose  more 
effectually  the  aggressions  of  the  abundant  camivora^  the 
remains  and  traces  of  which,  in  the  ossiferous  caverns, 
have  revealed  to  us  the  startling  truth,  that  not  only 
death,  but  also  pain  reigned  from  the  first  among  inferior 


142  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

orders  of  creation  that  "  had  not  sinned  after  the  simili- 
tude of  Adam's  transgression/^ 

Man  was  created  with  a  tool-using  instinct,  and  with 
faculties  capable  of  developing  it  into  all  the  mechanical 
triumphs  which  not  unreasonably  command  such  wonder 
and  admiration  in  our  day ;  but  he  was  also  created  with 
a  necessity  for  suck  "  The  heritage  of  nakedness,  which 
no  animal  envies  us,  is  not  more  the  memorial  of  the 
innocence  that  once  was  ours,  than  it  is  the  omen  of  the 
labours  which  it  compels  us  to  lindergo.  With  the  in- 
tellect of  angels,  and  the  bodies  of  earth-worms,  we  have 
the  power  to  conquer,  and  the  need  to  do  it.  Half  of 
the  industrial  arts  are  the  result  of  our  being  bom  with- 
out clothes ;  the  other  half  of  our  being  bom  without 
tooW'^ 

With  the  growing  wants  of  men  as  they  gathered  into 
communities,  novel  arts  were  developed  ;  and  the  de- 
mands of  each  new-felt  want  called  into  being  the  means 
of  its  supply.  Artificers  in  brass  and  iron  multiplied, 
and  the  sites  of  the  first  cities  of  the  earth  were  adorned 
with  temples,  palaces,  sculptured  marbles  and  cunningly- 
wrought  shrines.  But  still  it  was  the  lot  of  the  sons  of 
Adam  to  journey  from  that  old  East.  God  scattered 
them  abroad  firom  thence  upon  the  face  of  all  the  earth ; 
and  as  they  wandered,  westward  and  eastward,  the  ele- 
ments of  an  acquired  civilisation  were  inevitably  left 
behind ;  all  but  the  most  indispensable  arts  were  lost 
during  the  process  of  migration,  and  when  at  length  the 
wanderers  found  a  new  home,  it  might  be  "  a  land  whose 
stones  are  iron,  and  out  of  whose  hills  thou  mayest  dig 
brass,''  but  no  arts  so  speedily  disappear  among  migratory 
tribes  as  those  of  metallurgy.  The  hold  of  the  accumu- 
lated wisdom  and  experience  of  successive  generations 

*   What  is  Technology :  an  Inaugural  Lecture.     By  G«orge  Wilson,  M.D. 
Regius  Professor  of  Technology,  Edinburgh  University.- 


VI.]        THE  MARITIME  IXSTiyCT:  THE  CAXOE.        US 

mii8t.be  partial  and  Qncertain  among  an  unlettered 
people,  dependent  on  tradition  for  all  knowledge  except- 
ing such  as  is  practicaUy  transmitted  in  the  operations 
of  daily  experience ;  for  how  very  few  of  all  the  wan- 
derers from  the  old  centres  of  European  civilisation  to 
the  wilds  of  the  new  world  bring  with  them  the  slightest 
knowledge  either  of  the  science  or  the  practice  of  metal- 
lurgy ;  or  can  tell  how  iron  is  taken  out  of  the  earth, 
and  brass  molten  out  of  the  stone,  or  even  can  distin- 
guish the  metallic  ores.  Every  chemical  analyst  knows 
what  it  is  to  receive  iron  pyrites  for  silver,  and  ochres 
for  iron  or  gold.  Even  now  the  skill  of  the  American 
miner  has  to  be  imported,  and  the  copper-miners  of  Lake 
Superior  are  almost  exclusively  derived  from  Cornwall 
or  the  mining  districts  of  Germany. 

With  all  our  many  artificial  wants  so  promptly  sup- 
plied, even  in  the  remotest  colony  in  which  the  nomade 
Anglo-Saxon  wanders 

'*  By  the  long  wash  of  Australasian  seas 
Far  ofE,  and  holds  his  head  to  other  stars, 
And  breathes  in  converse  seasons," 

we  are  slow  to  perceive  how  much  we  owe  to  the  won- 
drous appliances  of  modem  civilisation,  and  its  social 
division  of  labour.  The  old  Dutchman  exported  his  very 
bricks  across  the  Atlantic,  wherewith  to  found  his  New 
Amsterdam  on  the  banks  of  the  Hudson ;  and  the  Eng- 
lish colonist,  with  enterprise  enough  to  mine  the  copper 
veins  of  Lake  Superior,  still  seeks  a  market  for  the  ore 
in  England,  and  imports  from  thence  both  the  engineers 
and  the  iron  wherewith  to  bridge  his  St.  Lawrence.  With 
such  facts  before  us  in  relation  even  to  the  systematic 
colonization  of  a  highly  civilized  and  enterprising  com- 
mercial nation  :  it  is  easy  to  understand  what  must  have 
been  the  condition  of  the  earth's  primeval  colonists,  as 
they  wandered  forth  successively  from  the  great  Asiatic 


144  PREHISfORIO  MAK  [Chap.. 

hive,  gradually  displacing  the  savage  fauna  of  the  un- 
peopled wilds  they  took  possession  of,  or  occupying,  as 
chance  directed  them,  the  far-scattered  islands  of  the  sea. 
Their  industrial  arts  were  all  to  begin  anew ;  and  thus, 
wherever  we  recover  traces  of  the  first  footprints  of  the 
old  nomade  in  his  wanderings  across  the  continents  of  Asia 
or  Europe,  or  follow  him  into  the  new  world  of  America, 
or  the  newer  continent  of  Australia  and  the  islands 
of  the  Southern  Ocean,  we  see  that  that  non-metallurgic 
condition  of  primitive  social  life  which  is  conveniently 
designated  its  stone-period,  is  not  necessarily  the  earliest 
human  period,  but  only  the  rudimentary  condition  to 
which  man  had  returned,  and  may  return  again,  in  the 
inevitable  deterioration  of  a  migratory  era.  The  world 
was  all  before  him,  where  to  choose  his  place  of  rest.  Its 
forests  had  to  be  cleared,  its  fields  to  be  tilled,  its  veins 
of  copper  to  be  explored,  and  the  long  lost  science  of 
metallurgy  to  be  recovered,  and  developed  anew  into 
industrial  arts.  Cast  once  more  on  his  primal  tool-using 
instincts,  we  can  nevertheless  fi-equently  trace  the  indi- 
viduality of  the  workman,  and  the  germs  of  original 
thought  and  the  novel  applications  of  inventive  skill, 
even  in  such  infantile  human  arts.  What  is  frequently 
of  still  more  importance  to  the  ethnologist,  we  can 
not  only  detect  in  the  workmanship  some  clue  to  the 
psychical  character  of  the  originator ;  but  even  more  so, 
from  the  materials  he  employed,  and  the  artistic  efforts 
at  imitation  he  displayed,  we  can  infer  his  former  geo- 
graphical relations,  and  the  physical  conditions  imder 
which  he  wrought. 

But  all  evidence  consistent  with  the  Adamic  origin  of 
paan  points  to  the  cradle-land  of  the  human  family  to- 
vl^ards  the  western  borders  of  Central  Asia,  and  remote 
from  its  coasts  :  probably  in  that  range  of  coimtry 
stretching  between  the  head  waters  of  the  Indus  and  the 


VI.]        THE  MARITIME  INSTINCT:  THE  CANOE.        145 

Tigris.  The  only  early  history  of  man  that  we  possess 
represents  the  postdiluvian  wanderers  journeying  east- 
ward, and  at  length  settling  on  a  plain  that  long  after- 
wards remained  one  of  the  chief  centres  of  history.  But 
the  arts  there  developed  belonged  exclusively  to  a  far- 
inland  people ;  and  to  this  day  the  rude  craft  of  the 
Tigris  and  the  Euphrates  betrays  the  total  absence  of 
maritime  instinct  or  skill  in  navigation.  The  highest 
effort  of  their  boat-bmlders  is  little  more  than  to  con- 
struct a  temporary  raft,  on  which  themselves  and  their 
simple  freight  may  float  in  safety  down  the  current  of 
the  great  river.  It  is  the  same  device  as  Juvenal  de- 
scribes, evidently  without  having  seen  it,  as  the  painted 
earthenware  boat  of  the  Egyptians  of  the  Nile  : — 

"  Imbelle  et  inutile  vulgus, 
Parvula  fictilibus  solitum  dare  vela  phaselis, 
Et  bFevibus  pictae  remis  incumbere  testsB."^ 

The  "  fictilibus  phaselis''  of  the  poet  were  in  reality  only 
the  NUe  rafts,  such  as  are  in  use  to  this  day,  formed  of 
earthenware  jars  bound  together  by  withes  and  cords, 
and  covered  with  bulrushes.  Like  the  corresponding 
river-craft  of  the  Euphrates,  these  are  steered  down  the 
Nile,  never  to  return  ;  for,  on  their  arrival  at  Cairo,  the 
rafts  are  broken  up,  and  the  jars  sold  in  the  bazaars. 
Such  was  the  rudimentary  condition  of  navigation  in 
that  great  Asiatic  hive  of  nations,  where  man  chiefly 
dwelt  for  centuries,  remote  from  the  sea.  But  from 
thence  the  wanderers  were  scattered  over  the  face  of  the 
whole  earth,  and  by  them  were  the  nations  divided  in 
the  earth,  and  the  isles  of  the  Gentiles  divided  in  their 
lands.  The  primitive  river-craft,  therefore,  found  an 
early  development  into  sea-craft,  and  maritime  migration 
gave  a  new  character  to  the  wanderings  of  the  primeval 

^  Juvenal,  Sat,  xv. 
VOL.  I.  K 


146  PREHISTOEIG  MAN.  [Chap. 

nomadesj  as  they  went  abroad  upon  the  face  of  all  the 
earth.  Thenceforth,  accordingly,  those  instinctive  ten- 
dencies began  to  characterize  certain  branches  of  the 
human  family,  as  leaders  of  maritime  enterprise,  which 
may  be  traced  imder  very  diverse  degrees  of  social  de- 
velopment ;  as  in  the  Phoenicians,  the  Northmen,  the 
Malays,  and  the  Polynesians ;  while  other  tribes  and 
nations,  such  as  the  Celts  and  Feejeeans,  representing, 
in  some  respects,  opposite  extremes  of  development, 
though  living  on  the  coast,  are  tempted  by  no  longings 
to  voyage  on  the  ocean's  bosom. 

The  islands  of  the  Central  American  archipelago  were 
the  first  to  reward  the  sagacity  of  Columbus,  as  he 
steered  his  course  westward  .in  search  of  the  old  East. 
The  arts  of  their  simple  natives  accordingly  first  at- 
tracted his  attention ;  and  although  he  found  among 
them  personal  ornaments  of  gold,  suflGicient  to  awaken 
the  avaricious  longings  of  the  Spaniards  for  that  fatal 
treasure  of  the  New  World,  yet  practically  they  were  in 
total  ignorance  of  all  metaUurgic  arts ;  and,  happy  in 
the  luxuriance  of  an  ocean-tempered  tropical  climate, 
they  knew  not  the  stimulus  to  ingenious  industry  which 
the  requisites  of  clothing  caU  forth  in  less  genial  climes. 
The  natives  of  Guanahanfe,  or  San  Salvador,  were  friendly 
and  gentle  savages,  in  the  simpUcity,  if  not  in  the  inno- 
cence of  nakedness.  Their  only  weapons  were  lances  of 
wood  hardened  in  lie  fire,  pointed  with  the  teeth  or 
bone  of  a  fish,  or  furnished  with  a  blade  made  either  of 
the  universal  flint,  or  more  frequently  with  them,  from 
the  large  tropical  shells  which  abound  in  the  West  Indian 
seas.  The  native  cotton-plant  they  had  learned  to  turn 
to  economical  account,  though  heedless  of  the  covering 
garmoAts  which  modesty  and  luxury  weave  out  of  its 
useful  fibres  ;  but  the  chief  mechanical  ingenuity  of  the 
islanders  was  expended  on  the  light  barks  to  which  they 


VI.]        THE  MARITIME  INSTINCT:  THE  CANOE.        147 

gave  the  now  universal  name  of  canoe.  These  were 
formed  from  the  trunk  of  a  single  tree,  hoUowed  by  fire, 
with  the  help  of  their  primitive  adzes  of  flint  or  shell ; 
and  were  of  various  sizes,  from  the  tiny  bark  only  ca- 
pable of  holding  its  solitary  owner,  to  the  ingenious 
galley  manned  by  forty  or  fifty  rowers,  who  propeUed  it 
swiftly  through  the  water  with  their  paddles,  and  baled 
it  with  the  invaluable  native  calabash,  which  supplied  to 
them  every  domestic  utensil,  and  rendered  them  alto- 
gether indilBferent  to  the  potter's  art 

The  canoe  has  a  peculiar  interest  and  value  in  relation 
to  the  archaeology  of  the  New  World.  To  those  who 
still  deem  the  invention  of  new  human  species  for  the 
peopling  of  America  a  gratuitous  assumption  of  science, 
it  is  the  type  of  the  older  caravel  of  the  primeval 
Columbu^  who  first  led  the  way  thither  from  Asiatic  or 
European  shores.  The  American  grey  squirrel  {Sciurus 
migratoriiis),  it  is  well  known,  migrates  in  prodigious 
numbers,  not  only  traversing  wide  tracts  of  country,  but 
crossing  broad  rivers,  in  search  of  localities  where  its 
food  abounds.  According  to  oft-repeated  popular  ac- 
counts, it  is  aflfirmed,  moreover,  to  embark  on  such 
occasions  on  a  rude  craft,  formed  of  a  stray  chip  or  piece 
of  the  bark  of  a  tree,  and  to  cross  by  its  means  otherwise 
impassable  lakes  of  great  width.  The  story,  though  con- 
fidently repeated,  requires  confirmation ;  but,  assuming 
its  accuracy,  had  this  rudimentary  trace  of  the  boat- 
building instinct  developed  itself  into  even  the  rudest 
art  among  inferior  animals,  the  geographical  ranges  of 
many  species  might  have  been  materially  changed,  since 
we  see  that  it  wanted  only  the  ship  which  man  provided 
for  them,  to  make  the  horse,  the  ox,  the  sheep,  the  hog, 
as  naturally  at  home  in  the  New  World  as  the  Old ;  and, 
even  in  defiance  of  man's  will,  to  carry  such  pests  as  the 
brown  rat,  the  mouse,  and  also  the  common  house-fly. 


148  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

almost  into  every  region  to  which  European  civilisation 
has  penetrated.  To  man  alone,  but  by  no  means  exclu- 
sively to  civilized  man,  pertains  the  art  of  navigating 
not  only  rivers,  but  oceans.  With  our  wondrous  steam- 
ships, wherewith  we  have  bridged  the  Atlantic,  we  are 
apt  to  lose  faith  in  the  capacity  of  uncivilized  man  for 
overcoming  such  obstacles  as  the  dividing  oceans  which 
had  so  long  concealed  the  New  World  from  the  Old. 
About  the  year  1750,  a  canoe,  now  preserved  in  the 
museum  of  Marischal  College,  Aberdeen,  was  picked  up 
by  a  ship  on  the  Aberdeen  coast,  with  an  Esquimaux  in 
it,  still  alive,  and  surrounded  by  his  fishing  gear,  though 
the  poor  voyager  died  soon  after,  from  being  allowed  to 
indulge  to  excess  the  voracious  appetite  which  long  ab- 
stinence had  created.  This  example,  though  an  exceed- 
ingly interesting,  is  not  a  solitary  one  ;  for  Humboldt,  in 
his  Views  of  Nature^  refers  to  other  well-authenticated 
proofs  of  natives  of  America,  supposed  by  him  to  have 
probably  been  Esquimaux  from  Greenland  or  Labrador, 
having  been  carried  by  currents  from  the  Western  to 
the  Eastern  Continent.  Again,  so  recently  as  1833,  a 
Japanese  junk  was  wrecked  on  the  coast  of  Oregon,  and 
some  of  its  crew  were  subsequently  rescued  from  capti- 
vity among  the  Indians  of  the  Hudson's  Bay  Territory. 
Other  evidences  in  proof  of  the  probability  of  such  modes 
of  colonization  of  the  New  World  will  be  noticed  in  a 
subsequent  chapter  ;  but  these  are  sufficient  to  illustrate 
the  interesting  relations  between  the  primitive  fleets  of 
the  Indian  islands  first  explored  by  Columbus,  and  the 
possible  sources  of  the  earliest  settlers  of  America.  To 
Columbus,  indeed,  with  that  well-defined  faith  in  the 
spherical  form  of  the  earth  which  gave  him  confidence 
to  steer  boldly  westward  in  search  of  the  Asiatic  Cipango, 
the  Indian  canoes  suggested  no  such  solution  of  diffi- 
culties of  later  origin  ;  for  the  great  Admiral  died  in  the 


VI]        THE  MARITIME  INSTINCT:  THE  CANOE.        149 

belief  that  he  had  reached  the  eastern  shores  of  the 
continent  of  Asia. 

Not  so,  however,  was  it  with  the  Spanish  savans  of 
the  fifteenth  century,  to  whose  judgment  the  unaccom- 
plished purpose  of  Columbus  was  referred.  In  the 
ancient  city  of  Salamanca,  there  assembled  in  the  Domi- 
nican convent  of  St.  Stephen,  in  the  year  1486,  a  learned 
and  orthodox  conclave,  summoned  by  Prior  Fernando  de 
Talavera,  to  investigate  the  novel  theory  propounded  by 
Columbus,  and  to  decide  whether,  in  that  most  Catholic 
of  the  kingdoms  of  Christendom,  in  which  the  Inquisition 
had  just  been  established  for  the  eradication  of  heresy, 
it  was  a  permissible  belief  that  the  New  World  of  the 
West  existed  or  no.  Columbus,  studying  the  wisdom  of 
a  past  then  drawing  to  its  close,  by  the  clearer  light  of 
his  later  dawn,  had  already  demonstrated  the  certainty 
of  an  ocean  highway  to  the  Western  Hemisphere.  The 
council  of  clerical  sages  included  professors  of  astronomy, 
geography,  mathematics,  and  other  branches  of  science, 
as  well  as  learned  friars  and  dignitaries  of  the  Church  : 
perhaps  as  respectable  an  assemblage  of  cloister-bred 
pedantry  and  orthodox  conservatism  as  that  fifteenth 
century  could  produce.  Philosophical  deductions  were 
parried  by  a  quotation  from  St.  Jerome  or  St.  Augustine, 
and  mathematical  demonstrations  by  a  figurative  text  of 
Scripture  ;  and  in  spite  alike  of  the  science  and  the  de- 
vout religious  spirit  of  Columbus,  the  orthodox  junto 
of  Salamanca  divines  pronounced  the  idea  of  the  earth's 
spherical  form  heterodox,  and  a  belief  in  antipodes  in- 
compatible with  the  historical  tradition^  of  our  faith  : 
since  to  assert  that  there  were  inhabited  lands  on  the 
opposite  side  of  the  globe,  would  be  to  maintain  that 
there  were  nations  not  descended  from  Adam,  it  being 
impossible  for  them  to  have  passed  the  intervening  ocean. 
This  would  be,  therefore,  to  discredit  the  Bible,  which 


150  FREUISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

expressly  declares  that  all  men  are  descended  from  one 
common  parent.^ 

It  may  well  excite  a  smile  to  find  the  very  ethnologi- 
cal problem  of  the  nineteenth  century  thus  dogmatically 
produced  by  the  sages  of  Salamanca  in  the  fifteenth  cen- 
tury, to  prove  that  America  could  not  exist.  But  we 
have  not  so  entirely  learned  even  now  to  harmonize  our 
scientific  belief  and  our  religious  faith,  that  we  can  afford 
to  sneer  at  the  follies  of  an  age  bewildered  in  the  mazes 
of  crude  scientific  theories  and  religious  controversy. 
The  bark  in  which  Columbus  did  at  length  achieve  the 
impossibility  of  reaching  a  new  world  beyond  the  At- 
lantic ocean,  was  in  no  degree  more  capable  of  braving 
the  ocean's  terrors  than  the  navies  of  the  Mediterranean 
were  a  thousand  years  before.  Nevertheless,  it  seems  to 
some  of  our  modem  scientific  theorists  an  easier  thing  to 
create  a  score  of  red,  brown,  and  black  Adams  and  Eves, 
wherewith  to  increase,  midtiply,  and  replenish  each 
"  realm,"  or  province  of  the  animal  world,  than  to  believe 
that  man  was  transferred  to  new  regions,  and  affected  by 
their  physical  influences,  just  as  we  see  the  horse,  ox, 
and  hog  have  been  in  our  own  day.  Throughout  the  Poly- 
nesian archipelago,  fragments  of  foreign  vocabularies  are 
the  chief  traces  of  that  oceanic  migration  by  which  alone 
the  descendants  of  a  common  race  could  people  those 
distant  islands  of  the  sea.  The  recognition  of  certain 
Malay  and  Polynesian  words  in  the  language  of  the 
remote  island  of  Madagascar,  is  one  of  the  striking  illus- 
trations of  what  such  intrusive  linguistic  elements  imply. 
"  A  navigation  of  three  thousand  miles  of  open  sea,"  says 
Mr.  Crawfurd,  "lies  between  the  Indian  Islands  and 
Madagascar,  and  a  strong  trade-wind  prevails  in  the 
greater  part  of  it.  A  voyage  from  the  Indian  Islands  to 
Madagascar  is  possible,  even  in  the  rude  state  of  Malayan 

^  Vide  Irving's  Columbus^  chap.  iii. 


VL]        THE  MARITIME  INSTINCT:  THE  CANOE,        151 

navigation ;  but  return  would  be  wholly  impossible. 
Commerce,  conquest,  or  colonization  are  consequently 
utterly  out  of  the  question  as  means  of  conveying  any 
portion  of  the  Malayan  language  to  Madagascar.  There 
remains,  then,  but  one  way  in  which  this  could  have 
taken  place  :  the  fortuitous  arrival  on  the  shores  of 
Madagascar  of  tempest-driven  Malayan  praus.  .  .  .  The 
occasional  arrival  in  Madagascar  of  a  shipwrecked  prau 
might  not  indeed  be  sufficient  to  account  for  even  the 
small  portion  of  Malayan  found  in  the  Malagasi ;  but  it 
is  oflfering  no  violence  to  the  manners  or  history  of  the 
Malay  people,  to  imagine  the  probability  of  a  piratical 
fleet,  or  a  fleet  carrying  one  of  those  migrations  of  which 
there  are  examples  on  record,  being  tempest-driven  like  a 
single  prau.  Such  a  fleet,  well  equipped,  well  stocked, 
and  well  manned,  would  not  only  be  fit  for  the  long  and 
perilous  voyage,  but  reach  Madagascar  in  a  better  condi- 
tion than  a  fishing  or  trading  boat.  It  may  seem,  then, 
not  an  improbable  supposition,  that  it  was  through  one 
or  more  fortuitous  adventures  of  this  description  that  the 
language  of  Madagascar  received  its  influx  of  Malayan." 
Dr.  Latham,  in  his  Man  and  his  Migrations,  supplements 
the  remarks  of  Mr.  Crawfurd,  by  referring  to  well-authen- 
ticated voyages  accomplished  by  escaped  slaves  from 
Mauritius.  Impelled  by  the  stem  necessity  of  effecting 
their  escape  at  aU  hazards  firom  an  intolerable  bondage, 
these  poor  untutored  slaves  have  been  known  to  seize  a 
canoe  in  the  night-time,  and  with  a  calabash  of  water, 
and  a  few  manioc  or  cassada  roots,  endeavour  to  reach 
Madagascar,  or  even  Africa,  a  distance  of  many  hundred 
miles,  without  compass  or  guide,  through  the  pathless 
and  stormy  ocean.  Many  perish  in  the  voyage,  but  some 
succeed,  and  Dr.  Latham  quotes  an  instance  commimi- 
cated  to  him  by  one  who  had  himself  picked  up  a  firail 
canoe,  within  about  a  hundred  miles  of  the  coast  of 


153  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

Africa^  containing  five  runaway  slaves,  who,  with  only  a 
small  quantity  of  water  and  rice,  and  their  fishing-lines, 
had  fled  fi'om  a  harsh  French  master  at  the  Seychelles, 
and,  guided  by  the  stars,  were  making  for  the  coast  from 
which  they  had  been  kidnapped.  The  poor  voyagers  had 
notched  on  the  side  of  their  canoe  the  record  of  twenty- 
one  days  pf  weary  hope ;  but  one  of  them  then  lay  dying  in 
the  bottom  of  the  canoe,  and  the  others  only  escaped  the 
same  fate  by  their  timely  rescue.  We  see,  however,  that 
frailer  ships  than  our  ocean  steamers  may  have  borne  the 
fathers  of  nations  to  remotest  isles  ;  and  that  when  that 
disputed  proposition  of  possible  oceanic  migration  is 
solved,  the  objections  of  St.  Augustine  and  the  Salamanca 
doctors,  along  with  some  of  those  of  equally  reputable 
doubters  of  modem  times,  to  the  possible  afiiliation  of 
the  red  man  and  the  white,  may  prove  to  rest  on  no 
better  foundations  than  other  obstacles  to  the  belief  in  a 
possible  new  world,  which  it  seemed  to  the  old  monkish 
impugners  of  science  in  Salamanca  equally  reasonable 
to  advance.  Copernicus,  the  astronomical  revolutionist, 
whose  solar  system  was  to  dethrone  this  earth  from  that 
usurpation  of  the  centre  of  the  universe,  which  it  had 
held  imchallenged  since  the  days  of  Ptolemy,  and  to 
simplify  in  so  many  ways  the  conception  of  our  terres- 
trial relations  in  space,  was  then  in  his  thirteenth  year. 
Yet,  in  that  year,  1486,  Columbus  was  required  gravely 
to  refute  the  objection  to  his  proposed  voyage  to  a  trans- 
atlantic continent,  that,  even  should  a  ship  succeed  in 
this  way  in  reaching  his  proposed  goal,  the  extremity  of 
India,  she  could  never  get  back  again ;  for  the  rotund- 
ity of  the  globe  would  present  a  kind  of  mountain  over 
which  the  vessel  might  indeed  under  favourable  circum- 
stances be  carried,  as  down  a  rapid,  but  up  which  it 
would  be  impossible  for  her  to  sail  with  the  most  favour- 
able wind  !     To  such  reasoners  the  new  world  of  Ame- 


VI.]        THE  MARITIME  INSTINCT:  THE  CANOE.       153 

rica  was  clearly  enough  an  absurdity  and  an  impossible 
thing. 

In  this  view  of  the  case,  the  canoe  of  America  is  the 
type  of  a  developed  instinct  pregnant  with  many  sug- 
gestive thoughts  for  us.  And  the  traces  of  the  primeval 
ship-builder's  art  accumulate  wonderfully  so  soon  as 
attention  is  drawn  to  it :  adding  fresh  evidence  of  the 
diffusion  of  the  human  race  in  earliest  times  to  remote 
outskirts  of  the  ancient  world,  and  of  an  underlying 
history  not  yet  embraced  within  our  oldest  accredited 
chroniclings.  On  the  banks  of  the  Scottish  Clyde,  the 
modem  voyager  from  the  New  World  looks  with  peculiar 
interest  on  the  growing  fabrics  of  those  huge  steamers^ 
with  ribs  of  steel,  and  planks,  not  of  oak,  but  iron,  which 
have  made  the  ocean,  that  proved  so  impassable  a  barrier 
to  the  men  of  the  fifteenth  century,  the  easy  hi^way  of 
commerce  and  pleasure  to  us.  The  roar  of  the  iron  forge, 
the  clang  of  the  fore-hammer,  the  intermittent  glare  of 
the  furnaces,  and  all  the  novel  appliances  of  iron  ship- 
building, teU  of  the  modem  era  of  steam  ;  but,  meanwhile, 
underneath  these  very  ship-builders'  yards  lie  the  memo- 
rials of  ancient  Clyde  fleets  in  which  we  are  borne  back, 
up  the  stream  of  human  history,  far  into  prehistoric 
times.  The  earUest  recorded  discovery  of  a  Clyde  canoe 
took  place  in  1780,  at  a  depth  of  twenty-five  feet  below 
the  surface,  on  a  site  known  by  the  apt  designation  of  St. 
Enoch's  croft,  when  digging  the  foundation  of  a  church 
dedicated,  by  a  strangely  apposite  misnomer  of  the 
ancient  one  which  occupied  the  same  spot,  to  the  ante- 
diluvian father  of  Methuselah.  This  primitive  canoe, 
hewn  out  of  a  single  oak,  rested  in  a  horizontal  position 
on  its  keel,  and  within  it,  near  the  prow,  there  lay  a 
curiously  suggestive  memorial  of  the  mechanical  arts  of 
the  remote  era  to  which  the  ancient  ship  of  the  Clyde 
must  be  assigned.     This  was  a  beautifully  finished  stone 


164  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

axe  or  celt,  represented  here,  doubtless  one  of  the  simple 
implemeute  of  the  allophylian  C^edonian  to  vhom  the 
canoe  belonged,  if  not  indeed  the  tool 
with  which  it  had  been  fashioned  into 
shape. 

Subsequent  to  this  at  least  sixteen 
other  canoes  have  been  brought  to 
light.  None  of  them  are  fully  equal  in 
interest  to  the  earliest  discovery  of  the 
stone  implement  and  equally  primitive 
bark ;  but  others  have  been  dug  up 
at  greater  distances  from  the  modem 
river's  banks,  buried  in  many  feet  of 

Fio.  2.— Clyde  Slone  Aie.  i  i  -i  i  i        - 

accumulated  soil,  underneath  sites  oc- 
cupied by  the  most  ancient  structures  of  the  city  of 
Glasgow,  tmd  doubtless  the  busy  scenes  of  city  life  for 
more  than  a  thousand  years.  It  is  difScult  to  appty  any 
satisfactory  chronological  test  whereby  to  gauge  the  lapse 
of  centuries,  since  this  primitive  fleet  plied  in  the  far- 
inland  estuary  that  then  occupied  the  modem  area 
through  which  the  Clyde  has  wrought  its  later  channel ; 
but  that  the  changes  in  geological,  no  less  than  in  tech- 
nological aspects  indicate  a  greatly  prolonged  interval, 
cannot  admit  of  doubt ;  and  primitive  man,  alike  in 
old  Africa  and  in  the  New  World,  is  still  practising  the 
rude  ingenuity  of  the  same  boat-builder's  art,  which 
the  allophyUan  of  the  Clyde  pursued  thousands  of 
years  ago. 

In  the  interesting  narrative  of  a  cruise  on  the  Tan- 
ganyika Lake  of  central  Africa,  by  Captain  J.  H.  Speke, 
the  simple  process  there  pursued  in  fa^oning  the  native 
canoe,  strikingly  illustrates  the  means  by  which  so 
imperfect  an  implement  could  be  turned  to  account  in 
felling  the  forest  oak,  and  shaping  it  into  such  vessels  as 
that  in  which  the  stone  axe  was  found.     Writing  in  his 


VI.]        THE  MARITIME  INSTINCT:  THE  CANOE,        155 

journal  on  the  3d  March  1858,  Captain  Speke  says : — 
"All  being  settled,  I  set  out  in  a  long  narrow  canoe, 
hollowed  out  of  the  trunk  of  a  single  tree.  These  vessels 
are  mostly  built  from  laige  timbers,  growing  in  the  dis- 
trict  of  Ugubha,  on  the  western  side  of  the  lake.  The 
savages  fell  them,  lop  off  the  branches  and  ends  to  the 
length  required,  and  then,  after  covering  the  upper  sur- 
face with  wet  mud  as  the  tree  lies  upon  the  ground,  they 
set  fire  to  and  smoidder  out  its  interior,  until  nothing 
but  a  case  remains,  which  they  finish  up  by  paring  out 
with  roughly  constructed  hatchets.'' 

Fire  is  thus  the  docile  servant  of  man  in  all  stages  of 
his  progress ;  as  needful  to  the  primeval  ship-carpenter 
of  the  Clyde  in  constructing  his  rude  oak  canoe,  as  to 
the  modem  ocean  ship-builder  in  the  completion  of  his 
huge  iron  steam-ship  for  Atlantic  or  Australasian  voyage. 
At  every  stage  of  human  progress  we  see  what  subtle 
meaning  there  is  in  the  Promethean  myth  of  the  Titan 
son  of  lapetus,  stealing  the  fire  of  Zeus  wherewith  to 
endow  the  infant  human  race.  Prometheus  was  to  the 
ancient  Greek  the  incarnation  of  practical  intellect,  which 
conquers  the  elements  of  nature,  and  makes  them  subser- 
vient to  human  necessities ;  and  he  was  represented  as 
chained  by  the  behest  of  the  supreme  Zeus,  with  bolts 
forged  by  Hephaestos  the  god  of  metallurgy,  in  full  ac- 
cordance with  the  relative  progress  in  man's  acquisition 
of  arts  and  mechanical  skill.  The  fire  ascended  from  the 
sacrifice  of  Abel,  long  generations  before  it  was  subdued 
by  Tubal-Cain  to  the  wise  ministry  of  the  artificer  in 
brass  and  iron ;  and  no  fitter  designation  of  man,  in  the 
descriptive  distinctions  of  scientific  classification,  could 
be  devised  than  that  of  the  Jire-using  animal. 

The  islanders  of  the  Southern  Ocean,  the  natives  of 
many  diverse  areas  of  the  African  continent,  and  the 
canoe-builders  of  the  New  World,  all  employ  the  agency 


156  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

of  fire  to  supplement  their  imperfect  tools.  The  stoue  axe 
of  the  St.  Enoch's  croft  canoe  is  formed  of  highly  pol- 
ished dark  greenstone.  It  measures  five  and  a  half  inches 
in  length  by  three  and  a  half  inches  in  breadth,  and  an 


Fia  ».— Sonth  Pscitlc 


unpolished  band  round  the  centre  shows  where  it  has 
been  bound  to  its  haft^  leaving  both  ends  disengaged,  as 
is  frequently  the  case  with  the  stone  hatchets  both  of  the 
American  Indians  and  the  Pol3Tie8iana    But  the  accom- 


FlQ.  4.— Clalun  I 


panying  woodcut  shows  a  much  more  ingenious  mode 
of  hafting  the  stone  adze  for  hollowing  the  charred  trunk, 
and  shaping  it  into  a  canoe.  It  is  drawn  from  one 
brought  by  Mr.  Paul  Kane  from  th§  Pacific  coasts  where 


VI.]        THE  MARITIME  INSTINCT:  THE  CANOE.       157 

such  implements  are  in  use  by  the  Clalam  Indians^  who 
occupy  the  shores  of  Puget's  Sound  and  the  Straits  of  Dc 
Fuca,  and  construct,  out  of  the  hollowed  trunks  of  single 
trees,  large  and  highly  ornamented  canoes,  in  which  they 
fearlessly  face  the  dangers  of  the  Pacific  ocean. 

The  lower  reaches  of  the  Columbia  river,  for  nearly 
forty  miles  before  it  enters  the  Pacific,  constitute,  strictly 
speaking,  an  estuary  of  the  sea,  indented  by  bays,  and 
varying  in  breadth  from  three  to  seven  miles.  There,  at 
Cape  Flattery,  and  along  the  neighbouring  coasts,  the 
various  tribes  live  to  a  great  extent  on  the  spoils  of  the 
sea.  In  the  lower  part  of  the  Columbia  river,  a  small 
fish,  called  by  the  natives  Uhl^kun,  is  caught  in  immense 
numbers,  and  is  greatly  prized  on  account  of  its  oily  fat- 
ness, which  is  such  that  when  dried  it  wiU  bum  with 
a  clear  steady  light  like  a  candle.  The  Uhl^kuns  are 
caught  with  astonishing  rapidity  by  means  of  an  instru- 
ment about  seven  feet  long,  the  curved  wooden  blade  of 
which,  measuring  about  four  feet,  is  somewhat  the  shape 
of  a  sabre.  Along  the  convex  edge,  at  distances  of  an 
inch  and  a  half,  are  inserted  sharp  bone-teeth  about  an 
inch  long.  The  Indian  standing  in  the  canoe  draws  this 
edgeways  with  both  hands  rapidly  through  the  dense 
shoals  of  fish,  which  are  so  thick  that  almost  every  tooth 
will  strike  a  fish.  One  knock  across  the  thwarts  safely 
deposits  them  in  the  bottom  of  the  canoe ;  and  this  is 
done  with  such  rapidity  that  nets  are  considered  useless. 
But  the  skill  which  the  fishing  tribes  of  the  North  Pacific 
coasts  show  in  the  management  of  their  canoes  finds  a 
better  field  for  its  display  than  the  easy  capture  of  the 
Uhlekun  in  the  estuary  of  the  Columbia  river.  Some  of 
their  canoes,  made  out  of  a  single  tree,  measure  upwards 
of  fifty  feet  long,  and  are  capable  of  carrying  thirty  as  a 
crew.  They  have  thwarts  from  side  to  side,  about  three 
inches  thick,  and  their  gunwales  curve  outwards  so  as  to 


158  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

throw  off  the  waves.  The  bow  and  stem  rise  in  a  grace- 
ful sweep  sometimes  to  a  height  of  five  feet,  and  are 
decorated  with  grotesque  figures  of  men  and  animals. 
In  managing  these  canoes,  the  Indian  crew  kneel  two 
and  two  along  the  bottom,  and  propel  them  rapidly  with 
paddles  from  four  to  five  feet  long,  wielded  with  the 
two  hands,  without  touching  the  side  of  the  canoe,  while 
a  bowman  and  steersman  sit  each  with  his  paddle  at 
either  end.  Washington  Irving,  in  describing  the  Oregon 
Indians,  remarks :  "  It  is  surprising  to  see  with  what 
fearless  unconcern  these  savages  venture  in  their  light 
barks  upon  the  roughest  and  most  tempestuous  seas. 
They  seem  to  ride  upon  the  wave  like  sea-fowl.  Should 
a  surge  throw  the  canoe  upon  its  side,  and  endanger  its 
overturn,  those  to  windward  lean  over  the  upper  gun- 
wale, thrust  their  paddles  deep  into  the  wave,  and  by 
this  action  not  merely  regain  an  equilibrium,  but  give 
their  bark  a  vigorous  impulse  forward.^' 

To  such  fearless  navigators  the  violent  currents  of  the 
Straits  of  De  Fuca,  or  the  stormy  waves  of  the  Pacific, 
present  little  to  daunt  them;  and  one  of  their  most 
coveted,  though  now  rarely  attained,  prizes  is  the  whale. 
Since  the  encroachments  of  European  settlements  on 
their  territories  their  game  has  greatly  diminished,  and 
few  whales  approach  the  coafit ;  but,  when  an  opportunity 
offers,  the  Indians  are  enthusiastic  in  the  chase,  and  the 
process  by  which  they  secure  their  prize  furnishes  an 
interesting  iUustration  of  native  ingenuity  and  daring. 
Upon  a  whale  being  seen  blowing  in  the  oflSng,  they  rush 
down  to  their  large  canoes  and  push  off,  furnished  with 
a  number  of  large,  strong  seal-skin  bags  filled  with  air. 
To  each  bag  a  barbed  spear-head  is  attached  by  a  cord 
about  nine  feet  long,  and  in  the  socket  of  the  spear-head 
is  fitted  a  handle  five  or  six  feet  in  length.  Upon  com- 
ing up  with   the  whale,   the  barbed  heads,   with   the 


VL]       THE  MARITIME  INSTINCT:  THE  CANOE.         159 

air-bags  attached,  are  driven  into  it,  and  the  handles 
withdrawn.  The  attack  is  continually  renewed  in  this 
manner,  until  the  whale  is  no  longer  able  to  sink  from 
the  buoyancy  of  the  bags,  when  he  is  despatched  and 
towed  ashore.  The  blubber  of  the  whale  is  as  much 
prized  amongst  the  Indians  of  the  Straits  of  De  Fuca  as 
by  the  Esquimaux.  It  is  cut  into  stripes  about  two  feet 
long  and  four  inches  wide,  and  eaten  generally  with 
their  dried  fish. 

Thus  we  see,  from  the  illustrations  supplied  by  the 
maritime  skill  and  enterprise  of  modern  tribes,  to  how 
much  greater  extent  the  ancient  canoe  may  have  sufficed 
for  oceanic  expeditions  than  our  familiarity  with  the 
daborately  perfected  modem  craft  inclines  us  to  believe 
possible.  The  old  navigators  of  the  estuary  of  the  Clyde 
were  probably  not  a  whit  less  fearless  than  the  native 
whalers  of  the  Oregon  coast;  and  they  had  to  face 
dangers  fully  equal  to  any  of  those  to  which  the 
voyagers  of  the  Pacific  are  exposed,  whenever  they 
navigated  the  lochs  and  island  channels  towards  its 
mouth,  or  ventured  beyond  it,  to  face  the  gales  and  cur- 
rents of  the  Irish  Sea.  The  ancient  alluvium  of  the 
river  Clyde  has  supplied  an  unusually  rich  store  of 
iUustrations  of  primitive  ship  carpentry ;  but  the  dis- 
closures of  another  Scottish  locality  also  merit  notice 
here.  The  carse,  or  alluvial  plain  of  Falkirk,  like  that 
of  Stirling,  is  intimately  associated  with  some  very 
memorable  events  of  Scottish  history.  It  is  traversed 
by  the  vallum  and  chain  of  forts  reared  by  LoUius  Ur- 
bicus,  the  Ebman  propraetor  of  Antoninus  Pius  in  the 
early  part  of  the  second  century,  and  is  rich  in  memo- 
rials of  later  incidents  already  referred  to.  But  under- 
neath the  ancient  footprints  of  Scottish  patriot  and 
invader  lie  records  of  older  human  history.  •According 
to  the  Statistical  Accounts,  in  the  vicinity  of  Falkirk  an 


160  PRERISTOniC  MAN.  [Chap. 

ancient  boat  was  discovered  some  thii-ty  feet  below  the 
surface  of  the  same  earse  from  which  the  remains  of  a 
foBsU  elephant  were  exhumed  in  excavating  the  Union 
Canal  in  1821.  In  the  earlier  part  of  the  previous  cen- 
tury a  sudden  rise  of  the  river  Carron  imdennined  a 
portion  of  its  banks,  and  exposed  to  view  an  ancient 
canoe  of  unusuaUy  lai^e  dimensions,  lying  imbedded  in 
the  alluvial  soil  at  a  depth  of  fifteen  feet,  and  covered  by 
successive  strata  of  clay,  shells,  moss,  sand,  and  gravel. 
Sir  John  Clerk  has  described  it  with  great  minuteness  in 
the  Biblioikeca  Topografitica  Britannica  aa  an  antedi- 
luvian boat ;  and  in  an  extract  from  a  contemporary 
newspaper  it  is  stated  to  have  been  finely  polished 
and  perfectly  smooth,  both  inside  and  outside,  and 
formed  from  a  single  oak-tree,  with  pointed  stem  and 
square  stem.  These  traces  of  primitive  human  art  have 
already  been  referred  to  in  the  Pr^istoric  Annals  of 
Scotland,  but  a  further  discovery  in  the  same  locality 
confers  a  fresh  interest  upon  them.  Soon  after  the 
publication  of  that  work,  when  on  a  visit  to  Falkirk, 


Pia.  t.~anng«moath  SkolL 

I  was  shown  by  Dr.  Q.  Hamilton  a  human  skull,  which 
at  once  attracted  my  attention  from  its  marked  corre- 
spondence to  the  brachycephalic  arania  of  ancient  British 
graves.  It  is  figured  here,  fi^m  a  drawing  executed 
with  great  care  at  a  later  date,  from  which  it  will  be 


VI.]       THE  MARITIME  INSTINCT :  THE  CANOE.         161 

seen  that  the  ekull  is  imperfect  in  the  base,  and  the 
facial  bones  are  wanting.  It  is  well  developed,  according 
to  the  tjrpe  of  crania  of  the  early  Scottish  tumnli.  But 
what  confers  the  special  interest  on  this  imperfect  human 
skull  is,  that  it  was  found  in  the  same  alluvial  carse-land 
as  the  ancient  canoes,  and  the  fossil  bones  of  the  Elephas 
pHmigenius^  twenty  feet  below  the  surface,  in  a  bed  of 
shell  and  gravel,  when  digging  the  area  of  the  large 
Grangemouth  lock  of  the  Union  Canal,  on  the  29th  of 
Jime  1843.^  Thus,  while  in  one  case  we  recover  traces 
of  the  ancient  tools  of  the  prehistoric  ship-carpenter,  in 
another  we  seem  to  alight  on  evidences  of  his  own  phy- 
sical characteristics,  corresponding  in  all  respects  with 
those  which  have  already  been  recognised  as  appertain- 
ing to  the  allophylian  of  the  Scottish  stone-period. 

The  bee,  according  to  Huber,  when  interrupted  in  its 
cell-building  operations,  adapted  its  structure  to  the 
novel  circumstances  imposed  on  it,  altering  the  other- 
wise invariable  hexagon.  The  bird,  in  like  manner, 
accommodates  the  form  of  its  nest  to  the  peculiarities  of 
the  chosen  locality  ;  as  if  making  the  instinctive  process 
subservient  to  the  rational  .We  need  not  wonder  there- 
fore to  find  the  primitive  arts  of  man,  while  disclosing  a 
correspondence  in  many  respects  so.  remarkable,  yet  also 
revealing  constant  traces  of  such  adaptation  as  pertains 
to  his  higher  attributes  of  reason  and  experience.  Among 
many  of  the  islands  of  the  Southern  Ocean,  the  boats  are 
simple  wooden  canoes,  pointed  at  either  end,  and  pro- 
pelled through  the  water  with  the  paddle  ;  but  the  barks 
of  the  true  Polynesians  are  more  elaborate  and  ingenious. 

^  The  discoveiy  attracted  considerable  attention  at  the  time,  and  was 
minutely  described  in  some  current  periodical — Chambers'a  Journal  was 
named  to  me,  but  no  notice  is  to  be  found  in  its  pages ;  and  Mr.  Robert 
Chambers  has  kindly  searched  other  sources  for  me  without  being  able  to 
recover  the  clue.  The  label,  however,  attached  to  the  skull  records  the  above 
facts  and  date,  and  is  authenticated  with  the  signature  "  Thoinas  Wilson^'*'     ^ 

VOL.  I.  L 


162  FREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

Frequently  they  are  double,  with  a  raised  platform  or 
quarter-deck,  and  they  are  invariably  provided  with  an 
outrigger,  an  article  seemingly  of  Malay  origin.  So 
essential,  indeed,  is  the  latter  deemed  for  the  safe  navi- 
gation of  their  ocean  archipelago,  that  the  most  remark- 
able characteristic  recognised  by  the  Tahitians,  when 
Captain  Cook's  vessels  firat  revealed  to  them  the  wonders 
of  European  civilisation,  was  the  want  of  the  indispens- 
able outrigger.  Throughout  the  mythology  of  oceanic 
Polynesia,  Mawai,  the  upholder  of  the  earth,  and  the 
revealer  of  the  secrets  of  the  future,  plays  a  prominent 
part.  In  one  of  his  prophecies,  Mawai  foretold  that  a 
canoe  such  as  had  never  been  seen  before,  a  canoe 
without  outriggers,  should  in  process  of  time  come  out 
of  the  ocean.  But  to  the  mind  of  the  Tahitian,  an  ocean 
canoe  without  outriggers  was  so  impossible  a  thing  that 
they  laughed  their  prophet  to  scorn  ;  whereupon  Mawai 
launched  his  wooden  dish  on  the  waters,  which  swam 
without  outriggers,  and  the  Tahitians  thenceforwani 
looked  for  the  strange  marvel  of  the  outriggerless  canoe. 
Accordingly  when  Cook  visited  the  islands,  his  ship  was 
regarded  as  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy,  and  still 
English  vessels  are  frequently  called  Mawai's  Canoes. 
The  mythic  prophecy  seems  in  reality  one  of  those  vague 
traditions  of  ancestral  intercourse  with  other  members  of 
the  human  family,  such  as,  among  the  Aztecs,  led  to  the 
belief  that  the  ships  of  Cortes  had  returned  from  the 
source  of  the  rising  sun,  with  Quetzalcoatl,  the  divine 
instructor  of  their  forefathers  in  the  arts  of  civilisation. 

The  proa  of  the  Pacific  is  a  product  of  the  naval 
architecture  and  maritime  skill  for  which  the  Malays 
are  specially  distinguished  among  the  islanders  of  its 
archipelagos.  It  is  generally  formed  of  two  pieces  of 
wood  joined  lengthways,  and  sewed  together  with  bark  ; 
and  is  found  chiefly  within  the  region  of  the  trade- winds, 


VL]        THE  MARITIME  INSTINCT:  THE  CANOE.        163 

for  which  it  is  peculiarly  adapted  The  indispensable 
outrigger,  the  absence  of  which  constituted,  to  the  Ta- 
hitians,  the  grand  marvel  of  Captain  Cook^s  ship,  is  a 
contrivance  for  counterbalancing  the  large  sails  of  the 
Malay  proa,  and  the  piroque  or  monoxylous  canoe  of 
the  Pacific.  In  its  most  common  form,  it  consists  of 
two  spars  fastened  athwart  the  vessel,  and  projecting 
about  half  its  length  to  windward.  The  ends  of  the 
spars  axe  attached  to  a  heavy  beam,  sometimes  in  the 
shape  of  a  small  canoe ;  and  to  mariners  familiar  only 
with  the  light  proa,  the  idea  of  a  vessel  carrying  lai^e 
sails  on  the  open  sea  without  an  outrigger,  must  seem  a 
miracle  requiring  Mawai's  aid.  The  outrigger  is  also 
used  in  some  of  the  small  narrow  canoes  of  the  Pacific  ; 
and  propelled  by  a  rude  sail  of  matting,  or  sometimes 
only  by  the  paddle,  and  protected  by  this  contrivance 
against  the  danger  of  upsetting,  the  fearless  ocean 
voyagers  find  their  way  fi-om  island  to  island,  through 
the  most  tempestuous  seas.  We  are,  in  truth,  in  danger 
of  forgetting,  amid  the  luxuriant  appliances  of  our  ocean 
steamships,  how  moderate  are  the  means  which,  in  this, 
as  in  other  requirements  of  man,  suffice  to  supply  all  the 
necessities  of  his  being. 

The  population  of  the  great  Polynesian  archipelago 
presents  many  highly  interesting  and  suggestive  features, 
bearing  closely  on  the  question  of  oceanic  migration. 
The  area  of  Polynesia  proper  is  defined  by  Latham  to 
extend  from  the  small  islands  westward  of  the  Pellews 
to  Easter  Island,  and  from  the  Mariannes  and  the  Sand- 
wich Islands  to  New  Zealand  on  the  south.  The  means 
of  acquiring  animal  food  in  nearly  aU  the  islands  is 
almost  exclusively  limited  to  the  sea.  The  cocoa-nut, 
the  taro,  the  banana^  aud  other  vegetable  food,  constitute 
their  chief  diet ;  and  hence,  possibly,  one  source  of  the 
tendency  to  j^jannibalism  so  horribly  developed  among 


164  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap> 

some  of  the  island  group.  In  Tonga-tabd  and  Easter 
Island,  as  well  as  in  the  Micronesian  Kota^  Tinian, 
Ualan,  and  throughout  the  Caroline  group,  remains  of 
massive  stone  buildings,  the  origin  or  use  of  which  is 
wholly  unknown  to  the  natives,  reveal  traces  of  an 
extinct  civilisation ;  and  also  afford  some  possible  clue 
to  the  strange  ethnological  phenomena  of  the  Oceanic 
rArchipelago.  Professor  Dana,  who,  as  geologist  to  the 
United  States'  Exploring  Expedition,  had  such  abundant 
opportunities  for  observation,  came  to  the  conclusion 
that  an  immense  area  in  the  Pacific  has  for  ages  been 
gradually  subsiding,  and  that  the  numerous  Lagoon 
Islands  mark  the  spots  where  what  were  once  the  highest 
peaks  of  mountains  have  finally  been  submerged.  Mr. 
Hale,  the  philologist  of  the  same  expedition,  gathered 
Bufficient  data  from  a  European  who  had  been  resident 
for  a  time  on  the  island  of  Bonabe,  in  the  Caroline  archi- 
pelago, and  firom  his  own  observations,  to  satisfy  him 
that  the  remarkable  stone  structures,  both  Ualan  and 
Bonabe,  were  erected  when  the  sites  on  which  they  stand 
were  at  a  different  level  fi'om  that  they  now  occupy. 
"  At  present  they  are  actually  in  the  water  ;  what  were 
once  paths,  are  now  passages  for  canoes,  and  when  the 
walls  are  broken  down  the  water  enters  the  enclosure/' 

Such  an  idea  seems  like  a  ghmpse  of  far-reaching 
truths  relative  to  the  unwritten  history  of  the  mysterious 
past  in  that  recently  explored  Southern  Ocean.  When 
Columbus  discovered,  the  islands  of  the  New  World,  he 
found  them  lying  in  thickly-clustered  groups,  and  ere 
long  reached  the  mainland  of  a  great  continent,  which 
lay  in  close  vicinity  to  its  island  satellites.  But  it  was 
altogether  different  with  the  Columbus  of  the  Southern 
Ocean.  A  strange  Antarctic  as  well  as  an  Australian 
continent  lay  there  also,  awaiting  new  discoverers  ;  but 
far  beyond  their  coasts  the  Pacific  and  Southern  groups 


VI.]        THE  MARITIME  INSTINCT:  THE  CANOE.        165 

dotted  the  wide  expanse  of  ocean,  like  the  stars  that  lose 
themselves  in  the  deep  abysses  of  night.  We  read  with 
wonder,  as  strange  as  that  which  rewarded  the  revela- 
tions of  the  Western  Ocean  in  the  closing  years  of  the 
fifteenth  century,  of  the  voyages  and  discoveries  of 
Byron,  Wallis,  Carteret,  and  of  Cook  and  later  explorers 
of  the  South  Pacific  Ocean.  When  Captain  Cook  reached 
the  Cape  on  his  return  from  his  second  expedition,  in 
1774,  he  had  sailed  no  less  than  twenty  thousand 
leagues,  through  imknown  seas,  since  he  left  the  same 
point  twenty  months  before.  His  grand  quest  was  in 
search  of  the  unknown  Terra  Australis  Incognita^  a 
continent  which  it  was  assumed  must  exist  in  the 
Southern  Ocean,  as  a  counterpoise  to  the  land  occupying 
so  large  a  portion  of  the  northern  hemisphere  ;  but 
instead  of  this,  the  voyagers  sailed  for  days  and  weeks 
through  a  vast  ocean,  arriving  by  chance,  now  and  agaiu^ 
at  some  little  island,  cut  ofi*  from  all  the  world  besides, 
yet  tenanted  by  human  beings.  And,  as  later  voyagers 
have  noted,  on  sailing  once  more  into  the  limitless 
horizon,  after  another  long  interval,  in  which  many 
htindreds  of  miles  have  been  passed,  another  island 
speck  appears ;  and  not  only  is  it  also  inhabited,  but 
affinities  of  speech,  mythology,  and  the  primitive  in- 
genuity of  native  arts,  all  concur  in  proving  a  community 
of  origin.  To  account  satisfactorily  for  so  puzzling  a 
problem  of  ethnology  has  taxed  the  ingenuity  and  skill 
of  some  of  our  ablest  elucidators  of  the  history  of  man. 
The  botanist  was  long  in  doubt  as  to  the  laws  which 
regulate  the  distribution  of  plants  over  the  globe,  and 
was  called  on  at  once  to  explain  the  occurrence  of  a 
peculiar  flora  in  islands  like  those  of  the  Pacific,  cut  off 
from  the  rest  of  the  world  by  a  vast  expanse  of  ocean  ; 
and  again,  to  reconcile  the  fact  of  the  same  or  allied 
species  being  diffused  over  areas  separated  from  each 


1 6 6  PREHISTORIC  MA  iV.  [Chap. 

other  by  the  same,  or  other  barriers  equally  impassable. 
But  Professor  Edward  Forbes  and  Dr.  Hooker  have 
effectually  cleared  up  the  difficulties  which  the  botanist 
experienced  ;  and  a  similar  mode  of  dealing  with  those 
of  the  ethnologist  seems  to  have  passed  through  the 
mind  of  Darwin,  as  he  explored  the  peopled  islands  of 
the  Southern  Pacific,  whatever  changes  may  have  since 
modified  his  views.  Other  subjects  engaged  his  atten- 
tion, and  fill  the  interesting  pages  of  his  Voyage  of  a 
Natw  alisty  and  it  is  only  as  a  passing  thought  that  he 
observes :  "  Nor  can  I  quite  pass  over  the  probability 
of  the  former  existence  of  large  archipelagos  of  lofty 
islands,  where  now  only  rings  of  coral  rock  scarcely 
break  the  open  expanse  of  the  sea,  throwing  some  Hght 
on  the  distribution  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  other  high 
islands  now  left  standing,  so  immensely  remote  from 
each  other,  in  the  midst  of  the  great  ocean,'^ 

lime  is  the  element  most  frequently  required  in  the 
h3rpotheses  of  the  ethnologist.  The  geologist,  happily 
freed  from  the'trammek  of  diluvial  systems,  takes  to 
himself  unlimited  ages  for  the  working  out  of  the  phe- 
nomena revealed  to  him  in  the  earth^s  crust ;  and,  with 
the  command  of  requisite  time,  the  whole  cosmical  his- 
tory moves  onward  in  calm,  majestic  progression,  under 
the  operation  of  laws  of  nature  little  differing  from  those 
fitUl  in  force.  The  palseontologist  and  the  botanist, 
guided  by  the  same  laws,  see  many  mysteries  disappear ; 
but  the  ethnologist  is  restricted  from  such  license  by 
historical  evidence,  which  he  may  critically  elucidate, 
but  which  he  dare  not  ignore.  The  very  license,  how- 
ever, which  the  geologist  has  thus  acquired  at  so  criti- 
cal a  time  for  his  science,  probably  tempts  him  to  its 
abuse ;  and  the  ethnologist  is  apt  to  stumble  at  assumed 
intervals  of  vast  extent  in  time  demanded  by  the  geo- 
logist, in  relation  to  those  most  recent  phenomena  in 


VLJ         THE  MARITIME  INSTINCT:  THE  CANOE.       167 

which  he  is  chiefly  interested.  In  this  respect  it  will 
probably  be  found  that,  in  many  of  those  post-tertiary 
formations  now  being  associated  with  the  traces  of  man 
and  his  arts^  a  greater  antiquity  has  been  demanded  by 
the  geologist  than  is  indispensable  to  account  for  their 
deposition.  And  so  also  may  it  be  with  the  theory  of 
submergence  of  a  southern  continent,  or  great  archi- 
pelago of  thickly-clustering  and  lofty  islands.  That  the 
coral  reefs  and  atoUs  of  the  Southern  Pacific  prove  that 
an  immense  area  in  that  ocean  has  for  ages  been  slowly 
sinking  beneath  its  waves,  until  large  portions  have  been 
submerged  and  have  disappeared,  is  an  opinion  uni- 
versally admitted  by  geologists.  Dana  assigns  such 
changes  to  a  period  "probably  within  and  since  the 
tertiSy  epoch ;"  and  the  facts  noted  in  reference  to  the 
ruined  structures  at  Bonabe  prove  that  they  were  pro- 
longed into  modem  times,  coeval  with  human  history. 
If  such  a  process  of  subsidation  were  stiU  in  progress, 
many  of  the  low  coral  islands  of  the  Pacific  would  dis- 
appear beneath  the  ocean  in  the  lapse  of  comparatively 
few  centuries ;  and  by  such  natural  causes,  continuous 
island  chains  may  have  been  engulfed,  which  once 
formed  the  natural  resting-places,  by  means  of  which 
the  fleets  of  Polynesia  piloted  their  way  to  islands  now 
separated  by  seemingly  impassable  oceau  barriers,  and 
even  found  their  way  to  Southern  America. 

We  must  not^  however,  be  misled  here,  any  more  than 
in  our  estimate  of  possible  Atlantic-  voyagers,  by  the 
undue  contempt  with  which  the  European  is  apt  to 
gauge  the  capacity  of  such  island  mariners  in  their 
native  ^raft.  At  Vanikoro,  the  native  canoe  is  a  mere 
rudely-fashioned  trunk  of  a  tree,  sufficiently  grooved  tp 
afford  foot-hold;  yet  to  this  the  islander  attaches  an 
outrigger,  spreads  a  mat  for  his  sail,  and  boldly  launches 
forth  into  the  ocean,  though  probably  few  Europeans 


168  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

would  be  induced  to  venture  in  such  a  craft  on  the 
stillest  pool.  Dr.  Pickering,  when  illustrating  the  ideas 
of  oceanic  migration  which  he  was  led  to  form  from 
intimate  observations  of  widely-scattered  and  very  di- 
verse branches  of  the  human  family,  remarks  :  "  Of  the 
aboriginal  vessels  of  the  Pacific,  two  kinds  only  are 
adapted  for  long  sea-voyages  :  those  of  Japan,  and  the 
large  double  canoes  of  the  Society  and  Tonga  groups. 
In  times  anterior  to  the  impulse  given  to  civilized 
Europe,  through  the  noble  enterprise  of  Columbus, 
Polynesians  were  accustomed  to  undertake  sea-voyages 
nearly  as  long,  exposed  to  equal  dangers,  and  in  vessels 
of  far  inferior  construction.  However  incredible  this 
may  appear  to  many,  there  is  sufficient  evidence  of  the 
fact.  The  Tonga  people  are  known  to  hold  intercourse 
with  Yavao,  Samoa,  the  Feejee  Islands,  Botuma,  and 
the  New  Hebridea  But  there  is  a  document,  published 
before  those  seas  were  frequented  by  whalers  and 
trading-vessels,  which  shows  a  more  extensive  aboriginal 
acquaintance  with  the  islands  of  the  Pacific.  I  allude 
to  the  map  obtained  by  Forster  and  Cook  from  a  native 
of  the  Society  Islands,  and  which  has  been  shown  to 
contain  not  only  the  Marquesas,  and  the  islands  south 
and  east  of  Tahiti,  but  the  Samoan,  Feejee,  and  even 
more  distant  groups.  Again,  in  regard  to  the  prin- 
ciples of  navigation,  the  Polynesians  appear  to  possess 
a  better  knowledge  of  the  subject  than  is  commonly 
supposed,  as  is  shown  from  recent  discoveries  at  the 
Hawaiian  Islands.  One  of  the  Hawaiian  headlands  has 
been  found  to  bear  the  name  of  The  starting-place  for 
Tahiti;  the  canoes,  according  to  the  account  of  the 
natives,  derived  through  the  missionaries,  leaving  in 
former  times  at  a  certain  season  of  the  year,  and  direct- 
tag  their  eour«  by  a  parfcular  star/  Thu.  we  per- 
ceive,   notwithstanding  the  silence  of  history,  oceanic 


VI.]        THE  MARITIME  INSTINCT:  TEE  CANOE,       169 

migration  presented  no  insurmountable  obstacle  to  the 
fearless  and  migratory  Polynesian,  with  his  naturally 
wandering  disposition,  and  his  aptitude  for  maritime 
enterprise.  Hence  the  marvel,  that  each  little  coral  and 
volcanic  island,  widely  scattered  through  the  vast  ocean 
that  spreads  its  expanse  of  waters  between  Asia  and 
America,  is  found  with  its  human  occupants,  its  abori- 
ginal arts,  and  its  little  fleet  of  ocean-canoes. 

But  leaving  such  glimpses  of  oceanic  migration,  there 
i^  another  aspect  in  which  the  ingenuity  of  the  primitive 
boat-builder  of  the  New  World  is  exhibited,  which  is 
highly  characteristic  in  itself,  and  also  worthy  of  a  pass- 
ing notice  from  some  elements  of  comparison  it  afibrds 
with  the  primeval  ingenuity  of  the  ancient  world. 
Throughout  the  islands  of  the  American  archipelago, 
and  among  the  southern  tribes,  where  large  and  freely 
navigable  rivers  abound,  the  native  canoe  was  made  of 
various  sizes,  but  invariably  of  the  trunk  of  a  tree  hol- 
lowed out,  and  reduced  to  the  required  shape.  Such 
appears  to  be  the  universal  instinctive  type  of  the  primi- 
tive mariner's  craft ;  but  where  obstacles  interfere  with 
its  accomplishment,  the  rudest  races  devise  means  to 
obviate  the  difficulty.  Among  the  Australians,  seem- 
ingly the  most  hopelessly  degraded  of  all  the  human 
family,  the  native  timber  is  mostly  too  heavy  to  float 
in  water,  and  the  Australian  constructs  for  himself  a 
bark  canoe,  sufficient  for  bearing  him  over  a  smooth 
stream,  though  not  such  as  to  tempt  him  to  face  the 
violence  of  the  open  sea.  Again,  the  Califomian  canoe 
is.  a  mere  rude  float  made  of  rushes,  in  the  form  of  a 
lashed-up  hammock ;  while  at  the  opposite  end  of  the 
scale  of  such  untutored  ship-craft,  the  canoes  of  the 
Navigator  Islands,  in  the  Pacific, — so  called  by  La  Pe- 
rouse,  their  first  discoverer,  owing  to  the  graceful  shape 
and  superior  workmanship  of  these  vessels, — are  formed 


170  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

of  irregular  pieces  of  wood,  sewed  together  by  means  of 
a  raised  interior  margin.  In  this  the  skilful  carpenter 
is  guided  by  taste  or  utility,  and  not  by  necessity,  for 
the  Navigator  Islands  are  fertile  and  populous,  and 
clothed  to  the  summits  of  their  lofty  hills  with  luxuriant 
forests  and  richly-laden  fruit-trees. 

But  across  the  wide  area  of  the  northern  continent  of 
America,  which  stretches  from  the  Gulf  of  the  St.  Law- 
rence to  the  Pacific,  a  totally  diflFerent  combination  of 
physical  circumstances  has  given  bent  to  the  develop- 
ments of  Indian  ingenuity  in  the  art  of  boat-building. 
In  the  St.  Lawrence  itself,  and  throughout  all  its  prin- 
cipal tributaries,  navigation  is  constantly  impeded  by 
waterfalls  or  rapids,  which  constitute  an  insurmountable 
baxrier  to  ordinary  navigation.  In  like  manner  the 
whole  country  along  the  northern  and  southern  shores 
of  Lake  Ontario,  the  vaUey  of  the  Ottawa,  reaching 
towards  Georgian  Bay  and  Lake  Superior,  and  much  of 
the  route  between  that  and  the  Rocky  Moimtains,  is  a 
chain  of  lakes  or  interrupted  river  navigation.  Hence 
all  the  principal  routes  of  travel  consist  of  lines  of  lake 
and  river  united  by  «  portages."  or  canying-places,  over 
which  the  canoe  and  all  its  contents  have  to  be  borne 
by  the  native  boatmen,  or  the  voyageurs,  as  the  French 
Canadians  and  half-breeds  of  the  traders  and  Hudson's 
Bay  Company  are  called.  For  such  mode  of  transport 
the  wooden  canoe  would  be  all  but  impracticable,  and 
accordingly,  probably  long  ages  before  voyageurs  of 
European  descent  had  learned  to  handle  such  canoes, 
the  native  Indian  devised  for  himself  his  light  and 
graceftd  bark-boat,  made  from  the  rind  of  the  Betula 
papyracea,  or  canoe-birch.  This  species  of  American 
birch  grows  in  great  abundance,  where  the  soil  is  good 
often  acquiring  a  height  of  seventy  feet.  The  wood  is 
of  little  value,  as  it  soon  decays  on  exposure,  but  its 


VI.]    THE  MARITIME  INSTINCT:  THE  CANOE,       171 

tough  and  durable  bark  is  invaluable  to  the  American 
Indian,  and  scarcely  less  indispensable  to  his  European 
supplanter.  The  birch-bark  wigwam  is  the  common 
residence  of  most  of  the  tribes  from  the  Atlantic  coast 
till  the  region  frequented  by  the  buffalo  is  approached, 
and  its  skins  supply  a  superior  substitute.  But  the 
most  important  use  of  the  bark  is  as  the  principal 
material  of  the  portable  canoe.  The  skeleton  is  formed 
by  constructing  a  frame,  called  by  the  French  Canadians 
gabarte,  which  represents  the  rim  of  the  intended  canoe, 
and  its  form  is  completed  in  skeleton  by  a  series  of  light 
ribs  of  cedar-wood,  covered  with  a  sheathing  of  thin, 
flexible  slips  of  the  same  placed  longitudinally.  Over 
this  the  covering  of  birch-bark  is  laid,  generally  rising 
into  a  gracefully  curved  stem  and  stem  ;  and  the  whole 
sheathing  is  sewed  together,  and  to  the  cedar-frame, 
by  means  of  an  awl  of  pointed  bone,  with  thread  com- 
posed of  the  fibrous  roots  of  the  cedar,  or  of  the  white 
spruce,  soaked  in  boiling  water.  The  seams  are  then 
caulked  with  the  prepared  resin  of  the  Balm  of  GUead 
fir,  or  the  pitch-pine ;  and  not  unfrequently  the  whole 
receives  an  artistic  finish  by  being  decorated  with  figures 
of  animals,  or  other  Indian  pictorial  devices.  The 
voyagers  in  such  canoes  kneel  in  the  bottom,  and  pro- 
pel them  by  a  light  paddle  ;  it  being  indispensable  for 
safety  in  such  slight  fabrics  to  keep  the  centre  of  gravity 
as  low  as  possible.  They  are  made  of  all  sizes,  from  the 
small  hunting-canoe  of  twelve  feet  long,  and  weighing 
only  twenty  poiands,  to  the  canot  de  mattre,  or  large 
north-western  canoe  of  the  fur  trade,  which  measures 
thirty-six  feet,  and  is  propelled  by  fourteen  rowers.  On 
the  Canadian  rivers,  and  in  the  Hudson's  Bay  territory, 
the  voyageurs  beguile  the  'labour  of  the  paddle  with 
simple  monotonous  songs,  of  which  one  takes  up  the 
air  and  the  whole  join  in  chorus  ;  and,  while  the  novelty 


172  PREHISTOBIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

of  the  scene  and  circumstances  reKeves  the  uniformity 
of  an  endless  range  of  wooded  river  or  lake  scenery, 
few  modes  of  transport  can  surpass  the  swift,  noiseless 
gliding  of  the  birch-bark  canoe,  or  the  hilarious  excite- 
ment of  the  voyageurs  and  half-breeds,  when  a  rapid  of 
manageable  force  has  to  be  surmounted  by  increased 
vehemence  in  plying  the  paddle,  and  the  cheering  stimu- 
lus of  the  noisy  chorus. 

The  portage  and  portable  canoe  were  not  unknown  to 
the  ancient  allophylian  of  the  British  Isles,  though,  with 
little  necessity  for  the  frequent  or  general  use  of  such, 
less  skill  was  applied  to  the  construction  of  a  suitable 
vessel.  In  Mr.  E.  P.  Shirley's  A  ccount  of  the  Dominion 
of  Famey  in  UlsteVy  a  curious  and  interesting  example 
of  such  a  portable  boat  is  figured  and  described,  which 
was  found  in  a  bog  in  that  territory  of  Ulster.  It  is 
formed  of  the  trunk  of  an  oak-tree,  measuring  twelve 
feet  in  length  by  three  feet  in  breadth,  and  is  hollowed 
out,  and  furnished  with  handles  at  both  ends,  evidently 
for  facility  of  transport  from  one  loch  to  another,  in  a 
district  where,  like  many  in  Canada^  numerous  small 
lakes  cover  the  surface,  such  as  among  the  ancient  Irish 
chiefs  frequently  formed  chosen  retreats,  where  they 
•^constructed  their  insulated  strongholds  beyond  the  reach 
of  hostile  surprise. 

A  much  closer  analogy  might  be  traced  between  the 
Indian  birch-bark  canoe  and  the  coracle  of  the  ancient 
Briton  described  by  Julius  Caesar,  which  was  made  of 
wicker-work  covered  with  skins.  SuqJi,  however,  are 
rather  to  be  regarded  as  the  ancient  British  counter- 
part of  the  Esquimaux  canoe,  which,  like  it,  is  formed 
of  a  light  frame  covered  with  skin ;  and  as  this  is 
brought  over  the  top,  and  made  to  wrap  round  the 
body  of  its  solitary  occupant,  it  enables  the  amphibious 
navigator,  both  of  the  North  Pacific  and  Greenland  seas^ 


VL]       THE  MARITIME  INSTINCT:  THE  CANOE,        173 

to  brave  a  stormy  ocean  in  which  no  open  boat  could 

live, 

HamilcOy  the  Carthaginian,  according  to  Festus  Avie- 
nus,  witnessed  the  ancient  Britons  ''  ploughing  the  ocean 
in  a  novel  boat ;  for,  strange  to  tell,  they  constructed 
their  vessels  with  skins  joined  together,  and  often  navi- 
gated the  sea  in  a  hide  of  leather."     Upwards  of  four 
centuries  later,  Caesar  found  the  same  stormy  sea  navi- 
gated by  the  southern  Britons  in  coracles  made  of  a  hide 
stretched  over  a  light  timber  and  osier  frame.     When, 
in  the  sixth  century,  we  once  more  recover,  in  the  lives 
of  the  Irish  Saints,  some  glimpse  of  maritime  arts,  it  is 
in  the  same  coracles, — sometimes  made  of  a  single  hide, 
and  in  other  cases,  such  as  the  ocean  currach  of  St 
Columba,   of  several  skins  sewed  together,— that   the 
evangelists  of  lona  crossed  the  Irish  sea,  visited  the 
Orkney  and  Shetland  Islands,  and  even,  as  there  is  rea- 
son to  believe,  preceded  the  Northmen  in  the  discovery 
of  Iceland.    The  old  Scottish  historian  Bellenden,  writ- 
ing in  the  sixteenth  century,  asks  :  "  How  can  there  be 
greater  ingyne  than  to  make  a  boat  of  a  bull's  hyde 
bound  with  nothing  but  wands  ?     This  boat  is  called  a 
currock,  with  which  they  fish,  and  sometimes  pass  over 
great  rivers.**     Yet  this  singularly  primitive  boat  is  still 
to  be  met  with  in  the  river-estuaries  of  Wales,  and  on 
various  parts  of  the  Irish  coast ;  the  counterpart  of  the 
Esquimaux  baydar  or  skin-canoe,  with  which  the  Aleu- 
tian Islanders  navigate  the  intervening  ocean  between 
Asia  and  America.     Dr.  Pickering  remarks,  on  encoun- 
tering it  to  the  north  of  the  Straits  of  De  Fuca  : — "  From 
its  lightness,  elegance,  and  the  capacity  of  being  rendered 
impervious  to  both  air  and  water,  I  could  not  but  admire 
its  perfect  adaptation  to  the  purposes  of  navigation  ;  for 
it  seemed  almost  to  enable  man  to  take  a  place  among 
the  proper  inhabitants  of  the  deep.      Such  vessels  are 


^-^ 


i**' 


174  PREHISTORIC  MAX,  [Chap. 

obviously  fitted  to  cope  with  the  open  sea,  and,  so  far  as 
the  absence  of  sails  permits,  to  traverse  a  considerable 
expanse  of  ocean/* 

The  same  intelligent  explorer  sums  up  the  results  of 
his  opportunities  of  observation  on  types,  as  he  believes, 
of  all  the  most  diverse  varieties  of  mankind,  by  affirm- 
ing :  "  I  have  seen,  in  all,  eleven  races  of  men,  and 
though  I  am  hardly  prepared  to  fix  a  positive  limit  to 
their  number,  I  confess,  after  having  visited  so  many 
different  parts  of  the  globe,  that  I  am  at  a  loss  where  to 
look  for  others/'  Nevertheless,  he  unhesitatingly  pro- 
nounces the  aboriginal  Americans, — alike  as  indicated  in 
the  sculptures  of  Mexico  and  Yucatan,  the  carvings  of 
the  ancient  mounds  of  Ohio,  and  the  portraits  and  liv- 
ing features  of  many  existing  tribes, — of  the  Mongolian 
race,  and  therefore  of  Asiatic  origin ;  and  in  speaking  of 
the  ingenious  baydar  of  the  Aleutian  Islands,  he  adds  : 
"The  presence  of  these  skin-canoes  among  the  Esqui- 
maux of  the  Greenland  Seas,  was  long  regarded  as  a 
proof  of  the  existence  of  a  north-west  passage ;  and  it 
likewise  indicates  the  course  of  human  migrations.  I 
have  not  examined  authorities  to  ascertain  whether  the 
passage  across  Behring  Straits  is  practicable  for  a  people 
in  the  purely  hunter  state.  But  in  view  of  the  large 
portion  of  North-west  America  in  contact  with  maritime 
tribes,  these  tribes  have  appeared  to  me  the  most  prob- 
able source  of  the  inland  population.''  Dr.  Pickering 
does  not,  however,  limit  his  ideas  of  Asiatic  migration  to 
this  single  northern  source;  but,  on  the  contrary,  states 
as  the  result  of  his  peculiarly  favourable  opportunities 
for  observation,  his  reasons  for  believing  in  various  en- 
tirely independent  routes  of  oceanic  migration  to  the 
New  World.  This  question  is  discussed  in  a  subsequent 
chapter,  but  the  opinion  is  one  which  must  carry  all  the 
more  weight  as  coming  from  one  who  so  entirely  dis- 


VL]        THE  MARITIME  INSTINCT:  THE  CANOE.       175 

cards  the  idea  of  a  common  Adamic  or  Noachic  origin 
for  man. 

Indispensable  as  the  means  of  oceanic  migration  are 
to  every  theory  of  American  colonization,  excepting  that 
which  ranks  the  Red  Man  among  the  indigenous  famia 
of  the  New  World,  the  peculiar  characteristics  of  its  tiny 
fleets  are  full  of  interest  for  us,  and  none  more  so  than 
the  baydar  of  the  Pacific  Esquimaux.  The  same  inge- 
nious vessel  reappears,  under  the  name  of  the  kaiak,  in 
the  Greenland  Seas ;  and  in  just  such  a  fragile  bark,  the 
poor  Greenlander  had  crossed  the  wide,  stormy  ocean, 
when  rescued  ofi*  the  Scottish  coast,  only  to  perish  on  the 
long  looked-for  shore.  In  such  a  bark,  therefore,  the 
passage  from  the  Asiatic  to  the  American  shores  is  no 
impossible  feat ;  as,  indeed,  it  is  probable  that  the  bark 
of  the  primeval  Columbus,  who  led  the  way  from  the 
continent  of  Europe  to  the  untrodden  wilds  of  Britain, 
bore  a  close  resemblance  to  it. 

It  is  a  curious  fact,  well  worthy  of  notice,  that  through- 
out the  American  continent,  seemingly  so  dependent  on 
maritime  colonization  for  its  settlement  by  man,  the  use 
of  sails  as  a  means  of  propelling  vessels  through  the 
water  appears  to  have  been  almost  unknown;  and,  in- 
deed, so  far  as  North  America  is  specially  considered, 
was  entirely  unknown  to  the  native  Indians.  Prescott, 
when  describing  the  singular  suspension  bridges,  made  of 
the  tough  fibres  of  the  maguey,  with  which  the  Peruvians 
spanned  the  broad  gullies  of  their  mountain  streams, 
adds  :  "  The  wider  and  more  tranquil  waters  were  crossed 
on  balsas,  a  kind  of  raft  still  much  used  by  the  natives, 
to  which  sails  were  attached,  furnishing  the  only  instance 
of  this  higher  kind  of  navigation  among  the  American 
Indians,''^  This  description  of  the  historian,  however,  is 
apt  to  convey  a  false  impression ;  for,  although  the  Peru- 

*  Conq4tegt  qf  Peru,  vol,  i.  b.  1,  cli.  '2. 


176  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

vians  were  so  essentially  an  agricultural  and  unmari- 
time  people,  nevertheless  the  use  of  sails  in  their  coasting 
trade,  constitutes  one  of  their  noticeable  points  of  supe- 
riority over  all  the  other  nations  of  the  New  World. 
Attention  is  specially  directed  to  this  by  an  incident 
recorded  in  the  second  expedition  for  the  discovery  of 
Peru  preparatory  to  its  conquest.  Bartholomew  Ruiz, 
the  pilot  of  the  expedition,  after  lingering  on  the  coast, 
near  the  Bay  of  St.  Matthew,  stood  out  into  the  wide 
ocean,  when  he  was  suddenly  surprised  by  the  sight  of  a 
vessel  in  that  strange,  silent  sea,  seemingly,  in  the  dis- 
tance, like  a  caravel  of  considerable  size,  with  its  broad 
sail  spread  before  the  wind.  "The  old  navigator  was 
not  a  little  perplexed  by  this  phenomenon,  as  he  was 
(Confident  that  no  European  bark  could  have  been  before 
him  in  these  latitudes,  and  no  Indian  nation  yet  dis- 
covered, not  even  the  civilized  Mexican,  was  acquainted 
with  the  use  of  sails  in  navigation.''  As  he  drew  near  he 
found  it  a  large  native  haha^  formed  of  huge  timbers  of 
light,  porous  wood,  and  with  a  flooring  of  reeds  raised 
above  them.  Two  masts  sustained  tbe  large,  square, 
cotton  sail,  and  a  movable  keel  and  rudder  enabled  the 
boatmen  to  steer.  This  vessel  plays  a  more  important 
part  in  the  history  of  the  discovery  and  conquest  of  Peru, 
than  the  galley,  or  great  canoe  of  the  Indian  cacique  does 
in  that  of  Mexico.  Seen  by  Columbus  on  his  fourth 
voyage,  off"  the  coast  of  Honduras,  that  canoe  seemed  to 
beckon  him,  though  in  vain,  to  the  shores  of  Yucatan, 
the  discovery  of  Mexico,  and  aU  the  triumphs  reaped  by 
Cortes  at  a  later  day.  It  was  otherwise  with  the  Peru- 
vian balsa.  On  board  of  it  Ruiz  found  ornaments  dis- 
playing great  skill,  wrought  in  silver  and  gold,  vases  and 
mirrors  of  burnished  silver,  curious  fabrics,  both  cotton 
and  wooUen,.  and  a  pair  of  balances  made  to  weigh  the 
precious  metals.    Here  were  the  first  imdoubted  evidences 


VI.]        THE  MARITIME  INSTINCT:  THE  CANOE.        177 

of  the  existence  of  that  strange  seat  of  a  native  American 
civilisation,  among  the  lofty  valleys  of  the  Southern  Andes, 
which  he  was  in  search  of.  The  balsa's  crew  included 
both  men  and  women,  who  carried  with  them  provisions 
for  their  voyage,  and  had  come  from  a  Peruvian  port 
some  degrees  to  the  south.  Like  older  voyagers  of  the 
Mediterranean,  the  Peruvian  pilots  were  wont  to  creep 
timidly  along  the  shore ;  but  the  Spaniards  encountered 
them  in  the  open  Pacific,  where  no  European  prow  had 
ever  sailed.  Caught  by  a  sudden  gale  their  bark  might 
have  been  borne  far  off  among  the  islands  that  stud  the 
Southern  Ocean,  and  here  was  the  germ  of  a  race  of 
islanders,  to  whom,  aft^  a  few  generations,  the  memory 
of  their  Peruvian  ancestry  would  have  sundved  only  as 
some  mythic  legend,  like  the  Manco  Capa<5  of  their  own 
Incas,  or  the  Mawai  of  the  Polynesian  archipelago. 


VOL.  I.  M 


178  PREHISTORIC  MAm  [Chap. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

THE  TECHNOLOGICAL  INSTINCT:  TOOLS, 

The  earliest  character  in  which  God  reveab  himself  to 
man  is  as  the  Supreme  Artificer.  In  the  beginning  God 
created  the  heavens  and  the  earth ;  and,  as  the  increasing 
powers  of  the  telescope  help  us  to  penetrate  ever  deeper 
into  the  dark  recesses  of  space,  and  the  progress  of  the 
microscope  discloses  minuter  traces  of  that  invisible 
world  of  order  and  infinite  beauty  which  lies  within  the 
meanest  objects  that  surround  us  on  every  hand,  we  only 
learn  to  dwell  with  profounder  wonder  and  admiration 
on  the  perfect  art  with  which  creation  is  inwrought. 
And,  in  like  manner,  at  the  beginning  of  a  new  order  of 
life,  God,  who  is  himself  so  wondrous  an  artificer,  created 
man  in  his  own  image,  with  instincts  and  faculties  for 
art,  commanding  a  range  compared  with  which  the  tool- 
bom  ant,  and  spider,  and  bee  seem  but  as  ingenious  self- 
acting  machines,  each  made  to  execute  perfectly  its  one 
little  item  in  the  comprehensive  plan  of  creation. 

As  industrial  artificers,  the  creatures  so  far  beneath  us 
in  the  scale  of  organization  seem  often  to  put  to  shame 
our  most  perfect  workmanship;  yet,  provided  with  no 
other  instruments  than  the  eye  and  the  hand,  but  guided 
by  that  intelligent  reason  which  distinguishes  man  from 
the  brutes,  we  see  him,  even  as  an  artificer,  presenting 
characteristics  of  the  Divine  image,  which  are  altogether 
wanting  in  the  lower  animals.     Labour  is  for  them  p;o 


VII.]       THE  TECHNOLOGICAL  INSTINCT:  TOOLS.        179 

sternly  imposed  necessity,  but  an  inevitable  process, 
having  only  one  possible  form  of  manifestation ;  produc- 
ing in  its  exercise  the  highest  enjoyment  the  labourer  is 
capable  of ;  and  in  its  results  leading  our  thoughts  from 
the  wise,  unerring,  yet  untaught  worker,  to  Him  whose 
work  it  is,  and  of  whose  wisdom  and  skill  the  workman- 
ship, not  less  than  the  workman,  appears  a  direct  mani- 
festation. It  is  not  so  with  man.  As  the  wise  preacher 
lias  told,  God  made  him  upright,  but  he  has  sought  out 
many  inventions.  The  capacity  of  the  workman  is  a 
divine  gift,  but  the  work  ia  his  own,  and  too  often  be- 
trays, in  some  of  its  most  ingenious  devices  and  results, 
anything  rather  than  a  divine  origin. 

As  Bacon  teaches,  and  as  Plato  had  taught  before 
Bacon,  the  mind  brings  to  every  action  an  antecedent 
idea ;  and  so  it  was  after  the  Creator  had  seen  that  all 
else,  animate  and  inanimate,  was  good,  that  he  said : 
"  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image,  after  our  likeness  ;"  and 
the  Divine  idea  went  onward  to  its  realization.  Our 
planet  had  been  the  theatre  of  life  in  infinite  variety  for 
coimtless  ages ;  the  once  vital  structures  and  minutest 
microscopic  organisms  of  that  ancient  past  had  been  built 
up  into  carboniferous,  silicious,  and  cretaceous  strata,  and 
mighty  cycles  of  animal  life  had  fulfilled  their  allotted 
destinies,  and  been  embalmed  and  entombed  in  the  living 
rock ;  but,  for  the  first  time,  the  earth  was  to  have  for 
its  occupant  a  being  capable  of  intelligent  progression. 
If  we  conceive  of  some  superior  intelligence  seeking 
hereafter  to  arrive  at  an  adequate  knowledge  of  man,  as 
the  higher  animal,  and  of  his  relative  rank  in  the  scale 
of  animal  life,  by  means  of  his  fossil  remains  :  remarkable 
^  are  the  differences  which  his  osteological  reUcs  present, 
when  compared  with  those  of  any  other  of  the  verte- 
brata,  a  singularly  imperfect  conception  would  be  formed 
of  what  place  man  had  actually  filled  in  the  economy  of 


180  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

life.  But  for  such  au  observer  other  than  the  mere 
oBteological  traces  of  man  are  in  store.  The  strange 
axmamfnte  of  Eastern  enterprise  ;  the  commercial  naTes 
of  the  Jasons,  the  Hirams^  and  the  Ptolemies  of  old ;  the 
viking  galleys  of  the  Northmen  ;  the  caravels  of  the 
Mediterranean ;  the  war  galleys  and  merchant  ships  of 
Sidon  and  Carthage,  of  Gkidir,  Massala,  Pisa,  and  Venice  ; 
the  royal  argosies  and  proud  axma^ of  Spain;  the  lone 
Arctic  explorers  and  the  stately  fleets  of  England ;  oaken 
three-deckers,  richly  freighted  East-Indiamen,  and  won- 
drously  constructed  ocean  steam-ships;  with  gold,  and 
gems,  and  strangely  varied  stores,  have  all  gone  down 
into  the  ocean's  depths. 

What  a  treaauiy  of  art  and  history  is  already  im- 
bedded  in  the  basin  of  the  Mediterranean !  Along  the 
tracks  of  commerce  in  the  pathless  ocean  what  marvel- 
lous formations  are  being  treasured  in  the  strata  that 
shall  rise  to  form  new  continents,  when  perchance  the 
submerged  coral  reefs  of  the  Pacific  shaU  be  the  summits 
of  lofty  moimtains,  in  the  long-sought  Terra  Australis 
Incognita,  known  and  found  at  last.  Stabiae,  Hercula- 
neum,  and  Pompeii,  show  what  earthquakes  and  volcanos 
may  effect.  The  cliff  of  Guadeloupe,  with  its  fossil 
skeletons,  pottery,  stone  arrow-heads,  and  even  carved 
wooden  relics,  all  petrified  into  limestone  rock,  reveals 
the  results  of  one  of  the  ordinary  processes  by  which  the 
detritus  of  shells  and  corals,  with  the  consolidated  sand, 
solidifies  into  stone.  J£  ours  be  not  the  latest  stage  of 
being,  but  is  to  be  succeeded  by  "  new  heavens  and  a 
new  earth,*  marvellous  indeed  are  the  revelations  which 
those  posthistoric  strata  have  yet  to  disclose.  But  even 
they  will  scarcely  suffice  to  reveal  the  most  striking  cha- 
racteristics of  a  being  for  the  first  time  introduced  into 
that  long  chain  of  organic  life,  on  whom  the  external 
economy  of  nature  reacts  in  a  way  it  never  did  on  living 


VIL]       THE  TECHNOLOGICAL  INSTINCT:  TOOLS.       181 

being  before;  while  he  is  capable  of  releasing  himself 
altogether  from  the  domination  of  such  external  elements 
of  sensation ;  of  searching  into  the  past ;  anticipating 
the  future;  of  looking  inward,  and  being  a  law  unto 
himself.  His  nature  embraces  possibilities  of  the  widest 
conceivable  diversity,  for  his  is  no  longer  the  law  of  in- 
stinct but  of  reason :  law,  therefore,  that  brings  with  it 
conscious  liberty,  and  also  conscious  responsibility.  If 
our  present  mode  of  viewing  him  admiJted  of  the  full 
consideration  of  all  that  is  implied  in  the  probation  of  a 
being  endowed,  as  we  are  assured  alike  by  nature  and 
revelation,  with  not  only  life  but  inmiortality,  a  con- 
sideration of  the  moral  constitution  of  this  the  latest  of 
the  creations  of  God,  would  involve  very  lofty  tiiemes  ; 
but  while  we  cannot,  even  from  the  ethnologist's  point 
of  view,  regard  man  solely  as  the  zoological  Birmna,  ajid 
treat  hiTn  like  the  mere  zoologist,  "  who  shows  a  Newton 
as  he  shows  an  ape,''  we  must  Umit  our  present  view  to 
the  influences  of  his  moral  and  intellectual  nature  in 
their  artistic  manifestations. 

But  an  important  and  seemingly  conflicting  element 
arises  out  of  the  capacity  of  man  for  moral  progression, 
to  which  some  ethnologists  fail  to  give  due  weight.  A 
suggestive  thought  of  Agassiz,  relative  to  certain  real  or 
supposed  analogies  between  the  geographical  distribu- 
tion of  species  of  simise,  and  especially  the  anthropoid 
monkeys,  and  certain  inferior  types  of  man,  sufficed  as 
the  nucleus  of  Gliddon's  elaborate  monkey-chart  in  the 
Indigenous  Races  of  the  Earthy  illustrative  of  the  geogra- 
phical distribution  of  monkeys  in  the  relation  to  that  of 
certain  types  of  men.  Notwithstanding  the  very  monkey- 
fying  process  to  which  some  of  the  illustrations  of  inferior 
human  types  have  been  subjected  in  this  pictorial  cho- 
rography,  the  correspondences  are  not  such  as  to  carry 
conviction  to  most  minds.     But,  assuming,  for  the  sake 


182  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

of  argument,  or  as  a  supposed  reductio  ad  absurdum, 
the  descent  of  all  the  diverse  species  of  monkeys  from  a 
single  pair,  Mr.  Gliddon  thus  sums  up  his  final  observa- 
tions :  "  I  propose,  therefore,  that  a  male  and  female 
pair  of  the  '  species '  Cynocephalus  HamadryaSy  be  hence- 
forward recognised  as  the  anthropoid  analogues  of  Noah, 
Shem,  Ham,  and  Japhet ;  and  that  it  must  be  from  these 
two  individuals  that,  owing  to  transplantation,  together 
with  the  combined  action  of  aliment  and  climate,  the 
fifty-four  monkeys  represented  on  our  chart  have  ori- 
ginated.   It  is,  notwithstanding,  sufficiently  strange,  that, 
under  such  circumstances,  this  *  primordial  organic  type ' 
of  monkey  should  have  so  highly  improved  in  Guinea, 
and  in  Malayana,  as  to  become  gorillas  and  chimpanzees, 
orangs  and  gibbons ;  whereas  on  the  contrary,  the  de- 
scendants of  '  Adam  and  Eve '  have,  in  the  same  locali- 
ties, actually  deteriorated  into  the  most  degraded  and 
abject  forms  of  humanity.'^     In  reality,  however,  what- 
ever may  be  said  about  the  possibility  of  such  simian 
development,    the  possible  human  deterioration   is  an 
inevitable  attribute   of  the  rational,  moral  free-agent, 
man  ;  capable  of  the  noblest  aspirations  and  of  wondrous 
intellectual  development,  but  also  with  a  capacity  for 
moral  degradation  such  as  belongs  to  him  alone  of  all 
created  beings.     The  one  characteristic,  as  well  as  the 
other,  separates  man  by  an  impassable  barrier  from  all 
those  other  living  creatures,  that  might  appear  in  some 
respects  gifted  with  endowments  akin  to  his  own. 

Man,  as  a  tool-using  artificer,  seems  to  have  a  rival 
in  the  beaver,  felling  its  timber,  carrying  its  clay,  and 
buUding  its  dam  ;  in  the  spider  weaving  its  web,  more 
perfect  than  any  net  of  human  fisher ;  and  even  in  the 
squirrel  with  its  provident  hoard  of  well-secured  winter 
store,  or  the  monkey  employing  the  cocoa-nut  and  other 
shell-fruit  as  missiles.     But  even  in  such  artificial  appli- 


^^mmm^m^^mt 


VII.]       THE  TECENOLOQIOAL  INSTINCT:  TOOLS,        183 

ances  there  is  nothing  obsolete,  nothing  inventive,  no- 
thing progressive  ;  neither  is  there  any  deterioration. 
Their  most  wonderful  arts,  as  the  cell  of  the  bee,  the 
web  of  the  spider,  or  the  beaver's  dam,  are  executed 
without  a  lesson,  and  are  improved  by  no  experience. 
The  bee  emerges  into  its  last  stage  of  perfect  life,  or  the 
spider  is  hatched  from  its  egg,  and  proceeds  to  do  with- 
out any  instruction,  what  we  could  scarcely  attempt 
after  much  training ;  whereas  the  child  bom  amid  the 
most  highly  developed  civilisation — the  son  of  a  Watt, 
a  Stephenson,  a  Brunei, — if  reared  from  infancy  to  man- 
hood, without  any  knowledge  of  mechanical  science,  or 
the  industrial  arts,  would  start  anew  from  the  rudimen- 
tary instincts  of  the  tool-using  animal,  and  expend  his 
ingenuity,  not  perhaps  without  some  traces  of  hereditary 
mechanical  genius,  on  the  primitive  materials  of  flint, 
stone,  horn,  or  shell. 

Man  depends  for  all  on  his  teachers  ;  and  when  moral 
and  intellectual  deterioration  returns  him  to  the  toolless 
condition  of  the  totally  uncivilized  nomade,  he  is  thrown 
back  on  the  resources  of  his  primary  instincts,  and 
reaches  that  point  from  which  the  primeval  colonist  has 
had  to  start  anew  in  all  lands,  and  work  his  way  up- 
wards, through  stone,  and  bronze,  and  iron  periods,  into 
the  full  co-operation  of  a  civilized  community,  treasuring 
the  experience  of  the  past,  and  making  for  itself  a  new 
and  higher  future. 

The  periods  of  the  archaeologist,  thus  designated  as 
The  Stone  Period,  The  Bronze  Period,  and  The  Iron 
Period,  have  been  brought  into  some  discredit,  in  part 
by  what,  as  a  general  system,  must  be  regarded  only  a^  a 
hjrpothesis,  being  assumed  by  some  who  have  adopted  it, 
as  involving  facts  of  no  less  indisputable  and  universal 
application  than  the  periods  of  the  geologist.  In  part 
also,  they  owe  their  non-acceptance  to  wilful  errors  of 


184  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

their  impugners,  and  to  the  want  of  appreciation  of  the 
inevitable  characteristics  which  pertain  to  transitional 
periods,  such  as  chiefly  come  under  the  European  archaeo- 
logist's observation.  So  far  as  the  aboriginal  American 
is  concerned,  the  New  World  is  in  its  earliest  transitional 
state  still :  that  of  a  stone  period,  veiy  partially  affected 
by  the  introduction  of  foreign-wrought  weapons  and 
implements,  and  in  no  degree  indicating,  among  the 
numerous  tribes  of  North  America,  any  traces  of  the 
adoption  of  a  superinduced  native  metallurgy.  Such 
therefore  has  appeared  to  me  an  actual  condition  of 
things,  the  study  of  which,  and  its  comparison  with  the 
traces  of  a  corresponding  stage  in  the  early  ages  of 
Britain,  may  be  of  some  use  in  clearing  the  subject  from 
much  confusion  which,  from  various  causes,  has  gathered 
round  it. 

The  special  characteristics  of  the  native  civilisation, 
which  the  early  Spanish  adventurers  found  already  ex- 
isting in  Mexico  and  Central  America,  will  come  under 
review  at  a  later  stage ;  but  it  cannot  admit  of  question 
that  throughout  the  whole  Red  Indian  forest-area  metal- 
lurgic  arts  were  unknown,  as  they  still  are  among  the 
Indians  of  the  North-west  after  an  intercourse  of  upwards 
of  three  centuries  and  a  half  with  Europeans.  Copper, 
indeed,  was  wrought  and  used  among  them,  but  it  was 
used  without  any  application  of  fire,  and  as  what  may 
be  most  fitly  designated  a  mere  malleable  stone.  In 
Britain,  as  I  have  already  observed,  "  it  is  not  impossible 
that  the  working  of  gold  may  have  preceded  the  age  of 
bronze,  that  is  the  first  true  age  of  metallurgy,  and  in 
reality  have  belonged  to  its  stone-period.  If  metal  could 
be  found  capable  of  being  wrought  and  fashioned  without 
smelting  or  moulding,  its  use  was  perfectly  compatible 
with  the  simple  arts  of  the  stone-period.  Of  such  use, 
masses  of  native  gold,  such  as  have  been  often  found  both 


VIL]      THE  TECHNOLOGICAL  INSTINCT:  TOOLS.        185 

in  the  Old  and  the  New  World,  are  peculiarly  susceptible ; 
and  some  of  the  examples  of  Scottish  gold  personal 
ornaments  fully  correspond  with  the  probable  results  of 
such  an  anticipatory  use  of  the  metals."^  The  idea  thus 
formed  from  an  examination  of  some  of  the  most  primi- 
tive and  artless  examples  of  primeval  British  goldsmiths' 
work,  has  been  amply  confirmed  by  later  opportunities 
of  observing  the  mode  of  using  the  native  copper,  and 
the  traces  of  its  former  workings,  among  the  American 
Indians ;  and  to  this  day  their  highest  attainment  in 
metallurgic  skill  extends  only  to  grinding  the  iron  hoops 
which  the  Hudson's  Bay  fur-traders  supply  them  with, 
into  knives,  lance  and  arrow  heads,  and  the  like  substi- 
tutes for  the  older  implements  which  they  chipped  out 
of  the  flint,  or  ground  from  the  broken  stone.  Further 
opportunities  will  occur  for  illustrating  this  subject ; 
which  is  full  of  interest  to  the  ethnologist  from  the  light 
it  throws  on  the  rate  of  progress  of  a  barbarous  people 
towards  civilisation  :  or  rather  on  the  capacity  of  man  in 
a  certain  undeveloped  stage,  for  witnessing^  the  most  re- 
markable products  of  the  useful  arts,  without  evincing 
any  desire  to  master  them.  To  the  historian,  who  has 
so  frequently  to  consider,  both  in  ancient  and  modem 
history,  the  immediate  and  remoter  results  of  the  contact 
of  a  highly  civilized  people  with  one  in  such  a  primitive 
condition,  some  of  the  bearings  of  this  inquiry  cannot  be 
without  their  value. 

After  centuries  devoted  to  the  elucidation  of  Roman 
remains,  and  the  assignment  to  Boman  artificers  of  much 
which  the  more  discriminating  classification  of  recent 
years  awards  to  totally  different  workmen,  the  existence 
of  a  singular  class  of  rude  primitive  weapons  and  imple- 
ments, made  of  stone,  shell,  or  bone,  in  nearly  every 
quarter  of  the  globe,  has  at  length  excited  a  very  general 

*  Prehistoric  Annals  of  Scotland^  p.  214. 


186  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

interest  among  the  archaeologists  of  Europe.  Made,  as 
these  simple  relics  of  primitive  art  are,  of  the  most 
readily  wrought  materials,  and  by  the  constructive  in- 
stincts  rather  than  tie  acquired  skiU  of  their  rude  arti- 
ficers,  they  belong  to  one  condition  of  man,  in  relation 
to  the  progress  of  civilisation,  though  pertaining  to  many 
periods  of  the  world's  history,  and  the  most  widely- 
separated  areas  of  the  globe.  In  one  respect,  however, 
though  not  in  this  one  alone,  such  relics  possess  a  pecu- 
liar value  to  the  ethnologist,  when  searching  into  the 
primeval  condition  of  our  race.  The  materials  of  such  in- 
fantile processes  of  manufacture  have  within  themselves, 
most  frequently,  the  evidences  of  their  geographical 
origin,  and  in  some  of  them  also  of  their  chronological 
eZ  The  periods  to  which  numerous  ancient  sepulchral, 
and  other  British  and  European  reUcs  pertain,  may  fre- 
quently  be  determined,  like  those  of  inferior  and  older 
strata,  by  their  accompanying  imbedded  or  buried  fossils. 
The  bones  of  the  Bos  pHmigenius  have  been  found  in- 
dented with  the  primitive  stone  javeHn  of  the  aborigines 
of  Northern  Europe,  and  dug  up  alongside  of  the  traces 
of  British  sepulture.  Those  of  the  Megaceros  Hihemicus 
seem,  in  like  manner,  to  be  traced  to  a  period  of  ancient 
Irish  colonization,  when  stone  hatchets  and  rude  pottery 
prove  the  simple  character  of  its  native  arts ;  while 
other  evidence  satisfies  the  palaeontologist  that  the  same 
Irish  elk — thus  seen,  as  it  were,  in  its  closing  epoch,  and 
immediately  before  its  final  extinction, — was  contempo- 
raneous with  the  mastodon,  the  manmioth,  and  the  fossil 
camivora  of  the  caverns.  The-  Bos  longifrons,  doubtless, 
traces  its  descent  from  an  ancestry  not  less  ancient ;  but 
from  its  wild  herds  the  native  Briton  appears  to  have 
derived  his  domesticated  cattle,  and  its  relics  pertain  to 
an  era  little  later  than  the  Koman  times.  The  orna- 
mented tusks  of  the  wild  boar,  the  bones  of  the  brown 


VIL]      THE  TECHNOLOGICAL  INSTINCT:  TOOLS,        187 

bear,  the  teeth  and  skulls  of  the  beaver,  the  carvings 
wrought  fix>m  the  wabiis  ivory,  the  skates  formed  from 
the  metatarsal  and  metacarpal  bones  of  the  red-deer  and 
small  native  horse,  with  numerous  kindred  relics  of  palse* 
oxAxAogj  within  the  era  of  the  occupation  of  the  British 
Islands  by  man,  all  serve  to  assign  approximate  dates  to 
the  examples  of  his  ancient  arts  which  they  accompany. 
Thus  within  the  historic  period,  as  in  geological  eras 
prior  to  the  creation  of  man,  the  progress  of  time  is 
recorded  by  the  extinction  of  races.  His  advent  on 
our  earth  was  speedily  marked  by  the  disappearance  of 
numerous  groups  of  ancient  life  which  pertain  to  that 
transitional  era  where  geology  closes  and  archaeology 
begins ;  though  the  more  recent  discoveries  of  the  traces 
of  human  arts  along  with  the  fossil  mammals  of  the 
drift,  confirm,  by  new  and  more  striking  evidence,  the 
fact  that  man  entered  on  this  terrestrial  stage,  not  as 
the  highest  in  an  entirely  new  order  of  creation,  and 
belonging  to  an  epoch  detached  by  some  overwhelming 
catastrophe  from  all  preceding  periods  of  organic  life ; 
but  that,  while  the  earth  moved  through  its  orbit  in  calm 
obedience  to  laws  which  still  govern  its  course,  he  ap- 
peared as  the  last  and  best  of  an  order  of  animated 
beings  whose  line  sweeps  back  into  the  shadows  of  an 
unmeasured  past.     And  as  it  was  of  old,  so  is  it  still : 

"  The  old  order  changetli,  yielding  place  to  new, 
And  God  fulfils  himseK  in  many  ways, 
Lest  one  good  custom  should  corrupt  the  world." 

The  disclosures  of  British  tumuli  and  chance  deposits 
suggest  strongly  the  belief  that  the  Celtic  Briton  was 
himself  an  intruder  upon  older  allophylian  occupants ; 
while  the  intrusion  of  the  Koman  into  Celtic  Britain 
is  recorded  for  us  in  the  extinction  of  many  of  its 
ancient  fauna,  as  well  as  of  whole  British  tribes.  What 
the  Eoman  partially  accomplished,  the  Saxon,  the  Dane, 


188  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

and  the  Nonnan  completed ;  displacing  the  Celtic  Briton 
from  all  but  the  fastnesses  of  Wales,  and  gradually  ex- 
tirpating all  but  such  animals  as  are  either  perfectly 
compatible  with  the  free  development  of  the  highest  social 
refinement,  or  are  worthy  of  protection  as  a  means  of 
ministering  to  man's  pleasures.  And  as  it  has  been  in 
the  Old  World,  so  is  it  in  the  New.  The  progress  of 
the  European  colonists  not  only  involves  the  extirpation 
alike  of  the  wild  animals  and  the  forests  which  formed 
their  natural  haunts,  but  also  the  no  less  inevitable  dis- 
appearance of  the  aborigines  who  made  of  them  a  prey ; 
and  thus  the  grave-mound  of  the  Eed  Indian,  and  the 
relics  of  his  simple  arts,  become  the  memorials  of  an 
extinct  order  of  things  no  less  clearly  defined  than  the 
post-tertiary  fossils  of  the  drift 

But  while  the  remains  of  extinct  species  thus  serve, 
like  the  graven  Eoman  or  runic  inscriptions  on  the 
sepulchral  slab,  to  determine  the  periods  at  which  cer- 
tain eras  had  their  close,  other  accompanying  objects, 
and  chiefly  the  traces  of  living  or  extinct  fauna,  are  no 
less  valuable  as  fixing  the  geographical  origin  of  the 
ancient  colonists,  amid  whose  relics  they  are  foimd  ;  just 
as  the  elephants,  the  camels,  the  monkeys,  and  baboons 
of  the  Nimrod  obelisk,  or  the  corresponding  sculptures 
on  the  walls  of  Memphis  or  Luxor,  indicate  the  coun- 
tries whence  tribute  was  brought,  or  captives  were 
carried  off,  to  aggrandize  the  Assyrian  or  Egyptian  con- 
querors.  Among  such  relics,  which  serve  to  fix  the 
geographical  centres  of  ancient  arts,  the  sources  of  early 
commerce,  or  the  birthplaces  of  migrating  races,  might 
be  noted  the  tin  and  amber  of  the  Old,  and  the  copper 
of  the  New  World.  So  also  in  minuter  analysis,  we 
recognise  among  primitive  American  relics  the  local 
origin  of  various  favourite  materials  :  as  the  Mexican 
obsidian,  the  clay-slate  of  the  Babeens,  the  favourite  red 


VII.]      THE  TECHNOLOGICAL  INSTINCT:  TOOLS.       189 

pipe-stone,  or  CatlmUey  of  the  Couteau  des  prairies,  and 
the  pyrulse  and  conch-shells  of  the  Gulf  of  Florida, 
found  mingling  with  the  aboriginal  reUcs  of  ancient 
tribes  in  the  islands  and  on  the  north  shores  of  the  great 
Canadian  lakes,  along  the  southern  slope  of  the  same 
water-shed  whence  the  Moose  and  the  Abbitibbe  pour 
their  waters  into  the  frozen  sea  of  Hudson^s  Bay. 

The  designation  appHed  to  the  primitive  condition  of 
the  economic  or  industrial  arts,  properly  signifies,  as  has 
been  already  sufficiently  clearly  indicated,  that  primeval 
condition  in  which,  in  the  absence  of  metals,  and  the 
ignorance  of  the  simplest  rudiments  of  metallurgy^  man 
Z.  to  find  materials  for  the  manufacture  of  h^  tools, 
and  the  supply  of  his  mechanical  requirements,  in  the 
commoner  objects  which  nature  places  within  his  reach. 
The  mere  recognition  of  the  convenient  uses  to  which 
the  malleable  native  metals  could  be  applied  as  substi- 
tutes for  stone,  can  scarcely  be  regarded  as  even  an 
initial  step  in  the  transition  towards  the  first  true 
metallurgic  period.  This  cannot  be  considered  to  have 
been  introduced  until  the  native  copper-worker  had 
perceived  the  wonderful  transformations  which  could 
be  wrought  by  fire,  and  had  learned  at  least  to  melt 
the  pure  metal,  and  to  mould  the  weapons  and  imple- 
ments he  required,  if  not  to  harden  it  with  alloys,  and 
to  quarry  and  smelt  the  unfamiliar  ores.  But  in  the 
great  archipelago  of  the  Caribbean  Sea,  as  weU  as  in 
the  widely -scattered  islands  of  the  Southern  Pacific,  the 
primeval  stage  of  native  art  might  more  correctly  be 
designated  a  shell-period ;  for  the  large  shells  which  the 
mollusca  of  the  neighbouring  oceans  produce  in  great 
abundance,  supplied  the  native  artificer  with  his  most 
convenient  and  easily-wrought  raw  material,  and  in 
reality  left  him  at  no  disadvantage  as  an  artificer,  when 
compared  with  the  Indian  of  the  copper  regions  on  the 


190  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

shores  of  Lake  Superior.  The  ethnographic  phases  of 
conchology,  accordingly,  present  an  exceedingly  varied 
and  attractive  study,  to  those  by  whom  such  indications 
of  the  initial  development  of  the  artistic  instincts  of 
man  are  recognised  as  involving  not  only  an  important 
element  in  his  natural  history^  but  also  occasional 
glimpses  of  facts  not  without  their  value  in  the  intro- 
ductory chapters  of  civil  history. 

Among  the  productions  of  nature  employed  as  mate- 
rials for  ornament  and  use>  scarcely  any  have  com- 
manded more  universal  acceptance  than  the  shells  which 
abound,  under  such  varied  forms,  on  every  sea-coast,  as 
well  as  in  the  deposits  of  fresh-water  lakes  and  rivers. 
To  the  conchologist  they  present  an  interesting  and 
singularly  beautiful  department  of  nature,  inviting  to 
research  amid  their  seemingly  endless  forms,  and  to 
inquiry  into  the  habits  of  the  "  living  will"  that  once 
tenanted  each  lovely  cell : — 

**  Did  he  stand  at  the  diamond  door 
Of  his  house  in  a  rainbow  frill  ? 
Did  he  posh,  when  he  was  unourl'd, 
A  golden  foot  or  a  fairy  horn 
Thro'  his  dim  water-world?"^ 

To  the  geologist  the  shells  of  the  testaceous  molluscs 
offer  a  department  in  palaBontology  of  very  wide  applica- 
tion and  peculiar  value.  They  constitute,  indeed,  one  of 
the  most  important  among  those  records  which  the  earth's 
crust  discloses,  whereby  its  geological  history  can  be 
deciphered  ;  and  to  their  value  in  this  respect  reference 
has  already  been  made.  But  it  is  to  the  special  phases 
of  interest  which  they  possess  for  the  ethnologist  and 
archaeologist,  in  their  inquiries  into  the  history  of  man 
and  his  arts,  that  attention  is  now  directed  The  mere 
beauty  and  variety  of  'many  niarine  shells  sufficiently 

*  Tennyson's  Mav/d.. 


VIL]       THE  TEGHNOLOGIGAL  INSTINCT:  TOOLS.       191 

account  for  their  selection  as  objects  prized,  for  personal 
ornament ;  while  their  large  and  solid  structure,  and  the 
readiness  with  which  their  substance  can  be  wrought 
into  a  variety  of  forms,  must  have  suggested  their  em- 
ployment in  the  earliest  stages  of  insular  art.  Thus 
they  became  the  natural  substitute  for  the  still  unknown 
commoner  metals ;  while,  like  the  precious  metals,  shells 
have  been  used,  both  in  the  Old  and  New  World,  not 
only  for  ornament,  but  as  the  most  primitive  forms  of  a 
recognised  currency.  Of  such  the  Gyprcea  moneta  is  the 
most  familiar.  The  cowrie-shells  used  as  currency  are 
procured  on  the  coast  of  Congo,  and  in  the  Philippine 
and  Maldive  Islands.  Of  the  latter,  indeed,  they  con- 
stitute the  chief  article  of  export.  At  what  remote  date, 
or  at  what  early  stage  of  rudimentary  civilisation  this 
singular  representative  shell-currency  was  introduced,  it 
is  perhaps  vain  to  inquire,  but  the  extensive  area  over 
which  it  has  long  been  recognised  proves  its  great  anti- 
quity. The  Philippine  Islands  form,  in  part,  the  eastern 
boundary  of  the  Southern  Pacific,  and  the  Maldives  he 
o£F  the  Malabar  coast  in  the  Indian  Ocean ;  but  their 
native  shells  circulate  as  currency  not  only  through 
Southern  Asia,  but  far  into  the  Afirican  continent. 

Corresponding  to  this  cowrie-currency  of  Asia  and 
Africa,  is  the  use,  by  the  American  Indians  of  the  North- 
west, of  the  loqua,  or  Dentalium^  a  shell  found  on  the 
neighbouring  shores  of  the  Pacific,  and  employed  by  them 
both  for  ornament  and  as  money.  The  Chinooks  and 
other  Indians  of  the  Northern  Pacific  Coast  wear  long 
strings  of  ioqua  shells  as  necklaces  and  fiinges  to  their 
robes.  These  are  said  to  be  procured  only  at  Cape  Mat- 
tery, at  the  entrance  of  the  Straits  of  De  Fuca,  where 
they  are  obtained  by  a  process  of  dredging,  and  have  a 
value  assigned  to  them  increasing  in  proportion  to  their 
size.    This  varies  from  about  an  inch  and  a  half  to  up- 


] 


192  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

waxds  of  two  inches  in  length.  They  are  white,  conical, 
and  slightly  curved  in  form,  and  taper  to  a  point.  Their 
circumference  at  the  widest  part  does  not  greatly  exceed 
the  stem  of  a  clay  tobacco-pipe,  and  they  are  thin  and 
translucent.  Mr.  Paul  Kane,  the  author  of  Wanderings 
of  an  Artist  among  the  Indians  of  North  America^ 
writes  to  me  in  reference  to  them :  "  A  great  trade  is 
carried  on  among  all  the  tribes  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Vancouver's  Island,  through  the  medium  of  these  shells. 
They  are  valuable  in  proportion  to  their  length,  and  their 
value  increases  according  to  a  fixed  ratio,  forty  shells 
being  the  standard  number  required  to  extend  a  fathom's 
lengdi.  A  fathom  thus  tested  is  equal  in  value  to  a 
beaver's  skin,  but  if  shells  can  be  found  so  far  in  excess 
of  the  ordinary  standard  that  thirty-nine  are  long  enough 
to  make  the  fathom,  it  is  worth  two  beavers'  skins ;  if 
thirty-eight,  three  beavers'  skins,  and  so  on ;  increasing 
in  value  one  beaver  skin  for  every  shell  less  than  the 
standard  number." 

No  evidence  appears  to  indicate  the  use  of  the  marine 
or  fresh-water  shells  of  Europe  as  a  species  of  currency 
during  its  primitive  era ;  but  it  is  interesting  to  notice 
the  fact,  that  the  same  simple  mode  of  employing  the 
spoils  of  the  sea  for  personal  decoration,  as  is  found  pre- 
valent among  the  rude  Indians  of  the  North-west  at  the 
present  day,  prevailed  among  the  primitive  occupants  of 
the  British  Isles  in  that  dim  dawn  of  their  primeval 
history  revealed  by  the  disclosures  of  their  most  ancient 
sepulchral  deposits.  Among  the  personal  ornaments 
found  in  early  British  graves,  seemingly  pertaining  to  a 
period  long  prior  to  the  acquisition  of  the  simplest  metal- 
lurgic  arts,  are  necklaces  formed  of  the  small  shells 
abounding  on  the  neighbouring  coasts,  such  as  the  Nerita 
littoralis,  the  Patella  vulgata^  and  others  equally  com- 
mon at  the  present  day.     These  are  perforated  like  the 


VII.]       THE  TECHNOLOGICAL  INSTINCT:  TOOLS,        193 

ioqua  shells  of  the  Chinook  Indian,  apparently  by  the 
simple  process  of  rubbing  the  projecting  point  on  a  stone, 
and,  thus  converted  into  shell-beads,  they  were  strung 
together  with  a  fibre  or  sinew.  It  may  also  be  noted 
that,  aa  among  the  Indians  of  tins  continent  such  per- 
sonal  ornaments  are  not  confined  to  the  squaws,  but  more 
frequently  adorn  the  person  of  the  brave,  and  mingle 
with  the  scalp-locks  and  other  war-trophies  of  the  most 
celebrated  chief,  so  was  it  with  the  Allophylian  of 
Britain.  The  bead  necklace  occurs  alongside  of  the 
stone  war-hatchet  and  flint  lance-head,  as  the  property 
of  the  warrior,  and  one  of  his  most  prized  decorations. 
Possibly,  indeed,  such  may  have  constituted  symbols 
of  rank,  and  the  special  badges  of  ofiice,  as  considerable 
variety  marks  their  forms. 

A  peculiarly  interesting  illustration  of  the  use  of  shells 
for  such  purposes  of  personal  decoration,  by  the  AUo- 
phyKan  of  the  British  Islands,  during  their  primitive 
stone-period,  is  furnished  by  a  discovery  made  in  the 
year  1838,  during  the  progress  of  improvements  in  the 
Phoenix  Park,  Dublin.  An  elevated  knoll,  known  by  the 
name  of  Knock-Maraidhe,  or  the  Hill  of  the  Mariners, 
was  ordered  by  the  superintending  ofiicer  of  the  Eoyal 
Engineers  to  be  levelled,  when  it  was  discovered  that  it 
was  an  artificial  sepulchral  mound,  one  hundred  and 
twenty  feet  in  diameter,  and  fifteen  feet  in  height,  con- 
cealing a  cromlech,  or  megalithic  tomb,  composed  of 
massive  unhewn  stones.  Within  this  sepulchral  cham- 
ber were  found  two  male  skeletons,  with  traces  of  other 
bones,  including  one  supposed  to  be  that  of  a  dog.  From 
the  dimensions  of  the  enclosed. chamber,  it  was  manifest 
that  the  bodies  had  been  interred  in  the  contracted  posi- 
tion common  in  early  British  sepulture  ;  and  immediately 
under  each  skuU  lay  a  quantity  of  the  common  littoral 
shells,  Nerita  Uttoralis.     These  had  been  rubbed  down 

VOL.  I.  N 


194  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

on  the  valve,  so  as  to  make  a  second  hole,  for  the  purpose 
of  being  strung  together  to  form  necklaces,  and  the  re- 
mains of  vegetable  fibre  were  discovered  along  with  them, 
a  portion  of  which  was  through  the  shells.  Alongside 
of  these,  also,  lay  a  knife  or  arrow-head  of  flint,  and  a 
double-headed  pin,  neatly  formed  of  bone,  but  no  traces 
of  metallurgic  arts.  In  the  outer  verge  of  the  tumulus, 
four  stone-cists  were  also  discovered,  each  containing  a 
small  sepulchral  vase,  and  calcined  bones.  The  sepulchre 
evidently  contained  the  bodies  of  one  or  perhaps  two  dis- 
tinguished chiefs,  to  whom  were  accorded  the  most  costly 
funeral  honours  of  primitive  times.  The  surrounding 
urns  with  their  incinerated  remains,  and  possibly  also  one 
of  the  skeletons  in  the  megalithic  chamber,  point  to  the 
practice  of  human  sacrifice,  when  the  subordinate  ofiicer, 
the  wives,  and  slaves  perished  beside  the  bier  of  the  great 
warrior,  that  they  might  pass  with  him  to  the  world  of 
spirits,  there  to  renew  the  same  servile  offices  they  had 
performed  on  earth.  Such  examples  of  primitive  sepul- 
ture have  been  repeatedly  brought  to  Ught,  and  amply 
correspond  with  the  barbarian  ideas  of  the  most  lavish 
honours  to  the  illustrious  dead.  Manifestly  neither  labour 
nor  cost  was  spared.  The  huge  megalithic  chamber  of 
the  dead  was  reared,  the  ornamental  cinerary  urns  were 
prepared,  the  bodies  of  the  attendant  victims  were  con- 
sumed on  the  pile,  and  their  remains  deposited  with  the 
urns  in  the  surrounding  cists,  and  then  the  earthen  pyra- 
mid was  laboriously  piled  over  the  whole,  and  the  costly 
structure  hidden  for  age&  from  the  light  of  day.  The 
occurrence  exclusively  of  weapons,  implements,  and  orna- 
ments of  the  stone-period  in  such  tombs  is  one  of  the 
strongest  arguments  that  it  was  an  absolute  stone-period, 
without  even  the  first  transitional  traces  of  metallurgic 
arts;  and  this  idea  which  I  was  led  to  form  from  the 
investigation  of  primitive  British  graves,  has  been  strongly 


VIL]      THE  TECHNOLOGICAL  INSTINCT:  TOOLS.         195 

confirmed  by  the  proofs  of  the  lavish  expenditure  of  the 
most  costly  treasures  of  the  American  Indian  in  his 
sepulchral  depositories.  In  the  Huron  grave-mounds  of 
the  Georgian  Bay  lie  the  tropical  shells  of  the  Gulf  of 
Florida,  the  carved  pipe-head,  the  stone  hatchet,  and  flint 
arrow-head,  and  along  with  these  the  copper  kettle,  the 
iron  knife,  and  other  metallic  treasures  acquired  from 
the  old  French  traders.  So  also  among  the  Chinook  and 
Cowlitz  Indians  on  the  Columbia  and  Cowlitz  rivers, 
the  honoured  dead  is  deposited  in  his  elaborately  deco- 
rated  canoe,  with  not  only  his  native  bow  and  arrows, 
his  spear,  paddle,  and  personal  ornaments,  but  with  the 
iron  tomaliawk,  copper  kettle,  gun,  and  others  of  the 
most  prized  objects  acquired  from  the  Hudson's  Bay  fac- 
tors, laid  beside  him.  It  may  therefore  be  assumed  that 
it  was  not  because  the  copper,  bronze,  or  iron  weapon  or 
implement  was  too  costly  a  sacrifice  to  deposit  in  the 
megalithic  tomb,  that  such  so  frequently  discloses  only 
the  stone  hammer  or  celt,  the  flint  lance-head,  the  shell 
necklace,  etc.,  but  because  these  alone  constituted  the 
implements  and  personal  ornaments  of  the  era. 

Neither  the  cromlech  nor  the  large  tumulus  can  be 
regarded  as  a  common  grave,  but  as  the  laborious  and 
costly  monumental  structure  erected  over  the  illustrious 
dead.  Some  of  them  must  have  occupied  the  labour  of 
months,  and  engaged  the  services  of  a  numerous  corps  of 
workmen,  not  hired  as  mercenary  labourers,  but  either 
compelled  by  some  commanding  authority,  or  more 
probably  heartily  uniting  in  a  willing  service.  They 
reveal  to  us  interesting  glimpses  of  the  ideas  of  a  future 
state  existing  among  the  Allophylians  of  Britain  and  the 
neighbouring  continent,  in  the  remote  era  to  which  such 
sepulchral  memorials  pertain,  while  they  disclose  striking 
analogies  in  the  development  of  human  thought  and  be- 
lief under  corresponding  social   conditions.      The  old 


196  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

pagan  Northman  anticipated  an  elysium  in  which  the 
joys  of  endless  war-triumphs  were  to  alternate  with  the 
feastings  of  the  Valhalla  of  the  gods;  the  luxurious 
Asiatic  dreams  of  the  sensual  joys  of  his  Mahometan 
Paradise ;  while  the  Red  Indian  looks  forward  to  the 
range  of  ampler  hunting-grounds,  and  to  unfailing  vic- 
tory on  the  war-patL  All  however  anticipate  a  corpo- 
real participation  in  joys  akin  to  those  which  constituted 
their  chief  pleasures  on  earth,  and  nearly  all  conceive  of 
the  distinctions  of  social  rank  perpetuated  beyond  the 
grave.  Hence  the  slaughter  of  the  dog  and  horse  of  the 
chief,  and  their  interment  beside  him ;  and  hence  also 
the  cruel  suttee,  which  Caesar  tells  us  prevailed  among 
the  Gauls,  who  consimied  on  the  same  funeral  pile 
with  their  most  honoured  dead,  not  only  the  objects 
•they  had  held  in  most  esteem  when  alive,  including  their 
dogs  and  horses,  but  also  their  favourite  retainers.  Along 
with  these  were  also  laid  the  bow  and  spear,  the  sword, 
shield,  and  other  indispensable  implements  of  war  and 
the  chase ;  but  the  disclosures  of  later  British  graves 
frequently  show  the  beautiful  bronze  sword  broken  ere 
it  was  deposited  beside  the  dead,  and  precisely  the  same 
custom  prevails  among  the  American  Indians.  The  cop- 
per kettle  is  perforated,  the  gun  is  deprived  of  its  lock 
or  otherwise  rendered  unserviceable,  and  all  the  objects 
destined  for  use  in  another  state  of  existence  are  ren- 
dered  useless  for  the  life  in  which  their  employment  has 
come  to  an  end.  In  all  this  a  strangely  simple  and 
child-like  confusion  of  ideas  is  discernible,  presenting 
many  analogies  to  those  which  may  still  be  discerned  in 
our  own  rustic  legends  and  popular  superstitions.  Many 
of  the  most  touching  passages  of  homely  pathos  and  ten- 
derness to  be  met  with  in  the  old  Scottish  Ballads,  be- 
tray the  same  undefined  mixture  of  primitive  supersti- 
tion with  the  difficulty,  still  experienced  by  the  popular 


VII.]       THE  TECHNOLOGICAL  INSTINCT:  TOOLS,       197 

mind,  in  conceiving  any  clear  idea  of  a  disembodied 
spirit,  or  of  death  distinct  from  the  grave.  Alike  in  the 
conception  of  the  primeval  barbarian,  and  in  the  uncul- 
tured rustic  mind,  the  grave  is  not  only  the  portal  to  the 
spirit-land,  but  the  sole  spirit-world 

A  reference  to  some  of  the  customs  of  the  Chinook 
Indians  of  the  Columbia  river  will  illustrate  the  prevail- 
ing ideas  relative  to  the  rites  of  the  dead,  and  to  a  future 
life,  which  seem  to  find  nearly  imiversal  acceptance 
from  the  barbarian  mind.  The  Chinooks  are  among  the 
most  remarkable  of  the  flat-head  Indians,  and  carry  the 
strange  process  of  cranial  distortion  to  a  great  extent. 
They  are  in  some  respects  a  superior  race,  making  slaves 
of  other  tribes,  and  evincing  considerable  skill  in  such 
arts  as  are  required  in  their  wild  forest  and  coast  life. 
Their  chief  war  implements  are  bows  and  arrows,  the 
former  made  from  the  yew-tree,  and  the  latter  feathered 
and  pointed  with  bone.  Their  caaoes,  hoUowed  out  of 
the  trunk  of  the  cedar-tree,  are  frequently  very  large,  as 
the  cedar  grows  to  an  immense  size  in  the  native  terri- 
tory of  the  tribe.  They  are  made  exceedingly  light,  and 
ornamented  with  much  taste  and  skilL  In  such  a  canoe 
the  dead  Chinook  chief  is  deposited,  surrounded  with  all 
the  requisites  for  war,  or  the  favourite  occupations  of 
life:  presenting  a  remarkable  correspondence  in  his 
sepulchral  rites  to  those  of  the  ancient  pagan  viking, 
who,  as  appears  alike  from  the  contents  of  the  Scandi- 
navian Shibssostninger,  and  from  the  narratives  of  the 
Sagas,  was  interred  or  consumed  in  his  war-galley,  and 
the  form  of  that  favourite  scene  of  his  ocean  triumphs 
perpetuated  in  the  earth -work  that  covered  his  ashes. 
Tin  cups,  copper  kettles,  plates,  pieces  of  cotton,  red  cloth, 
and  furs,  and  in  fact  everything  which  the  Chinooks 
themselves  most  value,  or  which  are  most  difficult  to  ob- 
tain,  are  hung  round  the  canoe.     Beside  the  body  they 


198  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

place  paddles,  spears,  bows  and  arrows,  and  food,  with 
everything  else  which  they  consider  necessary  for  a  very 
long  journey.  Beads,  ioqua  shells,  brass  buttons,  and 
small  coins  are  even  placed  in  the  mouth  of  the  dead. 
The  canoe  is  then  ready  to  be  conveyed  to  the  burial- 
place  of  the  tribe,  generally  selected  for  its  isolated 
situation.  The  two  principal  cemeteries  are  rocky 
islands  in  the  lower  part  of  the  Columbia  river,  both 
of  which  were  visited  and  sketched  by  Mr.  Paul  Kane, 
from  whom  my  information  on  the  customs  here  de- 
scribed is  chiefly  derived.  One  is  called  Coffin  Rock 
from  the  appearance  it  presents,  covered  with  the  raised 
biers  of  the  deceased  members  of  the  tribe.  The  funeral 
cortege  has  an  imposing  character.  The  deceased  is 
carefully  disposed  in  his  canoe-bier,  surrounded  by  the 
articles  intended  for  his  use  in  the  life  beyond  the  grave. 
The  attendant  mourners  then  assemble  in  their  canoes, 
and  that  of  the  deceased  is  towed  to  the  island  cemetery 
of  the  tribe,  and  there  either  fastened  to  the  branches  of 
a  tree,  or  raised  on  a  scaffolding  of  strong  cedar  boards 
and  poles,  four  or  five  feet  from  the  ground.  A  roll  of 
bark  is  placed  over  it  to  protect  the  body  from  the  rain, 
and  the  various  offerings  to  the  dead  are  disposed  about 
the  bier.  The  final  act  before  leaving  is  to  bore  holes  in 
the  bottom  of  the  canoe ;  and  in  like  manner  every  ar- 
ticle left  with  the  corpse  is  mutilated  and  rendered  use- 
less. The  belief  of  the  Indian  is,  that  while  their  use  on 
earth  is  thereby  at  an  end,  the  Great  Spirit  will  restore 
them  to  perfection  on  the  arrival  of  the  deceased  at  their 
elysian  hunting-grounds.  Among  the  greatest  crimes 
which  an  Indian  can  commit  in  the  eyes  of  his  tribe  is 
the  desecration  of  one  of  those  canoe-biers ;  and  its  per- 
petration, if  discovered,  is  certain  to  be  visited  by  death. 
Instances  of  such  sacrilege  are  accordingly  of  rare  occur- 
rence ;  but  one  happened  a  few  years  since,  to  which 


VIL]        THR  TECHNOLOGICAL  INSTINCT:  TOOLS.     199 

attention  was  directed  by  the  robber  of  the  sepulchral 
canoe  being  shot  dead  within  the  precincts  of  Fort  Van- 
couver, by  order  of  Casenov,  the  chief  of  the  Chinook 
Indians. 

The  favourite  son  of  this  chief  died,  and,  contrary  to 
the  wonted  custom  of  his  tribe,  he  had  him  buried  in 
the  cemetery  attached  to  Fort  Vancouver.  The  sepul- 
chral rites,  and  still  more  the  subsequent  proceedings 
of  the  bereaved  chief,  presented  a  singular  admixture  of 
Christian  sepulture  with  the  ineradicable  superstitions 
of  the  wild  Indian.  The  coffin  was  made  sufficiently 
large  to  contain  all  the  necessaries  supposed  to  be  re- 
quired for  his  comfort  and  convenience  in  the  world  of 
spirits.  The  chaplain  of  the  Fort  read  the  usual  service 
at  the  grave,  and  after  the  conclusion  of  the  ceremony, 
Casenov  returned  to  his  lodge,  and  the  same  evening 
attempted  the  life  of  his  boy's  mother,  who  was  the 
daughter  of  the  great  one-eyed  chief  generally  known 
as  King  Comcomly,  alluded  to  in  Washington  Irving's 
Astoria.  The  unfortunate  mother  had  devotedly  nursed 
her  son  during  his  sickness,  and  was  moreover  the 
favourite  wife  of  the  Chinook  chief.  But  this  only  fur- 
nished additional  motives  for  her  destruction  ;  for,  it  is 
the  general  belief  of  the  Indians  of  the  North-west,  that 
the  severer  the  privation  they  inflict  upon  themselves 
the  greater  is  the  manifestation  of  their  grief,  and  the 
more  pleasing  to  the  departed  spirit.  Casenov  stated 
to  Mr.  Kane,  that  as  he  knew  his  wife  had  been  so 
useful  to  her  son,  and  so  necessary  to  his  happiness  and 
comfort  in  this  world,  he  wished  to  send  her  with  him 
as  his  companion  on  his  long  journey.  The  reason  thus 
assigned  by  the  Chinook  chief  for  the  murder  of  his 
favourite  wife  over  the  grave  of  their  son,  gives  a 
curious  insight  into  the  motives  of  such  barbarous  sacri- 
ficial rites ;  exhibiting  as  they  do  so  strange  a  mixture 


200  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

of  good  and  evil,  of  generous  self-denial  and  cruel 
selfishness.  The  encircling  cists  and  cinerary  urns  of 
the  Knock-Maraidlie,  and  probably  also  some  of  the 
contents  of  the  megalithic  chamber  in  its  centre,  seem 
strongly  suggestive  of  the  idea  of  similar  sacrifices  hav- 
ing prevailed  among  the  ancient  occupants  of  the  British 
Isles.  Such  a  laboriously  constructed  vault  and  earthen 
P5rramid  were  manifestly  parts  of  one  grand  mauso- 
leum ;  and  if  we  suppose  the  whole  structure,  with  its 
included  cromlech,  cists,  and  urns,  to  have  been  com- 
pleted together,  it  is  difiicult  to  conceive  of  any  other 
mode  of  accounting  for  such  a  sepulchral  group  than 
the  one  suggested,  which  is  so  congenial  to  the  ideas  of 
barbarian  rank,  and  of  earthly  distinctions  perpetuated 
beyond  the  grave. 

Looking  at  the  subject,  however,  from  another  point 
of  view,  we  perceive  that  the  various  tribes  of  Indians, 
who  originally  possessed  only  weapons,  implements,  and 
personal  ornaments  of  bone,  shell,  flint,  and  stone,  or  at 
most  of  native  copper,  rudely  hammered  into  shape,  are 
seen  after  an  interval  of  upwards  of  three  centuries  of 
European  colonization  and  traffic,  without  the  slightest 
acquired  knowledge  of  working  in  metals,  but  possessed 
of  numerous  metal  implements  and  weapons,  which, 
as  their  greatest  treasures,  they  fi:eely  lavish  on  the 
loved  or  honoured  dead.  Such  traces  of  metallurgy,  it 
is  manifest,  afford  no  proof  of  an  acquired  native  art. 
The  copper  kettle  of  the  Chinook  coffin-bier  on  the 
Columbia  river,  was  in  all  probabiUty  brought,  not 
from  the  copper  regions  of  Lake  Superior,  but  from 
London  or  Liverpool,  along  with  the  beads,  knives, 
hatchets,  and  other  objects  of  barter,  by  means  of  which 
the  fur-traders  carry  on  their  traffic  with  the  Indian 
hunter.  At  most  these  only  prove  that  a  nation,  stiU 
in  its  stone-period,  and  totally  ignorant  of  any  further 


VIL]       THE  TECHNOLOGICAL  INSTINCT:  TOOLS.       201 

metallurgic  art  than  is  required  to  grind  an  iron  hoop 
into  lance  or  arrow-heads,  has  been  brought  into  contact 
with  a  civilized  people,  familiar  with  metallurgy  and 
many  acquired  arts,  such  as  the  musket  and  the  rifle 
may  most  aptly  symbolize. 

Among  the  Indian  tribes  of  North  America,  as  ob- 
served in  the  comparison  of  others  met  with  in  a  simi- 
larly rude  and  undeveloped  intellectual  condition  else- 
where, considerable  diversity  of  inventive  genius  and 
artistic  skill  is  discernible :  some  of  them  showing  an 
instinctive  aptitude  for  constructive,  and  others  for  imi- 
tative arts.  The  mode  in  which  the  latter  specially 
manifests  itself  among  many  of  the  tribes  of  American 
aborigines  is  well  worthy  of  note,  and  will  come  under 
review  when  referring  to  the  pipe  manufacture  which  is 
so  curiously  typical  of  American  art.  But  meanwhile 
an  equally  instructive  illustration  of  what  may  thus  be 
designated  aesthetic  and  constructive  instincts  may  be 
selected  from  the  diversely  gifted  islanders  of  the  South- 
em  Pacific.  On  the  extreme  western  verge  of  the  Poly- 
nesian archipelago  lie  the  Feejee  Islands,  occupied  by  a 
people  remarkable  among  the  islanders  of  the  Southern 
Pacific  alike  for  physical  and  intellectual  peculiarities.  The 
Feejeean  physiognomy  is  described  as  presenting  general 
characteristics  of  debasement,  when  compared  with  that 
of  the  true  Polynesian,  and  the  entire  proportions  and 
contour  of  his  figure  are  markedly  inferior  to  those  of 
the  Friendly  and  Navigator  islanders.  This  is  the  more 
remarkable  in  a  people  dwelling  in  the  midst  of  abund- 
ance.  and  enjoying  an  unusual  variety  of  choice  articles 
of  food.  Their  ferocious  and  treacherous  habits,  how- 
ever,  and  the  hideous  customs  of  cannibalism  and  syste- 
matic  parricide,  with  the  attendant  crimes  inevitable 
in  such  a  social  condition,  render  the  Feejeean  Islands, 
which  seem  fitted  by  nature  to  be  the  abodes  of  happi- 


202  PREHISTORIC  MAX,  [Chap. 

ness,  among  the  most  wretched  scenes  of  moral  degrada- 
tion. Nevertheless  it  is  in  this  strange  island  group 
that  the  arts  of  the  South  Pacific  appear  to  have  their 
origin  and  highest  development.  Dr.  Pickering,  after 
enjoying  abundant  opportunities  of  observation  in  the 
Southern  Pacific,  appears  to  look  on  the  Negrillos  as  the 
true  inventive  race,  from  whom  the  Feejeeans,  who  are 
unquestionably  allied  to  them  in  blood,  acquired,  elabo- 
rated, and  greatly  improved  many  applications  of  art 
and  skill.  But  the  ingenious  Negrillo  is  altogether  un- 
social and  prone  to  isolation,  and  the  Feejeean  appears 
to  derive  from  him  a  dislike  of  change,  and  a  disinclina- 
tion to  leave  his  island-home.  It  required,  therefore, 
the  intervention  of  a  migratory  or  aggressive  race  to 
diffuse  the  acquired  knowledge  and  skill  of  the  Feejeeans ; 
and  this  colonizing  race  of  the  Southern  Pacific  and  of 
the  Indian  Oceans  appears  to  be  the  Malayans,  who  are 
found  in  contact  with  many  diverse  and  widely-scattered 
nations,  and  are  of  a  roving  disposition,  the  proper 
children  of  the  sea.  "Naturally,''  says  Dr.  Pickering, 
"  the  most  amiable  of  mankind,  they  are  free  from  anti- 
pathies of  race,  are  fond  of  novelty,  inclined  rather  to 
follow  than  to  lead,  and  in  every  respect  seem  qualified 
to  become  a  medium  of  communication  between  the 
different  branches  of  the  human  family."  Such  a  race 
of  plastic,  amphibious  mediators  being  found,  a  curious 
light  is  thrown  on  the  diffusion  of  knowledge  and  the 
primitive  arts  throughout  the  widely -scattered  island 
groups  of  the  Southern  Pacific,  where  almost  every  Poly- 
nesian art,  it  is  said,  can  be  distinctly  traced  to  the 
Feejee  Islands,  while  the  Feejeean  himself  is  so  averse 
to  roam.  But  the  best  and  the  worst  characteristics  of 
the  Feejee  idanders  are  strangely  intermingled.  They 
use  the  bow  and  throw  the  javelin  with  great  dexterity, 
but  their  peculiar  and  distinguishing  weapon  is  a  short 


VII.]      THE  TECHNOLOGICAL  INSTINCT:  TOOLS,       203 

missile  club,  which  they  all  habitually  wear  stuck  in 
their  belt,  the  symbolic  Feejeean  tool  and  national  in- 
strument of  assassination.  Nevertheless  it  is  an  error, 
which  many  analogies  of  history  tend  to  confute,  if  we 
assume  the  occurrence  of  moral  degradation,  as  mani- 
fested in  parricide,  cannibalism,  and  systematic  treachery 
and  assassination,  to  be  necessarily  incompatible  with  such 
intellectual  development  as  distinguishes  the  Feejeean 
from  other  islanders  of  the  Pacific,  The  ferocious  New 
Zealander  has  proved  the  most  capable  of  civilisation  of 
all  the  aborigines  of  the  Pacific,  and  is  found  moreover 
to  possess  a  traditional  poetry  and  mythical  legends  of 
a  highly  striking  and  peculiar  character.  And  turning 
from  the  primitive  and  still  undeveloped  races  of  the 
world,  we  have  only  to  study  the  chronicles  of  ferocious 
deeds  perpetrated  by  tiie  pagan  Saxon,  the  Hun,  or  the 
later  Dane  and  Norseman,  to  see  in  what  hideous  aspects 
the  wild  energies  of  a  rude  people  niay  alone  manifest 
themselves,  who  shall  nevertheless  prove  capable  of  be- 
coming the  leaders  in  the  civilisation  of  Europe.  To  judge 
by  the  monkish  chronicles,  no  Feejee  cannibal  could 
surpass,  either  in  savage  atrocity  or  in  hideousness  of 
aspect,  the  Hungarian  or  Northman  from  whom  the 
proudest  of  Europe's  nobles  claim  descent.  The  chroni- 
clers of  Germany,  France,  and  Italy,  describe  the  fury 
of  the  former  with  dolorous  brevity,  while  popular  legend 
depicts  them  as  grinning,  child-devouring  ogres,  whetting 
their  ensanguined  tusks  over  their  prey ;  and  the  Hturgy 
of  the  Gallican  Church  of  the  ninth  century  preserves 
the  memorial  of  the  pagan  Northmen's  ravages  in  the 
new  supplication  added  to  its  litany  :  A  furore  Nor- 
mannorum  libera  nos. 

It  is  obvious  therefore  that  all  the  savage  vices  of  the 
Feejeeans  are  perfectly  compatible  with  considerable 
skiU  in  such  arts  as  pertain  to  their  primitive  and  insular 


204  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Char 

condition.  Their  musical  instruments  are  superior  to 
those  of  the  Polynesians,  and  include  the  Pan-pipe  and 
others  unknown  in  the  islands  beyond  their  range.  Their 
pottery  also  exhibits  great  variety  of  form,  and  includes 
examples  of  vessels  combined  in  groups,  presenting  a 
curious  correspondence  to  similar  productions  of  Peru- 
vian art.  Their  fishing-nets  and  lines  are  remarkable 
for  their  neat  and  skilful  workmanship,  and  they  carry 
cultivation  to  a  considerable  extent.  "  Indeed,"  remarks 
the  ethnologist  of  the  United  States  Expedition,  in 
summing  up  the  characteristics  of  the  Feejeeans,  "  we 
soon  began  to  perceive  that  the  people  were  in  possession 
of  almost  every  art  known  to  the  Polynesians,  and  of 
many  otters  besides.  The  highly-finished  wkmanship 
was  unexpected,  everything  being  executed  until  re- 
cently, and  even  now  for  the  most  'part,  without  the  use 
of  iron.  In  the  collection  of  implements  and  manufac- 
tures brought  home  by  the  Expedition,  the  observer  wiU 
distinguish  in  the  Feejeean  division  something  like  a 
school  of  arts  for  the  other  Pacific  islands.''  In  such  a 
strangely-gifted  savage  race  we  see  at  once  the  degra- 
dation of  which  human  nature  is  susceptible,  and  yet  at 
the  same  time  the  germs  of  constructive  and  artistic 
capacity,  capable  of  development  into  many  marvellous 
manifestations,  if  once  subjected  to  such  elevating  in- 
fluences as  changed  the  cruel  pagan,  the  merciless  pirate 
of  the  northern  seas,  into  the  refined  Norman,  the  chi- 
valrous crusader,  and  the  imaginative  troubadour. 

The  members  of  the  United  States  Exploring  Expedi- 
tion were  struck,  as  they  approached  the  extensive  coral 
archipelago,  interposed  between  the  Marquesas,  Society, 
and  Gambier  groups  of  islands,  by  the  small  and  slight 
canoes,  seemingly  emerging  from  the  sea,  with  a  pro- 
jecting beak  at  stem  and  stem,  and  propelled  by  means 
of  a  paddle  remarkable  for  its  curved  blade.     In  these 


VIL]      TEE  TECHNOLOGICAL  INSTINCT:  TOOLS.       205 

small  low  canoes  the  islanders  moved  with  great  rapidity- 
through  the  water,  while  they  formed  such  a  speck  on 
its  surface  that  they  were  close  to  the  ship  before  they 
were  observed ;  but  all  idea  of  rudeness  in  the  construc- 
tion of  these  canoes  and  paddles  gave  way  to  wonder  and 
admiration  of  their  makers  when  the  voyagers  acquired 
possession  of  the  implements  with  which  they  wrought. 
The  cocoa-palm  supplies  them  with  materials  for  matting 
and  weaving,  and  the  cassytha  stems  and  cocoa-nut 
fibre  are  plaited  into  cord.  The  finer  cord  is  made  of 
human  hair,  and  bones  of  the  turtle  and  of  the  larger 
fish  supply  them  with  the  means  of  making  fish-spears 
and  hooks.  But  there  is  no  natural  production  on  those 
coral  islands  harder  than  shell  or  coral,  and  from  these 
the  whole  constructive  tools  of  the  islanders  have  to  be 
made.  When  it  is  thus  seen  that  a  population  can  exist 
and  develop  ingenious  arts  amid  such  privation  of  all 
that  seems  indispensable  to  the  rudest  attempts  at  con- 
structive ingenuity ;  it  need  not  be  wondered  that  we 
should  find  such  abundant  traces  of  a  non-metallurgic 
European  era,  during  which  the  primitive  nomadic  colo- 
nists applied  their  far  ampler  resources  of  flint,  stone, 
horn,  and  bone,  to  all  the  purposes  for  which  the  metals 
have  been  adapted  in  later  times,  and  with  no  conscious- 
ness of  privation  in  the  unknown  want  of  metaUurgic 
arts.  To  the  absence  of  such  knowledge  among  the 
world's  primitive  wanderers,  or  to  the  want  of  the  metals 
themselves,  and  even  their  more  abundant  mineral  sub- 
stitutes, as  among  the  occupants  of  the  volcanic  and 
coral  islands  of  the  Pacific,  may  be  traced  the  ingenious 
adaptation  of  sea-shells  to  many  of  the  economic  and 
artistic  uses  to  which  they  have  been  so  extensively 
applied.  Such  applications  of  the  beautiful  ocean  shells, 
in  many  cases  to  purposes  seemingly  so  foreign  to  their 
natural  use,  illustrate  in  a  striking  manner  the  adapta- 


20G  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

bility  of  man  to  the  most  varied  physical  conditions  of 
the  globe,  and  frequently  exhibit  the  imperfectly-deve- 
loped reasoning  faculties  of  the  savage,  working  within 
narrow  limits,  akin  to  the  instincts  of  the  lower  animals. 
Thus  we  find  curious  affinities  between  the  rude  primi- 
tive arts  of  the  European  savage  in  the  dim  dawn  of  the 
ancient  world,  the  equally  rude  arts  of  the  Carib  or  the 
Guanche  of  the  Antilles  when  brought  to  our  knowledge 
in  the  fifteenth  century,  and  the  simple  devices  of  the 
Polynesians  occupying  the  Volcanic  or  Coral  Islands  of 
the  Southern  Pacific  Ocean,  first  visited  by  Europeans 
in  the  eighteenth  century.  In  the  Paumotu  group,  and 
others  of  the  coralline  formations  of  the  Pacific,  we  see 
islands  crowded  with  population,  while  deprived  by 
nature  of  all  the  means  which  seem  to  us  the  indispens- 
able elements  of  civilisation,  if  not,  indeed,  of  existence. 
With  them,  in  the  absence  not  only  of  metals,  but  even 
of  stone  and  wood,  marine  shells  form  the  most  important 
available  material  alike  for  economic  utility  and  orna- 
ment ;  and  the  same  appears  to  have  been  the  case,  to  a 
great  extent,  among  the  Indians  of  the  Antilles  before 
the  time  of  Columbus.  The  extreme  beauty  of  many  of 
the  marine  productions  of  the  tropics  and  the  Southern 
Ocean,  sufficiently  accounts  for  their  adoption  for  per- 
sonal adornment,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Gyprcea  aurantiay 
or  beautiful  orange  cowrie,  of  which  specimens  are  rarely 
to  be  met  with  which  are  not  perforated,  owing  to  its 
use  as  a  favourite  ornament  of  the  natives  of  the  Friendly 
Islands.  But  these  spoils  of  the  ocean  acquire  an  addi- 
tional value,  when,  as  in  Central  Africa,  or  among  the 
American  Indians  around  the  head-waters  of  the  Mis- 
sissippi, they  have  all  the  added  virtues  which  rarity 
confers.  Dr.  Livingston,  when  leaving  the  Belondas 
after  a  brief  sojourn  among  them,  thus  records  his 
friendly  parting  with  their  chief :  "  As  the  last  proof  of 


VIL]       THE  TEGENOLOGIGAI.  INSTINCT:  TOOLS,        207 

friendship,  Shiate  came  into  my  tent,  though  it  could 
scarcely  contain  more  than  one  person,  looked  at  all  the 
curiosities,  the  quicksilver,  the  looking-glass,  books,  hair- 
brushes, comb,  watch,  etc.  etc.,  with  the  greatest  interest ; 
then  closing  the  tent,  so  that  none  of  his  people  might 
see  the  extravagance  of  which  he  was  about  to  be  guilty, 
he  drew  out  from  his  clothing  a  string  of  beads,  and  die 
end  of  a  conical  shell,  which  is  considered,  in  regions  far 
from  the  sea,  of  as  great  value  as  the  Lord  Mayor's 
badge  is  in  London.  He  hung  it  round  my  neck,  and 
said,  *  There,  now,  you  have  a  proof  of  my  friendship.' 
My  men  informed  me  that  these  shells — a  species  of 
conidae, — are  so  highly  valued  in  this  quarter  as  evi- 
dences of  distinction,  that  for  two  of  them  a  slave  might 
be  bought,  and  five  would  be  considered  a  handsome 
price  for  an  elephant's  tusk  worth  ten  pounds."  But 
even  more  curious  is  it  when  such  sea-wrought  treasures 
are  found  employed  not  as  the  ornaments,  but  as  the 
substitutes  for  dress,  aa  among  the  natives  of  Damley 
Island,  an  island  of  volcanic  origin,  oflF  the  coast  of  New 
Guinea,  visited  by  Her  Majesty's  ship  "Fly"  in  1842-46. 
The  natives  are  described  as  fine,  active,  well-made  fel* 
lows,  rather  above  the  middle  height,  of  a  dark  brown  or 
chocolate  colour.  "  They  had  frequently  almost  hand- 
some faces,  aquiline  noses,  rather  broad  about  the  nostrils, 
well-shaped  heads,  and  many  had  a  singularly  Jewish 
cast  of  features.  They  were  entirely  naked,  but  fi:e- 
quently  wore  ornaments  made  of  mother-of-pearl  shells, 
either  circular  or  crescent  shaped,  hanging  round  their 
necks.  Occasionally,  also,  we  saw  a  part  of  a  large 
shell,  apparently  a  cassis,  cut  into  a  projecting  shield- 
shape,  worn  in  front  of  the  groin."  Among  these 
islanders  also,  the  larger  sea-shells  have  to  perform  the 
function^  which  are  so  abundantly  provided  for,  in  the 
Western  Archipelago,  by  the  calabash.     Their  adapta- 


208  PREIIISTORW  MAN.  [Chap. 

bility  for  this  purpose,  indeed,  naturally  suggests  such 
an  application  of  them  wherever  they  abound,  as  in  the 
case  of  the  Buccinum  doliuniy  frequently  used  by  the 
fishermen  and  mariners  of  the  tropics  as  a  convenient 
utensil  with  which  to  bale  their  boats.  So  in  like 
manner  the  graceful  trumpet-like  form,  and  richly- 
variegated  colours,  of  the  larger  species  of  the  tritons, 
such  as  the  beautiful  Triton  variegatuSy  render  their 
early  and  independent  application  as  horns  or  musical 
instruments,  alUce  by  the  islanders  of  the  Pacific  and  the 
Caribbean  seas,  sufficiently  natural  and  obvious. 

Though  the  natives  of  the  Antilles,  when  first  visited 
by  the  Spaniards,  possessed  some  natural  advantages 
over  the  inhabitants  of  the  volcanic  and  coral  islands  of 
the  Pacific,  yet  the  large  marine  sheUs  with  which  the 
neighbouring  seas  abound,  constituted  an  important 
source  for  the  raw  material  of  their  primitive  imple- 
ments and  manufactures.  The  great  size,  and  the  facility 
of  workmanship  of  the  widely-diffused  pyruLce^  turbindlay 
strombi,  and  others  of  the  larger  shells,  have  indeed  led 
to  their  application,  wherever  they  abound  among  unciv- 
ilized nations,  to  numerous  purposes  elsewhere  supplied 
from  other  sources.  Of  such,  the  Caribs  made  knives, 
lances^  and  harpoons,  as  well  as  personal  ornaments; 
while  the  mollusc  itself  was  sought  for  and  prized  as 
food.  The  Strombus  gigas  is  still  fished  for  the  table  off 
the  island  of  Barbadoes ;  and  numerous  ancient  weapons 
and  implements  made  from  its  shell  have  been  dug  up 
on  the  island.  An  interesting  collection,  illustrative  of 
the  character  of  such  primitive  manufactures  of  the 
Antilles,  has  been  presented  to  me  by  Dr.  Bovell,  by 
whom  they  were  dug  up  with  other  Carib  relics,  on 
the  island  of  Barbadoes,  where  traces  of  the  mixed 
blood  of  aboriginal  Caribs  continued  till  very  recently 
to  mark  a  portion  of  the   coloured  population  of  the 


VII.]     THE  TECHNOLOGICAL  IMSTIJfCT ;   TOOLS.        209 

island.    From  these  the  accompanying  illustrations  are 
selected. 


The  Carib  aborigines  of  the  Antilles  furnish  a  striking 
example  of  what  the  more  active  manifestations  of  moral 
degradation  really  imply.  Compared  with  the  gentle, 
passive  Indians  met  by  the  Spaniards  on  the  first  islands 
of  the  west  visited  by  European  explorers,  the  Caribs 
were  a  cruel  and  fierce  race  of  cannibals,  as  hateful  in  all 
their  moat  salient  characteristics  as  the  earlier  New  Zea- 
landers  or  Feejeeans.  Yet  time  has  proved,  even  under 
very  unfavourable  eircumstanees  for  the  development 
of  Carib  civilisation,  that  the  fierceness  and  aggressive 
cruelty  of  the  Caribs  of  the  Lesser  Antilles  corresponded 
to  the  wild  fury  of  the  old  viking  rovers  of  Europe,  and 
gave  proof  of  energy  and  stamina  capable  of  sturdy  en- 
durance, and  of  ripening  into  a  beneficent  maturity ; 
while  the  gentle  and  friendly  Indians  of  the  larger  An- 
tilles, without,  in  reality,  any  superior  moral  attributes, 
but  only  the  characteristics  of  a  weak  and  passive  nature, 
have  melted  away  like  the  snows  of  the  past  winter, 
with  scarcely  a  memorial  of  their  existence  left  The 
Caribs  are  the  historic  race  of  the  Antilles,  and  also  of 
the  southern  continent  of  America  :  their  chronicles  de- 
riving their  vitality  and  endurance,  like  those  of  ancient 
Europe,  from  the  vicissitudes  of  war.  In  all  their  annals 
they  present  themselves  as  an  aggressive  people ;  and 


^^^^^^^^^^mm^mm^mmm 


210  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

though  long  since  extirpated  or  expelled  from  their  an- 
cient insular  possessions,  they  still  appear  on  the  south- 
em  mainland  as  the  people  of  an  encroaching  area ;  and 
the  marches  of  their  extending  frontier  ring  with  the 
shouts  of  border  warfare,  as  fierce  and  to  us  not  greatly 
less  substantial  than  the  Wendish  and  Bulgarian  war- 
rings  of  Henry  the  Fowler,  and  his  German  Markgrafs 
of  well-nigh  a  thousand  years  ago. 

In  1851,  Sir  Kobert  Schomburgk  communicated  to 
the  British  Association,  the  result  of  recent  ethnological 
researches  in  St.  Domingo.  In  this  the  obsers^ant  tra- 
veller deplores  the  fact  that  of  the  millions  of  natives 
who  at  its  discovery  peopled  the  island,  not  a  single 
pure  descendant  now  exists,  though  he  could  trace  in  the 
Indios  of  mixed  blood  the  peculiar  features  and  other 
physical  characteristics  of  the  pure  Indian  still  uneradi- 
cated.  In  the  absence  of  a  true  native  population  of  the 
island  aborigines,  Sir  Kobert  Schomburgk  remarks  :  "My 
researches  were  restricted  to  what  history  and  the  few 
and  poor  monuments  have  transmitted  to  us  of  their 
customs  and  manners.  Their  language  lives  only  in  the 
names  of  places,  trees,  and  fruits,  but  all  combine  in  de- 
claring that  the  people  who  bestowed  these  names  were 
identical  with  the  Carib  and  Arawaak  tribes  of  Guiana. 
An  excursion  to  the  calcareous  caverns  of  Pommier,  about 
ten  leagues  to  the  west  of  the  city  of  Santo  Domingo, 
afforded  me  the  examination  of  some  picture-writings 
executed  by  the  Indians  after  the  arrival  of  the  Span- 
iards. These  remarkable  caves,  which  are  in  themselves 
of  high  interest,  are  situated  within  the  district  over 
which,  at  the  landing  of  the  Spaniards,  the  fair  Indian 
Catalina  reigned  as  cacique.*^  To  this  district  they  were 
tempted  by  the  news  of  rich  mines  in  its  mountains.  In 
1496,  a  fortified  tower  was  erected,  called  originally  San 
Aristobal,  but  so  abundant  was  the  precious  metal,'  that 


VII.]     THE  TECHNOLOGICAL  INSTINCT:  TOOLS.        211 

even  the  stones  of  the  fortress  contained  it,  and  the 
workmen  named  it  the  Golden  Tower.  But  the  lives  of 
millions  of  the  miserable  natives  were  sacrificed  in  re- 
covering the  gold  from  their  mountain  veins,  and  then, 
the  mines  being  exhausted,  the  country  was  abandoned 
to  the  wild  exuberance  of  tropical  desolation,  while  the 
caverns  which  had  previously  been  devoted  to  religious 
rites,  became  places  of  retreat  from  the  Spaniard  and 
his  frightful  bloodhound.  One  of  the  smaller  caves  stiU 
exhibits  a  highly  interesting  series  of  symbolic  pictures, 
which  the  Indians  had  traced  with  charcoal  on  the  white 
and  smooth  walls,  from  whence  it  has  received  the  name 
of  the  painted  chamber.  Peter  Martyr  of  Angleria,  the 
contemporary,  and  one  of  the  earliest  historians  of  the 
discoveries  of  Columbus,  relates  in  his  first  decade  of  the 
"  Ocean,"  that  the  aborigines  of  Santo  Domingo  held 
caves  in  great  veneration,  for  out  of  them  they  said  came 
the  sun  and  moon  to  give  light  to  the  world,  and  man- 
kind also  issued  fi-om  two  caves  of  unequal  height,  ac- 
cording to  their  relative  stature.  On  those  caverns  Sir 
R  Schomburgk  remarks :  "  In  the  general  uncertainty 
which  prevails  with  regard  to  these  monuments  of  by- 
gone races,  it  was  particularly  gratifying  to  find  sculp- 
tures which  afforded  a  clue  to  the  period  when  they  were 
executed.  Near  the  entrance  of  a  second  cave  close  to 
the  former,  I  observed  some  carvings  on  the  rock.  The 
character  of  these  figures,  and  their  being  cut  in  the  hard 
substance  of  stone,  prove  an  origin  of  a  more  remote 
date  than  those  in  the  other  cave.  Baron  Humboldt  ob- 
serves, when  alluding  to  the  carvings  he  met  with  on 
the  banks  of  the  Orinoco,  that  it  must  not  be  forgotten 
that  nations  of  very  different  descent,  when  in  a  similar 
uncivilized  state,  having  the  same  disposition  to  simplify 
and  generalize  outlines,  and  being  impelled  by  inherent 
menf al  dispositions  to  form  rhythmical  repetitions  and 


212  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

series,  may  be  led  to  produce  similar  signs  and  symbols. 
But  he  had  only  opportunity  to  view  the  carved  figures 
on  the  Orinoco,  but  the  examination  of  a  great  num- 
ber of  these  symbols  shows  to  me  that  there  is  a  great 
diflference  in  their  character  and  execution ;  nor  is  it  my 
opinion  that  the  idols  worked  in  stone,  and  the  carvings 
on  the  rocks,  were  executed  by  the  races  that  inhabited 
South  America  and  the  West  Indies  at  the  time  of  their 
discovery.  They  belong  to  a  remoter  period,  and  prove 
much  more  skill  and  patience  than  the  simple  figures 
painted  with  charcoal  on  the  walls  of  the  cave  near  Pom- 
mier.  The  figures  carved  of  stone,  and  worked  without 
iron  tools,  denote,  if  not  civilisation,  a  quick  conception 
and  an  inexhaustible  patience  to  give  to  these  hard  sub- 
stances the  desired  forms/'  From  his  examination  of 
the  tools  and  utensils  still  in  use  among  the  existing 
tribes  in  Guiana,  Sir  Eobert  doubts  such  to  be  the  work 
of  the  Caribs ;  but  he  admits  that  they  are  only  found 
where  we  have  sure  evidence  that  the  Caribs  inhabited 
or  visited  the  place,  and  he  under-estimates  both  the 
skill  and  patience  shown  by  many  native  artists  equally 
poorly  provided  with  tools.  The  carvings  of  the  Polyne- 
sians on  their  elaborately-wrought  clubs  and  paddles, 
and  the  complicated  designs  of  the  Babeen  and  Clalam 
sculptors,  are  frequently  the  result  of  many  weeks  and 
even  months  of  labour,  desultorily  and  intermittingly 
expended,  but  nevertheless  with  a  persevering  aim 
towards  the  accomplishment  of  one  premeditated  design. 
Among  various  evidences  of  the  former  presence  of  the 
Caribs  in  the  Santo  Domingo,  Sir  Eobert  Schomburgk 
^  describes  his  finding,  at  the  eastern  point  of  the  island 
called  Junto  Engano,  numerous  heaps  of  conch  shells 
{Strombus  gigas).  "  These  shells  have  invariably  a  hole 
near  the  spire,  which  has  been  made  for  the  purpose  of  de- 
taching the  animal  from  the  shell,  to  extract  it  with  ease. 


""■-*''  ^  V^^w««<9P— -^^m^^^^^^MP-9^rV««^S{««MWHVVaB«aBW«W«il91BHnHn^^B^«HP^ 


YIL]      riTJ^  TECHNOLOGICAL  INSTINCT:  TOOLS.        213 

• 

I  met  with  a  large  number  of  similar  piles  at  the  Island 
of  Anegada,  which  the  historians  of  the  Antilles  ascribe 
to  the  Caribs,  who,  on  their  descent  from  the  Lucuyas  to 
wage  war  upon  the  natives  of  Puerto  Kico,  touched  first 
at  Anegada  in  order  to  provision  themselves  with  conchs 
for  their  expedition."  Other  relics  of  native  art  and 
history  attracted  the  attention  of  the  traveller,  while 
exploring  those  islands,  and  he  specially  dwells  with 
interest  on  a  paved  ring  of  granite,  in  the  vicinity  of 
San  Juan  de  Maguana,  in  St.  Domingo,  which  formed, 
at  the  time  of  its  first  discovery  by  Europeans,  a  distinct 
kingdom,  governed  by  the  cacique  Caonabo,  the  most  fierce 
and  powerful  of  the  Carib  chiefs,  and  the  irreconcilable 
enemy  of  the  European  invaders.  The  circle  consists  of 
granitic  rocks,  from  thirty  to  forty  pounds  in  weight,  and 
seeming,  from  their  smooth  and  water-worn  look,  to 
have  been  brought  a  considerable  distance,  from  the  river 
Maguana.  The  ring  has  the  appearance  of  a  paved  road 
twenty-one  feet  in  breadth,  and  about  2270  feet  in  cir- 
cumference. A  large  granitic  mass  in  the  centre,  fully 
five  and  a  half  feet  in  length,  has  been  smoothed  and 
rudely  fashioned  into  the  shape  of  a  human  figure ;  and 
corresponds  in  every  respect  to  another  represented  by 
Pfere  Charlevoix,  in  his  Histoire  de  Vile  Espagnole  ou  de 
Saint-Dominique^  which  he  describes  as  a  figure  found 
in  an  Indian  grave.  A  pathway,  of  the  same  breadth 
and  workmanship  as  the  ring,  extends  from  it  due  west, 
and  turns  afterwards  at  a  right  angle  to  the  north,  end- 
ing at  a  small  brook.  It  is.  called  at  the  present  day, 
"  El  Cercado  de  los  Indios,'^  but  Sir  Robert  Schomburgk 
questions  its  being  the  work  of  the  inhabitants  of  the 
island  when  first  visited  by  the  Spaniards,  and  assigns  it, 
along  with  figures  which  he  examined  cut  into  rocks  in 
the  interior  of  Guiana,  and  the  sculptured  figures  of  St. 
Domingo,  to  a  people  far  superior  in  intellect  to  those 


2U  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

Columbus  met  with  in  Hispaniola.  These  he  conceives 
to  have  come  from  the  northern  part  of  Mexico,  adjacent 
to  the  ancient  district  of  Huastecas,  and  to  have  been 
conquered  and  extirpated  by  their  Carib  supplanters, 
prior  to  European  colonists  displacing  them  in  their 
turn.  In  this  opinion,  however,  perhaps  an  undue  weight 
is  attached  to  the  imperfect  appliances  of  the  insular 
Caribs. 

Among  the  numerous  stone  weapons  or  implements 
which  have  been  discovered,  and  serve  to  illustrate  the 
primitive  arts  of  the  New  World,  three  remarkable  reUcs 
from  the  Bay  of  Honduras,  in  South  America,  are  de- 
serving of  special  attention.    They  were  found,  about  the 


year  1794,  with  other  examples,  in  a  cave  between  two 
and  three  miles  inland.  One  of  them  was  presented  to 
the  British  Museum,  and  two  others  have  been  repeatedly 


VII.]      TBE  TECHNOLOOWAL  INSTINCT:  TOOLS.       21  i5 

exhibited  at  meetings  of  the  Archaeological  Institute. 
The  accompanying  woodcuts  will  best  convey  an  idea  of 
their  peculiar  forms.  One  ia  a  serrated  weapon,  pointed 
at  both  ends,  and  measuring  sixteen  and  a  half  inches 
long.  Another  is  in  the  form  of  a  crescent,  with  project- 
ing points.  It  measures  seventeen, 
inches  in  greatest  length,  and  it  is  con- 
jectured may  have  served  as  a  weapon 
of  parade,  like  the  state  partisan  or 
halbert  of  later  times.  The  third, 
which  is  imperfect,  has  probably  re- 
sembled the  previous  one  in  general 
form.  The  whole  are  examples  of 
implements  wrought  in  flint,  of  un- 
usually large  proportions,  and  chipped 
with  extraordinary  regularity  and  skill. 
A  remarkable  specimen  of  terra-cotta 
obtained  about  the  same  period,  and 
presented  to  the  Society  of  Anti-  •" 
quaries  of  Scotland  in  1798,  is  figured  on  a  subsequent 
page. 

The  island  of  Jamaica  has  furnished  a  peculiarly  abun- 
dant series  of  examples  of  the  stone  and  flint  weapons 
and  implements  of  its  ancient  inhabitants ;  and  in  many 
of  the  islands  relics  of  the  ingenious  conversion  of  the 
conch  and  others  of  the  lai^e  shells  of  the  Caribbean  Sea, 
to  the  purposes  of  manufacture,  have  been  frequently 
found.  But  while  thus  noting  the  varied  uaea  to  which 
the  gigantic  marine  shells  of  the  Antilles  were  applied  by 
the  natives  of  the  Archipelago,  a  still  greater  interest 
attaches  to  the  evidences  of  an  ancient  trade  in  the  same 
products  of  the  Gulf  of  Florida,  carried  on  among  the 
widely-scattered  tribes  and  nations  of  North  America, 
long  before  its  discovery  by  Columbus, 

Abundant  evidence  exists  to  prove  that  they  were 


216  FREHISTOEIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

greatly  valued,  and  even  regarded  with  superstitious  re- 
verence, both  by  the  more  civih'zed  nations  of  the  neigh- 
bouring mainland  around  the  GuLf  of  Florida,  and  also 
by  the  Indian  tribes  even  so  far  north  as  beyond  the 
shores  of  the  great  Canadian  Lakes.  In  one  of  the  sin- 
gular migratory  scenes  of  the  ancient  Mexican  paintings, 
copied  in  Lord  Kingsborough's  Mexican  Antiquities^ 
from  the  Mendoza  Collection,  preserved  among  the  Selden 
MSS.  in  the  Bodleian  Library  at  Oxford,  a  native  figure  is 
represented  carrying  a  large  univalve  shell  in  his  hand. 
He  is  barefooted,  and  dressed  only  in  a  short,  spotted 
tunic,  reaching  to  his  loins.  In  his  right  hand  he  bears 
a  spear,  toothed  round  the  blade,  it  may  be  with  inserted 
flints  or  points  of  obsidian,  while  he  holds  the  large  shell 
in  his  left  hand.  A  river,  which  he  is  passing,  is  repre- 
sented by  a  greenish  stripe  winding  obliquely  across  the 
drawing,  and  his  track,  as  indicated  by  alternate  foot- 
prints, has  previously  crossed  the  same  stream.  On  this 
trail  he  is  followed  by  other  figures  nearly  similarly 
dressed,  but  sandalled,  and  bearing  spears  and  large  fans  ; 
while  a  second  group  approaches  the  river  by  a  different 
trail,  and  in  an  opposite  direction  to  the  sheU-bearer. 
Other  details  of  this  curious  fragment  of  pictorial  history 
are  less  easily  interpreted.  An  altar,  or  a  temple,  appears 
to  be  represented  on  one  side  of  the  stream  ;  and  a  highly 
coloured  circular  figure,  like  a  shield,  on  the  other,  may 
be  the  epitomized  symbol  of  some  Achaean  land  or  Sacred 
Elis  of  the  New  World.  But  whatever  be  adopted  as 
the  most  trustworthy  interpretation  of  the  ancient  hiero- 
glyphic painting,  its  general  correspondence  with  other 
migratory  depictions  is  undoubted ;  and  it  is  worthy  of 
note,  that,  in  some  respects,  the  most  prominent  of  all 
the  figures  is  he  who  is  represented  as  fording  the  stream, 
bearing  one  of  the  large  tropical  univalves  in  his  hand. 

'  Mexican  Antiquities,  vol.  i.  plate  68. 


VH]      THE  TECHNOLOGICAL  INSTINCT:  TOOLS,       217 

The  evidence  which  such  a  remarkable  record  affords 
of  an  importance  attached  to  the  large  sea-shells  of  the 
Gulf  of  Mexico,  among  the  most  civilized  of  the  Ame- 
rican nations  settled  on  its  shores,  is  deserving  of  notice ; 
but  the  same  tropical  marine  products  acquire  a  new 
and  more  important  significance  when  they  are  met  with 
among  relics  pertaining  to  Indian  tribes  settled  in  the 
northern  regions  of  the  continent,  some  of  them  upwards 
of  three  thousand  miles  distant  from  the  native  habitat 
of  the  mollusca,  by  which  these  coveted  treasures  of  the 
ocean  are  produced,  and  separated  by  hundreds  of  miles 
from  the  nearest  sea-coast. 

Tracing  them  along  the  northern  route  through  the 
Mississippi  and  Ohio  valleys,  these  shells  have  been 
found  in  the  ancient  graves  of  Tennessee,  Kentucky, 
and  Indiana,  and  northward  to  the  regions  of  the  Great 
Lakes.  Dr.  Gerard  Troost,  in  a  communication  to  the 
American  Ethnological  Society,^  has  described  a  singu- 
larly interesting  series  of  ancient  relics  and  sepul- 
chral remains  discovered  in  Tennessee.  The  crania  of 
the  graves  were  characterized  by  remarkable  artificial 
compression,  as  in  the  example  figured  by  Dr.  Morton, 
plate  55,  Crania  Americana.  These  ancient  graves 
abounded  with  relics,  "lares,  trinkets,  and  utensils,  all 
of  a  very  rude  construction,  and  aU  formed  of  some 
natural  product,  none  of  metal."  From  an  examination 
of  these.  Dr.  Troost  was  led  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
race  to  whom  they  pertained  came  from  some  tropi- 
cal country.  Among  their  stone  implements  obsidian 
abounded.  Numerous  beads  were  formed  of  tropical 
marine  shells  of  the  genus  marginella,  ground  so  as  to 
make  a  perforation  on  the  back,  by  means  of  which  they 
could  be  strung  together  for  purposes  of  personal  orna- 
ment.    Plain  beads  were  made  from  the  columellse  of 

^  Transactions,  American  Ethnological  Society,  vol.  i.  pp.  355-365. 


218  PBE HISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

the  Siromhus  gigas;  and  such  columellfe  were  found 
worn  to  a  uniform  thickneas,  perforated  through  the 
centre,  and  in  all  stages  of  manufacture,  &om  the  rude 
state  in  which  such  are  found  on  the  island  shores  of 
the  West  Indies,  to  their  condition,  as  perfected  beads 
and  links  of  the  much-prized  wampum.  Similar  accu- 
mulations of  shell-beads  are  of  frequent  occurrence  in 
the  great  mounds  of  the  Ohio  valley,  and  are  again  re- 
ferred to  in  a  subsequent  chapter ;  but  another  relic, 
formed  in  part  also  of  the  gigantic  shells  of  the  tropics, 
presents  characteristics  of  still  greater  interest  as  illus- 
trative of  ancient  manners  and  modea  of  thought  Dr. 
Troost  describes  and  figures  various  rudely  modelled 
and  sculptured  idols  found  in  the  same  locality,  from 
some  of  which  he  was 
led  to  assume  the  ex- 
istence of  Phallic  rites 
among  the  ancient 
idolaters  of  the  Ohio 
valley.  One  of  these 
specimens  of  aboriginal 
;red  sculpture  was 
accidentally  discovered 
in  ploughing  a  piece  of 
land  newly  reclaimed 
from  the  forest.  The 
utensils  found  in  the 
Tennessee  graves  have 
all  been  made  of  stone 
or  obsidian ;  and  the 
greater  number  of  the 
idols  are  in  like  manner  sculptured  in  stone  of  various 
kinds  and  degrees  of  hardness.  But  the  figure  now 
referred  to  is  made  of  clay  and  pounded  shells,  and, 
like   other   examples  which  have  been  met  with,  has 


VII]      THE  TECHNOLOGICAL  INSTINCT:  TOOLS,        219 

been  hardened  in  the  fire.  It  represents  a  nude  human 
figure,  kneeling,  with  the  hands  clasped  in  front ;  and 
when  found,  it  still  occupied,  as  its  primitive  niche 
or  sanctuary,  a  large  tropical  shell  {Cassis  Jlmnmea), 
from  which  the  interior  whorls  and  columella  had  been 
removed,  with  the  exception  of  a  small  portion  at 
the  base,  cut  off  flat,  so  as  to  form  a  pedestal  for  the 
idoL  The  special  application  of  this  example  of  the 
tropical  cassides,  thus  found  so  remote  from  its  native 
habitat,  adds  a  peculiar  interest  to  it,  as  manifestly 
associated  with  the  religious  rites  of  the  ancient  race 
by  whom  the  spoils  of  southern  seas  were  transported 
inland,  and  converted  to  purposes  of  ornament  and  use. 
The  discovery  of  examples  of  similar  tropical  relics, 
or  of  articles  of  personal  ornament  fashioned  from  them, 
when  found  to  the  north  of  the  Great  Lakes,  is  still 
more  calcidated  to  excite  surprise,  and,  when  first 
brought  under  notice,  was  made  the  basis  of  some  very 
extravagant  ethnological  theories,  Mr.  John  Delafield, 
in  his  Inquiry  into  the  Origin  of  the  Antiquities  of 
Amelia,  describes  two  large  specimens  of  the  Pyrula 
perversa^  and  refers  to  similar  examples  frequently  found 
in  the  ancient  monumental  and  sepulchral  mounds  of 
Ohio.  He  then  quotes  from  an  essay  read  by  him  before 
the  Historical  and  Philosophical  Society  of  Ohio ;  but, 
ignorant  of  the  true  habitat  of  the  Pyrula  perversa^  he 
describes  it  as  unknown  on  the  coasts  of  North  or 
South  America,  while  it  abounds,  as  he  believes,  on  the 
coast  of  Hindustan,  and  hence  he  assumes  that  such 
relics  afford  no  slight  evidence  of  a  migration  from 
southern  Asia.^  This  idea,  which  for  a  time  was  enter- 
tained with  much  favour,  is  now  known  to  be  entirely 
unfounded ;  but  though  we  have  not  in  such  relics  the 
traces  of  such  far  wanderings  from  the  old  East,  the 

*  Inquiry  into  the  Origin  of  the  Antiquities  of  America,  p.  162. 


220  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

chief  interest  which  the  large  pynilse  of  the  Florida 
Gulf  do  possess  is  from  the  light  they  are  calculated  to 
throw  on  the  traces  of  ancient  migration,  or  of  traffic 
between  the  north  and  south,  in  ages  prior  to  the  dis- 
placement of  the  red  man  by  the  European.  Two  of 
such  large  tropical  shells,  both  of  them  specimens  of  the 
Pyrula  perversa,  the  native  habitats  of  which  are  the 
Antilles  and  the  Bay  of  Campeachy  on  the  mainland, 
have  been  presented  to  the  Canadian  Institute  at  To- 
ronto :  not  as  additions  to  its  specimens  of  native  con- 
chology  of  the  tropics,  but  as  Indian  relics  pertaining 
to  the  great  northern  chain  of  fresh-water  lakes.  The 
first  of  these  was  discovered  on  opening  an  Indian 
grave-mound,  at  Nottawasaga,  on  the  Georgian  Bay, 
along  with  a  gorget  made  from  the  same  kind  of  shell. 
The  second  example  was  brought  from  the  Fishing 
Islands,  near  Cape  Hurd,  on  Lake  Huron  ;  another,  from 
the  Georgian  Bay,  is  in  the  Museum  of  the  University 
of  Toronto,  and  many  specimens  have  come  under  my 
notice  which  have  been  procured  from  grave-mounds 
and  sepulchral  depositories  on  the  shores  of  the  same 
Bay.  In  one  pit,  about  seven  miles  from  Penetangui- 
shene,  three  large  conch-sheUs  were  found,  along  with 
twenty-six  copper  kettles,  a  pipe,  a  copper  bracelet,  a 
quantity  of  shell  beads,  and  numerous  other  relics.  The 
largest  of  the  shells,  a  specimen  of  the  PyruUi  spirata^ 
weighed  three  pounds  and  a  quarter,  and  measured 
fourteen  inches  in  greatest  length;  but  a  piece  had 
been  cut  off  this  and  another  of  the  large  shells,  pro- 
bably for  the  manufacture  of  some  smaller  ornament  for 
the  person.  It  exhibited  abundant  marks  of  age  and 
frequent  handling,  its  outer  surface  being  quite  honey- 
combed, while  the  inside  retained  its  smooth  lameUated 
surface.  Another  sepulchral  depository,  discovered  on 
elevated  ground  in  the  neighbouring  township  of  Oro, 


VII.]      THE  TECHNOLOGICAL  INSTINCT:  TOOLS.       221 

contained  twenty-six  copper  kettles,  underneath  one  of 
which  lay  another  of  the  large  tropical  shells,  seemingly 
carefully  packed  in  beaver  skins  and  bark ;  while  in  a 
third  cemetery  in  the  same  district,  among  copper 
arrow-heads,  bracelets,  and  ear-ornaments,  pipes  of  stone 
and  clay,  beads  of  porcelain,  red  pipe-stone,  etc.,  sixteen 
of  the  same  prized  tropical  univalves  lay  round  the 
bottom  of  the  pit  arranged  in  groups  of  three  or  four 
together.  Numerous  skeletons,  or  detached  skulls  and 
bones  promiscuously  heaped  alongside  of  these  relics, 
attested  the  sepulchral  character  of  the  depository,  and 
the  kettles  had  been  rendered  useless  by  the  blows  of  a 
tomahawk,  according  to  the  invariable  practice  of  the 
Indians  with  offerings  deposited  beside  their  dead.  Ex- 
amples of  corresponding  discoveries  of  the  tropical  shells 
of  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  thus  transferred  thousands  of 
miles  inland,  and  cherished  by  the  ancient  tribes  around 
Lake  Huron  with  superstitious  reverence,  might  be 
greatly  multiplied ;  but  evidence  enough  has  been  ad- 
duced to  prove  the  frequency  of  their  occurrence,  and 
the  value  attached  to  them.  From  their  columellse  the 
sacred  wampum  was  made,  along  with  gorgets  and  other 
special  decorations ;  and  the  appearance  of  some  of  the 
exhumed  shells  suggests  that  they  may  have  been  handed 
down  through  successive  generations  as  great  medicines, 
before  their  final  deposition  among  the  rare  and  costly 
offerings  in  honour  of  the  dead. 

The  ingenious  manufactures  of  the  islanders  of  the 
Caribbean  sea,  from  the  large  marine  shells  which  abound 
on  the  coasts,  naturally  attract  our  attention  as  examples 
of  constructive  skill  adapting  the  readiest  materials  to 
supply  the  necessity  which  man  has  for  tools.  But  the 
interest  which  attaches  to  such  conchological  relics  as 
the  Pyrulce  found  in  the  old  grave-mounds  and  ossuaries 
of  Canada,  manifestly  depends  on  the  fact  of.  thus  dis- 


222  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

covering,  along  the  shores  of  the  great  inland  chain  of 
fresh- water  lakes^  specimens  of  the  large  sea-shells  of  the 
Atlantic  and  Pacific  coasts  of  Central  America,  and  of 
the  West  Indian  Isles.  The  attractions  offered  by  such 
large  and  beautiful  tropical  shells  are  sufficiently  appa- 
rent, and,  as  we  have  seen,  are  by  no  means  limited  to 
the  untutored  tastes  of  the  American  Indian,  nor  to  the 
products  of  the  Mexican  coasts.  Their  employment  in 
the  construction  of  vessels  for  ordinary  use  has  already 
been  referred  to  ;  but  other  and  more  important  appli- 
cations of  some  of  them  for  special  religious  services 
among  the  inhabitants  of  the  Old  World  seem  to  offer 
illustrations  more  in  accordance  with  the  discoveries  here 
referred  to.  In  India,  China,  and  Siam,  the  Pyi^m,  and 
others  of  the  large  and  beautiful  shells  of  the  Indian 
Ocean,  of  the  species  Turbinellay  are  highly  prized  by 
the  natives  of  the  neighbouring  districts ;  and  this  is 
especially  the  case  with  a  sinistrorsal  variety  found  on 
the  coasts  of  Tranquebar  and  Ceylon,  and  made  use  of 
by  the  Cingalese  in  some  of  their  most  sacred  rites. 
Such  reversed  shells  of  the  species  Turbinellay  are  also 
held  in  special  veneration  in  China,  where  great  prices 
are  given  for  them  ;  and  they  are  often  curiously  orna- 
mented with  elaborate  carvings,  fine  specimens  of  which 
are  in  the  British  Museum.  They  are  kept  in  the 
pagodas  by  the  priests,  and  are  not  only  employed 
by  them  on  certain  special  occasions  as  the  sacred 
vessels  from  which  they  administer  medicine  to  the  sick, 
but  it  is  in  one  of  those  sinistrorsal  turbinellaB  that  the 
consecrated  oil  is  kept,  with  which  the  Emperor  is 
anointed  at  his  coronation. 

While  avoiding  the  error  of  earlier  observers,  who 
fancied  they  discovered  in  the  pyrulae  of  the  Ohio  grave- 
mounds  the  traces  of  a  remote  Asiatic  migration  to  the 
New  World  :  such  analogies  in  the  choice  of  objects  of 


Vn.]       THE  TECHNOLOGICAL  INSTINCT:  TOOLS.       223 

veneration  or  superstitious  value,  as  are  indicated  in  the 
uses  to  which  the  pjrrulsB  of  the  Indian  Ocean  and  of  the 
Gulf  of  Florida  are  applied,  are  full  of  interest  to  the 
ethnologist.  Nor  are  such  analogies  confined  to  the 
veneration  for  gigantic  tropical  shells.  Some  of  the 
personal  ornaments  of  the  modem  Hindu,  manufactured 
from  the  soUd  porcellaneous  pyrum,  closely  correspond 
to  the  relics  of  similar  construction  found  in  ancient 
American  grave-mounds,  and  supposed  by  their  first 
discoverers  to  be  wrought  in  ivory.  The  chief  value  of 
the  latter,  however,  arises  from  their  discovery  in  lati- 
tudes altogether  remote  from  the  native  habitat  of  the 
living  mollusc,  and  the  consequent  traces  which  they 
disclose  of  ancient  migration,  or  of  traflBc  between  widely 
separated  tribes.  But  while  the  tropical  shells  thus 
met  with  in  the  regions  of  the  Great  Lakes  may  be  as- 
sumed to  represent  one  among  the  treasures  of  southern 
latitudes  :  the  north  had  its  coveted  mineral  wealth,  of 
the  diffusion  of  which  throughout  the  whole  tribes  of 
the  northern  continent  we  have  abundant  evidence  from 
various  sources,  and  referring  to  very  different  periods. 
Among  the  relics  entombed  in  the  sacrificial  mounds  of 
the  Mississippi  valley  have  been  found  objects  formed 
from  the  mica  of  the  AUeghanies,  and  the  native  copper 
of  Lake  Superior,  mingling  with  others  made  of  the 
obsidian  of  Mexico,  or  modelled  from  tropical  fauna  of 
the  southern  continent. 

Traces  of  ancient  migration,  and  of  a  widely-extended 
traffic,  reveal  themselves  in  records  derived  from  very 
diverse  sources,  and  indicate  extensive  wanderings  of 
the  aboriginal  American  tribes  and  nations,  while  stUl 
practising  the  primitive  arts  of  the  American  stone- 
period.  In  the  League  of  the  Iroquois,  an  interesting 
contribution  to  American  ethnology  and  history,  written 
by  Mr.  Lewis  H.  Morgan,  from  materials  gathered  in  co- 


224  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

operation  with  Hasanoanda^  an  educated  Seneca  Indian, 
the  author  observes :  "  Earthen  pots  are  frequently  found 
beside  the  remains  of  the  Iroquois.  In  these  it  was 
customary  to  deposit  food  for  the  departed  while  jour- 
neying to  the  reahn  of  the  Great  Spirit.  These  earthen 
dishes  are  still  found  in  Indian  burial-places,  where 
perhaps  they  had  lain  for  centuries,  and  the  fragments 
of  those  which  have  been  broken  by  the  plough  are  also 
mingled  with  the  soil.  Metallic  implements  were  un- 
known among  them.  Rude  knives  of  chert  were  used 
for  skinning  deer,  and  similar  purposes ;  for  cutting  trees, 
and  excavating  canoes  and  com  mortars;  in  a  word, 
for  those  necessary  purposes  for  which  the  axe  would 
seem  to  be  indispensable,  the  Iroquois  used  the  stone 
chisel.  In  cutting  trees  fire  was  appHed  at  the  foot, 
and  the  chisel  used  to  clear  away  the  coaL  By  a  repe- 
tition of  the  process  trees  were  felled  and  cut  to  pieces. 
Wooden  vessels  were  hollowed  out  by  the  same  means. 
Stone  gouges  in  the  form  of  a  convex  chisel,  were  also 
used  when  a  more  regular  concavity  of  the  vessel  was 
d^ired.  Stone  mortars  for  pounding  com.  grinding 
mineral  paint,  and  for  pidverizing  roots  and  barks  for 
medicines,  were  also  among  their  utensils.  Arrow-heads 
of  flint  were  so  common  that  it  is  scarcely  necessary  to 
refer  to  them.  Occasionally  they  are  found  with  a 
twist  to  make  the  arrow  revolve  in  its  flight.  It  is  well 
known  that  the  Indian  always  feathered  his  arrow  for 
the  same  purpose.  It  is  not  uncommon  to  find  the 
places  where  these  arrow-heads  were  manufactured, 
which  are  indicated  by  the  fragments  of  chert  made  by 
cleavage."  The  osque^ont,  or  stone  tomahawk,  is  also 
described  as  the  ancient  weapon  of  the  Iroquois,  while 
various  other  equally  primitive  implements,  utensUs, 
and  personal  ornaments,  very  ingeniously  wrought,  were 
in  use  among  the  same  people. 


VII.]      THE  TECHNOLOGICAL  1NS27NCT :  TOOLS,        225 

For  all  the  purposes  of  ethnological  and  historical  in- 
vestigation, the  Indians  of  the  Iroquois  confederacy  are 
indeed  a  singularly  interesting  people.  Their  own  native 
chronicler,  while  unfailing  in  his  efforts  to  set  forth  m 
amplest  form  every  evidence  of  their  superiority  over  all 
the  northern  tribes,  acknowledges  that  metallic  weapons 
were  imknown  among  them,  and  that  they  had  no  use  of 
metals.  The  traditions  of  the  Aztecs  at  the  time  of  the 
Mexican  conquest,  pointed  to  their  origin  from  among 
the  warlike  and  migratory  Indian  tribes  of  the  North- 
west ;  and  here,  at  the  period  of  early  European  contact 
with  the  tribes  of  the  North-east,  we  find  an  Indian 
nation  in  the  most  primitive  condition  as  to  all  know- 
ledge of  progressive  arts,  but  full  of  energy,  vitality,  and 
miUtary  enterprise,  and  amply  endued  with  the  qualities 
requisite  for  effecting  permanent  conquests  over  a  civi- 
lized but  unwarlike  people.  Nor  did  the  primitive  arts 
of  the  Iroquois  prevent  the  development  of  many  inci- 
pient germs  of  civilisation  among  them.  Agriculture 
was  practised  systematically,  and  to  a  considerable  ex 
tent;  and  their  famous  league,  wisely  established,  and 
mamtained  unbroken  through  very  diversified  periods  of 
their  history,  exhibits  to  us  a  people  advancing  in  many 
ways  towards  the  full  initiation  of  a  self-originated  civi- 
lisation, when  the  intrusion  of  Europeans  abruptly  ar- 
rested its  progress,  and  brought  them  in  contact  with 
the  elements  of  a  foreign  civilisation  pregnant  only 
with  the  sources  of  their  degradation  and  final  destruc- 
tion. 

The  historian  of  the  Iroquois,  when  describing  their 
simple  arts  and  manufactures,  remarks,  that  in  the 
western  mounds  rows  of  arrow-heads  or  flint-blades  have 
been  found  lying  side  by  side,  like  teeth,  the  row  being 
about  two  feet  long.  "  This  has  suggested  the  idea  that 
they  were  set  in  a  frame,  and  fastened  with  thongs,  thus 

VOL.  L  P 


226  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

maJdng  a  species  of  sword."  In  this  description  we 
cannot  fail  to  recognise  the  sword  of  Mexico  and  Yuca- 
tan. In  the  large  canoe  with  its  armed  crew,  first  met 
ofi*  that  coast,  Herrera  teUs  us  the  Indians  had  ''  swords 
made  of  wood,  having  a  gutter  in  the  forepart,  in  which 
were  sharped-edged  flints  strongly  fixed  with  a  sort  of 
bitumen  and  thread."  Among  the  Mexicans  this  toothed 
blade  was  armed  with  the  itzLiy  or  obsidian,  capable  of 
taking  an  edge  like  a  razor ;  and  the  destructive  powers 
of  this  formidable  weapon  are  frequently  dwelt  upon  by 
the  early  Spaniards.  Among  the  ruins  of  Kabah,  in 
Yucatan,  the  attention  of  Stephens  was  attracted  by  the 
protruding  comer  of  a  sculptured  plume  of  feathers, 
which  led  to  his  laboriously  excavating  a  large  sculptured 
dab,  the  baBsc^reUevos  on  which  coLt  of  an  upright 
figure  having  a  lofty  plume  of  feathers  falling  to  his 
heek,  while  before  him  kneels  another  figure  holding  in 
his  hands  the  very  same  weapon,  with  its  flint  or  obsi- 
dian blades  projecting  from  the  wooden  socket  The 
idea  it  suggests  is  not  necessarily  that  a^umed  by  Ste- 
phens,  viz.,  that  the  sculptors  and  architects  of  the  great 
ruins  of  Central  America  and  Yucatan  were  the  same 
people  whom  the  Spaniards  found  there  on  their  land- 
ing. The  sculptured  slab  may  be  of  a  greatly  older  date. 
On  its  lower  compartment  is  a  row  of  hieroglyphics ;  and 
the  suppliant  attitude  of  the  armed  figure  is  rather  sug- 
gestive of  a  record  of  conquest  over  some  barbarian 
chief  of  the  Mexican  or  more  northern  tribes,  of  whom 
the  flint-edged  sword-blade  may  have  been  regarded  as 
the  most  typical  characteristic.  Nevertheless,  there  is  a 
singular  interest  in  the  simple  chain  of  evidence,  thus 
confirmatory  as  it  seems  of  the  ancient  Aztec  traditions 
of  original  migration,  which  leads  us,  step  by  step,  from 
the  rude  arts  of  the  Iroquois,  and  the  relics  of  the 
western  sepidchral  mounds,  to  the  armature  of  the  Mexi- 


VIL]      THE  TECHNOLOGICAL  INSTINCT:  TOOLS.        227 

cans  of  the  era  of  the  conquest^  and  the  artistic  records 
of  the  lettered  architects  of  Yucatan. 

The  history  of  the  Iroquois,  and  of  the  varied  appKca- 
tions  of  their  simple  arts,  illustrates  with  peculiar  aptness 
the  unwritten  chronicles  of  the  New  World,  The  In- 
dians of  the  Iroquois,  while  in  that  primitive  condition, 
achieved  a  more  remarkable  civil  and  military  organi- 
zation, and  acquired  a  more  extensive  and  enduring 
influence,  than  any  other  nation  of  native  American 
lineage,  excepting  the  civilized  Mexicans  and  Peruvians. 
Their  own  traditions  pointed  to  a  remote  era^  when  they 
migrated  from  the  northern  shores  of  the  St.  Lawrence 
into  that  region  to  the  south  and  east  of  Lake  Ontario, 
where  they  dwelt  through  all  the  period  of  their  authen  - 
tic  history;  though  it  must  also  be  noted  that  the 
Senecas  and  Onondagas,  two  of  the  members  of  the 
league,  claimed  to  be  autochthones,  sprung  from  the  soil 
of  that  Iroquois  territory.  The  league  embraced  the 
closely-allied  nations  of  the  Oneidas,  Onondagas,  Cajni- 
gas,  Senecas,  and  Mohawks,  all  united  in  a  strictly  federal 
union ;  and  to  this  the  Tuscaroras  were  admitted,  on 
their  expidsion  from  North  Carolina  in  1715.  The  claim 
of  a  common  origin  advanced  by  a  people  occupying 
territory  so  far  to  the  south,  throws  an  interesting  light 
on  the  migrations  of  the  Indian  tribes.  It  is  confirmed 
by  the  character  of  their  language,  and  received  practical 
recognition  in  the  assignment  of  a  portion  of  the  Oneida 
territory  for  their  occupation.  In  the  seventeenth  cen- 
tury the  Iroquois  were  the  great  aggressive  nationality 
of  the  continent,  to  the  north  of  Mexico.  In  the  very 
begiiming  of  that  century.  Captain  John  Smith,  tiie 
founder  of  Virgima,  encountered  their  canoes  on  the 
upper  part  of  the  Chesapeake  Bay,  bearing  a  band  of 
them  to  the  territories  of  the  Powhattan  confederacy. 


228  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

The  Shawnees,  Susquehannocks,  Nanticokes,  Miamis, 
Delawares,  and  Minsi,  were,  one  after  another,  reduced 
by  them  to  the  condition  of  dependent  tribes.  Even  the 
Canarse  or  Long-Idand  Indians  found  no  protection  from 
them  in  their  sea-girt  home  beyond  the  Hudson ;  and 
their  power  was  felt  from  the  St.  Lawrence  to  Tennessee, 
and  from  the  Atlantic  to  the  Mississippi 

How  long  before  the  discovery  of  this  vast  region 
by  Europeans,  it  had  been  in  occupation  by  those  who 
claimed  to  be  its  autochthones,  we  have  no  other  know- 
ledge than  their  own  traditions  of  migration.  But  so 
far  as  arts  are  any  evidence  of  national  progress,  they 
were  then  in  their  infancy.  Nevertheless,  for  nearly  two 
centuries,  the  Indians  of  the  Five  Nations,  as  they  were 
called  before  the  addition  of  the  Tuscaroras,  presented  a 
sturdy  and  unbroken  front  to  European  encroachment, 
alike  by  Dutch,  French,  and  British  colonists.  But  their 
uncompromising  hostility  was  concentrated  in  opposi- 
tion to  the  French  nation ;  and  as  the  rival  colonies  of 
France  and  England  were  long  nearly  balanced,  it  is 
not  unjustly  affirmed  by  the  historian  of  the  Iroquois, 
that  to  their  league  France  chiefly  owes  the  final  over- 
throw of  her  magnificent  schemes  of  colonization  in 
North  America. 

Such  are  some  of  the  glimpses  which  the  history  of 
the  New  World  thus  affords  us,  of  what  man  is  capable 
of  achieving  through  long  centuries,  independent  of  aU 
the  arts  and  appliances  of  civilisation,  which  to  us 
seem  almost  indispensable  to  our  very  existence.  But 
whatever  time  might  have  developed  out  of  the  Iro- 
quois confederacy,  akin  to  the  native  civilisation  which 
had  already  taken  root  beyond  the  verge  of  their  most 
southern  conquests,  in  their  barbarian  condition  they 
had  little  to  hope  from  the  triumph  of  either  of  the 


VII.]      THE  TECHNOLOGICAL  INSTINCT:  TOOLS,        229 

European  aggressors  between  whom  they  so  long  held 
the  balance.  The  insular  European  race  proved  the 
victors;  and  when  at  a  later  date  England  and  her 
American  colonies  came  into  collision,  the  nations  of 
the  League  took  different  sides,  and  the  Hodenosaunee 
finally  ceased  to  be  the  symbol  or  ideal  raUying-point 
of  a  united  people.  They  had  run  their  destined 
course ;  and  now  the  poor  scattered  remnants  of  the 
once-famous  Indian  federal  league,  serve  only  to  illus- 
trate how  irreconcilable  are  the  elements  of  a  highly 
developed  civilisation  with  the  most  vigorous  and  pro- 
gressive energy  of  a  people  only  maturing  the  earliest 
stages  in  the  progress  of  nations  towards  social,  moral, 
and  intellectual  elevation.  Stone,  bronze,  and  iron 
periods,  are  not  indispensable  links  in  the  progress  of 
the  human  race  ;  but  all  experience  serves  to  prove  that 
when  such  social  conditions  are  abruptly  brought  into 
contact,  as  the  stone  and  iron  periods  most  aptly  sym- 
bolize, the  invariable  tendency  is  towards  the  degrada- 
tion and  final  extinction  of  the  less  advanced  race.  It 
is  a  law  of  wide  application.  The  serf  of  Poland 
and  Russia  is  now  in  the  condition  of  the  Saxon  unfree 
long  prior  to  the  Conquest.  It  may  well  be  doubted 
if  it  either  ameliorates  his  present  condition,  or  accele- 
rates his  healthful  progress,  that  he  has  to  work  out  his 
elevation  alongside  of  the  advanced  nationalities  of 
Europe's  nineteenth  century.  France,  amid  all  her 
aesthetic  civilisation,  is,  in  point  of  political  progress, 
scarcely  in  advance  of  the  England  of  the  seventeenth 
century ;  and  more  than  one  false  step  in  her  past 
history  is  traceable  to  her  effort  to  assume  the  greater 
maturity  of  England  without  passing  through  England's 
preliminary  training.  But  whatever  truth  there  may  be 
in  such  applications  of  the  law  which  seems  to  control 


330  PEE  HISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

the  influence  of  nations  brought  into  contact  in  diverse 
stages  of  progress,  the  evidences  are  manifold  which 
prove  that  the  most  powerful  savage  nations,  when  forced 
into  contact  with  the  elements  of  a  highly-matured  civi- 
lisation, perish  hopelessly,  like  an  untimely  birth ;  or 
as  the  stars  fade  and  disappear  before  the  brightness  of 
the  sun. 


VIII.]  THE  METALLUROIC  ARTS:  COPPER,  231 


CHAPTER    VIIL 

THE  METAILUROIG  ARTS:  COPPER. 

THE  dawn  of  America's  metalluxgie  era  is  marked  by 
certain  specialities  which  trace  their  origin  to  physical 
causes  pertaining  to  the  diflferent  regions  in  which  it  had 
its  rise.  These  regions  are  widely  separated,  and  to  all 
appearance,  totally  independent  of  each  other.  They 
iUustrate  two  distinct  phases  of  incipient  civilisation, 
each  presenting  many  peculiarities  calculated  to  throw^ 
new  light  on  the  prehistoric  chroniclings  of  the  Old 
World,  as  well  as  to  furnish  glimpses  of  America's  un- 
written history.  To  man  in  the  primitive  condition  of 
rude  arts  pertaining  to  his  stone-period,  the  facilities 
presented  by  the  great  copper  regions  of  Lake  Superior, 
for  the  first  transitional  steps  towards  that  knowledge 
of  metaUurgic  arts  which  in  itself  is  power,  were  pecu- 
liarly accessible.  The  forests  that  spread  their  shadows 
along  the  shores  of  the  great  lake  were  the  haunts  of  the 
deer,  the  beaver,  the  bear,  and  other  favourite  objects  of 
the  chase  ;  the  rivers  and  the  lake  abounded  with  fish ; 
and  the  rude  hunter  had  to  manufacture  his  weapons 
and  implements  out  of  such  materials  as  nature  placed 
within  his  reach.  The  water-worn  stone  from  the  beach, 
patiently  ground  to  an  edge,  made  his  axe  and  toma- 
hawk ;  by  means  of  which,  with  the  ever-ready  service 
of  fire,  he  could  level  the  giants  of  the  forest,  or  detach 
from  them  the  materials  for  his  canoe  and  paddle,  his 


232  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

lance,  club,  or  bow  and  arrows.  The  bones  of  the  deer 
pointed  his  lance,  or  were  wrought  into  his  &h-hooks ; 
and  the  shale  or  flint  was  chipped  and  ground  into  his 
arrow-head,  after  a  pattern  which  the  tool-making  in- 
stinct of  man  seems  to  repeat  with  little  variation,  in 
all  countries,  and  in  every  primitive  age.  But  besides 
such  materials  of  universal  occurrence,  the  primeval 
occupant  of  the  shores  of  Lake  Superior  found  there  a 
stone  possessed  of  some  very  peculiar  virtues.  It  could 
not  only  be  wrought  to  an  edge  pr  point  without  liabi- 
lity to  fracture  ;  but  it  was  malleable,  and  could  be 
hanmiered  out  into  many  new  and  convenient  shapes. 
This  was  the  copper,  foimd  in  connexion  with  the  trap- 
pean  rocks  of  Lake  Superior,  in  inexhaustible  quantities, 
and  in  a  pure  metallic  state.  In  other  rich  mineral 
regions,  a^  in  those  of  ComwaQ  and  Devon,  the  prin- 
cipal source  of  the  copper  is  from  ores,  which  require 
both  labour  and  skill  to  fit  them  for  economic  purposes ; 
but  in  the  veins  of  the  copper  region  of  Lake  Superior 
the  native  metal  occurs  in  enormous  masses,  weighing 
hundreds  of  tons ;  and  many  loose  blocks  of  consider- 
able size  have  been  found  on  the  lake  shore,  or  lying 
detached  on  the  surface  ;  besides  smaller  pieces,  exposed 
or  mingled  with  the  superfiqial  soil,  in  sufficient  quan- 
tities to  supply  all  the  wants  of  the  nomade  hunter. 
This,  accordingly,  he  wrought  into  chisels  and  axes,  arm- 
lets, and  personal  ornaments  of  various  kinds,  without 
the  us^  of  the  crucible,  or  any  knowledge  of  metallurgie 
arts  ;  and,  indeed,  without  recognising  any  precise 
distinction  between  the  copper  which  he  mechanically 
separated  from  the  mass,  and  the  unmalleable  stone 
or  flint  out  of  which  he  had  been  accustomed  to  fashion 
his  spear  and  axrow-heads. 

Our  earliest  glimpses  of  Britain  pertain  exclusively  to 
those  regions  whither  the  fleets  of  Tyre  were  wont  to 


VIIL]         THE  METALLURGIC  AJ^TS :  COPPER.  233 

voyage  in  quest  of  the  metallic  ores  which  they  conveyed 
to  that  emporium  of  the  ancient  worid  ;  and  not  a  little 
of  her  later  prosperity,  and  of  her  greatness  among  the 
nations,  has  been  due  to  the  same  inexhaustible  mineral 
wealth.  To  that  region,  therefore,  we  have  to  turn  for 
the  earliest  chapters  of  Britain's  story ;  and  in  the  copper 
regions  of  the  Nbw  World  are  also  some  curious  records 
of  an  ancient  and  long-forgotten  past.  Having  visited 
and  partially  explored  the  ancient  mineral  regions  of 
Lake  Superior,  some  notes  of  its  characteristic  features 
and  general  aspects  will  not  be  out  of  place  here.  Some 
idea  of  the  present  appearance  and  condition  of  the 
region  is  indeed  indispensable  for  preparing  the  reader 
to  appreciate  the  changes  wrought  by  time  on  localities 
which  are  now  being  rescued  once  more  from  the  wilder- 
ness, but  where,  more  perhaps  than  on  any  other  spot  on 
the  American  continent,  may  be  witnessed  the  incipient 
traces  of  metallurgic  arts  and  the  dawn  of  an  aboriginal 
civilisation.  The  vast  inland  fresh-water  sea,  which 
constitutes  the  head  reservoir  of  the  great  chain  of  lakes 
that  sweep  over  the  falls  of  Niagara,  and  find  their  way 
to  the  ocean  by  the  river  St.  Lawrence,  has  been  as  yet 
so  slightly  encroached  upon  by  the  pioneers  of  modem 
civilisation,  that  its  general  aspect  scarcely  differs  from 
that  which  it  presented  to  the  eye  of  its  first  European 
explorers  in  the  seventeenth  century,  or  in  all  probability 
to  its  Indian  voyagers  at  that  older  epoch  before  the 
Spaniard  first  coasted  the  island  shores  .of  the  Bahamas, 
and  opened  for  Europe  the  gates  of  the  West.  With  its 
wide  extent  of  waters,  covering  an  area  of  thirty-two 
thousand  square  miles,  a  lengthened  period  of  sojourn 
in  the  regions  with  which  it  is  surroimded,  and  many 
facilities  for  their  exploration,  would  be  required,  in 
order  to  satisfy  the  curiosity  of  scientific  inquirers  in 
relation  to  their  varied  attractions.     But  even  a  brief 


234  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

visit  discloses  much  that  is  highly  interesting,  and  that 
serves  at  once  to  illustrate,  and  to  contrast  with  what 
comes  under  the  observer's  notice  elsewhere.  Having 
employed  both  pen  and  pencil  in  noting  the  most 
striking  features  which  catch  the  eye  from  their  novelty, 
a  description  of  the  scenery  and  present  aspects  of  the 
ancient  copper  region  of  Lake  Superior  will  help  the 
reader  in  some  degree  to  estimate  the  lapse  of  time  since 
its  dark  forest-glades  and  its  rocky  promontories  were 
enlivened  by  the  presence  of  the  industrious  miners  of 
the  centuries  before  Columbus.  The  memorials  of  Time's 
unceasing  operations  reach  indeed  to  periods  long  prior 
to  the  earliest  presence  of  man,  and  present  certain  lake 
phenomena,  on  a  scale  only  conceivable  by  those  who 
have  sailed  on  the  bosom  of  these  fresh-water  seas  with 
as  boundless  a  horizon  as  in  mid  Atlantic ;  and  who 
have  experienced  the  violence  of  the  sudden  storms  to 
which  they  are  liable.  But  while  the  broad  ocean-like 
expanse,  and  the  violence  of  their  stormy  moods,  alike 
characterize  Ontario,  Erie,  Michigan,  and  Huron,  it  is 
only  on  Lake  Superior  that  the  traveller  witnesses  the 
grandeur  and  wild  ruggedness  of  scenery  commensurate 
with  his  preconceived  ideas  of  such  great  inland  seas. 
Along  its  northern  and  western  shores  bold  cliflFs  and 
rocky  headlands  frown  in  savage  grandeur,  from  amid 
the  unbroken  wastes  of  forest  that  reach  to  the  frozen 
regions  around  the  Hudson's  Bay,  while  the  gentler 
coast-lines  of  its  southern  shores  are  varied  by  some 
of  the  most  singular  conformations,  wrought  out  of  its 
rocky  walls  by  the  action  of  the  waves  or  currents  of 
that  magnificent  inland  sea.  Of  these,  no  features  are 
so  remarkable  as  those  presented  by  a  portion  of  the 
extensive  range  of  sandstone  cliffs,  which  rear  their 
massive  fronts  and  project  their  jagged  and  picturesque 
cliffs  from  the  southern  shore,  soon  after  passing  the 


VIIL]         THE  METALLURGIC  ARTS:  COPPER,  235 

Grand  Sable  :  the  first  feature  of  commanding  interest 
which  meets  the  explorer  after  leaving  the  Rapids  of 
Sault  Ste.  Marie.  Here  the  rounded  and  slightly  undu- 
lating shores^  with  their  coast-line  of  sand  and  loose 
shingle,  are  suddenly  changed  for  a  long  reach  of  coast, 
stiU  rounded  in  its  forms,  but  rising  abruptly  in  dune- 
like masses,  to  a  height  of  upwards  of  three  hundred  and 
fifty  feet.  At  their  base  the  edges  of  the  sandstone 
strata  are  occasionally  exposed  by  the  action  of  the 
waves,  but  the  greater  portion  of  their  surface  is  formed 
by  sand  and  debris ;  and  the  same  materials,  loosely 
accumulated  on  their  tops,  afford  only  at  rare  intervals 
sufficient  soil  for  the  trees,  which  elsewhere  line  the 
whole  southern  shore  of  Lake  Superior,  with  that  un- 
varying monotony  so  familiar  to  the  eye  of  the  American 
traveller.  Beyond  the  Grand  Sable,  the  coast  trends 
rapidly  to  the  southward,  until  it  reaches  the  most 
southerly  point  of  the  lake,  in  the  beautiful  and  sheltered 
harbour  behind  Grande  Island.  In  some  respects  this 
resembles  the  magnificent  natural  harbour  in  the  Clyde, 
formed  by  the  sheltering  barrier  of  Holy  Island  and  the 
bold  coast  of  the  Isle  of  Arran  ;  though  in  the  solitude 
of  its  embayed  waters  it  presents  a  striking  contrast  to 
Lamlash  Bay,  towards  which  the  merchant  fleets  of  the 
Clyde,  and  of  the  whole  Irish  Channel,  may  be  seen 
crowding  all  canvas,  to  escape  the  dangers  of  a  westerly 
gale.  In  approaching  this  fine  natural  harbour  from  the 
east,  the  coast  presents,  for  upwards  of  ten  miles,  a  range 
of  rocky  cliffs  of  varying  character  and  elevation,  but 
rising  in  some  places  to  a  height  of  fully  two  hundred 
feet ;  and  it  is  on  a  portion  of  this  range  that  the  French 
voyageurs,  from  one  of  its  peculiar  features,  conferred 
the  name  "  Les  Portails,"  while  they  are  more  generally 
known  to  the  American  traveller  by  that  of  "  the  Pic- 
tured Rocks/'     The  latter  term  is  somewhat  of  a  mis- 


236  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

nomer,  as  it  is  usually  applied  to  rocks  decorated  with 
the  graven  pictuiings  of  native  artists,  whereas  the 
paintings  of  "  the  pictured  rocks''  have  been  pencilled 
alone  by  the  hand  of  Nature,  which  also  has  hewn  them 
out  into  their  still  more  remarkable  forms.  But  a  fresh 
and  wider  interest  has  been  given  to  the  remarkable 
scene  by  the  introduction  of  a  poetical  version  of  its 
native  legends  into  Longfellow's  Indian  Song  of  Hia~ 
ivcUhay  where  in  his  hunting  of  the  Storm  Fool,  Pau- 
Puk-Keewis  fleeing  from  Hiawatha — 

"  Sped  away  in  gust  and  whirlwind, 
On  the  shores  of  Gitche  Gomee, 
Westward  by  the  Big-Sea- Water, 
Came  unto  the  rocky  headlands, 
To  the  Pictured  Rocks  of  Sandstone 
Looking  over  lake  and  landscape. 

And  the  Manito  of  mountains 
Opened  wide  his  rocky  doorways. 
Opened  wide  his  deep  abysses. 
Giving  Pau-Puk-Keewis  shelter 
In  hi8  caverns  dark  and  dreary. 

•  •  ■  •  • 

Then  he  raised  his  hands  to  heaven. 
Called  imploring  on  the  tempest, 
Called  Waywassimo,  the  lightning, 
And  the  thunder,  Annemeekee  ; 
And  they  came,  with  night  and  darkness, 
Sweeping  down  the  Big-Sea- Water, 
From  the  distant  Thunder  Mountains  ; 
And  the  trembling  Pau-Puk-Keewis 
Heard  the  footsteps  of  the  thunder. 
Saw  the  red  eyes  of  the  lightning. 

And  Waywassimo,  the  lightning, 
Smote  the  doorways  of  the  caverns, 
With  his  war-dub  smote  the  doorways. 
Smote  the  jutting  crags  of  sandstone  ; 
And  the  thunder,  Annemeekee, 
Shouted  down  into  the  caverns. 
Saying,  *  Where  is  Pau-Puk-Keewis  !* " 

It  is  something  altogether  novel  to  have  the  spirit  of 
its  own  national  poetry  thus  associated  with  scenes  of 
the  New  World,  and  breathing  over  them  a  living  soul 


VIIL]  THE  METALLURGIC  ARTS:  COPPER.  237 

akin  to  that  which  haunts  with  such  thrilling  memories 
the  cave  of  Staffa  and  the  rocky  shores  of  lona.  The 
striking,  and  in  some  cases,  singularly  beautiful  forms 
which  beguiled  the  Indian  imagination  into  such  wildly 
fanciful  legends,  have  been  hewn  out  of  the  sandstone 
cliffs  by  the  prolonged  action  of  the  waves  and  winds, 
sweeping  from  "  the  distant  Thunder  Moimtains"  of  the 
far  North  through  unrecorded  centuries,  and  exhibit  all 
the  fantastic  and  picturesque  variety  which  is  so  charac- 
teristic of  the  wave-wrought  sculpturings  of  Nature's 
architecture. 

The  Pictured  Rocks  lie  at  the  eastern  end  of  the  lake, 
on  its  southern  shore,  and  are  thus  placed  between  the 
copper  regions  and  the  ancient  portage,  which  has  been 
recently  superseded  by  a  canal,  opening  navigation  for 
the  largest  vessels  from  Lake  Huron  to  Lake  Superior. 
An  interesting  indication,  however,  points  to  the  ancient 
native  centres  of  population  as  having  lain  to  the  west. 
The  Indian  name  of  the  cliffs  is  Schkuearchihi-kung^  or 
"  the  end  of  the  rocks,"  manifestly  impljdng  their  being 
observed  and  named  by  voyagers  from  the  western  re- 
gions, when  sailing  eastward  towards  the  Sault  Ste.  Marie 
rapids  and  the  lower  lakes.  Exploring  their  picturesque 
details  in  this  direction,  the  voyager  on  sailing  inside 
Grande  Island,  towards  the  shore,  gradually  approaches  a 
range  of  cliffs,  banded  in  layers  of  white,  yellow,  red,  and 
deep-brown  strata ;  and  streaked  with  strongly-marked 
veins  of  perpendicular  colouring,  occasioned  by  water 
oozing  through  the  seams,  impregnated  with  metallic 
oxides,  and  distributing  them  over  the  broad  bands  of 
yellow  sandstone  which  constitute  the  main  mass,  and 
lie  between  the  thin  layers  of  coloured  rock  or  shale.  In 
describing  one  magnificent  segmental  curve  of  the  cliffs, 
to  which,  from  its  lofty  and  regular  proportions,  Messrs. 
Foster  and  Whitney,  in  their  "  Report  on  the  Geology  of 


238  PREHISTORIC  MAK.  [Chap. 

Lake  Superior/'  have  given  the  name  of  "  The  Amphi- 
theatre/' they  remark :  "  It  is  in  this  portion  of  the  series 
that  the  phenomena  of  colours  are  most  beautifully  and 
conspicuously  displayed.  These  do  not  by  any  means 
cover  the  whole  surface,  but  are  confined  to  certain  por- 
tions of  the  cliffs  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Amphitheatre ; 
the  great  mass  of  the  surface  presenting  the  natural 
light-yellow,  or  raw-sienna  of  the  rock.  The  colours  are 
also  limited  in  their  vertical  range,  rarely  extending  more 
than  thirty  or  forty  feet  above  the  water,  or  a  quarter, 
or  a  third  of  the  vertical  height  of  the  cliff.  The  pre- 
vailing tints  consist  of  deep-brown,  yellow  and  grey : 
burnt-sienna  and  French  grey  predominating.  There 
are  also  bright  blues  and  greens,  though  less  frequent. 
All  of  the  tints  are  fresh,  brilliant,  and  distinct,  and  har- 
monize admirably  with  one  another;  which,  taken  in 
connexion  with  the  grandeur  of  the  arched  and  cavemed 
surfaces  on  which  they  are  laid,  and  the  deep  and  pure 
green  of  the  water  which  heaves  and  swells  at  the  base, 
and  the  rich  foliage  which  waves  above,  produce  an 
effect  truly  wonderful/'  Many  portions  of  the  cliffs  are 
indented  by  wedge-shaped  recesses,  which  leave  the  in- 
tervening rock  projecting  like  the  wasted  round  towers 
or  bastions  of  an  ancient  castle,  while  the  loose  soil  and 
shale  at  top,  yielding  more  freely  to  the  action  of  the 
atmosphere,  and  of  moisture  and  frost,  have  most  fre- 
quently assumed  the  form  of  a  conical  roofing,  greatly 
adding  to  the  artificial  look  of  the  whole.  In  one  group, 
especially,  a  little  to  the  west  of  the  magnificent  natural 
arch  styled  "  Le  Grand  PortaQ/'  the  illusion  was  for  the 
time  complete,  which  suggested  to  the  fancy  one  of  the 
ancient  ruins  of  Boman  masonry  still  to  be  seen  in  the 
south  of  England,  where  the  tiers  of  chalk  or  stone  are 
banded  by  occasional  layers  of  the  flat-tile  Boman  brick. 
The  cliffs  are  hoUowed,  arched,  and  perforated  into 


VIIL]         THE  METALLURGIC  ARTS:  COPPER,  23D 

caverns,  evidently  by  the  action  of  the  waters  when  at 
much  higher,  and  varying  relative  levels.  Two  groups 
of  these,  designated  respectively  the  "  Chapel''  and  the 
"  Miner's  Castle,"  have  been  excavated  into  aisles,  arched 
recesses,  and  columns,  so  as  to  rival  the  most  picturesque 
iiiins  of  the  castled  Shine ;  while  overhead  the  foliage 
of  the  uncleared  forest  crests  their  summits,  and  at  one 
spot  near  the  Chapel  Bock,  a  beautiful  cascade  dashes  in 
white  foam  over  the  cliffs  into  the  lake. 

"  The  rolling  stream,  the  precipice's  gloom. 
The  forest's  growth,  and  Gothic  walls  between, 
The  wild  rocks  shaped  as  they  had  turrets  been 
In  mockery  of  man's  art."^ 

This  remarkable  range  of  rocks  lies  in  the  centre  of 
the  long  indentation,  which,  sweeping  from  Keweenaw 
Bay  eastward  to  White  Fish  Point,  forms  the  bay  behind 
Grande  Island,  the  coast  most  distant  from  the  northern 
shores  of  the  lake.  Here  the  cliffs  have  been  exposed 
through  unnumbered  ages  to  the  action  of  the  northerly 
winds,  which  have  materially  affected  the  characters 
of  the  northern  and  southern  shores  of  the  lake ;  while 
the  process  of  upheaval,  prolonged  probably  through 
vast  periods  of  time,  has  contributed  no  unimportant 
share  in  the  operations  by  which  their  present  forms 
have  been  produced. 

Beyond  the  Grande  Island  the  voyager  who  pursues  his 
com«e  up  the  lake,  comes  once  more  on  rocky  cliffs  in 
the  vicinity  of  Marquette :  so  named  after  the  Jesuit 
missionary  by  whom  the  upper  waters  of  the  Mississippi 
were  reached  in  1673.  Important  changes  have  been 
wrought  in  the  interval  since  the  Jesuit  father  wandered 
into  the  wild  west  on  his  adventurous  mission.  Mineral 
treasures,  undreamt  of  by  the  ancient  miners  of  Lake 
Superior,  are  now  rewarding  the  industry  of  the  Indians' 

^  ChUde  Harold,  canto  iii.  s.  Ixi. 


540  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

supplanters.  The  iron-period,  with  its  fully  developed 
civilisation,  is  at  length  invading  those  western  forest 
tracks;  and  when  I  visited  Marquette  in  1855,  on  the 
bold  trappean  rocks  which  form  the  landing,  abraded  and 
scratched  with  the  glacial  action  of  a  long  superseded 
era,  were  piled  the  rich  products  of  the  "  Jackson  Iron 
Mountain,"  which  rears  its  bold  outline  at  a  distance  of 
twelve  miles  from  the  shore.  Immediately  to  the  north 
of  this  point  the  bold  promontory  of  Presque  Isle  attracts 
attention  from  its  rocky  outlines,  presenting  in  some  re- 
spects a  striking  contrast  to  the  Pictured  Kocks,  though, 
like  them,  also  indented  and  hollowed  out  into  detached 
masses,  and  pierced  with  the  wave-worn  caverns  of  older 
levels  of  shore  and  lake.  Here  the  water-worn  sandstone 
and  the  igneous  rocks  overlie  or  intermingle  with  each 
other,  in  picturesque  confusion ;  the  symbol  as  it  were  of 
the  great  transition  between  the  copper  and  iron  eras. 
For  it  is  just  at  Presque  Isle  that  the  crystalline  schists, 
with  their  intermingling  masses  of  trappean  and  quartz 
rocks,  richly  impregnated  with  the  specular  and  mag- 
netic oxide  of  iron,  pass  into  the  granite  and  sandstone 
rocks,  which  intervene  between  the  ferriferous  formations 
and  the  copper-bearing  traps  of  Keweenaw  Point ;  and 
it  is  of  this  very  locality  that  the  authors  of  the  report 
on  the  geology  of  the  district  remark :  "  It  would  be 
diflScult  to  select  another  spot  along  the  whole  coast, 
where  the  rocks  of  so  many  epochs,  from  the  oldest  to 
the  most  recent,  are  represented.  It  contains  an  epitome 
of  nearly  the  whole  geology  of  the  district.^'  Beyond 
this,  the  rich  copper-bearing  region  of  the  Keweenaw 
Peninsula  stretches  far  into  the  lake,  traversed  in  a 
south-westerly  direction  by  magnificent  cliffs  of  trappean 
rocks,  presenting  their  lofty  perpendicular  sides  to  the 
south-east,  and  covered  even  amid  the  rocky  debris  with 
ancient  forest-trees.     In  this  igneous  rock  are  found  the 


VIII.]         THE  METALLURGIG  ARTS:  GGPPER,  241 

copper  veins,  which  in  recent  years  have  conferred  such 
great  commercial  value  on  the  district  of  Michigan,  to 
which  they  belong.    Having  had  opportunities  of  explor- 
ing some  of  the  richest  mineral  districts  of  Lake  Superior, 
and  traversing  its  wild  natural  forests  and  steep  rocky 
tracts  :  I  have  felt,  while  surrounded  by  the  gloom  of 
the  savage  wilderness,  how  difficult  it  is  to  realize  the 
conception  that  these  copper-bearing  regions  were  ever 
before  ransacked  for  their  mineral  treasures,  or  explored 
by  any  other  but  the  stray  Indian  hunter,  until  the  com- 
mencement of  regular  mining  operations  in  very  recent 
years.     Yet  there  I  had  the  opportunity  not  only  of  wit- 
nessing the  extensive  mining  operations  now  in  progress, 
but  of  examining  for  myself  evidences  of  the  ancient 
miner's  labours,  which  prove  the  existence,  at  some  re- 
mote period,  of  the  rudiments  of  native  nietallurgic  arts. 
On  landing  at  Eagle  river,  one  of  the  points  for  ship- 
ping the  copper  ores,  on  the  west  side  of  the  Keweenaw 
Peninsula,  the  track  lies  through  dense  forest,  over  a  road 
in  some  parts  of  rough  corduroy,  and  in  others  travers- 
ing the  forest  in  its  gradual  ascent  over  the  irregular  ex- 
posed surface  of  the  copper-bearing  trap.     After  a  time 
it  winds  through  a  gorge,  covered  with  immense  masses 
of  trap  and  crumbling  debris,  amid  which  pine,  and  the 
black  oak  and  other  hard  wood,  have  contrived  to  find  a 
sufficient  soU  for  taking  root  and  growing  to  their  full 
proportions ;  while  here  and  there  the  eye  lights  upon 
some  giant  pine  overthrown  by  the  wind,  and  turning  up 
its  great  roots  which  grasp  the  severed  masses  of  rounded 
trap  in  their  convolutions,  like  gravel  clutched  from  the 
ocean's  bed  in  the  hands  of  a  drowned  seaman.     On  the 
summit  of  the  ridge,  the  trap  rock  rises  into  a  range  of 
clifis,  which,  judging  by  the  eye,  I  should  suppose  cannot 
be  less  than  two  hundred  feqt  high,  and  in  front  of  them 
is  a  sloping  tail,  the  accumulated  debris  of  ages,  bearing 

VOL.  I.  Q 


242  PREHISTORIO  MAN.  [Chap. 

a  close  resemblance  to  Salisbury  Crag,  excepting  that  it 
is  partially  wooded,  and  the  trees  have  in  some  places 
attained  to  an  immense  size,  notwithstanding  the  ap- 
parent  poverty  of  the  rocky  sou. 

In  traversing  this  route  the  road  lies  in  part  along  the 
banks  of  the  Eagle  river,  where,  some  miles  from  its 
mouth,  a  detour  has  to  be  made  to  avoid  a  beaver  dam, 
flooding  a  part  of  the  river  banks  by  means  of  the  inge- 
nious structure.  No  traces,  however,  give  the  slightest 
indication  to  the  passing  traveller  that  the  hand  of  man 
had  ever  wrought  any  changes  on  the  aspect  of  a  region 
characterized  by  features  so  singularly  wild  and  desolate- 
looking.  Beyond  the  cliffs,  in  a  level  bottom  on  the 
other  side  of  the  trap  ridge,  is  the  Cliff  Mine  settlement, 
one  of  the  most  important  of  all  the  mining  works  in 
operation  in  this  region. 

I  descended  the  perpendicular  shaft  by  means  of  lad- 
deiB,  to  a  depth  of  si^ty  fathoms,  and  explored  various 
of  the  levels ;  passing  m  some  ca.es  Ht^Jly  through 
tunnels  made  in  the  soUd  copper.  The  very  richness 
and  abundance  of  the  metal  proves  indeed  a  cause  of 
diminution  of  the  profits  arising  from  working  it.  I 
witnessed  the  laborious  process  of  chiselling  out  masses 
from  the  solid  lump,  of  a  size  sufficiently  small  to  admit 
of  their  being  taken  to  the  surface,  and  transported 
through  such  tracts  as  have  been  described,  to  the  shores 
of  Lake  Superior.  The  floor  of  the  level  was  strewed 
with  the  copper  shavings  struck  off  in  the  effort  to  de- 
tach them,  and  the  extreme  ductility  of  the  pure  native 
copper  was  pointed  out  as  a  cause  which  precluded  the 
application  of  any  other  force  than  that  of  slow  and  per- 
severing manual  labour,  for  separating  it  from  the  parent 
mass.  I  saw  also  beautiful  specimens  of  silver,  in  a 
matrix  of  ciystalline  quartz,  obtained  from  this  mine, 
and  the  copper  of  the  district  is  stated  to  contain  on  an 


Vni]         THE  METALLUROIG  ARTS:  COPPER.  243 

average  about  3*10  per  cent,  of  silver.  One  mass  of 
copper  quarried  from  the  CliflF  Mine  has  been  estimated 
to  weigh  eighty  tons.  It  was  suflSciently  detached  from 
its  rocky  matrix,  without  injuring  its  original  formation, 
to  admit  of  its  dimensions  being  obtained  with  consider- 
able accuracy,  and  it  was  foimd  to  measure  fifty  feet 
long,  six  feet  deep,  with  an  average  of  about  six  inches 
in  thickness.  This  is  indeed  by  fax  the  richest  mineral 
locality  that  has  yet  been  wrought.  In  one  year  upwards 
of  sixteen  hundred  tons  of  copper  have  been  pKK^nred 
from  the  single  mine.  Its  mineral  wealth  appears  to  have 
been  known  to  the  ancients,  from  the  traces  of  their  work 
which  have  been  discovered;  but  the  skill  and  appli- 
ances of  the  modem  miner  give  him  access  to  veins  en- 
tirely beyond  the  reach  of  the  primitive  metallurgist, 
who  knew  of  no  harder  material  for  his  tools  than  the 
ductile  metal  he  was  in  search  of,  and  to  whom  the 
agency  of  gunpowder  was  unknown. 

At  the  Cliff  Mine  are  preserved  some  curious  speci- 
mens of  ancient  copper  tools  of  the  native  metallurgists, 
found  in  its  vicinity,  but  it  is  to  the  westward  of  the 
Keweenaw  Peninsula  that  the  most  remarkable  and  ex- 
tensive traces  of  the  aboriginal  miners*  operations  are 
seen.  The  copper-bearing  trap  rock,  after  crossing  the 
Keweenaw  Lake,  is  traced  onward  in  a  south-westerly 
direction  till  it  crosses  the  Qntonagon  river  about  twelve 
miles  from  its  mouth ;  and  at  an  elevation  of  upwards  of 
three  hundred  feet  above  the  lake.  At  this  place  the 
edges  of  the  copper  veins  appear  to  crop  out  in  various 
places,  exposing  the  metal  in  irregular  patches  over  a 
considerable  extent  of  country.  Here,  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  the  Minnesota  Mine,  the  richest  of  all  the  modem 
works  in  the  district  of  Ontonagon,  are  traces  of  ancient 
mining  operations,  consisting  of  extensive  trenches, 
which  prove  that  the  works  must  have  been  carried  on 


244  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

for  a  long  period  and  by  considerable  numbers.  These 
excavations  are  partially  filled  up,  and  so  overgrown 
during  the  long  interval  between  their  first  excavation 
and  their  observation  by  recent  explorers,  that  they 
would  scarcely  attract  the  attention  of  a  traveller  unpre- 
pared to  find  such  evidences  of  former  industry  and  art. 
Nevertheless  some  of  them  measure  from  eighteen  to 
thirty  feet  in  depth,  and  in  one  of  them  a  detached  mass 
of  native  copper,  weighing  upwards  of  six  tons,  was 
found  resting  on  an  artificial  cradle  of  black  oak,  par- 
tially preserved  by  immersion  in  the  water  with  which 
the  trenches  had  been  filled  in  the  first  long  era  after 
their  abandonment.  Various  implements  and  tools  of 
the  same  metal  also  lay  in  the  deserted  trench,  where 
this  huge  mass  had  been  separated  from  its  rocky  matrix, 
and  elevated  on  the  oaken  frame,  preparatory  to  its  re- 
moval entire.  It  appeared  to  have  been  raised  about 
five  feet,  and  then  abandoned,  abruptly  as  it  would  seem, 
since  even  the  copper  tools  were  found  among  the  accu- 
mulated soU  by  which  it  had  been  auew  covered  up. 
The  soKd  mass  measured  ten  feet  long,  three  feet  wide, 
and  nearly  two  feet  thick  ;  every  projecting  piece  had 
been  removed,  so  that  the  exposed  surface  was  left  per- 
fectly smooth,  possibly  by  other  and  ruder  workers  of  a 
date  subsequent  to  the  desertion  of  the  mining  trench 
by  its  original  explorers.       • 

Mr.  Charles  Whittlesey,  who  has  enjoyed  considerable 
opportunities  of  personal  observation  in  the  copper 
region,  discusses,  in  the  Cleveland  Annals  of  Sciencey 
various  questions  connected  with  the  ancient  mines,  and 
remarks  in  reference  to  the  wood-work  found  in  the  old 
Minnesota  trench  :  "  I  had  a  piece  of  one  of  these  logs 
which  was  cut  from  a  black  oak-tree  about  six  inches  in 
diameter,  showing  distinctly  the  marks  of  a  narrow  axe 
If  inches  wide,  and  very  sharp.     The  character  of  the 


VIIL]  THE  METALLURGIG  ARTS:  COPPER,  245 

cut  or  stroke  made  by  the  axe,  struck  me  at  once  as 
such  as  the  copper  axes  would  make  that  I  had  seen  in 
Ohio,  which  were  taken  from  the  mounds.  Although 
the  timber  beneath  the  mass  of  copper  was  very  soft  and 
tender,  by  reason  of  its  age,  it  had  not  rotted  from  ex- 
posure, having  been  always  covered  by  water."  The 
marks  of  the  instrument  by  which  it  had  been  cut,  he 
adds,  were  as  plain  as  on  the  recently  hewn  stumps  in 
the  vicinity.  Messrs.  Whitney  and  Foster  remark  on 
specimens  acquired  by  them  from  the  same  ancient  exca- 
vations :  "  This  wood,  by  so  long  exposure  to  moisture, 
is  dark-coloured,  and  has  lost  all  its  consistency.  A 
knife-blade  may  be  thrust  into  it  as  easily  as  into  a 
peat-bog." 

It  was  in  the  year  1847  that  attention  was  first 
directed  to  such  traces  of  ancient  mining  operations,  by 
the  intelligent  agent  of  the  Minnesota  Mining  Company. 
Following  up  the  indications  of  a  continuous  depression 
in  the  soil,  he  came  at  length  to  a  cavern  where  he 
found  several  porcupines  had  fixed  their  quarters  for 
hybernation ;  but  detecting  evidences  of  artificial  exca- 
vation, he  proceeded  to  clear  out  the  accumulated  soil, 
and  not  only  exposed  to  view  a  vein  of  copper,  but  found 
in  the  rubbish  numerous  stone  mauls  and  hammers  of 
the  ancient  workmen.  Subsequent  observation  brought 
to  light  ancient  excavations  of  great  extent,  frequently 
from  twenty-five  to  thirty  feet  deep,  and  scattered  over 
an  area  of  several  miles.  The  rubbish  taken  from  these 
is  piled  up  in  mounds  alongside ;  while  the  trenches  have 
been  gradually  refilled  with  the  soil  and  decaying  vege- 
table-matter gathered  through  the  long  centuries  since 
their  desertion ;  and  over  all,  the  giants  of  the  forest 
have  grown,  and  withered,  and  fallen  to  decay.  Mr.  • 
Knapp,  the  agent  of  the  Minnesota  Company,  counted 
395  annular  rings  on  a  hemlock  tree,  which  grew  on  one 


246  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

of  the  mounds  of  earth  thrown  out  of  an  ancient  mine. 
Mr.  Foster  also  notes  the  great  size  and  age  of  a  pine- 
stump  which  must  have  grown,  flourished,  and  died 
since  the  works  were  deserted ;  and  Mr.  C.  Whittlesey 
not  only  refers  to  living  trees  now  flourishing  in  the 
gathered  soil  of  the  abandoned  trenches,  upwards  of 
three  hundred  years  old ;  but  he  adds  :  "  on  the  same 
spot  there  are  the  decayed  trunks  of  a  preceding  gene- 
ration or  generations  of  trees  that  have  arrived  at  matu- 
rity and  fallen  down  from  old  age."  According  to  the 
same  writer,  in  a  communication  made  to  the  American 
Association,  at  the  Montreal  Meeting,  in  1857,  these 
ancient  works  extend  over  a  track  from  100  to  150 
miles  in  length,  along  the  southern  shore  of  the  lake ; 
and  Sir  William  Logan  reports  others  observed  by  him 
on  the  summit  of  a  ridge  at  Maimanse,  on  the  north 
shore,  where  the  old  excavations  are  surrounded  by 
broken  pieces  of  vein- stone,  along  with  which  are  fre- 
quently found  the  stone  mauls,  rudely  formed  from 
natural  boulders.  The  extensive  area  over  which  such 
works  have  thus  already  been  traced,  the  evidences  of 
their  prolonged  working,  and  of  their  still  longer  aban- 
donment, all  combine  to  force  upon  the  mind  convictions 
of  their  remote  antiquity. 

At  Ontonagon  river  I  met  with  Captain  Peck,  a 
settler  whose  long  residence  in  the  coimtry  has  afforded 
him  many  opportunities  of  noting  the  evidences  of  its 
ancient  occupation.  Kepeated  discoveries  had  led  him 
to  infer  the  great  antiquity  of  the  works ;  and  he  spe- 
cially referred  to  one  disclosure  of  ancient  mining  opera- 
tions near  the  forks  of  the  Ontonagon  river,  where,  at 
a  depth  of  upwards  of  twenty-five  feet,  stone  mauls  and 
other  tools  were  found  in  contact  with  a  copper  vein  ; 
in  the  soil  above  these  lay  the  fallen  trunk  of  a  large 
cedar,  and  over  all  grew  a  hemlock-tree,  the  roots  of 


VIIL]  THE  METALLURGIG  ARTS:  COPPER.  247 

« 

which  spread  entirely  above  the  fallen  tree  in  the  accu- 
mulated soil  with  which  the  trench  was  filled,  and  indi- 
cated in  his  estimation  a  growth  of  not  less  than  three 
centuries.  This  assumed  age  nearly  corresponds  to  the 
actual  number  of  annual  rings  exposed  in  the  sections 
of  other  trees  felled  in  the  same  locality.  But  the 
buried  cedar,  which  in  favourable  circumstances  is  far 
more  durable  than  the  oak,  represents  another  and 
longer  succession  of  centuries,  subsequent  to  that  pro- 
tracted period  during  which  the  deserted  trench  was 
slowly  filled  up  with  accumulations  of  many  winters. 
Similar  traces  extend  over  a  large  area.  Not  only 
throughout  the  Keweenaw  Peninsula,  and  to  the  west- 
ward and  southward  of  Ontonagon,  but  also  on  Isle 
Royale,  off  the  north-west  shore  of  the  lake,  ancient 
works  have  been  found  with  like  evidence  of  their  great 
antiquity.  The  United  States  Geologists  remark,  in 
their  Keports  on  the  Geology  of  Lake  Superior :  "  Mr. 
E.  G.  Shaw  pointed  out  to  us  similar  evidences  of  mining 
on  Isle  Koyale,  which  can  be  traced  lengthways  for  the 
distance  of  a  mile.  On  opening  one  of  these  pits,  which 
had  become  filled  up,  he  foimd  the  mine  had  been 
worked  through  the  soHd  rock,  to  the  depth  of  nine 
feet,  the  walls  being  perfectly  smooth.  At  the  bottom 
he  foimd  a  vein  of  native  copper  eighteen  inches  thick, 
including  a  sheet  of  pure  copper  lying  against  the  foot- 
wall.  The  workings  appear  to  have  been  effected  simply 
by  stone  hammers  and  wedges,  specimens  of  which  were 
found  in  great  abundance  at  the  bottom  of  the  pits. 
He  foimd  no  metallic  implements  of  any  description, 
and  is  convinced,  from  the  appearance  of  the  wall- 
rocks,  the  substances  removed,  and  the  multitude  of 
hammers  found,  that  the  labour,  of  excavating  the  rock 
must  have  been  performed  only  with  the  instruments 
above  named,  with  the  aid,  perhaps,  of  fire.     From  the 


248  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

appearance  of  the  vein  and  the  extent  of  the  workings, 
he  conjectures  that  an  immense  amount  of  labour  had 
been  expended.  He  endeavoured  to  find  some  evi- 
dences of  the  antiquity  of  these  workings,  but  could 
discover  nothing  very  satisfactory  to  his  own  mind,  ex- 
cept that  they  were  made  at  a  remote  epoch.  The 
vegetable  matter  had  accumulated  and  filled  up  the 
entire  opening  to  a  level  with  the  surroimding  surface  ; 
and  in  a  region  where  it  accumulates  as  slowly  as  it 
does  on  the  barren  and  rocky  parts  of  Isle  Royale,  this 
filling  up  would  have  been  the  work  of  centuries.  Upon 
this  vegetable  accumulation  he  found  trees  growing 
equal  in  size  to  any  in  the  vicinity.'^ 

The  extent  of  the  works  on  Isle  Royale,  and  the  great 
distance  of  the  locality  from  the  mining  region  on  the 
southern  mainland,  add  important  proofs  of  the  numer- 
ous workmen  that  must  once  have  enlivened  the  long 
silent  shores  of  Lake  Superior  with  the  sounds  and 
scenes  of  industrious  toil ;  and  confirm  by  additional 
evidence  the  proofs  of  the  great  interval  which  has 
elapsed  since  their  works  were  finally  abandoned.  There, 
as  on  the  mainland,  accumulated  soil  and  subsequent 
vegetable  growth  establish  imquestionable  proofs  of  a 
long-protracted,  though  still  uncertain  interval,  between 
the  close  of  that  prehistoric  period  and  the  conamence- 
ment  of  the  New  World's  definite  annals.  On  Kewee- 
naw Point  the  recovery  of  the  ancient  miners'  tools  has, 
in  more  than  one  case,  led  to  the  disclosure  of  valuable 
lodes  of  copper.  Their  abandoned  works  have  been 
traced  over  an  area  of  twelve  miles  in  extent,  along  the 
base  of  the  trap  range  already  referred  to,  and  have 
been  the  first  indices  to  the  modem  miner  of  the 
mineral  wealth  below.  To  the  southward,  in  like 
manner,  the  attention  of  explorers  has  been  directed 
to   the   long-abandoned   trenches.      In   the   section   of 


VIIL]  THE  MET  ALL  URGIG  ARTS :  COPPER.  249 

country  lying  in  the  direction  of  Agozebec  Lake,  a  sur- 
veyor in  the  employment  of  the  Forest  Mining  Com- 
pany discovered  a  series  of  ancient  works  of  great 
extent,  excavated  along  the  southern  slope  of  a  hill. 
The  bones  of  the  bear,  the  deer,  and  the  caribou,  have 
been  repeatedly  found  in  the  soil  with  which  the  exca- 
vations are  filled.  In  one  of  the  pits  the  skeleton  of  a 
deer  rested  on  a  bed  of  clay,  which  had  been  deposited 
to  the  depth  of  a  foot  above  the  ancient  floor,  when  it 
stumbled  into  the  excavation  and  perished  there ;  and 
over  all,  day,  leaves,  sand,  and  gravel,  had  gradually 
accumulated  to  a  depth  of  nineteen  feet. 

The  traces  of  the  ancient  miners  of  Lake  Superior 
have  not  entirely  escaped  the  notice  of  Mr.  Henry  R. 
Schoolcraft,  though  he  is  inclined  to  undervalue  to  a 
remarkable  extent  the  indications  they  afford  that  a  civi- 
lisation of  no  slight  or  transitory  character  once  gave  life 
to  the  forest  wilds.  Resident  as  he  was*  for  a  consider- 
able time  in  the  locality,  surrounded  alone  by  the  wild 
Indian  hunters,  and  the  Algonquin  half-breeds,  it  is  per- 
haps more  difficult  for  him  to  realize  the  idea  that  such 
a  savage  wilderness  had  ever  been  otherwise  than  over- 
shadowed by  the  primeval  forest,  than  it  is  for  those  who 
have  only  studied  the  locality  in  the  narratives  of  its 
explorers.  My  own  impressions  of  its  endless  tracts  of 
uncleared  forests,  enlivened  as  they  were  by  a  visit  to  an 
encampment  of  Saultaux  Indians  in  all  the  simplicity  of 
wild  nature,  rendered  the  contrast  between  its  present 
aspect  and  the  ideas  which  the  traces  of  its  ancient 
miners  suggested,  not  less  startling  than  those  which 
arise  from  viewing,  amid  the  scenes  of  the  matured  civilisa- 
tion of  Britain,  the  disclosures  of  an  aUophylian  cromlech 
with  its  primitive  weapons  and  ornaments  of  stone.  Mr. 
Schoolcraft,  however,  reposes  an  undue  faith  in  the  evi- 
dence of  impressions  produced  by  long  familiarity  with 


250  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

the  modem  Indian  and  his  forest  haunts ;  such  as^  to  the 
sojourner  among  the  wandering  Arabs,  feeding  their 
flocks  above  the  mounds  that  diversify  the  solitude  of 
the  great  plains  of  the  Euphrates,  would  have  seemed 
equal  proof  that  since  man  first  trod  its  ancient  soil,  it 
has  been  known  only  to  the  wild  desert  nomade.  "  There 
are/^  says  he,  in  speaking  of  the  Lake  Superior  basin, 
«no  artificial  mounds,  embankments,  or  barrows  in  this 
basin,  to  denote  that  the  coimtry  had  been  anciently 
inhabited ;  and  when  the  inquiry  is  directed  to  that  part 
of  the  continent  which  extends  northward  from  its 
northern  shores,  this  primitive  character  of  the  face  of 
the  country  becomes  stiU  more  striking.  It  is  something 
to  affirm  that  the  Mound-Builders,  whose  works  have 
fiUed  the  West  with  wonder, — quite  unnecessary  wonder, 
— ^had  never  extended  their  sway  here.  The  country 
appears  never  to  have  been  fought  for,  in  ancient  times, 
by  a  semi-civilieed  or  even  pseudo-barbaric  race.  There 
are  but  few  darts  or  spear-heads.  I  have  not  traced 
remains  of  the  incipient  art  of  pottery,  known  to  the 
Algonquin  and  other  American  stocks  beyond  the  Straits 
of  Ste.  Marie,  whiclj  connect  Lakes  Huron  and  Superior ; 
and  am  inclined  to  believe  that  they  do  not  extend  in 
that  longitude  beyond  the  latitude  of  36°  30^  There  is 
a  fresh  magnificence  in  the  ample  area  of  Lake  Superior, 
which  appears  to  gainsay  the  former  existence  and  exer- 
cise by  man  of  any  laws  of  mechanical  or  industrial  power, 
beyond  the  canoe-frame  and  the  war-club.  And  its 
storm-beaten  and  castellated  rocks,  however  imposing, 
give  no  proofs  that  the  dust  of  human  antiquity,  in  its 
artificial  phases,  has  ever  rested  on  them.^  In  this,  how- 
ever, the  historian  of  the  Indian  tribes  is  betrayed  into 
an  exaggerated  depreciation  of  the  memorials  of  earlier 
ages,  from  his  disposition  to  ascribe  to  the  same  Bed 
Indian  stock  every  phase  of  civilized  or  savage  life  which 


VIEL]         THE  METALLURGIC  ARTS:  COPPER.  251 

reveals  itself  in  the  past  history  of  the  American  con- 
tinent. 

It  will  be  seen,  moreover,  that  it  is  an  error  to  affirm 
that  artificial  mounds,  embankments,  or  traces  of  earth- 
works, suggestive  of  correspondence  with  those  of  the 
Mound-Builders,  are  entirely  wanting  in  the  copper 
region.  Its  ancient  memorials  have  as  yet  been  very 
partially  disclosed ;  but  thus  far  we  derive,  from  many 
independent  observations,  the  like  confirmation  of  the 
indisputable  fact  that  what  appear  to  the  eye  of  the 
traveUer  as  the  giants  of  the  primeval  forest,  are  the 
growth  of  comparatively  modem  centuries,  subsequent 
to  the  era  when  the  shores  of  Lake  Superior  rang  with 
the  echoes  of  industrial  toil,  wrought  by  an  ancient  but 
long-extinct  population.  Two  or  three  centuries  would 
seem  altogether  inadequate  to  famish  the  requisite  time 
for  the  most  partial  accumulation  of  soil  and  decayed 
vegetable  matter  with  which  the  old  miners*  trenches 
have  been  filled,  before  the  forest  began  to  reassert  its 
ancient  sway,  and  clothe  in  the  rich  verdure  of  nature's 
wildest  freshness,  their  abandoned  mines.  Four  centuries 
thereafter  axe  indisputably  recorded  by  recent  survivors 
of  the  forest,  independent  of  all  traces  of  previous  arbo- 
rescent generations;  and  thus  we  perceive  that  in  the 
mining  excavations  and  the  tools  of  the  copper  regions 
of  Lake  Superior,  we  look  on  the  memorials  of  a  metal- 
lurgic'  industry  long  prior  to  those  closing  years  of  the 
fifteenth  century,  in  which  the  mineral  wealth  of  the  New 
World  awoke  the  Spanish  lust  for  gold.  An  imcertain, 
yet  considerable  period  must  be  assumed  to  have  inter- 
vened between  the  abandonment  of  those  ancient  works, 
and  their  being  restored  to  the  shadows  of  the  wild 
forest's  earliest  growth,  and  thus  we  are  thrown  back  into 
dim  centuries  corresponding  to  Europe's  early  mediaeval 
era  for  a  period  to  which  to  assign  at  the  very  latest 


252  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

those  singularly  interesting  relics  of  a  lost  American 
civilisation. 

Owing  to  the  filling  up  of  the  ancient  mining  trenches 
with  water  immediately  on  their  abandonment  by  their 
workers,  not  only  the  copper  and  stone  implements  of 
the  miners  are  found,  but  also  some  examples  of  wooden 
tools  and  timber  framing  have  been  preserved,  in  several 
cases  in  wonderful  perfection,  and  these  furnish  interest- 
ing supplementary  evidence  of  the  character  of  their 
industrial  arts. 

Of  the  wooden  implements  found  in  the  abandoned 
works,  the  most  noticeable  are  the  shovels,  by  means  of 
which  the  soil  was  excavated  and  the  copper  lode  laid 
bare.      The  accompanying  woodcut  represents  two  of 


Fio.  10. -Miners*  Shovels. 

these.  They  bear  some  resemblance  to  an  Indian  paddle, 
but  are  frequently  worn  sideways,  as  if  used  for  scraping 
rather  than  digging  the  soU.  One,  of  which  Mr.  Whittle- 
sey gives  a  drawing,  measured  three  and  a  half  feet  long, 
and  was  taken  from  the  loose  materials  thrown  out  from 
an  extensive  rock  excavation  in  the  side  of  a  hill  about 
four  miles  south-east  of  Eagle  Harbour.  Part  of  a 
wooden  bowl  used  for  baling  water,  and  troughs  of  cedar- 
bark,  were  also  found  in  the  same  debris,  above  which 
grew  a  birch  about  two  feet  in  diameter,  with  its  lower 
roots  scarcely  reaching  through  the  ancient  rubbish  to 
the  depth  at  which  those  relics  lay.  Mr.  Foster  describes 
another  wooden  bowl  found  at  a  depth  of  ten  feet,  in 
clearing  out  some  ancient  workings  opened  by  the  agent 
of  the  Forest  mine,  and  which  from  the  splintered  pieces 


Vra.]         THB  MBTALLURGW  ARTS:  COPPER.  353 

of  rock  and  gravel  embedded  in  its  rim,  must  have  been 
employed  in  baling  water.  Similar  implements  have 
been  found  in  other  workings,  but  they  speedily  perish 
on  being  exposed  to  the  air.  All  of  them  appear  to  have 
been  made  oi^  white  cedar,  the  indestructible  nature  of 
which,  when  kept  under  water,  or  in  a  moist  soil,  is 
abundantly  illustrated  by  the  experience  of  settlers  who 
have  attempted  to  clear  and  cultivate  a  cedar  swamp^ 
and  have  discovered  that  the  dead  trunks,  exhumed 
undecayed  after  centuries  of  immersion,  rest  above  still 
older  cedar-forests,  seemingly  unaffected  by  the  process 
which  restores  alike  the  oak  and  the  pine  to  the  vege- 
table mould  of  the  forest  soiL 

The  process  of  working  the  ancient  mines  seems  to 
be  tolerably  clearly  indicated  by  the  various  discoveries 
made.  The  soil  having  been  removed  by  means  of  the 
wooden  spades,  doubtless  with  the  aid  of  copper  tools  to 
break  up  the  solid  earth  and  clay,  remains  of  charcoal 
met  with  in  numerous  instances  on  the  surface  of  the 
rock  show  that  fire  was  an  important  agent  for  over- 
coming the  cohesion  between  the  copper  and  its  rocky 
matrix.  Before  the  introduction  of  gunpowder,  fire  was 
universally  employed  in  excavating  rock,  and  where  fuel 
abounds,  as  in  the  old  Harz  and  Altenberg  mining  dis- 
tricts of  Europe,  it  is  even  now  found  to  be  quite  as 
economical  in  destroying  silicious  rocks.  The  rock 
having  been  subjected  to  this  process,  stone  hammers 
or  mauls  were  next  employed  to  break  it  in  pieces. 
These  have  been  found  in  immense  numbers  on  the 
different  mining  sites.  Mr.  Knapp  obtained  in  one 
locality  upwards  of  ten  cart-loads  ;  and  I  was  shown  a 
well  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Ontonagon  trenches 
constructed  almost  entirely  of  stone  hammers,  obtained 
from  ancient  workings  in  the  immediate  vicinity.  Many 
of  these  mauls  are  mere  water-worn  oblong  boulders  of 


2Si  PRSBtSTORIG  MAN.  [Chap. 

greenstone  or  porphyry,  roughly  chipped  in  the  centre,  so 
as  to  admit  of  their  being  secured  by  a  withe  around 
them.  Bat  others  are  well  finished,  with  a  single  or 
double  groove  for  attaching  the  handle  by  which  they 
were  wielded.  They  weigh  from  ten  to  forty  pounds. 
Many  are  broken,  and  some  of  the  specimens  I  saw  were 
worn  and  fractured  from  frec^uent  use  Besides  these  a 
smaller  class  of  stone  chisels  or  axes  are  also  foimd, 
wrought  of  porphyry,  with  a  groove  towards  the  thicker 
end,  and  generally  weighing  from  five  to  six  pounds. 


But  the  extent  to  which  co-operation  was  carried  on 
by  the  fincieut  miners  with  the  imperfect  means  at  their 
command  is  still  further  illustrated  by  a  discovery  de- 
scribed by  Professor  Mather,  in  a  letter  to  Mr.  E.  G. 
Squier.  On  a  hill  to  the  south  of  the  Copper  Falls 
mines,  one  of  the  abandoned  trenches  was  explored. 
On  removing  the  accumulations  from  the  excavation, 
stone  axes  of  large  size  made  of  greenstone,  and  shaped 
to  receive  withe  handles,  and  some  large  round  green- 
stone masses  that  had  apparently  been  used  for  battering- 
rams,  were  found.  "They  had  round  holes  bored  in 
them  to  the  depth  of  sevoal  inches,  which  seemed  to 


VIII.]  THE  METALLURGIG  ARTS:  GOPPER.         2bb 

have  been  designed  for  wooden  plugs  to  which  withe 
handles  might  be  attached,  so  that  several  men  could 
swing  them  with  sufficient  force  to  break  the  rock  and 
the  projecting  masses  of  copper.  Some  of  them  were 
broken,  and  some  of  the  projecting  ends  of  rock  exhi- 
bited marks  of  having  been  battered  in  the  manner  here 
suggested/'^ 

But  the  industrious  miners  of  the  native  copper  fully 
appreciated  the  practical  utility  of  the  metal  they  were 
in  search  of ;  and  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  the  old 
metallurgists  employed  themselves  thus  laboriously  in 
mining  the  copper,  and  yet  used  in  such  operations  only 
stone  and  wooden  tools.  Copper  axes,  gads,  chisels,  and 
gouges,  as  well  as  knives  and  spear-heads,  of  considerable 
diversity  of  form,  have  been  repeatedly  brought  to  light, 
aU  of  them  wrought  from  the  virgin  copper  by  means  of 
the  hammer,  without  smelting,  alloy,  or  the  use  of  fire. 
At  the  Biglow  House  at  Ontonagon,  I  had  an  oppor- 
tunity of  examining  an  interesting  collection  of  copper 
relics,  found  a  few  months  before  in  the  neighbourhood. 
These  consisted  of  copper  tools  described  as  spear-heads, 
one  fourteen  inches,  and  the  others  about  twelve  inches 
in  length ;  and  two  singularly  shaped  copper  gouges 
about  fourteen  inches  long  and  two  inches  wide,  the 
precise  use  of  which  it  would  be  difficult  to  determine* 
The  whole  were  discovered  buried  in  a  bed  of  clay  on 
the  banks  of  the  river  Ontonagon,  about  a  mUe  above  its 
mouth,  during  the  process  of  levelling  it  for  the  purposes 
of  a  brick-field.  Above  the  clay  was  an  alluvial  deposit 
of  two  feet  of  sand,  and  in  this,  and  over  the  relics  of 
the  ancient  copper  workers,  a  pine-tree  had  grown  to 
full  maturity.  Its  gigantic  roots  gave  proof,  in  the 
estimation  of  those  who  witnessed  their  removal,  of 

^  Squier's  Aboriginal  Monuments  qf  tlie  State  of  New  York.    Appendix, 
p.  184. 


256 


PREHISTORIC  MAN, 


[Chap. 


more  than  two  centuries'  growth  ;  while  the  present 
ordinary  level  of  the  river  is  such  that  it  would  require 
a  rise  of  forty  feet  to  make  the  deposit  of  sand  beneath 
which  they  lay. 

An  experienced  practical  miner,  who  had  been  among 
the  first  to  open  some  of  the  ancient  diggings  foimd  at 
the  Minnesota  mine,  stated  that  the  copper  gouges 
seemed  to  him  exactly  adapted  to  produce  the  singular 
tool*marks  which  had  then  excited  his  curiosity.  Sub- 
joined is  a  representation  of  one  peculiar  type  of  copper 


Fio.  12.— Copi>er  Implement. 

tools,  sketched  from  the  original.  It  has  been  repeatedly 
met  with  among  the  relics  of  the  copper  region,  the 
blade  being  three-sided  like  that  of  a  bayonet.  The 
socket  is  formed  by  hammering  out  the  lower  part  flat, 
and  then  turning  it  over  partiaUy  at  each  side.  A 
smaller  spear-head  found  at  the  Copper  Falls  mine, 
measures  four  and  a  half  inches  in  length,  and  had  the 
remains  of  its  wooden  handle  in  it  when  discovered. 
This  mode  of  fitting  the  blade  to  the  haft,  especiaQy  in 
the  Ontonagon  tool,  presents  a  correspondence  to  some 
of  the  more  primitive  forms  of  the  bronze  implements 
found  in  Britain  and  the  north  of  Europe  ;  but  the  latter 
are  cast  of  a  metallic  compound  which  proves  the  pos- 
session of  a  skill  in  metallurgy  far  in  advance  of  the  old 
workers  of  the  metallic  treasures  of  Ontonagon.  In  the 
spear-heads  wrought  from  the  native  copper  of  Lake 
Superior  the  socket  formed  by  the  enclosing  flange  only 


VIII.]  THE  METALLURGIG  ARTS:  COPPER,         257 

gives  additional  confirmation  to  the  conclusions  sug- 
gested by  many  diverse  disclosures,  that  the  ancient 
miners,  as  well  as  the  Mound-Builders,  were  ignorant  of 
the  arts  of  welding  and  soldering,  as  well  as  of  smelting 
the  metallic  ores. 

The  details  of  another,  and  in  some  respects  more  in- 
teresting discovery,  than  that  at  Ontonagon,  were  commu- 
nicated to  me  in  reply  to  the  inquiries  made  while  there. 
This  took  place,  at  a  still  more  recent  date,  at  a  locality 
lying  to  the  east  of  Keweenaw  Point,  in  the  rich  iron 
district  of  Marquette.  There,  not  far  from  the  mouth  of 
the  river  Carp,  in  what  appears  to  have  been  the  ancient 
bed  of  the  stream,  and  about  ten  feet  above  the  present 
level  of  its  channel,  various  weapons  and  implements  of 
copper  were  recently  found.  Large  trees  grew  over  this 
deposit  also,  and  the  evidences  of  a  remote  antiquity 
seemed  not  less  obvious  than  in  that  of  Ontonagon.  The 
copper  relics  included  knives,  spear  or  lance  heads,  and 
arrow-heads,  some  of  which  were  ornamented  with  silver. 
One  of  the  knives  was  made,  with  its  handle,  out  of  a 
single  piece  of  copper.  It  measured  altogether  about  seven 
inches  long,  of  which  the  blade  was  nearly  two-thirds  of 
the  entire  length,  and  of  an  oval  shape.  It  was  orna- 
mented with  pieces  of  silver  attached  to  it,  and  was 
inlaid  with  a  stripe  of  the  same  metal  from  point  to  haft. 
Along  with  these  relics  were  also  found  numerous  frag- 
ments, or  chips  and  shavings  of  copper,  some  of  which 
were  such  as,  it  was  assumed,  could  only  have  been  cut 
by  a  fine  sharp  tool ;  and  the  whole  sufficed  to  indicate, 
even  more  markedly  than  those  at  Ontonagon,  that  not 
only  was  the  native  copper  wrought  in  ancient  times  in 
the  Lake  Superior  regions,  but  that  along  its  shores,  and 
on  the  banks  of  its  navigable  rivers,  there  existed  manu- 
factories where  the  native  artisan  fashioned  the  metal 
into  tools  and  weapons  for  war  and  the  chase. 

VOL.  I.  R 


2oS  PREHISTORIC  JiAX.  [Chap. 

A  lively  interest  is  felt  throughout  the  copper  regions 
in  the  relics  of  the  ancient  miners,  and  the  modem  occu- 
pants of  their  works  manifest  an  intelligent  appreciation 
of  the  uses  of  such  antique  remains  as  a  means  of  throw- 
ing light  on  the  hLstoiy  of  former  ages,  I  found  a  pecu- 
liar importance  attached  by  the  miners  and  others  to  the 
hardness  of  the  wrought  copper  implements.  This  they 
contrasted,  in  more  than  one  case,  with  the  ductility  of 
the  chips  and  fragments  of  unwrought  copper  found 
along  with  them,  as  well  as  with  the  condition  of  the 
native  copper  when  first  brought  from  the  mine,  and 
maintained  that  it  afforded  proof  of  a  knowledge  ac- 
quired by  the  ancient  metallurgist  of  some  hardening 
process  unknown  to  the  modem  copper-smitL  It  is  well 
known  that  copper  and  bronze  chisels  are  frequently 
found  among  the  ancient  relics  of  the  Nile  valley,  and 
that  the  paintings  of  Egypt  exhibit  her  sculptors  hewing 
out  the  colossal  memnons  of  limestone  and  granite  by 
means  of  yellow-coloured  tools,  which  may  fairly  be 
assumed  to  be  made  of  the  copper  wrought  by  the  Egyp- 
tians in  the  mines  of  Maghara^  near  Sinai,  so  early  as  the 
reign  of  Suphis,  the  builder  of  the  great  pyramid,  though 
with  them  hardened  by  means  of  alloys.  But  though 
the  bronze,  at  an  early  date,  superseded  the  pure  copper 
in  use  in  Egypt,  examples  are  not  wanting  of  copper 
tools.  Dr.  John  Forbes  of  Edinburgh  has  in  his  posses- 
sion a  large  chisel  of  pure  copper,  exhibiting  abundant 
marks  of  use,  which  he  found,  along  with  a  wooden 
mallet,  in  an  Egyptian  tomb. 

In  1856,  Dr.  Thomas  Keynolds  of  BrockviUe  exhibited 
to  the  Canadian  Institute  a  collection  of  copper  and  other 
relics  discovered  in  that  neighbourhood  under  singular 
circumstances ;  and  possessing  a  special  interest  owing 
to  the  distance  of  the  site  from  the  copper  regions  of 
Lake  Superior.    They  included  a  peculiarly-shaped  chisel 


vm.] 


THE  METALLURGIC  ARTS:  COPPER. 


or  gouge,  six  inches  in  length,  figured  here  along  with  a 
spear-head,  seven  inches  long,  and  one  or  two  small  dag- 
gers or  knives,  all  wrought  by  means  of  the  hammer  out 
of  native  copper  which  had  never  been  subjected  to  fire, 
as  is  proved  by  the  silver  remaining  in  detached  crystals 
in  the  copper.  The  spot  where  these  rehcs  were  found 
is  at  the  head  of  Lcs  Galops  Rapids,  on  the  River  St. 
Lawrence  ;  and  the  circumstances  under  which  they  were 
met  with  are  thus  narrated  by  Dr.  Reynolds  ;  "  All  these 
relies  were  found  at  a  depth  of  about  fourteen  or  fifteen 


— Brockvillfl  Copper 


feet  below  the  surface,  in  a  soil  composed  of  clay  and 
sand.  The  shore  at  the  point  of  land,  which  is  consi- 
derably washed  by  the  action  of  the  rapid  stream,  pre- 
sents a  face  of  large  granite  boulders  with  quartz  conglo- 
merate :  a  fitting  resting-place  for  the  stalwart  forms  of 
a  score  of  skeletons,  which  were  found  inhumed  in  a  cir- 
cular space  with  their  feet  towards  the  centre.  Some  of 
the  skeletons  were  of  gigantic  proportions.  The  lower 
jaw  of  one  is  sufficiently  large  to  surround  the  corre- 
sponding bone  of  an  adult  of  our  present  generation. 


260  FREHISTORIG  MAN,  [Chap. 

The  condition  of  the  bones  fiimished  indisputable  proof 
of  their  great  antiquity.  The  skulls  were  so  completely 
reduced  to  their  earthy  constituents  that  they  were 
exceedingly  brittle,  and  fell  in  pieces  when  removed  and 
exposed  to  the  atmosphere.  The  metallic  remains,  how- 
ever, of  more  enduring  material,  as  also  several  stone 
chisels,  Roug^es  made  of  the  same  durable  material,  and 
some  fl^t  Low-heads,  all  remain  in  their  original  con- 
dition,  and  furnish  evidence  of  the  same  rude  arts  which 
we  know  to  be  still  practised  by  the  aborigines  of  the 
far  West.  With  reference  to  the  question  whether  these 
copper  remains  are  of  European  or  native  origin,  their 
structure  is  very  rude ;  they  appear  to  have  been  wrought 
solely  by  means  of  the  hammer,  without  the  melting-pot 
or  the  aid  of  fire  ;  while  they  were  accompanied  by  stone 
and  flint  tools  and  weapons,  no  implements  were  found 
made  of  iron ;  and  finally,  the  copper  appears  to  corre- 
spond in  quality  with  the  specimens  of  the  native  metal 
now  found  in  such  large  quantities  on  the  shores  of  Lake 
Superior.  There  is  also  a  curious  fact,  which  these  relics 
appear  to  confirm,  that  the  Indians  possessed  the  art  of 
hardening  and  tempering  copper,  so  as  to  give  it  as  good 
an  edge  as  iron  or  steel  This  ancient  Indian  art  is  now 
entirely  lost." 

The  reference  thus  made  to  the  popular  theory  of  some 
lost  art  of  hardening  the  native  copper,  afforded  an  op- 
portunity of  testing  it  in  reference  to  the  Brockville 
reUcs.  They  were  accordingly  submitted  to  my  col- 
league, Professor  Henry  Croft,  of  University  CoUege, 
Toronto,  with  the  following  results  :  "  The  object  of  the 
experiments  was  to  ascertain  whether  the  metal  of  which 
those  implements  are  made  is  identical  with  the  native 
copper  of  the  Lake  Superior  mines,  or  whether  it  has 
been  subjected  to  some  manufacturing  process,  or  mixed 
with  any  other  substance,  by  which  its  hardness  might 


VIII.]  THE  METALLURGIC  ARTS:  COPPER.  261 

have  been  increased.  A  careful  examination  establishes 
the  following  conclusions  : — No  perceptible  diflFerence 
could  be  observed  in  the  hardness  of  the  implements, 
and  that  of  metallic  copper  from  Lake  Superior,  The 
knife  or  small  dagger  was  cleansed  as  far  as  possible 
from  its  green  coating;  and  its  specific  gravity  ascer- 
tained as  8*66.  A  fragment,  broken  off  the  end  of  the 
broad,  flat  implement,  described  as  a  'copper  knife 
of  full  size,'  having  been  freed  from  its  coating*  was 
found  to  have  a  specific  gravity  of  8*58.  During  the 
cleaning  of  this  fragment,  a  few  brilliant  white  specks 
became  visible  on  its  surface  ;  they  appeared  to  be  sUver, 
from  their  colour  and  lustre.  The  structure  of  the  metal 
was  also  highly  laminated,  as  if  the  instrument  had  been 
brought  to  its  present  shape  by  hammering  out  a  solid 
mass  of  copper,  which  had  either  split  up,  or  had  been 
originally  formed  of  several  pieces.  These  laminae  of 
course  contained  air,  and  the  metal  was  covered  with 
rust,  hence  the  specific  gravity.  The  process  by  which  a 
flat  piece  of  copper  has  been  overlapped,  and  wrought 
with  the  hammer  into  a  rude  spear-head,  is  shown  in  the 
accompanying  illustration.     A  portion  of  very  solid  cop- 


Fio,  14. — Brockville  Copper  Spear. 


per,  from  Lake  Superior,  of  about  the  same  weight  as  the 
fragment,  was  weighed  in  water,  and  its  gravity  found 
to  be  8*92  ;  in  this  piece  there  were  no  cavities  percep- 
tible. The  specific  gravity  of  absolutely  pure  copper 
varies  from  8*78  to  8*96,  according  to  the  greater  or  less 
degree  of  aggregation  it  has  received  during  its  manufac- 
ture.    The  small  difiference  between  these  numbers  leads 


262  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

to  the  conclusion  that  the  implements  were  made  of  pure 
copper.  The  fragment  was  completely  dissolved  by 
nitric  acid ;  and  the  solution,  on  being  tested  for  silver 
by  hydrochloric  acid,  gave  a  scarcely  perceptible  opacity, 
indicating  the  presence  of  an  exceedingly  minute  trace 
of  silver.  The  copper  having  been  separated  by  hydro- 
sulphuric  acid,  the  residual  Kquid  was  tested  for  other 
metals.  A  very  minute  trace  of  iron  was  detected.  The 
native  copper  from  Lake  Superior  was  tested  in  the  same 
manner,  and  was  found  to  contain  no  trace  of  silver,  but 
a  minute  trace  of  iron,  the  quantity  being  apparently 
about  the  same  as  in  the  fragment.  From  this,  it  ap- 
pears that  the  implements  are  composed  of  copper  almost 
pure,  differing  in  no  material  respect  from  the  native 
copper  of  Lake  Superior." 

The  result  of  the  above  experiments  is  suflScient  to 
show  that,  in  the  case  of  the  Brockville  relics,  the  theory 
of  a  lost  art  of  hardening  and  tempering  copper,  was  a 
mere  reflex  of  the  prevalent  popular  fallacy  without  the 
slightest  foimdation  in  fact ;  and  there  is  no  reason  for 
anticipating  a  different  result  in  other  cases  in  which  the 
same  theory  is  tested. 

In  his  accoimt  of  the  discovery  of  those  relics.  Dr. 
Reynolds  assumes  them  to  pertain  to  the  present  Indian 
race.  It  is  obvious,  however,  that  the  evidences  of  an- 
tique sepulture  are  unmistakable,  and  other  proofe  sug- 
gest a  different  origin.  Mr.  Squier,  by  whom  they  have 
been  described,  remarks  in  the  Appendix  to  his  Abori- 
ginal  Monuments  of  the  State  of  New  York :  ^  "  Some 
impletnents  entirely  corresponding  with  these  have  been 
found  in  Isle  Royale,  and  at  other  places  in  and  around 
Lake  Superior.'^  But  besides  the  copper  implements,  a 
miniature  mask  of  terra-cotta  lay  in  the  same  deposit,  of 
peculiar  workmanship,  and  suggestive  rather  of  relation 

^  Smithsonian  CcmtrUmtions,  vol.  ii.  pp.  14,  176. 


Vin.]  THE  METALLURGIC  ARTS:  COPPER.  263 

to  the  arts  of  the  Mound-Builders,  or  of  Central  America. 
It  13  figured  by  Mr.  Squier  from  an  incorrect  drawing, 
which  indicates  a  minuter  representation  of  Indian  fea- 
tures than  the  original  justifies 
It  may  rather  be  described  as  a 
grotesque  mask,  such  as  is  by 
no  means  uncommon  among 
the  small  terra-eottas  of  Mex 
ico  and  Central  America.  It 
is  accurately  engraved  here 
the  size  of  the  original,  from 
a  photographic  copy. 

The  mingling  of  traces  of 
a  certain  amount  of  artistic 
skill,  as  here  seen,  with  the 
rude    arts    of   the    primitive  ^  °  '*   t  r™  otta  uaak 

metallurgist,  entirely  correspond  with  the  disclosures 
of  the  ancient  mounds  of  the  Mississippi ;  and,  indeed, 
agree  with  other  examples  of  the  partial  manifestations 
of  artistic  skill  in  an  imperfectly  developed  civilisa- 
tion. I  was  struck,  when  examining  the  rude  mauls  of 
the  ancient  miners  of  Ontonagon,  by  the  close  resem- 
blance traceable  between  them  and  some  which  I  have 
seen  obtained  from  ancient  copper  workings  discovered 
in  North  Wales. 

In  a  communication  made  to  the  British  Archseolo- 
gical  Institute  by  the  Hon.  William  Owen  Stanley,  in 
1850,  he  gives  an  account  of  an  ancient  working  broken 
into  at  the  copper  mines  of  Llandudno,  near  the  Great 
Orme's  Head,  Carnarvonshire.  In  this  were  found  min- 
ing implements,  consisting  of  chisels,  or  picks  of  bronze, 
and  a  number  of  stone  mauls  of  various  sizes,  described 
as  weighing  from  about  2  lbs.  to  40  lbs.,  rudely  fash- 
ioned :  having  been  all,  as  their  appearance  suggested, 
used  for  breaking,  pounding,  or  detaching  the  ore  from 


2G4  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

the  rock,  and  pertaining,  it  may  be  presumed,  to  a  period 
anterior  to  the  Roman  occupation  of  Britain.  These 
primitive  implements  are  stated  to  be  similar  to  the 
water-worn  stones  found  on  the  sea-beach  at  Pen  Mawr, 
from  which  very  probably  those  most  suitable  for  the 
purpose  may  have  been  selected.  Mr.  Stanley  also  de- 
scribes others  of  precisely  the  same  character,  and  corre- 
sponding exactly  with  those  found  on  the  shores  of  Lake 
Superior,  which  had  been  met  with  in  ancient  workings 
in  Anglesea.  Were  we,  therefore,  disposed  to  generalize 
from  such  analogies,  as  ingenious  speculators  on  the  lost 
history  of  the  New  World  have  been  prone  to  do,  we 
might  trace  in  this  correspondence  between  the  ancient 
mining  implements  of  Lake  Superior  and  of  North 
Wales,  a  confirmation  of  the  supposed  colonization  of 
America,  in  the  twelfth  century,  by  Madoc,  the  son  of 
Owen  Gwynnedd,  king  of  North  Wales,  who,  according 
to  the  Welsh  chroniclers,  having  been  forced  by  civil 
commotions  to  leave  his  native  country,  set  sail  with  a 
smaU  fleet  in  1170,  and  directing  his  course  westward, 
landed,  after  a  voyage  of  some  weeks,  in  a  country  in- 
habited by  a  strange  race  of  beings,  but  producing  in 
abundance  the  necessaries  of  life.  Leaving  behind  him 
a  colony  of  settlers.  Prince  Madoc,  according  to  the  same 
authorities,  returned  to  Wales,  equipped  a  larger  fleet, 
and  again  set  sail  for  the  new  regions  of  the  West ;  but 
neither  he  nor  any  of  his  followers  were  ever  more  heard 
of.  The  general  story  has  nothing  improbable  in  it.  If 
a  small  colony  of  Welshmen  effected  a  settlement  on  the 
shores  of  America  at  that  early  date,  their  fate  would  be 
like  that  of  the  still  earlier  Scandinavian  colonists  of 
Vinland.  But  the  resemblance  between  the  primitive 
Welsh  and  American  mining  tools,  can  be  regarded  as 
nothing  more  than  evidence  of  the  corresponding  opera- 
tions of  the  human  mind,  when  placed  under  similar  cir- 


VIII]         THE  METALLURGIC  ARTS:  COPPER.  2G5 

cumstances  with  the  same  limited  means,  which  is  illus-. 
trated  in  so  many  ways  by  the  arts  of  the  stone  period, 
whether  of  the  most  ancient  or  the  most  modem  date. 
Nor  can  such  numerous  correspondences  be  regarded  as 
altogether  accidental.  They  confirm  the  idea  of  certain 
innate  and  instinctive  operations  of  human  ingenuity, 
ever  present  and  ready  to  be  called  forth  for  the  accom- 
plishment of  similar  purposes  by  the  same  limited  means ; 
and  which  reveal  to  us  the  same  type  in  the  works  of 
the  ancient  Mound-Builder,  and  the  relics  of  the  British 
barrow  of  ante-Christian  times,  2^  among  the  most  re- 
cent products  of  the  Ked  Indian  or  the  Polynesian 
artificer.  Yet  the  important  fact  must  be  borne  in  re- 
membrance that  the  flint  weapons  of  the  drift,  so  far  as 
hitherto  figured  and  described,  difier  to  a  remarkable 
extent  from  those  found  in  the  ancient  barrows.  They 
are  much  larger,  'ruder,  and  of  different  forms ;  and  it  is 
a  remarkable  fact,  the  significance  of  which  is  not  yet 
fully  apparent  to  us,  that  the  stone  axe  of  the  South  Sea 
Islander  of  the  eighteenth  century,  presents  a  close  re- 
semblance to  that  of  the  British  or  Gaidish  fabricator  of 
the  first,  or  earlier  centuries ;  and  the  modem  flint  lance 
or  arrow-head  of  the  Ked  Indian  can  scarcely  be  distin- 
guished from  that  found  in  the  most  ancient  British 
graves :  while  no  such  correspondence  is  traceable  be- 
tween the  latter  and  the  stiU  older  manufactured  weapons 
in  the  underlying  drift. 

From  the  review  thus  made  of  the  evidences  of  ancient 
and  long-abandoned  mining  operations  on  the  shores 
and  islands  of  Lake  Superior,  it  cannot  admit  of  doubt 
that  in  these  works  we  look  on  the  traces  of  an  imper- 
fectly developed  yet  highly  interesting  native  civilisa- 
tion, pertaining  to  centuries  long  anterior  to  that  lifting 
of  the  curtain  concealing  America  from  the  ancient 
world,  which  introduced  to  the  children  of  its  forests 


266  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

the  products  of  an  exotic  civiKsation,  for  them  pregnant 
only  with  destruction. 

The  question  naturally  arises :  By  whom  were  those 
ancient  mines  of  the  northern  copper  region  wrought  ? 
Was  it  by  the  ancestry  of  the  present  Indian  tribes  of 
North  America,  or  by  a  totally  distinct  and  long-super- 
seded race?  The  whole  tendency  of  opinion  among 
American  writers  has  latterly  been  towards  a  unity  and 
comprehensive  isolation  of  the  races  and  arts  of  the  New 
World ;  and  hence  the  theories  alike  of  Morton  and  of 
Schoolcraft,  though  founded  on  diverse  and  totally  inde- 
pendent premises,  have  favoured  the  idea  that  the  rude 
germs  of  all  that  is  most  noticeable  even  in  the  civilisa- 
tion of  Central  America  may  be  found  among  the  native 
arts  and  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  forest  tribes. 
But  neither  the  traditions  nor  the  arts  of  the  Indians  of 
the  northern  lakes  supply  any  satisfactory  link  connect- 
ing them  either  with  the  Copper-miners  or  the  Mound- 
Builders.  Loonsfoot,  an  old  Chippewa  chief,  living  at 
the  mouth  of  St.  Louis  Kiver,  where  it  enters  Lake 
Superior,  is  said  to  trace  back  his  ancestry  by  name,  as 
hereditary  chiefs  of  his  tribe,  for  upwards  of  four  hun- 
dred years.  At  the  request  of  Mr.  C.  Whittlesey  he  was 
questioned  by  an  educated  half-breed,  a  nephew  of  his 
own,  relative  to  the  ancient  copper  mines,  and  his  answer 
was  in  substance  as  foUows  : — "  A  long  time  ago  the 
Indians  were  much  better  ojff  than  they  are  now.  They 
had  copper  axes,  arrow-heads,  and  spears,  and  also  stone 
axes.  Until  the  French  came  here,  and  blasted  the 
rocks  with  powder,  we  have  no  traditions  of  the  copper 
mines  being  worked.  Our  forefathers  used  to  build  big 
canoes  and  cross  the  lake  over  to  Isle  Royale,  where 
they  found  more  copper  than  anywhere  else.  The 
stone  hammers  that  are  now  found  in  the  old  diggings 
we  know  nothing  about.     The  Indians  were  formerly 


VIII.]  THE  METALLURGIC  ARTS:  COPPER,  267 

much  more  numerous  and  happier.  They  had  no  such 
wars  and  troubles  as  they  have  now.''  At  La  Pointe 
on  Lake  Superior,  it  was  my  good  fortune  to  meet  with 
Bujffalo,  a  rugged  specimen  of  an  old  Chippewa  chief. 
He  retained  all  the  wild  Indian  ideas,  though  accus- 
tonied  to  frequent  intercourse  with  white  men,  boasted 
of  the  scalps  he  had  taken,  and  held  to  his  pagan  creed 
as  the  only  religion  for  the  Indian,  whatever  the  Great 
Spirit  might  have  taught  the  white  man.  His  grandson, 
an  educated  half-breed,  acted  as  interpreter,  and  his 
reply  to  similar  inquiries  was  embodied  in  the  following 
sententious  declaration  of  Indian  philosophy  : — "  The 
white  man  thinks  he  is  the  superior  of  the  Indian,  but 
it  is  not  so.  The  Red  Indian  was  made  by  the  Great 
Spirit,  who  made  the  forests  and  the  game,  and  he  needs 
no  lessons  from  the  white  man  how  to  live.  If  the 
same  Great  Spirit  made  the  white  man,  he  has  made 
him  of  a  different  nature.  Let  him  act  according  to  his 
nature ;  it  is  the  best  for  him  ;  but  for  us  it  is  not 
good.  We  had  the  red-iron  before  white  men  brought 
the  black-iron  amongst  us  ;  but  if  ever  such  works  as 
you  describe  were  carried  on  along  these  Lake  shores 
before  white  men  came  here,  then  the  Great  Spirit 
must  once  before  have  made  men  with  a  different 
nature  from  his  red  children  such  as  you  white  men 
have.  As  for  us,  we  Uve  as  our  forefathers  have  always 
done." 

La  Pointe,  or  Chaquamegon,  where  this  interview 
took  place,  was  visited  by  the  Jesuit  Father,  Claude 
Allouez,  in  the  month  of  October  1666,  and  is  described 
by  him  as  a  beautiful  bay,  the  shores  of  which  were 
occupied  by  the  Chippewas  in  such  numbers  that  their 
warriors  alone  amounted  to  eight  hundred.  In  the 
journal  of  his  travels,  he  thus  refers  to  the  mineral  re- 
sources for  which  the  region  is  now  most  famed  : — "  The 


208  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

savages  reverence  the  lake  as  a  divinity,  and  offer  sacri- 
fices to  it  because  of  its  great  size,  for  it  is  two  hundred 
leagues  long  and  eighty  broad  ;  and  also,  because  of  the 
abundance  of  fish  it  supplies  to  them,  in  lieu  of  game, 
which  is  scarce  in  its  environs.  They  often  find  in  the 
lake  pieces  of  copper  weighing  from  ten  to  twenty 
pounds.  I  have  seen  many  such  pieces  in  the  hands 
of  the  savages ;  and  as  they  are  superstitious,  they  re- 
gard them  as  divinities,  or  as  gifts  which  the  gods  who 
dwell  beneath  its  waters  have  bestowed  on  them  to  pro- 
mote their  welfare.  Hence  they  preserve  such  pieces  of 
copper  wrapped  up  along  with  their  most  prized  pos- 
sessions. By  some  they  have  been  preserved  upwards 
of  fifty  years,  and  others  have  had  them  in  their  families 
from  time  immemorial,  cherishing  them  as  their  house- 
hold gods.  There  was  visible  for  some  time,  near  the 
shore,  a  large  rock  entirely  of  copper,  with  its  top  rising 
above  the  water,  which  afforded  an  opportunity  for  those 
passing  to  cut  pieces  from  it.  But  when  I  passed  in 
that  vicinity  nothing  could  be  seen  of  it.  I  believe  that 
the  storms,  which  are  here  very  frequent,  and  as  violent 
as  on  the  ocean,  had  covered  the  rock  with  sand.  Our 
Indians  wished  to  persuade  me  it  was  a  divinity  which 
had  disappeared,  but  for  what  reason  they  would  not 

say.''' 

Such  is  the  earliest  notice  we  have  of  the  Indian 
ideas  of  the  native  copper,  and  their  mode  of  acquiring 
it.  It  entirely  accords  with  aU  subsequent  information 
on  the  same  subject,  and  is  opposed  to  any  tradition  of 
their  ancestors  having  been  the  workers  of  the  aban- 
doned copper  mines.  A  secrecy,  resulting  from  the 
superstitions  associated  with  the  mineral  wealth  of  the 
great  Lake,  appears  to  have  thrown  impediments  in 
the  way  of  the   earlier  inquirers  after  the  sources  of 

^  Relations  des  J^ttuiteay  vol.  iii.  1666  ei  1667. 


VIII.]  THE  METALLURGIG  ARTS:  GGPPER,  269 

the  copper.  Father  Dablon,  another  member  of  the 
Society  of  Jesus,  narrates  a  marvellous  account  com- 
municated to  him,  of  four  Indians  who,  in  old  times, 
before  the  coming  of  the  French,  had  lost  their  way  in 
a  fog,  and  at  length  eflFected  a  landing  on  Missipicooa- 
tong.  This  was  beKeved  to  be  a  floating  island,  and 
mysteriously  variable  in  its  local  position  and  aspects. 
The  wanderers  cooked  their  meal  in  Indian  fashion,  by 
heating  stones  and  casting  them  into  a  birch-bark  pail 
filled  with  water.  The  stones  proved  to  be  lumps  of 
copper,  which  they  carried  ojff  with  them ;  but  they  had 
hardly  left  the  shore,  when  a  loud  and  angry  voice, 
ascribed  by  one  of  them  to  Missibizi,  the  goblin  spirit 
of  the  waters,  was  heard  exclaiming,  "  What  thieves  are 
these  that  carry  oJff  my  children's  cradles  and  play- 
things?'' One  of  the  Indians  died  immediately  from 
fear,  and  two  others  soon  after,  while  the  fourth  only 
survived  long  enough  to  reach  home  and  relate  what 
had  happened,  before  he  also  died,  having  no  doubt 
been  poisoned  by  the  copper  used  in  cooking.  Ever 
after  this  the  Indians  steered  their  course  far  off  the  site 
of  the  haunted  island.  In  the  same  relation.  Father 
Dablon  teUs  that  near  the  river  Ontonagon,  or  Nanto- 
nagon  as  he  calls  it,  is  a  bluff  from  which  masses  of 
copper  frequently  fall  out.  One  of  these  was  presented 
to  him  weighing  one  hundred  pounds ;  and  pieces 
weighing  twenty  or  thirty  pounds  are  stated  by  him  to 
be  frequently  met  with  by  the  squaws  when  digging 
holes  for  their  com.  The  locality  thus  celebrated  for 
the  traces  of  its  mineral  wealth  by  the  earKest  French 
missionaries,  is  in  like  manner  referred  to  by  the  first 
English  explorer,  Alexander  Henry,  a  bold  adventurer, 
who  visited  the  Island  of  Mackinac,  at  the  entrance  of 
Lake  Michigan,  shortly  before  the  Treaty  of  Paris  in 
1763,   and  was   one    among   the   few  who   escaped  a 


270  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

treacherous  massacre  perpetrated  by  the  Indians  on 
the  whites  at  Old  Fort  Mackinac.  In  his  Travels  and 
Adventures  in  Canada  and  the  Indian  Territories^  he 
mentions  his  visiting  the  Kiver  Ontonagon,  in  August 
1765.  "At  the  mouth,  was  an  Indian  village  ;  and  at 
three  leagues  above,  a  fall,  at  the  foot  of  which  sturgeon 
were  at  this  season  so  abundant,  that  a  month's  subsist- 
ence for  a  regiment  could  have  been  taken  in  a  few 
hours.  But,*'  he  adds,  "I  foimd  this  river  chiefly  re- 
markable for  the  abundance  of  virgin  copper  which  is 
on  its  banks  and  in  its  neighbourhood.  The  copper  pre- 
sented itself  to  the  eye  in  masses  of  various  weight.  The 
Indians  showed  me  one  of  twenty  poimds.  They  were 
used  to  manufacture  this  metal  into  spoons  atid  bracelets 
for  themselves.  In  the  perfect  state  in  which  they 
found  it,  it  required  nothing  but  to  be  beat  into  shape.'' ^ 
On  a  subsequent  occasion,  in  the  following  year,  Henry 
again  visited  the  same  region.  "  On  my  way,"  he  says, 
"  I  encamped  a  second  time  at  the  mouth  of  the  Onto- 
nagon, and  now  took  the  opportunity  of  going  ten  miles 
up  the  river,  with  Indian  guides.  The  object  which  I 
went  most  expressly  to  see,  and  to  which  I  had  the 
satisfaction  of  being  led,  was  a  mass  of  copper,  of  the 
weight,  according  to  my  estimate,  of  no  less  than  five 
tons.  Such  was  its  pure  and  malleable  state  that  with 
an  axe  I  was  able  to  cut  ojff  a  portion  weighing  a  hun- 
dred pounds."^  This  mass  of  native  copper  which  thus 
attracted  the  adventurous  European  explorer  nearly  a 
century  ago,  has  since  acquired  considerable  celebrity, 
as  one  of  the  most  prominent  encouragements  to  the 
mining  operations  projected  in  the  Ontonagon  and  sur- 
rounding districts,  and  is  now  preserved  at  Washington. 
Those  notices  are  interesting  as  showing  to  what  extent 

*  Henry's  Travels  and  Adventures^  New  York,  1809,  p.  194. 
^  Ibid.  p.  204. 


VIIL]  THE  METALLURGIC  ARTS:  COPPER,  271 

the  present  race  of  Indians  were  accustomed  to  avail 
themselves  of  the  mineral  wealth  of  the  great  copper 
regions,  and  by  what  means  they  acquired  such  copper 
as  they  were  found  in  possession  of,  along  with  their 
weapons  and  implements  of  stone.  Illustrations  of  a 
like  kiad  might  Be  greatly  multiplied,  but  they  are  all 
nearly  to  the  same  effect,  exhibiting  the  rude  Indian 
gathering  the  chance  masses,  or  hewing  off  pieces  from 
the  exposed  copper  lodes,  in  fuU  accordance  with  the 
simple  arts  of  his  first  stone  period ;  but  affording  no 
ground  for  crediting  him  with  even  the  most  partial 
traditionary  memorials  of  any  ancestral  connexion  with 
the  industrial  mining  race  that  once  diligently  excavated 
the  trenches,  and  laid  bare  the  mineral  treasures  of  the 
great  copper  region. 

The  evidences  which  tend  to  prove  the  great  length  of 
time  which  has  intervened  since  the  ancient  mines  of 
Lake  Superior  were  abandoned,  receives  further  confirm- 
ation from  the  traces  of  a  long-protracted  trajfic  carried 
on  by  the  subsequent  occupants  of  their  abandoned 
territory.  The  mineral  wealth  that  still  lay  within  the 
reach  of  the  non-industrial  himter  of  the  forests  which 
grew  up  and  clothed  the  deserted  works,  in  the  interval 
between  their  abandonment  and  re-occupation,  furnished 
bim  with  a  prized  material  for  barter.  The  head-waters 
of  the  Mississippi  lie  within  comparatively  easy  reach  of 
an  Indian  party,  carrying  their  light  birch-bark  canoe 
over  the  intervening  portages,  as  is  practised  by  them 
at  the  present  day  ;  and,  once  launched  on  its  broad 
waters,  the  whole  range  of  the  continent  through  twenty 
degrees  of  latitude  is  free  before  them.  Through  Lake 
Huron  and  the  Ottawa  into  the  St.  Lawrence,  and  by 
Lakes  Huron,  Erie,  and  Ontario,  into  the  Hudson,  other 
extensive  areas  of  native  exchange  were  commanded. 
Articles  wrought  in  the  brown  pipe-stone  of  the  Chip- 


272  PRE  HISTORIC  MAX,  [Chap. 

pewa  river  of  the  Upper  Mississippi,  the  red  pipe-stone  of 
the  Couteau  des  Prairies,  west  of  St.  Peters,  and  the 
copper  of  Lake  Superior,  constituted  the  wealth  which 
the  old  North  had  to  oflFer ;  and,  in  return,  one  of  the 
most  valued  exchanges  appears  to  have  been  the  large 
tropical  shells  of  the  Gulf  of  Florida  and  the  West 
Indian  seas  ;  from  which  wampum -beads,  pendants, 
gorgets,  and  personal  ornaments  of  various  kinds  were 
manufactured ;  while  many  of  them,  as  we  have  seen, 
were  preserved  entire,  and  evidently  prized,  along  the 
shores  of  the  northern  lakes,  as  among  the  most  mar- 
vellous of  natural  productions. 

These  conchological  relics,  and  the  circumstances  under 
which  they  have  been  discovered,  have 'already  been  de- 
scribed in  a  former  chapter.  They  are  of  peculiar  value 
in  the  present  inquiry,  from  the  illustration  they  afford 
of  the  area  embraced  by  the  ancient  native  trafl&c  be- 
tween the  North  and  South.  Whatever  doubt  may  be 
thrown  on  the  derivation  of  some  specimens  of  ancient 
native  manufacture,  or  of  the  copper  found  in  sepulchral 
and  other  deposits  in  the  Southern  States  and  in  Central 
America  :  no  question  can  exist  as  to  the  tropical  and 
marine  origin  of  the  large  shells  exhumed  not  only  in 
the  inland  regions  of  Kentucky  and  Tennessee,  but  in 
the  northern  peninsula  lying  between  the  Ontario  and 
Huron  lakes,  or  on  the  still  remoter  shores  and  islands 
of  Georgian  Bay,  at  a  distance  of  upwards  of  three 
thousand  miles  from  the  coast  of  Yucatan,  on  the  main- 
land, the  nearest  point  where  the  Pyrula  perversa  is 
found  in  its  native  locality. 

Such  evidence  as  the  habits,  arts,  and  traditions  of  the 
Indian  tribes  around  Lake  Superior  supply,  seems  all  to 
point  in  the  same  direction,  and  to  be  irreconcilable 
with  the  idea  that  they  are  the  descendants  of  the 
nnident  miners.     The  stray  lumps  of  native  copper,  and 


Vni.]        THE  METALLURQIG  ARTS :  COPPER.  273 

the  exposed  masses  from  which  pieces  could  readily  be 
separated,  have  indeed  long  suppKed  them  with  the 
prized  miskopewahik^  or  red  iron  ;  and  the  peculiar 
manner  in  which  crystals  of  silver  are  frequently  enclosed 
in  the  copper  of  Lake  Superior,  enables  its  source  to  be 
traced  wherever  it  has  been  wrought  exclusively  by  the 
hammer  without  the  appKcation  of  fire.  Copper,  how- 
ever, is  obtained  in  its  native  state  stiU  farther  north ; 
and  Mackenzie,  in  his  Second  Joumeyy  mentions  its 
being  in  coromon  use  among  the  tribes  on  the  borders 
of  the  Arctic  Sea ;  by  whom  it  is  wrought  into  spear 
and  arrow  heads,  and  a  considerable  variety  of  personal 
ornaments.  Mr.  Henry  also  found  the  Ghristinaux  of 
Lake  Winipagon  wearing  bracelets  and  other  ornaments 
of  copper ;  and  most  of  the  earlier  voyagers  and  explorers 
describe  copper  implements  and  personal  ornaments 
among  the  widely-scattered  Lidian  tribes  of  the  New 
World.  But  in  all  cases  they  were  rudely  Wrought 
with  the  hammer,  and  sparingly  mingled  with  the  more 
abundant  weapons  and  implements  of  stone,  made  by  a 
people  whose  sole  metaUurgic  knowledge  consisted  in 
gathering  or  procuring  by  barter  the  native  copper, — 
just  as  they  procured  the  red  or  brown  pipe-rstone, — • 
and  hammering  the  mass  into  some  simple  useful  form. 
Silver,  procured  in  like  manner,  was  not  unknown  to 
them,  and  pipes  inlaid  both  with  silver  and  lead  are  by 
no  means  rare.  It  is  only  when  we  turn  to  the  scenes 
of  a  native-bom  civilisation,  in  Mexico,  Central  America, 
and  Peru,  that  we  find  actual  metallurgic  arts  in  use, 
and  discover  the  crucible  and  furnace,  and  copper  super- 
seded by  the  more  useful  alloy,  bronze.  But  inter- 
mediately between  the  copper  regions  of  Lake  Superior 
and  the  ancient  southern  scenes  of  native  American 
civilisation,  the  Mississippi  and  its  great  tributaries 
drain  a  country  remarkable  for  monuments  of  a  long 
VOL.  I.  s 


274  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

forgotten  past,  not  less  interesting  and  mysterious 
than  the  forsaken  mines  of  Keweenaw  and  Onto- 
nagon, or  Isle  Boyale.  These  great  earthworks  are 
ascribed  to  an  extinct  race,  conveniently  known  by 
the  name  of  the  Mound-Builders.  Extensive  and  care- 
fully executed  investigations  into  their  structure  and 
contents  prove  these  builders  to  have  been  a  people 
among  whom  copper  was  in  frequent  use,  but  by  Uiem 
also  it  was  worked  from  the  native  metal  only  by 
the  hammer.  The  invaluable  service  of  fire  in  reduc- 
ing and  smelting  ores,  moulding  metaJs,  and  adapting 
them  to  greater  usefulness  by  well-proportioned  alloys, 
was  entirely  unknown ;  and  the  investigation  and  ana- 
lysis of  their  cold-wrought  tools  seem  to  prove  that  the 
source  of  their  copper  was  the  Lake  Superior  mines. 
But  though  the  ancient  Mound-Builder  was  thus  pos- 
sessed of  little  higher  metaUurgic  skill  than  the  modern 
Indian  hunter,  he  manifested  in  other  respects  a  capacity 
for  extensive  and  combined  operations,  the  memorials  of 
which  perpetuate  his  monumental  skill  and  persevering 
industry  in  the  gigantic  earthworks  from  whence  his 
name  is  derived.  Prom  these  we  learn  that  there  was 
a  period,  in  the  long  past  epochs  of  America's  unrecorded 
history,  when  the  valleys  of  the  Mississippi  and  its  tribu- 
taries were  occupied  by  a  numerous  and  settled  popula- 
tion. Alike  in  physical  conformation — so  far  as  our 
very  imperfect  evidence  goes, — and  in  arts,  these  Mound- 
Builders  approximated  to  races  of  South  America,  and 
differed  from  the  Red  Indian  tribes  alone  known  to  the 
Europeans  as  the  occupants  of  their  deserted  seats,  and 
therefore  familiarly  styled  Aborigines.  They  were  not, 
to  all  appearance,  far  advanced  in  civilisation.  Com- 
pared with  the  people  of  Mexico  or  Central  America, 
when  first  seen  by  the  Spaniards,  their  arts  and  social 
state  were  probably  inidimentary.     But  they  had  ad- 


1 


VIII.]         THE  METALLURQIG  ARTS:  COPPER.  275 

vanced  beyond  ttiat  stage  in  which  it  ia  possible  for  a 
people  'to  continue  utterly  unprogressive.  The  initial 
steps  of  civilisaticHi  had  been  inaugurated,  and  the 
diflFerence  between  them  and  the  civilized  Mexicans  is 
less  strikmg  than  the  contact  which  the  evidences  of 
their  settled  condition,  and  the  proofs  of  extensive  co- 
operation in  their  numerous  earthworks  supply,  when 
compared  with  all  that  pertains  to  the  nomade  tribes 
by  whom  the  American  forests  have  been  exclusively 
occupied  during  the  centuries  since  Columbus.  They 
were  greatly  more  in  advance  of  the  Indian  hunter  than 
behind  the  civilized  Meidcan.  They  had  already  ac- 
quired habits  of  combined  industry ;  were  the  settled 
occupants  of  a  specific  territory  ;  and  are  proved,  by 
Ae  numerous  omLente  and  iiiplemente  of  copper  de- 
posited  in  their  monuments  and  sepulchres,  to  have  been 
familiar  with  the  mineral  resources  of  the  northern  lake 
regions,  whether  by  personal  enterprise,  or  by  an  ancient 
commercial  system  of  exchange.  What  probabilities 
there  are  suggestive  of  a  connexion  between  the  Mound- 
Builders  and  the  ancient  miners  of  America,  will  be 
discussed  in  a  later  chapter,  along  with  other  and  allied 
questions  ;  but  to  just  such  a  race,  with  their  imperfect 
mechanical  skiU,  their  partially-developed  arts,  and  their 
aptitude  for  continuous  combined  operations,  may  be 
ascribed,  d  priori,  such  ancient  mining  works  as  exist 
on  the  shores  of  Lake  Superior,  overshadowed  with  the 
forest  growth  of  centuries.  The  mounds  constructed 
by  the  ancient  race  are  in  like  manner  overgrown  with 
the  evidences  of  their  long  desertion  ;  and  the  condition 
in  which  recent  travellers  have  found  the  long- forgotten 
cities  of  Central  America,  may  serve  to  show  what  even 
New  York,  Washington,  and  Philadelphia ;  what  Toronto, 
Montreal,  and  Quebec,  would  become  after  a  very  few 
centuries,  if  abandoned,  like  the  desolate  cities  of  Chi* 


276  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

chenitza  or  Uxmal,  to  the  inextinguishable  luxuriance  of 
the  American  forest  growth. 

The  history  of  some  of  the  cities  of  Central  America 
is  known,  and  the  date  is  well  ascertained  when  the 
irraption  of  a  new  race  extinguished  the  advancing  civili- 
sation of  Mexico,  and  threw  back  into  primitive  barbarism 
the  remnant  of  the  ancient  race  which  it  failed  to  extir- 
pate. It  seems  no  illegitimate  assimiption  to  affirm  of 
the  Mound-Builders  of  the  Mississippi,  and  the  ancient 
miners  of  Lake  Superior,  in  like  mamier,  that  some  great 
catastrophe — ^the  intrusion,  it  may  be,  of  a  barbaric  but 
warlike  race,  such  as  the  history  of  some  of  the  great 
Indian  confederacies  illustrate,  or  the  still  deadlier  influ- 
ence of  pestilence,  such  as  in  the  seventeenth  century 
swept  away  the  Massacheuseuks  and  Narragansetts  of 
New  England ; — abruptly  arrested  their  labours,  and  re- 
stored the  scenes  of  their  industrious  progression  to  the 
silence  amid  which  the  later  forest-wilderness  arose.  It 
is  not  necessary  to  assume  a  very  remote  antiquity  for 
the  era  of  this  abortive  American  civilisation.  It  has 
been  a  favourite  theory  with  some,  to  trace  analogies  be- 
tween the  arts  of  Central  America  and  those  of  Egypt's 
or  Phoenicia's  primitive  maturity.  But  those  who  do  so 
forget  that  the  era  of  Montezuma  is  known,  and  that  to 
a  past  so  recent  as  that,  we  can  assign  so  much  of  Aztec, 
and  even  of  the  latest  traces  of  Toltec  art,  that  a  few 
more  centuries,  such  as  in  Europe  would  cany  us  back 
to  the  era  of  the  rise  of  Moorish  civilisation  and  mediaeval 
Christian  art,  may  suffice  to  embrace  nearly  all  that  we 
know  of  in  relation  to  those  of  the  New  World.  Cer- 
tainly, however,  no  computation  will  account  for  the 
chronological  data  deducible  from  the  mines  of  Lake 
Superior  or  the  mounds  of  the  Mississippi  valley  which 
does  not  considerably  antedate  the  close  of  their  era  to 
that  of  the  European  discovery  of  the  American  continent. 


VUL]         THE  METALLUROIG  ARTS:  COPPER,  277 

In  his  communication  to  the  American  Association, 
Mr.  C.  Whittlesey  endeavours  to  assign  an  approximate 
date  to  the  era  of  the  ancient  miners.  From  a  compari- 
son of  the  trees  found  on  the  tops  of  the  trenches  and 
the  extent  of  the  works,  with  the  difficulties  which  the 
miners  had  to  encounter  in  working  them,  he  considers 
that  an  interval  of  twelve  hundred  years  have  elapsed 
since  the  mines  were  abandoned,  and  five  hundred  years 
more  must  be  allowed  during  which  they  were  occupied 
and  wrought.  This  would  carry  us  back  to  the  second 
century  of  the  Christian  era,  when  the  ancient  Damnonian 
of  Cornwall  practised  his  ingenious  industry  by  means 
of  arts  not  greatly  in  advance  of  the  miners  of  Lake 
Superior.  But  the  grounds  for  asserting  such  an  anti- 
quity for  the  works  at  Ontonagon  or  Keweenaw,  are  too 
vague  to  carry  conviction  to  the  mind.  Were  we  as 
ignorant  of  the  history  of  all  the  monuments  of  Mexico 
and  Yucatan  as  of  those  of  Ohio,  there  are  not  wanting 
LDgenious  theorists  who  would  assign  to  the  architecture 
of  Central  America  a  date  still  older  than  the  pjrramids 
of  Egypt.  But  whatever  be  the  dates  of  their  commence- 
ment or  desertion,  the  condition  in  which  some  of  the 
ancient  works  on  Lake  Superior  have  been  found,  when 
reopened  in  recent  times,  is  suggestive  of  peculiar  cir- 
cumstances attending  their  abandonment.  It  is  difficult 
to  believe  that  the  huge  mass  of  copper,  upwards  of  six 
tons  in  weight,  discovered  beneath  the  rubbish  of  cen- 
turies in  the  Minnesota  mine,  resting  on  its  oaken  cradle, 
was  abandoned  merely  because  the  workmen,  who  had 
thus  overcome  one  of  the  greatest  difficulties  in  its  re- 
moval, were  baffled  in  the  subsequent  stages  of  their 
operations,  and  contented  themselves  by  chipping  off 
any  accessible  projecting  point.  Well-hammered  copper 
chisels,  such  as  lay  alongside  of  it,  and  have  been  repeatedly 
found  in  the  works,  were  abundanliy  sufficient,  with  the 


r 


278  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

help  of  the  accompanjong  stone  hammers,  to  enable  them 
to  cut  the  mass  of  native  copper  into  portable  pieces.  If, 
indeed,  the  ancient  miners  were  incapable  of  doing  more 
with  their  mass  of  copper  in  the  mine,  than  breaking  off 
a  few  projections,  to  what  further  use  could  they  have 
turned  it  when  transported  to  the  surface  ?  It  weighed 
six  tons,  and  measured  ten  feet  long  and  three  feet  wide. 
The  trench  at  its  greatest  depth  was  twenty-six  feet; 
while  the  mass  of  copper  was  only  eighteen  feet  from  the 
surface,  and  in  the  estimation  of  the  skilled  engineer  by 
whom  it  was  first  seen,  it  had  been  elevated  upwards  of 
five  feet  since  it  was  placed  on  its  oaken  frame,  and  sup- 
ported by  sleepers  of  the  same  material.  The  excava- 
tions to  a  depth  of  twenty-six  feet,  the  dislodged  copper 
block,  and  the  framework  prepared  for  elevating  the 
solid  mass  to  the  surface,  all  consistently  point  to  the 
same  workmen.  But  the  mere  detachment  of  a  few 
accessible  projecting  fragments  is  too  lame  and  impotent 
a  conclusion  of  proceedings  carried  thus  far  on  so  dif- 
ferent a  scale.  It  indicates  rather  such  results  as  would 
follow  at  the  present  day  were  the  barbarian  tribes  of 
the  North-west  to  displace  the  modem  Minnesota  miners, 
and  possess  themselves  of  mineral  treasures  they  are  as 
little  capable  as  ever  of  turning  to  any  but  the  most 
simple  and  rude  uses.  Such  evidences,  accordingly,  while 
they  serve  to  prove  the  existence,  at  some  former  period, 
of  a  mining  population  in  the  copper  regions  of  Lake 
Superior,  seem  also  to  indicate  that  their  labours  had 
come  to  an  abrupt  termination.  Whether  by  some  ter- 
rible devastating  pestilence,  like  that  which  nearly 
exterminated  the  native  population  of  New  England 
immediately  before  the  landing  of  the  Pilgrim  Fathers  ; 
or  by  the  breaking  out  of  war ;  or,  as  seems  not  less 
probable,  by  the  invasion  of  the  mineral  region  by  a 
barbarian  race,  ignorant  of  all  the  arts  of  the  ancient 


'  1 


VIII.]  TH£  METALLVRGIC  ARTS:  COPPER.  279 

Mound-Builders  of  the  Mississippi,  and  of  the  miners  of 
Lake  Superior :  certain  it  is  that  the  works  have  been 
abandoned,  leaving  the  quarried  metal,  the  laboriously 
wrought  hammers,  and  the  ingenious  copper  tools^  just 
as  they  may  have  been  left  when  the  shadows  of  the 
evening  told  their  long-forgotten  owners  that  the  labours 
of  the  day  were  at  an  end,  but  for  which  they  never  re- 
turned. Nor  during  the  centuries  which  have  elapsed 
since  the  forest  reclaimed  the  deserted  trenches  for  its 
own,  does  any  trace  seem  to  indicate  that  a  native  popu- 
lation again  sought  to  avail  themselves  of  their  mineral 
treasures,  beyond  the  manufacture  of  such  scattered  frag- 
ments as  lay  upon  the  surface. 


280  FREUISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 


CHAPTER   IX. 

THE  METALLURGIG  ARTS:  ALLOYS. 

The  age  of  bronze  in  the  archaeological  history  of 
European  civilisation  symbolizes  a  transitional  stage  of 
very  partial  development,  and  imperfect  materials  and 
arts,  through  which  the  Old  World  passed  in  its  progress 
towards  the  maturity  of  true  historic  times ;  but  the 
bronze  period  of  the  New  World  is  the  highest  stage  of 
its  self-developed  civilisation,  prior  to  the  intrusion  of  Eu- 
ropean arts.  Whether  we  regard  the  bronze  implements 
of  Britain  and  the  North  of  Europe  as  concomitant  with 
the  intrusion  of  a  new  stock,  or  only  as  proofs  of  the  dis- 
covery or  introduction  of  a  new  art  pregnant  with  many 
civilizing  and  elevating  tendencies,  they  constitute  an 
important  element  in  primitive  ethnology.  For  a  time 
they  necessarily  coincide  with  many  monuments  and 
works  of  art  pertaining  in  character  to  the  stone  period  ; 
just  as  the  stone  implements  and  weapons  still  manufac- 
tured by  the  Indians  and  Esquimaux  are  contemporane- 
ous with  the  intruding  products  of  foreign  metallurgy, 
but  nevertheless  are  the  perpetuation  of  processes  de- 
veloped in  a  period  when  metallurgic  arts  were  entirely 
unknown.  The  evidence  that  the  British  bronze  period 
succeeded  to  that  simpler  and  ruder  one  of  stone  is  such 
as  scarcely  to  admit  of  challenge,  independent  of  the  d 
priori  likelihood  in  favour  of  this  order  of  succession. 
The  question  however  suggests  itself  whether  metallurgy 


IX.]  TUB  M STALL  UR GIC  ARTS :  A  LLOYS.  28 1 

did  not  find  its  natural  beginning  in  the  easy  working 
of  the  virgin  copper,  and  so  intercalate  a  copper  age 
between  Europe's  stone  and  its  true  bronze  period.  On 
this  subject,  Dr.  Latham  remarks,  in  his  Ethnology  of  the 
British  Islands^  "  Copper  is  a  metal  of  which,  in  its 
unalloyed  state,  no  relics  have  been  found  in  England. 
Stone  and  bone  first ;  then  bronze,  or  copper  and  tin 
combined ;  but  no  copper  alone.  I  cannot  get  over  this 
hiatus ;  cannot  imagine  a  metallurgic  industry  beginning 
with  the  use  of  alloys.**  It  is  a  mistake,  however,  to  say 
that  no  unalloyed  British  copper  relics  have  been  foimd. 
No  very  special  attention  has  been  directed  hitherto  to 
the  distinction.  Nearly  all  the  earlier  writers  who  refer 
to  the  metallic  weapons  and  tools  of  ancient  Mexico  and 
Central  America,  apply  the  term  "  copper  *'  to  the  mixed 
metal  of  which  these  were  made ;  while  among  British 
and  European  antiquaries  the  corresponding  relics  of  the 
Old  World  are  no  less  invariably  designated  bronze, 
though  in  many  ca«8  U.UB  tekii  forVnted  wha 
.^.al^  could  L.  detennine.  Itl  an  eL,  however, 
that  the  later  nomenclature  of  archaeological  periods  has 
tended  to  strengthen ;  partiy  from  the  lack  of  appreci- 
atioD  of  the  importance  of  the  argument  thus  suggested 
by  Dr.  Latham.  But  examples  of  British  priiMtive  im- 
plements  of  pure  copper  have  already  been  noted.  In  a 
valuable  paper  by  J.  A.  Phillips,  F.C.S.,  on  the  metals 
and  alloys  known  to  the  ancients,  printed  in  the  4th  vol. 
of  ihe  Memoirs  of  the  Chemical  Society y  the  results  of 
analysis  of  thirty-seven  ancient  coins  and  other  bronzes 
are  given.  Among  these  are  included  three  bronze 
swords,  one  from  the  Thames,  the  others  from  Ireland ; 
a  spear-head,  two  celts,  and  two  axe-heads  ;  all  of  types 
well  known  among  the  weapons  of  the  "  bronze  period.*^ 
Yet  of  these  eight  articles,  selected  as  examples  of 
"  bronze  ^'  weapons,  one  of  them,  the  spear-head,  proved 


282  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

on  analysis  to  be  of  impure  but  unalloyed  copper.  Its 
composition  is  given  as  copper,  99'7l ;  sulphur,  28.  In 
the  Edinburgh  Philosophical  Journal^  of  February  1822, 
there  is  an  account^  from  the  pen  of  Sir  David  Brewster, 
then  one  of  its  editors,  of  a  large  battle-axe  of  pure  cop- 
per, found  at  a  depth  of  twenty  feet  in  Ratho  Bog,  near 
Edinburgh,  under  circumstances  scarcely  less  remarkable 
than  some  of  the  discoveries  of  works  of  art  in  the  drift. 
It  differed  from  all  the  specimens  preserved  in  the  Mu- 
seum of  the  Scottish  Antiquaries.  The  workmen  dug 
down  through  nine  feet  of  moss  and  seven  feet  of  sand, 
before  they  came  to  the  hard  black  tiU-clay ;  and  at  a 
depth  of  four  feet  in  the  clay  the  copper  axe  was  found. 
The  author  accordingly  remarks :  "  It  must  have  been 
deposited  along  with  the  blue  clay  prior  to  the  formation 
of  the  superincumbent  stratum  of  sand,  and  must  have 
existed  before  the  diluvial  operations  by  which  that 
stratum  was  formed.  This  opinion  of  ite  antiquity  is 
strongly  confirmed  by,  the  peculiarity  of  its  shape,  and 
the  nature  of  its  composition."^  When,  in  1850,  my 
brother.  Dr.  George  Wilson,  undertook  a  series  of  ana- 
lyses of  ancient  British  bronzes  for  me,  out  of  seven  spe- 
cimens selected  for  experiment^  one  Scottish  axe-head, 
rudely  caAt>  apparently  in  sand,  was  of  nearly  pure  cop- 
per. The  iron  and  silver  in  it  did  not  amount  together 
to  one  per  cent.,  and  were,  no  doubt,  naturally  present 
in  the  copper.  In  this  case  no  record  was  made  of  the 
fact,  as  the  object  in  view  was  to  compare  quantita- 
tively the  composition  of  different  ancient  bronzes,  in 
order  to  test  the  theory  of  a  supposed  common  source 
of  the  alloy.'  Again,  during  the  past  year,  I  procured, 
through  the  kind  services  of  Mr.  Thomas  Ewbank,  of 
New  York,  eight  specimens  of  metal  implements,  aU 

^  Edinburgh  PhUoaophkdl  Journal^  vol.  vi  p.  357. 
*  Prehistoric  AnnaU  ofSeoUand,  p.  246. 


IX.]  THE  METALLUROIC  ARTS:  ALLOYS.  283 

selected  as  examples  of  Peruvian  bronze ;  but,  on  analy- 
sis, four  of  them  proved  to  be  of  unalloyed  copper.  The 
rich  collections  of  the  Royal  Irish  Academy  furnish  sin- 
gularly interesting  confirmation  to  this  idea  of  a  transi- 
tional copper  era.  Dr.  Wilde  remarks,  in  his  Catalogue 
of  Antiquities,  that  *'upon  careful  examination,  it  has 
been  found  that  thirty  of  the  rudest,  and  apparently  the 
very  oldest  celts,  are  of  red,  almost  unalloyed  copper.'* 
In  addition  to  these  there  are  also  two  battle-axes,  a 
sword-blade,  a  trumpet,  several  fibulae,  and  some  rudely 
formed  tools,  aU  of  copper  ;  and  now  that  attention  has 
been  directed  to  the  subject,  further  examples  of  the 
same  class  will  doubtless  be  noted. 

A  very  important  difierence,  however,  distinguishes  the 
mineral  resources  of  the  British  and  the  North  American 
copper  regions.  The  copper,  as  we  have  seen,  occurs  in 
the  trappean  rocks  of  Keweenaw  and  Ontonagon,  in 
masses  of  many  tons  weight,  and  detached  blocks  of 
various  sizes  lie  scattered  about  in  the  superficial  soil  or 
exposed  along  the  lake  shore,  ready  for  use  without  any 
preparatory  skill,  or  the  slightest  knowledge  of  metal- 
lurgy. Nature  in  her  own  vast  crucibles  had  carried  the 
metal  ores  through  aU  their  preparatory  stages,  and  left 
them  there  for  man  to  shape  into  such  forms  as  his  con- 
venience or  simplest  wants  suggested.  The  native  silver 
had  undergone  the  like  preparation,  and  is  of  frequent 
occurrence  as  a  perfectly  pure  metal,  being  found,  even 
when  interspersed  in  the  mass  of  copper,  still  in  distinct 
crystals,  and  entirely  free  from  alloy  with  it.  But  neither 
tin  nor  zinc  occurs  throughout  the  whole  northern  region 
to  suggest  to  the  native  metallurgist  the  production  of 
that  valuable  alloy  which  is  indissolubly  associated  with 
the  civilisation  of  Europe's  bronze  age.  In  Britain  it  is 
altogether  different.  The  tin  and  copper  lie  together, 
ready  for  alloy,  but  both  occur  in  the  state  of  impure 


284  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

ores,  inviting  and  necessitating  the  development  of 
metallurgy  before  they  can  be  turned  to  economic  uses. 
Tin  is  almost  entirely  obtained  in  Cornwall,  from  its 
peroxide,  and  copper  occurs  there  chiefly  combined  with 
sulphur  and  iron,  forming  the  double  sulphuret  which  is 
commonly  called  copper  pyrites  or  yellow  copper  ore. 
The  smelting  process  to  which  it  has  to  be  subjected  is  a 
laborious  and  complicated  one,  and  if  we  are  prepared  to 
believe  in  the  civilisation  of  Britain's  bronze  period  as  a 
thing  of  native  growth,  the  early  discovery  and  use  of 
alloys  very  slightly  affects  the  question.  The  ancient 
American  miner  of  Lake  Superior  never  learned  to  sub- 
ject  his  wealth  of  copper  to  the  action  of  fire,  and  trans- 
fer it  from  the  crucible  to  the  shapely  mould.  No  such 
process  was  needed  where  it  abounded  in  inexhaustible 
quantities  in  a  pure  metallic  state.  If  he,  in  the  midst 
of  such  readily  available  metallic  resources,  was  found  to 
have  used  tools  of  bronze  or  brass,  to  have  transported 
the  tin  or  zinc  of  other  regions  to  his  furnaces,  and  to 
have  laboriously  converted  the  whole  into  a  preferable 
substitute  for  the  simpler  metal  that  lay  ready  for  his 
use,  it  would  be  difficult  indeed  to  conceive  of  such  as 
the  initial  stage  in  his  metaUurgic  industry.  But  Britain 
presents  no  analogy  to  this  in  its  development  of  metal- 
lurgic  arts.  Tin,  one  of  the  least  widely  diffused  of 
metals,  is  found  there  in  the  greatest  abundance,  and 
easily  accessible,  not  as  a  pure  metal,  but  as  an  ore  which 
is  readily  reduced  by  charcoal  and  a  moderate  degree  of 
heat  to  that  condition.  This  was  the  metallic  wealth  for 
which  Britain  was  sought  by  the  fleets  of  ancient  Phoe- 
nicia, and  on  it  we  may  therefore  assume  her  primitive 
metallurgists  to  have  first  tried  their  simple  arts.  But 
alongside  of  it,  and  even  in  natural  combination  with  it, 
as  in  tin  pyrites  and  the  double  sulphuret,  lies  the  cop- 
per, also,  in  the  condition  of  an  ore,  and  requiiing  the 


IX.]  THE  METALLUROIC  ARTS:  ALLOYS,  285 

application  of  the  metallurgist's  skill  before  it  can  be 
turned  to  account.  We  know  that  at  the  very  dawn  of 
history  tin  was  exported  from  Britain.  Copper  also  ap- 
pears to  have  been  wrought  there  from  very  early  times, 
in  North  Wales  as  well  as  in  Cornwall.  Both  metals 
were  found  rarely,  and  in  small  quantities,  in  a  native 
state,  but  these  may  have  sufficed  to  suggest  the  next 
step  of  supplying  them  in  larger  quantities  from  the  ores. 
To  seek  in  some  unknown  foreign  source  for  the  origin 
of  metallurgic  arts,  which  had  there  all  the  requisite 
elements  for  evoking  them,  is  wholly  gratuitous ;  and,  if 
once  the  native  metallurgist  learned  to  smelt  the  tin  and 
copper  ores,  and  so  had  been  necessitated  to  subject  them 
to  preparatory  processes  of  fire,  the  next  stage  in  pro- 
gressive metallurgy,  the  use  of  alloys,  was  to  him  an 
exceedingly  simple  one.  It  might  further  be  assumed 
that,  with  the  discovery  of  the  valuable  results  arising 
from  the  admixture  of  tin  with  copper,  the  few  pure 
copper  implements — excepting  where  already  deposited 
among  sepulchral  oflferings, — would  for  the  most  part  be 
returned  to  the  melting-pot,  and  reproduced  in  the  more 
perfect  and  useful  condition  of  the  bronze  alloy.  There 
seems,  however,  greater  probability  in  the  supposition 
that  Britain  never  had  a  copper  period,  or  an  age  of 
unalloyed  metals,  other  than  of  the  briefest  and  most 
transitory  character. 

The  cassiteron,  or  tin,  which  made  the  British  Islands 
famous  among  Phoenician  and  Greek  mariners,  long 
before  the  Roman  legions  ventured  to  cross  the  narrow 
seas,  was  derived,  as  has  been  noted,  from  the  same 
south-western  peninsula,  where  rich  veins  of  copper  are 
still  wrought.  The  name  of  Cassiterides,  or  Tin  Islands, 
bestowed  on  Cornwall  and  the  adjacent  isles,  seems  to 
imply  that  the  tin  was  the  chief  export,  and  was  trans- 
ported to  the  great  Mediterranean  ports,  to  be  mixed 


286  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

with  the  copper  of  the  Wady  Maghara^  and  other 
Asiatic  mines,  to  form  the  Egyptian,  Phoenician,  and 
Assyrian  bronze.  Tin,  therefore,  the  easiest  of  all  metals 
to  subject  to  the  requisite  processes,  first  engaged  the 
skill  of  the  ingenious  British  metallurgist ;  and  that 
mastered,  the  proximity  of  the  copper  ore  in  the  same 
mineral  districts,  inevitably  suggests  all  the  subsequent 
processes  of  smelting,  fusion,  and  alloy.  But  Phoenicia 
had  learned  the  value  of  tin,  and  its  application  for  the 
purposes  of  alloy,  before  her  merchantmen  sought  their 
mineral  freight  at  the  remote  seaports  of  Cornwall  and 
Devon.  The  native  Briton  had  also  acquired  his  inde- 
pendent  knowledge  of  it  before  the  Phoenician  trader 
visited  his  shores ;  for  it  is  inconceivable  that  the 
mineral  treasures  of  Cornwall  and  Devon  were  first 
discovered  by  wandering  mariners  from  the  Levant. 
More  probably  their  ores  and  metals  first  reached  the 
Mediterranean  through  Gaul ;  and  the  fame  of  their 
mineral  wealth  tempted  the  commercial  enterprise  of  Tyre 
and  Sidon  to  explore  the  mysteries  of  northern  seas. 

The  practical  value  of  the  alloy  of  copper  and  tin 
was  already  well  known  both  to  the  Phoenician  and 
Egyptian.  Tin  occurs  in  considerable  abundance,  and  in 
the  purest  state,  in  the  peninsula  of  Malacca,  and  thence, 
probably,  it  was  first  brought  to  give  a  new  impetus  to 
early  eastern  civilisation.  Britain  is  its  next  and  its 
most  abundant  source ;  and  since  America  was  embraced 
within  the  world's  sisterhood  of  nations,  Chili  and 
Mexico  have  become  known  as  productive  sources  of 
the  same  useful  metal. 

But  the  mineral  wealth  of  Mexico  and  Peru  was  fami- 
liar to  the  nations  of  the  New  World  long  before  it  was 
made  to  contribute  to  European  commerce  ;  and  to  the 
proximity  of  the  metals  best  suited  for  the  first  stages 
of  human  progress,  may  be  ascribed  in  part  the  curious 


IX.]  TH£  METALLURGIC  ARTS:  ALLOYS,  287 

phases  of  a  native  and  purely  aboriginal  civilisation, 
which  revealed  itself  to  the  wondering  gaze  of  the  first 
European  adventurers  who  followed  in  the  steps  of 
Columbus.  Whatever  doubts  may  arise  relative  to  the 
native  origin  of  British  metallurgy,  and  the  i^^orks  of 
art  of  the  European  bronze  period,  in  consequence  of 
their  most  characteristic  illustrations  being  preserved  in 
the  mixed  metal,  bronze,  and  not  in  pure  copper,  there 
is  no  room  for  any  such  doubts  relative  to  the  primitive 
metallurgy  of  the  New  World.  North  America  appears 
to  have  had  its  two  distinct  and  entirely  independent 
centres  of  self-originated  metallurgic  arts ;  its  greatly 
prolonged  but  slightly  progressive  copper  period ;  and 
apart  from  this,  and  probably,  in  part  at  least,  contem* 
poraneous  with  it,  its  separate  bronze  period,  with  its 
distinct  centres  of  more  advanced  civilisation,  and  better 
regulated  metallurgic  industry,  in  which  the  value  of 
metallic  alloys  was  practically  understood. 

The  great  copper  region  of  North  America,  with  its 
rich  supplies  of  pure  native  metal,  accessible  to  the 
rudest  efforts  of  the  aboriginal  miner,  has  already  been 
fully  described.  It  lies  along  the  shores  of  Lake  Su- 
perior, and  on  its  larger  islands  between  the  46  th  and 
•48  th  parallels  of  north  latitude ;  and  from  thence  its 
metallic  treasures  were  diffused  by  barter  and  primitive 
commercial  exchanges,  throughout  the  whole  vast  regions 
watered  by  the  Mississippi  and  its  tributaries ;  includ- 
ing also  the  Atlantic  states,  and  the  shores  of  the  great 
lakes.  But  southward  and  westward  of  this  great  area 
of  diffusion,  the  Rio  Grande  and  its  tributaries,  with  the 
Bio  Colorado,  drain  a  coimtry  modified  by  very  diverse 
conditions  of  climate,  and  having  a  totally  distinct 
southern  centre  of  metallurgic  wealth  and  civilizing  in- 
fluences. In  this  central  region  of  the  twin  continents  of 
America,  as  well  as  independently  in  the  more  southern 


288  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

tropical  Peru,  a  native  civilisation  had  advanced  a 
considerable  way,  before  it  was  arrested  and  destroyed 
by  the  mercenary  aggressions  of  foreign  intruders.  The 
peculiar  advantages  derivable  from  the  native  proximity 
of  the  distinct  metals  had  been  discovered,  and  metal- 
lurgy had  been  developed  into  the  practical  arts  of  a 
true  American  bronze  period. 

When  Columbus,  during  his  fourth  voyage,  landed  on 
one  of  the  Guanaja  islands,  before  making  the  adjoining 
mainland  of  Honduras,  it  was  visited  by  a  large  trading 
canoe,  the  size  and  freight  of  which  equally  attracted  his 
notice.  It  was  eight  feet  wide,  and  in  magnitude  like 
a  galley,  though  formed  of  the  trunk  of  a  single  tree. 
In  the  centre  a  raised  awning  covered  and  enclosed  a 
cabin,  in  which  sat  a  cacique  with  his  wives  and  chil- 
dren ;  and  twenty -five  rowers  propelled  it  swiftly 
through  the  water.  The  barque  is  believed  to  have 
come  from  the  province  of  Yucatan,  then  about  forty 
leagues  distant,  through  a  sea  the  stormy  violence  of 
which  had  daunted  the  most  hardy  Spanish  seamen.  It 
was  filled  with  a  great  variety  of  articles  of  manufacture, 
and  of  the  natural  produce  of  the  neighbouring  con- 
tinent ;  and  among  them  Herrara  specifies  "  small 
hatchets,  made  of  copper,  small  bells  and  plates,  crucibles 
to  melt  coppeVy  etc.'*  Here,  at  length,  was  the  true 
answer  to  that  prophetic  faith  which  upheld  the  great 
discoverer,  when,  peering  through  the  darkness,  the  New 
World  revealed  itself  to  his  eye  in  the  glimmering 
torch,  which  told  him  of  an  unseen  land  inhabited  by 
man.  Here  was  evidence  of  the  intelligent  service  of 
fire.  Well  indeed  might  it  have  been  for  Columbus  had 
he  been  obedient  to  the  voice  that  thus  directed  his 
way.  All  the  accompaniments  of  the  voyagers  fur- 
nished evidence  of  civilisation.  They  were  clothed  with 
cotton  mantles.     Their  bread  was  made  of  the  Indian 


IX.]  THE  METALLURGIC  ARTS:  ALLOYS.  289 

com,  and  from  it  ako  they  had  brewed  a  beverage  re- 
sembHng  beer.  They  informed  Columbus  that  they  had 
juBt  amved  from  a  country,  rich,  populous,  and  indus- 
trious,  situated  to  the  west,  and  urged  him  to  steer  in 
that  direction.  But  his  mind  was  bent  on  the  discoveiy 
of  the  imaginary  strait  that  was  to  lead  him  directly 
into  the  Indian  seas.  "  Well  would  it  have  been  for 
Columbus,"  exclaims  Washington  Irving,  "  had  he  fol- 
lowed their  advice.  Within  a  day  or  two  he  would 
have  arrived  at  Yucatan ;  the  discovery  of  Mexico,  and 
the  other  opulent  countries  of  New  Spain,  would  have 
necessarily  followed ;  the  Southern  Ocean  would  have 
been  disclosed  to  him,  and  a  succession  of  splendid  dis- 
coveries would  have  shed  fresh  glory  on  his  declining 
age,  itistead  of  its  sinking  amidst  gloom,  neglect,  and 
disappointment.'^  Not  Columbus's  own  future,  indeed, 
but  the  whole  future  of  the  New  World  might  have  been 
changed.     But  it  was  not  so  to  be. 

When  at  length  the  mainland  was  reached,  the  abun- 
dance and  extensive  use  of  the  metals  became  speedily 
apparent ;  and  as  further  discoveries  brought  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  Spaniards  the  opulent  and  civilized 
countries  of  Yucatan,  Mexico,  and  Peru,  which  the  pro- 
ject of  reaching  the  Asiatic  mainland  had  prevented 
Columbus  from  discovering,  they  were  more  and  more 
astonished  by  the  native  metallic  wealth.  When  the 
Spaniards  first  entered  the  province  of  Tuspan,  they 
mistook  the  bright  copper  or  bronze  axes  of  the  natives 
for  gold,  and  were  greatly  mortified  after  having  accu- 
mulated them  in  considerable  numbers  to  discover  the 
mistake  they  had  made.  Bemal  Diaz  narrates  that 
"  each  Indian  had,  besides  his  ornaments  of  gold,  a 
copper  axe,  which  was  very  highly  polished,  with  the 
handle  curiously  carved,  as  if  to  serve  equally  for  an 
ornament  as  for  the  field  of  battle.     We  first  thought 

VOL.  I.  T 


290  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

these  axes  were  made  of  an  inferior  kind  of  gold ;  we 
therefore  commenced  taking  them  in  exchange,  and  in 
the  space  of  two  days  had  collected  more  than  six 
hundred ;  with  which  we  were  no  less  rejoiced,  as  long 
as  we  were  ignorant  of  their  real  value,  than  the  Indians 
with  our  glass  beads/' 

In  the  form  of  copper  wedges  or  axes^  as  we  learn 
from  the  ancient  Mexican  paintings,  the  tribute  due  by 
certain  provinces  of  the  Mexican  empire  was  paid  ;  and 
Dupaix  describes  and  figures  examples  of  a  deposit  of 
two  hundred  and  seventy-six  axe-heads,  cast  of  alloyed 
copper,  such  as,  he  observes,  "  are  much  sought  by  the 
silversmiths  on  account  of  their  fine  alloy."  The  forms 
of  these,  as  well  as  of  the  chisels  and  other  tools  of 
bronze,  are  exceedingly  simple,  and  indicate  no  great 
ingenuity  in  adapting  the  moulded  metal  to  the  more 
perfect  accomplishment  of  the  artificer's  or  the  com- 
batant's requirements  than  had  been  done  in  the  ruder 
implements  and  weapons  of  stone.  The  methods  of 
hafting  the  axe-blade,  as  illustrated  by  the  ancient 
Mexican  paintings,  are  all  of  the  same  rude  description 
as  are  employed  by  the  modem  savage  in  fitting  a 
handle  to  his  hatchet  of  flint  or  stone  ;  and,  indeed,  the 
whole  characteristics  of  the  metallurgic  and  artistic  in- 
genuity of  Mexico  and  Peru  are  suggestive  of  a  civilisa- 
tion very  partially  developed  ;  though,  from  the  nature 
of  Peruvian  institutions,  the  civilisation  of  Peru,  like 
that  of  China,  may  have  been  in  existence,  with  very 
slight  and  intermittent  manifestations  of  progress,  during 
many  centuries.  It  was  indeed,  in  many  respects,  the 
early  transitional  bronze  period  of  the  New  World,  in 
which  not  only  the  rude  arts  of  the  elder  stone  period 
had  been  very  partially  superseded  or  modified  by  metal- 
lurgic influences,  but  in  which  the  stone  axe,  the  sword, 
or  mahgiiahuitl,  made  of  wood,  with  blades  of  obsidian 


IX.]  TEE  METALLURGIG  ARTS:  ALLOYS,  291 

inserted  along  its  edge,  the  flint  or  obsidian  arrow-head 
and  the  stone  hatchets  and  other  weapons,  were  in  com- 
mon use,  along  with  those  of  metal.  Yet  also,  along 
with  such  traces  of  the  rudest  primitive  arts,  remarkable 
progress  had  been  made  in  some  directions.  Humboldt 
remarks,  in  his  Vues  des  GordilUres^  on  the  surprising 
dexterity  shown  by  the  Peruvians  in  cutting  the  hardest 
stones  :  "  At  Canar,  we  find  carved  grooves  hollowed  in 
the  porphjrry,  to  supply  the  want  of  hinges  to  the  doors. 
La  Condamine  and  Bouguer  saw,  in  old  edifices  built  in 
the  time  of  the  Incas,  ornaments  of  porphyry  repre- 
senting the  muzzles  of  animals,  in  the  perforated  nostrils 
of  which  were  movable  rings  of  the  same  stone.  When 
I  crossed  the  Cordillera  by  the  Paramo  of  Assuay,  and 
saw  the  enormous  masses  of  stone  extracted  from  the 
porphyry  quarries  of  Pullal,  employed  in  constructing 
the  high  roads  of  the  Inca,  I  already  began  to  doubt 
whether  the  Peruvians  were  not  acquainted  with  other 
tools  besides  hatchets  of  fiint.  I  suspected  that  grinding 
was  not  the  only  method  they  had  employed  to  smooth 
the  stones,  or  give  them  a  regular  and  uniform  convexity; 
and  I  then  adopted  an  opinion  contrary  to  the  ideas 
generally  received.  I  conjectured  that  the  Peruvians 
had  tools  of  copper,  which,  mixed  with  a  certain  propor- 
tion of  tin,  acquires  great  hardness.  This  conjecture  has 
been  justified  by  the  discovery  of  an  ancient  Peruvian 
chisel,  found  at  Vilcabamba,  near  Cuzco,  in  a  silver  mine 
worked  in  the  time  of  the  Incas.  This  valuable  instru- 
ment, for  which  I  am  indebted  to  the  friendship  of  the 
Padre  Narcisse  Gilbar,  is  four  and  seven-tenth  inches 
long,  and  four-fifths  of  an '  inch  broad.  The  metal  of 
which  it  is  composed  has  been  analysed  by  M.  Vau- 
quelin,  who  found  in  it  0'94  of  copper,  and  0*06  of  tin.'' 
Unfortunately,  the  nature  and  composition  of  Mexican 
and  Peruvian  bronzes  have  hitherto  attracted  so  little 


292  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

attention,  that  it  is  impossible  to  obtain  many  accurate 
records  of  analyses,  or  to  procure  specimens  to  submit  to 
chemical  tests.  Dr.  J.  H.  Gibbon,  of  the  United  States 
Mint,  has  favoured  me  with  the  analysis  of  another 
chisel  or  crow-bar,  brought  from  the  neighbourhood  of 
Cuzco  by  his  son,  Lieutenant  Lardner  Gibbon,  who 
formed  one  of  the  members  of  the  Amazon  Expedition. 
Through  the  kind  services  of  Mr.  Thomas  Ewbank,  of 
the  American  Ethnological  Society,  I  have  also  obtained 
in  addition  to  results  determined  by  himself,  eight  spe- 
cimens of  Peruvian  implements,  though  only  a  portion 
of  these  proved  to  be  formed  of  metallic  alloys.  They 
were  submitted  to  careful  analysis  by  my  colleague, 
Professor  Henry  Croft,  and  the  results  in  reference  to 
the  bronzes  are  given  on  a  subsequent  page.^  Mr. 
Squier,  in  the  Appendix  to  his  A  horiginal  Monuments 
of  the  State  of  New  York,  gives  an  engraving  of  an 
implement,  somewhat  of  the  shape  of  a  shoemakers 
paring-knife,  which  was  found,  with  various  other  Peru- 
vian knives  and  chisels,  about  the  person  of  a  mummy, 
taken  by  Mr.  J.  H.  Blake,  of  Boston,  from  an  ancient 
cemetery  near  Arica.  On  analysis,  it  proved  to  contain 
about  four  per  cent,  of  tin.  Having  enjoyed  opportu- 
nities of  inspecting  the  valuable  collection  of  antiquities 
brought  by  Mr.  Blake  from  Peru,  including  a  variety  of 
bronze  implements,  he  has  favoured  me  with  the  fol- 
lowing results  of  his  investigations  in  this  department 
of  the  subject  : — "  Many  years  ago,  I  made  a  series  of 
analyses  of  bronze  instruments,  knives,  chisels,  hoes,  etc., 
which  I  found  in  ancient  cemeteries  in  Peru  in  con- 
nexion with  embalmed  bodies.  I  have  not  been  able 
to  find  my  notes  made  at  the  time ;  but  I  know  that 
they  consisted  of  copper  and  tin  only,  and  that  the 
proportion  of  the  latter  varied  from  upwards  of  two  to 

*  Analyses  of  Ancient  American  Bronzes,  p.  312. 


IX.]  THE  METALLURGIC  ARTS:  ALLOYS,  293 

four  per  cent.  After  receiving  yoi»r  last  letter,  I  maxie 
an  analysis  of  a  small  knife  found  by  me,  with  many 
other  articles,  with  the  body  of  a  man,  in  the  ancient 
cemetery  near  Arica,  in  South  Peru.  The  handle  is  of 
the  same  metal  as  the  blade,  and  at  right  angles  with 
it,  being  joined  at  the  middle.  The  end  is  fashioned  to 
represent  the  head  of  a  llama.  On  analysis,  the  compo- 
sition proves  to  be  :  Copper,  97*87  ;  tin,  2'13.''  Dr. 
C.  T.  Jackson  communicated  another  analysis  of  a 
"  Chilian  bronze  instrument,  probably  a  crowbar,"  to 
the  Boston  Natural  History  Society.  It  contained  7*615 
parts  of  tin,  and  is  described  by  him  as  a  bronze,  well 
adapted  for  such  instruments  as  were  to  be  hammer- 
hardened.^  The  general  result  of  the  whole  is  to  indicate 
a  variable  range  of  the  tin  alloy,  from  2*13  to  7*615  per 
cent.  ;  which,  in  so  far  as  any  general  inference  can  be 
drawn  from  so  small  a  number  of  examples,  shows  a 
greatly  more  indeterminate  and  partially  developed 
metallurgy  than  the  analyses  of  primitive  European 
bronzes  have  disclosed. 

Such  is  all  the  evidence  I  have  been  able  to  obtain 
relative  to  the  composition  of  Peruvian  alloys,  and  the 
progress  indicated  thereby  in  scientific  metallurgy.  It 
is  altogether  insufficient  for  any  positive  generalization  ; 
but,  so  far  as  it  goes,  it  fully  accords  with  thie  ideas 
otherwise  formed  of  the  Peruvians  as  a  people  who  had 
discovered  for  themselves  the  rudiments  of  civilisation, 
but  who  had  as  yet  very  partially  attained  to  any 
mastery  of  the  arts  which  have  been  matured  in  modem 
centuries  for  Europe.  This  accords  with  the  description 
furnished  by  Dr.  Tschudi  of  some  of  the  metallurgic 
processes  stiU  practised  in  Peru.  "  The  Cordillera,  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Yauli,''  he  remarks,  "  is  exceedingly 
rich  in  lead  ore,  containing  silver.     Within  the  circuit 

1  Proceedings,  B.  N.  H.  S.,  vol.  v.  p.  63. 


294  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

of  a  few  miles  above  eight  hundred  shafts  have  been 
made,  but  they  have  not  been  found  sufficiently  pro- 
ductive to  encourage  extensive  mining  works.  The 
difficulties  which  impede  mine-working  in  these  parts 
are  caused  chiefly  by  the  deamess  of  labour  and  the 
scarcity  of  fuel  There  being  a  total  want  of  wood, 
the  only  fuel  that  can  be  obtained  consists  of  the  dried 
dung  of  sheep,  Uamas,  and  huanacus.  This  fuel  is  called 
taquia.  It  produces  a  very  brisk  and  intense  flame, 
and  most  of  the  mine-owners  prefer  it  to  coal.  The 
process  of  smelting,  as  practised  by  the  Indians,  though 
extremely  rude  and  imperfect,  is  nevertheless  adapted 
to  local  circumstances.  All  European  attempts  to  im- 
prove the  system  of  smelting  in  these  districts  have 
either  totally  failed,  or  in  their  results  have  proved  less 
efiective  than  the  simple  Indian  niethod.  The  Indian 
furnaces  can,  moreover,  be  easily  erected  in  the  vicinity 
of  the  mines,  and  when  the  metal  is  not  very  abundant 
the  furnaces  may  be  abandoned  without  any  great  sacri- 
fice. For  the  price  of  one  European  furnace  the  Indians 
may  build  more  than  a  dozen,  in  each  of  which,  not- 
withstanding the  paucity  of  fuel,  a  considerably  greater 
quantity  of  metal  may  be  smelted  than  in  one  of 
European  construction/'  At  the  village  of  Yauli,  near 
the  mines  referred  to,  situated  at  an  elevation  of  13,100 
feet  above  the  sea,  from  twelve  to  fourteen  thousand 
Indians  are  congregated  together,  chiefly  engaged  in 
mining,  after  the  fashion  handed  down  to  them  from 
generations  before  the  Conquest.  Their  processes  entirely 
correspond  with  the  imperfect  results  disclosed  by  the 
analysis  of  native  alloys  ;  as  well  as  by  the  proofs 
afibrded,  on  the  same  evidence,  that  the  Peruvian  me- 
tallurgist was  accustomed  to  work  the  native  copper 
into  his  simpler  tools  and  personal  ornaments,  very  much 
in  the  same  fashion  as  the  ancient  mechanician  of  the 


IX.]  THE  METALLURGIG  ARTS:  ALLOYS.  295 

Ohio  valley,  to  whom  the  processes  of  smelting  and 
alloying  were  wholly  unknown. 

The  contrast  which  the  civilisation  alike  of  Mexico 
and  Peru  presents,  when  compared  with  the  highest  arts 
pertaining  to  any  of  the  tribes  of  North  America,  is  well 
calculated  to  excite  surprise  and  admiration.  But  the 
wonder  of  the  Spanish  conquerors  at  their  gems  and  gold, 
the  ready  credulity  of  the  missionary  priests  in  their 
anxiety  to  magnify  the  gorgeous  paganism  which  they 
had  overthrown,  and  the  patriotic  exaggeration  of  later 
chroniclers  of  native  descent,  have  all  tended  to  over- 
draw the  picture  of  the  beneficent  civilized  despotism  of 
the  Incas  of  Peru ;  or  the  crueller  but  not  less  magnifi- 
cent rule  of  the  Emperors  of  Mexico.  With  a  willing 
credulity  Spanish  historians  perpetuated  what  the  Peru- 
vian GarcUasso  and  the  Mexican  Ixtlilxochitl  related,  in 
their  adaptations  of  native  history  and  traditions  to 
European  conceptions.  Eeligious,  political,  and  social 
analogies  to  European  ideas  and  institutions,  accordingly, 
strike  the  modem  student  with  wonder  and  admiration  ; 
nor  has  the  gifted  author  of  the  Conquests  of  Mexico  and 
Peru  always  sufficiently  discriminated  between  the  glow- 
ing romances  begot  by  an  alliance  between  the  barbarous 
magnificence  of  a  rude  native  despotism  and  the  asso- 
ciated ideas  of  European  institutions.  The  metallic 
treasures  of  the  palaces  and  the  temples  of  the  Incas  of 
Peru  are  probably  not  exaggerated  ;  and  if  so,  the  pre- 
cious metals  with  which  they  were  adorned  would  have 
been  the  index  in  any  European  capital  of  a  wealth  suf- 
ficient to  employ  the  merchant-navies  of  Venice,  Holland, 
or  England  in  the  commerce  of  the  world.  But  in  Peru 
this  was  the  mere  evidence  of  the  abundance  of  the  pre- 
cious metals  in  a  country  where  they  were  as  little  the 
representatives  of  a  commercial  cmTency  as  the  feathers 
of  the  coraquenque,  which  were  reserved  exclusively  for 


296  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

the  decoration  of  royalty.  The  Peruvians  occupied  a 
long  extent  of  sea-coast,  but  no  commercial  enterprise 
tempted  them  to  launch  their  navies  on  the  Pacific,  ex- 
ceptiBg  for  the  most  partial  coasting  transit.  The  gr^t 
mass  of  the  people  patiently  wrought  to  produce  from 
their  varied  tropical  climates  and  fertile  soil  the  agricul- 
tural produce  on  which  the  entire  community  depended ; 
resembling  in  this — ^as^  well  as  in  their  vast  structures 
wrought  by  a  patiently  submissive  people  at  the  will  of 
their  absolute  rulers, — the  great  oriental  despotisms  when 
in  their  earUest  and  crudest,  yet  least  licentious  forms. 
Their  own  traditions  traced  the  dawn  of  their  govern- 
ment no  further  back  than  the  twelfth  century ;  and 
the  whole  characteristics  of  their  very  imperfect  and 
unequally  developed  civilisation  confirm  the  inference 
that  they  have  not  in  this  respect  departed  from  the 
invariable  tendency  of  historic  myth  and  tradition  to 
exaggerate  the  national  age.  Prescott  refers  to  extensive 
ruins  still  existing  on  the  shores  of  Lake  Titicaca,  which 
the  Peruvians  affirm  to  have  existed  before  the  Incas 
arrived.  But  what  value  can  be  attached  to  the  tradi- 
tions of  an  unlettered  people  relative  to  structures  or 
events  of  any  kind  dating  four  or  five  centuries  back  ? 
The  authority  of  Bede  is  held  as  of  little  value  relative 
to  the  Jute  or  Anglo-Saxon  colonization  less  than  three 
centuries  before  his  time ;  and  the  modem  New  Eng- 
lander,  with  deeds  and  parchments,  as  well  as  abundance 
of  printed  history  to  help  his  tradition,  cannot  make  up 
his  mind  as  to  whether  the  famous  Newport  Round 
Tower  was  built  by  a  Norse  viking  of  the  eleventh  cen- 
tury or  a  New  England  miller  of  the  seventeenth  century. 
"  No  account,''  says  Prescott,  "  assigns  to  the  Inca  djmasty 
more  than  thirteen  princes  before  the  Conquest.  But  this 
number  is  altogether  too  small  to  have  spread  over  four 
hundred  years,  and  would  not  carry  back  the  foundations 


IX.]  THE  METALLURGIC  ARTS:  ALLOYS,  297 

• 

of  the  monarchy,  on  any  probable  computation,  beyond 
two  centuries  and  a  half — an  antiquity  not  incredible  in 
itself,  and  which,  it  may  be  remarked,  does  not  precede 
by  more  than  half  a  century  the  alleged  foundation  of 
the  capital  of  Mexico."  Humboldt,  in  his  Vues  des  Cor- 
dillires,  indicates  the  borders  of  the  Lake  Titicaca,  the 
district  of  Callao,  and  the  high  plains  of  Tiahuanaco,  as 
the  theatre  of  ancient  American  civilisation ;  and  Pres- 
cott,  in  view  of  the  apparently  recent  origin  of  the  Incas, 
assumes  that  they  were  preceded  in  Peru  by  a  race  ad- 
vanced in  civilisation,  which,  in  conformity  with  native 
traditions,  he  would  derive  from  this  same  cradle-land  of 
South  American  civilisation  around  the  deserted  shores 
of  Lake  Titicaca.  Beyond  this,  however,  he  does  not 
attempt  to  penetrate  into  that  unchronicled  past.  Who 
this  people  were,  and  whence  they  came,  may  aflFord  a 
tempting  theme  for  inquiry  to  the  speculative  antiquarian. 
But  it  is  a  land  of  darkness  that  lies  far  beyond  the 
domain  of  history.  The  same  mists  that  hang  round  the 
origin  of  the  Incas  continue  to  settle  on  their  subsequent 
annals  ;  and  so  imperfect  were  the  records  employed  by 
the  Peruvians,  and  so  confused  and  contradictory  their 
traditions,  that  the  historian  finds  no  firm  footing  on 
which  to  stand  till  within  a  century  of  the  Spanish 
conquest. 

In  reality  only  a  very  small  portion  of  what  is  called 
Peruvian  histoiy  prior  to  that  conquest  can  be  regarded 
as  anjrthing  but  a  historical  romance  ;  and  the  exagge- 
rated conceptions  relative  to  the  completeness  and  con- 
sistent development  alike  of  Peruvian  and  Mexican 
native  civilisation,  are  based  on  the  old  axiom  which  has 
so  often  misled  the  archaeologist,  ex  pede  fferciilem. 

Viewed,  however,  without  exaggeration,  the  progress 
already  attained  in  mechanical  skill  and  artistic  ingenuity 
by  both  of  the  semi-civilized  American  nations,  is  very 


298  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

remarkable.  The  huacas  or  tombs  of  the  Incas^  and 
also  their  royal  and  other  depositories  of  treasure,  have 
disclosed  many  specimens  of  curious  and  elaborate 
metallurgic  skill :  bracelets,  collars^  and  other  personal 
ornaments  of  gold,  vases  of  the  same  abundant  precious 
metal,  and  also  of  silver ;  mirrors  of  burnished  silver,  as 
well  as  of  a  hard  and  highly-polished  stone ;  finely 
adjusted  balances  made  in  silver ;  and  numerous  com- 
moner articles  of  copper,  or  of  the  more  useful  alloy  of 
copper  and  tin,  of  which  their  tools  were  chiefly  made. 

The  Peruvian  mining  operations  fully  accorded  with 
the  partial  development  of  their  civilisation  in  other 
respects.  "  GU)ld,*'  says  Prescott,  "  was  gathered  by  the 
Incas  from  the  deposits  of  the  streams.  They  extracted 
the  ore  also  in  considerable  quantities  from  the  valley  of 
Curimayo,  north-east  of  Caxamaxca,  as  weU  as  from  other 
places ;  and  the  silver  mines  *  of  Porco,  in  particular, 
yielded  them  considerable  returns.  Yet  they  did  not 
attempt  to  penetrate  the  bowels  of  the  earth  by  sinking 
a  shaft,  but  simply  excavated  a  cavern  in  the  steep  sides 
of  the  mountain,  or  at  most  opened  a  horizontal  vein  of 
moderate  depth.  They  were  equally  deficient  in  the 
knowledge  of  the  best  means  of  detaching  the  precious 
metal  from  the  dross  with  which  it  was  united,  and  had 
no  idea  of  the  virtues  of  quicksilver — a  mineral  not  rare 
in  Peru, — as  an  amalgam  to  effect  this  decomposition. 
Their  method  of  smelting  the  ore  was  by  means  of  fur- 
naces built  in  elevated  and  exposed  situations,  where 
they  might  be  fanned  by  the  strong  breezes  of  the  moun- 
tains. The  subjects  of  the  Incas,  in  short,  with  all  their 
patient  perseverance,  did  little  more  than  penetrate  below 
the  crust,  the  outer  rind  as  it  were,  formed  over  those 
golden  caverns  which  lie  hidden  in  the  dark  depths  of  the 
Andes.'^^     To  the  famous  Cordillera  of  the  Andes,  with 

1  Conquest  of  Peru ^  book  i.  chap.  v. 


IX.]  THE  METALLURGIG  ARTS:  ALLOTS.  299 

its  golden  treasures,  the  Peruvians  are  believed  to  have 
given  their  name  of  Andes,  from  the  native  word  anta^ 
copper.  With  this  metal  they  also  aboimd ;  and  while 
their  golden  treasures  served  to  enkindle  with  a  useless 
blaze  of  barbaric  gold  their  temples  and  palace-haUs,  the 
metallurgic  skill  which  had  already  taught  them  to 
harden  the  abundant  copper  with  its  tin  alloy,  is  the 
most  promising  index  of  their  immature  civilisation. 

But  whUe  the  arts  of  civilisation  were  thus  being 
fostered  on  that  southern  plateau  of  the  Andes ;  appa- 
rently in  total  independence  of  all  that  the  institutions 
and  the  policy  of  the  Incas  had  achieved,  another  seat 
of  native  American  civilisation  had  been  founded  on  the 
corresponding  plateau  of  the  northern  continent,  and 
the  Aztecs  were  buUding  up  an  empire  even  more 
marvellous  than  that  of  the  Incas.  The  site  of  the 
latter  is  among  the  most  remarkable  of  all  the  scenes 
consecrated  to  memories  of  the  birth  of  civilisation.  On 
the  lofty  table-land  which  lies  between  the  Gulf  of 
Mexico  and  the  Pacific  Ocean,  at  an  elevation  of  nearly 
seven  thousand  five  hundred  feet,  the  valley  of  Mexico 
lies  engirdled  by  its  ramparts  of  porphyritic  rock,  like  a 
vast  fortress  provided  by  nature  for  guarding  the  in- 
fancy of  American  native  civilisation.  Here  was  the 
scene  of  the  half-mythical  heroic  age  of  Toltec  Art, 
where  the  foundations  of  all  later  progress  were  laid, 
and  architecture  achieved  its  earliest  triumphs  in  the 
New  World  on  the  temples  and  towers  of  Tula,  the 
ruined  remains  of  which  attracted  the  attention  of  the 
Spaniards  at  the  time  of  the  Conquest.  But  the  history 
of  the  Toltecs  and  their  ruined  edifices  stands  on  the 
border  lines  of  romance  and  fable,  like  that  of  the  Druid 
builders  of  Camac  and  Avebury.  To  them,  according 
to  tradition  and  such  historical  evidence  as  is  accessible, 
succeeded  their  Aztec  or  Mexican   supplanters,  along 


300  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

with  the  AcolhuanSy  or  Tezcucans,  as  they  were  latterly 
called  from  their  capital  Tezcuco.  On  the  opposite 
shores  of  the  same  Mexican  lake,  the  largest  of  five 
inland  waters  that  diversified  the  surface  of  that  great 
table-land  valley,  stood  Tezcuco  and  Mexico,  the  capitals 
of  the  two  most  important  states  within  which  the 
native  civilisation  of  the  North  American  continent 
developed  itself.  Prom  the  older  Toltecans^  the  en- 
ctroaching  Tezcucans  are  believed  to  have  derived  the 
germs  of  that  civilisation,  which  is  best  known  to  us 
in  connexion  with  the  true  Aztec  or  Mexican  state. 
Legends  of  the  golden  age  and  heroic  races  of  Anahuac 
abound,  and  have  been  rendered  into  their  least  extrava- 
gant forms  by  the  patriotic  zeal  of  Ixtlilxochitl,  a  lineal 
descendant  of  the  royal  line  of  Tezcuco.  But  the  true 
Mexicans  are  acknowledged  to  be  of  recent  origin,  and 
the  founding  of  Mexico — with  rites  as  rude  and  primi- 
tive as  those  of  the  Veneti  refugees  when  inaugurating 
the  Queen  of  the  Adriatic, — ^is  assigned  to  a.d.  1326. 
But  the  founders  of  Tenochtitlan,  as  the  new  capital  was 
called,  were  a  vigorous,  enterprising,  and  ferocious  race. 
The  later  name  of  Mexico  was  derived  from  the  Aztec 
war-god  Mexitli,  whose  favours  to  his  Aztec  votaries 
enabled  them  to  buUd  up  a  powerful  state  by  conquest, 
to  enrich  themselves  with  spoU,  and  to  replace  the  rude 
fabrics  of  their  city's  founders  with  substantial  and 
ornate  structures  of  stone. 

Whatever  gloze  of  mild  paternal  absolutism  may 
linger  around  our  conceptions  of  the  prehistoric  chron- 
icles of  Peru,  a  clearer  light  illuminates  the  harsh  reali- 
ties of  Mexican  sovereignty.  The  god  of  war  was  the 
supreme  deity  of  the  Aztecs,  worshipped  with  hideous 
rites  of  blood.  Their  civil  and  military  codes,  according 
to  the  narrative  of  their  conquerors,  were  alike  cruel 
as  that  of  Draco  ;    and  their  religious  worship  was  a 


IX.]  THE  METALLURGIC  ARTS:  ALLOYS,  301 

system  of  austere  fanaticism,  and  loathsome  butchery 
and  cannibalism,  which  seemed  to  refine  the  merciless 
cruelties  of  the  Ked  Indian  savage  into  a  ritual  service 
fit  only  for  the  devil.  But  besides  their  hideous  war- 
god,  the  Mexican  mythology  was  graced  by  a  beneficent 
divinity,  Quetzalcoatl,  the  instructor  of  the  Aztecs  in 
the  use  of  metals,  in  agriculture,  and  in  the  arts  of 
government.  This  and  similar  elements  of  Mexican 
mythology  have  been  regarded  by  Prescott  and  others 
as  the  traces  of  a  milder  faith  inherited  by  the  Mexicans 
from  their  Toltecan  predecessors,  and  on  which  they 
engrafted  their  own  incongruous  creed  of  unmitigated 
ferocity.  This  idea  is  one  supported  by  many  proba- 
bilities, as  well  as  by  some  evidence.  The  early  history 
of  the  Northmen,  however,  in  which  we  witness  the 
blending  of  that  rich  poetic  fancy  wherein  lay  the  germ 
of  later  Norman  romance  and  chivalry,  with  cruelties 
pertaining  to  a  creed  little  less  bloody  than  that  of  the 
Mexican  warrior,  shows  that  no  such  theory  is  needed 
to  account  for  the  incongruities  of  the  religious  system 
of  the  Aztecs.  In  truth,  the  ferocity  of  a  semi-barbarous 
people  is  often  nothing  more  than  its  perverted  excess 
of  energy ;  and — as  has  been  already  noted  in  reference 
to  the  Caribs, — is  more  easily  dealt  with,  and  turned 
into  healthful  and  beneficent  action,  than  the  cowardly 
craft  of  the  docile  slave.  It  is  only  when  such  hideous 
rites  are  consciously  engrafted  on  the  usages  of  a  people 
already  far  in  advance  of  such  a  semi-barbarous  child- 
hood— as  in  the  Spanish  adoption  of  the  Inquisition  at 
the  commencement  of  its  modem  history, — that  they 
prove  utterly  baneful,  because  the  nation  is  already  past 
that  stage  of  progress  in  which  it  would  naturally  out- 
grow them. 

Hideous,  therefore,  as  were  the  human  sacrifices,  with 
their  annual  thousands  of  victims,  the  offerings  of  in- 


302  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

fants  to  propitiate  Tlaloc,  their  rain-god,  and  the  loath- 
some banquets  on  the  bodies  of  their  sacrificed  victims, 
— ^if  indeed  this  be  not  an  exaggeration  of  Spanish  cre- 
dulity and  fanaticism, — it  is  nevertheless  difficult  to 
concur  in  the  verdict  of  the  gifted  historian  of  The  Con- 
quest  of  Mexico^  that  "  it  was  beneficently  ordered  by 
Providence  that  the  land  should  be  delivered  over  to 
another  race  who  would  rescue  it  fix)m  the  brutish  super- 
stitions that  daily  extended  wider  and  wider,  with  extent 
of  empire."  The  rule  of  the  conquerors,  with  their 
Dominican  ministers  of  religion,  was  no  beneficent  sway ; 
and  its  fruits  in  later  times  have  not  proved  of  such 
value  as  to  reconcile  the  student  of  that  strange  old 
native  civilisation  of  the  votaries  of  Quetzalcoatl,  to 
its  abrupt  arrestment  at  a  stage  which  can  only  be 
paralleled  by  the  earliest  centuries  of  Egyptian  pro- 
gress. 

Both  mining  operations  and  metaUurgic  arts  were 
carried  further  by  t^^e  Mexicans  than  by  Se  Peruvians. 
SUver,  lead,  and  tin  were  obtained  from  the  mines  of 
Tasco,  and  copper  was  wrought  in  the  mountains  of 
ZacotoUan,  by  means  of  galleries  and  shafts  opened  with 
persevering  toil  where  the  metallic  veins  were  embedded 
in  the  solid  rock ;  and  there,  as  at  the  Lake  Superior 
copper  regions,  the  traces  of  such  ancient  mining  have 
proved  the  best  guides  to  the  modem  searchers  for  the 
ores.  The  arts  of  casting,  engraving,  chasing,  and  carv- 
ing  in  metal  were  all  practised  with  great  skill.  Vessels 
both  of  gold  and  silver  were  wrought  of  enormous  size  : 
so  large,  it  is  said,  that  a  man  could  not  encircle  them 
with  his  arms ;  and  the  abundant  gold  was  as  lavishly 
employed  in  Mexico  as  in  Peru,  in  the  gorgeous  adorn- 
ment of  temples  and  palaces.  Ingenious  toys,  birds  and 
beasts  with  movable  wings  and  limbs,  fish  with  alter- 
nate scales  of  silver  and  gold,  and  personal  ornaments 


IX.]  THE  METALLUROIG  ARTS:  ALLOYS,  303 

in  great  variety,  were  wrouglit  by  the  Mexican  gold- 
smiths of  the  same  precious  metal,  with  such  curious 
art,  that  the  Spaniards  acknowledged  the  superiority 
of  the  native  workmanship  over  anything  they  could 
achieve.  When  Cortes  first  entered  the  capital  of  Mon- 
tezuma in  1519,  the  Mexican  Emperor  received  him  in 
the  palace  built  by  his  father  Axayacatl,  and  hung  round 
his  neck  a  decoration  of  the  finest  Mexican  workmanship. 
The  shell  of  a  species  of  craw-fish,  set  in  gold,  formed 
the  centre,  and  massive  links  of  gold  completed  the 
collar,  from  which  depended  eight  ornaments  of  the  same 
metal,  and  of  delicate- workmanship,  wrought  in  imita- 
tion of  the  prized  shell-fish. 

The  arts  thus  practised  on  the  great  plateau  extended 
to  the  most  southern  limits  of  the  North  American  con- 
tinent. The  huacas,  or  ancient  graves  of  the  Isthmus  of 
Panama,  have  been  ransacked  by  thousands  in  recent 
years,  from  the  temptation  which  the  gold  relics  they 
contain  held  out  to  their  explorers.  These  include  re- 
presentations of  beasts,  birds,  and  fishes,  fi'ogs,  and  other 
objects,  imitated  firom  nature,  often  with  great  skill  and 
ingenuity.  One  gold  frog  which  I  examined  had  the 
eyes  hollow,  with  an  oval  slit  in  front,  and  within  each 
a  detached  ball  of  gold,  which  appeared  to  have  been 
executed  in  a  single  casting.  This  insertion  of  detached 
balls  is  frequently  met  with  in  the  pottery,  as  well  as  in 
the  goldsmith^s  work  of  the  Isthmus,  and  is  singularly 
characteristic  of  a  peculiar  phase  of  local  art.  Human 
figures  are  also  found  in  the  same  graves  wrought  in 
gold  ;  but,  so  far  as  my  own  opportunities  of  observa- 
tion enable  me  to  judge,  of  inferior  imitative  skill  and 
execution  to  the  representations  of  other  animate  sub- 
jects. But  they  display  abundant  metallurgic  art. 
Soldering  as  well  as  casting  was  known  to  the  ancient 
goldsmith,  and  the  finer  specimens  have  been  finished 


304  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Caap. 

with  the  hammer  and  graving-tool.  Judging  from  the 
condition  of  the  human  remains  foimd  in  those  huacas 
of  the  peninsula,  they  are  probably  of  a  much  higher 
antiquity  than  the  era  of  Mexican  civilisation,  and  illus- 
trate tiie  source  of  later  Aztec  arts. 

But  while  the  Mexicans  wrought  their  ingenious  toys, 
and  lavished  their  inexhaustible  resoiu'ces  of  gold  and 
silver  in  personal  decoration,  and  adorned  their  public 
edifices  with  scarcely  less  boundless  profusion  than  the 
Peruvians,  they  had  learned  to  some  extent  the  practical 
value  of  gold  and  other  metals  as  a  convenient  currency. 
By  means  of  this  equivalent  for  the  gold  and  silver 
coinage  of  Europe,  the  interchange  of  commodities  in 
the  great  markets  of  Mexico  was  facihtated,  and  an  im- 
portant step  in  the  progress  towards  a  higher  stage  of 
civilisation  secured.  This  metaUic  currency  consisted  of 
pieces  of  tin  cut  in  the  form  of  a  T,  or  stamped  with  a 
sinular  character,  and  of  transparent  quills  filled  with 
gold  dust.  These  were  apparently  regulated  to  a  com- 
mon standard  by  their  size  :  for  the  use  of  scales  and 
weights,  with  which  the  Peruvians  were  familiar,  ap 
pears  to  have  been  totally  unknown  in  Mexico. 

The  nature  of  the  Mexican  metallic  currency  fully 
accords  with  the  knowledge  and  experience  of  a  people 
among  whom  the  metallurgic  arts  were  of  comparatively 
recent  origin.  The  easily  fused  tin,  and  the  attractive 
and  accessible  gold-dust,  supplied  the  ready  materials 
for  schooling  an  ingenious  people  in  the  use  of  the 
metals.  Copper  was  probably  first  used  when  found  in 
a  pure  metallic  state,  as  among  the  old  miners  of  Lake 
Superior,  while  the  art  of  fusing,  taught  by  the  Aztec 
Tubal-Cain,  was  tried  only  on  the  readily-yielding  tin. 
By  this  means  the  arts  of  smelting  and  moulding  the 
metallic  ores  would  be  acquired,  and  applied*  to  copper, 
silver,  and  gold,  as  well  as  to  the  tin.     Accident  might 


IX.]  THE  METALLURGIC  ARTS:  ALLOYS.  305 

suggest  the  next  important  stage  of  metallic  alloys ;  but 
under  the  circumstances  alike  of  Peruvian  and  Mexican 
civilisation,  progressing  in  regions  abounding  with  the 
most  attractive  and  easily-wrought  metals,  it  is  easy  to 
conceive  of  the  independent  discovery  of  the   useful 
bronze  alloy.    Yet  by  the  standard  composition  of  their 
bronze,  far  more  than  the  ingenious  intricacy  of  their 
personal  ornaments,  utensils,  and  architectural  decora- 
tions, may  fairly  be  tested  the  actual  progress  alike  of 
the  Incas  or  of  the  Aztecs.      The  delight  of  the  savage 
in  personal  adornment  precedes  even  the  most  needful 
covering  of  his  nakedness,  and  the  same  propensity  long 
monopolizes  the  whole  inventive  ingenuity  of  a  semi- 
barbarous  people ;  while  the  useful  tools  of  bronze  em- 
body the  true  germs  of  incipient  civilisation.     Tested  by 
such  a  standard,  the  metallurgic  arts  of  Peru  furnish 
conclusive  evidence  of  its  very  partial  development,  and 
suggest  the  probability  that  its  latest  stage  did  not 
pertain  to  any  period  very  remote  from  the  era  of  Euro- 
pean discovery.      The  alloy  of  copper  and  tiii,  when 
destined  for  practical  use  in  the  manufacture  of  weapons 
and  implements,  is  found  to  possess  the  most  serviceable 
qualities  when  composed  of  about  ninety  per  cent,  of 
copper  to  ten  of  tin  ;  and  so  near  is  the  approximation 
to  this  theoretical  standard  among  the  bronze  relics  of 
the  ancient  world,  that  the  archaeologists  of  Europe  have 
been  divided  in  opinion  as  to  whether  they  should  as- 
sume a  Phoenician  or  other  common  origin  for  all  the 
weapons,  implements,  and  personal  ornaments  of  that 
metal  found  more  or  less  abundantly  over  the  whole  con- 
tinent ;  or  that  the  mixed  metal  was  all  derived  from  a 
conmion  centre,  and  that  this  was  manufactured  in  the 
various  countries  of  Europe  into  the  objects  of  diverse 
form  and  pa^ttern  abounding  in  their  soil,  and  deposited 
VOL.  I.  u 


^^"'WVI'l^W^HiV 


306  PREUISTORIG  MAN.  [Chap. 

among  the  sepulchral  oflferings  which  their  baxrows  and 
tumuli  reveal  That  the  former  idea  of  a  common 
origin  for  the  finished  implements  is  imtenable,  has  been 
proved,  alike  by  numerous  discoveries  of  moulds  of  the 
prepared  metal,  and  even  of  the  furnaces  where  the 
bronze  worker  practised  his  ingenious  art ;  and  also  by 
the  varieties  in  form  and  style  of  ornament,  by  which 
the  bronze  relics  of  difierent  countries  of  Europe,  mani- 
festly belonging  to  the  same  period,  are  distinguishable. 
The  idea  of  the  bronze  itself  having  been  all  derived 
from  some  common  source  is,  in  like  manner,  rendered 
improbable  by  a  more  careful  investigation  of  the  evi- 
dence on  which  it  has  been  founded.  Mr.  Worsaae,  the 
distinguished  Danish  antiquary,  after  commenting  on  the 
resemblance  traceable  throughout  the  many  weapons, 
implements,  and  personal  ornaments  of  bronze,  which 
have  been  discovered  in  Greece,  Italy,  Germany,  France, 
England,  and  Scandinavia,  adds,  "They  have  all  been 
cast  in  moulds,  and  the  metal  is  of  the  same  composi- 
tion, nine  tenths  copper,  and  one  tenth  tin.  From  this 
there  would  be  further  reason  to  suppose  that  they  all 
originated  with  one  people.  But  a  careful  examination 
and  comparison  of  the  antiquities  themselves  from  these 
various  coimtries  will  nevertheless  show  that  in  different 
countries  the  antiquities  of  bronze  are  also  somewhat 
different."  This  he  proceeds  to  illustrate  from  a  com- 
parison of  their  forms,  patterns,  ornaments,  and  practical 
details;  and  he  accordingly  arrives  at  the  conclusion, 
"  beyond  a  doubt,  that  such  bronze  objects  were  manu- 
factured in  those  countries,  and  not  imported.  The  only 
thing  which  was  imported  being  of  course  the  metal, 
which  by  trade  and  barter  was  spread,  in  different  ways, 
over  the  whole  of  Europe."  ^     In  an  earlier  part  of  the 

*  Primeval  Antiquities  of  Denmark,  yy\).  137,  138. 


IX.]  THE  METALLUEGIC  ARTS:  ALLOYS,  307 

same  work,  Mr.  Worsaae  refers  to  the  additional  evidence 
supplied  by  numerous  discoveries  of  moulds,  pieces  of 
unwrought  metal,  collections  of  broken  weapons,  tools, 
and  ornaments  prepared  for  smelting,  and  the  fragments 
of  bronze  derived  from  the  metal  running  into  the  joints 
of  the  mould,  and  subsequently  detached  in  the  process 
of  finishing,  which  are  technically  called  "  castings/' 
From  all  such  evidence  it  is  assumed  that  the  acquisition 
of  weapons  and  implements  of  metal  was  speedily  fol- 
lowed throughout  all  the  countries  of  Europe  by  the 
knowledge  and  practice  of  metallurgic  arts.  Mr.  Wor- 
saae, however,  only  supposes  the  latter  to  have  extended 
to  the  amount  of  skill  requisite  for  melting  and  mould- 
ing the  useful  alloy ;  and  not  to  the  knowledge  required 
for  determining  the  most  useful  combinations  of  copper 
and  tin.  Keferring  to  the  Scandinavian  antiquities  of 
gold,  as  well  as  of  bronze,  he  remarks :  "  These  metals 
might  easily  have  been  introduced,  in  the  rude  state, 
either  from  Russia,  from  the  Ural  mountains,  or  from 
England,  where,  as  is  well  known,  tin  and  copper,  the 
constituents  of  bronze,  occur  in  considerable  quantities, 
and  where  gold  may  have  been  found  in  ancient  times : 
while  we  may  account  for  its  presence  here  either  by 
supposing  that  the  transit  took  place  direct  by  sea,  or 
that  the  metal  was  first  transmitted  to  countries  nearer 
England,  and  thence  by  barter  was  brought  to  the  north. 
This  fact,  at  least,  is  evident,  that  almost  all  bronzes 
which  are  referable  to  that  primeval  time,  when  iron  was 
not  generally  known  or  employed,  are  formed  of  a  pecu- 
liar mixture  of  metals,  which  is  constantly  the  same  in 
all  the  countries  in  which  they  are  found.  It  contains,  for 
instance,  about  nine  tenths  of  copper  and  one  tenth  of  tin, 
while  the  more  modem  bronze  which,  subsequent  to  the 
knowledge  of  iron,  was  used  for  ornaments,  vessels,  and 


^■^^ 


308  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

the  like,  was  usually  formed  of  equal  quantities  of  copper 
and  zinc.  Hence  it  is  highly  probable  that  the  ancient 
bronze  formed  of  copper  and  tin,  was  diffused  from  one 
spot  over  the  whole  of  Europe/'  This  spot  he  supposes 
to  be  England,  famed  for  its  rich  mines  of  copper  and  tin 
from  the  earliest  historic  times.  But  while  it  is  impro- 
bable that  the  tin  and  copper  were  separately  imported 
into  each  country  of  Europe,  to  be  there  converted  by  the 
native  metallurgist  into  the  more  useful  alloy ;  a  more 
careful  investigation  of  the  evidence  throws  as  much 
doubt  on  the  idea  of  any  single  common  source  for  the 
bronze,  a^  for  the  objects  of  varied  form  and  pattern 
made  from  that  alloy. 

The  reasons  for  some  general  approximation  to  a  con- 
stant proportion  in  the  elements  of  European  bronze, 
when  designed  for  tools  and  weapons,  have  been  well 
illustrated  by  the  report  of  a  series  of  synthetic  experi- 
ments of  Dr.  George  Pearson,  communicated  by  him  to 
the  Koyal  Society  of  London  in  1796,  and  printed  in 
the  Philosophical  Transactions  of  that  year.  Having  by 
a  series  of  analyses  determined  the  relative  proportions 
of  copper,  tin,  and  other  metals  present  in  various 
Eoman  and  British  bronze  relics,  he  next  proceeded  to 
fuse  copper  and  tin  in  various  united  proportions,  be- 
ginning with  one  part  of  tin  to  twenty  parts  of  copper, 
which  produced  a  dark-coloured  bronze,  with  a  fracture 
inclining  in  its  colour  to  the  peculiar  red  of  the  pure 
copper.  On  reducing  the  copper  to  fifteen  parts  of 
copper  to  one  of  tin,  the  colour  was  materially  affected, 
and  the  red  copper  hue  was  no  longer  seen  when  the 
product  was  fractured,  but  an  alloy  of  greater  strength 
was  produced.  The  experiments  were  continued  with 
twelve,  ten,  nine,  eight,  and  seven  parts  of  copper  to 
one  of  tin ;  and  when  the  last  fusion  of  the  metals  was 


IX.]  THE  METALLURGIG  ARTS:  ALLOYS.  309 

tested,  the  increase  in  hardness  and  brittleness  became 
very  apparent.  The  same  characteristics  were  still  more 
marked  on  successively  reducing  the  proportions  of 
copper  to  seven,  six,  five,  four,  and  three ;  and  when 
an  alloy  was  made  of  two  parts  of  copper  to  one  of  tin, 
it  was,  according  to  Dr.  Pearson/s  report,  as  brittle  as 
glass.  Here,  then,  we  see  at  a  glance  the  whole  process 
pursued  by  the  old  worker  in  bronze,  who  having  ascer- 
tained that  he  could  produce  a  harder  and  more  useful 
compound  than  the  pure  copper  by  alloying  it  with  tin, 
would  not  fail  to  diminish  the  proportions  of  the  latter 
till  he  had  obtained  a  suflSciently  near  approximation  to 
the  well  ascertained  admixture  of  the  best  bronze,  to 
answer  the  practical  purposes  for  which  it  was  designed. 
Accordingly,  without  any  great  nicety  of  apportionment 
of  the  two  metals,  it  is  obvious  that  no  intercourse  or 
interchange  of  experience  was  necessary  to  lead  the 
isolated  metallurgists  of  the  remotest  regions  of  Europe 
to  the  same  results  when  dealing  with  these  metals  with 
similar  objects  in  view  ;  nor  would  a  closer  correspond- 
ence between  the  proportionate  ingredients  of  the  native 
American  and  European  bronze  than  has  yet  been  de- 
tected, indicate  more  than  similar  aims,  and  the  inevitable 
experience  consequent  on  the  properties  of  the  varjdng 
alloy,  leading  to  corresponding  results.  The  following 
table  of  the  compositions  detected  by  analyses  in  various 
ancient  bronze  relics  will  suffice  to  show  how  little  foun- 
dation there  is  for  the  assumption  of  a  Phoenician,  British, 
or  any  other  common  origin  for  the  alloy  of  which  they 
were  made. 


SSMBBMPB^HBP 


■■ 


W 


msB 


310 


PEE  HISTORIC  MAX, 


[Chap. 


ANALYSES  OF  ANCIENT  BRONZES. 


No. 


1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

6. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
26. 
26. 
27. 


Litnos, 

Anglo-Roman  patellai 

Spear-head, 

Scabbard  (Danish  ?), 

Axe-head, 

Axe  palstave, 

Axe-head, 

Bronze  vessel. 

Sword, 

Caldron, 

Sword, 

Kettle, 

Axe-head, 

Caldron, 

Palstave, 

Sword, 

Sword, 

Sword, 

Sword, 

Celt, 

Axe-head, 

Axe-head, 

Celt, 

Celt, 

Drinking-horn, 

Bronze  vessel. 

Wedge, 


Lincolnshire, 


♦» 


tf 


>» 


Lreland, 
Cumberland,  . 


»i 


Cambridgeshire, 

France,  . 

Berwickshire, 

Duddingstone, 

Berwickshire, 

Mid-Lothian, 

Duddingstone, 

Fifeshire, 

Ireland, 


» 


Thames, 
Ireland, 


»* 
it 


Copper. 


King's  Co.,  Ireland 

II 
Ireland, 


II 


II 


88- 

86- 

86- 

90- 

91- 

91- 

88- 

88- 

87-47 

92-89 

88-51 

88-22 

88-5 

84-8 

81-19 

88-63 

83-50 

89-69 

85-62 

90-68 

90-18 

89-33 

83-61 

85-23 

79-34 

88- 

94- 


Tin. 

Tiejid. 

Iron. 

12- 

1 

14- 

14- 

10- 

9- 

9- 

12- 

12- 

12-63 

6-15 

1-78 

9-30 

2-30 

5-63 

5-88 

11-12 

0-78 

7-19 

8-53 

18-31 

0-75 

• 

8-54 

2-83 

616 

8-36 

3- 

9-58 

•  •  • 

0-33 

10-02 

•  •  • 

0-44 

7-43 

1-28 

•  ■  a 

9-81 

•  •  • 

•  •  • 

919 

•  •  • 

0-33 

10-79 

3-20 

0-58 

13-11 

114 

•  •  • 

10-87 

911 

•  •  • 

12- 

•  •  « 

•  •  • 

5-9 

•  •  ■ 

01 

Nos.  1-7.  Dr.  G.  Pearson,  P.R.S.,  Philoaaph.  Trans.,  1796. 

8.  Professor  Clarke,  M.D.  Cantab.,  Archoeologia,  xviii.  p.  348. 

9.  Mongez,  Mim.  de  VlnstittU. 

10-16.  €r€orge  Wilson,  M.D.,  Prehist.  Ann,  Scot,,  p.  246. 

16,  17.  Professor  Davy,  Prehist.  Ann,  Scot,  p.  247. 

18-23.  J.  A.  Philips,  P.G.S.,  Mem.  Chcm.  Soc,,  iv.  p.  288, 

24,  25.  Dr.  Donovan,  Chem.  Gazette,  1860,  p.  176. 

26,  27.  Dr.  J.  H.  Gibbon.  U.S.  Mint. 

From  the  varied  results  which  so  many  independent 
analyses  disclose,  ranging  as  they  do  from  79  to  94  per 
cent,  of  copper,  or  more  than  the  whole  amoimt  of  the 
supposed  constant  ratio  of  tin ;  besides  the  variations 
in  the  nature,  as  well  as  in  the  quantity  of  the  other 
ingredients,  it  is  abundantly  obvious  that  no  greater 
uniformity  is  traceable,  than  such  as  might  be  expected 
to  result  from  the  experience  of  isolated  and  independent 


IX.]  THE  METALLURGIG  ARTS :  ALLOYS,  311 

metallurgists,  very  partially  acquainted  with  the  che- 
mical properties  of  the  standard  alloy,  and  guided  for 
the  most  part  by  the  practical  experience  derived  from 
successive  results  of  their  manufacture. 

When  destined  for  other  uses  than  such  tools  and 
weapons  as  those  already  referred  to,  the  composition  of 
bronze  is  considerably  varied.  The  bronze  of  French 
cannons  is  composed  of  100  copper  to  11  tin,  while  for 
bell -metal  it  is  only  80  per  cent,  of  copper,  to  tin  10, 
zinc  5*6,  lead  4*4  ;  and  for  speculum  metal,  where  a 
hard  alloy,  susceptible  of  the  finest  polish,  is  desirable, 
while  its  extreme  brittleness  is  of  no  moment,  the  copper 
is  reduced  to  about  6  6  per  cent,  to  3  4  of  tin. 

We  thus  perceive  how  the  various  exigencies  of  the 
metallurgist,  under  the  control  of  a  very  ordinary 
amount  of  practical  skill,  would  gradually  lead  him  to 
discover  the  best  proportions  for  his  useful  alloy ;  though 
it  would  only  be  after  the  protracted  accumulation  of 
many  fruits  of  isolated  experiment,  and  the  development 
of  that  combined  experience  which  specially  pertains  to 
an  advanced  condition  of  civilisation,  that  anything 
more  than  some  crude  approximation  to  the  best  com- 
position of  the  alloy  would  be  determined.  Hence  the 
value  of  analytical  evidence  in  determining  the  degree 
of  civilisation  of  Mexico  and  Peru,  as  indicated  by  their 
metaUurgic  arts.  For  the  general  requirements  of  a 
tool,  or  weapon  of  war,  where  a  sufficient  hardness  must 
be  obtained,  without  any  great  liability  to  fracture, 
accumulated  experience  determined  the  best  proportions 
to  be  about  90  per  cent,  of  copper  to  10  of  tin  ;  or  with 
a  small  proportion  of  lead  in  lieu  of  part  of  the  tin, 
which  further  experience  taught  the  primitive  worker 
in  bronze  communicated  to  his  cutting  instrument  a 
greater  degree  of  toughness,  and  consequently  dimi- 
nished its  liability  to  fracture.     But  where  great  hard- 


312 


PREHISTORIC  MAN. 


[Chap. 


ness  was  the  chief  requisite,  as  in  certain  engraving, 
carving,  and  gem-cutting  tools,  then  the  mere  increase 
of  the  proportion  of  tin  in  the  alloy  supplied  the  requisite 
quaUty,  until,  carried  to  excess,  the  metallurgist  was 
warned  of  his  error  by  the  excessive  brittleness  of  the 
product.  In  this,  I  doubt  not,  lies  the  whole  secret  of 
Mexican  and  Peruvian  metallurgy  which  has  seemed  so 
mysterious,  and  therefore  so  marvellous  to  the  most 
sagacious  inquirers.  "  It  is  worthy  of  remark,"  says 
Prescott,  "that  the  Egyptians,  the  Mexicans,  and  the 
Peruvians,  in  their  progress  towards  civilisation,  should 
never  have  detected  the  use  of  iron,  which  lay  around 
them  in  abundance,  and  that  they  should  each,  without 
any  knowledge  of  the  other,  have  found  a  substitute  for 
it  in  such  a  curious  composition  of  metals  as  gave  their 
tools  almost  the  temper  of  steel ;  a  secret  that  has  been 
lost,  or,  to  speak  more  correctly,  has  never  been  dis- 
covered by  the  civilized  European.''^  Bearing  in  re- 
membrance the  synthetic  results  already  referred  to,  the 
following  table  will  supply  a  partial  contribution  towards 
the  requisite  data  for  testing  the  skill  of  the  native 
American  metallurgist 

ANALYSES  OF  ANCIENT  AMERICAN  BRONZES. 


No. 

Copper. 

Tin. 

Iron. 

1. 

■ 

Chisel  from  silver  mines,  Ciizco, 

94- 

6- 

2. 

Chisel  from  Cuzco,  . 

92-385 

7-615 

3. 

Knife  from  grave,  Atacama, 

97-87 

2-13 

4. 

Knife 

96- 

4- 

5. 

Crowbar  from  Chili,          .    •     . 

92-385 

7-615 

6. 

Knife  from  Amaro, 

95-664 

3-965 

0-371 

7. 

Perforated  axe, 

96- 

4. 

8. 

Personal  ornament,  Truigilla,    . 

95-440 

4-560 

9. 

Bodkin  from  female  grave,  do., 

96-70 

3-30 

Nos.     1.  Humboldt.                                 > 

fos.     5.  Dr.  T.  0.  Jackson. 

2.  Dr.  J.  H.  Gibbon. 

6,  7.  Dr.  H.  Croft. 

3,  4.  J.  H.  Bbike,  Esq. 

8,  9.  T. 

Ewbank,  ] 

ilsq. 

^  Prescott 's  Conquest  of  Peru,  book  i.  chap.^v. 


IX.]  THE  METALLURGIG  ARTS:  ALLOYS.  313 

The  comparison  of  this  with  the  previous  table  indi- 
cates a  smaller  amount  of  tin  in  the  American  bronze 
than  in  that  of  ancient  Europe.  For  some  Egyptian 
spear-heads  Gmelin  gives,  copper  77*60,  tin  22*02  ;  and 
ancient  weapons,  armour,  vessels,  and  coins,  indicate  such 
varied  proportions  as  imply  the  results  of  experience  in 
adapting  the  alloy  for  the  specific  purpose  in  view.  A 
much  larger  number  of  analyses  would  be  desirable  as 
the  data  from  which  to  generalize  on  the  metallurgic 
skill  developed  independently  by  a  native  American 
civilisation ;  but  the  examples  adduced  here  are  suffi- 
cient to  show  that  there  is  no  lost  secret  for  Europe  to 
discover.  The  native  metallurgist  had  learned  the  won- 
derful art  of  alloying  his  soft  and  ductile  copper  with  the 
still  softer  tin,  and  producing  by  their  chemical  admix- 
ture a  harder,  tougher  metal  than  either.  But  he  does 
not  appear  to  have  carried  his  art  so  far  as  to  ascertain 
the  most  efficient  proportions  of  the  combining  metals, 
or  even  to  have  made  any  very  definite  approximation 
to  a  fixed  rule,  further  than  to  use  with  great  moderation 
the  alloying  tin.  He  had  discovered,  but  not  entirely 
mastered,  a  wonderful  secret,  such  as  in  the  ancient  world 
had  proved  to  he  on  the  threshold  of  all  other  and  higher 
truths  in  mechanical  arts.  He  was  undoubtedly  advanc- 
ing, slowly  but  surely,  on  the  direct  course  of  national 
elevation ;  and  the  centuries  which  have  followed  since 
the  conquests  of  Cortes  and  Pizarro  might  have  witnessed 
in  the  New  World  triumphs  not  less  marvellous  in  the 
progress  of  civilisation  than  those  which  distinguish  the 
England  of  Victoria  from  that  of  the  first  Tudors.  But 
it  was  otherwise  decreed.  The  conquests  of  native  science 
and  art  were  abruptly  arrested  by  the  Spanish  conquis- 
tadors, and  it  is  difficult  to  realize  the  conviction  that 
either  Mexico  or  Peru  has  gained  any  equivalent  for  the 
irreparable  loss  which  thus  debarred  us  from  the  solution 


314  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

of  some  of  the  most  profoundly  interesting  problems 
connected  with  the  progress  of  the  human  race.  Amid 
all  the  exclusiveness  of  China,  and  the  isolation  of  Japan, 
there  is  still  an  unknown  quantity  among  the  elements 
of  their  civilisation  derived  from  the  same  sources  as  our 
own.  But  the  America  of  the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth 
centuries  was  literally  another  world,  guarded  almost  as 
securely  from  external  and  foreign  influences  as  the 
planets  that  move  around  us  in  their  fixed  orbits,  mem* 
hers  of  the  same  solar  system  with  ourselves. 


X.]      ARCHITECTURAL  INSTINCT :  EARTHWORKS,     315 


CHAPTEE  X. 

THE  ARCHITECTURAL  INSTINCT:  EARTHWORKS. 

The  labours  of  a  zealous  and  indefatigable  phalanx 
of  American  archaeologists  have  accumulated  a  valuable 
amount  of  materials  illustrative  of  the  history  of  primeval 
architecture,  as  it  exists  in  the  form  of  earthworks  over  a 
wide  extent  of  the  New  World.  Notwithstanding  some 
fine  mountain  ranges  which  diversify  the  landscape,  the 
general  character  of  the  United  States  presents,  in  its 
great  levels  and  gentle  undulating  contour,  a  singular 
contrast  to  the  physical  aspects  of  the  European  con- 
tinent ;  and  to  this  natural  character  of  its  scenery  may 
be  ascribed  the  multipUcation  of  those  earth-pyramids 
which  have  suggested  the  designation  of  the  Mound- 
Builders,  applied  to  its  ancient  population.  The  great 
pyramid  of  Suphis  transferred  from  its  original  site,  with 
the  far-receding  horizontal  plain,  to  an  Italian  or  Swiss 
valley,  backed  by  the  lofty  Apennines  or  the  towering 
peaks  of  the  Alps,  would  appear  as  incongruous  and 
insignificant  as  Silbury  Hill  under  the  shadow  of  Ben 
Nevis,  or  the  Great  Mound  at  Miamisburg,  Ohio,  among 
the  green  mountains  of  Vermont.  An  instinctive  per- 
ception of  the  harmonies  of  nature  and  art  guides  all 
primitive  builders  in  the  development  of  native  architec- 
ture. It  is  only  in  such  a  strange  artificial  condition 
of  exotic  social  life  as  that  which  now  pervades  the 
ancient  sites  of  the  Mound-Builders,  that  the  Egyptian 


316  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

propylaeum,  the  Greek  temple,  and  the  Gothic  cathedral, 
are  adopted  at  random,  and  without  a  sense  of  incongru- 
ity, either  in  relation  to  the  climate  or  their  special  fit- 
ness :  alike  for  churches,  courts  of  justice,  hospitals,  or 
criminal  strongholds. 

The  question  as  to  whether  the  pyramidal  earthworks 
of  the  Mound -Bmlders  originated  among  the  native 
aboriginal  occupants  of  the  great  river-valleys  of  North 
America,  or  are  only  ruder  reproductions  of  an  architecture 
which  had  its  birth  in  tropical  Mexico,  under  the  shadow 
of  the  Andes,  may  have  a  considerable  influence  on  the 
decision  of  very  important  questions  relating  to  primitive 
American  ethnology.  Under  any  circumstances,  how- 
ever, the  physical  geography  of  a  country  necessarily 
exercises  an  important  influence  on  its  history  ;  and  the 
singular  aspect  of  the  widely-extended  region  throughout 
which  the  earthworks  have  been  traced,  is  a  feature  of 
no  slight  importance  in  its  bearing  on  our  present  in- 
quiries. In  one  of  a  series  of  contributions  to  the  phy- 
sical geography  of  the  United  States,  Mr.  Charles  EUet 
has  specially  investigated  the  Mississippi  Valley,  with  a 
view  to  the  facilities  which  its  natural  advantages  and 
capabilities  afford  for  modem  enterprise.^  Looking  to 
the  general  features  of  the  country  between  the  Great 
Lakes  and  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  and  extending  from  the 
Atlantic  to  the  Kocky  Mountains,  he  describes  it  as  a 
great  plain  inclining  gently  towards  the  east,  along  which 
flow  all  the  streams  that  enter  the  Lower  Mississippi -and 
the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  from  the  west.  Another  plain,  of 
nearly  equal  extent,  and  corresponding  inclination,  de- 
scends from  the  north,  along  which  flow  the  northern 
tributaries  of  the  Ohio  and  the  Mississippi  itself,  until  it 

^  "  Of  the  Physical  Geography  of  the  Mississippi  Valley,  with  Suggestions 
for  the  Improvement  of  the  Navigation  of  the  Ohio  and  other  rivers,"  by 
C.  Ellet,  Jiin.,  C.E.     Smithsonian  Contributions,  vol.  ii. 


X.]      ARCHITECTURAL  INSTINCT:  EARTBWORKS.      317 

unites  with  the  great  Missouri,  pursuing  the  irregular 
line  which  marks  the  intersection  of  those  vast  surfaces ; 
while  another  plain,  descending  from  the  summit  of  the 
Alleghany  range,  is  drained  by  the  waters  of  the  Cum- 
berland and  Tennessee,  and  all  the  southern  tributaries 
of  the  Ohio,  and  intersects  the  great  plain  from  the  north 
in  the  valley  of  the  Ohio,  and  the  great  plain  from  the 
Avest  in  the  valley  of  the  Lower  Mississippi.  After  far- 
ther noting  the  spread  of  another  of  those  great  plains 
from  the  Alleghany  mountains  to  the  Atlantic  coast,  Mr. 
Ellet  adds  :  "  The  word  plain  is  adopted  here  for  the 
convenience  of  description  only,  and  is  not  to  be  received 
in  a  literal  sense.  These  great  surfaces  are  furrowed  by 
valleys,  and  relieved  in  places  by  hills  and  even  moun- 
tains ;  yet  these  mountains  are  of  inconsiderable  extent 
compared  with  the  vast  area  of  the  regions  described, 
and  rest  upon  the  great  slopes  which  descend  from  the 
dividing  ranges."  Along  the  great  levels  drained  by  the 
numerous  tributaries  of  the  river-system  of  this  wide 
champaign,  the  ancient  traces  of  America's  allophylian 
population  abound ;  and  especially  on  the  banks  of  the 
Ohio  and  its  tributaries  have  the  most  remarkable  monu- 
ments been  brought  to  light.  The  capabilities  of  this 
region  for  modem  settlement  and  the  abundant  develop- 
ment of  a  comprehensive  commercial  enterprise,  are  the 
same  which  made  it  anciently  the  resort  of  a  numerous 
settled  population.  "  In  tracing  the  Ohio  to  its  source,*' 
Mr.  Ellet  remarks,  "  we  must  regard  the  Alleghany  as  its 
proper  continuation.  This  noble  tributary  rises  on  the 
borders  of  Lake  Erie,  at  an  average  elevation  of  1300 
feet  above  the  surface  of  the  sea,  and  nearly  700  feet 
above  the  level  of  the  lake.  The  plain  along  which  this 
river  flows  is  connected  with  no  mountain  range  at  its 
northern  extremity,  but  continues  its  rise,  with  great 
uniformity,  from  the  mouth  of  the  Ohio  to  the  brim  of 


318  •        PREHISTORIC  MAK,     .  [Chap. 

the  basin  which  encloses  Lake  Erie.  The  sources  of  the 
tributary  streams  are  generally  diminutive  ponds,  dis- 
tributed along  the  edge  of  the  basin  of  Lake  Erie,  but 
far  above  its  surface,  and  so  slightly  separated  from  it 
that  they  may  all  be  drained  with  little  labour  down  the 
steep  slope  into  that  inland  sea.  From  these  remote 
sources  a  boat  may  start  with  sufficient  water,  within 
seven  miles  of  Lake  Erie,  in  sight  sometimes  of  the  sails 
which  whiten  the  approach  to  the  harbour  of  Buffalo,  and 
float  securely  down  the  Connewango,  or  Cassadaga,  to  the 
Alleghany,  down  the  Alleghany  to  the  Ohio,  and  thence 
uninterruptedly  to  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  In  all  this 
distance  of  2400  miles,  the  descent  is  so  uniform  and 
gentle,  so  little  accelerated  by  rapids,  that  when  there  is 
sufficient  water  to  float  the  vessel,  and  sufficient  power 
to  govern  it,  the  downward  voyage  may  be  performed 
without  difficulty  or  danger  in  the  channels  as  they  were 
formed  by  nature  ;  and  a  return  trip  might  be  made  with 
equal  security  and  success,  with  very  little  aid  from  art.'' 
Here,  therefore,  is  one  of  the  great  modem  centres  towards 
which  population,  agricultural  enterprise,  commerce,  and 
wealth,  aU  flow ;  and  it  is  a  subject  of  lively  interest  to 
investigate  the  traces  which  disclose  to  us  the  proof  that 
this  vast  area  is  not  now,  for  the  first  time,  being  rescued 
from  the  primeval  forest,  with  its  wild  fauna,  and  stiU 
wilder  savage  man ;  but  that  here,  in  older  centuries, 
busy  industry,  ingenious  arts,  and  civic  and  miUtary 
enterprise,  made  it  the  scene  of  stirring  events  that  only 
wanted  their  Homer  or  Herodotus  to  make  the  epos  of 
the  Ohio  more  interesting  for  us  than  the  legends  of  the 
Scamander  or  the  mythic  traditions  of  the  Nile. 

In  a  great  level  country  such  as  that  drained  by  the 
Ohio  and  its  tributaries,  and  attracting  its  multipl3dng 
population  to  the  broad  alluvial  terraces  overlooking  its 
smoothly-flowing  rivers,  it  was  natural  that  the  building 


X.]      ARCHITECTURAL  INSTINCT:  EARTHWORKS.      319 

instinct  of  man  should  first  employ  itself  on  earth- 
works, and  that  the  monumental  grave-moimd,  dedicated 
to  the  patriarchal  leader  or  sovereign  chief,  like  the 
architecture  of  the  primeval  builder  on  the  plain  of 
Shinar,  should  be  a  pyramid  "whose  top  may  reach 
unto  heaven."  The  great  moimd  of  Miamisburg,  Ohio, 
is  sixty-eight  feet  high,  and  eight  himdred  and  fifty-two 
feet  in  circumference  at  its  base.  The  more  famous 
Grave  Creek  Mound  of  Virginia  rises  to  a  height  of 
seventy  feet,  and  measures  at  its  base  one  thousand  feet 
in  circumference.  Other  and  stiU  larger  earthworks 
have  been  noted,  such  as  the  truncated  pyramid  at 
Cahokia,  Illinois,  which  occupies  an  area  upwards  of 
two  thousand  feet  in  circumference,  and  rears  its  level 
summit,  of  several  acres  in  extent,  to  a  height  of  ninety 
feet.  But  this  last  probably  belongs  to  a  different  class : 
an  earth-pyramid,  but  not  a  sepulchral  monument ;  re- 
sembling in  this  respect  the  still  greater  British  earth- 
pyramid  of  Silbury  Hill,  characteristically  reared,  remote 
from  the  mountain  ranges  of  Scotland  or  Wales,  on  the 
level  downs  of  Wiltshire,  where  it  towers  to  a  height  of 
one  hundred  and  seventy  feet,  and  covers  an  area  of 
more  than  five  acres  of  land.  Kecent  explorations  seem 
to  establish  beyond  doubt  that  that  great  EngUsh  earth- 
work is  not  a  sepulchral  mound,  like  the  earth-pyramids 
of  the  American  Mound-Builders,  and  as  such  there- 
fore, the  latter  are  probably  among  the  most  gigantic 
memorials  of  their  class  in  the  world.  "  We  have  seen 
mounds,''  remarks  Flint,  an  American  topographer,  with 
a  just  appreciation  of  the  relation  of  these  earthworks 
to  the  features  of  the  surrounding  landscape,  "which 
would  require  the  labour  of  a  thousand  men  employed 
on  our  canals,  with  all  their  mechanical  aids,  and  the 
improved  implements  of  their  labour,  for  months.  We 
have  more  than  once  hesitated  in  view  of  one  of  those 


320  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

prodigious  mounds,  whether  it  were  not  really  a  natural 
hill.  But  they  are  uniformly  so  placed,  in  reference  to 
the  adjacent  country,  and  their  conformation  is  so  unique 
and  similar,  that  no  eye  hesitates  long  in  referring  them 
to  the  class  of  artificial  erections."  The  exploration  of 
more  than  one  of  these  huge  earth-pyramids  has  entirely 
set  at  rest  any  doubts  as  to  their  artificial  origin,  and 
has,  moreover,  disclosed  the  fact  that  they  are  monu- 
mental structures  erected  to  preserve  the  memory  of  the 
honoured  dead  in  ages  utterly  forgotten,  and  by  a  race 
of  which  they  preserve  apparently  the  sole  remaining 
vestiges. 

The  earthworks  and  architectural  constructions  of  the 
Mound-Builders  are  by  no  means  limited  to  the  class  of 
mounds  already  referred  to,  and  from  which  their  char- 
acteristic name  is  derived.  They  are  exceedingly  varied ; 
and  extending  as  they  do  over  a  geographical  area  of 
wide  extent,  and  embracing  considerable  diversity  of 
climate,  they  include  many  other  structures  besides  those 
of  a  sepulchral  character ;  and  disclose  special  features 
of  peculiar  interest  belonging  to  particular  localities. 
The  original  limits  assigned  to  them  by  Messrs.  Squier 
and  Davis  embraced  the  entire  basin  of  the  Mississippi 
and  its  tributaries,  from  the  shores  of  the  great  lakes 
to  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  comprehending  alike  the  fertile 
plains  along  the  Gulf,  and  the  whole  northern  territory, 
including  the  sources  of  the  Alleghany  in  the  western 
part  of  the  State  of  New  York.  Since  the  "  Ancient 
Monuments  of  the  Mississippi  Valley''  appeared,  as  the 
first  of  the  Smithsonian  Contributions  to  Knowledgey 
Mr.  Squier  has  completed  a  minute  series  of  surveys  and 
explorations  of  the  aboriginal  monuments  of  the  State 
of  New  York,  the  result  of  which  has  been  to  lead  him 
entirely  to  dissociate  the  rude  and  comparatively  slight 
earthworks  of  that  northern  region  from  the  remarkable 


X.]      ARCHITECT  (IE  AL  INSTINCT:  EARTHWORKS.     321 

ancient  monuments  previously  explored  and  illustrated 
by  him.  Kejecting  theory,  he  has,  with  honest  and 
painstaking  zeal,  carefully  investigated  the  evidence 
which  previously  depended  on  loose,  and,  as  it  appears, 
exaggerated  accounts,  and  he  thus  sums  up  the  results  : 
"  In  full  view  of  the  facts,  I  am  driven  to  a  conclusion 
little  anticipated  when  I  started  upon  my  trip  of  ex- 
ploration, that  the  earthworks  of  western  New  York 
were  erected  by  the  Iroquois,  or  their  western  neigh- 
bours, and  do  not  possess  an  antiquity  going  very  far 
back  of  the  discovery."  Already  the  plough  is  fast  obli- 
terating every  trace  of  those  memorial  mounds  and 
defensive  works  of  the  frontier  tribes,  slight  and  ephe- 
meral as  their  savage  builders ;  but  the  convictions 
forced  on  the  mind  of  their  explorer  by  a  personal  sur- 
vey, have  not  altered  his  views  relative  to  the  great 
earthworks  previously  described  by  him  ;  or  tempted 
him,  as  they  have  some  other  writers,  to  confound  these 
lasting  evidences  of  the  combined  operations  of  a  numer- 
ous settled  population,  with  the  traces  of  the  slight  and 
simple  defences  and  other  earthworks  of  the  modem 
Indians.  He  accordingly  sums  up  his  observation  by 
remarking  that  "  the  ancient  remains  of  western  New 
York,  except  so  far  as  they  throw  light  upon  the  system 
of  defence  practised  by  the  aboriginal  inhabitants,  and 
tend  to  show  that  they  were  to  a  degree  fixed  and 
agricultural  in  their  habits,  have  slight  bearing  upon  the 
grand  ethnological  and  archaeological  questions  involved 
in  the  ante-Columbian  history  of  the  continent." 

The  people  by  whom  the  great  earthworks  of  the 
Mississippi  Valley  were  constructed,  and  its  remarkable 
defensive  enclosures  erected  and  maintained,  must  have 
been  in  a  condition  greatly  diflFerent  from  the  forest 
tribes  of  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries. 
Nevertheless,  though  gathered  at  many  favourite  points, 

VOL.  I.  x 


322  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

in  large  communities,  they  were  probably  isolated  by 
extensive  tracts  of  dense  forests  from  the  country  lying 
beyond  the  river-systems  in  which  they  were  settled. 
The  earthworks  of  the  Mound-Builders  are  of  very  di- 
verse character,  and  partake  in  some  respects  of  the 
local  aspect  of  their  sites ;  but  they  chiefly  abound 
where  tJie  widely  extended  alluvial  flats  furnish  the 
most  fertile  tracts  for  cultivation ;  and  it  has  been 
justly  noted  as  worthy  of  special  remark  that  the  sites 
selected  for  settlements,  towns,  and  cities  by  the  modem 
supplanters  of  the  Red  Indian,  are  often  those  which 
were  the  special  favourites  of  the  Mound-Builders;  and 
the  seats  of  their  densest  population.  Such  can  rarely 
be  said  of  the  Indian  settlement,  which  owes  the  selec- 
tion of  its  site  to  the  convenience  of  the  hunter,  and 
loses  all  its  original  attractions  when  the  axe  of  the 
settler  dissipates  the  charm.  The  country  lying  remote 
from  the  larger  tributaries  of  the  Mississippi  and  ite 
main  branches,  was  probably  in  the  era  of  the  Mound- 
Builders,  as  in  later  times,  covered  with  thie  primeval 
forest,  and  tenanted  by  the  abundant  game  of  the 
hunter ;  while  on  the  outlying  regions,  or  beyond  the 
great  Lakes  and  the  Rocky  Moimtains,  perchance  the 
progenitors  of  the  modem  Indian  tribes  lurked :  like 
the  barbarians  of  antechristian  Europe,  who,  beyond  the 
Rhine  and  the  Baltic,  nursed  the  future  spoilers  of  Rome, 
and  the  builders-up  of  modern  Europe  out  of  the  ruined 
empire  of  the  Caesars. 

The  fertile  vaUey  of  the  Scioto  appears  to  have  been 
one  of  the  seats  of  densest  population,  as  indicated  by 
the  numerous  ancient  works  which  diversify  its  surface* 
Corresponding  evidence  preserves  the  traces  of  an  equally 
dense  population  in  the  Miamis  Valley ;  and  throughout 
the  State  of  Ohio  the  mounds  and  earthworks  of  va- 
rious kinds  are  estimated  at  between  eleven  and  twelve 


X.]      ARCHITECTURAL  INSTINCT:  EARTHWORKS.     323 

thousand.  They  are  stated  to  be  scarcely  less  numerous 
on  the  Kenhawas  in  Virginia  than  on  the  Scioto  and 
Miamis,  and  ai-e  abundant  on  the  White  River  and 
Wabash,  as  also  upon  the  Kentucky,  Cumberland,  Ten- 
nessee, and  the  numerous  other  tributaries  of  the  Ohio 
and  Mississippi.  Works  accumulated  in  such  numbers, 
and,  including  many  of  great  magnitude,  elaborateness 
of  design,  and  executed  by  the  combined  labour  of  large 
bodies  of  workmen,  afford  indisputable  evidence  of 
the  presence,  through  a  greatly  protracted  period,  of  a 
settled  and  industrious  population.  Beyond  these  care- 
fully explored  regions,  traces  of  other  ancient  structures 
have  been  observed  at  widely  separated  points,  though 
caution  must  be  exercised  in  generalizing  from  data 
furnished  by  casual  and  inexperienced  observers.  All 
primitive  earthworks,  whether  for  defence,  sepulchral 
memorials,  or  religious  rites,  have  certain  features  in 
common ;  and  the  tendency  of  the  popular  mind  is 
rather  to  exaggerate  chance  resemblances  into  forced 
analogies  and  parallels,  than  to  exercise  any  critical  dis- 
crimination. Including,  however,  all  the  larger  earth- 
works, essentially  dissimilar  from  the  slighter  and  ruder 
traces  of  modem  Indian  workmanship,  they  appear  to 
stretch  away  from  the  upper  waters  of  the  Ohio  to  the 
westward  of  Lake  Erie,  and  thence  along  Lake  Michigan, 
nearly  to  the  Copper  Regions  of  Lake  Superior.  Through 
Wisconsin,  Iowa,  and  the  Nebraska  Tenitory,  they  have 
been  traced  extending  towards  the  Rocky  Mountains ; 
while  on  the  south  their  area  is  bounded  by  the  shores 
of  the  Gulf  of  Florida  and  the  Mexican  territory,  where 
they  seem  gradually  to  lose  their  distinctive  character, 
and  pass  into  the  great  teocaUis  of  a  higher  developed 
Mexican  architecture.  Their  affinities  ai-e  indeed  more 
southern  than  northern.  They  are  scarcely,  if  at  all,  to 
be  found  to  the  eastward  of  the  watershed  between  the 


324  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

MiflsiBsippi  and  the  Atlantic,  in  the  States  of  Pennsyl- 
vaniay  New  York,  or  Virginia ;  and  they  have  been 
rightly  designated,  from  their  chief  site,  the  Ancient 
Monuments  of  the  Mississippi  Valley,  including  in  this 
its  tributaries,  and  especially  the  valley  of  the  Ohio. 
There  their  localities  fully  accord  with  those  which,  in 
the  primitive  history  of  the  Old  Worid,  reveal  the  most 
abundant  traces  of  an  aboriginal  population,  in  their 
occupation  of  the  broad  alluvial  terraces,  or  "river 
bottoms,"  as  they  are  styled.  To  the  north,  however, 
though  the  memorials  of  an  ancient  population  are  no 
less  striking,  they  are  of  a  different  character ;  and  the 
earthworks  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Great  Lakes  must  be 
classed  by  themselves,  as  indicating  customs  and  rites 
distinct  from  those  pertaimng  to  the  ancient  population 
of  the  south. 

The  remarkable  works  thus  traceable  over  so  large  an 
extent  of  the  North  American  continent  have  been  so 
carefully  explored,  and  so  minutely  described,  especially 
by  Messrs.  Squier  and  Davis,  and  Mr.  J.  A.  Lapham,  in 
the  valuable  archaeological  monographs  printed  in  the 
Smithsonian  Contributions  to  Knowledge^  that  little  more 
is  needed  for  our  present  purpose  than  to  refer  to  one  or 
two  characteristic  types  of  each  of  the  different  classifi- 
cations under  which  they  have  been  grouped.  They  ad- 
mit of  being  primarily  arranged  into  the  two  obvious 
subdivisions  of  Enclosures  and  Mounds,  and  these 
again  embrace  a  variety  of  works  diverse  in  form,  and 
evidently  designed  for  very  different  uses.  Under  the 
first  of  these  heads  are  included  the  fortifications  or 
strongholds ;  the  sacred  enclosures,  destined,  as  is  as- 
sumed, for  religious  rites ;  and  numerous  miscellaneous 
works  of  the  same  class,  generally  symmetrical  in  struc- 
ture, but  the  probable  use  of  which  it  is  diflBcult  to 
determine.     The  second  subdivision  embraces  the  true 


X.]      ARCHITECTURAL  INSTINCT :  EARTHWORKS.     325 

mound-buildings,  including  what  have  been  designated 
sacrificial  mounds,  temple  mounds,  sepulchral  mounds, 
animal  mounds,  and  also  various  others  of  diverse  charac- 
ters and  uncertain  purpose.  All,  however,  partake  of  cha- 
racteristics specially  pertaining  to  a  broad,  level  country ; 
but  this  is  nowhere  so  strikingly  apparent  as  where 
mounds  appear  to  have  been  purposely  erected  as  obser- 
vatories and  points  of  sight  from  whence  to  survey  the 
works  elaborated  on  a  gigantic  scale  on  the  level  plain. 
In  addition  to  the  striking  features  which  the  external 
aspect  of  those  ancient  memorials  exhibits :  wherever 
they  have  been  excavated  many  interesting  relics  of  the 
ancient  builders  have  been  disclosed,  adding  new  and 
minutely  graphic  illustrations  of  their  social  condition, 
and  the  artistic  and  industrial  arts  of  the  remote  period 
to  which  they  pertain. 

The  British  hill-forts,  the  remarkable  vitrified  forts  of 
Scotland,  and  the  larger  strongholds  of  the  British  abo- 
rigines, such  as  the  ingenious  circumvaUations  of  the 
White  Caterthun  overlooking  the  Scottish  valley  of 
Strathmore,  all  derive  their  peculiar  character  from  the 
mountainous  features  of  the  country ;  whUe  on  the  low 
grounds,  under  the  shadow  of  the  Ochils,  the  elaborate 
earthworks  of  the  Camp  of  Ardoch  show  the  strikingly 
contrasting  castrametation  of  the  Roman  invaders.  The 
ancient  military  encampments  or  raths  of  Ireland,  which 
abound  in  the  level  districts  of  that  country,  as  well  as 
on  heights  where  stone  is  not  readily  accessible,  also  fur- 
nish highly  interesting  illustrations  of  earthworks  with  a 
special  character  derived  from  the  features  of  their  local- 
ities. An  earthen  dune  or  rath,  as  in  the  celebrated 
Eath  Keltair  at  Downpatrick,  occupies  a  commanding 
site,  where  it  is  strongly  entrenched,  with  a  considerable 
space  of  ground  enclosed  within  its  outworks.  But 
neither   the   Scottish  White  Caterthun,   nor  the   Irish 


326  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

Rath  Keltair,  or  even  the  Rath  Righ  of  Tara  Hill,  can 
compare  with  the  remarkable  American  strongholds  of 
Fort  Hill,  Ohio,  or  Fort  Ancient  on  the  little  Miami 
River,  in  the  same  State.  The  celebrated  Hill  of  Tara, 
in  the  coimty  of  Meath,  has  ceased,  according  to  tradi- 
tion, to  be  the  chief  seat  of  the  Irish  kings^  since  its 
desertion  in  the  latter  part  of  the  sixth  century,  shortly 
after  the  death  of  Dermot,  the  son  of  Fergus.  It  appears 
to  have  been  the  site  of  a  fortified  city ;  and  now,  after 
the  devastations  of  thirteen  centuries,  its  raths  and 
dunes,  circumvallations  and  trenches,  present  many  in- 
teresting points  of  comparison  with  the  more  extensive 
earthworks  of  the  Mississippi  valley. 

The  valley  of  the  Mississippi  is  a  vast  sedimentary 
basin  extending  from  the  Alleghanies  to  the  ranges  of 
the  Rocky  Mountains.  Through  this  the  great  river  and 
its  numerous  tributaries  have  made  their  way  for  count- 
less ages,  working  out  shallow  depressions  in  the  alluvial 
plain,  on  which  are  recorded  the  chronicles  of  successive 
epochs  of  change  in  the  broad  terraces  that  mark  the  de- 
serted levels  of  ancient  channels.  The  edges  of  these 
table-lands  bordering  on  the  valleys  are  indented  by 
numerous  ravines,  and  the  junctions  of  many  lesser 
streams  with  the  rivers  have  formed  nearly  detached 
peninsulas,  or  in  some  cases  tracts  of  considerable  eleva- 
tion insulated  from  the  original  table-land.  Many  of 
those  bluff  headlands,  peninsulas,  and  isolated  hiUs  with 
level  summits  of  considerable  extent,  presented  all  the 
requisite  adaptations  for  the  site  of  native  strongholds 
on  the  river  skirts  of  those  fertile  table-lands,  where  so 
many  traces  of  the  presence  of  an  ancient  population 
abound.  These  points  have,  accordingly,  been  fortified 
with  great  labour  and  skill.  Embankments  and  ditches 
enclose  the  whole  space,  varying  in  strength  according  to 
the  natural  resources  of  the  ground.    The  approaches  are 


X.]      ARCHITECTURAL  INSTINCT :  EARTHWORKS.     327 

guarded  by  trenches  and  over-lapping  walls,  more  or  less 
numerous  in  different  forts ;  and  have  occasionally  a 
mound  alongside  of  the  other  defences  of  the  approach, 
but  rising  above  the  rest  of  the  works,  as  if  designed 
both  for  out-look  and  additional  defence.  In  some  few 
cases  the  walls  of  these  enclosures  are  of  stone,  but  if 
they  were  ever  characterized  by  any  attempt  at  regular 
masonry  all  traces  of  it  have  disappeared,  and  there  seems 
little  reason  for  supposing  that  such  walls  differed  in 
essential  character  from  the  earthworks.  No  cement  was 
used,  and  in  all  probability  we  have  in  these  only  heaps  of 
stones  instead  of  earth-banks,  owing  to  special  local  facili- 
ties which  led  to  the  substitution  of  the  one  for  the  other. 
One  of  the  simplest,  but  most  extensive  of  those 
primitive  strongholds,  is  Fort  Hill,  Ohio,  surveyed  and 
described  by  Messrs.  Squier  and  Davis.  The  defences 
occupy  the  summit  of  a  detached  hill,  elevated  about 
five  hundred  feet  above  the  bed  of  Bush  Creek,  which 
flows  round  two  sides  of  it,  close  to  its  precipitous 
slope.  Along  the  whole  edge  of  the  hill  a  deep  ditch 
has  been  cut,  and  the  materials  taken  from  it  have 
been  piled  up  into  an  embankment,  varying  in  height 
above  the  bottom  of  the  ditch,  from  six  to  fifteen  feet. 
In  its  whole  extent  the  wall  measures  eight  thousand  two 
hundred  and  twenty-four  feet,  or  upwards  of  a  mile  and 
a  half  in  length,  and  encloses  an  area  of  forty-eight  acres. 
This  extensive  enclosure  is  how  covered  with  gigantic 
forest-trees.  One  of  them,  a  chestnut,  measured  twenty- 
one  feet,  and  an  oak,  though  greatly  decayed,  twenty- 
three  feet  in  circumference,  while  the  trunks  of  immense 
trees  lay  around  in  every  stage  of  decay.  Such  was  the 
aspect  of  Fort  Hill,  Ohio,  a  few  years  ago,  and  it  is 
probably  in  no  way  changed  now.  LyeU  mentions  in 
his  Travels  in  North  America,  that  Dr.  Hildreth  counted 
eight  hundred  rings  of  annual  growth  in  a  tree  which 


328  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

grew  on  one  of  the  mounds  at  Marietta,  Uhio;  and 
Messrs.  Squier  and  Davis,  from  the  age  and  condition 
of  the  forest,  ascribe  an  antiquity  to  its  deserted  site  of 
considerably  more  than  a  thousand  years.  In  their  pre- 
sent condition,  therefore,  the  walls  of  the  "  Fort  Hill '' 
are  ruins  of  an  older  date  than  the  most  venerable 
stronghold  of  the  Normans  of  England ;  and  we  see  as 
little  of  their  original  completeness^  as  in  the  crumbling 
Norman  keep  we  are  able  to  trace  all  the  complex  sys- 
tem of  bastions,  curtains,  baileys,  buttress-towers,  and 
posterns  of  the  military  architecture  of  the  twelfth  cen- 
tury. Openings  occur  in  the  walls,  in  some  places  on 
the  steepest  points  of  the  hill  where  access  is  impossible  ; 
and  where,  therefore,  we  must  rather  suppose  that  plat- 
forms may  have  been  projected  to  defend  more  accessible 
points.  The  ditch  has  in  many  places  been  cut  through 
sandstone  rock  as  well  as  soil,  and  at  one  point  the  rock 
is  quarried  out  so  as  to  leave  a  mural  front  about  -twenty 
feet  high.  Large  ponds  or  artificial  reservoirs  for  water 
have  been  made  within  the  enclosure  ;  and  at  the  south- 
em  point,  where  the  natural  area  of  this  stronghold 
contracts  into  a  narrow  and  nearly  insulated  projection 
terminating  in  a  bold  bluflF,  it  rises  to  a  height  of  thirty 
feet  above  the  bottom  of  the  ditch,  and  has  its  own 
special  reservoirs,  as  if  here  was  the  keep  and  citadel 
of  the  fortress :  doubtless  originally  strengthened  with 
palisades  and  mUitaiy  works,  of  which  every  trace  had 
disappeared  before  the  ancient  forest  asserted  its  claim 
to  the  deserted  fortalice.  At  this  point  the  surveyors 
noted  strong  traces  of  the  action  of  fire  on  the  rocks  and 
stones ;  though  whether  remote  or  recent,  they  found  it 
difficult  to  determine.^ 

Here  then,  it  is  obvious  we  look  on  no  temporary 
retreat  of  some  nomade  horde,  but  on  a  military  work 

"^Ancient  Monuments  of  (he  Mississippi  Valley,  pp.  14,  16. 


X.]      ARCHITECTURAL  INSTINCT :  EARTHWORKS.      329 

of  great  magnitude,  which,  even  with  all  the  appliances 
of  modern  engineering  skill,  would  involve  the  protracted 
operations  of  a  numerous  body  of  labourers^  and  when 
completed  must  have  required  a  no  less  numerous  gar- 
rison for  its  defence.  And  this  may  be  taken  as  an 
example  of  the  remarkable  military  earthworks,  though 
they  necessarily  differ  greatly  in  detail  from  their  inge- 
nious adaptation  to  their  varying  sites.  One,  called 
"  Fort  Ancient,'*  built  on  two  nearly  detached  terraces, 
rising  with  precipitous  banks  two  hundred  and  thirty 
feet  above  the  Little  Miami  River,  Ohio,  is  walled  by  a 
range  of  embankments,  measuring  at  the  most  accessible 
points  from  eighteen  to  twenty  feet  high,  and  extending 
altogether  to  a  length  little  short  of  four  miles,  besides 
detached  mounds,  parallels,  and  overlapping  curtain- 
walls.  Professor  Locke  of  Cincinnati,  by  whom  Fort 
Ancient  was  minutely  surveyed,  with  a  numerous  staff 
of  assistants,  states  that  "  the  number  of  cubic  yards  of 
excavation  may  be  approximately  estimated  at  628,800;" 
and  after  discussing  various  geological  and  other  evi- 
dences of  the  age  of  the  ensulated  hills  and  their  ela- 
borate earthworks,  he  concludes  by  expressing  his  aston- 
ishment "  to  see  a  work,  simply  of  earth,  after  braving 
the  storms  of  thousands  of  years,  still  so  entire  and 
weU-marked.*'  The  walls,  however,  are  formed  of  clay 
nearly  impervious  to  water,  and  at  numerous  points  are 
strengthened  with  large  quantities  of  water-worn  stones, 
seemingly  taken  from  the  bed  of  the  river.  Commenting 
on  the  same  stronghold,  Messrs.  Squier  and  Davis  re- 
mark :  "  A  review  of  this  magnificent  monument  cannot 
fail  to  impress  us  with  admiration  of  the  skill  which 
selected,  and  the  industry  which  secured  this  position. 
Under  a  military  system,  such  as  we  feel  warranted  in 
ascribing  to  the  people  by  whom  this  work  was  con- 
structed, it  must  have   been  impregnable.      In  every 


r 


330  PREHISTORIC  MAX.  [Chap. 

point  of  view  it  m  certainly  one  of  the  most  interesting 
remains  of  antiquity  which  the  continent  afforda"' 

Subsequent  explorations  conducted  by  Mr.  Squier  in 
reference  to  the  "  Aboriginal  Monuments  of  the  State  of 
Kew  York,"  led  to  the  publication  of  the  report,  already 
i-efened  to,  on  the  numerous  earthworks  scattered 
through  that  and  the  borders  of  the  adjacent  States ; 
and  to  his  narrowing  the  area  ascribed  to  the  works  of 
the  Mound-Builders  by  assigning  the  origin  of  all  such 
more  northern  remains  surveyed  by  him,  to  the  Iroquois 
and  other  Indian  tribes  known  to  have  been  in  occupa- 
tion of  that  region  in  comparatively  recent  times.  The 
conclusions  arrived  at,  on  evidence  thus  cautiously  con- 
sidered, are  of  considerable  importance  in  their  indirect 
bearing  on  questions  suggested  by  the  characteriBtics  of 
the  more  ancient  works.  Among  the  Indian  tribes  who 
have  come  under  direct  observation  of  the  European 
colonists  of  their  ancient  possessions,  none  played  a 
more  prominent  part  than  the  imited  nations  of  the 
Iroquois.  At  the  period  of  Dutch  discovery  in  the 
beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century,  they  occupied  the 
territory  between  the  Hudson  and  the  Genesee  rivers, 
which  they  continued  to  maintain  possession  of  for 
nearly  two  centuries  thereafter,  in  defiance  of  warlike 
native  foes,  and  the  more  formidable  aggression  of 
French  invaders.  The  Iroquois  exhibited  a  capacity 
for  united  action,  and  a  consistent  hereditary  policy, 
without  a  parallel  in  Indian  history.  Their  famous 
League,  or  Confederation  of  the  Five  Nations,  was,  as 
we  have  already  seen,  organized  and  maintained  with 
an  undeviating  fidelity  to  their  federal  interests.  Their 
numbers,  at  the  period  of  their  greatest  prosperity,  about 
the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century,  have  been  vari- 
ously estimated  from  70,000,  which  La  Hontan  assigned 

'  AiKitnt  iimtumenta  of  tht  MlvUsippi  VaUey,  p,  21. 


X.]      ARCHITECTURAL  INSTINCT:  EARTHWORKS,     331 

to  them,  to  Bancroft's  calculations,  which  reduce  them 
to  17,000.  Probably  the  estimate  of  the  historian  of 
their  League — who  considers  his  number  of  25,000  as 
lower  than  the  data  he  reasons  from  would  justify, — 
may  be  considered  as  fair  an  approximation  to  the  actual 
numbers  as  can  now  be  made.  Very  exaggerated  pictures 
have  been  drawn  by  some  modem  writers  of  this  Iro- 
quois confederacy,  as  though  it  were  a  well-organized 
oligarchical  government  of  federal  states,  not  greatly 
inferior  to  the  civil  institutions  of  Mexico  and  Peru. 
Such  an  idea  is  wholly  inconsistent  with  facts.  The 
Iroquois,  it  has  been  already  shown,  were  a  mere  nation 
of  savage  hunters,  among  whom  only  the  earliest  germs 
of  incipient  civilisation  are  traceable.  Though  still  in 
the  hunter  state,  they  had  nevertheless  acquired  settled 
habits,  and  devoted  themselves  to  some  extent  to  agri- 
culture. Such  a  people  must  be  considered  to  present 
the  highest  type  of  the  hunter  state.  But  with  aU  the 
long-matured  arts  resulting  from  such  combined  action, 
in  the  maintenance  of  a  settled  territory  for  successive 
generations  against  j&erce  hostile  tribes,  and  the  defence 
of  an  extensive  frontier  constantly  exposed  to  invasion, 
the  traces  of  the  Iroquois  strongholds  are  of  the  slightest 
and  most  ephemeral  description.  After  completing  his 
survey  of  them,  Mr.  Squier  remarks  : — "  From  the  facts 
which  have  fallen  under  my  notice,  I  feel  warranted  in 
estimating  the  number  of  ancient  works  which  originally 
existed  in  the  State  at  from  two  hundred  to  two  hundred 
and  fifty.  Probably  one  half  of  these  have  been  obli- 
terated by  the  plough,  or  so  much  encroached  upon  as  to 
be  no  longer  satisfactorily  traced.  Were  these  works  of 
the  general  large  dimensions  of  those  of  the  Western 
States,  their  numbers  would  be  a  just  ground  of  astonish- 
ment. They  are,  however,  for  the  most  part  compara- 
tively small,  varying  from  one  to  four  acres, — the  largest 


332  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

not  exceeding  sixteen  acres  in  area.  The  embankments, 
too,  are  slight,  and  the  ditches  shallow  ;  the  former 
seldom  more  than  four  feet  in  height^  and  the  latter  of 
corresponding  proportions ; "  and  their  history  is  com- 
pleted by  the  fact  that  the  numerous  relics  found  within 
their  enclosures  entirely  correspond  with  the  arts  prac- 
tised by  the  Indians  in  the  earlier  periods  of  their 
intercoise  with  Europeans. 

From  all  the  facts  thus  presented  to  our  consideration, 
it  is  obvious  that  the  highest  estimate  we  can  entertain 
of  the  remarkable  powers  of  combination  indicated  by 
the  famous  League  of  the  Iroquois,  or  all  the  singularly 
interesting  germs  of  an  incipient  civilisation  which  we 
detect  in  the  history  of  "  the  Five  Nations,"  furnish  no 
evidence  of  a  capacity  for  the  construction  and  main- 
tenance of  works  akin  to  those  selected  as  illustrations 
of  the  strongholds  of  the  Mound-BuUders  in  the  Ohio 
valley.  Striking  as  is  the  contrast  which  the  Iroquois 
present  to  more  ephemeral  savage  tribes,  the  remains  of 
their  earthworks  are  not  less  inferior  to  those  of  the 
Mound-Builders  than  the  latter  are  to  the  elaborate  and 
ornate  architecture  of  Mexico  and  Yucatan.  There  are 
indeed  points  of  resemblance  between  the  strongholds 
of  the  two,  as  there  are  between  them  and  the  British 
hiU  forts,  or  any  other  earthworks  erected  on  similar 
sites  ;  but  beyond  such  general  elements  of  comparison, 
— equally  interesting,  but  as  little  indicative  of  any 
community  of  origin  as  the  correspondence  traceable 
between  the  flint  and  stone  weapons  in  use  by  the 
builders  of  both, — there  is  nothing  in  such  resemblances 
calculated  to  throw  any  light  on  the  origin  of  those 
remarkable  monuments  of  the  New  World.  It  is  rather 
from  the  striking  contrast  between  the  two  that  we  may 
turn  the  remains  of  Iroquois  military  engineering  to 
account,  as  suggestive  of  the  greatly  more  advanced 


X.]      ARCHITECTURAL  INSTINCT:  EARTHWORKS.     333 

condition  of  social  life  and  the  arts  of  a  settled  poptda- 
tion  among  the  ancient  Mound-Builders  of  the  Missis- 
sippi and  its  tributaries. 

Further  proofs  of  the  settled  character  of  this 
ancient  population  are  furnished  by  another  class  of 
defensive  works  which  are  assumed,  with  much  pro- 
bability, to  mark  the  sites  of  fortified  towns.  One 
of  these,  called  "  Clark's  Work,"  on  the  north  fork 
of  Point  Creek,  in  the  Scioto  valley,  embraces  in  its 
main  defences  and  a  uniform  rectangular  outwork, 
an  area  of  one  hundred  and  twenty-seven  acres,  and 
encloses  within  its  circumvallations  sacrificial  mounds 
and  symmetrical  earthworks,  assumed  with  every  pro- 
bability to  have  been  designed  for  religious  or  civic 
purposes.  In  this,  as  in  some  other  examples,  a  stream 
has  been  turned  from  its  original  course  into  an  entirely 
new  channel,  in  order  to  admit  of  the  completed  circuit 
of  the  walls.  Considerable  traces  of  the  action  of  fire 
are  apparent  on  some  portions  of  the  work  ;  and  within 
its  enclosures  many  of  the  most  interesting  relics  of 
ancient  art  have  been  dug  up,  including  several  coiled 
serpents  carved  in  stone,  and  carefully  enveloped  in  sheet 
mica  and  copper ;  pottery,  carved  fragments  of  ivory, 
discoidal  stones,  and  numerous  fine  sculptures  in  the 
same  material  "The  amount  of  labour,''  Mr.  Squier 
remarks,  "  expended  in  the  construction  of  this  work,  in 
view  of  the  imperfect  means  at  the  command  of  the 
builders,  is  immense.  The  embankments  measure  to- 
gether nearly  three  miles  in  length  ;  and  a  careful 
computation  shows  that,  including  mounds,  not  less  than 
three  million  cubic  feet  of  earth  were  used  in  their 
composition."^ 

It  is  obvious  that  the  population  capable  of  furnishing 
the  requisite  labour  for  works  of  so  extensive  a  nature 

^  Ancient  Monuments  of  the  Mississippi  Valley,  pp.  26-29,  plate  x. 


334  PREHISTORIC  MAX.  [Chap. 

must  have  been  great,  and  its  resources  for  the  main- 
tenance of  such  a  phalanx  of  workers  proportionally 
abundant.  The  garrisons  of  the  great  strongholds,  and 
the  population  that  found  shelter  within  such  extensive 
mural  defences  as  **  Clark's  Work,"  must  also  have  been 
very  large,  and  requiring  for  their  subsistence  the  con- 
tributions of  an  extensive  district.  Such  conclusions 
are  the  manifest  and  inevitable  deductions  from  the 
evidence  which  the  two  classes  of  defensive  works  afford; 
and  they  derive  abundant  confirmation  from  those  of 
diverse  character.  "  By  a  minute  attention  to  the 
various  details  of  their  defensive  works,''  the  authors  of 
the  elaborate  Report  on  the  Ancient  Monuments  of  the 
Mississippi  Valley  remark,  "  we  are  prepared  to  estimate 
the  judgment,  skill,  and  industry  of  their  builders.  No 
one  can  rise  from  such  an  examination  except  with  the 
conviction  that  the  race  by  whom  these  works  were 
erected,  possessed  no  inconsiderable  knowledge  of  the 
science  of  defence,  a  degree  of  knowledge  much  superior 
to  that  known  to  have  been  possessed  by  the  hunter 
tribes  of  North  America  previous  to  the  discovery  by 
Columbus,  or  indeed  subsequent  to  that  event.  Their 
number  and  magnitude  must  also  impress  the  inquirer 
with  enlarged  notions  of  the  power  of  the  people  com- 
manding the  means  for  their  construction,  and  whose 
numbers  required  such  extensive  works  for  their  pro- 
tection." The  evidence  of  many  sections  of  the  coimtry 
having  once  been  fiUed  by  a  dense  population  is  no 
less  conclusive,  when  we  turn  from  the  consideration 
of  single  large  works  of  the  class  already  referred  to  ; 
and  estimate  the  number  and  extent  of  the  mounds, 
symmetrical  enclosures,  and  earthworks  of  various  kinds 
connected  with  the  arts  of  peace  and  the  rites  of  re- 
ligious worship,  which  give  so  striking  a  character  to 
the  same  river  valleys  and  terraces  where  such  extensive 


h 


X.]      ARCHITECTUEAL  INSTINCT:  EARTHWORKS.     335 

fortifications  crown  the  insulated  heights  best  adapted 
by  nature  for  defence. 

The  class  of  earthworks  designated  as  Sacred  En- 
closures has  been  separated  from  the  military  works  of 
the  Mound-Builders  on  very  obvious  grounds.  Instead 
of  the  elaborate  fortifications,  adapted  in  each  case 
to  all  the  natural  features  of  the  well-chosen  site,  and 
strengthened  by  external  ditch,  mound,  and  complicated 
approaches  :  the  broad  levels  on  the  river  terraces  have 
been  selected  for  their  reUgious  works.  There,  on  the 
great  unbroken  level,  have  been  constructed  groups  of 
symmetrical  enclosures,  square,  circular,  elliptical,  and 
octagonal ;  and  with  long  connecting  avenues,  suggesting 
comparisons  with  the  British  Avebury,  or  the  Hebridean 
Cullemish ;  with  the  Breton  Camac ;  or  even  with  the 
temples  and  Sphinx-avenues  of  the  Egjrptian  Kamak  and 
Luxor.  The  embankments  or  earthwalls  are  generally 
slight,  varying,  in  the  majority  of  cases,  from  three  to 
seven  feet  in  height ;  and  where  a  ditch  occurs  it  is  in 
the  interior.  Exceptional  cases,  however,  exhibit  the 
waUs  on  an  imposing  scale,  as  in  the  great  circle  at 
Newark,  Ohio,  which  forms  part  of  an  extensive  and 
complicated  series  of  square,  circular,  and  polygonal 
enclosures,  with  mounds  and  connecting  avenues,  ex- 
tending over  nearly  four  square  miles.  This  singular 
group,  designated  "  The  Newark  Works,''  will  be  best 
understood  by  a  reference  to  the  accompanying  engraved 
plan,  taken  from  surveys  executed  since  those  of  Mr. 
Charles  Whittlesey,  which  are  engraved  in  the  work  of 
Messrs.  Squier  and  Davis.^  They  differ  in  one  or  two 
minor  details ;  but  a  comparison  of  the  plans  will  be  found 
chiefly  interesting  from  showing  the  changes  effected  by 
modem  civilisation  in  a  very  few  years,  on  a  region 
which,  to  all  appearance,  had  previously  remained  un- 

^  Ancient  Monuments  of  the  Muuissippi  Valley^  plate  xxv. 


336  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

altered  through  many  centuries.  From  the  plate  it  will 
be  seen  that  the  group  consists  of  a  complicated  series  of 
works,  symmetaical  in  their  principal  features,  but  con- 
structed  apparently  with  reference  to  a  uniform  plan,  and 
connected  by  long  avenues  and  other  subordinate  works, 
some  of  which  appear  to  be  subsequent  additions  to  the 
original  design.  The  engraving,  however,  conveys  a  very 
imperfect  idea  of  the  scale  on  which  the  whole  is  con- 
structed. An  elliptical  enclosure,  measuring  respectively 
twelve  hundred  and  fifty,  and  eleven  hundred  and  fifty 
feet  in  its  diameters,  is  formed  by  embankments  about 
twelve  feet  in  perpendicular  height,  by  fifty  feet  of  base, 
and  with  an  interior  ditch  seven  feet  deep  by  thirty-five 
feet  wide.  At  the  entrance,  which,  as  a  nearly  invariable 
rule,  is  placed  towards  the  east,  the  ends  of  the  enclosing 
walls  curve  outwards  for  a  distance  of  a  hundred  feet, 
with  the  ditch  continued  along  the  inner  side  of  each, 
leaving  a  level  way  between  the  edges  of  the  ditch  on 
either  side,  like  a  terraced  viaduct,  measuring  eighty 
feet  wide.  Overhung  as  it  is  with  the  gigantic  trees  of 
a  primitive  forest,  the  surveyors  d5scribe  their  sensations 
on  first  entering  the  ancient  avenue  as  akin  to  the  awe 
with  which  the  thoughtful  traveller  is  impressed  when 
entering  the  portal  of  an  Egyptian  temple,  or  gazing 
upon  the  silent  ruins  of  Petra.  In  the  centre  of  this 
enclosure  is  a  remarkable  structure,  apparently  designed 
to  represent  a  gigantic  bird  with  expanded  wings ;  but 
on  opening  it,  an  "  altar''  was  found  under  the  centre  of 
the  long  mound  constituting  the  body ;  in  which  respect 
it  differs  from  anything  hitherto  noted  in  exploring  the 
emblematic  mounds  of  Wisconsin.  The  fact,  however, 
is  an  important  one,  tending  as  it  does  to  confirm  the 
idea  that  the  great  circle  and  its  group  of  earthworks  all 
bore  some  relation  to  the  strange  rites  of  religion  once 
practised  within  those  singular  circumvallations  under  the 


X.]      ARCHITECTURAL  INSTINCT:  EARTHWORKS.     337 

broad  canopy  of  heaven.  From  the  great  elliptical  en- 
closure a  wide  avenue  of  two  dissimilar  parts,  seemingly 
constructed  without  relation  to  each  other,  leads  to  a 
square  enclosing  an  area  of  twenty  acres,  with  seven 
mounds  disposed  symmetrically  within  the  enclosing  walls. 
Beyond,  this  avenue  is  continued  in  the  same  direction 
till  it  joins  another  group  of  works,  including  embank- 
ments, avenues,  mounds,  and  a  graded  way  between 
elevated  parallel  walls,  leading  down  to  the  lower  level 
where  the  South  Fork  joins  the  Kacoon  Creek,  as  it  flows 
eastward  to  the  Licking  river.  In  the  opposite  direction 
two  long  avenues  lead  westward,  one  of  them  ascending 
by  a  graded  way  from  the  same  lower  level,  and  the  other 
joining  the  enclosed  square,  and  leading  from  a  portal  in 
the  centre  of  its  western  enclosure.  The  parallel  walls  of 
these  avenues  are  upwards  of  a  mile  long,  and  two  hun- 
dred feet  apart,  and  both  terminate  at  an  octagonal  earth- 
work, enclosing  upwards  of  fifty  acres,  beautifully  level, 
except  where  a  truncated  pyramidal  elevation  stands  in 
front  of  the  gateway  opened  at  each  of  its  angles.  From 
the  widest  of  these,  on  its  south-western  side,  parallel 
walls,  enclosing  an  avenue  sixty  feet  wide,  extend  a  dis- 
tance of  three  hundred  feet,  connecting  the  octagon  with 
a  circular  work  2880  feet,  or  upwards  of  half  a  mile,  in 
circumference ;  and  notwithstanding  its  great  scale,  the 
surveyors  specially  note  that  they  ascertained  this  work 
to  be  a  true  circle.  Opposite  to  the  junction  of  the 
avenue-parallels  with  the  wall  of  the  circle,  corresponding 
parallels  are  continued  a  distance  of  one  hundred  feet, 
and  then  midway  across  this  an  immense  oblong  mound 
intersects  and  rises  above  the  parallels.  It  measures  170 
feet  long,  and  rises  eight  feet  above  the  walls  of  the  circle, 
so  as  to  present  a  point  from  whence  the  whole  works 
can  be  overlooked.  It  has  been  called  the  "  Observatory" 
on  this  account ;   but  it  is  a  remarkable  and  unique 

VOL.  I.  Y 


338  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

feature,  the  original  purpose  of  which  it  is  difficult  to 
surmise.  Since  the  publication  of  the  Smithsonian 
Report i  a  trench  has  been  cut  through  it,  from  which  it 
is  proved  to  be  entirely  constructed  of  clay ;  and  the  con- 
clusion suggested  to  careful  observers  appears  to  be  that 
this,  as  well  as  others  of  the  more  important  earthworks, 
were  regularly  built  of  adobes,  or  sun-dried  bricks,  the 
external  and  exposed  surfaces  of  which  have  gradually 
crumbled  away,  and  been  clothed  with  the  vegetation  of 
many  centuries.  From  the  octagonal  enclosure  a  third 
avenue  extending  towards  the  south  has  been  traced  for 
nearly  two  miles,  where  its  walls  gradually  lose  them- 
selves in  the  plain.  They  are  placed  about  two  hundred 
feet  apart,  and  have  been  ascertained  to  be  parallel 
throughout.  Numerous  minor  works,  mounds,  pyramids, 
and  circles  of  smaller  dimensions  are  included  within  the 
same  group  of  earthworks ;  and  a  number  of  small  circles, 
about  eighty  feet  in  diameter,  have  been  supposed,  with 
much  probability,  to  mark  the  sites  of  ancient  circular 
dwellings.  In  one  of  these  a  relic,  called  "  the  Ohio  Holy 
Stone,^'  is  affirmed  to  have  been  discovered,  bearing  a 
Hebrew  inscription,  which  has  recently  attracted  an 
amount  of  attention  amusingly  characteristic  of  the 
credulous  wonder  with  which  the  ancient  earthworks  are 
regarded.  Without  the  accompanying  plan,  the  above 
description  would  convey  a  very  vague  idea  of  the 
remarkable  works  of  which  the  Newark  group  is  selected 
as  a  type.  While  presenting  certain  analogies  to  the 
mound-groups  and  enclosures  both  of  Europe  and  Asia, 
in  many  other  respects  they  are  totally  dissimilar,  and 
illustrate  rites  and  customs  of  an  ancient  American 
people  unparalleled  in  the  monumental  memorials  of 
the  Old  World. 

Several  striking  coincidences  between  the  details  of 
these  works  and  others  of  the  same  class  are  worthy  of 


X.]     ARCHITECTURAL  INSTINCT:  EARTHWORKS,     339 

notice.  The  diameter  of  the  circle,  the  perfect  form  of 
which  has  been  noted,  is  nearly  identical  with  two  others 
forming  parts  of  remarkable  groups  in  the  Scioto  vaUey, 
one  of  them  seventy  miles  distant.  The  square  has  also 
the  same  area  as  a  rectangular  enclosure  belonging  to  the 
"  Hopeton  Works,"  where  it  is  attached  to  a  circle  1050 
feet  in  diameter,  and  to  an  avenue  constructed  between 
two  parallel  embankments  2400  feet  long,  leading  to  the 
edge  of  a  bank  immediately  over  the  river-flat  of  the 
Scioto.  A  like  coincidence  in  the  precise  extent  of  the 
area  enclosed,  is  noticed  in  the  octagon  of  another  re- 
markable group,  called  the  High  Bank  Works,  on  the 
same  river-terrace;  and  in  another,  at  the  junction  of 
the  Muskingum  and  Ohio  rivers.  A  similar  agreement 
is  also  observable  in  the  smaller  features  of  the  groups ; 
and  such  coincidences  acquire  additional  importance 
when  taken  in  connexion  with  another  fact  bearing 
directly  upon  the  degree  of  knowledge  possessed  by  the 
Mound-Builders.  The  authors  of  the  elaborate  and  care- 
ful survey  of  their  works  remark  : — "  Many,  if  not  most, 
of  the  circular  works  are  perfect  circles^  and  many  of  the 
rectangular  works  are  accurate  squares.  This  fact  has 
been  demonstrated  in  numerous  instances  by  careful 
admeasurements,  and  has  been  remarked  in  cases  where 
the  works  embrace  an  area  of  many  acres,  and  where  the 
embankments  or  circumvallations  are  a  mile  and  upwards 
in  extent."^ 

Again,  the  same  minute  observers  remark  : — "  The 
square  or  rectangular  works  attending  these  large  circles 
— some  of  them  embracing  fifty  or  more  acres, — are  of 
various  dimensions.  It  has  been  observed,  however,  that 
certain  groups  are  marked  by  a  great  uniformity  of  size. 
Five  or  six  of  these  are  eocact  squares,  each  measuring 
1080  feet  a  side, — a  coincidence  which  could  not  pos- 

^  Ancient  Monuments  of  the  Mississippi  VaUey,  p.  8. 


340  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

sibly  be  accideutal,  and  which  must  possess  some  signi- 
ficance. It  certainly  establishes  the  existence  of  some 
standard  of  measurement  among  the  ancient  people,  if 
not  the  possession  of  some  means  of  determining  angles/^ ^ 
It  is  no  less  important  to  note  that  it  establishes  with 
equal  certainty  the  use  of  instruments.  A  standard  of 
measurement  could  not  exist,  still  less  be  applied,  on  so 
large  a  scale  in  geometrical  construction,  without  some 
instruments ;  and  the  very  simplest  of  these  that  we 
can  conceive  of,  constitute  a  no  less  certain  evidence 
of  the  very  diflferent  condition  of  intellectual  develop- 
ment attained  by  this  ancient  people  from  anything 
achieved  by  the  most  advanced  Indian  tribes.  Varied, 
moreover,  as  the  combinations  of  their  singular  groups 
of  earthworks  are,  traces  are  clearly  discernible  that 
certain  well-defined  plans  of  construction,  and  a  pro- 
portionate scale  of  parts,  guided  theu*  builders.  Jn 
Liberty  township,  Ross  county,  Ohio,  a  somewhat  com- 
plicated group  occurs,  occupying  a  level  terrace  on  the 
east  bank  of  the  Scioto  river.  Of  this  the  surveyors 
remark  : — "  This  work  is  a  very  fair  type  of  a  singular 
series,  occurring  in  the  Scioto  valley,  aU  of  which  have 
the  same  figures  in  combination,  although  occupying  dif- 
ferent positions  with  respect  to  each  other,  viz.,  a  square 
and  two  circles.  These  figures  are  not  only  accurate 
squares  and  perfect  circles,  but  are  in  most  cases  of  cor- 
responding dimensions  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  sides  of  each 
square  are  1080  feet  in  length,  and  the  diameter  of  each 
of  the  large  and  small  circles  is  a  fraction  over  1700  and 
800  feet.  Such  were  the  results  of  surveys  made  at 
different  times,  the  measurements  of  which  correspond 
within  a  few  feet.  Although  in  the  progress  of  investi- 
gation singular  coincidences  were  observed  between  these 
works,  yet  there  was  at  the  time  no  suspicion  of  the 

*  Ancient  Monuments  of  the  Mississippi  Valley,  p.  48. 


X]      ARCHITECTURAL  INSTINCT:  EARTHWORKS,     341 

identity  wldcli  subsequent  comparison  had  shown  to 
exist."  Justly  estimating  the  importance  of  such  coin- 
cidences, and  the  still  greater  value  of  the  evidence  of 
the  perfect  construction  of  geometric  figures  on  so  large 
a  scale,  the  authors  of  the  surveys  have  detailed  their 
method  of  procedure,  in  order  "  to  put  at  once  aU  scepti- 
cism at  rest,  which  might  otherwise  arise  as  to  the  regu- 
larity of  these  works."  This  important  point  rests 
accordingly  on  the  most  satisfactory  evidence ;  ^  nor  are 
even  the  imperfections  observed  in  the  construction  of 
some  of  the  rectangular  figures  without  their  significance, 
as  a  test  of  the  extent  to  which  geometry  had  been 
mastered  by  the  ancient  builders.  About  five  miles 
below  the  town  of  Chillicothe,  on  the  right  bank  of  the 
Scioto  river,  the  terrace  spreads  out  into  a  beautiful  level 
plain  of  great  extent,  terminating  abruptly  in  a  bold 
bank  between  seventy  and  eighty  feet  high,  and  washed 
at  its  base  by  the  river.  On  the  edge  of  this  river-terrace 
a  group  of  enclosures  exist,  including  mounds,  avenues, 
circles,  and  other  figures  in  combination  ;  but  the  prin- 
cipal work  consists  of  an  octagon  and  a  circle,  the  former 
measuring  950  feet,  and  the  latter  1050  feet  in  diameter. 
The  circle  is  a  perfect  one,  but  the  octagon  is  not  strictly 
regular,  although  its  alternate  angles  are  coincident  and 
its  sides  equal.  It  is  joined  to  the  circle  by  a  short 
avenue  formed  by  the  continuation  of  the  embankments 
at  one  of  its  angles,  and  eight  mounds  are  regularly  dis- 
posed within  the  angles,  so  that  there  can  be  no  doubt 
it  was  designed  to  be  a  regular  octagon ;  and  indeed  it 
is  sujBGlciently  accurate  to  satisfy  the  eye,  though  its 
imperfection  thus  serves  as  a  gauge  of  the  geometric 
accuracy  of  its  constructors.  Most  probably  it  was  con- 
structed on  a  circle. 

Such  may  sujBGlce  to  illustrate  some  of  the  most  strik- 

*  Ancient  MonuraenU  of  the  Mississippi  Valley^  p.  67. 


342  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

ing  and  significaat  features  of  this  remarkable  class  of 
ancient  earthworks.  That  they  were  executed  for  some 
totally  different  purpose  from  the  strongholds  already 
described,  is  obvious :  for  their  site  is  invariably  on  a 
level  terrace ;  the  embankments  are  frequently  slight ; 
where  a  ditch  occurs  it  is  generally  in  the  interior ;  and 
the  whole  nature  of  the  works  is  inconsistent  with  the 
supposition  of  their  being  designed  for  purposes  of  de- 
fence. They  occur,  moreover,  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
defensive  enclosures,  showing  that  they  are  the  work  of 
the  same  builders;  as  in  the  case  of  the  "Newark 
Works,"  Ohio,  selected  as  one  of  the  most  elaborate  and 
characteristic  groups.  The  enclosures  extend  over  the 
level  terrace,  and  with  outlying  structures  embrace  an 
area  of  several  miles  in  extent ;  and  on  each  side  of  the 
Newark  Valley,  formed  by  the  Eacoon  Creek,  defensive 
works  occupy  two  prominent  elevations  presenting  spe- 
cial natural  advantages  for  such  strongholds.  One  of 
these  encloses  the  summit  of  a  high  hill,  and  its  detaQs 
leave  no  doubt  of  its  defensive  character ;  yet  it  contains 
a  small  circle  with  enclosed  mounds,  covering  "  altars " 
corresponding  to  those  hereafter  described,  which  give 
their  peculiar  character  to  the  sacred  mounds  of  the  great 
earthworks  abounding  on  the  river  terraces.  There  is  no 
room,  therefore,  for  doubt  that  the  various  works  referred 
to  illustrate  what  may  be  styled  the  civil,  military,  and 
ecclesiastical  structures  of  the  same  ancient  people  ;  and 
to  the  last  of  these  classes  must  also  be  assigned  another 
remarkable  work  in  the  same  Newark  Valley,  called 
"The  Alligator."  It  belongs  to  the  class  of  animal 
mounds,  and  its  description  will,  in  a  subsequent  chapter, 
serve  to  illustrate  other  characteristics  of  these  singular 
memorials  of  an  extinct  people. 

Meanwhile,  one  of  the  most  important  inferences  de- 
ducible  from  the  peculiar  features  of  the  class  of  works 


X.]      ARCHITECTURAL  INSTINCT:  EARTHWORKS.      343 

already  referred  to,  is  the  state  of  knowledge  of  their 
constructors,  as  shown  by  the  uniform  dimensions  and 
regularity  of  the  figures  adopted  by  them,  in  what  are 
here  designated  their  sacred  enclosures.  The  most  skilful 
engineer  of  our  own  day  would  find  it  difficult,  without 
the  aid  of  instruments,  to  lay  down  an  accurate  square 
on  the  scale  of  some  of  those  described,  enclosing  an  area 
four-fifths  of  a  mile  in  circumference.  Circles  of  moder- 
ate dimensions  might  indeed  be  constructed  without  the 
aid  of  instruments,  so  long  as  it  was  possible  to  describe 
them  by  a  radius  ;  but  with  such  works  measuring  five 
thousand  four  hundred  feet,  or  upwards  of  a  mile  in  cir- 
cumference, the  ancient  geometrician  must  have  had  in- 
struments, and  minute  means  of  measming  arcs  ;  for  it 
seems  impossible  to  conceive  of  the  accurate  construction 
of  figures  on  such  a  scale  otherwise  than  by  finding  the 
angle  by  its  arc,  from  station  to  station,  through  the 
whole  course  of  their  delineation.  It  is  no  less  obvious 
from  the  correspondence  in  area  and  relative  proportions 
of  so  many  of  the  regular  enclosures,  that  the  Mound- 
Builders  possessed  a  recognised  standard  of  measure- 
ment, and  that  some  peculiar  significance,  possibly  of  an 
astronomical  origin,  was  attached  to  figures  of  certain 
forms  and  dimensions. 

An  interesting  discovery  made  in  1841,  in  excavating 
an  ancient  sepulchral  mound  within  the  limits  of  the 
city  of  Cincinnati,  which  has  been  the  subject  of  some 
ingenious  speculations  by  different  writers,  may  possibly 
prove  to  have  a  special  significance  in  reference  to  our 
present  investigations.  In  the  centre  of  the  mound,  and 
rather  below  the  level  of  the  surrounding  surface,  a 
skeleton  was  found  greatly  decayed,  alongside  of  which 
lay  two  pointed  bones,  about  seven  inches  long,  formed 
from  the  tibia  of  the  elk,  and  an  engraved  tablet  of  fine- 
grained sandstone,  measuring  five  inches  in  length,  by 


34J  PREBISTORIG  MAif.  [Ohap. 

two  and  six-tenths  across  the  middle,  and  three  inches 
in  its  greatest  breadth  at  the  ends.  Upon  its  smooth 
surface  an  elaborate  figure  is  represented,  as  shown  in 
the  accompanying  illustration,  by  sinking  the  interspaces 


within  an  enclosing  square,  so  as  to  produce  what  has 
been  regarded  as  a  hieroglyphic  iiiscription.  But  the 
most  remarkable  features  of  its  graven  device  are  the 
series  of  lines  by  which  the  plain  surface  at  each  end  is 
divided.  The  ends  of  the  stone,  it  will  be  observed,  are 
curved,  and  form  arcs  of  circles  of  different  dimensions. 
The  greater  arc  is  divided  by  a  series  of  Une^  twenty- 
seven  in  number,  into  equal  spaces,  and  within  this  is 
another  series  of  seven  oblique  lines.  The  lesser  arc  at 
the  opposite  end  is  divided  in  like  manner  by  two  series 
of  twenty-five  and  eight  lines,  similarly  arranged.  This 
interesting  discovery  has  not  failed  to  receive  due  atten- 
tion. It  has  been  noted  that  it  bears  a  "  singular  resem- 
blance to  the  Egyptian  cartouche."  Its  series  of  lines, 
after  being  duly  cotmted  and  pondered  over,  were  dis- 
covered to  yield,  in  the  sum  of  the  products  of  the  longer 
and  shorter  hues,  a  near  approximation  to  the  number 
of  days  of  the  year.     This  ingenious  result  furnished 


X.]      ARCHITECTURAL  INSTINCT:  EARTHWORKS.     345 

grounds  for  ascribing  to  the  tablet  an  astronomical 
origin,  and  so  constituting  it  an  ancient  calendar,  on 
which  is  recorded  the  primitive  approximation  of  the 
Mound-Builders  to  the  true  length  of  the  solar  year. 
Mr.  Squier  perhaps  runs  to  an  opposite  extreme  in 
suggesting  that  it  is  probably  nothing  more  than  a 
stamp,  such  as  have  been  found  made  of  clay,  both 
in  Mexico  and  the  Mississippi  mounds,  and  appear 
to  have  been  used  in  impressing  ornamental  pat- 
terns on  cloth  or  prepared  skins.  Such  clay  stamps 
always  betray  their  purpose  by  the  handle  attached  to 
them,  as  in  the  corresponding  bronze  stamps  of  common 
occurrence  on  Roman  sites ;  whereas  the  Cincinnati 
tablet  is  about  half  an  inch  in  thickness,  with  no  means 
of  holding  or  using  it  as  a  stamp,  and  bears  on  its 
unfinished  reverse  the  grooves  apparently  made  in 
sharpening  the  tools  by  which  it  was  engraved.  But 
whatever  theory  be  adopted  as  to  its  original  object  or 
destination,  the  series  of  lines  on  its  two  ends  have 
justly  attracted  attention ;  for  they  constitute  no  part 
of  the  device,  and  if  intended  as  an  ornamental  border 
would,  it  may  be  presumed,  have  been  carried  round  the 
entire  tablet.  Another  hypothesis  may  therefore  be  ad- 
missible, that  here,  possibly,  is  a  record  of  certain  scales 
of  measurement.  Only  for  the  construction  of  regular 
curves  could  it  be  supposed  that  such  minute  sub- 
divisions were  required  in  the  scale  of  a  rude  people. 
It  has  been  noted  that  no  two  of  its  curves  or  lines  are 
precisely  alike.  But  this  has  been  assumed  as  evidence 
alike  of  its  imperfection  and  genuineness :  Mr.  Guest, 
its  possessor,  shrewdly  remarking,  that  "  a  person  in  our 
times  could  scarcely  make  so  perfect  an  engraving  as 
this  stone,  and  not  make  it  more  perfect.^'  Yet  the 
seemingly  systematic  variation  of  curve  and  scale  in  the 
two  ends  is  suggestive  of  the  idea  that  the  variation  in 


346  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

the  external  curves  is  purposely  designed.  If  this  idea 
be  accepted  as  probable,  the  discovery  of  a  record  per- 
taining to  the  instruments  and  standards  of  measurement 
of  the  Mound-Builders  is  calculated  to  add  a  new  and 
more  definite  interest  to  our  study  of  their  geometrical 
constructional 

Such  may  suffice  to  illustrate  the  predominant  char- 
acteristics of  one  remarkable  series  of  the  ancient 
American  earthworks :  the  precise  objects  aimed  at  in 
their  construction  it  must  obviously  be  difficult,  if 
not,  indeed,  altogether  impossible,  to  determine  with 
any  certainty.  To  these  structures  analogies  have  been 
supposed  to  be  traced  in.  the  practice  of  the  Indian 
tribes  formerly  in  occupation  of  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
of  erecting  a  circular  terrace  or  platform  on  which  their 
council-house  stood.  In  front  of  this,  a  quadrangular 
area  was  enclosed  with  earthen  embankments,  within 
which  public  games  were  played  and  captives  tortured. 
To  this  was  sometimes  added  a  square  or  quadrangular 
terrace  at  the  opposite  end  of  the  enclosure.  Upon  the 
circular  platform  it  is  also  affirmed  that  the  sacred  fire 
was  maintained  by  the  Creek  Indians,  as  part  of  their 
most  cherished  rites  as  worshippers  of  the  sun.  But 
even  the  evidence,  thus  far,  is  vague  and  unsatisfactory. 
The  scale  upon  which  such  southern  Indian  earthworks 
were  constructed  may  compare  with  those  stiU  to  be 
seen  in  the  country  of  the  Iroquois  in  the  western  parts 
of  the  State  of  New  York,  but  in  no  degree  approxi- 
mates to  the  true  works  of  the  Mound-Builders.  They 
lack,  moreover,  the  avenues  and  other  remarkable  ap- 
pendages, which  constitute  in  reality  the  distinctive 
features  of  the  great  enclosures  of  the  Ohio  and  Scioto 
valleys  ;    while  the  evidences  which  these  disclose  of 

^  The  woodcut  is  engraved  from  a  rubbing  taken  from  the  original. 


X.]      ARCHITECTURAL  INSTINCT :  EARTHWORKS.     347 

remarkable  geometrical  skill,  the  possession  of  a  recog- 
nised standard  of  measurement,  and  a  definite  means 
of  determining  angles,  with  the  repetition  of  earth- 
works of  great  and  uniform  dimensions  on  widely 
separated  sites,  all  combine  to  illustrate  a  condition 
of  society  utterly  incompatible  with  any  character- 
istics of  the  most  civilized  Indian  tribes  known  to 
Europeans/ 

Much  greater  resemblances  might  be  traced,  without 
any  great  play  of  fancy,  to  the  classic  stadium  or  circus, 
and  to  the  stone  avenues  of  Camac,  Avebury,  and  Cul- 
lemish  ;  but  in  any  such  comparisons  we  can  go  but  a 
little  way,  without  being  compelled  to  make  as  large 
demands  on  the  imagination  as  have  already  served  to 
swell  out  bulky  quartos  of  Druidical  antiquarianism  to 
so  little  purpose.  What,  for  example,  shall  we  make  of 
the  graded  ways,  such  as  that  of  Piketon,  Ohio,  where 
a  graduated  approach  has  been  laboriously  excavated 

1  It  is  important  to  bear  in  remembrance  the  nature  of  the  evidence  and 
authority  for  this.  The  remarkable  group  of  geometrical  earthworks  in 
Liberty  township,  Ohio,  includes  a  perfect  circle,  seventeen  hundred  feet  in 
diameter ;  a  smaller  one,  eight  hundred  feet  in  diameter ;  an  accurate 
square,  ten  hundred  and  eighty  feet  long  on  each  side ;  and  the  same 
figures,  with  precisely  the  same  dimensions,  were  quite  unexpectedly  found 
to  occur  repeatedly  throughout  the  Scioto  Valley.  On  this  subject  the 
surveyors  remark : — "  To  put  at  once  all  scepticism  at  rest,  which  might 
otherwise  arise  as  to  the  regularity  of  these  works,  it  should  be  stated  that 
they  were  all  carefully  surveyed  by  the  authors  in  person.  Of  course,  no 
diffictilty  existed  in  determining  the  perfect  regularity  of  the  squares.  The 
method  of  procedure,  in  respect  to  the  circles,  was  as  follows  : — ^Flags  were 
raised,  at  regular  and  convenient  intervals,  upon  the  embankments,  repre- 
senting stations.  The  compass  was  then  placed  alternately  at  these  sta- 
tions, and  the  bearing  of  the  flag  next  beyond  ascertained.  If  the  angles 
thus  determined  proved  to  be  coincident,  the  regularity  of  the  work  was 
placed  beyond  doubt.  The  supplementaxy  plan  A  indicates  the  manner  of 
survey,"  etc. — Vide  Anc,  Mon.  Miss.  VaUeyt  p.  67,  pi.  xx.  Added  to  this, 
we  have  the  independent  surveys  of  some  of  these  works  by  Mr.  Charles 
Whittlesey,  topographical  engineer  of  the  State  of  Ohio,  Mr.  D.  Morton, 
Mr.  James  M'Bride,  and  other  professional  surveyors.      The  later   super- 


348  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

and  embanked,  from  one  terrace  to  another,  one  thou- 
sand and  eighty  feet  long  by  two  hundred  and  fifteen 
feet  in  greatest  width?  The  excavated  earth  has 
been  employed,  in  part,  to  construct  lofty  embank- 
ments on  each  side  of  the  ascent,  which  are  now 
covered  with  trees  of  large  size.  Beyond  this  ap- 
proach, mounds  and  half-obliterated  earthworks  indi- 
cate that  it  was  originally  only  one  part  of  an  exten- 
sive series  of  structures.  But^  viewed  alone,  it  is  one 
of  the  most  remarkable  monuments  of  prehistoric 
times  to  be  found  on  the  whole  continent,  and  cer- 
tainly bears  not  the  slightest  resemblance,  either  in 
its  character  or  the  great  scale  on  which  it  is  exe- 
cuted, to  any  work  of  the  Bed  Indians.  But  thus 
much  these,  and  other  works  hereafter  described,  all 
combine  to  tell  us  :  that,  where  the  western  settlers  of 
the  United  States  are  now  obUterating  the  ancient 
forests,  from  whence  they  have  driven  out  their  old 

ficial  interments  of  the  Indian  tribes  are  of  common  occurrence  in  the 
mounds,  and  easily  distinguishable  from  their  original  contents,  lying  at  a 
greater  depth.  Yet,  ignoring  all  this,  Mr.  Schoolcraft,  in  speaking  of  the 
tribe  of  the  AUeghans,  says : — "  A  tumulus  raised  over  the  dead,  a  mound 
of  sacrifice  to  the  sun,  a  simple  circumvallation,  or  a  confused  assemblage 
of  ditches,  mounds,  and  lines  around  a  village,  a  ring-fort  on  a  hill,  or, 
in  fine,  a  terraced  platform  of  earth  to  sustain  the  sacred  residence  of  the 
priest  and  ogema, — ^these  must  be  deemed  evidences  which  accurately 
restore,  to  the  mind  of  the  inquirer,  the  arts  of  their  authors.  They 
answer,  I  am  inclined  to  think,  the  oft-made  inquiry.  Who  erected  these 
earthworks?  ....  They  (the  AUeghans)  were,  in  truth,  the  Mound- 
Builders." — Hist,  of  Ind.  Tribes,  voL  v.  p.  135.  Yet  it  is  in  the  very 
same  volume  that  the  author  revives  and  accredits  the  apochryphal  "  Grave 
Creek  Mound  inscription,"  and  states^  "  That  the  ancient  Celtic  character 
has  been  found  in  Western  Virginia  appears  incontestable."  He  accord- 
ingly hints  at  its  association  with  the  Welsh  Madoc, — ^a  very  suitable 
parentage  for  Celtic  characters  never  heard  of  before  by  any  Celtic  scholar. 
The  era  of  the  mythic  Madoc,  son  of  Owen  Gwyneth,  king  of  North  Wales, 
is  1169,  about  which  date,  therefore,  the  AUeghans  must  have  deposited  his 
incomprehensible  Celtic  in  the  Virginia  mound. —  Vide  Hist,  of  Ind,  Tribes, 
vol.  V.  p.  34. 


X.]      ARCHITECTURAL  INSTINCT:  EARTHWORKS.      349 

Indian  inheritors,  there  existed,  before  these  forests,  a 
people  far  higher  in  many  of  the  characteristics  and 
acquirements  which  tend  to  the  elevation  of  nations, 
than  those  who  have  been  regarded  as  the  abori- 
gines  of  the  country,  and  the  first  reclaimers  of  the 
soil  from  the  wild  beasts  that  haunted  its  trackless 
wastes. 


350  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 


CHAPTER   XL 

THE  HEREAFTER :  SEPULCHRAL  MOUNDS. 

The  remarkable  characteristics  revealed  by  the  careful 
surveys  of  the  ancient  military  and  sacred  enclosures  of  the 
Mound-Builders,  have  sufficed  to  disclose  proofs  of  great 
value  ;  in  corroboration  alike  of  the  extent  of  the  popu- 
lation by  which  such  works  must  have  been  wrought, 
and  of  the  progress  they  had  already  made  in  some 

departments 'of  lnowl4  -quiri^  I  long  juried  for 
their  development,  and  incompatible  with  anything  but 
a  settled  condition  of  society,  in  which  agriculture  and 
the  arts  of  civilisation  had  already  made  some  progress. 
From  their  great  earth-mounds,  however,  as  their  most 
characteristic  and  remarkable  structures,  the  ancient 
people  of  the  Mississippi  Valley  have  received  their 
name ;  and  the  disclosures  resulting  from  the  explora- 
tion of  these  structures  have  thrown  the  greatest  light  on 
the  arts  and  social  habits  of  their  long-extinct  builders. 
The  raising  of  memorial  and  sepulchral  mounds  of  earth 
and  stone  has  been  practised  among  many  nations  in 
the  earlier  periods  of  their  history.  Where  loose  stones 
abound,  the  cairn  is  the  simplest  monumental  structure, 
and  has  been  adopted  alike  in  Asia,  Europe,  and  America 
(and,  there  can  be  little  doubt,  in  Africa  also),  both  to 
commemorate  public  events,  and  to  mark  with  special 
honours  the  place  of  sepulture  of  some  distinguished 
chief.      But  the  accumulated    materials  of  such  rude 


XI.]     THE  HEREAFTER:  SEPULCHRAL  MOUNDS,      361 

pyramids  acquire  a  value  as  civilisation  brings  in  its 
train  the  arts  and  settled  habits  of  an  agricultural  people; 
and  the  cairn,  converted  into  a  quarry  for  building  ma- 
terials, rapidly  disappears,  while  the  seemingly  slighter 
earth -pyramid,  when  clothed  with  its  ever -renewing 
turf,  remains  almost  indestructible.  The  germ  of  the 
sepulchral  earth-mound — the  rude  tjrpe  of  the  pyramids 
of  Central  America  and  Egypt, — is  to  be  sought  for 
in  the  little  heap  of  earth,  displaced  by  interment,  which 
still  to  thousands  suffices  as  the  most  touching  memorial 
of  the  dead.  In  a  primitive  age,  where  the  tomb  of  the 
great  warrior  or  wise  ruler  was  to  be  indicated  by  some 
memorable  token  of  his  people's  veneration,  the  increase 
of  the  little  grave-mound,  by  their  united  labours,  into 
a  gigantic  barrow  or  earth -pyramid,  would  naturally 
suggest  itself  as  the  readiest  and  most  marked  distinc- 
tion ;  and  when  we  add  to  this  the  accompanying  sepul- 
chral rites  and  sacrifices,  so  abundantly  illustrated  by 
the  practice  of  many  ancient  and  modem  pagan  nations, 
we  have  a  satisfactory  key  to  the  origin  and  charac- 
teristics of  one  class  of  the  remarkable  structures  of 
America's  ante-Columbian  era.  The  earth-pyramids  of 
the  Mound-Builders  are  not,  however,  all  sepulchral 
memorials ;  but,  as  has  been  already  indicated,  they 
include  a  numerous  class  manifestly  associated  with  the 
religious  rites  and  superstitions  of  their  builders,  and 
others  presenting  interesting  analogies  in  form  and  struc- 
ture to  the  teocallis  of  ancient  Mexico  and  Yucatan. 

In  this,  as  in  the  previous  chapter,  our  aim  will  be 
sufficiently  accomplished  by  selecting  one  or  two  of  the 
most  characteristic  types  of  the  different  classes  of 
mounds  as  illustrations  of  the  whole.  But  those  ancient 
tumuli  have  a  value  of  their  own  totally  distinct  from 
the  great  military,  civic,  and  religious  works  already 
referred  to.     From  the  latter  we  are  able  to  deduce 


352  PREUISTORIG  MAN.  [Chap. 

important  conclusioiis  in  relation  to  the  probable  density 
of  population,  the  amount  of  knowledge  in  military 
architecture  and  the  strategy  of  defensive  warfare,  and 
their  acquirements  not  only  in  combined  mechanical 
operations,  but  in  geometrical  knowledge.  But  within 
both  the  religious  and  sepulchral  mounds  are  treasured 
the  memorials  of  ancient  rites  and  customs,  and  the 
illustrations  of  the  most  prized  and  ingenious  arts  of 
their  builders  ;  while  in  the  latter  lie  the  bones  of  those 
in  whose  honour  such  costly  piles  were  reared,  disclosing 
to  us  the  physical  characteristics  of  a  race  whose  imper- 
fect civilisation  had  been  arrested  and  brought  to  a  close 
long  before  the  conquest  of  Mexico  and  Peru.  Those 
great  earth-mounds  of  the  Mississippi  are  for  us  not 
merely  the  sepulchral  memorials  of  thB  ancient  race  ; 
they  are  the  cemetery  of  an  early  though  partial  civili- 
sation, from  whence  we  may  exhume  the  chronicles  of 
long-extinct  nations  ;  and  recover  illustrations  of  the 
life,  manners,  and  ideas  of  a  people  over  whose  graves 
the  forest  had  so  long  resumed  its  sway,  that  it  seemed 
to  the  Red  Indians'  supplanters  to  have  been  the  first 
occupant  of  the  soiL 

Tumuli,  barrows,  dunes,  moat-hills,  cairns,  and  earth 
or  stone  mounds  of  various  kinds,  abound  in  many  parts 
of  the  Old  as  weU  as  of  the  New  World,  and  are  nowhere 
more  abundant  than  in  some  districts  of  the  British 
Isles.  But  although  the  corresponding  primitive  struc- 
tures are  scattered  over  the  continent  of  America  from 
the  Gulf  of  the  St.  Lawrence  to  the  Isthmus  of  Panama, 
and  beyond  it,  far  into  the  southern  continent,  neverthe- 
less the  true  works  of  the  Mound-Builders  have  a  cha- 
racter of  their  own  altogether  peculiar ;  and  though 
numbered  by  thousands,  they  are  limited  to  well-defined 
areas,  leaving  a  large  portion  of  the  territory  of  the  more 
recent  Red  Indian  tribes,  and  the  whole  of  the  Atlajitic 


XL]     THE  HEREAFTER:  SEPULCHRAL  MOUNDS,     353 

sea-board,  without  any  traces  of  their  presence.  The 
Mound-Builders  were  not  a  maritime  people.  Their 
whole  navigation  was  confined  to  the  great  rivers  along 
the  banks  of  which  their  ancient  traces  abound ;  and 
their  commerce  and  traffic,  though  considerable,  was 
entii'ely  dependent  on  river  navigation,  and  communi* 
cation  by  long- obliterated  overland  routes  of  travel. 
Notwithstanding  the  careful  and  accurate  observations 
which  have  been  put  on  record  relative  to  the  mounds 
and  earthworks  of  "  The  West,^^  much  yet  remains  to  be 
disclosed  ;  for,  happily,  the  excavation  of  such  earth- 
pyramids  is  a  work  greatly  too'  laborious  and  costly  to 
tempt  their  investigation  by  those  who  are  influenced 
by  mere  idle  curiosity  ;  while  the  contents  hitherto  re- 
vealed to  their  explorers,  however  valuable  to  the  archaeo- 
logist, ofier  no  such  stimulus  to  cupidity  as  in  Mexico 
and  Peru  has  led  to  the  destruction  of  thousands  of  the 
memorials  of  their  extinct  arts  and  customs.  The 
mounds  of  the  Mississippi  Valley  are  sometimes  com- 
posed entirely  of  clay,  though  resting  on  a  soil  of  gravel 
or  loam.  Single  mounds  of  stone,  also,  occasionally 
occur  in  the  midst  of  a  group  composed  of  earth.  Of 
the  stone  mounds  or  cairns,  one  situated  about  eight 
miles  from  Newark  has  acquired  a  certain  factitious 
interest  in  the  progress  of  demolition.  It  formed  origi- 
nally a  conical  pyramid  forty  feet  high,  and  one  hundred 
and  eighty  feet  in  diameter.  But  the  stone  of  which  it 
was  composed  led  to  its  being  appropriated  as  a  con- 
venient quarry  for  the  construction  and  repair  of  a 
neighbouring  reservoir,  and  fifty  carts  are  stated  to  have 
been  employed  daily  for  a  period  of  two  years  in  trans- 
porting its  materials  to  the  new  works.  Here,  in  the 
fall  of  1860,  a  party  of  explorers,  digging  among  the 
foundations  of  the  nearly  levelled  cairn,  found  another 
of  those  mound-inscriptions  which  bring  into  suspicion 
VOL.  I.  z 


354  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

all  but  the  most  thoroughly  authenticated  discoveries. 
Enclosed  within  a  stone  case  of  about  nine  inches  long 
was  a  slab  of  hone-stone  with  a  figure  in  flowing  robes, 
in  low  relief  surrounded  by  an  inscription  partly  in 
Hebrew,  and  partly  in  unknown  characters,  but  which, 
nevertheless,  has  been  interpreted  as  an  abbreviated 
version  of  the  whole  Decalogue  1 

As  a  general  rule,  both  the  earth  and  stone  works  ap- 
pear to  have  been  constructed  of  materials  derived  from 
the  immediate  neighbourhood,  so  that  such  di£ferences  do 
not,  in  the  roajority  of  instances,  supply  any  guide  to  a 
diversity  in  the  enclosed  deposits.  A  special  character, 
however,  appears  to  pertain  to  one  class  of  such  monu- 
ments, designated  "Hill  Mounds,"  from  the  elevated 
sites  which  they  occupy.  The  authors  of  the  Ancient 
Monuments  of  the  Mississippi  VaUey  remark :  "  On  the 
tops  of  the  hills,  and  on  the  jutting  points  of  the  table- 
lands bordering  the  valleys  in  which  the  earthworks  are 
found,  mounds  occur  in  considerable  numbers.  The 
most  elevated  and  commanding  positions  are  frequently 
crowned  with  them,  suggesting  at  once  the  purposes  to 
which  some  of  the  mounds  or  cairns  of  the  ancient  Celts 
were  applied :  that  of  signal  or  alarm  posts.  It  is  not 
imusual  to  find  detached  mounds  among  the  hUls  back 
from  the  valleys,  and  in  secluded  places,  with  no  other 
monuments  near.  The  hunter  often  encounters  them  in 
the  depths  of  the  forests  when  least  expected ;  perhaps 
overlooking  some  waterfall,  or  placed  in  some  narrow 
valley  where  the  foot  of  man  seldom  enters.''  One  class 
of  these  mounds  has  already  been  referred  to  among  the 
more  definite  traces  of  ancient  rites  and  ceremonies  per- 
formed by  means  of  fire,  and  of  beacon-mounds  used 
according  to  the  familiar  telegraphic  system  which  has 
been  employed  in  aU  ages,  and  by  people  in  many  di- 
verse stages  of  social  progress.      Our  knowledge  of  aU 


XL]  THE  HEREAFTER:  SEPULCHRAL  MOUNDS.       355 

the  characteristics  of  the  mounds  which  crown  many 
western  heights  has  yet  to  be  greatly  extended,  before 
we  can  assign  to  them  the  true  and  probably  varied 
objects  aimed  at  in  their  construction. 

One  hill-mound,  however,  has  been  excavated  with 
highly  interesting  results.  Among  the  illustrations  of 
the  Aiicient  Monuments  of  the  Mississippi  Valley^  none 
has  been  more  frequently  referred  to,  or  made  the  basis 
of  more  comprehensive  generalizations,  than  the  **  Scioto 
Valley  cranium,*'  which  is  supposed  to  illustrate  the  phy- 
sical type  of  the  ancient  Mound-Builders.  To  this,  re- 
ference is  made  in  a  subsequent  chapter ;  but  its  locality 
belongs  to  the  present  department  of  our  subject  It 
was  obtained  from  a  mound  situated  on  the  summit  of  a 
high  hill,  overlooking  the  vaUey  of  the  Scioto,  where  the 
most  abundant  traces  of  ancient  earthworks  have  been 
observed.  It  is  described  as  one  of  the  most  prominent 
and  commanding  positions  in  that  section  of  the  coun- 
try. A  conical  knoll  crowns  the  hill,  rising  with  such 
great  regularity  as  almost  to  induce  the  belief  that  it 
also  is  artificial ;  and,  on  its  very  apex,  covered  by  the 
trees  of  the  primitive  forest,  is  the  mound.  It  is  only 
about  eight  feet  high,  and  on  being  opened  was  found  to 
be  composed  of  tough  yellow  clay,  underneath  which  a 
plate  of  mica  rested  on  an  inner  mound  composed  chiefly 
of  large  rough  stones,  and  below  this,  a  compacted  bed 
of  dry  carbonaceous  matter  contained  the  skull,  with  a 
few  bones  huddled  round  it,  and  some  shells  of  the  fresh- 
water molluscs  from  the  neighbouring  river.  Here, 
therefore,  is  one  interesting  example  of  a  sepulchral 
hill-mound  ;  and  in  all  probability,  judging  from  the 
analogies  of  the  ancient  tumuli  of  Europe,  the  hill- 
mounds  will  be  found  in  general  to  correspond  in  struc- 
ture and  contents  with  those  of  the  plain  ;  and  so  furnish 
evidence  of  the  ancient  population  that  crowded  the 


356  PREHISTORIC  MAX.  [Chap. 

great  valleys  having  been  diffused  in  smaller  numbei-s, 
far  inland  from  the  river's  banks,  in  the  outlying  val- 
leys and  among  the  secluded  recesses  of  the  hills.  There, 
perhaps,  as  among  the  higher  vaUeys  of  the  Andes,  under 
the  rule  of  the  Incas,  a  pastoral  people  supplemented  the 
agricultural  industry  of  the  central  provinces,  and  shared 
with  them  the  common  rites  and  superstitions  of  the 
national  religion. 

In  some  cases  the  lofty  site  of  the  hill-mound  may 
have  determined  its  selection  as  conferring  a  further  pre- 
eminence on  the  honom-ed  dead.  Such  at  least  is  the 
motive  which  occasionaUy  guides  the  modem  Indian  in 
his  selection  of  an  elevated  site  for  his  grave ;  and  of 
this  a  striking  illustration  is  furnished  in  the  history  of 
one  modern  hill-mound  on  the  Missouri.  Upwards  of 
forty  years  since,  Black  Bird,  a  famous  chief  of  the  Oma- 
haws,  visited  the  city  of  Washington,  and  on  his  return 
was  seized  with  small-pox,  of  which  he  died  on  the  way. 
When  the  chief  found  himself  dying,  he  called  his  war- 
riors aroimd  him,  and,  like  Jacob  of  old,  gave  commands 
concerning  his  burial,  which  were  as  literally  fulfilled. 
The  dead  warrior  was  dressed  in  his  most  sumptuous 
robes,  fully  equipped  with  his  scalps  and  war-eagle's 
plumes,  and  borne  about  sixty  miles  below  the  Omahaw 
village,  to  a  lofty  bluff  on  the  Missouri,  which  towers 
far  above  all  the  neighbouring  heights,  and  commands 
a  magnificent  extent  of  landscape.  To  the  summit 
of  this  bluff  a  beautiful  white  steed,  the  favourite 
war-horse  of  Black  Bird,  was  led ;  and  there,  in  pre- 
sence of  the  whole  nation,  the  dead  chief  was  placed 
with  great  ceremony  on  its  back,  looking  towards  the 
river,  where,  as  he  had  said,  he  could  see  the  canoes 
of  the  white  men  as  they  traversed  the  broad  waters  of 
the  Missouri.  His  bow  was  placed  in  his  hand,  his 
shield  and  quiver,  with  his  pipe  and  medicine-bag,  hung 


XL]  THE  HEREAFTER:  SEPULCHRAL  MOUNDS,      357 

by  his  side.  His  store  of  pemmican,  and  his  well-fiUed 
tobacco-pouch  were  supplied,  to  sustain  him  on  the  long 
journey  to  the  hunting-grounds  of  the  great  Manitou, 
where  the  spirits  of  his  fathers  awaited  his  coming.  The 
medicine  men  of  the  tribe  performed  their  most  mystic 
charms  to  secure  a  happy  passage  to  the  land  of  the  great 
departed  ;  and  all  else  being  completed,  each  warrior  of 
the  chiefs  own  band  covered  the  palm  of  his  right  hand 
with  vermilion,  and  stamped  its  impress  on  the  white 
sides  of  the  devoted  war-steed.  This  done,  the  Indians 
gathered  turfs  and  soil,  and  placed  them  aroimd  the  feet 
and  legs  of  the  horse.  Gradually  the  p^'^e  rose  und6r  the 
combined  labour  of  many  willing  hands,  until  the  living 
steed  and  its  dead  rider  were  buried  together  under  the 
memorial  mound ;  and  high  over  the  crest  of  the  lofty 
tumulus  which  covered  the  warrior's  eagle  plumes,  a 
cedar  post  was  reared  to  mark  more  clearly  to  the  voy- 
agers on  the  Missouri,  the  last  resting-place  of  Black 
Bird,  the  great  chief  of  the  Omahaws.  In  the  old  Pagan 
barrows  on  the  wolds  of  Yorkshire,  and  far  northward 
towards  the  Moray  Firth,  the  ancient  British  and  Saxon 
charioteers  have  been  exhumed,  with  the  iron  wheel-tires 
and  bronze  horse-furniture,  .the  wreck  of  the  decayed 
war-chariot,  and  the  skeletons  of  the  horses :  buried 
there  with  the  dead  chief,  that  he  too  might  enter  the 
ValhaUa  of  his  gods,  proudly  borne  in  the  chariot  in 
which  he  had  been  wont  to  charge  amid  the  ranks  of  his 
foes.  For  man  in  all  ages  and  in  both  hemispheres  is 
the  same  ;  and,  amid  the  darkest  shadows  of  Pagan 
night,  he  still  reveals  the  strivings  of  his  nature  after 
that  immortality,  wherein  also  he  dimly  recognises  a 
state  of  retribution. 

Among»the  numerous  and  minutely-detailed  illustra- 
tions of  Messrs.  Squier  and  Davis's  work  on  the  Ancient 
Monuments  of  the  Mississippi  Valley,  one  of  the  most 


358  PREUIiSTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

striking  evidences  of  the  extent  of  occupation  of  the 
country,  and  the  denseness  of  the  population  in  the 
forgotten  centuries  recalled  by  their  ancient  works,  is 
furnished  by  the  map  of  a  section  of  twelve  miles  of  the 
Scioto  Valley.  Square,  circular,  and  polygonal  enclosures, 
single  and  in  groups  ;  pai'allels,  ditches,  and  mounds, 
occupy  every  available  terrace  along  the  banks  of  the 
Scioto  River,  and  its  tributary  Paint  Creek.  Within  this 
once  populous  area,  accordingly,  elaborate  surveys  and 
explorations  have  furnished  many  interesting  disclosures 
relative  to  the  origin  and  objects  of  those  remarkable 
structures,  and  several  of  the  mounds  have  been  opened 
so  as  thoroughly  to  illustrate  their  general  structure  and 
contents.  They  have  been  invariably  found  to  cover  a 
single  skeleton:  though  in  one  or  two  exceptional  in- 
stances in  other  localities,  of  which  the, Grave  Creek 
Mound  of  Virginia  is  the  most  remarkable,  more  than 
one  body  has  been  deposited  under  the  mound.  Numer- 
ous as  monuments  of  this  class  are,  their  relative  numbers, 
when  compared  with  the  sacred  and  civic  works  of  the 
same  districts,  abundantly  prove  that  they  are  not  the 
common  places  of  sepulture,  but  monumental  memorials 
of  the  distinguished  dead.  They  vary  in  size  from  six 
to  eighty  feet  in  height,  but  the  greater  number  range 
jfrom  fifteen  to  twenty-five  feet ;  and  frequently  occur  in 
groups,  where  smaller  mounds  are  ranged  round  one  of 
considerable  dimensions.  Such  is  the  case  with  one  in 
Ross  county,  Ohio.  The  group  to  which  it  belongs  stands 
on  the  third  terrace  on  the  east  side  of  the^  Scioto  Valley, 
nearly  a  hundred  feet  above  the  river,  and  about  equi- 
distant from  the  High  Bank  Works,  and  those  of  Liberty 
township,  on  the  lower  terrace,  two  of  the  most  remark- 
able sacred  enclosures  already  referred  to.  The  principal 
mound  is  twenty  two  feet  high ;  and  on  penetrating  to 
its  centre  the  traces  of  a  rude  sarcophagus  or  framework 


XL  J      THE  HEREAFTER:  SEPULCHRAL  MOUNDS,      359 

of  unhewn  logs  were  found,  the  cast  of  which  still  remained 
in  the  compacted  earth.  The  bottom  had  been  laid 
with  matting  or  wood,  the  only  remains  of  which  were  a 
whitish  stratum  of  decomposed  vegetable  matter;  and 
the  timbers  once  covering  the  simple  sarcophagus  had  in 
like  manner  decayed,  and  allowed  the  superincumbent 
earth  to  fall  on  the  enclosed  skeleton.  In  this,  as  in  most 
others  of  the  opened  tumuli,  accordingly,  the  human 
bones  were  foimd  crushed  into  fragments,  which  crumbled 
to  powder  under  the  lightest  touch.  Indeed,  when  it  is 
borne  in  remembrance  how  frequently  crania  and  other 
bones  have  been  recovered  from  British  tumuli  and  crom- 
lechs in  a  perfect  condition,  though  unquestionably  per- 
taining not  only  to  the  Roman  period,  but  to  earlier  ages 
dating  beyond  the  Christian  era :  the  decayed  condition  of 
the  skeletons,  thus  protected  alike  from  air  and  moisture 
in  the  centre  of  the  large  American  mounds,  furnishes 
a  stronger  evidence  of  their  great  antiquity  than  any  of 
the  proofs  that  have  been  derived  either  from  the  age  of 
a  subsequent  forest  growth,  or  the  changes  wrought  on 
the  river  terraces  where  they  most  abound.  Around  the 
neck  of  the  single  skeleton  deposited  under  this  mound, 
were  several  hundred  beads,  made  of  the  columeUae  of 
marine  shells  and  of  the  tusks  of  some  animal ;  and, 
according  to  their  discoverers,  in  some  cases  not  only 
retaining  their  polish,  but  bearing  marks  which  seemed 
to  indicate  that  they  were  turned  in  some  machine, 
instead  of  being  carved  or  rubbed  into  shape  by  the 
hand.  They  retained  their  position,  forming  a  triple  row, 
as  originally  strung  around  the  neck  of  the  dead.  A  few 
laminae  of  mica  were  the  only  other  objects  discovered  in 
the  grave.  A  layer  of  charcoal,  about  ten  feet  square, 
lay  directly  over  the  sarcophagus,  and.  seemed,  from  the 
condition  of  the  carbonized  wood,  to  have  been  suddenly 
quenched  by  heaping  the  earth  over  it  while  still  blazing. 


360  PBEHTSTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

Similar  layers  of  charcoal  frequently  constitute  a 
noticeable  feature  in  mounds  of  this  class,  and  seem  to 
indicate  either  that  sacrifices  were  performed  over  the 
bier,  or  that  funeral  rites  of  some  kind  were  celebrated, 
in  which  fire  played  an  important  part  In  these  funeral 
pyres  probably  many  perishable  articles  were  consumed 
without  leaving  any  trace  behind,  as  the  beds  of  charcoal 
are  intermingled  occasionally  with  fragments  of  bone, 
stone  implements,  and  other  evidences  of  sacrifices  and 
tribute  to  the  deceased.  It  is  also  apparent  that  the  fire 
was  kindled  and  aUowed  to  blaze  only  for  a  limited  time, 
when  its  flames  were  quenched  by  heaping  the  earth 
over  the  glowing  embers.  The  rite  may  have  been 
symbolical  of  the  lamp  of  life  quenched  for  ever  by  the 
grave,  and  was  practised  where  cremation  was  not  fol- 
lowed ;  so  that,  while  charcoal  occurs  beneath  as  weU  as 
above  the  skeleton,  the  bones  are  found  unaffected  by 
fire.  Implements,  both  of  stone  and  metal,  have  been 
found  in  those  grave-mounds,  but  for  the  most  part  they 
ape  such  as  indicate  a  totally  different  condition  of  society 
and  mode  of  thought  from  what  Indian  sepulture  impUes. 
Weapons  are  of  rare  and  exceptional  occurrence.  The 
more  common  objects  are  personal  ornaments,  such  as 
bracelets,  perforated  plates  of  copper,  beads  of  bone, 
shell,  or  metal,  and  similar  decorations  wora  on  the  body 
at  the  time  of  its  interment.  Among  the  objects  which 
appear  to  have  been  purposely  disposed  around  the  dead, 
plates  of  mica  occur  most  frequently.  In  some  cases  the 
skeleton  has  been  found  entirely  covered  with  this  mate- 
rial ;  and  in  others  the  laminae  have  been  cut  into  regular 
figures  :  disks,  ovals,  and  symmetrical  curves.  As  a 
general  rule,  however,  it  would  appear  that  reverence  for 
the  dead  was  manifested  in  other  ways  than  by  deposit- 
ing costly  gifts  in  the  grave ;  nor  do  the  relics  found 
indicate   any  superstitious   belief  akin  to   that  which 


XL]     THE  HEREAFTER:  SEPULCHRAL  MOUNDS,      361 

induces  the  modem  Indian  to  lay  beside  his  buried  chief 
the  arms  and  weapons  of  the  chase,  for  use  by  him  in  the 
huntiDg-groirnds  and  war-path  of  the  land  of  spirits.  A 
general  uniformity  is  traceable  in  the  arrangements  and 
contents  of  the  tumuli.  In  some  cases  the  simple  sarco- 
phagus has  been  constructed  of  stone  instead  of  wood ; 
in  others  the  body  appears  to  have  been  merely  wrapped 
in  bark  or  matting.  In  some  of  the  Southern  States  both 
cremation  and  urn-burial  seem  to  have  been  practised, 
but  throughout  the  valleys  of  the  Ohio  and  its  tribut- 
aries  a  nearly  uniform  system  of  sepulchral  rites  and 
observances  has  been  traced.  These  no  doubt  bore  some 
important  relations  to  the  solemn  religious  observances 
and  superstitious  practices  indicated  by  other  works  of 
the  same  people  ;  and  as  it  is  not  ia  the  sepulchral 
mounds,  but  m  those  which  cover  the  "  altars''  on  which 
the  sacrificial  fires  of  the  ancient  worshippers  appear  to 
have  often  blazed,  that  the  greater  number  of  their  works 
of  art,  and  even  their  implements  and  weapons  have  been 
found :  it  may  be  that  there,  rather  than  at  the  grave- 
mounds,  they  propitiated  the  manes  of  the  dead,  and 
sought  by  the  sacrifices  of  love  and  reverence  to  reach 
beyond  this  world  to  one  unseen. 

So  far  as  has  hitherto  been  observed,  the  sepulchral 
mound  is  generally  the  memorial  of  a  single  interment ; 
though  the  frequent  occurrence  of  groups  of  four,  five, 
or  six  moimds,  where  a  central  one  of  from  twenty  to 
thirty  feet  high  is  surrounded  by  others  varying  from 
four  to  ten  feet  in  height,  suggests  a  probable  relation 
between  the  whole  group.  Contrary,  however,  to  what 
would  be  expected  from  a  people,  whose  earthworks  are 
constructed  on  so  large  a  scale,  and  in  regular  geo- 
metrical figures,  the  sepulchral  mound  groups  appear 
never  to  have  been  symmetrically  arranged.  But  their 
mode  of  grouping  presents  certain  analogies  to  the  ar- 


362  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

raDgements  of  cists  and  cinerary  urns  in  ancient  British 
tumuli,  which  suggest  the  probability  of  human  sacri- 
fices, and  a  suttee  self-immolation  at  the  grave  of  the 
great  chief,  so  congenial  to  the  ideas  of  barbaric  rank 
Such  cruel  rites  we  know  were  practised  among  the 
Mexicans  and  Peruvians  on  the  largest  scale;  wives, 
concubines,  and  attendants  being  immolated  by  the 
latter  on  the  tomb  of  their  deceased  Inca,  in  some  cases 
even  to  the  number  of  thousands.  If,  therefore,  we 
suppose  the  size  of  the  sepulchral  mounds  of  the  West 
to  indicate  the  rank  or  popular  estimation  of  the  de- 
ceased, then  the  relative  sizes  and  distances  from  the 
great  central  mound  may  have  reference  to  the  degrees 
of  rank  in  the  wife,  favourite  concubine,  or  official 
attendant ;  while  the  humbler  victims,  menials,  and 
slaves,  would  be  left  to  mingle  with  the  common  earth, 
with  no  memorial  to  perpetuate  the  costly  sacrifice  of 
their  life's  blood  in  celebration  of  the  obsequies  of  their 
chief.  Such  ideas,  as  we  have  seen,  pertain  to  the 
Indian  tribes  of  the  present  day,  no  less  than  to  the 
ancient  civihzed  races  of  the  New  World ;  they  are 
indeed  singularly  consonant  to  the  rude  conceptions  of 
a  future  state  which  the  untutored  mind  has  realized 
to  itself  in  aU  ages,  when  left  to  the  xmaided  light  of" 
nature,  and  which  perpetuate  in  a  future  life  the  habits, 
duties,  and  social  distinctions  of  earth.  The  smallest 
of  a  group  of  moimds  in  the  Scioto  Valley  was  excavated, 
and  found  to  contain  the  skeleton  of  a  girl,  enveloped 
in  matting  or  bark,  like  those  of  the  larger  mounds ; 
but  no  systematic  exploration  of  such  a  group  has  yet 
been  recorded.  This,  if  carefuUy  executed,  with  a 
minute  record  of  aU  the  contents  of  each  mound,  might 
reveal  the  origin  of  such  groups,  and  the  significance  of 
their  various  sizes  and  relative  positions;  which  can 
scarcely  be  supposed  to  be  without  their  meaning  among 


XI.]     THE  HEREAFTER:  SEPULCHRAL  MOUNDS.      363 

a  people  who  constructed  their  sacred  and  civic  enclo- 
sures with  such  geometrical  precision. 

Among  the  sepulchral  monuments  of  the  Ohio  Valley, 
the  Grave  Creek  Mound,  at  the  jimction  of  Grave  Creek 
with  the  Ohio  river,  in  the  State  of  Virginia,  commands, 
on  various  accounts,  a  prominent  distinction.  It  occu- 
pies a  site  on  an  extensive  plain  in  connexion  with 
various  works  now  much  obliterated  ;  but  its  own 
gigantic  proportions  bid  eflfectual  defiance  to  the  opera- 
tions which  are  rapidly  erasing  the  less  salient  records 
of  the  ancient  occupants  of  the  soil.  In  the  year  1838, 
at  a  period  when  various  circumstances  had  combined 
to  direct  an  unusual  degree  of  attention  to  American 
antiquities,  Mr.  Tomlinson,  the  proprietor  of  the  land  on 
which  the  Grave  Creek  Mound  stands,  had  it  explored 
at  considerable  cost.  A  perpendicular  shaft  was  sunk 
from  the  top,  and  a  tunnel  was  carried  to  the  centre. 
The  result  of  these  excavations  disclosed  two  sepulchral 
chambers,  one  at  the  base,  and  another  thirty  feet  above. 
They  had  been  constructed,  as  in  other  cases,  of  logs, 
which  had  decayed,  and  permitted  the  superincumbent 
earth,  with  stones  placed  immediately  over  them,  to  faU 
upon  the  enclosed  skeletons.  In  the  upper  chamber  a 
single  skeleton  was  found  in  an  advanced  state  of  decay, 
whilst  the  lower  one  contained  two  skeletons,  one  of 
which  was  believed  to  be  that  of  a  female.  With  these 
were  found  between  three  and  four  thousand  shell-beads, 
a  number  of  ornaments  of  mica,  several  bracelets  of 
copper,  and  sundry  relics  of  stone  carving,  among  which 
— if  its  genuineness  could  be  satisfactorily  authenticated, 
— an  inscribed  stone  disk  constitutes  perhaps  the  most 
marvellous  of  all  American  antiquities.  On  reaching 
the  lower  vault,  after  removing  its  contents,  it  was  de- 
termined to  enlarge  it  into  a  convenient  chamber  for 
A^sitors,  and  in  doing  so  ten  more  skeletons  were  dis- 


3r>4  PRBHTSTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

covered,  all  in  a  sitting  posture,  but  in  too  fragile  a 
stat^j  to  admit  of  preservaticn.  The  position  of  these, 
immediately  around  the  sepulchral  chamber,  in  the  very 
centre  of  the  mound,  precludes  all  idea  of  subsequent 
intennent^  and  scarcely  admits  of  any  other  mode  of 
accounting  for  their  presence  than  that  which  the  human 
sacrifices  both  of  ancient  and  modem  American  obse- 
quies suggest.  The  works  of  art  contained  in  this 
and  other  ancient  mounds  will  be  referred  to  more 
in  detail  in  subsequent  chapters,  when  we  come  to 
review  the  characteristics  of  the  Mound-Builders,  as 
illustrated  in  their  sculptures,  implements,  and  personal 
ornaments. 

A  tumulus  of  the  gigantic  proportions  of  the  Grave 
Creek  Mound  serves  emphatically  to  impress  the  mind 
with  the  fact  that  such  structures,  even  when  of  smaller 
dimensions,  were  not  the  accompaniments  of  common 
sepulture,  but  the  special  memorials  of  distinguished 
chiefs ;  or,  it  may  be,  at  times,  of  the  most  venerated 
among  the  priests  who  presided  over  the  long-forgotten 
rites  of  the  sacred  enclosures  and  the  buried  altars. 
Such  a  monument  is  the  memorial  no  less  of  the  toil  of 
multitudes,  than  of  the  posthumous  honours  lavished  on 
those  whom  they  delighted  to  honour.  But  of  the  busy 
population  that  once  thronged  the  valleys  of  the  West 
we  have  no  other  sepulchral  memorials  than  those  which 
commemorate  the  toil  of  many  to  give  a  deathless  name 
to  one  now  as  nameless  as  themselves.  The  investi- 
gators of  their  works,  after  describing  in  detail  the 
monumental  mounds,  remai'k  : — "  The  graves  of  the 
great  mass  of  the  ancient  people  who  thronged  our 
valleys,  and  the  silent  monuments  of  whose  toil  are 
seen  on  every  hand,  were  not  thus  signalized.  We 
scarcely  know  where  to  find  them.  Every  day  the 
plough  uncovers  crumbling  remains,  but  they  elicit  no 


XL]      THE  HEREAFTER:  SEPULCHRAL  MOUNDS.      365 

remark;  are  passed  by  and  forgotten.  The  wasting 
banks  of  our  rivers  occasionally  display  extensive  ceme- 
teries, but  suflScient  attention  has  never  been  bestowed 
upon  them  to  enable  us  to  speak  with  any  degree  of 
certainty  of  their  date,  or  to  distinguish  whether  they 
belonged  to  the  Mound- Builders  or  a  subsequent  race. 
These  cemeteries  are  often  of  such  extent  as  to  give  a 
name  to  the  locality  in  which  they  occur.  Thus  we 
hear,  on  the  Wabash,  of  the  '  Big  Bone  Bank'  and  the 
'  Little  Bone  Bank,'  from  which,  it  is  represented,  the 
river  annually  washes  many  human  skeletons,  accom- 
panied by  numerous  and  singular  remains  of  art,  among 
which  are  more  particularly  mentioned  vases  and  other 
vessels  of  pottery,  of  remarkable  and  often  fantastic 
form.  At  various  places  in  the  States,  north  of  the 
Ohio,  thousands  of  graves  are  said  to  occur,  placed  in 
ranges  parallel  to  each  other.  The  extensive  cemeteries 
of  Tennessee  and  Missouri  have  often  been  mentioned, 
and  it  has  been  conjectured  that  the  caves  of  Kentucky 
and  Ohio  were  grand  depositories  of  the  dead  of  the 
ancient  people."^  The  Ohio  and  Erie  canal  is  carried 
for  miles  along  the  river-terrace  of  the  Scioto  Valley,  in 
the  vicinity  of  Chillicothe,  where  the  ancient  works  of 
the  Mound-Builders  are  more  abundant  than  in  any 
other  area  of  equal  limits  hitherto  explored.  In  some 
cases  the  canal  has  been  cut  through  the  ancient  works, 
and  it  can  scarcely  admit  of  doubt  that  many  interesting 
traces  of  the  arts  and  habits  of  the  remarkable  people 
who  once  filled  the  long-deserted  scene,  must  have  been 
disclosed  to  heedless  eyes.  Here  and  there,  doubtless, 
a  stray  relic  was  picked  up,  wondered  at,  and  forgotten  ; 
but  no  note  was  taken  of  the  circumstances  imder  which 
it  was  found,  and  no  record  made  of  the  discovery. 
And  so  must  it  ever  be.     The  pioneers  of  civilisation 

^  Ancient  MonuTnents  of  the  Mississippi  VaUey,  p.  171. 


3G6  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

in  the  uncleared  wilds  of  the  West  are  too  entirely  pre- 
occupied with  the  present  to  spare  a  thought  for  long 
forgotten  centuries.  To  their  indomitable  energy  it 
is  due  that  others  can  enter  upon  their  labours  with 
leisure  for  such  thoughts ;  and  that,  through  a  fortu- 
nate combination  of  circumstances,  such  abundant  and 
accurate  data  have  been  preserved  relative  to  the  pre- 
historic ages  of  America. 

Various  classes  of  mounds,  probably  also  of  a  sepul- 
chral character,  have  been  subjected  to  exploration,  with 
results  diflFering  from  those  which  admit  of  the  strict 
classification  already  referred  to.      More  extended  and 
systematic  observations  will,  in  all  probability,  group 
into  new  classes  some  that  appear  at  present  entirely 
anomalous  ;  but  the  most  noticeable  indications  hitherto 
disclosed  by  them  suggest  that  cremation  may  have  been 
commonly  practised  among  the  ancient  Mound-Builders  ; 
or  that  a  custom  somewhat  analogous  to  the  scaffolding 
and  final  sepulture  of  the  bones  of  the  dead,  as  practised 
among  many  of  the  Red  Indian  tribes,  may  have  pre- 
vailed ;  and  that  the  bones  thus  periodically  gathered 
were  burnt,  with  fitting  and   solemn  rites,  and  their 
ashes  heaped  together,  forming  mounds,  such  as  one 
opened  on  the  bank  of  Walnut  Creek,  in  the  Scioto 
Valley.      The  pidncipal  portion  of  this  consisted  seem- 
ingly of  long-exposed  and  highly-compacted  ashes,  inter- 
mingled with  specks  of  charcoal,  and  small  bits  of  burned 
bones.     Beneath  this  was  a  small  moimd  of  very  pure 
white  clay,  resting  on  the  original  soil,  without  any 
traces  of  the  action  of  fire  ;  and  over  this  the  incinerated 
remains  had  been  piled  into  a  mound,  nine  feet  in  height 
by  forty  in  base.     The  customs  of  the  North  American 
Indians,  however,  were,  and  still  are  very  diverse ;  and  ^ 
among  the    ancient  Mexicans  and  Peruvians  also,   in- 
humation,  cremation,   urn -burial,   and   mummification, 


XI.]      THE  HEREAFTER:  SEPULCHRAL  MOUNDS,      367 

accjompanied  with  deposition  in  artificial  vaults  and  in 
caves,  were  all  practised.     It  need  not  therefore  surprise 
us  to  find  many  exceptions  among  the  ancient  Mound- 
Builders  to  any  practice  recognised  as  most  prevalent 
among  them.     Considering  the  decayed  state  of  most  of 
the  bones  recovered  from  the  great  sepulchral  mounds, 
where  they  were  equally  protected  from  external  air  and 
moisture  :  if  the  common  dead  were  inhumed  under  the 
ordinary  little  grave-mound,  their  bones  must,  for  the 
most  part,  have  long  since  returned  to  dust,  and  mingled 
with  their  mother  earth.     Even  if  such  be  the  case, 
however,  the  sites  of  their  ancient  cemeteries  in  all  pro- 
bability abound  with  many  of  the  more  indestructible 
relics  of  stone,  metal,  etc.,  repeatedly  found  in  the  larger 
mounds ;  nor  must  it  be  overlooked  in  the  latter,  that 
the  extremely  comminuted  state  to  which  most  of  their 
enclosed  skeletons  have  been  reduced,  when  brought  to 
light  by  the  modem  explorer,  is  fully  as  much  due  to  the 
falling  in  of  a  superincumbent  mass  of  earth  and  stones 
upon  them,  when  the  timber  ceOing  of  their  sarcophagus 
had  resisted  the  weight  long  enough  only  to  render  them 
the  less  able  to  resist  its  crushing  force.    The  perfect  pre- 
servation of  the  "  Scioto  Moimd  cranium,'*  described  by 
Messrs.  Squier  and  Davis  as  "the  only  skull  iucontestably 
belonging  to  an  individual  of  the  race  of  the  mounds 
which  has  been  recovered  entire,  or  sufficiently  well  pre- 
served to  be  of  value  for  purposes  of  comparison,*'  was 
due  to  its  being  entirely  embedded  in  charcoal,  over 
which  a  superstructure  of  large  stones  enveloped  with 
tough  yeUow  clay  had  been  piled,  without  any  treach- 
erous timber  vaults  ;  and  thus  it  was  found  in  perfect 
condition,  as  when  originally  deposited.     For  the  mound 
in  question  presented  another  illustration  of  the  practice 
of  cremation.     The  skull  was  found  in  the  centre  of  the 
carbonaceous  deposit,  resting  on  its  face.      The  lower 


368  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

jaw  was  wanting,  and  only  the  clavicle,  a  few  cervical 
vertebrae,  and  some  of  the  bones  of  the  feet  lay  huddled 
around  the  skulL  No  relics  of  ancient  art  accompanied 
it,  but  it  is,  in  itself,  one  of  the  most  valuable  relics 
hitherto  recovered  from  the  i\jnerican  mounds. 

Such  are  the  traces  we  are  able  to  recover  of  the 
sepulchral  rites  of  this  ancient  people.     In  discussing 
the  conclusions  suggested  alike  by  their  disclosures,  and 
by  those  which  the  sacrificial  mounds,  the  sacred  enclo- 
sures, and  the  buried  works  of  art  of  their  constructors 
reveal,  we  are  dealing  with  the  characteristics  of  a  people 
pertaining  to  periods  long  preceding  the  earliest  era  of 
written  history.     For  us  these  are  their  sole  chronicles  ; 
and  yet,  even  from  such  data,  we  are  able  to  recover 
some  traces  of  their  moral  and  intellectual  character- 
istics :  their  reverence  for  the  dead,  their  hope  beyond 
the  grave.     But  perhaps  the  most  important  conclusion 
to  be  noted  for  our  present  purpose  is  the  genera]  absence 
of  weapons  of  war  among  the  sepulchral  deposits.     It 
accords  with  many  other  indications  of  the  condition  of 
the  Mound-Builders.     They  had  passed  beyond  that  rude 
stage  of  savage  life  in  which  war  and  the  chase  are  the 
only  honourable  occupations  of  man,  and  the  only  con- 
ceivable enjoyments  of  his  barbarian  heaven.      Their 
weapons  of  war,  like  their  fortresses,  were  means  for  the 
defence  of  acquisitions  they  had  learned  to  prize  more 
highly.     They  had  conquered  the  forests,  and  displaced 
the  spoils  of  the  hunter  with  the  wealth  of  autumn's 
golden  grain ;  and  with  the  habits  of  a  settled  agricul- 
tural people,  many  new  ideas  had  taken  the  place  of  the 
wUd  imaginings  and  dark  superstitions  begotten  of  the 
forest's  gloom.     As  among  all  agricultural  nations,  the 
seasons  of  seed-time  and  harvest  doubtless  had  their 
appropriate  festivals ;  and  we  can  still,  in  imagination, 
reanimate  their  sacred  enclosures  and  long-drawn  avenues 


XL]      THE  HEREAFTER:  SEPULCHRAL  MOUNDS.     369 

with  the  joyous  procession  bearing  its  thank-oflFering  of 
first-fruits,  or  laden  with  the  last  golden  treasures  of  the 
harvest-home.  The  analogies  traceable  through  the  cus- 
toms and  sacred  rites  of  many  nations  help  to  depict  for 
us  such  festive  scenes  ;  and  in  accordance  with  the 
changes  of  thought  which  such  a  social  condition  begets, 
the  grave  had  ceased  to  be  the  mere  passage  from  the 
chase  and  the  warfare  of  forest  life,  to  new  hunting- 
grounds  in  a  land  haunted  by  the  shadows  of  life's 
weary  toUs. 


VOL.  T.     .  2  A 


37U  PREH7ST0RIC  MAN.  [Chap. 


CHAPTER    XII. 

PROPITIATION :  SACRIFICIAL  MOUNDS. 

The  name  of  sacrificial  mounds  has  been  conferred  on 
a  class  of  ancient  monuments,  altogether  peculiar  to  the 
New  World,  and  highly  illustrative  of  the  rites  and  cus- 
toms of  the  ancient  races  of  the  mounds.  From  their 
contents  also  we  derive  many  of  the  most  interesting 
examples  of  the  arts  of  that  singular  people,  preserved  on 
the  "  altars,"  where  they  appear  to  have  been  deposited, 
along  with  bumt-oflFerings  to  the  gods  of  the  ancient 
faith,  or  designed  as  the  sacrifice§  of  affectionate  devo- 
tion to  the  manes  of  the  dead.  This  remarkable  class  of 
mounds  has  been  very  carefiilly  explored,  and  their  most 
noticeable  characteristics  are :  their  almost  invariable 
occurrence  within  enclosures ;  their  regular  construction 
in  uniform  layers  of  gravel,  earth,  and  sand,  disposed 
alternately  in  strata  conformable  to  the  shape  of  the 
mound;  and  then-  covering  a  symmetrical  altar  of 
burnt  clay  or  stone,  on  which  are  deposited  numerous 
relics,  in  all  instances  exhibiting  traces  more  or  less 
abundant,  of  their  having  been  exposed  to  the  action 
of  fire. 

The  most  striking  featare  of  the  sacrificial  mounds, 
designated  by  their  explorers  "  the  altar,"  merits  special 
attention ;  and  a  sufficient  number  of  this  class  of 
mounds  has  been  opened  to  justify  the  adoption  of  cer- 
tain general  conclusions  relative  to  their  construction 


XII.]       PROPITIATION :  SACRIFICIAL  MOUNDS,         371 

and  the  purposes  for  which  they  were  designed.     On  the 
natural  surface  of  the  ground,  in  most  cases,  a  basin  of 
fine  clay  appears  to   have  been  modelled  with  great 
care,  in  a  perfectly  symmetrical  form,  but  varjdng  in 
.  shape,  and  still  more  in  dimensions.     They  have  been 
found  square  and  round,  elliptical  and  in  the  form  of 
parallelograms ;   and,  in  size,  range  from  a  diameter  of 
two  feet,  to  fifty  or  sixty  feet  long,  and  twelve  or  fifteen 
feet  wide.     The  most  common  dimensions,  however,  are 
from  five  to  eight  feet  in  diameter.    The  clay  basin,  or 
altar,  invariably  exhibits  traces  of  having  been  subjected 
to  the  action  of  fire,  and  frequently  of  intense  and  long- 
continued  or  oft-repeated  heat.     It  is,  moreover,  evident 
that  in  some  cases  the  enclosed  altar  had  not  only  been 
often  used ;  but  that  after  being  destroyed  by  repeated 
exposures  to  intense  heat,  it  had  been  several  times 
remodelled  before  it  was  finally  covered   over  by  the 
superincumbent  mound.     Within  the  focus  or  basin  of 
the  altars  are  found  numerous  relics,  elaborate  carvings 
in  stone,  ornaments  cut  in  mica,  copper  implements, 
disks,  and  tubes,  pearl,  shell,  and  silver  beads,  and  vari- 
ous other  objects,  hereafter  referred  to,  but  aU  more  or 
less  injured  by  the  action  of  fire.     In  some  cases  the 
carved  pipes  and  other  works  in  stone,  have  been  split 
and  calcined  by  the  heat,  and  the  copper  relics  have 
been  melted,  so  that  the  metal  lies  fused  in  shapeless 
masses  in  the  centre  of  the  basin.     Traces  of  cloth  com- 
pletely carbonized,  but  still  retaining  the  structure  of  the 
doubled  and  twisted  thread ;  ivory  or  bone  needles,  and 
other  objects  destructible  by  fire,  have  also  been  ob- 
served ;  and  the  whole  are  invariably  found  intermixed 
with  a  quantity  of  ashes.     Large  accumulations  of  cal- 
cined bones,  including  fragments  of  human  bones,  also 
lay  above  the  deposits  on  the  altars,  or  mingled  with 
them ;  and  in  other  cases  a  mass  of  calcined  shells,  or  of 


372  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

fine  carbonaceous  dust,  like  that  formed  by  the  burning 
of  some  vegetable  matter,  filled  up  the  entire  hollow  of 
the  altar.     But  while  it  is  obvious  from  a  few  traces,  that 
the  deposits  on  the  altars  had  included  offerings  of  objects 
which  yielded  at  once  to  the  destructive  element  to  which 
they  were  there  exposed,  as  well  as  others  capable  in 
some  degree  of  withstanding  the  intensity  of  the  flame : 
there  are  only  the  fidntest  traces  of  all  but  the  least  de- 
structible relics  of  stone  or  metal.     In  one  mound  a  por- 
tion of  the  contents  were  cemented  together  by  a  tufa- 
like substance  of  a  grey  colour,  resembling  the  scoriae  of 
a  furnace,  and  of  great  hardness.     But  subsequent  ana- 
lyses demonstrated  that  it  was  made  up  in  part  of  phos- 
phates, and  a  single  fragment  of  partially  calcined  bone 
found  on  the  altar  was  the  patella  of  a  human  skeleton. 
The  long-continued,  and  probably  oft-repeated  applica- 
tion of  intense  heat  had  reduced  the  cemented  mass  to 
this  condition.    A  quantity  of  pottery,  many  implements 
of  copper,  and  a  large  number  of  spear-heads  beautifully 
chipped  out  of  quartz  and  manganese  garnet,  were  also 
deposited  on  the  altar ;  but  they  were  intermixed  with 
much  coal  and  ashes,  and  were  all  more  or  less  melted  or 
broken  up  with  the  intense  action  of  the  fire.     Out  of  a 
bushel  or  two  of  fragments  of  the  spear-heads,  and  of 
from  fifty  to  a  hundred  quartz  arrow-heads,  only  four 
specimens  were  recovered  entire.     Fire  also  had  been 
employed  once  more  in  the  concluding  rites,  ere  this  altar 
was  finally  buried  under  the   earthen   mound,  on  the 
banks  of  the  Scioto  :  garnering  the  chronicles  of  a  long- 
extinct  past,  until  its  recent  exhumation  to  teU  its  tale 
of  forgotten  rites  and  reUgious  services  practised  there 
by  the  ancient  occupants  of  the  Ohio  Valley.    Scattered 
over  the  deposits  of  earth  filling  one  of  the  compart- 
ments, and  resting  upon  the  sides  of  the  altar,  were  found 
the  traces  of  a  number  of  pieces  of  timber,  four  or  five 


^m 


XIL]        PROPITIATION :  SACRIFICIAL  MOUNDS.         373 

feet  long.  They  had  been  somewhat  burned,  and  the 
carbonized  surface  had  preserved  their  casts  in  the  hard 
earth,  although  the  wood  had  entirely  decayed.  They 
had  been  heaped  over  while  glowing,  for  the  earth  around 
them  was  slightly  baked ;  and  thus,  after  repeated,  and 
perhaps  long-protracted  sacrificial  rites,  some  grand  final 
service  had  consummated  the  religious  mysteries ;  and 
the  blazing  altar  was  quenched  by  means  of  the  tumulus 
that  was  to  preserve  it  for  the  instruction  of  future  ages. 
Its  explorers  remark  in  reference  to  the  traces  of  a  tim- 
ber scaffolding  thus  surmounting  the  altar  at  its  closing 
services :  "  These  pieces  had  been  of  nearly  uniform 
length  ;  and  this  circumstance,  jomed  to  the  position  m 
which  they  occurred,  in  respect  to  each  other,  and  to  the 
altar,  would  almost  justify  the  inference  that  they  had 
supported  some  funeral  or  sacrificial  pile/* 

It  thus  appears  that  some  of  these  altars  remained  in 
use  for  a  considerable  period,  and  were  repeatedly  re- 
newed ere  they  were  finally  covered  over  by  the  sepul- 
chral mounds.  In  one  case,  for  example,  of  an  oblong 
mound  or  barrow  in  the  Scioto  Valley,  one  hundred  and 
forty  feet  in  length,  by  sixty  feet  in  greatest  breadth^ 
and  eleven  feet  in  height :  already  referred  to  as  that  in 
which  so  many  quartz  spear  and  arrow  heads,  along  with 
copper  and  other  relics,  were  found  ;  a  new  and  smaller 
hearth  was  observed  to  have  been  constructed  within  the 
oblong  basin  of  the  original  altar.  Within  this  smaller 
compartment  all  the  relics  deposited  in  the  mound  were 
placed,  and  the  outer  compartments  of  the  large  basin 
had  been  filled  up  with  earth  to  a  uniform  level,  the 
surface  of  which  showed  traces  of  fire.  Upon  attempting 
to  penetrate  the  altar  so  as  to  ascertain  its  thickness,  the 
task  proved  one  of  great  difficulty  owing  to  its  extreme 
hardness ;  and  when  at  length  it  was  effected,  the  clay 
was  found  to  be  burnt  to  the  depth  of  twenty-two  inches. 


374  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

As  such  a  result  seemed  one  that  coulcl  hardly  be  ac- 
counted for  by  the  action  of  any  degree  of  heat  applied 
from  above,  a  more  minute  examination  was  instituted, 
and  it  was  discovered  that  three  successive  altars  had 
been  constructed,  one  above  another,  in  addition  to  the 
smaller  hearth  or  focus  which  had  received  the  final 
sacrificial  offerings,  ere  it  was  buried  under  its  enclosing 
mound.  In  other  examples,  however,  these  altars  have 
been  observed  to  be  very  slightly  burned ;  but  wherever 
such  was  the  case,  they  have  also  been  observed  to  be 
destitute  of  remains. 

Along  with  the  manifest  evidences  of  a  uniformity  of 
system  and  purpose  in  those  remarkable  structures,  there 
is  also  a  considerable  variety  in  some  of  their  details ; 
and  one  group  may  be  selected,  as  on  several  accounts 
possessing  peculiar  features  of  interest.     On  the  western 
bank  of  the  Scioto  River,  an  ancient  enclosure  occupies  a 
level  terrace  immediately  above  the  river.     In  outline  it 
is  nearly  square  with  rounded  angles,  and  consists  of  a 
simple  embankment,  between  three  and  four  feet  high, 
unaccompanied  by  a  ditch,  or  any  other  feature  sug- 
gestive of  its  having  been  a  place  of  defence.   It  encloses 
an  area  of  thirteen  acres,  within  which  are  twenty-four 
mounds,  including  the  large  oblong  one  already  referred 
to.     The  whole  of  these  have  been  excavated,  and  found 
to  contain  altars  and  other  remains,  which  prove  beyond 
doubt  that  they  were  places  of  sacrifice,  dedicated  to 
sacred  and  superstitious  rites,  and  not  to   sepulture. 
Here,  therefore,  was  one  of  the  sacred  enclosures  of  the 
Mound-Builders :  a  temple  of  their  long-forgotten  faith, 
inroofed  only  by  the  azure  vault  of  heaven,  IDce  the  open 
British  temples  of  Avebury  and  Stonehenge.     To  this 
remarkable  enclosure  the  name  of  "Mound  City"  has 
been  given,  and  the  results  of  its  exploration  prove  it  to 
have  been  one  of  the  most  remarkable  scenes  of  ancient 


XIL]        PROPITIATION :  SACRIFICIAL  MOUNDS.         375 

ceremonial  in  the  Scioto  Valley.  It  would  almost  seem 
as  if  here  had  been  reared  an  altar  to  each  god  in  the 
ancient  American  pantheon ;  for  not  the  least  remarkable 
feature  observed  in  reference  to  the  altars  of  the  moimds 
is,  that  their  deposits  do  not  exhibit  a  miscellaneous 
assemblage  of  relics,  like  the  contents  of  an  Indian 
ossuary  or  grave- mound,  .  On  the  contrary,  the  sacrificial 
deposits  are  generally  nearly  homogeneous.  On  one 
altar  sculptured  pipes  are  chiefly  found,  sometimes  to  the 
number  of  hundreds ;  on  another,  pottery,  copper  orna- 
ments, stone  implements,  or  galena ;  on  others,  only  an 
accumulation  of  calcined  shells,  carbonaceous  ashes,  or 
burnt  bones.  A  few  altars  have  also  been  noticed,  which, 
though  much  burned,  have  no  deposit  upon  them,  except 
a  thin  layer  of  phosphate  of  lime,  which  seems  to  have 
incorporated  itself  with  the  clay  of  which  they  are  com- 
posed. Such  was  the  case  with  three  of  those  explored 
within  the  "Mound  City/'  and  it  appeared  to  their 
explorers  that,  though  repeatedly  used,  they  had  been 
carefuUy  cleared  of  all  their  contents  before  being  heaped 
over,  and  buried  under  the  final  mound.  The  altar  under 
one  of  the  mounds  of  this  enclosure  was  a  parallelogram 
of  the  utmost  regularity,  measuring  ten  feet  in  length, 
by  eight  in  width,  and  with  its  basin  of  the  same  rect- 
angular form.  It  contained  a  deposit  of  fine  ashes, 
with  fragments  of  pottery,  from  which  the  pieces  of  one 
beautiful  vase  were  recovered  and  restored.  With  these 
also  lay  a  few  shell  and  pearl  beads.  In  another  oblong 
mound,  the  altar  was  an  equally  perfect  square,  but  with 
a  circular  basin,  remarkable  for  its  depth,  and  fiUed  with 
a  mass  of  calcined  shells.  Another,  though  of  small 
dimensions,  contained  nearly  two  hundred  pipes,  carved 
with  ingenious  skill,  of  a  red  porphyritic  stone,  into 
figures  of  animals,  birds,  reptiles,  and  human  heads.  In 
addition  to  these  were  also  disks,  tubes,  and  ornaments 


376  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

of  copper^  pearl  and  shell-beads,  etc.,  but  all  more  or  less 
injured  by  the  heat,  which  had  been  sufficiently  intense 
to  melt  some  of  the  copper  rehcs.  The  number  and 
value  of  the  objects  found  in  this  moimd  exceed  any 
other  single  deposit ;  and  some  of  them  supply  illustra- 
tions of  great  importance  relative  to  the  arts^  habits,  and 
probable  origin  of  their  makers.  A  like  diversity  marks 
the  contents  of  other  moimds,  both  within  the  sacred 
enclosure  here  referred  to,  and  in  others  where  careful 
explorations  have  been  eflFected.  In  one,  for  example, 
the  whole  area  was  covered  with  two  layers  of  disks  of 
horn  stone,  some  round  and  others  oblong.  Upwards  of 
six  hundred  were  taken  out,  and  it  was  estimated  that 
the  entire  deposit  numbered  Uttle  short  of  four  thousand. 
From  those,  and  other  examples,  it  appears  that  burnt- 
oflFerings  and  sacrifices  by  fire  were  practised  as  an  im- 
portant  and  oft-repeated  part  of  the  sacred  rites  to  which 
the  altar-mounds  were  devoted :  yet  that  also  certain 
specific  and  varymg  purposes  were  aimed  at  in  the 
OflFerings  made  on  diflferent  altars.  While,  also,  these 
altar-mounds  are  chiefly  found  within  what  appear  to 
have  been  sacred  enclosures,  devoted  —  as  has  been 
assumed  from  a  variety  of  evidence, — primarily,  if  not 
exclusively,  to  reUgious  purposes ;  they  also  occur,  gener- 
ally, as  single  works,  within  the  military  enclosures  and 
strongholds :  where  it  may  be  assumed  they  sufficed  for 
sacrifices  designed  to  propitiate  the  objects  of  national 
worship,  and  to  win  the  favour  of  their  deities  when 
the  ancient  garrisons  were  precluded  from  access  to  the 
sacred  enclosures  where  the  national  reUgious  rites  were 
chiefly  celebrated.  ; 

Within  a  quarter  of  a  mile  to  the  south  of  "  Moimd 
City''  is  a  work  of  somewhat  similar  outline,  but  of  larger 
dimensions,  and  with  some  of  the  characteristics  of  a 
defensive  rather  than  of  a  sacred  enclosure.     From  its 


I 


XII.]       PROPITIATION :  SACRIFICIAL  MOUNDS.         377 

position,  indeed,  in  relation  to  that  remarkable  circnm- 
vallated  group  of  mounds,  and  also  of  other  enclosures 
and  earthworks  in  the  vicinity,  the  nature  of  its  construc- 
tion suggests  the  idea  of  a  fortified  site ;  not  designed  as 
a  military  stronghold,  but  as  a  walled  town,  wherein  may 
have  resided  those  who  ofl&ciated  at  the  sacrifices  of  the 
adjacent  temple.  Unlike  the  slight  enclosure  of  the 
latter,  its  waUs  are  further  guarded  by  an  outer  fosse,  and 
if  surmounted  by  a  palisade,  or  other  military  work,  they 
were  well  suited  for  civic  defence.  The  area  thus  enclosed 
measures  twenty-eight  acres ;  and  very  nearly,  if  not 
exactly,  in  the  centre  there  is  a  sacred  mound,  which  was 
found,  on  excavation,  to  contain  an  altar  of  singular  con- 
struction, and  with  remarkable  traces  of  sacrificial  rites. 
Like  other  altars  of  the  explored  mounds,  this  one  ap- 
peared to  have  undergone  repeated  changes  throughout 
jhe  period  intervening  between  the  first  rites  and  cere- 
monies performed  on  the  site,  and  that  of  its  final  inhu- 
mation. The  traces  of  these  are  thus  minutely  recorded 
by  its  intelligent  explorers  : — '^  This  altar  is  entirely 
peculiar.  It  seems  to  have  been  formed  at  different 
intervals  of  time,  as  follows  : — First,  a  circular  space, 
thirteen  feet  in  diameter  and  eight  inches  in  depth,  was 
excavated  in  the  original  level  of  the  plain  ;  this  was 
filled  with  fine  sand,  carefully  levelled,  and  compacted  to 
the  utmost  degree.  Upon  the  level  thus  formed,  which 
was  perfectly  horizontal,  offerings  by  fire  were  made ;  at 
any  rate  a  continuous  heat  was  kept  up,  and  fatty  matter 
of  some  sort  burned,  for  the  sand  to  the  depth  of  two 
inches  is  discoloured,  and  to  the  depth  of  one  inch  is 
burned  hard  and  black,  and  cemented  together.  The 
ashes,  etc.,  resulting  fi:om  this  operation  were  then  re- 
moved, and  another  deposit  of  sand,  of  equal  thickness 
with  the  former,  was  placed  above  it,  and  in  like  manner 
much  compacted.   This  was  moulded  into  the  altar- form, 


378  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

identical  with  that  of  the  circular  clay  altars  already 
described,  the  basin  in  this  case  measuring  seven  feet  in 
diameter  by  eight  inches  in  depth.  This  basin  was  then 
carefully  paved  with  small  round  stones,  each  a  little 
larger  than  a  hen's  egg,  which  were  laid  with  the  utmost 
precision,  fully  rivalling  the  pavior's  finest  work  They 
were  firmly  bedded  in  the  sand  beneath  them,  so  as  to 
present  a  regular  and  uniform  surface.  Upon  the  altar 
thus  constructed  was  found  a  burnt  deposit^  carefully 
covered  with  a  layer  of  sand,  above  which  was  heaped 
the  superstructure  of  the  mound.  The  deposit  consisted 
of  a  thin  layer  of  carbonaceous  matter,  intermingled 
with  which  were  some  burnt  human  bones,  but  so  much 
calcined  as  to  render  recognition  extremely  difficult. 
Ten  well-wrought  copper  bracelets  were  aJso  found, 
placed  in  two  heaps,  five  in  each,  and  encircling  some 
calcined  bones, — ^probably  those  of  the  arms  upon  which 
they  were  worn.  Besides  these  were  found  a  couple  of 
thick  plates  of  mica,  placed  upon  the  western  slope  of 
the  altar.'' ^ 

All  the  results  of  such  investigations  thus  coincide  in 
proving  that  the  altars  of  the  Mound-Builders  were  used 
for  considerable  periods,  and  repeatedly  renewed,  before 
they  were  finally  covered  over.      Others  undoubtedly 
remained  to  the  last  uncovered,  though  their  exposure 
has  necessarily  left  them  in  a  very  diflFerent  condition 
f]X)m  those  now  revealed  for  the  first  time  to  human 
eyes  since  the  last  rites  of  the  ancient  worshippers  ex- 
tinguished the  sacred  fires  on  their  hearth.    These  appear 
to  have  been  noted  fi:om  time  to  time  under  the  name 
of  "  brick-hearths.''     The  hard-burnt  clay,  cracked  and 
broken  up  by  the  roots  of  trees,  the  action  of  frost,  and. 
other  causes,  and  partially  buried  by  the  accumulating 
vegetation  and  decay  of  centuries,  when  brought  to  light 

^  Ancient  Monumenls  of  the  Mississippi  Valley^.]}.  157. 


XIL]       PROPITIATION:  SACRIFICIAL  MOUNDS.         379 

by  the  plough  or  the  spade,  not  iinnaturally  suggested 
the  idea  of  rude  brick  pavings.  One  of  these,  discovered 
near  the  town  of  Marietta,  in  Ohio,  was  surrounded  by 
a  low  bank,  of  about  one  hundred  feet  in  circumference, 
seemingly  the  ground-plan  or  commencement  of  a  mound. 
All  such  "  hearths ''  or  altars  were,  indeed,  it  may  be  as- 
sumed, destined  to  receive  their  final  completion  by 
means  of  the  incovering  mound.  But,  by  whatever 
causes  brought  about,  the  day  at  length  came  when  the 
dominion  of  the  Mound-Builders  was  brought  to  a  close  ; 
and  probably  not  less  abruptly  than  that  of  the  Aztecs 
of  Mexico  or  the  Incas  of  Peru.  The  sacred  fires  were 
extinguished,  the  uncovered  altars  were  desecrated,  and 
the  primeval  forest  slowly  resumed  its  sway  over  the 
deserted  temples  and  silent  cities  of  the  dead.  The 
exploration  of  the  sacred  mounds,  however,  has  sufl&ced 
to  show  that  the  covering  over  of  the  altar  was  a  work 
of  no  less  systematic  care  than  any  of  the  previous  rites 
and  ceremonies.  The  sepulchral  mounds  are  simple 
covers  or  earth-pyramids,  sometimes  elliptical  or  pear- 
shaped,  but  exhibiting  in  their  internal  structure  no  trace 
of  any  further  design  than  to  heap  over  the  sarcophagus 
of  the  honoured  chief  such  a  gigantic  tumulus  as  should 
preserve  his  name  and  fame  to  after  times.  It  is  alto- 
gether different  with  the  sacred  mounds.  The  uniform 
stratification  of  the  materials  composing  them  has  already 
been  specified  as  one  of  their  peculiar  characteristics, 
and  will  be  best  illustrated  by  tracing  the  process  of 
construction  as  disclosed  in  one  of  those  of  "Mound 
City ;''  though  it  is  to  be  noted  that  while  the  evidence 
of  a  careful  and  systematic  deposition  of  the  materials 
forming  the  mound  is  found  in  all,  the  differences  in 
these  details  are  fully  as  great  as  in  those  of  the  enclosed 
altars.  In  the  construction  of  the  mound  referred  to, 
which  occupies  the  north  east  corner  of  the  sacred  en- 


380  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

closure,  near  the  edge  of  the  steep  bank  immediately 
overhanging  the  Scioto  River,  the  following  were  dis- 
tinctly traceable  as  the  successive  stages  in  its  process 
towards  completion.  On  the  natural  level  of  the  soil 
an  altar  or  basin  of  fine  clay  was  constructed,  perfectly 
circular,  and  measuring  nine  feet  in  diameter.  From 
the  outer  edge  the  clay  walls  were  raised  at  an  angle  of 
about  40°  to  the  height  of  twenty  inches,  and  within 
this  a  hoUow  basin  was  formed  nine  inches  deep.  After 
this  clay  structure  had  been  subjected  to  long  and  re- 
peated action  of  intense  heat — as  is  assumed  from  its 
being  used  as  an  altar  of  burnt-sacrifice, — until  it  had 
been  burnt  throughout  to  the  consistency  of  the  hardest 
brick,  the  basin  was  filled  up  evenly  with  fine  dry  ashes, 
intermingled  with  which  were  fragments  of  pottery,  and 
a  few  copper  bosses  or  disks.  This  deposit  having  been 
carefully  levelled  to  the  edge  of  the  altar-focus,  a  layer 
of  silvery  or  opaque  mica,  in  sheets,  was  laid  with  great 
regularity  over  it,  the  mica  plates  overlapping  each  other, 
and  on  this  was  heaped  a  pile  of  human  bones,  reduced 
to  fragments  by  the  action  of  fire,  but  probably  the  re- 
mains of  only  a  single  skeleton.  Above  this,  and 
extending  beyond  the  outer  verge  of  the  altar,  a  layer 
of  earth  a  few  inches  in  thickness  was  uniformly  spread, 
presenting,  in  miniature,  the  final  shape  of  the  mound. 
Above  this  a  thin  stratum  of  fine  sand  was  laid,  con- 
forming, as  all  the  mound  strata  do,  to  the  convex  outline 
of  the  lower  heap.  Then  followed  a  deposit  of  earth 
one  foot  thick,  next  a  thin  stratum  of  sand,  then  another 
layer  of  eighteen  inches  of  earth,  a  thin  and  uniform 
layer  of  sand  somewhat  more  than  an  inch  thick,  another 
deposit  of  earth,  then  a  uniform  layer  of  gravel  and 
pebbles  to  the  depth  of  two  feet,  and  over  the  whole  a 
final  layer  of  coarse  gravel  and  pebbles  one  foot  in 
thickness,  procured  either  from  the  banks  of  the  neigh- 


XIL]       PROPITIATION :  SACRIFICIAL  MOUNDS.         381 

bouring  river,  or  from  deep  pits,  surrounding  the  sacred 
enclosure ;  which,  as  in  others  of  the  ancient  earth- 
works, show  from  whence  the  materials  for  their  con- 
struction were  procured.  Some  of  the  features  here 
described  were  peculiar,  but  the  traces  of  a  systematic 
construction  of  the  sacred  mounds  in  uniform  alternate 
layers  of  earth  and  other  materials  illustrate  a  fea- 
ture belonging  to  the  whole  class,  and  one  to  which 
nothing  analogous  in  the  structure  of  any  of  the  tumuli 
or  earth-pyramids  of  the  Old  World  has  hitherto  been 
noted. 

The  investigation  of  this  remarkable  class  of  ancient 
works  suggests  many  curious  questions  to  which  it  is 
difficult  to  furnish  any  satisfactory  answer.  It  is  pro- 
bable that  not  only  each  successive  stage  in  the  use  and 
reconstruction  of  the  altar,  but  in  the  building  of  the 
superincumbent  mound,  had  its  own  significance  and 
accompanying  rites  ;  and  on  these  future  discoveries 
may  yet  throw  further  light.  In  one  of  the  "  Mound 
City "  structures,  after  penetrating  through  four  succes- 
sive sand-strata,  interposed  at  intervals  of  little  more 
than  a  foot  between  layers  of  earth ;  and  excavating 
altogether  to  a  depth  of  nineteen  feet :  a  smooth  level  floor 
of  sKghtly  burned  clay  was  found,  covered  with  a  thin 
layer  of  sand,  and  on  this  a  series  of  round  plates  of 
mica,  ten  inches  or  a  foot  in  diameter,  were  regularly 
disposed,  overlapping  each  other  like  the  scales  of  a  fish. 
The  whole  deposit  was  not  uncovered,  but  sufficient  was 
exposed  to  lead  the  observers  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
entire  layer  of  mica  was  arranged  in  the  form  of  a 
crescent,  the  full  dimensions  of  which  must  measure 
twenty  feet  from  horn  to  horn,  and  five  feet  at  its 
greatest  breadth.  After  describing  the  peculiar  features 
of  this  mound)  its  explorers  remark  :  "  Were  we  to'  yield 
to  the  temptation  to  speculation  whi(ih  the  presence  of 


383  PRBHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap, 

the  mica  crescent  holds  out,  we  might  conclude  that  the 
Mound -Builders  worshipped  the  moon,  and  that  this 
mound  was  dedicated,  with  imknown  rites  and  cere- 
monies, to  that  luminary/'     It  is  obvious,  at  any  rate, 
that  very  diverse  rites  were  practised,  and  very  different 
sacrifices  offered  up  to  the  ancient  deities  of  the  Great 
Valley^     In  some,  the  accumulated  carbonaceous  matter, 
like  that  formed  by  the  ashes  of  leaves  or  grass,  might 
suggest  the  graceful  offerings  of  the  first-fruits  of  the 
earth,  so  consonant  to  the  milder  forms  of  ancient  sacri- 
fice instituted  in  recognition  of  the  Lord  of  the  Harvest. 
In  others^  the  accumulation  of  hundreds  of  elaborately 
carved  stone-pipes  on  a  single  altar,  is  strikingly  sug- 
gestive of  some  ancient  peace  or  war-pipe  ceremonial,  iq 
which  the  peculiar  American  custom  of  tobacco-smoking 
had  its  special  and  sacred  significance,  and  even  perhaps 
ite  origin.    In  others  again,  we  should  perhaps  trace  in 
the  deposition  under  the  sacred  mound  of  hundreds  of 
spear  and  arrow  heads,  copper  axes,  and  other  weapons 
of  war,  the  ancient  and  amply  developed  ceremonial 
shadowed  forth  in  the  rude  Indian  symbolism  of  burying 
the  tomahawk  or  war-hatchet.     But,  looking  to  the  evi- 
dence which  so  clearly  separates  the  sepulchral  from  the 
sacred  mounds,  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  avoid  the  con- 
clusion that  on  some  of  the  altars  of  the  Mound-Bmlders 
human  sacrifices  were  made ;  and  that  within  their  sacred 
enclosures  were  practised  rites  not  less  hideous  than  those 
which  characterized  the  worship  which  the  ferocious  Az- 
tecs are  affirmed  to  have  regarded  as  most  acceptable  to 
their  sanguinary  gods.     Among  the  Mexicans,  if  we  are 
to  believe  the  narratives  of  their  Spanish  conquerors, 
human  sacrifices  constituted  the  crowning  rites  of  almost 
every  festival      That  great  exaggeration,   however,  is 
traceatble  in  the  narratives  of  the  chronicles  is  admitted 
in  part  even  by  the  enthusiastic  modem  historian  of  the 


XIL]        PROPITIATION :  SACRIFICIAL  MOUNDS,         883 

conquest  of  Mexico ;  and  the  charming  historical  ro- 
mance woven  by  Prescott,  is  perhaps  even  more  open  to 
question  in  its  reproduction  of  the  gross  charges  of  can- 
nibalism and  wholesale  butchery  in  the  superstitious 
rites  of  the  Mexicans  :  than  in  its  gorgeous  picturings 
of  their  architectural  magnificence,  their  temples  and 
palaces,  sculptured  fountains  and  floating  gardens,  and 
all  the  strange  blending  of  Moorish  pomp  and  luxury, 
with  the  refinements  of  European  social  manners,  and 
the  unreserved  freedom  of  woman. 

Without  assimiing  either  an  Aztec  or  Northern  Indian 
origin  to  the  race  of  the  Mound-Builders  ;  or  discussing 
meanwhile  the  essential  points  of  difference  from  both, 
which  seem  to  be  traceable  in  such  memorials  as  reveal 
their  characteristics  to  us ;  it  is  undoubtedly  in  the  rites 
and  customs  of  the  various  tribes  and  nations  of  the  New 
World  that  we  must  look  for  such  analogies  as  may  tend 
to  throw  light  on  their  mysterious  mounds  of  sacrifice, 
and  other  singular  remains.  In  Hariot's  narrative  of  the 
discovery  of  Virginia  in  1584^  he  describes  the  use  of 
tobacco,  called  by  the  natives  uppdwoCy  and  greatly 
enlarges  on  its  medicinal  virtues.  He  then  adds  :  "  This 
uppdwoc  is  of  so  precious  estimation  amongst  them  that 
they  think  their  gods  are  marvellously  delighted  there- 
with, whereupon  sometime  they  make  hallowed  fires,  and 
cast  some  of  the  powder  therein  for  a  sacrifice.'^  The 
^discovery  of  such  unmistakable  evidences  of  one  of  the 
sacred  altars  of  "  Mound  City''  having  been  specially 
devoted  to  nicotian  rites  and  offerings,  renders  such  allu- 
sions peculiarly  significant.  In  the  belief  of  the  ancient 
worshippers,  the  Great  Spirit  smelled  a  sweet  savour 
as  the  smoke  of  the  sacred  plant  ascended  to  the 
heavens ;  and  the  homely  implement  of  modern  luxury 
was  in  their  hands  a  sacred  censer  from  which   the 


384  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

hallowed  vapour  rose  with  as  fitting  propitiatory  odours 
as  that  which  perfumes  the  awful  precincts  of  the 
cathedral  altar,  amid  the  mysteries  of  the  Church's  high 
and  holy  days. 

It  is  indeed  but  a  vague  and  partial  glimpse  that  we 
can  now  recover  of  the  old  worshipper,  with  his  strange 
rites,  his  buried  arts,  and  the  traces  of  his  propitiatory 
sacrifices,  which  the  opening  of  these  sacrificial  mounds 
reveals.  It  is  nevertheless  a  glimpse  of  a  condition  of 
things  diverse  in  many  respects  from  all  else  that  we 
know  of  the  former  history  of  the  New  World  ;  and  on 
that  account,  therefore,  the  most  imperfect  disclosures 
have  a  fascinating  interest  for  us,  greater  in  some  respects 
than  any  discoveries  relating  to  the  modem  Indian  can 
possess.  StiU  more  is  that  interest  confirmed  by  every 
indication  which  seems  to  present  the  ancient  Mound- 
Builders  as  in  some  respects  a  link  between  the  rude 
nomade  tribes  of  the  American  forests  and  prairies,  and 
those  nations  whom  the  first  Europeans  found  estabUshed 
in  cities,  under  a  well-ordered  Government,  and  surrounded 
by  many  appliances  of  civilisation  akin  to  those  with 
which  they  had  long  been  familiar  among  the  most 
ancient  nations  of  southern  Asia.  To  the  great  centres 
of  native  progress  and  development  which  had  gathered 
under  Aztec  and  Inca  rule,  and  to  the  older  seats  of 
American  nationality,  still  abounding  with  the  ruined 
memorials  of  their  extinct  arts,  in  Central  America  and 
Yucatan,  the  attention  of  the  inquirer  into  the  ancient 
history  of  the  New  World  must  be  finally  directed  in  his 
desire  for  some  clear  comprehension  of  whatever  was 
essentially  native  to  it.  But  before  turning  to  those 
seats  of  a  well-ascertained  native  civilisation,  there  still 
remains  for  consideration,  one  other  class  of  the  earth- 
works, of  a  very  pecuHar  character.     They  too  have  a 


XIL]        PROPITIATION :  SACRIFICIAL  MOUNDS.         385 

certain  value  as  a  possible  link  in  the  detached  frag- 
ments of  ancient  chroniclings  revealed  by  such  means ; 
lying  as  they  do  in  geographical,  and  perhaps  also  in 
other  relations,  immediately  between  the  old  region 
of  the  Mound-Builders  and  the  miners  of  the  copper 
regions  in  the  ante-Columbian  centuries  of  the  western 
hemisphere. 


VOL.  I.  2  b 


38  r»  PRBUI8T0R1C  MAX.  [Chap. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

COMMEMORATION:  SYMBOLIC  MOUNDS. 

After  surveying  the  many  remarkable  traces  of  primi- 
tive mining,  and  the  germs  of  native  metallurgic  axts, 
which  confer  so  vital  an  interest  on  the  forest  sohtudes 
aroimd  the  shores  of  Lake  Superior,  the  attention  of  the 
American  archaeologist  is  inevitably  attracted  by  the  ex- 
tensive relics  of  an  ancient  population  in  the  great  river 
valleys  of  the  Mississippi  and  its  tributaries.  But  be- 
tween the  regions  marked  by  those  diverse  features  of 
interest,  lies  an  extensive  tract  of  country,  in  close  con- 
tact with  the  former ;  and  constituting  the  geographical 
link  that  connects  it  with  the  area  of  those  ancient 
mounds,  from  which  so  many  implements,  wrought  ap- 
parently from  the  copper  of  Lake  Superior,  have  been 
recovered.  It  has  been  long  known  that  this  territory, 
which  stretches  westward  from  Lake  Michigan  to  the 
Mississippi,  is  marked  by  aboriginal  earthworks,  of  a 
highly  distinctive  character  and  altogether  peculiar  to  the 
New  World.  But  of  this,  as  of  other  partially  explored 
regions  of  the  West,  the  accounts  were  vague,  extravagant, 
and  contradictory ;  and  it  is  only  very  recently  that  the 
characteristics  of  its  remarkable  ancient  monuments  have 
been  accurately  defined.  Mr.  J.  A.  Lapham,  to  whose 
Antiquities  of  Wisconsin  surveyed  and  described^  we 
owe  the  minute  knowledge  of  these  remarkable  earth- 
works, claims  to  have  first  described  the  Turtle  Mound 


XIIL]       COMMEMORATION:  SYMBOLIC  MOUNDS,       387 

at  Waukesha^  as  well  as  other  animal  effigies  of  the  same 
territory,  so  early  as  1836.  These  notices,  however,  only 
appeared  in  local  newspapers ;  and  general  attention  was 
for  the  first  time  directed  to  them  by  a  paper  on  the  sub- 
ject, communicated  by  Mr.  R  C.  Taylor  to  the -American 
Journal  of  Arts  and  Sciences,  in  1838,  accompanied  with 
illustrations  from  his  pencil  To  this  and  other  early 
descriptions  it  is  due,  that  this  novel  class  of  earthworks 
at  length  excited  such  interest  as  to  lead  the  American 
Antiquarian  Society  to  place  funds  at  Mr.  Lapham's  dis- 
posal for  enabling  him  to  carry  out  the  elaborate  survey 
and  drawings,  since  published  in  the  Smithsonian  Conr 
trihutions  to  Knowledge. 

The  occurrence  of  "  Animal  Mounds  '^  is  by  no  means 
exclusively  confined  to  the  State  of  Wisconsin.  Some 
remarkable  examples  are  specially  worthy  of  notice  as 
mingling  among  the  numerous  and  varied  earthworks  of 
the  Ohio  and  Scioto  Valleys.  But  the  important  fact 
connected  with  the  aboriginal  traces  of  Wisconsin  is  that 
the  Animal  Mounds  constitute  its  great  distinguishing 
characteristic.  They  do  not  occur  there  interspersed,  as 
in  the  Ohio  Valley,  with  civic  and  sacred  enclosures, 
sepulchral  mounds,  and  works  of  defence  ;  but  within  an 
area  of  well-defined  limits,  extending  between  the  Mis- 
sissippi and  Lake  Michigan,  and  with  its  northern  and 
southern  boundaries  httle  less  clearly  traceable :  thou- 
sands of  examples  occur  of  gigantic  basso-relievos  of  men, 
beasts,  birds,  and  reptiles,  all  wrought  with  persevering 
labour  on  the  surface  of  the  soil.  The  vast  levels  or 
slightly  undulating  surfaces  of  that  great  prairie  land, 
present  peculiarly  favourable  circumstances  for  the 
colossal  relievos  of  the  native  artist ;  yet  not  more  so 
than  are  to  be  met  with  in  other  localities  where  no  such 
mounds  occur.  It  is  important  therefore  to  bear  in  re- 
membrance that  defensive  or  military  structures,  and 


388  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

such  as  are  apparently  designed  for' sacniicial  rites  or 
religious  ceremonies,  are  scarcely  to  be  met  with  in  the 
territory  marked  by  those  singular  groups  of  imitative 
earthworks.  It  is,  moreover,  a  country  well  adapted  for 
maintaining  a  large  popxilation,  in  very  diverse  stages  of 
social  progress.  Through  the  gently  undulating  surface 
of  the  nearly  level  territory,  numerous  rivers  and  streams 
flow  in  sluggish,  yet  limpid  current,  eastward  and  west- 
ward, to  empty  themselves  into  Lake  Michigan  or  the 
Mississippi  The  pools  and  groups  of  lakes  into  which 
they  expand,  furnish  abundance  of  wild  rice,  which  is  at 
once  a  means  of  sustenance  to  numerous  aquatic  birds, 
and  also  constituted  an  important  source  of  supply  to 
the  aborigines,  so  long  as  the  Eed  Indian  held  possession 
of  the  territory.  The  rivers  and  lakes  also  abound  with 
excellent  fish  ;  and  where  the  soil  remains  uninvaded  by 
the  ploughshare  of  the  intruding  settler,  numerous  traces 
of  older  agricultural  labour  show  where  the  Indian  cul- 
tivated the  maize,  and  developed  some  of  the  germs  of 
civilisation,  and  the  industrial  arts  of  a  settled  people. 
Indian  grave-mounds  also  diversify  the  surface,  and,  in 
their  ornaments  and  primitive  weapons  and  ^utensils, 
disclose  traces  of  the  simple  arts  of  the  rude  nomades 
that  still  linger  on  the  outskirts  of  that  western  state. 
But  such  slight  and  inartificial  sepulchral  mounds  are 
readily  distinguishable  from  the  remarkable  structures  of 
a  remoter  era  which  constitute  the  archaeological  charac- 
teristic of  the  region.  Here  indeed,  as  elsewhere,  the 
Indian  has  selected  the  ancient  mounds  as  the  most 
suitable  sites  for  his  simpler  sepulchral  works,  thereby- 
more  clearly  indicating  the  complete  independence  of 
the  two. 

In  describing  some  of  the  earthworks  near  the  town 
of  Horicon,  on  the  Eock  Eiver,  Mr.  Lapham  speaks  of 
them  as  at  once  the  most  extended  and  varied  groups  of 


XIIL]     GOMMEMORATION^ :  SYMBOLTG  MOUNDS.         389 

ancient  works,  and  the  most  compHcated  and  intricate. 
Of  one  form  of  mound  which  he  conceives  to  represent 
the  otter,  seven  examples  occur ;  illustrations  are  given 
of  sixteen  cruciform  earthworks ;  and  of  the  ordinary- 
circular  mounds  about  two  hundred  have  been  counted. 
While  some  of  those  are  small,  others  are  on  a  gigantic 
scale.  There  is  one  mound  of  peculiar  but  indeterminate 
form,  which  tapers  for  a  length  of  five  hundred  and 
seventy  feet.  At  its  smaller  extremity  or  tail,  it  slightly 
curves  to  the  east.  At  its  opposite  extremity  or  head, 
there  occurs  a  large  cross,  and  one  of  the  largest  circular 
mounds.  One  figure  is  named  appropriately  enough, 
"The  Tobacco-Pipe  Mound,'^  from  its  obvious  resem- 
blance to  that  characteristic  American  implement.  In 
several  of  the  mounds  of  another  group  the  surveyors 
noticed  recent  Indian  graves,  covered  with  slabs  or  stakes, 
in  accordance  with  the  usual  method  of  Indian  burial, 
and  belongiDg  to  the  Potawattomies ;  and  Mr.  Lapham 
adds  :  "  The  larger  and  more  conspicuous  mounds  are 
generally  selected  by  the  Indians  for  the  burial  of  their 
dead.^^ 

The  sites  of  these  ancient  works  closely  correspond  to 
those  adopted  by  the  Mound-Builders  of  the  more  south- 
em  river-valleys.  Within  the  well-watered  region  en- 
closed by  the  great  lakes,  and  bounded  on  the  west  by 
the  Mississippi,  a  numerous  population  may  have  long 
lain  undisturbed,  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  profusion  which 
wood  and  water  and  the  easily  cultivated  soil  supplied. 
On  the  bluffs  and  terraces  surmounting  the  rivers  and 
lakes,  where  game  abounded,  and  by  means  of  which 
facilities  of  communication  with  the  surrounding  terri- 
tory, and  with  more  distant  regions,  were  commanded, 
the  earthworks  are  found  in  extensive  and  evidently  de- 
pendent groups.  But,  unlike  the  rich  memorial  mounds 
of  the  Scioto  Valley,  the  Wisconsin  earthworks  reveal 


wmmmmm^mmmmmmmm 


390  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

scarcely  any  enclosed  relics  to  chronicle  the  history  of 
their  erection,  and  throw  a  light  on  the  mysterious  race 
of  artists  who  laboriously  recorded  such  hieroglyphics  on 
the  broad  canvas  of  the  natural  landscape.     In  a  few 
cases,  human  remains  have  been  found  in  the  emblematic 
mounds,  under  circumstances  which  did  not  clearly  point 
to  a  modem  date  ;  but  these  are  quite  exceptional.     In 
summing  up  the  results  of  his  exploration  of  the  Wis- 
consin earthworks,  Mr.  Lapham  remarks : — "  So  far  as  I 
have  had  opportunity  to  observe,  there  are  no  original 
remains  in  the  mounds  of  imitative  form,  beyond  a  few 
scattered  fragments  that  may  have  gained  a  place  there 
by  accident     Many  of  the  mounds  have  been  entirely 
removed,  including  the  earth  beneath  for  a  considerable 
depth,  in  the  process  of  gi-ading  streets  in  Milwaukee  ; 
and  it  is  usually  foimd  that  the  natural  surface  had  not 
been  disturbed  at  the  time  of  the  erection,  but  that  the 
several  layers  or  strata  of  mould,  clay,  gravel,  etc.,  are 
continuous  below  the  structure,  as  on  the  contiguous 
grounds.     Great  numbers  of  the  smaller  conical  tumuli 
are  also  destitute  of  any  remains ;  and  if  human  bodies 
were  ever  buried  under  them,  they  are  now  so  entirely 
*  returned  to  dust  *  that  no  apparent  traces  of  them  are 
left.     If  we  assume  that  each  mound  was  a  place  of 
burial,  we  must  infer,  from  the  absence  of  uten^s,  that 
the  conamon  practice  of  depositing  with  the  dead  the 
implements  to  be  used  in  the  other  world,  is  of  compa- 
ratively recent  origin,  since  some  of  these,  at  least,  would 
have  resisted  decay.^'  ^ 

The  great  earthwork-figures,  wrought  in  relievo  on  the 
surface  of  the  Wisconsin  soil,  include  among  their  devices 
the  lizard,  turtle,  elk,  buffalo,  bear,  fox,  otter,  racoon,  and 
other  animals.  Such,  at  least,  are  the  designs  which 
modern  fancy  has  traced  in  those  novel  works  of  primi- 

1  A  ntiquUies  of  Wisconsin,  p.  80. 


mtm  '^i. 


XIIL]       COMMEMORATION :  SYMBOLIC  MOUNDS.       391 

tive  art.  The  frog  also  appears  to  be  imitated ;  birds 
and  fishes  are  repeatedly  represented  ;  and  man  himself 
figures  among  the  stmige  groups.  Nor  axe  the  imi- 
tations  confined  to  animate  subjects,  though  the  preva- 
lence of  these  has  suggested  the  designation  of  "  animal 
mounds/'  as  suitable  for  the  whole.  Embankments  also 
occur  in  the  form  of  crosses,  crescents,  angles,  and  straight 
lines ;  and  also  seemingly  as  the  gigantic  imitations  of 
the  war-club,  tobacco-pipe,  and  other  familiar  implements 
or  weapons.  Some,  at  least,  of  the  crosses  and  other 
simpler  forms,  in  all  probability,  originally  represented 
animals,  birds,  or  fishes,  with  extended  wings  or  fins. 
In  these,  as  in  the  better-defined  animal  mounds,  time 
has  doubtless  obliterated  the  minuter  and  more  charac- 
teristic touches  of  the  ancient  modeller,  and  eflfaced  the 
indications  of  his  original  meaning. 

One  of  the  most  remarkable  groups  occurs  about 
eighteen  miles  west  of  the  "Four  Lakes,"  in  Dade 
County,  Wisconsin;  and  includes  six  quadrupeds,  six 
parallelograms,  one  circular  tumulus,  one  human  figure, 
and  a  small  circle.  This  conspicuous  group  is  situated 
on  the  great  Indian  trail  from  Lake  Michigan  to  the 
Mississippi,  and  is  figured  and  described  in  SiUiman's 
Journal,  by  Mr.  R  C.  Taylor,  from  actual  survey.  It 
is  again  figured  and  described,  along  with  other  examples 
of  the  monuments  of  the  North-west,  in  Messrs.  Squier 
and  Davis's  Ancient  Monuments  of  the  Mississippi 
Valley;  but  neither  from  figures  nor  d^cription  can 
any  more  definite  idea  be  drawn,  than  that  the  group 
includes  representations  of  quadrupeds,  varying  in  size 
from  ninety  to  one  hundred  and  twenty  feet,  but  either 
so  rudely  executed,  or  so  much  defaced,  that  they  may 
be  "  buffalos,"  or  "  bears,"  or  indeed  any  other  animals. 
They  are  grouped  in  two  rows  on  the  surface  of  a  high, 
open  piiairie,  on  the  dividing  ridge  between  the  Kock 


392  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

and  Wisconsin  Bivere.  Midway  in  the  group,  an  ele- 
vated conical  mound  overtops  the  whole,  and  affords  the 
only  point  from  whence  the  entire  group  can  be  sur- 
veyed It  appears  probable,  indeed,  that  such  a  mound 
was  purposely  erected  as  an  observatory  from  whence  to 
view  the  whole.  In  many  of  the  groups,  it  can  searcely 
admit  of  doubt  that  the  original  relation  of  the  several 
members  was  something  more  than  mere  juxtaposition ; 
but  an  ingenious  critic,  in  reviewing  the  work  of  Messrs. 
Squier  and  Davis,  thus  outstrips  their  attempts  at  inter- 
pretation of  the  dubious  **  bears"  or  "  buffalos  :" — "  It 
occurs  to  us  that  the  group  is  a  very  intelligible  repre- 
sentation of  a  sledge  with  its  rider,  and  a  train  of  six 
dogs,  wheeling  round  the  conical  mound,  which  last 
action  is  particularly  represented  by  the  last  animal 
being  in  a  position  almost  at  right  angles  with  the 
man,  behind  whom  are  the  oblongs  to  represent  the 
vehicle,  and  also  with  the  remainder  of  the  animals. 
Taking  the  rudeness  of  the  age  and  workmanship  into 
account,  the  impracticability  of  the  material,  and  the 
scale  and  material,  the  whole  is  really  not  a  bad  repre- 
sentation of  the  dog-drawn  sledges  of  the  Kamschatdales 
of  the  present  day.  Supposing  their  horns  to  have 
been  omitted,  from  the  impracticability  of  raising  earth- 
works that  would  stand  well,  and  in  proportion  to  re- 
present them,  they  might  have  signified  the  elk  or  the 
reindeer.  Whatever  animal,  however,  be  taken,  it  is 
perhaps  a  legitimate  inference  that  we  have  here  the 
colossal  trophy  of  a  successful  super-Atlantic  charioteer 
at  some  American  race ;  why  not  the  curious  hippo- 
drome, or,  more  correctly  here,  cynodrome,  with  its 
starting-cells,  its  course,  its  meta,  and  road  of  triumph 
to  the  town  ?''' 

It  was  not  necessary  for  the  fanciful  interpreter  of  the 

^  Jcumal  Brit,  ArchoeoL  Aasociaiion,  voL  v.  p.  411. 


XIIL]      COMMEMORATION :  SYMBOLIC  MOUNDS.        393 

Wisconsin  earthworks  to  resort  to  remote  Kamschatka 
for  the  model  of  his  dog-drawn  sledge,  for  such  are 
common  enough  among  the  Indians  of  the  North-west ; 
but  basso-relievos  that  admit  with  equal  probability  of 
their  determination  as  buflfalos,  bears,  dogs,  or  elks, 
yield  little  trustworthy  disclosures ;  and  a  general  sur- 
vey of  the  earthworks  of  Wisconsin  in  no  degree  tends 
to  confirm  such  modes  of  interpretation.  But  while 
rejecting  this  classical  reading  of  the  emblematic  mounds 
of  the  West,  it  is  not  because  of  their  rude  representa- 
tions appearing  to  be  unfit  memorials  of  any  triumph 
analogous  to  those  for  which  trophies  were  reared  in  the 
classic  arena.  Fully  to  appreciate  the  magnitude  of 
the  Dade  county  group,  we  must  bear  in  remembrance 
the  proportions  of .  the  supposed  charioteer.  He  is 
figured,  as  is  usual  in  similar  mounds,  with  his  limbs 
extended,  and  with  arms  of  disproportionate  length; 
possibly  owing  to  the  design  originally  representing 
some  implement  in  each  hand.  From  head  to  feet  he 
measures  one  hundred  and  twenty-five  feet,  and  one 
hundred  and  forty  feet  from  the  extremity  of  one  arm 
to  that  of  the  other.  The  head  alone  is  twenty-five  feet 
in  diameter,  and  nearly  six  feet  in  highest  elevation 
from  the  surrounding  soil.  Measuring  the  whole  by 
this  scale,  it  is  abundantly  apparent  that  a  group, 
including  altogether  sixteen  different  mound-figures, 
must  have  been  a  work  of  immense  time  and  labour, 
and  doubtless  owed  its  origin  to  some  motive  or  purpose 
of  corresponding  magnitude  in  the  estimation  of  its 
constructors. 

Mr.  Schoolcraft,  to  whom  no  problem  of  Americans 
prehistoric  times  appears  to  suggest  any  insoluble  diJfi- 
culties,  deals  with  the  emblematical  mounds  of  Wis- 
consin in  greater  seeming  consistency  with  the  aboriginal 
mode  of  thought  of  the  New  World.    In  the  first  volume 


394  PRBHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

of  his  History  of  the  Indian  Tribes,  he  solves  the  whole 
mystery  by  assuming  them  to  be  merely  the  Totems,  or 
heraldic  sjrmbols  in  use  among  the  Indian  tribes,  thus 
reproduced  in  earthworks  on  a  gigantic  scale.  "The 
connexion,''  he  remarks,  "  of  the  animal  mounds  of  Wis- 
consin  ynth  the  existing  totemic  system  of  the  Indians 
who  are  yet  on  the  field  of  action,  is  too  strong  to  escape 
attention.  By  the  system  of  names  imposed  on  the  men 
composing  the  Algonquin,  Iroquois,  Cherokee,  and  other 
nations,  a  fox,  a  bear,  a  turtle,  etc.,  is  fixed  upon  as  a 
badge  or  stem,  from  which  the  descendants  may  trace 
their  parentage.  To  do  this  the  figure  of  an  animal  is 
employed  as  a  heraldic  sign  or  surname.  This  sign  is 
called  in  the  Algonquin,  town-mark  or  totem.  A  tribe 
could  leave  no  more  permanent  trace  of  an  esteemed 
sachem,  or  honoured  individual,  than  by  the  erection  of 
one  of  these  monuments.  They  are  clearly  sepulchral, 
and  have  no  other  object  but  to  preserve  the  names  of 
distinguished  actors  in  their  history."^  Thus  by  the  aid 
of  superficial  resemblances  all  mystery  and  difficulty 
are  evaded.  But,  meanwhile,  the  explorations  of  Mr. 
Lapham  seem  to  prove  that  the  emblematical  mounds 
of  Wisconsin  are  not  sepulchral ;  while  any  correspon- 
dence that  may  be  traced  between  the  totemic  symbols 
of  tribes  once  as  widely  spread  as  the  Algonquin,  Iro- 
quois, and  Cherokees,  only  increases  the  mystery  of  such 
ancient  symbols,  constructed  on  this  colossal  scale,  and 
confined  to  a  territory  so  Hmited  and  well  defined.  So 
far  indeed  is  a  careful  survey  from  confirming  any  such 
convenient  and  summary  fancy,  that  Mr.  Lapham  states 
as  the  result  of  his  elaborate  exploration  of  the  earth- 
works of  Wisconsin,  that  he  conceives  four  epochs  are 
traceable  in  the  history  of  the  locality,  two  of  which  at 
least  preceded  the  era  of  occupation  by  the  Indian  tribes. 

*  History  of  Indian  Tribes,  vol.  i.  p.  52. 


XIIL]      COMMEMORATION :  SYMBOLIC  MOUNDS,        395 

There  is  the  period  of  the  animal  Mound-Builders, 
strangely  devoid  of  works  of  art,  though  one  or  two 
exceptional  cases  have  been  met  with,  as  at  Racine, 
where  Dr.  Hoy  describes  the  finding  of  a  deposit  of 
disks  of  homstone,  about  thirty  in  numbei*,  which  ap- 
pear to  correspond  in  description  to  similar  deposits  in 
the  more  southern  mounds.  Again,  the  extensive  works 
at  Aztalan,  on  the  west  branch  of  the  Eock  Eiver,  pre- 
sent considerable  analogies  to  the  sacred  and  civic  en- 
closures of  the  Mound-Builders  of  Ohio.  The  Aztalan 
earthworks  constitute,  it  is  believed,  the  only  ancient 
enclosure,  properly  so  called,  throughout  the  whole  region 
of  the  emblematic  mounds  ;  and,  imder  the  name  of  the 
"ancient  city  of  Aztalan,"  it  was  long  regarded,  from 
extravagant  and  grossly  exaggerated  descriptions,  as  one 
of  the  wonders  of  the  western  world.  The  name  was 
given  to  it  by  its  first  surveyor,  N.  F.  Hyer,  in  the 
belief  that  here  possibly  were  the  remains  of  a  city  of 
that  northern  Aztalan,  from  whence,  according  to  the 
traditions  of  the  Aztecs,  the  ancestors  of  the  Mexican 
people  derived  their  origin.  On  such  a  basis,  creduhty 
and  wilful  exaggeration  soon  reared  magnificent  western 
ruins.  Walls  of  brick  still  sustained  by  their  solid  but- 
tresses ;  a  subterranean  vault  and  stair-way  discovered 
within  one  of  its  square  mounds ;  a  subterranean  pas- 
sage, arched  with  stone  ;  bastions  of  solid  masonry,  and 
other  features  of  the  like  kind,  were  all  made  to  corre- 
spond with  the  supposed  mother-city  of  the  Aztecs,  and 
the  cradle-land  of  America's  native  civilisation.  On 
being  subjected  to  accurate  survey,  all  these  wondrous 
features  vanish  like  the  cloud-castles  of  the  dawn  before 
the  sun.  Freed,  however,  from  such  exaggeration  and 
falsehood,  the  Aztalan  works  still  present  very  remarkable 
characteristics.  An  area  of  seventeen  acres  on  the  banks 
of  the  Rock  River  is  enclosed  on  three  sides  by  earth- 


396  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

works ;  but  the  form  of  these  is  peculiar,  consisting  of  a 
series  of  "  bastions"  as  they  have  been  termed,  although 
both  the  construction  of  the  walls^  and  the  site  of  the 
enclosure — commanded  as  it  is  by  elevated  land  on 
nearly  every  side, — preclude  the  idea  of  its  having  ever 
been  used  as  a  place  of  defence.  Large,  square,  terraced 
mounds  occupy  the  northern  and  southern  angles  within 
the  enclosure,  and  in  the  former  of  these  there  was 
found,  several  feet  below  the  surface,  what  appeared  to 
be  the  remains  of  cloth  enveloping  portions  of  a  human 
skeleton.  Its  texture  was  open  like  the  coarsest  linen 
fabric,  but  the  threads  were  so  entirely  rotten  as  to 
make  it  uncertain  of  what  material  they  were  made.  It 
is  not  probable,  however,  that  either  this,  or  numerous 
fragments  of  pottery  taken  from  the  mounds  at  different 
times,  bear  any  relation  to  the  original  builders  of 
Aztalan.  Careful  and  elaborate  excavations  by  more 
recent  explorers  have  been  equally  fruitless  with  those 
carried  on  in  the  symbolic  mounds ;  and  cuttings  made 
in  some  of  the  largest  of  a  remarkable  range  of  tumuK 
outside  the  enclosures,  revealed  only  ashes,  mingled  with 
charcoal  and  fragments  of  human  bones,  at  various 
depths  ;  but  brought  to  light  no  single  work  of  art,  like 
those  which  confer  so  graphic  an  interest  on  the  mounds 
of  the  Ohio  Valley. 

Assuming  the  great  works  of  Aztalan  and  the  animal 
mounds  of  Wisconsin  to  belong  to  the  same  period  :  Mr. 
Lapham  regards  the  conical  mounds  as  built  for  sepul- 
chral purposes,  and  exhibiting,  both  in  construction  and 
materials,  the  workmanship  of  a  greatly  inferior  race  of 
builders^  pertaining  to  a  later  era.  Next  come  what  are 
designated  by  the  modem  settlers  "ancient  garden  beds." 
They  consist  of  low,  broad,  parallel  ridges,  as  if  com  had 
been  planted  in  drills.  They  average  four  feet  in  width, 
twenty-j&ve  of  them  having  been  counted  in  the  space  of 


XIII.]     GOMMEMORA  TION :  SYMBOLIC  MO  UNDS,        39  7 

a  hundred  feet,  and  the  deptk  of  the  walk  between  them 
is  six  inches.  These  appearances  indicate  a  more  perfect 
system  of  agricultural  operations  than  an3rthing  known 
to  have  been  practised  by  the  modem  Indian  tribes ; 
but,  at  the  same  time,  they  are  no  less  distinctly  discon- 
nected with  the  construction  of  the  ancient  mounds. 
Where  these  occur  within  a  cultivated  area,  the  parallel 
ridges  of  the  old  cultivators  are  carried  across  them  in 
the  same  manner  as  over  any  undulation  in  the  adjacent 
ground.  It  is  obvious,  therefore,  that  the  emblematic 
earthworks  had  neither  sacredness  nor  any  special  signi- 
ficance in  the  eyes  of  those  later  cultivators  of  the  soil. 
Probably,  indeed,  such  traces  of  agricultural  operations 
belong  to  a  greatly  more  modem  period  than  that  of 
the  mounds. 

The  ancient  monuments  of  this  territory,  lying  imme- 
diately to  the  south  of  the  great  copper  region  of  Lake 
Superior,  present  very  remarkable  features.  If  we  as- 
sume  the  existence  of  nations  or  tribes  in  Wisconsin 
and  Ohio  contemporary  with  the  Mound-Builders,  the 
chronicles  of  that  prehistoric  era  exhibit  them  to  us  in 
striking  contrast.  In  the  one,  every  convenient  height 
is  crowned  with  the  elaborate  fortifications  of  a  numerous 
and  warlike  people  ;  while,  on  the  broad  levels  of  their 
river -terraces,  ingenious  geometrical  structures  prove 
their  skiU  and  intellectual  development  as  applied  to  the 
formation  of  their  civic  and  temple  enclosures.  Their 
sacred  and  sepulchral  mounds,  in  like  manner,  reveal  a 
highly-cultured  artistic  skiU,  and  a  singular  variety  in 
the  rites  and  customs  once  exacted  in  the  performance 
of  their  national  worship.  Turning  to  the  northern  area, 
all  is  changed.  Along  the  river-terraces  we  look  in  vain 
for  military  structures,  and,  with  one  remarkable  excep- 
tion, for  sacred  enclosures.  The  mounds  disclose  no 
altars  rich  with  the  metallurgic  and  mimetic  arts  of 


31)8  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

their  builders ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  the  sole  traces  of 
imitative  art  are  exhibited  in  the  external  forms  of 
earthworks,  the  exploration  of  which  confutes  the  idea 
of  their  having  been  constructed  over  either  grave  or 
altar,  and  reveals  no  other  purpose  connected  with  their 
origin. 

When  it  is  considered  that  the  sacred  and  sepulchral 
mounds,  abounding  throughout  the  valleys  of  the  Missis- 
sippi and  its  tributaries,  frequently  contain  the  copper 
of  Lake  Superior  and  the  mica  of  the  Alleghanies,  as 
well  as  the  shells  of  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  and  obsidian 
from  the  ancient  centre  of  American  civilisation  to  the 
west  of  that  tropical  sea  :  we  are  tempted  to  trace  some 
intimate  relations  between  the  warlike  occupants  of  the 
Ohio  and  Scioto  valleys,  and  the  singular  race  who  dwelt 
in  peaceful  industry  on  the  well-watered  and  plentifully 
stocked  plains  to  the  south  of  the  great  copper  region, 
and  reared,  along  its  lake  and  river  terraces,  the  strange 
colossal  memorials  of  their  imitative  art     The  country 
seems  peculiarly  adapted  by  nature  as  a  central  neutral 
land  for  the  broad  continent  to  the  east  of  the  Rocky 
Mountains.     On  the  north  it  is  guarded  by  the  vast 
fountain  of  the  great  lake  and  river  chain,  which,  with 
Lake  Michigan  on  its  eastern  boundary,  sweeps  away  on 
its  course  of  twenty-five  hundred  miles  of  lake  and  river, 
over  the  mighty  leap  of  Niagara,  and  through  the  islands 
and  rapids  of  the  St.  Lawrence,  into  the  Atlantic  ;  and 
on  the  west,  with  its  infant  streamlets  originating  almost 
from  the  same  soiirce,  the  Mississippi  rolls  onward  in  its 
majestic  course,  receiving  as  its  tributaries  the  great 
rivers  which  rise  alike  on  the  western  slope  of  the  Al- 
leghanies  and  the  eastern  declivities  of  the  Eocky  Moun- 
tains, and  losing  itself  at  length  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico. 
This  wonderful  river-system,  and  the  great  level  contonr 
of  the  regions  which  it  drains,  exercised  a  remarkable 


XIIL]      COMMEMORATION:  SYMBOLIC  MOUNDS,         399 

influence  on  the  extinct  civilisation  of  America,  as  well 
as  on  her  later  Indian  nomade  life,  making  it  so  diflferent 
from  any  of  the  old  or  newer  centuries  of  Europe's 
history.  The  Indians  who  traded  with  Cartier  at  Ta- 
dousac,  on  the  lower  St.  Lawrence,  and  those  whom 
Raleigh  met  with  on  the  southern  coast  of  Carolina, 
obtained  their  copper  from  the  same  northern  region 
towards  which  the  head-waters  of  the  Mississippi  and 
the  St.  Lawrence  converge  ;  while  the  world  of  Europe 
between  the  Khine  and  the  Baltic  remained,  even  in  its 
late  Roman  era,  almost  as  much  apart  from  that  on  its 
Mediterranean  shores  as  the  America  of  centuries  before 
Columbus.  It  seems,  therefore,  not  inconceivable  that 
this  central  area  of  the  continent  derives  some  of  its 
axch^ological  characteristics  from  the  ancient  recognition 
of  its  relation  to  the  physical  geography  of  the  region 
between  the  Rocky  Mountains  and  the  Atlantic.  Was 
it  indeed,  as  has  been  suggested,  a  sacred  neutral  ground 
attached  to  the  metallurgic  region  of  Lake  Superior, 
like  the  famous  pipe-stone  quarry  of  the  Couteau  des 
Prairies  ?  or  was  it  in  the  possession  of  a  tribe  like  the 
Levites  of  ancient  Palestine,  recognised  by  others  as 
consecrated  to  religious  services  and  the  rites  of  peace  ? 
Who  shall  venture  to  lift  the  curtain,  which  is  itself  the 
sole  picture  visible  to  our  eyes  ?  Future  disclosures 
may,  indeed,  greatly  enlarge  our  knowledge  ;  but  mean- 
while we  must  be  content  to  limit  speculation  to  the 
confines  of  existing  evidence,  and  aim  at  clearly  discri- 
minating between  fact  and  fancy. 

While,  however,  the  symibolic  or  animal  mounds  are 
characteristic  of  ancient  Wisconsin,  examples  of  them 
are  intermingled  among  the  other  earthworks  of  the 
Mississippi  Valley ;  and  some  of  them,  indeed,  present 
there  their  most  remarkable  specialities.  One  of  these, 
in  Scioto  County,  Ohio,  is  described  from  a  survey  and 


400  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Caap. 

notes  by  IVIr.  Charles  Whittlesey.    On  a  high  level  terrace 
on  the  west  bank  of  the  Scioto  Eiver,  an  oval  embank- 
ment, approaching  very  nearly  to  a  true  ellipse,  has  been 
constructed  with  unusual  care.     Its  longest  axis  is  four 
hundred  and  eighty  feet,  and  its  conjugate  diameter  four 
hundred  and  seven  feet     A  single  gateway,  opening  to 
the  south-east,  and  about  ninety  feet  wide,  breaks  the 
continuity  of  the  embankment :  but  it  is  covered  by  a 
long  exterior  mound,  leaving  an  approach  at  either  end, 
where  it  overlaps  the  inner  oval.     Within  this  enclosure 
is  a  large  animal-shaped  mound,  resembling  those  of 
Wisconsin,  excepting  in  this  that  none  of  them  have 
hitherto  been  observed  to  be  enclosed  by  corresponding 
earthworks.     The  Ohio  Canal  passes  close  to  the  site, 
and  its  engineer  has  noted  the  interesting  fact  that,  in 
the  progress  of  its  excavation,  the  workmen  found,  in 
the  immediate  vicinity  of  this  ancient  enclosure,  large 
quantities  of  mica  in  sheets,  similar  to  what  has  been 
met  with  so  abundantly  in  the  sacrificial  mounds. 

The  same  canal  intersects  the  works  of  one  of  the  most 
remarkable  of  the  sacred  enclosures  already  referred  to  : 
the  Newark  group,  in  Licking  County,  Ohio  ;  and  here, 
within  an  elliptic  enclosure  of  1250  feet  in  its  longest 
axis,  is  the  great  bird-mound,  measuring^  155  feet  in 
length  of  body,  and  200  feet  between  the  tips  of  the 
wings.     As  already  described,  it  constitutes  only  one  of 
many  striking  features  of  a  remarkable  group  of  geo- 
metrical enclosiires,  mounds,  and   avenues ;    but   it    is 
distinguished  from  all  the  other  works  around  it,  covering 
an  extent  of  about  two  miles  square,  by  the  great  heiglit 
of  the  enclosing  walls,  and  the  peculiar  feature  of   an 
interior  ditch  seven  feet  deep  and  thirty-five  feet  wide. 
In  the  centre  of  an  area  of  thirty  acres,  enclosed    "by 
imposing  circumvallations,  and  under  the  shadows    of 
gigantic  trees,  hoary  with  the  years  of  many  generations. 


XIIL]      COM  ME  MORA  TION :  SYMBOLIC  MO  UNDS.        40 1 

rises  this  remarkable  bird-mound,  with  its  head  pointing 
directly  to  the  eastern  avenue  ;  while  immediatdy  in  its 
rear,  one  hundred  feet  distant,  is  a  semicircular  embstnk- 
ment  of  slight  elevation,  about  two  hundred  feet  in 
length.  This  bird-mound,  as  previously  obsferved,  has 
been  opened,  and  found  to  cover  a  sabrificial  altar,  but 
unfortunately  no  note  has  been  preserved  of  any  relics 
discovered  within  it.  The  fact,  however,  is  of  great 
importance,  in  comparing  the  works  of  the  Mississippi 
Valley  with  those  of  Wisconsin  ;  which,  in  the  absence 
of  any  included  relics  of  worship  or  inhumation,  seem 
but  as  the  typical  symbols  of  the  rites  and  practices  of 
the  southern  Mound-Builders. 

The  Newark  Valley  abounds  with  military  and  sacred 
enclosures,  embankments,  altar-mounds,  and  tumuli  of 
the  ancient  people ;  and  about  six  miles  higher  up  the 
vaUey,  the  "Alligator,'^  of  Licking  Coimty,  atti-acts  our 
attention  as  a  remarkable  example  of  the  colossal  animal- 
mounds  of  the  New  World.  A  hill  or  headland,  from 
150  to  200  feet  in  height,  projects  boldly  into  the  vaUey 
of  Eacoon  Creek,  and  on  the  rounded  summit  of  this 
headland  the  huge  lizard-mound  has  been  constructed. 
The  summit  of  the  hill  upon  which  the  effigy  rests  is  so 
regular  as  to  suggest  the  idea  that  it  has  been  artificially 
rounded  ;  as  is  by  no  means  improbable,  in  the  process 
of  excavating  the  materials  out  of  which  the  moimd  is 
formed. 

In  this,  as  in  other  examples  of  animal-mounds,  the 
probability  is  suggested  that  it  may  have  been  originally 
modelled  with  a  minuteness  of  detail  very  imperfectly 
preserved  in  its  present  condition.  The  outline  of  the 
figure  is  clearly  defined.  Its  average  height  is  fully  four 
feet,  but  the  head,  shoulders,  and  nmip  are  elevated  in 
some  parts  to  a  height  of  six  feet,  an  attempt  having 
evidently  been  made  to  preserve  the  contour  and  rela- 

VOL.  I.  2  c 


402  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

tive  proportions  of  the  animal  represented.  The  ends  of 
the  paws  are  broader  than  the  limbs,  as  if  the  spread  of 
the  toes  had  been  originally  indicated,  and  the  tail  curves 
off  to  the  left  side,  so  as  to  give  its  fall  length  within  the 
limits  of  its  elevated  site.  The  total  length  fix>m  the 
point  of  the  nose  to  the  end  of  the  curved  tail  is  about 
250  feet  Upon  the  inner  side  of  the  effigy  is  a  raised 
circular  space,  covered  with  stones  which  have  been  much 
exposed  to  the  action  of  fire  ;  and  from  the  summit  of 
this^  which  is  designated  the  altar,  a  graded  way,  ten  feet 
broad,  leads  to  the  top  of  the  Alligator  Mound.  Exca- 
vations made  at  various  points  of  the  figure  have  only 
sufficed  to  show  that  its  firamework  is  composed  of  stones 
of  considerable  size,  upon  which  the  superstructure  has 
been  modelled  in  fine  day. 

The  site  of  this  remarkable  ancient  monument  com- 
mands a  view  of  the  entire  valley  for  eight  or  ten  miles, 
and  is  by  far  the  most  conspicuous  point  within  that  limit. 
It  overlooks  a  beautiful  circular  enclosure  in  the  valley  im- 
mediately opposite.  An  ancient  fortified  hill  stands  about 
three-fourths  of  a  mile  distant  on  a  spur  of  the  same 
range  of  heights ;  and  another  entrenched  hill  nearly 
faces  it  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  valley.     Numerous 
mounds  are  seen  from  it  both  on  the  hill-tops  and  in  the 
level  bottom ;  and  it  is  only  the  luxuriant  growth  of  the 
still  uncleared  forest  which  conceals  the  great  Newark 
group,  with  its  numerous  geometrical  enclosures,  paral- 
lels, and  mounds.     It  is  apparent,  therefore,  that  the  site 
of  this  singular  symbolic  earthwork  was  selected  as  the 
most  prominent  natural  feature,  in  a  valley  abounding 
with  traces  of  the  military,  civic,  and  religious  stractures 
of  that  strange  extinct  race  to  whom  we  give  the  name 
of  the  Mound-Builders ;  and  in  one  of  the  most  populous 
centres  of  ancient  settlement.     It  is  not,  therefore,  with- 
out good  reason  that  its  surveyors  have  assumed  that  the 


^^f'^a'^rB^sammKaBammmmmmmmm 


XIIL]      COMMEMORATION:  SYMBOLIC  MOUNDS.         403 

Alligator  Mound  of  Newark  Valley  had  its  origin  in 
the  superstitions  of  its  makers ;  and  that  it  was  per- 
haps the  high  place  where  sacrifices  were  made  on  stated 
or  extraordinary  occasions,  when  that  ancient  people 
gathered  to  celebrate  the  rites  of  their  now  unknown 
worship. 

But  by  far  the  most  remarkable  of  all  the  S3nnbolic  or 
imitative  earthworks  hitherto  discovered  is  "  the  Great 
Serpent/^  of  Adams'  County,  Ohio.    At  the  junction  of  a 
small  rivulet  with  Bush  Creek,  a  tributary  of  the  Ohio, 
a  crescent-formed  spur  of  land  has  been  left  between  the 
two  water-courses,  rising  abruptly  from  the  level  of  the 
stream  to  a  height  of  1 5  0  feet.    At  the  extreme  point  of 
the  promontory  is  an  oval  earthwork  of  perfectly  regular 
outline,  measuring  160  feet  in  greatest  diameter,  and 
eighty  feet,  or  exactly  one- half,  in  least  diameter.    A  cii-- 
cular  heap  of  large  stones,  marked  strongly  by  the  action 
of  fire,  formerly  occupied  the  centre,  but  its  site  is  now 
indicated  only  by  a  slight  elevation.     The  point  of  the 
hill  on  which  this  oval  earthwork  rests  appears  to  have 
been   cut  to  a  conformity  with  its  outline,  leaving  a 
smooth  external  platform  ten  feet  wide,  with  an  inclina- 
tion towards  the  embankment  on  every  side.     Immedi- 
ately outside  the  inner  point  of  this  oval  enclosure  is  the 
Great  Serpent's  head,  with  distended  jaws,  as  if  in  the 
act  of  swallowing  what,  in  comparison  with  its  huge  di- 
mensions, is  spoken  of  as  an  egg,  though  it  measures,  as 
has  been  said,  160  feet  in  length.     Conforming  to  the 
summit  of  the  lull,  the  body  of  the  serpent  winds  back 
for  700  feet,  in  graceful  undulations,  terminating  with  a 
triple  coil  at  the  tail.     The  figure  is  clearly  and  boldly 
defined,  the  earth-AVTought  rehevo  being  upwards  of  five 
feet  in  height  by  thirty  feet  in  base  at  the  centre  of  the 
body,  and  diminishing  towards  the  head  and  tail.     The 
entire  length,  following  its  convolutions,  cannot  measure 


404  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

less  than  a  thousand  feet.  On  either  aide  of  the  serpent's 
head  two  small  triangular  elevations  extend,  looking  on 
the  ground-plan  like  external  gills,  but  they  are  so  much 
obliterated  as  to  render  their  original  form  uncertaia. 
Unlike  the  great  Alligator  Mound,  this  remarkable  monu- 
ment stands  alone.  With  the  exception  of  a  single  moimd 
of  moderate  dimensions  in  the  centre  of  the  isthmus, 
connecting  its  elevated  site  with  the  table-land  beyond, 
the  spectator  looks  forth  from  the  commanding  point  it 
occupies  over  an  extensive  prospect,  with  broad  alluvial 
terraces  spread  out  below,  but  aU  unoccupied  by  the 
ancient  works  which  generally  abound  in  that  region  on 
similar  sites. 

This  singular  monument  of  extinct  rites  and  faith, 
though  classed  here  with  the  symbolic  animal-mounds  of 
Wisconsin,  has  no  analogue  among  the  numerous  basso- 
relievos  wrought  on  the  broad  prairie-lands  of  that  ex- 
tensive region.  It  is  indeed  altogether  imique  among 
the  ancient  earthworks  of  the  New  World,  and  without 
a  parallel  in  the  Old,  though  it  has  not  unnaturally  fur- 
nished the  starting-point  for  a  host  of  speculations  rela- 
tive to  the  serpent-symbols  of  Egypt,  Assyria,  and 
Greece;  the  supposed  symbolism  of  Celtic  superstitions 
in  the  monolithic  temples  of  Avebury  and  Carnac ;  and 
the  serpent  in  combination  with  the  circle,  egg,  and 
globe,  among  the  predominant  S3nnbolic  devices  on  the 
most  ancient  temples  of  Egypt  and  India,  as  weU  as  on 
those  of  Central  America.  Mr.  Squier  has  devoted  a 
special  volume  to  the  working  out  of  this  fascinating 
subject  of  "the  Serpent  Symbol''  in  its  New  World 
aspects ;  but  his  ingenious  speculations  do  not  lead  to 
more  tangible  results  than  those  which  employed  the  fan- 
ciful pen  of  Stukely,  or  delighted  Toland  and  Davis  in 
the  belief  that  they  were  fathoming  the  mysteries  of 
the  Celtic  Druids. 


mmmm^s^^K^^m^amammmm 


XIIL]     COMMEMORA  TION :  SYMBOLIC  MO  UNDS.         405 

One  other  class  of  imitative  works  occurs  among  the 
strange  symbolic  mounds  of  Wisconsin,  presenting  some 
analogy  to  those  still  remaining  among  the  primitive 
monuments  of  the  British  Isles.  The  earthworks  hitherto 
described  are  in  bold  relief,  and  among  the  more  import- 
ant groups  there  frequently  occurs  an  elevated  mound  or 
observatory  from  whence  to  overlook  and  take  in  the  full 
design  of  the  whole.  But  on  the  Indian  prairie,  a  few 
miles  from  the  city  of  Milwaukee,  amid  an  interesting 
series  of  imitative  and  other  mound-works,  there  occur 
five  others,  wrought  —  to  use  the  terms  of  European 
art — in  intaglio.  Instead  of  the  representations  of 
animals  being  here  executed  by  modelling  them  in  relief 
on  the  level  surface  of  the  soil,  the  process  has  been 
reversed,  and  after  formmg  them  by  excavation,  the  earth 
removed  by  this  means  has  been  pUed  in  regular  mounds 
around  the  edge.  A  few  other  examples  of  this  intaglio 
work  have  been  noted ;  but  such  a  process,  if  ever  very 
extensively  used,  must  have  been  much  more  liable  to 
effacement  in  the  process  of  time,  unless  protected  and 
preserved,  like  the  famous  "  White  Horse"  of  Berkshire, 
by  a  periodical  "  scouring,"  which  haa  there  survived  as 
a  custom  long  after  less  faithful  tradition  has  preserved 
with  any  certainty  the  memory  of  the  events  it  was 
designed  to  commemorate.  The  chalk  hills  of  southern 
England  present  peculiar  facilities  for  such  effective 
colossal  intaglio  work.  Another  White  Horse,  ascribed 
to  Saxon  victors  of  the  Danes,  accompanies  an  interest- 
ing group  of  British  earthworks  on  Braddon  Hill,  Wilt- 
shire ;  and  the  colossal  human  figure,  armed  with  a  club, 
at  Ceme,  in  Dorsetshire,  preserves  a  curious  counterpart 
to  those  scattered  over  the  prairie  lands  beyond  the 
western  shores  of  Lake  Michigan.  ' 

It  is  difficult  to  convey  by  mere  description,  even 
though  accompanied  with  minutest  measurements,  a  de- 


406  PREHISTORIC  MAX.  [Chap. 

finite   conception  of  the  great  scale  upon  which  the 
American  earthworks  are  executed,  and  the  consequent 
labour  involved  in  their  construction.     One  of  the  cruci- 
form mounds,  for  example,  measures  420  feet  between  the 
extreme  points  of  its  limbs.     Lizard  and  other  animal- 
mounds  range  from  80  to  150  feet  in  length,  and  are 
met  with  in  groups,  involving  altogether  long  and  con- 
tinuous labour.     The  native  American  tribes  that  have 
come  under  the  direct  observation  of  Europeans^  are  as 
diverse  in  habits,  arts,  and  religious  rites  as  in  language ; 
but  none  of  them  have  manifested  the  capacity  for  con- 
tinuous labour  involved  in  the  construction  of  monu- 
ments which  more  nearly  resemble  the  great  embank- 
ments and  viaducts  of  modem  railway  engineering.    The 
extent  of  such  works,  like  those  in  the  more  southern 
valleys,  indicates  a  settled  condition  of  society,  with  a 
systematic  agricultural  industry,  very  diflferent  from  that 
of  the  Iroquois  Confederacy.      Agriculture  must  have 
been  sufficiently  developed  to  maintain  a  considerable 
population ;  and  though  in  all  this  there  is  nothing  abso- 
lutely incompatible  with  the  idea  of  the  modem  Indian 
being  the  degenerate  descendant  of  such  a  people,  yet  it 
is  a  mere  idea,  alike  improbable  and  unsupported  by 
proof.     No  modem  tribe  hitherto  discovered  preserves 
any  trace  of  such  ancestral  constructive  habits ;   and 
while  the  animal -mounds  appear  to  be  regarded  with 
superstitious  reverence  by  the  Indians,  and  are  never 
disturbed  by  them  except  for  purposes  of  sepulture,  they 
lay  no  claim  to  them  as  the  work  of  their  fathers.    Their 
only  theory  of  the  origin  of  such  structures  is,  that  they 
are  the  work  of  the  great  Manitou,  and  were  made  by 
him  to  reveal  to  his  red  children  the  plentiftd  supply  of 
game  that  awaits  them  in  the  world  of  spirits.    The  idea 
is  a  consoling  one  to  the  tribes  whose  hunting-grounds 
have  there  been  invaded  and  laid  desolate;  and  it   is 


^"^^^■•■iVMWi^aiBI^HVMlBVPHHHlVBBHH 


XIIL]      COMMEMORATION:  SYMBOLIC  MOUNDS,        407 

folly  as  philosophical  as  the  theory  gravely  propounded, 
in  my  hearing,  before  one  of  the  sections  of  the  American 
Scientific  Association,  that  the  cruciform  and  curvilinear 
earthworks  intermingled  with  the  animal-moimds,  include 
various  characters  of  the  Phoenician  alphabet,  and  are 
half-obUterated  inscriptions  commemorative  of  the  an- 
cient  exploration  of  the  American  lake  regions  by  the 
great  voyagers  of  antiquity ! 


4(^8  FREBISTORIC  MAN.  [Cbap. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

PROGRESS:  NATIVE  CIVILISATION. 

The  name  of  the  Toltecs  plays  a  part  in  the  initial 
pages  of  the  New  World^s  story  akin  to  that  of  the  fabled 
Cyclops  of  antiquity.    It  belongs  to  that  vague  era  which 
lies  Ixjyond  all  definite  records,  and  furnishes  a  name  for 
the  historian  and  the  ethnologist  alike  to  conjure  with : 
like  the  Druids  or  the  Picts  of  the  old  British  antiquary, 
or  the  Phoenicians  of  his  American  disciple.     Yet  it  is 
not  without  its  value  thus  to  discover,  among  the  nations 
of  the  New  World,  even  a  fabulous  history,  with  its  pos- 
sible fragments  of  truth  embodied  in  the  myth.     Mr. 
Gallatin  has  compiled  a  laborious  digest  of  the  successive 
migrations  and  dynasties  of  Mexico,  as  chronicled  from 
elder  sources,  by  Ixtlilxochitl,  Sahagun,  Veytia,  Clavi- 
gero,  the  Mendoza  Collection,  the  Codex  Tellurianus,  and 
Acosta.*     The  oldest  dates  bring  the  Toltec  wanderers  to 
Huehuetlapallan,  A.D.  387,  and  close  their  dynasty  in  the 
middle  of  the  tenth  century ;  when  they  are  superseded 
by  Chichimecas  and  Tezcucans,  whose  joint  sovereignty, 
by  the  unanimous  concurrence  of  authorities,  endures  till 
the  sixteenth  century.    But,  meanwhile,  the  same  autho- 
rities chronicle  the  foundation  of  Mexico  or  Tenochtitlan, 
variously  in  the  thirteenth  or  fourteenth  century,  by  the 
Aztec  conquerors,  and  profess  to  supply  the  dynastic 
chronology  of  Aztec  power.     The  earliest  date  is  not  too 

^  American  EthruAjogkal  Society's  TranMctions,  vol.  i.  p.  162. 


XrV.]  PROGRESS:  NATIVE  CIVILISATION.  409 

remote  for  the  commencement  of  a  civilisation  that  has 
left  such  evidences  of  its  later  maturity  ;  but  unfortu- 
nately the  various  authorities  differ  not  by  years  only, 
but  by  centuries.  IxtHlxochitl  carries  back  the  founding 
of  Mexico  upwards  of  a  century  farther  than  any  other 
authority ;  and  in  the  succeeding  date,  which  professes 
to  fix  the  election,  of  its  king,  Acamapichtli,  the  discre- 
pancies between  him  and  other  authorities  vary  from  two 
to  considerably  more  than  two  and  a  half  centuries ;  and 
leave  on  the  mind  of  the  critical  student,  impressions 
nearly  as  substantial  as  those  pertaining  to  the  regal 
dynasties  of  Alban  and  Sabine  Eome.  Spanish  chroni- 
clers, and  modem  historians  and  etiinologists,  have 
striven  to  piece  into  coherent  details  the  successive 
migrations  into  the  Vale  of  Anahuac  from  the  north,  and 
the  desertion  of  the  mythic  northern  Aztalan  for  the 
final  seat  of  Aztec  empire  in  the  lake  of  Tezcuco ;  but 
their  shadowy  history  marshals  before  us  only  shapes 
vague  and  immaterial  as  those  which  Turner's  pencil 
called  into  being  in  response  to  tiie  poet's  dream,  "  from 
many  an  age  withheld,''  of  kingly  splendours  of  the  en- 
gulfed Atlantis.^ 

There  is  something  at  once  amusing,  and  singularly 
suggestive  of  doubt  relative  to  much  else  that  is  greatly 
more  modem,  to  find  the  gifted  American  historian  of 
the  Conquest  of  Mexico  tracing  down  the  migrations 
and  the  conquests  of  the  Toltecs  from  the  seventh  till 
the  twelfth  century,  when  the  Acolhuans  or  Tezcucans, 
the  Aztecs,  and  others,  superseded  them  in  the  Great 
Valley.  We  turn  to  the  foot-notes,  so  abundant  in  the 
carefully  elaborated  narrative  of  Prescott,  and  we  find 
his  chief  or  sole  authority  is  the  christianized  half-breed 
of  Tezcuco,  De  Alva,  or  Ixtlilxochitl,  who  held  the  office 
of  Indian  interpreter  of  the  Viceroyalty  of  New  Spain  in 

^  Rogers'  Voyage  of  Columbtts. 


}}ll\  -  ^?.7'  JLlJT  li^ 


*-^    li-'t*^      if   Jl-.l^r^^v    tail    H  C»A*  •p:«r-nr:i  ¥?><> 
-V-  .f -.-     r  ^r  c^  ,;^j^  jj^r    .^    ;-^  r.^l   mciiiiz^r  i  T 


U/  :.vr  -^.vrr-i^t  ixn  oi  v'll'JL  Tr^^rzt  has  worn  ii 
^w./^:.A^  p-rr .;/»:  f^  Fecaziio  C-ones  and  iis  greai  Zfe- 
li^oriC  /t  ife  a  r:-irr-^>:is  r.«/irifal  pazKjoiDa,  ginteni:^ 
» ;*;j  a  %- ifrrtd/zar  at  of  tbEr  g^^^was  mo&rp^  and  palac^ 
of  0>*'i  Grai^Ia  ;  b-at  a  gTf>witor  iiicliiian<«n  is  feh  to 


*  fcjr  4  --^^Tv^  «T»^  afc  ti*  w4<»  ^5«ok4  to  PtODoti,  Hfurf  ^Jtf^^^ 

rnxu^^u,  ^A„ry  ;  Mn  O^  error  k  o^/riMHi     IW  AMoioB  kirtana  Mly 

ji/k<>/^^ .^  ^  ♦„ —  *x.  .^ ^j^  ^^^^^^  ^  ^^  ^tl..,^*^     y«wtfce- 

<*^  W,Mi  Uft  iM>t  yner^:mUA  ha  Itob  eovlnetu^  4mt  of  tfe  »>-tniih  Act 
Uy*^  fttrriufv^  »  er.b«r«rt  MrratiTe  of  aiMMit  adgntioi^  aad  Oe  Rfatire 
'^viii*ai/^  //f  priiriitire  nMc%  from  Oe  •ercstii  to  Oe  £&«.&  eafanr  - 
WtlM^il^  iA  m  ma.A  of  tbe  «««po«iiiig  «»  of  JEompc  we  li.Te  rtOl  to 

iJt  .7  1  ^'^'^^^'^  UiTMg  wntten  'on  the  fiatt,  of  tiie  Toltee  hktoriaM.' 
I*«t  th*t  •.^,/>Ur  d..«  im4  p«teiul  to 

\*^'''^^ff  ^  hMA  heMid  oi  imfy  oi^  in  The 

*tt*r  wrfW  t*IU  tw  thM  hi.  •cooiiDt  of  the  Toltee  and  C^^ 
^J^rlv«J  frr.f«  inU^,reUium'  (prohMy  of  the  TeamcMi  pamtinim)    'and 
T  *  -  ^«f  Hl/m.  of  oU  men ;'  poor  authority  for  erente  wShSpa^ 

S,!  Zl  !^  r  .^^^?^  *^*  ^  •^•*  ^^^^  *^  '^^^  nine-tenthB  of  them. 
.  /r  r^      */".*^  ''^'^  ""^  ^^*  ""^^^^  «*«^h,  probably,  if  he  had  reje^ 


XIV.]  PROORESS:  NATIVE  CIVILISATION.  411 

test  the  Spanish  chroniclers  by  the  surviving  relics  of 
that  past  which  they  have  clothed  for  us  in  more  than 
oriental  magnificence.  Specially  do  we  desire  to  look 
with  clear,  critical  vision  on  that  curious  phase  of  native 
American  civilisation,  which  was  abruptly  arrested  and 
quenched,  like  an  extinguished  torch,  under  the  heel  of 
the  conqueror.  Yucatan  and  Central  America  still  reveal 
to  us  indisputable  memorials  of  a  long-extinct  era  of 
native  architectural  skill,  and  to  these  monuments  of  a 
mysterious  past  our  attention  must  be  directed  with 
earnest  care.  But,  meanwhile,  it  is  important  to  note 
that  a  correspondence  in  probable  origin,  and  in  actual 
style  and  characteristics,  between  much  of  the  architec- 
ture of  Central  America  and  that  which  is  afl&rmed  or 
assumed  to  have  existed  in  Mexico  at  the  time  of  the 
Conquest,  is  made  to  constitute  the  basis  of  many  falla- 
cious arguments  on  the  nature  and  extent  of  Aztec 
civilisation  in  the  era  of  the  second  Montezuma.  Again, 
the  conflicting  elements  apparent  between  the  barbarous 
rites  and  cannibalism  affirmed  by  their  conquerors  to 
have  been  practised  by  the  Aztecs,  and  the  evidences  of 
matured  arts  and  high  civilisation  ascribed  to  them, 
have  been  the  plentiful  source  of  theories  as  to  Toltecan 
and  other  earlier  derivations,  for  aU  that  pertained  to 
such  manifestations  of  intellect,  taste,  and  inventive 
genius.  But  what  we  are  specially  desirous  of  testing 
at  present,  is  the  character  of  Mexican  architecture. 
The  mysterious  works  of  the  extinct  Mound-Builders 
are  full  of  wonder  for  us,  but  the  magnificence  of  the 
capital  of  Montezuma  throws  their  simple  earthworks 
into  the  shade ;  and,  while  reading  with  implicit  faith 
the  narrative  of  its  conqueror,  we  feel  that  the  age  of 
America's  infancy  and  childhood  lies  all  buried  in  the 
older  mounds.  Before,  however,  this  conclusion  can  be 
accepted,  it  is  indispensable  that  we  test,  by  existing 


412  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

evidence,  the  descriptions  of  Mexican  art  and  architecture 
handed  down  to  us  by  the  chroniclers  of  the  sixteenth 
and  seventeenth  centuries. 

A  peculiar  style  is  recognised  as  pertaining  to  the 
native  architecture  of  America,  which,  if  not  indepen- 
dently originating  on  the  soil  of  the  New  World,  it  has 
been  the  favourite  fancy  of  American  antiquaries  to 
trace  to  an  Egjqptian  or  a  Phoenician  source.  Alike  in 
their  general  character  and  mode  of  construction,  in  the 
style  of  sculpture  and  the  hieroglyphic  decorations  which 
enrich  their  walls :  the  ruined  palaces  and  temples  of 
Mexico,  as  well  as  of  Yucatan  and  Central  America, 
have  been  supposed  to  reproduce  some  of  the  most 
striking  characteristics  of  the  Nile  valley.  But  the 
experienced  eye  of  Stephens  saw  only  elements  of  con- 
trast instead  of  comparison ;  and  while  Prescott  sums 
up  his  history  of  Mexican  conquest  with  this  conclusion, 
"  that  the  coincidences  are  sufficiently  strong  to  authorize 
a  belief  that  the  civilisation  of  Anahuac  was,  in  some 
degree,  influenced  by  that  of  eastern  Asia,"  he  adds,  that 
the  discrepancies  are  such  as  to  carry  back  the  communi- 
cation to  a  period  so  remote  as  to  leave  its  civilisation, 
in  all  its  essential  features,  peculiar  and  indigenous. 
Searching,  on  an  earlier  page,  for  any  specific  proofs 
that  seemed  to  justify  the  analogies  which  command 
the  greatest  popularity,  the  historian  remarks  : — "  The 
points  of  resemblance  will  probably  be  found  neither 
numerous  nor  decisive.  There  is,  indeed,  some  analogy 
both  to  the  Egyptian  and  Asiatic  style  of  architecture, 
in  the  pyramidal,  terrace-formed  bases  on  which  the 
buildings  repose,  resembling  also  the  Toltec  and  Mexican 
teocalli  A  similar  care  also  is  observed  in  the  people 
of  both  hemispheres  to  adjust  the  position  of  their  build- 
ings by  the  cardinal  points.  The  walls  in  both  are 
covered  with  figures  and  hierogl3rphics,  which,  on    the 


XIV.]  PROGRESS:  NATIVE  CIVILISATION  413 

American  as  on  the  Egyptian,  may  be  designed  perhaps 
to  record  the  laws  and  historical  annals  of  the  nation. 
These  figures,  as  well  as  the  buildings  themselves,  are 
found  to  have  been  atained  with  various  dyes,  principaUy 
vermilion ;  a  favourite  colour  with  the  Egyptians  also, 
who  painted  their  colossal  statues  and  temples  of  granite. 
Notwithstanding  these  points  of  similarity,  the  Palenque 
architecture  has  little  to  remind  us  of  the  Egyptian  or 
of  the  Oriental'^*  And  we  must  add,  that  even  these 
analogies  are  very  partially  true,  and  can  only  be  carried 
so  far  by  ascribing  to  Mexican  civilisation  works  which 
probably  had  a  totally  distinct  origin.  For  if  the  gifted 
historian  of  the  Conquest  of  Mexico  had  to  employ  other 
eyes  to  give  to  the  world  the  attractive  and  glowing 
pictures  wrought  by  his  fancy  and  judgment  from  manu- 
script treasures,  gathered  alike  from  the  old  colonial 
empire  of  Spain,  and  from  the  public  archives  of  the 
Peninsula  :  we  may  feel  the  less  hesitation  in  testing, 
by  a  severe  standard  of  criticism,  the  proofs  on  which 
sj  many  of  our  ideas  are  founded  relative  to  the  native- 
bom  civilisation  of  Mexico,  and  of  America  at  large.  It 
is  indeed  difficult  to  determine  what  we  are  to  believe 
relative  either  to  the  former  or  the  present  characteristics 
of  some  of  the  most  famous  monuments  of  Mexican  art. 
The  ruined  city  of  Aztalan,  on  the  western  prairies,  after 
filling  the  imagination  with  glowing  fancies  of  a  desert 
Baalbek  or  Palmyra  of  the  New  World,  from  whence  the 
Aztecs  had  transplanted  the  arts  of  an  obliterated  civili- 
sation to  the  Mexican  plateau  ;  shrunk  before  the  critical 
gaze  of  a  truthful  surveyor  into  a  mere  group  of  mounds 
and  earthworks :  curious,  indeed,  and  replete  with  strange 
interest ;  but  presenting  no  other  analogies  than  those 
which  class  them  with  the  works  of  the  American  Mound- 
Builders.     Yet  it  is  strange  how  enduring  such  cloud- 

^  Prescott's  Conquest  of  Mexico,  Append,  part  I. 


414  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

built  structures  will  often  prove.  The  pride  of  local 
prejudice  becomes  enlisted  on  behalf  of  the  current 
tale  of  exaggeration  ;  the  stereot3^ped  phraseology  which 
speaks  of  earthen  mounds  and  clay  ramparts  as  pyramids, 
bastions,  and  buttressed  walK  perpetuates  the  extrava- 
gant hyberboles  of  their  first  discoverers ;  and,  but  for 
some  timely  and  well-authenticated  survey,  it  is  left  to 
later  generations  to  sift  painfully  the  vague  and  contra- 
dictory fables  of  a  past  that  never  had  a  present  The 
literal  A2talan,  on  the  banks  of  the  Rock  River  of  Wis- 
consin, but  poorly  corresponds  to  the  received  ideas  of 
that  northern  Aztalan,  to  which  Mexican  traditions  and 
hieroglyphical  maps  alike  pointed  as  the  bright  abode  of 
a  warlike  ancestry,  glorious  as  the  sons  of  the  Titans,  or 
the  ofispring  of  the  Teutonic  Odin.  It  may  be,  however, 
that  a  like  critical  survey  will  reveal  to  us  such  traits 
in  the  later  Aztecs  of  Anahuac,  as  to  render  such  an 
ancestral  birth-land  less  inconsistent  with  their  actual 
condition  when  brought  into  fatal  contact  with  the  higher 
civilisation  of  Europe.  Such  at  least  seems  to  be  the 
tendency  of  modem  disclosures,  if,  indeed,  they  do  not 
point  to  the  possibility  that  much  even  of  the  latest 
phase  of  Mexican  civilisation  may  present  some  closer 
analogies  to  the  actual  ruined  Aztalan  of  the  Wisconsin 
prairies,  than  to  the  fancied  mother-city  of  the  Aztecs. 

Midway  across  the  continent  of  North  America,  where 
it  narrows  towards  a  point  between  the  Gulf  of  Mexico 
and  the  Pacific,  the  civilisation  of  the  New  World  appears 
to  have  converged  at  the  close  of  the  fifteenth  century. 
Here  the  traveller  from  the  Atlantic  coast,  after  passing 
through  the  gorgeous  tropical  flowers  and  aromatic 
shrubs  of  the  deadly  tierra  ccdiente,  emerges  at  length 
into  a  pure  atmosphere.  The  vanilla,  the  indigo,  and 
flowering  cacao-groves  are  gradually  left  behind.  The 
sugar-cane  and  the  banana  next  disappear ;  and  he  looks 


XIV.]  PROGRESS:  NATIVE  CIVILISATION.  415 

down  through  the  gorges  of  the  elevated  tierra  templada 
on  the  vegetation  of  the  tropics,  carpeting,  and  scenting 
with  its  luscious  but  deadly  odours,  the  burning  region 
which  stretches  along  the  Mexican  Gulf.  Higher  still, 
he  climbs  into  regions  where  the  wheat  and  other  grains 
of  Europe's  temperate  zone  replace  the  tall  native  maize 
or  Indian  com  ;  until  at  length  he  enters  the  tierra  fria: 
climbing  up  through  a  succession  of  terraces  representing 
every  zone  of  temperature,  till  he  rests  on  the  summit  of 
the  Cordillera.  Beyond  this  the  volcanic  peaks  of  the 
Andes  tower  into  the  regions  of  perpetual  snow ;  while 
the  traveller  crosses  the  once  thickly-wooded  table-land 
into  the  celebrated  valley  of  Mexico  :  an  oval  basin  about 
sixty-seven  leagues  in  circumference,  and  elevated  be- 
yond the  deadly  malaria  and  enervating  heat  of  the  coast 
into  a  temperate  and  fertile  climate,  nearly  seven  thou- 
sand five  hundred  feet  above  the  equidistant  Atlantic 
and  Pacific  Oceans.  Here,  encompassed  by  the  salt 
marshes  of  the  Tezcucan  Lake,  stood  the  ancient  Tenoch- 
titlan  or  Mexico,  "  The  Venice  of  the  Aztecs." 

In  the  month  of  October  1519,  Don  Diego  de  Ordaz 
effected  the.  ascent  of  the  volcanic  Popocatepetl,  which 
stands  with  Iztaccihuatl, — ^regarded  in  the  simple  fancies 
of  the  Mexican  Indians  as  man  and  wife, — like  two 
giant  sentinels  guarding  the  portal  of  the  Mexican  val- 
ley. Keaching  the  summit  of  the  burning  mountain,  De 
Ordaz  stood  at  an  elevation  upwards  of  two  thousand 
feet  higher  than  the  lofty  monarch  of  Europe's  Alpine 
chain.  Marked  as  Popocatepetl  then  was  by  the  cha- 
racteristics of  an  active  volcano,  it  was  regarded  with 
superstitious  terror  by  the  natives  as  the  dread  abode  of 
departed  spirits,  the  ghosts  of  death-deposed  tyrants, 
whose  fiery  agonies  reproduced  there  the  convulsions  of 
the  classic  Titans.  From  this  awful  height,  De  Ordaz 
was  the  first  European  who  beheld  the  valley  of  Mexico 


^-j,>e^j ■     I    ■    ^^^■^^^^■i^^— Ji— ■— — 


416  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

with  its  curiouB  chain  of  lakes,  and  in  its  midst  the  far- 
famed  capital  of  Montezuma,  with  its  white  towers  and 
pyramidal  teocalU  rising  from  their  waJled  enclosures, 
reflecting  back  the  sun  from  their  stuccoed  walls,  tiU,  as 
Bemal  Diaz  reports  on  another  occasion :  **  The  buildings 
of  Cempoal  having  been  lately  whitewashed  and  plastered, 
one  of  our  horsemen  was  so  struck  with  the  splendour  of 
their  appearance  in  the  sun,  that  he  came  back  in  full 
speed  to  Cortes  to  tell  him  that  the  walls  of  the  houses 
were  of  silver." 

The  men  of  that  generation  which  witnessed  the  dis- 
coveries of  mighty  empires,  and  an  El  Dorado  beyond 
the  known  limits  of  the  world,  had  their  imaginations 
expanded  to  the  reception  of  any  conceivable  wonders. 
Sir  Thomas  More  constructed  his  Utopia  out  of  one  of 
those  supposed  traveller's  tales ;  and  Othello  styles  his 
wonderful  relations  a  "  traveller's  history  : " 

"  Wherein  of  antres  vast  and  desarts  idle, 
Aough  quarries,  rocks,  and  hills  whose  heads  touch  heaven, 
It  was  my  hint  to  speak." 

The  fine  poetical  imagination  of  Columbus  was  one  of 
the  sources  of  his  peculiar  power,  whereby  he  anticipated 
with  an  imdoubting  faith  the  realization  of  his  grand  life- 
work.    But  from  the  position  in  which  Cortes  was  placed, 
it  was  his  interest  rather  to  give  currency  to  the  highly- 
coloured  visions  of  his  first  pioneers,  than  to  transmit  to 
Europe  the  colder  narrative  of  more  matured  experience. 
Approaching  the  Mexican  capital,  he  exclaims  in  his  first 
burst  of  enthusiasm  :  "  We  could  compare  it  to  nothing 
but  the  enchanted  scenes  we  had  read  of  in  Amadis  de 
Gavly  from  the  great  towers  and  temples,  and  other  edi- 
fices of  lime  and  stone  which  seemed  to  rise  up  out  of 
the  water."     To  achieve  the  recognised  masteiy  of  this 
scene  of  enchantment,  he  had  not  only  to  conquer  its 
Mexican  lords,  but  to  defeat  his  Spanish  foes,  and  to  win 


XIV.]  PROGRESS:  NATIVE  CIVILISATION,  417 

to  his  side  that  Emperor  who,  while  giving  shape  to 
Europe-s  history  in  one  of  its  mightiest  revolutions,  could 
control  the  destinies  of  the  New  World.  When  reading 
his  accounts  of  the  gorgeous  treasures  of  Montezuma's 
palaces  which  he  transmitted  to  the  Emperor,  we  have 
to  bear  in  remembrance  that  the  treasures  themselves 
perished  in  the  dread  retreat  of  the  noche  tristey  as  the 
city  itself  vanished  in  the  final  siege  and  capture.  The 
very  dreams  of  an  excited  imagination  could  become 
realities  of  the  past  to  the  narrators  themselves,  when 
every  test  of  their  truth  had  been  swept  away. 

On  the  9th  of  November  1519,  Cortes  made  his  first 
entry  into  the  capital  of  Montezuma,  and  firom  thence 
he  wrote  to  the  Emperor  Charles  v.,  giving  an  account 
of  the  Indian  metropolis,  with  the  palaces  of  its  nobles 
and  the  stately  mansions  of  its  wealthy  citizens,  far  sur- 
passing in  grandeur  and  beauty  the  ancient  Moorish 
capital  of  Cordova.  The  palaces  of  Montezuma  he  de- 
scribed as  so  wonderful  that  it  was  hardly  possible  to 
exaggerate  their  beauty  and  extent.  Conduits  of  solid 
masonry  supplied  the  city  with  wdter,  and  furnished 
means  of  maintaining  hanging-gardens  luxurious  as 
those  of  ancient  Babylon.  "There  is  one  place,''  says 
Cortes,  "  somewhat  inferior  to  the  rest,  attached  to  which 
is  a  beautiful  garden  with  balconies  extending  over  it, 
supported  by  marble  columns,  andliaving  a  floor  formed 
of  jasper  elegantly  inlaid;"  and  he  adds,  "Within  the 
city,  the  palaces  of  the  cacique  Montezuma  are  so  won- 
derful that  it  is  hardly  possible  to  describe  their  beauty 
and  extent.  I  can  only  say  that  in  Spain  there  is  no- 
thing equal  to  them."  The  population  of  ancient  Mexico, 
"  the  greatest  and  noblest  city  of  the  whole  New  World," 
as  Cortes  styles  it,  amounted,  according  to  the  lowest 
computation  of  its  conquerors,  to  three  hundred  thousand ; 
and  its  streets  and  canals  were  illuminated  at  night  by 

VOL.  I.  2d 


418  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

the  blaze  from  the  sacred  altars  of  numberless  teocallis 
that  reared  their  pyramidal  summits  in  the  streets  and 
squares  of  what  Prescott  fitly  calls  **  this  city  of  enchant- 
ment.* Vast  causeways,  defended  by  drawbridges,  and 
wide  enough  for  ten  or  twelve  horsemen  to  ride  abreast, 
attracted  the  admiring  wonder  of  the  Spaniards,  by  the 
mechanical  skill  and  geometrical  precision  with  which 
they  were  constructed  of  huge  masses  of  stone  laid  in 
cement.  "  The  great  street  facing  the  southern  causeway 
was  wide,  and  extended  some  miles  in  nearly  a  straight 
line  through  the  centre  of  the  city.  A  spectator  stand- 
ing at  one  end  of  it,  as  his  eye  ranged  along  the  deep 
vista  of  temples,  terraces,  and  gardens,  might  clearly 
discern  the  other,  with  the  blue  moimtains  in  the  dis- 
tance, which,  in  the  transparent  atmosphere  of  the  table- 
land, seemed  almost  in  contact  with  the  buildings/'^ 
Near  the  centre  of  the  city  rose  a  huge  pyramidal  pile, 
dedicated  to  the  war-god  of  the  Aztecs,  the  tutelary 
deity  of  the  city  ;  second  in  size  only  to  the  great  pyra- 
mid-temple of  Cholula,  and  occupying  the  area  on  which 
now  stands  the  Cathedral  of  modem  Mexico.  Beyond 
the  Lake  of  Tezcuco  stood  the  rival  capital  of  that  name, 
resplendent  with  a  corresponding  grandeur  and  mag- 
nificence ;  and  the  whole  Mexican  valley  burst  on 
the  eyes  of  the  conquerors  as  a  beautiful  vision,  gUtter- 
ing  with  towns  and  villages,  with  rich  gardens,  and 
broad  lakes  crowded  with  the  canoes  of  a  thriving  and 
busy  populace. 

Less  than  three  centuries  and  a  half  have  intervened 
since  Cortes  entered  the  gorgeous  capital  of  Montezuma; 
and  what  remains  now  of  its  ancient  splendour,  of  the 
wonders  of  its  palaces,  the  massive  grandeur  of  its 
temples,  or  the  cyclopaean  solidity  of  its  conduits  and 
causeways  ?     Literally,  not  a  vestige.     The  city  of  Con 

*  Prescott*s  Conquest  of  Mexico^  B.  iii.  cli.  ix. 


XIV.]  PROGRESS :  NATIVE  CIVILISATION.  419 

stantine  has  preserved,  in  spite  of  all  the  destructive 
vicissitudes  of  siege  and  overthrow,  enduring  memorials 
of  the  grandeur  of  the  Byzantine  capital  more  than  a 
thousand  years  ago.     Eome,  too  : 

"  The  Goth,  the  Christian,  time,  war,  flood,  and  fire, 
Have  dealt  upon  the  seven-hilled  city's  pride  ; 
She  saw  her  glories,  star  by  star  expire. 
And  up  the  steep  barbarian  monarchs  ride, 
When  the  car  climVd  the  Capitol ;  far  and  wide 
Temple  and  tower  went  down,  nor  left  a  site : 
Chaos  of  ruins!** 

Yet  Rome  has  her  memorials  not  only  of  three  or  four 
centuries,  but  of  generations  before  the  Christian  era ; 
and  even  Jerusalem  appears  to  have  some  stones  of  her 
ancient  walls  still  left  one  upon  another.  In  spite, 
therefore,  of  the  narrative  of  desolating  erasure,  which 
describes  to  us  the  final  siege  and  capture  of  Mexico,  we 
must  assume  its  edifices  and  causeways  to  have  been  for 
the  most  part  greatly  more  slight  and  fragUe  than  the 
description  of  its  conquerors  impKes,  or  evidences  of  such 
extensive  and  solid  masonry  must  have  survived  to 
our  time. 

But  one  trustworthy  memorial  of  native  civilisation 
and  mechanical  skill  has  been  preserved  in  the  famous 
Calendar  Stone  :  a  huge  circular  block  of  dark  porphjrry, 
disinterred  in  1790  in  the  great  square  of  Mexico,  which 
discloses  evidences  of  progress  in  astronomical  science 
altogether  wonderful  in  a  people  among  whom  civilisa- 
tion was  in  other  respects  so  partially  developed,  but 
which  finds  further  confirmation  from  their  paintings. 
The  Mexicans  had  a  solar  year  of  365  days  divided  into 
eighteen  months  of  twenty  days  each,  with  the  five  com- 
plementary days  added  to  the  last.  The  discrepancy 
between  the  actual  time  of  the  sun's  annual  path  through 
the  heavens  and  their  imperfect  year,  was  regulated  by 
the  intercalation  of  thirteen  days  at  the  end  of  every 


r__.      J 


420  PREmSWRIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

fifty-second  year.  According  to  Gama,  who  differs  from 
Humboldt  on  this  point,  the  civil  day  was  divided  into 
sixteen  parts ;  and  he  conceives  the  Calendar  to  have 
been  constructed  as  a  vertical  sun-diaL  Mexican  draw- 
ings also  indicate  that  the  Aztecs  were  acquainted  with 
the  cause  of  echpses.  But  beyond  this,  our  means  of 
ascertaining  the  extent  of  their  astronomical  knowledge 


fail ;  while  we  have  proofs  that  their  inquiries  were 
zealously  directed  to  the  more  fevoured  epwailatione  of 
the  astrologer,  which  have  supplanted  true  science  in  all 
primitive  stages  of  society.  Mr,  Stephens  has  drawn 
attention  to  certain  points  of  notable  correspondence 
between  the  boldly  sculptured  central  device  on  the 
Calendar  Stone,  and  a  hideous  mask,  with  widely- 
czpanded  eyes  and  tongue  hanging  out,  which  forms  a 


XIV.]  PROGRESS:  NATIVE  CIVILISATION.  421 

prominent  feature  in  the  curious  scene  of  sacrifice  or 
offerings  sculptured  in  relief  in  the  Casa  de  Piedra  at 
Palenque.  But  the  correspondence  amounts  to  Kttle 
more  than  this,  that  each  is  a  gigantic  mask  with  pro- 
truding tongue.  That  of  the  Calendar  Stone  is  engraved 
here  from  the  cast  brought  home  by  Mr.  Bullock,  and 
now  in  the  Collection  of  the  Society  of  Antiquaries  of 
Scotland.  The  statues  dug  up  along  with  the  Calendar 
Stone  from  among  the  remains  of  the  great  teocalli  of 
Mexico,  were  buried  in  the  court  of  the  University,  to 
place  them  beyond  reach  of  the  idolatrous  rites  which 
the  Indians  were  inclined  to  pay  to  the  gods  of  their 
ancestors ;  but  at  the  solicitation  of  Mr.  Bullock  they 
were  again  disinterred,  to  admit  of  his  obtaining  casts 
of  them;  and  he  furnishes  this  interesting  account  of 
the  sensation  excited  by  the  restoration  to  light  of  the 
largest  and  most  celebrated  of  the  Mexican  deities : — 
"  During  the  time  it  was  exposed,  the  court  of  the  Uni- 
versity was  crowded  with  people,  most  of  whom  ex- 
pressed the  most  decided  anger  and  contempt.  Not  so, 
however,  all  the  Indians.  I  attentively  marked  their 
countenances.  Not  a  smile  escaped  them,  or  even  a 
word.  All  was  silence  and  attention.  In  reply  to  a 
joke  of  one  of  the  students,  an  old  Indian  remarked,  ^  It 
is  very  true  we  have  three  very  good  Spanish  gods,  but 
we  might  stiU  have  been  allowed  to  keep  a  few  of  those 
of  our  ancestors ! '  And  I  was  informed  that  chaplets  of 
flowers  had  been  placed  on  the  figure  by  natives  who  had 
stolen  thither  unseen  in  the  evening."^ 

The  figure  which  thus  reawakened  patriotic  sympathies 
in  the  degenerate  descendants  of  the  subjects  of  Monte- 
zuma, is  a  rude  disproportioned  idol,  strikingly  con- 
trasting with  the  elaborate  hieroglyphical  devices  and 
well-proportioned  figures  and  decorations  which  accom- 

^  Bullock's  Six  Months  in  Mexico^  p.  111. 


422  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

pany  the  grotesque  mask  in  the  Casa  de  Piedra  of 
Palenque.  In  the  latter,  the  principal  human  figures 
present  the  remarkable  profiles  of  the  ancient  Central 
American  rac^  with  the  prominent  nose,  the  retreating 
forehead  and  chin,  and  the  protruding  imder-lip,  so 
essentially  different  from  the  features  either  of  the 
Mexicans  or  northern  Indians.  The  subject  race  on 
whom  they  tread  are  characterized  by  a  diverse  profile, 
with  overhanging  brows,  a  Boman  nose,  and  a  well- 
defined  chin ;  while  their  costume  is  equally  indicative 
of  a  different  origin* 

But  rude  as  is  the  sculpture  of  the  Mexican  Calendar 
Stone,  it  embodies  evidence  of  an  amount  of  knowledge 
and  skill  not  less  interesting  for  us  than  the  mysterious 
hieroglyphics  of  the  Palenque  tablets  ;  and  was  believed 
by  Humboldt  to  indicate  unmistakable  relations  to  the 
ancient  native  science  of  south-eastern  Asia.  Mr.  Ste- 
phens has  printed  a  curious  exposition  of  the  chronology 
of  Yucatan,  derived  from  native  sources  by  Don  Juan 
Pio  Perez.  From  the  correspondence  of  their  mode  of 
computing  time  with  that  adopted  by  the  Mexicans,  he 
assumes  that  it  probably  originated  with  them ;  but  at 
the  same  time  he  remarks  that  the  inhabitants  of  Maya- 
pan,  as  the  Peninsula  was  called  at  the  period  of  Spanish 
invasion,  divided  time  by  calculating  it  almost  in  the 
same  manner  as  their  ancestors  the  Toltecs,  differing 
only  in  the  particular  arrangement  of  their  great  cycles. 
Their  year  commenced  on  the  16th  of  July,  an  error 
of  only  forty-eight  hours  in  advance  of  the  precise  day 
in  which  the  sun  returns  there  to  the  zenith,  on  his 
way  to  the  Bouth,  aiid  sufSciently  near  for  aBtronomers 
who  had  to  make  their  observations  with  the  naked  eye. 
Their  calendar  thus  presents  evidences  of  native  aid 
local  origin.  According  to  Humboldt,  the  Mexican  year 
began  in  the  corresponding  winter  half  of  the  year. 


XIV.]  PROGRESS:  NATIVE  CIVILISATION.  423 

ranging  from  the  9  th  to  the  28th  of  January,  but  Cla- 
vigero  places  its  commencement  from  the  14th  to  the 
26th  of  February,  If  my  ideas  as  to  evidence  of  a 
marked  inferiority  in  the  terra-cottas  and  sculptures  of 
the  Mexicans,  and  the  very  questionable  and  vague 
nature  of  the  proofs  of  their  architectural  achievements 
are  correct,  they  tend  to  confirm  the  inference,  that  not 
to  the  Aztecs,  but  to  their  peaceful  and  more  civilized 
Toltec  predecessors,  must  be  ascribed  that  remarkable 
astronomical  knowledge  and  accuracy  in  the  arrange- 
ment of  their  calendar,  which  exhibits  a  precision  in  the 
adjustment  of  civil  to  solar  time,  such  as  only  a  few  of 
the  more  civilized  nations  of  the  Old  World  had  attained 
to  at  that  date.  So  far,  therefore,  as  a  native  and  indi- 
genous American  civilisation  is  concerned,  it  matters 
little  whether  it  be  ascribed  to  Toltec  or  Aztec  origin. 
Of  its  existence  no  doubt  can  be  entertained,  and  there 
is  Kttle  more  room  for  questioning,  that  among  races 
who  had  carried  civiUsation  so  far,  there  existed  the 
capacity  for  its  full  development,  independently  of  all 
borrowed  aid  from  the  science  or  the  philosophy  which 
Greece  called  into  being,  and  modem  Europe  had  ma- 
tured. The  fierce  Dane  and  the  haughty  Norman  seemed 
to  offer  equally  little  promise  of  intellectual  progress  in 
their  first  encroachments  on  the  insular  Saxon,  but  out 
of  such  combined  elements  have  sprung  the  modem 
race,  which  has  outstripped  the  Spaniard  in  making  of 
the  land  of  Columbus  a  New  World;  and,  left  to  its 
own  natural  progress,  the  valley  of  Anahuac,  with  its 
mingling  races,  might  have  proved  the  fountain  fix)m 
whence  intellectual  life  should  flow  to  the  nations  of  the 
West.  But  the  modem  Mexico  has  displaced  the  ancient 
capital  of  Montezuma;  cathedral,  convents,  and  churches, 
have  usurped  the  sites  of  the  Aztec  teocallis  ;  its  canals 
have  disappeared,   and   its   famous   causeways  are  no 


424  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

longer  laved  by  the  waters  of  the  Tezcucan  Lake.  It  is 
even  denied  by  those  who  have  personally  surveyed  the 
site,  that  the  waters  of  the  lake  can  ever  have  overflowed 
the  marshes  around  the  modem  capital,  or  stood  at  a 
much  nearer  point  to  it  than  they  do  at  present^  Fresh 
doubts  seem  to  accumulate  around  its  mythic  story. 
The  ruined  masonry  of  its  vanished  palaces  and  temples 
may  be  assumed  to  have  been  all  swallowed  up  in  the 
edifices,  which  combine  to  make  of  the  modern  capital 
so  noble  and  striking  an  object,  amid  the  strange  scenery 
of  its  remarkable  elevated  tropical  valley.  But  Mexico 
was  not  the  only  city,  nor  even  the  only  great  capital, 
of  the  valley. 

In  attempting  to  trace  back  the  history  of  the  remark- 
able population  found  in  occupation  of  the  Mexican  ter- 
ritory when  first  invaded  by  the  Spaniards,  we  learn,  by 
means  of  various  sources  of  information  already  referred 
to,  but  chiefly  on  the  dubious  authority  of  Ixtlilxochitrs 
professed  interpretations  of  picture-writings,  no  longer  in 
existence ;  and  of  traditions  of  old  men  of  other  gener- 
ations, concerning  events  reaching  back  from  seven  or 
eight,  even  to  twelve  centuries  before  their  own  time : 
that  the  Toltecs,  advancing  from  some  unknown  region 
of  the  north,  entered  the  territory  of  Anahuac,  "  probably 
before  the  close  of  the  seventh  century.''  They  were, 
according  to  their  christianized  half-blood  historian, 
already  skilled  in  agriculture  and  the  mechanical  arts, 
familiar  with  metallurgy,  and  endowed  with  all  the 
knowledge  and  experience  out  of  which  grew  the  native 
civilisation  of  Anahuac  in  later  ages.  In  the  time  of  the 
Conquest,  extensive  ruins  are  said  to  have  still  indicated 
the  site  of  their. ancient  capital  of  Tula,  to  the  north  of 
the  Mexican  valley.     The  tradition  of  such  ruined  cities 

'  Topographical  View  of  the  Valley,  Wilson's  Neip  History  of  Mexico^ 
p.  462. 


XIV.]  PROGRESS:  NATIVE  CIVILISATION.  425 

adds  confirmation  to  the  inferences  derived  from  those 
more  recently  explored  in  regions  to  the  south ;  and 
stni  the  name  of  Toltec  in  New  Spain  is  synonymous 
with  architect:  the  mythic  designation  of  a  shadowy 
race,  such  as  glances  fitfully  across  the  first  traditional 
chapters  of  legendary  history  among  the  most  ancient 
nations  of  Europe.  But  subsequent  to  those  Pelasgi  of 
the  New  World,  there  followed  from  the  unknown  regions 
of  the  far  north  the  Chichimecas,  the  Tepanecs,  the  Acol- 
huans  or  Tezcucans,  the  Aztecs  or  Mexicans,  and  other 
inferior  tribes ;  so  that,  as  we  approach  a  more  definite 
period  of  history,  we  learn  of  a  league  .between  the  States 
of  Mexico  and  Tezcuco,  and  the  kingdom  of  Tlacopan, 
under  which  Tenochtitlan  or  Mexico,  the  Aztec  capital, 
grew  into  the  marvellous  city  of  temples  and  palaces 
described  by  Cortes  and  his  followers.  But  Ixtlilxochitl, 
or  Don  Fernando  de  Alva,  claimed  descent  on  his  mother's 
side  from  the  Imperial  race  of  Tezcuco,  the  Athens,  as 
Prescott  styles  it,  of  the  western  world ;  and  he  has  not 
failed  to  preserve,  or  to  create  the  memorials  of  the  glory 
of  that  imperial  city  of  the  laguna.  It  contained  upwards 
of  four  hundred  stately  edifices  for  the  nobles.  The  mag- 
nificent palace  of  the  Tezcucan  emperor  "  extended,  fi-om 
east  to  west,  twelve  hundred  and  thirty-four  yards,  and 
fi-om  north  to  south,  nine  hundred  and  seventy-eight. 
It  was  encompassed  by  a  wall  of  unbumt  bricks  and 
cement,  six  feet  wide  and  nine  high,  for  one  half  of  the 
circumference,  and  fifteen  feet  high  for  the  other  half. 
Within  this  enclosure  were  two  courts.  The  outer  one 
was  used  as  the  great  market-place  of  the  city,  and  con- 
tinued to  be  so  until  long  after  the  Conquest.  The 
interior  court  was  surrounded  by  the  council-chambers 
and  halls  of  justice.  There  were  also  accommodations 
there  for  the  foreign  ambassadors  ;  and  a  spacious  saloon, 
with  apartments  opening  into  it,  for  men  of  science  and 


426  PSEUISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

poete,  who  pnroued  their  studies  in  this  retieat,  or  met 
together  to  hold  conveise  under  its  marble  poirticos."^ 
Such  is  the  style  in  which  the  historian  of  the  Ck>nquest 
describes  the  glories  of  ancient  Tezcuco,  from  the  records 
left  by  Spanish  and  native  chroniclers.  A  lordly  pile, 
provid^  L  the  fitting  accommodation  of  the  sov L^ 
of  Mexico  and  Tlacopan,  contained  three  hundred  apart- 
ments^ including  some  fifty  yards  square.  Solid  mate- 
rials of  stone  and  marble  were  liberally  employed  both 
on  this  and  on  the  apartments  of  the  royal  harem,  the 
walls  of  which  were  incrusted  with  alabasters  and  richly 
tinted  -^  or  hpBg  with  gorgeous  ..pe.,rie.  of  varii- 
gated  feather  -  work.  Some  two  leagues  distant,  at 
Tezcotzinco,  was  the  favourite  residence  of  the  sovereign; 
on  a  hill,  "  laid  out  in  terraces,  or  hanging  gardens,  hav- 
ing  a  flight  of  five  hundred  and  twenty  steps,  many  of 
them  hewn  in  the  natural  porphyry.  In  the  garden  on 
the  summit  was  a  reservoir  of  water,  fed  by  an  aqueduct 
carried  over  hill  and  valley  for  several  miles  on  huge 
buttresses  of  masonry.  A  large  rock  stood  in  the  midst 
of  this  basin,  sculptured  with  hieroglyphics  representing 
the  years  of  Nezahualcoyotl's  reign,  and  his  principal 
achievements  in  each.  On  a  lower  level  were  three  other 
reservoirs,  in  each  of  which  stood  a  marble  statue  of  a 
woman,  emblematic  of  the  three  estates  of  the  empire. 
Another  tank  contained  a  winged  lion,*^ — but  here  the 
historian  grows  incredulous,  and  appends  a  (?)  before 
proceeding  in  accordance  with  his  historical  authorities 
to  add — "  cut  out  of  the  solid  rock,  bearing  in  his  mouth 
the  portrait  of  the  emperor."  The  authority  for  aU  this 
lived  and  wrote  in  the  beguming  of  the  seventeenth  cen- 
tury. His  narrative  appears  to  receive  some  confirmation 
from  architectural  remains  still  visible  on  the  hill  of  Tez- 
cotzinco, and  referred  to  by  Latrobe  and  Bullock  as  relics 

^  Prescott's  Contpiest  of  Mexico^  b.  i.  chap.  vi. 


r 


XIV.]  PROGRESS:  NATIVE  CIVILISATION,  427 

of  an  era  greatly  more  remote  than  that  of  Aztec  civili- 
sation. But  where  are  now  the  magnificent  remains  of 
the  imperial  city  of  Tezcuco?  The  spirit  of  Spanish 
romance  and  Moorish  fable  seems  to  beset  modem  as 
well  as  ancient  narrators,  as  if  a  spell  of  enchantment 
stiU  guarded  the  legends  of  Aztec  and  Tezcucan  empire. 
Bullock,  in  his  Six  Months  in  Mexico^  describes  the 
remains  of  the  royal  fountain  of  Tezcotzinco,  witnessed 
by  him,  as  a  "  beautiful  basin,  twelve  feet  long  by  eight 
wide,  having  a  well  five  feet  by  four  deep  in  the  centre ;" 
but  Latrobe,  in  his  Rambles  in  Mexico^  reduces  the 
dimensions  of  the  royal  bath  to  "  perhaps  two  feet  and  a 
half  in  diameter,  not  large  enough  for  any  monarch 
bigger  than  Oberon  to  take  a  duck  in/'  This  agrees 
with  other  authorities,  and  with  accounts  received  by 
Prescott  from  persons  resident  on  the  spot.  It  is  sug- 
gestive,  therefore,  of  grave  doubts  relative  to  the  first- 
mentioned  traveller's  observation  of  ancient  terraces  stiU 
entire,  and  numerous  remains  of  the  sculptured  blocks  of 
the  Tezcucan  temples  and  palaces  visible  in  its  modem 
buildings. 

Of  Tezcuco,  a  recent  traveller  tells  us  that  its  sole 
memorial  is  an  insignificant  mud  viUage.  "There  are 
no  remains  of  ancient  aqueduct  or  hanging  garden,  nor 
of  its  magnificent  palaces  and  surrounding  viUas,  nor  of 
its  halls  of  justice.  Even  the  walls  of  its  vast  enclosures 
have  left  no  trace.''^  Friar  Thomas  Gage,  writing  within 
a  century  of  the  Conquest,  with  no  incredulity  as  to  the 
former  greatness  and  high  civilisation  of  the  Mexican 
Valley,  speaks  of  Tezcuco  as  but  a  poor  village  of  some 
three  hundred  Indians,  and  one  hundred  Spaniards,  whose 
subsistence  mainly  depended  on  the  herbs  they  took  daily 
in  their  canoes  to  the  Mexican  market ;  while  in  passing 
another  famed  or  fabled  scene  of  ancient  native  grandeur, 

^  Wilson's  New  History  of  the  Conquest  of  Mexico,  p.  57. 


428  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

he  remarks :  "  We  passed  the  Mexicalziago,  which  for- 
merly was  a  great  town,  but  has  now  not  above  one 
hundred  inhabitanta"  ^  But  the  extravagant  character 
of  the  whole  romance  of  the  Spanish  conquistadors  seems 
to  be  summed  up  in  the  criticism  of  the  former  writer, 
based  on  topographical  evidence  as  noted  by  himself.  He 
shows,  that  owing  to  the  relative  levels,  Mexico  never 
can  have  been  surrounded  by  the  lake,  which  now  lies 
distant  from  its  marshy  site ;  while  the  multitudes, 
crowding  the  great  cities  of  the  Valley  at  the  era  of  the 
Conquest,  vanish  like  the  porphyry  of  their  temples,  and 
the  marbles  of  their  palaces,  when  we  read  of  "three 
imperial  capitals,  and  three  crowned  heads  of  the  empire, 
within  a  space  of  sixteen  miles,  in  a  mountain  valley 
twenty  miles  in  extent,  and  more  than  half  that  space 
filled  with  salt  marsh."* 

Of  the  great  Mexican  pyramid  or  teocalli  of  Huitzilo- 
potchU,  no  vestige  now  remains,  unless  such  as  is  reputed 
to  lie  buried  under  the  foundations  of  the  cathedral  which 
occupies  its  site.  But  time  and  fate  have  dealt  more 
tenderly  with  the  scarcely  less  famous  pyramid  of  Cho- 
lula.  The  ancient  city  of  that  name  was  said  to  include, 
within  and  without  its  walls,  when  first  seen  by  Cortes, 
about  forty  thousand  houses,  or  according  to  ordinary 
rules  of  computation,  two  hundred  thousand  inhabitants. 
But  whatever  its  ancient  population  may  have  been, 
time  and  the  fruits  of  Spanish  conquest  have  advanced 
it  to  the  rank  of  the  capital  of  the  republic  of  Cholula, 
though  they  have  left  only  sixteen  thousand  as  the 
number  of  the  modem  occupants.  StUl,  Cholula  was 
unquestionably  one  of  the  most  ancient  and  famous  of 
the  cities  of  the  New  World  :  the  sacred  Mecca  for 
the  pilgrims  of  Anahuac. 

*  Gage^B  New  Survey  of  the  Indians^  p.  90. 
2  Wilson's  New  History  of  Mexico,  p.  48. 


XIV.]  PROGRESS:  NATIVE  CIVILISATION.  429 

Quetzalcoatl,  the  milder  god  of  the  Aztec  pantheon, 
whose  original  worship  was  performed  by  offerings  of 
fruits  and  flowers  in  their  season,  was  venerated  as  the 
divine  teacher  of  the  arts  of  peace.  His  reign  on  earth 
was  the  golden  age  of  Anahuac,  when  its  people  learned 
from  him  agriculture,  metallurgy,  and  the  art  of  govern- 
ment. But  their  divine  benefactor,  according  to  the 
sacred  tradition  handed  down  to  the  Aztecs  by  an  elder 
people  whom  they  had  superseded,  incurred  the  wrath  of 
another  of  the  gods;  and  as  he  passed  on  his  way  to 
abandon  the  land  to  the  rule  of  the  terrible  HuitzUo- 
potchli,  he  paused  at  the  city  of  Cholula,  and  while  he 
tarried  there,  the  great  teocaUi  was  reared  and  dedicated 
to  his  worship.  But  the  benevolent  deity  could  not  re- 
main within  reach  of  the  avenger.  According  to  the 
universally  received  tradition  of  the  plateau,  after  spend- 
ing twenty  years  among  them,  teaching  to  the  people 
the  arts  of  civilisation,  he  passed  onward  till  he  reached 
the  shores  of  the  great  ocean,  and  there  embarking  in  a 
vessel,  made  of  serpents'  skins,  his  followers  watched  his 
retreating  bark  on  its  way  to  the  sacred  isle  of  Tlapallan. 
But  the  tradition  lived  on  among  the  Mexicans  that  the 
bark  of  the  good  deity  would  revisit  their  shores ;  and 
this  fondly  cherished  belief  materially  contributed  to  the 
success  of  the  Spaniards,  when  their  huge-winged  ships 
bore  the  beings  of  another  world  to  the  mainland  of  the 
Mexican  Gulf.  The  legend  bears  aU  the  marks  of  an- 
ciently derived  hero-worship,  in  which  the  love  for  a  lost 
benefactor  wove  for  itself  a  benevolent  deified  embodi- 
ment of  his  virtues.  This,  however,  is  important  to  note, 
that  the  Aztec  traditions  told  that  the  pyramid  of  Cho- 
lula belonged  to  an  older  race  and  era  than  their  own. 
It  was  there  when  they  entered  the  plateau,  and  the  arts 
of  the  divine  metallurgist  were  taught,  not  to  them  but 
to  the  Toltecs,  whom  they  superseded.    Nevertheless,  the 


430  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

deity  shared  in  their  worship ;  his  image  still  occupied 
the  shrine  on  the  summit  of  the  pyramid  of  Cholula,  re- 
splendent with  gold  and  jewels,  when  the  Spaniards  first 
visited  the  holy  city  of  Anahuac ;  and  the  undying  flame 
flung  its  bright  radiance  far  into  the  night,  to  keep  alive 
the  memory  of  the  good  deity,  who  was  one  day  to  re- 
turn and  restore  the  golden  age. 

The  present  appearance  of  the  great  teocaUi  very  par- 
tially justifies  the  reference  made  by  Prescott  to  it  as 
"  that  tremendous  mound  on  which  the  traveller  still 
gazes  with  admiration  as  the  most  colossal  fabric  in  New 
Spain,  rivalliDg  in  dimensions,  and  somewhat  resembling 
in  form,  the  pyramidal  structures  of  ancient  Egypt/^  K 
it  ever  was  a  terraced  pjrramid,  time  and  the  elements 
have  whoUy  effiaced  the  traces  of  its  original  outline.  On 
the  high  authority  of  Humboldt,  it  is  described  as  a 
pyramidal  mound  of  stone  and  earth,  deeply  incrusted 
with  alternate  strata  of  brick  and  clay,  which  **  had  the 
form  of  the  Mexican  teocallis,  that  of  a  truncated  pyra- 
mid facing  with  its  four  sides  the  cardinal  points,  and 
divided  by  the  same  number  of  terraces."  But  the  adobe 
of  the  Mexican,  which  is  frequently  styled  brick,  is  no- 
thing more  than  a  mass  of  unbaked  clay,  or  even  mud. 
If  such,  therefore,  is  the  supposed  brick  which  alternated 
with  the  other  materials  of  the  mound,  we  can  the  more 
readily  reconcile  the  seeming  contradictions  of  observers. 
One  of  the  latest  thus  describes  the  impression  produced 
on  his  mind  :  "Eight  before  me,  a^  I  rode  along,  was  a 
mass  of  trees,  of  evergreen  foliage,  presenting  indistinctly 
the  outline  of  a  pyramid,  which  ran  up  to  the  height  of 
about  two  hundred  feet,  and  was  crowned  by  an  old 
stone  church,  and  surmounted  by  a  tall  steeple.  It  was 
the  most  attractive  object  in  the  plain ;  it  had  such  a 
look  of  uncultivated  nature  in  the  midst  of  grain  fields. 
It  would  have  lost  half  its  attractiveness  had  it  been  the 


XIV.]  PROGRESS:  NATIVE  CIVILISATION.  431 

stiflF  and  clumsy  thing  which  the  picture  represents  it  to 
be.  I  had  admired  it  in  pictures  from  my  childhood, 
for  what  it  was  not ;  but  I  now  admired  it  for  what  it 
really  was :  the  finest  Indian  mound  on  this  continent/^  ^ 
Such  is  the  conclusion  arrived  at  by  Mr.  Eobert  Ander- 
son Wilson,  as  the  result  of  personal  observation ;  and 
the  deductions  ultimately  suggested  to  him  from  further 
investigation,  have  since  been  embodied  in  his  New 
History  of  the  Conquest  of  Mexico.  He  there  comments 
on  the  observations  of  Humboldt,  and  compares  them 
with  his  own,  and  with  the  disclosures  made  subsequently 
to  the  great  traveller's  visit.  Eecent  excavations  had 
exposed  abundant  traces  of  Indian  sepulture,  with  the 
familiar  and  rude  relics  of  their  primitive  arts ;  and  these 
suggest  to  him  the  remark  : — "  Humboldt  says  that  the 
pyramid  of  Cholula  is  composed  of  alternate  strata  of 
brick  and  clay;  another,  more  exact,  says,  where  the 
road  was  cut  through  its  base,  that  it  presents  the  ap- 
pearance of  alternate  layers  of  earth,  two  inches  in  thick- 
ness, with  layers  of  brick  one  inch.  To  the  author, 
looking  at  it  superficially,  it  had  the  appearance  simply 
of  different  soUs.  But  time  has  been  busy  on  this  mass 
of  earth  since  Humboldt  was  there.  The  cypresses  he 
mentions  are  gone,  and  a  large  part  of  the  churchyard 
wall  has  also  fallen."  Accordingly  the  mound,  which  is 
engraved  in  Humboldt's  Vues  de  GordilUres  as  a  series 
of  four  successive  terraces,  rising  to  an  elevation  of  less 
than  a  sixth  of  the  length  of  its  base  line,  is  figured  by 
Mr.  K.  A.  Wilson  from  sketches  taken  on  the  spot,  as  a 
lofty  conical  mound,  of  greater  elevation  than  breadth  of 
base,  overgrown  with  shrubs,  and  without  any  trace  of 
terraces.^  Each  is  surmounted  with  a  church,  but  there 
is  no  other  recognisable  feature  of  resemblance  between 

^  Mexico  and  its  Religion,  by  R.  A.  Wilson. 
2  New  History  of  MexkOy  p.  381. 


432  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

the  two.  Both  time  and  human  hands  have  been  busy 
on  the  ancient  pile ;  and  doubtless  in  earlier  years  and 
centuries  both  have  wrought  many  changes  on  its  origi- 
nal surface.  The  church  on  the  summit  of  the  mound  is 
now  the  only  appearance  of  art  about  it,  and  no  doubt 
has  somewhat  to  do  with  its  absence  elsewhere  ;  for  if 
the  clergy  found  the  teocalU  cased,  like  the  pyramidal 
terraces  of  Central  America,  with  cut  stone  steps  and 
facings,  there  can  be  little  doubt  they  would  go  no 
further  for  a  quarry  for  their  intended  church. 

But  after  making  every  allowance  for  the  influence  of 
time's  effacing  and  defacing  touch,  it  is  difficult  to  beheve 
that  the  sacred  city  of  Cholula  ever  realized  the  magni- 
ficent picturings  of  its  Spanish  conquerors,  with  its 
hundreds  of  mosques  and  towers,  its  lofty  white  temples, 
and  its  picturesque  exterior,  more  beautiful  than  any 
city  of  Spain.  Of  the  solidly  built  houses,  the  numerous 
and  large  pyramidal  temples,  and  all  the  substantial 
magnificence  which  is  said  to  have  struck  the  Spaniards 
with  such  wonder,  not  a  vestige  remains.  The  only 
traces  of  ruins  are  those  of  several  deserted  convents ; 
and  the  town  is  described  as  a  mere  collection  of  adobe 
or  mud  huts.  But  the  mutilated  earthen  pyramid  still 
exists,  and  on  its  truncated  summit  is  the  temple  of  the 
newer  faith,  the  construction  of  the  approach  to  which 
must  have  still  further  contributed  to  efface  the  original 
features  of  the  mound.  "  By  going  round  to  the  north 
side,^'  says  Mr.  R  A.  Wilson,  "  I  obtained  a  fine  view  of 
the  modem  improvements  constructed  upon  this  Indian 
pile.  I  rode  up  a  paved  carriage-way  into  the  church- 
yard that  now  occupies  the  top,  and  giving  my  horse  to 
a  squalid  Indian  imp,  who  came  out  of  the  vestry,  I 
went  in  and  took  a  survey  of  the  tawdry  images,  through 
which  God  is  now  worshipped  by  the  baptized  descend- 
ants of  the  builders  of  this  pyramid."     It  was  upon  this 


XIV.]  PROGRESS:  NATIVE  CIVILISATION,  433 

occasion  that  "  the  discovery  of  a  common  flint  arrow- 
head— an  indispensable  part  of  the  usual  weapons  of  a 
North  American  Indian, — upon  the  pyramidical  mound 
of  Cholula,  first  aroused  suspicion,  and  set  the  author 
upon  the  inquiry  into  the  pretended  civilisation  of  Mon- 
tezuma and  his  Aztecs/'^    'The  reasoning,  however,  is 
equally  fallacious  which  afisumes  either  from  the  flint 
arrow-head  on  the  surface,  or  the  Indian  graves  with 
corresponding  rehcs  disclosed  by  superficial  excavations, 
that  therefore  the  Cholula  pyramid  is  a  mere  Indiiin 
mound.     The  great  mounds  of  Ohio,  and  the  singular 
earthworks  of  Wisconsin,  in  like  manner  disclose  super- 
ficial interments  of  a  comparatively  recent  date,  and  of 
a  totally  distinct  character  from  the  genuine  sepulchral 
depositories  of  the  ancient  Mound-Builders.     But  it  may 
not  perhaps  be  without  some  significance  to  note  another 
correspondence  suggested  by  "the  alternate  layers  of 
different  coloured  soils  ^^  exposed  in  the  cutting  made  in 
the  pyramid,  and  the  striking  peculiarity  of  a  like  kind 
which  universally  characterizes  the  excavated  sacrificial 
mounds  of  the  Mississippi  Valley.     The  determination 
of  the  extent  of  resemblance  between  the  two  must  be 
reserved  for  future  exploration.     Theory  and  superficial 
observation  are  of  little  avail.     On  the  same  lofty  plat- 
form, where  Cortes  converted  the  half-burned  temple  of 
the  great  teocaUi  to  the  purposes  of  a  Christian  church, 
now  stands  a  more  modem  ecclesiastical  structure,  dedi- 
cated to  Our  Lady  de  Iob  Remedios,  whose  shrine  is 
tended  by  an  Indian  priest  of  the  blood  of  the  ancient 
Cholulans  ;  and  still  more,  the  same  magijificent  land- 
scape greets  the  eye,  as  was  first  gazed  on  by  the 
conqueror  from  that  elevated  summit. 

To  the  north  of  the  Mexican  valley  ancient  ruins 
arrest  the  gaze  of  the  traveller,  onward  even  to  Cali- 

'  New  History  of  the  Conquest  of  Mexico,  p.  78. 
VOL,  I.  2  E 


434  PRBHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

fomia.  On  the  Bio  Colorado  and  its  tributaries^  numer- 
ous ruins  of  great  extent  have  been  surveyed  by  recent 
exploring  parties,  and  are  described  as  built  with  large 
stoneSy  nicely  wrought^  and  accurately  squared.  But 
nothing  in  their  style  of  architecture  suggests  a  common 
origin  with  the  ruins  of  Mexico  or  Central  America. 
They  are  large  and  plain  structures^  with  massive  wbUs^ 
evidently  constructed  for  defence,  and  with  no  traces 
of  the  ornamentation  which  aboimds  on  the  ruins  of 
Yucatan.  The  Moqui  Indians^  the  supposed  remnant 
of  the  ancient  builders,  still  construct  their  dwellings  of 
stone  with  a  great  deal  of  art  and  skilL  They  are  a 
gentle  and  intelligent  race,  small  of  stature,  with  fine 
black  hair ;  and  differ  essentially  from  the  Indians  of 
the  North-west.  Their  villages  are  included  in  one  com- 
mon stone  structure,  generally  of  a  quadrangular  form, 
with  solid,  unpierced  walls  externally,  and  accessible  only 
by  means  of  a  ladder.  These  hive-like  colonies  are  usually 
placed,  for  further  defence,  on  the  summit  of  the  lofty 
plateaus,  which  in  the  region  of  New  Mexico  are  de- 
tached by  the  broad  canons  with  which  that  remarkable 
region  is  intersected.  By  such  means  the  remnant  of 
this  ingenious  people  seek  protection  from  the  wild 
Indian  tribes  with  which  they  are  surrounded.  Thus 
permanently  settled,  while  exposed  to  the  assaults  of 
marauding  nomades,  the  Moquis  cultivate  the  soil,  raise 
com,  beans,  cotton,  and  more  recently  some  vegetables 
derived  from  intercourse  with  the  Mexicans.  They  have 
also  their  flocks  of  sheep  and  goats ;  and  weave  their 
dyed  wools  into  a  great  variety  of  substantial  and  hand- 
some dresses.  But  of  this  interesting  people  only  a 
small  remnant  now  survives,  occupying  seven  villages 
on  the  range  of  the  Rio  del  Norte.^    Throughout  New 

^  Dr.  Tiathain  speaks  of  the  Moqui  as  a  people  that  "  no  living  writer 
seems  to  have  seen." —  Varieties  of  Matty  p.  394.     But  the  above  information 


XIV.]  PROGRESS:  NATIVE  CIVILISATION.  435 

California  ruined  structures  of  stone,  and  sometimes  of 
clay  abound.  The  Gcisas  grandes,  as  they  are  called, 
appear  to  have  been  defensive  structures  like  the  Moqui 
villages.  Captain  Johnston  describes  one,  called  the 
Casa  de  Montezuma,  on  the  river  Gila,  which  measured 
fifty  feet  by  forty,  and  had  been  four  storeys  higL  It 
is  indeed  worthy  of  note  that  while  we  find  throughout 
the  continent,  from  the  Rocky  Mountains  to  the  Atlantic, 
scarcely  a  vestige  of  ante-Columbian  stone  architecture  : 
traces  of  it  increase  upon  us  with  every  new  exploration 
of  the  country  that  lies  between  the  Eocky  Mountains 
and  the  Pacific,  and  merges  towards  the  south  into  the 
seats  of  ancient  native  civilisation  and  matured  archi- 
tectural skill. 

But  the  Southern  Continent  of  America  had  also  its 
seat  of  a  remarkable  native  civilisation,  deriving,  like 
that  of  Mexico,  some  of  its  most  striking  characteristics 
from  the  physical  aspects  of  the  country  in  which  it 
originated,  and  from  the  peculiar  natural  advantages 
resulting  from  the  settlement  of  a  people  on  the  lofty 
plateaus  of  the  Andes,  but  within  the  tropics,  where  at 
each  successive  elevation  a  diflFerent  chmate  was  secured. 
Such  products  as  the  mercantile  navies  of  Northern 
Europe  gather  from  many  distant  shores,  were  there 
brought  within  the  compass  af  the  industrious  popula- 
tion, who  fed  their  flocks  on  the  cold  crests  of  the  sierra, 
cultivated  their  gardens  and  orchards  on  its  higher 
plateaus,  and  gathered  the  luxuriant  products  of  the 
tropics  from  the  country  that  for  them  lay,  for  the  most 
part,  beneath  the  clouds,  and  spread  away  from  the 
lowest  slopes  of  the  Andes  to  the  neighbouring  shores 

communicated  to  me  by  Professor  Newberry,  is  the  result  of  his  own  per- 
sonal observations.  He  showed  me  also  specimens  of  their  woven  dresses, 
manifesting  considerable  skill,  and  exhibiting  great  taste  in  the  arrange- 
ment of  their  bright  colours.  They  have  recently  been  greatly  reduced  by 
small-pox. 


436  PREHISTORIC  MAS.  [Chap. 

of  the  Pacific.  The  character  of  the  people,  and  the 
nature  of  the  civilisation  of  this  remarkable  country 
presented  many  striking  contrasts  to  the  customs  and 
institutions  of  the  Mezicans,  and  these  have  generally 
been  assumed  as  of  totally  independent  origin. 

Peru  has  her  historic  traditions^  no  less  than  Mexico, 
and  her  native  historian,  Garcihwso  de  la  Vega,  a  de- 
scendant,  tiirough  his  mother,  from  tiie  royal  line  of  the 
Incas  ;  who  plays  for  them  the  part  which  Fernando  de 
Alva  did  for  his  Tezcucan  ancestry.  Seen  through  such 
a  medium,  the  traditions  of  the  Inca  race  expand  into 
gorgeous  scenes  of  romance ;  and  the  institutions  of 
European  chivaliy  and  mediseval  polity  are  grafted  on 
the  strange  usages  of  an  Indian  nation,  remarkable  for 
its  own  well-matured  commonwealth,  and  unique  phases 
of  native-bom  civilisation.  Sabaism  constituted  the  essen- 
tial element  of  Peruvian  religious  faith,  and  gave  form 
and  colour  to  the  national  rites  and  traditions.  Manco 
Capac  and  Mama  Oello  Huaco,  their  mythic  instructors 
in  tiie  arts  of  agriculture,  weaving,  and  spinning,  were 
the  Children  of  the  Sim ;  their  high  religious  festivals 
were  determined  by  the  solstices  and  equinoxes,  which 
marked  the  great  stages  of  its  annual  progress ;  and 
Quito,  the  sacred  city,  which  lay  immediately  imder  the 
Equator,  had  within  it  the  sacred  pillar  of  the  sun,  where 
his  vertical  rays  threw  no  shadow  at  noon,  and  they 
believed  the  god  of  light  to  seat  himself  in  full  efiulgence 
in  his  temple.  The  sacred  pillar  stood  in  the  centre  of  a 
circle  described  within  the  court  of  the  great  temple, 
traversed  by  a  diameter  drawn  from  east  to  west,  by 
means  of  which  the  period  of  the  equinoxes  was  deter- 
mined ;  and  both  then,  and  at  the  solstices,  the  pillar  was 
hung  with  garlands,  and  oflPerings  of  fruit  and  flowers 
were  made  to  the  divine  luminary  and  parent  of  man- 
kind.    The  titie  of  the  sovereign  Inca  was  the  Child  of 


XIV.]  PROGRESS:  NATIVE  CIVILISATION,  437 

the  Sun ;  and  the  territory  of  the  empire  was  divided 
into  three  portions,  of  which  one,  constituting  the  lands 
of  the  Sun,  maintained  the  costly  ceremonial  of  public 
worship,  with  the  temples  and  their  numerous  priests 
and  vestal  virgins.  The  national  traditions  pointed  to 
the  Valley  of  Cuzco  as  the  original  seat  of  native  civili- 
sation. There  their  mythic  Manco  Capac  founded  the 
city  of  that  name ;  and  on  the  high  lands  around  it  a 
number  of  columns  were  reared  which  served  for  taking 
azimuths,  and  by  measuring  their  shadows  the  precise 
time  of  the  solstices  were  determined. 

Besides  the  divine  honours  paid  to  the  sun,  the  Peru- 
vians worshipped  the  host  of  heaven,  and  dedicated 
temples  to  the  thunder  and  lightning,  and  to  the  rain- 
bow, the  wrathful  and  benign  messengers  of  the  supreme 
solar  deity.  It  might  naturally  be  anticipated  that  a 
nation  thus  specially  devoted  to  astronomical  observa- 
tions, and  maintaining  a  sacred  caste  exclusively  for 
watching  solar  and  stellar  phenoinena,  would  have  at- 
tained to  great  knowledge  in  that  branch  of  science. 
Apparently,  however,  the  facilities  which  their  equatorial 
position  afforded  for  determining  the  few  indispensable 
periods  in  their  calendar,  removed  the  stimulus  to  further 
progress ;  and  not  only  do  we  find  them  surpassed  in 
this  respect  by  the  Muyscas,  occupying  a  part  of  the  same 
great  southern  plateau,  who  regulated  their  calendar  on 
a  system  presenting  considerable  points  of  resemblance 
to  that  of  the  Aztecs ;  but  they  remained  to  the  last  in 
total  ignorance  of  the  true  causes  of  eclipses,  and  re- 
garded such  phenomena  with  the  same  superstitious  and 
apprehensive  wonder  as  has  afiected  the  untutored  savage 
mind  in  all  ages.  One  historian,  indeed,  affirms  that 
they  recognised  the  actual  length  of  the  solar  year,  and 
regulated  their  chronology  by  a  series  of  cycles  of  decades 
of  years,  centuries,  and  decades  of  centuries,  the  la^t  of 


438  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

which  constituted  the  grand  cycle  or  great  year  of  the 
Bun.^  This  is  only  confuted  by  a  reference  to  the  silence 
of  earlier  authorities^  and  the  absence  of  their  evidence 
on  the  subject ;  and  may  serve  to  remind  us  how  very 
imperfect  is  all  the  knowledge  we  possess  of  the  intellec- 
tual development  of  this  singularly  interesting  people, 
among  whom  science  was  essentially  esoteric,  and  sys- 
tematically excluded  from  the  vulgar.  It  is  a  presump- 
tuous assumption,  that  whatever  we  cannot  now  recover 
the  proofs  o^  never  existed.  Prescott,  indeed,  suggests 
that  the  very  imperfect  nature  of  the  astronomical  science 
of  Peru  may  be  explained,  in  part  at  least,  by  the  fact, 
that  the  Peruvian  priesthood  were  drawn  exclusively 
from  the  body  of  the  Incas  :  a  privileged  order  of  nobility 
who  claimed  divine  origin,  and  were  the  less  tempted 
thereby  to  seek  in  the  adventitious  attributes  of  superior 
learning  the  exclusive  rights  of  an  intellectual  aristocracy. 
Such,  however,  very  imperfectiy  accoimts  for  the  infer- 
iority of  tiiose  "children  of  tiie  sun,"  and  worshippers 
of  the  stars,  in  the  knowledge  and  practical  application 
of  astronomy.  Other  reasons  may  at  least  help  us  to 
explain  this  singular  intellectual  condition  of  a  nation, 
which  had  in  so  many  other  directions  made  remarkable 
progress  in  civilisation.  The  very  fact  that  astronomy 
constituted,  as  it  were,  the  national  religion,  placed  it 
beyond  the  reach  of  scientific  speculation,  among  a  people 
with  whom  blasphemy  against  the  sun,  and  malediction 
of  the  Inca,  were  alike  punished  with  deatL  The  im- 
pediments to  Galileo's  astronomical  discoveries  were 
trifling  indeed  when  compared  with  those  which  must 
have  beset  the  presumptuous  Inca  priest  who  ventured 
to  deny  the  diurnal  revolution  of  the  sun  round  the 
earth ;  or  to  explain,  by  the  simple  interposition  of  the 
moon  between  themselves  and  the  sun,  the  mysterious 

1  Montesino's  Mem.  4ntiqua8  MS.,  lib.  ii.  cap.  7  ;  cited  by  Prescott. 


XIV.]  PROGRESS:  NATIVE  CIVILISATION,  439 

and  malign  infirmities  with  which  it  constituted  a  part 
of  the  national  creed  to  believe  their  supreme  deity  was 
aMcted  during  the  progress  of  a  solar  eclipse.  But 
another  cause  also  tended  to  retard  the  progress  of  the 
Peruvians  in  the  intelligent  solution  of  astronomical 
phenomena.  Among  the  ancient  Egyptians  we  find  the 
division  of  the  year  determined  by  the  changes  of  the 
Nile ;  and  their  vague  year  of  365  days  abandoned  for 
a  civil  year  regulated  by  applications  of  astronomical 
science,  minutely  interwoven  with  all  their  sacred  as  well 
as  civil  institutions.  But  the  phenomena  of  the  seasons, 
which  have  fostered  with  every  other  civilized  nation  the 
accurate  observation  of  the  astronomical  divisions  of 
time,  and  the  determination  of  the  recurring  festivals 
dependent  on  seed-time  and  harvest :  were  almost  in- 
operative, where,  among  a  people  specially  devoted  to 
agriculture,  each  Reason  and  every  temperature  could  be 
commanded  by  a  mere  change  of  elevation  under  the 
vertical  sun  of  the  Equator. 

The  Peruvians,  however,  must  be  tried  by  their  own 
standards  of  excellence.  Manco  Capac,  their  mythic 
civilizer,  was  no  war-god,  like  the  Mexitli  of  the  fero- 
cious Aztecs.  Agriculture  was  the  special  art  of  civilisa- 
tion introduced  by  him ;  and  husbandry  was  pursued 
among  them  on  principles  which  modem  science  has 
only  recently  fully  developed  in  Europe.  There  alone, 
in  all  the  New  World,  the  plough  was  in  use ;  and  the 
Inca  himself,  on  one  of  the  great  annual  festivals,  con- 
secrated the  labours  of  the  husbandman  by  turning  up 
the  earth  with  a  golden  ploughshare.  Artificial  irriga- 
tion was  carried  out  on  a  gigantic  scale  by  means  of 
aqueducts  and  tunnels  of  great  extent,  the  ruins  of  which 
still  attest  the  engineering  skill  of  their  constructors. 
The  virtues  of  guanOy  which  are  now  so  well  appreciated 
by  the  agriculturists  of  Europe,  were  familiar  to  the 


440  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

Peravian  farmer ;  and  as  the  country  of  the  Incas  in- 
cluded, at  its  various  levels^  nearly  all  varieties  of  climate 
and  production,  from  the  cocoa  and  palm  that  fringed 
the  borders  of  the  Pacific,  to  the  pasture  of  their  moun- 
tain flocks  on  the  verge  of  the  high  regions  of  perpetual 
snow  :  a  systematic  succession  of  pubHc  fairs,  regulated, 
like  all  else,  by  the  supreme  government,  afforded  abun- 
dant opportunities  for  the  interchange  of  their  diverse 
commodities. 

Such  a  country,  if  any,  could  dispense  with  commerce, 
and  attain  to  considerable  advancement  without  any 
representative  currency  or  circulating  medium.  Gold, 
which  was  so  abundant,  served  only  for  barbaric  pomp 
and  decoration.  Silver  was  accessible  in  such  quanti- 
ties, that  Pizarro  found  In  it  a  substitute  for  iron  to  shoe 
the  horses  of  his  cavalry.  Copper  and  tin  in  like 
manner  abounded  in  the  mountains  ;  and  the  Peruvians 
had  learned  to  alloy  the  copper  both  with  tin  and  silver, 
for  greater  utility  in  its  application  to  the  useful  arts. 
The  discovery  of  well-adjusted  silver  balances  in  some  of 
the  tombs  of  the  Incas,  shows  that  they  made  use  of 
weights  in  determining  the  value  of  their  commodities ; 
and  thus  were  in  possession  of  a  systematic  mode  of 
exchange,  which,  for  their  purposes,  was  superior  to  that 
of  the  recognised  currency  of  the  Mexicans,  in  the 
absence  of  any  such  means  of  ascertaining  the  exact 
apportionment  of  commodities  produced  for  sale  or 
exchange. 

The  progress  of  the  Peruvians  in  agriculture  was 
accompanied  by  a  corresponding  development  of  the  re- 
sources of  a  pastoral  people.  Vast  flocks  of  sheep 
mnged  the  mountain  pastures  of  the  Andes,  under  the 
guidance  of  native  shepherds ;  while  the  Peruvians 
alone,  of  all  the  races  of  the  New  World,  had  attained 
to  that  important  stage  in  civilisation  which  precedes 


XIV.]  PROGRESS:  NATIVE  CIVILISATION,  441 

the  employment  of  machinery,  by  the  use  of  the  lower 
animals  in  economizing  human  labour.  The  native 
llama,  employed  as  a  beast  of  burden,  carried  its  light 
load  along  the  steep  paths  of  the  rocky  Cordilleras,  or 
on  the  great  highways  of  Peru.  As  the  mythic  Manco 
Capac  was  the  instructor  of  the  nation  in  agriculture,  so 
the  divine  daughter  of  the  Sun  introduced  the  arts  of 
weaving  and  spinning.  Such  traditions  indicate  the 
favourite  directions  of  the  national  taste  and  skill,  which 
were  specially  displayed  in  the  manufacture  of  a  great 
variety  of  woollen  articles  of  the  utmost  delicacy  of 
texture. 

Numerous  examples  of  the  woven  textures  of  the 
Peruvians  have  been  recovered  from  their  ancient  graves 
at  Atacama  and  elsewhere,  though  it  cannot  be  assumed 
that  in  these  we  have  specimens  of  the  rare  and  costly 
fabrics  which  excited  the  wondering  admiration  of  the 
early  Spaniards.  In  the  arid  soil  and  tropical  climate 
of  the  great  desert  of  Atacama,  articles  which  prove  the 
most  perishable  in  our  northern  latitudes  are  found,  after 
the  lapse  of  centuries,  in  perfect  preservation.  Of  these 
I  had  an  opportunity  of  examining  a  collection  recovered 
by  Mr.  J.  H.  Blake  from  their  ancient  huacas,  and  now 
preserved  in  his  cabinet  at  Boston.  They  include  spe- 
cimens of  woven  cloth,  wrought  in  dyed  woollen  thread, 
into  ingenious  and  tasteful  patterns,  and  sewed  in  re- 
gular and  ornamental  designs.  Each  piece  is  woven  of 
the  exact  size  which  was  required  for  the  purpose  in 
view,  and  some  of  them  furnish  proofs  of  ingenious  skiU 
in  the  art  of  weaving.  The  threads  consist  of  two  or 
more  strands  of  dyed  llama  wool  twisted  together ;  and 
elaborate  patterns  are  woven  of  them  into  a  soft  and 
delicate  web.  The  accompanying  figure,  though  gro- 
tesque, is  nevertheless  a  good  specimen  of  a  complicated 
feat  achieved  in  dyed  woollen  threads  on  the  ancient 


44S  PSBHISTORIC  JfAlf.  [Chap. 

PeniTian  loom.  It  was  found,  along  with  many  other 
relics,  in  a  Fernvian  grave,  described  minutely  in  a 
subsequent  ch^ter.  Mr.  Bl^e  re- 
marks, in  reference  to  the  discoveries 
of  this  class  which  rewarded  his  le- 
searches  in  Peru  : — "  In  forming  an 
opinion  of  the  degree  of  skill  displayed 
in  the  arts  of  spinning  and  weaving^ 
by  these  q>ecimenB,  it  should  be  bome 
in  mind  that  the  implements  in  use 
were  of  the  simplest  contrivance.  The 
only  ones  which  have  been  discovered 
are  simple  distaff,  and  among  the 
articles  obtained  from  the  Atacama 
graves  were  several  formed  of  wood 
and  stone,  such  as  are  still  in  use 
among  the  Indians  of  Peru  at  the 
present  day.  Weaving  on  the  loom  has  not  been  in- 
troduced among  them.  The  warp  is  secured  by  stakes 
driven  into  the  ground,  and  the  filling  in  is  inserted  by 
the  slow  process  of  passing  it  by  hmid  over  and  under 
each  thread  alternately."  It  would  be  a  grave  error, 
however,  to  assume  that  we  possess  in  such  reUcs,  re 
covered  from  the  ordinary  graves  formed  in  the  loose 
sand  of  the  desert,  the  highest  achievements  of  ancient 
Peruvian  skill.  On  tiie  contrary,  regarding  them,  as 
we  must,  as  fair  specimens  of  the  common  woollen 
tissues  of  the  country,  they  amply  confirm  the  proba- 
bility that  the  costly  hangings,  and  beautifully  wrought 
robes  of  the  Inca  and  his  nobles,  fully  justified  the 
admiration  with  which  they  are  referred  to  by  the 
Spanish  writers  of  the  sixteenth  century.  We  read  of 
marvellous  specimens  of  ceramic  art  made  by  the  ancie&t 
Peruvian,  surpassing  anything  found  in  the  common 
cemeteries  of  the  race ;   but  abundant  proofe  exist  of 


XIV.]  PROGRESS:  NATIVE  CIVILISATION.  443 

the  ingenuity  of  the  ancient  potter  expended  on  the 
utensils  in  daily  use  by  the  people  at  large,  to  render 
probable  the  accounts  of  such  rare  chef  d'ceuvres  wrought 
by  their  cunningest  workmen  for  the  imperial  service. 
So  also  we  read  of  the  native  animals  and  plants  inge- 
niously executed,  with  wonderful  delicacy,  in  gold  and 
silver ;  and  scattered  with  profuse  and  wanton  magnifi- 
cence about  the  apartments  of  the  Peruvian  princes  and 
nobles.  Such  specimens  of  goldsmiths'  work  no  longer 
survive ;  but  still  the  huacas  of  the  ancient  race  are 
ransacked  for  golden  ornaments,  which  prove  consider- 
able metallurgic  skill,  and  leave  no  room  to  doubt  that 
gold  and  silver  were  moulded  and  graven  into  many 
ingenious  forms.  Science  and  art  had  indeed  made 
wonderful  advances  among  this  remarkable  people ; 
though  with  them,  as  with  the  Chinese,  they  were  more 
frequently  expended  in  the  gratification  of  a  craving  for 
display,  than  in  realizing  the  practical  triumphs  in  which 
their  true  value  consists.  Nevertheless,  in  all  those 
respects  Peruvian  civilisation  had  already  wrought  out 
for  itself  the  most  essential  elements  of  progress  adapted 
to  its  native  soiL  Its  astronomical  science  admita  of 
no  comparison  with  that  of  Mexico  ;  and  in  lieu  of  the 
artistic  picture-writing  of  the  Mexicans,  it  employed  its 
qaipuSy  an  artificial  system  of  mnemonics  not  greatiy  in 
advance  of  the  Eed  Indian  wampum,  to  which  it  bears 
so  close  a  resemblance  ;  and  strikingly  contrasting  with 
the  matured  hieroglyphical  inscriptions,  which  preserve 
on  the  ruined  walls  of  the  cities  of  Central  America  and 
Yucatan  the  evidences  of  an  intellectual  progress  alike 
in  advance  of  the  highest  civilisation  of  the  Aztecs  and 
the  Incas,  and  of  all  but  the  most  civilized  nations  of 
ancient  or  modem  centuries. 

But  the  remarkable  system  of  national  polity,  when 
taken  into  consideration  along  with  the  docile,  gentle 


444  PREHISTORIC  MAX.  [Chap. 

nature  still  manifested  by  the  descendants  of  the  Peru- 
vian people,  furnishes  some  key  to  the  peculiar  charac- 
teristics of  their  native  civilisation.     Their  government 
was  a  sacerdotal  sovereignty,  with  an  hereditary  aris- 
tocracy, and  a  eystem  of  castes  more  absolute  seemingly 
than  that  of  the  Eg3rptians  or  Hindus.     Something  of 
the  partial  and  unprogressive  development  of  the  Chinese 
mingled  in  the  ancient  Peruvians  among  numerous  other 
traits  of  resemblance  to  that  singular  people.   Unlike  the 
Mexicans,  we  see  in  their  whole  polity,  arts^  and  social 
life,  institutions  of  indigenous  growtL      It  would  be 
difficult  to  limit  the  centuries  during  which  such  a  people 
may  have  passed  on  from  generation  to  generation  the 
slowly  brightening  torch  of  their  self-developed  civilisa- 
tion.    Their  own  traditions,  preserved  with  the  help  of 
quipus  and  national  ballads,  are  valueless  on  this  point 
But  their  institutions  reveal  some  of  the  most  remarkable 
evidences  of  a  primitive  people,  preserving  many  of  the 
traits  of  man's  social  infancy,  alongside  of  such  highly 
matured  arts  and  habits  as  could  only  grow  up  together 
around   the  undisturbed  graves  of  many  generations. 
Offerings  of  fruits  and  flowers  took  the  place,  among  that 
gentle  race,  of  the  bloody  human  sacrifices  of  Aztec 
worship  ;  but  the  suttee  rites,  which  disclose  their  traces 
everywhere  in  the  sepulchral  usages  of  primitive  nations, 
were  retained  in  full  force.     The  simple  solidity  of  a 
pure  megaiithic  art  gave  an  equally  primitive  character 
to  their  architecture,  notwithstanding  its  extensive  appli- 
cation to  all  the  most  important  practical  purposes  of 
life ;   and  the  precious  metals,  though  existing  in  un- 
equalled profusion,  were  retained  to  the  last  solely  for 
an  unproductive  contribution  to  barbaric  splendour.    The 
habits  of  that  pastoral  Ufe,  by  means  of  which  the  fore- 
most nations  of  the  Old  World  appear  to  have  emerged  out 
of  primitive  barbarism,  were  with  them  modified  by  the 


XIV.]  PROGRESS:  NATIVE  CIVILISATION.  445 

isolated  haunts  of  flocks  altogether  peculiar  to  the  strange 
region  of  mountain  and  plateau,  where  also  they  carried 
the  next  step  in  the  scale  of  human  progression,  that  of 
agriculture,  to  a  degree  of  perfection  probably  never  sur- 
passed They  had  advanced  metallurgy  through  all  its 
stages,  up  to  that  which  preceded  the  use  of  iron ;  and, 
with  the  help  of  their  metal  tools,  displayed  a  remark- 
able skill  in  many  mechanical  arts.  They  did  no  more, 
because  under  their  peculiar  local  circumstances,  and  the 
repressive  influences  of  the  mUd  despotism  of  Inca  rule, 
they  had  achieved  all  that  they  required.  A  gentle 
people  found  abundant  occupation  in  tilling  the  varied 
soil,  without  being  oppressed  by  a  labour  which  was 
lightened  by  the  frequently  recurring  festivals  of  a  joy- 
ous, and,  in  some  respects,  elevating  national  feith ;  nor 
is  it  difficult  to  conceive  of  such  a  people  continuing  to 
pursue  the  same  even  tenor  of  their  way,  with  scarcely 
perceptible  progression,  through  all  the  subsequent  cen- 
turies since  their  discovery  to  Europe,  had  not  the  hand 
of  the  conqueror  ruthlessly  overthrown  the  structure 
reared  by  countless  generations,  and  quenched  the  lamp 
of  native  civilisation  which  lighted  them  on  their  way. 
The  conquerors  of  the  sixteenth  century  have  given  ex- 
pression to  the  astonishment  with  which  they  beheld 
everywhere  the  evidences  of  order,  contentment,  plenty, 
and  prosperity ;  and  while  the  architectural  magnificence 
of  Montezuma's  capital  has  so  utterly  disappeared  as  to 
suggest  the  doubt  if  it  ever  existed :  the  traveller  along 
the  ancient  routes  of  Peruvian  industry  still  meets  on 
every  hand  the  ruins,  not  only  of  temples,  palaces,  and 
strongholds,  but  of  terraced  declivities,  military  roads, 
causeways,  aqueducts,  and  other  public  works,  that 
astonish  him  by  the  solidity  of  their  construction  and 
the  grandeur  of  their  design. 

Reflecting  on  the  striking  contrasts  which  are  apparent 


446  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

between  the  two  great  nations  thus  found  at  the  highest 
stage  of  progress  in  Northern  and  Southern  America^ 
Prescott  has  remarked :  '*  The  Mexicans  and  Peruvians, 
so  different  in  the  character  of  their  peculiar  civilisation, 
were,  it  seems  probable,  ignorant  of  each  other's  existence ; 
and  it  may  appear  sinmilar  that,  durinfi:  the  simultaneous 
continuant  oSr  ^ires,  some  <rf  L  seeds  of  science 
and  of  art,  which  pass  so  imperceptibly  from  one  people 
to  another,  should  not  have  found  their  way  across  the 
intervol  wUd.  »p«»t»d  tte  two  mtioD..  -Ly  furnish 
•n  hrt««tbg  ,xLple  of  ti>e  opp»ite  diroetii  which 
the  human  mind  may  take  in  its  struggle  to  emerge 
from  darkness  into  the  light  of  civilisation.''  Whilst, 
however,  there  seems  littie  room  for  doubt  that  those 
two  nations  were  ignorant  of  each  other  at  the  period  of 
the  discovery  of  America  :  there  are  traces  in  some  of 
their  arts  strongly  suggestive  of  an  earlier  intercourse 
between  the  northern  and  southern  continent,  which  finds 
singular  confirmation  from  the  correspondence  in  cranial 
type,  artificial  confonnation  of  the  head,  and  other  traite 
suggestive  of  a  common  origin,  or  subjection  to  some  com- 
mon influences^  which  reveal  themselves  in  monuments 
and  remains  of  the  region  lying  to  tiie  north  of  the  Istiimus, 
and  repeat  tiiemselves  from  time  to  time  in  one  or  other 
of  their  more  salient  aspects^  along  the  line  of  geogra- 
phical transmission  between  the  great  mountain  range 
and  the  shores  of  the  Pacific.  Neither  the  architecture, 
the  astronomical  science,  the  letters^  nor  the  languages  of 
Peru  or  Central  America  find  a  counterpart  among  any 
traces  of  incipient  civilisation  discernible  in  the  great 
eastern  plain  between  the  Eocky  Mountains  and  the 
Atlantic ;  unless  we  look  for  them  among  the  buried 
records  of  the  Mound-Builders.  Yet  there,  amid  the 
tribes  familiar  to  the  European  in  modem  times,  is  the 
stock  from  which  on  many  grounds  it  appears  to  me 


r 


XIV.]  PROGRESS:  NATIVE  CIVILISATION.  447 

most  reasonable  to  trace  the  predominant  Mexican  race 
of  the  era  of  the  Conquest :  the  inheritors,  but  not  the 
originators  of  the  civilisation  of  the  plateau.  Such  an 
idea  can  only  be  advanced,  in  the  present  state  of  our 
knowledge,  with  a  view  to  further  inquiry,  and  in  some 
of  its  aspects  it  is  glanced  at  in  other  chapters  of  these 
volumes;  but  while  the  traditions  of  the  Aztecs  aU 
pointed  to  a  migration  from  the  north,  the  Toltecs  whom 
they  displaced  can  be  assigned  on  no  tangible  evidence 
to  a  similar  origin.  Amid  the  many  diversities  of  ethnic 
characteristics  recognisable  among  the  tribes  and  nations 
of  the  New  World,  the  forest  and  prairie  tribes,  now 
clustering  chiefly  in  the  North-west,  are  the  representa- 
tives of  one  great  subdivision,  whose  origin  may  be 
sought  in  the  northern  hive  which  stretches  westwards 
towards  Behring  Straits  and  the  Aleutian  Islands,  with 
their  possible  suggestion  of  an  Asiatic  origin.  But  for 
the  more  intellectual  tribes  and  nations  whose  ancient 
monuments  lie  to  the  south  of  the  Eio  Grande  del  Norte, 
not  without  intermingling  some  faint  traces  of  their 
influence  along  the  more  northern  regions  of  the  Pacific ; 
and  perhaps  also,  even  for  the  strange  and  mysterious 
race  of  the  Mound-Builders  :  the  most  probable  hive  of 
America's  civilized  and  semi-civilized  nations  appear  to 
me  to  be  sought  for  in  the  rich  plateaus  of  the  Peruvian 
Cordilleras,  where  the  country  rises  through  every  change 
of  climate  under  the  vertical  rays  of  the  Equator ;  and 
its  rocky  steeps  are  veined  with  exhaustless  treasures  of 
metallic  ores,  in  such  a  condition  as  to  lead  man  on  step 
by  step  from  the  infantile  perception  of  the  native  metal 
as  a  ductile  stone,  to  the  matured  intelligence  of  the 
skUled  metallurgist,  mingling  and  fusing  the  diverse  ores 
into  his  most  convenient  and  useful  alloys.  The  theories 
of  migration  which  the  evidence  now  produced  suggests 
are  reserved  for  the  close,  and  will  have  to  be  revised 


448  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

with  evety  sabeequent  acquisition  of  knowledge.  It  may 
be  that^  though  time  seems  to  have  thrown  an  impene- 
trable veil  over  those  centuries  which  lie  behind  the  era 
of  Columbus's  adventurous  voyage,  yet  at  least  a  comer 
of  that  veil  may  be  lifted,  permitting  us  to  gaze  upon 
the  generations  over  whose  ashes  we  tread,  while  seeking 
to  interpret  the  significance  of  their  memorials. 


XV.]  THE  ARTISTIC  INSTINCT:  IMITATION,         449 


CHAPTER    XV. 

'  THE  ARTISTIC  INSTINCT:  IMITATION, 

In  turning  to  the  consideration  of  the  primitive  works 
of  art  of  the  American  Continent,  whether  pertaining  to 
the  ancient  race  of  the  Mound-Builders,  or  to  modem 
Indian  tribes,  the  critical  observer  cannot  fail  to  be 
struck  with  the  peculiar  manifestations  of  an  ingenious 
imitative  skiU.  Such  is  by  no  means  confined  to  the 
aboriginal  artists  of  the  New  World ;  nevertheless  it  is 
a  very  noticeable  characteristic  of  them,  in  which  they 
present  a  striking  contrast  to  the  primitive  artists  of 
Europe.  To  this  remarkable  intellectual  characteristic 
of  the  American  Indian,  the  author's  attention  was 
drawn,  long  before  he  had  opportunities  of  studying  the 
red  man  in  his  native  forests.  In  adopting  the  term 
archaic,  as  that  which  seemed  the  most  suitable  defini- 
tion for  the  era  of  primitive  British  metaUurgic  art,  cor- 
responding to  the  "  Bronze  Age  "  of  the  north  of  Europe, 
in  the  nomenclature  of  continental  archaeologists,  it  was 
selected  because  of  its  peculiar  applicability  to  the 
artistic  productions  of  the  period.  Many  of  these  are 
exceedingly  graceful  in  form,  and  some  of  them  highly 
ornamented,  but  there  is  scarcely  a  trace  of  imitative 
design.  So  also,  though  the  peculiar  form  of  one  pri- 
mitive class  of  gold  ornaments,  found  in  the  British 
Isles,  has  suggested  a  name  for  it  derived  from  the  calyx 
of  a  flower,  which  the  cups  of  its  rings  seem  in  some 

VOL.  I.  2  F 


450  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

degree  to  resemble,  yet  it  is  a  mere  fanciful  analogy,  for 
no  example  bears  the  slightest  trace  of  ornament  which 
would  suggest  that  such  similarity  was  present  to  the 
mind  of  the  ancient  British  goldsmitL  Where  incised 
or  graven  ornaments  are  wrought  upon  the  flower-like 
formsj  they  are  the  old  chevron,  or  herring-bone,  and 
saltire  patterns,  which  occur  on  the  rudest  clay  pottery, 
alike  of  northern  Europe  and  of  America,  thougli  exe- 
cuted on  the  finer  gold  work  with  considerable  delicacy 
and  taste.  The  correspondence  between  the  forms  and 
ornamentation  of  the  rudest  classes,  both  of  domestic 
and  sepulchral  pottery  of  the  Old  and  New  World, 
appears,  at  first  sight,  remarkable ;  but  it  is  only  the 
inevitable  correspondence  of  the  inartistic  simpUcity 
inseparable  from  all  infantile  art.  The  ornamentation 
is  almost  without  exception  only  an  improvement  on  the 
accidents  of  manufacture.  The  aboriginal  British  and 
American  potters  appear  both  alike  to  have  produced 
their  first  decorations  by  simply  passing  twisted  cords 
round  the  soft  clay.  More  compMcated  patterns  were, 
in  like  manner,  produced  by  plaited  or  knitted  cords, 
though  more  frequently  imitated  in  ruder  fashions  with 
the  point  of  a  bone-lance  or  bodkin.  But  it  is  only 
among  the  allophylian  arts  of  Europe  that  such  arbitrary 
patterns  are  perpetuated  with  improving  taste  and  skiU. 
The  European  vase  and  cinerary  urn  become  more 
graceful  in  contour,  and  more  delicate  in  material  and 
construction,  as  they  accompany  the  beautiful  forms  of 
weapons  and  personal  ornaments  wrought  in  bronze. 
But  in  no  single  case  is  any  attempt  made  to  imitate 
leaf  or  flower,  bird,  beast,  or  any  simple  natural  object ; 
and  when  in  the  bronze  work  of  the  later  Iron  period, 
imitative  forms  at  length  appear,  they  are  chiefly 
the  snake  and  dragon  shapes  and  patterns,  borrowed 
seemingly  by  Celtic  and  Teutonic  wanderers,  with  the 


XV.]       THE  ARTISTIC  INSTINCT:  IMITATION,  451 

wild  fancies  of  their  mythology,  from  the  far  Eastern 
cradle-land  of  their  birth. 

This  total  absence  of  every  trace  of  imitation  in  the 
forms  and  decorations  of  primitive  British  art,  and,  so 
far  as  my  observation  extends,  of  the  whole  archaic  art 
of  northern  Europe,  is  curious  and  noteworthy :  for  it 
is  by  no  means  an  invariable  characteristic  of  the  pri- 
mitive arts  of  man.  In  the  simplest  forms  of  ancient 
weapons,  implements,  and  pottery,  mere  utility  was  the 
aim.  The  rude  savage,  whether  of  Europe  or  America, 
had  neither  leisure  nor  thought  to  spare  for  decorative 
art.  His  aesthetic  faculty  had  not  yet  begun  to  influence 
his  constructive  instincts.  Ideas  of  comparison,  which 
enter  so  largely  into  the  spirit  of  modem  artistic  design, 
and  also  form  so  prominent  an  element  in  the  more  arti- 
ficial compositions  of  the  modem  orator  and  bard,  were 
altogether  latent  in  those  elder  times.  Art  was  the  child 
of  necessity,  and  borrowed  its  first  adjuncts  of  adorn- 
ment from  the  same  sources  from  whence  it  had  received 
its  convenient  but  arbitrary  forms. 

But  the  moment  we  get  beyond  this  primitive  and 
mere  utilitarian  epoch  of  rudest  art,  the  contrast  between 
the  products  of  early  European  and  American  artistic 
skill  is  exceedingly  striking ;  and  their  value  to  the  eth- 
nologist and  archaeologist  becomes  great,  from  the  insight 
they  give  into  the  aspects  of  mental  expression,  and  the 
intellectual  phases  of  social  life,  among  those  unhistoric 
generations  of  men.  The  useful  arts  of  the  British 
aUophylian  progressed  until  they  superinduced  upon 
themselves  the  decorative  and  fine  arts.  But  the  omar- 
mentation  was  inventive,  and  not  imitative ;  it  was 
arbitrary,  conventional,  and  singularly  persistent  in  style. 
It  wrought  itself  into  all  his  external  expressions  of 
thought,  and  whatever  his  religious  worship  may  have 
been,  we  look  in  vain  for  proofs  of  his  idolatry  among 


452  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

all  the  iBDumerable  relics  which  have  been  recovered 
from  the  supposed  Dmidical  &nes,  or  the  older  cromlechs 
and  tumuli  of  the  British  Isles.^     The  very  opposite  cha- 
racteristics meet  the  eye  the  moment  we  turn  to    the 
relics  which  illustrate  the  primitive  arts  of  the  New  World. 
There,  indications  of  imitative  design  meet  us  on  every 
hand.     Even  the  rude  tribes  of  the  North-west,  though 
living  in  the  simplest  condition  of  nomade  savage  life, 
not  only  copy  the  familiar  animal  and  vegetable  forms 
with  which  they  are  surrounded:   but  also  represent, 
with  curious  ingenuity  and  skill,  the  novel  objects  which 
European  enterprise  introduces  to  their  notice.     Even 
their  plaited  and  woven  grass  and  quill-work  is  made  to 
assume  a  pictorial  aspect;    and  the  decorated  IndiaD 
pottery  is  not  only  frequently  ornamented  with  patterns 
suggestive  of  their  being  derived  from  flowers  and  other 
natural  objects,  but  the  more  elaborated  examples  are 
occasionally  moidded  into  the  forms  of  animals.     StUI 
more  is  this  the  case  with  the  tubes,  masks,  and  personal 
ornaments,  but,  above  all,  with  the  pipe-heads  of  the 
ancient  Mound-Builders.     Nor  does  it  stop  with  those 
smaller  productions  of  art ;  but,  as  we  have  seen,  this 
same  remarkable  imitative  faculty  finds  expression  in  the 
great  earthworks  both  of  Wisconsin  and  Ohio,  where  the 
ingenious  artist  has  wrought  out  his  representations  of 
natural  objects  with  the  same  material  with  which  his 
enduring  pyramids  are  reared ;  and  on  a  scale  akin  to 
the  colossal  sphinx,  that  has  looked  forth  from  its  stony 
eyes  on  the  memorial  pyramid  of  old  Cheops,  while  that 
gnomon  of  the  Nile's  desert  sundial  has  traced,  with  its 
unresting  shadow,  the  revolutions  of  thirty  centuries  of 
time. 

And  invaluable  are  the  chronicles  of  Americans  ancient 
history  recorded  for  us  by  means  of  this  same  imitative 

*  Vide  Prehistoric  Annals  of  Scolkmd,  pp.  339-342. 


XV.]         THE  ARTISTIC  INSTINCT:  IMITATION.         453 

art.  The  walls  of  Central  American  ruins  are  covered 
with  voiceless  hieroglyphics,  and  the  costly  folios  of  Lord 
Kingsborough's  Mexican  Antiquities  have  placed  at  the 
command  of  the  scholars  of  both  hemispheres  the  dubious 
ideography  of  native  historians ;  but  the  records  of  a 
long-obliterated  past  revealed  to  us  by  means  of  the 
examples  of  imitative  art  brought  forth  from  the  sealed 
depositories  of  the  Mound-Builders,  disclose  chroniclings 
which  all  may  read  ;  or  of  the  interpretation  of  which, 
at  least,  all  are  qualified  to  judge.  The  picture-writing 
and  the  sculptured  symbolism  are  dark  to  us  as  were  the 
hieroglypMi  of  Eg^t  U.  a  thousand  generations,  and 
no  new  ChampoUion  appears  to  illumine  their  mystery  ; 
but  in  these  we  have  America's  demotic  writings,  brief 
and  fragmentary,  but  intelligible  through  all  their  extent. 
The  revelations  of  the  sacrificial  mounds  have  been  spe- 
cially ample  and  valuable  in  this  respect.  These  are 
"  the  chambers  of  imagery  '*  of  the  Western  World ; 
wherein  are  every  form  of  creeping  things,  and  beasts, 
and  all  the  idols  of  their  ancient  worship.  But  foremost 
among  all  the  primitive,  and  nearly  all  the  more  recent 
illustrative  relics  of  native  American  art,  is  the  tobacco- 
pipe.  It  is  the  peculiar  and  distinctive  sjnnbol  of 
America ;  as  its  narcotic  usages  have  been  the  strange 
gift  diflFiised  by  it  to  nearly  every  tribe  and  nation  of 
the  Ancient  World. 

In  attempting  to  determine  elements  of  classification 
for  the  diverse  types  or  varieties  of  man,  there  are  certain 
minute  yet  prominent  characteristics  which,  alike  among 
ancient  and  modem  races,  supply  at  least  convenient 
tests  of  classification ;  while  some  of  them  merit  the 
special  consideration  of  the  archaeologist  and  the  ethno- 
logist, as  indicating  far-reaching  principles,  or  derived 
customs  which  may  furnish  the  clue  to  a  continuous 
chain  of  relations.     Of  this  class  is  the  remarkable  and 


y 


454  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Ghap. 

persistent  rite  of  circumcision^  which  constitutes  a  pecu- 
Kaxly  distinctive  element  of  isolation  with  the  Jew  and 
his  Semitic  congeners.    Again,  the  ancient  epithet  "  bar- 
barian''  pointed  to  a  distinctive  mark  of  culture  and 
refinement,  which  this  nineteenth  century  of  Christian 
civilisation  seems  at  length  disposed  to  abandon,  aUke 
in  the  Old  World  and  the  New.     With  the  native  Ame- 
rican Indian,  the  beardless  features  have  been  invariably 
aimed  at :  in  part  because  of  the  scanty  natural  growtii 
of  hair  on  the  face,  but  also  partly  because  of  a  universal, 
immemorial  custom ;  for  the  sculptured  figures  of  Pa- 
lenque  and  Uxmal,  the  portrait  pipe-heads  and  masks  of 
the  Mississippi  mounds,  the  carving  of  the  great  Calendar 
Stone,  and  the  depictions  of  the  Mexican  picture-writings, 
all  concur  in  representing  the  aboriginal  American  as 
beardless.     Again,  the  artificial  flattemng  of  the  head,  a 
widely  diffused,  though  by  no  means  universal  custom 
among  American  tribes  :  also  had  its  existence  among 
ancient  nations  of  the  Old  World  ;  and  is  proved  by 
early  sculptures  to  have  been  practised  in  those  remote 
times  when  native  American  art  and  architecture  appear 
to  have  achieved  their  highest  efforts.     And  not  less 
distinctive  than  any  of  those,  are  the  scalp  war-trophy 
and  the  peace-pipe  of  the  American  Indian  :  the  charac- 
teristics still,  not  of  a  tribe  or  nation,  but  of  a  whole 
continent.     Herodotus  refers  to  scalping  as  one  of  the 
most  characteristic  war-customs  of  the  Scythians,  and 
to  the  Scythic  practice  of  hanging  the  scalp-trophies 
to  the  warrior's  bridle-rein.     Hence  the  airoaKvOifyiv  of 
Euripides,  quoted  by  Eawlinson,  when  remarking  the 
resemblance  of  such  ancient  Asiatic  customs  to  those 
of  the  Eed  Indians.     The  correspondence  is  worthy  of 
note,  in  what  is  otherwise  noticeable  only  as  the  Ameri- 
can counterpart  to  Egyptian  and  Oriental  accumulations 
of  trophies  of  the  slain — the  skulls,  the  hands,  the  ears. 


XV.]         THE  ARTISTIC  INSTINCT:  IMITATION.         455 

or  even  the  foreskins, — ^repeatedly  referred  to  in  the  Old 
Testament  Scriptures,  and  recorded  with  minute  detail 
in  the  paintings  of  Egypt,  and  the  sculptures  of  Nimroud 
and  KJiorsabad.  But  the  pipe  is  associated  with  the 
most  solemn  rites  of  the  native  American ;  with  the 
lavish  sacrifices  of  the  ancient  worshipper,  laid  on  the 
buried  altars  of  his  long-deserted  mounds  ;  and  with  the 
sacred  credentials  of  the  ambassador  of  the  tribe,  the 
inspired  medicine -man  and  priest,  or  the  accredited 
leader,  exercising  absolute  authority  for  war  or  peace. 

The  origin  and  difiusion  of  the  singular  practice  of 
smoking  tobacco  and  other  narcotic  herbs  will  come 
under  consideration,  in  a  subsequent  chapter,  in  relation 
to  existing  arts  and  customs  of  the  American  aborigines. 
It  is  only  referred  to  here,  because  of  the  prominent 
place  which  the  implements  of  this  practice  occupy 
among  the  works  of  art  of  which  the  sacrificial  mounds 
are  the  principal  depositories.  In  accordance  with  the 
almost  universal  custom  of  barbarous  and  semi-civilized 
nations,  the  Mound-Builders  devoted  to  their  dead  the 
implements  of  their  favourite  or  familiar  occupations, 
their  pipes  and  vessels,  along  with  personal  ornaments, 
and  objects  prized  for  their  worth  or  valuable  for  some 
talismanic  charm.  Hence  the  mounds  of  America  dis- 
close to  us  the  same  kind  of  evidence  of  the  past  as 
Wilkinson  has  deduced  from  the  catacombs  of  Egypt, 
or  Dennis  from  the  sepulchres  of  Etruria.  But  in  addi- 
tion to  this,  while  the  altars  of  Egypt  and  Etruria  have 
been  long  overthrown  :  the  remarkable  religious  rites  of 
the  American  Moimd-Builders  have  preserved  not  only 
their  altars,  but  the  ofierings  laid  upon  them,  before  the 
first  seedling  fell  from  whence  grew  the  ancient  monarchs 
of  those  forests  now  styled  primeval  The  perishable 
garments  of  the  dead  have  necessarily  disappeared  ;  and 
of  instruments  or  utensils  of  wood  or  other  combustible 


456  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

materials  it  is  vain  to  expect  a  trace,  where  even  metal 
has  melted  and  the  stone  been  calcined  in  the  blaze  of 
the  sacrificial  fires  ;  but  articles  of  copper  and  stone,  of 
fictile  ware,  and  even  of  shell,  ivory,  and  bone,  have 
escaped  the  destructive  flame,  and  withstood  the  action 
of  time  ;  and  it  is  in  those  enduring  characters  that  the 
inscriptions  upon  the  altars  of  the  Mound-Builders  are 
legibly  graven.  Let  us  try  to  read  these  inscriptions, 
and  translate  their  records  into  the  language  of  modem 
thought. 

What  they  record  for  us  in  regard  to  progress  in  the 
mechanical  arts  and  in  metallurgy,  we  have  already 
attempted  to  decipher.  The  Mound-Builders  were  ac- 
quainted with  several  of  the  metals.  Implements  and 
personal  ornaments  of  copper  abound  in  the  tombs  and 
on  their  altars  ;  and  the  mechanical  combination  of 
silver  with  the  native  copper  of  which  they  are  made, 
while  proving  their  ignorance  of  the  art  of  smelting 
metals  or  reducing  them  from  their  ores^  tends  also  very 
clearly  to  indicate  that  they  derived  their  masses  of 
native  copper  from  Lake  Superior,  where  alone  the  two 
metals  have  hitherto  been  found  in  the  singular  me- 
chanico- chemical  combination  of  included  crystals  of 
silver  in  a  copper  matrix.  The  accidental,  or  at  least 
unpremeditated  results  of  their  sacrificial  fires,  have  in 
some  cases  fused  the  metallic  offerings  on  the  altars  into 
a  mass  of  molten  copper ;  but  the  Mound-Builder  had 
very  imperfectly  learned  the  old  arts  of  Tubal -Cain. 
He  did  not  smelt  the  ores,  or  melt  the  native  copper 
and  cast  it  into  such  moulds  as  his  imitative  skill,  and 
his  ability  in  modelling  the  potter's  clay,  abundantly 
fitted  him  to  produce.  Neither  did  he  attempt  the 
simpler  process  of  welding,  much  less  the  valuable  art 
of  alloying  the  metals  :  although  silver  is  found  shaped 
into  personal  ornaments,  and  the  sulphuret  of  lead  was 


XV.]  THE  ARTISTIC  INSTINCT:  IMITATION         457 

familiarly  known  to  him,  and  is  found  in  considerable 
quantities  along  with  his  other  metallic  remains. 

Thus  far,   therefore,   those  inscriptions  tell  us  that 
directly,   or   through    some    intermediate    source,    the 
Mound-Builders  shared  in  the  metallurgic  wealth  of  the 
great  copper  region  of  L^ke  Superior.   We  are  reminded, 
accordingly,  that  the  broad  undulating  pjairie-lands  of 
Wisconsin,  with  their  remarkable  symbolic  earthworks, 
lie  directly  between  the  shores  of  Lake  Superior  and  the 
great  region  of  the  Mound-Builders  in  Ohio  and  Illinois. 
The  monuments  of  the  latter  abound  with  deposits  of 
the  works  of  art  of  their  builders,  and  are  surrounded 
with  varied  proofs  of  settled  occupation,  civic  and  reli- 
gious structures,  and  permanent  defensive  military  works ; 
while  within  the  era  of  Wisconsin  the  symbolic  mounds 
stand  almost  alone,  and  have  hitherto  been  found  to 
contain  no  relics  of  their  builders.    Neither  sacred  earth- 
works adapted  to  religious  rites,  nor  the  military  defences 
of  a  settled  people,  attest  that  the  region  of  Wisconsin 
was  anciently  occupied  by  a  numerous  population  such 
as  its  many  natural  advantages  fitted  it  to  sustain. 
Hence  the  conjecture  that  the  mineral  coimtry  on  the 
southern  shores  of  the  Great  Lake  was  permanently 
occupied  by  no  settled  tribe,  but  that  its  mines  were  the 
recognised  source  of  supply  for  the  whole  population 
north  of  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  ;  and  that  the  difierent  tribes 
and  nations  throughout  the  vast  basin  of  the  Mississippi 
and  its  tributaries  were  wont  to  send  their  working  par- 
ties there,  as  to  a  common  region  of  the  nations.     Such 
an  idea  well  accords  with  the  further  conjecture  that  the 
numerous  symbolic  moimds  of  Wisconsin  may  be  the 
memorials  of  sacred  rites,  or  pledges  of  peace  and  neu- 
trality among  nations  from  the  various  tributaries  of  the 
great  river,  as  they  annually  met  on  this  border-land  of 
the  common  metallic  storehouse.    It  is  obvious  that  the 


458  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

Mound-Builders  were  a  highly  religious  people.  Their 
superstitious  rites  were  of  frequent  occurrence,  and  ac- 
companied with  costly  sacrifices  ;  while  in  the  numerous 
symbolic  moimds  of  Wisconsin,  the  labour  alone  is  the 
sacrifice,  and  the  external  form  preserves  the  one  idea  at 
which  their  builders  aimed. 

So  far,  this  theory  of  a  sacred  neutral  ground  and 
common  mineral  region  is  to  a  great  extent  conjectural 
Nevertheless,  it  involves  certain  undoubted  facts  to  be 
borne  in  view  for  comparison  with  others  of  a  diverse 
kind.  In  the  once  densely-peopled  regions  of  Ohio  and 
Illinois,  where  the  works  of  the  Mound-Builders  aboutid, 
the  river-vaJleyB  were  occupied  by  an  ingenious,  indus- 
trious agricultural  population,  skilful  in  the  execution 
of  a  peculiar  class  of  works  of  art ;  who,  if  not  aggres- 
sive and  warlike,  employed  their  constructive  skill  on 
extensive  works  for  military  defence.  Whencesoever  the 
danger  existed  that  they  had  thus  to  apprehend  and 
guard  against,  there  is  no  trace  of  its  locality  within  the 
region  lying  immediately  to  the  south  of  Lake  Superior, 
through  which  their  path  lay  to  the  great  copper  country. 
More  probably  offensive  and  defensive  warfare  was  carried 
on  between  tribes  or  states  of  the  Mound  race  settled  on 
different  tributaries  of  the  same  great  water-system.  But 
the  growing  civilisation  of  the  nations  of  the  Mississippi 
valley  was  also  exposed  to  the  aggression  of  barbarian 
tribes  of  the  North-west ;  for  if  the  Mound-Builder  dif- 
fered in  culture,  in  blood,  and  race  from  the  progenitors 
of  the  modem  Red  Indian,  the  evidences  chronicled  for 
us  in  his  sacred  muniment  chambers  seem  to  place  the 
fact  beyond  doubt  that  the  Red  Indian  was  not  unknown 
to  him. 

So  far,  then,  we  connect  the  race  of  the  Mounds  with 
the  shores  of  Lake  Superior,  and  thus  trace  out  for  them 
a  relation  to  regions  of  the  North.     But  in  this  we  have 


XV.]        THE  ARTISTIC  INSTINCT:  IMITATION         459 

no  necessary  indication  of  the  birth-land  or  of  the  course 
of  migration  of  the  Mound  race.  "It  cannot  have 
escaped  notice,"  Messrs.  Squier  and  Davis  remark,  in 
drawing  their  great  work  on  the  ancient  monuments  of 
the  Mississippi  Valley  to  a  close,  "  that  the  relics  found 
in  the  mounds — composed  of  materials  peculiar  to  places 
separated  as  widely  as  the  ranges  of  the  Alleghanies  on 
the  east,  and  the  sierras  of  Mexico  on  the  west,  the 
waters  of  the  great  lakes  on  the  north,  and  those  of  the 
Gulf  of  Mexico  on  the  south, — denote  the  contempora- 
neous existence  of  communication  between  these  ex- 
tremes. For  we  find,  side  by  side  in  the  same  mounds, 
native  copper  from  Lake  Superior,  mica  from  the  Alle- 
ghanies, shells  from  the  Gulf,  and  obsidian  (perhaps 
porphyry)  from  Mexico.^^^ 

These  facts  the  authors  regard  as  seriously  conflicting 
with  the  hypothesis  of  a  migration  either  northward  or 
southward.  They  at  least  warn  us  against  any  hasty 
conclusion  from  partial  or  one-sided  evidence.  But 
meanwhile  it  appears  legitimate  to  infer  from  them  the 
proofs  of  an  extensive  traffic  ;  and  to  assume,  as  at  least 
exceedingly  probable,  the  existence  of  widely-extended 
commercial  relations  as  one  of  the  accompaniments  of 
civilisation  among  that  singular  race.  It  must  not  be 
inferred,  from  the  use  of  terms  specifically  applied  to 
modem  trade  and  commerce,  that  they  are  supposed  to 
imply  the  possession  of  a  currency  and  exchanges,  of 
banking  agencies,  or  manufacturing  corporations.  But, 
without  confoimding  the  traces  of  a  rudimentary  civili- 
sation with  the  latest  characteristics  of  its  mature  de- 
velopment, there  are  proofs  sufficient  to  justify  the 
inference  that  the  Mound-Builders  of  Ohio  traded  with 
the  copper  of  Lake  Superior  for  objects  of  necessity  and 
luxury  brought  from  widely-separated  regions  of  the  con- 

^  Ancient  Monuments  of  the  Mississippi  VaUey^  p.  306. 


460  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

tincut  By  many  intermediate  agencies^  rather  than 
by  any  direct  traffic,  such  exchanges  may  have  been 
effected*  But  the  river  system  of  the  Mississippi  has 
furnished  facilities  for  such  interchanges  imder  the  far 
less  favourable  circumstances  of  the  later  forest  tribes ; 
and  such  a  systematic  trade  among  an  ingenious  and 
settled  people  may  have  materially  contributed  to  the 
progress  of  civilisation  in  the  populous  valleys  of  Scioto 
and  Ohio. 

Turning  next  to  the  consideration  of  facts  recorded 
for  us  in  the  sculptures  of  their  sacrificial  and  sepulchral 
moimds,  we  find  our  study  directed  to  a  varied  class  of 
objects  of  singular  interest,  some  of  which,  at  least, 
fully  merit  the  designation  of  works  of  art.  Compared, 
indeed,  with  the  sculptures  in  porphyry,  and  the  great 
Calendar  Stone  of  Mexico;  the  elaborate  £a9ades  and 
columned  terraces  of  Uxmal,  Zayi,  and  Kabah ;  and  the 
colossal  statues  and  basso-relievos  of  Copan  and  Pal- 
enque,  with  their  mysterious  symbols  and  tablets  of 
hieroglyphics  :  the  art  of  the  Mound-Builders,  which 
found  its  highest  object  in  the  decoration  of  a  tube,  or 
the  sculpture  of  a  pipe-bowl,  may  appear  insignificant 
enough.  But  the  imagination  is  too  apt  to  be  impressed 
by  mere  size,  and  requires  to  be  reminded  of  the  supe- 
rior excellence  of  a  Greek  medal  or  a  Roman  gem  to 
all  the  colossal  grandeur  of  an  Egjrptian  Memnon.  The 
architecture  and  sculpture  of  Central  America  and  Yuca- 
tan preserve  to  us  the  highest  intellectual  efibrts  of  the 
New  World,  and  are  animated  by  a  historical  signifi- 
cance which  cannot  be  over-estimated.  Nevertheless, 
there  are  examples  among  the  miniature  works  of  art  of 
the  Ohio  Valley  unquestionably  admitting  of  comparison 
with  them  in  some  essential  elements  of  artistic  skill. 
The  colossal  statues  of  Copan  are  marvellous  specimens 
of  elaborate  barbaric  sculpture ;    but  apart  from  the 


XV.]         THE  ARTISTIC  INSTINCT:  IMITATION         461 

significance  of  the  hieroglyphics  with  which  some  of 
them  are  graven,  they  are  only  admissible  in  a  conven- 
tional sense  among  works  of  art :  whereas  some  of  the 
sculptures  taken  from  the  inhumed  altars  of  "Mound 
City''  are  examples  of  imitative  art  and  portrait-sculpture 
ftdl  of  character  and  individuality. 

The  simplicity,  variety,  and  minute  expression  in  those 
miniature  sculptures,  their  delicacy  of  execution  and 
evidence  of  considerable  imitative  skill,  all  render  them 
just  objects  of  interest  and  careful  study.  But  foremost 
of  all  in  every  trait  of  value  for  the  elucidation  of  the 
history  or  characteristics  of  their  workers,  are  the 
examples  of  sculptured  human  heads :  some  of  them 
presenting  striking  traces  of  individual  portraiture. 
Alike  from  the  minute  accuracy  of  many  of  the  sculp- 
tures of  animals,  hereafter  referred  to,  and  from  the 
correspondence  to  well-known  features  of  the  modem 
Red  Indian  suggested  by  some  of  the  human  heads, 
these  miniature  portraits  may  be  assumed,  with  every 
probability,  to  include  faithful  representations  of  the 
predominant  physical  features  of  the  ancient  people  by 
whom  they  were  executed.  What  would  the  ethnologist 
not  give  for  such  well-authenticated  portraiture  of  the 
old  Umbrian  or  Pelasgian,  for  example  ?  It  would  solve 
some  of  the  knottiest  problems  of  his  science,  better 
than  aU  the  obscure  disquisitions  that  the  aboriginal 
population  of  Greece  and  Italy  has  given  rise  to. 
American  ethnologists,  accordingly,  have  not  failed  to 
appreciate  the  value  of  such  iconographic  evidence  rela- 
tive to  the  ante-historical  population  of  their  own  con- 
tinent ;  and  have  turned  it  to  even  more  account  than 
legitimate  inductive  reasoning  wiU  sustain,  in  support 
of  their  favourite  argument  for  the  indigenous  unity  of 
the  whole  ancient  and  modem  aborigines  of  the  New 
World.     The  facts,  however,  are  independent  of  all  such 


46S  PREHISTORIC  MAX.  [Chap. 

deductiomi,  and  are  deserving  of  the  minutest  and  most 
impartial  consideration. 

It  is,  indeed,  in  these  two  respects,  as  records,  first, 
of  the  physical  characteristics  of  the  Mound- Builders 
and  the  contemporaiy  tribes  or  nations  known  to  them ; 
and  m^condly,  of  the  fauna,  native,  and  foreign  to  the 
country  occupied  by  them,  with  which  they  were  fami- 
liar, that  the  mound  sculptures  are  chiefly  to  be  valued. 
After  an  opportunity  of  carefuDy  inspecting  the  origi- 
nals, now  in  the  collection  of  Dr.  E.  H.  Davis  of  New- 
York,  I  cannot  avoid  the  conclusion  that  their  artistic 
merits  have  been  somewhat  overrated.     The  accuracy 
with  which  some  of  the  objects  of  natural  history  are 
copied  in  every  minute  detail  \&  indeed  remarkable  ;  yet 
it  is  only  a  stage  in  advance  of  the  imitative  faculty  so 
strikingly  apparent  in  similar,  though  inferior  specimens 
of  modem   Indian   sculpture.      Were   those   miniature 
works  of  art  the  sole  memorials  of  the  Mound-Builders, 
there  would  be  no  reason  for  regarding  them  as  other 
than  ancestors  of  the  forest  tribes,  among  whom  the 
artistic  faculty  had  been  developed,  in  all  probability, 
along  with  other  corresponding   elements  of  incipient 
civilisation.      But,   as  we  have   already  seen,  the  evi- 
dence by  which  both  their  civilisation  and  their  essen- 
tial difierence  are  demonstrated,  rests  on  independent 
groimds,  and  would  be  slightly   affected  by  the   ab- 
sence of  this  interesting  but  wholly  subsidiary  class  of 
illustrations. 

In  one  of  the  smaller  mounds  o(  the  remarkable  group 
already  referred  to,  within  the  sacred  enclosure  on  the 
west  bank  of  the  Scioto  Eiver,  called  "Mound  City," 
discoveries  were  made  of  a  varied  and  singularly  inter- 
esting nature,  which  are  thus  described  by  the  explorers : 
"  Intermixed  with  much  ashes,  were  found,  not  far  from 
two  hundred  pipes  carved  in  stone,  many  pearls  and 


XV.]         THE  ARTISTIC  INSTINCT :  IMITATION,         463 

shell-beads,  numerous  disks,  tubes,  etc.,  of  copper,  and 
a  number  of  other  ornaments  of  copper  covered  with 
silver,  etc.  etc.  The  pipes  were  much  broken  up,  some 
of  them  calcined  by  the  heat,  which  had  been  sufficiently 
strong  to  melt  copper,  masses  of  which  were  fused  to- 
gether  in  the  centre  of  the  basin.  A  large  number  have, 
nevertheless,  been  restored  at  the  expense  of  much 
labour  and  no  small  amount  of  patience.  They  are 
mostly  composed  of  a  red  porphyritic  stone,  somewhat 
resembling  the  pipe-stone  of  the  Coteau  des  Prairies^ 
excepting  that  it  is  of  great  hardness,  and  interspersed 
with  small,  various-coloured  granules.  The  fragments 
of  this  material  which  had  been  most  exposed  to  the 
heat  were  changed  to  a  brilliant  black  colour  resembling 
Egyptian  marble.  Nearly  all  the  articles  carved  in 
limestone,  of  which  there  had  been  a  number,  were  cal- 
cined. The  bowls  of  most  of  the  pipes  are  carved  in 
miniature  figures  of  animals,  birds,  reptiles,  etc.  All 
of  them  are  executed  with  strict  fidelity  to  nature,  and 

with   exquisite  skill But  the   most  interesting 

and  valuable  in  the  list  are  a  number  of  sculptured 
human  heads,  no  doubt  faithfully  representing  the  pre- 
dominant physical  features  of  the  ancient  people  by 
whom  they  were  made.  We  have  this  assurance  in  the 
minute  accuracy  of  the  other  sculptures  of  the  same 
date."^ 

Of  these  invaluable  examples  of  ancient  American 
iconography,  one  (Fig.  19.)  has  attracted  special  atten- 
tion, not  only  as  the  most  beautiful  head  of  the  series, 
but  from  its  supposed  correspondence  to  the  tjrpe  of  the 
modem  North  American  Indian.  "The  workmanship 
of  this  head,''  Messrs.  Squier  and  Davis  remark,  "is 
unsurpassed  by  any  specimen  of  ancient  American  art 
which  has  fallen  under  the  notice  of  the  authors,  not 

*  Ancient  Monunumts  of  the  Misgissippi  Vallejf^  p.  162. 


462  PREHtSTOBIC  MAlf.  [Ca 

deductions,  and  are  deserving  of  the  minuteBt  an-' 
impartial  consideration. 

It  is,  indeed,  in  these  two  respects,  aa  re'  '    _ 
of  tiie  physical  characteristics  of  the  Mr  ■  • 
and  the  contemporary  tribes  or  nations  ^s^ 
and  secondly,  of  the  fauna,  native,  bTj  , 
country  occupied  by  them,  with  whi-':  -  • 
liar,  that  the  mound  sculptures  arp 
After  an  opportunity  of  carefull^    ■  ■ 
nals,  now  in  the  collection  of  ^      ; 
York,  I  cannot  avoid  the  cor 
merits  have  been  somewhat  • 
with  which  some  of  the  o' 
copied  in  every  minute  de' 
it  is  only  a  stage  in  adva 
strikingly  apparent  in  s* 
of  modem  Indian  sc 
works  of  art  the  sole  ^^  ^oDnd  pii* 

. ,  4.  _,     f  i  artistically  beautiful  head,  the 

than  ancestors  oi  -^ ,  ,;       tt.  ■> ,         , 

-L-  ^     e      ^^^v.  unknown  Mound-Builders,   dug 

artistic  faculty  hr  .  7    r^ 

1         with  othe  rfquier,  exhibits  the  peculiar  Indian 

■  "I     t'  n       P         ''^'  ^^^  ^^'^  ^^^  sculptural  perfec- 

j         I.    ™i,-„'      jiot  withhold  our  admiration  from  their 

dence  by  whic       ■"  ,  ^  mi,  ^ 

tial  differenc       J**"?"     ^*  P*™^^  ^^^^  ^^^^  '  ^^^  ^^^^ 

A     ar     i-Builders  were  American  Indian  in  Type ; 

°^        of  t'    ^^  ^^^^  ante-Columbian,  but  otherwise  un- 

illiistratio     >^  "***^  changed  the  type  of  this  indigenous 

.  yittuos  ;  and  3d,  That  the  Mound-Builders  were 

already  3lt  >cquainted    with    no    other    men  but   them- 

wcat  '  ^L       ^^'^^   ^^*    *^®   sweeping  deductions    drawn 

disco  'f**  premises   supplied   by  a  single   example  of 

eatiu^S'^*'^^**^^'^  •  *"^  ra^er  from  the  depiction  of  it  in 

(  JiiUMnf  MonujwmU  qfthe  JlfiMiwippi  VcUle!/,  p.  245,  fig.  145. 
-  MigenouM  /iacet  of  the  Earth,  p.  183. 


XV.]         THE  ARTISTIC  INSTINCT:  IMITATION.         465 

Meaara.  Sqaier  and  Davis's  volume ;  for  after  a  careful 
exammation  of  the  original,  its  ethnic  characteriBtics 
appear  to  me  to  be  misrepreaented  in  the  illustration 
referred  to.  The  artist  has,  no  donbt  undesignedly, 
given  to  his  drawing  much  more  of  the  tj^ical  Indian 
features  than  are  traceable  in  the  original.  The  nose, 
instead  of  having  the  salient  Roman  arch  there  repre- 
sented, is  perfectly  straight,  as  shown  in  the  profile  here 


given  (Fig.  20,),  and  is  neither  very  prominent  nor 
dilated. 

The  mouth,  though  protuberant,  is  small ;  and  instead 
of  the  charact«rietic  ponderous  maxillary  region  of  the 
true  Indian,  the  chin  and  the  upper  lip  are  both  short ; 
and  the  lower  jaw,  without  any  marked  width  between 
the  condyles,  ie  small,  and  tapers  gradually  towarda  the 
chin.  Perhaps  it  is  owing  to  thia  smaUness  of  the  lower 
portion  of  the  head  and  face,  that  it  was  aupposed  to 
repreaent  a  female.  But  such  an  idea  is  not  suggested 
by  any  marked  characteristic  either  in  the  features  or 
head-dress.  The  cheek-bones,  though  high,  are  by  no 
means  so  prominent  as  in  the  engraving.  Indeed,  the 
projection  is  almost  entirely  in  front,  giving  a  protu- 
berant cheek  immediately  under  the  eye.  I  doubt  if 
any  impartial   observer,  familiar   with  Indian  physio- 

VOL.  I.  2  G 


4G6  PRBHJSTORIC  MAN.  [Chap 

gnomj,  would  assign  this  head  to  the  same  type,  if  shown 
to  him  without  aoy  knowledge  of  its  histoiy/ 

It  ifi  apparent,  therefore,  that  the  inferences  drawn 
from  the  representatioa  of  a  single  example  of  momid- 
sculpture,  are  open  to  question  on  account  of  the  inac- 
curacy of  the  premist'a  But  even  supposing  the  head 
to  be  as  represented  in  the  engraving  in  the  Monuments 
of  tfie  Mitfsissippi  Valley,  or  to  reproduce,  beyond  all 
doubt,  the  features  of  the  modem  American  Indian ;  it 
would  by  no  means  prove  the  three  propositions  deduced 
from  its  discovery ;  since  it  is  not  the  only  example  of 
sculptured  portraiture  discovered  in  the  mounds,  and  we 
look  in  vain  in  other  examples  for  those  points  of  In- 
dian physiognomy  which  would  first  attract  the  eye  of 
the  imitative  modeller  or  sculptor.  The  salient  and  di- 
lated noae,  the  prominent  cheek- 
bones, the  massive  jaw,  and 
large  mouth,  may  be  assigned 
aa  the  most  noticeable  charac- 
teristics ;  but  all  or  nearly  all 
of  them  are  wanting  in  most 
of  the  other  sculptured  heads 
or  masks  from  the  mounds. 
The  character  of  these  may  Iw 
seen  in  the  head  engraved  here 
(Fig.  21),  derived  from  the 
same  rich  depository  opened  in  "  Mound  City."  It  is 
cut  in  a  compact  yeUowish  stona     The  nose  ia  nearly 

■  This  head  bu  already  been  msde  the  baau  of  such  sweeping  genendizi' 
tionB  that  the  accnncy  of  its  description  and  repreBentation  becomes  of  great 
importance.  Through  the  kindnew  of  Dr.  Dariii,  I  have  not  only  had  oppor- 
tuoitiei  of  carefitlly  examining  the  original ;  but  I  possesa  a  cast  of  it,  from 
vhicb  the  drawiags  have  been  mode,  and  Biibsequently  compared  with  Ck 
original  A  comparison  of  Fig,  19  with  the  corresponding  view  of  the  suae 
object,  as  figured  in  VoL  I.  of  the  Smithtonian  ContrVmtUHU  to  Sacmlfdj'. 
will  abow  how  much  the  American  Indian  charocterialics  of  the  latter  iR 
due  to  the  i>encil  of  the  modem  draughtsman. 


XV.]         THE  ARTISTIC  INSTINCT:  IMITATION.         467 

in  a  line  with  the  forehead,  excepting  at  the  point,  which 
projects  in  a  manner  certainly  by  no  means  characteristic 
of  Indian  features ;  and  though  the  lips  protrude,  as  in 
the  previous  head,  they  are  delicate,  and  the  mouth  is 
smalL  The  ears  in  both  are  large,  and  in  the  latter  are 
perforated  with  four  small  holes  around  their  upper 
edges.  In  this  case,  from  the  delicacy  of  the  features,  it 
is  suggested  with  greater  probability  than  in  the  former 
example,  that  it  was  designed  after  a  female  model. 
Another  example  engraved  in  .the  Ancient  Monuments 
of  the  Mississippi  Valley  (No.  143)  is  executed  in  the 
same  material,  but  miich  altered  by  fire.  It  has  not, 
like  the  previous  examples,  been  designed  for  a  pipe- 
head,  but  is  broken  off  from  a  complete  human  figure, 
or  other  larger  piece  of  carving.  It  is  much  inferior  as 
a  work  of  art,  and  indeed  approaches  the  grotesque  or 
caricature.  Nevertheless,  it  has  considerable  character 
in  its  expression  ;  and  no  one  familiar  with  the  Indian 
cast  of  countenance  would  readily  assign  either  to  it  or 
the  previous  specimen  of  mound-sculpture  any  aim  at 
such  representation,  if  unaware  of  the  circumstances  of 
their  discovery.  In  this,  as  in  others  of  the  heads,  the 
face  is  tattooed,  and  the  ears  have  been  perforated; 
and  from  the  strongly  attached  oxide  of  copper  at  those 
points,  there  can  be  little  doubt  they  were  decorated 
with  rings  or  pendants  of  that  metal ;  but  the  action 
of  the  sacrificial  fires  has  only  left  an  uncertain  trace  of 
the  character  of  such  ancient  modes  of  personal  adorn- 
ment. Various  other  portrait -sculptures  and  terra- 
cottas, either  found  in  the  mounds,  or  discovered  within 
the  region  where  they  chiefly  abound,  are  figured  in  the 
works  of  Squier,  Schoolcraft,  and  others,  and  in  the 
American  Ethnological  Society's  Transactions.  The 
majority  of  them  axe  inferior  to  those  already  described, 
as  works  of  art.     But  if  they  possess  any  value  as  indi- 


•j 


468  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

cations  of  the  ph7si(^omical  type  of  ancient  American 
races^  they  tend  to  confirm  the  idea  of  a  prevailing 
diversity,  instead  of  a  uniformity  of  cranial  form  and 
features. 

From  the  examples  thus  referred  to,  it  is  obvious  that 
the  discovery  of  a  sculptured  head  of  the  most  strongly 
marked  Indian  features^  among  so  many  of  a  different 
type,  in  the  moimds  of  the  Alississippi  Valley,  would 
only  correspond  with  another  interesting  fact,  that  ani- 
m^ds  foreign  to  the  region,  and  even  to  the  North 
American  continent,  are  foimd  figured  in  the  mound- 
sculptures.  It  presents  a  parallel  to  well-known  examples 
of  Etruscan  vases,  moulded  in  the  form  of  negros'  heads ; 
and  of  Greek  pottery,  painted  with  the  characteristic 
neero  features  and  woolly  hair.  Specimens  of  both  are 
prTrved  among  the  collections  of  the  British  Museum, 
and  furnish  interesting  evidence,  alike  of  the  permanency 
of  the  negro  type,  and  of  the  famiharity  both  of  Greek 
and  Etruscan  artists  with  the  African  features,  long 
prior  to  the  Christian  era.  Similar  examples  of  foreign 
portraiture  have  attracted  attention,  on  the  still  older 
monuments  of  Egypt,  and  among  the  basso-relievos  of 
the  tomb  of  Darius  Hystaspes  at  Persepolis  :  supplying 
varied  and  interesting  iUustrations  of  imitative  axt  em- 
ployed in  the  perpetuation  of  ethnic  peculiarities  of 
physiognomy.  Supposing,  therefore,  the  Mound-Builders 
to  have  been  a  settled  semi -civilized  population,  as 
essentially  distinct  from  a  contemporaneous  barbarous 
race,  analogous  to  the  living  descendants  of  such  among 
the  Indian  tribes  of  the  North-west,  as  the  classic  nations 
of  antiquity  differed  from  the  barbarian  tribes  beyond 
the  Khine  and  the  Baltic  :  it  is  no  more  surprising  to 
trace  the  genuine  Indian  features  depicted  in  the  mound- 
sculptures,  than  to  discover  those  of  the  Dacian  or  the 
Gaul  on  the  column  of  Trajan.      It  proves  that  the 


XV.]         THE  ARTISTIC  INSTINCT:  IMITATION      >  469 

Mound-Builders  were  familiar  with  the  American  Indian 
t3rpe,  but  nothing  more.  The  evidence  indeed  tends 
very  distinctly  to  suggest  the  idea  that  they  were  not 
of  the  same  type  ;  since  the  majority  of  sculptured 
human  heads  hitherto  recovered  from  their  ancient  de- 
positories do  not  reproduce  the  Indian  features. 

The  physical  type  of  the  Mound-Builders  will  again 
come  under  consideration  in  a  subsequent  chapter ;  but 
it  is  interesting  meanwhile  to  observe  that  even  in  the 
style  and  art-characteristics  of  this  portrait -sculptiire, 
there  are  traces  of  peculiar  and  distinctive  qualities. 
The  imitative  art  still  manifests  itself  in  varied  and 
expressive  varieties  of  style,  in  the  works  of  the  rude 
Indians  :  some  tribes,  such  as  the  Algonquins,  confining 
themselves  to  literal  reproductions  of  natural  objects, 
while  others,  such  as  the  Babeens,  indulge  in  a  grotesque 
and  ingeniously  diversified  play  of  fancy.  But  the  in- 
tellectual development  implied  in  individual  portraiture 
goes  far  beyond  this,  and  is  rare  indeed  among  nations 
considerably  advanced  in  the  earlier  stages  of  civilisation. 
Even  among  the  civilized  Mexicans,  the  imitation  of  the 
human  face  and  figure  does  not  appear  to  have  advanced 
beyond  the  grotesque ;  and  although  the  sculptors  of 
Central  America  and  Yucatan  manifested  all  the  fine 
artistic  power  which  accords  with  the  civiHsation  of  a 
lettered  people,  yet  in  the  majority  of  their  statues  and 
reliefs,  we  see  the  subordination  of  the  human  form  and 
features  to  the  crude  symbolism  of  their  mythology,  or 
the  mere  ornamental  requirements  of  decorative  art. 
The  peculiar  characteristics  of  native  American  art  at- 
tracted at  an  early  period  the  notice  of  the  Spanish 
colonists,  though  unfortunately  for  us,  their  superstitious 
bigotry  led  in  many  cases  to  the  destruction  of  its  most 
interesting  and  valuable  examples.  The  following  curious 
criticism  on  the  sculptures  of  the  pagan  Mexicans,  from 


470  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

the  peu  of  Torquemada,  is  not  the  leas  valuable  from  the 
trait  of  Franciscan  prejudice  which  tinges  all  the  reflec- 
tions and  narrations  of  his  Indian  Monarchy: — "It 
appears,"  he  says,  "  as  if  God  permitted  that  the  figures 
of  their  idok  shoidd  be  the  hideous  semblances  of  their 
own  souls  ;  nor  was  it  till  after  they  had  been  converted 
to  the  Christian  faith  that  they  were  ever  able  to  model 
the  figure  of  a  man.''^  Again,  the  ingenious  and  learned 
Hungarian,  Francis  Pulszky,  after  comparing  Indian, 
Mexican,  Peruvian,  and  Central  American  works  of  art, 
remarks  :  "  The  hunter  tribes  of  America  evince  no 
feeling  for  plastic  beauty.  Yet  withal,  like  the  Turks 
and  the  Celts,  they  have  a  considerable  talent  for  deco- 
rative designs,  and  some  perceptions  of  the  harmony  of 
colours.  The  originality  and  ornamental  combination  of 
their  bead- work  and  embroidery  are  sufficiently  known, 
but  they  always  fail  in  rendering  the  human  form.  Far 
higher  was  the  civilisation  of  that  race  which  preceded 
them  in  the  trans-Alleghanian  States."^  It  thus  seems 
that,  amid  the  general  prevalence  of  a  peculiar  aptitude 
for  imitative  art,  alike  among  the  ancient  and  modem 
nations  of  the  American  continent,  the  Mound-Builders, 
though  confining  their  art,  so  far  as  we  can  now  judge, 
within  a  narrow  range,  developed  a  power  of  appre- 
ciating the  minuter  delicacies  of  plastic  truth  and 
beauty,  such  as  is  only  traceable  elsewhere  among 
the  choicest  productions  of  the  sculptors  of  Uxmal  and 
Palenque. 

To  the  fruits  of  this  cultivated  imitative  skiU  we  owe, 
in  like  manner,  another  class  of  sculptures  which  have 
an  important  significance  in  relation  to  the  ethnological 
problems  affecting  the  ancient  and  ante-Columbian  popu- 
lation of  the  New  World.     In  describing  the  remarkable 

^  Monarchia  Indiana,  b.  xiit.  c.  34. 

^  Iconographic  liesearches ;  Indigenous  BaceSf  p.  182. 


XV.]        THE  ARTISTIC  INSTINCT:  IMITATION  471 

deposit  of  specimens  of  miniature  sculpture,  including 
examples  of  human  portraiture  found  on  the  altars  of  one 
of  the  sacrificial  mounds  in  the  Scioto  Valley,  reference 
has  already  been  made  to  the  curious  collection  of  stone 
pipes  found  there,  with  the  bowls  of  most  of  them  carved 
into  figures  of  beasts,  birds,  and  reptiles  :  all,  as  described 
by  their  intelligent  discoverers,  executed  with  striking 
fideUty  to  nature.  On  these  representations  of  objects 
of  natural  history,  indeed,  along  with  those  of  the  human 
head  and  figure,  the  ancient  sculptors  appear  to  have 
lavished  their  artistic  skill,  with  a  degree  of  care  and  in- 
genuity bestowed  on  none  other  of  the  less  perishable 
works,  from  which  alone  we  can  now  judge  of  their  in- 
tellectual development,  or  the  progress  they  had  attained 
in  the  arts  of  civilisation.  "  Not  only,"  as  Messrs.  Squier 
and  Davis  observe,  "  are  the  features  of  the  various  ob- 
jects  represented  faithfully,  but  their  peculiarities  and 
habits  are  in  some  degree  exhibited.  The  otter  is  shown 
in  a  characteristic  attitude,  holding  a  fish  in  his  mouth ; 
the  heron  also  holds  a  fish ;  and  the  hawk  grasps  a  small 
bird  in  its  talons,  which  it  tears  with  its  beak.  The 
panther,  the  bear,  the  wolf,  the  beaver,  the  otter,  the 
squirrel,  the  racoon,  the  hawk,  the  heron,  crow,  swallow, 
buzzard,  the  paroquet,  toucan,  and  other  indigenous  and 
southern  birds;  the  turtle,  the  frog,  toad,  rattlesnake, 
etc.,  are  recognised  at  first  glance."^  To  this  compre- 
hensive list,  Mr.  Squier  makes  further  additions  in  a 
work  of  later  date.  Contrasting  the  truthfulness  of  the 
carvings  fi:om  the  mounds  with  the  monstrosities  or  cari- 
catures of  nature  usually  produced  by  the  savage  sculp- 
tor, he  remarks :  "  They  display  not  only  the  general 
form  and  features  of  the  objects  sought  to  be  represented, 
but  to  a  surprising  degree  their  characteristic  expression 
and  attitude.     In  some  instances  their  very  habits  are 

^  Ancient  Monuments  of  the  Mississippi  Vattey,  p.  152. 


472  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

indicated.  Hardly  a  beast,  bird,  or  reptUe,  indigenous 
to  the  coimtiy,  is  omitted  from  the  list;^'  and  in  addition 
to  those  named  above,  he  specifies  the  elk,  the  opossum, 
the  owl,  vulture,  raven,  duck,  and  goose,  and  also  the 
aUigator/  In  describing  specific  examples,  the  authors 
remark  in  reference  to  one  pipe-head  carved  in  the  shape 
of  a  toad :  the  knotted,  corrugated  skin  is  well  repre- 
sented, and  the  sculpture  is  so  very  truthful,  that  if 
placed  in  the  grass  before  an  unsuspecting  observer,  it 
would  probably  be  mistaken  for  the  natural  object ;  and 
they  further  add  :  "  those  who  deem  expression  in  sculp- 
ture the  grand  essential,  will  find  something  to  amuse  as 
well  as  to  admire,  in  the  lugubrious  expression  of  the 
mouths  of  these  specimens  of  the  toad.^'  In  so  far  as 
these  miniature  works  of  art  represent  indigenous  fauna, 
they  are  chiefly  remarkable  for  the  evidence  they  furnish, 
not  only  of  an  imitative  talent  of  a  high  order,  but  of  a 
command  of  the  individual  phases  of  character  and  ex- 
pression truly  artistic.  The  wild  cat,  for  example,  is 
figured  in  a  variety  of  characteristic  attitudes,  and  with 
a  corresponding  acuteness  of  expression,  worthy  of 
Audubon. 

Various  spirited  examples  of  such  sculptures  are  in  the 
collection  of  Dr.  Davis,  and  drawings  of  some  of  them 
have  been  given  in  the  Smithsonian  volume,  to  which 
he  so  largely  contributed.  One  of  tiiose  from  "  Mound 
City,"  a  highly  expressive  head,  differing  from  other 
examples,  bears  a  close  resemblance  to  that  of  the  cougar. 
The  sculptures  of  birds  are  much  more  numerous  than 
those  of  beasts,  and  comprise  between  thirty  and  forty 
different  kinds,  of  which  nearly  one  hundred  specimens 
have  been  found.  Of  these  the  explorers  observe :  "  We 
recognise  the  eagle,  hawk,  heron,  owl,  buzzard,  toucan  (?), 
raven,  swallow,  paroquet,  duck,  grouse,  and  numerous 

'  Antiqtnties  of  the  State  of  Keic  Torhy  p.  338. 


XV.]        THE  ARTISTIC  INSTINCT:  IMITATION  473 

other  land  and  water  birds.  There  are  several  varieties  of 
the  same  species ;  for  instance,  among  the  owls,  we  find 
the  great  owl,  the  horned  owl,  and  the  little  owl ;  there 
are  also  several  varieties  of  the  rapacious  birds/^  Of  one 
example,  it  is  remarked,  "  the  engraving  in  point  of  spirit 
falls  far  short  of  the  original/'  The  writers  further  ob- 
serve :  "  It  will  be  readily  recognised  as  the  tufted  heron, 
the  most  indefatigable  and  voracious  of  all  the  fisher 
varieties.  The  small  body,  long  wings,  extending  to  the 
extremity  of  the  short  tail,  long  thin  neck,  sharp  bill,  and 
tufted  head,  are  unmistakable  features.  He  is  repre- 
sented in  the  attitude  of  striking  a  fish,  which  is  also 
faithfiflly  executed.  Nothing  can  surpass  the  truthful- 
ness and  delicacy  of  the  sculpture.  The  minutest  fea- 
tures are  shown ;  the  articulations  of  the  legs  of  the  bird, 
as  also  the  giQs,  fins,  and  scales  of  the  fish,  are  represented. 
It  is  carved  fi-om  the  red,  speckled  porphyry,  already 
several  times  mentioned  as  constituting  the  material  of 
many  of  these  sculptures.  As  a  work  of  art  it  is  incom- 
parably superior  to  any  remains  of  the  existing  tribes  of 
Indians.''  ^  Around  one  pipe-bowl  a  rattlesnake  is  coiled ; 
other  representations  of  various  serpents  have  been  found, 
coiled  in  like  manner  round  the  bowls  of  stone  pipes. 
One  represents  a  variety  now  unknown,  or  not  hitierto 
described.  It  has  a  broad,  flat  head,  and  the  body  is  sin- 
gularly marked.  The  ingenuity  and  fancy  of  the  ancient 
sculptors  are  also  displayed  in  miniature  carvings, 
executed  seemingly,  Uke  the  sportive  sketches  of  the 
modem  artist,  with  no  other  object  than  their  own 
gratification.  The  head  of  a  goose,  for  example,  is  cut 
in  a  hard,  black  stone,  three  and  a  half  inches  long,  and 
with  a  human  skull  or  "death's-head"  carved  on  the 
back  of  it.  Unfinished  carvings  have  also  been  found, 
showing  in  some  degree  the  process  by  which  they  were 

*  Ancient  Monuments  of  the  Mississippi  VaUeyj  p.  259. 


474  PBEHISTORIG  MAN.  [Chap. 

wrought.  A  toad,  in  a  characteristic  attitude,  but  only 
roughly  shaped  out,  "  very  weU  exhibits  the  mode  of 
workmanship.  While  the  general  surface  appears  covered 
with  striae  running  in  every  direction,  as  if  produced  by 
rubbing,  the  folds  and  lines  are  clearly  cut  with  some 
sort  of  graver.  The  marks  of  the  implement,  chipping 
out  portions  a  fourth  of  an  inch  in  length,  are  too  dis- 
tinct to  admit  the  slightest  doubt  that  a  cutting  tool  was 
used  in  the  work.^'  Again,  it  is  remarked  of  another 
pipe-head,  blocked  out  into  the  form  of  a  bird :  "  This 
specimen  is  imfinished,  and  plainly  exhibits  the  process 
adopted  by  the  ancient  artist  in  bringing  it  to  its  present 
state.  None  of  the  more  minute  details  have  as  ^et  re- 
ceived any  attention.  The  base  and  various  parts  of  the 
figure  exhibit  fine  strias,  resulting  from  rubbing  or  grind- 
ing :  but  the  general  outline  seems  to  have  been  secured 
by  cutting  with  some  sharp  instxument,  tiie  marks  of 
which  are  plainly  to  be  seen,  especially  at  the  parts 
where  it  would  be  difficult  or  impracticable  to  approach 
with  a  triturating  substance.  The  lines  indicating  the 
feathers,  grooves  of  the  beak,  and  other  more  delicate 
features,  are  cut  or  graved  on  the  surface  at  a  single 
stroke.  Some  pointed  tool  appears  to  have  been  used, 
and  the  marks  are  visible  where  it  has  occasionally 
slipped  beyond  the  control  of  the  engraver.  Indeed, 
the  whole  appearance  of  the  specimen  indicates  that  the 
work  was  done  rapidly  by  an  experienced  hand,  and  that 
the  various  parts  were  brought  forward  simultaneously. 
The  freedom  of  the  strokes  could  only  result  from  long 
practice;  and  we  may  infer  that  the  manufacture  of 
pipes  had  a  distinct  place  in  the  industrial  organization 
of  the  Mound-Builders.'^  But  this,  though  full  of  inter- 
est, need  not  surprise  us,  since  it  is  undoubted  that  the 
art  of  the  arrow-maker,  which  required  both  skill  and 
experience,  was  pursued  among  the  forest-tribes  as   a 


XV.]        THE  ARTISTIC  INSTINCT:  IMITATION  475 

special  craft ;  nor  is,  even  now,  that  of  the  pipe-maker 
wholly  abandoned. 

So  far,  therefore,  we  are  enabled  to  lift  the  curtain, 
and  look  back  into  that  remote  past.  We  see  the  indus- 
trious sculptor  at  his  task ;  and  holding  silent  converse 
with  him  over  his  favourite  works,  we  learn  somewhat  of 
his  own  physical  aspect,  of  the  range  of  his  geographical 
experience  and  knowledge,  and  form  our  judgment  of  his 
mental  capacity  and  intellectual  development :  even  as 
we  do  of  a  Benvenuto  Cellini,  by  the  examination  of 
some  of  the  exquisite  productions  of  his  art,  and  the 
perusal  of  the  lively  chroniclings  of  his  graphic  autobio- 
graphy. The  pottery  of  the  mounds,  in  like  manner, 
adds  to  our  knowledge  of  the  art  and  civilisation  of  the 
ages  in  which  it  was  produced.  But,  next  in  importance 
to  the  evidence  thus  furnished  of  the  physical  charac- 
teristics of  the  ancient  race,  the  miniature  sculptures  of 
the  Scioto  mounds  derive  their  chief  value  from  the  indi- 
cations they  supply  of  the  extent  and  nature  of  the  geo- 
graphical relations  of  the  remarkable  people  by  whom 
they  were  executed ;  whatever  may  be  the  theory  finally 
accepted  as  that  which  may  most  satisfactorily  account 
for  the  facts  thus  brought  to  light.  By  such  speci- 
mens of  imitative  skill  we  learn  psychological  facts  con- 
cerning the  ancient  population  of  America,  not  without 
their  importance  in  the  history  of  its  incipient  civi- 
lisation, or  the  discussion  of  some  of  its  more  obscure 
ethnological  problems.  But  these  ingenious  products 
of  the  ancient  sculptor's  studio  have  a  still  more  im- 
portant significance  in  relation  to  those  inquiries  which 
embrace  the  migrations  of  aboriginal  races.  By  the 
fidelity  of  the  representations  of  so  great  a  variety  of 
subjects  copied  fi:om  animal  life,  they  furnish  evidence 
of  a  knowledge  in  the  Mississippi  VaUey,  of  the  fauna 
peculiar  not  only  to  southern  but  to  tropical  latitudes. 


476  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

extending  beyond  the  IsthmUB  into  the  southern  conti- 
nent ;  and  suggestive  either  of  arts  derived  from  a  foreign 
sovirce,  and  of  an  intimate  intercourse  maintained  with 
the  central  regions  where  the  civilisation  of  ancient  Ame- 
rica attained  its  highest  development :  or  else  indicative 
of  migration,  and  an  intrusion  into  the  northern  conti- 
nent, of  the  race  of  the  ancient  graves  of  Central  and 
Southern  America,  bringing  with  them  the  arts  of  the 
tropics,  and  models  derived  from  the  animals  famihar  to 
their  fathers  in  the  parent  land  of  the  race 

Of  one  of  the  most  interesting  of  these  exotic  models, 
the  Lamantm  or  Manatee,  seven  sculptured  figures  have 


•Muatie,  ripe-Sculptntt 


been  taken  from  the  mounds  of  Ohio.  This  phytophag- 
ous cetacean,  which,  when  full  grown,  measures  from 
fifteen  to  twenty  feet  in  length,  is  foimd  only  in  tropical 
waters.  Species  haunt  the  estuaries  and  large  rivers  of 
Central  and  intertropical  South  America  ;  as  also  those 
of  both  the  eastern  and  western  sides  of  tropical  Africa  : 
and  sometimes  ascend  the  rivers  to  a  great  distance  from 
the  sea.  Examples  were  seen  by  Humboldt  in  the  Rio 
Meta,  a  branch  of  the  Orinoco,  one  thousand  miles  above 
its  moutL  They  are  also  found  among  the  Antilles,  and 
on  the  coast  of  the  Florida  peninsula.  All  the  noted 
external  details  of  the  manatee  are  faithfully  and  mi- 


XV.l        THE  ARTISTIC  INSTINCT :  IMITATION.  477 

nutely  reproduced  in  the  sculptures  from  the  mounds. 
The  most  remarkable  feature  is  the  external  fore-paw, 
occupying  the  usual  place  of  the  cetacean  fin,  and 
which,  from  its  supposed  resemblance  to  a  hand,  led  the 
Spaniards  to  give  it  the  name  of  Manati.  To  the  earliest 
European  voyagers,  fancy  helped  to  exaggerate  the  pecu- 
liar novelty  of  this  strange  animal,  and  it  received  from 
them  the  name  of  the  Siren.  The  flesh  of  the  manatee 
is  extensively  used  among  the  inhabitants  of  St.  Christo- 
pher's, Guadaloupe,  and  Martinique  ;  and  in  Southern 
America  it  is  in  great  request  during  Lent,  as  its  flesh 
supplies  a  savoury  substitute  for  the  prohibited  animal 
food  of  that  season :  the  manatee  being  classed,  accord- 
ing to  the  system  of  ecclesiastical  natural  history,  among 
fishes.  The  form,  therefore,  of  this  animal  must  be  fa- 
miliar to  the  Indians  of  South  America,  and  was  once 
equally  well  known  to  the  natives  of  the  Antilles,  and 
probably  to  the  ancient  coastmen  of  the  Gulf.  But  we 
must  account  by  other  means  for  the  discovery  of  accu- 
rate miniature  representations  of  it  among  the  sculp- 
tures of  the  far-inland  moimds  of  Ohio ;  and  the  same 
remark  equally  applies  to  the  jaguar  or  panther,  the 
cougar,  the  toucan ;  to  the  buzzard,  possibly,  and  also  to 
the  paroquet.  The  majority  of  these  animals  are  not 
known  in  the  United  States ;  some  of  them  are  totally 
unknown  within  any  part  of  the  North  American  conti- 
nent. Others  may  be  classed  with  the  paroquet,  which, 
though  essentially  a  southern  bird,  and  common  in  the 
Gulf,  does  occasiojially  make  its  appearance  inland  ;  and 
might  possibly  become  known  to  the  untravelled  Mound- 
Builder,  among  the  fauna  of  his  own  northern  home. 

The  importance  of  such  evidences  of  a  knowledge  of 
tropical  animals,  and  even  of  those  now  confined  exclu- 
sively to  the  southern  continent,  possessed  by  the  ancient 
dwellers  in  the  Scioto  Valley,  has  not  escaped  the  notice 


478  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

of  the  intelligent  explorers  of  the  mounds.  It  has  even 
induced  them,  with  becoming  caution,  to  hesitate  in  asr- 
signing  with  absolute  certainty,  the  name  of  the  toucan 
to  sculptures^  concerning  the  aim  of  which  there  could  be 
no  other  reasonable  ground  for  doubt.  On  this  subject, 
accordingly,  they  remark,  in  special  reference  to  the 
manatee  sculptures :  ^'These  singular  relics  have  a  direct 
bearing  upon  some  of  the  questions  connected  with  the 
origin  of  the  mounda.  That  we  find  marine  shells  or 
articles  composed  from  them,  in  the  mounds,  is  not  so 
much  a  matter  of  surprise,  when  we  reflect  that  a  sort  of 
exchange  was  carried  on  even  by  the  unsympathizing 
American  tribes,  and  that  articles  from  the  mouth  of  the 
Columbia  are  known  to  have  found  their  way,  by  a  sys- 
tem of  transfer,  to  the  banks  of  the  Mississippi ;  their 
occurrence  does  not  necessarily  establish  anything  more, 
than  that  an  intercourse  of  some  kind  was  kept  up  be- 
tween the  builders  of  the  mounds  on  the  banks  of  the 
Ohio  and  the  sea.  There  is,  however,  something  more 
involved  in  the  discovery  of  those  relics.  They  are  un- 
distinguishable,  so  far  as  material  and  workmanship  are 
concerned,  from  an  entire  class  of  remains  found  in  the 
mounds,  and  are  evidently  the  work  of  the  same  hands 
with  the  other  effigies  of  beasts  and  birds  ;  and  yet  they 
faithfully  represent  animals  found  (and  only  in  small 
numbers)  a  thousand  miles  distant  upon  the  shores  of 
Florida,  or— if  the  birds  seemingly  belonging  to  the 
zygodactylous  order  be  really  designed  to  represent  the 
toucan, — found  only  in  the  tropical  regions  of  South 
America.  Either  the  same  race,  possessing  throughout 
a  like  style  of  workmanship,  and  deriving  their  materials 
from  a  common  source,  existed  contemporaneously  over 
the  whole  range  of  intervening  territory,  aud  maintained 
a  constant  intercommunication  ;  or  else  there  was  at 
some  period  a  migration  from  the  south,  bringing  with  it 


XV.]        THE  ARTISTIC  INSTINCT:  IMITATION.  479 

characteristic  remains  of  the  land  from  which  it  ema- 
nated The  sculptures  of  the  manatees  are  too  exact  to 
have  been  the  production  of  those  who  were  not  well 
acquainted  with  the  animal  and  its  haVjits."  Of  the  re- 
presentations of  the  toucan,  the  accompanying  woodcut 
(Fig.  23)  will  furnish  a  sufficient  illustration.  It  is 
imitated  with  considerable  accuracy,  though  inferior  to 
some  of  the  finer  specimens  of  mound-sculpture.  The 
most  important  deviation  from  correctness  of  detail  is, 
that  it  has  three  toes  instead  of  two  before,  although  the 
two  are  correctly  represented  behind.  It  is  also  figured 
stooping  its  head  to  take  food  from  a  human  hand ;  and 


Pm.  23.— Toucan,  Pi]«-8culptut8. 

as  it  is  known  that  the  brilliant  plumage  of  the  toucan 
leads  to  its  being  prized,  and  frequently  tamed  by  the 
natives  of  Guiana  and  Brazil,  this  tends  not  only  to 
confirm  the  idea  of  the  sculptures  in  question  being  re- 
presentations of  the  toucans  of  the  southern  continent ; 
but  to  suggest  that  the  Mound-Builders  may  have  had 
their  aviaries,  like  those  in  which  the  Aztec  monarchs 
assembled  birds  of  splendid  plumage  and  beautiful  form 
from  every  part  of  the  Mexican  empire. 

The  questions,  then,  submitted  here  for  our  consider- 
ation, as  legitimate  deductions  from  such  archaeological 
evidence,  are  these  : — Was  the  whole  geographical  area, 
indicated  by  such  a. fauna,  occupied  contemporaneously, 
in  those  ages  when  the  altars  of  the  Ohio  mounds  still 
blazed  with  sacrificial  fires,  by  a  common  race,  maintain- 


480  PREHISTOEIC  MAN,  [Cbap. 

ing  constant  interconise  and  commercial  relations,  for 
the  interchange  of  manufectures  and  commodities  ?— or 
must  we  recognise  in  such  evidences  of  a  familiarity  with 
the  natural  history  of  the  tropics^  and  even  of  the  south- 
em  continent  of  America,  a  proof  that  that  very  people, 
who  derived  all  their  metal  from  the  great  northern  re- 
gions of  Lake  Superior,  had  themselves  emigrated  from 
southern  latitudes  no  less  rich  in  metallic  ores  ? 

That  such  a  migration,  rather  than  a  contemporaneous 
existence  of  the  same  race  over  the  whole  area  thus 
indicated,  and  maintaining  intimate  intercommunication 
and  conmiercial  intercourse,  is  the  more  probable  infer- 
ence, is  suggested  on  various  grounds.  K  the  Mound- 
Builders  had  some  of  the  arts  and  models,  not  only  of 
Central  but  also  of  Southern  America^  and  perhaps  of 
Peru  :  we  have  seen  that  they  also  employed  in  their 
ingenious  manufactures  the  gigantic  tropical  shells  of  the 
Gulf  of  Mexico ;  mica  believed  to  have  been  brought 
from  the  Alleghanies ;  and  the  copper,  and  probably  the 
silver  of  Ontonagon  and  the  Keweenaw  peninsula.  The 
fact  indeed  that  among  the  specimens  of  their  most 
elaborate  carving,  some  of  the  objects  represent  birds  and 
quadrupeds  belonging  to  latitudes  so  far  to  the  south, 
naturally  tends  to  suggest  the  idea  of  a  central  region 
where  arts  were  cultivated  to  an  extent  imknown  in  the 
Mississippi  VaUey ;  and  that  those  objects,  manufactured 
in  the  localities  where  such  models  are  furnished  by  the 
native  fauna,  remain  only  as  the  evidences  of  ancient  com- 
mercial relations  maintained  between  these  latitudes  and 
the  localities  where  now  alone  such  are  known  to  abound. 
But  in  opposition  to  this,  fuU  value  must  be  given  to  the 
fact  that  neither  the  relics,  nor  the  customs  which  they 
indicate,  appear  to  pertain  exclusively  to  southern  lati- 
tudes; nor  are  such  found  to  predominate  among  the 
singular  evidences  of  ancient  and  more  matured  civilisa- 


XV.]         THE  ARTISTIC  INSTINCT:  IMITATION  481 

tion  either  in  Central  or  Southern  America ;  while  the 
varied  nature  of  the  materials  employed  in  the  arts  of 
the  Mound-Builders,  indicate  a  very  wide  range  of  rela- 
tions ;  though  it  cannot  be  assumed  that  these  were 
maintained  in  every  case  by  direct  intercourse. 

The  earlier  students  of  American  archaeology,  like  the 
older  Celtic  antiquaries  of  Britain,  gave  full  scope  to  a 
system  of  theorizing  which  built  up  comprehensive  eth- 
nological schemes  on  the  very  smallest  premises  ;  but  in 
the  more  judicious  caution  of  later  writers  there  is  a  ten- 
dency to  run  to  the  opposite  extreme.  Perhaps  Messrs. 
Squier  and  Davis  indulge  at  times  in  an  exaggerated 
estimate  of  the  merits  of  the  remarkable  works  of  art 
discovered  and  published  as  the  result  of  their  joint 
labours ;  but  subsequent  critics  have  either  unduly  de- 
preciated them,  or  solved  the  diflSculties  attendant  on 
such  remarkable  discoveries,  by  ascribing  their  manu- 
facture to  an  undetermined  foreign  source ;  as  though 
the  mere  transference  of  their  origin  to  some  unknown 
people,  in  a  locality  equally  vague  and  undefined,  could 
tend  in  any  satisfactory  degree  to  account  for  the  inge- 
nious skill  of  their  ancient  American  artists.  Mr.  School- 
craft certainly  manifests  a  disposition  to  underrate  the 
artistic  ability  unmistakably  discernible  in  some  of  the 
works  of  the  Mound-Builders ;  while  Mr.  Haven,  who 
fully  admits  their  skilful  execution,  derives  from  that 
very  fact  the  evidence  of  their  foreign  manufacture. 
After  describing  the  weapons,  potteiy,  and  personal  orna- 
ments obtained  from  the  mounds,  the  latter  writer  adds, 
"  and,  with  these  were  found  sculptured  figures  of  animals 
and  the  human  head,  in  the  form  of  pipes,  wrought  with 
great  delicacy  and  spirit  from  some  of  the  hardest  stones. 
The  last-named  are  relics  that  imply  a  very  considerable 
degree  of  art,  and  if  believed  to  be  the  work  of  the  people 
with  whose  remains  they  are  found,  would  tend  greatly 
to  increase  the  wonder  that  the  art  of  sculpture  among 

VOL.  I.  2  H 


482  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

them  was  not  manifested  in  other  objects  and  places. 
The  fact  that  nearly  all  the  finer  specimens  of  workman- 
ship represent  birds,  or  land  and  marine  animRla  belong- 
ing to  a  different  latitude ;  while  the  pearls,  the  knives 
of  obsidian,  the  marine  shells^  and  the  copper  equally 
testify  to  a  distant,  though  not  extra-continental  origin, 
may,  however,  exclude  these  from  being  received  as  proofs 
of  local  industry  and  skilL^'  But  a  reconsideration  of  the 
list  already  given  of  animals  sculptured  by  the  ancient 
pipe-makers  of  the  mounds,  cannot-  fEol  to  satisfy  the 
inquirer  that  it  is  quite  an  over-statement  of  the  case  to 
say  that  nearly  all  belong  to  a  different  latituda  The 
real  interest  and  difficulty  of  the  question  lies  in  the  fact 
of  discovering,  along  with  so  many  spirited  sculptures  of 
animals  pertaining  to  the  locality,  others  represented  with 
equal  spirit  and  fidelity,  though  belonging  to  diverse  lati- 
tudes. To  those  who  are  familiar  with  early  Scandinavian 
and  British  antiquities,  such  an  assignment  of  all  the 
sculptures  of  the  mounds  to  a  foreign  origin,  on  account 
of  their  models  being  in  part  derived  from  distant  sources, 
must  appear  to  be  a  needless  assumption  which  only 
shifts  without  lessening  the  difficulty.  On  the  sculptured 
standing  stones  of  Scotland — ^belonging  apparentiy  to  the 
closing  era  of  Paganism,  and  the  first  introduction  of 
Christianity  there, — may  be  seen  the  tiger  or  leopard,  the 
ape,  the  camel,  the  serpent,  and  as  supposed  by  some,  tiie 
elephant  and  walrus,  along  with  other  representations  or 
symbols,  borrowed,  not  like  the  models  of  the  Mound- 
Builders,  from  a  locality  so  near  as  readily  to  admit  of 
the  theory  of  direct  commercial  intercourse,  or  recent 
migration,  but  some  of  them  from  remote  districts  of 
Asia,  or  from  Africa.  The  most  noticeable  difference 
between  the  imitations  of  foreign  fauna  on  the  Scottish 
monuments,  and  in  the  ancient  American  sculptures,  is 
that  the  former  occasionally  betray,  as  might  be  expected, 
the  conventional  characteristics  of  a  traditional  type  ; 


XV.]        THE  ARTISTIC  INSTINCT :  IMITATION.  483 

while  the  latter,  if  they  furnish  evidence  of  migration, 
would  in  80  far  tend  to  prove  it  more  recent,  and  to  a 
locaHty  not  so  distant  as  to  preclude  all  renewal  of  inter- 
course with  the  ancestral  birth-land.  But  traces  of  the 
same  reproduction  of  unfamiliar  objects  are  apparent  in 
the  mound  sculptures.  The  objects  least  truthfully  re- 
presented, in  some  eases,  are  animals  foreign  to  the 
region  where  alone  such  works  of  art  have  been  found. 
But  the  South  American  toucan  of  the  mound  sculptor, 
figured  on  a  previous  page,  is  certainly  not  inferior  to 
the  accompanying  specimens  of  the  Peruvian  modeller's 
imitative  skill,  wrought  on  a  vessel  of  black  ware  (Fig. 
24),  now  in  the  collection  of  lie  Society  of  Antiquaries 


of  Scotland ;  though  it  will  be  remembered  that  the 
latter  are  the  work  of  an  artist  to  whom  the  original 
may  be  presumed  to  have  been  familiar.  Notwith- 
standing the  great  spirit  displayed  in  many  of  those 
miniature  sculptures,  the  difference  in  point  of  fidelity 
of  imitation  between  them  and  the  carvings  of  foreign 
subjects  on  the  Scottish  standing-stones,  is  not  so  great 
as  the  descriptions  of  American  archaeologists  would 
suggest ;  while  both  are  alike  accompanied  by  the  re- 
presentations of  monstrosities  or  ideal  creations  of  the 


484  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap. 

fancy,  which  abundantly  prove  that  the  ancient  sculptora 
could  work  without  a  model.  Some  of  the  human  heads 
of  the  American  sculptures,  for  example,  if  regarded  as 
portraits,  must  be  sopposed  to  be  designed  in  the  style 
of  Punch !  and  several  of  the  animals  engraved  in  the 
Ancient  Monuments  of  the  Missiisippi  VaUey  fall  far 
short  of  the  fidelity  of  imitation  ascribed  to  them  in  the 
accompanying  text.  But  after  making  every  requisite 
deduction,  there  are  still  sufficiently  remarkable  evi- 
dences of  imitative  skill  and  artistic  ingenuity  to  justify 
the  wonder,  that  a  people  capable  of  such  beautiful 
miniature  sculpture,  should  have  left  no  larger  monu- 
ments of  their  art.  Whilst,  however,  we  cannot  recog- 
nise in  this  any  sufficient  ground  for  transferring  their 
origin  to  a  foreign  locality,  we  may  still  look  for  analo- 
gies among  the  works  of  art  in  the  different  centres  of 
native  American  civilisation.  Works  precisely  similar 
to  the  mound  sculptures  do  not  occur,  except  in  one  or 
two  stray  specimens,  in  any  other  locality  ;  but  a  curious 
class  of  stone  relics  found  in  Peru  present  a  resem- 
blance to  the  sculptured  mound-pipes  too  striking  to  be 


Pernvlui  Stone  Uorters. 


overlooked.  Of  the  two  examples  given  here  (Fig.  25), 
the  one  is  a  Uama,  brought  from  Huarmachaco,  in  Peru, 
and  now  in  the  collection  of  the  Historical  Society  of 


XV.]        THE  ARTISTIC  INSTINCT:  IMITATION  485 

New  York.  It  is  cut  in  a  close-grained  black  stone, 
and  measures  four  inches  long.  The  other,  which  is 
somewhat  smaller,  and  of  darkish  brown  schist,  is  from 
a  drawing  made  by  Mr.  Thomas  Ewbank,  while  in  Peru. 
The  greater  number  of  those  seen  by  him  represent 
the  llama  and  its  congeners,  the  alpaca,  guanoco,  and 
vicuna.  They  are  all  hollowed  precisely  like  the  bowl 
of  the  sculptured  mound-pipes,  but  they  have  no  lateral 
perforation  or  mouth-piece.  Their  most  probable  use 
was  as  mortars  in  which  the  Peruvians  were  wont  to 
rub  the  tobacco  into  powder,  working  it  with  the  small 
pestle  until  it  became  heated  with  the  friction,  when  it 
was  taken  as  snuff.  The  transition  from  this  practice 
to  that  of  inhaling  the  burning  fumes  seems  equally 
simple  and  natural ;  and  the  correspondence  between 
the  ancient  Peruvian  tobacco-mortar  and  the  stone  pipe 
of  the  Mound-Builder  is  well  worthy  of  note,  when  taken 
into  consideration  along  with  the  imitations  of  birds 
of  the  southern  continent  found  among  the  sculptures 
of  the  northern  mounds.  Dr.  Tschudi  describes  four 
of  these  Peruvian  relics  preserved  at  Vienna,  carved  in 
porphyry,  basalt,  and  granite ;  and  he  adds  :  "  How 
the  ancient  Peruvians,  without  the  aid  of  iron  tools, 
were  able  to  carve  stone  so  beautifully,  is  incon- 
ceivable.^^ 

A  further  reason,  than  any  heretofore  noticed,  tends 
to  give  additional  interest  to  the  absence  of  any  but  the 
miniature  carvings  in  the  northern  mounds.  Idolatry, 
in  its  most  striking,  and  also  in  some  of  its  most  bar- 
barous forms,  prevailed,  as  we  know,  among  the  nations 
of  the  Mexican  Valley,  at  the  period  of  the  Conquest. 
The  monuments  of  Yucatan  and  Central  America  also 
leave  no  room  to  doubt^that  the  worship  of  such  visible 
impersonations  of  Divine  attributes  as  their  sculptors 
could  devise,  formed  a  prominent  part  of  their  religious 
services.     Eeference  has  also  been  made  in  a  previous 


> 


48G  PREHISTORIC  MAN,  [Chap. 

ehaptor  to  radely  modelled  and  sculptured  idols^  accom- 
panying numerous  other  ancient  remains,  in  sepulchral 
depoHitH  in  Tennessee.  Others  have  also  been  found 
in  the  Huacals  of  Chiniqui,  on  the  Isthmus  of  Panama, 
along  with  numerous  gold  relics,  and  many  fine  speci- 
mens of  {)ottery.  But  it  is  a  singular  fact  that^  amid 
so  many  traces  of  imitative  sculpture,  no  relics  obviously 
designed  as  idols,  or  objects  of  worship,  have  been  dug 
up  in  the  mounds,  or  found  in  such  circumstances  as  to 
connect  them  with  the  religious  practices  of  the  Mound- 
Builders.  The  remarkable  characteristics  of  their  elabo- 
rately sculptured  pipes,  and  their  obvious  connexion 
with  services  accompanying  some  of  the  rites  of  sacrifice 
or  cremation,  tend,  however,  to  suggest  very  diflferent 
associations  with  the  pipe  of  those  ancient  centuries 
from  such  as  now  pertain  to  its  fsuniliar  descendant. 
Embodjring,  as  these  highly-finished  implements  did,  the 
result  of  so  much  labour,  as  well  as  of  artistic  skill: 
there  are  not  wanting  highly  suggestive  reasons  for  the 
opinion,  that  the  elaborate  employment  of  the  imitative 
arts  on  the  pipe-heads  found  deposited  in  the  mounds, 
may  indicate  their  having  played  an  important  part  in 
the  religious  solemnities  of  the  ancient  race. 

It  is  well  worthy  of  note,  in  connexion  with  this,  that 
various  of  the  earlier  writers  on  the  customs  of  the 
American  Indians,  refer  to  expiatory  sacrifices  performed 
by  them,  which  present  some  striking,  though  rude 
analogies,  to  the  ancient  oflFerings  by  fire  on  the  mound- 
altars.  Heame  describes  a  custom  among  the  Chippe- 
was,  after  the  shedding  of  blood,  of  throwing  all  their 
ornaments,  pipes,  etc.,  into  a  common  fire,  kindled  at 
some  distance  from  their  lodges  ;  and  Winslow  narrates 
of  the  Nanohiggansets  of  New  .England,  that  they  have 
a  great  house  ordinarily  resorted  to  by  a  few,  whom  he 
likens  to  priests  ;  but  he  adds,  "  Thither,  at  certain 
times,  resort  all  their  people,  and  oflFer  almost   all  the 


XV.]        THE  ARTISTIC  INSTINCT:  IMITATION  487 

riches  they  have  to  their  gods,  as  kettles,  skins,  hatchets, 
beads,  knives,  etc.,  all  which  are  cast  by  the  priests  into 
a  great  fire  that  they  make  in  the  midst  of  the  house."* 
The  analogies,  however,  which  appear  to  be  traceable  in 
such  practices  of  modem  tribes  remote  from  the  locali- 
ties of  the  old  Mound-Builders,  are  after  all  slight,  and 
may  be  accidental '  They  lack  the  most  important  ele- 
ments which  give  their  peculiar  character  to  the  ancient 
mound-altars,  with  their  specific  objects  on  each,  their 
renewed  foci,  and  the  final  inhumation  of  all  under  the 
elevated  heap.  It  may  be,  rather,  that  in  the  strange 
mode  of  indulging  in  the  favourite  narcotic  bestowed  by 
America  on  the  Old  World,  we  have  perpetuated  into  a 
common  practice  of  mere  sensual  indulgence,  what  was 
once  a  solemn  rite  associated  with  the  mysterious  worship 
of  the  sacred  enclosures  and  the  altar-mounds  of  the 
Mississippi  Valley.  Nor  is  such  an  idea  altogether 
devoid  of  illustration  among  the  practices  indulged  in 
by  the  native  Indian,  in  latitudes  which  we  may  asso- 
ciate with  greater  probability  with  the  nativity  of  the 
Mound-Builders  than  the  northern  region  of  the  Chip- 
pewas  or  that  of  the  New  England  Nanohiggansets. 
Oviedo,  who  is  our  earliest  authority,  at  least  for  any 
minute  account  of  tobacco-smoking  among  the  native 
tribes,  speaks  of  it  as  an  evil  custom  practised  among 
the  Indians  of  Hispaaiiola  to  produce  insensibility  ;  and 
greatly  prized  by  the  Carribees,  who  "  called  it  hohiha, 
and  imagined,  when  they  were  drunk  with  the  fumes  of 
it,  the  dreams  they  had  were  in  some  sort  inspired.^^^ 
Again,  Girolamo  Benzoni  narrates,  in  his  travels  in 
America,  recently  translated  from  the  edition  of  1753 
by  Eear- Admiral  Smjrth  :  "  In  La  Espaiiola,  and  the 
other  islands,  when  their  doctors  wanted  to  cure  a  sick 
man,  they  went  to  the  place  where  they  were  to  ad- 

^  Mass.  Hist.  CoU.,  Second  Series,  vol.  ix.  p.  94. 
2  Historia  General  de  las  IndiaSy  second  edit.  p.  74. 


i^m 


488  PREHISTORIC  MAN.  [Chap.  XV. 

minister  the  smoke,  and  when  he  was  thoroughly  in- 
toxicated by  it  the  cure  was  mostly  eflFected.  On 
returning  to  his  senses,  he  told  a  thousand  stories  of  his 
having  been  at  the  council  of  the  gods,  and  other  high 
visions.  * 

Many  legends  among  the  Indians  ascribe  a  divine 
origin  to  tobacco.  A  chief  of  the  Susquehanna  Indians 
told  of  two  hunters  of  the  tribe  sharing  the  venison  they 
had  cooked  with  a  lovely  squaw,  who  suddenly  appeared 
to  them ;  and  on  returning  to  the  scene  of  their  feast 
thirteen  moons  after,  they  found  the  tobacco-plant  grow- 
ing where  she  had  sat.  Harriot,  who  sailed  in  Sir 
Walter  Kaleigh's  expedition  of  1584,  tells  that  the 
Indians  of  Virginia  regarded  tobacco  as  a  means  of 
peculiar  enjoyment,  in  which  the  Great  Spirit  was  wojit 
freely  to  indulge,  and  that  he  bestowed  it  on  them  that 
they  might  share  in  his  delights.  Repeated  allusions 
also  refer  to  its  intoxicating  eflFects  as  an  influence  analo- 
gous to  that  which  produced  the  visions  and  inspirations 
of  the  fasting  dreams.  It  seems,  therefore,  by  no  means 
improbable,  that  the  original  practice  of  inhaling  the 
fumes  of  tobacco  was  associated  exclusively  with  super- 
stitious rites  and  divination ;  so  that  the  tobacco-plant 
may  have  played  a  part  in  the  worship  of  the  ancient 
Mound-Builders,  analogous  to  that  of  the  inspiring 
vapour  over  which  the  Delphic  tripod  was  placed,  when 
the  priestess  of  Apollo  prepared  to  give  utterance  to  the 
divine  oracles. 

*  History  of  the  New  World.     By  Girolamo  Benzoni.     Hakluyt  Society, 
1857. 


END  OF  VOLUME  FIRST. 


/^'
