The American Indian (Clark Wissler, 1922)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (archive.org/details/americanindiana02wissgoog). Wissler's introduction to the anthropology of the New World - culture areas, the vision quest, and the diffusion of ritual.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

J 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

J"*-" 

THE 

AMERICAN INDIAN 

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE ANTHROPOLOGY 

OF THE NEW WORLD 

BY 

CLARK ^ISSLER 

CUmATOR OP ANnOLOPOLOOY IN TBS AMERICAN MUSBUM 
OF NATURAL HISTORY, NBW YORK aTY 

SECOND EDITION 

NEW YORK 

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 

AMRRICAN BRANCH: 3S WEST 32nd STREET 
LONDON. TORONTO. MELBOURNE AND BOMBAY 

1922 

1 

, Copyright, 1917, 

« i By Douglas C. McMurtrie 

Copyright, 1922, 

By Oxford UnivtrsUy Press 

American Branch 

• 

• 

FSXITTtD IN THt UNITtD STATtS OP AM MICA 

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 

This second edition of The American Indian is not merely 
a new book in the mechanical sense, for its reprinting gave 
opportunity for such revisions and additions as the progress 
of anthropological research and explorations seemed to re- 
quire. Thus, the chapter on chronology has been lengthened, 
for it is in the determination of time sequences for culture 
data that the most distinctive progress is now being made. 
Everyone familiar with the situation must feel that we are 
upon the threshold of epoch-making discoveries in the New 
World, particularly in Mexico and other parts of the area 
of higher cultures, for with the stratigraphic and analytic 
techniques how available, man's antiquity here and his sub- 
sequent relative chronology cannot for long remain a mys- 
tery. So, the time index to New World aboriginal civiliza- 
tion may soon be revealed, and with this new insight will 
come ready answers to many of the perplexing questions 
raised in these pages. 

Again, additional space has been given tQjhfiJriteipteta- 
tionjpfjistribution in terms of time sequence, which, now 
that we are in a position tx) command the facts, promises to 
be the next new lead in anthropological research. While it 
may be true that geographical distribution alone is not an 
unfailing index of time relations, it often does furnish us 
the key to the situation. Anyone doubting the resources 
of this method should consult the recent works of Norden- 
skiold. 

Though interest in chronological problems has focused 
attention upon culture data, the biological problems peculiar 
to the Indian as a race have not been neglected. While no 
new leads have developed, some gains have been made, the 
advances resulting from the comparative study of the teeth 
and from the detailed geographical distribution of anatomi- 
cal characters. Discussions of these topics will be found 
under the appropriate heads. 

VI THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Aside from these major revisions, note has been taken 
of many special local advances in knowledge and of a few 
noteworthy comparative studies, all of which it is hoped 
will increase the value of this resume of the American 
Indian and his culture. 

Clark Wissler, 
JantMory, 1922. 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 

This book is offered as a general summary of anthropo- 
logical research in the New World. It is in the main a by- 
product of the author's activities as a museum curator in 
which capacity he has sought to objectify and systematize 
the essential facts relating to aboriginal America. Thus, he 
is first of all indebted to the American Museum of Natural 
History for the opportunities and resources necessary to 
the development of the subject and for permission to use 
the experience so gained in the composition of these pages. 

Of personal obligations there are many. All of my 
associates in the Museum have been most helpful : particu- 
larly, acknowledgment should be made to Doctor Robert H. 
Lowie who read the manuscript and offered many sugges- 
tions as to the scope and form of the work. In addition, 
recognition should be given Professor A. L. Kroeber, Uni- 
versity of California, for valuable criticisms; to Mr. Leslie 
Spier for data on the archaeology of eastern North America, 
and to Mr. Andrew T. Wylie, Teachers' College, for sug- 
gestions as to the form of presentation. Finally, it is a 
pleasure to acknowledge my obligation to Professor Henry 
Fairfield Osborn, President of the American Museum of 
Natural History, for inspiration and encouragement in the 
earlier stages of the work. 

The technical preparation of these pages was undertaken 
by my secretary, Miss Bella Weitzner, who compiled the 
tables of linguistic stocks, the bibliography, and the index, 
and whose long experience, coupltd with extensive anthro- 
pological knowledge, greatly facilitated all phases of the 
work. The specimens illustrated are from the Museum col- 
lections. The maps, diagrams, and many of the drawings 
were executed by Mr. S. Ichikawa, who also rendered indis- 
pensable assistance in the selection and arrangement of the 
illustrations. 

Clark Wissler. 
June, 19 1 7. Y^ 

CONTENTS 

Pace 

Preface to the Second Edition v 

Preface to the First Edition yii 

Introduction xvii 

CHAPTER I 

The Food Areas of the New World i 

Hunting Areas 3 

The Salmon Area 9 

The Area of Wild Seeds 11 

The Agricultural Areas 12 

General Discussion 19 

Distribution of Narcotics 25 

CHAPTER H 

Domestication of Animals and Methods of Transportation . . 28 

Canoes and Navigation 38 

CHAPTER HI 

The Textile Arts 42 

Spinning 44 

Netting 47 

Basketry 48 

Cloth 53 

Feather-work 59 

Clothing 60 

CHAPTER IV ^^ 

The Ceramic Arts 66 

Processes of Manufacture 68 

Pottery Forms 72 

Pottery Decoration 74 

CHAPTER V 

Decorative Designs 76 

Textile Designs 77 

Distribution of Designs 80 

Symbolism gj 

ix 

X THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

CHAPTER VI 

Pase 

Architecture 102 

CHAPTER VII ^ 

Work in Stone and Metals 119 

Types of Artifacts 122 

Mines and Quarries 128 

Metal Work 129 

CHAPTER Vni 

Special Inventions 132 

CHAPTER IX 

The Fine Arts 140 

Literature 143 

Music 152 

CHAPTER X 

Social Grouping 156 

The Local Group x6o 

Clans and Gentes 162 

Dual Divisions x66 

Relationship Systems 168 

Taboos and Social Privileges 169 

Age Grades and Societies 171 

Totemic Features 172 

CHAPTER XI 

Social Regulation 175 

Conceptions of Property and Inheritance 183 

Marriage Regulations 185 

Education and General Discipline 187 

CHAPTER XII 

Ritualistic Observances 191 

Supernatural Guardians and Totemism 197 

Shamanism 199 

The Personal Relation in Ritualism 204 

CHAPTER XIII 

Mythology 206 

Mythology and Religious Conceptions 211 

Unity of New World Culture 215 

CONTENTS xi 

CHAPTER XIV 

Page 

The Classification of Social Groups according to their Cultures. . 217 

The Historic Tribes 218 

North American Culture Areas 218 

1. The Plains Area 218 

2. Plateau Area 222 

3. California Area 225 

4. North Pacific Coast Area 227 

5. Eskimo Area 229 

6. Mackenzie Area 231 

7. Eastern Woodland Area 234 

8. Southeastern Area 237 

9. Southwestern Area 239 

10. The Nahua Area 242 

^ South American Culture Areas 245 

11. The Chibcha Area 245 

12. The Inca Area 247 

13. The Guanaco Area 249 

14. The Amazon Area 251 

15. The Antilles 257 

Culture Centers 257 

CHAPTER XV 

Archaeological Classification 261 

North America 261 

1. The North Atlantic Area 261 

2. South Atlantic Area 265 

3. The Iroquoian Area 266 

4. The Mississippi-Ohio Area 268 

5. The Great Lake Area 270 

6. The Plains 271 

7. The Pueblo Area 272 

8. California 274 

9. The Columbia Basin 276 

la North Pacific Coast Area 277 

11. The Arctic Area 277 

12. The Canadian Area 277 

13. Northern Mexico 277 

14. Central Mexico 278 

15. State of Oaxaca 278 

16. Yucatan . 278 

17. Panama 279 

18. The Antilles 279 

• South America 281 

19. Colombia .•••... 281 

xii THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Pace 

20. Ecuador 282 

21. Peru 283 

22. Chile 283 

23. The Atlantic Highlands 284 

24. Patagonia 285 

CHAPTER XVI 

Chronology of Cultures 287 

Chronologies determined by Stratification 291 

Inapplicability of Old World Chronology 294 

Inferential Chronologies 296 

Summary 300 

CHAPTER XVH 

Linguistic Gassification 304 

Comparative Phonetics 311 

Comparative Morphology 315 

Distribution of Stocks . . . 319 

CHAPTER XVm 

Somatic Classification 324 

Breadth of Face 326 

Flattening of the Femur 327 

The Teeth 327 

Head Form 329 

Orbits and Nasal Skeleton 336 

Bodily Proportions 338 

Summary of Somatic Characters 338 

Relations to Mankind in General 340 

Grouping by Somatic Characters 350 

Chronological Types 354 

CHAPTER XIX 

Correlation of Classifications 359 

Linguistics and Culture 364 

Somatic Correlations 366 

General Relations of Culture, Linguistics, and Somatology 366 

The Migration Factor 367 

The Influence of Environment 370 

CHAPTER XX 

Theories of Culture Origm 375 

Culture Trait Association 384 

The Historical Conception of Culture 386 

CONTENTS xm 

CHAPTER XXI 

Pace 

New World Origins 389 

APPENDIX 

Linguistic Tables and Bibliography 401 

Linguistic Stocks of the United States and Canada . . . 403 

Linguistic Stocks of Mexico and Central America . . . 412 

Linguistic Stocks of South America 415 

Bibliography 423 

Index 451 

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

Dog Dancer of the Plains Frontispiece 

1. Food Areas of the New World 2 

2. The Distribution of the Caribou and the Musk-Ox 4 

3. The Distribution of Maize and Manioc 20 

4. Pueblo Indian Planting Maize 22 

5. Cultivating Maize and Squashes 22 

6. Distribution of Coca and Tobacco 26 

7. Distribution of Animal Transport 29 

8. Eskimo Dog Sledge 33 

9. Indians of the Bison Area on the March 33 

10. Various Methods of Using the Tumpline .... 37 

11. Types of Canoes 39 

12. Ancient Mexican and Egyptian Spinners .... 46 

13. Basketry Weaves 49 

14. Distribution of Types of Basketry 51 

15. Ojibway Weaving Frame 54 

16. A Navajo Weaver 54 

17. Distribution of Weaving 56 

18. Cape of Sagebrush Bark 58 

19. Types of Costume and their Distribution 61 

20. Forms of Footwear 63 

21. A Pueblo Indian Potter 67 

22. Distribution of Pottery 67 

23. Lower Mississippi Pottery 69 

24. South Atlantic Pottery 70 

25. North Atlantic Pottery 70 

26. Pottery from Southwestern United States .... 71 

27. Mexican Pottery 72 

28. Central American Pottery 72 

29. Peruvian Pottery 73 

30. Pottery from Eastern South America 74 

31. Types of Textile Design y8 

xiv THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Pate 

32. Types of Prehistoric Peruvian Textile Designs ... 79 

33. Decorative Design Areas 81 

34. Beaded and Painted Designs S|3 

35. The Decorative Art of the Plains Indians 85 

36. Design Elements 85 

Z7. Decorations on Birchbark 88 

38. Prehistoric Textile Designs, Maya gi 

39. Mexican Textile Designs 92 

40. A Series of Peruvian Designs .94 

41. A Series of Designs and their Names 98 

42. True Symbols IGO 

43. Cross-Section of the Temple of the Cross .... 103 

44. Groundplan of the House of the Nuns 104 

45. Elevations and Groundplans, Yucatan 105 

46. Section of the Hall of the Six Columns, Mexico . . . 107 

47. Pebbles Showing the Process of Abrading . . . .120 

48. Pieces of Worked Nephrite 121 

49. Common Types of Arrow-Head 123 

50. Knives of Copper from the Eskimo and Inca . . .126 

51. Methods of Drilling 133 

52. Wooden Slat Armor 137 

53. Two Figures from Palenque 141 

54. Statues of the Chacmool Type 142 

55. A Sculptured Turtle at Quirigua 143 

56. Distribution of Sculpture 145 

57. Distribution of Clans and Gentes 164 

58. Culture Areas 219 

59. The Plains Indian Culture Area 221 

60. Distribution of Forests in South America .... 253 

61. Archaeological Areas 262 

62. Types of Stone Implements, North Atlantic Area . . 263 

63. Iroquois Archaeological Types 267 

64. Ancient Maya Cities 280 

65. Linguistic Stocks in the United States and Canada . . 306 

66. Linguistic Stocks in Mexico and Central America . . . 308 

67. Linguistic Stocks in South America 312 

68. Consolidation of California Stocks 318 

69. North American Types 325 

70. Brazilian Types 325 

71. Patagonian Types 325 

72. The Cephalic Index 330 

73. Diagrammatic Representation of Average Bodily Forms . 340 

74. Bodily Forms from Various Races 341 

75. Lines of Dispersion for the Primates 345 

76. Living and Extinct Groups of Primates 345 

CONTENTS XV 

Page 

77. Dispersion of Mankind 348 

78. Somatic Areas 355 

79. Superposition of Culture Areas 363 

8a Distribution of Men's Societies among the Plains Indians . 383 

81. North American Indian Tribes 474 

82. South American Indian Tribes 474 

INTRODUCTION 

The term anthropology now stands for the specific sci- 
ence of man. Ethnology, archaeology, and somatology are 
merely divisions, or convenient groups of problems within 
the scope of this science. The ideal of anthropology is to 
coordinate all the data concerning man's culture, language 
and anatomy, past and present, with a view to solving the 
problems of his origin and the interpretation of his culture. 
To this end, it must employ the methods of history, zoology, 
psychology, geology, and the exact sciences, as the case 
may require. Its pursuit will prove no light task, but to 
him who has a grasp of some of these subjects and a work- 
ing insight into the others, anthropology offers problems of 
the most enticing sort. Naturally, but few of us can hope 
to grapple first-hand with these great inquiries, but the an- 
thropology of today has moved forward so far that no man 
who wishes to be considered well educated can afford to 
ignore its fundamentals any more than he can those of 
zoology or sociology. 

This book, however, is not designed to serve as an intro- 
duction to anthropology in general. On the other hand, it 
deals with one of the two grand world divisions under which 
the subject matter of anthropology is comprehended, for as 
we shall see in the course of this discussion, the native cul- 
ture of the American Indian stands out in sharp contrast to 
the culture of the Old World. This contrast is due to fun- 
damental differences in the specific cultures of the two hemi- 
spheres, which differences naturally tend to form two groups 
of problems. Yet, the problems that arise in the anthropol- 
ogy of the New World have a great deal in common with 
those pertaining to the Old. The functions of culture seem 

xviii THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

to be the same in each; hence, a review of the New World, 
such as we are now to take up, will at the same time intro- 
duce us to the methods and viewpoints of anthropology in 
general. 

Yet, aside from these academic considerations, the Amer- 
ican Indian makes an appeal to popular interest. The name 
occupies so large a place in our own culture that it may be 
doubted if there is anywhere in all the land a normal indi- 
vidual who has not acquired some interest in the Indian's 
history. On every hand we hear: How came the Indian 
here? Who were his ancestors? What knowledge and 
habits did he bring with him? What has he accomplished 
of his own initiative and how did he achieve it? And it is 
right and proper that every one of us should be interested 
in these questions, because we have not only displaced the 
Indian in this land but we have absorbed a great deal of his 
culture. For instance, what a void we should create if, by 
some magical power, we could strike from our history, geog- 
raphy and literature all that pertains to his race! Again, 
what havoc would be wrought by his withdrawal from 
painting, sculpture, and decorative art! But these losses, 
incalculably great as they are, would be lost in the over- 
whelming economic vacuity that would result from the ob- 
literation of maize, cacao, manioc, the potato, the squash, 
coca, quinine, tobacco and all the other numerous and name- 
less contributions the Indian has made to our culture. From 
that eventful day in 1492 when Columbus first laid eyes 
upon the Indian, down to this very hour, he has been the 
most studied of peoples. No other race of the world can so 
stir the imagination of the European. It is thus plain that 
we have before us one of our greatest cultural assets, the 
source of the most original traits of our present-day culture 
and a heritage upon which we may realize more and more. 
It behooves us. therefore, to systematize and extend our 
knowledge of this vanishing race whose life has been tram- 

INTRODUCTIOM xix 

pled under foot in uie ruthless march of culture's evolu- 
tion, but whose own cultural achievements were too virile 
and too finely adjusted to local geographical conditions to 
be obliterated. 

Further, the chief concern of scientific anthropology is to 
solve the very questions of origin that actuate the popular 
mind. As applied to the New World, the sole objective of 
anthropology is to discover the origin and conditions which 
have produced the Indian and his culture. Such questions 
of origin look simple and innocent enough but, my dear 
Reader, here are problems whose final solution shall surely 
put the intellect of man and his scientific methods to a su- 
preme test. Positive and complete answers can not now be 
given to any of these questions, yet anthropology has some- 
thing definite to offer on every point, though so far, this in- 
formation lies hidden from the uninitiated reader in the ac- 
cumulated mass of published data and special literature for 
the reason that no formal attempt has as yet been made to 
summarize or to present a general review of New World an- 
thropology as a whole. It is to make up in some measure 
for this deficiency that the following handbook of the sub- 
ject is projected. 

At the outset, we shall introduce the reader to what ap- 
pear to be the most important facts in the culture of the 
native peoples. Such facts are conveniently comprehended 
under three main headings: Material Traits of Culture 
(Chapters I to VIII), the Fine Arts (Chapter IX), and 
Social Traits (Chapters X to XIII). The thirteen chapters 
devoted to these topics are offered as a review of the data 
necessary to a more searching and constructive view of our 
subject. Turning from this descriptive task, we shall first 
consider the classifications under which all these data may 
be assembled. The historical development of anthropology 
as a whole, commits us to a historical and geographical point 
of view, consequently the basic principle of classification in 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

every case will be geographical distribution. Hence, we 
take up in turn the problems of the grouping of the living 
tribes according to culture; the evidences for the distribu- 
tion of the extinct tribes, if such there be; the distribution 
of languages ; and finally, the problem of somatic types. The 
completion of this task should leave us with a systematic 
view of the New World as a whole. 

We may, then, profitably consider such synthetic prob- 
lems as suggest themselves. Among these, by far the most 
popular, are those dealing with the origins of New World 
peoples and their culture, their relation to the races of the 
Old World, and the antiquity of their arrival in the New. 
These subjects have been^many times discussed, but they 
are here considered as interpretations based upon empirical 
classifications of scientific data. 

As we proceed, the reader will become conscious of a cer- 
tain asymmetry in the descriptive chapters, but this is un- 
avoidable, for it so happens that we have much more com- 
plete data for the United States and Canada than for other 
parts of the New World. For South America, in particu- 
lar, the data are quite unsatisfactory. Consequently, most 
of the illustrative examples and the inductive interpretations 
in this book are drawn from the best known parts of North 
America. On the other hand, the data at large are suffi- 
cient to reveal the main characteristics of the whole New 
World and to make clear the fundamental unity that exists 
throughout. In addition, the limitations of space have ne- 
cessitated passing over many topics in silence. For example, 
we have omitted all discussions of warfare and fighting cus- 
toms, chiefly because these are the most familiar to general 
readers. Moreover, these subjects are rather fully treated 
in historical books and tales of adventure, but the reader 
who wishes to go deeper into the problem may, with profit, 
consult the writings of Bandelier and Friederici. Another 
very important point that might be considered is the density 

INTRODUCTION 

of native populations in pre-Columbian times, a subject we 
should have gladly made room for if there were available 
reliable estimates. Recently this problem has been taken up 
by Mr. James Mooney, who is now preparing a publication 
on the subject. However, when we take into account the 
modes of life followed in the different areas, it appears a 
fair assumption that in 1492 the native population was about 
at its maximum; that is, the hunting areas contained as 
many people as the fauna would support and the agricul- 
tural areas about all that could be provided for under the 
existing systems. Yet, this may prove an error when more 
data are available. Again, the choice of topics has been 
governed by the importance of the problems involved. Thus 
so far, no very important problems have been found in war 
customs, population, etc., but in forms of social organization, 
certain industries, art, etc., we do find problems that bear 
upon the very fundamentals of anthropology. In the prep- 
aration of this volume our ideal has been to treat these fun- 
damental problems rather than to present a digest of all pos- 
sible phases of New World native life. 

CHAPTER I 
THE FOOD AREAS OF THE NEW WORLD 

The most tangible and objective of human traits are 
Ihose having to do with food. It is obvious that the funda- 
mental necessity for man's existence is a sufficient quantity 
of some kind of edible organic substance. Moreover, a 
retrospect of the world, as we find it today, suggests that 
one of the eternal problems confronting the several groups 
of mankind has been the discovery of practical methods for 
adapting living forms to dietary requirements. For this 
reason, if for no other, it seems advisable to begin our study 
of man in the New World with a general discussion of food 
complexes. 

The almost universal tendency among the several groups 
of mankind is to specialize in some one kind of food which 
thereby becomes the staple, or main support, to be supple- 
mented by secondary foods when opportunity permits. 
Even our own very complex culture has not fully overcome 
this disposition, as shown in our great dependence upon 
bread and beef. Another characteristic is that this special- 
ization is uniformly distributed over a considerable area. 
Because of these two conditions our task of classification is 
far less difficult than if it were otherwise. 

Guided by these considerations the New World may be 
comprehended under eight large food areas, the general 
boundaries of which are indicated on the map. Thus, be- 
ginning with North America, we have in the north a large 
extent of territory presenting Arctic and sub-Arctic charac- 
teristics. This region is the natural range of the caribou, 
or American reindeer, whose flesh was the main support of 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

WILD SEEDS 

Pig, 2, Food Areas of tht Ntw World 

HUNTING AREAS 3 

the aboriginal populations. On the Pacific slope, centering ^ 
in the drainage of the Columbia River, we have the salmon 
area. To the south, in California and a portion of the in- fv 
terior, is the area of wild nuts and seeds. In the heart of X 
the continent is the bison area. Eastern United States is>t 
embraced in the eastern maize area. Beginning at the Col- ^ 
orado River and extending down through the Isthmus and 
the Andean regions to the lower part of Chile, is the area 
of intensive agriculture in which maize is also the leading 
food. The interior of the southern continent, centering ^ 
around the Amazon drainage, is, in the main, a dense trop- 
ical forest about whose native inhabitants we have the least 
knowledge of any. In fact, we cannot certainly character- 
ize the food of the whole area, but inferring the whole from 
the known parts, we should say that small game and culti- > 
vated manioc are the important foods. Finally, the lower 
part of the continent has certain similarities to the North 
American caribou area, the chief food animal being the V 
guanaco. 

It will be observed that these eight areas can be grouped * 
three of them being the homes of hunting peoples, three of 
agriculturists, one of fishers, and one of gatherers of wild 
seeds. 

HUNTING ARJE;AS 

^Hthe caribou area live two groups of tribes pfenerally 
recognized as having little in common, the Eskimo and the 
Canadian Indians. As we shall see later, this view as to 
their diversity is in a largfe measure justifiable, but with 
respect to food they have close similarities. It is customary 
to characterize the Eskimo as a people living upon sea mam- 
mals, particularly the seal : but we must not overlook the 
fact that their winter clothing is of caribou skin and that 
the flesh of that animal is an important part of their diet!^ 
However, the severe winters of their extreme northern 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

HUNTING AREAS 5 

range drive the caribou southward and leave the seal the 
only recourse during the period of prolonged darkness. Yet 
whenever the caribou are in reach the Eskimo places his 
chief dependence upon them. Thus, while our classification 
should not be permitted to obscure the large part that sea 
mammals play in the domestic economy of the Eskimo, the 
caribou is absolutely indispensable to his existence, not so 
much for food as for winter clothing. Hence, we see that 
Eskimo culture must be considered as a modified form of 
canEbu culture. 

TfielhcQans of this area, chiefly the Dene and Northern 
Algonquin tribes, are an inland people occupying the sub- 
Arctic tundra and the sparse forest belt below it, which 
gradually shades off into the denser forests of southern Can- 
ada. Among these tribes we find the typical caribou culture. 
Vivid pictures of the prehistoric caribou hunting life have 
been penned by Hearne * and its surviving form by Warbur- 
ton Pike. * In southern Canada the moose and other deer 
were also available and in the far north the musk-ox ; wood 
bison were also found in a few localities, and hares and 
other small animals were eaten when needed. Though not 
reaching the seacoast at any place, these inland tribes had 
within their range lakes and rivers well stocked with fish, 
and in season frequented by water fowl. As with the Es- 
kimo, these sources of supply were drawn upon in season. 
Yet all these foods were merely supplementary, for the 
people pinned their faith to the caribou and developed their 
whole feeding and clothing complex around this animal. 
Consequently the failure of the caribou in any locality for 
even one season alone would spell disaster. 

The methods of hunting are fully described in the descrip- 
tive literature of the several tribes, but, as always, such 
methods are largely dictated by the habits of the animals 
themselves. Among both the Eskimo and the Indians, the 
method of killing caribou is to drive or stampede them into 

6 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

artificial or natural lanes or defiles where the hunters are 
concealed. A variant of this is to run them into deep water, 
where they are at the mercy of swift canoe men. Snaring 
is also highly developed, even the largest game being caught 
in this way. Fishing of whatever kind is with three forms 
of appliances: the harpoon, the hook and line, and the net 
These methods were both known to the Eskimo and to the 
Indian, though not used by both to the same relative degrees. 

The cache is an important invention of this area and has 
found its way into our own culture. The name is usually 
applied to an elevated or a subterranean enclosure for stor- 
ing dried or frozen meat. The caribou, living in great herds, 
must move forward as they graze over the almost barren 
tundra and the hunters must follow with equal speed. So 
the cache method was devised to solve the problem. The 
kill of the day is dressed as quickly as possible and then 
cached, after which the pursuit is again taken up. Thus, 
each family group will have a number of stores in various 
accessible places upon which they may draw in case of need. 

The bison area is contiguous to the caribou area, but is of 
far less extent. It is also entirely inland, and like the upper 
portion of the caribou area, is comparatively treeless, ex- 
cept along the water courses and upon the higher ridges. 
The tribes formerly residing here are known to us as Buf- 
falo Indians, and no characterization could be more exact. 
Along the foothills of the mountains, elk were formerly 
abundant and also mountain sheep, and out on the plain an- 
telope were to be met, but these were obscured by the seeth- 
ing masses of bison, or buffalo encountered everywhere, 
summer or winter. • Edible fish were not abundant, and 
some of the tribes observed a taboo against them as well as 
all water animals. 

The methods of hunting bison bear certain analogies to 
those employed in the caribou area. Before horses were in- 
troduced, small herds were enticed or stampeded into en- 

HUNTING AREAS 7 

closures where they were shot down at will ; at other times 
they were rounded up by systematic grass firing and while 
in compact formation attacked at close range by foot men.' 
In favorable times, the surplus meat was dried and packed 
in bags. 

This is a convenient place to note the manufacture of 
pemmican, a process which appears in some parts of the 
caribou area, but which seems to be more characteristic of 
this area. To make pemmican, the dried meat of the buf- 
falo was pounded fine with stone hammers and packed in 
bags which were then sealed with melted fat. A special 
variety of pemmican was prepared by pulverizing wild cher- 
ries, pits and all, and mixing with the pounded meat. This 
is known in the literature as berry pemmican. There was 
also a variety in eastern Canada and New England made 
of deer and moose meat. When properly protected, pem- 
mican will keep for many months and being compact and 
easily transported forms an exceedingly valuable food. 
From the very first it was adopted by Canadian and Arctic 
explorers among whom it is still the chief dependence. 

In pemmican we have our first good example of the many 
ingenious processes by which the various groups of man- 
kind have converted raw foods into more serviceable and 
conservable forms. In all cases, the chief consideration 
seems to have been its preservation and availability for 
transport. 

The next great hunting area is in South America. From 
the interior of Argentine to the Horn we have in the main 
an open country, suggesting the central portion of the United 
States. There are few trees and in some parts, as the cele- 
brated Pampas, there are rich, grassy plains. At the time 
of discovery (1492), the fauna here was not so rich as that 
of the northern continent. Yet the guanaco was abundant. 
This is considered to be the wild llama, a ruminant having 
close similarities to the camels of the Old World, but much 

8 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

smaller. Another animal of economic importance was the 
rhea, or American ostrich. The early accounts suggest that 
the original human inhabitants of this area were a nomadic 
hunting people, primarily dependent upon the guanaco, 
which they pursued with the tola and the bow. For this 
reason we shall speak of the region as the guanaco area. 
In the extreme southern part of the area, or lower Pata- 
gonia, we find a condition somewhat like that of the Es- 
kimo, the tribes tending to live more on fish and seals, until 
we reach the Fuegians, who were almost entirely dependent 
upon marine fauna. 

Spanish colonization soon made great changes in the gua- 
naco area proper by the introduction of horses and cattle.* 
The latter soon ran wild in great herds like the buffalo of 
the northern continent, and the former not only ran wild, 
but were domesticated by the natives. Dobrizhoffer* has 
given us most readable accounts of how completely these 
natives assimilated horse culture. Some of the Patagonians 
are still famous for their horsemanship. 

Though it is true that in these three great hunting areas 
the main food was flesh, many vegetable products were used. 
Even in the Arctic the Eskimo gather berries and edible 
roots in summer. Throughout flie caribou area proper, the 
berry crop is considerable, and judging from Mor ice's ■ ac- 
count of the Carrier some tribes dried and pressed them 
into cakes for storage. Edible roots also played an im- 
portant part. As we come southward into the bison area, 
the flora grows somewhat richer in wild fruits, such as the 
cherry, plum, strawberry, etc., while in the more arid por- 
tions, the prickly pear is abundant. Of roots there were sev- 
eral species, but particularly the prairie turnip (tipsina, in 
Dakota). Even in the guanaco area we find the Aucaria 
imbricafa, a kind of pine tree growing along the eastern 
border of the Andes, bearing abundant nuts, not unlike 

* Col. Church* lUtet that horses were purposely turned into the Pampu in 1535. 

SALMON AREA 9 

chestnuts, which are eaten raw, boiled, or roasted. Here 
also the algarroba, or mesquite tree, abounds and from its 
seeds a food is prepared. In the treeless parts of Patagonia 
are the prickly pear and a few other scant food plants, while 
the pampas proper is devoid of all except a few edible 
grasses. On the other hand, the territory of the Fuegians 
is fairly well provided with berries which they use, but also 
produces wild celery and scurvy-grass, of which they make 
no use. 

THE SALMON AREA 

All the Streams between San Francisco Bay, California, 
and Bering Straits, Alaska, draining into the Pacific, are 
visited by salmon. These ascend from the sea en masse to 
spawn, constituting a "run," in local speech. As they reach 
the very headwaters, they are available to all the tribes of 
this drainage, even those far inland. The run for each 
species of salmon occurs but once a year and this developed 
periodic seasonal practices not unlike those of agricultural 
peoples. As the time for the run approaches, the tribes 
gather upon the banks of the streams, equipped with fishing 
appliances, dip nets, harpoons, and weirs, as the local con- 
ditions may require. Then when the salmon pass, they are 
taken out in great numbers, to be dried and smoked. In 
the interior of the Columbia Basin, the dried fish are after- 
wards pounded fine in mortars, thus being reduced to a 
state not unlike pemmican. This pulverized food is care- 
fully stored in baskets as the chief reserve food supply of 
the year. The tribes on the coast and outlying islands en- 
gage in sea fishing all the year and are almost entirely de- 
pendent upon the marine fauna, but those of the interior 
hunt deer and other game to complete their diet. 

Of vegetable foods there are several varieties. Inland, 
several species of roots are gathered, dried and pounded fine 
in the same manner as dried fish. The chief root is camas 

lo THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

but there are several other species in general use. In their 
proper season, berries are also very numerous in certain 
localities. 

One striking peculiarity of these inland people is the ex- 
tent to which they pounded or pulverized dried flesh and 
vegetables quite like agricultural peoples treat forms of 
grain. The trait seems to be almost a conventionality and 
leads one to suspect that the idea was borrowed from their 
southern neighbors who, as we shall see, were in contact 
with grain grinders. The tribes of the coast, particularly 
the indented island-studded part north of Puget Sound, did 
not have this pi^lverizing habit, nor did they make very ex- 
tensive use of toots. Dried fish and berries were their 
staples. Where available, a kind of clover was eaten green 
and the inner barlf of the hemlock worked up into a kind^ 
of bread-like food. 

While in this area the tribes of the coast maintained fairly 
permanent villages; those of the interior were rather no- 
madic, or more correctly, moved in an annual cycle, accord- 
ing to their food habits. Thus at the salmon run each group 
took its accustomed/ place on a river bank; then as berries 
ripened, they shifted to the localities where they were abun- 
dant; later they moved again for the gathering of roots; 
again for hunting deer, and so on in one ceaseless round. 
To a less extent this seasonal shifting prevailed among the 
coast tribes, for by the use of canoes they could readily 
reach the places sought and return again to their villages. 

This correlation between the use of wild foods and in- 
stability of residence is perhaps more striking in this area 
than in the others but, nevertheless, holds for all. The Es- 
kimo regularly shifted from sea to inland and back again 
as winter set in, likewise, the caribou, bison, and guanaco 
hunters, each in their respective habitats, shifted according 
to seasonal requirements. The more extended and definite 
annual cycle of the salmon area seems to be due to the fact 

ACORN AREA ii 

that each of their staple foods was available for but single 
short periods of the year, not unlike so many successive har- 
vests of an agricultural people whose fields were far apart 

THE AREA OF WILD SEEDS 

The area of wild seeds is often spoken of as the **acom • \ 

area," and will frequently be so designated in this work. 
However, it should be borne in mind that in southern Cali- • 
fomia acorns are found only on the uplands and mountains ■ 
and that in the surrounding parts and eastward over the - 
Great Basin wild seeds take their place. Yet, since the most 
typical culture is found in central and southern California, 
we may consider the acorn the most characteristic food. 

At the proper time acorns are stored in large basketry 
bins to protect them against thieving rodents. The raw 
acorns are not palatable, for they contain a large amount of 
tannic acid ; however, this objection is eliminated by pound- 
ing the kernels into flour and then leeching with hot water. 
Good descriptions of this ingenious process may be read in 
the publications of the University of California. From this 
substance, a kind of bread or cake is made, which proves to 
be a very satisfactory food, but even here this is supple- 
mented by foods from several varieties of wild seeds, roots, 
herbs, and grasses/ The tribes on the eastern side of the 
mountains out on the arid plateaus are forced to get along 
without the acorn and in consequence eke out their living 
from but a scant flora. One peculiarity of the area is the . 
rarity of berries and fruits, which is in contrast to the in- 
terior of the salmon area. 

The term "digger," generally applied to the natives of 
this area, was suggested by their persistent gathering of 
roots and plants. It was also an expression of contempt 
due to the contrast between the scanty diet of these Indians 
and those of the bison area with whom travelers were more 
familiar. Likewise, the fauna was not particularly favor- 

12 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

able. Deer were to be found in the mountains, but rarely 
in large numbers, and small game animals were not nu- 
merous. In the eastern part, the rabbit was an important 
item, and as noted above, salmon were caught wherever 
they made "runs," and other fish were used when available. 
Likewise, the coast people depended to some extent upon the 
marine fauna. Thus, notwithstanding the popular idea of 
modem California as an ideal habitat for us modem Amer- 
icans, it must be regarded as rather unfavorable to the de- 
velopment of primitive tribes, for while enough food could 
be found, the daily routine of gathering it in small bits 
was time-consuming in the extreme. Moreover, in parts of --^ 
Nevada, Utah, and Idaho the margin of even this sort of - 
food was so narrow that many species of insects were eaten. ^ 

THE AGRICULTURAL AREAS 

There are just two cultivated native food plants, maize 
and manioc (cassava), that rise to the level of chief staples. 
Both take the highest rank in excellence among the world's 
foods, and after the epoch-making discovery of Columbus 
were quickly spread to other parts of the world.* The 
uniqueness of these plants and the sharp contrast they make 
when compared with the cultivated staples of the Old World, 
is the strongest possible argument for the independent de- 
velopment of American culture. 

In the first place, we have a distinct agricultural area in 
the eastern half of the United States, including a very small 
section of Canada. The chief crop was maize, on which 
account we speak of this division as the eastern maize area. 
Although its contact with the great agricultural area of 
Mexico and the south is slightly broken in Texas, we have 
no reason to doubt a historical connection between the two 
areas, and consequently we may consider them as parts of 
the same whole. The remaining inland botmdaries of this 

AGRICULTURAL AREAS 13 

eastern maize area mark the approximate climatic limits to 
its growth. These limits also define the distribution of agri- 
culture, from which we have reason to infer that the intro- 
duction of that art did not precede the introduction of maize 
culture. However, this is a problem to be discussed later. 
We see, then, that the Indian tribes had extended agricul- 
ture in the east to its physical limits. The stretch of country 
from Louisiana to Maine presents considerable climatic va- 
riety which is reflected in the aboriginal crop lists, for 
though maize was grown throughout, it seems to have been 
more exclusively toward the north. Roughly considered, 
in the northern half of the area, the crops were squash, 
beans, and maize, all planted in the same field, while in the 
southern half, maize was supplemented by a kind of millet, 
and squashes gave way to melons, sweet potatoes, and 
gourds. 

Tobacco, though not strictly a food, may be noted here. 
It was extensively grown in the south, and its cultivation 
carried as far north as the climate permitted. 

Wild plants were also abundant and many species were 
used. Parker's • exhaustive study of Iroquois foods shows 
how completely that people drew upon the contiguous flora. 
From the data at hand, we have reason to believe that in 
the south a still greater number of species were eaten. In 
the far north wild rice became almost a staple; but while, 
as Jenks *® has shown in his laudable investigation of this 
food, it was sometimes planted by the natives, it was not 
truly domesticated as was rice in the Old World. 

Of manufactured foods, other than those made of maize, 
maple sugar takes first place. Practically every essential 
detail of the process now in use was developed by the In- 
dians of this area before 1492. The sugar maple being a 
northern tree, the trait is almost peculiar to the northern 
lialf of the area, though the box elder and a few other trees 
have, in later times at least, permitted a makeshift ex ten- 

14 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

sion of the art. That any kind of sugar was made in the 
south is doubtful. 

Another food deserving mention is oil derived from hick- 
ory and walnuts. This oil was highly characteristic of the 
south and added a valuable element to the otherwise starchy 
diet. In early days the natives did a good business in sup- 
plying this oil to the colonists. In some parts of the Atlan- 
tic coast plain tuckahoe (a fungus) bread was made, and 
in the south, persimmon bread. 

Of foods and dishes made with maize there is a long list, 
which is in the main the same as we ourselves use. Two 
noteworthy studies of this aspect of maize culture by Carr " 
and Parker " show how completely the white colonists ab- 
sorbed the maize complex of the Indians. 

One important characteristic of agricuhure in this area 
is that it was woman's work, the man being a hunter. This 
sexual division of labor tended to give a well-balanced diet, 
but was not constant throughout, for in the far north where 
agriculture dwindled out into the caribou area, vegetable 
foods were decidedly in the minority, while in the extreme 
south, where agriculture was rather intense and the flora 
rich, the fruits of the chase were in the minority. The chief 
game was the deer. The bison of the prairies found its 
way as far east as the Alleghanies, but except in the open 
country was not an important item. The wild turkey and 
various small game were also abundant. Fish were taken 
where found by the usual methods, but in the south the use 
of poisons was general. 

Next we turn to the great area of intensive agriculture, 
the only one in the New World, where work in the fields is 
not regarded as woman's work exclusively, and in which 
hunting ceases to be an occupation. As may be anticipated, 
it IS also the home of the most advanced Indian cultures. 
We see from the map that it extends to about 35** on either 
side of the equator and is thus almost entirely within the 

AGRICULTURAL AREAS 15 

PLANTS CULTIVATED BY THE NATIVES OF THE 
NEW WORLD BEFORE 1 4^2 

The following list enumerates the most important plants 
originally cultivated by the several Indian tribes before the 
discovery of the New World in 1492. 

Namt Area of Cultivation 

Agavet or mloe {Agavt americana Linn.) Mexico to Chile 

Alligator pear {Persea gratUsima Geartn. f.) Central America and West Indies 

Arrowroot iMaranta arundinacea Linn.) Tropical America 

Barnyard grass iEchinochloa crusgaUi (L.) 

Bcauv.) Mexico and southern United States 
Bean, kidney iPhaseoitu vulgaris Linn.) Distribution same as maize 
Bean, Lima {Phaseoius lunatus L., var. macro- 
carpus Benth.) Brazil and Peru 
Cacao iTIuobroma cacao Linn.) Tropical America 
Capaicnm or Chili pepper iCapticum annuum 

Linn, and Capsicum frutescens Linn.) Tropical America 

Caabcw mat iAnacardium occidentale Linn.) Tropical America 

Coca, or cocaine {Erythroxylum coca Lamarck) Peru and Bolivia 
Com (See maize) 

Cottoo iCossypium barhadense Linn.) Tropical America 

Cherimoya (Anona Cherimolia Miller) Peru and Brazil 

Gourd (Cucurbiia pepo var. oviftfta Linn.) Distribution same as maize 

Guava (Psidium guajava Linn.) Tropical America 

Jerusalem artichoke (Heiianthus tuberosus Linn.) Mississippi Valley 

Madia (Madia sativa Molina) Chile 

Maize (Zea mays Linn.) See map (Fig. 3) 

Manioc (Manihot utilissima Pohl.) See map (Fig. 3) 

Mat< or Paraguay tea ilUx paraguarisnsis St Paraguay and western Brazil 

Hil. and lUx eonocarpa Reiss.) Brazil 

Papaw {Carica papaya Linn.) West Indies and Central America 

Peanut (Arachis hypogeea Linn.) Peru and Brazil 

Pineapple (Ananas satitms Schult. f.) Mexico and Central America 

Potato (Soianum tuberosum Linn.) Chile and Peru 
Prickly pear or Indian fig (Opuntia ficus-indica 

Mill.) Mexico 

Pumpkin (Cucurbita Pepo Linn.) Temperate North America 

Oca (Oralis tuberosa Molina) Chile and Bolivia 

(Oralis crenata Jacq.) Chile and Bolivia 

Quinine (Cinchona calisaya Wcdd.) Bolivia and Peru 

(Cinchona ofReinalis Linn.), and others Bolivia and Peru 

Qutnoa (Chenopodium quinoa Willd.) Colombia and Peru 

Squash (Cucurbiia marima Duchesne) Tropical America 

Star apple (Chrysophyllum cainito Linn.) West Indies and Panama 

Sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas Poir.) Temperate America 
Tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum Linn.) and other 

species See map (Fig. 6) 

Tomato (Lyeoptrsicum esculentum Mill.) Peru 

i6 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

torrid zone. On the other hand, all of this surface, except 
a narrow coast belt and a few intervening valleys, is the 
most elevated land in the New World. It is upon these high- 
lands exclusively that maize was grown. Furthermore, 
there is a general tendency to aridity throughout, which, 
combined with the elevation, gives a very favorable climate. 
It is just the region where the most intensive cultures would 
be anticipated. As we proceed with the later sections of 
this book, the reader may be appalled at the complexity and 
variety of peoples in this area ; hence it is fortunate that at 
the outset we aire able to see one element of unity in the 
whole. i 

Beginning with the north, we have the pueblo-dwelling 
peoples of soutfhwestern United States and northern Mex- 
ico. Besides maize, beans, melons, squashes and sunflower 
seed were the chief crops. In historic times, at least, onions 
and chili peppers were favorite garden plants; and accord- 
ing to local conditions, the following wild plants were 
largely used; piiion nut, mesquite, bean and saguaro. To- 
bacco and cotton were cultivated. Fish as food was not an 
important factor, in fact, it was under the ban of some 
tribes. Game was rather scarce, rabbits being the most 
numerous. Turkeys were domesticated. Of prepared 
foods, the most unique is the piki maize bread, made in thin, 
paper-like sheets. 

For the remainder of the North American part of the 
area the Nahua and Maya may be taken as the types. Here 
agriculture was more highly organized than in any of the 
areas we have discussed. With the former, maize is made 
into peculiar cakes called "tortillas," which, with beans and 
the inevitable chili pepper, constitutes the usual menu. If 
we add to this cacao we have the list for the Maya also. 
In the lower parts, especially in Central America, there were 
many fruits, many of which are now cultivated by Euro- 
peans, as the mammae apple, the alligator pear, the cashew 

AGRICULTURAL AREAS r7 

nut, together with the fleshy stalk of its tree, the tomato, 
pineapple, etc. 

The Andean region of South America is peculiar in that 
at ahnost any point one may shift from high to low valleys, 
thus quickly passing through several varieties of climate. 
Likewise, one may, by lateral shifting, encounter deserts 
and the most well-watered stretches in succession. All this 
tends to nullify the effects of changing latitude, so that the 
aggregfate agricultural conditions in Colombia, Ecuador and 
Peru can be made the same. Still we find some cultural 
differences. 

The Chibcha peoples of Colombia in the highlands raised 
maize, potatoes, sweet potatoes, manioc, beans, tobacco, 
coca, and cotton. They did not have the llama, and game 
was scarce, but carefully protected and conserved. The 
other peoples of Colombia did more hunting, but in addi- 
tion still cultivated maize. Salt was manufactured in favor- 
able localities and formed an important article of trade. 

The adjoining highlands of Venezuela formerly had a 
hunting and maize-growing population which was extermi- 
nated by the Spaniards. 

Ecuador was partly under the control of the Inca at the 
Spanish conquest but, no doubt, still retained its former 
food habits. Its population was almost exclusively agricul- 
tural. Maize was the staple except on the highest levels, 
where quinoa was substituted. Potatoes were universal, 
and coca, peppers, and other plants in the lowest valleys. 
On the coast there was fishing. 

To the south was the Inca empire with its hig^hly organ- 
ized agriculture. Here the crops were about the same as 
for Ecuador, but in favorable places manioc, ground nuts, 
beans, gourds, tomatoes, guava, and fiber plants were raised. 
Hunting was carried on in an organized manner, large 
drives being made over great areas. The grame animals were 
chiefly the guanaco and vicuna, of which the flesh was often 

i8 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

dried and stored for the use of the army. The familiar 
term "jerked meat" is believed to have come from the 
charqui, as this dried meat was called in Peru. Birds were 
taken in nets, and on the coast there was some fishing. 

The great basin of the Amazon with the adjoining coast 
is one of the world's most typical tropical areas, but almost 
everywhere throughout there was some native agriculture. 
As a whole, the area presents some geographical variety, 
for the eastern part of South America also has its high- 
lands, though far less pretentious than those of the west. 
Here, however, the elevation was much less; consequently, 
maize did not become the chief cultivated food, manioc or 
cassava, taking its place. Otherwise, the range of plants 
was about the same as in the Andean region. Tobacco, 
potatoes, and cotton were common. The celebrated mate» 
or Paraguay tea, and the edible clay of the Botocudo peoples 
are the principal unique features. Yet, in no case were the 
tribes of these highlands so dependent upon agriculture as 
were those of the west coast. In this respect they present 
a close analogy to the eastern maize users of North Amer- 
ica, with whom they are geographically connected by the 
West Indies. Further, the almost complete delegation of 
agricultural responsibilities to the women is in itself an indi- 
cation of the large part hunting played in their sustenance. 

Finally, we come to the interior of the continent where 
high temperature, low elevation, and abundant moisture 
combine to produce rank flora. Our knowledge of this area 
is still rather scant, but what information we have indicates 
that the whole interior Amazon Basin with the contiguous 
east coast noted above should be considered as one distinct 
food area. That the art of agriculture is now absolutely 
unknown to anv of the Amazon tribes is doubtful, because 
far into the interior we find manioc, tobacco, coca, pumpkins, 
sweet potatoes, etc., growing in the village fields. Also, 
maize has been reported from a number of localities, though 

GENERAL DISCUSSION 19 

the climate is unfavorable to it. The blowgun with poi- 
soned darts is used in hunting, the game consisting largely 
of birds and small tree-climbing animals. No living thing is 
so abundant as to offer opportunity for food specialization, 
and the native must make use of everything he can lay hands 
upon. On the upper Amazon and elsewhere the taking of 
fish by poisoning the water is common. A very charac- 
teristic dish of this whole area is the "pepper-pot." Small 
game of whatever kind is cast into a pot and boiled into a 
thick broth made hot with peppers. The pot is * -^ ' 
emptied, but the contents continually augmented. 

GENERAL DISCUSSION 

.Now that we have gained a .general perspective of New 
World food traits, we may note some of their most distinc- 
tive characteristics. It is clear that the art of agriculture 
centers around maize, for almost everywhere we find it 
gjown. Its only rival is manioc, but, as we have seen, this 
plant is resorted to only in spots where it is too moist for 
maize. In the same way, the quinoa displaces it in the high- 
est altitudes of the Andes. But this only serves to show how 
maize dominates aboriginal agriculture. We can be quite 
sure that if we knew the full history of this plant we should 
have a good insight into the development of the higher cul- 
tures of Mexico and Peru, yet in spite of its obvious im- 
portance, very little attention has been given to the subject. 
Though this homely art of maize culture is still practised 
by many surviving natives, the only field studies we have 
approaching a satisfactory standard are those of Parker^' 
for the Iroquois, Hough ** for the Hopi, and Wilson *' for 
the Hidatsa. For the Pueblo peoples who still raise maize 
in the aboriginal way we have little more than the pioneer 
work of Gushing.** With respect to Mexico and the An- 
dean region the literature is even more fragmentary. While 

ao THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Pit. J. Tki DiurOuiitm ef Main »ni ifwifoe 

GENERAL DISCUSSION 21 

we do have a great deal of more or less generalized infor- 
mation, this has been re-stated so often that it is difficult to 
weigh it and even the very best of such literature can never 
take the place of exhaustive field studies. For example, it 
is only from the works of Parker" and Wilson" that we 
can form a definite conclusion as to how closely the culti- 
vation of maize of white farmers follows aboriginal pat- 
terns. 

However, the gross characteristics of aboriginal maize 
culture are clearly known. In the first place, no beasts of 
draught were employed, but all was by hand. Nowhere do 
we find a plowing machine drawn by men. As an inde- 
pendent proposition it may seem strange that the Peruvians, 
with all their genius, should have missed the idea of har- 
nessing either men or llamas to a digging tool, but when we 
note that maize grows best in bunches or "hills," while the 
Old World inventors of the plow sowed grain broadcast, 
we find a partial explanation. The heaping up of earth 
around the growing plant is still one of the fundamentals 
in maize culture. It is a fair assumption that the hoe is an 
aboriginal solution of the practical problem involved here. 
The mere sowing of grain by the ancients of the Old World 
was the one great problem, for after that there was little to 
do until the harvest, while in the case of maize the tending 
of the crop was the most exacting. The former presents a 
much simpler mechanical problem than the latter ; in fact, it 
IS not until 1731 that we hear of a horse cultivator in Eng- 
land. 

The aborigines dug up the ground with pointed and 
Spade-like tools. From New Mexico to Chile, spade-like 
tools with foot-rests for thrusting into the ground were 
common, but in the eastern parts of both continents we find 
a simple digging-stick. In Peru the digging tools were 
sometimes pointed with copper and bronze. 

The hoe was universal in the eastern maize area and seems 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

JI^, f. CnlUmi^g U^tt oKd SgtMiAf / trith a Bent Hot. HUatt» 

GENERAL DISCUSSION 23 

to have extended into the West Indies, but from New Mex- 
ico southward it does not appear in our collections. The 
significance of this is not yet clear. The data for the eastern 
maize area show us that the agricultural pattern was to hoe 
up hills around the plants. As stated before, maize, 
squashes and beans were often put in the same hill. To- 
t^cco was planted in hills and so were the sweet potatoes of 
the south. The first Atlantic colonists adopted the hoe pat- 
tern of the native, especially in the south, where to some 
extent it still survives. 

Artificial fertilization was practised from Nova Scotia to 
Chile. One method, widely distributed in both continents, 
was the placing of fish in the maize hill. Manures, both 
human and animal, were used in parts of the area of inten- 
sive agriculture. So particular a correspondence as plant- 
ing with fish, reported for localities between New England 
and Peru, points clearly to a common origin, but it is the 
study of the maize plant itself that affords the strongest ar- 
gument for diffusion from one center. The investigations 
of Harshberger *• and Collins *® indicate that maize was de- 
veloped from a wild grass of the Maya habitat. The dis- 
tribution from this center of varieties once so developed 
would readily account for the uniformity of maize culture 
we have noted. Unfortunately, no careful study of the 
aboriginal varieties of maize has been made, but the data at 
hand suggest that about all the distinct kinds we still have 
on our farms were in existence by 1492 and that they ex- 
isted side by side in the same fields. The time required to 
stabilize all these forms and the subsequent precision of do- 
mestic routine that preserved their racial integrity to the 
present among some of the surviving natives, is one of the 
most impressive facts of our subject. Recently a fossilized 
ear of com was found near Cuzco, but the data concerning 
the specimen are insufficient for the determination of its 
geological age. Suffice it to say, however, that if this ear 

24 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

of com should prove to be of pleistocene origin, the whde 
story of maize must be re-written.^^ 

So brief a review as this must needs pass over in silence 
many interesting points, but we should give passing notice 
to the evidence for the local adaptation of these widely dis- 
tributed varieties of maize. It has been shown that the 
Hidatsa of the upper Missouri have trained certain varie- 
ties to ripen early and within the limits of the short season," 
a characteristic the maize of our eastern farms does not 
manifest. Collins^* makes clear that the Pueblo tribes of 
New Mexico and Arizona have developed varieties with 
long, deep-growing root habits to reach the moisture in 
their very arid fields. These are, no doubt, but suggestions 
of many other adaptations awaiting discovery and which 
present very interesting chronological problems. Yet, even 
as the case stands, we must assume a long period of time 
to have elapsed since the initial propagation of maize. 

The art of irrigation was known from Arizona to Chile, 
and in Peru was carried out on a scale scarcely equalled by 
modem nations. The remains of aqueduct systems in the 
Andes show such genius and organization that our respect 
for the native American rises to a high point. 

The alternate of maize, cassava or manioc, deserves spe- 
cial consideration. Though requiring a more tropical hab- 
itat than maize, it also requires a fairly dry, sandy soil. At 
the period of discovery it was found in the West Indies, 
Central America, and even in Florida. The poisonous na- 
ture of the juice leads to a mode of preparation described 
fully in the special literature.** The essential procedure is 
to grate the pulpy parts and squeeze them in a basketry 
press called a tipiti. The pulp is then made into cakes and 
heated to drive out the remaining volatile poison, finally 
giving cassava bread, which is a staple food. 

If we now take a general view of the data at hand it ap- 
pears a fair assumption that the prevailing type of agriculr 

DISTRIBUTION OF NARCOTICS 25 

xire was developed by a centrally located highland people 
md thence diffused, without essential modification, both to 
lie north and to the south. While the experience of mod- 
ern farmers indicates that the maize area of the Indians 
x>uld have been extended somewhat, it is doubtful if this 
vere possible without fundamental changes in the technique 
3f maize culture and in social organization. In other words, 
naize culture did expand outward from the central region 
)n a primitive level, the hunting tribes of both the north 
ind the south borrowing the trait one after the other, so far 
IS their habitat permitted. 

DISTRIBUTION OF NARCOTICS 

In connection with this discussion of cultivated plants 
K)me note should be made of aboriginal narcotics. The 
Dest known are tobacco and coca, both extensively culti- 
irated in aboriginal times, as shown on the distribution map 
(Fig. 6). The narcotic element in coca is cocaine, a mod- 
ern derivative. The native, however, simply chewed the 
dried leaves mixed with lime or other alkalis. Such coca 
Aewing still prevails in the area indicated on the map and 
lias spread to the natives of other parts of both continents, 
IS well as to the whites themselves. 

As will be noted, the chewing of tobacco is found in 
South America contiguous to the coca-chewing area, but it 
ilso occurs on the Pacific Coast of America.^' One pecu- 
liarity of the latter habit is that the tobacco is taken with 
pulverized shells or ashes, ground fine in mortars; in other 
ivords, after the coca method. The appearance of this trait 
in these two disconnected areas and its analogy to the betel 
lut culture of Melanesia and southeastern Asia is truly 
puzzling. 

The taking of snuff is also largely correlated with chew- 
ing, since we find it in both the chewing areas, though it 
extended rather well over the Amazon country and even to 

26 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

^^ 

& 

^ W^ f'A 

^-^ 

Vv 

^;^ 

■ M 

^H 

^^ 

■ • 

X 

!^^ 

■ C«.Ch„«<i 

p a' 

JBS TotXdo Chr-.of 

S Tubulir P.pt ind Clfirtin 

■1 Elbo. P,pt 

U- 

Fit. «. i)iMnh>tuiii e/ Cees and Tobaeeo 

DISTRIBUTION OF NARCOTICS 

27 

the West Indies. However, the usual substance for making 
snuff powder is said to be the Acacia niopo berry. Along 
with the chewing of tobacco go various forms of its eat- 
ing, drinking, licking, etc. 

Yet, the most widely distributed method of using tobacco 
was smoking, of which three aboriginal forms can be local- 
ized. First, we have the true pipe found in the greater part 
of the United States and Canada and in the lower Atlantic 
side of South America ; secondly, the cigar in the West In- 
dies and the greater part of the Amazon country; and lastly, 
the tubular pipe in western United States, Mexico, and Cen- 
tral America. The usual form of this last is a small section 
of cane stuffed with crushed tobacco to which the name 
cigarette is applied. These methods of smoking are not so 
exclusively localized as the map would imply, but grade one 
' into the other. 

The map indicates the approximate extent of smoking in 
1492, but as we all know, the custom was quickly carried 
to all parts of the world, both savage and civilized. The 
Asiatic peoples have a distinct type of pipe and a different 
method of smoking, which in late times has reached the 
i Eskimo of Alaska from Siberia. 

1. Hcarne, 1795. I. 

2. Pike, 1892. I. 

3. Allen, 1876. I. 

4. DobrizhoflFer, 1822. I. 

5. Morice, 1906. I. 

6. Church, 1912. I. 

7. Merriam, C. Hart, 1905. I. 

8. Laufer, 1907. I; Spinden, 1917. 
11. 

9. Parker, 1910, I; Waugh, 1916. 
I. 

10. Jenks, 19CX). I. 

11. Carr, 1896. I. 

12. Parker, 1910. I. 

13. Parker, 1910. I. 

14. Hough, 1915. I. 

15. Wilson, G. L., 1917. I. 

16. Gushing, 1884. I, 1920. I. 

17. Parker, 19 10. I. 

18. Wilson, G. L., 1917. I. 

19. Harshberger, 1893. I. 

20. Collins, 1914. I. 

21. Collins, 1919. I. 

22. Wilson, L., and Atkinson, M., 
1915. I ; Will and Hyde, 1917. 1. 

23. Collins, 1914. I. 

24. Im Thurn, 1883. I. 

25. McGuire, 1899. I; Krause, 
1885. I. 

CHAPTER II 

DOMESTICATION OF ANIMALS AND METHODS 

OF TRANSPORTATION 

The domestication of animals and methods of transpor- 
tation may be treated as a single division of our subject, 
because from the standpoint of Old World culture, one of 
these concepts calls the other promptly to mind, and even 
in aboriginal America there is found some relation between 
the two. The most common domesticated animals were the 
dog, the llama, and the related alpaca. With the exception 
of the guinea pig in Peru there were no others. It is true 
that we have on record instances of individual animals of 
other species being tamed, but in no case were they propa- 
gated. 

Of birds, we have the turkey of Mexico and the Pueblo 
tribes of the United States. Lawson* is responsible for 
the statement that in Carolina cranes were bred in captivity, 
while, according to Roger Williams, the Narragansett 
trained hawks to guard their fields. But all these are ex- 
ceptional cases. Also, eagles and serpents were sometimes 
confined for ceremonial reasons, but not truly domesticated. 
The bee was domesticated in Mexico by the Aztec and the 
Maya, as is still the case among some groups of natives in 
Central America and northwest Brazil. 

The dog appears in Paleolithic Europe in close associa- 
tion with the remains of man and was practically universal 
in aboriginal America. Thus, the history of its development 
and dispersion over the earth would in a large measure be 

the history of man's cultural achievements. So it is quite 

28 

DOMESTIC ANIMALS 

•f Animal Traiuffri 

30 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

natural that we have a large body of literature on the dog. 
Un f ortimately , this is largely speculative, whereas what we 
need for our discussion is actual investigfation. However, 
a recent study of the New World dog, by Allen, seems to 
prove that the dogs of both the Old and the New Worlds 
had a common origin, with their center of dispersion in 
Asia.* 

The available data indicate that in the New World dogs 
served at least four purposes: transportation, hunting, 
guarding and companionship, or food, according to locality. 
They varied greatly in size and form, from the small, pug- 
like type found in Peru and the hairless variety of the 
tropics, to the great hairy beasts reared in some parts of the 
Arctic. Since it is certain that all dogs will readily cross 
with wolves and foxes and yet tend to remain fertile, the 
preservation of these types must have required some selec- 
tive breeding. The only definite study of native dog culture 
so far made is that of Wilson® for the Hidatsa (Siouan) 
which reveals a complex not inferior to that for agriculture. 
The Peruvians are credited with three distinct varieties of 
dog, the contemporaneousness of which necessitates our 
assuming the existence of breeding control similar to that 
exercised by us. However, since the methods of propa- 
gation are unknown, except for a few northern localities, a 
comparative discussion of the subject is out of the question. 

Dog transportation, on the other hand, has received care- 
ful consideration. The most striking characteristic is its 
limited distribution, for, notwithstanding that the dog oc- 
curs everywhere, its use in transportation is confined to the 
caribou and bison areas with very narrow fringes in those 
adjoining. Above the forest line dogs were made to draw 
sledges, a trait quite characteristic of the Eskimo, but found 
among the most northern Indians of Canada as well. These 
sledges have straight parallel runners and do not differ es- 
' scntially from our own simple farm types. There arc dif- 

DOMESTIC ANIMALS 31 

ferent methods of harnessing, but for the most part the 
dogs are hitched by long single traces and run somewhat 
fan-shaped with the leader at the apex. Excellent descrip- 
tions are given in Arctic books of travel.* 

In all the wooded parts of the caribou area a toboggan is 
used, the snow being rather too soft for sledges. This is 
also the great snowshoe area. While dogs were used to 
drag these toboggans, the hunters themselves not infre- 
quently drew them. The early development of the Canadian 
fur trade by the Hudson's Bay and French companies 
greatly stimulated dog traction and greatly increased the 
use of sledges where ice conditions permitted. The former 
southern limits of the toboggan are not certainly known but 
it seemed to end with the Ojibway and Iroquois, though 
it may have been used along the upper Missouri.* 

In the spring and summer dogs were made to bear packs 
and drag tent poles.' This method was more widely dis- 
tributed than the use of sledges and toboggans, covering 
the entire caribou and bison areas and extending somewhat 
into the inland portion of the salmon area. In the bison 
area, particularly in the northern part, we find an original 
contrivance known to us as a travois. Though of two or 
three varieties, the essential structure is the same through- 
out— a V-shaped frame with an intervening section of net 
or wood upon which the load is placed.'' The structure sug- 
gests that this travois is merely a development of the pack 
and trailing tent poles, the more widely distributed method. 

It may be worth noting that dog packing in particular is 
a concomitant of those hunting tribes following a regular 
migratory circle. The excursions of the Eskimo to the 
caribou ranges, the corresponding shifts of the Canadian 
Indians, and the bison-hunting expeditions of the Plains 
were in pre-Columbian days facilitated by pack trains of 
dogs. The intrusion of this method into the inland salmon 
area is consistent with the journeys then made to gather 

Z2 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

food, as W2 have stated. On the contrary, topographical 
conditions in California made large movements unnecessaryV 
which may be one reason why dog packing was not adopted. 
The maize areas were more independent and had little tiae 
for this trait. So far as we know, dog transportation was 
not in vogue in the area of intensive maize culture. Mex- 
ico and the Pueblo area had no way of land transport except 
by human carriers, and it is not until Peru is reached that 
the use of the llama comes to notice. This small, camel-like 
animal has little more carrying power than a large dog, but 
is particularly well adapted to mountain travel. For the 
remainder of South America our information is vague, bat 
so far there is no reason to believe that the dog or any other 
animal was used for transport. 

All this suggests that dog traction was intrusive to the 
New World. When we recall that in Europe and Asia the 
dog and reindeer are used to draw sledges and that the trait 
is continuous from Scandinavia to Greenland, this assump- 
tion seems justified. Yet, the problem is far from simple. 
The situation in the Old World is complicated by the pres- 
ence of horse culture which appears as an early develop- 
ment and by the domestication of the reindeer. Either or 
both could have greatly stimulated dog traction, but on the 
other hand, dog traction could have developed in America 
and spread into Siberia. That it came in with the earliest 
Asiatic settlers is improbable, since in that case, though not 
necessarily, we should expect to find it surviving in south- 
em South America. It is also true that the method of hitch- 
ing in America is different from that in Siberia and con- 
tiguous parts of Alaska, and that nothing like 'the travois 
IS found there. 

Returning to our subject, we see that the prevailing mode 
of land transport in the New World was by human carrier. 
The wheel was unknown in pre-Columbian times. The wild 
fauna afforded nothing like the horse and ox of the Old 

DOMESTIC ANIMALS 33 

Fit. 9- '••■'miu of (A« Bimn Am h Iht itmrdt, Utoig t>u Dig Tivoeit 

34 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

World. The caribou has been found far less suitable for 
domestication than the closely allied reindeer, and the bison 
has proved itself rather too strenuous. Yet, these arc not 
sufficient excuses. The plain fact is that the tribes in con- 
tact with these animals were relatively primitive. It is fair 
to assume that if the bison and the caribou had been avail- 
able to the Peruvians, the tale would be different. 

Before the time of Columbus, no tribe had an animal 
able to carry a man. The dog packers walked in front of 
their trains, and even the Eskimo walked more than they 
rode. The coming of the Spaniards made quick changes. 
The mule and donkey were soon in general use in the area 
of intense maize culture, though they have not yet entirely 
displaced the llama in Peru. Wild cattle soon over-ran 
Texas and southern California and in the Pampas became 
almost as numerous as the bison in the north. Their pres- 
ence greatly modified the food supply, but the most far- 
reaching change resulted from the spread of the horse. 

By direct instruction or mere self-initiated imitation, the 
natives of the bison and guanaco areas acquired horse cul- 
ture. Unfortunately, the history of this cultural acquisi- 
tion is lost, but we know that the use of the horse spread 
much faster than exploration, so that in many cases our 
first actual view of a tribe is as a horse user. The bison in 
the north and the guanaco in the south, supplanted later by 
wild cattle, presented almost parallel environments. In 
Europe at the time of Columbus, the horse was used almost 
exclusively by soldiers and aristocrats as a riding animal, 
mules for packing and bearing the common folk, while 
carts and plows were drawn by oxen. This horse-riding 
complex was thus readily adaptable to the native culture of 
these two areas. At least they seem to have taken it over 
as a whole, for saddles and other riding appliances are of the 
same European patterns both south and north.* 

The important differences between the horse cultures of 

TRANSPORTATION aS 

the two areas appear in the adaptations made to the orig- 
inal cultures. Thus, in the bison area the horse was also 
used with an enlarged dog travois and in some cases seems 
to have been so used before the art of riding was acquired. 
The native names of mysterious-dog, elk-dog, etc., indicate 
the apperceptive attitude in the northern continent. In 
South America there was nothing like this, but a unique 
weapon known as the bola was peculiarly adapted to mounted 
use. It is believed that this weapon soon entirely displaced 
the bow and quickly led to the invention of the lasso and its 
use by all Spanish ranchers north and south. In the bison 
area the bow was essential for killing buffalo even from 
horseback. In the Pampas a long lance became the other 
chief weapon, and though this and the lasso appeared among 
the Comanche on the southern borders of the bison area, 
they did not prevail among the other tribes of the north. 

The use of the horse spread somewhat from these two 
continental centers. In the more open parts of the eastern 
maize area horses were common, but nowhere here except 
possibly in the Gulf States did they rise to a military level. 
In the greater part of California they were never used, but 
in some parts of the inland . salmon area they rose to the 
importance attained in the bison area. The greater part of 
the caribou area was too cold for the horse. 

The military and commercial necessities of Peru were met 
by caravans of llamas but even then human carriers were in 
general use. How the large stones found in some of the 
ruins of that counfry were transported is not known, but it 
must have been by human traction alone. Northward from 
Ecuador to the Colorado River there is no evidence of any- 
thing but human carriage. Tribute was brought to Mexico 
City by brigades of carriers. Chairs and litters for the 
transportation of people were used throughout the area of 
intense culture, and to some extent in the Gulf regions of 
the United States. In all areas there were special appliances 

36 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

for holding the pack upon the back. While only the lightest 
loads were carried upon the head, in contrast to the African 
negro way, a widespread method was to support the pack 
by a strap over the forehead, one form of which is now 
known as a "tumpline." Perhaps the most unique appliance 
is the kia of the Pima tribes in Arizona." (Fig. lo.) 

Before proceeding with our subject we may consider the 
extent to which animals were domesticated for food. The 
only place where a pastoral culture was noted is again in 
Peru. The Spaniards found the llama in great domesticated 
herds, sometimes reaching the thousands. In addition to 
their use in transportation, they were slaughtered for their 
flesh and sheared for their wool. The alpaca was also 
herded for its superior wool. The use of milk seems to 
have been unknown here as well as in other parts of the 
New World. In fact, the Indians as a whole seem to be 
as deeply prejudiced against milk as the Chinese,*® for it is 
with the greatest difficulty that our reservation tribes can 
be led to care for milk cows. The Spanish Americans seem 
to have been influenced by this also, for though great ranches 
were maintained it was seldom that a single animal was 
milked. This is still shown in our western states where 
cattle raising was derived from Mexico and gives us a fine 
illustration of culture diffusion. 

Dogs were used as foods, but not everywhere. The 
Spanish colonists found them in general use in Mexico, and 
in the West Indies the first discoverers found a small edible 
dog. In North America, dog flesh was eaten in parts of 
the bison area, chiefly among the Siouan tribes. On the 
other hand, many tribes, even of the same stock, are as 
averse to its use as are the whites. Since here the local 
distribution of the custom is geographical and is associated 
to some extent with certain ceremonies, its occurrence may 
be sporadic," for the general tendency north of Mexico is 
to regard the dog as not proper food. 

TRANSPORTATION 

Chile 
fit. 10. VarioM Uttho4t af Uiing tht Tumpliiu. JfMM, i|p(L / 

38 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Turkeys were raised for their feathers and eggs by the 
Pueblo and Mexican peoples. According to some authori- 
ties the latter domesticated geese also. Turkeys were wild 
in some parts of South America in pre-Columbian times, 
but seem never to have been tamed. As to the tribes of the 
lower Mississippi, we cannot be certain, for some of them 
got chickens so early that the first French settlers in Louisi- 
ana found them raised everywhere." They also had or- 
chards of European fruits and raised hogs, while many 
others ran wild. The natives of Cuba, however, are cred- 
ited with having domestic fowls and with stocking fish 
ponds when first discovered. The sheep, and to some 
extent the goat, was introduced into the great maize area 
and later developed the chief material characteristics of 
the Navajo tribe. The domestication of the bee for its 
honey has been noted above. 

CANOES AND NAVIGATION 

We come now to the second form of transportation and 
the one which is not in any way associated with the domes- 
tication of animals. It is strictly a mechanical affair from 
which the modern science of navigation has evolved. Some- 
what in contrast to the Old World, the New has no great 
insular regions except that of the West Indies. The other 
favorable island group is on the Pacific Coast north of the 
Columbia River. The only other one in ice-free waters 
is on the lower west coast of South America. In the regioil 
of high culture the coast line is very regular and the inland 
waters very shallow. South America has one great central 
river system but no lakes. On the other hand, North Amer- 
ica has a large river and lake area with many portages. Sc 
far as can be seen, boats were in use wherever advantageous, 
and from this point of view may be considered universal. 
Boats were made according to the materials at hand.** In 
regions of large trees the dug-out was preferred, but in the 

TRANSPORTATION 

39 

■'••''^•"'•' »'VT| jvy..^^ .»..v^.,.^^.>^^..,-^^Yi>^^"'-^ 

wmtwivn 

.... ^v 

\WU\UUWIlllll.I:M 

Fig. tl. Types of Canoes Used in the New World, a, The "Bull Boat," 

Bison Area; b, Eskimo Kayak; c, Eskimo Woman's Boat; d, Balsa, or 

Reed E^oai; e, Birckhark Canoe; f, Fuegian Bark Canoe; g. North 

PacHic Coast Dug-Out; h, Amason Dug-Gut 

40 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

far North, the extreme South and parts of the Amazon 
country and the lake region of North America, we find 
frame boats covered with skins or bark. The crudest arc 
the bark boats of the Fuegians; the finest are the birchbaiic 
canoes of the Ojibway and the kayaks of the Eskimo. 
From Central California to Chile we have occasional oc- 
currences of the balsa type, a raft-like structure of reeds. 

If we except the Eskimo, rowlocks were not used, the 
method of propulsion for small boats being to paddle first 
on one side and then on the other. The double paddle is 
found only among the Eskimo. (Yet it was reported by 
Frezier in 171 7 as being used in the insular region of Chile 
with a boat combining some of the features of the balsa and 
the kayak.") Even the great dug-outs of the North Pa- 
cific Coast were propelled by paddles. The use of sails is 
somewhat in doubt, but it is asserted that the Spaniards 
found them in Peru with balsas large enough to carry fifty 
men. Sails are used on the North Pacific Coast, but whether 
known before the era of Russian trade is not clear. The 
Eskimo use both the rowlock and sails, but as these occur 
on the Siberian coast, they are most likely intrusive. From 
the same source may have come sails on the west coast 
Large canoes are mentioned for the West Indies, but no 
sails are spoken of until later, so that we cannot be sure of 
their original use there. 

The only boat with hull built up of planks was that of 
the now extinct Santa Barbara of California. Another 
unique form was the circular tub-like boat with a skin-cov- 
ered frame, used to ford rivers in the widely separated 
bison and gnanaco areas, and one on the lower Colorado 
River made of basketry, Spanish name coritas. 

The two regions in which an approach was made to a 
sea-faring culture were the North Pacific Coast and the 
Antilles. The great war dug-outs of the former with their 
carved prows remind one of old Norse models. The latter 

TRANSPORTATION 41 

region was overrun in succession by two races of canoe men, 
both apparently war-like, the Arawak and the Carib. Of 
these only the latter have any just claim to long voyages. 
In summer, the use of boats by the Eskimo was a promi- 
nent feature, especially in Alaska, where voyages of trade 
to Siberia seem to have been made. 

An interesting problem lies in the distribution of specific 
variations in boats. Little has been done in this connection, 
except by students of the Eskimo, who, by careful and de- 
tailed comparison, have come to definite conclusions as to 
the origin of the kayak." The most recent attempt to apply 
the method of distribution deals with the North Pacific 
Coast area, in which a simple dug-out now found in north- 
em California and other marginal positions, is presented as 
the older form for the area as a whole." These are but 
suggestions of important problems that await the hand of 
the investigator. 

1. Lawson, i860. I; Mason, 1907. 9. Russell, 1908. I. 
I. la Laufer, 1914. I. 

2. Allen, G. M., 1920. I. 11. Wissler, 1910. I. 

3. Wilson, G. L., ms. 12. Swanton, 191 1. I. 

4. Boas, 1888. I; Stefinsson, 13. Mason, 1901. I; Friederid, 
1914. I; 1919. I. 1907. I. 

5. Maximilian, 1843. I. 14. Frezier, 1717. I, p. 120. 

6. Stefinsson, 1914. I ; Hearne, 15. Boas, 1888. I ; Thalbitzer, 1914. 
1 795-. I. I; Nelson, E. W.. 1899. I. 

7. Wissler, 1910. I. 16. Waterman and Coffin, 1920. I. 

8. Wissler, 1915. I. 

CHAPTER III 
THE TEXTILE ARTS 

The subject now before us is far less intelligible to the 
layman than any of the preceding, chiefly because it deals 
with definite processes or crafts which must be mastered 
to be thoroughly understood. This cannot be expected 
even of professional anthropologists, who must necessarily 
be guided by the statements of textile experts. With such 
guidance we may, however, safely proceed to a general 
view of the subject. 

There seem to be but four classes of textile fiber in gen- 
eral use : wool, bast, cotton, and silk. Of these, aboriginal 
America used all but the last. The sheep was not found 
here, but the hair of the Rocky Mountain goat was used 
in western Canada and also that of a dog bred for that 
purpose. In the bison area, particularly on the lower Mis- 
sissippi, buffalo hair was spun. Mexico and Central Amer- 
ica seem not to have used wool of any kind, no doubt be- 
cause it was not available. The same may be said of 
Colombia and parts of Ecuador. As soon, however, as 
the range of the llama, vicuna and alpaca is reached, their 
respective wools come into use. Some archaeological data 
indicate that at one time their use extended far down into 
Chile and out into Argentina. 

Of bast fibers we have a respectable list. Even as far 
north as the caribou area willow bark was used. On the 
Pacific coast of Canada cedarbark fiber, and inland in the 
salmon area sagebrush bark were used, extending far down 
among the Shoshonean tribes of the United States. In 
California a number of plants were used for string twist- 

42 

THE TEXTILE ARTS 43 

ing. In the bison area practically no bark fiber was used, 
but about the Great Lakes and eastward, basswood or linn 
bark was largely employed. Occasionally, cornhusk fiber 
was utilized. In southeastern United States, particularly 
on the lower Mississippi, the fibers of Indian hemp and 
pemmenaw grass were extensively used. In Arizona and 
New Mexico we find the maguey, extending down into 
Peru. In the remaining parts of South America there are 
a number of bast fibers in use. Thus, we may conclude that 
the use of bast fibers was general except among the highly 
specialized hunting peoples of the extreme north and 
south. 

Cotton, though a vegetable fiber, is a wool rather than 
a bast. Fiber experts claim that it is only the cultivated 
varieties that can be successfully spun. Proceeding from 
north to south we first enlounter cotton in the Pueblo area 
of the United States. That it was grown in what is now 
the great cotton belt of the United States is improbable, 
but from the Pueblo country down through Mexico to 
Peru, cotton was the great textile fiber. The known varie- 
ties were white and brown. In other parts of South Amer- 
ica and the Antilles a little cotton was grown, chiefly to be 
used in making hammocks. 

Taking a general view of the preceding facts, we note 
that the distribution of cotton culture is in the main coin- 
cident with the regions of higher culture; at least, it is not 
found among non-agricultural peoples. Wool fibers ap- 
pear in three disconnected regions: around Peru, British 
Columbia, and the lower Mississippi. Bast fiber, on the 
other hand, is practically universal, but shows decided 
specialization in the several food areas. 

One other class of fiber not generally recognized by us is 
sinew, or tendon. Among the Eskimo and the Indians of 
Canada it is of the greatest importance and also holds a 
high place in the bison area, the salmon area, and the 

44 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

northern part of the eastern maize area. In fact, wherever 
skin clothing is made, we find sinew in use, even in the 
guanaco area of South America. 

SPINNING 

The twisting of fiber into thread is the prerequisite of 
the whole textile art. Its distribution over the world is as 
universal as the use of fire and its origin probably fully as 
remote. Though there is but one way to do it, twist the 
fibers one upon the other, the appliances vary considerably. 
The primitive way, and no doubt the first historically, is 
solely by hand. A more mechanical way is to give the 
twist by a spindle bearing a whorl. 

Our first problem is to distinguish the diflFerent methods 
of spinning and state their respective distributions. In 
this we must proceed with hesitancy because of inadequate 
data, but since very little native spinning survives there 
is no ground for expecting important additions to our field 
observations. The subject is, therefore, ready for such 
comparative study as can be made. We have neither the 
time nor the special knowledge to do this now, but will 
discuss the most obvious points. 

One of the most direct approaches is the distribution of 
the spindle whorl. Its known occurrence in North Amer- 
ica is in the highlands from Panama to the Colorado River. 
Then with a break in continuity we find it in British 
Columbia and on the adjoining coast. The only other 
place where there is even a suspicion of its use is the 
lower Mississippi. This conjecture is based upon the bare 
mention of an improvised aflFair, a wad of clay upon a 
stick, by an early writer.* 

Archaeological data are on the whole consistent with the 
foregoing facts, from which their general finality may be 
assumed. Pre-Columbian sites yielding undoubted spindle 
whorls must be our safest criteria, because we lack definite 

SPINNING 45 

knowledge as to the exact state of spinning before white 
contact, and it is conceivable that the use of the European 
whorl could have been introduced quickly, as we have al- 
ready noted in the case of the horse. Peru presents a puz- 
zling case, for notwithstanding the high development of the 
art, the early historical data indicate the absence of a true 
whorl,* and objects of this nature are seldom found in 
excavating. However, in the northern part of the Andean 
region, pottery objects resembling whorls are frequent. 
We may suspect therefore that our data from Peru are 
incomplete. In other parts of South America they are 
rare, but the modern natives use them. So, in general, if we 
try to correlate the distribution of the whorl with that for 
fibers, we note that it is wanting in the distinctively bast 
and sinew areas. Where cotton, wool or both together 
are spun, we find the whorl, unless Peru should prove to 
be an exception. 

Outside of the whorl area we have defined, bast and 
sinew thread are given the final twist by rolling under the 
palm of the hand, usually upon the bare thigh or calf of 
the leg. (The peculiar slit skirt of the Algonkin and Iro- 
quois is regarded as a hand spinner's costume by Parker.') 
A twisting appliance has, however, been noted for the 
Eskimo.* 

But to return to our subject. The methods of preparing 
fibers for spinning differ with the materials, but after they 
are separated and cleaned, all must be carded, or extended 
in the same direction. No aboriginal appliance for this has 
come to light, but with the introduction of the sheep, the 
European card was also introduced and has been in use 
ever since. The difference between hand and whorl-twist- 
ing is merely a matter of machinery. In either case, the 
native first arranges the roving by hand. The only twist- 
ing machine in use for true textile fibers was the whorled 
or rolled spindle, but there was nothing like the wheel 
of the Old World. Further, we are told that it is only 

46 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

bast fiber that can be twisted by rolling under the palm upon 
the thigh. Neither cotton nor v/od can be economically 
handled that way because of the shortness and other char- 
acteristics of the fiber. In this case, the fiber must be 
made into a roving and then twisted from each end under 
the necessary draft, or tension. Thus, in the New World, 

Fit. "■ Ancilut Utxicm a> 
lirrt lAosj tht /rrttailing Nn 
IB what fart of Ihr procut ii 
irafi, or Itntion, u titfUitd a. 

typlioK Draminti of SfaiiUTi. 

rid mtlhfd. Thtri it lomi dm- 
itnled in tkt Egyptian fLgurt, bu 
int to Ik, Old World mrlhod 

we find that wherever cotton or wool are spun, a stick or 
spindle is used to facilitate the twist and to wind the 
finished thread. In Europe, spinning was by the whorl 
and distaff method; the spindle, being provided with a 
whorl or fly-wheel, was twirled and dropped, its weight 
providing the draft, and the momentum of the whorl the 
twist. There is yet no reason to believe that this method 
was practised in the New World before its discovery, the 
draft here being given by a pull of the hands, the spindle 
resting in a bowl on the ground, or simply held in the hands. 
The New World whorl is, therefore, not a true whorl, 

NETTING 47 

and was often dispensed with^ as seems to have been the 
case in parts of Peru. 

The uniformity of the aboriginal method of spinning 
cotton is clear when we compare sudti studies as Roth's* 
for the less cultured peoples of South America with the 
processes used in Old Peru. On this account we are scarcely 
left any other alternative than to conclude that the cotton 
complex of the entire New World is essentially one, as is 
the maize complex (p. 21), and that it was likewise dif- 
fused from a single center. Just what may be the relation 
between the wool and cotton complexes is not clear, for we 
have the salmon area peoples spinning wool and not cotton, 
and again the buffalo-hair spinning of the Mississippi Valley. 
As to how the latter was spun, we have no precise data, 
but in the salmon area a form of the characteristic New 
World spindle method was used.* Cotton could not be 
raised there, obviously. 

NETTING 

The making of string readily suggests nets, a form of 
textile almost as world-wide as fiber twisting. Accompany- 
ing the art are two implements: the shuttle and the mesh 
gauge. Unfortunately, no careful study of the net tech- 
nique and the distribution of the implements is available, 
but one who reads Rau's searching paper on modes of fish- 
ing ^ will see at a glance the importance of the problem. 
First, the manner of tying the meshes of the net is very 
much the same everywhere. This may be because the 
trait is as old and fundamental as the firedrill or merely 
due to the fact that there is but one good way by which 
a net can be formed. In the absence of investigation, 
speculation on this point is useless, yet we seem to have 
here an unusually promising subject for weighing the rela- 
tive merits of the independent origin and diffusion theories 
of culture. 

48 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

In the New World, fish nets seem to have been in use, 
wherever possible, from Cape Horn to Alaska and their 
antiquity is vouched for by the excavation of notched peb- 
bles used as sinkers. Stefansson,* however, secured archaeo- 
logical data from the northernmost coast of Alaska and 
western Canada, indicating that nets were of relatively re- 
cent introduction among the Eskimo of those districts. In 
view of the data supporting their antiquity elsewhere and 
their present universal distribution, this appears as a local- 
ized exception. 

The netting shuttle and mesh gauge are found chiefly in 
North America where they have a continuous distribution 
with Siberia and adjacent parts of the Old World, The 
precise forms of eastern Siberia are found in Alaska, but 
as we move southward along the coast toward California, 
the forms show more variation, as also eastward over the 
Great Lake area. So far, such implements have not been 
reported from South America, where nets are frequently 
made of cotton and woven upon a frame, as is the case 
with hammocks. The most recent contribution to the sub- 
ject is Moore's theory that the so-called bannerstone found 
east of the Mississippi is a mesh gauge; • however, this in- 
terpretation is questionable. 

Those closely allied techniques of lace making and tatting 
are found in many parts of the great cotton-using area, but 
have not been studied in detail. 

BASKETRY 

It is doubtful if any people exist who do not understand 
the art of intertwining twigs or other elements; likewise 
most of them show some conception of basketry. Even 
such an extreme marginal group as the Tasmanians made 
some progress with it. and in the New World it is diffi- 
cult to find groups of tribes entirely innocent of the art. 
About the only localities without basketry are among the 

BASKETRY 

49 

eastern Eskimo, and parts of the bison and guanaco areas, 
all specialists in skin work. 

The subject has received a great deal of attention and 

[4,|ji.J|.t|J|,iJ|d 

Fig. 13- flM*«tr>.- Stralehl Wta\ 

t and Optn Twint; i 

that great master of material culture, O. T. Mason, has 
left us an excellent treatise." Our museums have extensive 
collections, while those of private students are equally rich; 

50 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

there is also an abundant literature. Notwithstanding all 
this, the subject presents many unsolved problems. 

Baskets can be readily classified as woven or coiled 
(sewed). The basic concepts for these different classes 
seem to have nothing in common, from which it is fair to 
assume that they have separate histories. Under these 
Heads many techniques may be distinguished." 

From our point of view, coiled basketry reaches its 
highest development in California, where the Porno are 
generally given the first rank. ^Esthetically considered, 
these baskets are probably the finest in the whole world. 
From this center, coiling extends to the interior highlands 
among the Shoshoni-speaking tribes, thence northward 
through the inland salmon area and the Dene portion of 
Canada. Even the Eskimo of Alaska use it, and also the 
natives of eastern Siberia. To the east, it stops in the 
plains, but extends southward among the Pima, Navajo, 
Apache, and other non-pueblo-dwelling tribes. Of the 
Pueblo peoples only one section of the Hopi uses the 
process and elsewhere there are but the crudest of at- 
tempts. In Mexico the technique disappears and does not 
come to notice again until we reach Patagonia. While in 
California a few of the coast tribes were coilers, the main 
distribution is inland, for beginning with the upper part of 
California, the entire coast belt including the Aleutian chain 
is exclusively devoted to woven basketry. In the eastern 
part of North America coiling is rare, a few of the north- 
ern Algonkin tribes following the lead of their Dene 
neighbors. 

Notwithstanding the high development in the coil area. 
It is itself a part of the great western twined area. (Twine 
is a form of woven basketry.) The Porno, for example, 
also make fine baskets of this weave, which can be said 
of most coil workers. In other words, coiled basketry 
seems to be a smaller area overlying a larger one of twined 

Pit. 1*. Gtntral Diitributton ef Typti tf BaiktITy 

52 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

basketry. The Pueblo peoples do not make it, but do pn>- 
duce a kind of wickerwork like the tribes of northern Mex- 
ico, while their non-Pueblo neighbors, the Apache, Wal- 
apai, etc., make twined as well as coiled baskets. 

Almost all of the twine and coil basket weavers are stone 
boilers, that is, they cook in baskets by dropping hot stones 
into their contents. Close fine twining and coiling is thus a 
necessity, for cooking baskets must be water-tight. In the 
pottery region of the Pueblos and southward, basketry is 
open and coarser. This undoubtedly accounts for the very 
high development of the art in California and northward. 

Returning to the concentric distribution of the coil and 
twine technique, one must wonder which is the older. Some 
of the Dene coiled globular baskets are almost identical 
with a Chinese style, but this is more likely due to similar 
materials, for the intervening Siberian styles are more like 
those of the Eskimo. Thus coil seems to center in Cali- 
fornia and twine on the coast of the north, thus indicat- 
ing their most probable centers of dispersion. We must, 
however, allow for more complex conditions, since archaeo- 
logical remains in certain cliff-houses indicate a high de- 
velopment of coil in prehistoric times. The studies of Kroe- 
ber " and Barrett," as to the direction of the spiral coil 
in making the basket, suggest that central California and 
Arizona are of one type, while southern California (the 
Shoshoni-speaking tribes) and the interior as well as on 
northward, are of another. The meaning of this is not 
quite clear, but can be most readily explained as due to 
differentiation from two centers of influence. Hence, the 
chronological relation of coil and twine basketry remains 
a problem for the future. 

The central portion of the bison area marks a hiatus be- 
tween the basketry of the east and the west. Down the 
Mississippi and south from the Great Lakes, across the 
Antilles and on into the manioc or Amazon area of South 

CLOTH 53 

America, basketry has one common characteristic in that 
it is made of flat or splint-like materials. Basketry of this 
sort is also found in the Andean region, but seems not to 
have been the prevailing style. The material is usually 
cane, which is probably responsible for the observed dis- 
tribution. North of the Ohio River and in New England 
where suitable cane was not to be had, we find wood 
splints in use. They are made from the easily separated 
annual layers of certain trees. It seems a reasonable as- 
sumption that a historical connection exists between those 
two forms, and since basketry of cane is very widely dis- 
tributed and the materials more readily prepared, we may 
suspect this to be the parent form." 

In this connection birchbark vessels may*be noted. They 
are an associate of the birchbark canoe from Nova Scotia 
to northern Russia.^* At no place in America, however, 
do they entirely displace woven or coil techniques. 

Though closely analogous to splint basketry, matting does 
not always accompany it. Yet there are few peoples out- 
side of the great hunting areas who do not use mats in 
some form. In the main we have two kinds: those woven 
of flat flexible materials, and those made by binding to- 
gether long reeds or even twigs. 

CLOTH 

We can make one clear distinction between basketry and 
cloth, for the latter is formed by the weaving of spun or 
twisted materials. It is therefore made of string, or yam. 
We have noted that some knowledge of thread-making is 
universal among mankind, but it is otherwise with the 
weaving of cloth. Such weaving in the New World may 
be comprehended under two designations: loom weaving 
and finger weaving, or upward weaving and downward 
weaving. In the loom, the weaver begins at the bottom 
and builds the fabric upward, driving the weft home with 

54 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

a downward stroke; tn the other, the warp threads are htitig 
loosely from a horizontal support and the fabric built 
from the top, the weft being pushed upward into place. In 

loom weaving, a sword or batten is used to beat down 
the weft and also as a shedding device, though an addi- 
tional shedding device may be used. In downward weav- 
ing there are neither battens nor shedding devices, the fingers 

I'Tocccds Vpu-ard 

CLOTH 55 

taking their place, though a bodkin or other pointed instru- 
ment may be used to force the weft into position. 

Loom weaving begins with the Pueblo peoples and ex- 
tends southward over the entire area of intense maize cul- 
ture. Finger weaving is found in the salmon area, the 
Chilkat blanket ^* being the most unique example, and 
covers the entire eastern maize area. The data for the 
Antilles are meager, but since the natives there made some 
use of cotton, it is safe to assume a loom. In South Amer- 
ica the entire manioc area seems to have been influenced 
by the Andean region in that looms of some kind were 
in use. Cotton was raised in many parts for making ham- 
mocks, which were woven on a kind of loom." In fact, the 
loom is a correlated part of the spindle-spinning complex, 
which we have closely associated with cotton. The chances 
are, therefore, that this whole loom complex spread as a 
unit 

The distribution of downward weaving will repay further 
study. Thus in the Aleutian Islands flexible baskets are 
woven suspended, and the Ojibway and other Central Al- 
gonkin tribes wove flexible wallets and soft bags in the 
same way. This, with the Chilkat blanket, gives us a broad 
sweep across the continent. In the main, too, this region 
is also the area of spinning without a spindle. 

Turning aside for a moment, we find a peculiar type of 
sagebrush bark weaving in the plateaus among the Shos- 
honi and Salish in which parallel twisted strands are joined 
by widely separated rows of twined thread in pairs." 
Among the Kwakiutl and neighboring tribes, cedarbark is 
used in the same way. A similar technique for bags and 
mats is found around the Great Lakes and eastward. A 
few specimens from the Salish suggest that wild goat wool 
was sometimes treated in a similar fashion. 

It appears, then, that north of the area of intense maize 
culture we have in general a basketry-like basis for weaving, 

56 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

^irv 

i" 

rll 

J||i F- 

/ 
5^ 

*^ 

s 

S:, 

-^^ 

JU 

V 

S7 

'r 

v^ 

M T™L«.n. 
F Simple F™n,r 

Fig, 17. Diilribulion of Wnxing 

CLOTH 57 

and that when weaving is attempted with twisted elements, 
it is with suspended warp as for baskets and mats. Con- 
sistent with this is the rarity of the spindle. 

Our problem is not simple, however, because among the 
modem Salish we find a frame for weaving coarse wool 
blankets." This may have been introduced by whites, but 
as the batten and shedding devices are absent and the 
weave is downward, we still have one of the weaving char- 
acteristics of the area. Very widely spread is the weaving 
of blankets from twisted strips of rabbit fur, a method 
which has a continuous distribution from Yucatan north- 
ward in Mexico and thence over the great plateau area 
of the United States to Canada where it traverses about 
the whole of the caribou area and reaches far down into 
the eastern maize area. This blanket is usually woven on a 
frame, but also without a batten or shedding device. The 
similarities between the Salish goat wool blanket and the 
rabbitskin blanket are so striking that one must suspect 
some reactionary influence. Returning to our subject, it is 
clear that the loom and upward weaving developed in the 
area of intensive maize culture. Also it appears that the 
spindle tends to associate itself with cotton and wool rather 
than with either of the two main types of weaving. 

Space forbids going into details as to the quality of the 
product. From early accounts it appears that there was a 
remarkably high development in the Andean region. It 
seems that at the time of the Spanish Conquest the textile 
art was the chief social interest and that the whole gov- 
ernmental machinery was directed toward the encourage- 
ment of its production. Thus taxes, fines and tributes were 
levied in fine cloth. As to the qualities, we have not only 
the testimony of early observers, but in the desert burial 
grounds of Peru we have immense storehouses of pre- 
historic cloth preserved completely in the original forms 
and colors. Recent studies of museum collections by a tex- 

58 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

tile expert ** have shown that the fineness of weave exceeds 
that of any other known part of the world. As to forms 
of weave, we find the same techniques as in the Old World, 
even to the pile and gauze. Outside of America, the known 
weaves can mostly be traced to southern Asia; hence, it 
is peculiar that we should find two disconnected world 
centers of textiles and that each should develop the same 

0 Simftt Oft* Wtm: 

techniques. As to the weaves and qualities of Mexico and 
Central America, we are far less certain, since nature has 
not preserved samples for us, but from historical state- 
ments we infer that they also were of a high order. In 
southwestern United States we have an environment analo- 
gous to that of Peru, but which has less perfectly preserved 
examples of textiles from its cliff-houses. This, however, 
is the extreme margin of the area where, consequently, 
we cannot expect very high development. Our museums 
contain a few specimens, but they have not been studied 
by a textile expert. The surviving Pueblos of Arizona and 

FEATHER-WORK 59 

New Mexico and the Navajo still weave, but to what ex- 
tent they have been influenced by white contact we are not 
certain. For a long time they have used the wool of the 
domestic sheep almost exclusively, and though their work 
is highly prized by collectors, it is very coarse when com- 
pared with Peruvian types. Of the cotton cloth in the 
manioc area we have very little data. The early accounts 
of the southern half of the eastern maize area indicate a 
fair degree of textile development,** for while the informa- 
tion available is not specific, the statements of early ob- 
servers lead us to suspect that tapestry and double cloth 
were known, and that while the typical suspended, or 
downward, weaving was used, some tribes used a true 
loom, the two-barred loom, and a loom with three cross 
rods for twilling buffalo-hair cord. Woven feather-work 
was common, and there is mention of painted cloth. Per- 
haps the most distinctive textile of this area was buffalo- 
hair weaving, this art extending far up into the Mississippi 
Valley.*' The Chilkat blanket of the North Pacific Coast 
is quite coarse in weave, though somewhat finer than the 
fabrics of the immediate interior. The remainder of the 
continent, however, cannot boast anything that rises to 
the true cloth standard. 

FEATHER-WORK 

This 5eems a convenient place to note one of the most 
characteristic developments of New World technique, viz,, 
feather- work. The center of the art seems to have been in 
Mexico, where highly decorative schemes were carried out 
by overlaying cloth with feathers. A few specimens have 
been preserved for us, but our real insight into this trait- 
complex is from historical accounts, particularly Sahagun. 
Cloaks and mantles for distinguished persons, headdresses 
for war leaders, and other badges of distinction were in 
feather mosaics.** The less distinguished persons some- 

6o THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

times wore mantles of turkey feathers, an art extending to 
the Pueblo tribes of the United States, thence eastward 
through the Gulf States and northward as far as the Hud- 
son River. On the Pacific Coast feather mosaics reach a 
high state of development in California basketry. Feather 
insignia and headdresses were conspicuous among some of 
die warlike tribes of the bison area. 

Turning southward from Mexico, we find a fair develc^ 
ment of feather mosaics in Peru;" then out into the 
Amazon country where true mosaic work is rare we find 
one of the most characteristic traits to be brilliant feather 
head decorations. Thus, taking Mexico as the center, we 
see a radiation of feather-work into both continents. We 
may also be reminded of the very striking parallel in 
Hawaii and the possibility of an historical connection be- 
tween the two. On the other hand, the technique by which 
the feathers are made fast to the fabric is fundamentally 
different from that used in Peru. 

CLOTHING 

To describe the different styles of clothing for the vari- 
ous groups of natives is impossible in a few pages, but 
some of the general characteristics may be noted. The 
most completely clothed are the Eskimo and the caribou 
hunters of Canada. These people cut out and fit pieces 
of prepared skin together somewhat like a modern tailor. 
Moreover, their patterns are equally intricate and their 
skill in fitting gives distinct local styles. The southern 
limits of tailored skin garments are practically those of the 
caribou area, but in modified form they extend down into 
the most nomadic part of the bison area. Also, in some 
of the inland districts of the salmon area variants appear. 
On the other hand, the whole Pacific Coast plane ifrom 
the Tlino^it of Alaska to Lower California was occupied 
by bare-footed, scantily clothed peoples, among whom the 

CUDTHING 

Pif. 19. Gntnl Tyfu of Ceitumt ant Tlttir 

63 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

true coat and trousers were unknown. In the southern 
part of the eastern maize area, the costume consisted of 
little more than a breech or loin cloth. When needed, a 
robe or kind of loosely fitted cape was put on. Notwith- 
standing its ill adaptation to winter climate, this form of 
costume extended into New England, where, while leggings 
and moccasins protected the feet, the trunk was covered 
by a robe so arranged as to leave one arm free. This was 
covered by a muff -like sleeve.** In the bison area, as far 
north as Dakota, where the winters are severe, the bison 
robe was the only upper garment. It is quite clear, there- 
fore, that tailored skin clothing is an associate of the caribou 
or reindeer area, and that the only definite intrusion it 
makes is in the western part of the bison area and the 
contiguous parts of the salmon area. 

In the great weaving area of Mexico and the Andes, 
clothing is of woven cloth. The peculiarity of such cloth- 
ing is that it was never cut and fitted, but each garment 
was worn in the form in which it came from the loom. 
Thus a poncho, or shirt, is rectangular, with one slit for 
the neck and two for the arms. In some cases very short 
sleeves were added, formed by folding a rectangular piece 
of cloth and sewing. Thus, in the textile area we find the 
tailor's art at its lowest. That this is not entirely a matter 
of environment, is suggested by the weakness of tailoring 
among the skin-wearing tribes of Patagonia, who do little 
more than mufHe themselves in a robe. Originally this robe 
was worn over one shoulder as in eastern United States. 

When we look to the Old World we find a similar dis- 
tribution. In Siberia and northern Europe, we have tailor- 
ing of reindeer skins. Across southern Asia and around 
the Mediterranean is the great historical textile area from 
which all our own fine textiles seem to have been derived. 
As we proceed southward into Africa and Australia we 
meet with peoples who wear skins, but who do not cut them 

Fig. 10. Fomu ef Poahnar 

64 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

into garments. While there is a climatic factor here, 
there are still other influences to be considered. Europeans 
and their New World offspring are the only peoples except 
the Chinese who specialize in the cutting and fitting of 
cloth. History shows that tailored garments came into 
Europe relatively late, whereas in China they seem to 
be very ancient. Now the Chinese and Europeans were in 
contact with the reindeer hunters of the north and when 
we have such continuity for the distribution of a trait we 
usually consider it a case of diffusion from one center,** 
The continuity of the trait in Siberia and America is also 
clear. We see, then, that the whole tailoring art of the 
world has a continuous geographical distribution and centers 
around skin garments rather than those of cloth. 

It has been noted that certain peculiar styles of garment 
in the bison area were due to the natural form of the skim.** 
This seems to be the natural consequence with a people 
who, lacking tailoring* traditions, worked out a more com- 
plete costume of skins. We have noted that in the case of 
textiles the rectangular form necessitated by the technique 
of loom weaving, together with the lack of the tailoring 
idea, gave a characteristic form to the woven garments. 
In the bison area we find a skin poncho which follows 
so closely the main form of the textile poncho to the 
south that it is difficult to deny a historical relation, though, 
as stated above, the similarity is disguised by the peculiar 
contour of the edges of the skin. 

There are many other interesting problems in costume, 
but we have no space for their discussion. For example, a 
study of footgear is highly suggestive. Thus we find in 
both the Old and New World that the sandal is a correla- 
tive of textile clothing. In the bison area, moccasins have 
hard soles in contrast to those of the forest regions, which, 
considering the geographical relations, suggests the intrusion 
of the sandal idea, though denied by Hatt^* Going bare- 

CLOTHING 

65 

foot is peculiarly prevalent on the west coast of the salmon 
area and is the rule in the southern half of the eastern 
maize area and thence through the Antilles and down the 
eastern side of the Andes. In Patagonia a skin shoe again 
appears, but the Fuegians tend to go barefoot. 

1. Adair, 1775. I. 

2. Crawford, 1915. I. 

3. Parker, cited by Wissler, 191 5. 
II. 

4. Nelson, E. W., 1899. I- 

5. Roth, 1910. I. 

6. Kissel], 1916. II. 

7. Rau, 1884. I. 

8. Stefansson, 1914. I; 1919. 1 

9. Moore, 1916. I. 
ID. Mason, 1904. I. 

11. Kissell, 1916. I. 

12. Kroeber, 1908. I. 

13. Barrett, 1908. I. 
I4« Speck, 1920. I. 

15. Boas in Teit, 1909. I. 

16. Emmons, 1907. I. 

17. Im Thurn, 1883. I. 

18. Teit, 1900. I. 

19. Teit, 1909. I. 

20. Crawford, 1915. I; 1916. I. 

21. Du Pratz, 1758. I; Lewis, T. 
H., (Editor), 1907. I; Hun- 
ter, 1823. I; Adair, 1775. I; 
Kalm, 1772. I. 

22. Bushnell, 1909. I. 

23. Seler, 1904. I. 

24. Mead, 1907. I. 

25. Willoughby, 1905. I. 

26. Hatt, 1916. I. 

27. Wissler, 1915. II. 

28. Hatt, 1916. I. 

CHAPTER IV 

THE CERAMIC ARTS 

The first point to demand our attention is the distribu- 
tion of pottery in general. As nearly as can be told, at the 
time of discovery, North America had but one large area 
in which no pottery was made. If we draw a line from 
Ottawa to the mouth of the St. Lawrence and another to 
Edmonton, and then one from Edmonton to Los Atigeles, 
we shall have, in the rough, the northern boundary to pot- 
tery making. There seems to have been a narrow strip 
down into the bison area that should be excepted. This 
extended down through the country of the Arapaho, Chey- 
enne, Kiowa, and Comanche. On the other hand, certain 
early information for the Ojibway, Cree, and Blackfoot 
westward from Winnipeg, indicates that they made pot- 
tery; but this about exhausts the exceptions. Practically 
the whole of the Pacific belt and the great sweep of the 
caribou area is without pottery, but the Eskimo of Alaska 
and eastward at least as far as Coronation Gulf made it. 
Archaeological evidence does not change the boundary; 
hence, we may infer that the distribution of pottery was 
still in progress at the opening of the period of discovery 
and that it was distributed from the South. In Siberia 
we find a pottery somewhat like that of the Eskimo, which 
suggests that in this case the trait is intrusive from Asia. 
Yet, we must not overlook the possibility of contact with 
North American potters around Hudson Bay, a region 
whose archaeology is absolutely unknown. The improba- 
bility of this arises from the absence of the trait from the 

greater part of the caribou-hunting peoples, its tendency 

66 

CERAMICS 

Fi(. a. Dittribution af PMUrj 

68 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

to fail the most typical bison hunters, and that its encroach- 
ment in each case resembles the fringe of an adjoining 
area. We see that its extension out into Saskatchewan and 
Alberta is coincident with the distribution of Algonkian- 
speaking tribes : the Blackfoot, Cree, and Ojibway. In the 
bison area the encroachments are chiefly among the Siouan- 
speaking tribes. Then, if we recall the limits of maize 
culture, we note a rather close agreement between the dis- 
tributions for the two traits. As we know that maize 
came up from the South, it is reasonable to suppose that 
pottery came by the same road. As to their time relations, 
we cannot be so sure, for though pottery has gone a little 
farther than maize culture, there is a climatic limit to the 
latter. 

Over the Antilles, through Mexico, and on into South 
America was the great pottery region. In some places 
archaeologists have uncovered deposits of sherds many feet 
thick, suggesting an intensive pursuit of the art similar to 
that for textiles (p. 57). Outside of the Andean area pot- 
tery is less intense. It has been reported from sections 
of the manioc area throughout, from which we may infer 
that its distribution there is approximately continuous. In 
the South, somewhere near the 30° latitude, it disappears 
altogether, so that about the only part of the southern con- 
tinent that did not make some pretense of pottery was 
lower Patagonia and a portion of the Brazilian highlands. 

PROCESSES OF MANUFACTURE 

The process of manufacture varied according to locality, 
but one general characteristic applies to all, no wheel was 
used in the New World. It is true that large vessels were 
often built up on shallow baskets and turned slowly to bring 
the successive parts within easy reach, but this does not 
involve the principle of the* wheel. Even the Lacandone 
(Guatemala) method of supporting the pot upon a block 

CERAMICS 69 

which is turned by the feet, is not a true wheel, for the 
turning is merely for the sake of bringing all parts of the 
surface to the potter's hand/ 

As a rule, all the New World potters used the coil 
method; i.e., slender rods of clay were rolled out to con- 
venient lengths and the vessel built up spirally. In some 
vessels from the Pueblo area the original traces of the coils 
were retained as decorative motives, but as a rule, the sur- 
faces were afterwards scraped smooth and to the requisite 
thinness. So far as we have data, the coil method was used 
in all of the Aoutlon area of South America and in south- 
western and eastern United States, except in the general 
area about the Great Lakes. In this northern section, we 
have the Mandan-Hidatsa type, fully described by G. L. 

Fig. IS' Lower Mississippi Pottsry. Hohnes, 1903. 1 

Wilson,* in which the vessel is worked out from a single 
block of clay, then beaten into shape with a paddle, fired, 
rubbed with grease, and coated with a solution of boiled 
maize. Less complete, but still adequate data from the 
Blackfoot, Menomini, and Pawnee indicate that in the upper 
Mississippi area we had a generalized type of this process 
in contrast to the coil method. Eastward in the northern 
Algonkin area our data are not so good, but it is generally 
believed that the coil process prevailed, except in the far- 
thest north where the pottery was very crude. 

This upper Mississippi, or Mandan-Hidatsa type has a 
striking resemblance to Alaska-Siberian pottery. The 
studies of Jochelson and Bogoras * show one general method 
for Alaska and eastern Siberia, a method closely paralleling 

70 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

the Mandan-Hidatsa type. The Blackfoot, Mencwnini, Cree, 
and some of the adjacent tribes fired their pots by putting 
them over the fire, as in use, after first soaking them with 
fat. This is also the usual method among the Chukchee 
and Alaskan Eskimo. The archaeological specimens col- 

Fig. 14- Souih Atlantic Pottery. Holmes, 2903. 1 

lected by Stefansson at Cape Parry also show this crude 
firing. We thus have two regions with similar pottery 
traits, which as previously stated, may, after all, be con- 
nected west of Hudson Bay. If so, we may speak of this 
northern pottery area as a possible intrusion from Asia. 

In Mexico, Central America, and the Andean region the 
coil method seems to have been in use, but as to its relative 
position we cannot be sure. Traces of molding are seen in 
prehistoric pottery from Central America and Peru, where 

Algonlcin Iroquois Mandan Mounds 

Fig, 25. North Atlantic and Upper Mississippi Pottery, Holmes, 1903,1 

the potter's art ceased to be mere woman's work and rose 
to the level of a profession. On a priori grounds the coil 
method seems ill adapted to the fine modeling found here, 
yet it is clear that it is the fundamental method throughout 
the greater part of the pottery area. That it is the most 

CERAMICS 71 

primitive way may be doubted, since we find the crude 
pottery of the upper Mississippi and the trans-Bering region 
simply worked out from a mass. Such questions, how- 
ever, must await chronological studies of the ceramic art. 
The methods of tempering day with sand, gravel, pul- 
verized stone, or shell, used in the New World, are not 
essentially different from those employed in the Old. The 
use of "slips," or thin washes of such clays as will give 
pleasing color tones was understood in most places, the 
exceptions being the southern coast of Brazil and Patagonia, 
the greater part of eastern United States, the upper Mis- 

Fir. Jtf. PoUtry from SoMihwestgm United Statu 

sissippi, and Alaska. In short, the use of "slips" is found 
wherever pottery rises above the mere utilitarian level. 

The principle of glaze, highly characteristic of later Old 
World pottery, was not understood in the New. Yet, in 
the Pueblo area, a true glaze was used for decoration, giv- 
ing us wliat is known as the glazed type.* Since this glaze 
does not cover the entire surface, its use could not have 
been to make vessels water-tight. Glazed ware has also 
been reported from Totonac sites near Vera Cruz and also 
from the vicinity of Coban, Guatemala. 

However, when we turn to pottery paints the New World 
takes high rank. A brief visit to a museum will make 
this point clear. The only place where aboriginal pottery 
of the higher type survived the Conquest is in southwestern 
United States, and it is from here that most of our know- 
ledge of processes comes. Here we find the paints of both 
vegetable and mineral origin, the reds and yellows from 

7^ 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

iron, the blacks from juices of plants. By proper firing, the 
desired colors could be made permanent. On the whole, 
a'boriginal clay work was almost exclusively limited to oma- 

Pig. 27, Mexican Pottery 

mental and useful vessels, though in a few localities in the 
United States the stone pipe gave way to one of clay and 
in certain parts of Mexico true bricks were made. 

POTTERY FORMS 

Our consideration of pottery forms may properly begin 
with the United States/ On the whole, wherever pottery 
is extensively manufactured, there is considerable variety 
of form, but still the preference is given to two or three 
forms which may be taken as the distinguishing character- 
istics of the several areas. For example, in the Missis- 

Pig. aB, Central American Pottery, MacCurdy, 1911, 1 

sippi Valley the most distinctive forms are the bottle-like 
vases and effigy bowls. Among the latter are some re- 
markable human heads.* 

In the South Atlantic region, the bowl is the prevailing 
form and one type approaches the olla of the Southwest. 
In the North Atlantic area is the well-known pointed-bot- 

CERAMICS 73 

totned jar of the Algonkin, and inland the highly original 
Iroquois square-topped pot. Finally, in the upper Missis- 
sippi, we find a simple, globular, narrow-rimmed pot. The 
greatest variety of form is in the lower Mississippi area, 
where ceramics rises to the level of a true art. 

Proceeding southward, the next great pottery area is 
southwestern United States, where the leading forms are 
the shallow bowl and the bulging olla. 

Notwithstanding the great complexity of ceramic culture 
in Mexico and Central America, there is at least one char- 

Fig. 19. Peruvian Pottery 

acteristic form throughout, viz,, a support of three long 
legs. There is also a tendency toward flat bottoms and 
cylindrical bodies in vessels not supported by legs. 

In Colombia and Ecuador, hourglass shapes abound, 
while in Peru, we find the pointed jar, the double jar of 
which "whistling jars'* are an example, and the effigy vase, 
the latter reminding one of the lower Mississippi group. 
In southern and eastern Brazil, the most distinctive shape 
is the bulging burial urn, in some cases with a hood. Fre- 
quently, these urns take an hourglass form which is also 
the leading form for household pottery north of the Ama- 
zon. In addition, throughout the whole of the Amazon 
pottery area we find an extraordinarily large tub-shaped 
vessel, and in eastern Brazil a local development of effigy 
jars quite parallel to that of the lower Mississippi.^ 

An interesting theoretical problem lies in these pottery 
forms. It appears that almost everywhere the cooking pot 

74 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

tends toward the oval or hemispherical ^rm and that the 
regional distinctions we have drawn are in vessels for other 
purposes, often largely ornamental. Thus, when we move 
northward from the lower Mississippi, pottery beccHnes 
strictly a vessel for cooking, or specifically utilitarian. In 
the North Atlantic area, pottery has a rival in soapstone, 
but vessels of this material have a form of their own which 
seems to have something in common with the cooking kettle 

Calchaqui Brufl Brazil Guiana 

Fig. so. Pottery Forms from Eastern South America. Joyce, tgti. I.; 
Von den Steinen, 1897. /.; Im Thum, 1883. 1 

of the eastern Eskimo. Some pottery vessels collected by 
Stefansson and Anderson between Hudson Bay and the 
Mackenzie River have corners quite like Eskimo soapstone 
kettles, but the better type of Alaskan ware has a shape like 
that common in Aleutian baskets; yet, if there Jjs a funda- 
mental ceramic container concept in the New \ljprid, it is 
that of the globntar tuoking pot. The strong clJ^imS lor 
the recognition of this form appear when we exa^ne the 
animal-like vessels of Central America and the loWer Mis- 
sissippi in which we usually see the globular part with orna- 
mental appendages. 

POTTERY DECORATION 

Decorations of pottery fall into two groups, those pro- 
duced by secondary modeling and true designs. The former 
is a prominent feature in Peru, Colombia, Central America, 
the lower Mississippi, and eastern Brazil. Elsewhere it is 

CERAMICS 75 

relatively infrequent, the preference being given to painted 
or incised designs. The secondary modeling of the so- 
called Chiriqui pottery from Panama has been carefully 
studied by MacCurdy" who finds that practically all con- 
sists of efforts to represent the armadillo and the alligator. 
Von den Steinen has given an illuminating discussion of 
animal forms in eastern Brazil, in some cases so reduced 
by conventionalization as to appear symbolic* A some- 
what similar study has been made of lower Mississippi 
pottery,*® but without the help of the makers, the specimens 
being prehistoric. In Colombia we find frog and monkey- 
like creatures represented as peeping over the rims of jars, 
but it is in Peru that ceramic modeling reaches its highest 
level. Here, we not only have animals and natural objects 
faithfully represented, but human heads so executed as to 
suggest their being portrait jars. 

Painted and incised ceramic decorations tend to be geo- 
metric and often closely parallel textile designs, to be dis- 
cussed under the next head. We shall, therefore, defer 
their discussion until the whole subject of design has been 
considered. 

1. Tozzer, 1907. I. 6. Moore, 191 1. I. 

2. Wilson, G. L., Am. Mus. Mss. 7. Von den Steinen, 1897. I. 

3. Bogoras, 1904. I; Jochelson, 8. MacCurdy, 191 1. I. 

1908. I. 9. Von den Steinen, 1897, I, p. 

4. Kidder, M. A. and A. V., 191 7. 264. 

I; Nelson, N. C, 1916. I. 10. Holmes, 1903. I. 

5. Holmes, 1903. I. 

CHAPTER V 
DECORATIVE DESIGNS 

In the preceding discussions we have ignored the most 
interesting and suggestive sides of textiles and ceramics, 
namely, their decorations. Wherever such products occur 
we almost always find them richly ornamented by designs 
in color which constitute the greater part of the decorative 
art of their makers. Taking the New World decorative 
designs as a whole, we are impressed with their extreme 
geometric unrepresentative character and the rarity of realis- 
tic art. A stroll through a large museum reveals an as- 
tonishing complexity of geometrical design in contrast to 
similar collections from the Old World. Nowhere else do 
we find anything in basketry approaching the finest basketry 
decorations of the Pacific Coast or in pottery that of the 
Andean region. From the standpoint of aesthetic values, 
the ancient Old World products may be rated as superior, 
but the range and richness of geometric design in the New 
World cannot be denied. 

Anthropologists have given the subject of decorative de- 
sign a great deal of attention, and we consequently have for 
the tribes of the northern continent a body of special re- 
search literature not equalled by that for any other part of 
the world. Quite recently, the use of ceramic design as an 
index to chronology and relationship in extinct cultures has 
appeared as a special method in archaeological research and 
promises a considerable development in the near future.* 
Unfortunately, no such progress has been made in the art 
of the southern continent or even for the Antilles and Mex- 

76 

DECORATIVE DESIGNS ^^ 

ico. Our first task, therefore, is to consider rather fully 
the status of the North American design problem and then 
to view the southern continent from that horizon. 

TEXTILE DESIGNS 

If we compare the decorations upon a representative 
series of baskets from the Rocky Mountain region with 
those upon a series of pottery vessels from Arizona and 
New Mexico, there seems to be a definite similarity. Closer 
inspection suggests that this is true because certain combina- 
tions of angles and checker patterns are common to both. 
The chief point of difference is that curved lines and realis- 
tic figures are rare in basketry, whereas they occur with 
somewhat greater frequency on the pottery in question. 
Again, if we examine the blankets of the Navajo, we find 
a series of designs strikingly like those upon the basket 
series. Since we know that the Navajo weaving is of 
recent origin, we infer that many of their blanket designs 
were borrowed from basketry and because of the much 
greater distribution of the latter, that the pottery designs 
were also greatly influenced thereby. 

An important point has been made that the technique of 
weaving itself places certain form limitations upon designs 
which tend to make them similar, irrespective of the wishes 
of the artist.' In all weaving we have a geometrical rela- 
tion between the warp and weft elements since they have a 
right-angle relation to each other and, in the main, can 
build up a design by equal rectangular units only. In bas- 
ketry these units are usually so lar^e that diagonals can only 
be run as steps and even in cloth it is difficult to escape this 
effect. These stepped designs and diagonal rows of small 
squares constitute one of the prevailing characteristics of 
textile art, 50 that in our discussions of desi?:n distribution 
we must make full allowance for similarities due to the limi- 
tations imposed by the weaving technique. 

78 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

For example, we find a certain type of designs ior cane 
baskets in Louisiana, and passing over to northern South 
America," we find baskets of similar materials with designs 

ABC 

¥ff®fl^ 

fit- }'■ Tjt*i of TfrtUi Ofnfn. a. Cktcitr; b, Tmtl; e, A Typifl 
Patlim from Caiw Baikitry; d, D«if. from Iht Penn Tnaly Wamfum 
Bttt; t. Bird Fit%rt from PtruviaH Clolh; i, Dtript an a Pcni-Ma 
Batkri. Holmti, iSa.I 

almost identical. In this case we have other facts that sti^- 
gest this similarity to be but another example of culture dif- 
fusion. Yet, we can find baskets in some of the Pacific 

'fflipii^i 

jgg 

\^^Bw:miii 

g- 51 

DECORATIVE DESIGNS 79 

Islands which can scarcely be distinguished from cane bas- 
kets of the New World, if we consider the designs only, 
and in this case there is no good reason for expecting dif- 
fusion. 

The limitations set by weaving are more clearly shown 
when realistic figures are attempted (Fig. 31 ). Painted pot- 
tery, on the other hand, imposes no such restrictions m the 
matter of design, but leaves the hand free to make curves 
of any form. Accordingly, when we find the aboriginal 
potters of Arizona and New Mexico using a great array of 
checked and angular patterns, with stepped lines, we must 
necessarily refer them to textiles. 

Another significant point is that the extensive use of real- 
istic figures in cloth occurs only where weaving is highly 
developed, as in Peru and Mexico. When we examine 
examples of such decorations as are preserved in our mu- 
seum collections, we note that even so, these figures are 
greatly distorted to make their contours coincide with the 
fixed lines of weaving. Further, it is also in these same 
localities that pottery decorations become more realistic, 
suggesting that some allowance must be made for the de- 
gfrees of complexity in the culture of the weavers. It may 
be that the simple designs upon New England (Algonkin) 
pottery are about all that can be expected from such a crude 
cultural setting. Yet, we must conclude that in the earlier 
stages of their historical developments in the New World 
both textiles and pottery were decorated with geometric 
designs and that the use of realistic figures came later. 
This is somewhat at variance with a current theory of art 
genesis which considers geometric art to be mere conven- 
tionalizations of earlier realistic figures. We have already 
noted how the weaving technique itself conventionalized all 
figures and have recognized other factors producing con- 
ventional effects, but the cultural conditions in the New 
World do not seem consistent with the above theory of de- 

8o THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

sign origin. The total distribution of the several types of 
design points clearly to a development from the simplest 
geometrical textile designs to the realistic textile figures. 

DISTRIBUTION OF DESIGNS 

Like many other cultural traits, designs tend to fall into 
geographical groups. While the boundaries to such areas 
cannot always be drawn with great precision, their centers 
can be located without much difficulty. We have noted that 
California seemed to be the center of the highest attain- 
ments in basket-making, and it so happens that this is also 
the great center for basketry designs. As indicated on the 
map (Fig. 14) the basketry area includes the great plateau 
region extending from well up into British Columbia south- 
ward to the non-Pueblo tribes of Arizona and New Mex- 
ico. Here we saw that two kinds of technique were in use, 
coil and woven basketry, usually twined weaving, and that 
while tribes tend to specialize now in one of these and then 
in another, this variation seems to have little effect upon the 
designs, for the same designs occur upon both. The coil 
technique offers great freedom in design because of its simi- 
larity to embroidery; but this is perhaps, compensated by 
the trick of overlaying twined strands with thin strips of 
colored materials to produce the designs. In the inland 
salmon area, coil baskets are decorated by imbrication, which 
is also an ingenious overlay, and for that reason was most 
likely derived from twine overlay. The basketry of the 
Tlingit gives a different type of decoration, chiefly in the 
use of bands of overlay, but these are a secondary part of 
the art of the North Pacific area to which we shall return 
later. 

Another important art center is to be found among the 
Pueblo peoples of the Southwest, where we see an exuberant 
development of pottery designs and blanket decorations.* 
Archaeological collections ' show that, if anything, there has 

DESIGN AREAS 

8i 

been a deterioration in pottery decoration during the his^ 
toric period but, on the other hand, there seems to have been 
a marked development in blanket designs. We are clear 

fig- 33' Decorative Design Areas in North America: i. North Pacific 
Coast Center; 2. California Center: 3, Southwest, or Pueblo Center; 
4, Plains, or Bison Center; 5, Eastern Center — subtypes a and b; 
6, Sontkeastem, or Gulf Center 

that Navajo textiles have passed through a development of 
this kind, for the old specimens are almost entirely striped.' 
While Navajo weaving is supposed to be of recent origin, 
it is obvious that the designs were not copied from Euro- 

82 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

pean techniques, but from aboriginal American modds. 
Further, we have some textile remains from cliff ruins in 
which striped decorations are the rule and the same tendency 
is shown in Hopi and Zuni weaving. A few exceptional 
specimens have come to notice that bear designs of another 
character, particularly those from the Gila River;' but 
these are toward the south and may therefore be intrusive. 

However, our most important problem in this area is to 
be found in pottery decoration. If we consider modem 
Pueblo pottery only, we find that its designs are largely 
geometric in appearance, although a strong realistic tend- 
ency is also plainly evident. Even many of the highly coo* 
ventionalized geometric forms prove tQ be symbols of 
mountains, clouds, thunder, rain, etc., while among them 
appear unmistakable drawings of plants and animals. Yet, 
taking modern pottery as a whole, the geometrical char- 
acter of the designs seems to predominate. In the discus- 
sions of Southwestern chronology, we shall see that the 
more widely diffused and older type of pottery is decidedly 
geometric in character. Thus, two of the favorite design 
concepts are the simple checker textile pattern and the step 
or "terrace." Again, if we look almost anywhere in the 
Pueblo area we shall find these patterns occurring. They 
have so sure a place in textile art and lend themselves so 
much less readily to freehand work that a non-pottery origin 
is suggested. Quite recently a localized tendency toward 
realistic pottery painting has come to notice in southwestern 
New Mexico, but even here we also meet with the familiar 
geometric designs.* 

Adjoining the southwest and east of the great basketry 
area is the bison area, which is weak in basketry and cloth, 
but still has a highly developed embroidery of beads and 
quills in which the designs are geometric and manifest many 
of the characteristics of textile designs.* In fact, the way 
in which beads and quills are handled in this area requires 

DESIGN AREAS 

84 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

that designs be built up by accretions of small rectangular 
surface contours, which is just what we have in weaving. 
If our general principle of technique limitations holds, we 
should expect to find geometric forms prevailing. This is 
exactly what we do find (Fig. 34). 

Even among the basket-making Apache of the Southwest, 
we find objects of skin decorated with designs upon covered 
surfaces of beads. This is clearly an intrusion from the 
bison area because it is only now and then that we find 
identity between the designs on Apache baskets and objects 
of skin, each having a style of its own. On the other hand, 
these beaded designs are quite like those found far out 
into the buffalo country. These buffalo hunters did not 
decorate pottery, in fact, some did not even make it, but 
they did paint rawhide objects and, strange to say, even this 
freehand work was in geometric designs not at all unlike 
those in beads and quills. While the reason for this is not 
entirely clear, we note that all the beadwork is by women, 
who also paint the geometric designs, whereas the men who 
paint upon robes, tents, etc., use realistic figures. This 
suggests that the difference may be merely a matter of social 
convention. 

An important problem is the origin of Plains art as a 
whole. Though we have shown that bead technique im- 
poses textile limits upon the decorations, the fact that the 
Plains area is in direct contact with basketry-making peoples 
and the weavers of the Southwest reveals the possibility of 
diffusion. While this, like most other problems, is one for 
the future, there are several good reasons for believing that 
the art of the bison, or Plains area, is in the main an inde- 
pendent development. In the first place, its center is in the 
very heart of the area, while it is weakest on the margins. 
In its great western Shoshoni fringe we find a condition 
not unlike that of the Apache in that beadwork and basketry 
exist side by side but with different design systems. 

DESIGN AREAS 85 

There is, however, a more direct approach to the problem 
by the analytic comparison of designs. Kroeber " has care- 
fully analyzed the designs of California baskets and Plains 
beadwork in search of the prevalent design units. When 
these are found, they prove to be, in the main, very simple 
geometric forms and though many can be very closely 
matched for the two areas, their very simplicity, taken with 
the principle of textile limitation, lessens the probability 
of their common origin. On the other hand, if we take 
more complex design wholes we find very little correspon- 
dence between the two areas, for each has a number of 
highly unique designs not found in any other part of the 
world. Hence, even this method tends to assert inde- 
pendence of origin. 

MLMA 

^^^ ^ /////////////A. -: 

Fif. 36. Design Elements Used in Plains Indian Beadwork. 

Kroeber, 1908. II 

To the north and east of the Plains area we have another 
art area in which neither ceramics nor true textiles play 
an important part. This region comprises the greater part 
of the caribou area and the northern half of the eastern 
maize area, a region in which, although the decorations are 
again by beads and quills, there is yet a distinct type of 
design. Here we have exactly the opposite of the preced- 
ing, for instead of textile-like designs we find curved figures 
and more or less realistic, plant-like forms. The cause for 
this very extraordinary contrast is an important problem. 

86 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

When we try to locate the geographic center of this art, 
it proves somewhat elusive, but closer inspection reveals 
two sub-centers, one in eastern Canada, the other near Lake 
Superior. The eastern sub-type has been brought to notice 
by Speck ^* under the designation double-curve art (Fig. 
37). These curved designs, while obviously resembling 
vines and leaves, are still somewhat less realistic than bead- 
work designs of the western sub-type, perhaps because of 
their greater conventionalization. Though these curved de- 
signs do occur in beads and quill, they are more frequently 
found incised in birchbark or painted on skins. The best- 
known examples of the latter are the Naskapi coats in mu- 
seum collections. These observations suggest that this east- 
ern sub-center was originally dominated by freehand work 
upon skins and bark from which the somewhat similar 
beaded designs were most likely copied. No cloth is made 
here and practically no woven decorated basketry, but we 
find some woven wampum belts and some bands of quill and 
moose-hair interwoven with bast fiber, in which the designs 
tend to be geometric. So far, we do not recall a single exam- 
ple of the double-curve art in these truly woven objects. 
All this suggests that we have here at the eastern sub- 
center a type of design which developed from freehand 
drawing upon skins and birchbark. 

When we turn to the western sub-type we find practically 
no painting upon skins or decorative drawing upon bark and 
the beaded decorations correspondingly more numerous and 
decidedly floral. From this sub-center come those admir- 
ably beadedHowers seen in our museum collections. Speck " 
has included the more conventionalized examples of these 
under his double-curve motive, but all they have in com- 
mon seems to arise from their universal floral foundations. 
While there is little in the way of skin painting accompany- 
ing the western subtype of beading, there is a far greater 
textile development, especially at the sub-center. The weav- 

DESIGN AREAS 87 

ing of bands containing quills or moose-hair is a feature in 
the Dene region. From the Ojibway of Wisconsin south- 
ward, we find a rather high development of bag weaving 
and many forms of mats. The designs upon quill bands 
and mats are almost without exception geometric, while 
bags show two forms — purely textile geometric and realistic 
animal figures. Drawing and sketching upon birchbark was 
developed almost to the point of writing and in that sense 
was not decorative. It was, however, entirely pictographic 
Wooden objects were not infrequently adorned with incised 
curved designs somewhat like the floral effects in beads. 
The chief differences, therefore, between the two sub- 
centers are the disturbing textile developments in the west, 
with a decided realistic tendency in beadwork, while in the 
east freehand double-curve floral figures prevailed. The 
similarities are in the more fundamental character — a pre- 
dominatingly freehand floral decoration. In the preceding 
areas we found textiles or embroidery techniques in the 
majority, and at the same time the decorative art was 
geometric. But here in the north and east we find textiles 
extremely weak; yet, when they do appear they tend to 
geometric forms. Beadwork, however, more often followed 
the freehand motives than not. So we see here the sugges- 
tion of a chronological relation in that this particular beaded 
art was derived from bark and skin decorations. 

The extreme floral character of some of this beadwork 
has led many to regard the whole as a post-Columbian de- 
velopment. The very wide distribution of the Cree and 
Montagnais, together with their very early intimate associa- 
tion with French colonists, presents a favorable condition 
to rapid diffusion. Yet, the very characteristic double- 
curve art on bark and painted skins cannot be attributed to 
Europeans. All that can reasonably be conceded is that 
their trade stimulated the use of beads, and their decorative 
preferences tended to emphasize the old floral character. 

88 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

On the other hand, there seems not the least reason to doubt 
that the very striking beaded flowers of the west are due to 
European influence. 
Strange to say, all the regicMis we have so far ccmsidered 

Fig. JT- Dtcotatiem m BircUiark ftam Eoittrn Nerth Ammca. 
Tht ufpiT fipmi rrtrtmt tht liit a»d bottom of a bark vmrt from 
Ike Pnabicat ludiant. The lotter tketch it a tyfical "deubU nwtw" 
4etiiii. iCenler 5b, Fit. JS-i Spteb, ip/f. I 

are almost completely innocent of carving or modeling in the 
round, everything being flat. But we now turn to the North 
Pacific Coast and Eskimo areas where carving is the leading 
art. Faint traces of carving appear at the northern border 
of California and grow strcmger as we ascend the coast 

DESIGN AREAS 89 

untU we reach the Haida of the Queen Charlotte Islands 
which seems to be its geographical center. In the central 
part of the area we find the great totem poles and colossal 
grave figures, besides an endless array of smaller objects, all 
in wood. As we proceed still farther northward, wood 
tends to disappear and ivory to take its place. Like most 
other traits, ivory carving begins to be frequent with the 
Tlingit and gradually grows in intensity as wood disap- 
pears, the difference appearing merely as a matter of en- 
vironment. Then as we go around the north coast of 
Alaska and eastward along the extended habitat of the 
Eskimo, carving almost dies out. This peculiar distribu- 
tion among the Eskimo suggests an indirect historical rela- 
tion with the carving center. 

The intense development of carving at this center has a 
noticeable effect upon decoration. Boas ^' has shown how 
the very curious relief carving upon the outsides of wooden 
vessels results from an attempt to carry around the con- 
tour of animals or men in such a way that the whole may 
stand for a realistic model. Naturally, when flat surfaces 
are treated the whole figure is spread out upon it. Some- 
times these designs are merely laid out in color and though 
no doubt more conventionalized thereby, they are still the 
imdeniable offspring of carving. All this is a feature of 
the central group of tribes where the art is most intense 
and where it is, in part, at least, the expression of a very 
complex system of beliefs concerning family ancestors. 
North from the Tlingit and south from the Nootka of Van- 
couver Island we have many vessels carved in the life- 
like forms of animals, but practically no trace of the relief 
ornamentation just mentioned, a fact which strongly sug- 
gests that this feature is purely a development of the more 
intense art at the center and that it is, therefore, relatively 
recent. 

We have noted that there is also a textile center in this 

90 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

region, but we now see that it does not coincide with that 
for carving, its location being inland among the Salish peo- 
ples. Emmons ** has made a good case for the relatively 
recent introduction of the Chilkat blanket to that tribe. 
In this famous textile we usually find the queer spread-out 
animal forms noted above and not the usual type of textile 
designs. It has been clearly shown that this decoration was 
directly copied from house fronts.^' Now, if the blanket 
came from the southeast it must have arisen in a place 
and at a time too remote to have incorporated this decora- 
tion at the start. In fact, there is evidence of several sorts 
to show that these textiles were originally decorated with 
bands of small geometric figures. The basketry of the 
Haida and Tlingit*' shows a similar banded style, and 
this, in turn, has a curious resemblance to the quill woven 
bands of the Dene people of the adjacent caribou area. 
The significance of the latter is not clear. 

Thus, we find in this art area a good example of conflict 
between a carving center and a textile one, the Chilkat 
blanket being about the only compromise. The Eskimo of 
Alaska took up basketry but not its design decoration. 

Next we turn to a more difficult problem; namely, the 
art of the southern half of the eastern maize area. The 
data available are so much less adequate than for the pre- 
ceding that one must hesitate even to enter such a discus- 
sion. For though, as stated elsewhere, we have historical 
records vouching for a higher textile development in the 
Gulf States than in the north, no specimens have come 
down to us. There are reasons for suspecting that the 
bag weaving we have noted for the upper section of the 
Mississippi Valley is in a large measure the fringe of this 
area, but without some corroborative data we are scarcely 
justified in formulating it as an assumption. Basketry has 
survived in Louisiana," where we find cane weaving in 
designs of black and red. As previously stated, the mate- 

DESIGN AREA'S 

91 

rial and technique restrict designs to just such as we find 
here, and from this it may be inferred that they truly 
represent the former basketry art of the whole South- 
eastern area. What may be the relation of the pottery 
found here to the historic tribes is also a puzzle. If this 
pottery was extant at the period of discovery, then one of 
the most distinctive design concepts was the spiral scroll. 

When we turn to the art of the intense culture area, our 
problem becomes very largely one of archaeology and the 
yet undetermined sequences of culture, because the thorough- 
ness of the Spanish conquest practically obliterated the 

Pig. 3$. Prekistorie Sketches of Textile Designs from the Maya, 

Spinden, 1913- / 

native culture. No doubt careful research would still re- 
veal many surviving traits in the present populations of 
these countries but such studies have not been sufficiently 
numerous to assist us. As suggestions we may cite 
Tozzer's" study of the Lacandones as a surviving Maya 
people. 

With numerous dense groups of people, as in ancient 
Mexico and Peru, where a political organization gradually 
overflowed and submerged the successive local groups, there 
must have been a great variety of art types that persisted 
in the homely affairs of life; but the succeeding centuries 
of European trade seem to have swept them into oblivion. 
For Mexico and southward we have no clear idea of the 
aboriginal textile development. Among the present Hui- 
chol " we find considerable weaving in which the designs 
have a marked realistic tendency. So far as known, diis 

92 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

is a trait of the modern textile art for the whole stretch of 
country from the Rio Grande to Panama. While it is cer- 
tain that we have here a result due in part to contact with 
Spanish culture, there is no reason for assuming that a 

MfeSIMM^^l 

sssssssssw 

in Narlhtm Utzieo 

new textile art was created since the conquest. The gen- 
eral similarity to Peru, in the range and direction of con- 
ventionalization, is sufficient warrant for assuming an orig- 
inal textile art of a similar level,' We may, however, get 
some idea of Maya textile design from the known sculp- 
tures and codices." According to early Spanish author- 
ities, the Maya peoples were the most expert weavers in 
New Spain, which statement, if true, enables us to gauge 

DESIGN AREAS 93 

the whole state of the art from the illustrations the native 
artists have left us. From these the specific resemblances to 
modem native Mexican weaving are clear ** and also the 
general resemblance to Peruvian styles previously noted 

(Fig. 39). 
When we turn to the pottery of this region, even less 

survives among the living peoples so that any study of the 
ceramic art also becomes essentially archaeological. How- 
ever, the ceramic collections in our museums are not ex- 
tensively embellished with painted designs. In contrast to 
the pottery of the Pueblo area they are plain, modeling in 
relief and realistic painting here taking the place of mere 
design. In the Panama area, including Costa Rica and the 
Chiriqui district, we have a complex of alligator and arma- 
dillo designs, recalling again Peruvian and some modem 
Mexican textile decorations.** In a few instances the Maya 
were particularly successful with textile-like designs for 
mosaic and stucco work, but these, the well-known case 
of Mitla in Mexico,*' and the single example at Chanchan, 
Peru, are the striking exceptions to the rule that wherever 
architectural embellishment is undertaken, it tends toward 
realistic carving. 

When we come to South America, we find that certain 
accidents have preserved us a good series of aboriginal 
textiles from Inca culture. In the technique of design these 
ancients were remarkably proficient, even to the extent of 
using complex color sequences." On the whole, their de- 
signs tend to be realistic figures: men, cats, birds and fish 
being distinguishable in many degrees of conventionaliza- 
tion. In fact, we find here the best illustrations of the 
geometric biases in loom weaving. Associated with this art 
is an equally superior development of pottery decoration. 
One prominent feature of this pottery is the introduction 
of life forms, so that we have jars representing persons, 
birds, monkeys, fishes, etc., in which the modeling is of a 

94 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

"^ §s:^ ^%^ 

9 

^^ 

(S^e^QO 

1 of Piruvitn Diignj. Utad, rfi6, 1 

DESIGN AREAS 95 

high order. The decorations are in both color and incised 
work. In color, we have the great triumph of Nasca and 
Titicaca ware, so far superior to anything yet discovered 
in the New World. The painted designs upon this pottery 
are comparable to those upon cloth in that they have the 
same realistic tendencies. Certain fixed conventional forms 
appear both on pottery and cloth, suggesting the funda- 
mental unity of design concepts for both ceramics and tex- 
tiles. 

As we go out from Peru in either direction, pottery deco- 
rations become inferior ; consequently, we may be sure that 
the center of the art was in that country. The great prob- 
lem for the future is to discover the historical relations of 
this center to the adjacent cultures. If we follow around 
the north coast and down into Brazil we find greater use 
of painted pottery decorations than in the corresponding 
parts of North America. No doubt one factor in this dis- 
tribution is the presence of the very strong Peruvian art 
center. In a similar way this Peruvian influence can be 
seen in Chile and the adjacent parts of Argentina, presum- 
ably again connecting with eastern Brazil. 

As to the textile designs in these outlying regions, we are 
so ignorant that little can be said, though the explorations of 
German anthropologists ** among the wilder peoples of east- 
ern Brazil give us a fair idea of designs in a few localities. 
As previously noted, we find here the designs peculiar to 
cane basketry in all parts of the world; however, some 
textile work exists in which simple striped designs occur, 
though on the whole the designs are similar to those upon 
basketry. Painted decorations upon bark and wood are 
also found which have a geometric character ; but these are 
almost entirely made up of triangles. 

In the northwest Amazon country there is an identity be- 
tween pottery designs and those used in body painting.*' 
The colors are laid on in large masses, but in the form of 

96 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

true textile designs. A similar style of body painting has 
been reported for Panama. 

This relatively brief survey of New World art reveals 
some interesting general characteristics. The experience of 
anthropologists shows that by generalizing design character- 
istics we can consistently differentiate a few centers of de- 
velopment and influence. These prove also to be centers of 
specialization in industrial art. For example, the tribes of 
California are lamentably deficient in everything but bas- 
ketry. Again, we see that geometric art and realistic dec- 
oration tend to be antagonistic to each other in the sense 
that wherever one predominates the other adjusts itself 
to it. But while this is so strikingly true of the centers 
we find many intermediately situated peoples practising the 
two or more special arts of the nearest centers, but less 
successfully. In North America particularly we find a 
tendency for women to produce the geometric art and men 
the realistic. That this has'an important psychological basis 
is unlikely since the distinction is clearest among the groups 
where hunting is the chief work of the men. Here the 
textile arts fall to the women, who thus find their activities 
limited. Among the Pueblo peoples on the other hand, 
where the men wove, we still find geometric art. 

Finally, we must not forget that we have been but skim- 
ming over the surface of a very complex problem. Each 
small territory presents its own particular chafacteristics. 
Art, too, has everywhere strong individualities which tend 
to obscure the common elements, thus making every 
thorough survey of even a small area extremely exacting. 
The work of Kroeber" in California demonstrates that 
often the large areas we have designated can be resolved 
into many small geographical sub-areas, which can. in 
some cases, be further differentiated into tribal types. How- 
ever, all this is too intricate for discussion here. 

SYMBOLISM 97 

SYMBOLISM 

No discussion of our subject, however brief, can disre- 
gard symbolism. Though an old subject, it seems to have 
been given new life by Von den Steinen's observations in 
Brazil ^* and Haddon's *• vigorous exposition of the realistic 
origin theory. Following this, with Boas'® as leader, a 
number of American anthropologists began an intensive 
study of designs in the basketry and beadwork areas we 
have discussed. It was found that all tribes have names 
for many of their designs and in some cases, at least, employ 
these names to express ideas. Since these are almost always 
derived from familiar objects, as bird, feather, tree, etc., 
we are confronted with the possibility that the names were 
given at a time when the design was truly pictographic. 
This theory must be considered notwithstanding that we 
found certain objections to such origins in the influence 
of the technique. Accordingly, we have this problem: 
When a design is called by a definite name, is that name 
a clue to its historic origin? 

The study of design names shows that this nomenclature 
develops according to the practical needs of the workers, 
for among the Pomo" and Dakota,** who lead in their 
respective centers, designs have been analyzed into their 
structural elements and names given to the same. Further, 
when definite composite designs have been established, the 
names of the separate design elements in the complex are 
compounded into a single term. In other words, we have 
an intense systematization of design composition, with a 
corresponding terminology. When we turn to less special- 
ized decorations like the Maidu " and Arapaho " we find 
that they have a much longer list of design names, which 
upon inspection prove to be the result of a less elaborate 
classification and a failure to comprehend the advantages 
of design analysis. This forcibly suggests that the present 

98 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

association between a design and its name is quite likely to 
be the result of other than genetic causes. 

Another way of testing the case is to compare the designs 
associated with one name. For example, from the special 

hA 

a D □ 

iz 

A 

0 

Ud 

m 

n 

V 

Fig. 41. A Series of Designs ond Their Names, from the Dakota 
Indians: a, Twisted; b, Full-of -points ; c. Forked tree; d, Dragon-Ay; 
e, FUled-up; f. Tripe; g, Feathers; h, Leaf; i. Tent; j. Arrow; k. Three- 
row; 1, Vertebrw; m. Whirlwind; n, Bag; o, Pointed; p, Trails; 
q. Cut-out 

literature we find "flying goose" designs among the Tlingit, 
Thompson, Pit River, Maidu, Wintun, and Yurok, but 
we fail to find these designs identical or even similar. The 
tabulation of "butterfly" designs gives the same kind of 
result The converse of this experiment is to take a single 

SYMBOLISM 09 

design and tabulate its names. Thus, the Porno "quail tip" 
design is found elsewhere under the names bushes, pine 
cones, mountains, squirrel foot, and foot This suggests 
that we must allow for the borrowing of both designs and 
names independently, or at least for the former. 

Now while this is very good argument against the wide 
application of the design name theory of origin, it does 
not by any means prove that in the beginning the decorator 
did not copy from nature, for subsequent and repeated 
borrowing would completely disassociate the names. On 
the other hand, the steady growth of this art would produce 
a conventional naming system of whose existence we have 
good evidence in the published studies. Also, the acquisi- 
tion of textile decoration requires the comprehension of 
simple steps, or elements, before mastery can be acquired 
over complexes. It is inconceivable that decorative art 
began with the most complicated designs and developed into 
the simplest; and although it sometimes happens that de- 
signs do degenerate to mere dots and bars, yet there is no 
reason for believing that the whole of decorative design was 
evolved in this way. 

Unfortunately, we lack similar studies for pottery decora- 
tions, but the objective analysis of certain local types by 
Fewkes * gives us ground for suspecting an analogous rela- 
tion of names and designs. It is clear, however, that in 
pottery decoration we have different technical conditions; 
yet, one must assume that beginners would start with very 
simple forms, as in textiles. 

However, in the art of most peoples we find a few de- 
signs that rise to the level of true symbols. Among the 
best known New World symbols are the cloud terraces of 
the Pueblo peoples and the "whirling logs" or swastika '• 
of the Navajo. The list is, however, very short, but in 
addition we find many degrees of symbolic association as 
among the Arapaho, where current designs were often 

lOO THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

chosen by an individual to stand for scmie personal interests 
peculiar to himself. Again, not a single case of real 
symbolism has so far been reported for the many basket 
makers of California. Its strongest development is in the 
Southwest which is, perhaps, the center of its northern 
dispersion. Among the Navajo we note that because of 
their sacred character the true symbols are not used in 
blankets, and in the Plains we further note that the conven- 
tional and aesthetic relations are practically never modified 
to meet the demands of interpretation; it is always the latter 
that is sacrificed. All this indicates that we are dealing 
with decoration primarily, upon which is occasionally 
grafted some symbolism. The facts are that practically all 

Fig. 4^. Tru0 Symbols. The first represents the ctouds, or "cloud 
terrace" of the Ptteblo Indians; the second, the swastika, or "whirling 
logs" of the Navajo 

of the religious art of the New World is highly realistic and, 
therefore, stands apart from the art of ordinary decoration. 
In conclusion, we may recall our initial question : Is the 
pattern name at its inception symbolic, or even representa- 
tive ? We can safely say that in most cases it was certainly 
neither. The suggestion is that symbolic art is primarily 
realistic, and that many true symbols may be explained as 
derived from pictures ; but true symbols are relatively rare 
in the geometric designs we have studied and we have 
consequently no good reason for assuming that many of 
these as a class were once realistic. In short, the problem 
is an historical one. We have seen that geometric art is 
sometimes under pressure from realistic art and perhaps is 
always so. Hence, the feeling that its designs should be 

SYMBOLISM 

lOI 

sentative may universally arise and so account for all 
design interpretations as secondary phenomena. 

inden, 1913. I; Kidder, 191 5. 

3lmes, 1888. I. 

hmidt, 1905. I, p. 330. 

dder, 191 5. I; James, 1914. I. 

wkes, 1898. I. 

mes, 191 4. I. 

)tigh, 1907. I. 

!wkes, 19 14. I. 

as, 1903. I; Kroeber, 1908. 

x)eber, 1905. I. 
eck, 191 4. I. 
eck, 1914. I. 

as, 1897- !• 

nmons, 1907. I. 

las, in Emmons, 1907. I. 

imons, 1903. I. 

ranton, 191 1. I. 

zier, 1907. I. 

mholtz, 1900. L 

2a Spinden, 1913. I, p. 148. 

21. Lumholtz, 1904. I. 

22. Holmes, 1888. II; MacCurdy, 
191 1. I. 

23. Joyce, 1914. I. 

24. Mead, 1906. I. 

25. Von den Steinen, 1897. I; 
Koch-Grunberg, 1908. I. 

26. Whiffen, 1915. I. 

27. Kroeber, 1905. I. 

28. Von den Steinen, 1897. I. 

29. Haddon, 1902. I. 

30. Boas, 1903. I. 

31. Barrett, 1908. I. 

32. Wissler, 1904. I. 

33. Dixon, 1902. I. 

34. Kroeber, 1902. I. 

35. Fewkes, 1898. I. 

36. Wilson, Thomas, 1896. I.; 
Matthews, 1902. I. 

CHAPTER VI 

ARCHITECTURE 

The only regions in which building rises to the level of 
architecture axe those occupied by the higher cultures of 
Mexico and Peru. Roughly considered, there are indica- 
tions of three centers of development: Maya, Nahua, and 
Inca, though in last analysis we may find but two, the 
Maya and Inca, using those terms in their broadest sense. 
The chief characteristics common to both are rectang^ular 
groundplans, massive masonry walls, often of rubble, and 
the absence of the arch. The last is probably the most im- 
portant factor, for the clumsy method of a stepped ceiling, 
closed by a slab of stone, not only doomed the builders 
to narrow rooms, but required very thick, firm walls for 
their support. The published plans of the most typical 
ruins show long, narrow rooms or tiers of rooms, the 
widest so far reported being 14 feet.^ That these ancient 
builders were aware that at best this method of vaulting 
gave but weak support, is shown by the tendency to sup- 
port upper stories upon a solid masonry core around which 
the lower rooms were grouped.* This may also be one 
cause for the relative in frequency of storied structures and 
the almost universal practice of securing height and eleva- 
tion by building upon artificial or natural mounds (Fig. 
45). The necessity for narrow rooms no doubt led to 
the enclosed rectangular court plan, which prevailed both 
in the North and the South (Fig. 44). Curved or circular 
walls are very rare and when found are isolated and not a 
part of a rectangular building. Consequently, we have a 
plain rectangular contour as a universal character. 

102 

ARCHITECTURE 

IQ3 

Windows are very rare, e^Kctally in the north, and the 
doors are usually rectangxilar with straight lintels. Colon- 
nades formed with rectangular stone supports are cCHnmon, 
and m a few cases we meet with the cylindrical pillar, but it 

did not develop far enough to constitute an architectma* 
feature. Some remarkable feats of masonry are found, and 
the skill of these ancients in handling cement and transport- 
ing huge masses of stone excites our admiration. 

In the essential characteristics we have noted, there is 
httle to distinguish between the buildings of Peru and Yu- 

I04 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

catan, though, as we shall see presently, they did have 
important differences. The present state of our knowledge 
suggests that all the ruins of southern Mexico and of the 

Fig. 44. Groundplan of the House of the Nuns, Uxmal, Yueatmk 

Morgan, 1881. 1 

adjoining Central American states are historically related; 
but the type seems to disappear toward the Isthmus and 
reappears in Ecuador. The disconnection of these two 
centers in the face of their common structural characteristics 
presents an interesting problem as to how much of this 

ARCHITECTURE 

105 

is due to borrowing. If we take a little broader view, we 
shall find certain more widely distributed building concepts. 
First, the pyramidal mound for burial seems to extend from 
northern Mexico to the Isthmus and then to recur in Colom- 
bia, passing through Ecuador and down into the coast of 

SECOND LEVEL 

J^Km n\ wM wn 

Old Peru. At least in one part of the Inca domain we find 
buildings upon them. In fact, their general absence in Old 
Peru is accounted for by the rocky nature of the country, 
which affords sites of natural elevation to which buildings 
were frequently adjusted by terraces.* It may be of interest 
to note that the pyramid mound both for burial and build- 
ing sites extends up into the Mississippi Valley as far as the 
famous Cahokia of Illinois, and that this distribution is con- 
tinuous with the general mound area of the upper valley. 
In other words, the occurrence of mounds of this type has a 

io6 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

generally continuous distribution from the Great Lakies of 
the North to the coast of Old Peru of the South. Through- 
out, they are most numerous in level districts. 

The northern limits of building attributed to the Nahua 
are on the Gulf Coast about the 24° of latitude, or in 
striking distance of the Rio Grande. Though all the later 
northern buildings are far less preserved than those of the 
older Maya, they seem to have one suggestive diflFerence, 
the absence of the vaulted ceiling and the consequent in- 
creased size of rooms. The roofs were probably flat and 
supported by beams resting upon internal pillars where 
necessary (Fig. 46). It seems strange that the Maya did 
not make more use of wood, but the Nahua style reminds us 
of Pueblo architecture, where beams of wood support the 
ceilings and roofs.* Thus again, we have an interesting 
case of continuous distribution. It is certain that the large 
and imposing ruins did not house the bulk of the popula- 
tion. The surviving examples show that the prevailing 
habitation was a small, rectangular one-room house whose 
essential structure, when of stone or adobe, was the same 
as found in the several units of the so-called palaces and 
temples, except that the roof was thatched. In Peru, the 
roofs were often supported by ridge poles which would give 
us about the same interior effect as the stepped ceilings. 
The walls of the houses take three forms, all of which may 
be encountered on either continent; namely, stone, adobe 
and mud reinforced with canes or wattling. Studies among 
the Pueblos of New Mexico have indicated that when we 
know more of that area we shall find a period of single 
detached adobe and stone rectangular houses preceding the 
composite pile of the modern pueblo. In fact, the Pueblo 
Indians of the present show a disposition to revert to 
the detached house, which does not materially differ from 
a single unit in the village structure. In like manner, we 
find in Peru a grouping of single houses around a court so as 

ARCHITECTURE 

107 

to fonn a complete enclosure, and the groundplan of these 
is not essentially different from those of the preceding struc- 
tures. Similar conditions have been reported for the Maya 
district.* 

We see, then, that in at least two particulars we have a 
broad cultural base for the highly specialized building arts 
of the Maya and Inca. That all these widely distributed 
characters result by diffusion from these two centers is 

scarcely logical, for even cultures are not built of nothing, 
but all have a long train of historical antecedents. It is 
much more reasonable to assume that diffusion, and per- 
haps other factors, brought a certain extended uniformity 
in house-building before the final burst of higher culture in 
these two centers. Granting that in this burst they may 
have been independent, they nevertheless had the same 
heritage from which to fashion their art. 

One argument for their independence is to be found in 
the secondary decorative features. In this respect the north- 
em buildings are far in the lead. The embellishment of the 
facades is often intricate and full round sculptures are let 
into the walls by tenons; stucco reliefs are built out upon 
rough skeletons of stone work; and elaborate mosaics of 
separately carved stones are arranged so as to make gro- 
tesque faces, as well as geometric patterns. A special fea- 
ture is the use of monolithic monuments commonly called 
stela, placed around and among buildings, the surfaces of 
which are richly carved with pictographs and hieroglyphs. 

io8 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

The exterior and inside ornamentation was often painted in 
a very skilful way. 

When we turn to Peru, such monuments are conspic- 
uously absent and the exteriors of the buildings are, in the 
main, plain.' Still, we have an approach to it in the cele- 
brated stucco walls of Chanchan, bearing an elaborate tex- 
tile design, and in the inland we find traces of painting upon 
smooth stucco, suggesting that there was a great deal of 
such ornamentation that has disappeared. Then we have a 
few noted monoliths, as the Chavin stone and the very 
remarkable gateway at Tiahuanaco. To these may be added 
the curious sculptures at San Augustine, Colombia. Both 
the stucco and the monolithic carvings have a certain gen- 
eral resemblance to those of the Maya, but on the other 
hand, they have great differences. It is also noticeable that 
they have their counterparts in the textile and ceramic art 
of their respective localities. Yet, the distinction remains, 
that secondary embellishment, or what is often considered 
true architecture, is characteristic only of the Maya type. 

Associated with the foregoing culture were no less worthy 
feats of highway and drainage construction, particularly by 
the two great military cultures, the Nahua and Inca. In 
Peru, roads were paved and graded and brooks spanned by 
stone culverts, many of which are still in use.^ These were 
necessarily formed by huge stone slabs supported by piers. 
Chasms were bridged by true suspension bridges and in some 
cases crossed in chairs running on cables. Even a kind of 
pontoon bridge was in use. In Mexico, the country was 
less rugged, but the roads were excellent In both regions 
the irrigation and aqueduct systems are famous. As all 
travel was by foot, and only in Peru were pack animals 
used, these road builders had a somewhat different prob- 
lem than confronted the users of carts in the Old World. 

As we proceed southward in Peru, architecture rapidly 
deteriorates, disappearing altogether at the River Maule. 

ARCHITECTURE 109 

Thence toward the east in the neighborhood of the Calcha- 
qui, we find rough stone structures of many rooms, not un- 
like one-story pueblos. Burial is now in urns without true 
mounds, but many small carved monoliths have come to 
notice. Once out into the guanaco area we find the simplest 
kind of skin tent, which in the far south becomes merely a 
windbreak. Throughout the Amazon, on the north coast 
and southward as far as the Suyas, hammocks are in gen- 
eral use and the houses are frequently primitive. On the 
other hand, very large thatched structures are found, under 
which, as under one great shed, lives the whole community. 
So far, there seems to be no consistent distribution of varie- 
ties of this type, some are oval and well thatched, some 
square, and some mere roof shelters. In fact, the only thing 
essential is a hammock to keep one off the ground and a 
roof overhead. The whole population is rather nomadic. 
As we go eastward through the highlands of Venezuela, 
the court structures of Colombia disappear, but still the 
prevailing form is the rectangular hut; but in Guiana we 
begin to encounter the oval thatched house of Brazil. Of 
some interest are the pile-dwellings of the north coast, now 
almost extinct, though a few survive in swamps and even 
on dry land. In some of the inundated districts floating 
houses are found. Finally, the meager archaeological data 
we have reveal only one important site at the mouth of 
the Amazon where mound structures have been reported. 

The structure of habitations in the United States and 
Canada has been carefully studied so that we can make very 
definite statements as to the types and their distributions.* 
Nowhere outside of the frontier to the Pueblo area do we 
find buildings of stone until we reach the Eskimo. Conse- 
quently, there is very little content to the archaeology of 
architecture, our data being almost exclusively from the 
surviving tribes. The only building that reminds us of the 
traits we have discussed in our consideration of the area 

no THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

of intense maize culture was found in the lower Mississippi 
Valley, a rectangular house with walls of clay reinforced by 
wattling. Sometimes, as in Arkansas, there were two or 
three rooms suggesting the houses of Colombia, but these 
were not the prevailing type on the lower Mississippi. 

The Gulf States form a fairly distinct house area. Par- 
ticularly on the Atlantic side were curious oblong rectangu- 
lar houses with curved, or bowed, roofs. Their construc- 
tion was simple, a framework of light poles, lashed into 
place, with coverings of bark or thatch. (For tjrpe illus- 
trations see the Handbook of American Indians.) In the 
Florida swamps a kind of platform pile-dwelling is found, 
with roof and open sides reminding one of Guiana types. 
A very widely distributed structure is an oval dome-shaped 
house, plastered over with mud, with no opening except 
the door. In fact, none of these southern houses seems to 
have been provided with smoke holes, most of the cooking 
being done out-of-doors. 

In northeastern United States the prevailing form among 
the Algonkin tribes was a low, oval framework of poles 
covered with bark, mats, or thatch, according to the season 
and locality. The Iroquois of New York, who are generally 
regarded as of southern origin, lived in long, rectangular, 
bark-covered communal houses known in local literature as 
the "long-houses." • The structural similarity of this to 
one of the southern types is obvious. West of Lake Mich- 
igan the dome-shaped Algonkin house often gave way to a 
rectangular one with a flat roof, and among the Eastern 
Dakota we meet with this form made by setting up rows of 
posts in the ground. A little farther west on the Missouri 
we have what is usually called an earth-lodge, a circular, 
conical-roofed framework covered with thatch and finally 
with turf.*® However, its distribution is restricted in the 
main to Caddoan and Siouan tribes of bison hunters, who 
also raised some maize. 

ARCHITECTURE in 

Next, we have a well-known type of shelter to which the 
Dakota name, tipi, is usually applied. In the east, it ap- 
pears in northern New England, extending up into Lab- 
rador, thence eastward through the great Cree and Ojibway 
range, well up into the Canadian Northwest. Also, it 
sweeps down into the bison area, reaching some of the no- 
madic peoples of the Pueblo area and again invading the 
salmon area in Oregon and Washington. The other forms 
of shelter we have noted have all but disappeared, while the 
tipi is still used by the surviving tribes of this great areal 
These conditions tend to make it the most typical Indian 
shelter, and it now has so firm a place in the popular mind 
that it is used in art and story, regardless of the locality. 
Not infrequently we see pictures of Pocahontas, Henry 
Hudson on Manhattan, and even of California incidents 
associated with tipis, a form of shelter entirely inappro- 
priate. The term wigwam in Colonial literature is the 
Algonkin name for the oval bark-covered house we have 
described, and the modem tendency to apply the same name 
to the tipi has led to great confusion. 

It is not to be expected that we shall find a single type of 
tipi prevailing throughout. The essential structural concept 
is a tripod of poles, supporting other poles forming a cone.^* 
The base tripod is formed by binding together three or four 
poles, but in far western Canada these poles sometimes 
have interlocking forks, a feature also noted in southern 
Nevada and in the older type of Navajo hogan. Where 
birch trees grow, the cover is birchbark ; in the bison area 
it is skins. The Ojibway, however, often used mats, as 
was sometimes the case on the Columbia River. In the far 
North, we find a pointed skin tent, even forming a summer 
dwelling for the Eskimo. 

For the details of varieties of tipi and their distribution 
we must refer the reader to the special literature. We note 
that it seems to follow the outlines of the caribou and bison- 

112 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

hunting areas and is everywhere definitely associated with 
a nomadic hunting life, for many tribes on the borders used 
it only when on hunting trips. Its origin and development, 
therefore, is one of the important problems in our subject 
and must receive close attention in the future. Curiously 
enough, the tipi is found in Siberia and has analogous forms 
in northeilfjEuropef -Suggestingairtie possij^ility of its definite 
association with reindeer culture. 

We have now covered the whole of the northern continent 
except the western part and the Arctic. The most distinc- 
tive structures here are the wooden totem-pole houses of 
the North Pacific Coast, reaching their highest development 
among the Haida and Tlingit.^* The structural plan con- 
sists of four massive, upright timbers supporting two long, 
equally heavy beams. These are placed parallel about four 
feet apart and are essentially ridge poles. Around these a 
rectangular enclosure is made by setting split planks upon 
end. The ends are gabled and the roof of planks. The only 
framework is the massive central support, in contrast to 
which the remainder of the building appears flimsy in the 
extreme. But we find one feature not so far observed north 
of the Nahua area, namely, architectural embellishment 
The four interior posts are carved in high relief, and out- 
side is the famous totem pole. Paint is used to reinforce 
the carving, and in addition the front of the house is deco- 
rated with one of those curious spread-out animal forms we 
have noted in the preceding chapter. Had these people 
carved in stone instead of wood, we should now find their 
country one of our richest archaeological fields, but the 
perishable nature of their building material has left no 
records of their past history. 

The influence of this type of architecture reaches northern 
California, for though the heavy carved timbers have a 
central distribution only, we find the rectangular house of 
upright planks, with a circular door throughout the coastal 

ARCHITECTURE 113 

belt of Oregon and Washington. In Canada it invades the 
mountainous area of the Dene, but in Alaska it stops rather 
suddenly. In general, then, the distribution of this type 
of house lies in a narrow belt along the Pacific Coast, 
stretching from northern California to the Copper River 
in Alaska. 

Central and southern California present simple but vari- 
ous forms of shelter.** Yet, they may be characterized as 
shelters of brush and tule reeds. More permanent houses 
are sometimes formed by setting up poles over slight exca- 
vations. Toward the interior we meet with the margin of 
the great Shoshoni linguistic area, the characteristic shelter 
of which is a simple brush-covered lodge. Two forms occur, 
the precise distribution of which is not yet known, but the 
prevailing one seems to be a low dome-shaped, grass-cov- 
ered affair still encountered among the Comanche and the 
Apache. The other type we have mentioned is a pointed 
brush shelter upon a tripod of forked poles, a form closely 
allied to the Navajo hogan and perhaps to the tipi. 

Strictly considered, none of these houses so far described 
can be classed as underground. Yet, some approach this 
qualification in that they have sunken floors. However, 
in the interior, skirting the coastal belt for rectangular 
houses, from the southern tip of Alaska on the north to 
San Francisco Bay on the south is a belt of semi-subterra- 
nean houses entered through the smoke hole by a stepped 
ladder.** This type seems to center among the inland Salish 
of British Columbia and Washington. Because of this 
peculiar distribution one may suspect the Salish as chiefly 
responsible for the phenomenon. The next place where we 
encounter a subterranean house is among the Eskimo of 
Alaska. In this case we have two ways of entering: 
through the smoke hole and by a long covered trench, each 
used according to the season. The Eskimo house, however, 
is often set over a very shallow excavation and earth heaped 

114 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

over its framework like the earth-lodge of the Missouri. 
This form of house extends eastward beyond the mouth of 
the Mackenzie, but from there on timber is too scarce. 
Stone houses were noted by Stefansson near Coronation 
Gulf, and their distribution from that point eastward seems 
to be continuous. Their roofs are usually of skins, often 
supported by whale ribs. The snowhouse we all know so 
well is universal from east to west as a temporary residence, 
which in summer gives way to a small skin tent. Its long, 
low, tunnel-like entrance and internal arrangement is the 
same as that for the earth-covered type of Alaska, and 
both together may be regarded as revealing the character- 
istic Eskimo house concept. 

Jochelson *" has brought together some data for a his- 
torical connection between the earth-covered houses of the 
Old and New Worlds. While it is clear that examples of 
such dwellings are found intermittently from Europe, across 
Asia, to America, we do not find the definite structural par- 
allels necessary to form satisfactory conclusions regarding 
their historical relations. Archaeological work has brought 
to light a somewhat more extensive distribution of such 
houses in America. Numerous depressions in the upper half 
of the Ohio Valley have been regarded as old house sites and 
recently Sterns " located rectangular house pits in Nebraska, 
but, except in the last case, our knowledge is not definite, 
and the very perishable nature of the structures so far 
observed makes further discovery extremely difficult. 
. The explorations of Kidder and Guernsey in the adjacent 
parts of Utah and Arizona reveal an ancient type of pit 
dwelling that promises to have a genetic relation to the 
kiva, or circular underground ceremonial chamber of south- 
western United States.*^ The American data upon the dis- 
tribution of the various kinds of pit dwellings have recently 
been reviewed by Waterman. *• However, in all these dis- 
cussions the tendency is to call every shelter in which the 

ARCHITECTURE 115 

floor level is below the surface, a pit dwelling, even in cases 
where this is obviously due to the necessity for removing 
a few inches of the root-infested soil to secure a hard, wear- 
ing surface. One must suspect, therefore, that progress in 
this comparative problem will await the detailed study of 
special areas in which full account is taken of minute details 
in structures, rather than correspondences to generalized 
architectural characters. 

A similar problem deserving investigation is the lean-to 
type of shelter which is quite characteristic of the great 
Northwest of Canada and again of the extreme southern 
part of South America. Some recent travelers have brought 
out information as to the use of such shelters by the more 
primitive tribes in parts of British Columbia. One is tempted 
to see in the lean-to the parent of the tipi, the Navajo hogan, 
and many other New World tjrpes. A careful study of these 
types, therefore, seems worth while. 

In conclusion, attention may be called to one peculiarity 
of aboriginal house construction. The chimney was un- 
knowfi. Not even the skilled architects of Mexico and Peru 
seemed to have hit upon the idea. It is true that in the 
historic pueblos they are found, but this is generally attrib- 
uted to Spanish influence. In the older type of pueblo 
structure only the rooms having open roofs were used as 
living quarters. Hence, the universal American way of 
heating a house is by an open hearth at the center with a 
hole in the roof immediately above. 

Under the general head of architecture we may also con- 
sider earthworks, mounds, circles, etc., even though it is 
unusual to so associate them. As we have noted, it was 
the custom in the area of intensive maize culture to place 
temples and similar structures upon mounds, if no natural 
eminence was at hand. Something like this was observable 
at the period of discovery in southeastern United States, 
where the natives erected council houses and even dwellings 

ii6 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

upon raised platforms, or mounds of earth. However, wc 
find widely diffused over the lowlands of the Mississippi 
Valley thousands of burial mounds, or tumuli. These are 
usually of moderate size, often covering but a single burial 
Yet we not infrequently meet with very inspiring works 
containing many interments and, in the few cases where 
systematic excavations have been made, showing by their 
internal structure that the whole had been gradually built 
up by adding earth for each successive burial. 

In addition to these tumuli we find variously distributed 
a relatively small number of earthworks of more specialized 
types. Particularly in Wisconsin we find numerous small 
works in the unmistakable forms of animals and men. Such 
are occasionally met with elsewhere, the most conspicuous 
example being the great Serpent Mound in Ohio, which 
has no parallel in the whole world. Conspicuous among 
the unique earthworks are the great truncated mounds at 
Cahokia, Illinois, near St. Louis, again at Vincennes, Indi- 
ana, and the Etowah Mound in Forsyth County, Georgia. 
Circular and rectangular enclosures are sometimes met with, 
particularly in the Ohio Valley, while another conspicuous 
type is the enclosure upon a flat-topped hill, to be noted 
under fortifications. 

In general then we see the burial mound and occasional 
associated earthwork are characteristic of the Mississippi 
Valley and that with respect to distribution they seem to 
center there. On the other hand, there are certain gross 
resemblances to structures and methods prevailing in the 
area of intensive culture, but until our knowledge of both 
areas is more complete one guess is as good as another. 
It is to be hoped that each of the States in the Mississippi 
Valley will carefully work out the classification and dis- 
tribution of earthworks within its borders to the end that 
we may be able to see the phenomenon in its true setting; 
especially since these mounds and earthworks have always 

ARCHITECTURE 117 

been objects of great popular interest and the term mound 
builder has a fixed place in general literature. We see 
here, however, that mound building appears as a trait of 
culture and no more requires a distinct race for its explana- 
tion than does the existence of maize or tobacco. On the 
other hand, these earth structures present a problem of 
almost equal importance, since they are by far the most 
outstanding and impressive archaeological specimens to be 
found in the eastern maize area of North America. 

Fortifications may also be considered under the general 
head of architecture. At the time of discovery the native 
villages in the southern half of the eastern maize area were 
circled by palisades. In the north, the Iroquois possessed 
such fortified towns and even in New England they were 
known.^* It is now considered that certain rings of earth 
in New York State mark the sites of palisaded villages, 
and there is reason to believe that similar redoubts in the 
Ohio Valley had a like origin. The palisade was used as 
far up the Missouri as the Mandan villages. In fact, the 
distribution of palisaded villages is about coincident with 
maize culture in the east. The only other place for which 
palisades are reported is the North Pacific Coast, though 
the usual form in that region was a high rock with over- 
hanging platforms like a blockhouse. Nowhere else do we 
find fortifications until we reach the Pueblo area. It is 
true that a number of earthworks are designated as forts, 
but their use as such is largely hypothetical. Perhaps the 
best-known example is Fort Ancient in Ohio, which is one 
of the most imposing earthworks in the world. In the 
Pueblo region the houses were so placed, either in cliff re- 
cesses, upon mesas, or piled upon each other in such man- 
ner as to make other defensive works unnecessary. 

In the Antilles and eastern South America the palisaded 
village was known, but we have no record of other kinds 
of defensive works. It is, however, important to note that 

ii8 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

we have here a continuity of at least one trait for the 
eastern halves of both continents. 

Naturally the great military empires of Mexico and Peru 
developed fortifications. In the former, the road from 
Tlaxcala to Mexico City was defended by a stone wall 
about six miles long, faced by a ditch.*^ The internal citadel 
of the defense works at Mexico City was about the temple 
of Tenochtitlan, surrounded by a wall six feet high, where 
the last stand against Cortez was made. Strange to say, 
the great ruined cities of the Maya show no definite fortifi- 
cations. It is, however, in the Inca territory that the great- 
est systems of defense appear.^^ Important points on roads 
were guarded by blockhouses, cities were defended by 
systems of outlying forts, etc. The most famous fortresses 
are Ollantaitambo and Sacsahuaman. The latter is distin- 
guished for its remarkable masonry and the former for its 
internal passages cut in solid rock. 

1. Spinden, 1913. I. 

2. Holmes, 1895-1897. I. 

3. Joyce, 191 2. I. 

4. Holmes, 1895-1897. I. 

5. Thompson, 191 1. I. 

6. Joyce, 191 2. I. 

7. Markham, 1910. I. 

8. Morgan, 1881. I. 

9. Morgan, i88r. I. 

10. Fletcher and La Flesche, 191 1. 
I; Spinden and Will, 1906. I. 

11. Wissler, 1910. I. ^ 

12. Emmons, 1916. I. 

13. Kroeber, 1904. I. 

14. Waterman and Collaborators, 
1921. I. 

15. Jochelson, 1907. I. 

16. Sterns, 1915. I. 

17. Kidder and Guernsey, 1919. L 

18. Waterman and Collaborators, 
192 1. I. 

19. Willoughby, 1906. I. 

20. Joyce, 1914. I. 

21. Markham, 1910. L 

CHAPTER VII 
WORK IN STONE AND METALS 

It is frequently said that the whole of the New World 
was at the time of discovery still in the stone age. This is 
an unjust estimate of the metallurgic development in Mex- 
ico and Peru, but is true in a certain sense, since some stone 
tools were still in use even at the most advanced metallic 
centers. Outside the region of high culture the characteriza- 
tion holds and, even at the present moment, stone age cul- 
ture survives among a few outlying remnants of the aborig- 
inal population. The gradual displacement of stone tools 
by trade gave opportunities for the actual observation of 
their fabrication paralleled in no part of the continental 
Old World. For, although we have from western Europe 
a remarkable chronological series of stone implements in 
which it is believed the several steps in their development 
can be differentiated, it is practically impossible to tell 
exactly how the work was done. Since we find in Amer- 
ica somewhat analogous forms made from similar materials, 
the tendency has been to interpret European specimens by 
American data. 

In Europe we find one distinction not at all applicable to 
our subject. Stone work there is clearly ^divided into two 
successive periods, that in which chipping alone occurs 
and that in which polishing predominates; while in prac- 
tically all parts of the New World we find the two processes 
in simultaneous use. In the main, the stone industry of 
every social group comprises the following different meth- 
ods: chipping, or flaking; abrading, or pecking; grinding 
and polishing; sawing and drilling. 

119 

.« 

lao THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

The process used is dependent upon the materials. Thus 
any stone like flint, which has the property of conchoidal 
fracture, is flaked. While the precise tnanipulattons seem 
to differ according to locality, the essential procedure is 
everywhere the same. A pebble is first brought to a gen- 
eralized or blank form, by striking with a hammerstone. 
From this the desired implement is worked out, the fine 
chipping being by hand pressure with an antler or bone 
blunt-pointed tool. Holmes,' our leading experimental 
archaeologist, has worked out in his laboratory many o£ the 

necessary processes, which, in the main, agree with those 
observed among living peoples.* 

For pecking, our best data are from the Nootka of Van- 
couver Island, who occasionally resorted to it as late as 
twenty-five years ago.' As shown in the figure, parallel 
grooves were battered in the pebble to be shaped, then the 
intervening ridges pecked away, and so on. The battering 
tool was a long, oval pebble of tough, hard stone. When the 
approximate shape of the desired implement had been at- 
tained, it was finished by grinding on suitable stones. 

This seems to have been the method employed wherever 

WORK IN STONE lai 

polished tools of similar materials have been found. But 
nephrite, the fine, green, jade-like stone found on the North 
Pacific Coast and in Central America, cannot be worked in 
this way. It can only be cut and ground. Again, our best 
data are from Canada and Alaska. The Eskimo success- 

fully sawed off pieces of the required shape by the use of 
thongs and sand and water ; in short, the same principle as 
is employed in modern stone cutting. From unfinished 
pieces in collections and the fine examples unearthed by 
Smith,* it appears that the final separation of the block was 
by fracture produced by wedging. 

As to drilling and perforating, our data are less complete. 
Soft stones, like slate, were drilled with stone points. By 

122 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

experimental methods Rau' has reconstructed the process 
of drilling with a hollow reed and sand, which accounts for 
the luifinished borings with attached cores we sometimes 
find in museums. Again, the Nootka • made large perfora- 
tions by pecking. First, a pit was formed in the stone to be 
perforated, into which a hard pebble was laid and pounded 
upon until the hole reached the middle; then the stone was 
inverted and the process repeated. 

The fine sculptures of the Maya were executed with 
stone tools. We can safely assume, therefore, that all the 
stone work of the New World belongs strictly to a stone 
age and was such as could, and in the main was, accom- 
plished without the use of metal tools. 

TYPES OF ARTIFACTS 

Our next task is to enumerate the most distinctive types 
of stone artifacts and their respective distributions. The 
most universal is the arrow-head, which, though of many 
varieties, tends to take the generalized triangular form. 
The notched head is found in both continents, but is strik- 
ingly absent from Eskimo collections. By paying minute 
regard to size, secondary form, and materials, it has been 
possible to draw some distinctions between the arrow-heads 
from different parts of the two continents, but such study 
has not advanced to a point where a summary can be made.*^ 
The fact is that the difficulties of observing consistent dis- 
tinctions are so great as to be discouraging. Nor do we 
find any great divergence from the arrow-heads of the Old 
World, for somewhat similar notched forms are common 
in Neolithic deposits. On the other hand, the fact that they 
do not occur in Paleolithic culture may have a significant 
bearing upon the history of our continent. 

Lance heads and even knives are often indistinguishable 
from arrow-heads except as to size. Another closely related 
instrument is the drill. If we add to these, scrapers and a 

WORK IN STONE 

123 

few gravers, we about exhaust the list of analogous tools. 

Chipping, in particular, lends itself to fanciful produc- 
tions and we often find in our collections from both conti- 
nents many unusual objects. This work has been greatly 
stimulated by the modern tourist trade. 

While the celt and the gouge from America cannot read- 
ily be distinguished from those of Neolithic Europe, or any 
other part of the world, the grooved ax (Fig. 62) is so far 
unique, though a single specimen has been found in China.' 
Yet its distribution in the New World is rather restricted, 

Fif. #. Common Types . ArrouhHsad 

even if we include all implements hafted by a groove. For 
we find this grooved ax to be rare in South America, so far 
having been reported only for Ecuador. In North Amer- 
ica the grooved ax is not found on the Pacific side, but is 
first met with among the Pueblos and bison-hunting tribes, 
though with the latter it is usually a hammer that is grooved. 
In the eastern maize area it is frequently met with. In Mex- 
ico and Central America it is relatively infrequent, and in 
the Greater Antilles is not found at all. On the other hand, 
neither the Eskimo nor the Siberians seem to make use of 
this principle of hafting. 

The highly developed tribes of the North Pacific Coast 
use a grooved hammer, but in some cases a transverse hole 
is made, through which the binding is run. The important 

124 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

principle in haf ting here is the holding of the flat face of the 
tool against a similar surface on the end of the handle, as 
in the adze. Curiously enough, this method has a distribu- 
tion not quite the same as that of grooved tools. In Si- 
beria, Alaska, and on the North Pacific Coast, where the 
adze is common, hammers are hafted in this same way, but 
in the Pueblo and Plains regions the tendency is to twine 
the handle around the entire tool. Then, in the eastern 
maiztt area the grooved ax again bears the hafting shoulder, 
as also seems to be the case in Ecuador. 

That east of the Mississippi, celts were hafted and used 
as axes is clear from a few specimens found in swamps.* 
In these cases, the wedge-shaped top of the celt is put in a 
hole through the wooden handle. 

The other most important group of tools is that passing 
under the name of knife. From the Eskimo, particularly in 
Alaska, we have a knife for carving formed by setting a 
small flake in the lower edge of a bone handle. Similar 
knives have been found along the Upper Missouri," the 
significance of which is not clear. Among the Eskimo on 
the North Pacific Coast, and in the northern part of the 
eastern maize area, we find knives of slate, a material which 
takes a very keen edge, but does not wear well. The semi- 
lunar knife of the Eskimo is usually of slate and is found 
in the St. Lawrence Valley as well. In Peru, we find the 
same form in copper and bronze. Chipped blades were used 
as knives in all parts of both continents. The large, fine, 
obsidian blades of Mexico are the most famous. 

An implement of unique character is the pitted hammer- 
stone, the precise distribution of which cannot be stated." 
The stone pestle is essentially a hand hammer, and is found 
in all parts of the northern continent, except possibly in 
the heart of the bison and caribou areas. Detached stone 
mortars are a feature of the Pacific Coast, though in Cali- 
fornia they are usually mere holes in large boulders. In the 

WORK IN STONE 125 

interior and the east stone mortars are rare. Both in the 
Plains and in California, we find flat stones with skin and 
basketry hoppers, respectively. In the eastern maize area 
the mortars were usually of wood, as also in eastern South 
America. 

A particularly characteristic object in the culture of the 
New World is the stone pipe, the forms and distributions of 
which have been extensively treated by McGuire.** In the 
main, there are two types of stone pipe, the common or el- 
bow form, and the tubular pipe. The former has a wide 
distribution over the eastern half of the United States, ex- 
tending into Canada and northwestward to the Pacific. It 
does not occur with any frequency in the West Indies and 
northern South America, but is fairly abundant in eastern 
Brazil and Argentina. The tubular stone pipe, on the other 
hand, is found in the western part of the United States and 
is the exclusive form in the highland region from British 
Columbia to the Rio Grande; it is even occasionally met 
with in the Mississippi Valley. However, in Arizona and 
New Mexico, it begins to give way to the tube of cane which 
prevails in Mexico and Central America (Fig. 6). The 
center of development for highly carved stone pipes is the 
eastern half of the Mississippi drainage. 

Of special and frequently problematical stone objects we 
have a long list. In North America, the bannerstone and 
the discoidal are common on the Atlantic side. The Colum- 
bia River Valley also presents a large number of curiosities, 
such as stone weights, tool handles, monkey heads, etc., per- 
haps a greater variety than any other region. In the An- 
tilles we have large, curious rings or collars, and in Mexico, 
yokes. Central America yields carved jadeite celts and ani- 
mal-shaped metates. From Ecuador come large stone seats 
and from Peru curious carvings in stone, suggesting ap- 
pliances for a game of chance. The small area about Cata- 
marca, Argentina, produces a ciu4ous mace-like object and 

126 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

in eastern South America we find a large, finely formed ax. 
The distribution of these forms presents many interesting 
problems for which the reader must turn to the special lit- 
erature. 

Among questions of wider interest is that of steatite 
work. The making of steatite vessels was a prominent in- 
dustry on the Atlantic side of North America. In New 
England and Virginia, as well as elsewhere, aboriginal 
quarries are found, together with tools and vessels in all 

tkt Inea of Firm, rtlUclk'tly 

stages of completion, giving us a complete view of the in- 
dustry. The art is also highly developed among the Eskimo 
of the east. The apparent former southern extension of 
the Eskimo into New England raises the question as to a 
possible historical relation between them and their Indian 
(Algonkin) neighbors, which, while not altogether prob- 
able, deserves study. Again, on the Pacific Coast, especially 
in California, we find large, globular vessels and other 
forms. 

In closing, it may be noted that in the New World is the 
place where we get the most comi^ete data as to the meth- 

WORK IN STONE 127 

ods of hafting stone tools. While in Neolithic Europe axes 
were perforated, as is still the case with us, ;io such method 
was known here. It is true that a few South American 
forms were drilled, but not in a way to permit of similar 
hafting. Even the metal-using aborigines of Mexico and 
Peru simply set the blade into a mortise in the handle, sug- 
gesting that the hafted celt was the original and most fun- 
damental New World ax form. 

When we examine the total distribution of the stone ob- 
jects we have discussed, we find them not particularly nu- 
merous in the caribou and bison areas of the north and the 
guanaco and Amazon areas of the south. This may, in part, 
be due to lack of systematic collecting, especially in the 
Amazon country, but in the remaining regions we have the 
great hunting areas of the New World where bone is the 
prevailing tool material. For example, the Dene tribes of 
Canada seem to have used stone very rarely, even their 
arrows were tipped with bone. Likewise, antler-tipped ar- 
rows were very common in the North Atlantic states. 
Among the bison hunters, bone points were also in general 
use, though stone was not unknown. The use of bone awls, 
wedges, drills, knives, and even celts were common in all 
these hunting areas. 

Collections from excavations in Alaska and from the 
vicinity of New York Bay give us sufficient samples of im- 
finished bone and antler objects to indicate the processes by 
which these materials were worked. These processes were 
about the same in the two areas : linear pieces were removed 
by grooving and breaking; cutting was by sawing or hack- 
ing deep notches, then breaking. On the whole, the art 
seems most intense among the Eskimo, and in comparison 
with North America, the southern continent appears rather 
weaker in bone work, particularly in the simpler culture of 
Tierra del Fuego. Again, in the Antilles we find the thick 
part of shells used for making celts and other tools. 

128 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Of ornaments, pendants, and beads, there are great varie- 
ties of various materials from both continents. Even pearl 
beads were extensively used by the Ohio mound builders. 

MINES AND QUARRIES 

Under the general head of materials dug from the earth, 
we have an important series of archaeological topics. Not- 
withstanding that many of these aboriginal mining opera- 
tions must have survived well down into the period of col- 
onization, none was carefully observed by explorers. In 
the United States and Canada, copper, cinnabar, ocher, salt, 
altun, clay, steatite, flint and other flakable stones, catlinite, 
turquoise, coal (for making ornaments), and mica were dug 
out. Practically all such operations were confined to the 
eastern maize area and the Pueblo habitat. South of the 
Rio Grande, gold, silver, and copper, and in the Andean 
region, gold, copper, tin, silver, and platinum were worked. 
Here also, stone-quarrying operations were extensive, but 
outside of the Andean highlands we have practically no 
evidence of mining or quarrying in South America. 

Archaeological interest centers chiefly in flint workings 
and copper mining. In the case of the former, we have sites 
where a large part of the surface has been dug over for 
quartzite and other nodular forms. Of such sites the best 
known is that studied by Holmes at Washington, District of 
Columbia." The most extensive diggings seem to be those 
explored by Smith in Wyoming, which appear as part of a 
chain reaching into Oklahoma. Other noted sites are Flint 
Ridge, Ohio; Mill Creek, Illinois; Hot Springs, Arkansas; 
and two in Pennsylvania. In some of these the pits reach 
a depth of twenty feet The natives usually worked out the 
"blanks*' on the spot, leaving behind a great mass of chips 
among which the archaeologist finds many rejects and aban- 
doned forms. 

Some fairly successful attempts have been made to trace 

WORK IN METALS 129 

the materials of which stone implements are made to par- 
ticular known diggings, from which it appears that the na- 
tives made long journeys for this purpose. The method has, 
however, not been carried far enough to bring definite re- 
sults. Some recent studies for the lower Hudson show 
that we have here a very important method from which 
much may be expected in the future. 

Outside the regions of high culture the only important 
copper workings were those of Lake Superior. Free copper 
was gathered in many places, particularly, west of Hudson 
Bay and in Alaska, but no evidences of extensive mining 
have come to hand for these sections. As just stated, very 
extensive workings have been noted at Lake Superior, from 
which stone hammers to the weight of twenty-six pounds 
have been collected in the ancient pits; in one instance a 
wooden shovel, a bowl and a ladder were recovered. The 
aboriginal method of taking out the virgin copper seems to 
have been cracking by heat, breaking and wedging. In one 
pit twenty-six feet deep a six-ton piece of copper had been 
worked out and raised five feet on an incline of logs by 
wedging ; most of the supporting timbers and wedges were 
still in place." 

Some copper may have been mined in the Pueblo region 
before Spanish days, but we have no data as to methods. 
Our knowledge of operations in Mexico and Peru is 
equally vague, though here they must have been prosecuted 
on a far larger and more systematic scale. 

METAL WORK 

Lake Superior copper needed but to be beaten into shape 
and was, therefore, an ideal primitive metal. Particularly 
in Wisconsin we find copper duplicates of the most im- 
portant stone tools, which are less intensively distributed 
over the whole of the eastern maize area. However, in the 
immediate vicinity of the mines, we encounter a few depar- 

I30 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

tures from stone tool models, suggesting that the copper- 
working art had begun a development of its own. The most 
curious of these is a socketed ax reminding one of certain 
bronze axes found in Europe." 

No satisfactory evidence of casting or even beating in dies 
has been found for regions north of Mexico. Ingenious ex- 
periments by Gushing *• and others have demonstrated the 
possibility of making all the objects so far found here with 
the most primitive tools. Stefansson *' collected specimens 
from Coronation Gulf, showing long, slender rods fashioned 
by beating together thin sheets of copper. 

A very important problem is that of tracing out the dis- 
tribution of Lake Superior copper. It is generally believed 
that most of the copper objects found in Ohio and eastward 
came from this source, but the source of supply for the Gulf 
states is not so clear, since some copper was to be found in 
the Appalachian chain. 

Now turning to the region of higher culture, we have the 
best data from Peru, where ore was smelted in small pot- 
tery furnaces into which the operator blew through copper 
tubes. However, some ores, particularly silver, required 
greater heat and for such, large hopper-like pottery fur- 
naces were set up on high hills where the wind would create 
a draft. At the various intakes to these furnaces, fires were 
placed to heat the air, a mechanism employed by some Old 
World smelters. 

Another question of great interest is the use of bronze in 
the New World. The fact that implements contain tin, but 
in varying quantities, has led to the theory that the appear- 
ance of bronze is merely accidental or due to the natural 
mixtures in the ore. This view has received its strongest 
support from analytic studies of Peruvian copper tools, 
which reveal a lack of any consistent correlation between 
the amount of tin contained and the use for which the ob- 
ject was designed. Still, the investigations of Mead " have 

WORK IN METALS 131 

shown that the percentage of tin is often too great to be 
attributed to natural mixtures in the ore, and those of 
Mathewson " suggest that there is a correlation between the 
difficulty of casting tools of different forms and the amount 
of tin they contain. According to this view, the amount of 
tin added was an index of the casting process and was not 
added to harden the tool. Microscopic studies of typical 
tools also show that the combination of tin and copper was 
often made in the melting poTand not in the smelter. We 
may, therefore, consider it as settled that the art of making 
bronze was known in the New World, though the real pur- 
pose of the process may have been the facilitation of casting. 
In both Mexico and the Andean countries of South Amer- 
ica, gold and silver were skilfully worked by casting, solder- 
ing, hammering, and inlaying.*® The graves and sacred 
lakes of the Andes still yield very fine examples of this art, 
most of which are melted down to be sold as bullion. From 
Ecuador, we have a few examples of gold objects overlaid 
with platinum, which shows how truly meritorious were the 
aboriginal metal working arts of the New World. 

1. Holmes, 1897. I; 1919. I. n. Moorehead, 1910. I. 

2. Spencer and Gillen, 1899. I. 12. McGuire, 1899. I. 

3. Boas, 1909. I. 13. Holmes, 1897. I. 

4. Smith, H. I., 1900. I. 14. Holmes, 1901. I. 

5. Rau, 1873. I. 15- Moorehead, 1910. I. 

6. Boas, 1909. I. 16. Gushing, 1895. I. 

7. Moorehead, 1910. I. 17. Stefansson, 1914. I. 

8. Laufer, 1912. I. 18. Mead, 1915. I. 

9. Skinner, 1909. I. 19. Mathewson, 1915. I. 
10. Brower, 1904. I. 20. Saville, 1920. I. 

CHAPTER VIII 
SPECIAL INVENTIONS 

There remain a great array of culture traits we have 
not noted, such as machinery, fire-making, lamps, weapons, 
musical instruments, fermentation, glues and cements, paper, 
dyes and paints, woodwork, maps, astronomical knowledge, 
writing, poisons, medicine, surgery and anatomical knowl- 
edge, etc. For descriptive details on these topics, the reader 
must turn to the standard books of reference. Few of these 
subjects have been developed to a point whereby significant 
problems arise and the only function their discussion could 
now serve would be the increasing of our wonder at the 
complexity of aboriginal life. Therefore, we shall refer to 
"but a small number of them. 

One of the most fundamental traits in which the old cul- 
ture of Asia outstripped the New World was the develop- 
ment of the wheel and revolving machinery. Yet, we have 
noted the spindle whorl and find certain kinds of drills that 
embody a kind of wheel concept. However, among the Es- 
kimo we find drills turned by a strap pulled back and forth 
and also operated by a strong bow. This gives a reciprocat- 
ing motion which is the principle in old Asiatic drills and 
lathes.* The geographical position of the Eskimo makes it 
probable that we have in this a case of relatively recent bor- 
rowing from the Old World. The only other New World 
localities in which these forms of drilling occur are among 
the Northern Algonkin. From the native sketches in Mexi- 
can codices and the references of early writers, we infer that 
the universal mode of drilling: was by rolling between the 

palms of the hands. Even the Peruvians seem never to have 

132 

SPEaAL INVENTIONS 

133 

risen above this method. Yet, we have four problematic 
localities in which forms of the Old World pumpdrill oc- 
cur: the Iroquois, Pueblos, Round Valley Indians of Cali- 
fornia, and the North Pacific Coast. In the case of the 
farmer, we camiot be sure that this drill was not introduced 

0/ Dritlint. Tyler. 

by Eur<q>ean colonists, and as archaeological data from the 
Southwest give no trace of it, we may regard its presence 
there as of Spanish origin. Again, the California drill is 
operated on a slightly different principle, and its very lim- 
ited distribution suggests its intrusion. If these forms of 

I 

I 

134 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

the pumpdrill are truly in(lq)endent inventions, they are 
evidently recent, for they would with time have spread over 
large areas. In short, we are justified in assuming that the 
rotating tool or wheel had no place in the original mechan- 
ical concepts of the New World. 

Perhaps one of the greatest discoveries ever made by man 
was that fire could be kindled at will. The great English 
anthropologist, Tylor, has given us a model study of fire- 
making.^ It appears that in aboriginal times practically the 
whole of the New World kindled fire with the simple hand- 
drill.* Only among the Eskimo and a few of the adjoining 
Indians were other types of drill in use, as may be inferred 
from the preceding discussion. To strike fire from flint one 
must have good iron, preferably steel, hence, that method 
was unknown here ; but nature provides a fair substitute in 
iron pyrites to which the Eskimo frequently resort and 
which is the prevailing method in the greater part of the 
caribou area. It is sometimes believed that this is intrusive 
from the Old World, but it is also the method in the gua- 
naco area of South America, which suggests that the cause 
may be environmental. 

Another^ indention of great significance is the art of writ- 
ing. So far as we can tell, no form of writing was practised 
in South America, that achievement appearing to be a Maya 
contribution. The codices of Mexico and their official use 
at the time of the Conquest are a matter of common know- 
ledge, but the more definite extinct Maya system of writing 
presents one of the great puzzles of our subject.* Some 
progress has been made in recovering the key to it, in so 
far as the calendar and dates are concerned. From these, 
it appears that the Maya system is both pictographic and 
phonetic and that the Mexican scheme was in the main de- 
rived from it. 

North of Mexico the existence of true writing may be 
doubted. In the pictographic year counts of certain tribes 

SPECIAL INVENTIONS 133 

of Plains Indians," we find something faintly suggesting the 
Mexican codex, and in the birchbark ceremonial tablets of 
the Ojibway we have true picture writing. Yet, in no case 
did such picture writing become an accepted mode of com- 
munication, its function usually being merely to herald the 
deeds of the scribe. By this means, however, were devel- 
oped a few conventional characters that were equivalent to 
hieroglyphs." 

Yet, if the Inca of Peru did not have writing, they did 
have a scheme of knotted cords, or quipu, the methods of 
which have been inductively worked out by Locke.^ From 
this study it appears that the quipu could have served no 
other purpose than that of recording numbers. In fact, 
from the Spanish authors and the modern survivals of these 
knotted cord records, we know that the quipu were used to 
keep accounts. Mr. Locke's careful study of specimens in 
the American Museum of Natural History of New York 
demonstrates that the numerical system upon which the 
quipu were based was decimal. Further, an empirical anal- 
ysis of the knots on the several cords shows them to have 
definite numerical relations from which we infer that the 
quipu were instruments of enumeration only. It is scarcely 
conceivable that they could have been used for the recording 
of other facts. Hence, the oft-repeated statement that they 
were used to record historic narratives or as mnemonic sys- 
tems for the same, are unwarranted. 

Before leaving this subject, we should note one very re- 
markable achievement by the Maya. This was no less than 
the discovery and use oi the zero in mathematics.® In the \ 
Old World, this important contribution to our culture was 
invented by an Asiatic people, probably a Hindu group, 
from whom it found its way into Europe. On the other 
hand, it appears in ancient Maya. The very isolation of 
these two discoveries suggests their independent invention, 
but irrespective of this interpretation, the use of the zero 

136 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

in the New Wodd gives its people a high place in culture. 
Though somewhat of a diversion, we may at this point 
note the making of bark,;ioth and g^er. In Mexico, where 
writing was practised, good paper was made of amatl bark 
and, when this was not available, of maguey fiber. The 
latter was covered with thin animal membranes, reminding 
one of parchment. Outside of Mexico and Central Amer- 
ica, no paper was used, but some bark garments were made 
in the forest regions of South America. In this connec- 
tion an interesting point is raised by the ridged bark-beater 
of Mexico and Central America, an implement which re- 
minds one of the tool used by the tapa makers of the Pacific 
Islands. Then, far up on the west coast of North America, 
the natives shred cedarbark for weaving by beating with a 
similar ridged tool. We have here another very puzzling 
problem arising from the scattered distribution of an indus- 
trial process. 

Another item of importance is astronomical knowledge 
and methods of reckoning time. Of tl!e--South American 
system, we know next to nothing, but that of the Maya ex- 
cites our unbounded admiration. It is a veritable mathe- 
matical puzzle of the most ingenious kind.' That it was 
based upon careful astronomical study is clear from the 
corrections made for the odd five days in the year. The 
religion of the Maya, Nahua, and Inca was largely based 
upon star gods and the movements of the heavenly bodies, 
itself implying very exact astronomical knowledge. 

North of Mexico, methods of reckoning time are very 
crude, though apparently strongest among the Pueblo and 
adjacent Plains tribes. Some of the latter kept moon coimts 
by tally sticks and scored the years by winters, but this was 
quite perfunctory. So far as we know, the northern limits 
of this influence are near the Ohio River, the whole distri- 
bution suggesting that it is a phenomenon of diffusion from 
the centers of higher culture. 

SPECIAL INVENTIONS 

laz 

Perhaps the next most significant topic' in our hst is that . 
of weapons. Some very engaging problems center around I 
the bow, harpoon, spear, shield, sling, ax, sword, blowgun, I 
and defensive armor. Practically all have been made the 
subjects of special study. Thus, defensive armor of wood 
and hide has been studied by Hough, who for one thing 
favors a Japanese origin for North American plate armor." 
This subject has been more exhaustively treated by Laufer** 

Fir. a»- tfeodtn SUl Ai 

who demonstrates the improbability of its Japanese origin 
since this type of armor appears in other parts of Asia be- 
fore it was known in Japan, particularly among the wilder 
tribes, suggesting that we may yet find a much earlier his- 
torical connection between the plate armor of the New 
World and the Old. Yet, while it is true that wooden 
armor is found only on the upper Pacific side, cotton armor 
was worn in Mexico and in Peru, often reinforced with 
metal. In recent times, at least, some forms of armor were 
used by the Araucanians and Abipones of Chile and Ar- 
gentina. 

While shields of wicker and cane were widely used in 
the area of intense culture and in the eastern maize area, 
the small circular shield seems to have centered in Mexico. 

138 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Among the Pueblo and Plains tribes, a similar shield of 
bison hide appears, whose decorations are quite like those 
of ancient Mexico. Since the restricted distribution of the 
circular shield is geographically continuous, we may assume 
for it a single origin. In Peru, on the other hand, it is re- 
ported that shields were rectangular; yet, from the pottery 
collection in the American Museum of Natural History it 
appears that in figures of warriors the shields are more 
often circular. The devices upon these are usually simple 
and geometric, with feathers and pendants entirely absent 

A case of some theoretical interest is the blowgun, found 
among the forest Indians of eastern South America, in the 
Antilles, and even in eastern United States, the Iroquois of 
New York being the most northern point in its distribution. 
The somewhat analogous distribution of this weapon in 
Asia gives us one of the most probable cases of independent 
invention. 

Finally, we may turn to the bow. Its use appears to have 
been universal from the Eskimo of the north to the simple 
Fuegians of the south. Though in the historic horse cul- 
ture of the guanaco area it was not used, the evidence for its 
former use there is generally considered as conclusive. 
However, the tendency of the great military cultures of 
Mexico and Peru seems to have been toward mass fighting 
hand to hand, with swords and clubs. We notice the same 
thing among the Haida and other strong tribes of the north- 
west coast. In other words, as in the Old World, it was the 
less organized, more nomadic peoples who made most ef- 
fective use of the bow. 

One point of particular interest is the sinew reinforced 
bow, the highest type of which is found in Asia.*' In 
various forms it covers the hiehlands of North America 
well down into Mexico, but did not reach far into the 
eastern maize area. The Eskimo also had this bow in sev- 
eral forms, those of the west being more like the Asiatic 

SPECIAL INVENTIONS 139 

type. Now, as this structural concept does not appear in 
South America,^* we have the suggestion of an Asiatic in- 
trusion. This does not, however, apply to the bow trait as 
a whole, for its distribution carries it into the most remote 
marginal areas, and along with it the notched arrowjiead. 
Thus bow culture, in general, seems best explained as a trait 
brought in by the earliest visitors to the New World 
Among the curiosities is the pellet-shooting bow of Brazil 
which has its parallel in Asia, frequently cited as another 
clear case of independent invention. Yet there is good 
reason to believe that this bow was introduced into Brazil 
by Portuguese sailors and so not in any sense invented by 
the natives;" the limited distribution of this bow alone 
suggests its recent appearance. 

1. Rau, 1873. I. 8. Spinden, 1917. I. 

2. Tylor, 1889. I. 9. Morley, 191 5. I. 

3. Hough, 189a. I. 10. Hough, 1893. I. 

4. Morley. 191 5. I. 11. Laufer, 1914. II. 

5. Mooney, 1898. I. 12. Mason, 1894. I. 

6. Wissler, 191 1. I. 13. Meyer, 1898. I. 

7. Locke, 1912. I. 14. Nordenskiold, 1920. L 

CHAPTER IX 
THE FINE ARTS 

• 

No doubt many readers will object to the title we have 
given this chapter on the ground that no aboriginal produc- 
tion can rise to the level of an actual "fine art," but we feel 
that the name is justified because the productions here con- 
sidered occupy the same place in aboriginal life as do the 
fine arts in Europe. They may be comprehended under the 
familiar heads of sculpture, painting, literature, and music • 

As we have indicated before, the center of New World 
sculpture was Yucatan, where stone carving is one of the 
most distinctive traits of Maya culture. True stone carv- 
ing is rare in South America. The Peruvians did next to 
nothing of this sort ; in fact, the only two places where stone 
carving rises to an observable level are in the extreme south- 
em limits of Inca influence and again in Colombia, where 
we have the isolated statues of St. Augustine. In North 
America, no stone carving worthy of the name occurs north 
of the Rio Grande. Thus, the ancient Maya "cities consti- 
tute the center of the sculptor's art, which fringes out in 
northern Mexico above and in Panama below. Although 
the carving of small objects in stone reached a very high " 
level in the West Indies, it can scarcely be ranked as sculp- . 
ture. Even the Aztec and other antecedent Mexican cul- 
tures which produced a fair amount of stone carving have 
not left behind evidences of sculptural skill strictly compar- 
able to those of the Maya. Students of aboriginal art 
claim that the Maya development came before the Aztec 
•but that the influence of the latter is plainly seen in the 

later Maya.* For example, the well known Chacmool 

140 

SCULPTURE 141 

statue found at Chichen Itza is said to represent a Nahua 
type, examines of which have been found in several parts of 

Fig. JJ. Two Figum from Paltnqiu, Chiafai. Spiniai, igii, I 

Mexico and also in Salvador, south of the Maya. These 
statues are, however, fairly representative of aboriginal' 
sculpture for human figures, but do not reach the level of 

142 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

the best Maya work, of which the great turtles of Qnuigia 
may be cited as examples. However, Maya sodpture is 
usually in low relief, s<Mnetimes little more than drawing. 
Among the numerous examples that have been bfouglu to 

notice are the masterpieces shown in the drawings. The 
curious form of forehead appearing in all figures is not 
wholly conventional, but is a good representation of the ef- 
fects of head flattening practised upon infants. Like the 

LITERATURE 143 

Greeks and other classical sculptors, the Maya colored their 
carved figures. On the other hand, in contrast to the marble 
of the Greeks, the stones at the disposal of the Maya were 
^•ry inferior and were worked entirely with stone tools. 

Outside of the sculpture area as defined above, rock in- 
scriptions and drawings are numerous, particularly in the 
northern continent. Most of these pictographs are obvi- 
ously recent, but no one has studied them with sufficient 
care to suggest a chronological grouping. 

Qoscly allied with sculpture, in our minds, at least, is 
modeling in clay. We have already noted this art in the 
chapter on ceramics. Very good examples, in some cases of 
respectable size, are found in both Mexico and Central 
America. The Inca culture of Peru, which did not success- 
fully carve stone, did nevertheless, reach a high level in clay 
modeling, but apparently limited its work to small vessels 
and figures. At least, we find nothing like the large clay 
figures from Mexico. 

Painting in the New World never rose above flat tones, 
but the drawing is often good. Many examples have been 
preserved in the codex collections from Mexican and Maya 
cultures, but nothing of the kind has come down to us from 
the Andean region. Of the historic peoples, the Eskimo 
seem to lead in graphic skill, though they are, perhaps, 
equalled by the Dakota.* Elsewhere drawing is rather 
crude. 

LITERATURE 

Every student of our subject feels a keen regret that so 
few fragments of Inca, Maya, and Aztec literature have 
survived, for there is just enough to show that a consid- 
erable advance had been made. To most of us the term lit- 
erature implies printed works, but we are here using the 
term in the broadest sense, for literature arose and took 
many of its essential forms before attempts were made to 

144 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

write it. There is fair evidence that the Inca cultivated 
the drama. Thus Garcilasso,' himself of Inca descent, 
states that they "composed both tragedies and comedies, 
which were represented before the Inca and his court on 
solemn occasions. . The subject matter of the tragedy re- 
lated to military deeds and the victories of former times; 
while the arguments of the comedies were on agricultural 
and familiar household subjects. They understood the com- 
position of long and short verses, with the right number of 
syllables in each." * 

Markham finds evidence of "four different kinds of plays 
called Anay Sauca, a joyous representation, Hayachuca, 
Llama-llama, a farce, and Hanamsi, a tragedy. There is 
clear proof that the memory of the old dramatic lore was 
preserved, and that the dramas were handed down by mem- 
ory even after the Spanish conquest. It is to be found in 
the sentence pronounced on the rebels at Cuzco, by the Judge 
Areche, in 1781, which prohibited 'the representation of 
dramas, as well as all other festivals which the Indians cele- 
brated in memory of their Incas.' " ' 

A few complete plays have been recorded in later times, 
the most famous of which is Ollantay. As to what effect 
the intervening years of Spanish control had upon the lit- 
erary form of these productions is now a matter of debate. 
The reader is referred to Markham's translation • and dis- 
cussion for a statement of the case, and to our page 147 
for a selection of Inca verse. 

There is reason to believe that the early peoples of Mex- 
ico also had achieved something in the dramatic art, though 
good examples have not survived. Even among the Pueblo 
villages of the United States there are still native festivals 
in which there appear performances that deserve recogni- 
tion as dramas.^ This is true, to a less degree, of certain 
ceremonies among the outlying tribes of both continents. 

While the content we have given to the term literature is 

LITERATURE 

145 

Scone Carving 

Wood and Ivory Carving 

Gay Modelling 

Fig. 56, Distribution of Sculptute, Carving, and ModoKng 

146 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

far wider than the modem concept of books," the Maya and 
Aztec did have some written literature. Brinton quotes the 
Spanish writer, Landa (1565), as follows: — 

The sciences that they (Maya) taught were the reckoning of the years, 
months, and days, the feasts and ceremonies, the administration of 
their sacraments, the fatal days and seasons, their methods of divina- 
tion and prophecies, events about to happen, remedies for diseases, 
their ancient history, together with the art of reading and writing 
their books with characters which were written, and pictures which 
represented the things written. 

They wrote their books on a large sheet doubled into folds, which 
was afterwards inclosed between two boards, which they decorated 
handsomely. They were written from side to side in columns, as 
they were folded. They manufactured this paper from the root of a 
tree and gave it a white surface on which one could write. Some of 
the principal nobles cultivated these sciences out of a taste for them, 
and although they did not make public use of them, as did the priests, 
yet they were the most highly esteemed for this knowledge.* 

The first concern of the Spanish conquerors was to re- 
place the native culture with their own, and it may be 
doubted if religion played a much less part in one than in 
the other. Hence, the Spaniards bent every effort to destroy 
the native priestcraft, and as the native literature was in 
its keeping, all books were destroyed at sight. Yet, the 
people could not be made to forget, and many manuscripts 
were written in secret. A number of these have been pre- 
served under their native class name. The Books of Chilan 
Balam}^ It is from this source alone that we get an ink- 
ling of what Maya literature was like. No doubt, back of 
it all was a wealth of unwritten verse and narrative of real 
artistic merit. 

Outside of the areas we have just discussed, we find but 
the feeblest effort to record tribal literature; the skeleton- 
like vear counts of the Plains Indians and the mnemonic 
song tablets of the Algonkin are about all that come to no- 
tice. Literature in all these areas is comprised in myth- 
ology, ritual and song. 

LITERATURE 147 

naive notion prevails among us that poetry and song 
ng to the most advanced states of culture, whereas, it is 
•er the truth to say that they are the truly primitive 
les of artistic expression. Modem Europe has a verse 
song complex quite distinct from Asia and of very an- 
t origin. The scales of Bronze Age trumpets are said 
rove its existence even at that early period. Versifica- 
must be as old as song, and both are found in all parts 
he world. It is said, the languages of the New World 
lot have the vocalic quantities or accentuations of the 
sical world, so that aboriginal poetry is, in the main, 
le up of refrains of meaningless syllables and repeti- 
s.^^ Yet, there is form and sentiment, often of great 
>tic merit. 

Fn fortunately, the study of aboriginal verse has not been 
mpted. The field is particularly difficult, for since the 
nee of verse is lost when translated, the multiplicity of 
ve languages effectively bars progress. We cannot, 
efore, compare our data or draw satisfactory conclu- 
is as to the relative place of Inca or any other type of 
»e in the New World as a whole. As a suggestion, the 
ler may compare the following selections: — 

AN INCA HYMN " 

O Uira-cochal Lord of the universe, 

Whether thou art male. 

Whether thou art female, 

Lord of reproduction, 

Whatsoever thou mayest be, 

O Lord of divination. 

Where art thou? 

Thou mayest be above. 

Thou mayest be below. 

Or perhaps around 

Thy splendid throne and sceptre. 

Oh hear me I 

From the sky above, 

In which thou mayest be, 

From the sea beneath. 

148 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

In which thou mayest be, 
Creator of the world, 
Maker of all men; 
Lord of all Lords, 
My eyes fail me 
For longing to see thee; 
For the sole desire to know thee. 
Might I behold thee, 
Might I know thee, 
Might I consider thee. 
Might I understand thee. 
Oh look down upon me. 
For thou knowest me 
The sun — the moon — 
The day— the night- 
Spring — winter, 
Are not ordained in vain 
By thee, O Uira-cochal 
They all travel 
To the assigned place; 
They all arrive 
At their destined ends, 
Whithersoever thou pleasest 
Thy royal sceptre 
Thou boldest. 
Oh hear met 
Oh choose me! 
Let it not be 
That I should tire, 
That I should die. 

Far removed, geographically, from this beautiful verse, 
but of almost equal merit, is the following Navajo prayer 
chant : — ^* 

A NAVAJO PRAYER 

Tsegihi. 

House made of the dawn. 
House made of evening light. 
House made of the dark cloud. 
House made of male rain. 
House made of dark mist. 
House made of female rain. 
House made of pollen. 
House made of grasshoppers. 

LITERATURE 149 

Dark cloud is at the door. 

The outward trail is dark cloud. 

The zigzag lightning stands high up on it 

Male deity 1 

Your offering I make. 

I have prepared a smoke for you. 

Restore my feet for me. 

Restore my legs for me. 

Restore my body for me. 

Restore my mind for me. 

Restore my voice for me. 

This very day take out your spell for mc. 

Your spell remove for me. 

You have taken it away for me. 

Far off it has gone. 

Happily I recover. 

Happily my interior becomes cool. 

Happily I go forth. 

My interior feeling cold, may I walk. 

No longer sore, may I walk. 

Impervious to pain, may I walk. 

With lively feelings may I walk. 

As it used to be long ago, may I walk. 

Happily may I walk. 

Happily with abundant dark clouds, may I walk. 

Happily with abundant showers, may I walk. 

Happily with abundant plants, may I walk. 

Happily on a trail of pollen, may I walk. 

Happily may I walk. 

Being as it used to be long ago, may I walk. 

May it be happy (or beautiful) before mc. 

May it be beautiful behind me. 

May it be beautiful below me. 

May it be beautiful above me. 

May it be beautiful all around me. 

In beauty it is finished. 

In beauty it is finished. 

Going Still farther afield we have the following poetical 
em from the Eskimo: — 

I look toward the south, to great Mount Koonak, 
To great Mount Koonak, there to the south; 
I watch the clouds that gather round him; 
I contemplate their shining brightness; 

ISO THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

They spread abroad upon great Koonak; 
They climb up his seaward flanks; 
See how they shift and change; 
Watch them there to the south ; 
How the one makes beautiful the other; 
How they mount his southern slopes, 
Hiding him from the stormy sea. 
Each lending beauty to the other.^^ 

No doubt these verses are quite freely translated, but 
linguists have recorded very similar examples in the orig- 
inal, and Mr. James R. Murie has furnished us the texts 
and translations for two short Pawnee songs: — 

WAR SONG OF THE PAWNEE IRUSKA SOCIETY 

Kira katu kari rarix* 

Kira katu kari rarix* 

Kira katu kari rarix* 

Kira katu kari rarix* 

Kira katu kari rarix* ey ey a 

Let me sec (if) this is real — — — 

Ti rat pari 

Am I living (my life) 

Tiras ta kawahat 

You (who) possess the skies 

A good free rendering of this was published by Brin- 
ton :— " 

Let us see, is this real, 

Let us see, is this real. 

Let us see, is this real. 

This life I am living? 

Ye gods, who dwell everywhere, 

Let us see, is this real, 

This life I am living? 

PAWNEE WAR SONG 

He e e e e e e 

Yo e yoha eyu eyu eyo 

Eru he ee ee ee 

A tiras ta kawaha ti rat pari hey 

LITERATURE 151 

Oh you who possess the skies^ 

Am I living. 
Ero he ee ee cc 
Tat ara kitawira 
I in you entrust my fate 

Hawa re ra wira 
Again I do have on warpath 

He e e e e yo 

This is said to be a popular song among the Pawnee and 
was composed by a man named Tiriraktawirus when upon 
the warpath alone. Therefore, the following translation by 
Miss Curtis *• is not far wrong: 

0 great expanse of the blue sky ; see me roaming here. 

1 trust in you, protect me! 
Again on the warpath, lonely. 

From these texts we see that many of the lines in a verse 
are filled out by meaningless syllables and even the thought 
is carried along by abbreviated phrases here and there. The 
full import of such a verse is not self-evident, but is con- 
veyed by a secondary prose narrative, in which the inci- 
dents and situations leading to the composition are fully . 
stated. This must be considered in translations, such as we 
have just noted, for this setting is generally known to the 
singers. Thus, it appears that the song verses of the more 
primitive tribes are not themselves narrative, but rather 
mnemonic suggestions of prose tales. One more example 
may not be amiss : — 

DAKOTA FOX SOCIETY SONG" 

E ha e — yo e — yo he ye ye 
E ha e — ^yo e — ^yo he ye ye ye 
E ha e — yo e — yo he-ye yo yo 
E ha e — yo e — ^yo he ye yo 
He ye e ye yo! 
To-ka-la-ka mi -ye ca ya ya, 
Lo, the Fox, the Fox am I ! yea, yea. 

153 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Na ke nu la wa on we lo, 
Still the Fox a moment yet then, 

We ha e yo e yo he ye yol 
Then the Fox shall be no morel 

This is the song of a warlike society, the joining of which 
carries an obligation of bravery and even foolhardiness 
when on the line of battle ; hence, the pathetic lament of the 
phrases. 

Under the head of mythology we shall consider the lit- 
erary value of prose narrative. In such narrative and ora- 
tory rests a vast store of unwritten lore, much of which has 
great literary merit. In our own literature the speech of 
Logan is justly famous. As to its precise correctness wc 
may entertain some doubts, but there are authentic reports 
of similar speeches from other Indians, and anthropologists 
have collected literal transcriptions of discourses that rise to 
the same level of excellence. However, for the comprehen- 
sion of this phase of New World culture, the reader must 
turn to the published works on Indian languages. 

MUSIC 

If the history of verse did not show its origin to be in 
song, its form would ; but there is another side to the song, 
vi2,, the music. What the music of the Peruvians and Maya 
was like we can only conjecture, but among the less cultured 
surviving tribes we find aboriginal music in what seems to 
be an unadulterated form. Though some attention has been 
given to the subject, the study of this surviving native music 
as a culture trait-complex has never advanced beyond a few 
isolated experiments. On the other hand, a number of in- 
vestigators have sought by analytic methods to discover the 
fundamental structural elements, but their work is still in 
the controversial stage. For one thing, eflFort has been 
made to discover the ideal scales toward which the Indian 

MUSIC 153 

singer strove, whereas, the proper procedure is the empirical 
determination of actual scales. Nevertheless, this analytic 
study has revealed what seejn to be the most distinctive char- 
acters of New World music. First and foremost is what 
has been described as a "rhythmic pulsation of the voice on 
sustained notes somewhat analogous to the effect produced 
on the violin when the same note is slightly sounded several 
times during one stroke of the bow." ^* This is a feat of 
singing learned with difficulty and which makes the proper 
notation of the music in our system extremely difficult. An- 
other surprising characteristic is the disassociation of dance 
and instrumental rhythms from the song. Thus, we may 
sometimes find the drumming, dancing and singing each in 
a different rhythm, something almost incomprehensible to 
otu" musicians. As may be expected, there is no harmony, 
but this quality is lacking in all primitive music; hence, its 
absence is not distinctive of the New World. Yet, too 
much weight should not be given these immature generaliza- 
tions, for in the first stages of linguistic development analo- 
gous traits of New World languages were assumed, most 
of which are now historical curiosities. What we need first 
of all is patient collecting and classifying. Already we find 
evidences of geographical areas for music, just as in art, 
mythology, etc. Thus, the entire eastern maize area and 
the bison area seem to have one type, the Pacific Coast belt 
another, and the Pueblo area another. This, unfortunately, 
cannot be definitely stated and must remain a mere surmise 
until properly investigated.** 

A little more can be done with instruments, though even 
here we lack good studies. The only serious attempt to 
study the distribution of the most important types is that of 
Nordenskiold.'® The two most common instruments are 
the drum and the rattle. We refer to the calabash type of 
rattle. Its distribution is coincident with that of agricul- 
ture but extends somewhat farther in North America, where 

154 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

we find rawhide a substitute among the non-agricultural 
bison tribes, and beyond them the hoUowed-out wooden 
rattle of the Northwest. It is a fair assumption that the 
type arose among a calabash-producing people and was 
thence diffused. 

There are other types of minor rattling, rasping, and clap- 
ping instruments of restricted distribution. The only one 
approaching the calabash rattle in importance is the notched 
stick." 

Drums seem to be of greater variety. One general tam- 
bourine type is found in the bison area and northward to 
the Eskimo and Siberia. In the eastern maize area the 
single-headed water-tuned drum prevailed, whose distribu- 
tion seems to be continuous through the West Indies into 
South America. In southwestern United States and south- 
ward, a double-headed drum similar to our own was in use. 
The large wooden signal drums of the Amazon country we 
suspect to be of recent African origin. 

As the case now stands, there were no stringed instru- 
ments in the New World before 1492. The only debatable 
case is that of the musical bow found in California and 
northern Mexico. Of wind instruments, the most ccmipli- 
cated is the pan-pipe of Peru and Brazil.^^ Yet, the aborig- 
inal origin of t^is instrument has been challenged by Hom- 
bostel ^* who claims the scale of the New World pipes is the 
same arbitrary one as found in Melanesia, This is denied, 
however, by Charles W. Mead who reports a wide variation 
in *the scales of many South American pan-pipes examined 
by him. In any case, the distribution of this instrument is, 
in the main, Andean, and so localized." Trumpets were 
used in Mexico and Peru and still survive in the Amazon 
area. Some of the most interesting forms are the conch- 
shell, the pottery horn, and the bamboo types. In the Old 
World the horns or tusks of animals stand out as the orig- 
inal trumpet form, but horns seem not to have been so used 

MUSIC 

155 

in the New World. Again, all New World trumpets were 
end-blown. While it is true that the side-blown variety oc- 
curs in South America its distribution is such as to suggest 
its recent origin by African colonization.** Closely allied 
to this is a reed instrument of cane, sometimes called a 
cornet, used in Peru and still found along the Amazon. 
True flutes were used in Peru,** but in North America, the 
flageolet. No more than with song music can we compare 
the types of composition for these instruments in the several 
geographical areas. This is truly unfortunate, for it seems 
that music oflFers one of the very best trait-complexes for the 
study of diflFusion and invention. It is one of the weak 
points in the careful, painstaking study of ritualism now 
prosecuted by American anthropologists, for when a ritual 
passes from one tribe to another (of which phenomenon 
we have already many instances), we may expect that its 
music will be carried more faithfully than anything else. 

1. Spinden, 1913. I. 

2. Mallery, 1886. I. 

3. Garcilasso, 1688. I. 

4. Markham, 1910. I, p. 147. 

5. Markham, 1910. I, p. 147. 

6. Markham, 19 10. I. 

7. Beckwith, 1907. I. 

8. Mackenzie, A. S., 191 1. I. 

9. Brinton, 1890. I, p. 245. 

10. Brinton, 1890. I. 

11. Brinton, 1890. I. 

12. Markham, 1910. I, pp. loo-ioi. 

13. Matthews. 1907. I. pp. 54-55- 

14. Brinton, 1890. I, p. 290. 

15. Brinton, 1890. I, p. 292. 

16. Curtis, 1907. I, p. 112. 

17. Curtis, 1907. I, p. 51. 

18. Curtis, 1907. I, p. 27. 

19. Gilman, 1908. I; Densmore, 
1910. I; 1913. I; 1918. 1; Bur- 
ton. 1909. I. 

20. Nordenskiold, 1918. I. 

21. Lowie, 1909. I, p. 219; Hawley, 
1898. I. 

22. Mead, 1903. I. 

23. Hornbostel, 191 1. I. 

24. Nordenskiold, 1918. I. 

25. Nordenskiold, 1918. I. 

26. Mead, 1903. I. 

CHAPTER X 

SOCIAL GROUPING 

In the sixteenth century, there were at least three well- 
organized governments in the New World: the Nahua, 
Inca, and Chibcha. Though our data as to the details of 
these organizations are but fragmentary, it is clear that the 
social structure upon which they rested was communistic 
The family group was the unit to which plots of land were 
assigned and upon which levies were made. Each family 
group had its head man who also held a place in the council 
for the next higher group. The government was vested in 
a single family group, one of whom was the chief or mon- 
arch. He qualified and was chosen by such means as this 
group elected, regardless of his parentage. These were the 
fundamental characteristics common to all the governments 
of the area of higher culture ; they differed from each other 
not in these but in the ways in which the ruling family group 
built up its power and organized its political machinery. 
The thoroughness and efficiency of the Inca system was 
notorious, for it left practically nothing to the individual, 
an ideal toward which certain European states seem to be 
headed. The apparent ease of the Spanish conquest is 
often cited as proof to the contrary, but the conquerors suc- 
ceeded by a bold dash at the ruling group and. once having 
laid hands upon the machinery, the thoroughly domesticated 
natives were easily handled. So it was rather by the very 
thoroughness of the system, than its weakness, that they 
succeeded. In fact, wherever there were still independent 
cities, the invaders met with the most heroic resistance, 
some communities perishing to the last man.* Further, it 

156 

THE FAMILY GROUP 157 

was largely the ready-trained army of the native kingdoms, 
or such units of it as the usurpers could lay hands upon, 
that did the work against these refractory cities. 

The political organization in Mexico was less thorough 
than that of the Inca, though far superior to that in Co- 
lombia. Mexico was ruled by the head family group in the 
City of Mexico, which Bandelier * has shown rose from the 
determined head of a warlike people that the preceding 
government had failed to conquer. When once upon its 
feet, this ruling family conquered, one by one, the surround- 
ing cities and forced them to pay tribute. The system was 
thus plainly a matter of military rule, arbitrary and abso- 
lute. Apparently, this power had not yet seized the entire 
social machinery of production as in Peru, but was in a fair 
way to do so when the Spaniards came. 

The same form of growth by conquest of city after city is 
apparent in the Inca scheme, while in Colombia it was still 
in its incipient stage. These main characteristics will best 
enable us to comprehend this remarkable development. 

It is probable that underlying governments so built up, 
there must necessarily have been originally a considerable 
diversity of language and social custom. As to the atti- 
tude of the several governments toward these subjected 
groups, we are left in doubt, but both in Mexico and in 
Peru the conquered were required to participate in the offi- 
cial religious practices, or perhaps we should say that be- 
cause each military and other governmental act was accom- 
panied by ritualistic observances, the conquered could not 
conform to one without the other. The Inca seem to have 
developed the method of c^spersing refractory social groups 
over the empire as a means of decreasing resistance. 

Outside of the Andean region, the family group appears 
to be the prevailing independent unit, but, as elsewhere, the 
tendency is for two or more of these to live together under 
some kind of a federation. So far as we know, no strong 

1S8 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

subjecting tendencies were developed by any of these fed- 
erations. The Araucanians seem to have formed a very 
efficient organization for the common defense, since neither 
the Inca nor the Spaniard succeeded in subjecting them; 
yet they seem not to have developed the missionary idea of 
extending their -culture by conquest. 

In North America we find upon the frontier of the Mex- 
ican state a large number of pueblos, each village or group 
of villages, a government to itself, yet recognizing a com- 
mon interest in times of peril. Their heroic struggle 
against the Spaniards in 1680 reveals the existence of basic 
elements for union, but at no time did any of these villages 
appear to be moved by the spirit of conquest and force its 
neighbors into a closer organization. On the other hand, 
they were not easily assimilated, preserving to this very day 
a great deal of their independence. It is quite probable that 
underneath their individualities these villages, with their 
family groups, closely coordinated ritualistic observances, 
their elected governors and war captains, present the fun- 
damental characteristics of the towns from which the south- 
em aboriginal empires were built up. 

In the immediate vicinity of the Pueblo villages were the 
somewhat nomadic Apache, Ute, and Navajo, with simple 
tribal organizations in which each local group was a law 
unto itself. But to the east, through the Gulf States and 
up into Virginia, we find a tendency to close federation. 
Among the best-known examples are the Cherokee, Creek, 
and Powhatan organizations. Farther north in New York, 
was the famous Iroquois League,* with its finely balanced 
government, the aggressiveness of which created several 
small but weak neighboring unions. Farther west, we have 
the Pawnee group and the very loosely coordinated Dakota 
council of "Seven Fires." Beyond this, we have little more 
than informal alliances, as the Blackfoot, Gros Ventre, and 
Sarsi ; the Cheyenne, Arapaho, Kiowa, and Comanche. 

THE FAMILY GROUP 159 

Yet, outside of these few attempts at political consolida- 
tion, we must be prepared to meet a bewildering array of 
small independent tribal governments and, in some cases, 
nothing at all save the fundamental unit groups. Thus it 
happens that one of the most forbidding aspects of our sub- 
ject to the layman, is the nomenclature by which we desig- 
nate these numerous political groups. All these group 
names have historical origins and so represent neither sys- 
tems of tribal relationship nor equal social values. When 
our colonial forefathers observed a new political group 
under a common head, they gave to it a tribal name derived 
from its own language or from some other circumstances. 
Such designations can have little classificatory value. It 
is true that a linguistic nomenclature has been provided 
which is essentially classificatory, but this again employs the 
conventional historic names for the several social groups. 
The list for these tribal names is further complicated by 
the occurrence of alternate equivalents and again by unex- 
pected subdivisions into subordinate groups. Hence, when 
a tribe name is encountered, practically nothing except more 
or less political independence can be taken for granted ; as 
to other relations, we must know the conditions in each case. 
What we have just seen to be the most fundamental social 
tendencies of the New World, will prepare us for a very 
formidable list of tribes. It is estimated that fir N^rth 
America al#ne, our literature contains more than two thou- 
sand tribal designations. To oflFer such a list here would 
avail little, but some of the most important tribal names will 
be given in the linguistic classification (p. 401). 

No important problem seems to hinge upon this tribal 
nomenclature, since it is solely a matter of convenience. 
When, however, we come to consider the internal organiza- 
tion of these conventional tribal groups, we do come face 
to face with one of the most important problems in social 
science. That very distinguished American social philoso- 

i6o THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

pher, Lewis H. Morgan, took the data for his theory of mar- 
riage and social regulation from the Iroquois and other 
North American tribes and his field reports are still models 
of accuracy.* Following his lead, Bandelier' gave us an 
exhaustive discussion of the Mexican system. Morgan was, 
above all, an evolutionist, who considered all now inexplic- 
able social usages to be survivals of a state of culture when 
they did have a real function. For example, the observed 
tendency to use the same relationship term for father and 
uncle, was considered as dating from a time when there was 
no ready means of knowing who was the true father. As 
time went on, new data began to present inconsistencies with 
Morgan's views, but the recent extended discussion of 
Rivers * has sought to justify the earlier hypothesis on the 
ground that the very last culture traits to be lost or modi- 
fied by a social group, are those that have to do with fam- 
ily relationships. This work, perhaps more than anything 
else, stimulated a number of American field-workers^ to 
reexamine the whole problem. 

THE LOCAL GROUP 

The comprehension of social organization is by no means 
easy because the phenomenon is very complex and lacks 
objective definition. In North America, where we know 
the«ubJQct b^st, we find among other forms a natural social 
group, or band, under the leadership of a competent indi^ 
vidual. The nucleus of this group is frequently the im- 
mediate family of the leader, recruited by relatives and 
strangers who have attached themselves because of faith in 
his leadership. Thus an energetic leader may soon have a 
large following. Such groups are usually found among 
hunting peoples who maintain their tribal solidarity by meet- 
ing once or twice a year en masse, at which time only, the 
tribal government is in function. After these brief inter- 
vals, they again scatter out in these same groups, or com- 

THE LOCAL GROUP i6r 

munities. In the United States and Canada, and in fact 
everywhere, the annual round of seasons gives human social 
life a kind of yearly cycle. This is very striking in the 
bison area, particularly among those tribes on the borders 
who raise a little maize or tobacco. Here the severe weather 
of January finds the small bands we have noted sheltered in 
little valleys some distance apart, each usually having its 
definite camping place. Here they stay until spring, when 
their fields are prepared. When the crop is in, a call is sent 
out by the tribal chief for all to meet at a certain place, 
where the bands are automatically confederated into an or- 
ganized camp which now moves and kills bison as a body. 
After an interval, they return to harvest their crop and then 
once again set out for the autumn hunt, to scatter out, at 
last, to their homes in December. In such a political group, 
it is clear that the simple band is the fundamental unit and 
as such is little more than the voluntary association of indi- 
viduals under an able leader. All are more or less depend- 
ent upon his bounty. Among these may be a shaman and 
also a priest, though the leader himself may be one of these. 

Some authors designate such a band as a family group, 
but that is going a little too far, for when we have full data, 
these bands are found to contain many individuals not de- 
scended from the leader and not even his relatives. For 
these reasons, the term local group is preferable.* There 
is, however, a native tendency to consider all members of 
such a band as relatives in a figurative sense, and to apply 
blood relationship terms to them, as men of similar age- 
grades will speak of themselves as brothers, etc. As these 
groups have more or less permanency, it is conceivable that 
in time they may come to be largely blood groups. 

In such a society, an individual is known by his personal 
name, together with the band name, but, as among us, each 
must keep track of his blood relationship by specific mem- 
ory. We see then that the true family group, as we con- 

i62 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

ceive it, e^fists somewhat independent of the band. All 
the world over, the prime importance of keeping track of 
blood relationship is recognized, particularly in respect to 
marriage, or sexual life. These bands, on the other hand, 
seem to have no specific function in the regulation of mar- 
riage, but to be economic or political groups. 

Such bands, as we have just outlined, are characteristic 
o{ the great hunting areas (the caribou area, the bison area, 
and the guanaco area, though our data here are vague), 
and the interior of the salmon area. They may also prevail 
in the manioc area, but we lack good data. In these various 
areas, we have a great range of tribal organization, but the 
fundamental units are the loose bands, or local groups, we 
have just characterized. 

CLANS AND GENTES 

Now when we come to the centers of more intense cul- 
ture, we find what is called a clan or gens, as the case may 
be. If we should take one of the preceding groups and 
make it permanent in the sense that everyone born in it is 
forever a member, we would have a somewhat different af- 
fair. The group name would now be firmly fixed to the in- 
dividual and define his descent, for by it he could know, in 
theory, at least, that he was a blood relative of every other 
person with that group name. If the group is small, many 
individuals will be of too near kin to marry and must bring 
in wives or husbands as the case may be. Since the parents 
are now of different groups, their child must inherit one or 
the other group name. There are but two alternatives. 
When he takes the mother's group name, we use the term 
clan, when the father's, gens. We do not intend to imply 
that the clan necessarily came about in this manner, but give 
the statement this form for the sake of clearness in distinc- 
tion. 

Now, it frequently happens that certain social regulations 

CLANS AND GENTES 163 

are defined by the clan or gentile name. In many cases, the 
universal prohibition against marriage between nearest kin 
is formalized into a rule that persons with the same clan or 
gentile names cannot marry. This gives what is spoken of 
as an exogamous relation. In the New World, at least, this 
rule does not negate the world-wide prohibition against the 
marriage of parents and children and other near relatives, 
but is an additional social regulation. On reflection, it will 
be apparent that as a clan or gens expands, it will become 
more and more easy for one to find within it a mate not 
ineligible by blood. In fact, we have the example of the 
Pawnee clan organization on the endogamous principle ; i.e., 
one is expected to marry a member of his own clan, but, of 
course, not a near relative. 

This peculiar association of membership in a social group 
with marriage restrictions has received a great deal of at- 
tention from students of society, many of whom have looked 
upon it as the key, not only to the marriage system, but to 
society as a whole. Yet, in the light of concrete data for 
the New World, this seems unwarranted. Also, the tend- 
ency has been to consider clans and gentes as fundamentally 
different, but a close look at^them shows that they rest upon 
the same idea and differ only in the method by which the 
child is assigned membership. 

Turning now to the question of geographical distribu- 
tion, it appears that so far as known, the clan and gentile 
area will comprise the whole of the area of intense culture, 
the greater part of the eastern maize area, the coast tribes 
of the salmon area, and a portion of the manioc area. It is 
thus clear that it tends to appear in the regions of more in- 
tense culture and particularly wherever there is an appear- 
ance of political solidarity. If we consider only the gentile 
form, we find it somewhat in the majority, dominating 
among the Siouan peoples of the bison area, the Algonkin 
of the Great Lakes, the Nahua, Maya, and Inca peoples, 

l64 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

'JT 

Volf 

>^ 

^ 

=^-1 

IT 

li^ L 

i\^ 

1 

ii 

^ 

\^ 

^ 

rS 

• 

»■ 

fls 

^ 

Bbw. 

□ U.k.„ 

( 

&'*' 

Fit. SJ. DitiTibmtvm of Cla*t and GtnUt 

CLANS AND GENTES 165 

with outlying localizations in both continents. Yet, the 
clan also has a respectable distribution, comprising a large 
part of the coast tribes in the salmon area, the eastern and 
southern parts of the eastern maize area, the Pueblo tribes, 
the Antilles, the Arawak of South America, and the Chib- 
cha of Colombia and Central America. There is thus no 
great disparity, but considering them as merely two forms 
of the same grouping, we see that the clan-gentile system 
does prevail and is in general a correlate of political soli- 
darity. 

However, the clan or gens is not necessarily the ultimate 
social unit, but may by expansion come to have unexpected 
relations to the tribal group. Kroeber's * investigations of 
the Pueblo peoples of southwestern United States show 
that many clans have members in each village, a condition 
somewhat similar to that of the Iroquois as analyzed by 
Morgan *® many years ago. In these cases, we see that the 
clan organization simply cross-sections the community or 
tribal grouping, the one being, as it were, vertical and the 
other horizontal. In the Iroquoian system, we find a close 
federation between the tribal groups which stopped little 
short of a compact political state. Unfortunately, we do 
not know just how the clans were distributed in the confed- 
erated tribes of southeastern United States, nor the gens in 
the ancient states of the Aztec, Maya, and Inca, but we 
find the tWo systems together — compact government and 
the clan-gens organization. It is, therefore, fair to raise 
the question as to whether the real basic unity that made 
possible these aboriginal political states did not rest with 
their clan and gentile relations, since in these they had a 
definite bond. A study of the Arawak would be interesting 
in this connection, for though they are scattered far and 
wide, they seem to have preserved a definite clan system 
throughout. 

We have just noted how the clan-gens grouping seemed 

i66 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

to be independent of the tribal grouping and was not neces- 
sarily a political scheme. We may, therefore, be prepared 
to learn that clans are sometimes grouped or linked in ways 
peculiar to themselves. Thus, among the Menomini of the 
eastern maize area, we have the several gentes in groups 
of three or more, in each of which one is regarded as the 
leading gens.** A somewhat similar crude sort of linking 
is reported for the Arizona Apache, though in this case for 
clans. Evidence for certain kinds of linking occurs among 
the Pueblo villages and elsewhere. The phenomenon is of 
interest here only in that it is the vaguer and less definite 
of such associations, for when two or more of the clan-gens 
groups are subordinated to a complementary division of the 
tribal unit, they are considered a phratry. What we have 
noted as to the association between the clan-gens system 
and marriage restrictions, applies here also, for exogamous 
linked groups are likely to be mutually exogamous. The 
phratry also may become the controlling unit as, for ex- 
ample, among the Iroquois. 

DUAL DIVISIONS 

In addition to the social groups we have so far consid- 
ered, we find another peculiar one. Thus, among certain 
Pueblo Indians of southwestern United States (the Tewa), 
the village is divided in two halves, or moieties, known as 
summer and winter people, since one has charge of certain 
functions in summer, the other in winter. A similar group- 
ing IS reported for the Caddoan *^ and a part of the Siouan 
stock in the Mississippi Valley,*' the Miwok of California** 
and also among the Iroquois of the east.*' In such cases 
the clans or gentes are sometimes disregarded, but are usually 
treated as subdivisions of the moiety. For example, the 
Seneca division of the Iroquois had four clans in one 
moiety and an equal number in the other. Though in this 

DUAL DIVISIONS 167 

case equally divided, we find the Hidatsa with four in one 
and three in the other, and the Pawnee with two in one 
and eleven in the other. As an example of a moiety that 
disregards the gens or clan, we have the Fox and Kickapoo 
tribes, each of which has gentile groups; but membership 
in the moieties is determined arbitrarily when the child is 
named, so that the members of a given gens will be divided 
between the two. In this dual grouping of tribes, we are 
dealing with a curious phenomenon which is not yet well 
understood. It is almost universal in the southern half of 
the eastern maize area, the eastern half of the bison area, 
and extends well down into the area of intense culture, if 
indeed not to its extreme borders. The data we have at 
hand seem to justify the conclusion that a moiety is not 
merely a larger division of clan or gentile groups," but a 
grouping of another kind. This is clearly the case among 
the Sauk and Fox where children at birth are assigned, 
regardless of their gens, to one of two moieties whose only 
function seems to be pleasurable social rivalry in certain 
games. Something like this is found in the southern part 
of the eastern maize area and has been reported from the 
Jicarilla Apache. The precise distribution of this custom 
cannot be stated, but something very much like it has been 
noted among the western Eskimo.*^ 

If these dual divisions were entirely for sport and cere- 
monies, their origin and function would be intelligible, but 
the problem is complicated by the presence of exogamous 
regulations. For example, among the Iroquois, the dual di- 
visions, or moieties, are the phratries and were formerly 
exogamous, so that one must not only marry out of his clan, 
but out of his moiety. It is not clear, therefore, whether 
the mere fact of dual division is significant or just acciden- 
tal. Until the whole subject is searchingly analyzed, we 
cannot deal with it in a work of this kind. The present 
tendency is to regard it as in the main accidental and to con- 

i68 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

sider the exogamous character of moieties mere extensions 
of the system regulating marriage. 

RELATIONSHIP SYSTEMS 

In the older literature of our subject, special significance 
was given the fact that among certain peoples the term 
father or mother was extended to include uncles, and 
brother or sister to include cousins. It was assumed that 
if one called his mother's sister also mother, and his pa- 
ternal uncle, father, this was a survival of a time when 
marriage was indefinite and the identity of the parent in 
doubt. Recently, a great deal of attention has been given 
the various tribal systems of relationship terms," an ab- 
stract and rather difficult subject. From the New World 
data now at hand, it appears that where such systems are 
used, there is no actual confusion between one's real parent, 
for instance, and the uncle or aunt to whom the name may 
also be applied. We have, therefore, merely a system of 
designation which may be presumed to have an historical 
origin. 

A precise statement of the varieties of systems and their 
distribution cannot be made, for want of full data, but one 
common form is that designated by Morgan as classificatory, 
or that in which a single term is used for both father and 
father's brothers, mother and mother's sisters. Its best- 
known area is practically the whole of the United States east 
of the Mississippi, comprising almost the entire eastern clan 
and gens area as designated on our map (p. 164). Again, 
on the North Pacific Coast, we find a similar system asso- 
ciated with the clan and gens organizations. The next 
trace of it appears in the clan area of New Mexico. For 
the other clan and gens areas, we lack full data. These are 
also the regions in which exogamy prevails. On the other 
hand, for the great stretch of North America, which we 
have designated as the band area, the relationship nomen- 

TABOOS 169 

clature tends to resemble our own in that it differentiates 
the father from his brothers. Thus, in a general way, we 
find that wherever there are exogamous clans or gentes, one 
form of designating relatives prevails, while among tribes 
having simple family groups, there is a different form. This 
is not without exception, for example, the Pawnee have the 
system of these exogamous tribes but are endogamous. 

There are, however, other points of difference in rela- 
tionship systems as, for example, the use of reciprocal 
terms, or the method by which the same word is used by 
uncle and nephew, grandparent and grandchild, to express 
the relation of the one to the other. Such a system is found 
among the Kootenai, Ute, and most Shoshonean tribes of 
the highlands in western United States. By taking note of 
such distinctions as these, it seems possible to localize sev- 
eral geographical types of nomenclature whose investiga- 
tion promises to hold an important place in the anthropol- 
ogy of the future. 

TABOOS AND SOCIAL PRIVILEGES 

This is a convenient place to note certain curious social 
phenomena pertaining to the relationship complex. In many 
parts of the world, a man is not permitted to speak to his 
mother-in-law and in some cases not even to look at her. 
These restrictions are designated as mother-in-law taboos.*' 
The actual New World distribution of this custom cannot be 
stated at present, but it is found among many tribes in the 
interior of North America. In a few cases, the restric- 
tions seem to have applied to one's father-in-law also, par- 
ticularly among the Plains-Cree of the bison area.*® On 
the other hand, the father-in-law and the daughter-in-law 
are less rigidly restricted, their attitude toward each other 
being much like that of father and daughter. 

This subject deserves more careful investigation, first as 
to its distribution and ultimately as to its significance, since 

lyo THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

it seems to be the natural correlate of certain forms of mar- 
riage. The data so far available on their geographical dis- 
tribution show it to be erratic rather than continuous, even 
one or two tribes speaking mutually intelligible languages 
differing in the keeping of this taboo. This is shown by the 
following data supplied by Dr. R. H. Lowie : — 

The North American tribes, known to have the mother- 
in-law taboo, are : the Cree, Assiniboin, Blackf oot, Arapaho, 
Crow, Lemhi Shoshoni, Dakota, Hidatsa, Mandan, Omaha, 
Navajo, Apache, Tiibatulabal (Kern River Shoshoni), the 
Western Mono (not the Eastern Mono), Haida, Creek, Ali- 
bamu, Kiowa, and Cheyenne. Those known not to observe 
it are : the Pawnee, Kwakiutl, Nootka, Paviotso, Comanche, 
Wind River Shoshoni, Hopi, Zuni, Ute, Nez Perce, Tewa, 
Keresan, Beaver, and tribes in northwestern California. 
For South America the taboo has been reported for the 
Guaycuris and the Carib of the Antilles. 

JJowever, the apparent erratic distribution of this custom 
may 1^ due to incomplete information. 

There are other phenomena of this class, of which the 
joking-relationship is a type, so far reported for central 
North America only. In general, the custom is for indi- 
viduals of certain specific relationships to have the privilege 
of almost unlimited personal ridicule, even in public, which 
must be cheerfully borne. For example, among the Black- 
foot a man enjoys the conspicuous privilege of defying the 
conventionalities of speech in conversation with the sisters 
of his wife, but not with the wife of his brother. Con- 
versely, he must be extremely circumspect in conversation 
with all the male relatives of his wife. All such conven- 
tionalities deserve careful study because they promise to be 
survivals of more archaic forms of social and marriage 
systems. 

TOTEMS 171 

AGE GRADES AND SOCIETIES 

As in Other parts of the world, we find in the New World 
a tendency for a social group to recognize conventional age- 
classes, particularly for the males. Thus, for the purposes 
of administration, the Inca government divided the males 
into the following classes : — 

1. Puiiuc rucu (old man sleeping), sixty years and upwards. 

2. Chaupi rucu ChsAi old"), fifty to sixty years. Doing light 
work. 

3. Puric (able-bodied), twenty-five to fifty. Tribute payer and 
head of the family. 

4. Yma huayma (almost a youth), twenty to twenty-five. Worker. 

5. Coca pdla (coca picker), sixteen to twenty. Worker. 

6. PucUac huamra, eight to eighteen. Light work. 

7. Ttanta raquisic (bread receiver), six to eight 

8. Macta puric, under six. 

9. Soya huamrac, able to stand. 
10. Mosoc caparic, baby in arms.*^ 

A somewhat similar classification seems to have been rec- 
ognized by the Aztec,** and even out in the bison hunting 
area many tribes were regarded as composed of boys, young 
men, warriors, and old men, each class having certain privi- 
leges and duties. 

It so happens that in several parts of the world where 
such age-grades are recognized, we find a series of men's 
societies organized from these different age-ranks, and in 
the aggregate presenting the example of a series of so- 
cieties, membership in which is restricted to separate life 
periods. In such a system, one would begin by joining a 
boys* society and so gradually pass at the proper age to the 
next higher and so on through life.** The attention given 
this subject by many writers elevates it to one of great 
theoretical importance, but so far the phenomenon of age- 
graded societies appears in the New World only in the 
bison area. Lowie,** who is the most recent student of this 

172 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

subject, makes a good case for its independent origin in 
this small locality, suggesting that it is here at least merely 
the accidental outgrowth of the more fundamental tendency 
to segregate according to age. 

TOTEMIC FEATURES 

There is one aspect of social grouping that deserves ftir- 
ther notice, even in such a brief account as this. The terms 
totem and totemism have come to stand for a distinct body 
of literature and indicate a respectable complex of sociolog- 
ical theory. If, for example, we review the recognized 
names people give to their clans and gentes, most of them 
are seen to be derived from the names for animals. Thus 
Morgan,*' the great pioneer in this field, finds the Iroquois 
to have the following clans: Wolf, Bear, Beaver, Turtle, 
Deer, Snipe, Heron, Hawk. 

Similar naming systems are found among nearly all the 
clan peoples of North America, but it is not so clear that 
this is equally true of those having gentes. 

The significant point, however, is taken to be the mean- 
ing of this animal name. In almost every case it can be 
explained only by the mythical narrative accounting for 
the origin of the group in question, which deals with an 
animal-like being to whom the origin of the organization is 
ascribed, if indeed this being is not the true initial parent. 
The result is that if this being should be in some way asso- 
ciated with the black bear, for example, the people of the 
group would call themselves the black bear clan and would 
look upon all such bears as related to them. In short, the 
bear, or a bear, would come to be the totem of the group.** 
As the discussion of this subject will require some data on 
reli^*on and mythology, we may best postpone its further 
consideration. 

Our previous citations of the associations between mar- 
riage restrictions and the clan-gens system may prepare us 

TOTEMS 173 

for further complications, for the conception of a clan-gens 
ancestor and the group animal name will bring the totem 
into prominence when marriage systems are considered To 
this association, we shall revert in a succeeding chapter. 
One of the important problems for us, here, is the place and 
manner of origin for the New World totemic complex. 
This, like many others of its kind, must rest with the fu- 
ture. So far, analytic studies have shown that the various 
systems of totemic practices growing up around these an- 
cestral and other concepts have different historical origins 
and so are not to be explained as instinctive or as diffused 
from a common center; yet, it cannot be denied that the 
sameness of the underlying concepts throughout the New 
World must be accounted for by one or the other of these 
hypotheses.*^ From its distribution, we have a strong pre- 
sumption that the New World clan or gens system is a cor- 
relate of higher political and industrial organization, since 
it is among the loosely organized tribes that it does not oc- 
cur, but just where the totemic factor enters the complex 
is not clear. 

In closing this brief glance at the social grouping of abo- 
riginal man in the New World, we may be impressed with 
the tendency for each social feature to localize. Thus, 
whether it be merely a matter of terminology for uncles 
and aunts, methods of regulating marriage, or what not, we 
find it not scattered up and down the Americas at random, 
but gathered into more or less distinct geographical areas. 
It is this observed geographical distribution of the several 
social groupings we have noted in the New World that sug- 
gests their historical origin in opposition to an innate one. 
It is now clear that we may have an evolution of society 
that is determined by the conditions of the time and place 
and not by the inborn traits of the people producing it. 
This seems to be the most satisfactory interpretation of the 

174 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

data on social grouping, for more complete knowledge makes 
it impossible to believe that the bands, clans, gentes, etc., 
have a definite place in the mere organic evolution of peoples 
in the New World. 

1. Joyce, I9I2. I. 

2. Bandelier, 1879. I. 

3. Parker, 1916. 1 ;*Morgan, I904« I 

4. Morgan, 1870. I; 1878. I 

1904. I. 

5. Bandelier, 1879. I. 

6. Rivers, 1914. I. 

7. Lowie, 1914 I; 1916. I 
1920. I; Goldenweiser, I9i4- I 
Swanton, 1905. I; 1906. I. 

8. Goldenweiser, 1910. I. 

9. Kroeber, 1917. I. 

10. Morgan, 1904. L 

11. Skinner, 1913. I. 

12. Murie, 1914. I. 

13. Dorscy, J. O., 1897. L 

14. Gifford, 19161 L 

15. Morgan, 1904. I. 

16. Lowie, 1914. I. 

17. Stefinsson, 1914. I, p. 331. 

i& Lowie, 1915* I; 19161 I; 1917* 
I; Rivers, 1914. L 

19. Tylor (no date). 

20. Kane, 1859. L 

21. Markham, 1910. I, p. 161. 

22. Bandelier, 1879. L 

23. Lowie, 1916. II; Rivers, 1914. 
I; Schurtz, 1902. I; Webster, 
1908. I. 

24. Lowie, 1916. II. 

25. Morgan, 1904. I, p. 75- 

26. Frazer, 19 10. I. 

27. Goldenweisei; 191CK L 

CHAPTER XI 
SOCIAL REGULATION 

This work can scarcely be considered complete without 
some more definite discussion of social control. With the 
general modes of control, such as are almost universal 
among mankind, we have nothing to do, such subjects prop- 
erly belonging to sociology, our concern being with the 
particular machinery by which this control is exercised. 
When a man commits a crime his social group is presented 
with a problem for which the mode of attack is already con- 
ventionalized. To meet such contingencies the highly or- 
ganized governments of Peru and Mexico maintained com- 
plex judicial systems. In the former country each village 
had its appointed judge to whom the inspectors, or dis- 
ciplinarians, reported all irregularities. There was one of 
these inspectors for each recognized social unit.* The 
village judge dealt with all such cases and levied the pun- 
ishments, usually beating or whipping, and, if the code re- 
quired, execution. It seems, however, that these petty 
magistrates were not permitted to try important cases, par- 
ticularly those which we class as civil. At regular periods 
officials from the capital visited each province and held 
court for the presentation of complaints and petitions. 
Though the data leave us in doubt, they imply that appeals 
from the decisions of the local magistrate could be filed 
in this court. At any rate, these traveling judicial inspec- 
tors reported back to the supreme judicial bureau, which 
body, in turn, delegated judges to visit the locality of the 
petitioner and try the case. 

For the Nahua system we have abundant data in so far 

175 

176 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

as they apply to the City of Mexico.* Here the calputti, 
or gens, had representatives who sat as a lower court be- 
fore whom all irregularities were presented by the proper 
officers ; but all their important decisions were passed up to 
a higher court, consisting of a number of judges appointed 
by the ruler. These held court daily in a special chamber 
of the palace. In addition, there seems to have been a 
special body of thirteen judges who sat with the ruler at 
stated periods for the review of unusually important cases. 
Finally, there was a grand chief justice who stood as the 
responsible head of the system. To what extent the sub- 
ject cities and provinces shared in this system is not clear, 
but we are informed that their local courts were required 
to refer their decisions to the higher courts of Mexico City. 
For the earlier Maya we have very little data, but since 
their culture was of a high order and contributed liberally 
to the later Nahua, we may safely assume an almost equally 
complex system. 

In the preceding chapter, we noted a striking similarity 
in the social organizations of Peru and Mexico in that their 
political complexes were built of gens-like units. Here we 
see that their judicial systems also were based upon these 
same units, for at the bottom were the courts or magis- 
trates for the gens, subordinate to the magistrates of the 
governing gens. In the same way that a single warlike 
gens built up a political complex by subjecting other gens 
or groups of gens to its rule, it also erected a system of 
control and discipline. We may anticipate, therefore, that 
as we leave these centers of military culture we shall find 
little more than the separate individual gens systems. For 
example, south of Peru were the Araucans with a loose 
political system ; and here we are told the "law of revenge" 
was supreme, that is, the individual was his own judge and 
executioner. Colombia and Ecuador doubtless had some- 
thing of a judicial system, but elsewhere in South America 

JUDICIAL SYSTEMS 177 

we find only simple tribal groups where folk justice was 
free from all restraints. 

Turning back to North America and beginning at the 
farthest north with the extremely simple culture of the 
Eskimo, we find a considerable body of regulations, as 
must be the case in any well-formed culture, but still no 
effective judicial machinery to enforce them. If a man 
finds his conventional rights trod upon, he has no recourse 
except to resort to blood vengeance. Yet, we do find in- 
cipient judicial procedure, for among the Hudson Bay 
Eskimo the men of a group may, in consultation, condemn 
an obnoxious individual and arrange for some one to dis- 
patch him at the first opportunity.* Again, in Greenland 
there is a definite mode of dealing with an offender by 
challenging him to a public contest in which he is made to 
face his opponent who sings derisive songs specifying his 
misdeeds.* Such ordeals are not only used in case of theft 
and murder, but even to discipline a lazy or incompetent 
person. 

In the great interior of Canada among the Dene tribes 
and eastward, the fundamental legal procedure was about as 
above, each group of people being informally d(Hninated 
by one or more head men who exercised whatever judicial 
functions there were. The same can be said of the interior 
salmon area; but throughout, the right of blood vengeance 
was recognized. For example, we are told that among the 
Shoshoni the head man, or chief, did not concern himself 
•with murders, but left that to the injured party.' 

In general, we can say that this loose type of personal 
freedom to revenge, without definite judicial procedure, is 
distributed from southern California northward through the 
Plateaus, the Plains, Canada, Alaska, and Greenland. 
However, in Washington, Oregon, northern California, and 
practically everywhere in the Plains, we find the idea of 
compounding, or paying the injured party. Referring to 

178 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

the map for social groups, we note that this distribution 
follows closely the limits of the simple band, or village 
type of grouping. 

Turning now to the regions manifesting gens and clan 
organizations, we note that in the North Pacific Coast area 
there is little to add, except that the idea of compounding 
by gifts of property or slaves is rather prominent When a 
murder is committed, the essential payment is a life of equal 
rank, but this applies when the parties are of different 
families, whereas, within the family, the family chief ad- 
justs the case. In short', the blood vengeance again holds 
here and a distinct judicial procedure has so far not been 
brought to notice, nor do we hear of police officers. On 
the other hand, the blood vengeance was so far formalized 
that the taking of a life by the injured party closed the 
incident and did not lead to an endless chain of murders. 

Shifting eastward to the great gens area around the 
upper Mississippi and the Great Lakes, we find something 
more elaborate. In the first place, the Siouan group of 
tribes clustering around the Missouri had a well-developed 
police system which, however, had no definite relation to a 
gens group, but was initiated and controlled by a governing 
head for the whole tribal group of gentes.' A further pecu- 
liarity of this is that such a government was transitory or 
periodical, being called into life each spring and ending 
with the last fall bison hunt. For the gens itself there 
was no judicial system other than the individual acts of 
its members. About the only formal procedure was one 
that seems genetically related to the calumet idea ; for exam- 
ple, certain head men could wave a pipe over contending 
parties who were then bound to desist or to be set upon by 
the community. 

Turning now to the Algonkin-speaking tribes occupying 
the greater part of the Ohio and St. Lawrence drainage, we 
find no trace of a police system except among a few groups 

JUDICIAL SYSTEMS 179 

in immediate contact with the Siouans. On the other hand, 
we seem to have a more sharply defined gens system in 
which the idea that the gens is responsible for the acts 
of a member is clearly formalized. Yet, we cannot be sure 
as to this, since in many cases, as, for example, among the 
Ojibway, where the gens lines do not correspond to the 
local grouping and the local group seems itself to be the 
judicial unit. So it may turn out that what we have here 
is merely an emphasized idea of the community's respon- 
sibility, a factor common in some degree to all parts of the 
world. The most interesting point here, however, is a 
highly formalized procedure which constitutes a kind of 
trial under the autfiority of the chief and the shaman.^ 
The principle of procedure is that the friends and relatives 
of the deceased are persuaded by gifts and speeches to for- 
give the offense. If they cannot be so persuaded, the pris- 
oner is executed at once. This precise form of judicial 
procedure is found among the Ojibway and Micmac, with 
suggestions of it throughout the whole stretch of Algonkin 
peoples. The Iroquois also had formal trials, but the pro- 
cedure was different; witches, for example, were tried be- 
fore the council, a regularly constituted body, but murderers 
were subject to immediate revenge by the injured family, 
unless a peace token was offered. Yet, the council could 
intercede and try to mediate. This failing, the aggrieved 
were left free to exercise their right, which in turn might 
call for retah'ation.' 

As to the tribes of the Gulf States who had progressed so 
far as to form strong confederacies, and where we have 
reason to expect some judicial system, no very exact state- 
ment can be made. We infer from the available sources 
that murders and lesser crimes were left to adjustment by 
the interested parties, blood vengeance being the rule.* It 
is true that the village government seems to have had a few 
police officers, but these were to preserve order at ceremonies 

i8o THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

and to regulate labor in the communal fields, not to punish 
offenses against the individual. However, as to trials and 
formal methods of adjusting crimes, we are left with the 
impression that in this particular the tribes of the south 
were far behind their northern neighbors. We should not 
forget, however, that this may be an unjust estimate aris- 
ing from inadequate data. One judicial principle strongly 
developed in the south is that the murderer shall be killed 
in precisely the same way as his victim, and this, again, 
holds for the Iroquois, but not for the surrounding Algonkin 
tribes. 

There remains but one more area in North America, zns., 
southwestern United States. Among the less sedentary 
peoples, as the Apache and Navajo, the idea of compensa- 
tion for murder and minor injuries prevailed. Adjustments 
were usually made in public, but the decision seems to have 
rested with the injured party. They could, if they chose, 
exercise the right of vengeance, but the other side was then 
free to retaliate. For the Pueblo peoples proper we lack 
adequate data, but the inference is that the paying of an 
indemnity was universal/® In general, the governing ma- 
chinery of these villages seems to have been directed toward 
religious ends rather than otherwise and so to a large extent 
rests with the few properly accredited officials. It is true 
that there was a constant night patrol of the villages and 
on ceremonial occasions a day police, but that these officers 
acted in case of murder or theft is improbable. 

Now that we are at the end of this somewhat tedious 
survey, we may summarize the data, meager though they 
be. In the first place, it is only the complex governments of 
Peru and Mexico that exercised systematic judicial func- 
tions in what we consider criminal cases. Almost every- 
where else the family group, the gens or clan, as the case 
may be, was left to its own devices in meeting such situa- 
tions. There were always conventional ways of proceeding, 

JUDICIAL SYSTEMS i8i 

but these were almost entirely outside the jurisdiction of 
the tribal government. Everywhere, of course, the concq>t 
of "life for life" is entertained, but the tendency in the 
New World is for the true blood feud to be found among 
those tribes having the simplest family organizations, whose 
distribution is shown on our map for social grouping ; while 
in the regions of clans and gentes provision is made for com- 
pensating the injured parties either by a single execution, for 
which no retaliation is permitted or by the payment of an in- 
demnity. That this seemingly close correlation indicates a 
true functional relation between the two is doubtful, since it 
may be largely a matter of geographical segregation; yet, 
there remains the undeniable fact that at least the conven- 
tional methods of dealing with crime have geographical dis- 
tributions in every way comparable to those for other traits 
of culture. Hence, their presence in any given locality is to 
be explained by historical principles and not as due to inher- 
ent reactions. The principle of "blood for blood" may be 
innate and consequently world-wide, but its mere presence 
does not account for the conventional procedures we have 
noted, nor for their peculiar distributions. 

Like every other subject in this volume, this one admits 
of great elaboration, but space and time forbid more than 
passing notice of a few collateral practices. Thus, it often 
happens that the shaman in a group comes to have an official 
relation to its judicial system. This is particularly notice- 
able among the wilder peoples of South America where the 
shaman, or peaintan, becomes apprehender. judge, and exe- 
cutioner without check or supervision." 

As we have noted, the idea of a trial in which evidence 
is presented does not apply to the judicial procedures we 
have outlined, except in the area of intense culture. Out- 
side of this area, the only cases in which proof of guilt is 
sought by prosecuting parties are in the trials of witches as 
reported for the Iroquois and parts of the Pacific Coast. At 

i82 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

some of the Algonkin trials evidence might be produced to 
show that murder, for example, was excusable, but taking 
the country at large, the conventional procedures assume 
that the identity of the guilty is known to all concerned be- 
fore the trial. Naturally, there are cases in which the 
identity of the criminal is in doubt, and in such a con- 
tingency the shaman may be called upon to discover him. 
Further, throughout both continents, and especially in east- 
ern South America, normal death is considered as probably 
due to secret magic by some personal enemy, and it is the 
shaman's place to discover the culprit. Thus, we have no 
difficulty in explaining how the shaman comes into close 
association with the machinery of the law and how in many 
cases he stands as the highest exponent of authority. The 
regions where the shaman is most supreme are precisely 
those in which the blood feud is least restrained: ins., the 
Amazon country, the Arctic coast belt, the interior of Can- 
ada, and the great western plateaus of the United States. 
Here he often becomes the relentless avenger, hounding the 
steps of the real or assumed criminal, until opportunity 
presents itself for his dispatch." 

Another subject of interest is the oath. It has been 
stated that nothing like an oath existed in the New World, 
but we do find customs that can scarcely be interpreted in 
any other way. Obviously they serve the same purpose. 
Thus, when a Blackfoot woman faces the sun in the presence 
of a tribal priest and says, "May I never set my foot into 
another snow, if, etc./' or when a Dakota, challenged as to 
his war record, touches a knife point held by a referee and 
makes a similar pledge, we have the essentials of an oath. 
In this connection the remarks of Garcilasso on the oath 
taken by a native Peruvian should be read. While this 
author denies that the natives swear, yet the witness said : 
"I wish that the earth may swallow me up alive, as I stand, 
in case I speak not the truth," *• 

PROPERTY AND INHERITANCE 183 

Finally, some note should be made of the ordeal, which 
also had its analogous forms in this hemisphere. Through- 
out the interior of Canada and even among some of the 
Eskimo the right to a woman and other privileges is de- 
cided by a wrestling match. In parts of the Amazon coun- 
try an arm or leg is plunged into a vessel filled with vicious 
insects to test the integrity of the individual, and again, 
poisonous ants are allowed to bite one to show his remorse 
for injury to another. If space permitted, we could work 
out the distributions of these practices, but we have gone 
far enough to reveal the character of the phenomena. Thus, 
we find the principles of "life for life," indemnity, social 
control of settlements, tests by ordeals, and oaths, in the 
New World as well as in the Old. Where they differ is in 
the conventionalized forms of procedure. There are, how- 
ever, no differences common to all parts of the New World, 
each geographical area manifesting some individuality. 

CONCEPTIONS OF PROPERTY AND INHERITANCE 

From our own point of view, property may be con- 
veniently comprehended under the classes of real and per- 
sonal. Real estate, or property in lands, is with us an in- 
dividual matter, but such an idea seems to have been foreign 
to the New World. Here the land, in so far as it was 
owned at all, was the property of the family group. The 
Nahua, with all their complexity, never got above this idea, 
nor did the Inca. The one fact that makes this especially 
clear is the entire absence of the idea of selling or conveying 
title to lands.** Other kinds of property there were, which 
were freely given and exchanged and even levied upon by 
the organized governments of the central areas for taxes 
or tribute, yet in no case do we find evidence that this 
procedure extended to the land. On the other hand, the 
fight to the exclusive use of certain plots by the social 
group, gens, clan, etc., was clearly recognized. Yet, the 

i84 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

true communal character of the system appears when we 
note that almost everywhere there is an annual allotment 
of fields to the households of the group, thus distinctly 
demonstrating each individual's equality in the ownership of 
the community land. As in most other things, the Inca 
and Nahua highly systematized the workings of these 
fundamental concepts, forming thus codes of land laws. 
The boundaries to the group lands were fixed and the death 
penalty placed upon any one tampering with them. Also, 
certain unoccupied lands were set aside for the support of 
the governing class, labor upon which was requisitioned as 
needed. One who reads the special literature of the sub- 
ject can scarcely fail being impressed with the thorough 
control of agriculture exercised by these centralized powers. 
In each community there were officials whose duty it was 
to call the people to the fields, and to direct their labors./ 
Further, if we follow out the distribution of maize culture 
we find associated with it practically all of the following 
concepts: the family ownership of land without rights of 
sale or conveyance, the setting aside of plots for the rulers 
and religious officials, and, finally, the constant control and 
supervision by those in authority. Yet, the non-agricultural 
areas have these same characteristics to a less degree; 
hence, it is not fair to assume that the development of 
agriculture was wholly responsible for the general com- 
munistic conception, a conception universal from Cape Horn 
to the Bering Sea. Rather should we say that this funda- 
mental communal concept is the foundation upon which 
the one grand agricultural complex of the New World was 
reared. 

Personal property in the New World consisted of houses, 
chattels, produce, etc. In a very considerable part of North 
America, at least, the house, furniture, and all food was 
the property of the woman, regardless of whether descent 
was reckoned in the male or female line. No doubt a care- 

MARRIAGE 185 

ivl investigation of this subject would lead to important 
results, but this inquiry is for the future. 

A form of property not usually recognized by us is that 
of the hereditary right to certain functions in the com- 
munity, as the ownership of rituals for ceremonies, cere- 
monial songs, certain specific arts and trades, etc. While 
these were often hereditary to definite social groups, we 
frequently encounter the idea that the right can be solcf 
or conveyed at will. Perhaps closely associated with this is 
the custom of formally presenting gifts which in some 
localities is so systematized that it becomes a mere exchange 
of presents. In fact, we find in the North Pacific area 
under the name "potlatch," a very complicated system of 
gifts on a loan and credit system.** 

As to the rules of inheritance, little need be said here. 
Our previous discussions have shown that both male and 
female inheritance are recognized according to the respective 
social areas. Since land cannot well be alienated from the 
initial group, the rules of inheritance can only apply to 
personal property and privileges. As to the latter, while 
there is some tendency to recognize the rights of the son 
to his father's or maternal uncle's position in the tribe, as 
the particular system may require, the usual procedure is to 
exercise some kind of selection from the several descend- 
ants as a guarantee that a competent incumbent will be 
secured. This is plainly noticeable in the Inca and Nahua 
systems and can be safely taken as another of the funda- 
mental elements in the social structure of the New World. 

MARRIAGE REGULATIONS 

As in other parts of the world, one cannot marry back 
into his own family nor among the immediate relatives of 
his parents. Beyond this, the restrictions vary as has been 
suggested in the preceding chapter, becoming in the main 

i86 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

mere conventions. Chastity before marriage seems not to 
have been required, but in many places was regarded as 
essential to certain religious fimctions, indicating that, after 
all, it was an ideal. On the other hand, adultery was 
severely punished when the woman was the offender, while 
in many tribes the male offender was regarded as innocent 

One prominent trait among the Eskimo is the exchange of 
wives, indulged in chiefly as a matter of hospitality. This 
is also found among many of the Dene tribes of Canada 
and an analogous custom is found in parts of the bison area. 
In most parts of both continents there seem to have been 
certain festivals during which restrictions were relaxed, but 
the latitude granted by all these social sanctions did not 
weaken the gravity of transgression under other conditions. 

As to forms of marriage, it appears that the general 
tendency in both continents was monogamous. On the other 
hand, almost everywhere the custom was for chiefs, priests, 
and shamans to have more than one wife. In the centers 
of higher culture, those occupying positions of power and 
influence kept large establishments for women. The area 
in which plural marriage seems strongest is the bison area 
of North America, but this may be a partial exaggeration 
due to relatively richer data. Some reports for the Eskimo 
and Dene tribes indicate occasional states of plural hus- 
bands, but this appears rather as an adjustment to necessity 
than as an established mode of marriage. So thus, taking 
the New World as a whole, we find it singularly free of 
anything like group marriage, such as is found in the 
Pacific Islands and Asia. Yet we do find forms of cross- 
cousin marriage in California and northward into the sal- 
mon area;" also, it has been found in Guiana, South 
America. 

The notion that the husband of a woman acquired supe- 
rior rights to his wife's sisters is found in many parts of 
the New World, and its natural correlate, the taking over 

EDUCATION 187 

of a brother's or, in some cases, a maternal uncle's widow. 
These are particularly strong wherever plural wives are 
common. On the other hand, strict and universal monog- 
amy holds for a few communities, as the Iroquois and 
certain Pueblo villages of southwestern United States. 

Marriage ceremonies and the regulations for divorce vary 
greatly from tribe to tribe, making their discussion here 
impractical. The conventional exchange of presents pre- 
viously noted IS so developed in some localities as to give 
the impression that a man purchases his wife, but in many 
such cases the relatives also make an equal return as a pre- 
liminary to the ceremony. Yet, when property is given to 
the bride's family, whether as gift or purchase, and the 
woman for any cause deserts her husband, he can demand 
equivalent return. In Peru and Mexico the governments 
regulated divorce, but elsewhere the parties could separate 
at will, though the respective families of each party had a 
voice in the settlement. 

EDUCATION AND GENERAL DISCIPLINE 

We sometimes read specific statements that infanticide 
and neglect of the helpless prevailed in the New World, but 
a moment's reflection will make clear the improbability of 
either having been the rule. The exposing of infants was 
resorted to only in case of necessity or advisability. Thus, 
in the Amazon country, if the mother die soon after confine- 
ment, the child will be buried with her or otherwise disposed 
of. unless some woman volunteers to rear it. This seems 
to have been common in other regions as well, but the 
Eskimo visited by Stefansson *^ often exposed female infants 
to preserve the balance between population and sustenance. 
As to the aged and sick, we have the formal practice of 
putting to death among some of the Eskimo and Den6, a 
custom also found in Siberia. On the other hand, among 

i88 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

all hunting peoples who shift about from place to place, 
the infirm are often of necessity left behind to their fate. 
Yet the reported examples of such cruelties can usually be 
matched by incidents of the opposite tenor, and since the 
mythologies of the various tribal groups contain plots show- 
ing retribution for such cruelties, and herald the triumphs 
of the oppressed over the unjust, we must regard all such 
phenomena as exceptional. 

Travelers everywhere have remarked upon the extreme 
indulgence toward children. This is very marked among 
the Eskimo, though perhaps not more so than among the 
Fuegians of South America. Wherever we have data, par- 
ents almost never punish or even severely reprove, but such 
pressure as may be needed is exercised by certain relatives. 
In the United States this is sometimes the clan or gens uncle 
of the offender, according to sex and mode of inheritance. 
Though our information for Peru and Mexico is in this 
respect vague, something similar seems to have applied 
there. In any case, these higher cultures had some formal 
provisions for training. For example, in Mexico City there 
were two kinds of schools, those for religious instruction 
and those for military training. To the former, both sexes 
were admitted in a manner closely analogous to the con- 
vent system of Europe. A similar custom held for the Maya 
and the Peruvians. 

A point of special interest here is that one aspect of this 
cloister-like school is found in contiguous parts of North 
America. We note that these children, particularly the 
boys, went to live in the school or in barracks, or rather, 
they slept there of nights. This trait is particularly prom- 
inent in Maya and Nahua culture. Among the Pueblos of 
the Pio Grande, the kiva or ceremonial chamber was the 
sleeping place of males and a similar practice is found in 
parts of California and northward. 

Outside of these regfions, nothing like a school appears, 

EDUCATION 189 

but here and there seem to have been some kind of dis- 
ciplinary officials, as for example the men who superintended 
the morning baths of boys in the bison area. Chastising 
the yoimg seems to have been practised in the centers of 
higher culture, but outside of these limits was practically 
unknown. Exceptions must be made, however, of cere- 
monial whippings in southeastern United States and the 
Amazon country. In short, the same principle applied to 
control of the young as to adults, viz., admonition and ridi- 
cule. White people living with American natives are re- 
peatedly astonished at their extreme sensitiveness to dis- 
approval and ridicule. In fact, the whole control of the 
local group in aboriginal days seems to have been exercised 
by admonition and mild ridicule instead of by force and 
punishment. While the necessities of the case modified this 
in Mexico and Peru, we still note that one prominent fea- 
ture of Nahua life was the elaboration of the moral lee- 
ture." In the Pueblo region of the Rio Grande the chiefs 
and head men were given to daily moral lectures, and while 
the custom did not appear so frequently elsewhere, it was 
still in evidence. Perhaps we are again dealing with a gen- 
eral characteristic of New World society. 

In this connection some note may be taken of the ideals 
that were held up to the young in these lectures, particularly 
for boys. The Nahua put great emphasis upon the art of 
war, the taking of prisoners, and even of scalps." They 
maintained a series of graded war honors in the form of 
paint, styles of hair-cut, and finally, eagle feathers. Such 
ideals and customs were also prominent in all the outlying 
regions of lower culture, but particularly close parallels 
are observable in the Indians of our western plains. Yet 
in the matter of tribal ideals we are lamentably weak in 
data and can at best only infer their character and content 
from mythology and other secondary sources. Scarcely 
anyone has ever taken the trouble to record the homely re- 

190 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

marks and conversations of elderly natives on what one 
ought to strive for in life. Nevertheless, it is plain that 
it is to these ideals we must look for the origin of the 
forces that make native cultures what they are, deep hidden 
undercurrents, as it were, not unlike the subconscious in 
one's individual mental life. 

1. Joyce, 1912. I; Markham, 
1910. I. 

2. Bandelier, 1878. I. 

3. Boas, 1907. I, p. 117. 

4. Thalbitzer, 1914. I. 

5. Lowie, 1909. I; 1920. I. 

6. Wissler, 1912. III. 

7. Hickcy. 1883, I, PP. 550-5S6. 

8. Morgan, 1904. I ; Vol. i, p. 321. 

9. Adair, 1775. I; Cushman, 

1899. I. 

10. Bandelier, 1890. I, p. 205. 

11. Im Thum, 1883. I. 

12. Im Thurn, 1883. I. 

13. Garcilasso, 1688. I. 

14. Bandelier, 1878. I. 

15. Boas, 1897. II. 

16. Lowie, 192a I. 

17. Stefinsson, 1914. I; 1919. L 

18. Barnes, £. and M. S., 18961 I; 
Sahagun, 1880. I. 

19. Sahagun, 188a. I, p. 58. 

CHAPTER XII 
RITUALISTIC OBSERVANCES 

Formal ceremonialism, or ritualism, was developed to an 
unusual degree in the New World. The high poetic feel- 
ing of the natives and their fondness for symbolism is 
strikingly reflected in their tribal mythologies. This also 
finds expression in formal and ritualistic procedures, usually 
in connection with songs. However, before entering into 
generalizations on American ritualism we must review some 
of its typical forms. 

In the regions of higher culture we find the political or- 
ganization closely paralleled by a priestly hierarchy. Thus, 
in Peru, the priest of the sun at Cuzco, a near relative of 
the ruler, was the head of the religious system, and for 
each province another member of the family served as a 
sub-priest. Under each of the latter was a complex of 
priestly offices and functions. The ruler himself was a 
sacred person not to be looked upon by common men. The 
supreme power was conceived as resting in a culture hero, 
commonly passing under the name, Viracocha, though a 
number of other names appear in the literature of the sub- 
ject, with somewhat contradictory attributes, seemingly due 
to original differences between the older creator gods for 
the several localities, differences which the Inca conquest 
could not entirely eradicate. The true Viracocha seems to 
have been a white man with a long gray beard, whose acts 
and disappearance have a curious resemblance to those of 
similar characters in the mythologies of the wilder peoples 
of both continents. That Viracocha was a highly personal 

191 

192 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

and spiritual being is shown by one of the Inca prayers 
to him as translated by Sir Clements Markham/ 

Next in rank to Viracocha were the heavenly bodies of 
which the sun was the most significant. The moon, the 
earth (All-Mother), and on the coast, the sea (Mother 
Sea), were also of great importance. As a rule, temples 
and priests were for these gods only and not for Viracocha, 
the creator of culture. Sacrifices and g^fts were likewise 
to them and not to the latter. Below these gods stood in- 
numerable objects invested with huaca, a term difficult to 
define, but seemingly equivalent to wakan and manitou, as 
used by the wilder tribes of North America. All these ob- 
jects, or huaca, were the places of sacrifice and observance 
for which priests were detailed. 

From what we know of Chibcha, Maya, and Nahua re- 
ligions, this outline of Inca beliefs will serve as the type. 
Each had its creator, then the heavenly bodies to which 
sacrifices were made, and lastly a long array of fetish-like 
objects invested with some holy quality. Throughout, the 
political functions of the rulers were so closely intertwined 
with the priestly functions, that a strict separation of them 
is quite impossible. Thus, the Maya system provided a 
religious program for each day in the year, or a complete 
cycle of never-ending services. The great Maya calendar 
is essentially the recorded order of these ceremonies, rather 
than a dating device, the day being named after the god to 
be recognized in its particular form of worship. That an 
analogous calendar existed in Peru is most certain, but 
seems lost beyond recovery. 

The present status of our subject makes it difficult to truly 
characterize the ceremonial patterns for these four great 
centers, but certain striking features may be noted. The 
Mava and Nahua are notorious for the extent of their 
human sacrifice systems. One common form of such sacri- 
fice was to bind tjie victim to a frame or pole and shoot 

RITUALISM 193 

him full of darts. This was a custom in Colombia also. 
For Peru there is conflicting evidence, the Inca being cred- 
ited with prohibiting the practice by some authorities, but 
it is clear that the custom did prevail at one time. We 
may infer, therefore, that such sacrifices were fundamental 
traits among the many small social groups from which thes? 
great military empires were built up. Human sacrifice, 
however, appears but as an exceptional element in a larger 
complex, for from Mexico to Chile throughout, there was 
a daily round of sacrifices of animals, birds, fruits, and in- 
animate objects. 

It has frequently been remarked how the great historic 
cultures grew up around lakes or water holes which in 
consequence came to be sacrificial shrines. The most fa- 
mous of these are Guatovita and Titicaca in South America. 
Among other ceremonial features of comparative interest 
are the conception of a "maize mother," the snake cults, the 
foot races, and the new-fire ceremonies. Of great festivals 
we have in Peru the June sun ceremony and in August that 
for driving out disease. 

For the other parts of South America, we have but meager 
information. One striking feature in the Amazon region 
is the taboo against women, who are not permitted to take 
part or even to see the objects used in important ceremonies. 
Thus, it is stated that all women of the Uaupes tribe who 
happen to see the leading mask in their tribal ceremony 
must be executed, as required by the ritual. This masked 
ritualistic procedure is found throughout the whole of 
Brazil and has some curious analogies to a Pacific Island 
ceremony. This is also the land of the couvade, that curi- 
ous procedure in which the father is put to bed at the 
birth of a child, which has received undue attention in 
sociological literature.* The other most universal ritualistic 
idea is that of the ceremonial whipping, usually a part of the 
puberty ceremony for both girls and boys, but also found 

194 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

in certain public dances of adults. Agricultural rituals are 
also in evidence, the two most distinctive being the manioc 
and the pineapple harvests. 

Turning now to North America, we find a new-fire cere- 
mony among the Mexicans, but here it occurs every fifty- 
two years, on the day marking the completion of the calen- 
dar cycle. Again, every eight years the Atamalqualiztli 
ceremony was performed, a kind of fasting observance, but 
also the occasion when a peculiar cult, called Mazateca, 
danced about with live frogs and snakes in their mouths, 
somewhat like the Hopi of Arizona. In addition, each 
month and day of the year had its more or less elaborate 
ceremonies, but to outline the whole gamut of Mexican and 
Maya gods would take us too far afield. Joyce * believes 
that the bewildering multiplicity of Mexican gods is in 
part due to the Aztec having assimilated the respective 
religious systems of conquered cities; yet the Maya seem 
almost equally complex in their supernatural hierarchy. 
In both the Aztec and Maya systems there was a powerful 
god with a beard, resembling Viracocha of Peru, who was 
also the creator, but of very high rank; he was the sun 
and the god of thunder and rain. Particularly prominent 
were the star gods, of whom Venus seems to have been the 
most adored. 

Just north of the Aztec are the Pueblo Indians of south- 
western United States who have preserved the greater part 
of their prehistoric religious culture even down to this day 
and time. Hence, among these eminently conservative vil- 
lages we may look for hints as to what formerly underlay 
the systematized religious cultures further south. Thus, 
the Hopi, who seem to be typical, have a large number of 
definite priestly organizations, each of which administers 
special and distinct rituals. To one is assigned astronomical 
observations and the keeping of the calendar, another is 
charged with snake worship, etc. The appearance of the 

RITUALISM 19s 

clouds, the rain, maize planting, in short, the whole round 
of daily life is accompanied by ritualistic procedures, each 
group of priests performing its part at the appointed time. 
While essentially magical, these rituals contain a large 
amount of practical knowledge as to the care of seed, time 
and place of planting, etc. The supernatural hierarchy is 
composed of numerous gods among which are the sun, the 
goddess of all hardness, the spider goddess, the horned 
serpent, the thunder, and the four world quarters. For- 
merly, some forms of human sacrifice seem to have been 
practised among the Rio Grande Pueblos and even in very 
recent times certain newly-born were fed to sacred snakes. 
The ceremonial footrace is also found, and even the kindling 
of new fire. 

If now we turn to the maize-raising tribes of central and 
eastern United States, we note certain similarities in the 
ritualistic procedures. Thus, the Pawnee had a human sac- 
rifice and a whole yearly cycle of ceremonies centering 
around the cultivation of maize. On the lower Mississippi 
were temples to the sun to whom the rulers bore a relation 
not unlike that of the Inca.* Even the South American 
practice of bearing the ruler in a litter was also found 
here. The widespread use of the "black drink," a purify- 
ing emetic, also reminds one of Pueblo practices. Finally, 
certain special maize ceremonies are found throughout the 
whole extent of maize culture, though the farther we get 
from Mexico and Peru, the weaker these become. 

Among the Central Algonkin tribes of the Great Lakes 
we have another ritualistic form in the sense that it does 
not pertain to agriculture or to a yearly cycle. Its most 
complete expression seems to be the Mide ritual which con- 
cerns itself with the spiritual relations between the indi- 
vidual and the powers above." The spectacular public per- 
formance of pretending to pass, or "shoot" a shell into the 
initiate is the best known objective feature of this ceremony. 

196 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Important parts of the ritual are recorded on bark tablets 
so that we see here also the beginnings of written records. 

In the Plains area, beyond the encroachments of maize 
culture, we have the sun dance festival which seems to have 
been the occasion for the fulfilling of conventional vows 
made during the preceding year, but we also have a con- 
siderable development of the ceremonial pipe ritual, shared 
with certain contiguous tribes to the east. In California, 
ritualistic performance is very inconspicuous, which in con- 
trast to what is observed elsewhere presents this culture as 
one of very little interest here. 

The only other part of North America where ritualism is 
prominent is among the Pacific Coast tribes of Canada and 
southern Alaska. Here, perhaps more than elsewhere, the 
social group, clan or gens, is the keeper of special rituals and 
is wholly responsible for the ceremonies based upon the 
same. One idea, or pattern, seems to dominate these rituals, 
vis., the paying of proper homage to one's supernatural clan 
ancestors. In fact, the ritualistic ceremonies of the whole 
salmon area are little more than staged demonstrations of 
the clan, or family, origin myth. The principal features of 
these "ritualistic plays" are the impersonations of the ani- 
mal-like monsters who are the true heroes of the m)rths. 
For this very elaborate masks are prepared, some of which 
have movable eyes, ears, or jaws, as the case may require.* 
Collections of these masks are to be found in our large 
museums, where they stand as objective data as to what 
the native conceives his gods to be like. Masks are used 
elsewhere, even amon^ the Aztec and Inca, but among the 
wilder tribes are not highly developed as here on the coast 
of the salmon area. 

The whole subject of ritualism in the New World is too 
comnlicated to give an adequate view of it in a single 
ch;inter. Yet, from even this superficial sketch it appears 
that the phenomenon is strongest in Mexico and Peru, or 

TOTEMISM 197 

the regions of highest culture, and that as we go outward 
in both continents from these centers, ritualism becomes less 
and less conspicuous. If we consider the United States 
and Canada only, it appears strongest in the centers of clan 
organization. Another general characteristic of New World 
ritualism is that wherever it appears, these rituals are the 
formalized narratives of an assumed supernatural, or spirit 
revelation, from the gods. The tracing out of the distribu- 
tion of these rituals over the several areas of the New World 
is destined to become one of the most important problems 
of our subject and promises to reveal in the most satisfac- 
tory way the earlier historical contacts of the various exist- 
ing tribes. 

SUPERNATURAL GUARDIANS AND TOTEMISM 

Under the head of Social Grouping we enumerated the 
most striking totemic features associated with clans and 
gentes, but the totemic complex is also intimately bound up 
with the very fundamental trait of individual guardians. 
This trait is particularly strong among the bison hunters 
but far from infrequent elsewhere. It is usually one of the 
equipments of a warrior which youths acquire by fasting 
and spiritual endeavors. The procedure usually takes this 
form: if a youth does not have a dream or vision which 
his superiors regard as supernatural, he is instructed and 
prepared for the inducing of such an experience and left 
in a lonely place to fast and pray, day and night. If a 
spirit appears, it is usually in animal form and that animal 
becomes in a sense the individual guardian of the suppli- 
cant. This guardian is, however, conceived of as a spirit 
and not merely as a bear, eagle, wolf, etc., which are after 
all, but the objective links between the individual and the 
source of spiritual power. A very considerable number of 
objects in our museum collections are the material bonds 
between warriors and these personal guardians, usually 

198 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

classed under the technical name of medicine objects, or 
charms. Particularly among the tribes of the Mississippi 
Valley, these often form small bundles with short rituals 
and in some cases we find these accompanied by series of 
larger and more complex bundles often rising to the level 
of tribal ceremonies. The Pawnee, for example, have a 
hierarchy of these bundles extending from the tribe down 
to family groups. The center for this special bundle de- 
velopment seems to be about the Great Lakes in the Central 
Algonkin sphere of influence, but it has its analogies in 
the tribes of the Lower Mississippi and the Pueblos of the 
Rio Grande. Further, we note that certain Aztec legends 
mention two bundles miraculously handed down to the 
people in the days of their tribal migrations. Each of the 
two main divisions of the Aztec took one of these bundles 
for its chief guidance. As to the contents of these bundles, 
we are not fully enlightened, but one contained a crystal 
of some kind and the other a set of fire sticks, reminding 
us of Pawnee bundles. We must suspect, therefore, that 
the ritualistic bundle is an old and fundamental develop- 
ment in North American culture, and that it is based upon 
the much less specialized and more widely distributed con- 
cept of the individual guardian. 

In the extended discussions of totemism by Frazer^ and 
others this generalized concept of the relation between the 
New World native and his animal-like guardians is elevated 
to the plane of an explanatory theory, often called the 
"American theory of totemic origin." However, the lead- 
ing American students of the subject are disposed to regard 
this theory as accounting for facts peculiar to the New 
World totemic systems rather than as universal in appli- 
cation. Even in the New World, exceptions have been 
cited to show that similar totemic complexes seem to have 
had very different histories and so have superficial simi- 
larity. Facts of this tenor have led to the interpretation • 

SHAMANISM i99 

that the phenomenon of totemism is little more than the 
incidental association between individuals or kinship groups 
and animal-like guardians, exogamous or analogous restric- 
tions to marriage, ceremonial privileges, etc. The concep- 
tion is that in this manner were accidentally formed tribal 
complexes of varying content which we class together under 
the name totemism because they have some elements in 
common. Like the other culture traits we have discussed, 
these complexes show a geographical grouping and so fall 
into more or less localized types. 

SHAMANISM 

The medicineman, or as he is sometimes called, the 
shaman, occupies a large place in our Uterature. Some 
writers • give this functionary the chief place in all religious 
and ceremonial activities, thus making shamanism synony- 
mous with religion. While it is conceivable that shamanism 
can be so defined as to include all religion, we must not 
overlook the fact that the medicineman of the New World 
is not the priest. A large number of tribes have distinct 
names for each and their cultures give them distinct and 
sometimes antagonistic functions. It is the shaman rather 
than the priest who is called upon to treat the sick, to fore- 
tell the future, etc. The priest is essentially the keeper and 
demonstrator of rituals, his right to do so arising chiefly 
from his mere knowledge of the subject, but the native con- 
ception of the shaman is one who works directly by virtue 
of some extra-human power. Consequently, it is the shaman 
who goes into trances and mystifies by jugglery, not the 
priest 

The importance of this distinction appears when we con- 
sider its wide distribution. For the three great centers of 
higher culture, Inca, Chibcha, and Maya-Nahua, we have 
far less data than for some of the wilder peoples, but 
what are available reveal a distinction between the two. 

200 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

The priests of these cultures were organized, as we have 
noted, in a manner comparable to and complementary to 
the political scheme, but the shaman class appears as un- 
organized and in some cases is described as itinerant. In 
Peru, they were sometimes given a room in the outer pre- 
cincts of the temple where those who so desired could con- 
sult them. In the Mississippi Valley and the Great Lakes 
region, we have fewer organized cultures, but among the 
Pawnee and Ojibway, for example, the distinction is 
sharply made, as also appears to be the case on the Atlantic 
seaboard. In the great plateau region, we find among the 
Shoshoni a less formalized, but still perceptible distinction, 
while among the Navajo and Apache of the south, the line 
is again sharply drawn. In central California, the distinc- 
tion vanishes, but appears in the mixed cultures of the north 
and south. Again, on the Northwest Coast, the priest and 
the shaman are distinguished one from the other. 

On the other hand, we find the Eskimo angakok to be 
both the shaman and the priest In the great Dene area of 
Canada, practically the same condition holds as for the 
Eskimo and an analogous one for some of the Cree. Turn- 
ing back to South America, we meet with the undifferen- 
tiated priest in the Amazon country under the names, page, 
paye, kenaima, etc. For each group there is usually one 
such who performs all priestly and shamanistic functions. 

Supplementary to our previous discussion of rituals it 
may be noted that the differentiation of the priest from the 
shaman occurs wherever ritualism is highly developed. 
While it is true that we cannot always draw a definite line 
between priestly and shamanistic activities, the rule is for 
all tribes having well-formed rituals themselves clearly to 
differentiate two sets of individuals, priests and shamans. 
We cannot therefore ignore this fact in our consideration 
of the subject. 

As we have stated, the shaman is usually the doctor. 

SHAMANISM 201 

prophet, and seer. In native theory, he gets his powers not 
by training, but by direct transmission from some extra- 
human source. He is credited with the ability to perform 
extraordinary feats which we call jugglery. Some of these 
tricks fall into type classes with continuous geographical 
distributions. Thus, among the Ojibway and other Cen- 
tral Algonkin tribes, we find a form of the rope-tying trick 
which extends northward among some of the Dene to the 
Eskimo. Centering among the Siouan tribes of the bison 
area, we find the handling of fire and the plunging of the 
hand into boiling water. Forms of the sword-swallowing 
trick were found among the eastern tribes from the Lakes 
to the Gulf and on into the Pueblo area of the Southwest. 
In the Amazon country, the special feature is a kind of ven- 
triloquism in which animals and men carry on conversa- 
tions with the shaman in almost the same fashion as the 
jesako of the Central Algonkin.*® A plant-growing trick 
comparable to that of the Hindu fakir was found among 
the Navajo, Pawnee," and a few neighboring tribes. Other 
distributions could be cited, but we have gone far enough 
to reveal the geographical character of the phenomenon. 

When a shaman undertakes to treat the sick, he frequently 
pretends to suck out the cause of disease through a tube. 
This trick has been reported from the whole of the New 
World except probably the region of highest culture and 
the Eskimo." The use of a calabash rattle is also found 
throughout the Amazon area, the whole of the Pueblo and 
bison areas, though in the latter the bulb is often fashioned 
of rawhide. This distribution also extends up through the 
Columbia River Basin into the North Pacific Coast where 
rattles are made of wood, but still of the same essential 
form. 

Though the individualism of the shaman is apparent, 
there does appear a tendency for the formation of cults, 
the best examples of which are the wabano and jesako cults 

202 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

of the Central Algonkin, the heyoka of the Siouan tribes, 
and the animal lodges of the Caddoan." In nearly every 
case, these take the form of a group of followers with a 
single leader, each group specializing in certain devices and 
tricks. 

As we have noted, these tricks are not strictly confined to 
shamanism, but occasionally occur in priestly organizations. 
One of the best known examples is found in the Hopi snake 
and antelope society, whose members perform tricks with 
rattlesnakes; among others are the shell-shooting feat of 
the Central Algonkin midewin, and the dog-eating of the 
Nootka cannibal society. These tricks are, however, in- 
tegral parts of the respective rituals and form a large por- 
tion of the public part of the ceremonies. 

In literature the term shamanism specifically applies to 
the religious culture of Siberia. There we find a compli- 
cated conception of seventeen or more worlds in one of 
which human beings reside. Communication between these 
worlds can be made only through shamans conversing with 
the spirits of the dead. The typical shamanistic feats in 
Siberia are states of ecstasy, trembling, sweating, contor- 
tions, ravings, fits, etc. The shaman of the New World also 
manifests many of these reactions, particularly in those 
regions where there are no separate priests. The trances 
and ravings of the Eskimo angakok and the Tlingit doctor 
have an intensity comparable to those of the Siberian 
shaman, apparently much more so than have the methods 
of the page in the Amazon country. Yet, these abnormal 
psychic activities are to some degree the stock in trade of 
all shamans, only that when ritualism rises, they become 
relatively less important. 

Turning now to the priesthood, we find it most character- 
istic of the Inca, Chibcha, and Maya-Nahua centers. The 
priestcraft of the Maya, for example, illustrates the maxi- 
mum development of ritualism where each day and night 

SHAMANISM 203 

in the yearly cycle had its required rituals. Of the inter- 
mediate tribes, we may cite the Pueblo of the north with 
their far less elaborate, •but yet complete, yearly round of 
ceremony and on the south the Araucans of Chile who make 
sacrificial offerings at every turn. The tribes of the lower 
Mississippi had also a ceremonial cycle and maintained rude 
temples as did also the natives of the West Indies. But 
as we move outward in both continents from these centers, 
the rituals quickly shrink to a small residue, with the excep- 
tion that on the North Pacific Coast they are to a degree 
recurrent. In view of all this, one cannot escape the con- 
viction that the existence of the great Inca and Maya centers 
of priestcraft is responsible for many specific features of 
New World ritualism. In these centers, one of the chief 
functions of the priests was the making of sacrifices. In- 
numerable birds, rabbits, fruits, and even leaves of plants 
were offered up from day to day in one ceaseless round. 
The occasional human sacrifice was but an incident in an 
otherwise steady flow of sacrificial blood. This, like other 
aspects of ritualism, rapidly shrinks as we move outward 
but, far up among the Pawnee, we find offerings of animal 
and human blood and likewise among the Araucan and 
other Chaco tribes of the south. The Maya and Nahua 
priests offered their own blood upon blades of grass and also 
far up in the bison area devotees cut off bits* of flesh or even 
fingers to offer the sun and again the extinct Charrua of 
the Chaco are said to have offered up fingers in much 
the same- way. 

What we have then is a great center of rank growth in 
priestcraft with a ponderous system of blood sacrifice, the 
influence of which wanes as we move outward. The fact 
that the shaman lagged behind andshared but little in this 
elaboration would seem further basis for the assumption 
that the chief formative factors in priestcraft and ritualism 
are not found in shamanism. The shaman gets his power 

204 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

by an extraordinary experience. He usually seeks it in 
fasting and prayer; whence, if his tortured nervous sys- 
tem bring the desired illusion, he goes out among his fel- 
lows with the faith and confidence that convinces. While 
he has a great deal to learn from his fellow shamans, such 
learning is quite secondary and dispensable. The priest, 
on the other hand, may also fast and be fired with faith and 
zeal, but this is secondary to him, for he must master with 
infinite detail the arbitrary forms of rituals. In last analy- 
sis, the priest must be a man of intellect; the shaman may 
be a veritable idiot. 

THE PERSONAL RELATION IN RITUALISM 

While many anthropologists object to the view that all 
New World religion springs from the conceived relation 
between the shaman and the source of his power, it may 
be conceded that an analogous relation does hold for the 
masses. Thus, among many tribes, it is not merely the 
shaman who goes out to fast and pray, but practically every! 
individual, at least once in his life, such a procedure being 
one of the essential equipments of youth for the duties of 
life, as noted under our discussion of the individual guard- 
ian. This trait is prominent among the more warlike tribes 
of the bison area, the eastern maize area, and the guanaco 
area of South America, in all of which one of the primary 
equipments of the would-be warrior is to secure a personal 
guardian spirit, or power. Under the tutelage of a shaman 
he fasts, prays, or tortures himself as his tribal convention 
may demand, until he either has a visitation or gives up 
in despair. The attending shaman usually assists in for- 
malizing a kind of personal rite which remains a more or 
less secret individual formula. In most cases, it is in ani- 
mal form that the visitation comes, a speaking and other- 
wise human animal, which belief is no doubt intimately 
related to the great prevalence of animal tales in New 

SHAMANISM 205 

World mythology. In this meeting, some specific protec- 
tion is promised the penitent for the remainder of his life. 
A man may repeat these fasts and ultimately secure a great 
variety of such guardians and eventually be recognized as a 
shaman, though one usually becomes a shaman by virtue 
of some one remarkable experience. This personal rela- 
tion of an individual to his mentor is the fundamental con- 
cept in New World religion and ritualistic procedure. In 
fact, where rituals have been carefully studied, we find 
their reported origins to have been in the unusual experience 
of a single individual; hence, we can safely say that a 
typical New World ceremony is the performing of a ritual 
demonstrating this initial experience and that the concept 
of the individual guardian underlies the whole. While the 
ideal thing would be to close this discussion with the presen- 
tation of a type ritual, the limitations of space forbid. The 
reader may, however, be referred to Dorsey's "Arapaho Sun 
Dance," " Hoffman's "Midewiwin or 'Grand Medicine So- 
ciety' of the Ojibway," " or the author's "Ceremonial Bun- 
dles of the Blackfoot Indians." *• These will give examples 
typical of the United States and Canada and when suffi- 
ciently generalized, will be representative of the whole of 
the New World, tentatively, however, since our data from 
the southern continent are meager. 

1. Markham. 1910, I, p. 100. 9. Radin, 1914. I. 

2. Tylor (no date). 10. Hoffman, 1891. I. 

3. Joyce, 1914. I. II. Grinnell, 1893. I. 

4. Swanton, 1911. I. 12. Tylor (no date). 

5. Hoffman, 1891. 1;Radin, 1914. 1. 13. Murie, 1914. I; Hoffman, 

6. Boas, 1897. H; 1909. I. 1891. I; Dorsey, J. O., 1894. I. 

7. Frazer, 1910. I; Durkheim, 14. Do*scy, G. A., 1903. I; Spier, 
1912. I. 1921. I. 

8. Boas, 1916. I, p. 323. 15- Hoffman, 1891. I. 

16. Wissler, 1912. II. 

CHAPTER XIII 
MYTHOLOGY 

Under the general name of folklore, we have a more or 
less distinct department of inquiry, with its own partictdar 
societies and journals whose supporters consider the whole 
unwritten literature of the earth as their province, whether 
it pertains to primitive groups or to the most advanced na- 
tions. However, in our country, the American Folk-Lore 
Society has given its attention almost wholly to the myth- 
ology of the aborigines. Every such tribe, so far exam- 
ined, has been found to possess two kinds of tales, those 
referring to a previous order of events, and those having 
to do with the present. The latter take the form of anec- 
dotes, hero tales, etc., and, regardless of the many ficti- 
tious elements they contain, have the form of narratives 
of real events. The former deal with a period in which 
the world was taking shape and the present order of things 
evolving. While it may be true that a tribe will regard one 
of these two classes of tales as worthy of belief as the other, 
they yet recognize them as different. In this volume we 
shall designate as myths all tales that deal with this myth- 
ical pre-world, or that partake of the mythical style. 

In the first place, the myths of the world embody one 
universal feature: namely, that the animals and heavenly 
bodies are endowed with human qualities and associate with 
man indiscriminately. One can scarcely find a well-devel- 
oped tale in which animals, heavenly bodies, or both, to- 
gether, do not play the part of human beings. Another 
peculiarity is that but rarely do any of these tales convey 

a moral or even pretend to exemplify worthy ideals. In 

206 

MYTHOLOGY 207 

fact, we often find the standard of ethics and morals of 
the tales much at variance with the tribe of the narrator. 
On the other hand, these tales frequently profess to convey 
information as to the origins of specific features in the 
modern world. Thus, the alternation of day and night is, 
in some cases, explained as due to the original theft of day- 
light by a culture hero, who, finding himself closely pursued, 
casts out the daylight bit by bit. Again, the markings in 
the bark of the birch trees are explained on the ground that 
once a culture hero in anger gashed the tree with his knife. 
Yet, if we take native myths as they come, such explana- 
tions much more often apply to peculiarities of the heavens 
and the markings upon birds and animals than to other 
classes of phenomena. Another peculiarity is that the initial 
creation of the world is a single incident, generally disposed 
of in a single simple narrative, whereas we find many com- 
plex independent tales, each accounting for more or less 
trivial animal markings. Waterman ^ has discussed this 
diffuse explanatory character of American tales under the 
designation, explanatory element. The important problem 
is as to whether these tales were originally composed as 
theoretical explanations of natural phenomena in each case, 
or whether the explanatory applications were mere after- 
thoughts. Waterman's investigation, in particular, seems 
to make it clear that in the New World such explanations 
are quite secondary and could not have been in the mind 
of the first composer. This conclusion is reached by a 
comparative study of the myths for many tribes and is. of 
course, inferential. 

The place of the heavenly bodies in aborigfinal myth has 
been investigated by Ehrenreich,* who defended a theory 
which states that most of the plots in all tales were but 
variations of a single theme in which the sun and moon 
were the leading characters. He took as one of his main 
factors the submitting of a hero to various kinds of tests. 

2o8 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

This topic also has been made the subject of exhaustive in- 
quiry under the title of The Test Theme.' Here, again, 
the result is negative, and Ehrenreich's theory has been re- 
tired to the historical cabinet. 

While such problems are of great interest, their solutions 
are contingent upon facts of distribution. The data so far 
accumulated enable us to compare the mythologies of the 
several tribes occupying large areas. When we do so, we 
find certain tales in common. For example, take the story 
of the Dancing Birds : — 

A trickster induces a number of birds to dance around him, keeping 
their eyes closed. The penalty for opening the eyes is that they will 
become red. As the birds dance, the trickster wrings their necks, 
one by one. One of the dancers grows suspicious, opens his eyes, and 
gives the alarm. The rest escape.^ 

We find this tale among most Algonkin and Siouan tribes 
and a few of their neighbors. Approximating this distribu- 
tion is the "Woman who Went to the Sky," the "Crane 
Bridge," ''Snaring the Sun," and the "Deserted Children." 
Thus, we have what seems to be a mythological area over 
which a number of distinct tales have traveled. 

For another type tale, we may take the "Rolling Rock," 
which is found among the Shoshoni tribes of the western 
highlands, and among some of their immediate neighbors. 
Quite similarly distributed are the "Burning Cannibal," 
"Eye Juggler," "Ladder of Arrows," "Skin Shifter," and 
"Blind Dupe." These have one further peculiarity in that 
they show a tendency to occur on the North Pacific Coast 
and in eastern Siberia. Thus we have, in contrast to the 
preceding, a western mythological area. 

Boas ' defines another area, comprising the Nahua, some 
of the Pueblo tribes, the Caddoan tribes of the Mississippi 
Valley, and perhaps a few others, in which we find myths 
recounting successive migrations. 

MYTHOLOGY 209 

Common to the first two areas and extending far over 
the Old World, is the "Magic Flight," "Vaginal Teeth," 
and the "Unfaithftd Wife." The former tale extends into 
South America, making it one of the most widely recurring 
themes. 

One striking trait of Mexico, northwestern South Amer- 
ica, eastern Brazil, and southeastern United States, is that 
we find many Old World themes of which the race between 
the turtle and rabbit is a good example. Boas * has formu- 
lated evidence to show that these tales can be traced to early 
Spanish and Portuguese sources. The latter, and the in- 
stitution of negro slavery, he considers responsible for the 
many African themes encountered. 

There is also the suggestion of a tendency for each of 
the great economic areas we have defined (p. 2) to have a 
distinct group of myths. For example, in the bison area 
we have the well-known myths of "Blood-clot Boy," "Stone- 
Boy," and the "Twins." 

The peculiarity of the distribution we have just sketched 
is that we here have a number of tale groups which are 
distributed independently of each other. If we had found 
each tale distributed independently of the others, it would 
have been clear that the directions and extent of diffusion 
were mere matters of accident; but, when we find tales in 
groups which are independent, the case is far from clear. 
So far, the tales of a group show no signs of logical or 
functional relations, from which we assume that there are 
historical reasons for this grouping, but as to their iden- 
tity we are yet ignorant. It should be noted, however, that 
these areas are as yet but vaguely defined and that Water- 
man's list of correspondences leaves very marked gaps 
for the successive myths. More extended data in the future 
may greatly modify these results. 

When we shift our point of view to the place of these 
tales in aboriginal life, the most acceptable interpretation 

2IO THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

is that they are literature; in other words, artistic compo- 
sitions valued and preserved for the sake of their aesthetic 
qualities. We have noted that these tales fail to qualify as 
native theories of origin or as explanatory and test themes, 
but as literature, some myths rise to the level of sacred 
narratives and are so regarded by all of the tribe. No 
very serious attempts have been made to subject large 
groups of tales to literary analysis, but it is suggested that 
what is diffused from one tribe to another is a compact 
definite incident, as the "Magic Flight," the "Eye-Juggler," 
etc., the whole of which must be taken if at all.^ One may, 
therefore, infer that the causes for the grouping of inci- 
dents we have noted arise from the probability that the 
same historical factors favoring the diffusion of one tale 
also operated simultaneously with the other. The only ante- 
cedent condition, therefore, would be that the group be 
formed before it was diffused. From such a point of view 
the phenomenon is intelligible. 

That the Inca and the Nahua. at least, had made impor- 
tant advances in literary form is suggested by a few sur- 
viving fragments, as noted under Fine Arts (p. 147). The 
celebrated Inca drama, "Apu Ollantay " has strong claim 
to being pre-Columbian and certain poetical fragments have 
come down to us from the Maya and Nahua. That these 
should have been of a high order is to be expected for, as 
noted under Fine Arts, we find even among the tribes of 
the bison area, song rituals of dramatic and poetical merit.* 
In some cases, conspicuously in some Pueblo and North 
Pacific Coast ceremonies, well-composed rituals are enacted, 
staging sacred mythical tales in which the characters are 
impersonated by the use of masks and other accessories. 
The purely literary side of these rituals and songs has never 
been seriously studied. 

RELIGIOUS CONCEPTIONS 211 

MYTHOLOGY AND RELIGIOUS CONCEPTIONS 

Some of the older writers' have noted the wide distribu- 
tion of a kind of white-man god, and sought to demonstrate 
its origin in the phenomena of the sun. This interpretation 
has not survived criticism, but it serves to call attention to 
an interesting mythical character. As we have noted, in 
the god systems of the Inca, Chibcha, Maya, and Nahua, 
there appears a distinctly human god who lives among men 
and establishes the present order, but after a time departs. 
The names under which he is known are, respectively: 
Viracocha, Bochica, Kukulcan, and Quetzalcoatl. In each 
case, he is regarded as clothed in white cloth or paint, aa 
having arrived from the East, and as having a beard. When 
Europeans appeared upon the scene, the local term for this 
god was applied to them, and entered into the future termin- 
ology. We thus have the associated characters of whiteness, 
bearded, human-like, dawn-like, culture leader, and reformer 
continuously distributed from Chile to the Rio Grande. But 
this complex extends even farther afield. In the bison area 
the Cheyenne Vihuk, the Arapaho Nili-an-can, and the 
Blackfoot Napiwa possess all of these except the beard, yet 
each in turn forms the term applied to individuals of our 
race. In South America the Tsuma of Venezuela seems to 
have been identical with the whole complex, and the Tupi 
Zume seems to have been but little different. With the ex- 
ception of the bison area group, we have practically con- 
tinuity of distribution, and so far the whole complex has 
not been found outside of these limits. As Brinton has 
stated, we can find lesser units of this complex more widely 
distributed, but his effort to show that these facts of dis- 
tribution prove that each group devised the conception in- 
dependently to explain the phenomena of the stin, dawn, 
etc., is not convincing, for it seems far more probable that 
the complex was evolved in one locality and thence diffiised. 

212 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Perhaps one of the most striking traits of this character is 
that in contrast to most other gods of the New World, 
he is a person, not an animal or an astronomical monster. 
To our mind, this one fact is a strong argument for diffu- 
sion as against the independent origin theory. 

Another widely diffused concept is that of the culture hero 
trickster/® The most notorious of these are the Raven of 
the North Pacific Coast, the Coyote of the great western 
highlands, and the Rabbit of the eastern forest region. The 
peculiarity of this character is that while he gives us the 
order of the world, he stoops to the most vile pranks that 
can be conceived and frequently passes as the most guileless 
of dupes. Several investigators " have tried to harmonize 
these, to us, incompatible traits, but it remains simply a 
fact of observation and may be set down as one of the 
general characteristics of New World mythology. 

Of lesser imaginary beings, the most unique are the 
thunderbird and the plumed or horned serpent. The for- 
mer is widely distributed in the United States and Canada; 
the latter is found from Chile to Lake Superior. 

The conception of a deluge destroying the world and its 
immediate restoration in the present order, is almost uni- 
versal. It is found in the highlands of Peru and Mexico 
as well as in the lowlands of both continents. 

We have already commented upon the animal-like beings 
that visit a supplicant in his lonely fast, which is an aspect 
of the fundamental belief in the animation of nature. 
Animism," in the broadest sense of the term, was universal 
and fundamental in the beliefs of the New World. The 
procedures of the shaman we have discussed are an expres- 
sion of this faith. Of specific beliefs of this class, the 
most widespread seem to be those of the bear and the 
jaguar. From California to the Atlantic, we find the idea 
that shamans who derive their power from the bear can 
heal wounds and often restore life. Throughout the Ama- 

RELIGIOUS CONCEPTIONS, 213 

zon and even into the highlands of Peru and Mexico has 
spread the idea that the jaguar is the patron saint of all 
shamans, whose form many of them take on at will. 

Three well-localized methods of purifying oneself for 
sacred offices have been noted. In the whole of the United 
States and Canada, except among the Eskimo and some 
of their near neighbors, the sweat house is used. From 
some notes by Bandelier,** the custom seems to have been 
followed by the Mexicans also, but they in common with 
the Maya, Chibcha, and Inca resorted to bleeding, or the 
offering of drops of blood, for the same purpose. In the 
Amazon Basin and the West Indies, violent emetics were 
taken for purging the body. The latter lapped over into the 
sweat house area along the Gulf, and even in the Pueblo 
area, while the bleeding method is found in the bison area. 

The burning of incense, including the highly original 
use of tobacco, was almost universal. 

The conception of renewing the fire was found in most 
agricultural tribes, often associated with planting and gen- 
eral seasonal rejuvenation. In modern times, the fire is 
still kindled with the firedrill or other primitive appliances. 
In the north, the ceremony appears even among the Pawnee, 
where, as elsewhere, the fire is kindled by a particular 
shaman or priest. 

In the various discussions of ritualism, we have noted 
the tendency of the group to follow the whole year through 
with one ceaseless complex of ceremonies. This is far more 
conspicuous among the maize-growing tribes. Also closely 
associated with this cycle is the worship of the sun, moon, 
winds, rain, morningstar, and other heavenly phenomena. 

The concept of the vow was widely diffused in the same 
area. In the Andean region, one when ill may promise the 
ceremony of giving gold ornaments to a sacred lake ; in the 
bison area, to have a sun dance or other rituals performed, 
while between these two outposts it appears in analogous 

214 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

forms. The distinction we have noted between the shaman 
and the priest has its bearing here, for it is the latter upon 
whom the patient calls when a vow is made, and upon 
him devolves the duty of performing the prescribed rites. 

Somewhat analogous to this is the confession of sins. 
In Mexico, this seems to have been a prominent feature, 
particularly sexual sins. What may be a reverberation of 
this extends far up into the United States, where many 
tribes exact periodic public confessions of sexual irregulari- 
ties at which all adults must declare themselves in turn. In 
a wider sense, the concept is found among the Eskimo who 
have developed many curious taboos respecting every phase 
of life, the violation of which brings illness, etc., unless 
promptly confessed. In Peru, special confessions were 
required. 

While there are many other concepts of greater or more 
restricted distribution, we may close this enumeration with 
reference to one special group of ideas. A kind of abstract 
notion of a sacred quality is entertained which develops 
specific terms. The best known of these is the wakan " of 
the Siouan stock, which has its parallels in a number of 
other languages. In old Peru, the term was huaca. The 
conception seems to be the attribute of possessing or di- 
rectly associating with extra-human power. In function the 
terms resemble our sacred, holy, etc., except that they are 
applied to anything mysterious. 

Another abstract idea is that of the four world quarters, 
or four directions. This is sometimes expressed by crosses 
and swastika-like symbols. The number four, whether for 
this reason or otherwise, is to a large extent the sacred 
number of the New World. Even in Inca and Nahua or- 
ganizations, we find it often taken as the numerical unit. 
In many parts of both continents, smoke is offered to the 
four directions, and most ceremonial acts are repeated in 
sets of fours." 

NEW WORLD CULTURE 215 

There appears a tendency for certain tribes to divide into 
two parts, usually designated as summer and winter groups, 
w'hose chiefs lead alternately according to the season. This 
is quite conspicuous in the Mississippi Valley, whence it 
extends into Mexico, and has its counterparts in Peru. The 
mere social cleavage into two parts, or moieties, we have 
considered elsewhere (p. 166), but, like certain other social 
traits, this, also, has its ceremonial associations which greatly 
expand the complex. These mythical and religious concepts 
offer a fine field for further study. We have here but men- 
tioned a few of the best known, but for no one of them 
can so much as a complete distribution be stated. The whole 
subject of mythical thought, philosophical, and religious 
conceptions as a New World contribution to man's history 
is still before us. 

UNITY OF NEW WORLD CULTURE 

Our initial task, a general review of the most important 
traits of culture for the various native social units of the 
New World is now finished. The one striking suggestion is 
that notwithstanding the great diversity we have found, 
there are, on every hand, the unmistakable signs of unity. 
The higher cultures of Mexico and Peru are, after all, 
merely the great centers where the fundamental elements 
in New World culture were full blown. Thus, we found 
that agriculture, metal work, ceramics, architecture, and 
sculpture, all centered there. In addition, there were a 
number of specific instances of miscellaneous traits that 
radiated from these centers. Confronted as we are by the 
undeniable evidences for the local diffusion of culture traits 
in all parts of both continents, it would be difficult to con- 
ceive of the existence of these virile centers in entire iso- 
lation. 

But passing on to less material traits, we find even 
stronger claims to unity of culture. Thus, society itself was 

2i6 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

almost everywhere composed of the same kind of units, 
whose conceptions of property and political rights were the 
same. Ritualism, priestcraft, and shamanism, mythological 
conceptions, and religious attitudes also show many specific 
cases of uniformity. Hence, we are fully justified in re- 
garding the New World as one distinct culture province. 
These considerations, however, lead us into problems best 
deferred to the end of this work. 

1. Waterman, 1914. I. 8. Fletcher, 1904. I. 

2. Ehrenreich, 1905. I. 9. Brinton, 1882. I. 

3. Lowie, 1908. I. 10. Boas, 19 14. I. 

4. Waterman, 1914. I, p. 44. 11. Boas, 1914. I. 

5. Boas, 1914. I. 12. Tylor, 1889. I. 

6. Boas, 1914. I. 13. Bandelier, 1884. I* 

7. Boas in Teit, 1898. I; Radin, 14. Jones, W., 1905. I. 
1915. I; Alexander, 1916. I. 15. Alexander, 

Alexander, 1920. I. 

CHAPTER XIV 

THE CLASSIFICATION OF SOCIAL GROUPS 
ACCORDING TO THEIR CULTURES 

We have now passed in review the traits that are usually 
taken as constituting culture. The anthropological concep- 
tion of the term is that it is the trait-complex manifested by 
a separate social unit of mankind. Some anthropologists 
take the position that the only correct view of the data of 
our subject is that which regards the social unit solely and 
that all such discussions as we have so far made are wrong 
in principle, because each trait has a peculiar relation to the 
complex practised by the group. This belief seems to arise 
in a kind of functional view in which the only problem of 
importance is to describe the manner in which a given social 
unit works out its culture. But it is now clear that no social 
group in the New World can be reckoned guilty of entire 
cultural independence, and that certain traits have spread 
over very large parts of both continents, whence the prob- 
lem of a single social unit becomes of relatively little im- 
portance, because until we take in the whole sweep of the 
phenomenon no true account of it can be given. 

As we have stated before this, the number of social 
groups in the New World is so large that no one can hope to 
hold in mind more than a small portion of them. Hence, 
even if we accept the extreme view that our subject should 
be limited to observing the separate functioning of these 
social units, some mode of classifying these many groups 
would still be imperative; for only in this way could the 
number of groups be reduced to the level of human com- 
prehension. In the preceding chapters we saw that the na- 

2x7 

2i8 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

tives of the New World could be grouped according to single 
culture traits, giving us food areas, textile areas, ceramic 
areas, etc. If, however, we take all traits into simultaneous 
consideration and shift our point of view to the social, or 
tribal units, we are able to form fairly definite groups. 
This will give us culture areas, or a classification of social 
groups according to their culture traits. The historical de- 
velopment of our subject gives us two kinds of culture data 
and so commits us to two rather distinct classifications — 
historic culture areas and archaeological areas, respectively. 

THE HISTORIC TRIBES 

In the initial chapter, we defined nine economic areas, 
giving us a kind of culture classification which the subse- 
quent discussions proved to have some general validity for 
culture as a whole. Yet, we have from time to time brought 
to notice differentiations in the trait-complexes for different 
parts of these economic areas, suggesting that a close exam- 
ination of a large series of traits will result in a somewhat 
different grouping. A perusal of the literature of our sub- 
ject shows it to be customary to divide the two continents 
into fifteen culture areas, each conceived to be the home of 
a distinct type of culture. These areas are, in a sense, gen- 
eralizations, but the method we have followed here is highly 
empirical, since for each social group we have checked out 
the several culture traits and compared them in detail. 

NORTH AMERICAN CULTURE AREAS 

I. The Plains Area. For example, in the great western 
plains of the United States, we have thirty-one tribal groups, 
of which eleven may be considered as manifesting the tjrp- 
ical culture of the area: viz., the Assiniboin, Arapaho, 
Blackfoot, Cheyenne, Comanche, Crow, Gros. Ventre, 
Kiowa, Kiowa-Apache, Sarsi, and Teton-Dakota. The 
chief traits of this culture are the dependence upon the buf- 

PLAINS AREA 

^e — - 1 

^-/>W^ 

\;^fSr{ ^ 

"^ 

^^vj 

I? 

^^S^ 

^. 

¥^^ - 

■' 

'V^^^N; 

"x^^^:;. 

""v. 

• ^^W 

nf"j-^' 

1/ 5 /'' 

(M./' 

'■•.^•' 

220 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

falo or bison, and the very limited use of roots and berries; 
absence of fishing; lack of agriculture; the tipi as a movable 
dwelling; transportation by land only, with the dog and the 
travois (in historic times with the horse) ; want of bas- 
ketry and pottery; no true weaving; clothing of buffalo and 
deerskins; a special bead technique; high development of 
work in skins; special rawhide work (parfleche, cylindrical 
bag. etc) ; use of a circular shield; weak development of 
work in wood, stone, and bone. Their art is strongly geo- 
metric, but as a whole, not symbolic; social organization 
tends to the simple band; a camp circle organization; a 
series of societies for men; sun dance ceremony; sweat 
house observances, scalp dances, etc. 

In historic times, these tribes ranged from north to south 
in the heart of the area. (Fig. 59.) On the eastern border 
were some fourteen tribes having most of the positive traits 
enumerated above and, in addition, some of the negative 
ones, such as a limited use of pottery and basketry; some 
spinning and weaving of bags; rather extensive agriculture; 
alternating the tipi with larger and more permanent houses 
covered with grass, bark, or earth; some attempts at water 
transportation ; tending not to observe the sun dance, but to 
substitute maize festivals, shamanistic performances, and 
the mideunn of the Great Lakes tribes. These tribes are: 
the Arikara, Hidatsa, Iowa, Kansa, Mandan, Missouri, 
Omaha, Osage, Oto, Pawnee, Ponca, Santee-Dakota, Yank- 
ton-Dakota, and the Wichita. 

On the western border were other tribes (the Wind River 
Shoshoni, Uintah and Uncompahgre Ute) lacking pottery, 
but producing a rather high type of basketry; depending* far 
less on the buffalo but more on deer and small game ; mak- 
ing large use of wild grass seeds, or grain; alternating tipis 
with brush and mat-covered shelters ; and not as a whole in- 
clined to the sun dance and the other ceremonial practices 
of their eastern neighbors. 

PLAINS AREA 

Fif. 3f- Thi Pltimt I«diM Cullurt Art*. Tin mott tyfuai trtbtt 

222 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Also, on the northeastern border are the Plains-Ojibway 
and Plains-Cree who have many traits of the forest-hunt- 
ing tribes as well as most of those found in the Plains. 
Possibly a few of the little-known bands of Canadian As- 
siniboin should be included in this group in distinction from 
the Assiniboin proper. 

These variations from the type are, as we shall see, typ- 
ical traits of the adjoining areas, the possible exception be- 
ing the earth-lodges of the Mandan, Pawnee, etc. On the 
other hand, the tribes of the area as a whole have in com- 
mon practically all the traits of the typical group. For ex- 
ample, the Mandan made some use of tipis, hunted buffalo, 
used the travois, worked in skins and rawhide, and armed 
and clothed themselves like the typical Plains tribes; but 
also added other traits, pottery, basketry, agriculture, and 
earth-lodges. Thus we see that while in this area there are 
marked culture differences, the traits constituting these dif- 
ferences tend to be typical of other areas; hence, we are 
quite justified in taking the cultures of the central group as 
the type for the area as a whole. 

2. Plateau Area, The Plateau area joins the Plains on 
the west. It is far less uniform in its topography, the south 
being a veritable desert while the north is moist and fertile. 
To add to the difficulties in systematically characterizing 
this culture, arising from lack of geographical unity, is the 
want of definite information for many important tribes. 
Our readily available sources are Teit*s Thompson, Shu- 
swap, and Lillooet;* Spinden's Nez Perce;* and Lowie's 
Northern Shoshone ; ' but there is also an excellent summary 
of the miscellaneous historical information by Lewis.* In a 
general way, these intense tribal studies give us the cultural 
nuclei of as many groups, the Interior Salish, the Shahap- 
tian, and the Shoshoni. Of these, the Salish seem the typ- 
ical group, because both the Nez Perce and the Shoshoni 
show marked Plains traits. It is also the largest, having 

PLATEAU AREA 223 

sixteen or more dialectic divisions and considerable terri- 
torial extent. Of these the Thompson, Shuswap, Okanagan 
(Colville, Nespelim, Sanpoil, Senijixtia), and Lillooet seem 
to be the most typical. The material traits may be sum- 
marized as: extensive use of salmon, deer, roots (espe- 
cially camas), and berries; the use of a handled digging- 
stick; cooking with hot stones in holes and baskets; the 
pulverization of dried salmon and roots for storage; winter 
houses, semi-subterranean, a circular pit with a conical roof 
and smoke hole entrance; summer houses; movable or 
transient, mat or rush-covered tents and the lean-to, double 
and single; the dog sometimes used as a pack animal; 
water transportation weakly developed, crude dug-outs and 
bark canoes being used; pottery not known; basketry 
highly developed, coil, rectangular shapes, imbricated tech- 
nique ; twine weaving in flexible bags and mats ; some sim- 
ple weaving of bark fiber for clothing; clothing for the 
entire body usually of deerskins; skin caps for the men, 
and in some cases basket caps for women; blankets of 
woven rabbitskin; the sinew-backed bow prevailed; clubs, 
lances, and knives, and rod and slat armor (Fig. 52) were 
used in war, also heavy leather shirts; fish spears, hooks, 
traps, and bag nets were used ; dressing of deerskins highly 
developed, but other skinwork weak, upright stretching 
frames and straight long-handled scrapers; while wood 
work was more advanced than among the Plains tribes it 
was insignificant as compared to the North Pacific Coast 
area (4) ; stone work was confined to the making of tools 
and points, battering and flaking, some jadeite tools ; work 
in bone, metal, and feathers very weak. 

Of the non-material traits the most distinctive are : decor- 
ative art simple and inconspicuous, rather inclining towards 
the Plains type on the one hand and that of the North Pa- 
cific Coast tribes on the other; lack of definite tribal organ- 
ization and band distinctions ; a weak but still definite social 

224 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

distinction based upon personal wealth, with at least a 
modern use of the "potlatch'* ceremony; hence, there are no 
striking general ceremonies or ritualistic societies as in the 
preceding area; puberty ceremonies rather prominent and 
related to the general belief in personal guardians; my- 
thology largely a record of the "trickster type." 

The Shahaptian group includes tribes of the Waiilatpuan 
stock. The underground house seems to be wanting here, 
but the Nez Perce used a form of it for a young men's lodge. 
However, the permanent house seems to be a form of the 
double lean-to of the north. In other respects the differences 
are almost wholly due to the intrusion of traits from the 
Plains. 

The Northern Shoshonean tribes were even farther re- 
moved toward Plains culture, though they used a dome- 
shaped brush shelter before the tipi became general; thus, 
they used canoes not at all, carried the Plains shield ; deer 
being scarce in their country they made more use of the buf- 
falo than the Nez Perce, depended more upon small game 
and especially made extensive use of wild g^ass seeds, 
though as everywhere in the area, roots and salmon formed 
an important food; in addition to the universal sagebrush 
bark weaving they made rabbitskin blankets ; their basketry 
was coil and twine, but the shapes were round; they had 
some steatite jars and possibly pottery, but usually cooked 
in baskets; their clothing was quite Plains-like and work in 
rawhide was well developed; in historic times they were 
great horse Indians, but seem not to have used the travois 
either for dogs or horses. A number of ceremonial dances 
also remind one of the Plains. The remaining Shoshoni of 
western Utah and Nevada were in a more arid region and 
so out of both the salmon and the buffalo country, but other- 
wise their fundamental culture was much the same, though 
far less modified by Plain^^ traits. The Wind River divi- 
sion, the Uintah or Uncompahgre Ute, it should be noted. 

CALIFORNIA AREA 225 

belong more to the Plains area than here, and have been so 
classed. In the extreme western part of Nevada we have 
the VVasho, a small tribe and linguistic stock who, in com- 
mon with some of the little-known Shoshonean Mono- 
Paviotso groups, seem to have been influenced by California 
culture, since we find here a form of palsa. or the tule reed 
raft-like boat of California. Among other variants, the 
occasional use of insects as food may be noted. On the 
north of our area are the Athapascan Chilcotin, whose cul- 
ture was quite like that of the Salish, and to the northeast 
the Kutenai, with some individualities and some inclinations 
towards the Plains, especially in social and ceremonial 
traits. 

In general, it appears that in choice of foods, textile arts, 
quantity of clothing, forms of utensils, fishing appliances, 
methods of cooking and preparing foods, weakly developed 
decorative art, meager social organization, distinctions by 
property, religious and mythological conceptions, there was 
great uniformity throughout the entire area; while in 
houses, transportation, weapons, cut and style of clothing, 
specific ceremonies and war customs, the groups designated 
above presented some important differences. As in the 
Plains area, we find certain border tribes strongly influenced 
by the cultures of the adjoining areas. 

3. California Area, In California we have a marginal or 
coast area, which Kroeber' divides into four sub-culture 
areas. However, by far the most extensive is the central 
group to which belongs the typical culture. Its main char- 
acteristics are: acorns, the chief vegetable food, supple- 
mented by wild seeds, roots and berries are scarcely used; 
acorns made into bread by a roundabout process; hunting 
mostly for small game and fishing where possible ; houses 
of many forms, but all simple shelters of brush or tule, or 
more substantial conical lean-to structures of poles; the dog 
was not used for packing, and there were no canoes, but 

226 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

used rafts of tule for ferrying; no pottery, but high devel- 
opment of basketry, both coil and twine; bags and mats 
very scanty ; cloth or other weaving of twisted elements not 
known; clothing was simple, and scanty, feet generally 
bare; the bow, the only weapon, usually sinew-backed; 
work in skins very weak; work in wood, bone, etc., weak; 
metals not at all; stone work not advanced; no picture 
writing; designs only upon baskets and not symbolic ; social 
organizations simple without gens or clan forms; political 
solidarity almost lacking; no formal social ranking, but 
some tendency to recognize property distinctions ; ritualism, 
fetishism, and religious symbolism almost lacking; well 
developed puberty ceremonies for girls and a kind of secret 
initiation for men; a mourning ceremony in which gifts 
are burned ; a tendency to maintain a series of dances in a 
fixed order; a semi-underground or earth-covered house 
for ceremonies, a sweat house and the sleeping place of 
adult males; shamanism conspicuous, but absence of fasting 
and other inducing methods ; regalia not elaborate, feather 
head bands most general ; creation and culture origin myths 
prevail, a dignified creator, but in addition coyote tales. 

As with the preceding areas, we must again consider 
intermediate groups. In the south, the characteristic linguis- 
tic individuality vanishes to make room for large groups of 
Yuman and Shoshonean tribes; here we find some pottery, 
sandals, wooden war clubs, and even curved rabbit sticks, 
all intrusive; but, in ceremonies and other non-material 
traits, these tribes conform to the California type we have 
outlined. The extinct Santa Barbara were at least variants, 
living upon sea food, having some wood work, making 
plank canoes, and excellent workers of stone, bone, and 
shell. In northern California are again the Karok, Yurok, 
Wishosk, Shasta, and Hupa and other Athapascan tribes; 
here sea food on the coast and salmon in the interior rival 
acorns and other foods ; dug-out canoes ; rectangular gabled 

NORTH PACIFIC COAST AREA 227 

houses of planks with circular doors; basketry almost ex- 
clusively twined; elkhorn and wooden trinket boxes; elk- 
horn spoons; stone work superior to that of central Cali- 
fornia; the occasional use of rod, slat, and elkskin armor 
and also basket hats of the northern type. These all suggest 
the culture farther north (Area 4), as do the appearance of 
carving and the more elaborate decorative art. Also, social 
organization becomes more definite, with clear-cut property 
distinctions, mourning ceremonies, and the secret initiations 
are wanting; and the use of stuffed albino deerskins in cer- 
tain ceremonies is distinctive. Even the mythology is said 
to have leanings toward that of the north and east. 
•^4. North Pacific Coast Area. Ranging northward from 
California to the Alaskan peninsula we have an ethnic coast 
belt, known as the North Pacific Coast area.* This culture is 
rather complex and presents highly individualized tribal 
variations ; but can be consistently treated under three sub- 
divisions: (a) the northern group, Tlingit, Haida and 
Tsimshian; (6) the central group, the Kwakiutl tribes and 
the Bellacoola; and (c) the southern group, the Coast 
Salish, the Nootka, the Chinook, Kalapooian, Waiilatpuan, 
Chimakuan, and some Athapascan tribes. The first of these 
seem to be the type and are characterized by: the great 
dependence upon sea food, some hunting upon the mainland, 
large use of berries; dried fish, clams and berries are the 
staple food ; cooking with hot stones in boxes and baskets ; 
large rectangular gabled houses of upright cedar planks with 
carved posts and totem poles; travel chiefly by water in 
large, sea-going dug-out canoes, some of which had sails; 
no pottery nor stone vessels, except mortars; baskets in 
checker, those in twine reaching a high state of excellence 
among the THngit ; coil basketry not made ; mats of cedar 
bark and soft bags in abundance; the Chilkat, a Tlingit 
tribe, specialized in the weaving of a blanket of goat hair; 
there was no true loom, the warp hanging from a bar, and 

228 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

weaving with the fingers, downward, clothing rather scanty, 
chiefly of skin, a wide basket hat (only one of the kind on 
the continent and apparently for rain protection) ; feet 
usually bare, but skin moccasins and leggings were occasion- 
ally made ; for weapons the bow, club, and a peculiar dag- 
ger, no lances; slat, nJ3 and skin armor; wooden helmets, 
no shields; practically no chipped stone tools, but nephrite 
or green stone used ; wood work highly developed, splitting 
and dressing of planks, peculiar bending for boxes, joining 
by securing with concealed stitches, high development of 
carving technique; work in copper may have been aborig- 
inal, but, if so, very weakly developed; decorative art is 
conspicuous, tending to realism in carved totem poles, house 
posts, etc.; some geometric art on baskets, but woven 
blankets tend to be realistic; each family expresses its 
mythical origin in a carved or painted crest; the tribe of 
two exogamic divisions with maternal descent; society or- 
ganized as chiefs, nobles, common people, and slaves; a 
kind of barter system expressed in the potlatch ceremony in 
which the leading units of value are blankets and certain con- 
ventional copper plates; a complex ritualistic system by 
which individuals are initiated into the protection of their 
family guardian spirits, those so associated with the same 
spirit forming a kind of society; mythology characterized 
by the Raven legends. 

The central group differs in a few minor points: use a 
hand stone hammer instead of a hafted one; practically no 
use of skin clothing, but twisted and loosely woven bark or 
wool ; no coil or twined basketry, all checker work ; jias a 
tendency toward paternal descent for its exogamic groups; 
the crest system less in evidence, but the initiation groups 
very strong, particularly the cannibal cult, and far less asso- 
ciated with the clans. 

Among the southern group appears a strong tendency to 
use stone arrow-heads in contrast to the north ; a peculiar 

ESKIMO AREA 229 

flat club, vaguely similar to the New Zealand type, the occa- 
sional use of the Plains warclub; greater use of edible roots 
(camas, etc.) and berries, some use of acorns, as in Cali- 
fornia; the handled digging-stick; roasting in holes (espe- 
cially camas), and the pounding of dried salmon; a tempo- 
rary summer house of bark or rushes; twine basketry pre- 
vailed ; the sewed rush mat ; costume like the central group. 
The art, social, and ceremonial traits of the north all thin 
out as we move southward. 

5. Eskimo Area. The chief resumes of Eskimo culture 
have been made by Boas,^ who divides them into nine or 
more groups, as follows: the Greenland Eskimo; the Es- 
kimo of southern Baffin Land and Labrador; the Eskimo 
of Melville Peninsula, North Devon, north Baffin Land, and 
the northwest shore of Hudson Bay; the Sagdlirmiut of 
Southampton Island; the Eskimo of Boothia Felix, King 
William Land, and the neighboring mainland; the Eskimo 
of Victoria Island and Coronation Gulf; the Eskimo be- 
tween Cape Bathurst and Herschel Island, including the 
mouth of the Mackenzie River; the Alaskan Eskimo; and 
the Yuit of Siberia. When we consider the fact that the 
♦Eskimo are confined to the coast line, and stretch from the 
Aleutian Islands to eastern Greenland, we should expect 
lack of contact in many parts of this long chain to give rise 
to many differences. While many differences do exist, the 
similarfties are striking, equal, if not superior, in uniform- 
ity to those of any other culture area. However, our 
knowledge of these people is far from satisfactory, making 
even this brief survey quite provisional. 

The mere fact that they live by the sea, and chiefly upon 
sea food, will not of itself differentiate them from the tribes 
of the North Pacific Coast; but the habit of camping in 
winter upon sea ice and living upon seal, and in the sum- 
mer, upon land animals, will serve us. Among other traits 
the kayak and "woman's boat," the lamp, the harpoon, the 

230 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

float, woman's knife, bowdrill, snow goggles, the trussed- 
bow, and dog traction, with the sled, are almost universal 
and, taken in their entirety, rather sharply differentiate Es- 
kimo culture from the remainder of the continent. The 
type of winter shelter varies considerably, but the skin tent 
is quite universal in summer, and the snowhouse, as a more 
or less permanent winter dwelling prevails east of Point 
fearrow. Intrusive traits are also present; basketry of coil 
and twine is common in Alaska ; pottery also extended east- 
ward to Cape Parry ; the Asiatic pipe occurs in Alaska and 
the Indian pipe on the west side of Hudson Bay; likewise, 
some costumes beaded in general Indian style have been 
noted west of Hudson Bay. All Eskimo are rather ingen- 
ious workers with tools, in this respect strikingly like the 
tribes of the North Pacific Coast. In Alaska, where wood 
is available, the Eskimo carve masks, small boxes, and bowls 
with great cleverness. 

These variants all tend to disappear between Point Bar- 
row and Hudson Bay, and it may be noted that they are at 
the same time traits that occur in Asia, the North Pacific 
Coast, or the Mackenzie Area (6). Hence, we seem justi- 
fied in looking toward the east for the typical material cuk- 
ture. From our limited knowledge it appears that the great 
central group from Banks Island on the west to Smith 
Sound in North Greenland is the home of the purest traits ; 
here are snowhouses; dogs harnessed with single traces; 
rectangular stone kettles; and the almost entire absence of 
wooden utensils; a simple order of social and political life 
in which the unit is the family; a political chief, in the sense 
known in Indian culture, not recognized; shamanism rather 
prominent and comparable to that found in Siberia; great 
elaboration of taboos and a corresponding requirement of 
confession; almost no ritualistic ceremonies, but ^t least 
one yearly gathering in which masked men impersonate 
gods; temporary exchange of wives at the preceding; my- 

MACKENZIE AREA 231 

thology simple and centering around the goddess of the sea 
animals. Between Greenland and Labrador the differences 
are small, and apparently due more to modern European 
influences than to prehistoric causes. The limited study of 
archaeological specimens by Dall,* Solberg,® and Boas^® 
suggests much greater cultural uniformity in the prehistoric 
period, a conclusion apparently borne out by the collections 
made by Stefansson " on the north coast. While this is far 
from conclusive, it is quite consistent with the view that the 
chief intrusive elements in Eskimo culture are to be found 
west of the Mackenzie River. 

6. Mackenzie Area. Skirting the Eskimo area from east 
to west is a great interior belt of semi-arctic lands, including 
the greater part of the interior of Canada. Hudson Bay 
almost cuts it into two parts, the western or larger part occu- 
pied by the Dene tribes, the eastern by Algonkins, the Saul- 
teaux, Cree, Montagnais, and Naskapi. The fauna, flora, 
and climate are quite uniform for corresponding latitudes 
and are reflected to some extent in material culture, so that 
we should be justified in considering it one great area, if the 
less material traits did not show definite distinctions. As 
noted in our first chapter, the chief xultu^j[ bond through 
the region is the u^e of the caribou. The caribou rangecl 
from Maine to Alaska and throughout all this area furnished 
the greater part of the clothing and tents and a considerable 
portion of the food. They could not be taken easily in sum- 
mer, but in winter were killed in drives, on the ice, or after 
a thaw, in the water. They were also snared. All of these 
methods were known from Alaska to Newfoundland. Be- 
tween the Mackenzie and Hudson Bay ranged the barren 
ground variety, whose habits were somewhat like those of 
the buffalo on the plains, and the tribes in reach of their 
range lived upon them almost as completely as did the In- 
dians of the Plains upon the buffalo." Along with these 
widely distributed caribou traits go the great use of spruce 

232 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

and birchbark for canoes and vessels, babiche and bark fiber, 
toboggans and skin or bark-covered tents, and the use of 
snares and nets. Notwithstanding these similarities, the 
other aspects of culture for eastern Canada appear inter- 
mediate to the Eastern Woodland area (7) of the United 
States. Hence, the great Dene country of the Canadian 
Northwest is usually considered as a distinct culture area, 
taking its name from its largest river. 

Our knowledge of the Dene is rather fragmentary, for 
scarcely a single tribe has been seriously studied. Aside 
from the work of Father Morice ** we have only the random 
observations of explorers and fur-traders. It is believed 
that the Dene tribes fall into three culture groups. The east- 
ern group: the Yellow Knives, Dog Rib, Hares, Slavey, 
Chipewyan, and Beaver; the southwestern group: the Na- 
hane, Sekani, Babine, and Carrier; the northwestern group 
comprising the Kutchin, Loucheux, Ahtena, and Khotana. 
The Chilcotin are so far removed culturally that we have 
placed them in the Plateau group, and the Tahltan seem to 
be intermediate to the North Pacific center. 

Of these three groups, the southwestern is the largest and 
occupies the most favorable habitat. From the writings of 
Father Morice, a fairly satisfactory statement of their cul- 
tures can be made, as follows : All the tribes are hunters of 
large and small game, caribou are often driven into enclo- 
sures, small game taken in snares and traps; a few of the 
tribes on the headwaters of the Pacific drainage take sal- 
mon, but other kinds of fish are largely used ; large use of 
berries is made, they are mashed and dried by a special pro- 
cess; edible roots and other vegetable foods are used to 
some extent; utensils are of wood and bark; no pottery; 
bark vessels for boiling with and without use of stones; 
travel in summer largely by canoe ; in winter by snowshoe ; 
dog sleds used to some extent, but chiefly since trade days, 
the toboggan form prevailing; clothing of skins; mittens 

MACKENZIE AREA 233 

and caps; no weaving except rabbitskin garments, but fine 
network in snowshoes, bags, and fish nets, materials of bark 
fiber, sinew, and babiche; there is also a special form of 
woven quill work with geometric designs; the typical habi- 
tation seems to be the double lean-to, though many intrusive 
forms occur; fish-hooks and spears ; limited use of copper; 
work in stone weak; social organization simple, but yet 
showing forms of maternal clans, property distinctions, etc., j 
reminding one of the North Pacific area ; the hospitable I 
exchange of wives ; shamanism very prominent, but no good \ 
evidence of ritualism. 

Unfortunately, the data available on the other groups are 
less definite, so that we cannot decisively classify the tribes. 
From Hearne,^* Mackenzie," and others it appears that the 
following traits prevailed over the entire Dene area: the 
twisting of bark fiber without spindle and its general use, 
reminding one of sennit; snares and nets for all kinds of 
game; the use of spruce and birchbark for vessels and 
canoes; basketry of split spruce root (watap) for cooking 
with hot stones, noted by early observers; the toboggan; 
in summer the use of babiche; the short-handled stone 
adze; iron pyrites instead of the firedrill and fungus for 
touchwood; the use of the cache; and, above all, depend- 
ence upon the caribou ; a tendency toward the simplest kind 
of social grouping; prominence of shamanism and weakness 
of ritualism. These seem to be the most characteristic traits 
of the Dene as a whole, and, while neither numerous nor 
complex, are still quite distinctive. 

[n discussing this area, some writers have commented 
upon the relative poverty of distinctive traits and the pre- 
ponderance of borrowed, or intrusive ones. For example, 
the double lean-to is peculiarly their own, though used 
slightly in parts of the Plateau area ; but among the south- 
western Dene we frequently find houses, like those of the 
Tsimshian, among the Babine and northern Carrier ; while 

234 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

the Sekanais and southern Carrier use the underground 
houses of the Salish; and among the Chipewyan, Beaver, 
and most of the eastern group, the skin or bark-covered tipi 
of the Cree is common. Similar differences have been noted 
in costume and such social traits as clans and property dis- 
tinctions, in the west. Pemmican, a specialty of the eastern 
Indians, was made by the eastern Dene. According to 
Hearne ^* some of the eastern Dene painted their shields 
with Plains-like devices, and in the northwestern gjoup we 
find some sleds of Eskimo pattern. Such borrowing of 
traits from other areas is, however, not peculiar to the Dene, 
and while it may be more prevalent among them, it should 
be noted that our best available data are from tribes margi- 
nal to the area. It is just in the geographical center of this 
area that good data so far fail us. Therefore, the inference 
is that there is a distinct type of Dene culture, and that their 
lack,pf individuality has been over-estimated. 

7. Eastern Woodland Area. We come now to the so- 
called Eastern Woodland area, the characterization of which 
is difficult. As just noted, its northern border extends to 
the Arctic and all the territory between the Eskimo above, 
and Lakes Superior and Huron below, and eastward to the 
St. Lawrence, is the home of a culture whose material traits 
are comparable to those of the preceding area. In brief, 
these traits are the taking of caribou in pens; the snaring 
of game ; the considerable use of small game and fish ; the 
use of berry food; the weaving of rabbitskins; the birch 
canoe ; the toboggan ; the conical skin or bark-covered shel- 
ter; the absence of basketry and pottery; use of bark and 
wooden utensils. The tribes most distinctly of this culture 
are the Ojibway north of the Lakes, including the Saulteaux, 
the Wood Cree, the Montagnais, and the Naskapi. 

Taking the above as the northern group, we find the main 
body falls into three large divisions: 

I. The Iroquoian tribes (Huron, Wyandot, Erie, Susque- 

EASTERN WOODLAND AREA 235 

hanna, and the Five Nations) extending from north to south 
and thus dividing the Algonkin tribes. 

2. The Central Algonkin, west of the Iroquois: Some 
Ojibway, the Ottawa, Menomini, Sauk and Fox, Potawa- 
tomi, Peoria, Illinois, Kickapoo, Miami, Piankashaw, Shaw- 
nee, also the Siouan, Winnebago. 

3. The Eastern Algonkin: the Abnaki group, and the 
Micmac (not to be distinguished from the northern border 
group noted above save by their feeble cultivation of maize), 
the New England tribes, and the Delaware. 

While the Iroquoian tribes seem to have been predomi- 
nant, their culture, as a whole, suggests a southern origin, 
thus disqualifying them for places in the type group. The 
Eastern tribes are not well known, many of them being 
extinct, but they also seem to have been strongly influenced 
by the Iroquois and by southern culture. We must, there- 
fore, turn to the Central group for the type. Even here 
the data are far f rom"adequate ; for the Peoria, Illinois, 
Miami, and Piankashaw have almost faded away. Little 
is known of the Kickapoo and Ottawa, and no serious, 
studies of the Shawnee are available. The" latter, however, 
seem to belong with the transitional tribes of the Eastern 
group, if not actually to the Southeastern area. Our dis- 
cussion, therefore, must be based on the Ojibway, Menom- 
ini, Sauk and Fox, and Winnebago.^^ 

Enumerating their most characteristic traits, we have: 
maize, squashes, and beans cultivated (though weakly by 
the Ojibway) ; wild rice where available was a great staple; 
maple sugar was manufactured ; deer, bear, and even buf- 
falo were hunted, also wild fowl ; fishing was fairly devel- 
oped, especially sturgeon fishing on the lakes; pottery was* 
weakly developed but formerly used for cooking vessels; 
vessels of wood and bark were common; some splint bas- 
ketry; two types of shelter prevailed, a dome-shaped bark 
or mat-covered lodge for winter, a rectangular bark house 

236 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

for summer, though the Ojibway tended to use the conical 
type of the northern border group instead of the latter; 
canoes of bark and dug-outs were used, where possible ; the 
toboggan was occasionally used, snowshoes were common; 
dog traction rare; weaving of bark fiber downward with 
the fingers; soft bags; pack lines; and fish nets; clothing 
of skins, soft-soled moccasins with drooping flaps, leggings, 
breechcloth, and sleeved shirts for men ; for women, a skirt 
and jacket, though a one-piece dress was known ; skin robes, 
some woven of rabbitskin ; no arlmor, bows of plain wood, 
no lances, both the ball-ended and gun-shaped wooden club, 
in trade days the tomahawk; deer were often driven into 
the water and killed from canoes (the use of the jack-light 
should be noted) ; fish taken with hooks, spears, and nets, 
small game trapped and snared; work in skins confined to 
clothing; bags usually woven, other receptacles made of 
birchbark; mats of reed and cedarbark common; work in 
wood, stone, and bone weakly developed; probably consid- 
erable use of copper in prehistoric times; feather-work 
rare ; a gens organization, no social classes or formal prop- 
erty distinctions; decorative art tending toward non- 
geometric forms; a secret initiation ceremony known as 
the Midewiwin; a well-developed scalp dance; fixed ritual- 
istic procedures in conducting a war party ; ceremonial bun- 
dles for war, hunting, and also for social groups ; mythology 
complex, dealing in part with the deeds of Manitou beings; 
elaboration of song rituals for many phases of routine 
life: specialization in root and herb formulas for treating 
the sick, but some shamanistic traits, as the juggler's 
lodge. 

When we come to the eastern group we find agriculture 
more intensive (except in the extreme north) and pottery 
more highly developed. Woven feather cloaks seem to have 
been common, a southern trait. Work in stone also seems 
a little more complex; a special development of steatite 

SOUTHEASTERN AREA 237 

work. More use was made of edible roots. The decorative / 

art was less geometric and ritualism weaker than in the typi- 
cal group. 1 ^^ 

The Iroquoian tribes ** were even more intensive agricul- | ' ' * 

turists and potters; they made some use of the blowgun; 
developed cornhusk weaving; carved elaborate masks from*!'*** 
wood ; lived in rectangular long houses of peculiar pattern ; 
built fortifications ; and were superior in bone work ; main- 
tained a series of masked secret societies, a corn harvest fes- 
tival, and, above all, a highly developed political organiza- 
tion or "League of the Six Nations," which made syste- 
matic conquests. 

8. Southeastern Area, The Southeastern area is conven- 
iently divided by the Mississippi River, the typical culture 
occurring in the east. As we have noted, the Powhatan 
group and perhaps the Shawnee are intermediate. These 
eliminated, we have the Muskhogean and Iroquoian tribes 
(Cherokee and Tuscarora), as the chief groups, also the 
Yuchi, Eastern Siouan, Tunican, and Quapaw. The Chiti- 
macha and Attacapa differ from the others chiefly in the 
greater use of aquatic foods. The Caddoan tribes had a dif- 
ferent type of shelter and were otherwise slightly deflected 
toward the Plains culture. We have little data for the Ton- 
kawa, Karankawa, and Carrizo, but they seem not to have 
been agriculturists and some of them seem to have lived in 
tipis like the Lipan, being almost true buffalo Indians. These 
thus stand as intermediate and may belong with the Plains 
or the Southwest area. The Biloxi of the east, the extinct 
Timuqua, and the Florida Seminole are also variants from 
the type. They were far less dependent upon agriculture 
and made considerable use of aquatic food. The Timuqua 
lived in circular houses and, as did the Seminole," used 
bread made of coonti roots {Zantia putnila), the method of 
preparation suggesting West Indian influence. The eating 
of human flesh is also set down as a trait of several Gulf 

238 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Coast tribes. Our typical culture then may be found at its 
best among the Muskhogean, Yuchi, and Cherokee.** 

The following are the most distinctive traits : great use of 
vegetable food and intensive agriculture ; raised maize, cane 
(a kind of millet), pumpkins, melons, tobacco, and after 
contact with Europeans, quickly took up peaches, figs, etc.; 
large use of wild vegetables also ; dogs eaten, the only do- 
mestic animal, but chickens, hogs, horses, and even cattle 
were adopted quickly ; deer, bear and bison in the west were 
the large game, for deer the stalking and surround methods 
were used; turkeys and small game were hunted and fish 
taken when convenient (fish poisons were in use, suggesting 
South America) ; of manufactured foods — bears' oil, hick- 
ory-nut oil, persimmon bread, and hominy are noteworthy; 
houses were generally rectangular with curved roofs, cov- 
ered with thatch or bark, also often provided with plaster 
walls reinforced with wicker work; towns were well forti- 
fied with palisades ; dug-out canoes ; costume was moderate, 
chiefly of deerskins, robes of bison, etc., shirt-like gar- 
ments for men, skirts and toga-like upper garments for 
women, boot-like moccasins for winter; some woven fabrics 
of bark fiber, and fine netted feather cloaks; some buflFalo- 
hair weaving in the west, weaving downward with the fin- 
gers; fine mats of cane and some cornhusk work; baskets 
of cane and splints, the double or nested basket and the 
basket meal sieve are special forms; knives of cane, darts 
of cane and bone; blowguns in general use; good potters, 
coil process, paddle decorations ; ^^ skin dressing by slightly 
different method from elsewhere (macerated in mortars) 
and straight scrapers of hafted stone; work in stone of a 
high order, but no true sculpture ; little metal work ; cere- 
monial houses, or temples, for sun worship in which were 
perpetual fires; these, and other important buildings set 
upon mounds ; elaborate planting and harvest rituals, espe- 
cially an important ceremony known as the "busk"; the 

SOUTHWESTERN AREA 239 

kindling of new fire and the use of the "black drink" ; a clan 
system with society composed of chiefs and four grades of 
subjects; chiefs regarded as under the sacred influence of 
the Sun God, reminding us of Peru ; political systems devel- 
oped, with strong confederacies; strong development of the 
calumet procedure ; shamanism prominent. 

9. Southwestern Area. In the Southwestern area we 
have a small portion of the United States (New Mexico' 
and Arizona) and an indefinite portion of Mexico. For 
convenience, we shall ignore all tribes south of the interna- 
tional boundary. Within these limits, we have what appear 
to be two types of culture: the Pueblos and the nomadic 
tribes, but from our point of view this distinction seems not 
wholly justifiable, since the differences are chieflj^ those of 
architecture and social grouping and not unlike those already 
noted in the Eastern Woodland area. On account of its 
highly developed state and its prehistoric antecedents, the 
Pueblo culture appears as the type.** The cultures of the 
different villages are far from uniform, but, ignoring minor 
variations, fall into three geographical groups: the Hopi 
(Walpi, Sichumovi, Hano [Tewa], Shipaulovi, Mishong- 
novi, Shungopovi, and Oraibi) ; Zuiii (Zufii proper. Pes- 
cado, Nutria, and Ojo Calient*;) ; and the Rio Grande / 
(Taos, Picuris, San Juan, Santa Clara, San Ildefonso, 
Tesuque, Pojoaque, Nambe, Jemez, Pecos, Sandia, Isleta — 
all of Tanoan stock; San Fefipe, Cochiti, Santo Domingo, 
Santa Ana, Sia, Laguna, and Acoma — Keresan stock). The 
culture of the whole may ht characterized first by certain 
traits not yet found in our survey of the continent; viz., 
the main dependence upon maize and other cultivated foods 
(mgijdid the cultivating and weaving of cloth instead of 
women, as above) ; the use of a grinding stone, or metate, 
instead of a mortar; the art of masonry; loom or upward 
weaving ; cultivated cotton as textile material ; pottery dec- 
orated in color; a unique type of building; and the domes- 

240 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

tication of the turkey. These certainly serve to sharply dif- 
ferentiate this culture. 

While the main dependence was placed on vegetable food 
there was ^gme hunting ; the eastern villages hunted buffalo 
and deer, especially Taos. The most unique hunting weapon 
is the flat, curved rabbit stick, in fact, a kind of boomerang. 
Drives of rabbits and antelope were practised. The princi- 
pal wild vegetable food was the piiion nut. Of manufactured 
foods, piki bread is the most unique. In former times, the 
villages often traded for meat with the more nomadic tribes. 
Taos, Pecos and a few of the frontier villages used buffalo 
robes and often dressed in deerskins, but woven robes were 
usual. Men wore aprons and a robe when needed. In addi- 
tion to cloth robes, some were woven of rabbitskin and some 
netted with turkey feathers. Women wore a woven gar- 
ment reaching from the shoulder to the knees, fastened over 
the right shoulder only. For the feet, hard-soled mocca- 
sins, those for women having long strips of deerskin wound 
around the leg. Pottery was highly developed and served 
other uses than the practical. Basketry was known, but not 
so highly developed as among the non-Pueblo tribes. The 
dog was kept, but not used in transportation, and there were 
no boats. The mechanical arts were not highly developed ; 
their stone work and work in wood, while of an advanced 
type, does not excel that of some other areas; some work 
in turquoise, but nothing^ in metal. Art flourished chiefly 
as pottery decoration and in ceremonial painting; the latter 
tended to be symbolic but usually bordered upon the realis- 
tic; a complex social grouping in which relationship is 
usually maternal, but the unity of the system is apparent in 
that the same group names can be traced throughout the dif- 
ferent villages ; ^* each village independent with an elective 
governor and a war chief, the final sanction, however, jest- 
ing with a supreme religious officer; ritualism very corti- 
cated ; universal offerings of maize meal and other objects 

SOUTHWESTERN AREA 241 

at shrines ; extensive use of sand painted altars ; purifica- 
tion by emetics and head-washing ; two sets of priests and 
ceremonies, one for summer, the other for winter; many 
societies or cults ; a snake dance among the Hopi " and a 
rain ceremony at Sia are special demonstrations; the most 
common are the kachina ceremonies, part of which are 
masked dances; mythology characterized by migfration 
tales. 

The Pima*' once lived in adobe houses but not of the 
Pueblo type ; they developed irrigation but also made exten- 
sive use of wild plants (mesquite, saguaro, etc.). They 
raised cotton and wove cloth, were indifferent potters, but 
experts in basketry. The kindred Papago were similar, 
though less advanced. The Mohave, Yuma, Cocopa, Mari- 
copa, and Yavapai used a square, flat-roofed house of wood, 
did not practise irrigation, were not good basket makers 
(excepting the Yavapai), but were otherwise similar to the 
Pima. The Walapai and Havasupai were somewhat more 
nomadic. Among all these ritualism was weak in contrast 
to the Pueblos, but we have very little data on the subject. 

In some respects the Pima and their ethnic neighbors 
appear to be transitional to the Pueblo type, but when we 
come to the Athapascan-speaking tribes of the eastern side 
of the area we find some intermediate cultures. Thus, the 
Jicarilla and Mescalero used the Plains tipi; they raised 
but little ; gathered wild vegetable foods and hunted buffalo 
and other animals; no weaving, but costumes of skin in the 
Plains type; made a little pottery; good coil baskets; used 
glass-bead technique of the Plains* The southern Ute were 
also in this class. The western Apache differed little from 
these, but rarely used tipis and gave a little more attention 
to agriculture. All used shields of buffalo hide and roasted 
certain roots in holes. In general, while the Apache have 
certain undoubted Pueblo traits, they also remind one of 
the Plains and the Plateaus. 

242 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

The Navajo seem to have taken on their most striking 
traits under European influence; but their old t)rpe of 
shelter is again the up-ended stick type of the north, while 
their costume, pottery, and feeble attempts at basketry and 
formerly at agriculture, with their strong leaning toward 
ritualism, all suggest Pueblo influence. 

Thus, in the widely diffused traits of agriculture, metate, 
pottery, and, to a less degree, the weaving of cloth with 
loom and spindle, former use of sandals, a similar social 
system, and intense ritualism, we have common cultural 
bonds between all the tribes of the Southwest, uniting them 
in one culture area. In all these the Pueblos lead. The 
non-Pueblo tribes skirting the Plains and Plateaus occupy 
an intermediate position, as, doubtless, do the tribes to the 
southwest, from which it appears that, after all, we have 
but one distinct general type of culture centering in this 
area. 

lo. The Nahua Area, We have just seen how the Pueblo 
type of culture centered in the upper Rio Grande Valley 
and how its varying characteristics extend down into Mex- 
ico. It is clear from the historical data of the Spanish 
conquest that when Cortez landed on the Gulf Coast there 
was one center of culture for the whole stretch of country 
between the Rio Grande and Lake Nicaragua, and that its 
most typical representative was the Aztec group round 
about the City of Mexico. Yet, the Tarascan, the Zapotec 
and the Mixtec were almost equally typical, while somewhat 
less typical were the Totonac, and the Otomi. 

Some centuries before the discovery of America, the 
center of the area was in Yucatan, among the Maya, whence 
it seems to have shifted to the northern tribes we have just 
noted. Within the bounds of this older center are found 
the most impressive ruins in the New World (p. 102). 
While we cannot connect any one ruin with a specific sur- 
viving Maya group, it is certain that the builders of all of 

IS. 

^- 

NAHUA AREA 243 

them were members of the Maya stock. The attainment of 
this result is one of the most important triumphs of our 
science, for had we been unable to so connect these ruins 
with the Maya, we should find the whole Mexican-Central 
American problem extremely baffling. 

The Spaniards found the Maya in eighteen or more inde- 
pendent tribal groups, no longer living in pretentious cities, 
but no doubt representing the original social units forming 
the ancient Maya federation. That they were still of a 
culture type, comparable to the Aztec group, is indicated by 
extensive agriculture (maize, peppers, beans, cacao, etc.), 
the domestication of bees for the honey and the wax, weav- 
ing of cotton so fine that the Spaniards mistook it for silk, 
large canoes, and trade with Cuba, hieroglyphic books, a 
gentile organization with animal names, etc. Archaeological 
research has revealed their former ascendency in archi- 
tecture, art, calendar systems, and astronomical knowledge. 
A great deal of these specialized traits of culture passed to 
the Aztec, but one feature in particular seems to differen- 
tiate Maya culture : viz,, the absence of copper tools. Their 
culture was essentially a stone age culture, which used cop- 
per and gold, particularly the latter, only for ornament. 
In the smelting and casting of gold they were very skilful. 
Thus we have in the ancient Maya a fine example of the 
height to which a people may rise with only tools of stone 
and wood. While the later Aztec culture was in foundation 
a stone culture, it went somewhat farther than the Maya in 
the development of copper tools, but not so far as did the 
Inca of Peru. 

The present state of native culture in the Central Ameri- 
can States is quite the reverse of what the at-chgeology would 
lead one to expect. This is particularly true of the Maya 
area in which quite primitive and loosely organized groups 
of people are found still speaking Maya languages. One of 
these groups, known as Lacandones, has been carefully 

244 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

studied ^* and may be taken as the general historic type for 
the whole of Central America. Its characteristics are : agri- 
culture, hunting and fishing, carried on about in the same 
proportion as in the Amazon country; maize, potatoes, a 
yucca, calabashes, tobacco, corn, etc., raised; cotton raised 
and spun; some pottery; bees domesticated; bows and 
stone-pointed arrows; water drums; gourd .rattles; the 
ceremonial life simple, consisting in the main of an annual 
renewing ceremony and numerous offerings, from all of 
which women are excluded. Strange to say, no knowledge 
of the calendar system and writing of the Maya period 
survives, for Maya intellectual culture being exclusive to 
the priestly class, either passed over to the Aztec conquerors 
or into oblivion. 

Aztec culture embodied traits similar to those of the 
Maya.*^ They had a highly organized government and 
maintained armies; a gentile social order with gens land 
rights ; intensive agriculture, maize, beans, peppers, gourds, 
cotton, fruits; intoxicating drink, or pulque, from maguey 
plant; were skilful builders; made ornaments of gold, sil- 
ver and copper, cast in molds of wax, clay and charcoal; 
made some tools of copper and tin ; a gold wire technique 
from which filigree work was derived ; fine feather mosaics 
by the glue method for which large aviaries were main- 
tained ; work in obsidian and jadeite highly developed, cut- 
ting tools, mirrors and ornaments ; stone mosaic ornaments; 
finely woven cloth of cotton and agave with excellent dyes; 
fair potters; books on parchment and on maguey paper; an 
organized priesthood in whose hands were education and 
higher knowledge, literature was cultivated; separate 
schools for girls and boys maintained; children of 
a social class only, educated; a calendar system derived 
from the Maya, and an elaborate religious system in which 
sacrifices were prominent ; rituals recited in the temples for 
regular parts of each day and night and almost constant 

CHIBCHA AREA 245 

sacrificing of quails, rabbits and flowers; at certain human 
sacrifices some of the flesh was ceremonially eaten. 

Just how far north and south the full series of Aztec 
traits was diffused cannot be stated, but for many years 
preceding the landing of Cortez they had been subjecting 
tribe after tribe and forcing upon them their own culture. 
The efficiency and character of their political system has 
been presented with great clearness by Bandelier.^® To the 
north, beyond the Tarascan were the Otomi, by tradition 
the forerunners of the Aztec, but in later times, at least, 
less typical. Still further north we meet the Pima-speaking 
tribes, Huichol, Cora, Mayo, Yaqui, etc., whose culture is 
clearly intermediate to that of the Aztec and the Pueblo 
area. Just what the relative values may have been in the 
past will doubtless be revealed by future research. 

Immediately to the south were the Mixes, Zoque, Chia- 
panec, etc., some of which appear in early Spanish writings 
as wild savage cannibals, but their later docile appearance 
discredits these old accounts. Yet we may be certain that 
they were of less culture than the Aztec or truly inter- 
mediate. 

SOUTH AMERICAN CULTURE AREAS 

II. The Chibcha Area. On the southern frontier of the 
old Maya territory we meet such peoples as the Lenca and 
Xicaque of less intense culture, but still manifesting many 
of the fundamental traits of the Nahua center. Yet when 
near the boundary of Costa Rica, we find wilder tribes with 
cultures suggesting South America. Just across the line 
we meet with the Chibcha-speaking Talamanca and the 
Chiriqui. From here down through the Isthmus we seem to 
find an increasing number of such traits as poisoned arrows, 
fish poisons, hammocks, and palisaded villages, all highly 
characteristic df South American cultures. In fact, the 
whole isthmian country from the lower part of Nicaragua 

246 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

down is a marginal part of the Chibcha culture area, center- 
ing about Bogota, Colombia. 

Throughout this area we have environmental conditions 
similar to those surrounding the Maya, for the whole outer 
marginal circumference is studded with wild tribes and 
even the highly organized groups comprising the center in 
Colombia have some of these lowly folk interspersed among 
them. 

The dominating stock was the Chibcha, whose culture 
may be taken as the type.^* Like all Andean peoples, they 
were agricultural, producing maize, potatoes, manioc, beans, 
and squashes ; no domestic animals for transportation ; irri- 
gation systems highly developed ; salt was made on a large 
scale and traded to outlying tribes; cotton was raised and 
weaving highly developed ; fine dyeing ; no stone buildings, 
cane and thatch the rule, walls of wattling, plastered with 
clay; roads and suspension bridges; no copper, but great 
skill in gold work, in fact, the center of the art for the 
New World; a clan organization, or maternal descent; a 
kind of caste system ; one tribe, the Panche, is credited with 
exogamous clans; no evidence of books or calendar sys- 
tems; human sacrifices to the sun as an incident in sacri- 
fices of all kinds; an infinite number of local shrines where 
some power was assumed to be manifest to which offerings 
were made ; five sacred lakes ; an organized priesthood with 
a single head ; ceremonial foot-races ; coca chewing instead 
of tobacco and great use of chicha ; but some tobacco was 
used both as snuff and for smoking in stone pipes ; a myth- 
ical white man who was the culture hero, called Bochica; a 
deluge myth; an Atlas idea of the world; a fairly compact 
political organization; tribute or taxes in gold and cloth 
chiefly; a commercial system with markets, and a kind of 
currency. For further details, see the proper heading under 
archaeological classification. 

As to just how far the intermediale fringe of this culture 

INCA AREA 247 

extended into Venezuela, we cannot say, but from archaeo- 
logical evidence it seems to have reached out well into the 
highlands of the interior. On the south, it met Inca in- 
fluence in Ecuador. 

12. The Inca Area, The approximate northern border of 
the Inca area is near the equator, in the highlands of Ecua- 
dor, and its southern limits somewhere in the Atacama desert 
of Chile. It is remarkably narrow, following the coast belt 
of elevated Andean country. Another peculiarity is that 
the descent to the low level of the Amazon is abrupt, with- 
out the usual broad belt of plateau land, and in keeping with 
this, we find strong contrasts in culture, the intermediate 
tribes being chiefly in the north and south. Yet, as we shall 
• see in another place, some Inca traits did find their way down 
into the lowlands. 

The dominating stock languages are the Quechua and 
Aymara, having northern and southern distributions re- 
spectively.*" Reference to the linguistic map will show a 
few minor stocks, chiefly in the south, who form in the 
main an intermediate group. Among the largest of these 
are the Atacamas of northern Chile. Two small remnant 
stocks, the Puquinas and the Lecan of Lake Titicaca and the 
Changoan of the north Chilean coast were simple fisher folk 
who had acquired but few Inca traits, and who may be con- 
sidered surviving remnants of the earlier population. 

Reference to a relief map shows a marked eastern exten- 
sion of the Bolivian highlands, where we find a veritable 
swarm of minor stocks not found elsewhere, together with 
a few straggling Carib, Arawak and Tupi. On their eastern 
frontiers are successively the Amazonian forests and the 
Chaco. In culture we find here all degrees of transition. 
The truly upland groups are rather sedentary and agricul- 
tural, some maintaining temples and organized priesthoods. 
The Manacicos (Chiquitan) and Canichanan had palisaded 
villages as in eastern Brazil ; the former a gentile organiza- 

248 . THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

tion and made good pottery, but the latter were considered 
cannibals. Cannibalism, in fact, is charged to a large num- 
ber of these groups. 

In the north, in what is now Ecuador, were the Canarian, 
who by their high development of gold work take a posi- 
tion intermediate to the Chibchan center; but their inland 
neighbors, the Jivaran, are more like the wild Amazon 
tribes. 

The chief characters pertaining to Inca culture are: an 
organized government based upon gentile groups; the su- 
preme authority resting in a council who appointed from a 
hereditary group a war chief, or Inca (see p. 156), agricul- 
ture advanced, maize, manioc, peppers, potatoes, fertiliza-; 
tion with guanaco and other manures, elaborate irrigation 
systems; domestication of the llama, with the dog, guinea 
pig, birds, and monkeys as pets; some fishing on the coast 
and hunting in the interior; spinning and weaving highly 
developed, cotton cultivated, vicufia wool, elaborate designs 
and rich dyes; pottery carried to a high state of develop- 
ment, both in form and design, most unique form, the 
whistling jar; gold, silver, and copper mined, smelted and 
skilfully worked; true bronze was made by use of tin; tools 
and mechanical appliances simple, digging-stick and spade 
for farming, no hoe ; no saws, drilling by rolling in hands ; 
architecture massive, but plain and severe; a system of 
roads; stone, and suspension bridges; some water travel 
by balsa ; an organized army and fortifications ; no writing, 
but the quipu as a counting device ; sun worship, an organ- 
ized priesthood ; a mythical white man founder called Vira- 
cocha ; a deluge myth ; human sacrifices rare, but offerings 
of animals common; a series of gens gods, or huacas; re- 
ligious orders of virgins; a sacred shrine on Lake Titicaca; 
conventional confessions 6i sins to a priest; two important 
ceremonies, the new-fire with the banishment of disease and 
the sun festival. 

GUANACO AREA ^ 249 

13. The Guanaco Area, Adjacent to the Bolivian high- 
lands, the elevated lands of the headwaters of the La Plata 
drainage are known as the Gran Chaco. This is a rolling, 
wooded, and, in part, swampy plain. Farther south it 
merges into the Pampas, a level, treeless prairie. Still 
farther south, we have a more elevated, scantily wooded 
country in Patagonia. This whole stretch, together with 
the lower half of Chile, has one cultural center, though its 
geographical diversity gives certain distinctions. The typi- 
cal culture is found among the Guaycuruan (Abipones, 
etc.), Araucanian, Puelchean, and Calchaquian stocks.** En- 
gulfed by them are such tiny groups as the Lulean and Allen- 
tiacan. On the south we note the Chonoan of the Pacific 
Coast, who seem to have resembled the Alikulufan, Onan, 
and Yahganan farther south. The eastern slope of Pata- 
gonia was occupied by the Tsonekan (Tehuelche). Such 
of these as occupy the coast line live largely upon sea 
food. 

The culture of the typical group reminds one of the North 
American Plains area. The Spanish colonists introduced 
horses and cattle and very quickly the natives became horse 
Indians, hunting wild cattle." As such, they were nomadic 
and in the main did not till the soil, but in some cases did 
raise a little maize, etc., just as did some of the intermediate 
Plains area tribes of North America. All of the central 
group^seem to have woven some cloth, but developed work 
in skins more extensively ; the weapons were the lance, bola 
and lasso. A skin boat suggesting the bull-boat of the Plains 
area was used for fording rivers ; warriors rode into battle 
naked; dead were placed upon platforms, but the bones 
were afterward buried; smokers mixed tobacco with wood 
shavings, as in North America. 

In the historic period the natives of this area developed 
an intense horse culture. In many respects this complex 
was like the horse culture of the North American plains, 

2SO THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

because it was .acquired from the same foreign source. Yet 
we find in the guanaco area several new features, as the 
bola, the lasso, and the toe-stirrup. These highly original 
traits of the horse complex are found among all the typical 
tribes enumerated above, making it clear that even though 
they were original inventions, they must have been in their 
present form diffused from one center along with the horse. 
Habitations vary a great deal, but still are simple affairs of 
skin or mats supported by a ridge pole, in many cases with- 
out smoke holes. A common form is a kind of skin-covered 
lean-to. Infants are secured on a board or frame, as in 
North America (Fig. lo). Among the more primitive 
tribes the men wear aprons and a robe, the latter giving way 
to a cotton breechcloth among the Araucans. The footwear 
consists of a kind of skin boot with long trailing hair from 
which we get the name Patagonia (duck feet). This boot 
has an open toe so that the toe stirrup can be used. Yet the 
prevailing tendency of the area as a whole was to go bare- 
foot. 

As we go south in the area, the culture becomes more 
primitive until at last we reach the Fuegians, who are a 
seashore people. Still they have much in common with the 
horse-using tribes of the mainland and are often taken as 
the surviving remnant of the older population in the area. 
It is clear that in the period of horse culture the Araucan, 
Puelchean, Guaycuruan, and Calchaquian tribes w«re the 
most strongly developed. The former had a kind of con- 
federacy based upon the family group and had the dual 
peace and war chiefs observed in the area of higher culture; 
great value was placed upon oratory. They practised some 
agriculture and weaving. Shamanism was not well organ- 
ized, but each local group had at least one such official. Eye- 
brows and face hair were plucked out, but the lip plug of 
the Brazilian tribes was not worn. The Abipones, at least, 
were composed of social castes and had four gentile groups 

AMAZON AREA 251 

placed in the four directions, reminding us of North Ameri- 
can cultures. 

The Araucans were clearly intermediate to the Inca cen- 
ter, as indicated by the large use of chicha, tendency toward 
agriculture, the domestication of sheep and the wearing of 
wool in later times, great developments of animal and human 
sacrifices with features closely paralleling those of the north. 

The Fuegians and other stocks skirting the western and 
southern coast were not horse Indians, but developed the 
use of canoes; built fires in them upon clay hearths; went 
almost nude even in winter; lean-to shelters; bola not 
used but the bow and spear; water-tight baskets; iron 
pyrites used for fire-making ; dogs trained for hunting and 
even to drive fish by swimming. Some early accounts credit 
the Chonoans with weaving blankets from dog hair, remind- 
ing us of the Salish stock of the northern continent. 

When we turn to the north and east, we again meet the 
complex condition of the Bolivian highlands, for the Chaco 
is continuous with it. Here is the home of many stocks and 
representatives of others widely distributed." In the main, 
the culture of these people is intermediate to that of the great 
Brazilian area, since we find the lip plug now and then, urn 
burial, the short wooden club, dug-out canoe, etc. The Char- 
rua cut off fingers when in mourning, as is done in some 
parts of North America. 

14. A mason Area. Our discussion so far has disposed of 
all the continent except the Amazon-Orinoco drainage. We 
see from a map that this drainage comprises fully half the 
continent. Turning, to the linguistic map (Fig. 67), we 
find it dominated by four stocks : Arawak and Carib in the 
northwest, Tupi and Tapuya in the southeast. Of these, 
the former pair is by far the most widely distributed, occu- 
pying the whole of the Antilles, the greater part of Vene- 
zuela, Guiana, and northern Brazil. It is truly curious how 
the numerous small stocks of the continent cluster around 

252 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

the very headwaters of the Orinoco and Amazon, as if some 
of the powerful peoples of the interior had invaded the area 
from without, sweeping up the rivers and driving all before 
them. 

At first glance, the four main stocks seem to be promiscu- 
ously scattered over the area, but if we refer to a relief map 
we may note that their distribution is coincident with eleva- 
tion. The Arawak are a lowland people, while the Carib 
hold to the higher lands, almost without exception. On the 
other hand, the Tapuya stick close to the high tablelands of 
Brazil, while the Tupi skirt the coast and up into the lower 
Amazon. Therefore, we can with a fair degree of confi- 
dence lay down the geographical lines along which the ex- 
pansion of these stocks took place, though as to the direc- 
tions of movement we cannot be sure. Since the Arawak 
are most widely distributed over the Antilles and hold to 
very low lands on the continent where they travel by rivers, 
on general grounds it would seem likely that their center of 
dispersion was among the Islands. The Carib, on the other 
hand, are most intensely distributed as an inland people, 
from which it has been inferred that such of them as took 
to the sea borrowed this trait from their Arawak neighbors. 

Good studies of the Amazon tribes are rare, but it so 
happens that the few best are so distributed as to give us 
the probable range of traits throughout. For the Japura 
River, or the northwestern section of the area, we have 
Whiff en's " account of the Witto and Boro, whose culture, 
together with that of their immediate neighbors, may be 
characterized as follows: live by hunting, fishing and agri- 
culture ; raise manioc, tobacco and coca, and to a much les» 
extent maize, yams, pumpkins, peppers, sugar-cane, etc. ; 
fields cleared by fire and dug up by digging-stick, no hoe; 
no tame animals, even dogs rare; all animal life eaten, the 
monkey being the most nearly staple; honey prized, some 
tame bees; cassava bread and the "pepper pot," the chief 

AMAZON AREA 

Fig. &>. DiftrOiitnoa d/ PottfU in Saulh Amtnea. Ze». ifA I 

254 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

support ; manioc squeezed by rolling in a mat ; coca chewed 
and mimora seeds snuffed; tobacco used for ceremonial 
drink only; curare and other poisons; blowgim, throwing 
spear, bows, paddle clubs ; fish caught by poison, also with 
hooks, nets, traps and a tri-dent spear; clay eaten; canni- 
bals, eat prisoners ; drum signalling ; drums in pairs, male 
and female, phallic decorations; palm fiber rolled on thigh 
and hammocks made; pottery; basketry; no metal, little 
stone, tools of wood; dug-out canoes, sprung into shape 
when hot from burning out ; trees felled by holes and wedg- 
ing; large wooden mortars for coca, tobacco and maize^ 
habitations and fields shifted often; whole community in 
one house, large and square, four posts inside, thatched, no 
smoke hole; clearing around house, but all concealed in 
jungle by maze-like path; no clothing except bark breech- 
cloth for men ; combs of palm splints for women ; human 
tooth necklaces ; ornamental ligatures, nose pins, leg rattles, 
elaborate body paint; palaver with a kind of black drink 
of tobacco for all important undertakings of war or peace; 
the couvade; women not permitted to join in serious cere- 
monies and not to see boys' initiations, not allowed to join 
a cannibal feast; personal names not spoken, even true 
names of mythical characters are whispered; shamanism 
(paye) important, tricks crude except "voice-throwing," 
sucking for disease, but detecting evil spirits the chief func- 
tion of a shaman ; two serious harvest ceremonies, manioc 
and pineapple ; boys cruelly whipped in puberty ceremonies ; 
ordeals of stinging ants ; many social dances ; formal recital 
of one's grievances and a kind of riddle dance; pan pipe, 
flute, Castanet, drum, gourd rattle; each house group ex- 
ogamous, paternal descent; monogamy, each house has a 
chief, all adult males the council; many tales resembling 
European folklore and many animal tales reminding one of 
African lore; sun and moon venerated ; grave burial. 
In Guiana " we find most of these same traits, but what 

AMAZON AREA 555 

seems to be a higher ctilture, since here we have cotton cul- 
tivated and spun and the typical cassava squeezer. The 
Arawak peoples also have a clan organization, maternal de- 
scent. "None of the Guiana peoples use coca, but smoke 
tobacco, cigar fashion; the signal drum is absent The 
house is similar in form but smaller, the tendency being to 
form villages; yet as we go in from the coast the transi- 
tion to the large community house is rapid. 

On the south of the Amazon we find the higher culture 
among the Tupi of the Brazilian coast. The new traits are: 
smoking tobacco in stone pipes, palisaded villages, fine stone 
tools, urn burial; but otherwise the culture compares con- 
cisely with that of the Arawak and Carib of Guiana. A few 
small stocks have similar culture, but on the interior pla- 
teaus were the Tapuya (the Botocudo, etc.), who stand 
somewhat apart from their neighbors." All reports con- 
sidered, these tribes are of low culture and notorious canni- 
bals. They were non-agricultural, did not work stone and 
made little pretense of weaving. These negative traits and 
a few positive ones tend to group these people with the 
Patagonians. If it is true that the Tupi tribes pushed out 
from the interior and dispossessed the Tapuya, we may con- 
sider the earlier existence of a Brazilian extension to the 
great hunting areas in Argentina and Patagonia. This is 
made probable on geographical grounds as reference to the 
forestry map will suggest. Anyway, it is clear that by cul- 
ture the Tupi belong with the tribes of the Amazon, while 
the Tapuya belong elsewhere. With the latter eliminated, 
we have great uniformity of culture throughout. Yet the 
Tapuya share certain traits with the South Amazons, par- 
ticularly the large lip plug and, as may be expected, a num- 
ber of their neighbors in the Matto Grosso show simpler 
forms of Amazon culture. 

Turning again to the Amazon area, including the Tupi, 
we have remarkable uniformity in the following from north 

256 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

to south and east to west : agriculture ; canoes ; hammocks ; 
pottery; blowgun; a thatched post-supported house with 
gable; sword clubs; leg and arm binding; certain types of 
feather-work ; human bone flutes ; calabash rattles ; use of 
honey and wax ; cannibalism ; certain kinds of dance masks; 
couvade; ceremonial whipping of boys, and women barred 
from ceremonials. This is truly a formidable list. There 
are a few traits with partial distribution ; thus, on the south 
side of the Amazon we frequently find the lip plug in con- 
trast to the north, though it has a close analogy in Guiana. 
Again, on the south, urn burial is frequent, on the north, 
grave burial. Coca chewing and tobacco drinking are found 
in the west, tobacco smoking in the east, pipes in Brazil, and 
cigars in Guiana. Also, in eastern Brazil we have the pellet 
bow and the palisaded village. These, however, do not 
negate the unity of Amazon culture. 

Consistent with the wide distribution of these traits is the 
fact that we have in reality an area of canoe culture. Con- 
stant river travel made diffusion easy and sufficiently ac- 
counts for the wide range of certain stocks, for the low Ama- 
zon Basin is a dense tropical forest through which the rivers 
are the only roads open to man. Consequently, we have a 
well-developed canoe complex. Temporary canoes are 
formed by scraping out the soft interior of a palm trunk 
and expanding the sides by a brace, and true bark boats are 
sometimes made by stripping the bark from a large tree, 
precisely as the Iroquois and some other North American 
tribes do, in contrast to the fine birch-covered canoe of their 
Algonkin neighbors. But the real boat is the wooden dug- 
out. As to the absolute universality of the canoe in the 
Amazon Basin, there is some difference of opinion, but 
since it is found wherever we have good data, we may expect 
that it is a common trait of all. 

While more data will certainly bring out greater tribal 
differences, yet it appears that an unusual degree of uni- 

CULTURE CENTERS 257 

formity is found from the mouth of the Orinoco down 
through the entire Amazon basin. As we have noted, the 
only lines of movement are the rivers, and since these are 
gathered into one great system, we may expect culture traits 
to travel far. Colonel Church'^ has shown how certain 
stocks have moved westward in the open country along the 
southern rim, detached groups starting down the tributaries 
of the Amazon here and there, to be dispersed far and wide 
over its great expanse. One can scarcely escape the con- 
viction that the peopling of the interior was relatively late 
in consequence of which the culture at the center is quite 
like that upon the edges of the basin. On the other hand, 
the apparent remarkable conservatism of the natives which 
has preserved this culture in spite of two hundred years of 
contact with civilization, may be due to this culture being 
the only one that can successfully cope with the forests.** 

15. The Antilles. Finally, we have the Antillean insular 
area, properly discussed here because it has more affinities 
with the Amazon area than with any other. Unfortunately, 
the native life of the more important islands was so com- 
pletely stamped out by the Spanish conquerors that a com- 
prehensive view of native culture is impossible. Yet, from 
the narratives of the period, some significant data can be 
gleaned." So far as we know the pre-Columbian population 
was first pure Arawak, but later over-run by Carib. This at 
once connects the island culture with the canoe culture of the 
Amazon-Orinoco drainage. Among the distinctive traits 
are manioc culture, raising of cotton, use of the hammock, 
tobacco taken as snufT and inhalation, ceremonial emetics, 
fish poisons, cigars instead of pipes, all of which remind one 
of the Amazon area. 

CULTURE CENTERS 

Such a resume as we have just made shows how the cul- 
tures of the various social units grade into each other. This 

258 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

inter-gradation has often been cited as an insurmountable 
obstacle to classification, but it is not necessarily so, for we 
see that this condition arises from the existence of cul- 
ture centers, from which culture influences seem to radiate. 
While it is true that a culture area as marked off on the 
map is in the main an arbitrary division, it has within its 
borders a culture center whose geographical position is co- 
incident with the habitats of the most typical tribes. Between 
two contiguous" culture centers will be found many other 
social units with intermediate cultures. These relations are 
so consistent that one can almost predict the culture of a 
given unit when its geographical position with respect to 
the established centers is known. 

Hence, the culture areas we have designated serve to 
differentiate culture centers. This is why we have used 
straight and angular boundaries for our maps instead of 
more definite curved contours. These boundaries, in fact, 
are merely diagrammatic, serving to indicate the loci of 
the points where culture stands half way between that of 
the contiguous centers. While it may be difficult to em- 
pirically locate these points, our analysis of the several areas 
demonstrates the correctness of the interpretation and makes 
the approximate location of such points practical. Yet the 
important thing is not the precise location of these boun- 
daries, but the determination of the centers by analytic 
methods. 

It will be recalled that we have taken a new point of 
regard for this chapter, for whereas, in the others we singled 
out culture-trait complexes and sought their distributions, 
we now isolate social units in order to compare their indi- 
vidual cultures as wholes. What precedes is merely intro- 
ductory to what is to follow. Already our experience with 
the social group as a unit in the social complex, leads us to 
suspect that the mere social unit has little distinctive value 
as a culture unit. Thus, if we turn to one of thes^ centers, 

CULTURE CENTERS 

259 

seiect the social unit appearing to have the most typical 
culture, and then move outward, we find the culture changes 
from one social unit to the next, not abrupt, but gradual 
or transitional. 

These facts suggest that progress with our problem will 
be accelerated if we recognize that the social units are one 
kind of phenomena and culture complexes another. We 
are no doubt somewhat confused because our own culture 
is largely coincident with political grouping and nationalism, 
and so is characterized by territorial uniformity. This uni- 
formity is due to national standardizations of culture. If 
we look at the natives of the New World as a whole, it 
appears that only when a close political organization de- 
velops, as among the Maya, Nahua and Inca, do we find a 
tendency toward territorial uniformity in culture. It thus 
appears that in their original states, culture and political 
organization are independent phenomena, but that when 
the latter reaches a certain status, it seizes upon culture and 
standardizes it. On the other hand, it is by no means clear 
what causes led to the curious gradations of culture in 
regions occupied by many small political units. Standardi- 
zation IS a deliberate conscious process, but we may suspect 
that the causes underlying gradation lie outside of con- 
sciously directed activities. 

1. Teit, 1900. I; 1909. I; 1906. I. 

2. Spinden, 1908. I. 

3. Lowie, 1909. I. 

4. Lewis, 1906. I. 

5. Kroeber, 1904. I; 1920. I. 

6. Boas, 1906. I; Krause, 1885. I. 

7. Boas, 1907. I. 

8. Dall, 1877. I. 

9. Solberg, 1907. I. 

10. Boas, 1907. I. 

11. Stefansson, 1914. I. 

12. Pike, 1892. I, chapter 4; 
Grant, 1902. I. 

13. Morice, 1890. I; 1895. I; 
1906. I. 

14. Hearne, 1795. I. 

15. Mackenzie, A., 1902. I. 

16. Hearne, 1795. I. 

17. Jones, W., 1906. I; Skinner, 

1913. I; 1915. I; HoflFman, 
1897. I. 

18. Morgan, 1904. I. 

19. MacCauley, 1887. I. 

20. Swanton, 191 1. I; Speck, 
1909. I; Mooney, 1900. I. 

21. Holmes, 1886. I. 

26o 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

22, Goddard, 1913. I; Hough, 32. Church, 1912. I, p. 30a 
191 5. I. 33. Nordenskiold, 1918. I. 

34. Whiffcn, 1915. I. 

35. Im Thurn, 1883. I; Joyce, 
1916. I. 

2jS. Maximilian, 1820. I; Von den 

Steinen, 1897. I* 
Z7. Church, 1912. I. 

38. Bowman, 191 6. I. 

39. Fcwkcs, 1902. L 

23. Kroeber, 1917. I. 

24. Hough, 1915. I. 

25. Russell, 1908. I. 

26. Tozzcr, 1907. I. 

27. Joyce, 1914. I ; Spinden, 191 7. 1. 

28. Bandelier, 1878. I; 1879. I. 

29. Joyce, 1912. I. 

30. Markham, 1910. I. 

31. Dobrizhoffer, 1822. I, 

CHAPTER XV 

ARCHJEOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION 

I IT museums, the usual practice is to class as archaeological 
specimens all objects not definitely associated with an his- 
toric tribe. The somewhat arbitrary nature of this group- 
ing is obvious, but it is justifiable, for, in the main, these 
objects belong to an earlier time stratum than those that 
can be definitely assigned to living peoples. These speci- 
mens and their distributions constitute a large part of the 
data for one division of our subject and have been subjected 
to precisely the same kind of classification as have the culture 
traits of the historic tribes. Even a distribution map has 
been developed by Holmes,^ but the one we give here was 
first used in 19 12 as a hall label for the American Museum 
of Natural History. It differs somewhat from the Holmes 
map, though, in the main, the boundaries to the areas are 
the same. 

NORTH AMERICA 

I. The North Atlantic Area. This area includes all of 
New England and the Maritime Provinces of Canada with 
an indefinite inland border to the north and west, and south 
to the Delaware River. Its general archaeological char- 
acteristics are: extensive shell deposits on the coast; the 
dead interred in a flexed position and usually without accom- 
panying objects ; the absence of mounds and similar earth- 
works; crude pottery, with pointed bottoms (Fig. 25) and 
rudely stamped decorations; the grooved ax and long 

cylindrical stone pestle ; extensive steatite quarries and ves- 

261 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

d 

jt^A" ^«"^^. / ■^ 

'y^t^^k 

.(Sw;" 

^%h 

V\T^ J^ 

w 

Fig. 61. Arthaolagieal Anar 

NORTH AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY 263 

sels of the same material; and, finally, great numbers of 
rock-shelters. 

A detailed view of the area, however, reveals at least 
two subdivisions : a southern including the territory from 
the Delaware River to the Maine-New Hampshire boundary, 
and a northern from that point onward to Newfoundland.* 

Hiilii 

''^^-'^--i^^ 

Fie ^ f'yt" if Statu ImpltmttUt from tht North AtUuitte Am 
tht grontd ST tht rounded ctlt Iht ptumnul tin lougt llu bajomt 
thaftd pa nt and Iht lonf ptitlt 

The typical culture lies in the southern sub-area, center- 
ing in New Jersey. In this area village sites with cache 
pits for storage are numerous and often enclosed by traces 
of small defensive works. Shell-heaps are small and rela- 
tively barren of specimens. Objects made of stone are 
abundant and varied, and show good workmanship; the 
forms include the grooved ax, rounded celt, pestles, and 
problematical forms,* as banner stones, gorgets, etc. One 
noteworthy object is the carved stone human head, found 

264 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

in New Jersey. All these traits are found with much less 
intensity east of the Hudson where the plummet, gouge and 
adze appear. In the Hudson Valley proper we find some in- 
trusive Iroquoian pottery forms. Finally, we have in this 
region a large number of rock-shelters. 

The northern half of the area, including Maine, Gaspe, 
and the Maritime Provinces differs from the preceding in 
the relative scarcity of village sites and in the fact that 
when such sites are found they lack cache pits and are with- 
out defensive works, particularly east of the Penobscot. 
Shell-heaps are, on the contrary, large and numerous, con- 
taining a larger proportion of objects than those of the 
southern area, their numbers increasing as we go north and 
east. The same ratio holds for objects found in graves. 
Pottery, too, shows a change in form as we go eastward, 
the bottom rounded and with outcurved lip, while stamped 
designs increase. The grooved ax, pestle, and problematical 
forms are replaced by the angular celt, gouge and plummet 
A somewhat divergent group of finds are those with the so- 
called "red-paint** burials,* confined to the lower Penobscot 
Valley. Here stone objects only (celts, gouges, adzes and 
bayonet-shaped slate points) and masses of red ocher are 
found with certain burials. 

In addition to these geographical segregations of arti- 
facts, some advance has been made in the chronological 
analysis of the area. Thus, in the northern part, the objects 
found in shell-heaps seem to differ from those found in 
certain types of graves, particularly the "red-paint** burials 
just noted, suggesting that we have here the remains of at 
least two cultures, though their time relations remain in 
doubt. Likewise, the claim has been made that the rock- 
shelters of the south show some evidences of stratification 
in that the lower levels contained no pottery.' This con- 
clusion is, however, far from final. Lastly, mention should 
be made of certain evidences of an earlier culture in New 

NORTH AMERICAN ARCHiEOLOGY 265 

Jersey.* Yet, it must be admitted that these are little more 
than hints of possible sequence of cultures and that, on the 
whole, the archaeological artifacts so far brought to light 
stand as the exponents of one culture, though spanning a 
considerable time interval. 

2. South Atlantic Area. As indicated on the map, this 
area includes the South Atlantic coast plane and Florida. 
Shell-heaps are even more abundant than in the North At- 
lantic area and in Florida attain astonishing proportions. 
Large domiciliary mounds and low burial mounds are also 
numerous along the coast and rivers, particularly the St. 
Johns in Florida. The area, as a whole, may be divided 
into three districts: Georgia and northward, west Florida 
on the mainland, and peninsular Florida; yet, the culture 
center seems to be in coastal and central Georgia. Several 
distinct forms of burial have been noted, extended (the 
body at full length, as is our custom), flexed (legs drawn 
up against the body), bone burial (body exposed until flesh 
decays, when bones are interred), and cremation. Urn 
burial is also frequent here, a trait widely distributed in 
South America. Again, whereas in the North Atlantic area 
objects of any kind are seldom found in graves, they are 
here numerous, particularly small pottery figures. Some 
attempts to work gold and copper were made. In contrast 
to the preceding area, very few grooved axes occur, as is 
the case in the Antilles to the south, and the celt forms of 
the area are also said to suggest those of these islands. 
Occasionally, a kind of perforated ax is found somewhat 
similar to those of South America. Stone-tempered pot- 
tery is abundant, but limited in type, and though without 
color decoration is ornately treated with stamped and incised 
designs. Clay pipes are of angular trumpet shapes with 
bowls expanded into human or animal heads. In contrast 
to the North Atlantic area we find many objects made of 
shell, in particular a trimmed and perforated conch sug- 

266 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

gesting its use as a hoe. Among other features are finely 
carved stone bowls and curious stone plates, or disks/ 

The remains from west Florida stand somewhat apart 
from the typical culture, as outlined above. Here crema- 
tion is rare, but with the urn burial, sometimes occurs. 
Large deposits of pots are often found with the burials, 
the forms in some cases suggesting a distinct type of mcMtu- 
ary ware. In common with burials on the peninsula, the 
accompanying pots were almost invariably perforated 
through the bottom, or "killed." But in addition to this 
mortuary pottery there is great variety of ornamental and 
useful vessels. The forms suggest both those of Area 4 and 
the types found in Georgia (Figs. 23 and 24). Tobacco 
pipes are heavy and angular. All these differences are, 
however, in keeping with the marginal culture position of 
west Florida. 

The peninsula also presents marginal peculiarities. Its 
distinctions lie in the enormous shell-heaps and a highly 
developed type of ready-made mortuary pottery, bizarre in 
form, with the perforation made previous to baking; also 
mortuary pottery arrow points. Again, there are sugges- 
tions of cannibalism on the St. Johns and of pile-villages 
in the south, features prominent on the adjacent coast of 
South America. 

3. The Iroquoian Area. Adjacent to, and in a sense 
between, the North and South Atlantic areas, is an inland 
elevated region centering in New York and Pennsylvania 
This was the range of tribes speaking Iroquoian languages 
and it is from the immediate ancestors of these tribes that 
by far the greater part of our museum collections come. 

Iroquoian villages were characterized by defensive walls 
of circumvallation, their burials by large ossuaries, and 
their stone-work by lack of variety. A peculiar celt and 
adze of rectangular cross-section are found to the exclusicm 
of the grooved ax and gouge. In the southern half of the 

NORTH AMERICAN ARCHEOLOGY 267 

area a chipped celt is typical. The triangular arrow point is 
abundant and the long stone pestle inconspicuous. Yet the 
distinguishing feature of Iroquoian archaeology is a highly 
unique form of pottery (Fig. 25). It is well made, with 
globular body, constricted neck, and overhanging or flaring 
collar, bearing rectilinear incised decorations. The char- 
acteristic form prevails in the east and south of the area; in 

the western part the vessel is somewhat squat with short 
neck turned outward into a notched rim. The typical pot- 
tery pipe is trumpet-shaped, slightly bent, with the bowls 
representing miniature pots, animals, etc. Finally, note 
should be made of the richness and variety in objects made 
of bone and antler.' 

This older Iroquoian culture seems to overlie one (or 
more) of different form, now believed to be Algonquian.* 

268 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

This would appear to center to the southeast of Lake 
Ontario — perhaps only because that region is best known 
to us. It includes the grooved ax, gouge, long stone pestle, 
banner stones and other problematical forms, all having 
analogies elsewhere, more particularly in New England 
Separated from these, perhaps, but occurring in the same 
region are a series of slate objects — bayonet-shaped points, 
barbed points with notched tangs, etc. — presenting analogies 
to objects in the North Atlantic area and in particular to 
the "red-paint" culture of the Penobscot. 

4. The Mississippi-Ohio Area. Perhaps the most striking 
feature here is mound building. Although in the popular 
mind mounds are associated with the state of Ohio, they 
are very numerous on both sides of the Ohio River and on 
down the Mississippi, as shown by the distribution map of 
Thomas.*® Some of the most striking structures are the 
pyramidal Cahokia mound in Madison County, Illinois; 
Etowah mound, Forsyth County, Georgia; Grave Creek 
mound, Marshall County, West Virginia, the largest conical 
mound known; Fort Ancient and the Serpent mound of 
Ohio. Effigy mounds are rare, this type being characteristic 
of an adjoining area. The whole of the mound-building 
culture in the Ohio Valley had vanished before the period of 
discovery, but farther south there are historical and other 
evidences that it still survived.** 

Pottery is also distinctive. Here we find fine bottle- 
shaped vases and many life forms, including human figures. 
Color is used in decoration, especially in Arkansas. The 
center of the ceramic art may be roughly defined by a circle 
inscribed about Memphis, intersecting Nashville, Tennessee. 
We have already noted that other artifacts tended to center 
in this region, so that we have a true culture center here. 
As one goes north into Ohio, the pottery becomes cruder 
and color disappears. 

Of stone objects, we may note the fine discoidal stones 

NORTH AMERICAN ARCHEOLOGY 269 

south of the Ohio. Also very large stone pipes in animal and 
human forms. In the middle of the area the grooved ax is 
not uncommon and we find some very fine flaked objects. 
Shell objects are numerous; particularly striking are the 
engraved gorgets and the so-called hair pins. The margin 
of the Gulf Coast and over into Texas is one of simpler 
archaeological culture, though the absence of the grooved 
ax and some other forms suggests similarities to the South 
Atlantic area. 

To enumerate some of the unique objects indexing the 
cultural units of the whole area, we have : occasional trun- 
cated mounds; stone box-like graves; large effigy pipes; 
color decoration of pottery and skilful modeling of life 
forms, particularly the human head; numerous gorgets of 
shell and stone; reel-shaped copper ornaments; spool-like 
earplugs; large chipped blades variously designated as 
spades and hoes; unusually large caches of chipped blanks 
and occasional repousse copper plates. 

While the true center of the area lies, as just defined, the 
northern and southern extensions present some individu- 
alities. As noted at the outset, along the Ohio River, per- 
haps centering in Ohio, is a rich mound area, which has, 
perhaps, more earthworks to the square mile than any other 
part of the world. However, this prominence may be due 
to excessive zeal in exploration rather than actual superior- 
ity. Students of the subject usually recognize two varieties 
of mound culture here : that known as Hopewell, culminat- 
ing in the Scioto Valley ; and that known as Fort Ancient, 
centering in the Miami drainage. The latter seems to reach 
southward into Kentucky," and is, on the whole, more 
extended and less specialized than that of the Hopewell 
type, suggesting that what is recognized as Hopewell in- 
fluence is a northern sub-center of the area as a whole. Fur- 
ther, the distinctive traits of Hopewell culture are more like 
those at the center of the area in Tennessee than are those 

270 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

of Fort Ancient. While these types as thus identified arc 
minutely localized in the State of Ohio, they have been 
shown to have been contemporaneous and so no doubt de- 
velopments from the same influences. Again, there are indi- 
cations that the Fort Ancient variant extends westward 
across Indiana and Illinois, as the occasional finding of 
enclosed hilltops resembling Fort. Ancient, rarity of copper 
ornaments, etc. On the other hand, the Hopewell variant 
seems to stand out as highly individualized in art and the 
use of important materials such as copper, mica, shell, etc.** 

Some observers propose a third culture for Ohio, embrac- 
ing certain curious burials in gravel banks, seemingly inde- 
pendent of mound structures. This type of interment ex- 
tends westward into Indiana. However, no definite estimate 
of these observations can be made until closer studies of 
the area as a whole are available.** 

As remarked above, the southern portion of the area 
seems truly marginal to this and the South Atlantic area. 

5. The Great Lake Area. This is also a mound area and 
for that reason may be but a part of the preceding; yet, the 
well-developed copper industry south of Lake Superior and 
the specialized type of effigy mound in the same region is 
generally considered as sufficient warrant for the designa- 
tion of a separate archaeological area. Small mounds** 
occur in most parts and there is no reason for believing them 
historically independent of the whole mound trait extending 
from the Gulf Coast northward, but the aboriginal copper 
workings previously referred to give this outlying culture 
area a unique position. The most distinctive forms of cop- 
per objects found here are the socketed ax, or spud, which 
may be interpreted as a hafting adaptation to metal. Some 
of the copper arrow points are notched like those of stone, 
but others have a socket similar to the spud. A few copper 
axes duplicating the form of the grooved stone ax have 
been found here, and in the area to the south, but the usual 

NORTH AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY 271 

form of ax is a simple celt-like blade without grooves or 
socket. Knives are common. Ornamental objects are not 
so numerous as in the preceding area, particularly the fine 
repousse work of southern mounds. 

Peculiar features in Michigan are the "garden beds," 
ridged or furrowed tracts, the use of which is by no means 
obvious. Of stone objects, the most peculiar are the fluted 
ax, faceted celt, and problematic forms. The latter include 
banner stones, bird and saddle-shaped stones, etc., and ex- 
tend eastward into the northern half of the North Atlantic 
area. They are rarely found in graves and seldom in 
mounds, and for this reason have been regarded as older 
even than mound culture. Yet their distribution corresponds 
closely to the known Algonquian linguistic area and the 
Eastern Woodland culture area, a fact that must be con- 
sidered in estimating their chronological positions.** 
Another feature is the use of catlinite, a handsome red 
stone, for pipes, which though limited as to sources, yet 
found its way over the entire area. 

,The archaeology of the Missouri Valley is somewhat dif- 
ferentiated from the center in Wisconsin. Such remains as 
have come to light in Dakota are associated with the cul- 
tures of the historic tribes. Bone artifacts predominate, re- 
minding one of the great hunting area to the north. This 
analogy is further stimulated by the presence of certain 
parallel forms; for example, the knife made by inserting 
small stone blades into the side of a bone handle, suggest- 
ing Eskimo types. 

Farther south in Nebraska some recent excavations re* 
port evidences of older cultures whose people lived in rec- 
tangular pit-houses, a form so far unique in the area." 

6. The Plains. The present state of our knowledge indi- 
cates that the Plains is a barren area around whose border 
we find a fringe of artifacts common in the adjoining areas. 
Thus, the metate of Area 7 finds its way into this one, pot- 

2^2 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

tery of the Missouri type spreads somewhat on its eastern 
border, and the stone club and tubular pipe of 9 are also 
found in the west. Yet, there has been very little field ex- 
ploration in the heart of the area so that its vacuity may be 
more apparent than real. Such collections as have been 
made contain the grooved hammer, chipped scrapers, 
points, and the bone implements found among the historic 
tribes. 

Among the most striking features are the great quarries 
of quartzite in the valley of the Platte, Wyoming,*' where 
tracts many acres in extent show deep and extensive diggings 
for quartzite nodules. When found, these were broken into 
convenient blanks for transport, while the chips and re- 
jected pieces were left behind where they serve to mark 
the site. In addition to these localized works, we find scat- 
tered everywhere in the great central reaches of the area, 
circles and lines of boulders, with an occasional effigy in out- 
line. The small circles are assumed to mark tipi sites; 
but long lines of stones have been noted whose use is prob- 
lematical, though in Montana the historic Indians claim 
them as markers for buflfalo pounds. About the only other 
permanent evidences of man's work are the numerous pic- 
tographs pecked into the faces of rocks and ledges. Though 
not carefully studied, these seem to fall into two types, one 
of which is quite modern. Pottery is not found in the heart 
of the area, but stone vessels of original form are rather 
numerous. These are often crude, suggesting hollowed-out 
boulders, though some are dressed to the shape of an ^gg, 
while others are roughly pyramidal. All these data lead us 
to suspect that a more systematic survey of the true archaeo- 
logical center of the Plains will clearly define a distinct type 
of prehistoric culture. 

7. The Pueblo Area, In the states of Arizona and New 
Mexico centers the richest archaeological province north of 
old Mexico. For years ruthless relic hunters have overrun 

NORTH AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY 273 

it, turning over burial grounds and knocking down ruined 
walls in their search for marketable plunder, without ex- 
hausting the supply. Also a number of distinguished archae- 
ologists have spent the active years of their lives surveying 
groups of these remains, but notwithstanding all this, whole 
regions are still unknown. Thus, though some progress has 
been made in the cultural analysis of the area, the greater 
part of the task remains unraveled. 

If we consider first the general geography of the country, 
the mere topography seems to segregate the ruins into four 
large groups: those of the Rio Grande drainage, the San 
Juan, the Little Colorado, and the Gila. These four river 
valleys contain by far the greater part of the known sites. 
By using these gross distinctions as the points of departure, 
we can the more readily summarize the present state of the 
subject. 

The two distinguishing archaeological characters here are 
architecture and ceramics. As more attention has been 
given the latter, we may consider it at once. In the 
first place, there is a kind of glazed decoration which char- 
acterizes the sites of the Rio Grande country, but which ex- 
tends westward into that of the Little Colorado. As this is 
territory occupied by the historic Pueblo peoples, a connec- 
tion between the two has been assumed and, in fact, recently 
proven.*® 

Another easily distinguishable type of pottery is that fin- 
ished in white and decorated in black. This black-on-white 
ware has for long been considered one of the oldest and 
fundamental Pueblo types, chiefly because it is found in 
almost all parts of the area. Yet, its distribution does not 
equal that of corrugated ware, that type in which the origi- 
nal coils of clay can be seen, which in the Rio Grande Val- 
ley, at least, has as good claim to antiquity as the black-on- 
white. In addition, a number of more recent and local 
types of pottery have been defined,*" but the preceding are 

274 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

sufficient to show that we can safely asstime the fundamental 
unity of the original Pueblo cultures. 

Turning to architecture we note that the surviving Pueblo 
structures are merely accumulations of one-room houses and 
that those now occupied in the Rio Grande Valley do not 
differ in essentials from those in ruins. Hence, it is clear 
that a large portion of these ruined houses belong to the 
antecedent culture of the historic Pueblo natives, whose 
traits have been outlined in the preceding chapter. The cen- 
ter of dispersion for this type seems to have been in the Rio 
Grande Valley, from which it spread outward in all direc- 
tions. To the north and west, across the headwaters of the 
Rio Grande and over into the San Juan country, we have 
what is known as the cliff-dweller type of house. Just what 
may be the specific relations of these to the central type can- 
not be determined from the data at hand, but since the basic 
house plan seems to be of the Pueblo type, we may safely 
assume a close historical connection. The essentials of this 
plan are a bracket-like enclosure of articulated rooms in 
the open court of which is a kiva, or ceremonial chamber. In 
fact, the presence of this kiva alone, because of its unique 
form and functions, would be sufficient ground for assum- 
ing such a connection. 

In the Little Colorado country and down the Rio Verde 
toward its junction with the Gila, we find again the three 
kinds of houses noted in the preceding localities; the cave- 
like dwelling in the rock, the true cliff house, and the larger 
Pueblo pile of the open country. The remainder of the Gila 
is not so well known but seems to present some differences, 
both in architecture and ceramics. The best-known ruin is 
that of Casas Grandes, whose groundplan reminds us of 
southern Mexico rather than the Rio Grande. 

8. California. While from the artifacts in collections this 
area can be separated into three more or less distinct parts, 
there is still a great deal in common.*^ One of the most 

NORTH AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY 275 

numerous artifacts, and therefore the best index of Cali- 
fornia archaeology, is the stone mortar, found throughout 
the length and breadth of the state, in the bottoms and tops 
of shell deposits and apparently in the auriferous gravels. 
Another equally distributed, but apparently less ancient arti- 
fact, is the tubular stone pipe. Bone awls and a number of 
other less striking artifacts could be added to this list. 

The recognized subdivisions of the area are the south- 
western, central and northwestern portions of the state. The 
former, centering in the Santa Barbara Islands, is the home 
of the most unique artifacts. These are finely wrought 
bowls, boat-shaped vessels, baking slabs, and many proble- 
matic forms, all of steatite; great varieties of shell beads 
and pendants, also inlay shell-work in asphaltum ; and fine 
examples of flaked edge tools. Among the very unique 
objects are numerous steatite carvings of the killer whale or 
at least a fish with an erect fin ; perforated ring-like stones 
reminding one of African digging-stick weights, and curious 
shell hooks very much like those from the Pacific Islands. 

In northwestern California is a relatively small area 
which, though less distinctive, still presents unique features. 
Among these are curious curved stone adze handles, a stone 
hammer with broad base and flanged head, pestles with 
pointed handles, and flanges at their bases, and perforated 
net sinkers. 

The artifacts from the great central area are far less 
unique, but still we find here a curious plummet stone, very 
rarely, if at all, met with in the north and the south. Some 
slight evidences of intrusion from the Southwestern area 
are noted, particularly in inlay work. While the distribu- 
tion of the typical artifacts is quite uniform, there is the 
suggestion of local divergence about the city of Stockton 
where small mounds have yielded a few unusual objects. 
Shell mounds are numerous on the coast, particularly around 
San Francisco Bay. So far as these have been investigated, 

276 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

they show essentially the same culture from top to bottom, 
though improvements in form and finish are in evidence." 
Toward the southeast we meet with some intrusive traits 
from Area 7, as pottery and the metate, almost entirely con- 
fined to the Shoshonean-speaking peoples. 

In general, the most striking feature of California cul- 
ture is its unity, both geographically and chronologically. 
Rather more evidences of antiquity have come to hand for 
this area than elsewhere, as we shall see later. 

9. The Columbia Basin. This area comprises the greater 
part of the Columbia drainage, and a part of the Frazer 
Valley. Its archaeology has been investigated in type locali- 
ties by Harlan I. Smith,** who finds a fairly uniform cul- 
ture throughout, characterized by the prevalence of chipped 
points and the rarity of those of ground stone; bone and 
antler, digging-stick handles; bone tubes; arrow-shaft 
smoothers; hand hammers; pestles; summer lodge circles 
of stones ; and semi-subterranean house pits. Yet over and 
above this similarity, two centers can be differentiated, one 
in the heart of British Columbia, the range of the Thompson 
Indians, and the other along the Columbia between the Wil- 
lamette and the Snake rivers. The latter seems to be the 
seat of the most highly developed culture characterized by 
several unique artifacts, the so-called ape-head stone carv- 
ings, weight stones with suspension hoops, carved clubs, etc. 
Lewis ** suggests that this exuberance of carving in stone is 
due to the lack of suitable wood, since further down the 
river and along the coast, where wood is available, we find 
carving. 

The Thompson country in British Columbia is not so 
unique but it is differentiated by the use of nephrite, some- 
times called jade, a special form of stone scraper, etc. 

Between these two centers, particularly in the Yakima 
Valley, Washington, is found a less intense culture having 
some of the peculiarities of the two flanking centers. 

NORTH AMERICAN ARCHEOLOGY 277 

10. North Pacific Coast Area. Very little is known of 
the archaeology here, except in the vicinity of Puget Sound, 
where the investigations of Smith** reveal an early his- 
torical connection with Area 9. As this locality is truly 
marginal to the area, we assume that the true center lies 
northward, since we find there some evidences of a culture 
directly antecedent to that of the historic tribes. 

11. The Arctic Area. The only noteworthy archaeo- 
logical work in this area was by Dall ** and Jochelson in the 
Aleutians, Solberg*^ in Greenland, and Stefansson" at 
Point Barrow and Franklin Bay. Though relic-bearing de- 
posits of considerable depth have been reported by these ex- 
plorers, their great antiquity has not been established; and 
while some changes in culture have been noted, these are, in 
the main, but variants of the historic Eskimo culture. A 
description of the artifacts is, therefore, unnecessary. 

12. The Canadian Area, By the mere process of elimi- 
nation we have left the whole interior of Canada. Prac- 
tically no archaeological work has been done here except in 
the southern border, where, as may be anticipated, the cul- 
tures are marginal to those of the adjoining areas. The re- 
ports of missionaries and explorers lead us to suspect that 
it is the weakest archaeological area on the continent. 

13. Northern Mexico, In turning to the southern ex- 
tension of the continent, we approach a difficult task. The 
problem is not only complex, but further complicated by 
the lack of definite knowledge. We have already sketched 
the cultures found here by the Spanish invaders, but an 
empirical grouping of the archaeological artifacts gathered 
from this general region introduces an unknown chrono- 
logical factor, which may give quite a different result from 
our previous grouping by historical data. Holmes" pro- 
poses five archaeological areas which we designate as fol- 
lows : Northern Mexico, Central Mexico, State of Oaxaca, 
Yucatan, and Panama. Northern Mexico is the area of 

1 

27& THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

which we know least, so that its demarcation is rather an 
expression of ignorance than otherwise. The best-known 
site is Casas Grandes, which has striking similarities to the 
Pueblo culture north of the Rio Grande, suggesting that 
ultimately we may find this to be an intermediate area. 

14. Central Mexico. This was the seat of Nahua, or 
Aztec culture, and has been sufficiently characterized in the 
preceding cliapter and in the section dealing with archi- 
tecture. 

15. State of Oaxaca, The most distinctive ruins in this 
area are those at Mitla, supposed to have been the center 
of Zapotec culture. While the roofs of these buildingfs were 
of the flat beam type characteristic of Areas 19, 13 and 7, 
the stucco mosaics are of the Maya type, or Area 16. Thus 
the intermediate position of this trait is clear. On the other 
hand, Mitla takes the lead in stone masonry and, in fact, rises 
almost to the level of Peru. Of particular interest is the 
discovery of the original quarries, with the half-cut blocks, 
revealing all the essential details of the process. All this 
stone cutting was with stone tools, as was the case in Area 
16. A unique architectural feature is a cross-shaped 
tomb.*® The pottery is of good quality, but frequently un- 
painted. So far, very little metal work has been found 
here. Of a somewhat novel interest are several striking 
parallels to Peruvian traits." 

16. Yucatan. This area covers the range of Ma)ra cul- 
ture whose characteristics have been outlined in the pre- 
ceding chapter and under the head of architecture. The 
most impressive archaeological remains are the great ruined 
cities, the best-known of which are shown on the accom- 
panying map. The carved monuments, or stelae, bear hiero- 
glyphic inscriptions, many of which are dated. This char- 
acteristic makes them by far the most important antiquities 
in the New World, since it is from these alone that we get 
our safest idea of time perspective." 

NORTH AMERICAN ARCHJEOLOGY 279 

17. Panama. In the classification of historic cultures, we 
placed this geographical section with Colombia, but archaeol- 
ogists usually regard it as distinct. Yet no one attempts to 
deny the resemblance of its artifacts to those from the 
Andean region. The individuality of the area appears in 
pottery and gold work. In fact, this is the only part of the 
northern continent which to any degree approaches the An- 
dean level in metal work. Gold was cast, hammered and 
alloyed with copper in a bewildering variety of forms.** 
Objects of copper only are rare, and true examples of 
bronze unknown. As in the Andean region, gold objects 
were placed with the dead, and we may infer that they had 
the same religious sacrificial functions as in Colombia. 

Another unique group of objects are the ornate stone 
metates with legs, often appearing as life-like representa- 
tions of jaguars. Stone tools and ornaments of excellent 
finish abound, particularly highly carved jadeite celts.** 

The pottery is of the tripod decorated forms noted under 
ceramics. One unique feature is that many of these legs 
are hollow and contain a ball, thus suggesting bells. As 
golden bells made on the same principle are also numerous, 
this bell concept becomes a prominent trait. Perhaps closely 
associated with it are the numerous pottery whistles. 

18. The Antilles, The leading problem in Antillean 
archaeology will always be the continental affiliations of this 
insular culture. The available data are meager enough but 
still permit of some generalizations. According to Fewkes ** 
the culture center of the area was Porto Rico and Haiti, 
which is also the approximate geographical center. The 
culture traits of the historic tribes have been outlined in the 
preceding chapter, where we saw that this was also the 
approximate center of culture when Columbus arrived upon 
the scene. 

One of the most common objects in collections from the 
islands is a petal-shaped celt and its distribution is an index 

28o 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Fig. 64. Ancient Maya Cities, Morley, 1915- I 

SOUTH AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY 281 

of the general culture distribution, for it is most abundant 
at the center designated above and relatively less frequent 
in the Bahamas and the Lesser Antilles. In the latter, it 
gives way to an ax with lateral notches and sometimes side 
grooves. Another trait of general distribution is found in 
a type of pictograph, closely resembling those of the South 
American mainland, both in essential style and in juxta- 
position to waterfalls and water courses. Likewise, the 
known pottery of the whole insular area is similar. 

Of special archaeological features, Porto Rico offers a 
fine series in her mysterious stone collars, numerous three- 
pointed stone figures, elbow stones, and carved celts. Thus, 
in the main, we are justified in designating the Antilles as 
a distinct archaeological area, belonging rather to South 
America than to the northern continent. 

SOUTH AMERICA 

No one has attempted a close classification of South Am- 
erican archaeology but certain suggestions have been made." 
We have prepared a map upon which are located the areas 
indicated by our present knowledge. There are six of these : 
Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Chile, Atlantic Highlands, and 
Patagonia. The interior of the tropical forest is a blank, 
for if it has any archaeology, its discovery is for the future. 

19. Colombia. In Colombia four culture centers have 
been recognized. In the north one centers about Antioquia, 
the home of the Tamahi and Nutabi peoples; the next to 
the south about Cartago (the Quimbaya) ; the third at 
Popayan (the Coconuco) ; and lastly, in the extreme south, 
the seat of the Chibcha empire. Though at the time of the 
conquest the latter was the center of the highest political 
development, the leading culture was formerly, at least, at 
Cartago. 

No ruins of buildings comparable to those of the south 
have been noted. Even the mound development is feeble. 

282 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

However, there is one unique locality about San Augustine 
where remarkable monolithic statues have been found and 
also some mound structures. Metal work was praiseworthy, 
especially at Cartago. Skilful casting by the cire perdue 
method has been noted, and good examples of soldering, 
plating, and even gilding have been collected. Different 
colored alloys were produced with gold, silver, and copper. 

Cartago was also the center of pottery development, but 
on the whole, Colombia pottery is inferior. Some painted 
decorations are in geometric patterns, but bold incised de- 
signs are more frequent One striking feature is the 
tendency toward effigy vessels and vases bearing frogs, 
monkeys, etc., in relief, peeping over the brims. Spindle 
whorls of pottery, highly engraved, are frequent, but quite 
distinctive are the cylindrical pottery stamps for printing 
cloth and body painting. This may be considered as an 
independent invention of roller printing. 

Emerald mines were worked. Colombian collections con- 
tain numbers of stone tools, particularly ax blades, some of 
which are grooved. 

Very little is known of Venezuela, but the highland por- 
tion seems to have had culture affinities with Colombia. 
Unusually large stone mortars have been reported; ax 
blades are rectangular and triangular; pottery is rude, but 
shows incised decorations and the relief figures of Colom- 
bia; bone points and implements are abundant. Only a few 
mounds have been reported. 

20. Ecuador. While Ecuador has some striking individ- 
ualities, it nevertheless does show similarities to Peru on the 
one hand and to Colombia on the other. Historically, it is 
considered that a certain unity prevailed over the whole 
territory between the present boundary of Peru in the south 
and the River Ancasmayu on the north. This province is 
usually designated as the empire of Quito. The archaeology 
of this region is not very well known, but there seems to be 

SOUTH AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY 283 

considerable variety and curious local developments. Two 
general subdivisions are recognized, the interior highland 
culture and that of the coast plain. Of the latter, Manabi 
is the most peculiar, with its stone chairs, carved slabs, pil- 
lars, and stone buildings ; traits not found elsewhere.*^ 

Burial mounds are frequent on the coast and extend north- 
ward from Quito. Gold work is not so strongly developed 
as elsewhere, but there is a special development in the art 
of overlaying with gold leaf. This, as well as pottery, is 
more highly developed on the coast. A great variety of 
stone and copper club heads and axes is to be found in the 
highlands, but they are not conspicuous on the coast. 

21. PeriL Under another head we have outlined the cul- 
ture of this area, hence we may merely note the chronological 
and local differences." Three formative culture centers 
may be recognized: Nasca, Trujillo and Tiahuanaco. 
These individualities, according to Uhle," seem to have 
grown up from a more homogeneous state which formed the 
framework of Peruvian culture. Yet, in spite of all the 
investigations that have been made, it cannot be clearly per- 
ceived which of these three centers is the oldest, in fact, the 
data are more consistent with the view that they were in 
the main contemporaneous and mutually reactive. 

When the Inca come into control of the whole area, cer- 
tain tendencies to uniformity in art and technology are 
apparent, no doubt due to the shifting of population, the 
improved means of communication, and the direct legisla- 
tion of the Inca government. 

22, Chile. This region is frequently included in that of 
Peru, but the older underlying culture seems to have dif- 
fered from that of the Inca period. There are solid his- 
torical groimds for considering the southern extension of 
Inca culture to be recent and so overlying the native cul- 
tures. In fact, the shell mounds of the long coast line 
indicate three periods of occupation. In the first of these, 

284 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

there were long-headed people with a rude culture, though 
they made some pottery. Later, came a round-headed peo- 
ple of much higher culture, somewhat like the older Peru- 
vians. Later still, the Inca overran this area as far south 
as the Maule River. The pottery of the earlier periods is 
for the most part undecorated, metal work is not frequent, 
but usually of Inca patterns. On the whole, the interior 
elevated portions of Chile seem to have sheltered a higher 
culture than the coast. 

In the north, it will be noted that the area reaches out 
through Bolivia into Argentine, where centers the unique 
Calchaqui, or Diaguite culture.*® Aside from its own 
peculiar problems, this culture is interesting in that it, like 
the Pueblo culture of the United States, is an extreme out- 
post of the New World highland culture. There are even 
some curious correspondences between the two, the sig- 
nificance of which is not clear. 

Urn burial so widely diffused in the Atlantic Highland 
area (23) turns up here in infant burial only. Thus, one 
of the most puzzling peculiarities of the Calchaqui culture 
is the great number of large decorated urns containing the 
remains of very young infants. Adult urn burial is found 
just north and east of Calchaqui in the edge of the Atlantic 
Highland area. The designs have some vague resemblances 
to Marajo urns. Incidentally, we may note that urn burial 
of any kind is practically unknown in the Andean region. 
Other kinds of pottery are common in Calchaqui sites, some 
of which resemble the Nasca ware. The grooved ax also 
occurs here as in Ecuador. There are quite a number of 
original and unique articles, as the "knuckle-duster," a kind 
of hand dagger, and cup-shaped bells." 

23. The Atlantic Highlands. In this area we have in- 
cluded the whole coast from the mouth of the Orinoco to the 
La Plata, and a considerable portion of the interior. There 
are at least two general characteristics, that of urn burial 

SOUTH AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY 285 

throughout and, on the coast, extensive shell mounds. Most 
of these shell deposits are of human origin. On the north 
coast they contain objects suggesting the culture of the 
Antilles,*^ but from near the Amazon down, they seem to 
have a character of their own. That they contain pottery 
is not certain, the indications being that where found pot- 
tery is intrusive from the surface and later urn burials. 
Highly finished stone axes and other objects are common, 
and among the bones no suggestions of cannibalism are seen. 
In the vicinity of Santa Catharina, Brazil, there are finely 
wrought stone mortars in animal forms, and unique small 
point-like objects.*' 

Outside the shell mounds and inland, the most striking 
objects come from Mara jo Island and the territory sur- 
rounding the lower Amazon. A special feature is the en- 
graved decoration reinforced with color, and a very unique 
object is the tanga, or pottery fig leaf. 

Urn burial is highly characteristic of the Amazon Basin 
and extends far to the south, though its intensity declines 
as we leave the Amazon in either direction. Taking the 
artifacts as a whole, two rather clearly marked subdivisions 
of the area are suggested, the one centering around Mara jo 
and the other in southern Brazil, but taken in its entirety, 
it is essentially an area of simple culture in contrast to those 
we have just considered. 

24. Patagonia. In this area is included all the territory 
east of the Andes from Cape Horn up into the Pampas and 
the lower insular part of Chile. Its archaeology is very 
simple and suggests that it has always been the home of a 
simple hunting and fisher folk. The shell mounds continue 
along the coast on both sides, so that we have a continuous 
chain from the Orinoco around to Peru. No doubt the 
systematic investigation of these in the future will yield 
results of great value. 

Considerable attention has been given to the archaeology 

286 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

of this region, both of the coast and the interior, and cer- 
tain claims to antiquity made which we shall consider else- 
where. Two types of implements have been distinguished, 
an older chipped type and later polished implements, but 
this chronological relation is not certain. Some rude pot- 
tery has been found in parts of the area, particularly on 
the east coast, which has some resemblance to the pottery 
of eastern United States. Both the stone work and pottery 
of the Andean margin is of a higher order than in the east 
One of the distinguishing objects found throughout the 
open plains of the area is the stone bola. Two other arti- 
facts of an index value are the plano-convex flaked knife 
and the duck-bill scraper.** 

1916. I; Kidder, M. A. and 
A. v., 1917. I. 

21. Kroeber, 1909. I. 

22. Nelson, N. C, 1909, L 

23. Smith, H. I., 191a IL 

24. Lewis, 1906. I. 

25. Smith, H. I., 1907. L 

26. Dall, 1877. I. 

27. Solberg, 1907. I. 

28. Stefinsson, 1914. L 

29. Holmes, 1914. I. 

30. Saville, 1909. I. 

31. Joyce, 1914. I. 

32. Morley, 1915. I; 192a I. 

33. MacCurdy, 191 1. I. 

34. Hartman, 1901. I. 

35. Fewkes, 1902. I; 1916. I. 

36. Holmes, 1914. I ; Joyce, 1912. 1. 

37. Saville, 1907. I; 1910. I. 

38. Squier, 1877. I. 

39. Uhle and Stiibel, 1892. I. 

40. Boman, 1908. I. 

41. Joyce, 1912. I. 

42. Im Thurn, 1883. I. 

43. Joyce, 191 2. I, p. 260. 

44. Hrdlicka, 1912. I, p. I47< 

1. Holmes, 1914. I. 

2. Dixon, 1914. I; Skinner, 
1909. I; Abbott, 1877. I. 

3. Moorehead, 191 7. I. 

4. Moorehead, 1913. I; 1916. I. 

5. Harrington, 1909. I ; Schra- 
bisch, 1909. I. 

6. Volk, 1911. I; Spier, 1918. I. 

7. Holmes, 1903. I ; Jones, C. C, 

1873. I. 

8. Parker, 1916. H. 

9. Wintemberg, 1901. I, p. 38. 
ID. Thomas, 1889. I. 

11. Thomas, 1889. I. 

12. Smith, H. I., 1911. I; Shet- 
rone, 1920, I. 

13. Moorehead, 1910. I; Shetrone, 
1918. I. 

14. Moorehead, 1910. I; Shetronc, 
1918. I. 

15. Radin, 1911. I. 

16. MooreheadN 1917. I. 

17. Stems, 1915. I. 

18. Smith, H. I., 19TO. I. 

19. Nelson, N. C, 1916. I. 

20. Kidder, 1915. I ; Nelson, N. C, 

CHAPTER XVI 
CHRONOLOGY OF' CULTURES 

In the course of these discussions it may have occurred to 
the reader that our culture classification is purely extensive, 
or horizontal, and ignores the chronological, or vertical 
relation. It is this chronological relation that underlies the 
great classifications in Old World archaeology, especially 
that triumph of synthetic research in Europe, the determi- 
nations of the sequential relations among the several epochs 
in Paleolithic and Neolithic cultures. In this book we have 
so far been concerned with the distribution of trait-com- 
plexes rather than with their chronological sequence. Such 
a comprehension of the gross culture geography of the New 
World is logically necessary to its analytic treatment, but it 
is, after all, merely preliminary. It so far forms the chief 
content of our subject for the very good reason that anthro- 
pology is a new science and as such has had barely more 
than time to get even once around the distribution prob- 
lem; but now that such a general view has been attained, 
interest promises to center upon the time relations between 
the respective types of culture. 

Indeed a time perspective, or chronology, is just as essen- 
tial to the comprehension of culture and man as is the third 
dimension to space. Geology, for example, did not become 
a science until by empirical methods it established a time- 
sequence of periods and these periods are in turn of equal 
importance to zoology. In like manner, the future status 
of anthropology depends upon the establishment of a chron- 
ology for man and his culture, based upon objective veri- 
fiable data. Progress in this direction will go hand in hand 

287 

288 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

with the development of techniques adequate to the condi- 
tions of the problem. So far there are at least three classes 
of data from the interpretation of which chronological rela- 
tions may be inferred. These are respectively stratification, 
or superposition, the facts of distribution, and finally docu- 
mented data. The last of these we know as history. For 
each of these classes of data there are appropriate tech- 
niques, though in the most part still inadequate for the solu- 
tion of the New World Problem. 

Let us turn our attention to Mexico, Peru, and Yucatan 
that have histories ^ from which, as a vantage ground, re- 
spectable chronologies have been established. Of these, the 
last is the most extended, for the very good reason that 
the Maya have left to us a number of dated inscriptions.* 
While these have come down to us in terms of the curious 
and highly original Maya calendar, yet modern scholars have 
been able to correlate them with our own reckoning. This 
correlation is, of course, not absolute, so the exact dates of 
one investigator do not quite agree with those of another, 
but still all have the same sequence. The following brief 
list based upon Morley*s readings * will give an adequate 
idea of the age of Maya culture. 

B.C. MAYA CHRONOLOGY 

200 (?) Approximate earliest date. 

A.D. 

50 Period of sculpture. 

600 Last of dated sculptures. 
960 Chankanputun destroyed by fire. 

1000 Triple Alliance of Chichen Itza, Uxmal, and Mayapan — the 

period of architectural development. 
T200 Triple alliance broken by the ruler of Chichen Itza who was 
overcome by the ruler of Mayapan, aided by the Nahua. 
This is the period of Nahua influence. 
1450 Mayapan overthrown and destroyed and collapse of Maya 

culture. 
1517 First Spanish expedition to Yucatan. 

CHRONOLOGY 289 

Thus we see that fully two thousand years ago Maya art 
had already reached a high level of development, implying 
far more remote beginnings. No such series can be found 
in Peruvian antiquities, but they may be the older for all that 
The history of the rise of the Inca is fairly well known, the 
succession of rulers being as follows: — 

1. Rocca — about 1200 a.d, 

2. Lloque Yupanqui 

3. Mayta Capac 

4. Capac Yupanqui 

5. Sinchi Rocca 

6. Yahuar Huacac Mayta Yupanqui 

7. Huira Cocha-Tupac Yupanqui 

8. Tupac Yupanqui 

9. Huaina Capac (Inti Cusi Hualpa) 

10. Huascar Inti (Cusi Hualpa Yupanqui)* 

The unfortunate Huascar was made an end of in civil war 
just as the Spaniards came upon the scene in 1532. But 
Markham produces records of a much longer list of ninety- 
two kings, which, if authentic, carries us back to about 
1300 B.C. While the specific correctness of these early lists 
is improbable, we must bear in mind that such an antiquity 
is in keeping with archaeological data and closely parallels the 
projected Maya chronology. 

For the career of the Aztec in Mexico we have a respect- 
able historical literature,*^ but for the want of dated sculp- 
tures cannot establish so remote a chronology as for the 
Maya. The tabulated list gives us a few of the most hn- 
portant dates, though all those preceding 1325 a.d. are but 
crude approximations. 

A.D. MEXICAN CHRONOLOGY 

300 ( ?) Toltec cities founded, Tula, Teotihuacan, etc 
70o(?) Totonac settled in the State of Vera Cruz. 

290 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

AJ>. 
I200(?) 

1325 
1370 
1473 
1487 

I52I 

Tarascan established a state in Michoacan. 

Founding of Mexico City by the Aztec. 

Tri-partite confederacy, Mexico, Tezcoco, and Tlacopaiu 

Tlatilulco subjected by Aztec. 

The great temple of Mexico City built — famous for human 

sacrifices. 

Cortez captures Mexico City. 

The list of Aztec rulers as given by Sahagun is as fol- 
lows, the dates being approximate : — 

Name 

1. Acampich 

2. Uitziliuitl 

3. Chimalpopoca 

4. Itzcoatzin 

5. Moteuhgoma 

6. Axayacatl 

7. Tigocicatzin 

8. Auitzotl 

9. Moteuhgoma 

Length of Rule 

21 
21 
10 

14 
30 
14 

4 
18 

19 

Probable Dates 

1370-1391 
1391-1412 
1412-1422 
1422-1436 
1436-1466 
1466-1480 
1480-1484 
1484-1502 
1502-1521 

The career of the Aztec rulers appears closely parallel 
both as to time and extent to that of the Inca in Peru, but 
both were later than the rise of the Maya. The similar 
dominance of the rulers of Bogota in Colombia should be 
noted, though historians have been less successful in pro- 
jecting their chronology. The three examples we have 
given, therefore, exhaust the list of historical chronologies 
for the New World. Among the less cultured tribes there 
are a few feeble efforts to compile chronologies. The Kiowa 
and Dakota of the North American Plains have a kind of 
year count, but this does not reach beyond the period of 
colonization and so has no significance here.* The celebrated 
Walam Olum of the Delaware Indians^ gives us but the 
vaguest scraps of chronology, and little more can be said 
of the Popol Vuh manuscript for the Quiche of Guatemala • 
and the annals of their neighbors the Cakchiquel. Hence, 
for historical chronologies that correlate with dated time 

CHRONOLOGY 291 

we must look chiefly to Mexico and Central America. Here 
lies one of our most important problems, for on its solution 
depends our proper perspective of New Worid culture. 
In the main, all hinges upon our success in reading the in- 
scriptions left by the Maya. Such progress has been made 
with these that recorded events can be reckoned with an 
error of not more than seven days.* The preceding tables 
show us, then, that if Christ had come to the New World, 
he would have found flourishing cities with ornate temples, 
sheltering an elaborate order of priests. Beyond this, so 
far, documentary materials, or inscriptions, fail us. Yet, 
this is no mean accomplishment for it establishes a period of 
about two thousand years in which the facts of culture and 
distribution can be satisfactorily oriented. 

CHRONOLOGIES DETERMINED BY STRATIFICATION 

The former method partakes of the nature of history, 
but we now turn to more direct and objective methods of 
demonstrating time-relations. Those familiar with the story 
of Troy in the Old World will recall how one city was 
leveled off to form the foundations of another until there 
were in the earth beneath, layer upon layer, each containing 
the debris of a separate culture. Naturally these layers rise 
one above the other in order of their age and the chronology 
of the several cultures as was discernible in a cross-section as 
revealed by the trenches of an archaeologist. Our problem 
in the New World is, then, to find spots where the debris of 
one culture is piled upon another. 

Among the best known stratigraphic discoveries are those 
of Uhle *® at Pachacamac, Peru, where he found four dis- 
tinct types of pottery so superimposed as to make their 
chronology clear. These are as follows : — 

4. Inca style. 

3. Black pottery. 

2. Red -white-black fotte 

I. Tiahuanaco ware. 

292 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Subsequent analysis of the data for other parts of Peru 
shows that at the time the Tiahuanaco type held sway in 
Pachacamac, the ancient cities of Tiahuanaco, Nasca, and 
Trujillo were the leading culture centers and were funda- 
mentally similar. Preceding this period, upon the coast at 
least, was a primitive population. 

Recently a special student of the Andean region** has 
worked out more or less provisional tables for several re- 
stricted areas which may be summarized as follows: — 

1540 A.D. Spanish Intrusion — Historic Period. 

1000 A.D.-1540 A.D. Inca Period. 

SCO A.D.-1000 A.D. Tiahuanaco Period. 

200 B.C.-500 A.D. Pachacamac, Nasca, Trujillo. 

(?) - 200 B.C Archaic Period. 

While these data are by no means mere guesses, they are 
tentative and are intended to express the relative time in- 
tervals in this sequence as indicated by the data now avail- 
able, part of which is stratigraphic. 

In 1910 a stratification of cultures was observed near 
the city of Mexico, which subsequent investigation shows 
to consist of ceramic remains in three horizons," as fol- 
lows : — 

3. Aztec (iioo?-i52i). Contemporaneous with the rise of the 
Aztec group. 

2. Toltec (3oo?-iioo?). Contemporaneous with Maya dominance 
and marked by Maya influence. 

I. Archaic Tarascan (?-300?). Characterized by a highly conven- 
tionalized type of figurines. 

Already many of the known sites in Mexico can be placed 
in this scheme, so that all we now need is careful field- 
work. 

The researches of Nelson, Kidder, and Morris, have, by 
the use of stratigraphy, or the method of superposition, ar- 
rived at a chronology for the Pueblo area of the United 

CHRONOLOGY 293 

States by taking note of the minute variations in styles of 
pottery, as follows: — 

(7) The Historic Period (1540-1921); pottery index, Two-Color 

Glazed Ware, modem type. 
(6) Period of Three-Color Glazed and Painted Wares (?-i540); 

this is the latest prehistoric period. 
(5) Period of Two-Color Glazed Wares, early type. 
(4) Late Period of Two-Color Painted Wares. 
(3) Early Period of Two-Color Painted Ware. 
(2) The Pre-Pueblo Period, crude pottery only, 
(i) The Initial Period, or Basket Makers, pottery generally absent 

Outside of these areas there are a few sporadic cases of 
stratification, as Parker's demonstration of an older Algon- 
kin culture underlying that of the Iroquois in New York 
State," and Sterns' recent excavations in eastern Nebraska 
where he finds at least two cultures." Finally, the work of 
Abbott, Putnam, Volk," and Spier ^* in New Jersey has 
demonstrated at least two culture strata, to be discussed 
under another head. Some of the earlier investigators of 
shell-heaps claimed definite stratification, but later work has 
failed to verify the finding. Hence, considering the small 
number of exceptions just cited, we can truthfully say that 
so far, archaeological work outside of the regions of higher 
culture has given negative stratification. 

Perhaps it should be noted that so far the tendency of this 
negative archaeological investigation has been to show some 
sequential development in richness and complexity. Thus, 
Smith's " results in the Columbia area and Nelson's " shell- 
heap work in California show simpler and somewhat cruder 
cultures for the lower parts of their deposits, but the per- 
sistence of many fundamental forms throughout suggests 
that the succeeding cultures were built upon the foundation 
laid down at what seems to have been the period of earliest 
occupancy. This also seems to be true of shell and other 
deposits on the Atlantic Coast.^® Even in the Pueblo area 

294 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

we find a similar condition. Consequently the best interpre- 
tation we can give the observed data is that in the formative 
period of New World cultures the types now appearing in 
our areas were localized, but less differentiated. Such unin- 
terrupted occupation of an area would not result in good 
examples of stratification, but would give us deposits in 
which culture changes could be detected only in the quali- 
ties and frequencies of the most typical artifacts; for exam- 
ple, Nelson's pottery series from New Mexico. This is an 
altogether different condition from that confronting the 
archaeologist in Western Europe, and calls for a highly 
specialized technique.' 

20 

INAPPLICABILITY OF OLD WORLD CHRONOLOGY 

The only place in the whole world where we have a con- 
nected view of man's career from the first to the last is in 
western Europe. This is not taken to mean that that re- 
stricted area was the place of our origin, but simply that it 
is the one part of the earth where we have full data. Every- 
one is familiar with the few grand periods into which this 
history is divided, as Paleolithic, Neolithic, Bronze Age, 
Iron Age, etc., and there is a natural tendency to assume 
that these sequences for Western Europe must hold for the 
whole world. Consequently, many efforts have been made 
to discriminate between Paleolithic and Neolithic in the data 
for the New World. Some of the earlier writers sought to 
identify the typical forms of Paleolithic chipped implements 
by selecting those that closely parallel European types, but 
such matching of forms could not give certain conclusions 
and was eventually abandoned. Nevertheless, some modem 
students of European archaeology seem to hold to the belief 
that our data here in the New World are quite susceptible 
of division into true Paleolithic and Neolithic periods. 
Again, when the notion of a cave culture developed in 
Europe, American students searched our caverns for simi- 

CHRONOLOGY 295 

lar types, but without marked success. All this occupies an 
important place in the history of our subject; but the result 
was in the main negative, since no exact parallels were 
found. Unfortunately, the investigators of this period 
sought for specific parallels and not finding them, formu- 
lated a theory that the New World was extremely young 
and that in consequence no true Paleolithic, or even deeply 
stratified remains, would be found. The reaction to this 
seems to have been a turning away from all stratigraphic 
and analytic studies to other problems, with the obvious 
result that no advance has been made. 

Recently some of the younger anthropologists have 
turned to the problem anew, this time not seeking mere par- 
allels, but seeking to analyze the situation as found. For 
example. Nelson ^^ worked in the Mammoth Cave district 
of Kentucky, finding two cultures, the earlier of which is 
without pottery and with very little polished stone. Again, 
new studies at Trenton, New Jersey, by Spier " have made 
conclusive the existence of an earlier culture, also without 
pottery and polished stone. Since both of these observations 
are east of the Mississippi River, we may conclude that the 
existence of two culture periods is extremely probable in 
eastern United States. In other words, when the problem is 
treated independently, we can, by analysis, arrive at chrono- 
logical distinctions. We may, therefore, expect great devel- 
opments in the near future. While it is clear that the specific 
concepts of European archaeology cannot apply here, yet in 
the end it may turn out that there is something in common ; 
at least, the pioneer efforts of the new anthropological school 
have brought results. 

Now it so happens that the main characteristics of this 
early simple chipped stone culture remind one of certain 
horizons in western Europe which pass under the names of 
Solutrean and Magdalenian. However this may be, the 
remains of an early culture have come to light in northern 

296 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Ari-^ona to which the bow was unknown, but which made 
use of the spear-thrower instead. Again, it so happens that 
during the same periods of Paleolithic Europe just referred 
to, we find the spear-thrower in use and the bow unknowa 
Too much should not be made of this parallel, but it points 
a clue, whether true or false, only further research will 
reveal. It at least raises the question as to whether the first 
men to enter the New World brought with them the bow. 

INFERENTIAL CHRONOLOGIES 

Inferring time-relations between traits of culture from 
their distributions is not a new method, but so far its use 
has been sporadic and incidental. It has never been taken as 
the fundamental technique in a comprehensive investiga- 
tion, chiefly because the facts of distribution were not yet 
available. As we have stated more than once, the only ade- 
quate inventory of our phenomena is to be found in well 
worked out distributions for the most distinctive traits. 
Now that we have available a fair amount of such data, 
interest turns naturally to the consideration of chronological 
problems. 

Our previous delineation of culture areas revealed cen- 
ters in which appeared highly specialized traits not found 
in the respective margins of the areas in question. In 
archaeological investigations in the Pueblo area of the 
United States it was observed, that the older traits had the 
wider distribution. In the Rio Grande Valley of New 
Mexico Nelson first determined the time-relations of the 
prehistoric cultures by the method of superposition, only to 
find later that the same result could have been achieved by 
an inspection of the surface of the area as a whole. In gen- 
eral, it has long been the practice to infer that wide dis- 
tribution indicated greater relative antiquity. We have seen 
how, in a culture area, certain traits seem to survive only on 
the margins. This relation may be made obvious when we 

CHRONOLOGY 297 

consider the whole of the New World as a unit ; our pre- 
vious discussions have brought out the fact that the higher 
forms of culture are found in Mexico, Central America, and 
the northern Andes. Now it so happens that a few traits 
are found on the immediate borders of the great central 
area, among the historic peoples of the United States on the 
one hand, and among those of Chile and Argentina on the 
other, that are approximately identical. Further, these 
traits have not been noted for the intervening higher cul- 
tures. We may infer, therefore, that they represent a part 
of the culture that underlies the more central higher cul- 
ture, and hence, an older type.** Again, while the simple 
bow is found from Cape Horn to the Arctic, the sinew bow 
has but a limited distribution in Canada and the United 
States. We infer, therefore, that the latter is a much more 
recent type. Likewise, there is a curious bow used with pel- 
lets instead of arrows, which in the New World is confined 
to a few small localities in Brazil, in consequence of which 
we infer that its introduction was very recent, perhaps even 
since 1492. Many other examples will occur to the reader 
of these pages. We may safely take it, for example, that 
among the oldest traits of New World culture are the dog, 
the bow, the spear-thrower, the lip plug or labret, the simple 
firedrill, simple coil basketry, string twisting, stone chipping, 
and the lean-to shelter. One may infer, therefore, that so 
far as the evidence at hand goes, the first aboriginal groups 
to reach the New World brought cultures of which these 
traits were constituent parts. This, in rough outline, is the 
method by which distribution may on occasion be inter- 
preted in chronological terms. While every method can be 
over-rated, this one has distinctive merit and often lends 
itself to partial check by stratigraphic and historical data. 
Under this general head we may also include the more 
complicated logical methods used by a number of contem- 
porary anthropologists. The theoretical demonstration of 

298 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

this method has been led by Sapir,'* while the best examples 
of its application are to be found in certain studies by Boas 
among the Eskimo/* Spinden in Maya art,** Lowie in 
societies of the Plains Indians,** and Hatt in studies of 
clothing.*^ 

Boas " has used the method in a number of instances, but 
particularly in his discussions of Eskimo culture, when he 
concludes that the most differentiating features of the 
Alaskan Eskimo are more recent than the remaining Eskimo 
culture. The method is even more extensively applied by 
Thalbitzer,*' who decides that the original home of the Es- 
kimo was around Bering Sea, from which general center he 
traces out the older and newer traits. 

Hatt, a Danish student, has exhaustively studied skin 
clothing both for North America and Asia, distinguishing 
between very old surviving types and those of recent origin. 
The oldest origin center he places in northern Asia from 
whence the concepts seem to have been diffused.*® In gen- 
eral, he finds two periods of diffusion over the arctic and 
sub-arctic areas of the world : — 

1. The older culture: Marked by absence of snowshoes, its best 
representative being the Eskimo. It was essentially a seacoast 
culture. 

2. The later culture: Marked by the snowshoe, the tipi tent, the 
moccasin, etc. It was an inland culture. The transition from 
I to 2 was not recent. 

Spinden's searching analysis of Maya art '^ is important 
both for the results attained and as an example of sound 
method. By objective comparison the carvings upon the 
monuments and walls of Maya ruins were placed in two 
groups that seemed to be sequential. Further, since these 
stelae, or monuments, are dated, it is easy to designate the 
time relations of these groups, thus establishing art periods. 
From this as the point of departure, the entire art of the 
region is analyzed into its respective periods and norms 

CHRONOLOGY 299 

established for the identification of such additional examples 
as may be discovered. As to how far the method can be 
trusted in localities where there is no dating system to serve 
as a check, is not clear ; but it promises well. 

Of a different sort but equally meritorious is Lowie's his- 
torical analysis of societies among the various tribal groups 
in the Plains Area." The full reports available for practi- 
cally all the many Plains tribes make it obvious that one 
general system of societies was diffused throughout the area. 
By a close analysis of these data it is possible to show some 
of the older forms of these organizations, approximately 
where they arose, and in what direction they were diffused. 
Incidentally, close former historical contacts were revealed 
for some tribes now rather widely separated. 

Thus, we see, that by working backward from the historic 
period or, as in the exceptional case of the Maya, from a 
fixed date, it is possible by these methods to separate the 
older elements of culture from those of relatively recent 
origin. Looking back over these typical studies we see that 
the general iflethod is the same whether the subject be in 
art, industries, or social organization. In the main, it first 
analyzes the culture trait-complexes and then by compara- 
tive reasoning arranges them in time sequences. Practically 
every skilled field-investigator in the New World faces 
problems of this sort; but the method is at its best only 
when we deal with traits having wide continuous distribu- 
tions, for unless we can balance the trait variations in one 
group of people against those in a neighboring group, little 
can be expected. As a method, however, it has its limita- 
tions, particularly in its baffling complexity and its great 
dependence upon the mere logic of the case. What we need 
here is a more objective technique, such as in superposition 
and relative distribution. 

Aside from these more engaging problems there are 
opportunities for the study of trait origin by direct methods. 

300 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Of these Mooney's Ghost Dance Religion •• is a fine exam- 
ple. In such cases the problem is, on the whole, directly 
historical, based upon documentary and personal testimony. 
It is to be regretted that more attention is not given to such 
problems because it is only in them that we shall get actual 
cases of culture movements to serve as check data in the 
development of inferential chronologies. 

Returning now to the subject under consideration; viz., 
the relative time-relations of traits of culture as revealed 
in their distribution, we see in the first place, justificatioa 
for the detailed consideration given that subject in the pre- 
ceding pages and in the second place, that the culture cen- 
ters we thereby discovered, are after all local developments 
which are in turn integral parts of a larger area with its 
super-center. 

SUMMARY 

In conclusion it may be noted that while the chaotic state 
of our chronological knowledge calls for synthetic treat- 
ment, the problem is still in the pioneer stage, thus rendering 
any attempt in this direction extra hazardous. On the other 
hand, for the sake of clarity and that the reader may have 
before him the means of organizing the data we have passed 
in review, even a crude time chart seems justifiable. Look- 
ing now at the New World as a whole, it is plain that the 
greater part of the story must lie in the central area of inten- 
sive cultures (Fig. i). As we have seen, the historical 
method carries us back to B. C. time in one part of this area 
and it is certain that by the diligent application of the strati- 
graphic method we shall eventually carry this sequence back 
to the earliest type of aboriginal cultures. The experience of 
the past decade shows that the varying styles of pottery are 
the best indices to time-sequence, and since the ceramic art 
is everywhere in evidence in this area, the need of the future 
is intensive research in ceramics. But again, turning our 
attention outward (Fig. i), we see that immediately outly- 

CHRONOLOGY 

301 

1500 A.a 

o ac.- 

6000?- 

12000?- 

N. A. 

HUNTING 

AREAS 

Slai Armor 

Sin«w Bow 
Snowshoos 
D06 traction 

Moccasins 

r 

N.A. 

MAize 

AREA 

Copper^ 

Mounds. 

Pit-houss8*y 

f" 

\ Hoss. 

MEXICO & 

PERU 
CENTRAL 

AREA 

Axt«c40lnca 
Bronzs 

Maya and 

Andeon 

cities 

Medolithic 
oridins 

Soft Metals 

S.A. 

MANIOC 

AREA 

S.A. 

HUNTING 

AREAS 

Curore 
Blowdun 

l-jlgmmock 

Sola 

<XKc 

(CHAIC PERrOO 

i i 

Tobocco-Moize- Manioc 

I 

Agriculture 
Pottery 

Stone Poli8htn6 

HUNTING AND FISHING PERIOD 
/(do6- bow -conoe -n^J) 

INFILTRATION PERIOD 

horpoon - spear -thrower'- stone chippin6 

OLD WORLD SOLUTREAN-MAGDALENIAN HORIZONS 

Culture Sequence in the New World 
The above chart it in the main bused upon the available data for the distri- 
bution of culture traits. For the Hrst /soo years we have satisfactory historic data 
pertaining to a part of the central area, beyond this the time estimates a/re con- 
jectural. 

302 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

ing are the two great areas of primitive agriculture, the 
Eastern Maize area of North America and the Manioc area 
in South America, areas in which hunting and other cruder 
arts still play a large part in the lives of the people, as the 
older and more fundamental aspects of aboriginal culture. 
Further, there can be little doubt but that agriculture, pot- 
tery, etc., gradually crept outward over these areas and that 
it was still advancing in 1492. Looking still further afield, 
we see the final fringes of htmting and fishing peoples, both 
in North and South America. These relations we have 
shown in the accompanying diagram, on the horizontal line 
for the sixteenth century. If we now attempt to anticipate 
the results of future stratigraphic research in each of these 
areas, or zones of culture, and so project their respective 
chronologies in parallel series, guided by the distribution 
data now available, the result will be something like the 
chart here presented. The sequence in the central column 
has, in the main, been determined by objective methods and 
may, therefore, be taken with some confidence. In the two 
adjoining columns we cannot be so definite, but it is probable, 
for example, that mounds and other earthworks appeared 
during the period of megalithic development at the center. 
Again in the North American hunting areas, the distribu- 
tion of wooden slat armor is so localized and limited as to 
make its recent introduction from Asia reasonably certain; 
on the other hand, the wider but similar distribution of the 
subterranean house concept leads to the assumption of much 
greater antiquity. Similar arguments can be given for the 
intermediate position of the other traits enumerated. But 
passing over these many details, for the reader can elaborate 
the chart indefinitely, and turning to the general aspects of 
the outline, we note that as we go downward the distinctions 
vanish until all rest upon one common primitive sub-stratum. 
The probable nature of this initial culture we have previously 
outlined. However, in so doing we have merely formu- 
lated one of the great problems of the New World for the 

CHRONOLOGY 

303 

solution of which new techniques are needed to advance our 
knowledge, to the end that these early cultures may be recon- 
structed, and the chronologies of both the Old and New 
Worlds definitely correlated. 

1. Brinton, 1882. II, 1885. II; 17. Smith, H. I., 1910. 11. 
Brasseur de Bourbourg, 1861. 18. Nelson, N. C, i^ 
I. ^ 

2. Morley, 1915. I. 

3. Morley, 191 5. I; 1920. I. 

4. Markham, 191 o. I, pp. 309-3 la 

5. Anales de Cuauhtitlan, 1886. L 

6. Mooney, 1898. I. 

7. Brinton, 1885. I. 

8. Brinton, 1890. I. 

9. Sapir, 1916. I. 

10. Uhle, 1903. I. 

11. Means, 191 7. I. 

12. Spinden, 19 15. I. 

13. Parker, 1916. II; Shctrone, 
1920. I. 

14. Stems, 1915. I. 

15. Volk, 1911. I. 

16. Spier, 1916, I; 1918. I. 

191a I. 

19. Nelson, 1918. I. 

20. Spier, 1917. I. 

21. Nelson, N. C, 191 7. I. 

22. Spier, 1916. I; 1918. I. 

23. Sapir, 1916. I. 

24. Boas, 1907. I. 

25. Spinden, 191 3. I. 

26. Lowie, 1916. II. 

27. Hatt, 1914, I; 1916. I. 

28. Boas, 1907. I. 

29. Thalbitzer, 1914. I. 

30. Hatt, 1916. I. 

31. Spinden, 1913. I. 

32. Lowie, 1916. II. 

33. Mooney, 1896. I. 

34. Nordensldold, 1918. I. 

1909. I; 

CHAPTER XVII 
LINGUISTIC CLASSIFICATION 

While^ in the broadest sense, language is a trait of cul- 
ture, its characters are so distinct as to require very dif- 
ferent methods of investigation. The study of the different 
forms of speech in the Old World has become a separate 
learned pursuit and one in which the problems are so com- 
plex as to demand great specialization. The same is true of 
primitive languages in the New World, as well as in the less 
cultured parts of the Old. Consequently we have, under 
the head of New World linguistics, a fairly distinct division 
of our subject in which the most important investigations 
have been made by those who have specialized in it. 

One of the first tasks in primitive linguistics is the classi- 
fication of the existing forms of speech. The reader may 
need to be reminded that the national uniformity of lan- 
guage in Europe is a correlate of close political organization, 
one type of speech having been selected by the governing 
authority and its use perpetuated by enforced education. In 
the more primitive states of society, where political unity 
exists only for a single community and no legislative recog- 
nition of languages is taken, we may expect each such politi- 
• cal unit to show some individuality in speech. In fact, so 
far as can be judged from the data at hand any separation 
of such a political unit into two or more parts will sooner 
or later result in different forms of speech. 

Under such conditions, very unequal differences will exist. 

v' Between some groups we shall find but a small difference in 

vocabulary; in others, an additional phonetic change; and 

finally, variations in the grammatical structure. All degrees 

of these differences are found when we consider a very large 

304 

LINGUISTIC CLASSIFICATION 305 

number of political units, giving us an intergradation analo- 
gous to that we observed in the cultures of the same units. 
This inequality of difference renders any classification more 
or less arbitrary. So long as the tongues of two or more 
groups do not diverge beyond the possibility of communica- 
tion, they are usually considered as dialects, though the 
degrees of mutual intelligibility connoted by that term may 
vary greatly. When mutually unintelligible tongues are 
found to possess consistent similarities in vocabulary or 
grammatical structure, particularly the latter, they are said 
to be of the same family, or stock. Thus, all the languages 
of the New World may be placed in stock groups, the con- 
ception of a stock being a group of related languages with 
their dialectic subdivisions. 

The determination of these stocks for the native tribes of 
the United States was initiated by Gallatin* in 1826 and 
brought to a definite form in 1891 by J. W. Powell,* who 
organized the Bureau of Ethnology at Washington. Powell 
is credited with the system of nomenclature now used for all 
the languages of the New World, which is to take some 
native unit name and give it the adjective termination an. 
Thus, Siouan stock is from the term Sioux, Caddoan from 
Caddo, etc. In the main, this system is still followed, though 
the clumsiness of the termination in some instances has led 
to modification. 
^^ Powell confined his classification to the tribes of the 
United States and Canada, which he grouped under fifty or 
more stocks and prepared a map showing their distribution. 
It is not too much to say that this classification and map is 
the very foundation of American anthropology. The work 
was so well done that very few changes have been made and 
as it was, in the main, based u'pon mere vocabularies, its 
excellence stands as a worthy memorial to Powell and his 
able associates. (See map, Fig. 65, and list of stocks for 
United States and Canada, pp. 401-412.) 

3o6 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

The general value of this classification arose from the fact 

that it was then the only classification of native tribes based 

/ upon scientific principles and, therefore, afforded the point 

of departure for the investigation of culture and racial anat- 

Fig. 65. Linguistic Stocks in ihe United States and Canada 

J. W. Powell 

omy. Thus, its importance arises from historical conditions, 
for it has very little to contribute to the problems of culture 
and anatomy aside from the practical matter of tribal desig- 
nation. On the other hand, we should note that the basis of 

LINGUISTIC CLASSIFICATION 

307 

classification employed for language is different from that 
used for culture. As stated in the preceding chapters, cul-*^ «^ 
tures were grouped according to their objective similarities 
and their geographical associations, but such a gross group- 
ing was not in any sense expressive of genetic relations 
between the cultures concerned. We saw, however, that the 
ultimate grouping of cultures was destined to be chronologi- 
cal, which, in a way, would express genetic relationships. 
Now, the conception of a linguistic stock is a group of lan- 
guages all the members of which have a common ancestor, 
and between whom it is possible to establish degrees of rela- 
tionship. Hence, the moment we identify a language as*^ 
belonging to a definite stock, we automatically assert its 
genetic relationship. In this sense, the classification of the 
linguistic characters of man is superior to the present classi- 
fication of his cultural characters. 

We have now a considerable number of specialists in 
North American languages, but the task before them is so 
great that the investigations of the several stocks have not 
progressed far enough to make possible a comprehensive 
statement of the whole subject. In scarcely a single case are 

z. Algonquian 

2. Athapascan 

3. Attacapan 

4. Beothtikan 

5. Caddoan 

6. Chimakuan 

7. Chimarikan 

8. Chimmesyan 

9. Chinookan 

10. Chitimachan 

11. Chumashan 

12. Coahuiltrcan 

13. Costanoan 

14. Eskimauan 

15. Esselenian 
j6. Haida 

17. Troquotan 

18. Kalapooian 

19. Karankawa 

List of Stocks for Fig. 65 

20. Keresan 

21. Kiowan 

22. Klamath 

23. Kusan 

24. Kutenai 
2S- Maidu 

26. Moquelumnan 

27. Muskhogean 
a8. Piman 

29. Pcmo 

30. Quoratean 

31. Salinan 

32. Salishan 

33. Shahaptin 

34. Shastan 

35. Shoshonean 

36. Siouan 

37. Siuslaw 

38. Takelma 

39. Tanoan 

40. Timucuan 
4X. Tlingit 

42. Tonkawa 

43. Tunicaa 

44. Uchean 

45. Waiilatpuan 

46. Wakashan 

47. Washoan 

48. Weitspekan 

49. Wtntun 

50. V/ishoskan 

51. Vakona 

52. Yanan 

53. Vokuts 

54. Vukian 
55* Yumaa 
56. Zufiian 

3o8 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

LINGUISTIC CLASSIFICATION 309 

we able to designate the type tongue for a stock or to indi- 
cate the historical relationships of its divisions. All this is 
for the future. At present, the refinement of classification 
seems to be the chief interest. As we have stated, even the 
stock designation is somewhat arbitrary, for greater famil- 
iarity with these languages has brought to light new similar- 
ities between what have heretofore been regarded as dis- 
tinct stocks. For instance, the Shoshonean and Nahuatlv^ 
have been combined ; the Piman stock is also considered as 
a member of this group by S wanton and Kroeber; Natche- 
san and Muskhogean were grouped together by Swanton;* 
Sapir* claims Wishoskan (Wiyot) and Weitspekan (Yu-v^ 
rok) to be Algonquian; Kroeber and Dixon* gfroup the 
Shasta, Chimariko, Karok (Quoratean), Pomo (Kulanap- 
an), Esselen and Yuman of California as one stock under 
the new name of Hokan, and in like manner the Wintun 
(Copehan), Maidu (Pujunan), Yokuts (Mariposan), Mi- 
wok (Moquelumnan) and Costanoan under the name 
Penutian." All such changes have met with opposition 
and are accumulating a large amount of controversial 
literature. 

Aside from these specific attacks upon the Powell classi- 
fication it has been recognized that stocks show a geographi- 
cal grouping of some kind. Boas designates a southeastern 
type of language to which also the Iroquois and Caddoan 
seem to belong, other students have noted a similar grouping 

List of Stocks for Fig. 66 

X. Athapascan xi. Lencan ai. Tamaulipecan 

a. Chiapanecaii xa. Mayan aa. Tarascan 

3. Chibchan X3. Matagalpan 23. Tequistlatecan 

4. Chinantecan 14. Mosquitoan a4. Totonacan 

5. Cunan 15. Nahuatlan 2$. Ulvan 

6. Huavean 16. Olivean 26. Waicurian 

7. Janarobrian jy. Otomian 27. Yuman 

8. Jicaquean x8. Pakawan a8. Zapotecan 

9. Jincan 19. Payon ag. Zoquean 

10. Laguneros jo. Subtiaban 

3IO • THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

of the Shoshonean, Kitunahan, and Kiowan stocks. Boas 
J and later Sapir ^ find similarities between the Tlingit, Haida, 
and the Athapascan. It is quite probable that the further 
investigation of these relations will result in the elimination 
of some stocks, and in any event establish some kind of his- 
torical relationship. When this comes to pass, we may find 
that languages have also a geographical grouping not unlike 
that for other culture traits. Incidentally, we note that the 
existence of even such geographical affinities as have been 
so far established suggest long and permanent residence in 
one area. 

Unlike culture, language has no true archaeology, but a 
few stocks have become extinct since their discovery, as 
indicated in the tabulated lists. Yet, it is truly surprising 
that so few have so far passed out of existence, though it 
is probable that their extinction will proceed from now on 
^ with increasing rapidity.® This tendency of speech to sur- 
vive long after great culture change must be taken into ac- 
count when we attempt to correlate our classifications. It 
also complicates the problem of linguistic origins. 

To summarize, then, we find a genetic basis for linguistic 
classification, expressed by the term stock. All the native 
languages of the United States and Canada have been iden- 
tified, or we may say there is no historic tribe in this terri- 
tory whose linguistic stock is not known." For Mexico and 
Central America " we can not be sure, but it is improbable 
that more than two or three have been overlooked. In South 
America,*^ we are still less certain of the completeness of 
our knowledge. In the appendix we have tabulated the rec- 
ognized stocks for these geographical divisions: for the 
United States and Canada there are fifty-six stocks; for 
Mexico and Central America, twenty-nine; and for South 
America, eighty-four. Distribution maps have been pre- 
pared which we present in outline : Figs. 65, 66, and 67. 
Upon these, the stocks are designated by numerals which 

PHONETICS 311 

stand for the corresponding stocks in alphabetical order (see 
pp. 401-419.) 

COMPARATIVE PHONETICS 

Linguistic studies fall into two rather distinct groups: 
phonetics and structure. Of these, phonetics is still quite 
undeveloped, the greater effort being placed upon structure, 
or word and sentence formation. Yet, some progress has 
been made in phonetics. For a time, attention was given 
only to the necessary practical ways of recording these new 
languages, each field-worker devising his own system. A 
certain initial uniformity was secured by the mechanical 
limitations of printing, but even this proved unsatisfactory. 
Recently the American Anthropological Association ap- 
pointed a committee to formulate and standardize the 
methods of transcribing and printing.^* The report of this 
committee is essentially a pioneer work on New World 
phonetics, but no such practical system, however perfect, 
can take the place of independent phonetic investigation. A 
beginning has been made by Goddard who introduced the 
objective mechanical methods of phonetic analysis devised 
by European students, but as yet the whole subject is 
before us/* 

In a very tentative way a few of the characteristics of 
North American phonetics have been suggested. Perhaps 
one of the most obvious differences from English, for ex- 
ample, is the small use made of the stress accent. Another 
peculiarity of American speech is a curious stopping of the 
breath before or after vowels, the mechanism for which is 
a closure of the glottis. Some of the native consonants have 
proved particularly difficult to European recorders. Among 
these are the stopped consonants, b, d, g, k, p, q, and t, 
which have many forms, but sometimes seem to stand be- 
tween sonants and surds. These sounds are usually desig- 
nated as intermediate stops. Again, there are glottalized 

312 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Pit. 6j. LtHguiitic Sitckt JH S<mlk Antrica. A. P. ClumbTlaiM 

PHONETICS 

313 

forms resulting from a closure of the glottis and a quick 
release, giving an explosive sound not found in European 
speech. Yet the present enumeration of such assumed 
phonetic differences can serve no very good purpose, for 
until the study of New World phonetics comes into its own, 
we can not state what characters, if any, are peculiar to it. 
In passing, note should be taken of a few pioneer regional 
surveys. In California, where we find a large number of v 
different native languages, there appears to be a fair degree 
of phonetic uniformity." For one, the vowels tend to be 
open rather than closed and are given with a greater breath 
impulse than in European languages. The intermediate 
stops, just mentioned, are numerous and there is a strong 
tendency to use two ^s but on the other hand a single k. 

1. Alikulufan 

2. Allentiacan 

3. Andaquian 

4. Apolistan 

5. Araucanian 

6. Arawakan 

7. Ardan 

8. Atacameftan 

9. Aymaran 

10. Barbacoan 

11. Betoyan 

12. Bororan 

13. Calchaquian 

14. Cafiarian 

15. Canichanan 

16. Carayan 

17. Cariban 

18. Caririan 

19. Cayubaban 

20. Changoan 

21. Chapacuran 

22. Charruan 

23. Chavantean 

24. Chibchan 

25. Chiquitan 

26. Chocoan 

27. Cholonan 

28. Cbonoan 

List of Stocks for Fig. 67 

29. Coconucan 

30. Corabecaa 

31. Cunan 

32. Curucanecan 

33. Enimagan 

34. Esmeraldan 

35. Goyatecan 

36. Guahiban 

37. Guaraunan 

38. Guatoan 

39. Guaycunian 

40. Itonaman 

41. Itucalean 

42. Jivaran 

43. Jurian 

44. Lecan 

45. Lorenzan 

46. Lulean 

47. Mainan 

48. Makuan 

49. Matacan 

50. Miranhan 

51. Mocoan 

52. Mosatenan 

53. Moviman 

54. Muran 

55. Ocoronan 

56. Onan 

^T. Otomacan 

58. Otuquian 

59. Paniquitan 

60. Panoan 

61. Peban 

62. Piaroan 

63. Puelchean 

64. Puinavian 

65. Puquinan 

66. Quechuan 

67. Salivan 

68. Samucan 

69. Sanavironan 

70. Tacanan 

71. Tapuyan 
T2, Ticunan 

73. Timotean 

74. Trumaian 

75. Tsonekan 

76. Tupian 

77. Uitotan 

78. Uran 

79. Yabganan 

80. Yaruran 

81. Ypurinan 

82. Yuncan 

83. Yurucarean 

84. Zaparan 

314 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

In how far these phonetic traits are limited to California 
can not be stated, but such phonetic peculiarities as have 
been reported for the North Pacific Coast peoples suggest 
some differences; for example, there is a somewhat unique 
voiceless / found all the way from Alaska to northern Cali- 
fornia, and along with it, in the main, a few fortis con- 
sonants. These suggest that a study of phonetic distribu- 
tion will not only reveal some definite New World charac- 
ters, but show localized geographical types as well. 
y In this connection we may remark that J. P. Harrington's 
^ pioneer work suggests two main phonetic systems for the 
United States and Canada, which because of their apparent 
geographical segregation may be designated as the Atlantic 
and Pacific types. The great nucleus of the Atlantic t>^ is 
found in Algonkian and Eskimo speech. These suggestions 
should be noted for the grouping of Algonkian, Eskimoan, 
and a few minor stocks on one side, as against Athapascan, 
Salishan, Shoshonean, and Siouan, on the other, leads one 
to feel that he is upon the threshold of a new insight into the 
origins of American stocks. Thus, it would appear that the 
Algonkin and Eskimo are survivors of the earlier linguistic 
strata of aboriginal man and therefore may in their Wood 
and culture preserve something from this old heritage. Un- 
fortunately, our specialists know so little of South American 
phonetics that this suggestive comparison cannot be carried 
further, for by analogy we may expect that somewhere in 
Brazil and Patagonia the Atlantic type will appear. 

Again, from a different point of view, it appears that in 
phonetics, we have, perhaps more than anywhere else, an 
instinctive formative culture factor and an organic basis for 
the unconscious modification of a trait, all of which leads 
into psychological problems of the very greatest importance 
to anthropology. 

MORPHOLOGY 3^5 

COMPARATIVE MORPHOLOGY 

While, as stated above, the structure or morphology of 
languages has received the most attention, yet when we con- 
sider the speech of the New World as a whole, even this 
subject is quite undeveloped. In the main, the time of inves- 
tigators has been taken up with the necessary recording of 
texts and the working out of translations, and though their 
published papers often close with summaries of the struc- 
tural systems employed, this has in no case gone far enough 
to admit of extensive comparative studies for the continents 
at large. However, the reader will sometimes find in the 
older literature certain characterizations of New World 
languages, cited as distinguishing them from languages in 
other parts of the world. These should be ignored, for the 
different tongues of the New World show very wide diver- 
gence in their structure, in fact, presenting about all the 
known varieties. 

Yet there is one aspect of morphology in which the New v 
World shows some distinction. While, in general, the mor- * 
phological classification of all languages is rather difficult, 
yet from the point of view of the internal coherence of the 
word they can be comprehended under three heads : isolat- 
ing, agglutinative, and inflective.^' Other bases of classifi- 
cation have been proposed, but are found less satisfactory; 
hence, they may be ignored here. Applying the above cri- 
terion to the speech of the New World, we find it chiefly 
agglutinative, in fact, as far as we know, exclusively so. On 
the other hand agglutinative speech occurs in the Old World 
so that this character can not be taken as peculiar; we can 
only say that perhaps in this respect greater morphological 
unity exists among New World languages. Further, there 
seem to be some indications that certain processes, as the 
incorporation of the object in the verbal phrase, the polysyn- 
thetic formation of terms, etc., are of more frequent occiu"- 

3i6 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

rence here than in the Old World, but it remains for future 
students to definitely establish the facts. In fact, as the case 
stands at present, there are no known morphological charac- 
ters strictly peculiar to New World speech as a whole. 

If we attempt a review of comparative studies in mor- 
phology, we must again turn to California and the Pacific 
Coast, for as we shall see presently, this portion of the con- 
tinent is the home of a large number of small linguistic fam- 
ilies. The most important single contribution to the subject 
is by Dixon and Kroeber " who showed that, as a whole, the 
languages of California, differ in the non-use of reduplica- 
tion of the noun to indicate plurality, the method of incor- 
porating the pronoun and even the noun into the verb, and 
in contrast to these, the emplo)mient of syntactical cases, a 
method almost unknown in other parts of the continent. 
These of themselves suggest that we have here a close par- 
allel to the grouping of political units according to culture, 
for these linguistically independent stocks still show suf- 
ficient traits in common to form a geographical area, 
y In like manner, the languages of the North Pacific Coast 
form another area. Though no convenient summary is 
available for this group of stocks, Sapir " has proposed the 
term Na-dene for the Tlingit, Haida, and Athapascan on 
the assumption that they have a genetic relation. However 
this may be, this author shows. that they do form a group 
with some distinctive characters, as the absence of reduplica- 
tion, the very frequent use of freely compounded stems, 
modes and tenses indicated by internal phonetic changes in 
the verb stem, the somewhat general tendency to loose syn- 
thetic structure in forming words, etc. Of the other Ian- 
guages, Tsimshian on the one hand and Wakashan 
(Kwakiutl-Nootka) and Salish on the other, have some 
characters in common, as initial reduplication in both nomi- 
nal and verbal forms, and the use of suffixes in numerals as 
classifiers of the objects designated. Again, all the above 

4 

MORPHOLOGY 317 

languages have certain phonetic similarities. Thus, while 
we can not group these languages so readily as those of Cal- 
ifornia, yet we are able to distinguish them with respect to 
certain characters. Further, they fall into contiguous 
geographical positions. 

In an analogous manner Speck " shows that Muskhogean •^ 
of the lower Mississippi has affinities with its neighbors and 
recently Swanton " reports evidences of grouping among 
the several small stocks of the Gulf Coast. There is, there- • 
fore, a presumption that Caddoan, Iroquoian, Muskhogean, 
Uchean, etc., all possess certain characters that may be 
taken as linguistic indices of the region, or culture area 8 

(P- 237). 

Thus, in general, we seem to have a grouping of stocks ^ 
around geographical nuclei and this raises the question as to 
the nature of this larger group. Is this somewhat vague, but 
still definite, group of stocks to be considered as of the same 
sort as the strictly genetic cluster within a single stock? If 
the answer proves to be negative, then we must seek for 
some external causes contributing to this result ; but, if posi- 
tive, then the stocks forming such a group are themselves of 
common origin or descent. Between these two positions, 
the anthropologists of the United States are about equally 
divided. If we examine the case upon its gross merits, there 
appears no discernible difference between the kinds of sim- 
ilarities by which stock affiliations are determined and those 
making these geographical groups. It is merely a matter 
of degree. That being the case, the probabilities favor the 
genetic interpretation. On the other hand, very vague sim- 
ilarities may be possible as the result of mere social contact, 
in which case the genetic relation could only apply to one or 
two elements of the language. However, speculation upon 
these points is futile, and we may conclude by noting that 
along this line the greatest advances in future linguistic 
researches are to be expected. " 

3i8 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

The best illustration of the above is found in the investi- 
gations of Californian languages by Kroeber and Dixon," 
to which we several times referred. In Fig, 68 we see the 
positions of the original twenty-two stocks identified by 

Powell. Later, Kroeber and Dixon *' discovered three large 
morphological groups for these stocks as indicated by the 
shadings on the map. Recently,'* these investigators have 
becomtt convinced that these larger groups represent single 
stocks, two of which are not found elsewhere (Hokan and 

DISTRIBUTION OF STOCKS 3^9 

Penutian), while the third is a member of the Algonquian 
stock. While other linguists have not yet accepted this 
genetic interpretation of the observed grouping, the facts of 
similarity are not in dispute. In our discussion of the Cali- 1^ 
fomian culture area we noted a central group of tribes pos- 
sessing the most typical culture (p. 225), and we now see 
that these are almost exclusively members of the Penutian 
group. Thus, if the genetic relationship of these Powell 
stocks is denied, we must assume a correlation of some kind 
between language and culture. On the other hand, if the 
genetic interpretation is valid, what shall be said of the sim- 
ilarities between Muskhogean, Uchean and Iroquoian, pre- 
viously cited ? 

Finally, irrespective of these puzzling questions, there is a 
problem in mere word distribution. For example, the term 
for dog is approximately the same in many California 
stocks; the root term for hoofed animals is the same for 
several Algonquian, Siouan and Caddoan languages and 
there seems to be a continental tendency to use n and m as 
the roots of pronouns. Some of these observations may 
have historical value since the word for dog must have 
traveled along with the animal. The probabilities are that 
such studies will lead to historical discoveries and establish 
time relations in culture. *• 

DISTRIBUTION OF STOCKS 

We may summarize the previous discussion by the state- 
ment that the chief general result of linguistic investigation 
in the New World has been the identification and location 
of the several stocks. Yet, the perfecting of this classifica- 
tion is no mean achievement and is destined to play an in- 
creasingly larger role in the development of our subject. The 
important point is that such a classification is based upon 
the idea of genetic relationship, and so stands in much the 
same relation to our subject as does evolution to zoology. 

320 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Thus, there can not be the least doubt that all the Algon- 
guian languages had a common ancestor and the further 
study of the several divisions of that stock promises to reveal 
the general outline of this initial type. Further, we have 
a right to expect that when the comparative studies we have 
noted are more advanced, definite genetic relations will ap- 
pear between many of the now recognized independent 
stocks. For it is apparent that the cultural and somatic 
unity of the New World necessitates some kind of genetic 
relationship between the surprisingly large numbers of 
stocks now enumerated in its linguistic classifications. The 
pursuit of these important problems will be, in the main, 
empirical, and as such offers one of the most enticing fields 
for the scientifically inclined. Yet, this is for the future, 
our chief consideration here being the distribution of lin- 
guistic stocks. 

This is shown upon the maps. We see that the most 
widely distributed stocks in the northern continent are the 
Athapascan, Algonquian, Iroquoian, Muskhogean, Caddoan, 
Siouan, Salishan, and Shoshonean-Nahuatlan. The Arawa- 
kan, Tupian, Tapuyan, Cariban, Puelchean, and Tsonekan 
are the largest of the southern continent. In North Amer- 
ica, the eight large stocks enumerated occupy practically all 
of the United States and Canada save the Arctic and Pacific 
Coast belt and a small part of the Gulf Coast. The lower 
part of Mexico and southward to the Isthmus is also the 

v' home of many small stocks. Thus of the entire eighty-five 
stocks in North America, all but eight are crowded into less 
than one-eighth of the continental area where they occupy 
marginal positions. In South America there is some con- 
fusion arising from the interspersion of many stocks in the 
Amazon basin, but again we seem to have the smaller stocks 
on the Pacific side, though their marginal positions are not 

>r so prominent. One curious fact is that in the regions of 
higher cuhure we find great linguistic diversity while the 

DISTRIBUTION OF STOCKS 321 

very large widely extended stocks are met with chiefly in 
the regions of lower culture, though not exclusively. It 
does not follow, however, that the populations speaking the 
stock languages of the latter were much larger, because they 
were, in the main, hunting peoples and would require a 
large range for the support of each family. Whatever elsew' 
these facts may signify, they indicate that the development of 
higher culture was not a linguistic phenomenon. 

Another observable tendency of the large stocks is toV 
spread over a single geographical area. Thus, while the 
Siouan stock has a few straggling remnants on the coast, 
the great main body is found in the open plains west of the 
Mississippi. The Athapascan, Algonquian, Salishan^ and 
Shoshonean stocks show similar tendencies. In South Amer- « 
ica this is not quite so clear, but still seems to be the prevail- 
ing tendency. This suggests that the ancestors of these 
stocks took up their abodes in these respective areas and that 
their later distribution is the result of normal expansion, a 
common cultural bond tending to hold them to the same area. 
The detached groups appear to have modified their culture 
in response to their change of habitat. This does not signify 
that these detached tribes were always the migrants for it 
may sometimes have been otherwise. Thus, we have some 
very important problems in these larger stocks, for example 
the Athapascan. Here we have a right to expect that future 
linguistic research will reveal the oldest language group and 
its relations to the others and that from this their relative 
movements can be deduced. As it now stands, we can form 
no positive idea as to their original home, whether it was in 
Arizona, Oregon, or Canada. The most worthy suggestion 
comes from Sapir who states that the observable resem- 
blance of Athapascan to the languages of the adjoining 
Pacific Coast is a strong argument in favor of a northern 
cradle land.** 

Of almost equal importance are the Algonquian, Siouan 

322 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

and Shoshonean-Nahuatl problems. The Algonquian and 
Siouan stocks have somewhat similar distributions, a large 
compact group with a few outlying detached fragments. In 
the former the detached Arapaho and Blackfoot speak very 
widely divergent Algonquian languages and if we admit 
Sapir's identification of Wishoskan (Wiyot) and Weits- 
pekan (Yurok), we have representatives still farther re- 
moved geographically and correspondingly divergent. The 
Cheyenne appear somewhat less divergent than the Arapaho 
but we have historical reasons for believing their separation 
from the main body to be recent.** On general grounds, it 
has been proposed that the ancestral home of the Siouan 
stock was on the Atlantic Coast, where representatives were 
found, but it appears that the Biloxi of the Gulf Coast arc 
nearer the central linguistic types than those farther east.** 
We see here a tendency for the outlying groups to be more 
divergent from the main body than those nearer, a relation 
favoring the view that these detached groups represent 
stragglers, but, whether laggards or true wanderers, is dif- 
ficult to decide. In the author's opinion the probabilities 
favor the latter. Reasoning from the marginal phenomenon 
of faunistic distribution, it has often been assumed that the 
very small stocks on the coast belts represent the survivals of 
the more primitive groups. This view seems to have some 
justification, but it has not yet been demonstrated that these 
stocks are the more archaic forms of language. Hence, this 
interpretation so far as it applies to language, must be re- 
garded with caution. The unfortunate fact is that not even 
a beginning has been made with the chronological problem 
in aboriginal linguistics, so that we can not hazard a guess 
as to when the various stocks came into existence. 

I. Gallatin,- 1836. I. 5. Dixon and Kroeber, 1913. L 

^. Powell, 1891. I. 6. Dixon and Kroebcr, 1913. L 

3. Swanton, 1915. I. 7. Sapir, 1915. I. 

4. Sapir, 1913. I. 8. Goddard, 1914. L 

DISTRIBUTION OF STOCKS 

323 

^ Powell, i8gi. I; Boas (editor), 

1911. I. 
ID. Thomas and S wanton, 191 1. I. 

11. Chamberlain, 191 3. I; Brinton, 
1891. I. 

12. Boas, 1916. II. 

13. Goddard, 1905. I. 

14. Kroeber, 191 1. I. 

15. Sapir, 191 1. I. 

16. Dixon and Kroeber, 1903. I. 

17. Sapir, 1915. I. 

18. Speck, 1907. I. 

19. Swanton, 1915. I. 

20. Dixon and Kroeber, 1903. I. 

21. Dixon and Kroeber, 1913. I. 

22. Dixon and Kroeber, 1919. L 

23. Sapir, 191 6. I. 

24. Sapir, 1915. I. 

25. Michelson, 1912. I. 

26. Dorsey and Swanton, 1912. I. 

CHAPTER XVIII 
SOMATIC CLASSIFICATION 

We come now to the man of the New World himself, 
instead of his works. While it may be more logical to begin 
here, the discussions under this head also call for a general 
understanding of the geography and relative distributions 
of all other characters. Further, this study of man presents 
certain technical difficulties which make it unsuitable for the 
first introduction to our subject. The fundamental difficulty 
has been to find a definite and consistent basis of classifica- 
tion. For example, the system developed by systematic 
zoology is not strictly applicable, because the existing peo- 
ples of the earth are very near to each other. Our expe- 
rience with zoological classification leads us to expect that 
when we offer a morphological grouping of mankind, we 
shall base it upon descent. While this may be asking too 
much of a mere classification, we must not overlook the fact 
that here is the real problem in the case. Thus, in the New 
World, we must eventually know from what kind of men 
the original stock sprang and what elements, if any, have 
been later assimilated by it. 

The most obvious method of approach to this solution is 
by morphological analysis of the main geographical groups. 
First, if we take the New World as a whole, certain com- 
mon characters may be taken as significant. For one thing, 
the hair of the New World tends to be straight and black; 
indeed, the variations from this are so rare that we may 
consider straight black hair as universal. The only other 
part of the world where this is a distinguishing character is 
in Asia, particularly among Mongoloid peoples. A close 

324 

Louchcux Man and Woman Showing Eskimo Characters 
Boas, 1901. I 

Fig. 69. North Am 

I'holograplti {'}' EhrtHTiitk 
Fig. To. Brazilian Typ<'s 

fig. 7i. Palagonian Typi 

SOMATIC CHARACTERS 325 

view of the hair of mankind, as a whole, indicates great 
stability as to type, in consequence of which many anthro- 
pologists make it the basis of the first classification. We 
may, therefore, set down the above affinity with Mongoloid 
peoples as one very strong indication of common descent. 

A few exceptions to straight hair have been found in 
South America under conditions that make it unlikely that 
they are of European origin.^ However, a g^eat deal more 
field-work will be necessary before this point can be made 
clear. K, however, it proves out that an element of wavy 
hair once entered the New World population, we shall have 
good ground for suspecting a non-Asiatic origin for at least 
one New World strain. 

Skin color is rather an elusive matter, since its gradations 
do not admit of very precise definition. Some anthropolo- 
gists see the basic color of the New World as yellow, others 
as brown. The yellow is clearly present in many tribes of 
Brazil and on the west coast of North America, but the 
remaining portions of both continents show populations 
ranging from dark chocolate to light brown. According to 
our own observation, this light color turns toward yellow, 
•' and the assumption of an original yellow race is fully justi- 
fied. This, again, suggests Asiatic affinities, but just what 
may be the history of this dark strain in the yellow is not 
clear. 

The nose has also been considered as Mongoloid, but as it 
presents great variety of form in both the north and the 
south and is not easily distinguished from the nose of the 
Pacific Islands and some other parts of the Old World, no 
great stress can be laid upon it, at least, until very carefully 
studied. Again, one of the most striking facial characters 
of Mongolian peoples is the eye fold, or, in popular lan- 
guage, the "slanting eye." A number of observers claim to 
see faint traces of this in the Indian, but we should proceed 
with caution where the resemblances are so vague. Yet, a 

3^6 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

recent author * asserts its positive identification in the An- 
dean region and also in parts of the Amazon country. In 
North America, it is prominent among the Eskimo and ap- 
pears in Siberia, which fact gives us continuity with Asia. 

BREADTH OF FACE 

In popular belief, the aboriginal face is broad in respect to 
the width of the head, or "the cheek bones are prominent," 
resulting in what is sometimes characterized as a dishar- 
monic face. This belief is, in the main, justified, when we 
review the measurements that have been made. The studies 
of Boas' and Jenks* upon mixed-blood Indians in the 
United States, show that the relative width of face among 
these is still greater than in case of whites, while reference 
to the accompanying table shows a very positive difference 
between the whites and full-blood Indians, in both North 
and South America. Thus, it is generally true that the New 
World peoples are characterized by broad faces. This fea- 
ture is strongly accented in the Eskimo, but not sufficiently 
to place them in a class by themselves. Of Old World peo- 
ples, the broad faces are chiefly among Asiatics. 

VALUES OF FACE-BREADTH HEAD-BREADTH INDEX FOR MALES 

(Compiled from Jenks ^) 

Nationality 

Number 

Index 

Scotch 

50 

90.34 

French 

100 

90.8s 

Mixed-Indian 

60 

94.68 

Mixed-Indian 

8 

92.14 

Mixed-Indian 

12 

92.52 

Mixed-Peruvian 

24 

90.40 

Ojibway 

24 

97.19 

Mexican 

2300 

94.90 

Apache 

148 

94.30 

Pima 

51 

98.63 

Peruvian 

124 

95.30 

SOMATIC CHARACTERS 327 

FLATTENING OF THE FEMUR 

Another anatomical trait supposed to characterize native 
Americans is an excessive flattening of the femur, or platy- 
meria. A resume of the literature, however, leaves one in 
doubt that any such variation can be definitely assigned to 
the New World as a whole, though some reports of Hrd- 
licka • suggest that Indians differ from whites and negroes. 
The same can be stated for flattening of the tibia, or platyc- 
nemia. If the theory of Manouvrier that the phenomenon 
is dependent upon the muscular development of the indi- 
vidual, is accepted, then these flattenings of the shafts have 
no racial significance. (For a brief resume, see Duck- 
worth.'') 

Another curious femoral variation is the presence of a 
third trochanter, which Duckworth believes is, to a certain 
extent, correlated with platytneria. The most convenient 
frequency table so far compiled is that of Deniker,* which 
shows a range from 13 per cent, for prehistoric Europe to 
64 per cent, for the Fuegians of the New World. The great 
frequency of this trochanter among the Fuegians raises a 
suspicion as to the remainder of the New World, but satis- 
factory published data are wanting. 

THE TEETH 

In recent years a great deal of attention has been given to 
the teeth of mammals and man. Interest in human teeth has 
been stimulated by such epoch-making Old World discov- 
eries as the Pithecanthropus and the Mauer jaw, because the 
associated teeth seemed to be morphologically intermediate 
to modern man and the anthropoids. It was inevitable 
therefore that the teeth of the different living races should 
be carefully scrutinized and while the problem is still in the 
pioneer stage, a few significant results are at hand. The 

328 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

most distinctive tooth character in the New World is the 
shovel-shaped incisor. 

This character has been recently reviewed by Hrdlicka* 
showing that, so far as the data at hand go, more than 90 
per cent of the Indians show this peculiarity in unmistak- 
able form. While the character is thus not invariable to the 
extent that an Indian can be absolutely identified by his in- 
cisor teeth, its frequency is great enough to make it an im- 
portant qualitative character. Among the peoples so far 
examined this peculiarity is most pronounced among the 
Mongoloids of Asia and rarest among Europeans and 
American negroes. (The data given by Hrdlicka runs: 
white, 6; negro, 10; Hawaiian, 47; Chinese, 60; Japanese, 
85; Indian, 91.0). Thus, shovel-shaped incisors may be 
set down as one of the most distinctive of aboriginal char- 
acters. 

Again the patterns of the molar teeth promise to be of 
some significance. Thus Sullivan ^® notes that the number 
of cusps on the lower molar teeth vary from four to five, 
and while it has not been possible yet to extend his observa- 
tions to all parts of the continent, it appears that among the 
American Indians approximately 75 per cent show five 
cusps. Unfortunately, there are at hand no data for the 
Mongoloids of Asia, but the white race ranges from 6 to 2 
per cent, the negro around 35 per cent. The Australian, on 
the other hand, ranks but slightly below the Indian. 

Note may also be taken of comparative observations on 
the bite as recorded by Hellman." 

11 

Indians Edge to edge bite. 

Eskimo Edge to edge bite. 

Mongolians Tend to over-bite. 

Hindus Somewhat over-bite. 

White Americans Somewhat over-bite. 

In the importance of these observations, particularly the 
last, the possibilities of modification by function should not 

SOMATIC CHARACTERS 3^9 

be Ignored. But taking the data as they now stand, both 
human and mammaKan, shovel-shaped incisors, five cusped 
molars, and edge to edge bite are the more primitive, or 
older, tooth characters. In the most distinctive of these 
characters, shovel-shaped incisors, the peoples of the New 
World again show a close relationship to the Mongoloids. 
It is apparent, therefore, that further investigation of this 
subject is urgent, since here appears one of the most promis- 
ing leads in the problem of man's origin and differentiation. 
What is especially needed is a careful survey of all Ameri- 
can and Asiatic skeletal material and a careful plotting of 
distribution for the several tooth characters, the data to be 
supplemented by observations upon the living. With such 
in hand one could proceed to the underlying biological 
problems with full confidence. 

This about exhausts the list of widely diffused common 
characters for the New World as a whole. As we have 
seen, the somatic line-up is with the Mongoloid peoples, and, 
while we are facing this way, attention may well be called 
to other similarities asserted by certaia observers. Posnan- 
sky " reports the Mongolian spot in the Andean area, and 
an anatomical peculiarity of the cranium in the maxillar or 
region of the processus frontalis which is absent in the 
European, but prominent in Mongolian crania. It seems 
best, however, to defer further discussion of this subject 
until we have considered the differentiation of internal New 
World types and their distributions. 

HEAD FORM 

Head form has received so much attention that it almost 
monopolizes the subject matter of physical anthropology. 
As to what extent this is justifiable, remains to be seen. 
The special literature for the New World contains a large 
mass of measurements, both on crania and heads of living 
subjects, from which we can form some idea of their classi- 

330 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Fit. T' Th* Ctphatic Index 

SOMATIC CHARACTERS 331 

ficatory value. The most conventional of these measure- 
ments is the cephalic index, or the maximum breadth of 
head divided by the maximum length and the quotient ex- 
pressed in per cent. Ripley has plotted the distribution of 
this index on a map of the world," but an inspection of this 
suggests that the New World cannot be sharply differ- 
entiated on the basis of the cephalic index alone. It is true, 
however, that the broadest heads are here accredited to 
Asia and the longest have minor representation in the New 
World, which would give our hemisphere a kind of inter- 
mediate position. Yet, we should not give much weight to 
the specific boundaries indicated upon such a map because 
the cephalic index numerals have been arbitrarily grouped. 
A better method would be to plot according to each numeri- 
cal unit of difference. To do this successfully, we must 
use a large map and enter in its proper place the actual 
cephalic index for each g^oup of people. A condensed form 
of such a map for the New World is presented here (Fig. 
72).* 

From this it appears that we have the most data for the 
United States, but, in general, all the larger parts of both 
continents are represented in some fashion. Notwithstand- 
ing such discrepancies, the data as given should approxi- 
mately outline the general distribution of the cephalic index. 

Perhaps the first impression we get from this map is one 
of great range and variability. The scattered index values 
may even suggest a random distribution. Yet, it appears 
that the lowest values tend to cluster around certain points, 
as the Gulf of St. Lawrence, southeastern Brazil, and south- 
ern Patagonia, while the highest seem to mass on the Pacific 
side of both continents. On the other hand, if we regard 

* The cephalic indices appearing on this map are based upon skull measurements, 
but contain also those reported for living subjects. The special works upon 
craniometry give the accepted methods for reducing the latter to units of the 
former. The indices are from the published notes of all observers; hence, some 
allowance must always be made for errors of observation, though in the long run 
these should cancel out 

Fig. 7q. Brazilian Types 

I-ig. 7i. Palagonian Typi 

334 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

the normal, or symmetrical type, found in homogeneous 
groups. Also, the series for absolute length and breadth of 
head show fairly symmetrical distributions. From all this 
one may suspect that there is, after all, but one type of head 
form for the New World. 

It should be noted that we are here treating the successive 
social groups like individuals. Thus, if we wish to arrive 
at the head form for a social group, we take individuals at 
random and calculate from these observations the most prob- 
able average value. In exactly the same manner, we may 
take these values for groups in the New World and place 
them in a series. When we do this, we again find a typical 
distribution suggesting homogeneity. However, as it stands, 
this result should be taken only as a suggestion, for there 
are many complicating factors to be considered. The whole 
problem awaits further investigation, and so cannot be 
profitably considered here. That the general assumption 
we have made is consistent with other somatic data is obvi- 
ous, for if the people of the New World spring from a sin- 
gle stock then the observed deviations of head form are but 
the normal variations of a biological character. 

In a general discussion of the whole subject, Boas ^^ states 
that as the population expanded over the New World, it 
scattered out into more or less isolated local groups, whose 
inbreeding soon diflferentiated varieties of head form and 
other features. In other words, these were the natural ran- 
dom fluctuations around the fundamental type and are prob- 
ably not permanent characters, all of which is consistent 
with their erratic geographic distribution. It may be. there- 
fore, that the longer headed Algonkins and Patagonians are 
merely the result of greater marginal isolation rather than 
survivors of a previous long-headed population. 

At the outset, we stated that the New World could make 
some claim to an intermediate position in head form. If 
we take the averages of the lengths and breadths of head 

SOMATIC CHARACTERS 335 

tabulated on p. 333, we find a length of 175 cm. and a 
breadth of 141 cm. Martin " places the extremes of the 
world at 143-225 for length, and 101-173 for breadth, from 
which it appears that our natives are grouped around the 
middle values. Further, since the extremes in our tables 
fall short of those for the world as a whole, we are justified 
in the conclusion that in absolute dimensions of head the 
New World is truly intermediate, but that in respect to head 
form as expressed by the cephalic index, approximately the 
whole known range is found. 

The investigations of the Australian school of anthropo- 
logists have demonstrated the great comparative significance 
of the height of the head." We may suspect, therefore, 
that the native of the New World will show some distinc- 
tions in this character, but, as is often the case, sufficient 
data are not available for a satisfactory conclusion. Mar- 
tin" gives the range of absolute height of skull as 125 to 
143 mm. and cites certain Calif ornians as 129, Dakota as 
131, and Eskimo as 135. This is not very promising as a 
definitive character, since we have about the whole range in 
the New World alone. Further, when we consider the dis- 
tribution of the recorded values they seem to occur at ran- 
dom over both continents and when all are treated as com- 
ponents of a single series, we get the normal frequency 
curve. The suggestion is, therefore, that we have in the 
height of the skull for the New World a character that 
shows considerable range of variation, but which, on the 
other hand, is of one distinct type. However, at present 
this must remain a mere suggestion. 

The obvious difficulty with somatic characters is their 
lack of qualitative distinctions. Stature, for example, can 
only be dealt with in a variable series, it being impossible 
to identify an American Indian as such by his stature. We 
have seen that the same is true of head form. In general, 
wherever anatomical characters are reduced to measure- 

336 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

ments that is in itself a confession of our inability to make 
qualitative distinctions. Such traits as pigmentation and 
hair have long stood out as the dominant, if not altogether 
satisfactory, qualitative characters, but to these we may 
now add certain markings on the teeth, as previously stated. 

ORBITS AND NASAL SKELETON 

A great deal of attention has been given to the form of 
the eye sockets or orbits, and the nasal skeleton. The former 
takes a quadrilateral form whose varying breadth and 
height can be measured. The relation of the latter to the 
former is expressed as the orbital index. The tabulation 
of such data as we found in the literature presents a sym- 
metrical distribution with an approximate node at 87. As 
in the case of other characters we find the orbits of each 
local group to vary, but all to cluster about a single norm. 
Since there are several ways of measuring the orbit and 
the several authors are not often explicit as to the method 
employed, the above result should be regarded as tentative. 
Both Deniker *° and Martin '^ have compiled standard lists 
of this index, which furnish the additional series in our 
table. The series we have for the New World is of the 
symmetrical type which gives us greater confidence in its 
mean value. Martin ^* regards the Fuegian as in the lowest 
class, with the Tasmanian and Australian, while the Pata- 
gonian and Indians in general have very high indices, as 
also do the Eskimo and Mongolians. It appears, therefore, 
that the New World as a whole falls in the same class as do 
Asiatics, but that, on the other hand, high values are not 
unusual elsewhere. Thus, we cannot be sure that the orbit 
is a definitive character. 

The skeletal structure of the nose affords further oppor- 
tunity for measurement. The reader interested in the tech- 
nical details of the subject may consult the very concise and 
convenient statement of Deniker,^* together with a tabula- 

SOMATIC CHARACTERS 337 

tion of nasal indices for representative groups from all 
parts of the world. This index is analogous to that for the 
orbit, expressing the relation between the height of the 
nasal bones and their width. From the recorded indices, 
it appears that the white race is at one end of the series and 
the negro at the other.'* Just where our natives will fall 
is not yet clear, but in last analysis our conclusion must 

DISTRIBUTION TABLE FOR THE ORBITAL INDEX 

All Races 
Deniker^^ Martin *• 

I 
I 
o 

2 
O 

3 I 

O 3 

3 3 

6 5 

4 4 
4 6 

4 I 
4 7 
6 4 
3 2 
3 4 
6 X 

The New 

Wc 

76 

77 

78 

79 

1 

8o 

2 

8i 

0 

8a 

I 

83 

3 

84 

3 

85 

3 

86 

3 

87 

9 

88 

6 

89 

6 

90 

4 

91 

3 

92 

I 

93 

3 

94 

0 

95 

I 

96 

0 

07 

I 

rest upon qualitative observations, and it is the opinion of 
our leading anthropologists that there is a recognizable 
form for the nasal opening of New World peoples as a 
whole. In a recent review of the subject Sullivan shows 
that the minute form of the lower border of the nasal aper- 
ture, or the apertura pyriformis, takes on a rounded, or in- 
fantile, form among the Indians. This is also highly char- 
acteristic of Mongoloids. 

338 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

In conclusion, then, we find in the New World face and 
head many indications of somatic homogeneity strongly 
suggesting unity of origin. A more positive statement, 
while greatly to be desired, must await new searching in- 
vestigation, for the problem is peculiarly intricate and the 
available data, so far, inadequate. 

BODILY PROPORTIONS 

Among the many other aspects of somatological descrip- 
tion that promise well, is bodily proportion. This is usually 
expressed in diagrammatic form, as in Fig. 73. Though 
there are many published measurements of New World 
natives, in few cases do they give sufficient data for the 
construction of such diagrams. In fact, the four we have 
here about exhaust the subject. Yet, they show a striking 
similarity in form and proportions, suggesting that the 
New World native is of one bodily type. 

This method of comparison seems to have been devised 
by Thomson*^ from whom three of the diagrams in 
Fig. 74 are taken. If these are accurately constructed, 
there are obvious differences between the Indian and other 
races. However, our present purpose is to show that even 
in bodily form there is evidence of New World unity. 

SUMMARY OF SOMATIC CHARACTERS 

In this brief review of a large subject, we have sought, 
first of all, the characters truly definitive of New World 
man. The difficulties besetting such a quest are now ap- 
parent, but a summary of some kind is necessary to 
progress. Accordingly, on the basis of the preceding and 
the available studies, the following is offered : — 

1. The hair is straight, of medium coarseness, and black. 
Body hair scant. The skin color is a brown, ranging from 
yellowish to chocolate tones. Eyes tend to be dark brown. 

2. The head is quite variable as to length and breadth, 

SOMATIC CHARACTERS 339 

but appears to approximate an intermediate position in the 
world's series. On the other hand, the face is broad in 
proportion to the head. As to facial angle, there is mod- 
erate prognathism, and this, as well as size of mouth, thick- 
ness of lips, proportions of nose, size of teeth, takes an inter- 
mediate rank between whites and negroes. Finally, there 
is a slight slant to the eye, reminding one of certain Asiatics. 

3. The incisor teeth are markedly concave, or shovel- 
shaped and the lower second molars tend to five cusps in- 
stead of the usual four. 

4. In bodily proportions we note first an intermediate 
position between whites and negroes with respect to length 
of arms and legs. The hands and feet are relatively small. 
The capacity of head and estimated brain weights also give 
intermediate values. 

RELATIONS TO MANKIND IN GENERAL 

Assuming for the time, at least, the single origin of all 
New World peoples, we may now turn to the question in 
which all are interested, viz., the relation of the Indian to 
mankind in general. As has often been stated, the affinities 
of New World man are with Mongolians and, to a less 
marked degree, with Polynesians. With the former we 
have close parallels in hair, form of eye, breadth of face, 
and bodily proportions. With the Polynesians, the agree- 
ments are chiefly in pigmentation and to some extent, in the 
hair. Hrdlicka *• has formulated a convenient statement of 
the problem, which may serve as our point of departure: — 

The conclusions, therefore, are: the American natives represent in 
the main a single stem or stram of people, one homotype; this stem 
is identical with that of the yellow-brown races of Asia and Polynesia ; 
and the mam immigration of the Americans has taken place, in the 
main, at least, gradually and by the northwestern route in the earlier 
part of the recent period, after man had reached a relatively high 
stage of physical development and multiple secondary differentiations. 
The immigration, in all probability, was a dribbling and prolonged 

340 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

overflow, likely due to pressure from behind, or want, and sl search 
for better hunting and hshing grounds in the direction where no re- 
sistance of man as yet existed. This was followed by multiplicatioo, 
spread, and numerous minor differentiations of language due to iso- 
lation and other natural conditions, and by the development, on the 
basis of what was transported, of more or less localised American 

P't' }}■ DtatrammalU RtfTtuntatieti of Avnat* Boiilj Fermi for 
tht Etkmo {Duckworih. roao. I), tht Qatchua (Firru. I9<6. I), tkt 
Bakam lEhmrticli, ii97. I). aHd tht yaJigan IDtniktr, ifao. I) 

cultures. It is also probable that the western coast of America, whhia 
the last 2,000 years, was on more than one occasion reached by small 
parties of Polynesians, and that the eastern coast was similarly reached 
by small groups of whites, and that such parlies may have locally 
influenced the culture of the Americans; but such accretions have 
nowhere, as far as we know to-day, modified the native population. 

Such conclusions must, in last analysis, rest upon a satis- 
factory classification of mankind as a whole, but as stated 

SYSTEMS OF CLASSIFICATION 

341 

at the outset, this has proved a difficult problem, and the 
reader will find the literature of the subject very perplexing, 
each investigator proposing a different scheme. Upon 
analysis, however, we find these schemes have a great deal 

Sioux 

Negro 

Australian 

Amherst Students 

Fig. T4* Bodily Forms from Various Races: Sioux Indians iSullivan, 
1920. II); Negro and Australian {Thompson, 1S89. I); and Amherst 
Students (Hitchcock, 1S88. /) 

in common and, hence, are fairly intelligible. In the first 
place, they fall into two groups according to the controlling 
concepts. One of these classifications is purely objective 
and empirical, no regard being paid to ancestral relations or 
other related factors, while in the other, the ideal is to form 
a classificatory scheme that will express genetic relation- 
ships. The exposition of these systems does not fall within 
the scope of this work, but a few of their main features may 
be noted. 

Taking men as they come, experience shows that the most 

342 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

definitive objective characters are hair, skin color, and head- 
face form. Of these, the first is most persistently trans- 
mitted from parent to offspring, and so tends to remain con- 
stant. In the main, three kinds of hair are recognized: 
straight, wavy, and woolly, each having a distinctive cross^ 
section and associated peculiarities.*' With these as the 
points of departure, the people of the world fall into three 
groups : — 

1. Straight hair (leiotrichi) . The Asian- American group. 

2. Wavy hair {cymotrichi) . The Polynesian-European 
group. 

3. Woolly hair {ulotrichi). The Australian- African 
group. 

It is important to note that, though this grouping is 
strictly based upon the hair, the majority of all classifica- 
tions recognize these three great clusters of mankind, their 
differences arising from transferences of the more doubtful 
examples from one class to the other. A convenient sum- 
mary of the main characters for each is offered by Gid- 
dings : ^° — 

I. The Australian-African Group. 

Characteristics: black skin, dolichocephalic (long-headed), 
prognathic, woolly or frizzly-haired (cross-section of hair 
very elliptical). 

Area of distribution: Australia and Africa south of the equator. 
II. The Polynesian-European Group. 

Characteristics: fair skin, mesocephalic, orthognathic, straight 
or wavy hair (cross-section slightly elliptical). 
Area of distribution: broad zone from Polynesia northwest- 
ward through southwestern Asia and northern Africa and most 
of the continent of Europe. 
III. The Asian-American Group. 

Characteristics: yellow or red skin, brachycephalic (broad- 
headed), narrow-eyed, lank or straight-haired (cylindrical in 
cross-section). 

Area of distribution: eastern Asia and western America, 
chiefly north of the equator along the semicircular shore-line 
of Asia and America.^^ 

SYSTEMS OF CLASSIFICATION 343 

This investigator regards the second or middle group as 
the main stem, the generalized ancestral stock, from which 
the other two diverged and specialized. The American 
aborigines are regarded as a diverging branch of the Asiatic 
group. This classification, therefore, assumes a genetic 
relation between its main division by selecting the Poly- 
nesian-European type as the generalized, or ancestral type. 
Unforttuiately, in this case, as in most others, there is at 
hand no convincing proof. The grouping by hair and asso- 
ciated characters, has proved of great convenience and is 
in-so-far justified ; but it cannot meet the needs of the case. 
Recently, Duckworth •* offered a morphological analysis of 
man upon the basis of which was proposed a different group- 
ing. In this scheme, the generalized type is designated as 
the Eurasiatic, embracing almost the entire population of 
Europe, Asia, and the New World. It will be observed that 
in distribution, this type covers the greater part of the earth 
in one continuous mass. What remains are the minor out- 
lying groups, as the Australians, Africans, Andamanese, 
Polynesians, etc., which are treated as diverging stems from 
the main body. The one new feature of this grouping is 
that it correlates morphological distinctions with the facts 
of distribution, the significance of which we shall consider 
shortly. On the other hand, the morphological grouping is 
based upon the same principles of classification as are em- 
ployed in zoology. Hence, Duckworth's scheme is worthy 
of the most careful consideration. The vital question is, 
however, the reconstruction of the generalized ancestral 
type. This is a broad problem whose solution will rest 
largely on general paleontological conceptions and the spe- 
cific study of the primates. Its discussion falls outside the 
limits of the chapter, but a brief glance into the special lit- 
erature of the subject will show the strong support that can 
be found for this idea. We may, therefore, adopt as our 
working hypothesis the view that the Eurasiatic type, to 

344 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

which the bulk of the native population of the New World 
belongs, is the best living representative of the general type 
hominidce, and that the remaining groups of mankind are 
such as by wide dispersion and greater isolation became 
more divergent, or specialized. This idea is also consistent 
with culture data, for it is exclusively among this general- 
ized main body that the great civilizations of the world 
arose ; the highly specialized outlying groups, though show- 
ing sparks of true genius now and then, never rise to such 
a level. 

The next point to consider is the distribution of mankind 
over the earth. In the synthetic treatment of such a large 
problem, we need the greatest possible array of corrective 
data. While such data cannot entirely mitigate the weak- 
ness of all interpretations based upon incomplete series of 
observations, they, at least, serve as friendly guide-posts. 
If, instead of focusing our attention upon man alone, wc 
take in the whole gamut of mammalian dispersion, wc 
greatly increase the number of these corrective aids. Thus, 
a brief perusal of general books on mammalian life " sug- 
gests at once the existence of a veritable swarming center in 
the heart of Asia. It is not, of course, contended that all 
mammals arose there, but that a surprisingly large number 
of the most distinctive families can be successfully localized 
within the general limits of that continent. This is sup- 
ported by specific data when we restrict our view to the 
primates alone, respecting whose Asiatic origin there is no 
dissenting voice among those competent to speak. The most 
convenient presentation of the subject is in Matthew's paper 
on "Climate and Evolution,'* whose sketch map we repro- 
duce here, together with the chronological scale essential to 
its interpretation." From this we see, in a general way, 
how the many diverse forms of primates have swarmed out 
of the Old World, one after the other. We have, therefore, 
no alternative but to conclude that the same factors control- 

RACIAL DISPERSION 

Fit. 75- I-i<ut tf DUfriin far tkt Primala. Uatlhtw, iflj. I 

LIVINQ AND EXTINCT. GflOUPS Of PHIMATCS 
'ivob"" LEMUR^OIDEA AWrHROPOlDEft 

Fig. 76. Pkylottntlie Riltttant of lln Lhing and Extinct Greupt ef 
Primaltt. Tilt tinUt iniiittt Ikt tUt and known teohtital rangt of th» 
itBtrat irnnpx. Ikt iotUd linii IA«f moH fratabtt dtriinlion. Thtir 
luffoitd riloliont to ctrlain Initctivart and int*rm*di»li 4*iinet gtvuft 
trt alio indicaltd. Uatlhm, r^rj. I 

346 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

ling the dispersion of the whole division of primates apply 
also to man, and that his dispersion will, in the main, follow 
the same beaten tracks. With this as a point of departure, 
it is not very difficult to form a satisfactory statement of the 
order and direction of dispersion for the known species and 
varieties of hominidce. 

When we consider the map in Fig. 75, it appears that the 
New World is geographically more remote than either Af- 
rica, Europe, or the insular area, and has but one point of 
contact, but that point is in direct line with the asstuned cen- 
ter of dispersion. On mere geographical grounds, we should 
locate the extremes of expansion in Patagonia, Greenland, 
Cape Colony, Ceylon, and Tasmania. To this list may also 
be added the extreme western parts of Europe, as the Cana- 
ries and British Isles. These are veritable blind alleys in 
which primitive man was ultimately brought up short and 
where some of his descendants are still marking time. It so 
happens, however, that the fluctuating polar ice cap hovers 
over the single narrow bridge to the New World and the 
part it has played in the story of the primates is truly won- 
derful. The reader familiar with the recent literature on 
Paleolithic man need not be told that the pulsation of this 
ice-cap is proving the only reliable time clock for human 
culture. At four intervals, at least, this ice field crept down 
into North America and into the Old World, each time 
greatly modifying the distribution of mammalian life. 

Though we now have a fairly complete outline of man's 
relation to these events in Europe, we are quite in the dark 
as to what happened in Asia and America. The United 
States school of anthropologists, led by the veteran Holmes, 
has successfully combated all claims to an interglacial man 
in America, but this negative result is difficult to harmonize 
with the cultural career of the aborigines we have just 
sketched. No doubt it was the consciousness of this that led 
Boas" to formulate the dissenting view: viz,, that man 

RACIAL DISPERSION 347 

reached the New World during an interglacial period. 
Many investigators agree that ten to twenty thousand years 
is all that can be allotted for the lapse of time since the last 
retreat of the ice in the New World. This, of itself, might 
give time enough to account for the growth of American 
culture, but the ice receded gradually, in fact, still hangs 
about the connecting bridge, so that a much more recent 
date must be set for the last opening of communication. 
Reference to our chapter on chronology will show that this 
leaves a very narrow margin for the development of abo- 
riginal culture. Yet, exactly the same difficulty confronts us 
in the Old World, for it is clear that the earlier phases of 
Egyptian development also leave us a narrow margin, if we 
assume that all the higher cultures we know were developed 
since the dawn of the Neolithic in Europe. The important 
difference, however, lies in that whereas we know that man 
was even at that time a very old inhabitant of the vicinity, 
his corresponding presence in the New World is denied. 
Thus, if we accept the theory that man first reached 
America after the opening of the ice in Alaska, we are 
under the necessity of assuming a sudden unprecedented 
growth of culture, unless it turns out that the lapse of time 
has been greatly underestimated. It seems far more con- 
sistent with the facts to assume that the peopling of the New 
World was contemporaneous with that of Western Europe, 
and that the subsequent return of the ice practically isolated 
the two hemispheres, leaving each to develop as it might. 
If we leave out of account everything below the Tropic 
of Cancer, a certain parallelism appears between western 
Europe and eastern North America, though far more 
strongly accentuated in the former. The Cro-Magnon man. 
who appears rather abruptly in western Europe, has in his 
disharmonic face, one of the most prominent New World 
characters, and it is not at all improbable that future re 
search in Asia will give grounds for assuming the Cro- 

348 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

RACIAL DISPERSION 349 

Magnon and contemporaneous New World peoples to be 
collateral branches from a central Asiatic type. More than 
once, attention has been called to certain vague similarities 
between certain Paleolithic races and the Eskimo, and in 
the New World certain older skulls from the remoter parts 
of South America are not far removed from this same 
Eskimo type. Incidentally, we may note that the Chan- 
celade skeleton in western Europe belonging to Magdalenian 
time, is quite similar to the modern Eskimo. The earlier 
races appearing in Europe tend to be long-headed, and we 
have noted a less marked, but still noticeable tendency for 
the long heads in the New World to cluster on the extreme 
margins. That this is rather fundamental appears when we 
regard mammals as a whole, for we read that "when the 
parallel series in Europe and North America are sufficiently 
complete, they are seen to be not parallel phyla of inde- 
pendent local evolution, but periodically recruited by more 
progressive new stages, apparently from a common center 
of dispersal. The relations are like those of one side and the 
other of a branching tree whose trunk region is unknown 
to us." *• The human phenomena we have been consider- 
ing appear, therefore, as but an integral part of mammalian 
expansion, and, for that reason, become more evident. 

In conclusion, then, we seem to have a large mass of 
hominidcB occupying the greater part of Asia and America, 
the tendency of which was toward round-headedness and 
straight hair; hanging on the outskirts of these were many 
variants. This interpretation is not antagonistic to those 
who regard the modern Indo-European as distinct from 
the Asiatic-American branch, for the suggestive parallels 
between earlier types of western Europe and America arise 
in a much earlier period of man's history. That the New 
World native is a direct descendant of the Asiatic Mon- 
golian is not to be inferred, for the diflferentiation is evi- 
dently remote; what is implied, is that somewhere in the 

3SO THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

distant past the Asiatic wing of the generalized type diverged 
into strains, one of which we now know as Mongolian, and 
another as American. 

GROUPING BY SOMATIC CHARACTERS 

After these necessary digressions we may turn to our 
initial task, the classification of New World peoples accord- 
ing to somatic characters. In the first place, our previous 
discussions have revealed the primary somatic units to be 
the in-breeding local social groups. The resemblances of 
individuals within these are comparable to family resem- 
blances among our own people. If, for example, we take 
the Navajo, Apache, Pawnee, Teton-Dakota, Patagonian, 
and Eskimo, there is often no difficulty in placing an indi- 
vidual by his portrait alone. On the other hand, to reduce 
the characters of identity to exact statement, is extremely 
difficult, just as is the case when one attempts to write a 
facial description of an acquaintance that would clearly 
identify him. Our problem, then, is quite the same as in the 
preceding chapters, vis., to find some empirical grouping for 
these small somatic groups. 

Those who are reasonably familiar with anthropological 
literature can understand the sexual conditions that readily 
contribute to the leveling down of family diflferences to the 
group type. When we take up the question of group resem- 
blances, we may, upon a priori grounds, assume that con- 
tiguous groups will often mix to an extent sufficient to bring 
them very near to each other. The data for tribal social 
practices give every justification for this assumption. Then 
when one plots out a series of anatomical measurements on 
a map he finds that high values often tend to cluster in one 
geographical area and low in another. Thus, in case of 
stature, we rarely find a single tall social group surrounded 
by groups of low stature. For example, the Cheyenne are 
rated as tall (1,748 mm.), near them were the Crow (1,732), 

SOMATIC AREAS 351 

Arapaho (1,728), and the Dakota (1,726). In fact, all the 
tribes of the bison area which cluster around the above 
group show high stature, but receding to the south, west, 
and north. This is comparable to what we find to be true 
of culture traits, tAjs., a tendency to radiate around a geo- 
graphical center. Another good example is around the 
mouth of the Colorado River, where the Mohave are rated 
at 1,740, the Maricopa at 1,722, the Yuma at 1,700, and the 
Pima at 1,703, while surrounding them are groups of lower 
statures. A similar grouping appears in head measure- 
ments, a fine illustration of which is seen in Hrdlicka's " 
data on the Indians of northeastern United States, where we 
find certain agreements between tribal groups that are con- 
tiguous. In short, it appears that as we pass from one social 
group to another, there is a gradation of somatic characters 
and that these gradations radiate from centers in much the 
same way as we noted for culture characters. 

Now, if we generalize, it appears that the same leveling 
causes that unify the internal somatologies of the several 
social groups also operate to reduce group diflFerences. On 
logical grounds this leveling will be most marked where the 
opportunities for sexual contact are greatest, and it follows 
that these opportunities will be greatest where cultural dif- 
fusion is accelerated. It appears, then, that our best lead in 
the development of a somatic classification is to seek for 
correlated distinguishing characters in each recognized cul- 
ture area. 

Before proceeding, it may be well to try grouping a few 
measurements according to these areas. The most accessible 
are stature and cephalic index, for which we present the 
accompanying tables. If, for instance, there were no cor- 
respondences between the statures of social groups within 
the same area, we should expect the distributions in the suc- 
cessive columns to be similar, or to have a chance relation. 
This is not what we observe, but, on the contrary, in almost 

352 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

STATUKES OF TKIBAL GROUPS ACCORDING TO CULTURE AREAS 

c 

0 
0 

en 

s 

u 

u 

^ 

N 

.2 

en 

^ 

0 

E 

V 
•♦J 
(A 

(2 

c 

en 
C 

0 

0 

5 

•♦-• 
s 
0 

CO 
V 

p 
0 

C/3 

8 

••* 

K 

"3 

0 
H 

cm. 

150 

155 

I 

2 

3 

160 

I 

3 

2 

2 

3 

11/ 

165 

3 

2 

I 

8 

2 

16 

170 

5 

2 

10 

4 

2 

6 

3 

32 

175 

I 

3 

I 

I 

6 

180 

68 

every case there is a tendency to cluster around an area 
average. Thus, our initial assumption seems justified and 
we may expect a somatic grouping of natives at least 
roughly coincident with the culture grouping. 

If, however, we disregard all such assumptions and pro- 
ceed empirically with the compilation of a distribution map 
we reach a result shown in Fig. 78. First, we may be re- 
minded that the data and conditions under which this map 
must be made do not permit of such clear-cut distinctions 
as were possible in the preceding chapters. The determining 
characters used here were stature, pigmentation, head, and 
face form. Proceeding, then, with these limitations, we 
find, first of all, that the Eskimo are fairly distinct. Again, 
centering in the North Pacific area, we have another type, 
and stretching east and above the Great Lakes and out to 
the Atlantic, is a third. The centering of 4. 5, 6, and 7 on 
our map is approximately coincident with culture areas. 

SOMATIC AREAS 353 

CIPHAUC INISX ACCORSIHC TO CULTOBB AKEA5 

~ 

— 

■ 

c 

c 

J! 

1 

,K 

1 

1 

, 

. 

X 

1 

1 

(2 

S 

1 

z 

i 
1 

1 

3 

1 

1 

.2 

0 

£ 
< 

M 

1 

1 

7' 
7S 

y 

73 

3 

s 

74 

I 

75 

76 

' 

' 

I 

77 

i 

3 

I 

' 

I 

I 

78 

I 

4 

6 

' 

1 

1 

14 

79 

1 

' 

3 

• 

1 

3 

to 

80 

I 

3 

1 

1 

I 

81 

I 

1 

a 

I 

a 

1 

Si 

I 

1 

t 

83 

I 

I 

I 

1 

1 

1 

84 

I 

3 

1 

1 

3 

3 

■ 

,, 

8S 

' 

■ 

86 

, 

87 

' 

9' 

Central America seems to be a separate area, but the data 
are meager. 

South America is still more vague, but we have the sug- 
gestion of the following: First, an upper Andean region 
including the greater part of Ecuador and Colombia ; second, 
the great Amazon basin; third, eastern and southern Brazil, 
with a possible extension into Peru ; fourth, the Patagonian- 
Araucan group; and finally, the Fuegians. 

It should be understood that somatic identity is not 
claimed, for such is improbable outside of the social groups 
we have designated as the fundamental units, but that a 
general similarity exists. Additional data will surely mod- 

354 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

ify the boundaries we have designated, but it is unlikely that 
the areas as a whole will be effaced. However, the great 
need is for a new type of investigation in which the full dis- 
tributions of specific characters are worked out. The 
tendency in the past has been to isolate a tribal unit, or 
locality, and then describe minutely its cranial anatomy or 
its anthropometry, as the case might permit. What we need, 
however, is to know the entire geographical distribution of 
such characters as the inca bone, apertura pynformis, fossa 
pharyngea, as well as stature, face width, nasal index, etc. 
It was from such studies of the distributions for traits of 
culture, that our present insight into the phenomena of the 
New World developed, and in equal measure will our hold 
upon the biological problem of man in the New World be- 
come more secure with each advance in the data of distribu- 
tion. 

CHRONOLOGICAL TYPES 

In the preceding, we have assumed the same attitude as in 
the other initial classifications, viz., treating all as if contem- 
poraneous in origin. This is, of course, the only attitude to 
assume toward observations upon the living, but skeletons 
from burials may belong to very widely separated periods. 
We must, therefore, give some consideration to the chronol- 
ogy of somatic types. In the first place, no skeletal remains 
have so far been found to which great antiquity can be as- 
signed with absolute certainty, at least, not to the satisfaction 
of the critical. A considerable number of fragmentary 
skeletons have come to light, and achieved literary fame, 
among which are the Lansing Man, the Calaveras Skull, the 
Nebraska Loess Man, ana the Homo pampccus proposed by 
Ameghino. The claims of all these to a respectable age have 
been vigorously assailed by Hrdlicka,'® and, consequently, 
placed in the doubtful column. Nevertheless, one must sus- 

CHRONOLCXilCAL TYPES 355 

Pig. ji. Somatic Attat 

356 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

pect that where so many cases arise which exercise die 
utmost ingenuity of scientists to disprove, the probability of 
some being authentic is very greaL The later work at Tren- 
ton, however, makes it extremely diflScult to disprove the 
presence of the aborigines during the recession of giadal ice. 
However, the one positive point resulting from these contro- 
versies is that whatever may be the age of the skeletons in 
question, they are of the same general t}^ as those of the 
surviving New World native. This finding is consistent with 
our conclusions as to his homogeneity and probable single 
origin. On the other hand, it will not do to argue that unless 
we find skeletons that do differ from this general type, they 
cannot, therefore, be old. But as this controversy over the 
antiquity of man in the western world is not our {Hesent 
concern, we may accept the above conclusion in-so-far as it 
applies to the homogeneity of type. Under such conditions, 
the problem of antiquity shifts to the geological and faunal 
associations. For example, the contemporaneity of man and 
the mammoth has not yet been established for North Amer- 
ica, whereas in Europe there cannot be the least doubt of it 
There is just one case of association with extinct fauna that 
promises something. In 1914 a human skeleton was found 
in the famous La Brea asphalt bed of southern California, 
among the bones of both extinct and extant animals.** When 
this deposit is completely excavated and its faunal strata 
determined, we may have an early date for man's appearance 
here, though not earlier than late Pleistocene. Again, how- 
ever, the somatic type is the same. We may anticipate, 
therefore, no future skeleton finds but what are of the gen- 
eral New World type, but if we consider the data in other 
parts of this work, we must expect some of them to have a 
respectable antiquity. 

While this point of view applies to the New World as a 
whole, it still remains possible that there have been changes 
in the sub-types occupying some of the areas we have just 

CHRONOLCXJICAL TYPES 

357 

designated. Something like this is suggested for South 
America,*® where we find some reasons for assiuning that 
the coast, at least, was first occupied by a fishing people with 
long heads, who later gave way to a round-headed popula- 
tion. There are, also, some indications that these long- 
headed South Americans are somatically similar to the Es- 
kimo and so, possibly, connected ; but for the present, such 
interpretations must be taken as problems stated rather than 
solved. The facts are that since a general unity appears to 
hold for the whole New World population, we cannot expect 
definite chronological grouping for somatic types until the 
time relations of their cultural associates are determined. 
Our previous discussion of the time relations for culture 
shows that little aid can come from that quarter until new 
evidence is produced. Without this help, it would serve no 
definite purpose to sunmiarize the few random observations 
of local somatic sequences found in the special literature of 
the subject. Yet our inquiry has not been in vain for we 
have found that, whatever may ultimately prove to be the 
truth concerning the chronological relations of the skeletal 
material available for the study of aboriginal man, there 
cannot be the least doubt as to the general somatic homo- 
geneity of the race and the place of its origin. 

1. Deniker, 1900. I, p. 292. 

2. Posnansky, 1916. I. 

3. Boas, 1895. I. 

4. Jenks, 1 9 16. I. 

5. Jenks, 1916. I. 

6. Hrdlicka, 1916. I. 

7. Duckworth, 1904. I, p. 3I7- 

8. Deniker, 1900. I, p. 89. 

9. Hrdlicka, 1920. I. 

10. Sullivan, 1920. I. 

11. Hellman, 1919. I. 

12. Posnansky, 1916. I. 

13. Ripley, 1899. I, p. 43. 

14. Martin, 1914. I. 

15. Boas, 191 0. I. 

16. Boas, 191 2. I, pp. 177-183. 

17. Martin, 1914. I. 

18. Berry and Robertson, 1914, I. 

19. Martin, 1914. I. 

20. Deniker, 1900. I. 

21. Martin, 1914. I. 

22. Martin, 1914. I. 

23. Deniker, 1900. I. 

24. Martin, 1914. I. 

25. Deniker, 1900. I, pp. 63-64. 

26. Martin, 1914. I. 

27. Thomson, 1899. I» PP. 125-128. 

28. Hrdlicka, 1915. I, p. 91. 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

358 

29. Haddon (no date). j6. Matthew, 1915. I, p. 27a 

30. Giddings, 1909. I. *'* "-'«««*'»i'« "^»< t 

31. Chapin, 1913. I, p. 2ra 

32. Duckworth, 1904. I. 

33. Osborn, 1910. L 

37. Hrdlicka, 1916. I. 

38. Hrdlicka, 1907. I; 1912. L 

39. Merriam, J. C, 1914. I, pp. 
33* Osborn, 1910. L 198-203. 

34. Matthew, 1915. I, pp. 214, 215. 40. Joyce, 1912. L 

35. Boas, 1912. L 

CHAPTER XIX 
CORRELATION OF CLASSIFICATIONS 

We have now g^ven a descriptive account of the facts con- 
stituting our subject, and with this preliminary task ended, 
may turn to a few more serious problems. We have sue- , 
ceeded in classifying the minor social units, according to 
culture data, language, and somatic characters. Also, it has 
been possible to group geographically the known archaeologi- 
cal artifacts resulting in a distinct culture classification. The 
general impression prevails that all of these classifications 
are independent of each other. The facts in the case are 
that each system developed in its own way and largely at 
the hands of specialists. The result has, on the whole, been 
detrimental to anthropology, because the tendency has been • 
to diverge into uncoordinated sciences, as linguistics, archae- 
ology, ethnology, and physical anthropology. Such differ- 
entiation developed partisans for each classification, whose 
controversies have obscured the problem rather than other- 
wise. Thus, the linguist asserts that no one can do any- 
thing until he learns native languages, because they are the 
keys to the whole subject; the archaeologist insists that his is 
the main road to travel; the ethnologist belittles the claims 
of both ; while the physical anthropologist looks down upon 
all. Fortunately, this condition is passing and the coming 
generation of anthropologists is facing the synthetic prob- 
lems upon which the future of our science depends. 

Such broader synthetic work must, in the nature of the 
case, begin with the correlation of the four g^eat groups of 
data we have so far discussed independently. Each has 
developed a classification based upon geographical distribu- 

359 

36o THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

tion and in this direction lies our first task. As may be 
anticipated, any such attempt to correlate these four great 
systems of classification will meet with opposition, for there 
is a deep-rooted belief that there are no such correlations. 
But let us ignore this proposition for the present, and ex- 
amine the case on its merits. 

Let us begin first with the historic and prehistoric culture 
classifications. Our experience with Old World archaeology 
arouses two expectations. In classical problems, we antici- 
pate finding a long and continuous occupation of definite 
areas where we find the successive remains of what is, in its 
fundamentals, a single expanding culture. As all of these 
areas have well-established historical periods, we take, as a 
matter of course, the close correlation, or superposition, of 
archaeological and historical culture localizations. On the 
other hand, when we deal with the archaeology of cultures 
that do not readily connect themselves with historical data, 
as the Paleolithic cultures of western Europe, and even some 
of the Neolithic, we are accustomed to find a series of cul- 
tures resting one above the other, but between which the con- 
nections are broken. It has sometimes been proposed that 
this diflFerence is, in the main, one of interpretation, but 
again it is defended as a real difference due to the relative 
antiquities of the two groups. Thus, it is considered that 
cultures arising early enough to run their courses before the 
dawn of history, have time to vanish completely and leave 
room for the establishment of something entirely new and 
independent. Without dwelling upon the respective merits 
of these two somewhat opposing views, we may turn to the 
objective correlation of the archaeological and cultural classi- 
fications for the New World. 

In the first place, the reader should fix in his mind the 
nature of these distribution areas. Our analyses show that 
each is a more or less illy-defined area in which there are 
many trait differences, but that these show a gradation 

CORRELATIONS 361 

outward from a center, or nucleus. While, by comparative 
study, one arrives at the generalization of a type for the 
various social groups making up such a center, the result 
is, nevertheless, strongly grounded in empirical methods, and 
is not the work or interpretation of a single individual. We 
have seen that in this respect the historic and archaeological 
areas are essentially similar, indicating that the data of both 
apply to analogous, if not identical, cultures. We should 
note, also, that the difference between the two classifications 
is one of time. One deals with observations upon living 
natives, the other with what is found on the ground. Since 
the former begins with 1492 and thus arbitrarily cross-sec- 
tions the cultural career of the natives, we may expect a 
large part of the readily accessible archaeological data to 
refer to the historic cultures. On the other hand, we have 
just grounds for assuming that the prehistoric period was of 
much greater duration than the historic. One of our prob- 
lems, therefore, will be to discover if the archaeological data 
can be analyzed so as to reveal earlier independent cultures 
in any of these areas, if such there were. Unfortunately, 
this task must await more searching field-work, as our dis- 
cussion of chronology has suggested ; so all that can be hoped 
for now is the mere formulation of the problem. 

The most direct approach to this will be a comparative 
study of the respective distribution maps. For convenience, 
we have superimposed the archaeological and culture area 
maps (Fig. 79), the historic areas in Arabic, the prehistoric, 
or archaeological areas, in Roman enumeration. At first 
glance, the respective boundaries may seem bewildering, but 
closer inspection shows many areas to have common centers. 
Reading from north to south, we have the following coin- 
cident pairs : XI-s, X.4, IX-2, VIII-3, VII-9, VI-i, XVIII- 
15, XXI-12, XXIII-r4, XXIV-r3. Thus ten of the fourteen 
historic culture areas coincide with prehistoric archaeological 
centers. Of the remaining, XII-6, may well be added to the 

362 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

above, since it is rather a graphic factor that gives the im- 
pression of divergence. 

Turning now to Area 10, we find it embracing archaeologi- 
cal centers for XIV, XV, and XVI. Area XIII lies between 
or on the margins of 9 and 10, but need not be considered 
here, for reasons previously stated (p. 277). Area XVI is 
the old Maya region and is, therefore, somewhat earlier than 
the type culture of historic Area 10. In like manner, XV 
is the center of Zapotecan culture, which also seems to be 
older than the type of Area 10, or XIV. 

Likewise, for Area 1 1 we have three archaeological cen- 
ters, XVII, XIX. and XX. While we cannot yet state the 
chronological relations of these, yet, from the artifacts alone, 
we see that XVII affiliates with XIX and XX rather than 
with XVI, indicating that they have a great deal in common. 

Perhaps the most complicated is the superposition in east- 
ern North America. Thus, in Area 8 we find two archae- 
ological centers, and in 7, three, if not four. In Area III, 
the home of the Iroquois, stratified deposits have been re- 
ported showing Iroquois remains over and above what are 
regarded as Algonkin. The latter have affiliations to Area I 
and V, and since the ancestral home of the Iroquois seems 
to have been farther south, we assume that the prehistoric 
Area IIJ is due to this intrusion. In the discussion of cul- 
ture Area 7, we found the Iroquois to be intermediate to 8 
hence, not typical. That their archaeology seems more 
sharply divergent than their historic culture, may be due to 
the leveling effect of contact with the surrounding tribes. In 
Areas I and V we have no very satisfactory chronological 
determinations, so that further discussion is useless. 

Looking back over this comparison, we see, first of all, 
that the greater disparities between the two classifications 
fall in the regions of higher culture. In the case of 10 and 
II, it is suggested that the chronological factor is the chief 
disturbing element. For 7 and 8, we are less clear, but some 

CORRELATIONS 

363 

m 

w 

\'^^»^C^^%v 

\yv 

^ 

lH"'*^ 

x« A 

" fy^ y 

y 

&//' y^j/ 

^ 

364 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

students attribute the divergence to shif tings in the popula- 
tion, as the data for the Iroquois suggest/ To generalize, 
we may say that on the whole, the tendency is for the his- 
toric cultures to coincide with those of the prehistoric classi- 
fication, but that in the region of intense culture and the 
eastern maize province, the archaeological areas are more 
numerous than the historic classifications would lead us to 
anticipate. A natural inference would be that this is explica- 
ble as an expression of relative age, those areas in which the 
people had lived through only one culture cycle being the 
ones in which the two maps most nearly coincide. This, 
however, does not seem consistent with other data, and may 
be disregarded at present. 

LINGUISTICS AND CULTURE 

The reader is, no doubt, quite familiar with the idea of no 
correlations between culture and linguistic type, which is 
regarded as a kind of truism. But when we look carefully 
into the case, it is not clear that every kind of correlation is 
absent.* Our attention, so far, has been fixed upon the con- 
ventional stock grouping, but it is now becoming clear that 
this is not the only possible classification. Under the appro- 
priate heading, we have noted that in California, positive 
similarities between a large number of stocks have been 
worked out and new groupings proposed. Further, we have 
shown how the great variety of languages spoken in the 
California culture area fell into groups strictly parallel to 
the culture grouping, and noted suggestive data from other 
areas pointing in the same direction. In all this, there ap- 
pears a definite tendency for language to correlate in certain 
ways with the culture grouping. Yet, this correlation may 
be an expression of tribal contact rather than genetic rela- 
tionship in speech, for it certainly does not follow that simi- 
larities in culture parallel identities of linguistic stock. 

Perhaps the reader should be reminded that we are dis- 

LANGUAGE AND CULTURE 365 

cussing unity in stock and not identity of speech. Though 
the English and Gennan languages are of the same stock, 
they are far from being mutually intelligible, and this well 
illustrates what we meet with in native American stocks. It 
is, in fact, a safe assumption that real identity of speech in 
the New World will be accompanied by political and cul- 
tural unity. On the other hand, we are dealing with a dis- 
tinction of another sort, for a stock relation is an expression 
of common origin. Even the most cursory comparison of 
culture and linguistic maps will show that a single stock may 
spread into several culture areas, as, for example, the 
Athapascan, which is found in Areas i, 2, 3, 6, and 9. This 
simply means that a language can travel independently of 
culture, or, at least, outlives it. The point we made in the 
preceding is that the representatives of different stocks 
gathered into a culture area often show intra-stock similari- 
ties by which also they can be grouped and segregated. These 
similarities suggest that languages have a grouping similar 
to, and largely coincident with, the culture grouping. This 
may, or may not, be the result of genetic relations, but 
rather of long social contact. Our point is that the lan- 
guages of a culture area, even when regarded as of inde- 
pendent stocks, still show a grouping that tends to be coinci- 
dent with that for cultural characters. It is a reasonable 
expectation that a distribution of phonetic types alone would 
show a similar correspondence. The peculiar point is, how- 
ever, that the unity is in the stock affiliation and not in prac- 
tical speech, for the linguistic differentiation within a stock 
is often very great. Neither is there political unity, and it 
may be doubted if the latter can long exist without the other. 
The suggestion is, therefore, that the similarities of lan- 
guages within a geographical, or culture area, are due to the 
expansion of the early parent stocks within their habitats, 
and to the long association made possible thereby. 

366 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

SOMATIC CORRELATIONS 

We may now turn to the somatic classification of Ameri- 
can aborigines. Again, we have a truism that no correla- 
tions are to be found with culture and language. Yet, our 
previous discussion of somatic classifications indicated a 
kind of agreement in-so-far that each culture area mani- 
fested some somatic unity, or that the geographical distribu- 
tion of somatic types is generally coincident with culture 
distribution. Under that head it was suggested that this 
could be expected if the population were fairly stable, since 
sexual and culture contacts are largely simultaneous. As to 
linguistic correlations, it follows that wherever agreements 
are found between language and culture, there also may be 
expected agreements in somatic type. A fine example of this 
is to be found in the Eskimo, where culture, language, and 
somatic type are equally distinct from other parts of the con- 
tinent. On the other hand, we find cases where a stock 
language is found in more than one culture area, and again, 
other cases in which the somatic type has spread into neigh- 
boring areas. Hence we are dealing with three independent 
groups of human phenomena, each of which tends toward 
the same geographical centers. 

GENERAL RELATIONS OF CULTURE, LINGUISTICS, AND 

SOMATOLOGY 

If now we take a comprehensive view of anthropology as 
a whole, we see no reason for revising the general assump- 
tion that no necessary relation exists between the known 
types of culture, linguistics, and somatology. Neither are 
certain types of linguistics associated with certain types of 
culture, nor certain types of somatology accompanied by spe- 
cial forms of culture or language. The particular combina- 
tion of these which we encounter are, in the main, historical 
facts. Yet, we have seen that, while this is essentially true. 

MIGRATION 367 

there are ways in which these classes of data do correlate. 
This correlation is seen in many of our culture areas. One 
of the best known examples, that of the Eskimo, has been 
cited in a previous discussion. Here the language, culture, 
and somatology are all distinctly different from those in 
other areas. Again, in California the languages, though of 
many stocks, show a curious tendency to possess common 
distinctive characters, while the somatic type is claimed as 
uniform throughout.' We can, therefore, safely summarize 
our discussion by stating that each distinct culture area 
tends to have distinctive characters in language and soma- 
tology. However, the reversal of this formula does not hold, 
for people speaking languages of the same stock do not show 
a tendency to common culture characters unless they occupy 
a single geographical area. An analogous negation holds for 
somatology. It seems then, that culture is one of the pri- 
mary factors in this association, and that, due to causes we 
have not yet perceived, both languages and somatologies are 
differentiated after culture's own pattern. 

THE MIGRATION FACTOR 

Our next task will be to seek out clues to the identity of 
these contributory causes. Early in this discussion, we saw 
how closely the prehistoric areas agreed with the historic, 
suggesting that a type of culture was in some vague manner 
firmly fixed in a locality. In some respects, such a conclu- 
sion is disconcerting, because the traditions of our subject 
call for a veritable and constant flux of migrations. While 
our previous discussions have made it apparent that migra- 
tion is exceptional rather than universal, still, the logical 
necessities of the case require some movements of popula- 
tion. One can scarcely conceive of the peopling of the New 
World except by the expansion and spread of its population 
gradually from one area to another. It may be, however, 
that this is not the important point here. Thus, when we 

368 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

consider the best known or most probable cases of migra- 
tion, they all seem to have one common character, since they 
are circumscribed movements in a single area. For example, 
the Eskimo, whose first appearance in the New World must 
have been in Alaska, spread only along the Arctic coast belt 
to its ultimate limits. Yet, since they are the sole posses- 
sors of this territory, they offer a far less suggestive exam- 
ple than can be found elsewhere. We now have satisfactory 
data for the northern movement of the Iroquois, but if we 
superimpose a linguistic map and one showing topography, 
we see clearly that whichever way the tribes of Iroquoian 
stock moved, they kept close to the Atlantic Highlands. On 
the other hand, the Algonkin expanded in lands of less ele- 
vation, 500 to 2,000 feet, but chiefly in a wooded lake and 
portage region. In like manner, we may follow out the 
Siouan, Athapascan, Salishan, and Muskhogean, ShosAio 
nean, Mayan, Arawakan, Cariban, and other stocks. It can- 
not be an accident that all the Muskhogean peoples lived at 
an elevation less than 500, that the Algonkin were, with few 
excei>tions, between 50a and 2,000, that the Athapascan are 
chiefly inland between 2,000 and 5,000, while the Shoshoni- 
Nahuatl stock occupies land above 5,000. If, then, we turn 
from linguistic to culture characters, we find similar agree- 
ments. The southeastern culture (Area 8, Fig. 67), is below 
500 feet, the Eastern Woodland area (7) is, in the main, 
from 500 to 2,000, the Nahua area (10) above 5,000, as was 
also the home of Inca culture (12). 

It is also suggestive to take a topographical map as our 
point of departure, and note the correlations between eleva- 
tion and the variations in cultures. Thus, the Algonkin of 
the Atlantic Coast plain from Maine southward are below 
500 feet, or on a level with the Muskhogean group, and it is 
just here that we find certain northern traces of Southeast- 
em culture. In the Mississippi Valley these same lowlands 
reach up to the Ohio and the Missouri, and here also, we 

MIGRATION 369 

find the margin of Southeastern traits. The two types of 
culture which we find in the bison area ( i ) , the western and 
the eastern, line up along the north and south divide of 2,000 
feet. Further, it is distinctly among the eastern tribes that 
we find Eastern Woodland traits, the elevation of both being 
below 2,000 feet. 

These few illustrations must suffice, but the reader can 
follow out others by referring to suitable maps. We are not 
contending for a direct correlation between elevation and 
culture, for these numerals are but convenient geographical 
indices to climatic, faunal, and floral areas. As boundaries, 
they are just as arbitrarily chosen as those for culture areas, 
but for that very reason should be strictly comparable. The 
fact, then, that they do so correspond cannot be dismissed 
as a logical error. We are thus brought to the conclusion 
that the phenomena of our subject manifest a strong ten- 
dency to expand to the limits of the geographical area in 
which they arise, and no farther. Language and blood seem 
to spill over the edges far more readily than culture, from 
which we must infer that their dispersion is a by-product of 
migration, but thai these migratory groups seem imable to 
resist complete cultural assimilation. 

From this point of view, it is conceivable that the Musk- 
hogean and Algonkian stocks, for instance, could have ex- 
changed habitats without changing the cultures localized 
within the two areas, provided the shifting was by success 
sive small units; or that all of the Shoshonean peoples could 
have become Pueblos and the Keresan and other stocks have 
scattered out on the plateaus to the north, while the culture 
values of the two areas remained relatively the same. That 
such extreme transpositions ever occurred is, of course, im- 
probable, but their possibility is demonstrated in the Plains 
and particularly in the Pueblo area itself. 

Yet, the real problem in the case remains unsolved. What 
became of the culture brought into an area by the first set- 

370 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

tiers? That the new envircmment was harsh enough to 
stamp it out promptly is beyond belief. The idea that all 
initial cultures were uniformly simple at the first dispersion 
over the New World is equally unsatisfactory. No doubt 
part of our trouble arises from the fact that we are best 
acquainted with the centers of lower cultures. When we 
have fuller knowledge of Mexico and the Andean region, it 
may be expected that different underlying cultures will come 
to light. It is impossible to guess what insight will thus be 
gained into the early history of the Americas, though it is 
a fair assutnption that even the earlier cultures of these 
higher centers will possess individuality comparable to other 
areas. 

On the other hand, we have everywhere encountered evi- 
dences of fundamental unity of origin, in both culture and 
somatic types. The basic elements of culture in the area of 
most intense development have their fading parallels as we 
go outward, and the somatic grouping shows, also, unmis- 
takable evidences of expansion from a single ancestral stock. 
This may account for the close correspondences we have 
observed between archaeological and historic classifications, 
for, in contrast to Europe and western Asia, there were no 
sudden eruptions of new races until the white occupation of 
the New World, whereas in the former, we find evidences of 
many such successive invasions.* It is fair to assume that, 
had the road from Asia to America been broad, direct, and 
open, we should find here a complex archaeological condition 
quite comparable to that of the Old World, for then wave 
after wave of new peoples and cultures would have poured 
into America as they did into Europe. 

THE INFLUENCE OF ENVIRONMENT 

We are now prepared to take a closer view of the control- 
ling factors in the formation of these geographical types of 
man and his works. It is natural to suspect the environment 

ENVIRONMENT 371 

to be one of these, since the fauna and flora of a locality are 
certain to leave their stamps upon many traits of culture. 
From the very first, we saw how the location of food areas 
laid down the general lines of culture grouping. One strik- 
ing characteristic of such an area is the tendency to spe- 
cialize in some one or two foods. Reference to the initial 
chapter of this work will make this point clear. For exam- 
ple, we have, centering in California (3), the use of the 
acorn; in the Plains (i), the bison; in parts of both conti- 
nents, maize; and in the Amazon country (14), manioc. At 
all these culture centers we find more or less elaborate pro- 
cesses of preparation involving technical knowledge, for 
example, the making of acorn flour and bread, the roasting 
of camas, etc. These processes tend to spread throughout 
the area of supply. Thus, the acorn industry extends well 
up into Oregon far beyond the California center; the roast- 
ing of camas (2) to the mouth of the Columbia, and also to 
the Blackfoot of the Plains, etc. Again, we note certain 
specializations of manufacture: California (3), baskets; 
North Pacific Coast (4), boxes and plank work; the Plains 
(i), rawhide work (parfleche, bags, etc.) ; Mackenzie (6), 
birchbark (canoes, vessels, etc.); Plateau (2), sagebrush 
weaving; Southwest (9), textiles and pottery; Southeast 
(8), cane and fiber weaving; the Eastern Woodlands (7), 
knot bowls and bass fiber weaving, etc. Types of shelter 
present similar distributions, and so do many other traits. 
All of these traits are seen to reach out far beyond the bor- 
ders of the respective culture centers, and such extensions 
can, in the main, be correlated with faunal and floral dis- 
tributions. Yet, not even all of the more material traits can 
be considered dependent upon the fauna and flora, for ex- 
ample, pottery. Also, art and ceremonies are no less dis- 
tinctive and, as we have seen, are also localized in these same 
centers. In this case, the influence of the environment could 
be but remote. In any case, we find that the people in a cul- 

372 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

ture area have chosen but a few of the possibilities and spe- 
cialized in them, leaving many other resources untouched. 
It is, of course, plain that, if the directions of this specializa- 
tion varied, many different kinds of culture could succes- 
sively occupy the same geographical area. 

Apparently, the chief explanation of this phenomenon lies 
in man himself. A group of people having once worked out 
processes like the use of acorns, maize, manioc, etc., estab- 
lish social habits that resist change. Then the successful 
adjustment of one tribe to a given locality will be utilized 
by neighbors to the extension of the type, and to the inhibi- 
tion of new inventions, or adjustments. Therefore, the 
origin of a culture center seems due to ethnic factors more 
than to geographical ones. The location of these centers is 
largely a matter of historic accident, but once located and 
the adjustments made, the stability of the environment 
doubtless tends to hold each particular type of culture to its 
initial locality, even in the face of many changes in blood 
and language. 

As to actual movements of tribes from one center to the 
other, we have no good historical examples. Our discussion 
of migrations has shown that the tendency was to move 
about in the same geographical area, yet these wanderings 
must have sometimes led to other culture areas. The most 
probable case of this kind is to be found in the history of the 
Cheyenne Indians. According to Mooney," they left Minne- 
sota, where they had an intermediate Plains culture and 
joined the typical tribes at the center, where, in the course of 
a century, they became typical in culture. On linguistic 
grounds, we assume that the Blackfoot and Arapaho did the 
same at a much earlier date. In California and the South- 
west we see Athapascan-speaking remnants who are most 
likely immigrants from the north, yet this does not show 
itself in their culture. The fact seems to be that these mi- 
grating units were not strong enough to prevent their people 

ENVIRONMENT 373 

following the lead of neighbors wherever they hap- 
1 to tarry. It is clear, however, that such migrations 
have been but occasional and exceptional, for, unless 
stinctive tribes remained in force at the culture center, 
pe would have been destroyed. Hence, we must assume 
jreat stability of these centers and a fair degree of sta- 

for the New World as a whole, 
w reverting to the correlations of language, culture, 
jomatic type, we are prepared to see that while the 
Dnment does not produce the culture, it furnishes the 
im in which it grows, and that when once rooted in a 
aphical area, culture tends to hold fast. The somatic 

while not closely correlated with environment, yet 
; a tendency to conform to it. This would be consistent 
3ur conclusion that the population of a center was rela- 

stable, so that an occasional immigrant group could be 
tally leveled by intermarriage. But the immigrant 
► need not change its language so long as it maintains 
cial independence, nor does the environment appear to 
ny pressure upon its members to so change it. What 
rmity of somatic type we then have is merely the acci- 
1 result of sexual contact, while the lack of linguistic 
rmity is due to the former history of the group. It fol- 
then that about all that survives in an immigrant group 
speech, for both its culture and blood gradually disap- 
in the new environment. But blood being a biological 
cter, in contrast to culture, it is subject to certain very 
te laws of inheritance and the particular forms the 
ire will take are likely to be various. Culture on the 

hand, can be entirely displaced even within a single 
ation. 

lally, with a few generalizations we may summarize 
ong and tedious, but we trust not unprofitable, survey 
original man and his varied characters. It appears a 
issumption that so long as the main sustaining habit- 

374 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

complexes of life remain the same in an area, there will be 
little change in material culture. This may be in part an 
explanation for the lack of close correspondence between the 
historic cultures and archaeology in the several parts of the 
great maize areas in contrast to identity elsewhere. The 
bison, salmon, wild acorn, and guanaco must have been in 
their respective habitats for a long, long time, and a culture 
once developed around them could be displaced only by a 
radical change, such as the introduction of agriculture or 
pastoral arts. Now the regions where maize was found in 
use at the opening of the historic period are just those in 
which archaeology shows the most disparity. It seems then, 
that the environment as a static factor conserves the types 
of culture and because of this weighting of one of our three 
great groups of characters, breaks their unity, so that the 
same language and likewise the same blood may be fotmd in 
association with different cultures according to the laws of 
historic accident. 

1. Dixon, 1914. I. 4. Haddon, 191 1. I. 

2. Sapir, 191 6. I. 5. Mooney, 1907. I. 

3. Hrdlicka, 1906. L 

CHAPTER XX 
THEORIES OF CULTURE ORIGIN 

The familiar phenomenon of identity of traits among dif- 
ferent groups of aborigines has always been treated as a 
serious problem. Our leading anthropologists have shown 
a tendency to seek the explanation for such identity in inde- 
pendent development rather than in diffusion, or borrowing, 
presumably because of the/)rcdisposition arising from expe- 
rience with the highly organized military groups of Europe, 
where political unity is practically synonymous with cultural 
individuality. We have seen how this correlation also ap- 
peared among the more highly organized peoples of the New 
World, but was not found among the more primitive tribes 
where culture groups were far more inclusive than the politi- 
cal ones. But there is still another important factor favor- 
ing the independent origin theory: viz,, Darwinism, the 
great influence of whose evolutionary ideas emphasized the 
development aspect of culture and thus gave the primitive 
social group an exaggerated importance. 

According to the independent development theory, the 
unity of the human mind is sufficient to account for identi- 
ties in culture wherever the environments are the same. 
Thus, according to this view, no matter what tribes moved 
into the country occupied by one of our culture centers, the 
environment would react on their minds in essentially the 
same way, suggesting the same ideas and so leading to the 
same inventions. One important objection to the wide ap- 
plication of this theory is that different peoples do not seem 
to arrive at the same solutions even when confronted with 
like conditions. Another difficulty is that similarities are 

375 

376 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

found in such traits as mythological characters, social prac- 
tices, etc., whose origin can not be successfully accounted for 
as reactions to the environment. Yet, a close view of the 
case shows that many times these objections can be fairly 
well met, so that a final conclusion as to the applicability of 
the theory is reached with difficulty. Further, it is clear that 
there is usually but a single solution for a problem so that 
if it is solved at all it will be solved in the same way and 
given time enough some one is by the law of accident sure to 
hit upon it. But the greatest difficulty with the theory of 
independent invention is found in the observed distribution, 
for this tends to be continuous over certain areas, instead of 
intermittent, as would be the case if due to accident, unless 
we assume a greater age for NeW World culture than other 
facts warrant. Also, we have historical examples of diffu- 
sion, as, for example, the Ghost Dance religion,* the Peyote 
Cult,* the Grass Dance ceremonies,* the Spanish horse cul- 
ture,* etc., and scarcely one of the contrary kind. In these 
historic cases, the phenomena came under direct observation 
so that there can not be the least doubt as to diffusion, or 
borrowing by one social group from another. The most 
satisfactory conclusion, then, seems to be that while there is 
reason to believe that different social groups will ultimately 
solve many of their problems in the same way, they arc far 
more likely to borrow the solutions of their neighbors, which 
arrangement gives the initial solution a very great advan- 
tage. Hence, when there is continuity of distribution we 
may posit a single origin, or locality, from which the trait 
has been diffused, until we can find evidence to the con- 
trary. 

The most modern advocate of the diffusion theory is 
Graebner," who is disposed to the extreme view that inde- 
pendent invention is practically impossible and that all sim- 
ilarities, however widely separated, are to be considered as 
having single origins. Such extreme views are always 

THEORIES OF CULTURE ORIGIN 377 

harmful, for they set up a mere formula according to which 
problems are solved deductively, whereas the true and safe 
method of science is to proceed empirically. The ideal 
method is to treat each case according to its own data and 
not to assume diffusion from a single locality until we have 
some good, specific reasons for so doing. 

There is, however, still another theory to account for sim- 
ilarities in culture — an hypothesis first advocated by Ehren- 
reich,* under the title of convergence. According to this 
view a definite culture complex, which appears to be the 
same among two or more social groups, may prove upon 
analysis to have been arrived at in quite different ways.^ 
The similarity is in this case merely an accident of develop- 
ment. As the reality of stCUi convergence has been clearly 
established for certain instances, it must always be consid- 
ered as a possible factor, and so complicates our problem. 
It has, however, one great virtue in that its applicability 
must be empirically determined for each case, and can not 
be deduced from a general presupposition. In fact, all these 
theories are of little use as formulae of interpretation, for we 
must study carefully each trait-complex before a conclusion 
as to its origin can be reached. Their true functions are to 
define the different ways in which cultural similarities have 
been observed to come about. 

The intensive analytic study of single trait-complexes has 
developed the pattern theory.* The conception is that in cer- 
tain phases of culture each social unit develops a style, or 
pattern, for its traits and that borrowed traits will be worked 
over to make them conform to this pattern. So far as we 
can now see such patterns hold only for organized traits like 
ceremonies and social systems of control. The very com- 
plete studies we now have for the cultures of a few tribes in 
the central part of North America suggest that in organized 
ceremonies each tribe has one main concept according to 
which all their ritualistic performances are adjusted. For 

378 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

example, we find that the Dakota have a conception that 
supernatural power comes by a vision or dream, in which 
an animal-like being designates a plant as containing the 
power sought, and this plant then becomes the important 
objective part of the ritual. The Menomini, on the other 
hand, consider that power is conveyed by a song and that 
the true supernatural experience is to be found only when a 
song is handed down. The rituals of each also have distinct 
forms or styles of composition by which they can be distin- 
guished. Yet, so far as we have observed, these tribal pat- 
tern conceptions do not greatly interfere with the absorption 
of foreign rituals. For example, the hako pipe ritual of the 
Pawnee • has been traced through a number of tribes with- 
out losing its important f eature.'j^ But where the pattern has 
most force is within the tribe itself. For example, in the 
Plains area we usually find a very large number of rituals 
projected on similar lines, indicating that they are the accu- 
mulative creations of many individuals in imitation of the 
rituals already established. This is particularly noticeable 
in the bundle rituals of the Blackfoot, Menomini, and Paw- 
nee. Yet, these tribal patterns have not prevented the occa- 
sional borrowing of rituals from their neighbors. It is, per- 
haps, too soon to pass judgment upon the general applicabil- 
ity of the pattern theory, for until we have detailed analyses 
of several contiguous tribal complexes we can not form a 
satisfactory conception of just what ideas may have been 
worked over to form rituals not originally conforming to 
the tribal pattern; but as it now stands the theory of pat- 
tern phenomena applies rather to the original products of a 
tribe than to borrowed traits, and can not be considered as 
expressing an important principle of culture diffusion. 

Perhaps the most important contributions to this subject 
have been made by those who have exhaustively studied the 
diffusion of single traits. As a good example, we may cite 
Goldenweiser's study of totemism,^° in which the distribu- 

THEORIES OF CULTURE ORIGIN 379 

tions of the several elements appearing in specific examples 
of totemism are followed out to their limits, exposing the 
workings of pattern and other formative factors. Of equal 
value is Lowie's research in Plains societies *^ previously 
cited. 

In the older literature, we find a number of studies of 
single traits, particularly in material culture, but as their 
investigators usually took their diffusion for granted, they 
gave their chief attention to the question of genetic rela- 
tionships.** Yet what we need in this connection is analytic 
studies, like the above, that reveal the manner of diffusion 
over a considerable area. Some recent studies of material 
culture have made attempts of this kind. One of the most 
suggestive is the study of horse culture in both North and 
South America, first developed by Lewis, but carried out 
in some detail by the author.** Here it can be shown that 
the natives of the New World first in contact with the 
Spanish settlements acquired the whole horse-complex of 
the invaders. They did not take over the cart, but as a 
matter of fact, the Spaniards drew carts and ploughs with 
oxen, using horses and mules only for packing and riding. 
Historical data show that the whole horse-complex acquired 
by the first tribes was passed on to their neighbors in rapid 
succession, far in advance of interior exploration. Prac- 
tically nothing was lost. Nor was anything of moment 
added except the travois in North America and a few rit- 
ualistic observances which, so far as they have been studied, 
seem to have had a common origin. In this region of aborig- 
inal dog-traction there still remains a very important prob- 
lem as to how much of the older dog culture was incorpo- 
rated in the more recent horse-complex. The only good 
study of dog-culture is that for the Hidatsa by Wilson,** 
which suggests that in the care and handling of dogs and 
horses we shall find some pattern phenomena. On the other 
hand, the tribes of the pampas in the south seem to have had 

38o 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Si 

s 

8 

I 

I? 

I 

D 

i 

& 

I 

s 

S 

rl-l 

I 

l-ll 

^1 

i3 

* Ji i •* 

."2 -SO* 

4 

_s_ 

Li 

THEORIES OF CULTURE ORIGIN 381 

no dog-traction. Unfortunately, we have no data as to the 
ceremonial accompaniments of the horse, but in its objec- 
tive features the horse-complex agrees with the Spanish 
riding complex. 

The author's studies of maize culture show that in this 
case the whole complex was carried along over the eastern 
maize area and, what is perhaps of more significance, almost 
the entire complex was taken over by the English colonists.^* 
In the Old World, where the seed alone was introduced, we 
do not find this complex but an adaptation of the prevailing 
cereal complex. 

Additional examples of diffusion by whole complexes 
come readily into mind so that we can generalize by stating 
that in the New World the diffusion of material complexes 
has been by wholes. It was not merely a plant, a food, or 
an idea that was borrowed, but a complete method, with 
all of its associates. When, however, we turn to cere- 
monial practices and art, the case is less simple, for there 
seems to be a conflict between tribal patterns and the new 
trait. 

Perhaps the most carefully studied ceremonial complex 
is the modern Grass Dance of the Plains area in North 
America.** Its variegated history is outlined in the diagram, 
showing how it first took definite form among the Pawnee 
by the union of certain foreign concepts and how later from 
this sprang the Grass Dance, and in turn the latter gave 
the Dream Dance. A close study of the rituals for each type 
indicates that the Dream Dance, which originated among 
groups belonging to the Eastern Woodland culture area is 
widely divergent from the Grass Dance, notwithstanding 
that this dance was its parent. The tribes in the Plains area 
took up the Grass Dance one after the other, but on the 
borders of the Eastern Woodland area the Dream Dance is 
found. Analysis of the two ceremonies shows that each is 
adapted to the prevailing pattern of its area. Hence, we 
may generalize with the statement that in taking over a 

382 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

foreign ceremony, concessions will be made to the tribal 
pattern. 

Thus, it is apparent that a great advance has been made 
in empirical studies of the origin of particular culture-com- 
plexes. The spread of these complexes over a geographical 
area is explained by diffusion from a center. Some progress 
has been attained in observing the manner, or mechanism, of 
this diffusion. On the other hand, we are constrained to 
assume that since in many cases these trait-complexes are 
confined to a single area, they must have originated as new 
inventions within its borders. As an illustration, we may 
again refer to the societies of the Plains Indians.. The 
native conception upon which this organization is based is 
the creation of a series of societies which one must enter 
in a fixed sequence at equal intervals. Further, as these 
organizations require that the youths who enter the lowest 
society shall be of about the same age, we have a system 
of age-grading. Now, this idea of age-qualifications for 
membership in a society is found only among the Black- 
foot, Gros Ventre, Arapaho, Mandan, and Hidatsa tribes. 
Yet the same societies in all their other essential features 
are found to cover the entire area (Fig. 80). From the 
map, we see that tribes having the age-grading system have 
a central position; at least, they do not reach the edges of 
the distribution area. Now, since we do not find these 
societies anywhere else in the New World, it is fair to 
assume that they originated in this area. In so far the 
conception of an age-graded series is an independent inven- 
tion. It is also fair to assume that one of the five tribes 
manifesting this complex is responsible for its presence. 

Thus, we may generalize by stating that when a trait- 
complex is confined to a single area, it may be regarded 
as an independent invention. As such, it can be hypo- 
thetically, if not actually, assigned to a single tribe from 
whom it was diffused outwardly. Yet, we have seen that 

CULTURE TRAIT ASSOCIATION 383 

Fit. lo. Dutrihiitiait of Mtn'i Sociiiitt among tht InJiani of Iki Plaim. 
ThM tt^ti haviHt at*-f'*i" ar> indicatti by ttttitrhiHiig. (.Tht Bloed oiiJ PUtUi 
an •Uird wiA tht BUckfoa*.) 

384 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

not one, but many such inventions seem to center in one 
place, or area. What, therefore, shall we say of the causes 
contributing to this result? 

CULTURE TRAIT ASSOCIATION 

Such discussions as the preceding lead ultimately to an 
important theoretical problem; namely, the nature of trait 
association within what we call a tribal culture. So far, 
we have used the term culture to designate the sum total 
of trait-complexes manifested by a social group, or tribe. 
We have naively assumed that they formed a whole, because 
they pertained to a single group of people and we have 
characterized types of culture by enumerating the most 
conspicuous of these traits. Such a view would, in the end, 
commit us to the theory that the simultaneous appearance of 
two or more traits was a mere coincidence, or an accident 
In other words, unless we can find some other basis for this 
association of traits in a culture, such traits have no func- 
tional or other necessary relations to each other. 

If we recall the details of trait distribution so far dis- 
cussed, there come to mind many instances of whole groups 
of associated traits so segregated as to suggest their dif- 
fusion as a whole. In this book we have preferred to use 
the term trait-complex because it more accurately expresses 
the character of the phenomenon. For example, we have 
frequently referred to the maize-complex. By this term, we 
designate all the practices that immediately accompany maize 
production. Upon analysis, we find these processes to fall 
into unit cycles such as planting, cultivating, gathering, pre- 
serving, storing, grinding, cooking, etc., each of which may 
be quite complex in itself, but all are dependent one upon the 
other. They thus form a kind of logical sequence, the ulti- 
mate aim of which is to provide a specific type of food. As 
another example, we may cite pottery : here we again see a 
complex in which are a number of unit cycles of processes, 

CULTURE TRAIT ASSOCIATION 385 

as making the paste, modeling, drying, decorating, baking, 
etc. Now it appears that there is a functional association of 
some kind between the unit processes within one of these 
complexes — ^they are at least knit into a logical whole. On 
the other hand, our previous discussions have shown a 
tendency for the whole pottery-complex to accompany the 
maize-complex. Yet it is not apparent that one of these is 
necessary to the other. Since the natives of California 
cooked acorn meal in baskets (page 52), it appears equally 
possible to cook maize meal in the same manner. The co- 
incidence, then, between the distribution of the maize-com- 
plex and the pottery-complex can scarcely be due to any 
objective fimctional relation between the two complexes 
themselves. 

Another interesting example of such association has been 
noted among the tribes intermediate to the North American 
Plains center of culture. These tribes lived in tipis at all 
times except when engaged in the production of maize, 
during which period they occupied permanent houses of a 
different type. Now, if the tipi sufficed as a residence in 
one case, it could do so equally well in the other. The most 
satisfactory explanation for this peculiarity is that the tribes 
from whom the art of maize culture was borrowed, used a 
shelter of that kind. In the same way, we could assume 
that pottery vessels and maize were diffused. Such explana- 
tions for trait-complex associations are classed as historical 
interpretations. The tacit assumption is that if two com- 
plexes once happen to get associated there is small chance 
of diffusing one without the other. 

We have taken our illustrations from material life, but 
they could be duplicated in about every aspect of culture. 
The distinguished English anthropologist, Tylor/^ once dis- 
cussed such associations between social trait-complexes under 
the name "adhesions/' which, in a way. rather closely char- 
acterizes the relation. In our discussions of relationship 

386 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

systems, we found certain methods of estimating kinship to 
follow certain forms of marriage; but, in such cases we arc 
dealing with a single complex. On the other hand, wc 
have not found that specific kinship complexes were always 
associated with specific ceremonial or other complexes. In 
short, nothing so far connects specific forms of ceremony 
with a single form of social organization. 

The general net result of this inquiry, therefore, has been 
negative and we are left with a presumption that there are 
no direct functional relations between the several trait-com- 
plexes constituting a culture. The safest assumption seems 
to be that they are found together because historical causes 
operated to bring them into juxtaposition within the life of 
the group. Now, we are facing one of the very f tmdamental 
assumptions of anthropology: vis., the historical concep- 
tion of culture, a subject for further consideration. 

THE HISTORICAL CONCEPTION OF CULTURE 

While the full exposition of the historical conception of 
culture is not permissible here, some general statements 
may be attempted. Each individual usually brings to this 
subject strong sociological biases which distort his com- 
prehension of the idea. Thus, our particular ideas of race 
values and our opinions as to heredity make the assumption 
of a fair attitude toward even the facts of culture extremely 
difficult. The zoological sciences have for their own the 
conception of evolution which is the heart and soul of the 
whole subject. Man as a mammal, or even as a primate, 
falls under this conception and we have seen how fruitful 
was its application in the discussion of New World racial 
affiliations with the Old. Taking this as the point of de- 
parture, sociology and anthropology have sought to inter- 
pret culture as the mere expression of organic evolution; 
but such interpretations could not be made consistent with 
the data. Heredity did not appear to perpetuate the differ- 

HISTORICAL CONCEPTION OF CULTURE 387 

ent forms of culture found in the world, nor could it in any 
way accoiuit for the cultural associations formed by the his- 
torical nations. A good illustration of this difficulty is 
found in language ; every one knows that a language is not 
inherited, for if such were the case a person would speak 
French, Algonquian, or Chinese according to his parentage, 
and not according to his first associates. Neither are shoot- 
ing with bows or kindling fire with firedrills inherited. Yet, 
such are the elements that constitute culture-complexes. It 
appears, then, that the form and direction the development 
of culture takes is something of another sort from that fol- 
lowed by organic evolution, because the perpetuating mech- 
anism is not the same. Further, the knowledge we now 
possess of culture prohibits any fundamental distinctions in 
this respect between, say, the Eskimo and the English, for 
in neither case is the particular form of culture perpetuated 
by direct inheritance. The phenomenon of English culture 
IS made the subject matter of English history, but it is a fair 
assumption that the causes that operate in it are of the same 
general type as those that operate in Eskimoan culture. 
Hence, in dealing with problems of culture, we must take 
our points of regard from the historian, because he deals 
with the phenomena where the approaches are most com- 
plete and direct We assume, therefore, that the culture 
complex of the Eskimo grew up in the same type manner 
as that of England and is, in other words, a historical fact. 
Both are conceived of as perpetuated and evolved by social 
mechanisms. On the other hand, the straight black hair of 
the New World native and the more specific cephalic char- 
acter of the Eskimo are not facts of the same series and 
are perpetuated by a mechanism we call inheritance. 

It seems strange that these two series of facts should be 
continually confused to the extent of reading the interpre- 
tations arising from one directly into the structure of the 
other. In so far, then, as anthropology deals with culture, 

388 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

which IS, after all, the only distinctly human phenomenon 
in the objective sense, it conceives of it as historical phe- 
nomena and this conception is in so far the soul of its 
method. But anthropology is something more than the 
study of culture; it is essentially a coordinating and syn- 
thetizing science. It seeks to bring to bear upon the prob- 
lem of man the full joint force of geology, zoology, and 
history. To do this is a no mean task, a task which offers 
the greatest possible scientific opportunity of the age. 

1. Mooney, 1896. I. 

2. Radin, 1914. II. 

3. Wissler, 1916. I. 

4. Wissler, 1914. I. 

5. Graebner, 191 1. I. 

6. Ehrenreich, 1903. I. 

7. Goldenweiser, 1913. I; Lowie, 
1912. I. 

9. Fletcher, 1904. I. 
10. Goldenweiser, 191a L 
J I. Lowie, 1916. II. 

1 2. Mason, 1895. I. 

13. Wissler, 1914. I. 

14. Wilson, G. L., 1917. L 

15. Wissler, 1916. 11. 

-•*- •'-——-— -f -^ — - — 
iv;iz. 1. 16. Wissler, 1916. I. 

8. Goldenweiser, 1913. I; Lowie, 17. Tylor, 1889. I; Czekanowsld, 
1912. I. 191 1. I. 

CHAPTER XXI 
NEW WORLD ORIGINS 

The aim of the preceding chapters has been to convey 
a general idea of the content of the science of anthropology 
in so far as it applies to the New World. The ultimate goal 
of investigation in this field in the New World is the dis- 
covery of the origin of the Indian and the causes and con- 
ditions leading to the development of his culture. Though 
thus simply stated, the problem is truly complex. We have 
seen what a great array of facts must be considered and 
how one must draw upon the resources of zoology, geogra- 
phy, and geology, before the various parts of the problem 
can be formulated for critical consideration. As to the 
origin of the New World man himself, we have achieved 
one point: tAs,, that he migrated hither from Asia where 
his nearest relatives still reside. Yet, we are far from the 
truth as to the exact relationship between the Indian and 
the Asiatic, and have still much to learn as to his own 
sub-divisions. Again, when we turn to culture, we are 
confronted with another problem of origins. One of our 
objectives in this volume has been the formulation of the 
anthropological view of culture to which end we have re- 
viewed and classified the facts, or manifestations, of the 
phenomenon of culture in so far as they seemed necessary 
to the comprehension of current problems and interpreta- 
tions. This view we have stated to be the historical con- 
ception of culture origins. 

Now, with the main facts before us and recognizing that 
the differentiation of cultures is a historical jriienomenon, 

389 

390 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

we should be able to project the general outlines of man's 
career in the New World. Recalling our conclusion that 
the Indian came here from Asia at a relatively recent period, 
we find ourselves confronted with the question as to what 
elements of culture man brought with him when he crossed 
over to America. Even the casual reader will be impressed 
by the close general parallelism between the two halves of 
the world, and, it is this obvious fact more than anything 
else, that has stimulated speculative writings upon the sub- 
ject. Repeated efforts have been made to show that all the 
higher culture complexes of the New World were brought 
over from the Old, particularly from China or the Pacific 
Islands. Most of these writings are merely speculative and 
may be ignored, but some of the facts we have cited for 
correspondences to Pacific Island culture have not been satis- 
factorily explained. Dixon * has carefully reviewed this 
subject, asserting in general that among such traits as blow- 
«> guns, plank canoes, haminocks, lime chewing, head-hunting 
cults, the man's house and certain masked dances common 
to the New World and the Pacific Islands, there appears the 
tendency to mass upon the Pacific side of the New World. 
This gives these traits a semblance of continuous distribu- 
tion with the Island culture. Yet it should be noted that 
these traits, as enumerated above, have in reality a sporadic 
distribution in the New World and that there are exceptions. 
On the other hand, there is no great a priori improbability 
that some of these traits did reach the New World from the 
Pacific Islands. Satisfactory proof of such may yet be 
attained, but such discoveries would not account for New 
World culture as a whole. Then there are abundant data to 
show that the Polynesians are recent arrivals in the Pacific; * 
in fact, Maya culture must Iftive been in its prime when 
they were within striking distance of the American coast. 
In the preceding discussions, we found evidences of a 
certain unity in the fundamentals of culture for all parts 

NEW WORLD ORIGINS 391 

of the New World, and unless we find among these some 
fundamentals that are also conspicuous in the Old World, 
we need look no farther than the New for their place of 
origin. The Old World also has its fundamental traits, 
particularly the ancient cultures of Asia, but so far, few close 
parallels between these and those of the New have come 
to light Again, the originality of many New World traits 
is apparent when our subject is viewed from the cultural 
horizon of the Old World It has been very aptly said 
that the fundamentals of Old World culture are expressed 
by the terms "cereals, cattle, plough, and wheel." * Yet, 
what have we found in the New World that can be set 
down as specifically similar to these? We are left, there- 
fore, little choice but to recognize that the cultures of the 
New World peoples were developed independently of the 
ancient centers of higher culture in the Old. 

The old argument against such a conclusion was that the 
barbarous Indian was incompetent to develop the cultures 
of Yucatan and Peru. This view is now somewhat anti- 
quated, but still lingers as a kind of intellectual reaction in 
the minds of modem Europeans. Perhaps back of it is a 
habit of thought, since in Old World culture, in which we 
ourselves live and think, fundamental traits are often found 
to have a single origin. For example, the horse, ox, wheat, 
glass, printing, gunpowder, etc., seem to have had each a 
single place of origin from which they were diffused. Yet, 
in contemplating New World culture we must not forget 
that the comparisons between the two hemispheres should 
be specific. It will not do, for instance, to say that because 
agriculture is found in both the Old and New Worlds one 
must have been derived from the other, for we are here 
dealing with a mere abstraction, like eating, writing, fish- 
ing, etc. The proper method is to examine the agricultural 
traits found in each hemisphere. Thus, one basic factor in 
agriculture is the development of specific food plants. Let 

392 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

us, therefore, compare the plants cultivated by the Indian 
with those grown in the Old World. 

De Candolle* has listed more than forty plants grown 
by the Indians whose wild ancestors were, without reason- 
able doubt, peculiar to the New World. On the other hand, 
the ancestors of the leading food plants of the Old World 
have been found peculiar to^ it. Thus, we find that each 
hemisphere developed agriculture by drawing upon its own 
peculiar flora and that in consequence their seed lists had 
nothing in common before 1492. Now, when we consider 
the rapidity with which maize, tobacco, and other New 
World plants were taken up in the Old World after the com- 
memorable voyage of Columbus, it is scarcely conceivable 
that the peoples of the two hemispheres could ever have 
been in contact without exchanging some of their seeds, and 
certainly impossible to assume that the agriculture of the 
New World was directly derived from the Old. 

But our case does not rest upon this one observation, for 
there are others of almost equal weight. The wheel is a 
fundamental concept in the Old World and clearly of great 
antiquity, but is singularly absent from the New World,* 
even its spinners and potters failing to grasp the principle. 
The use of iron is another, though perhaps later, invention 
of the Old World that remained peculiar to it. However, 
the facts of cultivated plants and the wheel, which must be 
very ancient in origin, make a strong case for the peopling 
of the New World either at a very remote period or by wild 
tribes only, such as might arise from contact between the 
historic tribes of Alaska and Siberia. 

On the other hand, the New World peoples did achieve 
some of the specific inventions of the Old ; for instance, the 
making of bronze and casting gold, silver, copper, etc ; again, 
in certain methods of weaving and dyeing. It is sometimes 
objected that the knowledge of these traits could have been 
handed over or relayed from southern Asia to Mexico by 

NEW WORLD ORIGINS 393 

the intervening wild tribes; but this seems fanciful, for 
while we do find certain traits spread over adjacent parts 
of the two continents, as the sinew-backed bow, the bow- 
drill, the magic flight myth, the opium type of smoking, all 
of which are considered as of Asiatic origin, their distribu- 
tion is continuous from Alaska downward, and fades out 
before we reach the southern continent. Further, it has been 
assumed that the ideas underlying a trait could be carried 
along as part of a myth and so pass from one of the higher 
cultures of Asia to Mexico by way of Siberia and Alaska. 
There is no a priori improbability in this notion that specific 
ideas can be carried from tribe to tribe as constituent parts 
of mythical tales. The difficulty is that notwithstanding our 
very complete knowledge of typical tribal mythologies, we 
are so far unable to find examples of such extensive trans- 
missions of the process concepts underlying specific culture 
traits. As we have noted under Mythology, myths do seem 
to have carried a few mythical conceptions from the Old 
World to the New, but these have remained as mere parts 
of tales and do not function in practical life. 

Hence, the general condition for any interpretation of Old 
and New World relations is the full recognition that their 
great culture centers were well isolated by a complex chain 
of wilder hunting peoples and that direct contact between 
the two was impossible without modem means of transpor- 
tation. Only such traits could, therefore, filter through 
from one to the other as were assimilated by these more 
primitive tribes. When we consider their great number and 
the diversity of their speech, we realize that Mexico was 
completely isolated from China in agriculture, metal work, 
and similar arts, but not necessarily so in simpler traits like 
the sinew-backed bow. The proof of independent develop- 
ment thus rests largely in chronological and environmental 
relations. 

The age-societies of the Plains Indians of North America 

394 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

are an illustration of this point The only other places in 
the world where they exist seem to be in Melanesia and 
eastern Africa. In each case they have a restricted distri- 
bution.' What, then, shall be said of this case? If simi- 
larity in culture is in itself evidence of common or genetic 
origin, then these peoples must have been in contact with 
each other. But there are no reasons for believing that they 
ever were in contact. Yet, there are those who would re- 
gard these societies as survivals of a time when all the 
world had them as a part of its culture. Now the best 
way to approach this assumption is to appeal to chronology. 
These societies in America have been thoroughly studied; 
yet, none of the recorded facts favors their antiquity of 
origin. In fact, a few Plains tribes are known to have 
acquired some of these societies within a century and for 
the phenomenon as a whole, 500 to 700 years seems a liberal 
estimate of its age. But what chances had these tribes to 
meet the Melanesian or the Masai of Africa during this 
period? Further, this age-grading system in America can 
be identified with one group of villages in the heart of the 
Plains area, from whom it was borrowed by the other tribes. 
These villages must, therefore, be considered as the origina- 
tors of the trait as it appears in the New World. 

We must not overlook one difficulty in dealing with cul- 
ture similarities of this kind; vis., the proof that these simi- 
larities are real. Recently, Elliot Smith ^ revived the dis- 
cussion of certain elephant-like figures found on Maya sculp- 
tures. In this case, we may doubt the reality of the simi- 
larity between these figures and southern Asiatic drawings 
of elephants, because those who have studied the Maya sculp- 
tures themselves, instead of the pencil sketches made by 
earlier observers, find proof that another creature was in the 
artist's mind. In cases of this kind when we are dealing 
with the conventionalized drawings of the New World and 
the Old, it can scarcely be expected that the mere objective 

NEW WORLD ORIGINS 395 

similarity between a few of these drawings is to be taken as 
proof of their identity in origin. Other check data must be 
appealed to before even a useful working hypothesis can be 
formulated. Yet, if it should ultimately turn out that a 
stray vessel did drift ashore in Mexico and land a sculptor 
who created a new art tnoHf such would be a mere incident 
in the culture history of the New World. Further research 
into the chronology of archaeological remains ought to show 
just how abruptly this fancied elephant motif appeared and 
at what relative period. In such chronological data the 
basis for the real solution to the problem may be expected. 

Again, when the similarity of cultural phenomena has 
actually been demonstrated, empirical procedures cease and 
interpretation begins. This interpretation is, in last analy- 
sis, speculative. It is truly amusing to read some passages 
in current anthropological literature in which writers who, 
considering their own observations of similarity valid, offer 
the most fantastic interpretations which they assert are 
strictly empirical. We should bear in mind, then, that the 
comparative study of Old and New World cultures is no 
mere diversion. Superficial and hasty comparisons will re- 
tard rather than hasten the solution of the main problem. 
Patient, unremitting toil in the trenches of the archaeologist, 
and not spectacular flights on the part of curio hunters and 
literary enthusiasts, will show at what periods, and in what 
forms, the assumed similarities came into existence. 

We must now take leave of our brief review of culture in 
the New World. We have found the highest centers of 
culture in Mexico and Peru to be not really unique growths, 
but to possess many of the fundamental traits common to 
the wilder folk in the marginal areas of both continents. 
New World culture is thus a kind of pyramid whose base 
is as broad as the two Americas and whose apex rests over 
Middle America. We have foimd no just ground for as- 
suming that the culture of the Maya was projected into the 

396 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

New World from the Old, where it rested as an isolated 
replica of cultures beyond the Pacific. That influences of 
various kinds did reach the New World from the Old 
is apparent, but each of these must, upon its own merits, 
particularly as to its chronology, be subjected to the most 
exacting investigation. 

However, the discovery of New World origins is not 
merely a problem in culture. Language is also regarded as 
a reliable index to origin. So far, no evidence has come to 
hand that would identify a single New World language with 
an Old World stock. In fact, the only language found in 
both America and Asia is the speech of the Eskimo, rep^^ 
sented in Asia by a small group of villages, on the extreme 
eastern coast of Siberia. This exception may be ignored in 
this instance. Then, though there is great diversity of lan- 
guage within the New World itself, we have a right to ex- 
pect that if colonies were planted here by an Old World cul- 
ture, such colonization would have grafted-in Old World 
tongues. Yet, so far, there is no trace of such intrusioa 
Hence, as the case stands to-day in language, we must con- 
clude that the separation of New World man from the man 
of the Old World, was exceedingly remote, so remote that 
the existence of an advanced state of culture among the 
original stock is improbable. 

Finally, there is the question of blood. Our review of 
New World somatic characters revealed the essential unity 
of the Indian population. It is also clear that there are 
affinities with the mongoloid peoples of Asia. Hence, we are 
justified in assuming a common ancestral group for the 
whole mongoloid-red stream of humanity. We have already 
outlined the reasons for assuming the pristine home of this 
group to be in Asia, but when it comes to locating the pre- 
cise cradle land of this parent group, we must proceed with 
caution. This is, however, not of prime importance, for 
if we start with the known facts, the present distribution of 

NEW WORLD ORIGINS 397 

the mongoloid-red stem, we note that it concentrates in the 
colder northern halves of both hemispheres where the cul- 
tures of its units are primitive, but that in each case its 
southern outposts developed complex cultures. The New 
World branch can claim originality for its high center and 
•while it is clear that the ancient Chinese center was stimu- 
lated by non-mongoloid centers, the pioneer students of 
Chinese origins have already presented a strong brief for 
their priority in many Old World inventions.* Thus, the 
future may lead to the opinion that inherent in this mongo- 
loid stem was a germ of originality which blossomed forth 
wherever the environment permitted, and we may be able 
by contrasting these two independent cultures — the ancient 
Chinese and the Maya — with those of southern Asia and 
Europe, to arrive at last at the knowledge of elements pecul- 
iar to both. What these may be, we can but guess, but 
there seems to be a similarity between the Indians and the 
Asiatics in the weakness for loosely coordinated social 
groups, failure to develop nationalism, and relatively greater 
regard for tradition. Returning to our subject, we may 
note that the geographical position of these two centers of 
higher cultures on the frontiers of the extended swarming 
ground of the mongoloid-red stem, one of which could not 
have been borrowed from the other, necessitates the assump- 
tion of a northern cradle land and an expansion into more 
favorable environments. It also presupposes a main horde 
of the mongoloid-red peoples with a culture not materially 
different from that of the great mass of wilder North Asiatic 
and American tribes known to history. Like a great cres- 
cent this horde stretched from Cape Horn, through Alaska, 
across Asia and beyond to the shores of the Baltic and the 
Mediterranean. It appears, in the main, as a virile horde 
of hunting and fisher folk most at home in cold, elevated 
or semi-arid lands. Among other traits, we find the main 
body characterized by tailored skin clothing, the sinew- 

396 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

backed bow, the snowshoe, the sled, etc. These are all 
fairly primitive characters; yet, wherever the outposts of 
this great horde met with favorable uplands they developed 
agriculture and other complex traits. It seems, therefore, 
that the solution of our New World problem lies as tnuch 
in the heart of Asia as in Mexico or Peru. But, reverting 
once more to this great mongoloid-red horde, we may ask 
from what sources in its primitive cultures sprang the im- 
pulses that produced the two great cultures of ancient China 
and Yucatan? In the New World, the fundamentals of 
Maya culture are found among the wilder folk; in Asia 
there are also evidences that Chinese culture sprang from 
the primitive heritage of the original mongoloid group set- 
tling in the valley of the Yellow River.* And while it is 
true that the most fundamental traits in Old World cul- 
ture can not be ascribed to these same early Chinese, they 
did, nevertheless, achieve great originality in the invention 
of new traits, many of which are now elements of modern 
culture. Hence, unless we return once more to the old 
theory of the fall of man, we must look upon these two 
great cultural achievements as the special contributions of 
the mongoloid-red peoples to the culture of mankind. 

Now, as a final conclusion to this volume on the man of 
the New World and his culture, we beg the reader's indul- 
gence in the formulation of an hypothetical statement. The 
New World received a detachment of early mongoloid peo- 
ples at a time when the main body had barely developed 
stone polishing. That this was contemporaneous with the 
appearance of stone polishing in Europe does not necessarily 
follow, for future research in Asia may show it to have been 
much earlier. One or more periods of climatic change fol- 
lowed, cutting oflF ready communication with the mother- 
land and forcing both the Old and New World wings south- 
ward. In the former, they came in contact with other 
differentiated groups from whom they received culture 

NEW WORLD ORIGINS 399 

stimuli, but in the New World they had only themselves. 
Yet, in the course of time, the increase of numbers and the 
development of sub-social groups led to considerable varie- 
ties of culture. Some of the probable traits brought from 
the mother-land are the firedrill, stone chipping, twisting of 
string, the bow, throwing stick, the harpoon, simple basketry 
and nets, hunting complexes, cooking with stones in ves- 
sels of wood, bark or skin, body-painting, and perhaps tat- 
tooing, and the domestication of the dog. Some of these 
may have filtered through Alaska from time to time, but 
the facts in the case favor the view that in the main they 
came in with the original emigrants. Independently, the 
New World developed agriculture, pottery, the higher types 
of basketry and cloth weaving, the working of the softer 
metals and the manufacture of bronze. The progress in 
astronomical knowledge and the fine arts compares favor- 
ably with that achieved by the early Asiatics. Yet, in all 
we see the marks of originality which are alone sufficient 
evidence of their independent origin. 

The centers of civilization in the New World were the 
highlands of Mexico and western South America which, 
as they developed, reacted to the stiYnulus of their more 
backward brothers in other parts of the land in much the 
same fashion as did the different groups of mongoloid peo- 
ples in Asia. One of the significant points in our discussion 
has been the identification of the fundamental widely dif- 
fused complexes in the cultures of the New World, many 
of which seem to center in the Mexican and Andean regions 
of higher civilization and from which their respective radia- 
tions are often apparent. The more recent studies of ancient 
Chinese culture show that a somewhat parallel condition 
existed in Asia. Apparently, then, we have a more isolated 
people in the New World who did not travel the road to 
higher culture so rapidly as their relatives in Asia, the con- 
nection between whose centers of development having long 

400 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

been broken by climatic changes and later almost completely 
blocked by hordes of primitive hunter and fisher folk. As to 
what a few more thousand years of this freedom would 
have done for the New World, we can but speculate, for 
in the sixteenth century a calamity befell the New World, 
the like of which has no exact parallel in history. A mili- 
tant civilization from without, fired by a zeal not only to 
pltmder the material treasures of mankind, but to seize the 
very souls of men in the name of its God, fell upon the two 
great centers of aboriginal culture like a thunderbolt from 
a clear sky. The blow was mortal. . But the man of the 
New World went down fighting and, though his feeble sur- 
vivors still keep up the struggle in a few distant outposts, the 
first great onslaught that annihilated the Aztec and the Inca, 
marks the end of our story. In this volume we have be&i 
concerned only with the history of a race and a culture to 
which those aboriginal city states were the culmination. As 
we look back upon the long and tortuous career of man in 
the New World, comprehend his crude equipment as he first 
set foot upon the land, and pass in review his later achieve- 
ments, we cannot but regret that the end came so suddenly. 

1. Dixon, igi2. I. 6. Lowie, 1916. 11. 

2. Haddon, igii. I. 7. Elliot Smith, 1915. I; 1916. L 

3. Laufer, 1914. I. 8. Laufer, 1914. I. 

4. Dc Candolle, 1902. I. 9. Laufcr, 1914. I. 

5. Tylor (no date) ; Means, 
1916. L 

APPENDIX 
LINGUISTIC TABLES AND BIBLIOGRAPHY 

'■ 

r 

LINGUISTIC STOCKS OF THE UNITED STATES 

AND CANADA 

After J, W. Powell 

In this compilation we have thought best to be conservative. 
As noted in the text, claims have been put forward for the 
consolidation of several stocks, but since these are still under 
discussion, and some of the leading American linguists are 
not convinced, we think best to follow the old classification. 
The chief changes proposed are the consolidation of the 
Piman, Shoshonean, and Nahuatlan stocks; the transfer of 
Wishoskan (Wiyot) and Weitspekan (Yurok) to the Al- 
gonquian; the combination of Wintun (Copehan), Maidu 
(Pujunan), Yokuts (Mariposan), Moquelumnan (Miwok), 
and Costanoan imder the name Penutian; and the grouping 
of Shasta, Chimariko, Quoratean (Karok), Pomo (Kulana- 
pan), Esselenian, and Yuman under the name Hokan. 

The United States census of 1910 compiled a statistical 
list of the Indians according to their stocks, from which, and 
the current reports of the Canadian government, we have 
taken the population nimierals added to each stock designa- 
tion in this Ust. The total population, as reported, is 383,- 
151. The number of extinct stocks is six, leaving fifty 
stocks still spoken in the United States and Canada, thou^ 
of these twelve are on the verge of extinction. 

I. Algonquian, or ALComaif (90,975): 

A. BlackfooL i. Piegan. 2. Blood. 3. North BkKckfoot. 

B. Cheyenne, i. Northern and Southern Cheyenne. 2. IVobablf 

the Sutaio (extinct). 

C Arapako. i. Northern and Southern Arapaho. 2. Grocr Ventre 

(Atsina). 
D. Easiem-Ceniral Dioisi&H: 

a. Cree-Montagnais Type. i. Cree. 2. Montagnais. 3, 
Naskapi. 4. Menomini. 5. Sauk and Fqx. 6. IGck* 
apoo. 7. Shawnee. 8. Abnaki-Micmac Type (Abnakv 

403 

404 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Pennacook, Micmac, Malectte, P^tf8aiiiaqiioddy» tnd 

Penobscot), 
b. OjibwayType. i. Ojibway. 2. PotawatomL 3. Ottawau 

4, /Ugonldn. 5. Peoria. 6. Natick. 7* Delaware. 

8. Illinois. 9. Miami. 
c Massachuset Type. i. Massachuset. a. Narrafifanaet 

3. Wampanoag. 4. Nauset. 5. Montauk. 6. Nipmuk 
(possibly). 7. Connecticut River Indians (poesibly). 

d. Uncertain Type. i. Unami. 2. Unalachtiga* 3. Mun* 

see. 4. Wappinger. 5. Mahican. 6. Pequot. 

e. Unclassified, i. Nanticoke. a. Conoy. 3. Powhatan. 

4. Weapemeoc 5. Secotan. 6. Pamunkey. 7, Pianka* 
diaw. 8. MatU^Mny. 9. Qiickahominy. 

a. Athapascan (53,212): 

A. Northern Croup: 

a. Highland Tribes, i. Loucheoz. 2. SekanL 3. Ourier. 

4. Babine. 5. Nahane Ctahltan, Takn. Kaaka). 6k 
Chilkotin. 

b. Lower Yukon, i. Kaiyuhkhotana. 2, Koyukukhotana. 

3. Knaiakhotana. 4. Unakhotana. 
c Upper Yukon, i. Tenankutchin. 2. Tennuthkutdun. 

3. Kutchakutchin. 4. Natsitkutchin. 5. Vuntakutchin. 
6. Tukkutchkutchin. 7. Hankutchin. 8. Tutchone 
Kutchin. 9. Tatlitkutchin. la Kwitchakutchin. 

d. Mackenzie Tribes, i. Slavey. 2. Chipewyan* 3. Dog- 
rib. 4. Hares. 5. Yellow Knives. 
Ci Beaver. 

f. ^irsi. 

g. Ahtena. 

B. Pacific Coast Group: 

a. HupaType. i. Hupa. 2. Whilkot. 

b. Kato Type. I. Kato. 2. NongaL (Saias). 3. WaOaku 

4. Sinkyone. 5. Metolle (?)• 

c« TolowaType. I. Tolowa. 2. Shasta (jOsta. 3. T^itiitni 
4. Galise Creek. 

d. Coquille. 

e. Umpqua. 

f. TlatskanaL 

C. Southern Croup: 

a. San Carlos Type. I. San Carlos Apache. 2. ^^fhheMonn* 

tain Apache. 3. Chiricahua Apache. 4. Tonto. 5. 
Coyotero. 6. Mescalero Apache. 7. Navajo. 

b. Jicarilla Type. I. Jicarilla Apache. 2* Kiowa Apadie. 

3. Lipan Apache. 

LINGUISTIC STOCKS 405 

^ Attacafan (extinct): 

A. BasUmDiokeL 

B. Western DiakcL 

4. Bbothuxan (extinct; tome reason for assuming it to be Algonquian). 

5. Caddoan (1863): 

A. Narikem Group, t. Arikara 

B. UiddU Croup: 

a. Pawnee Type. t. SlddL 3. Chaui. 3. Kitkahaxki. 4. 
Pitahauirata. 

C. Souikem Group, i. (}addo. 3.. WichiU. 3. Kichai. 4. Tawa* 

koni. ,5. Waco. 

6. Chimakuan (306): 

B. QuUeuU. I. Hob. 

7. Cbimarikan, or Chimariko (31): 

Member of the proposed Hokan. 

8. Chimmbsyan (2155): 

A. Tsimskian. 

B. KUksan. 

C. Nuka. 

Cbinooxan (897): 

A. Upper Chinook, i. Wasco, ji. Wishram. 3. Kathlamet. 4. 

Klackamas. 

B. Lower Chinook, i. Clatsop, i. Chinook proper. 

10. Chitiicacban, or Chitim acba (69). 

It. Chumashak (38): 

A. San Luis Obispo. 

B. Central Group, i. San Buenaventura. 2. Santa Barbara. 3, 

Santa Yne2. 

C. Island Group. I. Santa Cruz. 

12. CoAHUiLTECAN, or Carrizo (extinct): 

A. Pakawa. 

B. Comecrudo. 

C. Cotoname. 

13. C08TANOAN (17): 

A. Northern Division, i. San Francisco. 2. San Jose. 3. Santa 

Clara. 4. Santa Cruz. 

B. Southern Division, i. San Juan Bautista. 2. Soledad. 3. Mon< 

terey. (Members of the proposed Penutian.) 

406 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

.r4. GsKtMAUAN (30.000 ?}: 

A. Eastern Eskimo DulieciSt 

a. Greenland Eskimo, t. Upemavik. 1. Diieo B&y. 3. 

Ammassalik. 4« Oftmmannaq FiorKf. 5* Smith Sound 

b. Baffin Land. 

c. Labrador. 

B. Probable Central Eskimo Didkcts, U WetC shore of Hudioa 

Bay. 2. Southampton Island; 3. Melville Pfeninsub* 

4. Boothia Peni^isula. 5. Part of Baffin Land. 6. Vic- 
toria Island. 

C. Western Eskimo Dialects, t. Kadiak Island, d. Bristol Bay. 

3. Mouth of Yukon Rivet. 4. Norton Sound. 5. Kotxe* 
bue Sound. 6. Point Barrow. 7. Month of Mackensie 
River. 

D. Aleui. 1. Unalaska. 2. Atkaot. 

15. EssBLBNiAN (extinct): 

Member of the proposed Hokan* 

16. Haida (961): 

A. Masset DiaUa. I. Howkatt* 2. Klinkwan. 3. KaaaaiL 

B. Skidegate Dialed. 

Hoxan: 

Proposed name for the combined Chimarikan, Esselenian, Shastsiit 
Quoratean (Karok), Pomo (Kulanapan); and Yoman 
stocks. 

17. Iroquoian (50,160): 

A. Huron, or Wyandot. 

B. Tionontati. 

C. Aiiiwendaronk, or Neutrals. 

D. Conkhandeenrhonon. 

E. Iroquois, i. Mohawk. 2. Oneida. 3. Onondaga. 4. Cayuga* 

5. Seneca. 6. Tuscarora. 

F. Conesloga, or Susquehanna. 

G. Erie. 

H. Noitaway, 

I. Meherrin. 

J. Cherokee, i. Elati. 2. Middle Cherokee. 3. AtalL 

K. Onnontioga, 

|8. Kalapooian (106): 

A. Kalapooia, Santiam, Lakmiut^ Ahantsa^uk, Mary's Rioer Cke^) 

penafal). 

B. YamhiU, Atfalati. 

C. YonkaUa. 

D. Chelamela. 

LINGUISTIC STOCKS 407 

19. Kabankawa (extinct). 

3a Kbrpsan (4037): 

A. Weslem Vtttages, X. Acoma. 3. Laguna. 

B. Eastern VtUages. i. Cochitl. 3. Sia. 3. Santa Ana. 4, San 

Felipe. 5. Santo Domingo. 

31. KiowAN, or Kiowa (1136). 

33. Klamath (978): 

A. Moioe. 

B. KlamaiK 

33. KusAN (93): 

A« MdukiiM. 

B. Anasikk, 

C. MuUvk. 

D. Nasumi. 

34. KuTBNAi (1091): 

A. Upper Kutenai, i. Aldskemikinik. 3. Akamnik. 3. Akane* 

kunik. 4. Akiyenik. 

B. Lower Kutenai. 

35. MArou, or Pujunan (iioo): 

Three dialects: Northwestern, Northeastern, Southern. 
Members of the proposed Penutian. 

36. MOQUBLUMNAN, Or MlWOK (699): 

A. Coast Dialects, i. Marin, or Southern Coast. 3. Bodega, or West- 

em Coast. 3. Lake, or Northern Coast. 

B, Interior Dialects: 

a. Plains, or Northwestern. 

b. Sierra Dialects, i. Amador. 3. Tuolumne. 3. Mariposa. 

(Members of the proposed Penutian.) 

37. MUSXBOGBAN (39, I91): 

A. Muskhogean Proper: 

a. Southern Division: i. Hitchiti Group: Hitchiti, Mika- 
aauld, Sawokli. 3. Apalachee. 3. Yamasi (?). 4. Ala- 
bama C^up: Alibamu, Koasati, Tuskegee. 5. Choctaw 
(kqup: Choctaw; Northern Choctaw, Sixtowns Choc- 
taw; Chickasaw. 
1>« Northern Division, i. Muskogee pcpFf^« or Creek: Upper 
Creek, Lower Creek, Seminole. 
.B» NMk9Diakcti4 L^Avpyelt Taenia^ 

4o8 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Pkkutian. 

FropOBed name for the combined Wintun (Copehan), Maidu (Pu- 
junan), Yokuts (Mariposan)* Moquelumnan (Mi wok), 
and Costanoan stocks. 

38. PiMAN (8607): 

A. Pima. 

B. Papago, 

(Probably a member of the proposed Uto-Aztecan, or Na* 
huatlan f&mily^-see following table.) 

39. PolfO, or KULANAt»AN (II93): 

There are seven dialects desig:nated as Northern, Central, Eastern, 
Southwestern, Southern, Southeastern, and Northeast* 
em, all members of the proposed Hokan. 

30. QuoRATBAN, or Karok (775): 

Member of the proposed Hokan. 

31. Salinan (16): 

A. San Antonio. 

B. San Miguel. 

32. Salishan (18,097): 

A. Interior DiaUcis: 

a. Lillooet. 

b. Ntlakyapamuk (Thompson Indians). 

c. Shuswap. 

d. Okiaagan. I. Cdville. 2. Nespelim, or Sanpoil. 3. Se- 

nijextee. 

e. Flathead. I. Spokan. 2. Kalispel, or Pend d'Oreille. 3. 

Sftlish, or Flathead. 

f. CoBur d'Al€ne. 

g. Columbia Group, i. Pisquow, or Wenatchi. 2. Sinkiuse. 

9* Met how. 

B. Coast Dialects: 

a. Bella Coola. 

b. Comox Group: (a) Comox: 1. Comox. 2. E^ksen. 3, 

Homalko. 4. Ka&ke. 5. Kakekt. 6. Seechelt. 7. Sli- 
kmmon. 8. Tatpods; (b) Puntlatsh: 1. HwahwatL 
2. PuntlaUh. 3. Saflmen. 

c. Cowichan Group, (a) Vancouver Island: i. Clemdem- 

alau. 2. Cowichan. 3. Hellelt^ 4. Kenipsim. 5. 
Kilpanlus. 6. Koksilah. 7* Kulleets. 8. Lilmakrhe. 
9. Malakut. 10. Nanaimo. 11. Kwantlin. 12. Pen- 
clakut. 13. Quamichan. 14. Siocameen. 15. Soo- 

LINGUISTIC STOCKS 409 

nowas. 16. Somenos. 17. Tatelce. i8. Ydraioas; (6) 
FfBaer Valley: i. Chehalis. 2. Chilliwack^ 3. Coquit- 
lam. 4. Ewawoos. 5. Katsey. 6. Kelatl. 7. Kwant* 
len. 8. Matsqui. 9. Musqueam. 10. Nehaltmoken. 
II. Nicomen. 12. Ohamil. 13. Pilalt. 14. Popkurii. 
15. Samahquam. .16. Scowlitz. 17. Sewathen. 18. 
Slyita. 19. Skwawalooks. 20. SnonkweametL 21. 
Squawtita. 22. Sumasa. 23. Tsakuam. 

d. Squawmish Group. I. Squawmish. 2. Nooksak. 

e. Songish Group, i. Clallam. 2. Liimmi. 3. Lkufigen. 4. 

Samish. 5. Sanetch. 6. Semiahmoo. 7. Songish. 8. 
Sooke. 

f. Nisqualli Group, (a) Nisqualli: i. Dwamish. 2. Puyal« 

lup. 3. Skagit. 4. Snoqualmu, or Snoquamisb. 5.Squax- 
on; (b) Snohomish. 

g. Twana Group, i. Twana. 2. Sailupsun. 

h. Chehalis Group, i. Quinault. 2. Quaitso. 3. Humptu- 
lips. 4. Lower Chehalis. 5. Satsop. 6. Upper Chehalis. 
7. Cowlitz. 

L Tillamook, i. Tillamook, or Nestucca. 2. Siletz. 

33* Shahaptin (4391): 

A. Klikital. E. Umatma, 

B. NnPerci. F. WaUawaUa. 

C. Palaos. G. Warm Springs. 
p. Tofnnish. H. Yakima. 

34. Sbastan (1578): 

A. Shasta. 

B. Konomihu. 

C. New Riper. 

D. Okwantichu. 

E. Achomawi. i. Astaldwi. 2. Atuami. 3. Chumawi. 4. Han* 

tiwi. 5. Humawhi. 6. Ilmawi. 

F. Atsugewi {Pakamalt). 

(Members of the proposed Hokan.) 

35. Sboshonran (16,842): 

A. Pueblo Group, i. HopL 

B. Plateau Croup: 

a. Ute-Chemehuevi. i. Ute. 2. Paiute of Southern Nevada. 

3. Chemehuevi. 4. Kawaiisu. 5. Uintah Ute. 6» 
Southern Ute. 7. Uncompahgre. 

b. Shoshoni-Comanche Group, x. ShoshonL a. (Comanche. 

3. K080 (Panamint). 

4IO THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

c Mono-Paviotso. i. Monachi, or Mono. 3. Northern Pai- 
ute, or Paviotso. 3. Snake. 4. Bannock. 

C. Kern River Croup, i. TObatulabal. 2. Bankalachi. 

D. Southern California Croup: 

a. Serrano, i. Semnos. 2. Cfitanemuk. 

b. Gabrielino. I. Mission of San Gabriel. 2. Mission of San 

Fernando. 

c. Luiseflo-Cahuilla. i. Luiseik). 2. Juaneilo. 3. Cahuilla. 

4. Agua Caliente. 

(Probably a member of the proposed Uto-Aztecan, or 
Shoshonean-Nahuatkin family.) 

36. SiouAN (40,801): 

A. Dakota' A ssiniboin: 

a. Eastern, or Santee Dakota, i. Mdewakanton. 2. Wahpe- 

kute. 3. Sisseton. 4. Wahpeton. 

b. Yankton. 

c. Yanktonai. 

d. Teton, i. Brul6. 2. Oglala. 3. Sans Arc. 4. Blackfoot. 

5. Miniconjou^ 6. Two-Kettle. 7. Hunkpapa. 

e. Assiniboin. i. Stoney. 2. Turtle Mountain Sioux. 

B. Dhegiha. i. Kansa. 2. Omaha. 3. Osage. 4. Ponca. 5. 

Quapaw. 

C. Chiwere. i. Iowa. 2. MiasourL 3. Oto. 4. Winnebago. 

D. Mandan. 

E. Hidatsa, I. Crow. 2. Hidatsa. 

F. Biloxi, 1. Biloxi. 2. Ofo. 

G. Eastern, I. Catawba. 2. Tutelo. 3. An indefinite number of 

extinct tribes. 

37. SlUSLAW (7): 

A. Siuslaw. 

B. Lower Umpqua, or Kuitc. 

38. Takelma (i): 

A. Takelma, 

B. Upper Takelma. 

39. Tanoan (3140): 

A. Tiwa. I.Taos. 2. Picuris. 3. Sandia. 4. Isleta. 5. Isletadel 

Sur. 6. Piro (extinct). 

B. Towa. I. Jemez. 2. Pecos (extinct). 

C. Tewa. I. San Juan. 2. Sonta Clara. 3. San Ildefonso. 4. 

Nambe. 5. Pojoaque. 6. Tesuque. 7. Hano. 

40. TiMUCUAN (extinct). 

UNGUISTIC STOCKS 41 1 

41. . TLnmiT, or KoLuscBAN (4458): 

A. TUngii. I. Auk. 2. Chilkat. 3. Henya. 4. Huna. 5. Kake. 

6. Kuiu. 7. SanyakoaiL 8. Sitka. 9. Stikine. 10. Surodum; 

II. Takik 12. Tongas. 13. Yakutat. 
B« Tag^h. 

4a. Tonka WA (43): 

A. Tankawa, C. Mayeye^ 

B. Empiam$. D. Yojuane* 

43. TuNiCAN (43): 

A. Tunica. D. Tiaux. 

B. Koroa. & Crigra, 

C. Yazoo. 

44. UCHBAN (78): 

A. Yuchi. 

Uto-Aztbcan: 

Name proposed for the combined Nabuatlan, Piman, and Shosho- 
Dean stocks. 

45. Waiilatpuan (329): 

A. Cayuse. B. Molala. 

46. Wakasban (4538): 

A. Noolka. 

B. KwdkiuU: 

a. Haisk Dialect, i; Kitamat. 3. Kitlope. 

b. HeilUuk Dialect, i. Bellabella. 2. China Hat. 3. No- 

huntsitk. 4. Somehulitk. 5. Wikeno. 

c. Kwakiutl. (a) Koskimo: i. Klaskino. 2. Koprino. 3. 

Koskimo. 4. Quatsino; (h) Nawiti: l.Nakomgilisala. 
2. Tlatlasikoala; (c) Kwakiutl: i. Awaitlala. 2. Goa- 
sila. 3. Guauaenok. 4. Hahuamis. 5. Koeksotenok. 
6. Kwakiutl. 7. Lekwiltok. 8. Mamalelekala. 9. Na* 
koatdc 16. Nimkish. 1 1. Tenaktak. 12. TIauitsis. 
13. Tsawatonok. 

47. Washoan (819): 

A. Wasko. 

48. WbitspbxaK* or Yuiok (668): 

A. Rher DiaUds. 
fi. Coasi DiaioOi. 

412 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

49. WiNTUN, or COPEHAN {710): 

A. Northern Division, or Wintun. 

B. Southern Division, or Patwin. 

(A member of the proposed Penutian.) 

50. WiSHOSKAN, or WlYOT (152): 

(Possibly Algonquian.) 

51. Yakona (55): 

A. Yaquirui. 

B. Alsea, 

52. Yanan (39): 

A. Northern Yatta, C. Soulhem Yama. 

B. CetUral Yana. D. YakL 

53. YoKUTs, or Mariposan (533): 

Yokuis: 

(According to Kroeber there are seven dialectic groups with a 
total of about fifty tribes, all members of the proposed 
Penutian.) 

54. YuKUN (198): 

A. Yuki proper, C. Huchncm, 

B. Coast Yuki. D. Wappo. 

55. YuMAN (4279): 

A. Eastern Group. I. Havasupai. 2. Walapai. 3. Tonto. 4. Ya* 

vapai. 

B. Central Croup, i. Mohave. 2. Yuma. 3. Maricopa. 4. Dte- 

gueAo. 5. Cocopa. 

C. Lower California Group, i. Kiliwi and Santo Thom&s. 2. G>- 

chimi. 3. Waikuru. 

(Members of the proposed Hokan.) 

56. ZuJ^UN, or ZuSi (1667). 

LINGUISTIC STOCKS OF MEXICO AND 
CENTRAL AMERICA 

The following tabulation has been compiled after Thomas 
and Swanton (Bulletin 44, Bureau of American Ethnology). 
As will be noted in the text of these authors, the place of many 
groups is far from certain so that this classification is not so 
definite as the preceding. It should rather be taken as the 
first preliminary lay-out of the subject. 

LINGUISTIC STOCKS 

413 

1. Athapascan (Sec preceding Table): 

A. Apache, 

B. Tohoso, 

2. Chupanecan: 

A. Ckiapaneco. 

B. Mangiu {Ckduteca). 

3. Chibchan (See South American Table): 

A. Guatuso, 

B. Vota, or Boto. 

C. Cuetare. 

4. Chinakttecan. 

5. CuNAN (See South American Table) : 

A. San Bias. 

6. HuAVEAN (probably Zoquean). 

7. Janambrun: 

A. Pisone (extinct). 

B. Xanamhre (extinct). 

8. Jicaquean: 

A. Xicague, 

9. Jincan: 

A. Xinca, 

B. Sinacanta, 

10. Laguneros. 

11. Lencan. 

12. Mayan: 

A. Huastec. 

B. Maya, i. Lacandone. 3. Itza 

(Peten). 3. Mopan. 

C. Chontal. 

D. Tiotnl. 

E. CM. 

F. Chaflahal, 

G. ChicamuceUeca. 
H. MotonnUeca, 
h Chuje, 

JfaraUtfti , 

C. Dirian, 

D. Orotinan. 

D. Talamanca, 

E. Ctia^rmte. 

F. Doraskean. 

C. JupUtepeque. 

D. Jutiapa, 

K. Afam. 

L. /xtf. 

M. i4^fiacaleca. 

N. /Cfc/i^. 

O. Cahchiqud. 

P. TtutuhU. 

Q. Uspanleca. 

R. /Ceibcibf'. 

S. Pokonchi, 

T. Pokamam, 

U. Otffl*. 

414 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

13. Mataqalpajt: 

A. Maiagalpa. 

B. Cacaopera, 

C. LUlique, 

S4« MoSQUItOAN. 

15. Nahuatlan: 

A. Ptmaff (See preceding Table). 

i» Pima Alto. 3. Pima Bajo. 
3. Pima Samoa. 4. Potlap- 
igiML 5. Tepehuane villages. 

B. Opata, I. Eudeve. 3.Jova,or 

Ova. 

C. Tarahumare, 

D. Seri. 

E. Yaqui, I. Mayo. a.Tehueco. 

3. Yaqui. 

F. Zoe, Baimena. t. Tepehue 

and Tepehuane (extinct). 

G. Acaxee {extincX}). i. Acaxee. 

2. Jijinse (Xixime). 3. Sa* 
baiba 4. Teloca. 

16. Olivean. 

17. Otomun: 

a. Mazahua. 
B. Otomi. 

18. Pakawan (C^huiltecan). 

19. Payon. 

20. SuBTUBAN (Maribi). 

21. Tamaxjlipecan. 

22. Tarascan. 

23. Tequistlatbcan. 

24. Totonacan: 

A Totonac. 
B. Tepehua. 

25. Ulvan. 

d6. WaIcu&iaiv: 
A WaMH. 

H. Cora. 

I. Huidud* 

J. Tepecano. Teule, Gu6 

K. Concha (extioct). 

L. Zacaieco. 

M. CuachichiU. 

N. iVio (extinct). 

O. AtUec. 

P. P»/>i/. 

Q. Niquiran. 

R. 5tf na. 

C. Pame. 

D. Pirinda. 

LINGUISTIC STOCKS 415 

97- YuMAN (See preceding Table). 

28. Zapotbcan: 

A. Amishgo, E. Maaaieco, 

B. Chatino. F. MixUco. 

C. Ckocho. G. Tfik9. 

D. Cuicateco. H. Zafotecd. 

29. Zoquban: 

A. i/tx«. C Tapachvh. 

B. Popoktco. D. Zojtie. 

LINGUISTIC STOCKS OF SOUTH AMERICA 

The classification of South American linguistic groups can- 
not be so precisely summarized as in the preceding. The most 
comprehensive tabulation is offered by Chamberlain {American 
Anthropologist^ Vol. XV, 236), whose nomenclature we have 
followed throughout. We have not attempted a full enume- 
ration of the tribes under each stock because the chaotic state 
of the subject makes such an undertaking inadvisable. There- 
fore, the reader is referred to Brin ton's American Race and 
Markham's List of Tribes in the Valley of the Amazon, etc. 
{Journal Anthrop. Inst., Vol. XXIV, pp. 236-284) for the 
names of tribal subdivisions. However, we have noted the 
stock affiliations for a few of the best known tribes. 

1. Alikulufan: 

Alikulufs» Karailcas. 

2. Allbntucan (extinct): 

Allen tiac or Huarpes (Guaipes). 

3. Andaquun, or Andaquis. 

4. Apolistan. 

5. Araucanun. 

6. Arawakan: 

A. Arawak of the Mainland. I. Arawak. 2. Atorai (also Dauri or 
Tauri). 3. Bar6. 4. Campas (also Anti or Ande). 5. Guan& 
(also Chuala, Chabacana, Echenoana, Echoaladi). 6. Ipu- 
rinas. 7. Kustenau. 8. Maipure. 9. Manaos. 10. Maopityan. 
1 1. Moxos, or Mojos. 12. Paiconeca. 13. Paumari (also Pau* 

4i6 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

mary, Pamaouri, Pammary). 13. Sarav^ (or Sarabto). 

13. Taruin&. 14. Wapisiana (also Wapiana, Wapityan). 15. 

Waurlu 16. Yamamadi (or Jamamadi). 17. Yumana (or 

Jumana). 
B. Arawak in Haiti, i. Taino. 
C Arawak in the Lesser Antilles. I. Inert (or Igneri, Iny 
D. Arawak in the Bahamas, I. Lucayans, 

7. AsDAN (extinct). 

8. ATACAMBSAN, or LiKANANTA. 

9. Aymasan. 

10. Barbacoan. 

11. Bbtoyan. 

13. BOROSAN. 

13. Calchaquun (extinct, also Cacan, Diaguitas). 

14. CaRarian (extinct).' 

15. Canichanan, or Caniszana. 

16. Caravan, or Carajas. 

17. Cariban: 

A. Accauai, Apalais, Apiacas, Bakairis, Galihis, Guaques^ Cmhan' 

bos, Jpuricolos, Kalinas, Macusis, Motilones, Nahuqnas^ Pal- 
mellas, Pimenteiras, Rocouyennes, Wayawai. 

B. Caribs in the Orinoco Region, i. Maquiritares. 

18. Carirun. 

19. Cayubaban (or CayuvAva, Cayuaba, Chacqbos). 

30. Changoan (extinct). 

31. Chapacuran: 

Ptapaenra (or Tapacura), Napeka, Pawumwa, Quitemocas. 

33. (TharruaK (extinct?). 

33. Chavantban. 

34. Chibchan (See preceding Table): 

Aruacs, Chibchas, Doraskeans, Cuatusan^ Cuaymis^ Guetan^ TaUh 
manca, Tunebos. 

35. Chiquitan^: 

Manaeicas, 

LINGUISTIC STOCKS 417 

afl). C&0CQ4W. 
27. CBOLONAJC. 

28. Cbonoan. 

29. Coconucan: 

Coumucast Cmohucos, Mogiuxes^ Totoros. 

30. CosABBCAN (extinct). 

31. CuNAN (CuNAS or San Blas): 

Cunast San Bias Indians, 

3^. CuRUCANBCAN (extinct). 

33. Enimagan (or Machicui. Mu9Covi» or Maskoi). 

34. ESMBKALDAjr. 

35. GOYATACAN. 

36. GUABIBAN. 

37. GuABAURAK (Wimraus). 

38. GUATOAN. 

39. GUAYCUBUAN 

Ahipones^ Guackis. Mhocohis^ Tdbas. 

4a Itonaman. 

41. Itucalban (extinct?). 

ItucaU (also Uarina, or Urarina). 

4a. JiVABAN. (This is Jebero or Xebero of the Mainan stock, qjD,, accord* 
ing to Beuchat and Rivet.) 

43. JUBUN. 

44. Lbcan or Atbnianos. 

45. LOBENZAN. 

46. LULEAN. 

47. Mainan (See Jivaran). 

48. Mabuan. 

49. Matacan. 

5a Mibanban, or Mabanba: 
Baro.WiUo. 

4i8 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

51. MOCOAN. 

53. MOSATBNAN. 

53. MOVIMAN, or MOBDIA. 

54. MUSAN. 

55. OCORONAK. 

56. Onan. 

57. Otomacan. 

58. Otuquun (extinct?). 

59. Paniquitan: 

Paaes, Panches, Paniquitas, 

6a Panoan: 

CashiboSt Ctmibos, Pacaguaras, Panes. 

61. Pbban. 

63. PlAROAN. 

63. Publchban: 

Chechehets, Diuihets, TalMheis. 

64. PUINAVUN. 

65. PuQUiNAN (extinct?). 

66. QUECHUAN: 

Canas, Incas, Kechuas, QuUus. 

67. Salivan. 

68. Samucan. 

69. Sanavironan (extinct). 

70. Tacanan: 

AraunaSt Cavinds, Maropas, Sapihoconas. 

71. Tapuyan: 

Botccudos, Cis, Puris, Suyas, Tapuya, Tucano. 

72. TiCUNAN. 

73. TlMOTBAN (extinct). 

74. Trumaiak. 

LINGUISTIC STOCKS 4^9 

75. TsoKSKAii (Tehueldiean). 

76. Tupun: 

Cocamas, Guaranis^ JacundaSt Mutidrwcus^ Mum. Omanias. Tapa* 
Twos. 

77. UnoTAN (Kaimo). 

78. Uran. 

79. YAHGAHAtf. 

80. Yaruran. 

81. YpuRiNAN.(Hypurinan). 

83. YUNCAN. 

83. yurucarban. 
84* Zafaran. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

The publications listed here are those to which reference 
is made in the text. This bibliography is, therefore, not in 
any sense complete, but lists the special contributions and 
sources of data that have been immediately serviceable in 
the preparation of this volume and which will, upon perusal, 
furnish the concrete materials necessary to a more intimate 
acquaintance with the phenomena of our subject 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Abbott, C. C. 

1877. I. Stone Age in New Jersey. Washington, 1877- 
Adair, James. 

1775. I. The History of the American Indians, etc London, 1775. 
Alexander, Hartley Burr. 
1916. I. North American Mythology. The Mythology of All Races, 

vol. 10, Boston, 1916. 
1920. I. Latin-American. The Mythology of All Races, yoL ii» 
Boston, 1920. 
Allen, Glover M. 

1920. I. Dogs of the American Aborigines (Bulletin, Museum of 
Comparative Zoology, Harvard College, vol. 63, no. 9, 1920). 
Allen, J. A. 
1876. I. The American Bisons, Living and Extinct (Memoirs, Geo- 
logical Survey, Kentucky, voL i, part 2, Cambridge, 1876). 
Anales de Cuauhtitlan. 
1886. I, Anales del Museo Nadonal de Mexico, Appendix to vol. 3. 
Mexico, 1886. 
Atkinson, Alfred. See Wilson, N. L., and Atkinson, Alfred. 

Bandelier, Adolph F. 

1878. L On the Distribution and Tenure of Lands and the Customs 
with Respect to Inheritance, among the Ancient Mexicans 
(Eleventh Annual Report, Peabody Museum of American 
Archaeology and Ethnology, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 384-448, (Cambridge, 
1878). 

1879. L Social Organization and Mode of Government of the An- 
cient Mexicans (Twelfth Annual Report, Peabody Museum of 
American Archaeology and Ethnology, vol. 2, no. 3, Cambridge, 

1879). 
1884. L Report of an Archaeological Tour in Mexico in 1881 

(Papers, Archaeological Institute of America, American Series, 

vol. 2, Cambridge, 1884). 
18901 I. Final Report of Investigations among the Indians of the 

Southwestern United States, carried on mainly in the years 

from 1880 to 1885 (Papers, Archaeological Institute of America, 

American Series, vol. 3, Cambridge, 1890). 
Barnes, Earl and Mary S. 
1896. I. Education among the Aztecs (Studies in Education, Leland 

Stanford, Jr. University, vol. i, no. 2, pp. 73-80, 1896). 

423 

424 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Barrett, S. A. 

1908. I. Porno Indian Basketry (University of California Publica- 
tions in American Archaeology and Ethnology, vol 7, no. 3, 
Berkeley, 1908). 

Beck WITH, Marthe Warren. 
1907. I. Dance Forms of the Moqui and Kwakiutl Indians 
(Congres International des Americanistes, XV® session, Quebec, 

1907). 
Berry, Richard A. J. and Robertson, A. W. D. 

191 4. I. The Place in Nature of the Tasmanian Aboriginal as De- 
duced from a Study of his Calvaria — Part 2, His Relation to 
the Australian Aboriginal (Proceedings, Royal Society of Edin- 
burgh, voL 39, part 2, pp. 144-189, I9H). 
Boas, Franz. 

1888. I. The Central Eskimo (Sixth Annual Report, Bureau of 
Ethnology, Washington, 1888). 

1895. I. Zur Anthropologie der nord-amerikanischen Indianer (2^t- 
schrift fiir Ethnologie, vol. 2Ty pp. 366-411, 1895). 

1897. I. The Decorative Art of the Indians of the North Pacific 
Coast (Bulletin, American Museum of Natural History, vol 9, 
art. 10, New York, 1897). 

1897. II. The Social Organization and Secret Societies of the 
Kwakiutl Indians (Report, United States National Museum for 
1895, Washington, 1897). 

1901. I. A. J. Stone's Measurements of Natives of the Northwest 
Territories (Bulletin, American Museum of Natural History, 
vol. 14, art. 6, New York, 1901). 

1903. I. The Decorative Art of the North American Indians (Popu- 
lar Science Monthly, October, 1903). 

1906. I. The Tribes of the North Pacific Coast (Annual Archaeologi- 
cal Report, 1905, Appendix, Report, Minister of Education, On- 
tario, Toronto, 1906). 

1907. I. The Eskimo of Baffin Land and Hudson Bay (Bulletin, 
American Museum of Natural History, vol. 15, New York, 
1907). 

1909. I. The Kwakiutl of Vancouver Island (Memoirs, American 
Museum of Natural History, vol. 8, part 2, New York, 1909). 

1910. I. Changes in Bodily Form of Descendants of Immigrants 
(The Immigration Commission, Senate Document no. 208, Wash- 
ington, 1910). 

191 1. I. Handbook of American Indian Languages (Bulletin 40, Bu- 
reau of American Ethnology, Washington, 1911). Editor. 

191 1. II. The Mind of Primitive Man. New York. 1911. 

1912. I. The History of the American Race (Annals, New York 
Academy of Sciences, vol. 21, pp. 177-183, New York, 1912). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 425 

Boas, Franz. 

1914. I. Mythology and Folk-Tales of the North American Indians 
(Journal of American Folk-Lore, vol. 27, pp. 374r-4io, Lancaster, 

1914). 
1916. I. The Origin of Totemism (American Anthropologist, N. S., 

vol. 18, pp. 319-326, Lancaster, 1916). 

1916. IL Phonetic Transcription of Indian Languages (Smithsonian 

Miscellaneous Collections, vol. 66, no. 6, Washington, 1916. 

[Report of Committee of American Anthropological Association, 

with Goddard, Sapir, Kroeber]). 

See also Enunons, 1907. I ; Teit, 1898. I ; Teit, 1909. I. 

BOGORAS^ WaLDEMAS. 

1904. I. The Chukchee — Material Culture (Memoirs, American Mu- 
seum of Natural History, vol. 11, part i, Leiden and New York, 

1904). 
BoMAN, Eric. 

1908. I. Antiquites de la Region Andine de la R^publique Argentine. 
Paris, 1908. 

Bowman^ Isaiah. 

1916. I. The Andes of Southern Peru. Geographical Reconnais- 
sance along the Seventy-third Meridian (American Cieographical 
Society of New York, New York, 1916). 
Brasseur de Bourbourg, C. E. 

1861. I. Popol Vuh. Le Livre sacr^ et les Mythes h^roiques et his* 
toriques des Quiches, etc. Brussels, 1861. 
Brinton, Daniel G. 

1882. I. American Hero-Myths. A Study in the native Religions of 
the Western Continent. Philadelphia, 1882. 

i88(2. I. The Maya Chronicles. Philadelphia, 1882. 

1885. I. The Lenape and their Legends; with the Complete Text 
and Symbols of the Walum Olum, a new Translation, and ao 
Inquiry into its Authenticity. Philadelphia, 1885. 

1885. II. The Annals of the Cakchiquels. The Original Text, withe 
Translation, Notes and Introduction. Philadelphia, 1885. 

1890. I. Essays of an Americanist. Philadelphia, 1890. 

1891. I. The American Race. Philadelphia, 1891. 
Brower, J. V. 

1904. i. Mandan. (Memoirs of Explorations in the Basin of the 
Mississippi, Contributions by £. R. Steinbrueck, St Paul, Min- 
nesota, 1904)- 
Burton, Frederick R. 

1909. I. American Primitive Music with Especial Attention to the 
Songs of the Ojibways. New York, 1909. 

426 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

BusHNELL, David I., Jr. 
1909. I. The Various Uses of Buffalo Hair by the North American 
Indians (American Anthropologist, N. S. vol. 11, pp. 401-425, 
Lancaster, 1909). 

Carr, Luqen. 
1896. I. The Food of Certain American Indians and their Methods 
of Preparing It (Proceedings, American Antiquarian Society, 
N. S. voL 10, Worcester, 1896). 
Chamberlain, Alexander F. 
1913. I. Linguistic Stocks of South American Indians, with Dis- 
tribution-Map (American Anthropologist, N. S. vol. 15, pp. 
236-247, Lancaster, 1913). 
Chapin, F. Stuart. 

1913. I. An Introduction to the Study of Social Evolution: The 
Prehistoric Period. New York, 191 3. 

Church, Col. G. E. 

1912. I. Aborigines of South America. London, 1913. 
CoiTiN, Geraldine. See Waterman, T. T. and Coffin, Geraldine. 

COLUNS, G. N. 

1914. I. Pueblo Indian Maize Breeding (The Journal of Heredity, 
vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 255-268, Washington, June, 1914). 

1919. I. A Fossil Ear of Maize (The Journal of Heredity, vol. 10, 
no. 4, pp. 170-172, Washington, April, 1920). 
Crawford, M. D. C. 

191 5. I. Peruvian Textiles (Anthropological Papers, American Mu- 
seum of Natural History, vol. 12, part 3, New York, 1915). 

1916. I. Peruvian Fabrics (Anthropological Papers, American Mu- 
seum of Natural History, vol. 12, part 4, New York, 19 16). 

Curtis, Edward S. 
1903-1913. I. The North American Indian. Vols. 1-9, Cambridge, 

1903-1913. 
Curtis, Natalie. 

1907. I. The Indian's Book. New York and London, 1907. 
CusHiNG, Frank Hamilton. 
1884. I. Zuni Breadstuff. V (The Millstone, vol. 9, November, 
1884; Reprinted in Indian Notes and Monographs, Museum of 
the American Indian, Heye Foundation, vol. 8, New York, 1920). 
1895. I. The Arrow (American Anthropologist, vol. 8, pp. 307-349* 
Washington, 1895). 
CUSHMAN, H. B. 

1899. I. A History of the Choctaw, Chickasaw and Natchez In- 
dians. Greenville, Texas, 1899. 

CZEKANOWSKI, JaN. 

191 1. I. Objektive Kriterien in der Ethnologie (Korrespond'jnz- 
Blatt der Deutschen Gesellschaft fiir Anthropologie, Ethnologie 
und Urgeschichte, vol. 42, Braunschweig, pp. 71-75, I9"). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 427 

Dall, Wiluam H. 
1877. I. On Succession in the Shell-Heaps of the Aleutian Islands 
(Contributions to North American Ethnology, vol. i, Washing- 
ton, 1877). 
De Candolle, Alphonse. 

1902. I. Origin of Cultivated Plants. New York, 1902. 
Deniker, J. 
1900. I. The Races of Man: An Outline of Anthropology and 
Ethnography. London, 1900. 
Densmore, Frances. 
1910. I. Chippewa Music, I (Bulletin 45, Bureau of American 

Ethnology, Washington, 1910). 
1913. I. Chippewa Music, II (Bulletin 53, Bureau of American 
Ethnology, Washington, 1913)* 

1918. I. Teton Sioux Music (Bulletin 61, Bureau of American 
Ethnology, Washington, 1918). 

Dixon, Roland B. 

1902. I. Basketry Designs of the Indians of Northern California 
(Bulletin, American Musetmi of Natural History, vol. 17, part i, 
New York, 1902). 

1912. I. The Independence of the Culture of the American Indian 
(Science, N. S. vol. 35, pp. 46-55, January, 1912). 

1913. I. Some Aspects of North American Archaeology (American 
Anthropologist, N. S. vol. 15, pp. 549-577, Lancaster, 1913). 

1914. I. The Early Migrations of the Indians of New England and 
the Maritime Provinces (Proceedings, American Antiquarian So- 
ciety, N. S. vol. 24, part i, pp. 65-76, Worcester, 1914). 

Dixon, Roland B. and Kroeber, A. L. 

1903. I. The Native Languages of California (American Anthropol- 
ogist, N. S. vol. 5, pp. 1-26, Lancaster, 1903). 

1913. I. New Linguistic Families in California (American Anthro- 
pologist, N. S. vol. IS, pp. 647-655, Lancaster, 1913). 

1919. I. Linguistic Families of California (University of California 
Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology, vol. 16, 
no. 3, pp. 47-118, Berkeley, 1919). 

Dobrizhoffer, Martin. 

1822. I. An Account of the Abi pones, an Equestrian People of 
Paraguay. 3 vols. London, 1822. 
Dorsey, George A. 
1903. I. Arapaho Sun Dance; the Ceremony of the Offering Lodge 
(Publications, Field Columbian Museum, Anthropological Series, 
vol. 4, Chicago, 1903). 
DORSEY, J. O. 

1894. I. A Study of Siouan Cults (Eleventh Annual Report, Bu- 
reau of American Ethnology, Washington, 1894). 

428 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

DORSEY, J. O. 

1897. I. Siouan Sociology (Fifteenth Annual Report, Bureau of 
American Ethnology, Washington, 1897). 
DoRSEY, J. O. and Swanton, John R. 

1912. I. A Dictionary of the Biloxi and Ofo Languages Accom- 
panied with Thirty-one Biloxi Texts and Numerous Biloxi 
Phrases (Bulletin 47, Bureau of American Ethnology, Wash- 
ington, 191 2). 
Duckworth, W. L. H. 

1904. I. Morphology and Anthropology. A Handbook for Stu- 
dents. Cambridge, 1904. 

Duckworth, W. L. H. and Pain, B. H. 
1900. I. An Account of some Eskimo from Labrador (Proceedings, 
Cambridge Philosophical Society, vol. 10, pp. 286-291, Cambridge, 
1900). 
Du Pratz, le Pace, Antoine S. 
1758. L Historic de la Louisane. Tomes 1-3. Paris, I758w 

DURKHEIM, filCILE. 

1912. L Les Formes el^mentaires de la Vie religieuse. Le systeme 
totemique en Australie. Paris, 1912. English translation by Jo- 
seph Ward Swain. 

Ehrenreich, Paul. 

1897. L Anthropologische Studien iiber die Urbewohner Brasiliens 
vornehmlich der Staaten Matto Grosso, Goy^z und Amazonas 
(Purus Gebiet). Nach eigenen Aufnahmen und Beobachtungen 
in den Jahren 1877 bis 1889. Braunschweig, 1897). 

1903. L Zur Frage der Beurtheilung und Berwerthung ethnograph- 
ischer Analogien (Correspondenz-BIatt der deutschen Gescll- 
schaft fur Anthropologic, Ethnologic und Urgeschichte, vol. 34, 
pp. 176-180, Miinchen, 1903). 

1905. 1, Die Mythen und Legenden der siidamerikanischen Urvol- 
ker und ihre Beziehungen zu denen Nordamerikas und der ahen 
Welt. Berlin, 1905. 

' Emmons, G. T. 

1903. I. The Basketry of the Tlingit (Memoirs, American Museum 
of Natural History, vol. 3, part 2, New York, 1903). 

1907. L The Chilkat Blanket (Memoirs, American Museum of Nat- 
ural History, vol. 3, part 4, New York, 1907). 

1916. L The Whale House of the Chilkat (Anthropological Papers, 
American Museum of Natural History, vol. 19, part i, New York, 
1916). 

Ferris, H. B. 
1916. L The Indians of Cuzco and the Apurimac (Memoirs, Ameri- 
can Anthropological Association, vol. 3, no. 2, Lancaster, 1916). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 429 

F1WKE8, J. W. 

1898U I. Archeological Expedition to Arizona in 1895 (Seventeenth 
Annual Report, Bureau of American Ethnology, Washington, 
1898). 

X902. I. Prehistoric Porto Rico (Proceedings, American Associa- 
tion for the Advancement of Science, vol. 51, pp. 487-512, 1902). 

1907. I. Aborigines of Porto Rico and Neighboring Islands 
(Twenty-fifth Annual Report, Bureau of American Ethnology, 
Washington, 1907). 

1914. I. Archaeology of the Lower Mimbres Valley, N. M. 
(Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, vol. 63, no. 10, Wash- 
ington, 1914). 
Fletcher, Auce C. 

1904. I. The Hako, a Pawnee Ceremony (Twenty-second Annual 
Report, Bureau of American Ethnology, part 2, Washington, 

1904). 
Fletcher, Alice C. and La Flesche; pRANas. 
191 1. L The Omaha Tribe (Twenty-seventh Annual Report, Bureau 
of American Ethnology, Washington, 191 1). 
Frazer, J. G. 

1910. I. Totemism and Exogamy. A Treatise on Certain Forms of 
Superstition and Society. 4 vols. London, 191a 
Frezier, Aic^Dis Francois. 

171 7. I. A Voyage to the South-Sea, and along the Coasts of Chili 
and Peru, in the Years 1712-1714, London, 17 17. 
FRiEDCRia, Georg. 
1907. I. Die Schiffahrt der Indianer (Studien und Forschungen zur 
Menschen- und Volkerktmde. Stuttgart, 1907). 

1907. n. Scalping in America (Smithsonian Report for 1906, pp. 
423-438, Washington, 1907). 

Gallatin, Albert. 

1836. I. A synopsis of the Indians within the United States east of 
the Rocky Mountains, and in the British and Russian possessions 
in North America (Transactions and Collections, American 
Antiquarian Society, vol. 2, pp. 1-422, Cambridge, 1836). 
GiDDiNGS, Franklin H. 

1909. L The Principles of Sociology. 1909. 
GiFFORD, Edward Winslow. 
1916. L Miwok Moieties (University of California Publications in 
American Archaeology and Ethnology, vol. 12, no. 4, Berkeley, 
1916). 
Gillen, F. J. See Spencer, Baldwin and Gillen, F. J. 
GiLMAN, Benjamin Ives. 

1908. I. Hopi Songs. Boston, 1908. 

430 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

GODDABD, P. E. 

1905. I. Mechanical Aids to the Study and Recording of Languages 
(American Anthropologist, N. S. vol. 7, pp. 613-619, Lancaster, 

190S). 

1913. I. Indians of the Southwest (Handbook Series, American Mu- 
seum of Natural History, no. 2, New York, 1913). 

1914. I. The present Condition of our Knowledge of North Ameri- 
can Languages (American Anthropologist, N. S. voL 16, pp. 
555-601, Lancaster, 1914). 

See also Boas, 1916, IL 

GOLDENWEISEX, A. A. 

1910. L Totemism, an Analytical Study (Journal of American 
Folk-Lore, voL 23, pp. 179-292, Lancaster, 1910). 

1913. I. The Principle of Limited Possibilities in the Development 
of Culture (Journal of American Folk-Lore, vol. 26, pp. 259-290, 
Lancaster, 1913). 

191 4. I. The Social Organization of the Indians of North Americi 
(Journal of American Folk-Lore, vol. 27, pp. 411-436, Lancaster, 

1914). 
1916. I. Diffusion vs. Independent Origin: a Rejoinder to Pro- 
fessor G. Elliot Smith (Science, N. S. vol. 44, no. 1137, pp. 531- 
533. October 13, 1916). 
Gordon, G. B. 
191 3. I. The Book of Chilan Balam of Chumayel, with Introduction 
by G. B. Gordon (Anthropological Publications, University of 
Pennsylvania, vol. 5, Philadelphia, 1913). 
Graebner, F. 

191 1. I. Methode der Ethnologic. Mit einem Vorwort des Hcraus- 
gebers. Heidelberg, 191 1. 

Grant, Madison. 

1902. I. The Caribou (Seventh Annual Report, New York Zoo- 
logical Society, New York, 1902). 
Grinnell, George Bird. 

1893. I. Pawnee Hero Stories. New York, 1893. 
Guernsey, S. J. See Kidder, A. V., and Guernsey, S. J. 

Haddon, a. C. 
No date. Races of Man and their Distribution. London, no date. 
1902. I. Evolution in Art: As illustrated by the Life-Histories of 
Designs. London and New York, 1902. 

1910. I. History of Anthropology. London, 1910. 

191 1. I. The Wanderings of Peoples. Cambridge, 1911. 
Harrington, M. R. 

1909. I. The Rock-Shelters of Armonk, New York (Anthropologn- 
cal Papers, American Museiun of Natural History, vol. 3, New 
York, 1909). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 431 

Harsington, M. R. 
1921. I. Cuba Before Columbus. Part i, 2 vols. (Indian Notes and 
Monographs, Museum of the American Indian, Heye Fotmdation, 
New York, 1921). 
Harshbebcer, J. W. 
1893. I. Maize: a Botanical and Economic Study (Contributions, 
Botanical Laboratory, University of Pennsylvania, vol i,. no. 2, 
Philadelphia, 1893). 
Hartman, C. V. 

1901. I. Ardueological Researches in Costa Rica (The Ro3ral Eth- 
nographical Museum in Stockholm, Stockholm, 1901). 
Hatt, Gudmund. 

1914. I. Arktiske Skinddragter i Eurasien og Amerika. En Eth- 

nografisk Studie. Copenhagen, 191 4. 
1916. I. Moccasins and their Relation to Arctic Footwear (Mem- 
oirs, American Anthropological Association, vol 3, no. 3, 1916). 
Hawk£s, E. W. 

1916. I. The Labrador Elskimo (Memoir 91, (Geological Surtrey of 
Canada, Anthropological Series, no. 14, Ottawa, 1916). 
Hawley, E. H. 

1898. I. Distribution of the Notched Rattle (American Anthropol- 
ogist, vol. II, pp. 344-346, Washington, 1898). 
Hearne, Samuel A. 
1795- I. Journey from Prince of Wales Fort in Hudson's Bay to 
the Northern Ocean. London, 1795. 
Hellman, Milo. 

1919. I. Dimensions versus Form in Teeth and theii* Bearing on 
the Morphology of the Dental Arch (International Journal of 
Orthodontia and Oral Surgery, vol. 5, no. 11, pp. 3-39, Novem- 
ber, 1919). 
Hickey, Rev. M. 
1883. I. A Missionary among the Indians (Reminiscences of Rev. 
M. Hickey as a minister and missionary of the Michigan Anntial 
Conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church, Michigan 
Pioneer Collections, vol. 4, PP. 544-556, Lansing, 1883). 
Hitchcock, E. 
1888. I. Statistics Bearing upon the Average and Typical Student 
in Amherst College, March, 1888 (Journal of the Anthropo- 
logical Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, vol. 17, pp. 357- 
358, London, 1888). 

Hoffman, Walter James. 

1891. I Mid6wiwin or "Grand Medicine Society" of the Ojibwa 
(Seventh Annual Report, Bureau of American Ethnology, Wash- 
ington, 1891). 

432 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Hoffman, Walter James. 

1897. I. The Menomini Indians (Fourteenth Annual Report, Boreau 
of American Ethnology, part i, Washington, 1897). 
Holmes, Wiluam H. 

1886. I. Origin and Development of Form and Ornament in Ceramic ' 
Art (Fourth Annual Report, Bureau of American Ethnology, I 
Washington, 1886). 

1886. n. Ancient Pottery of the Mississippi Valley (Fourth An- 
nual Report, Bureau of American Ethnology, Washington, 1886). 

1888. I. A study of Textile Art in its Relation to the Development 
of Form and Ornament (Sixth Annual Report, Bureau of Amer- 
ican Ethnology, Washington, 1888). 

1888. II. Ancient Art of the Province of Chiriqui, Colombia (Sixth 
Annual Report, Bureau of American Ethnology, Washington, 
1888). 

1895-1897. I. Archaeological Studies among the Ancient Cities in 
Mexico (Publications, Field Columbian Museum, voL 3, Chicago, 

1895-1897). 

1897. I. Stone Implements of the Potomac-Chesapeake Tidewater 
Province (Fifteenth Annual Report, Bureau of American Eth- 
nology, Washington, 1897). 

1901. I. Aboriginal Copper Mines of Isle Royale, Lake Superior 
(American Anthropologist, N. S. vol. 3, pp. 684-696, Lancaster, 
1901). 

1903. I Aboriginal Pottery of the Eastern United Ststtes (Twen- 
tieth Annual Report, Bureau of American Ethnology, Washing- 
ton, 1903). 

1914. I. Areas of American Culture Characterization Tentatively 
Outlined as an Aid in the Study of Antiquities (American An- 
thropologist, N. S. vol. 16, pp. 413-446, Lancaster, 1914). 

1919. I. Handbook of Aboriginal American Antiquities. Part I. 
Introductory. The Lithic Industries (Bulletin 60, Bureau of 
American Ethnology, Washington, 1919). 
Hornbostel, Erich von. 

191 1. I. Uber ein akustisches Kriterium fiir Kulturzusammenhinge 
(Zeitschrift fur Ethnologic, vol. 43, pp. 601-615, 191 1). 
Hough, Walter. 

1890. I. Fire-making Apparatus in the U. S. National Museum (Re- 
port, United States National Museum for 1888, Washington, 
1890). 

1893. I. Primitive American Armor (Report, United States Na- 
tional Museum, Washington, 1893). 

1907 I. Antiquities of the Upper Gila and Salt River Valleys in 
Arizona and New Mexico (Bulletin 35, Bureau of Americas 
Ethnology, Washington, 1907). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 433 

Hough, Walter. 

191 5. I. The Hopi Indians. Cedar Rapids, Iowa, 191 5. 
Hkducka, a. 

1906. I. Contribution to the Physical Anthropology of California 
(University of California Publications in American Archeology 
and Ethnology, vol. 4, no. 2, Berkeley, 1906). 

1907. I. Skeletal Remains suggesting or attributed to Early Man 
in North America (Bulletin 33, Bureau of American Ethnology, 
Washington, 1907). 

1912. I. Early Man in South America (Bulletin 52, Bureau of 
American Ethnology, Washington, 1912). 

1915. I. The Peopling of America (The Journal of Heredity, vol. 6, 
pp. 79-9if Washington, February, 1915). 

1916. I. Physical Anthropology of the Lenape or Delawares, and 
of the Eastern Indians in (General (Bulletin 62, Bureau of Am- 
erican Ethnology, Washington, 1916). 

1920. I. Shovel-Shaped Teeth (American Journal of Physical 
Anthropology, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 429-465. Washington, 1920). 
Hunter, John D. 

1S23. I. Memoirs of a Captivity among the Indians of North Amer- 
ica. London, 1823. 
Hyde, George E. See Will, George F., and Hyde, George E. 

Im Thurn, Everard F. 

1883. I. Among the Indians of Guiana. London, 1883. 

James, George Wharton. 

1914. I. Indian Blankets and their Makers. Chicago, 1914. 
Jenks, a. E. 

1900. I. The Wild Rice Gatherers of the Upper Lakes (Nineteenth 
Annual Report, Bureau of American Ethnology, part 2, Wash- 
ington, 1900). 
1916. I. Indian-White Amalgamation, an Anthropometric Study 
(Studies in the Social Sciences, University of Minnesota, no. 6, 
Minneapolis, 1916). 
Jochelson, Waldemar. 

1907. I. Past and Present Subterranean Dwellings of the Tribes of 
North Eastern Asia and North Western America (Congr^s In- 
ternational des Americanistes, XV* Session, Quebec, 1907). 

1908. I. Material Culture and Social Organization of the Koryak 
(Memoirs, American Museum of Natural History, vol. 10, part 
2, Leiden and New York, 1908). 

Jones, Charles C. 

1873. I Antiquities of the Southern Indians, particularly of the 
Georgia Tribes. New York, 1873. 

434 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Jones, William. 

1905. I. The Algonkin Manitou (Journal of American Folk-Lore^ 
vol. 18, pp. 183-190, Lancaster, 1905). 

1906. I. Central Algonkin (Annual Archaeological Report, 1905, Ap- 
pendix, Report, Minister of Education, Ontario, Toronto, 1906). 

Joyce, T. A. 
1912. I. South American Archaeology. New York, 191 2. 
X914. I. Mexican Archaeology. An Introduction to the Archaeology 

of the Mexican and Maya Civilizations of pre-Spanish America. 

New York and London, 1914. 
1916. I. Central American and West Indies Archaeology. Being an 

Introduction to the Archaeology of the States of Nicaragua, 

Costa Rica, Panama and the West Indies. New York, 1916. 

Kalm, Peter. 

1772. I. Travels into North America. 2 vols. London, 17721 
Kane, Pauu 

1859. I. Wanderings of. an Artist among the Indians of North Am- 
erica. London, 1859. 
Kean, a. H. 

1896. I. Ethnology. Cambridge, 1896. 
Kidder, A. V. 

1915. I. Pottery of the Pajarito Plateau and of some Adjacent 
Regions in New Mexico (Memoirs, American Anthropological 
Association, vol. 2, part 6, Lancaster, 1915). 

Kidder, A. V., and Guernsey, S. J. 

1919. I. Archaeological Explorations in Northeastern Arizona (Bul- 
letin 65, Bureau of American Ethnology, Washington, 1919). 
Kidder, M. A. and A. V. 
19 1 7. I. Notes on the Pottery of Pecos (American Anthropologist, 
N. S. vol. 19, pp. 325-360, Lancaster, 191 7). 
KissELL, Mary Lois. 

1916. I. Basketry of the Pima and Papago Indians (Anthropological 
Papers, American Museum of Natural History, vol. 17, part 4* 
New York, 1916). 

1916. II. A New Type of Spinning in North America (American 
Anthropologist, N. S. vol. 18, pp. 264-270, Lancaster, 1916). 

KoCH-GRtJNBERG, ThEODOR. 

1908. I. Zwei Jahre unter den Indianem — Reisen in Nordwest-Bra- 
silien, 1903-1905. Band 1-2. Berlin, 1908. 
Krause, A. 

1885. I. Die Tlinkit Indianer, Ergebnisse einer Reise nach dcr 
Nordwestkuste von America und der Beringstrasse (Auftrage 
der Bremer geographischen Gessellschaft, 1880-1881. Jena, 1885). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 435 

Kroeber, a. L. 

1900. I. Symbolism of the Arapaho Indians (Bulletin, American Mu- 
seum of Natural History, vol. 13, article 7, New York, 1900). 

1902. L The Arapaho (Bulletin, American Museum of Natural His- 
tory, vol. 18, part I, New York, 1902). 

1904. I. Types of Indian Culture in California (University of Cali- 
fornia Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology, vol 
a, no. 3, Berkeley, 1904)* 

1905. I. Basket Designs of the Indians of Northwestern California 
(University of California Publications in American Archaeology 
and Ethnology, vol. 2, no. 4, Berkeley, 1905). 

1908. I. Ethnography of the Cahuilla Indians (University of Cali- 
fornia Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology, voL 
8, no. 2, Berkeley, 1908). 

1908. II. Ethnology of the Gros Ventre (Anthropological Papers, 
American Museum of Natural History, voL i, part 4, New York, 
1908). 

1909. I. The Archaeology of (California (Putnam Anniversary Vol- 
ume, New York, 1909). 

191 1. I. Phonetic Constituents of the Native Languages of Cali- 
fornia (University of California Publications in American 
Archaeology and Ethnology, vol. 10, no. i, Berkeley, 191 1). 

1917. I. Zuni Kin and Clan (Anthropological Papers, American Mu- 
seum of Natural History, vol. 18, part 2, New York, 1917). 
See also Dixon and Kroeber, 1903. I and 1913. I ; Boas, 1916. II. 

1920. I. California Culture Provinces (University of California 
Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology, vol. 17, 
no. 2, Berkeley, 1920). 

La Flesche, FnANas. See Fletcher, Alice C. and La Flesche, Francis. 
Laufer, Berthold. 
1907. I. The Introduction of Maize into Eastern Asia (Congres In- 
ternational des Americanistes XV® Session, part i, Quebec, 1907). 

1912. I. Jade. A Study in Chinese Archaeology and Religion (Pub- 
lications, Field Museum of Natural History, Anthropological 
Series, vol. 10, Chicago, 1912). 

1913. I. Plate Armor in America, a Sinological Contribution to an 
American Problem (American Anthropologist, N. S. vol. 15, pp. 
96-97, Lancaster, 1913). 

1914. I. Some Fundamental Ideas of Chinese Culture (The Journal 
of Race Development, vol. S, no. 2, October, 1914). 

1914. II. Chinese Clay Figures. Part i. Prolegomena on the His- 
tory of Defensive Armor (Publications, Field Museum of Nat- 
ural History, Anthropological Series, voL 13, no. 2, Chicago, 

1914). 

436 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Lawson, John. 
i860. I. History of Carolina, containing the Exact Description and 
Natural History of that Country. London, 1714. Reprint, Ral- 
eigh, i860. 

Lewis, Alfred Buell. 

1906. L Tribes of the Columbia Valley and the Coast of Wash- 
ington and Oregon (Memoirs, American Anthropological Asso- 
ciation, vol. I, part 2, Lancaster, 1906). 

Lewis, Meriwether, and Clark, Wiluam. 

1905. L Original Journals of the Lewis and Clark Expedition 
(Thwaites Edition). New York, 1905. 
Lewis, Theodore H. (Editor). 

1907. L The Narrative of the Expedition of Hernando de Soto by 
the Gentleman of Elvas. New York, 1907. 

Locke, L. Leland. 
191 2. The Ancient Quipu, a Peruvian Knot Record (American 
Anthropologist, N. S. vol. 14, pp. 325-332, Lancaster, 191 2). 
LowiE, Robert H. 

1908. I. The Test-Theme in North American Mythology (Journal 
of American Folk-Lore, voL 21, pp. 97-148, Lancaster, 1908). 

1909. L The Northern Shoshone (Anthropological Papers, Ameri- 
can Museum of Natural History, vol. 2, part 2, New York, 1909). 

191 2. L On the Principle of Convergence in Ethnology (Journal of 
American Folk-Lore, vol. 25, pp. 24-42, Lancaster, 1912). 

1914* I* Social Organization (The American Journal of Sociology, 
vol. 20, no. I, pp. 68-97, (Hiicago, 1914). 

191 5. L Exogamy and the Classificatory Systems of Relationship 
(American Anthropologist, N. S. vol. 17, pp. 223-239, Lancaster, 

1915). 

1916. I. Historical and Sociological Interpretations of Kinship Ter- 
minologies (Holmes Anniversary Volume, pp. 293-300, Wash- 
ington, 1916). 

1916. n. Plains Indian Age-Societies: Historical and Compara- 
tive Summary (Anthropological Papers, American Museum of 
Natural History, vol. 11, part 13, New York, 1916), 

1917. I. Culture and Ethnology. New York, 191 7. 
1920. I. Primitive Society. New York, 1920. 

LuMHOLTZ, Carl. 

1900. I. Symbolism of the Huichol Indians (Memoirs, American 
Museum of Natural History, vol. 3, part i, New York, 1900). 

1904, I. Decorative Art of the Huichol Indians (Memoirs, Ameri- 
can Museum of Natural History, vol. 3, part 3, New York, 1904). 

MacCauley, Clay. 
1887. I. The Seminole Indians of Florida (Fifth Annual Report, 
Bureau of American Ethnology, Washington, 1887). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 437 

MacCukdy, George Grant. 

191 1. I. A Study of Chiriquian Antiquities (Memoirs, Connecticut 
Academy of Arts and Sciences, vol. 3, New Haven, 1911}. 
Mackenzie, Alexander. 
1902. I. Voyages from Montreal through the Continent of North 
America to the Frozen and Pacific Oceans in 17S9 and 1793. 
2 vols. New York, 1902. 
Mackenzie, A. S. 

191 1. I. The Evolution of Literature. New York, 191 1. 
Mallery, Garrick. 
1886. I Pictographs of the North American Indians. A Prelimi- 
nary Paper (Fourth Annual Report, Bureau of American Eth- 
nology, Washington, 1886}. 
Markhaji, Sir Clements R. 

1910. I. The Incas of Peru. New York, 191a 
Marett, R. R. 

191 1. I. Anthropology. London, 1911. 
Martin, Rudolph. 

1914. I. Lehrbuch der Anthropologic; in Systematischer Darstel- 
lung mit besonderer Beriichsichtigung der Anthropologischen 
Methoden. Jena, 1914. 

Mason, Otis T. 

1894. L North American Bows, Arrows and Quivers (Smithsonian 
Report for 1893, United States National Museum, Washington, 

1894). 

1895. I. Origins of Invention. London and New York, 1895. 

1896. I. Primitive Travel and Transportation (Report, United 
States National Museum for 1894, Washington, 1896). 

1901. I. Pointed Bark Canoes of the Kutenai and Amur (Report, 
United States National Museum for 1899, Washington, 1901). 

1904. I. Aboriginal American Basketry (Report, United States Na- 
tional Museum for 1902, Washington, 1904). 

1907. L Domestication (Handbook of American Indians, Bulletin 
30, Bureau of American Ethnology, pp. 397-399f Washington, 

1907). 
Matthew, W. D. 

1915. I. Climate and Evolution (Annals, New York Academy of 
Sciences, vol. 24, pp. 171-238, New York, 1915)- 

Matthews, Washington. 

1902. I. Night Chant, a Navajo Ceremony (Memoirs, American 
Museum of Natural History, vol. 6, New York, 1902). 

1907. I. Navajo Myths, Prayers and Songs with Texts and Trans- 
lations (University of California Publications in American 
Archaeology and Ethnology, vol. 5, no. 2, Berkeley, 1907). 

438 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Matthswson, C. H. 
191 5. I. A Metallographic Description of Some Ancient Peruvian 
Bronzes from Machu Picchu (The American Journal of Science, 
vol. 40, December, 1915} . 
Maudslay, a. p. 
1889-1902. I. Biologia Centrali- Americana ; or Contributions to the 
Knowledge of the Fauna and Flora of Mexico and Central 
America. Archaeology, vols. 1-4. London, 1889-1902. 
Maximilian, Prince of Wied. 
1820. I. Travels in Brazil in the years 1815, 1816, 1817. London, 

1820. 
1843. I. Travels in the Interior of North America. Translated by 
H. Evans Lloyd. London, 1843. 
McClintock, Walter. 
1910. I. The Old North Trail, or Life, Legends and Religion of 
the Blackfoot Indians. London, 191a 
McGuiRE^ Joseph D. 
1899. I. Pipes and Smokini^ Customs of the American Aborigines 
(Report, United States National Museum for 1897, Washington, 

1899). 
Mead, Charles W. 
1903. I. The Musical Instruments of the Incas (Guide Leaflet, 
American Museum of Natural History, no. 11, New York, 

1903). 

1906. I. The Six-Unit Design in Ancient Peruvian Cloth (Boas 

Anniversary Volume, New York, 1906). 

1907. I. Technique of some South American Feather-work (Anthro- 
pological Papers, American Museum of Natural History, vol. i, 
part I, New York, 1907). 

191 5. I. Prehistoric Bronze in South America (Anthropological 
Papers, American Museum of Natural History, vol. 12, part 2, 
New York, 1915). 

1916. I. Conventionalized Figures in Ancient Peruvian Art (Anthro- 
pological' Papers, American Museum of Natural History, vol. 
12, part 5, New York, 1916). 

Means, Philif Ainsworth. 

1916. I. Some Objections to- Mr. Elliot Smith's Theory (Science, N. 
S. vol. 44, pp. 533--534» October 13, 1916). 

1917. I. An Outline of the Culture-Sequence in the Andean Area 
(Proceedings, Nineteenth International Congress of American- 
ists, 191 5, pp. 236-252; Washington, 1917)- 

Merriam, C. Hart. 
1905. I. The Indian Population of California (American Anthropol- 
ogist, N. S. vol. 7, pp. 596-606, Lancaster, 1905). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 439 

Merriam, J. C. 
1914. I. Preliminary Report on the Discovery of Human Remains 

in an Asphalt Deposit at Rancho La Brea (Science, N. S. vol 

40, pp. 198-203, August, 1914). 
Meyer, H. A. H. 

1895. I. Bows and Arrows in Central Brazil (Annual Report Smith- 
sonian Institution, 1896, Washington, 1898}. 

MiCHELsoN, Truman. 

1912. I. Preliminary Report on the Linguistic Classification of Al- 
gonquian Tribes (Twenty-eighth Annual Report, Bureau of Am- 
erican Ethnology, Washington, 1912} . 

MooNEY, James. 

1896. I. The Ghost-Dance Religion and the Sioux Outbreak of 
1890 (Fourteenth Annual Report, Bureau of American Ethnol- 
ogy, part 2, Washington, 1896). 

1898. I. Calendar History of the Kiowa Indians (Seventeenth An- 
nual Report, Bureau of American Ethnology, part i, Washing- 
ton, 1898). 

1900. I. Myths of the Cherokee (Nineteenth Annual Report, Bureau 
of American Ethnology, Washington, 1900). 

1907. I. The Cheyenne Indians (Memoirs, American Anthropo- 
logical Association, vol. i, part 6, Lancaster, 1907}. 
Moore, Clarence B. 

191 1. I. Some Aboriginal Sites on Mississippi River (Journal, 
Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, vol. 14, Philadel- 
phia, 191 1 ). 

1916. I. Some Aboriginal Sites on Greene River, Kentucky, etc 
(Journal, Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, vol. 16, 
Philadelphia, 1916). 

MOOREHEAD, WaRREN K. 

19 10. I. The Stone Age in North America. 2 vols. Boston and 
New York, 1910. 

1913. I. The Red-Paint People of Maine (American Anthropolo- 
gist, N. S. vol. 15, pp. 33-47, Lancaster, 1913). 

1916. I. The Problem of the Red-Paint People (Holmes Anniver- 
sary Volume, Washington, 19*6). 

1917. L Stone Ornaments used by Indians in the United States and 
Canada. And over, 191 7. 

Morgan, Lewis H. 

1870. I. Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity of the Human Fam- 
ily (Smithsonian Contributions to Knowledge, vol. 17, article 2, 
Washington, 1870). 

1878. I. Ancient Society or Researches in the Lines of Human 
Progress from Savagery through Barbarism to Civilization. 
New York, 1878. 

440 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Morgan, Lewis H. 
1881. I. Houses and House-Life of the American Aborigines (Con- 
tributions to North American Ethnology, vol. 4, Washington, 
1881). 
1904. L League of the Ho-d6-no-sau-nee or Iroquois. Edited by 
Herbert M. Lloyd. New York, 1904. 
MoRiCE, A. G. 
1890. L The Western Den^s (Proceedings, Canadian Institute, third 

series, vol. 7, Toronto, 1890). 
1895. I. Notes on the Western D6n6s (Transactions, Canadian In- 
stitute, vol. 4f Toronto, 1895}. 
1906. I. The Canadian Den^s (Annual Archaeological Report, 1905, 
Appendix, Report, Minister of Education, Toronto, 1906). 
MoRLEY, Sylvan us Griswold. 
191 5. I. An Introduction to the Study of the Maya Hieroglyphs 
(Bulletin 57, Bureau of American Ethnology, Washington, 1915). 
1920. I. The Inscriptions at Copan (Carnegie Institution of Wash- 
ington, Publication No. 219. Washington, 1920). 
MuRiE, James R. 
1914. I. Pawnee Indian Societies (Anthropological Papers, Ameri- 
can Museum of Natural History, vol. 11, part 7, New York, 
1914). 

Nelson, E. W. 
1899. I. The Eskimo about Bering Strait (Eighteenth Annual Re- 
port, Bureau of American Ethnology, part i, Washington, 1899). 
Nelson, N. C. 

1909. I. Shellmounds of the San Francisco Bay Region (University 
of California Publications in American Archaeology and Eth- 
nology, vol. 7, no. 4, Berkeley, 1909). 

1910. I. The Ellis Landing Shellmound (University of California 
Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology, voL 7, 
no. 5, Berkeley, 1910). 

.1916. I. Chronology of the Tano Ruins, New Mexico (American 
Anthropologist, N. S. vol. 18, pp. 159-180, Lancaster, 1916). 

191 7. I. Contributions to the Archaeology of Mammoth Cave and 
Vicinity, Kentucky (Anthropological Papers, American Museum* 
of Natural History, vol. 22, part i. New York, 191 7). 

1918. I. Chronology in Florida. (Anthropological Papers, Ameri- 
can Museum of Natural History, vol. 22, part 2, New York, 
1918). 

Nordenskiold, Erland. 
1918. I. Eine Geographische und Ethnographische Analyse der Ma- 
teriellen Kultur Zweier Indianerstamme in el Gran Chaco (Sud- 
amerika) (Vergleichende Ethnographische Forschungen, I, 
Goteberg, 1918). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 44i 

NOBOENSKIOLD, ErLAND. 

ig20. I. The Changes in the Material Culture of Two Indian Tribes 
under the Influence of New Surroundings (Comparative Ethno- 
graphical Studies, 2, G6tet>org, 1920). 

OsBORN, Henry Fairfield. 
1910. I. The Age of Mammals in Europe, Asia and North America. 
New York, 1910. 

1915. I. Men of the Old Stone Age. Their Environment, Life and 
Art. New York, 1915. 

Pain, B. H. See Duckworth, W. H. L. and Pain, B. H. 
Parker, Arthur C. 

1910. I. Iroquois Uses of Maize and other Food Plants (Bulletin 
144, New York State Museum, Albany, 1910). 

1916. I. The Constitution of the Five Nations (Bulletin 184, New 
York State Museum, Albany, 1916). 

1916. II. The Origin of the Iroquois as suggested by their Archx- 
ology (American Anthropologist, N. S. vol. 18, pp. 479-507, 
Lancaster, 1916). 
See also Wissler, 191 5. II. 
Pike, Warburton. 
1892. I. The Barren Ground of Northern Canada. New York, 
1892. 
PosNANSKY, Arthur. 
1916. I. Mongoloid Signs in Some Ethnic Types of the Andine 
Plateau (Science, N. S. vol. 43, pp. 904-905, June 23, 1916). 
Powell, J. W. 
1891. I Indian Linguistic Families of America North of Mexico 
(Seventh Annual Report, Bureau of Ethnology, Washington, 
1891). 

Radin, Paul. 

191 1. I. Some Aspects of Winnebago Archeology (American An- 
thropologist, N. S. vol. 13, pp. 517-538, Lancaster, 191 1). 

1914. I. Religion of the North American Indians (Journal of Am- 
erican Folk-Lore, vol. 27, pp. 335-373* Lancaster, 1914). 

1914. II. A Sketch of the Peyote Cult of the Winnebago : a Study 
in Borrowing (Journal of Religious Psychology, vol. 3, pp. 1-22, 
1914). 

1915. I. Literary Aspects of North American Mythology (Bulletin 
16, Anthropological Series, no. 6, Ckological Survey, Canada, 
Ottawa, 1915). 

Ratzel, Friedrich. 

1896-1898. I. The History of Mankind. London and New York, 
1896-1898. 

442 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Rau, Chasles. 
1873. I. North American Stone Implements (Smithsonian Report 

for 1872, Washington, 1873). 
1884. I. Prehistoric Fishing in Europe and North America (Smith- 
sonian Contributions to Knowledge, vol. 25, Washington, 1884). 
Ripley, William Z. 
1899. I. The Races of Europe. A Sociological Study. Accom- 
panied by a Supplementary Bibliography. New York, 1899. 
Rivers, W. H. R. 

1914. I. Kinship and Social Organization. London, 1914. 
Robertson, A. W. D. See Berry, Richard A. J. 
Roth, W. E. 
1910. I. Some Technological Notes from the Pomeroon District, 
British Guiana, part 2 (Journal, Royal Anthropological Insti- 
tute, vol. 40, 1910). 
Russell, Frank. 
1908. I. The Pima Indians (Twenty-sixth Annual Report, Bureau 
of American Ethnology, Washington, 1908). 

Sahagun, Bernardino de. 
1880. I. Histoire G^nerale des Choses de la Nouvelle-Espagne. 
Translated by D. Jourdanet and Remi Simeon. Paris, i88a 
Sanchez, J. 
1877. !• Estudio Acera de la Estatua Llamada Chac-Mool 6 Rey 
Tigre (Anales del Museo Nacional, vol. i, pp. 270-278, Mexico, 

1877). 
Sapir, Edward. 

191 1. I. The History and Varieties of Human Speech (Popular 
Science Monthly, July, 191 1). 

1913. I. Wiyot and Yurok, Algonkin Languages of California (Am- 
erican Anthropologist, N. S. vol. 15, pp. 617-646, Lancaster, 

1913). 

1915. I. The Na-dene Languages, a Preliminary Report (American 
Anthropologist, N. S. vol. 17, pp. 534-558, Lancaster, 191 5). 

1916. I. Time Perspective in Aboriginal American Culture, a Study 
in Method (Memoir 90, Geological Survey of Canada, Ottawa, 
1916). 

See also Boas, 1916. II. 
Saville, Marshall H. 

1907. I. The Antiquities of Manabi, Ecuador. Preliminary Re- 
port, vol. I (Contributions to South American Archeology. The 
George G. Heye Expedition, New York, 1907). 
1909. I. The Cruciform Structures of Mitla and Vicinity (Putnam 
Anniversary Volume, New York, 1909). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 443 

Saville, Marshall H. 

191a I. The Antiquities of Manabi, Ecuador. Final Report. (Con- 
tributions to South American Archeology. The George G. Heye 
Expedition, New York, 1910). 

1920. I. The Goldsmith's Art in Ancient Mexico (Indian Notes and 
Monographs, Museum of the American Indian, Heye Founda- 
tion, New York, 1920). 
Shetrone, H. C. 

191 8. I. The Indian in Ohio (Reprinted from Ohio Archaeological 
and Historical Quarterly, July, 1918. Columbus, 1918). 

1920. I. The Culture Problem in Ohio Archaeology (American An- 
thropologist, N. S. vol. 22, pp. 144-172, Lancaster, 1920). 
Schmidt, Max. 

1905. I. Indianerstudien in Zentral-Brasilien. Erlebnisse und Eth- 
nologische Ergebnisse einer Reise in den Jahren 1900 bis 1901. 
Berlin, 1905. 
ScHRABiscH, Max. 

1909. I. Indian Rock-shelters in Northern New Jersey and Southern 
New York (Anthropological Papers, American Museum of Nat- 
ural History, vol. 3, New York, 1909). 

SCHURTZ, HeINRICH. 

1902. I. Altersklassen und Mannerbunde, eine Darstelltmg der 
Grundformen der Gesellschaft. Berlin, 1902. 
Seler, Eouard. 

1904. I. Ancient Mexican Feather Ornaments (Bulletin 28, Bureau 
of American Ethnology, Washington, 1904). 
Skinner^ Alan son. 

1909. I. Archaeology of the New York Coastal Algonkin (Anthro- 
pological Papers, American Museum of Natural History, vol 3, 
New York, 1909). 

1 913. I. Social Life and Ceremonial Bundles of the Menomini Indi- 
ans (Anthropological Papers, American Museum of Natural 
History, vol. 13, part i, New York, 1913). 

191 5. I. Associations and Ceremonies of the Menomini Indians 
(Anthropological Papers, American Museum of Natural History, 
vol. 13, part 2, New York, 1915). 
Smith, G. Eluot. 

191 5. I. Pre-Columbian Representations of the Elephant in Am- 
erica (Nature, vol. 96, pp. 340-341, 425, November, 1915). 

1916. I. Pre-Columbian Representations of the Elephant in America 
(Nature, vol. 96, pp. 59^594* January, 1916). 

Smith, Harlan I. 
1899. I. Archaeology of Lytton, British Columbia (Memoirs, Ameri- 
can Museum of Natural History, vol 2, part 3, New York, 1899}. 

444 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Smith, Haslan I. 
1900. I. Archaeology of the Thompson River Region (Memoirs, 

American Museum of Natural History, vol. 2, part 6, New York, 

1900). 
1903. I. Shell-heaps of the Lower Fraser River, British Columbia 

(Memoirs, American Museum of Natural History, vol. 4, part 

4, New York, 1903). 
1907. I. Archaeology of the Gulf of Georgia and Puget Sound 

(Memoirs, American Museum of Natural History, voL 4, part 

6, New York, 1907). 
1910. I. An Unknown Field in American Archaeology (Bulletin, 

American Geographical Society, vol 42, pp. 511-520, 1910). 

1910. II. The Archaeology of the Yakima Valley (Anthropological 
Papers, American Musetun of Natural History, vol. 6, part i. 
New York, 1910). 

191 1. I. Prehistoric Ethnology of a Kentucky Site (Anthropological 
Papers, American Musetun of Natural History, voL 6, part 2, 
New York, 191 1). 

SOLBESG, O. 

1907. I. Beitrage zur Vorgeschichte der Ost-Eskimo (Videnskabs- 
Selskabets Skrifter, II, Hist-Filos. Klasse, Christiana, 1907). 
Speck, Frank G. 
1907. I. Some Comparative Traits of the Maskogian Languages 
(American Anthropologist, N. S. vol. 9, pp. 470-483, Lancaster, 

1907). 

1909. I. Ethnology of the Yuchi Indians (Anthropological Publica- 
tions, University of Pennsylvania, vol. i,no. i, Philadelphia, 1909). 

1914. I. The Double-Curve Motive in Northeastern Algonkian Art 
(Memoir 42, Geological Survey of Canada. Ottawa, 1914). 

1920. I. Decorative Art and Basketry of the Cherokee (Bulletin, 
Public Museum of the City of Milwaukee, vol. 2, no. 2, Mil- 
waukee, 1920). 

Spencer, Baldwin and Gillen, F. J. 

1899. I. The Native Tribes of Central Australia. London, 1899. 
Spier, Lesue. 

1916. I. New Data on the Trenton Argillite Culture (American 
Anthropologist, N. S. vol. 18, pp. 181-189, Lancaster, 1916). 

1917. I. An Outline for a Chronology of Zuni Ruins (Anthro- 
pological Papers, American Museum of Natural History, vol. i8» 
part 3, New York, 1917). 

1918. I. The Trenton Argillite Culture (Anthropological Papers, 
American Museum of Natural History, vol. 22, part 4, New 
York, 1918). 

1921. I. The Sun Dance of the Plains Indians: Its Development 
and Diffusion (Anthropological Papers, American Museum of 
Natural History, vol. 16, part 7, New York, 1921). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 445 

Spinden, Herbert J. 
1908. I. The Nez Perce Indians (Memoirs, American Anthropo- 
logical Association, vol. 2, part 3, Lancaster, 1908). 

1913. I. A Study of Maya Art Its Subject Matter and Historical 
Development (Memoirs, Peabody Museum of American Archae- 
ology and Ethnology, vol. 6, Cambridge, 1913)- 

191 5. I. Notes on the Archaeology of Salvador (American Anthro- 
pologist, N. S. vol 17, pp. 446-487, Lancaster, 191S). 

191 7. I. Ancient Civilizations of Mexico and Central America 
(Handbook Series, American Museum of Natural History, New 

York, 1917)- 
191 7. II. The Origin and Distribution of Agriculture in America 
(Proceedings, Nineteenth International Congress of American- 
ists, 191S. pp. 269-276, Washington, 1917). 
Spinden, Herbert J. and Will, George F. 
1906. I. The Mandans. A Study of their Culture, Archaeology and 
Language (Papers, Peabody Museum of American Archaeology 
and Ethnology, vol. 3, no. 4, Cambridge, 1906). 
Squier, E. G. 
1853. I. Travels in Central America, Particularly in Nicaragua. 
With a Description of its Aboriginal Monuments, Scenery and 
People, their Languages, Institutions, Religion, etc. 2 vols. New 
York, 1853. 
1877. I. Peru. Incidents of Travel and Exploration in the Land 
. of the Incas. New York, 1877. 
Steensby, H. p. 
191 7. I. An Anthropogeographical Study of the Origin of the 
Eskimo Culture (Meddelelser om Gr^nland, vol. 53, Copenhagen, 

^ 1917). 
Stefansson, VilhjAlmur. 

1914. I. The Stefinsson-Anderson Arctic Expedition of the Am<;ri- 
can Museum: Preliminary Ethnological Report (Anthropological 
Papers, American Museum of Natural History, vol. 14, part i, 
New York, 1914). 

1919. I. My Life with the Eskimo. New York, 1919. 
Steffen, Max. 

1883. I. Die Landwirtschaft bei den altamerikanischen Kultur- 
volker. Leipzig, 1883. 
Steinbrueck, E. R. See B rower, J. V., 1904. I. 
Sterns, Fred H. 

1915. I. A Stratification of Cultures in Eastern Nebraska (Ameri- 
can Anthropologist, N. S. vol. 17, pp. 121-127, Lancaster, 1915). 

StCbel, a. See Uhle, Max, and Stubel, A. 

446 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Sullivan, Louis R. 
igao. I. Differences in the Pattern of the Second Lower Molar 
Tooth (American Journal of Physical Anthropology, vol 3. 
no. 2, pp. 255-257, Washington, 1920). 
1920. IL Anthropometry of the Siouan Tribes (Anthropological 
Papers, American Museum of Natural History, voL 23, part 
3, New York, 1920). 
S WANTON, John R. 

1905. L The Social Organization of American Tribes (American 
Anthropologist, N. S. vol. 7, pp. 663-673, Lancaster, 1905). 

1906. I. A Reconstruction of the Theory of Social Organization 
(Boas Anniversary Volume, pp. 166-178, New York, 1906). 

1911. L Indian Tribes of the Lower Mississippi Valley and Ad- 
jacent Coast of the Gulf of Mexico (Bulletin 43, Bureau of 
American Ethnology, Washington, 191 1). 

1915. L Linguistic Position of the Tribes of Southern Texas and 
Northeastern Mexico (American Anthropologist, N. S. vol 17, 
pp. 17-40, Lancaster, 191 5). 

See also Dorsey, J. O., and Swanton, John R., 1912. I ; Thomas, 
Cyrus and Swanton, John R., 1911. I. 

Tetf, James. 

1898. L Traditions of the Thompson River Indians of British 

Columbia (Memoirs, American Folk-lore Society, vol. 6, 1898). 

1900. L The Thompson Indians of British Columbia (Memoirs, 

American Museum of Natural History, vol. 2, part 4, New 

York, 1900). 

1906. I. The Lillooet Indians (Memoirs, American Museum of 

Natural History, vol. 4, part 5, New York, 1906). 
1909. I. The Shuswap (Memoirs, American Museum of Natural 
History, vol. 4, part 7, Leiden and New York, 1909). 
Thalbitzer, William. (Editor). 

1 91 4. I. The Ammassalik Eskimo. Part i. Contributions to the 
Ethnology of the East Greenland Natives (Meddelelser oro 
Gr^nland, vol. 39, Copenhagen 1914). 
Thomas, Cyrus. 
1889. I. The Problem of the Ohio Mounds (Bulletin 8, Bureau of 
American Ethnology, Washington, 1889). 
Thomas, Cyrus, and Swanton, John R. 
1911. L Indian Languages of Mexico and Central America and 
their Geographical Distribution (Bulletin 44, Bureau of Ameri- 
can Ethnology, Washington, 191 1). 
Thompson, Edward H. 
1911. I. The Genesis of the Maya Arch (American Anthropologist, 
N. S. vol. 13, pp. 501-516, Lancaster, 1911). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 447 

Thomson, Arthur. 
1899. I. On the Treatment and Utilization of Anthropological Data. 
III. Racial Proportions (Knowledge, vol. 22, pp. 125-128, Lon- 
don, 1899). 
TozzER, Alfred M. 
1907. I. A Comparative Study of the Mayas and the Lacandones 
(Report of the Fellow in American Archaeology, 1902-1905, 
Archaeological Institute of America, New York, 1907). 
Tyuor, Edward B. 
1889. I. Primitive Culture. Researches into the Development of 
Mythology, Philosophy, Religion, Languages, Art and Custom. 
2 vols. New York, 18B9. 
1889. II. A Method of Investigating the Development of Institu- 
tions, etc. (Journal of the Anthropological Institute, vol. 18^ 
pp. 246-269, 1889). 
Researches into the Early History of Mankind and the Develop- 
ment of Civilization. New York, no date. 

Uhls, Max. 
1903. I. Pachacamac. Report of the William Pepper, M.D., LL.D. 
Peruvian Expedition of 1896 (University of Pennsylvania, De- 
partment of Archaeology, 1903). 

1913. I. Die Muschelhugel von Ancon, Peru (Proceedings, Inter- 
national Congress of Americanists, London, 1913). 

Uhle, Max, and Stubel, A. 
1892. I. Die Ruinenstatte von Tiahuanaco im Hochlande des Alten 
Peru. Breslau, 1892. 

DB la Vega, Garcilasso. 
1688. I. The Royal Commentaries of Peru. Translated by Sir Paul 
Ricaut. London, 1688. 
VoLK, Ernest. 

191 1. I. The Archaeology of the Delaware Valley (Papers, Pea- 
body Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology, vol. 5, 
Cambridge, 1911). 
Von den Steinen, Karl. 
1897. I. Unter den Naturvolkem Zentral-Brasiliens. Berlin, 1897. 

Waterman, T. T. 

1914. I. The Explanatory Element in the Folk-tales of the North- 
American Indians (Journal of American Folk-lore, vol. 27, pp. 
1-54, Lancaster, 1914). 

Waterman, T. T. and Coffin, Geraldine. 

1920. I. Types of Canoes on Puget Sound (Indian Notes and 
Monographs, Museum of the American Indian, Heye Founda- 
tion, New York, 1920). 

448 THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Waterman, T. T. and Collaborators. 
192 1. I. Native Houses of Western North America (Indian Notes 
and Monographs, Museum of the American Indian, Heye Founda- 
tion, New York, i^i). 
Waugh, F. W. 

1916. I. Iroquois Foods and Food Preparation (Memoir, 86, no. 
12, Geological Survey, Anthropological Series. Ottawa, 1916). 

Webster, Hutton. 

1908. I. Primitive Secret Societies. A Study in Early Politics and 
Religion. New York, 1908. 

Whiffen, Thomas. 
191 5. I. The Northwest Amazons. Notes of Some Months spent 
among Cannibal Tribes. New York, 1915. 
Will, George F. and Hyde, George £. 

1917. I. Com Among the Indians of the Upper Missouri (Little 
Histories of North American Indians, No. 5, St. Louis, 1917). 

Will, George F. See Spinden, Herbert J., and Will, George F. 

WiLLOUGHBY, ChARLES C. 

1905. I. Dress and Ornaments of the New England Indians (Amer- 
ican Anthropologist, N. S. vol. 7, pp. 499-508, Lancaster, 1905). 

1906. I. Houses and Gardens of the New England Indians (Ameri- 
can Anthropologist, N. S. vol. 8, pp. 1 15-132, Lancaster, 1906). 

Wilson, Gilbert L. 
191 7. I. Agriculture of the Hidatsa Indians, an Indian Interpreta- 
tion (University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 1917). 
Wilson, N. L. and Atkinson, Alfred. 

191 5. I. Corn in Montana. History, Characteristics, Adaptation 
(Montana Agricultural College Experiment Station, Bozeman, 
Montana, 191 5). 
Wilson, Thomas. 

1896. I. The Swastika, the Earliest Known Symbol, and its Migra- 
tions; with Observations on the Migration of Certain Industries 
in Prehistoric Times (Report, United States National Museum 
for 1894, Washington, 1896). 
Wintemberg, W. J. 

1901. I. Indian Village Sites in the Counties of Oxford and Water- 
loo (Annual Archaeological Report, 1900, Appendix, Report Min- 
ister of Education, Toronto, 1901). 
Wissler, Clark. 

1904. I. Decorative Art of the Sioux Indians (Bulletin, American 
Museum of Natural History, vol. 18, part 3, New York, 1904). 

1909. I. Notes Concerning New Collections (Anthropological 
Papers, American Museum of Natural History, voL 2, part 2, 
New York, 1909). Editor. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 449 

WiSSLER, ClAXK. 

1910. I. Material Culture of the Blackfoot Indians (Anthropological 
Papers, American Museum of Natural History, voL 5, part i, 
New York, 1910). 

191 1. I. The Social Life of the Blackfoot Indians (Anthropological 
Papers, American Museum of Natural History, vol. 7, part i. 
New York, 191 1). 

1912. I. North American Indians of the Plains (Handbook Series, 
American Museum of Natural History, no. i. New York, 1912). 

1912. II. Ceremonial Bundles of the Blackfoot Indians (Anthro- 
pological Papers, American Museum of Natural History, vol. 
7, part 2, New York, 1912). 

1912. III. Societies and Ceremonial Associations in the Oglala Divi- 
sion of the Teton-Dakota (Anthropological Papers, American 
Museum of Natural History, vol. 11, part i. New York, 1912). 

1912. IV. The Psychological Aspects of the Culture-Environment 
Relation (American Anthropologist, N. S. vol. 14, pp. 217-225, 
Lancaster, 1912). 

1914. I. The Influence of the Horse in the Development of Plains 
Culture (American Anthropologist, N. S. vol. 16, pp. 1-25, Lan- 
caster, 1914). 

1915. I. Riding Gear of the North American Indians (Anthropo- 
logical Papers, American Museum of Natural History, vol. 17, 
part I, New York, 1915). 

191 5. II. Costumes of the Plains Indians (Anthropological Papers, 
American Museum of Natural History, vol. 17, part 2, New 
York, 191S). 

1916. I. (general Discussion of Shamanistic and Dancing Societies 
(Anthropological Papers, American Museum of Natural His- 
tory, vol. II, part 12, New York, 1916). 

1916. II. Aboriginal Maize Culture as a Typical Culture-Complex 
(The American Journal of Sociology, vol. 21, no. 5, Chicago^ 
1916). 

Zos, Raphael. 

1916. I. South American Timber Resources and their Relation to 
the World's Timber Supply (The Geographical Review, vol. 2, 
no. 4, pp. 256-266, October, 1916). 

INDEX 

Abipones, 137, 249, 250-251 

Aboriginal life, complexity of, 
132 

Abrading, pebbles showing process, 
120 

Acta niopo berry, snuff powder, 
27 

Accent, stress, little used in Amer- 
ican phonetics, 311 

Acorn, area, ix; bread, xi, 225; in- 
dustry, northern extension of, 
371 ; meal, cooked in baskets, 
California, 384; preparation of, 
for food, II 

Adhesions, associations between so- 
cial trait-complexes, 385-386 

Adultery, punishment for, 186 

Adze, distribution of» 124 

Africa, age-societies of, 393 ; tales 
from, in New World mythology, 
209 

Age, grades, 1 70-171 ; grades, Plains 
Indian societies, 382 ; grading sys- 
tems, origin of, 393-394 : societies, 
men's, 1 70-1 71 ; societies. Plains, 
393-394; system of societies in 
America, 393 

Aged, treatment of, 187-188 

Agricultural, areas, 12-19; products, 
Amazon Basin, 18; products, 
Chibcha peoples, 17; products, 
Ecuador, 17; products, Inca, 17- 
18; products, Pueblo peoples, 16; 
rituals. 194 

Agriculture, Amazon Basin, 18; 
Amazon tribes, 237 ; area of in- 
tensive, outlined, 2 ; area of in- 
tensive, 14, 16; Chibcha area, 
246 ; control of, by Inca and Na- 
hua, 184 ; cultural differences in 
Colombia. Ecuador, and Peru, 17- 
18 ; diffusion of. 24-25 ; distribu- 
tion in America, 25; Eastern 

Woodland Area, 235, 236-237; 
extensive, Maya, 243 ; guanaco 
area, 249; high organization of 
in Nahua and Maya areas, 16; 
Inca area, 248; intensive, Aztec, 
244; lack of, in the Plains, 220; 
limits of distribution in North 
America. 12-13; main dependence 
on in Southwest area, 239 ; no- 
madic tribes of the Southwest, 
241-242; in the Old and New 
Worlds, 391-392 ; Southeastern 
area, 237, 238; still maintained 
by Amazon tribes, 18 ; woman's 
work in eastern maize area, 14 

Alaska-Siberian type of pottery, 69- 
70 

Aleutian Islands, archxology of 
277; basketry of, 50, 55 

Algonkin, 45, 50, 78, no, iii, 163, 
178-179, 182, 208, 231, 235, 256, 
293> 334t 362, 368; possible his- 
torical relation to Eskimo, 126. 
See also Algonquian 

Algonquian, languages. 320; lin- 
guistic area, 271 ; stock, 320, 321, 
322, 387; stock in California, 
319; stock, consolidated with 
California stocks, 403 ; stock, lin- 
guistic and tribal groups, 403- 
419; stocks, linguistic, recently 
combined with, 309 

Alpaca, herded for wool, 36 

Altars, sand painted, Pueblo area, 
241 

Amazon area, culture characteriza- 
tion of, 251-257 

Amherst students, bodily propor- 
tions, 341 

Ancestors, family, carving influ- 
enced by beliefs concerning, 89 

Angakok, 189 

Animal, lodges, Caddoan, 202 ; tales, 
451 

452 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

prevalence of, in mythology, 206; 
transport, distribution of, 29 

Animals, clan and gens names de- 
rived from, 172; domestication 
of, 28-38; early introduction of 
European, 38; hoofed, similarity 
of root terms for, in several lan- 
guages, 319; life-like forms of, 
carved, 89; Old World, early 
adoption in Southeastern area, 
238 ; take on human qualities in 
mythology, 206 

Animism, 212-213 

Anthropology, aims of, xvii, 386- 
388 ; uncoordinated sciences, mak- 
ing up the whole, 359 

Antilles, 40, 43, 52, 65, 68, 76. 
1x7, 125, 127, 138, 16s, 252; 
archxological characterization of, 
279, 281 ; cultural characterization 
of, 257 

Antiquity, of archaeological deposits 
in the Arctic, not established, 
277; of archaeological remains 
in California, 276; of cultures in 
Peru, 283 ; of remains, in Pata- 
gonia, 285-286; of skeletal re- 
mains, 354, 356 

Antler, process of working, 127 

Apu Ollantay, Inca drama. 210 

Aqueduct systems, Peru and Mex- 
ico, 108 

Araucanians, 158, 176, 249. 250, 251 

Arawak. 41, 165, 247, 251, 255, 257; 
distribution of, 252 

Arawakan stock, 320, 368 ; tribal 
groups. 415-416 

Arch, absence of in New World 
architecture, 102 

Archaeological areas, 262; areas, 
agreement with historic culture 
areas. 361, 367; centers. 361-364 

Archseological characterization of 
culture areas, Antilles. 279, 281 ; 
Arctic area, 277 ; Atlantic High- 
lands. 284-285 ; California, 274- 
276 : Canadian area. 277 ; Central 
Mexico, 278 ; Chile, 283-284 : Co- 
lombia. 281-282; Columbia Basin, 
226 ; Ecuador, 282-283 ; Great 
Lakes area, 270-271 ; Iroquoian 

area, 266-268 ; Mississippi-Ohio 
area, 268-270; North Atlantic 
area, 261, 263-265; Northern 
Mexico, 277'27S; North Pacific 
Coast, 277; Panama, 279; Pata- 
gonia, 285-286 ; Peru, 283 ; Plains 
area, 271-272; Pueblo area, 272- 
274; South Atlantic area, 265- 
266; State of Oaxaca, 278; Yu- 
catan, 278 

Archaeological classification, 261- 
286; correlated with cultural 
classification, 360-364; close cor- 
respondence with historic classi- 
fication, 370 

Archaeological specimeiis» manner of 
classification, 261 

Archaeology, Eskimo, 231 ; Euro- 
pean, 294-296; Iroquoian, 362; 
North America, 261-281 ; South 
America, 281-286 

Architecture, X02-118; centers of 
development, 102; Inca area, 232; 
Pueblo, X06, 273, 274 

Armor, defensive, 137; Northeni 
California, 227; North Pacific 
Coast area, 228; Plateau area, 
223 

Arrow-head, common types of, 123; 
distribution and form, 122; 
North Pacific Coast area, 228 

Art, center, Pueblo, 80-82; charac- 
teristics of New World, 96; dec- 
orative. Eastern Woodland area, 
236, 237 ; decorative, modem re- 
vival in, xvi ; decorative. Northern 
California, 227; decorative. North 
Pacific Coast area, 228 : decorative, 
Plateau area, 223; double-curve, 
85-88; geometric. 79; geometric. 
Plains, 220; geometric and realis- 
tic, 77; individualities in, 96: of 
intense culture area, 91 ; localiza- 
tion of, 371 ; Maya, high develop- 
ment of, 289. 298-209 : Plains, 83. 
84-85; realistic, 85-86; symbolic 
240 

Artifacts, archaeological. Northern 
Mexico. 277 : California area, 274- 
275 : Columbia Basin, 276 ; most 
common in Antilles, 279, 281; 

INDEX 

453 

geographical segregation of. 
North Atlantic area, 264-265; 
•tones, types, and distribution, 
122-128 

Arts, fine, 140-155; mechanical, 
Pueblo area, 240; textile, 42-65 

Astronomical knowledge. New 
vVorld peoples, 136 

Athapascan stock, 310, 316, 320, 
321, 368; distribution, 365; im- 
migrants from the North, 372; 
linguistic and tribal groups, 404, 

413 

Atlantic Highlands, archaeological 
characterization of, 284-285 

Australians, 336, 342; bodily pro- 
portions, 341 

Ax, copper, 129-130; grooved, dis- 
tribution, 123 

Axes, perforated, in Neolithic Eu- 
rope, 127 

Aymara, distribution, 247; stock, 
416 ^ 

Aztec, 28, lAO, I43,\i7ii 194, 195. 
196, 243^1227 27ir'392 ; culture, 
similarity to Maya, 244-245 ; niost 
typical of the Nahua culture, 242 

Bakatri, 340 

Balsa, distribution of, 40; in Pla- 
teau area, 225 

Bands, found among hunting 
groups, 160-162; quill-worked, 86- 

87, 90 

Bannerstone, 125 ; possibly a mesh 
gauge. 48 

Barefoot regions, outlined, 60-65 

Bark-beater, ridged, 136 

Basketry, 48-53, 240; area, outlined, 
80; California area, 50, 52. 96, 
226; cane, 53, 90-91; central 
group, North Pacific Coast tribes. 
221, 228; decorations on, 76; dis- 
tinguished from cloth, 53 ; distri- 
bution of types, 52 ; eastern maize 
area, 00-91; Eskimo. 90. 230; 
Haida and Tlingit, 90 ; imbricated, 
80 ; Northern Shoshonean tribes, 
224 ; Pima, 241 ; Plateau area, 
223; Southeastern area, 90-91; 
Southwestern area, 240-241 ; 

splint, 52-53; techniques, 80; 
Tlingit, 227 

Baskets, Aleutian, 74 ; California, de- 
signs on, analyzed, 85 ; California, 
specialization in, 371 ; cane, 78, 
238 ; classification of, 50-52 ; cook- 
ing, 52; decoration of, 76-78; 
flexible, 55 

Bast fibers, used in textiles, 42-43 

Beadwork, 82-84; design elements 
in Plains, 85 ; floral designs on, 
86; Plains designs analyzed, 85 

Bear, belief in power of, 212 

Bee. domestication of, 28, 38, 244 

Betel nut culture, analogy of to- 
bacco chewing to, 25 

Berries, used as food, D6n^, 232; 
Carrier, 8; salmon area, xo; and 
fruits, rarity in acorn area, xi 

Birchbark, canoes of, 42; covers 
for tipis, hi; decorations on, 85, 
86; high development of drawing 
on, 87 ; vessels and canoes asso- 
ciated, 53; work in Mackenzie 
area, 37 x 

Bison area, 3, 31* 35. 36, 4a, 5^, 
66, III, 127, 161, x86, 209. 2x1, 
213, 351; costume, 63; described, 
6 ; designs, 83 ; pottery made in, 
68; types of culture in, 369 

Bison, eastern range of, X4 ; meth- 
ods of hunting, 6-7 ; use of cen- 
tered in the Plains, 371. See also 
buffalo 

Bite, comparative observation on, 
328-329 

"Black drink,'* Southeastern area, 
239 ; widespread use of, X95 

Black-on-white pottery, distribution, 

^73 

Blanket, Chilkat, 55, 59, 90, 227; 
Navajo, 77, 8X-82; rabbitskin, 57- 
S8. 225 

Blind dupe, distribution of story, 
208 

Blood-clot Boy, story, 209 

Blood feuds, tribes with simple or- 
ganization, 18 X 

Blood, offering, Maya and Nahua, 
203 ; as a means of purification, 
ai3; vongeance, right of recog- 

454 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

nized in North America, 177; 
vengeance, tribes of Gulf States, 

179 

Blowgun, distribution, 138; used in 
hunting, Amazon Basin, 19 

Boats, Eskimo, 41 ; frame, distribu- 
tion, 40; in the NeW World, 38-41 

Bochica, Chibcha culture hero, 211, 
246 

Bodily proportions, 338, 340, 341 ; 
unity of, in the New World, 338 

Bola, 35, 249, 251 ; stone, Patagonia, 
286 

Bone, artifacts, in Missouri Valley, 
271 ; objects of, California area, 
275 1 prevailing tool materials in 
hunting areas, 127; process of 
working, 127 

Boomerang, Pueblo area, 240 

Boundaries, to culture areas, 257- 
259; of pottery area, 66-68 

Bow, in bison area, 35 ; distribution, 
138-X39; musical, 154; sinew- 
backed, 393 ; universal use of, 

138-139 
Bowdrill, 132 

Bowls, knot. Eastern Woodland 
area, 371 

Boxes, and plank work, specializa- 
tion in, 371 

Bread, acorn, 11, 225; cassava root, 
24 ; coonti roots, 237 ; hemlock 
bark, 10; tuckahoe and persim- 
mon, 14 

Breadth, of head, 331, 333, 334, 335 

Bricks, made in Mexico, 72 

Bridges, suspension, in Peru, xo8 

Bronze, Age, 294 ; made in Inca 
area, 248 ; use of in the New 
World, 1 30-13 1, 392 

Brush shelters. 113 

BufTalo. dependence on, by Plains 
Indians, 219-220, 231 ; hair, used 
as fiber, 42 ; hair, spinning. 47 ; 
hair weaving, northern extension 
of. 59. See also bison 

Building, art, diffusion of, 107; 
northern limits of Nahua, 106- 
107 

Buildings, Peru and Yucatan, dif- 
ferences in, 103-104; stone. 

Pueblo and Eskimo areas, 1 09-1 10 
Bull-boat, 40, 249 

Bundles, ceremonial, 197-198; ritu- 
als for, 378 
Burial, form of, 265, 266; in gravel 

banks, Mississippi-Ohio area, 270; 

mound, distribution, X05-106, 283; 

platform, guanaco area, 249; urn, 

73» X09, 26s, 284. a8s 
Burning Cannibal, distribution of 

story, 208 

Cache, important invention cariboo 
area. 6 ; pits, North Atlantic area, 
^63, 264 

Cahokia mound, 105, 116, 268 

Calabash rattle, distribution of, 201 

Calchaqui, X09, 284 ; stock, 249, 250, 
416 

Calendar, system, Maya, 192, 244; 
Maya, aid to establishing chronol- 
ogy, 288 

California, area, archaeological char- 
acterization of, f^'276; area, 
characterization of culture, 225- 
2^7 1 371 ; culture traits, in Pla- 
teau area, 225 

Calpulli, function of. among Nahua, 
176 

Calumet, pipe, 178; procedure. 
Southeastern area, 239 

Camas, chief root used in salmon 
area, 9-10; roasting, distribution 
of, 371 

Canadian area, archaeological char- 
acterization of. Z77 

Cane, baskets, s^Si, 78, 90-91, 95; 
tube, for smoking. 125 

Cannibal, cult, North Pacific Coast 
tribes, 228 ; feast. Amazon tribes, 
254; society, Nootka, 202 

Cannibalism, Inca area, 248 ; South 
Atlantic area, 266 

Canoe culture. Amazon area. 256 

Canoes, 38-41 ; West Indies, 40 

Carib, 41, 170, 247, 251, 252, 257; 
stock. 320, 368, 416 

Caribou area. 4, 31. 35 ; dependence 
of Canadian tribes and Eskimo 
upon. 3-4 ; tribal groups in, 3 

INDEX 

455 

Caribou, range of, x, 3, 4; range 

and importance of, Mackenzie 

area, 231 
Carving, in Columbia Basin, 276; 

distribution of, 88-89, 145; ivory, 

89; North Pacific Coast area, 1x2, 

22S ; stone, 140 ; wood, 88-89, X45 
Casas Grandes, 274, 278 
Cassava, area of cultivation, 24; 

preparation for use, 24. See 

Manioc 
Catlinite, use of, in Great Lakes area, 

271 
Cattle, introduction of, 8, 34, 249 
Cave culture, in the Old and New 

Worlds, 294-295 
Cedarbark, fiber, 42; weaving, 55, 

136 
Ceilings, X02; absence of vaulted, 

Nahua buildings, xo6 
Celt, 123 ; distribution of Porto 

Rican, 280-281; hafted, 124, 127; 

Iroquoian area, 267; jadeite, 

125 

Central Algonkin, 55, 195, 198, 201, 
202, 235 

Central Mexico, archsological char- 
acterization of, 278 

Cephalic index, distribution in the 
New World, 329-333 ; rapid 
change in, immigrant population 
of United States, 332 ; range and 
variability of, 331-332; tribal 
groups, according to culture areas, 
35a 

Ceramic arts, 66-75 

Cereal complex, Old World, maize 
culture adapted to, 381 

Ceremonial tablets, birchbark, 135 

Ceremonialism, great development 
of, 19Z 

Ceremonies, Amazon tribes, 254 ; 
dogs eaten during, 36 ; eagles and 
serpents confined for. 28 ; Eastern 
Woodland area, 236 : Eskimo area, 
230 ; Inca area, 248 : . Lacandones, 
244; localization of, 371; mar- 
riage, 187; Maya. 192-193; Mex- 
ican. 194; Northern California, 
226: patterns for, 377-378; 
Pueblo area, 241 ; rituals of 

Pueblo and North Pacific Coast, 
210; tribal patterns for, 381 

Ceremony, Atamalqualiztli, 194 ; 
masked, 193; new-fire, 194; typi- 
cal New World, 205 

Chacmool statue, 140- 141, 142 

Chavin Stone, 108 

Cheyenne, 66, 158, 211, 218, 322, 
340 ; migrations of, 372 

Chibcha, agricultural products of, 
17; area, 156, 165, 192, 199, 202, 
an, 213, 245-247, 281; area, cul- 
tural characterization of, 245-247 

Chichen Itza, 141, 288 

Chilan Balam, Books of, 146 

Children, care and training of, 187- 
189 

Chile, archaeological characterization 
of, 283-284 

Chilkat, 55. 59, 9©, 227 

Chimney, absence of, in aboriginal 
houses, 115 

Chipping, process of, 120; unusual 
objects made by, 123 

Chiriqui, 93, 245 ; pottery from, 75 

Chronological, position of certain 
stone objects. Great Lakes area, 
271 ; types of man, 354-357 

Chronologies, determination of, 296- 
303 ; determined by stratification, 
291-294; inferential, 296-300 

Chronology, basis for solution of 
problems of similarity between 
Maya and Asiatic drawings, 394- 
395; of cultures, 297-303; estab- 
lished by stratification of pottery 
in Mexico. 292; inapplicability of 
Old World, to the New World, 

» 294-296 ; Maya, 288-289 ; Mex- 
ican, 289-290 ; of sculptures, 140 ; 
Southwestern. 82 

Civilization, centers of, in the New 
World, 399 

Clan, defined, 162; system, Arawak, 

165 

Gans, 162-166; and gentes, geo- 
graphical distribution, 163-165; 
Iroquois. 165, 167; Pueblo, 165 

Oassification of man, basis of. 324- 
326 ; breadth of face, 326 : flatten- 
ing of the femur, 327; flattening 

4S6 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

of the tibia, 327; by hair, 324- 
325 ; by skin, 325 
Classifications, correlation of, 359- 

374 
Classificatory system of relationship, 

distribution of, 168 

Clay, edible, 18 ; modeling in, 143 

Cliff-dweller, house type distribu- 
tion, 274; houses, basketry re- 
mains in, 52; houses, textiles 
from, 58; ruins, textiles from, 82 

Qoth, 53-59 ; bark, 136 ; clothing of, 
62; cotton in manioc area, 59; 
Peruvian, 57-58 

Clothing, 60-65; Amazon tribes, 
254; California area, 226; East- 
ern Woodland area, 236; Eskimo, 
dependence on caribou for, 5 ; 
cruanaco area, 250; Mackenzie 
area, 231 ; North Pacific Coast 
area, 238; Plains, 220; Plateau 
area, 223 ; Pueblo area, 240 ; skin, 
44, 298; Southeastern area, 238; 
southwestern D6ne, 232-233; tail- 
ored, diffusion of, 60-62 ; tailored, 
in the Old World, 62, 64 

Cloud terrace, Pueblo symbol, 99, 100 

Coca-chewing, 25-26 ; Chibcha area, 
246 

Codex, Mexican, resemblance to 
year counts, 134-135 

Codices, 146; Maya, 134; Mexican 
and Maya, 143 

Coil, method in making pottery, 69 ; 
spiral, direction of, in basketry, 52 

Coiled, basketry, distribution, 50, 52 ; 
pottery, Pueblo area, 273 ; tech- 
nique in basketry, 80 

Collars, stone, in the Antilles, 125. 

Colombia, archaeological character- 
ization of, 281-282 

Colonnades, common, in Mexican 
houses, 103 

Colonization, Spanish, changes 
caused by. 8. 34, 249; realism in 
textile art due to, 91-Q2 

Color sequences, in Peruvian de- 
signs, 93 

Columbia, area, culture of, 292; 
Basin, archaeological characteriza- 
tion of, 276 

Communal, character of land sys- 
tem, 183-184; foundation of agri- 
cultural concept, 184 
Communistic government, 156 
Complex, cotton, unity in the New 
World, 47; horse-riding, 34-35; 
maize, unity in New World, 47 
Confession, conventional, Inca area, 
248; of sins, distribution of, 
JI4 
Convehtionalization, in design, 86 
Convergence, in culture, theory of, 

Z77 

Copper, aboriginal workings of, 270 ; 
knives, 124, 126; Lake Superior, 
129; mining, 129; tools, 129-130, 
243; work in, North Pacific 
Coast, 228 

Cortez, 1x8, 242, 245, 290 

Costume, bison area, 64; distribu- 
tion and types in the Old World, 
62-64; tailored, 60-64 

Cotton, armor of, 137 ; culture, dis- 
tribution, 43 ; raised in South 
America, 55 ; unity of New World 
complex, 47 

Couvade, in South America, 193 

Cranes, domestication of, 28 

Crane Bridge, distribution of story, 
208 

Creation, in mythology, 208 

Crests, North Pacific Coast tribes, 
228 

Crime, compounding of, 177; pun- 
ishment for, 175-181 

Cro-Magnon man, 347, 349-350 

Crops, aboriginal, in North Amei^ 
ica, 12-13 

Cross-cousin marriage. x86 

Cults, Mazateca, 194; shamanistic, 
201-202 

Cultural classification, correlated 
with archaeological classification, 
360-364 

Culture, Amazon area, 252-253, 255- 
256 ; American, independent de- 
velopment of. 12; of the Antilles, 
257 ; anthropological conception 
of, 217 \ areas, close agreement 
with archaeological areas, 367; 
areas, North America, 218-245; 

INDEX 

457 

areas, otiilised, J17; areas. South 
America, 245-257; areas, super- 
position of, 363 ; center, Missis- 
sippi-Ohio area, 268, 269 ; centers, 
^S7'^S9f 3^1* 362; centers of high- 
est, 215, 396-397; centers, origin 
of, 372 ; centers, Peru, 283 ; cen- 
ters, stability of, 372; changes 
shown in shell-heaps, 293; chro- 
nology of, 287-303; classification 
of social groups* according to, 
ai 7-257 ; classifications, historic 
and prehistoric, 361 ; Columbia 
Basin, 276 ; common traits in New 
and Old Worlds, 392-393; com- 
plexes, elements constituting, 386 ; 
by conquest, 157; contrasts in 
Inca area. 247-248; correlated 
with political organization, 259; 
correlations between elevations 
and variations in. 368-369 ; corre- 
spondences between Old and New 
Worlds, 390-392; correspondences 
between Pueblo and Diaguite, 
MS4; differences in Amazon area, 
251-257; differentiation of, a his- 
torical phenomena, 389; diffusion, 
78; evidence of early in New 
Jersey, 264-265 ; fundamental dif- 
ferences in New and Old Worlds, 
XV ; fundamentals of Old World, 
391 ; general relations with lin- 
guistics and somatology. 367-368 ; 
grouping, 307; grouping, corre- 
lated with language grouping, 364- 
365; guanaco area, 249-251 ; hero, 
in mythology, 207 ; hero, Peruvian, 
29 1 ; hero trickster, wide diffusion 
of concept, 212; historical con- 
ception of, 387-388 ; intergrada- 
tions of, 257-258 ; material, sta- 
bility of, 373-374 ; means of in- 
terpretation of, 386-388; Mongo- 
loid-Red peoples, contributions to, 
396-398; most advanced in area 
of intense agriculture, 14 ; origin, 
theories of, 375-388 ; periods, in 
Eastern United States, 295 ; Plains, 
218-222; possibility of transposi- 
tions of, 369 ; seafaring. 40-41 ; 
sequence in the New World, 301 ; 

sequences in, 294 ; subdivisions of, 
South Atlantic area, 265-268; 
subdivisions of, Atlantic High- 
lands, 284-285; subdivisions, Co- 
lombia, 281-282; subdivisions, 
Ecuador, 283; succession of, in 
Chile, 283-284 ; term defined, 384 ; 
time required for development of, 
347 ; trait-association, 384-386 ; 
traits, correlation with faunal and 
floral distributions, 371 ; traits, 
originality of many New World, 
391 ; traits, patterns for, 377- 
378; traits, similarities in, 375- 
376; traits. South American, 245- 
246; types of Southwestern area, 
239; typical, North Atlantic area, 
263-264; unity of, in California 
archsology, 276; unity in funda- 
mentals, New World, 215, 390- 
391 ; unity of original Pueblo, 
273 ; varieties in Inca area, 247- 
248; varieties of mound in Ohio, 
269-270 

Cycle, annual, tribes in salmon area, 
10; religious, Maya, 192; yearly, 
ceremonial 202-203. 213; yearly, 
in social life, i6o-i6x 

Cymotrichi, found in Polynesian- 
European group, 342 

Dakota, 97, 98, in, 143, i5x» 158, 
170. 182, 290. 335, 350, 378 

Dancing Birds, distribution of story, 
208 

Day and night, origin of, as told 
in myths, 207 

Decoration, architectural, North Pa- 
cific Coast, 112; coiled baskets, 
80 ; Colombia pottery, 282 ; Ma- 
rajo Island pottery, 284 ; Peruvian 
pottery, 93, 95; pottery. 74-75. 
81 ; pottery and baskets, 76, 77, 

78 
Decorations, North Pacific Coast 
baskets, 90 ; painted on bark and 
wood, 95 ; on pottery by glaze, 

71 
Decorative art, development of. 99 ; 
features of Maya and Nahua 
buildings, 106-107 

4S8 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Deer, in acorn area, 1 1 ; chief game 
in eastern maize area, 14 

Deluge concept, distribution, 212 

D^nc, 5, so, s^* 87. 90, X13. 137, 
177, 186, 187, 200, 332-233 

Descent, common. Mongoloid, and 
New World peoples, 324-325 ; 
morphological grouping of man- 
kind based on, 324 ; skin color in- 
dicating common with Asiatic 
peoples, 325 

Deserted Children, distribution of 
story, 208 

Design, areas. North America, 81 ; 
ceramic, an index to chronology, 
76; elements, Plains beadwork, 
85; geometric, range of, 76; 
names, 97, 98, 99; unity of con- 
cepts, Peruvian pottery and cloth, 

94-95 

Designs, alligator and armadillo, 
93; Algonkin pottery, 78; anal- 
ysis of, 97-99 ; analytic compari- 
son of, 85 ; Apache baskets, 84 ; 
basketry and beadwork, 97 ; bas- 
ketry, California center, 80; 
beaded and painted. Plains, 84; 
cane basketry, 90-91, 95 ; caribou 
and eastern maize area, 85 ; Chil- 
kat blankets, 90 ; decorative, 76- 
10 1 ; distribution of. 80-96; Inca 
textiles, 93 ; influenced by tech- 
nique of basketry and weaving, 
77; Navajo blankets, 81-82; 
Northwest Amazon, 95-96 ; painted 
on pottery, 93. 95 ; Peruvian, se- 
ries of, 94 ; Plains and California, 
independent origin of, 85 ; Plains- 
like, Dene shields, 234 ; pottery, 
74-75. 78; realism in, 77-80; 
Shoshoni beadwork and basketry, 
84; symbolism in, 97-101; South- 
western pottery, 80-82 ; textile. 
77-80. 90, 91, 92, 93-95; on urns, 
from Chile, 284 

Diaguite, 284 

Dialects, language, defined, 305 

Diffusion, in art. 84 ; Aztec traits of 
culture, 24s ; cane baskets, 78 ; 
cotton complex, 43, 47 ; culture 
trait* in the Amazon, 256 ; grass 

dance, 380-381 ; historical exam- 
ples of, 376; horse-complex in 
the New World, 379; horse and 
horse culture, 249-250 ; house- 
building art, 107 ; maize complex, 
23 ; material complexes in the 
New World, 379-381 ; methods of 
reckoning time, 136; in mythol- 
ogy, 209; wide. New World cul- 
ture complexes, 399 ; Old World 
traits of culture, 391-392; Plains 
Indian societies, 299; similar as- 
sociated cultiure complexes, 384- 
385 ; skin clothing in North 
America, 298; theory, 376, 377; 
trait-complexes, 382 ; white-man 
god idea, 21 1-2 12 

Digging-stick, Plateau area, 223 

Digging tools, 21 

Discipline, 187-189 

Disease, ceremony for driving out, 

193 

Dispersion, of language, culture, 
and somatic characters, 369 ; of 
mankind, 348; of primates, 345 

Divisions, dual, 166-168 

Divorce, regulation of, 187 

Dog, culture, 32, 379; eaten by 
Nootka Cannibal society. 202 ; 
first appearance in Paleolithic Eu- 
rope, 28 ; food, 36 ; hair as a 
textile fiber, 42 ; packing, distri- 
bution, 31-32; similarity of term 
for. 319; traction, 379; traction, 
intrusive in the New World, 32- 
34 ; transportation by, 30, 32 ; use 
of in the New World, 30-32 

Domestication, of animals, 28-38 ; 
Inca area, 248 

Doors, New World houses, 103 

Double-curve, art, origin, 86 ; de- 
sign, 85-86 

Downward weaving, 53-55 ; distri- 
bution of, 55 

Drama, 210; cultivated by the Inca, 
144, 210 

Drawing, 143 

Dream, dance, 381 ; to obtain indi- 
vidual guardian, 197 

Drilling, methods of, 121-122, 132, 
133-134 

INDEX 

459 

DrumB, Tarieties and distribution, 

154 
Dual» divisions, 166-167; grouping 

of tribes, 167 

Dug-out, Amazon Basin, 256; ca- 
noes, 227, 256; North Pacific 
Coast, 40-41 

Dyeing, New World, 392 

Earth-lodge, xio, 114, 220, 222; dis- 
tribution, no 

Earthworks, 116-X17 

Eastern maize area 2, 3, 12, 13, ai, 
a3» S5» 59, 62, 90, 117, 123, 128, 
129 

Eastern Woodland area, 271, 368, 
369, 381 ; culture characterization 

of, 234-237 

Ecuador, archsological character- 
ization of, 282-283 

Economic areas, 218 

Education, 187-189; Aztec, 244 

Efiigy, jars, 73; mounds, 268; ves- 
sels, from Colombia, 282 

Elevation, distribution of certain 
linguistic stocks, coincident with, 
252 ; range of, in which New 
World cultures expanded, 368- 

369 

Emerald mines, worked in Colom- 
bia, 282 

Emetics, taken as a means of puri- 
fication, X95, 213 

Endogamy, among Pawnee, 163, 169 

Environment, Chibcha area, 246 ; 
factor in change of cephalic in- 
dex, 332; influence of, 370-374; 
similarity of bison and guanaco 
area. 34 

Eskimo, 10, 31, 33, 39, 40, 41, 48, 
49. 50, sa, 60, 67, 70, 74. 88. 89, 
90. 108, 109, 114, 121, 122, 123, 
124, 126, 127, 132, 133, 147, 149, 
167, 177. 186, 187. 188, 202, 213, 
214. 271. 277, 298, 326. 350. 352, 
353. 357; area, characterization 
of culture, 229-231 ; bodily pro- 
portions of, 326, 340; character- 
ized as to food, 3, 4 ; distinct t3rpe 
of culture, language, and somatic 
type, 366, 367; groups of, 229: 

migrations, 10, 368; possible his- 
torical relation with Algonkin, 
X26 

Etowah mound, 116, 268 

Eurasiatic, generalized type of man, 
distribution of, 343-344 

Evolution theory, not applicable to 
culture, 386 

Exogamic groups, North Pacific 
Coast tribes, 228 

Exogamous regulations, connected 
with dual divisions, 167-168 

Exogamy, 163; coincident with 
classificatory system of relation- 
ship in North America, 168-169 

Expansion, of mankind, extremes 
of, 346 

Explanatory element, in mythology, 
207 

Eye, fold, Mongolian, in the New 
World, 325-326. 339; form of. 
New World man, 339; color. 
New World, 338 

Eye Juggler, distribution of story, 
208 

Face, breadth of, New World, 326, 

339 

Facial angle. New World, 339 

Family group, has title to lands 
among Inca and Nahua. 183-184; 
importance of in communistic 
government, 156; importance of 
in government of Mexico, 157; 
independent of the band, 1 60-161 

Fasting, to obtain spiritual mani- 
festation, 197 

Father-in-law taboo, 169 

Fauna, influence of on culture 
traits, 371 

Feather mosaics, Aztec, 244; Peru, 
60 

Feather-work, 59-60 

Federations, of tribal groups, 158 

Femur, flattening of, 327 

Fertilization, artificial, range of, 23 

Fiber, textile, classes of, 42-43 ; 
twisting, methods of, 44-47; 
twisting, universal distribution of, 
44, 53 ; twisting, without a spin- 
dle, D^n^, 233 

460 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Fibers, bast, 42-43 ; distribution cor- 
related with whorl distribution, 
44-45 ; wool. 43 

Fine arts, 140-155 

Finger weaving, 53-54 

Fire, invention of, 134; renewal of, 
associated with agriculture, 213; 
shamanistic handling of, 201 ; uni- 
versal use of, 44 

Firedrill, 134 

Firing, of pottery, methods of, 69, 
70, 72 

Fish, fertilizer for maize, 23 ; meth- 
ods of taking, 14; nets, distribu- 
tion of use, 48; taboo against, in 
bison area, 6; taboo against, 
among Pueblo tribes, 16 

Fishing, absence of in the Plains, 
220 ; appliances for, Eskimo and 
Indians, 6; in Peru, 18; sea, in 
salmon area, 9 

Flageolets, 155 

Flint workings, aboriginal, 128 

Flora, influence on culture traits, 

371 

Flutes, 15s 

Flying goose, design, distribution of, 
98 

Folklore, in America, content of, 
206-207 

Food. Amazon tribes, 252, 254 ; ani- 
mals domesticated for, 36. 38 ; 
areas, 1-27 ; areas, general lines of 
culture grouping laid down by, 
371 ; California area, 225 ; dogs 
as, 36 ; Eastern Woodland area, 
234, 235 ; Eskimo area, 229 ; 
guanaco area, 249 ; lack of spe- 
cialization in interior Amazon, 
18-19; processes of preparation, 
371; Northern California. 226; 
Northern Shoshonean tribes, 224- 
225 ; North Pacific Coast area, 
22y, 22g; Plains area. 218. 220: 
Plateau area. 223 ; Pueblo In- 
dians, 239-240 ; Southwest area, 
241 ; southwestern Dene group, 
232 ; specialization in. a universal 
tendency, i ; specialization in, 
371-372 

Foods, Maya and Nahua, 16; wild. 

correlated with instability of resi- 
dence, 10 

Footgear, 63-65 

Footrace, ceremonial, 195 

Footwear, forms of, 63 ; g^uanaco 
area, 250 

Forests, distribution of, in South 
America, 253 

Fort Ancient, 117; mound culture, 
268-270 

Fortifications, 1x7-1x8 

Four, sacred number in New World, 
214 

Fox, 167; society song, Dakota, 
151-153 

Fruits, early introduction of Euro- 
pean, 38 

Fuegians, 40, 65, 138, 188, 250, 251, 
327f 336, 353 

Gauge, mesh, distribution of, 48 

Gens, defined, 162; function, in so- 
cial organization of Mexico and 
Peru, 176 

Gentes, 162-166 

Geographical grouping, linguistic 
stocks, 316-317, 320-322 

Geometric, art, 78-80; art. bison 
area, 82-84; art, produced by 
women, 96; art, Pueblo pottery, 
80, 82 ; character of New World 
designs, 76; designs, in bison 
area made by women, 84; designs, 
84, 86-87 

Ghost dance religion, 376 

Gifts, formal presentation of, 185 

Glaze, on pottery, 71 

Glazed pottery, distribution of, 273 

Glottal stops, peculiarity in Ameri- 
can speech, 311, 313 

God systems. 211-2x2 

Gods, Mexican, X94 

Gold work, Aztec, 244; Chibcha, 
246 ; Ecuador. 283 ; high develop- 
ment of, by Caiiarian, 248 ; in Inca 
area, 248 ; Maya, 243 ; in the New 
World, X31 ; in Panama, 279 

Gouge. 123 

Government, compact, coincident 
with clan-(rens organization. 163, 
165; Gulf States, 179-180; higher 

INDEX 

461 

cultures in the New World, 156- 
157; Inca system, 157, 170-171; 
predominance of independent trib- 
al* 159; Pueblo, 159; system of 
the Siouan, 178 

Grass dance, ceremonies, 376; dif- 
fusion of, 380-382 

Grave Creek mound, 268 

Great Lake area, archseological char- 
acterization of, 270-271 

Groundplan, Casas Grandes, 274; 
characteristic of New World 
architecture, 102; Peruvian house 
group, 106-107 

Group marriage, 186 

Grouped clans, 166-168 

Grouping, social. 156-174 

Groups, local, 160-162 

Guanaco area, 3, 7-8, 134, 138; 
changes inaugurated by Spanish 
colonization, 8 ; culture character- 
ization of, 249-251 

Guatovita, sacrificial shrine, 193 

Habitations, Guanaco area, 250; in- 
termediate Plains tribes, 385 ; 
Plains area, 220 ; prevailing, Maya 
and Nahua area, 106; United 
States and Canada, types and dis- 
tribution, X09-X15 

Hafting, 124, 126, 127 

Haida, 89, 90, 112, 138, 170, 227; 
stock, 310, 316; stock, linguistic 
and tribal grouping. 406 

Hair, basis of classification of man, 
324-325 ; buffalo, spinning of, 42, 
47 ; form, Asia and America, 324- 
325, 349 ; goat and dog, as textile 
fiber, 42 ; grouping of New Wor!d 
people by, 342 ; New World man, 
338, 387 ; straight black, universal 
in the New World. 324-325 

Hako pipe ritual. Pawnee, 378 

Hammer, grooved. North Pacific 
Coast, 123-124 

Mammerstone. pitted, 124 

Hammocks, cotton, 43, 55 ; southern 
limits of use, 109 

Headdresses, feather, bison area, 60 

Head, breadth of, 326, 329 ; flatten- 
ing practised among the Maya, 

142 ; form of, 338-339 ; form, Asia 
and America, 329-331; form, 
homogeneity in, 331-332; form. 
New World, 329-336 ; form. South 
America, 357 ; height of, 334. 335 ; 
length of, 333, 334; measure- 
ments, geographical grouping of, 

351-354 

Heating, universal method of, in 
America, 1x5 

Heavenly bodies, in myths, 206 

Hemlock bark, made into bread-like 
food, 10 

Hereditary right, to conununity 
functions, 185 

Heyoka cult, 202 

Hidatsa, 19, 24, 30, 167, X70, 220, 
382 

Hierarchy, priestly, in region of high 
cultures, 191 ; supernatural, com- 
plexity of Maya and Aztec, 194; 
supernatural, of the Pueblo, 194- 

195 
Historical, chronologies. New 
World, 288-290; conception of 
culture, 386-388 ; connection. 
North Pacific Coast area with Co- 
lumbia Basin, 277 ; connection, 
types of g'lazed pottery, 273 ; types 
of Pueblo houses, 274; data, Na- 
hua culture, 242 
History, Aztec, 289-290; of r^an. 
Old World, 294-295 ; Inca, 289 ; 
Maya, 288 ; Mexico, Peru, and 
Yucatan, chronologies based upon, 
288 
Hoe, distribution of, 21-23 
Hogan, Navajo, ixx, 1x3, 1x5 
Hokan, in California, 3x8; lin- 
guistic stocks grouped under. 309, 
403 ; proposed name for combined 
stocks. 406 
Hopewell mound culture, 269-270 
Homed serpent concept, wide dis- 
tribution of, 2X2 
Horse, complex, taken over as a 
whole by New World natives, 
379; cultivator, first in England. 
21 ; culture. 32, 34 ; culture, ac- 
quired in the New World, 34- 
35; culture, differences between 

462 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

North and South America, 34- 
35 ; culture, guanaco area, 138, 
249-250; culture. New World, 
379> 381 ; culture, Spanish, 343 

Horses, introduction of, 6, 8, 249- 
250 

House of the Nuns, groundplan of, 
104 

Houses, adobe and stone, 106; 
Amazon tribes, 254; California 
area, 225 ; Chibcha area, 246 ; 
D6ne area, 233; earth-covered, 
114; Eastern Woodland area, 
234-236; Eskimo, 113-1x4, 230; 
guanaco area, 250; nomadic 
tribes, 241-242; Northern Cali- 
fornia, 226-227 ; North Pacific 
Coast, 227, 229; Plateau area, 
223, 224 ; Pueblo area, 239, 275 ; 
southeastern area, 227-228 ; south- 
western Den^, 233 ; stone, distri- 
bution of, 114; totem pole. North 
Pacific Coast, 112; types and dis- 
tribution, South America, 108- 
109; types and distribution, 108- 
115; underground, iij 

Huaca, defined, 192, 214 

Human, carrier, prevailing mode of 
transport, New World, 32, 35-36 ; 
flesh, eaten by Gulf tribes, 237- 
238; sacrifice. 192-193, 195 

Hunting areas, 309; Inca. 17-18; 
interior Amazon Basin. 18-19; 
methods of, 5, 6, 231, 236; Pueblo 
area, 240 ; South America, 7 ; 
Southeastern area, 237-238 

Hymn, Inca. 147-148 

Ice, time allowed since last retreat 
of, in the New World, 347 

Ideals, for the young in the New 
World, 188-189 

Immigrant population, in the United 
States, rapid change in cephalic 
index, 332 

Immigration, American natives, 
northwestern route, 341 

Implements, copper. Great Lakes 
area, 270-271 ; stone and bone, 
Columbia Basin, 276 ; stone, 
chronological series of, 119; types 

of, Ecuador, 283 ; types of, Pata- 
gonia, 286; types of, Venezuela. 
282 

Inca, 102, 105, 107, 118, 126. 143, 
X47-148, 156, 157, 165, 170-171. 
183, 184, 185, 192, 193, 196. 199. 
202, 210, 211, 243, ^47-248, 259. 
283, 290, 291, 292; area, charac- 
terization of culture, 247-248; 
controlled Ecuador at Spanish 
Conquest, 17; food, 17-18 

Incense burning, universal distribu- 
tion, 213 

Incised designs, 87 

Incising, of pottery, 75 

Incisor, shovel-shaped, in the New 
World, 327-328 

Indemnity, in payment for crime. 
180, 181 

Independent development. Plains art, 
84-85; New World cultures, 391- 
393; theory, 375-376 

Indian, American, popular interests 
in, xvi 

Individual guardians, 197-198, 204- 
205 

Individuality, cultural, coincident 
with political unity, 375 

Infants, exposing of, 187 

Inheritance, conception of, 183-185; 
physical traits, perpetuated by, 
387 ; rules of, 185 

Inscriptions, dated, of the Maya, 
288 

Insects, as food, 12, 225 

Insignia, feather, bison area. 60 

Instability of residence, correlated 
with use of wild foods, xo 

Instruments, musical. 153-155 

Interglacial period, marks arrival of 
man in the New World, 347 

Interpretations, of culture, 352- 

354 
Invention, independent, age-graded 

societies, 171, 382; independent 
blowgun, 138; independent, pellet- 
shooting bow, 139; independent, 
roller printing, 282 : independent, 
theory of, 375 ; independent, use 
of zero, 135 
Inventions. Old World, Chinese pri- 

INDEX 

463 

ority in, 397, 398; special, 132- 

139 

Iron* absence of, in New World cul- 
ture, 392; a«e» 294 

Iroquoian, area, archaeological char- 
acterization of, 265-268; stock, 
311, 3x7; stock, linguistic and 
tribal grouping, 406; tribes, 234 

Iroquois, 13, 19, 31, 45» 73» no. iJ7» 
133. 138, 158, 165, 166, 167, 179. 
180, 187, 237, 256, 264, 293, 362, 
364; league of the, 158; migra- 
tions of, 368 

Irrigation, Chibcha area, 246; Inca 
area, 248; limits of, 24; South- 
west area, 241 ; systems, Peru and 
Mexico, 108 

Jagnar, belief in power of, 212 
Jesako cult, Central Algonkin, 201 
Joking-relationship, 170 
Judicial systems, 175-182; Arau- 

canian, 176; Dini, 177; Hudson 

Bay Eskimo, 177; Maya, 176; 

Mexico and Peru, 180; Nahua, 

175-176; Peru, 17s 

Kayak, Eskimo, 41 

Kia. 36 

Kiva, 114, 188, 274 

Knives, 122; copper, 124, 126; Es- 
kimo types of, 124, 271 ; types of, 
124 

Labor, sexual division of, 14, x8, 

^39 

La Brea, skeleton found in asphait 
bed, 356 

Lacandone, 68, 91, 243-244 

Ladder of arrows, distribution of 
story, 208 

Land, assigned to family groups, 
156; laws, Inca and Nahua, 184 

Language, classification of, 306-307; 
correlation with culture, 364-365 ; 
distribution may be independent 
of culture, 365 ; groups in Cali- 
fornia, 364 ; independence of New 
World, 396; stability of, among 
immigrant groups. 37^-373 

Languages, California, 313, 3x4. 3i6> 

318, 319, 367; classified according 
to internal structure of the word, 
3x6; differentiation of, after cul- 
tural pattern, 367; geographical 
types, 309-310; grouping, coinci- 
dent with cultural characters, 365 ; 
intergradation of, 304-305 ; man- 
ner of recording, by field-workers, 
311; similarity within a cultiure 
area, 365 

Lansing Man, 354 

Lasso, 35 

Leiotrichi, found in Asian-American 
group, 342 

Linguistic, classification, 304-323. 
364-365; diversity, in regions of 
higher culture. 320-321 ; investiga- 
tion, chief result, 3x9; stock, con- 
ception, and meaning, 305 ; stocks, 
Amazon area, 251-252; stocks, 
California, comparative morphol- 
ogy, 316; stocks, California, mor- 
phological groups, 318; stocks, 
California, phonetic uniformity of, 
313; stocks, California, proposed 
consolidation of, 318-3x9; stocks, 
distribution of, 3x9-322; stocks, 
extinct, 310; stocks, geographical 
grouping of, 309-310 ; stocks, group- 
ing of, 361, 364 : stocks, Inca area, 
247; stocks, Mexico and Cen- 
tral America, 308. 309, 412-415: 
stocks, new grouping of, 309-310; 
stocks. New World distribution, 
3x9-322; stocks, North America, 
403-4x2; stocks. North Pacific 
Coast, morphology of, 3x6-317; 
stocks, number of. 3x0; stocks. 
South America, 251-252, 312, 3x3, 
415-4x9; stocks. United States and 
Canada, 306-307, 403-4x2 

Linguistics, correlation with culture, 
364-365 ; general relations with 
culture and somatology. 366-367; 
investigations in, 304, 307-308 

Linked clans. 165-166 

Literature, 143-152; Aztec, 244; 
myths regarded as, 152. 210 

Llama, domestication of, 32, 36; as 
a pack animal, 36 

Local groups, 160-162 

464 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Loom, Antilles, 55 ; complex, dif- 
fusion of, 5S-57 ; in South Amer- 
ica, 55 ; weaving, 55-57 

Mackenzie area. 371 ; culture char- 
acterized, 231-234 

Magic Flight, distribution of story, 
209 

Maize, area of intense cultivation, 
15-16, 3^' 55i 59; areas, lack of 
correspondence between historic 
cultures and archsology, 374; 
ceremonies, I93f i95 ; complex, 
taken over as a whole by English 
colonists, 381 ; complex, processes 
necessary to production, 381 ; cul- 
ture, aboriginal characteristics of, 
19-24 ; culture, close agreement 
with distribution of pottery, 68; 
culture, concepts associated with, 
184: culture. Old World, adapted 
to cereal complex, 381 ; culture, 
uniformity of, 21, 23 ; distribu- 
tion of, 20, 68, 371 ; foods made 
from, 14; history paralleled by 
history of higher cultures. 19; 
local adaptation of, 24 ; most im- 
portant aboriginal agricultural 
product, 19 ; origin of, 23-24 ; 
Pueblo method of raising, 19; 
unity of New World complex, 47 

Maguey, southern extension of use, 

43 
Males, classification of, 1 70-1 71 
Mammoth, Cave, 295 ; contem- 
poraneity with man not estab- 
lished for North America, 356 
Manabi. archaeology of. 283 
Mandan-Hidatsa, pottery. 69-70 
Manioc, area, 3. 55, 59, 68 ; Amazon 
area, 371 ; chief food, Amazon 
Basin. 18; distribution of, 20; 
preparation for use, 24 
Afanitou, 236; compared with huaca, 

192 
Man. dispersion from the Old 

World. 341-350 
Mankind, classes recognized, 342 ; 
distribution over the earth, 340- 
346 ; general lines of dispersion 
for, 348 ; general relation of In- 

dian to, 340-350; systems of 
classification of, 341-344 

Maple sugar, manufacture of, 13-14 

Marriage, ceremonies, 187 ; forms 
of, x86; mother-in-law taboo cor- 
relate of certain forms of, 170; 
regulations, 185-187 ; restrictions 
of, 163, 166, 172 

Masked ritualistic ceremony, 193 

Masks, Aztec and Inca, 196; North 
Pacific Coast, 196 

Masonry, at Mitla. 278 ; New World, 
103 ; Pueblo area, 240 

Mat^, 18 

Material culture, Antilles, 257; 
Araucanians, 249-251 ; Arawak, 
252, 253 ; California area, 225- 
227 ; Chibcha area, 245-247 ; Dene, 
232-233; Eastern Woodland area, 
234« 235-237; Eskimo area, 229- 
230 ; Fuegians, 251 ; guanaco area, 
249 ; Lacandones. 243-244 ; Mack- 
enzie area, 23 1 ; North Pacific 
Coast area, 226-229 » Plains area, 
220-222 ; Plateau area, 222-223 ; 
Southeastern area, 238; south- 
western Den^, 232-233 ; Tupi, 255- 
256 ; typical Eastern Woodland 
tribes, 235-237 ; typical Eskimo. 
230-231; Witto and Boro, 252, 

254 
Matting, classification of, 53 
Mats, North Pacific Coast area, 227 ; 

for tipi covering, 11 1 
Maya, 16, 23, 28. 91* 102, 106, 107, 

108, 118, 134. 135, 136, 140, 141. 

142, 143, 146, 165. 176, i83. 191. 

192, 194, 199, 202, 203, 210, 211. 

242, 243, 244, 246, 259, 278, 290, 

291, 292, 362, 390, 397; culture, 

New World origin of, 395 
Medicineman, defined, 199 
Melanesia, 154; age-societies of. 

394 ; betel nut culture, 25 
Metal, high development of work in, 

Colombia, 282; work in, 129-132, 

392 
Metate, 242, 279 
Mide ritual, 195-196 
Midewin. Central Algonkin, 209. 220 
Mid^wiwin, 235, 236 

INDEX 

465 

Migrations, 367-370, 372-373; Ama- 
zon tribes, 252, 257; myths re- 
counting, 208 ; tendency to move 
within a culture area, 372; sea- 
sonal in accordance with food 
needs, lo-xi 

Military rule, in Mexican govern- 
ment. 157 

Milk, Indian prejudice against, 36 

Minerals, mined in the New World, 
128-129 

Mines, 128-129 

Mississippi-Ohio area, archaeological 
characterization of, 268-270 

Mitla, Hall of the Six Columns, 
107 ; mosaic designs at, 93 ; ruins 
of, 278 

Moccasins, bison area, 64; Pueblo 
area. 240 

Modeling in clay, 143 ; distribution 
of, 145; Peruvian pottery, 94; 
pottery vessels, 75 

Moieties, division into, 2x5; func- 
tions among Sauk and Fox, 168; 
summer and winter, 167 

Mongolian, affinities of New World 
man with, 340; peoples, most 
striking facial characters, 325 ; 
physical characters, found in An- 
dean region. 329 

Mongoloid, affinity, of New World 
peoples. 396-397 ; character of 
nose in the New World, 325 ; peo- 
ples, hair of, 324-325 

Mongoloid-Red peoples, common an- 
cestor group of, 396-397; distri- 
bution of, 397-398 

Morphological, analysis of man, 
343-344 ; characters, New World 
languages, 315-316 

Morphology, comparative studies in 

language. 31 5-3 19 
Mortars, stone, 124-125, 275; 

wood, 125 
Mosaics, feather, Peru, 60 
Mother-in-law taboo, distribution of, 

170 
Mound, builders, Ohio. 128; culture, 

varieties of, 268-270 ; structures, 

mouth of Amazon. 109 
Mounds, building on to secure ele- 

vation, 102, 115; burial. South 
Atlantic area, 265 ; in Colombia, 
281-282; Mississippi-Ohio area. 
268, 269 ; Patagonia, 285 ; pyra- 
midal, distribution of, 105-106; 
shell, California, 275-276; Vene- 
zuela, 282 

Mourning, Charrua, 251 

Murder, punishment for, 177, 179 

Muskhogean stock, 317, 320. 368; 
grouped with Natchesan, 309; lin- 
guistic and tribal grouping, 407 

Music, 152-155; evidence of geo- 
graphical areas, 153 

Mythologies, distribution of, 207- 
209 

Mythological areas, 208-209 

Mythology, 152, 205, 206-215; Ama- 
zon area, 254 ; California area, 
226; Northern California area, 
227; Eastern Woodland area, 
236; probable means of transmit- 
ting cultiure traits, 393 ; Pueblo 
area, 241 ; symbolism in, 191 ; 
trickster type. Plateau area, 224 

Na-dcne, proposed term for grouped 
North Pacific Coast languages, 
316 

Nahua, z6, 102, 106, 112, 136. 141, 
156, 163, 176. 183, 184, 185, 188, 
192, 199, 202, 203, 208, 210, 211, 
259, 278, 288; area, characteriza- 
tion of culture, 242-245 

Nahuatl stock, combined with Shos- 
honean stock, 309. 403, 410, 41 z 

Names, clans, 172-173; designs, 97, 
98, 99; not symbolic, loo-ioi ; 
tribal, historical origin for, 159 

Napiwa. Blackfoot god, 211 

Narcotics, distribution of, 25-27 

Narrative, mythical, for origin of 
clan group, 172; prose. 151, 152 

Nasal, index, 336-337 ; skeleton, 

336-337 
Nasca. 95, 283, 284, 292 

Navajo, 38, 59, 81, 99. m. "3. 

148, X49. 158. 170, 180. 200, 201, 

242, 350; blankets, 77; weaving, 

59 
Navigation, 38-41 

466 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Nebraska Loess Man, 354 

Neolithic, culture, 288, 294* 360; 
deposits, 122; implements, 123; 
period, in Europe, 347 

Nephrite, manner of working, 121; 
used in North Pacific Coast, 228 ; 
used in Thompson River region, 
276 

Nets, antiquity of use, 47-48 ; birds 
taken in, 18; for fishing. 48; re- 
cent introduction among Eskimo^ 

48 
Netting, 47-48; southwestern D^n6, 

233 

New-fire ceremony, Inca, 248 ; Mex- 
ican, 194; Pawnee, 213; Pueblo, 
195 ; Southeastern area. 239 

Nomenclature, system of, New 
World languages, 305 

North Atlantic area, archaeological 
characterization of, 261, 262-264 

Northern Mexico, archxological 
characterization of, 277-27^ 

North Pacific Coast area, 40, 88, 
112, 121, 124, 133, 185, 203, 208, 
212, 223, 314, 371 ; archaeological 
characterization of, 277 ; charac- 
terization of culture, 227-229 

Nose, great variety in form, 325- 
326 ; skeletal structure of, 336-337 

Numbers, recorded by quipu. 135; 
sacred in the New World, 214 

Nuts and seeds, wild, area of, de- 
fined, 3 

Oath, in the New World, 182 
Objective characters of man, most 

definitive, 342 
Offerings at shrines, 240-241 
Ollantaitambo, xi8 
Ollantay, an Inca play, 144 
Orbital index, distribution table, 337 
Orbits, symmetrical distribution, 336 
Ordeals, in the New World, 183 
Organization, political, Inca and 
Mexican, 91, 157; simple tribal, 
nomadic tribes, 158; tribal, bands, 
fundamental units in, 160-161 
Origin, age-grading systems in 
America, 393-394: art. theories 
of, 97 ; Asiatic, New World man, 

389-390; Chilkat blanket, 90; cul- 
ture centers, due to ethnic fac- 
tors, 372; culture, theories of, 
375-388; culture traits, 299-300; 
defensive armor, 137; double- 
curve art, 87-88; independent, 
age-societies in the Plains, 171 ; 
independent, designs. Plains and 
California, 85 ; language a reliable 
index to, 396; New World peo- 
ples, xviii, 324 ; New World totemic 
complex. 172-173 ; Plains art, 84- 
85 ; rituals, 20s ; single, funda- 
mental Old World traits, 391 ; 
single, culture traits having con- 
tinuous distribution, 376 ; Siouan 
stock, 322 ; southern, of Iroquoian 
culture, 235 ; unity of, culture and 
somatic types, 370 ; verse in song, 
152 

Origins, frequently detailed in my- 
thology, 207; New World, 389- 
400 

Ornamentation, Maya and Nahua 
buildings, 107, 108; textiles and 
pottery, 76 

Ornaments, copper and gold, Maya 
and Aztec, 243; stone, 128 

Pachacamac, 291 

Pacific Islands, ceremonies, 193 ; 
New World culture correspond- 
ences with, 390 

Packing, methods of, 35-36 

Paddles, 40 

Painting, 143 ; body, 95 ; building 
interiors, 108; pottery, 71-72, 75; 

. skins, 86 

Palenque, 103, 141 

Paleolithic, culture. 122, 287, 294, 
295 ; races, similarity of Eskimo 
to, 349 

Palisades, distribution of, 1 17-118 

Panama, archxological characteriza- 
tion of, 279 ; area, designs, 93 

Pan-pipe, 154 

Paper, in Mexico and Central Amer- 
ica, 136 

Patagonia, 8, 50. 62, 65. 68. 334, 
341. 350; archaeological charac- 
terization of, 285-286 

INDEX 

467 

Pattern, phenomena, 378; of rituals. Pit-houses, in Great Lakes area, 271 
196; theory, in the study of single Pits, house, 1x3-115 
trait-complexes, 377*379 y Plains area, 124, 136, 138, 241, 249, 

^ 394; archzological characteriza- 
tion of, 27\-2T2\ area, character- 

Pawnee, 69, 150. 151, 158, 163, 167, 
170, 195, 198, 200, 201, 203, 213, 
222, 350, 378, 381 

Pemmican, 7, 9, 234 

Peopling of the New World, 347, 
349* 367-368 

"Pepper- pot," characteristic dish of 
the Amazon area, 19, 252 

Persimmon, bread made of, 14 

Personal property, 184-185 

Peru, archaeological characterization 
of, 283 

Pestle, stone, distribution of, 124 

Peyote cult, 376 

Phonetic, analysis of language, by 
mechanical methods, 311; sys- 
tems. United States and Canada, 
314; uniformity found in Cali- 
fornia languages, 313 

Phonetics, characteristic of Ameri- 
can languages, 311, 3x3; compara- 
tive, 3 II -3 14; geographical types 

of, 313-314 

Phratry. defined, 166-167 

Pictographs, in the Antilles, 28: ; 
Plains area, 272 ; on rock, 143 

Picture writing, 135 

Pigmentation, New World man, 325, 
336, 338 

Piki, maize bread, 15, 240 

Pile-dwellings, Northern South 
America, 109, no; in Florida 
swamps, no 

Pile-villages, South Atlantic area, 
266 

Piman stock, consolidated with 
Shoshonean-Nahuatlan stock, 309, 
403 ; linguistic and tribal group- 
ing, 408 

Pipe ritual, ceremonial, 196 

Pipes, J2 ; clay. South Atlantic area, 
265 ; distribution and form of, 26- 
27 ; elbow, distribution of, 26-27 ; 
Eskimo area, 230; pottery, Iro- 
quois area, 267 : South Atlantic 
area, 266 ; stone, form and dis- 
tribution, 125 

Pit-dwellings, 114-1x5 

ization of culture, 217-222; proba- 
bly a distinct type of prehistoric 
culture, 272; traits, in Plateau 
area, 223-225 

Plant-growing trick, 201 

Plants, Central American, taken 
over and cultivated by Europeans, 
16-17; cultivated before 1492, 15; 
peculiar to the New World, 392; 
used in eastern maize area, 13-14 

Plateau area, 233, 241-242, 371 ; 
area, characterization of cultures, 

222-22$ 

Platinum, in the New World. 131 

Platycnemia, flattening of, 327 

Platymeria, flattening of, 327; pres- 
ence of third trochanter corre- 
lated with, 327 

Plumed serpent concept, wide dis- 
tribution of, 212 

Plural marriage, 186 

Poetical merit, in aboriginal rituals, 
210 

Poetry, aboriginal, 147 

Poison, fish taken with, eastern 
maize area, 14; upper Amazon, 19 

Police system, Pueblo, 180; Siouan, 
178; tribes of the Gulf states, 
179-180 

Political, organization, Aztec, 244- 
245 ; close uniformity of speech a 
correlate of, 304; conducive to 
standardization of culture, 259 ; 
Iroquois tribes, 237 ; in regions of 
higher culture, 191 ; system, 
Araucans, 176; solidarity, coinci- 
dent with clan-gens organization, 
165 ; unity, coincident with cul- 
tural individuality, 375 

Polynesian-European gri'oup, charac- 
teristics and area of distribution, 

342 

Poljrnesians, 343; affinities of New 
World man with, 340-431 ; recent 
arrivals in the Pacific, 390 

Poncho, 62; skin, bison area, 64 

468 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Populations, culture centers, stabil- 
ity of, 373 ; movements of, 367- 
368 ; native, density of, xviii-ix ; 
regions of lower culture, 321 ; 
shifts in, 364; total of Indians, 
United States and Canada, 403 

Popul Vuh manuscript, 290 

Portrait jars, 75 

Potlatch ceremony. North Pacific 
Coast, 185, 228; Plateau area, 224 

Pottery, Algonkin, 78; Central 
American, 73 ; Chile, 284 ; Chi- 
riqui, 75 ; close agreement with 
diffusion of maize, 68 ; Colombia, 
282; complex, total of processes 
of making, 384-385 ; decorations 
on, 76, 77t 80, 99 ; diffusion of, 
66-68 ; distribution of, 66-68, 93 ; 
Eastern Woodland area, 235, 237 ; 
Ecuador, 283 ; Eskimo, 230 ; 
forms of, 72-74 ; Inca, 248 ; in- 
tense culture area, 93 ; intensive 
pursuit of the art in the South, 68 ; 
Iroquoian, 267; Iroquoian, North 
Atlantic area, 264; lower Missis- 
sippi, 69, 74 ; means of establish- 
ing chronologies, 291, 292, 293, 
301; Mexican, 72; Mississippi- 
Ohio area, 268 ; mortuary, 266 ; 
North Atlantic and Upper Missis- 
sippi types, 70 ; not dependent on 
environmental surroundings, 371 ; 
painted, in Brazil, 95 ; Patagonia, 
286 ; Peruvian, 73, 95 ; processes 
of manufacture, 68-74 *. Pueblo 
area, '240, 242, 273 ; South At- 
lantic type, 70, 265, 266 ; South- 
eastern area, 91, 238; South- 
western United States. 71, 371 ; 
state of Oaxaca, 278 ; tripod from 
Panama, 279 

Power, supernatural, Dakota and 
Menomini concept for origin of, 
378; shamanistic, source of, 199. 
201 

Prayer, Navajo, 148-149 

Presents, conventional exchange of 
at marriage, 187 

Priest. Amazon area, 201 ; com- 
pared to shaman, 109-200, 203- 
204, 214; priesthood, 202-203; 

priesthood, organized, Aztec area, 
244 ; priestly organizations, among 
the Hopi, X 94- 1 95 

Primates, lines of dispersion for, 
345; phylogenetic relations of 
living and extinct groups, 345 

Privileges, social, 169-170 

Property, conceptions of, 183-185 

Puberty ceremonies, 193; California 
area, 226 ; Plateau area, 224 

Pueblo area, 32, 38, 50, 58, 60, 69, 
80, 99, 106, 109, III, 115. 117, 
124, 129, 133, 136, 137, 138, 153, 
158, 165, 166, 180, 187, 1S9, 194, 
198, 201, 210, 2x3, 245, 284. 292, 
293; area, archaeological classifi- 
cation of, 272-274; culture, ex- 
tension into Mexico, 242 ; culture, 
resemblance of Casas Grandes to, . 
274;' influence on culture of no- 
madic tribes of the Southwest, 
24 X, 242 

Pueblo, Calchaqtii structures re- 
semble, 109; form of modem, 
106 

Pulverizing, dried flesh and vegeta- 
bles, salmon area, 10 

Pumpdrill, distribution of 132, 133- 

134 
Ptu-ification, for sacred ofHces, meth- 
ods of, 213 

Quarries, 128-129 ; stone at Mitla, 

278 ; quartzite. Plains area, 272 
Quillwork, 82-84 
Quinoa, 19 
Quipu, 135 
Quirigua, 142 
Quito, archxology of, 282-283 

Rabbit, as culture hero, 212 

Rabbitskin blankets. Dene, 233 ; dis- 
tribution of, 57 ; Northern Shos- 
honean tribes, 224 ; Plateau area, 
223 

Rabbitstick, Pueblo area, 240 

Racial dispersion, 344-350 

Rain ceremony. Sia. 241 

Rattle, calabash, distribution, 153* 
154 

INDEX 

469 

Rawhide, painting, bison area, 84; 
work in, 220, 371 

Raven, culture hero. North Pacific 
Coast, 212; legends, North Pacific 
Coast, 228 

Realism, in designs, 78-79; textile 
art, 91-92 

Realistic, art. New World, 100; art, 
produced by men, 96; art, rarity 
of, 76 ; carving, 88-89 ; carving, in 
architectural decoration, 93; de- 
signs, bison area, 82-84; designs, 
caribou and eastern maize area, 
8s ; designs. North Pacific Coast, 
89 ; designs. Peruvian textiles. 93 ; 
designs, pottery, 80-81 ; origin of 
art, theory, 1 00-101 

Reciprocal terms of relationship, 
169 

** Red-paint," burials, 264; culture, 
268 

Regulation, social, in North Amer- 
ica, 175-190 

Reindeer, culture, associated with 
tipi, 112; used in transportation, 

32 
Relationship, systems, 168-169, 385- 

386; terras, 160, 161-162 

Religion, Chibcha, Maya, and Na- 
hua, 192; Maya, Nahua, and Inca, 
136; New World, source of, 204; 
and ritualism, 205 

Religious, conceptions, and mythol- 
ogy, 211-215; culture, Pueblo In- 
dians, 194-195; culture, Siberia, 
202; system, Aztec, 244-245; sys- 
tem, in Peru, 1 91-192 

Revenge, personal freedom to, 177- 

178, 179 

Rhea, economic importance of, 8 

Rhythm, in aboriginal music, 153 

Rice. wild, as food, 13 

Rio Grande Pueblos, 239 

Ritualism, 191-197; Aztec, 244; 
Eastern Woodland area, 236 ; high 
development of, coincident with 
distinction between priest and 
shaman, 200 ; importance of music 
in study of, /55 ; maximum de- 
velopment among Maya, 202-203 ; 
personal rdation in, 204-205; 

Pueblo area, 240-241 ; Southeast- 
ern area, 238-239; Southwestern 
area, 240-241, 242 

Ritualistic, observances, 191-205 ; 
performance, California, 196 ; 
plays. North Pacific Coast, 196; 
procedures, Pueblo, 1 94-1 95; sys- 
tem. North Pacific Coast area, 
228 

Rituals, agricultural, 194; distinct 
forms of, 378; dramatic and 
poetical merit of, 210; grass 
dance. 381; Pacific Coast, 196; 
Plains area, 378 ; transfer of, 378 

Road-building, Mexico and Peru, 
X08 

Rock-shelter, North Atlantic area, 
264 

Rolling rock, distribution of story, 
208 

Roofs, Nahua and Peruvian build- 
ings, 106 

Rooms, size, influenced by absence 
of arch, 102; size, Nahua build- 
ings, 106 

Roots, as food, 8, 232 

Rope-tying trick, distribution of, 201 

Rowlock, used by Eskimo, 40 

Rulers, Aztec, 290 ; Inca, 289 

Ruins, ancient Maya cities, 278; 
historical relation of, 104 ; most 
impressive in the New World, 
242; Pueblo area, groups of, 273- 
274 

Sacrifices, animals and inanimate 
objects, 193; to gods of the Peru- 
vians, 193 ; great number of Az- 
tec. 244, 245 ; human. 203 ; hu- 
man, Maya and Nahua, 192-193 ; 
human, Pawnee and Pueblo, 195 ; 
Inca area, 248 

Sacsahuaman, 118 

Sagebrush bark fiber, distribution 
and use, 42; weaving, 55. 371 

Sandal, a correlative of textile 
clothing, 64 

Sails, use of, 40 

Salmon, area, 3, 9-1 1, 31, 35, 47, 55, 
62, 196; caught in acorn area, 
12; methods of catching, zo 

470 

THE AMERICAN INDIAN 

Salt, manufactured and traded, Co- 
lombia, 17 
Santa Rosa Xlabpak, restoration 

and groundplan, 105 
Scales, in aboriginal music, 152-154 
Schools, for children, 188-189 
Sculpture, center of New World, 
140 ; distribution of, 145 ; Maya, 

122, i40-i43» 394 

Seats, stone, 125 

Seeds, wild, area of, ix-12 

Shaman, distinguished from medi- 
cineman, 199-204; distinguished 
from priest, 214; relation to ju- 
dicial system, 181-182 

Shamanism, 199-204; Amazon area, 
254; California area, 226; Dene 
area, 233 ; Eastern Woodland 
area, 236; guanaco area, 250; 
Siberia, 202; Southeastern area, 

239 

Shell-heaps, North Atlantic area, 
261, 263, 264; no true stratifica- 
tion found in, 293 ; South At- 
lantic area, 264. 265; stratifica- 
tion claimed for. 293 

Shell mounds, Atlantic Highlands, 
285 ; California. 275 ; Chile, 283- 
284 ; Patagonia, 285 

Shell, objects. South Atlantic area, 
265-266; work in, California, 275 

Shelter, Shoshonean tribes, 224 ; 
types and distribution, 371 

Shields, circular, distribution and 
origin, 138; rectangular, in Peru, 

138 

Shoshonean, culture, 224 ; stock. 309. 
318, 320, 368, 369; stock, com- 
bined with Nahuatl, 309. 403 1 
stock, linguistic and tribal group- 
ing, 409-410 

Shoshonean-Nahuatl. stock, 318, 320, 
321. 322, 368 

Shuttle, netting, distribution of, 48 

Silver, aboriginal working of, 130, 

131 
Sinew, used in making skin clothing, 

43-44 
Sinkers, notched pebbles used as, 48 

Sins, confession of, 214 

Skin, clothing, tailored, 60-64; 

dressing, Plateau, 223, dressing. 

Southeastern area, 238; designs 

painted on, 84; painting on, 86 
Skin color, basic in the New World, 

325; range in the New World, 

338 
Skin Shifter, distribution of story, 

208 
Sledges, Eskimo, 30, 32 
Slips, for coloring pottery, 71 
Smelting, of metals, 130 
Smoking, diffusion of, 27; opium 

type of, 393 
Snake, dance, Hopi, 241 ; society, 

Hopi, 202 
Snares, for game, Deae, 233 
Snaring, caribou, 231 ; among Es- 
kimo and Indians, 6 
Snaring the Sun, distribution of, 

story, 208 
Snowhouse, distribution of, 114 
Snuff taking, distribution of, 25, 27 
Soapstone, vessels of, 74 
Social, control, 175; grouping, 256- 

173 

Social organization, 160-162 ; Ama- 
zon area, 254; California area, 
226; Chibcha area, 246; Den^ 
area, 233 ; Eastern Woodland 
area, 236; guanaco area, 250-251 ; 
Inca area, 248; Northern Cali- 
fornia. 227 ; Plains, 220 ; Pueblo 
area, 240; similarity of Mexico 
and Peru, 176; Southeastern area, 
239 

Social, privileges, 169-170; regula- 
tion, 175-190 

Societies, 1 70-1 71 ; Plains Indian, 
220, 298, 299. 379, 382 

Society, evolution of, 173 

Somatic, areas, 352-354- 355; char- 
acters, grouping by. 3SO-354: 
characters, g^oup resemblances in, 
350 '. characters, summary of, 338- 
340 ; characters, unity of New 
World peoples. 357. 396; classi- 
fication, 324-358; correlations, 
366 ; grouping, roughly coincident 
with culture grouping. 350-351 : 
homogeneity, in the New World, 
338; type, California, 367; type. 

INDEX 

471 

tendency to conform to environ- 
ment, 373 ; units, primary in- 
breeding local social groups, 350; 
unity, in each culture area, 366 

Somatologies, differentiation of, 
after culttu-al pattern, 367 

Somatology, general relations with 
linguistics and culture, 366-367 

Song, Dakota Fox society, 1 51-152; 
tablets, Algonkin, 146; war, 
Pawnee, 150-151 

South Atlantic area, archzological 
characterization of, 265-266 

Southeastern area, 91, 235, 371 ; 
culture characterization of, 237- 
239 ; northern traces of culture, 
368-369 

Southwestern area, 371 ; culture 
characterization of, 239-242 

Speech, American, peculiarities of, 
311; chiefly agglutinative in the 
New World, 315; identity of, co- 
incident with political and cultural 
unity, 365 ; reasons for individ- 
uality in the New World, 304; 
survives longer than other culture 
traits, 310 

Spindle, 46, 57; European, 46 

Spindle whorl, distribution of, 44- 
45. 132; pottery, 282 

Spinning, 44-47 ; cotton, 47 ; meth- 
ods and distribution. 45-47 ; with 
a spindle, 57 ; without a spindle, 

55 

Splint basketry, 53 

Stamps, of pottery, for printing 
cloth, 282 

State of Oaxaca. archaeological char- 
acterization of, 278 

Stature, geographic grouping of, 
352-353 : of tribal groups, accord- 
ing to culture areas, 352 

Steatite, work in. 126 

Stelae. 107 ; dated. 278 

Stock, language, determination of, in 
the New World, 305 ; language, 
distribution in more than one cul- 
ture area, 364, 365 ; linguistic de- 
fined, 305 

Stocks, linguistic, consolidation of, 
403; distribution of, 319-322; 

most widely distributed, 320-321 ; 
similarities in California, 364 ; 
unity of, within culture areas. 
364-365 ; United States and Can- 
ada, number of, 306-307 

Stone age culture, Maya, 243 ; in the 
New World, 118, 122 

Stone, boiling, 52, 223, 227, 233; 
carving, 140, 276; implements 
Mississippi-Ohio area, 268-269. 
implements. Great Lakes area 
271 ; implements, types of. Iro- 
quoian area, 266-267. 268; imple- 
ments, types of. North Atlantic 
area, 261, 263; implements. South 
Atlantic area, 265; implements. 
Plains area, 271, 272; objects, 
problematical. 125-126; objects, 
total distribution of, 127; quar- 
rying, 128-129; vessels. Plains 
area, 272; work in, 119-228; 
work in, Aztec area, 244 ; work in. 
Southeastern area, 238; work, 
periods of, in Europe, 119 

Stone-Boy, story of, 209 

Stratification, chronologies deter- 
mined by, 291-294; of cultures, 
Iroquois area, 362; of pottery re- 
mains, 291-293; in rock-shelters. 
North Atlantic area, 264 

Stringed instruments, absence in 
the New World before discovery, 

154 

Sun, ceremony, in Peru, 193 ; dance, 
196, 213, 220; offerings to. 203; 
in religious system of Peru, 191 

Supernatural guardians, 197-199 

Sweat house, distribution of use, 213 

Sword-swallowing trick, distribu- 
tion, 201 

Symbolism, 97-101 ; in mjrthology 
and ritualism, 191 ; Pueblo pot- 
tery designs, 82; strong develop- 
ment in the Southwest area, 100 

Symbols, true, in New World art, 
99* 100 

Synthetic work, importance in de- 
velopment of anthropology, 359- 
360 

System of relationship, 168-169; 
classificatory, 168
