A NEW CAVE MAN FROM RHODESIA, SOUTH AFRICA
By Dr. Arthur Smith Woodward, F.R.S.
Nature, Vol. 108, No. 2716 (17 November 1921), pp. 371-372
[Transcribed from the original journal page images; OCR of 1921 newsprint]

A New Cave Man from Rhodesia, South Africa. 

By Dx. ArtHUR SMITH Woopwarp, F.R.S. 

Daher recent years the British Museum has 
received from the Rhodesia Broken Hill 
De\clopment Co. numerous bones from a cave 
discovered in their mine in North-west Rhodesia 
abuut 150 miles north of the Kafue river. All 
exicpt the smaller of these bones are merely 
broxen fragments, and they evidently represent 
the food of men and flesh-eating mammals who 
have at different times occupied the cave. As 
described by Mr. Franklin White (Proc. Rhodesia 
Sci. Assoc., vol. 7, p. 13, 1908) and Mr. F. P. 
Mennell (Geological Magazine [5], vol. 4, p. 443; 
1go7), rude stone and bone implements are 
abundant among the remains, and there can be 
no doubt that the cave was a human habitation 
for a long period. Very few of the bones can 
be exactly named, but, so far as they have been 
identified by Dr. C. W. Andrews and Mr. E. C. 
Chubb, they belong to species still living in 
Rhodesia or to others only slightly different from 
these. The occupation of the cave, therefore, 
seems to have been at no distant date—it may 
not even have been so remote as the Pleistocene 
period. 

Until lately no remains of the cave man him- 
self have been noticed at Broken Hill, but at the 
end of last summer Mr. W. E. Barren was so 
fortunate as to discover and dig out of the earth 
in a remote part of the cave a nearly complete 
human skull, a fragment of the upper jaw of 
another, a sacrum, a tibia, and the two ends of 
a femur. These specimens have just been 
brought to England by Mr. Ross Macartney, the 
managing director of the company, and they are 
to be added to the many generous gifts of the 
company to the British Museum. 

The skull is in a remarkably fresh state of 
preservation, the bone having merely 
animal matter and not having been in the least 
mineralised. As shown in the accompanying 
photograph, it is strangely similar to the skull 
of the Neanderthal or Mousterian race found in 
the caves of Belgium, France, and Gibraltar. Its 
brain-case is typically human, with a wall no 
thicker than that of the average European, and 
its capacity, though still not determined, is obvi- 
ously well above the lower human limit. Its large 
and heavy face is even more simian in appearance 
than that of Neanderthal man, the great inflated 
brow-ridges being especially prominent and _ pro- 
longed to a greater extent at the lateral angles. 
markably similar to that of Pithecanthropus from 
Java, having the same slight median longitudinal 
ridge along the frontals and rising to its greatest 
height just about the coronal suture. It is, how- 
ver, very much larger, and the resemblance may 
not imply any close affinity. The length of the 
skuil from the middle of the glabella to the inion 
is about 210 mm., while. its maximum: width at 

NO. 2716, VOL. 108]. *~ 

lost its | 

the roof of the skull at’ first sight appears re- | 

| length. 

the parietal bosses is 145 mm. The skull is there- 
fore dolichocephalic, with a cephalic index of 69. 
Its greatest height (measured from the basion to 
the bregma) is 131 mm. In general shape the 
brain-case is much more ordinarily human than 
that of the La Chapelle Neanderthal skull, which 
differs in the expansion and bun-shaped depression 
of its hinder region. The mastoid process, though 
human, is comparatively small. The supramastoid 
ridge is very prominent and broad. The tympanic 
meatus is short and broad, as always in man. 
The foramen magnum occupies its usual forward 
position, so that the skull would be perfectly 
poised on an erect trunk. 

The facial bones much resemble those of the 
La Chapelle skull, the great flat mayillaries, with- 
out canine fosse, being especially similar. The 
nasal bones, however, are more gently sloping; 
the sharp lateral edge of the narial opening runs 
down on the face (as in the gorilla), allowing the 

premaxillary surface to pass uninterruptedly into 
the floor of the narial cavity; and the infranasal 
region is unusually deep. The typically human 
anterior nasal spine is conspicuous. 

The palate is of enormous size, as large as that 
inferred by Boule from the fragments preserved 
in the La Chapelle skull. It is, however, in all 
respects human, being deeply arched and bounded 
by the horse-shoe-shaped row of teeth, which are 
unusually large, but also entirely human. The 
teeth are much worn, and those of the front of 
the jaw met their lower opposing teeth in the 

| primitive way, edge to edge. The canines are not 
enlarged. The second molar is square, 

3:5 mm. 
in diameter. The third molar is much reduced, 
measuring 12-5 mm. in width by 9-5 mm. in 
The total length of the molar series is 
about 33 mm. The, outside measurement of the 
dentition across the second molars is 78 mm. 
The width between the sockets of the third molars 

372 NATURE 

[ NovEMBER 17, 1921 

is 51 mm. The length from the socket of the 
of the third molars is also 51 mm. The whole 
dentition is much affected with caries, and the 
disease has spread to the tooth-sockets, which 
are pierced in some places. 

The lower jaw is unfortunately absent, but the 
size of the palate and the extent of the temporal 
fosse show that it must have been massive. Even 
the Heidelberg jaw is slightly narrower and 
shorter than this must have been. 

Although the new skull from the Rhodesian 
cave so much resembles that of Neanderthal man, 
the shape of the brain-case and the position of the 
foramen magnum are so different that we may 
hesitate to refer the two skulls to the same race. 
This hesitation seems to be justified when the 
associated limb-bones are considered, for the tibia 
is long and slender, of the typically modern type, 
and the extremities of the femur do not differ in 
any essential respect from the corresponding parts 
of a tall and robust modern man. They are thus 

| discoveries. 

of the human frame. | 
Rhodesian man may therefore tevive the idea that 
Neanderthal man is truly an ancestor of Homo 

very different from the tibia and femur of Nea 

median incisor to a line drawn across the back | derthal man found in the caves of Belgium an 

France. As the skull appears to postulate an ere: 
attitude, the congruous limb-bones may well b 
referred to it. We therefore recognise in th 
Rhodesian cave man a new form which may b 
regarded as specifically distinct from Homo nea) 
derthalensis, and may be appropriately name 
Homo rhodesiensis. 

The precise systematic position of this new speci: 
of primitive man can be determined only by furth« 
It has, however, been pointed out 
by Prof. Elliot Smith that the refinement of th 
face was probably the last step in the evolutio 
The newly discovered 

sapiens ; for Homo rhodesiensis retains an almost 
Neanderthal face in association with a mor 

modern brain-case and an up-to-date skeleton. He 

may prove to be the next grade after Neanderthal 
in the ascending series.
