S^TfT
L.B.S. National Academy of Administration
MUSSOORIE
LIBRARY
arnfa *rw
Accession No. /C C 6 X ^ ^
Class No. _ / S / •
3^ 3T©tt
Book No. _ l/V&O
GL 181.4
WOOC.1
100680
LBSNAA
THE WORLD AS POWER
REALITY
The World as Power
Reality
BY
SIR JOHN WOODROFFE
GANESH & CO., MADRAS
FOREWORD.
The present book is the first of a series which
I hope to be able to complete, explaining suc¬
cinctly some general philosophical principles of
the Doctrine of Shakti or Power from the
Sh&kta VedSnta standpoint. A correspondent
once asked me—what was that ? The answer
is, that it is that Doctrine which is to be found,
expressly or implicitly, in the Tantras of the
Agama Shastra of the Advaita Sh&kta and
Shaiva communities of worshippers. The two
have points in common in (amongst others)
their Doctrine of Shakti and its evolution as
the 36 Tattvas and so forth. Thus the latter
are explained in both the Gandharva Tantra,
the Kashmirian Tattva Sandoha, and other
works. In the Prfttah-Kritya as set out in
the Mah&nirv&na Tantra (V. 39) Salutation is
made to Atma-tattva, Vidyd,-tattva, and Shiva-
tattva, these being the threefold divisions of the
36 Tattvas.
6
FOREWORD


In what way another enquirer asks—is it to be
distinguished from Vishishtadvaita? The answer
is that according to the latter the Universe is
the Body of the Lord both now and in dissolu¬
tion, that is always, whereas according to
Sh&kta views though we may speak of the
existing Universe as the Body of the Mother-
Power (in Herself or Svardpa, infinite and pure
Consciousness or Cliidrupini) yet in dissolution
the Universe, the Power whence it proceeds and
of which it-is a transformation, and the Change¬
less Real or Shiva are one.

The books will be short but with much
condensed substance. My object is to state
general principles with reference to the thought
of the day. The present counts. It is because
Indian Philosophy and Religion are too often
treated in an archaeological way, as things
which have been and are gone, and as wholly
unrelated to, and vithout value for, current
thought, that they do not often receive the
attention and respect which is their due. My
own conviction is that an examinaton of Indian
Vedantic Doctrine shows that it is, in important
respects, in conformity with the most advanced
scientific and philosophic thought of the West,
and that where this is not so it is Science which


FOREWORD


7


will go to Ved&nta and not the reverse. This
is not necessarily proof that it is true, for the
teaching of Western Science may or may not
be well founded, and has certainly undergone
revolutionary changes from time to time. What
is laughed at to-day is accepted to-morrow and
vice versa. But if Western Science is deemed of
value, so must be the Vedantic teaching which
is in conformity with it.

This series will illustrate more fully what is
here stated, but in a general way some ex¬
amples may be given in support of it. The
primary doctrine of Advaita Vedanta is
Unity. The world is not a heap of entirely
disparate things thrown together by chance.
All are connected, the one with the other and
suffer and enjoy through one another. Some gain
this truth through their reason, others through
their heart and others again by the stick. Thus
the late war has discovered the truth to those
ignorant of it—that each people and each man
are dependent the one on the other. So that if
we harm others we harm ourselves immediately
or in the long run. Practical Science is charged
with the same mission. Railways, steamers,
aeroplanes, the telegraph, the telephone, all
help to establish the idea of the unity of man-


8


FOREWORD


kind, to diminish particularism and to foster a
wide view of the Universe and its meaning.

India has ever held views which are both
wide and of the deepest. Her infinities may
bore or appal some. But who will deny that
Her ideas have been the most colossal the world
has known? Her fearless logic has stayed at
nothing, until reaching the last barriers of
thought,man transformed bySadhandand Yoga ,
has attained That which is alogical. By thinking
and direct experience unity is known. Western
Science is working towards the same or similar
conclusions by its own objective experimental
method. In this process it is destroying the
difficulties and contradictions, which itself had
created. It has set up partitions which it now
pulls down. Some of them may be pragmatically
useful, for thinking would be fluid unless we
controlled the continuous flow of phenomena by
divisions, labels and so forth. Some are indeed
imposed on us from without, for this power to
impose itself on the mind is a test of our
Reality. But others are the product of imper¬
fect observation and gratuitously erroneous
thinking. None according to Ved&nta are
essentially justified.

Unity and Continuity are metaphysical


FOREWORD


9


concepts. The forms which we observe are, as
forms, breaches of both.- Nevertheless from
their gradations and relations the unity of
Power of which they are manifestations is
inferred. Union by Sadhana with such essential
Power gives .direct experience (Veda) of the
unitary essence which is displayed as Mind and
Matter. Though the notion of Chit as the basis
of all psychical modes, is still peculiar to India,
Western Science and Philosophy are now com¬
mencing to distinguish between Mind and
Consciousness, holding that below and above
the surface Consciousness there is yet another.
There is in us much more than that of which
we are aware. The unity of Mind and its action
as a whole is now recognised, as also that Mind
is a Force. This is well established in Indian
Doctrine which teaches its activity in percep¬
tion, actually going forth to its object and its
creative power as shown in the so-called occult
faculties or Siddhis.

Speaking of this Mind-ray reminds me of a
recent announcement that an instrument in the
nature of an electroscope is to be shown at a
forthcoming medical congress in proof of the
■statement that in vision a ray proceeds from
the eye,—an old Indian notion. The hitherto


10


FOREWORD


supposed gap between Mind and Matter is-
closing, thus rendering a transition from physi¬
cal to psychical concepts easier. It is ancient
Indian Doctrine that both Mind and Matter
are modes of one and the same Substance, and
as such related to and akin to one another, thus
rendering all knowledge possible. Cognition is
recognition.

Of the greatest importance is the change of
ideas regarding the nature and constitution of
Matter. India in the person of her great
thinkers has never held to what Sir William
Jones called the “ vulgar notions of matter”.
Western Science now dematerialises Matter.
The notion of real and lasting partitions
between various forms of elementary matter is
passing. The present tendency of science is
towards the revival of the ancient Doctrine of
one Substance-Energy, the Mahashakti of the
Yedantic Shakta and the Prakriti of the
Sangkhyas. All material forms are passing
modes ( Vikriti) of this one Power. Mdyd
becomes a possibility and not the absurdity
which some have supposed it to be. S&ngkhya
is not a “ chaotic impertinence” as the English
Sanskritist Dr. Fitz Edward Hall, with the usual
depreciation of things Indian, called it. On the


FOREWORD


11


contrary, here as elsewhere the rational charac¬
ter of Indian doctrine is justified. The hither¬
to supposed gap between “living” and “non¬
living” substance is now by many denied*
Both are forms of the One Power which in this
aspect is Prdnah Prdnasya, the Life of all lives.
In so-called “inorganic” substance that Form
displays itself in certain restricted ways, and in
organic substance in other ways of increasing
freedom. As regards the evolution of “living”
substance, the Indian notion has always been
that the various forms of it differ only in
degree and not in kind.

In future numbers of this series I hope to deal
with Chit, the unchanging principle of all
changing experience, Its Power ( Chit-Shakti
and Mdyd-Shakti ) Unity, Causality, Continuity
and the various manifestations of Power
(Shakti) or modes of its Substance-Energy as
Mind, Life and Matter.

But it is to be remembered that the Indian
Quest has been and is a practical one—the
quest of Happiness which all men seek- If it be
true, as Yoga holds, that Man can by the appro¬
priate method think and otherwise work him¬
self out of the dualistic system of which he is a
part, yet whilst he is in and of it, on the path of


12


FOREWORD


Enjoyment (Bhoga) his thinking has its end in
some form of action. In Shftkta teaching,
Yoga and Bhoga are unified ( Yogo Bhogayate).
Man gains every end in and through the
finite yet real world—even those which are
unworldly, in the striving for unity with the
Ens Realissimum of which the world is an act
of will. That action in the world will be
powerful to effect his aims (and who does not
want that ?) if he worships the infinite Mother
Power, the Supreme and complete “ I ” (Purnd-
ham) of which he is according to this teaching
a contraction ( Sangkocha ) or form. By Sadhand
he makes contact and then unifies himself with
the fundamental Grand Will. This Will re¬
inforcing his own individual and contracted will,
the “ Little Doer” achieves all success.

Another and most important matter to be
remembered is this.—It has recently been said
{Hoernle “Studies L: Contemporary Meta¬
physics,” 75) that “ the Eastern doctrines of the
veil of illusion over reality and of the elaborate
ascetic regimen for Mind and Body by which
the student must discipline himself for penetra¬
ting to the Reality behind the veil, have never
profoundly affected the main current of
Western thought. Most of the great Philoso-


FOREWORD


13 '


phers of the West, certainly since the time of
the Renaissance, have been men of the world as
well as students and thinkers. They have never
tried to be ‘holy’ men set apart from their
fellows and the problems of contemporary life.
They have not, even when they were professors,
spent their days in Meditation and mortification,
of the flesh in order to achieve individually the
blessedness of Union with the One”.

These statements do not apply to the Middle
Ages in the West. With the supposed “ Veil
of Illusion” this book deals. Sh&kta doctrine
does not favour an “ascetic regimen”, except by
“ascetic,” we understand a self-controlled and
ordered life. Says the Kul&rnava Tantra (Ch,
l-V, 75, et seq) “ Fools deceived by Thy Mayd
hope to attain liberation by eating one meal a
day, by fasting and other acts which emaciate
the body. What liberation can such ignorant
ones get by the torture of the body ? Donkeys
go about naked, are they therefore Yogis ? If
liberation is to be had by smearing oneself with
mud and ashes then village dogs who roll there¬
in are Yogins. Deer and other animals live on-
grass leaves and water, are they therefore
Yogins ? Hogs are exposed to cold wind and
heat. To them all food fit and unfit are alike.


14


FOREWORD


Are these then Yogins ? Oh Kuleshwari all such
practices deceive. The only direct cause of
liberation is knowledge of the Truth ( Tattva -
jndna). It again affirms that, in Kaula Dharma,
Bhoga (Enjoyment and Suffering) is converted
into Yoga (Yogo bhogdyate) and the world is
made the seat of liberation (Mokshdyate
sangsdrah).

The end which is beyond the life of earth is
achieved in it. It is not the fugitive but the
Vira (hero) who meets life face to face, who
conquers all vain fears and ignorance and achie¬
ves. He is Vira who struggles with Avidyd.
By what man falls, by that he rises. But in
common with other Indian systems, it holds that
by reason and speculation alone Reality, in its
sense as the Supreme Experience, is not attain¬
ed. For this, Sddhand as physical, intellectual
and moral purification, self-control, discipline,
and worship are necessary. Without these the
doctrine is not, even in an intellectual sense,
rightly apprehended, still less is the Truth
realised. Man must transform his nature to
attain it. This involves right activity (Kriyd)
with awareness of, and self-identification in all
functions with, the indwelling Mother-Power:
“ She I am ” “ Sa’ham ” he says.


FOREWORD


15


It has been said in the West (and this is
Indian doctrine) that there is no end to what
the trained and tutored will can do; and that
because if a man puts himself in line with the
Forces of Life he can tap reservoirs of Power,
the contents of which are bottomless, because
they are co-extensive with the Universal Life.
This is the meaning of two terms common in
the Tantra,namely, Yoginipriya (Beloved of the
Yoginis) Yogint-pashu( slave of the Yoginis).
The Yoginis are the Devatd aspect of the Forces
of Nature or Avarana Devatds of the Maha-
yogini, the supreme Mahdmdyd Tripura-
sundari. Work with them and successis attained.
Work against them and ill fortune follows.
Identify the self with the partial aspects which
are the Yoginis and then various Powers
(Siddhi) are attained. Identify the self with the
Mahayogini Herself and Man is liberated, for
He is no longer man but Her. This is the Sh&kta
teaching, come down from days when India
was a Siddha Bhumi. With what a man should
identify himself, depends upon what he wants;
But whatever it is, he gets the Power, if he but
wills and works for it.

In conclusion I wish to express my thanks
to my friend Professor Pramathan&tha


16


FOREWORD


Mukhyopadhy&ya for the help he has given me
in the preparation of and in revising this and the
forthcoming volumes, in which latter I hope to
include some valuable notes of his on their
subject.

Calcutta \

14ih July 1921.) J. W.


THE WORLD AS POW ER
REALITY

I

It is a common notion concerning the
Hindus that they are an unpractical people,
without “grip on reality,” believing life to
be a “dream.” This estimate is supposed
to receive corroboration from the fact of
their political dependence and to be in
some degree the justification of it. Their
Religion and Philosophy is said to be
accountable for these alleged defects and
their results. False philosophies and reli¬
gions have (it is supposed) impeded India
in the path of what its critics consider to
be self-realisation. That there has been a
lack of dynamism is obvious enough, for
otherwise things would not be what they
are. Therefore is needed the worship of
2


18


The World as Power


Shakti or Power. There has been in some
quarters a lack of faith, of belief, of self-
confidence which is life and the issue of
Life. How wonderful is the saying of that
unnamed sage (to which I will in another
volume return) which is quoted by Punyft-
nanda and Bh&skarar&ya in their Commen¬
taries on the Yoginihridaya, and Nity&-
shodashikS. Tantras.

Apurnammanyatd vyddhih kdrpanyaika-
niddnabhuh

“ Sense of imperfection is disease and the
sole source of every misery.” But does not
the Vedanta speak of the Puma, the Whole
which is both Health and Life lasting ?
Is it the fact that Indian philosophy
and; religion are responsible ? This is a
large question, the answering of which
would involve very many inquiries extend¬
ing over a large field. Here I am concern¬
ed with one only. To me the Hindu
typal-mind has a profound sense of reality,
both as universe and its ground.

The power of ideas is immense and the
greatest of all powers. But we must not


Reality 19

over-exaggerate the influence on man at
large of the technical discussions of pro¬
fessional philosophers. This is above all
true of the philosophical issue, so long and
even now agitated, namely as to the
reality of the world of objects, as to the
real nature of the “Real,” as to what is
real and unreal in experience, and so on.
The reality of the universe is imposed even
on philosophers, notwithstanding their
arguments. For both they and the com¬
mon folk form part of and perceive it. The
difference between these two classes, in
India as elsewhere, lies in this, that the
reality of the world, in the technical sense
of “Reality ” as understood in the West, is
taken for granted by the latter, who pursue
their avocations unworried by self-created
difficulties, whilst some at least of the
former in the West have been engaged in
the task of endeavouring to show that the
things which we perceive are not really
what we perceive them to be. Indian
philosophic thought preserves the reality
of the object experienced, whilst making
full allowance for the influence in the act


20


The World as Power


of perception of individual mental charac¬
teristic and tendencies called Sangskaras ,
until that stage of cosmic consciousness
(called Hiranyagarbha) is attained in which
Reality as the Universals or Generals of
the sense-particulars ( Tanmdtras ) is ex¬
perienced. Beyond this is Perfect Ex¬
perience as tshvara and then Pure Samvit
Itself. In the Hiranyagarbha subsumed
by Ishvara there is still the limiting
Sangsk&ra which while allowing perfect
experience of the universals, yet precludes
a perfect experience of the whole cosmic
dynamism of things and their relations.
This limitation is removed in the stage of
Ishvara in which there is not only a per¬
fect experience of effects (k&ryya) as they
are but of causes as they are. There is no
question of noumenal and phenomenal as¬
pects but rather of causal and effectual
aspects ; nor is there a question of an un¬
knowable background as in Western
Science. Both aspects are actually known
by us imperfectly; the effectual by Hiran¬
yagarbha perfectly ; both causal and effec¬
tual by tshvara perfectly.


Reality 21

Western thought has endeavoured to
show that things are not what they appear
to be, that is, they are in fact other than
what they seem. We are thus said to live
in “ appearances ” of “ things in themsel¬
ves,” unknowable yet existing in their own
right. The sense-data are mere effects,
produced in a perceiver’s mind by the action
on the sense organs of material objects,
conceived in terms of imperceptible and
hence hypothetical particles and forces.
According to the Indian idea here described
it is affirmed that things are as things what
they appear to be. There is no “ thing in
itself ” and therefore no appearance of it.
The individual’s perception of a thing is
however subject to the limitations of
his sense-capacity and of his Sangskdras.
The Western view is—“What I see as
green is objectively not green at all, but an
hypothetical vibration of an hypothetical
Ether.” But according to Indian doctrine
greenness is objective : though this green¬
ness may be perceived by me subject to
my Sangskdras or prenatal tendencies
and conditions of sense-capacity. The


22


The World as Power


standard thing or the standard quality is
not an unknowable extra-mental X, but
the standard experience of a perfect
Experiencer Ishvara or Hiranyagarbha.
ishvara’s experience is the “thing in it¬
self” and of the “thing in itself”; my expe¬
rience is an actual participation in His sub¬
ject to my own limitations. There is thus no
difference (as in theWest)between “thing
in itself ” and “ appearance ” (which latter
does not. resemble the former), but between
standard or perfect experience on the one
hand and varied individual experience,
subject to limitations, on the other. The
Ved&nta says that things are forms of,
or appearances backed by, a Spiritual
Reality which is not a thing at all.
But so far as any thing is a thing, we
know it, subject to our limitations, for
what it is. The Real has three bodies, cau¬
sal, subtle, and gross of which the former is
the common source of the other two, which
constitute the world of subtle and gross
objects. Experience in each of these
bodies is direct and real. Scientific
doctrine has not this reality of experience.


Reality 23

For the perceived is substituted the
inferred, and some of this inference is
(when not unsound) either based on slender
evidence or mere hypothesis. Inference
is not the experience of the real* It may
be wholly error. In applied science we
live in a real world. But theoretical
science and metaphysic may, as regards the
inferred ultimate nature of things, be with¬
out truth, the correspondence of the real.
In such matters an idolatry of Science is
amongst the most foolish. Nevertheless it
is a fact that Science is putting forward
to-day theories which, if without meaning
as applied to the physical world alone,
nevertheless tend to establish the truth,
which gives them meaning. Thus when it
attributes unity, conservation, and continu¬
ity to Matter, Energy, and Motion in an
universe of obvious plurality and discon¬
tinuity (since every form is a real breach
of it) what it is in fact doing is to show
that none of its conceptions have any
meaning, except on the assumption of the
unity and unmoving continuity of Consci¬
ousness in the sense of the Ved&ntic Chit.


24


The World as Power


Indian thought affirms the truth (in
its grade) of experience whether empirical
or transcendental. Mere speculation as to
the nature of either as inferred by
reasoning or sense data leads at best to a
conclusion of probability. The only certi¬
tude is in direct Experience itself. Nothing
useful is gained in attempting to prove
that that experience is in itself not real, or
is an appearance of some thing unpercei¬
ved. If we would know what some other
than ordinary experience is, we must actu¬
ally shift not our speculative thought on to
it but our being into it. In other words we
must have that experience directly. When
we have made the shift, the experience
which we have left is of no concern to us.
But even if it were, it would not appear to
be false but to be the relative truth of the
stage at which it was had. It is “ correc¬
ted ” only in and for the next experience
of the Real. Whilst on the plane of mate¬
rial experience, sense-data, inference, and
reasoning take their part in raising the
self to its own higher Self and its experi¬
ences. There is no magic carpet which


Reality

wafts the self from one stage to the other.
But it is only a part of the Sadhand as
moral conduct, self discipline and ritual
worship which are the necessary prelimi¬
nary of Yoga through reasoning ( Jndna ),
feeling ( Bhakti) or action (Karma). Truth
is given us in our awareness of the world,
for as we see it so it really is for us. There
are higher experiences than this. But if
they are to be had, the whole subjective
being and its material body must be so
actually transformed as to enable such
experiences to be had. In other words we
must experience reality whatever be its
aspect—and not merely discuss it.

Contrary to common belief, Hindu think¬
ers have been and are (in an epistemo¬
logical sense) not only Realists but Realists
of a thorough-going type. There is no trace
of the Subjectivism which may be found in
the Buddhist schools. I have used the term
“Realism,” because it can be described, for
the present purpose, in a clear way as the
doctrine which holds that the world of
objects is real in the sense that they exist
independently of the consciousness of the


26


The World as Power


person who experiences them. The vast
bulk of the people of India are as “naively
realistic,” as the rest of the world. Nor
have they the mental malady which doubts
the obvious and seeks for anything but a
plain account of things. Theirs is the
great common sense which means man-
kind-sense ; even though like every thing
which is human, it is not free from error.
Common-sense is the sense of Reality in
its material form. I am not however here
concerned with popular but with philoso¬
phic Indian thought. By “ Indian ” I
mean Brahmanical or, to use a popular
term, Hindu. In fact one of the great clea¬
vages between Brahmanical and Buddhist
thought concerns this philosophical ques¬
tion of Reality, either as the Constant
Centre of experience, or the universe which
is the object of ics experience. If the
charge made can be laid at the door of any
philosophy or religion, it is at that of some
forms of Buddhism. For the very mark of
Brahmanism is reality and practicality in
doctrine and discipline. “ Realism ” in the
Western sense is the doctrine that reality


Reality 27

exists apart from its presentation to, or
conception by, consciousness. The realist
believes that in sense-perception we have
assurance of the presence of reality dis¬
tinct from the modifications of the perceiv¬
ing mind and existing independently of
perception. This is the Hindu position.
In Epistemology or theory of knowledge the
Idealist asserts, after the manner of the
Buddhist, that the reality of the world is
its perceptibility. This the Hindu denies.

With this definition of “Realism” no
harm is done by the employment of a tech¬
nical Western term. Descriptive names
given to Western systems of thought
are not seldom in themselves ambiguous
and often actually misleading when ap¬
plied to Indian doctrine. They have their
utility as a species of shorthand for the
description of Western systems and serve
a purpose when we endeavour to compare
Western and Eastern thought. But care
must always be taken in their use. “ Rea¬
lism” even in Europe does not always con¬
note the same thing. Idealism again is a
vague term. In the metaphysical sense*


28


The World as Power


Idealism is the name given to any theory
which maintains the Universe to be
throughout the work or the embodiment of
Reason or Mind. 1 In this metaphysical
sense of the term, that is as opposed to
materialism, all the Six Philosophies may
be described as idealistic, for none of them
are materialistic. 2 In an epistemolo¬
gical sense the Hindus are Realists. In
the metaphysical sense, some of their sys¬
tems, such as the S&ngkhya and Vedanta
have been called Idealistic. The former
may perhaps be so described, if a system
which derives matter from things mental
can be so called. It is certainly not (as has
been said ) 3 materialistic. It sounds
strange to call a system materialistic
which derives matter from thoughts and


\. See Baldwin. Phil. Diet, sub . voc.

2. The first standard or Nyaya-vaisheshika has been
called 11 Hindu Realism M and in several senses it is so. It
is however not materialism and cannot be called Idealism
in so far as its creation is a conjunction of previously
•existing realities.

3. By Prof. Garbhe. Samkh. Phil. 242 : et seq , Prof.
Max Muller called it a system of Idealism, “Six Systems/*
X.


Reality 29

ideas and such an estimate is 4 absolutely
against the universal tradition of the
Hindus who, notwithstanding their assidu¬
ous critics, may be at least allowed to know
what their own systems mean. For this
reason, the Indian author last cited calls it
Psycho-dynamism, inasmuch as the Princi¬
ples which it regards as the origin of things
are both psychical, that is, in the nature of
feelings, thoughts and ideas, and dynamic,,
that is of the nature of forces or powers.
The Ved&nta again differs fundamentally
from such idealistic Western systems as
those of Fichte, Schelling and Hegel, in
that (amongst other things) the Ved&ntic
Cause of the universe is not Mind or Reason
as those terms are understood in the West
but Chit (of which Mind is only a limited
mode) and its Power or Shakti. It is better
then in all cases to avoid Western terms
except where they are nearly adequate, or
comparison calls for them. We can most
accurately describe Indian systems by


+. As pointed out by J. C. Chatterjee in “ Hindu Real-
ism,” 14.


30


The World as Power


avoidance of labels, and by stating what
in fact they say, leaving others to docket
them in their Histories of Philosophy, if
they will.

The belief to the contrary of that which
I have expressed is I think in part due to
the fact that the most talked-of system in
the West is the Monistic Vedanta of the
School of Shangkaracharyya, and in part
to a lack of understanding of this system,
which presents some difficulties to the
European mind. Even in India there are,
I believe, at the present day but few who
are really masters of it.


II

The chief orthodox systems of Brah¬
manism are known as the Six Darshanas
or “ Means of seeing,” 5 because what the
West calls Philosophy is that which gives
men sight of sensible verities and enables
them to understand in the light of Rea¬
son the super-sensible Truth attainable
only through Veda, that is, the super-sen¬
sible standard experience of the Rishis 6
or Seers. Philosophy habits this experi¬
ence, so far as may be, in its rational
dress.

These six systems may for the purpose
of metaphysics be grouped into three, viz.,
(1) Ny&ya-vaisheshika, (2) S&ngkhya-Yoga,
(3) Vedtota- 7 This last term means Up-

5. Darshana comes from the root “ Drish ” *• to see”
that is to know,

6. Rishi also comes from the same root “ to see” for
they saw as Seers, that is had experience (Jn&na) of super¬
sensible truths.

7. This is the UttaramlmfingsS. The Pftrvaor Dharma
Mxm&ngs&’s metaphysical basis belongs to the first group.


32


The World as Power


anishad. As such it must be distinguished
from the various interpretations of it
which are given by the Vedantic philoso¬
phical schools.

All these systems teach the empirical
reality of the external world. In fact
Shangkaracharyya to whom the doctrine
of the “ unreality ” of the world is attribu¬
ted, emphatically affirms, in his polemic
against the Subjectivism of the Buddhists,
that matter is every whit as real as the
mind which perceives it. The first of these
groups teaches the absolute reality (that
is, independence of the universe) of its
nine eternally existing ultimate entities 8 ,
with their properties, relations and so
forth ; the second, the absolute reality or
the independence of the universe of its
ultimate root as the evolving Material
Cause 9 associated with Efficient Cause 10 or
Consciousness, the two Realities of this
system; and the third, which is sub-divi¬
ded into two general divisions, teaches in

8. Dravya: post.

9, Mtilaprakriti ; v. post.

10. Purusha which is Chit.


Reality 33

the first of these divisions that the
universe in ultimate resort is real, not as
independent, but as part of the one ultimate
Reality or Brahman ; whilst the M&y&v&da
Veda nta, which is the sole system of the
second division and is regarded by its
adherents as the crown of all doctrines,
teaches that the universe, whilst empiri¬
cally real, is in the transcendental sense
neither “ real ” nor “ unreal ”, nor partly
either, but is backed up and made apparent¬
ly substantial by this one Reality ; which,
though It is (relative to us) Being-Bliss-
Consciousness 11 and Lord, 12 is in Itself
beyond all mind and speech (which, how¬
ever, does not make It unknowable).

These Six Systems are really One Sys¬
tem, 13 containing three chief presentments
or Standards of Indian Thought suitable to
various types and grades of mind, which
Standards, in themselves, mark stages of


11. Sachchidananda,

12. fshvara.

13. Some correspondences between the Six Systems are
given in the following notes with a view to explaining the
statement that they are each a presentment of the one
standard Truth.

3


34


The World as Power


advance towards the understanding by the
mind of the beyond-mind standard experi¬
ence of the Seers or Rishis. Those who
regard them according to notions of histori¬
cal succession only will not accept this.
They will also further point to the contro¬
versies of the adherents of each of the
philosophical and religious schools. It
is however the Indian notion which is
expressed by Shiva who says 14 “The Six
Doctrines 15 are My Six Limbs 16 (that is
they form the unity of His Intellectual
Body). He who separates them one from
another severs my limbs (that is the unity
of His Body). These also are the Six Limbs
of Kula.” 17 Shiva is the all-knowing Sup¬
reme Consciousness 18 , and Mind 19 is a
mode of it. The Six Philosophies are the
Six Minds or Six Ways in which intellectual

(14) Kul&rnava Tantra, 11-84, 85.

5) Darshana : commonly called the Six (orthodox)
Philosophies,

(16) Two legs and feet, belly or trunk, two arms, hands
and head.

(17) The community and doctrine of the Tantrik school
called Kaulas. Kula=Shakti. Akula=Shiva, He who
is Lina in both is Kuljna or Kaula.

(18) Chit.

(19) Antahkarana or inner instrument.


Reality 35

approach is made to that Full or Whole
Experience, 20 a state which transcends
mind and its operations. This Indian
notion is essentially a true one. It is un¬
affected by succession in time, or by the
fact that each adherent of a system is
taught 21 and believes that his system is the
truth and would argue others out of theirs.
It is necessary that this should be so, be¬
cause only that can be received which the
particular mind is capable of receiving.
That is its truth. And that only can be
held and lead to practical result in which
one has faith. One stage is not contradict¬
ory of another, because each are stages
complete and true in themselves, as repre¬
sentative of a particular psychic develop¬
ment, of which the doctrine held is the
corresponding expression. Absolute truth
consists in this, that it is impossible of
correction. But the stages being relative
are in a sense corrected ; not in the sense

(20) Piirna ; which is the Immense or Brahman which
is theologically God.

(21) See my Essay on the alleged 11 Conflict of Sh4s-
tras” in the 44 Indian Philosophical Review.*'


36


The World as Power


that they fail according to a standard
applicable to the stage of particular deve¬
lopment for which they are appropriate;
but because the mind, enriched and trans¬
formed in its continuing advance, moves
towards another and truer attitude and
standpoint.

The Six' Systems then are not wholly
separate and mutually contradictory as
commonly supposed, but are a graduated
series in which the three groups form three
great Standards suited to different types
or grades of mind—different intellectual
capacities and temperaments. 32 What
system any individual should follow
depends on his competency or Adhikara, a
very fundamental doctrine of Brahmanism.
To each is given the truth of his stage.
When acquired, the mind naturally ascends
to the next until, by the elimination of all
which is accidental, it passes into the one
essential stageless Reality. 23 When there¬
fore it is said that the Six form one system,

(22) See “ Hindu Realism,” 5, ef seq,

(23) See my Essay in the “ Indian Philosophical
Review ” " On the Alleged Conflict of Sh&stras.”


Reality 37

reference is not made to their historical
genesis. The relation is not temporal but
logical. They are stages in a process of
immanent logic of the Reason realising
itself as the true expression (so far as may
be) in mind of supermental experience.
The former cannot truly represent the
latter, but some systems of thought make
nearer approach to it than others. Classifi¬
cation by time is superficial. One system
may ante-date or post-date another but
what is essential is its character as being
more or less advanced in the process of
self-realisation.

In all these systems the world as a com¬
bination of elements is a passing thing, it
being a common Hindu notion that noth¬
ing which is produced (and the universe as
we know it is that) lasts for ever. Into
what is it resolved ? What are or is its
fundamental Realities or Reality ? This
leads to a short survey of the teachings of
the Six Systems on this point.


Ill

If we reflect on the nature of ultimate
Reality or Realities, the most obvious divi-
. sion which suggests itself is that of the
Experiencer and Experienced, of the con-
' scious Selves and the world of objects to¬
gether with their various properties and
relations.

On the subjective side there is Consci¬
ousness and Mind, for none of the Indian
systems fails to distinguish the one from
the other. We know ourselves as conscious
beings. Consciousness is recognised by
the First Standard 24 as a property and as
such must inhere in some Reality which is
independent of the body, since it is not the
latter’s property for several reasons which


(24) As to what follows the English reader may consult
“Hindu Realism” by J.C. Chatterjee and others. To
those who know Bengali Rajendra Ghose’s work on
this System is recommended.


Reality 39

this Shdstra develops. We may only note
here the view that if Consciousness cannot
be the property of the body as a whole,
neither can it be a mere function of the
brain, the brain theory of Consciousness
being open to the same objections as the
one which maintains that consciousness is
a property of the body as a whole. 25 In
fact consciousness belongs to what feels
itself to be possessor of the body and makes
use of the body. But as in all the other
Standards, a distinction is drawn between
Consciousness and Mind. 26 The Atman or
Self is the basis of Consciousness and ex¬
perience. It is not limited but is all-
pervading and present everywhere. But
we observe that the Self does not always
perceive an object, even when the latter is
in relation with a sense or senses by which
it is perceived. Therefore the Self requires
something else for perception, namely, at¬
tention in which case only perception of

(25) See Chandrak&nta Tark&langk&ra Lectures on
Hindu Philosophy, II. 174,

(26) Manas. In this case between Manas and the Self
or utman whose property is consciousness and mind.


40


The World as Power


the object takes place. Moreover mind
is wanted to enable the self to have experi¬
ence, not simultaneously of all things at
once but in succession. For these and
other reasons the necessarily limiting
function of moving atomic mind in rela¬
tion to unmoving all-pervading Self, and
the separate real existence of mind is
shown. As consciousness is not the pro¬
perty of the body, neither is it the property
of and one with the senses, life or mind.
Mind and senses are instruments of Cons¬
ciousness. Thoughts, ideas and feelings
are generally called Mind in the West, but
the Self as sustainer of consciousness is
not any of these. For they are in continual
change and are known and experienced as
changing things in much the same way as
the body and its changes are known and
experienced. Being so experienced they
are not the experiencer. We are here on
ground common in general to all the
Standards, the main distinction being that
i in this Standard the Self or Atman is the
I Reality in which all consciousness inheres,
and consciousness is not its essential cha-


Reality 41

racteristic as in S&ngkhya and VedSnta.
We thus get two ultimate Realities on the
side of Perception: for the senses are made
up of the four minima 27 of discrete things
perceived by the senses, and though real
are not original ultimate realities.

Then what is perceived ? What is per¬
ceived is Matter with its properties and re¬
lations and so forth, now moving, now held
in position in space. Matter is real,
its properties and relations are real, and
so are time, motion and space. The
sensible world is thought to be five-fold, for
it affects our senses in five different ways.
As the Standard does not admit a com¬
mon Substance with varying form, matter
is constituted by a number of separate
independently existing Realities. Matter
has certain general qualities 28 which cor¬
respond to a certain extent to what Euro¬
pean Philosophy calls the primary quali¬
ties which may be perceived by more
senses than one: as also certain special


(27) Param&nu.

(28) S&m&nya guna.


42


The World as Power


qualities 29 which can each be perceived by
a certain sense only and correspond to
some of the so-called secondary qualities
of Western Philosophy. But if external
things exist, they must do so independently
of the percipient, for that is their Reality.
Their qualities are really inherent in them
and not in the percipients. Nor can it be
said, as some do in the West, that some
properties are inherent and objective and
others subjective. For the arguments
which prove that some properties are
objective will also prove that the rest are
so. As further explained later the theory
of perception is fully “ realistic.” The
four special qualities which affect the four
corresponding senses are odour, taste,
colour, and the touch sense. Sound in this
standard is not regarded as a property of
the discrete sensible things, there being no
such thing from which sound cannot be
entirely eliminated; yet sound as a quality
can have no independent existence of its
own, nor is it purely subjective. It inheres


(29) Vishesha guna.


Reality 43 -

in the Reality called Ether (Ak&sha)
though not possessing exactly the same
qualities as the Ether of modern Western
science. Things move in it and produce
sounds not in themselves but in the
medium in which they move. There are-
thus four classes of Minima of those
moving things which are discrete and are
perceived by the senses, each of which is
eternal and changeless and a fifth Reality
the ethereal motionless Akasha in which
they are. These Minima or Param&nus-
have been called 30 misleadingly “Atoms.”
For the latter have in Western chemistry
some magnitude, whilst the four classes of
Paramanus are non-spatial and absolutely
without any magnitude whatever. Unlike
many, if not most, schools of Realism in
the West there is no Hindu system of
realistic thought which has ever held that
the essential basis of the sensible world is
a something or somethings which must
have magnitude and extension. The ulti¬
mate constituents of sensible things are-


(30) As pointed out in “Hindu Realism.”


44


The World as Power


real but not hard solid particles with
magnitude—a conclusion towards which
Western investigation with its “ demate¬
rialization ” of Matter now tends. The
Minima combine to form sensible matter,
the pure points standing themselves away
from one another but being united media¬
tely through the intervening ether which is
itself a non-discrete Reality or continuum
in touch with all discrete things. Each of
these four classes of Param&nus, as the
origin of a special quality perceived by a
special single sense, is also the origin of
the particular sense itself, namely, the
senses commonly called “ touch,” sight,
taste, and-smell. That is the special senses
are essentially of the same nature as the
ingredients or originators of the qualities
themselves. It is thus important to
remember that according to the Hindu
theory of Perception the senses are essen¬
tially of the same nature as the origina¬
tors of the qualities which are perceived by
them. These senses perceive all perceptible
things as moving, changing, coming into
existence, and passing out of it. This


45


Reality

standard has no such notion of inherent
causal efficiency as is held by the second.
It holds that the things themselves as
things cannot do all this. Motion is
communicated by the First Mover who is
separate from that which He moves.
Discrete things have no power of self
origination and movement—even if they
had, we should not see the orderly
movement which is in the universe unless
there were some Power which makes
this orderly movement and seasonable
origination and distinction of things possi¬
ble. But we not only see things moving
and changing, but they hold relative posi¬
tions to one another, that is, are held
together in their positions and must there¬
fore be conceived as being acted upon by a
Power which works in a direction opposite
to that in which the power of movement
works. This movement or Kdla produces-
all relations which are called temporal and
so is in this sense Time. The other princi¬
ple or Dik by which discrete things are held
in relative position produces notions of
spatial direction. Space and Time have an


46


The World as Power


objective existence irrespective of the mind
thinking about them. The relations which
they produce are as real as the things rela¬
ted. They are relations of the real separate
things.

Of Entities ( Dravya) or as they are some¬
times translated Substances, there are thus
(both subjective and objective) nine. 31 These
with their qualities or properties, move¬
ments or actions, and species, particular,
inherent inseparable relation, and nega¬
tion 32 are known as the seven Padarthas
or Categories under which everything
which can be imagined are classed. All

»

(31) Atman, Manas, Paramanu (4) Ak&sha, K&la, Dik.

(32) Guna, Karma, S&m&nya Vishesha, Samavaya (as
•of quality with substance, action with substance, part
with whole) Abh&va. Gunas are 24 in number and are
Nitya and Anitya, Karma 5, Sam&nya (3) Vishesha
many, Samavaya 1, Abhava 2 again divided into
three. According to Kanada there were only 6 Pa-
d&rthas, Abh&va being omitted. That in which they
inhere (&dh&ra) are Dravya in the case of Guna, Karma,
Vishesha ; Dravya, Guna, Karma in the case of S&m&nya
and Samav&ya : and AbMva may be related to anything
in Svarftpa Sambanda. According to Ved&nta, Shakti is
different from these. The Ny&ya includes Shakti or Power
in Abh&va as the negation of obstruction hindering pro¬
duction of effect (Prati-bandhak&bhava). Ishvara has
Nityajn&na, Nitya ichchha,, Nitya kriy&. These three
properties are called the Shaktis of Ishvara.


Reality 47

these entities, properties, relations and so
forth are real.

Dealing with the Entities ( Dravya)
there are in the Ny&ya-vaisheshika,
the first and simplest of the three
stages of philosophical development, on the
one hand the Selves, 33 the basis of consci¬
ousness and experience, or that in which
consciousness inheres, together with the
Mind or instrument of their experience, 34
and, on the other hand, the four essential
subtile objects of experience 35 from which
are produced the gross perceptible objects
of experience together with the ethereal
medium 36 in which all discrete and separat¬
ed things exist. To these it adds Kdla the
Principle of universal movement bringing,
according to general Hindu ideas, things


(33) Atmans. These correspond (when I use this word
here or elsewhere I do not imply that the notions are
identical: on the contrary) to the Purushas of the S&n-
khya-Yoga and to the one Atman of the Ved&nta.

(34) Manas. This, as an instrument of experience*
-corresponds to the Antahkarana of the other systems of
which Manas is one particular function.

(35) Param&nus. Their place is taken in the other
system by the Tanm&tras or supra-sensible matter.

(36) Ak&sha : given as such medium in all the schools.


48


The World as Power


into existence, subjecting them to change
and carrying them out of existence, giving
rise in the percipient to the notion of
Time ; 37 and Dik the Principle which, not¬
withstanding the impulse of the former,
holds things together in their various
relative positions giving rise in the perci¬
pient to the notion of relative position as
“here and there,” “near and far” in
Space. 38 In this system however neither
Time nor Space are mere notions. They
are Dravya or Entities that is something
independently real, and self-subsisting.
Confusion has arisen from the supposition

(37) K&la. In the Panchar&tra Tantras also time is
defined as “the mysterious power which urges on and
matures everything.” It is three-fold as Supreme, Subtle,
Gross. Transcendental Time is traced back to Veda and
is referred to in the saying Kalah kale nayati m&m
M Time leads me in time.” This is Akhanda Kala or
Time without sections, See Dr. SchradersIntrod. Ahir-
budhnya Sanghit& 65. As to time as a form of perception
(Anschauungsform) in the Panchar&tra see Schrader Op*
c#.—71) where also he says that the idea of spatial
transcendence was known to them and others. As to the
two higher standards v, post.

(38) It is a part of the function of Niyati in the 36
Tattvas accepted by Shaivas and Sh&ktas, v.ib„ and my
44 Studies in Mantra Sh&stra ”. Dik is spatial position as
to which see post .


Reality 49

that Kola and Dik mean Time and Space
in the general Western sense of those
terms. 39 Western Realists have also main¬
tained that Time and Space have an
existence irrespective of the mind think¬
ing about them, with the result that all
necessary relations drawn from knowledge
may also be regarded as having a reality
independent of the mind reflecting on
them. This does not mean according to
Western Realism that they have exist¬
ence as individuals or independent of the
things related. But they have just such
reality as we are intuitively led to believe
them to have; that is, they exist as neces¬
sary relations of the separate things. 40
According to the Nyaya-Vaisheshika
Darshana, Kala is a general principle of
movement and Dik is a power which acts
in exactly a contrary way, that is, by hold¬
ing things together in a particular posi-


(39) See J. C. Chatterji’s “ Hindu Realism,” 54 et
seq. where the point is discussed.

(40) See Dr. J. McCosh. “ First and Fundamental
truths,” 185.

4


50


The World as Power


tion. It is not Space in the sense of room 41
and is in the nature of spatial direction.
Each Reality has only general relation
with everything which moves or is held in
position. They are both, as realities, dis¬
tinct from the things in and upon which
they operate: but as so operating they give
rise in the percipient to the notion of rela¬
tions called Time and Spatial position.

The imperceptible Paramanus or things
of no magnitude produce perceptible things
with magnitude. 42 In this system the
World as a compound of these lasting eter¬
nal elements is real since it exists independ¬
ent of experience. Its ultimate consti¬
tuents are self-subsisting and independent
of all perceiving entities or selves.

During dissolution 43 there exist all the


(41) This is A kasha m which Dik operates. Space as
extension or locus of finite body (Sthity&dh&ra) is called
Desha.

(42) Just as the infra-sensible Tanmatras of the other
standards give rise to the Bhfttas and their compounds as
sensible matter.

(43) Pralaya.


Reality 51

Paddrthas 44 except non-eternal compound¬
ed substance, non-eternal qualities or pro¬
perties and action or motion. 45 Where there
is more than one thing there must exist
some sort of relation. 46 The Selves or
Atmans 47 (in whom is their Adrishta ) 48 and
their Manas 49 exist unconsciously, that is,
without experience. The Paramfinus with
their Adrislita 50 exist without motion in
Akasha 51 and Kola and Dik 52 are inopera-


(44) See p. 29. Including Abhava there are seven catego¬
ries or Paddrthas here spoken of, but different schools of
Darshanikas classify Padartha differently. The M&yk-
v&dins say two (Chit, Achit), the Ramanujas three (Chit,
Achit, tshvara), the Madhvas have two (Svatantra, Para-
tantrah Nakulishas three (Pati, Pashu, Pasha).

(45) That is the Nitya Dravya, Nitya gunas, Sim&nya,
Vishesha, Samavaya, There is Abhava of K&ryya and
no Karma, Anitya (non-Eternal) Dravyas are everything
beginning with the Dvyanukas of Prithivt, Apah, Tejah,
Vayu. The rest are, including the Param&nus, nitya
(Eternal).

(46) Here called Samyoga-vishesha-sambandha.

(47) See p. 30.

(48) The product of past Karma and the cause of future
Karma. Adrishta as a Guna cannot be ever separated
from the Atman.

(49) Seep. 49.

(50) These have their Sangsk&ras. All Matter has its ap¬
propriate behaviour due to inner tendency or Sangsk&ra.

(51) See p. 30,

(52) Srishti.


52


The World as Power


tive. Ishvara alone is eternally conscious,
willing and active but without production of
the universe. At creation 53 Ishvara makes
the Adrishta of the Atmans operative and
conjoins the Atmans, ever associated with
their Manas 49 in such wise that the Selves
become Conscious and have experience of
sensible Matter, 53 the Adrishta of which
is also made operative, upon which they
are active after their nature, have motion,
combine as Dvyanuka and then as Trasa-
renu, that is, combinations of the Dvyanu-
kas or six “ atoms ” which is the smallest
sensible matter of three dimensions.

The second and more advanced Standard
or Sangkhya-yoga asks whether, in an
analysis of the World, we cannot reduce it
to a lesser number of Realities than the
nine Entities with their properties and
relations, namely, Consciousness and Mind
on the one hand, and on the other the four
elements of matter in space, now moved,
now held in position ? It answers that we
can. We can keep Consciousness and Mind


(53) Compounded of the ultimate Minima or Pa ram anu.


Reality 53

and include the rest under the common
heading Matter and attribute the latter’s
motions and positions to its own inherent
energies. We thus get three things—
Consciousness, Mind and Matter. In the
World we see constant change and we
experience a continuity of consciousness
as an unchanging Self. We see and expe¬
rience both Consciousness and Uncon¬
sciousness. The two chief concepts then
which claim our attention are Conscious¬
ness, Unconsciousness, Changelessness,
and Change. Examination shows that the
first differs fundamentally from the second
and belongs to a category of its own, that
is, it must be regarded as a separate and
different reality from the rest. Why?
Because our intuition of Consciousness is
of its continuity. It is true that some
speak of the “ stream ” of consciousness,
but examination shows that it is not un¬
limited consciousness which moves but
the limited mind which is associated with
it and is its instrument. Notwithstanding
all apparent change, we are conscious of a
persisting spaceless and timeless Self which.


54


The World as Power


gives meaning to all our notions of mo¬
tion, change, space, and time. But whilst
we know ourselves as consciousness wo
are aware of limitations upon it. Con¬
sciousness cannot as such limit Conscious¬
ness. It must then be something uncon¬
scious which does so. This something then
is Mind. Mind certainly appears to be
conscious, but this is so not because it is
in fact Consciousness but because it is as¬
sociated with, and backed by, Conscious¬
ness. Mind is a play of dark unconscious
force which is lit up by Consciousness.
Again Consciousness in itself is unlimited,
but everything else which is not Conscious¬
ness, or so far as it is not so, is limited.
Consciousness then is distinct from Mind
and Matter in that the former is change¬
less, timeless, spaceless, unlimited, whilst
Mind and Matter are changing things
and (being things) limited in Time and
Space.

The next question is—Consciousness
being a distinct reality from Mind and
Matter, are these last two separate reali¬
ties or can they be reduced to one ? They


Reality 55

can be so reduced if shown to have quali¬
ties in common bringing them under one
general concept. We have seen that there
are two such qualities. Each are per se
unconscious. Consciousness is unlimited
and all-pervading and therefore immanent
(however veiled) in Mind and Matter.
But abstractedly considered and by them¬
selves, Mind and Matter are unconscious.
Again they are both changing. We
observe matter in constant change. So
also the mind changes, its instability
being compared to mercury. In fact mo¬
tion, as both Aristotle and the Hindus say,
is the essential characteristic of Nature.
For this reason the world is called in Sans¬
krit “ Jagat ” which means the “ moving
thing.” The universe is Mind and Matter
in constant movement ( Spanda ), not a sin¬
gle particle being even for one moment at
rest. Throughout all this movement the
Self remains as the one unchanged Consci¬
ousness, the static centre of this other
Reality which is many, changing, and un¬
conscious. Both Matter and Mind, which
move in and around it are two aspects, the


56


The World as Power


first gross, and the second subtle, of one
common Ground and Reality.

The Second Standard then reduces the
many realities of the first into two, namely,
the Purushas or Selves as Consciousness
and Prakriti the source of both the mental
and psychical as subject on the one hand 54
and the material as object 55 on the other.
Prakriti the source of the world of mind
and matter is a self-subsisting Entity
independent of the Selves which, as being
in themselves Consciousness, lighten and
give the similitude of consciousness to its
dark unconscious operations. She is active
before Him because Nature always works
for the Consciousness directed towards it.
As Prakriti is real so also are its deriva¬
tives Mind and Matter, the latter including
the whole universe of objects and the
former all empirical subjects.

(54) The Antahkarana working with the aid of the senses
or Indriyas. Consciousness is reflected on these because
the natural Principle (Prakriti) and all its products are in
themselves unconsciousness.

(55) Compound matter made up of the five forms of
sensible matter (Bhuta) derived from the super-sensible
Tanm&tra.


Reality 57

In this system the nine Realities of the
previous one are dealt with as follows:—
The place of the eternal, infinitely numer¬
ous selves or Atmans is here taken by the
eternal, infinitely numerous Purushas or^
Selves. But whereas the Vaisheshika!
Atman is a Reality of which consciousness \
is not an essential, inalienable characteris- j

tic but is that in which Consciousness is >

\

only sustained, the Purushas are Pure
Consciousness (Chit) Itself. All the other
eight Realities of the former system are
assigned to, and included within Prakriti y
the non-conscious Principle. The place of
Manas is taken by the inner instrument
or Antahkarana £6 by which finite experi¬
ence is had ; 57 and the place of the four
Paramanus and Akasha is taken by the
five Tanmdtras or five forms, of super¬
sensible “ Matter ” or universals, which in
combination produce the particulars which


(56) This term includes Buddhi, Ahangk&ra, Manas
which operate with the aid of the outer instruments, the
senses, between which and the first two Manas is the link.

(57) Through a form of catalytic activity: that is by the
reflection of consciousness on it.


58


The World as Power


are sensible matter. 58 Kdla as“ Time ’’has
no objective existence apart from the
Moment 59 or ultimate and absolute unit of
change, namely, the instantaneous 60 transit
of a Tanmatra from one point in space to
the next succeeding point. The moment is
real, being identical with the unit of
change in phenomena and the Time-rela¬
tion thus shares in this reality. Dik as
the totality of position, or as an order of
co-existent points, is like order in time
relative to the understanding, being con¬
structed on the laws of actual relations of
position intuited by empirical conscious¬
ness. Spatial position results from the
different relations in which the all-perva¬
sive Ether or Akdsha stands to the various
bounded objects in it. The category of
Causality is mediated through the scheme
of order in time. In short Space, Time,
and Causality are empirical relations of

(58) Bh&ta.

(59) Kshana.

(60) Lotze says “ Nothing could conceivably have the
power to interpose an interval of time, vacant as in that
case it would be between cause and consequence


Reality 50

things having objective empirical reality
but not independent of the things so rela¬
ted. 61 This standard teaches the efficiency,
as inherent dynamism, of the world of
things, since the Universe in all its forms
is a manifestation of the Supreme Causal
Energy-Substance Itself.


(61) See Dr. Seal’s “ Positive Sciences of the Hindus.”
18-22.


(5)

The third stage opens with the question
whether it is possible to reduce the two
Realities to one. At this point reason
alone fails to establish the necessity of any
such resolution. Perceiver and Perceived
can only be unified in something which
transcends both and therefore all empiri¬
cal experience is something alien to it.
Reason may doubtless establish conclusions
of some probability, but it cannot be shown
with certitude that the ultimate Reality is
single whilst we still rest in present world
experience. If we assume one of two
Realities only we may reasonably fix on
Consciousness which is self-directing
rather than on unconscious matter, but
that there is only one remains to be proved.
Supreme unitary experience is known only
by Consciousness divested of those condi¬
tioning limitations which are the very
constituents of ordinary limited world ex-


Reality 61

perience, and which consciousness has
thus expanded into that Immensity which
is the meaning of the world Brahman. To
know this One Reality directly is to be It.
To know of It is learnt from those who
have had unitary experience or have re¬
ceived the traditional teaching of such ex-
periencers. Therefore it is that the
Vedanta is essentially a Shrutipradhdna
or revealed Shastra as opposed to a Yukti-
pradhdna or reasoning Shdstra. That there
is one ultimate Reality is known by most
only secondarily as the revelation of the
Seers or Rishis who have “ seen ” this
Truth, that is, have had direct 62 experience
of it in Samddhi or ecstasy; and primarily
by such direct experience which is open to
all who are qualified and strive to attain
it. Spiritual experience varies. It may ba
of a more or less dualistic character or (for
so long as it endures) Monistic. The great
Vedic saying ( Mahdvdkya) “That thou
art ” (Tat tvam asi) has thus received vary¬
ing interpretation. The word Tat (That) in


(62) Aparokshajn&na.


<62


The World as Power


Sanskrit may stand for any case. 63 It
may be read in the nominative, then mean¬
ing the identity of the M&y&v&da school
or of RarnSnuja. 64 It may stand for other
•cases. Tat may mean Tasmdt as in Valla-
bba’s school—“the one from Whom all
proceeds.” Tat may mean Tasya , as in
Madhva’s school—“you are His.” 65 “ He
is your Lord, you belong to, and depend on
Him.” Tat may mean Tasmin, Tasmai as
in the case of other dualistic teachers
(Dvaitavddins) and devotees (Bhaktas).
“ He it is in Whom you live, with whom
you must unite through devotion or It is
for Him you are.” “ For Him you are pro¬
duced and for Him you must work being in
His service.” Out and out dualists like the
Naiyayikas say “ You are not That (Atvat
tvam asi ).

In the system taught by Ramanuja
N’mb&rka, Yallabha and Madhva, the

(63) See BhAmati Kalpataruparimala of Appaya Dlk-
shita s&tra 1. No school stands for the accusative or
instrumental, each school puts forward its own Veda
mantra.

(64) Tvam=here Angsha, "You are part of the whole.”

(65) Sv&mitva sambandha.


63


Reality

world in each case is real, but the Principle
of which it is the manifestation is not in¬
dependent and self-subsisting but depend¬
ent on or present in God as the Ens
Realissimum in various ways, as either the
Body of the Lord, 66 within His Lordship,
67 or as different 68 from the Lord as the
possibility of distinct and dependent exis¬
tence, 69 and yet not different as impossi¬
bility of independent existence, 70 or as one
with God without recourse to any principle


(66) Ramanuja. God thus stands to the world in the
same relation as man’s soul to his body.

(67) Sv&mitva-sambandha. The three real entities in
this system are the Supreme who controls (Niyamaka),
the enjoyer (Bhoktrij and the objects of enjoyment
(Bhogya). This system, in that it denies that God is a
material cause of the universe, makes nearest approach to
Christian theology. Union consists m making approach
to and becoming like to God.

(68) Nimbarka.

(69) Para-tantra-satta-bh&vah.

(70) S vat ant r a -sat t a • bh a vatu Hence the doctrine is
known as Bhedabheda “different yet not different.” In the
Shaiva Tantras of the Kashmir school (such as Svach-
chhanda Tantra, Netra Tantra and others) and other
Shastras, Unity (Abheda) Diversity (Bheda) and Diver¬
sity in Unity (Bhed&bheda) are also taught. Every Indian
Shcistra shares ideas to be found in others (See
41 Kashmir Shaivaism” by J. C. Chatterjee, 6.)


64


The World as Power


of Mdya, n such as Shangkara teaches,
being a part of Him as it were a spark
thrown out by fire. 72 In all these systems
73 God is the Ens Realissimum, and all
other realities are in one way or another
dependent on Him, though independent of
the mind of the creature who perceives
them. Being part of the Lord they share
in His Reality. For a knowledge of this
ultimate Reality all depend on Shruti or
Veda, the teaching of which is interpreted
in various ways. The interpretations
differ and so do the spiritual experiences,
but they are none the less true for that.
They have the reality of all actual experi¬
ence and the truth of their stage of ex¬
periencing. In spiritual progress man
passes from out the lower to the higher
experience, that is, an experience of great-

(71) Vallabha.

(72) Shangkar&ch&ryya denies absolute identity in this
sense, for according to him the identity of the Supreme
and individual self is only established after eliminating
M&y& from the first and Avidy& from the second.

(73) The Western reader who desires a short summary
of these different schools may consult V.S. Ghate “Le
Ved&nta E’tudesur les Brahma-sfttras.”


Reality 65-

er unity. The standard spiritual experi¬
ence is that of the Rishis as embodied in.
the Vedas.


5


Y

The third Standard or Vedanta consists
of two main divisions. In the first is con¬
tained every school but that of Shangkar&-
ch&rya. His Mayavada is the sole system -
of the second division. The ground of
distinction consists in this, that he alone
distinguishes between conventional and
transcendental reality and truth. All
Vedantic schools are at one in taking up
the analysis at the point at which it was
left by the previous standard. They do not
altogether discard its findings but hold
that one of its two Realities, Prakriti the
Unconscious Form-principle, is not wholly
independent of the other or Formless Con¬
sciousness or Purusha. Reality of the
universe as the complete independence of
the second Standard is denied, but another
reality is given to the universe according


Reality 67

to the first division, namely, the reality of
that of which it is a part or with which it
is connected. According to the Ved&nta
of the second division this reality of the
universe is empirical only, and from the
transcendental standpoint is denied. The
Vedanta thus in the continuous approach
to unity reduces the two Realities of the
second Standard to one Reality only.

The final step is taken by the M&y&v&da
Ved&nta on its transcendental side. Em¬
pirically it admits a real material causa¬
tion by Mdyd as the Power of the Lord,
who is Being-Consciousness-Bliss, as also
the reality of the world of Mind and
Matter. If the cause be real the products
must be so. Matter is every whit as real as
Mind, is not the creation of the latter.
The order of evolution of the Jiva or indivi¬
dual differs from that of the Sangkhya. But
from the transcendental aspect, which is
the standpoint of God, the world is without
reality. The ultimate experience is not a
world-experience. From the viewpoint of
the former’s persistence, what comes and
goes is unreal. There is he're no infringe-


68


The World as Power


ment of Realist doctrine which affirms that
matter exists independently of mind. This
is fully recognised. But it is clear that in
a state which transcends both, that is, in
which there is neither Matter nor Mind, the
question whether matter exists independ¬
ently of mind cannot arise. There is no
denial of the realistic position because a
further form of experience is assumed
where Realism, Subjectivism and the like
have from the nature of the case no mean-'
ing. “ Realism ” assumes both Mind and
Matter. So does the Advaitin Vedantist
as regards World-experience. In the state
which it assumes beyond World-experience
the question does not arise.

It is this second division of the Vedftntic
schools occupied by one System only,
namely, the Monistic Mftyavada doctrine of
Shangkar&ch ary a which has given rise to
the notion that the Hindus think the world
is unreal, though the vast number of
Qrdinary folk can have no such notion and
every other Indian philosophical school
combats his teaching on this point. By
its followers this school is regarded as the


Reality 69

crown of the whole series of thought-sys¬
tems of which the Ch&rvakas and
Lok&yatas, atheists and materialists, are
at the other and the. lowest end. The
fundamental distinction between it and the
other Ved&ntic systems lies in this, that
whereas they in ultimate resort give to the
universe reality, though dependent on
Brahman of which it is in one sense or
other a part, in this last system the
manifold of the universe consists only of
“ Names and Forms ” 74 , which are no true
part of the one and sole Reality or Brahman,
whose presence gives the world the appear¬
ance of substantiality it possesses. They
are the product of an inscrutable Power 75
of the Lord 76 , who is Himself only the
Immense or Brahman seen through the
self-same veil of Mdyd. In this way the
sole Reality, in its sense of unchanging
everlastingness, is affirmed.

The unreality of the world was the
theme of some of the northern Buddhist


74. N&ma-rupa.

75. Achintya-Shakti.

76. fshvara.


70


The World as Power


schools, 77 who in this as in other matters
deserted the path of good sense marked
out by Brahmanism. The Tibetan word
which answers to Mayd, when given the
meaning of a magical and illusory show
conjured up by a Magician, is s-Gyuma.
It was Shangkarach&rya’s object to refute
these Buddhists and he, in so doing, gave an
interpretation of Ved&nta which, whilst in
opposition to Buddhistic Idealism on the
empirical plane, in that it asserted that
matter was every whit as real as the mind
which perceived it (and was therefore not
the creation of mind), yet conceded the
“ unreality ” (as his school defines the term
“ Real ”) of the universe from the trans¬
cendental standpoint.

That there is some similarity between
his doctrine and that of the Buddhist M&ya-
v&da was long ago perceived, as in the
Padma PurSna which speaks of his system
as a “ bad doctrine and a covert form of


77. See my Introduction to the Buddhist Tantra
Shrichakrasambhara, Vol. VII, Tantrik Texts, p. xv.


71


Reality

Buddhism.” 78 It is however equally obvi¬
ous that there are also fundamental differ¬
ences between the two doctrines, some of
which we will shortly, examine. In the
first place, Shangkar§ch&rya held to the
empirical reality of the world as existing
independently of its percipient. Since the
Jiva or Individual Centre produces his
own Sangskdras or tendencies, there is, it
is true, a sense in which we each make our
own world. But in another sense the world
exists independently, as the actualization
of the collective Sangskdras. He conced¬
ed empirical reality to the waking and
dreaming states and even to illusion 79
(strictly so called) whilst they lasted. They
are, they are “had” or experienced. More¬
over the object as experienced is for such
experience true- A vivid dream is for the
dreamer indistinguishable from waking
experience, the sense-data of which it
revives and combines after its own myste¬
rious fashion. All that Shangkar&ch&rya

78. Mfty&v&dam asachchMstram prachchhannam.
bauddham, etc.,

79. Pr&tibh&sika satt&.


72


The World as Power


said was that the reality of one state was
“ contradicted,” that is corrected, by an¬
other, the dream by the waking state, illu¬
sion by normal experience. Was there then
any state which was not contradicted or
corrected by another ? The answer was—
Yes, there is—it is that which exists
“ uncontradicted ” in all the “ three times ”
(past, present and future). This is Parti
Vidya. The working of the senses and
intellect are Apara Vidya. These are
neither contradicted nor even corrected
by Para Vidya. All contradiction is
within the Apard Vidya between attri¬
butes—the work of the senses and the
intellect. But where these have no place
and forms have no meaning, where dualtiy
does not exist—how can such Reality
(itself uncontradicted) contradict ? Con¬
tradiction is possible when opposite
attributes are applied to a thing assumed
to be the same. But the same relation
does not exist between the two forms
of Knowledge. They do not give opposite
versions of one and the same Reality. There
is and can be nothing in common between


Reality 73

the formal Knowledge of Apard Vidyd and
the attributeless Immense which is Pard
Vidyd. There is no sameness (in which all
contradiction is based)between the qualified
and un-qualified, between the formal and
formless. Even if it be said that the basis
is the same in both, they are indistinguish¬
able. The self never contradicts the evid¬
ence of the senses and intellect. All con¬
tradiction is relative to these, its instru¬
ments but never with it. There are thus
no two standards of truth. 80 The “ Real ”
then is defined as that which is the eter¬
nally enduring and changeless, and this is
the Supreme. It has been said too by some
Western thinkers that conservation and
persistence are the criterion of the Real. 81
This is the Hindu view. Mdyd, the Princi¬
ple of change, itself is not unreal any more


80. See G. R. Malkanis “ Method of Philosophy’*
(Indian Institute of Philosophy, Amalner), 28 et seq .

81. As in physics by Professor Tait. And Herbert
Spencer on biological principles defined pleasure as the
index of the unimpeded flow of vitality. Hence Supreme
Bliss is absolutely unimpeded (Akhanda) Reality**
Persistence=Deathlessness (Amritatva)=Bliss (Ananda)*


74


The World as Power


than it is real. It is an inscrutable Mystery * 2
which is neither. The world is meta¬
phorically described as a dream , 83 as a
mirage and a falsity. But to whom and
when? Not to the world-experiencer to
whom it is in fact real whatever his philo¬
sophy may be. In a state in which no
world is experienced no question of its rea¬
lity arises. There are in short two condi¬
tions, one in which there is world-experi¬
ence, that is, the gross universe, and'
another or Foga-experience in which there
is either the subtle or ideal universe or no
object at all. If we would compare the pass¬
ing ephemeral world of Humanity with
that state which is Divinity, the former has
only the reality of its transient stage,
whilst the latter is the stageless, timeless,
and spaceless Unchangeable, which is
alone (in this sense) the Real. To speak

82, Anirvachantya. All systems ultimately get back to
inscrutable Power (Achinty& Shakti) “ Omnia exeunt in
mysterium ” as the Schoolmen said.

83. This description is common to many schools in the
sense of non-lasting. So in the shlokas by the Sikh Guru
Tegh Bahadur he says : “It is a dream. Know nothing is
real but Him alone.”


Reality 75>

(as is commonly done) of an esoteric and
exoteric doctrine is to mislead. The doctrine
teaches the reality which is conventional
or pragmatic and the reality which is the
true and transcendental real. 84 Those who-
follow it, hold to both realities. The doctrine
however is a subtle one, only truly known
to its Sddhakas. 85 That it is possible to hold
to the reality of the world and yet follow
this Monistic doctrine is shown by its
Bhaktas, 86 for a Bhakta or worshipper
must believe in the reality not only of the
object of his worship but of himself andhis
worship and the World in and by which it
is done. How to live in this and other anti¬
nomies is the secret of men of his tempera¬
ment, capacity, and type. 87 It is not uncom-


84. Vy&vah&rika satt\, p&ram&rthika satta.

85. He who does S&dhana follows the religious discip¬
line which (and not mere intellectual knowledge) qualifies
one to be a Ved&ntist.

86. He who has Bhakti or devotion to God: a
devotee.

87. It is not everyone who is qualified (Adbik&ri) for
it. Each will follow that school of thought which suits
him best Each has its merits and its demerits, that of
Shangkara included, since no intellectual system can truly
present the alogical or reconcile the opposites.

\


76


The World as Power


monly but wrongly supposed that an
adherent of M&yavgda Vedanta cannot be a
devotee ( Bhakta ). This is not so, as an
Indian author well points out 88 instancing
the teaching of the Shantas of Maharashtra
and Jnaneshvara the author of the well-
known Commentary on the Gita, who was
both a convinced Mayavadin and an ardent
partisan of Bhakti. Numberless instances
might be cited, as for instance the Shakta
Tantras which, though practical Scriptures
of worship, teach Vedantic Monism, or to
be more accurate, “ non-dualism (advaita -
“not two”). What is affirmed is that there is
no duality but what else there is is not
affirmed. To the Transcendental neither
oneness nor any other attribute strictly
applies.

Probably it is a correct conclusion to
say that Shangkara adjusted his exposition
of Vedanta to meet the original M&yav&da
of the Buddhists and so promulgated a


88. Ghate Op. cit. “ Remarquons quil est d’ailleurs
possible de conserverla bhakti sans rfenoncer it la doctrine
■de l’unit6 absolue ni 4 sa consequence la doctrine de la
Maya.” XXVI.


Reality 77

presentment of Mdyd different from
that of the Buddhists, 89 and therefore
without abandonment of what he believed
to be essential principles of Brahmanism,
In fact he was by tradition a worshipper
of the Supreme Mother or Shakti whose
Shri Yantra 90 may sometimes be seen in
Ved&ntic Maths.

After all what does the doctrine amount
to ? The empirical reality of the world is
fully affirmed; that is, as long as one is in
the world, both mind and its object are
equally real. Objects are realities inde¬
pendent of the experiencer. The qualities
of things exist in them and are perceived.
The limited Knower, in so far as he is
limited, is as much of a product as limited
Matter is. If our experience tells us that
we see a world of objects we in fact do so.
Commonsense cannot proclaim otherwise.
But the next question is—is it or is it not


89. The term is used by other schools as meaning the
inscrutable power of God whereby He is enabled to do
that which seems impossible to us.

90. A diagram used in worship. See my “ Shakti and
Shakta” 2nd Edn, and the K&makal&vil&sa Ed. A Avalon.


78


The World as Power


the fact that there is an experience for
which the world does not exist ? The
answer is in the affirmative, given on the
authority of Shruti —which the West calls
Eevelation—but which may be perhaps
better described by what is there called
Spiritual Experience. This is not for the
Hindu any spiritual experience but the
standard experience of the Yedic Seers.
That experience may be had by any man
who strives for it, not necessarily now in
this life but in some stage of his future
self-evolution. Is this last experience itself
corrected ? Those who have it say that it
is not. It is a state, permanent, without
change, in all the “ three times,” past,
present and future. If the true Eeal is (as
this system affirms) That which change-
lessly and for ever endures, then This alone
is True Eeality and all else relative to it is
unreality. It seems to be thought that its
adherents take the world to be unreal in
' { the epi stemological idealistic (one has to
tv' take breath with such long words) sense.
This is not so. They say in effect “ we are
-in a world which to us is real, but we


Reality 79

aspire to the attainment of a state known
by our Seers, in which the world of things
and pains, the world of contingencies, the
world of opposites is not. Relative to
that, our experience, though in present
fact real, is ultimately unreal. The reality
of the world is a pragmatic truth.”


VI

Speaking in a general way we may~
convert the second Standard or S&ngkhya
system into the Sh&kta doctrine of Power
or Shakti by substituting for the infinite
Purushas one Shiva, and for Prakriti,
Shiva’s Power or Shakti, and then affirm¬
ing that Shiva and Shakti are not, as the
Sangkhya says, two independent Realities
but one Reality in twin aspect, namely,
static and kinetic. The Sangkhyan Puru-
sha is changeless Consciousness (Chit.>
So is Shiva. Prakriti is as unlimited
cause the principle of Change, and as
effect limited changing forms, which are,
as effects, modifications of their cause.
Shakti or Power is that which, in itself
unchangeable, produces from out itself
as Material Cause the world of change.
Common language speaks of the Power of
Shiva but strictly Power or Shakti is


Reality 81

Shiva. When the one Reality or Brahman
is regarded as the Changeless Conscious¬
ness it is called Shiva : when it is regarded
as the Power of Consciousness or Consci¬
ousness-Power which projects the Uni¬
verse from out itself, it is called Shakti. It
is fundamental doctrine that there is no
Shiva without Shakti, nor Shakti without
Shiva. But this substantial unity with
diversity of aspect involves a changed view
of the nature of the cosmic process. In
Sangkhya there are two Realities, in
Sh&kta doctrine there is only one with
dual aspect. According therefore to
S&ngkhya, evolution is from and of Pra-
kriti who is distinct from the Purushas
but associated with them. The Purusha
is the efficient and Prakriti the material
cause, the two causes existing not in one
but in two entities. In Sh&kta doctrine,
as Shiva and Shakti are one, it follows that
the world is evolved from, and by the one
Reality, Shiva-Shakti, that is by a Rea¬
lity which in one aspect does not change
(for Consciousness never does so) and in
another aspect is the Cause of Change and
6


82


The World as Power


Change itself. As we are here dealing
with the Power-aspect of Consciousness to
recollect and imagine forth the Universe,
we may for convenience speak only of
Power or Shakti, if we are careful to
remember that Shakti is only the active
power of actionless Consciousness (Shiva).
The Shakta Darshana reminds us of this
fact when it says that the universe is the
product of Chit-Shakti and Mayd-Shakti,
that is, Chit or Consciousness in its aspect
as power and efficient cause and May&-
power or material cause. Chit-Shakti like
the Sangkhyan Purusha is by its presence
the efficient cause and yet the actionless
Witness, of all which goes on. What hap¬
pens is by and in its aspect as May&-
Shakti which, like Prakriti, is the ultimate
Substance-Energy out of and through
which the universe is evolved. There is
thus one ultimate enduring absolute Rea¬
lity of which all other relative realities as
Mind, Life, Matter are transient forms.
The world is real and must be so, for we
are here viewing the problem from the
world standpoint. The question of its rea-


Reality 83

lity only arises when the problem is viewed
from the other end.

If we put this doctrine into modern
form avoiding all technical terms it comes
to this. Persistence is the criterion of
Reality. The ultimate Reality is Eternal
Being-Consciousness which in itself is
changeless. Consciousness whether trans¬
cendent or immanent in the world never
moves. If in the world-process 'it appears
to do so, this is due to the play of
mind of which it is the basis. But
this Consciousness is nevertheless a
true efficient cause, that is, one which
moves without itself being moved.
As such it is consciousness-power. But
what is the patient and the material
cause in the Cosmic Substance ? It can be
only the one same Reality for there is no
other. But what is this Substance-Energy
which is the material cause of the uni¬
verse? The answer depends on the side
from which we view it. If we look at it
from the other-world aspect, that is, the
Reality which we call Power as it is
in Itself, then the answer is that it


84


The World as Power


is Consciousness. 91 If on the other hand
we look at it on the world-side then it is
the Root-Substance-Energy of the universe
which appears as Mind and Matter. That
root as cause is neither one nor the other
but the Power to produce in itself and to
appear as both, when Consciousness on the
arising remembrance of past world-enjoy¬
ment becomes outer turned (Bahirmukhi)
and sees, in its gradual awakening to the
world, the “ This ” (Idam) or Universe.
Why and how ? In consciousness there is
the seed of power to manifest itself as
object to limited centres in it. That seed
is the collectivity of all Tendencies (Sangs-
kcira) towards life and form acquired in an
infinite number of past universes. In
short it is the nature of this ultimate Real¬
ity to manifest itself. How ? Conscious¬
ness has two attitudes, inner (Antarmukhi)
and outward turned (Bahirmukhi). In the
first and in its fullest sense there is an
experience in which there is no subject or
object. In the second the object or “This”


91. Chsdrftpini Shakti.


85


Reality

(Idam) is gradually experienced at first as
part of and then outside the Self. There
is a polarisation in unitary consciousness
of “I” (Aham) and “ This ” (Idam), the
experiencing subject and his world. The
latter is as real as the former which per¬
ceives it but since both are transient and
change, their reality is relative. Full,
timeless, spaceless, endless Persistence is
the Absolutely Real which is the Supreme
Experience.

I have stated the matter in the simplest
way hoping to recur to it in a discussion on
the term Shakti or Power. The Advaita
Shaiva and Sh&kta Shastras however ex¬
plain it in great detail and complication
and in technical terms of their own. In
what are called Thirty-six Tattvas or
stages of evolution of Consciousness into
Mind and Matter, their Scriptures show the
origin of even Purusha and Prakriti. This
scheme I have explained elsewhere. 92
These are not, in such case, the ultimate

92. See my *' Shakti and Shakta,” 2nd Edn. and
“ Garland of Letters.’ ’


86


The World as Power


reality but merely one of the principles
(Tattoa) or stages in a line of Con¬
sciousness which extends upwards be¬
yond them. 93 Purusha and Prakriti
Tattvas merely mark the stage when the
“This” (Idam) or object of the “I” (Aham)
is thrown out of the Self and becomes an
outer thing distinct from it. In other
words they are the immediate Root of
Empirical reality but that Root is itself
grounded in the soil of Consciousness
which is ultimately Samvit or the Supreme
Experience Itself.

The relation of this system to that of
Mfiyavftda Vedanta will be more fully ex¬
plained in a discussion of what the Shakta
understands by Maya,. Both are Monistic
or rather non-dualistic (Advaitav&da). The
Sammohana Tantra thus gives high praise
to Shangkar&charya as an incarnation of
Shiva (Shangkara) and describes his four
disciples as the four Mahdpreta , who
support the Throne of the Mother of the


93. Through Shuddhavidyfi. or Sadvitlya, Ishvara Sada-
shiva or Sadftkhya, and Shiva-Shakti-Tattvas.


Reality 8?

World, for such is Mayd-Shakti to the
Shakta. She in one aspect is the ultimate
Changeless Reality. She in another aspect
does evolve into and appear in the forms
of the World. These are in their essence
the enduring Real that is Herself, and as
forms of Herself the passing yet real
objects of experience. There is thus a
real yet transient diversity in a real and
enduring unity. Doubtless this doctrine
does not explain how logically God can
be changeless and yet change. But the
Mdya of Shangkar&ch&rya, which is
neither real nor unreal, also runs coun¬
ter to logic. The highest truth is alogical.
Better the Sh&kta says accept both the
reality of the changing World which is
imposed by Mdya on us in our ordinary
experience, as also the reality of the
Changeless which is experienced in Yoga,
a state free of the coercive effect of Mdya ,
which is Mahfimaya Herself. No logical
argument will solve the Problem. In
spiritual experience the Problem disap¬
pears. And so Shiva says in the Kul&rnava
Tantra (1-110) “ Some desire Dualism


88


The World as Power


(Dvaitavdda), others Monism (Advaita-
vdda). Such however know not My
Truth which is beyond both Monism and
Dualism (Dvaitadvaitavivarjita).


VII

An examination of all the Indian scrip¬
tures of worship leads to the same conclu¬
sions. Some are philosophically related to
the first division of Vedanta and some to
the second in various ways and degrees.
The Sh&kta Tantras are a form of Advaita
Vedanta. All worshippers are practical
realists, whatever their doctrine may be.
This does not prevent a Shakta from hold¬
ing to the doctrine that the Supreme
Experience is not an experience by a
limited knower of a world of limited
objects, external to a plurality of selves,
themselves mutually exclusive. He prays
to the Mother knowing that the form of
the One as Mother is that in which She
appears to him.

To sum up:—No Brahmanical system
countenances any form of subjectivism.
All teach the empirical reality of the world


90


The World as Power


and the perception of the physical non-
mental qualities of things therein. All
but one give it, besides this reality, an ulti¬
mate reality either as being the combina¬
tion of several or of two everlasting Reali¬
ties, or as in some sense a part of the one
ultimate Reality or Brahman in its aspect
as Power. We have thus Pluralism,
Dualism and Monism in all its shades.
That one exception says that the universe
is ultimately neither real nor unreal , nor
partly one and partly the other, but an
inscrutable mystery which we must accept,
if we would hold to the changelessness and
partlessness of God—which all admit. For
only in this way, even though it be form¬
ally, is the Reality beyond Reason truly
expressed in that high manifestation of
Itself which is Reason.

Indian doctrine is realistic firstly in so
far as it affirms the independent reality of
objects in our daily experience, wherein
the percipient is in presence of a reality
existing independently of,and distinct from,
the Vritti or modifications of the Mind.
This we have seen. It is secondly realistic


91


Reality

in its treatment of the nature of that
perception; thirdly because the sphere of
reality is more extensive than that which
is generally allowed in the philosophic
West, and because experience in time is
only a section of what is an eternal
process without beginning or end. The
first point has been sufficiently establish¬
ed. I will now add some further observa¬
tions on the second point and deal shortly
with the third.


VIII

To deal fully with the nature of percep¬
tion would take me beyond the scope of
this paper. It will be discussed when
treating of Shakti or Power as Mind. It
is necessary however to make some fur¬
ther reference to it here from the Ved&ntic
standpoint for the doctrines held are more
thoroughly realistic than those of many
Western schools.

Perception has not only a real object
independent of the percipient (thus reject¬
ing the Berkleyan dictum esse estpercipi),
but (as already stated) the physical quali¬
ties we perceive are, according to the
Indian view, in the object itself. No dis¬
tinction is made of primary, secondary or
tertiary qualities. The first two are in the
object as well as in the mind, and the last
has an objective basis in the Universal


Reality 9$

Mind of which the individual mind is only
a special case. A so-called secondary
quality is not a mere mental impression in
the percipient. It is “ out there ” in the
object perceived. Its 94 real, in the sense
of basic quality, is quality as the Univer¬
sal apprehended by the Universal and
Collective Mind. Its quality as a variable
sense-particular is perceived by the indivi¬
dual mind according to its manner of
perceiving. This quality is therefore
“ there ” in the object even when there is
no individual mind perceiving it. For this
Universal is always “ sensed ” by the
Collective or Cosmic Mind. It has not
however all the qualities which different
percipients see in it from different points
of view and at the same time. For, in this
sense, individual sensation is “private.”
Indian thought does not hold that the
object as perceived is an exact copy of the
object as it is in itself. Though the object
is always one and the same, all do not per-


(94) I here answer, from the Ved&nticstandpoint, some
queries put in R. F. A. Hoernle’s “Studies in Contempor¬
ary Metaphysics,” 104 where the question is discussed.


94


The World as Power


ceive it in one and the same way. Both
mind and its object are active in perception
and affect the one the other. The mind
brings its own quota to the act of experi¬
ence. What is this ? These are the
individual Sangskdras or tendencies and
aptitudes produced by former experience
in this and previous lives. As the product
•of such previous lives they are innate.
The variety of sensation is thus due to the
imported subjective element or individual
Sangskdra and not attributable to the
object. It is the percipient’s manner of
perceiving it. The Universals of Tanmd-
tra, the Generals of what is apprehended
as the-sense particulars, are always object¬
ively present. Hence sensation is both
“private” through the individual mind and
common through the Cosmic Mind. The
Hindus therefore are more realistic than
those who distinguish between the qualities
as primary and so forth and make sensa¬
tion merely “ private.”

The basis of these principles may be
found in the doctrine that the quality of
the object which is sensed and the consti-


Reality 95

tution of the sense which perceives it are
the same.

The same forces which go to make the
subtle mental object also go to make the
sense which perceives it. The gross
material object is derived from a combina¬
tion of the subtle elements. One and the
same Causal Stress in the original
Substance-Energy (Shakti) phenomenally
appears as the sense on the one hand and
the matter and its qualities on the other.
The knowing is of like by like. The causal
aspect of an Universal is a stress or motion
(Spanda) in Universal Substance without
reference to any percipient organ at all.
From the phenomenal aspect the Univer¬
sal relates to a percipient organ evolved
co-ordinately with it which may be either
absolute or relative, universal or indivi¬
dual. The object is apprehended as it is
with all its qualities, subject to the parti¬
cular Sangskaras or mental tendencies
which merely affect the manner of knowing
them. Western science thinks that it is
concerned with a real world which persists
independently of our experience but then,


96


The World as Power


as has been pointed out, 95 we are committed
to a division between the contents of
immediate experience and its causes which
division has become deeper and more im¬
passable with every advance in physics and
physiology. For the physical causes of
perception are now inferred but not
perceived. The real material world has
been driven into the unseen and now lies
(it is said) hidden behind the screen of its
own effects. Perception becomes a remote
psychological effect of a long train of
causes, physical and physiological, origin¬
ally set in motion by the external thing but
in no way resembling it. It dissolves the
thing perceived into a remote reality which
is neither perceived nor perceivable: as in
the case of the reduction of matter to the
structure and motions of invisible homo¬
geneous electric units. Thus we perceive
foe example in an object impenetrability,
density, weight, configuration, colour,
taste and so forth whereas we are told
that the object is really constituted of

(95) Balfour. Gifford Lectures (1914,) 159.


Reality 97

vortices in homogeneous ether which is
not. matter at all. It turns the world of
common sense into an illusion and on this
illusion it rests its case. 96

According to the Indian view we do
perceive things as they phenomenally are.
The physical causes of perception are
perceived. What is not perceived and is
not the object of any percipient is the
creative activity of and in the fundamental
Substance-Energy which is phenomenally
presented to us as mind and senses on the
one hand and objects on the other.

As sensible experiences do undoubtedly
exist, so there must be, other than and
outside of ourselves as individual experi¬
ences, things by which such experiences
are produced. It is not the fact that what
really exists are only our impressions and
ideas. The sensible world exists apart
from, and other than, our experience. The
Shdstra puts forward many reasons in sup¬
port of these common sense beliefs. 97


(96) Balfour. Gifford Lectures (1914,) 159.

(97) See “Hindu Realism,” 21 et seq.


98


The World as Power


Thus we deny the existence of things
perceived in dreams precisely because we
are certain of the existence of things
experienced on waking. If the sensible
did not exist then dreams, which are the
repetition of things already experienced
when waking as existing outside, would
be impossible. If sensible things had no
existence of their own there is no reason
why we should not see them at will and
continuously just as we can have our own
ideas at will and for so long as we like.
But on the contrary we perceive sensible
things only so long as they remain in
relation with us and this is because they
exist independently of us. So again we
distinguish between right perceptions and
hallucinations, which we could not do if
sensible things had no objective existence :
all of which arguments are grounded on
good realistic common sense with nothing
“ dreamy ” about them.

These teachings are not merely confined
to the Standard itself but are parts of the
other Standards also, subject to the neces¬
sary modifications involved in the fact that


Reality 99

advance is made to a new Standard. It
is obvious that the teachings of all the
Standards are not in all respects the same,
otherwise there would, not be several
Standards. Nevertheless there are teach¬
ings which are common, correspondences,
and similarities. The second Standard
takes up the matter (whatever it be) at the
point at which it was left by the previous
Standard and carries it further. Thus
both the first and second Standard treat
Consciousness as distinct from Mind, but
the first regards it as a property of the
Self and the second as the Selfs essential
characteristic. The first Standard does
not recognise the faculties of Mind which
the second Standard calls ‘ Judgment’ 98 and
* Self-arrogation,’ 99 as substantive princi¬
ples at all. It would regard them as attri¬
butes, 100 of the Self. Mind as Manas is in
the first Standard a substantive principle
but it is atomic 101 , that is without magni-

(93) Buddhi.

(99) Ahangk&ra.

K Guna.

Anu ; in Vedanta Anu is created and therefore
cannot be partless,


100


The World as Power


tude. It is so to say a point at which, and
through which, connection is established
between the Self and objects for the pur¬
poses of experience. Hence all experience
is necessarily serial. It is like a tap
through which all experience whether
internal or external must flow. The func¬
tions of Manas are generally recognised as
the same. But the whole “ Inner Instru¬
ment 102 as assumed by S&ngkhya and
Ved&nta will better explain life by their
respective activities than the simple atomic
Manas of the first Standard. Just as the
senses are of the same nature as the
Paramanus or originators of the qualities
which are perceived by means of them, so
in S§.ngkhya and Vedanta the senses and
their subtle objects 103 have a common
origin. These minima of sensible matter
are in the first Standard non-mental, in the
others they are the universals or generals
of the sense-particulars which by the


(102) Antahkarana involving Buddhi, Ahangk&ra, Manas.

(103) Tanmatra which in S; ngkhya derive with senses
from Ahangk&ra and in Vedf nta the senses and their
gross objects both derive from theApanchlkritaTanm&tra*


101


Reality

addition of mass appear as such particulars
in the form of gross matter. In a general
way there are similarities especially in
fundamental matters as regards the theory
of Perception, such as the reality of the
object with its own physical qualities and
the like. On the other hand principles
peculiar to the system have their modify¬
ing effect. Thus in the Advaita Vedftnta
Consciousness is the one Immanent Rea¬
lity, and it is the discovery of the essential
identity between Mind and its material
object which makes the substance of
perception according to Vedanta. The
main realistic position is maintained
throughout the standards for all empirical
experience.


IX


As regards the third point it is to be
noted that there are many more Realities
than those experienced by the gross mind.
The Real as object is not merely the mate¬
rial as that term is ordinarily understood.
There is the world of the Subtle Real which
is the object of the mind which has deve¬
loped to that stage in which it can be
experienced. The 104 originating sources
of the sensible are themselves super-sensi¬
ble realities. These constitute, besides
the sensible, other worlds which are super¬
sensible. A world or sphere of existence
is nothing but a condition of the experi¬
ence on the part of experiencing
Beings: and therefore there must be
as many varieties of worlds as there are
fundamentally different types of beings.
In the sensible world are a great variety


(104) See “ Hindu Realism/* 101.


Reality 103

of beings who form a number of orders and
grades. These grades form a series, at one
extremity of which lies that order of beings
whose experiences are the most limited.
From this grade upwards to man there is
an ascending series, each successive order
of which has experiences wider in range
than those of the beings of the preceding
order. Man stands at the head of this
series. But there is no reason to suppose
that he is the absolutely highest order. In
fact he is limited and helped by Unseen
Powers, Beings more powerful than he who
exist in unseen forms. If what is super¬
sensible in man can exist in an unseen
form after death, why not other Beings who
habitually exist in such forms ? And if
these Beings exist in unseen or supersen¬
sible forms, then there are also states of
existence or worlds which are also super¬
sensible and quite as real, if not in a sense
more so than the gross world of ordinary
experience. 105 Experience reaches up to
that of the Cosmic Mind which apprehends


(105) See “ Hindu Realism,” 101, 102.


J 04


The World as Power


the world of universals as they exist in
themselves. 106 The Sangsara , or wandering
or world of birth and death, is thus consti¬
tuted of different orders of experiencing
beings, of which man is one, and there are
worlds of experience beyond the Sangsdra
from which there is no return for the
Beings therein. These supersensible
worlds 107 are as real as the material and as
much the body of and in correspondence
with the Metaphysical Real as is the
latter. 1 - 8


(106) This 5s not the Supreme but the Hiranyagarbha
Consciousness for which experience the Universals are
still mysterious stresses in Consciousness, the real nature

of which is only known to the Lord Himself (Ishvara).

(107) Each of these has its inhabitants or Experiences.
The Lokas or Worlds of experience are fourteen, seven
above and seven below ; super-normal, normal and sub¬
normal. Thus also t^e Shaiva systems speak of various
classes of beings (Jivas) such as Mantras, Maheshvaras
Mantreshvaras, Vidyeshvaras and so forth, who exist in the
descending and ascending stages of involution and evolu¬
tion which are called the 36 Tattvas.

(108) H. Keyserling dealing with the Indian outlook in
his Das Reisetagebuch eines Philosophen, 3rd Ed, says at
p. 86 : Ich weiss dass das Psychische ein ebenso objec¬
tives ist wie das materielle, dass Vorstellungen ein
genau so entsprechender leib von metaphysisch-wirklichem
sein Konnen wie feste Korper. dass es uberall moglich
ist im Prinzip von Geiste her den stoff zu beeinflussen.


Reality 105

The stages here are lived through as
states in each of which nearer approach is
(through the transformation of the expe-
riencer and with him his world) made to
That (Tat) which is the full and perfect
Real, which stages at length pass and
expand into It as that Whole or Puma
in which all forms of determined experi¬
ence are had, which sums them all up in
Itself and which transcends them all. The
stages may be thought of and in some
degree described, but are in themselves the
actual experience lived through of deter¬
mined being evolving into the Puma , the
Full or Whole. The stage is not a matter
of subjective information but is objectively
lived. It is not a mere matter of argument
but is a transformed life. The Self gives
testimony of Itself in various ways to the
Self in the process or movement of the Self
to the Self. That testimony again is not
something communicated from one to
another. It is a realisation of the self as
the Self in each of its grades of manifesta¬
tion. “To know is to be”; a Ved^ntic
maxim which has application not only as a


106


The World as Power


description of the highest end but to every
stage on the way thither.


X


Here we touch upon the practical bent of
the Indian mind and its craving for reality
which makes it satisfied with nothing hut
the most real foundation for its knowledge.
To truly know is to be. I do not intend ta
work out the matter now as it forms a
distinct subject with which I hope to deal
on some future occasion. It is this :—the
teachings of Religion which Philosophy
supports are not mere speculation. The
lcn»wledge of plurality is based on actual
experience, that is, of the senses and
reasoning thereon. If the reality and
nature of the world requires to be esta¬
blished it is done here. But what of
supersensible matters ? 109 Their nature and
existence is not the subject of mere specu¬
lative reasoning which can at best esta¬
blish a conclusion of probability only-


(109) Atindriya.


108


The World as Power


Reasoning on such matters gives no
certitude that we perceive the Real and
the True. The warrant of authority again
is actual experience (Anubhava) which
is not a specific form of proof co-ordinate
with other forms but the basis of all these
—the Self itself 110 of a supra-sensible kind.
Just as the physical sense-faculties are ex¬
tended by the use of scientific instruments,
so by Yoga there is an extension of natural
faculties which gives experience on a plane
beyond that of the ordinary daily earth
experience. This Yoga-experience is of
varying degrees leading up to Ishvara-
experience or that of the Lord Himself
who is the Great Yogi If then the Vedanta
affirms that notwithstanding apparent
plurality all is one—“All this universe is
Brahman ”—it is not merely because argu¬
ment leads to a Monistic conclusion (it
may perhaps as well lead to the contrary),
but because that unity has actually and

(110) See G. R. Malkani “Method of Philosophy”
criticising Professor Zimmerman’s article. “Truth and its
criterion in Shangkaracharya’s Vedanta” in Indian Philo¬
sophical Review.


Reality 10£

really been experienced directly by those
who affirm it. The truth of the doctrine is
accepted by others on the faith of this
experience which they accept. This is the
twofold sense of Veda.

Two points are apt to be overlooked now¬
adays owing to Western influence. The first
is that the Vedanta is not a mere system of
philosophy in the modern Western sense.
It is based on Revelation (Shruti). If not so
based, it is worth no more and may be
worth less than any other particular philo¬
sophy, seeing that it, in some respects, at
any rate in its Monistic form, runs counter
to our sense-experience. The second point
is that it is not to be understood by mere
reading and study. He who would under¬
stand it must first worship and self-disci¬
pline himself by the Vedantic Sddhand.
The notion that a man if clever enough
can understand anything is not an Indian
one. His must be not only a good mind
but a pure and good character. Such an
one alone will act rightly and will under¬
stand the Real. Understanding it, he will
worship the Ground in its form. The


110


The World as Power


Hindu may be right or wrong but he is
obviously a greater “ realist ” when he
holds that matter is not only an independ¬
ent reality, but it is perceived as it is with
its qualities, than even the modern scien¬
tist who makes matter as presented an
illusory appearance produced by some
reality no doubt, but one which is wholly
different from what we perceive. To the
former present experience is real but still
more so is the persistent Ground of it,
attainable by a practical and real trans¬
formation of the Self. From whatever point
of view we examine the matter we find a
realistic standpoint. One is at a loss to
know how the notion that the Hindus were
non-realists arose. For however Mayav&da
may be ill-understood it is no case a philo¬
sophic system adopted by all India.
Perhaps some may have confused the
questions whether the world is real, and
whether in action due regard is had to the
realities or circumstances under which it
is to be taken. A man who in his actions
does not take sufficient account of the real
facts of the world is sometimes said to


Reality 111

have no sense of reality. This may doubt¬
less in some cases be mere foolishness. In
others when noble ends are pursued in
disregard of the sordid “ realisms ” of the
day, the world is the better for it. However
this be, I merely note the possible ambi¬
guity and do not further discuss a question
which has no bearing on my present sub¬
ject.

Whatever be Indian capacity in ordinary
affairs, the Indian mind has done its think¬
ing with a practical end in view. Philosophy
was not pursued from a mere curious
desire to know, to found “ systems,” earn
academic applause, and so forth but with
a View to realise the practical end of all
material being or Happiness. Every sys¬
tem posits that as its aim. The world and
material ends are real, but spiritual experi¬
ence is the truly Real. Philosophy worked
hand in hand with religion as in Europe
during the Middle Ages, though it was never
Meretrix Theologorum. The Ved&nta is
really an Indian Scholasticism based on
Shruti, or what Westerns call Revelation,
though we must not confound the two.


112


The World as Power


There is in fact scarcely any important
technical term of Western philosophy or
religion which can be used without some
qualification. Rather we should say
Philosophy and Religion were not severed,
the fundamental principle of Ved&nta
being to sever absolutely nothing. All
knowledge was considered in relation to
the whole. The notion held by some in the
West that Religion and Science and
philosophy are antagonistic was unknown:
such notion having arisen in the West for
historical reasons, Religion there being
identified with Christian Dogma. Indian
Religion teaches that Absolute Bliss is to
found only in That which is beyond the
contingent world of opposites which is
unimpeded and full Being. It not only so
teaches but gives out the practical means or
Sddhand whereby this state of Bliss may
be attained which is the true and real. -
The only fruitful path is that of real
striving,or Sddhand. Any Sddhand sincerely
and diligently pursued will secure its fruit.
The fruit of the highest Shdkta Sddhand
(for Sddhand may be of various kinds) is


Reality 113

the realisation of its fundamental Shruti,
“All this is verily Brahman ” (Sarvam
Khalvidam Brahma ). “ This ” is the
Universe. Brahman the Immense or
Immeasurable is as Power ( Mahdshakti ) its
cause.

That Power is real and so is the universe
which is for the worshipper Its Body or
Form. 111

For if the material cause is real so is the
effect. He affirms “ I am real as Body ” for
Matter is a form of the Great Power or
Shakti. “ I am real as Mindfor mind is
another form of the same Power. Sa’ham
“ She I am ” refers to the Mother of the
universe. Again “ I am the Real as Un¬
changing Consciousness vehicled by Mind
and Body and transcending it.” The forms
come and go re-entering and again re¬
issuing from the Paramdrtha or Supreme


(111) A correspondent has asked me how this view
differs from Vishishtadvaita Vedanta. It differs in this
that according to R&m&nuja, mind and matter not merely
seem to be but are the body of the Lord distinct from
Him ; whilst in Shakta doctrine, the world is the body of
the Lord so long as it lasts, but ultimately there is only
the one Atm&, in which mind and matter are merged,

8


1.14


The World as Power


Reality. So'ham “ He I am ”, Shivo' ham
“ Shiva I am ” the Sh&kta also says, when
speaking of the Kutastha Shiva or En¬
during Real. Those who thus worship
Power become “ Power.”

Though the unreality of the universe is
spoken of because of its being a passing
thing, it is yet to be also remembered that
the world-process is according to Indian
ideas an eternal one. The world is not
something which appears and is gone for
ever. It reappears eternally. It is not the
first and only one produced, but merely one
of a beginningless and endless series. U2 The
manifestation of the universe is thus an
eternal process. It appears and disappears.
This is the pulsing movement as the sys¬
tole and diastole of the Cosmic Heart as
Divine Power. Nothing can come from
nothing, and something cannot vanish into
nothing. It arises from the seed of Tendency
(Sangskdra) which is in the Great Womb
( Mahdyoni) and is there in a potential state.
The seed sprouts as the great Ashvattha

(112) For the argument on this point, common to all
the three Standards, see " Hindu Realism,” 95.


115


Reality

Tree which is the manifested universe. It
dies down again into the seed of potentiali¬
ty to reappear again in endless succession.
This appearance and reappearance is the
Sangsdrd or the constant “ moving on ” or
wandering in the worlds of birth and
death. 113 There is thus an eternal series
of Experiencers.

Man breathes forth and inbreathes.
What is done “ here ’ ’ ( Iha) is done “ there ’*
(Amutra). The Universe pulses forth and
rests, and pulses back again. Breathing
is a microcosmic re-presentation of the
macro-cosmic process. 114 And so the dura¬
tion of the life of the highest being in the
hierarchy of Being or Brahma, for whose


(113) Called in the West re-incarnation. Transcenden-
tally there is no re-incarnation. Empirically also re-incar¬
nation is not an exact term. In say a series of three, viz.,
X—Y«-Z,the first X does not re-incarnate as X but as Y
nor Y as Y but as Z, The forms change but there is yet a
continuity which is the cause of Z affirming that he was
Y and before that X and so on. The Atman being eternal
has no real birth or death. It is merely related to and
dissociated from a body.

(114) As to the charge of Anthropomorphism which with
Animism stampedes so many I will deal in another place.
In Pr&n;iy&ma or Breath-control, appearance, stay, and
disappearance are Kumbhaka, Rechaka, Puraka,


116


The World as Power


experience the universe as a whole exists,
is the duration of that particular Universe.
The duration of Brahma’s life is that of
one outgoing breath 115 of K&la 116 which is
objectively a beat of Cosmic Time. Time
is no magnitude for the Supreme. For Him
the Immeasurable there is no measurer.
But Time is attributed to His appearances.
The Universe is dissolved and at rest for a
period of the same duration when it appears
again with, what the Pancharfitra Tantra
calls, the “ Wheel of Dawn. ”

Ancient Hindu teaching is thus to be
found in the following words of Professor
Huxley :— 117 “ The faith which is born of
knowledge finds its object in an eternal
order bringing forth ceaseless change,
through endless time, in endless space:
the manifestations of Cosmic Energy
alternating between phases of potentiality
and spheres of explication. It may be*as


(115) Nishvasa.

(116) K&la, here the Time-aspect of the Supreme. Then
follows the Great Dissolution (Mah&pralaya). See Intro¬
duction to Prapanchasara Tantra 8. Tantrik Texts Vol.
3, Ed. A. Avalon and Schrader Op. cit. 27

(117) Evolution and Ethics, pp, 8, 9.


117


Reality

Kant suggests, every cosmic Magma pre¬
destined to evolve into a new world has
been the no less pre-destined end of a
vanished predecessor.” For Cosmic Energy
we may read Divine Power or Daivt
Shakti : for phase of potentiality Pralaya,
when the world exists potentially in the
Womb of the Immense : 118 and for sphere
of explication, Srishti or production, there¬
from. 119 The Power, the Process and the
Result are real. Shangkarach&ryya from
his transcendental view point calls the
world “ false,” but to the Sh&kta, and from
his standpoint, it is real. It is the field of
action and liberation “ Mokshciyate sang-
sara .” “ The world is made the seat of

liberation as the Kul&rnava Tantra says—
To him M&ya is not unreal ( Avastu ). It is
not a mere mist of ignorance connected,
yet unconnected, with the Brahman and


(118) Brahman.

(119) In the same way Herbert Spencer speaks of the
alternating states of homogeneity (that is Pralaya when
all is undifferentiated mass) Heterogeneity (that is Srishti
when the generals and their particulars are produced) a
state of relative stability (Sthiti) and then a lapse into
homogeneity again (Pralaya).


118


The World as Power


which screens the Real. It is an eternal
Reality or Power appearing as the passing
and changing worlds. For it is the World-
Mother who is the Great Power Herself.
What is unreal (in the sense of passing)
are the Names and Forms which are yet, so
long as they last as the objects of percep¬
tion, also real. And so the Sh&kta can say
of himself that not only in Spirit, but in
Mind and Body, Sa ’ ham, “ She I am,” “ I
am the Real and the Power of the Real.”


WORKS BY ARTHUR AVALON
ON TANTRA SHASTRA


RS. A.

Tantra of the Great Liberation. (Mahd-
nirvdna Tantra ). A Translation from the
Sanskrit, with Introduction and Commen¬
tary by Arthur Avalon Reprinting ... 8 0

Hymns to the Goddess. From the Tantra

and other Sh&stra and the Stotra of
Shangkarach&ryya. With Introduction and
Commentary. Translated from the Sans¬
krit by Arthur and Ellen Avalon ... 3 0

Principles of Tantra. Part I. The Tan-
tratattva of Shriyukta Shiva Chandra
Vidyarnava Bhatt^charyya Mahodaya. Edi¬
ted with an Introduction and Commentary
by Arthur Avalon ... ... ... 8 0

Do do Part II. With an

Introduction by Shriyukta Barada Kanta
Majumdar. Edited by Arthur Avalon ... 12 0

“'Wave of Bliss*’ [Anandalaharf] a tran¬
slation and Commentary by Arthur

Avalon ... ••• ••• ••• 1 8

Greatness of Shiva” ( Mahimnastava of
Pushpadanta) a translation and commentary
by Arthur Avalon together with Sanskrit
commentary of Jagannatha Chakravartti ... 1 8

BY SIR JOHN WOODROFFE

Shakti and Shakta. Essays and addresses
on the Shakta Tantra Shastra Second Edition 7 8

The Serpent Power, f Kundalini Yoga) ... 15 12

Garland of Letters. Reprinting .


TANTRIK TEXTS


UNDER GENERAL EDITORSHIP OF
ARTHUR AVALON


KS. A.

Vol. I. Tantrabhidhana withBija-Nighantu
and Mudrfi-Nighantu .—A Tantrik Diction¬
ary, Edited by Tarantha Vidyaratna with an
Introduction in English by Arthur Avalon... 2 0

Vol. II. Shatchakranirupana.— A work

on the six centres of the body by PurmV
nanda Svami, with Commentary of Shang-
kara. Pddukdpanchaka —(‘‘ Five-fold foot¬
stool of the Guru”), with commentary of
Kalicharana and Notes from the Tika of
Vishvanatha on the Second Patala of Kai-
valya Kalika Tantra ; with an Introduction
in English by Arthur Avalon ... ... i 0

Vol. III. Prapanchasara Tantra. —Edited
by Taranatha Vidyaratna, with an Introduc¬
tion in English by Arthur Avalon ... 3 0

Vol. IV. Kulachudamani Nigama.— Edi¬
ted by Girisha Chandra Vedantatirtha.

With an Introduction by Akshaya
Kum&ra Maitra ... ... ... 2 0

Vol. V. Kularnava Tantra. —Edited by
Taranatha Vidyaratna, with Introduction
in English by Arthur Avalon. ... 3 0


RS. A,


Vol. VI. Kalivilasa Tantra.— Edited by
Parvati Charana Tarkatirtha with English
Introduction by Arthur Avalon ... 2 0

Vol. VII. Shrichakrasambhara. —A Bud¬
dhist Tantra, edited by Kazi Dausamdup
with a foreword on the Vajray&na by Arthur
Avalon

Vol. VIII. First Part.Tantraraja (Kddimata)

Edited by Mahamahopadhyaya Lakshmana
Shastri Dravida ... ... ... 3 0


In the Press

Vol. IX. The Second Part of same is in
preparation

Vol. X. Kamakalavilasa, a Tantrik
Prakarana of the Kashmir School by Punya-
nanda with Commentary by Anantanatha.

Vol. XI. Advaitabhavopanishad, Kalyu-
panishad, Taropanishad, Kaulopanishad.
With Introduction by Arthur Avalon


To be had of

LUZAC & CO., LONDON. THACKER SPINK & CO.,
CALCUTTA. GANESH & CO., MADRAS.
TARAPOREWALA & SONS, BOMBAY.


SOME PRESS NOTICES

“ These Books dealing with the secret Mysticism and
Magic of India are the most interesting which have been
published in recent years.”— Neue Metaphysische Rund¬
schau .

“His book (Mahanirvana) brilliantly inaugurates the
study of the Tantras, the literature of which occupies a
front rank in the religious life of Modern India. The
introduction to it is the most solid and exact account that
has yet been written on the doctrines of the Tantras, their
ontology, mystical phraseology, worship, yoga and ethics.”
— j Revue Critique (Professor Sylvain Levi).

11 The translation (Mahanirvana) is distinguished by its
elegance and by the profound and comprehensive know¬
ledge by which it is backed ” (and by another critic in the
same journal) “ Shakti and Shakta reveals a wonderful
grasp of the fundamentals of consciousness.” — The
Theosophist (Dr. Schrader).

“ He commenced his work with a Hindus* heart, with a
Hindus* regard, and a Hindus’ faith and so his translation
is what it ought to be. The Introduction not only reveals
the learning of its author but is also proof that* he has


SOME PRESS NOTICES V

understood in what light Hindus regard the Tantra
Shastra.” — {Hitabadi),

“In perusing the author’s Introduction to the Mahanir*
vana Tantra we have been bewildered with astonishment.
We could never have dreamt that it was possible for a
Modern Christian Englishman to so fully understand
such matters as the Mode of Tantrik Sadhana. The author
has certainly learnt a great deal of the inner and secret
doctrine of the Tantra. We have never heard even from
any Bengali Fandit such a clear exposition of Mantra
Shakti as the author has given. It seems as if the World-
Mother has again willed it and has again desired to
manifest Her power”.— Sahitya.

“ The first really important work that I know of on the
Spirit of any Ritual-philosophy .”—Her maun Keyserling
{Das Reise Tagebuch Einer Philosophen.)

rt A magnificent historical and philological record due to
the author who has taken upon himself with complete
success a task which might seem to be thankless but
which is in reality fecund, opening for the first time a a
enormous and almost unknown branch of Indian litera¬
ture .”—Isis (M. Masson D'Oursel)

“ Mr. Avalon is doing a very great service for students
of religions by making a small part of it (Tantra-Shastra)
accessible. The Treatise (Principles of Tantra) is the
most remarkable presentment on the subject which has
yet appeared. It is full of points of very great interest.”
—The Quest ( W . Mead).


VI


SOME PRESS NOTICES


Is clearly an European disciple of some Pandit
belonging to the left-hand Shaktas and he shows great
sympathy for the sect. He is always ready to defend any
of its doctrines and practices even the most shameful.
On the other hand his faithful disci pleship has
brought him a wonderful understanding of the teaching
and cult of the sect .... of great exegetical value.” —
International Review of Missions {Dr. J. N . Farquahar).

“ For the student of religions there is then a mine open¬
ed for his enquiries. The whole work bears the stamp of
conscientiousness and accuracy. — Literarishches Zentral -
blatt fur Deutschland .

“ The first impression was of amazement and delight*
The Mahanirvana is one of the most important of Hindu
philosophical works combined with elaborate ritualism
and its translation therefore by an European involved cer¬
tainly a prodigious amount of study, sympathy and real
understanding. Of the Introduction alone it may be said
that for its lucidity, conciseness, directness and for its
depth of penetration and insight it may itself claim to be
a standard work on the much abused Tantras. We have
rarely come across such an illuminating exposition
of the Principles of Devi Worship.” — {Frabuddha
Bharata).

u Most meritorious productions. From what has been
said it is clear that Avalon is right when he declares that
up to now this literature has been too often judged and
more often condemned without knowing it and that the


SOME PRESS NOTICES


Vll


Tantras deserve to become better known than has been
the case hitherto/ 1 — Ostasiatische Zeitschrift (Professor
M. Winternitz).

“ Arthur Avalon has rendered an eminent service
to the Cause of Sanskrit Literature.”— Calcutta Review
(Mahamahopadhyaya Satish Chandra Vidyabhushana)

“We suspect that Arthur Avalon is one of the learned
Pandits of Bengal whose native speech has not been
without influence upon his almost impeccable English.
We value highly the work done, if for no other reason
than it gives us a real insight into the jargon of the ritual
and the worthlessness of Tantrik Philosophy.”— The
Nation (New York).

“Illuminating discussion (“ Serpent Power*Author
makes some rarely fine brilliant definitions...throughout
maintains a strictly scientific attitude, though he is ob¬
viously impressed with the extraordinary nature of the
Tantrik Doctrine.”— Britain and India.

“ There is no doubt that he has an extensive and pe¬
culiar knowledge of the subject of which he treats/’ —

Luzacs Oriental List (Dr. Barnett .)

“ The first fact which strikes the student of Eastern
Philosophy is the Author’s extraordinary knowledge and
the second is his impartiality/’ — (Shakti and Shakta).
New India.


BOOKS BY SIR JOHN WOODROFFE


BHARAT A SHAKTI

3rd Edition (Addresses on


Indian culture)

Rs.

1

8

0

IS INDIA CIVILIZED ?


2nd Edition

Rs.

2

8

0

SEED OF RACE

Re,

1

0

0

SHAKTI AND SHAKTA


2nd Edition


(Essays and Addresses in


the Tantra Shastra;

Rs.

7

8

0


THE GARLAND OF LETTERS

(Studies in the Mantra Shastra)
nearly ready


THE WORLD AS POWER (Life)

In the Press


IS INDIA CIVILIZED P


PRESS OPINIONS

Foreign domination has been much more than
mainly political. It is the cultural and social
conquest of India which is the really important
one, insidious in its cause but permanent in its
results, xilien culture threatens to obscure the
soul of India, to swamp the Indian culture. There¬
fore Sir John Woodroffe’s latest book is most
opportune. His style is simple and convincing.
The fundamental principles of Indian culture are
examined with great power of insight. Sir John’s
purpose is to defend the minds of young India
against defilement—to create a strong working
faith in their own ideals and for this India will be
very grateful.”— The Commonweal (M.S.M.).

“ Powerful exposition of Indian culture.Many

wise political, social and religious observations
abound in its inspiring pages. We can commend
its perusal to all who are seekers after the truth.
If it serves to induce the Europeans to abate some
of their racial pride, prejudice and intolerance, and
the Indians to have a more correct appreciation
of their culture, then it must be regarded as a


X


PRESS OPINIONS


most opportune publication at the present moment
when the great catastrophe in the West has shaken
the faith in the basic principles of Western culture
and has given a powerful stimulus to the spirit of
introspection and enquiry.” — The Leader .

“ Deep insight into what is of true value in Indian
culture —clear with an enthusiasm all the more
effective because restrained. It is his conception of
India that is the great inspiration in the book. His
conception of life is Indian through and through. I
have read this book all one afternoon marking page
after page its trenchant criticisms of our detractors,
its pen pictures of Indian life and culture and espe¬
cially its illuminating description of what some of
our philosophies really mean. It is as if once
again as of old, one heard an ancient Guru talking
to his disciples. It is a noble book for every
Indian home. 1 ' —New India (C. Jinarajadasa).

“Sir John has already earned an abiding place
in the affections of our countrymen by his intimate
and profound studies of Hinduism and his enthu¬
siastic exposition of the basis of Hindu culture.
The volume in spite of the ephemeral nature of
the incidentsof composition has a permanent value
and must find a place in the library of every self-
respecting Indian. 1 *— Central Hindu College Maga•
zine , the monthly organ of Benares Hindu University.

‘‘This matter and much more are explained with
wonderful lucidity. Sir John points out that the
true view of human evolution is the Eastern one


PRESS OPINIONS


XI


and supports and illustrates his position by refer¬
ence to, and also using the clearcut and meaningful
nomenclature of that system of Hindu Philosophy
and Religion of which he is such a master.*’ — The
Hindu (Dr. Subramanya Aiyar).

‘‘So ably indicates the basic principles of Indian
civilization and repudiates the baseless charges
with such commendable enthusiasm and righteous
indignation as could have befitted one who by birth
has inherited the culture—deserves study by every
sincere believer in Indian thought. An admirable
book —crushing reply—from start to finish shows
that the author has a masterly and sympathetic
grasp of the whole situation and he who goes
through it will find himself in touch with the
essentials of Indian civilization.”— Prabuddha
Bharata .

'*Sir John Woodroffe has done well to expose the
fallacies underlying certain old time attacks recent¬
ly reiterated —is deeply imbued with the spirit of
Shakta Vedantism, and it is from this point of view
that he defends Indian civilization. In a very fine
chapter Sir John Woodroffe exhibits the various
opinions held about India and her civilization.”

— Servant of India (Professor R. D. Ranade)

‘‘Contains high intellectual qualities with freedom
from, prejudice or nonsense of any kind —the best
informed work on the subject written by one not a
Hindu.”— United India and Native States .

“ The book demands the close attention of every


PRESS OPINIONS


• •

11X

Indian who is interested in the future of his coun¬
try. It is an urgent invitation to us to appreciate
better both this sacred trust and the near peril
which besets it, and to stand firm and faithful in
the hour of ordeal. The author develops his theory
with great skill and much quiet depth and the
essays are strewn throughout with acute and
penetrating observations expressed with a lucid
solidity which tempts one constantly to quotation.”
— Ary a.

“Is throughout thought-provoking and replete
with interesting passages. But those on whom Sir
John’s eulogisms will drop like manna from
Heaven should also ponder on what (else) he has
to say. It would be well for India if instead of cul¬
tivating a blind racial vanity, for which Sir John’s
book will furnish ample material to the unthinking
bigot, we concentrate our attention on those other
lessons preached by him, for only by so doing wo
would make a right use of the truths it contains.”
—Modern Review .

“This noble work is a trumpet call to the Indians
to realise their greatness and distinctiveness and
to build the great future of Indiana loving and
intimate student of a great culture”—Hindu Message *

“ India owes a deep debt of gratitude to Sir John
Woodroffe for this timely volume in defence of
Indian culture —certain social aspects have been so
satisfactorily discussed and defended by this erudite
defender of our civilization that if the Indian social


PRESS OPINIONS


Xlll


reformer would care to read and think over them,
much of his rancour towards orthodoxy will prove
baseless. India’s greatest civilization is misunder¬
stood by many intellectual imps both foreign
and indigenous. It is a consolation to find that
great minds* Indian or foreign, can realise it
so well as in the case of Sir John’s. Knowledge
of the inner capability of the Ego teaches but
on3 kind of patriotism which is of course universal
and not national. It is as silly to hug the degenera¬
tes of our own nationality as to hate the great
souls of the other continents. But to stand for
their rights when oppressed is the privilege of every
right thinking man and words fail us in thanking Sir
John for his humane duty ; may they be ever
m o re. ”— Mahratta.

“ Sir John writes profoundly of the Hindu
religion and culture of which he is an ardent
admirer and his defence of Indian civilization is
informed with a glowing enthusiasm. He finds it
easy to confound the rationalist Mr. Archer. The
book will not please every Christian that reads it.
But no occidental student of Indian politics should
miss the reading, for it explains much in the Hindu
character and point of view that before was obscure
and incomprehensible. The Author believes that
the ancient Hindu culture which has persisted
throughout the ages, is the best for India and he is
fearful lest it be lost in the political maelstrom
which will follow the war”— Capital .


XIV


PRESS OPINIONS


Great erudition—sturdy champion of Sanatana
Dharma .— Indian Daily News .

“ Most effective and crushing rejoinder—the
work of a distinguished scholar and deep thinker—
truly merits a very wide circulation in this country.
It is a profoundly philosophic study ofthe subject.’*
— Hindus than Review.

“ The constitution of a politically dependent
people can never appear to advantage because it is
the interest of the politically dominant people to
discredit everything belonging to the subject race
as inferior. The Author has been actuated by a
strict regard for truth and a desire for the establish¬
ment of true Dharma. He has not spared from
criticism what is mean, calculating, vulgar, in¬
human in his own countrymen, nor has he minced
words in condemning what is low or servile or
selfish or imitative in Indians of to-day. Actuated
by the highest aims, he has really given a most
remarkable and convincing book on a difficult and
much-abused theme.” — Bombay Chronicle .

“ Ably written defence of Hindu civilization by

a profound scholar.It would have been better if

he had entered as much an emphatic protest against
the prevailing abuses of Hindu society as he has
taken care to define its virtues and ideals.”—
Everyman's Review.

“ It is rather unusual to find among the British
members of the Indian Judiciary an apologist for
the claims of the Neo-Hindu revivalists and their


PRESS OPINIONS


xv


allies the Extreme Nationalists. It is iri this role
that we find Sir John Woodroffe figuring as a sort
of modern Saul among the prophets —much of the
book is occupied with an unworthy attack on
Western and particularly Christian civilization.” —
Madras Mail .

“ From keen irritation and annoyance.we

passed to a feeling of contempt touched by a sorry
sense of amusement that the Absolute (or the Spirit
or whatever else the Author wishes to call it) should
indulge in the bad joke of this conflict... We consider
both Mr. Archer and Sir John Woodroffe in this
episode a nuisance...There is an absence of clear¬
ness even of logic... A person who presents such a
position as this is not really and truly the friend of
India.”— The Indian Philosophical Review [Professor A,
Widgery).

'* Rechauffe* of more or less familiar arguments —
without the illumination of any new thought-
vague, obscure—illogical antithesis and loose and
disingenuous assertions - Extravagant abstraction
—cannot be exempted from the charge of bias. His
interpretation of the West suggests that with all
his metaphysical abstractions he is unable to dis¬
tinguish form from reality— Vapourising, nebulous.
The aspect of these essays is when not obscure, fami¬
liar ; their style is provocative without being very
stimulating. The confusion of issues, the multipli¬
cation of sketchy extracts without context, the
breach of simple rules of logic and a running speech


XVi PBESS OPINIONS

that gives no reason for the division into Chapters
make altogether a book which is very hard to read
and still harder to remember when read.”

— Englishman .

“ Sir John Woodroffe is a guide whom the reader
may follow with confidence. He has lived many
years in India and has shown himself to be in real
sympathy with the spirit of the East; on the other
hand he has not lost touch with the ideals of his
own people, nor been blinded by the essential beauty
of Indian tradition so as to be unaware of actual
present defects ;nor does he forget that those who
write against or in praise of India must do so with
exactness, discrimination, and the latter with the
avoidance of mere puffing general statements. He
is definite and balanced and gives one the impres¬
sion of being thoroughly reliable .”—Theosophist
C A de L),

“ I admire the spirit of absolute fairness with
which Sir John Woodroffe has approached the task
— should be studied carefully by every Indian who
aspires to lead the people and to mould the aspira¬
tions of his countrymen ”—Indian Review {Hon. Mr •
Justice Seshagiri Aiyar).

“ The whole book is replete with useful sug¬
gestions to every one who is interested in a
proper understanding of Indian culture-Sir John
who has devoted many years to the study of Indian
religion and who brings to his task a judicial frame
of mind and abundant sympathy has no difficulty


PRESS OPINIONS xvii

in proving the utter hollowness of Mr. Archer’s con¬
clusions.”— Vedanta Kesharu

“ We have not seen any one who loves Bharata
as Sir John Woodroffe does. . His pre-eminence
consists in this that he has said that the service
(Seva) of Bharata is the service of Shri Bhagavan.”
Utsava (R.0.M.)

“ Sir John Woodroffe rightly earned the gratitude of
the people by his recent vigorous repudiation of the many
unjust aspersions made on India and the Indians by a
foreign critic.” (Hon. Justice Sir Abdur Rahim in his
Convocation Address (1919) to the Mysore University.)

By the same Author

BHARATA SHAKT1

COLLECTION OF ADDRESSES ON INDIAN
, CULTURE.

“The thoughtful savings of an honest foreigner*
a true Muni or ** Freethinker” as he himself inter¬
prets the Hindu terms.ought to be in the hands

of every Indian. It would give him thought and
self respect. The Christian Missionary and the
Christian Orientalist are the two great factors of
Indian denationalisation. We fight the third factor
the politician more or less successfully. We have
fought the Missionary and defeated him generally
but the scars of his early attacks we are unconsci¬
ously bearing as acceptable badges.Thus when

we run down—we are unwittingly showing our-


xviii


PRESS OPINIONS


selves as Chelas of the mediocrity of Europe. Like
a living organism we must cast off the foreign matter
trying to bore a home into our intellectual system.
Sir John does not spare the Indian mind in its
analysis. He has very ably shown that our so often
professed Vairagya is more often our incapacity and
sometimes philosophic confusion. The little book
is one of those productions which would go to make
a new age in this country. It is a protest against
cultural suicide of a civilization designed by its past
to live for ever.” — Modern Tleview.

“ Sir John Woodroffe rarely says anything which
has not an element of originality in it. He makes
a powerful plea against the cultural conquest of
this country by the nations of the West...a vigor¬
ous plea which we commend to the notice of every
true born Indian. Sir John’s sympathy is bold and
fearless as his scholarship is deep and erudite —he
has a clear and perspective view of our culture.”—
Amrita Bazar Patrika.

" The whole of the booklet is studded with shining
gems of thought and thrilling insight into truth...this
sterling faith in the profound individuality of India*
in the glorious future which She is bound to work
out for Herself, in the great mission She is to fulfil
in the world, animates every word spoken in the
addresses compiled in this book. We cannot, in
fact, overestimate the necessity of every student of
India, of every worker in Her cause, furnishing
himself with a copy of this compilation and it is


PRESS OPINIONS


XIX


our ardent wish that the great exponent of the
wonderful Tantrik lore of India would more often
make time to come forward, as in these addresses,
to contribute his weighty ideas to the keen intellec¬
tual struggle going on in our country round practi¬
cal problems of re-organising our life and thought.”
—Prabuddha Bharat a.

“ Inspiring title—he has what is not given to
many, understood the soul of India. He is a thorough
sympathiser with Indian aspirations and has dwelt
upon the real aim and purpose of our efforts. Ought
to be read by every patriotic Indian. He will then
have a clear vision and feel a new strength in his
onward struggle .”—New India .

“Each of these papers is overflowing with thought¬
fulness and desire to do good to Bharata. We ask
every English educated man to read it. It will give
us reverence for our natural culture and will save
us from the thoughtless spirit of imitation.”

“ Politically India is dead, this is bad enough but
if cultural conquest follows the political then She
will be truly dead. Is India to be a mere name and
Her culture assigned to the cold room of the Orien¬
tal scholar, or is She to be a living form ?” Sir
John Woodroffe takes up the question with as much
enthusiasm as the youngest Nationalist amongst
us. His answer is one of courage and hope,...but
Sir John is not blind to the difficulties.”— Search¬
light.


THE SEED OF RACE

An Essay on Indian Education. Price Re* 1.

BY SIR JOHN WOODROFFE
OPINIONS.

“ There is much in this little essay with which the
student of India cannot but heartily agree.”

—Asiaiic Review .

“Of immense value...what is Sangskara, the Racial
coul, the author as one who has dived deep into Indian
Philosophy fully discusses in detail...this is the right
view of Indian Education .”—Searchlight — Patna.

All who seek knowledge as to the essentials of
Indian education should possess and study carefully a
copy of this book. — India,

“ Readers of 1 Is India Civilized * will realise how well
qualified the author is to offer an opinion on the mainte¬
nance of racial culture. His answer is sufficient to refute
the contention of his critics that his love for the old
and beautiful in Indian Culture has made his outlook
reactionary.” — Theosophist de L.),


Published by GANESH & Co., MADRAS.


La! Bahadur Shastrl National Academy of Administration Librar
MUSSOORIE )Oo6 &°


Iff rTTfl^ WTfaff SRrff | I

This book is to be returned on the date last stamped


Date

Borrower's

No.

Date

1 ^Sjn^Fff
! tr^ifT

Borrowers

No.


j


i i


i ;

j |


1


- - -


1


Gi. 181.4
WOOC .1


/ oo6 Sr°


SRTfccT SWT
ACC. No.?

^ swt 11A sswrs.

Class No..w^^. Book No.

C f'

Author....! Jnaux.o. f. .,. ..,i xr...JLflhn..


rrrVrra


131-4


Ig&MM)


Woo LIBRARY

£,.\. LAL BAHADUR SHA8TRI

National Academy of Administration

MUSSOORIE


Accession Na. _ /°°^ ^

1. Books are Issued for 15 days only but
may have to be recalled earlier if urgen¬
tly required.

2. An over-due charge of 25 Paise per day
per volume will be charged.

3. Books may be renewed on request, at
the discretion of the Librarian.

4. Periodicals, Rare and Refrence books
may not be issued and may be con¬
sulted only in the Library.

5. Books lost, defaced or injured In any
way shall have to be replaced or its
double price shall be paid by the
borrower.
