The n-Rays (Robert W. Wood, 1904)
=================================
Robert W. Wood — Nature, September 29, 1904. Public domain. Extracted from the issue scan via Internet Archive (paper-doi-10_1038_070530a0).

THE N-RAYS.

The inability of a large number of skilful experimental
physicists to obtain any evidence whatever of the existence
of the n-rays, and the continued publication of papers
announcing new and still more remarkable properties of the
rays, prompted me to pay a visit to one of the laboratories
in which the apparently peculiar conditions necessary for
the manifestation of this most elusive form of radiation
appear to exist. I went, I must confess, in a doubting
frame of mind, but with the hope that I might be convinced
of the' reality of the phenomena, the accounts of which
have been , read with so much scepticism.

After spending three hours or more in witnessing various
experiments, I am not only unable to report a single observ¬
ation which appeared to indicate the existence of the rays,
but left with a very firm conviction that the few experi¬
menters who have obtained positive results have been in
some way deluded.

A somewhat detailed report of the experiments which
were shown to me, together with my own observations, may
be of interest to the many physicists who have spent days
and weeks in fruitless efforts to repeat the remarkable ex¬
periments which have been described in the scientific journals
of the past year.

The first experiment which it was my privilege to witness
was the supposed brightening of a small electric spark when
the n-rays were concentrated on it by means of an aluminium
lens. The spark was placed behind a small screen of
ground glass to diffuse the light, the luminosity of which
was supposed to change when the hand was interposed
between the spark and the source of the n-rays.

It was claimed that this was most distinctly noticeable,
yet I was unable to detect the slightest change. This was
explained as due to a lack of sensitiveness of my eyes, and
to test the matter I suggested that the attempt be made to
announce the exact moments at which I introduced my hand
into the path of the rays, by observing the screen. In no
case was a correct answer given, the screen being announced
as bright and dark in alternation when my hand was held

NO. 1822, VOL. 70]


motionless in the path of the rays, while the fluctuations
observed when I moved my hand bore no relation whatever
to its movements.

I was shown a number of photographs which showed the
brightening of the image, and a plate was exposed in my
presence, but they were made, it seems to me, under con¬
ditions which admit of many sources of error. In the first
place, the brilliancy of the spark fluctuates all the time by
an amount which I estimated at 25 per cent., which alone
would make accurate work impossible.

Secondly, the two images (with n-rays and without) are
built of “ instalment exposures ” of five seconds each, the
plate holder being shifted back and forth by hand every
five seconds. It appears to me that it is quite possible that
the difference in the brilliancy of the images is due to a
cumulative favouring of the exposure of one of the images,
which may'be quite unconscious, but may be governed by
the previous knowledge of the disposition of the apparatus.
The claim is made that all accidents of this nature are made
impossible by changing the conditions, i.e. bv shifting the
positions of the screens; but it must be remembered that
the experimenter is aware of the change, and may be un¬
consciously influenced to hold the plate holder a fraction of
a second longer on one side than on the other. I feel very
sure that if a series of experiments were made jointly in
this laboratory by the originator of the photographic ex¬
periments and Profs. Rubens and Lummer, whose failure
to repeat them is well known, the source of the error would
be found.

I was next shown the experiment of the deviation of the
rays by an aluminium prism. The aluminium lens was re¬
moved, and a screen of wet cardboard furnished with a
vertical slit about 3 'mm. wide put in its place. In front of
the slit stood the prism, which was supposed not only to
bend the sheet of rays, but to spread it out into a spectrum.
The positions of the deviated rays were located by a narrow
vertical line of phosphorescent paint, perhaps 0-5 mm. wide,
on a piece of dry cardboard, which was moved along by
means of a small dividing engine. It was claimed that a
movement of the screw corresponding to a motion of less
than o-i of a millimetre was sufficient to cause the
! phosphorescent line to change in luminosity when it was
moved across the n-ray spectrum, and this with a slit 2 or
3 mm, wide. I expressed surprise that a ray bundle 3 mm.
in width could be split up into a spectrum with maxima and
minima less than 01 of a millimetre apart, and was told
that this was one of the inexplicable and astounding proper¬
ties of the rays. I was unable to see any change whatever
in the brilliancy of the phosphorescent line as I moved it
along, and I subsequently found that the removal of the
prism (we were in a dark room) did not seem to interfere
in any way with the location of the maxima and minima in
the deviated ( !) ray bundle.

I then suggested that an attempt be made to determine
by means of the phosphorescent screen whether I had placed
the prism with its refracting edge to the right or the left,
but neither the experimenter nor his assistant determined
the position correctly in a single case (three trials were
made). This failure was attributed to fatigue.

I was next shown an experiment of a different nature.
A small screen on which a number of circles had been painted
with luminous paint was placed on the table in the dark
room. The approach of a large steel file was supposed to
alter the appearance of the spots, causing them to appear
more distinct and less nebulous. I could see no change
myself, though the phenomenon was described as open to no
question, the change being very marked. Holding the file
behind my back, I moved my arm slightly towards and
away from the screen. The same changes were described
by my colleague. A clock face in a dimly lighted room
was believed to become much more distinct and brighter
when the file was held before the eyes, owing to some
peculiar effect which the rays emitted by the file exerted
on the retina. I was unable to see the slightest change,
though my colleague said that he could see the hands dis¬
tinctly when he held the file near his eyes, while they were
quite invisible when the file was removed. The room was
j dimly lighted by a gas jet turned down low, which made
! blank experiments impossible. My colleague could see the
change just as well when I held the file before his face, and
the substitution of a piece of wood of the same size and


© 1904 Nature Publishing Group


September 29, 1904]


NA TURE


53 i


shape as the file in no way interfered with the experiment.
The substitution was of course unknown to the observer.

I am obliged to confess that I left the laboratory with a
distinct feeling of depression, not only having failed to see
a single experiment of a convincing nature, but with the
almost certain conviction that all the changes in the
luminosity or distinctness of sparks and phosphorescent
screens (which furnish the only evidence of n-rays) are
purely imaginary. It seems strange that after a year’s work
on the subject not a single experiment has been devised
which can in any wav convince a critical observer that the
rays exist at all. To be sure the photographs are offered
as an objective proof of the effect of the rays upon the
luminosity of the spark. The spark, however, varies greatly
in intensity from moment to moment, and the manner in
which the exposures are made appears to me to be especially
favourable to the introduction of errors in the total time of
exposure which each image receives. I am unwilling also
to believe that a change of intensity which the average eye
cannot detect when the n-r ays are flashed “ on ” and “ off ”
will be brought out as distinctly in photographs as is the
case on the plates exhibited.

Experiments could be easily devised which would settle
the matter beyond all doubt; for example, the following:—-
Let two screens be prepared, one composed of two sheets
of thin aluminium with a few sheets of wet paper between,
the whole hermetically sealed with wax along the edges,
i he other screen to be exactly similar, containing, however,
dry paper.

Let a dozen or more photographs be taken with the two
screens, the person exposing the plates being ignorant of
which screen was used in each case. One of the screens
being opaque to the n-rays, the other transparent, the re¬
sulting photographs would tell the story. Two observers
would be required, one to change the screens and keep a
record of the one used in each case, the other to expose the
plates.

The same screen should be used for two or three successive
exposures, in one or more cases, and it should be made
impossible for the person exposing the plates to know in
any way whether a change had been made or not.

I feel very sure that a day spent on some such experiment
as this would show that the variations in the density on the
photographic plate had no connection with the screen used.

Why cannot the experimenters who obtain results with
n-rays and those who do not try a series of experiments
together, as was done only last year by Cremieu and Pender,
when doubt had been expressed about the reality of the
Rowland effect? R. W. Wood.

Brussels, September 22.
