The Serpent Power: The Secrets of Tantric and Shaktic Yoga (Arthur Avalon (Sir John Woodroffe), 1924; public domain)
===============================================================================
Woodroffe's translation and commentary on the Sat-cakra-nirupana — the book that introduced kundalini yoga to the West. Source: Internet Archive.

THE SERPENT POWER

BEING THE

.SJfAr-CHAKRA-NIEtJPAFA AND
PADUKi-PANGHAKA

' 2S

TWn WORKS ON LATA TOGA, TRANSLATED FROM THE
SANSKRIT, WITH INTRODUCTION AND OOMMENTART

BY _

ARTHUR AVALON

{Second Revised Editimi)

Publishers :

GANESH & Co., MADRAS
1924

PEEFACE

lx niy work “ Shakti and Sliakta ” I outlined for the first
time the principles of “ Kundali-Yoga ” so much discussed
in some rjuarters, but of which so little was known.

This work is a description and explanation in fuller
detail of the Serpent Power (Kundali Shakti), and the
Yoga effected through it, a subject occupying a pre-eminent
place in the Tantra Shastra. It consists of a translation of
two Sanskrit works published some years ago in the second
volume of ray series of Tantrik Texts, but hitherto un-
translated. The first, entitled ^Shatehakranirupana ”
(“Description of and Investigation into the Six Bodily
Centres”), has as its author the celebrated Tantrik
Purnananda Svami, a short note of whose life is given later.
It forms the sixth chapter of his extensive and unpublished
work on Tantrik Ritual entitled “ Shritattvachintamani ”.
This has been the subject of commentaries by among others
Shangkara and Vishvanatha cited in Volume II of the
Tantrik Texts, and used in the making of the present trans-
lation. The commentary here translated from the Sanskrit
is by Kalicharana.

The second text, called “ Paduka-Panchaka ” (“ Fivefold
Footstool of the Guru ”), deals with one of the Lotuses
described in the larger work. To it is appended a transla-
tion from the Sanskrit of a commentary by Kalicharana.
To the ti’anslation of both works I have added some further
explanatory notes of my own. As the works translated are

THE SIX CENTBES AND THE SERPENT POWEli

of a higlilj recondite character, and by themselves un-
intelligible to the English reader, I have prefaced the
translation by a general Introduction in which I have
endeavoured to give (within the limits both of a work of
this kind and my knowledge) a description and explanation
of this form of Yoga. I have also included some plates of
the Centres, which have been drawn and painted according
to the description of them as given in the first of these
Sanskrit Texts.

It has not been possible in the Introduction to do more
than give a general and summary statement of the principles
upon which Yoga, and this particular form of it, rests.
Those who wish to pursue the subject in greater detail are
referred to my other published hooks on the Tanti’a Shastra.
In Principles of Tantra will be found general Introduc-
tions to the Shastra and (in connection with the present
subject) valuable chapters on Shakti and Mantras. In my
recent work, /S/ifl/Lfi and SlidTcta (the second edition of
which is as I write reprinting), I have shortly summarised
the teaching of the Shakta Tantras and their rituals. In
my Studies in the Mantra Shastra, the first three parts
of which have been reprinted from the “ Vedanta Kesari,”
in which they first appeared, will be found more detailed
descriptions of snob technical terms as Tattva, Causal
Shaktis, Kala, Nada, Bindu, and so forth, which are referred
to in the present book. Other works published by me on
the Tantra, including the “ Wave of Bliss,” will be found
in the page of advertisements.

The following account of Purnananda, the celebrated
Tantrika Sadhaka of Bengal, and author of the “ Shat-
chakranirupana,” has been collected from the descendants
of his eldest son, two of whom are connected with the work
of the Varendra Research Society, Rajshahi, to whose
Director, Sj. Akshaya Kumara Maitra, and Secretary,

PREFACE vii

Sj. Radha Govinda Baisak, I am indebted for the following
details :

Pm’nananda was a Rahri Brahmana of the Kashyapa
Gotra, whose ancestors belonged to the village of Pakrashi,
which has not as yet been indentified. His seventh ancestor
Anantacharya is said to have migrated from Baranagara,
in the district of Murshidabad, to Kaitali, in the district of
Mymensingh. In his family were born two celebrated
Tantrika Sadhakas — namely, Sarvananda and Purnananda.
The descendants of Sarvananda reside at Mehar, while
those of Purnananda reside mostly in the district of
Mymensingh. Little is known about the worldly life of
Purnananda, except that he bore the name of Jagadananda,
and copied a manuscript of the Vishnupuranam in the
Shaka year 1448-a.d. 1526. This manuscript, now in the
possession of one of his descendants named Pandit Hari
Kishore Bhattacharya, of Kaitali, is still in a fair state of
preservation. It was brought for inspection by Pandit
Satis Chandra Siddhantabhushana of the Varendra Research
Society. The colophon states that Jagadananda Sharma
wrote the Purana in the Shaka year 1448.

This Jagadananda assumed the name of Purnananda
when he obtained his Diksha (Initiation) from Brahmananda
■*" and went to Kamarupa (Assam), in which province he is
believed to have obtained his “ Siddhi ” or state of spiritual
perfection in the Ashrama, which still gOes by the name of
Vash^shthashrama, situated at a distance of about seven
miles from the town of Gauhati (Assam). Purnananda
never returned home, but led the life of a Paramahangsa
and compiled several Tantrika works, of which the Shri-
tattvachintamani, composed in the Shaka year 1499-a.d. 1577,
Shyamarahasya, Shaktakrama, Tattvanandatarangini, and
Yogasara are known. His commentary on the Kali-
kakarakuta hymn is well known. The Shatchakranirupana,

Tiii THE SIX CENTRES ANO THE SERPENT POWER

here translated, is not, however an independent work, but
a part of the sixth Patala of the ShritattvachintHmanl.
According to a genealogical table of the family of this
Tantrika Aeharya and Viraohara Sadhaka, given by one of
his descendants, Purnananda is removed from his present
descendants by about ten generations.

This work has been on hand some five years, but both
the difficulties of the subject and those created by the war
have delayed its publication. I had hoped to include some
other plates of original paintings and drawings in ^ my
possession bearing on the subject, but pi’esent conditions
do not allow of this, and I have therefore thought it better
tn nnblish the book as it stands rather than risk further

Arthur Avalon

Ranchi

September 20, 1918

NOTE TO SECOND EDITION

CoNSiDEEiNti the recondite nature of the subject, the
first edition published by Messrs. Luzac & Co., London, has
had a more rapid sale than was expected and a call for
a second edition has enabled me to revise the whole work
and to make several corrections and additions both in the
Introduction and Text. To this second edition has been
added the Sanskrit Text of the works here translated which
formerly appeared as Vol. 2 of the Tantrik Texts and which
has since gone out of print. This edition also contains in
addition to the original coloured plates of the Chakras, a
number of half-tone plates taken from Life, showing some
positions in Kundalini Yoga.

The Introduction deals in a general way with the
subject-matter of the Texts translated. I take however this
opportunity to say again that it has not been possible to
give here a full explanation of such matters and refer my
reader to my other works dealing with the Tantras and
their Ritual, namely, Principles of Tantra, a work of peculiar
value in that it is a translation of the work of a Bengali
Pandit himself a Shakta unacquainted with the English
language but an inheritor of the old traditions ; as also the
second edition of my SkaJdi and ShdJda dealing with
ritual, published since the date of my first Preface. The
“ Studies in Mantra Shastra ” referred to therein has also
recently been published under the title of “Garland of
Letters All such technical terms as Bindu, Nada and

X THB SIX GJENTEBS AXl> THE SEE-PEKT POWER

the like used iti the works translated have been fully
-explained therein as also the general principles of Mantra.
It is necessary also to know with accuracy the exact
meaning of the terms Consciousness, Mind, Life, Matter and
so forth as used in Vedanta and these have been given in
the series of little works under the general caption “ I he
World as Power It is not possible to understand the
rationale of Yoga without an accurate understanding of
these fundamental terms. It has been rightly ^aic
that “ the practical portion of all L oga, specially o aja
Yoga, is concerned with mental practices. It is therefore
absolutely necessary that the student of Yoga^should
know what his mind is and how it works” io'/'b by

Swami Dayanand, p. 9). I have given a short account ot
Sarvananda and his Me w the Hindust'han Revmi-. Other
works by me on the Shastra are noted in the advertise-
ment sheet at the end of the book.

Les Andelys, Eube
October, 1922

A. Avalon

We pray to the Paradevata united with Shiva, whose sub-
stance is the pure nectar of bliss, red like unto vermilion, the
young flower of the hibiscus, and the sunset sky ; who, having
cleft Her way through the mass of sound issuing from the clashing
and the dashing of the two winds in the midst of Sus/iumna, rises
to that brilliant Energy which glitters with the lustre of ten
million lightnings. May She, Kmidalini, who quickly goes to and
returns from Shiva, grant us the fruit of Yoga ! She being awak-
ened is the Cow of Plenty to Kaulas, and the Kalpa Creeper
of all things desired for those who worship Her /’ — Sharadd
TilaJca, xxv, 70.

CONTENTS

iNTEOnUCTION . . . ...

PASES

1—320

I.

Introductory .....

1

II.

Consciousness and Its Power .

24

III.

Embodied Consciousness . ,

49

IV.

The Garland of Letters . .

84

V.

The Centres or Lotuses . .

105

VI.

Practice . . . ' . . . .

184

VII.

Theoretical Bases of the Yoga

261

Text (Translation) . * . , . , ,

1—184

Description of the Six Centres (Shatchakra-
nirupana) . . . . . . .

1

The Fivefold Footstool (PMukapanchaka) .

165

Test (Sanskrit) 1 — 154

ILLUSTRATIONS

PLATE

PAGE

1.

The Centres or Lotuses . .

. . Frontispiece

II.

MulMhara Chakra . • .

{Introduction)

. 117

III.

Manipuraka „ . .

99

. 144

IV.

Svadhishthana „ , . .

99

. 233

V.

Anahata ,, * . .

{Translation)

1

VI.

Visuddha .

99

. 61

VII.

Ajna „ . . .

99

. 76

VIII.

Sahasrara ,,

99

. 93

YOGASANA ILLUSTRATIONS

IX.

Mahabedha according to Hatha-

yogapradipika and Yamala ,

99

. 96

X.

Padmasana with Lauliki .

99

. 104

XI.

Uddiyana Bandha in Siddhasana

— 1st Stage ....

■' ' 99

. 112

XII.

Uddiyana Bandha in Siddhasana

— 2nd Stage ....

99

. 120

XIII.

Mahabandha ....

99

. 128

XIV.

Mulabandha in Siddhasana

99

. 136

XV.

Yoni Mudra „ ,,

99

. 144

XVI.

Mahamudra ....

■ "99

. 152

XVII.

Baddha-Padmasana .

99 .

. 160

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE
SERPENT POWER

INTRODUCTION

The two Sanskrit works here translated — Shatchakrani-
rupana (“Description of the Six Centres, or Chakras”)
and Paduka Panchaka (“ Fivefold Footstool ”), deal with a
particular form of Tantrik Yoga named Kundali Yoga, or,
as some works call it, Bhiitashnddhi. These names refer
to the Kundalini Shakti, or Supreme Power in the human
body by the arousing of which the Yoga is achieved, and
to the purification of the elements of the body (Bhuta-
shuddhi) which takes place upon that event. This Yoga is
effected by a process technically known as Shatchakrabheda,
or piercing of the six Centres or Regions (Chakra) or
Lotuses (Padma) of the body (which the work describes)
by the agency of Kundalini Shakti, which, in order to give
it an English name, I have here called the Serpent Power.^
Kundala means coiled. This Power is the Goddess (Devi)
Kundalini, or that which is coiled ; for Her form is that of
a coiled and sleeping serpent in the lowest bodily centre, at
the base of the spinal column, until by the means described
She is aroused in that Yoga which is named after Her.
Kundalini is the Divine Cosmic Energy in bodies {v. post).

1 One of the names of this Devi is Bhnjan^, or the Serpent.

• • ' •' .

2 THE SIX OENTEES AND THE SERPENT POWER

The Saptabhuroi, or seven regions (Loka),* are, as popular-
ly understood, an exoteric presentment of the inner Tuntrik
teaching regarding the seven centres."

The Yoga is called Tantrik for a twofold reason. It
will be found mentioned in the \oga Upanishads whicli
refer to the Oentres, or Chakras, and in some of the I iu“ina.s.
The treatises on Hathajoga also deal with the subject.
We find even similar notions in systems other than the
Indian, from which possibly in some cases they have been
borrowed. Thus, in the Risala-i-ha{[-nnma, by Prince
Mahomed Dara Shikoh,-^ a description is given of the three
centres “Mother of Brain,” or “ Spherical heart ” (Dil-i-
muddawar) ; the “ Cedar heart ” (Bil-i-sanowbari) ; and
the Dil-i-nilofari, or “ Lily heart Other references may
be found in the works of the Mahomedan Sufis. So some
of the Sufi fraternities (as the Naqshbandi) are saitl = to
have devised, or rather borrowed, from the Indian Yogis ®
the Kundalini method as a means to realisation.^ I am
told that correspondences are discoverable between the
Indian (Asiatic) Shastra and the American-Indian Maya

1 The seven “ worlds ” Bhuh, Bhnvab, Svah, Mahah, Jana, Tapah,
Satya. See my “Wave of Bliss ” (Comm, to V. 35). Lofeaswwhat

Sir© S66Ti '“""’ii'fast'fc IS,

Karmai in tli© form of particular re-birtla. SatjtoaiMiaa
Isba Up.,’’ Mantra 2. See p. 258.

2 That is, the six Chakras and the upper cerebral centre, or Sahas-
rara. As to Upanishads and Puranas, see post

s « The Compass of Truth.” The author was the eldest son of the
Emperor Shab-i-Jehan, and^ died in a.b. 1659. Its teaching is alleged
to he that of the secret doctrine of the “ Apostle of God

‘^Chapter I. on Alam-i-nasut : the physical plane, or hat the
Hindus call the Jagrat state. Ed. Rai Bahadur Srisha Chandra Vasu.

5 See “ The Development of Metaphysics in Persia ” hy Shaikh
Muhammad Iqbal, p. 110.

« Al-Biruni is said to have translated Patanjali’s work, as also the
Sangkhya Sutras, into Arabic at the beginning of the eleventh century.

The author cited, however, wsays : ‘‘ Such methods of contempla-
tion are quite unislamic in character, and the higher Subs do not attach
any importance to them.”

INTEODUCTION

Scripture of the Zirais called the Popul Vuh.^ My inform-
ant tells me that their “ air-tube ” is the Sushumna ; their
“ twofold air-tube ” the Nadis Ida and Pinggala. “ Hura-
kan,” or lightning, is Kundalini, and the centres are depicted
by animal glyphs. Similar notions have been reported to
me as being held in the secret teaching of other communities.
That the doctrine and practice should be widespread we
might expect if it has a foundation on fact. This form
of Yoga is, however, in particular associated with the
Tantras or xlgamas, firstly, because these Scriptures are
largely concerned therewith. In fact, such orderly descrip-
tions in practical full detail as have been written are to be
found chiefly in the Hathayoga works and Tantras which
are the manuals, not only of Hindu worship, but of its
occultism. Next, Yoga through action on the lowest centre
seems characteristic of the Tantrik system, the adepts of
which are the custodians of the practical knowledge where-
by the general directions in the books may be practically
applied. The system is of a Tantrik character also in
respect of its selection of the chief centre of consciousness.
Various people have in antiquity assigned to various parts
of the body the seat of the “ soul ” or life, such as the
blood, ^ the heart, and the breath. Generally the brain was
not so regarded. The Vaidik system posits the heart as
the chief centre of Consciousness — a relic of which notion
we also still preserve in such phrases as “ take it to heart ”
and to “ learn by heart ”. Sadhaka, which is one of the
five functions of Pitta,® and which is situated in the heart,
indirectly assists in the performance of cognitive functions

1 A translation was, I am told, began and not finished by the
occultist James Pryse in Lucifer, the old Theosopbical iournal, which I
have not seen.

- Of. the Biblical saying, “ The blood is the life

3 See p. 12 of the Introduction to the third volume of my Tantrik
Texts (Prapanchasara Tantra). ■ ‘ ^

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

by keeping up tbe rhythmic cardiac contractions, and it
has been suggested* that it was perhaps this view of the
heart’s construction which predisposed Indian physiologists
to hold it to be the seat of cognition. According to the
Tantras, however, the chief centres of consciousness are to
be found in the Chakras of the cerebro-spinal system and
in the upper brain (Sahasrara), which they describe, though
the heart is also recognised as a seat of the Jiviltma, or
embodied spirit, in its aspect as vital principle or Prana.*
It is for tbe reasons mentioned that the first verse of the
Shatchakranirupana here translated speaks of the Yoga
which is to be achieved “ according to the Tantras ” (Tantru-
nusarena) — that is, as Kalicharana its Commentator says,
“ following the authority of the Tantras”.

Recently some attention has been given to tbe subject
in Western literature of an occult kind. Generally its
authors and others have purported to give what they
understood to be the Hindu theory of the matter, but
with considerable inaccuracies. These are not limited to
works of the character mentioned. Thus, to take but
two instances of these respective classes, we find in a
well-known Sanskrit dictionary ® that the Chakras are
defined to be circles or depressions (sic) of the body for
mystical or cHromantic purposes,” and tbeir location has
in almost every particular been wrongly given. The
Muladhara is inaccurately described as being “ above the

1 Kaviraja Knnjalala Bhishagratna in his edition of the Sushruta
Sanghita. Another explanation, however, may be given — namelj*, tliat
during man’s history the importance of the varions perceptive centres
has in fact varied.

* According to some Indian views, the brain is the centre of the
mind and senses, and the heart that of life. Oharaka says that the
heart is the root from which spring all other parts of the body, and is
the centre of some of the functions or oi^ans. According to Sushrata,
the heart is the seat of sensations.

5 Professor Monier Williams’ Sanskrit Dictionary, sub voce
“ Chakra

INrRODOOTION

5.

pubis J!^or is the Svadhishthana the umbilical region.
Anabata is not the root of the nose, but is the spinal
centre in the region of the heart ; Vishuddha is not “ the
hollow between the frontal sinuses,” but is the spinal
centre in the region of the throat. Ajna is not the-
fontanelle or union of the coronal and sagittal sutures,-
which are said to be the Brahmarandhra,^ but is in the
position allotted to the third eye, or J nanachakshus..
Others, aToiding such gross errors, are not free from-
lesser inaccuracies. Thus, an author who, I am informed,
had considerable knowledge of things occult, speaks of
the Sushumna as a “ force ” which “ cannot be energised
until Ida and Pingala have preceded it,” which “ passes
to the accompaniment of violent shock through each sec-
tion of the spinal marrow,” and which on the awakening-
of the sacral plexus passes along the spinal cord and
impinges on the brain, with the result that the neophyte
finds “ himself to be an unembodied soul alone in the
black abyss of empty space, struggling against dread and
terror unutterable ”. He also writes that the “ current
of Kundalini is called Nadi ; that the Sushumna extends-
as a nerve to the Brahmarandhra ; that the Tattvas are
seven in number ; and other matters which are inaccu-
rate. The Sushumna is not a “ force,” * and does not
pass and impinge upon anything, but is the outer of
the three Nadis, which form the conduit for the force
which is the arousing of the Devi called Kundalini, the
cosmic Power in bodies, which force is not itself a Nadi,,
but passes through the innermost, or Ohitrini Nadi, which
terminates at the twelve-petalled lotus below the Sahasrara,
from which ascent is. made to the Brahmarandhra. It

1 A term which is also employed to denote the Brahmanadi, in
that the latter is the passage whereby the Brahmarandhra in the-
cerebrum is attained.

* Except in the sense that everything is a manifestation of power.

THE SIX OBNtEES AND THE SERPENT POWER

would be easy to point out other mistakes in writers who
lia-v© referred to the subject. It wifi be more profitable if
I make as correct a statement as ray kiiowled.^m admits of
this mode of Yoga. But I desire to add thtit somt*
modern Indian writers have also helped to diffuse erroneous
notions about the Chakras by describing them from what
is merely a materialistic or physiological standpoint. To
do so is not merely to misrepresent the case, but to give it
away ; for physiology does not know the Chakras as they
«xist in themselves — that is, as centres of consciousness — ■
•and of the activity of Sfikshma Pranavayu or subtle vital
force ; though it does deal with the gross l>ody which is
related to them. Those who appeal to physiology only are
like to return non-snited.

We may here notice the account of a well-known
■“ Theosophical ” author ^ regarding what he calls the
Force centres” and the “ Serpent Fire,” of which he writes
that he has had personal experience. Though Mr. Leadbeater
also refers to the Yoga Shastra, it may perhaps exclude
•error if we here point out that his account does not profess
to be a representation of the teaching of the Indian Yogis
^ whose competence for their own Yoga the author
■somewhat disparages), but that it is put forward as the
Author’s own original explanation (fortified, as he con>
•ceives, by certain portions of Indian teaching) of the
peKSonal experience which (he writes) he himself has had.
This experience appears to consist in the conscious arousing
•of the “ Serpent Fire,” * with the enhanced “ astral ” and
mental vision which he believes has shown him what he

1 “ The Inner Life,” by G. W. Leadbeater, pp. 443-478, First
'Series.

s This and the following notes compare his and the Indian theorj".
The Devi or Goddess is called Bhiijangi or serpent becanse at the
lowest centre (Muladhara) she lies coiled ronnd tlie Linga.

Coiled ’’=afc rest. The Cosmic Power in bodies is here at rest;
Jwhen roused it is felt as intense heat.

INTBODUOTION

/

tells us.^ The centres, or Ghakras, of the human body are
by Mr. Leadbeater described to be vortices of “etheric”'
matter^ into which rush from the “ astral ” ® world, and at
right angles to the plane of the whirling disc, the sevenfold,
force of the Logos bringing “ divine life” into the physical
body. Though all these seven forces operate on all the-
centres, in each of them one form of the force is greatly
predominant. These inrushing forces are alleged to set
up on the surface of the “ etheric double ” ^ secondary
forces at right angles to themselves. The primary force
on entrance into the vortex radiates again in straight lines,,
but at right angles. The number of these radiations of
the primal force is said to determine the number of
“petals”® (as the Hindus call them) which the “ Lotus
or vortex exhibits. The secondary force rushing round
the vortex produces, it is said, the appearance of the petals-
of a flower, or, “perhaps more accurately, saucers or
shallow vases of wavy iridescent glass ”. In this way —
that is, by the supposition of an etheric vortex subject to
an incoming force of the Logos— both the “ Lotuse^,.”'
described in the Hindu books and the number of their
petals is accounted for by the author, who substitutes for
the Svadhishthana centre a six-petalled lotus at the spleen,*
and corrects the number of petals of the lotus in the head,,
which he says is not a thousand, as the books of this Yoga
say, “but exactly 960 ”.® The “ etheric ” centre which

1 Certain Siddhis or occult powers are acquired at each centre a&
the practitioner works his waj upwards.

2 The petals of the lotus are Pranashakti manifested by Pranayayu.
or vital force. Each lotus is a centre of a different form of “ matter
(Bhuta) there predominant. — A, A.

3 This is a Western term. — A. A.

4 Not mentioned in the account here given. — A. A.

5 See last note but three.

6 So little attention seems to be given to exactitude in this matter
that one of the letters is d.ropped in order to make 1,000 petals—that
is, 50 X 20 . Thousand ” is, here only symbolic of magnitude, — A.Ai

•8 THE SIX CENTRES ANP THE SERPENT I’OWEi!

keeps alive the physical vehicle is said to correspond with
■an “ astral ” centre of four dimensions, but between them
is a closely woven sheath or web composed of a sin*ijle
cotnpressed layer of physical atoms, which prevents a
premature opening np of communication between the planes.
There is a way, it is said, in which these may be properly
opened or developed so as to bring more through this
ohannel from the higher planes than ordinarily passes
thereby. Each of these “astral” centres has certain
functions : at the navel, a simple power of feeling ; at the
spleen, ** conscious travel ” in the astral body i at the heart,
•“ a power to comprehend and sympathise with the vibra-
tions of other astral entities ” ; at the throat, power of
HA5.,rmo- on the astral plane; between the eyebrows,

1 Certain Siddhis are said to be gained at each centre. Bot the
■top of the head is far beyond the ‘‘ astrai ” life. There Samadhi, or
flinion with the Supreme Consciousness, is bad. — A.A.

2 Parashabda which is Kundalini in Her aspect as cause of all
rsound has seven aspects from Kuridaii to Bindu.— A.A.

3 Kundali is Shabdabrahman or the “ Word (Vak) ’’ in bodies, and
is in Her own form (Svarupa) Pure Consciousness, and is all Powers
(Sarva-shaktimaya). Kundali is in fact the cosmic energy in bodies
ii.nd as such the cause of all and though manifesting as, is not confined

may be tlie quality iulierent in the astral centre which
corresponds to it. When vivified by the “Serpent
Fire ” they become gates of connection between the
physical and “ astral ” bodies. When the astral awakens
ing of these centres first took place, tliis was not
known to the physical consciousness. But the sense body
can now “ bs brought to share all these advantages
by repeating that process of awakening with the etheric
centres ”. This is done by the arousing through will-force
of the “ Serpent Fire,” which exists clothed in “ etheric
matter in the physical plane, and sleeps ^ in the correspond-
ing etheric centre — that at the base of the spine ”. When
this is done it vivifies the higher centres, with the effect
that it brings into the physical consciousness the powers
which were aroused by the development of their corres-
ponding astral centres. In short, one begins to live on the
astral plane, which is not altogether an advantage, were it
not that entry into the heaven world is said to be achieved
at the close of life on this plane.^ Thus, at the second
centre, one is conscious in the physical body “ of all kinds
of astral influences, vaguely feeling that some of them are
friendly and some hostile without in the least knowing
why ”. At the third centre one is enabled to remember
“ only partially ” vague astral journeys, with sometimes
half-remembrance of a blissful sensation of flying through
the air. At the fourth centre man is instinctly awai’e of the
joys and sorrows of others* sometimes reproducing in him-
self their physical aches and pains. At the arousing of the

1 Kundali is called the Serpent (Bhujangi), She sleeps in the
MCiladhara. As to what she is, see last note. She sleeps because she
is at rest. Then man’s consciousness is awake to the world, Her creation,
in w^hich She is immanent. When She awakes and Toga is completed
man sleeps to the world and enjoys divine experience.

^ The end of Kundali Yoga is beyond all Heaven worlds. JSTo
Yogi seeks “ Heaven ” but union with that which is the source of all
worlds. ’ .

INTRODUCTION

2

10 fHl' SiX CBKTEES AXJ) THK SERFEKT PO« EE

fifth centre be hears voices “ which make all kinds of sug-
gestions to him”. Sometimes he hears music “or other
less pleasant sounds Full development secures clair-
audience in the “ astral ” plane. The arousing of the sixth
centre secures results which are at first of a trivial charac-
ter, such as “ half seeing landscapes and clouds of colour,”
hut subsequently amount to clairvoyance. Here it is said
there is a power of magnification by means of an etheiic
flexible tube which resembles “ the microscopic suako on
the headdress of the Pharaohs ”. The power to expand
or control the eye of this “ microscopic snake ” is stated to
be the meaning of the statement, in ancient hook^, of the
capacity to make oneself large or small at will.* When the
pituitary body is brought into working order, it forms a
link with the astral vehicle, and when the Fire reaches the
sixth centre, and fully vivifies it, the voice of the “ Master
(which in this case means the higher self in its various
stages) is heard.^ The awakening of the seventh centre
enables one to leave the body in full consciousness.
“ When the fire has thus passed through all these centres in
a certain order (which varies for different types of people),
the consciousness becomes continuous up to the entry into
the heaven world ^ at the end of the life on the astral

plane.” .

Tliors soiQB r6S6niblatic8S betwsen tbis account aBu

the teaching of the Yoga Shastra, with which in a general
way the author cited appears to have some acquaintance,

1 According to the text translated, the sound of the Shabdabrah-
man is heard at the Anahata, or fourth centre.— A.A.

a There is no mention of such a “ snake The Siddhis Anima,
etc., do not depend on it. It is consciousness which identities itself with
the’small or the great.— A.A.

3 As the text here translated says, the Ajna is so called because
1 1 t.Vio /.nTOTnand of the Guru from above. — A. A.

INTEODOOTION

11

and which may have suggested to him some features of his
account. There are firstly seven centres, which with one
exception correspond with the Chakras described. The
author says that there are three other lower centres, but
that concenti’ation on them is full of danger. What these
are is not stated. There is no centre lower, that I am
aware of, than the Muladhara (as the name “ root-centre ”
itself implies), and the only centre near to it which is
excluded, in the above-mentioned account, is the Apas
Tattva centre, or Svadhishthana. Next there is the Force
“ the Serpent Fire,” which the Hindus call Kundalini,
in the lowest centre, the Miiladhara. Lastly, the effect
of the rousing of this force, which is accomplished by
will power (Yogabala),^ is said to exalt the physical
consciousness through the ascending planes to the
“heaven world”. To use the Hindu expression, the
object and aim of Shatchakrabheda is Yoga. This is
ultimately union with the Supreme Self or Paramatma ;
but it is obvious that, as the body in its natural
state is already, though unconsciously, in Yoga, otherwise
it would not exist, each conscious step upwards is Yoga,
and there are many stages of such before complete or
Kaivalya Mukti is attained. This and, indeed, many of the
preceding stages are far beyond the “ heaven world ” of
which the author speaks. Yogis are not concerned with
the “heaven world,” but seek to surpass it; otherwise they
are not Yogis at all. What, according to this theory,
manifested force apparently does is this : it enhances the
mental and moral qualities of the self-operator as they
existed at the time of its discovery. But if this be so, such
enhancement may be as little desirable as the original state.
Apart from the necessity for the possession of health and

1 With the aid of bodily purification, certain Asanas and Madras
(v, post),

\

12 THE SIX OBNTEES AND THE SEEI’ENT POWER

strength, the thought, will, and Tnorality, which it is pro-
posed to subject to its influence must he first purified and
strengthened before they are intensified by the vi%'ifying
influence of the aroused force. Furthei’, as J ha%’e else-
where pointed out,^ the Yogis say that tlie piercing of the
Brahmagranthi or “ knot ’’^sometimes involves considerable
pain, physical disorder, and even disease, as is not unlikely
to follow from concentration on such a centre as the navel
(Nabhipadma).

To use Hindu terms, the Siidhaka must be competent
(Adhikarl), a matter to be determined by his Guru, from
whom alone the actual method of Yoga can be learned.
The incidental dangers, however, stated by Mr. Leadbeattir
go beyond any mentioned to me by Indians tbera.selves,
who seem to be in general unaware of the subjeet of
“ phallic sorcery,” to which reference is made by Mr. Lead-
beater, who speaks of Schools of (apparently lYestern)
“ Black Magic ” which are said to use Kundalini for the
purpose of stimulating the sexual centre. Another author
says ; ® “ The mere dabbler in the pseudo-occult will only
degrade his intellect with the puerilities of psychism, be-
come the prey of the evil influence of the phantasmal world,
or ruin his soul by the foul practices of phallic sorcery — as
thousands of misguided people are doing even in this age.”
Is this so ? It is possible that perverse or misguided con-
centration on sexual and connected centres may have the
effect alluded to. And it may be that the Commentator
Lakshmidara alludes to this when he speaks of Cttara
Kaulas who arouse Kundalini in the Muladhara to satisfy
their desire for world-enjoyment and do not attempt to lead

1 In the first edition of my Mahanirvana Tantra, CXXIT.

2 There are three knots ” which have to be pierced or centime? where
the force of Maya is particularly strong.

^ ‘‘The Apocalypse Unsealed,’’ p. 62.

INTRODUCTION

13

11

Her upwards to the Highest Centre which is the object of
Yoga seeking super-worldly bliss. Of such, a Sanskrit verse
runs “they are the true prostitutes”. I have, however,
never heard Indians refer to this matter, probably because,
it does not belong to Yoga in its ordinary sense, as also by
reason of the antecedent discipline required of those who
would undertake this Yoga, the nature of their practice,
and the aim they have in view, such a possibility does not
come under consideration. The Indian who practises this
or any other kind of spiritual Yoga ordinarily does so not
on account of a curious interest in occultism or with a
desire to gain “ astral ” or similar experiences.’- His
attitude in this as in all other matters is essentially a religi-
ous one, based on a firm faith in Brahman (Sthiranishtha),
and inspired by a desire for union with It which is libera-
tion.

What is competency for Tantra (Tantrashastradhi-
kara) is described in the second chapter of the Gandharva
Tantra as follows : The aspirant must be intelligent
(Daksha), with senses controlled (Jitendriya), abstaining
from injury to all beings (Sarvahingsavinirmuktah), ever
doing good to all (Sarvapranihite ratah), pure (Shuchi) ; a
believer in Veda (Astika), whose faith and refuge is in
Brahman (Brahmishthah, Brahmavadi, Brahmi, Brahma-
parayana), and who is a non-dualist (Dvaitahina). “ Such
a one is competent in this Scripture, otherwise he is no
Sadhaka” (So’smin Shastredhikari syat tadanyatra na
sadhakah). With such an attitude it is possible that, as
pointed out by an Indian writer (Ch. VII ])ost ), con-
centration on the lower centres associated with the

1 Those who do practise magic of the kind mentioned -work only in
the lowest centre, have recourse to the Prayoga, which leads to Nayika
Siddhi, whereby commerce is had with female spirits and the like.
The process in this work described is one upon the path of liberation
and has nothing to do with sexual black magic.

THE SIX CENTHE8 AND THE SEUI’ENT I’OWER

passions may, so far from I’onsing, tjuiet them. It is ({iiite
possible, on the other hand, that another attitude, practice,
and purpose, may produce another result. I’o speak,
however, of concentration on the sextial CiuUiv i.s itself
misleading, for the Chakras are not in the gro.ss hotly, and
concentration is done upon the subtle centre, with its
presiding Consciousness, even though such centre's may
have ultimate relation with gross physical fuiiction.
Doubtless, also, there is a relationship and cun’espi>ndenco
between the Shaktis of the mental and sexual centres, atitl
the force of the latter, if directed upwards, extraordinarily
heightens all mental and physical functioning.’ In fact
ttose who are ” centred ” know how to make all their
forces converge upon the object of their will, and train anti
then use all such forces and neglect none. The experienced
followers of this method, however, as I have stated, allow
that this method is liable to be accompanied by certain
inconveniences or dangers, and it is therefore considered
inadvisable except for the fully competent (Adhikari).

There are, on the other hand, many substantial points
of difference between the account which has been sum-
marised and the theory which underlies the form pf Yoga
with which this work deals. The terminology and classi-
fication adopted by that account may be termed “ Theo-
sophical ” ; * and though it may be possible for those who
are familiar both with this and the Indian terminology to
establish points of correspondence between the two systems,

1 Mind, Breath and Sexual function are interconnected. The aim
of the Yogi is to carry “his seed high ” to be Crddhvaretas as it is
called. For this purpose the Vipaiuta Mudras are designed.

^ 1 am aware that the Theosophical Society has no official doctrine.
What I call “ Theosophical ” are the theories put forward by its leading
exponents and largely accepted by its members. I put the word in
inverted commas to denote doctrine so taught and held by this Society,
with which doctrines, Theosophy, in its general sense, is not necessarily
wholly identified.

INTBODUOTION

15

it must by no means be assumed that the connotation even in
such cases is always exactly the same. For though “ Theo-
sophical ” teaching is largely inspired by Indian ideas, the
meaning which it attributes to the Indian terms which it
•employs is not always that given to these terms by Indians
themselves. This is sometimes confusing and misleading,
a result which would have been avoided had the writers of
this school adopted in all cases their own nomenclature and
definitions.^ Though for the visualisation of our conceptions
the term “ planes ” is a convenient one, and may be so em-
ployed, the division by “ principles ” more nearly adumbrates
the truth. It is not easy to correlate with complete
accuracy the Indian and Theosophical theories as to man^s
principles. It has, however, been stated ® that the physical
body has two divisions, the “ dense ” and “ etheric ” body ;
that these correspond to the Annamaya and Pranamaya-
koshas, and that the “ astral ” body corresponds to the
Kamik or desire side of the Manomayakosha or 'mental
sheath. Assuming for argument the alleged correspondence,
then the "etheric centres ” or Chakras of Mr. Leadbeater’s
s^ccount appear to be centres of energy of the Prana-vayu
■or Vital Force. The lotuses are also this and centres of the
universal consciousness. Kundalini is the static form of
the creative energy in bodies which is the source of all
energies, including Prana. According to Mr. Leadbeater’s
theory, Kundalini is some force which is distinct from

1 Thus, the Theosophical Sanskritist Srisha Chandra Yasu,
in his “ Introduction to Yoga Philosophy,” calls the Linga Sharira
“ the etherial duplicate ” (p. 35). According to the ordinary

Indian use of that term the Linga Sharira is the subtle body — that
is, the Antahkarana and Indriyas — vehicled by the Tanmatras, or,
according to another account, the five Pranas. Elsewhere (p. 51) it is
called the “ Astral ” body, and some statements are made as to the
Chakras which are not in accordance with the texts with which I am
acquainted.

2 “Ancient Wisdom,” p. 176, by Mrs. A. Besant.

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SEHPEXT PDWKIf

Prana, understanding this term to mean vitality or the life-
principle, which on entrance into the body shows itself
in various manifestations of life which are the minor
Pranas, of which inspiration is culled hy the general
name of the force itself (Prana). Verses 10 and 11 .say
of Kundalim : “ It is She who maintains ad the being.s
(that is, jiva, jiviitraa) of the world by means of inspira-
tion and expiration.” She is thus the Prana Devata,
but, as She is (Comm., vv. 10 and 11) Srishti-.sthiti-
layatmika, all forces therefore are in Her. She is, in fact,
the Shabdabrahman or “Word” in bodies. I’he theory
discussed appears to diverge from that of the Yogis wlien
we consider the nature of the Chakras and the t|uestion
of their vivification. According to Mr. Leadbeater’s
account, the Chakras ai’e all vortices of “ etherio matter,”
apparently of the same kind and subject to the same
external influence of the inrushing sevenfold foi’ce of the
“ Logos ” but differing in this, that in each of the Chakras
one or other of their sevenfold forces is predominant.
Again, if, as has been stated, the astral body corresponds
with the ■ Manomayakosha, then the vivification of the
Chakras appears to be, according to Mr. Leadbeater, a
rousing of the Kamik side of the mental sheath. According
to the Hindu doctrine, these Chakras are differing centres-
of consciousness, vitality, and Tattvik energy. Each of the
five lower Chakras is the centre of energy of a gross
Tattva — that is, of that form of Tattvik activity or
Tanmatra which manifests the Mahabhuta or sensible
matter. The sixth is the centre of the subtle mental
Tattva, and the Sahasrara is not called a Chakra at all.
Nor, as stated, is the splenic centre included among the six
Chakras which are dealt with in this account.

In the Indian system the total number of the petals
corresponds with the number of the letters of the Sanskrit

INTEODDOTION'

17

Alphabet, ^ and the number of the petals of any specific
lotus is determined by the disposition of the subtile
“ nerves ” Nadis around it. These petals, further, bear
subtile sound-powers, and are fifty ^ in number, as are the
letters of the Sanskrit .Alphabet.

This work also describes certain things which are gained
by contemplation on each of the Chakras. Some of them
are of a general character, such as long life, freedom from
desire and sin, control of the senses, knowledge, power
of speech, and fame. Some of these and other qualities
are results common to concentration on more than one
Chakra. Others are stated in connection with the contem-
plation upon one centre only. Such statements seem to be
made, not necessarily with the intention of accurately
recording the specific result, if any, which follows upon
concentration upon a particular centre, but by way of praise
for increased self-control, or Stuti-vada ; as where it is said
in V. 21 that contemplation on the Nabhi-padma gains for
the Yogi power to destroy and create the world.

It is also said that mastery of the centres may produce
various Siddhis or powers in respect of the predominating
elements there. And this is, in fact, alleged.® Pandit
Ananta Shastri says : ® “We can meet with several persons
every day elbowing us in the streets or bazaars who in all
sincerity attempted to reach the highest plane of bliss, but
fell victims on the way to the illusions of the psychic world,
and stopped at one or the other of the six Chakras. They
are of varying degrees of attainment, and are seen to possess
some power which is not found even in the best intellectuals
of the ordinary run of mankind. That this school of

1 Which are sometimes given as 50 and sometimes as 51.

^ See Yogatattva Upanishad, where contemplation on the eai'th
centre secures mastery over earth, etc. At the same time it points-,
out that these “ pow’^ers ” are obstacles to liberation. , :

^ Anandalahari, p. 35*

.'ih.

If I
I'l jifl

aiW

*

* ■ ;4h||

, f; -N

I

THE SIX CENTRES AXU THE SEIiTKXr POWER

practical psychology was working very wi^ll in India at one
time is evident from these living instances aiot to speak of
the numberless treatises on the subject'l of men roaming
about in all parts of the country.” Tlie mere rousing of the
Serpent power does not, from the spiritual Yoga stand-
point, amount to much. Nothing, however, of real moment,
from the higher Yogis’ point of view, is achieved until the
Ayna Ghakra is reached. Here, again, it is said that the
Sadhaka whose Atma is nothing but a meditation on this
lotus ‘‘ becomes the creator, preserver, and destruyer, of
the three worlds”; and yet, as the commentator pennts
out (v. 34), “ This is but the highest Prashang-sa-vada or
Stutivada— that is, compliment — which in Sanskrit litera-
ture is as often void of reality as it is in our ordinm-y life.
Though much is here gained, it is not until the Tattva.s of
this centre are also absorbed, and complete knowledge * of
the Sahasrara is gained, that the Yogi attains that which is
both his aim and the motive of his labour, cessation from
rebirth which follows on the control and concentration of
the Chitta on the Shivasthanam, the Abode of Bliss. It is
not to be supposed that simply because the Serpent fire
has been aroused that one has thereby become a Yogi or
achieved the end of Yoga. There are other pointa of
difference which the reader will discover for himself, but
into which I do not enter, as my object in comparing the
two accounts has been to establish a general contrast
between tbis modern account and that of the Indian
schools. I may, however, add that the differences are not
only as to details. The style of thought differs in a way

1 Tbis, it is obvious, comes only after long effort, and following on
less complete experiences and results. According to Indian notions,
success (Siddbi) in Yoga may be tbe fruit of experiences of many
preceding lives. Kundali must be gradually raised from one centre to
another until sbe reaches tbe Lotus in tbe cerebrum. The length of
time required varies in tbe individual — it may be years ordinarily or in
exceptional eases months.

INTEODDOTION

19

"I

not easy shortly to describe, but which will be quickly
recognised b}^ those who have some familiarity with the
Indian Scriptures and mode of thought. The latter is ever
disposed to interpret all processes and their results from a
subjective standpoint, though for the purposes of Sadhana.
the objective aspect is not ignored. The Indian theory is
highly philosophical. Thus, to take but one instance,
whilst Mr. Leadbeater attributes the power of becoming
large or small at will (Anima and Mahima Siddhi) to a
flexible tube or “ microscopic snake ” in the forehead, the
Hindu says that all powers (Siddhi) are the attributes
(Aishvaryya) of the Lord Ishvara, or Creative Conscious-
ness, and that in the degree that the Jiva realises that
consciousness ^ he shares the powers inherent in the degree
of his attainment.

That which is the general characteristic of the Indian
systems, and that which constitiites their real profundity,
is the paramount importance attached to Gonsoiousness and
its states. It is these states which create, sustain, and
destroy, the worlds. Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva, are the
names for functions of the one Universal Consciousness
operating in ourselves. And whatever be the means
employed, it is the transformation of the “ lower ” into
higher ” states of consciousness which is the process and
fruit of Yoga and the cause of all its experiences. In this
and other matters, however, we must distinguish both
practice and experience from theory. A similar experience
may possibly be gained by various modes of practice, and
an experience may be in fact a true one, though the theory
which may be given to account for it is incorrect.

The following sections will enable the reader to pursue
the comparison for himself.

1 As this is by the Devi’s grace. She is called “ the giver of the
eight Siddbis” (Ishitvadyashtaaiddhida). See Trishati, 11.47. She
gives Aishvaryya. ■ : ' '

iii

iiiiiiiiiiiiiisi

'mmmmrn

W

20 THE SIX CENTRK8 AND THE SERl'ENT IWEIt

As regards practice, I am told that Knndalinl cannot
be roused except iu the lliiludhara am! by line juean.s here
indicated, though this maj' take phu*e l)y a<‘i‘idt'nt when
by chance a person has hit upon the necessary positions
and conditions, but not otherwise. Thus the story i.s told
of a man being found whose body was as cold as ii eorp.se,
though the top of the head was slightly warm. (This is
the state in Knndali Yoga Sainadhi.) He was ina.ssaged
with ghee (clarified bntter), when the head got grafhial-
ly warmer. The warmth deiscended to the neck, wh m
the whole body regained its beat with a rush. The
man came to consciousness, and then told the .story
of his condition. He said he had been going thn>ugh some
antics, imitating the posture of a Yogi, when suddenly
“ sleep ” had come over him. It was surmised that hi.s
breath must have stopped, and that, being in the right
position and conditions, he had unwittingly roused Kundali,
who had ascended to Her cerebral centre. Jfot, however,
being a Yogi, he could not bring her down again. This,
further, can only be done when the Nadis {v. post) are pure.
I told the Pandit (who gave me this story, who was learned
in this Yoga, and whose brother practised it,) of the case of
a European friend of mine who was not acquainted with
the Yoga processes here described, though he had read
something about Kundali in translations of Sanskrit works,
and who, nevertheless, believed be had roused Kundali by
meditative processes alone. In fact, as he wi’ote me, it was
useless for him as a European to go into the minutim of
Eastern Yoga, He, however, saw the “ nerves ” Ida and
Pingala (r. post), and the “ central fire ” with a trembling
aura of rosy light, and blue or azure light, and a 'svhite fire
which rose up into the brain and flamed out in a wdnged
radiance on either side of the head. Fire was seen flashing
from centre to centre with such rapidity that he could see

INTEODUOTION

21

little o£ the vision, and movements of forces were seen in
the bodies of others. The radiance or aura round Ida was
seen as moonlike— that is, palest azure— and Pingala red or
rather pale rosy opalescence. Kundali appeared in vision
as of intense golden-like white fire rather curled spirally.
Taking the centres, Sushumna, Ida, and Pingala, to be
symbolised by the Oaduceus of Mercury,^ the little ball at
the top of the rod was identified with the Sahasrara or
pineal gland,® and the wings as the flaming of auras on
each side of the centre when the fire strikes it. One night,
being abnormally free from the infection of bodily desires,
he felt the serpent uncoil, and it ran up, and he was “ in a
fountain of fire,” and felt, as he said, “ the flames spreading
wingwise about my head, and there was a musical clashing
as of cymbals, whilst some of these flames, like emanations,
seemed to expand and meet like gathered wings over my
head. I felt a rocking motion. I really felt frightened,
as the Power seemed something which could consume me.”
My friend wrote me that in his agitation he forgot to fix
his mind on the Supreme, and so missed a divine adventure.
Perhaps it was on this account that he said he did not
regard the awakening of this power as a very high spiritual
experience or on a level with other states of consciousness
he experienced. The experience, however, convinced him
that there was a real science and magic in the Indian books
which treat of occult physiology.

The Pandit’s observations on this experience were as
follows : If the breath is stopped and the mind is carried

1 In which the rod is the central channel (Sushumna), which is
interlaced by the Ida and Pingala sympathetics, the points of section
being at the ^centres. The two wings at the top are the two lobes or
petals of the Ajna Chakra,

^ Here I differ. The Sahasrara is at the top of the skull or upper
brain. The pineal gland is much lower in the region of the A.jna
Chakra. ,

22 THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERl’RNT POWER

downwards heat is felt. It is possible to “ sev ” Kuinlalini
with the mental eye, and in this way to experience Her
without actually arousing Her and bringing Her up, which
can only be effected by the Yoga methods prescribed.
Kundalini may have thus lieen seen as Light in tin* basal
centre (Mtiladhara). It was the mind (Bmidhi) (r.
which perceived Her, but as the experieneer had not been
taught the practice he got confused. There is one siiu})!©
test whether the Shakti is actually aroused. When she is
aroused intense heat is felt at that spot, but when she !eave.s
a particular centre the part so left becomes as cold and
apparently lifeless as a corpse. The progress upwards
may thus be externally verified by others. When the
Shakti (Power) has reached the upper brain (Sahasrara)
the whole body is cold and corpse-like ; e.Kcept the top of
the skull, where some warmth is felt, this being the place
where the static and kinetic aspects of Consciousness unite.

The present work is issued, not with tlie object of
establishing the truth or expediency of the principles and
methods of this form of Yoga (as yet indeed I have no
decided opinion upon a matter which each will determine
for himself), but as a first endeavour to supply, more
particularly for those interested in occultism and mysticism,
a fuller, more accurate, and rational presentation of the
subject.

An understanding of the recondite matters in the
treatise here translated is, however, only possible if w'e
first shortly summarise some of the philosophical and
religious doctrines which underlie this work, and a know-
ledge of which in his reader is assumed by its author.

The following sections, therefore, of this Introduction
will deal firstly with the concepts of Consciousness ^ and

1 For tbe meaning of this term as here used, see my “ Shakti and
Shakta

INTRODUCTION

23

of Mind Matter and Life which are unconscious, and with
their association in the Embodied Spirit or Jivatma.
Nextly the kinetic aspect of Spirit, or Shakti, is considered ;
its creative ideation and manifestation in the evolved
Macrocosm and in the human body or Microcosm (Kshudra-
brahmanda), which is a replica on a small scale of the
greater world. After an account of the “ Word ” and the
letters of speech, I conclude with the method of involution,
or Yoga. The latter will not be understood unless the
subject of the preceding sections has been mastered.

It is necessary to explain and understand the theory
of world-evolution even in the practical matters with
which this work is concerned. For as the Commentator
says in v. 39, when dealing with the practice of Yoga, the
rule is that things dissolve into that from which they
originate, and the Yoga process here described is such
dissolution (Laya). This return or dissolution process
(Nivritti) in Yoga will not be understood unless the for-
ward or creative (Pravritti) process is understood. Similar
considerations apply to other matters here dealt with.

CONSCIOUSNESS AND ITS POWEK
(SHIVA-SHAKTI)

The bases of this Yoga are of a highly metaphysiciil aud
scientific character. For its understonding there is re-
quired a full acquaintance with Indian philosophy, reli-
gious doctrine, and ritual in general, and in particular
with that presentment of these three matters w'hich is
given in the Shakta and Monistic (Advaita)* Shaiva Tantras.
It would need more than a bulky volume to describe and
explain in any detail the nature and meaning of this Yoga,

■ 1 Knlamava Tautra speaks of that “Monism oi which Shiva
speaks” (AdTaitam tn Shivenoktam, I. 108). See also M&hinirvina
Taatra, Ch. II» vv* 33-44, III, 33-35, 50-64; Prapanehaftira
Tajitm, II. XIX, XXIX Prapanchasara Tantra, Ch. XIX ; for tW
identity of Jivi-tmi and Paramatma is liberation (Mnkti), wbieti tha
Ve&ntasara defines to' be Jivabrahmanor aikyam. See Mahintirfiim
Tantra, where they ate given (VIIL 264, 265, T. 105). also
Prapanchasara Tantra, II, whe#e Hting is identified with Kondali and
Hangsah, and then with “ So’ hang See also ^’6., Oh. XXIT : “ That,
which is subtle 1 am ” (Yah Snkshmah So’ ham) ; and Jnin&rnam
Tantra, ,XXL 10. As to Brahmfemi, see Knlarnava Tantra, IX. 32.
and 41 : So’ hambhavena pnjayet. The Shakta disciple (Sadhaka)
should not be a dualist. Maharudrayamala, I. Khanda, Ch. 15 ; IL
Khanda, Oh. 2 Similarly, the Gandharva Tantra, Ch. 2, says that he
must be devoid of dualism (Dvaitahina). See Fran atosh ini, 10v8.
The Seventh Sutra of the Sbakti Sutras of Agastya runs Tat-kal-
pakatvam aupadhikam. (The fact of Her being creatrix is Her
Upadhi.) Tn fact, that particular form of worship which has earned
the Kaula Tantras their ill-name claims to be a practical application of
Advaitavada. Kaulachara is said to properly follow a full knowledge
of Yedantik doctrine. -As the Bbatchakra-niruparia here translated
says, the Jivatma or embodied spirit is the same as the Paramatma or
Supreme Spirit, and kiiowdedge of this is the root of all wisdom (Muia-
Tidy a).

OONSOrOTJSNBSS AND ITS POWER (SHIVA-SHAKTl) 25

and the bases on which it rests. I must therefore assume
in the reader either this general knowledge or a desire to
acquire it, and confine myself to such an exposition of
general principles and leading facts as will supply the
key by which the doors leading to a theoretical know-
ledge of the subject may be opened by those desirous
of passing through and beyond them, and as will thus
facilitate the understanding of the difficult texts here
translated. For on the practical side I can merely
reproduce the directions given in the books, together with
such explanations of them as I have received orally. Those
who wish to go fai’ther, and to put into actual process this
Yoga, must learn directly of a G-uru who has himself been
through it (Siddha). His experience alone will say whether
the aspirant is capable of success. It is said that of those
who attempt it one out of a thousand may have success. If
the latter enters upon the path, the Guru alone can save
him from attendant risks, moulding and guiding the '
practice as he will according to the particular capacities
and needs of his disciples. Whilst, thefefore, on this
heading it is possible to explain some general principles,
their application is dependent on the circumstances of each
particular case.

It is essential Indian Monistic Doctrine that man is a
microcosm (Kshudrabrahinanda), that is, everything which
is in the Universe is in him. Everything which is in this
world is in the other world-systems of the Universe. The
■doctrine is concisely expressed in the following words of
the Vishvasara Tantra — “ what is here is elsewhere. What
is not here is nowhere ” (Yad ihiisti tad anyatra yan nehasti
na tat kvachit). Man is Spirit, Mind and Matter.^ Spirit is set

^ Spirit is Atma or Self. Its vehicles are Mind or Antahkarana
■working with Manas and the Senses or Indriyas, and Matter, namely
the five kinds of Bhuta or sensible matter.

i

I

4

THE SIX CENTBES AK1> THE SEIirKW’ i'HWKK

over against and may be contrastetl with its vehicles. Spirit
is one. There are no degrees or qualities of Sjui ir. I'he
Spirit which is in naan is the Spirit which is in evtowthing
and which is, as the object of worship, the liord (Ishvara'f
or God. Mind and Matter are many and of many degiH‘e.s
and qualities. Atma or Spirit is the whole (Puma ) without
section (Akhanda). Mind and Matter arc ]'iart.s in that
whole. They are the not whole { Apunia) and are the section
(Khanda). Spirit is infinite (Aparichchhinn.a) formle.ss
( Ai'upa). Mind and Matter are finite (Parichchhinna) and with
form (Rtipa), Atma is unchanged and unmoving in action.
Its Power *(Shakti) in the form of Mind and Matter is ct di-
stantly active and changing. Pure consciousness is (’hit or
Samvit. Matter is the antithesis of that. And !Mind too is
unconscious according to Vedanta. For mind limits consci-
ousness so as to enable man to have finite experience. Mind
appears to be conscious because of its a.ssociation with
consciousness. There is no Mind without consciousness as
its background, though the Consciousness, which is the
Lord, is Mindless (amanah). Where there is no mind
(amanah), as in the case of God, there is no limitation and
He is therefore Perfect Experience; Consciousness does not
limit consciousness but a principle of Unoonscicfusness does
so. Man then is Pure Consciousness (Chit) vehicled in
unoonscions Mind and Matter.

The ultimate reality is Pure Consciousness (Chit,
Samvit) from out of which by its Power (Shakti) Mind and
Matter proceed. In theology this Pure Consciousness is
Shiva and His Power (Shakti) which is one with Himself
is the Devi, the Mother of the universe who exists in man’s '
body in i^ lowest centre just as Shiva is realised in tHe
highest brain centre, the cerebrum or Sahasrara Padma.
Cbmpleted Yoga is the Union of Her and Him in the *
body of the Sadhaka. This is Laya or dissolution, the

CONSCIOUSNESS AND ITS POWBB (sSIVA-SHAETl) 27

reverse of Srisliti or involution of Spirit in Mind and
Matter.

Veda says : “^11 this (that is, the manifold world) is
(the one) Brahman” (Sarvam khalvidam Brahma).^ How
the many can be the one * is variously explained by the
different schools. The interpretation here given is that of
the grand doctrine underlying and contained in the Shakta
Tantras or Agamas. In the first place, what is the one Reality
which appears as -many ? What is the nature of Brahman
as it is in itself (Svarupa) ? The answer is Sat-Ohit-Ananda
— that is, Being-feeling-consciousness-bliss. Consciousness
or feeling, as such (Chit, or Chaitanya, or Samvit), is
identical with being as such. Though in ordinary experience
the two are essentially bound up together, they still seem
tQ diverge from each other. Man by his constitution
inveterately believes in an objective existence beyond and
independent of himself. And this is so as long as, being
embodied Spirit (Jivatma), his consciousness is veiled by
Maya. But in the ultimate basis of experience, which is
the Supreme Spirit (Pararaatraa), the divergence has gone,
for in it lie in undifferentiated mass experiencer, experience,
and the experienced. When, however, we speak of Chit as
feeling-consciousness we must remember that what we know
and observe as such is only a limited changing manifestation
of Chit, which is in itself the infinite changeless principle
which is the background of all experience. This Being-
consciousness is absolute Bliss (Ananda), which is defined
as “ resting in the self ” (Svarupa-vishranti). It is Bliss

1 This, as the Mahanirvana Tantra says (Yll. 98), is the end and
aim of Tantrika Knlachara, the realisation of which sayiM» the Pra-
pj^chasara Tantra calls the fifth or supreme state (Ch» XIX, Vol. Ill,
^‘Tantrik Texts”). #'

^ Thus it is said of Devi that She is in the form of one and many
0 (Ekanekakshai^akritih). Ekam==ekam ajnanam or Maya, Anekani=the
several ajnanas — that is, Avidja. She is both as IJpadhi of Ishvara
and Jiva (Trishati, II. 23). , ,

TH8 SIX CENTEES AND THE SERPENT TOWER

because, being the infinite all (Puma), it can be in want
of nothing. This blissful consciousness is the ultimntc and
real nature or Svarupa, as it is called, of the one Reiilitv,
the own form or the piuipnii forma of the scholastics.
Svarupa is the nature of anything as it is in itsidf, as
distinguished from what it may appear to be. This .Supreme
Consciousness is the Supreme Shiva (Parashiva). It never
changes, but eternally endures the same throughout all
change.

But if this be so, how is it that evervthing we see i.s
associated with apparent unconsciousness? Our mind is
evidently not a pure, but a limited consciousness. Wiiat
limits it must be something either in itself unconscious or,
if conscious, capable of producing the appearance of
unconsciousness.^ In the phenomenal world there is nothing
absolutely conscious nor absolutely unconscious. Con-
sciousness and unconsciousness are always intermingled.
Some things, however, appear to be more conscious, and
some more unconscious than others. This is due to
the fact that Chit, which is never absent in any-
thing, yet manifests itself in various ways and degrees.
The degree of this manifestation is determined by the
•nature and development of the body in which it is enshrined.
Spirit remains the same ; the body changes. The manifest*
ation of consciousness is more or less limited as ascent is
made from the mineral to man. In the mineral world Chit
naanifests as the lowest form of sentiency evidenced by
reflex response to stimuli, and that physical consciousness
which is called in the West atomic memory. The sentiency
of plants is more developed, though it is, as Ohakrapani
says, in the Bhanumati a dormant consciousness. This is
further manifested in those micro-organisms which are

1 The alternative is given to meet the differing views of MSyavada
and Shaktivada.

CONSCIOUSNESS AND ITS POWER (SHIVA-SHA'KTl) 29

intermediate stages between the vegetable and animal worlds,
and have a psychic life of their own. In the animal
world consciousness becomes more centralised and
complex, reaching its fullest development in man, who
possesses all the psychic functions, such as cognition, per-
ception, feeling, and will. Behind all these particular
changing forms of sentiency or consciousness is the one
formless, changeless Chit as it is in itself (Svarupa),
and as distinguished from the particular forms of its
manifestation.

As Chit throughout all these stages of life remains the
same it is not really developed. The appearance of deve-
lopment is due to the fact that It is now more and now less
veiled by Mind and Matter. It is this veiling by the power
of Consciousness (Shakti) which creates the world. What
is it, then, which veils consciousness and thus produces
world-experience?

The answer is Power or Shakti as Maya. Maya Shakti
is that which seemingly makes the whole (Puma) into the
not-whole (Apurna), the infinite into the finite, the formless
into forms and the like. It is a power which thus cuts down,
veils and negates. Negates what ? Perfect consciousness. Is
Shakti the same as or different from Shiva or Chit? It
must be the same, for otherwise all could not be one
Brahman. But if it is the same it must be also Chit or
Consciousness. Therefore it is Sachohidanandamayi ^ and
Chidrupini.®

And yet there is, at least in appearance, some distinc-
tion. Shakti, which comes from the root SAaifc, “ to have
power,” “ to be able,” means power. As She is one with

1 That is, its substance is Sat, Gbit, Ananda. The suffixes Mayi
and Rfipini indicate a subtle distinction — namely, that She is Chit, and
yet by appearance something di:fferent from it.

2 In the form or nature of Chit, As the Kubjika Tantra says, the

Parama Kala is both Chit (Chidrupa) and NMa (Ji^'adarupa), , y

■so THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

Shiva, She as such power is the power of Sliiva or Con-
sciousness. There is no difference between Sliiva as tlie
possessor of power (Shaktiinan) and power itself. 'I’he
poorer of Consciousness is Consciousness in itso.'/o’f aspt'ct.
Whilst, therefore, both Shiva and Shakti are Conscioiisiiess,
the former is the changeless static aspect of Conseionsness,
®nd Shakti is the kinetic active aspect of the same f 'on-
sciousness. The particular power whereb_y the dnalistic
world' is brought into being is Ma3''a-Shakti, which is both
a veiling (Avarana) and projecting (Vikshepa) Shakti.
'Consciousness veils itself to itself, and projects from the
«tore of its previous experiences (Sangskara) the notion of
a world in which it suffers and enjoys. The universe is
thus the creative imagination (Srishtikalpana, as ifcis called)
-of the Supreme World-thinker (Ish vara). Maya is that
power by which things are “ measured ’’—that is, formed
and made known (Miyate anaya iti maya). It is the sense
•of difference (Bhedabuddhi), or that which makes man see
the world, and all things and persons therein, as diffe^nt
■from himself, when in truth he and it and they are the one
Self. It is that which establishes a dichotomy in what
v^onld otherwise be a unitary experience, and is the cause
•of the dualism inherent in all phenomenal experience.
Shakti veils consciousness by negating in various degrees
Hei^elf as consciousness.

Before the manifestation of the universe, Being-Con-
Isciousness-Bliss alone was — that is, Shiva-Shakti as Chit
and Chidrupini respectively. Consciousness not exercising
its power. Consciousness alone changelessly was. In this
the quiescent state of the Atma or Self, Shakti being latent,
is one with it. Devi in the Kulachuidamani Nigama^ says :

I, though Prakriti, lie hidden in Oonsciousness-Blis-S.”

Aham prakritirupa chet chidananda-parayana (Ch I, vv. 16-24,
VoUV., “ Tantrik Texts ”).

CONSCIOUSNESS AND ITS POWER (SHIVA-SHAKTl) 31

Ragliava Bhatta says : ^ “ She who is eternal (Anadiriipa)
existed in a subtle state, as it were Consciousness, during
the great dissolution.”

This is Parashiva, who in the scheme of the Thirty-six
Tattvas is known as Parasamvit. This is the perfect
experience and perfect universe. By this latter term is
not meant any heaven in the sense of a perfected world of
forms. The perfect universe is Shakti herself in Her own
nature as consciousness experienced by Shiva as conscious-
ness. As the Upanishad says, “ The self knows and loves
the self.” It is this love which is bliss or “ resting in the
self,” for, as it is elsewhere said, “ Supreme love is bliss ”
(Hiratishaya-premaspadatvam anaudatvam). If, however,,
there be one Changeless Consciousness there is no manifes-
tation. If, again, we assume some other than Conscious-
ness as cause of the universe, then the Monistic (Advaita)
truth is destroyed, as in the dualistic Sangkhya, which
assumes, in addition to and independent of the Purusha
consciousness, the Prakriti unconsciousness as the material
cause (Upadanakarana) of the world. All Indian Monism,,
therefore, posits a dual aspect of the single consciousness
— one the transcendental changeless aspect (Parasamvit),®'
and the other the creative changing aspect, which is called
Shiva-Shakti Tattva.® In Parasamvit the “ I ” (Aham)'
and the “ This ” (Idam), or universe of objects, are indis-
tinguishably mingled in the supreme unitary experience.^

1 Ta anadirupa chaitanyadhyasena mahapralaye sukshma sthita
(Comin. on Sharada Tilaka, C’h. 1)— that is. the Adhyasa or attribution
is given from the world aspect. Transcendentally She is then in her
own nature (Svarupa).

2 This is Paramashiva, or Nirgnna (attribnteless), or Nishkala
(partless or devoid of Shakti), Shiva, or Parabrahman.

® This is Saguna (with attribute), or Sakala (with parts or Shakti),,
Shiva, or Sbabdabrahman (Brahman as the source of “ sound,” c. post).

* As the Toginihridaya Tantra says : The Para Devi is Prakasha-
vimarshasamarasyarupini. This is the Nirvikalpa-jnana state i» •

..'AS

* ' 4 ^

faiiHiiil

flilsll®

t

iiililir

t}2 THE SIX CENITfES ^AXIt THK SKiM'KXT imvj R

In Shiva-Sliakti Tattva Shakti, which is tin* iicirative
aspect of the forraer. Her function bciiifjr ix'ixiition
(Nishedha-vjapara-rupa Siiaktih), neiratCK herself ns the
Idam of experience, leaving tlie Hhiva consciousness as a
mere “I,” “not looking towards another” (Ananyon-
miikhah ahampratyayali). This is a state of mere
subjective illumination (Prakhsha luatra)' to which Shakti,
who is called Viraarsha/ again presents Herself, but
Dow with a distinction of “ I ” and “ This ” as yet held
together as part of one self. At this point, the first
incipient 'stage of dualism, there is the first emanation of
consciousness, known as Sadashiva or Sadakhja Tattva,
which is followed by the second or faiivara Tattva, the
Lord.

And then by the third or Shuddhavidya Tattva. In
the first emphasis is laid on the “ this ”, in the second on
the “ J,” and on the third on both equally. Then Maya
severs the united consciousness so that the object is seen
as other than the self and then split up into" the multi-
tudinous objects of the universe. Some worship predomi-
nantly the masculine or right side of the conjoint male and
female figure (Ardhanarishvara). . Some, the Shaktas,
predominantly worship the left, and call Her Mother, for

CONSCIOUSNESS AND ITS POWER (SHIVa-SHAKTI) 33

aspect ^ of Consciousness, imagining (Srishtikalpana) ^ the
work! to be, according to the impressions (Sangskara)
cleriTed from enjoyment and suffering in former worlds.
It is natural to worship Her as Mother. The first Mantra
into which all men are initiated is the word Ma (Mother).
It is their first word and generally their last. The father
is a mere helper (Sahakari-matra) of the Mother. ^ The
whole world of the five elements also springs from the
Active Consciousness or Shakti, and is Her manifestation
(Piirna vikasa). Therefore men worship the Mother,^
than ivhom is none more tender,^ saluting Her smiling
beauty as the Eosy Tripurasundari, the source of the
universe, and Her awe-inspiring grandeur as Kali, who
takes it back into Herself.

1 The quiescent Shiva-aspect is by its definition inert. It is
because of this that the Devi is in the Tantras symbolically represented
as being above the body of Shiva, who lies under Her like a corpse
(Shava). As the Kubjika Tantra, Oh. J, states, it is not Brahma,
Vishnu, and Rudra, who create, maintain, and destroy, but their
Shaktis, Brahmani, Yaishnavi, Rudrani. See Pranatoahini, 9. Activity
is the nature of Prakriti (Sangkhya Pravachana Sutra, III. 66). For
the same reason the female form is represented in Sexnal union as being
above (Yiparita) the male. When the Devi stands above Shiva, the
symbolism also denotes (particularly in the case of Kali) the liberating
aspect of the Mother. See “ Principles of Tantra,” I. 328.

2 world is called an imagination (Kalpana), for it is creative
ideation on recalled memory. As the Yoginihridaya Tantra says, “ the
picture of the world is designed by Her own will” (Svechchhavishva-
mayollekhakhachitam), seeing which Bhagavan was very pleased

^ The Supreme Father gives His illumination (Prakasha). She,
the Yimarshashakti, creates, but not alone. (Vimarshashaktik praka-
shatmaiia paramashivena samarasya-vishvam srijati na tu: kevala —
(Yoginihridaya Tantra).

4 ixx Matri-bhava, according to the Sanskrit term. Philosophically
also this is sound, for all that man knows (outside ecstasy or Samadhi)
is the Mother in Her form as the world. The Supreme Shakti, who is
not different from Shiva (Parashaktishivabhinna), is embodied in every
order of thing (Sarvakramasharirini — Yoginihridaya).

5 It is said that ‘‘ there is nothing more tender than Prakriti,” who
serves Purusha in every way in his enjoyment, finally giving Mukti or
liberation by retiring from Him.

THE SIX CENTSES AND THE SEI.’I’ENT rOVEP.

In the Mantra side of the Tantra Shastra, dealing
with Mantra and its origin, these two Tattvas t'nianating
from Shakti are from the snumi side known as Nadu ioal
Bindu. Parashiva and Paraslmkti are inutii'fdi'ss
spanda) and soundless (Xihshahda!.

Nada is the first produced nun'ement in the ideating
cosmic consciousness leading up to the Hoimd-Bi’alunnn
(Shabdabrahman), whence all ideas, *the language in wliieli
they are expressed (Shabda), and the objects ( Artha)
which they denote, are derived.

Bindu literally means a point and the dot (Amtsvara),
which denotes * in Sanskrit the nasal breathing It i.s
placed in the Chandrabindn nasal breathing above Nftfla (2).
In its technical Mantra sense it denotes that .state of
active Consciousness or Shakti in which the “ I ” or
illuminating aspect of Consciousness identifies itself
with the total “ This ” as the yet dualistically un-
manifest state of the universe.^ It subjectifies the
“ This,” thereby becoming a point (Bindu) of consci-
ousness with it. When Consciousness apprehends an
object as different from itself it sees that object as
extended in space. But when that object is completely
subjectified it is experienced as an unextended point. This
is the universe-experience of the Lord experiencer as Bindu.®

Where does the Universe go at dissolution? It is with-
drawn into that Shakti which projected it. It collapses, m
to speak, into a mathematical point without any inagnitiide

1 Lit. What goes with (ann) with vowel sound (Svara or Srara),

2 For until the operation of Maya at a later stage the “ This ” is
still experienced as part of the “ I ”. Therefore there is no manifestation
or dualism.

^ 3 Yqy the same reason Shakti is then said to be Ghaiiibhuta, wbieh
is literally massive or condensed* It is that state of g‘atbered-up power
^ which immediately precedes the burgeoning forth (Sphuraiia) of the
universe.

CONSCIOUSNESS AND ITS POWER (SHIVA-SHAETl)

whatever.^ This is the Shivabindu, which again is with-
drawn into the Shiva-Shakti-Tattva which produced it.
It is conceived that round the Shiva Bindu there is coiled
Shakti, just as in the earth-centre called Mhladhara Chakra
in the human body a serpent clings round the self-produced
Phallus (Svayambhulinga). This coiled Shakti may be
conceived as a mathematical line, also without magnitude,
which, being everywhere in contact with the point round
which it is coiled, is compressed together with it, and
forms therefore also one and the same point. There is one
indivisible unity of dual aspect which is figured also in the
Tantras * as a grain of gram (Chanaka), which has two
seeds so closely joined as to look as one surrounded by an
outer sheath.h

To revert to the former simile, the Shakti coiled round
Shiva, making one point (Bindu) with it, is Kundalini
Shakti. This word comes form the word Kundala or “ a coil ”
“ a bangle ”. She is spoken of as coiled because She is likened
to a serpent (Bhujanggi), which, when resting and sleeping,
lies coiled; and because the nature of Her power is
spiraline, manifesting itself as such in the worlds — the
spheroids or “ eggs of Brahma ” (Brahmanda), and in their
circular or revolving orbits and in other ways. Thus the
Tantras speak of the development of the straight line
(Eijurekha) from the point which, when it has gone its
length as a point, is turned (Vakrarekha angkushakara)
by the force of the spiraline sack of Maya in which it works
so as to form a figure of two dimensions, which again is

1 The imagery, like all of its kind, is necessarily imperfect ; for
such a point, though it has no magnitude, is assumed to have a position.
Here there is none, for we are in spacelessness.

2 See the Commentary, post.

2 The two seeds are Shiva and Shakti, and the sheath is Mtiya.
When they come apart there is creation. Again the imagery is faulty,
in that there are two seeds, but Shiva and Shakti are the One with
dual aspect.

THE SIX CEKTBES AND THE SERPENT POWER

turned upon itself, ascending: as a straii^ht lino into tlie
plane of the third dimension, thus fonnin<r the trian-
gular or pyramidal figure called Rhringataka.^ Its other
w'ords, this Kundali Shakti is that which, when it moves
to manifest itself, appears as the universe. To say that
it is “ coiled ” is to sav that it is nt tliar is, iti the

form of sciatic- poimtial eurrgtj. This Shakti coiled round
the Supreme Shiva is called Maluikundali (“ The grt-at
coiled power”), to distinguish it from the same power
which exists in individual bodies, and which is calknl
Kundali or Kundalinl.* It is with and through the last
powei- that this Yoga is effected. When it is accomplished
the individual Shakti (Knndall) is united with the great
cosmic Shakti (Mahu-kiindari), and She with Shiv'n, with
whom in truth She is one. Kundalinl is an aspect of the
eteimal Brahman (Brahmarupa Sanatanl), and is both
attribnteless and with attribute (Yirguna and Saguna). In
Her Nirguna aspect She is pure consciousness (Chaitan-
yarilpinl) and bliss itself (Anandarupinl, and in creation
Brabmanandaprakasbini). As Saguna She it is by whose
power all creatures are displayed (Sarvabbutaprakasbinl).®
Kundali Shakti in individual bodies is jww&i’ at rest, or the
static centre round which every form of existence as moving
power revolves. In the universe there is always in and
behind every form of activity a static background. Tlijs
is one of the profound truths of the Shakta Tantras, which,
as later explained, is borne out by recent discoveries of
modern science. The one Consciousness is polarised into
static (Shiva) and kinetic (Shakti) aspects for the purpose

^ The shape of the Singara 'water-nut, which grows freelv iu the
lakes of Kashmir. Here I may observe that Yantras, though drawn on
the flat, must be conceived of in the solid mass. The fiat drawing is a
mere suggestion of the three dimensional figure which the Yantrais.

* Because She is thus bent the Devi is called Kubjika (hunchback).

s Kubjika Tantra, Ch. I, Pranatoshini, p.8.

CONSCIOUSNESS AND ITS POWER (SHIVA-SHAKTl) 37

■of creation. This Yoga is the resolution, of this duality
into unity again.

The Indian Scriptures say, in the words of Herbert
Spencer in his “ First Principles,” that the universe is an
unfoldment (Srishti) from the homogeneous (Mulaprakriti)
to the heterogeneous (Vikriti), and back to the homoge-
neous again (Pralaya or dissolution). There are thus
•alternate states of evolution and dissolution, manifestation
taking place after a period of rest. So also Professor
Huxley, in his “ Evolution and Ethics,” speaks of the
'manifestation of cosmic energy (Maya Shakti) alternating
between phases of potentiality (Pralaya) and phases of
'explication (Srishti). “It may be,” he says, “as Kant ,
suggests, every cosmic magma predestined to evolve into a
new world has been the no less predestined end of a
vanished predecessor.” This the Indian Shastra affirms in
its doctrine that there is no such thing as an absolutely *
first creation, the present universe being but one of a series
■of worlds which are past and are yet to be.

At the time of dissolution (Pralaya) there is in con-
sciousness as Mahakundali, though undistinguishable from
its general mass, the potentiality or seed of the universe to
be. Maya, as the world, potentially exists as Mahakundali,
who is Herself one with Consciousness or Shiva. This-;, ,
Maya contains, and is in fact constituted by, the collec-","
tive Sangskara or Vasana — that is, the mental impres-
sions and tendencies produced by Karma accomplished in
previously existing worlds. These constitute the mass of
the potential ignorance (Avidya) by which Consciousness
veils itself. They were produced by desire for worldly
enjoyment, and themselves produce such desire. The
worlds exist because they, in their totality, will to exist.
Each individual exists because his will desires worldly life.
This seed is therefore the collective or cosmic will towards

■

38

38 THE SIX OBNTEES AND THE SERPENT POWER

manifested life— that is, the life of form and enjoyment.
At the end of the period of I’est, which is dissolution, this
seed ripens in Consciousness. Consciousness has thus a
twin aspect : its liberation (Mukti) or formless aspect, in
which it is as mere Consciousness-Bliss ; and a universe or
form aspect, in which it becomes the worlds of enjoyment
(Bhukti). One of the cardinal principles of the Bhakta
Tantra is to secure by its Sadhana both liberation (Mukti)
and enjoyment (Bhukti).^ This is possible by the iden-
tification of the self when in enjoyment with the soul of the
world. When this seed ripens Shiva is said to put forth
His Shakti. As this Shakti is Himself, it is He in his
Shiva-Shakti aspect who comes forth (Prasarati) and endows
Himself with all the forms of worldly life. In the pure,,
perfect, formless Consciousness there springs up the desire
to manifest in the world of forms — the desire for enjoyment
of and as form. This takes place as .a limited stress in the
unlimited unmoving surface of pure Consciousness, which is
Nishkala Shiva, but without affecting the latter. There is
thus change in changelessness and changelessness in change.
Shiva in His transcendent aspect does not change, but
Shiva (Sakala) in His immanent aspect as Shakti does. As
oresetive will arises Shakti thrills as Nada,® and assumes the
form of Hindu, which is Tshvara Tattva, whence all the
worlds derive. It is for their creation that Kundali uncoils.
When Karma ripens, the Devi, in the words of the Higama,®
“ becomes desirous of creation, and covers Herself with Her
own Maya Again, “the Devi, iovful in the mad delight

1 Bliogena nioksliam apnoti bliogena kulasadbanam
Tasroad yatnad bhogayukto bhaved viravarab sadhib,

(Kularnava Sangbita, v. 219.)

2 Literally “ sound/’ that initial activity wbicb is the first source of
tbe subsequently manifested Sbabda (sound) wbieb is tbe word to wbicb
corresponds tbe Artba or object.

^ Kulacbudtoani, VoL IV, ^‘Tantrik Texts,” Oh. I, vv. 16-24.

OONSOIOtJSNBSS AND ITS POWBtt (SHIVA-SaAKl'l) S9

points as changes in the limited consciousness or as move-
ment (Spanda), form, and “ sound ” (Shabda). Both Shaivas
and Shaktas equally accept the Thirty-Six categories or
Tattvas, the Ealas, the Shaktis Ilnmani, and the rest in the
Tattvas, the Shadadhva, the Mantra concepts of Nacla,
Bindu, Eamakala, and so forth.^ Authors of the Northern
■Shaiva school, of which a leading Shastra is the Malinivijaya
Tantra, have described with great profundity these Tattvas.
'General conclusions only are, however, here summarised.
These thirty-six Tattvas are in the Tantras divided into
three groups, called Atma, Vidya, and Shiva Tattvas.
The first group includes all the Tattvas, from the lowest
Prithivi (“ earth ”) to Prakriti, which are known as the impure
•categories (A.shuddhatattva) ; the second includes Maya, the
Eanchukas,^ and Purusha, called the pure-impure categories
(Shuddha-ashnddha Tattva) ; and the third includes the five
highest Tattvas, called the pure Tattvas (Shuddha Tattva),
from Shiva Tattva to Shuddhavidya. As already stated,*the

1 Akula is a Tantrik name for Sliiva, Sliakfci being called Kula,
which is Matri, Mana, Meja. In the Yoginihridaya Tantra it is said
(Ch, I) : Kulam meyamanamatrilakshanam, kaulas tatsamashtih. These
three are Knower, Knowing, Known, for that is consciousness as Shakti.

2 Kiilachiidamani, Vol. IV, ‘‘ Tantrik Texts,” Ch. I, yv, 16-24.

^ See as to these terms the author’s “ Garland of Letters ” or
Studies in the Mantrashastra”.

^ Forms of Shakti whereby the natural perfections of Consciousness
are limited. Thus, from all-knowing it becomes little-knowing ; from
being almighty, it becomes a little doer, etc. See ‘‘ Garland of Letters ”,

The term Sangkocha (contraction) expresses the same idea. The
Devi is Sangkuchadrupa through Matri, Mana, Meya, and therefore ho
a^lso is Shiva as Jiva (tatha shivo ’ pi sangkuchadrupah). — Yoginihridaya
Tantra.

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

supreme changeless state (Parasamvit)^ is a unitai'y ex-
perience in which the “ I ” and “ This ” coalesce into a
unity in which neither are perceived as such.

In the kinetic or Shakti aspect, as presented by the
pure categories, experience recognises an “ I ” and “ This,”
but the latter is regarded, not as something opposed to and
outside the “ I,” but as part of a one self which has two
sides — an “ I ” (Aham) and “ This ” (Idam). The emphasis
varies from insistence on the “ I ” to insistence on the-
“ This,” and then to equality of emphasis on the “ I ” and
“ This ” as a preparation for the dichotomy in consciousness-
which follows.

The pure-impure categories are intermediate between
the pure and the impure. The essential characteristic of
experience constituted by the impure categories is its
dualism effected through Maya — and its limitations — ^the
result of the operation of the Kanchukas. Here the
“ This ” is not seen as part of the self, but as opposed to
and without it as an object seen outside. Bach conscious-
ness thus became mutually exclusive the one of the other..
The states thus described are threefold : a transcendent
mingled “ I ” and “ This,” in which these elements of ex-
perience are as such not perceived ; a pure form of experi-
ence intermediate between the first and last, in which both
the “I” and the “This” are experienced as part of the
one self ; and, thirdly, the state of manifestation proper,
when there is a complete cleavage between the “ I ” and
the “ This,” in which an outer object is presented to the
consciousness of a knower. This last stage is itself twofold.
In the first the Purusha experiences a homogeneous uni-
verse, though different from himself as Prakrit! ; in the
second Prakrit! is split up into its effects (Vikriti), which
are Mind and Matter, and the multitudinous beings of the-
1 This is not counted as a Tattva, being Tattvatita.

OONSOIOUSNES3 AND ITS POWEE (SKIVA-SHAKTl) 41

ciniverse 'wliicli these compose. Shakti as Prakriti first
ovolves mind (Buddhi, Ahangkara, Manas) and senses
(Indriya), and then sensible matter (Bhiita) of fivefold form
.(“ ether,” “ air,” “ fire,” “ water,” “ earth ”) derived from
the supersensible generals of the sense-particulars called
Tanmatra. When Shakti has entered the last and grossest
Tattva (“ earth ”)— that is, solid matter— there is nothing
further for Her to do. Her creative activity then ceases,
•and She rests. She rests in Her last emanation, the
■“ earth ” principle. She is again coiled and sleeps. She
is now Kundali Shakti, whose abode in the human body is
the earth centre or Muladhara Chakra. As in the supreme
state She lay coiled as the Mahakundali round the Supreme
Shiva, so here She coils round the Svayambhu Lingga in
the Muladhara. This last centre or Chakra and the four
above it are centres of the five forms of Matter. The sixth
<;entre is that of Mind. Consciousness and its processes
through' Shakti prior to the appearance of Maya are
realised in the seventh lotus (Sahasrara-padma) and centres
intermediate between it and the sixth or Ajna Mind centre.

The Mantra evolution, which must be known if the
Text is to be understood, is set forth with great clarity in
the Sharada Tilaka, wherein it is said that from the Sakala
Shiva (Shiva Tattva), who is Sat-Chit-Ananda, issued
Shakti (Shakti Tattva) ; from the latter Nada (Sadakhya
Tattva); and from Nada evolved Bindu (Tshvara Tattva),*
which, to distinguish it from the Bindu which follows, is
called the Supreme Bindu (Para-Bindu). NMa and Bindu

1 These terms have not the ordinary English meaning, but denote
the ethereal, gaseous, igneous, liquid, and solid states of matter. In
worship (Puja) they are symbolised by the following ingredients
(Upachara) : Pushpa (flower), ether ; Dhupa (incense), airj Dipa (light),
fire; Naivedya (food-olfering), water; Ohandana (sandal), earth.
Sachchidananda-vibhavat sakalat parameshvarat
Asichchhaktis tato iiMo n^M foindu-samudbhavab

(Ch. I.)

<■ ''dll

Ill®p

ililllilliliiplilll

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

supreme changeless state (Parasamvit)^ is a unitary ex-
perience in which the “ I ” and “ This ” coalesce into a
unity in which neither are perceived as such.

In the kinetic or Shakti aspect, as presented by the
pure categories, experience recognises an “ I ” and “ This,”
but the latter is regarded, not as something opposed to and
outside the “ I,” but as part of a one self which has two
sides — an “ I ” (Aham) and “ This ” (Idam). The emphasis
varies from insistence on the “ I ” to insistence on the
“ This,” and then to equality of emphasis on the “ I ” and
“ This ” as a preparation for the dichotomy in consciousness,
which follows.

The pure-impure categories are intermediate between
the pure and the impure. The essential characteristic of
experience constituted by the impure categories is its
dualism effected through Maya — and its limitations — ^the
result of the operation of the Kanohukas. Here the-
“ This ” is not seen as part of the self, but as opposed to
and without it as an object seen outside. Each conscious-
ness thus became inutually exclusive the one of the other.,
The states thus described are threefold : a transcendent
mingled “ I ” and “ This,” in which these elements of ex-
perience are as such not perceived ; a pure form of experi-
ence intermediate between the first and last, in which both
the “ I ” and the “ This ” are experienced as part of the
one self; and, thirdly, the state of manifestation proper,
when there is a complete cleavage between the “ 1 ” and
the “ This,” in which an outer object is presented to the
consciousness of a knower. This last stage is itself twofold.
In the first the Purusha experiences a homogeneous uni-
verse, though different from himself as Prakriti; in the-
second Prakriti is split up into its effects (Vikriti), which
are Mind and Matter, and the multitudinous beings of the
1 This is not counted as a Tattva, being Tattvatita.

CONSCIOUSNESS AND ITS POWER (SEIVA-SHAKTl) 41

universe which these compose. Shakti as Prakriti first
evolves mind (Buddhi, Ahangkara, Manas) and senses
(Indriya), and then sensible matter (Bhiita) of fivefold form

“ water,” “ earth ”) ^ derived from
■als of the sense-particulars called
When Shakti has entered the last and grossest
is, solid matter — there is nothing
Her creative activity then ceases,

■(“ ether,” “ air,” “ fire,”
the supersensible gener;

Tanmatra,

Tattva (“ earth ”) — that
further for Her to do.
and She rests. She rests in Her last emanation, the
earth ” principle. She is again coiled and sleeps. She
is now Kundali Shakti, whose abode in the human body is
the earth centre or Muladhara Chakra. As in the supreme
state She lay coiled as the Mahiikundali round the Supreme
Shiva, so here She coils round the Svayambhu Lingga in
the Muladhara. This last centre or Chakra and the four
above it are centres of the five forms of Matter. The sixth
■centre is that of Mind. Consciousness and its processes
through' Shakti prior to the appearance of Maya are
realised in the seventh lotus (Sahasrara-padma) and centres
intermediate between it and the sixth or Ajna Mind centre.

The Mantra evolution, which must be known if the
Text is to be understood, is set forth with great clarity in
the Sharada Tilaka, wherein it is said that from the Sakala
Shiva (Shiva Tattva), who is Sat-Chit-Ananda, issued
Shakti (Shakti Tattva) ; from the latter Nada (Sadakhya
Tattva); and from Nada evolved Hindu (Tshvara Tattva),®
which, to distinguish it from the Bindu which follows, is
called the Supreme Hindu (Para»Bindu). Nada and Bindu

^ These terms have not the ordinary English meaning, hnt denote
the ethereal, gaseous, igneous, liquid, and solid states of matter. In
worship (Puja) they are symbolised by the following ingredients
(Upachara) : Pushpa (flower), ether ; Dhupa (incense), air; Dipa (light),
fire; Naivedya (food-offering), water; Ohandana (sandal), earth.
Sachchidananda-vibhavat sakalat parameshvarat
Asichchhaktis tato nMo iiMM bindu-samudbhavah

(Ch. I.)

lWii|

iRiil

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

CONSCIOUSNESS AND ITS POWER (sHIYA-SHAKTl) 43

phases of tlie Cliandrabindu, or Nada, Bindu, Shakti^
and Shanta of the Om and other Bija Mantras. Its abode
is Satyaloka, which within the human body exists in the
pericarp of the thousand-petalled lotus (Sahasrara) in the
highest cerebral centre. * The Sharada ^ then says that this
Parabindu, whose substance is Supreme Shakti, divides
itself into three — that is, appears under a threefold aspect.
There are thus three Bindus, the first of which is called
Bindu,^ and the others Nada and Bija. Bindu is in the
nature of Shiva and Bija of Shakti.^ Nada is Shiva-Shakti
— that is, their mutual relation or interaction (Mithah
samavayah) ^ or Yoga (union), as the Prayogasara calls it. ^
The threefold Bindu (Tribindu) is supreme (Para), subtle
(Siikshma), and gross (Stiila).® Nada is thus the union of

1 Ch. 1.

^ Karyya, ov produced, Bindu, to distinguish it from the causal
(Karana) Bindu or Parabindu.

3 iii the case of the Mantras, Bija (according to the Kulachudamani,
V, 58) is the first letter of a Kuta or group and what follows is Shakti.
Thus in the Mantra “ Krim,” K is Bija and R and I are Shakti. By
the Bija form is made (Bijena Murtikalpana.)

4 Parashaktimayah sakshat tridha sau bhidjate punah
Bindur nado bijam iti tasya bhedah samiritah
Binduh shivatmako bijang shaktir nMas tayor mithah
Samavayah samakhyatah sarvagamavisbaradaih (Oh. I).

The first word of the third line reads better as Binduh shivatmako
than as Bindur nadatmako, as some MSS., such as that from which
I quoted in Introduction to the Mahanirvana. The Commentary to
V, 40, post, also speaks of Bindu as being ISTadatmaka, but explains that
that means Shivatmaka. See also to the same effect Kriyasara.

5 See Ragbava Bbatta’s Gomm. on Cb. I. v. 8 of Sharada.

Mrgunab sagunasb cbeti sbivo jneyah sanatanab
hTirgunachcbaiva sangjata bindavas traya eva cba
Brabmabindur visbnubindu rudrabindur mabeshvari.

The verse as cited in Pranatosbini (p. 13) reads in second line
INirguoasbcbaiva ; but this must be a mistake for Nirgunacbcbbaiva,
for the Bindus themselves are not nirguna, but spring from it.

6 Asmacb cba karanabindob sakasbat kramena karyyabindus tato
nMas tato bijam iti trayam utpannam tad idang parasuksbmasthula-
padaih kathyate (Lalita-Sabasranama, Comm.).

These represent the Chit, Cbidacbit, Acbit aspects of nature.
Cbidangsbah chidachinmisbrah acbidangshasbcba teshangrupani (Bhas-

-'4m

44 THE SIX CENTRES ANC THE SERPENT POWER

these two in creation. As the Text says (v. 40), it is by
this division of Shiva and Shakti that there arises creative
ideation (Srishti-Kalpana). The causal Bindu is from the
Shakti aspect undifferentiated Shakti (Abhedarupa Shakti)
with all powers (Sarvashaktimaya) ; from the Prakx’iti
aspect Trigunamayi Mulaprakriti ; from the Devata
aspect the unmanifest (Avyakta) ; from the Devi aspect
Shanta. The three Bindus separately indicate the
operations of the three powers of will (Ichchha), know-
ledge (Jnana), and action (Kriya), and the three Gunas
(Rajas, Sattva, Tamas) ; also the manifestation of the
three Devis (Varna, Jyeshtha, Raudri) and the three

CONSCIOUSNESS AND ITS POWER. (SHIVA-SHAKTl)

(Ravi), Moon (Chandra), and Fire (Agni), terms constantly-
appearing in the works here translated.

In Sun there are Fire and Moon.^ It is known as
Mishra Bindu, and in the form of such is not different
from Paramashiva, and is Kamakala.^ Kamakala is the
Triangle of divine desire formed by the three Bindus —
that is, their collectivity (Samashtirupa).® This Kama-
kala is the root (Mula) of all Mantra. Moon (Soma,
Chandra) is Shiva Bindu, and white (Sita Bindu) ; Fire
(Agni) is Shaktibindu, and red (Shonabindu) ; Sun is a
mixture of the two. Fire, Moon, and Sun are the Ich-
chha, Jnana, Kriya Shaktis (will, knowledge, action). On the
material plane the white Bindu assumes the form of
semen (Shukra), and the red Bindu of menstrual fluid
(Rajasphala, Shonita), Mahabindu is the state before the
manifestation of Prakriti.'* All three Bindus — that is,
the Kamakala — are Shakti, though one may indicate
predominantly the Shiva, the other the Shakti aspect.
Sometimes Mishra Bindu is called Shakti Tattva, to

Te jnanechclilia-kriyatmano vahnindvarka-svarupinab.

Icbchha kriya tatha jnanang gauri brabmi tu vaisbnavi

Tridba sbaktih sthita yatra tatparang jyotir om iti.

As the author of the Pranatoshini (p. 9) says, the names are not tO'
be read in the order of words (Pratishabdam), otherwise Jnana would
be associated with Vaishnavi, but according to the facts (Yatha sam-
bhavam) as stated in the text. According to this account it would
seem that Jnana, Sattva, and Kriya Tamas in note 1 should be
transposed.

1 It is Agnishomamayah. See Tika, vv. 6, 7, of KtoakalavilAsa.
See my “ Garland of Letters ’h

2 That is, Kamayukta Kala, Kala with creative will (here its mani*
festation).

Mahabindu=Paramashiva==:Mishrabindu=:Ravi=:Kamakala.

Ravi-paramashivabhinna mishrabindurupa Kamakala.

3 As Ravi or Surya (Sun) Bindu is in the form of Parashiva, and
in it are the other two Bindus, it is the Samashtirupa of them, and ia
thus called Kamakala.

4 This, which isO, becomes ? ? — that is, Chandra, Ravi, and Ra

(fire). \ \ *

THE SIX OENTBES AND THE SBBPENT POWER

denote the supremacy of Shakti, and sometimes Shiva
Tattva, to denote the supremacy of the possessor of
power (Shaktiman). It is of coupled form (Yamalariipa).
There is no Shiva without Shakti, nor Shakti wdthout
Shiva/ To separate ^ them is as impossible as to sepai’ate
the moving -wind from the steadfast ether in which it
blows. In the one Shiva-Shakti there is a union (Mai-
thuna),^ the thrill of which is Nada, whence Mahabindu
is born, which itself becomes threefold (Tribindu), which
is Kamakala.^ It is said in the Sharadii-Tilaka that on
the “ bursting ” or differentiation of the Supreme Bindu
there was unmanifested “ sound ” (Shabda).® Tins nn-
manifested Shabda is through action (Kriya Shakti) the
source of the manifested Shabda and Artha described later.®

1 Tayor yad yamalang rupang sa sanghatta iti smritah
Anandashaktih saivokta yato visbvang visrijyati
iSTa Shivah Shaktirabito na Shaktih Sbivavarjita.

(Tantraloka-Abiiika, S.)

“The coupled form of these two (Shiva- Sbakti) is called junction.
That is called the blissful Shakti from which creation arises*. There
is no Shiva without Shakti, nor Shakti without Shiva.”

2 Ik, 3 Ahn.

® On the physical plane this word denotes sexual union,

4 In the Shrichakra this is in the region of Baindava Chakra, the
highest, fol^wed by^ the triangular Chakra, which is Kameshvari,
Bhagamahni, and Vajreshvari. See further as to Ktoakala, post.

^ Bhidyamanat parad bindor avyaktatmaravo ’ bhavat
Shabdabrahmeti tang prahuh sarvagamavisharadah.

(Sharada Tilaka, Ch. I.)

It will be observed that in this verse the first Bindu is called Para,
and to make this clear the author of the Pranatoshini adds the followino-
note : ®

. Paradbindorityanena shaktyavastharupo yah prathamo bindus-
tasmat (By Parabmdu is meant the first Bindu, which is a state of
Shakti). See “ Garland of Letters ”.

® See Raghaya Bhatta, Comm. Ch, I. y. 12, Sharada, and the same.
Kriyashaktipradhanayah shabda-shabdarthakaranam
Frakriter bindurupinyah shabdabrahmabhavat param.

^“larnava Tantra (Khanda 5, IJIlasa I) says, the one Brah-
man has twofold aspect as Paramahrahman (transcendentl and Shabda.

CONSCIOUSNESS AND ITS POWER (SHIVA-SHAKTl)

The Brahman as the source of language (Shabda) and ideas
on one hand, and the objects (Artha) they denote on the
other, is called Shabdabrahman, or the Logosd From this
differentiating Bindu in the form of Prakriti are evolved
the Tattvas of Mind and Matter in all their various forms,
as also the Lords of the Tatt'vas (Tattvesha) — that is, their
dii’ecting intelligences — Shambhu,® the presiding Devata
over the Ajna Chakra, the centre of the mental faculties ;•
and Sadashiva, Isha, Rudra, Vishnu, Brahma, the Devatas
of the five forms of Matter, concluding with Prithivi
(“ earth ”) in the Muladhara centre, wherein the creative
Shakti, having finished Her work, again rests, and is
called Kundalini.

Just as the atom consists of a static centre round
which moving forces revolve, so in the human body Kundalini
in the “ Earth-Chakra ” is the static centre (Kendra) round
which She in kinetic aspect as the forces of the body works.
The whole body as Shakti is in ceaseless movement.
Kundali Shakti is the immobile support of all these opera-
tions. When She is aroused and Herself moves upwards,.
She withdraws with and into Herself these moving Shaktis,

brahman (immanent). Shabdabrahmaparambrahmabhedena brahmanor
dvaividhyam nktam. (And see also Slirimad Bhagavata, 6 Sbandha, 16
Ch.) Tena shabdartbarapavishishtasya sbabdabrahmatvam avadharitam
(Pranatosliini, 13j.

1 It is said in the Pranatoshini, p. 22, that Shamhhn is the “ asso*
ciate of time ” (Kalabandhu), because Kaia in the form of NMa assists-
in giving birth to Him and the other Devatas,

2 Atha bindvatmanah shambhoh kalabandhoh kalatmanah

Ajayata jagat-sakshi sarvavyapi sadashivah

Sadashivat bhaved Ishas tato Rudrasamudbhavah

Tato Vishnns tato Brahma tesham evam samndbhavah.

(Ch. I, vv. 15, 16.)

Here they are mentioned in connection with the form creation-
(Artbasrishti). The Pranatoshini says: Atra arthasrishtau punah
• rndradinam utpattista artharupena. Purvam tesham ntpattih shab-
darupena, ato na paunaruktyam iti kala niaya tadatmanas tadntpan-
natvat.

iw

48

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

and then unites with Shiva in the Sahasriira Lotus. The
process upward (evolution) is the reverse of the involution
■above described. The Worlds are dissolved (lay a) from
time to time for all beings. The perfected yogi dissolves
the Universe for all time for himself. Yoga is thus Laya.

Before proceeding to a description of the Chakras it is,
firstly, necessary to describe more fully the constituents of
the body — that is, the Tattvas mentioned, extending from
Prakriti to Prithivi. It is of these Tattvas that the Chakras
are centres. Secondly, an explanation is required of the
doctrine of “ Sound ” (Shabda), which exists in the body in
the three inner states (Para, Pashyanti, Madhyama), and is
expressed in uttered speech (Vaikhari). This will help the
reader to an understanding of the meaning of Mantra or
manifested Shabda, and of the “ Garland of Letters ” which
is distributed throughout the six bodily centres.

EMBODIED COHSOIOUSNBSS (JlVATMA)

The Transcendental Consciousness is called the Supreme
Self or Atma. The consciousness which is either in fact
embodied or liable to be embodied is the Jivatma. These
are but names for differing aspects of the same Self or
Atma. In the first case Consciousness is liberated from,
and in the second it is with, form. As Consciousness is
in itself formless, form is derivable from its power (Shakti),
This power is Prakriti Shakti — that is, the immediate
source and the constituent of Mind and Matter. The
corresponding consciousness-aspect of the same power
is called Purusha. This term is sometimes applied to the
Supreme, as in the name Brahmapurusha.^ Here is meant
^ limited consciousness — limited by the associated Prakriti
and Her products of Mind and Matter. In this sense the
term Purusha does not mean merely a human being, or
indeed any animal, but all beings and things which are
centres of expressed or hidden consciousness. In this
sense an atom of sand is a Purusha — that is, a conscious-
ness identifying itself with that particular form of solid
matter faintly showing such consciousness in atomic memory
and in its response to stimuli. For with that with which
man identifies himself that he becomes. This is from the
philosophical aspect. More popularly by Purusha, as by

1 So it is said Purushati na parang kinchit sa kashtha sa paragatih.

, r i'-

THE SIX OENTEES AND THE SERPENT POWER

Jiva, is Tneant sentient being with body and senses — that
is, organic lifed Man is a microcosm (Kslindrabrah-
manda)d The world is the macrocosm (Brahmanda).
There are numberless worlds, each of which is govern-
ed by its own Lords, though there is but one great
Mother of all whom these Lords themselves w'orship,
placing on their heads the dust of Her feet. In evervthing
there is all that is in anything else. There is thus nothing
in the universe which is not in the human body. There is
no need to throw one’s eyes into the heavens to find God.
He is within, being known as the “ Ruler within ” {An-
taryamin) or “Inner self” (Antaratina).® All else is His
poAver as Mind and Matter. Whatever of Mind or AJatter
exists in the universe exists in some form or manner in the
human body. So as already stated it is said in the Vish-
vasara Tantra : “ What is here is there. What is not here
is nowhere.”^ In the body there are the Supreme Shiva-
Shakti who pervade all things. In the body is Prakriti
bhakti and all Her products. In fact, the body is a vast
magazine of power (Shakti). The object of the Tantric

, 1 DeheBdriyadiynktah chetano jivah. The Knlarnava Tantra, I.

7-9, describes the Jivas as parts of Shiva enveloped in Maya Cwhich

EMBODIED CONSOIODSNESS (jIVATMA)

rituals is to raise these various forms of power to their full
expression. 'Phis is the work of Sadhana'. The Tantras
say that it is in the power of man to accomplish all he
wishes if he centres his will thereon. And this must be so,
for man is in his essence one with the Supreme Lord
(Ishvara), and the more he manifests Spirit the greater
is he endowed with its powers. The centre and root of
all his powers is Kundali Shakti. The centre in which the
quiescent consciousness is realised is the upper brain or
Sahasrara, whence in the case of the Yogi, the Prana escapes
through the Brahmarandhra at death. (See Plate VIII.}
The Mind and Body are constituted of the products of
Prakriti. Both having the same origin, each, whether
Mind or Matter, are “ material ” things— that is, they are
of the nature of forces,^ and limited instruments through
which Consciousness functions, and thus, though itself un-
limited, appears to be limited. The light in a lantern is
unaffected, but its manifestation to those without is affected
by the material through which the light shines. Prakriti
is not scientific Matter. The latter is only its grossest
product, and has no lasting existence. Prakriti is the
ultimate “material” or substantive cause of both Mind and
Matter, and the whole universe which they compose. It is
the mysterious fructescent womb (Yoni) whence all is born.^

1 So Herbert Spencer holds, in conformity with Indian doctrine,
that the universe, whether physical or psychical, is a play of force which
in the case of matter we as the self or mind experience as object. As
to Mind and Matter see my volumes so entitled.

2 The word has been said to be derived from Kti and the affix Min,
which is added to express bhuva, or the abstract idea, and sometimes
the Karma, or object of the action, coixesponding with the Greek affix
sts. Ktin inflected in the nominative becomes tih, it's. Prakritis therefore
has been said to correspond with cj)va'i<; (nature) of the Greeks
( Saner jee, “ Dialogues on Hindu Philosoph 3 %” 24). It is also called
Pradhana. Pra-}- dha + anat=Pradhatte sarvam atmani, or that which
contains all thing.s in itself ; the source and receptacle of all matter and
form. Pradhana also literally means “ chief ” (substance), for according
to Sangkhya it is the real creator.

OA THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

What She is in Herself cannot be realised. She is only
known by Her • effects.^ Mulaprakriti is the noumenal
cause of the phenomenal world from which creation arises.*^
Ultimately, as it is in itself (Svarupa), Prakriti Shakti,
like all else, is Consciousness, for Consciousness as Power
and Consciousness are one.® Consciousness, however,

assumes the role of Prakriti— that is, creative power

universe. Her substance consists of the

^-1 principle which are called

* The general action of Shakti is
Prakriti, in fact, 'like the maien’o.

when evolving the
Gunas or modes of this natural
Sattva, Pajas, Tamas,
to veil consciousness.
pima of the Thomistic philosophy, is a finitisivg principle.
To all seeming, it finitises and makes form in the infinite
formless Consciousness.® So do all the Gnnas. But one

V 1 Prakriti in Prapanchasara Tantra

but not She. It cannot be seen by the eyes.” Kena^ Fp., 1-6 : “ Yat
^akshusha na pashyati.” She is beyond the senses' Hence the
rishati addresses the Devi (11. 44) as idrigiiyavinirdeshva (who is not
o be particularly pointed out as being this or that).' See Sharada
n ®“'^,7'®bva8ara Tantras, cited in Pranatoshini,

inconceivable: with form (Vikriti) yet
Herself (Mulaprakriti) formless. Mahanirvana Tantra, IV 33-35

’'whilst Maya is Anir-

irlat neither Sat nor Asat, Chit is definable

® Kriteh prarambho yasyah. That is, by which creation (Srishtil

Sadananda’s_ Comm, on 4th Mantra of Isha Up. “The
chanpless Brahman which is consciousness appears in creation as MaS
which IS Brahman (Brahmamayi) consciousness (Chidrilpini') holdino-
in Herself unbeginning (anadi) Karmik tendencis (SastSa?

CbinmayT Ind'Vs despiteleLg

^ ^ ^ principle these Gunas are Chit-

^ The three Gunas are Prakriti. The Devi as in thp fn,.,,, r.t
Prakriti, is called Trigunatmika (who is composed ’of the three Gnnas)
All nature which issues from Her. thfi H-roof

EMBODIED CONSCIOUSNESS (JIVATMA)

does it less and another more. The first is Sattvaguna,
the function of which, relative to the other Gunas, is to
reveal consciousness. The greater the presence or power
of Sattvaguna, the greater the approach to the condition
of Pure Consciousness. Similarly, the function of Tamas
Guna is to suppress or veiZ consciousness. The function
of Rajasguna is to mahe active— is,, it works on
Tamas to suppress Sattva, or on Sattva to suppress
Tamas.^ The object and the effect of evolution, as it is
of all Sadhana, is to develop Sattvaguna. The Gunas
<ilwajs coexist in everything, but variously predominate.
The lower descent is made in the scale of nature the more
Tamasguna prevails, as in so-called “ brute substance,”
which has been supposed to be altogether inert. The
higher ascent is made the more Sattva prevails. The
truly Sattvik man is a divine man, his temperament being
'Called in the Tantras Divyabhava Through Sattva-guna
passage is made to Sat, which is Chit or pure Conscious-
ness, by the Siddhayogi, who is identified with Pure Spirit.

Prakriti exists in two states, in one of which (so far as
any effect is concerned)^ She is quiescent. The Gunas are
then in stable equilibrium, and not affecting one another.
There is -no manifestation. This is the unmanifest
{Avyakta), the potentiality of natural power (naktra

1 tn the words of Professor P. Mukhyopadbjaya, dealing with the
matter monistically, these are the three elements of the Life-Sti ess on
the surface of pure Consciousness — namely, presentation (Sattva),
movement (Rajas), and veiling (Tamasl, which are the three elements
•of creative evolution (“The Patent Wonder,” p. 19).

Those in whom Rajas Guna is predominant, and who work that
'Guna to suppress Tamas, are Vira (hero), and the man in whom the
Tamasguna prevails is a Pashu (animal).

® The three gunas are essentially changeful. Naparinamya kshana-
mapyavatishthante gunah (the gunas do not remain for a moment with-
ont raovenient). Vaohaspati Misra ; Sangkhya-Tattva-Kaumndi, 16th
Karika. The movement is twofold: (a) Sarupaparinama or Sadrisha

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

natumns)} When, however, owing to the ripening of
Karma, the time for creation takes place, there is a stirring
of the G-nnas (Giinakshobha) and an initial vibration
(Spandana), known in the Mantra Shastra as Cosmic
Sound (Sabdabrah man). The Gruuas affect one another,
and the universe made of these three Gunas is created.
The products of Prakriti thus evolved are called Yikara
or Vikriti.® Vikriti is manifest (Vyakta) Prakriti (inihAm
natnmta). In the infinite and formless Prakriti there
appears a strain or stress appearing as form. On the
relaxation of this strain in dissolution forms disappear iii
formless Prakriti, who as power (Shakti) re-enters the
Brahman- Consciousness. These Vikritis are the Tattvas
issuing from Prakriti,® the Avidyii Shakti — namely, the
different categories of Mind, Senses, and Matter.

The bodies are threefold : causal (Karanasharira, or
Parasharira, as the Shaivas call it), subtle (Suksbma-
sharira), and gross (Sthulasbarira). These bodies in which
the Atma is enshrined are evolved from Prakriti Shakti,
and are constituted of its various productions. They form

1 This is, in fact, the definition of Prakriti as opposed to Vikriti :
Sattvarajastamasang samyavastha prakritih. Sangkhya Kanmadi
Karika 3 : Sangkhya Pravachana, I. 61.

2 Vikara or Vikriti is something -which is really changed, as curd
from milk. The former is a Vikriti of the latter. Vivartta i.s apparent
hut unreal change, such as the appearance of what was and is a rope
as a snake. The Vedantasara thus musically defines the two t<?rms :

Satattvato’ nyathapratha vikara ityudiritah
Atattvato’ nyathapratha vivarta ityudiritah.

Under V. 40 of the Shatehakra the commentator speaks of Vikriti
as a reflection (Pratibinibata) of Prakriti. It is Prakriti modified.

3 As already explained, there are 1’attvas which precede the
Purnsha-Prakritl Tattvas. IStymologieally Tattva is an abstract deriv-
ation from the pronoun “ Tat ” (that), or Thatness, and may, it. has
been pointed out, be compared with the Hfficceitas of Duns Scotus.
The Tattva in a general sen.se is Truth or Braliman But in the
Sankhya it has a technical sense, being employed as a concrete term to
denote the eight •“ prodncens,” the sixteen “productions,” and the
twenty -fifth Tattva or Purusha.

EMBODIED CONSCIOUSNESS (JIVA'J'MA) 55

the tabernacle of the Spirit (Atma), which as the Lord is
“in all beings, and who from within all beings controls
them Tim i)ody of the Lord (Ishvara) is pure Sattva-
gvina (Shnddhasattvagunapradhana).* This is the aggre-
gate Prakriti or lilajm of Him or Her as the Creator-
Ci'eatrix of all things. Jiva, as the Knlarnava Tantra®
savs, is bound bj the bonds (Pasha) ; Sadashiva is free of
them.^ The foiuner is Pashu, and the latter Pashupati, or
Lord of Pashas (Jivas). That is, IshvarH is not affected
by Her own Hava. She is all-seeing, all-knowing, all-
ptnverful. Ishvara thus rules Maya. Jiva is ruled by it.
From this standpoint the Mother and Her child the Jivaai’e
not, thus, the same. For the latter is a limited conscious-
ness subject to error, and governed by that Mayii-shakti
of Hers which makes the world seem to be different from
what it in its essence is. The body of Jiva is therefore
known as the individual Prakriti or Avidya, in which there
is impure Sattva, and Rajas and Tamas (Malinasattva-
gunapradhana). But in the Mother are all creatures.
And so in the Trishati ® the Devi is called “ in the form of
■one and many letters ” (Ekanekaksharakritih). As Eka
She is the Ajiuina which is pure Sattva and attribute

1 Yah sarveshn bhfiteshu tishtlian ; yah sarvani bhutany antaro
yamayati (Brlh. Up., iii. 7, 15). The Jiva is thus Cliaitaiiyarupa with
the Upadhi ajnana and its effects, mind and body, and which is Abhi-
maiiin, or attributor to itself, of the waking, etc., states.

2 Shangkara’s Bhashya, II. 3-45. The Jiva is Chaitanya distin-

56

THE SIX CENTEES AND THE SEEPENT POWER

(TJpacllii) of Islivara ; as Aneka She is Upadhi or vehicle-
of Jiva. Whilst Ishvara is one, Jlvas are many, ^ according
to the diversity in the nature of the individual Prakriti
caused by the appearance of Rajas and Tamas in it in
differing proportions. The Atinii appears as Jiva in the
various forms of the vegetable, animal, and human worlds.

The first or Causal Body of any particular Jiva, there-
fore, is that Prakriti (Avidyii Shakti) which is the cause
of the subtle and gross bodies of this Jiva which are
evolved from it. This body lasts until liberation, when
the Jivatma ceases to be such and is the Paramatmu or-
bodiless Spirit (Videba Mukti). The Jiva exists in this
body dniing dreamless sleep (Sushnpti).

The second and third bodies are the differentiations
through evolution of the causal body, from which first
proceeds the subtle body, and from the latter is produced
the gross body.

The Stddle Body, -which is also called Linga Sharira
or Puryashtaka, is constituted of the first evolutes
(Vikriti) from the causal Prakritic body — namely, the
Mind (Antahkarana), the internal instrument, together
with the external instruments (Bahyakarana), or the
Senses (Indriya), and their supersensible objects (Tan-
matra). The third or gross body is the body of “ matter ”■
which is the gross particular object of the senses * derived
from the'supersensibles.

Shortly, this subtle body may be described as the
Mental Body, as that which succeeds is called the gross
body, of Matter. Mind is considered by itself, that is as
dissociated from Consciousness -which is never the case, an
unconscious force which breaks up into particulars the

^ According to another Yedantic wiew there is only one jiva.

2 The definition of a Bhuta (sensible matter) is that which can be
seen by the outer organ, such as the eye, ear, etc.

EMBODIED CONSCIOUSNESS (JIVATMA) 57

Experience-Whole which is Chit. It is called the
“ working within ” or “ internal instrument ” (Antah-
karana), and is one only, but is given different names to
denote the diversity of its functions. ^ The Sangkhya thus
speaks of Buddhi, Ahangkara, Manas, to which the
Vedanta adds Chitta, being different aspects or attributes
(Dharma) of Mind as displayed in the psychical processes
by which the Jiva knows, feels, and wills.

These may be considered from the point of view of
evolution — that is, according to the sequence in which
the limited experience of the Jiva is evolved — or from
that in which they are regarded after creation, when the
experience of concrete sense objects has been had. Ac-
cording to the former aspect, Buddhi or Mahat Tattva
is the state of mere presentation ; consciousness of being
•only, without thought of “ I ” (Ahangkara), and unaffected
by sensations of particular objects (Manas and Indriyas).
It is thus the impersonaIJiva Consciousness. Ahangkara,
of which Buddhi is the basis, is the personal consciousness
which realises itself as a particular “ I,” the experiencer.
The Jiva, in the order of creation, first experiences in a
vague general way without consciousness of the self, like
the experience which is had immediately on waking after
sleep. It then refers this experience to the limited self,
and has the consciousness “ I am So-and-so

Manas is the desire which follows on such experience,
and the Senses (Indriya) and their objects are the means
whereby that enjoyment is haid which is the end of all will
to life. Whilst, however, in the order of evolution Buddhi
is the first principle, in the actual working of the Antah-
karana after creation has taken place it comes last.

It is more convenient, therefore, to commence with
the sense-objects and the sensations they evoke. The
1 Sangkliya Pravactana Sutra, II. 16. See my vol. on “ Mind ”.

11*

illMp

im

flpillii*

stiiH*

wm

58

THE SIX CENTBES AND THE SEHDENT POWEE

experiencer is affected by Mattel' in five different ways, giving
rise in him to the sensations of hearing, touch and feel,^
colour and form® and sight, taste, and smell.® But sensible
perception exists only in respect of particular objects and
is thus perceived in its variations only. But there exist
also general elements of the particulars of sense-perception.
That general ideas may be formed of particular sense-
objects indicates, it is said, ^ their existence in some |>arts of
the diva’s nature as facts of experience ; otherwise the
generals could not be formed from the particulars given by
the senses as the physical facts of experience. This ”
general is called a Tanmatra, which means the “ mere
thatness,” or abstract quality, of an object. Thus, the
Tanmatra of a sound (Shabdatanmatra) is not any particular
sensible form of it, but the “ thatness ” of that sound — that
is, that sound apart from any of its particular variations
stated. The Tanmatras have, therefore, aptly been called
the “ generals of the sense particulai’S ” ® — that is, the
general elements of sense perception. These necessarily
come into existence when the senses (Indriya) are produced ;
for a sense necessitates something which can be the object
of sensation. These Siikshma (subtle) Bhutas, as they are
also called, are not ordinarily themselves perceived, for
they are supersensible (Atindriya). Their existence is only

1 See post ; also ray volume on “ Matter

2 Bupl. is primarily colour. By means of colour form is perceived,,
for a perfectly colourless thing in not perceivable by the gross senses.

3 The other objects of the senses are the speakable, prehexjsifole,
approachable, excitable (that which is -within the genitals), and excre-
tabie. Each sense is suited to a particular class of influences — touch
to solid pressure, hearing to aerial pressure, taste to liquid, light to
liiramous rays ” (Bain: “ Mind and Body,” p. 22, 1892).

See Sangkhya Pravachana Sutra, II. 26-28, 40 ; Sangkhya Tattva
Kaumndi, 27 Karika.

4 See for this in greater detail J. 0. Chatterji’s “ Kashmir
Shaivaism,” 125.

5 See post.

EMBODIED CONSCIOUSNESS (jIVATMA) 59

mediately perceived througb. the gross particular objects of
which they are the generals, and which proceed from them.
They can be the objects of immediate (Pratyaksha) per-
ception only to Yogisd They are, like the gross sense-
objects derived from them, five in number— namely, sound
(Shabdatanmatra), touch and feel ^ (Sparshatanmatra),
colour and form (Rupatanmatra), flavour (Rasatanmatra),
and odour (Gandhatanmatra) as universals. Bach of these
evolves from that which precedes itd

Sensations aroused by sense-objects are experienced
by means of the outer instruments (Bahyakarana) of the
Lord of the body, or senses (Indriya), which are the gate-
ways through which the Jiva receives worldly experience.
These are ten in number, and are of two classes : to.,
the five organs of sensation or perception (Jnanendriya),
or ear (hearing), skin (feeling by touch), eye (sight), tongue
(taste), and nose (smell) ; and the five organs of action
(Karmendriya), which are the reactive response which
the self makes to sensation — namely, mouth, hands,
legs, anus, and genitals, whereby speaking, grasping,
walking, excretion, and procreation, are performed, and,
through which effect is given to the Jiva’s desires. These
are afferent and efferent impulses respectively.

The Indriya, or sense, is not the physical organ, but
the faculty of mind operating through that organ as its
instrument. The outward sense-organs are the usual means
whereby on the physical plane the functions of hearing and
so forth -are accomplished. But, as they are mere instru-
ments and their power is derived from the mind, a Yogi

1 So it is said Tani vastuni tanmatradini pratyaksha-vishayani (that
is, to Yogis).

2 Whereby the thermal quality of things is perceived.

^ In a general way the last four correspond with the Yaishe-
shika Paramanus. There are diferences, however. Thus, the latter are

60 THE SIX OENTBES AND THE SEBPINT POWEB

may accomplisli by tbe mind only all that may

,neans of iheae physical organs wrthont the use of tl.e

““toK reference to their phyeioal ““‘tf “‘“I!;;

not as ther are in themselves, the classes into n Inch the

Llr:;s"a?e .vi« ^ nS ^

^f'the Jlva desiring to kno. and act ^

claims to accomplish without the use of the s bteot *

ordinarily done hy their means. So a hypnotic 1 sul^,.^c
can perceive things, even when no ns °
physical organs ordinarily necessaiy fo . L ^ 1^3

made.' The fact of there being a

not necessarily involve the same number ot Inclri} as. a
“t of .-^otng ■■ done by means of the band (as by a c^

is to be regai-ded really as an operation of the Mi pa ^^t

feet (Padendriya), even though tbe band lb ^ ‘

Indriva for handling.' By the instruinentahtj ot tlm
IndriVas things are perceived and action is taken with
reference to them. The Indriyas are_not, ^®^®J2cTtress

in themselves for this purpose. ^ In the hrb P ^ ^

attention (Alochana) co-operates ttere is ,

To be “ absent-minded ” is not to know what is happening.

Itotiok must therefore co-operate with ‘be senses heio e

+ldP latter can “give” the experiencer anything at all.
sL'rit one afd the same moment the expeneneer is
BiihjJt to receive a countless number of sensations win

1 See “ Kashmir Shaivaism,” hj J- C. Mad', leTd

t/ThSe ^ti'Shi..; tneeis a.d sielt her toes.

2 Tantrasara Abxiika, 8.

EMBODIED CONSCIOUSNESS (jIVATMA)

come to and press upon him from all sides. If any of these^
is to be brought into the field of consciousness, it must be-
selected to the exclusion of others. The process of experi-
ence is the selection of a special section from out of a
general whole, and then being engaged on it, so as to make-
it one’s own, either as a particular object of thought or a
particular field of opei’ation.^ Lastly, as Western psychology
holds, the senses give not a completed whole, but a
manifold — the manifold of sense. These “ points of sensa-
tion ” must be gathered together and made into a whole..
“These three functions of attention, selection, and synthesis-
ing the discrete manifold of the senses, are those belonging
to that aspect of the mental body, the internal agent
(Antahkarana), called Manas.^ Just as Manas is necessary
to the senses (Indriya), the latter are necessary for Manas..
For the latter is the seat of desire, and cannot exist by
itself. It is the desire to perceive or act, and therefore-
exists in association with the Indriyas.

Manas is thus the leading Indriya, of which the senses:
are powers. For without the aid and attention of Manas
the other Indriyas are incapable of performing their
respective offices ; and as these Indriyas are those of per-
ception and action, Manas, which co-operates with both
is said to partake of the character of both cognition and
action.

Manas, through association with the eye or other sense,,
becomes manifold, being particularised or differentiated by
its co-operation with that particular instrument, whicL
cannot fulfil its functions except in conjunction with

Manas.

1 So in the Text here translated fost, Manas is spoken, of as a door-
keeper -who lets some enter, and keeps others outside.

2 See “Kashmir Shaivaism,” 94-114. This is the San^^
Vedantic definition. According to the Vaisheshika, Manas is
which gives knowledge of pleasure, pam, and Jivatma (I am So-and so)..

Rill

;

62 THK SIX CENTRES ANB THE SERPENT POWER

Its function is said to be Sangkalpa-Vikalpa. That
is, selection and rejection from the material provided by
the Jnfinendriya. When, after having been brought into
contact with the sense-objects, it selects the sensation which
is to be presented to the other faculties of the mind, there
is Sangkalpa. The activity of Manas, however, is itself
neither intelligent result nor moving feelings of pleasure or
pain. It has not an independent pow'er to reveal itself to
the experience!’. Before things can be so revealed and
realised as objects of perception, they must be made subject
to the operation of Ahangkara and Buddhi, without whose
intelligent light they would be dark forms unseen and
unknown by the experience!’, and the efforts of Manas but
blind gropings in the dark. Nor can the images built up
by Manas affect of themselves the experiencer so as to
move him in any way until and unless the experiencer
identifies himself with them by Ahangkara — that is, by
making them his own in feeling and experience. Manas,
being thus an experience of activity in the dark, unseen
and unrevealed by the light of Buddhi, and not moving the
experiencer until he identifies himself with it in feeling, is
one in which the dark veiling quality (Tamas guna) of
Shakti Prakriti is the most manifest.^ This Guna also
prevails in the Indriyas and the subtle objects of their
operation (Tanmatra).

Ahangkara the “ I-raaker” is self-arrogation® — that is,
the realisation of oneself as the personal “ I ” or self-
consciousness of worldly experience, in which the Jlva
thinks of himself as a pai’ticular person who is in relation
with the objects of his experience. It is the power of

^ See Kashmir Shaivaism,” p. 116, where the anthor cites the
dictum of Kant that perceptions (Anschauung) without conceptions
are blind.

2 Abhimana. Ahhixuano’hangkarah. See Sangkhya Tattva Kau-
mudi, 24 Karika, and Bk. 11, Sutra 16, Sangkhya Pravachana Sutra.

EMBOD[ED CONSCIOUSNESS

welded

its support/ Buddlii considerea wita retanoii to uue utuor
faculties of experience is that aspect of the Antahkarana

which determines (Adhyavasayatnaika buddhih)/ “A man

is said to determine (Adhyavasyati) who, having perceived
(Manas), and thought, ‘I am concerned in this matter"
(Ahangkiira), and thus having self-arrogated, comes to the
determination, ‘ This must be done by me’ (Kartavyam etet
maya).”^ “ Must be done ” here does not refer to exterior
action only, but to mental action (Manasikriya) also, such
as any determination by way of the forming of concepts
and percepts (“ It is so ”) and resolutions (“ It must be
done ”). Buddhi pervades all effects whatever other than
itself. It is the principal Tattva because it pervades all the
instruments (Indriya), is the receptacle of all the Sangskaras
or Karmic tendencies, and is in Bangkhya the seat of
memory.* It is the thinking principle which forms concepts
or general ideas acting through the instrumentality of Ahang-
kara, Manas, and the Indriyas. In the operations of the
senses Manas is the principal; in the operation of Manas

1 Tam ahangkaram upajivya hi buddhir adhyavasyati (Sangkhya-

Tattva-Kaumiidi, supra). , .

2 Sanakhya-Pravachana, IL 13. The Sutra has Adhyavasayo
buddhih ; 'but; the Commentator points out that Buddhi is not to be
identified with its functions. Buddhi is thus called Nishchayakarim.

3 Sangkhya-Tattva-Kaumudi, 23rd Karika: Sarvo vyavahartta
5 locbvrmatt 4 aham atradhikrita ityabhimatya kartavyam etat maya

THE SIX ' ClKTRfiS- .AKD ' TH SERPENT POWER

the principal ; and in tiie operation oi
Buddhi is the principal. With the instrument-

■ ' j Biiddlii acts, niodiacations. taking place
throngli the instmnientalitj of the sense func-
Buddhi which is the basis of all cognition,
and resolves, and makes over objects to Purusha
And so it is said that Bitddhi,
determination, is the charioteer ;

Sangkalpavikalpa, is the
Jlva is the Enjoy er
senses,

In Bnddhi Sattvagnna predomi-
Manas and the Indriyas

Ahangkara is
Ahangkara
ality of all of these
in Buddhi
tionsd It is
sensation

—that is, Consciousness
whose characteristic is
Manas, whose characteristic is
reins; and the Senses are the horses
(Bhokta)— that is, Atma conjoined Avith body

Manas, and Buddhi.*
nates ; in Ahangkara, Rajas , in

and their objects, Tamas. ^ ^ ^

Chitta * in its special sense is that faculty ( v ntti) bj
which the Mind first recalls to memory (Smaranam) that
■of which there has been previously Annbhava or Prat-
yaksha Jnana— that is, immediate cognition. This Sma-
ranam exists only to the extent of actual Anubhava. For
remembrance is the equivalent of, and neither more nor
less than, Avhat has been previously known ; ^ remembrance
being the calling up of that. Ohinta, again, is that faculty
whereby the current of thought dwells, thinks, and con-
templates upon (Chinta)® the subject so recalled by
■Smaranam, and previously known and determined by
Bnddhi. For such meditation (Dhyana) is done througl

EMBODIED CONSCIOUSNESS (jIVITMA) 65

concepts. According to Vedanta, Buddhi determines but
once only, and the further recall and thought upon the
mental object so determined is the faculty of the separate
mental category called Chitta. Siingkhya, on the principle
of economy of categories, regards Smaranam and Ghinta to
be functions of Buddhi.^ In the -works here translated
and elsewhere Ohitta is, however, currently used as a
general term for the working mind — that is, as a synonym
for the Antahkaraoa.® •

To sum up the functions of the subtle body : the
sense-objects (Bhuta, derived from Tanmatra) affect the
senses (Indriya) and are perceived by Manas, are referred
to the self by Ahangkara, and are determined by Buddhi.
The latter in its turn is illumined by the light of Conscious-
ness (Chit), which is the Purusha; all the Principles
(Tattva) up to and including Buddhi being modifications of
apparently unconscious Prakriti. Thus all the Tattvas
work for the enjoyment of the Self, or Purusha. They are
not to be regarded as things existing independently
by themselves, but as endowments of the Spirit (Atma).
They do not work arbitrarily as they will, but represent an
organised co-operative effort in the service of the Enjoyer,
the Experiencer, or Purusha.

The subtle body is thus composed of what are called
the “ 17,” vk., Buddhi (in which Ahangkara is included),
Manas, the ten senses (Indriya), and the five Tanmatra.
Ho special mention is made of Prana or Vital Principle by
the Sangkhya, by which it is regarded as a modification of
the Antahkarana, and as such is implicitly included. The

66

THE SIX CENTEES AND THE SERl’ENT POWEK

Mayavadins insert the Priina pentad instead of the Tan-
matrad

The Jiva lives in his subtle or mental body alone when
in the dreaming (Svapna) state. For the outside world
of objects (Mahabhiita) is then shut out, aiul the con-
sciousness wanders in the world of ideas. The subtle
body or soul is imperishable until Liberation is attained,
when the Jivatmii, or seemingly conditioned consciousness,
ceases to be sucb, and is the Supreme Consciousness or
Paramiitma, Nirguna Shiva. The subtle body thus survives
the dissolution of the gross body of matter, from which it
goes forth (utkraman), and “ reincarnates *’ - (to use an
English term) until liberation (Mukti ). The Lingasharira is
not all-pervading (Vibhu), for in that case it would he eternal
CSiitya), and could not act (Kriya). But it moves and goes
(Gati ). Since it is not Vibhu, it must be limited (parich-
chhinna) and of atomic dimension i^Anuparimana). It is
indirectly dependent on food. For though the material body
is the food-body (Annamaya), Mind is dependent on it when
associated with the gross body. Mind in the subtle body
bears the Sangskaras which are the result of past actions.
This subtle body is the cause of the third or gross body.

The whole process of evolution is due to the presence
of the will to life and enjoyment, which is a result of
Viisana, or world-desire, carried from life to life in the
Sangskaras, or impressions made on the subtle body by
Karma, which is guided by Ishvara. In its reaching forth
to the world, the Self is not only endowed with the faculties

1 Saxigkhya-Pravacbana- Sutra, III. 9. See my volume on ‘‘ Life ”
(Fraria-Shakti).

- This is transmigration or pretyabkava, which means ‘‘the arising
again” (and again) — punarufcpattih pretyabhavah, as Gautama says*
Pretya—having died, and Bhava=r^Hhe becoming (born into the ^vorld)
again “ Again ” implies habitnalness : birth, then death, then birth,
and so on, until final emancipation, which is Moksha, or Apavarga
(release), as the IN^yaya calls it.

EMBODIED OONSOIODSNESS (jIVAl’Ml) 67

of tlie subtile body, but with the gi’oss objects of enjoyment
on which those faculties feed. There therefore comes into
being, as a projection of the Power (Shakti) of Conscious-
ness, the yros's ftody of matter called Sthula Sharira.

The word Sharira comes from the root “ Shri,” to
decay ; for the gross body is at every moment undergoing
molecular birth and death until Prana, or vitality, leaves
the organism, which, as such, is dissolved. The Soul
(Jivatma) is, when it leaves the body, no longer concerned
therewith. There is no such thing as the resurrection of
the same body. It returns to dust, and the Jiva when it
reincarnates does so in a new body, which is nevertheless,
like the last, suited to give effect to its Karma.

The Sthula Sharira, with its three Doshas, six Koshas,
seven Dhatus, ten Fires, and so forth,^ is the perishable
body composed of compounds of five forms of gross sensible
matter (Mahabhuta), which is ever decaying, and is at the
end dissolved into its constituents at death.* This is the
Vedantik body of food (Annamaya Kosha), so called because
it is maintained by food which is converted into chyle
(Rasa), blood, flesh, fat in bone, marrow and seed-components
of the gross organism. The Jiva lives in this body when
in the seething (Jagrat) state.

The human, physical, or gross body is, according to
Western science, composed of certain compounds, of which
the chief are W'ater, gelatine, fat, phosphate of lime,
albumen, and fibrine, and of these water constitutes some
two-thirds of the total weight. These substances are com-
posed of simpler non-metallic and metallic elements, of which
the chief are oxygen (to the extent of about two-thirds),

I See Introductioii to my edition ot Prapanchasara Tantra, Vol. Ill,
“Tantrik Texts”.

® Decay and death are two of the six PTrinis which, with hunger and
thirst, grief and ignorance, are characteristics of the body (Deha-
dharma) : Prapanchasara Tantra, II.

hydrogeB, carbon, nitrogen, ealcinm, and phospborns.
Again, to go one step farther back, though the alleged
indestructibility of the elements and their atoms is still
said by some to present the character of a “ practical truth,’
well-known recent experiments go to re-establish the
ancient hypothesis of a single Primordial Substance to which
these various forms of matter may be reduced, with the
resultant of the possible and hitherto derided transmutation
of one element into another 5 since each is but one of the
plural manifestations of the same iinderlying unity.

Recent scientific I'esearch has shown that this oiiginal
substance cannot be scientific “ matter ’ that is, that
which has mass, weight, and inertia. Matter has been
dematerialised and reduced, according to cuiient hypo-
theses, to something which differs profoundly from matter
as known by the senses. This ultimate substance is stated
to be Ether in a state of motion. The present scientific
hypothesis would appear to be as follows ; The ultimate
and simplest physical factor from which the universe has
arisen is motion of and in a substance called ether,
which is not scientific “matter”. The motions of this
substance give rise from the realistic point of view to the
notion of “ matter Matter is thus at base one, notwith-
standing the diversity of its forms. Its ultimate element
is on the final analysis of one kind, and the differences in
the vai-ious kinds of matter depend on the various move-
ments of the ultimate particle and its succeeding combina-
tions. Given such unity of base, it is possible that one
form of matter may pass into another. ■

The Indian theory here described agrees with the
Western speculations to which we have referred, that what
the latter calls scientific or ponderable matter does not
permanently exist, but says that there are certain motions
or forces (five in number) which produce solid matter, and

68 THE SIX CENTEES AND THE SEEPENT POWEE

EMBODIED CONSCIOUSNESS (jIVATMA) 69

which are ultimately reducible to ether (Akasha). Akasha,
however, and scientific “ Ether ” are not in all respects the
same. The latter is an ultimate substance, not “ matter,”
having vibratory movements and affording the medium for
the transmission of light. Akasha is one of the gross
forces into which the Primordial Power (Prakriti-Shakti)
differentiates itself. Objectively considered it is a vibra-
tion ^ in and of the substance of Prakriti of which it is a
transformation in which the other forces are observed to
be operating. Lastly, Akasha is not an ultimate, but is
itself derived from the supersensible Taninatra, with its
quality (Guna) whereby Akasha affects the senses ; and this
Tanmittra is itself derived from the mental I-making princi-
ple fAhangkiira), or personal consciousness produced from

the superpersonal Jiva-consciousness as such (Buddhi),
emanating from the root-energy, or Prakriti-Shakti the
-cause and basis of all forms of “ material ” force or sub-
stance. At the back of both “ matter” and mind, there is
the creative energy (Shakti) of the Supreme who is the
cause of the universe and Consciousness itself.

Matter affects the Jiva in five different ways, giving
rise in him to the sensations of smell, taste, sight, toucl
-and feel, and hearing.

As already explained, the Tanmatras are supersensible
being abstract (jualities, whilst the senses perceive thei
variations in particular objects only. These sense-parti
culars are produced from the generals or IJniversals.

70

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWEK

From the Shabda Tanmiitra and from the combina-
tions of the latter with the other Tanmatras are prod need
the gross Bhutas (Mahubhi'ita), Avhich as things of phj’si-
cal magnitude perceivable by the senses appi-oach the
Western definition of discrete sensible “ matter Tliese
five Mahabhutas are Akasha (Ether), Vayu (Air), Tejas
(Fire), Apas (Water), and Prithivi (Earth). Their deve-
lopment takes place from the Tanmiitra, from one unit of
that which is known in sensible matter as mass (Tamas),
charged with energy (Rajas) by the gradual accretion of
mass and i-edistribution of energy. The result of this
is that each Bhuta is more gross than that which pre-
cedes it until “Earth” is reached. These five Bhutas
have no connection with the English “ elements ” so called,
nor, indeed, are they elements at all, being derived from
the Tanmatra. Dynamically and objectively considered
they are (proceeding from Akasha) said to be five forms of
motion, into which Prakriti differentiates itself : viz., non-
obstructive, all-directed motion radiating lines of force in
all directions, symbolised as the “ Hairs of Shiva,” ^
affording the space (Akasha) in which the other forces
operate ; transverse motion ^ and locomotion in space
(Vayu) ; upward motion giving rise to expansion (Tejas) ,*
downward motion giving rise to contraction (Apas) ;
and that motion which produces cohesion, its characteristic
of obstruction being the opposite of the non-obstructive
ether in which it exists and from which it and the other
Tattvas spring. The first is sensed by hearing through

1 “ Kashmir Shaivaism,” p. 132, where it is suggested that the
lines of the magnetic field are connected with the lines of Dik (direction)
as the lines of ethereal energy.

"V ajn, as the Prapanchasara Tantra vsays, is characterised by
motion (Chalanapara). The Sanskrit root Ya=- to move. See Sushrnta^
Vol. II, p. 2, ed. KaviraJ Kunja Lala Bhishagratna.

EMBODIED CONSCIOUSNESS (jIVATMA) 71

its quality (Guna) o£ sound (Shabda) tbe second by touch
tbrougb resistance and feeling tbe third by sight as
colour ; ^ the fourth by taste through flavour; and the fifth
by the sense of smell through its odour, -which is produced
by matter only in so far as it partakes of the solid stated
The hal'd and stable obstructive “earth” is that
which is smelt, tasted, seen, and touched, and which exists
in space which is known by hearing — that is, the sounds
in it. The smooth “ water ” is that which is tasted, seen,
and touched, in space. “Tire” is what is seen and
touched — that is, felt as temperature — in space. “ Air ”
is what is so felt in space. And sound which is heard is
that by which the existence of the “Ether” is known.
These Bhiitas when compounded make up the material
universe. Each thing therein being thus made of all the
Bhutas, we find in the Tanti'as that form, colour, and
sound, are related, a truth which is of deep ritual signifi-
cance. Thus, each of the sounds of speech or music has
a corresponding form, which have now been made visible
to the eye by the Phonoscope.® Thus the deaf may
perceive sounds by the eye, just as, by the Optophone
the blind may read by means of the ear.

i According to Western notions, it is the air which is the cause of
-sound. According to Indian notions, Ether is the substratum of
(Ashraya) of sound, and Air (Vayu) is a helper (SahakM) in its mani-
festation.

^ Touch is not here used in the sense of all forms of contact, for
form and solidity are not yet developed, but such particular contact as
that by which is realised the thermal quality of things.

^ Fire is the name for that action which builds and destroys

^ All matter in tbe solid state (Parthiva) giving rise to smell is in
the state of earth — e.g,, metals, flowers, etc.

s When Avords are spoken or snug into a small trumpet attached
to the instrument, a revolving disk appears to break up into a number
of patterns, which vary with the variations in sound.

72 :

THE SIX OENTEBS AN0 THE SBRPEXT POWER

In the same Shastra various colours and figures (IMan-
dalas) are assigned to the Tattvas to denote them. Akii-
sha is represented bj a transparent white circular diagram
in which, according to some accounts there are dots
(Chhidra==hole), thus displa3ring the interstices which Aka-
sha produces ; for Akaslia, which is all-pem^ading, intervenes
between each of the Tattvas which are evolved from it.

Vayn is denoted by a smoky grey, six-cornered dia-
gram;^ Tejas, red, triangular diagram; Apas, white,
crescent-shaped diagram ; and PrithivI, yellow, <{ua-
drangular diagram which as the superficial presentation of
the cube well denotes the notion of solidity.

Similarly, to each Devatii also there is assigned a Yan-
tra, or diagram, which is a suggestion of the form as-
sumed by the evolving Prakriti or bod}" of that particular
Consciousness.

The gi*oss body is, tbeii, a combination of the com-
pounds of these Mahabhutas, derivable from tbe Akasha
(“Ether”) Tattva.

The Bhutas and the Tanmatra, as parts of these com-
pounds, pervade the body, bnt particular Bhutas ai'e said
to have centres of force in particular regions. Thus the
centres (Chakra) of “ Earth ” and “Water” are the two
lower ones in the trunk of the body. “ Fire ” predominates
in the central abdominal region, and “ Air ” and “ Ether **
in the two higher centres in the heart and throat. These
five Tanmatras, five Bhutas, and the ten senses (Indriyas)
which perceive them, are known as the twenty gross
Tattvas which are absorbed in Yoga in the centres of the
bodily trunk. The remaining four subtle mental Tattvas
(Buddhi, Ahangkara, Manas) and Prakriti have their special
centres of activity in the head. Again, the Bhutas may be

^ 1 See as to this and the other diagrams the coloured plates of the*

Chakras.

EMBODIED CONSCIODSKESS (jIVATMA)

73

specially displayed in other portions of the bodily organism.
Thus, PrithiTl displays itself as bone or muscle ; Apas as
urine and saliva; Tejas as hunger and thirst; Vayu in
grasping and walking. Fire is manifold, its great mystery
being saluted by many names. So Tejas manifests both as
light and heat, for, as Helmholtz saj'^s, the same object may
effect the senses in different ways. The same ray of
sunshine, which is called light when it falls on the eyes, is
called heat when it falls on the skin. Agni manifests in
the household and umbilical fires ; as Kamagni in the
Muladhara centre ; in Vadava or submarine fire and in the
“ Lightning ” of the Sushumna in the spinal column.

Matter thus exists in the five states etheric,^ aerial,^'
fiery,® fiuid,^ and solid.® Prithivi does not denote mei’ely
what is popularly called “ Earth ”. All solid (Parthiva)
odorous substance is in the Prithivi state. All substance in.
the fluid (Apya) state is in the Apas state, as everything
which has cohesive resistance is in that of Prithivi. This
latter, therefore, is the cohesive vibration the cause of
solidity of which the common earth is a gross compounded
form. All matter in the aerial (Vayava) condition is in the
Vayu state. These are all primary differentiations of
cosmic matter into a universe of subtly fine motion. The
Tattvas regarded objectively evoke in the Indriyas smell,
taste, sight, touch, and hearing.

1 All-pervading (Sarvavyiipi), though relatively so in Sangkhya^
and colourless (Nirupa). As to vibration, v. ante,

^ With movements which are not straight (Tiryag-gamana-shila).

^ Illuminating (Prakasha) and heating (Tapa),

4 Liquid (Tarala), moving (Chalanashila). It has the quality of
Sneha, whereby things can be rolled up into a lump (Pinda), as mois-
tened flour or earth. Some solid things become liquid for a time
through heat ; and others become solids, the Jati (species) of which is
still water (Jalatva).

5 Without hollow, dense (Ghana), Arm (Dridha), combined (Sang-
hata), and hard (Kathina).

74 THE SIX GENTEES AND THE SKEPENT POWEE

The STOSS boclv is thus a combination of the compounds

O «•' *

of these Mahabhiitas, derivable ultiraatel}" from Ither
(Akasha), itself evolved in manner described.

The gross and subtle bodies above described are vital-
ised and held together as an organism by Prana, which
is evolved from the active energy (Kriya Shakti) of the
Linga Sharira. Prana, or the vital principle, is the special
relation of the Atma with a certain form of matter which
by this relation the Atmh organises and builds up as a
means of having experienced This special relation con-
stitutes the individual Prana in the individual body. The
cosmic all-pervading Priina is not Prana in this gross sense,
but is a name for the Brahman as the author of the
individual Prana. Thie individual Priina is limited to the
particular body which it vitalises, and is a manifestation in
all breathing creatures (Pram) of the creative and sustaining
activity of the Brahman, who is represented in individual
bodies by the Devi Kundalini.

All beings, whether Devatas, men, or animals, exist
•only so long as the Prana is within the body. It is the life-
duration of all.^ What life is has been the subject of dispute
in India as elsewhere.® The materialists of the Lokayata
■school considered life to be the result of the chemical
combinations of the elements, in the same manner as the
intoxicating property of spirituous liquors results from the
fermentation of unintoxicating rice and molasses, or as
spontaneous generation was supposed to occur under the
influence of gentle warmth. This is denied by the Sangkhya.
Though Prana and its fivefold functions are called Vayu,
Life, according to this school, is not a Vayu in the sense of

1 “ Hindu Realism,” p. 84. See my volume on “ Life ”.

* Kausliifcakl TTpanisliad, 3-2.

^ See mj volume on Life

EMBODIED OONSOIOUSNESS (jIVATMi) 75

a mei’e biomeclianical force, nor . any mere mechanical
motion resulting from the impulsion of such Vayu.

According to the view of this school, Prana, or vitality,
is the common function of the mind and all the senses, both
sensory (Jnanendriya) and motor (Karmendriya), which
result in the bodily motion. Just as several birds when
confined in one cage cause that cage to move, by themselves
moving, so the mind and senses cause the body to move
while they are engaged in their respective activities. Life
is, then, a resultant of the various concurrent activities
of other principles or forces in the organism.

The Vedantists agree in the view that the Prana is
neither Vayu nor its operation, but deny that it is the mere
resultant of the concomitant activities of the organism, and
hold that it is a separate independent principle and
“ material ” form assumed by the universal Consciousness.
Life is therefore a subtle principle pervading the whole
organism which is not gross Vayu, but is all the same a
subtle kind of apparently unconscious force, since every-
thing which is not the Atma or Pur usha is, according to
Mayavada Vedanta and Sangkhya, unconscious or, in
Western parlance, “material” (Jada).^ The gross outer
body is heterogeneous (Parichchhinna) or made up of distinct
or well-defined parts. On the other hand, the Pranamaya
self which lies within the Annamaya self is a homogeneous
undivided whole (Sadharana) permeating the whole physical
body (Sarvapindavyapin). It is not cut off into distinct
regions (Asadharana) as is the Pinda, or microcosmic physi-
cal body. Unlike the latter, it has no specialised organs each
discharging a specific function. It is a homogeneous unity
(Sadharana) present in every part of the body, which it

• 1 See Commentary on Taittiriya Upanishad, edited by Matadeva

Sbastri, and Appendix 0, by Dr. Brojendra Nath Seal, to Professor
B. K. Sarkar’s “ The Positive Background of Hindu Sociology,” where
some further authorities are given.

76 THE SIX a&NTSES AND THE SERTENT POWER

ensouls as its inner self. Vayu ^ which courses through the
body is the manifestation, seif-begotten, the subtle, invisible,
all-pervading, divine energy of eternal life. It is so called
from the fact of its coursing throughout the universe.
Invisible in itself, yet its operations are manifest. For it
determines the birth, growth, and decay, of all animated
organisms, and as such it receives the homage of all created
being. As vital Vayn it is instantaneous in action, radiating
as nerve force through the organism in constant currents.
In its normal condition it maintains a state of equilibrium
between the different Doshas ^ and Dhatus, ® or root prin-
ciples of the body. The bodily Vuyu is divided, as are the
principles called Pitta ^ and Kapha, ^ into five chief divisions
accoi’ding to the differences in location and function.
Vayu, known in its bodily aspect as Prana, the xmiversal
force of vital activity, on entry into each individual is
divided into tenfold functions (Vritti), of which five are
chief. The first or breathing, bear the same name (Prana)
as that given to the force considered in its totality — the
function whereby atmospheric air with its pervading
vitality, which has been first drawn from without into the
bodily system, is expired. ®

On the physical plane Prana manifests in the animal
body as breath through inspiration (Sa), or Shakti, and
expiration (Ha), or Shiva. The male principle of Prana
throws out, and the female principle draws in, in
accordance with the nature of Shakti as Shabdabrahman

1 In the .sense of Prana. The Sanskrit root va=io move. See Snsh-
ruta, VoL II, p. 2, edition by Kaviraj Kunja Lala Bhishagratna.

2 See Introduction to third volume of “ Tantrik Texts,” where these
terms are explained. The Devatas of the,se Dhatus are Dakiui and the
other Sbakiis in the Chakras. See my volume on “ Life ”.

® The Vayus have other functions than those mentioned. The
matter is here stated only in a general way. See Sushruta Sanghita,
cited ante. Prana is not the physical breath, which is a gross thing,
but that function of vital force which exhibits itself in respiration.

EMBODIED OONSOIOUSNESS (jIVATMA)

77

^'Knla-kundaliin). Breathing is itself a Mantra, known as
the ]\[antra which is not recited (Ajapa-mantra), for it is
said without volition^ .

The divine current is Hang and Sa or the motion of
Ha and Sa. This motion, which exists on all the planes of
life, is for the earth plane (Bhiirloka) created and sustained
by the Sun, the solar breath of which is the cause of human
breath with its centrifugal and centripetal movements, the
'Counterpart in man of the cosmic movement of the
Hangsah or Shiva-shakti Tattvas, which are the soul of the
Universe. The Sun is not only the centre and upholder of
the solar system,^ but the source of all available energy
and of all physical life on earth. Accompanying the sun-
shine there proceeds from the orb a vast invisible radiation,
the prerequisite of all vegetable and animal life. It is
these invisible rays which, according to science, sustain the
mystery of ail physical life. The Sun as the great luminary
is the body of the Solar God, a great manifestation of the
inner Spiritual Sun.®

Apana, the downward “ breath ” which pulls against
Prana, governs the excretory functions ; Samana kindles
the bodily fire and governs the processes of digestion and
assimilation ; Vyana, or diffused “ breathing,” is present
throughout the body, effecting division and diffusion,

1 Thus the Niruttara Tantra (Chapter IV) says :

Hangharena vahir yati sakarena vishet punah
Harigseti paramang mantrang jivo japati sarvada.

(By Hangkara it goes out, and by Sakara it comes in again._ A
Jiva always recite.s the Suprema Mantra Hangsa.) See also Dhyana-
bind a Up,

The Sun is said to bold the vast bulk of the total matter of the
•solar system, while it only carries about 2 per cent of its moment of
momentum. ^ ,

3 The Yoo-a works speak of the Moon-chit (Chichchandra). It is
this spiritual °mooii which is shown on the cover of this book, embraced
by the Serpent Kundalini.

78

THE SIX OBNTfiES AND THE SEBPENT POWEB

resisting disintegration, and holding the body together in all
its parts; and Udana, the ascending Vsiyu, is the so-called
“ upward breathing Prana is in the heart ; Apuna in the
anus ; Sainana in the navel ; Udana in the throat ; and
Vyana pervades the whole bodyd By the words “ navel ”
and so forth it is not meant that the Vayu is in the navel
itself but in that region of the bod}* so designated — the abdo-
minal region and its centre the Manipara Chakra. The five
minor Vayus are Naga, Kiirma, Krikara, Devadatta, and
Dhananjaya, which manifest in hiccup, closing and open-
ing the eyes, digestion,*^ yawning, and in that Vayu “ which
leaves not even the corpse The functions of Priina
may he scientifically defined as follows : Appropriation
(Prana), Rejection (Apana), Assimilation (Samana),
Distribution (Vyana), and utterance (Udana). The
Prana represents the involuntary reflex action of the
organism, and the Indriyas one aspect of its voluntary
activity.

In the case of the individualised Prana, or principle
which vitalises the animal organism during its earth life, it
may be said, when regarded as an independent principle,
to be a force more subtle than that which manifests as
terrestrial matter which it vitalises. In other words,
according to this theory, the Atma gives life to the
earth organisms through the medium of terrestrial Prana,
which is one of the manifestations of that Energy which

issues from and is at base the all-pervading Atma,. as

Shakti.

I Ainriianada Upanishad, vv. 34, 35 — Anandashrama Edition.
Vol. XXIX, p. 43; Sbandilya Up., Ch. 1. See also, as to .Prana,
Ch. II, Prapanchasara Tantra. It is also said that Prana is at the tip
of the nostrils (ISTas^ravartti), and others are also said to be elsewhere.
These localities denote special seats of function. See my volume on
“ Life

Kshudhakara ; lit., ‘‘ appetite-maker '

—r—

iili

ill

EMBODIED OONSOIOUSNBSS (JIVITM a) 79

Atm a as sucli lias no states, but in worldly parlance we
•speak of sucli. So tbe Mandukya Upanishad Vspeaks of
the four aspects (Pada) of the Brahman.

Ohaitanya, or Consciousness in bodies, is immanent in
the individual and collective gross, subtle, and causal bodies,
and transcends them. One and the same Chit pervades and
transcends all things, but is given different names to mark
its different aspects in the Jiva. Chit, being immutable,
has itself no states ; for states can only exist in the
products of the changing Prakriti-Shakti. Prom, however,
the aspect of Jiva several states exist, which, though in-
formed by the same Chit, may from this aspect be called
states of consciousness.^

In the manifested world, Consciousness appears in
three states (Avastha), vbi.^: waking (Jagrai), dreaming,
(Svapna), and dreamless slumber (Sushupti). In the waking
state the Jiva is conscious of external objects (Bahihprajna),
and is the gross enjoyer of these objects through the senses
(Sthulabhuk).^ The Jiva in this state is called Jagari —
that is, he who takes upon himself the gross body called
Vishva, Here the Jiva consciousness is in the gross body.

In dreaming (Svapna) the Jiva is conscious of inner
objects (Antahprajna), and the enjoyer of what is subtle
(Praviviktabhuk) — that is, impressions left on the mind by

1 This Upanisliad gives an analysis of the states of Consciousness
■on all planes, and should he studied in connection with Gaudapada’s
Karikil on the same subject with Shangkaracharya’s Commentary on
the latter.

Described in detail post.

^ See Mandukya Ilpanishad (where these are analysed) with Gauda-
pada’s Karika and Shangkaracharya’s Commentary on the same.

^ Maridukya Up., Mantra 3. Prapanchasara Tantra : Svairindri-
yair yadatma bhungte bhogan sa jagaro bhavati (Ch. XIX., Tantrik
Texts, Vol. 111). See Ishvarapratyabhijna : Sarvakshagocharatvena
ja tu vahyataya stbita (cited by Bhaskararaya in Comm, to v. 62 of
Lalita).

80 THE SIX CENTEES AND THE SEBDENT TOWER

objects sensed in tbe waking state. The objects of dreams,
have only an external reality for the di’eamer, whereas the
objects perceived when awake have such reality for all who
are in that state. The mind ceases to record fresh impres-
sions, and works on that which has been registered in the
waking state.

The fir.st (Jagrat) state is that of sense perception.
Here the ego lives in a mental world of ideas, and the Jiva
consciousness is in the suhtle hod)). Both these states are
states of duality in which multiplicity is experienced.’^

The tliird state, or that of dreamless sleep (Snshupti),
is defined as that which is neither waking nor dreaming,
and in which tbe varied experiences of the two former
states are mei’ged into a simple experience (Ekibhuta), as
the variety of the day is lost in night without extinction of
such variety. Consciousness is not objective (Bahihprajna)
nor subjective (Antaliprajna), but a simple undifferenced
consciousness without an object (Pi-ajnanaghana). In
waking tbe Jiva consciousness is associated wdth mind and
senses ; in dreaming tbe senses are withdrawn ; in dreamless
slumber mind also is withdrawn. The Jiva, called Prajna,
is for the time being merged in bis canml bodij — that is,
Prakriti insepai’ably associated with Consciousness — that is,
with that state of Consciousness which is the seed from
which the subtle and gross bodies grow. The state is one
of bliss. The Jiva is not conscious of anything,* hut on
awakening preserves only the notion, “ Happy I slept ; I

1 See Maiidukja Up., Mantra 4. Islivarapratyabliijnil :

Maiiomatrapatlie’ dbyakshayisliayatvena vibbramat

SpasbtayabasabbavaBang srisbtib svapnapadang matam.

(Cited in Lalita, under v. 113.

Prapancbasara Tantra : Sangjnaraliitair api tair asyanubbavo-
bbavet punab svapnab.

2 This state, when nothing is dreamt, is rarer than is generally sup-
posed.

miBODIED OONSOIOUSNESS (jIVATMA) 81

was not conscious of anyfcliing.” ^ This state is accordingly
that which has as its object the sense of, nothingness.^
Whilst the two former states enjoy the gross and subtle objects
respectively, this is the enjoyer of bliss only (Anandabhuk)—
that is, simple bliss without an object. The Lord is always
the enjoyer of bliss, but in the first two states he enjoys bliss
through objects. Here he enjoys bliss itself free from both
subject and object. In this way the Sushupti state approaches
the Brahman Consciousness. But it is not that in its purity,
because it, as the other two states, are both associated with
ignorance (Avidya) — the first two with Vikriti, and the last
with Prakriti. Beyond, therefore, this state there is the
^‘fourth” (Tnriya). Here the pure experience called
Shuddhavidya is acquired through Samadhi-yoga. Jiva
in the Sushupti state is said to be in the causal (Karana)
body, and Jiva in the Turiya state is said to be in the great
causal (Mahakarana) body.^

Beyond this there is, some say, a fifth state, “ beyond the
fourth ” (Turiyatita), which is attained through firmness in
the fourth. Here the Ish vara Tattva is attained. This is
the Unmesha^ state of consciousness, of which the Sada-
khya Tattva is the Nimesha.^ Passing beyond “the spotless
one attains the highest equality,” and is merged in the
Supi’erae Shiva.

The above divisions— Vishva, Taijasa, and Prajna — are
those of the individual Jiva. But there is also the collective

1 See Patanjala joga-sutra ; Sukliamabamasvapsang na kincLid ave-
disliam iti smaraiiat.

2 AblTavapratyayalainbana-vrittir iiidra. See also Prapancliasara
Tantra : Atmainrudviiktataya nairakulyang bbavet susbuptir api (Cb.
XIX, Yol. HI, of Tantrik Texts).

3 Bbaskararilya in bis Comm, on Lalita says: Ata eva susbuptida-
sbaparinajivopadheb karanasbariratvena turiyadasbapannajivopMheh
m ab a k aran a sli ar J ra t ve n a vy a vab iirab .

4 Opening and closing of tbe eyes (of consciousness). The latter is
ibe last stage before tbe perfect Sbi^a-consciousness is gained.

82

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

or cosmic Jiva, which is the aggregate of the individual
Jlvas of each particular stated In the macrocosm these
collective ^ Jivas are called Vaishvanara (corresponding to
the individual Vishva body), Iliranyagarba, and Sutratina ®
(corresponding to the individual Taijasa body) ; and Islivara
is the name of the collective form of the Jivas described
as Prajna. Cosmically, these are the conscious Lords of
the objective, subjective, and causal worlds, beyond wliich
there is the Supreme Consciousness.

Supreme Yoga-experience and liberation is attainoil by
passing beyond the first three states of ordinary experience.

The Yoga-process is a return-movement to the Source
which is the reverse of the creative movement therefrom.
The order of production is as follows : Buddhi, then
Ahangkara, fi'om the latter the Manas, Indriya and
Taninatra and from the last the Bhiita. As the seat of
the Source is in the human body the cerebrum in which
there is the greatest display of Consciousness, the seat of
Mind is between the eyebrows and the seats of Matter
in the five centres from the throat to the base of the
spine. Commencement of the return-movement is made
here and the various kinds of Matter are dissolved into

i x4ccoiiiits vary in detail according as a greater or less number of
stages of ascent are enumerated. TIius Nirvana Tantra, cited in Comm,
to V. 43 post, says tbe Paramatnia is the Devata in the Tmiya state ;
and Prapancbasara Tantra (Cb. XIX) says Jagrat is Bija, Svapna is
Bindu, Siishupti is Niida, Turiya is Shakti, and the Lay a beyond is
■ 'Sbinta. :

^ Tbe nature of tbe collectivity is not merely a summation of units,
but a collectivity the units of which are related to one anotlier as parts
of an organised whole. Thus Hiranyagarbba is he who has the conscious-
ness of being all the Jivas. Samashtyabhimani Pliranyagarbbatmakah
(Bhaskararaya, op. v. 61). He is the aggregate of these Jivas.

3 There is said to be this distinction between the two, that tbe
Paramatma manifested as the collective Antalikarana is Hiranjagarbha,
and as the collective Prana it is called Siltratma. When manifest through
these two vehicles without differentiation it is Antaryamin. See Bhaska-
raraya, he. cit.

? THE GARL.iND OF LETTERS (VARNAMAl.A)

Reference is made in tlie Text and in this Introduction
to Shabda, Varna, Mantra. It is said that the letters
(Varna) of the alphabet are distributed throughout the
bodily centres on the petals of the lotuses, as is shown on
Plates II- VII. In each of the lotuses there is also a Seed-
Mantra (Bija) of the Tattva of the centre. Kundalini is
both light (Jyotirmayi) and Mantra (Mantramayi),^ and
Mantra is used in the process of rousing Her.

There is perhaps no subject in the Indian Shastra
which is less understood than Mantra. The subject is so
important a part of the Tantra-Shastra that its other title
is Mantra-Shastra. Commonly Orientalists and others
describe Mantra as “ prayer,” “ formuhe or worship,”
“ mystic syllables,” and so forth. These are the super-
ficialities of those who do not know their subject. Whilst
I am not aware of any work in any European language
which shows a knowledge of Mantra and its science, yet
there is perhaps no subject which has been so ridiculed — a
not unusual attitude of ignorance. Mantra science may be
well founded or not, but even in the latter case it is not the
absurdity which some suppose it to be. Those who think
so might except Mantras which are prayers, and the mean-
ing of which they understand, for with prayer they are
familiar. But such appreciation itself shows a lack of

’ Tbe first is the subtle, the second the gross form. See as regards
the subject matter of this Chapter the Author’s Garland of Letters

THE GAELAND OP LETTERS (vABNAMALa)

85

understanding. There is nothing necessarily holy or
prayerful about a Mantra. Mantra is a power (Mantra-
shakti) which lends itself impartially to any use. A man
may be injured or killed by Mantra ; ^ by Mantra a kind of
union with the physical Shakti is by some said to be
effected ; * by Mantra in the initiation called Vedhadiksliii
there is such a transference of power from the Guru to the
disciple that the latter swoons under the impulse of it;*
by Mantra the Homa fire may and, according to ideal
conditions, should be lighted ; A by Mantra man is saved,
and so forth. Mantra, in short, is a power (Shakti) ; power
in the form of Sound. The root “ maw” means “to think”.

The creative power of thought is now receiving in-
creasing acceptance in the West. Thought-reading,
thought-transference, hypnotic suggestion, magical pro-
jections (Mokshana), and shields (Grahana),® are becoming

1 As IB Mamnatii and other of the Shatkarma. To quote an
example which 1 have read in an account of an author nowise

suspect” as an Occultist, Theosophist, etc.— General J. T. Harris
noticed a scorpion close to the foot of a Sadhu. “ Don’t move,” he
said ; there is a scorpion bj your foot.” The SMhu leaned over, and
when he saw the scorpion he pointed at it wdth his fingers, on which
the animal immediately and in the presence of the General shrivelled
up and died. You seem to have some powers already,” the Genei’al
said ; hot the Sadhu simply waived the matter aside as being of no
importance Ohina Jim ” : “ Incidents in the Life of a Mutiny Veter-
an,” by Major-General J. T. Harris, p. 74. Heinemann).

2 An extraordinary use to which it is put, 1 am informed by some
worshippers of the Bhairava Mantra. The man projects the Mantra
on to the woman, who then experiences the sensation of a physical union.
The Yislmu Furana speaks of generation by will power.

3 As the Kularnava Tantra says, and as may be readily understood,
such a Guru is hard to get. The disciple who receives this initiation
gets all the powers of his initiator. It is said that there are Gurus who
can at once make their disciples fit for the highest aims.

4 As is stated to have actually happened lately in the house of a
friend of a collaborator of mine. A man is alleged to have lit the fuel
in Kushandika Homa simply by Mantra and the Bija of fire (“ B<am ”)
without recourse to light or match.

*'> This Sanskrit term expresses not so much a “fence” to which use
a Kavaeha is put, but the knowledge of how a man may “ catch ” a
Mantra projected at him.

86

THE SIX CBNTEBS AND THE SERPENT POWER

•known and practised, not always with good results. The
doctrine is ancient in India, and mnlerlies the practices
to be found in the Tantras, some oF which are kept in
general concealed to prevent misuse.^ What, however,
is not understood in the West is the particular form of
Thought-science which is llantravidya. Those familiar
with the Western presentment of similar subjects will
'more readily understand ^ wdien I say that, according to
the rndiau doctrine here described, thought (like mind, of
which it is the operation) is a pow'er or Shakti. It is,
therefore, not only as real, but in a sense more real than
■outer material objects, winch are themselves but the
projections of the creative thought of the World-thinker.
The root “ mnn,” which=to think, is also the root of the
Sanskrit word for man, who alone of all creation is pro-
perly a thinker. Mantra is the manifested Shabda-
•brahman.

But what is Shabda or “ sound ” ? Here the Shakta-
Tantra Shinstra follow^s the Miinangsa doctrine of Shabda,
'with such modifications as are necessary to adapt it to its
■doctrine of Shakti. Sound (Shabda), which is a quality
(Guna) of ether (Aknsha), and is sensed by hearing, is
twofold — namely, lettered (Varnfitmaka shabda) and
■unlettered, or Dhvani (Dhvanyatmaka shabda).® The

1 ill the Saiiihita called Kulanmva (not the Tantra of that name)
:Shiva, after referring to soma terrible rites with the flesh of black cats,
bats, and other aniinals, the soiled linen of a Cliandala woman, the
shroud of a corpse, and so forth, says : “ Oh 5 Pirvati, my hand and
-limbs tremble, my mouth is dried ’’ (Hridayam kampate mama, gitrani
mama kampante, mukham shushyate Parvati), adding : “ One must not
speak of it, one must not speak, one must not speak, again and again I say
it must not be spoken of’* (Na vaktavyam iia vaktavyam na vaktavyam
;punah punab).

2 It is because the Orientalist and missionary know nothing of
occultism, and regaid it as superstition, that their presentment of
Indian teaching is so often ignorant and absurd.

^ This Dhvani is the gross bodjf of the Mantra, See the Author’s
Garland of Letters ”,

THE GARr,AND OP LETTERS (vARNAMAOA) 8T

latter is caused by the striking of two things together, and-
is meaningless. Shabda, on the contrai’y, which is Anahata
(a term applied to the Heart Lotus), is that Brahman
sound which is not caused by the striking of two things-
together. Lettered sound is composed of sentences (Vakya),.
■words (Pada), and letters (Varna). Such sound has a
meaning.^ Shabda manifesting as speech is said to be
eternal.^ This the Naiyajikas deny, saying that it is-
transitory. ' A -word is uttered, and it is gone. This-
opinion the Mimangsa denies, saying that the perception,
of lettered sound must be distinguished from lettered sound-
itself.® Perception is due to Dhvani caused by the striking
of the air in contact with the vocal organs — namely, the
throat, palate, and tongue. Before there is Dhvani there
must be the striking of one thing against another. It is
not the mere striking which is the lettered Shabda. This-
manifests it. The lettered sound is produced by the form-
ation of the vocal organs in contact with air, which form-
ation is in response to the mental movement or idea, which-
by the will thus seeks outward expression in audible
sound.^ It is this perception which is transitory, for the-
Dhvani which manifests ideas in language is such. But
lettered sound, as it is in itself— is eternal. It was not
produced at the moment it was perceived. It was only-
manifested by the Dhvani. It existed before, as it exists,
after, such manifestation, just as a jar in a dark room

1 When the -word “ Ghata ” is uttered, then there arises in the mind
the idea of a jar.

2 Not as audible sounds (Dhvani), but as that which finds auditory
expression in audible sounds. The sensible expressions are transient.
Behind them is the Eternal Logos (Shabdabrahman), whose manifesta-

’ivhicli is reveuled by a tlash ot li<,ditnnig is not tiien pro-
duced, nor does it cease to exist on its ceasing to be per-
ceived tlirongb the disappearance of its inanifester, the
liu-htniniy. The air ii:i contact with the vtiiee organs
reveals souinl in the fortn of the letters of the alphabet,
and tlieir coinlnnations in words and sentences. 'riie
letters are prodtieed for hearing tiy the effort of the person
de.siring to speak, and become audible to the ear of others
through the operation of unlettcreil sound or Dlivani. The
latter being a inanifester only, lettered Shabda is something
other than its inanifester.

Before describing the nature of Shabda in its different
furnis of development it is nece.ssary to understand the
Indian psychology of perception. At each moment the
Jiva is subject to innumerable influences which from all
quarters of the universe pour upon him. Only those reach
his Consciousness which attract his attention, and are thus
selected by hik Manas. The latter attends to one or other
of those sense impressions, and conveys it to the Buddhi.
When an object (Artha) is presented to the mind and
perceived, the latter is formed into the shape of the object
perceived. This is called a mental Vritti (modification),
which it is the object of Yoga to suppress. The mind as a
Vritti is thus a representation of the outer object. But
in so far as it is such representation it is as much an
object as the outer one. The latter — that is, the physical
object — is called the gross object (Sthiila artha), and the
former or mental impression is called the subtle object
(Sukshma artha). But besides the object there is the mind
which perceives it. It follows that the mind has two aspects,
in one of which it is the perceiver and in the other
the perceived in the form of the mental formation (Vritti)
which in creation precedes its outer projection, and after
the creation follows as the impression produced in the mind

THE GARLAND OP LETTERS (vARNAMALA)

by tbe sensing of a gross physical object. The mental
impression and the physical object exactly correspond, for
the physical object is, in fact, but a projection of the cosmic
imagination, though it has the same reality as the mind
has ; no more and no less. The mind is thus both cogniser
(Grahaka) and cognised (Grahya), revealer (Prakashaka)
and revealed (Prakashya),. denoter (Vachaka) and denoted
(Vachya). When the mind perceives an object it is trans-
foi-med into the shape of that object. So the mind which
thinks of the Divinity which it worships (Ishtadevata) is at
length, through continued devotion, transformed into the
likeness of that Devata. By allowing the Devata thus to
occupy the mind for long it becomes as pure as the Devata..
This is a fundamental principle of Tantrik Sadhana or
religious practice. The object perceived is called Artha, a
term which comes from the root “ Ri,” which means to get,
to know, to enjoy. Artha is that which is known, and
which therefore is an object of enjoyment. The mind as
Artha — that is, in the form of the mental impression — ^is an
exact reflection of the outer object or gross Artha. As the
outer object is Artha, so is the interior subtle mental foi’m
which corresponds to it. That aspect of the mind which
cognises is called Shabda or Nama (name), and that
aspect in which it is its own object or cognised is called
Artha or Rupa (form). The outer physical object of which
the latter is, in the individual, an impression is also
Artha or Rupa, and spoken speech is the outer Shabda.
Subject and object are thus from the Mantra aspect
Shabda and Artha — terms corresponding to the Vedantio
Nama and Rupa, or concepts and concepts objectified.
As the Vedanta says, the whole creation is Nama and
Rupa. Mind is the power (Shakti), the function of
which is to distinguish and identify (Bhedasangsargavritti
Shakti).

Just as the IkhIv is causal, su5)tlc, and gross, so is
Sliahda, of which there are four states (Bhava), called Para,
Pashyanti, l^Iadhyama, and Vnikharl — terms further ex-
plaiueil in Section V of this Introduction. Para sound is
tliat which exist.s on the differentiation of tlie Malifibindu
before actual nuuiifestation. This is motionless causal
Shabda in Kuiidalini in the lilidadhai-a centre of the body.
That aspect of it in which it comnionce.s to move with a
general — that is, non-particularised — motion (Saraanya
spanda) is Pashyanti, who.se place is from the Mixladhara
to the Manipura Chakra, the next centre. It is here
associated with lianas. These represent the motionless and
first moving Ishvara aspect of Sliahda. lladhj’ama sound
is associated with Buddhi. It is liiranyagarbha Shabda
(Hiranyagarbhariipa) extending from Pashyanti to the heart.
Both lladhj’arna sound, which is the inner “ naming” by
the ciignitive aspect of mental movement, a.s also its xirtha
or subtle (Sfikshma) object (A.rtha), belong to the mental or
subtle body (Sukshma or Linga sharira). Perception is
dependent on distinguishing and identification. In the
perception of an object that part of the mind which identifies
and distinguishes, or the cognising part, is subtle Shabda,
and that part of it which takes the shape of the object (a
shape which corresponds with the outer thing) is subtle Artha.
The perception of an object is thus consecpient on the
simultaneous functioning of the mind in its twofold aspect
as Shabda and Artha, which are in indissoluble relation
with one another as cogniser (Griiliaka) and cognised
(Graliya). Both belong to the subtle body. In creation
Madhyama Shabda first appeared. At that moment there
was no outer Artha. Then the cosmic mind projected this
inner Madhyama Artha into the world of sensual experience,
and named it in spoken speech (Vaikhari Shabda). The
last or Vaikhari Shabda is uttered speech developed in the

THE GAELAND OP LITTEES (VAENAMALA) 91

throat issuing from the mouth. This is Virat Shabda.
Vaikhari Shabda is therefore language or gross lettered
sound. Its corresponding Artha is the ph3'sical or gross
object 'which language denotes. This belongs to the
gross body (Sthula sharira). Madhyama Shabda is
mental movement or ideation in its cognitive aspect,
and Ma,dhyama Artha is the mental impression of the
gross object. The inner thought-movement in its aspect
as Shabdartha, and considered both in its knowing
aspect (Shabda) and as the subtle known object (Artha),
belong to the subtle body (Sukshma sharira). The cause of
these two is the first general movement towards particular

„v Supreme Speeet. 'I™*"” „„vemeut,Trtui-

causal and subtle, acco p ^ ip\ie inner forms

pneoede and lead “P ctbtle, and tie uttered

of ideating movement tbe manifested

sound the gross, aspect of Mantra, w

Shabdabrahman. ^ ii Voikhari or uttered speech,

The gross Shabda,

and the gross Artha, oi p g^a^bda and Artha

speech, of the Shabdabrahman into the

through the

world of gross P^^^®^t^,^affe-that is, sentences,

physical world Shabda mean ^ expression of ideas and

words and or mentL world Madhyama

are Mantra. . ^a^^es >’ in its aspect as

Shabda is the mind whic

oogniser, and Artha le. ^ sa ^gg^ed to be the outer
mental object of its cogni 1 • gi^iiar to the state of

in the form of the mind. I is thi^^

dreams (Svapna): as tos ,

(Snshnpti) and ^aikbau an impression , left on the

Mental Artha is a SangsKara, ^

Sliabcia, of which there are four .states (Bliuva), calletl Para,
Pashyuntl, Madbyama, and Vaikhaii — tenu.s further ex-
plained in Section V of this rntruduetion. Ihirfi sound is
that which exi.sts im the differentiation of the Malnibindu
before actual inanifestathm. 'rids is inotionle-ss cau.sal
Shabda in Kundalini in the ^Miiladhara centre of the body.
That aspect i>f it in which it conimencek to move with a
general — that is, non-particularised— motion (Samanj-a
spanda) is Pashyantl, whose place is from the Mfiliidhara
to the Manipura CUiakra, the next centre. It is here
as.sociated with Manas. These repre.^ent the motionless and
first moving Ishvara aspect of Shabda. Madhjaina sound
is associated with Buddhi. It is Hiranvagarbha Shabda
(Hiranyagarbharupa) extending from Pashyanti to the heart.
Both 'Madhyarnii sound, which is the inner “ naming” by
the cognitive aspect of mental movement, as also its Arfcha
or subtle (Sukshma) object (Artha), belong to the mental or
subtle body (Sukshma or Linga sharira). Perception i,s
dependent on distinguishiiig and identification. In the
perception of an object that part of the mind whicli identifies
and distinguishes, or the cognising part, is subtle Shabda,
and that part of it which takes the .shape of the object (a
shape which corresponds with the outer thing) is subtle Artha.
The perception of an object is thus consecpient on the
simultaneous functioning of the mind in its twofold aspect
as Shabda and Artha, which are in indissoluble relation
with one another as cogniser (Giiihaka) and cognised
(Grahya). Both belong to the subtle body. In creation
Madhyama Shabda first appeared. At that moment there
was no outer Artha. Then the cosmic mind projected this
inner Madhyama Artha into the world of sensual experience,
and named it in spoken speech (Vaikhari Shabda). The
last or Vaikhari Shabda is uttered speech developed in the

THB GARLAND OP LETTERS (vAENAMILA) 91

throat issuing from the mouth. This is Virat Shabda.
Vaikhari Shabda is therefore language or gross lettered
sound. Its corresponding Artha is the ph^’sical or gross
object which language denotes. This belongs to the
gross body (Sthiila sharira). Madhyama Shabda is
mental movement or ideation in its cognitive aspect,
and Madhyama Artha is the mental impression of the
gross object. The inner thought-movement in its aspect
as Shabdartha, and considered both in its knowing
aspect (Shabda) and as the subtle known object (Artha),
belong to the subtle body (Sukshma sharira). The cause of
these two is the first general movement towards particular
'ideation fesHU the motion less cause, Parashabda,

or Supreme Speech. Two"formTlS^TTrrKsw-«s:E_vidds-ns:geeGh,

causal and subtle, accompanying mind movement, thim-

precede and lead up to spoken language. The inner forms
of ideating movement constitute the subtle, and the uttered
sound the gross, aspect of Mantra, which is the manifested
Shabdabrahman .

The gross Shabda, called Vaikhari or uttered speech,
and the gross Artha, or the physical object denoted by that
speech, are the projection of the subtle Shabda and Artha
through the initial activity of the Shabdabrahman into the
world of gross sensual perception. Therefore in the gross
physical world Shabda means language — that is, sentences,
words, and letters, which are the expression of ideas and
are Mantra. In the subtle or mental world Madhyama
Shabda is the mind which “names” in its aspect as
cogniser, and Artha is the same mind in its aspect as the
mental object of its cognition. It is defined to be the outer
in the form of the mind. It is thus similar to the state of
dreams (Svapna) ; as Parashabda is the causal dreamless
(Sushupti) and Vaikhari the waking (Jagrat) state.
Mental Artha is a Sangskara, an impression , left on the

1)2

THE SIX CKOTEES AND THE S Eli 1' ENT TOWEE

subtle body by previous experience, wbieh is recalled
when tbe Jiva reawakes to world experience and
recollects tbe experience temporarily lost in tbe cosmic
dreamless state (Susbupti) wbieli is dissolution (Mahu-
pralaya). What is it which arouses this Sangskura? As
an effect (Kfirya) it must have a cause (Kfirana). This
Karana is the Shabda or name (ISanm), subtle or gross,
corresponding to that particular Artba. When the
word “ Ghata” is uttered this evokes in the mind
the image of an object — a jar — just as the present-
ation of that object does. In tbe Hiranyagarbba state
Shabda as Sangskai'a worked to evoke mental images.
The whole world is

without Artha'or Artba
wifliout Shabda. The Greek word Logos also means
thought and word combined. There is thus a double line
of cz’eation, Shabda and Artha, ideas and language to-
gether with their objects. Speech, as that which is heard,
or the outer manifestation of Shabda, stands for the
Shabda creation. The Artha creation are the inner and
outer objects seen by the mental or physical vision. From
the cosmic creative standpoint the mind comes first, and
from it is evolved the physical world according to the
ripened Sangskiiras, which led to the existence of the
particular existing universe. Therefore the mental Artha
precedes the physical Artha, which is an evolution in gross
matter of the former. This mental state corresponds to
that of dreams (Svapna) when man lives in the mental
world only. After creation, which is the waking (Jagrat)
state, there is for the individual an already existing
parallelism of names and objects.

Uttered speech is a manifestation of the inner naming
or thought. This thought-movement is similar in men of

THl GARLAND OP LETTERS (VARNAMALa)

93

all races. When an Englishman or an Indian thinks of an

ohjeet, the image is to both the same, whether evoked by
the object itself or by the utterance of its name. Perhaps
for this reason a thought-reader whose cerebral centre is
■en rapport with, that of another may read the hidden
■“ speech ’’—that is, the thought of one whose spoken
speech he cannot understand. Thus, whilst the thought-
movement is similar in all men, the expression of it as
Vaikhari Shabda differs. According to tradition, there
was once a universal language. According to the Biblical
account, this was so before the confusion of tongues at
the Tower of Babel. Similarly in the R
terious passage^ speaks of the “three fathers and three
mothers ” by whose action, like that of the Elohim, all-
comprehending speech” was made into that which was
not so. Nor is this unlikely when we consider that differ-
ence in gross speech is due to difference of races evolved

in the course of time. If the instruments by, and con-
ditions under, which thought is revealed in speech were
the same for all men, then there would be but one lan-
guage. But now this is not so. Racial characteristics
and physical conditions, such as the nature of the vocal
organs, climate, inherited impressions, and so forth, differ.
Therefore, so also does language. But for each particular
man speaking any particular language the uttered name of
any object is the gross expression of his inner thought-
movement. It evokes that movement and again expresses
it It evokes the idea, and the idea is consciousness as
mental operation. That operation can be so intensified as
to be itself creative. This is Mantra-chaitanya.

' From the above account it will be understood that,

when it is said that the “letters” are in the six bodily
1 On report of an Indian friend who has forgotten to give me the
reference.

94 THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERl’ENT T'OWER

Chakras, it is not to be supposed that it is intended to
absurdly affirm that the letters :is written shapes, or as
the uttered sounds which are heard lyv the ear, are there.
The letters in tiiis sense — that is, as gross things — are
inatiifesled only in speech and writing. This much is
clear. But the precise significance of this statement is
a matter of great difficulty. I'here is, in fact, no subject
which presents more difficultie.s than Mantravidya,
whether considered generally or in relation to the par-
ticular matter in hand. In the first place, one must be
constantly on guard against falling into a possible trap
— namely, the taking of pre.scribed method.s of realisation
for actualities in the common sense of that term. The
former are conventional, the latter are real. Doubts on
thi.s matter are increased by some variations in the de-
scriptive accmnits. Thus in some Ganesha is the Devata
of the Muladhiira. In the Text here translated it is
Brahma. Similarly thi.s Text gives Dukini in the Mula-
dhara as the Devata of the Asthi Dhiitu (bony substance).
When sitting in the prescribed Asana (posture), the bones
are gathered up around this Chakra, and, moreover, from
it as the centre of the body the bones run up and down-
wards. Another account, however, given to me places
Devi Shakini here.^ Mistakes have also to be reckoned
with, and can only be ascertained and rectified by a

1 This account, which may be comp-ared witli that of the Text, is as

follows : , :

Bone (Asthidlmto): Mfilaclliara cliakra ; Devi Shakini.

Fat (Medadhatu): Bvadhi.slithana chakra ; Devi Kakini.

Flesh (Man^sadbatu) : Manipilra chakra ; Devi Lakini.

Blood (Raktadhatn) : Anahata chakra ; Devi Rakini.

Skin (Tvakdbatu) : Vishuddha chakra; Devi DakinL

Alarrow (>lajjMhatn); Ajna ebakra; .Devi Hakini.

In the Sahasrara Fadina are all Dhatns hegiimin^ with Shnkra
(semen).

TBE GARLAND OS’ LBTTEBS (VAENAMALA.) 95

comparison of several MSS.^ Again, four letters are said to be
on the petals of tbe Muladhara Lotus namely, Va, Sha,
Sha, and Sa. Why are these said to be there? Various
statements have been made to me. As there are certain
letters which are ascribed to each form of sensible matter
(Bhuta), it seems obvious to suggest that the earth letters
(Parthiva varna) are in the earth centre. But an examin-
ation on this basis does not bear the suggestion out. Next,
it is said that the letters have colours, and the letters of a
particular colour are allocated to the lotuses of the same
colour. The Text does not support this theory. It has
been said that certain letters derive from certain Devata.
But the letters produce the Devata, for these are the Artha
of the Mantra as Shabda. I have been also told that the
letters ai-e placed according to their seat of pronuncmtion
(Uchcharana). But it is replied that the Mfdadhara is the
common source of this (Dchcharanasthana) for all.* Again,
it is said that the letters on the petals are Bijas or seed-
mantras of all activities (Kriya) connected whh the Tattva
of the centre, each letter undergoing variations according
to the vowels.* All beings in Prithivi (Barth) Tattva,
should be meditated upon in the Muladhara. Here are
therefore (as we might expect), the organs of feet (Paden-
driya), the action of walking (Gamanakriya), smell (Gandha),
the quality of Prithivi, the sense of smell (Ghrana), Nivritti

1 Thus in the text given me, from which T quote, the four letters of
the Muladhara are given as Va, Sha, 8ha, and La. The latter should,
according to other accounts, be undoubtedly ba.

2 This is true, but nevertheless there may be special seats of pro-
nunciation for each letter or class of letters. As apparently supporting
this suggestion it may be noted that the vowel sounds are placed in the
throat centre, and Ha and Ksha above,

3 I am informed that the subject is dealt with in detail in the
Kundalinikalpataru, and in particular in the Adhyatmasagara, neither
of which MSS. have I yet seen.

96

THE SIX CESTEES AND THE SKKi'ENT PDWER

KalA,’ and Brahma (Lord of the Tattva,). Bat we are also
told tliat the letters Va, Sha, Sh>i, and Sa are the Atma and
Bfjas of the tour Veda-s/ of the four Yiigas,'’ of the four
oceans/ which are therefore ctdletl Cliaturvarnatmaka, or in
the self of the four letters. It is true that the four Yodas
are in, and issue fismi, Piirashabda, the seat of which is the
xMuladlnira. For Veda in its primary sense is the world as
idea in the mind of the creative Brahman, portions of which
have been revealed to the Rishis (seers) and embodied in the
four Vedas. But why should Va be the seed of the Rigveda,
Sha of the Vajurveda, and so forth ? The ritual explana-
tion, as given in the Rudrayamala (xiv. 73, xv. d, .vvi. 1, 2), is
that the petal Va is Brahma (Rajoguna), and is the Bija of
Rik; Sha is Vishnu (Baitvaguna), and Sha, being Pundari-
katm.i, is the Bija of Yajus ; S/ie is Rudra (Tamoguna),
and is the Bija of Siima. Sa is the Bija of Atharva, as it
is the Bija of Sliakti.® These four jire in Parashabda in
Muladhara. It .seems to me (so fai‘ as my studies in the
Shastra have yet carried me) that the tietails of the descrip-
tions of the centres are of two kinds. There are, firstly,
certain facts of objective and universal reality. Thus, for
example, there are certain centres (Chakra) in the spinal
column. The principle of solidity ( Prithivl Tattva) is in
the lowest of such centres, which as the centre of the body
contains the .static or potential energy called Kundali
Shakti. The centre as a lotus is said to have four petals,

I See author’s “ Studies in. the Mantra Shastra ” (Kalfts of the
Shaktis). Samfina Vnyu is also located here.

® Va of Rik, Sha of Yajus Ska of Sama, and Sa of Atharva Veda.

s The four ages— Satya, Treta, Dvapara, and Kali.

Of sugar-cane juice, wine, ghee (Ghrita), milk.

/ See Rudrayamala XVII, where priority is given to Atharva as
dealing with the Achara of Shakti. From Atharva arose Sama, from
Sama, Yajus, and from the latter Rik.

THE GARLAND OP LETTERS (VAENAMALA.)

97

because of the formation and distribution of the Yoga-
nerves ^ (Nadi) at that particular point. Solidity is denoted
aptly by a cube, which is the diagram (Yantra) of that
centre. The consciousness of that centre as Devata is
also aptly borne on an elephant, the massive solidity of
which is emblematical of the solid earth principle (Prithivl).
The forces which go to the making of solid matter may, by
the Yogi, be seen as yellow. It may be that particular
substances (Dhatu) of the body and particular Vritti (quali-
ties) are connected with particular Chakras, and so forth.

Thei’e are, however, another class of details which
have possibly only symbolical reality, and which are placed
before the Sadhaka for the purposes of instruction and
meditation only. ^ The letters as we know them— that is,
as outer speech— are manifested only after passing through
the throat. They cannot therefore exist as such in the
Chakras. But they are said to be there. They are there,
not in their gross, but in their subtle and causal forms. It
is these subtle forms which are called Matrika. But as
such forms they are Shabda of and as ideating movements,
or are the cause thereof. Consciousness, which is itself
(Svarupa) soundless (Nih-shabda), in its supreme form
(Para shabda) assumes a general undifferentiated movement
(Samanya spanda), then a differentiated movement (Vishe-
sha spanda), issuing in clearly articulate speech (Spashta-
tara spanda). The inner movement has outer correspond-
ence with that issuing from the lips by the aid of Dhvani.
This is but the Mantra way of saying that the homogeneous
Consciousness moves as Shakti, and appears as subject

1 The term “ nerve ” is used for default of another equivalent.
These Nadis, called Yoga-Nadis, are not, like the Nadls of physiology,
gross things, but subtle channels along which the life-force works in

bodies.

3 See tbe Demcliog Tantra, now pablisbed as a volume of “ ian-
trik Texts
13 '.

■

9S

THE SIX CENTKES AXD THE SEKPENT POWER

(SIir^kIs) {Hid objBCt (Artliu) fit fivst iu tlio sulitls foiin of
i^Iind and its contents generated by tlie Sangskaras, and
then in the gross form of language as the expression of
ideas and of physical objects (Artha), which the creative or
Cosmic Alind projects into the world of sensual experience
to he the source of impressions to the individual experience!'
therein. It is true that in this sense the letters, as hidden
speech or the seed of outer speech, are in the Chakias, but
the allocation of particular letters to particular Chakras is
a matter which, if it has a real and not merely symbolical
signiiicance must receive the explanation given iu my
“ Shakti and Shukta

In each of the Chakras there is also a Bija (seed)
Mantra of each of the Tattvas therein. They are the seed
of the Tattva, for the latter springs from and re-enters the
former. The Natural Name of anything is the sounci
which is produced by the action of the moving forces which
constitute it. He therefore, it is said, who mentally and
vocally utters with creative force the natural name of any-
thing brings into being the thing which bears that name.
Thus “ Ram ” is the Bija of fire in the Manipura chakra.
This Mantra “ Ram ” is said to be the expression in gross
sound (Vaikhari Shabda) of the subtle sound produced by
the forces constituting fire. The same explanation is
given as regards “ Lam ” in the Miiladhara, and the
other Bijas in the other Chakras. The mere utterance, '
however, of “ Ram ” or any other Mantra is nothing but
a movement of the lips. When, however, the Alantra
is “awakened”® (Prabuddha)— that is, when there is

1 The mind must in worship with foi-m (Sahara) be centred on the
Deity of Worship (Ishtadevata) ; and in Yoga on the light form ( Jyoor-
Laylrupa). It is said, however, that mere repetition

without knowing its meaning will produce some benefit. The subject
of natural Name is dealt with in the Author s Garland of Letters .

2 Thought is not then only in the outer husk, but is vitalised
tbroBgb its conscious centre*

THE GABLAND op LETTERS (vABNAMALa) 99

Mantra-cliaitanya (Mantra-consciousness) — then the Sadhaka
can make the Mantra work. Thus in the case cited the
Vaikhari Shabda, through its vehicle Dhvani, is the body
of a power of Consciousness which enables the Mantrin to
become the Lord of Fire.^ However this may be, in all
cases it is the creative thought which ensouls the uttered
sound which works now in man’s small magic, just as it
first worked in the grand magical display of the World-
creator. His thought was the aggregate, with creative
power, of all thought. Each man is Shiva, and can attain
His power to the degree of his ability to consciously
realise himself as such. For various purposes the Devatas
are invoked. Mantra and Devata are one and the same.

A Mantra-Devata is Shabda and Artha, the former being
the name, and the latter the Devata whose name it is. By
practice (Japa) with the Mantra the presence of the Devata
is invoked. Japa or repetition of Mantra is compared to
the action of a man shaking a sleeper to wake him up.
The two lips are Shiva and Shakti. Their movement is the
coition (Maithuna) of the two. Shabda which issues there-
fi’om is in the nature of Seed or Bindu. The Devata thus
produced is, as it were, the “ son ” of the Sadhaka. It is
not the Supreme Devata (for it is actionless) who appears,
but in all cases an emanation produced by the Sadhaka for
his benefit only.® In the case of worshippers of Shiva a
Boy-Shiva (Bala Shiva) appears, who k then made strong
by the nurture which the Sadhaka gives to his creation.
The occultist will understand all such symbolism to mean

1 Some attam these powers through worship (Upasana) of Agni
Yetala a Derayoni ; some of Agni Himself. The former process,
which requires 12,000 Japa, is given in Shavara-tantra. In the sa
way ohiects are said to he moved, though at a distance from , ®

hy the worship of Madhumati Devi. A higher state of development

dispenses with all outer agents,

2 If Suryya (Sun God) be invoked, it is an emanation which comes
and then goes back to the sun.

100

THE SIX CEXTEKS AXD THE SERPEXT POWER

that the Devata is a form of the consciousness of the pure
Sadhaka which the latter arouses and strengthens, and
gains good thereby. It is his consciousness which
becomes the boy Shiva, and when strengthened the full-
grown Divine power itself. All Mantras are in the body as
forms of consciousness (Vijnana-rupa), When the Mantra
Ls fully practised it enlivens the Sangskara, and the Artha
appears to the mind. Mantras are thns a form of the
Sangskara of Jivas, the Artha of which becomes manifest to
the consciousness which is pure. The essence of all this is
— concentrate and vitalise thought an<l wdll power. But
for such a purpose a method is necessary — namely, lan-
guage and determined varieties of practice according to
the end sought. These, Mantra vidya (wliich explains what
Mantra is) also enjoins.

The causal state of Shabda is called Shabdabrahman —
that is, the Brahman as the cause of Shabda and Artha.
The unmanifest (Avyakta) power or Shabda, which is
the cause of manifested Shabda and Artha, upiises on the
differentiation of the Supreme Bindu from Prakriti in the
form of Bindu through the prevalence of Kriya Shakti.^
Avyakta Rava or Shabda (unmanifested sound) is the
principle of sound as such (Nada-matra) — that is, un-
differentiated sound not specialised in the form of letters,
but which is, through creative activity, the cause of mani-
fested Shabda and Artha.' It is the Bi’ahman considered
as all-pervading Shabda, undivided, unmanifested, whose
substance is Nuda and Bindu, the proximate creative
^ See w. 12 Slmradi.

Kriy asbaktipradhanay ab sb abd asbabd artb a-karan am
Prakriter bmdurupinyab sbabdabrabmabbaTat param.

Ill plain Engiisb this means, in effect, that increasing activity in
the Consciousness about to create (Bindu) produces that state in wbicli
it is the cause of subject and object, as mind and matter,

2 Tena sbabdartbarupa-visbisbtasya sbabda-braliraatvam avadba-
ritam (Pranatosbini, 13),

of inoYBiiient—iianiely, firstly, the bhabda (with iBeBtal

1 See Pranatoshini, p. 10; Bagliava Bliatta, Comm. v. 12, Cli. I,
Sliarada.

Srislityunmnkha-paramasliiva-pratliamollasamatram akhando vyak-

to nadabindumaya eva vyapako brahmatmakah sliabdab.

^ Spbota, wbicii is derived from Sphut, to open (as a bud does), is
that by vs^bicb the particular meaning of words is revealed. The letters
singly, and therefore also in combination, are non-significant. A word
is not the thing, but that through which, when uttered, there is cogni-
tion of the thing thereby denoted. That which denotes the ^ thing
denoted is a disclosure (Sphota) other than these letters. This Sphota
is eternal Shabda.

3 It is to be noted that of five Bhiitas, Ikasha and Vayu belonging
to the formless division (Am iirtta), and the remaining three to the
form division (Miirtta). The first is sensed by hearing. Shabda is
vibration for the ear as name. Agni, the head of the second division,
is sensed as form (Eupa). Artha is vibration to the eye (mental or
physical) as form,

4 Oh. IV, vv. 101,

5 Yatkinchiii nadarupena shruyate shaktir eva sa
Tas tattvanto nirakarah sa eva parameshvarah.

^ Tavad akasbasangkalpo yavach chhabdah pravartate
Illihshabdam tatparam brahma paramatmeti giyate.

102 THIi SIX CEXTBES AND TEK SEEPKXT POWER

vibratious of cognition) ■wiiich, passing through the vocal
orii-aiis, become articulate sound ; and, secondlj, Artha
movements denoted by Shabda in the form of all things
constituting the content of mind and the objective world.
These two are emanations from the same Conscious Activity
( Shakti) which is the Word (Vak or Logos I, and are in
consecjuence essentially the same. Hence the connection
between the two is permanent. It is in the above sense
that the universe is said to be composed of the letters. It
is the fifty * letters of the Sanskrit alphabet which are
denoted by the garland of severed human heads which
the naked ^ mother, Kali, dark like a threatening rain-
cloud, wears as She stands amidst bones and carrion beasts
and birds in tlie burning-ground on the white corpse-
like (Shavarupa) body of Shiva. For it is She who
“ slaughters ” — that is, withdraws all speech and its
objects into Herself at the time of the dissolution of
all things (IMahapralaya).® Shabdabrahman is the con-
sciousness (Chaitanya) in all creatures. It assumes the
foi*m of Kundali, and abides in the body of all breathing
creatures (Pranl), manifesting itself by letters in the form
of prose and verse."* In the sexual symbolism of the
Shakta Tantras, seed (Bind u)® issued iipon the reversed

2 Sometimes given as fifty -one.

- She is so pictured because She is hejond Maya (ilayatita). She
is the “ Bewilderer of all ” by Her Mayii, but is Herself undeceived
thereby. This Kali symbolism is explained in the Svarupa-vyakhya of
the “ Hymn to Kali ’’ (Karpuradi Stotra) which I have published as
vol. IX of Tantrik Texts,

3 The same symbolism is given in the description of the Heruka in
the Buddhist Demchog Tantra.

^ Ohaitanyam sarvabhutanang shabdabrahmeti me matih
Tat prapya kundalirflpam praninam dehamadhyagam
Varnatmanavirhhavati gadyapadyadi-bhedatah. (Sharada
Tilaka, Ch. I.)

5 The term Bindu also means a drop as of semen.

THE GAEL4ND OF LETTERS (VAENAMALA) 103

union ^ of Maliakala and Maliakali, wMcli seed, ripening
in tlie womb of Prakriti, issued as Kundali in tbe form

Kundali as Mahamatrikasun-
Lcli are the Matrikas or subtle

of tbe letters (Ak
■dari has fifty-one (
forms of the gross
form of the Shabda at the centres. Kundali when with
one coil is Bindu ; with two, Prakriti-Purusha ; with three,
the three Shaktis (Ichchha, Jnana, Kriya) and three Gunas
(Sattva, Bajas, Tamas) ; with the three and a half She is
then actually creative with Vikriti ; with four She is the
Devi Bkajata, and so on to Shrimatrikotpattisundari with
fifty-one coils.^ In the body, unmanifested Parashabda is
in kundali Shakti. That which first issues from it is in the

ids upwards through the rest as
When Shakti
^ in the mother-form
speech (Para vak) and
She “ sees ” the manifest-
■ ’ 1. The Pashyanti ^

which Ichchha Shakti (Will) in the
about to display the
This is the Shakti

Pashyanti, Madhyama, and Vaikhari Shabda,
first “ sees ” ® She is Parama Kala
(Ambikarupa), which is supreme^
supreme peace (Parama shanta). C-
od Shabda from Pashyanti to Vaikhari,

state of Shabda is that in '

form of a goad ® (Angkushakara) is

universe, then in seed (Bija) form. \ ^

Varna.’ Madhyama Vak, which is Jnana (knowledge), and

iVimritamaitlmna. Shakti is above Shiva, and moving on and

in coilon with Him because She is the active and He the inert con-

“’°“slaktisanggama Tantra, first Ullasa Utpattikhanda. When with
ten coils She is the well-known Dashamahavidya. ^

3 The first movement in creation, called Ikshana ( seeing ) in

Veda. To see is to ideate. t x- i a x -

4 Parama=supreme or first. Kala=Vimarsha-Shakti of Atma.
,She is, as such, the first cause of all the letters.

Pashyanti=She who “ sees ” (Ikshana). , . t +

6 Here the crooked line (Vakrarekha) comes first, and the straight
second Possibly this may be the line rising to form the triangular

pyramid. « vomits forth ” the universe (Yamanai

lO-t THB SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

in form of a straight line (Rijiirekha). is Jjeshtha ShaktL
Here there is the first assumption of form as the Matrik^
(Mutrikatvam upapanna), for here is particular motion
(Visheslia Spanda). The Vaikhari state is that of Kriya
Bhakti, who is the Devi Eaudri, whose form is triangular ^
and that of the universe. As the former Shakti produces
the subtle letters or Matrika which are the Vasana,’ so this
last is the Shakti of the gross letters of words and their
objects.® These letters are the garland of the Mother
i.ssuing from Her in Her form as Kundali Shakti, and
absorbed by Her in the Kundali-yoga here described.

lifil

THE CENTRES OR LOTUSES (CHAKRA, PADMA)

At this stasfe we are in a position to pass to a consideration
of the Chakras, which may shortly be described as subtle
centres of operation in the body of the Shaktis or Powers
of the various Tattvas or Principles which constitute the
bodily Sheaths. Thus the five lower Chakra from Mula-
dhara to Vishuddha are centres of the Bhuta, or five forms
of sensible matter. The Ajna and other Chakras in the
region between it and the Sahasrara are centres of the
Tattvas constituting the mental sheaths, whilst the
Sahasrara or thousand-petalled lotus at the top of the brain,
is the blissful abode of Parama Shiva-Shakti which is the

stats of purs Con scion sue ss,

A description of the Chakras involves, in the first place,

an account of the Western anatomy and physiology of the

central and sympathetic nervous systems ; secondly , an
account of the Tantrik nervous system and Chakras ; and,
lastly, the correlation, so far as that is possible, of the two
systems on the anatomical and physiological side, for the
rest is in general peculiar to Tantrik occultism.

The Tantrik theory regarding the Chakras and Sahas-
rara is concerned on the 2'>hysiologiccil side, or Bhogayatana
aspect, with the central spinal system, comprising the bram
or encephalon, contained within the skull, and the spnia.
cord, contained within the vertebral column (Merudanda).

106 THE SIX CBXTEES AXB THE SERPENT POWER

It is to be BOted that, Just as there are five , centres
(Cbakras) hereinafter described, the vertebral column itself
iV divided into five regions, which commencing from the
lowest, are the coccygeal, consisting 5f four imperfect
vertebive, often united together into one bone called the
coccv-x ; the sacral region, consisting of five vertebrm united
tmTether to form a single bone, the sacrum ; the lumbar

region or region of the loins, consisting of five vertebrm ;

the dorsal region, or region of the back, consisting of twelve
vertebrm ; and the cervical region, or region of the neck,
consisting of seven vertebrm. As exhibited by segments,
the cord shows different characteristics in different regions.
Roughlv speaking, these correspond to the regions which
are assigned to the governing control of the Miiludhura,
Svadhisiithiina, Manipura, Anahata, and Vishuddha centres,
or Chakras. The central system has relation with the
periphery through the thirty -one spinal and twelve cranial
nerves, which are both afferent and efferent or sensory and
motor,’ arousing sensation or stimulating action.^ Of the
cranial nerves, the last sLx arise from the spinal bulb
(medulla), and the other six, except the olfactory and optic
nerves, from the parts of the brain Just in front of the bulb.
Writers of the Yoga and 'tantra schools use the term Aadi,
by preference, for nerves. They also, it has been said,
mean cranial nerves when they speak of Sliiras, never using
the latter for arteries, as is done in the medical literature.
It must, however, be noted that the Yoga Nadis are not the
ordinary material nerves, but subtler lines of direction along
which the vital forces go. The spinal nerves, after their exit
from the intervertebral foramina, enter into communication

iDr. Broiendranath Seal, p. 337, Appeedix to Professor^ Benoy
Kumar Sarkar’s “Positive Background of Hindu Soeiologj . The

» aJ,o»..dkr,-lv. It i, to be .oted, ho^ev.r that

the present "work uses Shiras for other than cranial nerves,
it calls Ida and Pinggala Hadis or Shiras.

THE CEIfTEES OE LOTUSES (oEAKEAj PADMA) 107

■vvith tbe gangliated coi’ds of the sympathetic nervous
system, which lie on each side of the vertebral column. The
spinal cord extends in the case of man from the upper boi’der
of the atlas, below the cerebellum, passing into the medulla,
and finally opening into the fourth ventricle of the brain,
and descends to the second lumbar vertebra, where it tapers
to a point, called the fikmi terminale. I am told that
recent microscopic investigations by Dr. Cunningham have
disclosed the existence of highly sensitive grey matter in
filtm terminale which was hitherto thought to be mere
fibrous cord. This is of importance, having regard to the
position assigned to the Muladhara and the Serpent Power.
It is continued in this for a variable distance, and there
ends blindly. Within the bony covering is the cord, which
is a compound of grey and white brain matteiy the grey
being the inner of the two, the reverse of the position in
the encephalon. The coi-d is divided into two symmetrical
halves, which are connected together by a commissure in

the centre of which there is a minute canal called the
central spinal canal (wherein is the Brahmanadi), which is
said to be the remnant of the hollow tube from which the
cord and brain were developed.'^ This canal contains
cerebro-spinal fluid. The grey matter viewed longitudinally
forms a column extending through the whole length of the
cord, but the width is not uniform. There are special
enlargements in the lumbar and cervical regions which are
due mainly to the greater amount of grey matter in these
situations. But throughout the whole cord the grey matter

is specially abundant at the junctions of the spinal nerves,
so that a necklace arrangement is visible, which is more
apparent in the lower vertebrates, corresponding to the
ventral ganglionic chain of the invertebrates.® The white

1 See Ferrier’s “ Functions of the Brain ”.

2 16 ., 7 .

connected together with the higher centres by the associat-
iii*^ and longitudinal tracts of the spinal cordd All the

ich are ascribed primarily to the spinal centres
in an ultimate sense to the cerebral centres.

I the “ Letters ” which exist distributed on the
e lotuses exist in the Sahasrara. The centres
t only the muscular combinations concerned in
ovements, but also the functions of yasoular
secretion, and the like, which have theii
centres in the spinal cord. The cerebral
said, however, to control these functions only
with the manifestations of volition, feeling, and
hereas the spinal centres with the subordinate
; system are said to constitute the mechanism
ous adaptation, in accoi’dance with the varying
of stimuli which are essential to the continued
if the organism. The Medulla, again, is also
h of communication between the higher centres

and the peripliery and an independent centre regulating
functions of the greatest importance in the system. It is
to be noted that the nerye fibres which carry motor impulses
descending from the brain to the spinal cord cross over
rather suddenly from one side to the other on their way
through the spinal bulb (medulla), a fact which has been
noted in the Tantras in the description of the Mukta
Triveni. The latter is connected by numerous afferent and
efferent tracts with the cerebellum and cerebral ganglia.
Above the cerebellum is the cerebrum, the activity of which
is ordinarily associated with conscious volition and ideation
and the origination of voluntary movements. The notion
of Consciousness, which is the introspective subject-matter
of psychology, must not, however, be confused with that of
pfiysiological function. There is therefcre no organ of
consciousness, simply because “ Consciousness ” is not an
organic conception, and has nothing to do with the phy-
siological conception of energy, whose inner introspective
side it presents.V Consciousness in itself is the Atma.
Both mind and body, of which latter the brain is a part, are
imperfect or veiled expressions of Consciousness, which in
the case of body is so veiled that it has the appearance of
unconsciousness. The living brain is constituted of gross
sensible matter (Mahabhuta) infused by Prana. Its material
has been worked up so as to constitute a suitable vehicle
for the expression of Consciousness in the form of Mind
(Antahkarana). As Consciousness is not a property of the
body, neither is it a mere function of the brain. The fact
that mental consciousness is affected or disappears with
disorder of the brain proves the necessity of the latter for
the expression of such consciousness, and not that con-
sciousness is inherent alone in brain or that it is the property
of the same. On each side of the vertebral column there
1 Auguste Corel’s “ Hygiene o£ Nerves and Mind,” 95.

THE . CENTRES OR LOTUSES (CHAKRA, PADMa) 109

110 THE SI'S; CEXTHES AND THE SEKPEN'T POWEK

is a cliaiu of ganglia connected with nerve fibre, called the
sympathetic cord (Ida and Pinggala), extending all the vay
from the base of the skull to the coccyx. Ihis is in com-
munication 'with the spinal cord. It is noteworthy that

there is in the thoracic and lumbar regions a ganglion of
each chain corresponding with great regularity to each
spinal nerve, though in the cervical region many of them
appear to be missing ; and that extra large clusters of nerv-
ous structure are to be found in the region of the heart,
stomach, and lungs, the regions governed by the Anahata,
Manipura, and Vishuddha, respectively, the three upper of
the five Chakras hereinafter described. From the sym-
pathetic chain on each side nerve fibres pass to the viscera
of the abdomen and thorax. From these, nerves are
also given off which pass back into the spinal nerves, and
others which pass into some of the cranial nerves ; these
are thus distributed to the bloodvessels of the limbs, trunk,
and other parts to which the spinal or cranial nerves go.
The sympathetic nerves chiefly carry impulses which govern
the muscular tissue of the viscera and the muscular coat of
the small arteries of the various tissues. It is through
the sy mpathetic that the tone of the blood vessels is kept up
by the action of the vaso-motor centre in the spinal bulb.
The sympathetic, however, derives the impulses which it
distriUites from the central nervous system ; these do not
arise in the sympathetic itself. The impulses issue from
the spinal cord by the anterior roots of the spinal nerves,
and pass through short branches into the sympathetic
chains. The work of the sympathetic systems controls and
influences the circulation, digestion, and respiration.^

The anatomical arrangement of the central nervous
system is excessively intricate, and the events which
take place in that tangle of fibre, cell and fibril, are, on
1 See Foster and Shore’s “ Physiology,” 206, 207.

the other hand, eyen now almost unknown. Ana so id
has been admitted that in the description of the physiology
of the central nervous system we can as yet do little more
than trace the paths by which impulses may pass between
one portion of the system and another, and from the
anatomical connections deduce, with more or less pro-
bability, the nature of the physiological nexus which its
parts form with each other and the rest of the body.® In
a o-eneral way, however, there may (it is said) be reasons
to suppose tliat there are nervous centres in the central
system related in a special way to special mechanisms,
sensory, secretory, or motor, and that centres, such as the
alleo-ed genito-spinal centre, for a given physiological
action exist in a definite portion of the spinal cord. It
is the subtle aspect of such centres as expressions of
consciousness (Chaitanya) embodied in various forms of
Miiya Shakti which is here called Chakra. These are
related through intermediate conductors with the gross
oro-ans of generation, micturition, digestion, cardiac action,
and respiration in ultimate relation with the Muladliara,
Svadhishthana, Manipiira, Anahata, and Visliuddha Chakras
respectively, just as tracts have been assigned in the
higher centres as being in special, even if not exclusive,
OTfh various nerceptive, volitional, and ideative

112

THE SIS CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

body. “As in the leaf of the Ashvattha tree {Ficus
rdhiios.i) there are minute fibres, so is the body permeated
by Xadls.” ^ Nadi is said in v. 2 to be derived from the
root mil, or motion. For here the Prana or Ijife Principle
moves. Tlie Bhutashiiddlii Tantra speaks of 72,000, the
Prapanehasara Tantra of 300,000, and the Shiva Sanghita
of 350, UOO ; but of these, whatever be their total extent,
onlv a limited number are of importance. Some are
gro.ss Nadls, such as the physical nerves, veins, and
arteries, known to medical science. Bat they are not
all of this gross or physical and visible character. They
exist, like all else, in subtle forms, and are known as
Yoga Nadis. The latter may be described as subtle
clm"mels (Vivara) of Pranik or vital energy. The Nadls
are, as .stated, the conduits of Prana. Through them its
solar and lunar currents run. Could we see them, the
body would present the appearance of those maps which
delineate the various ocean currents. They are the paths
along which Pranashakti goes. They therefore belong to
the vital science as life-element, and not to the medical
Shiistra (Vaidyashastra). Hence the importance of the
Sadhana, which consists of the physical purification of the
body and its Nadis. Purity of body is necessary if
purity of mind is to be gained in its extended Hindu sense.
Purification of the Nadis is perhaps the chief factor in
the preliminary stages of this Yoga; for just as their
impurity impedes the ascent of Knndali Shakti, their purity
facilitates it. This is the work of Pranayama (c. post).

Of these Nadis, the principal are fourteen, and of these
fourteen Ida, Pinggala, and Sushumna, are the chief. Of
these three, again, Sushumna is the greatest, and to it

1 Shandilva Up., Ch. I, where the Nadis are given and their
purification spoken of ; Dhyanahindu Up. ; and as to Sushumna see

Mandalabrahmana Up., First Bi'ahmaiia.

THE OENTBES OB LOTUSES (OHAKEA, PADMa) 113

all others are suboi’clinate ; for by the power of Yoga
(Yogabala) Prana is made to go through it, and, passing
the Chakras, leave the body through the Brahmarandhra.
It is situate in the interior of the cerebro-spinal axis, the
Merudanda, or spinal column, in the position assigned to
its interior canal, and extends from the basic plexus, the
Tattvik centre called the Mfiladhara, to the twelve-
petalled lotus in the pericarp of the Sahsrara Padma, or
thousand-petalled lotus. Within the tiery red Tamasik
Sushumna is the lustrous Rajasik Vajra or Vairini Nadi,
and within the latter the pale nectar-dropping Sattvik
Ohitra or Ghitrini. The interior of the latter is called the
Brahma Nadi. The first is said to be fire-like (Vahni-
svarupa), the second sun-like (Suryyasvariipa), and the
third moon-like (Chandrasvarupa).^ These are the three-
fold aspect of the Shabdabrahman. The opening at the
end of the Ghitrini Nadi is called the door of Brahman
(Brahmadvara), for through it the Devi Kundali enters to
ascend.'^ It is along this last-mentioned Nadi, known as
the Kula Marga and the " Royal Road,” that the Shakti
Kundalini is led in the process hereafter described.

Outside this nerve ai’e the two Nadis, the pale Ida or
Shashi (Moon) and the red Pinggala or Mihira (Sun), which
are connected with the alternate breathing from the right
to the left nostril and vice The first, which is

1 Hence She is ca}lecl in the Lalita-sahasranama (v. 106) Muladha-
rambiijaru(^/ia. Fire, Sun, and Moon are aspects of the differentiated
Parabindu or Kamakala (v- ante). See the Chapter on Sun, xMoon and
Fire in “Garland of Letters”.

3 The sun generally represents poison, and the moon nectar (Shan-
dilja Up., Oh. I). Both were obtained at the churning of tlie ocean,
and represent the upbuilding and destructive forces of Hature.

3 The Hindus have long known that breathing is done through one
nostril for a period of time and then through the other. In Pranajtoa
to make the breathing change one nostril is closed. But the skilled
Yogi can shift the breathing^at his will without closing a nostril with

■■■-LV 16 ■■ ■, .

"‘feminine” (Slmktirupa) and tke embodiment ot nectar
( Ainritavigraliiib it? on the left ; and tbe second, wlucb is
raa-tmilinc,” as being in the nature of Eudra (Raudrat-
miku t, is on tlie right. They both indicate Time or Eala,
anil Suslmmna devours Kiila. For on that path entry is
made into timelessness. The three are also known as
Gansu fldal, Yamuna (Pinggala), and Sarasvati (Su-
shumna after the names of the three sacred rivers of India.
The Mfiladliara is the meeting-place of the three *• rivers,”
and hence is called Yuktatriveni. Proceeding from the
Adhiira lotus, they alternate from right to left and left to
right, thus going round the lotuses. According to another
acconuT, their position is that of two bows on either side of
ihe spinal cord. An Indian medical friend tells me that
these are not discrepant accounts, but represent different
positions according as Ida and Pinggala exist inside or
outside the spinal cord. When they_ reach the space
between the eyebrows known as the Ajna Chakra, they
enter the Sushumna, making a plaited knot of three called
ISluktatrivenl. The three “ Rivers,” which are again united
at this point, flow separately therefrom, and for this reason
the Apia Chakra is called Muktatrivenl. After separation,
■K.irlT which oroceeded from the right testicle goes to

where tlie two currents meet.^ These are all but microcosmic
instances of the vaster system of cosmic matter, every
portion of which is composed of the three G-unas (Trigu-
natmaka) and the threefold Bindus, which are Sun, Moon,
and Fire.

As regards nerve cords and fibres, cranial and spinal
nerves, and the connected sympathetic nerves, Dr. Bro-
jendranath Seal says; “With the writers on the Aoga,
all the Shiras, and such of the Dhamanis as are not
vehicles of vital cuiwent, metabolic fluid, lymph, chyle,
or blood, are cranial nerves, and proceed from the heart
through the spinal cord to the cranium. These cranial
nerves include pairs for the larynx and the tongiie, for
the understanding and use of speech, for the raising and
lowering of the eyelids, for weeping, for the sensations
of the special senses, etc., a confused and imintelhgent
reproduction of Sushruta’s classification. But the enu-
meration of the spinal nerves with the connected sym-
nathetic chain and ganglia is a distinct improvement on

1 Similarly, there are three iSadls which

sliippGii in tb6 Olifinclii., Sd

the sun, moon, and tire.

2 P. 340, Appendix to Professor Sarkar’s
Hindu Sociology, ” subsequently published i
of the Hindus”. The author annexes a plan
rough idea of the relative position of jihe pr
pathetic spinal system.

(st-e j?aiig1taratnnkara), tlie fourteen niost important
are : ^

“1. Snshainna, in tire central cluinnel of tlie spinal
cord. 2. Itia, tlie left sympathetic chain, stretching from
under the left nostril to below the left kidney in the form
of a bent bow. 3. Pinggala, the corresponding chain on
the right. 4. Kuhn, the pudio nerve of the saci’al plexus,
to the left of the spinal cord. 5. Gtuidhari, to the back
of the left s^'inpathetic chain, supposed to stretch from
below the corner of the left eye to the left leg. It -was
evidently supposed that some nerves of the cervical plexus
came down through the spinal cord and joined on to the
great .sciatic nerve of the sacral plexus, b. Hastijihva,
to the front of the left sympathetic chain, stretching from
below the corner of the left eye to the great toe of the left
foot, on the same supposition as before. Pathological
facts were believed to point to a special nerve connection
between the eyes and the toes. 7. Sarasvati, to the right
of Snshumna,* stretching up to the tongue (the hypoglossal
nerves of the cervical plexus). 8. Pusha, to the back of
the right sympathetic chain, stretching from below the
corner of the right eye to the abdomen (a connected chain
of cervical and lumbar nerves). 9. Payasvini, between
Pusha and Sarasvati, auricular branch of the cervical plexus
on the left. 10. Sankhiiil, between Gandharl and Saras-
vati, auricular branch of the cervical plexus on the left,
n. Yashasvinl, to the front of the right sympathetic
chain, stretching from the right thumb to the left leg (the
radial nerve of the brachial plexus continued on to certain
branches of the great sciatic). 12. Varuna, the nerves
of the sacral plexus, between Kuhn and Yashasvinl, ramify-
ing over the lower trunk and limbs. 13. Vishvodara, the
nerves of the lumbar plexus, between Kubu and Hastijihva,
1 Some of these are referred to in the present -work ; see v. 1.

in tlie body pervaded by Trana nave
centi’es of predominance and influence
re the Chakras (centres or circles or
las (lotuses) of which this work is a

pinal column, are the six main

called Chakras or Padmas,
as the Sahasrara above
These are the Muladhara,
lira, Aniihata, Vishuddha, and Ajna,

'll are said to have their corre-
Tal nerve plexuses and organs,
is possibly the sacro-coccygeal
between the eyebrows,” which
ith the pineal gland, the centre of the
and others with the cerebellum,
are, however, as explained later,
as extremely subtle
which are built up
are subject to their
■hich loosely and inaccurately they
d, have been said to be various
of the body and the lower cerebral
In the portion of the body below

lower worlds, Patala and

tl)6 Yogarnava
an Indian
ifluenced too

certain sp<
therein, w
regions) or
description.

- Inside the Meru, or s
centres of Tattvik opeiation,
which are the seats of Shakti,
is the abode of Shiva,

Svadhishthana, Maui]
which ill the plti/sica
spondences in the p
commencing from w
plexus to the “ space
some identify w
third or spiritual eye.

The Chakras® themselves
centres of Consciousness
force (Shakti) ; but the gToss
by their coarsened vibrations, which
influence, and with w]
are sometimes identified
plexuses in the trunk c
centres mentioned
the Mfiladhara are the seven

5 Citins? Sangitaratnakara, Shlokas 144-156 ,8.Lo
Tanira This account has in parts been criticised by
Ita Z; a who tells me that it is in those parts in

Dbyanabindu Up., and Ch. Ill;

- , ^ AC ■ M

' ' ' ' A) n.

118 THE SIX OENTBES AND THE SEEBExN’T POWER

Others, together with the Shaktis which support all in the

universe.

The first centre, or Mulaclhara Chakra, which is so
called from its being the root of Sushumna where Kundali
i-ests,^ is at the place of meeting of the Kanda (root of all
the Mis) and the Sushumna Nadi, and is in the regioiv
midway between the genitals and the anus. It is thus the
centre of the body for men.^ By this and similar state-
ments made as regards the other lotuses, it is not meant
that the Chakra proper is in the region of the gross body
described, but that it is f/ic subtle centre of that gross
region, such centre existing in the spinal column \\hich
forms its axis. The reader must bear this observation in
mind in the descriptions of the Chakras, or an erroneous
notion will be formed of them. This crimson Muladhara
lotus® is described as one of four petals, the Vrittis of
which are the four forms of bliss known as Paramananda,
Sahajananda, Yogananda, and Ylrananda.^ On these four
petals are the golden letters Vang (4), Shang (^), Sh&ng
(f), and Sang (h).® Bach letter in its Vaikharl form is a
gross manifestation of inner or subtle Shabda. On the
petals are figured the letters, which are each a Mantra,
and as such a Devata. The petals are configurations made
by the position of the Nadls at any particular centre, and
are in themselves Pranashakti manifested by Pranavayu in

1 Derived from Mfila (root) and Adliara (support).

2 Shandilya Dp., Gh. I, where also tho centres for birds and other
animals are given. In some (Kashmir “ Kadichakra ’ ) Knndall is
represented above the position given in the Text.

3 This and other lotuses hang head downwards except when
Kundali passes through them, when they turn upwards.

i These Vrittis or qualities (see post) denoting four forma of bliss
are not given in the text here translated, but in Tarkalangkara’s Com-
mentary to the Mahanirvana Tantra.

5 In this and other cases meditation is done from the right (Uak-
shinavaitena). See v. 4, Shat-chakra-nirupana cited as S.K.

THE CBINTRES OE LOTUSES (OHAKEA, PADMa)

119

I living bod}". AYhen that Vayu departs they cease to

manifest. Bacli letter is thus a particular Shabda or
Sbakti and a surrounding (Avarana) Devata of the Princi-
!' pal Bevata and its Shakti of the particular Chakra. As

Shakti they are manifestations of Kundali, and in their
i totality constitute Her Mantra body, for Kundali is both

I light {Jyotirmayi) and Mantra (Mantramayi). The latter

I is the Sthfila aspect of which Japa is done. The former is

the Sukshma aspect which is led up to in Toga. Their
\ specific enumeration and allocation denote the differentia-

tion in the body of the total Shabda. This Lotus is the
I centre of the yellow Prithivi, or “ earth ” Tattva, with its

quadrangular Mandala, the Bija or Mantra of which Tattva
I is Lang (s).^

I At this centre is the Prithivi Tattva, the Bija of which

» La,” with Bindu or the Brahma-consciousness presid-
ing over this centre or “ Lang ” which is said to be the
I expression in gross (Vaikhari) sound of the subtle sound

I made by the vibration of the forces of this centre. So,

f -again, the subtle Tejas Tattva and its Bija Rang is in the

I mnipiira Chakra, and the gross fire known as Vaishvii-

i nara is in the physical belly, which the subtle centre

governs. This Bija represents in terms of Mantra the
Tattva regnant at this centre, and its essential activity,
f With the symbolism used throughout this work, Bija

is said to be seated on the elephant Airavata, which is here
located. This and the other animals figured in the Chakras
are intended to denote the qualities of the Tattvas
there regnant. Thus, the elephant is emblematic of the
strength, firmness, and solidity, of this Tattva of “ Earthy .
They are, further, the vehicles (Vahana) of the Deratas
there. Thus in this Chakra there is the seed- mantra

The Dhyanabinda Up. associates the Bijas with the five Pranas.
Tims “ Lang ” is associated with Yyana.

120 THE SIX CENTEES AND THE SEEPENT POWER

(Bija) of Indra, whose vehicle is the elephant Airavata.
The Devata of this centre is, according to the Text, the
creative Brahma, whose Shakti is Savitind Thei-e also is
the Shakti known as Dakini,- who, as also the other
Shaktis, LakinI and the rest, which follow, are the Shaktis
of the Dhiitus or bodily substances ® assigned to this and
the other centres. Here is the “female ’’ triangle or Yoni
known as Traipura, which is the Shaktipitha, in which is.
set the “ male ” Shivalingga known as Svayambhu, of the-
shape and colour of a young leaf, representing, as do all
Devis and Devas, the Maya-Shakti and Ohit-Shakti,.
aspects of the Brahman as manifested in the particular-
centres (vv. 4-14). The Linggas are four — Svayambhu,.
Bana, Itara, Para. According to the YoginihridayaTantra ■*
(Ch. I), they are so called because they lead to Chit. They
are the Pithas, Kamariipa, and the rest because they
I’eflect Chit (Chitsphurattadharatvat). They are A^rittis
of Manas, Ahangkara, Buddhi, Chitta. To the first three
are assigned certain forms and colours— namely, yellow,,
red, -vdaite, triangular, circular ; as also certain letters
— namely, the sixteen vowels, tlie consonants Ka to-
Ta (soft), and Tha to Sa. Para is formless, colour-
less, and letterless, being the collectivity (Samashti)
of all letters in the form of bliss. The Traipima is the
counterpai’t in the Jiva of the Kamakala of the Sahas-
rara. The Devi Kundalini, luminous as lightning, shining
in the hollow of this lotus like a chain of brilliant lights, the
World-bewilderer who maintains all breathing creatures,®'

1 The Creator is called Savita because He creates.

2 Who, according' to Sammohana Tantra, Ch. IJ, acts as keeper of

THE CENTEES OE LOTUSES (CHAKBA, PADMa) 121

lies asleep coiled three and a half times ^ round the Linga,
coTering with Her head the Brahmadvara.*

The Svadhishthana Chakra is the second lotus proceed-
ing upwards, and is, according to the commentary, so called
after Sva or the Param Lingam.^ It is a vermilion lotus
of six petals placed in the spinal centre of the region at the
root of the genitals. On these petals are the letters like
lightning : Bang (#), Bhang (u), Mang (u), Yang (q), Bang
(t), Lang (t). “Water” (Ap) is the Tattva of this Chakra,
which is known as the white region of Varuna. The
Tattvik Mandala is in the shape of a crescent moon ^

(Ardhendiirupalasitam). The Bija. of water (Varuna) is
“Vang”. This, the Varuna Bija, is seated on a white
Makara® with a noose in his hand. Hari (Vishnu) and
Rakini Shakti of furious aspect, showing Her teeth fiercely.

are here (vv. 14 — 18).

Above it, at the centre of the region of the navel, is
the lotus Manipiira (Nabhipadma), so called, according to
the G-autamiya Tantra, because, owing to the presence of
the fiery Tejas, it is lustrous as a gem (Mani).® It is a
lotus of ten petals on which are the letters Hang (%),
Hhang (t), iVang (d), Tang (fi), Thang (4), Dang (^), Dhang
(sf), Hang (fi), Pang (4), Phang (-4). This is the trian-
gular region of the Tejas Tattva. The triangle has

1 These correspond with the three and a half Bindus of which the

Kubjika Tantra speaks. Bee ante.

2 Entrance to the Siisliumna.

3 For another definition see Dhyanabindu Up., where all the
Chakras are named. Another derivation is “ own abode” of (Shakti).

4 The diagrams or m an dalas symbolic of the elements are also given,
as here stated, in the first chapter of the Sharada Tilaka and in the
Vishvasara Tantra, cited at p. 25 of the Pranatoshini, with the excep-
tion that, according to the Yishvasara Tantra, the Mandala of water is
not a crescent, but eigbt-cornered (Ashtasra).

s An animal like an alligator. See Plate 3.

« For another derivation, derived from Samaya worship, see Oom-
mentary on the Lalita-Sahasranama, vv. 88, 89.

16

Ulili

, tv V

^

122

THE SIX CENTEES AND THE SEliPENT POWER

three Svastikas. The red Bija of fire, “ Rang,” is seat-
ed on a ram, the carrier of Agni, the Lord of Fire.
Here is the old red Rudra smeared with white ashes, and
the Shakti Lakini who as the Devata of this digestive
centre is said to be “fond of animal food, and whose
breasts ai-e ruddy with the blood and fat which drop
from Her mouth Lakini and the other special Shaktis
of the centi’es here named are the Shaktis of the Yogi
himself— that is, Shaktis of the Dhatus assigned to
each of his bodily centres, and concentration on this centre
may involve the satisfaction of the appetites of this Devata.
The Shaktis of the higher centres are not meat-eaters.
From these three centres the gross Virat, waking body,
is evolved (vv. 19-21).

Next above the navel lotus (Nabhipadma) is the Ana-
hata, in the region of the heart, which is red like a Ban-
dhuka flower, and is so called because it is in this place
that Munis hear that “ sound (Anahata shabda) which
comes without the striking of any two things together,”
or the “ sound ” of the Shabdabrahman, which is here the
Pulse of Life. For it is here that the Purusha (Jivatma)
dwells. This lotus is to be distinguished from the Heart
Lotus of eight petals, which is represented in the place
below it, where in mental worship the Patron Deity (Ishta-
devatii) is meditated upon. (See Plate V.) Here is the
Tree which grants all desires (Kalpataru) and the jewelled
altar (Manipitha) beneath it. As the Vishvasara Tantra
cited in the Pranatoshini says ; “ Shabdabrahman is said
to be Deva Sadashiva. That Shabda is said to be in the
Anahatachakra. Anahata is the great Chakra in the heart
of all beings. Ongkara is said to be there in association
with the three Gunas.” ^ The Mahasvachchhanda Tantra

1 P. 10.

Shabdabrahmeti tang praha saksbad devali sadaslnvaii

Anabatesbu chakreshu sa sbabdah parikirttyate

THE CENTEES OR LOTOSES (CHAKBA, PADMA). 123

says : 1 “ The gi’eat ones declai’e that Thy blissful form,

0 Queen, manifests in Anahata, and is experienced by the
mind inward-turned of the Blessed Ones, whose hairs
stand on end and whose eyes weep with joy.” This is a
lotus of ten petals with the vermilion letters Kang {€),
Khang (#), Gang (4), Ghang (^), Ngang (#), Chang (=4),
Ohhang (s), Jang (^), Jhang (ft), Nyang (^i), Tang (s),
Thaug (e). This is the centre of the Vayu Tattva.
According to v. 22, the region of Vayu is six-cornered
(that is, formed by two triangles, of which one is inverted),
and its colour that of smoke by reason of its being
surrounded by masses of vapour.^ Its Bija “A^ang” is
seated on a black antelope which is noted for its fleetness,
and is the Vahana of “ Air ” (Vayu), with its property of
motion. Here are Isha, the Overlord of the first three
Chakras ; the Shakti Kakini gar-landed with human bones,
whose “ heart is softened by the drinking of nectar ” ; and
the Bhakti in the form of an inverted triangle (Trikona),
wherein is the golden Bana Linga, “ joyous with a rush
of desire ” (Kamodgamollasita), and the Hangsa as Jiv-
iltma, like “ the steady flame of a lamp in a windless place”
(vv. 22-27). The Atma is so described because just as the
flame is undisturbed by the wind, so the Atma is in itself
unaffected by the motions of the world.^

Analiatan^ maliachakrang liridaye sarvvajantuslm

Tatra ongkara ityukto gunatraya-samanvitah.

1 Cited by Bbaskararaya’s Comm, on Lalita, v. 121, on the title of
the Devi as Nadarupa ; and in v. 218, where she is described as Nada-
riipini, referring also to YoginJhridaya Tantra.

2 According to the Sharada, Ch. 1 (and to the same effect Prapan-
chasara Tantra), the colours of the Bhiitas are as follows: Akasha
(ether) is transparent (svaohcbha) ; Vayu (air) is black (Krishna) ;
Agni (fire) is red (Rakta) ; Ap (water) is white (Sveta) ; and PrithivI

124 THE SIX OEKTEES AND THE SKBPBNT POWER

The seventeentli Terse of the Anaiicla-Lahari mentions
that the Devatas Vashinl and others are to he worshipped
in the two last-mentioned Chakras. Vashinl and others
are eight in number.^

(I) Vashini, (2) KamesliTari, (3) Modinl, (4) Vimahh
(5) Aruna, (6) Jayini, (7) Sarveshvarl, and (8) Kfdl or
Kaulinl. These ai*e I’espectively the Presiding Deities of
the following eight groups of letters; (1) 3? to sr:, 1(>
letters; (2) ^ to 1=, 5 letters; (3) ^ to 5 letters;
(4) 3 to % 5 letters; (5) ci to 5 letters; (G) t to
5 letters ; (7) ^ to 4 letters ; (8) to ^ or s:, 5 letters.

The other beings in t. 37 of Ananda-Laharl refer to
the twelve Yoginis, who are (1) Vidyayoginl, (2) Eechika,
(3) Mochika. (4) Amrita, (6) Dlpikii, (6) Jnana, (7) Apya-
yanl, (8) Vyapini, (9) Medha, (10) Vyomarupa, (11) Sid-
dhirupa, and (12) Lakshmlyogini.

These twenty Deities (eight Vashinls and twelve Aogi-
nis) are to be worshipped in Manipura and Anahata
centres. In respect of this, the Commentator quotes a
verse from the Taittiriyiiranyaka, and gives a description
of these Deities, their respective colours, place, etc.

At the spinal centre of the region at the base of the
throat (Kantha-mula) is the Vishuddha Chakra or Bhfi-
ratisthana,® with sixteen petals of a smoky purple hue, on
which are the sixteen vowels with Bindu thereon— that is,
Ang (at), Ang (m), Ing (^), Ing (f), Ung ( 3 ), Ung (a),
Ring (^), Ring {%), Bring (^), Bring (5t), Eng (g), Aing (^),
Ong (3ff), Aung (^), and the two breathings Ang (bt).
Ah (3T:). According to the Devibhagavata (VII. 35), the
Chakra is so called because the Jiva is made pure (Vi-
shuddha) by seeing the Hangsa. Here is the centre of the

1 Pandit Ananta Shastri’s Aiianda Laliari, pp. 47, 48, and transla-
tion of same by A. Avalon, ‘‘ Wave of Bliss

2 That is, abode of the Devi of speech.

THE CENTRES OR LOTOSES (OHAKBA, TADMa) 125

white circular Akaslia or Ether Tattva, the Bija of which is
“ Hang ”. Akasha is dressed in white and mounted on a
white elephant. Its Mandala is in the form of a circle.’^
Here is Sadashiva in his androgyne or Arddhanarishvara
Miirti, in which half the body is white and the other half
gold. Here also is the white Shakti Shakini, whose form
is light (Jyotihsvarupa). Here, too, is the lunar region, “the
gateway of the great liberation”. It is at this place that
the Jnani “ sees the three forms of time (Trikaladarshi).
As all things are in the Atma, the Jnani who has realised
the Atma has seen them (vv. 28-31). Above the Vishuddha,
at the root of the palate, is a minor Chakra called Lalanii,
or in some Tantras Kala Chakra, which is not mentioned in
the works here translated. It is a red lotus with twelve
petals bearing the following Vritti or qualities : Shraddha
(faith), Santosha (contentment), Aparadha (sense of error),
Dama (self-command), Mana (anger)® Sneha (affection),*
Shuddhata (purity), Arati (detachment), Sambhrama (agit-
ation),^ Urmmi (appetite).* {V. post.)

Before summarising the previous description, it is to
be here observed that the Commentator Ealioharana
states the principle of this Yoga to be that that which is
grosser is merged into that which is more subtle (Sthii-
lanam sukshme layah). The grosser are lower in the
body than the more subtle. The gross which are in and

^ This is sometimes represented as a circle with a number of dots
in it, for, as the Prapanchasara Tantra sajs, Akasha has innumerable
Sushira — that is, Chhidra, or spaces between its substance. It is
because of its interstitial character that things exist in space.

2 This term is generally applied to cases arising between two
persons who are attached to one another, as man and wife.

3 Usually understood as affection towards those younger or lower
than oneself.

^ Through reverence or respect.

5 Or it may refer to the six which are technically called iirnimi —
that is, hunger, thirst, sorrow, ignorance (moha), decay, and death.

126 THE SIX CENTEES AND THE SERPENT POWER

below the Muladhara or connected 'witli it are (11 tlie
Pritliivl Tanmatra ; (2) the PritliivI j^Ialuibhiita ; (3) the
nostrils with their sense of smell, which is the grossest
of the senses of knowledge (Jiiiinendriya), and which is
the quality (Guna) of the Prithivi Tanmatra; and (4) the
feet, which are the grossest of the senses of action (Kar-
mendriya), and “ which have Prithivi (earth) for their
support Here the nostrils are classified as the grossest
of the Jnanendriyas, because therein is the sense which
perceives the quality (Guna) of smell of the grossest lan-
matra (Gandha), from whiclvis derived the Prithivi Stliida
Ehuta. Thus the Jnanendriyas have a relation with the
Tanraatras thi’ough their Gunas (qualities), for the percep-
tion of w'hich these senses exist. In the case, however, of
thp, senses of action tKarmendriva), no such relation

^ At first sight this might appear not to be so, but the importance
of the anus is well known to medical experts, its sensitivity having
even given rise to what has been called a ‘‘ Psychology of the anus

THK CENTRES OR LOTUSES (cHAKRAj PADMA) 127

connection that the Tantras here follow the Sangkhya, and
state the scheme of creation as it occurs also in the
Puranas, according to which the Jnanendriyas and Kar-
inendriyas and the Tan matras issue from different aspects
of the threefold Ahangkara. There is a relation between
the senses and the Tanmatras in the created Jiva, according
to the Vedanta, for the senses are related to the Tanmatras,
but the order, in that case, in which the senses occur is
different from that given in this work. For, according to
the Vediintik scheme, earth is related to the sense of smell
and penis ; water to the sense of taste and anus ; fire to
the sense of sight and feet ; air to the sense of touch and
hands ; and ether to the sense of hearing and mouth.
Another explanation seemingly artificial, however, which
has been given, is as follows ; The feet are associated with
“ Earth ” because the latter alone has the power of support,
and the feet rest on it. “Water” is associated with the
hands because in drinking water the hand is used. The
word Pani, which means hand, is dei-ived from the root
Pa, to drink (Piyate anena iti pani). “ Fire ” is associated
with the anus because what is eaten is consumed by fire
in the stomach, and the residue is passed out through
the anus, whereby the body becomes pure. “Air” is
associated with the penis because in procreation the
Jivatma as Prana Vayu throws itself out through the
penis. And so the Shruti says ; “ Atma itself is reborn
in the son ” (Atma vai jayate putrah). “ Ether ”
is associated with the mouth because by the mouth
sound is uttered, "which is the Guna (quality) of ether
(Akasha).

Hitherto we have dealt with the comparatively
gross Tattvas. According to this work, the twenty

I

^ ' r- 't ,/ " f.V > " . 'W. i '

128

THE SIX CBNTEES AND THE SEEPENT POWER

■oTosser Tattvas are associated (4X5) as in. the following

table :

Centre in which
dissolved

1. Mfiiildbara

■2, SvadliisLthaoa
Manipiira
•i. Aiiabata

5. Visliucldba

Grosser Tattvas

Gaiidba (smell) .Taiiniatra; Pritbivi Tattva ,
(earth); tbe Jnanendriya of sroeil ; V the
Karmeiidrija of feet.

Easa (taste) TanmMra ; Ap Tattm (water) ; the
Jnanendi’iya of taste; the Karmeiidriya of
baods.

Rupa (sight) Taiimatra ; Tejas Tattva (fire) ; the
Jnanendriya of sight; the Karmeiidriya of
■aBus.

Sparsha (touch) Tanniatra ; A^ayii Tattm (air) ;
the Jii.^Beiidriya of touch ; the Karmeiidriya c^f
penis.

Shabda (sound) Tanmatra ; Akasba Tattva (ether) ;
the Jnanendriya of hearing ; the Karmeiidriya
of mouth.

It will be observed that with each of the elements is
associated an organ of sensation (Jnanendriya) and action
(Karmendriya). In Chapter II of the Prapanchasara
Tantra it is said : “lEther is in the ears, air in the skin,
fire in the eye, water in the tongue, and earth in the
nostrils.” The Karmendriyas are possibly so arranged
because the Tattvas of the respective centres in which they
are placed are, as above stated, of similar grades of subtlety
and grossness. As explained below, each class of Tattvas
is dissolved in the next higher class, commencing from the
lowest and grossest centre, the Muladhara. So far the
Tattvas have been those of the “ matter ” side of creation.

Progress is next made to the last or Ajna Chakra, in
which are the subtle Tattvas of Mind and Prakriti. The
Chakra is so called because it is here that the command
(Ajna) of the Guru is received from above. It is a lotus of

^ The nose is a centre at which ses-ual excitement may he aroused or
subdued. Though the reproductive organ is higher np than the
Muladhara, the sexual force proceeds from the latter.

THR CENTRES OR LOTOSES (OHAKRA, PADMA) 129

two white petals between the eyebrows, on which are the
white letters Hang (i), and Kshang (^). This exhausts the
fifty lettei’s. It will have been observed that there are fifty
petals and fifty letters in the six Chakras. In the pericarp
is the great Mantra “ Om Each Lotus has either two or
four more petals than the one immediately below it, and
the number of the petals in the Vishuddha Chakra is the
sum of the preceding differences. Here are Paramashiva
in the form of Hangsa (Hangsa-rupa), Siddhakali, the white
Hakini Shakti “elated by draughts of ambrosia,” the
inverted triangle or Yoni (Trikona), and the Itara Linga,
shining like lightning, which is set in it. The_three Lingas
are thus in the Muladhara, Anahata, ana. Ajna Chakras
respectively ; for here at these three Brahmagrantbis the
force of Maya Shakti is in great strength. And this is the
point at which each of the three groups of iattva associated
with fire, sun, and moon, converge.^ The phrase “opening
the doors ” refers to passage through these Granthi. Here
in the Ajna is the seat of the subtle Tattvas, Mahat and
Prakriti. The former is the Antahkarana with Gunas— <
namely, Buddhi, Chitta, Ahangkara and its product Manas
(Sasangkalpavikalpaka).' Commonly and shortly it is said
that Manas is the Tattva of the Ajna Chakra. As, however,
it is the mental centre, it includes all the aspects of mind
above stated, and the Prakriti whence they derive, as also
the Atma in the form of the Pranava (Om) its Bija. Here
the Atma (Antaratma) shines -lustrous like a flame. The
light of this region makes visible all which is between the
Mula and the Brahmarandhra. The Yogi by contemplation
of this lotus gains further powers (Siddhi), and becomes
Advaitacharavadi (Monist). In connection with this Padma,
the text (S.N., v. 36) explains how detachment is gained
through the Yoni Mudra. It is here that the Yogi at the

1 F. post.

.180 THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

time of death places his Prana, and then enters the supreme
pi'imordial Deva, the Puriina (ancient) Purnsha, “ who was
before the three worlds, and is known by the Vedanta
The same verse describes the method (Pranaropana-
prakara). From the last centre and the causal Prakriti is
evolved the subtle body which individually is known as
Taijasa, and collectively (that is, the Ishvara aspect) as
Hiranyagarbha. The latter tei'm is applied to the mani-
festation of the Paramatma in the Antahkarana ; as
displayed in Prana it is Siitratma ; and when manifested
through these two vehicles without differentiation it is
known as the Antaryamin. The Chakras are the bodily
centres of the world of differentiated manifestation, with
its gross and subtle bodies arising from their causal body,
and its threefold planes of consciousness in waking, sleep-
ing, and dreamless slumber.

Above the Ajna-chakra (vv. 82— -39) there are the minor
Chakras called Manas and Soma, not mentioned in the texts
here ti*anslated. The Manas Chakra is a lotus of six
petals, on the petals of which are (that is, which is the
seat of) the sensations of hearing, touch, sight, smell,
taste, and centrally initiated sensations in dream and
hallucination. Above this, again, is the Soma Chakra,
a lotus of sixteen petals, with certain Vrittis which are
detailed later.^ In this region are “ the house without
support” (Niralambapuri), “where Yogis see the radiant
■Ishvara,” the seven causal bodies (v. 39) which are inter-
mediate aspects of Adya Shakti, the white twelve-petalled
lotus by the pericarp of the Sahasrara (vv. 32 — 39), in
which twelve-petalled lotus is the A-ka-tha triangle, which
surrounds the jewelled altar (Manipitha) on the isle of
gems (Manidvipa), set in the Ocean of Nectar,^ Avith Bindu

1 V, posL

^ In mental worship the jewelled altar of the Ishtadevata is in the
eight “petalled lotus below Anahata (see Plate Y). The Isle of ’Gems is

the CiSNTHES OS LOTOSES (OHAKEA, PADMa) 131

above and Nada below, and the Kainakala triangle and the
Gluru of all, or Paramasliiva. Above this, again, in the
pericarp, are the Snryya and Chandra Mandalas, the Para-
bindu surrounded by the sixteenth and seventeenth digits
of the moon circle. In the Chandra Mandala there is a
triangle. Above the Moon is Mahavayu, and then the

Brahmarandhra with Mahashangkhini.

The twelve-petalled lotus and that which is connected
with it is the special subject of the short book Padukapan-
chaka Stotra here translated, which is a hymn by Shiva in
praise of the “ Fivefold Footstool,” with a commentary by
Shri Kalicharana. .The footstools are variously classified
as follows ; According to the first classification they are—
(1) The white twelve-petalled lotus in the pericarp of the
Sahasi-ara lotus. Here there is (2) the inverted Triangle,
the abode of Shakti called “ A-ka-tha ”. (3) The region of

the altar (Manipitha), on each side of which are Nada and
Bindu. The eternal G-uru, “ white like a mountain of
silver,” should be meditated upon, as on the Jewelled-
Altar (Manipitha). (4) The fourth Paduka is the Hangsa
below the Antaratma ; and (5) the Triangle on the Pitha.
The differences between this and the second classification
are explained in the notes to v. 7 of the Paduka. Accord-
ing to this latter classification they are counted as follows:
(1) The twelve-petalled lotus; (2) the triangle called
A-ka-tha; (3) Nada-Bindu; (4) the Manipitha-Mandala;
and (5) the Hangsa, which makes the triangular Kamakala.
This Triangle, the Supreme Tattva, is formed by the three
Hindus which the text calls Chandra (Moon), Suryya (Sun),
and Vahni (Fire) Hindus, which are also known as Pra-
kasha, Vimarsha, and Mishra Hindu. This is the Hangsa

a supreme state of Oonsoionsness, and the Ocean of Nectar is ^e
Consciousness Itself. As to the causal bodies, -.see my Garland ot
Letters ” or “ Studies in the Mantra Shastra ' . . : •

132 THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

known as the triangular Kamakala, the embodiment of
Purusha-Prakriti. The former is the Bindu Hangkara at
the apex of the triangle, and the two other Hindus called
Visarga or Sa are Prakriti. This Kamakala is the Mula
(root) of Mantra.

The Shabdabrahman with its threefold aspect and
energies is represented in the Tantras by this Kamakala,
which is the abode of Shakti (Abalalayam). This is the
Supreme Triangle, which, like all Yonipithas, is inverted.
It may be here noted that Shakti is denoted by a triangle
because of its threefold manifestation as Will, Action, and
Knowledge. (Ichchha, Kriya, Jnana). So, on the material
plane, if there are three forces, there is no other way in
which they can be brought to interact except in the form
of a triangle in which, while they are each separate and
distinct from one another, they ai’e yet related to each
other and form part of one whole. At the corners of the
Triangle there are two Bindus, and at the apex a single
Bindu. These are the Bindus of Fire (Vahnibindu), Moon
(Ohandrabindu), and Sun (Sury5’'abindu).^ Three Shaktis
emanate from these Bindus, denoted by the lines joining the
Bindus and thus forming a triangle. These lines are the
line of the Shakti Vama, the line of the Shakti Jyeshtha,
and the line of the Shakti Raudri. These Shaktis are
Volition (Ichchha), Action (Kriya), and Cognition (Jnana).
With them are Brahma, Vishnu, and Rudra, associated
with the Gunas Rajas, Sattva, and Tamas.

The lines of the triangle emanating from the three
Bindus or Hangsah are formed by forty-eight letters of the
alphabet. The sixteen vowels beginning with A form one

1 The Kamakalavilasa says : “ Bindu -tray am ay as tejas-tritayah ”
(three Bindus and three htes). Tripurasundarl sits in the Chakra
which is composed of Bindus (Bindumaye chakre), Her abode being the
lap of Kameshvara, whose forehead is adorned by the crescent moon*
She has three eyes, which are Sun, Moon, and Eire.”

THE CENTEES OB TiOTDSES (CHAKBA, PADMa) 133

line; tlie sixteen consonants beginning with Ka form the
second line ; and the following sixteen letters beginning
with Tha form the third line. Hence the triangle is known
as the A-ka-tha triangle. In the inner three corners of
the triangle are the remaining letters Ha, Lla, Ksha. The
Yamala thus speaks of this abode, “I now speak of
Kamakala,” and, proceeding, says : " She is the eternal One
who is the three Hindus, the three Shaktis, and the three
Forms (Trimiirti).” The Brihat-Shri-krama, in dealing
with Kamakala, says: “From the Hindu (that is, the
Parabindu) She has assumed the formofletters(Varna-
vayavariipini).” The Kali tlrddhvamnaya says : “ The
threefold Hindu (Tribindu) is the supreme Tattva, and
embodies in itself Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva. ^ The
triangle which is composed of the letters has emanated
from the Hindu. These letters are known as the Matrika
Varna. These form the body of Kulakundalini * the
Shabdabrahman, being in their Vaikhari state various
manifestations of the primal unmanifested sound
(Avyaktanada).

They appear as manifested Shabda on the self-division
of the Parabindu ; for this self -division marks the appear-
ance of the differentiated Prakriti.

The commentary on the Padukapanchaka (v. 3) says
that the Hindu is Parashakti itself, and its variations are '

called Hindu, mda, and Bija, or Sun, Moon, and Fire ;

' Hindu, the sun, ‘ being red, and Nada,_ the moon, being
' white.^ These form the Chinmaya or Anandamayakosha

' 1 The Maheshvari Sangliita says : “ Suryya, Chandra, and Vahm,

are the three Hindus ; and Brahma, Vishnu, and fehamhhu, are t

'till P0© ilTlGS

2 The Kamakalavilasa says : “ Ekapanchashadaksharatma ” (She
is in the form of the 51 letters). See A. Avalon s edition and translation
of this text, VoL 9, Tantrik Texts.

3 This appears to he in conflict with the previous statemen o
Raghava Bhatta, that Hindu is Moon and Nada the Sun.

■I

THK SIS OENTBES AND THE SEBPENT POWER.

(Padukapanoliaka, v. 3). The two Hindus making the
base of the triangle are the Visai-ga (ih., v. 4). In the
Agamakalpadruma it is said : “ Hangkara is Hindu or
Purusha, and Visarga is Sail or Prakriti. Hangsah is the
union of the male and female, and the universe is
Hangsah.” The triangular Kamakala is thus formed bj
Hangsah (ib.). The Hangsa-pitha is composed of Mantras

As this subject is of great importance, some further
authorities than those referred to in the work here tran-
slated are given. In his commentary to v. 124 of the LaUta,
in which the Devi is addressed as being ill the form of
Kamakala (Kamakalarupa), Bhiiskararaya says : “ There
are three Hindus and the Hardhakala.’^ Of these Hindus
the first is called Kama, and the Hakarardha is named
Kala.” * He. adds that the nature of Karnakahl is set
forth in the Kamakalavilasa in the verses commencing
" Supreme Shakti (Para Shakti) is the manifested union of
Shiva and Shakti in the form of seed and sprout,” and
ending with the lines “ Kama (means) desirableness, and
the Kala the same. The two Hindus are said to be the
Pire and Moon ”.® Kama, or creative Will, is both Shiva
and Devi, and Kala is their manifestation. Hence it is
called Kamakala. This is explained in the Tripurasiddhanta :
“ 0 Parvati, Kala is the manifestation of Kameshvara and
Kameshvarl. Hence She is known as Kamakala.” Or

1 Also called Hakarardha — that is, half the letter Ha

^ Bindu-trayarig hardhakala cha ity atra prathamo binduh kama-
khyash charama kala cha iti pratyaharanyayena kamakalety nchyate.

3 Tasyah svarupang sphutashi%mshakti-samagamabijangkiirarupini
para shaktiritjarabhya Kamah kamaiuyataya kala cha dabanenduvi-
grahau biDdu ityantena nirnitang kamakalavilase tadrupetyarthah (ib,),

^ Kamayoh kaleti va, tadaktang, Tripurasiddhante :

Tasya kameshvarakhyasya kameshvaryash cha Parvvati
Kalakhya salila sa cha khyata kamakaleti sa, . . i .

THE CENTRES OR LOTUSES (CHAKRA, PADJU)

■She is the manifestation (Kala) of desire (Kama) ^ — that is,
of Tchchhil. The Kalika Pin’Ana says: “Devi is called
Kama because She came to the secret place on the blue peak
of the great mountain (Kailasa) along with Me for the sake
of desire (Kama) : thus Devi is called Kama. As She is
■also the giver or fulfiller of desire, desiring, desirable,
beautiful, restoring the body of Kama (Manmatha) and
destroying the body of Kama, hence She is called Kama.”®
After Shiva (with whom She is one) had destroyed Kama,
when he sought by the instilment of passion to destroy
His yoga ; so She (with whom He is one) afterwards gave
a new body to the “ Bodiless One ” (Ananga). They
destroy the worlds and take them to themselves through
the cosmic yoga path, and again by Their desire and will
(Ichchha) recreate them. These Bindus and Kala are
refeiTed to in the celebrated Hymn “ Waves of Bliss ”
(Anandalahari), attributed to the great Shangkaracharyya.®
This Devi is the great Tripurasnndari. Bhaskara-
raya’s Guru Krisinghanandanatha wrote the following
verse, on which the disciple commentates : “ I hymn
Tripura, the treasure of Kula,^ who is red of beauty ; Her

i Kamash obasau kalarupa cbeti va.

‘2 Kamapadamatra-vacbyatayab Kalipurane pratipadanat.

^ Kamartliam agata yasman tnaya sardbang mabagirau
Kamakbya procbyate devi nilakutarabogata
Kamada kamini kamya kanta kamaiiggadayiiii
KtoanggaDasbini yasmat ktoakbya tena katbyate
Iti sbadaksbaramidang nama {ib.).

Mukhang binduHg kritva kucbayngam adbas tasya tadadbo
Hakarardbang dbjayet baramabishi te mamnatbakalto (v. 19).

(Let bim contemplate on tbe first Bindu as the face ( f the Devi,
;and on tbe other two Bindus as Her two breasts, and below that on tbe
half Ha.) Half Ha is tbe Yoni, tbe womb, and origin of all. See
Lalita, v. 206,

4 Kulanidbi. In its literal ordinary sense Kala means race or
family, but bas a number of other meanings : Shakti (Akula is Shiva),
tbe spiritual hierarchy of Gurus, the MulMbara, the doctrine of the
Kaula Tantriks, etc.

■■

'

:

THE SIX CENTEBS AND THE SEEPBNT POWEB

136

limbs like unto those of Kamaraja, wbo is adored by the
thi’ee Devatas ^ of the three Gunas ; who is the desire (or
will) of Shiva ; ® who dwells in the Bindu and who mani-
fests the universe.” She is called (says the commentator
cited) ^ Tripura, as She has three (Ihi) Paras I lit., cities),
but, here meaning Bindus, angles, lines, syllables, etc.
The Kalika Parana says : “ She has three angles {in the
triangular Yoni) as well as three circles (the three Bindus),
and her Bhiipura ^ has three lines. Her ilantra is .said to
be of three syllables,® and She has three aspects. The
Kundalini energy is also threefold, in order that She may
create the three Gods (Brahma, Vishnu, Pudra). Thus,
since She the supreme energy is everywhere triple. She is
called Tripurasundari.”® These syllables are said by the
commentator last cited ’’ to be the three Bijas of the three
divisions (of the Panchadashi) — vh., Vtigbhava, Kamaraja,
and Shakti, which according to the Vamakeshvara Tanti’a

1 Yisbiin, Brabma, and Rudra, of the Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas
qualities respectively.

2 This is the Commentator’s meaning of Ekam tain.* Eka —
a-fi=e. According to the Yishva Dictionary, ‘‘ A ” has among other
meanings that of Isha or Shiva, and, according to the Anekarthadhvani-
manjari Lexicon, I = Manmatha — that is, K'toa, or desire* Eka. is
therefore the spouse of Siva, or Shivakama, the desire or will of Shiva.

3 Introduction to Lalita.

4 The portion of the Yantra which is of common form and which
encloses the particular design in its centre. Reference may, however,
also be here made to the three outer lines of the Shrichakra.

5 V. post. The Kama Bija is Kling. Kiingkara is Shivakama.
Here Ing means the Kaniakala in the Turiya state through which
Moksha is gained, and hence the meaning of the saying {tb., v. 176)
that he who hears the Bija without Ka and La does not reach the
place of the good actions — that is, he does not go to the region attained
by good actions, but to that attainable by knowledge alone (see ib..
V. 189, citing Yamakesbvara Tantra).

s Other instances may be given, such as the Tripurarnava, which
says that the Devi is called Tripura because She dwells in the three
RMis (Sushumna, Pinggala, and Ida ; v. post) and in Buddhi Manas
Ohitta (v. post),

7 Y. 177.

THE CENTRES OR LOTUSES (OHAKRA, PADMa) 137

are the Jnanashakfci which confers salvation, and the Kriya
and Ichchha Shaktis.

Three “ Pada ” are also spoken of as Tripura — white,
red, and mixedd Elsewhere, as in the Varaha Parana,
the Dev! is said to have assumed three forms— white,
red, and black : that is, the Supreme energy endowed
with the Shttvik, Rajasik, and Tamasik qualities.^ The
one Shakti becomes three to produce effects.

In the Kamakala meditation (Dhyana) the three
Bindus and Harddhakala are thought of as being the
body of the Devi Tripurasundari. The Commentator on
the verse of the Ananda-Lahari cited says ; ® "In the fifth
sacrifice (Yajna) let the Sadhaka think of his Atma as in
no wise different from, but as the one only Shiva ; and
of the subtle thread-like Kundalini which is all Shaktis,
extending from the Adhara lotus to Paramashiva. Let
him think of the three Bindus as being in Her body
(Tripurasundari), which Bindus indicate Ichchha, Kriya,
Jnana — ^Moon, Fire, and Sun ; Rajas, Tamas, Sattva ;
Brahma, Rudra, Vishnu ; and then let him meditate on
the Chitkala who is Shakti below it.” ^

1 According to a note of E. Anantakrishna Shastri, translator of the
Lalita, p. 213, the three “ feet ” are explained in another work of
Bhaskararaya as follows : White, the pure Samvit (Consciousness)
untainted by any (Jpadhis ; red, the Parahanta (Supreme Individuality),
the hrst Yritti (modification) from the Samvit ; and the mixed — the
above-mentioned as one inseparable modification (the Yritti) of “ I
These are known as the ‘‘three feet” (Charana-tritaya), or Indu
(white), Agni (red), Eavi (mixed).

2 So also the Devi Bhagavata Pr. says : “ The Shambhaviis white ;
Shrividya, red ; and Shyama, black.” The Yantra of Shrividya is the
Shrichakra mentioned.

3 Shan gkaraeharyyagTanth avail (Yol. II), ed. Shri Prasanna
Kumara Shastri. The editor’s notes are based on the Commentary cf
Achyutananda Svtoi.

4 Atha panchamayage abhedabuddhya atmanang sbivarupam ekat-
manang vibhavya adharat paramasbivantang sutrarupang sukshmang
kundalining sarvashaktirupang vibhavya sattvarajastamogunasuchakang
brahmavishnushivashaktyatmakang suryagnicbandrariipang bindutra-
yangtasya angge vibhavya adhash chitkalang dhyayet (Comm, to v. 19).

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

The Bindu which is the “ face ” indicates Virinchi ^
(Brahma) associated with the Rajas G-una. The two
Bindus which are the “ breasts,” and upon which medita-
tion should be done in the heart, indicate Hari - (Vishuu)
and Hara ® (Rudra) associated wdth the Sattva and Tamas
Gunas. Below them meditate in the Yoni upon the
subtle Ohitkala, which indicates all three Gunas, and
which is all these three Devatas/ The meditation given
in the Yoginl Tantra is as follows : “ Think of three
Bindus above Kala, and then that from these a young girl
sixteen years old springs forth, shining with the light of
millions of rising suns, illuminating every quarter of the
firmament. Think of Her body from crown to throat
as springing from the upper Bindu, and that her body
from throat to middle, with its two breasts and three belly
lines of beauty (Trivali), arise from the two lower Bindus.
Then imagine that the I’est of Her body from genitals to
feet is born from Kama. Thus formed, She is adorned
with all manner of ornaments and dress, and is adored by
Brahma, Isha, and Vishnu. Then let the Sadhaka think
of his own body as such Kamakala.” ® The Shritattvar-
nava says : “ The glorious men who worship in that body
in Samarasya ® are freed from the waves of poison in
the untraversable sea of the world (Sangsara).” ®

1 That is, He who creates, from Vi+rich.

~ He -who takes away or destroys (harati) all grief and sin.

2 The same.

■4 Mukhaiig bindung kritva rajogunasuohakang virincliyatmakarig
bindmig mukhang kritva, tasyadho hridayasthane sattvatamoguna-
suchakang hariharatmakang bindudvayang kuchayugang kritva,
tasyadhah j'onigaaatrayasuchikang hariliaravirinchyatmikang suksh-
mang ehitkalang hakarardhang kritva yonyantargata-trikonakriting
kritva dhyayet (iZi.).

5 See p. 199, et seq., Nityapujapaddhati, by Jaganmohaiia Tarka-
langkara.

® That i.s equal, feeling; or being one with ; homogeneity; union
of Shiva and Shakti.

THK CENTRES OB LOTOSES (OHAKEA, PADMA) 139

To tlie same effect are the Tantrik works the Shrik-
rama ’ and Bhuvachiidamani cited in the Commentary to
the Ananda-Lahari. The first says : “ Of the three
Bindus, 0 Mistress of tlie Devas, let him contemplate the
first as the month and in the heart the two Bindus as the
two breasts. Then let him meditate upon the subtle Kala
Hakarardha in the Yoni.” And the second says ; “The
face in the form of Bindn, and below twin breasts, and
below them the beauteous form of the Hakaradha.” The
three Devatiis Brahma, Vishnu, and Rudra, with their
Shaktis, are said to take birth from the letters A, TJ, M,
of the Ongkara or Pranava. ^ Ma, as the Prapanchasara
Tantra ^ says, is the Sun or Atma among the letters, for it
is Bindu. Prom each of these ten Kalas arise.

Verse 8 of the first work translated says that in the
Mfiladhiira centre there is the Triangle (Trikona) known
as Traipura, which is an adjective of Tripura. It is so
called because of the presence of the Devi Tripura within

1 Tatha cha Shrikrame :

Bindutrayasya deveshi prathamang devi vakimkang

Bindudvayang stanadvandvang hridi sthaue niyojayet.

Hakarardhang kalang sukshmang yonimadliye vickintayet.

Taduktang Bhavachudamanau ;

Makhang binduvadakarang
Tadadhah kucbayagmakam
Tadadhashelia hakarardhang
Suparishkritamandalam.

The third line of this verse is also printed Tadadhah saparardhimj
cha. But this means the .same thing. Sapara is Hakara, as II
follows Sa. For further Dhyana.s and mode of meditation, see p. U
of the Nityapujapaddhati of Jaganmohana Tarkalangkara.

3 Phetkarini Tantra, Ch. I : , -v i

Tebhya eva samutpanna varna ye vishnn-shulinoli
Murtayab sbaktisangynkta nebyante tah kra,mena tu.

And so also Vislivasara Tantra (see Pranatoshini, 10) :

Shivo brahma tatha vishnnrongkare cha pratishthitah
Akarash cha hhaved hrahma nkarah saohchidatmakah
Makaro rudra itynkta iti tasyarthakalpana.

4 Ch. III.

140

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

the Ka inside the triangle. This Ka is the chief letter of
the Kama Bija, and Kang^ is the Bija of Kumiui, the
aspect of Tripnrasundari in the Muladhara. Here also, as
the same verse says, there are the three lines Varna,
Jyeshtha, and Raudri, and, as the Shatohakra-vivriti adds,
lohchha, Jnana, and Kriya.'^ Thus the Traipura Trikoua
is the gi’oss or Sthula aspect of that subtle (Sukshma)
Shakti which is below the Sahasrara, and is called
Kamakala. It is to this Kaminl that in worship the essence
of Japa (Tejorupajapa) is offered, the external Japa being
offered to the Devata worshipped in order that the Siidhaka
may retain the fruits of his worship.® There ai'e also two
other Lingas and Trikonas at the Anfdiata and Ajna
centres, which are two of the Knots or Granthis, and which
are so called because Maya is strong at these points of
obstruction, at which each of the three groups converge.
The Traipura Trikona is that, how'ever, in the Muladhara
which is the grosser correspondence of the Kamakala,
which is the root (Mfila) of all Mantras below the
Sahasrara, and which, again, is the correspondence in Jiva
of the Tribindu of Ishvarav^^

■ Before, however, dealing in detail with the Sahasrara,
the reader will find it convenient to refer to the tables on
pp. 143 and 144, which summarises some of the details
above given up to and including the Sahasrara.

In the description of the Chakras given in this work,
no mention is made of the moral and other qualities and
things (Vritti) which are associated with the Lotuses in
other books, such as the Adhyatmaviveka, * commencing

1 Nityapujapaddhati, p. 80, by Jaganmohana Tarkalangkara.

® See p. 117, Vol. II, of Tantrik Texts, where that Commentary is
printed.

3 Nityapujapaddhati, Inc. cit.

Quoted in the Dipika to v. 7 of the Hangsopanishad.

with the

Thus, thf

Sarvanas

Lajja, I

Eashaya,

Ghinta, <

Viveka,

Mriduta,

Eomaneh

XJdyatna,

Somaoha

has beei

able ®s1

mentioru

Nishada,

Dhaivate

Vashat,

“ venom

petals a

the fori:

petalled

Sparsha,

and Svi

1 Ore.
knowledg'
to), pitile

2 Sha
ignorance

3Ho]
ment), f
conceit, d

4 ]VXe
prosperit
of propr
demean 01
by emetic

5 Boi

Vikala
a, Anu

Hang

142 ., ' ' THE, ' SIX G.ENTRES' AND THE SERPENT TW¥.,EE ,

of the sensoniim— hearing, touch, sight, sinell, taste, and
centrally • initiated sensations in dream and hallucination.
It is stated that pai'tioular Vrittis are assigned to a parti-
cular lotus, because of a connection between such Vritti
and tlie operation of the Shaktis of the Tattva at the
centre to which it is assigned. That they exist at any
pai'ticular Chakra is said to be shown lyy their disappear-
ance when Kundali ascends through the Chakra, Thus
the had Vritti of the lower Chakras pass away in the Yogi
who raises Kundali above them.

Moral qualities (Vritti) appear in some of the lower
Chakras and in the secret twelve-petalled lotus called the
Lalana (and in some Tantras Kalii) Chakra, situate above
the Vishuddha, at the root of the palate (Talumula), as
also in the sixteen-petalled lotus above the Manas Chakra,
and known as the Soma Chakra. It is noteworthy that the
Vritti of the two lower Chakras (Svadhishthana and Mani-
pura) are all bad ; those of the Anahata centi’e are mixed, ^
those of the Lalana Chakra are predominantly good, and
those of the Somachakra wholly so ; thus indicative of an
advance as we proceed from the lower to the higher
centres, and this must be so as the Jiva approaches or lives
in his higher principles. In the twelve-petalled white
lotus in the pericarp of the Sahasrara is the abode of
Shakti, called the Kamakala, already'^ described.

Between Ajna and Sahasrara, at the seat of the
Kai’ana Sharira of Jiva, are the Varnavalirupa Viloma
Shaktis, descending from Unmani to Bindu. Just as in
the tshvara or cosmic creation there are seven creative
Shaktis from Sakala Parameshvara to Bindu ; and in the
miorocosmio or Jiva creation seven creative Shaktis from

^ with Dambha (arrogance), Lolata (covetousness), Kapatata
(duplicity), we find Asha (hope), Cheshta (endeavour), Yiveka (dis-
crimination).

THK CENTEES OB liOTDSES (CHAERA, PADMA) 143

SlTU'lTIOX

Number Letters Regnant Tattva Goi^oue

OF ON AND its OF

Petals Same Qualities Tattva

Muirulhara

Spinal centre of
I . '.region ' below
I genitalS'

va, sha, I Prithivi; cohe- j Yellow
s/ia, sa I sion, stimulat- !

; I ing sense of i

; I smell

Svadhish-

fcliana

i Spinal centre of
1 region above
I' the genitals ;

ba, blia, j Ap ; contraction, White
ma, ya, i stimulating
ra, la ;; sense of taste ;

Hanipura

Spinal centre of j
I region . of ■ the \
\ navel ‘ 1

i il a, d h a, | Tejasj expansion, Red
n a, t a, producing heat j

I tha, da, and stimulating |

dha, na, sight-sense of |

i pa, pha i colour and form I

An^lhata

Spinal cento of i
region of the
heart

: ka, k h a,

; ga. glia.

i nga-jCha,
j chha, 3 a,
i iha, nya,

; fa, fha

Yishuddha Spinal cento of j
region of the i
1 throat :

Yayu ? general | Smoky
m o V e m e n t, |
stimulating I
sense of touch

I the vowels Akasha j space- White
a, a., i, i, j giving, stirau-
i ii,u,ri,ri,i lating sense of
I Iri, Irl, e, hearing I

! {li, o, au, ■ ;

I' .ang, ah

Cen to of region |
between the;
eyebrows

i h a, a n d Manas (mental |
I ks?ia ! faculties)

Above the Aina is the causal region and the Lotus of a -^ousainl petals, with all the
letters, wherein is the abode of the Supreme Bindu Parashiva.

■

■ ,v . ^

THE SIX.CINTBES AND THI SEEPENT POWEB.

'■ Sb.apB' ■ ' '

OF

Maxoala

BiJA A.NB ITS

Vahana

(Carribe)

Dsa^ata

AND ITS
Yah ANA

Shakti i

OF THE 1

Dhatu

■I

Ling A, .J

■■■ 'ANB ■■■, ' j

' Y^oni

' Other Tatttah

HERE

BISSOLYKI^

Square

Lang on
the ;

Airavata s
elephant !

Brahni a
on

Hangsa

Dakint

S^myani-
bhu and }
Traipiii’a 1

Trikona I

!

Gandha (smell) Tattva-;
smell (organ of sen-
sation) ; feet (organ of
action)

Crescent

i

tr '

Vang on 1
IMakara ^

■

Vishnu on
Garnda

Kakini

.

Easa (taste) T a 1 1 v a ;
taste (organ of sen-
sation) J hand ; (organ
of action)

Triangle

Kang on a
ram

1

Kudra on
a bull

La kin i

,

Rupa (form and colour ;
sight) Tattva ; sight
(organ of sensation) ;
anus (organ of action)

Six-poiiitecl j Yang on an
hexagon i antelope

Isha

!

1 ' '

Kakini

Bana and
Trikona

Sparsha (touch and
feel) Tattva; touch
(organ of sensation) ;
penis (organ of action)

011*016

:1

1 '■

Hang on a
•white ele-
phant

Sadashiva

Shakini

Shabda (sound) Tattva;
hearing (organ of
sensation) ; mouth
(organ of action)

Om

Shambhu

Hakini

Itara and
Trikona

Mahat, the Bukshnia
Frakriti called
Hiranyagarbha (v. 52)

m

PLATE 3

THE CENTRES OB LOTUSES (OHAKBA, PADMa) 145

Kundaliai, who is in the Muladhara, to Bindu, both of
which belong to what is called the Anuloma order : ^ so in
the region between the Ajna Chakra and Sahasrara, which
is the seat of the causal body (Karana Shariraj of Jiva,
there are seven Shaktis/ which, commencing with the
lowest, ai’e Bindu (which is in Ishvara Tattva), Bodhini,
Nada, Mahiinada or Nadanta (in Sadakhya Tattva),
Vyapika, Samani (in Shakti Tattva), and Unmani (in Shiva
Tattva). Though these latter Shaktis have a cosmic crea-
tive aspect, they are not here co-extensive with and
present a different aspect from the latter. They are not
QQ.. 0 ^l^ 0 usxve, because the last-mentioned Shaktis are, as
here mentioned, Shaktis of the Jiva. Hangsa, Jiva or
Kundali is but an infinitesimal part of the Parabindiu
The latter is in the Sahasrara, or thousand-petalled lotus,
the abode of Ishvara, who is Shiva- Shakti and is the seat,
of the aggregate Kundali or Jiva. And hence it is said
that all the letters are here twentyfold (60 X 20=1,000).
In The Sahasrara are Parabindu, the supreme Nirvana
Shakti, Nirvana Kala, Amakala,® and the fire of Nibodhika.
In the Parabindu is the empty void (Shunya) which is the
supreme Nirguna Shiva.

Another difference is to be found in the aspect of the
Shaktis. Whilst the cosmic creative Shaktis are looking
outwards and forwards (TJnmukhi), the Shaktis above the
Ajna are, in Yoga, looking backwards towards dissolution.
The Ishvara of the Sahasrara is not then the creative

1 That i.s, the ordinary as opposed to the reversed (viloma) order.
Thus, to read the alphabet as A to Z is anuloma; to read it backwards,
Z to A is viloma. In the above matter, therefore anuloma is creation
(srishti) or the forward movement, and viloma (nivritti) the path of
return.

2 See my Garland of Letters or Studies in Mantra Shastra :

Causal Shaktis of the Pranava.”

3 See my Garland of Letters or “ Studies in Mantra Shastra ” :

Kalas of the Shaktis.”

‘ A. . ■

■

■

■

■

146 THE SIX OENTBES ANP THE S EBP ENT TOW EE

aspect of Islwara. There He is in the Nirvana mood,
and the Shaktis leading up to Nirvana Shakti are “ upward
moving ” — that is, liberating Shaktis of the Jiva.

These seven states or aspects of Bindumayaparashakti
(S. N., V. 40) leading up to Unmani, which are described
in this and other Tantrik books, are called causal forms
(Karanariipa). The commentary to the Lalita^ apparently
enumerates eight, but this seems to be due to a mistake,
Shakti and Vyapika being regarded as distinct Shaktis in-
stead of differing names for the third of this series of Shaktis.

Below Visarga (which is the upper part of the Brahma-
randhi’a, in the situation of the fontenelle) and the exit
of Shangkhinl NMi.is the Supreme White (or, as some call
it, variegated) Lotus of a thousand petals (S.N., vv. 40 — 49),
known as the Sahasrara, on which are all the letters of the
Sanskrit alphabet, omitting according to some the Vaidik
Lakara, and according to others Ksha. These are re-
peated twenty times to make the 1,000, and are read from
beginning to end (Anuloma), going round the Lotus from
right to left. Here is Mahavayu and the Chandraman-
dala, in which is the Supreme Bindu (0), “ which is
served in secret by ail the Devas Bindu as such im-
plies Guna, but it also means the void of space, and in its
application to the Supreme Light, which is formless, is
symbolical of its decaylessness. This subtle Shunya (Void),
which is the Atma of all being (Sarvvatma), is spoken
of in S.N., vv. 42 — 49, Here in the region of the Supreme
Lotus is the Guru, the Supreme Shiva Himself. Hence
the Shaivas call it Shivasthana, free of all illusion, and
the abode of bliss where the Atma is realised. Here, too,
is the Supreme Nirvana Shakti, the Shakti in the Para-
bindu, and the Mother of all the three worlds. He who
has truly and fully known the Sahasrara is not reborn" in
i V. 121, Lalita-Sahasranama.

the working out of the Karma already commenced and not
exhausted. He is the possessor of all Siddhi, is liberated
though living (Jivanmukta), and attains bodiless libera-
tion (Moksha), or Videha Kaivalya, on the dissolution of
his physical body.

In the fourteenth verse and commentary thereon of
the Anandalahari the Deity in the Sahasrara is described. ^
She is above all the Tattvas. Every one of the six
centres represents a Tattva. Every Tattva has a definite
number of rays. The six centres, or Chakras, are divided
into three groups. Bach of these groups has a knot or
apex where converge the Chakras that constitute that
group. The names of the groups are derived from those
of the Presiding Deities. The following table clearly

Name
OF Con-
verging
Point

No. OF
Bays

OF

Tattva

Name

•OF

Tattva

Name of
Group

Name of i
Chakra I

Bemarks

In Sahasrara the
rays are num-
berless, eternal
and unlimited
by space.

There is another
Chandra here
■whose rays are
countless and
ever-shining.

Agni- Rudra-^

Khanda granthi

1 Muladhara Bhu

2 Svadhish- Agni

thana

Vishnu-

grantbi

Z Manipura
4 Anahata

72') nr, A Brahma-
III granthi

5 j Vishuddhi Akasha

6 i Aina Manas

1 See Pandit R. Ananta Sliastri's Anandalahari, p. 42 et ieq.
age within quotation marks is taken from that work.

See “Wave of Bliss,’’ by A. Avalon.

148

THE SIX CENTEB;s AND THE SERPENT POWER

“ Lakshmidliara quotes tbe Taittiriyaranyaka in support
uf liis commentary, from which we have taken the notes
above given. The extracts which he makes from ‘ Bhairava
Yamala ’ are very valuable. In discoursing about Chandra,
Shiva addresses (vv. 1— 17, Chandrajnanavidyaprakarana)
Piirvati, his consort, thus :

“ ‘ Welcome, O Beauty of the three worlds, wel-
come is Thy question. This knowledge (which I am
about to disclose) is the secret of secrets, and I
have not imparted it to anyone till now. (But I shall
now tell thee the grand secret. Listen, then, with
attention’;)

“‘Shrlchakra (in the Sahasrara) is the form of Parii-
.shakti. In the middle of this Ohaki’a is a place called
Baiudava, where she, who is above all Tattvas, rests united
with Her Lord Sadashiva. 0 Supreme One, the whole
Cosmos is a Shrichakra formed of the twenty-hve Tattvas
— 5 elements -H 5 Tanmatras-j-lO Indriyas-f- Mind + Maya,
Shuddhavidya, Mahesha, and Sadashiva.^ Just as it is in
Sahasrara, so cosmically, also, Baindava is above all
Tattvas. Devi, the cause of the creation, protection, and
destruction, of the universe, rests there ever united with
Sadashiva, who as well is above all Tattvas and ever-shining.
Uncountable are the rays that issue forth from Her body ;
0 good one, they emanate in thousands, lacs — nay, crores.
But for this light there would be no light at all in the
universe . . . 360 of these rays illumine the world in

the form of Fire, Sun, and Moon. These 360 rays are
made up as follows : Agni (Fire) 118, Sun 106, Moon 136.
0 Shankari, these three luminaries enlighten the macrocosm
as well as the microcosm, and give rise to the cal-
culation of time — the Sun for the day, the Moon for the

1 Maya to Sadashiva are the Shiva Tattvas described in the Intro-
dnetion,—- A, A.

150

THE SIX OENTEES AND THE SEEPENT PCWEE

physiology than to correlate them. Indeed, this is for
the present a difficult matter. In the first place, the
material as regards the latter is insufficiently available
and known to us, and those native scholars and Sadhakas
(nowadays, probably, not numerous) who are acquainted
with the subject are not conversant with Western phy sio-
logy, with which it is to be compared. It is, further,
possible to be practically acquainted with this Yoga.
without knowing its physiological relations, a knowledge
of which is not so important as is sometimes supposed.
Working in what is an unexplored field, I can only here
put forward, on the lines of the Text and such informa-
tion as I have gathered, explanations and suggestions
which must in some cases be of a tentative character, in the
hope that they may be followed up and tested by others.

It is clear that the Merudanda is the vertebral column,
which as the axis of the body is supposed to bear the
same relation to it as does Mount Meru to the earth. It
extends from the Mula (root) or Muladhara to the neck.,
It and the connected upper tracts, spinal bulb, cerebellum,
and the like, contain what has been described as the
central system of spinal nerves (Nadi) and cranial nerves
(Shiro-nadi). The Sushumna, which is undoubtedly a
Nadi within the vertebral column, and as such is well
described by the ‘books as the principal of all the Nadis,
runs along the length of the Merudanda, as does the
spinal cord of Western physiology, if we include there-
with the filum termmale. If we include thefilum, and
take the Kanda to be between the anus and penis, it
starts from practically the same (sacro-coccygeal) region,
the Muladhara, and is spoken of as extending to the
region of the Brahmarandhra,^ or to a point below the

1 SammohaBa Tantra, II, 7, or, accordiog to the Tripnrasarasa-
muclichaya, cited in v. 1, from the head to the Adhara.

THE CENTRES OB LOTUSES (CHAEBA, PAUMA) 151

twelve-petallecl lotus (v. 1) — tliat is, at a spot below but
close to tbe Sahasrara, or cerebellum, where the nerve
Ohitrini also ends. The position of the Kanda is that
stated in this w'ork (v. 1). It is to be noted, however,
that according to the Hathayogapradipika the Kanda is
higher up, between the penis and the navel.^ The place
of the union of Sushumna and Kanda is known as the
“ Knot ” (Granthisthana), and the petals of the Mula
lotus are on four sides of this (v. 4). It is in this Su-
shumma (whatever for the naoment we take it to be) that
there are the centres of Prana Shakti which are called
Chakras or Lotuses. The spinal cord ends blindly in the
ilium terminah, and is apparently closed there. The
Sushumnii is said to be closed at its base, called the
gate of Brahman ” (Brahmadvara), until, by Yoga,
Kundali makes its way through it. The highest of the six
centres called Chakra in the Sushumna is the Ajna, a
position which corresponds frontally with the space
between the eyebrows (Bhriimadhya), and at the back
with the pineal gland, the pituitary body, and the top of
the cerebellum. Close by it is the Chakra called Lalana,
and in some Tantras Kala Chakra, which is situate at the
root of — that is, just above — the palate (Talumula). Its
position as well as the nature of the Ajna would indicate
that it is slightly below the latter.^ The Sushumna passes
into the ventricles of the brain, as does the spinal cord,
which enters the fourth ventricle.

Above the Lalana are the Ajna Chakra with its two
lobes and the Manas Chakra with its six lobes, which it
has been suggested are represented in the physical body

^ F. post.

^ And not, as I wrote in the Introduction to the Mah§,niryana
Tantra, p. Ixii, above it. On further consideration, I think the position
' as stated in the text is correct, though in any case the two are very
close together.

152 THE SIX CENTKES AND THE SERPENT POWER

by tbe Cerebellum and Sensorium I’espectively. The
Soma Chakra above this, with its sixteen “petals,” has
been said to comprise the centres in the middle of the
Cerebrum above the Sensorium, Lastly, the tliousand-
petalled lotus Saliasrara corresponds to the upper Cere-
brum of the physical body, with its cortical convolutions,
which will be suggested to the reader on an examination
of the Plate VIII, here given of that centre. Just as, all
powers exist in the seat of voliintaiw action, so it is said
that all the fifty “ letters ” which are distributed through-
out the spinal centres of the Sushumna exist here in
multiplied form — that is, 50 x 20. Tlie nectar-rayed
moon^ is possibly the under part of the brain, the convolu-
tions or lobes of which, resembling half-moons, are called
Chandrakala, and the mystic mount Kailasa is undoubtedly
the upper brain. The ventricle connected with the spinal
cord is also semilunar in shape.

As above stated, there is no doubt that the Sushumna
is situated in the spinal column, and it has been said that
it represents the central canal. It is probable that its
general position is that of the central canal. But a query
may be raised if it is meant that the canal alone is the
Sushumna. For the latter Nadi, according to this work,
contains within it two others— namely, Vajrini and Chitrini.
There is thus a threefold division. It has been suggested
that the Sushumna when not considered with its inner
Nadis as a collective unit, but as distinguished from them,
is the white nervous matter of the spinal cord, Vajrini the
grey matter, and Chitrini the central canal, the inner Nadi
of which is known as the Brahmanadi, and, in the Shiva-
sanghita, Brahmarandhra.^ But as against such suggestion
it is to be noted that v. 2 of this work describes Chitrini

See Shiva-Sangluta, II, 6.

* Oh. II, V. 18.

as being as tine as a spider s thread (Liita-tantuparaeya),
and the grej matter cannot be so described, but is a gross
thing. We must therefore discard this suggestion, and
hold to the opinion either that the central canal is the
Sushumna or that the latter is in the canal, and that with-
in or part of it are two still more subtle and imperceptible
channels of energy, called Vajrinl and Chitrini. I incline
to the latter view. The true nature of the Ohitrini Nadi
is said in V. 3 to be pure intelligence (Shuddha-bodha-
svabhava) as a force of Consciousness. As v. 1 says, the
three form one, but considered separately they are distinct.
They are threefold in the sense that Sushumna, “ who is
ti’emulous like a woman in passion,” is as a whole com-
posed of “Sun,” “Moon,” and “Fire,” and the three
Gunas. It is noteworthy in this connection that the
Kshurika Upanishad,^ which speaks of the Sushumna,
directs the Skdhaka “to get into the white and very subtle
Nadi, and to drive Pranavayu through it”. These
three, Sushumna, Vajrinl, and Ohitrini, and the central
canal, or Brahraanadi, through which, in the Yoga here
described. Kundalini passes, are all, in any case, part of

154 THE SIX CENTEES AND THE SERPENT POWER

whioli are described as being pale and ruddy respectively
(v. 1), do not lie merely on one side of tbe cord, but cross
it alternating from one side to the other (see v. 1), thus
forming with the Sushuinua and the two petals of the Ajun
Chakra the figure of the Oaduceus of Mercury, which
accoi-ding to some represents them. Elsewhere (v. 1),
however, it is said that they are shaped like bows. That
is, one is united with Sushumna and connected w*ith the left
scrotum. It goes up to a position near the left shoulder,
bending as it passes the heai’t, crosses over to the right
shoulder, and then pi'oceeds to the right nostril. Similarly,
the other Nadi connected with the right scrotum passes to
the left nostril. It has been suggested to me that Ida and
Pinggala are blood-vessels representing the inferior Vena
Cava and Aorta. But the W'orks and the Yoga process
itself indicate not arteines, but nerves. Ida and Pinggala
w’hen they reach the space between the eyebrows make
with the Sushumna a plaited threefold knot called Triveni,
and proceed to the nostrils. This, it has been said, is the
spot in the medulla where the sympathetic cords join
together or whence they take their origin.

There remains to be considered the position of the
Chakras. Though this work speaks of six, there are,
according to some, others. This is stated by Vishvanatha
in his Shatchakra-Vivriti. Thus we have mentioned
Lalana, Manas, and Soma Chakras. The six here given
are the principal ones. Indeed, a very long list exists of
Chakras or Adharas, as some call them. In a modern
Sanskrit work called “ Advaitamartanda ” the author ^
gives twenty, numbering them as follows : (1) Adhdra, (2)
Kuladipa, (B) Vajra or Yajna, (4) Svddhislithdna, (5) Raudra,

1 Brail man and a Svami, a native of Palghat, in tlie Madras Presidencj,
late Guru of H.H. the Maharaja of Kashmir. The work is printed at
Jummoo.

THE CfiNTRES OR LOTUSES (CHAKTIA, PADMA) 155

(6) Karala, (7) Galivara, (8) Vidyaprada, (9) Trimuklia,
(10) Tripada, (11) Kaladandaka, (12)Ukara, (13) Kaladvara,
(14) Karangaka, (16) Dipaka, (16) Anandalalita, (17)
Manipnrahi, (18) Nakula, (19) Kalabhedana, (20) Mahotsaha.
Then for no appai'ent reason, many others are given witli-
<jnt numbers, a circumstance, as well as defective printing,
which makes it difficult in some cases to say whether the
Sanskrit should be read as one word or two. ^ They are
apparently Parama, Padukam, Padam (or Padakampadam),
ICalpajala, Poshaka, Lolania, Nadavarta, Hriputa, Kang-
kalaka, Putabhedana, Mahagranthiviraka, Bandhajvalana
(printed as Bandhejvalana), Andhata, Yantraputa (printed
Yatra), Vyomachakra, Bodhana, Dhruva, Kalakandalaka,
Kraunchabberundavibhava, Damara, Kulapithaka, Kulakola-
hala, Halavarta, Mahadbhaya, Ghorabhairava, Vishiddhi,
Kantham, Uttamam {qusere Vishnddhikantham or Ean-
thamuttamam), Purnakam, Apia, Kakaputtam, Shringatam,
Kamariipa, PCirnagiri, Mahavyoma, Shaktirupa. But, as
the author says, in the Vedas (that is, Yogaohudamani,
Yogashikba Upanishads, and others) we read of only six
Chakras— namely, those italicised in the above list, and
described in the works here translated— and so it is said :
“ How can there be any Siddhi for him who knows not the
six Chakras, the sixteen Adharas, the five Ethers, and three

Lakshas, in his own body ? ” . . .

I have already pointed out that the positions of the
Chakras generally correspond to spinal centres of the anatomi-
cal divisions of the vertebrse into five regions, and it has
been stated that the Padmas or Chakras correspond with

II am not sure that the author himself was aware of this m all

= is. "‘i

Si. z b.i.g “ r ““

a distinction between the Chakras and Adharas.

Iv.

" ‘ s

I fsi I

156

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERl’ENT POWEE

various plexuses which exist in the body surrounding those
regions. Various suggestions have been here made. The
Author of a recent work ^ identifies (commencing with the
Muladhara and going upwards) the Chakras with the sacral,
prostatio, epigastric, cardiac, laryngeal (or pharyngeal), and
cavernous plexuses, and the Sahasi'ilra with the Medulla.
In passing it may be noted that the last suggestion cannot
in any event be correct. It is apparently based on verse
120 of chapter v. of the Shiva Sanghita.^ But this work
does not in my opinion support the suggestion. Elsewhere
the Author cited lughtly identifies Mount Kailasa with the
Sahasrara, which is undoubtedly the upper cerebrum. The
anatomical position of the Medulla is below that assigned
to the Ajna Chakra. Professor Sai'kar’s Avork contains
some valuable appendices by Dr. Brojendranath Seal on,
amongst others, Hindu ideas concerning plant and animal
life, physiology, and biology, including accounts of the
nervous system in Charaka and in the Tantras.^ After
pointing out that the cerebro-spinal axis with the connect-
ed sympathetic system contains a number of ganglionic

i “ The Positive Background of Hindu Sociology,’’ by Professor
Benoy Kumar Sarkar.

® P. 54 of the translation of Srisha Chandra Yasu, to -which I
refer because the author cited does so. The rendering, however, does
not do justice to the text, and liberties have been taken with it. Thus,
a large portion has been omitted without word or warning, and at p. 14
it is said that Kundalini is “ of the form of electricity There is no
warrant for this in the text, and Kundalini is not, according to the
Shastra, mere electricity.

I cannot too strongly protest against attempts to represent Indian
Shastra, not as it actually is, but what some who are concerned with it
would like it to be. State accurately what is in the Shastra, and then
disapprove of it if you will.

^ Both the work of Professor Sarkar and the Appendices of
Dr. Seal are of interest and value, and gather together a considerable
number of facts of importance on Indian Geography, Ethnology,
Mineralogy, Zoology, Botany, and Hindu Physiology, Mechanics, and
Acoustics. These Appendices have since been republished separately
as a work entitled ** Positive Sciences of the Hindus

THK OEIsTRES OR LOTUSES (OHAKUA, PaDMA) 157

centres and plexuses (Chakras, Padnaas), from which nerves
(Nadi, Shira, and Dhainani) I’adiate over the head, trunk,
and limbs, the latter says, as regards the ganglionic cen-
tres and plexuses constituting the sympathetic spinal
system :

“ Beginning with the lower extremity, the centres and
plexuses of the connected spinal and sympathetic systems
may be described as follows ;

“ (1) The Adhara Chakra, the sacro-coccygeal plexus,
with four branches, nine Angulis (about six inches and a
half) below the solar plexus (Kanda, Brahmagranthi) ; the
source of a massive pleasurable gesthesia ; voluminous
organic sensations of repose. An inch and a half above it,
and the same distance below the membrum virile (Mehana),
is a minor centre called the Agni-sikha. (2) The Svadhish-
thana Chakra, the sacral plexus, with six branches (Dalani

petals) concerned in the excitation of sexual feelings,

with the accompaniments of lassitude, stupor, cruelty,
suspicion, contempt.^ (3) The Nabhikanda (coriesponding
to the solar plexus, Bhanubhavanam), which forms the
great junction of the right and left sympathetic chains
(Pinggala and Ida) with the cerebro-spinal axis. Connected
with this is the Manipuraka, the lumbar plexus, with con-
nected sympathetic nerves, the ten branches ® of which are
concerned in the production of sleep and thirst, and the ex-
pressions of passions like jealousy, shame, fear, stupefaction.
(4) The Anahata Chakra, possibly the cardiac plexus of the
sympathetic chain, with twelve branches, connected with the
heart, the seat of the egoistic sentiments, hope^ anxiety,
doubt, remorse, conceit, egoism, etc. (5) The Bharatisthana,

1 These and other Vritti, as they are called, are enumerated m the
Introduction to my first edition of the Mahtairvana 1 antra.

* That is, petals. ' «

3 This is a name for the Visbuddha Chakra as abode of the
Goddess of Speech (Bharati),

THE SIX OENTEES AND THE SERl’KNT POWER

the junction of the spinal cord with the medulla oblongata,
which, by means of nerres like the pneumogastric,
etc., regulate the larynx and other organs of articulation.
(6) The Lalana Chakra, opposite the uvula, which has
twelve leaves (or lobes), supposed to be the tract affect-
ed in the production of ego-altruistic sentiments and
affections, like self-regard, pride, affection, grief, regret,
respect, reverence, contentment, etc. (7) The sensori-
motor tract, comprising two Chakras ; (a) the Ajna
Chakra (lit., the circle of command over movements)
with its two lobes (the cerebellum) ; and (//) the IManas
Chakra, the sensorium, with its six lobes (five special
sensory for peripherally initiated sensations, and one
common sensory for centrally initiated sensations, as in
dreams and hallucinations). The Ajna-vaha Nadis, effer-
ent or motor nerves, communicate motor impulses to the
pei’iphery from this Ajna Chakra, this centre of command
orer movements ; and the afferent or sensor}’^ nerves of the
special senses, in pairs, the Gandhavaha Nadi (olfactory
sensory), the Rhpavaha Nadi (optic), the Shabdavaha Nadi
(auditory), the Rasavaha Nad! (gustatory), and the Spar-
shavaha Nadi (tactile), come from the periphery (the
peripheral organs of the special senses) to this Manas-
chakra, the sensory tract at the base of the brain.
The Manaschakra also receives the Manovaha NMi,
a generic name for the channels along wdiich cen-
trally initiated presentations (as in dreaming or hallu-
cination) come to the sixth lobe of the Manaschakra.
(8) The Somachakra, a sixteen-lobed ganglion, com-
prising the centres in the middle of the cerebrum, above
the sensorium ; the seat of the altruistic sentiments and
volitional control — e.g., compassion, gentleness, patience,
renunciation, meditativeness, gravity, earnestness, x’eso-
lution, determination, magnanimity, etc. And lastly

THE CENTRES OR LOTUSES (OHAKBA, PADMA) 159

(9) the Sahasrara Ghakra, thousand -lobed, the upper
cerebrum with its lobes and convolutions, the special and
highest seat of the Jiva, the soul. ” ^

Then, dealing with the cerebro-spinal axis and the
heart, and their respective relations to the conscious life,
the Author cited says :

“ Vijnanabhikshu, in the passage just quoted, iden-
tifies the Manovaha Nadi (vehicle of consciousness) with
the cerebro-spinal axis and its ramifications, and com-
pares the figure to an inverted gourd with a thousand-
branched stem hanging down. The Sushumna, the
central passage of the spinal cord, is the stem of this
gourd (or a single branch). The writers on the Yoga
(including the authors of the various Tantrik systems) .
use the term somewhat' differently. On this view, the
Manovaha Nadi is the channel of the communication of
the Jiva (soul) with the Manaschakra (sen^orium) at the
base of the brain. The sensory currents are brought to
the sensory ganglia along afferent nerves of the special
senses. But this is not sufficient for them to rise to the
level of discriminative consciousness. A communication
must now be established between the Jifa (in the Sahas-
rara Chakra, upper cerebrum) and the sensory currents
received at the sensorium, and this is done by means of
the Manovaha Nadi. When sensations are centrally
initiated, as in dreams and hallucinations, a special Nadi
(Svapnavaha Nadi), which appears to be only a branch of
the Manovaha Nadi, serves as the channel of communica-
tion from the Ji^a (soul) to the sensorium. In the same
way, the Ajnavaha Nadi brings down the messages of the
Soul from the Sahasrara (upper cerebrum) to the Ajna

^ T1i 6 stutlior citBcl rofors to tli6 Tfintrii,

ratnakara, and for functions of Ajna-valia NMi and Manovaha Nadi

to Shangkara Mishra’s Upaskara.^^^^ ^ ^

siliiilliis

THK StX CKXTRES AND THE SEKFEXT I'OWEE

Chakra (motor tract at the base of the brain), messages
which are thence carried farther down, along efferent
nerves, to various parts of the periphery. I may add that
the special sensor}^ nerves, together with the Manovaha
ISirdi, are sometimes generally termed Juanavaha Nadi —
lit., channel of presentative knowledge. There is no diffi-
culty so far. The Manovaha Nadi and the Ajuavaha Nadi
connect the sensori-motor tract at the base of the brain
(Manas Chakra and Ajna Chakra) with the highest (and
special) seat of the soul (Jiva) in the upper cerebrum
(Sahasrara), the one being the channel for carrying up the
sensory, and the other for bringing down the motor
messages. But efforts of the will (Ajnti, Prayatna) are
conscious presentations, and the Manovaha Nadi must
therefore co-operate with the Ajuavaha in producing the
consciousness of effort. Indeed, attention, the character-
istic function of Manas, by which it raises sense-presenta-
tions to the level of discriminative consciousness, implies
effort (Prayatna) on the part of the soul (Atma, Jiva), an
effort of which we are conscious through the channel of
the Manovaha NMi. But how to explain the presentation
of effort in the motor nerves ? Shangkara Mishra, the
author of the Upaskara on Kanada’s Sutras, argues that
the Nadis (even the volitional or motor nerves) are them-
selves sensitive, and their affections are conveyed to the
sensoriuin by means of the nerves of the (inner) sense of
touch (which are interspersed in minute fibrillse among
them). The consciousness of effort, then, in any motor
nerve, whether Ajuavaha (volitional motor) or Pranavaha
(automatic motor) , depends on the tactile nerves (or nerves
of organic sensation) mixed up with it. Thus the assimila-
tion of food and drink by the automatic activity of the
Pranas implies an (automatic) effort (Prayatna) accom-
panied by a vague organic consciousness, which is due to

THE CENTRES OR LOTUSES (CHAKEA, PADMa) 161

the fact that niinute fibres of the inner touch-sense are
interspersed Avith the machinery of the automatic nerves
(the Pranavaha Nadis).”

To a certain extent . the localisations here made must
be tentative. It must, for instance, be a matter of opinion
whether the throat centre corresponds with the carotid,
laryngeal, or pharyngeal, or all three ; whether the navel
centre corresponds with the epigastric, solar, or lumbar,
the Ajna with the cavernous plexus, pineal gland, pituitary
body, cerebellum, and so forth. Por all that is known to
the contrary each centre may have more than one of such
correspondences. All that can be said with any degree of
certainty is that the four centres, above the Miiladhara,
which is the seat of the presiding energy, have relation to
the genito-excretory, digestive, cardiac, and respiratory
functions, and that the two upper centres (Ajna and
Sahasrara) denote various forms of cerebral activity, ending
in the repose of pure Consciousness. The uncertainty
which prevails as regards some of those matters is indicated
in the Text itself, which shows that on various of the
subjects here debated differing opinion^ have been express-
ed as individual constructions of statements to be found in
the Tantras and other Shastras.

There are, however, if I read them correctly, state-
ments in the above-cited accounts with which, though not
uncommonly accepted, I disagree. It is said, for instance,
that the Adhara Chakra is the sacro-coccygeal plexus, and
that the Svadhishthana is the sacral plexus, and so forth.
This work, however, not to mention others, makes it plain
that the Chakras are in the Sushumna. Verse 1 speaks of the
“ Lotuses inside the Meru (spinal column) ; and as the
Sushumna supports- these (that is, the lotuses) She must
needs be within the Meru ”. This is said in answer to those
who. on the strength of a nassane in the Tantrachudamani,

erroneoiislv suppose that Susluimnu is outside the Meru.
In the same way the Coaimentator refutes the error of
those who, relying on the Nigamatattvasara, suppose that
not only Sushiiinna, but Ida and Pinggala, are inside the
Meru. Verse 2 saj'S that inside Vajiii (which is itself
within Sushumna) is Chitrini, on which the lotuses are
strung as it were gems, and who like a spider’s thread
pierces all the lotuses which are within the backbone. The
Author ill the same place combat.s the view, based on the
Kalpa Sutra, that the lotuses are within Chitrini. These
lotuses are in the Sushumna ; and as Chitrini is within the
latter, she pierces but does not contain them. Some
confusion is raised by tlie statement in v. 51, that the
lotuses are in or on the Brahmantidi. But by this is meant
appertaining to this Nadi, for they are in Sushumna, of
which the Brahmanadi is the central channel. The
commentator Vishvanatha, quoting from the Msiya Tantra,
says that all the six lotuses are attached to the Chitrini
Nadi (Chitrini-grathitam). One conclusion emerges clearly
from all this — namely, that the Lotuses are in the vertebral
column in Sushumna, and not in the nerve plexuses which
surround it. There in the spinal column they exist as
extremely subtle vital centres of Prunasbakti and centres
of consciousness. In this connection I may cite an
extract from an article on the “ Physical Errors of
Hinduism,”^ for which I am indebted to Professor
Sarkar’s work : “ It would indeed excite the surprise of
our readers to hear that the Hindus, who would not
even touch a dead body, much less dissect it, should
possess any anatomical knowledge at all. . . . It is

the Tantras that furnish us with some extraordinary pieces
of information concerning the human body. , . . But of
all the Hindu Shastras extant, the Tantras lie in the
1 Published in Vol. XI, pp. 436 — 440, of the Calcutta Review.

'I'HE CENTRES OR LOTUSES (OHiKBA, PADMA)

1.63

greatest obscurity. . . . The Tantrik theory, on which
the well-known Yoga called ‘ Shatchakrabheda ’ is founded,
supposes the existence of six main internal organs, called
Chakras or Padnias, all bearing a special resemblance to
that famous flower, the lotus. These are placed one
above the other, and connected by three imaginary chains,
the emblems of the Ganges, the Yamuna, and the
Saraswati. . . . Such is the obstinacy with which the

Hindus adhere to these erroneous notions, that, even
when we show them by actual dissection the non-existence
of the imaginary Chakras in the human body, they will
rather have recourse to excuses revolting to common sense
than acknowledge the evidence of their own eyes. They
say, with a shamelessness unparalleled, that these Padmas
exist as long as a man lives, but disappear the moment he
dies.” ^ This, however, is nevertheless quite correct, for
conscious and vital centres cannot exist in a body when the
organism which they hold together dies. A contrary conclu-
sion might indeed be described as “ shameless ” stupidity.®
The Author of the work from which this citation is
made says that, though these Chakras cannot be satis-
factorily identified, the Tantriks must nevertheless have
obtained their knowledge of them by dissection. By
this he must refer to the physical regions which corre-
spond on the gross plane to, and are governed by, the

164

THK SIX CENTEES AND THE SERPENT POWER

existing when the body is alive and disappearing
^vlien vitality (Prana) leaves the body as part of the
Lingasharira.

It IS a mistake, therefore, in ray opinion, to identify
the Chakras with the physical plexuses mentioned.
These latter are things of the gross body, whereas the
Chakras are extremely subtle vital centres of various
Tattvik operations. In a sense we can connect with
these subtle centres the gross bodily parts visible to the
eyes as plexuses and ganglia. But to connect or corre-
late and to identify are different things. Indian thought
and the Sanskrit language, which is its expi-ession, have a
peculiarly penetrative and comprehensive cpiality which
enables one to explain many ideas for which, except by
paraphrase, there is no equivalent meaning in English.
It is by the Power or Shakti of the Atma or Conscious-
ness that the body exists. It is the collective Prana
which holds it together as an individual human unit,
just as it supports the different Principles and Elements
(Tattva) of which it is composed. These Tattvas, though
they pervade the body, have yet various special centres
of* operation. These centres, as one might otherwise
suppose, lie along the axis, and are the Stikshma Rupa,
or subtle forms of that which exists in gross form (Sthula
Rupa) in the physical body which is gathered around it.
They are manifestations of Pranashakti. In other
words, from an objective standpoint the subtle centres,
or Chakras, vitalise and control the gross bodily
tracts which are indicated by the various regions of the
vertebral column and the ganglia, plexuses, nerves,
arteries, and organs, situate in these respective regions.
It is only therefore (if at all) in the sense of being the
gross outer representatives of the spinal centres that we
can connect the plexuses and so forth with the Chakras

THE CENTRES OR LOTUSES (CHAKBA, PABMA) 165

spoken of in the Yoga books. In this sense only the
whole tract, which extends from the subtle centre to
the periphery, with its coi’responding bodily elements,
may be regarded as the Chakra. As the gross and subtle
are thus connected, mental operation on the one will affect
the other. Certain forces are concentrated in these
Chakras, and therefore and by reference to their function
they are regarded as separate and independent centres.
There are thus six subtle centres in the cord with grosser
embodiments within the cord itself, with still grosser
sheaths in the region pervaded by the sympathetics Ida and
Pinggala, and other Nadis. Out of all this and the gross
compounded elements of the body are fashioned the organs
of life, the vital heart of which is the subtle Chakra by
which they are vivified and controlled. The spiritual aspects
of the six centres according to Tantrik doctrine must not
be overlooked whilst attention is paid to the gross or
physiological aspect of the body. As previously and in
the Commentary to the thirty-fifth verse of the Anandala-
hari explained, there are six Devas- — viz,, Shambhn,
Sadashiva, Ishvara, Yishnu, Rudra, Brahma — whose abodes
are the six Lokas or regions : viz., Maharloka, Tapoloka,
Janaloka, Svarloka, Bhuvarloka, and Bhiirloka (the Earth).
It is these Divinities who are the forms of Consciousness
presiding over the Shatchakra. In other words, Conscious-
ness-feeling .(Chit), as the ultimate experiencing principle,
pervades and is at base all being. Every cell of the body
has a consciousness of its own. The various organic parts
of the body which the cells build have not only particular
cell-consciousness, but the consciousness of the particular
organic part which is other than the mere collectivity of
the consciousness of its units. Thus there may be an
abdominal consciousness. And the consciousness of such
bodily region is its Devata — that is, that aspect of Chit

m

'•I

«Pl

- r

"Sir
\ '-il

...

^ 1 14,1*'

^

'I;-

ililillia

' / H 'i *

166 THK SIX CENTEES AND THE SERPENT POWER

wliich is associated with aiKl informs that region. Lastly,
the organism as a whole has its consciousness, which is the
individual Jiva. Then there is the subtle form or body of
these Devatas, in the shape of Mind- — supersensible
“matter” (Tanmatra) ; and sensible “matter” — namely,
ether, air, fire, water, earth, with their centres at the Ajna,
Vishuddha, Anahata, Manipfira, Svadhishtbana and Miila-
dhara. Of these six Tattvas, not only the gross human
body, but the vast macrocosm, is composed. The six
Chakras are therefoi*e the divine subtle centres of the
corresponding physical and psychical sheaths. The seventh
or supreme centre of consciousness is Paramashiva, whose
abode is Satyaloka, tbe Cosmic aspect of the Sahasrara in the
human body. The Supreme, therefore, descends through
its manifestations from the subtle to the gross as the
six Devas and Shaktis in their six abodes in tbe world-
axis, and as tbe six centres in the body-axis or spinal
column. The special operation of each of the Tattvas
is located at its individual centre in the microcosm. But,
notwithstanding all such subtle and gross transforma-
tions of and by Kula-Kundalini, She ever remains in Her
Brahman or Svarixpa aspect the One, Sat, Chit, and
Ananda, as is realised by the Yogi when drawing the Devi
from Her world-abode in the earth centre (Milladhara) he
unites Her with Paramashiva in the Sahasrara in that
blissful union which is the Supreme Love (Ananda).

In a similar manner other statements as regards these
Chakras should be dealt with, as, for instance, those con-
nected with the existence of the “ Petals,” the number of
which in each case has been said to be determined by
characteristics of the gross region which the particular
Chakra governs. The centres are said to be composed
of petals designated by certain letters. Professor Sarkar ^

^ Op. cit^, p. 292.

168 TBE SIX CENTBES AND TEE SEBPENT POWEB

corresponds to each of the senses. It is for this reason
that the Tantra correlates sound, form, and colour. Sound
produces form, and form is associated with colour. Kundali
is a form of the Supreme Shakti who maintains all breath-
ing creatures. She is the source from which all sound or
energy, whether as ideas or speech, manifests. That sound
Matrika when uttered in human speech assumes the form
of letters and prose and verse, which is made of their
combinations. And sound (Shabda) has its meaning — that
is, the objects denoted by the ideas which are expressed
by sound or words. By the impulse of Ichchha Shakti
acting through the Pranavayu (vital force) of the Atma
is produced in the Muladhara the sound power called
Para, which in its ascending movement through
other Chakras takes on other characteristics and names
(Pasbyantl and iMadhyama), and when uttered by the
mouth appears as Vaikhari in the form of the spoken
letters which are the gross aspect of the sound in the
Chakras themselves (see vv. 10 and 11). Letters Avhen
spoken are, then, the manifested aspect in gross speech of
the subtle energy of the Shabdabrahman as Kundali. The
same energy which produces these letters manifesting as
Mantras produces the gross universe. In the Chakras is
subtle Shabda in its states as Para, Pashyanti, or Madhyama
Shakti, which when translated to the vocal organ assumes
the audible sound form (Dhvani) which is any particular
letter. Particular forms of energy of Kundali are said to
be resident at particular Chakras, all such energies existing
in magnified form in the Sahasrara. Each manifested
letter is a Mantra, and a Mantra is the body of a Devata.
There are therefore as many Devatas in a Chakra as there
are petals which are surrounding (Avarana) Devatas or
Shaktis of the Devata of the Chakra and the subtle element
of which He is the presiding Consciousness. Thus, Brahma.

THK CENTRES OE LOTOSES (OHAJCEA, PADMA)

Ji

1

is tlie presiding Consciousness of tlie Muladhara lotus,
indicated by the Bindu of the Bija La (Lang), which is the
body of the earth Devata ; and around and associated with
these are the subtle forms of the Mantras, which constitute
the petals and the bodies of associated energies. The whole
human body is in fact a Mantra, and is composed of Mantras.

These sound powers vitalise, regulate, and control, the
corresponding gross manifestations in the regions sur-
rounding them. Why, however, particular letters are
assigned to particular Chakras is the next question.
Why, for instance, should Ha be in the Ajna and Sa in the
Miiladhara ? It is true that in some places in the Tantras
certain letters are assigned to particular elements. Thus,
there are certain letters which are called Vayava Varna,
or letters pertaining to the Vayu Tattva ; but an examina-
tion of the case on this basis fails to account for the
position of the letters, as letters which are assigned to one
element may be found in a Chakra the predominant Tattva
of which is some other element. It has been said that in
the utterance of particular letters the centres at which
they are situated are brought into play, and that this is the
solution of the question why those particular letters were
at their particular centre. A probable solution is that
given by me in my » Shakti and Shakta ». ^ Apart from
this one can only say that it is either SvabhWa or the
nature of the thing, which in that case is as little suscep -
ible of ultimate explanation as the disposition in the body
of the <^ross organs themselves ; or the arrangement may
be an artificial one for the purpose of meditation, in which

‘case no further explanation is necessary.

The four Bhavas, or states of sound, in the human
body are so called as being states in which sonnd or
mOTeinent is produced or becomes, ewlving from Para
1 Second Edition. See Chapter on Kundallj-oga.

170

THE SIX CENTBES AND THE SERPENT POWKB

Sliakti in the bodj of Jshvara to the gross Vaikhari
Shakti in the body of Jiva. As already stated, in the
bodily aspect (Adhyatinu) the Kurana Bindu resides in the
Miiladhui'a centre, and is there known as the Shakti Pinda^
or Knndalini.''^ Knndali is a name for Shabdabrahman in
human bodies. The Achiirvya, s])eaking of Kundalim,
says : “ There is a Shakti called Ivundalini who is ever
engaged in the work of creating the universe. He who
has known Her never again enters the mother’s womb as a
child or suffers old age.” That is, he no longer enters
the Sangsara or world of transmigration.^ This Karana
Bindu exists in a non -differentia ted condition.*

The body of Kundali is composed of the fifty letters
or sound-powers. Just as there is an apparent evolution '

^ She is so called because all the Sbaktis are collected or “ rolled
into one mass in Her* Here is the Kendra (centre) of all the Shaktis*
The Svaehchhanda as also the Sharada say :

Pindang Kundalini-sbaktih
Padang bangsah prakirtitah
-Rupang bindur ifei khjatang
Rfipatitas tu cbinmayab.

[Kundalini Shakti is Pinda, Hangsali is Pada ; Bindu is Rupa, but
Chinmaya (Chit) is formless.] The first, as potentiality of ail mani-
fested power, is in the Muladhara Chakra ; the second, as Jivatma, is
in Anahata, where the heart beats, the life-pulse. Bindu, the causal
form body, as Supreme Shakti, is in Ajna, and the formless Conscious-
ness passing through Bindu Tattva manifesting as liangsa, and again
resting as Kundalini, is in the Brahmarandhra (see Tika of first
Sangketa of Yoginihridaya Tantra).

^ Adhyatmantu karanabinduh shaktipindakundalyMishabdavachyo
muladbarasthab (Bhaskararaya, Comm. Lalita, v. 132),

3 “ Shaktib kundaliniti vishvajananavyaparabaddbodyamang
- , Jnattvaitbang na punar vishanti Jananigarbhe ’rbhakatvang

narah ”

itjadirityacharyyair vyayabritah {ih.).

^ So’yam avibhagavasthah karanabinduh (ib.).
s Vikara or VikHti is something which is really changed, as curd
from milk. The former is a Yikriti of the latter. Yivarta is apparent
hut unreal change, such as the appearance of what was and is a rope
as a snake. The Yedantasara thus musically defines the two terms :
Satattvato ’nyathapratha vikara ityudiritah
Atattvato ’nyathapratha vivarta ityudahritah.

THE CENTRES OR LOTUSES (CHAKEA, PADMa) 171

in tlie cosmic body of Islivara, represented in the seven
states preceding from Sakala Parameshvara to Bindu, so
thei’e is a similar development in the human body in
Kundali, who is the Ishvari therein. There are evolved
by this form the following states, corresponding with the
cosmic development — viz., Shakti, Dhvani, NMa, Niro-
dliika, Ardhendu, Bindu. These are all states of Kundali
Herself in the.Mfdadhara, and are known as Para sound.
Each one of the letters composing the body of Kundali
exists in four states as Para Shakti, or in the succeeding
states of sound, Pashyantl, Madhyama, and Vaikharl, to
which reference is later made. The first is a state of
undifferentiated sound, which exists in the body of
Ishvara ; the second and third as existing in the body
of diva are stages towards that complete manifestation
of differentiated sound in human speech which is called
Vaikharl Bhava. In the cosmic aspect these four states
are Avyakta, Ishvara, Hiranyagarbha, and Virat. The
Arthasrishti (object creation) of Kundalini are the Kalas,
vfhicb arise from the letters such as the Rudra and Vishnu
Murtis and their Shaktis, the Kamas and Ganeshas and
tbeir Shaktis, and the like. In the Sakala Parameshvara
or Shabdabrahman in bodies — that is, Kundalini Shakti
the latter is called Chit Shakti or Shakti simply, “ when
Sattva enters ” — a state known as the Paramakashavastha.
When She into whom Sattva has entered is next “ pierced ”
by Rajas, She is called Dhvani, which is the Aksharavastha.
When She is again “ pierced ” by Tamas, she is called
Nada. This is the Avyaktavastha, the Avyakta Nada
which is the Parabindu. Again, She in whom Tamas
abounds is, as Raghava Bhatta says, called Kirodhika ; She
in whom Sattva abounds is called Arddhendu ; and the com-
bination of the two (Ichchha and Jnana) in which Rajas as
Kriya Shakti works is called Bindu. Thus it has been

172

THE SIX CENTS ES AND THE SERPENT POWER

said; “Drawn by the force of lohcliha Shakti (will),
illumined by Jnana Sbakti (knowledge), Shakti the Lord
appearing as male creates (Kriyfi Shakti, or action).”

When the Karana Bindn “ sprouts ” in order to create
the three (Bindu, Nada, and Bija) there arises that im-
manifested Brahman-word or Sound called the Shabda-
brahman (Sound Brahman).^ It is said : “ From the
differentiation of the Karana Bindu arises the unmanifested
‘ Sound ’ which is called Shabdabrahman by those learned
in Shruti.”* It is this Shabdabrahman which is the
immediate cause of the universe, which is sound and
movement manifesting as idea and language. This sound,
which is ' one with the Karana Bindu, and is therefore
all-pervading, yet first appears in man’s body in the Mula-
dhara. “ It is said in the Muladhara in the body the ‘ air ’
(Pranavayu) first appears. That ‘ air ’ acted upon by the
effort of a person desiring to speak, manifests the all-
pervading Shabdabrahman.” * The Shabdabrahman which
is in the form of the Karana Bindu when it remains
motionless (Nishpanda) in its own place (that is, in Kuridali,
who is Herself in the Muladhara) is called Para Shakti or
speech. The same Shabdabrahman manifested by the
same air proceeding as far as the navel, united with the
Manas, possessing the nature of the manifested Karjya
Bindu with general (Samanyaspanda) motion, is named

1 Ayamevacha yada karyabiBdvMitrayajananonmukbo bludyate tad-
dashayto avyaktah sbabdabrabmabhidheyo ravas tatrotpadyate iib,),

2 Tadapyuktam :

Bindos tasmad bbidyamanad avyakfcatma rayo ’bbavat,

Sa ravab sbrtitisampannaib sbabdabrabmeti giyate {tb.).

3 So’yang ravab karanabindutMatmyapannatvat sarvagnto^ pi vyan-
jakayatnasangskritapavanavasbat praninang muladbara eva abbiv-
yajyate. Taduktang :

Debe’pi muladb are’ stain samudeti samiranab,

Yivaksboriobchbayottbena prayatnena susangskritab.

Sa vyanjayati tatraiva sbabdabrabmapi sarvagam (ib,).

Pashyanti speech/ rashyanti, wnicn is
Jnankmaka and Bindvatmaka (in the nature of Chit and
Bindu), extends from the Muladhara to the navel, or,
according to some accounts, the Svadishthana.

Next, the Shabdabrahman manifested by the same air
proceedii^ as far as the heart, united with the Buddhi,
possessing the nature of the manifested Nada and
endowed with special (Visheshaspanda) motion, is called
® This is Hiranyagarbha sound, ex-
region of Pashyantv to the heart,
shabdabrahman manifested by the
as far as the mouth, developed in the
•ticulated and capable of being heard by the
the nature of the manifested Bija
articulate motion (Spashtatara), is called
the Virat state of sound, so

comes out”.

plained by the Acharyya : “ That
the Muladhara is called Para ;

the heart and

shabdabrahmas-
ityuchyate. Atha
pavanenabhivyaktani vi-

Madhyama speech
tending from the
Next,® the same !
same air proceeding
throat, etc., ar
ears of others, possessing
with quite distinct
Vaikhari speech.* This is
called because it “

This matter is thus ex;
sound which first arises in
next Pashyanti ; next, when it goes as far as

1 Tad idan<y karanabindvatmakam abbivyaktang
vapratishthataya nislipandam tadeva cba para vag r

mabbivyajyamanang nishchayatmikaya buddbya >

spandaprakasharupanadamayang sat madhyamavagi y y< ^

3 Atha tad eya vadanaparyyantang tenaiva ^‘*y“r:^^t^hSayo-

TU. i., Sh.W. in if pV jcji

mentary to the ^ j According to the Saubhagya-

derivations: ,.,,wTthe eL) ,• ° or

Sndhodaya, Vai — certainly ; kha ^ y, the ' Devi -who is in the

174 THE SfX CENTRES AN0 THB SEHTENT POWER

is joined to the Buddhi, it is called ‘ Madbyama This
name is derived from the fact that She abides “ in the
midst She is neither like Pashyanti nor does She proceed
■outward like Vaikhari, with articulation fully developed.
But She is in the middle between these two.

The full manifestation is Vaikhari of the man wishing
to cry out. In this way articulated sound is produced by
air.^ The Nitya Tantra also says: “ The Para form rises
in the Muladhara produced by ‘ air ’ ; the same ‘ air ’ rising
upwards, manifested in the Svadhishthaua, attains the
Pashyanti^ state. The same slowly rising upwards and
manifested in the Anahata united with the understanding
{Buddhi), is Madhyama. Again rising upwards, and
^appearing in the Vishuddha, it issues from the throat
:as Vaikhari.” ® As the Yogakundali Upanishad^ says:
■“ That Vak (power of speech) which sprouts in Pani gives
forth leaves in Pashyanti, buds forth in Madhyama, and
blossoms in Vaikhari. By reversing the above order sound
is absorbed. Whosoever realises the great Lord of Vak the

^ Tadiiktamachiryjaili ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Muladharat prathaioam adito yasli clia bliavali parakliyah,
Pasbchat pasbyanty atha bridayago biiddhiyiig madhyamakbyab,
Yyakte vaikbary atba raradisbor asya jaiitob sushumna,

Baddbas tasmM. bbavati pavaiiaprerita varDasangjna, (Bbaskara-
raya, op, giL).

2 Bbaskararaja eifcies Her other name, Utiirna (risen up), and tbe
Saubbagya-Sudbodaya^ which says : As She sees all in Herself, and
*as She rises (Uttirna above tbe path of action, this Mother is called
Pashyanti and UttirBaY)*

3 Nityatantre’pi :

Muladharat samutpannab parakhyo nadasambbavah.

Sa evordbvataya nitab svadbisbtbane vijriinbbitab,
Pasbyantyakbyam avapnoti tatbaivordhvang sbanaih shanaih,
Anabate buddbi-tattvasameto madhyamabbidhab,

Tatba tayordbvang nunnab san visbuddhau kanthadesbatab
Vaikbaryakbya ityadi (Bbaskararaya, op. cit.).

See also Ch. II, Prapancbasara Tantra, Vol. HI of Tantrik
‘Texts, ed. A. Avalon.

4 Cb. III.

THE CENTRES OB LOTOSES (CHAKEA, PADMa) 175-

undifferentiated illuminating Self is unaffected by any

■woi*dj be it wiiat it may.

Thus, tbongli there are four kinds of speech, gross-
minded men (Manushyah sthuladrishah) ^ who do not

understand the 'first three (Para etc.), think speech to be

Vaikhari alone, ^ just as they take the gross body to be the
Self, in ignorance of its subtler principles. Shruti says :
“ Hence m"en think that alone to be speech which is imper-
imperfect in so far as it does not possess the
first three forms.® Another Shruti also says : ^ “ Four are
the trades of speech— those Brahmanas who are wise know
them ; three are hidden and motionless ; men speak the

fourth” The Suta Sanghita also says Apada (the mo-

tionless Brahman) becomes Pada (the four forms of speech),
and Pada may become Apada. He who knows the distinc-
tion between Pada® anff^ Apada, he really sees {i.e.

himself becomes Brahman).” ® ^ ^

Thus, the conclusions of Shruti and Smriti are that_th<
“That” (Tat) in the human body has four division
(Para, etc.). But even in the Para form the word Ta
Lly denotes the Avyakta with three Gunas, the cans
of Para, and not the unconditioned Brahman who i

above Avyakta. The word “Tat”
transcendental sayings means the uhabdabrahman,

X That is, men who see and accept only the gross aspect of thmg

The Pada^ or wd.^^s *^^*j2s^in Vup7«oSi entog^s)'?
in Ttn’(irhal tSminations) is called Pada.” Again, the Sup (termn
tion) has five divisions.

® Bhaskararaya, loc. cit.

Islivara endowed with the work of creation, maintenance,
and “destruction,” of the UniTerse. The same word also
indicates indirectly (Laksbana) the unconditioned or
supreme Brahman who is without attributes. The rela-
tion between the two Brahmans is that of sameness (Ta-
datmya). Thus, the Devi or Shakti is the one essence of
consciousness (Chidekarasarnpini) — that is, She is ever
inseparate from Chit. The relation of the two Brahmans
is possible, as the two are one and the same. Though
they appear as different (by attributes), yet at The same

upon the difierentiation of the Great Bindu (Maha-
bindu). This is due in part to the fact that the verses in
which the accounts appear are not always to be read in
the order of the words (Shabda Krama), but according to
the actual order in fact, whatever that may be (Yatha
sambhavani)d Nextly, there is some appai’ent variance
in the commentaries. Apart from names and technical
details, the gist of the matter is simple and in accord-
ance with other systems. There is first the unmani-
fested point (Bindu), as to which symbol St. Clement of
Alexandria says ' that if from a body abstraction be made
of its properties, depth, breadth, and length, that which
remains is a point having position, from which, if
abstraction be made of position,® there is the state of pri-
mordial unity. There is one Spirit, which appears three-
fold as a Trinity of Manifested Power (Shakti). As so
manifesting, the one (Shiva-Shakti) becomes twofold,
Shiva and Shakti, and the relation (Nada) of these two
(Tayor mithah samavayah) makes the threefold Trinity
common to so many religions. The One first moves as
the Great Will (Ichchha), then as the Knowledge or
Wisdom (Jnana) according to which Will acts, and then
as Action (Kriya). This is the order of Shaktis in Ish-
vara. So, according to the Pauranik account, at the
commencement of creation Brahma wakes. The Sangskaras

1 As pointed out by the author of Pranatoshini, p. 9, when citing
the verse from the Goraksha Sanghita :

Ichchha kriya tatba jnanaiig gauri hrahmi tu vaishnavi
Tridha shaktih sfchita yatra tatparang 3 yotir Urn iti. ^

According to this account of the Deyas of different Ad haras of
Pranashakti upasana the order is (according to sequence of words) .

Ichchha=Gauri; Kriya==Brahmi; Vaishnavi-Jnana.

2 Stromata, Book V, Ch. 11, in Vol. IV, Antenicene Library. So
also in “ Les Mysteres de la Croix,” an eighteenth -century mystjoal
tork, we read: “Ante omina punctum exstitit ; non mathematioum

sed diffusivum.” .

3 -mv “ Oarland of Letters or Studies in the Mantrashastra .

178

THE SIX CENTRES ANl' THE SEKCENT POWER

then arise in His mind. There ai’ises the Desire to create
(Ichchha Shakti) ; then the Knowledge (Jnana Shakti) of
what He is aboiit to create ; and, lastly, the Action (Kriya)
of creation. In the case of Jiva the order is Jnana,
Ichchha, Kriya. For He first considers or knows some-
thing. Informed by such knowledge. He wills and then
acts. The three powers are, though counted and spoken of
as arising separately, inseparable and indivisible aspects of
the One. TFherever there is one there is the other, though
men think of each separately and as coming into being —
that is, manifested in time — separately.

According to one nomenclature the Supreme Hindu
becomes threefold as Hindu (Karyya), Hija, Nada. Though
Shiva is never separate from Shakti, nor Shakti from
Shiva, a manifestation may pi'edominantly signify one or
another. So it is said that Hindu is in the natime of Shiva
(Shivatmaka) and Hija of Shakti (Shaktyatmaka), and Nada
is the combination of the two (Tayor mithah samavayah).
These are also called Mahabindu (Parabindu), Sitabindu
(White Hindu), Shonabindu (Red Hindu), and Mishrabindu
(Mixed Hindu). These are supreme (Para), subtle (Suksh-
ma), gross (Sthula). There is another nomenclature — viz..
Sun, Fire, and Moon. There is no question but that Hija
is Moon, that from Hija issues the Shakti Varna, from whom
comes Hrahma, who are in the nature of the Moon and
Will-Power (Ichchha Shakti).^ Ichchha Shakti in terms
of the Gunas of Prakriti is Rajas Guna, which impels
Sattva to self-display. This is Pashyanti Shabda, the seat of
which is in the Svadhishthana Chakra. From Nada similarly
issue Jyeshtha Shakti and Vishnu, and from Hindu Raudri

1 Baudri bindos tato nMaj jyesbtba bijad ajayata
Varna tabbyab samutpanna rudrabrahniaraiDadhipah
Sangjnanecbchbakriyatmano vahnindvarka-svarupinab.

(Sbarada Tilaka, Cb. I.)

THE f'BNTRKS OK LOTUSES (OHAKBA, PADMa) 179

and Rudra, whioli are Madliyarnii and Vaikhari Sbabda,
tlie seats of wliicb are tbe Aniibata and Visbuddba Cbakras
T-espectively. According to one account ^ Bindu is ‘‘ Fire
and Kriya Sbakti (action), and Nada is “ Sun and Jnana
Sbakti, wbicb in terms of the Gunas are Tamas and battva
respectively Ragbavabbatta, however, in bis Commentary
on the Sharada, says that the Sun is Kriya because, like

that luminary, it makes all things visible, and Jnana is
Fire because knowledge burns up all creation. When Jiva
through Jnana knows itself to be Brahman it ceases to act,
so as to accumulate Karma, and attains liberation (Moksha).
It may be that this refers to the Jiva, as the former

represents the creation of Ishvara. _

In the Yoginihridaya Tantra it is said that Varna an
Ichchha Shakti are in the Pashyanti body ; Jnana an ^
JyesMha are called Madhjama ; Krija Shakti is Eaiidn ,

and Vaikhan is m „

tion of the Bhavas is given in the Sharada ™

follows: the all-pervading Shabdabrahman or KuoMi

emanates Shakti, and then follow Dhvani, »»da, Ni
dhika, Arddhendu. Binda. Shakti is Chit with Sattva
(Paramakashavastha) : Dhvani is Chit with Sattva and

Sa.bhS|«S. A,a »d Tatt,...nd.ta. d.o ^

itS followi.g .bows Ibo oorr..pooa»c aooord.ag tolb.tert.

Biia (Shakti, Moo», y"**’’

I ShStowtS*,' J,”btM, T‘.b.2Ti.b«»bli*r*.

Mistobindn j BSA“'Kri,S, T.»..,

Sitabindu t Vaikhari, Yishuddha.

3 Icbchbashaktis tatha Vama pashyantivapusba sthita

tatha Jjeshtha

Kriyashaktis tu Randriyam vaikliari vishvavigia ^ .

^ (Cited Tinder v. 22, Comm. Kamakalavilasa.)

4 Chap. I. *

IliliHB

' , l-'i ^1* '^ 1 ,. • , ' ’ ' » 1 -^' .

THE SIX CENTRES AND THK SERPENT POWER

Rajas (Aksharavastha) ; Nada is Chit with Sattva, Rajas,
Tamas (Avyaktavastha) ; Nirodhikri is the same with
abundance of Tamas (Tamah-prachuryat) ; Arddhendu the
same with abundance of Sattva ; and Bindn the combination
of the two. This Bindii is called by the different names of
Para and the rest, according as it is in the different centres,
Muladhara and the rest. In this way Ktindali, who is
Ichchha, Jnana, Kriya, who is both in the form of conscious-
ness (Tejorupa) and composed of the Gunas (Gunatmika),
creates the Garland of Letters (Varnamala).

The four Bhavas have been dealt with as coming under
Nada, itself one of the following nine manifestations of
Devi.

Pandit Ananta Shastri, referring to Lakshmidhara’s
commentary on v. 34 of Anandalahari, says ; ^

“ ‘ Bhagavati is the word used in the text to denote
Devi. One that possesses Bhaga is called a Bhagavati
(feminine). Bhaga signifies the knowledge of (1) the
creation, (2) destruction of the universe, (3) the origin of
beings, (4) the end of beings, (5) I’eal knowledge or divine
truth, and (6) Avidya, or ignorance. He that knows all
these six items is qualified for the title Bhagavan. Again,
Bha=9. “Bhagavati” refers to the nine-angled Yantra
(figure) which is used in the Ohandrakalavidya.’

“ According to the Agamas, Devi has nine manifesta-
tions, which are :

“ 1 . Kala group — lasting from the twinkling of an
eye to the Pralaya time. The sun and moon are included
in this group. Time.

“ 2. Kula group — consists of things which have form
and colour. Poem.

“ 3. Nama group — consists of things which have
Name.

Ananta Shastri, op. 72.

names.

■

H

the centres or lotuses (ohakba, padma) 181

“ 4, Jnana group — Intelligence. It is divided into
two branches : Savikalpa (mixed and subject to change)
and Nirvikalpa (pure and unchanging). Ohit.^ _

“ 5 Chitba group — consists of (1) Ahangkara (egoism),
(2) Ohitta, (3) Buddhi, (4) Manas, and (5) Unmanas Mind.

“ 0 Nada group— consists of (1) Raga
(2) Ichchha (desire ^ strengthened, or developed desire) (3)
Klriti (action, or active form of desire), and (4) Bra j a na
(attempt made to achieve the object desired). These
correspond, in order, to (1) Para (the first stage of sound
emanating from Muladhara), (2) Pashyanh
Stacie), (3) Madhyama (the third stage), and (4) \ aikhan
(the fourth stage of sound as coming out of the mouth).

7 Bindu group — consists of the six Chakras from^
Muladhara to Ajna. Psychic Essence, the Spiritual Cbem.

“ 8. Kala group — consists of fifty letters from Mula-
dhara to Ajna. Keynotes.^* . t, j

“ 9. Jiva group — consists of souls in the bondage o,

”^^^*»The Presiding Deities or Tattvas of the four con-
stituent parts of Nada are Maya, Shuddhavidya, Mahesha

and Sadfishiva. The Commentator deals with this s^

fully, quoting extracts from

is a tLslation of a few lines from Namakalavidya,

IchlSt Srtm'toStllon (KrSSin

Deste is a gross thing ^hich comes in with the material wor d.

2 1 cite the passage as written, bat these terms are not clear to m .

fndTctu" he“ .for a long time become food for worms

and white ants ” (Ananta Shastri)*

jt.sa

182

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

a work on phonetics, which will be of interest to the
reader :

“ ‘ Para is Eka (without duality) ; its opposite is the
next one (Pashyanti) ; Madhyaina is divided into two,
gross and subtle forms : the gross form consists of the
nine groups of letters ; and the subtle form is the
sound which differentiates the nine letters. . . . One
is the cause, and the other the effect ; and so there is
no material difference bet’ween the sound and its gross
forms.’

“ Com. ‘ Eka ’ : When the three Grimas, Sattva, Rajas,
and Tamas, are in a state of equilibrium (Samya), that state
is called Para. Pashyanti is the state when the three
Gunas become unequal (and consequently produce sound).
The next stage is called Madhyama ; the subtle form of
this is called Sukshmamadhyama, and the second and gross
form is called Sthulamadhyama, which produces nine dis-
tinct forms of sound represented by nine groups of letters :
vk., 3T (and all the other Towels), (Kavarga, 5 in number),
(Cbavarga, 5 ), z (Tavarga, 5 ), ^ (Tavarga, - 5 ), ^ (Pavarga,
5), (Ya, Ra, La and Va), ^ (Sha, Sha, Sa and Ha),
and ^ (Ksha). These letters do not in reality exist, but
represent only the ideas of men. Thus all the forms and
letters originate from Para, and Para is nothing but

THE CENTRES OB LOTUSES (CHAKBA, PADMA) 183

hmldhara quotes several verses from the Kaula
nas, of which the following is one :

“‘The blissful Lord is of nine forms. This God is
d Bhairava. It is he that confers enjoyment (bliss)
liberates the souls (from bondage). His consort is
ndabhairavi, the ever-blissful, the Chaitanya. When
p two become equal (imite in harmony), the universe

Yoga is sometimes understood as meaning the result and
not the process which leads to it. According to this
meaning of the term, and from the standpoint of natural
dualism, Yoga has been described to be the union of
the individual spirit with God.

But if Jiva and Pararaatma are really one, there can be
no such thing as union, which term is strictly applicable to
the case of the coming together of two distinct beings.
Samadhi (ecstasy) consists in the realisation that the
Jivatma is Paramatma ; and Yoga means, not this realisa-
tion, but the means by which it is attained. Yoga is thus a
term for those physical and psychical processes which are
used to discover man’s inner essence, which is the Supreme,

It is thus not a result, but the process^ method, or
practice, by which this result is attained. This result is
possible, according to Advaita Vedanta, because Chit, as
the true being of every Jiva, is not really fettered, but only
appears to be so. Were Atma not truly free, Liberation
(Moksha) would not be possible. Liberation or Moksha
therefore is potentially in the possession of every Jiva. His
identity with Paramatma exists now as then, but is not
realised owing to the veil of Maya, through which Jivatma
and Paramatma appear as separate. As ignorance of the
identity of the Jivatma and Paramatma is due to Avidya,

PRACTICE (yoga : laya-krama)

the realisation of such identity is ‘ attained by Vidya or
Jnana.

The latter alone can immediately produce liberation
(Sadyomukti). Jnana is used in a twofold sense— namely,
Svarupa Jnana and Kriya Jnana. The first is Pure Con-
sciousness, which is the end and aim of Yoga; the second
is those intellective processes which are the means taken
to acquire the first. Jnana considered as means or mental
action (Manasi Kriya) is an intellective process that is the
discrimination between- what is and what is not Brahman ;
the right understanding of what is meant by Brahman,
and the fixing of the mind on what is thus understood
until the Brahman wholly and permanently occupies the
mind to the displacement of all else. Mind is then absorb-
ed into Brahman or Consciousness, which alone remains ;
this is realisation or the attainment of the state of pure
consciousness, which is J nana in its true (Svarupa) sense.
Liberating Yoga short of perfect Jnana effects what is
called Kramamukti — that is, the Yogi attains Sayujya
with Brahman in Satya-loka, which is thence perfected
into complete Mukti through the Devata with whom he is
thus united. What the Siddha (complete) JnanayogI or
Jivanmukta himself accomplishes in this life is thereafter
attained as the sequel to Brahmasayujya. But man is not
only intellect. He has feeling and devotion. He is not
only these, but has a body. Other processes (Yogas) are
therefore associated with and in aid of it, such as those
belono-ing to worship (Upasana) and the gross (Sthula
Kriyal and subtle processes (Sukshma Kriya) of Hathayoga.
% * Mind and body are the instruments whereby the

ordinary separative worldly experience is had. As long,
however, as they are so used they are impediments in the
way of attainment of the state of pure Consciousness (Chit).
For such attainment all screenings (Avarana) of Chit must

■

1 The Tattva (Rfalitj) is revealed wlien all thought is gone (kular"
nava Tantra, IX, 10).

^ Hathajogapradipika, IV, 5 — 7. The same simile is used in the
Buddhist Demchog Tanti'a.

be cleared away. Yoga therefore is the method whereby
mental intellection and feeling sChittavritti) and Pi-fma
are first controlled and then stayed.* When the Ohitta,
Vritti, and Prana, are .stilled, then (.’hit or Paramatmn
stands revealed. It supervenes without further effort on
the absorption of matter and mind into the primordial
Power iShakti) whence they sprang, of whom they are
manifested forms, and who is Herself as Shiva one with
Him who is Shiva or Consciousness. Yoga thus works
towards a positive state of pure consciousness b\ the
negation of the operation of the principle of unconscious-
ness which stands in the way of its uprising. This pruning
action is well illustrated by the names of a bhakti which in
this work is variously described as Nibodiku and Xirodhika.
The first means the Giver of Knowledge, and the second
That which obstructs — that is, obstructs the affectation of
the mind by the objective w'orld through the senses. It is
by the prohibition of such impressions that the state of
pure consciousness arises. The arising of such state is
called Samadhi— that is, the ecstatic condition in which the
“ equality ” that is identity of Jivatmii and Paramatina is
realised. The experience is achieved after the absorption
(Laya) of Prana and Manas and the cessation of all ideation
(Sangkalpa). An unmodified state (Samarasatvam) is thus
produced which is the natural state (Sahajavastha) of the
Atma. Until then there is that fluctuation and modifica-
tion (Vritti) -which is the mark (jf the conditioned con-
sciousness, with its self-diremption of “ I ” and “ Thou
The state of Samadhi is " like that of a grain of salt,
which mingled in. water becomes one with it .- It is, in

186 THE SIX CBNTBBS AND TBK SBKl’KXT IWEK

tlie words of the Kul-arnava 'I'antra, “tnat torm oicou-
templatiou (Dhyana) in wliicli there is neither ‘ here ’ nor
‘ not here,’ in which there is illunaination and stillness as of
some great ocean, and which is the Void Itself.” ^ ^

The all-know'ing and venerable Teacher has said, “ One
who has attained complete knowledge of the Atma reposes
like the still watei’S of the deep” (v. 31). The Maya
Tantra defines Yoga as the unity of Jiva and Paramatma
(v. 51) ; that by which oneness is attained with the Supreme
(Paramatma), and Samadhi, or ecstasy, is this unity of Jiva
and Atma (i5.).® Others define it as the knowledge of the
identity of Shiva and Atma. The Agamavadis proclaim
that tile knowledge of Shakti (Shaktyatmakang jnanam) is'
Yo'J-a. Other wise men say that the knowledge of the
1 fT>nvi\r\‘A. Pnrnaha^ is Yosa, and otliers,

188 THB SIX CENTRES THE SEKTENT I'OWRR

world),* Niranjana (stainless)/ Jivaninukti (liberation in the
body), Hahajavasth a (natural state of the Atina), and Turiya
(Fourth State), all mean one and the same thing — that is,
the cessation of both mental binctioning (Chitta) and action
(Karma), on which there aidses freedom from joy and
sorrow and a changeless (Nirvikara) state. This on the
dissolution of the body is followed by bodiless (Videha-
kaivalya) or snpi'eme liberation (Paramamukti), which is
the permanent existence of the real state (Svarupayas-
thanam). Whilst the aim and the end of all Yoga is the
same, the methods by which it is attained vary.

There are, it is commonly said, four forms of Yoga,
called Mantrayoga, Hathayoga, Layayoga, and Eajayoga.'^
These are all vai’ious modes of practice (Sadhana) whereby
the feelings and intellectual activities of the mind (Ohitta-
vritti) are brought into control and the Brahman is in
various ways realised (Brahmasakshatkara). .Bach of these
forms has the same eight subservients, which are called the
” eight limbs ” (Ashtangga). Each of these has the same
aim — namely, spiiutual experience or realisation of Brah-
man ; they differ, however, as to the means employed and,
, it is said, in degree of result. The Samadhi of the first has
been described as Maliabhava, of the second as Mahabodha,
of the thii’d as Mahsilaya, and by Riijayoga and Jnanayoga,
it is said, the liberation called Kaivalyamukti is obtained.

^ This is the Nii'alambapni'i referred to in the Text,

2 Anjana^Mayopadhi fthe Upadhi, or apparently limiting* eoridi-

tion produced by or appearance) ; therefore ISTiranjana—destitute

of that (Tadrahitam), or Shuddham (pure) — that is, the Brahman,
■Comm, Hathajogapradipika, IV, v. 1.

3 Varaha Upanishad, Oh, V, XI ; Yogatattva Up, A. useful analysis
of Yoga will be found in Rajendra Ghose’s “ Sbangkara and Ramanuja”.
Mention is also made of a threefold division corresponding to the three
Vaidik Kandas, Karma Yoga (Karma Kanda), Bhakti Yoga (Upa-
sana Kanda), Juana or Raja Yoga (Jnana Kanda). Karma Yoga is good
action without desire for its fruit. Bhakti Yoga is devotion to God.

pRAOTiCE (yoga: laya-krama)

189

It is to be noted, however, that in the estimation of
the practitioners of Kundali Yoga it is the highest Yoga
in which a perfect Samadhi is gained by the union with
Shiva of both mind and body, as hereafter described. In
Raja and Jnana Yoga intellective processes are the pre-
dominant where they are not the sole means employed. In
Mantra Yoga worship and devotion predominate. In
Hathayoga there is more stress on physical methods, such
as breathing. Each, however, of these Yogas employs some
methods of the others. Thus, in Hatha Layayoga there is
Kriyajnana. But whereas the Jnana Yogi attains Svarupa
Jnana by his mental efforts without rousing Kundali, the
Hathayogi gets this Jnana through Kundalini Herself.
For Her union with Shiva in the Sahasrara brings, and in
fact is, Svarupa Jnana.

It will be convenient, therefore, to deal with the
general subservients (Ashtangga) which are common to all
forms of Yoga, and then follow with an account of Mantra

and the lower Hatha Yogas as a preliminary to that form

of Layayoga which is tlie subject of this work, and includes*
within itself elements to be found both in Mantra and such
Hathayogas.

The prerequisites of all Yoga are the eight limbs or
parts, Yama, Niyama, and others. Morality, religious
disposition and practice, and discipline (Sadhana), are
essential prerequisites of all Yoga which has as its aim
the attainment of the Supreme Experience. Morality
(Dharma) is the expression of the true nature of being.
The word Dharma, which includes both ethics and religion,
but has, also a wider context, comes from the root J-Ari,

1 There are forms of Toga, such as that with the elements giving
“ powers ” (Siddhi) over them, to which different considerations ^ply.

Th^is is a part of magic, and not of rejigion. So the uniting of Prana

with the Tejas Tattva ia the navel (Agneyidharana mndra) is said to
secure immunity from fire.

190 THK SIX OBNTBBS AND THE SKIU-BNT POWEI!

to sustain, and is therefore both the sustainer and the act
o! sustaining. The Universe is sustained (Dhnryate) by
Dharma, and the Lord who is its Supreme Sustainer is
embodied in the eternal law and is the Bliss which its
fulfilment secures. Dharma is thus the lavr governing the
universal evolution, or the path of outgoing (Pravritti),
and involution, or the path of return (Nivritti).^ And only
those can attain the liberation to which the latter path
leads who by adherence to Dharma co-operate in the
carrying out of the universal scheme. For this reason it is
finely said, “ Doing good to others is the Supreme Duty ”
(Paropakaro hi paramo dharmah).

In this scheme the Jiva passes from Shabdavidyii, with
its Tapas involving egoism and fruit attained through the
» Path of the Gods,” its Karma (rites), wdiich are either
Sakama (with desire for fruit) or Nishkama (disinterested),
to Brahmavidya (knowledge of the Brahman) or Theo-
sophy as taught by the ITpanishads. This transition is
made through Nishkama Karma. By Sakama Karma is
attained the “ Path of the Fathers ” (Pitri), Dharma, Artha
(wealth), Kama (desire and its fulfilment). But Nishkama
Karma produces that purity of mind (Chitta-shuddhi) which
makes man competent for Brahmavidya, or Theosophy,
which leads to, and in its completest sense is, liberation
(Moksba).

It is obvious that before the pure blissful state of the
Atma can be attained the Jiva must first live that ordered
life which is its proper expression on this plane.

1 This gran4 concept, therefore, is a name for all thoSe laws (of
-which religion is but one) which hold the universe together. It is the
inherent law of all manifested being. It is thus the Law of Form, which
is beyond that is beyond both Dharma or Adharma. As pain follows
wrong-doiDg, the Vaisheshika Darshana describes Dharma as “ that by
which happiness is attained in this and the next world, and birth and
suffering are brought to an end (Mokshadharma)

191

practice (Sadliana; turtners tne actpHsiucij ui. muse <iuaunes
which Yoga requires. Indeed, by persevering devotion to
the Mother, Samadhi may be achieved.

Therefore is it that the Commentator in v. 50 of the
fir.st of these works says :

“He alone whose nature has been purified by the
practice of Yama and Niyama and the like (referring to
the Sadhana hereinafter described) will learn from the
month of the Guru the means whereby the way to the
great Liberation is discovered.”

He adds, however, that the practice of Yama and the
like is only necessary for those whose minds are disturbed
by anger, lust, and other evil propensities. If, however,
a man through merit ac(piired in previous births is by
good fortune of a nature whicli is free of these and other
vices, then he is competent for Yoga without this pre-
liminary preparation.

All forms of Yoga, whether Mantra, Hatha, or Raja,
have the same eight limbs (Ashtangga) or preparatory sub-
servients : Yama, Niyama, Asana, Pranayama, Pratyahara.
Dharana, Dhyana, and Samadhi.^ Yama is of ten kinds
Avoidance of injury to all living creatures (Ahingsa)
truthfulness (Satyam) ; restraint from taking what belongs
to another, or covetousness (A steyam) ; sexual continent
in mind, speech, or body (Brahmacharyya) ; forbearance

1 Varaha Up., Gh. V. The preliminaries are necessary only fc
those who have not attained. For those who have, Niyama, A-sans
and the like, are needless. Kularnava Tantra, XI, 28, 29.

® As the Hathayo»apradipika says : “ He who knows Yoga shoul
preserve his semen. For the expenditure of the latter tends to deatl

■a : laya-

PKACTIOI

the bearing patiently of all things pleasant or unpleasant
(Kshama) ; fortitude in happiness or unhappiness (Dhriti) ;
mercy, kindliness (Day a) ; simplicity (Arjavam) ; moderation^
in and regulation ^ of diet (Mitahara), suited to the develop-
ment of the Sattvaguna ; and purity of body and mind
(Shaucham). The first form of pmfity is the external
cleansing of the body, particularly dealt with by Hathayoga
(v. pout) and the second is gained through the science
of self (Adhyatmavidya).®

Niyama is also of ten kinds : Austerities, such as fasts
and the like, in the nature of purificatory actions (Tapah) ;
contentment with that which one has unasked (Santosha) ;
belief in Veda (Astikyam) charity (Danam)— that is gifts
to the deserving of what one has lawfully acquired;
worship of the Lord or Mother (Ishvai’apujanam) accord-
ing to His or Her various forms ; hearing of Shastric
conclusions, as by study of the Vedanta (Siddhanta-
vakyashravanam) modesty and shame felt in the doing of
wrong actions (Hri) ; a mind rightly directed towards
knowledge revealed and practice enjoined by the Shastra.
(Mati) ; recitation of Mantra (Japa) ; ‘ and Homa sacrifice

Sadliana tbe heat goes upwards, the penis shrinks, and sexual powers
are largely lost. Coition with emission of semen at this stage is likely
to prove fatal. But a Siddha regains his sexual power and can exercise
it. Bor if fire and the other elements cannot hurt him, what can a
woman do? Pi'esumably, however, the dictum cited applies, for con-
tinence must in all eases tend to strength and longevity. It may,
however, be that the physical perfection assumed negatives the ill
effects observed in ordinary men.

1 Yogiyajnavalkya (Oh. I) says: “ 32 mouthfuls for a householder,
16 for a forest recluse, and 8 for a Muni.”

2 For foods detrimental to Yoga, .see Yogatattva Up., Yogaknndali
Up.

3 Shandilya Up., Ch. I ; see also Mandalabrahmana Up.

^ Which is either spoken (which, again, is loud or soft) or mental
(Shandilya Up.).

I'HK SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

(Hiitam) ^ — that is, religious observances in general (Vrata).
The Patanjala Sutra mentions only five Yamas — the
fii'st four and freedom from covetousness (Parigraha).
Ahiugsil is the root of those which follows. Shauoham,
or cleanliness, is included among the Niyama. Five of
the latter are stated — namely, cleanliness (Siiaucham),
contentment (Santosha), purificatory action (Tapah),
study of the Scriptures leading to liberation (Svadhyiiya),
and devotion to the Lord (Tshvarapranidhuna).'^

The statement of such obvious truths would hardly
be necessary were it not that there are still some who see
in Yoga mere “ Shamanism,” feats of breathing, “ acrobatic
posturing,” and so forth. On the contrary, no country
since the Middle Ages and until our own has laid
greater stress on the necessity of the association of
morality and religion with all forms of human activity,
than India has done.®

The practice of Y'ama and Niyama leads to renuncia-
tion of, and detachment from, the things of this world and
of the next,* arising from the knowledge of the permanent

1 See Ch. I, vv. 16, 17, Hathayogapi-adipikii, and p. 13.S. 2nd vol.
of Tantrik Texts, ed. A. Avalon. The Shandilya Up., Ch. I, gives
Vrata as the last, wliicli is described as the observance of actions
enjoined and refraining from actions prohibited. See also Ch. V,
Varaha Up.

2 Patanjali’s Yoga Sutra, Ch. II, 30, 32.

3 So, as was the case in bar Mediseval guilds, religion inspires
Indian Art -, and Indian speculation is associated with religion as was
the scholastic philosophy. In modern times in the West, the relevancy
of religion in these matters has not been generally considered to be
apparent, craftsmanship in the one case and intelligence in the other
being usually thought to be sufficient.

PSAOTICE (YOGA : LAYA-KBAMA)

and impermanent, and intense desire for and incessant
striying after emancipation, wliich characterises him who
is Mumukshu, or longs for Liberation.

Yama and Niyama are the first two of the eight acces-
sories of Yoga (Ashtanggayoga). These accessories or
limbs may be divided into five exterior methods ^ (Bahi-
rangga), chiefly concerned with the subjugation of the
body, and three inner methods ^ (Antarangga), or states
affecting the development of the mind.

Attention is paid to the physical body, which is the
vehicle of the Jiva’s existence and activity. Purity of
mind is not possible without purity of the body in which
it functions and by which it is affected. Purity of mind
is here used in the Hindu sense. According to English
parlance, such purity merely connotes absence of irregular
sexual imaginations. This^ though creditable, particularly
in a civilisation which almost seems designed to fan every
desire, is yet obviously insufficient for the purpose in
hand. Proper thought and conduct in all its forms is
but the alphabet of a school in which they are merely
the first step to the conquest of greater difficulties to
follow. What is here meant is that state of the mind or
approach thereto which is the result of good functioning,
clear thinking, detachment, and concentration. By these
the Manas is freed of all those modifications (Vritti) which
enshroud by their illusions the Atma from Itself. It is

THE SIS CENTRES AXE THE SERPENT POWER

Hafchayoga, of whicli they are particular processes. Prat-
yahara is the restraint of anil subjection of the senses to
the mind, which is thereby steadied.’ The mind is with-
drawn from the objects of the senses. The mind is by
nature unsteady, for it is at every moment being affected
by the sight, sounds, anil so forth, of external objects
which Manas through the agency of the senses (Indriyas)
perceives. It must therefore be detached from the objects
of the senses, withdrawn from whatsoever direction it may
happen to tend, freed from all distraction, and kept under
the control of the dominant self. Steadiness (Dhairya)
tlierefore is the aim and result of Pratyahara.® The three
processes known as the “ inner limbs ” (Antaranga) —
namely, Dharana, Dhyana, and Savikalpa Samadhi —
complete the psychic and mental discipline. These are
concenti'ation of the mind on an object ; unity of the mind
by contemplation with its object ; resulting in the last or
consciousness of the object only. The first is the “ holding
by ” — that is, fixing the Chitta, or thinking principle, on —
a particular object of thought or concentration (Dharana).
The mind, having been drawn away from the objects of the
senses by Pratyahara, is fixed on one object, such as the
Devatas of the Bhiitas, alone. Uniform contemplation on
the subject which the Chitta holds in Dharana is Dhyana
(meditation). ' Dhyana has been defined to be the state of
the Antahkarana (mind) of those wliose Chaitanya holds
to and is occupied by the thought of one object, having first

1 See Glieranda Sanghita, Fourth Upadesha; Shandilya Up., Ch. 1 ;
Amritanada Up, ; Mandalabrahmana Up., First Brahmaua. The
Sharada Tiiaka defines Pratyahara as “the forcible obstruction of the
senses wandering over theii^ objects ” (Indriyanang vicharatang visha'
yesliu balad aharauam tebhyah pratyahiirah vidhijate). The Shandilya
Up. (loc, cit.) speaks of five kinds of Pratyahara, the last of which ivS
Dharana on eighteen important points of the body.

2 Shandilya Up., Ch. I ; Amritanada Up. ; Mandalabrahmana Up.,
First Brahmana.

It is of two kinds : Saguna, or meditation ot a torm
(Murti) ; and Nirgnna, in whicli the self is its own object. ®
Samadhi has been defined to be the identification of
Manas and Atma as salt in water,® that state ii
known as one (equal) ® and the “ nectar c
(oneness). ®
samvit or
degrees
lesser deg
degree,

objects, assumes
subject of its contemplation.

There are in Advaita

Samprajnata (Savikalpa) Samadhi nami
Prajnaloka, Prashantavahita. ® In —
of the mental Vritti is Sachchidananda,

a separate knower.

kind of Avarana (screening) is cast away,

Sakshatkara Brahmajnana passing i.
of Peace in which the mind is
self exists as the Brahman alone:’

Vnawn fivervthinsr is known

Complete Samadhi is thus the state ot Para-
Pure Consciousness. Of Samadhi there are two
in the first of which (Savikalpa) the mind in a
gree, and in the second (Nirvikalpa) in a complete
continuously and to the exclusion of all other
the nature and. becomes one with the

__L.

Vedanta three states (Bhumika) of
lely, Eitambhara,
u “ In the first the content
■ 5 Sachchidananda. There is still
The second is that in which every

and there is
“ into the third state
void of all Vritti and the
» On which being
” (Yasmin vijnate sarvvam idam

jurvaka-sajatiyavrittikabhih nirantara

f vasya, tat tadrishang obittam aiitan-
^ nf Trisbati, on tbe title oi tlie

198 THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

vijnatam bhavati). Entrance is here made into Nirvikalpa
Sainadhi by Rajayoga.

These three— Dharana, Dhyana, Savikalpa Samadhi —
called Sangyama, are merely stages in the mental effort of
concentration, though, as later stated, according to the
Hathayoga aspect, they are progressions in Pranayama,
each stage being a longer period of retention of Pranad
Thus by Yama, Niyama, Asana, the body is controlled ; by
these and Pranayama the Prana is controlled ; by these and
Pratyahara the senses (Indriyas) are brought under subjec-
tion. Then through the operation of Dharana, Dhyana,
and the lesser Samadhi (Savikalpa or Samprajnata), the
modifications (Vritti) of the Manas cease and Buddhi alone
functions. By the further and long practice of dispassion
or indiffei’ence to both joy and sorrow (Vairagya) Buddhi
itself becomes Laya, and the Y'ogi attains the true unmodi-
fied state of the Atma, in which the Jiva who is then pure
Buddhi is merged in Prakriti, and the Brahman as salt in
the waters of ocean and as camphor in the flame.

Passing then to the processes^ peculiar to the different
Yogas, Mantrayoga comprises all those forms of Sadhana
in which the mind is controlled by the means of its own
object — that is, the manifold objects of the world of name
and form (Namarupa). The whole universe is made up of
names and forms (Namarupatmaka) which are the objects
(Vishaya) of the mind. The mind is itself modified into
the form of that which it perceives. These modifications
are called its Vritti, and the mind is not for one moment
devoid of ideas and feelings. It is the feeling or intention
(that is, Bhava) with which an act is done which determines

1 See Yogatattva Upainshad.

2 See two publications by the Sliri Bbaratadharmmamabamandala
>-r~Mantrayoga and Hathayoga in the Dharma Prachara Series.
(Benares.) The latter in a short compass explain the main essentials o£
each of the four systems.

PEAOTIOE (yoga : laya-kbama)

199

its moral worth. It is on this Bhava that both character
and the whole outlook on life depend. It is sought there-
fore to render the Bhava pure. As a man who falls on the
ground raises himself by means of the same ground, so to
break worldly bonds the first and easiest method is to use
those bonds as the means of their own undoing.'- The
mind is distracted by Niimarupa, but this Namarupa may
be utilised as the first means of escape therefrom. In
Mantrayoga, therefore, a particular form of Namarupa,
productive of pure Bhava, is given as the object of contem-
plation. This is called Sthfila or Saguna Dhyiina of the
five Devatas, devised to meet the requirements of different
natures. Besides the ordinary “ eight limbs ” (Ashtanga)^
■cammon to all forms of Yoga, certain modes of training and
worship are prescribed. In the latter material media are
utilised as the first steps whereby the formless One is by
Jnanayoga attained — such as images (Murti),'' emblems
(Linga, Shalagraina), pictures (Chitra), mural markings
(Bhittirekha), Mandalas and Yantras (diagrams),^ Mudras,®
Nyasa.® With this the prescribed Mantra is said (Japa)
either aloud or softly only. The source of all Bija-Mantra
(Seed-Mantra), the Pranava (Om), or Brahman, is the
articulate equivalent of that primal “ Sound ” which
issued from the first vibration of the Ounas of Mulapra-
kriti, and the other Bija-Mantras are the same equivalents

' This is an essentially Tantrik principle. See Kiuamaira, Ch. II.

“ Tide ante, p. 192.

3 “ The Deva of the unawakened (Aprahnddha) is in Images ; of the
Vipras in Tire ; of the -wise in the Heart. The Deva, of tho^ who know
the Atma is evei’jwhere ” (Kularnava Tantra, IX, 44). 0 Beau i u -

Eyed 1 Kot in Kailasa, Meru, or Mandara, do I dwell. I am there where
the knowers of Kula doctrine are ” {ih., v, 94).

^ See Introduction, Mahanirvana Tantra.

5 These ritual Mudras are not to be confused with the Yoga
Mudras later described.

“ See Introduction, Mahanirvana Tantra,

200

vastha state. In Mantrayoga the state of Samadhi is called
Mahabhava. This is the simplest form of Yoga practice,
suited for those whose powers and capacities are not such
as to qualify them for either of the other methods.

Hathayoga comprises those Sadhanas, or prescribed
methods of exercise and practice, which are concerned
primarily with the gross or physical body (Sthula Sharira).
As the latter is connected with the superphysical or subtle
body (Sukshma Sharira), of which it is the outer sheath,
control of the gross body affects the subtle body with its
intellection, feelings, and passions. In fact, the Sthula

PBACTICB (yoga : laya-krama) 201

m ' ■ ■

Dharma), and the respective duties of men and women
(Kula Dharma). So the Mantra which is given to the male
initiate may not be given to a woman. Nor is the Mantra
given to a Brahmana suitable for a Sbudra. The objects
of contemplation are Devas and Devis in their various
manifestations and concrete symbols, and the Samadhi
called Mahabhava is attained by contemplation of and by
means of Namarupa. In Hathayoga, on tbe other hand,
the question of the fitness or otherwise of a novice is deter-
mined from the physical point of view, and rules are
prescribed to procure and increase health and to free the
body of disease. In Hathayoga contemplation is on the
“ Light,” and the Samadhi called Mahabodha is attained
by the aid of control of breath and other vital Vayus
(Pranayama), whereby the mind is also controlled. As
already observed, Asana and Pranayama, which are parts
of Hathayoga, are also parts of Mantrayoga. Those who
pi'actise the latter will derive benefit from taking advan-
tage of some of the other exercises of Hathayoga, just as
the followers of the latter system will be helped by the
exercises of Mantrayoga.

The word Hatha is composed of the syllables Ha and
Tha, which mean the “Sun” and “Moon” — that is, the
Prana and Apana Vayus. In v. 8 of the Shatchakra-
nirupana it is said that the Prana (which dwells in the
heart draws Apana (which dwells in the Muladhara), and
Apana draws Prana, just as a falcon attached by a string is
d.rawn back again when he attempts to fly away. These two
by their disagreement prevent each other from leaving the
body, but when they are in accord they leave it. Both
their union or Yoga in the Sushumna and the process
leading thereto is called Pranayama. Hathayoga or
Hathavidya is therefore the science of the Life-Principle,’

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

using tnat wora m tne sense or tue variuus lunns oi vital
Vayu into wliich Prana is divided. Prana in the bodi-
of the individual is a part of the Universal Breath
(Prana), or the “ Great Breath An attempt, therefore,
is first made to harmonise the individual bx’eath, known as
Pinda or Vyashti Priina, with the cosmic or collective
breath, or the Brahmanda or Samashti Prana. Strength
and health are thereby attained. The regulation of the
harmonised breath helps to the regulation and steadiness
of mind, and therefore concentration.

In correspondence with the threefold division Adh-
yatma, Adhidaiva, Adhibhuta, Mind (Manas), Prana
(vitality), and Viryya (semen), ai-e one. Therefore the
subjection of Manas causes the subjection of Prana or
Vayu and Viryya. Similarly, by controlling Priina, Manas
and Viryya are automatically controlled. x\gain, if the
Virya is controlled, and the substance which under the
influence of sexual desire develops into gross seed,^ is made
to flow upwards (Urddhvaretas), control is had over both
Manas and Prana. With Pranayama the semen (Shnkra)
dries up. The seminal force ascends and comes back as
the nectar (Amrita) of Shiva-Shakti.

Pranayama is recognised as one of the “ limbs ” of all
the (Ashtiingga) forms of Yoga. But whereas it is used
in Mantra, Laya and Raja Yoga, as an auxiliary, the
Hathayogi as such regards this regulation and Yoga
of breath as the chief means productive of that result

1 According to Hindu ideas semen (ShukraJ exists in a subtle
form throughout the whole body. Under the influence of the sexual
will it is withdrawn and elaborated into a gross form in the sexual
organs. To be ilrddhvaretas is not merely to pi^event tbe emission of
gross semen already formed but to prevent its formation as gross seed^
and its absorption in the general system. The body of a man who is
truly urddhvaretas has the scent of a lotus. A chaste man where gi’oss
semen has formed may on the other hand smell like a buck goat.
Some Yogis can make both tbe Penis and testes disappear in the
pubic arch so that the body has the appearance of that of a woman.

PU AGTICE (yoga : laya-keama) 203

(Moksha), which is the comaion'end of all schools of Yoga.
This school, proceeding on the basis that the Vritti or
modification of the mind always follows Prana,^ and on the
sufificiency of that fact, held that by the aid of the union of
Ha and Tha in the Sushumna, and the leading of the
combined Pranas therein to the Bi*ahmarandhra, Samadhi
was attained. Though the reciprocal action of matter and
mind is common knowledge, and bodily states influence
psychic or mental states as the latter the former, the
Hathayoga method is preponderantly a physical one,
though the gross physical acts of the preparatory stages of
this Yoga are succeeded by Kriyajnana and subtle vital
.processes which have Prana as their subject.

Under the heading of gross physical training come
provisions as to the place of residence, nyode of life as
regards eating, drinking, sexual fnnctionf exercise, and
so forth.

The practice and exercises connec^Cd with Hathayoga
are divided into seven parts or staged— namely, cleansing

PRACTICE (yoga: laya-keama) 205

OP cloth (Vasodhauti) pushed into the throat, or swallowed,
or by vomiting (Vamanadhauti). Miiladhauti is done to
cleanse the exit of the Apanavayu, either with the middle
finger and water or the stalk of a turmeric plant.

Yasti, the second of the Shatkarma, is twofold, and is
either of the dry (Shushka) or watery (Jala) kind. In the
second form the Yogi sits in the Utkatasana ^ posture in
water up to the navel, and the anus is contracted and ex-
panded by Ashvini Mudra; or the same is done in the
Pashohiinottanasana,^ and the abdomen below the navel is
gently moved. In Neti the nostrils are cleansed with a
piece of string. Lauliki is the whirling of the belly from
side to side (see Plate X). In Trataka the Yogi, without

winking, gazes at some minute object until the tears start
from his eyes. By this the “ celestial vision” (Divya
Drishti) so often referred to in the Tantrik Upasana is
acquired. Kapalabhati is a process for the removal of
phlegm, and is threefold ; Vatakrama, by inhalation and
exhalation ; Vyutkrama, by water drawn through the
nosti’ils and ejected through the mouth ; and Shitkrama,
the reverse pi’ocess.

These are the various processes by which the body
is cleansed and made pure for the Yoga practice to
follow.

A Sana, or posture, is the next, and when the Shat-
karma are dispensed with, is the first stage of Hathayoga.

Dridhata, or strength or firmness, the acquisition of
which is the second of the above-mentioned processes, is

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

j-iifci are postures oi tne DOCiy. ine term is

geiierallv described as modes of seating the body. But
the posture is not necessarily a sitting one; for some
Asanas are done on the belly, back, hands, etc. It is said^
that the Asanas are as numerous as living beings, and that
there are 8,400,000 of these; 1,600 are declared to be ex-
cellent, and out of these thirty-two are auspicious for men,
which are described in detail. Two of the commonest of
these are Muktapadraasana^ (the loosened lotus seat), the
ordinary position for worship, and Baddhapadmasana.^
Kundaliyoga is ordinarily done in an Asana and Mudra in
which the feet press upon the region of the genital centre
and close the anal aperture, the hands closing the others — ■
nostrils, eyes, ears, mouth (Yonimudra). The right heel is
pressed against the anus and the left against the region
of the genital centre and in order to close the aperture
of the penis, it is contracted and withdrawn into the pubic
arch so that it^is no longer seen. The tongue is turned
back in Khechari Mudra so as to close the throat also
where these two Mudras are combined.

There are certain other Asanas which are peculiar to
the Tantras, such as Mundasana, Chitasana, and Sha-
vasana, in which skulls, the funeral pyre, and a

/•ni Sanghita, Second Upadesha. In the Shiva Sanghiia

(Oh. 1J.X, vv. b4— 91) eighty-four postures are mentioned, of which four
are recommended— dw., Siddhasana, Ugrilsana, Svasbikasana, and
t admasana. Another account given me added four more— Baddha-
padmasana, Tr ikon asana, Majiirasana, Bhujangasana.

_ 2 The right foot is placed on the left thigh, the left foot on the right
thigh, and the hands are crossed and placed similarly on the thighs ;
the chin is placed on the breast, and the gaze fixed on the tip of the nose
(.see also Shiva Sanghita, Ch. I, v. 52),

rhe same, except that the hands are passed behind the back, and
the right hand holds the right toe and the left hand the left toe. By
this, increased pressure is placed on the MiilMhara, and the nerves are
braced with the tightening of the body. The position is figured in
Plate XYII. . .

PEACTICB (yoga : LAYA-KBAMA)

corpse/ respectively, form the seat of the SMhalca. These,
though they have other ritual and magical objects, also form
part of the discipline for the conquest of fear and the attain-
ment of indifference, which is the quality of a Yogi. And
so the Tantras prescribe as the scene of such rites the
solitary mountain-top, the lonely empty house and riverside,
and the cremation ground. The interior cremation ground
is thei’e where the Kamik body and its passions are con-
sumed in the fire of knowledge.®

Patanjali, on the subject of xlsana, merely points out
what ai’e good conditions, leaving each one to settle the
details for himself according to his own requirements.

Asana is an aid to clear and collect the thought. The
test of suitability of Asana is that which is steady and
pleasant, a matter which each will settle for himself.
Postin*e becomes perfect when effort to that end ceases, so
that there is no more movement of the body.^ The Eajas
Guna, the action of which produces fickleness of mind, is
restrained. A suitable steady Asana produces mental equili-
brium. Hathayoga, however, prescribes a very .large
number of Asanas, to each of which a peculiar effect is

1 In successful Siiav asana the Devi appears to the Sadhaka. Tn
Shavasadhana the SMhaka si fcs astride on the hack of a corpse (heading
the north), on which he draws a Yantra and then does Japa of Mantra
with Shodhanyasa and PCija on its head, A corpse is selected as being
a pure form of organised matter, since the Devata which is invoked
into it is the Mahavidya whose Svariipa is Nirgunabrahman, and by
such invocation becomes Saguna. The corpse is free from sin or
desire. The only Vayu in it is the Dhananjaya, “ which leaves not even
a corpse The Devata materialises by means of the corpse. There
is a possession of it (Avesba) — that is, entry of the Devata into the
dead4)ody. At the conclusion of a successful rite the head of the corpse
turns round, and, facing the Sadhaka, speaks, bidding him name his
boon, which may de spiritual or worldly advancement as he wishes.
This is part of JSTila Sadhana done by the “ Hero (Yira), for it and
Shavasana are attended by many terrors.

^ As the Yogakundali Upanishad says (Oh. HI), the outer burning
is no burning at all.

3 Patanjala Yogasutra, 46, 47 (Sthirasukham asanam).

THE SIX CENTEES AND THE SERPENT POWER

ascribed. These are more in the nature of a gymnastic
than an Asana in its sense of a seated posture. Some forms
of this gymnastic are done seated, but others are not so,
but standing upright, bending, lying down, and standing
on the head. This latter is Vrikshasana. Thus, again, in
Ohakrasana the Yogi stands and bends and touches his
feet with his hand, a familiar exercise, as is also Vama-
dakshinapadasana, a kind of goose step, in which, however,
the legs are brought up to right angles with the body.
These exercises secure a fine physical condition and free-
dom from disease.^ They also bring different portions of
the body into such a position as to establish a direct contact
of Prana-vayu between them. They are also said to assist
in Pranayama, and to help to effect its object, including the
rousing of Kundalini. The author of the work last cited
says ^ that as among the Niyamas the most important is
Ahingsa, and among Tamas Mitahara, or a moderate diet
(a significant choice), so is Siddhasana (in which the Mula-
dhara is firmly pressed by the heel and the Svadhishthana
region by the other foot) among the Asanas. (See Plates
XI, XII). Mastery of this helps to secure the Unmani
Avastha, and the three Bandhas (v. 'post) are achieved
without difficulty.

Sthirata, or fortitude, is acquired by the practice of
the Madras.® The Mudra dealt with in works of Hatha-
yoga are positions of the body. ^ They are gymnastic,
health-giving, and destructive of disease and of death,

i See Oh. II of Gheranda Saoghita, and Hathajogapradipika,
I, vv. 19 — 35 ; Shandilya Upanishad, Oh. I.

a Ch. 1, V. 39.

^ According to the Commentarj on the Hathayogapradipika
(Ch. lY, Y. 37), Mudra is so called because it removes pain and sorrow
(Mudrayati klesham iti mudra). See my Introduction to Mahanirvana
Tantra, 1st Ed. CXXYII and Oh. Ill of Ghei^anda Sanghita.

^ Gheranda Sanghita, Third Upadesha.

-■ PBAOTIOJ') (yoga : mya-kbama) . 209

such as the Jalandhara ^ and other Madras. They also
preserve from injury by fire, water, or air. Bodily action
and the health resulting therefrom react upon the mind,
and by the union of a perfect mind and body, Siddhi is by
their means attained. The Mudra is also described as the
key for opening of the door of Kundalini Shakti. It is not
(as I undei stand it) that all keys are necessarily to be em-
ployed in each case, but only such as are necessary to accom-
plish the purpose in that particular case; what is necessary in
one case may not be necessary in another. The Gheranda
banghita describes a number of Madras, of which (with the
eight Asanas mentioned at p. 205) ten are said to be of
importance in Kundali Yoga, of which Khechari is the chief
as Siddhasana is chief amongst Asanas. In Yonimudra, the
Yogi in Siddhasana stops with his fingers the ears, eyes,
nostrils, and mouth, so as to shut out all external im-
pressions. As already stated he presses with his heel the
Sivani or* centre of the perinseum closing the anal
aperture and withdrawing the penis into the pubic arch
(See Plate XV). He inhales Pranavayu by Kakinimudra/
and unites it with Apanavayu. Meditating in their order
upon the six Chakras, he arouses the sleeping Kulakuu-
dalini by the Mantra " Hung Hangsah With “ Hang,”

1 Ihid., V. 12.

*The lips are formed to resemble the beak of a crow and the

air gently drawn in (Gheranda Sans'hita, III. 86, 87). ’ '

T he* w- js Kavaeba Bija=.“May

I be protected. .Hung stands for Kama (desire) and Krodha (anger)
Kama here means creative .will (Srishti), and Krodl, a its rever.se or
dissolution (Laya). So-called “ angry ” Devata.s are not angry in the
OTdiiiary sense, bufc are tlien in that aspect in which they are Lords of
Dissolution, an aspect which seems angry or terrible to the worldly-
minded. _ It is .said of the Taraniantra that the Hung in it is the sound

of Ohola lake to the west of Meru

what tune bhe manifested Hang.sah=:Prakriti (Sah ) and Paiusha
(Hang) or Jivatma. J his Mantra is used in taking Kundalini np, and
bo ham (He I am) in brmguig Her down. Hang also=Snn (Suryya),
and Sah==Moon (Inda)=Kama=Ichchha. • ■ • ' ^

THE SIX CENTBES AN0 THE SBEPENT POWER

or the Sun, heat is produced, and this heat is made to play
on Kundali Shakti. By “ Sah ” the Kama or will (Ichchha)
is made active. The vital air (Vayu) in the Muladhara is
in the form of both Moon and Sun (Somasuryyarupi).
With “ Hangsah ” She is roused, Hang rousing Her with
h:b heat, and Sah lifting Her upwards. He raises Her to
the Sahasrai’a ; then deeming himself pervaded with the
Shakti, and in blissful union (Sanggama) with Shiva, he
meditates upon himself as, by reason of that union, Bliss
Itself and the Brahman.^ Ashvinimudra consists of the
repeated contraction and expansion of the anus for the
purpose of Shodhana, or of contraction to restrain the
Apanavayu in Shatchakrabheda. Shaktichalana employs
the latter Mudra, which is repeated until Vayu manifests in
the Sushumna. Shaktichalana is the movement of the
abdominal muscle from left to right and right to left; the
object being to arouse Kundalini by this spiraline movement.
The process is accompanied by inhalation and the union of
Prana and Apana whilst in Siddhasana.®

Yoni Mudra is accompanied by Shaktichalana Mudra,®
which should be well practised first before the Yoni Mudra
is done. The rectal muscle is contracted by Ashvini Mudra
Until the Vayu enters the Sushumna, a fact which is
indicated by a peculiar sound which is heard there.^ And
with the Kumbhaka the Serpent goes upwards to the
Sahasrara roused by the Mantra “ Hung Hangsah The
Yogi should then think himself to be pervaded with Shakti
and in a state of blissful union (Sanggama) with Shiva.
He then contemplates : “ I am the Bliss Itself,” “ I am

^ Gheranda Sangtita, Third Upadesha.

2 Ibtd., vY. 37, 49, 82.

3 Ibtd., Ill, vv. 49—61.

* Hathayogapradipika, Commentary to Ch. 11, v.

PEAOTIOE (yoga: IAYA-KRAMa) 211

the Brahman”.! Mahamudra* and Mahavedha are done
in conjunction with Mahabandha, already described. In
the first the Yogi presses the Yoni (Muladhara) with the
left heel, and, stretching out the right leg, takes hold of
the two feet with both hands. (See Plate XVI). Jalandhara
Bandha is then done. When Kundalini is awakened, the
Prana enters the Sushumna, and Ida and Pinggala, now
that Prana has left them, become lifeless. Expiration
should be done slowly, and the Mudra should be practised
an equal number of times on the left and right side of the
body. This Mudra, like other Hathayoga Madras, is
said to ward off death and disease. In Mahavedha '■> the
Yogi assumes the Mahabandha posture, and, concentrat-

1 The Mantra Hangsah is the breath held in Knmhhaka,

2 Gheranda Sanghita, Ilf. 37—42. The Yoni Mudi
detaclies the Manas from the objective world,” is descri
Com, to V. 86 of work here Erst translated, 'post.

^ Ib.. V. 25 et scq.

^ See as to this tapping Plate IX which shows the posi
gx'oiind before or after it has been tapped.

»XA THE SIX-'. CfiN'TBBS .AN’Dv THK SKEPHNr POWER

The Kheohari Mndra,^ which, as well as the Yoni
Mudra, is referred to in the text translated, is the lengthen-
ing of the tongue until it reaches the space between the
eyebrows. It is then turned back in the throat, and closes
the exit of the breath previously inspired. The mind is
fixed in the Ajna * until with Siddhi this “path of the up-
ward Kundali ” (IJrddhvakundalini) conquers the whole uni-
verse, which is I’ealised in the Yogi’s body as not different
from Atma.^ It is said that sometimes the /raswim is cut
but others can do the Mudra without doing a physical
injury which interferes with the putting out and
withdrawing the tongue without manual help. In Shambhavi
Mudra is the mind kept free from Vritti or functioning in
Siddhasana.

The term Mudra also includes ^ what are called
Bandha (bindings), certain physical methods of controlling
Prana. Three important ones which are referred to in the
texts here translated are Uddiyana, Mula and Jalandhara. ^
(See Plates XI, XII, XIV.) In the first the lungs are

1 So called, according to the Dhyanabindu Up., because Chitta
nioves in Kha fAkaslia^. and thft fioncrnA ■prmo’lr fVnc

called IJ^dijana

; ' PBaOTWE (tDGA t- ,7,ATA5-K'EAMa) . ■ 21S

'emptied by a strong expiration, and drawn against
the upper part of the thorax, carrying the diaphragm
along with them, and Prana is made to rise and enter the
Sushnmna. Through Mulabandha (see Plate XIV) the
Prana and Apana unite ^ and go into the Sushnmna. Then
the inner “ sounds ” ai’e heard — that is, a vibration is felt
and Prana and Apana, uniting with Nada of the cardiac
Auahata Chakra, go to^the heart, and are thereafter united
with Bindu in the Ajna. In Mulabandha the perinael
region (Voni) is pressed with the foot, the rectal muscle
contracted (by Ashvini Mudra), and the Apana drawn
up.* The natural course of the Apana is downwards, but
by contraction at the Mfxladhara it is made to go upwards
through the Sushumna when it meets Prana. When
the latter Vayu reaches the region of fire below the navel,®
the fire becomes bright and strong, being fanned by Apana.
The heat in the body then becomes very powerful, and
Kundalini, feeling it, awakes from Her sleep “just as a
serpent struck by a stick hisses and straightens itself
Then it enters the Sushumna. Jalandhara Baildha is
done by deep inspiration and then contraction of the
thoracic region (wherein is situated the Vishuddha Chakra),
the chin being held firmly pressed against the root of
the neck at a distance of about four fingers (Anguli) from
the heart. This is said to bind the sixteen Adharas, or
vital centres, and the nectar (Piyusha) which flows from

^^The Shaadilya Up., Oh. I, deBaes Pranjivama to be tlio union
of Prana and Apana, Il^^ada and Hindu are thus united.

s See Agaiuaknlpadruina, cited in notes to S.K., v. ^0, pos^, comm.,
and Dhyanabindu Up. The Yogakundali Up., Ch. 1, says that the
downward tendency of Apana is forced up by bending down.

3 Vahner ruandalang trikonang iiabher adhobhage (Hathayoga-
pradipika, v. 66).

^ See Commentary, posi, v. 38, , A

214 THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

the cavity above the palate,^ and is also used to cause
the breath to become Laya in the Sushumna. If the
thoracic and perinaeal regions are simultaneously contracted,
and Prana is forced downward and Apana upward, the
Vayu enters the Sushumna.^ This union of the three
Nadis, Ida, Pinggala and Sushumna, may be also effected
by the Mahabandha,* which also aids the fixation of the
mind in the Ajna. Pressure is done on the perinmal region
between the anus and penis with the left heel, the right
foot being placed on the left thigh. Breath is inspired and
the chin placed firmly on the root of the neck that is top
of the breast'bone as in Jalandhara, (see position in plate
XVI) or alternatively the tongue is pressed firmly against
the base of the front teeth ; and while the mind is centred
on the Sushumna the Vayu is contracted. After the breath
has been restrained as long as possible, it should be expired
slowly. The breath exercise should be done first on the
left and then on the right side. The effect of this Bandha is
to stop the upward course of the breath through all the
Nadis except the Sushumna.

As the Dhyanabindu Upanishad says, the Jiva oscil-
lates up and down under the influence of Prana and
Apana and is never at rest, just as a ball which is hit to

1 The “Moon” is situate in the palatal region near the Ijna.
Here is the Somachakra under the Ajna, and from the Somachakra
comes a stream of nectar which, according to some, has its origin ahove.
It descends to the “Sun” near the navel, which swallows it. By the
process of Viparitakarana these are made to change positions, and the
mternal Bre ( Jatharagni) is increased. In the Viparita position the
Yogi stands on hi,s head.

* Hathayogapradipika, II, vv. 46, 47 ; Yogatattva Up., Dhyana-
bmdn Up. Yogakundali Up. (Gh. I) says that the contraction of the
upper part of the body is an impediment to the passage of the Vayu
upwards.

® Dhyanabindu Up., ib., Ill, v. 19, done in conjunction with Maha-
mudra and Mahavedha, described post-, ib., v. 25, and Yogatattva
Upanishad.

PEAOTICE (yoga: LArA-KBAMA) 215

the earth with the palm of the hand uprises again or like
a bird which, tied to its perch by a string, flies away and is
drawn back again. These movements, like all other
dualities, are stayed by Yoga, which unites the Pranas.

When the physical body has been purified and con-
troled, there follows Pratyahara to secure steadiness
(Dhairya), as already described. With this the Yogi pasi3es
from the physical plane, and seeks to acquire the equipoise
of, and control over, the subtle body. It is an advanced
stage ni which control is acquired over both mind and body.

Prom the fifth or Pranayama arises lightness (Laghava)
—that is, the levitation or lightening of the body.

The_ air which is breathed through the mouth and
nostrils IS material air (Sthula Vayu). The breathino- is a
manifestation of a vitalising force called Prana Vayu"’ By
control over the Sthula Vayu the Prana Vayu (Sukshma
Vayu or subtle air) is controlled ; the process concerned
With this is called Pranayama.

Pranayama is frequently translated “ breath control ”
Having regard to the processes employed, the term is not
altogether inappropriate if it is understood that “ breath ”
means not only the Sthula but the Sukshma Vayu. But
the word does not come from Prana (breath) and Yama
(control), but from Prilna and Ayama, which latter term
according to the Amarakosha, means length, ifising, ex-
tensity, expansion d in other words, it is the process where-
by the ordinary and comparatively slight manifestation of
Prana is lengthened and strengthened and developed. This
takes place firstly in the Prana as it course.s in Ida and
Pinggala, and then by its transference to the Sushumna,
when it is said to bloom (Sphurati) * or to display itself in

parinfiho vishalata (Amarakosha Dic-
^ Comm. Hathayogapradipika, III, v. 27.

' ’ ’ * ^ t i ^ V'>' ' f I '' i 'I

IHK SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWEP

its fulness. When the body has been purified by constant
practice, Prana forces its way with ease through Sushumna
in their middle. ^ From being the small path of daily
experience, it becomes the “ Royal Road ” which is the
Sushumna. Thus, Suryabheda Kumbhaka is practised
until Prana is felt to pervade the whole of the body from
head to toe ; Ujjayi until the breath fills the body from
throat to heart ; and in Bhastra the breath is inhaled and
exhaled again and again rapidly, as the blacksmith works
his bellows. The breath is controlled only in the sense
that it is made the subject of cei’tain initial processes.
These prooe.sses, however, do not control in the sense of
confine, but expand. The most appropriate term, therefore,
for Pranayama is " breath control and development,”
leading to the union of Prana and Apana. Pranayama is
first practised with a view to control and develop the Prana.
The latter is then moved into Sushumna by the stirring of
Kundalini, who blocks the entry (Brahmadvara) thereto*
With the disappearance of Prana therefrom, Ida and
Pinggala “ die,” ® and the Prana in Sushumna by means of
the Shakti Kundalini pierces the six Chakras which block
the passage in the Brahmanadi, and eventually becomes
Laya in the Great Breath which is the final end and aim of
this process.

Pranayama ^ should be practised according to the in-
structions laid down by the Guru, the Sadhaka living on a

iShaiidilya Up., Ch. I.

2 pranasya filiunyapadavi tatlia rajapatbayate (ib,, vv. 2, 3).

^ That is, they are relaxed and devitalised, as every part of tbe
body is from which the Prana Shakti is withdrawn.

^ The Shandilya Up., Ch. I, says : ‘‘As lions, elephants, and tigers,
are gradually tamed, so also the breath when rightly managed conies
under control ; else it kills the practitioner.” It should not, therefore,
be attempted wn'thout instruction. Many have injured themselves and
some have died through mistakes made in the processes, which, must be
adapted to the needs of each person. Hence the necessity for an
experienced Guru. :

PEAOTIOE (rOGA: lArA-KBAMA) 217

nutritious but moderate diet, with his senses under control.
As already stated, mind and breath react upon one another
and when the latter is regulated so is the mind, and there-
tore rhythmic breathing is sought. This Prauayama is
said to be successful only when the Nadis are purified, for
unless this_ is so the Prana does not enter the Sushumna. »
ihe Yogi, assuming the Pad inasana posture, inhales
( uraka) and exhales (Rechaka) alternately through the left
(Ida) and right (Pinggala) nostrils, retaining the breath
meanwhile (Kumbhaka) for gradually increasing periods,
ihe Devatas of these elements of Pranayama are Brahma
udra, and Vishnu.^ The Prana enters Sushumna, and if
retained sufficiently long goes, after the piercing of the
Iffiakras, to the Brahmarandhra. The Yoga manuals speak
of vanous forms of Pranayama according as commencement
IS made with Rechaka or Puraka, and accordina- as the

breath is suddenly stopped without Puraka and Rechaka.
There are also various forms of Kumbhaka, such as Sahita
Kumbhaka, which resembles the first two above mentioned
and which should be practised until the Prana enters the
bushumna ; and Kevala, in which the breath is restrained
without Puraka and Rechaka.^ Then tliere are others which
cure excess of Vata, Pitta, and Kapha, ^ and the diseases
arising therefrom; and Bhastrii, which is an important
Kumbhaka, as it operates in the case of all three Doshas,^

1 Hathayogapradipika, Ch. 11. vv. 1—6 fsee d ex-vr!:,- nf
Introdnction to the Mahanirvana Tantra). ^ ^ ^

““ °P'. V*™!. Up., Ch. V.

K-r,r,aT-‘® Shandilya Up., Ch. I, says that by Kevala the knowledo-e of
Knndali arises, and man becomes tJrddhvaretas—that is his seminal
goes upward instead of developing into the gross seed which ia
thrown by Apana downwards. Bindu (seminal LerS) must

L Oh! rToglklSii ’“k “ita,

Vol.IIl7p. P'^^P^ne'iasara Tantra, Tantrik Texts,

28

. .'V 'I'fe.'l: I. 'J'-ii!-';-'

• ■ ' ; t *1 ;

218

THE SIX OBNTBBS AND. THE SERPENT POWEB

and aids the Prana to break through the three Granthis,
which are firmly placed in the Susbumna.^

It will be observed that all the methods previously and
subsequently described practically subserve one object, the
making of the Prana enter Sushumna, and then become
Laya in the Sahasrara after the Prana Devata Kundalini
has pierced the intervening Chakras ; for when Prana flows
through the Sushumna the mind becomes steady. When
Chit is absorbed in Sushumna, Prana is motionless.’^ This
object colours also the methods Pratyahara, Dharana, Dhya-
na, and Samadhi ; for whereas in the Rajayoga aspect they
are various mental processes and states, from the Hathayoga
point of view, which is concerned with “ breathing,” they are
progressions in Pranayama. Therefore it is that some
works describe them differently to harmonise them with
the Hatha theory and practice, and explain them as degrees
of Kumbhaka varying according to the length of its dura-
tion.® Thus, if the Prana is retained for a pai'ticular time
it is called Pratyahara, if for a longer time it is called
Dharana, and so on until Samadhi is attained, which is
equivalent to its retention for the longest period.^

All beings say the Ajapa Gayatri,® which is the expul-
sion of the breath by Hangkara, and ’ its inspiration by
Sahkara, 21,600 times a day. Ordinarily the breath goes
forth a distance of 1 2 fingers’ breadth, but iji singing,
eating, walking, sleeping, coition, the distances are 16, 20,
24-, 30, and 36 breadths, respectively. In violent exercise
these distances are exceeded, the greatest distance being

^ Hathayogapradipika, II. 44 — 75,

^ Yogakundali-Up,, Oh. I.

3 See Yoga Butra, ed. Matiilal Nabhuhhai Dvivedi, Ap. VI.

4 Bee Comm, to Hathayogapradipika, Ch. II, v. 12.

5 This is the Mantra Hangsah manifested by Prana. See Dhvana-
bindn-Up. Hangsah is Jivatraa, and Parainahangsa is Paramatma.
See Hangsa-IJpanishad.

I'RACTICK (ro(u; laya-kbama) 219

96 breadths. Where the breathing is under the normal
distance, life is prolonged. Where it is above that, it is
shortened. Puraka is inspiration, and Rechaka expiration,
Kumbhaka is the retention of breath between these two
movements. Kumbhaka is, according to the Gheranda
Sanghita, of eight kinds: Sahita, Suryyabheda, TJjjaji,
Shitali, Bhastrika, Bhriimari, Murchchha, and Kevali.
t ranajatna similarly varies. Pranayiima awakens Shakti,
frees iTom disease, produces detachment from the world,
and bliss. It is of varying values, viz., best (Uttama) mid-
dling (Madhyama) and inferior (Adhama). The value is
measured by the length of the Puraka, Kumbhaka, and
Rechaka, In Adhama Pranfiyama it is 4, 16, and 8 res-
pectively =28. In Madhyama it is double of that, viz.,
8 32, 16, = 56. In Uttama it is double of the last, viz., 16,
64, 32 respectively = 112. The number given is that of the
recitation of the Pranava Mantra. The Sadhaka passes
through three different stages in his Sadhana which are
similarly named. In Adhama perspiration is produced, in
Madhyama tremor, and Uttama done for a 100 times is said
to result in levitation.

It is necessary that the Nadi should be cleansed, for
air does not enter those which are impure. Months or
years may be spent in the preliminary process of cleansing
the Nadis. ffhe cleansing of the Nadi (Nadishuddhi) is
either Samauu or Nirmanii — that is, with or without the
use of Bija. According to the first form, the Yogi in
Padmasana does Gurunyasa according to the directions of
the Guru. Meditating on “ Yang,” he does Japa through
Ida of the Bija 16 times, Kumbhaka with Japa of Bija 64
times, and then exhalation through the solar Nadi and
Japa of Bija 32 times. Fire is raised from Manipura and
united with Prithivi. Then follows inhalation by the solar
Nadi with the Vahni Bija 16 times, Kumbhaka with 64

if*
■ '

i ■ '
■•V ' ; ,

220 THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

Japa of the Bija, followed by exhalation through the lunar
Nadi and Japa of the Bija 32 times. He then meditates on
the lunar brilliance, gazing at the tip of the nose, and
inhales by Ida with Japa of the Bija “ Thang ” 16 times.
Kumbhaka is done with the Bija Vang 64 times. He then
thinks of himself as flooded by nectar, and considers that
the Nadis have been washed. He exhales by Pinggala with
32 Japa of the Bija Lang, and considers himself thereby
as strengthened,
grass, a deerskin
Pranayama.

etc., and, facing east or north, does
For its exercise there must be, in addition to
NMi Shuddhi (purification of “ nerves ”), consideration of
proper place, time, and food. Thus, the place should not
be so distant as to induce anxiety, nor in an unprotected place,
such as a forest, nor in a city or crowded locality, which
induces distraction. The food should bo pure and of a
vegetarian character. It should not be too hot or too cold,
pungent, sour, salt, or bitter. Pasting, the taking of one
meal a day and the like are prohibited. On the contrary,
the Yogi should not remain without food for more than one
Yama (three hours). The food taken should be light and
strengthening. Long walks and other violent exercise
should be avoided, as also— certainly in the case of be-
ginners — sexual intercourse. The stomach should only be
half filled. Yoga should be commenced, it is said, in spring
or autumn. As stated, the forms of Pranayama vary. Thus,
Sahita, which is either with (Sagarbha) or without (Nir-
garbha) Bija, is, according to the former form, as follows :
The Sadhaka meditates on Vidhi (Brahma), who is full of
Bajoguna, red in colour, and the image of Akara. He
inhales by Ida, in six measui’es (Matra). Before Kura-
bhaka he does the Hddiyanabandha Mudra. Meditating on
Hari (Yishnu) as Sattvamaya and the black Bija Hkara, he
does Kumbhaka with 64 Japa of the Bija; then, meditating

intACTIOS (yoga: i^aya-kbama)

221

on Shiva as Tamomaya and his white Bija Makara, he
exhales through Pinggala with 32 Japa of the Bija; then.

inhaling by Pinggala, he does Kumbhaka, and exhales by

Ida with the same Bija. The process is repeated in the
normal and reversed order.

Dhyana, or meditation, is, according to the Gheranda
Sanghita, of three kinds: (1) Sthula, or gross; (2) Jyotih ;
(3) Sukshma, or subtle.^ In the first the form of the
Devata is brought before the mind. One form of Dhyana
for this purpose is as follows: Let the Sixdhaka think of

the great Ocean of Nectar in his heart. In the middle of

that ocean is the island of gems, the shores of which ai’e
made of powdered gems. The island is clothed with a
Kadainba forest in yellow blossom. This forest is sur-
rounded by Malati, Champaka, Parijata, and other fragrant
trees. In the midst of the Kadamba forest there rises the
beautiful Kalpa tree, laden with fresh blossom and fruit.
Amidst its leaves the black bees hum and the Koel birds
make love. Its four branches are the four Vedas. Under
the tree there is a great Mandapa of precious stones, and
within it a beautiful couch, on whicli let him picture to
himself his Ishtadevata. The Guru will direct him as to
the form, raiment, Vahana, and the title of the Devata.

dyotirdhyana is the infusion of fire and life (Tejas)
into the form so imagined. In the Muladhara lies the
snake-like Kundalini. There the Jivatma, as it were the
tapering flame of a candle, dwells. The Sadhaka then
meditates upon the Tejomaya (Light) Brahman, or.

1 Glieranda Saiigliita, Sixth llpadesha. It is said bj Bhaskai'araya,
in the Lalita (v. 53), that there are three forms of the Devi which equally
partake of both the Prakasha and Virnai’slia aspects — viis,, tlie physical
(Sthula), the subtle ( Sukshma), and the supreme (Para). The physical
form has hands, feet, etc., the subtle consists of Mantra, and the
supreme is tlie Vasana, or, in the technical sense of the Mantra Shastra,
real or own. The Kularnava Tantra divides Dhyana into Sthula and
Sukshma (TX, 3) beyond which, it says, is Samadhi.

::;'l

il

222 THE SIX OENTBES' AND THE SEEPENT POWER

alternatively, between the eyebrows on the Pranavatmaka
flame (the light which is Om) emitting its lustre.

Sukshmadhyana is meditation on Kundalini with
iShambhavi Mudra after She has been roused. By this
Yoga (vide post) the Atma is revealed (Atmasak'shatkara).

Lastly, through Samadhi the quality of Nirliptatva, or
detachment, and thereafter Mukti (Liberation) is attained.

This Samadhi Yoga is, according to the Gheranda
Sanghita, of six kinds : ^ (1) Dliyanayogasamadhi, attained
by Shambhavi Mudra,L in which, after meditation on the
Bindu-Brahman and realisation of the Atma (Atma-
pratyaksha), the latter is resolved into the Mahakasha or
the Great Ether. (2) Nadayoga, attained by Khechari
Mudra,® in which the tongue is lengthened until it reaches
the space between the eyebrows, and is then introduced in
a reversed position into the tnouth. This may be done
with or without cutting of the frssnum. (•!) Basanandayoga,
attained by Kumbhaka,^ in which the Sadhaka in a silent
place closes both ears and does Pfiraka and Knmbhaka
until he hears ATada in sounds varying in strength from
that of the cricket’s chirp to that of the large kettledrum.
By daily practice the Anahata sound is heard, and the
Light (Jyotih) with the Manas therein is seen, which is
ultimately dissolved in the supreme Vishnu. (4) Laya-
siddhiyoga accomplished by the celebrated Yonimudra
already described.^ The Sadhaka, thinking of himself as
Shakti and the Paramatma as Purusha, feels himself in union
(Sanggama) with Shiva, and enjoys with Him the bliss

1 Seventli TJpadesha.

^ IhiiL^ Third Upadeaha, v. 65 et seg.

^ Ibid., V. 25 et seq,

^ Ibid., Fifth ITpadesha, v. 77 et seq.

5 III the Lalita (v, 193) the Devi is addressed as Lay akari --“the
cause of Laya or absorption.

PRAOTICE (yoga I OATA-KIUMa) ' 228

which is Shringararasa, ^ and becomes Bliss itself, or the
Brahman. (5) Bhakti Yoga, in which meditation is made
on the Ishtadevata with devotion (Bhakti) until, with
tears flowing from the excess of bliss, the ecstatic condition
is attained. (6) Rajayoga, accomplished by aid of the
Manomurchchha Kumbhaka.* Here the Manas, detached
frorn^ all worldl}' objects, is fixed between the eyebrows in
the .Ajriachakra, and Kurabhaka is done. By the union of
the Manas with the Atma, in which the Jnani .sees all
things, Rajayogasamadhi is attained.

The Hathayogapradipika says that on perfection being
attained in Hatha the body becomes lean and healthy,
the eyes are bright, the semen is concentrated, the Nadis
are purified, the internal fire is increased, and the Nada
sounds above-mentioned are heard.® These sounds (Nada)
issue from Anahata Chakra in the cardiac region, for it
is here that the Sliabdabrahtnan manifested by Vayu and
in association with Buddhi, and of the nature of manifested
Nada endowed with a special motion (Vishesha Spanda),
exists as Madhyama speech. Though sound (Shabda) is
not distinct and heard by the gross senses until it issues in
the form of Vaikhari speech, the Yogi is said to hear this
subtle Nada when, through the various Bandhas and
Mudras described. Prana and Apana have united in the
Sushumna. This combined Prana and Nada proceed
upwards and unite with Bindu.

1 Slirin^^ara is the love sentiment or sexual passion and sexual union.
Here Shi inofararusa is the cosmic root of that. The first of the eight
or nine Rnsas (sentiments) — viz.^ Shringgara, Vira (heroism), Ksruna
(compassion \ Adbhuta (wondering), Hasya (humour), }'5hayanaka‘(fear),
Bibhntsa (disgust), Eaudra ( wrath), to which Mamma th a bhatt a, author
of tlie Kavjiiprakaslia, adds Shanti (peace). What the Yogi enjoys is
that supersensual bliss which manifests on the earthly plane as material
Shringarn.

2 lUil, Fifth Upadesha, v, 82.

3 Oh. 11, Y. 78. ^

224

224 THE SIX CENTBES AKD THE SBEPENT POWEE

There is a particular method by which Laya (absorp-
tion) is said to be attained by hearing the various bodily
sounds.^ The Yogi in Muktasana and with Shambhavl
Mudra concentrates on the sounds heard in the right ear ;
then after closing the sense apertures by Shanmukhi
Mudrii and after Pranayama a sound is heard in the Su-
shumna. In this Yoga there are four stages. When the
Brahmagranthi has been pierced, the sweet tinkling sound
of ornaments is heai’d in the ethereal void (Shunya) of the
heart ; in the second stage the Prana united with Nada
pierces the Vishnugranthi. In this, the further void
(Atishunya) of the thoracic region, sounds are heard like
those of a kettle-drum. In the third stage a drum-like
sound (Mardala) is heard in the Ajna or Mahashunya,
the seat of all powers (Siddhis). Then the Prana, having
fnreed the Rudrasrrauthi or Aina, goes to the abode of

m

: PRA-OTIOB (:T0QA:'XA;Y4-KBMa)v^.

aimed. Chit exists within these sounds, which are its
Shaktis, and by union with Nada the self-effulgent
Chaitanya (Gonsciousness) is said to be attained. As long
as sound is heard the Atm a is with Shakti. The Laya
state is soundless.^ There are also other methods^ by
which Laya is achieved, such as Mantrayoga, or the recita-
tion of Mantras according to a particular method.

Layayoga is the third and higher form of Hathayoga,
which, in connection with other auxiliary Hatha processes,
is the subject-matter of the works here L’anslated. Both
Sachchidananda or Shiva and Saohohidananda or Shakti
are present in the body, and Layayoga consists in the
control of Chittavritti by merging the Prakriti Shakti in
the Purusha Shakti according to the laws which govern
the Pinda (individual— Vyashti) and Erahmanda (cosmic—
Samashti) bodies, and thereby gaining Liberation (Moksha).

As in the case of the preceding systems, Layayoga has
special features of its own.® Speaking in a general way,
ordinary Hathayoga is specially, though not exclusively,
concerned with the physical body, its power and functions ;
and affects the subtle body through the gross body.
Mantrayoga is specially, though not exclusively, concern-
ed with the forces and powers at work outside, though
affecting the body. Layayoga deals with the supersensible
Pithas (seats or centimes) and the supersensible forces and
functions of the inner world of the body. These Pithas,
or seats of the Devatas, are the Chakras already described,
ranging from the Sahasrara, the abode of the unattached
(Nirlipta) Sachchidanandamaya Paramatma, to the Mula-
dhara, the seat of Pi’akriti-Shakti, called Kulakundalini in

1 Hatliayo^apradipika, Cli. IV, vv. 65 — 102.

^ AmritanMa-Upanisliad, Ch. TV, v. 66, says feliat Shiva has given
out a quarter of a crore (2,500,000) of ways for the attainment of Laya,
though Nada is the best of them all.

^ See Dharma Prachara Series, 9.

226

THE SIX CBNTEBS AND THE SERPENT POWER

the Toga Shastras. The object of this Toga is therefore
to take and merge this Shakti in Pnrnsha when Samadhi
is attained. In Hathayoga the contemplation of /' Light ”
is in particular prescribed, though, as already stated, its
Dhyana is thi*eefold. In Mantrayoga the material forms
in which Spirit clothes Itself are contemplated. After
Prakriti-Shakti in the form of Kulakundalini has according
to this method of Layayoga been I'oused by constant
practice, its reflection is manifested as a Ijight between the
eyebrows, which when it is fixed by practice and contem-
plation becomes the subject of Bindudhyana. Kundali is
aroused by various Hatha and other processes hereafter
described. Methods are followed whiclrare common to all
the systems, such as Tama, Niyama, Asana, though only a.
limited number of these and of the Mudras of Hathayoga are
used. These belong to the physical processes (Sthfdu Kriya),
and are followed by Pranayama,! Pratyahara, Dharaua,
Dhyana (on Bindu), which are superphysical exercises
(Sukshma Kriya). In addition to these are certain features
peculiar to this Toga. There' are, besides those already
noted, Svarodaya, or the science relating to theNadis;
Panohatattva Chakra, Sukshraaprana, and the like inner
forces of natni’e ; and the Layakriya, leading through Nada
and Bindu to the Samadhi, which is called Mahalaya.

The hearing of the NMa sounds is included under
Pratyahara, and under Dharana the rousing of Kundali,
As Japa, or recitation of Mantra, is the chief element in
Mantrayoga, and Pranayama in the ordinary Hathayoga,
so Dharana is, with the last as a preliminary, the most
impoi’tant part of Layayoga. It is to be observed, how-
ever, that Pranayama is only a preliminary method to
secure mastery of the breath. It is the lower door at

1 Of the several forms of Pranayama given in Hathayoga, it is
said that only two are employed in Layajoga.

T’KACTIOE (yoga: LAYA-KRAMa)

227

which the already perfect in this matter need not enter.
Some processes described are for practice (Sadhanii) only.
An expert (Siddha) can raise and lower Kundali Shakti
within an hour.

It is said that as Ananta, the Lord of Serpents,
supports the whole universe, so is Kundalini, “ by whom the
body is supported,” ^ the support of all Yoga practice,® and
that “ as one forces open a door with a key,” so the Yogi
should force open the door of liberation (Moksha) by the
aid of Kundalini ® (the coiled one), who is known by
various names, s;ich as the Shakti, Ishvarl (Sovereign
Lady), Kutiliingi (the crooked one), Bhujanggi (serpent),
Arundhat! (unstayable helper to good action).'* This
Shakti is the Supreme Shakti (Parashakti) in the human
body, embodying all powers and assuming all forms.
Thus the sexual force is one of such powers and is
utilised. Instead, however, of descending into gross
seminal fluid, it is conserved as a foi’m of subtle energy,
and rises to Shiva along with Prana. It is thus made
a source of spiritual life instead of one of the causes
of physical death. With the extinction of sexual desii’e,
mind is released of its most powerful bond.^

She the “ Serpent Power ” sleeps coiled up in the Mula-
dhara, closing with Her mouth the entry to the Sushurana

^ Varaha Upanisliad, Ch. Y,

2 Hathayogapradipika, Cb. Ill, v. 1 : SarvesbaDg yogatantranang
tatbMbara bi Kundali.

^ Hatbayogapradipika, Cb. HI, v. 105 :

Udgbatayet kapatan tu yat-ba kunebikaya batliM
Kundalinya tatba yogi moksb ad varan g vibbedayet.

Tbe same verse occurs in Cb. ill, v, 5, of the Gberanda Sangbita.

^ The Yogakundalx-IIp , Cb. 1. calls Sarasvati Ariindbati, saying
that it is by arousing Her that Kundali is aroused. When Kundali
wishes to go up nothing can stop Her, Therefore She is called
Arundbati, which is also the name of a Nadi.

^ Yogakundali Upanishad, Cb. I.

THE SIX CENTBES AND THE SERPENT POWER

called tlie “door of Braliman ” (Brahmadvara). She
sleeps above what is called the Kanda or Kandayoni,
which is four fingers in length and breadth, and is covered
by a “ soft white cloth ” — that is, membrane like the
egg of a bird. It is generally described as beingtwo
fingers (Anguli) above the anus (Guda) and two fingers
below the penis (Medhra).^ Prom this Kanda spring the
72,000 Nadis which here both unite and separate. Kula-
kundalini is the Shabdabrahmau, and all Mantras are
Her manifestation (Svarupavibhfiti). For this reason one
of the names of this, the Mantradevata, whose substance
is “ letters,” is Matrika— that is, the Genetrix of all the
universes. She is Matrika, for She is the Mother of all
and not the child of any. She is the world-consciousness
(Jagachchaitanya), the Virat consciousness of the world
as a whole.® Just as in space sound is produced by move-
ments of air, so also in the ether within the Jiva’s body
currents flow, owing to the movements of the vital
air (Pi’anavayu), and its inward and outward passage
as inhalation and exhalation. Verse 12 describes Kunda-
lini as the revered supreme Parameshvari (Sovereign
Lady), the Omnipotent Kala in the form of Nadashakti.
She, the subtlest of the subtle, holds within Herself the
mystery of cimtion,* and the stream of Ambrosia which
flows from the attributeless Brahman. By Her radiance
the universe is illumined, and by it eternal knowledge is

1 As given, by Yajnavalkya, cited in Conimentary to v. 113, Ch.
Ill, of Hathayogapradipika, whicli also refers to tlie Goraksbasbataka.
The verse itself appears to fix its position as between the penis and
navel (Nabhi), twelve finger.? (Vitasti) above the Mulastbana. Kanda
is also applied to the seat of Prana, the heart (see Shatchakranirupana,
V. 8).

2 See Vol. II, “ Principles of Tantra,” Ch. XI, XII, et seq. It is
because She is Mantradevata that She is roused by Mantra.

® She is creation itself (Srishtirupa), vv. 10, 11, post, in Her are
creation, maintenance, and dissolution (Srishtisthitilayatmika), ib.

229

PKACTioB (yoga: laya-kbama)

awakened ^ — that is, She both hinds as Creatrix (Avidyii
Shakti) and is the means as Vidja Shakti whereby Liber-
ation may be attained. For this reason it is said in the
Hathayogapradipika that She gives liberation to Yogis and
bondage to the ignorant. For he who knows Her knows
Yoga, and those who are ignoi’ant of Yoga are kept in the
bondage of this worldly life. As vv. 10 and 11 of the
Shatchakranivupana says : “ She the World-bewildei’er is
lustrous as lightning; Her sweet murmur is like the in-
distinct hum of swarms of love-mad bees.* She is the source
of all Speech. It is She who maintains all the beings of the
Avorld by means of inspiration and expiration,* and shines
in the hollow of the Mida lotus like a chain of brilliant
lights.” Mantras are in all cases manifestations (Vibhiiti)
of Kulakundalini Hei’self, for She is all letters and Dhvani^
and the Paramatma Itself. Hence Mantras are used in the
rousing of Kundalini. The substance of Mantras is the
Eternal Shabda or Consciousness, though their appearance
and expression is in words. Words in themselves seem
lifeless (Jada), but the Mantra power which they embody
is Siddha — that is, the truth and capable of teaching it,
because it is a manifestation of Chaitanya, which is Satya
Itself. So Veda, which is the formless (Amurti) Brahman
in Veda-form (Vedamfirti), is the self-illumined Principle
of Experience* (Chit) itself, and is displayed in words

1 For She is also be^'Ond the universe (Vishvatita), and is the
form of knowledge itself (Jiianariipa), ih. As such She is thought of
as going npw^ards, as in descending She creates and binds.

^Vishvanatha the Commentator says that She makes this sound
when awakened. According to the Commentator Shangkara, this
indicates the Vaikharl state of Kundalini.

3 Thus, Prana and Apana are declared to be the maintainers of
animate being (v. 8, post).

4 See Principles of Tantra,” Vol. II, Oh. XI and XIT.

5 Yeda is one with Chaitanya. As Shangkara says (comm. Trishati,
V. 19), dealing with the Panchadaslu Mantra : Sarve veda yatra ekam
bhavanti, etc. Shrutya vedasya atmabhedena svaprakashataya.

280 THK SIX CENTEES AND THE SBEPENT POWEk

(SiOdhashabda) which are without humaii authorship
(Apaurnsheja)d incessantly revealing knowledge® of the
nature of Brahman, or Pure Being, and of Dharmma,® or
those principles and laws, physical and psychical and
spiritual, by which the universe is sustained (Dharyate).
And so the Divine Mother is said to be Brahman-know-
ledge (Brahmavidya) in the form of that immediate
experience* which is the fruit of the realisation of the
great Vedantic sayings (Mahav&ya).® As, notwithstand-
ing the existence of feeling-consciousness in all things, it
does not manifest without particular processes, so, although
the substance of -Mantras is feeling-consciousness, that
feeling-consciousness is not perceptible without the union
of the Sadhaka’s Shakti (derived from Sadhana) with
Mantrashakti. Hence it has been said in the Sharada
Tilaka ; “ Although Kulakundalini, whose substance is
Mantras, shines brilliant as lightning in the Miiladhara of
every Jiva, yet it is only in the lotuses of the hearts of
Yogis that She reveals Herself and dances in Her own joy.
(In other cases, though existing in subtle form,) She does
not I’eveal Herself. Her substance is all Vedas, all Man-
tras, and all Tattvas. She is the Mother of the three

1 And because it is without such authorship and is “ heard '’only, it
is called Shruti (“ what is heard ”): Shru^^ata eva na tu kena chit kriyate
(Vachaspati Misra in Sangkhya Tattva Kaumudi) ; and see the Yamala
cited in Pranatoshini, 19 : “ Veda is Brahman ; it came out as His
breathing.”

® The term Veda is derived from the root vid, to know’.

^ Veda, according to Vedanta, is that word without human author-
ship which tells of Brahman and Dliarinma ; Dharmabrahmaprati-
padakam apaurusbeyam vakyam.

4 Sakshatkara — that is, actual Spiritual Experience (Aparoksha
Jnana) as opposed to indirect (parokslia) or merely intellectual
knowledge.

5 Vedanta-mahavakyajanva-sakshatkararupa-brahmavidya (Shang-
kara’s Comm, on Trisbati, v. 8). The Vedanta here means Upani-
shad, and not any particular philosophy so called.

'231

PBAOTicB (yoga: i.aya-keama) '231

forms of energy, ‘ Sun,’ ‘ Moon,’ and ‘ Fire,’ and Shabda-
brahman Itself.” Kundalini is therefore the mightiest
manifestation of creative power in the human body.
Kundali is the Shabdabrahman — that is, Atma as manifest-
ed Shakti— in bodies, and in every power, person, and
thing, ihe Six Centres and all evolved therefrom are
Her manifestation. Shiva "dwells” in the Sahasrara.
The latter is the upper Shrichaki-a, as the six centres are
the lower. Yet Shakti and Shiva are one. Therefore the
body of Kundalini Shakti consists of eight par'ts (Angas) —
namely, the six centres of psychic and physical force,
Shakti, and Sadashiva Her Lord.V In the Sahasrara
Kundali is merged in the Supreme Atrna-Shakti. Kuuda-
lini is the great Pranadevata which is Nadatma, and if
Prana is to be drawn up through the “ middle path,” the
Sushumna towards the Brahmarandhra, it must of necessity
pierce the lotuses or Chakras which bar the way therein.
Kundalini being Pranashakti, if She is moved Prana is
moved.

The Asanas, Kumbhakas, Bandhas, and Mudrus, are
.used to rouse Kundalini, so that the Prana withdrawn
from Ida and Pinggala may by the power of its Shakti,
after entry into the Sushumna or void (Shunya), go up-
wards towards the Brahmarandhra.* The Yogi is then
said to be free of the active Karma, and attains the
natural state.* The object, then, is to devitalise the rest
of the body by getting the Prana from Ida and Pinggahl
into Sushumna, which is for this reason regarded as the
most important of all the Nadis and " the delight of the
Yogi,” and then to make it ascend through the lotuses

1 Soe Lakslimidhara’a Comm, on v. 9, Inandalahari. Dindima on
V. :15, ih., says that the eight forms are the six (Mind to “ Earth ”),
the San and Moon.

2 Hathayogapradipiba, Ch. IV, y. 10.

® Ih., V. 11 ; upon what follows refer also to Ch. IV, ih., passim.

SIX CENTBES AND THE SERPENT POWER

■whicli “ bloom ” on its approach. The body on each side
of the spinal column is devitalised, and the whole current
of Prana thrown into that column. The Manonmani
state is said to arise with the Laya of Prana, for on this
ensues Laya of Manas. By daily practising restraint of
Prana in Sushumna, the natural effort of the Prana along
its ordinary channels is weakened and the mind is steadied.
For when there is movement (Parispanda) of Prana there
is movement of mind ; that is, it feeds upon the objects
(Vishaya) of the objective world.

But when Prana is in Sushumna “ there is neither day
nor night,” for “ Sushumna devours time When there
is movement of Prana (Pranaspanda), there is no cessation
of Vritti (mind functioning). And, as the Yogavashishtha
says, so long as Prana does not cease to exist there is
neither Tattvajnana nor destruction of Vasana, the subtle
cause of the will towards life which is the cause of rebirth.
For Tattvajnana, or supreme knowledge, is the destruction
of both Ohitta and Vasana.® Eestraint of breath also
renders the semen firm. For the semen fluctuates as long
as Prana does so. And when the semen is not steady the
mind is not steady.® The mind thus trained detaches
itself from the world. These various results are said to be
achieved by rousing Kundalini, and by the subsequent
processes for which She is the “ key.” “ As one forces
open a door with a key, so the Yogi should force open the
door of liberation by Kundalini.” ^ For it is She who
sleeps in the Muladhara, closing with Her mouth the
channel (Sushumna) by which ascent may be made to the

1 /6., vv. 16 and 17, Commentary thereto.

vv. 19 — 21, and Commentary (Tattvajnanang manonasho
vasanakshaya eva cha).

3 See ante, and Varaha-Up., Ch. Y.

4 lb., Ch. Ill, v. 106. See Bhutashnddhi Tantra cited under v. 50,

fOSt,

PIUC'THJB (yOCM : LAYA-KRAMA)

Brahmarandlira. This must be opened when the Prana
naturally enters into it. “ She, the young widow, is to be
despoiled forcibly.” It is prescribed that there shall be
daily practice, with a view to acquire power to manipiilate
this Shakti.^

It generally takes years from the commencement of
the- practice to lead the Shakti to the Sahasrara, though
in exceptional cases it may be done in a short time.® At
first She can only be led to a certain point, and then
gradually higher. He who has led Her to a particular
centre can reach the same centre more easily at the next
attempt. But to go higher requires further effort. At
each centre a particular kind of bliss (Ananda) is experienc-
ed, and particular powers, such as the conquest of the
elementary forms of sensible matter (Bhiita) are gained,
until at the Ajna centre the whole universe is experienced.
In the earlier stages, moreover, there is a natural tendency
of the Shakti to return. In the continued practice
facility and greater control are gained. Where the Niidis
ai-e pure it is easy to lead Her down even from the
Sahasrara. In the perfection of practice the 7ogi can
stay as long as he will in the Sahasrara, where the bliss
is the same as that experienced in liberation (subject in
this case to return), or he may transfer himself into
another body, a practice known to both the Indian
and Tibetan Tantras, in the latter of which it is called
Phowa.

The principle of all the methods to attain Samadhi
is to get the Prana out of Ida and Pinggala. When this
is achieved these Nadis become “ dead, because vitality
has gone out of them. The Prana then enters the
Sushumna, and, after piercing by the aid of Kundalini, the

1 lb.. Oh: III, V. 112 et seq.

^ As related by Yogi from a Girnar speaking of his own case.

30

THE SIX OENTEES AND* THE SEEPENT POWEE

six Chakras in the Sushumna becomes Laya or absorbed
in the Sahasrara. The means to this end, when operating
from the Miiladhara, seem to vary in detail, but embody a
common principle — namely, the forcing of Prana down-
ward and Apana upwards^ (that is, the reverse of their
natural directions) by the Jalandhara and Mula Banda, or
otherwise, when by their union the internal fire is increased.
The position is thus similar to a hollow tube in which a
piston is working at both ends without escape of the
central air, which thus becomes heated. Then the Serpent
Force Kundalini, aroused by the heat thus generated, is
aroused from Her potential state called “ sleep,” in which
She lies curled up; She then hisses and straightens Her-
self, and enters the Brahmadvara, or enters into the
Sushumna, when by further repeated efforts the Chakras
in the Sushumna are pierced. This is a gradual process
which is accompanied by special difficulties at the three
knots (G-ranthis) where Mayashakti is powerful, particularly
the abdominal knot, the piercing of which may, it is
admitted, involve considerable pain, physical disorder, and
even disease. As already explained, these “knots” are
the points at which converge the Chakras of each of the
three groups. Some of the above-mentioned processes
are described in the present work, to which we now
proceed, and which on this matter may be summarised as
follows ;

The preliminary verse (and in the reference to the
verses I include the Commentary) says that only those
who are acquainted with the Six Lotuses can deal with
them; and the first verse says that Yoga by means of
the method here described cannot be achieved without
knowledge of the Chakras and Hadis. The first verse
says that the Brahman will be realised. The next question
1 See Varaha Upanisliad, Ch. III.

PEAOTIOK (yoga: EArA-EBAMA) 235

is. How is this effected? The Commentator in the
preliminary verse says that the very merciful Purnananda
Svami, being wishful to rescue the world sunk in the mire
of misery, has undertaken the task firstly of instructing
it as regards the union of the Shakti Kundalini with the
vital centres, or Chakras, and secondly of imparting that
knowledge of Brahman (Tattvajnana) which leads to Libera-
tion. The former — that is, knowledge concerning the
Chakras, and so forth — is the “ first shoot ” of the Yoga
plant. Brahman, as the Commentator says, is the Supreme
Consciousness which aiuses upon the acquisition of know-
ledge. The first cause of such knowledge is an acquain-
tance with and practice of the Tantrik Yoga Sadhana,
which is concerned with tlie Chaki’as, Nadis, and Kunda-
lini ; the next cause is the realisation of that Sadhana by
the rousing of Kundalini ; and the final result is the
experiential realisation of the Brahman, which is the
effect of the action of Kundalini, who is the Shakti or
power of Will (Ichchha), Action (Kriya), and Knowledge
(Jnana), and exists in forms both subtle and gross. Mind
is as much one of the forms of Kundall as is that which is
called “ matter ”. Both are equally products of Prakriti-
shakti, which is a grosser form of the Nadamayl Shakti.
Kundall takes the form of the eight Prakritis.^ It is
necessary to bear this well in mind, or there is likely to be
uninstructed criticism of the system on the ground of its
supposed “ materialism,” and so forth. The Power which
is aroused is in itself (Svarupa) Consciousness, and when
aroused and taken to the upper cerebral centre is the
giver of true knowledge (Svarupa Jnana), which is the
Supreme Consciousness.

The arousing of this force is achieved both by will and
mind power (Yogabala), accompanied by suitable physical
1 Shandilya Upanishad, Oh. 1 ; Yogakundali-Up., Oh. I.

iiiii

alllB

SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

action. The Sadhaka ^ sits himself in the ^prescribed
Asana and steadies his mind by the Khechari Mudra, in
which concentration is between the eyebrows. Air is
inhaled (Piiraka) and then retained (Knmbhaka). The
upper part of the body is then contracted by Jalandhara-
bandha,^ so that the upward breath (Prana) is checked.
By this contraction the air so inhaled is prevented from
escape. The air so checked tends downw-ards. When
the Yogi feels that the air within him, from the throat to

the belly, is tending downwards through the channels in
the Nadis, the escape of Vayu as Apana is again checked
by the MCilabandha and Ashvini Mudra, in which the anal
muscle is contracted. The air (Vayu) thus_ stored becomes
an instrument by which, under the direction of mind anc
will, the potentialities of the vital force in the Miiladhara

may be forced to realisation. The process of mental con-
centration on this centre is described as follows: With
mental Japa of the Mantra prescribed and acquisition
thereby of Mantrashakti, Jivatma (individual Consciousness),

which is thought of as being in the shape of the tapering
flame of a lamp, is brought from the region of the heart
to the Muladhara. Jivatma here spoken of is the Atma of
the subtle body— that is, the Antahkarana or mind as
Buddhi (including therein Ahangkara) and Manas, the
faculties of sense (Indriya) or mind operating to receii e
impression through the sense organs, and Prana the
constituents of the second, third, and fourth bodily sheaths.
Following such concentration and impact of the retained
Vayu on this centre, the Vayu is again raised with the

1 The account here given follows and amplifies the text. See
Commentary to v. 50, post.

2 Vide ante and Dhyanahindu-Up.

® Accordinof to the "Vedantik definition ; or the five l^nmatras,
according to Sangkhya. The Chitta (mind) therefore enters^Sushumna
along with Prana (Togatattva-TJpanishad and Dhyanabmdu-Up.).

237

PRACTICE (yoga ; laya-kbama)

Bija “ Yang ”. A revolution fr'om left to right is given to
the “ air of Kama ” or Kandarpa (Kamavayu).' This is a
form of Ichchha Shakti. This, the pressure of the Prana
and Apana held in Kumbhaka, the natural heat arising
therefrom, and the Y^ahni Bija (Fire Mantra) Rang,
kindle the fire of Kama (Kamagni). The fire encircles
and arouses the slumbering serpent Kundalini, who is then,
in the language of the Shastra, seized with the passion of
“ desire ” for Her Spouse, the Parahangsah or Paramashiva.
Shakti thus rendered active is drawn to Shiva, as in the
case of ordinai 7 positive and negative electric charges,
which are themselves but other manifestations of the
universal polarity which affects the manifested world.

The Yogakundali Upanishad* states the folloiving
methods and others mentioned : When Prana is passing
through Ida, assume Padmasana and lengthen the Akasha
of 12 points by 4— that is, as in exhalation Prana goes out in
16 measures, and in inhalation comes in 12, inhale for 16 and
thus gain power. Then, holding the sides by each hand,
stir up Kundalitii with all one’s strength from right to left
fearlessly for 48 minutes. Draw the body up a little to let
Kundali enter Sushumna. The Yogi does a drawing-up
movement in which the shoulders are raised and dropped.
Prana enters of itself with Her. Compressing above and
expanding below, and vice versa, Prana rises. _

In the commentary® on verse 32 of the AnandalahaiT
it is said ; “ The sun and the moon, as they move always
in Devayana and Pitriyana (northern and southern orbs)
in the Macrocosm, are travelling (incessantly in the
Microcosm) by Ida and Pinggala day and night. The
moon, ever travelling by the left Nadi (Ida), bedews the

1 A form of Apana Vayu.

2 Ch. 1.

3 Anandalaharl, ed. Pandit R. Ananta Shastri, pp. 69, 70.

238

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

whole system with her hectar. The sun, travelling by
the right Nadi (Pinggala), dries the system (thus moist-
ened by nectar). When the sun and the moon meet at
Miiladhara, that day is called Amavasya (new moon day.)
... The Kundali also sleeps in Adharakunda. . . . When
a Yogi whose mind is under control is able to confine
the moon in her own place, as also the sun, then the moon
and sun become confined, and consequently the moon
cannot shed its nectar nor the sun di} it. hi ext, ^
the place of nectar becomes dried by the fire with the
help of Vayu, then the Kundali wakes up for want of food

and hisses like a serpent. Afterwards, breaking through

, n f.lAPc

the three knots. She runs to Sahasrara and bites tie

Chandra (moon), which is in the middle of the same. ^ l ben
the nectar begins to flow, and wets the (other) Chandra
Mandala in Ajnachakra. From the latter the whole body
becomes bedewed with nectar. Afterwards the fifteen
eternal Kalas (parts) of Chandra (moon) in Ajna go to
Vishuddhi and move thereon. The Chandra Mandala in
Sahasrara is also called Baindava. One Kala remains
there always. That Kala is nothing but Chit Itself,
which is also called Atman. We call Her Tripurasundari.
It is understood by this that, in order to rouse the Kun-
dali, one should practise in the lunar fortnight alone, and

not in the solar one.” .

Kundalini is led upwards “ as a rider guides trained

mare by the reins,” through the aperture hitherto closed
by Her own coils, but now open, within the entrance
of the Chitrini Nadi. She then pierces, in that Nadi, each
of the lotuses, which turn their heads upwards as She
passes through them. As Kundalini united with the
subtle Jivatma passes through each of these lotuses. She
absorbs into Herself the regnant Tattvas of each of these
centres, and all that has been above described to be in

PRACTICK (yoga : laya-eeama)

239

tlaein. As tbe ascent is made, eacli of the grosser Tattvas
enters itito the Laya state, and is replaced by the energy
of Kundalini, which after the passage of the Vishuddha
Chakra, replaces them all. The senses which opei’ate in
association with these grosser Tattvas are merged in Her,
who then absorbs into Herself the subtle Tattvas of the
Ajna. Kundalini Herself takes on a different aspect as
She ascends the three planes, and unites with each of
the Lingas in that form of Hers which is appropriate to
such union. For whereas in the Muladhara She is the
Shakti of all in their gross or physical manifested state
(Virat), at the stage of Ajna, She is tbe Shakti of the mental
and psychic or subtle body (Hiranyagarbha), and in the
region of the Sahasrara She is the Shakti of the spiritual
plane (Ishvara), which, though itself in its Brahman
aspect undifferentiated, contains in its Power-aspect
all lower planes in a concealed potential state. The Maya
Tantra (see v. 51 , says that the four sound-produc-

ing Shaktis— namely, Para, Pashyanti, Madhyama, and
Vaikhari— are -Kundali Herself (Kundalinyabhedarupa).
Hence, when Kundali starts to go to Sahasrara, She in
Her form as Vaikhari bewitches Svayarabhu Linga ; She
then similarly bewitches Bana Linga in the heart as
Madhyama and Itara Linga in the eyebrows as Pash-
yanti, Tiien, when She reaches the stage of Parabindu,
She attains the state of Para (Parabliava).

The upward movement is from the gross to the more
subtle, and the order of dissolution of the Tattvas is as
follows : Prithivi with the Indriyas (smell and feet), the
latter of which have Prithivi (the earth as ground) as
their support, is dissolved into Gandha Tattva, or Tan-
, matra of smell, which is in the Muladahra ; Gandha Tattva
is then taken to the Svadhishthana, and it, Ap, and its
connected Indriyas (taste and hands), are dissoHed in

;..p,

ku

■■I

P

PP

Bli

Rasa (Taste) Tanmatra ; the latter is taken to the Mam-
pura and there Rasa Tattya, Tejas, and its connected
Indriyas (sight and anus), are dissolved into Riipa (Sight)
Taninatra; then the latter is taken into the Anahata,.
and it, Vayu, and the connected Indriyas (touch and
penis), are dissolved in Sparsha (Touch) Tanmatra ; the
latter is taken to the Vishuddha, and there it, Akasha,
and associated Indriyas (hearing and mouth), are dissolved
in the Shabda (Sound) Tanmatra ; the latter is then taken
to the Aina, and, there and beyond, it and Manas are
dissolved in Mahat, Mahat in Sukshma Prakriti, and the
latter is united with Parabindu in the Sahasrara. In the
case of the latter merger there are various stages which are
mentioned in the text (v. 52), as of Nada into Nadanta,
Xadanta into Vyapika, Vyapika into Samani, Samani into
Unmani, and the latter into, Vishnuvaktra or Pungbindu,
which is also Paramashiva. When all the letters have
been thus dissolved, all the six Chakras ai’e dissolved as
the petals of the lotuses bear the letters.

On this upward movement, Brahma, Savitri, Dakini,
the Devas, Matrikas, and Vrittis, of the Miiladhara, are
absorbed in Kundalini, as is also the Mahimandala or
Prithivi, and the' Prithivl Blja “Lang” into which it
passes. For these Bijas, or sound powers, express the
subtle Mantra aspect of that which is dissolved in theim
Thus “ earth ” springs from and is dissolved in its seed
(Blja), Avhich is that particular aspect of the creative con-
sciousness which propelled it. Tho uttered Mantra
(Vaikhari Shabda) or “ Lang ” is the expression in gross
sound of that.

When the Devi leaves the Muladhara, that lotus, which
by reason of the awakening of Kundalini and the vivifying
intensity of the Pranik current had opened and turned its
flower upwards, again closes and hangs its head downwards.

, . PEAOTIGE (yoga : LATi-KBAMA) 241

As Kundalini readies tbe SvadhislitliaDia, that lotus opens
out and lifts its flower upwards. Upon Her entrance,
Vishnu, Lakshmi, Sarasvatl, Eakini, Matrikas and Vritti,
Vaikunthadhama, Goloka, and the Deva and Devi residing,
therein, are dissolved in the body of Kundalini. The
Prithivi or Earth Bija ” Lang ” is dissolved in the Tattva
water, and water converted into its Bija “ Vang ” remains
in the body of Kundalini. When the Devi reaches the
Manipura Chakra or Brahmagranthi, all that is in that
Chakra merges in Her. The Varuna Bija “Vang” is
dissolved in fire, which remains in Her body as the Bija
“ Rang ”. The Shakti next reaches the Anahata Chakra,
which is known as the Knot of Vishnu (Vishnugranthi),
where also all which is therein is merged in Her. The
Bija of Fire “ Rang ” is sublimed in aii*, and air converted
into its Bija “ Yang ” is absorbed in Kundalini. She then
ascends to the abode of Bharati or Sarasvati, the Vishuddha
Chakra, Upon Her entrance, Arddhanarishvara Shiva,
Shakini, the 16 vowels. Mantra, etc., are dissolved in Her.
The Bija of Air “ Yang ” is dissolved in ether, which, itself
being transformed into the Bija “ Hang,” is merged in the
body of Kundalini. Piercing the concealed Lalana Chakra,
the Devi reaches the Ajna known as the “ Knot of Rudra
(Rudragranthi), where Paramashiva, Siddhakali, theDevas,

and all else therein, are dissolved in Her. At length the
Bija of Vyoma (ether) or “ Hang ” is absorbed into the
subtle Tattvas of the Ajna, and then into the Devi. After
passing through the Rudragranthi, Kundalini unites with
Paramashiva, As She piuceeds upwards from the two-
petalled lotus, the Niralambapui’i, Pranava, Nada, etc., are
merged in the Devi. She has thus in Her progress upwards
absorbed in Herself the twenty-three Tattvas, commencing
with the gross elements, and then remaining Herself Shakti,
the cause of all Shaktis, unites with Paramashiva.

;

if

f- ■

■

in :

H

■|i

pt’.

31

242 THE SIX CENTRES AND THE ■ SERPENT POWER ■ .

By tliis method of menial concentration, aided by the

physical and other processes described, the gross is absorbed
into the subtle, each dissolving into its immediate catise and
all into the Chidatma or the Atma 'which is Chit. In
language borrowed from the world of human passion, which
is itself but a gross reflection on our physical plane of
corresponding, though more subtle, supersensual activities
and bliss, the Shakti Kundalini who has been seized by
rlpsire for Her Lord is said to make swift way to him, and,
kissing the Lotus mouth of Shiva, enjoys him (S.N., v. 51).
By the term Samarasya is meant the sense of enjoyment

arising from the union (Samarasya) of male and female.

This the most intense form of physical delight symbolises
the Supreme Bliss arising from the union of Shiva and
Shakti in the spiritual plane upon which it is enactec . o
Daksha, the Dharmashastrakara, says : “The Brahmaiys
to be known by Itself alone, and to know It is as the bliss
of knowing a virgin.” ^ Similarly, the Sadhaka in Laya-
siddhiyoga, thinking of himself as Shakti and the Para-
matma as Purusha, feels himself in union (Sanggama) with
Shiva, and enjoys with him the bliss which is Shringararasa,
the first of the nine Basa, or the love sentiment and bliss.
This Adirasa (Shringara) which is aroused by Sattvaguna®
is impartite (Akhanda), self-illuminating (Svaprakasha)
bliss (Ananda) whose substance is Chit (Ohinmaya).® It
is so intense and all-exclusive as to render the lover

1 Svasangvedyam etad bralima kumari-stri-sukhang yatha, cited
in Commentary to t. 15 of Gh. I of the Hathayogapradipika

2 So all tlie eight Bhavas commencing -with Sveda, btambha, inciua-

in- thr^ell-known Romancha or thrill in which the hair stands on end
(Rilaka), the choking voice (Svarahhanga), f

■fnrfh are all Sattvik. The objection of an Indian friend, that these
Bhavas could not be Sattvik inasmuch as Sattva was “ spiritiml,' is an
apt instance of the disassooiation from Indian thought effected by

■ English education. .

3 It is not a Tamasik thing such as dream or madness, etc.

: PBAGTIOB (yoga : LAYA^IvEAMA)

unconscious of all Other objects of knowledge (Vedyantnra-
sparsba-sbunyah), and the own brother^ of Brabma-bliss
fBrabmasTadasabodara).^ But as the Brabma-bliss is

known only to the Yogi, so, as the Alangkara Shastra last
cited observes, even the true love-bliss of the mortal work
“ is known to a few knowers only ” (Jneyah kaisbcbit
pramatribbih), such as poets and others. Sexual as well
as other forms of love are reflections or fragments of the

Brahman-bliss. , mi • •

This union of the Shakti Kundalini with Shiva in the
bodv of the Sadhaka is that coition {Maithuna) of the
Sattvika Panchatattva which the Yogini Tantra says is
“ the best of all unions for those ivho have already con-
trolled their passions,” and are thus Yati.=* O? this the
Brihat Shrikrama {vide S.N., y. post) says ley
with the eye of knowledge see the stainless Kala, unite
with Chidananda on Nada. He is the MahMeva, white
like a pure crystal, and is the effulgent Cause (Vimbarupa-
nidana), and She is the lovely woman of beauteous hmbs
which are listless by reason of Her great passion. Un
their union nectar (Amrita) flows, which in ambrosia
stream runs from the Brahmarandhra to the Muladhara,
flooding the Kshudrabrahmanda, or microcosm, an
satisfying the Devatas of its Chakras. It is then that the
Sadhaka, forgetful of all in this world, is immersed in
ineffable bliss. Refreshment, increased power and en3oy-
ment, follows upon each visit to the Well of Life. ^

In the Chintamanistava, attributed to Shri Shangkara-
charyya, it is said : “ This family woman {i.e., Kundahm),

1 Sahodara-that is, brothers born of the

is the reflection (faint comparatively though it be) of Brah .

2 Sahitya Darpana, Oli. HI*

3 Oh- '^’'1 '

Sahasraropari bindau kundalya melanam .

Maithunang paramang dravyang yatinam parikirtitam.

,, , , I S.AI Srf I'-'A ■ .A i ; i ? '

1

:

Li.

■1

llil

tiil

p

ii

iil

llpl

ill

244

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

entering the royal road (ie., Snshumna), taking rest at
intervals in the sacred places {i.e.. Chakras), embraces the
Supreme Husband (Parashiva) and makes nectar to flow
(i.e., from the Sahasrara).”

The Gruru’s instructions are to go above the Ajnu
Chakra, but no special directions are given : for after this
Chakra has been pierced, the Sadhaka can, and indeed
must, reach the Brahmasthana, or abode of Brahman,
unaided by his own effort. Above the Ajna the relation*
ship of Guru and Shishya (Master and disciple) ceases.
Kundalini having pierced the fourteen “Knots (Gran-
this) — viz,, three Lingas, six Chakras, and the five Shivas
which they contain, and then Herself drunk of the nectar
which issues from Parashiva, returns along the path
whence She came to Her own abode (Muladhara).^ As
She returns She pours from Herself into the Chakras all
that She had previously absorbed therefrom. In other
words, as Her passage upwards was Layakrama, causing
all things in the Chakras to pass into the Laya state (dis-
solution), so Her retuim is Srishtikrama, as She re-
creates ” or makes them manifest. In this manner She
again reaches the Muladhara, when all that has been
already described to be in the Chakras appears in the
positions which they occupied before Her awakening,
In fact, the descending Jivatma makes for himself the
idea of that separated multiple and individualised world
which passed from him as he ascended to and became one
with the Cause. She as Consciousness absorbs what She as
conscious Power projected. In short, the return of
Kundalini is the setting again of the Jivatma in the phe-
nomenal world of the lowest plane of being after he had
been raised therefrom in a state of ecstasis, or Samadhi.
The Yogi thus knows (because he experiences) the nature
1 As to the Samaya practice, v. post, p. 250 ei seq.

245

PEAOTIOE (yoga : laya-keama)

and state of Spirit and its pathway to and from the Mayik
and embodied world. In this Yoga there is a gradual
process of involution of the gross world with its elements
into its Cause. Each gross element (Mahabhuta), together
with the subtle element (Tanmatra) from which it pro-
ceeds and the connected organ of sense (Indriya), is dis-
solved into the next above it until the last element, ether,

with the Tanmatra sound and Manas, aire dissolved in
Egoism (Ahangkara), of which they are Viki’itis. Ahang-
kara is merged in Mahat, the first manifestation of creative
ideation, and the latter into Bindu, which is the Supreme
Being, Consciousness, and Bliss of the Brahman. Kundali
when aroused is felt as intense heat. As Kundalini
ascends, the lower limbs become as inert and cold as a

corpse; so also does every part of the body when She has

passed through and leaves it. This is due to the fact that
She as the Power which supports the body is leaving Her
centre. On the contrary, the upper part of the head
becomes “ lustrous,” by which is not meant any external
lustre (Prabha), but brightness, warmth, and animation.
When the Yoga is complete, the Yogi sits rigid in the
posture selected, and the only trace of warmth to be found
in the whole body is at the crown of the head, where the
Shakti is united with Shiva. • Those, therefore, who are
sceptical can easily verify the facts should they be fortu-
nate enough to find a successful Yogi who will let them see
him at work. They may observe his ecstasis and the
coldness of the body, which is not present in the case of
what is called the Dhyana Yogi, or a Yogi operating by
meditation only, and not rousing Kundalini. This cold is
an external and easily perceptible sign. Its progression
may be seen, obviously denoting the passing away of
something which supplied the -previous heat. The body
seems lifeless, indicating that its supporting power has

246 THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

(tliougli not entirely) left it. The downward return of the
Shakti thus moved is, on the other hand, indicated by tlie
reappearance of warmth, vitality, and the normal con-
sciousness. The return process is one of evolution from
the highest state of attainment to tlie point of departure.

Though not dealt with in this work, reference may
here be made to the Sadhana accompanying the return of
Kundalinl to Her resting-place in -the ritual practice
called Bhiitashuddhi, Avhere the ascent and descent are
imagined only.

The Sadhaka, thinking of the Vayu Bija ” Yang ” as
being in the left nostril, inhales througli Ida, making Japa
of the Bija sixteen times. Then, closing both nosti'ils, he
makes Japa of the Bija sixty-four times. He then thinks
of the ” black man of sin ” (Papapurusha in the left ■
cavity of the abdomen as being dried up (by the air),
and so thinking he exhales through the right nostril
Pinggala, making Japa of the Bija thirty-two times.
The Sadhaka then, meditating upon the red-coloured
Bija “ Bang ” in the Manipura, inhales, making sixteen
Japa of the Bija, and then closes the nostrils, making
sixteen Japa. Whilst making Japa he thinks that the
body of the “ man of sin ” is being burnt and reduced
to ashes (by the fire). He then inhales through the right

1 See Mahanirvana Tantra Ullasa, Oh. V, vv. 98,99, where the
Bhutashuddhi process is shortly described. Also Devi-Bhagavata,
cited, post,

^ The worse or weaker side.

247

PBAOTIOE (yoga ; LAYA-KRAMa)

celestial body is being formed by the nectar (composed of
all the Matrika-varna, or sound-powers, embodied in their
Vaikhari form as lettered sound) dropping from the
“Moon.” In a similar way with the Bija of water “Vang”
the formation of the body is continued, and with the Bija
“ Lang ” of the cohesive Prithivi Tattva it is completed
and strengthened. Lastly, with the Mantra “ So’ham ”
(“ He l am ) the Sadhaka leads the Jivatma into its place
in the heart. Some forms of meditation are given in v. 51 .

Kundali does not at first stay long in Sahasrara. The
length of stay depends on the strength of the Yogi’s
practice. There is then a natural tendency on the part of
Kundali to return. The Yogi will use all effort at his
disposal to retain Her above, for the longer this is done
the nearer approach is made to the time when She can be
in a permanent manner retained there.^ For it is to be
obsei’ved that liberation is not gained by merely leading
Kundali to the Sahasrara, and of course still less is it
gained by stirring it up in the Miiladhara or fixing it in
any of the lower centres. Liberation is gained only when
Kundali takes up Her permanent abode in the Sahasrara,
so that She only returns by the will of the Sadhaka. It
is said that after staying in Sahasrara for a time, some
Yogins lead the Kundalini back to Hridaya (heart), and
worship her there. This is done by those who are unable
to stay long in Sahasrara. If they take the Kundalini
lower than Hridaya— i.e., worship her in the three Chakras
below Anahata— they no longer, it is said, belong to the
Samaya group.^

1 Great power (Siddhi) is had by the man who can keep Knndali
Shakti in the Sahasrara three days and three nights.

2 Lakshmidhara, cited by Ananta Shastri, op. cit., p. 71. What this
means is more than I can say, as I am not familiar with the views of
the school which Lakshmidhara (cited also post) quotes.

MS THE SIX OBNTBES AND THE SERPENT POWEE

Thus, when by the preliminary SMbana purity of
physical and mental function is gained, the Sadhaka learns
how to open the entrance of the Sushumna, which is
ordinarily closed at the base. This is the meaning of the
statement that the Serpent with its coil closes the gate of
Brahma. At the base of the Sushumna Nadi and in the
Adhara lotus the Shakti Kundalini lies slumbering coiled
round the Linga, the Shiva or Purusha aspect in that
centre of the Shabdabrahman, of which She is the Prakriti
aspect. Kundali in the form of Her creative emanations
as mind and matter is the whole moving body, but She
Herself exists at the Muladhai’a or earth centre as a gross
aspect of Shakti in its sleeping form. This is the normal
abode of the Shakti who is the Shabdabrahman Itself. For
having so completely manifested Herself She rests or
sleeps in what is her grossest and concluding manifestation.
The residual vital force in this centre there exists in a
latent and ' potential state. If its aid- towards Yoga is
sought, the first process must be that by which the Serpent
is aroused from its slumber. In other words, this force is
raised from its latent potential state to one of activity, and
there reunited with Itself in its other aspect as the Spiritual
Light which shines ^ in the cerebral centre.

Kundali Shakti is Obit, or Consciousness, in its
creative aspect as Power. As Shakti it is through Her
activity that the world and all beings therein exist.
Prakriti Shakti is in the Muladhara in a state of sleep
(Prasupta) — that is, latent activity looking outwards
(Vahirmu’khi). It is because She is in this state of latent
activity that through Her all the outer material world
functions of life are being performed by man. And it is
for this reason that man is engrossed in the world, and

1 For tills reason the Sahasrara is also called Bhaloka (from the
root hha, “ to shine

249

^ Shandilja TJpanisliad, Ob. I,

2 Knlarnava Tantra, Cb, Y.
destroyed there.

]\IaridaIabralii]Qai)a-Up, Tanias is

250

sucli Jiva destroyed, and Liberation (Mnkti) is obtained.
Under, however, the influence of the Cosmic Shakti, the
universe continues for those who are not liberated until the
great Dissolution (Mahapralaya), at the close of which the
universe again evolves into those Jivas whose Karma has
not been exhausted, and who have therefore not been
liberated. The rousing and stirring iip of Kundali or
Kiindali Yoga is thus a form of that merger of the individ-
ual into the universal consciousness which is the end of
every system of Indian Yoga.

Pandit R. Ananta Shastri says ^ that “ The Samaya
method of worshipping Shakti, called the Samayaohara, ^
is dealt with in five treatises whose reputed authors are the
great sages Sanaka, Sananda, Sanatkumara, Vashishtha,
and Shuka. The following is a siimmary of the teachings
contained in these Samaya Agamas, each of which goes
after the name of its author :

“ The Shakti or energy, the development of which is
the subject of these treatises, is called the Kundalini. The
place where it resides is called the Muladhara (original
abode). By a successful development and working of this
Shakti, the liberation of the soul is attained. In the
ordinary condition Kundalini sleeps quietly at the Mula-
dhara. The first purpose of the practitioners is to
awaken this sleeping snake, and this is effected in two
ways :

“ (1) By Tapas. Here Tapas refers to the process of
Pranayama, which means the regulation of the breath and

1 Anandalahari, p. 8. The passage is given by way of citation only.
There are statements in it which I have not verified, and some from
which I dissent, and some which 1 do not understand.

^ This term is apparently of varying significance. It seems to be
used here in a sense opposed to, some forms at least of, Kulachara, and
is yet used in the Kaula Bhastras to denote their worship with the
Panohatattva.

THE SIX OENTBES ' THE SEEPIHT POWEB

PRACTICE (yoga: laya-rbama) 251

holding it for stated periods of time. This is also the
course adrocated by the Yoga Shastras.

“ (2) By Mantras. The pupil is initiated in the chant-
ing of certain Mantras which he has to repeat a fixed
number of times at particular hours of the day, all the while
having before his mind’s eye the figure of the Murti or Grod
connoted by the Mantra he chants. The most important
of these Mantras is said to be the Panchadashi.

“ When it is thus roused up, the Kundalini ascends
from (1) Miiladhara, where it was sleeping, to the next
higher centre, called the (2) Svadhishthana (own place).
Thence with great effort this Shakti is carried to the
following centres in regular ascending order : (3) Manipura
(full of rays) ; (4) Anahata (sound, not emanating from the
collision of bodies) — the Shakti here is transformed into
sound ; (5) Vishuddhi (place of purity) — here it becomes a
pure Sattvic element ; and (6) Ajna (a-jna, a little know-
ledge). At this stage the practitioner may be said to have
so far been successful in securing a command over this
Shakti, which now appears to him, though only for a
moment, in the form of a sharp flash of lightning.

“ The passage of the Kundalini from the Muladhara
through the above centres of energy up to Ajna constitutes
the first part of the ascent. The disciple who takes to
this practice has to undergo a course of Upasana (contem-
plation and worship of the prescribed Deity) and Mantra
Japa. (chanting of incantations),^ into which he will be
initiated by his (xuru (teacher and guide). The six centres
of energy above enumerated from Muladhara to Ajna,
joined together by imaginary; straight lines, form a

\ la this and other citations from the Pandit the English equivalents
of Sanskrit terms are incorrect, as might he expected in one to whom
English is not his own tongu e. Japa is not chanting In fact, in
Upangshu Japa nothing is heard, and ‘‘ incantations ” provoke another
set of ideas to the English mind.

w.

THJl SIX CENTBES AND THE SERPENT POWER

double-faced triangle — a hexagon /the six -pointed star —
which is called the Shrichakra in Sanskrit. The Anahata
centre (the heart) is the critical point in the course of this
ascent, and hence much is found written in the Agamas
about this centre.

“ These centres in the body of man (Pindanda) have
their correspondence in the cosmic planes, and each of
these has its own quality, or Guna, and a Presiding Deity.
When the disciple ascends centre by centre, he passes
through the corresponding Lokas, or cosmic planes. The
following table gives the correspondences, Guna, and
Presiding Deity :

“If one should die after attaining any of these stages,
he is born again having all the advantages of the stages
gained; thus, a man dies after leading the Shakti to the
Anahata : in his next birth he begins where he has last left,
and leads the Shakti orwards from the Anahata.

“ This aspiration to unify one’s soul with the Eternal
One has been held by some, to be an attempt of a Tamasa
origin to rid itself Of all Tamas and Rajas in it. There-
fore the aspirant in the first and second stages is said to
have, more Tamas than in the succeeding stages, and to be

■No,

Psychic Oektee in j
Man’s Body ' , . j

Loka, oh Cosmic
Plane

Gcna, oh I
Quality |

I ' ■ 1

Presiding

Deity

1

Muladhara at the stage
when Shakti is roused
up

Bhuvarlokay

c

Tamas

Agni (Fire)

2/

S vadhi shth ana

Svarloka )

3

4

Manipura

Anahata

Maharloka )
Janaloka j

Rajas

Sun

5

6

Yishuddhi

Ajna

Tapoloka 1
Satyaloka J

Sattva

Moon

PBACTIGE (toga : laya-keama) 253

therefore in the Tamasic stage, which is presided over by
Agni. In the next two stages he is similarly said to be in
the Raj asio stage, presided over by the Sun. In the next
two he is in the Sattvic stage, presided over by the Moon,
the Deity which is assigned a higher plane than the Sun
and Agni. But it is to be noticed that the aspirant does
not get at pure Sattva until he passes on to the Sahasrara,
and that Tamas, Rajas, and Sattva, referred to in the
above table, ai’e but relative, and bear no comparison with
their common acceptation.

“ Kundalini is the grossest form of the Chit, the
twenty-fourth Tattva, which lives in the Muladhara ; later
on we shall have to speak of it in detail in our treatment
of the second part of the aspirant’s ascent. This Kunda-
iini, as soon as it is awakened, is in the Kumari (girl) stage.
On reaching the Anahata, it attains the Yoshit stage
(womanhood). Hence the indication that it is the most
difficult and important step in the ascent. The next stage
is in the Sahasrara, -of which we shall speak hereafter, and
the Shakti in that stage is called Pativrata (devoted to
husband). See Taittiriyaranyaka, 1.27. 12.

“ The second part of the ascent of Kundalini consists
of only one step ; the Shakti should be taken into the
Sahasrara from the Ajna, where we left her. The Sahas-
rara (lit., a thousand-petalled lotus) forms in itself a
Shrichakra. The description of this place in Sanskrit is
too difficult to be rendered satisfactorily into English, In
the Sahasrara there is a certain place of lustre known as
Chandra Loka (a world of nectar). In this place live in
union the Sat (Sadashiva) and the Chit, the twenty-fifth
and the twenty-fourth Tattvas. The Chit, or Shuddha
Vidya, is also called Sadakhya, the 16th Kala of the moon.
These two Tattvas are always in union, and this union
itself is taken to be the twenty-sixth Tattva. ,_ ItJs this

THE SIX OENTSIS AND THE SERPENT POWER

HDion of Sat and Obit that is tbe goal of tbe aspirant.
The l^iradalini which has been led all the way to the
Sahasrara should be merged into this union ; this is the
end of the aspirant’s journey ; he now enjoys beatitude
itself (Paramananda).

“ But this Kundalini does not stay in the Sahasrara
for a long time. It always tends to return, and does return
to its original position. The process should again and
again be repeated by the aspirant several times, until the
•Shakti makes a permanent stay with her Pati (husband) —
namely, Sadashiva — or until the union of Sadashiva and
Chit is complete, and becomes Pativrata, as already
mentioned. The aspirant is then a Jivan-mukta, or pure
Sattva. He is not conscious of this material limitation
of the soul. He is all joy, and is the Eternal itself. See
vv. 9 and 10. So much of Samayachara.

“ Now to the other methods of Shakta worship ; the
Kaulas worship the Kundalini without rousing her fi’om
her sleep ^ in the Muladhara, which, is called Kula ; and
hence Kaulas (Sans. Ku=earth, Prithivi ; so Muladhara).
Beyond the Muladhara they do not rise ; they follow the
Vamachara or black magio,^ and gain their temporal

PEAOTiaE (yoga : laya-krama)

255

objects and enjoy ; they are not liberated from birth and
death; they do not go beyond this earth. Nay, more,
the Eaulas are now so far degraded that they have left
off altogether the worship of the Kundalini in the Mula-
dhara, and have betaken themselves to practices most
inhuman, which are far from being divine.^ The Mishras
are far above the Kaulas. They perform all Karmas, worship
the Devi or Shakti in the elements, such as the sun, air,
etc., and do Upasana with Yantras made of gold or other
metals. They worship the Kundalini, awake her, and
attempt to lead her on. Some of the Mishra worshippei-s
rise even as far as the Anahata.

“We learn from the Commentators that this whole
subject of Shakti- worship is treated of in detail in the
* Taittariya Aranyaka ’ (1st chapter). Some of them even
quote from that ‘ Aranyaka ’ in support of their explanations.
This subject is vast and a very difficult one. It is not
possible for one to go into the intricacies of the subject

should always be tested. This is not to say that some practices may be
blameworthy.

1 The Pandit here apparently adopts the opinion of Lakshmidhara,
a follower of the so-called Samaya school, and an opponent of the
Kaulas, If fas is probably the case) “inhuman” is the Pandit’s
phraseology it is inapt. The practices apparently referred to — namely,
the worship, so little understood, with wine, meat, woman — is, in part, a
continuance of the most ancient Vaidik usages in differing forms (see
my “Shakti and Shakta”). It may he admitted that some forms of
Sadhana are dangerous or blameworthy, and that some details of the
ritual will be generally considered repellent, as will also be (1 may add
byway of example) the Vaidik “horse-sacrifice ” (Ashvamedha) — at
any rate, as Mahidhara and others interpret it. The worst charge which
can be successfully maintained against some of the lower order of the
class referred to is black magic proper, through improper use of the
Shatkarma. As Shiva in the Kularnava Samhita (not the generally
known Tantra) says, “ In Kali all men are lustful for money, and will
even destroy beings to gain it. But I will destroy all such as does fire
dry grass.” The abuses of some of the followers are not to be laid to
the charge of the true Shastra. It must also not he forgotten that there
have been different communities with very differing views and practice,
e.g,^ a Brahma Kaula and a Kapalika,

256 THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

imless one be a great Guru of vast learniug and much
personal experience great works have been written on
even single points in the ascent of the aspirant up the
psychic centres.”*^

“ The followers of the Sainaya group are prohibited from
worshipping Devi in the Macrocosm. They should worship
Her in any of the Chakras in the human body, choosing
that centre which their practice and ability permits them-
to reach. They should contemplate on Devi and Her Lord
Shiva as (1) having the same abode (Adhishthanasamya),.
(2) occupying the same position (Avasthanasamya), (3)
performing the same functions (Anushthanasamya), (4)
having the same form (Riipa), and (5) as having the same
name (Alama). Thus, in worshipping Devi in the Adhara-
chakra, Shiva and Shakti (1) have Muladhara for their
seat, (2) both of them occupy the position of dancers, (3)
both together perform the function of creating the universe,
(4) both are red in colour, (5) Shiva is called Bhairava, and
Shakti Bhaii’avi.

“ Similarly for other Chakras mentioned in the
preceding Shlokas. This is the way how beginners have to
practise. Advanced students worship Devi in the Sahasra-
ra, and not in the lower centres. How is the worship to be
carried on in Sahasrara ?

“ The worshipper should fix his attention on Baindava,
which is the locality where the ever-existing 26th Tattva —
the union of Shiva and Shakti — resides. It lies above all the
25 Tattvas, and is situated in Chandramandala (the sphere
of the moon) in Sahasrara. He should contemplate on the
said union and identify himself with it. This shows that
those who carry on Bahya Puja, or worship in the external
world, do not belong to the Samaya School. As regards

3- Here I wholeheartedly agree with my fidend the Pandit.

^ See his edition, Anandalahari, pp. 8 — 13.

257

PEACTIOE (yoga: laya-keama) 257

the identification of oneself with the union of Shiva and
Shakti at Baindava just spoken of, there are two ways of
realising it ; one is known as the fourfold path, and the
other the sixfold path. These should be learnt from the
Guru.

** -A novitiate in the Samaya school has to go through
the following course :

“(1) He should cherish the utmost regard for and
confidence in his Guru. (2) He should receive the Pan-
chadashi Mantra from his Guru, and, chant the same
according to instructions, with a knowledge of its seer
(Eishi), metre (Chhandas), and the Deity (Devata).^
(3) On the eighth day in the bright fortnight of Ashva-
yuja month, Mahanavami, he should at midnight pros-
‘trate himself at his Guru’s feet, when the latter will be
pleased to initiate him in some Mantra and the real nature
of the six Chakras and of the sixfold path of identification.

“ After he is thus qualified. Lord Mahadeva* gives him
the knowledge or capacity to see his inner soul.

Then the Kundalini awakes, and, going up suddenly to
Manipiira, becomes visible to the devotee-practitioner.
Thence he has to take Her slowly to the higher Chakras
one after another, and there performs the prescribed
worship, and She will appear to him more and more
clearly. When the Ijnachakra is crossed, the Kundalini
quickly darts away like a flash of lightning to Sahasrara,

258 THE SIX OBNTBBS AND THE SESPBNT POWEE

“ The practitioner should now wait outside the veil*
until Kundalini returns to Her own place, and on Her
return continue the process until She is joined for ever
with Sadashiva in the Sahasrara, and never returns.

“The process heretofore described and others of a
similar nature are always kept secret ; yet the commen-
tator says he has out of compassion towards his disciples
given here an outline of the method.

“ Even in the mere expectation of the return of Kunda-
lini from Sahasara, the aspirant feels Brahmananda
(Brahma bliss). He who has once taken Kundalini to
Sahasrara is led to desire nothing but Moksha (Liberation),
if he has no other expectation. Even if any of the Samaya
practitioners have some worldly expectations, they must
still worship in the microcosm only.

“ ‘ Subhagodaya ’ and other famous works on Shri-
vidya say that the practitioner should concentrate his mind
on Devi who resides in Siiryamandala (the sun’s disc), and
so on. This statement is not at variance with the teaching
contained in this book, for the Siiryamandala referred to
applies to the Pindanda (microcosm), and not to Brahmanda
(macrocosm). Similarly, all the verses advocating outer
worship are to be applied to the corresponding objects in
the Pindanda.”®

The last, highest and most difficult form of Yoga is
Eaja Yoga. By means of Mantra, Hatha and Laya Yoga
the practitioner by gradual attainment of purity becomes
fit for Savikalpa Samadhi. It is through Eaja Yoga alone
that he can attain to Nirvikalpa Samadhi. The former

1 This, as well as some other details of this description, I do not
follow. Who is waiting outside the veil ? The Jiva is, on the case
stated, within, if there he a veil, and what is it ?

^ Comm, on Anandalahari, ed* hy Pandit E. Ananta Shastri, p. 85
et seq.^ who adds : ‘‘ For full particulars of these principles vide ‘Shuka
Samhita,’ one of the hve Samhitas of the Samaya group.”

259

PBACTIOB (toga : lata-kbama) 259

Samadhi or Ecstasy is one in wliicla unless it perfects into
the second kind there is a return to the world audits
experience. This is not so in the Samadhi of Eaja Yoga
in which there is not the slightest seed of attachment to
the world and in which therefore there is no return thereto
but eternal unity with Brahman. The first three kinds of
Yoga prepare the way for the fourth.^ In the Samadhi of
Mantra Yoga the state of Mahabhava is attained marked
by immobility and speechlessness. In the SamMhi of
Hatha Yoga respiration ceases and to outward experience
the Yogi is without sign of animation and like a corpse.
In the Samadhi of Laya Yoga described in this
book the Yogi has no outer consciousness and is
also immersed in the Ocean of Bliss. The Samadhi of
Raja Yoga is complete (Ohit-svarupa-bhava) and final
(Hirvikalpa) Liberation.^ There are, it is said, four states of
detachment (Vairagy a) from the world® corresponding to the
four Yogas, the mildest form of Vairagya being the mark
ef the first or Mantra Yoga and the greatest degree of
detachment being the mark of the highest Yoga or Raja
Yoga. Another mark of distinction is the prominence giyen
to the mental side. All Yoga is concerned with mental
practices but this is more specially so of Raja Yoga which
has been described * as the discrimination of the real from
the unreal, that is the infinite and enduring from the finite
and transient by their reasoning with the help of the
Hpanishads and the recognised systems of Philosophy.

1 Eaja-Yoga, by Swami Dayananda, published by Shri Bharata
Dharma Mahamandala, Benares.

2 Ibid., 19, 20.

2 Mridu (intermittent, vague and weak), Madhyama (middling),
Adhimatra (high degree when worldly enjoyment even becomes a source
of pain), Para (highest when the mind is turned completely from
worldly objects and cannot be brought back to them under any

260 ■, ■ ^ THE SIX . OENTBIS • AND THE SEEFENT ' FOWIE

Tlie English reader must not ho weTer identify it^^w
mere philosophising. It is the exercise of Eeason by the
morally pure and intellectually great under the eonditions
and subject to the discipline aboYe described with Vairagya
or Renunciation. In the man of Knowledge (Jnani) Biiddhi
or Reason holds full sway. Raja Toga comprises sixteen
diYisions. There are sexen varieties of Vichara (reasoning)
in seven planes of knowledge (Bhumika) called Jnanaday
Sannyasada, Yogada, Lilonmukti, Satpada, Anandapada
and Paratpara.^ By exercise therein the Raja-Yogi gradu-
ally effectively practises the two kinds of Dharana,^
Prakrityashraya and Brahmashraya dependent on
Nature or Brahman respectively. There are three kinds of
Dhyana whereby the power of self-realisation (Atnia*
pratyaksha) is produced. There are four forms of SamadhL
There are three aspects of Brahman, m.. Its gross aspect
as immanent in the universe known as the Virat Purusha^
Its subtle aspect as the creator, preserver and dissolver of
all this is the Lord (Ishvara) and the supreme aspect beyond
that is Sachchidananda. Raja Yoga lays down different modes
of Dhyana for the three aspects.^ Of the four Samadhis
won by these exercises the two first or Savichara. that is there
is still a subtle connection with the conscious working or the
power of Vichara (reasoning, discernment), and the last two
are without this or Nirvichara. On reaching this fourth state
the Raja-Yogi attains liberation even when living in the body
(Jivanmukta) and is severed from the Karmashaya.^ It is
only by Raja Yoga that this Nirvikalpa Samadhi is attained.

^ Similarly there are seven Bhumikas or planes of H.arma, viZy
Yividisha or Shubhechchha, Vicharana, Tannmanasa, Sattapatti,
Asangsakti, Padarthabhavini, Tnryaga and also seven planes of Worship
(Upasana Bhumika), viz., Namapara, Rupapara, Vibhutipara, Shakti-
para, Gunapara, Bhavapara, Svarupapara.

2 See p. 207, ante.

3 Raja-Yoga, by Dayananda Svami, 19.

^ The mass of Karma Sangskaras in their Seed (Bija) state.

CHAPTER VII

THEORETICAL BASES OF THIS YOGA

This Yoga has been widely affirmed. The following
review does not profess to be exhaustive, for the literature
relating to Kundali and Laya Yoga is very great, but includes
merely a short reference to some of the Upanishads and
Puranas which have come under my notice, and of which
I kept a note, whilst engaged in this workd It will, how-
ever, clearly establish that this doctrine concerning the
Chakras, or portions of it, is to be found in other Shastras
than the Tantras, though the references in some cases are
so curt that it is not always possible to say whether they
are dealing with the matter in the same Yoga-sense as the
work here translated or as forms of worship (Upasana). It
is to be noted in this connection that Bhutashuddhi is a rite
which is considered as a necessary preliminary to the
worship of a Deva.* It is obvious that if we understand
the Bhutashuddhi to here mean the Yoga practice described,,
then, with the exception of the Yogi expert in this Yoga,
no one would be competent for worship at all. For it is
only the accomplished (Siddha) Yogi who can really take
Eundalini to the Sahasrara. In the ordinary daily

1 There are manj others. Some references kindly supplied to me
by Mahamahopadhyaya Adityarama Bhattacharyya arrived too late for
insertion in the first Edition and have since been inserted.

^ See Taranga I of the Mantramahodadhi : Devarcha-yogyata-
praptyai bhutashuddhing samaoharet.

THE SIX OENTBES AND THE SERPENT POWER

Bhufcasliuddhi, therefore, the process is purely a mental or
imaginary one, and therefore forms part of Upasana, and not
Yoga. Further, as a form of worship the Sadhaka may,
and does, adore his Ishtadevata in various parts of his
body. This, again, is a part of Upasana. Some of the
Shastras however, next mentioned, clearly refer to the
Toga process, and others appear to do so.

In what are called the earliest Upanishads,^ mention is
made of certain matters which are more explicitly described
in such as are said by Western orientalists to be of later
date. Thus, we find reference to the four states of con-
sciousness, waking, and so forth ; the four sheaths ; and to
the cavity of the heart as a “ soul ” centre.

As already stated, in the Indian schools the heart was
considered to be the seat of the waking consciousness. The
heart expands during waking, and contracts in sleep. Into
it, during dreaming sleep (Svapna), the external senses are
withdrawn, though the representative faculty is awake;
until in dreamless sleep (Sushupti), it also is withdrawn.
Reference is also made to the 72,000 Nadis ; the entry and
exit of the Prana through the Brahmarandhra (above the
foramen of Monro and the middle commissure) ; and “ up-
breathing” through one of these Nadis. These to some
extent probably involve the acceptance of other elements
of doctrine not expressly stated. Thus, the reference to
the Brahmarandhra and the “ one nerve ” imply the
cerebro-spinal axis with its Sushumna, through which alone
the Prana passes to the Brahmarandhra ; for which reason,
apparently, the Sushumna itself is referred to in the
Shivasanghita as the Brahmarandhra. Liberation is finally

1 For some references from the older Upanishads, see an article
by Professor Rhys Davids in J.R.A.S., p. 71 (January, 1899), “Theory
of Soul in Upanishads”. See also Yol. I of my “Principles of
Tantra,” referring amongsi; others to Prashna Upanishad, III. 6, 7.

264 THE SIX OENTBES AKD THE SERPENT POWER

the centre of this lotus is dispassion (Vairagya). In the
filaments is the waking state (Jagrad-avastha) ; in the
pericarp the sleeping state (Svapna) ; in the stalk the
state of dreamless slumber (Sushupti). Above the lotus
is “ the place without support ” (Niralamba pradesha),
which is the Turiya state. The Commentator Narayana
says that the Vritti of the petals are given in the Adhyat-
maviveka which assigns them to the various lotuses. In
the passage cited from the Hangsopanishad, they, or a
number of these, appear to be collected in the centre of
meditation upon the Ishtadevata. In § 9 ten kinds of
sound (Nada) are mentioned which have definite physical
effects, such as perspiration, shaking, and the like, and
by the practice of the tenth kind of Nada the Brahma-
pada is said to be attained.

The Brahma Upanishad^ mentions in v. 2 the navel
(Nabhi), heart (Hridaya), throat (Kantha), and head
(Murdha), as places (Sthana) “ where the four quarters
of the Brahman shine”. The Commentator Narayana
says that the Brahmopanishad, by the mention of these
four, indicates that they are the centres from which the
Brahman may (according to the method there prescribed)
be attained.® Keference is made to the lotuses at these
four places, and the mind is spoken of as the “tenth
door,” the other nine apertures being the eyes, ears,
nostrils, and so forth.

The Dhyanabindu Bpanishad® refers to the hearing of
the Anahata sounds by the Yogi (v. 3). The Upanishad
directs that with Puraka meditation should be done in
the navel on the Great Powerful One (Mahavira) with four

1 Anandashrama Series, Yol. XXIX, p. 325.

2 It will be observed that the two lower Tamasic centres are not
bere mentioned.

3 Ibid., p. 262.

THEOBETICAL BASES OF THIS YOGA

265

arms and of the colour of the hemp flower (i.e., Vishnu) ;
with Kumbhaka meditate in the heart on the red Brahma
seated on a lotus ; and with Rechaka think of the three-
eyed one (Rudra) in the forehead. The lowest of these
lotuses has eight petals; the second has its head down-
wards; and the third, which is compounded of all the
Devatas (Sarvadevamaya), is like a plantain flower
(vv. 9— 12). In T. 13, meditation is directed on a hundred
lotuses with a hundred petals each, and then on Sun,
Moon, and Fire. It is Atma which rouses the lotus,
and, taking the Bija from it, goes to Moon, Fire, and
Sun.

The Amritanada Upanishad ^ refers to the five elements
and above them Arddhamatra — that is, Ajna (vv. 30, 31).
The elements here are those in the Chakras, for v. 26
speaks of the heart entrance as the aerial entrance (for the
Vayu Tattva is here). Above this, it is said, is the gate of
Liberation (Mokshadvara). It is stated in v. 25 that Prana
and Manas go along the way the Yogi sees (Pashyati), which
the Commentator says refers to the way Prana enters (and
departs from) Muladhara, and so forth. He also gives some
Hatha processes.

The Kshurika Upanishad * speaks of the 72,000 Nadis,
and of Ida, Pingala and Sushumna (vv. 14, 15). All these
with the exception of Sushumna, can “be severed by
Dhyana Yoga ” {ih.). Verse 8 directs the Sadhaka " to get

into the white and very subtle Nada (Qw^ere Nadi) and Yo

drive Prana Vayu through it ” ; and Puraka, Rechaka, Kum-
bhaka, and Hatha processes are referred to. The Commen-
tator Narayana, on v. 8, remarks that Kundali should be
heated by the internal fire and then placed inside the

1 Op. cit., 43. The Amritahindu Upanishad at p. 71 deals oenerallv

with Yoga. ^ ^

2 Ibid,, Vol. XXIX, p. 145.

34 ■■ ‘

i

;r

266 THE SIX CENTEES AND THE SBEPENT POWEB

Brahmanadi, for which purpose the dalandhara Bandha

should be employed. • .i - nu tt

The Nrisinghapurvatapaniya Upanishad in uh. V,

T. 2, speaks of the Sudarshana (which is apparently here
the Muladhara) changing into lotuses of six, eight, twelve,
sixteen, and thirty-two petals respectively. _ This cor-
responds with the number of petals as given in this work
except as to the second. For, taking this to be the Sva-
dhishthana, the second lotus should be one of ten petals.
Apparently this divergence is due to the fact that this is
the number of letters in the Mantra assigned to this lotus.
For in the six-petalled lotus is the six-lettered Mantra of
Sudarshana ; in the eight-petalled lotus the eight-lettered

Mantra of mrayana; and in the twelve-petalled lotus the

twelve-lettered Mantra of Vasudeva. As is the case
ordinarily, in the sixteen -petalled lotus are the sixteen

Elalas (here vowels) sounded with Bindu or Anusvara. The
thirty-two-petalled lotus (Ajua) is really two-petalled because
there are two Mantras here (each of sixteen letters) of
]Sfrisingha and His Shakti.

The sixth chapter of the Maitri Upanishad * speaks of
the Hadis ; and in particular of the Sushumna ; the pierc-
ing of the Mandalas Sun, Moon, and Fire (each of these
being within the other, Sattva in Fire, and in Sattva
Achvuta') ; and of Amana, which is another name for

^ Anaiidasliraniaj Edition, Vol. XXX., p. 61.

2 Yol. XXIX of same edition, p. 345 j see pp. 441, 450, 451, 458,
and 460,

3 Same edition, ToL XXIX, p. 477.

p. 483; and as to the passage of Knndali through the
Brahmadvara, see p* 485.

, ■; i •. 4 ■

’ h-ir a- -I

closing of the “inner door,” the opening ot tJie gawa,y
of Sushnnina (that is, by Knndal! entering the Brahmad-
vara), and the piercing of the Sun. The Ramatapanxya
Upanishad ^ refers to Tarious Yoga and Tantrik processes,
such as Asana, Dvarapuja, Pithapuja, and expressly
mentions Bhutashuddhi, which, as above explained, is the
purification of the elements in the Chakras, either as an
imaginative, or real process by the aid of Kundalini.

I have already cited in the Notes numerous passages
on this Yoga from the Shandilya Upanishad of the Athar-
vaveda, the Varaha and Yogakundali Upanishads of the
Krishna Yajurveda, the Mandalabrahmana Upanishad of
the Shukla Yajurveda, and the Nadabindu Upanishad of

the Rigveda,* yt

The great Devibhagavata Purana (VII. 3-5, XL »)

mentions in a full account the six Chakras or Lotuses^ , the
rousing of Kundali (who is called the Paradevata) in the
Muladhara by the manner here described, uniting Jiva
therewith by the Hangsa Mantra ; Bhutashuddhi ; the
dissolution of the gross Tattvas into the subtle Tattvas,
ending with Mahat in Prakriti, Maya in Atma. The
Dharamandala is mentioned, and it and the other M^^-
dalas are described in the manner here stated. The Bijas
of Prithivi and other Tattvas are given. Allusion is also
made to the destruction of the “ man of sin ” (Papapu-
rusha), in terms similar to those to be found in the Maha-
nirvana and other Tantras. A remarkable Dhyana of
Pranashakti is to be found in this chapter, which reads
very much like another which is given in the Prapancha-
sara Tantra.®

1 Anandashrama Edition, Yol. XXIX, p. 520.

2 These Yoga Upanishads have been recently translated as part o.
“ Thirty Minor Upanishads,” by K. Xarayanasvami Aiyar (Theosophioa
Society of Madras, 1914).

3 See Oh. XXXV, Vol. Ill of my “ Tantrik Texts ”.

CENTEBS AND THE SEEPENT POWBE

iXXV, mentions the
!, the names of which
Shiva is Nirguna, it

biit fOT the benefit of men He resides in the body

Him in the different

Lingga Parana,

Chakras with theii
are given by the
says, 1 — ---

with Uma, and Yogis meditate upon

lotuses. , . V • 14-

Ohapter XXIII of the Agni Parana, which is replete

with Tantrik rituals, magic, and Mantras, also refers to

the Bhutashuddhi rite wherein, after meditation witu the

respective Bija Mantras on the navel, heart, and Apa

centres, the body of the Sadhaka is refreshed by the flow

THE0BET1CA.IJ BASES OF THIS TOGA

269

m

Brahmarandhra, and the Jiva becomes one with the Puru-
sha.” The famous hymn called Anandalahari (“Wave of
Bliss ”), which is universally ascribed to Shangkara, deals
with this Toga (Shatchakrabheda) ; and in the thirteenth
chapter of Vidyaranya’s Shangkara vijaya the six lotuses
are mentioned, as also the fruit to be gained by worship-
ping the Devata in each Chakra. ^

Pandit E. A nata Shastri says : *

“ Many a great man has successfully worked the Kun-
■dalini to the Sahasrara, and effected her union with the Sat
and Chit. Of these stands foremost the great and far-
famed Shangkaracharya, a humble pupil of one of the
students of Graudapadaoharya, the author of the well-known
‘ Subhagodaya ’ (52 slokas) . Having well acquainted himself
with the principles contained in this work, Shri Shangkara-
charya received special instructions based upon the personal
experience of his Guru. And adding his own personal experi-
ence to the above advantages, he composed his famous work
on the Mantra-shastra, consisting of 100 slokas ; the first
forty-one of these forming the ‘ Ananda-Lahari,’ and the rest
forming the ‘ Saundarya-Lahari’ ; the latter apostrophises
the Devi as a being who is beauteous from head to foot.

‘ Ananda-Lahari ’ may be said to contain the quint-
essence of the Samayachara. The work is all the more
valuable because the author teaches it from personal
experience. Lengthy commentaries are written on almost
every syllable of the text. The value attached to the work
may be adequately understood by the following_theory.
Some hold that Shiva is the real author- of ‘Ananda-
Lahari,’ and not Shangkaracharya, who was but a Mantra-
drashta, or Eishi — i.e., one who realised the process and

1 See also Aiiandagiri’s Shangkara vijaya and Madhava’s Shangkara-
vijaya (Oh. XI ; see also ib., where Shriohakra is mentioned).

2 Anandalahari, 14 I have translated this hymn under the title
Wave of Bliss

r

I'

I

if

|l

■i

ml

■I

270

THE SIX CENTBES AND THE SEBPBKT POWER

gave it to the world. No less than thirty-and-six commen-
taries on this work are now extant. Among them we find
one written by our great Appaya Dlkshita. The commen-
taries are not entirely different, but each has its own
peculiar views and theories.

“ As for the text of ‘ Ananda-Lahari,’ it contains forty-
and-one slokas. According to some commentators, the
slokas are 35 in number; some recognise only 30, and
according to Sudhavidyotini and others only the following
slokas constitute the text of ‘ Ananda-Lahai'i : 1 2, 8 9,

10—11, 14—21, 26— 27, 31— 41. In my opinion, also, the
last statement seems to be correct, as the other slokas treat
only of Prayogas (applications of Mantras) for worldly
purposes. ^ Only a few of these Prayogas are recognised
by ail the commentators; while the rest are passed over as
being entirely Karmic.

“ has been remarked already, ‘ Ananda-Lahari is

but an enlargement of the work called Subhagodaya by
Gaudapada, who is the Guru of the authors Guru. That
work gives only the main points, without any of the
characteristic admixture of illustrations, etc., above

noticed. _

“ Of all the commentaries on ‘ Ananda-Lahari Lak-
shmidhara’s seems to he the most recent ; yet in spite of
this it is the most popular, and with reason, too; Other
commentaries advocate this or that aspect of the various
philosophical schools ; but Lakshmidhara collates some of
the views of others, and records them side by side with
his own. Mis commentary is in this way the most
elaborate. He sides with no party ; ^ his views are broad

1 Thus, Yv. 13, 18, 19 are said to treat of Madana-prayoga— that is,
application for the third Pnrushartha or Kama (desire).

2 He seems to be very adverse to the TJttara or Northern Kanla
School, and if his views are accurately reproduced by the Pandit he is
not always correct as to their teaching. A. A.

272 THE SIX CJENffiES AND THE SERPENT POWER

nor has any of the Prayoga Kartas^ explained the
same.

“ The following is a list of commentaries written upon^

' Ananda-Lahari ’ ; some of them include ‘ Saundarya*
Lahari ’ also :

“1. ‘Manorama,’ a Commentary. 2. A Commentary
by Appaya Dikshita (Tanjore Palace Library). 3. ‘Vish-
nnpakshL’ Perhaps this may be the same as ISTo. 14 given
below. 4. By Kavirajasharman — about 3,000 granthas
(Deccan College Library), o. ‘ Manjubhushani/ by Krish-
nacharya, the son of Vallabhaoharya — slokas about 1,700.
He says in his Introduction that Shri Shankaracharya
praised the Brahmashakti called Kundalini when he was
meditating on the banks of the Ganges. He gives the purport
of this work in his first sloka ; ‘ I praise constantly the
Kundalini, who creates innumerable worlds continuously,
though She is like a filament of the lotus, and who resides at
the root of the tree (Muladhara) to be roused and led (to
Sahasrara).’ This is popular in the Bengal Presidency. 6..
Another Commentary, called ‘ Saubhagyavardhani,’ by
Kaivalayasharma. The Adyar Library has a copy of it. This
is popular throughout India, so we can get as many MSS.
of the same as we require from different places. It contains
about 2,000 granthas. 7. By Keshvabhatta. 8. ‘Tattva-
dipika,’ by Gangahari, a small commentary based on
Tantrashastra. 9. By Gangadhara. 10. By Gopiramana-
tarkapravachana — granthas about 1,400. Seems to be of
recent origin. 11. Gaurikantasarvabhaumabhattacharya —
granthas about 1,300. Of recent origin. 12. By Jagadisha.
13. By Jagannatha Panohanana. 14. By Narasimha —
granthas 1,600. The chief peculiarity of this commentary
is that it explains the text in two different ways, each sloka
being applicable to Devi and Vishnu at the same time.

1 Those writers who deal with the practical application. — A. A.

THEOBETICAL BASES 'OF THIS TOGA

273 :

Thougli some commentators have given different meanings
to some of the verses, yet all of them apply to the different
aspects of Devi alone, and not to the different Devatas. 15.

‘ Bhavarthadipa,’ by Brahmananda^- — granthas about 1,700.
16. By Mallabhatta. 17. By Mahadevavidyavagisha. IS.
By Madhavavaidya (Deccan College Library). 19. By
Eamachandra — granthas about 3,000 (Deccan College
Library). 20. By Ramanandatirtha. 21. Lakshmidhara s ,
which is well known to the public, and needs no comment.
This has been brought out excellently in Deva Nagaratype
by the Mysore Grovernment lately. 22. By Vishvambhara.
23. By Shrikanthabhatta. 24. By Rama Suri. 25. By
Dindima (Adyar Library). 26. By Ramachandra Misra—
granthas about 1,000 (Deccan College Library). 27. By
Achyutananda (printed in Bengali characters). 28. Sada-
shiva (Government Oriental Library, Madras). 29. Another
nameless Commentary (Government Oriental Library,
Madras) . 30. By Shrirangadasa. 31. By Govinda Tarka-

vagisha Bhattacharya— granthas 600. He seems to give
the Yantra also for each verse. Further, he says that the
god Mahadeva specially incarnated as Shangkaracharya to
promulgate the science of Shrividya. o2. Sudhavidyotini,
by the son of Pravarasena. This commentator says that the
author of this famous hymn was his father, Pravarasena,
Prince of the Dramidas. He tells us a story in connection
with Pravarasena’s birth which is very peculiar. As he
was born in an inauspicious hour, Dramida, the father of
Pravarasena, in consultation with his wise Minister, by name
Suka, threw him out in the forest, lest he (the father)
should lose his kingdom. . . . The child praised Devi by
this hymn, and, pleased with it, the Devi fostered and took

1 This is the celebrated Bengali Paramahangsa gnrn of Purnananda
Svami, author of the Shatchakranirupana. Brahmananda was the
author of the celebrated Shaktanandatarangini.— A. A.

36

I n

■

TBB SIX 0BNTEE8 AND THE SERPENT BO WEE

care of him in the forest. The story ends by saying that
the boy returned to his father’s dominion and became
King. By his command, his son, the present com-
mentator, wrote Sudhayidyotini, after being fully
initiated into this mystic Shastra, Shrividya. The
account, however, appears to be rather fantastic. This
MS. I got fi’om South iMalabar with much difficulty. It
gives the esoteric meaning of the verses in ‘ Ananda-
Laharl,’ and seems to be a valuable relic of occult
literature. 33. The book of Yantras with Prayoga.
This is very rare and important.

“ Besides the above commentaries, we do not know
how many' more commentaries there are upon this hymn.

The celebrity of “ Anandalaliari ” and the great
number of commentaries upon it are proof of the wide-
snread ■ and authoritative character of the Yoga here

THEOBBTIOAL BASES OF THIS TOGA

275

“ Om. The Deyas, coming to Satyaloka, thus spoke to
Pra^apati, saying, ‘ Tell us of the Narasingha ^ Chakra ’

(to which he replied). There are six Narasingha Chakras.

The first and second haye each four spokes ; the third, fiye;
the fourth, six ; the fifth, seyen; and the sixth, eight
spokes. These six are the Narasingha Chakras. Now,
what are their names (that is what you ask). They are
Achakra,^ Suchakra,' Mahachakra,^ Sakalaloka-rakshana-
chakra,® Dyuchakra,® Asurantaka-chakra.’' These are their

respectiye names. [1] '

“ Now, what are the three circles (Balaya) ? These are
inner, middle, and outer.® The first is Bija ; Hhe second,
Narasingha.gayatri ;“ and the third, or outer, is Mantra.
Now, what is the inner circle ? There are six such (tor
each Chakra has one); these are the Narasingha,Maha-
lakshmya, Sarasyata, Kamadeya, Pranaya, Krodhadawata

(Bljas), respectiyely.^^ These are the six interior circles ot
the six Narasingha Chakras. [2]

1 The man-lion incarnation of Yishnn.

2 Anandatmaka ; in the self of Xnanda (bliss).

3 Good, perfect.

4 Lustrous (Tejomay a). ^ -Ax

5 The Chakra which by the Shaktis of Jnana and Kriya protec s
all regions (Loka).

6 The Chakra of the path reached by Yoga.

’J' The Chakra which is the death of all Asnras, or liars.

8 That is, each Chakra has three divisions — inner, middle, and outer ;
or Bija, Narasingha Gayatri, Mantra.

9 The root Mantra, which in this case are those given in the next

note but one. ^ ^ i i - -i-u- i, -

10 That is, the Mantra;Narasinghaya vidmahe va^ranakhaya dhimani
+«Tinqh sinsrhah prachodayat. (May we contemplate on Narasingha,
r^arie State on his Yajra-like claws. May that Man-lion direct

us«) —

11 That is, the following Bijas : Kshaung (in Achakra) ; Shring,
His Shakti (in Suchakra) ; Aing (in Mahachakra) ; Kling (m
Sakalalokarakshana chakra) ; Om (in Dyuchakra) ; and Hung (in
Asurantakachakra) .

p ■

kv

V

I

■■

IS

jpi

k

276

IHE SIX CENTBES AND THE SERPENT POWIB ^ ^ ^ ^

“Now, wliat is the middle circle? There are six such.
To each of these belong Narasinghaya, Vidmahe, Vajra-
nakhaya, Dhimahi, Tannah, Singhah prachodayat, respec-
tirely.^ These are the six circles of the six Narasingha
Chakras. Now, what are the six outer circles ? The first
is Anandatma or Achakra; the second is Priyatma or
Suchakra ; the third is Jyotiratina or Mahachakra ; the
fourth is Mayatma or Sakala-loka-rakshana Chakra ; the
fifth is Yogatma or Dyuchakra ; and the sixth is Sainap-
tatma or Asurantakachakra. These are the six outer circles
of the six Narasingha Chakras.® [8]

“ Now, where should these be placed ? ® Let the first
be placed in the heart the second in the head;® the third
at the site of the crown-look® (Shikhayiim) ; the fourth
all over the body ; ® the fifth in all the eyes ® (Sarveshu
netreshu) ; and the sixth in all the regions ® (Sarveshu
desheshu). [4]

“ He who does Nyasa of these Narasingha Chakras on
two limbs becomes skilled in Anushtubh,^ attains the
favour of Lord Nrisingha, success in all regions and

1 That is, to each of them is assigBed the several parts of thel^ara-
singha-gajatri above meBtioBed,

2 The Atma as Miss, love, light or eBorgj, Maya, Yoga, and the
concluding Chakra which is the destruction of ail Asuras.

3 That is, how should Fjasa be done ? This is explained in the text
and following notes where the Nyasa is given.

4 Kshaung Narasinghaya achakraya anadatmane svaha hridayaya
namah.

5 Shring vidmahe suchakraya priyatmane svaha shirase svMia.

6 Aing vajranakh^a mahachakraya jyotiratmane svaha shikhayai
vashat.

Kling dhimahi sakala-loka-rakshana-chakraya mayatmane svaha
kavachaya hung.

3 Ong tanno dyuchakraya yogatmane svaha netratrayaya vaushat.

9 Haung nrisiughah prachodayat asurantaka-chakraya satyatmane
svaha astraya phat.

19 That is, he becomes capable of speech — a poet. He knows the
beginning and end of all things and able to explain all things.

THEORETICAL BASES OE THIS YOGA

id (at the end) liberation (Kaivalya).
Nyasa be done. This Nyasa puri-
made perfect in worship, is pious,
lion thereof, on
not gained nor is

piety generated. [5]

1 in all V edas, gains
all sacrifices, becomes like
grimage, an adept in
both within and without. He be-
Hakshasas, Bhutas, Pishachas,
He becomes fi’eed of all

and pleases Narasingt
the other hand, the fa’
strength, worship, nor _

“ He who reads this becomes versed

capacity to officiate as pi’iest at <

one who has bathed in all places of pil
all Mantras, and pure
comes the destroyer of all
Shakims, Pretas, and Vetalas
fear; therefore should it not be spoken of to an un-

believer.”® [6]

Notwithstanding the universal acceptance of this g
it has not escaped some modern criticism. The following

passage in inverted commas is a summary * of that passea

by an English-educated Hindu, ^’formerly a lawyer and now
a Guru, from one of whose disciples I received it. it was
elWtea by tbe gift of the Sanskrit text of the works here

“ Yoga as a means to liberation is attained by ent y
through the doors of Jnana (Knowledge) and
r Action). Yoga is doubtless bliss, for it_is the union of the
Jivatma with the Brahman who is Bliss (Ananda). But there
are various forms of Bliss. There is, for ffistance, physical
bliss, e-ross or subtle as it may be. It is a mistake to suppose

THB SIX CBNTEBS AXD THE SEEPEXT POWER

that because a method of Yoga procures bliss it there-
fore secures liberation. In order that we be liberated w©
must secure that pai’ticular Bliss which is the Brahman.
Some centuries ago, however, a band of Atheists (i.e., the
Buddhists) discovered the doctrine of the Void (Shunyavnda),.
and by a false display of a new kind of Yirvana Mukti
locked up these two doors which gave entry to liberation.
To-day these doors are secured by three padlocks. Th©
first is the doctrine that by faith one attains Krishna, but
where there is argument (Tarka) He is far away. The second
is the error of the Brahmos, who in Western fashion think
that they can control the formless, changeless Brahman by
shutting their eyes in church and repeating that He is the
merciful, loving Father who is ever occupied with our good»
and that if He be flattered He will be pleased ; for worship
(IJpasana) is flattery. The third is the opinion of those to
whom all religious acts are nothing but superstition ; to
whom self-interest is the only good, and whose pleasure it
is to throw dust into the eyes of others and secure the praise
of those whom they have thus blinded. Vishnu, in order to
cause the disappearance of the Vedas in the Kali age, mani-
fested as the atheist Buddha, and allowed various false
doctrines, such as that of the Arhatas, to be proclaimed.
Rudra was affected by the sin of destroying the head of
Brahma. Then he began to dance, and a number of Uohch-
hishta (or low maglinant) Rudras whose deeds are never
good issued from His body. Vishnu and Shiva asked each
other, ‘ Can we do these people any good ? ’ Their partial
manifestations the.n promulgated Shastras opposed to the
Vedas, fitted for the atheistic bent of their minds, that they
might haply thereby rise through them to higher things. God
fools the wicked with such Scriptures. We must now, how-
ever, discriminate between Shastras. It is not because it is
said in Sanskrit ‘ Shiva says ’ (Shiva uvacha) that we should

THEOEETIOATi BASES OF THIS YOGA

accept all whicli follows this announcement. All that is
•opposed to Veda and Smriti must be rejected. Of the
oLmies of the Vedas i for whom such Shastras were de-
•signed, some became Vaishnavas, and^ others Shaivas.
One of such Scriptures was the Tantra with a materialistic
Yoga system called Shatchakra-Sadhana, which is nothing
but a trickery on the part of the professional Gurus, who
have not hesitated also to promulgate forged scriptures.

The very mention of Tantrik Shastra Blls us with shame.
The Shatchakra Sadhana is a mere obstruction to spiritual
advancement. The bliss which is said to be attained by
leading Kundali to the Sahasrara is not denied, since it
is affirmed by those who say they have experienced it.
But this Bliss (Ananda) is merely a momentary superior
kind of physical Bliss which disappears with the body, and
not the Bliss which is Brahman and liberation. _ Moksha is
not to be got by entering the Sahasrara, but in leaving it
by piercing the Brahmarandhra and becoming bodiless.®

“ The Tantrik seeks to remain in the body, and thus
to obtain liberation cheaply, just as the Brahmos and
Members of the Arya Samaja have become Brahma-
inanis (knowers of the Brahman) at a cheap price. Nec-
tar, too, is cheap with the Tantriks. But what is cheap
is always worthless, and this shows itself when one attempts
to earn some fruit from one’s endeavours. ‘And yet all
men are attracted when they hear of Shatchakra.’ ‘ Many
are so steeped in Tantrik faith that they can find nothing
wrong with its Shastras.’ And the Hindu nowadays has

1 Tins no Tantrik would admit. He would eay tkat it is ignorance
<Avidya) whicli sees any differences between Veda and Agama. ihe
< 5 ritic re-eclioes some Western criticisms.

2 It is true that complete Mukti or Kaivalya is bodiless (Videha).
But there is a Mukti in which the Yogi retains his body (JivanmuUi).
lu truth, there is no “ leaving,” for Atma, as Shangkara says, does not
<jome and go. '

I

'if ^

‘4

■1

M l

1 ••-•"'

■il ' ' ■

I

I*

■ii

280 THE SIS CENTaBS AND THE SERPENT POWER

been put in such a maze by bis Tantrik Gurus tliat he does
not know what he wants. For centuries he has been
accustomed to the Tantrik Dharma,^ and his eyes are there-
fore not clear enough to see that it is as truly unacceptable
to a Hindu as it is to a Mussalman. In fact, these persons
(for whose benefit the Guru makes these remarks) are full
of I^Ilechchhata,^ though, after all, it must be admitted to be
some advance for such a creature as a Mlechchha to adhere-
even to Tantrik doctrine. For bad as it is it is better than
nothing at all. All the same, the Gurus delude them with
their fascinating talk about Shatchakra. Like a lot of the
present-day advertisers, they offer to show their so-called
‘ Lotuses ’ to those who will join them. Men are sent to
collect people to bring them to a Dikshaguru (initiator). In
this respect the Tantriks act just like coolie recruiters for
the tea-gardens.® The Tantrik says there are really
‘ Lotuses ’ there ; but if the Lotuses are really there, why
are we not told how we may see them ? ^ And there also
are supposed to be Devatas, Dakinis, Yoginis, ‘ all ready at
every moment for inspection.’ ® And, then, how material
it all is ! They speak of a Parashiva above Shiva, as i£

1 This, at any rate, attests its wide pervasi’Yeness.

2 This is a contemptuous term which has descended from the days
when the stranger was looked on as an object of enmity or contempt.
Just as the Greeks and Chinese called anyone not a Greek or a Chinese
a “ barbarian,” so Hindus of the Exoteric School call all non-HinduSj^
whether aboriginal tribes or cultivated foreigners, Mlecbchhas, Mlech-
chhata is tbe state of being a Mlecbchha. It is to tbe credit of the
Sbakta Tantra that it does not ei^courage such narrow ideas.

3 These wander about India persuading the villagers to go and work
on the tea-gardens, to which they are then conveyed by means which,
to say the least, are not always admirable. Truth makes it necessary to
state that the allegation that the Gurus employ agents to secure
followers is baseless. Tbe Gurus of the right type as a matter of fact
are very particular about the competency of the would -he disciple.

^ The hooks and the Gurus claim to do so.

5 It is not a peep-show open to any. Only those are said to see
who have mastered the great difficulties in this path. *

THEOBETIOAL BASES OF THIS YOGA 281

there was more than one Brahman. And, then, the nectar
is said to be of the colour of lac Well, if so, it is a gross

(Sthula) and perceptible thing ; and as a doctor can then

squeeze it out there is no need for a Guru.^ In short, the
Tantrik Shatchakra is nothing but ‘ a sweet in the hands

of a child’. A child who is wayward is giYen a sweek to

keep him quiet. But if he has sense enough to know that
the sweet is given to distract him, he throws it away, and
finds the key to the locked doors of Yoga called Karma
and Jnana. This process of Yoga was expelled from Hindu

society centuries ago. For nearly 2,500 years ago Shang-

kara,^^ when destroying atheism, exterminated also Shat-
chakravoffa. (When Shangkara disputed with the Kapa-
KraScha, the latter invoked to his aid the fierce
form of Shiva called Bhairava. But on Shangkara s
worshipping the God, the latter said to Kraka^a, Thy

time has come,’ and absorbed His devotee into Hmsel .)

Shangkara then showed the worthlessness of the Tantras.

They are again to-day attempting to enter Hindu society,
and must be again destroyed.” _ 4 .^

The writer of the note thus summarised omitted to
notice or perhaps was unaware that the Chakras are men-
tioned in the Upanishads, but endeavoured to meet the fact
that they are also described in the Puranas by the allegation
that the Pauranik Chakras are in conformity .^^^h the Vedas
whereas the Tantrik Chakras are not. It is admitted that
in the Shiva Purana there is an account of the six centres,
but it is said that they are not there alleged to actually

1 These observations display misunderstanding of e Jdt

I dealt with this class of criticism. I limit my present

observations to the historical origins of this Yoga.

J This is the Indian tradition as to the philosopher’s date.

3 The parenthesis is mine. See also Madhava’s Shangkara-
^ijaya, Cli. XV.

36

ft ' i ^ 'I- ' ^ ^ ^ ■ ..

282

THE SIX CBNTBES AND THE SEEPEXT PGWEB

exist, nor is anything mentioned of any Siidliana in connec-
tion with them. They are, it is contended, to be imagined
only for the purpose of worship. In external worship Dexas
and Devis are worshipped in similiar Lotuses. The
Puranas, in fact, according to this Tie w, convert xvhat is
external worship into internal worship. If, according to
the Purana, one worships an interior lotus, it is not to be
supposed that there is anything there. One is worshipping
merely a figment of one*s imagination, though it is curious
to note that it is said that this figment secures certain
advantages to the worshipper, and the latter must commence,
according to this critic, with the Chakra which he is
qualified to worship. It is not obvious how any question
of such competency arises when each of the Chakras is
imagined only. Attention is drawn to the fact that in the
Linga Purana there is nothing about the rousing of Kundali,
the piercing of the six centres, the drinking of nectar, and
so forth. The Purana merely says, “ Meditate on Shiva and
Devi in the different lotuses.” There is, it is thus contend-
ed, a radical difference between the two systems. “ In the
Pauranik description of the Chakras everything is stated
clearly ; but with the Tantrik all is mystery, or else how
indeed, except by such mystification, could they dishonest-
ly cai'ry on their profession as Gurus ? ”

Buddhists may dispute this critic’s understanding of
their Shunyavada, as Tantriks will contest his account of the
origin of their Shastra. The Historian will call in question
the statement that Shangkara ^ abolished the Tantra. For,
according to the Shangkaravijaya, his action was not to
abolish any of the sects existing at his time, but to reform
and establish bonds of unity between them, and to induce
them all through their differing methods to follow a common
ideal. Thus, even though Krakacha was absorbed into his
1 See ante, n. 281.

r

THlOBETICAIi BASES OF. THIS YOGA

God, the extreme Tantrik sect of Kapalikas which he repre-
sented is said to hare continued to exist with Shangkara’s
approval, though possibly in a modified form, under its
leader Vatukanatba. The Brahmos, Aryasamaj, Vaishnavas,
and Shaivas, may resent this critic’s remarks so far as they
touch themselves. I am not here concerned with this
religious faction, but will limit the following observations in
reply to the subject in hand : > i,-

‘The criticism, notwithstanding its “ pious ” acerbity
against forms of doctrine of which the writer disapproved,
■contains some Just observations. I am not however here
concerned to establish the reality or value of this Yoga
method, nor is proof on, either of these points available
except through actual experiment and experience. From
a doctrinal and historical point of view, however, it
seems that this critic did not have a sufficient know-
ledge^ of the subject which he has thus so vigorously
condemned, or of the wide acceptance which this
Yoga has received in India. It is true that Karma
with Jnana are means for the attainment of Moksha.
These and Bhakti (devotion) which may partake of the
character of the first or the, second, according to the
nature of its display,' are all contained in the eight pro-
cesses of Yoga. Thus, they include Tapas, a form of
Karma yoga,' and Dhyana, a process of Jnana yoga. As

1 An Enslisli edacation, such as the Author of this criticism received,

not infrequently has the effect of divorcing those thus educated, not
•only from a knowledge of Indian Shastra, but from the possibility of
(understanding it. ^ ^

2 Thus, the offering o! flowers and the like to the Divinity partakes
•o! the nature of Karma ; whilst Bhakti in its transcendental aspect, in
which by love of the Lord the devotee is merged in Him, is a form ot

Samadhi. ^

3 When, however, we deal with what are called the three Kandas
■mz.. Karma. Upasana, and Jnana-Tapas and the like practices form
part of Upasana Kanda. The above definition is for the purposes of

t

Toga classification only.

282

THE SIX OENTBES AND THE SBEPENT POWER

exist, nor is anything mentioned of any Sadhana in eonnec-
tion with them. They are, it is contended, to be imagined
only foi’ the purpose of worship. In external worship Devas
and Devis are worshipped in similiar Lotuses. The
Puranas, in fact, according to this view, convert what is
external worship into internal worship. If, according to
the Purana, one worships an interior lotus, it is not to be
supposed that there is anything there. One is worshipping
merely a figment of one’s imagination, though it is curious
to note that it is said that this figment secures certain
advantages to the worshipper, and the latter must commence,
according to this critic, with the Chakra which he is
qualified to worship. It is not obvious how any question
of such competency arises w'hen each of the Chakras is
imagined only. Attention is drawn to the fact that in the
Linga Parana there is nothing about the rousing of Kundali,
the piercing of the six centres, the drinking of nectar, and
so forth. The Purana merely says, “ Meditate on Shiva and
Devi in the different lotuses.” There is, it is thus contend-
ed, a radical difference between the two systems. “ In the
Pauranik description of the Chakras everything is stated
clearly ; but with the Tantrik all is mystery, or else how
indeed, except by such mystification, could they dishonest-
ly carry on their profession as Gurus ? ”

Buddhists may dispute this critic’s understanding of
their Shunyavada, as Tantriks will contest his account of the
origin of their Shastra. The Historian will call in question
the statement that Shangkara ^ abolished the Tantra, For,
according to the Shangkaravijaya, his action was not to
abolish any of the sects existing at his time, but to reform
and establish bonds of unity between them, and to induce
them all through their differing methods to follow a common
ideal. Thus, even though Krakacha was absorbed into his
1 See ante^ p. 281.

God, the extreme Tantrik sect ot Hapaiiicas wmcn iie
sented is said to have continued to exist with Shangkara’s

approval, though possibly in a modified form, under its
leader Vatukanatha. The Brahmos, Aryasamaj, Vaishnavas,
and Shaivas, may resent this critic’s remarks so far as they
touch themselves. I am not here concerned with this
religious faction, but will limit the following observations in

reply to the subject in hand :

The criticism, notwithstanding its “ pious ” acerbity
against forms of doctrine of which the writer disapproved,
contains some just observations. I am not however here
concerned to establish the reality or value of this Yoga
method, nor is proof on, either of these points available
except through actual experiment and experience. From
a doctrinal and historical point of view, however, it
seems that this critic did not have a sufficient know-
ledge’- of the subject which he has thus so vigorously
condemned, or of the wide acceptance which this
Yoga has received in India. It is true that Karma
with Jnana are means for the attainment of Moksha.
These and Bhakti (devotion) which may partake of the
character of the first or the, second, according to the
nature of its display,* are all contained in the eight pro-
cesses of Yoga. Thus, they include Tapas, a form of
Karma yoga,* and Dhyana, a process of J nana yoga. As

1 An Englisli education, such as the Author of this criticism received,
Bot infrequently has the effect of divorcing those thus educated, not

only from a knowledge of Indian Shastra, but from the possibility of

lUiiderstanding it. n i

Z Thus the offering of flowers and the like to the Divinity partakes
■of the nature of Karma ; whilst Bhakti in its transcendental aspect, in
which by love of the Lord the devotee is merged in Him, is a form ot

Samadhi. i

3 When, however, we deal with what are called the three Kandas
•mz,, Karma, TJpasana, and Jnana— Tapas and the like practices form
nart of Unasana Kanda. The above definition is for the purposes of

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

has been pointed out, the “ eight-limbed ” Yoga (Ash-
tangayoga) includes Hatha processes, such as Asana and
Pranayama. What Hathayogis have done is to develop
the physical or Hatha processes and aspect. The true
view of Hathavidya recognises that it is an auxiliary of
Jnana whereby Moksha is obtained. It is also obviously
true that all Bliss is not Moksha. Ananda (Bliss) of a kind
may be secured through drink or drugs, but no one supposes
that this is liberating Bliss. Similarly, Hathayoga processes
may secure various forms of gross or subtle bodily Bliss
which are not The Bliss. There is, however, a mis-
understanding of the system here described when it is
described as merely materialistic. It has, like other forms
of Yoga, a material side or Hatha aspect, since man is
gross, subtle, and spiritual ; but it has a Jnana aspect also.
In all Yoga there is mental exercise. As the Jiva is both
material and spiritual, discipline and progress in both the
aspects is needed. Kundali is aroused by Mantra, which is
a form of Consciousness (Chaitanya). “ It is he whose
being is immersed in the Brahman,” who arouses the Devi
Kundali by the Mantra Hungkara (v. 50). The Devi is
Herself Shuddha Sattva^ (v. 61). “ The wise and excellent
Yogi, wrapt in Samadhi and devoted to the Lotus Feet
of his Guru, should lead Kulakundali along with Jiva to
Her Lord the Parashiva in the abode of liberation within
the pure Lotus, and meditate upon Her who grants all
desires as the Chaitanyarupa Bhagavati (that is, the Devi
whose substance is Consciousness itself) ; and as he leads
Kulakundali he should make all things absorb in Her.”^
Meditation is made on every centre in which She operates.
In the Ajna centre Manas can only unite with and
be absorbed into Kundali by becoming one with the

^ Safctva, Atisattva, Paramasattva, Shuddhasattva, and Visliud-
dhasattva, are five different forms of Ghaitanva.

Tnana-shakti wMch She is, for She is all bhaktis. ne i.ay ^
voga is therefore a combination of Karma and Jnana. ibe

former mediately and the latter directly achieves Moksha.

In the Aina is Manas and Om^ and on this the Sadha a.
meditates (v. 33). The Sadhaka’s Atma must be transformed
into a meditation on this lotus (v. 34). His Atma is the
Dhvana of Om, which is the inner Atma of those whose

Buddhi is pure. He realises that he and the Brahman are
one and that Brahman is alone real (Sat) and all else unreal
fAsat). He thus becomes an Advaitavadi, or one wbe
realises the identity of the individual and universal bel
(ib ) The mind (Chetas) by repeated practice (Abhyasa) is
here dissolved, and such practice is mental operation itselt
(y 36) For the Yogi meditating on the Mantra where y
le realises the umty of Praoa aud Manas doses the
“house which hangs without support . That )S, he
disengages the Manas from all contact with the. o ]ec
world (t. 36), in order to attain the TJmnam.Arastha.
X is PaLashiva. The Tantrik does not supp«i

that there are several Shivas in the sense of severd dis-
tinct Deities. The Brahman is one. '

Paramashiva, and so forth, are hut names for 4'®'™ _
manifestations of the One. When it is said that any
Devata is in any Chakra, it is meant that that ^ *e se^
of -the operation of the Brahman, which ,

Daiva aspect is known as Devata. ‘hT S^sjjra
vary, so do the Devatas. The Ha^ of the feahasr ^

contains in Himself all Devatas (v. M).

the Ajna that the Yogi places at the ime °«e»th to

Prana and enters the supreme Purusha, ™ ^

the three worlds, and who is known by the

(V. 88). It is true that this action, like others, is M

panied by Hatha processes. But these are associate wrtb
Tyna(lif-fl.t,ion unites Kundali and Jiv

f

maya), and the Yogi after such nnioii, piercing the
Brahmarandhra, is freed from the body at death and be-
comes one with Brahman (ib.). The secondary causal body
(Karan avantara Sharira) above Ajna and below Sahasrara
is to be seen only through meditation (v. 39). when perfec-
tion has been obtained in "yoga practice. "V". 40 refers to
SamadhiYoga.

Passing to the Sahasrara, it is said, “ well concealed
and attainable only by great effort, is that subtle ‘ Void ’
(Shunya) which is the chief root of liberation ” (v. 42). In
Paramashiva are united two form;

Rasa or Paramananda Rasa (thi
and Virasa (or the bliss which is
of Shiva and Shakti). It is fi
there arise the universe and th^
lesser world (Kshudrabrahmanda)

(Yati) of pure mind is instructed i
he realises the unity of the Jivtan
It is “ that most excellent of mi
mind (Kiyata-nija-chitta)

. . inner

faculties (Antahkarana) on the Sahasrara, and has known

It— who is freed from rebirth,” and thus attains Moksha

(v. 45). He becomes Jivanmukta, remaining only so long

in the body as is necessary to work out the Karma, the
activity of which has already commenced — ^just as a revol-
ving wheel will yet run a little time after the cause of its
revolving has ceased. It is the Bhagavati Nirvana-Kala
which grants divine liberating knowledge— that is, Tattva-
jnana, or knowledge of the Brahman (v. 47). Within Her
is jSityananda, which is “ p\ire Consciousness itself ” (v. 49),
and “is attainable only by Yogis through pure Jnana ” (ib.)
It is this Jnana which secures liberation (ib,). The Maya
Tantra says : “ Those who are learned in Yoffa sav that it

THEOEETIOAL BASES OP THIS YOOA

287

is the unity of Jiva and Atma (in Samadhi). According to
the experience of others, it is the knowledge (Jnana) of the
identity of Shiva and Atma. The Agamavadis say that
knowledge (Jnana) of Shakti is Yoga. Other wise men say
that the knowledge (Jnana) of the Parana Pnrusha is Toga ;
and others again, the Prakritivadis, declare that the know-
ledo-e of the union of Shiva and Shakti is Yoga ” (v. 57).

“ The Devi, by dissolving Kundalini in the Parabindu,
effects the liberation of some Sadhakas through their medi-
tation upon the identity of Shiva and Atma in the Bindu.
She does so in the case of others by a similiar process and
by meditation (Ohintana) on Shakti. In other cases this is
done by concentration of thought on the Paramapurusha,
and in other cases by the meditation of the Sadhaka on
the union of Shiva and Shakti ” (^i^-)- In fact, the wor-
shipper of any particular Devata should realise that he is
one with the object of his worship. In Pranava worship,
for instance, the worshipper realises his identity with the
Ongkara In other forms of worship he realises his identity
with Kundalini, who is embodied by the different Mantras
worshipped by different worshippers. In short, Jnana is
Kriyainana and Svarupajnana. The latter is direct spiritual
experience. The former are the meditative processes
leading to it. There is here Kriyajnana, and when KuiMa-
lini uMtes with Shiva She gives Jnana (Svarnpa), for Her

nature (Svarupa), as also His, is that.

After union with Shiva, Kundali makes Her return
journey. After She has repeatedly' gone to Him, She
makes a journey from which, at the will of the op
there is no return. Then the Sadhaka is Jivanmukta.
His body is preserved until such time as the active Karma

1 TBlc, i, necessary in order that the aptitude be attained. By

repetiJiJn 2 aTbSmes natural, and its result in the end becomes

Dermanent.

■

■

p

h;:

1

288 THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

is exTiausted, when he can achieve bodiless (Videha) or
Kaivalya Mukfci (supreme Liberation). “ The revered Lord
Preceptor ” — that is, Shangkaracharyya — in his celebrated
Ananda-Lahari thus hymns Her return (v. 53) :

“ Kuharini, Thou sprinklest all things with the stream
of nectar which flows from the tips of Thy two feet ; and
as Thou returneth to Thine own place, Thou vivifieth
and maketh visible all things that were aforetime invisible ;
and on reaching Thy abode Thou resumeth Thy snake-like
coil and sleepeth.” That is, as Her passage upward was
Layakrama (dissolution of the Tattvas), so Her return is
Srishtikrama (re-creation of the Tattvas). V. 54 says that
the Yogi who has practised Yama and Niyama and the like
(that is, the other processes of Ashtangayoga, including
Dhyana with its resulting Samadhi), and whose mind has
been thus controlled, is never again reborn. Gladdened by
the constant realisation of the Brahman, he is at peace.

Whether the method above described be or be not
effectual or desirable, it must be obvious upon a perusal of
the text, which gives an explanation of it, that the Yoga
which the author affirms to be the cause of liberation is not
merely material, but that it is the arousing of the Power
(Jivashakti) of the World-Consciousness (Jagachchaitanya)
which makes man what he is. The Yogi thus does claim
to secure the Bliss of liberation by making entry thereto
through the doors of Karma and Jnanayoga.

A Brahmo Author ^ who is so little favourable to the
Tantra as to describe the difference between it and the
Yeda as being “ as great as that which exists between the
Netherworld (Patala) and Heaven (Svarga) ” * does not

1 Gayatrimiilaka Shatcliakrer vyakkyana o sadhana (Maiigala
Gaiiga Mission Press).

^ The unorthodox author cited, quoting the saying that “ to attain
Siddhi (fruition) in Shruti (study and practice of ordinances of the
Vedas) the Brahmana should follow the Tantra,’’ asks, in conformity

THIOEETIOAI; BASES OP THIS YOGA 289

deny the efficiency of the Tantrik Shatchakra Sadhana,
but contrasts it 'with the Vaidika Gayatri Sadhana in an
account of the two methods which I here summarise in
inverted commas.

“ The Chakras (the existence of which is not disputed)
are placed where the nerves and muscles unite.h The Ajna
is the place of the Command. This manifests in the
operation of Buddhi. If the command is followed, the
Sadhaka becomes pure of disposition (Bhava) and speech.
Speech displays itself in the throat, the region of the
Vishuddha. The next lower Chakra is called Anahata
because of its connection with Nada, which is self-produced
in the heart. The Vayu in Anahata is Pranashakti. Here
when free from sin one can see the Atma. Here the Yogi
realises ‘ I am He’. Fire is at the navel. The seat of
desire is at the root of the Svadhishthana. In the lowest
lotus the Muladhara are the three Shaktis of Jiva— -namely,
lohchha, Kriya, and Jnana— in an unconscious unenlivened
state. The Sadhaka by the aid of the Paratma as fire
(Agni) and air (Vayu)^ awakens these three forces (Shaktis)
and ultimately by the grace of the Paratma he is united,
with the Turiy a Brahman.”

“ In days of old Sadhana commenced at the Muladhara
Chakra ; that is, those who were not Sadhakas of the

with his views on the latter Shastra, “ How can those who are divorced
from Veda get Siddhi in Shruti ? ” This echoes a common reproach,
that the Tantra is opposed to the Vedas which the Shastra itself denies.
The Kulariiava Tantra speaks of it, on the contrary, as Vedatmaka.
Of course it is one question to claim to be based on Veda and another
whether a particular Shastra is in fact in accordance with it. On this
the Indian schools dispute, just as the Christian sects differ as to the
Bible which all claim as their basis.

1 This definition is inaccurate. As explained later, the physical
ganglia are merely gross correspondences of the subtle vital Chakras
which inform them.

^ The Author here refers to the processes .subsequently described,
whereby air is indrawn and the internal fires are set ablaze to rou.se
the sleeping Serpent. The Paratma is the Supreme Atma.

; • , r ^ ‘ 1* ■’ , /•; 'w K ' ' , ’ . '

290 TEE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

Gayatri-Mar-tra commenced from below at tbe lowest
centre. There was a good reason for this, tor thereby the
senses (Indriya) were controlled. Without siicli contro
purity of disposition (Bhawa) cannot be attained. If such
purity be not gained, then the mind (Chitta) cannot find its
place in the heart ; and if the Chitta be not in the heart
there can be no union with the Paratma. The first thing,
therefore, which a Sadhaka has to do is to control the
senses Those who achieved this without fixing their minds
on the Lord (Ishvara) ^ had to go through many difficult
and painful practices (such as the Mudras, Bandhas, etc.,
mentioned later) which were necessary for the control of
the Indriyas and of the action of the Gunas. All this is
unnecessary in the Gayatri Sadhana or method. It is true
that the senses should be controlled in the three lower
centres (Chakras) -this is, cupidity (Lobb a) in the Mula-
dhara lust (Kama) in the Svadhishthana at the root of t e
aenitals, and anger (Krodha) at the navel. These three
passions are the chief to set the senses in motion, and are
the main doors to Hell. The way, however, in which
control should h& effected is to place the Chitta (mind) on
Satta (existence) of Paramatma in these Chakras. The
Chitta should be taken to each of these three lowest centres
and controlled, whereby these passions which have their

respective places at those centres are controlled. Whenever,

therefore, the senses (Indriya) get out of control, fix the
Chitta (mind) on the Paramatma in the particular Chakra.”

[To give the above an English turn of thought : if, say,
anger is to be controlled, carry the mind to the navel, and
there meditate upon the existence of the Supreme One
(Paramatma) in this centre, not merely as the Supreme

1 Thin observation suggests a line of tbouglit winch is of value,
Some pursue the path of devotion (Bhakti), but what of those who have
it not or in less degree P

fflKOKETIOAL BASKS OK THIS YOGA

without the body and within the body, but as embodied in
that particular part of it ; for that is Its manifestation.
The result is that the passionate activity of this centre is
subdued ; for its functioning is attuned to the state of the
Atma which informs it, and both the body and mind attain
the peace of the itma on which the self is centred.'^]

“Having thus controlled the senses, the Gayatri Sa-
■ dhana commences, not at the lowest, but at the highest, of
the six centres— namely, the Ajna between the eyebrows.
There is no necessity for the difficult and painful process
of piercing the Chakras from below.* Fix the mind, on the
Lord (Ishvara) in the highest centre. For the ether (Akasha)
there is the existence (Satta) of the Supreme Atma. There
and in the two lower centres (Vishuddha and Anahata)
enioyment is had with Ishvara. The union between Jiva
and Prakriti is called Honey (Madhu) in the Hpamshads.

By Sadhana of the Ajna centre (Chakra) purity of being
(Bhavashuddhi) is attained, and purity of speech follows on
the attainment of such Bhava. Yoga with the Supreme
Devata who is all-knowing is had here. ^ He who is freed
from all disturbing conditions of body and mind reaches the
state which is beyond the Gunas (Gunatita), which is that

of the Supreme Brahman.”

We many conclude these two criticisms wdh the true
Indian saying somewhat inconsistently quoted in the first .
“ To dispute the religion (Dharma) of another is the mark
of a narrow mind, 0 Lordl 0 Great Magician ! with
whatsoever faith or feeling we call on Thee, Thou art
pleased.”

1 The paraj^raph in brackets is mine. A. A.

2 This observation shows a misunderstanding of the specific char
aoter of the Yoga. If it is desired to rouse Kundali, then operation
must I am told commence at the lowest centre. There are, however, o h l
forma of Yoga in which Kundali is not aroused. A, A.

f '* -WY -I 'J ' ' ,#

292 THE SIX OENTE.es AND THE SEEPKNT POWEE

Whatsoever difference there has been, or may be, as
to forms and methods, whether in Upasana or Yoga, yet
all Indian worshippers of the ancient type seek a common
end in unity with Light of Consciousness, which is beyond
the regions of Sun, Moon, and Fire.

It will now be asked what are the general principles
which underlie the Yoga practice above described. How
is it that the rousing of Kundalini Shakti and Her union
with Shiva effects the state of ecstatic union (Samadhi)
and spiritual experience which is alleged? The reader
who has understood the general principles recorded in
the previous sections should, if he have not already
divined it, readily appreciate the answer here given.

In the first place, the preceding section will have indi-
cated that there are two lines of Yoga— namely, Dhy ana
or Bhavana Yoga, and Kundali Yoga, the subject of this
work— and that there is a difference between the two.
The first class of Yoga is that in which ecstasy (Samadhi)
is attained by intellective processes (Kriya jnana) of medi-
tation and the like with the aid, it may be, in the prelimin-
ary stage of auxiliary processes of Mantra or Hathayoga ^
(other than the rousing of Kundali Shakti) and by detach-
ment from the world ; the second is that Yoga in which,
though intellective processes are not neglected, the creative
and sustaining Shakti of the whole body as Kundalini is
actually and truly united with the Lord Consciousness so
as to procure for the Yogi a result which the Jnana-yogi
directly gains for himself. The Yogi makes Her introduce
Him to Her Lord, and enjoys the bliss of union through
Her. Though it is He who arouses Her, it is She who
gives Jnana, for She 'is Herself that. The Dhyana-yogi
gains what acquaintance with the supreme state his own
meditative powers can give him, and knows not the
1 Such as Pranaryama, Asana, See ante^ p. .195.

THKOEETIOAL BASES OE THIS TOGA

293

enjoyment of union with Shiva in and through his funda-
mental body-power. The two forms of Yoga differ both
as to method and result. The Hathayogi in search of Lay a
regards his Yoga and its fruit as the highest. The Jnana-
y ogi thinks similarly of his own. And in fact Raja Yoga is
generally regarded as the highest form of Yoga. Kunda-
lini is so renowned that many seek to know Her. Having
studied the theory of this Yoga, I have often been asked
“whether one can get on without it The answer is .
“It depends upon what you are looking for and on your
powers.” If you want to rouse Kundali Shakti to enjoy
the bliss of union of Shiva and Shakti through Her, which
your capacities do not otherwise allow you to have or if you
wish to gain the accompanying powers (Siddhx),^it is
obvious that this end can only be achieved by the Yoga
here described. But if liberation is sought and the Yogi
has capacity to attain it without Kundalini, then such
Yoga is not necessary, for liberation may be obtained by
pure Jnanayoga through detachment, the exercise, and
then the stilling, of the mind without any reference to the
central bodily power at all. Indeed perfect Liberation
(Nirvikalpa Samiidhi) can only be obtained in this w^ by
Raia Yoga of which Kundali Yoga is a preliminary method.
Samadhi may also be attained on the path of devotion
(Bhakti), as on that of knowledge. Indeed, the highest
kvotion (Parabhakti) is not different from knowledge
Both are realisation. A Dhyiina-Yogi should not neglect
his body, knowing that, as he is both mind and matter,
each reacts the one upon the other. Neglect or mere
mortification of the body is more 'apt to produce

1 Thus, by raising Kundali Shakti to the Manipura centre, power
may (it is kid) be acquired over fire.

2 Subiect to Dharma. Yama, Niyama, etc. In any case where the
end sought is purely spiritual there is Yairagya or renunciation.

btjube Doac cne uatiiayogi is. Jt is possible to be a suc-
cessful Dhyana-Yogi aud yet to be weak in body and
health, sick, and short-lived. His body, and not he him-
self, determines when he shall die. He cannot die at will.
The ecstasis, which he calls “Liberation while yet living”
(Jivanmukta), is (so it was said to me) not a state like that
of real liberation. He may be still subject to a suffering
body, from which he escapes only at death, when, he is
liberated. His ecstasy is in the nature of a meditation
which passes into the Void (Bhavana samadhi) effected
through negation of thought (Chittavritti) and detachment
from the 'world— a process in which the act of raising the
central power of the body takes no part. By his effort ^
the mind, which is a product of Kundalini as Prakriti
Shakti, together with its worldly desires, is stilled, so that
the veil produced by mental functioning is removed from
Consciousness. In Layayoga Kundalini Herself, when
roused by the Yogi (for such rousing is his act and part),
achieves for him this illumination. But why, it may be
asked, should one trouble over the body and its central
power, the more particularly that there are unusual risks
and difficulties involved ? The answer has been already
given— alleged certainty and facility of realisation through
the agency of the power which is Knowledge itself (Jnana-
rfipa shakti) ; an intermediate acquisition of powers (Siddhi) ;
and both intermediate and final enjoyment. This answer
may, however, usefully be developed, as a fundamental

teilOlaBTlOAt BASBS 01* THtS YOGtA

The Shakta Taiitra claims to give both enjoyment ^
(Bhukti) in this and the next world, and liberation (Mukti)
from all worlds. This claim is based on a profoundly true

principle.^ If the ultimate reality is the one which exists
in two aspects of quiescent enjoyment of the Self in libera-
tion from all form and of active enjoyment of objects— that
is, as pure Spirit and Spirit in matter— then a complete
union with Reality demands such unity in both of its
asneets. It must be known both “ here” (Iha) and “ there
(Amutra). When rightly apprehended and practised, there
is truth in the doctrine which teaches that man should
make the best of- both worlds.^ There is no real incom-
patibility between the two, provided action is taken in
• conformity with the universal law of manifestation. It is
held to be false teaching that happiness hereafter can only
be had by neglect to seek it now, or in deliberately sought
for suffering and mortification. It is the one Shiva who is
the supreme blissful experience, and who appears in the
form of man with a life of mingled pleasure and pain. Both
happiness here and the bliss of liberation here and here-
after may be attained if the identity of these Shivas be
realised in every human act. This will be achieved by
making every human function, without exception, a religi-
ous aSi of sacrifice and worship (Yajna). In the ancient

1 As there are persons who always associate with the word “enjoy ■
Tnent ” (Bhoo-a) “ beer and skittles,” it is necessary to say that that is
Mt the necessary iinplioation of the word Bhoga, nor the sense in which
it is here nsed^ Philosophically, Bhoga is the perception of objects
upon which enjoyment, or it may be suffering, ensues. Here any form
of sense or intellectual enjoyment is intended. All life in the world of
form is' enjoyment.

2 Which it is possible to adopt without approval of any particulai

,• I- ^ 1-+ miv he nut. There are some dangerous prae-

tos^hich in the hands of inferior persons have led to results which
have given the Shastra in this respect its ill repute.

3 “Worlds,” because that is the English phrase Here, however,

the antithesis is between the world (whether as earth or heaven) and
liberation from all worlds.

THE Six OENTEES AND THE SERPENT POWER

Vaidik ritual enjoyment by way of food and drink was
preceded, and accompanied by, ceremonial sacrifice and
ritual. Such enjoyment was the fruit of the sacrifice
and the gift of the Gods. At a higher stage in the life
of a Sadhaka it is offered to the One from whom all
gifts come and of whom the Devatas are inferior limit-
ed forms. But this offering also involves a dualism
from which the highest Monistic (Advaita) Sadhana of
the Shakta-Tantra is free. Here the individual life and
the world-life are known as one. And so the Tantrik
Sadhaka, when eating or drinking,^ or fulfilling any other
of the natural functions of the body, does so, saying and
believing, Shivo’ham (“ I am Shiva ”), Bhairavo’hain
(“ I am Bhairava Sa’ham (“ I am She ”).® It is not
merely the separate individual who thus acts and enjoys.
It is Shiva who does so in and through him. Such a one
recognises, as has been w'ell said,^ that his life and the
play of all its activities are not a thing apart, to be held
and pursued egotistically for its and his own separate
sake, as though enjoyment was something to be seized
from life by his own unaided strength and with a sense
of separateness; but his life and all its activities are
conceived as part of the divine action in nature (Shakti)
manifesting and operating in the form of man. He
realises in the pulsing beat of his heart the rhythm
which throbs. through, and is the sign of, the universal life.
To neglect, or to deny the needs of the body, to think of
it as something not divine, is to neglect and deny that

1 Thns in the Shakta ritual the Sadhaka who takes the wine-eup
pours the wine as a libation into the mouth of Kundali Shakti, the
Shakti appearing in the form of himself.

^ A name of Shiva.

3 That is, the Mother of all appearing in the form of Her
worshipper,

4 By BJ, Arobindo Ghose in the Arya.

TnEOIiETiOAt BASES OF THIS YOGA 297

greater life of wliioli it is a part, and to falsify the great
doctrine of the unity of all and of the ultimate identity
of Matter and Spirit. Governed by such a concept, even
the lowliest physical needs take on a cosmic significance.
The body is Shakti. Its needs are Shakti’s needs ; when
man enjoys, it is Shakti who enjoys through him. In all
he sees and does it is the Mother who looks and acts. His
eyes and hands are Hers. The whole body and all its
functions are Her manifestation. To fully realise Her as
such is to perfect this particular manifestation of Hers
which is himself. Man, when seeking to be the master
of himself, so seeks on all the planes, physical, mental,
and spiritual ; nor can they be severed, for they are all
related, being but differing aspects of the one all-per-
vading Consciousness. Who is the more divinp, he who
neglects and spurns the body or mind that he may attain
some fancied spiritual superioihty, or he who rightly
cherishes both as forms of the one Spirit which they clothe?
Realisation is more speedily and truly attained by dis-
cerning Spirit in, and as, all being and its activities, than
by fleeing from and casting these aside as being either
unspiritual or illusory and impediments in the path.^
If not I’ightly conceived, they may be impediments and
the cause of fall, otherwise they become instruments of
attainments ; and what others are there to hand ? A.nd
so the Kularnava Tantra says : “ By what men fall, by
that they rise.” When acts are done in the right feeling
and frame of mind (Bhava), those acts give enjoyment
(Biiukti) ; and the repeated and prolonged Bhava pro-
duces at length that divine experience (Tattvajnana)
which is liberation. When the Mother is seen in all

1 The first is tlie Tantrik method of applying Vedantio truth ; the
second, the ascetic or Mayavadin method, with a gi-eatne,ss of its own,
but le.ss conforming, I think, to the needs of the mass of men,

38

298 THE Sll OBlfTRES AND THE SERPENT POWeB

things, She is at length realised as She is when beyond,
them all.

These general principles have their more frequent
application in the life of the world before entrance on the
path of Yoga proper. The Yoga here described is, how-
ever, also an application of these same principles in so
far as it is claimed that thereby both Bhukti and Mukti
are attained. Ordinarily it is said that where there is
Yoga there is no Bhoga (enjoyment), but in Kaula teaching
Yoga is Bhoga and Bhoga is Yoga, and the world itself
becomes the seat of liberation (“ Yogo bhogayate,
mokshayate sangsarah ”).^

In Kundali Yoga enjoyment (Bhoga), and powers
(Siddhi) may be had at each of the centres to which the
Central Power is brought and by continuance of the
practice upward the enjoyment which is Liberation may
be had.

By the lower processes of Hathayoga it is sought to
attain a perfect physical body which will also be a wholly
fit instrument by which the mind may function. A perfect
mind again approaches, and in Samadhi passes into, pure
Consciousness itself. The Hathayogi thus seeks a body
which shall be as strong as steel, healthy, free from
suffering, and therefore long-lived. Master of the body,
he is master of both life and death. His lustrous form
enjoys the vitality of youth. He lives as long as he has
the will to live and enjoy in the world of forms. His
death is the “ death at will,” when making the great and
wonderfully expressive gesture of dissolution ^ he grandly
departs. But it may be said the Hathayogis do get sick

1 Yogo bhogayate saksbat dusnkritain sukritayate
Moksbayate hi sangsarab kauladbarme kiilesbvari,

(Kularnava Taiitra.)

2 Sangbaramudra, the gesture which signifies dissolution, I^ow I
am about to die

TH BOB BTIOAL BASES OB THIS TOGA

299

and die. In the first place, the full discipline is one of
difiicnlty and risk, and can only be pursued under the
guidance of a skilled Guru. As the Goraksha Sanghita
says, unaided and unsuccessful practice may lead not only
to disease, but death. He who seeks to conquer the Lord
of Death incurs the risk on failure of a more speedy con-
quest by Him. All who attempt this Yoga do not, of
course, succeed, or meet with the same measure of success.
Those who fail, not only incur the infirmities of ordinary
men, but others brought on by practices which have been
ill pursued, or for which they are not fit. Those, again,
who do succeed, do so in varying degree. One may
prolong his life to the sacred age of 84, others to 100,
others yet further. In theoi’y, at least, those who are
perfected (Sidd ha) go from this plane when they will.
All have not the same capacity or opportunity through
want of will, bodily strength, or circumstance. All may not
be willing or able to follow the strict rules necessary for
success. Nor does modern life offer in general the oppor-
tunities for so complete a physical culture. All men may
not desire such a life, or may think the attainment of it
not worth the trouble involved. Some may wish to be rid
of their body, and that as speedily as possible. It is
therefore said that it is easier to gain liberation than
deathlessness. The former may be had by unselfishness,
detachment from the world, moral and mental discipline.
But to conquer death is harder than this ; for these
qualities and acts will not alone avail. He who does so
conquer holds life in the hollow of one hand, and if he be a
successful (Siddha) Yogi, liberation in the other. He has
enjoyment and liberation. He is the Emperor who is
master of the Avorld and the possessor of the bliss which is
beyond all worlds. Therefore it is claimed by the Hatha-
yogi that every Sadhana is inferior to Hathayoga.,

1 See my “ Shabti and Sbakta

* The statements in the Tantras that this union is liberation (Mukti)
18 mere Stuti — that is, praise in the Indian fashion of the subject in
hand, -which goes beyond the actual fact. The European reader who
takes such statements au pied de la lettre and ridicules them makes
himself (to the kno-wing) ridiculous. What actually happens in such
case is a fugitive bliss, which, like all bliss, emanates from the Great
Bliss, but is a pale reflection of it which nowise, in itself, secures im-
munity from future rebirth. It is the bliss of this lower Sadhana, as
the union of Kundalini Shakti with Shiva is that of the higher.

3 As the Parapraveshika beautifully calls Her. Toginihridaya
Tantra says, “ She is the heart, for from Her all things issue.”

^ This, as the Yogiiii Tantra says, is the coition (Maithuna) of
those who are Yati (who have controlled their passions).

® This term indicates the enjoyment which arises from the union
of male and female, which may be either of bodies or of their inner
principles.

300 THE SIX OKNTEBS AND THE SERPENT POWER

The Hathayogi who rouses Kundalini gains various
occult powei’S (Siddhi) and enjoyment thereby. At every
centre to which he leads Kundalini he experiences a
special form of bliss (Ananda) and gains special powers
(Siddhi). If he has Vairagya for these he carries Her to the
Shiva of his cerebral centre, and enjoys the Supreme Bliss,
which in its nature is that of Liberation, and which, when
established in permanence, is Liberation itself on the
loosening of the spirit and body. She who “ shines like
a chain of lights” — -a lightning-flash— in the centre
of his body is the “ Inner Woman ” to whom reference
was made when it was said, “ What need have I of
any outer woman ? I have an Inner Woman within
myself.” The Vira (“ heroic ”) I Sadhaka, knowing him-
self as the embodiment of Shiva (Shivo’ham), unites with
woman as the embodiment of Shakti on the physical
plane. ^ The Divya (“ divine ”) Sadhaka or Yogi unites
within himself his own principles, female and male, which
are the “ Heart of the Lord ” (Hridayam parameshituh) ^
or Shakti, and Her Lord Consciousness or Shiva. It is
their union which is the mystic coition (Maithuna) of the
Tantras.^ There are two forms of Union (Samarasya) ® —

THBOEBTIOAL BASES OF TH IS YOGA

301

I

namely, the first, which is the gross (Sthiila), or the union
of the physical embodiments of the Supreme Consciousness ;
and the second, which is the subtle (Sukshma), or the
union of the quiescent and active principles in Conscious-
ness itself. It is the latter which is liberation.

Lastly, what in a philosophical sense is the nature of
the process here described ? Shortly stated, energy (Shakti)
polarises itself into two forms — namely, static or potential
(Eundalini), and dynamic (the working forces of the body
as Prana). Behind all activity there is a static back-
ground. This static centre in the human body is the
central Serpent Power in the Muladhara ^oot support).
It is the power which is the static support (Adhai’a) of the
whole body, and all its moving Pranik forces. This
centre (Kendra) of power is a gross form of Chit or
Consciousness— that is, in itself (Svarupa) it is Conscious-
ness and by appearance it is a power which, as the highest
form of force, is a manifestation of it. Just as there is a
distinction (though identity at base) between the supreme
quiescent Consciousness and its active power (Shakti), so,
when Consciousness manifests as energy (Shakti), it
possesses the twin aspects of potential and kinetic energy.
In Advaita Vedanta there can be no partition, in fact, of
Reality. To the perfect eye of its Siddha the process of
becoming is an ascription (Adhyasa) to the ultimate Real.
To the imperfect eye of the Sadhaka— that is, the aspirant
for Siddhi (perfected accomplishment)— to the spirit which
is still toiling through the lower planes and variously iden-
tifying itself with them, becoming is tending to appear.

1 To the eye of Siddhi, to the spirit who is Udasina (simple ■witness

unmindful of the external world), becoming is Mhyasa and nothing

real (in the Indian sense of that term, as used by Shaugkara). Creation
(Srishti) is Vivartta, or apparent and not real evolution (Parinama),
Adhyasa! is attributing to something that which it does not reaUy
possess.

THK SIX CKNTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

and appearance is real The Shakta Tantra is a render-
ing of Vedantic truth from this practical point of view, and
represents the world-process as a polarisation in Conscious-
ness itself. This polarity as it exists in, and as, the body,
is destroyed by Yoga, which disturbs the equilibrium of
bodily consciousness which is the result of the maintenance
of these two poles. In the human body the potential pole
of energy, which is the supreme powmr, is stirred to action,
on which the moving forces (dynamic Shakti) supported by
it are drawn thereto, and the whole dynamism ^ thus
engendered moves upward to unite with the quiescent
Consciousness in the highest Lotus.* This matter has been
so well put by my friend Professor Pramathanatha
Mukhyopadhyaya that I cannot impi'ove on his account,*
and therefore cite it in lieu of giving a further description
of my own :

“ When you say that Kundali Shakti is the primordial
Shakti at rest, I am led to think of an analogy (and it
may be more than an analogy) in modern science. Cosmic
energy in its physical aspect may be considered either as
static or as dynamic, the former being a condition of
equilibrium, the latter a condition of motion or change of
relative position. Thus a material thing apparently at
rest (there being no absolute rest except in pure Conscious-
ness or Chit) should be regarded as energy or Shakti
equilibrated, the various elements of it holding one another

1 The projecting power of consciousness withdraws its projections
into the sensual world, and the power of Consciousness merges in Con-
sciousness itself.

3 Why here, it may be asked, seeing that Consciousness is all per-
vading ? True ; but there the tamasik force of Maya is at its lowest
strength. Therefore Consciousness is reached there.

3 In a letter to me, in reply to one of mine answering some inquiries
made by him as regards this Yoga. He wrote that my letter had sug-
gested certain ideas “ on a subject of supreme interest pbilosopbically
and practically in tbe life of a Hindu,” which I reproduce in the text.
The bracketed translations of tbe Sanskrit words are mine.

I’fiEOEETIOAL BASES 0® THtS TOGA OOd

ill check (or, as the mathematicians "will say, the algebraic
Slim of the forces being zero). Of course, in any given
case the equilibrium is relative rather than absolute. The
important thing to note is this polarisation of Shakti into

two forms— static and dynamic.

“ In the tissues of a living body, again, the operative
energy (whatever the nature of that may be, whether we
believe in a special ‘ vital force ’ or not) polarises itself into
two similar forms — anabolic and katabolic— one tending to
change and the other to conserve the tissues, the actual
condition of the tissues being simply the resultant of these
two coexistent or concurrent activities.

“In the mind or experience also this polarisation or
polarity is patent to reflection. In my own writings ^ I
have constantly urged this polarity between pure Chit and
the stress which is involved in it : there is a stress or
Shakti developing the mind through an infinity of forms
and changes ; but all these forms and changes are known
as involved in the pure and unbounded ether of awareness
(Chidakasha). This analysis therefore exhibits the pri-
mordial Shakti in the same two polar forms as before
static and dynamic— and here the polarity is most funda-
mental and approaches absoluteness.

“ Lastly, let us consider for one moment the atom of
modern science. The chemical atom has ceased to be an
atom (indivisible unit of matter). We have instead fte
electron theory. According to this, the so-called atom is a
miniature universe very much like our own solar system.
At the centre of this atomic system we have a charge of
positive electrioty round which a cloud of negative charges
(called electrons) is supposed to revolve, just as myriads of
planets and smaller bodies revolve round the sun. Ihe

1“ Approaches to Truth,” “The Patent Wonder,” valuable pre-
sentments in modern terms of the ancient Vedantic teaching.

I A k

1 ^'

t/

S04 THli sit OBiJDRES AN£> tHfe SEEfEMT EoWfift

positive and the negative charges hold each other in check,
so that the atom is a condition of equilibrated energy, and
does not therefore ordinarily break up, though it may
possibly break up and set free its equilibrated store of
energy, as probably it does in the emanations of the
radium. What do we notice here ? The same polarity of
Shakti into a static and a dynamic partner— m^., the positive
charge at rest at the centre, and the negative charges in
motion round about the centre : a most suggestive analogy
or illustration, perhaps, of the cosmic fact. The illustration
may be carried into other domains of science and
philosophy, but I may as well forbear going into details.
For the present we may, I think, draw this important
conclusion ; .

“ Shakti, as manifesting itself in the universe, divides
itself into two polar aspects — static and dynamic — which
implies that you cannot have it in a dynamic form without
at the same time having it in a corresponding static form,
much like the poles of a magnet. In any given sphere of
activity of force we must have, according to this cosmic
principle, a static background— Shakti at rest or ‘ coiled,’
as the Tantras say. ^

“ Before I proceed, let me point out what I conceive
to be the fundamental significance of our Tantric and
Pauranic Kali. This figure or Murti is both real and
symbolic, as indeed every Murti in the so-called Hindu
mythology is. Now, the Divine Mother Kali is a symbol of
the cosmic truth just explained. Sadashiva, on whose
breast She dances, nude and dark, is the static background
of pure Chit, white and inert (Shavarupa), because pure
Chit is in itself Svaprakasha (self-manifest) and Nishkriya
(actionless). At the same time, apart from and beyond
Consciousness there can be nothing — no power or Shakti
— hence the Divine Mother stands on the bosom of

THEORETICAL BASES OP THIS TOGA

305

the Divine Father. The Mother Herself is all activity
and Griinamayi (in Her aspect as Prakrit! composed of the
Grunas). Her nakedness means that, though She encom-
passes all, there is nothing to encompass Herself; her
darkness means that She is inscrutable, Avang-manasa-
gocharii (beyond the reach of thought and speech). Of
course, this is no partition of reality into two (there lies
the imperfection of the Sangkhya doctrine of Purusha and
Prakrit!, which is otherwise all right), but merely polari-
sation in our experience of an indivisible fact which is the
primordial (Adya) Shakti itself. Thus Chit is also Shakti.
Shiva is Shakti and Shakti is Shiva, as the Tantras say.
It is G-unashraya (support of Gunas) as well as Gunamaya
(whose substance is Gunas) ; Nirguna (attributeless) as
well as Saguna (with attribute), as said in a well-known
passage of the Chandi.

“ Your suggestive hint ^ makes the nature of the Kun-
dali Shakti rather clear to me. You are quite right,
perhaps, in saying that the cosmic Shakti is the Samashti
(collectivity) in relation to which the Kundali in the bodies
is only the Vyashti (individual) : it is an illustration, a
reproduction on a miniature scale, a microcosmic plan, of
the whole. The law or principle of the whole— that of
macrocosmic Shakti— should therefore be found in the
Kundali. That law we have seen to be the law of polarisa-
tion into static-dynamic or potential-kinetic aspects. In
the living body, therefore, there must be such polarisation.
Now, the Kundali coiled three times and a half at the
Muladhara is the indispensable and unfailing static back-
ground of the dynamic Shakti operative in the whole body,
carrying on processes and working out changes. The body,
therefore, may be compared to a magnet with two poles.
The Muladhara is the static pole in relation to the rest of

1 That Kundalini is the static Shakti.

306 THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

the body, w'hicli is dynamic ; the working the body neces-
sarily presupposes and finds such a static support, hence
perhaps ^ the name IVIuladhara, the fundamental support.

In one sense, the static Shakti at the Muladhara is neces-
sarily coexistent with the creating and evolTing Shakti of
the body, because the dynamic aspect or pole can never be
without its static counterpart. In another sense, it is the
Shakti left over (you have yourself pointed this out, and
the italics are yours) after the Prithivi— the last of the
Bhutas^ — has been created, a magazine of power to be drawn
upon and utilised for further activity, if there should arise
any need for such. Taking the two senses together (yours
as well as mine), Shakti at the Muladhara is both coexistent
with every act of creation or manifestation and is the
residual effect of such act— both cause and effect, in fact—
an idea which, deeply looked into, shows no real contradic-
tion. There is, in fact, what the physicist will describe as
a cycle or circuit in action. Let us take the impregnated
oyiixn—the earliest embryological stage of the living body.
In it the Kundali Shakti is already presented in its two
polar aspects : the ovum, which the mother-element
represents, one pole (possibly the static), and the spermata-
zoon, which is the father-element, represents the other
(possibly the dynamic).* From their fusion proceed those
processes which the biologist calls differentiation and inte-
gration ; but in all this process of creation the cycle can
be fairly easily traced. Shakti flows out of the germinal
cell (fertilised ovum), seizes upon foreign matter, and
assimilates it, and thereby grows in bulk ; divides and
subdivides itself, and then again co-ordinates all its
divided parts into one organic whole. Now in all this

1 Oertainlj.

2 Tlie process of fertilisation is dealt with in the Matrikahheda
Tantra.

THEORETICAL BASKS OE THIS TOGA

307

■we have the cycle. Seizing upon foreign matter is an
outwardly directed activity, assimilation is an inwardly
directed activity or return current; cell division and
multiplication is an outwardly directed operation, co-
ordination is inwardly directed ; ^ and so on. The force
in the germ-cell is overflowing, but also continuously it is
flowing back into itself, the two operations presupposing
and sustaining each other, as in every circuit. The given
stock of force in the germ-cell, which is static so long as
the fusion of the male and female elements does not take
place in the womb, is the necessary starting-point of all
creative activity ; it is the primordial cause, therefore, in
relation to the body — primordial as well as constantly
given, unceasing. Qn the other hand, the reaction of every
creative action, the return current or flowing back of every
unfolding overflow, constantly renews this starting force,
changes it without changing its general condition of relative
equilibrium (and this is quite possible, as in the case of any
material system) ; the force in the germ-cell may therefore
be also regarded as a perpetual effect, something left over
and set against the working forces of the body. Many
apparently inconsistent ideas enter into this conception, and
they have to be reconciled.

" “1. We start with a force in the germ-cell which is
statical at first (though, like a dicotyledon seed, or even a
modern atom, it involves within itself both a statical and a
dynamical pole ; otherwise, from pure rest, involving no
possibility of motion, no motion could ever arise). Let this
be the Kundali coiled.

“ 2. Then there is creative impulse arising out of it ;
this is motion out of rest. By this, the Kundali becomes
partly static and partly dynamic, or ejects, so to say, a
dynamic pole out of it in order to evolve the body, but
^ This outflow and inflow is a eotninon Tan trik notion.

308

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

remaining a static pole or background itself all along. In
no part of the process has the Kundali really uncoiled itself
altogether, or even curtailed its three coils and a half.
Without this Muladhara Shakti remaning intact no evolu-
tion could be possible at all. It is the hinge upon which
everything else turns.

“ 3. Each creative act again reacts on the Muladhara
Shakti, so that such reaction, without disturbing the
relative rest of the coiled Shakti, changes its volume or
intensity, but does not curtail or add to the number of coils-
For instance, every natural act o£ respiration reacts on the
coiled Shakti at the Muladhara, but it does not commonly
make much difference. But Pra nay ama powerfully racts
on it, so much so that it awakes the dormant power and
sends it piercing through the centres. Now, the common
description that the Kundali uncoils Herself then and goes
up the Sushumna, leaving the Muladhara, should, I thinkj
be admitted with caution. That static background can never
be absolutely dispensed with. As you have yourself rightly
observed, ‘ Shakti can never be depleted, but this is how to
look at it.’ Precisely ; the Kundali, when powerfully
worked upon by Yoga, sends forth an emanation or ejection
in the likeness of Her own self (like the ‘ ethereal double ’
of the Theosophists and Spiritualists) which pierces through
the various centres until it becomes blended, as you point
out, with the Mahakundali of Shiva at the highest or
seventh centre. Thus, while this ‘ ethereal double ’ or self-
ejection of the coiled power at the Muladhara ascends the
Sushumna, the coiled power itself does not and need not
stir from its place. It is like a spark given from an over-
saturated ^ electro-magnetic machine ; or, rather, it is like
the emanations of radium which do not sensibly detract
from the energy contained in it. This last, perhaps,

1 Overcliarged.

THBOBETIOAL BASES OF THIS TOGA

309

is the closest physical parallel of the case that -we
are trying to understand. As a -well-known passage
in the TJpanishad has it, ‘ The whole (Puma) is sub-
tracted from the whole, and yet the whole remains.’ I
think our present case comes very near to this. The
Eundali at the Muladhara is the whole primordial Shakti
in monad or germ or latency ; that is why it is coiled. The
Kundali that mounts up the NMi is also the whole Shakti
in a specially dynamic form — an eject likeness of the
Eternal Serpent. The result of the last fusion (there are
successive fusions in the various centres also) in the
Sahasrara is also the whole, or Puma. This is how I look
at it. In this conception the permanent static background
is not really depleted, much less is it dispensed with.

“4. When again I say that the volume or intensity
of the coiled power can be affected (though not its
configuration and relative equilibrium), I do not mean to
throw up the principle of conservation of energy in relation
to the Kundali, which is the embodiment of all energy. It
is merely the conversion of static (potential) energy into
dynamic (kinetic) energy in part, the sum remaining
constant. As we have to deal with infinities here, an
exact physical rendering of this principle is not to be
expected. The Yogi therefore simply ‘ awakens,’ and
never creates Shakti. By the way, the germ-cell which
evolves the body does not, according to modern biology,
cease to be a germ-cell in any stage of the complicated
process. The original germ-cell splits up into two : one
half gradually develops itself into the body of a plant or
animal — this is the somatic cell ; the other half remains
encased within the body practically unchanged, and is
transmitted in the process of reproduction to the offspring—
that is, the germ-plasm. Now, this germ-plasm is unbroken
through the whole line of propagation. This is W eismann .s

310

THE SIX CINTBES AND TAB SEEPENT POWER

doctrine of ‘continuity of tbe germ-plasm,’ whicb has
been widely accepted, though it is but an hypothesis.”

In a subsequent postscript the Professor wrote *

“1. Shakti being either static or dynamic, every
dynamic form necessarily presupposes a static background.
A purely dynamic activity (which is motion in its physical
aspect) is impossible without a static support or ground
(Adhara). Hence the philosophical doctrine of absolute
motion or change, as taught by old Heraclitus and the
Buddhists and by modern Bergson, is wrong ; it is based
neither upon correct logic nor upon clear intuition. The
constitution of an atom reveals the static-dynamic polari-
sation of Shakti ; other and more complex forms of exist-
ence also do the same. In the living body this necessary
static background is Muladhara, where Shakti is Kundali
coiled. All the functional activity of the body, starting
from the development of the germ-cell, is correlated to,
and sustained by the Shakti concentrated at, the Muladhara.
Cosmic creation, too, ending with the evolution of Prithivi
Tattva (it is, however, an unending process in a different
sense, and there perhaps Henri Bergson, who elaims that
the creative impulse is ever original and resourceful, is
right), also presupposes a cosmic static background (over
and above Ghidakasha — ether of Consciousness), which is
the Mahakundali Shakti in the Chinmayadeha (body of
Consciousness) of Parameshvara or Parameshvarl (the
Supreme Lord in male and female aspect). In the earliest
stage of creation, when the world arises only as a mist in
Divine Consciousness, it requires, as the principle or pole of
Tat (That), the correlate principle or pole of Aham (I) ; in
the development of the former, the latter serves as the static
background. In our own experiences, too, ‘apperception’
or consciousness of self is the sustaining background
— a string, so to say, which holds together all the loose

THEOEETICAI, BASES OP THIS YOOA

311

beads of onr elements of feeling. The sustaining ground
or Adhara, as the seat of static force, therefore is found,
in one forni or other, in every phase and stage of creative
evolution. The absolute or ultimate form is, of course,
Ohit-Shakti (Consciousness as power) itself, the unfailing
light of awareness about which our Gayatri (Mantra)
says: ‘ Which sustains and impels all the activities of
Buddhi.’ This fact is symbolised by the Kali-murti : not
a mere symbol, however.

“2. My remarks about the rising or awakening of the
Serpent Power at the Muladhara have been, perhaps,
almost of the nature of a paradox. The coiled power,
though awakened, uncoiled, and rising, never really stirs
from its place; only a sort of ‘ ethereal double ’ or ‘ eject ’
is unloosed and sent up through the system of centres.
Now, in plain language, this ethereal double or eject means
the . dynamic equivalent of the static power concentrated at
the Mhla, or root. Whenever by Pranayama of Bijamantra,
or any other suitable means, the Muladhara becomes, like
an electro-magnetic machine, oversaturated (though the
Kundali Shakti at the Mula is infinite and exhaustless, yet
the capacity of a given finite organism to contain it in a
■static form is limited, and therefore there may be over-
saturation), a dynamic or operative equivalent of the static
power is set up, possibly by a law similar to Nature’s law
of induction, by which the static power itself is not deplet-
ed or rendered other than static. It is not that static
energy at the Miila wholly passes over into a dynamic form
— the coiled Kundali leaving the Mula, thus making it a
void ; that cannot be, and, were it so, all dynamic operation
in the body would cease directly for want of a background.
The coiled power remains coiled or static, and yet something
apparently passes out of the M'u.la — viz., the dynamic equi-
valent. This paradox can perhaps be explained in two ways ;

312 THU SIX CENTBES AND THE SEEPENT POWER

“ (ffl) One explanation was suggested in ray main
letter. The potential Kundali Shakti becomes partly
con vertM into kinetic Shakti, and yet, since Shakti, even
as given in the Mula-centre, is an infinitude, it is not
depleted : the potential store always remains unexhausted.
I referred to a passage in the Upanishad about Purna. In
this case, the dynamic equivalent is a partial conversion of
one mode of energy into another. In Laya-yoga (here
described) it is ordinarily so. When, however, the infinite
potential becomes an infinite kinetic — when, that is to say,
the coiled power at the Mula becomes absolutely uncoiled
— we have necessarily the dissolution of the three bodies
(Sthula, Linga, and Karana— gross, subtle, causal), and
consequently Videhamukti (bodiless liberation), because
the static background in relation to a particular form of
existence has now wholly given way, according to our
hypothesis. But Mahakundali remains; hence individual
Mukti (liberation) need not mean dissolution of Samsara
(transmigrating worlds) itself. Commonly, however, as
the Tantra says, ‘ Pitva pitva punah pitva,’ etc. ^

“ (fe) The other explanation is suggested by the law
of induction. Take an electro-magnetic machine ; ^ if a
suitable substance be placed near it, it will induce in it an
equivalent and opposite kind of electro-magnetism * without
losing its own stock of energy. In conduction, energy
flows over into another thing, so that the source loses and
the other thing gains what it has lost, and its gain is
similar in kind to the loss. Not so induction. There the
source does not lose, and the induced energy is equivalent
and opposite in kind to the inducing energy. Thus a

I “ Having drunk, having drunk, having again drunk,” a passage
in the Knlarnava Tantra signifying not actual drinking (as some
suppose), but repeated raising of Kundaiini.

* We may say “ Take a magnet ” and “ magnetism ”.

THEOBETIOAL BASES OF THIS TOGA

818

positive charge will induce an equivalent negative charge
in a neighbouring object. Now, shall we suppose that the
Muladhara, when it becomes over-saturated, induces in the
neighbouring centre (say, Svadhishthana) a dynamic (not
static) equivalent ? ^ Is this what the rise of the Serpent
Power really means ? The explanation, I am tempted to
think, is not perhaps altogether fantastic.”

In reply to this highly interesting and illustrative
account of my friend, 1 wrote suggesting some ditkculties
in the way of the acceptance of his statement that Kun-
dali-Shakti did not, in fact. Herself uncoil and ascend,
but projected upwards an emanation in the likeness of
Her own self. The difficulty I felt was this: In the first
place, the Yoga books, to which full credence must be
given in this matter, unequivocally affirm that Kundali
Herself does, in fact, ascend. This is borne out by some
inquiries made of a Tantrik Pandit very familiar with his
Shastra * after the receipt of the letter quoted. As the body
of the Yogi still lives, though in an inert corpse-like condi-
tion, when consciousness of it is lost, I asked him how the
body was sustained when Kundali left Her central abode.

■ His answer was that it was maintained by the nectar which
flows from the union of Shiva and Shakti in the Sahasrara,
This nectar is an ejection of power generated by their
union. If Kundali does not ascend, but a mere emanative
spark of Her, how (he further asked) is it that the body
becomes cold and corpse-like? Would this follow if the
power, still remained at its centre, and merely sent forth a
dynamic equivalent of itself ? There were further difficulties

1 Here is the seat of the first moving, or PashyantI Shahda.

2 Though not practising himself, his brother, from whom he had
learnt, was an adept in this Toga. His statements I have always found
of peculiar value. It must, however, be remembered that, however
learned or practised a Pandit or Yogi may be, it is possible for him to be
ignorant- of the scientific implications of his doctrine and practice.

l' '

■

■■i

I' I

814 THE sii OBliTBES AND THE SEEPENT POWER

in tHe theory put forward by my friend, though it may be
that there are also difficulties in the acceptance of the
statement that the Muladhara is entirely depleted of the
great power. I suggested that Kundali was the static
centre of the whole body as a complete conscious organism,
and that each of the parts of the body and their constituent
cells must have their own static centres, which would
uphold such parts and cells; and that the life of the body,
as a collection of material particles (from which the general
organic consciousness as a whole was withdrawn), was
sustained by the nectar which flowed from Kundali Shakti
when in union with Shiva in the Sahasrara. In reply.
Professor P. Mukhopadhyaya dealt with the matter as
follows :

“ According to my presentation of the case, something

— viz., a dynamic equivalent or ‘ operative double ’ ^^is

certainly sent forth from the Muladhara, but this basic
centre or seat is not depleted or rendered void of static
energy in consequence of that operation. The Mula (root),
as the seat of static or coiled power, can never be dispensed
with. It is the sine qua non of all functions of the triple
body (gross, subtle, causal). It is, so to say, the buffer or
base against which any activity of the Jiva (embodied
consciousness) must react or recoil, like a naval or any
other kind of heavy gun against its base or emplacement.
Thus, while the dynamic or uncoiled Shakti ascends the
axis, the static or coiled Shakti retains its place at the
Mula, and remains as the very possibility of the dynamic
upheaval. The ascending power is simply the dynamic
counterpart of the static ground. To say that Kundali
leaves its place and ascends is only to say that it ceases to
be Kundali and becomes dynamic. The ascending power
is therefore uncoiled or non-Kundali power; it is the
dynamic expression of the Kundali power. So far all can

THEOEETICAL BASES OF THIS YOGA

315

I

I

*

agree. But the question is : Is the Mula depleted or
deprived of all power (especially coiled power) when that
dynamical expression leaves it and ascends the axis ? Is
the dynamic expression wholly at the expense of the static
ground ? Should the latter cease in order that the former
may commence?

“ Here, I think, I must answer in the negative. It is
a case of power leaving as well as remaining — leaving
as dynamic and remaining as static ; it is the case of the
Kundali being uncoiled in one aspect or pole and remain-
ing still coiled in another aspect or pole. A paradox,
perhaps, but, like most paradoxes, it is likely to be true.

“ Is scriptural authority, which, by -the- by, I hold in
utmost reverence, really challenged by this interpreta-
tion ? The nature of the dynamic equivalent and its
relation to the static background have been indicated in
the previous two communications, and I need not dilate
on them. I have claimed, throughout that the Muladhara,
as the seat of static (ie., coiled) power, can never be ren-
dered a vacuum in relation to such power except in, the
circumstances of Videhamukti (bodiless liberation), when
the triple body (gross, subtle, causal) must dissolve, I
think, also, that the point of view which you have taken can
be reconciled with this interpretation of the matter. The
Kundali Shakti is the static aspect of the life of the whole
organised body, as you say rightly. The relation between
the lives of the individual cells and that of the whole
organism is not clearly understood in science. Is the com-
mon life a merely mechanical resultant of the lives of the
individual cells, or are the lives of the individual cells only
detailed manifestations of the common life ? In other words,
is the common life cause and the cell-lives effects or vice
versa ? Science is not yet settled on this point. As a sub-
scriber to the Shaktivada (doctrine of Shakti) I am inclined,

316

THE SIX CJEOTEES AND THE SEEPENT POWEE

however, to give primacy to the common life ; in the germ-
cell itself the common life is given in substance, and the
whole development of the Jivadeha (Jiva body) is only the
detailed carrying out in particulars of what has been
already given in substance, according to the principle of
Adrishta (Karma). Nevertheless, I am quite willing to
concede to the individual cells lives of semi-independence.
‘ Semi,’ because they require to be sustained to a consider-
able degree by the life of the whole. Benefit or injury to the
life of the whole reacts on the condition of the cells ; the
death of the whole life is followed by the death of the cells,
and so on. ’

" Now, in every cell there is, of course, static-dynamic
polarity ; in the whole organism, also, there is such polarity
or correlation. In the whole organism the static pole or
correlate is the coiled power at the Muladhara, and the
dynamic correlate is the operative power (the five Pranas
vis., Prana, Apana, Samana, tJdana, and Vyana), which
actually carries on the various functions of the body.
Ordinarily, therefore, this dynamic power is distributed over
the whole body, vitalising not merely the larger tissues, but
the microscopic cells. Now, the devitalisation (as you say)
of the body in Kundaliyoga or Shatchakrabheda is due, I
venture to think, not to the depletion or privation of the
static power at the Muladhara, but to the concentration or
convergence of the dynamic power ordinarily diffused over
the whole body, so that the dynamic equivalent which is
set up against the static background or Kundali Shakti is
only the diffused fivefold Prana gathered home — withdrawn
from the other tissues of the body — and concentrated in a
line along the axis. Thus ordinarily the dynamic equivalent
is the Prana diffused over all the tissues ; in Yoga it is
converged along the axis, the static equivalent or Kundali
Shakti enduring in both cases. Thus also the polarity or

THEORETICAL BASES OP THIS TOGA

317

,

correlation is maintained: in the former case between
Shakti at Mhladhara and the diffused Prana ; in the latter
case between Shakti at Mula and the conTerged Prana
along the axis. This will perhaps adequately explain
coldness, increased inertia, insensibility, etc., of the rest
of the body in Kundali Yoga of which you write. Oom-
monly in Yoga this withdrawal and convergence of Prana
is incomplete ; the residual Prana, together with the lives
of the cells, keeps the body alive, though inert or corpse-
like. In the case of complete withdrawal and focussing,
the cells will die and the body disintegrate.

“ On the other hand, if the coiled power were simply
and wholly Uncoiled (ie., dynamised) in Kundali Yoga,
then there should be an excess rather than a defect of
vitality all over the body ; nothing would be subtracted
from the already available dynamic energy of the body,
but something would be added to it on account of the static
power at the Miila being rendered kinetic, and going up the

axis and influencing neighbouring tissues.

“ Hence I should venture to conclude that the static
power at the base of the axis, without itself being depleted
or rendered other than static, induces or produces a
dynamic equivalent which is the diffused Prana of the
body gathered and con verged along the axis. 1 he states
in the process may thus be summarily indicated :

“1, To begin with, there is coiled power at the base
of the axis and its necessary correlate, the dynamic Prana,
diffused all over the body in the five forms.

“2. In Kundali Yoga some part of the already avail-
able dynamic Prana is made to act at the base of the axis
in a suitable manner, by which means the base or par-
ticularly the four-petalled Padma (lotus) which represents
this centre — becomes over-saturated, and reacts on the
whole diffused dynamic power (or Prana) of the body by

' K

318 THE SIX OENTEES AHD THE SEEPENT POWER

withdrawing it from the tissues and converging it alonff
he line of the axis. In this way the diffused dynamic
equivalent becomes the converged dynamic equivalent
along the axis. This is what the rising of the serpent
perhaps means, ^

“ (ft) In thus reacting, the coiled power has not lost
Its general equilibrium or static condition.

“ (6) The modus operandi of this reaction is difficult to
indicate, _ but it is probably (as suggested in my previous
communications) either (i) a partial conversion* of the
infinite coiled power into the sort of influence that can
bus gather the diffused Prana, and converge it in its
own resultant line along the axis, or (ii) an inductive
action, analogous to electro-magnetic action, by which
e ranas ^ are collected and converged. In this latter
w ^ there IS no need for conversion of the static energy.
W e Shall have perhaps to choose between, or rather co-
ordinate, these two explanations in understandino- the
mo^ us operandi. In mathematical language, the diffused
Prana is a scalar quantity (having magnitude, but no
irection), while the converged Prana is a vector quantity
(having both magnitude and definite direction). ^

V 1 ^1’® witnessing with a Divya-

chakshu (inner eye) the progress of Kundali Yoga. ThLe

thrM-®]/-'''’ (Tadit) is vming from

e IWadhara, and gathering momentnm in going op

from Ohakra to OhiAra, till the consummation if reached

B„t to "“‘“y ("‘’“'Jo ‘1« Supreme Shiva).

But look back and behold the Kulakundalini is also

there at the Mula coiled three times and a half round the

Svayambhu Linga. She has left anti

tstarorl ov,.! • ^ ^ ^nd yet remained or

sta^ ed, and is again coming back to Herself. Is not this

vision supported by scriptural authority and the
experience of the Yogi ? ” ^

THEORETICAL BASES OF THIS TOGA

319

Putting aside detail, the main principle appears to be
that, when “ wakened,” Kundali Shakti either Herself
(or as my friend suggests in Her eject) ceases to he a
static power which sustains the world-consciousness, the
content of which is held only so long as She “sleeps,”
and, when once set in movement, is drawn to that other
static centre in the thousand-petalled lotus (Sahasrara),
^hich is Herself in union with the Shiva-consciousness, or
the consciousness of ecstasy beyond the world of forms.
When Kundall “ sleeps ” man is awake to this world.
When She “awakes” he sleeps— that is, loses all con-
sciousness of the world and enters his causal body. In
Yoga he passes beyond to formless Consciousness.

I have only to add, without further discussion of the
point, that practitioners of this Yoga claim that it is
higher than any other, ^ and that the Samadhi (ecstasy)
attained thereby is more perfect. The reason which they
allege is this : In Dhyanayoga ecstasy takes place through
detachment from the world and mental concentration,
leading to vacuity of mental operation (Vritti), or the
uprising of pure Consciousness unhindered by the limita-
tions of the mind.^ The degree to which this unveiling
of consciousness is effected depends upon the meditative
powers (dnanashakti) of the Sadhaka and the extent of
his detachment from the world. On the other hand
Kundali, who is all Shaktis, and who is therefore Jnana-
shakti itself, produces, when awakened by the Yogi, full

1 I do not say either that this is admitted or that it is a fact. Only
he who has had both true spiritual experience and has been through
this Yoga can say. I merely here state the facts. See the criticism,
ante, at p. 277. Another is perhaps suggested by the distinction made m
the Buddhist Tantras between natural and artificial Samadhi.

2 What, I believe, the Christian Scientist calls the “ mortal mind
In Indian doctrine mind is a temporal and limited manifestation of the
unlimited eternal Consciousness. As the states aye different, two terms
are better than one.

THE StX OENTEES AND THE SEBPBNT POWER

J Dana for him. Secondly, in the Samadhi of Dhyana Yoga
there is no rousing and union of Kundali Shakti, with the
accompanying bliss and acquisition of special powers
(Siddhi). Further, in Kundali Yoga there is not merely a
Samadhi through meditation, but through the central
power of the Jiva, a power which carries with it the forces
of both body and mind. The union in that sense is claimed
to be more complete than that enacted through mental
methods only. Though in both cases bodily consciousness
is lost, in Kundali Yoga not only the mind, but the body in
so far as it is represented by its central power (or, may be,
its eject), is actually united with Shiva. This union pro-
duces an enjoyment (Bhukti) which the Dhyanayogi does
not possess. Whilst both the Divya Yogi and the Vira
Sadh aka have enjoyment (Bhukti), that of the former is
infinitely more intense, being an experience of Bliss itself.
The enjoyment of the Vira Sadhaka is but a reflection'' of
it on the physical plane, a welling up of the true
bliss through the deadening coverings and trammels of
matter. Again, whilst it is said that both have liberation
(Mukti), this word is used in Vira Sadhana in a figurative
sense only, indicating a bliss which is the nearest approach
on the physical plane to that of Mukti, and a Bhava or
feeling of momentary union of Shiva and Shakti which
ripens in the higher Yoga Sadhana into the literal liberation
of the Yogi. He, in its fullest and literal sense, has both
Injoyment (Bhukti) and Liberation (Mukti). Hence its
claim to be the Emperor of all Yogas.

However this may be, I leave at this point the subject,
with the hope that others will continue the inquiry I have
here initiated. It, and other matters in the Tantra Shastra,
seem to me (whatever be their inherent value) worthy
of an investigation which they have not yet received.

A. A.

I

DESCRIPTION OF THE SIX
CENTRES

(SHATOHAKRA NIEtPANA)

Preliminary Verse

Now I speak of the first sprouting shoot (of the Yoga
plant) of complete realisation of the Brahman, which
is to he achieved, according to the Tantras, by means of
the six Chaki’as and so forth in their proper order.

’ COMMENTART

He alone who has become acquainted with the wealth ^ of the
six Lotuses^ by Maha-yoga is able to explain the inner principles 3
thereof. Not even the most excellent among the wise, nor the
oldest (in experience), is able, without the mercy of the Guru, ^ to
explain the inner principles ^ relating to the six Lotuses, replete
as they are with the greatness of Shu, ba, and Ha.

Now, the very merciful Purnananda Svami, wishful to rescue
the world sunk in the mire of misery, takes that task upon

^ Parichita-s/iafiambhoja-vibhava.

2 That is, the SAa^-ohakra ; six centres, which are : Muladhara
Svadhis7i^Ilana, Manipura, Anahata, Vishuddha, and Ajna.

3 Antas-tattva— f.e., relating to the sAai- chakra.

< Kripa-natha, Lord of Mercyf.e., the Guru.

5 S&a, Sa, Ha. b’^a=Final Liberation. _Sa=Knowledge. Ha=
Supreme Spirit ; also Brahma, Yishnn, and Shiva, respectively.

41

■

IW

■

■

2

THE SIX CENTEES AND THE SEEPENT POWER

himself. He does so to guide Sadhakas ; ^ to impart Tattva-
jnana,^ which leads to Liberation ; and also with the desire of
speaking of the union of Kundalini with the six Chakras.-^

(Atha). — ^The force of this particle is to show the
connection of this book with the Author's work entitled Shri'-
tattva-chintama?ii, the first five chapters of which deal with the
rites and practices preliminary to /SAa^-chakranirupawa. ^ In this
book he speaks of the first shoot of the realisation of the Brahman.

Paraniananda (Supreme Bliss) means Brahman, Who, says
Shruti, is Eternal (Nityam) and knowledge (Yijnmam) and
Bliss (Anandam)

FoUoiving the Tantras '' (Tantrtousare?ia) — i.e., following the
authority of the Tantras.^

First sprouting shoot’' (Prathamangkura)— f.e., the first
steps which lead to realisation of the Brahman. The first cause
of such realisation is achieved by knowledge of the six Chakras,
the NadTs, and so forth, which is the Tantrika Yoga Sadhana.

Complete realisation'' (Nirvaha). — The Sanskrit word means
'' accomplishment " ; here, it is the accomplishment of the immedi-
ate experiential realisation of the Brahman. ^

'' Achieved by means of the six Chakras and other things "
(iSAai-chakradi-kramodgata) — i.e., attained by ^ meditating on the

^ Those who practise Sadhana, or spiritual discipline ; here aspirants
for Yoga.

2 Tattva-jnana=Brahma-jnana, or Brahman-knowledge.

3 The Devi as Shabda Brahman (Shabda-brahma-rfipa Kundalini,
V. 2, post) in the world of the body (PiwdawrZa), or K^Audra-brahmanda
(microcosm). Verse 10 describes Her as She who maintains all beings
in the world by inhalation and exhalation. Unmanifested “ sound
assumes the form of Kuwdali in the animal body (vv. 10, 11).

^ MulMhara, etc.

s ^^Aa^-chakra-nirupawa. NTirupa^za^ investigation, ascertainment
into, and of, the six Chakras. This forms the sixth chapter of Purna-
nanda’s Shri-tattva-chintamawi.

® In which is to be found a detailed description of the process here
described, known as SAa^-chakra-hheda, or piercing of the six Chakras.

7 The ‘‘ nerves,” or channels of energy (see v. 2). Nadi is derived
from the root nad, “ motion,” and means a channel (Vivara).
f Brah ma-saksAMkara-rupa-nisApattiA.

® ‘ Attained by.” This is Udgata, which literally means ** sprung^
4(.out of ” or “ sprouted out of ”.

DESGEIPTION OF THE SIX CENTRES 3

six Chakras, ; Muladhara, SvadhisJi£/iana, Manipura, Anahata,
Vishuddha, and Ajna and other things,^ viz , : on the Nadis®, the
Linggas/ the five Elements,^ Shiva, Shakti, etc., connected with
the six Chakras, in their order.

The order (Krama) is, first, meditation on them, next
awahening of Kmidalinl, and Her passage to the Brahma lotus
and then Her return therefrom ; the union of Shiva and Shakti,
etc., and so forth.

Order (Krama) by which it is attained, and this is the
same as Yoga practice. .

The Author in substance says : 1 speak of the first step

(Angkura) of the practice which is the First Cause of the
immediate or experiential realisation ^ of the Brahman, brought
about by a knowledge of the six Chakras, as is laid down in
the Tantras.’^

1 According to Sbangkara, by ‘‘ other things ” are meant the
Sahasrara, etc. This Shangkara here and hereafter referred to is a
commentator on this work, and not the philosopher Shangkaracharyya.

2 See note 2, p. 5.

3 In three of the Chakras — viz.y Svayambhu, Yawa, and Itara.

^ Vyoma-panchaka.

5 Brahma-sak^Ziat-kara.

. !■: .

' ;

' 1 1

•I-:-

4

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SEBPENT POWEE

ipiwi and Sflryyarupa,

DESGEIPTION OF THE SIX OENTRlS-

“ — Tins is the the Mckbotie or spinal

column, extending from the Mula (root) or Muladhara to the
neck. This will be explained later. .

Placed on the left and the right (Savya-dak^fee msh^niie)*

^[ These two Ida is placed on the left, ahd the

Pinggala on the right of the Meru ” says the Bhuta-shuddhi Tantra.
The Sammohana Tantra ^ speaks of their likeness to the Sun
and Moon as follows :

The Ida Nad! on the left is pale, and is in the nature of the
Moon ^ (Chandrasvarupi?a) . She is the Shakti-rupa Devi, ^ and
the very embodiment of nectar (Amrita-vigraha). On the right
is the masculine Pinggala, in the nature o£ the Sun. She, the
gi’eat Devi, is Rudi-atmika,^ and is lustrous red like the filaments
of the pomegranate flower.’^

These two hladis go upward singly from the Mula {i,e., Mula-
dhara), and, having reached the Ajna Chakra, proceed to the
nostrils., ■ ■■ "

The Yamala says : On its (i.e., the Meru’sj left and right
are Ida and Pinggala. These two go straight up, alternating
from left to right and right to left, and, having thus gone round
all the Lotuses, these auspicious ones proceed to the nostrils. ’

The above passage shows the twofold and differing posi-
tions of the two Nadis. They go upward alternating from left

' to right and right to left, and going round the Lotuses (Pad ma)

I they form a plait and go to the nostrils.

i Elsewhere they are described as being placed like bows :

Know that the two Nadis Ida and Pinggala are shaped like
^ bows.’^' . ■■■■■

Also^ : ^SShe who is connected with the left scrotum is
I united with the Snshumna, and, passing near by the right

^ Oh. iv, 5 — 6. The seventh verse, which is not quoted by the
I Commentator, runs: “Inside, the Meru, she who extends from the

Mula to the place of Brahman is the fiery Su 5 ?ium«a, the very sell o
L all knowledge.”

tr- ® Cf. Rudrayainala, Oh. NXYII, v. 51.

I' 3 Shakti-rupa — the Devi as Shakti or female”.

; ^ Rudratmika — that is, of the nature of Rudra or “ male

- ^ Passage is from Prapanchasara (Vol. Ill, Tantrik Texts), Oh. !■>

I vv. 81, 82. There is a variant reading nadika for nasikA

■4

THE SIX GENTRES AND THE- SEIiFENT POWEE

Verse 1

In tlie space outside tlie Meru,^ placed on the left and the
rightj are the two Shiras/ Shashi^ and Mihira.^ The Narii
^nshnmndi whose substance is the threefold G-nwas/ is in
the middle. She is the form of Moon, Sun, and Fire
Her body, a string of blooming Dhiistiira'^ flowers, extends
from the middle of the Kanda® to the Head, and the Vajra
inside Her extends, shining, from the Me^ZAra® to the
Head.

Commentary

Now, Yoga like that which is about to be spoken of cannot be
achieved without a knowledge of the six Chakras and the Nadfs;
the Author therefore describes the relative Nadis in this and the
following two verses.

In the space out$ide '^\ (Vahya-pradeshe) the two Nadis.
Shashi* and (Shashi-mihira-shire=the two Nadis or Shiras,

Shashi and Mihira). Shashi=;Ohandra (Moon) ; Mihira=Surjya
(Sun). These two Nadis, which are in the nature of the Moon
and Sun,^^ are the Nadis, Ida and Pinggala.

1 The spinal column.

2 Nadis.

^ Moon— that is, the feminine, or Shakti-riipa Nadi Ida, on the left.

^ Sun, or the masculine Nadi Pinggala, on the right.

5 Meaning either (v, post) the Gums, Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas ;
or, as ‘‘strings,” the Nadi SusAumm with the Nadi Yajra inside it,
and the Nadi Chitriwi within the latter.

^ That is, as Chitrki, Yajriwi and Sn^/iumm.

Dhatura fashios.

s The root of all the Nadis (®. post), Kanda=Bulb.

® Penis.

Chandrasvarupiwi and Suryyarupa.

DESCRIPTION OP THE SIX OENTRES-

r

— Tliis is t the backbone or spinal

column, extending from the Mula (root) or Muladhara to the
neck. This will be explained later, • '

Placed on the left and the right (Savya-dak^he nishdinne) .

“ These two NadisP'-‘^ The Ida is placed on the left, and the
Pinggala on the right of the Meru says the Bhiita^shuddhi Tantra.
The Sammohana l^’antra ^ speaks of their likeness to the Sun
and Moon as follows :

/^The Ida Nad? on the left is pale, and is in the nature of the
Moon (Chandrasvai upiui) . She is the Shakti-rupa Devi, ^ and
the very embodiment of nectar (Amrita-vigraha). On the right
is the masculine Pinggala, in the nature o£ the Sun. She, the
great Devi, is Eudratmika,^ and is lustrous red like the filaments
of the pomegranate flower.’^

These two Nadis go upward singly from the Mula (^e., Mula-
dhara), and, having reached the Ajna Chakra, proceed to the
nostrils.'

The Yamala says : On its (i.e., the Meru's) left and right
are Ida and Pinggala. These two go straight up, alternating
from left to right and right to left, and, having thus gone round
all the Lotuses, these auspicious ones proceed to the nostrils.”

The above passage shows the twofold and differing posi-
tions of the two Nadis. They go upward alternating from left
to right and right to left, and going round the Lotuses (Padma)
they form a plait and go to the nostrils.

Elsewhere they are described as being placed like bows :
** Know that the two Nadis Ida and Pinggala are shaped like
bows.”'

Also^ : She who is connected with the left scrotum is

united with the Sushxxxxinhj and, passing near by the right

1 Ch. iv, 5— 6. The seventh verse, which is not quoted by the
Commentator, runs: ‘‘Inside the Meru, she who extends from the
Mula to the place of Brahman is the fiery Snshurnnh, the very self ot
all knowledge.”

Gf. Eudrayainala, Ch. XXVII, v. 51.

3 Shakti-rupa— the Devi as Shakti or “ female ”.

4 Rudratmika— 'that is, of the nature of Rudra or “ male

5 Passage is from Prapanchasara (Yol. Ill, Tantrik Texts), Oh. I,
vv. 81, 82. There is a variant reading nadika for nasika.

THK SIX 0BNTBE8 AND THE SERPENT POWER

shouUer-jomt, remains bent like a bow by the heart, and having
reached the left shoulder-joint passes on to the nose. Sirnilarlf
She that comes from the right scrotum passes on to the left

nostril/^

These two N^Ts which come from the left and right scrotum
when they reach the space between the eyebrows, make with
the Su..Aumna a plaited knot of three (Trivewi) and proceed to
the nostrils.

They are also thus described: “In the Ida is the Devi
Yamuna, and in Pinggala is Sarasvati, and in Sus/mrana dwells
Gang^ 1 They form a threefold plait ^ united at the root of
n f separate at the eyebrows, and hence it is

called Trivem-yoga, and bathing there < yields abundant fruit.”

“ Whose .mhstance is the threefold Gunas ” (Tritaya-gnna-
mayij.— The compound word here used is capable of different
interpretations. Reading Guna to mean “ a string,” it would
mean « made up of three strings t'fo., Su-s/iumna, Vajra and
Ohitriwi. ahese three form one, but considered separately they
are distinct. If Gu«a be read to mean “ quality,” then it would
mean possessed of the qualities Sattva, Rajas and Tamas
Now, the substance of ChitrinT is Sattva (Sattvagunamayi), of

Vajia, Ra]as, and of Su^Aamna^ Tamas.

theMe^V” (Madhye)— ,:.e., in the middle or inside

fi n fclie ’-eg'on of

the Brahma-randhra/^ s etc. °

1 Sammohana Tantra, Ch. If 13 thn« • <■ Tr, -

Siif9Aurii?2a is the outermost slieafli • ** ai.

»d .Mi. cM«,i i.

».drarS? ““ “ «'>■ V. 52, of

iliUl-Sil

TiiK SlX^;fp;E;NTKES ANi> THE SETiPENT POWER

head. See the opening verse of Paduka-panchaka : I adore the

twelve-petalled Lotus that is the crown of the Xadi along the
channel (Randhra) i within which the Kurtdall passes.”

As the Chitriwi ends here, her Container, Susi^um??a, also ends
here. If it be taken to mean that she exists above the Hahasrjira,
then there will be a contradiction to the description in the fortieth
verse, where the Sahasrara is spoken of as “ shining in vacant
space” (Shunyadeshe prakasham). If Snahumaa pas”ses over it
there can be no vacant space. ’

There are some who contend that all the three Nadis— Ida
Pinggala, and Sna/iumrea— are inside the Mem, and quote the
following as their authority from the Nigaraa-tattva-sara : “ The
three Nadis are said to be inside the Meru, in the middle of the
back.” But this cannot be; all the Tantras say that the Ida and

Pinggala are outside the Meru, and on the authority of these our

Author speaks of their being outside the Meru. Further, if they
were inside the Meru they could not be bow-shaped and touch the
hip and shoulder joints. The Nigama-tattva-sara by the “ three
Nadis” apparently means Sua/mmua, Vajra and ChitrinI, and not
Ida, Pinggala and Sus/mmna.

The position of the SusAumraa from the Muladhara to the head
is thus described : “ Sus/iumwa goes forward, clinging like a
Chavya-creeper 2 to the Meru, and reaching the end of tlmneek, 0
Beauteous One, she emerges and deflects, and, supporting herself
on the stalk of the Shangkhinvs goes towards the region of
Brahman (Brahma-sadana)/^

Also cf . : “ The other two are placed like bows. Sushumua is
the embodiment of Pranava ;^ emerging from the backbone, she
goes to the forehead. Passing between the eyebrows and united with
Kunda]),5 she with her mouths approaches the Brahma-randhra.”

1 This channel or passage within Chitriwi is Brahmanadi.

2 I’etranihera Apetala (Colebrooke’s Amarakosha).

2 Nadi of that name ; v. post.

f..lA!The''su,Wr “““ *'*•• ''"“O™

^ Devi KundBlinl ; v. ante.

6 Her mouth has neared the Brahmarandhra. The locative here is
Samipye saptarni—that is, locative in sense of proximitv. Su6-Aumna
thrtw.? actually reach Brahmarandhra, but goes near it, endin</ near
the twelve-petalled lotus, Gf. v. I, Padukapanchaka.

DESCEIPTION OF THE SIX OENTBES 9

By this it becomes apparent that the backbone extends to the

end of the back of the neck.

“ Supporting herself on the stalk of Shangkhini ” (Shangkhini-
nalam alambya). Shangkhini is thus described :

Ishvara said: “ Sarasvati and Kuhu are on either side of
Sushumna ; Gandhari and Hastijihva again are on the right and
left of Ida.”

And again : “ Between Gandhari and Sarasvati is Shangkhini.
The Nadi named Shangkhini goes to the left ear.”

And also again : “Shangkhini, emerging from the hollow of the
throat, goes obliquely to the forehead, and then, 0 Ambika,i united
with and twisted round Chitrini, she thereafter passes to the head.”

Hence she (Shangkhini) starts from Kanda-mula, proceeds
between Sarasvati and Gandhari and reaches the throat, and then
one of her branches proceeds obliquely to the left ear and the other

goes to the top of the head.

“ Fa;Vd inside Her ” (Madhyame ’8ya?i.)~i.e., inside Sushumna.

There are some who contend that the Meru-da»da extends
from the feet to the Brahma- randhi-a, and quote in support the
following passage from Nigama-tattva-sara : “ The bony staff which
goes from the feet* to the Brahma-randhraiscalledtheMeru-
dawda of the fourteen Lokas.”

But the backbone is the spinal bone (Meim-danda), It
extends from the Mula-kanda to the end of the back of the neck.
This is self-evident, and no authority can alter things which are
patent. Moreover, it is impossible for one piece of bone to go to
the end of the feet, for then the legs could not be bent or stretched.
The Mere therefore does not go below the Mula (Muladhara).
The meaning of the passage from the Nigama-tattva-sara becomes
clear if we read Pada to moan “ leg,” and not “ foot ”. “ Beginning
of the pada” (Padadi) would then mean “where the legs
begin ”. The sense would then be that the bone which controls the
whole body from the feet right up to the head is the Meru-da?ida,
which is like a stick, and begins from the penis two fingers breadth
above the Mula-kanda. The Bhutashuddhi Tantra says : " Within
it and two lingers’ breadth above it are Vajra and Ohitrim.”

1 “Mother,” a title of the Devi.

2 Padadi Lit., beginning of the pada; ©.post.

42

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SEBPENT POWBB

Verse 2

is ChifcriM, who is lustrous with the lustre of
I and attainable in Yoga by Yogis. She
subtle as a spider’s thread, and pierces all the
ih are placed within the backbone, and is pure
She (Chitrki) is beautiful by reason of these
lich are strung on her. Inside her (Chitrim)
Da-na(ii,V which extends from the orifice of
»f Hara® to the place beyond, where Adi-

COMMENTAKY

“ Inside Her ” (Tanmadhye)— i.e., inside Vaji
Ijustvous With the lustre the I^rcmuacc (]
—She absorbs the luminous character of the i
chakra when she passes through it. Cf. v. 37, post
“ Uko a spider's thread ” (Luta-tantupameya).
the spider’s thread.

“ She pierces all the Lotuses,” etc. (Sakala
madhyantara-sthan bhittva dedipyate).— She pie
of the six Lotuses, and shines like a thread strung

DBSCEIPTION OP THE SIX CENTRES

n

There is a passage quoted as from the fourth Kawda of the
Kalpa-Sutra, and explained to mean : “In the hollow channel
within Ohitriwi are six Lotuses, and on the petals of these the
Mabadevi Bhujanggi move about (viharanti).”

But this text, as it has given a plural verb to Bhujanggl* in
the singular, seems to be incorrect. But if it be said that it is the
word of Shiva, and that the plural is used as singular, it would
then have to be understood that the locative in the phrase “ in the
channel within OhitrinT ” is used as an instrumental, and the
correct meaning of the passage would in that case be that
Bhujanggi goes along the channel within Ohitrini. And as She
passes in her upwai’d movement She piei'ces the Chakras, and
moves about on the petals of the Chakras Or it may also mean
that Bhujanggi goes along the hollow of the Chitrini, and moves
about on the petals of the six Lotuses within Sus/iumiia, and at
length goes to Sahasrara

From the above authority it is not to be concluded that the
six Lotuses are in the hollow of Chitrini.^ ^

“ Inside her ” (Tan-madhye).— Within Chitrini is Brahmanadi.
The word Nadi here means a channel (Vivara). It is derived from
the root Nad, motion. The word Brahmanadi means the channel
by which Kn?idalini goes from the Muladhara to the place of
Parama-shiva. Kundalini is a form of the Shabda-Brahman.»
From this it is certain that the inside of Ohitrini is hollow, and

there is no other Nadi inside her.

“ The orifice of the mouth of Eara ” (Hara-mukhaTkahara).
The orifice at the top of the Svayambhu-lingga in the Muladhara.
Adideva is the supreme Bindu in the pericarp of the thousand-
petalled Lotus.

The rest of the verse requires no explanation.'*

1 Lit., “ Serpent,” a name of Kundalini.

» Vishvauatha, quoting from Maya Tautra, says that all the six

lotuses are attached to the Chitrini (Chitrhii-grathitaiig).

3 Shabda-Brahma-rupa Kuwdaliui.^ The Shabdabrahmau (see
Introduction) is tbe Ohaitanja in all beings.

^ Sbangkara reads this verse
meaning is practically tbe same,
character only.

I

in a slightly modified form, but
the modifications being of a verbal

Commentary

this bhloka she is further described :

“ Fine like a (lotus) fibre and shines ’’ (Li

She is luminous, albeit fine like the fibre
she shines because of the presence of Kuwifalini.

“ Embodiment of all bliss ” (Sakala-sukha-
here used as the equivalent of Ananda, whicl
i>liss. She is the source of all Bliss.'^

“ Whose true nature is pure consciousness ”
svabhava).— Shuddha-bodha is Tattva-juana, SI
IS pure Consciousness. ^

1 That IS, Ohitriwi, the interior of which is callec

^ Shuddha-bodha-svabhava.

^ See Commentary.

* Because, accoi-ding to Yishvanatha, She drons
fore contains all kinds of bliss. Shano-kara savs^i
the interpretation, » It is blissful to all » ^

is interpreted by Kalmhara^a to i

SVion It A** other words, divine or spiritual Jna
Shangkara, the reading is Shuddha.bbaT 7 a.o,,.t.i,K„=

Veese 3

'.r ^ lightning and fine like a

(. 0 us) fibre, and shines in the minds of the sages. She
IS extremely subtle; the avrakener of pure knowledo-e •
the embodiment of all Bliss, whose true nature is pure

Consoiousness.' The Brahma-dvara => shines in her mouth
Ihis place is the entrance to the region sprinkled by
ambrosia, and is called the Knot, as also the mouth of

THE SIXA'CENTRES AND THE SEEFENT POWER

DESCEIPTIDN OF THE SIX CENTRES

13

“ Brahma-dvdra ” ^ is the entrance and exit of Knwdalira in

her passage to and from Shiva.

» Her mouth ” (Tadasye)— the mouth of Brahmanadi, the

orifice in the mouth of Hara.

“ This place ” (Tadetat)— i.e., the place near the entrance.

“ The entfomce to the region sfrinMed hy ambrosia” {Snih&-
dhara-gamya-pradesha).— The region which is sprinkled by the
ambrosia (Sudha) which flows from the union 2 of Paratna Shiva
and Shakti, and which is attained by the help of Shiva and
Shakti dwelling in the Muladhara.

“Knot” (Granthi-sbbanam).— The place of the union of

Sos/iuiD'ii/a and Kanda. ^

“ Is called ’’—that is, by those versed in the Agamas.

1 Door of Brahman.

A ^Samarasya, a term which is ordinarily applied to sexual un ion

(Stripungyogat yat saukhyang tat samarasyam)— here and elsewhe re,
of course, used symbolically.

3 The root of all the Nadis ; see v. 1, ante.

, ’ ' I . '1 " ' " ' /■; ’ ‘

14 THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

Verse 4

Now we come to the Adhara Lotus/ It is attached to the
mouth of the Sus/rnmna, and is placed below the genitals
and above the anus. It has four petals of crimson hue.
Its head (mouth) hangs downwards. On its petals are the
four letters from Va to Sa, of the shining colour of gold.

Commentary

After having described the Nadis^ the Author describes the
MulMhara Chakra in detail in nine verses beginning with the
present.

It is attached to the mouth of Sushumna^ (Su6?/iumwasya-
lagnam). — The petals 2 are on four sides of the place where the
Kanda ^ and Sushumna meet.

Below the genitals and above the anus (Dhvajadho
gudorddhvam). — From below the root of the genitals to Snshumna.

Four petals of crimson hue (Chatu/l-sho7^apatram). — l^'he
four petals are red in colour. Shona is the crimson colour of the
red lotus.

On its petals are the four letters from Va to 8a ’’ (Va-
karadisantairyutam veda ^ -var^mih). — The four letters are Va, Sha
(palatal), 8ha (cei'ebral), and Sa. ^ On each of the petals of the six

1 That is, Muladbara-chakra, so called from its being at the root of
the six Chakras ; see hence to v. 12, post,

2 See Introduction.

3 Y, p. 7, ante,

^ Veda-var«a : Veda stands for “ four There are four Vedas, and
the learned sometimes use the word Veda to mean four — i,e,^ the
number of the Vedas.

See Introduction.

BESGEIPTION OF THE SIX HENTEES ,

15

Lotuses tie letters of the alphabet are to be meditated upon, going
round in a circle from the right (Dakshinavartena). C/. Vishva-
sara Tantra : “ The petals of the Lotuses are known to contain the
liters of the alphabet, and should be meditated upon as written in

a circle from the right to the left.”

BESOEIPTION OP THE SIX CENTRES

Malaya, and Suparvata — dwell in the four corners.” According
to this notion, the eight spears are likened to the seven Kula
Mountains on Earth.

“ Within it” (Tad-angke). — Inside the region of Prithivi
(Dhara-mawdala) is the Bija of Earth— yfz., “ Lang ”. This Bija
is also of a yellow colour. The phrase “ shining yellow colour ”
(Lasat-plta-vanza) is descriptive of the Bija also. So it has been
said :

“Inside it is the Aindra Bija (Bija of Indra),i of a yellow
colour, possessed of four arms, holding the thunder in one hand,
mighty ^ and seated on the elephant Airavata.” ^

the same.

1 The Bija of Indra and the Bija of Barth are
2Maha-bahu, “possessed of great long arms
■Gf. Ajanu-lambita-bahu farms reaching the knees).

3 'The elephant of Indra. This and other animals figured in the
Chakras denote both qualities of the Tattva and the Vehicles (Vahana)
of the Devata therein. See Introduction.

■sign of prowess.

18 THE SIX CENTEES AND THE SERPENT POWER

Verse 6

Ornamented with four arms ^ and mounted on the King
of Elephants,* He carries on his lap * the child Creator,
resplendent like the young Sun, who has four lustrous
arms, and the wealth of whose lotus-face is fourfold.

Commentary

This is the Dhyana of the Dhara Bija. The Bija of Dhara or
Prfthivi is identical with that of Indra.

“On Kvi lap ” (Tad-angke)— i.e., in the lap of Dhara Bija.
The sense of this verse is that the Creator Brahma dwells in the
lap of Dhara Bija. By “ anglca ” (lap) is to he understood the
space within the Bindu of Dhara Bija. Gf. “ In the Muladhara is
the Dhara Bija, and in its Bindn dwells Brahma, the image of a
Child, and the King of the Immortals 5 is mounted on an Elephant.”

The above quoted passage, it is urged, means “ the King of
the Immortals is in the lap of Dhara Bija.” But according
to our view as the Dhara Bija and the Indra Bija are the same,
their identity is here spoken of ; for it is also said “the letters of
the Mantra are the Devata j the Devata is in the form of the
Mantra (Mantra-rupiwi).”

Also cf. Nirvana Tantra : “ 0 beautiful one, the Indra Bija is
below the genitals. The very perfect and beautiful dwelling of
Brahma is above Nada, and there dwells Brahma the Creator, ® the
Lord of creatures.’

1 These two adjectival phrases qualify Dhara Bija.

2 Airavata.

3 That is, the Bindu of the Bija (Dhara) or “ Lang This is ex-
plained jooiA

4 Brahma is represented with four heads.

3 Indra Deva.

6 Sns^ifikarta.

Praia-pati.

DEBCRIPTION OF THE SIX CENTRES

19

By above Nada ” in this passage, we must understand that
the abode of Brahma is within the Bindu which is above Nada*
Some read left of the genitals/^ and thus there is a difference of
opinion. The Sharada says that the Idharas are various accord-
ing to different views.

Four lustrotis arms ” (Lasad-veda ^-bahu).— Some interpret
the Sanskrit compound word to mean in whose arms shine the
four Vedas Sama and others,’^ thus thinking of Brahma as being
possessed of two arms only. But Brahma is nowhere described as
holding the Vedas in his hands, and that he should be meditated
upon as having four arms is clear from the following passage in
Bhuta-shuddhi Tantra :

Know, 0 Shiva, that in its lap is the four-armed, red-
coloured child 2 Brahma, who has four faces and is seated on the
back of a swan,” ^

The wealth of whose lotus-face is fourfold (Mukhambhoja-
loikshmlh chatur-bhaga-bheda?i), — By this is to be understood that
Brahma has four faces.

Some read the passage as Chatur-bhagaveda ” ; thus read the
meaning practically is the same. If the Sanskrit text is read
« Mukhambhoja-lak^/imi-chatur-bhagaveda,” the meaning would be,
the four different Vedas enhance the beauty of his lotus-faces . ^

As opposed to the opinion that Brahma bolds the four Vedas
in his arms, the Vishva-sara Tantra in the Brahmi-dhyana says :

Meditate on Brahmi (Shakti) as red in colour and garbed in the
skin of the black antelope, and as holding the staff, ^ gourd, ^
rosary of Rudrak.s/ta beads, and making the gesture dispelling
fear.”^ And in the Sapta-shati Stotra ^ it has been said that

^ Veda is used to mean four, there being four Vedas,

2 1.e., Hirariya-garbha. ^ TTcr i ?

SHangsa, or, as some say, goose or flamingo, b.ee Woodrolte s

“ Garland of Letters ” p. 155.

^ The allusion is to the belief that the four Vedas came out ot the
four mouths of Brahma.

^ Dan.(ia,, ■ ■

^ Kama^^dalu.

7 AkJta-sutra.

8 That is, the Abhaya-mudra. The hand is uplifted, the palm
being shown to the spectator. The four fingers are close together, and
the thumb crosses the palm to the fourth finger.

9 Marka? 2 deya Chandi.

I-

SMI :

rlfi'

?*V;

IMtrs

«'S # i,

I?':?

Brahmi Shakti.

2 That is, the Yarada-niudra, the hand being held in the same
position as in note 8, p. 19, but with the palm held horizontally instead
of vertically.

3 Kamawc^alu : a vessel with a gourd-shaped body, and handle at
the top, used for carrying water, generally by ascetics.

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

Shiva and Shakti /are to be meditated upon as having the same
weapons.

Also c/. Yamala : “The Adi-Murti^ should be meditated
upon as making the gestures of dispelling fear and granting
boons/ as also holding the Knndika,^ and rosary of EudraksJia
beads, and adorned with fine ornament.^^

This is how She should be meditated upon. The rest requires
no explanation.

DESCRIPTION OF THE SIX CENTRES

'-.in

IHH

I

Vkese 7

Hebe dwells the Devi Dakini ^ by name ; her four arms
shine with beauty, and her eyes are brilliant red. She is
resplendent like the lustre of many Suns rising at one and
the same time.^ She is the carrier of the revelation of the
ever-pui’e Intelligence.®

■u

Commentary

In this Sbloka the Author speaks of the presence of Dakini
Shakti in the Adhara-padma. The sense of this verse is that in
this Lotus the Devi Dakini dwells.

She is the Carrier of the revelation of the ever-'pure
telligence ’’ ^ (Prakasham vahanti sada-shuddha-buddhe/t) — that is,
she, Dakini Shakti, enables the Yog'i to acquire knowledge of the
Tattva (Tatfcva-jnana). By meditating on her, which is part of
Yoga practice, one acquires Tattva-jnana. This Devi is the
presiding Divinity of this region.

C/. ‘^The mouth® (the lotus) has the letters Va, Sha (palatal),
Sha, (lingual), and Sa, and is presided over by Dakini.^’

i Dakini and the other Shaktis of this class are in some Tantras
called the Queens of the Chakras, and in others the door-keepers
thereof.

That is, according to Yishvanatha, she is very red.

^ Shuddha-buddhi — ix,, Tattva-jnana.

4 If the word “ sada is read separately from “ shuddba-buddhi,”
it becomes an adverb qualifying vahanti,” and the passage would
then mean that ‘‘ she ever carries revelation of Divine Knowledge ”,

5 Yaktra. This is possibly the transcriber’s mistake for “ Padma ”=
lotus.

THE SIX GENTEBS AND THE SERPENT POWER

Pakim, Rakim, Lakini, Kakini, as also S hakim and Hakini,
ai’e the queens of the six respective Lotuses,” i Elsewhere is given
the Dhyana of Pakini thus : “ Meditate on her^ the red, the red-eyed
Pakim, in the MulMhara, who strikes terror into the hearts
of Pashus,^ who holds in her two right hands the Spear ^ and
the Kha^vanga, 4 and in her two left hands the Sword ^ and
a drinking-cup filled with wine. She is fierce of temper and
shows her fierce teeth. She crushes the whole host of enemies.
She is plump of body, and is fond of Payasanna. ® It is
thus that she should be meditated upon by those who desire
immortality.” Elsewhere she is described as “ bright with a
Tilaka*^ of Vermillion, her eyes ornamented with collyrium, clad
in black (antelope^s skin) and decked with varied jewels,”
etc.

On the authority of the above passage, which occurs in a
Dhyana of Pakini, she should be meditated upon as clad in black
antelope skin. * ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

The Devas Brahma and others are to be meditated upon as
having their faces down or up according to the frame of mind
(Bhava) of the Sadhaka.

The Shaktananda-taranggim ^ quotes the following from the
Maya Tantra :

Parvatf asked : How can they be in the Lotuses which have
their heads downward bent ?

1 The Sbaktananda-taranggmi places them in a difierent order.
See P. K. Shastrfs edition, p. 75.

^ The unillumined. See Introductiou to Author’s Mahanirvana.

^ Shula.

4 A staff surmounted by a human skull.

5 Khadga, a kind of sword used in the sacrifice of animals. Some
read KhejJa.

6 A kind of milk pudding made of rice boiled in milk with ghee
and sugar*.

Here the mark borne by woman between the eyebx*ows showing
that her husband is living— an auspicious mark. The Saubhagyaratna”
kara says that Pakini abides in Tvak Dhatu.

8 Fourth chapter ; Prasanna Kumara Shastrfs edition, pp. 78, 79.
The passage in the text is incompletely quoted.

DESOEIPTION OP TEE SIX CENTRES

23

‘‘ Mahadeva said : The Lotuses, 0 Devi, have their heads in
different directions. In the life of action ^ they should be thought
of as having their heads downward, but in the path of renun-
ciation ^ they are always meditated upon as having their heads
upward turned.’ ■

: The rest is clear.

1 Pravntti-marga : the outgoing path as distinguished from the
Nivntti-margaj or path of return to the Parabrahman.

2 Nivntti-inarga.

:■?

H^BHnnw

24 THE SIX C.ENTBES AND THE . SEEPEKT POWER

Verse 8

Near the mouth of the called Vajra, and in the

pericarp (of the Adhara Lotus), there constantly shines the
beautifully luminous and soft, lightning-like triangle which
is Kamariipa, ^ and known as Traipura.® There is always
and everywhere the Vayu called Kandarpa,^ who is of a
deeper red than the Bandhujiva flower,^ and is the Lord of
Beings and resplendent like ten million suns.

Commentary

In this Shloka is described the triangle in the pericarp of
the Mula-Chakra.'

Near the mouth of the Nadi called 7 (Vajrakhya--
vaktradeshe). — The month of the Vajra is two fingers above that
of the Snshumn*^ and below the base of the genitals.

The triangle hnown as Traipura^^ (Trikonam traipura-
khyam). — The triangle is so called because of the presence of the
Devi Tripura within the Ka inside the triangle, and the letter Ka
is the chief letter of the Kamabija. 5

Cf. Shaktananda-taranggim ^ : Inside dwells the Devi

Sundari, ^ the Paradevata.’^

1 See Commentary,

2 This triangle, says Vishvanatha, citing Gautamiya Tantra, is
Ichchhfijnanakriyatmaka — ^^that is, the powers of Will, Knowledge, and
Action. See Introduction.

^ A form of the Apana vayu. Kandarpa is a name of Kama the
Deva of Love.

^ Pentapcetes Phce7ticea.

5 That is, the Mantra “Kling”; in Tantraraja Shiva speaking
to Devi says, “letter Ka is Thy form.” The Nityapujapaddhati,
p. SO, mentions in this connection “ Kang,” the Vija of Kamini. See
Introduction.

^ When dealing with the Kakara-tattva, p. 165, Prasainia Kumara
Shastri’s edition.

Sundari— Tripura-sundari, a name of the Devi. See Tan-
traraja (Tantrik texts, YIII, Ch. 4 — 6).

DESCEIPTION OP THE SIX OENTBES

25

“ So/i ” (Komala) — i.e,, oily and smooth.

“ Eama-rupa ” i : that by which Kama is caused to be felt—
f.e., it is Madanagaratmaka.^

Of. “ Ihe triangle should be known as the charming
Shaktipit/ia.”

This triangle is above the Dhara-vija. Cf. Sammohana Tantra,
speaking of Dhara-vija : “ Above it (Dhara-vija) are three lines—
Vama, JyesMM, and Raudri.”

“ Kandarpa.”— The presence in the Trikona of the Kandarpa-
vayu is here spoken of. It is everywhere (samantat) that is extend-
ed throughout the triangle.

“ Lord of Beings (Jivesha).— So called because the con-
tinuance of life depends on Kama or Kandarpa.

It is said that “In the Kanda (heart) region dwells Prawa ;
and Apana dwells in the region of the anus”. The air in the
region of the anus is Apana, and Kandarpa VSyu accordingly
is a part-of Apana Vayu.3 It is also said that ^ “ Apana draws
Prana, and Prana draws Apana— just as a falcon attached by a
string is drawn back again when he flies away j these two by their
disagreement prgvent each other from leaving the body, but when
in accord they leave it.”

The two Vayus PrSna and Apana go different ways, pulling at
one another ; and neither of them, therefore, can leave the body,
but when the two are in accord — that is, go in the same direction
— they leave the body. Kandarpa Vayu, being a part of Apana,
also pulls at Prfiwa Yayu, and prevents the latter from escaping
from the body ; hence Kandarpa Vayu is the Lord of Life.

In V. 10 the Author describes Kuwdalini as “ She who main-
tains all the beings of the world by Inspiration and Expiration.” s
He himself has thus said that Prana and Apana are the maintainers
of animate being.

_ 1 Shangkara defines this as “ the embodiment of the devotee’s
desire ” (Bhaktabhilas^a-svarupam).

* Chamber of Madana (Deva of Love) — the Toni.

3 Yayu here is a name for a manifestation of Prawa, the five most
important of such manifestations being Pra«a, Apana, Samana, Vyana,
TJdana. See Introduction.

* This is an oft-repeated passage (Shaktananda, p. 5).

5 The Inspired and Expired breath is HangsaA.

y j.'-,, r. ' rtl * 4, 1,, ^

f I ' *

Piiili

Pa,

V' f ' ^

Bii®

I

i-*' ?

I

Rii

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

Verse 9

Inside it (the ti’iangle) is Svayambhu ^ in His Lingga-
form,^ beautiful like molten gold, with His head downwards.
He is revealed by Knowledge ^ and Meditation,^ and is of
the shape and colour of a new leaf. As the cool rays of
lightning and of the full moon charm, so does His beauty.
The Deva who resides happily here as in Kashi is in form
like a whirlpool.®

COMMENTARV

In this verse he speaks of the presence of the Svayamhhaling^a
in the triangle.

Svayambhu in his ’’ (Lingga-rupi svayambhu)

— i,e,j here dwells the Shivalingga whose name is Svayambhu.

Betmtiful like molten (Druta-kanaka-kala-komala). —

His body has the soft lustre of molten gold.

Eis head downwards ” (Pashchimasya).— C/. Kali-kulamWta :
“ There is placed the great Lingga Svayambhu, who is ever
blissful, his head downward, active when moved by Kama Bija.

Itevealed hy Knowledege and Meditatiorh^^ (Jnana-dhyana-
prakasha).— Whose existence is apprehended by us by Knowledge
(Jntoa) and Meditation (Dhyana). By Jnana we realise the
attributelessness, and by Dhyana the attribiitefulness (of the
Brahman). Such is Svayambhu,

1 ** Self -originated,” ‘‘ self -existent,” the Shiva Lingga of that name.

2 As the human phallus.

3 Jnana.

4 Dhyana.

5 This refers to a depression on the top of the Lingga.

DESGRIFTION OF THE SIX CENTRES

27

The shape and colour of new leaves (PratHama-Msha-
layakararupa).~By this is conveyed the idea that the shape of the
Svayambhn^ Liiigga is tapering like a new unopened leaf-bud.
Like the pistil inside the Ohampaka flower, it is broad at the
bottom and tapers to a point at the end ; this also shows that the
Svayambhu-lingga is of a blue-green colour (Shyama).

Cf Shiiktananda-taranggini : “ 0 Maheshani, meditate inside
it (the triangle) upon the Svayambhu-lingga, who holds his head
with an aperture therein downward— the beautiful and blue-green
Shiva (Shivang shyamala-sundaram).’*

In the Yamala occurs the following passage: “Meditate upon
the very beautiful celestial triangle (Trikona) in the Muladhara ;
within its three lines is Ku^iiZali, charming like ten million light-
ning flashes in the dark blue ^ clouds.”

This passage, which describes Ku^zdali as “ lightning in the
dark blue clouds , goes to show that the Svayambhu-Lingga is also
blue; but Nila (blue) and Shyama (dark green) belong to the same
category, and hence there is no contradiction.

“ As cool rays of lightning and of the full moon charm so does Mis
beauty ” (Vidyut-pur^iendu-bimba-prakarakara^-chaya-snigdha-
santana-hasi). — As the strong light of the moon and of lightning
emits no heat, so is the light which emanates from the Svayambhu-
linga cool and pleasing, bringing gladness into the hearts of men.

The Deva who resides happily here as in Kashi ^ (Kashi-
vasi vilasi). Kashi is the place sacred to Shiva, his favourite
abode. By these two adjectives it is implied that the Svayambhu
I in the Adhara Lotus is happy as He is in His form of Yishveshvara

i. ^ in Kashi, and He is as pleased to be here as at Kashi. “ Vilasi ”

f may also mean amorous because it has been said above, “ moved

■ Kama Bija Vilasi is indicative of His Lordship of the

Universe.^

Like a ” (Sarid-avarta-rupa-prakara). — The whirl-

'[ ' water on its outer edge creates a depression in the

I ^ ^ila.

' Vishvanafcha for Kara (ray) reads Rasa— that is, the nectar

; flowing from the Moon.

^ Benares or Baranasi.

^ The Universe is His Vilasa or Lila.

THE SIX GENTEES AND THE SEBPENT POWEB

middle and the centre thereof is raised like the shape of a
conch A

This Svayambhu is placed on the Kama-bija. This has been
said in Kali-Kulamnta : Surrounded by the filaments of the
lotus, is the Shringaia ^ and over this is the beautiful Maha-lingga
Svayambhu, with an opening on the top, ever happy, holding his
head downwards, and active when moved by the Kama-bija/’

Elsewhere the following occurs: There, in the pericarp, is
the above-mentioned Pakinf, and the triangle (Trikowa) within
which is a small aperture and the red Kama-bija. There is also
the Svayambhu Lingga, his head downward and of a ruddy hue/’
This is, however, a different conception.

I Shangkara says that he is so described because of his restless

motion

2 The triangular pyramidical seat of Kama.

Jr-" -•y- -

DESOBIPTION OE THE SIX CENTRES

Verses 10 and 11

Over it^ shines the sleeping Kmit^alini, fine as the fibre of
the lotus-stalk. She is the world-bewilderer,® gently-
covering the mouth of Brahma-dvara ^ by Her own. Like
the spiral of the conch-shell, Her shining snake-like form
goes three and a half times round Shiva,® and her lustre is
as that of a strong flash of young strong lightning. Her
sweet murmur is like the indistinct hum of swarms of love-
mad bees.® She produces melodious poetry and Bandha
and all other compositions in prose or verse in sequence or
otherwise® in Sanskrita, Prakn'ta and other languages. It is
She who maintains all the beings of the world by means of
inspiration and expiration,® and shines in the cavity of the
root (Mula) Lotus like a chain of brilliant lights.

1 Shangkara, unlike Kalicharawa, has annotated the two verses
separately.

^ S vayaTnbliu Lingga — that is, round It with Her body and over It
with Her bead.

3 Ku??ri!alim is the Shakti whereby the Mayik world exists, at rest.
In the Kurina Parana Shiva says : “ This Supreme Shakti is in me,
and is Brahman Itself. This Maya is dear to me, by which this world
is bewildered.^^ Hence the Devi in the Laiita is called Sarvamohinl
(all-bewildering).

4 See Commentary.

5 Shivopari.

® Vishvanatha says She makes this sound when ^wakened.
According to Shangkara, thivS indicates the Vaikhari state of Ivundalini.

^ Is a class of literary composition in which verse is arranged in
the manner of a diagram or picture.

8 Bhedakrama and Atibhedakrama.

9 Vishvanatha quotes Dak57d;2amurti as stating that during day
and night man breathes in and out 21,600 times, taking both expiration
and inspiration as the unit. See Introduction.

so THl SIX OBNTEjBS AXD THE SERPENT POWER

Commentary.

In ^ these two verses the author speaks of the presence of
Kmichhm Shakti in the Svayambhu Lingga. It is the Devi
Ku? 2 dalin! who maintains the existence of individual beings
(Jiva, JivMma) by the functions of inspiration and expiration.
She places them in^ individual bodies p She produces the hum-
ming sound resembling that of a swarm of bees, and is the source
of Spe^ech and She, as described below, dwells in the triangular
hollow in the pericarp of the Muladhara Lotus resting upon the
Svayambhu Lingga,

Shines fine as the fibres of the lotus-stalh (Bisa-tantu-

sodara-lasat-sfiks/ima)— i.e., She is fine like the fibre of the
lotus-stalk.

“ World-bewilderer ” (Jagan-mohin!)— i.e. She is Maya in
this world.

“ 1— JVfadhuram.

The month 0 / J5raAma-d't?<^m (Brahma-dvara-mukha) — the
hollow on the liead of Svayambhu Lingga.

/strong fla-ih of young lightning ” (Navina-chapala-mala-
vilasaspada).— Lit., “ possessed of the wealth of a strong flash
of young lightning. In youth every thing and person shows

characteristic qualities in a state of vigorous perfection.
Hence a “young flash of lightning means a strong flash.

“She pvodw.es poetry etc.,” (Koinalakavya-bandda-

rachana-bhedatibheda-kra)na).~This shows the mode in which
words are produced. The soft music produced bv a combination
ot soft and melodious words descriptive of beauty, virtue, etc., in
all Its modulations, resulting from perfection of composition and
regularity and irregularity in the disposition of words. By Bandha
IS here meant pictorial poetical composition in prose ' or verse
arranged to look like a lotus (Padrnabandha) a horse (Ashvabandha)
and so on ; and by Atihheda the author alludes to all the words in
Sangsknta and Praknta. By using the word “ order, sequence,” the
author emphasises the fact that these compositions and words come
out in the order laid down in the Shastras. Kundalini produces’

1 Madhuram : this is used as an adieotire, accordin'' to Shano-karT
and means sweet. He says She is drinking nectar by the Smad’
vara ; as the nectar is coming through it, the Brahmad4ra is sweet. ^

DESOBIPTIOK OP THE SIX OENTEES

botli afc random, and in set forms. Kundlalini produces words,
Sangskrita and Prakrita, distinct and indistinct. She is the source
from which all sound emanates.

Cf. Sharada ^ Upon the bursting (unfolding) of the
supreme Bindu ai'ose unmanifested Sounds (Avyakta-rava). It
assumed the form of Kumiali in living bodies, and manifested
itself in prose and verse by the aid of the letters of the Alphabet
(lit., the essence of the letters).”

By Prose and Verse ” all forms of speech are meant.

It has distinctly been said in Kadimata ^ “ By the action of

the Tchchha-Shakti of the Atma acting on Prtoa-vayu there
is produced in the Muladhara the excellent NMa (Sound) called
Para,^ In its ascending movement it is thrown upward and opening
out in the Svadhi6*/iif/iana,^ it receives the name of Pashyanti ; and
again gently led up as before-mentioned, it becomes united in the
Anahata with Buddhi-tattva, and is named Madhj^ama. Going
upward again, it reaches the Vishuddha in the throat, where it is
called Vaikhari; and from there it goes on towards the head,
(upper part of, the throat, the palate, the lips, the teeth. It also
spreads over the tongue from root to tip, and the tip of the nose;
and remaining in the throat, the palate, and the lips, produces by

1 Ch. I, second line of v. 11 and v. 14, the intermediate verses are
omitted. _ These run as follows : “ That sound is called, by those versed
in the Agamas, Shabdabrahman, Some teachers define Shabdabrah-
man to mean Shabdartha, others (grammarians) define it to mean
Shabda ; but neither of them is correct, because both Shabda and
Shabdartha are Jada (unconscious things). In ray opinion, Shabda-
brabman is the Ohaitanya of all beings.” The Agama in the test is
Shruti ; Raghava quotes Shangkaracharyya in Prapanchasara, which
speaks of men versed in Shruti. Ohaitanya is the Brahman considered
as the essence of all beings — that is, Chit and Shakti, or Chit in mani-
festation.

2 That is, the Principle or Cause of Sound. See Introduction.

3 Tantraraja (Vols. VlIT and XII. Tantrik Texts), Ch, XXVI,
vv. 5 — 9.

4 At pp. 120 — 122, Vol. II, Tantrik Texts, Vishvanatha speaks of
Para, Pashyanti, and the others Shaktis. The form of Kada, says the
Manoravid, should be known fi'om the Guru. This lohchha- Shakti
is Kalamayi.

3 Pashyanti is sometimes associated with Mawipura, See Introduc-
tion, ‘

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

the throat and the lips the letters of the Alphabet from A to
Ks/ia."i

It is needless to quote more.

Elsewhere has Kuwdalini been thus described : “ Meditate upon
Devi Knwdalinl, who surrounds the Svayambhu-Lingga, who is
Shydma and subtle, who is Creation itself, 2 in whom are creation,
existence, and dissolution, ^ who is beyond the universe '* and is
consciousness ® itself. Think of Her as the One who goes up-
wards.” *

Also; “ Meditate Upon the Devi Kuwdalini as your Ishta.-
devata,’ as being ever in the form of a damsel of sixteen in the full
bloom of her first youth, with large and beautifully formed breasts,
decked with all the varied kinds of jewels, lustrous as the full
moon, red in colour, with ever restless eyes.” ®

“ Red (Rakta) as regards Sundarl ”, so says the Author of the
Shaktanandatarangini. Kuwdalini, as a matter of fact should
always be meditated upon as red (Rakta) in colour.®

Shyama (which ordinarily denotes “colour ”) is here meant to
signify something different. In all Tantras and all Tiintrika
collections KundalinI is described to be like lightning. “ Shvama
is the name given to a woman who is warm in winter and cool in
summer, and has the lustre of molten gold.” “ This is what is

1 The sense of this, says the Manoramd, is that Hada which has
four stages (AvasthachatusAtayatmaka) does after passing throuo-h
the different centres mentioned in the Text assume the form of the
51 letters.

2 Sm^^irupa.

3 SwTi-jfi-sthiti-layatmika.

Vishvatita. She is not only immanent, but transcends the
universe.

6 Urddfivavahini, for Kuradalini ascends to the Sahasrara.

7 lafeta-deva-svarupiwi. The Is&tadevata is the particular Devata
of the Sadhaka’s worship.

8 These in women indicate a passionate nature.

9 The Shaktanandatarangiwi says : She is only to be meditated upon
as red only when the object of worship is Tripura. The text may also
be read as meaning that “ red ” is an attribute applicable to Shri
bundari — that is, the Devi Tripurasundari.

This is a quotation from the Alangkara Shastra (Rhetoric).

jjESCiUrTION OF THE SIX GENtltES

meant liere and colour is not intended. Thus the apparent discre-
pancy is removed.

The Kangkala-nmlin! Tanfcra describes Ku7?.cZalini in the
Brahma-dvara, and before the piercing of the Chakras^ thus :

She, the Brahman Itself, resplendent like millions of moons rising
at the same time, has four arms and three eyes. Her hands make
the gestures ^ of granting boons and dispelling fear, and hold a
book and a Vf?iri. ^ She is seated on a lion, and as She passes to
her own abode the Awe-inspiring One (Bhiina) assumes different
forms/^. :

i That IS, the Mudras Vara and Abhaya
^ The musical instrument of that name.
3 The Muladhara.

'J’HK SIX OENTBKS AND THE SERPENT POWER

Commentary

He is DOW speaking of the StafMike Pam Shakti, who is like a
straight thread above Kn?if/alin], who is coiled round Svayainbhu-
Lingga. The Shri Paraineshvai’b whose radiance illumines this
Universe ^ and its cauldron, dwells in the Svayambhu Lingga
above where Ku^irZalini is coiled and holds supreme sway.

“ Omnvpotmt ’’ (l^arama).— She is the Maya who is able to do
that which is impossible. ^

^ Svayambhu lingga, round which Kur^Jali is coiled.

2 According to Shangkara, Para is in Kuw^Mini. She is called
Brahma^?! by Vishvanatha, wdio Quotes the Svachchhanfla snmo'O'r'ftlit*

DESCRIPTION OF THE SIX CENTRES

KaU is a form of Nada Shakti (Kala Nada-shakti-rupa) j
and inseparate from Ku? 2 rialinLi

The Shaktananda-taranggmi says: Kala is Ku^dalinl, and
She, Shiva has said, is Nada-shakti.*’ 2

And it has also been elsewhere said : “ Above it, meditate in
your mind on Ohitkala united with I (Lafe/irai) who is tapering
of shape like the flame of a lamp, and who is one with Ku/zdalL*’

(7/. Kalika-Shruti : Man becomes freed of all sins by
meditating upon Kundalinl as within, above, and below the flame,
as Brahma, as Shiva, as Sura, ^ and as Parameshvara Himself j
as Wishnxx, as Pram, as Kalagni,^ and as Chandra.” ^

By within the flame” is meant the excellent Kala (=:Nri-
darupa) above Kuncfalinfs threefold coil. This is what has been
said by the author of this Lalitarahasya.

“She [Para) is wonderfully skilftd to create (Ati-kushahi) —
i.e., She it is who possesses the wonderful skill and power of
creation.

“ She is the receptacle of that continuous stream of ambrosia
■jioiring from Eternal Bliss {Brahman) ” (Nityananda-paramparati-
vigjilat-plyus/ia-dhara-dhara).— By Eternal Bliss (Nityananda) is
meant the Nirguna or Attributeless Brahman. Parampard means
connected step by step From Nityananda, which is Nirguwa
Brahman, there arises (in Its aspect as) Saguwa Brahman; from
Saguna Brahman, Shakti; from Shakti, Hilda; from Nada, Bindu ; and
from Bindu, Kundtalini.® Ohit-kala is another form of Ku7^c^alin^. It
is thus that the ambrosia comes step by step to Pararneshvarl, the
Ohitkala. She is Nityanandaparampara— that is, She belongs to
the chain of emanation from Nityananda downwards ; and She is

immeasurable) that She who is one with the Supreme, is formative
activity. See Introduction. Vishvanatha, quoting an unnamed Tantra,
says that this Maya is within Kimd^alim, and this Parama is Para-
matmasvarupa.

1 Kufidalinyabheda-sharirmi.

2 Nada-shakti=Shakti as Nada. See Introduction.

3 Sura=Suryya, or Sun.

4 The fire which destroys all things at the time of dissolution
(Praiaya).

5 Moon.

^ S^e Introduction,

-if

m

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

Atiyigalat-piyns/^a-dharadhara — that is, She is the receptacle of
the stream of ambrosia which flows copiously from Nityananda. ^
This compound word may be interpreted to mean that She
holds the copious flow of ambrosia caused by her umon with the
Brahman. From Nitytoanda this nectar comes to Para-Bindu, and
passes through the Ajna Chakra, Vishuddha Chakra, etc., till it
reaches the Muladhara, and this nectar is that of which She is
the receptacle. To interpret it to mean this, the entire word is
read as one.

I That is, if the compound be read in two sections — viz,, Nityarianda-.
parampara, and then separately, Ativigalatpiyus^adharadhara. The
translation adopted in the text is that which is referred to in the para-
graph which follows.

DESGRIPTTON OP THE SIX CENTRES

37

Verse 13

By meditating thus on Her who shines within the Miila
Chakra, with the lustre of ten million Suns, a man becomes
Lord of speech and King among men, and an Adept in all
kinds of learning. He becomes ever free from all diseases,
and his inmost Spirit becomes full of great gladness. Pure
of disposition by his deep and musical words, he serves the
foremost of the Devas,^

Commentary

In this verse the Author speaks o£ the benefit to be derived
from meditating on Kuwdalini. By Mida Ghahra i& meant the
Muladhara. “It is the root of the six Chakras— hence its name.”

“ Within ” (Mula-chakrantara-vivara-lasat-koti-suryya-pra-
kasham). — She shines in the Muladhara Chakra like ten million
suns shining at one and the same time.

“ Eis deep and musical words" (VakyaiA kavya-prabandhaili)-
— His speech is musical and full of meanings, as in a poetical
composition.

“ Ee serves ” (Sevate).^ —He uses his words in hymns of praise
and for purposes of a like nature. He pleases them by words of
adoration.

"All the foremost of the Dems ” (Sakala-sura-gurun).— The
word Gruru here means excellent, and the Author by Sura-gurun
means Brahma, Ytshnu, and Shiva, the principal Devas. Amara
says that “ adding the words Singha (lion), Shardula (tiger), Naga
(serpent), etc., to a male name implies excellence ”.

1 That is, Brahma, Yishnn, Shiva, etc.

2 That is by his mastery over words he becomes like to Brihaspati
Curn of the Devas (Shangkara).

THE SIX CEHTEES AND THE SEEPENT POWER

Summary

3 Dawf^a.

^ Kama7^(2alu.

5 Abhayamudra ; y. 19, ante, n. 8.

® Spear*

Skull-mounted staff.

^ Sword. Kbadi^a is a heavy sacrificial sword
^ Drinking-cup.

10 “ Kling.’’

11 Its colour.

12 Described in v. 12 as another form of Kund\

13 Prakarawa. The commentator divides tlie
mentary into eight section^.

39

DESCiilPTiON iiF i'HE SIX OEN'i'EES

Vebse 14

There is aBotlier Lotus ^ placed inside the iinsimwnn
at the root of the genitals^ of a beautiful vermilion colour.
On its six petals are the letters from Ba to Purandara,^
with the Bindu ^ superposed, of the shining colour of
lightning.

Commentary

Having described the Muladhara, he describes the Svidhh'fe-
tham Chakra in five verses beginning with the present. This
verse says that at the root of the genitals there is, distinct
from the Muladhara, another Lotus, of a beautiful verinilion
colour.

Placed inside the Stishtmn/'? (SaurS'?4umW/a ^ -madhyagha-
iitam).— The place of this Chakra or Padma is within Sushamm.

Ai the root of the genitals {DhYaja-muladeshe),

Of a heautifnl vermilion colour (Sindura-pura^ruchi-
raru^ia). — This Lotus is of the charming red colour of vermilion.

On its six petals (Angga-chhadaiA). — It is surrounded by

its six petals which are the letters. ^

1 That is, the SvadhL/ii^//.ana Chakra. See Introduction.

^ The letter La ; v. pod.

The Anusvara.

4 San67mm5ta : Shangkara reads this word to mean the Brahmanarfi
which is within Sushimma^ and says that the suffix m ” by which
the change is affected is used in the sense of “ relating to,” and not
** placed within

^ V. antes Introduction,

i

B'

i

40 l’Hi3 SIX 0 ENTERS AND TIIe SEEFENT POW

“ The letters ^^ (Badyaife savindu-lasifcai)^ Parandarantai/i).—
By Ptirandara is meant the letter La, it being the Bija of
Purandara or Indra. Each of these letters from Ba to La is on
each petal of the lotus. They have the Bindu over them, and are
of the shining colour of lightning. The above may also mean that
the lustre of the letter is caused by their union with the Bindus
placed over them.

bESOMPTlON Ob’ THIS SIX OEN'J’kES

41

t

Verse lb

Within is the white, shining, watery region of Varmm,
of the shape of a half -moon, ^ and therein, seated on a
Makara/is the Bija Vang, stainless and white as the
autumnal moon.

CoMMENTAliY

Here the Author speaks of the presence of the watery region
of Varuna in the pericarp of the Svadhi^Miatia. This watery
region ( Ambhoja-ma?idalam) is in shape like the half-raoon (Ardhen-
durupalasitara), and is luminously white (Vishadaprakasham).

The Sharada says: The region of water is lotus (shaped)
that of earth is four-cornered ^ and has the thunderbolt (Vajra) and
so forth/’ Raghava-bhai^a/ in describing it, says : Draw a half-
moon, and draw two Lotuses on its two sides.” The Great Teacher ^
says that the region of water is like the light of the Lotus-united
Half-Moon”.

Then he speaks of the Varuna-bija. This Bija is also white,
and is seated on a Makara, which is the Carrier^ of Varmm. He
has the noose in his hand.

1 Svadlih/Aana.

2 Water is the element of this Chakra, Avhich is represented by the
crescent.

** An animal of a legendary form, somewhat like an alligator. See
■Plate. ■

4 Oil. L V. 24, Ghaturasram ; sed (jti, for ordinarily the Maxidata is
semicircular.

® The famous Commentator on the vSharada-tilaka.

6 Apparently Shangkaracharyya, Prapanchasara (Tantrik Texts,
vol. Ill) i, 24.

1 Vahana. *

4.6

Ml
' ^ ■;!

' i> s

t Hi.

'•IB

i'i!

lirti

mf'

h

THE Bit GtotkES ANJb THlS SEEFENT toWM

C/. “(Meditate) upon the white Blja of Varuna (within
the Lotus). Varu?ia is seated on a Makara, and carries the
noose (Pasha). And above him ^ (that is, in the Bind uj meditate
on Hari ^ who is blue of colour (Shyama) and four-armed/’

The Va in Varuna Bija belongs to the Ya class — -i.e., to the
group Ya, Ra, La, Va. This becomes clear from the arrangement
of the letters in Kulakula Chakra and in Bhutalipi Mantra.

The rest is clear.

1 Tadurddl^varn, See Comm, to next verse,
^ Yishnn,

-

I

PESCBIPTION OF THE SIX OENTBBS

Mat Hari, wlio is within it,\ who is in the pride of early
youth, whose body is of a luminous blue beautiful to behold,
who is dressed in yellow raiment, is four-armed, and wears
the Shri-vatsa,^ and the Kaustubha,® protect us !

CoiVIMIilNTAHY

The Aathor here speaks of the presence of Mishnn in the
Varuna Bija.

Within (Angkadeshakalita)— t.e., in the Blnda above

Varuna. Bija, in the same way as Brahma is in the lap of Dhara
Bija. The same explanation applies by analogy to the description
of the other Lotuses.

Whose body, (Nila-prakasha-ruchira-shriyam). — Lit., He

possesses the enchanting beauty of blue effulgence ; i.e., his body
is of a luminous blue beautiful to behold.

Wears Shrlvafsa and Kaustubha ,^^ — The following is his
Dhytoa in the Gautamiya Tantra : On his heart is the gem
Kaustubha, lustrous as ten thousand Suns shining at the same

1 i,e., Yishnxi is within “ the lap ” of the Bindu of Yang.

2 Lit., Favourite of Shri or LakA*7/.mi — an auspicious curl on the
breast of Yish7in and his Avatara, Krishun, It is said to symbolically
represent Prakriti. See Ahirbiidhnya Bamhita, 52, 92, citing also the
Astrabhf^.s*/ia?^a Adhyaya of Yishm Pura? 2 a, I, 22.

3 A great gem worn by Vis/iwn, which is said to symbolically
signify the souls (see authorities in last note). These are said to be
united with tlie Kaustubha of the Lord (yi^Anati].fj,ka, 100)-

1 Vanaraala : the name for a large garland descending to the knee.
It is defined as follows :

Ajannlambini mala sarvartu-kusumojjvala
Madhye sthulakadambadhya vanamaleti kirtita.

(That is said to be Van am ala which extends down to the knee,
beauteous with flowers of all seasons, with big Kadamba flowers
in the middle.) This garland is celestial because in it the flowers of
all the seasons are contained.

2 Shangkha.

2 Chakra.

^ Gada.

^ Padma.

6 The garland symbolises the elements ; as the club, Mahat ; the
couch, Sattvika Ahangkto. ; the bow, Tamasika Ahangkara ; the sword,
knowledge ; its sheath, ignorance ; discus the mind and the arrows the
senses. See authorities cited at p. 43, ante,

7 The Bird King, Vahana of YMwu,

44 THE SIX CENTRES ANB THE SEEPENT POWEE

time, and below it is the garland with the lustre of ten
thousand moons. Above Kaustubha is Shri-vatsajj which also is
luminous like ten thousand moons/^

The Tantrantara speaks of the weapons in the hands of Hari :

(Meditate on) Him ^vho has the noose in His hand, and on Hari
who is in his lap, and has four arms, and holds the Conch, ^ Dis-
cus, ^ Mace, ^ and Lotus, 5 is dark blue (Shyama) and dressed in
yellow raiment.’’

By who has the noose in his hand ” is meant Varuwa as he
has been described in the verse preceding the Text quoted.

Elsewhere he (Hari) is spoken of as “ clad in yellow raiment,
benign of aspect, and decked with a garland ^

We have seen that, in the Muladhara, Brahma is seated on the
Hangsa, and we should therefore think of Yishnxx as seated on

Garnda. 7

DKSOEffTION . OF THF SIX CENTOFS

Verse 17 -'

It is here that Eakim always dwells.^ She is of the colour
of a blue lotus.^ The beauty of Her body is euhanced by
Her uplifted arms holding various weapons. She is dress-^
ed in celestial raiments and ornaments, and Her mind is
exalted ^ with the drinking of ambrosia.

Commentary

In this Shloka the Author speaks of the presence of Raldm in
the Svadhw/ii/i^ma.

Of, Rakini-dhyana elsewhere : “ Meditate on Rakiwf, who is
blue of colour (Shyama). In Her hands are a spear, ^ a lotus, a
drum ® and a sharp battle-axe. ^ She is of furious aspect. Her
three eyes are red, and her teeth show fiercely. She, the Shining
Devi of Devas, is seated on a double lotus, and from one of her
nostrils there flows a streak of blood.s She is fond of white rice, ^
and grants the wished-for boon.’’

As Rakim is within another lotus in this Lotus, therefore
should the six Shaktis everywhere be understood to be in a red
lotus as in the MulMbara.

, 1 Dwells (Bhati) : the Sanskrit word literally means ‘‘ shines ” —

‘ here ’ that is, in the Svadhi.v7ii^/iana.

.^Of the colour of a blue lotus (Nilarabujodara-sahodarakanti-
shobha) ; lit., Her radiant beauty equals the interior of the blue lotus.

■ s Matta-chitta ; for she drinks the nectar which drops from Sahas-
rara. She is exalted with the divine energy which infuses Her.

4 Shula.

5 Daraaru.

6 Tangka.

7 B^xigshtm , — She has long projecting teeth.

8 Raktadharaikanasam. The Saubhagyaratnakara has Rakta-
dhatvekanAtham, that is, she who is the Lord of Raktadlvatu.

9 Shuklanna.

There is another smaller Lotus in each of the main lotuses on
which the Shakti sits, • ^

46

T5B1 Sit OEJNTRISS 4ITP TB[B SBBPEjNT POWER

Verse 18

He who meditates upon this stainless Lotus, which is
named SvadhisMiana, is freed immediately from all his
as the fault of Ahangkara® and so forth.
Lord among Yogis, and is like the Sun
dense darkness of ignorance.® The wealth
ke words flows in prose and verse in well-

mem

tne

uiscourse

Commentary

preme Linga), and he
“ Fault of Ahari
By this

destrovi

3 inipli6u

tc. These

and Moha 6 and th

escribed the benefit derived from the
IhifilitMuB, Lotus.

* By Sva is meant the Para-Linga (Sa-
the Lotus is called SvadhisW/iana/^4
a and so forth (Ahangkara-dos/iadi). — •

ix evil inclinations : Kama (lust), Krodha
» which are the six enemies of Man, are
;ioTi on the SvadhisftiMna Lotus. By
re also destroyed the darkness of Maya,
i of knowledge (Juiina) is acquired. The

lernies the six passions.
Introduction.

(pride), M;
Ahangkara
ice, iljiisidn

)£ Ch. XXVII of the Budra-ytoala.

Krodha (anger), Lobha (greed), Moha (delu-
Asaryya (envy), which all arise from a sense
h

infatuation,

MmkiFmii oi’ thk sK c}SNTEii.s- ■, 47

SUMMAEY OF VeESES 14 TO 18

The SvMliisAi/iana Chakra is of the colour of vermilion, and
has six petals. On its six petals are the six letters Ba, Bha, Ma, Ya,
Ra, and La, with the Bliidu placed thereon. They are of the colour
of lightning. In the pericarp of this Lotus is the region of water
in the form of an eight-petalled Lotus, with a half-moon in its
centre. This region is white. Inside this latter is the Varutia
Bija “ Vang,’^ seated on a Makara, with a noose in his hand. In
the lap of the latter (i.e., in the hollow of the Bindu) is Ykh}a
seated on Garuda. He has four lisnds, and is carrying the
Shangkha (conch shell). Chakra (discus), Gada (mace), and Padma
(lotus). He is dressed in yellow raiment, wears a long garland
(Vana-mala) round his neck, the mark Shrivatsa and the gem
Kaustubha on his breast, and is youthful in appearance. On a red
lotus in the pericarp is the Shakbi Rakim. She is Shyama-varna,i
and in her four hands she holds the Simla (spear or trident), Abja
(lotus), Damaru (drum), and Tan gka (battle-axe). She is three-
eyed and has fierce projecting fangs,^ and is terrible to behold.
She is fond of white rice,^ and a stream of blood runs from Her
nostril.

(Here e^idb' the seeond section)

^ See note to v. 11.
2 Kurila-dangsMra.
8 Shuklanna.

4b

I’lli! S IX GJSNTBlJS AND I'HE S lS Et^BXT Do WEB

Vebse 19

Above it,’ and at the root of the navel, is the shining Lotus
of ten petals,® of the colour of heavj-laden rain-clouds.
Within it are the letters Da to Pha, of the colour of the
blue lotus with the Nada and Bindu above them. Meditate
there on the region of Fire, triangular in form and shining
like the rising sun. Outside it are three Sva,stika marks,*
and within, the Bija of Vahni himself.^

COMMENTAKY

iliH Majiipiira Chakra is described in this and the two follow-
ing verses.

“ Skinivg lottis of ten petals” (Dashadala-lasite) — i.e.,- the
Lotus which shines by reason of its ten petals.

“ 0 / the colmtr of heavij rain-dvvds” (Vmnsimtighn-pvaknshB)

— i.e., of a dark hue.

Within it are the letterSy^ etc. (Nilambhoja-prakiishair
upahitajai^/iare tiadi-phantai/i^ sachandrai/i-).

The ten letters from Da (cerebral) to Pha, with the Bindu
placed above them, are of the colour of the blue lotus, and are
each of them on the ten several petals. The letters are Da, D/ta,
Aa, I’a, Tha, Da, Dha, Na, Pa, Pha. By Sachandraih which
qualifies Varwaife is meant that the letters have Bindu and Nada
over them, for these two go together.

^ Svadhis'/i^^ana.

. * The Maa^pura Chakra, the seat of the Element of Eire the sinn of
which IS a triangle. See Introduction. ^

3 An auspicious mark ; v. post.

^ 1 hat is, “ Rang,” the Seed-mantra of Eire.

s Shangkara reads Dasha-dala-lalite— i.e., the cbarmins lotus of
ten petals. ®

DESGEIPTION Oi' THE SIX CENTRES

“Like the rising Sun" (Aruiia-inihii’a-samam)—i.e., like the

young sun.

“ Svastika M arks. These three marks or signs are on three
sides of the triangle.

Raghava-bhaiia says 2; “A Svastika sign is made by the
crossing of two straight lines going in four different directions.-”
In this region of Fire is Kain the Bfia of Fire.

^ like a cross

2 In the note to v. 23 of Ch. I of the Sharada Tilaka,

i Tbc'it is, making Vara and Abliaya Mudras, ante^ pp. 20, 21.

® Vahni’s or Fire^s weapon. Bliaskararaya says it is the weapon
winch is called in Maharashtra Samti*

§0 . . TOK SIX. ANp . Thli SEBPWr, TO

Verse 20

Mepctate Upon Him (Fire) seated on a ram, four-armed,
radiant like the rising Sun. In His lap ever dwells Rudra,
who is of a pure vermilion hue. He (Rudra) is white
with the ashes with which He is smeared ; of an ancient
aspect and three-eyed, His hands are placed in the attitude
of granting boons and of dispelling fear.^ He is the
destroyer of creation

Gommentary

Elsewhere the Dhyana of Vahni is as follows : Seated on
a ram, a Rudraks/ia rosary in one hand, and the Shakti ^ in the
other.’^

As there are no weapons placed in the other hands it is to be
inferred that the other two hands are in the attitude of granting
boons and of dispelling fear; that is how He is described to be in
other Dhyanas of Him.

Rudra should here be meditated upon as seated on a bull.

‘‘He is white . , , smeared (Bhasmaliptangga-bhu6‘7ia-
hharana-sita-vapwh). — The ashes with which his body is smeared
and the ornaments he is wearing make him look white (though his
hue is red).

DfeSCEimON OP i’HE SIX GENl’BES

51

Veesb 21,

Hkeio abides Lakini, the benefactress of all. She is four-
armed, of radiant body, is dark^ (of complexion), clothed
in yellow raiment and decked with various ornaments, and
exalted with the drinking of ambrosia.^ By meditating on
this® Navel Lotus ^ the power to destroy and create (the
world) is acquired. Vam ® with all the wealth of knowledge
ever abides in the lotus of his face.

Commentary

“ Decked with variouti ornammile ” (Vividha-viraclianiilang-
ferita).— She who is decorated with gems and pearls arranged in
varied and beautiful designs.

Cf. Lakinl-dhyana elsewhere : “ Let the excellent worshipper
meditate upon the Devi Lakini, who is blue and has three faces,
and three eyes (to each face), fierce of aspect/and with Her teeth'
protruding.® In Her right hand She holds the thunderbolt and’
the Shakti,’’ and in the left She makes the gestures ® of dispelling
fear and of granting boons. She is in the pericarp of the navel
lotus, which has ten petals. She is fond of meat (Mangsashl), ® and

1 Shyarna ; see awie, note to v. 11.

2 Matta-chitta ; vide ante-, p. 44, n. 3.

® Btat : a variant reading is evam, “ in this manner”.

^ Nabhi-Padma.

® That is, the Devi of Speech, Sarasvati.

® Vishvanatha quotes a Uhyana in which She is described as huinp'
backed (kubjini) and as carrying a staff.

2 The weapon of Vahni (Fire). See note 2, page 50.

® Mudra.

9 Some read “ Maugsastham ”=She who abides in flesh.

THE SIX GENTEES AKD THE SERPENT .EOWEE

her breast is ruddy with the blood and fat which drop from Her
mouth/^

The navel lotus is called Ma?ii-pura. The Gantamiya Tantra
says.^ ^^Tliis Lotus is called Ma?zipura because it is lustrous like
a

Summary op Verses 19 to 21

The Nabhi-padma (Navel Lotus) is of the colour of the raiii«
cloud, and has ten petals ; on each of its petals are each of the
ten letters Da, Dha iVa, Ta, Tha, Da, Dha, Na, Pa, and Pha, of a
lustrous blue colour, with the Bindu above each of them. In the
pericarp of this Lotus is the red Region of Fire, which is triangular
in shape, and outside it, on its three sides, are three Svastika signs.
■Within the triangle is the Bija of Fire — Rang He (Bija of
Fire) is red in colour and is seated on a ram, is four-armed, and holds
in his hands the Vajra (thunderbolt) and the Shakti weapon, and
makes the signs of Vara and of Abhaya.^ In the lap of Vahni Bija
is Rudra, red of colour, seated on the bull, who, however, appears
to be white on account of the ashes which He smears on his body.
He is old in appearance. On a red lotus in the pericarp of this
Lotus is the Shakti LakiiiT. She is blue, has three faces with three
eyes in each, is four-armed, and with Her hands holds the Vajra
and the Shakti weapon, and makes the signs of dispelling fear
and granting boons. She has fierce projecting teeth, and is fond
of eating rice and dhal, cooked and mixed with meat and blood
[Here ends the third section)

1- A Vaib’/zj/ava Tantra of great authority. , The quotation is from
Cb, 34 of the same.

2 Mani-vad bhinnanjr. Bhinna liere means “distinguished,” for in
the Mimipura is the Region of Fire. See also Rudrayamala, Ch.
XXVII, V. 60.

3 Vara and Abhaya— ^^e., the Madras dispelling fear and granting

boons ”

4 Khecharamia— that is, meat mixed with rice and dhal, such as
Khecharamia (Khichri), Pilau, etc.

MSGRIPTiON GF THE SIX CENTRES

Aik)VE in the heart, is the charming Lotus,' of the

shining colour of the Bandhdka flower,'' with the twelve
letters beginning with Ka, of the colour of vermilion,
placecl therein. It is known bj its name of Anahata, and
is like the celestial wishing-tree,'' bestowing even more
than (the supplicant’s) desire. The Eegion of Vayn,
beautiful and with six corners," which is like unto the
smoke in colour, is here.

OOMMBJNTAKY

The Anahata Lotus is described in the six verses beginning
with this.

This Lotus should be meditated upon in the heart; the
NQxh dhyayet 'm understood. The twelve letters beginning with Ka,
that is, letters Ka to T/^a are on the petals.

is known hy its name Anahata (Namnahiahata-sangjna-
kam).— “ It is so called by the Munis because it is here that
the sound of Shabdabraiimaii is heard, that Shabda or

^ The Anahata, or heart Lotus, seat of the air element, the sign of
which is described as hexagonal, is here. See Introduction.

^ Fentapoetes Fhoenicea*

^ Kalpa-tani. Shangkara says the Kalpa^taru, one of the celestial
trees in Indra’s heaven, grants what is asked ; but this gives more,
since it leads him to Mok.s/ia.

^ 6V^a^ko?^a — that is, interlacing triangles. See Plate V. Sea Intro-
duction and Eudrayamala, Ch. XXYII, v. 64.

THIS HIX 01‘JNTUKS AND Tlii*. SKUDEM’ imVEU

^ ^ c^ote^^ (p. 121, Vol. 11, Tau.riK lexts

tollowiug : Witbni it is Vatia Liiigga, lustrous like ten thousand

also bound which is fe’" ’ ' . .

and is produced by
wherein Puru^-Aa (that

brahman see Kaghavabha^^a’s Comm, on Siiarada, Ch. I, y. 12,

® Surataru=Kalpa4aro, ♦

Tantrik ''Texts)',' the

. ^ . . _ * 1- l.suns,

labclabrahmauiaya (whose sulistance is Brahman},
no cause (Ahetuka). Such is the lotus An^iata
IS, the Jivatma) dwells.” As to Shabda-

Oi

sound which issues without the striking of any two things
together/^ ^

Wishuif^f-trm^^'' is tlie tree in Heaven which grants all one
asks ; as it is like the Ivalpataru, so it bestows more than is
desired. ■ ■

'' Beglou oj (Vayur iiuunialain.— In the pericarp of this

Lotus is the Vnyu-inantiala.

Meditate within it on the sweet and excellent Pavana Bija,*
grey as a mass of smoke, with four arms, and seated on a
black antelope. And within it also (meditate) upon the
Abode of Mei-cy,® the Stainless Lord who is lustrous like
the Sun,"* and whose two hands'" make the gestures which
grant boons and dispel the fears of the three worlds.

Commentary

In this verse the Aotlior speaks of the presence of the Vajn
Bija' in the Aniilmta: Chakra. ■ '

'Favana Blja (lhivanrik.'^7mra)— t.c., the Bija Yang.

Grey a-s a mcm of >imoke ( Dliunirivali-dhusara). — It lias the
greyish coloor of smoke by reason of its being sarroonded by
masses of vapour.

A black anieloppf which is noted for its fleetiiess, is the
Vahana (carrier) of Vuyu. Vayii carries his weapon, Angku-
sha,”^ ill the same way that Yarnna carries his weapon, Pasha.

1 Vayu, ivliose Ylja i.s “ Yang

2 This smoke, Shangkara says, emanates from the Jivatma which
is in the form of a flame.

3 Shangkara read.s “ ocean of mercy (Karu^iavaridhi.)

4 Hangsa, the Sun — a name also of the Supreme. Cf. Hring the
Supreme Hangsa dwells in the brilliant heaven.” See the Hangsa vati
Elk of J^^gveda lY — 40 quoted in Mahanirvawa Tantra, vv. 196, 197,
Ch. V. Hangsa is from Han--Gati, or motion. It is called Aditya liecause
it is in perpetual motion (Sfiyana). Hangsa is also the form of the
Antaratma, see v. 61, post. This I.Uk also runs in Yajurveda, X, 24,
and XII, 14, and in some of the Upanishads,

5 This shows that the Blja has hands and feet (Shangkara).

<5 Goad.

Xoose,

THE SIX CINTEES AMD ,fiij S'EliPEMT FOWEB

He ■next speaks o£ the presence .of Isha iii.fclie Vajn Bija.
Everywhere Shiva is spoken of as having three eves,^ hence Isha
also has three eyes.

Elsewhere it is said : Meditate upon him as wearing a
jewelled necklet and chain of gems round his neck, and bells on
his toes, and also clad in silken raiment.’^ In the same way ol: him
it has also been said : The boantifnl One possessed of the soft
radiance of ten million moons, and shining with the radiance of
his matted hair.”

Isha should therefore be tliooght of as clad in silken raiment

etc,

1 The third eye, situate in the forehead
d, IS the Eye of Wisdom (Jnanachakfj/iu),

region

psscBfpTioN OB'. ^ rim , SIX oummf^

Veesb 24

IT EEE dwells Kakinij who in colour is yellow like unto new
liglitning/ exhilarated and auspicious ; three -eyed and the
benefactress of all. She wears all kinds of ornaments, and
in Her four hands She carries the noose and the skull, and
makes the sign of blessing and the sign which dispels fear.
Her heart is softened with the drinking of nectar.

Commentary

In this verse the Author speaks of the presence of the
Shakti Kakini.

Exhilarated ^ (Matta)— that is, She is not in an ordinary,
but in a happy, excited mood.

With the drinking of etc, {Purna andha-rasardra-

hridayii).-'~Her heart is soffceiied to benevolence by the drinking
of nectar ; or it may be interpreted to mean that Her heart is
softened by the supreme bliss caused by drinking the excellent
nectar which drops from the Sahasrara. Her heart expands with
the supreme bliss. Kakini should be thought of as wearing the
skin of a black antelope.

Compare the following Dhyana of Kakini where She is so
described : If thou desirest that the practice of thy Mantra be

1 Kava-ta^Ht-pita— 2 .<?., where there is more thunder than rain,
when the lightning shows itself very vividly. Pita is yellow ; Kakini
is of a shining yellow colour,

2 Shangkara gives unmattil (maddened or exalted) as equivalent of
Matta.

58

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERDENT POWER

ever-

crowned with success, meditate on the moon-faced,
existent i Shakti Kakini, wearing the skin of a black antelope,
adorned with all ornaments/’^ ' '

“always*”^”*' stuti, possibly the word is nityam,

^ Vishvanatha, in his commentary on the S/iaichakra, gives the

= “Meditate on Kakini whose abode is in
7+ hands Pasha (noose), Shula

prident), Kapala (skull), Damarn (drum). She is yellow in colour
tond of eating curd and rice (Dadhyanna). Her beautiful body is in a
slightly hending pose_ (Svavayavanamita). Her heart is made ioyous
by the draught of rice wine (Varuai).” The Saubhagya-rat4bara
cites Seven Dhyanas of the Seven Shaktis or Yoginis— Dakini and others

« A®'® of seven Dhatus. The

peventp fefaakti Y^k.<?7^ini is pot Tnentioned in this book.

DESCUIl'I'lON' Oi' TIJE SIX CENTfi-iiS

Veksi; 25

The vShakti wlujso tender body is like ten million flaslies of
lightning is in the pericarp of this Lotus in the form
of a triangle (Triko/ia). Inside the triangle is the Shiva-
lingga known by the name of Vfum. This Lingga is like
shining gold, and on his head is an orifice minute as that in
a gem. He is the I’esplendent abode of Lak.i'/(.ml.

C0MMKIs’Tx\KY.

In tliis Shloka in described the triangle Trikon*a which is
in the {3ericarp of this Lotus.

“Shaldi in thii form of a triangle” (Trikoaabbidhil Sbaktife).
—By this we are to understand that the apex of the Triangle is
downward^

this iriko?iaj is below the Vciyu Bija, as has been said else-
where. its lap is Isha. J3eIow it, within the Triko^a is

Viina-Lingga/’

“ On his etc. (Manlaii suk.s'/^ma»vibheda-yung mnnih ), —

This is a description of Va?^,a-Lingga. The orifice is the little
space within the Bindu which is within the haif-rnoon which is on
the head of the Lingga,

Elsewhere we find the following description: “The Va?ia«
Lingga within the triaTigle, decked in jewels made of gold—the
Leva with the half-moon on his head ; in the middle is an excellent
red lotus/’

The red lotus in this quotation is one below the pericarp
of the heart lotus ; it has its head turned upwards, and has
eight petals. It is in this lotus that mental worship (Manasapuja)

^ As it is a Triko?ia Shakti it mast have its apex downwards as
in the case of the Yoni.

I’HK BIX ceNTEES ANB THE SEIiPEKT POWEJl

should be made.^ Compare the following : Inside is the red
eight-petalled lotus. There is also the Ivaipa-tree and the seat of
the Ls/#^a-deva under a beautiful awning (Gliandratapa), surrounded
by trees laden with dowers and fruits and sweet-voiced birds.
There meditate on the L7/^a-deva according to the ritual « of the
worshipper.”

Orifice minute — He here speaks of the Bindu which in
the head of the Viiua Lingga. As a gem has a minute orifice in it
(when pierced to be threaded), so has this Lingga,^ By this is meant
that the Bindu is in the head of the Shiva Lingga.

The resplendent abode of Lahshmiy ^ — By this one must know
the great beauty of the Lingga, due to a rush of desire,^

^ This is not one of the six Chakras, but a lotus known as Ananda-
kanda, where the la'/aadevuta is meditated upon. See Ch. Y, v. 132,
Mabanirvawa Tantra.

2 Kalpa. Tattat'kalpoktamargataA. That is, in manner enjoined
by the respective sampradaya of the sMhaka.

3 The Lingga itself is not pierced, hot it carries the Bindu, which
has an empty space (Shunya) within its circle.

^ That is, here, beauty.

5 Kamodgama.

f ' I'v

BESL'itiraON oi'’ 'ME SIX CBIffTEES 61

Verse 26

He who meditates on this Heart Lotus becomes (like) the
Lord of Speech, and (like) Ishvara he is able to protect and
destroy the worlds. This Lotus is like the celestial
wishing-tree,^ the abode and seat of Sharva.® It is beauti-
fied by the Hangsa,-'* which is like unto the steady tapering
flame of a lamp in a windless place.f The filaments which
surround and adorn its pericarp, illumined by the solar
I'egion, charm.

OoMMENTAEY

li) this and the following verse he speaks of the good to be
gained by meditating on the Heart Lotus.

II 6 who MBdiidtss on this Lotus iji the ElocLYb hecoiues liJks th&
Lord of S2we€h ^ Brihaspati, the Guru of the Devas— and able

like Ishvara the Creator to protect and destroy the worlds. Briefly,
he becomes the Creator, Protector, and Destroyer, of the Worlds.

He speaks of the presence of the Jlvatmil which is Hangsa, ^
in the pericarp of this Lotus. The Jlvatma is like the steady flame
of a lamp in a windless place, and enhances the beauty of this Lotus
(Anila-hina'-dfpa-kalika-hangsena sang-shobhitam), Bangsa is the
Jlvatma. He also speaks of the presence of the Suryya-mar^dala
in the pericarp of this Lotus.

1 Snra-taruszkalpa-taru.

2 Maha-deva, Shiva.

^ Here the Jivatma.

^ See Introduction.

^ Vishvanatha quotes a verse In which this Hangsa is spoken of as
VnvXkshdL,

G2y- THB':SIX-€BNTEE8 AND TUB SEiiPBNT FOWKE

■ ^- The surround and adorn tis- penVarp, illumined

hij the solar region^ charm (Bliaiiorniawtlala-inaHciitantara-lasat-
kinjalka-sliobiiadliaram).— It is beautified bj reason of fcbe
filaments which surround the pericarp being tinged by the rays of
the Siifu' The rays of the Sun beautify the filaments, and not the
space within 'the- pericarp.- The filaments of the other Lotuses are
not' so tinged, and -it is the distinctive featiire of this Lotus. By
the expression the-. Ma^dala .of Surya (Bbaiiu).’^ the reader is to
understand that all .the filaments in the pericarp .are beauteous
with the raj^s of the Sun, and not a portion of them.

All over the pericarp is spread the region of Vayu. Above
it is the Eegion of Suryya 5 and above tliese the Vayu Bija
and Tribona, etc., should be meditated upon. This is quite
consistent. In mental worship the mantra ivS Mang — salutation to
the Eegion of Fire with his ten Kalfis/^ ^ etc. From texts and
Mantras like this we therefore see that the regions of \Lihni (Fire),
Arka (Sun), and Chandra (Moon), are placed one above the other.

“ Creator.

Able to protect and destroy the world (Kak^M-vinfishe
ks‘/iama/t) — i.e., it is he who protects and destroys. The idea
meant to be conveyed by these three attributes is that he becomes
possesvsed of the power of creating, maintaining, and destroying, the
Universe.^

i Kala=digits or portions of Shakti.

^ By reason of his unification with the Brahma-substance.

PESCRIPTiON OP THE SIX OEXTBES

Verse 27

Foremost among 1 ogis, he ever is dearer than the dearest
to women.i He is pre-eminentlj wise and full of noble
deeds. His senses are completely under control. His mind
in its intense concentration is engrossed in thoughts of the
Brahman. His inspired speech flows like a stream of
(clear) water. He is like the Devata who is the beloved of
Laks/tmi ^ and he is able at will to enter another’s body.®

.C0M,MENTARY

'’Dearer than the dearest to wo^nen” (Priyafc priyatama/i.
bantakulasya) — i.e., because he is skilful to please them.^

“ Eis senses are completely under control ” (Jitendriyaga^ja/t)—
he., he is one who should be counted among those that have
cotnpletely subjugated their senses,

“ffis inmd , . . Brahman” (Dhyanavadhana-lMharnah). —
Dhyana is Brahma-chiutana, and Avadhuna means steady and
intense concentration of the mind. The Yogi is capable of both.

”Eis insxdred speech flows like a stream of (clear) water”
(Kavyumbu-dharri-vaha).— The flow of his speech is compared to
an uninterrupted flow of water, and it is he from whom it flows.

“ Ee is like the Devatd who is the beloved ofLakshmi ” (Laks-hml-
rangga«a-daivata7i). — He becomes like the Deva who is the beloved

1 Priyat priyatamaZi — more beloved than those that are dear to them.

2 According to Shangkara’s reading, Laks/jmi become.s his family
i-^evata that is, his family is always prosperous.

^ Parapure ; ik post.

^ Karmmakushala/i. “ Dearer than their husbands ” (Shangkara),

'I

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POI\*EB

of LaksAmi. Laks^mi, the Devi of Prosperity, is the spoase of
Vishnu. This compound word is capable of another meaning. It
may mean : One who has enjoyed all prosperity (Lakshml) and all
good fortune (Ranggaiia) in this world and who goes along the path
of liberation. It has therefore been said ; “ Having enjoyed in
this world the best of pleasures, he in the end goes to the abode of
Liberation.” j

“Another’s body” (Para-pura).— He is able at will to enter
the enemy’s fort or citadel (Durga), even though guarded and
rendered difficult of access. And he gains power by which he may
render himself invisible, fly across the sky, and other similar
powers. It may also mean ^" another man s body . *■■

Summary OF Verses 22 to 27

The Heart Lotus is of the colour of the Bandhuka ^ flower,
and On its twelve petals are the letters ICa to T/ia, with the Bindu
above them, of the colour of vermilion. In its pericarp is the
hexagonal ^ Vayu-Mandala, of a smoky colour, and above it
Suryya-ManMa* with the Trikona lustrous as ten million flashes
of lightning within it. Above it the Vayu Bija, of a smoky hue,
is seated on a black antelope, four-armed and carrying the goad
fanffkushaV. In his (Vay u-bija’s) lap is three-eyed Isha. Like

DESOEIPTION OP THE SIX CENTRES 65

He looks joyous with a rush of desire. i Below him is the -Jivatma
like Hangsa. It is like the steady tapering flame of a lamp. ^ Below
the pericarp of this Lotus is the red lotus of eight petals, with its
head upturned. It is in this (red) lotus that there are the Kalpa
Tree, the jewelled altar surmounted hy an awning and decorated
by flags and the like, which is the place of mental worship.^

{B[ere ends the fourth section)

1 Kamodgamollasita.

2 See Introduction.

3 See Mahanirva«a Tantra, Gh. V, vv. 129, 130, p. 85, where the
Mantra is given.

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

Verses 23 and 29

In the throat is the Lotus called Vishuddha, which is pure
and of a smoky purple hue. All the (sixteen) shining
vowels on its (sixteen) petals, of a crimson hue, are distinct-
ly visible to him whose mind (Buddhi) is illumined. In the
pericarp of this lotus there is the Ethereal Region, circular
in shape, and white like the full Moon, ^ On an elephant
white as snow is seated the Bija ® of Ambara, ® who is
white of colour.

Of His four arms, two hold the noose ^ and goad, ® and
the other two make the gestures ® of granting boons and
dispelling fear. These add to His beauty. In His lap ^
there ever dwells the great snow-white Deva, three-eyed
and five-faced, with ten beautiful arms, and clothed in a
tiger’s skin. His body is united with that of Girija, ® and
he is known by what his name, Sada-shiva, ® signifies.

1 Ether is the element of this Chakra, the sign (Mawc^alaj of this
Tattva being a circle (VWtta-rupa). See Introduction.

2 Manu=Mantra=(here) ‘‘ Hang

3 Ambararsthe Ethereal Region ; the word also means “ apparel ”
— “ Yyomni, vasasi ’’ (Amara-ko.sAa). On an elephant of the colour of
snow is seated Ambara, white in colour in his Bijaform. The Sanskrzt
is capable of another meaning : On an elephant is seated the Bija
whose raiment is white.”

4 Pasha.

5 Angkusha.

6 Mudra ; v. pp. 20, 21, ante.

7 Of the ISTabhovija or “ Hang

s “ Mountain-born,” a title of the Devi as the daughter of the
Mountain King (Himavat — Himalaya). The reference is here to the
Androgyne Shiva-Shakti form. See Commentary.

9 Sada=:ever. Shiva=:the Beneficent One, Beneficence.

DBSCEIPflOH. OP THl 8IX GENTBES

Commentary

The Vishtiddha Chakra is described in four verses begiiiBiiig
with these.

Because bj the sight of the Hangsa the Jiva attains purity,
this Padma (Lotus) is therefore called Vishuddha (pure)— Ethereal,
Great, and Excellent/’

In the regi07i of the throat in the Lotus called Vishuddha ,^’ —
Pure (Amala, without impurity) by reason of its being tejo-maya ^
(its substance is tejas)^ and hence free from impurity.

All the vowels^^ (Svarai/i- sarvaife) — i.e., all the vowels begin-
ning with A-hara and ending with Visarga — altogether sixteen in
number.

“ Shining on the ]}etals ” (Dala-parilasitai/i) . — The vowels
being sixteen in number, the number of petals which this lotus
possesses is shown by implication to be sixteen also.

Elsewhere this has been clearly stated : Above it (Anahata)
is the Lotus of sixteen petals, of a smoky purple colour ; its petals
bear the sixteen vowels, red in colour, with the Bindu above them.
Its filaments are ruddy, and it is adorned by V^yoma-matidala.”^

“ Distinctly visible ” (Dipitam). — These letters are lighted up,
as it were, for the enlightened mind (Dipta-buddfoi).

Whose 7nind (buddhij is illumined ” refers to the person
whose buddhij or intellect, has become free from the impurity
of worldly pursuits as the result of the constant practice of Yoga.

“ The Ethereal Region circular m shape, and white like the full
Moon ” (Purnendu-prathita-tama-nabhomartfl^alam vnttaimpam),—
The Ethereal Region is circular in shape (Vnttarupa), and its
roundness resembles that of the full Moon, and like the Moon it is
also white. The Sharada says : “ The wise know that the Mandalas
participate in the lustre of their peculiar elements.”^ The Ma-n-dalas
are of the colour of their respective Devatas and elements : Ether

1 See Rudrayamala, Ch. XXYII, v. 67.

2 Fire purifies.

3 The Ethereal Circle.

^ That is, each Mawdala (z.e., square
after the characteristics of its elements.

68 THE SIX CENTBES AND THE SERPENT POWER

‘‘In the pericarp of this lotus is the circular Ethereal Region ”
(Nabho-ma^idalam vrifcta-rupam).— In the lap of this white Ambara

Ethereal Hegion) ever dwells 8a(Ia-shivaj who is spohen of in
the second of these two verses.

“On an elephant white assnou’i.‘'.s‘eaie<f”(Hi£na-chchhaya-
nagopari lasita-tanu).— This qualifies Ambara.

Naga here means an Elephant, and not a serpent. The
Bhuta-shuddhi clearly says: “ Inside it hs the white Bija
of Vyoma on a snow-white elephant.” Literally, “ His body
shows resplendent on an elephant,” because He is seated
thereon.

“The Blja oj Atnhara’f (Tasya manoh).— Tasya manoh

means literally ‘'His mantra,” which is the Bija of Ether or
Hang.i

“His four arms, (two of) which hold the Pclsha (noose),

Anghusha (goad), and (the other two) are m the gesttiregrmdin^^^

boons and dis 2 '>elling fear, add to his beaiciy (Bhujai/i pasha-
bhityangkasha-vara-lasitai/i shobhitaiiigasya). The meaning, in
short, is that in His hands He is carrying the and

anghusha, and making the gestures of dispelling fear and granting
boons.

In the lap of his Blja'' (Tasya manor angke).— He is
here in His Bija form— in the form of Hang which is Ikasha-
Bija. This shows the presence of the Bija of Ether in the
pericarp of this Eotus, and we are to meditate upon it as here
described,

The snow-‘White Beva whose body is united with for in-sepavahle
frow ) that of Giri-ja" (Gririjabhinna-deha), By this is meant
Arddha-narishvara,^ The Deva Arddhanarishvara is of a golden
colour on the left, and snow-white on the right* He dwells in the
lap of Nabho-bija. He is described as the Deva Sada-shiva
garbed in white raiment. Half His body being inseparate from that
of Girija, He is both silvern and golden He is also spoken of as

possessed of the down-turned digit (Kala) of the Moon which
constantly drops nectar

1 The Bija of a thing is that thing in essence.

^ Hara-Gaari-murti (Shangkara).

^ This is, the Ama Kala.

iiili

Piii

DESCEIPTION .OF THE SIX .CINTBES^

says : VVixniii xoe xaitirci* m ana over ix a non oeax

(Singliasaiia). On this is the eternal Gauri, and on Her right is
Sadi-Shiva. He has five faces, and three eyes to each face; His
body, is ' smeared with ashes,' and He is like a mountain of silver.
The Deva is wearing the skin of a tiger, and garlands of snakes
'are,. His ornaments,”

The Eternal Gaur! (SadS Ganri) is there as half of Shiva’s
body. She is in the same place spoken of as the Gauri, the
Mother of the Universe, who is the other half of the body of Shiva

With ten htautiful arms^^ (Lalita-dasha-bhuja). — The
Author here has said nothing of what weapons the Deva has in His
hands. In a Dhyana elsewhere He is spoken of as carrying in His
hands the Shula (trident), the Tangka (battle-axe), the Knpa?ia
(sword), the Vajra (thunderbolt), Dahana (fire),theN%endra (snake-
king), the QhB,nUi (bell), the Angkusha (goad), Pasha (noose), and
making the 'gesture dispelling fear (Abhltikara).^ In meditating on
Him, therefore, He should be thought of as carrying these imple-
ments and substances and making these gestures in and by His ten
arms. Great (Prasiddlia lit known) here wall known for his
OTeatness. The rest can be easily understood.

1 Pataia YlII. The text translated is incorrect. In Rasikainohana
Cha^i^opadhyaya’s Edition it runs : Within the Yantra is the bull,
half whose body is that of a lion.” This is consistent with the Arddba-
narishvara, as the bull is the Yahana (carrier) of Shiva, and the lion of
the Devi.

2 That is <S7ia^-kona yantra,

3 This gesture is called also Astra or a weapon which is thrown
because it throws goodness on the Sadhaka.

70

Tfl,E six/ CBHTBIS ^AHB' THE. SEKPENT POWER

. V:EIISS 30

PoEER than the Ocean of .Nectar is ' the Shakti Shakini
who . dwells' in this Lotus* , Her raiment ,is yelloWs and
in Her four lotus-hands She carries the bow^ the arrow,,
the noose, and the goad. The w^hole region of the Moon
without the mark of the hare^ is in the pericarp of this
Lotos. This (region) is the gatew^ay of great Liberation
for him who desires the wealth of Yoga and whose senses
are pure and controlled.

Commentary

Here the Author speaks of the presence of Shakini in the
pericarp of the Vishuddha Lotas.

Purer than the Ocean, of Nectar (Sudhasindho/i ^ Shuddha)^
—•The Ocean of Nectar is white and cool and makes immortal.
Shakini, who is the form of light itself (Jyoti?i-svarupa) is white
and heatless.

In the following Dhyana of Shakini She is described in detail r
Let the excellent Sadhaka meditate in the throat lotus on the
Devi Shakini. She is light itself (Jyoti/i-svarupa) ; each of Her
five beautiful faces is shining with three eyes. In Her lotus hands
She carries the noose, the goad, the sign of the book, and makes
the Jnanamudra.^ She maddens (or distracts) all the mass of

1 The “ Man in the Moon”.

2 Sudhasindhu, says Shangkara, is Chandra (Moon). She is purer
and whiter than the nectar in the moon. The translation here given
is according to the construction of Shangkara and Yishvanatha, who
read SudhasindhoA in the ablative. Kalichara^^a, however, reading
it in the possessive case, gives the meaning “ pure like the ocean of
Nectar,” which is the innermost ocean of the seven oceans, which
surrounds the jewelled island (Mawdvipa),

3 Made by touching the thumb with the first finger of the right
hand and placed over the heart.

OESCEEFTION OF THE SIX CENTRES

71

Paslius/ and She has her abode in the bone.^ She is fond of
oiilk food, and elated with the nectar which She has drunk.’’

By the expression She is light itself ” in the above Dhyana, it
is meant that She is white, whiteness being characteristic of light.
The two Dhyanas diifer as regards the weapons the Devi has in her
hands. This is due to differences in the nature of the Sadhaka’s aim.^

The Devi ds in the lunar region (ChandramanJala) within the
pericarp. The Frema-yoga Taramgim says : ‘‘ Here dwells the
Shakti Shakini in the auspicious region of the Moon.”

fMs Lotus (Kamale) — i.e., in the pericarp of the

Vishiiddha Chakra.

“ In this pericarp is the sjnytless region of the Moon^ withoict the
-mark of a hare ” (Shasha-parirahita), conveys the same meaning.
The spots on the moon are called the sign of the hare/’ the
stain on the moon She is likened to the Stainless Moon.

The gateway cf great liheration^^ (Maha-mok^/ia-dvara). —
This is attributive of the lunar region, and is used in

praise of the Ma>idala. It is the gateway of Liberation, of Nirva?^a-
mukti, for those who have purified and conquered their senses,
among other practices ; by meditating on this in the path of Yoga
they attain liberation (Mukti).

“ Who desires the wealth of Yoga ” (Shriyamabhimata-shilasya).
— B}'' Shri is meant the wealth of Yoga”. For him who by his
very nature desires the wealth of Yoga, that Is the gateway of
Liberation. This clearly explains the meaning of Shuddhendriya,
whose senses are pure and controlled.

In the pericarp of this Lotus is the Nabho-inantiala (ethereal
region) : inside the latter is the triangle (Triko? 2 a) ; inside the
triangle is the Chandra-ma?f.fMa ; and inside it is the Nabho-
bija^ : and so forth. Cf, Think of the full moon in the triangle
within the pericarp ; there think of the snowy Akasha seated on
an elephant, and whose raiment is white. Thei*e is the Deva Sada-
Shiva.” Whose raiment is white ” qualifies Akasha.

^ See Introduction to A. Avalon's Mahanirva?ia Tantra.

2 i,e,, She is the Devata of the Xsthi Dhatu.

3 The nature of the Dhyana (meditation) varies with the aim which
a SMhaka wishes by his worship. See Tantraraja. Tantrik Texts
Vols. YIII and XIL

4 The Bija of Ether — Hang.

IS

EKPENT rOWKR

YBE- SIX'/OEHraiS AND THE

Commentary

nE^^CEIPTtON OF THE SIX CENTRES

73

f '

I He is constant, gentle, steady, modest, courageous, forgiving, self- j

I controlled, pure and the like, and free from greed, malice and -

I pride/’ ^ I

\ “He secs the three perioih” (Tri-kala-darslif) — i.e., by the ■

[ knowledge acquired by Yoga he sees everything in the past, ^

I present, and future. Some say that the meaning of this is that i

I the Yogi has seen the Self (Atma), and, as all objects of knowledge *

f are therein, they become visible to him.

Freefrohi itisease and sorroic ” (llogashokapramukta/i) . !

i '• n by having attained Siddhi in his mantra he becomes free from
[: diseases and long-lived, and by reason of his having freed himself

■ I ' from the bonds of Maya he feels no sorrow.

I “Like Eangsa, the destroi/er of endless dangers ” (Eira.va.dh.i-

\ . vipadiing dhvangsa-hangsa-prakasha/i). — From acts good and evil

i < various dangers (Yipat) arise. The Sadhaka becomes like the

‘s Hangsa which is the Antaratma that dwells by the pericarp of the

I Sahasrara,? for he can destroy all such dangers and in the result

i open the gate of Liberation (Moks/ia). Hangsa is the form of the

; , Antaratma. 'J'he rest is clear.

BuJIMARY of the S'^lSHDDDHA OliAKEA

I

At tlie base of the throat ^ is the Vishaddha Chakra, with
sixteen petals of smoky purple hue. Its filaments are ruddy,

f d the sixteen vowels, which are red and have the Bindu
pve them, are on the petals. In its pericarp is the ethereal
region (NabhO“ma«dala), circular and white. Inside it is the
Chandra-mam|ala., and above it is the Bija Hang. This Bija
is while and garmented in white, ^ seated on an elephant, and
is four-armed. In his four hands he holds the Piisha (noose)
and the Angkusha (goad), and makes the Vara-mudra and
the Al)haya*niudra. In his lap is Sada-shiva, seated on a

i The portion within inverted commas is from the Bhagavad-Gita,
XYI, 2,

^ Cl. Sarvarogaharachakra in Shri Yantra.

3 That is, the Hangsa is in the tw el ve-pe tailed Lotus below the-
Bahasrara. Shangkara and Yishvanatha call Hangsa the Sun.

^ Kan^/ia-mule.

5 That is clothed in ‘space.

50

74 ' ' "THB six CENfBES' -ANB THE SEBPENT POWER

great lion-seat which is placed on the back of a bull. He is
in his form of Arddhanarishvara, and as such half his body
is the colour of snow, and the other half the colour of gold.
He has Jive faces and ten arms, and in his hands he holds the
Simla (trident), the Tangka (battle-axe), the Khariga (sacrificial
sword), the Vajra (thunderbolt), Dahaiia, ^ the Nageiidra (great
snake), the Gha^ii^a (bell), the Angkusha (goad), the Pasha (noose),
and makes the Abhaya-mudra. He wears a tigePs skin, his whole
body, is smeared with ashes, and he has a garland of . snakes round
his neck. -'The nectar dropping from the down-turned digit of the,.
Moon is on his forehead. Within the pericarp, and in the Lunar
Region and seated on bones, is the Shakti Shakini, white in colour,
four-armed, five-faced and three-eyed, clothed in yellow, and carry-
ing in Her hand a bow, an arrow, a noose, and a goad.

^Agneya astra.

BEBommim of the sir oentees

Ve'Ese 31 a^

The Yogi, his mind constantly fixed on this Lotus, his
breath controlled by Kiimbhaka/ is in his vrraty able to
move all the three worlds. Neither Brahma nor Yishnu^
neither Hari-Hara^ nor Suryya® nor Gampa/ is able to
control his power' (resist him).’;

COMMENTARy

' His breath '■ controlled by Knmhhaka- (Atta-pavana). — >
Literally it means, who has taken the air in, which is done by
Knmbhaka.

Hari-Harai ^^ — The Yugala (coupled) form, consisting of
Yishnn and Shiva combined.

Suryya ’’ (Kha-mam). — This word means the jewel of the
sky, or Suryya.

fHei^e ends the fifth section)

1 This verse has not been taken into account either by Kalicharawa
or Shangkara. It is given by Bala-deva in his text, and his Commentary
is also here given. It is in Tripurasara-samnchchaya, Oh. V, 26,

2 Betention of breath in Pra?iayama is Kumbhaka.

^ This is praise (Stntivada) of bis great powers — that is, were he to
get angry be could move the three worlds.

4 See Commentary.

5 Sun. See Commentary.

® Gat^esha.

7 . 6 '

•ME SIX' CENTRES- .AND .THE SERPENT FCnVE.R.

Verse 32

The Lotus- named AjuiV is like the Moon, ' (beautifull j
■white).. On its- -two petals are the .letters, Ha ..and
which', are- also white and enhance its beauty. It shines'
with the glory of Dhyana.^ Inside it is the Shakti Hakini,
whose six faces are like so many moons. She has six arms^
in one of which She holds a book ^ ; two others are lifted up
in the gestures of dispelling fear and granting boons, and
with the rest She holds a skull, a small drum/ and a
rosary/ Her mind is pure (Shiiddha-chitta).

Commentary

The Author now describes the Ajna Chakra between the
eyebrows in the seven verses beginning with this.

Lottus named Ajnd ’’ ( Ajna-nama), — Ajna of the Guru is
communicated here, hence it is called Ajna.^’ Here between the
eyebrows is the Ajna (Command), which is communicated from
above, hence it is called Ajna. This Lotus which is well known is
here,®

1 Ajua — command. See Commentary. The Tantrantara Tantra calls
this Chakra the house of Shiva (Shivageha).

2 The state of mind which is acquired by meditation (Dhyana).

3 Vidyam mudram dadhana, she is making the gesture of
Yidya or Pustaka Mudra and those of dispelling fear and granting
boons. It is not that she is carrying a book in her han . See post,

^ Damaru.

5 Posary with which “ Recitation ” ( japa) of mantra is done.

6 It is here that the Ajna of the Guru is communicated (Gautamlya
Tantra, cited by Yishvanatha). See Rudrayamala, Ch. XXYIl, v. 68,
which says that the Guru’s Ajna is communicated (Gurorajneti).

PLATE

BESOEIPTION OF THE SIX ■ CENTEBS

77

'■ 'This' 'Lotus 'is 'betweeri felie. eyebrows, as the following shows :
Going upwards after entering ' the .throat and .palate, the ■
white and anspicioiis Lotus between the eyebrows is reached by
Kiiiidalf. It has two petals on which are the. letters Ha and Ksfea,
and it is the' place .of mind. (Manas).”

The following .are descriptions, of the Lotus '

ih&'^Moons hewutifuUy white ” (Hima-kara-sadrishang),
— This coinparisoii with Chandra (Himakara) may also mean
that this Lotus is cool like the moonbeams (the moon being
the receptacle of x^mrita, or Nectar, whose characteristic is
co.oloess), a.iid that it is .also beautifully white, ■

It has been said in ‘Vlshvara-kartikeya-sangvada ” : ^

“ Ijna Chakra is above it ; it is white and has two petals;
the letters Ha and K.s^lia, variegated in colour, also enhance its
beauty. It is the seat of mind (Manas).”

Twe petals ” (Netra-patra).— The petals of the lotus.

The letters Ha> and Ksha, te hick are also white ” (Ha-k^/ia-
bhyang kalabhyain parilasitavapu/i su-shubhrara). — These two
letters are by their very nature white, and by their being on the
white petals the whiteness thereof is made more charming by this
very excess of whiteness.^ The letters are called Kalas because
they are B!ja&' of Kalui?.^

shines with the glory of Dhy ana (Dhyana-dhama-praka-
sham) — that is, its body shines like the glory of Dhyana Shakti.

** He next speaks of the presence of the Shakti

Hakin! here. The force of the pronoun Sa (She) in addition to
Her name is that She is the well-known Hakini.

The gestnres of dispelling fear and granting boons ” (Mudra).
— -This word stands for both Mudi*as. There should be six weapons

in Her hands, as She has six hands. There are some who read
Vidja and Mudra as one word, Vidya-mudra, and interpret it to

mean Vyakhyamudra — the gesture that conveys learning oi
knowledge— and speak of Her as possessed of four arms. Different

1 z.e., the Sammohana Tantra.

2 Or the meaning may be that the Ajna Chakra has rays cool like
the ambrosial rays of the Moon and like the Moon beautifully white.

3 See Introduction, Prapancbasara Tantra, Vol. Ill, Tantrik Texts,
ed. A. Avalon.

III

. !•;!

[t

i

. li ■

if ^

t

! ' :
y-i'f ' • '

[

j. -i-' :

fcll

» h '

!t^-|

Mb

i;

Lf-I:

Ml

i ? ;■
•r*

1

i - L

rl

I

TH£, SIX amTms : and the .seki'ent power

maiiBscripis give different readings. Various manuscripts read
these as two words. . The wise reader should judge for himself. .

. In a Dhyinadn another place She is thus described : Medi-
tate upon Her, the divine Hikini. She abides in the marrow^ and
iS' . white. In Her hands are the Damariiy the liudrik^lm rosary j
the ■ skull, the Vidya (the sign of the book), the Mudra (gesture of
granting ; boons and dispelling fear). She is fond of food cooked
with Turmini, and is elated by drinking ambrosia. She is well
seated on a white Lotus, and Her mind is exalted by the drink of
the King of the Devas gathered from the Ocean.’^

The rest is clear.

^ Majjastha.
in the chakra.

ililSii

According to another reading (chakrastha) abides

' itll i u

Within tins Lotus dwells the subtle mind (Manas). It
is well known. Inside the Yoni in the pericarp is the
Shiva called Itara/ in His phallic form. He here shines
like a chain of lightning flashes. The first Bija of the
Vedas,- which is the abode of the most excellent Shakti,
and which bv its lustre makes visible the Brahma-siitra,^
is also there. The Sadhaka with steady mind should
meditate upon these according to the order (prescribed).

Co.MMEKTAHY

3 Tlie ISTarH Chitrira.

^ Sangkalpavikalpatmaka, T1
referred to in the Commeiitary to v,
see Introduction.

5 Fhallie emblem of Shiva.

80

THE SIX'-OEHTEES AKB THE f^ERPENT POWER

..the' pericarp. The Itam-Sliiva who is tliere is in His phallic form^
and' within the. Toni. Within the triangle in the pericarp dwells
Ifcara-shivapada ^ — Le., the Shiva known by the name of Itara.
This Lingga is in the phallic form and white. As has been said in
the Bhnta-shuddhi ■ Taotra : Inside it is the Lingga Itara,

crystalline and with three eyes,’^ This Lingga resembles contimi-
oas streaks of lightning dashes (Vidyiin-malavilasam),

Fint Bija of the Vedm^^ (Vedanam adibijam),— He then
speaks of the presence of The Praimva ^ in the pericarp of
this Lotus. In the pericarp there is also the first
Pranava^ ^

Which i*?. the abode of the -niost excellent Shakti
kula-pada). — Kula=Shakti which is here of a triangular form.
Parama means most excellent, by reason of its resembling lightning
and the like luminous substances; and Pada means place — i.e.,
the triangular space. Hence this Bija— namely, the Pra?iava— we
perceive is within the triangle. This is clearly stated in the
following text :

“Within the pericarp, and placed in the triangle, is Atnm
in the form of the Pra^iava, and above it, like the flame of a lamp,
is the charming Nada, and Bindu which is Bfakara, ^aiid above it is
the abode of Manas.”

Now, if the Paramakulapada ^ be the container (Adhara) of
and therefore in separate from the Pranava, how is it that it is
separately mentioned as one of the sixteen Adbaras spoken of in
the following passage? For it has been said that “the sixteen
Adharas hard of attainment by the Yogi are Muladhara, SvadhW*-
thkna,, ^lani-pura, Anahata, Vishiiddba, Ajna-chakra, Bindu,
Kalapada, Nibodhika, Arddhendu, Nada, Nadanta, Unman!,
Yis^-nu-vaktra Dhruvamandala,A and Shiva.”

1 According to Vishvanatha, this is an Angsha (part) of the
Nirgii-aa Para Shiva in the Sahasrara.

^ Om.

A The letter Ma; that is, it is Makararupa or Ma before maiiifesta-
■ tion. . ■ ■ ■ ■ "

4 Shangkara says that Paramakula=Muladhara Padma, and
Paramakulapada=He who has bis abode in the Muladhara.

5 See Sharada Tilaka, Ch. V, 135, Ch. XII, v. 117 et seq . ; Kularwava
Tantra, Ch. IT, and Introduction.

■: DEJ<CBIPTiON OF TBE .SIX -GjBKTBES . ■ Bl

. The answer is that- the second Kalapada is not the one in the
Ajna Chakra, biit- is in, the vacant space above Mahanada which is
spoken of latev. This will become clear when dealing with the

..subject of Mahanada.

Which mafrftv manifest the Brahma-suira'^^ (Brahma-sutra-
prabodha).— Brahina"Sntra==OhitriB!--iiadi. This Nad'^ is made
'visible by the bistre of the Pranava. In v. 3 this Nadi has been
described as lustrous with the lustre of the Pramva.-^^

The Sadhaka .should with a steady mind meditate upon all
tliese^ — nh'., Hakini, Manas, Itara Liriiga and Pra?zava— in the
order prescribed. This is different to the order in which they are
placed in the text by the author. But the arrangement of words
according to their import is to be preferred to their positions in the
text. The order as shown here should prevail. Thus, first Hakini
in the pericarp; in the triangle above her Itara Limga ; in the
triangle above him the Praiiava ; and last of all, above the Prana va
itself,' Manas should be, meditated upon.' ' ,

_____

THE. SIX ■OBXTEES, AXD THE SERPENT POWER

Verse 34

The .excellent' Sadliaka, wliose Itma is notMiig .but, a
meditation OB this Lotii^ is able quickly to enter another's
body ^ at will, and- becomes the most excellent among Munis,

and all-knowing and all-seeing. He becomes tlie benefactor

of all, and versed in all the Sliastras. He realises his
unity with the Brahman and acquires excellent and un-
known powers. ^ Pull of fame and long-lived, he ever
becomes the Creator, Destroyer, and Preserver, of the three
worlds.

Commentary

In this verse he speaks of the good to be gained by the
Dhyana of this Lotus.

Most emcellent amony *(Mnnindra).— A Muni is one

who is accomplished in Dhyana and Toga^ and other excellent
acquirements. The suffix Indra means King or Chieftain, and is
added to names to signify excellence.

Versed in all the Bhdstras (Sarva-shastrarthavetta).— Such
an one becomes pi’oficient in the Shastras and in Divine knowledge,
and thus he becomes all-seeing (Sarva-darshi) — i.e., able to look at
things from all points by reason of his being possessed of wisdom
and knowledge which harmonises with Shastras, manners, and
customs.

1 Para-pura — may also mean another’s house. See p. 63, ante.

a Siddhi.

3 Dhyanayogadisampannah. — The word may also mean one who is an
adept in Dhyanayoga and other acquirements.

BESCEIPTIOX OP THE SIX CENTRES

83

He realises,^' eic, (Advaitachara~Tadi). — ^He knows that this
Universe and all material existence is the Brahman, from such
sayings of Shroti as, The worlds are Its Piida (that is Angshas) :

All that exists is the Brahman ^ and, I am the Deva, and no'
one else ; I am the very Brahman, and sorrow is not my share.’’ ^
He knows that the Brahman alone is the Real (Sat), and every-
thing else is unreal (Asat), and that they all shine by the light of
the Brahman, ^ The man who by such knowledge is able to realise
the identity of the Individual with the Supreme Spirit ^ (Jivatma
I and Paramatma), and preaches it, is an Advaitavadf.

L “ Excellent awl miknown poicers ” (Paramapurva-siddhi) —

I that is, most exalted and excellent powers.

I Full of fame (Prasiddha) — i.e., famous by reason of his

I excellence.

L “ He ever becomes f etc, (So’pi karta tri-bhuvana-bhavane

I sanghritaii pfilane cha). — This is Prashangsa-vada ; ^ or it may mean

: that such Sadhaka becomes absorbed in the Supreme on the

5 dissolution of the body, and thus becomes the source of Creation,

I Preservation, and Destruction.

s

■i' ■' '

r 1 ‘ Pado ’s 3 ^a vishva bhutanitiP ^ Tadidang sarvvang BrahmaP The

i' Chba.-Up. reads (3. 12. 6), ‘ Pado’sya sarva bhutani’ and (3. 14. 1),

t * Sarvarii khalvidam Brahma ’ — which mean the same things.

I ^ Ahang devo na chanjm’smi Brahmaivasmi na shokabhak.

I ^ Brahmaivaikang sad-vastu tadanyad asat prapancha-samudayas

I tn Brahma-hhasataya bhasate.

I 4 Jivatma-paramatmanor aikyachintanam.

f , ^ e.6., Stuti-vMa, or praise ; or, as we should say, compliment,

I which, while real in the senvse of the presence of a desire to praise that

I which is in fact praiseworthy, is unreal so far as regards the actual

i words in which that desire is voiced.

I

I

84

.THE -SIX' CEHTEIS-AKD THE SERPENT POWER

' Verse 35 "

Within the. triangle in ^ this Ohakra exer dwells the com- ■
bination of, letters ^ which form the PraRaYa* .It is the iniier
Atma-. as pure mind (Biiddhi),. and resembles a' flame in its
radiance. AboTe it is the half (crescent) moon, and aboYe
this, again, is Ma-kara, ^ shining in its form of Bindin
Above this is Nada, whose whiteness equals that of Bala-
rama ^ and diffuses the rays of the Moon* ^

COHMENTAHY, ' ,

The author desires to speak of the preseuce of the Pra-'^mYa in
the Ajna- Chakra and says that in this Chakra, and within the
triangle which has already been spoken of, ever dwells the com-
hination of the letters A and U which by the rules of Sandhi
makes the thirteenth vowel 0. This combination of letters is
Suddha-buddhyantaratma— i.e., the innermost Spirit manifesting as
pure intelligence (Buddhi). The question may be asked if the
thirteenth vowel (0) is that. To obviate this the author qualifies it
by saying above it is the half Moon, etc.^’ It is by adding the
half Moon (Nada) and Bindu to 0 that the Pra^iava is formed.

He next gives its attributes :

Resembles a flame in its radiance ’’ (Pradipabhajyoti/i). — But
how can this thirteenth vowel by itself be Shuddha-buddhyan-
taratma? He therefore says :

Above it is the crescent moon^^ (Tadurdhve chandrardha/i),

1 That is, a and which by Sandhi becomes 0, and with anusvara
{m) thus form the Pranava, or mantra Om.

2 The letter M in its Bindu form in Chandra-vindu.

^ Shangkara reads it as Jaladhavala, etc.,’^ and explains it by
** white like water The last portion may also mean smiling white-
ness equals that of the Moon

DESCRIPTIOX OF THE SIX CENTRES

85

■ I

(ihfwe fliiSj, (iijuuiy is 31(i-]iaT(iy shining in its fovm of
(Tad-npari vilasadbiiKiu-rup! Ma-karaE).— It is thus
. shown that by the placing of the crescent moon and the Bindu ^
over the thirteenth vowel the ]^ra?iava is completely formed.

Above this is (Tadurdiive nado’sau) — above the

Prawava is the Avilntara (final or second) Nada, which challenges
as it were the whiteness of Baladeva and the Moon (Baladliavala-
sudhadhira-saiitilnadiasl). By this he means to say that it is
extremely white, excelling in whiteness both Baladeva and the
rays of the Moon.

Some read Tadfidye iiadoWi (in the place of Tadurdhve
nado'saii), and interpret it as, ‘M'telow Bindii-rupi Ma-kara is
: Nada . . But that is incorrect. ' The text says, '' Above this, again,'
is Ma-kara, shining in its form of Bindu, and there is Nada below
it ; that being so, it is useless to repeat that NMa is below.

Besides, this Nilda is beyond the Nada which forms part of
the PraMva, and is part of the differentiating (Bhidyamana)
Parabindu placed above the Prawava. If, however, it be urged
that it is necessary to state the details in describing the special
Pranava (Vishi^??i^a-Pra«ava), and it is asked, Why do you say a
second Nada is inappropriate?” then the reading Tadadye
nado’sao may be accepted.

But read thus it should be interpreted in the manner following :
** This Nada shown below tlie Bindu-rupi Ma-kara is Bala-dhavala-
sudhadhara-santana-has! ii\ .ante), and the Nada first spoken of is
also so described. Such repetition is free from blame on the
authority of the maxim that the great are subject to no
limitations '

^ That is, Anusvara.

2 Sudhadbarasantana, Vishvanatha says, means a multitude of

THE'..81X C'ENTEES .AHD THE SEEPENT POWER

Wheis'* the Yogi closes the ' lioiise which liaags without
support,^ the knowledge whereof he has gained by the
service of Parama-guru, and, when the Ohetas ^ by repeated
practice becomes dissolved in this place which is the abode
of uninterrupted bliss, he then sees within the middle of
and in the space above (the triangle) sparks of fire
distinctly shining.

Commentary

Having described the Pra?iava, he now speaks of its union
(with Ohetas), i.e., Pra%avayoga.

The Yogi should close the house (Puram baddliva)— i.e., he
should, with his mind set on the act, close the inner house ; or, in
other words, he should make Yoni-mudra^ in the manner prescrib-
ed, and thus effectually close the inner house. The use of the word
Piir used shows that the Yoni-mudra is meant. Then, when his
Chetas by repeated practice (Abhyasa) or meditation on the Pra?iava
becomes dissolved (Lina) in this place (the Ajiiachakra), he sees
within and in the space above the triangle wherein the Pranava is,
sparks of Pire^ (Pavana-sahridang ka?uin), or, to put it plainly,
sparks of light resembling sparks of fire appear before his mental

1 Kiralamba-puri. Firalamba (t\ post) means that which has no
support — viz., that by wbich the mind’s connection with the world
has been removed and realisation of the infinite established. Akasha-
mangsi=whose flesh or substance is Akasba (Eajanirghaw^u Diet.)-

2 See next page and Introduction.

3 i.e., closes the avenues of the mind and concentrates it within
itself.

^ Pavana-suhWd— He whose friend is air ”=r Fire. When the
wind blows fire spreads.

wfl

r»KSCKll‘riO\ OF the six centres

vision above tbe triangle on which the Pra?iava rests. It is by
Yoni-mudra that the inner- self (Anta?i-pur) is restrained and
detached from the outside world, the region of material sense.
The Manas cannot be pnritied and steadied unless it is completely
detached from the material si'ihere. It is therefore that the mind
(Manas) should be completely detached by Yoni-mudrti.

Yoni-mudra, which detaches the Manas from the outside
world, is thus defined : “ Place the left heel against the anus, and
the right heel on the left foot, and sit erect with your body and
neck and head in a straight line. Then, with your lips formed to
resemble a crow’s beak,i draw in air and fill therewith your belly.
Next - close tightly your ear-holes with the thumbs, with your
index-fingers the eyes, the nostrils by your middle fingers, and
your mouth by the remaining fingers. Restrain the air 3 'within you,
and with the seuse.s controlled meditate on the Mantra whereby
you realise the unity (Ekatvam) of Prana and Manas.^ This is
Yoga, the favourite of Yogis.”

That steadiness of mind is produced by re.straint of breath
through the help of Mudnl, has been said by Shruti. “ The mind
under the influence of Hangsa 5 moves to and fro, over different
subjects ; by restraining Hangsa the mind is restrained.”

“ Closes the house ” (Puram baddhvii). — This may also mean
Khechari Mudra.® This latter alsso produces steadiness of mind.

As has been said, “ As by this the Chitta roams in the Brah-
man (Kha),'^ and a.s the sound of uttered word* also roams the

1 That is, by Kaki-iimdra. Shruti says that when Vayu is drawn in
by this Mndra and stopped by Kiinibhaka Readiness of mind is produced.

2 These and following verses occur in Sharada Tilaka, Oh. XXY,
vv. 45, 46. The first portion of this passage describes Siddhasana,

3 That is, by Kurubhaka.

That is, recite the Hangsa or Aiapamantra, or breathing in
Knmbhaka.

3 The Jivatma manifesting as Prana.

3 One of the Mndras of HatAa-yoga. See Introduction.

’ Kha has three meanings — inz., Ether, Brahman, and space between
eyebrow.s (Ajna). Brahmananda, tbe Oommentator of the HatAayo-
gapradlpika, adopts tbe last meaning in interpreting this verse (Oh. ill,
V. 41,) and in commenting on v. 55 of the HaiAayogapradipika gives it the
meaning of Brahman.

3 Lit., tong-ue.

Ether (Klia), : therefore Is. Khech Mudra hononred by all the
Siddhas.’^ '

, The Chifcta is Khechara^ when, disunited from Manas and
devoid of all attachment to all worldly things, it becomes Unman!;’

.. A.S has been said,^ ^Hhe- Yog! is united with Unman! ; without
Unman! there, is. no Yogf.^'^ ISTiralamba means that which has no
support — namely,' that from which the mind^s connection with the
world has been removed.

The knoivledge tohereof he has gamed by iheseriicB qfhis
Parama-gurif, (Parama-giiru-seva-suviditam). — Parama is excellent
in the sense that he has attained excellence in Y'oga practice (by
instructions) handed down along a series of spiritual preceptors
(Gurus), and not the result of book-learning,^

Serving the GuruJ ^ — Such knowledge is obtained from the
Guru by pleasing him by personal services (Seva), C/. it can be
attained by the instructions of the Guru, and not by ten million of
Shastras/’

‘‘The abode of immterrupted bliss (So-sukha-sadana) — be.,
this is the place where one enjoys happiness that nothing can
interrupt. This word qualifies place (Iha-sthane — be., Ajna-
chakra).

Sparks of fire distimily shining (Pavana-suhridam pravila-
sita-rupta kanan). — These sparks of Fire shine quite distinctly.

Elsewhere it is clearly stated that the Pranava is surrounded
by sparks of light : Above it is the flame-like Atma, auspicious
and ' in shape like the Pranava, on all sides surroonded by sparks
of light.’"

^ What moves about in the sky or ether. It is Manas which deprives
the Chitta of freedom by causing attachment to the world. On being
disunited from Manas it moves freely in the ether, going its own way.

2 Unmani is there where, to coin a word, the “ Manasness ” of
Manas ceases. See note to v. 40. Ut= without, and mani is from Manas.

3 This is from Jnauarwava Tantra, Oh. XXIY, v. 37.

^ Which is well recognised to be insufficient in these matters.

nE.<eRIPTfOX OF THE SIX .'CINTBBS

89

Veesb 37

He tliOB also sees the Liglit^ which is in the form of a
flaming lamp. It is lustrous like the clearly shining
morning sun, and glows between the Sky and the Earth.^
It is here that the Bhagavfm manifests Himself in the
fulness; of His mightr^ He knows no decay, and witnesseth
all, and is here as He is in the region of Fire, Moon, and
,Siin/;''

COMMIXTARY

Yogis such as these see other visions ' beside the sparks of
light. After seeing the fiery sparks they see the light.'

Then ” (Tadaiiii) — after seeing the sparks spoken of
in the preceding Shloka.

He then describes this Light (Jyoti/i).

GlotCi^ hetimen the Sky and the Earth ’’ (Gagana-dharaTzi-
madhyaniilita). — This compound adjective qualifies Jyotih or Light.

Gagaua (sky) is the sky or empty space above Shangkhini
Nad! (see verse 40, mid Dharazil (Earth) is the Dhara-mandala
in the Muladhara. This liglit also extends from the Muladhara
■■■ 'to the Saliasrira,,^ : '

^ fjyoti/i.

2 See Commentary, pmL

3 Pur?za-vibhava, which, however, as Kalicharatza points out post,
may be interpreted in various ways. According to Vishvanafcha, the
second chapter of the Kaivalya-Kalika Tantra contains a verse which
says that the presence of the all-pervading Brahman is realised by
His action, as we realise the presence of Rahu by his action on the sun
and moon.

4 That is, the triangle on Manipi^/ia within the A-ka-tha triangle.
See V. 4 of the Padukapanehaka.

^ The particle va in the text is used in an inclusive sense.

i

li

m

iii

90. ME Six eiNfRES' .AMD TH.E. SERFEMT POWER '

... . ^ He next speaks of the . presence of Parama Shiva in the' ,
Aina Chakra. ■'

It is here (Iha. stfiane)— i.e., in the Ijna Chakra; Parama
Shiva is here, as in the Saliasrara, Bhagavan is Parama Shiva.

. Manifests Himself (SaksAM bhavati)— i.e., He is here.i

In the fulness of His might ” (Pur?ia-vil,)hava). — This com-
pound word which qualifies Bhagavau is capable of various
interpretations,

Purna-vibhava nmy also be interpreted in the following differ.-
ent ways :

(а) Pilrna may mean complete in Himself, and infinite

powers, such as the power of creation, etc. In that case the
word would mean : “ One who has in Him such powers, who is the
absolute Creator, Destroyer, and Supporter, of the Universe/’

(б) Vibhava, again, may mean the diversified and limitless
creation,” andpwrna “ all-spreading”. In this sense Punia-vibhava
means “ He from whom this all-spreading and endless (vast) crea-
tion has emanated.” C/. “ From whom all these originated, and in
whom having originated they live, to whom they go and into whom
they enter ” (Shruti).^

(c) F^6/la^'a, again, may mean “ omnipresence,” and Puma
“ all-spreading It would then mean : “ He who in His omnipre-
sence pervades all things,”

(d) Puma ^ may also mean the qualify of one whose wish is not
moved by the result and is not attached to a;ny object* P^rnu-
vibhava would then mean one who is possessed of that quality.

All things except Atraii pass away. The omnipresence of the
ethereal region, (Akasha) etc., is not ever-existent. The Nirvana
Tantra (Ch. IX) speaks of the presence of Parama Shiva in the
Ajna Chakra in detail.

“ Above this (i.e., Vishuddha) Lotus is Jnana Lotus, which is
very difficult to achieve ; it is the region ^ of the full Moon, and

1 He is seen here.

s Tait Up., 3. L 1.

3 Phalannpahita-vk/iayitanaspadechchhakatvam : He whose wish
is not moved by the result, and is not attached to any object ; or, in
other words, He whose ways are inscrutable to us, subject as w’’e are to
limitations (May a) .

4 Purna-chandrasya mandalam.

DESCHIiTlOX OF TBE S'tX ClXTEEg

91

has ,tw.,o petals.” Again; “Inside it, in the form of is

the 'Bija of Shamblui ” ; and again ; “Thns is Hangs.ah in Mani-
„ and in its lap is Parama Shiva, with SitUha Kali ^ on his left.

She. is the very self of eternal Bliss.” By lap is meant the space
.within the Bindn.^ which form the '\%arga at the end of
.EangsaJo'^

So it has been said in describing the Sahasrara': “There are
the two Bind ns which make the imperishable Visarga.-^ In the
space within is Parama Shiva.” As It is in the Sahasrara so It is
represented here/*

We are to nnderstand that these two, Shiva and Shakti, are
herein union (Bandhaiia) in the form of Parabindn,.as the letter Ma
(Ma-karatma), and that they are surrounded (Achchhadana) by
Maya.® “ She the Eternal One stays here (Ajna Chakra) in
the form of a grain of gram/ and creates beings (Bhntani).” Here
the Parama Shiva as in the form of a gram dwells, and according
tO' the Utkaladimata ^ also creates.

“ As He is in the rt-gion of Fire^ iloon, and Sun ” (Vahnefe
shashimihirayor rnandalamiva). — As the presence of Bhagavan in
these regions is well known, so is He here. Or it may be that the
author means that as He in tlie shape of a grain of gram dwells in
the regions of Fire, ]Moon, and Son, in the Sahasrara, so does He
dwell here also. We shall describe the Arka, Indu, and Agni Ma?idala
in the Sahasrara later* In Pi^lia-puji the Puja of Paramatma and

1 The isle of gems in the Ocean of Ambrosia. The Eudrayamala
says that it is in the centre of the Ocean of nectar outside and beyond
the countless myriads of world systems, and that there is the Supreme
abode of Shrividya.

2 A form of Shakti.

s the two dots which form the aspirate breathing at the end of
Hangsalh.

4 Imperishable visarga — Visargarupam avyayam...

5 That is, the Parabindu is represented in the Ajna by the Bindu
of the Ongkara, which is its Fratika.

® Bindu is the nasal sound of Ma, which is a male letter. Bindu
is here the unmanifest Ma.

^ Oha«akakara-rupi«i. See Introduction.

^ Apparently a school of that name.

fHE :six- ClKTElS^ijrD Tfl.'E BEEFlKf 'POWEl

Juiaatoi,, should ^ be 'perforiBed' onMlie ' Maiidalas of Sail {j|.rka),.
Moon. (Iiidu),' and Fire (Agni). Bj .ParainitiaiBaraina .Shiva is
meant},., and - by ■ Joanatmi Jiitoa Shakfci., ■ The' B'lndii .'should be
m.edifcafced .npoti as like the .'grain of graiii, ■ corisisfciiig' of „ the''

der its encircling sheath,

_______

ilESCKIPTIOX OF THE SIX .CEHTRES

This is the iiiciHiiparable and delightful abode of Yishrm.
The excellent Yogi at the time of death joyfully places
his vital breath (Prawa), ^ here and enters (after death) that
Supreme, Eternal, Birthless, Primeval Deva, the Puru^‘/ia,
who was before the three worlds, and who is known by the
Vedanta,

COMMINTAEV , ■

He now .speaks of the good to be gained by giving up the'
Pram by Yoga in the Ajna Chakra.

This verse means : The excellent Yogi (Yogindra) at the time
of death (Prana-nidhane) joyfully (PramuditamanaA) places his
Prana (Pranang sainaropya) in the abode of Vishnu in the Ajna
Chakra (Iha sthane — i.e*, in the abode of Bhagavan in the

Bindu already described), and passes away, and then enters the
Supreme Purmht\.

At the time of death (Prawa-nidhane) — i.e., ' feeling the

approach of death.

Joyjkdly (Framodita-maiia/d — Glad in mind in the enjoy-
ment of the blissful union with Atmil, ' (Atmanandena hrisMa-
chitta/?-.)

Fishnii. Bhagavan ssParama Shiya (see previous Shloka).

Here (Ilia sthane)— in the Bindu in the Ajna Chakra
spoken of above.

Places the prdina here^* (Iha sthane pranang samaropya)—
f.e., he places it on the Bindu already spoken of. He describes
Puru^/ia as Eternal

^ Compare Bliagavad-Gita, Ch. VIll, vv. 9 and 10, and the com-
mentary of Shangkaracharyja and Madhusfidana Sarasvati on those
verses.

94

THE 'SIX-. CENTRES AND THE .'SEBDENT POWER ,

‘■yEternaV^ {Nifeyani).- — •Indestructible (Viiiiisliarahitatii).

^^ Birihless^^ (Ajdk),

t€ Primeval^^ (Purana). — He is tlie one known as tie Piita«a '
Pura.<;ia.^

“ Be i)a means he whose play, is Creatkni^ Existence, „ and.
DestriictioiiT

/y Wha teas before j5ietfere6M:orM^/’(Tn-jagatHmaldyam).® —
By., this ■the implication is .that He is the Cause of all as He
preceded all,

'.,■. Known by ... the ■ Vedanta ’’ (Vedanta-vidita).® — Vedaiitas
are sacred texts dealing with the inquiry concerning the Brahman*
He is known by a Knowledge (Jnana) of these.

The way the Prana is placed ( Pra?iaropa? 2 a>prakfira) in the
place of Vishnu, is described below : Knowing that the time
for the Prana to depart is approaching, and glad that he is
about to be absorbed into the Brahman, the Yogi sits in Yoga*
Sana and restrains his breath by Kumbhaka. He then leads
the Jivatma in the heart to the Muladhara, and by contracting
the anus ^ and following other prescribed processes rouses the
Kundalinn He next meditates upon the lightning-like, blissful
Nada, which is thread-like and whose substance is Ku?£dali
(Kun^ialinl-maya). He then merges the Hangsa which is the
Paramatraa in the form of Pranas in the NMa, and leads it along
with the Jiva through the different Chakras according to the rules
of Chakra-bheda to Ajna Chakra. He there dissolves all the
diverse elements from the gross to the subtle, beginning with
Pnthivi, in Kundalini. Last of all he unifies Her and the
Jivatma with the Bindu whose substance is Bhiva and Shakti
(Shiva-shakti-maya) ; which having done, he pierces the Brahma-
randhra and leaves the body, and becomes merged in the Brahman.

According to Shangkara, it is an adjective, and means “ He who
is the cause of Creation,” and the like,

^ That is, the thr^e spheres BhuA, Bhuva/i, SvaA the Vyahr/ti of
the Gayatri.

3 Shangkara reads Yedanta-vihita, and explains the expression to
mean “ this is the teaching of the Yedanta ”,

4 Gudam akunchya—that is, by Ashvini Mudra.

5 Prawarupashvasaparamatmakam. See Jnanarnava Tantra, Cb.
XXI, vv, 13-18,

95

OKbUJIl'TlOX <>F THE SIX CEXTEES
.SCMMAin- OF THK il.lXA ChAKRA, VeRSES 32 TO 38

The IjnS Chakra has two petals and Is white. The letters
Ha and K.'ika., which are white, ’ are on the two petals. The
presiding Shakti of the Chakra, Hakini, is in the pericarp. She

is white, ha.s six faces each with three eyes, and six arms, and is

seated on a white lotus. With Her hands She displays Vara-
mudra and Abhaya-mndnl,^ and holds a Rudrakiha rosary, a
human skull, a .small drum, and a book. Above Her, within a
Trikona, is itara-Lingga, which is lightning-like, and above this,
again, within another Trikowa, is the inner Atma (Antaratma)
lustrous like a flame. On its four sides, floating in air, are sparks
surrounding a light which by its own lustre makes visible all
between iluln and the Brahina-randbra. Above this, again, is
Manas, and above Manas, in the region of the Moon, is Hangsa/i,
within whom is Parama Shiva with His Shakti.

(Here ends the sixth section)

[Vishvamltha,^ in the Commentary to the S^atchakra, gives
under this verse a description, taken from the Svachchhanda-
saihgraha, of the region beyond the Ajna — that is, beyond the
Samashti or collective or cosmic Ajna : “ Within the Hindu is a
space a hundred million Yojanas^ in expanse, and bright with the
brightness of ten million suns. Here is the Lord of the State
beyond Shanti (Shantyatiteshvara), with five heads and ten arms
and lustrous as a mass of lightning flashes. On His left is Shan-
tyatitii Manonmani. Surrounding them are Nivritti, Pratishlha,
Vidya, and Shanti.s Each of these is adorned with a moon and
has five heads and ten arms. This is Hindu Tattva. Above
Hindu is Arddhacliandra, with the Kalas of the latter — namely,
Jyotsna, Jyotsnavatl, Kanti, Suprabba, Vimala. Above Arddha-
chandra is Nibodhika, with the Kalas of the latter — Bandhati,

I I Karbara=white, and also means «ar%ated.

2 V. pp. 19, 20, ante.

3 The portion in brackets is my note. — A. A.

/! . ^ A Yojana is over eight miles.

it ® See, as to the Kalas, Introduction to Yol. Ill, Tantrik Texts, ed.

i by A. Avalon. See also Introduction to this volume ; and “ Studies in

the Mantrashastra,” by A. Avalon.

!' / . ^ ■

■

THB'.'SIX "C-iNTEBS AHB THE SERPENT POWER

Bodhinl, Bodha, JnanabodhS^ Taraopahii. Above Xibodhika is Nsda
and its five Kalis— Indliiki, Recliikaj rirddhmgij Trasi, and
Parania. On tbe lofcns above this last is Isbvara, in extent a
hnndred million Yojanas, and Iwsfcroos as ten thousand moons. He
is five-headed, and each head has three eyes. His hair is matted,
and he holds the trident (Shula). .. He. is the. one who goeth
upwards (Drddhvagami), and in His eiiibrace',„CUtsaihga) is the
Kala tJrddhvagamioL”]

Plate iX. MAHABEDHA ACCORDING TO HATHAYOGAPRADIPIKA

AND YAMALA' "

To face p, 96.

I I'KSt'lUl’TIOX OK KHK SIX CEXTEES

I Vkkse 39

When the actions of the Yogi are tlmnigh the service of
the Lotus feet of his Gnni in all respects good, then he
I will see above it {b\, Ajna-chakra) the form of the

I Mahanacla, and will ever hold in the Lotus of his hand

J the Siddhi of Speech.’ The iilahanSda which is the

\ place of dissolution of Yayu - is the half of Shiva, and

; like the plough in shape, ^ is trani]uil and grants boons and

dispels fear, and makes manifest pure Intelligence (Buddlii).^

I Commentary

i He now wishes to describe the intermediate causal body

I (Kiiranavantara-.sliariru)" situate above Ajnii Chakra and below

I Sahasrara, and says: When the actions of the Yogi are, through

; the service of the Lotos feet of his Guru, in all respects good

that is, when he excels by intense concentration of the mind in
Yoga practice— he then seo.s the image of Mahanada above it
t That is, all powers of speech.

^Yayoh layasthanam. Shangkara dedne-s it by sayinc; Etat
sthanam vayoh virania-bhfitam —this is the place where vayu ceases
to be.

; ^ That IS, Shiva is Hakara ; and if the upper part of Ha is removed,

the remaining portion of the letter has the form of an Indian plough.

^ Shuddha-buddhi-prakasha.

i 5 Karawavaiitarasharira. Kara«a=cause ; Avaatara=secondary or

intermediate or inclusive; Shurira=body. Body i.s so called becao-se
i it wastes and fades. It is derived from the root Sbrf, to wane. Kara-

aavantara-sharira would thus mean “ the intermediate Sharira of the
. pause.” _ The primary cause is the Great Cause. Its effects are also

intermediate causes of that which they them.selves produce ; they are
. thus secondary or intermediate eansal bodies. Taking the siala

Parameshvara to be the first cause, Mahanada is one of its effects and
I a KararaBTantarasharira as regards that which it produces and which

follows it.

SR

08

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERCENT POWER

{above Ajiifi Chakra', and he becomes accomplished in speech
(Tak-siddha).

“Actions in all respecds f/owrf ” (Siishila). — The good inclina-
tion for Yoga practice rendered admirable by strong and undivided
application thereto. This re.sult is oIituim>d by serving the Guru.

The author then qualitie.s Nadu, and says it is the place of
dmolntiun of Vayu (Vayor laya-sthanani). 'I’hp llule is “ thinc's
dissolve into what they originate from.” Hence, although in
Bhura-shuddhi and other -practices it ha.s been -seen that Vayu
dissolves into Spavsha-tattva,i and the latter in A'yoina,^ Vayu
dissolves in Nada also. Wtj have rhe authority of Revelation
(Shruti) for this :

“Prithivi, the possessor of Rasa (Rasa-vati), originated from

l-kara.3 From Ka-kara,^ who is Rasa, the waters and Tirthas'*
issued; from Repha (Ra-kara)3 originated Vahni-tattva 5 ; from
Nada 3 came Vayu,® which pervades all life (Sarva-priinamaya).
From Bindu 3 originated the Void^ which i.s empty of all things
and is the Sound-container. And from all these » issued the
twenty-five Tattvas which are Guna-maya. All this Universe
(Vishva), which is the mundane egg of Brahma, is pervaded by
Kalika.”

We should therefore realise in our mind that at the time
the letters of the Kali-mantra ® are merged into that which is
subtle, Vayu is absorbed in Nada.

iThe “touch principle,” also called Tvak-tattva. As to Bhuta-
shnddhi, see the same described in Author’s Introduction to the
Mahanirvaiaa Tantra.

2 jijtlier.

3 The Bija Kring is here being formed. Kakara=Kali ; Ra-kara=

Brahma as hre ; Ikara Mahamaya. Anusvara or Chaiidrabindu
(Ng) is divided into two— Nada, which is Vishvamata, or Mother
of the Universe j and Bindu, which is Du/ikhahara, or remover of pain
fBijako^^a). ^

4 Places of pilgrimage where the devotees bathe. It also means
sacred waters.

s Fire.

^ Air.

Gagana, or Ether.'

® That is, from Kring as composed of Ka + Ra 4* 1 -f Ng.

® Kring.

Half uf Shiva sSliivarddlia).— By this is meant that here
Shiva is in the kmn tA Arddha-mirlslivara. Half is Shakti
which is Jvicla. ■■

Like ii ” (Sirakura).— The word Sira is spelt here

with a shmt i, and in Aiiiara-Kiw/ai it is spelt with a long ? ;
but it is clearly tlie sumo word, as it begins with a dental s.

Cf. Above it- is *\lahainli!a, in form like a plough^ and.
lustrous ” (Ishvara-kurtikeya-Sangvada)^

If the text is read a.s Shivaknlra instead of Sirakara/^ then
the meaning wonkl be tliar the Xada is Shiva-ShaktiinayaA

Of. Ikayoga-sfira : That Shakti which tends towards
the seat of Liberation^ is called male (Piingrupa — that is, Bindii)
when, quickened by X<lda, She turns towards Shiva'* (Sliivon-
mukhi)/^ It is thc?refore that Kaghava-Bha/ia has said
that Xacla. and Biiulii are the conditioiis under which She
creates

It has elsewhere been said: “She is eternal® existing,
as Chit (Chininatra) ^ : when being near the Light She is
desirous of change, She becomes massive {C4hanLbhuya) and

Bindud’

^ z.e., Samrnoliana 1'antra. Eci, R, Chattopadhyaya.

2 That is, its substance is Shiva and Shakti.

® Nimmaya*»pad6nimikhl~slie who is turned to the place of
Liberation ; that is Shakti in tiie supreme state.

^ Tending towiirdB, intent on, or with face uplifted to, Shiva, that
is here tending to creation. That is, the first state is Chit. Nada is
the Mithiye-samavaya of Shakti and Bindu. The establishment of
this relation quickems Her to turn to Shiva for the purpose of creation
when She appears as male, or Bindu.

® Tasya eva shakier midabindii sm/ilyiipayogyarupati (Upayoga
is capacity or fitness lor cixiation).

® According to another reading this part would mean “ She who is
ihaTattva”.'

^ f She is there, existing as Chit, with whom she is completely
unified. She “ measures Chit ’"—that is, coexists with and as Chit,
and is also formative activity. The above translation is that of the
text, but the verse has been quoted elsewhere as if it vrere Chinmatra-
jyoti^fea^, and not Chinmatra Jjotisha/^, in which ease the translation
would he : “She who whan near Jyoti/i, which is mere consciousness,
becomes desirous of change, become*s massive and assumes the
form of Bindud’

^ Sbangkaracharja.

^ That is, they are both gold in the form of an ear-ring.

0/. Chhandogya Up., 6. 1. 4.

‘‘0 Gentle One, by one lump of clay all things mack up of clay
are known. The variation is in the names given to it when spoken

about. The clay alone is real,’’

100 , rm : cektei.s am* Tift: ?^eki‘KXT iwyeu

, Bo ' ill the %V0rii of the hoiioiirpil ^Shriirnil ; Acliilrya : ^ Kada
becomes ■ njassi^'o mud the Bindn*’^ Now, taking al! these into
taiiisideratbn, /tlm x*oncl«sbn is tliiit Shiikii iiiHiiifests her.«e!f as
Kfida-biiidu, like gold in t?iir«rifigs made of gohL''

Nada and Bindii again are one— fh.it the dedurtioin

ItKSCKIPTlOX OF THE SIX CESTBEs^

101

Vekse 40

AiiOVE all these, in the vacant space ' wherein is Shangkliini
NiVn, and l)el«>\v A^isarga is the Lotus of a thousand petals.®
This* Lotus, lustrous and whiter than the full Aloon, has
its head turned downward. It charms. Its clustered
filaments are tinged with the colour of the young Sun. Its
body is luminous with the letters beginning with A, and it
is the absolute Idiss.'*

COMMENTAEY

The Acliaryva enjoins that Sadhakas vvho wish to^ practise
Samadhi Yo>ra " should before such time with every consideration
and ‘effort dissolve all things in their order from the gross to the
subtle in Chidatnwi ^ All things, both gross and subtle, which
make up creation should first be meditaned upon. _ As the know-
ledge thereof is necessary, they are here described in detail.

The five gross elemeiits-PWthivT ^ and so forth— have been
spoken of as being in the five Chakras from Aluladhara to X ishud-
dha In the BhuniamMa « in the .Muladhara there are the tollow-
ing-r«., feet, sense of smell, and (landha-tattva. ’ for tins is their

I This place is called the Supreme Ether (Parang-vyoma) in the

t Th!“s(dmlraty is called Akula, according to the Svachchlianda
sariigraha, cited by X i.shvitiiatha.

3 Kevalauanda-mpam, i.e.. Brahman Bliss.

^ The Atniii considered as Chit.

5 Earth, Water, Fire, Air, Ether. _

6 Region of the Earth Element, or Mflladhara t/liakra.

7 Smell principle or Tanmatra.

I’HK SIX CESTRKS AND THF SEKi'KXT I'OWKIi

place. In the .lak-maMcfeihi, 5 ^similarly, tuv the liaiuls, seii.se of
taste, and Ra.sa-tattva/ In the Viihni-niiue/ala ■' are t!u- sums, the
sense of .«ighfe, and Rupa-tattva. In the Vuyinna«(/aln, ■> the
peni.s, sense of touch, and Sparsha-iattva. In th,- Xublio-
ina?«Za!a ^ are .speech, the sen»e of hearing, athi Sliuhiia-tattru.
The,se make fifteen tattva.s. .\ddiug th«‘<e lifc.nni to I’ci'thiv) und
•so forth, we get twenty gros.s rnttvas.

VVe next proceed to the subtle forms. In the .Ijna t’imkra
the subtle ilanas has been spoken of. Others have been .spoken of
in the Kangkala-inalini Tantra (Ch. fl) when dealing- witii the
Ajna Chakra: “Here constantly shines the e.xeeilenr .Manas,
made beantifnl by the presence of the Shakti Hakinl. It is
lustrous, and has Buddhi.s i‘rakr/ti,>« and .Ihangkara,” for its
adorDiiieiit.’^

From the above the presence of tlie tliree siilitle birms- — riz,^
Biiddhij Prak'rtf.tij, and Alui!ig'kara’*-*"'iii tihis place becomes clear*
lf\e must, however, know that Aliaii^kfira is ma placed in the
order shown in the above quotation, We have seen that from the
Muladliara_ upwards the generated is below the generator ; that
whicdi is dissolved is below what it is dissolved iistt), and we also
know that the Shabdakrama is stronger than Paf/iaknimad^ We
mosfc^ remember that Vyoma is dissolved in Ahangkilra, and hence
the latter is next above \Voma. Cj\ “ In Aliuiig-kani, Vyoma
with sound should be dissolved, and Ahangkfini. again in ^faliatd^
Ahangkara, being the place of dissolution, coines first above
Vyoma, and above it are Buddhi and Prakriti.

‘ Svadhi^/i/Zmiia, which' is the region of Water (4aht)»

- Principle of taste.

Mani-pura, which is the region of Fire (Vahni).

Principle of sight.

. . .. Anihata,. which is- the. region of Air (Vayu)»

^ Principle of touch.

^ Visbaddha, which is the region of Ether (Nabhas),

^ Principle of sound.

^ See next note.

See Introduction, and post, Commentarj.

Egoism — self-consciousness.

“That IS, the actual arrangement of things as compared with the
order in which they are stated.

The Sharadatilaka 17, IS) speaks of their connection as
-Jatiya (effect, gencnuinl) and Janaka (eanse, generator).

“From the unnianitWt (Avyakta,) Mfilabhuta, Paravastu i
wlu‘ 1 ! N'ikrifa originated -Maliut-tattva, i which consists of the
(iuwas am! Anfuh-karai'm. Frotn thi.s (Mahat-tattva) originated
Ahang-kilni, which is of three kinds according to its source of
geiierutioii. ’ * !iy \ ikrtti wliich means change is here meant
reflection or image (I’rativiniha) ^ of the Paravastu, and as such
reflection it is Vikr/ti ; hut as it is the Prakriti of Mahat-
tattva, etc., it is also calliui Prukriti.'' Cf. “ Praknti is the Parama

(Supreme) Shakti, ami Vikr/ti is the pruduct thrrefif." i It hag
also been shown before that the I’mkr/fi of the Para Brahman
is but another aspect of Him (PrativimlmsvarfjpiMi i.

Accowiing to Sharadatiiaka, Maiiat-tuttva is tl|^- as

Buddhi.® Ishana-Shiva says: “ 'I'Iih olijecfivc PrakrftiA which
is evolved by Shakti, is when associated with Siitt\a-gu)iti, Buddhi-
tattva. It is this Buddhi that is spoken of as Mahat in Sjiiikhva.”

jilahat-tattva consists of tlie (Imias and the Antah-kanma.
The Gunas are Sattva, Rajas, atid Taiitas. 'I’lu; Sliuradn-tilaka
says: “ AntaA-kara»a is the .Manas, Budiihi, Aliang-kara, and
Chitta, of the AtmaA All these are coniprised in the term
Mahat-tattva.

Xow, a qne.stion may be raised— namely, If .Manas be within
Aiahat-tattva, what of that which has been said in v. dd, where
Manas ha.s been spoken of as havitig an independent existence ?
But the answer to that is, that that Manas is the product of
Ahangkara, and Raghava-Bhaffa quotes a text which says : “ In
so much as the other Manas is the one which selects and rejects
(Sa-sangkalpavikalpaka), ^ it is known to be the product of
lejas. ® Ihus it is that, as Manas and other Tattvas in the .4 jna
Chakra are placed in their order, Ahang-kara and others should
be known as being placed above them. In the Ijna Chakra are
Hafcini, Itara-Iimsa. Pranava. Manas. AVian rsrlr'.StM . ■ 'Jl'

ItESCKH'TEON OF THE SIX CENTRES

the Other without anything intervening between them. Bodhini
is above all the rest.

The Sammohana I'a’
above Ajna Chakra ; “ I
region of the fi.irehead,

Bodhini shines the excel!
moon ; above this is the
plough ; above this is the
Above this last is Uninani
return,”

In the above pas.sage, i
word “ it ” stands for the fo

The Bhuta-shuddhi Tantra
Bindu below Bodhini.: “ De\
is Nada, and above tbia, again, '
the dissolution of Vayn.” Matri
'fhe following passage from
that the Arddha-matra means

itra speaks of the Cause (Karaaarupa) as
ndu (the Moon, here— Bindu) is in the
and above it is Bodhini Herself. Above
It Nilda, in form like the half (crescent)
lustrous Mahilnada, in shape like a
Kalil called Anji, the beloved of Yogis,
which havintr reached one does nob

1 lo this passage Anji is Saiuaul. The BhutasBuddin (see

too between Anji "and Samani. 'These are the
of the First Cause eniimerated in Iiajakranm, , , The
* j the S'rwlii'i-krama.

'■ 111 the' DeTi Bhfeavata' there ocours the^ .expression;

lor Nida) 'in I, 'I, v. 55, and III, 5,

deineB it' to 'mean 'Pamm padain====the supreme
Ardd h a-matra 'also' O'Ccmrs, . In
, Gopala 0 liakravarfci quotes

attribalelesS'.CHirgufia), and ,

He quotes another passage which says : “ Om
three Lokas, and after the. three Lokas
iaijreme Tattva.” See Ohan^
)evibhagavata, I, 5, v. 55. Shrnti

" kVa, Giyatri, and Vyahnti.”
is shown. She is Brahman nnited
• -). The Nadabindu Upanishad
the right wing (of: Om figured as a bird),

■ ■ Ma-kara the tail, and Arddhamatra

' *' jas and Tamas are its two feet,
and Adharma is ita left eye._ The Bhur-loka
is its feet, the Bhuvarloka its knees ; the Svarloka is its middle, the
Maharloka its navel; Janaloka is the heart, lapoloka its throat, and
Satyaloka the place between the eyebrows. See also BrahmavKiya

make.s a distinction
Avantarashariras cl
text quoted from the Shirada gives
* Matrarddha.

Axddha-m&tra (which is a name

T. 29, and Nilakaaf&a C ~.. —
state, or the Brahman. The 8X|

Ohawdi, 1, 55, in practically the sai
a passage which says
realisable by the Yogi.”

— this is the three Vedas,

Matrarddha is the fourfl _

“ Tvamudgithe arddhamatrasi,” ant
says; “Thon art the Arddhamatra of Prana
Here the ttnitv of Oevi and Brahman i.

With Maya (Mayavishi«/iiabrahmarupiJ»i.l
(v. 1) soys: “A-kiia is i' _

Il-kara i.5 the other (left) wing,
the head. Satbva is its body, and Ea]!
Hharma is its right eye, f-

THE SIX CENTRES AND THK SJ.KI'F.XT mvvKII

Sun is AksAara, which is Bindumat (Hijifln ItRclf) ; abovt* it ia
Arddhainatra, associated with the tiilndharariiga.” '

As both the above passages pctint to the sume tbiiig, we must
take it that Arddha-niatra and Bndhini are idejitical. Hindu
Bodhini, and JJada, are but different aspects of the Bindu-maya-
pura-shakti.

The ShSradS-tilftka says: “ From the .Sakahi i’arinne.shvara, »
who is Sat, Chit, and Ananda, Shiikti enmtmtcd ; from Shakti,
again, emanated Nada ; and Hindu has its origin from Nuda. He
who is I'ara-Shakti-maya manifests Himself in three different ways.
Bindu and Nada and Biia are but His tlifterent inspects. Hindu is
NSdiltmaka,® Bija is Shakti, and Nada, again, is the union or
relation of the one to the other. * This is .spoken of by all who
are versed in the Agamas.” ®

“ Para-Shakti-maya ” : Pani==Shiva ; hence Shiva-Shakti-maya
= Bindu. The Bindu who is above the forehead is Nadutinaka—
that is, Shivatmaka.® Btja is Shakti as Bodhini (Bodhini-rupam).
Nada is the connectioti between the two whereby the one acts upon
the other ; hence it is Kriyii Shakti. Above these three is Maha-
nada. This has already been shown.

“Above this is Kala,” etc. : Kalfi=Shakti. Anji = a crooked,
awry, bent line. This is in shape like a bent or crooked line over
a letter. This Shakti appeared in the beginning of creation. Of.
Pancha-ratra ; “Having thus seen, the Supreme Male in the
beginning of creation makes manifest the eternal Prakriti who is

® Sharada, Ch. I, vv. 7 — 9, Sakala, as opposed to Ni#/ikala or
means united with Kala, which according to Singkhya is
Simyavastha of the Guaas which is Praknti. According to the
Yedantists (of the Maya Vada), Kala ia Avidya. In the Shaiva Tantra
KsJa is Shakti (Raghava Bhatia).

® Another text has Shivatmaka— that is, Vindu is the Shiva
aspect.

_ i Samavaya = ksAobhy a-k«Aobhaka-sambandha— lit., connec t i o n
which is the connection of reciprocity.

® See Introduction.

6 In the Benares edition as also in Rasika Mohana ChattopMhyaya’s
edition of the SharadAtilaka the text reads Shivatmaka, as if qualifying
Yija, which seems erroneous. ^ “

IlESCHirTIOX OF THE SIX OEHfEES

107

tlie embodiment of Sat, Cliitj and Ananda, in whom-^;. are all tbe
Tattvas, and who is file presiding (Adhi.^la^ritn) of creation.’^
Also elsewhere : “ From the iiniimnifested (Avyakfca) Para-
niesbvaraj the united Sliiva and Slmlcti, emanated the ,Adya .(first)
Dev! Bbagavatf, who in Tripiira-sandarl, the . Sfiakti from whom
came NMa^ and thence came Biodii7*

Above it is Urinniii!/^ etc- ; Cjl ** By going' where ^ Manas-
ness^ (Manastva) of )^Ia«as ceases to be, is called Unmani, the
attainment of which is the secret teaching of all Tantras/’ ^

The state of IJnmuiil is the lAttva which means the dispelling
of the attachment prompted by Mimas towards 'worldly objects.

Unman!, again, is of two kinds ; (1) Nirvfea-kali-rfipa,
which also has its place in the Sahasmra^ (2).Yarr^aval^-rupa,
which also has its place in this region. Cf» Ka'ngkala-malin! : In
the pericarp of tlie Bahasrira, placed within the circle of the moon,.

is the seventeenth Kala, devoid of attachment^ The name of this "

is Unman!, which cats the bond ol attachment to the world.’’

Cf, also : By mental recitation of the 'Mali-vaim (rosary
of letters) is IJnriiaiii the granter of Liberation '(attained)/’
Mala-vaniars Vamavali-r npa.

The Bhuta-shnddhi speaks of the Samani .below Un'mam. ■
*^Next is the Vyapikii Shakti (Diffusive Energy) which people
know as AajL Baman! ^ is over this, and Unman! is above all/ '
This (Samani) also is an intermediate ' aspect ■■(Avantararupa)
of Paraslmkti.

^ E&ghavfi reads “ SaiiiaRtatatt%iiKauighatmasphartyadhis^tAatri- "
tCipiaim ’’—which nieaiis who is the Devi presiding over or directing
the evolution or manifestation of all the mass of Tattvas”. . ' .

^ Vishvanatlia, t|iiotiiig Svachchhand^amgraha,. which speaks ' of .
ITnmaiii as akwe Samani, sajs that in the 'Unman! stage there is no ■
cognition of and no distinction is made between Kila and Kali; there is .
no body, and no Devatas, and no cessation of €OBtinnity. . It is tbe pure ,
and sweet moiilh of lindrii. C/. Vnitihinam-^manai in the Shiva-
SamhitS, Y, 219,

5 Sahasriradhari. See Introduction.

4 Saiwa-sangkalpii-rahiti— who is free from all attachment,

not prompted by anything in any action- The passages quoted are
from ch. v, Kangk&Ia-maliiii.

^ Vishvanatlm speaks of it as Sjamana, and says that She is Ohida-
BEBdasvaripa (that is, Chit and Ananda), and the cause of all causes

(Sarvakirawakarafiain.)

fli'. sil. CiOTllS AKP fllB .^Miri3T FiiWKB

We 'BOW get the following :

Aboire Ajni ■. Cbakra ii the secoml Binrlii— wliieli is Sliiva
(S!iiva-STOriipa|. Above Binclii is the Shakti Bmiliini in shape
like an Ardiha-in&tm; next m Niiilii wbieli is tine onion
of Shim and Shakti* in shape like a half {cresreiit ) union ; next
(above this) is Mahaiiiida, shaped like a pknigh ; above
Mahinida is the Vyapika Shakti^ trociked { AnjI) in shiipe ; above
this last is Samain and highest of these all is I'niiniiii* l^his
IB the order in which the seven caiisiil forms (Kiraiia-riapa)
are placed.

There is no'.need to go into further detail Let ns then follow
the text.

Wishing to describe the Saliasrim he speaks of it in ten more

verses,

. Al/r/ne. all ihem^^ (Tadnrddlive),— Above every other that
has been described or spoken before.

Over the Aead of the Shamkhiul Nad I ** — -a sight of which
has been given to the- disciple,

^^Jaemnt epme^^- (Shnnya-desha)— that is, the place where
.there are, no Nidfs.; the Am plication is that it is above where
SotAnmni ends. .

Belmv ViBargm ’'is the him of a thommd pdakJ ^ — ^Tliis is
the purport of ■ the Sliloka, Yisarga is in the upper part of the ■
Brahma-randhra, Cf* “ (Meditate) in that aperture on Yisarga
the ever blissful and stainless,^^ There are other simikf

iiadyaih fmnmh
' the first vowels
icond I/aktra (L)
I© Alphabet, In
Ara ^ is always

mmh^ ^ as is done by
milting the letters,
in the petals of the
ted twenty times.

ItESCKinUiN OF THE SIX (.'ENTRES

109

the number 1,0-0, ami repeated nineteen times is 969. By
leaving out KwJin-kiiru we are freed of this difficulty. By
“ Ifahftradvailt ” it >‘ol meant that the letters are to be
read Viluma.* 'I’he !\:uigkfda-ina!ini in the following passage
distinctly says that it is to be read Anuloma * ; “ The Great
Lotus Hahasrarii is %vhitp, and has its head downward, and the
lustrous letters from .A.-kura f.^), ending with the last letter
before K.siuikara (Ks/uij, decorate it.’* Here it is distinctly
stated that the letter K.'/m is left out.

Akaradi-k-s/m-karautai/i : 'I'liis compound, Ksha-karanta, if
formed by Bahu-vrihi-sanirwa,^ would mean that Kshakara is
left out of calculation.

There is nothing ssiid of the colour of the letters, and, as
the ilatrikil (letters) are white, they are to be taken as being
white on the Sahasrara petals. 'I’hese letters go round the Sahas-

rara from right to left.^ ^

Some read lVavi!asita-tann/i in place of pravilasita-vapuA,
and say that, as the word padma alternatively becomes masculine
in gender (va pungsi padmam), therefore the word Tanu, which
qualifies a word in the masculine gender, is itself masculine. ^ That
cannot be. The verb Nivasati {=is, dwells) has for its nominative
Padmam, and, as it ends with the Bindu im), it is in the neater
gender and not masculine. For in that case it would have ended
with vwarga (i.e., h), and its adjective, tann, would also end with a
marga. The word tanu (if their reading is accepted) would be m
the neuter ; therefore it cannot end with a Bindu. And if there is
no Bindu the metre becomes defective. Therefore the correct
reading is Pravilasita-vnpu^.

The rest m ekar.

1 le,, from end to liegiiming*

, ^ From begiBnitig to end.

3 A form of Sanskrit verbal compound. , , j *

I ■* DaWiiwavarta— the opposite way to that in which the hands of a

) , - clock work.

^ ^ ■ ■ ■ ■ /y'' K: :y:: :■

110

Vekse 41

Within it (Sahasmra) is the full without the mark

of the hare,' resplendent as in a dear sky. It sheds its
rays in profusion, and is moist anti cool like nectar. In.side
it (Chandra-mawdala), constantly shining like lightning,
is the Triangle,* and inside thi.«t, again, shines the Great
Void® which is served in secret by all the Saras.*

Commentary

He here speaks of the exi.stence of the Chaadra-matdala in

fclie pericarp of the Safaasriira. ■ ■

“ ReBplendent m in a clear % ” (Shuddha)-seen in a cloudless

sky {nirmah-^dmya-mshuMa).

“ Is mmst and cool,” etc. (Paraina-rasa-chaya-snigdlia-santiina-
hasi).— Snigdha which means moist here implies the moisture of
the nectar. Parama-rasa (Amrite) is free from heat. Hence the
meaning of this compound word : Its rays are cool and moist, and
produce a feeling of smiling gladness.

The Kangkala-malini speaks of the presence of Antaratma,
etc. m the upper portion of the space below Chandra-mandala. In
dealing with the Sahasrara, it say-s : “ In its pericarp, 0 Deveshi,
18 the Antaratma. Above it is the Guru. The Maadalas of Suryya

: ThcTOSB iu tho jnaoori. ’ ■ '

* The A-ka-thadi triaiifrle according to Viahvanatha.

® Sb««ya=Bindn-that is, the Parabindn, or Ishvara, havimr as
sLrand (Brahmap^^a). In tlm

UnreX assets Badwhiva and Ishvara are the Nimer/ia and

anT ShndTwLf intermediate between Shiva Tattva

and bbnddhavidya, the former being called Shanyatishunva The

. . vweiye petallect lotus with the Kamakala are given in the Text.

, , ,* 4,6.,. .Devas.

THE SIX CBNTRES A.ND THE J^Khl'KNT i'OWKl;

itKtii'UIJTluN OF THK SIX CENTRES

ind Chandra are also there, .^bove this is Mahavayu, and then
the Brahma-randhra. In this aperture (Kandhra) is Visarga, the
ever blissful Brahman. Above this (Tadurddhve) last is the BevT
ShangkhinI, who ereatcs, maintains, and destroys."

“ Withiit Ohanth’n-nmmWa cofii)tanlly shinsa, like lightning,
the triangle ” ('rrikmtatn tasyantah vidyndakararupam). That is

the shining triangle is there.

“ Imvlc thia s/a'aw the I heat VoiiV’ (Tadantah' sh unyam
sphurati).— I'hat which as a void within is, the body of the Para-
bindu (Paravindushuriram). Within the triangle the e.vcellent
Bindn (Shunya) shines, or within the triangle the Shunya which
is the excellent Bindu shines.

Cf. Todala Tantru, 0th UllSsa ; “ The Supreme Light is form-
less (XinTkura), and Hindu i.s imperishable. Bindn means thf

void (Shunya), and implies Guna also.” *

Sert'ed in merH" (Sevitang chatiguptam).— The rule is
“ Eating (Ihiira), evacuation (Xirhara), sexual intercourse (¥ihara)

Dharma,

t When it assumes the form of Bindn, It is with the operating
Gnstas, for then It is Sakala.

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SKMl'ENT I’OWER

Wbll concealed, and attainahle uijly hy (■I'h.ru i< tisat
subtle Hindu (Shiinya) which is the chief root of Liheratioii.
and which manifests the pure Nirvium Kalsi with Amu
Here is the Deva who is known to ail as Parama
Shiva. He is the Brahman and the Atnui of all beings.
In Him are united both Rasa and Virasa,* and He is ti.e
Sun which destroys the darkness of nescience * and
delusion.'*

OOMMENTABY

The sense is that the void (Shunya) is very secret and subtle,
being, as described later, like the ten millionth part of the end of
a hair. It is attainable only by great effort consisting of long and
incessant performance of Dhy&na and like practices. It makes
manifest the parity of the sixteenth KalA of the moon along witli
Nirvana Kulb—Lv., the void (Antah-shfinya) along with the Amu
Nalft and Nirvaiia Kala within the triangle is realise*! (PrakiSsfaam
bhavati) by meditation (Dhyana). [t is the source of all the
ipasa of great Bliss, which is Liberation, Some, however, read
Sakala-shMlu-kalS-slinddlia-rupa-prakaHham as qualifying the great ?
Toid within the triangle, and read ‘sakoia’ to mean with all the
sixteen kalas and say that the Para Binda manifests the moon with f
sBch kalis. This requires consideration. When it was said that the

J There are seventeen Kali* (digits) of the Motm. bat the nectar- '

fbeotWKS are only at this stage revealed.

1 he other Kalsa are mentioned in Skanda Puriaa, Prafehasa Khanda.

and lum f ****

fAjoana.

^ Mo'ha. This Terse ocears in ok V, 40»

OF TIIK SIX OgHTERS

Trikoi^u widiiii t\w full iiiooii, tlia repetitbii of ife is.

useless* prerioiis vm*m we Imve goii ^^served

|)y the I'hc'^ term “service'* as applied to a void is

jj^appixipriate. The ohjeel of service is liie Biiida within the
triangh^* If ii ho said tliat llie \"oid sIimiM be worshipped by
reason of tbo pro'^enrt'* of f!ie ihini Bindti, then the Para Hindu
being there piv^oii! then* no void.

Ifdi vt^iieeninl i Hugiiptiifii j.— Hv reason of its being like
the ten liiilliinith part of a hair

Jif/ r|forf (Vaiiiai' by long*continued practice

of meclilatitiii (lliiyHini) ittid so hunlu

Chief mo/” (Pariing kaiidaind #— Para usually' means
stipreiiie^ excellinil ; here eliii?f| principal Kandass-Muk* .

LiheraihnC ^ /r. ( Atishiiyw-pamiiiamodasinitaiia-rashi).-— The
compound word itieaiis, licenilly, continuity of all the ma.ss" of
ffreat and siiprciiie bliss, anti this is Ijibcration (Mok^^/m), ' . ,

Manifivi^.etin, Amfikdlfi ” (^iikiila-sliashi-kala-slniddha-rupa-
prakashaiii|.-“-ms ciiiipoiiiid word is lo be broken up as follows :

6Vifci:{lci=wii!i I lie KmUi : i\abt here meaning Nirvaim 'Kals.
hi the word Sliaslii-kalii the I\nlfi mimns Aiiulkala, the sirfeeeiith
WAa or diffit. of the iiii'N»ri. Sh nddh nzz pnre : the lustre is not

114

THE SIX OiHfEiS AMD THE fiKEPEMT EOWEt

The Bmhmmn ** {Kharupi).^ — Klia=:

The Jtmd nf all (Siirv.itiiifi),— Harvas=»ll (beings).

He is the; but in fuel there no between

Jivalmii and ParaiiMitmii. The Atmil is the efiva. ,Tlie xldiiyiitina
Eiin&yafia ' sayso. .-'‘'Tlie is merely aiiotlier name

(Paryyilya) for the Paramiitiinl. Wlien by the iiistriietioiis of the
Acharyya and the Shastras their oneness is kiiown^ ilieii the
iisciple possesses -MilaYidya eoiiceriiing Jfviltimi ami Paraifiatina ”
The Shriitl also, when it says That thou urt ’ — Tal ivam
■atiy ^—identifies the Tmm {Them) wifcli the Kil. (That))'

: Bmm ani ■; Firim'*’ 'fEasa-Yirasainitab—Rasa is 'Fmmmi,*':
nandii-rasa— f.e.j ' the 'experience of .Siip'reiii© Virasals . the

bliss which is the product of the union of 81 iivn and Shakti. He
is both,. 'Or Rasa' may., -mean the riatniml attacdinienfc
enjojinent, and. Virasa detaohinenl from it. The laeaiiiiig.wo'iili.
then be : in Him is the'Snpfeiiie Bliss arising froiii liis defcachment
from worldly enjoyment.

■ ^^.Tha Stm- *^=Hangsa. ' As fclia sn'ii- dispels darkiiesSj so does

He dispel nescience (Ajnina) and dekisioin

; I ':G/:,'Shrnli""‘‘'Khang Brahma ’'^/Chhi., 4— 10— 5 Brah.,',1—

2 That Thou art.” See Introdnetion.

4 That is, the 'E^a in Him has become Virasa.

itKM'Kii’l'lO.N OP TUB SIX OES4TEES

Uliiiii’ H (‘OJistaiit and profuse stream of nectar-like
' the Biiapiviin’ iiistriu-ts the Yati ^ of pure mind
knowledge liy which he realises tke oneness of the
i and the Ihiraiurdimi. He pervades all things as
ord, who is the ever-flowing and spreading current
manner of bliss known hy the name of Hangsa/f
. (FaramH-hangsa/().

i\,>MM£KTAHY

•‘Constant ami proCm " (Niraviuihi atitanim)

“ Bij shtdiliiuj a stream uf neriar-lihe esmiM
sarain vitimncliHii).— -The compound word can I
nterpreted in tour ilifTer(>nt ways :

1. ShedditJK a stream of nectar-like essence,

2. The Adlnlra (receptacle) of Sudlia {necta
by which is meant the Moon ; Asara is what f
stream. Now, what Hows from tlie Moon is
silvery ; hence the whole w«srd nseans “ the sih
moon ”. This adjective proves that the ipialified
transparent like the moon. .Shedding=V imunch

* tl. Asiira may, .again, mean “ what is lit
Sudhildhara=recej»tiic!e of sweetness, which is a

I As appears from the l.'onamentary pmt, thi
translated as follows ; “ Hy shetldiug a constant an
neetai resembling the silvery lieanis of the Moon, t

THE SIX rEHTEKS AHP fliK SKHPENT roWKK

fieiice biMfi»dliarasiiraiit==:iiectftr*lifc« m ji.inlif«,)giiu word* 1%e
meaiiiog of Niravadhi would then he “ m all and Afcitanlm

wonlii mean powerful in de^^frojiiig the tkrkne.H^ of igfifiniiif*e or
delosioii Viiimnchaii should then mean iitteriog

4, SudhSj again, may mean “ rieetar of iiiert^y,” and Sara is
essence the essence of liraliiim-iiiaiitra ; and Dlifirfi is a

stream (confcionons repetition) of the raereifiil wonl containing the
essence of the Bmliiiia*riianfciir.

ImirudB the Yati/* pie. (Bliagaviin iiiriiiaia-inater yateh
sratma-jniiiam dishati).

%?'hose mind intently rentH upon the Dei^ati of

his worship.

Knowledge by whkh^ etc. ^ PmmmMnm (Svfitma-jmliia) : Svatiiss
Ji¥atma and Atma^FammStriui ; and Jmlna ^ that by wliieli one
knows — namely, the Tamka-brahma-mantra, which leads to a
knowledge of the.. .Paramiitinii, and therebv helps the worshipper

1 Jnana is spiritual knowledge or wisdom, and ViJnSna is the
knowledge of the material world (science).

2 i.e.y who is engrossed in.

- ^TMs' k in 'pm^ of Shakti, without whom Shim is Shava

(a corpse) and unable to move.

THE mx CEHTEES AHIt TfiE I'OWEI,

The aboTe pasj%age speaks of the prc^heiiei* nf Aiiifi ivalij and
m forth, ^ wilhin-rlie triangle in the Cliaoilni Mu^i^iah, Tfn^
therefore is' below . them mii above Aiitarritiinb Xow, if it. hi?
asked how it is that, the Kaiigkak-iiialiiil luiiiiig plavecl the Guni
over the ■ AntarMuia,,. the (turn is spoken of placeil above
Hangsali ? the answer is that the Aiitsiriitiryi and the Ihimmlt are
one and the same*'

. Cf, . (xurii-dhyiina in Kangkalfi-iiialini ^ “ .\fwlitate mi your

(joru seated on a.shiniiit? throne (Siihhii^aini) plticed on the
excellent Antiiratma betiveeii Niiihi ami Hindu, ’* etc. Also eke-,
where: “Meditate on your liiirii, who is liio iiiiaiye of Shiva
Himself, as 'Seated on the Hangsa-pillia which is Maiitramaja.”
Also ef, the Annada-ksilpa Taiitni ® “ Meditate on jmir Cjiirii in
the white Lotus of a thousand petals in the head ; fie is Farfiiim
Shiva sealed on the Hangsa among the filaiiieiits/’

On a catefni consideration of tlie above authorities, the
ideiititj of Hangsa with Aiitaratmil becomes clear. By the
expression “ one’s own who is Parama Shiva,” it is to be

understood that. Parama Shiva Himself is the Guru,

The following passage, which relates to the Sahiisrfira, shows
that Parama Shiva is in the triangle: “Within (or near) it
(Sahasrara) is the lightning-like Triangle, and within the
Triangle are the two Bindiis whicli make the imperishable
Visarga. There in the empty void is Parasoa Shiva,”

These conflicting views lead to %lie conclusion that the
Guru is within the triangle in the pericarp of the tipfeiirned
Lotus , of -twelve petals, below the pericarp of the Sahasrara
and inseparable from it. Hits has been made clear in the
Padtika-panchaka Stotra. ^ Prom these passages it is not
to- be inferred that the Guru is within the triiiiigla in the
pericarp of the Sahasrara. The triangular Hangsa is below
the middle triangle; otherwise it would conflict with the
authority of the Kangkala-mfilini Taiitra,

“ He per^ade$ dll things as their Lord ’’ (Sairulste sarveshafc)— *
ia,, in this pericarp ■dwells He who is the Lord of All Now,
iPalalallL

^ This quotation is not traceable in PrasiMmakamim Shistrik

Edition of this Tantra,

See notes to v. 7 of the Paduka-Panchaka,

iiKSrnUTUW OF THE MX CEKTKKS

by saying that raraiiiH Shiva is there it ha« been sai<5 that
Ishvara (Lord) is then*; then why this repetition ? But there
is an object in s» duing, as the following qualifying expressions
will show, 'i'he Sarvesha (Lord of .\n) is the Hangsai— i.e.,

He is the Mantra “ lfang-S«/i.”

Of. Prapancha-sura : " She whose name is Tattva is
Ohinmatrii': when by proximity t> the Light she wishes to
create,® She becomes massive tGlmnibhuya) and assumes the
form of Hindu. Thmi in time She divides Herself in two;
the one on the right is Hindu, and that on the left side is
Visarga. The right and left, are respectively distinguished
as w«/i; m\ii fftniah.. Hang in the Hindu, and Sah is the Visarga ;
Bindu is Puriw/ta, and Msarga is Prakriti ; Hangsah is the
union of Prakriti and Puriwha, who pervade the Universe.”

The Mahiikali Tantra speaks clearly on the subject (Pafala
I): -‘In the empty space® in the Chandra Ma?idala ^ which
is within the Sahasriira, adorned with a celestial gateway,
are the letters Hang and Halt, over which (meditate on) Him
who is pure like rock cry.stal and dressed in pure white silken
raiment, and so forth,” Here the letters Hang and Sali are
explicitly spoken of.

Or if Hangsa and Parama be read separately as Hangsa and
Parama, it would mean “ He who is known as Hangsa and
Parama The Author himself speaks of Him as Hangsa/i
in the forty-ninth ver.se. Or if the two words be read to-
gether, then the meaning would be “ He who is known by the
name of Parama-haugsjiA,” by one of the exceptional rules of
Harmadharaya Samasa this word having been formed, the word
‘antah’ being omitted. Cy. Agaraa-kalpa-druma : “ He is called
Parama-hanefsa/i. nervadine all that is moving and motionless.”

1 Vide anfe, v. S9. The text quoted here differs from that of the
Edition publislted by me (See ch. I, vv. 41 — 44, Tantrik Texts,
VoL 111).

® Viehikirs^u — “ wishes to distort herself.” Here “ distortion,”
or stress, is creation. See Introduction. Fide ante, p. 99.

® Sbunya. The Shunya is the empty space within the Bindu.

* The locative is to be read S&mipye saptami — that is, the space is
not in, but near, the Chandramaizdala ; otherwise there appears to be
a contradiction.

CiHTBlS AMD , fUE, SEEPSHT POWgfi

I III II III jii^,aiii IT** ^

description of the six centres

121

: Vbesb 44

The Shaixas call it the abode of Shiva ^ ; the Vais/i-navas
call it Parama Puruskt ^ ; others, again, call it the place
of Hari-Hara.® Those who are filled with a passion for
the Lotus feet of the Devi | call it the excellent abode of
the Devi ; and other great sages (Munis) call it the pure

place of Praknti-Purus/ia.®

Commentary

As mngs&h, who has in Him all the Devatas (Sarvadevata-
maya), and others, are in this pericarp, it is the place of the
Devatas of worship of all classes of worshippers, such as

Shaivas, Shaktas, etc. _ oi,- n -j-

“ The 8haiva8”—i.e., the worshippers of Shiva— call it the

place of Shiva. t. „ • ,

“ The Fafshnaras « call it Farama Ftmiaha — i.e., tne place

of the Parama Pnrusha, or Vishwu.

“ Others, again ” (Kechid apare)— i.e., others^ who are wor-
shippers of Hari-Hara, or, in other words. United Vishwu and ^iva
and not of Shiva alone or Vishnu alone, call it the place ^of Hari-
Hara.’’ They do not call it either the place of Han (Vishnu) or
of Shiva (Hara) hut the place of their united selves.

1 Shiva-sthanarTi.

2 i.e., the place of Parama Purusha— Vishnu.

3 Yishnn and Shiva.

4 Shakti, or the Goddess,
s Shakti- Shiva.

^ Worshippers of Yishna.

7 Hari-Hara-padam.

56

^ ‘ j V u ih tv, i f:tu

THE SIX CENTRES AXU THE

" (Munlndm apyaaye).— By this the
■shippers of the “ Hangsah ” Mantra who
ikrfti-Paru^ha. Ilangsah is tlie union of
hence it is the place of Prakn'ti and

1 Muni means “ knower ” and whose Mind is therefo
■state of Meditation.

2 Hangsasya praknti.purui'/iobhayarupatvat. Hang

5/^a, and Sa^ is Praknti. ^

1 Obitta.

2 Saiigsara, the world of birth and rebirth to which men are
impelled by tbeir Karma.

3 The interpretation o£ Visbvanatha is here adopted, according to
which Kha=Brahman. As the term also means the “ air ” or “ ether,
the text is canable of translation as “ He is able to roam the sky .

DESOBIPTION OP THE SIX GENTSES

Vebsb 45

That most excellent of men who has controlled his mind *
and known this place is never again born in the Wander-
ing, * as there is nothing in the three worlds which binds
him. His mind being controlled and his aim achieved, he
possesses complete power to do all which he wishes, and
to prevent that which is contrary to his will. He ever
moves towards the Brahman. V His speech, whether in
prose or verse, is ever pure and sweet.

Commentary

In this verse he speaks of the fruit of a complete knowledge
of the Sahasrara. The idea sought to be conveyed is that a
knowledge of this place should be gained as a whole and in detail.

“ Who has controlled his mind ” (Niyata-nija-chitta)— i.e., he
who has controlled and concentrated the inner faculties on this
place. Such an one becomes free from Sangsara, or, in other
words, he is released from bondage, as there is nothing to bind or
attract him in these worlds. By bondage is meant the Mayik
bonds of virtue (Partya) and sin (Papa).

The Bhagavata says : “ If the action which is the product of
the operation of the GrU'ii'as is attributed to tbe self, then such

(false) attribution is bondage and Sangsiira and ssrvit
r/. Bhagavad-GM: “0 Son of Kunti, Man is boui
which is the product of his own nature (Sva-bhava).” i
To inhabit this body for the purpose of undergoinj
and Puaya (virtue) is bondage. In heaven one enjo;
of) Piwya, and in the nether world (Pittala) one .sui
and on earth man is .subject to both Papa and Piiwy
Tattva-jnani (him who knows the truth) there is ne
nor Papa, which are the can.ses of bondage ; his a

destroyed. He is in consequence under no I
heaven (Svarga), earth (Martya), or nether woi
is not truly embodied.^ Such a one stays on ea
he has not worked out what he has begun,
though living (Jivanmukba), and attain s com
the dissolution of the bodv.

The Kulamava Tantra says ; “ 'I’hose
Brahman in the heart can acquire neither me;
hundred horse sacrifices, nor demerit by
Brahmamas.” The Gita (III, 18) also says : ‘
nothing in this world that should or should not
a one there is no dependence on any being.” ^

The Subodhini^ interprets this verse
“ knower” (Tattvajna.nl) acquire.? no merit bj' t
actions nor demerit by the omission thereof.

Shrnti® speaks of the destruction of accu
Puwya and Papa : “ When Manas, which is
now rejecting, is dissolved in That ; when
are destroyed (lit., burnt), Sadashiva, who i.s

1 Ch. XVIII, V. 60.

® Xa shariri bhavati — though he has a body, he is not of it.

Telang s Translation : “ He has no interest at all in what is done,
in what is not done, in this world; nor is any
StTvok YIII) (P- H Sacred Books of the

^ That is, Shrldhara-svami’s Commentary on the Gita,

frr,Tn^'^ IS from Hangsa Upanw^ad but differs slightly
from the published texts of that Upanisliad.

DESCRIPTION OP THE SIX CBNTEES

Gf. Btiagavad-Gita

(o/. Hangsa/i, ante), i
the fire of knowledge c

“ Complete power . _ oi i ■

enables him to do everything. By power, or Shakti, is mea'
ability to do all he desires to do® and counteract all harm,
fly across the air,^ and to become possessed of great powers

speech and of poetic composition.

1 That is, peace and quietude like the still surface of an ocean

characteristic of the Supreme State. • '•

2 IV, B7. . ,

3 Such an one may have such a power but will not wrongly

exercise it. '

< Khagati ; this is Kaliohara«a’s interpretation ; as to Vishvanatha,

see p. 123, n. 3, ante.

THE.' SIX ■'.CENTRES AND. THE ..SEBDENT .POWER

Here is tiie excellent (supreme) sixteenth Kala of the
Moon. She is pure, and resembles (in colour) the young
Sun. She is as thin as the hundredth part of a fibre in
the stalk of a lotus. She is lustrous^ and soft like ten
million lightning flashes, and is down-turned. From Her,
whose source is the Brahman, flows copiously the
continuous stream of nectar^ (or, She is the receptacle of
the stream of excellent nectar which comes from the
blissful union of Para and Para).^

Commentary

Verses 41 and 42 speak of the presence of A.tnakal%
Nirva^ia-kala, and Para Bindu, within the triangle in the pericarp
of the Sahasrara. He now desires to describe them by their
distinctive attributes, and speaks in this verse of the distinctive
features of Ama-kala.

Emellmt or supreme ’’ (Para) — Le,, She is Chit Shakti.
In the Prabhasa-khawfe occurs the following passage : The
excellent Maya who maintains the bodies of all that have bodies,’^

b Shangkara reads Nityodita,’^

)r : NTityananda-paramparativi-
may mean “ in a continuous
Para, Shakti. This difference
s in which these words may be

mean Para, Pashyanti, Mudh-
and Para are the Bindurupa

127

DESOEIPTIOK OF THE SIX CEMEES

imth KaU of the Moon" (Ohandrasya sfeo(ias'hi)
to understand that he is speaking of Ama-kalad
3huddha)-f.e., stainless. -o . .

mhles," etc. (Shishu-suryya-sodara-kala). By this

this Kala is indicated.

the hundredth part of a fibre in the stalk of the

-sukshma-tantu-shatadha-bhagaika-rupa). 'I'hin like

art of the fibre in the lotus-stalk split lengthwise.
snm-oe is ihe Brahman " (Nityananda-parampara).—

Ananda is
,d from such

.ys that this Ania-kala is LTrddhayashaktirupa, or
the Brahman) moving Shakti.

128

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

Verse 47

Inside it (Ama-kala) is Nirvam-kala, more excellent than
the excellent. She is as subtle as the thousandth part of
the end of a hair, and of the shape of the crescent moon.
She is the erer-existent Bhagavati, who is the Devata who
pervades all beings. She grants divine knowledge, and
is as lustrous as the light of all the suns shining at one
and the same time.

OOMMINTAEY

In this verse the Nirvana Kala is described.

“ Inside it ” (Tadantargata) — i.e., placed in the lap^ of Ama-kala.
The Kala has already been described* as the “ crescent seventeenth
Kala placed within Ama, and known by. the name of Nirvana-
kala.”

' ^ More excellent than the exceMenb^^ (Para paratara), — The
Amk-kala is excellent ; this is more excellent than Ama. If.
^ Paratparatara ’ be accepted foi’ ^ Para paratara/ then the meaning
^ill be that She is the most excellent.

I She is as subtle . . . hair^^ (Keshagrasya sahasradha
vibhajitasyaikangsha-rupa). — She is equal in dimension to the
thousandth part of the end of a hair, so very subtle is She.

Of the Shafe of the crescent Moon (Ohandrardhamga-samana-
bhamguravati) — like Amakala she is in shape like the crescent.

1 That is, within the curve of Aiii,akala. Vishvanatha says, not
within Amakala, but within the Chandramandala^ of which the Ama-
kala is one of the digits* I^irvawakala is, he says, Vyapinitattva.

^ See p. 112, anfe^

I S’ 11 il

130

THE SIX CBNTEBS AMD THE SERPENT POWER

■■n

IH

Verse 48

Within its middle space (ie., middle of the Nirvan-akala)
shines the Supreme and Primordial Nirvana Shakti^ ; She
is lustrous like ten million suns, and is the Mother of the
three worlds. She is extremely subtle, and like unto the
ten-millionth part of the end of a hair. She contains
within Her the constantly flowing stream of gladness,^ and
is the life of all beings. She graciously carries the know-
ledge of the Truth (Tattva) ^to the mind of the sages.

OOMMEHTARY

H

He now speaks o£ tke Para-Bindu.

” (Btasyafc) — i.e., of the Nirvam Kala.

Middle (Madhya-deshe) . — W itliin the lap ^

The Supreme and Primordial Nirvana Shahti^^ (Paraina-
phrva-nirvana-shaktife=parama apurva-nirvatia-shakti/i) Paramii ^

i.e., the Supreme Brahman as Shakti. Apurva— i.e.. She before

whom there was nothing, She having appeared at the beginning
of creation.

1 This is, according to Vishvanatha, the Samanapada or Samani
Shakti. This state is not free from the multitude of bonds (Pashajala).

2 Prema. See notes,

3 This word ‘‘ Tattva ” has by Vishvanatha been said to be Shiva-
bhedajnanam — ^^e., the non-distinction between Shiva and Shiva.

^ That is, within the crescent. According to Vishvanatha the
locative indicates proximity and means near the middle but slightly
above it.

5 This word has been defined by Shangkara to mean She who is
as great as the Para or Supreme ”. Vishvanatha says it means She
who measures futurity (Para—Uttarakala) ” — that is, all future time
is in Her control.

“ Shines ” (Vilasati parama}i —i.e., dwells resplendent.

“ Mother of the three worlds ” (Tri-bhnvana-ianani)— i.e., She
is the origin of the Universe which comprises Svarga, Martya,
and Patftla and the like. ®

“ Sh-Q extremely subtle ^ like unto the ten~m%lhonih furt of trie

end of a hair” (Keshagrasya koii-bhagaikarupa’tisukshma).— As
She is like the ten-millionth part of the end of a hair, She is

extremely subtle. , , . . 'r

“ She contains within Her the constantly dowing stream oj

gladness” (Niravadhi-vigalati-praTna-dharil-dhara).— Prema is the

tenderness of mind produced by feeling of gladness ; that is
qbe holds within Her the stream of excellent nectar which has its
origin in the blissful union of Shiva and Shakti, and which flows

incessantly. ^

“ Is the life of all beings {6s.vYeshimg jiva-bhuta— i.e., am-

mated being is but a part of Her.

Of. ” 0 Devi, as sparks fly forth from a flame, so does th

Parabiudu (as Jiva) issue from Her (Nirvana Shakti), and becomes

knowing® when it touches the Barth. ■* ^ ^ ■ t t.

By “ Her ” is meant the Shakti who is in the Parabindn, who

is both Shiva and Sha,kti; and from Her emanates the Jiva.

Nirvana Shakti is situated below Nirvana-kala, and over

Nibodhika,® which is Nada-rupa.® Cf. “ Placed within Nnwana

(Kala) is the fiery (Vahnirupa) Nibodhika, who is unmanifested

NMa’; above it is the supreme Nirvana-Shakti, who is the cause

1 P^rama-She who is coexistant or of equal degree with the
^ Parana, bh the Supreme. This is as applied

! Heaven, Earth, and Netherworld,
i Saminayuktah. i.e., Jiva-consciousness. It
imes Endowed with a name ’ Name and form
a as Sat, Chit and Ananda do Brahman.

Of Asti bhati priyaiig rupang iiama ehetyaiigsha
Adyang trayang Brahma-rupaiig jagadrupang
^ Yada bhumau patati tada sarhjuayukto bhaTOti,
is here spoken of* The Text quoted in from Nim

iaiiiii

132

TH'E "SIX' 'OENTBIS AND THE ,SB]EFENT POWER

of all and is possessed of the ksfcre of ten million sobs. ^

Her that there is the Brahman ^ who is the chaDgeless Shiva ® it is
here that Ko^dal! Shakti enjoys with Paramatma.'’

Nibodhika is a phase of Avyakta-nada (Avyakta-imdatmika^
and is fire-like, Eaghava-bha:^k says; Nada exists in three
states. When Tamo-gum is dominant, it is merely sound nnmani-
fest (Avyakta-nMa)^ in the nature of Bhvani ; when Rajo-gum is
more dominant, there is sound in which there is somewhat of a
placing of the letters^; when the Sattvagum preponderates, Nada
assumes the form of Bindu.”^ Hence Nada, Bindii, and Nibodhika,
are respectively the Sun, the Moon, and Pire,^ and their activities
are Jnana, Ichchha, and Kriya. Jnana, again, is Fire, Ichchha
the Moon, and Kriya the Sun. This has been said in the Sharada.
Therefore, insomuch as it has been said that Nirvam Shakti is
above the fiery (Vahnirupa) Nibodhika, the wise should conclude
that Nirvam-Shakti is placed above the Mandalas of the Sun, the
Moon, and Fire.

This has been clearly stated in the Kularmva Tantra, in the
Para-Brahma-dliytoa, which begins, ‘tThe Bindu-rupa Para

1 Niranjana. This word may either be equal to Ni/^-Panjana {is,,
stainless) or KiA+anJana (unaffected by pleasure or pain, unmoved).
It is one of the aspects of tbe Brahman.

^Nirvikara, gome read Nirvikalpa, or of unconditioned conscious-
ness. Nirvikalpa is also the last stage of Samadhi, in which there are
no (Nir) specific distinctions (Vikalpa) : and no “this” and “that,”

3 Tamo-gunadhikyena kevaladhvanvatmakoVyaktanadaA.

4 Raja adhikyena kinchidvarm-badclha-nyasatmakaA. The sense
appears to he that the letters exist anyhow together in massive un-
differentiated form.

5 Sattvadhikyena vindu-rupa/i.

6 Tatash oha nada-vindu-nibodhika arkendu-vahni-rupa^. Jnana is
Fire, because it burns up all action. When the result of action is
realised, action ceases (see note to v. 45). Ichchha is the Moon, be-
cause Ichchha is the precursor of creation and is eternal. The Moon
contains the Ama-kala, which knows neither increase nor decay.
Kriya is the Sun, because like the Sun it makes everything visible.
Unless there is striving there cannot be realisation and manifestation.
Of, “ As one Sun makes manifest all the Lokas ” (Gita).

The Text will be made clearer if an arrangement be made in the
following groups : (1) KMa, Sun, Kriya ; (2) Bindu, Moon, Ichchha
(3) Kibohhika, Fire, Jnana. But see Introduction.

THE SIX ■ OENTRES

134

THE SIS GfiNTBBS AND THE SEEI’ENX POWER

Veese 49

Within Her is the everlasting place ualled the abode of
Shiva/ which is free from Maya, attainable only by Yogis,
and known by the name of Nityananda. It is replete with
every form of bliss,* and is Pure Knowledge itself.* Some
call it the Brahman ; others call it the Hangsa. Wise
men describe it as the abode of Vis/mu, and righteous
men ^ speak of it as the ineffable place of knowledge of the
Atma, or the place of Liberation.

h

Commentary

He speaks of the Para-Brahma-sthana
Brahma) in the Void within NirvaTia Shakti.

(place of Para

ii

1 Shiva-padam or state of Shiva. This, Vishvanatha says, is the
Unmani state of Shakti where there is neither Kala nor Kala, time
nor space. It is the body of Shiva (Shi vatanu). It is then said
Unmanyante Parashiva/i. The following verse which occurs in Padma
Parana (Uttara Khanda, ch. 78, v. 43i puts the idea in a more popular
form. It says :

Shaiva^ Saurash cha Ganeshah Vai^/wava^ Shaktipujaka/t.

Mameva prapnuvanti hi var^/tambha/^ sagarang yatha.

Shaivas, Sauras, Ga?ieshas, Vai^-Zwavas and Shaktas all verily
come to me like rain water the ocean.”

2 Sakalasukhamayam. Vishvanatha reads here Paramakulapadam,
which he interprets as Param Akula-padam, or the abode of the
Supreme Shiva, who is known as Akula, as Kula is Shakti. It is so
called because it is here that the universe finds its rest.

3 Sbuddha-bodha-svarupam.

4 SukWtina^,

THE SIX CBNTE'ES

“ Within Her ” (Tasja/i madhyantarale)— i.e., within Nirvana i
Shakfci in Her form of Param Bindu, i.e., the empty space within

the BiBd.0,.

« Abode of Shiva ” (Shivapadam).— This is the place of the

from Maya” (Amalam)— i.e., free from the impurity of

“ Galled ”—i.e., called by those who know the Tattva.

“ Attamable only by Yogis” (Yogi-gamyam).— On account
of its extreme subtlety, it is beyond the scope of word and mind,

is attainable by Yogis by pure Jnana^ only.

“ Some call it ”—i.e., the Vedantists (Yaidantibas) call it.

» r«,fitih6Ze” {K:iraapi)--i.e., wonder-inspiring.

The place where the Atma is seen or reanseu.

“Liberation” (Moksha)— -i.e., where one is
Maya by which one is surrounded.

Now be good enough to mark the following :
which is Prakrit! and Puru.sha is surrounded*!
within the triangle in the pericarp of the Lotus
petals. So it has been said ;

“ In the Satya-loka is the formless and lusi
has surrounded Herself by Miiya, and is like a
devoid of hands, feet, and the like. She is ^ I
Fire. When casting off (TJtsi-ijya) the coverin,
Maya, She becomes of two-fold aspect (Dvid
Unmukhi,* then on the division or separation
Shakti arises creative ideation. ®

136

THIS .SIX ..C.EHTBES AND tHE SEEPEXT POAVER

The word “ Satya-loka in the above passage means Sahasrara.
Also cf, ^^The afctribiiteless .Hindu is without doubt the
Cause (of the attainment) of Siddhis. Some say that the Deva
who is one, stainless (Niraiijana), all embracing (Maliapuinz-a) and
united with the primordial Shakti as in the form of a grain of
gram ^ is Brahma, and by some, again, He is called ; by

others, again, He is called the Deva Rudra.’’

The luminous empty space within the Nirvc'wa Shakti
the outer circle of the Parabindu), which is more minute than the
ten-millionth part of the end of a hair, is, according to the author,
the abode of Brahman (Brahmapada). Cf. Within it " is Para-
bindo, whose nature it is to create, maintain, and destroy^ The
space within is Shiva Himself and Bindn-'^ is Parama-kii^i^ali.’’

Also : The circumference (V'^'itta) is the Kmicialini-Shakti,
and She possesses the three Gunas. The space within, 0 Beloved
Maheshfuii, is both Shiva and Shakti.’^ ^

This Bindii is, according to some, Ishvara, the Cause of AIL
Some Panra-Jiikas call Him Maha-Vi.9/inu ; others call Him Brahma
Purushn.

Cf. There was neither day nor night, neither the firmament
nor the earth, neither darkness nor any other light ; there was That
the Brahma-Male, ^ imperceptible to hearing, and the other sources
of knowledge united with Pradhtoa.’’®

The wSharada*^ says : The eternal Shiva should be known
both as Nirga?^a (attributeless) and Sagu^ia (possessed of attri-
butes). He is Nirguna when (considered as) disassociated from
the workings of Praknti, but when Sakala {i.e., so associated with
Prak?’i'’ti) He is Saguna.’’^

1 Cha^mka, which under its outward sheath contains two undivided
halves.

2 Apparently Nirva?ia-Kala.

® That is, the circumference as opposed to the inner space.

Jnanar?iava Tantra, XXIV, 21.

^ PrMhanikang Brahma-puman.

« Kalika Parana, XXIV, v. 125.

^ Ch. 1.

^ And so, also, the Shaktanandataramgha (Ch. 1) says of the
Devi that Mahamaya without Maya is Xirgu^xa, and with Maya Sagnwa.

DBSCBIP'l'ION OF THE SIX CENTRES

Summary of Verses 41 to 49

(ve (tbe SasJmmna Nadi is the Lotus of a

1 petals ; it is white and has its head downward turned ;
lents are red. The fifty letters of the Alphabet from A to
ch are also white, go round and round its thousand petals
times. On its pericarp is Hangsah, and above it is the
•ho is Parama-Shiva Himself. Above the Guru are the
and Chandra Maadalas, and above them Mahavayu. Over
er is placed Brahmarandhra, and above it Mahashangkhini.

Mandala of the Moon is the lightning-like triangle within

137

DSSCEIPTION „OM fHE SIX CENTERS

This shows that the Biiidu is Sagana Brahmati. We should
hnowthat Sagmia Brahman is in reality but one, though He is
called by different names according to the inclinations of men.
There is no need to go into further details.

Summary ow Verses 41 to 49

Above (the end) of the Smhumn^ Nadi is the Lotus of a
thousand petals; it is white and has its head downward turned ;
its filaments are red. The fifty letters of the Alphabet from A to
ia, which are also white, go round and round its thousand petals
twenty times. On its pericarp is Hangsa?i, and above it is the
Guru who is Parama-Shiva Himself. Above the Guru are the
Suryya and Chandra Ma?^dalas, and above them Mahavayu. Over
the latter is placed Brahmarandhra, and above it Mahashangkhini.
In the Maridala of the Moon is the lightning-like triangle within
which is the sixteenth Kalfii of the Moon, which is as fine as the
hundredth part of the lotus-fibre, and of a red colour, with its
mouth downward turned. In the lap of this Eala is the Nirva?ia-
Kala, subtle like the thousandth part of the end of a hair, also red
and with the mouth downward turned. Below Nirva?^a Kala is the
Fire called Nibodhika, which is a form of Avyaktanada.^ Above
it (Nibodhika), and within Nirvaaakala, is Para Bindu, which is
both Shiva and Shakti. The Shakti of this Para Bindu is the
Nirvana Shakti, who is Light (Tejas) and exists in the form of
Hangsafe (Hangsarupa), and is subtle like the ten-millionth part of
the end of a hair. That Hangsafe is Jiva. Within the Bindu is
the void (Shunya) whicii is the Brahmapada (place of the
Brahman)*

According to the view expressed in the fifth chapter
of the Igama-kalpa-druma and other works, the triangle A-Ka-
Tha^ is in the pericarp of the Sahasrara. At its three corners
are three Bindus : the lower Bindu at the apex of the
triangle is Ha-kara,^ and is male (Puru-Siha) ; and the two

1 That is, AmakalA

^ Avyakta-iiadatmaka-nibodhikakhya-vahiii.

^ That is, the letters arranged in the form of the triangle referred
to in V. 4 of Paduka-pauchaka. The Devi is Matnka-mayi.

^ viz,^ Hang representing the Male ” Bindu.

Bindus afc tlie corners constitute tlie Visarga in the form Sa i
and represent Praknti. Hangsa/^ which is Puriisha and Praknt
thus shows itself in the form of three Bind us. In its middle Is
Amakala, and in Her lap is Nirva/m-Shakti, and the vacant
space within lSrirvtwa"Shakbi is Parjibralinian. It has been
said : Within the Mar/!.<iala of the moon in the white Lotus
of a thousand petals shines like lightning the triangle A-
Ka-Tha united with Ha-La-K.S'/}a.2 Within it, is the excellent
(Para) Biadu (Shunya), placed below Visarga. lu this region is
the dowiivvavd-turned sixteenth Kala, of the colour of the rising
Sun, in shape like the crescent uioou who discharges a. stream of
nectar, and within Her is Para Shakti, possessing the effulgence of
ten million suns* She is as subtle as the thousandtli part of the
Lotas fibre, and is Chidatmika.^ Within Her is Biudu who is the
ISTiranjana Puru-^/za, who is beyond mind ami speech and is Sach-
chidananda, and Visarga (who is also there) is Prakriti. Hangsa
who is both Pnng^ and Praknti shines by His own effulgence.'’

Those who follow this view, place Sa-kara over the Biadu, and
place the Guru above Visarga^^ and Biiidu which together make
Hangsa/i. But this cannot be right. The N'irva?ia Tantra speaks
of the Guru as worshipping the Para Bindu-rupa-Shakti, and as
being close to Her and in the act of worpliipping Her. 1'he wor-
shipper should always sit at a level lower than, and in front of the
object of worship, and never at a higher level than, and behind
the object of worship. Cf. Nirvana Meditate upon the
Niraniana Devi within the Satya-loka in the Chintamanignha'^ as

1 That is, literally ‘‘standing Sa,'’ or Visarga in the form Sa. The
letter Sa, or more strictly Sa without the vowel, changes into VLarga^ ;
ihus, Tejas become Teja/i, Rajas Raja/i.

s These Varnas are inside the triangle A-Ka-Tlia.

3 Of the nature of Chit. Gf, definition of Maya-Shakti in Tattva
Sandoha 14.

4 The Male, Puru6f/ia.

5 Lit., Generator of Visarga/i (see note e5, ante, p. 136), for from Sa
Visarga comes.

6 Nirvana Tantra, Ch. X.

‘5' The room made of Chintamani stone which grants ail desires,
described in the Rqdrayamala and Brahma? 2 da Pui*ana. The Lalita
refers to it as being the place or origin of all those Mantras which
bestow all desired objects (Chintita).

PBSOBIPTION OF THE SIX GEXTRES

’aced on the jewelled throne or lion-seat (Simhasana), and on your
m-a as being near Her and worshipping Her.”

The Mahakali Tantra, moreover, speaks explicitly of the
presence of the Guru over the two letters Hang and Sah.i It is to
he understood that if there be any texts which differ from, or add
to those here adopted, then they must be taken to refer to different

methods and opinions.

This is the end of seventh section.

THE BI.K,-".0ENTE1B A'NB ' tHE SERPENT POWER

Veese 50

Hi whose imture is purified by the practice of Yama,
Niyama, and the like/ learns from the mouth of his Guru
the process -which opens the w^ay to the disco-very of the
great Liberation. He whose whole being is iminersed in the
Brahman then rouses the Devi by Hxing-kara, pierces the
centre of the Liihga, the mouth of which is closed, and is
therefore invisible, and by means of the Air and Fire
(within him) places Her within the Brahmadvara.^

Commentary

Having described the Chakras ending with the Sahasrara, he
now wishes to speak of the union of KundalinT, and preliminary to
that he refers to the mode of rousing Kuw{£alinL^

The sense conveyed by this vei'se is that the man who has
attained success in Yoga learns from his Guru the process, which
consists of contracting the heart, rousing KuwcZalini by the power
of the air and fire, and so forth ^ ; and having learned it from the
mouth of his Guru, he rouses Ku?i£^alinT, attacking Her with air
and fire, and by uttering the Kurchcha “ Hung^’ and piercing the
mouth of the Svayambhu Liiiiga places KuricZalini within Brahma^
dvara, or, in other words, within the mouth of the Nadi Chitri^ii.

X See Introduction.

^ That is, within OhitrmlNMi.

^ In the Yoga-process known as S/^.a^chakrabheda, generall}" de-
scribed in the Introduction, but which practically must be learned of
the Guru.

4 The Commentator Shangkara, citing Goraks^a Sanghita, says
that air makes the fire go upwards, and the fire awakens Kutzdalini and
She also goes upwards.

desceiption of the

we is furified” (Sushila)— j.e., the man wao
fama and so forth, and has trained himself.
Yama, Niyama,” etc- (Y ama-niyama-sama-
ast be observed that it is not merely by
and Niyama that perfection in the preliminary
attained. But the SMhaka has by practice to
tions as lust, anger, and the like, which inter-
I cultivate others, such as controlling the inner
lind, and so forth, which are helpful in Yoga
ause of this that in v. 54 the Author has used
yaih ” in the plural. Practising Yama and the
wliinsft Tiiinds ar6 d.istu.rb6ci

' Momes me by Bung^kfira {kinng-km^endiWn, I)eYim).>^

The Agama-kalpa-druma says : Then having tBentallj recited
Hangsa, gently contract the mimJ' ^ ft therefore follows that in
moving Ku^u^alini the Hangsa Mantra should be uttered. The
Author of the Lalifcarahasya, following this, says that in movino-
Ku9^da]ih^ the Mantra 'Miuog Hangsa/^ should be employed.
But, from the fact that the part is to be contracted after the
Hangsa Mantra is recited, the intention appears to be that the
Jivatrna, which is of the shape of the flame of a lamp, should by
the recitation of the Hangsa Maiitra be brought from the heart to
the Muladhara, and then moved along with

The Agama-kalpa-druma in a subsequent passage says :

Raising and again raising the Shakti \yith the Atma from the
abode of Brahma,^ the excellent Siidhaka should (and so forth).’^
This shows that She should be led away along with Atnni. or
JiVcitma. The Kali-Kulamrita has: ‘"'Having led Jiva from the
heart by the Hangsa Mantra to the Mula Lotus, and having
roused the Paradevata Ku/Adalini by Hung-kara/^ The Kangkala-
malini says : " 0 daughter of the King of Mountains, having drawn
the jivatrna by the Praaava, let the Sadhaka move Prana and
Gandha^ with Kunialini by the aid of the ' So’ham ’ Mantra,

and make the Devi enter the Svadhis/iifena.”

The wise should, from the above texts, understand that the
Jivatrna should be brought from the heart by the aid of either the
Pra^iava or Hangsa Mantra, and then KuncZalini should be roused
by the Kurchcha-bija alone.

" The mouth of which is closed,^ etc, (Guptam). — This word may
be read either as an adjective qualifying Lirhga, and mean unmani-
fested by reason of its mouth being closed,^ or may be read as an
adverb qualifying places,” and bhen the word would mean
imperceptibly.”

^ Shanair akunchayed gudam — that is, by Ashvini-mudra.

^ Brahma is in Muladhara.

3 Mukbambbuja. This may he a mis-script for Mulambuja.

^ i,e., Pr^thivL

5 On the top of the Lingga is Kadabinda— f.e., Chandra Biiidu.
The mouth is the Bindu which Kuwdalini pierces.

143

l)ESCliimON OP THE SIX OENTEES

j-ama-kalpa-druma, Panchamashakha, the mode of

is d,»=tibed i» aet.il thesj “H.vi.J^.

in the Padmasana posture, the two hands should be
Thereafter, having mentally recited the Hangsa
inus should be gently contracted. One should then
se the air by the same way, ^and having raised it let
le Chakra, 1 now speak of its process.

,tus is a very beautiful triangle. Inside it is Kama,-
B ten million young suns; above Him (Karna), and
Svayambhu-Limga, is Kundali Shakti. ^^^so j/.

t of excitation by the Kamagni and the action of the
1 - „„ Wq.. RWr is seized with desire for rara-

4 This passage is obscure, and cannot

*■“ the p..s.ee O. th. up.«d b.e.ih

• Tb.l i., the ehesl ,«i the .me, th.e etos ««

Upward and downward airs, ^

7 That is, the motion of the Kama vayu spoken of

8 Nagini, one of the names of Kuwdah. ^

ft 'TKot. ic tiifi Trikona in the Muladhaia w icisui

THB SIX -OIHTBIS AKI>„ THE SB3KPENT POWER

^ The passages irj quotation marks are here cited from different
hooks on Hat^ajoga.

* Retention of breath in Pra^^ayama.

3 Hndayam akunchayet— that is, by Jalandhara Bandha, etc. See
Introduction.

^ Kama-vayu.

^ Sama*rasya, a term used on the material plane to denote sexual
union.

Plate XV. YONI MUDRA IN SIDDHASANA
[Vide p. 209)

illiiiiiiiiii®

DBSOEIPTION OP THE SIX OBNTEBS

Verse 51

The Devi who is Shuddha-sattva^ pierces the three Liih-
gas, and, having reached all the lotuses which are known
as the Brahma-naii lotuses, shines therein in the fulness
of Her lustre. Thereafter in Her subtle state, lustrous
like lightning and fine like the lotus fibre. She goes to
the gleaming flame-like Shiva the supreme Bliss, and
of a sudden produces the bliss of Liberation.

Commentary

Now he speaks of the mode of the Union of Kundalini (with
Shiva). The meaning of this verse, in brief, is that the Devi
Kandalini pierces the three Limgas — viz., Svayambhu, Baaa, and
Itara ^ — and by so doing makes a passage for Herself ; and when
she reaches the lotuses in (or appertaining to) the Nadi called
Brahma-nadi she shines in the fulness of Her lustre in these lotuses.
Then, when in Her subtle form, fine like the lotus fibre. She
approaches Shiva, who is Supreme Bliss ® Itself, and who is in His
Bindu form in the pericarp of the Sahasrara, She brings to the
Sadhaka the Bliss of eternal Liberation^ when that is least
expected.

“Pierces” (Bheda) means making a passage through that
which is obstructed.

“ Shiiddha-satva.” — Sattva, Ati-sattva, Parama-sattva, Shud-
dha-sattva, and Vishuddha-sattva, are the five different degrees of

1 A form of embodied Chaitanya. See Commentary, post

® In the Muladhara, Anahata and Ajna Chakras respectively,

5 Paramarasa=Paramananda.

Moksh akhy anand ar upam =N ityanandar upa-muktim.

■

■ '

K

t

i

m

M.

146

140 THB SIX OBNTBIS AMD THJE SEEPENT POWER

Ohaitanya perjadmg the body. i Shuddha-safcfcva is therefore the

fourth Cluriya) stage. By Brahmanadi is meant Chitriai The
Lotuses are the six Lotuses which are strung upon Ohitrim ’

“ The three Lifhgas” (Limga-trayam).-The three Liihsas
already described^ By this we are to understand that the six
Ghakras and five Shivas are included. She pierces all these, which
altogether make fourteen knots (Granfchi).

^ The Shaktananda-taraihghn- speaks of » Her who goes alone

the Channel of Brahman ^ having pierced the fourteen knots ” 3 *

T - . Svatantra Tantra speaks of the distinctive features of

Limga and Shiva.

. 1 , Brahman (NMkala) ^ after having pierced

the Shivas^placed in the six Chakras. As She reaches each of the
different Chakras, She acquires the beauty characteristic of each
Md bewitches Maheshana 5; and having there repeatedly enioyed

Him who IS filled with joy, She reaches the Eternal One (Shash-
by^P^a transpierced (Bhinna), as He is bewitched'

The Maya Tantra says : “ The Devi goes along the Shakti-
marga, piercing the three Liihgas in the Chakras in each of Her
different forms ^ (Tattadrupena), and having attained union (in the
Sahasrara) with Nis/ikala (Brahman) She is satisfied.” Tat-
tadrupena— f e., in the forms Vaikhari, Madhyama, and Pashyanti.

It has been said that ^ ''The first state (Bhava) is Vaikhari*
and Madhyama is placed in the heart j between the eyebrows is the
Pashyanti state, and the Para state is in the Bindu The mean
ing of the above quotation is that the four sound-producing
^ Sbariravachchhinna-chaitanja.

the ™ “nle“hVw ““ ® Breh«Sand

* The Supreme or Nirguwa Brahman.

® That is, the Shiva in the particular Chakra.

the LiSL*£ tfat f^m :f

bee Commentary on v. 11, ante.

DISOEIFTION OF THE SIX OENTEIS

147

(ShabdotpMika) Sbaktis— Para, PashyanfcT, Madhyama, and
Vaikkari — are identical with KmidalinT (Ku?^c^alinyabheda-rupa).
Hence at the time when Ku^idalini starts to go to Sahasrara She
in Her form of Vaikhar! bewitches Svayambhu Limga ; She then
similarly bewitches Va?ia-Limga in the heart as Madhyama, and,
Itara Lirriga between the eyebrows as Pashyanti, and then
when she reaches Para Bindii She attains the stage of Para
(Para-bhava).

The Method of Chakra-bheda is thus described: ‘^0 Para-
meshvari, let the Sadhaka carry along with Her the Lotuses which
are on the Chitriwij and which have their origin in the mud of
blood and fat*^ Let him ^ enter the channel (Nala) ^ on the left,
from below, and in this way Chakra-bheda (piercing the Chakra) is
effected. After having thus pierced the six Chakras, She along with
Jiva should be led as the rider guides a trained mare by the reins.^’

Also c/. The Dev! should be led by the Hangsa Mantra to
the Sahasrara through the points of union of the six Chakras (with
the Nadi) along the road of Su5?ium^^a.**

‘‘ Gleaming flame-like (Suk^Jima-dhamni pradipe). — The
gleam is the Hangsa, which is the luminous energy {Tejas) of the
Para Bindu, in its aspect as Nirva?ia Shakti (Nirvamshaktyatmaka),
The Paramaj Shiva shines with it.

We now describe how the joy of Liberation is brought about.

The Devi by dissolving Kundalini in the Para Bindu effects
the Liberation of some Sadliakas through their meditation upon the
identity of Shiva and Atma in the Bindu. She does so in the case
of others by a similar process, and by their meditation on Shakti.'* In
other cases, again, this is done by the concentration of thought on
the Pararaa PurusAa, and in other case by the meditation of the
Sadhaka on the bliss of union in the Bindu of Shiva and Shakti,

1 Lotuses grow in the mud, and these Lotuses grow in the blood and
fat of the body. The process described is Kuwdalini-yoga, or, as it is
called in the Tippani of Shangkara, Bhuta-shuddhi.

2 As the Sadhaka, who has taken the Ji^atma from the heart to the
Muladhara, and thus identifies himself with KunMini, it is he who
enters.

3 That is, the Nadi.

^ Shaktyatmakachintana ; or it may mean meditation on the union
of Shiva and Shakti.

THE BIX ClNfEES AND THE SEEPEOT POWEE

The Maya Tantra says i ; " Those who are learned in Yoga
say that it is the union of Jiva and Itma. According to
others (le., Shaivas) it is the experience of the identity of
Shiva and Atina. The Agauaa-vadis proclaim that Yoga ^ is the
knowledge (Jnana) relating to Shakti. Otherwise men say
that the knowledge of the Purawa Parusha is Yoga, and others
again, the Praknti-vadls, declare that the bliss of union of Shiva
and Shakti is Yoga.” » By “ union of Jiva and Atma ” is meant
Samadhi. By Yoga is meant that by which oneness is attained
with the Paramatma. Having spoken of Samadhi, he then deals
with the different kinds of Yoga in Dhyana. By “ bliss of union
(Samarasya) of Shiva and Shakti ” is meant the sense of enjoy-
ment arising from the union of male and female.^

The Bnhat Shrlkrama speaks of the manner in which this is
to be meditated upon : “ They with the eye of knowledge 5 gee the
stainless Kala, who is united with Ohidananda « on Nada. He is
the Mahadeva, white like pure crystal, and is the effulgent First
Cause (Vimba-rupanidana),^ and She is Para the lovely woman of
beauteous body » whose limbs are listless by reason of Her great
passion °

-A. IS meant the realisation of the identity

«Vat as indicated in the Mahavakya

Tat tvam asi (That thou art).” By Parana PurusTia the Pnrus&a in
bamkbja Darsbana is meant the Va^sA?^avas understand by it JJ^arayana

of Shakti” x^s

Knowledge that Shakti is inseparate from Shiva.

2 Shaktyatmakajnana.

is the I%a^S*rKnkyiT“^“' *hat Samarasaya

4 Stripumyogat yat saukhyang samarasyang prakirtitam In

^ ♦Tnana-chak^AuA.

® Ohidananda is Consciousness-Bliss.

Bindu^oim^^^^^ reading is Bmdu-rupa-nidana, the First Cause in the

^ Madalasa-vapu^.

DESOBIPTION OP THE SIX CENTRES

By Kala in the above is meant Kuwtklini. V-imba-rupa-
nidana qualifies Para-shiva or Chidananda. Chidananda is the
Bindu-rupa Shiva or Para Shiva.

It has also been said elsewhere t “ Having united Kundall
with the ShOnya-rupa i Parashiva, and having caused the Devi so
united to drink the excellent nectar from their union. She by the
same way should be brought back to the Kula cavity.” ^

“ Having brought them together and meditated upon Their
union, 3 let the Deha-devatS ^ be satisfied with the nectar which
flows from such a union.”

The Gandharva-malika speaks of a different process : “The
Sahasrara is the beautiful and auspicious place of Sadashiva. It
is free from sorrow and divinely beautiful with trees which always
bear and are adorned by flowers and fruits. The Kalpa Tree ®
adds to its beauty. This tree contains all the five “ elements,” and
is possessed of the three Gnnas. The four Vedas are its four
branches. It is laden with beautiful unfading flowers which are
yellow, white, black, red, green, and of variegated colour. Having
meditated on the Kalpa Tree in this manner, then meditate upor
the jewelled altar below it. 0 Beauteous One, on it is a beantifa
bed adorned with various kinds of cloth and Mandara flowers, anc
scented with many kinds of scents. It is there that Mahadevi
constantly stays. Meditate upon Sadashiva, who is like the pures

DESCBIWION OP THE SIX OBNTEES

Verse 52

The wise and excellent Yogi rapt in ecstasy,^ and devoted
to the Lotus feet of his Gruru, should lead Kula-kundali
along with Jiva to Her Lord the Parashiva in the abode
of Liberation within the pure Lotus, and meditate upon
Her who grants all desires as the Chaitanyarupa Bha-
gavati.* When he thus leads Kula-Kundalini, he should
make all things absorb into Her.

Commentary

Having spoken of the Dhyana-yoga of Kundalini, he now-
speaks of the Samadhiyoga of Kundalini. The substance of this
verse is that the wise (Sudhi) and excellent Yogi (Yogindra) intent
on the attainment of Samadhi should first of all lead Her who has
been roused, who then, taking with Her Jiva, reaches the Brahma-
dvara, causing the absorption into Herself of everything as She
moves along. When She who is the IsAtadevata and the giver of
all good fruits is led up to Her Lord and is united with Him, the
Para Hindu, she should be meditated upon as the Supreme (Para, i.e.,
Para Bindu, Pararhbindusvarupam). When She has been led to
Her Lord Shiva, the Para-Bindu, and has been united with Hiin,
She should be meditated upon as the Ishiadevata who grants
good fruit.

He should there (in the Sahasrara) dissolve the Para-
Bindu in the 0hidatma,3 which is in the void within the Bindu,
and should meditate upon Her (Kuwdalini) as Shuddhachai-
tanyarupa.^ He thus realises the identity of Jiva and Atma,

1 Samadhi. Vide Introduction, and post. Commentary.

3 The Devi who is the Chit in all bodies.

3 The Brahman as Chit.

Pure Chit.

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

l 36 ing conscious witliin. liinisolf tliuti ^ I uui 1^6 (So lium) , uud.
having dissolved the Ohifcta he remains unmoved, by reason of his
full and all-pervading Knowledge.

The Eevered Preceptor (Shrimat Acharyya)i has said : “The
wise one should absorb the Karana® Ma-kara into the Chidatma,
and realise : ‘ I am Chidatma, I am eternal, pure (Shuddha),
enlightened (Buddha), liberated (Mukta) ; I am That which alone
is (Sat), without a second (Advaya) ; I am Supreme Bliss
wherein is all bliss and Vasudeya’s very self, I am — Om.’ ^ Having
realised that the mind (Ohitta) is the discriminator, he absorbs it
into its witness.^ Let not the mind (Ohitta) be distracted when
it is absorbed into Chidatma. Let him (the Sadhaka) rest in the
fulness of his Illumination like a deep and motionless ocean.”

“ Ma-kara.”® : This is said for those who are Sadhakas of the
Prauava. By .Karatia is here meant Para-Bindu. By “I am
Vasndeva ” (Vasudevo’ham) the Vais^wavas are alluded to {vide

DESOBIPTION OP THE SIX OENTEES

s< ^l)ocl& of JjibovOttion '
Pure Lotus (Shuddhapadma)
attained.

“Devoted to th

padma-y ugalalambi) .

The Author means

instructions

that Siddhi can oi
of the Guru. The Sadhaki
shelter at his feet.

“ Baft in ecstasy ” (Samadhau yatah)

{ix, 9) defines Samadhi thus : “ L

plation^ in which there is neither ‘ here
illumination and is still like the ocean
Itself.” ®

Also elsewhere: “The Munis declare that the constant
realisation of the identity of the Jivatma with the Paramatma is
Samadhi, which is one of the eight limbs (Amga) of Yoga.”-!
Patanjali defines “Yoga to be the control of the modifications (or

functions) of Chitta (Yogash chittavnttinirodha/i.).”

Rapt (Yatah)-i.e., he who constantly and with undivided

attention practises it. __ ,, .i-

“ When he leads Eula-Kundalinl, he should make all things

absorb into her ” (Laya-vashat nitva).^ Below is shown the process

of absorption : ^ i

“0 DeveshI, the Lang-kara® should next be meditated upon

in the Triangle j there should also Brahma and then Kama-deva be
contemplated. Having fixed Jiva there with the utterance
of the Pramava, let him lead the Woman, -v^ho is longing for
the satisfaction of Her passion,’ to the place of Her husband,
0 Queen of the Devas. 0 Great Queen, 0 be oved of my
life, let him think of Ghrawa (PMhivi), and meditate on the

1 Shankara reads it as Shnklapadma, white lotus.

2 Dbyana.

3 Bvarupa-sbunya.

4 This is from Sharada Tilaka, Cb. XXT, y. 2

5 Vishvanatha reads it as Naya-vashat.

6 Bija of Prithivi.

7 ''\7"isar2ra"ri a sha-katnini.

* That is, the BiudU in SahasrSra.

’ ).— The Kularwava Tantra
Samadhi is that kind of contem-
er ‘ here ' nor ‘ not here,’ which is
le ocean, and which is the Void

154

THE SIX OENTBBS AND THE SERPENT POWER

adorable Shakti Bakini. O Daughter of the Mountain, 0
Queen of the Gawas,^- 0 Mother, all these should be led into
Prithivi.”

Also : “ Then, 0 Great Queen, the blessed Prithivi should be
absorbed into Gandha, and then, O Daughter of the Mountain
King, the Jivatma should be drawn (from the heart) with the
Pranava (Mantra), and the Sadhaka should lead PraMa,® Gandha, »
and Kundalini, into SvadhisWana with the Mantra So’ham.”

And also : “ In its (Svadhis/ithana) pericarp should Varuiia
and Hari^ be meditated upon. And, 0 Beauteous One, after
meditating on Eakini ® all these and Gandha (smell) should be
absorbed into Rasa (taste), and' Jivatma, Kuwdalini, and Rasa,
should be moved into Ma-aipura.”

And again ; “ 0 thou of beautiful hips « (Sushroni), in its^ peri-
carp the Sadhaka should meditate upon Fire, and also on Rudra, who
is the destroyer of all, as being in company with the Shakti
Lakini and beautiful to behold. And, O Shiva, let him next
meditate on the lustrous sense of vision, and absorb all these and
Rasa (taste) into Rupa (Sight), and thereafter lead Jivatma,
Kundalini, and Rupa, into Anahata.”

And again : “ Let him meditate in its » pericarp on Vayu,
who dwells in the region of Jiva,- as also on the Yoni-Mawciala,
which is made beauteous by the presence of the Bana-Liinga.
Let him there also meditate on Vayu® as united with Rakiwi and
touch (Tvagindriya or Sparsha), and there, 0 Thou who pnrifiest,
Jiva, Kundalini, and Rupa, should be placed in Sparsha (Touch),
and then Jiva, Kuwdalinf, and Sparsha, should be placed in the
Vishnddha.”

1 Attendant (Bpadevata) on Shiva, of whom Gawesha is the
Lord.

2 Sic in text : Quaere Ghrawa or Prana in sense of Hangsa.

» i.e., Gandha Tanmatra.

i.e., Yishrm.

5 PnrawakariwJ— one of her names.

6 i.e., one who has a beautiful figure, the part being selected for
the whole.

’’ “ Its ” — i.e., of Maaipura padma.

8 “ Its ” — i-e., of Anahatapadma.

® V ayu here is Isha the Lord of' Air.

0ESCBIPTION OF THE SIX 81NTBBS ;

155

And again: “Let him meditate in its ^ pericarp on the
Ethereal region, ^ and on Shiva accompanied by Shakini; and
having placed Speech (Vak), and Hearing (Shrotra), in Ether, let
him, O daughter of the Mountain, place all these and Sparsha in
Shabda (Sound), and place Jiva, Kujidalini, and Shabda, in the
Ajna Chakra.”

The above passages are from Kangkalamalini Tantra.

“ Triangle ” in the above is the Triangle in the Muladhara,
from which the commencement is made. Lang-kara should be
meditated upon as within this Triangle. Leading of Jiva with the
use of the Pranava is a variant practice. “ Visarga-nasha-
kaminl ” : By Visarga is meant the agitation caused by an
access of Kama (desire). The compound word means She who
is striving to satisfy Her desire (Kama). The bringing of Jiva
by the Hangsa Mantra is according to the teaching of some.

“ Place of her husband ” (Patyau pade) ; This is the Bmdn, the
Shiva in the Lotus of a thousand petals. Sadhaka should lead

Her there, _ . . ,

The Bija Lang, Brahma, Kamadeva, Dakini-Shakti,;and the
sense of smell (Ghranendriya) — all these are absorbed into Pnthivi,
and Prithivi is absorbed into the Gandha-tattva. Jivatma,
Kuftdalini, and Gandha-tattva, are drawn upward by the Pranava,
and brought into the Svadhishfhana by the So’ham Mantra. This
is the process to be applied right through. After leading Jiva,
Knndalini, and Shabda-tattva, into Ijna Chakra, Shabda-tattva
should be absorbed into Ahangkara which is there, and Ahang-
kara into Mahat-tattva, and Mahat-tattva into Sukshma-praknti,
whose name is Hiramya-garbha, and Prakriti again into Pata-bin u.

The Mantra-tantra-prakasha says: “Let Vyoma (Ether) be
absorbed into Ahangkara, and the latter with Shabda into Mahat,
and Mahat, again, into the unmanifest (Avyakta) supreme (Bara)
Cause (Karana) of all the Shaktis. Let the Sadhaka think
attentively that all things beginning with Pnthivi are absorbed
into Vishnu, 3 the Cause who is Sat, Chit, and Ananda.

1 Yislmddliapadnaa.

^ A .Ik*

• sYisfmn is specified by this particular Tantra, but it may be any

other Devata who is the Ishiadevata of the Sadhaka (see p. 151).

156

THE SIX OBNTEES AND THl SEEPBNT POWER

That, is, Mahat, which is all Shaktis (Sarvashakti), should
be absorbed into Suk^Ama-praknti, who is known by the name
of Hirajij/a-garbha, and that l^rak'r&ti should be absorbed into
Para, by which is meant the Cause in the form of Parabindu.
In this connection the Achiiryya has laid down the rule that
the p^ross should be dissolved into the subtle. ^ C/. : It
should be attentively considered and pi*actised that the gross is
absorbed into the subtle, and all into Chidatma,^^ The absorption
of all things, beginning with Prithivi and ending with Anahata, ^
takes place in the aforesaid manner ; that being so, the feet and
the sense of Smell (Chrmendriyaj and all pertaining to Prithivi
are dissolved in the place of Prithivi, as they inhere in Prithivi.

Similarly, the hands, the sense of Taste (Rasanendriya),
and all that pertains to Water, are dissolved in the region of
Water. In the region of Fire (Vahni-sthana) are dissolved
the anus, the sense of Vision {Ohak.«/iurindriya), and all that
pertains to Fire. In the region of Air (Vayu-sthana) the geni-
tals, the sense of Touch (Tvagindriya), and all that pertains to
Vayu, are dissolved. In the place of Akasha are dissolved
the sense of Speech (Vak) and hearing (Shrotrendriya) and
all that pertains to Akasha (Ether).

In the Ajna Chakra the dissolution of Ahangkara, Mahat,
SufeAmaprakriti, and so forth, takes place, each dissolving
into its own immeditate cause. The letters of the alphabet
should then be absorbed in the reverse order (Viloma), be-
ginning with K^/ia-kara and ending with A-kara. By all
things it is meant that “ Bindu,^’ BodhinI,’’ and so forth,
which have been shown above to be causal bodies (Karana-
Sharira), should be dissolved in a reversed order (Yilomena)
into the Primordial Cause (Adikara^^a) — the Para Bindu. Thus
the Brahman alone remains.

The process is thus described : “ The Sadhaka, having thus
made his determination (Sangkalpa), should dissolve ^ the letters
of the Alphabet in the Nyasa-sthana.*^ The dissolution of Kshot

1 Vide V. 40 and Commentary under it.

2 This seems an error, for the last Mahabhuta Akasha is dissolved
in Vishuddha.

3 Samharet.

^ The places where the Yarwa have been placed in Matnka I^yasa.

DESOBIPTION OP THE SIX OENTEES

157

is in La, and La in Ha ; Ha, again, is dissolved into Sa, and ba
into 8ha, and thus it goes on till A is reached. This should he
very carefully done.”

Also ^ : “ Dissolve the two letters into Bindn, and dissolve
' b. Dissolve Kala in Nada, and dissolve Nada
and this into Unman!, and Unman! into Vi»?in-u-
YishnnvBktva should be dissolved into Guruvaktra.^

realise that all the letters are

Bindu into Kala,
in Nadanta, ® i —

vaktra® ; -

Let the excellent Sadhaka then
dissolved in Earama Shiva.”

By Vishnuvaktra is meant Pung-Bindu. “The Suryya,bindu
is called the Face, and below are Moon and Fire.” “ Bindu is said
to be the Male, and Yisarga is Prakn'ti.”^

All these authorities imply the same thing, and go to prove
that it is the “ mouth of Yisfewu ” (Vishna-vaktm) where dissolution
should take place. The following from Keshavacharyya “ also leads
to the same conclusion : “ Lead Her (Unman!) into the Male, which
is the Bindu ; lead Bindu into Paratma, and Paratma into Kak-
tattva, and this latter into Shakti, and Shakti into Chidatma, which
is the Supreme (Kevala), the tranquil (Shahta), and effulgent.

We have seen that each dissolves into its own immediate
cause. Nadanta is therefore dissolved in Yyapika Shakti, the
Yyapika Shakti in Unman!, and Unman! in Saman!^ and
Saman! in Yie/inuvaktra. When the letters have been thus
dissolved, all the six Chakras are dissolved,' as the petals of the
Lotuses consist of letters. «

1 Here is shown the Anuloma process. The two letters are Ha

and

2 i,e., that which is beyond Nada. See Introduction.

3 Punff- Bindu ; t;. - cit -

4 That is. the mouth of the Supreme Bindu (cited foom Sharada^

tilaka, Oh. Y,^vv. 134-136). Also of. Sharada, Ch. XII, 123, and

Kularnava lY, 76. • i t - r om

5 Cf Sharada, Gh. XXV, v. 51. Also Nityashodashika, I, 201,

and Kama-Kalavilasa (Yol. X, Tantrik Texts). v i.,

6 Also called Keshava Bharat!— a great YaisA«ava tocher whc

initiated Shr! Chaitanya the greatest among latter day Vaisfcwavas
into Sannyasa or the path of Eenunciation. ,„v,:„i.

7 Sic. This is in conflict jwith other texts, according to

Unman! is above Saman! . *

8 Padmadalanang varna-mayatvat.

THl BIX CEHTBIS AND THB SBEFENT FOWBE

1 Adivarwatmakam patram padmanam parikirtitam.

2 Ch. lY. The passage cited also occurs in Sharadatilaka, Ch. Y,

129-134

3 Yilaya.

^ That is, Miiladhara where Brahma or Kamalasana is,

5 That is, the Bindu of the Ajna Chakra is dissolved into Kutidalini,

DESCBlFnON OS’ THE SIX 0BNTBE8

159

■ • Verse 53,

The beautiful Kujidall drinks tlie excellent red^ nectar
issuing from Para Sbiva, and returns from there where
shines Eternal and Transcendent Bliss ^ in all its glory
along the path of Kula/ and again enters the Muladhara.
The Yogi who has gained steadiness of mind makes offering
(Tarpa?m) to the Is/i^a-devata and to the Devatas in the six
centres (Chakra), Dakini and others, with that stream of
celestial nectar which is in the vesseP of Brahmantla, the
knowledge whereof he has gained through the tradition of

the Gurus.

OOMMENTAEY

He now speaks of what should be done after all the different
kinds of Yoga described have been understood. The meaning ot
this verse is fhat the beautiful Mali drinks the excellent necter
issuing from Para Shiva, and having emerged from the place of
EternS and Transcendental Bliss, She passes along the path of
Hula and re-enters Muladhara. The Yogi, after having understood
the different matters mentioned

think of the inseparate union = of Shiva and Shakti, an

mB«nfrkara says it is so coloured because it is mixed with the
mensS luX Sh is symbolic, like the rest of this erotic imagery.
Red is the colour of the Rajoguna.

* Brahman is Eternity and Bliss.

3 The Channel in the Chitrimnadi.

■* The vessel is Kundalini.

5 Samarasya.

THE SIX CENTEES AND THE SBEPENT POWER

The Vishvasara Tanfcra says: “The petals of the Lotuses
are the letters of the Alphabet, beginning with A.” i The
Sammohana Tantra* describes the dissolution ^ of the Lotuses and
the petals thus : “ Dissolve the letters frona Va to Sa of the petals
in Brahma,^ and dissolve Brahma in the Lotus of six petals which
contains the letters Ba to La, and which is called Svadhis/itMna.
Do this as the Guru directs.” And so forth. And ending with :

“ The wise one should then dissolve it (Vishuddha) in the
(Lotus of) two petals which contains the two letters Ha and Ks7ia,
and dissolve the two letters which are in the latter lotus into
Bindu, and dissolve Bindu into Kala.” ®

We thus see that the four letters in the Muladhara are dis-
solved therein and Muladhara is dissolved in Svadhishthana.
Proceeding in this way till the Ajna Chakra is reached, the letters
Ha and Ksha. which are there are also dissolved at this place.
Then the Lotus itself is dissolved into Bindu, Bindu into BodhinI,
and proceeding in this way as already shown everything is
dissolved into Para Bindu. M7hen the Ajna Chakra is dissolved
all that it contains in its pericarp — Hakini, Itara-Limga, Pranava
— are unable to exist without support, and therefore after the
dissolution into Prakriti these also are dissolved into Para Bindu.

1 Adivamatmakam patram padmanam parikirtitam.

2 Ch. IV. The passage cited also occurs in Sharadatilaka, Oh. V,
129-134

* Yilaya.

That is, Muladhara where Brahma or Kamalasana is.

5 That is, the Bindu of the Ajua Chakra is dissolved into Ku«dalini.

DESCEirnON OF THE SIX CBNTEE8

159

Vebse 53

The beautiful Ku?i&Ji drinks tlie excellent red^ nectar
issuing from Para Sbiva, and returns from there where
shines Eternal and Transcendent Bliss ® in all its glory
along the path of Kula,^ and again enters the Miiladhara.
The Yogi who has gained steadiness of mind makes offering
(Tarpaim) to the Is/i<a-devata and to the Devatas in the six
Lntres (Chakra), Dakini and others, with that stream of
celestial nectar which is in the vesseP of Brahmanda, the
knowledge whereof he has gained through the tradition of

the Gurus.

Commentary

He now speaks of what should he done after all the different

kinds of Togs described hove been understood. The meaning of

this verse is that the beautiful Kuudali drinks the once lent nectar
iaining from Para Shiva, and having emerged from the place of
EteruS and Transcendental Elias, She passes along the path of
Kula and renters Muladhjra. The Yogi, alter having understood
the different matters mentioned (Tat-tad.dhyan»nantar»m), should
think of the inseparat. unions ef Shiva and Shakti, and with the

Red is the colour of the Rajoguma.
a Brahman is Eternity and Bliss.

3 The Channel in the Chitriwinadi.
^ The vessel is Kundalini.

SaiBBbrasjBi-.

k-s;vv

To face p. 160.

Plate XVII. BADDHA-PADMASANA

dbsobiption of mb six obntees

161

it has been said ; “ Kuwdali, who is Bliss, 1 the Queen of the Suras, 2
goes back in the same way to the Adhara s Lotus/’ _ ^

The Bhuta-shiiddhi-prakara'^ta has the following : Let the
Tattvas Pnthivi, etc., in their order, as also Jiva and Kundalini,
he led back from Paramatma and each placed in its respective
position.” She is then particularly described ; “ She is lustrous
when first She goes, and She is ambrosial 1 when She returns.”

“ Stream of celestial weciar ” (Divyamntadhara).— This is the
excellent nectar which, as has already been shown, is produced by
the unions of Shiva and Shakti, and runs in a stream from the
Brahmarandhi-a to the Muladhara. It is for this reason that the
Author says in v. 3 that » the Brahmadvara which shines in Her
mouth is the entrance to the place sprinkled by ambrosia.”^

“Knowledge whereof he has gained through the tradition of the
Gurus” (Yoga-pararapara-viditaya).— This qualifies “Stream of

Nectar ” It means that the knowledge is gained from instructions
(in Yoga practice) handed down traditionally through the succession

Which is in the vessel of Brahmdnia ” (BvahmBndahhdnda-

sthitam) -This qualifies Amnta (nectar).« The vessel or support
(Bhanda) on which the Brahmaada (universe) rests is Kundalini.
Kundalini is the Bhanda as She is the Source (Yoni) of all.

By Daivatam ^ is meant the Is/iiadevata and Pakini and others
in the six Chakras. It has been said : “ 0 Deveshi, with this
nectar should offering (Tarpana) be made to the Paradevata, and
then having done Tarpawa to the Devatas in the six Chakras, and

so forth.

iMudrakara — that is, Anandarupini ; for Mudra=lnandadayim.
Mudra is derived from Mud=ananda (bliss) + Rati -dadati (gives);

Mudra therefore means that which gives bliss. _ nvaVi-as
2 Sura=Deva. Here the different Devas in the Chakras.

' 3 *.e., Muladhara. . x • vf

4 Because ambrosia (Amnta) gives lite.

compared to a Bhaada and tne

UnL^st 0l Lcorkng to Kalicharana, offering is made to the Devatas
of the Amnta which Kuwc^ali has drunk.

7 Daivatam is the collective form of Devatas.

61

THE SIX OENTBIS AND fHE SIEPINT POWIB

Verse 54

The Yogi who has, after practice of Yama, Niyama, and
the like,^ learnt this excellent method from the two Lotus
Feet of the auspicious Diks/fca-guru,^ which are the source
of uninterrupted joy, and whose mind (Manas) is control-
led, is never born again in this world (Samsara), For
him there is no dissolution even at the time of Final
Dissolution.^ Griaddened by constant realisation of that
which is the source of Eternal Bliss, ^ he becomes full of
peace and foremost among all Yogis.^

Commentary

He here speaks of the good to be gained by knowing the
method of Toga practice.

From the lotus feet of his auspicious Dlhshd-guru, which are
the source of uninterrupted joy (Shri-diksM-guru-pada-padma-
yugalamoda-pravahodayat).— Amoda means joy or bliss; and by
Pravaha is meant uninterrupted and continuous connection.
Amoda-pravaha therefore means Nityananda, or Eternal Bliss
Bliss such as this comes from the Lotus feet of the Guru, which
also lead to a knowledge of Yoga practice.

The Dik5-/ia’-guru is here spoken of as he is the first to initiate,
and also by reason of his pre-eminence. But in his absence refuge

1 See Introduction.

2 The Guru who has given him initiation.

3 Sangk5^aya=Pralaya.

^ ]Srityananda= Brahman.

5 Batam — lit., “ of the Good

DESOEIPTION OP THE SIX CENTRES Ibd

may be sought with other Gurus. It has therefore been said:
“ As a bee desirous of honey goes from one flower to another, so
does the disciple desirous of knowledge (Jnana) go from one Guru

to another.” ^ _

“ Gladdened hy constant realisation of that which is the
source of Eternal Bliss ” (Nityananda-parampara-pramudita)— i.e.,
•who is united with the Stream of Eternal Bliss.

“ Foremost among the good ” (Satam agram)— i.e., he is count-
ed to be foremost among the good who are the Yogis.

THE SIX OINTEIS AND THE SBSPBNT POWBB

Verse 55

Commentary

He here speaks of the good to be gained by the study of the

verses relating to the six Chakras.

“ Heart mperturhed ” (Svabhava-sthitak) — i.e., engrossed in
his own true spiritual being.

“ Concentrated mind (Yatantarmanak) i.e., he who by
practice of Yoga has steadied and concentrated his mind on the
inner spirit (Antaratma).

The rest is clear.

Here ends the Eighth Section of the Explanation of the
Verses descriptive of the Six Chakras, forming part of the
Shritattvachintamani, composed by Shri-Pumanandayati.

1 Chetaa or Ohitta.

THE FIVEFOLD FOOTSTOOL ^ (PlDIJKA.-
PANOHAKA)

InTBODUOTOBY VlBSE ®

I MEDITATE on the Ouru in the Lotus of a tLousand petals,

who is radiant like tke cool rays of the Ml moon, whose

lotus hands make the gestures which grant blessing and

dispel fear. His raiment, garland, and ^ perfumes, are

ever fresh and pure. His countenance is benign. e
is in the Hangsa in the head. He is the Hangsa Himself.

1 T>ia meaning of this is explained in v. 7, posL . ^ ,

2 This verse is inserted as it was foand in a ^®^Sr!

to the late Aohalananda Svami, now in the possession of the Varendra

Annsandhana Samiti.

-'1 ‘'i.A;

166

THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

Verse 1

I ADORE the wonderful White Lotus of twelve letters’^
which is within the womb (TJdare) of, and inseparable
from, the pericarp of the Lotus in which is the Brahma-
randhra, and which is adorned by the channel of Kimdali. *

Commentary

The hymn Paduka-panchaka, composed by Him of
live Paces,® destroys all demerit.^ Kali-charana by his Tika

called Amala (Stainless) makes patent its beauty.

Sadashiva, the Liberator of the three Worlds, being desirous

of speaking of Gurndhyana-yoga ® in the form of a hymn (Stotra),
first of all describes the place of the Guru.

The verb Bhaije is First Person Singular, Atmanepada, emphasiz-
ing that Shiva Himself adores or worships. He says, “ I do adore or
worship.” By saying so He expresses the necessity that all wor-
shippers (Upasakas) of the ■Mantras revealed by Him should adore
this wonderful twelve-petalled Lotus. He thus shows the necessity
of His worship.

Til® meaning of this verse in brief is this : I adore the twelve-
petalled Lotus which IS within the pericarp of the Sahasrara.

Tantlf ^v^7 w citation from the Limgarchana

i an to, V. 7, post. There is also a concealed sixth face, “ like the colour
caused by deadly poison,” known as Filakantiia..

® Aihghas— sin and sorrow, pain and penalty.

* Toga with the. Supreme known as the Guru.

THE FIVEFOLD FOOTSTOOL (pADEKAPANCHAKa) 167

“ Wonderful ” (Aabhuta).— It excites our wonder by reason of
its being pervaded by the lustre (Tejas) of Brahman, and for other
reasons.

“Lotus of twelve letters” (Dvadasharwa-sarasiruha) — i.e., the
Lotus which contains twelve letters. The twelve letters, according
to those learned in the Tantras, are the twelve letters which make
the Gurumantra ; they are Sa, ha, kha, phreng, ha, sa, ksha, ma,
la, va, ra, yang. Some say that by l)vadashar?ia is meant the
twelfth vowel, which is the Vag-bhava-bija.i But that cannot be.
If it were so, the authority quoted below would be tautologous :
“(Meditate on) your Guru who is Shiva as being on the lustrous
Hangsapatia, the substance of which is Mantra (Mantramaya),
which is in the pericarp of the Lotus of twelve letters, near the
region of the Moon* in the pericarp, and which is adorned by
the letters Ha, La, and Ksha, which are within the triangle
A-Ka-Tha. The lotus of twelve letters is in the pericarp (of the
Sahasrara),^^

The above passage speaks of the MantramayapiiAa. The
Mantra substance of this Pi^Aa is the Gurumantra in the form of
Vag-bhava-bija.3 There would therefore be a repetition of the
same Mantra.^ " Dvadasharna is made up by Bahuvrihi Samasa—
that in which there are Dvadasha (twelve) Arnas (letters). This
lotus has therefore twelve petals, on which are the twelve letters.

It p true that the letters are not here specified, and there has
been nothing said as to where they are placed ; but the Gurugita
says ^ that the letters Hang and Sa surround (that is, as petals)
the Lotus, wherein the Guru should be meditated. This leads us
to the conclusion that the letters Hang and 8a>h are repeated six
times, thus making twelve, and so the number of petals becomes
clearly twelve, as each petal contains one letter. This is fit
subject of consideration for the wise.

^ Bija of Sarasvati — Aing.

^ Chandra-mancZala, by the Commentator (reading the locative as
Samipye saptami, locative case indicative of proximity).

2 Aing.

^ That is, if we understand that the body of both the FitJia and the
petals is Aing. The V%bhava Bija Aing is the Guru Bija also,

5 This verse is quoted in full under v. 6, post

*

■

""E

THE SIX CENTBBS AND THE SERPENT POWEB

» Inseparable from ” (Nifcya-lagnanQ).— Chat is, it is connected
with the Sahasrara in such a way that the one cannot be thought

of without thinking of the other.

is within the womb of and inseparable from
of the Lotus in which is the Brahmarandhra ’’

is, the Sahasrara, the
which is the Brahmarandhra ; within its

is, within its

“ Which
the pericarp

(Brahmarandhra-sarasirnhodara). — That
thonsand-petalled lotus in

womb, that is to say, within it (Tanmadhye), that
pericarp (Tat-kamikayam).

The Kangkala-Malinl, in describing the Lotus of a thousand
petals, thus speaks of the place of the Brahmarandhra : “ In its
(Sahasrara) pericarp, 0 Deveshi, is Antaratma, and above it is the
Guru ; above him is the Suryya Mawdala and Chandra Maniala
and Mahavayu, and above it is Brahma-randhra.”

Some say that by TJdara (belly or interior) is meant within the
triangle in the pericarp. That is not right. The word TJdara here
mean's “ interior ” or “ centre The interior of the Lotus contains
its pericarp, but the text does not mean the interior of the triangle
in the pericarp, because the triangle is not here mentioned. The
Shyama-saparyya quotes the following explicit :

“ The Lotus of twelve petals (or Letters) is within the peri-
carp of the White Lotus of a thousand petals, which has its head
turned downward, and the filaments of which are of the colour of
the rising sun, and which is adorned by all the letters of the
alphabet.” Here the statement ‘ within the pericarp ’ is explicit.

“ Adorned by the chaimel of Kuadall ” (KM/idali-vivara-kaiida-
maJiditam).— The Vivara (Channel) is that by which Kuwdalini
goes to Shiva in- the Sahasrara. The Chitrini contains within it this
passage or channel. Chitrini is the tube (stalk), as it were,
through which the passage runs, and Chitrini adorns and is
adorned by this Lotus. As a Lotus rests on its stalk, so does the
twelve-petalled Lotus rest on Chitrini, and is made beautiful by its
stalk.

I

THE FIVEFOLD B’OOTSTGOI. (paDUKIPANOHAKA) 169

Verse 2

I ADOBE the Abode of Shakti in the place where the two
pericarps come together. It is formed by the lines ^ A, Ka,
and Tha; and the letters Ha, La, and Ksi'ia, which are
visible in each of its corners, give it the character of a
Ma7^^?ala.^

Commentary

The Guru should be meditated upon as in the triangle A-Ka-Tha
within the pericarp of the Lotus before- mentioned. He now wishes
to describe the triangle so that an adequate conception of it may
be formed,

The abode of ShaJcti (Abalalayam).— By Abala is meant
Shakti. Here She is Eamakala triangular in form, and the three
Shaktis, Varna, Jye^jhtM, and Raudri, are the lines of the triangle.
These three lines or Shaktis emanate from the three Bindus.^
Kamakala is the abode of Shakti.

The Taraala speaks of the identity of Kamakala with this
abode. The passage begins, I now speak of Kama-kala,” and
proceeding says ^ She is the three Bindus. She is the three
Shaktis. She is the threefold Manifestation. She is everlasting.”
That is, Kamakala is composed of the three Shaktis spoken of
(Trishaktirupa). He next speaks of the attributes of AbalMaya
(abode of Shakti).

1 A-Ka-Thadi — the lines formed by the letters A to A A, Ka to
Tas and Tha to Sa. These letters placed as three lines form the three
sides of the triangle.

^ i.e., the diagram where the Divinity is summoned and worshipped.

• ^ Yindutrayangkurabhuta — ^that is, they have the three Bindus as
their sprouting shoot. (See Kamakala vilasa, Vol. X, Tantrik Texts.)

4 TrivinduA sa trishaktiA sa trimurtiA sa sanatani.

170 THE SIX CENTRES AND THE SERPENT POWER

The place tohere the two pericarps come tog ether
Karnikapuie). — Kandala ordinarily means a quarrel in which one
attacks the other with words. Here its significance is merely xbat
the pericarp of one (the twelve-petalled lotus) is included within
that of the other (Sahasrara).

Place (Puia), i.e., the place where the triangle is/^ /omed %
the lines Ea, and Tha (KZipta-rekham akathadirekha:ya). —
The sixteen vowels beginning with A form the line Varna, the
sixteen letters beginning with Ka form the line JyesMM, and the
sixteen" letters beginning with Tha form the line EaudrL The
Abode of Shakti is formed by these three lines.

The Brihat Shrikrama, in dealing with Kamakala, says :
“From the Bindu as the sprouting root (Angkura) She has
assumed the form of letters.’^ ^

“ The letters Ha, La, and JBTsha, ivhich are visible in its corners,
give it the character of a Maxidata^’ (Kona-lak^/iita-ha-la-k^/ia-
mandall-bhava-lak^/iyam). — In its corners — i.e., in the inner
corners of the aforesaid triangle. The three corners of the
triangle are at the apex,^ the right, and the left. The letters
Ha, La, and Ksha, which are visible there, give the place the
character of a Mandala.

One cannot form an adequate conception (Dhyiina) of this
triangle without knowing it in all its particulars, and that
is why other authorities are quoted. This triangle should be
so drawn that if one were to walk round it would always be
on one^s left.

The Shiyictananda-taraihgmi says: “Write the triangle
A-Ka-Tha so that walking outside it is always on one’s left.”

Kali Urddhvamnaya : The Tri-bindu ^ is the Supreme

Tattva, and embodies within itself Brahma, Vis/iwu, and Shiva
(Brahmavi^/i'nushivatmakam). The triangle composed of the
letters has emanated from the Bindu.” Also : The letters

1 Vartiavayava*rupiwi. Bindu appears in the form of letters by
germinating as a sprout. The letters are sprouts from Bindu ; that is,
the Universe is erolved from Bindu.

2 The triangle, it should be remembered, has its apex downward.

3 Yamavartena vilikhet. The drawing is made in the direction
which is the reverse to that of the hands of a watch.

4 ^^e., the three Bindus considered as one and also separately.

Tttl MYEFOLD . FOOTSTODIi' (pIEOKAPAN^IHAKA) ' .'Z- . ' 17 : 1 '

A to Visarga make the line Brahma/ which is the line of
Prajapati ; the letters Ka to Ta make the most supreme
(Pariitpara) line oi Vishnu. The letters Tha to Sa make the
line of Shiva. The three lines emanate from the three Bindus.^'

Tantra-jivana : The lines Rajas, Sattva, and Tamas,

surround the Yoni-Mawiala,’^ Also .* Above is the line of
Sattva j the line of Rajas is on the left, and the line of Tamas is
on one’s right.” ^

Bj a careful consideration of the above authorities, the con-
clusion is irresistible that the letters A-Ka-Tha go in the direc-
tion above-mentioned.

The Svatantra Tantra says : “ The lines A-Ka-Tha surround
the letters Ha, La and Ks/ia.” It therefore places the letters
Ha, ta, Kska within the triangle.

It is needless to discuss the matter at greater length.

That is, on the left and right of the Yoni or the right and left of
the spectator.

172

THE SIX OENTBIS AND THE SIRPINT POWEE

' ■ Verse '3

In my heart I meditate on the Jewelled Altar
und on Nada and Bindu as within the triangle aforespoken.
The pale red ^ gloj’y of the gems in this altar shames the
brilliance of the lightning flash. Its substance is Chit.

CoMMEKTARr

The place of the Guru is on the jewelled altar within the
triangle. He therefore describes the jewelled altar (Ma?^ipl^/i.a),

“ In my heart (Hridi), i.e., in my Mind (Manasi).

On the Jewelled Altar and on Ndda and Bindu (Nada-bindu-
mawipi^Aamandalam). — ^The compound word may be formed in two
ways : Ma?^ip^^/lama?^dalam along with Nada and Bindu (Nada-
bindubhyang saha), or Nada and Bindu and Mampi^/iama^^dalam — »
i.6., all these three. Some interpret this to mean that the Mandala
Mampi^Aa is composed of Nada and Bindu. But that cannot
be. Nada is white, and Bindu is red ; and the pale red glory
whereby the Manipii^a shames the lustre of the lightning flash is
neither red nor white.

The Sharadatilaka says; This Bindu is Shiva and Shakti,^
and divides itself into three different parts ; its divisions are called
Bindu, NMa, and Bija.” If this be interpreted to mean, as it
ought to be, that Bindu is Para-Shaktimaya, and Bija, Nada, and
Bindu, are respectively Fire, Moon and Sun, then Nada being the
Moon is white, and Bindu being the Sun is red. Purnananda also
speaks ^ of Nada as being white like Baladeva, etc.

The Brihat Shrikrama also says : There was the imperish-
able Bindu, lustrous (red) like the young Sun.^^ ,

1 Pa^ala.

^ Para- Shaktimaya=Shi va- Shakti-maya.

^ V, 35, fi^Aai^-chakra-nirupa^a.

THE FIVEFOLD FOOTSTOOL ^ 173

Ifow, as one is white and the other red, they can never be
the pale red gem. The meaning given by us is therefore correct-
The solution is that Nada is below, and Bindu above, and
Mampi^Aa in between the two — thus should one meditate. This has
been clearly shown in the G-urudhyana in Kangkala-malini Tantra :

Meditate on the excellent Antaratma ^ in the (region of the) Lotus
of a thousand petals, and above it (Antaratma) meditate on the
resplendent throne ® between NMa and Bindu, and on this throne
(meditate) upon the eternal Guru, white like a mountain of silver.’’

The f ale red glory of the gems in this altar shames thebrilli^
mce of lightning ’’ (Pa^u-ta^it-kacZarima-sparddharaana-mampa^ala-
prabham).— This qualifies Manipiifca-manc?alam. To be paiu ” is to
be able to fully do one’s work. Now, lightning wants to display
itself. Here the idea is that the pale red lustre of the gems in the
Pi^ha shames the uninterrupted brilliance of the reddish-yellow
(Pirhgala) lightning flash. It is of a pale red colour inasmuch as
the Mampi^ha is covered all over with gems.

Its substance is Chit ” (Ohinmayang vapuh),— The Chinmaya
or Jnanamaya body. The body of Nada, Bindu and Mam-
pi^ha, is Chinmaya or Jntaa-maya.^ Others interpret it to mean,
I meditate on the Chinmaya body of the twelfth vowel, ^ the Bija
of Sarasvati, which is the Gurumantra.” But that is wrong. The
Guru is white, and his Bija is also white ; to attribute to it a pale
red lustre would be incongruous.

1 This Antaratma is Hangsa. Unless the words in the text, “ in
the lotus of a thousand petals,” be read Samipye saptami, the view
here expressed differs from that adopted by Kalicharawa, that Hangsa
is in the twelve -pet ailed lotus.

^ Simhasana— lit., lion seat, the seat of the honoured one, the
King’s seat.

3 That is, their substance is pure Chit not in association with Maya.

4 The Bija of Sarasvati or Yagbhava Bija is Aing. Ai'is the
twelfth vowel.

THS SIX OiNTBlS AHB THE SERPENT POWER

Verse 4

I INTENTLY meditate on the three lines above it (Manipi/Jia)^
beginning with the line of Fire, and on the brilliance of
which is heightened by the lustre of those lines.
I also meditate on the primordial Hangsa/ which is the
all-powerful Great Light in which the Universe is absorbed.^

Commentary

On Hangsa-pi^Aa, which is within the triangle on Ma7^ip^^7la,
between NMa and Bindu, is the place of the Guru. He now
wishes to describe Hangsa and the triangle in order that a clear
conception of these two may be gained.

The meaning of this verse is, shortly, this : I meditate on the
primordial Hangsa, ^ I meditate on the three lines, beginning with
the line of Fire, above the place of Mampif/ia and also on the glory
of the Mampiit/ia itself illumined as it is by the light of the three
lines of Fire and others. The verb I meditate ” occurs once in
this verse, and governs three nouns in the objective case.

I intently meditate (Vyamwhami). — That is, I think with
mind undisturbed, excluding all subjects likely to interfere with
my thoughts.

Above it ’’ (Urddhvam asya) — ^that is, above Mampii/ia.

The three lines beginning with the line of Fire ” (Hutabhuk-
shikha-trayam). — This compound word is made up according to the
rule known as Shaka-parthiva, by which the word Adi which
comes in between two words is dropped. Adi means and others

t I That is, the Paramahaugsa which is both Praknti and Puru^Aa.

2 Lit., “ Light which devours the Universe.”

3 the union of Hang and Sa?^ whereby the Hangsa is formed.

THE MVlfOLD fOOTSTOOE (paDUKAPANCHAKA) 175

The Line of Fire, i which is called the Line Varna, emanates from
Vahni Bindu in the South, and goes to the North-East Corner ;
and the Line of Moon emanates from Chandra Bindu in the
North-East Corner, and goes towards the North-West Corner:
this is the line Sjeshtha. The Line of Sun emanates from
Suryya Bindu in the North-W est Corner, and reaches Vahni
Bindu : this is the Line Eaudri. The triangle which is formed
by the three lines uniting the three Bindus is Kamakala
CKamakalarupam) .

The Brihat Shrikrama says : She whose form is letters is
■coiled up in the Bindu and comes out thereof as a sprouting seed
from the South. Prom there ^ She goes to the Ishana corner
<N.B.)- goes is the Shakti Varna. This is Chitkala

Para and the line of Fire. The Shakti which has thus gone to the
Ishana corner then goes in a straight line (that is, to the N.W.).
This line is the line of Jjeshtha, This, 0 Parameshvari, is Tripura,
the Sovereign Mistress. Again turning left ^ She returns to the
place of sprouting. She is Eaudri, who by Her union with
Ichchha and Nada makes the Shnmga^a.^’ ^

The Maheshvari-samhita says : Suryya, Chandra and Vahni,
are the three Bindus, and Brahma, Yishnxi and Shambhu, are the
three lines.’*

The Prema-yoga-tarathgmi, in describing the Sahasrara,
quotes an authority which is here cited, clearly showing that
the place of the Guru is within this triangle, Within it is
the excellent lightning-like triangle. Within the triangle are

1 Here Fire is the origin of life, and is therefore associated with
Brahma. Moon is associated with VisAwu. And the Sun spoken of
here stands for the twelve suns (Aditya) which rise to burn the world
at dissolution (Pralay a).

^ Yasmat is according to the reading given in the original. The
same passage is quoted elsewhere reading yamyat (from the south) in
place of yasmat.

3 Heading vakrihhuta punar vame for vyaktibhuya punar vame.

4 According to another reading, “ By the union of Ichchha, and
Jnana Eaudri makes the Shnmgafa.” The passage above quoted shows
that the Ktoa-kala is a subtle form of Kuwdalini, more subtle than the
A Ka Tha triangle. 0/, Anandalahari, v. 21, where the Suk^Ama dhyana
of Kuwdalini is given.

■

^

176

THE -SIX CENTRES' AND THE SERPENT POWER

two imperishable Bmdus in the form of Visarga, With
the void, is Shiva, known by the name of Parama/^ ^

Shangkaracharyya also has shown this clearly in his Inanda-
lahari. The Author of the Lalita-rahasya also speaks of the Guru
as seated on Visarga. Visarga is the two Bindus Chandra and
Suryya at the upper angles of the (down-turned) triangle.

the primordial Eangsa'' (Adihangsayor yugam),—
Literally interpreted it would mean the union of ^ the primordial
Hang and Sa?i. By Adi (first) is implied the Parama-hangsa,,
which is also known as Antaratma, and not the Jivtona, which
resembles the flame of a lamp. The Hangsa here is the combi-
nation of Prakriti and PurusJia.

In xlgama-kalpadruma-panchashakha it is said : “ Hangkara
is Bindu, and Visarga is Sa/i. Bindu is Purus/ia, and Visarga is
PrakHti. Hangsa is the union of Pung (Male) and Prakriti
(Female). The world is pervaded by this Hangsa.’’

Some interpret Asya urddhvam ^^ to mean above Mampi^/ia,”’
and say that the verse means : I meditate on the union of the
two who constitute the primordial Hangsa above MBniplths,/*
This is wrong. The Kangkalamalini speaks of the ManipUha as
above Hangsa and between Nada and Bindu. So how can these
be below Hangsa ? This is impossible. This also shows the
impossibility of the reading adopted by some — namely, Euta-hhuk-
shikhd-sakham ^ in place of Euta-hhuk-shikhd-^trayam, If this reading
were accepted, then the words Erddhvam asya (above it) have no
meaning. The interpretation I meditate on the union of,” as
given above, may, however, be understood in the following sense.
We have seen that the KangkalamMini speaks of the Hangsa as
below the Mawipii/ia, which is between Nada and Bindu. The

1 z.e., Par ama Shiva.

2 Hang and Sa7t. The union of the two makes Hangsa^.
This is the beginning and end of creation. The outgoing breath
(Nishvasa) Hang of the Supreme is the duration of the life of Brahma
the Creator {Of. Tavayur mama nishvasa/^ — Prapanchasara Tantra,
Ch. I) and Sa^ is the indrawing breath by which creation returns to
Praknti.

3 Huta-bhuk-shikha-sakha — the friend of the flame of Fire. By this
is meant Vayu (air). As there is no Vayu in this region, therefore
Vayu cannot be above the triangle or above Manipi^/ia. :

THE PITEFOLH FOOTSTOOL (PiDUKiSPANOeAKA) 177

interpretation mentioned is in great conflict with the view of
KangkMamMini. But if Huta-bhuk-shikha-trayam be read as
qualifying Hangsa, then the difiiculty may be removed. Then the
meaning would be : Below Ma^npi^/^a is Hangsa, and above it is
the triangular Kamakala which is formed by the Hangsa.’^ i

Which is the all-powerful Great Light in which the Universe
is alsorhed^^ (Vishva-ghasmara-mahochchidotkaiam). — Bhabsh’’
and Ghas mean the same thing. The root “ Ghas ” means to
devour/’ and the roots “Chid/’ “ Hlad/’ and. “Dip/’ all mean
“ to shine.” The Great Light (Maliochchit) which is the Devourer
(Ghasmara) of the Universes: By tha,t is meant that It is all-
powerful (Utka^a). Utka^a, which literally means very high, here
means very powerful.

1 Tasya parMatasya. Apparently the. sense is that the three
Hindus, or Hangsa, are below, but that the triangle which they collec-
tively form, or the Kamakala, .is above, and in this sense the Hangsa is
both above and below MampJ/Aa, ^ .

THE SIX OBNTBES AND THE SEEPBXT POWER

Veese 6

The mind there contemplates the two Lotuses which are
the Feet of the Guru, and of which the ruby-coloured
nectar is the honey. These two Feet are cool like the
nectar of the Moon, and are the place of all auspiciousness.

COMMENTAEY

Guru should be meditated upon, he now speaks of the (badhaka s)
union therewith by meditation (Dhyana) on them, in this and the
following verse.

There (Tatra) — i.e., in the triangle on the Mampi^foa.
The meaning of this verse, in short, is : The mind there,
within the triangle on the Ma7iipi^/ia, contempiates upon the
Lotus Feet of the Guru.^’

Of which the Suby •‘Colour ed nectar is the honey ” (Kungku-
masavaparimarandayofi). — This qualifies ‘‘the lotuses Kung-
kuma means reft, the colour of lac. The excellent nectar
which is of the colour of lac is the honey of the Lotus Feet of
the Guru. Some read “ Jhari ” for “ Pari ” ; the meaning
would then be: “from which flows like honey the ruby*
coloured nectar.’^

Cool like the nectar of the Moon^^ (Indu-makaranda-
shitalarn) — i>e., they are cool as the nectar-like beams of the
Moon. As the beams of the Moon counteract heat, so does
devotion to the Feet of the Guru overcome sorrow and suffering.

“ PZac8 of all auspiciousness (Maihgalaspadam), — ^It is
the place where one gets all one desires. The sense is that
bv devout concentration, on the feet of the Guru all success is

i’HB FIVEFOLD FOOTSTOOL (pADUKAPANOHAKA)

Verse 6

I ADORE in my head the two Lotus Feet of the Guru.
The jewelled footstool on which they rest removes all sin.
They are red like young leaves. Their nails resemble
the moon shining in all her glory. Theirs is the beautiful
lustre of lotuses growing in a lake of nectar.

COMMENTAKY

He says here : I adore the two Lotas Feet of the Guru,
resting on the footstool already described in my head.^' By
adoration here meditation is meant.

The jewelled footetool on which they rest removes all sin,^^
(Nishakta-mani-paduka-niyamitagha-kolahalara).— That is, all the
multitude of sins are removed by devotion to the jewelled
footstool which serves as the resting-place of His Ifeet. Or it
may be interpreted thus : The footstool which is studded with
gems— that is, the Ma^iipl^/ia-ma^zdala which is the footstool —
removes all the multitude of sins. By meditating on the Feet
of the Guru as resting on this stool all sins are destroyed.-^
Or it may be thus interpreted : The five footstools with
which are inseparably connected the gems (by which are meant
the Chintamam-like feet of the Guru) destroy all the multitude
of sins.'' By meditating first on the fivefold footstool, and then
on the feet of the Guru as resting thereon, sin is removed. As
the removal of sins is effected by meditation on the fivefold
footstools, it is the cause which effects such removal.

They are like yowng lames- (Sphurat-kisg;layarumm).
—That is, the feet of the Guru possess the red colour of newly
opened leaves. The leaves of the Mango and Kenduka^ tree
^ Diospyros glutinosa, ,

i i'l

TH£ six OBMTfeBS ANU THK Bi5RFENT FOWBE

when newly opened are of a red colour, and comparison is made
with them.

Their nails resemlle the moon shining in all her glory ”
(Nakha-samullasachchandrakam) — Le,, the toe-nails are like so
many beautifully shining moons.

Th&irs is the beautiful lustre of lokises growing in a lake of
nectar ” (Paramrita-sarovarodita-saroja-sadrochi^/iam). — That is,
they have the clear lustre of lotuses growing in a lake of nectar.
He means to say that the excellent nectar drops constantly from
the Lotus Feet of the Guru, Purtiananda has said the same thing
in V. 43 of the /S/ia^-chakra-nirupa?iain. The excellent nectar is
the lake on which the Feet show like lotuses. It has been said that
the place of the Guru is between the pericarps of the two Lotuses
afore-mentioned. Now, a question may be raised as to whether it
is in the pericarp of the twelve-petalled lotus below, or in that of
the Sahasrara above. To solve this the following passages are

Bnhat Shrikrama : Then meditate upon the Lotus which
h its head downward is a.bove all, and which drops nectar on

Shakti of the Guru in the other Lotus,”

Yamala : “ The Lotus of a thousand petals is like a canopy ; ^

3 above all, and drops red nectar,”

Gurugita ; In your own Guru meditate on the Supreme Guru
having two arms in the Lotus whose petals have the letters Hang
I Sa/j. and as surrounded by all the causes ^ of the universe,
though He manifests in all in varying degrees, He is without
i beyond the Universe* On His will there are no limitations. ^
om Him emanates the Light of Liberation. He is the visible
.bodiment of the letters of the word^ Guru.”

The Shyama*saparyya quotes the following : The Lotus
-hasrara downward turned, in the head, is white. Its filaments
e of the colour of the rising sun ; all the letters of the Alphabet

1 Which is an emblem of supremacy.

2 ^^e., the Avantarakarawashariras, See Stochakranirupana, w. 39
seq,

^ Svachchhandam atmechchhaya=By His own will He is free,.

^ Of. Mantrarna devata prokta devata gurnrupiwi.

The word Guru signifies many beneficent qualities (See Kultaava,

FIVETOLD FOOTSTOOL (PABUitAPANOHAKA) 181

are on its petals. In the pericarp of the Sahasrara is Chandra
Ma^zdala, and below the pericarp is the lustrous lotus of twelve
petals which contains the triangle A-Ka-Tha, marked out by the
letters Ha, La and K67ia. Meditate there on your Guru who is
Shiva, seated on the Hangsa-pi^Aa which is composed of Mantras/’

The above and similar passages indicate that the place of the
Guru is in the pericarp of the Lotus of twelve petals.

The Kangkala-Malini says : Meditate on the excellent
Antaratma in the Lotus ^ of a thousand petals, and on the shining
throne which is between Nada and Hindu, and on (the throne
meditate) constantly upon your own Guru, who is like a Mountain
of Silver,” etc.

The Yamala says'^ : “ (Meditate on your Guru) in the Lotus of
a thousand petals* His cool beauty is like that of the full moon, and
His Lotus hands are lifted up to grant boons and to dispel fear.”

The Purashcharam-rasollasa (Oh. VIII) has the following dia-
logue : "Shri Mahadeva said : ^ There in the pericarp of the wonderful
everlasting Lotus of a thousand petals meditate always on your own
Guru.’ Shri-Parvati said ; ^ The head of the Great Lotus of a
thousand petals, 0 Lord, is always downward turned; then say 0
Deva, how can the Guru constantly dwell there ? ’ Shri Mahadeva
said : ‘Well hast thou asked, 0 Beloved, Now listen whilst I
speak to Thee. The great Lotus Sahasrara has a thousand petals,
and is the abode of Sadashiva and is full of eternal bliss. It is full
of all kinds of delightful fragrance, and is the place of spontaneous
bliss.^ The head of this Lotus is always downward, but the
pericarp is always turned upward,^ and united with Kunc?alini
is always in the form of a triangle.”

The Bala-vilasa Tantra has the following : “ Shri Dak^Aiwa-
murti said : ‘ As you awake in the morning meditate on your
Guru in the White Lotus of a thousand petals, the head of
which great Lotus is downward turned, and which is decorated

1 Or in the region of the lotus of a thousand petals.

^ The Commentator does not say from which of the different
Yamalas he has quoted this and the passage in the first group.

3 Sahajananda— that is, the bliss springs up itself. This bliss is
Svabhava.

4 That is, apparently, if we regard that portion of the pericarp
which is attached to the lotus as its head. The triaugle is A-KLa-Tha.

■

THK SIX ommm and the serpent power

with all the letters of the Alphabet. Within it is the triangle
known by the name of A-Ka-Tha, which is decked by the
letters Ha, La and K^ha. He of the smiling countenance is on
the Hangsa-pT^/ta,^ which is in the region of the Chandra Mandala
within it (the Sahasrara).^ Shri Devi said ; ^ 0 Lord, how does
the Guru stay there when its head is turned downwards ? ^ Shri
Dak^/imamurtL said; ^ The Chandra Ma?idala in the pericarp of
the Lotus of a thousand petals is turned upward ; the Hangsa is
there, and there is the Gurams place/

These and similar passages speak of the place of the Guru as
in the pericarp of the Lotus of a thousand petals.

As there are two distinct methods, one should follow the
instruction of the Guru and adopt one of the two in his Sadhana
{Annshthknix), For it has been laid down in the Kularwava Tantra,
(Ch. XI) : Beloved, Vedas and Tantras handed down to us by
tradition, as also Mantras and usages, become fruitful if communi-
cated to us by the Guru, and not otherwise.^^

1 Kamakala

THE FIVEFOLD FOOTSTOOL (pSdUHJFAKOHAKA) 183

Verse 7

This hymn of praise of the Fivefold Footstool was uttered
by Him of Five Faces. By (the recitation and hearing of)
it is attained that good which is gained by (the recitation
and hearing of) all the hymns in praise of Shiva. Such
fruit is only attainable by great labour in the Wandering
(Sangsara).

Commentary

He now speaks of the good gained by reciting and listening
to this Stotra.

Hymn of praise of the Fivefold FootstooV^ (PMuka-panchaka-
stotram). — Paduka means a footstool (Padarak^feawMhara). The
five of these are : (.1) The (twelve-petalled) Lotus; (2) the triangle
A-Ka-Tha in its pericarp ; (3) the region of the Nada, Hindu, and
Ma^iipi^/ia in it; (4) the Hangsa below, and (5) the triangle on,
the Mampi^Aa. Or they may be counted thus : (1) The Lotus {i.e.,
twelve-petalled) ; (2) the triangle (A-Ka-Tha) ; (3) Niida-Bindu ;
(4) the MampH/ia Ma?zdala ; (5) the Hangsa— which is above it
and taken collectively form the triangular Kimakali. i

I These two accounts appear to agree as to the position cf the
following in the order stated — vi^., twelve-petalled Lotus with A-Ka-Tha
triangle in which are Mampi^Aa, with Bindu above and Kada below.
There remains then to be considered the position of Hangsa and the
Kamakala which they form. Both are one and the same, the first being
the three Bindus, and the second the triangle they make (Kamakala),
from which emanates (and in this sense forms part of it) the lower
A-Ka-Tha triangle (for tliis is Yarwamaya). In the second classification
the three Bindus and the triangle (Kamakala) which they form are
treated as one, and placed above the Mawipi^?iia. In the first classifica-
tion, apparently with a view to gain accordance with the Kangkala-
malini Tantra cited under v. 4, the Hangsa and the triangle which
they form are taken separately, the first being placed below and the
pther above MawipH/ia,

IIX GINTBIS AH0 fHE SIEPENT POWEE

hymB of praise. This hymn, including the verse
the benefit to be gained by listening to it, is one of

hy Kim of Five Faces (Pancha-vaktrad vinirgatam).
Paces of Shiva as given in the Liriigarchana Tantra
3 West 1 (i.e., back) is Sadyojata ; on the North (i.e.,
.deva; on the South (right) is Aghora; and on the
is Tat-puru^^a. Ishana should be known as being in
They should thus be meditated upon in a dev^out
rgata means uttered (K^. come out) — that is, uttered
Faces#

is attained that good (Si^adilmnaya-phala-
his literally means ; by it is obtained the fruit of
en spoken by the Six Mouths/’ The Six Faces are
m above and a sixth concealed one which is below,
3a. This is alluded to in jS/iadvaktranyasa in the
i thus : Ong Hang Hring Aung Hring Tamasilya
also in the meditation (Dhyana) there given, thus i
face, Nilakani/ia, is of the colour caused by the
1 Kalaku^a.” ^

aaya is what has been spoken by these Paces — that
'mns of praise to Shiva. By the fruit of this is meant
gained by reciting or listening to all these Mantras,
ig the appropriate Sadhana. This is what is gained
hymn.

attainable hy great labour in this Wandering ” (Pra-
idurlabham).^ — By Prapancha is meant this Sangsara
or World), comprising the Universe from all effects
ma, and which is shown by Maya, It is difficult of
(Durlabha), as it is the result of manifold merit
the practice of laborious endeavour (Tapas) in previ-

the Commentary (Tippanl) of the Name of Amal
written by Shri Kalichara72.a on the Padukapanchaki

irection one faces is the East.

poison churned out of the ocean and drunk by Shiv^j
\ the secret emissary of Death.

Lted by J. E, Aria at the Vasanta Press, Aclyar, Madras,

TANTRIK TEXTS

ARTHUR AVALON

WITH

5i7ArCHAKRANIRUPAiVA

PADUKAPANCHAKA

Second Edition Revised with variant readings

Edited by

TARANATHA VIDYARATNA

GANESH & CO., MADRAS

3TST 'R^T^fil’l'pil'tj: 'Joik?5[^j|t g^-

‘Id-^sh ^nWR^IFTR

I STSfpj^^ p^*tt i+i’J^ i

id'd'^ f+id<4: 1 'Sf^; q-(JP| H^d pjo-^lriiisrart^.

II * II 1 qfTT 555 f^¥fT?I^ ^sgjf^

’P%, I'IW I

1 ?F?IT3^0T %qidid»^lqyyiqiggT^?7‘|: 1 ^^qsBTf^-

w 1 1 q?:qw^i

:^^<siRrHdL ^ f^i5^ fT?imftoq smfirc qrq^ i

r^wm

mfi ii^rr *^?s[^pi!-

[ftnPTT \

[^ ^^5^ u m

1 wm^ m, “ f^fTJPT?^ m”^ «f^; I

*3^5NR-^f^gFr-

%R!T«r5tFif^; 1 ^«r cF^f^l|?Tg2wrfei%ra^
11 * 11

Wi clT?5?r^*TFI%T: ^

g ;n^ 5rFR[f^

1

t^ts^ ^ 11 ^ 11

gRiTT ^ ’TT^ I

^ ^T ^ II

# 3 ter m ^ 1

JTfT^ ^tM%WTT II ff^ II
^ 5fM JIRWl^ I

^ ^ tesT % ^ ^ gf^ I
^v5#^ 1^ ^ =^ ^R^f^pJI^; I
^lo|q^ #15^ JTRRVSlllI- ^ |1

3R ^ =5f |R5r =g^‘gT4;, ^ #npl gwg^liif^;

^s^q^IT'Pl #n^ ^ JTTOWI^ |r4: I
#IFI^: f^: ^ 1 3^;qffFR^%T#W

%fct^ I

ff^ ■R^rar i

'^i*iRi'3i«4'd<^i( n II

51 ^ 1

^ qWKT 11 II

^ ITT'^

wm\ l^’^ofl^^P T 5r{^swmm l^*- i

Rid^jiPw4 ti% 5pi W^

flR^ 1 ^RR^oi y^«Ji|(^di^^Htr^-37

Rtd ^ PIT: 2?^ I ?Rt«r

^goTipft, cf^ 1

I ^

3 ^TW m \
sra; 33^ ^?FT W II

f% I d4di4!5rt ^ I cis^i’wii; —

m ^5^33^ II

fig?Tfn: ?IprFTT 1|3H%: II ^ H

33prf^^ d<f^+<'JI33’^T^T ®t 1% I ^3T^T d^'d'^'^H-^-

q^j^dwrf^ ■d'?=ifR^3^^ ''

“ ^V-T igJ i^Tf ^ ^ ^m-. f?riTiTdTg?IR^=^ ™

f5Tftlf?>T33^^ fdW df^^T |

Wl

^5^ Tt?%ST g^t^rar i

sft^ STR TifefT I

5r^-R'i41^i<!Wii5^ j^T ^ si^tiK’i^ ti fRi U

Jn5=5^KFn; ^

[^TT^

^55^TT%^T;i;^^¥T^5rrT?^-
_ ... . [^^1

^«r 'tl<^^cn'<ri*-W['i^^'^ '=f)»^*i5*flK«T TMT 'fSFJiTc^JT

^^1^ SPTH^ Tr^;=^ ^J%f^ I ^ %^—

II

^ Pi^W^T^IflK^JT TO
#rf^: I 1 2T: Ig3[0^; ?r ^

in’4 |M'*4j^Rsf^; sR^^R) 4':=1»I SR^^Rl^'l^’tl ^ ^

1 ’TKri^j^?R!^ 'TT^^klfOT^R-

ww^ ^ I

% N^pnnwrr^ j?Rr^
r?^ 1 ^iRr^ti qt^rq^rr

idi d <q » iT d3TO?^

\

#iildl*dlWTf^ % 1
d^^5 H

i te^Pd

I |f^ WT^f^-

^ 1 3^ f[fl^ Rpiundl^

^ T,5hHdshi^ui

#3ncn ^THT ^ cRq^ tef^ f^'- i W
qrl^ 15«JTRW^ sRjRP^,

1i(#I ^ I ^ 5

«tW?IHt 1 I

mp[M ^ df [ ^ Tf ^ f% ip^OT

q^, ^ ?r533n^qHTi

(S,dl<l«^^|qi 1 ■d'h^tiife'dl'i, ♦i^ldKI'CtJI 1 i

f q:d^*4: ,1 H^-idf%?ft 3fRT^

T^fes?^ snkm s>si^ ^ fFf q^TT: i

[^^w I

mim STTW^HT^ l^T^r?^q‘5T^

5ri?«r^H rr3:?r^3r;fTmfiT

[^f^ ii \ w

ivnTO^q^«cr I mw‘ R:?jcrm^

W^ ' *i«NR^RT^5?lf^>«?T ^ 1

#ff^ m w^ 3^^^«R«^^f ^-

11«IT^; #«IWT IffOlHT ^1% ^fUFlfT ^
yji<^Hl4: 11 ^ 11 * 11 .

' w# q^n: 1 sf^PFffe siwjin^fii^w'sra:

^ I ifilfHFT q^ir: 1 ?i%r

1^ ^rjtt:, qsT lOTRT ^ ^

?R ifct ^ ^ 1 ^ 5^ aro I 31^ q gnm:

' ', ' „ „'. '" ‘ it,..,,^:!.'.^ '. ..'' — - % % ; Ci- ^-.—^^gxC::. . ■■.■ C C T »

:(T55IWT13t ?fg; I

c\ ^ r\ ^ ♦ ■

Rqf^^ilT cfTf^^T^TW

wn: W H «

?nfr "R^

q^Rt 1 =^3RT^ ?rfN^H-

1 55*01 tM4»R

1 ^1:3^01^ I ^5?RTRrrI: ^ 3?r ^ ^T ffcT

I ^ c[{^anq^5r

J=?f#r: 1 ^

^i CTfTRT I

qpsq^ I ^fRRKq^ |Ri i istoiftt

5^15^54 35?Ti| 3TqT;iP4T% ^^R^.sfq^srRi: i

mi l ■

ifQTT^T^^ *

?:^?^T5FW^^^ITT^5VIT5m^: |) ^ i|

w^5^2Tml^§ sTORRRTs^^i^ i

■^4'"'=t^ui 1

'T%i^TS#: ^=4: 1| |f% H

f^^Rf% I

fl^n^ »R5q^ I

^?rf^5T=^ II

ff% w S«#Ft g l ^<!^ W Sf M g ^T Pi

ff% ^Tif^: 1 c!^ ^ ^ SRTW<j!if4| 3}:;% ;F%
55^; I ’^rT^tsnrf^ cf|^ ^I?I8(T —

<IWr =^3^5(15^ I

' • II ff^ II ,

I 2% 3^|p^5r#iczr-.

te?i 1

I I Rf^tsrTF’ijtr^ 1 #Rii^xf4,|U|i ?i?nfe%cic^
I f^q grfJT i^q ^^sqj: 1

(\) I f^qoT qrqid qTf^ ^qj sq^fltT

^ WTpi; 11 fi% 11

^ ^n#Tp sirf^fd'fis?^ ^ndt

l fPl WRl^ 1 ^ —

3{FtRT^ Tfg^lSCT^rW 1 I

^ 1%^: ? 1 ^ ^-
mM j^ ^ ^ I

cl5I f^fPRTt ^^’^TWT 1 PF^ ^

T.%t: I gp?T

^km ^ I'

rn: %%

^«iWR5>J5 11

A W<^l^+H^i^/t^^^SlTHFPI^?tf^ I ll^ll

^TTfft ^ 1 m ? WJ ^ W^-

(^) #5^ I ^ ^rf^FFqfiiw m m ^ i
“srf^iw 5Tfn#¥p7t;” |c!7n^: i

sm^T ^ irsit; rt cI«tt 1 rs%t
^ dSNiNicfRT 3[^^5q^: I

mmm hto

^THFRopif^raw: n

l (^<=hH{l^^Tfi^Tf^R#^ Slfl 1 ^

N ^

a^Mf?wFTFP% — ms4^ctR 1

Sl^Tt m ^ I ^ ST^,

1

mA 'Tf4 ^ I

f^f^pwriTf!! =? 11 11

apTci: ^TFT^ 11 v3 11

^ ^ te ^ q#^ I ^ I

lf%?^ \ cTSlT qJFT^ qJW f^l^cq^sg^ij^ ^ ^TT?^
*T^^rTiTRFq+Rlcq^; | ^ ijrq —

1%#JT ^ra 1^4 ^4t5 I f^Wj; I

qiRT ^ ^ 1^1,

(^:) 1 31^ q#Rnqsq?4

3iq5RT^^#q^ 4)5*1 1 R5T RrRTfWNi^^ ?Rq

^stDTFT qs% Rq^iia% ^j=?q! JTra q^rq ^

^*j^toif^^|fcf 2^^w: I ^ IgjiT ^qTrq*Tifq^d)i% snf
1 3Rq^ 1 ci^scjRtpi-

i ^tfe^foTT ^ qqq^ i: " : . %

irroT snoi^sqTsig ^ I

• ^’^7 mm

1^ ^TfTlW; |

3T%?^: fiRKT«r

=WTf^: II f% II
ff^ fW'-'^rmwT s[^5T5n ^
f^i^ot^^: '-:?n^ ^goT^TH'^Kri'

1^

3?^ 3:SJ^?fJj5T^ ^^ ? tqr 4 ^ =TOfl^
5r55T^Tq^: ^T’Tqof^jpl: | ^^ ' W ^ ni.d^f^u^lM, —

Wgfl5# cF?v:% Tf^FFW: I

T^lf^ -j^^ ^qij5W^ II II

jf!?53tWTv:W ^r%#f^^riI3qTi3; ii

^ I ^ m\ ^ g?rf^ cf^^^TFftf^ \

^Rtet 1 'ql^in^^swtg^: | ir^i^FiT^^f^iK^i 33[qi iRq (

flF? ^ ^ 1 ^c^«7TJT*Tf^ ^ 3!FT

^r# ^w^^q'w?^sn:=^;Ti^^im¥rg[^H: i

^r^ETf’sf ^JT^r ^sWt m\

HT ^i^T5F|3riTi> Af m^rm-

II tm

^5ftwn ^ 2T«n

^ siqfg^ app--

’^T^Wf%FrsTf^^0PT^ W(

WT l^?ratf^ f^tef^T^; I

1^^: I JT^iHq<3 WT55TR[55T?ri^W^ Rl ^T^qf JT#r^

f^55TO^ f^sdg; ^

^W^nrq'SfjJWl^ =h)q[^«bMsl«-^fq5TT^T^
^ I Rqui'i i=w^

^pqrl^f^wR^ I

1 w: qiT^Frr^-
ra; I Mq: i

(n) ^sFcftf^ 1 gi ^ w mmm ^ I
^sqs^TrJraro I ^ ?r q;3[ w^: q;<J3^T^g[^?siT^
^aifeqq;#^ qRfi^ I^Tf 2^tq^qn5q^?=iqi7WiT ?rRm^:
^ qiirT^ qite'tta: ^ %c[5fq

I HTTSfiTOi^q ^ w ?qrasn qr^q^ ^^Fcft ci?q
STT^RlPlj^ 1 qqr ^ =q Wm ^

^Tl cm^ I Rt?m^tHTql^5^: xR: l|

"s{T#RT 1

aoT^^TRl^Rffg 11 1% 1

gg^f^T: M<K^1 ^ 11

^ ^ ^^TT »ft?['. ^II’^SH Rl'^l''^'- I

?1^‘- 11

3Fn# iT^^sf^: I

'ti'J<i^n4«iMlg^.*^*T: I

II ff^ 11

fq^rq^ ft'^srqt^^?n ii^^^n

f ^cfpg ^ ^fMD ft q; 1

^5i^fNt 'fl^^RitR^q; 1

^ ^ =^55^=^jnJ3^ li ii
TTgri^if^ !«?%% i

I3R JT 3 ^\^^

^'dsrl R I ^2n*TTl^iR^

dtcRj# ^^con Rt’aJf^ ^ dta I

r^cJgRJn^R I ^ g ^TOfejT^; i

=5R>%5[^ l4 5fllg[W:^ fo^'^JIFFTTf ^f l^li%^—

wteR^sf^RTRiT ’7^sfn^f;wuiK 1
Rgi^rt ^TFlWRfSIT I!

3f^f#nir ^oft f^if^rfldK t

#rr ii n \o~^i n
^Sfl5i%flclf'^fl!?3^t ^W^i^mrF™ i%pj.

’T^s^fTfirrn: cFR^R 1 3^^; Jf^;

(U) 1^1 £R^ arr?^ tf^

'Kqi^R sTJfqT q^iiF I f5^ m. ?njc^;^ I ^

m ^ '7=WT si^^r^s^TisT^^fT =^i^ I ^iT?5(f^'n

^ fosfisfflf 1^ *iK^i^; 1

ctsn^ —

^ f-^FTTf^^RTR. 1

11 ^ 11

^ —

cR^: ftl^FTl 3 |

^ ^ ?f t^‘. ^ 11

F f^’^; ?f SIFT: ?T qjf^lf^* ^ 1

f% fogf M F5#TT^; 11 fl^ 11

^^i: l^qr q^qt qF5T *ii<^Mlf5icq^; 1

' Plciq T F^ TRq^ I Pt<?MW'^^ Ml-Hil PRqRqPT^Fq^ fcq^: 1

•f ^^ TF== ^ f?l^ m rlFTT^ ^RPlf^wk: ^rf%;

Era^Rstn qn ffri yflif^qi ^ 3 tr?3;m wt;i

q^TT: ^ ^-TT 1 SFTqfq^^^l^q q^TRIcT qFTT!

aurq^^Fq anf^qzifq®^ q^qr: qi^iqi qpEfqr ^'h'^

^^qrf^ qFF^w— “q^not % 3 Ft: ^f|;5#tiq5%^”

mqi(u |e| ^^^ ^ CT 1 %q ^qr^jqfl ^q^ 3tqcft?T#; 1 ^FTfiq^^

qp^ ^ qT3T5=^l

?ftr3[: H W% Hfm H5#-

R?in%^ I

3TRNt rT^ ^ fTfTJT?^-

f^TTRf^Rm

WT^: q^T5?TSR5=%: ^

^5fte: II II

^r^Ffk: ik^:

^sRjrn ■Pr^JT?3^?’='T^ ^ricf: I mj -

I ^ f^:

’fl^^RT m ^iir^ m i ii u ll

f'^^MI^RRWTf I ^kfk, “13^-

RRrKTCq^T ’ijTO ^ ” ff^ w(\^

Tf^ w I TO^^ii^Plfd I

“■fen^JTFiRn; 3(%

5^5f#r sRf^ 1 ^

RraT%Hl#?2rcfipT4: I li 11 ^ 11

(U) 1 '^cR[, gj5T5?K^«T sqic^

?Ir^CFTT^— sn=^Tift^ RfRT =^

I ^ STT^J^ PK^F^T 3 T^^ iT^?F 2[ f^: ?!l%?cfT-

3FTO1T q?=Ji 1 ? ^TKTKnsqq^T?!

^mfe^cqfoiT SISRT# JR^r ?T^4T 1 R 3f^:

1 [^ g#lf^ 'TR5;]

5^: H

% fqDlf¥I=^55|5%^55^^FFIT Sn^Tf^

Ri^ t

f|sf|^(^r^*T^^ fsi^y^MsI^T ?Tf)^; "^3^' 'i.'JS^^*J4^8i'(i?<

f5^; 1

isJsn I ft^'s.i^nKRi'bloi

[nw3: I 1

1 :?0iTOt<ir

II ^ II ^ II

I I f^sw’i^sn^

"IW ^®-n d^s^Tb^fe

TOIFfT^ir T^rf^ ^ 3!W^:

« T 4 f ^ 1% 1 J-F^^T 55^^; d<i.«^«ll%^^ WnT#f%

il’i) I ^w?4_^fQ5fn^^

piTOsw^d, 531^5^^ 3ro];^%^l ^ I

Fmi ^

«?wK I 3^’ gf^lnicni I

tfe=n?P ^ ^ d=4^: 1 3F=c^ gP

1 ^sqqfls^qiq]^ |

WfRfmiTIT^ W^RTf^r^:fi3C » II

arfl^f+r^'JM'^^Rtd: ^ rj;^T^=o^^ ^tii^: sf^; |
MwRf #F55if^l|f^ I -Rp^ ^ ^RiTFTr: ?lt^: cJte;
H«fiTl%^T: I #RW«r ^ lir^: I cRT^n^ M^-

sRfk^ i “

'RRff’RRr ^|f^^Efoi^<|qj^ I w ■

f^55^ f^F^qR^T: ^ Rf W#n^; ll ? 9 ||

f^iqj R w *<|5rw<?iRiq Rj^ i^ riRiFci^ ff% i ^ q?R?r

^ w^mm^ jtorrw: i

^ i¥^ ? te[5r^RT I 3R:

(\\) |Rl 1 rR3T qWT ^ sqR# sira

I 9EP4t 51?^:^?F¥tT^:TFnR. I I Sl^ Rirfe-
q?JT ^«IT 1 ^ 1^

®[i# I +jqi<i(t|<fv<i T[^

^ £R#: tS:, gp^ 5 t Wc!4<{Hlct ^

Ufoif ^ It^ ^Nk ^

nferarrasqR i ^ swtt ^i?: ||

3m vrtm m

%q7¥^5rT¥r?:trT‘^fq^j?Trf%^r II ^vs a

W^TTf —

'TT^Tf^ ^ f ^ ^^\^ =ggi5fJ3; I

5If=?^iI3tTq?RTf^OT qt^siw^fq: 11 f]% 11

5f?oTi3; fra fraoTTra^; i '<s{^^ ^TraJjfl

fra i \mK wM -Rsrf^fe-^ ^ra^R
f^'^rajft^T: iM ^ 11

I sfl^rars^f I frf%#^-

f^mif —

wrt s^^s^Tfrat €Ws\^

3^ fft^rat^^TfrafST^srarf^: i

^ w irPft^Tra®

ra^^^nrafra'?;^ 5 [tM ii

m >T^TTral TTf^o^TT:

^mi 11 ^vs 11

(^vs) 3ra%fn 1 .3^f qlr ?:Tl^Tft

3Tra^ 1 jft^w^Tif^grai^ra! q^: srraii'iTl^cfqit: cfqjT^qrar
q^rr: ^n ciqr i f^5qTi:q?:T^Kraqf q qFii:m

ra |i% trar il

■• qf^q^gqj^. ’ #rrait.

^ ?'qiqR%^qTsrT. * f^T qfqqg^rt.

fm%5riTiT^ t%?^w

^TT^q^Ffi:

I

>s 5 rT^i^T?n:^T’ 5 ’JTw?|?:H 4 rar^jm

^ 5 r wf :

^^F^Ji: II \% II

^TTWT m^:

fi^^j II ^ H^Efirwi; 11*1

5#!^=^^ ^tt 1 m ^^Tf^FT-

<=<’

1 ff^ siwf^ ff% I

IF^of I ^«IT 5 01 ^ 81 ^

^ ?r q ^ ^ 2 [R%r%T 3 % ^zt ’qFT ^ 1 ?fq^-

I =q?^S^r5; 3JF5p^qTf|<3Tfk«^«r ^«TT ^ q€fn|olt-
1^4: 1 qi. I qF5T^?f?^q4: 1

qw ^f^[«Fpqi5^ Fqwrf^t”

fq I q^qqJltfirf^T: ^q^: ^0TTq=5^ |

®[5r qilFoi^ q^#T t II ti

^ (K) q^l I qw q^^qi| q#[g% 2[wqiq^ nq^

SW ^ qqJT# q^ q;qi^ q^ f5i40T sqr^ 1

^^'0^ q^: i%fq:

^feiqn’wfq^fqq, q^q qf|qu^% q|: I qjg^qm’H

ffq 1 ^ q% pFF»j% I ^qf^:

q^RTf^qiq>KI*^qH (|ci'ii<il q^^qq^STifiiq^iSl ^qftqcPF% ^s|; II

IK l^^rT
in?rTS?rTf^?3fr%

^ Ri'i'wr

i?tf% I

^-^TTFT ^

^TP^: II

^TTfvT'T^to^rp;^^ i sTrf^ ^rf&p^iwf. i

^Wi 11 = ? 11

FfT^TW^f^: I 5TTf^ ^ qcikF ^

fft55TfT#F^ s^DT^ar^^^JT'T'P ftr 5^1%% I gr^f%pn
fll^t^R f^^: Pffjqol I i ^

Ifffjft ^oi! ■ Wr^'T^iTFpJTF^ft

1^: 1 T^T^fc!^ ^sif^'^^iRb; ;ft55^

=^#iT %% ^T^^=?^ g r r ff-

1 4^'MpiI^, 1

W>5? W ff^ I 1^ fte-

^^TT 3T^f cfT I q^qr: m 1 3^=jnfim J#f^T^

’SiTTr^I f?7??: 1 ?TfRqT^ ^ mki I ^FPSPTF^

I ? fTJT?T3^^Tfti: 1

{R\) c!5??Ti| I q^fq q%q qigj

3T?rf?RTf4i WIT^ I q?*pj5FJTf?ciq|=5Tq# ^

^ ^ qisR^Rq' I

frft u H

?a®^[HTPr-. ?i®%sjrr?5Fci^ \

era; #rf^; H

cmK»ll^eWW4^'Ptf^ efra?^ I W^
^i^ i R i RTb»fig 5 raM t 1 ef?mf%rat

^t5*t'3S5!Rs?Riw 'ti’^RRi 11 11

3T5rT# ^n%?rT

Hs^fef^T'JTTp^^r fl^fr ^?TRf

f ’TT5nf^qR5^TH5T^TT^ ^\k^
jTtTT ^OTT^T-

TO II ll

^ -‘^T^ 1 11 II

3T5r ^JTf^ffl^nfrf^if^Tnf ^s{m^ I# I ^rai

sT^cn^sn i i 3 ^;

2T: f3[4 qW I

^4: I w^^ 1

i^l’^^nrqffsqfj;^ ^THFROT’lf^^ 1

f^^TT ^5TM 11

qr IfTR^ CRT I qif&TRgS^q fi^f^qTf^^ qt q|®^
3^503^ ^ sqr^^ 1 qq t?T ’^if^RT ^R qR

^qi^3^(^% I ^^q; ? qi^Tqrftf^R^qqL ^ t^TH ^

^ #iTT qR 1 jq; ^'%^’l qrlRRi q^Ri
Rnnqf^ fq^ 1 |q iRqi^if^iqf^fq 1
'■ ■ (^8) R5[T^ ^ 1 3T%[ q^T ^ ^q qjT^ ^q3 Riq^ l

qpqfq^q q'tqq'q! | ^foi ?Rifq q^rr; m \ iqriqqrtejr, qsqi
^fit^TifdT, gqr sRiqi RRqqqjftor f|qqj(t i R§f^: qjqr^-
^I^^rqqTTqqrq; 1 qqr q^ffciT, qj^qr^rqn Rferqiqw:! i

»|ta

I - , ■ ■ . . rf -S. %JlKl®M

■■imum

Wrq?7T

1 ^0 fN ij^ I

^RT»ft<J8r?: f -^sft wmj ^^TT^tir

w R^ ii

JTRT5cq^l|% ^F^STR’T Wto(, 1

^ ’3TT%f%g^q

\ ^ ^ ':m ll^ sq^r?!; W.

i^q%qwTq% 1 qrqTjfi^:__fl?=q^pq: srqqTfft^: ?:^Tf^5T^nT^ a^rfe;

^5?R#qTqm qFT qriqT I

I irf^dT ^

^?d<^^r’^‘. ^fffl^FT^ M'tiRidldT: ^•

cisn^

,pug^ I ^ F'sod

^'%T

i

dRf^ dc+I^l'hRFH^ ^;f%Fm^ diJidu^^

1 ^Id'd 1=^*1 Wi

^ I w- ■^^rfd5t55Wd1

^ 1 ftWT; +T<^Tf^^

■ (5(vs) %{t5i ^ 1 . q;cicqi3P5jnwt 1

fSiqic^^^nMisfq f5p?d#f 1 fT^^‘

3RTTf^; I

sfWM ^1 \ WTF|5^R1^^ f1%

I W^k 1 ^ mf^\

3?h?=[T 3¥R: ^q; 'd^

^ tel I 1

If 1^ firq; %te sf^ ii ^ ii

'Rgt 5F^: 5i^ j ^DTTf^ra 5%wwrte ^teTfwf^ qi5^
mi: 3te^m^?P#n^TWRif^^te^ 5 i*ts5; 1 m
if^T wfq ^nrMPRPn ^

'TT4^ I ^ “ f^l^T

. . '.'^iP.,. ■ ^ . ■ '

3% ^ te teR”

IfcT ff^ teter^slq erf; i sRte^ 3 3fiT ci^ i

II II * II

1 ter^wte

|f^ 5Tf^ra%^Tf^35Pl I

^^fe prt 13|TFPi i i

1 fT3^ fi^TORTtef

’RfqwTH^W ^ I
SRCRI^^oRft^: ^WTT |% ^^3 I ^8r4ldr^^^sfclftf^ SIW-
^^FqrsFT: I?t4: i q§T ^ R*

R wflf^ to: I |^#lf^ ?3f^ ^1 W- 8cf°TI ^ te

3Rqi5ii^\ 5[%§ Rim! I f3Tte% qi:gRi^i^Ttew:TOF;^-
RTteRTcI 1 [irte “ |fct qis:] I

t^nw^ II ^ H * II

f3[T^ q5'js^% Pt^-e. I v-i Fh"^ t • I

w i

®l'*f^Plfcf ’T^r%rf^94; I 1^0^; 3{q7Rjj^.

iRH^lt: mW im SR5Tf^.q^; | ?

a[5qR5f^f^ 1 ir^?r ^mi q?} tes[5i^

?if^ I

^ qf 5f I

5% #r: I

5mqqo^55qfb^q; !1 II

“rig^rMFIT^ ^#n” # 5rT#^=q^ qiWTT

dTj^'lcl\d'Hq JR?r: 5[fq<feT^o^qTl^

q#!^ I f^‘ q^^q^TqjfSRqqrl^^ %^^. \

fi% =q ?rqTw^i%^: ” Hera

Pl^HeOf^ %fra^l%HFqq; I arWT q5tl??Rq ? 1| H ^ | q H H l\qf^
Siteraf: HH^^raHT HPT: flfps^HTH: ff^ ^^TFera^OT
t%HTf%teTTH feH^: I ^ t|H^^THT5<?4t HTH |f^ ^IT^raf^-
HTf^rap^ H«!Tq5[^ Heq^^^T I

sra HT^ SHHrail — /

:;:0

Tf^l^ 1 i 1

1^ ?f| I

mm ^ I

o^TbfTlf —

^ I

f wr: ^^'<T%f|^ TT^?^

T%rWTWrT?[T[Q5^ s^J^^ II

=^ |W ?Ifr%RR I

H

jri%^ i

II II

“ ? 1 % I

s^TtPHI ^—

^TT ^ffTdT 5JF%^ff|Tj^ II ^ II

?1% 3J%5 1%i= ^4]^ t^ (d I

^ Ernrr^ i^^t^-. i gwj; ii n

Pl^«-dsn't>f55|'tiiqt 5nf%4lH(ifl f^ 2 R?T: | cit

{\°) 1 m ^ I ?

^ 5IPft%m: I

fit^raraf 3[!Sf

SRn?t: II \% II

*fcwi 'joWs-si i^^5< I

lnw ^W^I^N'S+il'bi^l ^ II

^ ^ Wf^: II ^ II

ff ff^ I sTTcTRFJ^tt |f%

371^1% ^ni^i ^T®ipif T^prf ^ff ^ ^rpr ?it?^; i

3nW’J^i%iT # TT^ 3TTg; JHH; | q;^

#TfRP^ “ ’jj'i^^TFnrr ■^fl^ ” fi% i ^«r

^•. ^ ^ M mm 3Tw.^%it mf^, ^

fpft f^ ^IFcT^: 5fT'P^^U||e|<^fi5|[^^; |

^ i‘i^=5iTq^^ 1

m ff^: 2jNT#its:Tf^T%T I1

fc^lRii'JllMl^df^Tl ff^ I ■^rqjRspit I ^ %f^

fFP^^ET^R: ^1%^RI%Ffe%TW#T Rsf q^^id I 3Rt ^

fRT I 3RTqT

n I R 3r; qjl^^qtar
P ^ ct3R^ 1

1 Wqfw f^Rq^ ^qrmRRT

'i

"ry5iiii;aEaLEtAgCilSiSfe1(S!0^^

a n’ ^H m

l^rT¥?rt% l^*l»

g5[T

S|?T^ I

1^'' t^^FTPmRl^

^•. i ^ ^ 1 133 ^ ^ f^RT^-- 1

^ ^ ' TOT^n ^ ^

^ I TO#

gmTB%^ ^ Thc(u1^Pl^ct..^;g^Rq ^^ I ^feFtt
a^ aiAciufa ! ^ I ^ ^

irfMt ^'. =^3#fT qwtipn?5’^R^

^ li ^ il

^ ^ /N> . > I. ■■ TvT^ rk’ra

1 y^{^5 snfTJiw w^.^*TR% I

JKP^™ sqpi’^jllf^ JWt q^EJ cicj: 1 f

—

tlT^'lj ^PTF^ M ^Wi I

fl^ 11 s

q?i 1|*TW?^rW% i

sTT^nro ’^WT w

^TFtwn i ^

^J5Wr%T; I ^mi fe5q; 1 ^

f^f^^n?frrag$[fT[1^ mt i

5ftcrf%^

^5%^‘JnMf I

%fcwii fi% 1 ^rr
^TRWTT ^»TTWr 3%5 ’^it^

o?nwn ^

1^ 3e[T 3[5THT W'M'i N<?i'Hs(xh«(sq-^'4Tni^ 1

irfeo^ W^

M ’TR^g; frfM ^ 11 fT^ II

mmm f 1

11 11

m 1 i?oi^sft

5RRft?*I^: I #3T q^Frf^J'T^^ 1 ?F f ^g [ ? Rj^o iT-

o5RF?T^ —

iT O RIff H 1

^ II ff^ II

ifOT^^T^RTiSI^—

WfH Wf^ I

%S?TWRW I

Mf^T \

37Ti?ft piTo^f^: fiR: I

qk^nwR li , . . ^

g^'5!!

?is%; ?I5$^ H^55tf ?t5^5Jifii4-

^ I

"ira^ ^ u \t «

1^ ^rpf qt^^^rPWTOHWr 3[J5T7^ ^siJTf^WiT ^ ^

%5f I ^^FRCPTT%^

- sl^^tdMdl^'f^fd 1 »n^ si^RTt

I 1 r{f^ 51^^-

q^ ^ f^RF¥?: I 3^:

1 #^5^^ d43?af

(^«) sqHT^ 1 WTT^^T 5i^ \ sTwre^

sEtF#g i d dra%^: q^ ^ 1 drt^sqjnq^
mm^^rsR dl ddl^dld^f dWRcftfe dl«^qi3, 1 3T5dM?:

stCrrras^itRt: sm^ftr^reMsriftsraRi! i
^i|f =^scrl?ei|qft *raR-

^®’^?55|'^I'^R^^i=mH|Rf^ u

qi^s^ i%^T I ?l4 ^ I

3iC ^ ^ =^F^sf^ JT I ,

^ 5tl% 3n»mraqT

I ^r^R:

^^FIRT§;t^ R Wi: sit^M^qTaOi q»1^T*5: I

'RiTrj4f^^%lftKRPn SITWT% wm 1^4: 1 ^sfq ^

qR5R %f^ sRiRmq; i cfnwwqjRr

cRJTRqfjf^iJtTg^R; ?iraf^«lf^Si^WR clFR^R li^«ll

mi i

31^: 3ff^ =q% ^RRcl^ 3 Rp 4^ 2ri wm;

m^ Tq?q^TT^oi

R icFqq; i

i Mq^rfe sr^qTR^^f^R^ I ^rs ^ f% 5r^^^![R?5ra'to

^ 1 ^ ^g^orfqR 'Rqq^ l

^m R m ^ ^ l R RWi: 1 Rfsig

^ 3T^ 1 f^q#tqiflf?ft qi

g qsrrf 1 31^1 sirfqsgfeqRTO i

(W) I ^1 ^ auiq^=qFn jprq

^ ^qr^pjm# l 4€5 i:1

f f ^ 3^

^T \

q^5T^f ^T

srft^sfegf^’THTq \m\

cT^ 5TT^5€r(%f^ sWt'^ I ^ 3

^srr«rR?F^?TfRft l^TRR^l^Fra 5?ft^

;IK: 1

%f^ g[3[T^ JIT^S^T^ 1^^T

ffg 33n^Fff^ =^ ! I ^

JT^JRT^ 3^5'fT^W ^ I

?{j^5l^jpjff5[Tfcr^ i

2rf^ 3 ^RiRTh<HT^l-

ssp^^; fi% %^rfl 3T^s^i RiRi msts'Rw^^ i

wnm^- I ^ 5f3»s^ m-

^5=R$5^i[^Riiiw Mi^ I

“3 3 ^3:” ^ 3 H II

mi ■Ri^ fft^f^ ff ^ fRi I 31^:

I ^ ^^Km 1 m

^ :^rfrP^ ^ ^\h I

aniT^^fWF^'Tft ROT^SlEfiRfef?'. ^I’PTI'TR ^ 5[^iifira: 1

I ^ '3' 3«n I

^ 3TS*-] I ^ ^

(W) f? I 3^r5Ts?3?3??^ m. ^ ^

Tm^ 5^ ?i5%¥qTgT3; ^l=fft 33 3T3ii3j

I k ^3?T

^ 3TWr^ ^ mm 3?rf«RriTT^ ^

%J#r sroR^ifts ^ sp™k 1 %#iw^

sp^T^^^i^sT ^Fi, mf^

^ ^TFRTR^^ I 3?:^w 4 f^^n F^T^f; ^

si I ■

cf^ sn^s^irf^f^ i ^ 3 ^^ 5 ^ 1 ^-

^jvn’TR^P^^TRCI^ sR5^^ g^TRK^FcTFIi^

^ jnds^T^f^ qjf^

ff^ s^tTWrfj^ ^ I I WR

^•- W-

Rg^?K^ H 1<AT(% fi =^ 1^RTJTR?:fsF%RRRf^'- I

3 tl3:WR?RWRR Rf5^

SR^; R^ JTT^Sgif^ qratsf^^ 1

I 350^ RT^:

’lo^fTRT^R^fr 5R5RR%cRT^[fR%RDT M1R3 1
“Jf 3 ^IRTRR,” ^ ^ 3R^^: 11 H

sm ^1^ fR^RRf^ ^ I

%ft 3R; gt R^T f3%RT^:3t R^R^^Ron^-.^^RtRWft-

}. mj lli^R 5R5TORT 3??R I m ®?TRT

^ 5=^fg4?R ^ R^* R^- 1

^ rP?Tl^K ^ WfKl* I

1 ^ 5? RRT 1

(^^) ^ ^RT% 1 SRRRi’R^ ^ ^RT% %cT% ^ ^
R<R 3#R T3fRii:Rf ^IW’PRt ^ R|T ^l5%KiT^{T3,RlRt !R3 RRRgi^T

^TWT^ ^^[^^'FrFri^ 5^: ^

JfiW^g 5^1^ ?ff^ TOi^infsi:^^

gj;^R^^ q^qif5[T ^^\ mR 'mf^

^ JTR^ISR^T^ \ 3T5r 5^5F'^iT ^f[T

sfFWl^; 3^ 1

■ ■ ■ei :

3[gqTf^

'm^ ’Tf^'iJ^ II

31^1#^ 5r^ ?TOTl|^f: 1

ST^SSF^nsir ^ II

^ 3Fr3Tn^rF5TTf^l4^5T ^ I
^ WTOT^^ ^prg wFi i

^S?T II |i% 11

^3 3s[31 313^ TO; ^43Tf ff^: 1 33 ITOPT^
TOf^ ^33TOf^ 33:^^ 3T3^ 1

3T33T ’H #3fte:5T snsi IFT^; I PTlft 33:^14 33f^ 1

m TO3; 1^ 3Tf3 % 33:. I

^ %3^ 33T 34f3TO^ II ^ II

333(3 1 3FF3 P4T33T %3t^(^3^ 33^4 3^: 3^
33(3 f3^1P^T 53T 33(3 1 3333 ^ 3lpT^ik3 fT3^ 1 33^3-

rfl^SF^ q5;i;i ^313 3^3fe 1 [<^3^3^ “ 3313” 315;]

sr^ sTnftsgr ’PR'iF c q f t ffw tt *) fe ri n, i

f f ^sjR

ss^: inf^m{|^«fl-

wlofg fg II II

5iwr

Tf^; II ^ II

^ m I 35

m rfn^-

■f^: I m qwiw^straRRdif^if^ q^: jiw^T^TOt’TFqr

^^Roft J??T^RW^Fr’^

v:qfTlfl5^ 5i^NRT%|WF^fe^TH f^?5: I

gra®?: ^I3^Prr^: I

sTTfT^ q^^f^NRsrf^ ^ ^ I

q^f^: ff ^ m ^ 1 WW^

1^1^ 1 >1^; q#jq:

?wi4: I 3TS?^ I^^SJRRjflTOef^FT: ’?^; f^:

?iwnf^: I “ ^ f^nf^ ^ ^rfr

W?2Tf^^3?Tf^ ” %f^ I q^ri 1^ t^:

5q45m^ 1^ I m 'TJ^Tgq^-

M^RfFTW^T^^ I ^nRTfcfe-

m 5¥Tf^ Pioq^uig;^.

rrgRqqi^^ WT'T^ 1
q5IITOT5% W^ II

ipFRFiftqiJ^a%?T!:^?ra qi^ 1

sira;rtJT^?% sm# ^ m p-f%

^rr^ v?qfe i q?!^: I ipr: fq^q: f[R q^Fftiq i q 5qqf%
l??5qq: i sra: ^nelt ^qf qq^qRTf^qw^pqRi; l qjl^rf^-

iF5^ ^ qwiT?!^ 3Ta^4rrq!wq]q: 11 [irfi# “
^rroq;” ^ qRs:] I ’ -

^ m ^ "K: 'to: I

11 # 1!

Wf ^ W- fW I

5 f^; 11 11

34 3€3T3^F313JT^^T3T fl% 1 mj^%:

^flTkR?33T=5giT3^ 3^RT^q^qqtf^^^ f^«Tf^'-3{T 1

^ 3?Tf^ ®T5r f^si^ ?f;n^ 11 ^ 11

■#- ■■

3pr ?f3T 1 3^J^5Tf^ g ^

^ I iFRi3Tf wlfe^rf^ 1 mm,

I srfto; I m

1 Sf3#f^ 1 ^ 3^

'fl3'i^T3W45^3o^'7f^ 'Hill^JTfFn?#; ^ 1 ^wm

sTTot i

g?:m tmFs^: sri^m ^

. \< II

sniT^ 5lFRJnFfT'?5^ ^ ^ ff^ 1 31 WIt4;

5tFri^^[iTO stsfew^n: 3ir^iTH%

isl^: ^

?PT#*T 31^^ cl1%?^ TO sjT#m qt 3^4

I w I \i ^sjfsi^-

IT55|: 1 3T5I ^T^iwlcl^. I sf^

■■"■■''■■ ■ '<5 , .

11 11 * II

^ f¥^i ^ sFmrtTTOK: l to^#t^

f^M-

^fl^^JTFR f 05^4#^ m

TO^^4 W M< * l' M i m =q^-

^ ^rar^rt i^-

5qTf^£i™5^4 ^ TOffTORT m

i%^^R

^r^ft

i%f«r! ^<^fl35ra ?R?r

II \% II

ii * II

?f^4 1 3n^N^

^5fq^ I ^?fSlW =^f^^'t ^Tff ?ft

t f^Rf^W: li^'^f: I qui^f^ft-

MT q^lTPT^^: 1 ^

\3Tt^^lR5=S^ 1 ^l| W^

I =^Fs?ra^ T^irf^^; II

qgsfWWi. II * 11

^ rn- s^^ Tg; 1 ^T^: ^T ^ ^•

^ ^nsgT^TOI^ m^m-.m,

^ l ^q: I ^ 5iTq^ gciRq[. 1 1

[oi ^lf^4fe5?^q^rcai*I. 1 I

^ 1 ^

(\<K) ^4i?fWci 1 ^ ^«TTq gTqif%:m--ii^ i

FII^ qtift 51^ sr^I ^

M m ^

?fG[T |

^\i 1 3Rr ff^Rn^

wrii^Tf^; ^f^Rij 2Rrf^ cn^ ^fz r

^ I m

“ iNI^Rs^rt RTTWRf ^RR[ #t|f5r

>?ng[f|^ ^IKTHS’. h^'.

craWrrs'WRra ^5Tfl5OTra:”

stcf ff^RT#T ^fT ^fRR7[% ?n^ ^T#t^

I T^R^ !5R?T[f^ M ^55RR[R;Rft^4: I

1% 1 ?Rrf^ “ ff^ ^t^-

^ ?fk«r ” f55RR^ ^«rR^

q^^TRil^m^T3d%?r 5i#i^ f1% i

^ mmk —

^TKlRf^fT UpJ RT I

W 3^T m Ri?n 11 ^ II
3Rt “ ^iRTT q;^ ^’jq^> raw'll'^ ” ^

w: 1 mt ^RoqjR RTq^sqRSTfJT^^q qFi

g^ i i^ s qicq q K q Ri : I ^ 1 ^3[T^ 3iw?fq i

qqiT# iRffTR I ^ q?tf^: I 5^^TOT%qTi5^ #f y^wi^iq^

^ ^ r\ >v

^5;^?r5=^^ u

?n^™TO w^

WTO ^

=*n5Nt^:

1 1%f^

T^5[gcIxgTi% 1 if^sqrf^Jn f^lf^I
^5«nf^ I ^T^ff I

m i sR^F^m —

^ 1-

iNrg qR^ II ff^ II

3M Rl^g.^’T^^TTOTT f^s#: 5f^ | ^

m 1^: I ^ “ 3T|fK ^oi ^

i^f^: 1 W^RT’5. —

3n#j: wm i

sp^WTR^lRf^: €fl[^; II II

ilirfrlRra; I

Slff^: m\ ¥f^Bfe1%: ^M¥m II ^ II

Jif^TRi^rt^ 1 2% 1^ |f^: I ^1301 fsanf^—

srt: I

goRTte I

h if^%5nJT ^'. II f1% II

■■

1 1 ^ ’T^ ’Tf^:T5rR^k^

“ ifl^i^ m-. i«FTf^

g^__

%5Fn^ I

pfjitoT c(^S|lKT^^

^sff^«n I gcf«rwT=^^ fcRto'JR»r^54'^T^if^?i^tJn-

%?r I “ ^ WPK’' ff^

aJ i jo CTa a R W ?Toaft ^ m I

iTT5fT^ 5F1%>: —

5rT5g?4R^ft^jn#gr5if3[^;[q; 1

3 JTF^FFnf^^* 11

ft% i ^

Jfl^ m ■f^J=p^5I%; mMw; 1
3501 5rR3T3T3;—

3f^^W3: 3Wi: 'T^ir^?n3 1
31T3>E^^ 3Td 3T^Tfl?33353: 11
tR?#fi33: 3T^Tf^T^ 33; 1

3^ Ij

■f^^3kM# sft# 5fRb3k^%P33; 1
3Wr; ^WF9313; 11 ^ II

'R5r^fi33; 3^; Rh^T Rl353Rfi3% f^; I ^ 5555T^
ft;^3kT533J; t^3T3T^: I

1 3T5[^^: mm-, wm^-

^r!^^t33j'<?NMt^3 \A ^353%^ 317313; I

33i[ =3 35557 3733 ^[3 1 35^ I ^TT^tfe-'^p:^
\<3(^4313T35RT ll ?3 3lf^; TCS^H^ 371^^ 1

3 ^1 % 1 % 1
—

2T5r ?i^ 5 ???!# i

^iwncTT ^{5|^T% ^rrf^ ii ii

ii ^ ii

3TT %^T: 1

?W^4cRgWT It ^ 11

f5[iTff[ I ■%'nFq^: i

^ M^TpnqjT^ feq?ri%^{qqFr^si^T-

$ld>lkw^ KW'l^ oqTf^^rRff^;

^ ^ TOROT^TTf^ 1

ff^ I ^Ti| sfTjq^lt^qT’il 1 'ie^q3[f|^iii%jft?n^;

W% I w^ I 3Tfq

c|

;!lf%q - 1 ^?nWr: ^ 2 ?Rr^^ i

fsra^

^RTfe f^mw4 il

q^ Mq^ ’i^R%TTf^ 1 55-q;H^4§f: Sf^RSterjf^ 1
^ 3-q;MfDi ^ ss-wst^ ^-qsK-

qfi^FH^ 1 H qorlirt \

1 ^qfeii^nqi^ 5 qqf^ i 3^-.

^-q5Fq%rFiq ^ t ^ ^r-q^Ff^ 55-WTFfqw[^

3!ig^q fcqrqi^ f%jq#TT #n3; 1 3 ^ 5 ^

qatf^F H sqqFTIl qJfF5Tn1M^—

FfFR qfiq^ ^qiWs^ 1

3T-^Fl1^.q5T^:

II #

flts^ rR^TFti: =^ fi^d'I^PK^'T

^f%?T ^if^ganti

5j^tf|DIT I 55 -^RtIRRi

^ u Jr| 1 N&l^

qr^^TT;

'TT^ 3 «!i^|i^fo^»T +H'l'hl^l^‘^'!^'ji|i'(*^r- ®{+K'W-
I 55^ q^rag['Wt

m sri ^ gi^g fi Rf ’tsR^'i ^ tRf
fRi IR? f^f^ii^ q^rRiR^ d^R^RTf^

g^R lfct RTRTRR^ R I ^ RR^t^Rl'K:^ fdf^«?RT :

q?rRj1% Rt^ - dPiX^ ^ gl^t Rs^q^ ^ 3

a?RRr%^ WT #IR»R^

^f 4 ^ ^dRi RiR'^^ i^R^d

<TT5: I RCTR^ tl ^ ° II

=^W^R«tRFnf ^RT^ # I
m T^ 3Rf%% Rl*^<il-?RRRl¥; 1 =^

(\j 0 ^ ^sRftci: ^rr^^IRwr:

I ? ^!J>IRc 1 ?T d*^T 1

m I g^«r

f^'H'-^H3^ fT'e<^5CH*^+l^R5<'J|RRiia I sm =^^TT0^-

^ 3?! SRRRJTT^ ?IOT-

51 ^^ —

w%T^ m ^fm^ I

5^ M 11

m\^‘ ^ •^;^t f

cT3[?^;APlf^f^ 1 ^

?rf^

?T •^#4

SRT^x^ ^ 21^,^:^ '#Fpnft^

u u

HiraMf 1 31 w^: ^^*1 ^

wn ^ ^#THT ^ ^ ^

zr^ 1 m\ =sn%l^’Wft -^OTF^lsi^-

*<!i[Pi^!u(it,'»i^ I

qi^ g f ^ T feq^ ^ '^m \

1 ^

Ri^w iFgq^^TH^ 'Ji'i^''4si^Mq;T235n^ gjfr^^iOTT I

^ ^

(SH) g S Hfitf d 1 ii^Ttcq ^ »tM

qtqjftq qiFiTim qi«i#ra i 3i{^:^iMH'».HHil'5.ii^id-

3Rqnwa%: nfs*# d?FT^ 83?j% i

qqiT^ 1 ^ ?«rFT qrri^q!^?! %«:
ste: qt^ ^ qqjraqqT; ^ifqi^: i ®n?qT

q ^4qT= 3^f ^ d: ^ m m' 1

*nmR[. i

W: 'iraf ’jftfttrT! II •i\ II

1 q^jr%5RFm?2iH^: wit ^

ff^ I ^ mw!^ siwRifi i

^ ^T 5fN[: I 3^ ’#xf5frwwiw^ —
sftWIT wm\ ^ ^ ^Mt: I

“ cTWftl ” ^ I ^T^rf^r

fti w,

?F^: 1 w. I ®fW W^ Rsiit’#*?!#!

tel ^ WI»l'^<^tdP^r(

1 sffi^ritfFri^r: i^'

3«W^TOR Pia^v(Ridr.|R(d 1

3?tePT^i m\ W^siT l^TFfKTWIR I

(8^) I ?r

3n?Ji^{TO qw#r fT^ ^ I gmTOT^

qiT ^ ^iT^ w^mm

W i«?TTOIR I ^«r

^ siter %irT5iFnf^5R5^

ftWFT?!: ^IcWN ^ ^TW

qRiTFn I STflTlstWrf^^ 'WFTfH-

arw wi 3% m si^^i^i^fl^-ai^m-

3^^; ?r4^wf^: I

1^ Wi I

q^f^: q^^n^q^TTl^i^ ^

w^ \ ^%7T3^w: ^

^ m 'wf^; ^ ^ 3^f^ I

^ \

^ sni 355^sjR^ 11 11

m q^JTf^q; srfl^w: q;«qrrfHt^:

d^fij'l'HWi %(% siRFT^ 55; 1
W^ M =q?s[W 55 ^ =q 11

1 ^ 1 ^ m ^q#n 1 ^ q«!T i
ff^ fjFqkr^^FR# ^ II
^ =q;s(F> 31 ^r?^fel^WsqTq»^l<{l^l(Trq
i^s<w?Fr f^f^'qrq i ^

^ #; ^ im ^ 3 ^; ^

vs 6

W!i 5^1% I

5 m^m- II

ff^ ^ q ^T rf ^ t q^ ^T cFFT^^r ?if^-

3^^8#^tW^ I 1^: I

SF^TSTT 1

m?^ ^ I m ^"I^^ftt ^Fft^: ^wr^ 1

5F^ ^«? 3^; ^I^5#rf^-

1 2W 53^ m ^ ^^^

5^q^ira^^—

^n CRW I

^!%JT f^FFTR^ ^ ^ I

f^tf^owiT^ mm^ II
k I

5fTd 'M; ^ ff^ m'. II

f^; ^ 1^: q^; |

4-^pg-^ W\^ II ff^ II

srPTT fRf^^ %^qT i

g;fNa

IsqrCTTl ^m^ —

=^05^1.^ g I

II f^nf^ II

m 1 3i?i^T W. ff% ^ 7^1%;

^ 1% ?iTHT JfT^ ^ w^\ I 3TO

5F8I^T^ 3iiTqWF^^c!il% i?RTTO’f^5T3Tl>q;i

^ ^ #s^: #s^«n^ qv ^ rr ^ ^

^FwqrW^^ ir-:2Tq^ W.m ^ -tej; i ^ ^

?n9T qf^ f^: I

^TFwqj^q^- —

q<q^^Kc^ IrR^sm^WT: II ff^ II

M+Rq| q1^ f^q^: 1 qq«r ^pjqrqj^ ^sqiqqj^r^qqiRi^ R Ri &

^ I m m qqqf%qwTtq^1^ qjf ii ii

(««) %qp4H ^ I qgq qi:q^q^H^t!qT srt; fliq^qiT#
1 1 q^qj; m^m qrr sifST w '^^jqgqq qqP=q I

|H

WMlMPHli

?rRm maW'iiw^i
sr v|jTn^ 551^ ^ i

wrat ?tfe: ?qTftr«i»r>H?RrR?r ^f^-.

^ fi ^'>n gmsi ii «H«

twr^ I m^m -f^oit:

^ %S?i I %1%f^ % 1^

^ ^ I ^^

^ tm %<W: %^^5^mFT 5T ^52Tf^in%0I

I 3F% ^^T?#qra^ 5#^:

^ 11 y» 11

m 1 ^PRTft^rf^ 1^ ^ 1 ^ 13 % f^r^rf^ ^

1 ^ ^ 5^ ^TR; 1 m: ^f^5[fq ^

^ 1 3oq<nqwrFtTTOi^: 1

^ mqt f I ^ ^=q^?3T3WF??:to

^®qr: q^ ^qf^ 1 qwiqqiii+iiqTiiqT i^iwq qq f^pqf^: i
srqqq “qsifif^^wRTqqiqr qpq” ^ g^qq^qtqi^n^^q^ II

^ (^^) ^ F^iFTftfq 1 If qq qqc^qrq w^j f^q qqq
l^rq^q %q w. qiqrcrrfq^qrqd wm.: qqft q ^qi^ qrf^qfq fq^q^
q^ q qqf% j qqqqq^OT ff^q: toft 5Tfe; ^nq; I ^Tf ^tiq
qsi fi ^T 23^ qqf^ i ’qq^roqiqf^ qqfq i qf^r qpift qRfeqfejft

^ 'TRcRm m. II ^ II.

te-- #T II ^ II

joWWl^T^ I ^ ^ ^ HWT^

q^tr^tin^ W^ ^'IdlRl 1 ctT^^lPt^ll’^ 5p?|^^^uqqi-

qrg^qT?!, 5Eff^?f3^'m^^ ^sf^

51 ^: >r ^ >T^ I ^sq llK5M%^4|nq5^

5ftg?gTp; ?F1^ 1rlg^ 5^ I ■

3<KfqiM ^ II II

l«r ^ fi^sTRf I

^ qrf^R^TW: II ff^ II

IsET^gRlT^^Tl^: 3^ 5n% ?! =^Ifk ^•

^«R M<^'tl4|S^^ ti-HlRi41°ilMR^ I

{\ a

fH#; ^ 11 11

m wn ^Fi 1 ^rteT4

^ mi ^ ^ =^

^nWFWit eiToft ^^iim'. 11«M1

^ ^ 3?in^Tf^5^WMi^W<Pl^?rFff^gR ^-

JTTf^ffl^ I ^ ^ ^lPl5l$l=5^?lT-

®i^ I wn

^Tt^ I ?n nft^ i ^ft^-

m wn^ I ^ -=f>?5f=(f|^T I 'm

5RTWJ% —

#sraT mi TTFTT ^t|JTt ^f«nM ii

(8^) 3T5nf^ ^ 1 gilf =q?^ ^ qfe^T SFIFim't
^ I ^t?:?ft 1. Jira:f;T^d^?%q ^ ci?tt i

15T : ^cTRra*iFR%^ q;qi^

dg^: I f^fcqtfen i iP?k?gq^j=TO ^-

qqiTs^TO qj ^tgqsrRT q^istqr n

' [’3^1^ “ i^Fq^ ” ^ qT3:] I

^qyif ?%qT I <

TO TORI RI^ a^R I »\ai
%RraRl RflS'R R?ft I

vRRift t%?i!RrHt^

5tf^; 3n^ 'RW^TT UHiiiUWWidRil^T ^

#iqqRT telt tniSWKTft^ to TOI^^: I

11 VS, 11

■(%o^io|qj3T^c[^:qTr^ i ?it to tort tott

mi ^ TORT ^ 1 TOftf% *TT^ I ^ ^fTOFfel

aWTl^FTf: ^ I “ mi’'^ fts^klWRl^ ^ ”
ff^ * 45 /^=^^=TOT g I %5{15f^^^ %55TTOT R|^^TT%TO^TOPT

?n^ 'jfl mm-

?3^ 1 ^ siFRT^EI^i^ 1 ^wm\-

?F^T^Wr^cIFfto ^

crT?5RRT ^TRZRft^: I R5%t I

WIT ^ W —

?R?n«ra^ 'it Wift I

..' ' . ’.; ■>' ‘''”'

Uiiii^^^

iSIlfpppfppiilPl

'S$§;

*1*^ ’Ct ”'t ' '*' ► , “

^ ^ 11 fft 11

gfJfT: 1

1 f 4 1 ^ 3 ;

I

j^^mi —

MoTPRPWrar sfH^T I

^ 5^ ^ 14 ^[feri I
^ fo^ 'RWRT II |f4 11

M14^s52t^kt^ ^^^1 ^siT t| I

“ d^lg on fi i#^ %^5^-^sTT^s52RRn^: i 1%f^-

1 ?r^Tf^ 4 JT ^ 5 ^;” |t 4 1

u.

5 i?*n »i«n?rro% % 5 'i^»t»i 55 ^«ra

(^ gi Ri =^fitwt ?t^ 55 i^iTO ^^t«ra^<mt
%^ij^nf^t’?H <i3ifrf% rrgqPd

fiwft § 1 ^^

SRI'?H II S'*, II

q^^^l^FWTi: tTPn I

1 ^ 1 ^ 5 ?Ti^ if^ I ?j^»rr^R 3 ^-

5R^Fi; ^tf^RT fT^iF^rf^I^ ^IR: 1 %Ni:

t^Tl^ 5 iwf^ ^?RFRiMt

W^: I ^ ariRiI^R^

siRRT^fT^K^ 55CRft?T^: | ?i|#r^ JTFTPTqW^I^

(8^) 3TR1 I mu: I

(^'fliq»^ I S?F7 H-H Isq^ofR.

scrq^F ^ ^ cRl ^ 1

ISf^ m q^ I <^q^ %Ni,q^^TPRRMi q^ i
3 F% %oiq qq ®qf^ i igrcqftici

qqfni I qnf^sf^q^qte^ q^^?i[qR i?fF?qRTcT i qqrq

m ^ ^sRiRgqqrqq^
qRirqq: q^qrati^^ I

1|SIT gT % ? g# I

cRFPT

f%^: ^TT^ ^

^9

m # %i^i

Mi5#s2ra; 1

f^: n

II II * "

^l^^rc[55^3^ 1 '<flc^(^i't>Rf rRT’.^T^-

I ^ 1 ^ ^-

\ ^ 1

ijon55^i5RRi¥n%«m ^s%# 1

qti^: I ^ iJi'hl ri*i A' pM

I 31^ ^•- I f^F^R ^ I ^-

f^rf^: i^F^i^: %mmi' i ^r*(^-

mK' sifter: I

5J^^ J sr^nf^T

»R 311 ff^ I

II

^ 5 ^ qt ^ I

m«Tfeqsw ^ ^ fei%5^ 11
wp^ I =q-s[T5ki^^f?T i

^t5F^ TO ^t3^r[f^?TsrqFnft ii

d^Fd: ^d;i^dl' II

t^: 3^ f^: M^'fd^d; 1

3-i(t>«TdI^t W. ^ II II

t^FR^T^rf^ ^iqjf^RPifqft y-^jf^RiRR

^ ii^ Ifi^ ^ I

^tT5?T: 1 5jf\^ ^ ^ \ l-^tl'* cl«IT I

;F^ ^ c!T fgnf qM\i^;H>^

^irf^: EifSi W^’. m g?|rrftR^ 1

5p=^5^5FnTOT 5 *^ I

gspft ^tKI 'tjj^'hll^g^SJ+lT 1
S^ i=ll^q1*t?l tFTOTTF^ ^ I
gopTReR IIRW I

g|T^ w ftaT w I
■ ^u:gt^ ? q i g«n ^ %35K awfci; II

gpceagilte^ H [’5^FH^ “ l^^snw: ” ^ w.] I

RPl^Tb ” ffll ^i^K^t^'bH: 1 1^
[Tf^^rf^^^HT^i; ^ ffif

j^srRm#T ^ mt I

I *T 3 i sRn^

JrsTf^ =^;'Tin5psS^ ‘ wljcf ’

5f3^ I 2TrrT?Pf^^: ^T^nff^f^^HFTq |

3^53 ?i% i #n«t-

5iw^ I 3^ ^ '

3Tcn#rP5:—

|4 JT 3 11 11

m JTfT^^ERJT?^ 1 f^riM^n^lwri^-

^ ^ir^: 1

1 IP w f^^^rrNtwj: i cfto^

II II

I ^

fiRfT fl5|f5R

I

ggn^qrar: sn^ ^

?»ft %ll<?<)H-gC^ ’t '=ldflf% Bf^n ^■fRtT-

;5^J0t^ II H? II

appTT^: ^ ^

1^: ^ ^ si^nwn: ^m\

;r d <^il ( ^g [ fi lf^ 1 ^ y'txjitrKRl^ RT

mm

^ ’pr 11

#(^ m ^ to; rrW^ I

^m ^i^-. ii ^ ii

gsn —

f^m ^ safWiDT TTs^ I
=q'%5 sift 1^1^ II f1% 11

q^ 2 T;:#m: mm. il

' 0 « ■

gsFTT^; snd T^^^T^ TIWfT ^i'l'ORl ; ^P^t?ni^[^'. ’?RR;
^u^RMI^^^qT : I s^l^ W’i:

i %f^ ^33 15^ PiM TOTPfT#T

#T ^ II ff^ II

I ^ ff^ I f^Rk-

^ wm^

?twwnR^ m^Ri^s^ II fRr ii

^RlkfkR^ I %fkk 3^ T^JITR^IT
3k?n^?kT: I i I ^EWlteRT ^ I

^f3[T I

ITT^ s(t^i I

?RW^ 1

Tl^ q^?IC^UT TIWfT 5jltf^ ^‘. 11
^ T^goH, 1
??i5^^?w4 ^•. 11
^ I

-f^ M 1

«i i ^feg 'a^5t g :t ia«j^qt g^f

(<K^) 1 ^rmF? 1 i3R:

m ^ ^ 1%

sqi^^ 1 ‘‘ wm: ^ m m^sqm

SRT qTOTt snqi^J# ^ sftqicqiTT cMT
«tFpm I I Bm i qt

3T«iqT 'ft P4FI^Tftft[ ^l^qiq^ftf&T ti^K'hKuircli':^ 1 m
|gq^ q3[3[T% if^ isqi^q^ 1 *FTq^ ?ftqqqriT|T?Rq^ %?q^ %rt-
5?^ 1 q?:T5^T I 3ft: qi^q^i^q^i^'t qftft^: qqqftu?
w^: I sqpi'qTwIt q^t: I “ ^nqwsft ” ^ qis:] i

^o[rit 1^ R^rr^ 5^%pr^'Ti «rr4R[i% 1

^ R<!iR ti4o«< iM'h'^ri'^fT'i 1 ■^-

1^: 1

fit^ i g r R h \

'J^StWRT 'i^=^^?I5s[^ II II
TOT^ I ^ ^oT q^R^: i qri^sffiri^ “Vtq
cfgqf^” Icq^^qrq^raqr I ^ ^ ^r^^qi^;, ^

^scRrf^ I ^ li% wWwJTT^ I rra^ww-

fT^ fR I
w^ —

=q-r^q?[q'aTiw: I

^»ici^ifq(^)fr4 ^ q^PRTs ii ii

mi ff!^ m ff^ l^pT^

s[ |qqiR q;r q ?R fR j^M^qFfrq ^

«j5^'l'?[if^R I ?5?iq3WT5 —

ilt#in^ 3 I

lUFRi^ ^iftRq qiw^'iM ll

f “ i?fr^ 5rq ^ crRR^qff^wwis: i

5noi \

cR^^ ^01 ^rf^ r

Ri^Pi^T '=I<H^ II

ipqir ?:?T 1

^ Rf%(% II

m ^ 'Frtef ?n«RJ; i
^ ^ W ^ w

^f^sraif ^sqr^ 11

#f ?il^ qi’iiraFTJi^ =^1

^ *1^ 'iwl ^?Ff Jrfe II ’iraRRH. II

'* itsit?lf% ’' TTSFcRH. II

fct: tR ‘‘R|%^S[?l«6q!F4 3t^ ^5^”

“|F5T<lfM”?%TOF?R»^ll ,-?Rf=^^,

WR: il

^ I ^ jrM 1

»?ciRr^i fWi-
I 1^ :3q^; ^ 2|T^ I ?I5iWf^

rMt f^i^ wi ?rn#T

w^

«I^T: ^T W^Wn

I i33Tt%

^ 1%^ if^€ ipwcf# 1^M fo gM

JF«ra^ SfDl^JTTlK'^ ^siip^or ^if^ WT^ ff^ I Ki
I jft^ ?ps[^t4

Slfflt fkwmfero'Tsif^ qirf^

11

■ ^ #T

cTT 3^: 11

^ ^ I

^ S %T^ I

^«r >7^ II ff^ II

1^: 3^ iWi: Iff^^: I

#7T ^ 5% [^-^(Wpl ?WST qRFRT^ ^T^cIt"^

?l| I^^TcfPTf^ ^ ?R3 cTT %# «7T% ^ I

gnf^jpTT wt m i¥3^ i ^qsRn^

gnf^!?oifw«K ^ q^ ll n

^ II

'ITdraig.

fi«RW. u H

?T^«r JF?# =5[15^ ^l?r #g; i wriw-

=wif tm ^ 1^ ^ ^

wm\^ 5ifiRiqcq?^?i5<'j(Rrd< ^Fffq qtl^

I mf^ Fi4: i

FTT^ ^ 1 — .

m i^f^: I

^ ii

— ^nr^^n^Jn Pm ^sfiwrqFw^: i ^

“ qW^raff^rf^: ” ff% mm^\ i cf3[Frai^

II 11

^T hM^ g^ 55T^IP#f^ I

3g?n4; 1 qf(^i^ mm #qT

(M) 1 wrm ^ ^it

fjrsM spik!^ gg[^ Wi^RTct. q^ip

wmT^ p5fo% 11 ^ 11

m I M^tct ^ ?n^i

m.' 51^: I

W ♦i^miWFT 5l#i% I 3 i^Ts

^ f^q^PT # ^mRq^ 1 m §5=3?fti ^

^ ^ «?RM?:Fq3ci5»ii|ui f RPiT cif^qwRqr m s^no^-

?TW<WR%
?R[^>iirea >(1^^; 1

5EITIP?P1 Mf: ^

m'rRi^i 1

fRr loifff)^

sB*Tg^ sinft

^ % 3P?i^ !i f| ^

gpg: ^lanPiofttiiHsii

qRWr;

^ f ^ H |f^ 11

— H+liiTORT smsPfT^

^ 1 3Tgi#%

l^T^TRJFW^^” |l% I ^ %ft 1

pnf^ I ^TPTli^ w

(<K«) fi ^dRR i 1 ^ 5f?i fT^

qi%a sft^ lii^M I'ii l^'iM'l ^ ^ 1

^T^^f>jp3[. I cf^^

gpsfjj^ fTgs2J^ 1

W‘ 3 ^ 3 '^^ ^ 1
fFli5«?^«IT W^ ^ II ^ II

^ ^1 1 m

I ^TS^ ^ I ^-

^ I 21^1'ra^Jn ^ #iF2i#r

srrt^ ^ ^ ^ni5i I 11 11 * 11

?iTsii mm ?wra^ il * ii

5t ft «R?j 1 n^sft ^ ^qt fTT^cflm: i ^r*. q>ts^: !

yuil^i ^q ^K^T ng^ ?qT^^ q^ ?T: ^T 1 ^rcfTWifftfq ¥[qft 1
[3151 n^ ms: Q

(<\^) ^ 1 q: 5^ ftfti

^F53q^: ftqr dV^iq^q^ gTJftg^ej^q^- fqg gff?# 1 m
^ ^ 1.

^fcF qqiW I

Wf ^1#^: Ef^^ II

m #51^ ?!{^^FI%T

^ Wl^ 3^W^™WJT I 3f^:

ci^

cP^ dc=t»fJ5'l'bWlfHf^ 1

^ ^ 1^; I 31^ 5(1% ^ f^52iqT f^iq^TTO^

1 533 I

^iRTSPWTqTf ?if^i3«5qqiiqqi^ —

cp^f^iqjPTT aiSd^'ldlT 5^: I
?is§53 W^ i?slW55%3 3 1

^ 3Tf=%T3Fn 33; il # II

^S{ I

^ g[T^?n'W^ II f^^Til^ II
3I5T ^5f%Rr:^ ftr w^mi i §[i5[w!:

I ^ 3TFrR^WJW[. 1 ^«r ^ 'ijtetf

3R

/Xj:3 TI 1 1

^=rTW55m^^ II II

q^N^ q'^RFTqjqqi?!^ ^mJ^ IfS[q^q5^

1 Mqqt 1^i^ i

I mim

er^t1%I: 155^

#PT ?R[^OTf%gWr^ Wl^ ^ T g^ f Rl^

1¥r^ ^ ^FW:qH ^ WiTFci

^TOTf^[ft?|7lkn SRNi^; I
^^5FTfef^RFdT ^3^ 'FFFT I

’ffffw-

ffic

w(m' i

A l<;!><i't^M<{l'+ I^W 1'^ II ^ 11

^ ^i4«ns?n^ i m: ERffra?5

(^ m^[mi I ^ f^: JTf¥lOT5I® f^-

#tfTi1^ I

1^ tessffit^

qiwMH

5rife5raqR4l'ntw?:«i, i
5!nwi<^ 5JT»n(^4t: ii « «

^oik^ra^Wt I
f IfeSRfiT 2IF«n^lWniMT 11
JrRjTI ^rf^'^'H ^ 1^^551 ’RT I

^^RlfPRTPRT 11

m 1

3JTo^ srsl4^1|<f^TJHT I
^■^^1 'iK’WcSilT fls{l 11 ^ II

m sn^pwmr m\ ^

. W3[. 11 ^ 11

cb^HW^;^^ q^WFiP5—
flRt Rl^R^ ?r ^ 1

t^: 5^ ^Rr-- 11

^ 11 ^ 11

iTRe y\ H «

^rf^qgmst f^‘. i ^ i m

;Tf¥teW55#| 1

=^ns{ 1

—

^ vn5<Tlsra^ 1 ^ I

?T5#I^;5F55qf^: 11 ^ 11 _

^ §IF^ 1 ^ mmK-

*TFW Wl% * ,

i

■

mm

%i% T%Td gi5«i5[R^?g:§C?r^

R^mfd I

^ ^ 'T^SRft II

“ir(|JRr^:” ^ qr^ ^ iiROT qrq^l

“ f^fqwqnt ^

^sPTf^qw^ qqtfeq^: i

^ qJts^ra, ? ^ to=^: ^t^-

t%mq: i m =q??iwfi5w s-^iqPiffWsn

5:^amTPdRf^ m: I

qi55T^j^_ i ^wiH iRtsi^rf^

H ^ 11

t^ra^ I 3i^‘ ^ f^ T^ p-

51^ SJT% |?ra: I q3[Rf^^ t

?§; I m q^qjFiT m qMs-

;T m sfEF^^Tf^; d^w+iqRw^-

I

\\\

qmrt q^qr^Ht

qR^^q^ ^IwPiRt I

1 w^ f^^q^FTT M?3<Hi*n*i<?'Ji^^qpi

^ I 3iT^q5if^q^ ^ i

q^gggqiFs?^ ^ f«i*^<»H'h rI^ H-q-siMi-^qi

q^w.-ndM ^ ^ ^
Pi^g q q?! ^ I «ft^n«Rq =qw«n

f^RRR qrod 1

3T?n#^ ’infk% —

^;srRrRTOR f^Rqf^ fqs^^rf^

2?^: WRqfH felRl II H

q3 q^ ^ ^ ^

^ni^8Rif?fq55qd^qnq^ ^ >

^ipnipqp q^ II

m =^Nt5?q q^ ^ i

Ri^g | i4iR^^ or ^ ir w^> II

=ERf^^^q^ m ^m' II ^ II
^jfRRq ®nw d-qRqi^^’^, 3fq^isqi5gra=^r^ ■Ri^tri*. i

^ W =^FP{T 11 ^ 11 S. 11

cirar 'Wj; i ii m dc+fuiw*# ^T^rf^Wora; ii r ii
d«^^dkfd^^f^l ’ ^S= R qg g q: 11 ^ 11 1! « II

1%#!^ 11 ^ II ?T3^ I

3IW 11 ^ II n II ^TKfiF5 II ^ 11 *Tf&f-

qf^ I ^Fi^ I
31%’ ^ ^ cR3?q I

f?iw 11 fi% II

%qt 1

q^jMTiqwiyfiifd I q^i^Tp^ m qir i

“ ^ t ^ ^ ^ ^nwT w ” S9%r “ %W'

f^oft ?RmT 1

^ ## 1

>1^^; f55»IFfgTRT

+l(^'hl3^ —

^\ g^%[rs?^^Til^ ^ ^?wl^ I

^S«l^ l^g^T^JT ^ I

®rf^ gMW^^T ^^+I'ii44{^ II

^45 “ t('4^'=(*l^ ^ II * II

TO5(^ ^

“ 4 '^^q g^ f | :’TT^ ^ JTWTfFfn^ I

^W I

il^utT^f^ SIM mm RRTfkfT II
3[^piTFiw wte I
m^ ^nf^TOR snffrf^ Mts# ii
Ri^ 1

i3^T^5to mi ^ ^f^pwrf^T 11

1^ mrtrtw sr|TpRi 1

5[f^ JRi^^SR 5IT^ M%si# II

=^RTfidns^ ^^omTRMT ^gRTTRRM 1
W^ RT^ I I

ll*Drr — ^ RRTRRlTg |
mm RR?I^ —

PRR: I #r il’wiTRfcn; ^^ '5 [ U€ W[

^ t^RMT STSifg^ f^ ^RM 1

^ qr'wrr ^5; i

% 11

^ ^Tt^: ^I3?Mf JiHlR<S'«: !#rf%T: II
^ w I

?rr^ ll*on ii

qnw^^ggpi ?iraT 1%W«Tt I^^T i^f: 1
?RpT5n II

m - I wifRt 1 m is^sn^ i

JTfl^ 13^ II

5??Tf5t ^rRi^W'-^ 1^ 3 cl?^n 1

^ ^ 3 M I WK 11

^ ^rNt 3 I wi

1

JIT^Tf I 1%^;'??^

m^. ^ 1 ®f^T 15^2?! ^5^^

fTRra^SN —

ipwr ^^TW (^f-’i^^f: II

1^5rFri#TTf ^F»T«T l cR'-^

g^fT^SlROraNK^ 1 m ? <rl+<!i'H<(^^T
I t^tr;

M 1

IPPIT f^5W’i^: I

cFT'i^ -NM I

It.

fR TTRl^T^I

cf«lH jrfsicf’>5( I

qn^: q|^; wpn w- ll

mm m 1

m 11

usaaj^'W^Mi ^ g^HUctiTf^Tift 1

I ^ wm: ^ m-. w.

m ^ 1 t ^ 1

m §[1^11 fo^i^T stuf&i w\i I

mmu ^ 1

^ II

irFTra^ I

5#iTi?T 1

^ grf^ tr{o4 mmi^ Pi^m^ i

g%?n^^ ^ II

g5»oiFn JTT^ ^ ^ II * II
snWT^^ a#??Tl^T I

fooi^^g^sWR ^rfl^3*IWI^ 1

w( f^i^rf^i^ II

^ ^ ^ 5l1^^ W'TORJiW; 1

m ^ —

g?o2HT^W srT^ ,t^ ] I
;f:gjtjqf lfa[efDlf ij^sTWT^Sc?}^!^^^; II II

^si^feWLI ‘ .

^ 3r^ 1

gsTR 5d%irpi€f—

^{O^f 11 11

^ ^1: ^ 5[?sifft5[qfiiqT m

1^ i

11

^R[^?RTFnf^ 1

g^[5SRITiqo#I wm^ m #1^: f q ^ q 55 q%5T^ 1 ?

0 ^

^tqqWT f ^Tf^ ^^5^?rFrTfm#q^: 1 5n

I^Tf^ 11* 11

I 3151 ^ 1

3{5r STM I

w^ «iil^^—

j|jyMi 5JPT: ff^ i

SlfMt 3l^'=t><ij4M'=t>Rll 1 3ri%5I51T^ i .

—

^«IHt 1 ^ I

STO 11 * 11

^’^ 1 'I'^TWT

?n#% ^ 1

g?jJFn#W t"^'! I

I

m=^ wra^ —

^*^1 i#w i

^ gll^; m\^ ll ^ 11

^jfSiOT ^5Fn^ 'T^^ I

^^qT»j|l5# 'Tf^wrf^s^ 1^ 11
^^sfq—

31%?^ |RT^ 11 ff^ 11 * II

JTFn^F^iHn cR^ ^ 1 Mow'^^ I

^ #fi55; cfsnf^cp?. I

'Tf^JUPT; 3i^Tt5^: I ^TIJr^^n^TF^ R I

^f^RROTf 1 ^^RlRTfRft

1 ^f’W ^-

ERJRd W R crar I “ ^JTKT^^S^RT R^f: ” fcW: II * II
?rf^ f’osfM w^

1 RT, =^ ^ sff#^ m m i

ii®i

w —

si^

■ 'SO. ■ ■ •■

si^IRS# 3%mi^=!T 11

^ g^OT Timo4 3HR 1

WH U

11

f^fgTcRtmn ¥\ Sf^sni^ ii
miT *rFrRP%# —

mwm 11 H * n

1 ^#Rn ^•- 1

rtm ^

ffi^^rPifn 11 11

qitzf snfllWT 1

gDllm^Tf3pN% 11

I

i^: I

Wt t?l?TTf^clT^ 1

5fFrf«f^ snort nr^^^nr;® ll

m#TTnn; 1

^ wm w^ I

§[K^3^5?n^ STpjf 11

^TfT: W^ 1 ?

3^Tte ^ftmf^SFtr I t^: snoTTM:

moi5[TgnnT«R[: SfFT: ?n^«rT?^?l: 1

%m siTf sTp^Tot^ 1 f %f^ sfTOT; %fk sTFW^o^^if^

r f>. . nTTi T -r

SO^OTTi^ 5 —

^ in f^^R§r?T;3t I

nwn: sPf^ tnwn nte: 11

=%t3: ^ %5[FRJ: 11

?r:^ 5ri|jT^ Mn; jn; ii ffit ll
RtfFT^M 11 * 11

qi3i?5OT:, 1

m wrrf^ ” ^ i
*nfejft ” ^ q5Fcn?i: i

HT^sn” ^ 'nspwii

qw! i

q5[in ^^ST TO TO^n^ft 1

^sqtfcFli^ TO ^ 1 I

m ^ TOTT^TOfCT 1

m =q —

m\: ■^iTO^ 3 TOn ?n sqqf^ i ^ i
■ppnf 1 aiH'^TOTO 1

TOOT agnosif^JTfF^ ^ ^ *

^Tij^ 1 *Tf^r|?l ^ I

cFi[ —

^pJTT f^FPR^rf^

^ 5rf% ?R<wFrzR^ 5[^fr 1 i

^ 1 fm#r ^ 11 * 11 ^

^l(^S l 4 : 5TS[^^t i%?^: 1

^fsnR —

^jT^SFcnf^ ^ R#S^ 11
cjsnR +nMici'^ —

gsps^ "TR^ *^<^*^1 II * II

,,^t5nn? ^ ' ''^ ^nrow^wn^

3^ I ^ igg. iw 1
,,ppn,a#s^, wft:g41ireT ^ gggra. i
,;^,,nftTOftwft=n I f-wfM t-wigm i ww ^*^1

w-iwiPMagi^ I ^ w*^

m^nsarorara flw* I 5<lftW®TO I

^T^oftWf^rTPJ^ 1

^:g55?r5Wi^ 3Ri^R 'cW 3T%(?rf55T l

5fFrf^ 3 cFJMs%% 1% i

snotwi 13^^51^ 1
^|o<jst^iW; 51®^ 3 |3^|3^: II
3RTfp?4 m swf^fl^ m, 11

g^ ^c | T F t 3 T fi% 1 f^(^ ^Tforf^ ^sflWTFIH^

r^\sm Wtf^ 1 FFH^sft—

“ ^w\ I ^T’llR'fl^ ^ffF^t 1

^ ^ F«i m ^ ^ I

Hw imm 1 II * 11

?isn d^l<K —

m W^ 3^^ mwK\ ^ »

qii^iilTf^ 1'

nflRfi^ spRftaj^w gt^sw ^pw iiiwlwwft
,ps#p^: m ^ fti?i spTOWwmt 'sroe^wa: i ^

%3^ ^rfru^ I

^ ^^tfcRkr w 1

3i?Tprf^WT^ '*

cR?F?ft 1

^ ^?q^ Sir^ «| II

tmmi i

'^^|^tt>uidIiW 1^Rl5lFR^lf^ I'

srassrq^q^ft 3 ^ H * H

snfTwnf i ^

1 ” ^wwT si'i5iw<?sH I

=3T I
qro^sf^' — “®nfi^ ^ I

^nfprt 1^?j^Frt i

11^ 1^ ^#NlFlt »R\55^ I I

ftei5% f^-. ^ %mm‘. \
ff^ ^ 4<Ri^¥T "T^ ^ f^HMcC^Rl

g^: <7^1%^ ^ ^ f^T: HK'blf^^T; 11

gjIfT^ =^ l^'i'Jitt^P'l^ 1

'it f^ ssl^^M 11 11

kPi w. ■%% 1^: 1

F3 1 Jf 1 ^ I

cisrr? «ft^ —

^ ’if^ l^t

Tf^sfq

iTf ^ n

gpT f 5R5 igqffirf tl I 5111^

airaraw ^ ^

w. I

^ ^fcp: I

ssf^sf^

1 31^ Jn3[; 3id^
?PR5^: #PFIR«FS[

d<?t>(^i'=t»i^WI^^' 11

^iff%«r sii^ =q 11

f^5£raite[; (^O ^ I

51FWFT ^FRft^ ^TF^qPl^ JIRlFFsft II

?WF^qFf

w 1

3r#^f^ i^: W. ^ SR^Ito: I
5p^ fFi%fT cWtTff II

fMM^‘.(^)^T: W 1

’T^51Tftf^l%^ I

fj#f^i%|% m to ^ toto 11
^rl^rarr^ % ?n3[^ctoft to: I

11

% tor 11

gjto ^ qwi ^ I

=q?jii^idMcflq)M il

^ 1

dt^'icd^^idiHjlto ff tow II

c|

®Tiqf^ I i*RT55to%^ d^^nTFqK, 1
to^jRlto—

^qto dW(il I

^ydiq?d5[T ’tor^: 1

^ ^T q^ 95^ toto^ qto II

ff Ki to ^fT 9W3T^ ^

I

^FraR ?IT^I<5h Kl^^ 1

^nff^ i ^

3?|q 1 srpif^i^ fi; itfih. ^-

'TI^ yqi^cq qc^irdPtf^^ “ ^

1 c[^ '{jqkjJTKtqR •^+ki^mI'a¥IIR
^ qi ' ^k ^ 'st'iK'4-Of^ ^

I ^ ^ fIfr!RRW I

3t| Rw^RI^I^ 3i|;n^^q:dTlR^: |

m R sift^ —

^rKn% iwRiq^ i

^ sl^f^I^ |?T; WH^RRff%^- 1

mv^ I

gj^ ^4 '|R*ct 11

ff^ ?[t^f55T^^l?€R'T^ ^

3pt f^^aqr ^ ^ ^

ffFlT^sfit —

^55Tfg;q^3^ f^\

'T^ ^ “

55r%;ft^ TW

wm q^JTFI^W

p5# 1

5qim5il 11

pw^sfq I ##=53^ 1?

m ?iHRP% —

JTfRi^ mmi -FRirq^^^^ 1

m\^ qjfer^n; wi\M. 11

d .

3^ 1 I^FRn^

1%KRRiT?ilRft I ^1

f55^wfe3 1 cI3?^rflrat0T»T^:^ ^
q^f^H w^ 5^Tq5T?^^ W(^ 1

3^q i?i qw^5wqj3 1
^^q q^FT-^'h-^ 1^ q^tf^ U

^^'•

g{^. 3{g[ l^p^'i r^f^'1 RKR^ I

q^ JIFT ^ SFTtoj. I ^

I I “f^ fqiitW+tH^ ^

3T5{ q#Ff^ ^Tf — ^ r^Tt^ I

3iq5K; W^T: T^’T'- f^‘ '

^qn^SFT; ^^51^ «r#f%I: 1

w{^: ?rnT^4 "

^ 3T ^ fm mm^^-

q^q^Scqqn^T^; IFF^HT^R^ >

^ ^ ^

r^: I t?I-.

wmmi ^ ^

1 ^tm‘ \

q^^; ” wm‘ I ffif ^ ^

*n^i«iR^^: I

?fsiF —

fh^ K-<?ui^^<sF^;*n^< I

^ wwrr 11 ii

ifg %ca^; 1 \

SISET^ f^ETTf ^ 'T?l=E^T^ 1
3io?i^ ^ 5^jr 11

mf^' \ ^ ^ ’fi^: I “^su”

1 3;;|?ifffi^ ^FT| i^nl^ I RT^ft^js^i^i

31J?HWlf^ 2Tr^ 1

%15PT[^R ^ ^T 1

53f^T ^THT ^tlJrt 11

^ 1 ^»ilTi^TB10lT^5^f;i^Tl^^^'n ^3[q-

3f%# mw^ I I *n

3Tf^iTi5R<ft^wa ^T m \

wit 11 fi% n

oinfqiftg^ wt^t I

^^m I '^’ ’

^ 3 *

w ?rpsn^ 'ti'?!»iflPi^ —

t r^^^ T: q5[?f; i^sRIT ^f^^'llf^

Ptocilui 1 ^ 1

jTsw?arrH ■f^Rl^rsnfFft' ^IT s^R^n^ipiT II 11

gfl^TR ^fTR^T^ 51^# ?WT^: I.

?^irf % 1^1^ ^ cI®lT% WR3T II

i^sraMwi ^ ’

f^t ^ ^ "

I rmt ^

I iwm sra: 1

teft ^ ^T 1 5

31^1^ TRT^n^ 1

wn m m ??rf^; ii

?rs^knft -^i^jr ^Ewf^scfT i
m ^ f^: 'Rq^ROiq, 1

^ ■'^Rai5=aT^ 11

3^#?^ i ^t; mm-

m 1 f^i^RTf^siFi^ mmi i

mn g% —

ClT^lcft^

SIR 1 1 “ ^

STSn^ W^ TI^sdtcl^T^JfTJrT |

j^rf^RRopi^ RK; gRrfP^ SRl^ II
^ HH’l I ^

3 ;^; ^t 3lf^<T3??^3Tf55T^?Tq{f^M^q^i^‘g^ f^?inJl^T5|^l

m ^^1 “ f^fPWT^r^ M ” I

^rPTTI^^ tft R# 1^ cTcRi^’i II
f^RgraraL I

^ fm\' 11 1

«i>rrsw^

w^ m I
Wiw^ —

w^ ^ ^TWR^srai^ I

m f^T M 1!^

gf % g | pi ^nTwn ff^ ^^5^^ 'T^ ^iRn#n^ sift

I ^

^^TRR RF# 1 FRRIRi:
1 ?WT^ ^ ^ ^^FRTT ^

mm ^

^ ;jj5p# 1 ^ ^

snHJn sinF^W ^ ^ *

#TFi^Tf^f^ ^ ?ra: I

Zfgfj___!:j^^ tl^RTF ^1

?J^ goWRW 15*®^^ H
fSTiTl^

^5^ ^rar f^T ^ I

m ^tift mm

fc^ ^ ^ 3 <i^rRR ^

iiK =[^ cra^rft i

ff^lW ^^H't)l{l':^M^T I ..

fwocilum^^T^rf^ —

r^sf;^ %i^; 1

^TtfiF^ ^rPRg[Wf^ 11

^rfl^^TFJTFr^’^ 11

ws^ aiWT^N 3 1

3nj3 'R*rR^^®Pi 11

sihttosr^i
1^ f?5P53# 3^ ^

i m ^ II
S^r: si#ll 'hl<!il^ll^(^Wlf^^^ I

%f^S5[T W ^n 5 ^FT^giW: 11

rf% 3^^ I sfff^3w«n3. i mm^'h

: t *fNRTP^ ^1%; I. ^ I

^fH<RT3--

fm foSfMt f^RRTt *T^ i^T: ^R«5RRTRT I

illllli

sSiliSssf

qf 1

I

#rf^ %q: 1 m I

<1<l^ d'5|'i

an^mqi^t i

^5r 1 ^Tfiq^ra 'Dd'tjf^i+'^i 3^ tl
q5fSl^Tq^ I

^qii^ II
3{Tcqg I

^«r 1* ^

^ ^it&P^ I

tjn[^ # fgTJT ^ ?WsiWwi^ II

qf!^ qilRi^Psq qHsq gRWq?3’ II
l^<l<?l^l I ^WTl^ I
=q q:T^ qiqrMsqj^ II

Tr^RTT ^ii1^^ qraq^ ii
=SFs[f¥q I

q<^5illPi 'i'f^'t’T II

srifpq^ %t(^T®3f I

^iqcft m '11'^ ^ 3 * "

m^' Wlf^alHf® ^

3^ II

^ fra 1

T^i^ fjiNiT sf^sf^zr; =^: TRarar: i

^ ^ra# 1^ i

q[ =^ 1

5ri%raH^ %% i

m fsp^—

w\ w^ w 5irat^ l^iJdRi^RRra. ii

3ra%: I

f%[T^ I Rra^w— -

^s^rm\ ^Rpprar ll

tf^ra raraRr^ra RRrs^ ^ sTraRR*?^ rafj4
3{^^^aRraRra^ I ^n^rra iraiRr^R RRii^

^iR ^TFftR aprar Rrdfl3^ i ^ ^

R^tR^ l I

^jtRwt^sR —

MriRe <1^ sHU^^RofH 11

^sfq —

^ ^ wn f^: I

11 .

%g[P^sf^ “ 1'

gsn — ’n%TTr^(^Pt*^^ i

^sf^?im^ 11

1 ’STW ^ ^ TOT^^THT^ ’Tf^ 1

m —

?n *j^!iff^: ^ n ,.

^ ^ 5^' '^^’v * ,

^ fl^ "

gil?T 3^^^ I

^nf^ ^ 1^: 11

^o%cn Pt'^^+i^y^-tiRfi'- 1

gT;p^Rr^«r 11 # * H

^|;( j ; t o t^ 1

^ Ejt^shRtRlcfl^iT ^*3?!^ 1

^ wm Tlrgw^J3Li

w ^ WT =^ ^irf^-

w \\ a (\)

*T% -^pw sn^gf; 3j^tem5: gq- f I

^ 5fJT: *T^ ^ I ^ ^4

ff^: im >3^ ^TT^ JT

W^ II •

HITO

^ ^5nf^ fNt55^i
#Rt |«iT |^?iT»ra>
qftc goRgfira

'TWT#i^ wm^ ^^^'. 5:wiiFn^ig^«fti

TpsgRflRl ’T^rf^FI-

If ^ f^R#{

mw4 ^iTft wm: 1)

Finnted by J. R. Aria at the Vasanta Press, Adyar, Madras.

SOME PRESS NOTICES

These Books dealing with the secret Mysticism and
Magic of India are the most interesting which have been
published in recent years .” — Neue Metaphysische Rundschau.

“ His book (Mahdnirvdna) brilliantly inaugurates the
study of the Tantras, the literature of which occupies a
front rank in the religious life of Modern India. The
introduction to it is the most solid and exact account that
has yet been written on the doctrines of the Tantras, their
•ontology, mystical phraseology, worship, yoga and ethics.
— Revue Critique {Dr. Professor Sylvain Levi).

“ The translation {Maddnirvdna) is distinguished by
its elegance and by the profound and comprehensive know-
ledge by which it is backed ” ; (and by another critic in
the same journal) “ Shakti wid ShdJcta reveals a wonderful
'grasp of the fundamentals of consciousness.” The Theo-
■sophist {Dr. Professor Schrader).

“ He commenced his work with a Hindu s heart, with
n Hindu’s regard and a Hindu’s faith, and so his transla-
tion is what it ought to be. The Introduction not only
reveals the learning of its author, but is also proof that he
has understood in what tight Hindus regard the Tantra
Shastra.” — Mtahddi.

" In perusing the author’s Introduction to the Madtd-
nirvdna Tantra we have been bewildered with astonishment.

SOME PBBSS NOTICES

SOME PBESS NOTICES

m

“For the student of religions there is then amine
opened for his enquiries. The whole work bears the stamp
of conscientiousness and d^GnraGj” —Literans'ho'hes Zentral-
blattfuer Deutschland.

“ The first impression was of amazement and delight.
The Malidnhvdna is one of the most important of Hindu
philosophical works combined with elaborate ritualism,
and its translation therefore by a European involved oer-
tainly a prodigious amount of study, sympathy and. real
understanding. Of the ‘Introduction’ alone it may he
said that for its lucidity, conciseness, directness and for its
depth of penetration and insight it may itself claim to be a
standard work on the much abused Tantras. ^ We have
rarely come across such an illuminating exposition of the
Principles of Devi Worship.”— Bhdrata.

“ Most meritorious productions. From what has been
said it is clear that Avalon is right when he declares that
up to now this literature has been too often judged and
more often condemned without knowing it and that the
Tantras deserve to become better known than has been the
case hitherto.” — Ostasiatische Zeitschrift {Dr. Professor

M. Wintemitz). _ .

“ Arthur Avalon has rendered an eminent service to

the Cause of Sanskrit Utevatnve.^'-Ocdcutta Beview {Mahd-
rmhopddhydya Satish Ghundra VUydbhmhana).

“ We suspect that Arthur Avalon is one of the learned
Pandits of Bengal whose native speech has not been wi^-
out influence upon his almost impeccable English. We
value highly the work done, if for no other reason than
that it gives us a real insight into the jargon of the ritual
and the worthlessness of Tantrik Philosop y.

Ration (New York).

iv . SOME PBESS NOTICES

“ Illuminating discussion (“ Serpent Power ”)• The
Author makes some rarely fine brilliant definitions . . .
throughout maintains a strictly scientific attitude, though
he is obviously impressed with the extraordinary nature of
the Tantrik Doctrine .”— and India.

“There is no doubt that he has an extensive and
■ndf'niinv kTiowledffe of the subiect of which he treats.**“~

of Eastern
vledge and
kta ). — Aew

BOOKS BY SIR JOHN WOODROFFE

BHARATA SHAKTI (Addresses on Indian
culture) , 3rd Edition
IS INDIA CIVILIZED? 3rd Edition
THE SEED OP RACE, 2nd Edition
SHAKTI AND SHAKTA (Essays and Address-
es in the Tantra Shastra), 2nd Edition ...
GARLAND OP LETTERS (V arnamala), Studies
in the Mantra Shastra

THE WORLD AS POWER— REALITY ...
THE WORLD AS POWER -LIFE
THE WORLD AS POWER— MIND
THE WORLD AS POWER— MATTER
THE WORLD AS POWER- CAUSALITY
AND CONTINUITY

THE WORLD AS POWER— CONSCIOUS-
NESS. {In Preparation.)

IS INDIA CIVILIZED ?

PRESS OPINIONS

“ Foreign domination has been much more than mainly
political. It is the cultural and social conquest of India
which is the really important one, insidious in its cause but
permanent in its results. Alien culture threatens to
obscure the soul of India, to swamp the Indian culture.
Therefore Sir John Woodroffe’s latest book is most

opportune. His style is simple and Convincing. The

fundamental principles of Indian culture are examined with
great power of insight. Sir John’s purpose is to defend

the minds of young India against defilement— to create a

strong working faith in their own ideals, and for this India
will be very grateful .” — The Gommonioeal (M.8.M.).

“ Powerful exposition of Indian culture. . . Many wise
political, social and religious observations abound in its
inspiring pages. We can commend its perusal to all who
are seekers after the truth. If it serves to induce the
Europeans to abate some of their racial pride, prejudice
and intolerance, and the Indians to have a more correct
appreciation of their culture, then it must be regarded as a
most opportune publication at the present moment when
the great catastrophe in the West has shaken the faith in
the basic principles of Western culture and has given a
powerful stimulus to the spirit of introspection and enquiry.

Vlll

PEESS OPINIONS

“ Deep insight into what is of true value in Indian
culture — clear with an enthusiasm all the more effective
because restrained. It is his conception of India that is
the great inspiration in the book. His conception of life
is Indian through and through, I have read this book all
one afternoon, marking page after page its trenchant
criticisms of our detractors, its pen pictures of Indian life
and culture, and especially its illuminating description of
what some of our philosophies really mean. It is as if
once again as of old, one heard an ancient Gruru talking to
his disciples. It is a noble book for every Indian home.”
— New India (0. Jinarajaddsa).

“ Sir John has already earned an abiding place in the
affections of our countrymen by his intimate and profound
studies of Hinduism and his enthusiastic exposition of the
basis of Hindu culture. The volume in spite of the
ephemeral nature of the incidents of composition has a
permanent value and must find a place in the library of
every -self-respecting Indian .” — The Central JSindft College
Magazine, The monthly organ of Benares Eindu University.

.“This matter and much more are explained with
wonderful lucidity. Sir John points out that the true view
of human evolution is the Eastern one, and supports and
illustrates his position by reference to and. also using the
clearcut and meaningful nomenclature of that system of
Hindu Philosophy and Religion of which he is such a
master.”— TA-e Eindn{Dr, 8ulrama7iya Aiyar).

“ So ably indicates the basic principles of Indian
civilization and repudiates the baseless charges with such
commendable enthusiasm and righteous indignation as
could have befitted one who by birth has inherited the
culture — deserves study by every sincere believer in Indian

PRESS ■ OPINIONS

IX

thought. An admirable book— crushing reply— trom start
to tinisii shows that the author has a masterly and sym-
pathetic grasp of the whole situation and he who goes
through it will find himself in touch with the essentials of
Indian civilization.”— Prahtdd/io, Bhdrata.

“Sir John Woodroffe has done well to expose the

other lessons preached Dy mm, lor omy uy su uuuig we
would make a right use of the truths it contains.

The Modem Beinew.

“ This noble work is a trumpet call to the Indians to
realise their greatness and distinctiveness and to build the
great future of India — a loving and intimate student of a
great culture .” — The Hindu Message.

“India owes a deep debt of gratitude to Sir John
Woodroffe for this timely volume in defence of Indian
culture — certain social aspects have been so satisfactorily
discussed and defended by this erudite defender of
our civilization that if the Indian social reformer would
care to read and think over them, much of his rancour
towards orthodoxy will prove baseless. India’s greatest
civilization is misunderstood by many intellectual imps
both foreign and indigenous. It is a consolation to find
that great minds, Indian or foreign, can realise it so well
as in the case of Sir John’s. Knowledge of the inner
capability of the Ego teaches but one kind of patriotism
which is of course universal and not national. It is as silly
to hug the degenerates of our own nationality as to hate
the great souls of the other continents. But to stand for
their rights when oppressed is the privilege of every right
j33an and words fail us in thanking Sir John for
his humane duty; may they be ever more .” — The Mahtatta.

‘^Sir John writes profoundly of the Hindii religion
and culture of which he is an ardent admirer and his
defence of Indian civilization is informed with a glowing
enthusiasm. He finds it easy to confound the rationalist
Mr. Archer. The book will not please every Christian that
reads it. But no occidental student of Indian politics
should miss the reading, for it explains much in the Hindu

PBESS OPINIONS

the best for India and he is fearful lest it be lost in the
political maelstrom which will follow the wax” —The Oapital.

“ G-reat erudition — sturdy champion of Sanatana
Bharma,”— The Indian Daily News.

“ Most effective and crushing rejoinder— the work of
a distinguished scholar and deep thinker truly merits a
very wide circulation in this country. It is a profoundly
philosophic study of the subject.”— T/ie Hindusthan Review.

“ The constitution of a politically dependent people can
never appear to advantage, because it is the interest of the
politically dominant people to discredit everything belong-
ing to the subject
actuated by

race as inferior. The Author has been
a strict regard for truth and a desire for the
establishment of true Dharma. He has not spared from
criticism what is mean, calculating, vulgar, inhuman in his
own countrymen, nor has he minced words in condemning
what is low or servile or selfish or imitative in Indians of
to-day. Actuated by the highest aims, he has really given
a most remarkable and convincing book on a difficult and
much-abused theme.”— The Bombay Ohronide.

“ Ably written defence of Hindu civilization by a pro-
found scholar ... It would have been better if he had
entered as much an emphatic protest against the prevailing
abuses of Hindu society as he has taken care to define its
virtues and ideals.”— T/ie Everyman’s Review.

“It is rather unusual to find among the British
members of the Indian Judiciary an apologist for the
claims of the Neo-Hindu revivalists and their allies, the
■R^rtreme Nationalists. It is in this rdle that we find

Sir John Woodroffe figuring as a sort of modern Soul
among the prophets— much of the book is occupied with
an unworthy attack on Western and particularly Christian
civilization .”— Madvcis Mail>

“ From keen irritation and annoyance ... we passed
to a feeling of contempt touched by a sorry sense of
amusement that the Absolute (or the Spirit or whatever
else the Author wishes to call it) should indulge in the
bad joke of this conflict. . , . We consider both Mr. Archer
and Sir John VV oodroffe in this episode a nuisance. . . .
There is an absence of clearness even of logic. ... A
person who presents such a position as this is not really
and truly the friend of India .” — The Indian Philosophical
Review {Professor A. Widgery).

“Rechauffe of more or less familiar arguments with-
out the illumination of any new thought — vague, obscure

PRESS OPINIONS

XIU

spirit of the East ; on the other hand he had not lost touch
with the ideals of his own people nor been blinded by the
essential beauty of Indian tradition so as to be unaware of
actual present defects ; nor does he forget that those who
write against or in praise of India must do so with exact-
ness, discrimination, and the latter with the avoidance of
mere puffing general statements. He is definite and
balanced and gives one the impression of being thoroughly
reliable.” — The Theosophist {A. de L.),

“ I admire the spirit of absolute fairness with which
Sir John WoodroSe has approached the task— should be
studied carefully by every Indian who aspires to lead the
people and to mould the aspirations of his countrymen.”—
The Indian Review {Eon. Mr. Justice Seshagiri Aiyar).

“ The whole book is replete with useful suggestions to
every one who is interested in a proper understanding of
Indian culture — Sir John who has devoted many years to
the study of Indian religion and who brings to his task a
Judicial frame of mind and abundant sympathy has no
difficulty in proving the utter hollowness of Mr. Archer s

conclusions.” — The Veddfita KesavL

“ Sir John Woodroffe rightly earned the gratitude of
the people by his recent vigorous repudiation of the many
unjust aspersions made on India and the Indians by a
foreign critic.”- Justice Sir Abdur Rahim in his Oon-
wcaticm Address of 1919 to the Mysore EniversUy.

“We have not seen any one who lo?es Bharata as
Sir John Woodroffe does. His pre-eminence consists in
this that he has said that the service (Seva) of Bharata is
the service of God (Shri Bhagavan).”— (R.D.M.)

XIV

PRESS OPINIONS

By the same Author

COLLECTION OF ADDRESSES ON INDIAN CULT0RE

“ The thoughtful sayings of an honest foreigner, a true
Mtmi or “ Freethinker ” as he himself interprets the Hindu
terms . . . ought to be in the hands of every Indian.

It would give him thought and self-respect. The Christian
Missionary and the Christian Orientalist are the two great
factors of Indian denationalisation. We fight the third
factor the politician more or less successfully. We have
fought the Missionary and defeated him generally, but the
scars of his early attacks we are unconsciously bearing as
acceptable badges . . . Thus when we run down —we

are unwittingly showing ourselves as Chelas of the medio-
crity of Europe. Like a living organism we must cast off
the foreign matter trying to bore a home into our intel-
lectual system. Sir John does not spare the Indian mind
in its analysis. He has very ably shown that our so often
professed Vairagya is more often our incapacity and some-
times philosophic confusion. The little book is one of
those productions which would go to make a new age in
this country. It is a protest against cultural suicide of a
civilization designed by its past to live for ever .” — The
Modem Review.

“ Sir John Woodroffe rarely says anything wkich has
not an element of originality in it. He makes a powerful
plea against the cultural conquest of this country by the
nations of the West ... a vigorous plea which we
commend to the notice of every true born Indian.

PRESS OPINIONS

XV

Sir John’s sympathy is bold and fearless as his scholarship
is deep and erudite — he has a clear and perspective view
of our culture .” — The Amrita Bazar Patrikd.

“ The whole of the booklet is studded with shining
gems of thought and thrilling insight into truth . . .

this sterling faith in the profound individuality of India,
in the glorious future which She is bound to work out for
Herself, in the great mission She is to fulfil in the world,
animates every word spoken in the addresses compiled in
this book. We cannot, in fact over-estimate the necessity
of every student of India, of every worker in Her cause,
furnishing himself with a copy of this compilation and it is
our ardent wish that the great exponent of the wonderful
Tantrik lore of India would more often make time to come
forward, as in these addresses to contribute his weighty
ideas to the keen intellectual struggle going on in our
country round practical problems of re-organising our life
and thought .” — The Prahuddha Bhdrata.

“ Each of these papers is overflowing with thought-
fulness and desire to do good to Bharata. We ask every
English educated man to read it. It will give us reverence
for our natural culture and will save us from the thought-
less spirit of imitation.”

“ Politically India is dead ; this is bad enough, but if
cultural conquest follows the political, then She will be
truly dead. Is India to be a mere name and Her culture
assigned to the cold room of the Oriental scholar, or is She
to be a living form ? Sir John Woodroffe takes up the
question with as much enthusiasm as the youngest
Nationalist amongst us. His answer is one of courage and
hope . . . but Sir John is not blind to the difficulties.”
— The Searchlight.

■5

't . ‘

' 1 :

4

, /: ;v

XVI

PRESS OPINIONS

“ Inspiring title— he has, what is not given to many,
understood the sonl of India. He is a thorough sympathiser
with Indian aspirations and has dwelt upon the real aim
and purpose of our efforts. Ought to be read by every
patriotic Indian. He will then have a clear vision and feel
a new strength in his onward struggle.”— India.

THE SEED OP RACE

An Essay on Indian Education, } tics Ke* 1.

“ Tliere is much in this little essay with which the
student of India cannot but heartily agree.”— T/ie Asiatic
'Review.

“ Of immense value . ♦ . what is Sangskara, the
Racial soul, the author as one who has dwed deep into
Indian Philosophy, fully discusses in detail . . . this is the
right view of Indian Education.”— SearcUight, Pa,tna.

“ All who seek knowledge as to the essentials of Indian
education should possess and study carefully a copy of this
book.”— Aew hidia,

“Readers of Is India Civilized? will realise how
well qualified the author is to offer an opinion on the
maintenance of racial culture. His answer is sufficient tc
refute the contention of his critics that his love for the oW
and beautiful in Indian Culture has made his outlool
reactionary .”' — lias Theosopliist (4. de L.)

PuBWSHED BY GANBSH M' Co., MADRAS
