This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 

We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 


at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/ 


^^v^Yy^v^ 


I^arbarU  dollcgc  Eibrarg 

FROM    THE    HEtyjJEST   OF 

JAMES   WALKER,    D.D.,   LL.D., 

(Cldss  of  1B14) 

FOnM&R    rBBStOKNT   Ot    UAKVAHt)   COLLEGE; 

*  Pteference  bemg  given  to  works  in  the  Intellectual 
and  Moral  Sciences." 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Digitized 


by  Google 


© 

NARRATIVES 


SORCERY   AND   MAGIC, 


FROM  THE  MOST  AUTHENTIC  SOURCES. 


BY 


THOMAS  WRIGHT,  ESQ..  M.A.,  RS.A.,  &c. 

CORRBSPONDINO     MBMBBB    OF    TRB     NATIONAL    INSTITUTE  OF   FRANCR, 
(acADBMIB  DE8  INSCRIPTIONS   KT  BBLLB8  LBTTRBS.) 


IN  TWO  VOLUMES. 

VOL  I. 


LONDON: 
RICHARD  BENTLEY,  NEW  BURLINGTON  STREET. 
1851. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


jrf^Um.HO 


v., 


* 


.^ 


/^i^r7  5^1'^    ?/// 


LONDON  : 
PRINTED  BY   Q.  J.  PALMER,  SATOT  STRBET,  STRAND. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


\ 


TO 
THE  LORD  LONBESBOROUGH, 

E.C.H.,   F.R.S.,    F.S.A., 

THBSB    VOLUMES 

ABE  DEDICATED, 

AS  A   SMALL   TRIBUTE   OF   RESPECT 

FOR  A   NOBLEBfAN   WHO   HAS  ALWAYS  BEEN   DISTINGUISHED 

BY  HIS  ATTACHMENT   TO,   AND  PATRONAGE   OF, 

HISTORICAL  AND  ANTIQUARIAN   SCIENGE. 


Digitized 


zed  by  Google 


Digitized 


\ 
by  Google  i 


THE   LOBD   LONDESBOBOUGH. 


My  Lord, 
The  interest  which  your  lordship  has  always 
taken  in  historical  studies  has  encouraged  me 
to  oflFer  to  you  two  volumes  of  what  may  be 
truly  considered  as  the  dark  features  of  his- 
tory. It  appears  to  me  that  these  are  features 
on  which  sometimes  at  least  we  ought  to  dwell, 
and  which  it  has  been  too  much  the  fashion 
with  historical  writers  to  conceal  from  view, 
and  I  am  not  sure  if  we  are  not  at  this  mo- 
ment suffering  from  the  results  of  that  conceal- 
ment. It  is  true  that  if,  in  tracing  the  history 
of  declining  Rome,  we  pass  gently  over  the 
crimes  of  a  Caligula  or  a  Commodus,  if  we  show 
the  brisrht  side  of  the  history  of  the  middle 


Digitized 


by  Google 


VI 


ages  and  hide  their  vicionsness  and  brutality,  if 
we  tell  thefitory  of  Romanism  without  its  arro- 
gance, its  persecutions,  and  its  massacres,  or  if 
we  attempt  to  trace  the  progress  of  society 
from  darkness  to  light  without  entering  into 
the  details  of  those  strange  hallucinations  which 
have  at  times  disfigured  and  impeded  it — such 
as  are  related  in  the  following  Narratiyes — ^in 
acting  thus  we  spare  the  reader  much  that  is 
horrible  and  revolting  to  his  better  feelings,  but 
at  the  same  time  we  destroy  the  moral  and 
utility  of  history  itself. 

If  I  mistake  not,  the  history  presented  in 
these  yolumes  ftunishes  more  than  any  other 
an  example  of  the  manner  in  which  the  pub- 
lic mind  may,  under  particular  circumstances, 
be  acted  upon  by  erroneous  views.  The 
paganism  of  our  forefathers,  instead  of  being 
eradicated  by  papal  Rome,  was  preserved 
as  a  useful  instrument  of  power,  and  fostered 
until  it  grew  into  a  monster  fer  more  fear- 
ful and  degrading  than  the  original  from 
which  it  sprung,  and  infinitely  more  cruel  in 
its  influence.  It  is  the  object  of  the  follow- 
ing detached  histories  to  exhibit  the  character 
and  forms  under  which  at  various  different 


Digitized 


by  Google 


vu 


periods  the  superstitions  of  sorcery  and  magic 
affected  the  progress,  or  interfered  with  the 
peace  of  society.  At  first  they  appeared  as  the 
mere,  ahnost  miobserved,  febles  of  the  vulgar- 
then  they  were  seized  upon  as  an  arm  of  the 
ecclesiastical  power,  to  crush  those  who  dared 
to  question  the  spiritual  doctrines  or  oppose 
the  temporal  power  of  the  papal  church.  From 
this  time  sorcery  makes  its  appearance  more 
frequently  in  history,  until  it  gained  that  hold 
on  the  minds  of  all  classes  which  led  to  the 
fearful  persecutions  of  the  sixteenth  and  seven- 
teenth centuries. 

It  is  no  part  of  the  design  of  these  little 
volumes  to  enter  into  a  disquisition  on  what 
have  been  termed  the  occult  sciences,  nor  do  I 
pretend  to  give  a  regular  history  of  witch- 
craft. I  have  merely  attempted  to  show  the 
influence  which  superstition  once  exercised  on 
the  history  of  the  worid,  by  a  few  narratives 
taken  from  the  annals  of  past  ages,  of  events  which 
seemed  to  place  it  in  its  strongest  and  clearest 
light.  For  these  sketches,  thrown  together 
somewhat  hastily,  and  gathered  from  a  field  of 
research  which  has  always  had  great  attractions 
for  me,  I  venture  to  claim  from  your  lordship 


Digitized 


by  Google 


VIU 


an  indulgence  which  will  be  the  more  valued 
from  the  appreciation  which  I  know  that  these 
studies  have  always  received  from  you ;  and  I 
have  only  to  hope  for  the  same  indulgence  from 
the  public  at  large. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be, 

My  Lord, 

With  sincere  respect, 

Your  lordship^s  very  faithful  servant, 

Thomas  Wright. 


24,  Sydney  Street,  Brampton, 
February  15,  1851. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CONTENTS 

OF   VOLUME   THE    FIRST. 


CHAPTER  1 

^  PAGE 

Introduction  ......        1 

CHAPTER  n. 
Story  of  the  lady  Alice  Kyteler  .  .25 

CHAPTER  lU. 

Further  political  usage  of  the  belief  in  sorcery. — The  Tem- 
plars  .  .  ...  .  .41 

CHAPTER  IV. 
Sorcery  in  France. — The  citizens  of  Arras  65 

CHAPTER  V. 
The  lord  of  Mirebeau  and  Pierre  d'Estaing  the  alchemist      85 


Digitized 


by  Google 


X  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  VI. 

PAGE 

The  earlier  medieyal  type  of  the  sorcerer ;  Virgil  the  en- 
chanter .  .  .  .  .  .99 


CHAPTER  Vn. 

The  later  medieval  types  of  the  magician ;  Mar  Bacon 

and  Dr.  Faustus    i     .  .  .  .122 


CHAPTER  Vm. 

Sorcery  in  Germany  in  the  fifteenth  century :  the  Malleus 

Maleficarum   ...  .  .     141 


CHAPTER  IX. 
Witchcraft  in  Scotland  in  the  sixteenth  century  -  '     1 60 

CHAPTER  X 
King  James  and  the  witches  of  Lothian  .  o  ',    180 

CHAPTER  XI. 
Magic  in  England  during  the  age  of  the  Reformation      .     198 

CHAPTER  XU. 
The  English  magicians :  Dr.  Dee  and  his  followers         ,     226 

CHAPTER  XIII. 
The  witches  of  Warboys    .....    264 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CONTBNT&  XI 

PAGE 

CHAPTER  XIV. 
The  poetry  of  witchcraft    .....    277  \ 

CHAPTEE  XV. 
Witchcraft  in  France  in  the  sixteenth  century     .  297 

CHAPTER  XVI. 
Pierre  de  Lancre  and  the  witches  of  Labourd  .317 

CHAPTER  XVIT. 
Magic  in  Spain;  the  auto-da-fe  of  Logrono  .    334 


i  Digitized  by  VjOO^IC 


Digitized 


by  Google 


SORCERY  AND   MAGIC. 


CHAPTER  L 


IKTEODUCTOBY. 


If  the  universality  of  a  belief  be  a  proof  of  its 
truth,  few  creeds  have  been  better  established  than 
that  of  sorcery.  Every  people,  from  the  rudest  to 
the  most  refined,  we  may  almost  add  in  every  age, 
have  believed  in  the  kind  of  supernatural  agency 
which  we  understand  by  this  term.  It  was  founded 
on  the  equally  extensive  creed,  that,  besides  our 
own  visible  existence,  we  live  in  an  invisible  world 
of  spiritual  beings,  by  which  our  actions  and  even 
our  thoughts  are  often  guided,  and  which  have  a 
certain  degree  of  power  over  the  elements  and  over 
the  ordinary  course  of  organic  life.  Many  of  these 
powerful  beings  were  supposed  to  be  enemies  of 
mankind,  fiendish  creatures  which  thirsted  after 
human  blood,  or  demons  whose  constant  business  it 

VOL.   L  B 


Digitized 


by  Google 


2  SORCERY   AND  MAGIC. 

was  to  tempt  and  seduce  their  victim,  and  deprive 
him  of  the  hope  of  salvation.  These  beings  were 
themselves  subject  to  certain  mysterious  influences, 
and  became  the  slaves  even  of  mortals,  when  by  their 
profound  penetratfen  mto  the  secrets  of  nature 
they  obtained  a  hiwwledge  of  those  influences.  But 
more  frequently  tfeeir  intercourse  with  man  was 
voluntary,  and  the  services  they  rendered  him  were 
only  intended  to  draw  him  to  a  more  certain  de- 
struction, ^t  is  a  dark  subject  for  investigation  ; 
and  we  will  not  pretend  to  decide  whether,  and  how 
far,  a  higher  Providence  may,  in  some  cases,  have 
permitted  such  intercourse  between  the  natural  and 
supernatural  world^  Yet  the  superstitions  to  which 
this  creed  gave  rise  have  exerted  a  mighty  influence 
on  society,  through  ages,  which  it  is  far  fr^m  unin- 
teresting to  trace  in  its  outward  manifestations. 

The  belief  of  which  we  are  treating  manifested 
itself  under  two  different  forms,  sorcery  and  magic. 
The  magician  differed  from  the  witch  in  this,  that, 
while  the  latter  was  an  ignorant  instrument  in  the 
hands  of  the  demons,  the  former  had  become  their 
master  by  the  powerful  intermediation  of  a  science 
which  was  only  within  reach  of  the  few,  and  which 
these  beings  were  unable  to  disobey.  In  the  earlier 
ages,  this  mysterious  science  flourished  widely,  and 
there  were  noted  schools  of  magic  in  several  parts  of 
Europe.  One  of  the  most  famous  was  that  of  Toledo 
in  Spain,  nearly  on  the  confines  which  divided 
Christendom  from  Islam,  on  that  spiritual  neutral 
ground  where  the  demon  might  then  bid  defiance  to 
the  Gospel  or  the  Koran.  It  was  in  this  school  that 
Gerbert,  in  the  tenth  century,  is  said  to  have  ob- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


GERBERT   THE   PHILOSOPHER.  3 

tained  his  marvellous  proficiency  in  knowledge  for- 
bidden by  the  Church.  Grerbert  lived  at  Toledo,  in 
the  house  of  a  celebrated  Arabian  philosopher,  whose 
book  of  magic,  or  "  grimoire,"  had  unusual  power  in 
coercing  the  evil  one.  Gerbert  was  seized  with  an 
ardent  desire  of  possessing  this  book,  but  the  Sara- 
cen would  not  part  with  it  for  love  or  money,  and, 
lest  it  might  be  stolen  from  him,  he  concealed  it 
under  his  pillow  at  night.  The  Saracen  had  a  beau- 
tiful daughter ;  and  Gerbert,  as  the  last  resource, 
gave  his  love  to  the  maiden,  and  in  a  moment  of  amor- 
ous confidence  learnt  from  her  the  place  where  the 
book  was  concealed.  He  made  the  philosopher 
drunk,  stole  the  grimoire,  and  took  to  flight  The 
magician  followed  him,  and  was  enabled,  by  consult- 
ing the  stars,  to  know  where  he  was,  either  on  earth 
or  water.  But  Gerbert  at  last  baffled  him,  by  hang- 
ing under  a  bridge  in  such  a  manner  that  he 
touched  neither  one  element  nor  the  other,  and 
finally  arrived  in  safety  on  the  sea-shore.  Here  he 
opened  his  book,  and  by  its  powerful  enchantment 
called  up  the  arch-fiend  himself,  who  at  his  orders 
carried  him  in  safety  to  the  opposite  coast. 

The  science  of  the  magician  was  dangerous,  but 
not  necessarily  fatal,  to  his  salvation.  The  posses- 
sion of  one  object  led  naturally  to  the  desire  of  ano- 
ther, until  ambition,  or  avarice,  or  some  other  pas- 
sion, tempted  him  at  length  to  make  the  final  sacri- 
fice. Gerbert  is  said  to  have  sold  himself  on  condi- 
tion of  being  made  a  pope.  Magicians  were,  in 
general,  beneficent,  rather  than  noxious  to  their  fel- 
low-men; it  was  only  when  provoked,  that  they 
injured  or  tormented  them;   and  their  vengeance 

B  2 


Digitized 


by  Google 


4  SORCEEY  AND  MAGIC. 

was  in  most  cases  of  a  ludicrous  character.  A  ma- 
gician of  the  twelfth  century,  named  Eustace  the 
Monk,  who  also  had  studied  in  Toledo,  was  ill  re- 
ceived in  a  tavern,  in  return  for  which  he  caused 
the  hostess  and  her  gossips  to  expose  themselves  in 
a  disgraceful  manner  to  the  ridicule  of  their  fellow- 
towns-people  ;  the  latter  had  shown  him  disrespect, 
and  he  set  them  all  by  the  ears  with  his  conjura- 
tions ;  a  waggoner,  in  whose  vehicle  he  was  riding, 
treated  him  with  insolence,  and  he  terrified  him  ^^:^ 
his  enchantments.  Another  necromancer,  accord- 
ing to  a  story  of  the  thirteenth  century,  went  to  a 
town  to  gain  money  by  his  feats  ;  the  townspeop^:? 
looked  on,  but  gave  him  nothing ;  and  in  revengii 
by  his  magic  (arte  dcemonica),  he  made  them  ah 
strip  to  the  skin,  and  in  this  condition  dance  and 
sing  about  the  streets. 

Sometimes  the  evil  one  had  intercourse  with  men 
who  were  not  magicians;   when  they  were  influ-i 
enced  by  some  unattainable  desire,  he  appeared  to| 
them,  called  or  uncalled,  and  bought  their  souls  in  j 
exchange  for  the  gratification  of  their  wishes.     Nov  | 
unfrequently  the  victim  had  fallen  suddenly  from  \ 
wealth  and  power,  to  extreme  poverty  and  helpless-  \ 
ness,  and  the  tempter  appeared  to  him  when  he  had  - 
retired  to  some  solitary  spot  to  hide  the  poignancy 
of  his  grief     This  circumstance  was  a  fertile  source 
of  stories  in  the  Middle  Ages,  in  most  of  which  the 
victim  of  the  fiend  is  rescued  by  the  interference  of 
the  Virgin.  Sometimes  he  sought  an  interview  with 
the  demon  through  the  agency  of  a  magician.   Thus 
Theophilus,  a  personage  who  figures  rather  exten- 
tively  in  medieval  legends,  was  the  seneschal  of  a    \ 


Digitized 


by  Google 


I 


THEOPHILTTS.  O 

bishop,  and,  as  such,  a  rich  and  powerful  man ;  but 
his  patron  died,  and  the  new  bishop  deprived  him 
of  his  place  and  its  emoluments.  Theophilus,  in 
his  distress,  consulted  a  Jew,  who  was  a  magician  ; 
the  latter  called  in  the  fiend,  and  Theophilus  sold 
himself  on  condition  of  being  restored  to  his  old 
dignity,  with  increased  power  and  authority.  The 
temper  of  men  raised  in  the  world  in  this  manner 
was  generally  changed,  and  they  became  vindictive, 
j1,  and  vicious.  It  was  one  of  the  articles  of  the 
pact  of  Theophilus  with  the  demon,  that  during 
remainder  of  his  life,  he  should  practise  every 
d  of  vice  and  oppression ;  but  before  his  time 
e,  he  repented,  and  from  a  great  sinner,  became 
great  saint  We  have  in  the  legend  of  Faust, 
Dr.  Faustus,'")  the  general  type  of  a  medieval  ma- 
cian. 

The  witch  held  a  lower  degree  in  the  scale  of  for- 

lidden  knowledge.    She  was  a  slave  without  re- 

mpense ;  she  had  sold  herself  without  any  appa- 

irent  object,  unless  it  were  the  mere  power  of  doing 

/eviL     The  witch  remained  always  the  same,  poor 

/and  despised,  an  outcast  from  among  her  fellow- 

/  creatures.      It  is  to    this    class    of   persons  that 

^  our  work  will  be  more   especially  devoted;    and 

in  the  present  chapter  we  will  endeavour  to  trace, 

amid  the  dim  light  of  early  medieval  history,  the 

ideas  of  our  forefathers  on  this  subject,  previous  to 

the  time  when  trials  for  sorcery  became  frequent. 

It  has  been  an  article  of  popular  belief,  from  the 
earliest  period  of  the  history  of  the  nations  of 
Western  Europe,  that  women  were  more  easily 
brought  into  connexion  with  the  spiritual  world 


Digitized 


by  Google 


6  SORCERY  AinO  MAGIC. 

than  men  :  priestesses  were  the  favourite  agents  ol 
the  deities  of  the  ages  of  paganism,  and  the  natural 
weakness  and  vengeful  feelings  of  the  sex  made 
their  power  an  object  of  fear.  To  them  especially 
were  known  the  herbs,  or  animals,  or  other  articles 
which  were  noxious  to  mankind,  and  the  ceremo- 
nies and  charms  whereby  the  influence  of  the  gods 
might  be  obtained  to  preserve  or  to  injure.  After 
the  introduction  of  Christianity,  it  was  the  demons 
who  were  supposed  to  listen  to  these  incantations, 
and  they  are  strictly  forbidden  in  the  early  eccle- 
siastical laws,  which  alone  appear  at  first  to  have 
taken  cognizance  of  them.  We  learn  from  these 
laws  that  witches  were  believed  to  destroy  people's 
cattle  and  goods,  to  strike  people  with  diseases,  and 
even  to  cause  their  death.  It  does  not  appear,  how- 
ever, that  previous  to  the  twelfth  century,  at  least, 
their  power  was  believed  to  arise  from  any  direct 
compact  with  the  devil.  In  the  adventures  of  Here- 
ward,  a  witch  is  introduced  to  enchant  a  whole 
army,  but  she  appears  to  derive  her  power  from  a 
spirit  which  presided  over  a  fountain.  The  Anglo- 
Saxon  women  seem,  from  allusions  met  with  here 
and  there  in  old  writers,  to  have  been  much  ad- 
dicted to  these  superstitious  practices,  but  unfortu- 
nately we  have  very  little  information  as  to  their 
particular  form  or  description.  The  character  of 
Hild,a  m  Bulwer's  noble  romance  of  "  King  Ha- 
rold," is  a  faithful  picture  of  the  Saxon  sorceress 
of  a  higher  class.  During  the  period  subsequent  to 
the  Norman  conquest,  we  are  better  acquainted  with 
the  general  character  of  witchcraft  in  England, 
and  among  our  neighbours  on  the  continent,  ber 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THB  WITCH  OP  BBBKBLBT.  7 

cause  more  of  the  historical  monuments  of  that 
period  have  been  preserved 

During  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries,  the 
power  of  the  witches  to  do  mischief  was  derived 
from  a  direct  compact  with  tihie  demon,  whom  they 
were  bound  to  worship  with  certain  rites  and  cere- 
monies^  the  shadows  of  those  which  had  in  remoter 
ages  been  performed  in  honour  of  the  pagan  gods. 
Southey's  ballad  has  given  a  modern  popularity  to 
the  story  of  the  witch  of  Berkeley,  which  William 
of  Malmsbury,  an  historian  of  the  first-half  of  the 
twelfth  century,  relates  from  the  information  of  one 
of  his  own  acquaintance,  who  assured  him  that  he 
was  an  eye-witness,  and  whom  William  "  would 
have  been  ashamed  to  disbelieve.''  *  No  sooner  had 
her  unearthly  master  given  the  miserable  woman 
warning  that  the  hour  had  approached  when  he  should 
take  final  possession,  than  she  called  to  her  death- 
bed her  children  and  the  monks  of  a  neighbouring 
monastery,  confessed  her  evil  courses  and  her  sub- 
jection to  the  devil,  and  begged  that  they  would  at 
least  secure  her  body  from  the  hands  of  the  fiends. 
"  Sew  me,''  she  said,  "  in  the  hide  of  a  stag,  then 
place  me  in  a  stone  coffin,  and  fasten  in  the  cover- 
ing lead  and  iron  Upon  this  place  another  stone, 
and  chain  the  whole  down  with  three  heavy  chains 
of  iron.  Let  fifty  psalms  be  sung  each  night  ,and 
fifty  masses  be  said  by  day,  to  break  the  power 
of  the  demons.  If  you  can  thus  keep  my  body 
three  nights,  on  the  fourth  day  you  may  securely 
bury  it  in  the  ground."    These  directions  were  exe- 

*  Ego  illud  a  tali  audivi,  qui  se  vidisse  juraret,  cui  erubes* 
cerem  non  credere. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


8  SORCERY  AND  MAGIC. 

cuted  to  the  letter;  but  psalms  and  masses  were 
equally  unavailable.  The  first  night  the  priests 
withstood  the  efforts  of  the  fiends ;  the  second  they 
became  more  clamorous,  the  gates  of  the  monastery 
were  burst  open  in  spite  of  the  strength  of  the  bolts, 
and  two  of  the  chains  which  held  down  the  coffin  were 
broken,  though  the  middle  one  heldfirm.  On  thethird 
night  the  clamour  of  the  fiends  increased  till  the  mo- 
nastery trembled  from  its  foundations;  and  the  priests, 
stiff  with  terror,  were  unable  to  proceed  of  with  their 
service.  The  doors  at  length  burst  open  of  their 
own  accord,  and  a  demon,  larger  and  more  terrible 
than  any  of  the  others,  stalked  into  the  churcL  He 
stopped  at  the  coffin,  and  with  a  fearful  voice 
ordered  the  woman  to  arise.  She  answered,  that 
she  was  held  down  by  the  chain;  the  demon  put 
his  foot  to  the  coffin,  the  last  chain  broke  asunder 
like  a  bit  of  thread,  and  the  covering  of  the  coffin 
flew  off.  The  body  of  the  witch  thien  arose,  and  her 
persecutor  took  her  by  the  hand,  and  led  her  to  the 
door,  where  a  black  horse  of  gigantic  stature,  its 
back  covered  with  iron  spikes,  awaited  them,  and, 
seating  her  beside  him  on  its  back,  he  disappeared 
from  the  sight  of  the  terrified  monks.  But  the  hor- 
rible screams  of  his  victim  were  heard  through  the 
country  for  miles  as  they  passed  along. 

At  this  period  the  witches  met  together  by  night, 
in  solitary  places,  to  worship  their  master,  who  ap- 
peared to  them  in  the  shape  of  a  cat,  or  a  goat,  or 
sometimes  in  that  of  a  man.  At  these  meetings,  as 
we  are 'informed  by  John  of  Salisbury,  they  had 
feasts,  and  some  were  appointed  to  serve  at  table, 
while  others  received  punishment  or  reward,  accord- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  NIGHT  RIDERS.  9 

ing  to  their  zeal  in  the  service  of  the  evil  one. 
Hither,  also,  they  brought  children  which  they  had 
stolen  from  their  cradles,  and  which  were  sometimes 
torn  to  pieces  and  devoured.  We  see  here  the  first 
outlines  of  the  witches'  "  Sabbath''  of  a  later  age. 
The  witches  came  to  these  assemblies  riding  through 
the  air,  mounted  on  besoma  William  of  Auverne, 
who  wrote  in  the  thirteenth  century,  informs  us 
itat  when  the  witches  wished  to  go  to  the  place  of 
rendezvous,  they  took  a  reed  or  cane,  and,  on 
making  some  magical  signs  and  uttering  certain 
barbarous  words,  it  became  transformed  into  a 
horse,  which  carried  them  thither  with  extraordi- 
nary rapidity.  It  was  a  very  common  article  of 
belief  in  the  middle  ages,  that  women  of  this  class 
rode  about  through  the  air  at  night,  moimted  on 
strange  beasts  ;  that  they  passed  over  immense  dis- 
tances in  an  incredible  short  space  of  time ;  and 
that  they  entered  men's  houses  without  opening 
doors  or  windows,  and  destroyed  their  goods,  and 
injured  their  persons  while  asleep,  sometimes  even 
causing  their  death.  Vincent  of  Beauvais,  in  the 
thirteenth  *  century,  tells  a  story  of  one  of  these 
wandering  dames,  who  one  day  went  to  the  priest 
in  the  church,  and  said,  "  Sir,  I  did  you  a  great 
service  last  night,  and  saved  you  from  much  evil ; 
for  the  dames  with  whom  I  am  accustomed  to  go 
aboutj,t  night,  entered  your  chamber,  and  if  I  had 
Hot  interceded  with  them,  and  prayed  for  you,  they 
"would  have  done  you  an  injury."  Says  the  priest, 
"  The  door  of  my  chamber  was  locked  and  bolted, 
how  could  you  enter  it  V  To  which  the  old  woman 
(for  we  are  assured  that  it  was  an  old  woman)  an- 

B  5 


Digitized 


by  Google 


]0  SOROEBT  AKB  ttAGIC. 

swered,  "  Sir,  neither  door  nor  lock  can  restrain  or 
hinder  us  from  freely  going  in  and  out  wherever  we 
choose/'  Then  the  priest  shut  and  bolted  the 
church  doors,  and  seizing  the  staff  of  the  cross,  "  I 
will  prove  if  it  be  true/'  said  he,  "  that  I  may  repay 
you  for  so  great  a  service,''  and  he  belaboured  the 
woman's  brfck  and  shoulders.  To  all  her  outcries, 
his  onlj-  reply  was,  "  Get  out  of  the  church  and  fly, 
since  neither  door  nor  lock  can  restrain  you  V  It 
was  an  argument  that  could  not  be  evaded.  A 
writer  of  the  twelfth  century,  however,  relates, 
from  his  own  knowledge,  an  incident  where  a 
woman  in  France  had  been  seized  for  her  wicked 
opinions,  and  condemned  to  the  fire ;  but,  with  a 
word  or  two  of  contempt  for  her  keepers  and  judges, 
she  approached  the  window  of  the  room  in  which 
she  was  confined,  uttered  a  charm,  and  instantly 
disappeared  in  the  air. 

Another  faculty  possessed  by  the  witches  of  the 
twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries,  was  that  of  taking 
strange  shapes,  as  those  of  different  animals,  or  of 
transforming  others.  It  was  a  very  prevalent  belief 
that  such  persons  turned  themselves  into  ravenous 
wolves,  and  wandered  about  by  night  to  devour 
people.  They  took  many  other  shapes  to  indulge 
passions  which  could  not  be  otherwise  gratified. 
They  sometimes  revenged  themselves  upon  their 
enemies,  or  those  against  whom  they  bore  ill-will, 
by  turning  them  into  dogs  or  asses,  and  they  could 
only  recover  their  shapes  by  bathing  in  running 
water.  William  of  Malmsbury,  in  the  earlier  part 
of  the  twelfth  century,  tells  us,  that  in  the  high 
road  to  Rome  there  dwelt  two  old  women,  of  no 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   METAMORPHOSIS.  11 

good  reputation,  in  a  wretched  hut,  where  they 
allured  weary  travellers;  and  by  their  charms 
transformed  them  into  horses,  or  swine,  or  any 
other  animals  which  they  could  sell  to  the  mer- 
chants who  passed  that  way,  by  which  means  they 
gained  a  livelihood.  One  day  a  jougleur,  or  mounte- 
bank, asked  for  a  night's  lodging ;  and  when  they 
were  informed  of  his  profession,  they  told  him  that 
they  had  an  ass  which  was  remarkable  for  its  in- 
telligence— being  deficient  only  in  speech,  but 
which  would  do  every  kind  of  feat  it  was  ordered 
to  do.  The  jougleur  saw  the  ass,  was  delighted 
with  its  exploits,  and  bought  it  for  a  considerable 
sum  of  money.  The  woman  told  him  at  parting, 
that  if  he  would  preserve  the  animal  long,  he  must 
carefully  keep  it  from  water.  The  mountebank 
followed  these  directions,  and  his  ass  became  a  very 
fertile  source  of  profit  But  its  keeper,  with  in- 
crease of  riches,  became  more  dissolute,  and  less 
attentive  to  his  interests;  and  one  day  while  he 
was  in  a  state  of  drunken  forgetfulness,  the  ass 
escaped,  and  ran  directly  to  the  nearest  stream,  into 
which  it  had  no  sooner  thrown  itself,  than  it  reco- 
vered its  original  shape  of  a  handsome  young  man. 
The  mountebank  soon  afterwards  missing  his  ass, 
set  out  anxiously  in  search  of  it,  and  met  the  young 
man,  who  told  him  what  had  happened,  and  how 
he  had  been  transformed  by  the  wicked  charms  of 
the  old  women.  The  latter  were  carried  with  him 
before  the  pope,  to  whom  they  confessed  their  evil 
practices. 

The  power  of  the  witches  was  indeed  very  great ; 
and  as  they  were  believed  to  be  entirely  occupied 


Digitized 


by  Google 


12  80RCERT  AKD  MAGIC. 

in  the  perpetration  of  mischief,  it  was  in  these  early 
ages  an  object  of  universal  terror.  They  sent  storms 
which  destroyed  the  crops,  and  overthrew  or  set 
fire  to  people's  houses.  They  simk  ships  on  the  sea. 
They  cast  charms  on  people's  cattle.  They  carried 
away  children  from  the  cradle,  and  often  tore  and 
devoured  them  at  their  horrible  orgies,  while  some- 
times they  left  changelings  in  their  places.  They 
struck  men  and  women  with  noxious  diseases,  and 
made  them  gradually  pine  away.  The  earlier  Ger- 
man and  Anglo-Saxon  witches  were  still  more 
ferocious,  for  it  appears  that  when  they  found  men 
asleep,  or  off  their  guard,  they  slew  them,  and  de- 
voured their  heart  and  breast,  a  crime  for  which  a 
severe  punishment  is  allotted  in  the  ancient  laws  of 
some  of  the  Teutonic  tribes.  But  it  appears  by 
some  of  these  laws,  that  the  witches  had  contrived 
a  singular  mode  of  evasion.  When  they  found  a 
man  asleep,  they  tore  oiit  his  heart  and  devoured  it, 
and  then  filled  the  cavity  with  straw,  or  a  piece  of 
wood,  or  some  other  substance,  and  by  their  charms 
gave  him  an  artificial  life,  so  that  he  appeared  to 
live  and  move  in  the  world,  and  execute  all  his 
functions,  until  long  after  the  actual  crime  had 
taken  place,  and  then  he  pined  away,  and  seemed 
to  die. 

The  practice  of  bewitching  and  killing  people  by 
charmed  images  of  wax,  which  is  so  often  mentioned 
in  later  times,  does  not  occur  in  the  earlier  history 
of  sorcery  in  the  west  It  is  not  distinctly  men- 
tioned until  the  beginning  of  the  fourteenth  cen- 
tury ;  but  it  must  not  be  forgotten,  that  we  have 
no  detailed  trials  of  witches  in  these  early  ages,  and 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  MAGICIANS  OP  COVENTRY.  13 

that  consequently  we  find  only  accidental  allusions 
to  their  practices.  The  earliest  trial  for  witchcraft 
in  England  occurs  in  the  tenth  year  of  the  reign  of 
king  John,  when,  as  it  is  briefly  stated  in  the 
Abbreviatio  Pladtorimi,  the  only  record  of  the  legal 
proceedings  of  the  time,  "  Agnes,  the  wife  of  Odo 
the  merchant,  accused  Gideon  of  sorcery  (de  sorce- 
ria),  and  she  was  acquitted  by  the  judgment  of 
[hot]  iron."  During  tfie  reign  of  Edward  II.,  in 
1324,  occurs  the  earliest  case  of  sorcery  in  England 
of  which  we  have  any  details.  The  actors  in  it 
were  men,  and  their  object  was  to  cause  the  death 
of  the  king,  the  two  Despensers  (bis  favourites), 
and  the  prior  of  Coventry,  who,  it  appears,  had  been 
supported  by  the  royal  favourites  in  oppressing  the 
city  of  Coventry,  and  more  especially  certain  of  its 
citizens.  The  latter  went  to  a  famous  necromancer 
of  Coventry,  named  master  John  of  Nottingham, 
and  his  man  Robert  Marshall  of  Leicester,  and  re- 
quested them  to  aid  "  by  their  necromancy  and 
their  arts"  in  bringing  about  the  death  of  the  king, 
the  two  favourites,  and  the  said  prior.  Robert 
Marshall,  perhaps  in  consequence  of  a  quarrel  with 
his  master,  sought  his  revenge  by  laying  an  infor- 
mation against  the  other  confederates.  He  said 
that  John  of  Nottingham  and  himself  having  agreed 
for  a  certain  sum  of  money  to  do  as  they  were  re- 
quested by  the  citizens,  the  latter  brought  them,  on 
the  Sunday  next  after  the  feast  of  St.  Nicholas, 
being  the  11th  of  March,  a  sum  of  money  in  part 
payment,  with  seven  pounds  of  wax  and  two  yards 
of  canvass,  with  which  wax  the  necromancer  and 
his  man  made  seven  images,  the  one  representing 


Digitized 


by  Google 


14  SORCERY  AND  MAGIC. 

the  king  with  his  crown  on  his  head,  the  six  others 
representing  the  two  Despensers,  the  prior,  his 
caterer  and  steward,  and  a  certain  person  named 
Richard  de  Lowe,  the  latter  being  chosen  merely  for 
the  purpose  of  trying  an  experiment  upon  him  to 
prove  the  strength  of  the  charm.  Robert  Marshall 
confessed  that  he  and  his  master,  John  of  Notting- 
ham, went  to  an  old  ruined  house  under  Shorteley 
Park,  about  half  a  league  from  the  city  of  Coventry, 
in  which  they  began  their  work  on  the  Monday 
after  the  feast  of  St  Nicholas,  and  that  they  re- 
mained constantly  at  work  until  the  Saturday  after 
the  feast  of  the  Ascension ;  that  "  as  the  said  master 
John  and  he  wete  at  their  work  in  the  said  old 
house  the  Friday  after  the  feast  of  the  Holy  Cross, 
about  midnight,  the  said  master  John  gave  to  the 
said  Robert  a  broach  of  lead  with  a  sharp  point, 
and  commanded  him  to  push  it  to  the  depth  of 
about  two  inches  in  the  forehead  of  the  image  made 
after  Richard  de  Lowe,  by  which  he  would  prove 
the  others  ;  and  so  he  did ;  and  the  next  morning 
the  said  master  John  sent  the  said  Robert  to  the 
house  of  the  said  Richard  de  Lowe,  to  spy  in  what 
condition  he  was,  and  the  said  Robert  found  the 
said  Richard  screaming  and  crying  "  harrow !"  and 
without  knowledge  of  any  body,  having  lost  his 
memory ;  and  so  the  said  Richard  lay  lan^ishing 
until  the  daybreak  of  the  Sunday  before  the  feast 
of  the  Ascension,  at  which  hour  the  said  master 
John  drew  out  the  said  leaden  broach  from  the 
forehead  of  the  said  image  made  after  the  said 
Richard,  and  thrust  it  into  its  heart.  And  thus 
the  said  broach  remained  in  the  heart  of  the  image 


Digitized 


by  Google 


SUTO  DE  STELLA.  15 

iitil  the  Wednesday  following,  on  which  day  the 
id  Richard  died."'  It  appears  that  a  stop  was  put 
» the  further  prosecution  of  their  design,  and  thus 
lie  only  person  who  suffered  was  one  against  whom 
Itiiey  appear  to  have  had  no  cause  for  malice.  The 
llrial  was  adjourned  from  term  to  term,  until  at 
[length  it  disappears  from  the  rolls,  and  the  prosecu- 
[  tion  was  probably  dropped. 

It  was,  however,  the  church  more  frequently 
than  the  common  law,  which  took  cognizance  of 
such  crimes ;  for  sorcery  was  conceived  to  be  one 
of  the  means  used  by  Satan  to  stir  up  heresies,  and 
it  was  on  this  account,  that  on  the  continent  it  was 
at  an  early  period  treated  with  so  much  severity.* 
Apostate  priests  were  believed  to  attend  the  secret 
assemblies  of  the  witches,  and  receive  their  lessons 
from  the  evil  one.  A  very  remarkable  heretical 
sorcerer,  named  Eudo  de  Stella,  lived  in  the  middle 
of  the  twelfth  century,  and  is  the  subject  of  several 
wonderful  stories  in  the  chronicles  of  those  times. 
By  his  "  diabolical  charms,^'  if  we  believe  William 
of  Newbury,  he  collected  together  a  great  multitude 
of  followers.  Sometimes  they  were  carried  about 
from  province  to  province,  with  amazing  rapidity, 
making  converts  wherever  they  stopped.  At  other 
times  they  retired  into  desert  places,  where  their 
leader  held  his  court  in  great  apparent  magnifi- 
cence, and  noble  tables  were  suddenly  spread  with 
rich  viands  and  strong  wines,  served  by  invisible 

*  Tlie  earliest  instance  which  I  have  met  with  of  the  burn- 
ing of  witches,  occurs  in  the  curious  treatise  of  Walter  Majjes 
de  Nugis  Curialium,  Dist  iv.  c.  6,  written  in  the  reign  of  our 
Henry  II. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


16  SORCEBt  AND  MAGIC. 

spirits,  and  whatever  the  guests  wished  for  was  laid 
before  them  in  an  instant,  But  William  of  New- 
bury tells  us,  that  he  had  heard  from  some  of  Eudo  s 
followers,  that  these  various  meats  were  not  sub- 
stantial, that  they  gave  satisfaction  only  for  the 
moment,  which  was  soon  followed  by  keener  hunger 
than  before,  so  that  they  were  continually  eating. 
Any  one,  however,  who  once  tasted  of  these  meats, 
or  received  any  of  Eudo's  gifts,  was  immediately 
held  by  a  charm,  and  became  involuntarily  one  of 
his  followers.  A  knight  of  his  acquaintance — ^for 
he  was  a  man  of  good  family — ^visited  him  at  his 
"  fantastic''  court,  and  endeavoured  in  vain  to  con- 
vert him  from  his  evil  ways.  When  he  departed, 
Eudo  presented  his  esquire  with  a  handsome  hawk. 
The  knight,  observing  his  esquire  with  the  bird  on 
his  hand,  advised  him  to  cast  it  away ;  but  he  re- 
fused, and  they  had  scarcely  left  the  assembly  which 
surrounded  Eudo's  resting-place,  when  the  esquire 
felt  the  claws  of  his  bird  grasping  him  tighter  and 
tighter,  until,  before  he  could  disengage  himself,  it 
flew  away  with  him,  and  he  was  seen  no  more. 
The  hawk  was  a  demon.  Eudo  was  at  length 
arrested  by  the  archbishop  of  Rheims,  and  died  in 
prison.  His  followers  dispersed  when  their  leader 
^as  taken,  but  some  of  them  were  seized  and 
burnt 

The  religious  sects  which  sprang  up  rather  nu- 
merously in  the  twelfth  century,  in  consequence 
of  the  violent  intellectual  agitation  of  that  age,  and 
which  attempted  to  throw  ofl*  the  corruptions  of  the 
papacy,  naturally  gave  great  alarm  to  the  church ; 
and  the  advocates  of  the  latter  adopted  the  course 


Digitized 


by  Google 


SORCERY  AND   HERBSY.  17 

too  common  in  religious  controversies,  of  attempt- 
ing to  render  their  opponents  unpopular,  by  fixing 
upon  them  some  disgraceful  stigma.  They  thus 
ascribed  to  them  most  of  the  scandalous  practices 
which  the  fathers  had  told  them  were  in  use  among 
the  Manichaeans  and  other  heretics  of  the  primitive 
church,  while  among  the  vulgar  they  identified 
them  with  the  hated  sorcerer  and  witch,  and  ac- 
cused them  of  being  in  direct  compact  with  the 
devil  The  secresy  which  their  safety  compelled 
them  to  observe  gave  a  ready  handle  for  such 
sinister  reports.  William  of  Rheims,  the  prelate 
mentioned  above,  appears  to  have  been  a  great  per- 
secutor of  these  sects,  which  were  numerous  in  all 
parts  of  France,  and  were  known  by  such  names  as 
Publicans,  (said  to  be  a  corruption  of  Paulicians,) 
Paternins,  &c.,  in  the  north,  and  Waldenses  in  the 
south.  Walter  Mapes,  a  well-known  English  writer 
of  the  latter  half  of  the  twelfth  century,  in  a 
treatise  entitled  De  Nugis  Curialiwn,  recently  pub- 
lished for  the  first  time  by  the  author  of  these 
pages,  has  preserved  some  curious  stories  relating 
to  these  Publicans,  whom  he  represents  as  being 
under  the  necessity  of  concealing  their  opinions 
from  the  knowledge  of  the  public.  Some  of  them, 
he  says,  who  had  returned  to  the  community  of  the 
church,  confessed  that  at  their  meetings,  which 
were  held  "about  the  first  watch  of  the  night,'' 
they  closed  the  doors  and  windows,  and  sat  waiting 
in  silence,  until  at  length  a  black  cat  descended 
amongst  them.  They  then  immediately  put  out 
the  lights,  and  approaching  this  strange  object  of 
adoration,  every  one  caught  hold  of  it  how  he  could 


Digitized 


by  Google 


18  SOROEBY  AND  If  AGIO. 

and  kissed  it  The  worshippers  then  took  hold  of 
each  other,  men  and  women,  and  proceeded  to  acts 
which  cannot  here  be  described.  The  archbishop 
of  Rheims  told  Mapes  himself  that  there  was  a  cer- 
tain great  baron  in  the  district  of  Vienne  who 
always  carried  with  him  in  his  scrip  a  small  quan- 
tity of  exorcised  salt,  as  a  defence  against  the  sor- 
cery of  these  people,  to  which  he  thought  he  was 
exposed  even  at  table.  Information  was  brought 
to  him  at  last  that  his  nephew,  who  was  also  a  man 
of  great  wealth  and  influence,  (perhaps  the  same 
Eudo  de  Stella  mentioned  by  William  of  Newbury,) 
had  been  converted  to  the  creed  of  these  Publicans 
or  Paterins  by  the  intermediation  of  two  knights, 
and  he  immediately  paid  him  a  visit  As  they  all 
sat  at  dinner,  the  noble  convert  ordered  ,  to  be 
placed  before  his  uncle  a  fine  barbel  on  a  dish, 
which  was  equally  tempting  by  its  look  and  smell, 
but  he  had  no  sooner  sprinkled  a  little  of  his  salt 
upon  it,  than  it  vanished,  and  nothing  Was  left  on 
the  dish  but  a  bit  of  dirt  The  imcle,  astonished  at 
what  had  happened,  urged  his  nephew  to  abandon 
his  evil  courses,  but  in  vain,  and  he  left  him,  carry- 
ing away  as  prisoners  the  two  knights  who  had 
corrupted  him.  To  punish  these  for  their  heresy, 
he  bound  them  in  a  little  hut  of  inflammable  mate- 
rials, to  which  he  set  fire  in  order  to  bum  them, 
but  when  the  ashes  were  cleared  away,  they  were 
found  totally  unhurt.  To  counteract  the  effects 
this  false  miracle  might  produce  on  the  minds  of  the 
vulgar,  the  baron  now  erected  a  larger  hut  with 
still  more  inflammable  materials,  which  he  sprinkled 
all  over  with  holy  water  as  a  precaution  against 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  WALDEirSES.  19 

sorcery,  but  now  it  was  found  that  the  flames 
would  not  communicate  themselves  to  the  building. 
When  people  entered,  however,  they  found  to  their 
astonishment  that  the  former  miracle  was  reversed ; 
for  now,  while  the  wooden  building  which  had 
been  sprinkled  with  holy  water  would  not  bum, 
the  two  sorcerers  were  found  reduced  to  ashes. 
The  Iruth  of  this  story  was  asserted  by  the  prince- 
bishop  of  Rheims,  (for  the  prelate  was  the  French 
king's  brother-in-law,)  and  the  readiness  with 
which  it  was  received  is  a  proof  of  the  extraordi- 
nary credulity  of  the  age  in  matters  of  this  kind. 
Walter  Mapes,  who  was  rather  beyond  his  age  in 
liberality  of  sentiment,  acknowledges  the  simplicity 
and  innocence  of  the  Waldenses,  or  Vaudois,  yet 
before  much  more  than  a  century  was  past,  they 
also  were  exposed  to  the  worst  part  of  the  charges 
mentioned  above  A  list  of  the  pretended  errors  of 
this  sect,  compiled  probably  about  the  end  of  the 
thirteenth  century,  speaks  of  the  same  disgraceful 
proceedings  at  their  secret  meetings,  of  the  figure  of 
a  cat  under  which  the  demon  appeared  to  them  t6 
receive  their  homage,  and  tells  us  that  they  tra- 
velled through  the  air  or  skies  anointed  with  a  cer- 
tsan  ointment ;  but  the  writer  confesses  naively 
that  they  had  not  done  such  things  to  his  know- 
ledge in  the  parts  where  he  lived  * 

*  This  list  of  the  errors  of  the  Waldenses  is  printed  in  the 
EeliquisB  AntiqusB,  vol.  i.  p.  246.  The  charges  alluded  to  are 
placed  at  the  end. 

"  Item,  habent  etiam  inter  se  mixtum  abominabile  et  per- 
versa dogmata  ad  hoc  apta,  sed  non  reperitur  quod  abutantur  in 
partibus  istis  a  muUis  temporibus. 


% 


Digitized 


by  Google 


20  SOBOBBY  AND  MAGIC- 

The  demons  whom  the  sorcerer  served  seem 
rarely  to  have  given  any  assistance  to  their  victims, 
when  the  latter  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  judicial 
authorities.  But  if  they  escaped  punishment  by 
the  agency  of  the  law,  they  were  only  reserved  for  a 
more  terrible  end.  We  have  already  seen  the  fate 
of  the  woman  of  Berkeley.  A  writer  of  the  thirteenth 
century  has  preserved  a  story  of  a  man  who,  by  his 
compact  with  the  evil  one,  had  collected  together 
great  richea  One  day,  while  he  was  absent  in  the 
fields,  a  stranger  of  suspicious  appearance  came  to 
his  house,  and  asked  for  him.  His  wife  replied 
that  he  was  not  at  home.  The  stranger  said,  "  Tell 
him,  when  he  returns,  that  to-night  he  must  pay 
me  my  debt/'  The  wife  replied  that  she  was  not 
aware  he  owed. anything  to  him.  "  Tell  him,''  said 
the  stranger,  with  a  ferocious  look,  "  that  I  will 
have  my  debt  to-night"  The  husband  returned, 
and,  when  informed  of  what  had  taken  place, 
merely  remarked  that  the  demand  was  just  He 
then  ordered  his  bed  to  be  made  that  night  in  an 
outhouse,  where  he  had  never  slept  before,  and  he 
shut  himself  in  it  with  a  lighted  candle.  The 
family  were  astonished,  and  could  not  resist  the 
impulse  to  gratify  their  curiosity  by  looking  through 

"  Item,  in  aliquibus  aliis  partibus  apparet  eis  daemon  sub 
specie  et  figura  cati,  quern  sub  cauda  sigillatim  osculantur. 

"  Item,  in  aliis  partibus  super  unum  baculiun  certo  un- 
guento  perunctum  equitant  et  ad  loca  assignata  ubi  voluerint 
congregantur  in  momento  dum  volunt.  Bed  ista  in  istis  par- 
tibus  non  inveniuntur." 

The  latter  is  distinctly  an  allusion  to  the  "  sabbath  "  of  the 
witches. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  ROUTIERS.  *  21 

the  holes  in  the  door.  They  beheld  the  same 
stranger,  who  had  entered  without  opening  the 
door,  seated  beside  his  victim,  and  they  appeared 
to  be  counting  large  sums  of  money.  Soon  they 
began  to  quarrel  about  their  accounts,  and  were 
proceeding  from  threats  to  blows,  when  the  ser- 
vants, who  were  looking  through  the  door,  burst  it 
open,  that  they  might  help  their  master.  The  light 
was  instantly  extinguished,  and  when  another  was 
brought,  no  traces  could  be  foimd  of  either  of  the 
disputants,  nor  were  they  ever  afterwards  heard  o£ 
The  suspicious  looking  stranger  was  the  demon  him- 
self, who  had  carried  away  his  victim. 

In  some  cases  the  demon  interfered  uncalled  for, 
and  without  any  apparent  advantage  to  himself  A 
story  told  by  Walter  Mapes  furnishes  a  curious 
illustration  of  this,  while  it  shows  us  the  strong 
tendency  of  the  popular  mind  to  believe  in  super- 
natural agency.  The  wars  and  troubles  of  the 
twelfth  century,  joined  with  the  defective  construc- 
tion of  the  social  system,  exposed  France  and  other 
countries  to  the  ravages  of  troops  of  soldier  rob- 
bers, who  made  war  on  society  for  their  own  gain, 
and  who  represented  in  a  rude  form  the  Free  Com- 
panies of  a  later  period.  They  were  commonly 
known  by  the  appellation  of  Routiers,  and  in  many 
instances  had  for  their  leaders  knights  and  gentle- 
men who,  having  squandered  away  their  property, 
or  incurred  the  ban  of  society,  betook  themselves 
to  this  wild  mode  of  life.  The  chief  of  one  of  the 
bands  which  ravaged  the  diocese  of  Beauvais  in  the 
twelfth  century  was  named  Eudo.  He  was  the  son 
and  heir  of  a  baron  of  great  wealth,  but  had  wasted 


Digitized 


by  Google 


22  *  SORCEBY  AND   MAGIC. 

hia  patrimony  until  he  was  reduced  to  beggary. 
One  day  he  wandered  from  the  city  into  a  neigh- 
bouring   wood,   and    there    he   sank   down   on   a 
bank-side,  reflecting  on  his  own  miserable  condi- 
tion.   Suddenly  he  was  roused  from  his  reverie  by 
the  appearance  of  a  stranger,  a  man  of  large  stature 
but  repulsive  countenance,  who,  nevertheless,  ad- 
dressed him  in    conciliatory  language,    and   soon 
showed  that  he  knew  all  his  aflkirs.     The  stranger, 
who  was  no  other  than  a  demon  in  disguise,  pro- 
mised Eudo  that  he  should  not  only  recover  his 
former  riches,  but  that  he  should  gain   infinitely 
more  wealth  and  power  than  he  had  ever  possessed 
before,  if  he  would  submit  to  his  guidance  and  fol- 
low his  councils-     After  much  hesitation,  Eudo  ac- 
cepted the  tempter  s  aid,  and  the  latter  not  only 
waived  any  disagreeable  conditions  on  the  part  of 
his  victim,  but  even  agreed  that  he  would  give  him 
three  successive  warnings  before  his  death,  so  that 
he  might  have  sufficient  time  for  repentance.    From 
this  moment  Olga,   for  this   was    the  name    the 
demon  took,  was  Eudo's  constant  companion,  and 
the  adviser  of  all  his  actions.     They  soon  raised  a 
powerful  troop,  and  by  the  knowledge  and  skill  of 
Olga,  the  whole  district  of  Beauvais  was  gradually 
overrun  and  plundered,  and  its  inhabitants  exposed 
to  every  outrage  in  which  the  lawless  soldiers  of 
the  middle  ages  indulged.      Success  attended  all 
Eudo's  undertakings,  and  neither  towns  nor  castles 
were  safe  from  their  ravages.   The  possessions  of  the 
clergy  were  the  special  objects  of  Eudo's  fury,  and 
the  bishop  of  Beauvais,  after  using  in  vain  all  means 
of  reclaiming  or  resisting  him,  thundered  against 


Digitized 


by  Google 


EUBO  AND  THE  DEMON  OLGA.         23 

him  the  deepest  anathema  of  the  church.  In  the 
midst  of  these  daily  scenes  of  rapine  and  slaughter, 
one  day  Olga  met  him  with  a  more  serious  counte- 
nance than  usual,  reminded  him  of  his  sins, 
preached  repentance,  and  recommended  him,  above 
all  things,  to  submit  to  the  bishop  and  reconcile 
himself  to  the  church.  Eudo  obeyed,  obtained  the 
bishop's  absolution,  led  a  better  life  for  a  short 
time,  and  then  returned  to  his  old  ways,  and  be- 
came worse  than  before.  In  the  course  of  one  of 
his  plundering  expeditions,  he  was  thrown  from  his 
horse,  and  broke  his  leg.  This  Eudo  took  as  his 
first  warning ;  he  repented  anew,  went  to  the 
bishop  and  made  his  confession,  (omitting,  however, 
all  mention  of  his  compact  with  Olga,)  and  re- 
mained peaceful  till  his  recovery  from  the  accident, 
when  he  collected  his  followers  again,  and  pursued 
his  old  life  with  such  eagerness  that  no  one  could 
speak  of  his  name  without  horror.  A  second  warn- 
ing, the  loss  of  his  eye  by  an  arrow,  had  the  same 
Iresidt.  At  length  he  was  visited  by  the  third  and 
last  warning,  the  death  of  his  only  son,  and  then 
true  penitence  visited  his  heart.  He  hastened  to 
the  city  of  Beauvais,  and  found  the  bishop  outside 
the  walls  assisting  at  the  burning  of  a  witcL  But 
the  prelate  had  now  experienced  so  many  times  the 
falseness  of  Eudo's  penitence,  that  he  refused  to 
believe  it  when  true.  The  earnest  supplications  of 
the  sinner,  even  the  tardy  sympathy  of  the  multi- 
tude who  stood  round,  most  of  whom  had  been  suf- 
ferers from  his  violence,  were  of  no  avail,  and  the 
bishop  persisted  in  refusing  to  the  unhappy  man 
the  consolations  of  the  churcL     At  length,  tor- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


24  SORCERY  AND   MAGIC. 

mented  and  angered  with  his  impunities,  the  bishop 
exclaimed,  "  If  I  must  relent,  be  it  known  that  I 
enjoin  as  thy  penitence  that  thou  throw  thyself  into 
this  fire  which  has  been  prepared  for  the  sorceress."' 
Eudo  remonstrated  not,  but  threw  himself  into  the 
fire,  and  was  consumed  to  ashes. 

With  the  fourteenth  century  we  enter  upon  a 
new  period  of  the  history  of  sorcery.  The  trial  of 
the  necromancers  of  Coventry  appears  to  have  ori- 
ginated in  an  attempt  to  gratify  private  revenge, 
in  our  next  chapter  we  shall  detail  a  far  more  ex- 
traordinary case,  occurring  at  the  same  time,  which 
appears  to  have  arisen  from  acts  of  extortion  and 
oppression.  From  this  time,  during  at  least  two 
centuries,  (the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth,)  we  shall 
find  sorcery  used  frequently  as  a  powerful  instru- 
ment of  political  intrigue.  After  that  period,  we 
enter  upon  what  may  be  termed,  par  eicceUence,  the 
age  of  witches. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


25 


CHAPTER  IL 


8T0EY   OF  THB  LADY  ALICE  KTTELER. 

It  was  late  in  the  twelfth  century  when  the 
Anglo-Normans  first  set  their  feet  in  Ireland  as 
conquerors,  and  before  the  end  of  the  thirteenth 
the  portion  of  that  island  which  has  since  received 
the  name  of  the  English  Pale,  was  already  covered 
with  flourishing  towns  and  cities,  which  bore  wit- 
ness to  the  rapid  increase  of  commerce  in  the  hands 
of  the  enterprising  and  industrious  settlers  from  the 
shores  of  Great  Britain.  The  county  of  Kilkenny, 
attractive  by  its  beauty  and  by  its  various  resources, 
was  one  of  the  districts  first  occupied  by  the  inva- 
ders, and  at  the  time  of  which  we  are  speaking  its 
chief  town,  named  also  Kilkenny,  was  a  strong  city 
with  a  commanding  castle,* and  was  inhabited  by 
wealthy  merchants,  one  of  whom  was  a  rich  banker 
and  monejr-lender  named  William  Outlawe. 

This  William  Outlawe  married  a  lady  of  property 
named  Alice  Kyteler,  or  Le  Kyteler,  who  was,  per- 
haps, the  sister,  or  a  near  relative  of  a  William  Ky- 
teler, incidentally  mentioned  as  holding  the  office 

VOL.  I.  c 


Digitized 


by  Google 


26  SOBCEBT  AND  MAGIC. 

of  sheriff  of  the  liberty  of  Kilkenny.  William  Out- 
lawe  died  some  time  before  1302 ;  and  his  widow 
became  the  wife  of  Ado^m  le  Blond,  of  Callan,  of  a 
family  which,  by  its  Eii^glish  name  of  White,  held 
considerable  estates  in  Kilkenny  and  Tipperary  in 
later  times.  This  second  husband  was  dead  before 
1311 ;  for  in  that  year  the  lady  Alice  appears  849 
the  wife  of  Richard  de  Valle,  and  at  the  time  of  the 
events  narrated  in  the  following  pages,  she  was  the 
spouse  of  a  fourth  husband,  Sir  John  le  Poer.  By 
her  first  husband  she  had  a  son,  named  also  William 
Outlawe,  who  appears  to  have  been  the  heir  to  his 
father's  property,  and  succeeded  him  as  a  banker. 
He  was  his  mother's  fkvourite  child,  and  seems  to 
have  inherited  also  a  good  portion  of  the  wealth  of 
the  lady  Alice's  second  and  third  husbands. 

The  few  incidents  relating  to  this  family  previous 
to  the  year  1324,  which  can  be  gathered  from  the 
entries  on  the  Irish  records,  seem  to  show  that  it 
was  not  altogether  free  from  the  turbulent  spirit 
which  was  so  prevalent  among  the  Anglo-Irish  in 
former  ages.  It  appears  that  in  1302,  Adam  le 
Blond  and  Alice  his  wife  intrusted  to  the  keeping 
of  William  Outlawe  the  younger  the  sum  of  three 
thousand  pounds  in  money,  which  William  Outlawe, 
for  the  better  security,  buried  in  the  earth  within 
his  house,  a  method  of  concealing  treasure  which 
accounts  for  many  of  our  antiquarian  discoveries. 
This  was  soon  noised  abroad ;  and  one  night  Wil- 
liam le  Kyteler,  the  sheriff  above-mentioned,  with 
others,  by  precept  of  the  seneschal  of  the  liberty  of 
Kilkenny,  broke  into  the  house  vi  et  armis,  as  the 
recQrd  has  it,  dug  up  the  money,  and  carried  it  off 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THB   LADY  ALICE   KYTELBR.  27 

along  with  a  hundred  pounds  belonging  to  William 
Outlawe  himself,  which  they  found  in  the  house. 
Such  an  outrage  as  this  could  not  pass  in  silence  ; 
but  the  perpetrators  attempted  to  shelter  themselves 
under  the  excuse  that  being  dug  up  from  the  ground 
it  was  treaawre'trove,  and  as  such  belonged  to  the 
king ;  and,  when  Adam  le  Blond  and  his  wife  Alice 
attempted  to  make  good  their  claims,  the  sheriff 
trumped  up  a  charge  against  them  that  they  had 
committed  homicide  and  other  crimes,  and  that 
they  had  concealed  Roesia  Outlawe  (perhaps  the 
sister  of  William  Outlawe  the  younger),  accused  of 
theft,  from  the  agents  of  justice,  under  which  pre- 
tences he  threw  into  prison  all  three,  Adam,  Alice, 
and  Roesia  They  were,  however,  soon  afterwards 
liberated,  but  we  do  not  learn  if  they  recovered 
their  money.  William  Outlawe's  riches,  and  his 
mother  s  partiality  for  him,  appear  to  have  drawn 
upon  them  both  the  jealousy  and  hatred  of  many  of 
their  neighbours,  and  even  of  some  of  their  kindred, 
but  they  were  too  powerful  and  too  highly  connected 
to  be  reached  in  any  ordinary  way. 

At  this  time  Richard  de  Ledrede,  a  turbulent  in- 
triguing prelate,  held  the  see  of  Ossory,  to  which  he 
had  been  consecrated  in  1318  by  mandate  from 
pope  John  XXII.,  the  same  pontiff  to  whom  we 
owe  the  first  bull  against  sorcery  (contra  magos  ma- 
gicdsque  sH/perstitiones),  which  was  the  ground-work 
of  the  inquisitorial  persecutions  of  the  following 
ages.  In  1324,  bishop  Richard  made  a  visitation 
of  his  diocese,  and  "  found,"  as  the  chronicler  of 
those  events  informs  us,  "  by  an  inquest  in  which 
were  five  knights  and  other  noblemen  iij  great  mul- 

c  2 


Digitized 


by  Google 


28  SOECBRY   AND  MAGIC. 

titude,  that  in  the  city  of  Kilkenny  there  had  long 
been,  and  still  were,  many  sorcerers  using  divers 
kinds  of  witchcraft,  to  the  investigation  of  which 
the  bishop  proceeding,  as  he  was  obliged  by  duty  of 
his  office,  found  a  certain  rich  lady,  called  the  lady 
Alice  Kyteler,  the  mother  of  William  Outlawe,  with 
many  of  her  accomplices,  involved  in  various  such 
heresies."  Here,  then,  was  a  fair  occasion  for  dis- 
playing the  zeal  of  a  follower  of  the  sorcery-hating 
pope  John,  and  also  perhaps  for  indulging  some 
other  passions. 

The  persons  accused  as  lady  Alice's  accomplices 
were  her  son  the  banker  William  Outlawe,  a  clerk 
named  Robert  de  Bristol,  John  Galrussyn,  William 
Payn  of  Boly,  Petronilla  de  Meath,  Petronilla's 
daughter  Sarah,  Alice  the  wife  of  Henry  the  Smith, 
Annota  Lange,  Helena  Galrussyn,  Sysok  Galrus- 
syn,  and  Eva  de  Brounstoun.  The  charges  brought 
against  them  were  distributed  under  seven  formid- 
able heads.  First,  it  was  asserted  that,  in  order  to 
give  effect  to  their  sorcery,  they  were  in  the  habit 
of  denying  totally  the  faith  of  Christ  and  of  the 
church  for  a  year  or  month,  according  as  the  object 
to  be  attained  was  greater  or  less,  so  that  during 
the  stipulated  period  they  believed  in  nothing  that 
the  church  believed,  and  abstained  from  worship- 
ping the  body  of  Christ,  from  entering  a  church, 
from  hearing  mass,  and  from  participating  in  the 
sacrament.  Second,  that  they  propitiated  the  de- 
mons with  sacrifices  of  living  animals,  which  they  di- 
vided member  from  member,  and  offered,  by  scat- 
tering them  in  cross-roads,  to  a  certain  demon  who 
caused  himself  to  be  called  Robin  Artisson  {jUius 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  LADY  ALICE  KYTBLBB.  29 

Artis),  who  was  "one  of  the  poorer  class  of  hell'' 
Third,  that  by  their  sorceries  they  sought  counsel 
^d  answers  from  demons.  Fourth,  that  they  used 
the  ceremonies  of  the  church  in  their  nightly  con- 
venticles, pronouncing,  with  lighted  candles  of  wax, 
sentence  of  excommunication,  even  against  the  per- 
sons of  their  own  husbands,  naming  expressly  every 
member,  from  the  sole  of  the  foot  to  the  top  of  the 
head,  and  at  length  extinguishing  the  candles  with 
the  exclamation  "  Fi !  fil  fi!  Amen."  Fifth,  that 
with  the  intestines  and  other  inner  parts  of  cocks 
sacrificed  to  the  demons,  with  **  certain  horrible 
worms,"'  various  herbs,  the  nails  of  dead  men,  the 
hair,  brains,  and  clothes  of  children  which  had  died 
unbaptized,  and  other  things  equally  disgusting, 
^boiled  in  the  skull  of  a  certain  robber  who  had 
been  beheaded,  on  a  fire  made  of  oak-sticks,  they 
had  made  powders  and  ointments,  and  also  candles 
of  fat  boiled  in  the  said  skull,  with  certain  charms, 
which  things  were  to  be  instrumental  in  exciting 
love  or  hatred,  and  in  killing  and  otherwise  afflict- 
ing the  bodies  of  faithftd  Christians,  and  in  effect- 
ing various  other  purposes.  Sixth,  that  the  sons 
and  daughters  of  the  four  husbands  of  the  lady 
Alice  Kyteler  had  made  their  complaint  to  the 
bishop,  that  she,  by  such  sorcery,  had  procured  the 
death  of  her  husbands,  and  had  so  infatuated  and 
charmed  them,  that  they  had  given  all  their  pro- 
perty to  her  and  her  son,  to  the  perpetual  impover- 
ishment of  their  own  sons  and  heirs ;  insomuch, 
that  her  present  husband.  Sir  John  le  Poer,  was 
reduced  to  a  most  miserable  state  of  body  by  her 
powders,  ointments,  and  other  magical  operations  ; 


Digitized 


by  Google 


30  SOBOEBT   AND  MAOIO. 

but  being  warned  by  her  maid-servant,  he  had  for- 
cibly taken  from  his  wife  the  keys  of  her  boxes,  in 
which  he  found  a  bag  filled  with  the  "  detestable '' 
articles  above  enumerated,  which  he  had  sent  to  the 
bishop.  Seventh,  that  there  was  an  unholy  con- 
nexion between  the  said  lady  Alice  and  the  demon 
called  Robin  Artisson,  who  sometimes  appeared  to 
her  in  the  form  of  a  cat,  sometimes  in  that  of  a 
black  shaggy  dog,  and  at  others  in  the  form  of  a 
black  man,  with  two  tall  and  equally-swardiy  com- 
panions, each  carrying  an  iro^  rod  in  his  hand.  It 
is  added  by  some  of  the  old  chroniclers,  that  her 
offering  to  the  demon  was  nine  red  cocks,  and  nine 
peacocks'  eyes,  at  a  certain  stone  bridge  at  a  ox>ss- 
road  ;  that  she  had  a  certain  ointment  with  which 
she  rubbed  a  beam  of  wood  "called  a  cowlta^,"  upon 
which  she  and  her  accomplices  were  carriM  to  any 
part  of  the  world  they  wished,  without  hiirt  or  stoj)- 
page ;  that  "  i^he  swept  the  stretes  of  Eilkennie  be- 
tweene  compleine  and  twilight,  raking  ^  the  filth 
towards  the  doores  of  hir  sonne  William  Otttlawe, 
murmuring  secretlie  with  hir  selfe  these  Words  : 

*  To  the  house  of  William  my  sonne, 
Hie  all  the  wealth  of  Kilkennie  town ;'  *' 

and  that  in  her  house  was  seized  a  wafer  of  conse- 
crated bread,  on  which  the  name  of  the  dfevil  was 
written. 

The  bishop  of  Ossory  resolved  at  once  to  enforce 
in  its  utmost  rigour  the  recent  papal  bull  against 
offenders  of  this  class  ;  but  he  had  to  contend  with 
^ater  difficulties  than  he  expected.  The  mode  of 
proceeding  was  new,  for  hitherto  in  England  sorcery 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THB   LADY   ALIOB   KYTBLBR.  31 

was  looked  upon  as  a  crime  of  which  the  secular 
law  had  cognisance,  and  not  as  belonging  to  the 
ecclesiastical  court ;  and  this  is  ssid  to  have  been 
the  first  trial  of  the  kind  in  Ireland  that  had  at- 
tracted any  public  attention.  Moreover,  the  lady 
Alice,  who  was  the  person  chiefly  attacked,  had 
rich  and  powerful  supporters.  The  first  step  taken 
by  the  bishop  was  to  require  the  chancellor  to  issue 
a  writ  for  the  arrest  of  the  persons  accused.  But  it 
happened  that  the  lord  chancellor  of  Ireland  at 
this  time  was  Roger  Outlawe,  prior  of  the  order  of 
St  John  of  Jerusalem,  and  a  kinsman  of  William 
Outlawe.  This  dignitary,  in  conjunction  with  Ar- 
nald  le  Poer,  seneschal  of  Kilkenny,  expostulated 
with  the  bishop,  and  tried  to  persuade  him  to  drop 
the  suit  When,  howeyer,  the  latter  refused  to  listen 
to  them,  and  persisted  in  demanding  the  writ,  the 
chancellor  informed  him  that  it  was  not  customary 
^  issue  a  writ  of  this  kind,  until  the  parties  had 
been  regularly  proceeded  against  according  to  law. 
ISie  bishop  indignantly  relied  that  the  service  of 
the  church  was  above  the  forms  of  the  law  of  the 
land ;  but  the  chancellor  now  turned  a  deaf  ear, 
and  the  bishop  sent  two  apparitors  with  a  formal 
attendance  of  priests  to  the  house  of  William  Out- 
lawe, where  lady  Alice  was  residing,  to  cite  her  in 
person  before  his  court  The  lady  refused  to  ac- 
knowledge the  jurisdiction  of  the  ecclesiastical  court 
in  this  case ;  and,  on  the  day  she  was  to  appear,  the 
chancellor,  Roger  Outlawe,  sent  advocates,  who  pub- 
licly pleaded  her  right  to  defend  herself  by  her 
counsel,  and  not  to  appear  in  person.  The  bishop, 
regardless  of  this  plea,  pronounced  against  her  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


32  fiOBCERY   AND  MAGIC. 

sentence  of  excommunication,  and  cited  her  son 
William  Outlawe  to  appear  on  a  certain  day,  and 
answer  to  the  charge  of  harbouring  and  concealing 
his  mother  in  defiance  of  the  authority  of  the 
church. 

On  learning  this,  the  seneschal  of  Kilkenny,  Ar- 
nald  le  Poer,  repaired  to  the  priory  of  Eells,  where 
the  bishop  was  lodged,  and  made  a  long  and  touch- 
ing appeal  to  him  to  mitigate  his  anger,  until  at 
length,  wearied  and  provoked  by  his  obstinacy,  he 
left  his  presence  with  threats  of  vengeance.  Th§ 
next  morning,  as  the  bishop  was  departing  from  the 
priory  to  continue  his  visitation  in  other  parts  of 
the  diocese,  he  was  stopped  at  the  entrance  to  the 
town  of  Kells  by  one  of  the  seneschal's  officers, 
Stephen  le  Poer,  with  a  body  of  armed  men,  who 
conducted  him  as  a  prisoner  to  the  castle  of  Kil- 
kenny, where  he  was  kept  in  custody  until  the  day 
was  past  on  which  "William  Outlawe  had  been  cited 
to  appear  in  his  court  The  bishop,  after  many  pro- 
tests on  the  indignity  offered  in  his  person  to  the 
church,  and  on  the  protection  given  to  sorcerers  and 
heretics,  was  obliged  to  submit  It  was  a  mode  of 
evading  the  form  of  law,  characteristic  of  an  age  in 
which  the  latter  was  subservient  to  force,  and  the 
bishop's  friends  believed  that  the  king's  officers  were 
bribed  by  William  Outlawe's  wealtL  They  even  re-* 
ported  afterwards,  to  throw  more  discredit  on  the 
authors  of  this  act  of  violence,  that  one  of  the 
guards  was  heard  to  say  to  another,  as  they  led  him 
to  prison,  "  That  fair  steed  which  William  Outlawe 
presented  to  our  lord  Sir  Amald  last  night  draws 
well,  for  it  has  drawn  the  bishop  to  prisoa" 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THB   LADT   ALICE   KTTBLER.  33 

This  summary  mode  of  proceeding  against  an  ec- 
clesiastic appears  to  have  caused  astonishment  even 
in  Ireland,  and  during  the  first  day  multitudes  of 
people  of  all  classes  visited  the  bishop  in  his  confine- 
ment, to  feed  and  comfort  him,  the  general  ferment 
increasing  with  the  discourses  he  pronounced  to  his 
Tisiters.  To  hinder  this,  the  seneschal  ordered  him 
to  be  more  strictly  confined,  and  forbade  the  admis- 
sion of  any  visiters,  except  a  few  of  the  bishop's 
especial  Mends  and  servants.  The  bishop  at  once 
placed  the  whole  diocese  under  an  interdict  It  was 
necessary  to  prepare  immediately  some  excuse  for 
these  proceedings,  and  the  seneschal  issued  a  pro- 
clamation calling  upon  all  who  had  any  complaints 
to ,  make  against  the  bishop  of  Ossory  to  come  for- 
ward; and  at  an  inquest  held  before  the  justices 
itinerant,  many  grievous  crimes  of  the  bishop  were 
rehearsed,  but  none  would  venture  personally  to 
charge  him  with  them.  All  these  circumstances, 
however,  show  that  the  bishop  was  not  fetultless ;  and 
that  his  conduct  would  not  bear  a  very  close  exami- 
nation is  evident  from  the  fact,  that  on  more  than 
one  occasion  in  subsequent  times,  he  was  obliged  to 
dielter  himself  under  the  protection  of  the  king's 
pardon  for  all  past  offences.  William  Outlawe  now 
went  to  the  archives  of  Kilkenny,  and  there  found 
a  former  deed  of  accusation  against  the  bishop  of 
Ossory  for  having  defrauded  a  widow  of  the  inherit- 
ance of  her  husband.  The  bishop's  party  said  that 
it  was  a  cancelled  document,  the  case  having  been 
taken  out  of  the  secular  court ;  and  that  William 
had  had  a  new  copy  made  of  it  to  conceal  the 
evidence  of  this  fact,  and  had  then  rubbed  the  fresh 

0  5 


Digitized 


by  Google 


34  80B0EBT  AND  HAGIO. 

parchment  with  his  shoes  in  order  to  giye  his  copy 
the  appearance  of  an  old  document  However,  it 
was  delivered  to  the  seneschal,  who  now  offered  to 
release  his  prisoner  on  condition  of  his  giving  suffi- 
cient bail  to  aj^ar  and  answer  in  the  secular  court 
the  charge  thus  brought  against  him.  This  the 
bishop  refused  to  do,  and  after  he  had  remained 
eighteen  days  in  confinement,  he  was  uncondi- 
tionally set  free. 

The  bishop  marched  from  his  prison  in  triumph, 
full-dressed  in  his  pontifical  robes,  and  immediately 
cited  William  Outlawe  to  appear  before  him  in  his 
court  on  another  day ;  but  before  that  day  aurived, 
he  received  a  royal  writ, .  ordering  him  to  appear 
before  the  lord  justice  of  Ireland  without  any 
delay,  on  penalty  of  a  fine  of  a  thousand  pounds,  to 
answer  to  the  king  for  having  placed  his  diocese 
imder  interdict,  and  also  to  make  his  defence 
against  the  accusations  of  Amald  le  Poer.  He 
received  a  similar  summons  from  the  dean  of  St 
Patrick's,  to  appear  before  him  as  the  vicarial  repre- 
sentative of  the  archbishop  of  Dublin.  The  bishop 
of  Ossory  made  answer  that  it  was  not  safe, for  him 
to  undertake  the  journey,  because  his  way  lay 
through  the  lands  and  lordship  of  his  enemy,  Sir 
Amald,  but  this  excuse  was  not  admitted,  and  the 
diocese  was  relieved  from  the  interdict 

Other  trials  were  reserved  for  the  mortified  pre- 
late. On  the  Monday  after  the  Octaves  of  Easter 
the  seneschal,  Amald  le  Poer,  held  his  court  of 
justice  in  the  judical  hall  of  the  city  of  Kilkenny^ 
and  there  the  bishop  of  Ossory  resolved  to  present 
himself  and  invoke  publicly  the  aid  of  the  secular 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THB   LAB7  ALIOB  KTTELEIL  35 

arm  to  his  assistance  in  seizing  the  persons  accused 
of  sorcery.  The  seneschal  forbade  him  to  enter  the 
court  on  his  peril ;  but  the  bishop  persevered,  and 
^' robed  in  his  pontificals,  carrying  in  his  hands  the 
body  of  Christ  (the  consecrated  host)  in  a  vessel  of 
gold/'  and  attended  by  a  numerous  body  of  friars  and 
clergy,  he  entered  the  hall  and  forced  his  way  to  the 
tribunal  The  seneschal  received  him  with  re- 
proaches and  insults,  and  caused  him  to  be  igno- 
miniously  turned  out  of  court  At  the  repeated 
protest,  however,  of  the  offended  prelate,  and  the 
intercession  of  some  influential  persons  there  present, 
he  was  allowed  to  return,  and  the  seneschal  ordered 
him  to  take  his  place  at  the  bar  allotted  for  crimi- 
nals, upon  which  the  bishop  cried  out  that  Christ 
had  never  been  treated  so  before  since  he  stood  at 
the  bar  before  Pontius  Pilate.  He  then  called  upon 
the  seneschal  to  cause  the  persons  accused  of  sorcery 
to  be  seized  upon  and  delivered  into  his  hands,  and, 
upon  his  refusal  to  do  this,  he  held  open  the  book  of  the 
decretals  and  said,  '^  You,  Sir  Arnald,  are  a  knight, 
and  instructed  in  letters,  and  that  you  may  not  have 
the  plea  of  ignorance  in  this  place,  we  are  prepared 
here  to  show  in  these  decretals  that  you  and  your 
officials  are  bound  to  obey  my  order  in  this  respect 
under  heavy  penalties.'' 

'^  Go  to  the  church  with  your  decretals,"  replied 
the  seneschal,  "  and  pyeach  here,  for  here  you  will 
not  find  an  attentive  audience." 

The  bishop  then  read  aloud  the  names  of  the 
<yffenders,  and  the  crimes  imputed  to  them,  sum- 
moned the  seneschal  to  deliver  them  up  to  the  juris- 
diction of  the  church,  and  retreated  from  the  court 


Digitized 


by  Google 


36  SO&OEET  AND  MAGia 

Sir  Arnald  le  Poer  and  his  friends  had  not  been 
idle  ontheir  part,  and  the  bishop  was  next  cited  to 
defend  himself  against  various  charges  in  the  parlia- 
ment to  be  held  at  Dublin,  while  the  lady  Alice 
indicted  him  in  a  secular  court  for  defamation.  The 
bishop  is  represented  as  having  narrowly  escaped 
the  snares  which  were  laid  for  him  on  his  way  to 
Dublin ;  he  there  found  the  Irish  prelates  not  much 
inclined  to  advocate  his  cause,  because  they  looked 
upon  him  as  a  foreigner  and  an  interloper,  and  he 
was  spoken  of  as  a  truant  monk  from  England,  who 
came  thither  to  represent  the  "  Island  of  Saints  "  as 
a  nest  of  heretics,  and  to  plague  them  with  papal 
bulls  of  which  they  never  heard  before.  It  was, 
however,  thought  expedient  to  preserve  the  credit  of 
the  church,  and  some  of  the  more  influential  of  the 
Irish  ecclesiastics  interfered  to  effect  at  least  an  out- 
ward reconciliation  between  the  seneschal  and  the 
bishop  of  Ossory.  After  encountering  an  infinity  of 
new  obstacles  and  disappointments,  the  latter  at 
length  obtained  the  necessary  power  to  bring  the 
alleged  offenders  to  a  trial,  and  most  of  them  were 
imprisoned,  but  the  chief  object  of  the  bishop's  pro- 
ceedings, the  lady  Alice,  had  been  conveyed 
secretly  away,  and  she  is  said  to  have  passed  the 
rest  of  her  life  in  England.  When  her  son,  William 
Outlawe,  was  cited  to  appear  before  the  bishop  in 
his  court  in  the  church  of  St  Mary  at  Kilkenny,  he 
went  "  armed  to  the  teeth  "  with  all  sorts  of  armour, 
and  attended  with  a  very  formidable  company,  and 
demanded  a  copy  of  the  charges  objected  against 
him,  which  extended  through  thirty-four  chapters 
He  for  the  present  was  allowed  to  go  at  lai^e, 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THB  LABT  ALICE   KTTELEB.  37 

because  nobody  dared  to  arrest  him,  and  when  the 
officers  of  the  crown  arrived  they  showed  so  openly 
their  favour  towards  him  as  to  take  up  their  lodg- 
ings at  his  house.  At  length,  however,  having  been 
convicted  in  the  bishop's  court  at  least  of  harbour- 
ing those  accused  of  sorcery,  he  consented  to  go  into 
prison,  trusting  probably  to  the  secret  protection  of 
the  great  barons  of  the  land. 

The  only  person  mentioned  by  name  as  punished 
for  the  extreme  crime  of  sorcery  was  Petronilla  de 
Meath,  who  was,  perhaps,  less  provided  with  worldly 
interests  to  protect  her,  and  who  appears  to  have 
been  made  an  expiatory  sacrifice  for  her  superiors, 
^e  was,  by  order  of  the  bishop,  six  times  flogged, 
and  then,  probably  to  escape  a  further  repetition  of 
this  cruel  and  degrading  punishment,  she  made  a 
public  confession,  accusing  not  only  herself  but  all 
the  others  against  whom  the  bishop  had  proceeded. 
She  said  that  in  all  England,  "perhaps  in  the  whole 
world,"  there  was  not  a  person  more  deeply  skilled 
in  the  practices  of  sorcery  than  the  lady  Alice 
Kyteler,  who  had  been  their  mistress  and  teacher  in 
the  art  She  confessed  to  most  of  the  charges  con- 
tained in  the  bishop's  articles  of  accusation,  and  said 
that  she  had  been  present  at  the  sacrifices  to  the 
demon,  and  had  assisted  in  making  the  unguents  of 
the  intestines  of  the  cocks  ofiered  on  this  occasion, 
mixed  with  spiders  and  certain  black  worms  like 
scorpions,  with  a  certain  herb  called  millefoil,  and 
other  herbs  and  worms,  and  with  the  brains  and 
clothes  of  a  child  that  had  died  without  baptism,  in 
die  manner  before  related ;  that  with  these  unguents 
they  had  produced  various  effects  upon  different 


Digitized 


by  Google 


38  80RCERT  AND  MAOia 

persons,  making  the  faces  of  certain  ladies  appear 
homed  like  goats ;  that  she  had  been  present  at  the 
nightly  conventicles,  and  with  the  assistance  of  her 
mistress  had  frequently  pronounced  the  sentence  of 
excommunication  against  her  own  husband,  with  all 
the  ceremonies  required  by  their  unholy  rites ;  that 
she  had  been  with  the  lady  Alice  when  the  demon, 
Robin  Artisson,  appeared  to  her,  and  had  seen  acts 
pass  between  them,  in  her  presence,  which  we  shall 
not  undertake  to  describe  The  wretched  woman, 
having  made  this  public  confession,  was  carried  out 
into  the  city  and  publicly  burnt  This,  says  the 
relator,  was  the  first  witch  who  was  ever  burnt  in 
Ireland. 

The  rage  of  the  bishop  of  Ossory  appears  now  to 
have  been,  to  a  certain  degree,  appeased.  He  was 
prevailed  upon  to  remit  the  offences  of  William  Out- 
lawe,  enjoining  him,  as  a  reparation  for  his  contempt 
of  the  church,  that  within  the  period  of  four  years 
he  should  cover  with  lead  the  whole  roof  of  his 
cathedral  from  the  steeple  eastward,  as  well  as  that 
of  the  chapel  of  the  Holy  Virgin.  The  rest  of  the 
lady  Alice's  "  pestiferous  society  "  were  punished  in 
different  ways,  with  more  or  less  severity ;  one  or 
two  of  them,  we  are  told,  were  subsequently  burnt ; 
others  were  flogged  publicly  in  the  market-place  and 
through  the  city;  others  were  banished  from  the 
diocese;  and  a  few,  like  their  mistress,  fled  to  a 
distance,  or  concealed  themselves  so  effectually  as  to 
escape  the  hands  of  justice. 

There  was  one  person  concerned  in  the  foregoing 
events  whom  the  bishop  had  not  forgotten  or  for- 
given.   That  was  Amald  le  Poer,  the  seneschal  of 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  LADY   ALICffl  KYTBLBR.  39 

Balkenny,  wlio  had  so  strenuously  advocated  the 
cause  of  WiUiam  Outlawe  and  his  mother,  and  who 
had  treated  with  so  much  rudeness  the  bishop  him- 
self. The  Latin  narrative  of  this  history,  published, 
for  the  Camden  Society  by  the  writer  of  this  paper, 
gives  no  further  information  respecting  him,  but  we 
learn  from  other  sources  that  the  bishop  now  accused 
him  of  heresy,  had  him  excommunicated,  and  ob- 
tained a  writ  by  which  he  was  committed  prisoner 
to  the  castle  of  Dublin.  Here  he  remained  in  1328, 
when  Roger  Outlawe  was  made  lord  justice  of  Ireland, 
who  attempted  to  mitigate  his  sufferings.  The  bishop 
of  Ossory,  enraged  at  the  lord  justice'^  humanity, 
accused  him  also  of  heresy  and  of  abetting  heretics ; 
upon  which  a  parliament  was  called,  and  the  different 
accusations  having  been  duly  examined,  Amald  le 
Poer  himself  would  probably  have  been  declared  in- 
nocent and  liberated  from  confinement,  but  before 
the  end  of  the  investigation  he  died  in  prison,  and 
his  body,  lying  under  sentence  of  excommunication, 
remained  long  uhburied. 

The  bishop,  who  had  been  so  great  a  persecutor  of 
heresy  in  others,  was  at  last  accused  of  the  same 
crime  himself,  and  the  case  being  laid  before  the 
archbishop  of  Dublin,  he  appealed  to  the  apostolic 
see,  fled  the  country  privately,  and  repaired  to  Italy. 
Subsequent  to  this,  he  appears  to  have  experienced  a 
variety  of  troubles,  and  he  suffered  banishment  dur- 
ing nine  years.  He  died  at  a  very  great  age  in  1360. 
The  bishop's  party  boasted  that  the  "  nest "  of  sor- 
cerers who  had  infested  Ireland  was  entirely  rooted 
out  by  the  prosecution  of  the  lady  Alice  Kyteler 
and  her  accomplices.     It  may,  however,   be  well 


Digitized 


by  Google 


40  SOBGEET  AND  MAQIO. 

doubted,  if  the  belief  in  witchcraft  were  not  rather 
extended  by  the  publicity  and  magnitude  of  these 
events.  Ireland  would  no  doubt  afford  many  equally 
^remarkable  cases  in  subsequent  times,  had  the  chro- 
niclers thought  them  as  well  worth  recording  as  the 
process  of  a  lady  of  rank,  which  involved  some  of 
the  leading  people  in  the  English  Pale,  and  which 
i^tated  the  whole  state  during  several  successive 
years. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


41  :  K 


CHAPTER  III. 

FUETHBR    POLITICAL    USAGE    OF   THE    BELIEF    IN    SOE- 
CERY. — THE   TEMPLARS. 

The  history  of  the  lady  Alice  Kyteler  is  one  of 
the  most  remarkable  examples  that  the  middle  ages 
have  left  us  of  the  use  which  might  be  made  of 
popular  superstition  as  a  means  of  oppression  or 
vengeance,  when  other  more  legitimate  means  were 
wanting.  France  and  Italy  had^  however,  recently 
presented  a  case  in  which  th^  belief  in  sorcery  had 
been  used  as  a  weapon  against  a  still  higher  per- 
sonage. 

It  is  not  necessary  to  enter  into  a  detailed  history 
of  the  quarrel  between  the  French  monarch,  Philippe 
le  Bel,  and  the  pope,  Boniface  VIII.  It  originated 
in  the  determination  of  the  king  to  check  in  his  own 
dominions  the  power  and  insolence  of  the  church 
and  the  ambitious  pretensions  of  the  see  of  Rome. 
In  1JJ03,  Philippe's  ministers  and  agents,  having  col- 
lected pretended  evidence  in  Italy,  boldly  accused 
Boniface  of  heresy  and  sorcery,  and  the  king  called 
a  council  at  Paris  to  hear  witnesses  and  pronounce 


Digitized 


by  Google 


42  SOECEET  AHD  MAGIC. 

judgment  The  pope  resisted,  and  refused  to  ac- 
knowledge a  council  not  called  by  himself;  but  the 
insults  and  outrages  to  which  he  was  exposed 
proved  too  much  for  him,  and  he  died  the  same 
year,  in  the  midst  of  these  vindictive  proceedings. 
His  enemies  spread  abroad  a  report,  that  in  his  last 
moments  he  had  confessed  his  league  with  the 
demon,  and  that  his  death  was  attended  with  "  so 
much  thunder  and  tempest,  with  dragons  flying  in 
the  air  and  vomiting  flames,  and  such  lightning  and 
other  prodigies,  that  the  people  of  Rome  believed 
that  the  whole  city  was  going  to  be  swallowed  up 
in  the  abyss/'  His  successor,  Benedict  XL,  under- 
took to  defend  his  memory ;  but  he  died  in  the  first 
year  of  his  pontificate,  (in  1304,)  it  was  said  by 
poison,  and  the  holy  see  remained  vacant  during 
eleven  months.  In  the  middle  of  June,  1S06, 
a  Frenchman,  the  archbishop  of  Bordeaux,  wa^s 
elected  to  the  papal  chair  under  the  title  of  G3e- 
ment  V. 

It  was  understood  that  Clement  was  raised  to 
the  papacy  in  a  great  measure  by  the  king's  influ- 
ence, who  is  said  to  have  stipulated  as  one  of  the 
conditions,  that  he  should  allow  of  the  proceedings 
against  Boniface,  which  were  to  make  his  memory 
infiEiimous.  Preparations  were  again  made  to  carry 
on  the  trial  of  Boniface,  but  the  king's  necessities 
compelled  him  to  seek  other  boons  of  the  supreme 
pontiff*,  in  consideration  of  which  he  agreed  to  drop 
the  prosecution,  and  at  last,  in  1312,  Boniface  was 
declared  in  the  council  of  Vienne  innocent  of  all 
the  offences  with  which  he  had  been  charged. 

Whatever  may  have  been  Boniface's  faults,  to 


Digitized 


by  Google 


TEIAL  OP  POPB  BONIFAOB  VIII.  43 

screen  the  reputation  of  a  pope  was  to  save  the 
character  of  the  church.  If  we  may  place  any  fistith 
at  idl  in  the  witnesses  who  were  adduced  against 
him,  Boniface  was  at  bottom  a  free  thinker,  who 
concealed  under  the  mit^e  the  q>irit  of  mockery 
which  afterwards  shone  forth  in  his  count^ryman 
Rabelais,  and  that  in  moments  of  relaxation,  espe- 
cially  among  those  with  whom  He  was  familiar,  he 
Was  in  the  habit  of  speaking  in  bold — even  in 
cynical — ^language,  of  things  which  the  church  re- 
garded as  sacred.  Persons  were  brought  forward 
who  deposed  to  having  heard  expressions  from  the 
lips  of  the  pope,  which,  if  not  invented  or  exagge- 
iMed,  savour  of  infidelity,  and  even  of  atheism.  Other 
persons  deposed  that  it  was  commonly  reported 
in  Italy,  that  Boniface  had  communication  mth 
dcfmims,  to  whom  he  offered  his  worship,  wlK)m 
he  bound  to  his  service  by  necromancy,  and  by 
whose  agency  he  acted.*  They  said  further,  that 
lie  Wd  been  heard  to  hold  conversation  with  spirits 
in  the  night ;  that  he  had  a  certain  "  idol,''  in 
which  a  "  diabolical  spirit''  was  inclosed,  whom  he 
was  in  the  habit  of  consulting ;  while  others  said 
tha^  he  had  a  demon  enclosed  in  a  ring  which  he 
wore  on  his   finger."f"      The    witnesses  in  general 

*  Quod  ipse  thurisabatet  sacrificabat  diemonibus,  et  spiritos 
diabolicos  citendo  arte  nigromantioa  oonstringebat,  et  quicquid 
agebat  per  actus  diabolicos  exercebat  Dupuy,  Preuves,  p. 
523. 

+  Audivit  dici  quod  ipse  Bonifacius  utebatur  consilio  dsemo- 
num,  et  babebat  dsBmonem  inclusum  in  annulo.  According  to 
tbe  popular  report,  spread  abroad  by  bis  enemies,  when  Boniface 
was  dying,  he  tore  this  ring  from  bis  finger,  and  dashed  it  on 


Digitized 


by  Google 


44  SOBCEBT  AKD  MAGIC. 

spoke  of  these  reports  only  as  things  which  they 
had  heard;  but  one,  a  friar,  brother  Bernard  de 
Sorano,  deposed,  that  when  Boniface  was  a  cardinal, 
and  held  the  office  of  notary  to  Nicholas  III,  he 
lay  with  the  papal  army  before  the  castle  of  Puriano, 
and  he  (brother  Bernard)  was  sent  to  receive  the 
surrender  of  the  castle.  He  returned  with  the  car- 
dinal to  Viterbo,  where  he  was  lodged  in  the  palace. 
Late  one  night,  as  he  and  the  cardinal's  chambei^ 
lain  were  looking  out  of  the  window  of  the  room 
he  occupie<J,  they  saw  Benedict  of  Graeta  (which 
was  Boniface's  name  before  he  was  made  pope) 
enter  a  garden  adjoining  the  palace,  alone,  and  in  a 
mysterious  manner.  He  made  a  circle  on  the 
ground  with  a  sword,  and  placed  himself  in  the 
middle  having  with  him  a  cock,  and  a  fire  in  an 
earthem  pot  (m  qaadam  olla  terrea).  Having  seated 
himself  in  the  middle  of  the  circle,  he  killed  the 
cock  and  threw  its  blood  in  the  fire,  from  which 
smoke  immediately  issued,  while  Benedict  read  in 

the  ground,  reproaohing  the  demon  with  having  deserted  him 
at  his  greatest  need. 

Spirits  confined  in  rings  are  often  mentioned  among  the 
magical  operations  of  the  middle  ages,  and  occur  as  late  as  the 
sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries,  when  such  rings  appear  to 
have  heen  hrought  from  Spain,  the  seat  of  the  ancient  celehrated 
school  of  magicians.  Bodinus  (DsBmonomania,  lih.  ii.  c.  3,) 
speaks  of  a  magician  condemned  in  the  duchy  of  Gueldres,  in 
1548,  who  had  a  demon  confined  in  a  ring  (daemonem  sibi 
esse  inclusum  annulo  fatebatur) ;  and  he  mentions  as  having 
come  within  his  own  knowledge  the  case  of  a  man  who  bought 
of  a  Spaniard  a  spirit  with  a  ring.  (Tb.  lib.  iii.  o.  6.)  Magical 
rings  are  by  no  means  imcommon  in  the  cabinets  of  col 
lectors. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


HERETICS   AT   OBLEAKS.  45 

a  certain  book  to  conjure  demona  Presently 
brother  Bernard  heard  a  great  noise,  (rvmorem 
magnum^  and  was  much  terrified  Then  he  could 
distinguish  the  voice  of  some  one  saying,  "  Give  us 
the  share,''  upon  which  Benedict  took  the  cock, 
threw  it  out  of  the  garden,  and  walked  away  with- 
out uttering  a  word  Though  he  met  several  per- 
sons on  his  way,  he  spoke  to  nobody,  but  proceeded 
immediately  to  a  chamber  near  that  of  brother 
Bernard,  and  shut  himself  up.  Bernard  declared 
that,  though  he  knew  there  was  nobody  in  the 
room  with  the  cardinal,  he  not  only  heard  him 
all  night  talking,  but  he  could  distinctly  perceive  a 
strange  voice  answering  him.  This  voice,  of  course, 
was  that  of  a  demon.* 

The  same  charge  that  had  been  brought  forward 
to  confound  pope  Boniface,  was  made  a  principal 
ground  of  persecution  against  the  Templars.  It 
was  by  no  means  the  first  time  that  people  who 
associated  together  thus  in  mutual  confidence,  or 
for  mutual  support  and  protection,  were  branded 
Tvith  the  accusation  of  holding  intercourse  with  de- 
mons, as  we  have  already  seen,  in  the  case  of  the 
Waldenses,  who  were  hated  for  their  heresy,  and  the 
Routiers,  who  were  detested  for  their  outrages. 
We  might  easily  collect  other  examples.  A  French 
antiquary,  M.  Guerard,  has  printed,  in  the  cartulary 
of  St.  Peter's  at  Chartres,  a  document  of  the  earlier 
part  of  the  eleventh  century,  which  describes  a  sect 
of  heretics  that  had  arisen  in  the  city  of  Orleans, 

*  All  the  documents  relating  to  the  trial  of  this  pope  have 
been  collected  and  printed  by  Dupuy,  in  his  Histoire  du  diffe- 
rent de  Boniface  VIII.  avec  Philippe  le  Bel,  4to. 

7 


Digitized 


by  Google 


46  SOBOEBT   AND  MAGIO. 

whose  proceedings  are  described  as  too  horrible  to 
be  translated  here  from  the  original  Latin  of  the 
narrator  *  Just  two  centuries  later,  the  inhabitants 
of  the  district  of  Steding,  the  modem  Oldenberg,  a 
race  of  people  who  hved  in  sturdy  independence, 
were  at  variance  with  the  archbishop  of  Bremen. 
The  quarrel  had  arisen  from  disputed  claims  to 
tithes  of  the  land  and  the  right  of  hunting  in  their 
forests.  The  archbishop  resented  this  contempt  of 
the  church,  declared  that  the  Stedingers  were 
heretics,  and  proclaimed  a  crusade  against  them. 
At  first  they  contended  with  success  against 
their  enemies,  repulsed  them  with  valour,  and  for 
some  years  set  the  archbishop  at  defiance.  But 
archbishop  Gerard,  who  came  to  the  see  of  Bremen 
in   1219,  resolved  to  suppress  them.     One  day  a 

*  Congregobantur  siquidem  certis  noctibus  in  domo  deno> 
minata,  singuli  lucemas  tenentes  in  manibus,  et,  ad  ingtar 
letanisB,  dsBmonum  nomina  declamabant,  donee  subito  dsemo* 
nem  in  simllitudine  cujuslibet  bestiolsB  inter  eos  viderent 
descendere.  Qui  statim  ut  visibilis  ilia  videbatur  visio,  omni- 
bus extinctis  luminaribus,  quam  primum  quisque  poterat 
mulierem  quae  ad  manum  sibi  veniebat,  ad  abutendum  arripie- 
bat,  sine  peccati  respectu  et  utrum  mater  aut  soror  aut  mo- 
nacha  habereter ;  pro  sanctitate  ac  religione  ejus  concubitus  ab 
illis  SBstimabatur.  Ex  quo  spurcissimo  concubitu  infans  gene- 
ratus,  octava  die  in  medio  eorum  copioso  igne  accenso  piabatur 
per  ignem,  more  antiquorum  paganonmi,  et  sic  in  igne  crema- 
batur,  Cujus  cinis  tanta  veneratione  colligebatur  atque  custo- 
diebatur,  ut  Christiana  religiositas  corpus  Christi  custodiri 
solet,  aegris  dandimi  de  hoc  seculo  exituris  ad  viaticum.  Inerat 
enim  tanta  vis  diabolicsB  fraudis  in  ipso  cinere,  ut  quicimque 
de  prsefata  hseresi  imbutus  ^esset  et  de  eodem  cinere  quamvis 
sumendo  parum  prselibavisset,  vix  unquam  postea  de  eadem 
heeresi  gressimi  mentis  ad  viam  veritatis  dirigere  valeret. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   STEDINGBRS.  47 

greedy  priest,  who  had  been  oflfended  at  the  small 
fee  given  him  by  a  noble  lady  of  this  country  after 
confession,  took  his  revenge  by  thrusting  the  money 
into  her  mouth  instead  of  the  consecrated  host, 
when  she  was  communicating.  The  husband  of  the 
lady  resented  this  aflfront  by  slaying  the  priest.  The 
archbishop  launched  against  the  murderer  the  sentence 
of  excommunication  ;  but  he  set  the  power  of  the 
church  at  defiance,  and  the  Stedingers  rose  up  in 
his  cause.  The  archbishop,  with  th^  assistance  of 
the  neighbouring  princes,  invaded  their  district; 
but  they  resisted  with  so  much  courage,  that  he  was 
driven  back. 

The  archbishop  now  applied  to  the  pope,  and  ac- 
cused the  Stedingers  of  being  obstinate  heretics. 
Gregory  IV.,  who  at  that  time  occupied  the  papal 
chair,  addressed  a  bull,  in  1232,  to  the  bishops  of 
Minden,  Liibeck,  and  Ratzeburg,  ordering  them  to 
preach  a  crusade  against  the  offending  population  ; 
and  in  the  year  following  a  second  bull  was  ad- 
dressed to  the  bishops  of  Paderborn,  Hildesheim, 
Verden,  Munster,and  Osnabriick,  which  repeated  this 
order  more  pressingly,  and  gave  the  special  charge 
of  the  war  to  the  archbishop  of  Maintz  and  Conrad 
of  Marburg  In  the  year  1234,  an  army  of  40,000 
men  overran  and  laid  waste  the  district  of  Steding ; 
a  considerable  portion  of  the  population  fell  in 
battle,  and  the  rest  engaged  to  make  reparation  to 
the  archbishop,  and  to  be  obedient  to  him  in  future, 
and  they  were  thereupon  released  from  the  sentence 
of  excommunication. 

When  the  archbishop  of  Bremen  invented  the 
charge  of  heresy  against  the  Stedingers,  he  seems  to 


Digitized 


by  Google 


48  SORCERY   AND   MAGIC 

have  culled  from  the  accounts  of  the  heresies  of  the 
primitive  church  a  choice  collection  of  horrible 
accusations.  In  the  pope's  first  bull,  the  Stedingers 
were  accused  of  contempt  and  hostility  towards  the 
church;  of  savage  barbarity,  especially  towards 
monks ;  of  scorning  the  sacrament ;  and  of  holding 
communication  with  demons,  making  images  of  wax, 
and  consulting  with  witches.  But  Gregory's  second 
bull  contains  more  details  of  the  charges  brought 
against  them,  and  gives  the  following  strange  and 
i^d  account  of  the  ceremonies  attending  the  initia- 
tion of  a  new  convert  into  their  sect.  When  the 
novice  was  first  introduced  into  their  "  school,"  we 
are  told  a  toad  made  its  appearance,  which  they 
kissed,  some  behind,  and  others  on  the  mouth ;  and 
they  drew  its  tongue  and  spittle  into  their  mouths. 
Sometimes  this  toad  appeared  of  a  natural  size  ;  at 
other  times  it  was  as  big  as  a  goose  or  duck,  but  its 
usual  size  was  that  of  an  oven.  As  the  novice  pro- 
ceeded, he  was  met  by  a  man,  who  was  wonderfully 
pale,  with  great  black  eyes,  and  his  body  so  wasted 
and  thin,  that  his  flesh  seemed  to  be  all  gone,  and 
he  appeared  to  have  nothing  but  skin  hanging  upon 
his  bones.  The  novice  kissed  this  creature,  and 
found  that  he  was  as  cold  as  ice ;  and  "  after  the 
kiss  all  remembrance  of  the  Catholic  faith  vanished 
entirely  from  his  heart.*'  Then  they  all  sat  down  to 
the  banquet,  and  when  they  rose  again,  there  stept  out 
of  a  statue,  which  was  usually  found  in  these  schools, 
a  black  cat,  double  the  size  of  a  moderate  dog ;  it 
came  backwards,  with  its  tail  turned  up.  The  novice 
fiirst,  then  the  master,  and  afterwards  the  others,  one 
after  another,  kissed  the  cat  as  it  presented  itself; 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   STEDINGEIIS.  49 

and  when  they  had  returned  to  their  places,  they 
remained  in  silence,  with  their  heads  inclined  to- 
wards the  cat,  and  the  master  suddenly  pronounced 
the  words,  "Save  us/'  He  addressed  this  to  the 
next  in  order,  and  the  third  answered,  "  We  know 
it,  lord ;"'  upon  which  a  fourth  added,  "  We  have 
to  obey/'  After  this  ceremony  was  performed,  the 
candles  were  extinguished,  and  they  proceeded  in- 
discriminately to  acts  which  can  hardly  be  de- 
scribed When  this  was  over,  the  candles  were 
again  lighted,  and  they  resumed  their  places ;  and 
then  out  of  a  dark  corner  of  the  room  came  a  man, 
the  upper  part  of  whom,  above  the  loins,  was  bright 
land  radiant  as  the  sun,  and  the  lower  part  was 
rough  and  hairy  like  a  cat,  and  his  brightness  illu- 
minated the  whole  room.  Then  the  master  tore  off 
a  bit  of  the  garment  of  the  novice,  and  said  to  the 
shining  personage,  "  Master,  this  is  given  to  me,  and 
I  give  it  again  to  thee  ;"  to  which  he  replied,  "  Thou 
hast  served  me  well,  and  thou  wilt  serve  me  more 
and  better ;  what  thou  hast  given  me,  I  give  into 
thy  keeping/'  Immediately  after  this  the  shining 
personage  vanished,  and  the  meeting  broke  up. 
The  bull  further  charges  these  people  with  wor- 
shipping Lucifer ;  and  contains  other  articles,  evi- 
dently borrowed  from  the  creed  of  the  ancient  gnos- 
tics and  manichaeans  and  their  kindred  sects. 

Such  is  the  statement  gravely  made  in  a  formal 
instrument  by  the  head  of  the  church.  At  the  first 
outbreak  of  the  quarrel  between  the  Stedingers  and 
the  see  of  Bremen,  no  one  appears  to  have  thought 
of  charging  them  with  these  horrible  acts.  They 
were  invented  onlj^  when  the  force  which  the  arch- 

D 


Digitized 


by  Google 


50  SORCERY  AND   MAGIC. 

bishop  could  command  was  not  sufficient  to  reduce 
them  ;  and  singularly  enough,  when  they  had  sub- 
mitted, the  charge  of  heresy,  with  all  its  concomitant 
scandals,  seems  to  have  been  entirely  forgotten. 
The  archbishop  of  Bremen  with  the  Stedingers,  like 
Philippe  le  Bel  with  the  templars,  began  by  defaming 
the  cause  which  he  wished  to  destroy.  The  prelate 
was  incited  by  the  love  of  temporal  authority,  the 
king  by  the  want  of  gold. 

The  military  order  of  the  Templars  was  foimded 
early  in  the  twelfth  century,  for  the  protection  of 
the  holy  sepulchre  ;  its  members,  by  their  conduct, 
merited  the  eulogy  of  St.  Bernard,  and  on  many 
occasions  their  bravery  saved  the  Christian  interests 
in  the  East.  But  the  order  soon  became  extraor- 
dinarily rich,  and  wealth,  as  usual,  brought  with  it  a 
host  of  corruptions  and  attendant  vices.  The  writers 
of  the  twelfth  century  complain  that  the  templars 
had  degenerated  much  from  the  virtue  which  origi- 
nally characterised  the  order ;  and  in  the  century 
following  "  the  pride  of  a  templar''  became  a.  pro- 
verbial saying.  The  new  knight  was  received  into 
the  order  at  a  private  initiation,  with  various  forms 
and  ceremonies,  having  partly  a  literal  and  partly 
a  symbolical  meaning.  Some  of  these  appear  to 
have  been  repeated  and  corrupted  after  their  real 
intention  was  forgotten ;  and  it  is  not  impossible 
that  in  the  course  of  the  familiar  relations  which 
they  are  said  to  have  held  with  the  infidels,  some  of 
them  may  have  learnt  and  adopted  many  doctrines 
and  practices  which  were  inconsistent  with  their 
profession.*   It  is  certain,  that  before  the  end  of  the 

*  Some  years  ago,  Von  Hammer  Piirgstall,  in  an  elaborate 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THB   KKIGHTS  TEHPLARS.  51 

thirteenth  century,  rumours  were  spread  abroad  of 
strange  practices,  and  still  stranger  vices,  in  which 
the  templars  were  said  to  indulge.  The  mysterious 
secresy  which  they  maintained,  their  pride,  riches, 
and  power,  were  quite  sufficient  grounds  in  a  super- 
stitious age  for  such  charges.  Their  power  made 
them  an  object  of  alarm  to  the  sovereigns  of  the 
various  countries  in  which  they  were  established, 
but  their  riches  proved  the  cause  of  their  final  doom. 
The  treasury  of  Philippe  le  Bel  had  been  long 
exhausted,  and  he  had  already  tried  a  variety  of 
expedients  for  the  purpose  of  raising  money,  when, 
in  the  first  years  of  the  fourteenth  century,  he  de- 
termined to  recruit  his  finances  by  seizing  the  im- 
mense property  of  the  templars.  The  sinister  re- 
ports, already  believed  by  many,  were  encouraged ; 
vogue  complaints  against  the  corruptions  of  the 
templars  were  carried  to  the  pope,  and  the  king  of 
France  urged  that  an  inquiry  should  be  instituted. 
At  length  one  or  more  knights  of  the  order  were 
induced  to  make  a  voluntary  confession  of  the  enor- 
mities which  they  pretended  were  practised  by  the 
templars  in  their  secret  conclaves,  and  then  the 
pontiff  yielded  to  the  urgent  demands  of  king  Phi- 
lippe, and  agreed  that  they  should  be  brought  to 
a  trial  The  richest  possessions  of  the  order  were 
in  France,  for  the  Temple  in  Paris  was  their  grand 
central  establishment  ;  and  hence  Philippe  le  Bel 

essay  ptiblished  in  the  Fimdgriiben  des  Orients,  attempted  to 
show  frommedieyal  monuments,  that  the  order  of  the  Templars 
was  infested  with  gnosticism ;  but  his  error  has  been  pointed  out 
by  more  than  one  subsequent  writer.  In  fact,  Von  Hammer 
totally  misunderstood  the  character  of  the  monuments  on  which 
he  built  his  theory. 

1>  2 


Digitized 


by  Google 


52  SOSOEBT   AKD  MAGIC. 

assumed  the  right  of  directing  and  presiding  over 
the  process  which. was  to  be  carried  on  against 
them.  He  had  offered  himself  as  a  candidate  for 
admission  into  the  order,  and  been  refused 

The  knights  themselves  appear  to  have  had  a 
presentiment  of  their  impending  fate,  and  to  have 
been  alarmed  at  the  extent  of  the  popular  feeling 
against  them.  An  English  templar  meeting  a 
knight  who  had  been  newly  received  into  the  order, 
inquired  if  he  had  been  admitted,  and  the  latter 
having  replied  affirmatively,  he  added,  "  If  you 
should  sit  on  the  top  of  the  steeple  of  St  Paul's  in 
London,  you  should  not  be  able  to  see  greater  mis- 
fortunes than  shall  happen  to  you  before  you  die." 
The  rumours  against  the  order  were  increased  by 
indiscreet  confessions  and  boasts  of  a  few  indivi- 
duals, which  seemed  to  give  consistence  to  them. 
A  templar  had  said  to  one  who  did  not  belong  to 
the  order,  that  in  their  chapter-general  "  there  was 
a  thing  in  secret  that  if  any  one  had  the  misfortune 
to  see  it,  even  were  it  the  king  of  France  himself, 
nothing  would  hinder  those  of  the  chapter  from 
killing  him,  if  it  were  in  their  power/'  Another 
said,  "  We  have  three  articles  among  us  in  our 
order,  which  none  will  ever  know,  except  God  and 
the  devil,  and  we  the  brethren  of  the  order."  Many 
stories  were  reported  of  individuals  who  had  been 
secretly  put  to  death,  because  they  had  been  witnesses, 
by  design  or  accident,  of  the  secret  ceremonies  of  the 
temple,  and  of  the  terrible  dungeons  into  which  the 
chiefs  of  the  order  threw  its  disobedient  members. 
One  of  the  knights  declared  that  his  uncle  "  had 
entered  the  order  in  good  health,  and  cheerful,  with 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  KNIQHTS   TEMFLAfiS.  53 

Ms  dc^s  and  falcons,  and  that  in  three  days  he  was 
dead '"  and  one  witness  examined  before  the  com- 
mission by  which  the  cause  of  the  templars  was 
tried,  deposed  that  he  had  heard  several  templars 
say  that  there  were  points  besides  those  mentioned 
in  the  public  rules  of  the  order,  "  which  they  would 
not  mention  for  their  heada" 

In  the  autumn  of  the  year  1307,  the  king  of 
France  struck  the  blow  which  he  had  been  some 
time  contemplating.  He  invited  the  grand  master, 
Jacques  de  Molay,  and  the  chiefs  of  the  order  in 
France,  to  Paris,  under  pretence  of  showing  them 
his  fcivour,  and  received  them  with  every  mark  of 
attachment  After  having  acted  as  god£Bi,ther  to 
one  of  the  king's  sons,  the  grand-master  was  one  of 
the  pall-bearers  at  the  burial  of  his  sister-in-law  on 
the  twelfth  of  October.  Next  day,  Jacques  de 
Molay,  and  a  hundred  and  forty  templars  who  were 
in  Paris  on  this  occasion,  were  arrested  and  thrown 
into  prison.  The  same  day  thirty  were  arrested  at 
Beaucaire,  and  immediately  afterwards  the  tem- 
plars in  all  parts  of  France  were  seized.  The  pub- 
lication of  scandalous  reports,  the  invectives  of  the 
monkish  preachers,  an  inflammatory  letter  of  the 
king,  every  method  was  employed  to  excite  the 
people  against  them.  The  grand-master,  and  some 
of  the  principal  brethren  of  the  order  arrested  in 
Paris,  were  carried  before  the  university,  and  exa- 
mined on  certain  articles  of  accusation,  founded,  it 
was  said,  on  the  voluntary  confession  of  two  knights 
of  the  order,  a  Gascon  and  an  Italian,  who,  impri- 
soned for  some  offences  against  the  law,  had  revealed 
the  secrets  of  the  order.     These  pretended  secrets 


Digitized 


by  Google 


54  SOBOB&T  AlTD  MiLaiO. 

were  now  made  public,  probably  with  mu£h  exagg^ 
ration  and  addition^  The  templars  were  accused  of 
renouncing  the  faith  of  the  church,  and  of  spitting 
and  trampling  upon  the  cross,  of  using  ceremonies 
of  a  disgusting  character  at  tlieir  initiations,  and  of 
secret  practices  of  the  most  revolting  description. 
The  general  character  of  the  act  of  accusation 
against  the  templars  bore  a  close  resemblance  to 
that  of  the  earlier  bull  against  the  Stedingers.  It 
was  said  that  they  worshipped  the  evil  one  in  the 
shape  of  an  idol,  which  they  looked  upon  as  the 
patron  of  their  order,  and  as  the  author  of  all-  their 
riches  and  prosperity,  and  that  they  were  indivi- 
dually protected  by  a  cord  l^at  had  been  passed 
with  mystic  ceremony  round  the  idol,  and  whi<^ 
ihej:  wore  as  a  girdle  at  the  waist  This  idol 
they  were  accused  of  consecrating,  by  anointing  it 
with  the  fat  of  a  new-bom  infant,  the  illegitimate 
oflfepring  of  a  brother  of  the  order.*  A  more  ra?- 
tional  charge  was  that,  founded  on  the  intimate 
mtercourse  with  the  Saracens,  of  having  betrayed 
the  Christians  of  the  East  to  their  unbelieving  ene- 
mies. They  were  even  accused  of  having  entered 
into  the  service  of  the  Sultan.  It  was  said,  fur- 
ther, that  they  refused  to  receive  the  sacraments 
from  those  who  were  alone  authorized  by  the 
church  to  communicate  them,  and  that  they  con- 
fessed only  to  one  another  and  to  their  chiefs. 

^  Gar  enGQxe  Msoieiit-il  pis,  oar  im  enfant  nouvel  engendre 
d'un  templier  en  une  pucelle  estoit  cuit  et  rosti  au  feu,  et 
toute  la  gresse  ostee ;  et  de  celle  estoit  sacree  et  olnte  leur 
ydole.  Zes  grandes  Ohroniques  de  St.  DeniSt  ed.  de  Paulin 
Paris,  torn,  t.,  p.  190. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  KNIGHTS  TEMPLABS.  65 

The  process  dragged  on  slowly  during  more  than 
three  years,  in  consequence  of  the  jealousies  which 
arose  among  those  who  were  more  or  less  interested 
in  its.  prosecution.  The  pope  wished  to  bring  it  en- 
tirely under  the  jurisdiction  of  ike  church,  and  to 
have  it  decided  at  Eome.  The  king,  on  the  other 
hand,  mistrusting  the  pope,  and  resolved  on  the  de- 
struction of  the  order,  and  that  none  but  himself 
should  reap  the  advantage  of  it,  decided  that  it 
should  be  judged  at  Paris  under  his  own  personal 
influence.  The  prosecution  was  directed  by  his 
ministers,  Nogaret  and  Enguerrand  de  Marigny. 
The  templars  asserted  their  innocence,  and  de- 
nwaided  a  fair  trial ;  but  they  found  few  advocates 
who  would  undertake  their  defence,  and  they  were 
subjected  to  hardships  and  tortures  which  forced 
many  of  them  into  confessions  dictated  to  them  by 
thek  persecutors.  During  this  interval,  the  pope^s 
orders  were  carried  into  otiier  countries,  ordering  the 
arrest  of  the  templars,  and  the  seizure  of  their 
goods>  and  everywhere  the  same  chsntgea  were 
brought  against  them,  and  the  same  means  adopted 
to  procure  their  condemnation,  although  they  were 
not  everywhere  subjected  to  the  same  severity  as  in 
France.  At  length,  in  the  spring  of  1316,  the 
grand  process  was  opened  in  Paris,  and  an  immense 
number  of  templars,  brought  from  all  parts  of  the 
kingdom,  underwent  a  public  examination.  A  long 
act  of  accusation  was  read,  some  of  the  heads  of 
which  were,  that  the  templars,  at  their  reception 
into  the  order,  denied  Christ,  and  sometimes  they 
denied  expressly  all  the  saints,  declaring  that  he 
was  not  God  truly,  but  a  false  prophet,  a  man  who 


Digitized 


by  Google 


56  80BCEBT  AKP  MAQia 

had  been  punished  for  his  crimes ;  that  they  had 
no  hope  of  salvation  through  him ;  that  they 
always,  at  their  initiation  into  the  order,  spit  upon 
the  cross,  and  trod  it  under  foot;  that  they  did 
this  especially  on  Good  Friday;  that  they  wcwr- 
shipped  a  certain  cat,  which  sometimes  appeared  to 
them  in  their  congregation  ;*  that  they  did  not 
believe  in  any  of  the  sacraments  of  the  church ; 
that  they  took  secret  oaths  which  they  were  bound 
not  to  reveal;  that  the  brother  who  officiated  at 
the  reception  of  a  new  brother  kissed  the  naked 
body  of  the  latter,  often  in  a  very  unbecoming 
manner ;  that  each  different  province  of  the  order 
had  its  idol,  which  was  a  head,  having  sometimes 
three  faces,  and  at  others  only  one ;  or  sometimes  a 
human  skuU  ;"f"  these  idols  they  worshipped  in 
their  chapters  and  congregations,  believing  that 
they  had  the  power  of  making  them  rich,  and  of 
causing  the  trees  to  flourish,  and  the  earth  to  become 
fruitful ;  that  they  girt  themselves  with  cords,  with 
which  these  idols  had  been  superstitiously  touched  ; 
that  those  who  betrayed  the  secrets  of  their  order, 
or  were  disobedient,  were  thrown  into  prison,  and 
often  put  to  death ;  that  they  held  their  chapters 
secretly  and  by  night,  and  placed  a  watch  to  pre- 
vent them  from  any  danger  of  interruption  or  dis- 
covery ;  and  that  they  believed  the  grand-master 
alone  had  the  power  of  absolving  them  from  their 

*  Item,  quod  adorabant  quendam  catum  sibi  in  ipsa  con- 
gregatione  apparentem  quandoque. 

f  Item,  quod  ipsi  per  singulas  provincias  habebant  ydola, 
videlicet  capita  quorum  aliqua  habebant  tres  facies  et  aliqua 
imam,  et  aliqua  craneum  humanum  habebant 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  KNIOHTS  TEMPLARS.  57 

sins.  The  publication  of  these  charges,  and  the 
agitation  which  had  been  designedly  got  up,  created 
such  a  horror  throughout  France,  that  the  tem- 
plars who  di^d  during  the  process  were  treated  as 
condemned  heretics,  and  burial  in  consecrated 
ground  was  refused  to  their  remains. 

When  we  read  over  the  nximerous  examinations 
of  the  templars,  in  other  countries,  as  well  as  in 
France,  we  cannot  but  feel  convinced  that  some  of 
these  charges  had  a  degree  of  foundation,  though 
perhaps  the  circumstances  on  which  they  were 
foimded  were  misunderstood.  A  very  great  num- 
ber of  knights  agreed  to  the  general  points  of  the 
formula  of  initiation,  and  we  cannot  but  believe  that 
they  did  deny  Christ,  and  that  they  spit  and  trod  upon 
the  cross.  The  words  of  the  denial  were,  Je  reney 
DeUy  or  Je  reney  Jhesu,  repeated  thrice ;  but  most  of 
those  who  confessed  having  gone  through  this  cere- 
mony, declared  that  they  did  it  with  repugnance, 
and  that  they  spit  beside  the  cross,  and  not  on  it 
The  reception  took  place  in  a  secret  room,  with 
closed  doors ;  the  candidate  was  compelled  to  take 
off  part  or  all  of  his  garments,  (very  rarely  the 
latter,)  and  then  he  was  kissed  on  various  parts 
of  the  body.  One  of  the  knights  examined,  Guis- 
chard  de  Marzici,  said  he  remembered  the  re- 
ception of  Hugh  de  Marhaud,  of  the  diocese  of 
Lyons,  whom  he  saw  taken  into  a  small  room, 
which  was  closed  up  so  that  no  one  could  see  or 
hear  what  took  place  within  ;  but  that  when,  after 
some  time,  he  was  let  out,  he  was  very  pale,  and 
looked  as  though  he  were  troubled  and  amazed, 
(Juit  vcdde  paUidvs  et  qium  turbatus  et  stupef actus,) 

D  5 


Digitized 


by  Google 


58  SO&eSBT  AKD  UAQIC 

In  conjimetion,  however,  irith  these  strange  and  re* 
volting  c^emonies,  there  were  others  that  showed 
a  t&vexencQ  for  the  Christian  church  and  its  ordi- 
nances, a  profound  faith  in  Christ,  and  the  con^ 
acdousness  that  the  partaker  of  them  was  enteiing 
into  a  holy  vow. 

M.  Midielet,  who  has  carefully  investigated  the 
matmab  relating  to  the  trial  of  the  templari^  has 
suggested  at  least  an  ingenious  explanation  of  tiiese 
anomaliea  He.  imagines  that  the  form  of  reception 
was  borrowed  from  the  figurative  mysteries  and 
rites  of  the  early  church>  The  candidate  for  admis- 
sion into  the  order,  according  to  this  notion,  was 
first  presented  as  a  sinner  and  renegade,  in  which 
character,  after  the  example  of  St.  Peter,  he  denied 
Christ.  This  denial  was  a  sort  of  pantotoime,  in 
which  the  novice  expressed  his  reprobate  state 
by  spitting  on  the  cross.  The  candidate  was  then 
stripped  of  his  profane  clothing,  received  through 
the  kiss  of  the  order  into  a  higher  state  of  faith, 
and  re-dressed  with  the  garb  of  its  holiness.  Forms 
like  these  would,  in  the  middle  ages,  be  easily  mis- 
understood, and  their  original  meaning  soon  for- 
gotten. 

Another  charge  in  the  accusation  of  the  templars 
seems  to  have  been  to  a  great  degree  proved  by  the 
depositions  of  witnesses;  the  idol  or  head  which 
they  were  said  to  have  worshipped,  but  the  real 
character  or  meaning  of  which  we  are  totally  imable 
to  explain.  Many  templars  confessed  to  having 
seen  this  idol,  but  as  they  described  it  difierently,  we 
must  suppose  that  it  was  not  in  all  cases  represented 
under  the  same  form    Some  said  it  was  a  frightful 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THB  KKIGH1»  T1HPLAB8.  59 

head,  with  long  beard  and  sparkling  eyes ;  others . 
sadd  it  was  a  man's  skull;  some  described  it  as 
having  three  faces ;  some  said  it  was  of  wood,  and 
others  of  metal ;  one  witness  described  it  as  a  paint- 
ing X^ftt^  pictd)  representing  the  image  of  a  man, 
(imago  hammis^  and  said  that  when  it  was  shown 
to  hhn,  he  was  ordered  to  "  adore  Christ  his  crea- 
tor/' According  to  some,  it  was  a  gilt  figure,  either 
of  wood  or  metal;  while  others  described  it  as 
painted  black  and  white.  According  to  another  de- 
position, the  idol  had  four  feet,  two  before  and  two 
behind;  the  one  belonging  to  the  order  at  Paris 
was  said  to  be  a  silver  head,  with  two  faces  and  a 
beard.  The  novices  of  the  order  were  told  always 
to  regard  this  idol  as  their  saviour.  Deodatus  Jaffet, 
a  knight  from  the  south  of  France,  who  had  been 
received  at  Pedenat,  deposed  that  the  person  who 
in  his  case  performed  the  ceremonies  of  reception, 
showed  him  a  hea;d  or  idol,  which  appeared  to  have 
three  faces,  and  said,  "  You  must  adore  this  as  your 
saviour,  and  the  saviour  of  the  order  of  the  Tem- 
ple,'' and  that  he  was  made  to  worship  the  idol,  say- 
ing, "  Blessed  be  he  who  shall  save  my  souL"  Cet- 
tus  Bagonis,  a  knight  received  at  Rome  in  a 
chamber  of  the  palace  of  th^  Lateran,  gave  a  some- 
what similar  account  Many  other  witnesses  spoke 
of  having  seen  these  heads,  which,  however,  were, 
perhaps,  not  shown  to  everybody,  for  the  greatest 
number  of  those  who  spoke  on  this  subject,  said 
t^t  they  had  heard  speak  of  the  head,  but  that 
they  had  never  seen  it  themselves ;  and  many  of 
them  declared  their  disbelief  in  its  existence.  A 
friar  minor  deposed  in  England  that  an  English 


Digitized 


by  Google 


60  SOBOBBT  AND  HAGia 

templar  had  assured  him  that  in  that  country  the' 
order  had  four  principal  idols,  one   at  London  in 
the  sacristy  of  the  Temple,  another  at  Brist^am^ 
a  third  at  Brueria,  (Bruem  in  Lincolnshire,)  and 
a  fourth  beyond  the  Humber. 

Some  of  the  knights  from  the  south  added  ano- 
ther circumstance  in  their  confessions  relating  to 
this  head  A  templar  of  Florence,  declared  that,  in 
the  secret  meetings  of  the  chapters,  one  brother 
said  to  the  others,  showing  them  the  idol,  "  Adore 
this  head  This  head  is  your  God  and  your  Ma- 
homet/' Another,  Gauserand  de  Montpesant,  said, 
that  the  idol  was  made  in  the  figure  of  Baffbmet, 
(in  figuram  Baffometi) ;  and  another,  Raymond 
Rubei,  described  it  as  a  wooden  head,  on  which  was 
painted  the  figure  of  Baphomet,  and  he  adds,  "  that 
he  worshipped  it  by  kissing  its  feet,  and  exclaiming, 
Yalla"  which  he  describes  as  "  a  word  of  the  Sara- 
cens,'" (verbum  Saracenorum).  This  has  been  seized 
upon  by  some  as  a  proof  that  the  templars  had 
secretly  embraced  Mahometanism,  as  Baffomet  or 
Baphomet  is  evidently  a  corruption  of  Mahomet ; 
but  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  Christians  of 
the  West  constantly  used  the  word  Mahomet  in  the 
mere  signification  of  an  idol,  and  that  it  was  the 
desire  of  those  who  conducted  the  prosecution 
against  the  templars  to  show  their  intimate  inter- 
course with  the  Saracens.  Others,  especially  Von 
Hammer,  gave  a  Greek  derivation  of  the  word,  and 
assumed  it  as  a  proof  that  gnosticism  was  the 
secret  doctrine  of  the  Temple. 

The  confessions  with  regard  to  the  mysterious 
cat  were  much  rarer  and  more  vague.   Some  Italian 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  EKIGHTS  TEMPLABS.  61 

knights  confessed  that  they  had  been  present  at  a 
secret  chapter  of  twelve  knights  held  at  Brindisi,  at 
which  a  grfey  cat  suddenly  appeared  amongst  them, 
and  that  they  worshipped  it  At  Nismes,  some 
templars  declared  that  they  had  been  present  at  a 
chapter  at  Montpellier,  at  which  the  demon  appeared 
to  them  in  the  form  of  a  cat,  and  promised  them 
worldly  prosperity  ;  and  added,  that  they  saw  devils 
in  the  shape  of  women.  Gilletus  de  Encreyo,  a 
templar  of  the  diocese  of  Rheims,  who  disbelieved 
in  the  story  of  the  cat,  deposed  that  he  had  heard 
say,  though  he  knew  not  by  whom,  that  in  some  of 
their  battles  beyond  sea,  a  cat  had  appeared  to 
them.*  An  English  knight,  who  was  examined  at 
London,  deposed,  that  in  England  they  did  not 
adore  the  cat  or  the  idol  to  his  knowledge,  but  he 
had  heard  it  positively  stated  that  they  worshipped 
the  cat  and  the  idol  in  parts  beyond  sea."t-  English 
witnesses  deposed  to  other  acts  of  "  indolatry.'*  It 
was  of  course  the  demon,  who  presented  himself  ia  the 
form  of  the  cat.  A  lady,  named  Agnes  Lovecote,  ex- 
amined in  England,  stated  that  she  had  heard  that, 
at  a  chapter  held  at  Dineslee,  (Dynnesley  in  Hert- 
fordshire,) the  devil  appeared  to  the  templars  in  a 
monstrous  form,  having  precious  stones  instead  of 
eyes,  which  shone  so  bright  that  they  illuminated 
the  whole   chapter ;   the  brethren,  in  succession, 

*  Audivit  tamen  ab  aliquibus  dici,  de  quibus  non  reoorda- 
tur,  quod  quidam  catus  apparebat  ultra  ■  mare  in  preliis  eorum, 
quod  tamen  non  credit. 

t  Respondit  quod  in  Anglia  non  adorant  catum  nee  idolum, 
quod  ipse  sciat ;  sed  audivit  bene  dici,  quod  adorant  catum  et 
idolimiin  partibus  transmarinis. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


62  SOBCSBY  AND  MAGIC. 

kissed  him  on  the  posteriors,  and  marked  there  the 
form  of  the  cross.  She  was  told  that  one  young  man, 
who  refused  to  go  through  this  ceremonj,  was 
thrown  into  a  well,  and  a  great  stone  cast  upon 
him.  Another  witness,  Robert  de  Folde,  said  that 
he  had  heard  twenty  years  ago,  that  in  the  same 
place,  the  devil  came  to  the  chapter  once  a  year, 
and  flew  away  with  one  of  the  knights,  whom  he 
took  as  a  sort  of  tribute.  Two  others  deposed  that 
certain  templars  confessed  to  them  that  at  a  grand 
annual  assembly  in  the  county  of  York,  the  tem- 
plars worshipped  a  catf.  All  this  is  mere  heatsay, 
but  it  shows  the  popular  opinion  of  the  conduct  of 
the  order.  A  templar  examined  in  Paris,  named 
Jacques  de  Treces,  who  said  that  he  had  been  in- 
formed that  at  secret  chapters  held  at  midnight,  a 
head  appeared  to  the  assembled  brethren,  added, 
that  one  of  them  "  had  a  private  demon,  by  whose 
council  he  was  wise  and  ricL''  * 

Absurd  as  these  accusations  may  appear  to  us  at 
the  present  day,  they  were  then  believed,  and 
helped  as  much  as  anything  else  to  ensure  the  con- 
demnation of  the  order.  The  aim  of  king  Philippe 
was  secured ;  he  seized  upon  the  whole  treasure  of 
the  temple  in  France,  and  became  rich.  Those  who 
ventured  to  speak  in  defence  of  the  order  were 
browbeaten,  and  received  little  attention ;  the  tor- 
ture was  employed  to  force  confessions ;  fifty-four 
templars  who  refused  to  confess  were  carried  to  the 
windmill  of  St  Antoine,  in  the  suburbs  of  Paris, 

*  Audivit  tamen  dici  postquam  fuit  in  ordine,  quod  dictus 
frater  Kadulphus  habebat  daemonem  privatum,  cujus  consilio 
erat  sapiens  et  dives. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THS  KNIQHT8  TKMFBAB8.  68 

and  there  burnt ;  and  many  others,  among  whom 
was  the  grand-master  himself,  were  subsequently 
brought  to  the  stake.  After  having  lasted  two  or 
three  years,  the  process  ended  ip  the  condemnation 
and  suppression  of  the  order,  and  its  estates  were 
given  in  some  countries  to  the  knights  of  St  John. 
It  was  in  France  that  the  persecution  was  most  cruel ; 
in  England,  the  order  was  suppressed,  but  no  execu- 
tions took  place.  Even  in  Italy,  the  severity  of  the 
judges  was  not  everywhere  the  same ;  in  Lombardy 
and  Tuscany,  the  templars  were  condemned,  while 
they  were  acquitted  at  Ravenna  and  Bologna.  They 
were  also  pronounced  innocent  in  Castile,  while  in 
Arragon  they  were  reduced  by  force,  only  because 
they  had  attempted  to  resist  by  force  of  arms ;  and 
both  in  Spain  and  in  Portugal  they  only  gave  up 
their  own  order  to  be  admitted  into  others.  The 
pope  was  offended  at  the  lenity  shown  towards  them 
in  England,  Spain,  and  Germany.  The  order  of 
the  temple  was  finally  dissolved  and  abolished,  and 
its  memory  branded  with  disgrace.  Some  of  the 
knights  are  said  to  have  remained  together,  and 
formed  secret  societies ;  from  one  of  which  it  has 
been  supposed  that  the  modem  Freemasons  are  de- 
rived. This,  however,  is  a  doubtful  question,  which 
will  perhaps  never  be  cleared  up.  * 

*  The  history  of  the  suppression  of  the  templars  was  treated 
in  a  large  work  by  the  historian  Dupuy,  in  which  numerous 
documents  relating  to  the  process  were  printed.  M.  Baynouard 
published,  in  1813,  a  critical  essay  on  the  subject,  in  which  he 
put  himself  forwards  as  the  champion  of  the  order.  M.  Mi- 
chelet  has  more  recently  printed  the  original  examinations  and 
other  docxmients  of  the  process  in  the  collection  of  historical 


Digitized 


by  Google 


64  SOBOEBT   AND  MAQIC. 

documents  published  by  direction  of  the  French  government ; 
and  he  has  treated  the  matter  at  considerable  length  and  with 
much  research  in  the  third  volume  of  his  "  Histoire  de  France/' 
A  manuscript  of  the  fourteenth  century  in  the  Cottonian 
library  in  the  British  Museum,  .(MS  Cotton.  Julius  B.  XII.) 
contains  a  considerable  portion  of  the  depositions  of  the 
witnesses  examined  in  England. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


65 


CHAPTER  IV. 


SORCERY  IN  FRANCE. — THE   CITIZENS   OP  ARRAS. 

In  France,  the  belief  in  sorcery  appears  to  have 
been  more  prevalent  at  this  early  period,  even  than 
in  England,  and  about  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth 
century  it  became  the  ground  of  one  of  the  most  re- 
markable acts  of  wholesale  oppression  that  the 
history  of  that  age  has  preserved  to  us.  We  have  seen 
how,  as  early  as  the  thirteenth  century,  the  charge 
of  sorcery  had  been  used  as  one  of  the  means  of 
branding  with  infamy  the  name  of  the  Waldenses 
or  Vaudois  ;  they  were  accused  of  selling  them- 
selves to  the  devil,  of  passing  through  the  air 
mounted  on  broomsticks  to  a  place  of  general  meet- 
ing, where  they  did  homage  to  the  demon,  and 
where  they  had  preaching,  and  did  various  acts  of 
impiety  and  sinfulness.  Several  persons  accused  of 
taking  part  in  these  meetings  were  put  to  death, 
and  the  meeting  itself  was  often  characterised  by 
the  name  of  a  Vaudoisie  or  a  Vauderie,  The  se- 
cresy  of  the  meetings  of  persecuted  religious  secta- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


66  SOBOBBT  AND  HAQIO. 

ries  gave  a  certain  plausible  appearance  to  such 
stories.  We  have  seen,  at  the  commencement 
of  the  fourteenth  century,  the  same  hated  and  fear- 
ful crime  of  sorcery  deeply  mixed  up  with  the 
charges  brought  against  the  unfortunate  templars ; 
and  it  was  not  imfrequently  used  then  and  in  sub- 
sequent times  to  ruin  the  character  of  high  state 
offenders. 

One  of  its  victims  was  the  powerful  minister  of 
Philippe  le  Bel,  Enguerrand  de  Marigny,  the  same 
who  had  conducted  the  execution  of  the  templars, 
and  who  thus  fell  under  a  stroke  of  the  deadly 
weapon  which  he  had  conjured  up  for  the  destruc- 
tion of  others.  After  the  death  of  that  monarch  in 
X315,  Enguerrand  was  thrown  into  prison,  and 
accused  of  various  acts  of  extortion  and  other 
crimes  in  abuse  of  the  confidence  of  his  late  master, 
at  the  instigation  of  some  of  the  princes  of  the  royal 
family  of  France,  whosfe  enmity  he  had  provoked, 
especially  of  the  counts  of  Valois  and  St  PoL  Phi- 
lippe's successor,  Louis,  showed  some  inclination  to 
save  Enguerrand,  and  his  trial  was  making  little 
progress,  when  it  was  suddenly  published  abroad 
that  he  had  entered  into  a  conspiracy  to  compass 
the  death  of  his  two  principal  accusers.  It  was 
stated  that  Enguerrand  had  sent  for  his  wife,  the 
lady  of  Marigny,  her  sister  the  lady  of  Chantelou, 
and  his  brother,  the  archbishop  of  Sens,  who  came 
to  him  in  his  prison,  and  there  held  counsel  toge- 
ther on  the  best  method  of  effecting  the  deaths  of 
the  two  counts.  The  ladies,  after  leaving  the 
prison,  sent  for  a  lame  woman,  who  appears  to  have 
dealt  in  alchemy — qui  fesoit  Vor — and  a  mauvads 


Digitized 


by  Google 


ENGUERBAin)  DE  MABIGNT.  67 

garfon,  named  Paviot,  and  promised  them  a  great 
sum  of  money  if  they  would  make  "  certain  faces 
whereby  they  might  kill  the  said  counts."  The 
*^  fitces,'"  or  images,  were  accordingly  made  of  wax, 
and  baptised  in  the  devil's  name,  and  so  ordered 
"  by  art  magic/'  that  as  they  dried  up  the  counts 
would  have  gradually  pined  away  and  died.  But 
accidentally,  as  we  are  told,  the  whole  matter  came 
to  the  ears  of  the  count  of  Valois,  who  gave  infor- 
mation to  the  king,  and  the  latter  then  consented 
to  Enguerrand's  deatL  Enguerrand  and  Paviot 
were  hanged  on  one  gibbet ;  the  lame  woman  was 
burnt,  and  the  two  ladies  were  condemned  to  prison. 
In  1334,  the  lady  of  Robert  count  of  Artois,  and 
her  son,  were  thrown  into  prison  on  a  suspicion  of 
sorcery  ;  her  husband  had  been  banished  for  crimes 
of  a  diflTerent  nature. 

The  chronicle  of  St.  Denis,  in  which  is  preserved 
the  account  of  the  trial  of  Enguerrand  de  Marigny, 
furnishes  a  singular  instance  of  the  superstitious 
feelings  of  the  age.  In  1323,  a  Cistercian  'abbot 
was  robbed  of  a  very  considerable  sum  of  money.  ^ 
He  went  to  a  man  of  Chateau-Landon,  who  had 
been  provost  of  that  town,  and  was  known  by  the 
name  of  Jehan  le  Prevost,  to  consult  on  the  best 
way  of  tracing  the  robbers,  and  by  his  advice  made 
an  agreement  with  a  sorcerer,  who  undertook  to 
discover  them  and  oblige  them  to  make  restitution. 
A  box  was  first  made,  and  in  it  was  placed  a  black 
cat,  with  three  days'  provision  of  bread  sopped  in 
cream,  oil  that  had  been  sanctified,  and  holy  water, 
and  the  box  was  then  buried  in  the  ground  at  a 
cross  road,  two  holes  having  been  left  in  the  box. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


68  SOROEBT  AND   MAGIC. 

with  two  long  pipes,  wliich  admitted  sufficient  air 
to  keep  the  cat  alive.  After  three  days  the  cat  was 
to  have  been  taken  out  and  skinned,  and  the  skin 
cut  into  thongs,  and  these  thongs  being  made  into 
a  girdle,  the  man  who  wore  it,  with  certiiin  insigni- 
ficant ceremonies,  might  call  upon  the  evil  one,  who 
would  immediately  come  and  answer  any  question 
he  put  to  him. 

It  happened,  however,  that  the  day  aftier  the  cat 
was  buried,  a  party  of  shepherds  passed  over  the 
spot  with  their  sheep  and  dogs,  and  the  latter, 
smelling  the  cat,  began  to  bark  furiously  and  tear 
up  the  ground  with  their  feet  The  shepherds, 
astonished  at  the  perseverance  with  which  the  dogs 
continued  to  scratch  the  ground,  brought  the  then 
provost  of  Ch&teau-Landon  to  the  place,  who  had 
the  ground  excavated,  and  found  the  box  and  cat 
It  was  at  once  judged  to  be  an  act  of  sorcery,  and 
was  the  subject  of  much  scandal,  but  no  traces 
could  be  discovered  of  the  persons  who  had  done  it, 
until  at  last  the  provost  found  the  carpenter  who 
had  made  the  box  for  Jehan  le  Prevost,  and  thus 
the  whole  matter  came  to  light,  and  two  persons 
were  burnt  for  the  crime. 

Later  on  in  the  century,  in  the  reign  of  the  weak 
Charles  VI.,  the  superstitions  of  the  vulgar  were 
again  mixed  up  with  the  highest  affairs  of  the 
state.  It  was  in  1393  that  this  prince  experienced 
the  first  attack  of  that  painful  malady  which  af- 
fected his  reason,  and  rendered  him  unfit  for  several 
years  to  fulfil  the  duties  of  his  high  station.  People 
in  general  ascribed  his  madness  to  the  effects  of 
sorcery,   and  they  pointed   to   his   beloved  Italian 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   MALADY   OF  CHABLBS  VI.  69 

sister-in-law,  the  young  and  beautiful  duchess  of 
Orleans,  as  the  author  of  it  This  lady  was  a  Vis- 
conti,  the  daughter  of  the  rich  and  powerful  *duke 
of  Milan :  and  it  appears  that  at  this  time  Lom- 
bardy,  her  native  land,  was  celebrated  above  all 
other  parts  for  sorcerers  and  poisoners.*  The  wise 
ministers  of  the  court  judged  it  necessary  to  set  up 
one  sorcerer  against  another,  and  a  man  of  this 
stamp,  named  Amaud  Gruillaume,  was  brought  from 
Guienne  to  cure  the  king  by  his  magic.  Amaud 
was  in  every  respect  an  ignorant  pretender,  but  he 
possessed  a  book  to  which  he  gave  the  strange  title 
of  Smagorad,  the  original  of  which  he  said  was 
given  by  God  to  Adam,  to  console  him  for  the  loss 
of  his  son  Abel ;  and  he  pretended  that  any  one 
who  possessed  this  book  was  enabled  thereby  to 
hold  the  stars  in  subjection,  and  to  command  the 
four  elements  and  all  the  objects  they  contained. 
This  man  gave  credit  to  the  general  opinion  by  as- 
serting positively  that  the  king  lay  under  the  power 
of  sorcery ;  but  he  said  that  the  authors  of  the 
charm  were  working  so  strenuously  against  him, 
that  it  would  take  much  time  before  he  could  over- 
come them.  The  clergy,  in  the  meantime,  inter- 
fered to  put  a  stop  to  proceedings  so  contrary  to 
the  sentiments  of  the  church,  and  the  king  having 
recovered,  Arnaud  Guillaume  seems  to  have  fallen 
back  into  his  original  obscurity.  Another  attack 
followed  rapidly,  but  the  magician  was  not  recalled, 

*  Allegantes  quod  in  Lombardia,  undeducebat  originem, 
intoxicationes  et  sortilegia  vigebant  plus  quam  aliis  partibus. 
The  Chronique  du  religieux  de  St.  Denis,  which  is  my  autho- 
rity for  these  facts. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


70  SOBOEBY  AND  MAGIO. 

although  people  still  believed  that  thek  king  was 
bewitched,  and  they  now  openly  accused  the  duke 
of  Milan  himself  as  the  sorcerer. 

In  1397,  king  Charles  was  again  the  victim  of  a 
violent  attack.  On  this  occasion  the  province  of 
Guienne,  which  appears  to  have  been  celebrated  for 
persons  of  this  description,  contributed  towards  his 
cure  by  sending  two  persons  to  counteract  the  in- 
fluence under  which  he  was  believed  to  have  fallen. 
These  men,  who  were  by  profession  Augustine  friars, 
were  received  at  court  with  every  respect  and 
honour,  and  were  lodged  in  the  ch&teau  of  St.  An- 
toine.  They,  like  their  predecessor,  delayed  their 
operations,  amusing  people  with  formalities  and  pro- 
mises, while  they  lived  in  luxury  and  debauchery, 
and  used  their  influence  over  people's  minds  to 
corrupt  their  wives  and  daughters.  At  last  their 
character  became  so  apparent,  that,  after  having 
been  subjected  to  a  fair  trial,  they  were  conducted 
to  the  Greve  at  Paris,  where  they  were  first  publicly 
degraded  from  their  order,  and  then  beheaded.  But 
even  their  fate  was  no  warning  to  others  ;  for  when, 
in  1403,  the  king  was  labouring  under  another 
attack  of  his  malady,  two  sorcerers,  named  Poinson 
and  Briquet,  who  resided  at  Dijon  in  Burgundy, 
offered  to  effect  his  cure.  For  this  purpose  they 
established  themselves  in  a  thick  wood  not  far  from 
the  gates  of  Dijon,  where  they  made  a  magic  circle 
of  iron  of  immense  weight,  which  was  supported  by 
iron  columns  of  the  height  of  a  middle-sized  man, 
and  to  which  twelve  chains  of  iron  were  attached. 
So  great  was  the  popular  anxiety  for  the  king's  re- 
covery, that  the  two  sorcerers  succeeded  in  persuad- 

6 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  DUKE   OF  OBLBANS.  71 

ing  twelve  of  the  principal  persons  of  the  town  to 
enter  the  circle,  and  allow  themselves  to  be  fastened 
by  the  chains.  The  sorcerers  then  proceeded  with 
their  incantations,  but  they  were  altogether  without 
result.  The  bailiff  of  Dijon,  who  was  one  of  the 
twelve,  and  had  averred  his  incredulity  from  the 
first,  caused  the  sorcerers  to  be  arrested,  and  they 
were  burnt  for  their  crime. 

The  duke  of  Orleans  appears  to  have  fallen  under 
the  same  suspicion  of  sorcery  as  his  Italian  consort 
After  his  murder  by  order  of  the  duke  of  Burgundy 
— ^the  commencement  of  those  troubles  which  led  to 
the  desolation  of  France — ^the  latter  drew  up  various 
Iliads  of  accusation  against  his  victim  as  justifica- 
tions of  the  crime,  and  one  of  these  was,  that  the 
duke  of  Orleans  had  attempted  to  compass  his  death 
by  means  of  sorcery.  According  to  this  statement,  he 
had  received  a  magician — another  apostate  friar-— 
into  his  castle  of  Mountjoie,  where  he  was  employed 
in  these  sinister  design&  He  performed  his  ma- 
gical ceremonies  before  sunrise  on  a  neighbouring 
mountain,  where  two  demons,  named  Herman  and 
Astramon,  appeared  to  him ;  and  these  became  his 
active  instruments  in  the  prosecution  of  his  de- 
sign. 

Many  other  such  cases  no  doubt  occurred  in  the 
annals  of  this  period.  Every  reader  of  history 
knows  that  the  most  serious  crime  laid  to  the 
charge  of  Jeanne  of  Arc  was  that  of  sorcery,  for  which 
chiefly  she  was  condemned  to  the  stake.  It  was 
pretended  that  she  had  been  in  the  habit  of  attend- 
ing at  the  witches'  sabbath  which  was  held  on  the 
Thursday  night  of  every  week,  at  a  fountain  by  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


72  SORCERY   AND   MAGIC. 

fairies'  oak  of  Bourlemont,  near  Domremy,  her  na- 
tive place ;  that  from  thence  she  was  sent  forth  to 
cause  war  and  slaughter ;  that  the  evil  spirits  had 
discovered  to  her  a  magic  sword  concealed  in  the 
church  of  St.  Catherine  at  Fierbois,  to  which,  and 
to  charmed  rings  and  banners  which  she  bore  about 
with  her,  she  owed  her  victories;  and  that  by 
means  of  sorcery  she  had  gained  the  confidence  and 
favour  of  the  king  and  the  duke  of  Bourbon.  She 
was  gravely  condemned  on  these  charges  by  the 
faculty  of  theology  of  the  university  of  Paris. 

The  belief  in  the  nightly  meetings,  or  sabbath  of 
the  witches,  had  now  become  almost  universal  "We 
learn  that  it  was  very  prevalent  in  Italy  about  the 
year  1400,  and  that  many  persons  were  accused  of 
having  been  present  at  them,  and  of  having  denied 
their  belief  in  the  church,  and  done  homage  to  the 
evil  one,  with  various  detestable  acts  and  ceremo- 
nies. It  was  half  a  century  later  that  this  belief 
was  made  the  ground-work  of  a  series  of  prosecu- 
tions in  Artois  and  Flanders,  the  only  object  of 
which  appears  to  have  been  revenge  and  extortion. 
We  know  nothing,  however,  of  the  events  which  pr^ 
ceded  and  led  to  them.  A  particular  account  of 
the  proceedings  has  been  left  us  by  a  contemporary 
writer,  Jacques  du  Clerc,  who  appears  to  have  been 
present,  and  shorter  accounts  are  preserved  in  one 
or  two  of  the  old  historians.  The  term  Vauldois 
is  here  used  simply  in  the  sense  of  a  sorcerer. 

At  the  time  of  which  we  are  speaking,  a  Jacobin 
monk,  named  Pierre  le  Broussart,  was  inquisitor  of 
the  faith  in  the  city  of  Arras.  About  the  feast  of 
All  Saints,  1459,  a  young  woman,  somewhat  more 


Digitized 


by  Google 


WITCHCRAFT  AT  ARRAS.  73 

than  thirty  years  of  age,  named  Demiselle,  who  lived 
by  prostitution  (difemme  defolle  vie),  in  the  city  of 
Douai,  was  suddenly  arrested  at  that  place  by  Pierre 
le  Broussart's  orders,  and  carried  prisoner  to  Arras, 
where  she  was  brought  before  the  municipal  magis- 
trates, and  by  them,  at  the  inquisitor's  demand, 
given  over  to  the  ecclesiastical  arm,  and  thrown 
into  the  bishop's  prison.  When  she  asked  her  per- 
secutors why  she  was  thus  treated,  they  only  conde- 
scended to  inform  her  that  she  would  hear  in  good 
time,  and  one  of*  them  asked,  by  way  of  raillery,  if 
she  did  not  know  a  hermit  named  Robinet  de 
Vaulx.  She  replied  in  consternation,  "  Et  que 
checy  ?  cuide  ton  que  je  sois  Vauldoise  f — "  And 
what  of  that  ?  do  they  think  me  a  witch  V 

In  fact,  Robinet  de  Vaulx,  who  was  a  native  of 
Artois,  but  had  lived  for  some  time  as  a  hermit  in 
the  province  of  Burgundy,  had  recently  been  burnt 
for  the  crime  of  sorcery,  or  VayMerie,  at  Langres, 
and  she  could  only  suppose,  by  the  allusion  to  his 
name,  that  she  was  now  accused  of  the  same  crime. 
Accordingly,  it  was  soon  afterwards  made  known 
that  Pierre  le  Broussart  had  been  at  the  chapter- 
general  of  the  friars  preachers  (or  Jaa^bins),  held 
that  year  at  Langres,  at  which  Robinet  de  Vaulx 
had  been  condemned  ;  that,  on  his  trial,  Robinet  had 
confessed  that  there  were  a  great  number  of  sor- 
cerers in  Artois,  men  and  women ;  and,  that, 
among  others,  he  had  named  this  woman,  Demiselle, 
dwelling  at  Douai,  and  a  man  named  Jehan  Levite, 
who  was  known  by  the  nickname  of  abbe  de  peu  de 
sens  (the  abbot  of  little  sense).  On  his  return  from 
the  chapter,  Broussart  had,  as  he  pretended,  acted 

VOL.   I.  B 


Digitized 


by  Google 


74  SORCERY   AND  MAGIC. 

on  this  information,  and  caused  Demiselle  to  be 
arrested.  She  was  examined  and  put  to  the  torture 
several  times  before  the  vicars  of  the  bishop  of 
Arras,  and,  among  the  rest,  master  Jacques  Dubois, 
a  doctor  in  theology,  canon  and  dean  of  the  church 
of  Notre  Dame  at  Arras,  made  himself  most  busy 
and  active,  and  laboured  most  in  interrogating  her. 
After  having  been  very  cruelly  tortured,  the  mise- 
rable woman  was  at  length  induced  to  confess  that 
she  had  been  present  at  the  Vaulderie,  or  meeting 
of  sorcerers,  where  she  had  see»  and  recognised 
many  persons,  and,  among  others,  the  said  Jehan 
Levite,  known  as  the  066^  de  peu  de  sens,  who  was  a 
painter,  and  then  resided  at  Arras,  but  where  he 
was  at  the  time  of  her  examination  she  did  not 
know.  The  inquisitor  of  the  faith,  after  much 
trouble,  found  him  living  at  Abbeville  in  Ponthieu, 
and  had  him  seized  and  brought  to  Arras,  where  he 
arrived  on  the  25th  of  February,  and  was  imme- 
diately committed  to  the  bishop's  prison.  The  ahbe 
de  peu  de  sens,  at  the  moment  of  being  taken,  ap- 
pears to  have  lost  the  little  sense  he  possessed,  for  he 
attempted  to  cut  off  his  own  tongue  with  a  pen- 
knife, and  maimed  himself  so  much  that  he  was  for 
some  length  of  time  unable  to  speak.  The  inqui- 
sitors said  that  he  did  this  to  avoid  making 
emy  confession;  and  they  subjected  him  to  a 
close  examination  and  cruel  tortures,  until  they 
forced  him  to  make  an  avowal  in  writing,  that  he 
had  been  at  the  Vaulderie,  and  that  he  had 
seen  there  many  people  of  all  estates,  men  and 
women,  nobles  and  burghers,  and  even  ecclesiastics, 
whose  names  and  surnames  he  gave.     In  conse- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


WIIXIHCRAFT   AT   ARRAS.  75 

quence  of  this  information,  Huguet  Carney,  a  barber, 
known  commonly  by  the  name  of  Paternoster; 
Jehan  le  Ferre,  a  seijeant  of  the  echevins  of  the 
city  of  Arras ;  Jeanne  d'Auvergne,  the  mistress  of 
the  new  baths  of  the  city ;  and  three  prostitutes  of 
Arras,  known  by  the  familiar  appellations  of  Be- 
lotte,  Vergengen,  and  Blancquinette ;  were  all 
thrown  into  the  bishop's  prison,  and  subjected  to 
the  same  interrogations  and  tortures  as  the  others. 

When  the  bishop's  vicars  saw  the  matter  going 
on  in  this  way,  and  the  number  of  persons  accused 
increasing  daily,  they  began  to  dread  the  conse- 
quences, and  were  inclined  to  put  a  stop  to  the  pro- 
ceedings. Indeed,  it  was  understood  to  be  their 
intention  to  set  all  the  prisoners  at  liberty  at  Easter. 
But  Jacques  Dubois,  the  dean  of  Arras^  who  had 
already  shown  himself  such  an  active  inquisitor, 
opposed  violently  this  act  of  leniency,  and  offered 
himself  as  their  accuser,  being  supported  in  this  by 
a  bigotted  friar  minor,  John  bishop  of  Bayrut  and 
sufiragan  of  the  church  of  Arras.  Still  fearful  that 
he  might  not  be  successful,  the  dean  went  to  Pe- 
ronne,  and  obtained  a  private  interview  with  the 
count  of  Estampes,  who  came  in  haste  to  Arras, 
called  before  him  the  bishop's  vicars,  enjoined  them 
to  proceed  energetically  against  the  prisoners,  as  it 
was  their  duty  to  do,  or  he  would  take  the  affair 
into  his  own  hands,  and  then  returned  to  Peronne. 
The  vicars  did  not  venture  to  disobey  the  count, 
because,  if  by  their  negligence  they  let  the  cause  go 
out  of  their  court,  it  implied  a  loss  or  diminution  of 
their  privileges. 

The  prisoners  were  again  subjected  to  the  tor- 

E  2 


Digitized 


by  Google 


76  SORCERir   AND   MAGIC. 

ture,  and,  as  it  appears,  the  number  of  persons  ac^ 
cused  by  them  was  considerably  increased.     The 
bishop's  vicars  were  more  and  more  embarrassed, 
and  tried  to  relieve  themselves  by  sending  a  copy  of 
the  examinations  to   Cambray,  for  the   advice  of 
Grilles  Carlier,    a  doctor  of  theology,   seventy-two 
years  of  age,  dean  of  the  church  of  Notre  Dame  of 
Cambray,  and  "  one  of  the  most  notable  clerks  in 
Christendom,   as   was   said;''    and    another    "tr^ 
notable  clerc"  master  Grregoire  Nicollay,  canon  and 
official  of  the  bishojp  of  Cambray.    These  two  no- 
tables,  having  carefidly  and   attentively  read  the 
confessions,  gave  it  in  writing  as  their  opinion  that 
they  should  only  punish  the  prisoners  leniently, 
and  not  proceed  to  extremities,  if  they  had  com- 
mitted no  murders,  and  had  not  abused  the  body  of 
Christ,  (i.  ^.  the  consecrated  host)     Master  Jacques 
Dubois  and  the  titular  bishop  of  Bayrut  were  much 
irritated  at  this  decision.     They  proclaimed  it  as 
their  opinion  that  the  prisoners  ought  all  to  be 
burnt,  and  that  even  those  who   did  not   confess 
should  be  condemned,  if  four  of  those  who  confessed 
agreed  in  accusing  the  same  person  ;  and  these  two 
dignitaries  used  their  utmost  diligence  to  bring  this 
opinion  into  effect.     Dubois  declared  publicly,  that 
he  knew  things  at  which,  if  made  known,  "  people 
would  be  much  abashed,"  and  that  he  knew  that 
all  who  were  accused  were  justly  accused.     He  said 
that  bishops  and  even  cardinals  had  been  at  the 
Vavlderie,  or  sabbath,  and  that  the  number  of  per- 
sons compromised  in  it  was  so  great,  that,  if  they 
had  only  some  king  or  great  prince  to  head  them, 
they  would  rebel  against  the  whole  world.     Tnh^ 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


N 


WItCHCBAFT   AT   ARRAS.  77 

bishop  of  Bayrut  had  held  the  office  of  penitentier 
to  the  pope,  and  was  said  to  connaitre  moult  des 
choses ;  and  the  historian  tells  us  that  he  had  "such 
an  imagination/'  that  as  soon  as  he  saw  people,  he 
at  once  judged  and  said  whether  they  were  Vaid- 
dois  or  not,  (a  veritable  Matthew  Hopkins  of  the 
fifteenth  century).  This  man  and  Dubois  sus- 
tained, that  when  a  man  was  once  accused  of  this 
crime,  from  that  moment  nobody,  even  father  or 
mother,  or  wife,  or  brother,  or  child,  ought  to  take 
his  part,  or  hold  any  communication  with  him.  '  At 
this  time,  another  citizen  of  Arras,  a  wood-mer- 
chant, was  accused  and  thrown  into  prison ;  and 
the  count  of  Estampes  was  prevailed  upon  to  write 
a  letter  to  the  vicars,  rebuking  them  for  their  tardi- 
ness. 

At  length,  a  scaffold  was  raised  in  the  public 
place  of  the  city  of  Arras,  and,  amid  an  immense 
concourse  of  people,  all  the  prisoners  were  brought 
forth,  each  with  a  mitre  on  his  head,  on  which  the 
devil  was  painted  in  the  form  in  which  he  had  ap- 
peared at  the  Vaulderie.  They  were  first  exhorted 
by  the  inquisitors,  and  their  confession  was  then 
read  to  them,  in  which  they  avowed  that  when 
they  wished  to  go  to  the  Vaulderie,  they  took  a 
certain  ointment  which  the  devil  had  given  them, 
rubbed  a  little  wooden  rod  and  the  palms  of  their 
hands  with  it,  and  then  placed  the  rod  between 
their  legs,  upon  which  they  were  suddenly  carried 
through  the  air  to  the  place  of  assembly.  There 
they  found  tables  spread,  loaded  with  all  sorts  of 
meats  and  with  wine,  and  a  devil  in-  the  form  of  a 
goat,  with  the  tail  of  an  ape,  and  a  human  counte- 


N 


Digitized 


by  Google 


78  SORCERY  AKD  MAGIO- 

nance.  They  first  did  oblation  and  homage  to  him, 
ofFering  him  their  soul,  or  at  least  some  part  of 
their  body,  and  then,  as  a  mark  of  adoration,  kissed 
him  behind,  holding  burning  torches  in  their  hand& 
The  abbe  de  peu  de  sens  was  stated  to  have  held  the 
office  of  master  of  the  ceremonies  at  these  meetings, 
it  being  his  duty  to  make  the  new-comers  do  their 
homage.  After  this,  they  all  trod  on  the  cross,  spit 
upon  it,  in  despite  of  Jesus  and  the  Holy  Trinity, 
and  performed  other  profane  actions.  They  then 
fell4o  eating  and  drinking,  and  the  meeting  ended 
in  a  scene  of  indescribable  debauchery,  in  which 
the  demon  took  alternately  the  forms  of  each  sex. 
After  a  number  of  wicked  actions,  the  devil 
preached  to  the  assembly,  and  forbade  them  to  go 
to  church,  or  to  hear  mass,  or  to  touch  holy  water^ 
or  perform  any  other  christian  duty.  The  as- 
sembly was  stated  to  have  been  most  commonly 
held  at  a  fountain  in  the  wood  of  Mofflaines,  about 
a  league  from  Arras,  but  sometimes  in  other  places 
and,  on  some  occasions,  they  had  gone  thither  on 
foot 

When  this  confession  had  been  read,  the  pri- 
soners were  publicly  asked  if  they  acknowledged  its 
truth,  and  they  all  answered  with  a  clear  voic^ 
"  Yes,''  after  which  they  were  taken  from  the  scaf- 
fold, and  carried  to  the  town-haE  Their  sentence 
was  then  published  in  French  and  Latin,  and  they 
were  delivered  over  to  the  secular  power,  to  do  exe- 
cution upon  them  as  rotten  and  stinking  members 
of  the  church  of  Christ  Their  inheritances  were 
forfeited  to  the  count,  and  their  goods  (the  better 
share  of  the  booty  in  this  instance)  to  the  bishop. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


IflTOHCRAFT  AT  ARRAa  79 

When  it  was  announced  to  the  prisoners  that  they 
were  condemned  to  death,  the  women  burst  into 
fearful  screams  and  lamentations,  and  they  all  de- 
clared themselves  innocent,  and  called  for  ven- 
geance on  Jacques  Dubois,  who,  they  said,  had  in- 
duced them  to  make  the  confession  which  he  had 
put  into  their  mouths,  by  the  promise  that  on  that 
condition  he  would  save  their  Uves.  They  persisted 
in  declaring  their  innocence  to  the  last,  which 
"  moved  people  to  great  thought  and  murmurs,'' 
some  asserting  that  they  were  wrongfully  con- 
demned, while  others  said  it  was  the  devil  who  had 
made  them  obstinate,  that  they  might  not  relin- 
quish his  service.  The  abb^depeu  de  sens  was  the 
first  that  was  burnt;  and  his  fate  excited  much 
conmiiseration,  for  he  was  between  sixty  and 
seventy  years  of  age,  a  painter  and  a  poet,  who  had 
been  welcome  everywhere,  because  he  composed  and 
sung  songs  well ;  and  it  was  observed,  that  he  had 
made  beautiful  ditties  and  ballads  in  honour  of  the 
blessed  Virgin;  but  there  were  people  malicious 
enough  to  say,  that  when  he  simg  these,  he  took  oflF 
his  hat  at  the  end,  and  said  in  a  low  voice,  "  Ne 
deplaise  h  man  maistre  !"  The  woman  Demiselle, 
who  had  been  the  first  person  accused,  was  carried 
to  Douai  to  be  burnt  there. 

Hitherto,  the  accused  had  been  all  poor  people, 
and  chiefly  persons  of  very  equivocal  character. 
Their  depositions,  as  far  as  they  compromised 
others,  were  kept  in  the  greatest  secresy ;  but  it 
was  after  their  execution  that  the  real  designs  of 
the  prosecutors  began  to  show  themselves.  Late  in 
the  evening  of  the  16th  of  July,  1460,  the  governor 
of  Peronne,  Bauldwin  lord  of   Noyalles,  came  to 


Digitized 


by  Google 


80  SORCERY   AND  MAGIC 

Arras,  and  arrested,  on  an  accusation  of  Vaulderie, 
master  Anthoine  Sacquespee,  one  of  the  echevins  of 
the  city,  and  a  very  rich  bnrgher,  and  delivered, 
him  into  the  custody  of  the  lieutenant  of  Arras, 
who  committed  him  to  the  bishop's  prison.  The 
following  morning  another  of  the  echevins,  Jehan 
Josset,  and  the  city  Serjeant,  Henriet  de  Royville, 
both  men  of  substance,  were  imprisoned  in  the 
course  of  the  day ;  the  fear  and  consternation  of 
the  citizens  became  so  great,  that  several  of  the 
most  wealthy  attempted  to  save  themselves  by 
flight ;  but  they  were  immediately  pursued  by  the 
officers  of  the  count  of  Estampes,  and  brought  back 
to  be  imprisoned  along  with  their  companions. 
Some  of  them  were  followed  as  far  as  Paris ;  seve- 
ral other  persons,  all  chosen  apparently  for  their 
wealth,  were  arrested  in  the  course  of  the  following 
days,  among  whom  was  the  lord  of  Beauffi^rt ;  and 
the  afikir  made  so  miich  noise,  that  even  in  distant 
parts  of  France  a  traveller  who  was  known  to  have 
come  from  Arras,  could  with  difficulty  find  any 
body  who  would  give  him  lodgings. 

A  few  of  the  persons  thus  seized  were  set  at 
liberty,  because  they  would  not  confess,  and  only 
one,  or  two,  or  three  witnesses  had  deposed  to  having 
seen  them  at  the  sabbath;  but  th^  rest  accused 
only  on  the  evidence  forced  from  prostitutes  and 
others,  who  had  been  put  to  death,  and  were  there- 
fore not  forthcoming  to  be  cross-examined  or  con- 
fronted with  the  persons  they  accused,  were  treated 
with  the  utmost  rigour.  The  city  of  Arras  was  in 
the  greatest  consternation ;  trade  was  at  a  stand ; 
and  people  were  seizing  every  possible  excuse  to 


Digitized 


by  Google 


WITCHCRAFT   AT  ARRAS.  81 

leave  it  At  length  the  affair  reached  the  ears  of 
the  duke  of  Burgundy,  and  it  was  discussed  before 
him  and  the  learned  people  of  his  court  at  Brussels, 
and,  at  their  {suggestion,  the  opinion  of  the  univer* 
sity  of  Louvaine  was  taken.  There  was  found  much 
division  of  (^)inion,  however,  among  the  learned 
clerks ;  for  some  declared  loudly  their  belief  that 
this  crime  of  Vavlderie  was  not  real,  but  a  mere 
illusion ;  while  others  as  resolutely  sustained  the 
contrary.  The  duke,  however,  interposed  his  au- 
thority so  far,  that  from  this  time  no  other  persons 
were  arrested,  and  he  sent  to  Arras  one  of  his  con- 
fidential courtiers  to  watch  the  trials,  which  were 
pushed  forward  as  rapidly  as  possible  by  Dubois 
and  his  colleagues. 

On  the  12th  of  October,  1460,  the  five  prisoners 
of  most  importance  for  their  wealth  or  position, 
were  brought  forth,  and,  to  the  surprise  of  every- 
body, the  lord  of  Beauffort  made  a  voluntary  con- 
fession, that  he  had  been  acquainted  with  the  three 
prostitutes  who  had  already  perished  at  the  stake, 
and  that  he  had  allowed  himself  to  be  overcome  by 
their  wicked  persuasions,  in  consequence  of  which 
he  had,  in  his  own  house,  anointed  a  stick  and  his 
own  body  with  the  ointment  which  they  had  given 
him,  and  that  he  was  immediately  carried  away  to 
the  wood  of  Mofflaine,  where  he  found  a  great  mul- 
titude of  persons  of  both  sexes  congregated  toge- 
ther. He  said  that  the  devil  presided  over  the 
assembly  in  the  form  of  an  ape,  and  that  he  had 
done  homage  to  him,  and  kissed  one  of  his  paws. 
He  expressed  the  greatest  contrition  for  his  crime, 
and  begged  for  mercy  of  his  judges.     Many  of  the 

E  5 


Digitized 


by  Google 


82  SORCERY  AND  MAGIC. 

other  prisoners  sustained  the  utmost  extremity  of 
torture,  and  still  asserted  their  innocence ;  but  the 
confession  of  the  lord  of  Beauffort  had  its  effect  in 
giving  credit  to  the  accusations  of  the  inquisitors, 
who  declared  publicly  that  Antichrist  was  bom, 
and  that  the  Vaviderie  was  preparing  the  way  for 
him.  All  the  prisoners  were  found  guilty,  and  the 
sentence  was  confirmed  by  the  duke,  but  none  of 
them  were  put  to  death.  The  lord  of  Beauffort 
was  condemned  to  ten  years'  imprisonment,  and  to 
a  heavy  fine,  which  went  chiefly  to  the  church  and 
to  the  inquisitors.  The  others  were  similarly 
punished  with  various  degrees  of  fine  and  imprison- 
ment. 

A  new  incident  in  this  tragedy  occurred  at  the 
beginning  of  the  year  1461,  which  seemed  like  a 
judgment  of  providence  on  one  of  the  most  busy 
persecutors  of  the  good  citizens  of  Arras.  Mas- 
ter Jacques  Dubois,  dean  of  the  church  of  If 6tre 
Dame,  as  he  was  on  his  way  to  the  town  of  Corbey, 
was  suddenly  struck  with  a  paralytic  attack,  which 
deprived  him  of  his  senses  He  was  carried  to 
Paris,  but  medical  aid  was  of  no  avail.  He  reco- 
vered the  use  of  his  senses,  but  he  remained  in  a 
state  of  extreme  bodily  weakness,  his  members 
trembled  and  shook  when  he  attempted  to  use 
them,  and  he  lingered  on  miserably  in  his  chamber 
till  the  month  of  February,  when  he  died.  All 
who  believed  in  the  truth  of  the  Vaviderie,  said 
that  he  had  been  bewitched  by  some  of  the  sor- 
cerers in  revenge  for  the  activity  he  had  shown  in 
bringing  them  to  justice. 

But  it  turned  out  that  the  inquisitors,  in  their 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  LOED  OP  BEAUPFORT.  83 

eagerness  for  the  plunder,  had  struck  too  high.   The 
lord  of  Beauffort,  indignant  at  the  treatment  he 
had  experienced,  prosecuted  his  judges,  and  carried 
his  cause  before  the  parliament  of  Paris,  where  it 
was  pleaded  by  his  counsd  in  June,  146L    The 
latter  laid  open,  with  a  very  unsparing  hand,  the 
illegal  knd  tyrannical  conduct  of  the  inquisitors ; 
showed  that  the  confessions  of  the  prisoners  had 
heea  forced  from  them  by  the  torture,  and  that 
they  had  been  allowed  to  make  no  defence ;  and 
stated,  that,  at  the  trial,  the  lord  of  Beauffort  had 
himself  been  put  to  the  torture,  and  persisting  in 
asserting  his  innocence,  had  been  carried  back  to 
prison,  where  he  was  visited  by  master  Jacques 
Dubois,  the  dean  of  N6tre  Dame  above  mentioned, 
who  had  begged  him  on  his  knees  to  make  a  con- 
fession and  acknowledge  that  he  had  been  present 
at  the  Vaidderie,  pretending  that  he  made  this 
request  for  the  sake  of  his  children  and  family,  as 
it  was  the  only  way  in  which  he  could  save  him 
from  the  stake,  in  which  case  his  property  and  es- 
tates would  be  confiscated,  and  his  children  reduced 
to  poverty ;  that  when  the  lord  of  Beauffort  repre- 
sented to  Dubois  in   reply,  that  he  was  already 
bound  by  the  oath  he  had  taken  to  his  own  inno- 
cence, and  which  he  could  not  contradict,  the  dean 
told  him  not  to  be  uneasy  on  that  point,  as  he 
would  undertake  to  obtain  an  absolution  for  him. 
It  was  now  remembered  that  when  the  first  victims 
of  the  inquisitors  were  carried  to  execution,  they 
had  asserted  that  all  they  had  said  in  their  confes-^ 
sions  was  untrue,  and  that  Jacques  Dubois  had  pro- 
mised them  he  would  save  their  lives  if  they  would 
8 


Digitized 


by  Google 


84  SORCEET   AND  MAGIC. 

say  it.  The  parliament  at  once  acquitted  the  lord 
of  Beauffort  and  set  him  at  liberty.  The  other  pri- 
soners were  then  sent  for  by  the  parliament,  and 
their  cases  having  been  severally  examined  into, 
they  were  also  released  from  the  penalties  to  which 
they  had  been  condemned,  and  sent  home  to  their 
families.  Thus  ended  the  persecution  of  the  sor- 
cerers of  Arras,  an  extraordinary  example  of  the 
lengths  to  which  people  may  be  led  by  ignorance 
and  superstition. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


85 


CHAPTER  V. 


THE   LOBD  OF  HIBEBEAU  AND   PIERRE     D  ESTAING    THE 
ALCHEMIST. 

At  the  same  period  with  the  persecution  of  the 
citizens  of  Arras  for  Vanlderie  or  sorcery,  another 
town  in  France  was  the  scene  of  events  equally 
characteristic  of  an  age  when  great  troubles  fre- 
quently arose  out  of  what  would  now  be  considered 
the  most  contemptible  superstitions  of  the  vulgar. 
The  science  of  alchemy  was  closely  allied  to 
that  of  magic;  both  were  grounded  in  the  desire 
to  become  master  of  the  secret  and  mysterious 
workings  of  nature.  The  former  especially  ad- 
dressed itself  to  the  covetous  feelings  of  mankind, 
and  found  dupes  in  every  class  of  society,  although 
old  Chaucer's  judgment  was  constantly  verified  in 
the  result — 

"  This  cursed  craft  who  so  wol  exercise, 
He  shal  no  good  have,  that  him  mt^y  suffice  : 
For  all  the  good  he  spendeth  thereaboute 
He  lesen  shal,  thereof  have  I  no  doute." 


Digitized 


by  Google 


86  SORCERY   AND  MAGIC. 

The  history  of  alchemy  in  the  middle  ages  would 
make  a  book  of  itself;  I  will  not  enter  upon  it, 
but  proceed  to  my  narrative,  which  furnishes  a  per- 
tinent illustration  of  the  dictum  of  the  old  English 
poet 

One  day,  at  the  beginning  of  the  month  of  No- 
vember, 1455,  a  man  named  Pierre  d'Estaing,  a 
practitioner  in  medicine,  who  stated  that  he  was 
attached  to  the  household  of  the  duke  of  Bourbon, 
arrived  suddenly  and  hurriedly  at  the  convent  of 
the  Jacobins  in  the  town  of  Dijon,  and  claimed 
protection  under  the  right  of  asylum  which  the 
house  of  this  order  enjoyed  by  especial  privilege. 
He  refused,  however,  to  inform  them  of  the  circum- 
stances which  had  placed  his  life  in  danger.  He 
remained  safe  under  shelter  of  the  immunities  of 
the  place  a  few  days,  until  on  Friday,  the  7th  of 
November,  between  eight  and  nine  o'clock  in  the 
morning,  Jean  de  Beaufiremont,  lord  of  Mirebeau 
and  Bourbonne,  a  powerful  baron  of  the  neighbour- 
hood, came  to  the  postern-gate  of  the  monastery,  on 
pretence  of  hearing  mass,  accompanied  by  two  of 
his  bastard  children  (one  of  whom  was  a  Jacobin 
iQQnk)  and  a  party  of  armed  retainer&  Their  horses 
had  been  placed  secretly  in  the  stable  of  an  adjoin- 
ing inn.  The  intruders,  marched  direct  into  the 
cloisters,  and  there  seized  Pierre  d'Estaing,  whom 
they  found  sitting  under  the  arcade,  and,  in  spite 
of  the  cries  and  resistance  of  the  monks,  who  had 
been  brought  together  by  the  noise  of  these  violent 
proceedings,  dragged  him  to  the  outside  of  the  con^ 
vent,  where  they  ordered  him  to  moimt  a  horse 
which  had  been  brought  there  in  readiness.     On 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   LORD   OP  MIBBBEATT.  87 

his  refusing  to  obey,  the  lord  of  Mirebeau  drew  his 
dagger,  and  struck  him  on  the  head,  so  as  to  pro- 
duce an  effusion  of  blood ;  and  after  giving  him 
several  blows  with  the  fist,  they  bound  him  with 
cords  and  tied  him  on  the  horse's  back.  The  whole 
party  then  rode  off  at  full  gallop,  succeeded  in  pass- 
ing one  of  the  gates  of  the  town  before  it  could  be 
closed  upon  them,  and  made  for  the  castle  of  Mire- 
beau, where  their  prisoner  was  thrown  into  the 
castle  dungeon. 

Meanwhile  the  good  town  of  Dijon  was  thrown 
into  a  great  uproar.  The  mayor  and  6chevins  met 
the  same  day.  A  detailed  procis-verbal  was  drawn 
up  by  the  municipal  officers,  and  witnesses  were 
heard,  who  all  confirmed  the  account  given  by  the 
monks.  Not  only  had  there  been  a  flagrant  breach 
of  the  privileges  secured  to  the  town  by  its  charter, 
which  gave  to  the  municipal  officers  the  sole  right  of 
arrest  within  the  town  and  its  jurisdiction,  but  a 
convent,  protected  by  the  strongest  sympathies  of 
the  municipality,  had  been  openly  violated.  The 
monastery  of  the  Jacobins  was,  indeed,  under  the 
special  jurisdiction  of  the  mayor  and  echevins  ;  and 
it  was  within  its  walls  that,  for  half  a  century,  the 
municipal  elections  had  always  taken  place.  On 
the  morrow  master  Etienne  Berbisey,  lieutenant  of 
the  mayor,  and  master  Mougin  Lacome,  secretary 
of  the  municipality,  (or,  as  we  should  say,  town- 
clerk,)  were  sent  to  Mirebeau,  to  demand  of  its  lord, 
Jean  de  Bauffremont,  reparation  for  the  injuries 
done  to  the  privileges  of  Dijon ;  but  he  made  eva- 
sive answers,  and  evidently  wished  to  gain  time. 
After  vain  attempts,  on  the  part  of  the  town,  to 


Digitized 


by  Google 


88  SORCERY  AKD  MAGIC. 

bring  their  opponent  to  reason  by  friendly  expostula- 
tions, the  authorities  proceeded  to  act  with  the 
vigour  that  so  frequently  characterized  the  measures 
of  the  municipal  bodies  in  the  middle  ages.  On  the 
13th  of  November,  Philippe  Bergain,  the  seijeant 
and  crier  of  the  town,  summoned,  by  sound  of  trum* 
pet,  in  all  the  streets  and  places  of  Dijon,  the  lord 
Jean  de  Bauffremont  and  his  accomplices,  to  appear 
before  the  mayor,  on  Monday,  the  24th  of  Novem- 
ber, at  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  on  pain  of  con- 
fiscation of  all  the  goods  he  possessed  in  Dijon,  and 
of  perpetual  banishment  from  the  town  and  its 
jurisdiction. 

The  town  had  met  with  a  formidable  antagonist 
in  Jean  de  Bauflfremont,  who  quietly  set  the  muni- 
cipal authorities  at  defiance.  He  happened  to  possess 
no  goods  within  the  limits  of  their  jurisdiction,  so 
that  their  only  hope  of  obtaining  justice  was  by 
calling  for  the  interference  of  their  feudal  lord,  the 
duke  of  Burgundy,  to  whom,  and  to  his  house,  the 
lord  of  Mirebeau  had  done  important  services. 
Jean  de  Bauffremont  had  accompanied  the  duke 
Jean-sans-Peur  to  the  siege  of  Bourges,  in  1412  ;  in 
1417  he  was  one  of  the  captains  who  besieged  the 
castle  of  Nogent,  and  who  received  its  capitulation 
in  the  name  of  the  duke  :  and  in  the  year  ensuing, 
he  had  bravely  repulsed  the  troops  of  the  king  of 
France,  which  were  ravaging  the  frontiers  of  the 
duchy.  In  fact,  he  had  shown  himself,  through 
these  desolating  civil  wars,  one  of  the  bravest  and 
most  devoted  adherents  of  the  Burgundian  party. 
At  the  first  glance,  therefore,  the  success  of  an  ap- 
plication to  the  duke  appeared  to  be  very  doubtfuL 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   LORD  OF  MIBEBEAU.  89 

But,  amid  the  constant  troubles  and  hostilities  of 
the  middle  ages,  the  leading  men  in  the  municipal 
towns  l^irned  to  be  at  once  brave  captains  and  skil- 
ful diplomatists ;  and  we  shall  see  in  the  sequel 
that  those  of  Dijon  were  not  deficient,  at  least  in 
the  qualifications  of  the  latter. 

The  duke  of  Burgundy  was  at  this  time  in  Hol- 
land, at  the  Hague,  whither  the  mayor  and  echevins 
sent  messengers  with  letters,  placing  themselves 
under  his  special  protection.  They  made  a  full 
statement  of  the  affair,  pleaded  their  chartered 
rights  and  privileges,  and  ended  by  intimating  that 
the  reason  they  had  not  been  on  the  spot  in  time  to 
seize  the  offenders  in  the  fact,  and  exact  justice  for 
themselves,  was  that  they  were  at  that  moment  occur 
pied  in  their  assembly  in  voting  unanimously  the  aid 
ofsiccty  thousand  francs,  which  the  duke  had  asked 
of  them  in  the  month  of  January  preceding.  This 
was  a  very  cunning  stroke  of  policy,  and  seems  to 
have  had  its  effect  To  make  still  more  sure,  the 
burghers  wrote  at  the  same  time  to  the  duke's 
chancellor,  to  Jean  de  Molesmes,  the  duke's  secre- 
tary, Jean  Costain,  his  butler,  to  Jean  Martin,  the 
castellan  of  Rouvre  and  the  duke's  valet-de-chambre, 
and  to  other  officers  of  the  ducal  household,  recom- 
mending the  cause  of  the  town  to  their  protection 
in  the  most  pressing  terms,  and  as  there  are  in  the 
municipal  accounts  of  this  period  a  number  of  vague 
and  mysterious  entries  of  payments  of  money  voted 
by  the  town,  it  seems  probable  that  other  means 
were  taken  to  make  clear  to  the  duke's  councillors 
the  justice  of  this  cause.  The  result  was,  that  the 
duke  took  up  the  cause  of  the  burghers  with  zeal, 


Digitized 


by  Google 


90  SORCERY   AKD   MAGIC. 

and  issued  on  the  9th  of  December  a  peremptory- 
order  to  the  bailiff  x)f  Dijon  to  repair  immediately  to 
the  castle  of  Mirebeau,  to  deliver  the  prisoner,  and 
restore  him  to  the  place  from  whence  he  had  been 
taken,  using  force  in  case  of  resistance,  and  to 
arrest  without  delay  all  persons  concerned  in  the 
outrage,  and  commit  them  to  prison  in  the  strong 
castle  of  Talant,  belonging  to  the  duke,  and  situated 
in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Dijon.  On  the  31st  of 
December  the  bailiff  of  Dijon,  Philippe  de  Courcelles, 
went  to  Mirebeau  with  a  strong  party  of  seijeants 
and  men-at-arms,  but  he  found  the  gates  of  the 
castle  closed  and  barricadoed.  After  he  had  knocked 
three  times  at  the  principal  entrance,  and  summoned 
the  castle  by  sound  of  horn  at  the  end  of  the  draw- 
bridge, the  chief  of  the  watch,  who  is  called  the 
bastard  Jean  de  Ruppes,  made  his  appearance  ;  but 
the  only  answer  he  would  give  was,  that  his  master 
was  absent,  and  that  he  had  left  strict  orders  to 
open  to  nobody.  The  bailiff  then-read  the  duke's 
order,  but  in  vain ;  whereupon  he  pronounced 
solemnly  the  confiscation  of  the  castle  of  Mirebeau, 
and  in  sign  of  seizure  placed  the  ducal  arms  on  the 
great  gate.  He  then  collected  together  the  people 
of  the  town  of  Mirebeau  by  sound  of  trumpet,  and 
caused  the  crier,  as  well  before  the  castle  as  in  the 
market-place,  to  summon  the  lord  Jean  de  Baufire- 
mont,  his  accomplices,  and  the  bastard  Jean  de 
Ruppes,  to  appear  before  him  on  the  1 0th  of  Ja- 
nuary following,  on  pain  of  banishment  and  final 
confiscation  of  the  goods  of  all  the  persons  thus 
summoned.  Philippe  de  Courcelles  then  returned 
with  his  escort  to  Dijon. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  LOBD  OF  MIRBBBAU.  91 

The  affair  had  now  taken  a  very  serious  turn, 
Jean  de  Baufiremont  imagined  that  it  would  end  in 
a  mere  squabble  between  himself  and  the  towns- 
men, or  he  would  hardly  have  carried  the  matter  so 
far ;  but  when  he  saw  the  promptitude  with  which 
the  duke  had  taken  up  the  cause  of  the  town,  he 
was  not  so  rash  as  to  brave  ai^  authority  against 
which  he  knew  that  he  was  powerless.  Accordingly, 
w^hen  the  10th  of  January  arrived,  he  came  forward 
and  surrendered  himself  a  prisoner  in  the  castle  of 
Talant    The  prosecution  was  now  actively  followed 
up  as  well  by  the  duke's  bailiff  as  in  the  municipal 
court    When  brought  into  the  court  for  examina- 
tion, the  lord  of  Mirebeau  confessed  the  crime  with 
which  he  was  charged ;  but  he  refused,  with  the 
same  obstinacy  which  had  been  shown  by  Pierre 
d'Estaing  himself,  to  give  any  account  of  the  motives 
of  his  hostility  to  that  individual.     The  bailiff  ad- 
journed his  judgment  from  day  to  day,  in  the  expec- 
tation of  further  disclosures.     The  municipal  body 
held  a  rapid  series  of  deliberations,  all  of  which 
were  entered  in  their  secret  register,  and  the  result  of 
which  was  regularly  communicated  to  the  duke  and 
his  councillors,  in  a  correspondence  which  was  car- 
ried on,  without  interruption,  during  the  months  of 
January,  February,  and  March.     The  men-at-arms 
of  the  town  were  in  the  meantime  actively  engaged 
in  tracing  the  accomplices  of  Jean  de  Bauffremont, 
who  had  hitherto  effectively  concealed  themselves  ; 
but  they  were  at  length  discovered,  and  were  all 
arrested  on  the  11th  of  March,  and  the  same  day 
confronted  with  their  master.    The  latter  now  made 


Digitized 


by  Google 


92  SORCERY   AND  MAGIC* 

a    full    confession    of   his    dealings    with    Pierre 
d'Estaing. 

It  appears  that  some  months  before  the  proceed* 
ings  described  above,  a  certain  Jacobin  monk  named 
Olivier  came  to  the  lord  of  Mirebeau,  and  told  him, 
among  other  things,  that  there  was  a  man  at  Mou* 
lins,  in  the  Bourbonnois,  who  had  an  art  (a  ligtie,  as 
he  termed  it — ^perhaps  with  the  evil  one)  whereby 
he  could  make  forty  or  fifty  thousand  ecus  every 
year,  and  that  he  was  called  master  Pierre  d'Estaing, 
a  gentleman  by  birth,  and,  as  he  said,  a  near  kins- 
man of  the  pope.  Seeing  that  he  had  raised  the 
curiosity  of  the  lord  of  Mirebeau,  he  added  that,  if 
it  were  his  pleasure,  he  would  undertake  to  act  as 
a  negotiator  for  him  with  the  said  Pierre  d'Estaing. 
The  cupidity  of  Jean  de  Bauffremont  was  strongly 
excited  and  he  eagerly  embraced  the  monk's  ofier ; 
and  brother  Olivier  made  several  journeys  to  Mou- 
lins  at  his  expense,  to  convey  his  proposals  to  the 
alchemist  Led  by  the  favourable  reports  which 
this  monk  brought  him,  Jean  de  Bauffremont  re- 
paired to  Moulins  in  person,  and  there  conversed 
with  master  Pierre,  and  was  so  fully  satisfied  with 
his  statementiS,  that  he  entered  into  an  agreement 
whereby  Pierre  d'Estaing  promised  to  put  him  in 
possession  of  the  science  of  his  "  ligtie,"  on  condi- 
tion that  the  lord  of  Mirebeau  should  deposit  in 
the  hands  of  a  merchant  the  sum  of  one  thousand 
ecus  of  gold,  which  were  to  be  given  to  Master 
Pierre  as  soon  as  he  had  fulfilled  his  promise.  The 
next  day  the  lord  of  Mirebeau  was  so  much  pleased 
with  the  "  fair  and  great  promises''  of  the  alchemist^ 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE    LORD   OF   MIEEBEAU.  93 

that  he  gave  him  a  diamond  of  the  value  of  twenty 
ecus  or  more,  to  present  to  his  lady ;  which  so  en- 
tirely gained  his  heart,  that  he  immediately  agreed 
to  reduce  his  demand  from  a  thousand  to  five  hun- 
dred ecus,  and  Jean  de  Baufiremont  took  imme- 
diate steps  to  raise  the  mooey.  From  this  time  we 
hear  no  more  of  brother  Olivier ;  and  it  looks  much 
as  if  the  two  parties  chiefly  concerned  were  trying 
mutually  to  overreach  each  other. 

Before  Jean  de  Bauffremont  departed  from  Mou- 
lins,  Pierre  d'Estaing  gave  him  one  of  his  servants  to 
accompany  him  back  to  Mirebeau,  there  to  com- 
mence operations,  which  he  said  would  take  three 
months  before  it  would  be  necessary  for  him  to  in- 
terfere. He  was  then  to  bring  the  preparation  to 
Moulins,  and  to  pay  two  hundred  ecus  into  the 
hands  of  the  alchemist,  upon  which  the  latter  would 
enter  upon  the  more  secret  parts  of  the  process, 
which  his  servant  was  incapable  of  performing. 

Jean  de  Baufremont  accordmgly  returned  to  his 
castle  of  Mirebeau  with  Pierre  d'Estaing's  servant, 
to  whom  he  gave  money  to  defray  his  expenses.  At 
Mirebeau,  the  servant  began  to  work  assiduously  on 
his  "  operations,''  in  the  course  of  which  he  was 
sent  several  times  to  consult  his  master,  always  at 
Jean  de  Bauffremont's  expense,  who  also  gave  him 
daily  a  Rhenish  florin  for  his  wages.  In  the  sequel 
Pierre  d'Estaing  himself  came  to  Mirebeau,  and  re- 
newed his  promises  to  its  lord,  who,  in  return,  as- 
sured him  that  he  should  be  liberally  rewarded. 
Master  Pierre,  with  three  assistants,  had  remained 
in  the  castle  a  considerable  time,  at  Jean  de  Bauf- 
fremont's  expense,  when  the  latter  received  a  letter 


Digitized 


by  Google 


94  SOBCEBT   AND  MAGIC. 

from  the  coimt  of  Clermont,  son  of  the  duke  of 
Bourbon  and  Auvergne,  to  whose  household  the 
alchemist  had  been  attached.  The  coimt  congratu- 
lated the  lord  of  Mirebeau  on  the  acquisition  He 
had  made  in  the  person  of  master  Pierre  d'Estaing, 
who,  he  said,  was  quite  capable  of  performing  what 
he  had  promised,  adding,  that  he  would  not  have 
permitted  him  to  leave  his  service  for  that  of  any 
other  person  ;  he  recommended  him  to  keep  a  sharp 
watch  upon  the  alchemist,  and  if  he  did  not  per- 
form his  work  to  his  satisfaction,  to  shut  him  up  in 
a  place  where  he  could  work  only  by  candlelight, 
and  to  keep  him  there  till  it  was  done ;  and  con- 
cluded by  expressing  a  hope  that  Jean  de  Bauffre- 
mont  would  not  object  to  share  with  Mm  the  great 
treasure  which  he  was  to  gain  by  the  labours  of 
master  Pierre. 

Jean  de  Bauflfremont  immediately  showed  the 
count's  letter  to  Pierre  d'Estaing,  who  was  much 
abashed  when  he  heard  its  contents,  and  bursting 
into  tears,  fell  on  his  knees  before  him,  and  begged 
that  he  would  have  pity  upon  him  Jean  de  Barif- 
fremont  told  him  to  lay  aside  his  fears,  assured  him 
that  no  one  should  injure  him,  and  promised  to 
treat  him  as  he  would  his  own  child.  It  appears, 
however,  that  he  led  him  into  the  chapel  of  the 
castle,  and  made  him  swear,  with  his  hand  upon  the 
altar,  that  he  would  not  go  beyond  the  castle  walls 
until  he  had  entirely  completed  his  task.  Upon 
this  Pierre  d'Estaing  obtained  from  his  employer  a 
hundred  and  fifty  francs  to  give  to  his  first  servant,a 
horse  worth  twelve  6cus,  and  a  mantle  of  four  6cus  ; 
six  6cus  to  distribute  among  his  other  servants  ; 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   LORD  OF   MIEBBEAU.  95 

twenty  ecus  to  send  to  his  house  at  Moulins ;  and 
ten  ecus  to  send  to  his  "  chambriere/'  (we  are  ^ot 
told  if  this  were  the  lady  for  whom  the  diamond 
was  designed).  It  is  probable  that  the  alchemist 
was  now  treated  with  rigour,  and  that  he  considered 
his  life  in  danger ;  for  these  last  transactions  oc- 
curred about  the  feast  of  All  Saints,  two  or  three 
days  after  which,  while  Jean  de  Baufiremont  was 
absent  on  a  visit  to  Villers-les-Pots,  he  let  himself 
down  from  one  of  the  castle-windows  by  means  of 
his  bed-clothes,  about  eleven  o'clock  at  night,  passed 
the  outer  watch  of  the  castle  unperceived,  and,  wan- 
dering till  morning,  reached  the  town  of  Dijon, 
where,  as  we  have  already  seen,  he  sought  shelter  in 
the  convent  of  the  Jacobins. 

Jean  de  Bauffremont  was  immediately  made  ac- 
quainted with  master  Pierre's  escape,  and  he  hur- 
ried back  in  a  fury  to  Mirebeau,  where  the  hiding- 
place  of  the  fugitive  was  soon  known.  According 
to  his  own  account  of  what  followed,  the  lord  of 
Mirebeau  repaired  with  a  party  of  his  friends  and 
servants  to  Dijon,  and  there  gave  information  to  the 
authorities  that  a  prisoner  had  escaped  from  his 
castle,  and  w^;S  concealed  by  the  Jacobins.  The 
next  day  he  went  to  the  monastery,  had  an  inter- 
view with  Pierre  d'Estaing,  and,  as  he  stated,  ob- 
t-ained  from  him  a  promise  to  return  with  him  to 
his  castle  and  continue  his  alchemical  operations, 
which  seems  to  have  been  the  thing  he  had  most  at 
heart  Finding  subsequently  that  master  Pierre 
was  still  unwilling  to  leave  the  sanctuary,  he  repre- 
sented to  him  the  great  expenses  he  had  already 
been  at,  and  offered  to  pay  for  him  into  the  hands 


Digitized 


by  Google 


96  SOECERT  AND  MAGIC. 

of  soine  person  in  Dijon  a  thousand  ecus  as  the  re* 
ward  for  the  completion  of  his  work,  pledging  him- 
self that  when  it  was  finished,  he  would  bring  him 
back  in  safety  and  restore  him  to  the  same  place  in 
which  he  had  now  taken  refuge.  The  alchemist 
seems  now,  however,  to  have  had  no  inclination  to 
renew  his  experiments  ; — perhaps  he  had  no  great 
confidence  in  their  success — and  Jean  de  Bauffre- 
mont,  finding  that  he  would  no  longer  put  any  trust 
in  his  promises,  told  him  openly  that  from  that 
moment  he  considered  all  their  engagements  broken, 
and  that  each  must  do  his  best  for  himself  He 
then  concerted  measures  for  taking  away  the  fugi- 
tive by  force,  which,  as  we  have  already  seen, 
were  carried  into  effect  early  on  the  following 
morning. 

The  legal  investigation  of  this  strange  affair  being 
brought  to  a  close  by  the  confession  of  the  principal 
offender,  the  mayor  and  echevins  demanded,  in  the 
name  of  the  crown,  that  Jean  de  Bauffremont  should 
pay  a  fine  of  ten  thousand  ecus  of  gold,  to  be  em- 
ployed on  the  fortification  of  the  town-wall,  and 
that  his  accomplices  should  be  given  up  to  the 
judgment  of  the  municipal  court.  The  latter  point 
was  yielded  at  once,  without  any  hesitation,  and  on 
the  18th  of  March  the  court  pronounced  its  sentence, 
according  to  which  the  men  who  had  aided  the 
lord  of  Mirebeau  in  violating  the  sanctuary  of  the 
convent,  were  to  be  brought  on  a  Sunday,  in  their 
shirts  and  barefoot,  each  with  a  lighted  taper  in  his 
hand  weighing  three  pounds,  before  the  same  gate 
of  the  town  through  which  Pierre  d'Estaing  had 
been  carried  away,  and  there  they  were  to   cry 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THB  LORD  OF  UI&BBSAU.  97 

**  mercy"  on  their  knees  before  the  mayor  and  eche- 
vins,  who  were  to  be  summoned  for  the  occasion, 
and  they  were  also  to  cry  "  mercy"  to  the  whole 
town,  at  the  same  time  making  a  public  confession 
of  their  drime ;  they  were  then  to  recite  the  amende 
honorable,  after  which  each  was  to  have  one  of  his 
hands  cut  off;  they  were  next  to  carry  the  tapers  to 
the  monastery  of  the  Jacobins,  and  there  offer  them 
at  the  high  altar ;  after  which  they  were  to  pay  a 
pecuniary  fine  proportionate  to  their  means,  and  to 
be  banished  from  the  town  and  jurisdiction  of  Dijon 
for  ever.  This  sentence  was  executed  to  the  letter 
on  the  first  Sunday  in  April 

It  appears  to  have  been  a  much  more  difficult 
matter  to  pronounce  judgment  on  tiie  person  of 
Jean  de  Bauffremont,  who  remained  in  prison  till 
the  month  of  December  following,  without  any 
prospect  of  a  satisfactory  decision  of  his  cause.  He 
then  wrote  to  the  mayor  to  propose  terms  of  ar- 
rangement, and  sent  the  letter  by  one  of  the  duke's 
councillors ;  but  when  the  common  council  of  the 
town  had  held  two  deliberations  on  the  subject,  he 
only  received  for  answer  that,  since  the  cause  was 
now  in  the  duke's  court,  and  before  his  bailiff,  it 
was  not  in  the  power  of  the  municipal  body  to  enter 
upon  his  proposals.  Jean  de  Baufiremont  then 
wrote  direct  to  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  begging,  in 
the  most  abject  terms,  that  the  duke  would  have 
compassion  upon  him.  Hiree  months  again  passed 
away;  but  at  length,  on  the  26th  of  March,  1457, 
duke  Philippe,  then  at  Brussels,  granted  the  pri- 
soner letters  of  pardon  and  restitution  to  his  goods, 

vol-  L  r 


Digitized 


by  Google 


98  SOBOERT   AND  MAGIC. 

on  condition  that  he  should  give  sureties  for  making 
his  peace  with  the  town. 

This,  however,  was  not  so  easily  done.  A  new 
series  of  proceedings  was  commenced,  in  the  course 
of  which  the  lord  of  Mirebeau  died.  They  still  re- 
mained imdecided  in  the  year  1462,  when  the  cause 
was  again  prosecuted  against  Jean  de  Baufi&emont's 
widow,  Marguerite  de  Ch&lon,  and  his  son  Pierre 
de  Bauffremont,  and,  by  the  duke's  orders,  the  affair 
was  carried  beforfe  the  parliament  of  Burgundy, 
then  sitting  at  Beaime.  This  new  process  lasted  till 
1470,  in  which  year,  on  the  12th  of  January,  the 
parliament  condemned  the  heyrs  of  Jean  de  Bauffre- 
mont to  a  fine  of  four  thousand  livres  to  the  town, 
which  was  subsequently,  by  an  agreement  of  the 
two  parties,  commuted  for  one  thousand  livres.  It 
was  not  till  the  6th  of  August,  1472,  that  the  judg- 
ment of  the  parliament  was  executed,  and  tiiat  this 
long  affiur,  which  had  been  held  in  suspense  during 
more  than  fifteen  years,  was  fully  terminated.* 

"f  The  documents  of  this  remarkable  story  are  published  in 
an  article  in  the  Bibliotheque  de  I'Ecole  des  Chartes. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


99 


CHAPTER  VL 


Tfi£     BARLIER     MEDIEVAL    TTPE    OF    THE    SOBOEBER  ; 
VIEaiL  THE  BNOHANTEE. 

Wb  have  hitherto  been  obliged  to  form  our  no- 
tion of  the  practice  of  sorcery  and  magic  in  the 
middle  ages  from  individual  and  scattered  exam- 
ples of  superstitious  practices.  But  it  was  a  pecu- 
liar trait  in  the  character  of  the  middle  ages  to 
create  imaginary  personages,  and  clothe  them  with 
the  attributes  of  a  class — ^types,  as  it  were,  of  popu- 
lar belief  or  of  popular  attachment  or  glory.  Such, 
in  that  age,  to  history  and  to  sentiment,  were  the 
heroes  and  heroines  of  its  romances.  Romance, 
indeed,  was  then  but  a  sort  of  reflection  of  the 
popular  mind.  The  despised  and  hated  witch  has 
left  us  no  such  lype  of  her  life  and  history ;  but 
the  magician  or  sorcerer  held  a  higher  rank  in  pub- 
lic estimation.  From  a  feeling  which  may  be  traced 
back  to  runic  ages,  when  every  letter  of  the  alpha- 
bet was  supposed  to  possess  its  mystic  power  as  an 

F  2 


Digitized 


by  Google 


100  SOBCEBT  AND  HAGFia 

instrument  of  magic,  his  vocation  was  looked  xtpon 
with  more  reverence  as  closely  connected  with  lite- 
rature and  science. 

Either  from  this  circumstance,  or  because  their 
names  were  populariy  attached  to  some  of  the  mar- 
vellous remains  of  ancient  art,  the  people  of  the 
^  middle  ages  first  saw  the  type  of  the  magician  in 
the  poets  and  philosophers  of  classic  days.  The 
physician  Hippocrates,  under  the  corrupted  name 
o{  Ypocras,  was  supposed  to  have  effected  his 
cures  by  magic,  and  he  was  the  subject  of  a  legend- 
ary history,  certainly  as  old  as  the  end  of  the 
twelfth  century,  containing  incidents  which  were 
subsequently  told  of  a  more  celebrated  conjurer, 
,VirgiL  In  the  popular  creed  of  the  middle  ages, 
jmedicine  was  also  closely  allied  with  witchcraft  and 
phe  forbidden  sciences ;  many  of  the  herbs  and 
other  articles  which  restored  the  patient  to  health 
had  qualities  of  a  more  mysterious  nature,  and  the 
philter  or  the  more  fearful  mixture  of  the  sorcerer  s 
cauldrcm,  which  had  the  power  of  commanding  the 
spirit  of  darkness,  were  but  an  extension  of  the 
physician's  specific.  We  shall  have  occasion  to  re- 
cur again  to  this  subject,  and  show  how  far  a 
knowledge  of  the  medical  properties  of  herbs  airf 
other  things  did  form  a  part  of  medieval  soirceryp 
and  was  used  for  deadly  purposes.  It  is  not  impos- 
sible that  the  equivocal  meaning  of  the  Latin  word 
carmen  (which  means  a  poem  and  a  charm)  may 
have  contributed  to  the  popular  reputation  of  the 
poets.  Down  to  a  very  recent  period,  if  not  at  the 
present  day,  the  people  in  the  neighbourhood  erf 
Palestrina  have  looked  upon  Horace  as  a  powerful 


Digitized 


by  Google 


TH»  EWDHANTEK  VIMIL.  101 

and  "benevolent  wizaxA  A  story,  apparently  not  more 
modem  than  the  thirteenth  century,  represents  two 
scholars  proceeding  to  the  tomb  of  Ovid,  and  re* 
ceiving  answers  from  his  manes ;  in  fact,  practising 
i!iecromancy.  But  the  personage  of  antiquity  about 
whom  these  mysterious  legends  were  principally 
gi^ouped  was  the  poet  VirgiL  It  would  perhi^s  not 
be  very  difficult  to  point  out  some  reasons  for  which 
such  tales  were  attached  to  the  memory  of  one  who 
seems  to  have  found  a  place  in  popular  superstition 
from  a  very  early  period,  and  whose  name  was  con- 
fleeted  in  popular  tradition  with  several  ancient 
monuments  in  Italy. 

We  find  scattered  allusions  to  the  supposed  ex* 
ploits  of  Virgil  at  an  early  period,  connected  chiefly 
with  Naples  and  Rome.  Gervase  of  Tilbury,  a 
well-known  writer  of  the  end  of  the  twelfth  cen- 
tury, heard,  while  in  Italy,  how  Vir^  had  placed 
•a  brazen  fly  on  one  of  the  gates  of  the  former  city, 
which  kept  the  city  free  from  real  flies ;  how  he 
had  erected  chambers  in  which  meat  could  be  kept 
iot  any  length  of  time  without  tainting ;  a,nd  how 
he  had  placed  two  images  of  stone  at  another  gate 
of  Naples,  which  severally  he  endowed  with  the 
quality  of  giving  good  fortune  or  bad  fortune  to 
strangers  who,  entering  the  city,  approached  by  the 
one  or  the  other.  According  to  this  writer,  he 
-raised  on  a  mountain  near  Naples  a  statue  of  brass, 
lerhich  had  in  its  mouth  a  trumpet,  and  when  the 
north  wind  blew,  this  trumpet  sounded  so  loud, 
that  the  fiire  and  smoke  issuing  out  of  those  forges 
of  Vulcan,  which  ar«  at  this  day  seen  near  the  city 
of  Puossola,  (Puzzuola,)  were  forced  back  towards 


Digitized 


by  Google 


102  SOEOfiHT  Ain>  iUGtC. 

the  sea,  so  as  not  to  injiire  or  annoy  the  inhabi- 
tants. He  made  three  baths  capable  of  removing 
every  disorder,  with  inscriptions  in  lettars  of  gold ; 
but  the  latter  were  cunningly  defaced  by  the  phy- 
sicians of  Salerno,  who  were  jealous  lest  people 
should  be  cured  of  their  diseases  without  their  in- 
tervention. He  also  made  a  contrivance  by  which 
no  man  could  be  hurt  in  Ae  miraculous  vault  cut 
through  the  mountain  at  Pausilippo  in  going  to 
Naples.  He  further  made  a  public  fire,  where  every 
one  might  warm  himself,  near  which  he  placed  a 
brazen  archer,  with  his  bow  and  arrow  drawn 
ready  to  shoot,  and  an  inscription,  stating,  "If 
any  one  strike  me,  I  will  shoot  off  my  arrow.''  At 
length  a  fool-hardy  individual  struck  the  archer, 
who  shot  him  with  the  arrow  and  sent  him  into  the 
fire,  which  was  immediately  extinguished.  Other 
writers  added  to  this  list  of  Virgil's  wonders.  But 
there  seems  to  have  been  a  more  explicit  and  con- 
nected story,  of  the  enchanter  Virgil,  from  what 
period  it  is  difficult  to  say,  which  appeared  in  a 
French  history  in  the  fifteenth  century,  and  was 
printed  at  the  close  of  that  century  and  the  begin- 
ning of  the  sixteentL  Two  editions  are  known, 
and  it  has  been  reprinted.  About  the  same  time, 
"  the  Life  of  Virgilius"  appeared  in  English,  printed 
at  Antwerp  by  John  Doesborcke,  about  the  year 
1608;  The  English  story  does  not  appear  to  have 
been  taken  directly  from  the  French,  at  least  not 
from  the  printed  edition,  from  which  it  differs  con- 
siderably in  some  of  its  details  and  in  its  extent 
It  gives  us  the  ftdl  outline  of  the  medieval  belief  in 
Virgil  the  magician. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


VIBQIL   INITIATED  IN   MAOIG.  103 

Virgil,  according  to  this  story,  was  the  son  of  a 
Roman  senator  of  great  wealth  and  power,  who  was 
at  war  with  the  emperor  of  Rome.  Virgil's  birth 
was  attended  with  prodigies,  and  he  soon  showed 
so  much  aptitude  for  learning,  that  he  was  sent  to 
school  at  Toledo.  Toledo,  as  I  have  ahready  ob- 
served,  was  a  celebrated  school  of  magic  in .  the 
middle  ages ;  but  the  way  in  which  Vir^  obtained 
his  knowledge  was  sufficiently  singular  to  deserve 
being  repeated  in  the  quaint  language  of  the  ori- 
ginal "  And  Virgilius,"  we  are  told,  "  was  at 
scole  at  Tolenten,  where  he  stodyed  dyligently, 
for  he  was  of  great  understandynge.  Upon  a  tyme 
the  scholers  hadde  lycence  to  goo  to  play  and  sporte 
ihem  in  the  fyldes  after  the  usaunce  of  the  olde 
tyme ;  and  there  was  also  Virgilius  thereby  also 
walkynge  among  the  hylles  all  about  It  fortuned 
he  spyed  a  great  hole  in  the  syde  of  a  great  hyll, 
wherin  he  went  so  depe  that  he  culde  not  see  no 
more  lyght,  and  than  he  went  a  lytell  ferther 
therin,  and  than  he  sawe  som  lyght  agayne,  and  than 
wente  he  fourth  streyghte.  And  within  a  lytyll 
wyle  after  he  harde  a  voice  that  called,  *  Virgilius, 
Virgilius  I '  and  he  loked  aboute,  and  he  colde 
nat  see  nobodye.  Than  Virgilius  spake,  and  asked, 
'  Who  calleth  me  V  Than  harde  he  the  voyce 
agayne,  but  he  sawe  nobody.  Than  sayd  he,  *  Vir- 
gilius, see  ye  not  that  lytyll  bourde  lyinge  bysyde 
you  there  marked  with  that  worde  V  Than  answered 
Virgilius,  *I  see  that  horde  well  enough.'  The  voyce 
sayd,  ^Doo  awaye  that  bourd,  and  lette  me  oute 
theratte.'  Than  answered  Virgilius  to  the  voyce 
that  was  under  the  lytell  horde,  and  sayd,  '  Who 


Digitized 


by  Google 


104  80ROBET  AKD  MAQia 

art  thow  that  talkest  me  so  f  Than  answered  the 
devyll, '  I  am  a  devyll  conjured  out  of  the  body  of 
a  certeyne  man,  and  banysshed  here  tyll  the  day  of 
jugement,  without  that  I  be  delyvered  by  the 
handes  of  men*  Thus,  Virgilius,  I  pray  the  delyver 
me  out  of  this  payn,  and  I  ^hall  shewe  unto  the 
many  bokes  of  nygromancy,  and  howe  thow  shalt 
cum  by  it  lyghtly  and  knowe  the  practyse  therein, 
that  no  man  in  the  scyence  of  negromancye  shall 
pass  the  ;  and,  moreover,  I  shall  showe  and  enforme 
you  so  that  thou  shalt  have  all  thy  desyre,  wherby 
me  thynke  it  is  a  great  gyfte  for  so  lytyll  a  doynge, 
for  ye  may  also  thus  all  your  poor  frendys  helpeh, 
and  make  ryghte  your  ennemyes  unmyghty/ 
Thorowgh  that  great  promyse  was  Virgilius  tempt- 
ed ;  he  badde  the  fynd  showe  the  bokes  to  hym, 
that  he  myght  have  and  occupy  them  at  his  wylL 
And  so  the  fynd  shewed  hym,  and  than  Virgilius 
pulled  open  a  bourde,  and  there  was  a  lytell  hole, 
and  therat  wrange  the  devyll  out  lyke  a  yeel 
[an  eel],  and  cam  and  stode  byfore  Virgilius  lyke  a 
bygge  man.  Therof  Virgilius  was  astoned  [asto- 
nished] and  merveyled  greatly  therof,  that  so  great 
a  man  myght  come  out  at  so  lytell  a  hole.  Than 
sayd  Virgilius,  '  Shulde  ye  well  passe  into  the  hole 
that  ye  cam  out  off  'Ye,  I  shall  well,'  sayd  the 
devyll.  '  I  holde  the  beste  pledge  that  I  have,  ye 
shaU  not  do  it'  'Well,'  sayde  the  devyll,  'thereto 
I  consente.'  And  than  the  devyll  wrange  hymselfe 
into  the  lytell  hole  agen,  and  as  he  was  therein, 
Virgilius  kyvered  the  hole  ageyn  with  the  bourd 
close,  and  so  was  the  devyll  begyled,  and  myght  not 
there  come  out  agen,  but    there  abydeth   shytt^ 


Digitized 


by  Google 


i. 


VIBaiL  AND  THE  EMPEROR.  105 

[Aut]  8tyll  therm.  Than  called  the  devyll  drede- 
fully  to  Virgilius,  and  sayd,  *  What  haye  ye  done  T 
Virgilius  answered,  '  Abyde  there  styll  to  your  day 
apoynted.'  And  fro  thensforth  abydeth  he  there. 
And  so  Virgilius  becam  very  connynge  in  the 
practyse  of  the  blacke  scyence.'^ 

While  Virgil  was  thus  pursuing  such  studies,  his 
father  died,  and  the  other  senators  joined  in  usurp- 
ing his  inheritance,  on  the  principle  that  the 
smaller  number  of  persons  being  in  power,  the 
greats  would  be  the  power  of  each  indivi- 
duaL  Virgil's  mother  next  became  aged,  and  she 
sent  for  her  son  from  Toledo  to  protect  her  and 
reclaim  his  property  and  rank.  Virgil  collected 
the  riches  he  had-  gained  by  his  science,  and  re- 
I>aired  to  Rome,  and  was  received  well  by  his 
'*poor  kinsmen,''  as  they  had  no  interest  contrary  to 
his  own  5  but  the  rich  leagued  with  his  enemies, 
and  would  not  acknowledge  him.  Then  he  went 
before  the  emperor,  stated  his  case,  and  demanded 
his  rights.  The  emperor  hesitated,  and  listened  to 
evil  counsellors,  who  said,  "  Methinketh  that  the 
land  is  well  divided  to  them  that  have  it,  for  they 
may  help  you  in  their  need ;  what  needeth  you  for 
to  care  for  the  disheriting  of  one  schoolmaster  ? 
bid  him  take  heed  and  look  to  his  schools,  for  he 
hath  no  right  to  any  land  here  about  the  city  of 
Rome.'^  And  so  the  emperor  put  him  off  for  four 
or  five  years. 

But  VirgU,  aware  of  his  own  powers,  was  deter- 
mined not  to  be  thus  deluded.  He  waited  quietly 
till  harvest,  conciliating  his  poor  kinsmen  and 
friends  by  his  liberality,  and  then,  when  com  and 

F  5 


Digitized 


by  Google 


106  SOBCERT  AND  MAQIC. 

fruit  were  ripe,  he  threw,  by  art  magic,  a  mist 
over  all  the  lands  of  his  inheritance,  so  that  theii: 
new  possessors  could  not  approach  them,  and  so 
quietly  gathered  in  the  whole  produce.  "  And 
when  Virgil's  enemies  saw  the  fruit  so  gathered, 
they  assembled  a  great  power,  and  came  towards 
Yirgilius  to  take  him  and  smite  off  his  head ;  and 
when  they  were  assembled,  they  were  so  strong  that 
the  emperor  for  fear  fled  out  of  Rome,  for  they 
were  twelve  senators  that  had  all  the  world  under 
them ;  and  if  Yirgilius  had  had  right,  he  had  been 
oiie  of  the  twelve,  but  they  had  disinherited  him  and 
his  mother.  And  when  Virgilius  knew  of  their 
coming,  he  closed  all  his  lands  with  the  air  round 
about  all  his  land,  that  no  living  creature  might 
there  come  in  to  dwell  against  his  (Virgil's)  will  or 
pleasure.'' 

This  dispute  led-icrlstill  more  important  events. 
The  emperor  took  part  with  the  senators,  and  they 
all  joined  in  making  war  upon  Virgil,  who  not  only 
found  safety  in  his  enchantments,  but  he  at  length 
compelled  the  emperor  to  restore  him  to  his  rights. 
From  this  moment  Virgil  became  the  emperor's 
greatest  friend,  and  was  the  foremost  in  all  his 
counsels. 

"  After  that  it  happened  that  Virgilius  was  ena- 
moured of  a  fair  lady,  the  fairest  in  all  Rome. 
Virgilius  made  a  crafb  in  necj^omancy  that  told  heir 
all  his  mind ;  when  the  lady  knew  his  mind,  she 
thought  in  herself  to  deceive  him,  and  said.  If  he 
will  come  at  midnight  to  the  castle  wall,  she  should 
let  down  a  basket  with  strong  cords,  and  there  to 
draw  him  up  at  her  window,  and  so  lie  by  her  and 


Digitized 


by  Google 


VIEGIL  DBOEIYBD   BY   THE   LADY.  107 

have  his  pleasure  ;  and  with  this  answer  was  Vir- 
gilius  very  glad,  and  said  he  should  do  it  with  a 
good  will"  It  appears  that  the  tower  in  which  the 
lady  dwelt  was  one  of  the  most  public  places  in 
Bome^  immediately  looking  over  the  market,  and 
that  it  was  there  that  malefactors  were  exhibited  to 
public  view.  Virgil  went  in  the  night,  found  the 
basket^  jumped  into  it,  and  was  rejoiced  at  finding 
himself  pulled  up  with  no  hesitating  hand.  But 
when  the  basket  was  half  way  up  the  tower,  the 
lady,  who  had  no  intention  of  yielding  to  his  seduc- 
tions, left  it,  and  Virgil  remained  in  this  disgrace- 
ful posture  to  be  gazed  at  and  ridiculed  by  the 
multitude  during  the  whole  of  the  following  day, 
until  the  emperor  himself  interfered,  at  whose  re- 
quest the  enchanter  was  released  from  his  penance. 

Virgil  hastened  home,  breathing  nothing  but 
vengeanca  He  began  by  extinguishing  all  the  fire 
in  Rome  except  his  own.  The  Romans  soon  found 
the  inconvenience  of  this  measure,  and  made  their 
complaint  to  the  emperor,  who  went  to  seek  assist- 
ance of  VirgiL  The  latter  at  once  told  him  that, 
if  he  wished  for  relief,  he  must  cause  the  lady  to  be 
brought  out  in  a  state  of  nudity  and  placed  in  a 
public  part  of  the  city,  and  that  every  Roman  who 
wanted  fire  must  go  and  light  his  candle  or  torch 
on  her  person  in  a  manner  which  hardly  admits  of 
detailed  description.  She  was  exposed  in  this  man- 
ner during  three  days,  "  and  after  the  third  day  went 
the  gentlewoman  home  sore  ashamed,  for  she  knew 
well  that  Virgilius  had  done  that  violence  to 
her."* 

*  This  was  the  most  popular  of  the  legends  relating  to  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


108  SOROERT  AKD  MAOIC. 

Virgil  now  married,  and  after  his  marriage  he 
built  by  his  magic  art  a  palace  for  the  emperor, 
with  four  comers,  answering  to  the  four  quarters  of 
Rome ;  and  when  the  emperor  placed  himself  in 
any  one  of  these  comers,  he  heard  all  that  was  said 
in  the  corresponding  quarter  of  the  city,  so  that  no 
secret  could  be  kept  from  him.  Thus  was  the  state 
protected  against  domestic  enemies ;  but  it  was  re- 
quisite also  to  guard  against  outward  foes.  And 
one  day  "  the  emperor  asked  of  Virgilius  how  that 
he  might  make  Rome  prosper  and  have  many  lands 
under  them,  and  know  when  any  land  would  rise 
against  them ;  and  Virgilius  said  to  the  emperor, 
'  I  will,  within  short  space,  that  do/  And  he  made 
upon  the  capitolium,  that  was  the  town-hou^ 
carved  images  of  stone,  and  that  he  let  call  salvatio 
RwTKB,  that  is  to  say,  the  salvation  of  the  city  of 
Rome.  And  he  made  in  the  compass  all  the  gods 
that  we  call  mawmets  and  idols,  that  were  under 
the  subjection  of  Rome ;  and  each  of  the  gods  that 
were  there  had  in  his  hand  a  bell,  and»  in  the  mid- 
dle of  the  gods  he  made  one  god  of  Rome.  And 
whensoever  that  there  was  any  lajid  that  would 
make  any  war  against  Rome,  then  would  the  gods 
turn  their  backs  toward  the  god  of  Rome;   and 

magician  Virgil,  and  is  frequently  alliided  to  in  old  writings. 
The  story  itself  is  generally  told  with,  coarse  details,  better 
suited  to  those  times  than  to  the  present.  The  reader  may  be 
referred,  for  an  example,  to  the  account  of  this  legend  given 
in  the  Pastime  of  Pleasure  of  Stephen  Hawes,  (see  the  edition 
published  by  the  Percy  Society,  p.  1 39.)  This  story  was  told 
of  Hippocrates,  or  Ypocras,  before  it  was  fSathered  upon 
Virgil. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


SALVATIO  ROMiB.  109 

tben  the  god  of  the  land  that  would  stand  up 
against  Rome  clinked  his  bell  so  long  that  he  had 
in  his  hand,  till  the  senators  of  Rome  heard  it,  and 
forthwith  they  went  there  and  saw  what  land  it  was 
that  would  war  against  them,  and  so  they  prepared 
them,  and  went  against  them,  and  subdued  them.^' 

This  also  was  one  of  the  most  popularof  the  legends 
relating  to  Virgil  the  necromancer;  and  we  can 
easily  imagine  how  vulgar  credulity  invented  such 
a  belief  to  explain  the  remains  of  Roman  statuary 
which  were  still  visible  in  the  middle  ages.  The 
destruction  of  the  salvatio  Romce  was  not  less  singu- 
lar than  its  origin. 

"  This  foresaid  token  knew  the  men  of  Carthage, 
that  were  sore  agrieved  for  the  great  harm  that  the 
Romans  had  done  them.  And  they  took  a  privy 
counsell  in  what  manner  they  might  destroy  that 
work  Then  thought  they  in  their  mind  to  send 
three  men  out,  and  gave  them  great  multitude  of 
gold  and  silver;  and  these  three  men  took  their 
leave  of  the  lordes,  and  went  towards  the  city  of 
Rome,  and  when  they  were  come  to  Rome,  they 
reported  themselves  soothsayers  and  true  dreamers. 
Upon  a  time  went  these  three  men  to  a  hill  that 
was  within  the  city,  and  there  they  buried  a  great 
pot  of  money  very  deep  in  the  earth,  and  when  that 
was  done  and  covered  again,  they  went  to  the 
bridge  of  Tiber,  and  let  fall  in  a  certain  place  a 
great  barrel  with  golden  pfence.*    And  when  this 


*  We  cannot  help  seeing  how  naturally  legends  like  this 
arose  out  of  the  frequent  discoreries  of  the  concealed  treasures 
of  ancient  times,  and  the  constant  recovery  of  antiquities  from 

7 


Digitized 


by  Google 


110  SOBGERT  AND  HAQIO. 

was  done,  those  three  men  went  to  the  senators  of 
Rome,  and  said,  'Worshipful  lords,  we  hare  this 
night  dreamed,  that  within  the  foot  of  a  hill  here 
within  Rome  is  a  great  pot  with  mcmey ;  will  ye, 
lords,  grant  it  to  us,  and  we  shall  do  the  cost  to  seek 
thereafter  V  And  the  lords  consented ;  and  they 
took  labourers,  and  delved  the  money  out  of  the 
earth.  And  when  it  was  done,  they  went  another 
time  to  the  lords,  and  said,  '  Worshipful  lords,  we 
have  also  dreamed  that  in  a  c^i^ain  place  of  Tiber 
lieth  a  barrel  full  of  golden  pence,  if  that  you  will 
grant  to  us  that,  we  shall  go  seek  it/  And  the 
lords  of  Rome,  thinking  no  deceit,  granted  to  those 
soothsayers,  and  bade  them  do  what  they  should  to 
do  their  best  And  then  the  soothsayers  were  glad ; 
and  they  hired  ships,  and  men,  and  went  towards 
the  place  where  it  was,  and  when  they  were  come 
there,  they  sought  in  every  place  there  about,  and 
at  the  last  found  the  barrel  full  of  golden  pence, 
whereof  they  were  right  glad.  And  then  they  gave 
to  the  lords  costly  gifts.  And  then,  to  come  to 
their  purpose,  they  came  to  the  lords  again,  and 
said  to  them,  '  Worshipful  lords,  we  have  dreamed 
again  that  under  the  foundation  of  capitolium,  there 
where  scdvcUio  Romce  standeth,  be  twelve  barrels 
full  of  gold;  and  pleaseth  you,  lords,  that  you 
would  grant  us  licence,  it  shall  be  to  your  great 
advantage.'  And  the  lords,  stirred  with  covetous- 
ness,  granted  them,  because  two  times  afore  they 


such  rivers  as  the  Tiber.  The  English  antiquary  will  under- 
stand this  perfectly  well.  The  Thames  has  always  been  rich 
in  the  produce  which  would  give  rise  to  such  stories. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


VIRGIL  UaHTS  THE  CITY.  Ill 

told  true ;  whereof  they  were  glad,  imd  got  la- 
bourers, and  began  to  dig  under  the  foundation  of 
sahatio  Romce ;  and  when  they  thought  they  had 
digged  enough,  they  departed  from  Borne,  and  the 
next  day  following  fell  that  house  down,  and  all 
the  work  that  Yirgilius  had  mada  And  so  the 
loids  knew  that  they  were  deceived,  and  were  sor- 
rowful, and  after  that  had  no  fortune  as  they  had 
aforetimes."  * 

After  having  contrived  this  defence  against  the 
outward  enemies  of  Rome,  Virgil  was  desired  by 
the  emperor  to  invent  some  method  of  clearing  the 
city  of  the  numerous  banditti  who  infested  it  by 
night,  and  who  robbed  and  murdered  great  numbers 
of  its  inhabitants.  He  accordingly  made  images  of 
copper,  and  the  emperor  having  issued  a  decree  that 
no  honest  people  should  appear  out  of  their  houses 
after  a  certain  hour  at  night,  these  images  swept 
throu^  the  city,  destroying  every  living  being  that 
was  found  in  the  streets.  After  an  attempt  to 
.rrade  these  perilous  enemies,  the  robbers  were  all 
killed  or  driven  away.  We  can  easily  understand 
how  the  popular  imagination  formed  legends  like 
this  on  the  sculptures  of  bronze  and  other  material 
that  must  have  been  frequently  discovered  among 
the  ruins  of  ancient  Roma  Virgil's  next  perform- 
ance was  a  sort  of  prototype  of  the  electric  light 
"  For  profit  of  the  common  people,  Virgilius,  on  a 
great  mighty  marble  pillar,  did  make  a  bridge  that 
came  up  to  the  palace,  and  so  went  Virgilius  well 

*  This  was  one  of  the  most  popular  of  the  early  legends  re- 
lating to  Virgil.  It  is  found  in  the  early  collection  of  stories 
entitled  the  Seven  Sages,  and  frequently  elsewhere. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


tJ2  SOBCEBT  Am)  MAGIC. 

up  the  pillar  out  of  the  palace.  That  palace  and 
the  pillar  stood  in  the  middle  of  Rome ;  and  upon 
this  pillar  made  he  a  lamp  of  glass  that  alway 
burned  without  going  out,  and  nobody  might  put  it 
out ;  and  this  lamp  lightened  over  all  the  city  of 
Rome  from  the  one  corner  to  the  other,  and  there 
was  not  so  little  a  street  but  it  gave  such  a  light 
that  it  seemed  two  torches  there  had  stand.  And 
upon  the  walls  of  the  palace  made  he  a  metal  mian 
that  held  in  his  hand  a  metal  bow  that  pointed 
ever  upon  the  lamp  for  to  shoot  it  out ;  but  alway 
burned  the  lamp  and  gave  light  over  all  Rome. 
And  upon  a  time  went  the  burgesses'  daughters  to 
play  in  the  palace,  and  they  beheld  the  metid  nian, 
and  one  of  them  asked  in  sport,  why  he  shot  not ; 
and  then  she  came  to  the  man,  and  with  her  hand 
touched  the  bow,  and  then  the  bolt  (arrow)  flew 
out,  and  brake  the  lamp  that  Virgilius  made.  And 
it  was  wonder  that  the  maiden  went  not  out  of  her 
mind  for  the  great  fear  she  had,  and  also  the  other 
burgesses'  daughters  that  were  in  her  company,  oi 
the  great  stroke  that  it  gave  when  it  hit  the  lamp, 
and  when  they  saw  the  metal  man  so  swiftly  run 
his  way,  and  never  after  was  he  no  more  seen. 
And  this  foresaid  lamp  was  abyding  burning  after 
the  death  of  Virgilius  by  the  space  of  .three  hun- 
dred years  or  more. 

After  this  VirgU  made  himself  a  wonderful 
orchard  or  garden,  and  placed  in  it  an  extraordi- 
nary fountain,  with  a  cellar  or  vault  in  which  to 
store  up  his  great  wealth.  "And  he  set  two  metal 
men  before  the  door  to  keep  it,  and  in  each  hand  a 
great  hammer,  and  therewith  they  smote  upon  an 


Digitized 


by  Google 


YIRQIL  AKD  THE  SULTANAS  DAUGHTER.  113 

unril,  one  after  the  other,  insomuch  that  the  birds 
that  %  over  heareth  it,  and  by  and  by  falleth  there 
down  dead;  and  otherwise  had  Virgilius  not  his 
good  (L  e.  wealth)  kept''  Another  image  made  by 
Virgil  produced  effectswhich were  by  no  means  agree- 
able to  the  Roman  ladies,  in  consequence  of  which 
his  wife  went  secretly  and  overthrew  it ;  and  when 
he  discovered  this,  "from  thenceforth  began  Vir- 
gilius to  hate  his  wife." 

^'  The  next  of  Virgil's  exploits  appears  to  have  been 
taken  from  some  one  of  the  old  Spanish  romances. 
Virgil  had  heard  people  speak  often  of  the  beauty 
of  the  sultan's  daughter,  and  he  determined  to  pos- 
sess her.  By  his  "  cunning"  he  made  a  bridge  in 
the  air,  by  which  he  passed  over  in  an  instant  to 
the  sultan's  palace  in  Babylon.  There  he  intro- 
duced himself  into  the  chamber  of  the  princess,  and 
overcame  her  scruples  without  much  difficulty,  al- 
though "  she  never  saw  him  before."  At  length  he 
prevailed  upon  her  to  accompany  him  in  his  return, 
and  he  carried  her  through  the  air  to  his  orchard 
in  Italy,  and  there  he  kept  her  as  long  as  he  liked, 
and  afterwards  replaced  her  in  her  bed  in  her 
father's  palace.  The  sultan  meanwhile  missed  his 
daughter,  and  in  his  distress  he  had  caused  diligent 
search  to  be  made  for  her,  but  without  success, 
when  he  was  informed  that  she  was  asleep  in  her 
bed.  He  was  overjoyed  at  her  recovery,  and  exa- 
mined her  closely  as  to  the  cause  and  manner  of 
her  disappearance,  and  she  confessed  the  whole,  but 
she  neither  knew  who  had  carried  her  away,  nor 
whither  she  was  taken.  It  was  not  long,  however, 
before  Virgil  came  to  seek  her  again,  and  then,  by 


Digitized 


by  Google 


114  SOECEEY  AJ^D  MAGIC. 

her  father^s  dii*ections,  the  princess  took  home  with 
her  some  of  the  fruit  which  her  lover  had  given  her 
to  eat,  from  which  the  Sultan  concluded  that  she 
had  been  carried  to  some  place  "  on  the  side  of 
France/'  After  she  had  been  frequently  carried 
away  in  this  manner,  the  sultan,  under  pretence 
that  he  wished  to  ascertain  from  whence  her  lover 
came,  persuaded  the  princess  to  give  him  a  sleeping 
draught,  and  thus  was  the  intruder  captured,  and 
thrown  into  prison ;  and  it  was  judged  that  both 
he  and  his  mistress  should  be  burnt  for  their  mis- 
deeds. "When  Virgilius  heard  of  this,  he  made 
with  his  cunning  the  sultan  and  all  his  lords  think 
that  the  great  river  of  Babylon*  was  run  in  the 
middle  of  them,  and  that  they  swam  and  lay  and 
sprung  like  ducks,  and  thus  took  Virgilius  with 
him  the  fair  lady  upon  the  bridge  in  the  air.  And 
when  they  were  both  upon  the  bridge,  he  delivered 
the  sultan  from  the  river,  and  all  the  lords,  and 
then  they  saw  Virgilius  carry  away  his  daughter 
over  the  sea  upon  a  bridge  in  the  air,  whereof  he 
marvelled  and  was  very  sorry,  and  wist  not  what  to 
do,  for  he  could  not  remedy  it  And  in  this  man- 
ner did  he  convey  the  sultan's  daughter  over  the 
sea  to  Rome.  And  Virgilius  was  sore  enamoured 
of  that  lady.  Then  he  thought  in  his  mind  how  he 
might  marry  her,  and  thought  in  his  mind  to  found 
in  the  midst  of  the  sea  a  fair  town  with  great  lands 
belonging  to  it ;  and  so  he  did  by  his  cunning,  and 
called  it  Naples ;  and  the  foundation  of  it  was  of 

*  The  Nile. — ^The  Babylon  in  which  the  sultans  dwelt  was 
old  Cairo,  Babylon  of  Egypt. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


FOUNDATION  OF  NAFIfig.  115 

J .♦  And  in  that  town  of  Naples  he  made  a 
tower  with  four  comers,  and  on  the  top  he  set  an 
{q)ple  upon  an  iron  yard  (rod,)  and  no  man  could 
pull  away  that  apple  without  he  brake  it;  and 
through  that  iron  set  he  a  bottle,  and  on  that  bot- 
tle set  he  an  egg ;  and  he  hanged  the  apple  by  the 
stalk  upon  a  chain,  and  so  hangeth  it  stiU.  And 
when  the  egg  stirreth,  so  should  the  town  of  Naples 
quake;  and  when  tfie  egg  brake,  then  should  the 
town  sink.  When  he  had  made  an  end,  he  let  call 
it  Naples.  And  in  this  town  he  laid  a  part  of  his 
treasure  that  he  had  therein ;  and  also  set  therein 
his  lover,  the  fair  lady  the  sultan's  daughter ;  and 
he  gave  to  her  the  town  of  Naples,  and  all  the 
lands  thereto  belonging,  to  her  use  and  her  chil- 
dren." 

With  such  a  dower,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  if 
the  lady  soon  found  a  husband,  and  accordingly  Vir- 
gil gave  her  in  marriage  to  a  certain  lord  of  Spain, 
whose  courage  was  put  to  the  trial  in  defend- 
ing the  town  against  the  emperor,  who  had  '*  a 
great  fantasy'^  to  it,  and  had  brought  a  powerful 
army  to  seize  upon  it  by  forca  But  Virgil  defeated 
him  with  his  enchantments,  and  when  he  had  se- 
cured the  place  and  driven  the   emperor    away, 

*  The  foundation  of  the  city  of  Naples  upon  eggs,  and  the 
egg  on  which  its  fate  depended,  seem  to  have  been  legends 
general  current  in  the  middle  ages.  They  are  said  still  to 
exist  among  the  Lazzaroni.  By  the  statutes  of  the  order  of 
the  Saint  Esprit  au  droit  desir,  instituted  in  1352,  (Mont- 
faucon,  Monumens  de  la  Mon.  Fr.,  vol.  ii.  p.  329,)  a  chapter  of 
the  knights  was  appointed  to  be  held  annually  in  casUUo  pvi 
ineantati  in  nUrabiU  perioulo. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


116  dOltOEHY  AKD  MAGIC. 

"  then  returned  he  again  to  Rome,  and  fetched  hid 
books  and  other  removeable  goods,  and  brought 
them  to  Naples,  and  let  his  good  alone  that  he  had 
shut  in  the  cellar,  and  his  dwelling  he  gave  to  his 
friends  to  keep,  and  his  dwelling  places,  and  so 
departed  to  Naples.  There  he  made  a  school,  and 
gave  thereto  much  lands,  that  every  scholar  abiding 
and  going  to  school  had  land  to  live  on  of  the  town, 
and  i3^ej  that  gave  up  the  school  lost  the  land. 
And  there  came  many  from  Toledo  to  school  And 
when  he  had  ordained  the  towu  well  with  scholars, 
then  made  he  a  warm  bath,  that  every  man  might 
bathe  him  in  that  would ;  and  that  bath  is  there 
to  this  time,  and  it  was  the  first  bath  that  ever  was. 
And  after  this  he  made  a  bridge,  the  fairest  that 
ever  man  saw,  and  there  might  men  see  all  manner 
of  fair  ships  that  belonged  to  merchandize,  and  all 
other  things  of  the  sea.  And  the  town  in  those 
days  was  the  fairest  and  noblest  in  all  the  world. 
And  in  this  school  aforesaid  did  Virgilius  read  (i  e. 
lecture  upon)  the  great  cunning  and  science  of 
necromancy,  for  he  was  the  cunningest  that  ever 
was  afore  or  after  in  that  science.  And  within 
short  space  his  wife  died,  and  she  had  never  no 
children  by  him.  And  moreover  above  all  men  he 
loved  scholars,  and  gave  much  money  to  buy  books 
withaL" 

Virgil  seems  now  to  have  been  reconciled  with 
the  emperor,  for  he  made  for  him  a  serpent  of 
metal,  to  which  he  gave  such  a  quality  that  any 
one  who  put  his  hand  in  its  mouth  and  swore 
falsely  would  have  it  bitten  off ;  but  if  he  swore 
the  truth,  he  would  withdraw  it  uninjured.     At 


Digitized 


by  Google 


tirgil's  death.  117 

Ust  a  woman  accused  of  adultery  deceived  Virgil 
and  his  serpent  hy  an  artful  trick,  which  is  found 
rcj)eated  in  Tristan  and  some  others  of  the  me- 
dieval romancea  She  arranged  that  her  lover 
shoidd  be  there  disguised  as  a  fool,  and  then, 
holdlj  thrusting  her  hand  into  the  serpent's  mouth, 
she  swore  that  she  had  no  more  sinned  with  the 
man  who  was  accused  of  being  her  paramour  than 
with  that  fooL  Virgil,  in 'anger  against  woman- 
kind, broke  the  serpent  to  pieces. 

Virgil's  death  was  quite  as  extraordinary  as  his 
life.  "  And  after  this  made  Virgilius  a  goodly 
castle,  that  had  but  one  going  in  thereto,  and  no 
man  might  not  enter  in  thereto  but  at  the  one  gate, 
or  else  not  And  also  about  the  same  castle  flowed 
there  a  water,  and  it  was  impossible  for  any  man 
there  to  have  any  entering.  Ajid  this  castle  stood 
without  the  city  of  Rome.  And  this  entering  of 
this  gate  was  made  with  twenty-four  iron  flails,  and 
on  every  side  was  there  twelve  men  on  each  side 
still  a  piece  smiting  with  the  flails,  never  ceasing, 
the  one  after  the  other ;  and  no  man  might  come 
in,  without  the  flails  stood  stiU,  but  he  was  slain. 
And  these  flails  were  made  with  such  a  gin  (contri- 
vance) that  Virgilius  stopped  them  when  he  list  to 
e|iter  in  thereat,  but  no  man  else  could  find  the 
way*  And  in  this  castle  put  Virgilius  part  of  his 
treasure  privily ;  and,  when  this  was  done,  he  ima- 
gined in  his  mind  by  what  mean  he  might  make 
himself  young  again,  because  he  thought  to  live 
longer  many  years,  to  do  many  wonders  and  mar- 
veUous  things.  And  upon  a  time  went  Virgilius  to 
Ijie  emperor,  and  asked  him  of  licence  (of  absence) 


Digitized 


by  Google 


118  SOftOB&T  AND  MAQia 

by  the  space  of  tliree  weeks.  But  the  empeixw  in 
no  wise  would  grant  it  Unto  him,  for  he  would  have 
Virgilius  at  all  times  by  him.  Then  heard  he  that 
Virgilius  went  to  his  house,  and  took  with  him  one 
of  his  men  that  he  above  all  men  trusted  and  knew 
well  that  he  would  best  keep  his  counsel ;  and  they 
departed  to  his  castle  that  was  without  the  town, 
and,  when  they  were  afore  the  castle,  there  saw  the 
man  men  stand  with  iron  flails  in  their  hands  sore 
smiting.  Then  Virgilius  said  to  his  man,  *  Enter 
you  first  into  the  casde.'  Then  answered  the  man 
and  said,  *  If  I  should  enter,  the  flails  would  slay 
me.'  Then  showed  Virgilius  to  the  man  of  each 
side  the  entering  in,  and  all  the  vices  (screws)  that 
thereto  belonged ;  and  when  he  had  shown  him 
all  the  ways,  he  made  cease  the  flails,  and  went 
into  the  castle.  And  when  they  were  both  in, 
Virgilius  turned  the  vices  again,  and  so  went  the 
iron  flails  as  they  did  afore.  Then  said  Virgilius, 
*  My  dear  beloved  friend,  and  he  that  I  above  all 
men  trust,  and  know  most  of  my  secrets  ;*  and  then 
let  he  the  man  into  the  cellar,  where  he  had  made  a 
fair  lamp  at  aU  seasons  burning.  And  then  said  Vir- 
gilius to  the  man,  '  See  you  the  barrel  that  standeth 
here  f  And  he  said,  *  Ye  must  put  me  there ;  first 
ye  must  slay  me,  and  hew  me  small  to  piec6s> 
and  cut  my  head  in  font  pieces,  and  salt  the  head 
under  in  the  bottom,  and  then  the  pieces  thereafter, 
and  my  heart  in  the  middle,  and  then  set  the  bar- 
rel under  the  lamp,  that  night  and  day  therein 
may  drop  and  leke ;  and  ye  shall  nine  days  long 
once  in  the  day  fill  the  lamp,  and  fail  not ;  and  when 
this  is  all  done,  then  shall  I  be  renewed  and  made 


Digitized 


by  Google 


viegil's  dbath.  119 

joung  again,  and  live  long  time  and  many  winters 
more,  if  Aat  it  fortune  me  not  to  be  taken  of  above 
and  die/  *  And  when  the  man  heard  his  master 
Virgilius  speak  thus,  he  was  sore  abashed,  and  said, 
'  That  will  I  never  whUe  I  live,  for  in  no  manner 
wiU  I  slay  you**  Then  said  Virgilius,  '  Ye  at  this 
time  must  do  it,  for  it  shall  be  no  grief  unto  you.' 
And  at  last  Virgilius  entreated  his  man  so  much, 
that  he  consented  to  him ;  and  then  the  servant 
took  Virgilius,  and  slew  him,  and,  when  he  was 
thus  slain,  he  hewed  him  in  pieces,  and  salted  him 
in  the  barrel,  and  cut  his  head  in  four  pieces  as  his 
master  bade  him,  and  then  put  the  heart  in  the 
middle,  and  salted  them  well;  and  when  all  this 
was  done,  he  hung  the  lamp  right  over  the  barrel, 
that  it  might  at  all  times  drop  in  thoreto.  And 
when  he  had  done  all  this,  he  went  out  of  the  cas- 
tle and  turned  the  vices,  and  then  went  the  copper 
men  smighting  with  their  flails  as  strongly  upon 
the  iron  anvils  as  they  did  before,  that  there  durst 
no  man  enter ;  and  he  came  every  day  to  the  castle 
and  filled  the  lamp,  as  Virgilius  had  badf  him. 

"  And  as  the  emperor  missed  Virgilius  by  the 
space  of  seven  days,  he  marvelled  greatly  where  he 
should  be  become ;  but  Virgilius  was  killed  and 
laid  in  the  ceUar  by  his  servant  that  he  loved  so 
well.  And  then  the  emperor  thought  in  his  mind 
to  ask  VirgiUus's  servant  where  Virgilius  his  mas- 
ter was  ;  and  so  he  did,  for  he  knew  well  that  Vir- 
gilius loved  him  above  all  men  in  the  world.     Then 

*  A  sinailar  mode  of  renovation  occurs  not  unfrequently  in 
medieval  tales  and  legends.  It  seems  to  have  had  its  origin 
in  the  classic  story  of  Medea. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


120  SOBOERT  AKD  MAQia 

answered  the  servant  to  the  emperor,  and  said, 
*  Worshipftd  lord,  and  it  please  yonr  grace,  I  wot 
not  where  he  is,  for  it  is  seven  days  past  that  I  saw 
him-  last ;  and  then  went  he  forth  I  cannot  tell 
whither,  for  he  would  not  let  me  go  with  him.'' 
Then  was  the  emperor  angry  with  that  answer,  and 
said,  *  Thou  liest,  false  thief  that  thou  art ;  but 
without  thou  show  me  shortly  where  he  is,  I  shall 
put  thee  to  death/  With  those  words  was  the  man 
abashed,  and  said,  *  Worshipful  lord,  seven  days  ago 
I  went  with  him  without  the  town  to  the  castle, 
and  there  he  went  in,  and  there  I  left  him,  for  he 
would  not  let  me  in  with  him/  Then  said  the  em- 
peror, *  Go  with  me  to  the  same  castle  \  and  so 
he  did ;  and  when  they  came  afore  the  castle  and 
would  have  entered,  they  might  not,  because  the 
flails  smote  so  fast.  Then  said  the  emperor,  '  Make 
appease  these  flails  that  we  may  come  in/  Then 
answered  the  man,  *  I  know  not  tlje  way.'  Then ' 
said  the  emperor,  *  Then  shalt  thou  die/  And  then, 
through  the  fear  of  death,  he  turned  the  vices  and 
made  the  flails  stand  still ;  and  then  the  emperor 
entered  into  the  castle  with  all  his  folk,  and  sought 
all  about  in  every  comer  after  Virgilius,  and  at  the 
last  they  sought  so  long  that  they  came  into  the 
cellar  where  they  saw  the  lamp  hang  over  the  bar- 
rel, where  Virtus  lay  indeed.  Then  asked  the 
emperor  the  man,  who  had  made  him  so  hardy  to 
put  his  master  Virgilius  so  to  death  ;  and  the  man 
answered  no  word  to  the  emperor.  And  then  the 
emperor,  with  great  anger,  drew  out  his  sword,  and 
slew  he  there  Virgilius'  man.  And  when  all  this 
was  done,  then  saw  the  emperor  and  all  his  folk  a 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   END   OF   YIRGIL.  121 

naked  child,  three  times  running  about  the  barrel, 
saying  the  words,  '  Cursed  be  the  time  that  ye  came 
ever  here !'  And  with  those  words  vanished  the 
child  away,  and  was  never  seen  again ;  and  thus 
abode  Virgilius  in  the  barrel,  dead.  Then  was  the 
emperor  very  heavy  for  the  death  of  Virgilius,  and 
also  all  Virgins'  kindred,  and  also  all  the  scholars 
that  dwelt  about  the  town  of  Naples,  and  in  espe- 
cial the  town  of  Naples,  for  because  that  Virgilius 
was  the  founder  thereof,  and  made  it  of  great  wor- 
ship. Then  thought  the  emperor  to  have  the  goods 
and  riches  of  Virgilius;  but  there  were  none  so 
hardy  that  durst  come  in  to  fetch  it,  for  fear  of  the 
copper  men  that  smote  so  fast  with  their  iron 
flails  ;  and  so  abides  Virgilius'  treasure  in  the 
cellar." 


VOL.   I. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


122 


CHAPTER  Vn. 


THE  LATEB  MEDIEVAL  TYPES  OF  THE  MAGICIAN  ;   FBIAB 
BACON  AND  DB.   FAUSTUS. 

We  have  seen  the  type  of  the  magician  as  it  was 
formed  at  an  early  period,  and  in  a  particular 
locality  and  circumstances.  Virgil  the  enchanter 
was  the  creation  of  the  popular  imagination  to  re- 
present its  notion  of  the  wondeirs  of  ancient  science 
and  art.  It  was  the  type  of  the  sorcerer  as  it  arose 
out  of  the  wreck  of  antiquity.  But  the  middle  ages 
wanted  a  type  of  its  own  time,  which  should  repre- 
sent, according  to  the  notions  of  the  vulgar,  the 
consciousness  of  that  extraordinary  science  which 
was  producing  present  wonders.  This  it  soon  found 
in  one  of  the  greatest  of  its  own  scholastics,  the 
celebrated  Roger  Bacon. 

So  naturally  was  the  notion  of  magic  connected 
with  that  of  superior  learning  in  the  mind  of  the 
nuiltitude,  that  few  of  the  great  scholars  of  the 
middle  ages  escaped  the  imputation.  Probably  in 
their  own  time,  Roger  Bacon,  and  Grosseteste,  and 


Digitized 


by  Google' 


FBIAR  BACON.  123 

others,  enjoyed  the  same  reputation  in  this  respect  as 
the  more  ancient  Gerbert.  This  was  the  case  with 
Bacon  especially,  who  devoted  himself  so  much  to  prac- 
tical science,  and  whose  chymical  discoveries,  (such  as 
that  of  gunpowder,)  his  optical  glasses,  and  his  mecha- 
nical contrivances,  were  the  wonder  of  the  thirteenth 
century.  A  few  of  the  genuine  traditions  relating 
to  him  are  found  scattered  in  old  writings,  such  as 
that  of  the  brazen  head,  and  others  connected  with 
his  glasses.  One  of  them  tells  us  of  friar  Bacon's  (as 
he  was  usually  termed)  compact  with  the  evil  one, 
and  the  artful  mariner  in  which  he  evaded  it  It  is 
said  that  his  agreement  stipulated  that  he  was  to 
belong  to  the  devil  after  his  death,  if  he  died  in 
the  church  or  out  of  it ;  but  the  wily  magician, 
when  he  felt  his  end  approaching,  caused  a  cell  to 
be  made  in  the  wall  of  the  church,  where  he  died 
and  was  buried,  neither  in  the  church  nor  without, 
and  thus  the  fiend  was  cheated  of  his  prey. 

When,  in  the  sixteenth  century,  the  study  of 
magic  was  pursued  with  increased  zeal,  the  celebrity 
of  friar  Bacon  became  more  popular,  and  was  spread 
wider  ;  and  not  only  were  the  traditions  worked  up 
into  a  popidar  book,  entitled  "  The  History  of  Friar 
Bacon,''  but  one  of  the  dramatists  of  the  age,  Robert 
Green,  founded  upon  them  a  play,  which  was  often 
acted,  and  of  which  there  are  several  editions.  The 
greater  part  of  the  history  of  friar  Bacon,  as  far  as 
it  related  to  that  celebrated  personage,  is  evidently 
the  invention  of  the  writer,  who  appears  to  have 
lived  in  the  time  of  queen.  Elizabeth ;  he  adopted 
some  of  the  older  traditions,  and  filled  up  his  nar- 
rative with  fables  taken   from  the  common  story 

G  2 


Digitized 


by  Google 


124  SORCBEY  AND  MAGIC. 

books  of  the  age.  We  are  here  first  made  acquainted 
with  two  other  legendary  conjurers,  friars  Bungay 
and  Vandermast ;  and  the  recital  is  enlivened  with 
the  pranks  of  Bacon's  servant  Miles. 

According  to  this  legendary  history,  B;Oger  Bacon 
was  the  son  of  a  wealthy  farmer  in  the  west  of 
England,  who  had  placed  his  son  with  the  parish 
priest  to  gain  a  little  scholarship.  The  boy  soon 
showed  an  extraordinary  ability  for  learning,  which 
was  encouraged  by  the  priest,  but  which  was  ex- 
tremely disagreeable  to  the  father,  who  intended 
him  for  no  other  profession  but  that  of  the  plough. 
Young  Bacon  fled  from  home,  and  took  shelter  in 
a  monastery,  where  he  followed  his  studies  to  his 
heart's  content,  and  was  eventually  sent  to  complete 
them  at  Oxford.  There  he  made  himself  a  proficient 
in  the  occult  sciences,  and  attained  to  the  highest 
proficiency  in  magic.  At  length  he  had  an  oppor- 
tunity of  exhibiting  his  skill  before  the  court,  and 
the  account  of  his  exploits  on  this  occasion  may  be 
given  as  a  sample  of  the  style  of  this  quaint  old 
history. 

"  The  king  being  in  Oxfordshire  at  a  nobleman's 
house,  was  very  desirous  to  see  this  famous  friar,  for 
he  had  heard  many  times  of  his  wondrous  things 
that  he  had  done  by  his  art,  therefore  he  sent  one 
for  him  to  desire  him  to  come  to  the  court  Friar 
Bacon  kindly  thanked  the  king  by  the  messenger, 
and  said  that  he  was  at  the  king's  service,  and 
would  suddenly  attend  him  ;  '  but,  sir,'  saith  he  to 
the  gentleman,  '  I  pray  make  you  haste,  or  else  I 
shall  be  two  hours  before  you  at  the  court.'  '  For 
all  your  learning,'  answered  the  gentleman,  '  I  can 


Digitized 


by  Google 


BACON  AT  COURT.  125 

hardly  believe  this^  for  scholars,  old  men,  and  tra- 
vellers, may  lie  by  authority/  *  To  strengthen  your 
belief,"  said  friar  Bacon,  *  I  could  presently  show 
you  the  last  wench  that  you  were  withal,  but  I  will 
not  at  this  time.'  *  One  is  as  true  as  the  other,' 
said  the  gentleman,  *  and  I  would  laugh  to  see 
either."  *  You  shall  see  them  both  within  these 
four  hours,'  quoth  the  friar,  *  and  therefore  make 
what  haste  you  can.'  '  I  will  prevent  that  by  my 
speed,'  said  the  gentleman,  and  with  that  he  rid  his 
way ;  but  he  rode  out  of  his  way,  as  it  should  seem, 
for  he  had  but  five  miles  to  ride,  and  yet  was  he 
better  than  three  hours  a  riding  them,  so  that  Friar 
Bacon  by  his  art  was  with  the  king  before  he 
came. 

"  The  king  kindly  welcomed  him,  and  said  that 
he  long  time  had  desired  to  see  him,  for  he  had  as 
yet  not  heard  of  his  like.  Friar  Bacon  answered 
him,  that  fame  had  belied  him,  and  given  him  that 
report  that  his  poor  studies  had  never  deserved,  for 
he  believed  that  art  had  many  sons  more  excellent 
than  himself  was.  The  king  commended  him  for 
his  modesty,  and  told  him  that  nothing  could  be- 
come a  wise  man  less  than  boasting :  but  yet  withal 
he  requested  him  now  to  be  no  niggard  of  his 
knowledge,  but  to  show  his  queen  and  him  some  of 
his  skilL  *  I  were  worthy  of  neither  art  or  know- 
ledge,' quoth  friar  Bacon,  *  should  I  deny  your  ma- 
jesty this  smaU  request ;  I  pray  seat  yourselves,  and 
you  shall  see  presently  what  my  poor  skill  can  per- 
form.' The  king,  queen,  and  nobles,  sat  them  all 
down.  They  having  so  done,  the  friar  waved  his 
wand,   and  presently  was    heard    such    excellent 


Digitized 


by  Google 


126  SORCERY   AND   MAGIC. 

music,  that  they  were  all  amazed,  for  they  all  said 
they  had  never  heard  the  like.  '  This  is/  said  the 
friar,  *  to  delight  the  sense  of  hearing, — I  will  de- 
light all  your  other  senses  ere  you  depart  hence.' 
So  waving  his  wand  again,  there  was  louder  music 
heard,  and  presently  five  dancers  entered,  the  first 
like  a  court  laundress,  the  second  like  a  footman, 
the  third  like  a  usurer,  the  fourth  like  a  prodigal, 
the  fifth  like  a  fool.  These  did  divers  excellent 
changes,  so  that  they  gave  content  to  all  the  be- 
holders, and  having  done  their  dance  they  all 
vanished  away  in  their '  order  as  they  came  in. 
Thus  feasted  he  two  of  their  senses.  Then  waved 
he  his  wand  again,  and  there  was  another  kind  of 
music  heard,  and  whilst  it  was  playing,  there  was 
suddenly  before  them  a  table,  richly  covered  with 
all  sorts  of  delicacies.  Then  desired  he  the  king 
and  queen  to  taste  of  some  certain  rare  fruits  that 
were  on  the  table,  which  they  and  the  nobles  there 
present  did,  and  were  very  highly  pleased  with  the 
taste ;  they  being  satisfied,  all  vanished  away  on 
the  sudden.  Then  waved  he  his  wand  again,  and 
suddenly  there  was  such  a  smell,  as  if  all  the  rich 
perfumes  in  the  whole  world  had  been  then  pre- 
pared in  the  best  manner  that  art  could  set  them 
out.  Whilst  he  feasted  thus  their  smelling,  he 
waved  his  wand  again,  and  there  came  divers  na- 
tions in  sundry  habits,  as  Russians,  Polanders, 
Indians,  Armenians,  all  bringing  sundry  kinds  of 
furs,  such  as  their  countries  yielded,  all  which  they 
presented  to  the  king  and  queen.  These  furs  were 
so  soft  to  the  touch,  that  they  highly  pleased  all  those 
that  handled  them.     Then,  after  some  odd  fantastic 


Digitized 


by  Google 


BACON   AT   COURT.  127 

dances,  after  their  country  manner,  they  vanished 
away.  '  Then  asked  friar  Bacon  the  king's  majesty 
if  that  he  desired  any  more  of  his  skilL  The  king 
answered  that  he  was  fully  satisfied  for  that  time, 
and  that  he  only  now  thought  of  something  that 
be  might  bestow  on  him,  that  might  partly  satisfy 
the  kindness  that  he  had  received.  Friar  Bacon 
said  that  he  desired  nothing  so  much  as  his  ma- 
jesty's love,  and  if  that  he  might  be  assured  of  that, 
he  would  think  himself  happy  in  it  '  For  that,' 
said  iJbe  king,  *  be  thou  ever  sure  of  it,  in  token  of 
which  receive  this  jewel,'  and  withal  gave  him  a 
costly  jewel  from  his  neck.  The  friar  did  with 
great  reverence  thank  his  majesty,  and  said,  '  As 
youTgrnajesty's  vassal  you  shall  ever  find  me  ready 
to  do  you  service ;  your  time  of  need  shall  find 
it  both  beneficial  and  delightful  But  amongst  all 
these  gentlemen  I  see  not  the  man  that  your 
grace  did  send  for  me  by ;  sure  he  hath  lost  his 
way,  or  else  met  with  some  sport  that  detains  him 
so  long ;  I  promised  to  be  here  before  him,  and  all 
this  noble  assembly  can  witness  I  am  as  good  as 
my  word — I  hear  him  coming.'  With  that  entered 
the  gentleman,  all  bedirted,  for  he  had  rid  through 
ditches,  quagmires,  plashes,  and  waters,  that  he  was 
in  a  most  pitiful  case.  He,  seeing  the  friar  there, 
looked  full  angrily,  and  bid  a  plague  on  all  his 
devils,  for  they  had  led  him  out  of  his  way,  and 
almost  drowned  him.  '  Be  not  angry,  sir,'  said 
friar  Bacon,  '  here  is  an  old  friend  of  yours  that 
hath  more  cause,  for  she  hath  tarried  these  three 
hours  for  you,' — ^with  that  he  pulled  up  the  hang- 
ings, and  behind  them  stood  a  kitchen-maid  with  a 


Digitized 


by  Google 


128  SORCERY   AND  MAGIC. 

basting-ladle  in  her  hand — *  now  am  I  as  good  as 
my  word  with  you  ?  for  I  promised  to  help  you  to 
your  sweetheart, — how  do  you  like  this  X  *  So 
ill,  answered  the  gentleman,  that  I  will  be  revenged 
of  you/  '  Threaten  not,'  said  friar  Bacon,  '  lest  I 
do  you  more  shame,  and  do  you  take  heed  how  you 
give  scholars  the  lie  again ;  but  because  I  know  not 
how  well  you  are  stored  with  money  at  this  time,  I 
will  bear  your  wench's  charges  home/  With  that 
she  vanished  away  " 

This  may  be  taken  as  a  sort  of  exemplification  of 
the  class  of  exhibitions  which  were  probably  the 
result  of  a  superior  knowledge  of  natural  science, 
and  which  were  exaggerated  by  popular  imagination. 
They  had  been  made,  to  a  certain  degree,  familiar  by 
the  performances  of  the  skilful  jugglers  who  came 
from  the  east,  and  who  were  scattered  throughout 
Europe ;  and  we  read  not  unfrequently  of  such  magi- 
cal feats  in  old  writers.  When  the  emperor  Charles 
IV.  was  married  in  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth  cen- 
tury to  the  Bavarian  princess  Sophia  in  the  city  of 
Prague,  the  father  of  the  princess  brought  a  waggon- 
load  of  magicians  to  assist  in  the  festivities.  Two  of 
the  chief  proficients  in  the  art,  Zythothe  great  Bohe- 
mian sorcerer,  and  Grouin  the  Bavarian,  were 
pitched  against  each  other,  and  we  are  told  that 
after  a  desperate  trial  of  skill,  Zytho,  opening  his 
jaws  from  ear  to  ear,  ate  up  his  rival  without  stop- 
ping till  he  came  to  his  shoes,  which  he  spit  out, 
because,  as  he  said,  they  had  not  been  cleaned. 
After  having  performed  this  strange  feat,  he  re- 
stored the  unhappy  sorcerer  to  life  again.  The  idea 
of  contests  like  this  seems  to  have  been  taken  from 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   DEVIL   OUTWITTED.  129 

the  scriptural  narrative  of  the  contention  of  the 
Egyptian  magicians  against  Moses. 

We  must  run  through  friar  Bacon's  other  exploits 
more  briefly.  As  I  have  said,  the  greater  number 
of  them  are  mere  adaptations  of  medieval  stories  ; 
but  they  show,  nevertheless,  what  was  the  popular 
notion  of  the  magician's  character.  Such  is  the 
story  of  the  gentlemen  who,  reduced  to  poverty  and 
involved  in  debt,  sold  himself  to  the  evil  one,  on 
condition  that  he  was  to  deliver  himself  up  as  soon 
as  his  debts  were  paid.  As  may  be  imagined  with- 
out much  difficulty,  he  was  not  in  haste  to  satisfy 
his  creditors,  but  at  length  the  time  came  when  he 
could  put  them  ofiF  no  longer,  and  then,  in  his  de- 
spair, he  would  have  committed  violence  on  himself 
had  not  his  hand  been  arrested  by  Bacon.  The 
latter,  when  he  had  heard  the  gentleman's  story, 
directed  him  to  repair  to  the  place  appointed  for 
his  meeting  with  the  evil  one,  to  deny  the  devil's 
claim,  and  to  refer  for  judgment  to  the  first  person 
who  should  pasa  "  In  the  morning,  after  that  he  had 
blessed  himself,  he  went  to  the  wood,  where  he 
found  the  devil  ready  for  him.  So  soon  as  he  came 
near,  the  devil  said,  *  Now,  deceiver,  are  you  come  ? 
Now  shall  thou  see  that  I  can  and  will  prove  that 
thou  hast  paid  all  thy  debts,  and  therefore  thy  soul 
belongest  to  me.'  '  Thou  art  a  deceiver,'  said  the 
gentleman,  '  and  gavest  me  money  to  cheat  me  of 
my  soul,  for  else  why  wilt  thou  be  thine  own  judge  ? 
— let  me  have  some  others  to  judge  between  us.' 
'  Content,'  said  the  devil,  *  take  whom  thou  wilt' 
*  Then  I  will  have,'  said  the  gentleman,  '  the  next 
man   that   cometh  this   way.'      Here^jo   the   devil 

-    K  5 


Digitized 


by  Google 


130  SORCERY  AND  MAGIC. 

agreed  No  sooner  were  these  words  ended,  but 
friar  Bacon  came  by,  to  whom  this  gentleman 
spoke,  and  requested  that  he  would  be  judge  in  a 
weighty  matter  between  them  two.  The  friar  said 
he  was  content,  so  both  parties  were  agreed :  the 
devil  said  they  were,  and  told  friar  Bacon  how  the 
case  stood  between  them  in  this  manner.  *  Know, 
friar,  that  I  seeing  this  prodigal  like  to  starve  for 
want  of  food,  lent  him  money,  not  only  to  buy  him 
victuals,  but  also  to  redeem  his  lands  and  pay  his 
debts,  conditionally  that  so  soon  as  his  debts  were 
paid,  that  he  should  give  himself  freely  to  me ;  to 
this,  here  is  his  hand,' — showing  him  the  bond ; 
'  now  my  time  is  expired,  for  all  his  debts  are  paid, 
which  he  cannot  deny/  *  This  case  is  plain,  if  it 
be  so  that  his  debts  are  paid.'  *  His  silence  con- 
firms it,'  said  the  devil,  '  therefore  give  him  a  just 
sentence.'  '  I  will,'  said  friar  Bacon ;  *  but  first  tell 
me'  —  speaking  to  the  gentleman — 'didst  thou 
never  yet  give  the  devil  any  of  his  money  back,  nor 
requite  him  in  any  ways  ?'  *  Never  had  he  any- 
thing of  me  as  yet,'  answered  the  gentleman. 
'  Then  never  let  him  have  anything  of  thee,  and 
thou  art  free : — deceiver  of  mankind,'  said  he, 
speaking  to  the  devil,  '  it  was  thy  bargain  never  to 
meddle  with  him  so  long  as  he  was  indebted  to 
any ;  now  how  canst  thou  demand  of  him  anything 
when  he  is  indebted  for  all  that  he  hath  to  thee  ? 
when  he  payeth  thee  thy  money,  then  take  him  as 
thy  due ;  till  then  thou  hast  nothing  to  do  with 
him,  and  so  I  charge  thee  to  be  gone.'  At  this  the 
devil  vanished  with  great  horror,  but  friar  Bacon 
comforted  the  gentleman,  and  sent  him  home  with 


Digitized 


by  Google 


FEIAE  bacon's  BRAZEN  HEAD.  131 

a  quiet  conscience,  bidding  him  never  to  pay  the 
devil's  money  back,  as  he  tendered  his'own  safety/' 

Bacon  now  met  with  a  companion,  friar  Bungay, 
whose  tastes  and  pursuits  were  congenial  to  his 
own,  and  with  his  assistance  he  undertook  the 
exploit  for  which  he  was  most  famous.  He  had  a 
fancy  that  he  would  defend  England  against  its 
enemies  by  walling  it  with  brass,  preparatory  to 
which  they  made  a  head  of  that  metal  Their  in- 
tent was  to  make  the  head  speak,  for  which  purpose 
they  raised  a  spirit  in  a  wood,  by  whose  directions 
they  made  a  fumigation,  to  which  the  head  was  to 
be  exposed  during  a  month,  and  to  be  carefully 
watched,  because  if  the  two  friars  did  not  hear  it 
before  it  had  given  over  speaking,  their  labour 
would  be  lost  Accordingly,  the  care  of  watching 
over  the  head  while  they  slept  was  entrusted  to 
Bacon's  man  Milea  The  period  of  speaking  un- 
fortunately came  while  Miles  was  watching.  The 
head  suddenly  uttered  the  two  words,  "  Time  is." 
Miles  thought  it  was  unnecessary  to  disturb  his 
master  for  such  a  brief  speech,  and  sat  still.  In 
half  an  hour,  the  head  again  broke  silence  with  the 
words,  "  Time  was."  Still  Miles  waited,  until,  in 
another  half  hour,  the  head  said,  "  Time  is  past," 
and  fell  to  the  ground  with  a  terrible  noise.  Thus, 
through  the  negligence  of  Miles,  the  labour  of  the 
two  friars  was  thrown  away. 

The  king  soon  wanted  friar  Bacon's  services,  and 
the  latter  enabled  him,  by  his  perspective  and  burning 
glasses,  to  take  a  town  which  he  was  besieging  In 
consequence  of  this  success,  the  kings  of  England  and 
France  made  peace,  and  a  grand  court  was  held. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


1  32  SOBCERT   AND   MAGIC. 

at  which  the  German  conjurer  Vandennast  was 
brought  to  try  his  skill  against  Bacon.  Their  per- 
formances were  something  in  the  style  of  Bacon's 
former  exhibition  before  the  king  and  queen. 
Vandennast,  in  revenge,  sent  a  soldier  to  kill 
Bacon,  but  in  vain.  Next  follow  a  series  of  adven- 
tures which  consist  of  a  few  medieval  stories  very 
clumsily  put  together,  among  which  are  that  known 
as  the  Friar  and  the  Boy,  the  one  which  appeared 
in  Scottish  verse  under  the  title  of  the  Friars  of 
B3rwick,  a  tale  taken  from  the  Gesta  Romanorum, 
and  some  others.  A  contention  in  magic  between 
Vandennast  and  Bungay  ended  in  the  deaths  of 
both.  The  servant  Miles  next  turned  conjurer, 
having  got  hold  of  one  of  Bacon's  books,  and  es- 
caped with  a  dreadful  fright  and  a  broken  leg. 
Everything  now  seemed  to  go  wrong.  Friar  Bacon 
"  had  a  glass  which  was  of  that  excellent  nature, 
that  any  man  might  behold  anything  that  he  de- 
sired to  see  within  the  compass  of  fifty  miles  round 
about  him."  In  this  glass  he  used  to  show  people 
what  their  relations  and  friends  were  doing,  or 
where  they  were.  One  day  two  young  gentlemen 
of  high  birth  came  to  look  into  the  glass,  and  they 
beheld  their  fathers  desperately  fighting  together, 
upon  which  they  drew  their  swords  and  slew  each 
other.  Bacon  was  so  shocked  that  he  broke  his 
glass  in  disgust,  and  hearing  about  the  same  time 
of  the  deaths  of  Vandennast  and  Bungay,  he  be- 
came melancholy,  and  at  length  he  burnt  his  books 
of  magic,  distributed  his  wealth  among  poor  scho- 
lars and  others,  and  became  an  anchorite.  Thus 
ended  the  life  of  friar  Bacon,  according  to  "the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


BR.   FAUSTUS.  133 

famous  history/'  which  probably  owed  most  of  its 
incidents  to  the  imagination  of  the  writer. 

The  character  of  Dr.  Faustus  seems,  as  a  magi- 
cian, to  be  more  veritable  than  that  uf  friar  Bacon. 
His  history,  which  was  transferred  to  English  lite- 
rature direct  from  the  Grerman,  appeared  in  Eng- 
land about  the  same  time.  There  appears,  in  fact, 
to  have  lived  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  sixteenth 
century  a  great  magician  and  conjurer  of  the  name 
of  Faust  or.  Latinized,  Faustus,  a  native  of  Kund- 
ling,  in  the  duchy  of  Wirtemberg,  whose  celebrity 
gave  rise  to  the  book  entitled  "  The  History  of  the 
Life  and  Death  of  Dr.  Faustus,"  which  became  so 
popular  in  England,  that  it  was  brought  on  the 
stage  by  one  of  the  best  of  the  dramatists  of  the  / 
Elizabethan  age,  Greene,  and  went  into  a  proverb 
in  our  language,  and  which  has  been  embodied  in 
one  of  the  most  extraordinary  productions  of  the 
literature  of  our  age,  the  Faust  of  Grothe. 

Still  we  must  look  upon  Dr.  Faustus  as  one  of  the 
types  only  of  the  art,  for  we  have  no  authentic  ac- 
count of  w;hat  he  did  perform.  The  book  consists, 
like,  the  histories  of  Virgil  and  Bacon,  of  a  mere  col- 
lection of  stories  of  magic  and  incantation,  many 
of  them  probably  invented  for  the  occasion,  and  all 
of  them  fathered  upon  one  personage,  whose  name 
had  become  sufficiently  notorious  for  the  purpose. 
According  to  this  history,  Faustus  was  the  son  of  a 
German  boor,  and  being  remarkable  for  his  early 
talents,  was  adopted  by  a  rich  uncle  at  Wittenburg, 
who  enabled  him  to  pursue  his  studies  at  a  celebrated 
university  in  that  city.  The  inclinations  of  Faustus 
led  him  into  the  forbidden  paths  of  science,  and  at 


Digitized 


by  Google 


134  SORCERY   AKD   MAGIC. 

length  he  became  such  a  proficient  in  magic  that  he 
determined  to  call  up  the  demon.  So,  "  taking  his 
way  to  a  thick  wood  near  to  Wittenburg,  called  in 
the  German  tongue  Spisserholt,  he  came  into  the 
wood  one  evening  into  the  cross-way,  where  he  made 
with  a  wand  a  circle  in  the  dust,  and  within  that 
many  more  circles  and  characters;  and  thus  he 
passed  away  the  time  until  it  was  nine  or  ten  of 
the  clock  in  the  night ;  then  began  Dr.  Faustus  to 
call  on  Mephistophiles  the  spirit,  and  to  charge  him 
in  the  name  of  Belzebub  to  ^appear  there  presently, 
without  any  long  stay.  Then  presently  the  devil 
began  so  great  a  rumour  in  the  wood,  as  if  heaven 
and  earth  would  have  come  together,  with  wind, 
and  the  trees  bowed  their  tops  to  the  ground.  Then 
fell  the  devil  to  roar,  as  if  the  whole  wood  had  been 
full  of  lions,  and  suddenly  about  the  circle  run  the 
devil,  as  if  a  thousand  waggons  had  been  running 
together  on  paved  stones.  After  this,  at  the  four 
corners  of  the  wood  it  thundered  horribly,  with  such 
lightning  as  the  whole  world  to  his  seeming  had 
been  on  fire.  Faustus  all  this  while,  half  amazed  at 
the  devil's  so  long  tarrying,  and  doubting  whether 
he  were  best  to  abide  any  more  such  horrible  con- 
jurings,  thought  to  leave  his  circle  and  depart, 
whereupon  the  devil  made  him  such  music  of  all 
sorts,  as  if  the  nymphs  themselves  had  been  in  the 
place.  Whereat  Faustus  revived,  and  stood  stoutly 
in  the  circle,  expecting  his  purpose,  and  began  again 
to  conjure  the  spirit  Mephistophiles  in  the  name  of 
the  prince  of  devils,  to  appear  in  his  likeness ; 
whereat  suddenly  over  his  head  hung  hovering  in 
the  air  a  mighty  dragon.     Then  calls  Faustus  again 


Digitized 


by  Google 


FAUSTUS  AKD  MEPHISTOPHILBS.  135 

after  his  devilish  manner;  at  which  there  was 
a  monstrous  cry  in  the  wood,  as  if  hell  had  been 
open,  and  all  the  tormented  souls  cursing  their  con- 
dition. Presently,  not  three  fathom  above  his  head, 
fell  a  flame  in  manner  of  lightning,  and  changed 
itself  into  a  globe  ;  yet  Faustus  feared  it  not,  but 
did  persuade  himself  that  the  devil  shoidd  give  him 
his  request  before  he  would  leave.  Then  Faustus, 
vexed  at  his  spirit's  so  long  tarrying,  used  his  charm, 
with  fiill  purpose  not  to  depart  before  he  had  his 
intent ;  and  crying  on  Mephistophiles  the  spirit, 
suddenly  the  globe  opened,  and  sprung  up  in  the 
height  of  a  man ;  so,  burning  a  time,  in  the  end  it 
converted  to  the  shape  of  a  fiery  man.  This  plea- 
sant beast  ran  about  the  circle  a  great  while,  and 
lastly,  appeared  in  the  manner  of  a  grey  friar,  asking 
Faustus  what  was  his  request  Faustus  commanded, 
that  the  next  morning  at  twelve  of  the  clock  he 
shoidd  appear  to  him  at  his  house ;  but  the  devil 
would  in  no  wise  grant  it  Faustus  began  to  con- 
jure him  again,  in  the  name  of  Belzebub,  that  he 
should  fulfil  his  request;  whereupon  the  spirit 
agreed,  and  so  they  departed  each  on  his  way/' 

The  spirit  accordingly  visited  Faustus,  and  after 
three  interviews,  they  came  to  an  agreement,  by 
which  the  doctor,  as  the  price  of  his  soul,  was  to 
have  Mephistophiles  for  his  servant,  and  have  a  cer- 
tain allotment  of  life,  during  which  he  would  have 
the  fidl  gratification  of  his  power  in  everything- 
One  of  the  first  uses  which  Faustus  made  of  the 
power  he  had  now  obtained  was  to  gratify  his  ardent 
thirst  for  knowledge,  and  by  the  aid  of  his  spirit 
Mephistophiles,  he  soon  surpassed  all  others  in  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


/ 

136  '  SORCERY   AND  MAGIC. 

knowledge  of  hidden  causes.  All  his  desires  were 
fulfilled  the  instant  they  were  formed,  so  that  he 
lived  a  life  of  unrestrained  gratification.  He  tra- 
velled with  inconceivable  rapidity,  not  only  through 
different  countries,  but  into  the  remotest  regions  of 
the  air,  and  even  into  hell,  and  thus  he  became  a 
profound  astronomer,  and  was  initiated  in  some 
measure  into  the  secrets  of  the  other  world.  He 
now  "  fell  to  be  a  calendar-maker  by  the  help  of  his 
spirit,"  and  nobody's  prognostications  were  equal  to 
those  of  Dr.  Faustus.  His  travels  were  so  extensive, 
thar  he  even  obtained  a  glimpse  of  Paradise ;  and 
in  the  course  of  his  wanderings  he  played  all  sorts 
of  pranks.  Among  other  victims  of  his  wantonness 
were  the  Grand  Turk  and  the  pope  of  Rome. 

When  the  emperor  Charles  V.,  we  are  told,  was 
holding  his  court  at  Innspruch,  he  invited  Faustus 
to  make  an  exhibition  of  his  skill,  and  to  gratify 
him  he  raised  up  the  spirits  of  Alexander  the  great 
and  his  beautiful  paramour,  to  the  emperor's  no 
small  delight.  Some  of  the  courtiers  having  pro- 
voked him,  he  transformed  them,  and  exposed  them 
to  the  ridicule  of  their  companions.  After  leaving 
the  court,  he  performed  a  variety  of  tricks  upon 
persons  of  all  conditions,  whom  he  met  on  his  way. 
He  pawned  his  leg  to  a  Jew  for  money.  At  the  fair 
of  Pfeiffeng,  he  sold  a  horse  to  a  horse-dealer,  with  a 
warning  not  to  ride  through  a  course  of  water  with  it ; 
but  the  dealer,  having  disobeyed  these  directions,  found 
himself  suddenly  sitting  astride  a  bottle  of  straw. 
He  alarmed  a  countryman  by  eating  a  load  of  hay ; 
and  wherever  he  found  students  or  clowns  drinking 
together,  he  seldom  failed  to  make  them  victims  of 


Digitized 


by  Google 


FAUSTUS  AND  THE  JUQOLERS.  137 

His  art  He  subsequently  performed  extraordinary 
exploits  at  the  court  of  the  duke  of  Anhalt ;  and  he 
gave  equally  extraordinary  specimens  of  his  power 
in  a  •  series  of  extravagant  feats  with  which  he 
treated  the  students  of  Wittenburg,  and  which  he 
ended  by  calling  up  to  their  sight  the  fair  Helen  of 
Troy. 

"  Dr,  Faustus  came  in  Lent  unto  Frankland  fair, 
where  his  spirit  Mephistophiles  gave  him  to  under- 
stand that  in  an  inn  were  four  jugglers  that  cut  one 
another's  heads  off,  and  after  their  cutting  off  sent 
them  to  the  barber  to  be  trimmed,  which  many 
people  saw.  This  angered  Faustus,  for  he  meant  to 
have  himself  the  only  cook  in  the  devil's  banquet, 
and  he  went  to  the  place  where  they  were  to  beguile 
them.  And  as  the  jugglers  were  together,  ready  one 
to  cut  off  another's  head,  there  stood  also  the  barber 
ready  to  trim  them,  and  by  them  upon  the  table 
stood  likewise  a  glass  full  of  stilled  waters,  and  he 
that  was  the  chiefest  among  them  stood  by  it.  Thus 
they  began :  they  smote  off  the  head  of  the  first, 
and  presently  there  was  a  lily  in  the  glass  of  distilled 
water,  where  Faustus  perceived  this  lily  as  it  was 
springing  up,  and  the  chief  juggler  named  it  the  tree 
of  life.  Thus  dealt  he  with  the  first,  making  the 
barber  wash  and  comb  his  head,  and  then  he  set  it 
on  again ;  presently  the  lily  vanished  away  out  of 
the  water  ;  hereat  the  man  had  his  head  whole  and 
sound  again.  The  like  did  he  with  the  other  two ; 
and  as  the  turn  and  lot  came  to  the  chief  juggler, 
that  he  also  should  be  beheaded,  and  that  his  lily 
was  most  pleasant,  fair,  and  flourishing  green, 
they  smote  his  head  off,  and  when  it  came  to  be 


Digitized 


by  Google 


1S8  SOBCEBT  AND   MAGIC 

barbed,  (i  e,  shaved,)  it  troubled  Faustus  his  con- 
science, insomuch  that  he  could  not  abide  to  see 
another  do  anything,  for  he  thought  himself  to  be 
the  principal  conjurer  in  the  world;  wherefore 
Dr.  Faustus  went  to  the  table  whereat  the  other 
jugglers  kept  that  lily,  and  so  he  took  a  small  knife 
and  cut  off  the  stalk  of  the  lily,  sayiug  to  himself, 
'  None  of  them  shall  blind  Faustus/  Yet  no  man 
saw  Faustus  to  cut  the  lily ;  but  when  the  rest  of 
the  jugglers  thought  to  have  set  on  their  master's 
head,  they  could  not ;  wherefore  they  looked  on 
the  lily,  and  found  it  bleeding.  By  this  means  the 
juggler  was  beguiled,  and  so  died  in  his  wickedness  ; 
yet  no  one  thought  that  Dr.  Faustus  had  done  it.'' 

It  was  about  this  time  that  Faustus  had  a  fit  of 
repentance,  for  which  he  was  severely  rebuked  by 
his  spirit  Mephistophiles,  who  forced  him  to  sign  a 
new  bond  with  the  evil  one.  From  this  time  he  be- 
came more  headstrong  and  depraved  than  ever,  and, 
to  use  the  words  of  the  history,  "  he  began  to  live 
a  swinish  and  epicurean  life."  He  now  caused  Me- 
phistophiles to  bring  him  the  fair  Helen  of  Troy, 
with  whom  he  fell  violently  in  love,  and  kept  her 
during  the  rest  of  his  life  as  his  mistress  ;  but  she, 
and  a  child  she  bore  him,  vanished  together  on  his 
death.  This  was  not  long  in  approaching,  and  when 
his  last  day  was  at  hand,  he  invited  his  fellow-stu- 
dents to  a  supper,  and  gave  them  a  moral  discourse 
on  his  own  errors,  and  an  urgent  warning  to  avoid 
his  example.  "  The  students  and  the  others  that 
were  there,  when  they  had  prayed  for  him,  they 
wept,  and  so  went  forth ;  but  Faustus  tarried  in  the 
haU ;   and  when  the  gentlemen  were  laid  in  bed, 


Digitized 


by  Google 


DEATH   OF  BR.   FAUSTUS.  139 

none  of  them  coidd  sleep,  for  that  they  attended  to 
hear  if  they  might  be  privy  of  his  end.  It  happened 
that  between  twelve  and  one  o'clock  at  midnight 
there  blew  a  mighty  srtorm  of  wind  against  the 
house,  as  though  it  would  have  blown  the  founda- 
tion thereof  out  of  its  place.  Hereupon  the  students 
began  to  fear,  and  go  out  of  their  beds,  but  they 
would  not  stir  out  of  the  chamber,  and  the  host  of 
the  house  ran  out  of  doors,  thinking  the  house  would 
falL  The  students  lay  near  unto  the  hall  wherein 
Dr.  Faustus  lay,  and  they  heard  a  mighty  noise  and 
hissing,  as  if  the  hall  had  been  full  of  snakes  and 
adders.  With  that  the  hall-door  flew  open  wherein 
Dr.  Faustus  was;  then  he  began  to  cry  for  help, 
sapng,  *  Murther !  murther !'  but  it  was  with  a  half 
voice  ^nd  very  hollow ;  shortly  after  they  heard  him 
no  more.  But  when  it  was  day,  the  students,  that 
had  taken  no  rest  that  night,  arose  and  went  into 
the  hall  in  the  which  they  left  Dr.  Faustus,  where, 
notwithstanding,  they  found  not  Faustus,  but  all  the 
hall  sprinkled  with  blood,  the  brains  cleaving  to  the 
wall,  for  the  devil  had  beaten  him  from  one  wall 
against  another ;  in  one  comer  lay  his  eyes,  in  ano- 
ther his  teeth  ;  a  fearful  and  pitiful  sight  to  behold. 
Then  began  the  students  to  wail  and  weep  for  him, 
and  sought  for  his  body  in  many  places.  Lastly, 
they  came  into  the  yard,  where  they  found  his  body 
lying  on  the  horse-dung,  most  monstrously  torn,  and 
fearful  to  behold,  for  his  head  and  all  his  joints 
were  dashed  to  pieces.  The  forenamed  students 
and  masters  that  were  at  his  death,  obtained  so 
much  that  they  buried  him  in  the  village  where  he 
was  so  grievously  tormented.'' 


Digitized 


by  Google 


140  SORCERY   AND   MAGIC. 

Such  was  the  end  which  it  was  believed  awaited 
the  magicians  who  entered  into  a  direct  compact 
with  the  evil  one.  The  history  of  Dr.  Faustus  has 
been  the  delight  and  wonder  of  thousands  in  various 
countries  and  through  several  ages.  The  popularity 
of  the  book  was  so  great,  that  another  author  un- 
dertook to  compile  a  continuation.  Faustus,  it  was 
pretended,  had  left  a  familiar  servant,  named  Chris- 
topher Wagner,  with  whom  he  had  deposited  his 
greatest  secrets,  and  to  whom  he  had  left  his  books 
and  his  art  The  exploits  of  Wagner  form  what  is 
called  the  second  part  of  Dr.  Faustus,  which  seems 
to  have  been  compiled  in  England,  and  was  pub- 
lished long  subsequent  to  the  first  part  Wagner  is 
made  to  call  up  the  spirit  of  his  master  Faustus,  and 
compel  him  to  serve  as  his  familiar.  The  book  con- 
tains a  repetition  of  the  same  descriptions  of  exor- 
cisms which  had  been  used  by  Faustus  towards  Me- 
phistophiles,  and  of  similar  exploits. 

The  foregoing  are  types  of  the  popular  belief 
during  many  centuries.  They  picture  to  us  the  no- 
tion of  the  magician  as  it  existed  in  people's  imagi- 
nation. We  must  now  return  to  the  reality  of  these 
superstitions,  as  it  is  presented  to  us  by  the  history 
of  past  ages. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


141 


CHAPTER  VIIL 

SORCERY   IN  (SERMANY    IN    THE    FIFTIBNTH    CENTURY  : 
THE   MALLEUS   MALEFICARUM. 

Since  the  establishment  of  the  inquisition,  and 
the  practice  of  drawing  the  crime  of  sorcery  under 
its  jurisdiction,  the  belief  in  its  effects  was  becoming 
more  intense  and  was  spreading  more  widely.  In 
the  fifteenth  century  the  holy  inquisition  had  gra- 
dually formed  the  witchcraft  legends  into  a  regular 
system,  and  when  published  under  such  authority 
few  woidd  venture  to  disbelieve  it.  It  was  in  Ger- 
many, indeed,  that  the  belief  in  witchcraft  seems  to 
have  first  taken  that  dark,  systematical  form  which 
held  so  fearful  a  sway  over  men's  minds  in  the  six- 
teenth and  seventeenth  centuries.  There  the  wilder 
superstitions  of  the  ancient  Teutonic  creed  have 
been  preserved  in  greater  force  than  in  aixy  other 
part  of  Europe.  The  pious  legends  of  Caesarius  of 
Heisterbach,  who  flourished  in  the  earlier  part  of 
the  thirteenth  century,  are  little  better  than  a  mass 
of  stories  of  magic  and  sorcery.  The  imaginative 
feelings  of  the  people,  and  the  wild  character  of 


Digitized 


by  Google 


142  SORCERY  AND  MAGIC. 

many  parts  of  the  country,  were  peculiarly  calcu- 
lated to  foster  superstitions  of  this  description. 

In  fact,  we  may  there  trace  back  distinctly  most 
of  the  circumstances  of  the  earlier  belief  relating  to 
witchcraft  to  the  mythology  of  the  ante-christian 
period.  The  grand  night  of  meeting  of  the  German 
witches  was  the  night  of  St.  Walpurgis,  which  an- 
swered to  one  of  the  great  religious  festivals  of  the 
Teutonic  tribes  before  their  conversion.  In  after- 
times  two  other  nights  of  annual  assembly  were 
added,  those  of  the  feasts  of  St  John  and  St  Bar- 
tholomew. It  is  probable  that,  as  Christianity 
gained  ground,  and  became  established  as  the  reli- 
gion of  the  state,  the  old  religious  festivals,  to  which 
the  lower  and  more  ignorant  part  of  the  people,  and 
particularly  the  weaker  sex,  (more  susceptible  of 
superstitious  feelings,)  were  still  attached,  were  cele- 
brated in  solitary  places  and  in  private,  and  those 
who  frequented  them  were  branded  as  witches  and 
sorcerers  who  met  together  to  hold  communication 
with  demons,  for  as  such  the  earlier  Christians 
looked  upon  all  the  heathen  gods.  This  gives  us  an 
easy  explanation  of  the  manner  in  which  the  heathen 
worship  became  transformed  into  the  witchcraft 
of  the  middle  agea  At  an  early  period  it  was 
commonly  believed  that  the  witches  (wnholde)'Tode 
through  the  air  to  the  place  of  rendezvous  on  reeds 
and  sticks,  or  on  besoms,  which  latter  were  the  arti- 
cles readiest  at  hand  to  women  of  this  class  of  so- 
ciety. The  chief  place  of  meeting,  at  the  great  an- 
nual witch-festivals  in  Germany,  appears  to  have 
been,  from  an  early  period,  the  Brocken  mountain, 
the  highest  part  of  the  wild  Hartz  chain  ;  but  there 


Digitized 


by  Google 


GBBMAN   SOBCBBT.  143 

were  several  other  favourite  places  of  resort  The 
persons  believed  to  have  been  initiated  at  their  as- 
semblies were  looked  upon  with  dread,  for  they  were 
supposed  to  be  capable  of  injuring  people  in  various 
ways,  both  in  their  persons  and  in  their  possessions, 
and  their  malice  was  especially  directed  against 
little  children.  One  of  the  earliest  trials  for  witch' 
craft,  unconnected  with  other  offences,  on  the  conti- 
nent, is  that  of  a  woman  in  the  bishopric  of  Novara, 
on  the  northern  borders  of  Italy,  about  the  middle 
of  the  fourteenth  century ;  and  it  illustrates  the  ge- 
neral belief  in  Germany  at  that  period.  It  appears, 
from  the  slight  account  which  remains  of  this  trial, 
(which  is  printed  in  a  collection  of  criminal  cases 
in  Latin,  by  JoL  Bapt.  Ziletti,  foL  FrancL  1578), 
that  the  belief  then  held  by  the  church  was,  that 
women  of  this  class  could,  by  their  touch  or  look, 
fascinate  men,  or  children,  or  beasts,  so  as  to  pro- 
duce sickness  and  death  ;  and  they  believed  further, 
that  they  had  devoted  their  own  souls  to  the  demon, 
to  whom  also  they  had  done  personal  homage,  after 
having  trampled  under  foot  the  figure  of  the  cross. 
For  these  offences  they  were  judged  by  the  most 
learned  theologians  to  be  worthy  of  being  burnt  at 
the  stake. 

In  the  earlier  period  of  the  history  of  witchcraft 
in  Germany,  we  find  no  traces  of  the  more  repulsive 
details  of  the  Sabbath  of  the  sorcerers ;  and  it  is, 
therefore,  probable  that  they  were  introduced  there 
perhaps  not  before  the  fourteenth  century,  and 
that  even  during  that  century  they  did  not  con- 
stitute an  article  of  the  general  belief  They 
appear  to  have  originated  in  France    and  Italy, 


Digitized 


by  Google 


144      ,  SORCERY  AND   MAGIC. 

where  there  is  reason  for  believing,  that  down  to  a 
late  period  some  of  the  worst  sects  of  the  ancient 
Gnostics  retained  a  footing.  These  sects  appear  to 
have  been  justly  accused  with  the  celebration  of 
infamous  rites,  or  rather  orgies,  which  the  popish 
church  found  it  convenient  to  lay  to  the  charge  of 
all  whom  it  thought  right  to  class  under  the  title  of 
heretics.  The  church,  it  is  well  known,  claimed  the 
right  of  judging  witchcraft,  by  considering  it  as  a 
heresy,  or  as  akin  to  heresy,  and  it  is  probable  that, 
by  the  confusion  of  ideas  thus  produced,  the  orgies 
of  the  Gnostics  were  transferred  to  the  Sabbath  of 
the  witches. 

Druing  the  period  of  which  we  have  been  speak- 
ing, men  of  sense  in  Germany,  and  the  better  edu- 
cated and  less  bigoted  portion  of  the  clergy,  appear 
to  have  looked  upon  the  whole  as  a  delusion  ;  witch- 
craft was  a  crime,  inasmuch  as  it  was  an  act  of  vul- 
gar superstition.  Some  of  the  early  councils  forbid 
the  belief  in  it,  and  consequently  the  partaking  in 
any  of  its  practices  and  ceremonies.  It  only  rose  to 
higher  estimation  in  the  age  of  inquisitors.  To- 
wards the  middle  and  during  the  latter  half  of  the 
fifteenth  century,  the  question  of  witchcraft  began 
to  be  much  agitated.  The  wholesale  persecutions  of 
witches  had  commenced  with  the  celebrated  council 
of  Constance,  (1 414  to  1418,)  which  had  proscribed 
the  doctrines  of  Wycliffe,  and  condemned  John 
Huss  and  Jerome  of  Prague  to  the  flames.  One  of 
the  inquisitors  of  this  period,  a  Swiss  friar  preacher 
named  John  Nider,  published  a  work  on  the  various 
sins  and  crimes  against  religion,  under  the  title  of 
Formicarium,  (or  the   Ant-hill,)  the  fifth  book  of 

4 


Digitized 


byG>^ogIe 


SOECBEY   IN  SWITZBELAND.  145 

which  is  devoted  to  the  subject  of  sorcery.  This 
book  was  published  towards  the  year  1440,  for  it 
speaks  of  the  latter  events  of  the  life  of  Joane  of 
Arc  as  having  occurred  within  ten  years ;  and  the 
author's  information,  relative  to  sorcerers,  appears 
to  be  mainly  derived  from  the  inquisitor  of  Berne, 
named  Peter,  who  had  distinguished  himself  by  his 
activity  in  the  pursuit  of  witches  and  sorcerers,  and 
had  caused  a  great  number  of  them  to  be  burnt 

According  to  John  Nider,  the  injury  done  by  the 
witches  was  manifold,  and  difficult  to  be  guarded 
against ;  and  we  are  amused  with  the  various  ab- 
surd formulae  of  exorcism  which  he  recommends 
against  their  effects,  as  though,  if  their  object  were 
to  drive  away  the  evil  one,  or  tp  call  upon  divine 
interference,  one  proper  formula  would  not  be  suffi- 
cient for  every  case  that  could  occur.  They  raised 
at  will  destructive  storms  ;  they  caused  barrenness, 
both  of  living  beings  and  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth  : 
a  man  at  Poltingen,  in  the  diocese  of  Lausanne,  by 
placing  a  charmed  lizard  under  the  doorstead  of  a 
house,  is  stated  to  have  caused  the  good  woman  of 
the  house  to  have  abortive  births  during  seven  years, 
and  to  have  produced  the  same  effect  on  all  living 
creatures  of  her  sex  which  remained  within  her 
dwelling ;  when  the  sorcerer  was  seized,  and  made 
a  full  confession  of  his  evil  practices,  no  lizard  was 
found  in  the  spot  indicated,  but  as  it  was  supposed 
during  so  long  a  period  of  time  to  have  been  entirely 
decomposed  by  decay,  all  the  dust  under  the  door 
was  carefully  carried  away,  and  from  that  time  the 
inmates  were  relieved  from  this  severe  visitation 

VOL.    I.  H 


Digitized 


by  Google 


146  SORCEBY  Ain)  MAGia 

They  sometimes  raised  illicit  love  ;*  and  at  others^ 
hindered  the  consummation  of  marriage,  excited 
hatred  between  man  and  wife,  and  raised  dissen- 
sions between  the  dearest  Mends.  They  drove 
horses  mad,  and  made  them  run  away  with  their 
riders.  They  conveyed  away  the  |fl:operty  of  others 
into  their  own  possession ;  though,  in  most  of  the  ex- 
amples cited,  the  property  thus  conveyed  away  con- 
sisted of  articles  of  small  value.  They  made  known 
people's  secrets,  were  endowed  with  the  power  of 
second  sight,  and  were  able  to  foretell  events.  They 
caused  people  to  be  struck  with  lightning,  or  to  be 
visited  with  grievous  diseases ;  and  did  many  other 
"  detestable  things.'"  Their  enmity  appears  to  have 
been  especially  directed  against  little  children. 
There  were  persons  of  both  sexes  who  confessed  to 
having  transformed  themselves  into  wolves  and 
other  ravenous  beasts,  in  order  to  devour  them  more 
at  their  ease.  They  watched  opportunities  of  push- 
ing them  into  rivers  and  wells,  or  of  bringing  upon 
them  other  apparently  accidental  death&  Their  s^ 
petite  for  children  is  said  to  have  been  so  great,  that 
when  they  could  not  get  those  of  other  persons,  they 
would  devour  their  own.  They  watched  more  espe- 
cially  new-born  infants,  which,  if  possible,  they 
killed  before  baptism,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  make 
the  mothers  believe  that  they  had  died  naturally, 
or  been  overlain.    When  buried,  the  witches  dug 

*  This  singular  writer,  among  his  remedies,  indicates  as  the 
most  effective  one  against  the  goadings  of  the  passion  of  love 
in  young  men,  to  frequent  the  company  of  old  women !  Vetu- 
larum  aspectus  et  coUoquia  amorem  excutiunt. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  SWISS  WITOHBS.  147 

the  bodies  out  of  the  graves,  and  carried  them  to 
the  scene  of  their  secret  rites,  where,  with  various 
charms,  they  boiled  them  in  cauldrons,  and  reduced 
them  to  an  unguent,  which  was  one  of  their  most 
efficient  preparations.  The  liquor  in  which  they 
were  boiled  was  drawn  off,  and  carefully  preserved 
in  flasks.  Any  one  who  drank  of  it,  became  in  an 
instant  a  perfect  master  of  the  whole  art  of  magic. 

Such  were  the  Swiss  witches  of  the  beginning  of 
the  fifteenth  century.  The  large  proportion  of  the 
children  which  died  in  the  middle  ages,  from  want 
of  cleanness  and  improper  treatment,  may  account, 
in  some  measure,  for  the  readiness  with  which 
people  believed  in  the  agency  of  witchcraft  to  cause 
their  destruction..  John  Nider  makes  not  the 
slightest  allusion  to  the  witches'  Sabbath  meetings, 
a  circumstance  which  naturally  leads  us  to  suppose 
t^at  this  was  not  then  an  article  of  popular  belief 
in  the  district  with  the  superstitions  of  which  he 
was  acquainted.  They  had  sometimes  meetings  at 
which  the  demon  appeared  in  person,  either  to 
initiate  new  converts,  or  to  obtain  his  aid  in  the 
perpetration  of  some  great  mischief. 

A  young  man,  named  Stadelin,  was  seized  at 
Berne,  on  suspicion  of  being  a  sorcerer,  and  sub- 
mitted to  the  most  cruel  tortures,  until  at  last  he 
was  compelled  to  make  a  confession.  He  gave  the 
following  account  of  the  mode  in  which  a  new  jBor* 
cerer  was  initiated.  He  must  first  in  a  church,  be- 
fore witnesses  who  were  already  of  the  order,  make 
a  full  denial  of  his  faith  and  baptism.  He  was  then 
taken  to  a  meeting,  and  made  to  do  homage  to  the 
"  little  master,''  as  the  demon  was  called.    A  flask 

H  2 


Digitized 


by  Google 


148  80BGEBT  AKB  MAGIC. 

was  next  brought  forth,  and  he  drank  of  the  liquor 
above-mentioned,  after  which,  without  further  in- 
struction, he  became  fully  and  intimately  ac- 
quainted with  the  whole  art,  and  all  the  customs 
and  practices  of  the  sorcerers.  "  I  and  my  wife,'' 
said  Stadelin,  "  were  thus  seduced  and  initiated ; 
but  she,  I  know,  is  too  strongly  possessed  by  the 
evil  one,  and  too  obstinate  in  her  ill  ways,  to  con- 
fess,  although  I  know  that  we  are  both  witches." 
The  inquisitor  ordered  Stadelin  to  be  burnt  because 
he  had  confessed,  and  his  wife  because  she  would 
not  confess :  for  so  far  the  man's  ass^ei^on  was  veri- 
fied, that  the  poor  woman  denied  aU  h«  said,  and 
was  dragged  to  the  stake,  obstinately  persisting  in 
the  declaration  that  she  was  innocent. 

Stadelin  confessed  that  he  had  been  instrumental 
in  perpetrating  much  mischief  by  means  of  thunder 
and  lightning.  The  way,  he  said,  in  which  they 
effected  this,  was  to  go  to  a  place  where  there  were 
cross  roads,  and  there  call  upon  a  demon,  who  im- 
mediately came.  They  then  sacrificed  to  him  a 
black  chicken,  and  made  their  offering  by  tossing  it 
up  in  the  air.  This  was  followed  almost  immedi- 
ately by  a  violent  storm,  which  was  most  destruc- 
tive in  the  places  that  had  been  pointed  out  to  the 
demon's  anger.  It  may  be  observed,  that  the  belief 
that  storms  were  the  work  of  demons,  who  were 
supposed  to  be  present  in  them,  was  universally  cur- 
rent during  the  middle  a^es. 

At  this  period,  the  demons,  contrary  to  their 
practice  in  a  later  age,  seem  to  have  exerted  them- 
selves in  the  defence  of  their  worshippers,  when  the 
latter  were  in  danger  of  falling  into  the  hands  of 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  WITCHES  AND  THE  INQUISIT0B8.  149 

justice.  The  evil  one  generally  used  his  power  to 
enable  his  votaries  to  support  their  tortures  without 
confessing.  When  the  order  was  given  to  arrest 
Stadelin,  the  officers  sent  in  search  of  him  felt  such 
a  sudden  numbness  in  their  hands  and  members, 
that  they  were  a  long  time  before  they  could  take 
hold  of  him. 

The  witches,  at  this  time,  sometimes  counteracted 
each  other,  which,  according  to  the  information 
given  to  John  Nider  by  another  inquisitor,  was 
effected  in  the  following  manner.  A  person  who 
believed  himself  to  be  bewitched,  and  who  desired 
to  take  vengeance  on  the  person  who  had  bewitched 
him,  though  entirely  ignorant  who  was  his  tor- 
mentor, applied  for  this  purpose  to  another  witch, 
and  told  her  his  case.  She  immediately  took  lead, 
melted  it,  and  threw  it  into  a  vessel  of  water,  and, 
by  magical  agency,  it  received  the  rude  shape  of  a 
man.  She  then  said,  "  In  which  member  of  his 
body  will  you  have  me  punish  your  enemy  V  And 
upon  his,  naming  the  member,  she  struck  a  sharp 
instrument  into  the  corresponding  part  of  the  leaden 
figure.  The  inquisitor  assured  John  Nider  that  the 
sorcerer  who  was  the  author  of  the  witchcraft  by 
which  the  complainant  had  been  affected,  never 
failed  to  suffer  in'  the  identical  part  of  the  body 
which  had  been  struck  in  effigy  by  the  witch. 

The  inquisitors  themselves  were  not  always  safe 
from  the  vengeance  of  the  witches.  Peter,  the  in- 
quisitor of  Berne,  told  Nider  that  he  was  obliged  to 
be  constantly  on  his  guard,  for  he  had  been  so  great 
a  persecutor  of  sorcerers,  that  he  knew  they  had 
been  long  watching  for  an  opportunity  of  injuring 


Digitized 


by  Google 


150  SORCERY  AND    MAGIC. 

him.  He,  however,  was  strong  in  faith,  and  he 
signed  himself  with  the  sign  of  the  cross  at  night 
when  he  went  to  his  bed,  and  again  when  he  arose 
in  the  morning.  Once,  however,  the  opportunity, 
long  looked  for,  occurred. 

Peter,  while  holding  the  office  of  judge  ov^r 
Berne,  resided  in  the  castle  of  Blanckenburg,  which, 
on  resigning  his  office,  he  quitted  to  return  to  a 
house  in  the  city ;  but,  one  of  his  own  friends  being 
elected,  his  successor,  he  was  not  an  unfrequent 
visitor  to  the  castle.  One  day  he  went  thither,  aupd, 
in  resigning  himsdif  to  slumber,  he  signed  himself 
as  usual.  It  happened,  however,  that  during  the 
day  he  had  committed  some  oversight  in  his  reli- 
gious duties,  which  took  from  this  ceremony  its 
ordinary  degree  of  efficacy.  It  was  his  intention  to 
rise  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  and  to  pass  an  hour 
or  two  in  writing  some  correspondence  of  an  im- 
portant character.  At  midnight  he  was  disturbed 
from  his  sleep  in  an  unaccountable  manner,  scad 
perceiving  a  light  like  that  of  day,  he  suppoi^d  that 
it  was  morning,  and  that  his  servant  had  forgot  to 
call  him  at  the  time  appointed.  He  rose  from  his 
bed  in  an  ill-humour,  and  went  down  si^irs  to  seek 
his  writing  materials,  but  he  found  that  the  room 
in  which  they  had  been  left  was  locked.  Peter  now 
burst  into  a  great  rage,  and  returned  upstairs  to 
bed,  muttering  maledictions,  but  he  had  hardly  pro- 
nounced the  words  "  in  the  devil's  name  V  (in 
nomine  diaboli),  when  he  suddenly  found  himself  in 
utter  darkness,  amid  dreadful  noises,  and  he  was 
struck  down  with  so  much  force  that  he  remained 
senseless  on  the  steps,  until  his  servant,  who  slept 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THB  DTQUISITOB  PUKI8HBD.  151 

near,  roused  by  the  unusual  noise,  came  to  his 
assistance.  For  a  time,  the  inquisitor  seemed  to  be 
entirely  deprived  of  his  reason,  and  it  was  three 
weeks  before  he  regained  the  perfect  use  of  his 
members. 

The  cause  of  this  singular  visitation  was  acciden* 
tally  brought  to  light  some  time  afterwards.  A 
man  of  Friburg,  who  was  looked  upon  suspiciously 
in  his  own  neighbourhood,  went  on  business  to 
Berne,  and  sat  in  a  tavern,  drinking  with  some  of 
the  citizens.  Suddenly  he  appeared  abstracted,  and 
exclaimed,  *'  I  see  so-and-so  (mentioning  a  man's 
name)  creeping  round  my  house,  and  stealing  the 
lines  I  had  laid  in  the  river  to  catch  fish.''  This 
was  second-sight,  or,  as  the  mesmerist  would  say, 
clairvoyance,  for  the  man's  house  was  distant  about 
six  German  miles,  or,  nearly  thirty  English  miles, 
from  Berne.  The  persons  who  were  sitting  by, 
looked  at  him  with  astonishment ;  and,  after  the 
first  moment  of  surprise,  taking  him  for  a  sorcerer, 
ihey  seized  upon  him,  and  carried  him  before  the 
inquisitor.  The  latter  put  him  to  the  torture 
during  two  days,  without  effect ;  but,  on  the  third, 
which  happened  to  be  the  feast  of  the  Virgin,  he 
made  a  confession,  after  stating  that  the  demon  had 
hindered  him  from  confessing  during  the  two  pre- 
ceding days,  but  that  day,  being  under  the  influ- 
ence of  the  Virgin,  the  fiend  had  lost  his  power. 
Among  other  things,  he  stated  that  he  was  one  of 
four  sorcerers,  who  had  joined  with  a  witch  to  take 
vengeance  on  the  inquisitor,  who,  as  judge  of  Berne, 
had  given  judgment  against  her  in  some  case  which 
had  come  within  his  jurisdiction.     He  said,  that  on 


Digitized 


by  Google 


152  SOECERTAin)  MAGIC. 

such  a  day,  (naming  the  day  on  which  the  inqui- 
sitor had  paid  his  unlucky  visit  to  Blanckenburg,) 
having  learnt  that  the  inquisitor  was  less  on  his 
guard  than  usual,  they  had  met  together  in  a  cer- 
tain field,  and,  by  means  of  sorcery,  had  caused  the 
accident  which  had  fallen  upon  him  in  the  night 
The  inquisitor  gravely  stated,  that  he  did  not  be- 
lieve that  the  individuals  themselves  had  been  per- 
sonally there  to  strike  him,  but  that  the  devil  had 
struck  him,  at  their  bidding. 

From  the  time  of  John  Nider,  the  persecution  of 
witches  in  Germany  increased  in  intensity.  In 
1484,  a  bull  of  the  pope  appointed  inquisitors  for 
this  especial  purpose,  and  the  following  year  they 
burnt  upwards  of  forty,  within  a  small  space  on 
th^  borders  of  Austria  and  Italy.  In  1486,  the 
emperor  Maximilian  L,  then  at  Brussels,  took  the 
papal  inquisitors,  sent  to  put  down  witchcraft  in 
Grermany,  under  his  protection.  Nevertheless,  the 
archduke  Sigismund,  who  was  prince  of  the  Tyrol, 
and  a  man  above  the  ordinary  prejudices  of  his 
time,  at  first  gave  what  protection  he  could  to  the 
miserable  objects  of  persecution;  but  he  was  at 
length  obliged  to  allow  himself  to  be  carried  away 
by  the  popular  torrent.  He  employed  Ulric  Mo- 
litor  to  compose  a  dialogue  on  the  subject,  which 
was  printed  under  the  title  De  Pythonids  Mu- 
Uerihus,  at  Constance,  in  the  beginning  of  1489. 
In  this  tract,  the  archduke  Sigismund,  Ulric  Mo- 
litor,  and  a  citizen  of  Constance,  named  Conrad 
Schak,  are  introduced  as  the  interlocutors,  Sigis- 
mund arguing  against  the  common  belief  In  con- 
clusion, the  witches  are  judged  worthy  of  execution. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  MALLEUS  MALEFICARUM.  153 

although  the  opinions  here  expressed  as  to  witch- 
craft itself  are  by  no  means  those  of  the  inquisitors. 
From  this  time  there  arose  two  parties,   one  of 
which  sustained  that  all  the  crimes  imputed  to  the  i 
witches  were  real  bona  fide  acts,  whilst  the  other  I 
asserted  that  many  of  the  circumstances  to  which  | 
they  were  made  to  confess,  such  as  their  being  ; 
carried  through  the  air,  and  their  presence  at  the  i 
S^^bath,  were  mere  delusions,  produced  on  their ' 
imagination  by  their  master  the  deviL     Both  par- 
ties, however,  agreed  in  general  to  the  condemna- 
tion of  the  offenders. 

Under  the  papal  inquisitors  appointed  by  the 
bull  of  1484,  the  persecution  of  people  accused  of 
withcraft  was  carried  on  with  a  fury  which  can 
only  be  compared  with  what  took  place  in  different 
countries  at  the  latter  part  of  the  end  of  the  follow- 
ing century.  Hundreds  of  wretched  individuals 
were  publicly  burnt  at  the  stake  within  the  space 
of  a  few  years.  As  an  apology  for  these  proceed- 
ings, two  of  the  inquisitors,  Jacob  Sprenger  and 
(as  the  other  is  named  in  Latin)  Henricus  Institor, 
employed  themselves  in  compiling  a  rather  large 
volume  under  the  title  MaMeus  Maleficarum,  which 
was  printed  before  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century. 
In  this  celebrated  work,  the  doctrine  of  witchcraft 
was  first  reduced  to  a  regular  system,  and  it  was 
the  model  and  groundwork  of  all  that  was  written 
on  the  subject  long  after  the  date  which  saw  its 
first  appearance.  Its  writers  enter  largely  into  the 
much-disputed  question  of  the  nature  of  demons ; 
set  forth  the  causes  which  lead  them  to  seduce  men 
in  this  manner ;  and  show  why  women  are  most 

H  5 


Digitized 


by  Google 


154  SORCBBT  AND  MAOICf. 

prone  to  liaten  to  their  proposals,  by  reasons  which 
prove  that  the  inquisitors  had  but  a  mean  estimate 
of  the  softer  sex.  The  inquisitors  show  the  most 
extraordinary  skill  in  explaining  all  the  difficulties 
which  seemed  to  beset  the  subject ;  they  even  prove 
to  their  entire  satisfaction  that  persons  who  have 
become  witches  may  easily  change  themselves  into 
beasts,  particularly  into  wolves  and  cats  ;  and  after 
the  exhibition  of  such  a  mass  of  learning,  few 
would  venture  any  longer  to  entertain  a  doubt 
They  investigate  not  only  the  methods  employed  to 
effect  various  kinds  of  mischief,  but  also  the  counteT'- 
charms  and  exorcisms  that  may  be  used  against 
them.  They  likewise  tell,  from  their  own  expe* 
rience,  the  dangers  to  which  the  inquisitors  were 
exposed,  and  exult  in  the  fact  that  they  were  a 
class  of  men  against  whom  sorcery  had  no  powert 
These  writers  actually  tell  us,  that  the  demon  \sA. 
tried  to  frighten  them  by  day  and  by  night  in  i^ 
forms  of  apes,  dogs,  goats,  &c. ;  and  that  they  frc^ 
quently  found  large  pins  stuck  in  their  nigfat-caps, 
which  they  doubted  not  came  there  by  witchcraft 
When  we  hear  these  inquisitors  asserting  that  the 
crime  of  which  the  witches  were  accused,  deserved 
a  more  extreme  punishment  than  all  the  vilest 
actions  of  which  humanity  is  capable,  we  can  un^ 
derstand  in  some  degree  the  complacency  with 
which  they  relate  how,  by  their  means,  forty  per- 
sons had  been  burnt  in  one  place,  and  fifty  in  an- 
other, and  a  still  greater  number  in  a  third.  From 
the  time  of  the  publication  of  the  Malleus  Malefir 
ca/rwm,  the  continental  press  during. two  or  three 
generations  teemed  with  publications  on  the  all* 
absorbing  subject  of  sorcery. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  WITCH   AHD  THB  WgDMS?g.^^_        US 

One  of  the  points  9ii  whick  opinion  had  differed 
most  was,^«rhether  the  sorcerers  were  carried  bodily 
through  the  air  to  the  place  of  meeting,  or  whether 
it  was  an  imaginary  journey,  suggested  to  their 
minds  by  the  agency  of  the  evil  one.  The  authors 
of  the  MaM$U8  decide  at  once  in  favour  oi  the  bodily 
transmission.  One  of  them  was  personally  ac- 
quainted with  a  priest  of  the  diocese  of  Frisingen, 
who  declared  that  he  had  in  his  younger  days  been 
carried  through  the  air  by  a  demon  to  a  place  at  a 
very  great  distance  from  the  spot  whence  he  had 
been  taken.  Another  priest,  his  friend,  declared 
that  he  had  seen  him  carried  away,  and  that  he 
appeared  to  him  to  be  borne  up  on  a  kind  of  cloud. 
At  Baldshut,  on  the  Rhine,  in  the  diocese  of  Con- 
stance, a  witch  confessed,  that  offended  at  not 
having  been  invited  to  the  wedding  of  an  acquaint- 
ance, she  had  caused  herself  to  be  carried  through 
the  air  in  open  daylight  to  the  top  of  a  neighbour- 
ing mountain,  and  there,  having  made  a  hole  with 
her  hands  and  filled  it  with  water,  she  had,  by 
stirring  the  water  with  certain  incantations,  caused 
a  heavy  storm  to  burst  forth  on  the  heads  of  the 
wedding-party;  and  there  were  witnesses  at  the 
trial  who  swore  they  had  seen  her  carried  through 
the  air.  The  inquisitors,  however,  confess  that  the 
witches  were  sometimes  carried  away,  as  they  term 
it,  in  the  spirit ;  and  they  give  the  instance  Of  one 
woman  who  was  watched  by  her  husband  ;  she  ap- 
peared as  if  asleep,  and  was  insensible,  but  he  per- 
ceived a  kind  of  cloudy  vapour  arise  out  of  her 
mouth,  and  vanish  from  the  room  in  which  she  lay 
— ^this  after  a  time  returned,  and  she  then  awoke, 


Digitized 


by  Google 


JgOBCERY  AND  MAGIC. 

and  gave  an  account  of  her  «47®?^^^u^8,  as  though 
she  had  been  carried  bodily  to  the  asseilkblfr-  -^ 

The  Swiss  and  German  witches  are  represented 
at  this  period  as  ahowing  an  extraordinary  eager- 
ness to  make  converts.  The  neophyte  was  admitted 
either  at  the  great  solemn  assemblies  or  at  smaller 
private  meetings  where  the  demon  was  present — ^he 
or  she  was  obliged  to  deny  faith  in  Christ,  do 
homage  to  the  demon,  and  then  received  from  his 
hands  a  certain  quantity  of  an  unguent,  made  of 
men's  bones  and  the  flesh  of  unbaptised  infants. 
It  was  this  unguent  which,  being  rubbed  on  the 
body,  enabled  the  sorcerer  to  travel  through  the 
air. 

Some  persons,  even  of  the  same  sex,  were  natu- 
rally more  prone  to  become  witches  than  others, 
and  this  was  observed  to  run  in  families,  so  that 
when  a  witch  was  convicted,  all  her  kindred  fell 
under  suspicion,  and  the  number  of  prosecutions 
increased  as  they  went  on.  The  children  of  a  witch 
almost  always  followed  in  the  track  of  their  mother, 
and  they  were  sometimes  endowed  with  the  power 
of  sorcery  long  before  they  arrived  at  an  age  to  im- 
derstand  the  sinfulness  of  their  conduct  The  re- 
verend inquisitors  who  wrote  the  MaUeuSj  tell  us 
of  a  singular  fact  which  had  come  under  their  own 
immediate  notice.  A  farmer  in  Switzerland  was 
walking  out  into  his  fields,  and  bitterly  complain- 
ing of  the  want  of  rain  which  was  rendering  them 
sterile.  A  little  girl  of  only  eight  years  of  age 
accosted  him,  and  said  in  a  playful  manner,  "  You 
need  not  grieve  for  want  of  rain,  for  I  can  give  you 
as  much  as  you  like.'' 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THB  IKYOKEB  OF  RAIir.  157 

The  latter,  in  astonishment,  exclaimed,  "  Who 
taught  thee  to  bring  rain  f 

"  I  learnt  it  from  my  mother/'  was  the  reply. 

"  And  how  do  you  proceed  to  effect  this  object  V 
inquired  the  farmer. 

"  Give  me  some  water,"  said  the  little  girl,  "  and 
I  will  show  yoa" 

The  farmer  took  her  to  a  small  brook  which  was 
near  at  hand.  "  Now,"  said  he,  "  if  you  can,  cause 
rain  to  fall  upon  all  my  fields,  but  upon  those  of  no 
other  person." 

The  little  girl  put  her  hand  in  the  water,  stirred 
it  in  a  particular  manner,  muttering  at  the  same 
time  unintelligible  words,  and  a  plentiful  shower 
fell  upon  the  farmer  s  lands,  as  he  desired.  He  then 
asked  her  if  she  could  produce  hail  or  thunder,  and 
on  her  answering  in  the  affirmative,  he  intimated 
his  wish  to  have  a  sample  of  a  hail-storm  in  one 
field  only.  The  girl  moved  her  hands  more  violently 
in  the  water,  muttering  other  words,  and  a  heavy 
shower  of  hail  followed  immediately.  When  the 
farmer,  still  more  amazed  at  this  instance  of  power 
in  a  child,  inquired  how  she  had  been  taught  to  do 
this,  she  said,  "  My  mother  gave  me  a  master,  and 
he  taught  me.'' 

The  farmer  pressed  her  for  a  further  explanation, 
and  asked  her  if  she  saw  this  master  visibly. 

"  Yes,"  she  said,  "  when  I  am  with  my  mother  I 
see  men  coming  in  and  going  out,  and  these  my 
mother  tells  me  are  our  masters." 

This  innocent  revelation  led  to  the  seizure  of  the 
woman  on  suspicion  of  being  a  witch ;  she  was 
carried  before  the  inquisitors,  put  to  the  torture 


Digitized 


by  Google 


158  SOBCBBT  AND  XAQia 

until  she  confessed,  and  then  burnt  The  child 
was  spared  on  account  of  its  age,  but  as  a  measure 
of  precaution,  it  was  placed  in  a  nunnery. 

The  witches  of  the  Malleus  Maleficarwm  appear 
to  have  been  more  injurious  to  horses  and  cattle 
than  to  mankind.  A  witch  at  Ravenspurg  con- 
fessed that  she  had  killed  twenty-three  horses  by 
sorcery.  We  are  led  to  wonder  most  at  the  ease 
with  which  people  are  brought  to  bear  witness  to 
things  utterly  beyond  the  limits  of  belief.  A  man 
of  the  name  of  Stauff,  in  the  territory  of  Berne,  de- 
clared that  when  pursued  by  the  agents  of  justice, 
he  escaped  by  taking  the  form  of  a  mouse ;  and 
persons  were  found  to  testify  that  they  had  seen 
him  perform  this  transmutation. 

The  latter  part  of  the  work  of  the  two  inquisitors 
gives  minute  directions  for  the  mode  in  which  the 
prisoners  are  to  be  treated,  the  means  to  be  used 
to  force  them  to  a  confession,  the  degree  of  evidence 
required  for  conviction  of  those  who  would  not 
confess,  and  the  whole  process  of  the  trials.  These 
show  sufficiently  that  the  unfortunate  wretch  who 
was  once  brought  before  the  inquisitors  of  the  holy 
see  on  the  suspicion  of  sorcery,  however  slight 
might  be  the  grounds  of  the  charge,  had  very  small 
chance  fit  escaping  out  of  their  claws. 

The  Malleus  contains  no  distinct  allusion  to  the 
proceedings  at  the  Sabbath.  The  witches  of  this 
period  differ  little  from  those  who  had  fallen  into 
the  hands  of  the  earlier  inquisitors  at  the  council 
of  Constance  We  see  plainly  how,  in  most 
countries,  the  mysteriously  indefinite  crime  of  sorcery 
had  first  been  seized  on  to  ruin  the  cause  of  great 
4 


Digitized 


by  Google 


GEBMAV  SOROEBY.  159 

political  .offenders,  until  the  fictitious  importance 
thus  given  to  it  brought  forward  into  a  prominent 
position,  which  they  would,  perhaps,  never  other- 
wise have  held,  the  miserable  class  who  were  sup- 
posed to  be  more  especially  engaged  in  it  It  was 
the  judicial  prosecutions  and  the  sanguinary  execu- 
tions which  followed,  that  stamped  that  character 
of  reality  on  charges  of  which  it  required  two  or 
three  centuries  to  convince  mankind  of  the  empti- 
ness and  vanity.  One  of  the  chief  instruments  in 
fixing  the  belief  in  sorcery,  and  in  giving  it  that 
terrible  hold  on  society  which  it  exhibited  in  the 
following  century,  was  the  compilation  of  Jacob 
Sprenger  and  his  fellow  inquisitor.  In  this  book 
sorcery  was  reduced  to  a  system,  but  it  was  not  yet 
perfect ;  and  we  must  look  forward  some  half  cen- 
tury before  we  find  it  clothed  with  all  the  horrors 
which  cast  so  much  terror  into  every  class  of  so- 
ciety. 


Digitized 


4d  by  Google 


•160 


CHAPTER  IX. 

WITCHCRAFT   IN   SCOTLAND   IN  THE  SIXTEENTH 
CBNTUET. 

It  has  been  already  remarked,  that  the  super- 
stitions connected  with  sorcery  and  magic  had  their 
foundation  in  the  earlier  mythology  of  the  people. 
If  we  would  perceive  this  connexion  more  inti- 
mately, we  have  only  to  turn  our  eyes  towards 
Scotland,  a  country  in  which  this  mythology  had 
preserved  its  sway  over  the  popular  imagination 
much  longer  than  in  the  more  civilized  south.  We 
know  but  little  of  the  Scottish  popular  superstitions 
until  the  sixteenth  century,  when  they  are  found 
in  nearly  the  same  shape  in  which  they  had  ap- 
peared in  England  in  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth 
centuries.  In  Scotland,  witchcraft  had  not  been 
magnified  and  modified  by  the  systematical  pro- 
ceedings of  ecclesiastical  inquisitors,  and  it  is 
therefore  found  in  a  much  less  sophisticated  form 

In  Scotland,  as  in  other  parts  of  Europe,  witch- 
craft first  makes  its  appearance  in  judiciary  pro- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


WITCHES   IN   SCOTLAND.  161 

ceedings  as  an  instrument  of  political  or  personal 
animosity,  and  was  used  where  other  grounds  of 
accusation  were  too  weak  to  effect  the  objects  of 
the  accuser.  In  the  latter  half  of  the  fifteenth 
century,  the  earl  of  Mar,  brother  of  James  III.,  was 
accused  of  consulting  with  witches  and  sorcerers,  in 
order  to  shorten  the  king's  days,  and  he  was  bled 
to  death  in  his  ^wn  lodgings,  without  even  being 
brought  to  a  trial  Twelve  witches,  and  three  or 
four  wizards,  were  subsequently  burnt  at  Edinburgh 
as  his  accomplices.  In  the  century  following,  in 
1532,  a  woman  of  rank  and  beauty,  Janet  Douglas 
lady  Glammis,  was  charged  with  having  caused  the 
death  of  her  first  husband  by  sorcery,  but  escaped, 
to  be  tried  and  burnt,  amid  the  general  commisera- 
tion of  her  countrymen,  for  a  similar  crime  which 
she  was  said  to  have  attempted  against  the  person 
of  James  V.,  with  a  view  to  the  restoration  of  the 
Douglas  family,  the  object  of  James's  special  hatred. 
In  these  executions,  death  ^was  the  punishment 
rather  of  the  treason  than  of  the  sorcery  ;  and  the 
first  simple  case  of  the  latter  which  we  find  in  the 
records  of  the  High  Court  of  Justiciary  in  Scotland, 
is  that  of  Agnes  Mullikine,  alias  Bessie  Boswell,  of 
Dumfermling,  who,  in  1563,  was  "  banished  and 
exiled"  for  withcraft,  a  mild  sentence  which  seldom 
occurs  in  subsequent  times.  The  records  just 
alluded  to,  published  a  few  years  ago  by  Mr.  Robert 
Pitcairn,  will  be  our  chief  guide  in  the  history  of 
sorcery  in  Scotland. 

In  Scotland,  the  witches  received  their  power, 
not  from  the  evil  one,  but  from  the  "  fairy  folk," 
with  whom,  at  least  until  a  late  period,  their  con- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


162  SOBCE&Y  ANP  MAOIC. 

nexion  was  more  innocent,  and  was  characterised 
by  none  of  the  disgusting  particularities  which  dis- 
tinguished the  proceedings  of  their  sisters  on  the 
continent  According  to  an  old  and  popular  ballad 
— as  ancient  perhaps  as  the  fourteenth  century — 
the  celebrated  Thomas  of  Erciidowne  obtained  his 
supposed  skill  in  prophecy  from  his  connexion  with 
the  queen  of  faery.  In  1576,  a  very  extraordinary 
case  was  tried  before  the  high  court,  in  which  the 
chief  actress  was  known  as  Bessie  Dunlop,  a  native 
of  the  county  of  Ayr,  and  wife  of  a  cottager  named 
Andro  Jak.  In  her  confession,  this  woman  stated 
that  she  was  one  day  going  from  her  own  house  to 
the  yard  ol  Monkcastell,  driving  her  cows  to  the 
pasture,  and  weeping  "  for  her  cow  that  was  dead,." 
her  husband  and  child  that  were  both  lying  ill  of 
an  epidemic,  and  herself  newly  risen  from  child- 
bed, when  a  strange  man  met  her  by  the  way,  and 
saluted  her  with  the  words,  "  Gude  day,  Bessi  I" 
She  returned  his  salutation,  and  in  answer  to  his 
inquiries,  told  him  of  her  troubles,  upon  which  he 
informed, her,  that  her  child,  as  well  as  the  sick 
cow,  and  two  of  her  sheep,  would  die,  but  that  her 
"  gude  man''  should  soon  recover,  all  which  took 
place  as  he  foretold.  She  described  her  interrogator 
as  "  ane  honest  wele-elderlie  man,  gray  bairdit 
(bearded),  and  had  ane  gray  coilt  with  Lumbart 
slevis  of  the  auld  fassoun  ;  ane  pair  of  gray  brekis 
(breeches),  and  quhyte  schankis,  gartanit  abone 
the  kne  ;  ane  black  bonet  on  his  heid,  cloise  behind 
and  plane  befoir,  with  silkin  laissis  drawin  throw 
the  lippis  thairof ;  and  ane  quhyte  wand  in  his 
hand."    This  personage  told  her  at  last  that  he  was 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THOME  RBII>  AHB  BESSIE  DUNLOP.  163 

^ne  Thome  Reid,  "  quha  deit  (died),  at  Pinkye." 
(Sept  10,  1547).  And  this  account  was  confirmed 
bj  the  manner  in  which  he  disappeared  through 
the  yard  of  Monkcastell — "  I  thocht  he  gait  in  at 
ane  narroware  hoill  of  the  dyke,  nor  ony  erdlie  man 
culd  haif  gaiie  throw ;  and  swa  I  was  sumthing 
fleit  (aghast)"  It  appears  that  Thome  Reid  had 
been  a  tumed-off  servant  of  ike  laird  of  Blair,  and 
Bessie  Diinlop  was  once  sent  on  a  message  to  his 
son,  who  inherited  his  name,  and  had  succeeded  to 
his  place  in  the  household  of  the  laird  of  Blair, 
and  who  fully  confirmed  Thome's  story,  that  he  had 
gone  to  the  battle  of  Pinkye,  and  fallen  in  that  dis- 
astrous conflict 

•  The  next  time  Thome  Reid  appeared  to  Bessie, 
as  she  was  going  between  her  own  house  and  the 
thorn  of  Dawmstamok,  and  he  then  declared  more 
openly  his  ultimate  designs.  After  remaining  some 
time  with  her,  Thome  asked  her  pointedly  if  she 
would  believe  in  him,  to  which  she  replied  with 
great  rhaivet^,  "  She  would  believe  in  anybody  who 
did  her  good.''  Thome  had  hitherto  q)oken  like  a 
good  Christian,  and  at  their  first  interview  he  had 
addressed  her  in  the  name  of  the  Blessed  Vii^n, 
but  now,  encouraged  by  her  answer,  he  boldly  pro- 
posed to  her  that  she  should  "  deny  her  Cristendom, 
and  the  faith  she  took  at  the  baptismal  font,"  in  re- 
turn for  which  she  should  have  goods  and  horses 
and  cows  in  abundance,  besides  other  advantages 
This,  however,  she  refused  indignantly,  and  her 
tempter  went  away,  "  something  angry"  with  her. 

Thome's  visits  generally  occurred  at  mid-day,  not 
at  the  still  hour  of  night,  and  he  seemed  little  embar- 
rassed  by  the  presence  of  other  company.    Shortly 


Digitized 


by  Google 


164  SOROBBT  AND  MAQIO. 

after  the  interview  just  mentioned,  he  visited  her 
in  her  own  house,  where  she  was  in  company  with 
her  husband  and  three  tailors,  and,  unseen  by  these, 
he  took  her  by  the  apron  and  led  her  to  the  door, 
and  she  followed  him  up  to  the  "  hill-end,''  and 
there  he  told  her  to  remain  quiet  and  speak  not, 
whatever  she  might  hear  and  see.  She  then  ad- 
vanced a  little,  and  suddenly  saw  twelve  persons, 
eight  women  and  four  men — "  the  men  were  clad 
in  gentlemen's  clothing,  and  the  women  had  all 
plaids  round  about  them,  and  were  very  seemly  like 
to  see,  and  Thome  was  with  them."  They  bade  her 
sit  down,  and  said,  "  Welcome,  Bessie,  wilt  thou 
go  with  us  V  but,  as  she  had  been  warned,  she  re- 
turned no  answer,  and,  after  holding  a  consultation 
amongst  themselves,  which  she  did  not  hear,  they 
disappeared  in  a  "  hideous"  whirlwind.  Shortly 
afterwards  Thoine  returned,  and  told  her  the  per- 
sons she  had  seen  were  the  "  good  wights,"  who 
dwelt  in  the  court  of  Elfen,  who  came  there  to  in- 
vite her  to  go  with  them,  and  he  repeated  the  invi- 
tation very  pressingly,  but  she  answered  that  "  She 
saw  no  profit  to  gang  that  kind  of  gates,  unless  she 
knew  wherefore." 

Then  he  said,  "  Seest  thou  not  me,  worth  meat 
and  worth  clothes,  and  good  enough  like  in  per- 
son ?"  and  he  promised  to  make  her  far  better  off 
than  ever  she  was. 

Her  answer,  however,  was  still  the  same — ^she 
dwelt  with .  her  own  husband  and  "  bairns,"  and 
CQuld  not  leave  them — and  so  he  "  began  to  be 
yery  crabbed  with  her,"  and  told  her  that  if  she 
continued  in  that  mind  she  would  get  little  good 
of  him.    His  anger,  however,  appears  to  have  soon 


Digitized 


by  Google 


BESSIE   AKD  THE  FAIBIES.  165 

subsided,  and  he  continued  to  come  at  her  call,  and 
give  her  his  advice  and  assistance,  always  treating 
her  with  respect,  for  she  declared  that  the  greatest 
liberty  he  had  taken  with  her  was  to  draw  her  by 
the  apron  when  he  would  persuade  her  to  go  with 
him  to  fairyrland.  She  said  that  she  sometimes 
saw  him  in  public  places,  as  in  Edinburgh  streets 
on  a  market-day,  aud  that  on  one  occasion,  when 
she  was  "  gone  a-field"  with  her  husband  to  Leith, 
she  went  to  tie  her  nag  to  the  stake  by  Restalrig 
loch,  and  there  came  suddenly  a  company  of  riders 
by  "  that  made  a  din  as  though  heaven  and  earth 
had  gone  together,'"  and  immediately  they  rode  into 
the  loch  with  a  "  hideous  rumble/'  Thome  came 
to  her  and  told  her  that  it  was  the  "  good  wights," 
who  were  taking  their  ride  in  this  world.  On 
another  occasion  Thome  told  her  the  reason  of  his 
visits  to  her ;  he  called  to  her  remembrance  that 
one  day  when  she  was  ill  in  child-bed,  and  near 
her  time  of  delivery,  a  stout  woman  came  in  to  her, 
and  sat  down  on  the  form  beside  her,  and  asked  a 
drink  of  her,  and  she  immediately  gave  it ;  this  he 
said  was  his  mistress,  the  queen  of  Elfen,  who  had 
commanded  him  to  wait  upon  her  and  "  do  her 
good/' 

The  whole  extent  of  Bessie  Dunlop's  witchcraft 
consisted  in  curing  diseases  and  recovering  stolen 
property,  which  she  did  by  the  agency  of  her  un- 
earthly visitor,  who  gave  her  medicines,  or  showed 
her  how  to  prepare  them.  Some  of  her  statements 
appear  to  have  been  confirmed  by  other  witnesses  ; 
and  however  we  may  judge  of  the  connexion  be- 
tween Thome  Reid  and  Bessie  Dunlop,  it  is   ren- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


166  SOBOBBT  AND  MAQIC. 

dered  certain  by  the  entry  in  the  court  records, 
that  the  unfortunate  woman  was  "  convict  and 
brynt" 

From  thi&  time  cases  of  witchcraft  occur  more 
frequently  in  the  judicial  records,  and  they  become 
exceedingly  numerous  as  we  approach  the  end  of 
the  century,  still,  however,  distinguished  by  their 
purely  Scottish   character.     A   remarkable  case  is 
recorded  in  the  memorable  year  1588,  which  has 
several  points   of   resemblance  with  the  story  of 
Bessie  Dunlop.     The  heroine  was  Alison  Peirsoun, 
of  Byrehill,  whose  connexion  with  "  faerie''  origi- 
nated with  her  kinsman,  William   Sympsoune,  a 
"  great  scholar  and  doctor  of  medicine/'     He  was 
bom  at  Stirling,  his  father  being  the  king's  smith, 
but  he  "  was  taken  away  from  his  father  by  a  man 
of  Egypt,  a  giant,  while  but  a  child,  who  led  him 
away  to  Egypt  with  him,  where  he  remained  by  the 
space  of  twelve  years  before  he  came  home  again." 
During  this  time  his  father,  who  also  appears  to 
have  had  a  hankering  after  unlawful  knowledge, 
died  "  for  opening  a  priest's  book  and  looking  upon 
it."       On   his  return   home,  Alison  Peirsoun  be- 
came intimate  with  her  kinsman,  who  cured  her  of 
certain  diseases,  until,  as  it  would  appear,  he  died 
also.     One   day,  as   she   stated,   being  in   Grange 
Muir,  with  the  people  that  passed  to  the  muir 
(moor),  she  lay  down  sick  and  alone,  when  she  was 
suddenly  accosted  by  a  man  clad  in  green  clothes, 
who  told  her  that  if  she  would  be  faithful,  he  would 
do  her  good.     She  was  at  first  terrified,  and  cried 
for  help,  but  no  one  hearing  her,  she  addressed  her 
in   God's  name,  upon  which  he  immediately  dis- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


ALISON  PSIBSOUK.  167 

appeared.  But  he  soon  afterwards  appeared  to  her 
again,  accompanied  with  *'  many  men  and  women,'' 
and  she  was  obliged  to  go  with  them,  and  they  had 
with  them  '^  piping  and  merriment,  and  good 
cheer ;"  and  she  was  thus  carried  to  Lothian,  where 
they  found  puncheons  of  wine  with  drinking^cups. 
From  this  time  she  constantly  haunted  the  com- 
pany of  tiie  "  good'  neighbours"  (fairies),  and  the 
queen  of  Elfen,  at  whose  cou^  she  was  a  frequent 
visitor,  and  she  boasted  that  she  had  many  friends 
there,  among  whom  was  the  aforesaid  William 
Sympsoune,  who  was  most  familiar  with  her,  and 
from  whom  chiefly  she  derived  her  skill  in  curing 
diseases.  She  declared  that  her  familiarity  with 
the  fairies  was  so  great,  that  she  was  allowed  to  see 
them  "  make  their  salves,  with  pans  and  fires,  and 
that  they  gathered*  their  herbs  before  sun-rising,  as 
she  did."  The  archbishop  of  St.  Andrews,  a  scholar 
and  profound  divine,  had  condescended  to  seek  the 
assistance  of  this  woman  in  a  dangerous  illness,  for 
which  he  was  made  an  object  of  severe  satire  by 
his  political  enemies ;  she  caused  him  to  eat  a 
sodden  fowl,  and  take  a  quart  of  claret  wine  mixed 
with  her  drugs,  which  the  worthy  prelate  drank  off 
at  two  draughts  !  Alison,  in  the  course  of  her  ex- 
amination, gave  many  curious  anecdotes  of  the 
fairy  people,  with  whom  she  was  sometimes  on 
better  terms  than  at  others ;  among  them  she  saw 
several  of  her  acquaintance,  who  had  been  carried 
to  Elfland,  when  their  friends  imagined  they  were 
dead  and  gone  to  heaven ;  and  she  learnt  from  her 
kinsman,  Sympsoune,  that  a  tithe  of  them  was 
yearly  given  up  to  hell,  and  had  been  warned-  by 


Digitized 


by  Google 


168  SOBCSBT   AND   MAGIC. 

t 

him  from  time  to  time  not  to  go  with  them  at  cer- 
tain periods,  lest  she  should  be  made  one  of  the 
number.  This  woman  also  was  convicted  and  burnt 
(convicta  et  comJmsta). 

The  next  case,  or  rather  two  cases,  of  witchcraft 
in  the  Scottish  annals,  is  of  a  more  fearful  and 
more  criminal  character  than  either  of  the  preceding. 
The  chief  persons  implicated  were  Katherine  Munro 
lady  Fowlis,  wife  of  the  chief  of  the  clan  of  Munro, 
and  Hector  Munro,  the  son  of  the  baron  of  Fowlis 
by  a  former  wife.  The  lady  Fowlis  was  by  birth 
Katharine  Ross  of  Balnagown  ;  and,  in  consequence 
of  family  quarrels  and  intrigues,  she  had  laid  a  plot 
to  make  away  with  Robert  Munro,  her  husband's 
eldest  son,  in  order  that  his  widow  might  be  married 
to  her  brother,  George  Ross,  laird  of  Balnagown, 
preparatory  to  which  it  was  also  necessary  to  effect 
the  death  of  the  young  lady  Balnagown.  The  open 
manner  in  which  the  proceedings  of  lady  Fowlis 
were  carried  on,  affords  a  remarkable  picture  of  the 
barbarous  state  of  society  among  the  Scottish  clans 
at  this  period.  Among  her  chief  agents  were  Agnes 
Roy,  Christiane  Ross,  and  Marjory  Neyne  Mac  Al- 
lester,  the  latter  better  known  by  the  name  of 
Loskie  Loncart,  and  all  three  described  as  "  noto- 
rious witches;"  another  active  individual  was  named 
William  Mac  Gillevordame  ;  and  there  were  a  num- 
ber of  other  subordinate  persons  of  very  equivocal 
characters.  As  early  as  the  midsummer  of  1576,  it 
appears  from  the  trial  that  Agnes  Roy  was  sent  to 
bring  Loskie  Loncart  to  consult  with  lady  Fowlis, 
who  was  advised  "  to  go  into  the  hills  to  speak  with 
the  Elf-folk,''  and  learn  from  them  if  Robert  Munro 


Digitized 


by  Google 


LADY    FOWLIS  AND   EOBBET  MUNRO.  169 

and  lady  Balnagown  would  die,  and  if  the  laird  of 
Balnagown  would  marry  Robert's  widow ;  and 
about  the  same  time,  these  two  women  made  clay 
images  of  the  two  individuals  who  were  to  die,  for 
the  purpose  of  bewitching  them.  Poison  was  also 
adopted  as  a  surer  means  of  securing  their  victims, 
and  the  cook  of  the  laird  of  Balnagown  was  bribed 
to  their  interests.  The  deadly  ingredients  were  ob- 
tained by  William  Mac  Gillevordame,  at  Aberdeen, 
under  pretence  of  buying  poison  for  rats ;  it  was 
administered  by  the  cook  just  mentioned,  in  a  dish 
sent  to  the  lady  Balnagown's  table,  and  another  ac- 
complice, who  was  present,  declared  "  that  it  was 
the  sairest  and  maist  cruell  sicht  that  evir  scho  saw, 
seing  the  vomit  and  vexacioun  that  was  on  the 
young  lady  Balnagown  and  hir  company.'*  How- 
ever, although  the  victim  was  thrown  into  a  misera- 
ble and  long-lasting  ilness,  the  poison  did  not  pro- 
duce immediate  death,  as  was  expected.  From  va- 
rious points  in  the  accusation,  it  appears  that  the 
conspirators  were  actively  employed  in  devising 
means  of  effecting  their  purpose  from  the  period 
mentioned  above  till  the  Easter  of  the  following 
year,  by  which  time  the  deadly  designs  of  the  lady 
Fowlis  had  become  much  more  comprehensive,  and 
she  aimed  at  no  less  than  the  destruction  of  all  the 
former  family  of  her  husband,  that  their  inheritance 
might  fall  to  her  own  children.  In  May,  1577,  Wil- 
liam Mac  Gillevordame  was  asked  to  procure  a  greater 
quantity  of  poison,  the  preceding  dose  having  been 
insufficient ;  but  he  refused,  unless  her  brother,  the 
laird  of  Balnagown,  were  made  privy  to  it ;  a  diffi- 
culty which  was  soon  got  over,  and  it  appears  that 

VOL.    I.  I 


Digitized 


by  Google 


170  80ECBET   AND   MAGIC. 

the  laird  was,  to  a  certain  degree,  acquainted  with 
their  proceedings.  A  potion  of  a  much  more  deadly 
character  was  now  prepared,  and  two  individuals, 
the  nurse  of  the  lady  Fowlis  and  a  boy,  were  killed 
by  accidentally  tasting  of  it ;  but  we  are  not  told  if 
any  of  the  intended  victims  fell  a  sacrifice.  The 
conspirators  had  now  again  recourse  to  witchcraft, 
and  in  the  June  of  1577,  a  man  obtained  for  the 
lady  Fowlis  an  "  elf  arrow-head,"  for  which  she 
gave  him  four  shillings.  The  "  elf  arrow-head"  was 
nothing  more  than  one  of  those  small  rude  weapons 
of  flint,  belonging  to  a  primeval  state  of  society, 
which  are  often  met  with  in  turning  up  the  soil, 
and  which  the  superstitious  peasantry  of  various 
countries  have  looked  upon  as  the  offensive  arms  of 
fairies  and  witches.  On  the  2nd  and  6th  of  July, 
lady  Fowlis  and  her  accomplices  held  two  secret 
meetings  ;  at  the  first  they  made  an  image  of  butter, 
to  represent  Robert  Munro,  and  having  placed  it 
against  the  wall  of  the  chamber,  Loskie  Loncart 
shot  at  it  eight  times  with  the  elf  arrow-head,  but 
always  missed  it ;  and  at  the  second  meeting  they 
made  a  figure  of  clay  to  represent  the  same  person, 
at  which  Loskie  shot .  twelve  times,  but  with  no 
better  success,  in  spite  of  all  their  incantations. 
This  seems  to  have  been  a  source  of  great  disap- 
pointment, for  they  had  brought  fine  linen  cloth,  in 
which  the  figures,  if  struck  by  the  elf  arrow-head, 
were  to  have  been  wrapped,  and  so  buried  in  the 
earth  at  a  place  which  seems  to  have  been  conse- 
crated by  superstitious  feeling,  and  this  ceremony 
was  to  have  insured  Robert  Munro's  death.  In  An 
gust,  another  elf  arrow-head  was  obtained,  and  to- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


LADY   FOWLIS   AND  BOBEET   MUNBO.  I7l 

wards  Hallowmass  another  meeting  was  held,  and 
two  figures  of  clay  made,  one  for  Robert  Munro  and 
the  other  for  the  lady ;  lady  Fowlis  shot  two  shots 
at  lady  Balnagown,  and  Loskie  Loncart  shot  three 
at  Robert  Munro,  but  neither  of  them  were  success- 
ful, and  the  two  images  were  accidentally  broken, 
and  thus  the  charm  was  destroyed.  They  now  pre- 
pared to  try  poison  again,  but  Christiane  Ross,  who 
had  been  present  at  the  last  meeting,  was  arrested 
towards  the  end  of  November,  and,  being  put  to  the 
torture,  made  a  full  confession,  which  was  followed 
by  the  seizure  of  some  of  her  accomplices,  several  of 
whom,  as  well  as  Christiane  Ross,  were  "  convicted 
and  burnt"  The  lady  Fowlis  fled  to  Caithness,  and 
remained  there  nine  months,  after  which  she  was  al- 
lowed to  return  to  her  home.  Her  husband  died  in 
1588,  and  was  succeeded  by  Robert  Munro,  who  ap- 
pears to  have  revived  the  old  charge  of  witchcraft 
against  his  stepmother ;  for  in  1589  he  obtained  a 
commission  for  the  examination  of  witches,  among 
whose  names  were  those  of  lady  Fowlis  and  some 
of  her  surviving  accomplices.  She  appears  to  have 
warded  off  the  danger  by  her  influence  and  money 
for  some  months,  until  July  22,  1590,  when  she  was 
brought  to  her  trial,  her  accuser  being  Hector 
Munro.  This  trial  offered  one  of  the  first  instances 
of  acquittal  of  the  charge  of  sorcery,  and  it  has 
been  observed  that  there  are  reasons  for  thinking 
the  case  was  brought  before  a  jury  packed  for  that 
purpose. 

It  is  somewhat  remarkable,  that  while  the  lady 
Fowlis  was  thus  attempting  the  destruction  of  her 
step-children,  they  were  trying  to   effect,   by  the 

I  2 


Digitized 


by  Google 


172  SOECEET   AND   MAGIC. 

same  means,  the  death  of  her  own  son.  Imme- 
diately after  her  acquittal,  on  the  same  day,  the  22nd 
of  July,  1590,  Hector  Munro  (her  accuser)  was  put 
on  his  trial  before  a  jury  composed  of  nearly  the 
same  persons,  for  practising  the  same  crime  of  sor- 
cery. It  is  stated  in  the  charge  that,  when  his  bro- 
ther Robert  Munro  had  been  grievously  ill  in  the 
summer  of  1588,  Hector  Munro  had  assembled 
"  three  notorious  and  common  witches,''  to  devise 
means  to  cure  him,  and  had  given  harbour  to  them 
several  days,  until  he  was  compelled  to  dismiss  them 
by  his  father,  who  threatened  to  apprehend  them. 
Subsequent  to  this,  in  January,  1588,  (t.  e.  1589 
according  to  the  modern  reckoning,)  Hector  became 
himself  suddenly  ill,  upon  which  he  sent  one  of  his 
men  to  seek  a  woman  named  Marion  Mac  Ingaruch, 
"  ane  of  the  maist  notorious  and  rank  witches  in  all 
this  realme,''  and  she  was  brought  to  the  house  in 
which  he  was  lying  sick.  After  long  consultation, 
and  having  given  him  "  three  drinks  of  water  out 
of  three  stones  which  she  had,''  she  declared  that 
there  was  no  remedy  for  him,  unless  the  principal 
man  of  his  blood  should  suffer  death  for  him.  They 
then  held  further  counsel,  and  came  at  last  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  person  who  must  thus  be  his 
substitute  was  George  Munro,  the  eldest  son  of  the 
lady  Fowlis,  whose  trial  has  just  been  described. 
The  ceremonies  which  followed  are  some  of  the 
most  extraordinary  in  the  whole  range  of  the  his- 
tory of  these  dark  superstitions.  Messengers  were 
sent  out  to  seek  George  Munro,  the  intended  victim, 
in  every  direction,  and  he,  "  as  a  loving  brother," 
suspecting  no  evil,  came  to  where  Hector  lay,  on  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


WIBRD    PRACTICES   OP  THE   MUNROS.  173 

fifth  day.  By  the  express  direction  of  the  witch, 
the  latter  was  to  allow  none  to  enter  the  house  until 
after  his  brother's  arrival;  he  was  to  receive  his 
brother  in  silence,  give  him  his  left  hand  and  take 
him  by  the  right  hand,  and  not  speak  till  he  had 
first  spoken  to  him.  Hector  Munro  followed  these 
instructions  to  the  letter ;  George  Munro  was  asto- 
nished at  the  coldness  of  his  reception,  compared 
with  the  pressing  manner  in  which  he  had  been  in- 
vited, and  he  remained  in  the  room  an  hour  before 
he  uttered  a  word.  Greorge  at  last  asked  him  how 
he  did,  to  which  Hector  replied,  "  the  better  that 
you  have  come  to  visit  me,''  and  then  relapsed  into 
his  former  silence.  This,  it  appears,  was  a  part  of 
the  spelL  At  one  o'clock  the  same  night,  Marion 
Mac  Ingaruch,  the  presiding  sorceress,  with  certain 
of  her  accomplices,  provided  themselves  with  spades, 
and  went  to  a  piece  of  earth  at  the  seaside,  lying 
between  the  boundaries  of  the  lands  of  two  proprie- 
tors, and  dug  a  grave  proportionate  to  the  size  of 
the  sick  man,  and  took  off  the  sod.  She  then  re- 
turned to  the  house,  and  carefully  instructed  each 
of  the  persons  concerned  in  the  part  they  were  to 
perform  in  the  ceremonies  which  were  to  transfer 
the  fate  of  Hector  Munro  to  his  brother  George. 
The  friends  of  Hector,  who  were  in  the  secret,  re- 
presented that  if  George  should  die  suddenly,  sus- 
picion would  fall  upon  them  all,  and  their  lives 
would  be  in  danger,  and  wished  her  to  delay  his 
death  "  a  space ;"  and  she  took  on  hand  to  "  war- 
rant him  unto  the  17th  day  of  April  next  there- 
after." They  then  took  the  sick  man  from  his  bed, 
and  carried  him  in  a  pair  of  blankets  to  the  grave,  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


174  SOBCEBT  AND   MAGIC. 

assistants  being  forbidden  to  utter  a  word  until  the 
witch  and  his  foster-mother,  named  Christiana  Neill 
Dayzill,had  first  spoken  with  "theirmaster,  the  devil'' 
Hector  was  then  placed  in  the  grave,  and  the  green 
sod  laid  over  him,  and  held  down  upon  him  with 
staves,  and  the  chief  witch  took  her  stand  beside 
him.  The  foster-mother,  leading  a  young  lad  by 
the  hand,  then  ran  the  breadth  of  nine  ridges,  and 
on  her  return  inquired  of  the  hag  "  which  was  her 
choice  ?"  to  which  she  replied  that  "  Hector  was  her 
choice  to  live,  and  his  brother  George  to  die  for 
him."  This  strange  form  of  incantation  was  repeated 
thrice,  and  then  the  patient  was  taken  from  the 
grave,  and  carried  home  to  his  bed  in  the  same 
silence  which  had  distinguished  the  first  part  of  the 
ceremony.  The  effects  of  an  exposure  to  the  cold  of 
a  January  night  in  the  north  on  a  sick  man  must 
have  been  very  serious ;  but  Hector  recovered  soon 
afterwards,  and  in  the  month  of  April,  as  foretold, 
George  Munro  was  seized  with  a  mortal  disease, 
under  which  he  lingered  till  the  month  of  June, 
when  he  died.  Hector  Munro  took  the  witch  into 
great  favour,  carried  her  to  the  house  of  his  uncle 
at  "  Kildrummadyis,''  where  she  was  "  entertained 
as  if  she  had  been  his  spouse,  and  gave  her  such 
pre-eminence  in  the  country  that  there  was  none 
that  durst  offend  her,  and  gave  her  the  keeping  of 
his  sheep,  to  colour  the  matter."  After  the  death 
of  George,  the  affair  was  whispered  abroad,  and  an 
order  was  issued  for  the  arrest  of  the  witch,  but  she 
was  concealed  by  Hector  Munro,  until  information 
was  given  by  lady  Fowlis  that  she  was  in  the  house 
at  Fowlis.    When  subjected  to  an  examination,  and 


Digitized 


by  Google 


WITCHCEAPT   IKCEBASES   IN   SCOTLAND.  175 

no  doubt  to  the  torture,  she  made  a  confession,  and 
was  probably  burnt  Her  confession  was  the  ground 
of  the  charge  against  Hector  Munro,  who,  like  his 
step-mother,  was  acquitted. 

The  trials  of  lady  Fowlis  and  Hector  Munro  ap- 
pear to  have  caused  much  excitement,  and  other 
cases  of  witchcraft  followed  with  fearful  rapidity  in 
different  parts  of  the  country,  to  such  a  degree  that 
they  moved  the  learned  superstition  of  the  king, 
who  from  this  period  began  to  take  an  extraordi- 
nary interest  in  prosecutions  for  crimes  of  this  de- 
scription. King  James's  example  was  not  lost  upon 
his  subjects,  and  not  only  did  they  show  redoubled 
diligence  in  seeking  out  offenders,  but  probably 
cases  were  made  up  to  gratify  his  curiosity,  until  a 
fearful  conspiracy  between  the  hags  and  the  evil 
one  was  discovered,  of  which  the  king  himself  was 
to  have  been  the  chief  victim,  and  which  will  be  re- 
lated at  full  in  our  next  chapter.  The  interference 
of  king  James  not  only  marks  an  epoch  in  the  his- 
tory of  sorcery  in  Scotland,  but  it  had  also  an  influ- 
ence in  modifying  the  belief  by  the  introduction  of 
the  scientific  demonology  of  France  and  Germany. 
In  the  conspiracy  to  which  I  have  just  alluded,  we 
shall  see  many  foreign  notions  mixed  with  the  na- 
tive superstitions. 

For  two  or  three  subsequent  years,  the  records  of 
the  high  court  are  unfortunately  missing,  but  in 
1596  we  find  several  prosecutions  for  the  practice 
of  witchcraft,  of  which  persons  of  high  rank  believed 
themselves,  or  were  believed  to  be,  the  victims.  On 
the  24th  of  June,  John  Stewart,  the  master  of 
Orkney,  was  accused,  on  the  confession  of  certain 


Digitized 


by  Google 


176  SORCERY   AND  MAGIC. 

witches  who  had  previously  been  condemned  and 
burnt,  of  having  employed  them  to  compass  the 
death  of  Patrick  earl  of  Orkney  ;  but  he  alleged  in 
his  defence  that  the  confessions  had  been  extorted 
by  extreme  torture,  and  had  afterwards  been  con- 
tradicted by  the  sufferers  as  they  were  carried  to 
the  stake,  and  he  was  acquitted  by  the  jury.  On 
the  30th  of  October,  a  woman  named  Alison  JoUie 
was  tried  for  the  same  crime  of  employing  a  witch 
to  cause  the  death  of  a  woman  with  whom  she  had 
quarrelled,  grounded  on  the  confession  of  the  witch, 
and  was  also  acquitted.  Another  woman,  named 
Christian  Stewart,  tried  on  the  27th  of  November 
for  compassing  the  death  of  one  of  the  powerful 
family  of  the  Ruthvens  by  witchcraft,  was  less  for- 
tunate, for  she  was  judged  "  to  be  tane  to  the  Cas- 
tle-hill and  thair  to  be  burnt." 

In  1597,  we  have  another  case  bearing  some  re- 
semblance to  those  of  Bessie  Dunlop  and  Alison 
Peirsoun.  The  healing  art  had  been  during  the 
middle  ages  practised  by  all  sorts  of  quacks  and 
unskilful  pretenders,  who  made  use  of  certain  pre- 
parations of  herbs  and  some  other  ingredients,  but 
depended  more  for  their  success  on  the  superstitious 
observances  with  which  they  were  gathered,  pre- 
pared, or  applied.  In  order  to  gain  more  credit  for 
their  remedies,  they  pretended  to  receive  their 
knowledge  from  an  intercourse  with  the  spiritual 
world.  It  was  a  part  of  the  education  of  every  good 
housewife  in  former  days  to  understand  the  use  of 
medicines,  and  most  women  were,  more  or  less,  ac- 
quainted with  the  mode  of  preparing  them.  Most 
JO  the  remedies  which  are  mentioned  in  the  trials  as 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   WITCHES   OF   HADDINGTON.  177 

used  by  Bessie  Dunlop,  Alison  Peirsoun,  and  others, 
are  found  in  the  old  medieval  receipt-books.  On 
the  12th  of  November,  in  the  year  last  mentioned, 
four  miserable  women,  Jonet  Stewart,  Christian 
Lewingstoun,  Bessie  Aiken,  and  Christian  Saidler, 
were  brought  to  their  trial  for  various  alleged  acts 
of  witchcraft  Christian  Lewingstoun  was  accused 
of  having  bewitched  a  baker  of  Haddington  by 
burying  a  small  bag  full  of  worsted  thread,  hairs  and 
nails  of  men,  and  other  articles,  under  his  stairs, 
then  pretending  that  the  witchcraft  was  the  work  of 
another,  and  undertaking  to  relieve  him  from  it. 
In  this  we  can  see  little  more  than  a  dishonest  trick 
to  extort  money ;  but  she  pretended  to  further 
knowledge,  and  the  baker  s  wife  being  with  child  at 
the  time,  she  told  her  that  she  would  give  birth  to 
a  boy,  which  happened  accordingly.  When  asked 
whence  she  derived,  her  knowledge,  she  said  that  she 
had  a  daughter  who  was  carried  away  by  the  "  fairy 
folk,"  and  from  her  she  had  her  knowledge.  She 
was  accused  after  this,  with  the  other  women 
as  accomplices,  of  the  superstitious  treatment  of  va- 
rious sick  persons,  besides  some  other  transactions 
not  more  honest  than  her  treatment  of  the  baker  of 
Haddington.  Jonet  Stewart  was,  on  one  occasion, 
called  to  a  woman  who  was  "  deadly  sick  ;"  she  took 
off  the  sick  woman's  shirt  and  her  "  mutche,"  (cap,) 
and  carried  them  to  a  stream  which  ran  towards  the 
south,  and  washed  them  in  it,  and  made  the  patient 
put  them  on  dripping  wet,  and  said  thrice  over  her, 
**  In  the  name  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost,"  and  then  put  a  red-hot  iron  in  the  water  ^ 
and  burnt  straw  at  each  "  newke"  of  the  bed.     This 

I  5 


Digitized 


by  Google 


178  SORCBBY  AND   MAGIC. 

was  a  primitive  sort  of  "  cold-water  cure/'     She 
healed  several  women  of  another  disease,  by  passing 
them  thrice  through  a  garland  of  green  wood-bind, 
which  she  afterwards  cut  in  nine  pieces,  and  cast  in 
the  fire.     Wood-bind  appears  to  have  been  a  favou- 
rite remedy  in  a  variety  of  cases.     Bessie  Aiken 
cured  most  of  her  patients  by  passing  them  nine 
times  through  a  "  girth''  of  wood-bind,  in  the  name 
of  the  three  persons  of  the  Holy  Trinity.     For  a  wo- 
man labouring  under  a  pain  in  the  loins,  she  took  a 
decoction  of  red-nettles  and  herb  Alexander,  and 
bathed  the  part  with  it,  and  then  boiled  herb  Alex- 
ander with  fresh  butter,   and  rubbed  her  with  it, 
and  then  passed  her  nine  times  through  the  girth 
of  wood-bind,   at  three  several  times,  a  space  of 
twenty-four  hours  being  allowed  to  elapse  between 
each.     Other  similar  practices  are  recounted ;  and 
the  four  women  were  finally  condemned  "  to   be 
taken  to  the  Castle-hill  at  Edinburgh,  and  there  to 
be  strangled  at  a  stake  till  they  died,  and  their 
bodies  to  be  burnt  to  ashes  ;"   a  sentence  which  was 
duly  executed  on  three  of  them.     But  Bessie  Aiken 
pleaded  that  she  was  with  child,  and  she  was  allow- 
ed to  languish  in  prison  until  the  15  th  of  August,  - 
1598,  when  the  king,  moved  with,  for  him,  an  un- 
usual degree  of  clemency,  in  consideration  that  she 
was  "  delyverit  of  ane  infant,  and  hes  sustenit  lang 
puneischment  be  famine  and  impreisment,"  com- 
muted her  original  sentence  for  perpetual  banish- 
ment. 

We  have  thus  traced  the  history  of  witchcraft  in 
Scotland  to  the  close  of  the  sixteenth  century,  down 
to  which  time  it  had  preserved  its  national  charaor 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   GOWBY   CONSPIRACY.  179 

ter,  altogether  differing  from  the  superstitions  which 
prevailed  on  the  continent  in  the  same  age.  In 
Scotland,  witchcraft  was  an  object  of  more  universal 
and  unhesitating  belief  than  in  almost  any  other 
country,  and  it  obtained  greater  authority  from  the 
circumstance  that  so  many  people  of  rank  at  different 
periods  had  recourse  to  it  as  a  means  of  gratifying 
revenge  or  ambition.  There  were  sorcerers  among 
the  minor  agents  in  the  mysterious  conspiracies  of 
the  earl  of  Gowry,  which  have  given  such  celebrity 
in  Scottish  history  to  the  last  year  of  the  century. 
The  narrative  which  will  occupy  our  next  chapter, 
will  exhibit  in  a  remarkable  manner  the  sentiments 
of  king  James,  who  appears  to  have  carried  his 
hatred  of  witches  with  him  into  England,  and  with 
his  reign  in  the  latter  country  began  the  darkest 
period  of  the  history  of  witchcraft  in  the  southern 
parts  of  our  island.  In  a  future  chapter  we  shall 
bave  to  return  to  the  superstitions  of  Scotland, 
which  took  a  still  wider  and  more  fearful  form  in 
the  seventeenth  century,  when  they  were  beginning 
to  subside  in  other  countries. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


180 


CHAPTER  X. 


KING  JAMBS   AND   THE   WITCHES   OF   LOTHIAN. 

In  the  year  1589,  surrounded  by  political  jea- 
lousies abroad,  and  harassed  by  the  turbulence  of 
his  subjects  at  home,  James  VI.  of  Scotland  came 
to  the  resolution  of  marrying  Anne  of  Denmark, 
and  the  earl  marshal  left  Scotland  on  the  18th  of 
June  on  a  mission  to  Copenhagen^  to  arrange  the 
contract.  In  July  the  marriage  was  celebrated  by 
proxy,  and  in  September  the  new  queen  of  Scotland 
left  her  father's  court,  and  embarked  with  the  earl 
marshal  and  his  suite  for  her  adopted  country ;  but 
they  had  hardly  left  the  port  when  they  were  as- 
sailed by  a  tempest,  which  carried  them  so  far  from 
their  course  that  they  with  difficulty  reached  Upsal 
in  Norway,  where  a  continuance  of  tempestuous 
weather  threatened  to  detain  them  till  the  setting  in 
of  winter.  King  Jame»,  impatient  of  delay,  sum- 
moned up  more  courage  than  he  had  ever  shownSDe- 
fore,  and  on  the  22nd  of  October,  set  off  in  search  of 
his  wife,  whom  be  found  still  at  Upsal,  where  they 


Digitized 


by  Google 


PLOT  AGAINST   KING  JAMES.  181 

were  again  married,  and  with  whom  he  retiimed  to 
Copenhagen,  and  remained  there  during  the  winter. 
On  the  re- appearance  of  spring  he  left  Denmark,  and 
after  a  rough  voyage,  landed  with  his  queen  at 
Leith,  on  the  1st  of  May,  1590. 

The  obstinate  hostility  of  the  weather  towards 
James  and  his  new  consort  coinciding  with  political 
hatred  among  a  portion  of  his  subjects,  gave  rise  to 
strange  reports,  and  at  last  a  conspiracy  of  an  un- 
earthly character  was  brought  to  light,  by  the 
agency  of  which  it  was  universally  believed  that  the 
royal  sea-farer  had  been  persecuted.  The  earl  of 
Bothwell,  the  especial  organ  of  the  Romish  party, 
was  said  to  have  been  its  instigator,  and  on  this 
and  other  charges  he  was  committed  to  ward,  from 
which  he  broke  towards  the  end  of  June,  1591,  and 
took  refuge  among  his  friends  in  the  more  inaccessi- 
ble parts  of  the  north.  He  was  himself  believed 
to  be  a  skilful  necromancer,  and  held  frequent  com- 
munication with  witcheg. 

The  manner  in  which  this  extraordinary  affair 
was  discovered  is  involved  in  some  obscurity ;  but, 
according  to  the  common  story,  the  first  divulger  of 
the  secret  was  a  young  woman  named  Geillis  Dun- 
can. This  woman  was  servant  in  the  house  of 
David  Seytoun,  deputy  bailiff  of  the  little  town  of 
Tranent,  on  the  shores  of  the  t  rith  of  Forth,  about 
nine  miles  to  the  east  of  Edinburgh ;  and  on  a  sud- 
den she  became  celebrated  for  her  extraordinary 
skill  in  curing  diseases,  and  for  doing  other  things 
which  gave  rise  to  the  belief  that  the  agency  by 
which  she  worked  was  something  more  than  natural. 
Her  master's  suspicions  on  this  subject  were  strength- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


182  SORCERY   AND  MAOIO. 

ened  by  the  discovery,  that  Geillis  was  in  the  habit 
of  secretly  leaving  the  house  and  absenting  herself 
every  other  night  He  thereupon  questioned  her  in 
private,  but  obtaining  no  satisfactory  answer,  he 
presumed  so  far  upon  his  municipal  office,  as  td  call 
in  some  of  his  acquaintance,  and  in  their  presence 
put  her  to  most  severe  tortures.  But  even  this  had 
no  effect ;  and  they  then  examined  every  part  of  her 
body  in  order  to  discover  the  devil's  mark.  For  it 
was  one  article  of  the  belief  in  witchcraft,  that,  after 
the  compact  between  the  witch  and  the  evil  one 
had  been  completed,  the  latter  sucked  some  part  of 
his  victim's  body,  and  left  his  mark,  and  until  this 
mark  was  discovered,  his  influence  was  unabated, 
and  he  hindered  confession.  The  mark  was  most 
commonly  placed  on  a  part  covered  with  hair,  that 
it  might  be  more  easily  concealed  :  and  hence  one 
of  the  first  processes  in  the  examination  of  a  witch 
was  one  most  shocking  to  her  feelings  of  modesty, 
that  of  shaving  her  body.  In  the  case  of  Geillis 
Duncan,  the  fiend's  mark  was  found  in  the  fore-part 
of  her  throat,  upon  which  she  confessed  that  she  ef- 
fected her  cures  by  means  of  witchcraft  She  was 
now  committed  to  prison,  and,  after  a  short  confine- 
ment, made  a  more  full  confession,  which  implicated 
a  number  of  persons  living  in  different  parts  of  the 
district  of  Lothian,  and  led  to  the  arrest  of  not  less 
than  thirty  presumed  sorcerers,  whose  examinations 
brought  to  light  the  conspiracy  above  alluded  to. 
The  more  remarkable  of  the  persons  thus  placed 
under  arrest  were  Dr.  Fian,  otherwise  named  John 
Cunningham,  Agnes  Sampsoun,  Euphame  Mac^al- 
zeane,  and  Barbara  Napier.  In  the  account  which 
4 


Digitized 


by  Google 


DR.    FIAN.  183 

these  persons  gave  of  their  communications  with 
the  tempter,  we  find  many  incidents  apparently  new 
to  the  popular  mythology  of  Scotland,  but  which 
recur  over  and  over  again  in  the  witchcraft  stories 
of  later  days. 

John  Fian,  one  of  the  chief  persons  compromised 
by  Geillis  Duncan's  confession,  was  a  schoolmaster 
of  Tranent,  a  man  above  the  ordinary  stamp  of 
sorcerers  at  this  period,  who  appears,  at  the  time 
of  these  transactions,  to  have  taken  up  his  residence 
in  the  neighbouring  township  of  Preston-Pans,  the 
same  place  which  obtained  so  much  celebrity  in 
later  Scottish  history.  Dr.  Fian  gave  the  following 
account  of  the  origin  of  his  acquaintance  with  the 
devil.  He  lodged  at  Tranent,  in  the  house  of  ene 
Thomas  Trun^bill,  who  had  given  him  great  offence 
by  neglecting  to  "  sparge,"  or  whitewash,  his  cham- 
ber, as  he  had  promised;  Fian  was  lying  in  his 
bed,  "  musing  and  thinking  how  he  might  be  re- 
venged of  the  said  Thomas,"  when  the  devil  sud- 
denly made  his  appearance,  clad  in  white  raiment, 
and  said  to  him,  "  Will  ye  be  my  servant,  and 
adore  me  and  all  my  servants,  and  ye  shall  never 
want  V 

The  doctor  assented  to  the  terms,  and,  at  the 
suggestion  of  the  evil  one,  he  revenged  himself  on 
Trumbill  by  burning  his  house.  The  second  night 
the  devil  again  appeared  to  him  in  white  raiment, 
and  put  his  mark  upon  him  with  a  rod.  Subse- 
quently, Fian  was  found  in  his  chamber,  as  it  were, 
in  a  trance,  during  which  he  said  that  his '  spirit 
was  carried/*  over  many  mountains,"  and  as  it  ap- 
peared all  over  the  world.     From  this  time  he  was 


Digitized 


by  Google 


184  SORCERY   AND  MAGIC. 

present  at  all  the  nightlj  conventions  held  in  the 
district  of  Lothian,  and  rose  so  high  in  Satan's 
favour,  that  the  fiend  appointed  him  his  "  registrar 
and  secretary/'  His  first  visit  to  these  conventions 
was  at  the  church  of  North  Berwick,  about  four- 
teen miles  along  the  coast  from  Preston-Pans, 
a  favourite  meeting-place  of  the  witches.  He  was 
transported  thither  from  His  bed  at  Preston-Pans, 
"  as  if  he  had  been  skimming  across  the  earth ;" 
and  he  found  a  number  df  Satan's  "  servants,"  with 
a  candle  burning  blue  in  the  middle  of  them. 
Their  master  stood  in  a  pulpit  "  making  a  sermon 
of  doubtful  speeches,"  the  effect  of  which  was  that 
they  were  not  to  fear  him,  "  though  he  were  grim" 
(he  seems  to  have  appeared  in  a  different  character 
from  that  in  which  he  first  presented  himself  to 
Fian) ;  telling  them  that  "  he  had  many  servants, 
who  should  never  want,  and  should  ail  nothing,  so 
long  as  their  hairs  were  on,  and  that  they  should 
never  let  any  tears  fall  from  their  eyes."  It  was  a 
common  article  of  belief  that  witches  could  not  died 
tears.  He  further  exhorted  them  that "  they  should 
spare  not  to  do  evil,  and  to  eat,  drink,  and  be 
blithe ;"  and  he  made  them  do  him  homage  by 
kissing  his  posteriors.  Fian  appears  to  have  been 
an  ill-disposed  person,  and  well  inclined  to  put  in 
practice  Satan's  exhortations.  The  power  which 
he  obtained  by  his  connexion  with  the  tempter, 
was  always  employed  to  work  mischief,  or  for  the 
indulgence  of  his  wicked  passions.  He  confessed 
on  his  trial  that  he  had  seduced  a  widow  named 
Margaret  Spens,  under  promise  of  marriage,  and 
then  deserted  her.     He  was   popularly   accused  of 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   WISE   WIFE   OF   KEITH.  185 

having  attempted  to  force  to  his  will  a  virtuous 
maiden,  the  sister  of  one  of  his  scholars,  by  charms 
which  cannot  well  be  described  here,  but  which  were 
thwarted  by  the  ingenuity  of  her  mother,  and  made 
to  throw  disgrace  on  the  designing  sorcerer.  While 
residing  at  Tranent,  Fian  one  night  supped  at  the 
miller's,  some  distance  from  the  town,  and  as  it  was 
late  before  he  left,  was  conveyed  home  on  a  horse  by 
one  of  the  miller's  men  ;  it  being  dark,  he  raised  up, 
by  his  unearthly  agency,  four  candles  on  the  horse's 
ears,  and  one  on  the  staff  which  his  companion 
carried,  which  were  so  bright  that  they  made  the 
night  appear  as  light  as  day;  but  the  man  was 
terrified  to  such  a  degree,  that  on  his  return  home 
he  dropped  down  dead.  This  was  told  by  Fian 
himself  on  his  examination. 

Agnes  Sampsoun  acted  an  especially  prominent 
part  in  these  transactions.  She  is  described  in  the 
indictment  as  residing  in  Nether  Keith,  was  com- 
monly known  by  the  title  of  the  wise  wife  of  Keith, 
and  seems  to  have  used  her  art  chiefly  in  curing 
diseases,  although  she  was  accused  of  having  in- 
flicted serious  injuries  on  those  who  provoked  her. 
Archbishop  Spotswode  describes  her  as  a  woman, 
not  of  the  base  and  ignorant  sort  of  witches,  but 
matron-like,  grave,  and  settled  in  her  answers. 
Her  examination  was  long,  and  her  confession,  by 
what  is  preserved,  appears  to  have  been  the  wildest 
and  most  extraordinary  of  them  all ;  but  it  would 
take  too  much  of  our  space  to  give  more  than  a 
sample  of  them. 

She  said  that  she  had  learnt  her  art  of  knowing 
and  healing  diseases  from  her  father  ;  that  the  first 


Digitized 


by  Google 


186  80BGERT   AND  MAGia 

time  she  began  to  serve  the  devil  was  after  the 
death  of  her  husband,  when  he  appeared  to  her  in 
the  likeness  of  a  man,  and  commanded  her  to  ac- 
knowledge him  as  her  master,  and  to  renounce 
Christ.  This  she  agreed  to,  being  poor,  and  the 
tempter  promising  her  riches  for  herself  and  her 
children.  He  generally  appeared  to  her  in  the  like- 
ness of  a  dog,  of  which  she  asked  questions,  and  re- 
ceived answers.  On  one  occasion,  when  she  was 
sent  for  to  the  old  lady  Edmestoune,  who  lay  sick, 
she  went  into  the  garden  at  night  and  called  the 
devil  by  the  name  of  Elva,  who  came  in  over  the 
dyke,  in  the  likeness  of  a  dog,  and  came  so 
near  to  her  that  she  was  frightened,  upon  which 
she  charged  him,  "  on  the  law  he  believed  on,''  to 
come  no  nearer.  She  then  asked  him  if  the  lady 
would  recover,  and  he  told  her  that  "  her  days  were 
gone."  He  then  asked  where  the  gentlewomen,  the 
lady's  daughters,  were.  She  told  him^they  were  to 
meet  her  there,  on  which  he  said  that  he  would 
have  one  of  them.  Agnes  said  that  she  would 
hinder  him,  on  which  he  went  away  howling,  and 
concealed  himself  in  the  well,  where  he  remained 
till  after  supper.  The  gentlewomen  came  into  the 
garden  when  supper  was  over,  whereupon  the  dog 
rushed  out,  terrified  them  all,  and  seized  one  of  the 
daughters,  the  lady  Torsenye,  and  attempted  to 
drag  her  into  the  well  to  drown  her,  but  Agnes 
also  seized  hold  of  her,  and  proved  stronger  than 
the  devil,  who  thereupon  disappeared  with  a  terri- 
ble howL  On  another  occasion,  Agnes,  with  Geillis 
Duncan  and  other  witches,  wishing  to  be  revenged 
on  David  Seytoun  (Geillis  Duncan's  master),  met 


Digitized 


by  Google 


EUPHAME   MAGKALZEANE.  187 

on  the  bridge  at  Foulstruthir,  and  threw  a  cord 
into  the  river,  and  Agnes  Sampsoun  cried,  "  Hail, 
holoa!"'  The  end  of  the  cord  which  was  in  the 
water,  became  immediately  heavy,  and  when  they 
drew  it  out,  the  devil  came  up  at  the  end  of  it,  and 
asked  if  they  had  all  been  good  servants.  He  then 
gave  them  a  charm,  which  was  to  affect  David  Sey- 
toun  and  his  goods,  but  it  was  accidentally  averted, 
and  fell  upon  another  person.  The  lady  of  whom 
we  are  now  speaking  seems  to  have  had  a  little  of 
the  evil  one  in  her,  for  she  sometimes  quarrelled 
with  the  devil  himself. 

Euphame  (Euphemia)  Mackalzeane,  one  of  the 
persons  most  deeply  implicated  in  these  charges, 
was  a  lady  of  rank  in  society,  the  only  daughter 
and  heiress  of  Thomas  Mackalzeane  lord  Cliftoun- 
hall,  one  of  the  senators  of  the  College  of  Justice,  a 
distinguished  scholar,  lawyer,  and  statesman.  She 
appears  to  have  been  led  into  associating  with  the 
base  people  concerned  in  this  conspiracy,  by  her 
devotion  to  the  Romish  religioti  and  to  the  party  of 
the  earl  of  Bothwell.  She  confessed  that  she  had 
first  been  made  a  witch  by  the  means  of  an  Irish- 
woman "  with  a  fallen  nose  f  and  that  to  make 
herself  "  more  perfect  and  well-skilled  in  the  said 
art  of  witchcraft,''  she  had  caused  another  witch, 
dwelling  in  St.  Ninian's  Row  (in  Edinburgh),  to 
"  inaugurate"  her  in  the  said  craft,  with  "  the  girth 
of  ane  grit  bikar,''  turning  the  same  "  oft  round  her 
head  and  neck,  and  oft-times  round  her  head,'' 
She  was  charged  with  having  procured  the  deaths 
of  her  husband,  her  father-in-law,  and  various  other 
persons,  by  means  of  poison  and  sorcery.    She  had 


Digitized 


by  Google 


188  SORCERY   AND   MAGIC. 

become  acquainted  with  Agnes  Sampsoun  at  the 
time  of  the  birth  of  her  first  son,  when  she  applied 
to  her  to  ease  her  of  her  pains  in  childbirth,  which 
she  did  by  transferring  them  to  a  dog,  which  ran 
away,  and  was  never  heard  of  afterwards.  At  the 
birth  of  her  second  son,  Agnes  Sampsoun  in  the 
same  way  transferred  her  pains  to  a  cat. 

Barbara  Napier  was  also  a  woman  of  some  rank  ; 
but  the  others  were  in  general  persons  of  very  low 
condition.  A  man,  nicknamed  Grey  Meill  (Gray 
Meal)  whom  Spotswode  describes  as  "  ane  auld  sely 
pure  plowman/'  was  keeper  of  the  door  at  their  con- 
ventions. 

The  extensive  scene  of  the  operations  of  this 
society  embraced  the  sea  as  well  as  the  land.  I 
have  already  stated  that  the  church  of  North  Ber- 
wick was  their  favourite  place  of  meeting.  Agnes 
Sampsoun  confessed  that,  one  Allhallow  Eve  "  shee 
was  accompanied  with  a  great  many  other  witches, 
to  the  number  of  two  hundredth,  and  that  all  they 
together  went  to  sea,  each  one  in  a  riddle  or  cive, 
and  went  into  the  same  very  substantially,  with 
flaggons  of  wine,  making  merrie  and  drinking  by 
the  way,  in  the  same  riddles  or  cives,  to  the  kirke 
of  North  Barrick,  in  Lowthian  ;  and  that  after  they 
had  landed,  took  handes  on  the  lande,  and  daunced 
this  reill  or  short  daunce,  singing  all  with  one  voice, 

Commer  goe  ye  before,  commer  goe  ye, 
Gil*  ye  wall  not  goe  before,  commer  let  me. 

At  which  time  she  confessed  that  this  Geillis  Dun- 
cane   did  goe  before  them,   playing  this   reill   or 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   WITCHES   AT   SEA.  189 

daunce,  upon  a  small  trumpe,  called  a  Jewes  trumpe, 
until  they  entered  into  the  kirk  of  North  Barrick/' 
On  one  occasion,  Fian^  Agnes  Sampsoun,  an  active 
wizard  named  Robert  Griersoun,  and  others,  left 
Griersoun's  house,  at  Preston,  in  a  boat,  and  went 
out  to  sea  to  a  "  tryst,"  with  another  witch,  and 
entered  a  ship,  and  had  "  good  wine  and  ale"  there- 
in, after  which,  as  was  their  usual  custom,  they 
sank  the  ship  and  all  that  was  in  it,  and  returned 
home.  On  another  occasion,  as  Agnes  Sampsoun 
confessed,  they  sailed  out  from  North  Berwick  in  a 
boat  like  a  chimney,  the  devil  passing  before  them 
like  a  rick  of  hay,  and  entered  a  ship  called  the 
"  Grace  of  God,"  where  they  had  abundance  of  wine 
and  "  other  good  cheer,"  and  when  they  came  away 
the  fiend  raised  "  an  evil  wind,"  he  being  under 
the  ship,  and  caused  the  ship  to  perish  ;  and  Agnes 
said  that  she  gave  on  this  occasion  twenty  shillings 
to  Grey  Meill  for  his  attendance,  which  would  seem 
to  imply  that  they  had  taken  the  ship's  money. 
On  one  of  their  voyages,  in  the  summer  of  1589, 
Dr.  Fian  stated  that  the  fiend  informed  them  of  the 
leak  which  subsequently  endangered  the  queen's 
ship,  when  she  took  refuge  in  Norway.  Subsequent 
to  this,  when  the  queen  was  on  her  way  from  Den- 
mark, a  convention  was  held  at  the  "  Brume- 
hoillis,"  where  the  whole  party  went  to  sea  in 
riddles,  Robert  Griersoun,  above-mentioned,  being 
their  "  admiral  and  master-man,"  and  they  again 
entered  a  ship  and  made  merry ;  and  finished  by 
throwing  a  dog  overboard,  which  not  only  made  the 
ship  turn  over  and  sink,  but  raised  a  storm  which 
helped  to  drive  the  queen  back. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


190  SOECEBY   AND   MAGIC. 

This  latter  event,  however,  was  effected  by  more 
imposing  ceremonies.  A  meeting  was  held  in  a 
Webster's  houSe,  at  Preston-Pans,  at  which  were 
present  Agnes  Sampsoun,  John  Fian,  Geillis  Dun- 
can, and  two  others,  who  "  baptized'"  a  cat  in  a 
manner  thus  described  in  the  confession  of  Agnes 
Sampsoun  :  "  first,  two  of  them  held  one  finger  in 
the  one  side  of  the  chimney-crook,  and  another  held 
another  finger  in  the  other  side,  the  two  nibs  of  the 
fingers  meeting  together ;  thus  they  put  the  cat 
thrice  through  the  links  of  the  crook,  and  passed  it 
thrice  under  the  chimney."  They  subsequently 
tied  to  the  four  feet  of  the  cat  four  joints  of  dead 
men  ;  and  it  was  then  carried  to  Leith,  and  the 
witches  took  it  to  the  pier-head  about  midnight, 
and  threw  it  into  the  sea.  Another  party  of  the 
conspirators,  at  Preston-Pans,  threw  another  cat 
into  the  sea  at  eleven  o'clock  at  night  The  result 
of  all  this  was  a  storm  so  dreadful,  that  the  boat 
between  Leith  and  Kinghorn  perished  with  all  on 
board,  amounting  to  three-score  persons. 

This  particular  quality  of  the  cats  for  raising 
storms  is  not  easily  accounted  for.  Dr.  Fian  was 
accused  of  the  hunting  of  a  cat  at  Tranent;  in 
which  hunt  he  was  carried  high  above  the  ground, 
with  great  swiftness,  and  as  lightly  as  the  cat  her- 
self, over  "  a  higher  dyke  than  he  was  able  to  lay 
his  hand  to  the  head  of ;"  and  when  asked  why  he 
pursued  the  cat,  he  replied,  that  at  a  convention 
held  at  the  "  Brume-hoillis,"  Satan  had  commanded 
all  that  were  present  to  catch  cats,  to  be  cast  into 
the  sea  for  the  purpose  of  raising  winds  for  the  de- 
struction of  shipa     A  cat  was  subsequently  cast 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MEETIIIG  AT   THB  PAIRT-HILLS.  191 

into  the  sea  to  raise  winds  on  the  king's  passage  to 
Denmark ;  and  when  the  king  was  returning,  an- 
other convention  was  held,  at  which  Satan  promised 
to  raise  a  mist,  and  cast  the  king  into  England,  for 
which  purpose  he  threw  into  the  sea  a  thing  like  a 
foot-ball,  in  the  presence  of  Dr.  Fian,  who  saw  a 
vapour  and  smoke  rise  from  the  spot  where  it 
touched  the  water. 

The  king  and  his  consort,  as  we  have  seen, 
escaped  all  the  perils  of  the  sea,  and  landed  safely 
in  Scotland.  Satan  confessed  that  James  was  "  un 
homme  de  Dieu,''  and  that  he  had  little  power  over 
him ;  but  after  his  return,  new  plans  were  formed 
for  the  king's  destruction,  at  the  moment  when 
Bothwell  was  plotting  rebellion  against  his  sove- 
reign. On  Lammas  Eve  (July  31st),  1 590,  nine  of 
the  principal  sorcerers,  including  Dr.  Fian,  Agnes 
Sampsoun,  Euphame  Mackalzeane,  and  Barbara 
Napier,  with  others  to  the  number  of  thirty,  met  at 
the  New  Haven,  between  Mussilburgh  and  Preston- 
Pans,  at  a  spot  called  the  "  Fayrie-hoillis,"  when 
the  devi  made  his  appearance  in  the  form  of  a 
black  man,  which  was  "  thought  most  meet  to  do 
the  turn  for  the  which  they  were  convened."  When 
they  had  all  taken  the  places  assigned  to  them, 
Agnes  Sampsoun  proposed  that  they  should  con- 
sult for  the  destruction  of  the  king.  The  devil, 
after  stating  that  their  designs  were  likely  to  be 
thwarted,  promised  them  a  picture  of  wax,  and  di 
rected  them  to  hang  up  and  roast  a  toad,  and  lay 
the  drippings  of  the  toad,  mixed  with  "  Strang 
wash,"'  an  adder's  skin,  and  "  the  thing  in  the  fore-* 
head  of  a  new-foaled  foal,"  in  the  way  where  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


192  SORCERY   AND   MAGIC. 

king  was  to  pass,  or  hang  it  in  a  position  where  it 
might  drop  on  his  body.  Agnes  Sampsoun  was 
appointed  to  make  the  figure,  which  she  did,  and 
gave  it  to  the  evil  one,  who  promised  to  prepare  it 
and  deliver  it  to  them  for  use  within  a  short  tima 
The  process  of  the  toad  was  carried  into  effect,  and 
the  dripping  was- to  have  fallen  on  the  king  "  during 
his  majesty's  being  at  the  Brig  of  Die,  the  day  be- 
fore the  common  bell  rang,  for  fear  the  earl  Both- 
well  should  have  entered  Edinburgh/'  It  happened, 
however,  that  the  king  did  not  pass  by  the  way  he 
was  expected. 

The  image  of  wax  appears  to  have  been  con- 
sidered a  matter  of  much  greater  moment — a  last 
and  terrible  resource,  and  there  was  evidently  more 
than  one  meeting  on  the  subject  between  the  time 
above-mentioned  and  the  eve  of  Hallo wmass,  1 590, 
An  unusually  solemn  meeting  had  been  called  for 
that  night,  to  be  held  at  North  Berwick  church, 
where  the  witches  assembled  to  the  number  of 
above  a  hundred,  among  which  number  there  w*ere 
only  six  men.  Agnes  Sampsoun  confessed  that  she 
went  thither  on  horseback,  and  arrived  at  the 
churchyard  about  eleven  o'clock  at  night,  across 
which  they  danced,  Dr.  Fian  leading  the  way,  and 
Geillis  Duncan,  as  usual,  playing  to  them  on  a 
trump.  At  the  church  the  women  first  made  their 
homage,  being  turned  six  times  "  widderschinnes,'' 
(i.  e,  in  the  contrary  direction  to  the  course  of  the 
sun),  and  then  the  men  were  turned  in  the  same 
manner  nine  times  Fian  next  blew  open  the 
church  door,  and  blew  in  the  lights,  which  were 
like  great  black  candles  held  in  an  old  man's  hand, 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  DEVIL  IN  THE  PULPIT.         193 

round  the  pulpit  The  devil  suddenly  rose  up  in 
the  pulpit  in  the  form  of  a  black  man,  with  a  black 
beard  sticking  out  like  that  of  a  goat,  and  a  high 
ribbed  nose,  falling  down  like  the  beak  of  a  hawk, 
"with  a  long  rumple/'  He  was  clad  in  a  black 
gown,  with  an  "  evil  favoured'"  skull-cap,  also 
black,  on  his  head.  John  Fian  stood  beside  the 
pulpit,  as  clerk,  and  next  to  him  was  Robert  Grreir- 
soun,  above-mentioned.  Some  of  the  company  stood 
and  others  sat.  The  fiend  first  read  from  a  black 
book  their  names,  and  each  when  called  answered, 
"Here,  master.''  On  this  occasion  Satan  appears 
to  have  been  in  some  confusion,  for,  whereas  it  was 
the  custom  for  every  one  to  have  a  nickname,  by 
which  only  they  were  to  be  named  in  that  com- 
pany, that  of  Robert  Greirsoun  being  "Rob  the 
Rowar,"  the  devil  called  him  by  his  own  proper 
name,  which  caused  great  scandal  and  clamour,  and 
they  all  "  ran  hirdie-girdie,"  and  were  angry.  The 
excitement  was  increased  by  his  making  the  same 
mistake  with  regard  to  Euphame  Mackalzeane  and 
Barbara  Napier.  When  this  outbreak  was  ap- 
peased, Satan  made  a  short  sermon,  exhorting  them 
all  to  be  good  servants  and  to  continue  doing  as 
much  evil  as  they  could.  This  was  followed  by  an- 
other outburst  of  dissatisfaction,  on  account  of  the 
image  of  wax  that  was  not  yet  forthcoming.  Robert 
Greirsoun,  urged  on  by  the  women,  said,  "  Where 
is  the  thing  ye  promised  V  To  appease  the  tumult, 
which  was  becoming  greater  and  greater,  the  fiend 
replied  that  "  It  should  be  gotten  the  next  meeting, 
and  he  would  hold  the  next  assembly  for  that 
cause  the  sooner ;  it  was  not  ready  at  that  time." 

VOL.    L  K 


Digitized 


by  Google 


194  SORCERY -AND   MAGIC 

Robert  Greirsoun,  who  was  perhaps  offended  at  the 
mistake  about  his  name,  called  out,  "Ye  promised  twice 
and  deceived  us  I"  and  four  "  honest-like  women,""  as 
Barbara  Napier  termed  them  in  her  confession, 
were  very  importunate,  and  obtained  a  promise 
that  the  image  should  be  delivered  very  shortly  to 
Barbara  Napier  and  Euphame  Mackalzeane,  with- 
out waiting  for  another  meeting.  In  the  midst  of 
this  tumult,  poor  Grey  Meill,  the  door-keeper,  was 
imprudent  enough  to  say  that  "  Nothing  ailed  the 
king  yet,  God  be  thanked  I"  for  which  "  the  devil 
gave  him  a  great  blow/'  "We  are  told  that  the 
devil  gave  as  a  reason  for  his  tardiness,  the  king's 
extreme  piety  and  wisdom,  which  had  preserved 
him  from  all  dangers ;  and  the  king  was  not  a  little 
flattered  by  this  confession.  After  this  business 
was  ended,  the  company  appear  to  have  had  a  sort 
of  a  revel,  and  they  opened  two  graves  within  and 
one  without  the  church,  and  took  the  joints  of  the 
dead  to  make  charms  of,  which  were  shared  amongst 
them,  and  then  they  departed,  having  given  the 
evil  one  the  accustomed  compliment  of  a  kiss  be- 
hind. It  appears  that  the  judicial  prosecution 
arose  before  any.  further  progp-ess  could  be  made 
with  the  image  of  wax. 

The  strange  circumstances  described  above,  with 
much  more,  were  confessed  to,  more  or  less,  by 
nearly  thirty  individuals,  so  that  we  can  hardly  do 
otherwise  than  suppose  that  the  persons  implicated, 
under  some  mental  illusion,  had  plotted  together 
to  effect  a  criminal  object  by  superstitious  practices. 
Much,  however,  of  the  more  extravagant  part  of  the 
story  was  probably  suggested  by  the  questions  put 

8 


Digitized 


by  Google 


KING  James's  judgment.  195 

by  their  examiners,  and  extorted  under  the  terror 
and  the  feeling  of  helplessness  produced  by  the 
cruelty  and  tyranny  of  their  tormentors.  "We  have 
already  seen  the  manner  in  which  Geilles  Duncan's 
confession  was  wrenched  from  her.  The  firmness 
with  which  many  of  them  suffered  was  looked  upon 
as  diabolical  obstinacy,  and  only  provoked  to  the 
application  of  severer  tortures.  Those  to  which  Dr. 
Fian  was  subjected  were  too  horrible  to  be  de- 
scribed. Agnes  Sampsoun  was  examined  before 
the  king  at  Holyrood  House  ;  she  bore  the  torture, 
which  is  described  in  the  old  narrative  as  "  a  payne 
most  grevous,''  firmly  and  without  confession ;  upon 
which  she  was  stripped,  the  hair  shaved  from  her 
body,  and  "  the  devil's  mark''  found  in  a  part 
where  it  was  a  cruel  insult  to  her  womanhood  to 
search.  She  confessed  anything  rather  than  sub- 
mit to  further  indignities. 

The  king,  we  are  told,  "  took  great  delight"  in 
these  examinations;  and  the  confessions  put  him 
"  in  a  wonderful  admiration."  His  vanity  was  flat- 
tered, at  the  same  time  that  his  curiosity  was  ex- 
cited and  gratified.  He  made  Geilles  Duncan  play 
before  him  on  her  trump  (or  Jew's  harp)  the  same 
tune  to  which  the  witches  had  danced  in  their 
meetings.  The  trials  continued  to  occupy  him 
throughout  the  winter  of  1590,  and  the  end  was 
more  tragical  even  than  the  beginning,  for  the 
Scottish  Solomon  was  inexorable  in  his  judgments. 
Dr.  Fian  was  condemned  on  the  26th  of  December, 
1590,  and  "byrnt"  at  the  beginning  of  January. 
On  the  27th  of  January,  1591,  Agnes  Sampsoun 
was   sentenced   to  be  taken   to  the  castle-hill  of 

K  2 


Digitized 


by  Google 


196  SORCERY   AND   MAGIC. 

Edinburgh,  and  there  be  bound  to  a  stake  and  "  wir- 
reit"  (worried)  till  she  was  dead,  and  thereafter  her 
body  burnt  to  ashes  ;  all  which  was  duly  executed. 
The  sentence  of  Euphame  Mackalzeane  was  still 
more  cruel;  she  appears  to  have  been  kept  long 
and  to  have  undergone  many  examinations,  pro- 
bably in  the  hope  that  she  might  give  up  the  names 
of  some  of  Bothwell's  accomplices,  and  on  the  7th 
of  June,  1591,  she  was  condemned  to  be  burnt 
alive,  the  others  being  all  strangled  before  they 
were  committed  to  the  flames.  During  the  inter- 
vening period  many  of  her  accomplices  of  less  note 
suffered  at  the  stake.  In  the  case  of  Barbara 
Napier,  the  majority  of  the  jury  having  acquitted 
her  of  the  chief  articles  of  the  charge  against  her, 
were  themselves  threatened — ^the  king  sitting  in 
judgment  in  his  own  person^ — with  a  trial  for  wilful 
error  upon  an  assize,  and  were  compelled  to  avoid 
the  consequences  by  acknowledging  themselves 
guilty  and  throwing  themselves  on  the  king's  mercy, 
who  "  pardoned''  them. 

King  James  now  became  proud  of  his  skill  and 
knowledge  in  the  matter  of  sorcery,  and  of  the 
wisdom  of  his  judgments.  He  made  it  a  subject  of 
his  special  study,  and  his  royal  leisure  was  occu- 
pied with  the  compilation,  in  form  of  a  dialogue,  of 
a  treatise  which  was  printed  under  the  title  of 
"  Daemonologie,"  with  the  king's  name,  at  Edin- 
burgh in  1597.  In  the  preface  the  royal  author 
speaks  of  *'tiie  fearfull  aboundinge"  of  witches  in 
Scotland  at  that  time;  and  complains  bitterly 
against  the  Englishman  Reginald  Scott,  who  had 
attempted  to  disprove  the  existence  of  witches,  and 


Digitized  by  VjOO^IC      /' 


KING  JAMES   ON   WITCHCRAFT.  197 

against  Wierus,  the  German,  who  had  written  a 
sort  of  apology  for  the  persons  thus  accused, 
"  whereby,"'  says  the  king,  **  he  plainly  bewrayes 
himselfe  to  have  bene  one  of  that  profession/"  His 
majesty's  book  is  much  inferior  to  the  other  trea- 
tises on  the  subject  published  about  the  same 
period ;  it  is  compiled  from  foreign  wprks,  and  be- 
gins with  discussing  very  learnedly  the  nature  and 
existence  of  witchcraft,  and  with  describing  the  con- 
tract with  Satan,  but  it  furnishes  little  or  no  infor- 
mation on  the  real  character  of  the  Scottish  super- 
stitions of  the  day. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


198 


CHAPTER  XL 


MAGIC  IN  ENGLAND   DURING  THE  AGE  OF  THE    REFOR- 
MATION. 

The  magician,  as  we  have  stated  in  a  former 
chapter,  differed  from  the  witch  in  being  the  master 
and  not  the  slave  of  the  spirits  who  were  supposed 
to  work  his  will.  In  the  middle  ages  the  know- 
ledge of  the  few  contrasted  so  marvellously  with 
the  ignorance  of  the  multitude,  that  people  were 
easily  led  to  put  faith  in  the  report  that  they  ob- 
tained it  by  a  communication  with  the  invisible 
world,  which  they  in  too  many  cases  designedly 
propagated,  in  order  to  impose  more  powerfully  on 
popular  credulity.  However,  neither  the  learning 
of  the  scholar  nor  the  wisdom  of  the  statesman 
were  proof  against  the  influence  of  the  universally 
prevailing  belief  in  magic.  The  latter  not  unfre- 
quently  sought  the  advice  of  the  astrologer  or  the 
aid  of  the  magician  in  his  difficulties ;  while  some 
of  the  most  profound  scholars  wasted  their  lives  in 
the  unprofitable  study  of  a  science,  the  truth  of 


Digitized 


by  Google 


POPULAR  INFLtENCE  OF  MAGIC.        199 

which  was  pretended  to  rest  on  books  and  rules 
handed  down  to  posterity  from  the  age  of  Solomon, 
and  even  from  those  of  Adam  and  the  patriarchs, 
who  were  said  to  have  received  them  from  the  angels 
Raziel  and  Raphael 

The  popular  belief  in  this  science  was  strength- 
ened by  the  extraordinary  effects  of  natural  pro- 
cesses now  commonly  understood,  but  then  known 
only  to  a  small  number  of  individuals,  who  covered 
their  knowledge  with  the  most  profound  secrecy ; 
and  by  the  no  less  extraordinary  feats  of  jugglers, 
who  derived  their  skill  in  sleight-of-hand  from  the 
East,  a  part  of  the  world  always  celebrated  as  the 
cradle  of  this  class  of  performers.  "We  find  in  old 
histories  mention  of  strange  exhibitions,  which  can 
only  be  explained  by  the  supposition  of  a  combina- 
tion of  optical  instruments,  and  by  other  agencies 
which  indicate  an  unusual  knowledge  of  natural 
philosophy.  The  performances  of  the  jugglers  often 
excited  astonishment  and  alarm,  and  they  were 
sometimes  prosecuted  by  the  church  for  their  pre- 
sumed intercourse  with  the  devil.  We  are  told  by 
the  ecclesiastical  inquisitor,  John  Nider,  mentioned 
in  a  former  chapter,  that,  in  the  latter  half  of  the 
fifteenth  century,  a  woman  made  her  appearance  at 
Cologne  who  performed  many  extraordinary  feats, 
such  as  tearing  a  napkin  to  pieces,  and  then  in  an 
instant  producing  it  uninjured  before  the  eyes  of 
the  spectators ;  dashing  a  glass  against  the  ceiling, 
and  immediately  restoring  it  whole,  and  the  like  ; 
and  although  these  are  among  the  commonest 
tricks  of  modern  sleight-of-hand,  it  required  power- 
ful protectors  to  screen  her  from  the  pursuits  of  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


200  SORCERY   AND  MAGIC. 

bishop.  Even  as  late  as  the  year  1595,  as  we  learn 
from  the  journal  of  Pierre  TEstoile,  when  a  juggler, 
who  had  taught  a  cat  to  perform  various  surprising 
feats,  offered  to  exhibit  it  before  the  French  king 
Henri  IV.,  his  ministers  represented  to  the  monarch 
that  it  might  be  a  plot  to  bewitch  him,  and,  al- 
though his  majesty  laughed  at  their  apprehensions, 
means  were  found  to  get  the  juggler  and  his  cat  out 
of  the  way.  It  was  indeed  at  that  time  an  unpo- 
pular animal ;  a  learned  pig  would  have  had  a  bet- 
ter chance.  In  the  earlier  part  of  the  sixteenth 
century,  as  we  learn  from  Wierus,  a  contemporary 
writer  on  these  subjects,  there  was  a  man  at  Magde- 
burg who  undertook  to  ride  up  in  the  air,  and, 
under  this  pretext,  collected  from  those  who  were 
eager  to  witness  his  departure  a  considerable  sum 
of  money.  The  people  who  had  paid  their  money 
met  on  the  day  appointed ;  they  saw  the  man  bring 
forth  a  horse  and  perform  certain  mysterious  cere- 
monies, whereupon  it  began  to  rise  from  the 
ground ;  the  conjuror  took  hold  of  the  horse's  tail, 
and,  as  he  gradually  mounted  upwards,  his  wife 
took  hold  of  him,  and  their  servant  held  by  his 
mistress,  and  so  they  disappeared,  to  the  great 
astonishment  of  the  beholders.  But  in  the  midst 
of  their  admiration,  a  townsman,  returning  from  a 
visit  to  the  country,  informed  them  that  he  had 
seen  the  juggler  marching  away  with  his  family 
and  his  spoils,  along  one  of  the  public  roads  leading 
from  the  city,  in  the  same  ordinary  manner  in 
which  other  mortal  men  are  accustomed  to  traveL 
The  whole  was  a  deception. 

Treatises  on  magic,  both  in  manuscript  and  in 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MAGICAL   PROCESSES.  20l 

print,  were  abundant.  In  these  we  find  the  de- 
scription of  a  numerous  host  of  spirits,  classed  ac- 
cording to  their  powers,  and  forms,  and  attributes. 
One  had  for  its  province  the  care  of  treasures,  ano- 
ther the  giving  of  power,  this  of  endowing  with 
eloquence,  that  of  procuring  or  destroying  love. 
Each  of  these,  by  certain  ceremonies  and  invoca- 
tions, might  be  made  subservient  to  the  person  who 
called  him  up.  So  general  was  the  belief  in  the 
efficacy  of  these  charms  and  ceremonies,  that  even 
late  in  the  sixteenth  century,  when  men  of  enlight- 
ened minds  printed  them  in  order  to  expose  them 
to  ridicule,  others,  their  opponents,  but  men  of 
learning  and  character,  such  as  Bodin,  cried  out 
with  terror  at  the  danger  likely  to  arise  from 
placing  within  the  reach  of  the  vulgar  such  power- 
ful instruments  of  mischief  Sometimes  the  magi- 
cian called  the  spirit  to  a  charmed  circle ;  some- 
times he  compelled  him  to  appear  in  a  mirror  ;  but 
the  more  usual  method  was  to  force  the  spirit  into 
a  crystal,  or  stone,  and  to  hold  him  confined  there 
until  he  had  answered  the  purposes  for  which  he 
was  called.  Dee's  conjuring  stone  was  preserved 
in  the  Strawberry  Hill  collection,  and  is  described 
as  being  apparently  a  polished  piece  of  kennel  coal. 
The  works  on  magic  give  the  several  invocations 
and  forms  for  calling  each  particular  spirit ;  and 
there  are  even  incantations  of  a  more  stringent 
nature  to  be  used  for  the  purpose  of  constraining  or 
punishing  such  spirits  as  might  show  obstinacy 
towards  those  who  called  upon  them.  A  volume  of 
this  description  among  the  manuscripts  in  the  Bri- 
tish Museum,  (MS.  Sloane,  Np.  3850,  fol.  149,)  after 

K  5 


Digitized 


by  Google 


202  SOECBRY  AND  MAGIO. 

giving  a  charm,  and  directions  for  using  it,  goes  on 
to  say,  "  The  virtue  of  this,  first,  is,  that  if  any 
spirit  were  in  any  glass,  and  any  of  these  figures 
laid  upon  the  said  glass,  that  then  the  spirit  should 
not  depart  till  the  figure  were  removed ;  and  when 
thou  wilt  bind  or  conjure  any  spirit,  then  thou 
must  bind  the  seal  of  Solomon  about  thy  right  arm, 
the  pentagon  and  mortagon  about  thy  head,  and 
the  girdle  about  thy  breast:  then  hold  a  ^ttle 
myrrh  and  frankincense  under  thy  tongue,  and  call 
what  spirit  thou  wilt,  and  he  will  presently,  with- 
out delay,  come  and  obey  thee  in  what  he  may/' 
It  was  necessary  that  persons  using  these  charms 
should  be  well  acquainted  with  the  science  and  its 
applications;  for,  although,  when  properly  per- 
formed, they  made  the  magician  absolute  master  of 
the  spirit,  the  latter  was  an  unwilling  servant,  and 
if  the  slightest  error  were  made  in  the  incantation, 
he  not  unfirequently  took  his  revenge  by  rushing  on 
the  unskilful  scholar,  and  carrying  him  away.  In 
1530,  as  "Wierus  tells  us,  a  priest  of  Nuremberg  had 
recourse  to  such  incantations,  and  the  devil  showed 
him  in  a  glass  where  treasure  lay  buried.  The 
priest  went  to  the  spot,  and  began  digging,  but, 
when  he  had  just  come  in  sight  of  the  chest  of 
treasure  and  of  a  black  dog  which  guarded  it,  the 
earth  fell  in  upon  him  and  buried  him,  and  nobody 
could  find  the  place  afterwards. 

As  we  approach  the  age  of  the  Reformation,  we 
find  that  the  study  of  magic  and  alchemy  had  be- 
come extremely  common  among  the  Romish  clergy. 
This  was  especially  the  case  in  England,  where  we 
hear  of  frequent  instances  of  priests  and  monks  who 


Digitized 


by  Google 


WiLtlAM   NBVlUiK.  203 

ventured  to  dabble  in  the  forbidden  sciences.  Under 
the  first  monaxchs  of  the  Tudor  dynasty,  the  extra- 
ordinary and  rapid  elevation  of  men  like  Wolsey 
and  Cromwell,  from  comparatively  low  stations  in 
life  to  the  possession  of  immense  wealth  and  almost 
regal  power,  led  people  to  suspect  the  intervention 
of  supernatural  agency,  and  set  people  mad  in  their 
efforts  in  search  of  treasure  and  the  attainment  of 
power.  In  the  reign  of  bluff  king  Hal,  to  judge  by 
documents  still  preserved,  this  island  must  have 
been  full  of  conjurors.  One  or  two  curious  exam- 
ples are  furnished  by  documents  among  the  Crom- 
well papers  in  the  record-office  of  the  Rolls-House. 

Among  these  ambitious  hunters  after  fortune  was 
one  of  the  Neville  family,  who  is  merely  described  as 
William  Neville,  "  gent,''  but  who  had  a  house  at 
"  Weke,"  near  Oxford,  and  who  appears  to  have 
held  some  place  in  the  haughty  cardinal's  household. 
At  the  period  of  Wolsey's  greatness,  a  magician  who 
is  described  as  "  one  Wood,  gent,"  was  dragged  be- 
fore the  privy-council,  charged  with  some  misde- 
mea^our  which  was  connected  with  the  intrigues  of 
the  day.  In  a  paper  addressed  to  the  lords  of  the 
council.  Wood  states  that  William  Neville  had  sent 
for  him  to  his  house  at  Oxford,  it  being  the  first 
communication  he  ever  had  with  that  "  gent"  After 
he  had  been  at  Weke  a  short  time,  Neville  took 
him  by  the  arm  and  led  him  privately  into  the 
garden,  and,  to  use  the  quaint  language  of  the  ori- 
ginal, "  ther  demawndyd  of  me  many  questyons,  and 
amowng  all  other  askyd  [if  it]  were  not  possible  to 
have  a  rynge  made  that  showld  brynge  man  in  favor 
with  hys  prynce,  saying  my  lord  cardinale  had  suche  a 


Digitized 


by  Google 


204  SOROEEY   AND   MAGIC. 

rynge  that  whatsomevere  he  askyd  of  the  kyngcs 
grace  that  he  hadd  yt,  *  and  master  Cromwell,  when 
he  and  I  were  servauntys  in  my  lord  cardynales 
housse,  dyd  hawnt  to  the  company  of  one  that  was 
seyne  in  your  faculte,  and  shortly  after  no  man  so 
grett  with  my  lord  cardynale,as  master  Cromwell 
was." "  Nevill  added,  that  he  had  spoken  "  with  all 
those  who  have  any  name  in  this  realm/'  who  had 
assured  him  that  in  the  same  way  he  might  become 
"  great  with  his  prince,''  and  he  ended  by  asking  of 
the  reputed  magician  what  books  he  had  studied  on 
the  subject.  The  latter  continues,  "  and  I,  at  the 
hart6  desyre  of  hym,  showyd  hym  that  I  had  rede 
many  bokes,  and  specyally  the  boke  of  Salamon,  and 
how  his  rynges  be  made  and  of  what  mettell,  and 
what  vertues  they  had  after  the  canon  of  Salamon.'' 
He  added,  that  he  had  also  studied  the  magical 
work  of  Hermes.  William  Neville  then  requested 
him  ^  to  undertake  the  making  of  a  ring,  which  he 
says  that  he  declined,  and  so  went  away  for  that 
time.  But  Neville  sent  for  him  again,  and  entered 
into  further  communication  with  him  on  the  old 
subject,  telling  him  that  he  had  with  him  another 
conjurer,  named  Wade,  who  could  show  him  more 
than  he  should ;  and,  among  other  things,  had 
showed  him  that  "  he  should  be  a  great  lord."  This 
was  an  effective  attempt  to  move  WoodVjealousy  ; 
and  it  appears  that  Neville  now  prevailed  upon  him 
to  make  "  moldes,"  probably  images,  "  to  the  entent 
that  he  showld  a  had  mastres  Elezebeth  Grare,"  on 
whom  he  seems  to  have  set  his  love.  Perhaps  she 
was  a  rich  heiress.  Wood  then  enters  into  excuses 
for  himself,  declaring  that,  although  at  the  desire  of 


.Digitized 


by  Google 


"  some  of  his  friends,"  he  had  called  to  a  stone  for 
things  stolen,  he  had  not  undertaken  to  find  trea- 
sures ;  and  he  concludes  with  the  naive  boast,  "  but 
to  make  the  phylosofer's  stone,  I  wyll  chebard  (i.  e. 
jeopard)  my  lyffe  to  do  hyt,  yf  hyt  plesse  the  kynges 
good  grace  to  command  me  do  hyt/^  This  was  the 
pride  of  science  above  the  low  practitioners.  He 
even  ofi*ered  to  remain  in  prison  until  he  had  per- 
formed his  boast,  and  only  asked  "  twelve  months 
upon  silver,  and  twelve  and  a  half  upon  gold/'  This 
reminds  us  of  the  story  of  Pierre  d'Estaing  and 
the  lord  of  Bauffremont. 

The  search  of  treasures,  which  the  conjuror 
"Wood  so  earnestly  disclaims,  was,  however,  one  of 
the  most  usual  occupations  of  our  magicians  of  this 
period.  The  frequent  discoveries  of  Roman  or 
Saxon,  or  medieval  deposits,  in  the  course  of  acci- 
dental digging — then  probably  more  common  than 
at  present — was  enough  to  whet  the  appetite  of  the 
needy  or  the  miserly ;  and  the  belief  that  the  sepul- 
chral barrow,  or  the  long  deserted  ruin,  or  even  the 
wild  and  haunted  glen,  concealed  treasures  of  gold 
and  silver  of  great  amount,  has  been  carried  down 
to  our  own  days  in  a  variety  of  local  legends.  Hid- 
den treasures  were  under  the  particular  charge  of 
some  of  the  spirits  who  obeyed  the  magician's  call, 
and  we  still  trace  his  operations  in  many  a  barrow 
that  has  been  disturbed,  and  ruined  floor  which  has 
been  broken  up.  That  these  searches  were  not 
always  successful  will  be  evident  from  the  following 
narrative. 

In  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII.  a  priest  named  "Wil- 
liam Stapleton  was  placed  under  arrest  as  a  conju- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


206  SOBCBBY  AND  MAGIC. 

ror,  and  as  having  been  mixed  up  in  some  court  in- 
trigues, and  at  the  request  of  cardinal  Wolsey  he 
wrote  an  account  of  his  adventures,  still  preserved 
in  the  Roll's  House  records  (for  it  is  certainly  ad- 
dressed to  Wolsey,  and  not,  as  has  been  supposed,  to 
Cromwell).  Stapleton  says  that  he  had  been  a 
monk  of  the  mitred  abbey  of  St  Benet  in  the  Holm> 
in  Norfolk,  where  he  was  resident  in  the  nineteenth 
of  Henry  VIII.  i.  e.  in  1527  or  1528^  at  which  time 
he  borrowed  of  one  Dennys,  of  Hofton,  who  had  pro- 
cured them  of  the  vicar  of  "Watton,  a  book  called 
"  Thesaurus  Spirituum,  and  after  that  another,  called 
Secreta  Secretorum,  a  little  ring,  a  plate,  a  circle, 
and  also  a  sword  for  the  art  of  dig^ng,""  in  studying 
the  use  of  which  he  spent  six  months.  Now  it  ap- 
pears that  Stapleton  had  small  taste  for  early  rising, 
and  after  having  been  frequently  punished  for  being 
absent  from  matins  and  negligent  of  his  duty  in 
church,  he  obtained  a  licence  of  six  months  from 
the  abbot  to  go  into  the  world,  and  try  and  raise 
money  to  buy  a  dispensation  from  an  order  which 
seemed  so  little  agreeable  to  his  taste.  The  first 
person  he  consulted  with  was  his  friend  Dennys, 
who  recommended  him  to  try  his  skill  in  finding 
treasure,  and  introduced  him  to  two  "  knowing 
men,'"  who  had  "  placards,'"  or  licences  from  the 
king  to  search  for  treasure  trove,  which  were  not 
unfrequently  bought  from  the  crown  at  this  period. 
These  men  lent  him  other  books  and  instruments 
belonging  to  the  "  art  of  digging,"'  and  they  went 
together  to  a  place  named  Sidestrand  in  Norfolk,  to 
search  and  mark  out  the  ground  where  they  thought 
treasure  should  lie.     It  happened,  however,  that  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


STORY  or  WILLIAM  STAPLETON.  207 

lady  Tyny,  to  whom  the  estate  belonged,  received 
intelligence  of  their  movements,  and,  after  sending 
for  them  and  subjecting  them  to  a  close  examina- 
tion, ordered  them  to  leave  her  grounds. 

After  this  rebuff,  the  treasure-seekers  went  to 
Norwich,  where  they  became  acquainted  with  ano- 
ther conjuror  named  Godfrey,  who  had  a  "  shower,'' 
or  spirit ;  "  which  spirit,''  Stapleton  says,  "  I  had 
after  myself;"  and  they  went  together  to  Felming- 
ham,  and  there  Godfrey's  boy  did  "  scry"  unto  the 
spirit,  but  after  opening  the  ground  they  found  no- 
thing there.  There  are  Roman  barrows  at  Felming- 
ham,  which,  when  examined  recently,  appeared  to 
have  been  opened  at  a  former  period  in  search  of 
treasure.  The  disappointed  conjurers  returned  to 
Norwich,  and  there  met  with  a  stranger,  who  brought 
them  to  a  house  in  which  it  was  supposed  that 
treasure  lay  concealed :  and  Stapleton  again  applied 
himself  to  his  incantations,  and  called  the  spirit  of 
the  treasure  to  appear,  but  he  turned  a  deaf  ear  to 
their  charms,  "  for  I  suppose  of  a  truth,"  is  the 
pithy  observation  of  the  operator,  "  that  there  was 
none." 

Disappointed  and  disgusted,  Stapleton  now  gave 
up  the  pursuit,  and  obtained  money  from  a  friend 
with  which  he  bought  a  dispensation  to  quit  his 
monastic  order,  and  returned  to  Norfolk  with  the 
intention  of  establishing  himself  as  a  hermit. 

Perhaps  William  Stapleton's  object  in  turning 
hermit  was  to  follow  his  former  pursuits  with  more 
secrecy.  In  Norfolk  he  soon  met  with  some  of  his 
old  treasure-seeking  acquaintances,  who  urged  him 
to  go  to  work  again,  which  he  refused  to  do  unless 


Digitized 


by  Google 


208  SORCBRt  AND  MAGIO. 

his  books  were  better.  They  told  him  of  a  man  of 
the  name  of  Leech,  who  had  a  book,  to  which  the 
parson  of  Lesingham  had  bound  a  spirit  called 
"  Andrea  Malchus  f  and  to  this  man  he  went 
Leech  let  him  have  all  his  instruments,  and  told 
him  further  that  the  parson  of  Lesingham  and  Sir 
John  of  Leiston  (another  ecclesiastic)  with  others, 
had  called  up  of  late  by  the  means  of  the  book  in 
question  three  spirits,  Andrew  Malchus  (before 
mentioned),  Oberion,  and  Inchubus.  "  When  these 
spirits,''  he  said,  "  were  all  raised,  Oberion  would 
in  nowise  speak.  And  then  the  parson  of  Lesing- 
ham did  demand  of  Andrew  Malchus,  and  so  did 
sir  John  of  Leiston  also,  why  Oberion  would  not 
speak  to  them.  And  Andrew  Malchus  made  an- 
swer, '  For  because  he  was  bound  unto  the  lord  car- 
dinal.' And  that  also  they  did  entreat  the  said 
parson  of  Lesingham,  and  the  said  sir  John  of 
Leiston,  that  they  might  depart  as  at  that  time ; 
and  whensoever  it  would  please  them  to  call  them 
up  again,  they  would  gladly  do  them  any  service 
they  could." 

When  Stapleton  had  made  this  important  acqui- 
sition, he  repaired  again  to  Norwich,  where  he  had 
not  long  been,  when  he  was  found  by  a  messenger 
from  a  personage  whom  he  calls  the  lord  Leonard 
Marquees,  who  lived  at  "  Calkett  Hall,''  and  who 
wanted  a  person  expert  in  the  art  of  digging.  He 
met  lord  Leonard  at  Walsingham,  who  promised 
him  that  if  he  would  take  pains  in  exercising  the 
said  art,  he  would  sue  out  a  dispensation  for  him  to 
be  a  secular  priest,  and  so  make  him  his  chaplain. 
The  lord  Leonard  proceeded  rather  shrewdly  to 


Digitized 


by  Google 


STCRY    OF  WILLIAM   STAPLETON.  209 

make  trial  of  the  searcher's  talents  ;  for  he  directed 
one  of  his  servants  to  hide  a  sum  of  money  in  the 
garden,  and  Stapleton  "  shewed''  for  it,  and  one 
Jackson  "  scryed,"  but  he  was  unable  to  find  the 
money.  Yet,  without  being  daunted  at  this  slip, 
Stapleton  went  directly  with  two  other  priests,  sir 
John  Shepe  and  sir  Robert  Porter,  to  a  place  beside 
Creke  Abbey,  where  treasure  was  supposed  to  be, 
and  "  sir  John  Shepe  called  the  spirit  of  the  trea- 
sure, and  I  shewed  to  him,  but  aU  came  to  no  par^ 


Stapleton  now  went  to  hide  his  disappointment 
in  London,  and  remained  there  some  weeks,  till  the 
lord  Leonard,  who  had  sued  out  his  dispensation  as 
he  promised,  sent  for  him  to  pass  the  winter  with 
him  in  Leicestershire,  and  towards  spring  he  re- 
turned to  Norfolk.  And  there  he  was  informed 
that  there  was  "  much  money"  hidden  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Calkett  Hall,  and  especially  in  the  Bell 
Hill  (probably  an  ancient  tumulus  or  barrow),  and 
after  some  delay,  he  obtaii\ed  his  instruments,  and 
went  to  work  with  the  parish  priest  of  Gorleston, 
but  "  of  truth  we  could  bring  nothing  to  effect^ 
On  this  he  again  repaired  to  London,  carrying  his 
instruments  with  him,  and  on  his  arrival  he  was 
thrown  into  prison  at  the  suit  of  the  lord  Leonard, 
who  accused  him  of  leaving  his  service  without  per^ 
mission,  and  all  his  instruments  were  seized.  These 
he  never  recovered,  but  he  was  soon  liberated 
from  prison,  and  obtained  temporary  employment 
in  the  church. 

But  his  conjuring  propensities  seem  still  to  have 
lingered  about  him,  and  we  find  this  ex-monk  and 


Digitized 


by  Google 


210  SORCERY  AND  MAGIC. 

hermit,  and  now  secular  priest,  soon  afterwards  en- 
gaged in  an  intrigue  which  led  him  eventually  into 
amuch more  serious  danger.  It  appears  by  Stapleton's 
statements,  that  one  Wright,  a  servant  oi  the  duke  of 
Norfolk,  came  to  him,  and  "  at  a  certayn  season 
shewed  me  that  the  duke's  grace,  his  master,  was 
floore  vexed  with  a  spyrytt  by  the  enchantment  of 
your  grace'' — he  is  addressing  Wolsey.  Stapleton 
says,  that  he  refused  to  interfere,  but  that  Wright 
went  to  the  duke  and  told  him  that  he,  Stapleton, 
knew  of  his  being  enchanted  by  cardinal  Wolsey, 
and  that  he  could  help  him  ;  upon  which  the  duke 
sent  for  Stapleton,  and  had  an  interview  with  him. 
It  had  previously  been  arranged  by  Wright  and 
Stapleton  (who  says  that  he  had  been  urged  into 
the  plot  by  the  persuasion  of  Wright,  and  by  the 
hope  of  gain  and  prospect  of  obtaining  the  duke's 
favour),  that  he  should  say  he  knew  that  the  duke 
was  persecuted  by  a  spirit,  and  that  he  had 
"forged "  an  image  of  wax  in  his  similitude,  which 
he  had  enchanted,  in  order  to  relieve  him.  The 
duke  of  Norfolk  appears  at  first  to  have  placed  im- 
plicit belief  in  all  that  Stapleton  told  him  ;  he  in- 
quired of  him  if  he  had  certain  knowledge  that  the 
lord  cardinal  had  a  spirit  at  his  command,  to  which 
he  replied  in  the  negative.  He  then  questioned 
him  as  to  his  having  heard  any  one  assert  that  the 
cardinal  had  a  spirit ;  on  which  Stapleton  told  him 
of  the  raising  of  Oberion  by  the  parson  of  Losing- 
ham  and  Sir  John  of  Leiston,  and  how  Oberion  re- 
fused to  speak,  because  he  was  the  lord  cardinal's 
spirit.  The  duke,  however,  soon  after  this,  became 
either  suspicious  or  fearful,  and  he  eventually  sent 


Digitized 


by  Google 


SMITH  AND  AMTLYON.  211 

Stapleton  to  the  cardinal  himself,  who  appears  to 
have  committed  him  to  prison,  and  at  whose  order 
he  drew  up  the  account  here  abridged. 

The  foregoing  is  the  history  of  a  man  who,  after 
having  been  a  victim  to  his  implicit  belief  in  the 
efficiency  of  magical  operations,  was  himself  driveu 
at  last  to  have  recourse  to  intentional  deception.  The 
number  of  such  treasure-hunters  appears  to  have  been 
far  greater  among  his  contemporaries,  of  almost  all 
classes  of  society,  than  we  should  at  first  glance  be 
led  to  suppose.  A  few  years  before  the  date  of 
these  events,  in  the  12th  Henry  VIII.,  or  a.  d.  1521, 
the  king  had  granted  to  Robert  lord  Curzon,  the 
monopoly  of  treasure-seeking  in  the  <Jounties  of 
Norfolk  and  Suffolk,  and  lord  Curzon  immediately 
delegated  to  a  man,  named  William  Smith,  of  Clop- 
ton,  a;nd  a  servant  or  retainer  of  his  own,  named 
Amylyon,  not  only  the  right  of  search  thus  given  to 
him,  but  the  power  to  arrest  and  proceed  against 
any  other  person  they  found  seeking  treasures 
within  the  two  counties.  It  appears  that  Smith 
and  Amylyon  had  in  some  cases  used  this  delegated 
authority  for  purposes  of  extortion ;  and  in  the 
summer  of  the  same  year.  Smith  was  brought  up 
before  the  court  of  the  city  of  Norwich,  at  the  suit 
of  William  Goodred,  of  Great  Melton,  the  minutes 
of  the  proceedings  against  him  still  remaining  on 
the  records.  We  here  again  find  priests  concerned 
in  these  singular  operations. 

It  appears  that  the  treasure-diggers,  who  had  re- 
ceived their  "  placard''  of  lord  Curzon  in  March, 
went  to  Norwich  about  Easter,  and  paid  a  visit  to  a 
schoolmaster,  named  George  Dowsing,  dwelling  in 


Digitized 


by  Google 


212  SORCERY  AND   MAGIC. 

the  parish  of  St  Faith,  who,  they  had  heard,  was 
"  seen  in  astronymye/'  They  showed  him  their 
license  for  treasure-seeking,  which  authorised  them 
to  press  into  their  service  any  persons  they  might 
find  who  had  skill  in  the  science  ;  so  that  it  would 
appear  that  they  were  not  capable  of  raising  spirits 
themselves,  without  the  assistance  of  "  scholars.'' 
The  schoolmaster  entered  willingly  into  their  pro- 
ject, and  they  went,  about  two  or  three  o'clock  in 
the  morning,  with  one  or  two  other  persons  who 
were  admitted  into  their  confidence,  and  dug  in 
ground  beside  "  Butter  Hilles,''  within  the  walls  of 
the  city,  but  "  found  nothing  there."  These 
"  hilles,"  also,  were  probably  tumuli.  They  next 
proceeded  to  a  place  called  "  Seynt  William  in  the 
Wood  by  Norwich,''  where  they  excavated  two 
days  (or  rather  two  nights),  but  with  no  better 
success. 

They  now  held  a  meeting  at  the  house  of  one 
Saunders,  in  the  market  of  Norwich,  and  called  to 
their  assistance  two  ecclesiastics,  one  named  sir 
William,  the  other  sir  Robert  Cromer,  the  former 
being  the  parish  priest  of  St  Gregory's.  At  this 
meeting,  George  Dowsing  raised  "  a  spirit  or  two," 
in  a  glass ;  but  one  of  the  priests,  sir  Robert 
Cromer,  "  began  and  raised  a  spirit  first."  This 
spirit,  according  to  the  depositions,  was  seen  by  two 
or  three  persons.  Amylyon  deposed  that  "  he  was 
at  Saunders's,  where  sir  Robert  Cromer  held  up  a 
stone,  but  he  could  not  perceive  anything  in  it ; 
but  that  George  Dowsing  caused  to  rise  in  a  glass  a 
little  thing  of  the  length  of  an  inch  or  thereabout, 
but  whether  it  was  a  spirit  or  a  shadow  he  cannot 


Digitized 


by  Google 


PERSECUTION    OF   FARMER  GOODRED.  213 

tell,  but  the  said  George  said  it  was  a  spirit." 
However,  spirit  or  no  spirit,  they  seem  to  have 
had  as  little  success  as  ever  in  discovering  the  trea- 
sure. 

Unable,  after  so  many  attempts,  to  find  a  trea- 
sure themselves,  they  seem  now  to  have  resolved  on 
laying  a  general  contribution  on  every  body  who 
followed  the  same  equivocal  calling.  They  went 
first  and  accused  a  person  of  the  name  of  Wikman, 
of  Morley  Swanton,  in  the  county  of  Norfolk,  of 
"  digging  of  hnies,''  and,  by  threatening  to  take 
him  before  lord  Curzon,  they  obtained  from  him 
ten  shillings.  Under  the  same  pretext,  they  took 
firom  a  lime-burner  of  Norwich,  named  White,  a 
"  christal-stone,''  and  twelvepence  in  money,  in 
order  that  he  "  should  not  be  put  to  further  trou- 
ble.'' They  took  both  books  (probably  conjuring 
books)  and  money  from  John  Wellys,  of  Hun  worth, 
near  Holt  Market,  whom,  similarly,  they  accused  of 
"  digging  of  hilles/'  And  of  another  person,  la- 
bouring under  the  same  charge,  they  took  **  a 
christal-stone  and  certain  money.'' 

The  case  of  William  Goodred,  "  husbandman,''  of 
Great  Melton,  in  Norfolk,  affords  a  remarkable  in- 
stance of  the  manner  in  which  these  worthies  went 
to  work.  On  St.  George's  Eve,  (April  22nd,  J  521,) 
Smith,  Amylyon,  and  an  accomplice  of  the  name  of 
Judy,  came  to  Goodred,  as  he  was  at  the  plough  in 
Melton  field,  and  charged  him  with  being  a  "  hill- 
digger."  In  order  to  settle  the  dispute,  they  ad- 
journed from  the  field  to  an  "  alehous  "  in  Melton, 
where  several  persons  were  drinking,  and  there 
they  took  Goodred  into  the  yard  to  examine  him. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


214  SORCERY   AND   MAGIC. 

He  denying  the  charge,  Smith  drew  his  dagger, 
and  threatened  that,  unless  he  would  confess  to 
them  that  he  was  a  hill-digger,  he  "  would  thrust 
his  dagger  through  his  cheeks/'  Goodred  still  per- 
sisted in  hi&  denial ;  whereupon  Smith,  Amylyon, 
and  Judy,  finding  that  he  would  not  confess  "  to 
their  minds,'"  asked  him  what  money  he  would 
give  them  "  to  have  no  further  trduble/'  On  his 
refusing  to  give  them  anything,  they  threatened  to 
carry  him  to  Norwich  Castle.  The  noise  in  the 
yard  had  now  brought  out  several  men  of  sub- 
stance, who  were  drinking  in  the  alehouse,  and 
who  not  only  attempted  to  bring  the  accusers  to 
reason,  but  offered  to  give  security,  to  the  amount 
of  a  hundred  pounds,  for  Goodred's  appearance  to 
answer  any  charges  brought  against  him.  But  this 
was  not  what  Smith  and  his  companions  wanted, 
and  they  refused,  and  led  away  Goodred  as  far  as 
Little  Melton,  accompanied  by  those  who  had  joined 
them  at  the  alehouse,  and  there  they  met  a  Mr. 
Calle,  who  also  offered  to  be  surety  for  Goodred, 
but  in  vain.  They  thus  proceeded  to  carry  their 
prisoner  to  Norwich,  but  at  last,  after  much  wrang- 
ling, they  agreed  to  take  surety  of  the  persons  who 
had  followed  them  from  Great  Melton  for  Goodred's 
appearance  at  Norwich  the  next  day.  Accordingly, 
on  St  George's  Day,  Goodred,  with  his  sureties, 
came  to  the  house  of  Saunders  already  mentioned, 
in  the  market-place,  and  there  Smith  and  Amylyon 
asked  him  again  how  much  money  he  would  give 
them  to  have  no  further  trouble,  "or  eUes  they 
would  send  him  to  the  castle/'  On  his  again  re- 
fusing to    give    any    money,    they    dragged    him 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  conjurors'  QUARREL.         215 

through  the  market-place  towards  the  castle,  but 
at  Cutlers'  Row  his  courage  failed  him,  and  "  for 
fear  of  imprisonment,''  he  engaged  to  give  Smith 
twenty  shillings,  in  part  of  which  he  paid  down  to 
him,  on  a  stall  in  Cutlers'  Row,  six  shillings  and 
eight-pence,  and  gave  sureties  for  the  remainder, 
which  was  duly  paid  on  the  following  Saturday, 
and  Smith  and  Amylyon  had  the  impudence  to  give 
him  a  written  acquittance. 

Such  was  the  oppressive  manner  in  which,  in 
former  days,  men  could  act  under  cover  of  the 
livery  or  licence  of  a  lord.  The  matter  was  brought 
before  the  court  of  Norwich,  as  stated  above,  and 
Amylyon,  who  appears  to  have  had  a  quarrel  with 
his  accomplice  Smith,  came  forward  as  a  witness 
against  him.  But  still  there  appears  to  have  been 
no  great  expectation  of  securing  justice  in  this 
court;  and  the  persons  injured  had  recourse  to  a 
surer  manner  of  obtaining  vengeance.  They  swore 
that,  at  Great  Melton,  one  of  the  party  asking 
Smith  if  he  had  heard  that  the  duke  of  Bucking- 
ham was  committed  to  the  Tower,*  he  had  an- 
swered, "  Yea,  and  therefor  a  very  mischief  and 
vengeance  upon  the  heads  of  my  lord  cardinal  and 
of  my  lord  of  Suffolk,  for  they  are  the  causers 
thereof!"  And  when  his  interrogator  observed, 
"  Beware  what  ye  say,"  Smith,  "  setting  his  hands 

*  Edward  Stafford,  duke  of  Buckingham,  having  incuired 
the  enmity  of  cardinal  Wolsey,  the  proud  prelate  pursued 
him  to  the  scaffold,  and  it  was  just  at  this  time  that  he  was 
hy  his  means  attainted  of  high  treason  and  executed.  The 
expression  of  sympathy  with  the  duke  was  looked  upon  as 
amounting  to  treason. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


216  SORCERY   AND   MAGIC. 

under  his  sides,"  answered  again,  "  By  the  mass,  I 
would  say  it  again,  even  if  I  were  before  my  lord 
cardinal  and  my  lord  of  Suffolk,  before  their 
faces  !"  We  are  left  to  guess  at  the  result ;  but  in 
the  days  of  cardinal  Wolsey  a  man  who  used  free- 
dom of  speech  like  this  would  with  difficulty  escape 
the  gallows. 

Other  instances  might  be  quoted  of  the  infatua- 
tion of  men  at  this  period,  in  seeking  treasures-  by 
means  of  magical  operations,  the  influence  of  which 
was  long  after  felt,  even  in  an  age  when  true 
science  had  made  wide  and  solid  progress  in  the 
land.  In  1574,  the  celebrated  Dr.  Dee  petitioned 
lord  Burghley  to  obtain  for  him  from  Queen  Eliza- 
beth a  licence  of  monopoly  of  treasure-digging  in 
England.  This  superstition  appears  to  have  lingered 
longest  in  Wales  and  on  the  borders.  Among  the 
Lansdowne  manuscripts  there  is  a  letter  from  John 
Wogan,  sheriff  of  Pembrokeshire,  to  lord  Burghley, 
informing  him  that  it  was  reported  that  certain 
persons  had  "  found  at  an  old  pair  of  walles  at 
Spittell,  in  the  said  county,  a  great  quantity  of 
treasure,  gold  and  silver,  contained  in  a  certain 
work  of  hr^SB,  (i,  e,  a  brass  pot,)  as  is  supposed,  and 
that  they  had  knowledge  thereof  by  the  advertise- 
ment of  one  Lewis,  a  priest  dwelling  in  Carmarthen- 
shire.'' The  worthy  sheriff,  who  appears  to  have 
considered  this  an  affair  of  momentous  importance, 
adds  that,  besides  examining  various  persons  said  to 
have  been  concerned  in  this  matter,  he  with  others 
had  "  repaired  to  the  place,  and  found  the  walls 
broken  with  engines,  and  a  place  within  the  center 
of  the  wall  containing  one  foot  square  fit  for  such  a 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   DEVIL  AND   HIS  DAM.  217 

work,  and  the  rest  of  the  work  had  made  black  the 
circumference  of  the  place  f  and  expresses  his  opi- 
nion that  "  the  truth  of  this  matter  will  never  be 
bolted  out,  without  that  the  priest  be  exa^lined, 
and  the  parties  also  menaced  with  some  torture  or 
extremity/'  Long  after  this,  a  man  named  William 
Hobby,  who  appears  at  the  time  to  have  been  in 
confinement  in  the  Tower,  writes  to  lord  Burghley, 
on  the  28th  of  April,  1589,  for  authority  to  seek 
treasure  in  Skenfrith  Castle,  in  Monmouthshire, 
where  he  gravely  informs  the  old  and  experienced 
minister  that  "  the  voyce  of  the  counthrey  goeth 
there  is  a  dyvell  and  his  dam,  one  sitts  upon  a 
hogshed  of  gold,  the  other  upon  a  hogshed  of  silver/' 
The  writer  undertakes,  if  properly  authorised,  to 
drive  away  these  loathsome  guardians  of  the  trea- 
sures of  olden  times 

The  treasure-hunting  mania  seems  not  to  have 
been  confined  to  England  at  the  time  of  which  we 
have  been  speaking  above,  but  it  spread  over  Ger- 
many, France,  Italy,  and  Spain.  In  the  latter 
country,  as  we  learn  from  Llorente,  a  Spanish  noble 
named  don  Diego  Fernandez  de  Heredia,  was,  on  the 
ninth  of  May,  1591,  denounced  to  the  inquisitors  of 
Saragossa  on  the  charge  of  necromancy.  He  was 
said  to  have  been  in  league  with  a  Moorish  magician 
of  the  village  of  Lucenic,  jfirom  whom  he  obtained 
some  Arabic  books  of  magic,  and  these  be  communi- 
cated to  another  Moorish  magician,  named  Fraoicisco 
de  Marquina,  who  read  the  books  and  told  him  they 
contained  rules  and  directions  for  discovering  con- 
cealed treasures.  Don  Diego  took  this  magician 
home  to  his  house,   and  in  a   very  dark  summer 

VOL.    I.  L 


Digitized 


by  Google 


218  SORCERY  km)  MAGIO. 

night  they  proceeded,  with  the  book  of  magic  and 
one  or  two  companions,  to  the  hermitage  of  Mata- 
mal,  not  far  from  the  Ebro,  where  Marquina  said 
that,  according  to  the  book,  a  great  hoard  of  gold 
and  silver  money  was  concealed.  When  they  had 
arrived  there,  and  everything  was  ready,  the  necro- 
mancer Marquina  pronounced  the  formula  of  con- 
juration, and  immediately,  we  are  told,  loud  thunder 
was  heard  on  the  hill  beside  them,  and  Marquina 
advanced  towards  it,  and  pretended  to  hold  converse 
with  the  demon.  He  returned  to  inform  his  com- 
panions that  they  must  dig  under  the  altar  of  the 
hermitage,  and  they  began  their  operations  under 
don  Diego's  directions,  while  he  went  to  continue 
his  discourse  trith  the  evil  one.  It  is  probable  that 
the  hermitage  was  built  on  a  Roman  site,  for  they 
found  some  fragments  of  pottery,  although  there  was 
no  treasure.  On  this,  the  demons  were  conjured  anew, 
and  they  said  that  there  certainly  was  treasure,  but 
that  it  Was  very  deep,  and  the  time  destined  for  its 
discovery  was  not  yet  arrived.  The  next  night  they 
went  to  another  solitary  place,  near  Xelsa,  a  town 
which  occupies  the  site  of  the  Roman  Celsa.  It  is 
probable  that  they  had  again  hit  upon  a  Roman 
burial-place,  for,  after  repeating  the  same  conjura- 
tions, they  found,  as  we  are  told,  some  earthen  vases 
and  a  quantity  of  cinders  and  ashes,  but  no  treasure, 
the  absence  of  which  was  explained  in  the  same 
way  as  before. 

As  the  searchers  appear  always  to  have  chosen 
sites  of  this  description,  led  probably  by  popular 
tradition,  it  is  not  surprising  if  their  search  was  at 
times  crowned  with  success.    Ignorance  and  super- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


OELLINI  AND  THB  KEOBOMAKCER. 


2l9 


stition  combined  led  them  to  attribute  this  to  the 
efficacy  of  their  charms,  in  which  they  seem  honestly 
to  have  placed  confidence.  Indeed,  when  we  read 
the  old  and  apparently  authentic  descriptions  of 
the  performances  of  some  of  the  pretended  magi- 
cians of  former  days,  we  are  not  surprised  that 
the  science  should  gain  belief  The  wild  stories 
of  a  Bacon  or  a  Faustus  scarcely  exceed  the 
realities  which  are  described  by  old  writers,  and 
which  must  have  been  brought  about  by  some  sort  of 
optical  delusion,  assisted  of  course  by  the  imagination. 
One  of  the  most  remarkable  instances  with  which 
I  remember  to  have  met  is  that  told  in  the  Auto- 
biography of  the  celebrated  Benvenuto  Cellini,  a 
writer  who  is  generally  looked  upon  as  worthy  of 
belief  In  his  youth  Benvenuto  fell  in  love  with  a 
courtezan,  from  whom  he  was  suddenly  separated  by 
the  departure  of  the  lady  from  Rome. 

"  Two  months  after,''  says  he,  "the  girl  wrote  me 
word,  that  she  was  in  Sicily,  extremely  unhappy. 
I  was  then  indulging  myself  in  pleasures  of  all  sorts, 
and  had  engaged  in  another  amour  to  cancel  the 
memory  of  my  Sicilian  mistress.  It  happened, 
through  a  variety  of  odd  accidents,  that  I  made  ac- 
quaintance with  a  Sicilian  priest,  who  was  a  man  of 
genius,  and  well  versed  in  the  Latin  and  Greek 
authors.  Happening  one  day  to  have  some  conver- 
sation with  him  upon  the  art  of  necromancy,  I,  who 
had  a  great  desire  to  know  something  of  the  matter, 
told  him,  that  I  had  all  my  life  felt  a  curiosity  to 
be  acquainted  with  the  mysteries  of  this  art  The 
priest  made  answer,  that  the  man  must  be  of  a  re- 
solute and  steady  temper  who   enters  upon  that 

L  2 


Digitized 


by  Google 


220  SORCERY   AND  MAGIC. 

study.  I  replied,  that  I  had  fortitude  and  resolu- 
tion enough,  if  I  could  but  find  an  opportunity. 
The  priest  subjoined,  *  If  you  think  you  have  the 
heart  to  venture,  I  will  give  you  all  the  satisfaction 
you  can  desire/  Thus  we  agreed  to  undertake  this 
matter. 

"  The  priest  one  evening  prepared  to  satisfy  me, 
and  desired  me  to  look  out  for  a  companion  or  two- 
I  invited  one  Vicenzo  Romoli,  who  was  my  inti- 
mate acquaintance ;  he  brought  with  him  a  native 
of  Pistoia,  who  cultivated  the  black  art  himself 
We  repaired  to  the  Colosseum,  and  the  priest,  ac- 
cording to  the  custom  of  necromancers,  began  to 
draw  circles  upon  the  ground  with  the  most  impres- 
sive ceremonies  imaginable ;  he  likewise  brought 
thither  assafoetida,  several  precious  perfumes,  and 
^re,  with  some  compositions  which  diffused  noisome 
odours.  As  soon  as  he  was  in  readiness,  he  made 
an  opening  in  the  circle,  and  having  taken  us  by 
the  hand  one  by  one,  he  placed  us  within  it  Then 
having  arranged  the  other  parts  and  assumed  his 
wand,  he  ordered  the  other  necromancer,  his  part- 
ner, to  throw  the  perfumes  into  the  fire  at  a  proper 
time,  entrusting  the  care  of  the  fire  and  the  per- 
fumes to  the  rest,  and  began  his  incantations.  This 
ceremony  lasted  above  an  hour  and  a  half,  when 
there  appeared  several  legions  of  devils,  insomuch 
that  the  amphitheatre  was  quite  filled  with  them. 
I  was  busy  about  the  perfumes,  when  the  priest, 
perceiving  there  was  a  considerable  number  of  in- 
fernal spirits,  turned  to  me,  and  said,  '  Benvehuto, 
ask  them  something.'  I  answered,  '  Let  them  bring 
me  into  the  company  of  my  Sicilian  mistress,  An- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CELLINI   AND  THE   NEGROMANCEB.  221 

geUca.'  That  night  we  obtained  no  answer  of  any 
sort ;  but  I  had  received  great  satirfaction  in  having 
my  curiosity  so  far  indulged.  The  necromancer  told 
me  it  was  requisite  we  should  go  a  second  time,  as- 
suring me  that  I  should  be  satisfied  in  whatever  I 
asked,  but  that  I  must  bring  with  me  a  pure  and 
immaculate  boy.  I  took  with  me  a  youth  who  was 
in  my  service  of  about  twelve  years  of  age,  together 
with  the  same  Vincenzo  Romoli,  who  had  been  my 
companion  the  first  time,  and  one  Agnolino  Graddi, 
an  intimate  acquaintance,  whom  I  likewise  prevailed 
on  to  assist  at  the  ceremony.  When  we  came  to  the 
place  appointed,  the  first,  having  made  his  prepara- 
tions as  before  with  the  same  and  even  more  striking 
ceremonies,  placed  us  within  the  circle,  which  he 
had  drawn  with  a  more  wonderful  art  and  in  a  more 
solemn  manner  than  at  our  former  meeting.  Thus 
having  committed  the  care  of  the  perfumes  and  the 
fire  to  my  friend  Vincenzo,  who  was  assisted  by  Gaddi, 
he  put  into  my  hand  a  pentacolo*  or  magical  chart. 
The  necromancer  having  begun  to  make  his  tremen- 
dous invocations,  called  by  their  names  a  multitude 
of  demons,  who  were  the  leaders  of  the  several 
legions,  and  invoked  them  by  the  virtue  and  power 
of  the  eternal  uncreated  God,  who  lives  for  ever,  in- 
somuch that  the  amphitheatre  was  almost  in  an  in- 
stant filled  with  demons  a  hundred  times  more  nu- 
merous than  at  the  former  conjuration.  Vincenzio 
Romoli  was  busied  in  making  a  fire  with  the  assist- 
ance of  Agnolino,  and  burning  a  great  quantity  of 
precious  perfumes.  I,  by  the  direction  of  the  necro- 
mancer, again  desired  to  be  in  the  company  of  my 
*  A  preservative  against  the  power  of  demons. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


222  SOBOERT  AND  MAOIO. 

Angelica.  The  former  thereupon  turning  to  me, 
said,  *  Know,  they  have  declared  that  in  the  space 
of  a  month  you  shall  be  in  her  company/  He  then 
requested  me  to  stand  resolutely  by  him,  because 
the  legions  were  now  above  a  thousand  more  in 
number  than  he  had  designed,  and,  besides,  these 
were  the  most  dangerous,  so  that  after  they  had  an- 
swered my  question  it  behoved  him  to  be  civil  to 
them,  and  dismiss  them  quietly.  At  the  same  time, 
the  boy  under  the  pentacolo  was  in  a  temble  fright, 
saying,  that  there  were  in  that  place  a  million  of 
fierce  men,  who  threatened  to  destroy  us ;  and  that, 
moreover,  four  armed  giants  of  an  enormous  stature 
were  endeavouring  to  break  into  our  circle  During 
this  time,  whilst  the  necromancer,  trembling  with 
fear,  endeavoured  by  mild  and  gentle  methods  to 
dismiss  them  in  the  best  way  he  could,  Vinceneo 
Romoli,  who  quivered  like  an  aspen-leaf,  took  care 
of  the  perfumea  Though  I  was  as  much  terrified  as 
any  of  them,  I  did  my  utmost  to  conceal  the  terror 
I  felt,  so  that  I  greatly  contributed  to  inspire  the 
rest  with  resolution  ;  but  the  truth  is,  I  gave  my- 
self over  for  a  dead  man,  seeing  the  horrid  fright 
the  necromancer  was  in.  The  boy  placed  his  head 
between  his  knees,  and  said,  '  In  this  posture  will  I 
die ;  for  we  shall  all  surely  perish.'  I  told  him 
that  all  those  demons  were  under  us,  and  what  he 
saw  was  smoke  and  shadow ;  so  bid  him  hold  up 
his  head  and  take  courage  No  sooner  did  he  look 
up,  but  he  cried  out,  *  The  whole  amphitheatre  is 
burning,  and  the  fire  is  just  falling  upon  us ;'  so 
covering  his  face  with  his  hands,  he  again  exclaimed 
that  destruction  was  inevitable,  and  he  desired  to 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CELLINI  AND  THE   NEOBOMANCEB.  223 

see  no  more.  The  necromancer  entreated  me  to 
have  a  good  heart,  and  take  care  to  bum  proper  per- 
fumes ;  upon  which  I  turned  to  Romoli,  and  bid 
him  bum  all  the  most  precious  perfumes  he  had. 
At  the  same  time  I  cast  my  eye  upon  Agnolino 
Graddi,  who  was  terrified  to  such  a  degree,  that  he 
could  scarce  distinguish  objects,  and  seemed  to  be 
half  dead.  Seeing  him  in  this  condition,  I  said, 
^  Agnolino,  upon  these  occasions  a  man  should  not 
yield  to  fear,  but  should  stir  about  and  give  his  as- 
sistance ;  so  come  directly  and  put  on  some  more 
of  these  perfiunes.'  Poor  Agnolino,  upon  attempting 
to  move,  was  so  violently  terrified,  that  the  effects 
of  his  fear  overpowered  all  the  perfumes  we  were 
burning.  The  boy  hearing  a  crepitation,  ventured 
once  more  to  raise  his  head,  when  seeing  me  laugh, 
he  began  to  take  courage,  and  said  that  the  devils 
were  flying  away  with^arvengeance. 

"  In  this  condition  we  stayed  till  the  bell  rang  for 
morning  prayer.  The  necromancer  again  told  us 
that  there  remained  but  few  devils,  and  these  were 
at  a  great  distance.  When  the  magician  had  per- 
formed the  rest  of  his  ceremonies,  he  stripped  off  his 
gown,  and  took  up  a  wallet  full  of  books  which  he 
had  brought  with  him.  We  all  went  out  of  the  circle 
together,  keeping  as  close  to  each  other  as  we  possi- 
bly could,  especially  the  boy,  who  had  placed  him- 
self in  the  middle,  holding  the  necromancer  by  the 
coat  and  me  by  the  cloak.  As  we  were  going  to  our 
houses  in  the  quarter  of  Banchi,  the  boy  told  us 
that  two  of  the  demons  whom  we  had  seen  at  the 
amphitheatre  went  on  before  us  singing  and  skip- 
ping,   sometimes  running  upon  the  roofs  of  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


224  SORCERY  AND   MAGIC. 

houses,  and  sometimes  upon  the  ground.  The  priest 
declared,  that  though  he  had  often  entered  magic 
circles,  nothing  so  extraordinary  had  ever  happened 
to  him.  As  we  went  along  he  would  fain  have  per- 
suaded me  to  assist  with  him  at  consecrating  a'book 
from  which  he  said  we  should  derive  immense  riches ; 
we  should  then  ask  the  demons  to  discover  to  us  the 
various  treasures  with  which  the  earth  abounds, 
which  would  raise  us  to  opulence  and  power ;  but 
that  those  love  affairs  were  mere  follies,  from  whence 
no  good  could  be  expected.  I  answered,  *  that  I 
would  have  readily  accepted  his  proposal,  if  I  had 
understood  Latin.'  He  redoubled  his  persuasions, 
assuring  me  that  the  knowledge  of  the  Latin  lan- 
guage was  by  no  means  material  He  added,  that 
he  could  have  found  Latin  scholars  enough,  if  he 
had  thought  it  worth  while  to  look  out  for  them, 
but  that  he  could  never  have  met  with  a  partner  of 
resolution  and  intrepidity  equal  to  mine,  and  that  I 
should  by  all  means  follow  his  advice.  Whilst  we 
were  engaged  in  this  conversation,  we  arrived  at  our 
respective  homes,  and  all  that  night  I  dreamt  of  no- 
thing but  devils. 

"  As  I  every  day  saw  the  priest,  he  did  not  fail  to 
renew  his  solicitations  to  engage  me  to  come  into  his 
proposal  I  asked  him  what  time  it  would  take  to 
carry  his  plan  into  execution,  and  where  this  scene 
was  to  be  acted.  He  answered,  that  in  less  than  a 
month  we  might  complete  it,  and  that  the  place  best 
calculated  for  our  purpose  was  the  mountains  of 
Norcia ;  though  a  master  of  his  had  performed  the 
ceremony  of  consecration  hard  by  the  mountains  of 
the  abbey  of  Farfa,  but  that  he  had  met  with  some 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CELLINI  AND   THE   KEOBOMANCER.  225 

difficulties  which  would  not  occur  in  those  of  Norcia. 
He  added,   that  the  neighhouring  peasants   were 
men  who  might  be  confided  in,  and  had  some  know- 
ledge of  necromancy,  insomuch  that  they  were  likely 
to  give  us  great  assistance  upon  occasion.     Such  an 
efiect  had  the  persuasions  of  this  holy  conjuror,  that 
I  readily  agreed  to  all  he  desired,  but  told  him,  that 
I  should  be  glad  to  finish  the  medal  I  was  making 
for  the  pope  first     This  secret  I  communicated  to 
him,  but  to  nobody  else,  and  begged  he  would  not 
divulge   it      I   constantly   asked  him  whether  he 
thought   I   should,  at  the  time  mentioned  by  the 
devil,  have  an  interview  with  my  mistress  Angelica  ; 
and  finding  it  approach,  I  was  surprised  to  hear  no 
tidings  of  her.     The  priest  always  assured  me  that  I 
should  without  fail  enjoy  her  company,  as  the  de- 
mons never  break  their  promise,  when  they  make 
it  in  the  solemn  manner  they  had  done  to  me.      He 
bid  me,  therefore,  wait  patiently,  and  avoid  giving 
room  to  any  scandal  upon  that  occasion,  but  make 
an  efibrt  to  bear  something  against  my  nature,  as 
he  was  aware  of  the  great  danger  I  was  to  en- 
coimter ;  adding,  that  it  would  be  happy  for  me  if 
I  would  go  with  him  to  consecrate  the  book,  as  it 
would  be  the  way  to  obviate  the  danger,  and  could 
not  fail  to  make  both  him  and  me  happy.'' 

Immediately  after  this,  Benvenuto  Cellini  fell 
into  so  dangerous  a  scrape  at  Rome,  that  he  was 
obliged  to  fly,  and  taking  his  route  to  Naples,  he 
there  accidentally  met  with  his  mistress  on  the  last 
day  of  the  month  predicted  by  the  necromancer. 


L  5 


Digitized 


by  Google 


226 


CHAPTER  XIL 


THE     EKQLISH     MAGICIANS:     DR.     DEE    AND    HIS     FOL- 
LOWERS. 

Whatever  may  have  been  the  means  employed 
to  produce  the  eflfects  described  at  the  end  of  the 
preceding  chapter,  there  must  have  been  a  great 
and  general  tendency  to  belief  on  the  part  of  those 
to  whom  they  were  exhibited.  This  credulity  seems 
to  have  risen  to  its  greatest  height  at  the  time  of 
the  reformation,  as  though,  when  the  mind  had 
been  suddenly  relieved  from  intellectual  restraint, 
it  overleaped  in  the  first  burst  of  liberty  every 
bound  to  which  sober  reason  would  naturally  con- 
fine it.  When  we  see  men  of  the  greatest  talents 
and  the  most  profound  learning  shutting  themselves 
in  their  secret  studies  to  push  their  anxious  re- 
searches beyond  the  limits  of  natural  knowledge, 
and  hear  them  talking  soberly  of  their  intercourse 
with  spirits  of  another  world  and  with  their  rulers, 
we  are  almost  driven  to  believe  that  the  world  had 
been  suddenly  deluged  with  a  host  of  demons  who 
amused  themselves  with  turning  to  mockery  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


DR.   DEB.  227 

intellectual  powers  of  the  human  race.  Nor  per- 
haps was  this  mental  infatuation  entirely  without 
its  use,  for  we  must  not  forget  that  we  owe  some  of 
our  fundamental  discoveries  in  science  to  the  magi- 
cians of  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries, 
and  that  one  of  the  most  universally  necessary  arti- 
cles of  the  present  day,  our  almanacks,  are  derived 
from  the  astrologers. 

There  is  something  extraordinary  in  the  rage  for 
the  study  of  what  were  called  the  occult  sciences 
which  manifested  itself  at  the  period  of  which  we 
are  speaking.  In  our  own  country,  Caius,  the 
founder  of  a  college  of  learning  in  one  of  our  uni- 
versities. Dee,  one  of  the  first  mathematicians  of 
his  age,  and  piany  of  the  wisest  and  best  among 
their  contemporaries,  gave  implicit  belief  to  the 
science  which  enabled  them  to  invoke  and  con- 
strain the  spiritual  world.  The  doings  and  thoughts 
of  those  who  specially  dedicated  themselves  to  such 
pursuits  form  a  singular  chapter  in  the  history  of 
human  intelligence. 

One  of  the  most  remarkable  of  these,  certainly, 
was  Dr.  John  Dee.  This  celebrated  personage  was 
bom  in  London  in  the*  year  1527.  With  a  mind 
full  of  energy  and  ambition,  he  studied  with  an 
eagerness  and  success  that  soon  raised  him  to  repu- 
tation in  the  universities  of  England  and  the  con- 
tinent. He  is  said  to  have  imbibed  his  taste  for 
the  occult  sciences,  which  his  imaginative  mind 
iTetained  during  his  life,  while,  a  student  at  Lou- 
vaine ;  yet  it  is  singular  that  one  of  his  earliest 
writings  was  a  defence  of  Roger  Bacon  against  the 
imputation  of  having  leagued  with  demons  to  ob- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


228  SOBCEBT   AND  MAQia 

tain  his  extraordinary  knowledge.  Under  the  reign 
of  Mary,  Dee  was  in  close  correspondence  with  the 
princess  Elizabeth,  who  from  her  childhood  had 
been  brought  up  in  the  love  of  learning  and 
learned  men ;  and  for  this  intimacy  the  young 
philosopher  became  an  object  of  suspicion,  and  was 
thrown  into  prison.  Elizabeth  preserved  her  at- 
tachment for  him  during  her  life,  and  perhaps  she 
had  received  from  him  the  leaning  to  superstition 
which  she  exhibited  on  more  than  one  remarkable 
occasion.  On  her  accession  to  the  throne,  the  vir- 
gin queen  consulted  with  him  to  fix  a  fortunate 
day  for  her  coronation ;  and  subsequently,  when  an 
image  of  wax  in  her  resemblance  was  found  in 
Lincoln's-Inn-Fields,  Dee  was  called  to  her  cham- 
ber to  exercise  his  science  in  counteracting  the 
charm. 

In  his  preface  to  Euclid,  printed  in  1670,  Dee 
complains  that  he  was  already  reputed  a  conjurer. 
In  the  meagre  diary  edited  by  Mr.  Halliwell,  and 
in  such  of  Dee's  papers  as  have  been  preserved,  we 
find  him  paying  attention  to  his  dreams,  to  strange 
noises  which  he  fancied  he  heard  at  times  in  his 
chamber,  and  to  other  matters  of  a  similar  descrip- 
tion. In  this  diary,  imder  the  date  of  May  25,  1 581, 
he  says,  that  he  then  first  saw  in  a  crystal.  It  was 
one  of  the  usual  methods  of  raising  spirits  at  this 
time  to  bring  them  into  a  glass  or  stone,  duly  pre- 
pared for  the  purpose.  One  of  Dr.  Dee's  con- 
juring stones  is  still  preserved ;  it  was  sold 
at    the    Strawberry    Hill    sale.*      The    particular 

*  This  was  evidently  not  the  stone  which  he  used  in  his  con- 
ference s  with  the  spirits,  with  Edward  Kelly  for  his  "  skryer,"  as 


Digitized 


by  Google 


EDWABP   KBLLT.  229 

branch  of  magic  which  he  followed  was  that 
termed  theurgy,  which  taught  that  by  a  proper 
disposition  of  mind,  joined  with  purity  of  life, 
cleanliness  of  person,  and  other  conditions,  a  man 
might  be  placed  in  visible  communication  with 
good  spirits,  and  received  their  counsel  and  assist- 
ance. With  such  views,  it  is  not  surprising  that  a 
man  like  John  Dee  should  be  the  easy  dupe  of  the 
first  bold  and  cunning  man  who  undertook  to  prac- 
tise on  his  credulity. 

Such  a  man  evidently  was  Edward  Kelly.  He  was, 
it  seems,  a  native  of  Lancashire,  bom,  according  to 
Dee's  own  statement,  in  1555,  but  we  find  him 
subsequently  living  at  Worcester,  in  the  profes- 
sion of  a  druggist  He  was  a  man  of  ill  repute, 
had  been  convicted  at  Lancaster  of  coining,  and 
been  punished  with  the  loss  of  his  ears,  and  he 
appears  to  have  found  it  necessary  to  remove  from 
his  native  county.  He  was  known  as  an  alche- 
mist and  a  conjuror  before  he  became  acquainted 
with  Dr.  Dee.  A  story  has  been  preserved,  told  on 
good  authority,  which  shows  to  what  an  extent 
these  practices  had  been  carried.  One  night  Kelly 
took  a  man  who  was  anxious  to  pierce  the  myste- 
ries of  the  future,  with  certain  of  his  servants,  into 
the  park  of  Walton  le  Dale,  near  Preston  in  Lanca- 
shire, and  there  gratified  his  desire  by  means  of 

that  was  a  globe  of  crystal.  That  even  in  ancient  times  optical 
delusions  were  practised  to  make  the  iminitiated  believe  in  the 
appearance  of  spirits,  is  evident  from  the  singular  doctrine 
of  the  old  rabbinical  writers,  that  when  spirits  were  raised 
they  always  appeared  in  a  reversed  position,  with  their  heads 
downward  and  their  feet  in  the  air. — See  the  Introduction  to 
Casauban*s  edition  of  Dee*8  Conference  with  Spirits. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


230  80B0EB7  AND  MAQIG. 

necromancy.  When  his  incantations  were  ended, 
Kelly  inquired  of  one  of  the  servants  whose  corpse 
had  been  last  interred  in  the  churchyard  adjoining; 
and  being  told  that  a  poor  man  had  been  buried  there 
the  same  day,  they  dug  up  the  body,  and  the  con- 
jurer made  it  speak  and  deliver  sundry  "  strange 
predictions/^ 

At  the  period  when  he  became  acquainted  with 
Kelly,  Dee  was  living  at  his  house  at  Mortlake  in 
Surrey,  with  his  young  wife,  whom  he  had  married 
in  1578.  He  was  looking  out  for  an  assistant  in 
his  studies  fitted  to  serve  the  office  of  inspector  of 
his  glass,  or,  as  it  was  termed,  skryer,  a  name,  not 
as  Disraeli  supposed,  invented  by  Dee.  It  appears 
that  it  was  always  necessary  to  have  an  assistant 
to  perform  this  office,  who  alone  communed  with 
the  spirits,  and  repeated  what  he  saw  or  heard 
In  a  manuscript  of  Dee's  proceedings,  preserved  in 
the  British  Museum,*  we  find  copies  of  prayers 
with  a  view  to  these  purposes,  dated  in  1569  and 
1579,  but  his  first  skryer  of  whom  there  is  any 
mention  was  named  Barnabas  Saul.  In  the  diary 
already  mentioned.  Dee  has  noted  down  on  the 
ninth  of  October,  1581,  that  Barnabas  Saul  was 
^^  strangely  troubled  by  a  spiritual  creature  about 
midnight'^  On  the  6th  of  March  following,  Saul 
**  confessed,  that  he  neither  heard  or  saw  any  spi- 
ritual creature  any  more.''  At  this  time  Saul  and 
his  employer  were  evidently  much  dissatisfied  with 
each  other,  and  it  was  probably  not  long  after  when 

*  This  ciirious  manuscript,  which  contains  the  journal  of 
Dee's  earlier  conferences  with  spirits,  is  the  Sloane  MS.,  No. 
3677. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


DR.  DEB  AND  HIS  SKRTEBS.  231 

they  parteA  In  the  manuscript  just  quoted,  Dee 
has  set  down  his  magical  proceedings  on  the  2nd  of 
December,  1581,  and  he  begins  with  the  statement, 
^  I  willed  the  skryer  (named  Saul)  to  looke  into 
mj  great  chrystalline  globe,  if  God  had  sent  his 
holy  angel  Anael,  or  no"  Saul  looked,  and,  as  the 
narrative  goes  on  to  say,  he  saw  the  angel  AnaeL 
It  was  probably  Dee^s  own  assistant  who  spread 
abroad  the  reports  of  his  being  a  conjurer.  On  the 
9th  of  March,  1582,  Dee  has  made  an  entry  in  his 
diary,  that,  "  at  dinner-time  Mr.  Clerkson  and  Mr. 
Talbot  declared  a  great  deal  of  Barnabas's  naughty 
dealing  toward  me.  .  .  .  His  friend  told  me,  before 
my  wife  and  Mr.  Clerkson,  that  a  spiritual  creature 
told  him  that  Barnabas  had  censured  both  Mr. 
Clerkson  and  me.'^  In  the  manuscript  of  the  Bri- 
tish Museum,  we  find  Edward  Talbot  exercising  the 
office  of  skryer  to  Dr.  Dee  during  a  great  part  of 
the  year  1582,  and  as  Edward  Kelly  was  certainly 
"skrying'^  at  the  same  time,  it  is  not  improbable 
that  they  are  one  and  the  same  person.  Weaver 
speaks  of  him  as  "  Kelly,  otherwise  called  Talbot,^' 
so  that  he  seems  to  have  passed  under  both  names. 
Prom  the  time  of  his  acquaintance  with  Kelly,  Dr. 
Dee  kept  a  regular  journal  of  all  that  passed  in  his 
conferences  with  the  spirits,  the  earlier  portion  of 
which  is  preserved  in  the  manuscript  in  the  British 
Museum,  and  the  latter  part  was  printed  by  Meric 
Casaubon  in  1659. 

Kelly  soon  proved  himself  a  very  skilful  skryer, 
and  he  seems  to  have  used  the  greatest  cunning  in 
practising  upon  Dee^s  credulity,  and  insinuating 
himself  into  his  confidence.    He  pretended  to  doubt 


Digitized 


by  Google 


232  SOROBBT   AKD  MAGIC. 

the  propriety  of  the  work  he  was  employed  in,  and 
expressed  from  time  to  time  his  suspicions  of  the 
character  of  the  spirits  with  whom  they  were  deal- 
ing. Dee  gives  an  account  of  one  of  their  quarrels 
that  happened  in  the  April  of  1582,  soon  after  the 
dinner  party  described  above ;  Kelly  not  only  ex- 
pressed his  belief  that  the  spirits  who  came  into 
the  glass  were  demons  sent  to  hurry  them  to  their 
destruction,  but  he  complained  that  he  was  kept  in 
Dee's  house  as  in  a  prison,  "  that  it  were  better  for 
him  to  be  near  Cotsall  Plain,  where  he  might  walk 
abroad  without  danger.''  The  feelings  of  the  doc- 
tor seem  to  have  been  much  hurt  at  the  doubts 
thus  cast  on  the  respectability  of  his  spiritual  visi- 
tors. 

During  this  and  the  following  year,  Dee's  con- 
ferences with  the  spirits  were  very  frequent  It 
appears  that  he  consulted  them  sometimes  for  him- 
self, and  sometimes  for  others,  and  they  often  came 
when  not  called  for.  In  the  year  1583,  Albert  Laski, 
or  Alaski,  waiwode  or  prince  of  Siradia,  in  Poland, 
paid  a  visit  to  the  court  of  queen  Elizabeth,  and 
became  a  frequent  visitor  at  Dee's  house  at  Mort- 
lake,  where  he  was  initiated  into  these  spiritual 
mysteries.  Kelly  seems  to  have  harboured  strange 
and  ambitious  projects  to  be  carried  into  effect 
through  Laski  or  some  of  the  German  princes,  and 
he  began  to  work  upon  his  imagination  by  the  re- 
velations of  Dee's  magic  stone.  From  this  moment 
the  spirits  could  be  brought  to  talk  of  little  but 
revolutions  and  mighty  convidsions  which  were 
speedily  to  take  place  in  Europe.  On  the  28th  of 
May,  1583,  Dee  and  Kelly  were  sitting  together  in 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  PBETTT   QIBL.  233 

the  study,  talking  of  the  Polish  prince  and  his  af- 
fairs. "  Suddenly,"  Dee  tells  us,  "  there  seemed  to 
come  out  of  my  oratory  a  spiritual  creature,  like  a 
pretty  girl  of  seven  or  nine  years  of  age,  attired  on 
her  head  with  her  hair  rowled  up  before,  and  hang- 
ing down  very  long  behind,  with  a  gown  of  sey.  .  .  . 
changeable  green  and  red,  and  with  a  train ;  she 
seemed  to  play  up  and  down,  and  seemed  to  go  in 
and  out  behiad  my  books,  lying  on  heaps,  and  as 
she  should  ever  go  between  them,  the  books 
seemed  to  give  place  sufficiently,  dividing  one  heap 
from  the  other,  while  she  passed  between  them. 
And  so  I  considered,  and  heard  the  diverse  reports 
which  E.  K  made  unto  this  pretty  maiden,  and 
I  said, — ^Whose  maiden  are  you  ? 

"  She,  Whose  man  are  you  ? 

"  D.  I  am  the  servant  of  Grod,  both  by  my  bound 
duty,  and  also  (I  hope)  by  his  adoption. 

"  (A  voyce.  You  shall  be  beaten  if  you  telL) 

"  She.  Am  not  I  a  fine  maiden  ?  give  me  leave  to 
play  in  your  house ;  my  mother  told  me  she  would 
come  and  dwell  here. 

"  D.  She  went  up  and  down  with  most  lively  ges- 
tures of  a  young  girl  playing  by  herself,  and  divers 
times  another  spake  to  her  from  the  corner  of  my 
study  by  a  great  perspective  glasse,  but  none  was 
seen  beside  herself. 

"  She.  Shall  I  ?  I  will  {Now  she  seemed  to  answer 
one  in  the  foresaid  corner  of  the  study)  I  pray  you 
let  me  tarry  a  little  {speaking  to  one  in  the  foresaid 
comer). 

"  D.  Tell  me  what  you  are. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


234  80BCERT  AND  MAQia 

"  She.  I  pray  you  let  me  play  with  you  a  little, 
and  I  will  tell  you  who  I  am. 

"  2).  In  the  name  of  Jesus,  then,  tell  me. 

"  She.  I  rejoyce  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  and  I  am  a 
poor  little  maiden,  Madimi ;  I  am  the  last  but  one 
of  my  mother  s  children ;  I  have  little  baby  chil- 
dren at  home. 

"  D.  Where  is  your  home  ? 

"  Mad.  I  dare  not  tell  jou  where  I  dwell,  I  shall 
be  beaten. 

"  D.  You  shall  not  be  beaten  for  telling  the  truth 
to  them  that  love  the  truth ;  to  the  eternal  truth 
all  creatures  must  be  obedient. 

"  Mad.  I  warrant  you  I  will  be  obedient ;  my  sis- 
ters say  they  must  all  come  and  dwell  with  you. 

"  D.  I  desire  that  they  who  love  Grod  should  dwell 
with  me,  and  I  with  them. 

"  Mad.  I  love  you  now  you  talk  of  Grod. 

"  D.  Your  eldest  sister — ^her  name  \s  EsimelL 

"  Mad.  My  sister  is  not  so  short  as  you  make 
her. 

"  D.  0, 1  cry  you  mercy  !  she  is  to  be  pronounced 
EsemelL 

"  jK  K.  She  smileth  ;  one  calls  her,  saying,  Come 
away,  maiden. 

"  Mad.  I  will  read  over  my  gentlewomen  first ; 
my  master  Dee  will  teach  me  if  I  say  amiss. 

"  D.  Read  over  your  gentlewomen,  as  it  pleaseth 
you. 

"  Mad.  I  have  gentlemen  and  gentlewomen,  look 
you  here. 

"  E  K.  She  bringeth  a  little  book  out  of  her 
pocket    She  pointeth  to  a  picture  in  the  book. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  PEINCE  ALBERT  LASKI.  235 

"  Mad.  Is  not  this  a  pretty  man  ? 

"  D.  What  is  his  name  ? 

"  Mad,  My  [mother]  saith  his  name  is  Edward ; 
look  you,  he  hath  a  crown  upon  his  head ;  my 
mother  saith  that  this  man  was  duke  of  York." 

Such  is  the  style  in  which  these  extraordinary 
revelations  commence.  In  the  earlier  books  their 
objects  were  generally  matters  of  much  less  im- 
portance ;  but  Kelly  seems  to  have  formed  some 
wild  notions  of  universal  monarchy,  like  that  of  the 
older  anabaptists  of  Munster,  and  to  have  imagined 
that  the  Polish  prince  Lasky  was  the  man  to  carry 
out  this  purpose ;  and  from  this  time  all  his  visions 
tended  to  this  point.  Madimi,  who  was  now  one  of 
their  most  constant  visitors,  proceeds  in  the  scene 
just  described  to  convince  them,  by  a  sort  of  picto- 
rial pedigree,  that  Lasky  was  descended  from  the 
Anglo-Norman  family  of  the  Lacies.  There  is 
something  very  extraordinary,  and  certainly  great 
force  of  imagination,  in  the  grouping  and  character 
of  the  spirits  by  whom  Dee  imagined  that  he  was 
visited,  which  exhibits  to  us  the  peculiar  talents  of 
Edward  Kelly.  When  they  next  consulted  the  stone, 
which  was  on  the  second  of  June,  they  were 
favoured  with  a  vision  of  one  like  a  husbandman, 
who  talks  mystically  of  the  wickedness  of  the  world, 
and  the  general  regeneration  which  is  to  be  eflfected 
through  Albert  Lasky.  This  husbandman  is  an 
angel  named  Murifri,  to  whom,  at  the  close  of  this 
interview,  Dee,  descending  to  more  common-place 
subjects,  presented  petitions  for  a  woman  who  in  a 
fit  of  desperation  had  attempted  to  commit  suicide, 
and  for  another  who  had  dreamt  of  a  treasure 


Digitized 


by  Google 


SOBCERT   AI^D  MAQIO. 

buried  in  a  cellar.  Several  following  revelations 
relate  chiefly  to  the  state  of  the  world,  to  the  ap- 
proaching revolution  and  regeneration,  and  to  a 
book  of  the  new  law  which  was  to  be  communicated 
to  them.  Another  spirit,  in  the  form  of  a  maiden, 
named  Galuah,  shows  herself,  and  gives  them  still 
more  definite  information  on  Albert  Lasky's  future 
fortunes. 

^'  GcU.  .  .  .  /  say  unto  thee,  his  name  is  in  the  book 
of  life.  The  sun  shall  not  passe  his  course  before 
he  be  a  king.  His  counsel  shall  breed  alteration 
of  his  state ;  yea,  of  the  whole  world.  What 
wouldst  thou  know  of  him  ? 

"  D,  If  his  kingdom  shall  be  of  Poland,  or  what 
land  else  ? 

"  Oai.  Of  two  kingdoms. 

"  D.  Which,  I  beseech  you  ? 

"  Oai.  The  one  thou  hast  repeated,  and  the  other 
he  seeketh  as  right 

"  D.  God  grant  him  sufficient  direction  to  do  all 
things  so  as  may  please  the  highest  of  his  calling. 

"  Oal,  He  shall  want  no  direction  in  anything  he 
desireth. 

"  D.  As  concerning  the  troubles  of  August  next, 
and  the  dangers  then,  what  is  the  best  for  him  to 
do  ?  to  be  going  home  before,  or  to  tarry  here  ? 

"  Qid.  Whom  God  hath  armed,  no  man  can  pre- 
vail against." 

Kelly  now  again  began  to  pretend  scruples  as  to  the 
propriety  of  their  dealing  with  the  spirits,  whom  he 
believed  were  devils;  and  he  threatened  once  or 
twice  to  desert  the  doctor,  who,  however,  kept  a 
close  watch  upon  him.     One  day,   at  the  end  of 


Digitized 


by  Google 


QUABBELS   OF   DEE   AND   KELLT.  237 

.  June,  Kelly  announced  his  intention  of  riding  on 
some  business  or  other  from  Mortlake  to  Islington. 
"  M7  heart  did  throb  oftentimes  this  day/'  says 
Dee,  "  and  thought  that  Edward  Kelly  did  intend  to 
absent  himself  from  me,  and  now  upon  this  morning 
I  was  confirmed,  and  more  assured  that  it  was  so  ; 
whereupon  seeing  him  make  such  haste  to  ride  to 
Islington,  I  asked  him  why  he  so  hasted  to  ride 
thither,  and  I  said,  if  it  were  to  ride  to  Mr.  Harry 
Lee,  I  would  go  thither  also  to  be  acquainted  with 
him,  seeing  now  I  had  so  good  leisure,  being  eased 
of  the  book  writing.  Then  he  said,  that  one  told 
him  the  other  day  that  the  duke  (Lasky)  did  but 
flatter  him,  and  told  him  other  things  both  against 
the  duke  and  me.  I  answered  for  the  duke  and 
myself,  and  also  said,  that  if  the  forty  pounds 
annuity  which  Mr.  Lee  did  offer  him,  was  the 
chief  cause  of  his  minde  setting  that  way,  (contrary 
to  many  of  his  former  promises  to  me,)  that  then  I 
would  assure  him  of  fifty  pounds  yearly,  and  would 
do  my  best,  by  following  of  my  sute,  to  bring  it  to 
passe  as  soon  as  possibly  I  could ;  and  thereupon 
did  make  him  promise  upon  the  Bible.  Then  Ed- 
ward Kelly  again  upon  the  same  Bible  did  swear 
unto  me  constant  friendship,  and  never  to  forsake 
me ;  and  moreover  said,  that  unlesse  this  had  so 
fain  out,  he  would  have  gone  beyond  the  seas, 
taking  ship  at  Newcastle  within  eight  days  next. 
And  so  we  plight  our  faith  each  to  other,  taking 
each  other  by  the  hand  upon  these  points  of  bro- 
therly and  friendly  fidelity  during  life,  which  cove- 
nant I  beseech  God  to  turn  to  his  honour,  glory, 


Digitized 


by  Google 


238  SOECBEY  AND  MAGIC. 

and  service,  and  the  comfort  of  our  brethren  (hu 
.  children)  here  in  earth.'' 

Eelly  seems  at  this  time  to  have  been  unhappy 

in  his  domestic  affairs,  and  to  have  been  in  fear  of 

arrest,  and  he  still  talked  of  leaving  Dee's  service. 

In  a  fit  of  anger,   at  the  beginning  of  July,  he 

offered  to  release  Dee  of  his  engagement  of  fifty 

pounds  a  year,  declared  that  he  hated  his  own  wife, 

and  wished  to  be  away.    All  this,  except  the  want 

pflif^OYe  for  his  wife,  was  mere  dissimulation ;  he  did 

he  be  a%  ^^^  ^^  *^®  ^®^*  conference  with  the  spin- 

of  his  sta4^>  ^^  declared  that  he  had  been  rebuked 

wouldst  thcjscontent. 

h,  all  preparations  having  been  made  for 
<^A%7y  Dee  and  Kelly,  with  their  two  wives 
^j  %  ^.Jes.  left  liortlaj^eto  accompany  Albert 
Lasky  into  Poland,'  where  tbej^vhpped  to  share  in 
the  great  fortunes  which  had  been  promised  him. 
They  consulted  their  spirits,  even  when  ^^  g^  and 
apparently  with  the  utmost  satisfaction^  They 
landed  at  the  Brill  on  the  3'Oth  of  the  same  -raonth, 
and  proceeded  through  Holland  and  Frieslai^^  to  ^ 

Embden  and  Bremen,    and  so  to  Lubeck,    wlwe 
they  remained  during  the  latter  part  of  Novemb^ 
and  the  beginning  of  December.    On  Christmas-dayt 
they  reached  Stettin  in  Pomerania,  where  they  re-Ik 
mained  till  the  middle  of  January.    During  their  ^ 
travels,  they  were  favoured  with  many  wonderful       \ 
revelations  of  events  which  were  soon  to  occur,         \ 
most  of  them  pointing  to  the  extraordinary  fortunes 
which  awaited  the  Polish  prince. 

At  Stettin,  on  the  13th  of  January,  the  angel 


Digitized 


-c^ 


s 


PRINCE  LASKY  REJECTED.  239 

Uriel  appeared  to  them,  and  assured  them  of  the 
approaching  advent  of  antichrist  Early  in  Febru- 
ary, they  reached  Lasco,  the  prince's  lordship,  and 
here  they  began  to  be  affected  with  doubts  if 
Albert  Lasky  were  indeed  the  destined  regenerator. 
They  seem  to  have  been  deceived  as  to  his  riches 
and  power,  and  it  was  revealed  to  them  that  on 
account  of  his  faults  he  had  been  in  part  rejected, 
but  that  he  would  eventually  obtain  the  kingdom  of 
Moldavia.  Dee  was  now  directed  by  the  spirits  to 
leave  Lasco,  and  take  up  his  residence  at  Cracow. 
Thither  accordingly  they  all  repaired  towards  the 
middle  x)f  the  March  of  1584,  and  they  remained 
there  till  the  end  of  July.  During  this  period  the 
doubts  relating  to  Lasky  produced  an  almost  daily 
appeal  to  the  spirits.  Sometimes  the  Polish  prince 
seemed  restored  to  favour,  at  other  times  he  was  in 
discredit,  until  at  length,  after  Dee  and  his  party 
had  been  reduced  to  great  distress  for  want  of 
money,  Lasky 's  final  rejection  was  announced,  and 
Dee  was  sent  with  a  divine  message  to  the  em- 
peror Rodolph.  Dee  and  Kelly  were  at  the  same 
time  directed  by  their  spirits  to  remove  fix)m  Cracow 
to  Prague. 

During  their  residence  at  Cracow,  there  were 
several  violent  disputes  between  Dee  and  Kelly, 
resulting  from  the  pretended  doubts  of  the  latter  as 
i^to  the  character  of  the  spirits  with  whom  they  con- 
Versed.    The  object  of  these  doubts  was  evidently 

o  drag  Dee  more  entirely  into  Kelly's  power,  by  prac- 
tising upon  his  credulity.  On  the  23rd  of  May, 
Dee  has  noted  that  "  there  liappened  a  great  storm 

or  temptation  to  Edward  Kelly  of  doubting  and  mis- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


240  SORCERY   AND  MAGIC. 

liking  our  instructors  and  their  doings,  and  of  con- 
temning and  condemning  anything  that  I  knew  or 
could  do.  I  bare  all  things  patiently  for  God  his 
sake.''  When  Kelly  proceeded  to  consult  the  spirits, 
he  was  rebuked  for  his  doubta  Next  day,  these 
doubts  returned,  and  he  refused  to  continue  his  per- 
formances. But  on  the  28th  of  May,  he  performed 
the  office  of  skryer  again,  and  was  further  rebuked 
for  his  disbelief  At  the  beginning  of  June,  Kelly 
is  represented  as  being  entirely  converted  from  his 
evil  thoughts ;  yet  about  a  fortnight  afterwards  we 
find  him  again  in  "  great  temptation,"  which  was 
followed  by  another  declaration  of  penitence. 

At  Prague  the  visions  of  political  changes  in  the 
world  became  again  more  frequent  and  vivid  ;  but, 
though  Dee  was  received  at  the  imperial  court  with 
respect  as  a  philosopher  of  reputation,  he  appears  to 
have  been  regarded  only  as  a  visionary  dreamer  in 
respect  of  his  pretended  mission.  At  this  period 
hints  were  now  and  then  thrown  out  by  the  spirits 
of  Dee's  own  unworthiness,  because  he  was  not 
always  sufficiently  credulous  and  obedient,  and  de- 
nunciations were  pronounced  against  the  emperor. 
During  the  time  of  which  we  are  now  speaking, 
Dee  and  his  party  were  often  in  great  poverty,  and 
we  are  therefore  not  surprised  at  the  anxiety  he 
frequently  evinced  to  obtain  the  knowledge  of 
the  philosopher  s  stone,  which  was  now  a  great 
object  of  their  search.  According  to  a  story 
preserved  by  Lilly,  Kelly  cheated  his  master 
of  this  knowledge,  and  appropriated  the  disco- 
very to  himself  Frequent  quarrels  occurred  at 
this  time  between  Dee  and  Kelly,  and  the  doctor 
10 


Digitized 


by  Google 


EELLT  AND  MBa   DEB.  241 

appears  to    have    been   a&aid    of   losing  his  as- 
sistant 

In  the  May  of  1586,  the  bishop  of  Placenza,  who 
was  residing  in  Austria  as  apostolical  nuncio,  pro- 
cured from  the  emperor  an  order  forbidding  Dee  to 
remain  any  longer  in  his  dominions ;  upon  which 
he  went  to  Erfiirdt,  and  being  ill  received  there, 
proceeded  to  CasseL  Dee  appears  to  have  har- 
boured at  this  time  the  project  of  going  to  Italy, 
but  he  was  deterred  by  the  intelligence  that  he  had 
been  accused  at  Rome  of  heresy  and  magic.  In 
the  autumn  of  1586,  Kelly  left  Dee  for  a  time  to 
repair  to  Bohemia ;  and  when  the  emperor's  orders 
against  the  conjurers  appear  to  have  been  relaxed, 
Dee  followed  him.  In  1587,  they  were  at  the  castle  of 
Trebone  in  Bohemia,  again  consulting  the  spirits,  but 
with  less  satisfaction  than  ever.  In  the  April  of  the 
year  last  mentioned,  Kelly  appears  to  have  made  up 
his  mind  to  resign  his  office  of  "  skryer,''  and  they 
proceeded  to  initiate  Dee's  son  Arthur  into  th«  mys* 
tery,  but  as  it  would  seem  without  much  success. 

So  far  Dr.  Dee  appears  to  have  been  the  mere 
tool  of  Kelly's  ambiticm,  ^ijd  ^ow  that  there  seemed 
to  be  no  longer  hopes  of  success  in  th^ir  designs,  the 
^^  skryer"  determined  to  leave  him.  He  prepared, 
however,  one  last  trial  for  his  master's  credulity 
Mrs  Jane  Dee  was  of  the  same  age  as  Kelly,  and 
was  consequently  much  younger  than  her  husband: 
Kelly  had  often  professed  dislike  to  his  own  wife, 
but  he  appears  to  have  had  other  feelings  towards 
the  wife  of  his  employer.  On  the  18th  of  April, 
1587,  while  they  were  still  at  Trebone,  in  Bohemia, 
a  revelation  was  nmde  iA  the  glas9  tp  the  effect  that 

VOL.   I.  M 


Digitized 


by  Google 


242  .    SORCERY  AND  MAGIC. 

it  was  God's  pleasure  the  two  philosophers  should 
have  a  community  of  wives.  Dee  was  shocked,  and 
Kelly  professed  the  utmost  abhorrence  to  that  doc- 
trine, yet  the  revelations  were  repeated ;  they  were 
told  that  sin  was  but  a  relative  thing,  and  coidd 
not  be  bad  if  ordered  or  allowed  by  God,  with  other 
doctrines  of  the  anabaptists  of  those  days,  and  of  the 
socialists  of  the  present ;  and  finally,  they  opened 
the  secret  to  their  wives,  and  obtained  their  con- 
currence, though  not  without  some  reluctance. 
Dee  has  noted  in  the  journal  of  his  proceedings, 
"  that  on  Sunday,  the  3rd  of  May,  anno  1 587,  (by 
the  new  account,)  I,  John  Dee,  Edward  Kelly,  and 
our  two  wives,  covenanted  with  God,  and  subscribed 
the  same,  for  indissoluble  and  inviolable  unities, 
charity,  and  friendship  keeping,  between  us  four, 
and  all  things  between  us  to  be  common,  as  God  by 
sundry  means  willed  us  to  do/' 

During  the  remainder  of  this  year,  having  ob- 
tained money  for  th^ir  necessities,  they  were  occu- 
pied in  alchemical  labours,  which  Kelly  appears 
to  have  pursued  with  much  zeal  during  their 
long  residence  at  Trebone,  where  they  had  seve- 
ral quarrels,  and  where,  as  far  as  we  can  gather 
from  some  notices  in  the  journal  edited  by  Mr.  Hal- 
liwell,  the  new  arrangement  had  given  rise  to 
jealousies  between  the  two  ladies.  In  1589,  Dee 
proceeded  to  Bremen,  and  his  eyes  now  appear  to 
have  been  turned  towards  England.  His  character 
had  been  branded  in  Germany,  and  he  had  heard 
during  his  absence,  not  only  that  the  queen  was 
displeased  at  his  departure,  but  that  he  was  threat- 
ened on  his  return  with  prosecution  on  the  charge 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Kelly's  death,  24}3 

of  being  a  conjurer.  We  have  seen  him  wandering 
about  the  centre  of  Europe,  sometimes  travelling 
with  the  pomp  of  a  prince,  and  at  others  penniless, 
reckoning  in  vain  on  the  protection  of  the  great,  and 
deceived  and  deluded  by  those  about  him.  Disap- 
pointed, mortified,  and  dispirited,  deserted  even  by 
his  own  servants  and  companions,  at  length,  in 
the  November  of  1589,  he  resolved  to  return  to  his 
own  country,  and  he  landed  at  Gravesend  on  the 
second  of  December,  after  an  absence  of  six  years. 
Before  the  end  of  the  year  Dee  was  again  settled  at 
Mortlake,  pursuing  his  old  studies. 

Kelly,  who  had  been  knighted  in  Germany,  re- 
mained behind,  having,  as  it  appears,  impressed  the 
emperor  Rodolph  with  the  belief  that  he  had  pro- 
ceeded so  far  in  alchemical  knowledge  as  to  be  able 
to  make  gold.  The  emperor  kept  him  about  his 
court,  most  of  the  time  under  restraint,  and  some- 
times  actually  in  prison.     At  length,  in  the  year 

1 593,  endeavouring  to  make  his  escape  by  night, 
Kelly  fell  from  the  wall  of  his  house  in  Prague,  and 
received  injuries  of  which  he  died. 

Dr.  Dee  was  received  by  Elizabeth  with  kindness, 
but  he  had  lost  the  respect  with  which  he  was  for- 
merly regarded.  He  was  gradually  neglected,  and 
left  exposed  to  the  ill-nature  of  his  enemies.     In 

1594,  he  was  obliged  to  write  a  tract,  calling  atten- 
tion to  his  writings  and  his  discoveries,  and  protest- 
ing against  the  opinion  then  generally  entertained 
that  he  was  a  conjurer.  The  queen  at  length  took 
compassion  on  him,  and  after  many  troubles  he  was 
appointed  and  instituted  warden  of  the  college  at 
Manchester.     After  the  loss  of  Kelly,  Dee  obtained 

M  2 


Digitized 


by  Google 


244  SORCERY   AND   MAGIC. 

Other  "  skryers/'  and  continued  his  "  actions*'  with 
the  spirits  to  the  time  of  his  death ;  thongh  their 
revelations  had  now  lost  all  their  imaginative  cha- 
racter, and  consisted  chiefly  in  answer  to  questions 
about  thefts,  hidden  treasures,  andsuch  common-place 
matters.  Under  James,  he  still  received  protection 
from  the  court,  although  his  reputation  as  a  con- 
jurer and  magician  increased.  On  the  5th  of  June^ 
1604,  we  find  him  presenting  a  petition  to  the  king 
at  Greenwich,  imploring  his  aid  against  the  inju- 
rious imputation  of  being  "  a  conjurer,  or  caller,  or 
invocator  of  devils,'^  and  assuring  his  majesty  that 
none  "  of  all  the  great  number  of  the  very  strange 
and  frivolous  fables  or  histories  reported  and  told 
of  him  (as  to  have  been  of  his  doing)  were  true.'' 
This  petition  is  said  to  have  been  one  of  the  causes 
of  an  act  then  passed  against  personal  slander, 
which  had  an  especial  reference  to  the  caseof  Dr.Dee 
But  even  this  did  not  mend  his  reputation,  though 
it  produced  from  the  aged  philosopher  the  follow- 
ing doggrel  lines,  which  show  that  he  was  still  less 
a  poet  than  a  conjurer. 

TO   THE    HONORABLE   MEMBERS   OF   THE   COMMONS   IN 
THE   PRESENT   PARLAMENT. 

The  honor,  due  unto  you  all, 

And  reverence,  to  you  each  one 

I  do  first  yeeld  most  speciall ; 

Grant  me  this  time,  to  heare  my  mone. 

Now  (if  you  will)  full  well  you  may 
Fowle  sclaundrous  tongues  for  ever  tame ; 
And  helpe  the  trueth  to  beare  some  sway, 
In  just  defence  of  a  good  name ; 


Digitized 


by  Google 


DEATH   OF   DR.   DEE.  245 

H€dfe  hundred  yeeres,  which  hatlj  had  wrong. 
By  false  light  tongues  and  divelish  hate ; 
O  helpe  tryde  trueth  to  become  strong, 
So  Ood  of  trueth  will  blesse  your  state. 

in  sundry  sorts  this  sclaunder  great 
<0f  conjurer)  I  have  sore  blamde ; 
But  wilfiill,  rash,  and  spitefiill  heat 
Doth  nothing  cease  to  be  enflamde. 

Yoyr  helpe,  therefore,  by  wisdoms  lore* 
And  by  your  powre,  so  great  and  sure, 
J  humbly  crave,  that  never  more 
This  hellish  wound  I  shall  endure. 

And  so  your  act,  with  honor  great, 
All  ages  will  hereafter  prayse ; 
And  tru«th,  that  sitts  in  heavenly  seat, 
Will,  in  like  case,  your  comforts  rayse* 

June  8,  1604  * 

In  the  subscription  to  this  singular  document, 
Dr.  Dee  describes  himself  as  "  mathematician  to  his 
i][iost  royal  majesty.'"  He  died  at  Mortlake,  in 
1608,  it  is  said  in  great  poverty  ;  but  he  left  behind 
him  many  victims  to  the  same  delusions,  though  few 
so  honest  as  himself  Of  these,  one  of  the  most  re- 
markable was  Simon  Forman,  who  has  a  melan- 
choly celebrity  as  connected  with  the  crimes  of  the 
reign  of  James  L,  and  who  was  succeeded  by  the 
still  more  remarkable  characters,  William  Lilly  and 
Elias  Ashmole.  The  first  half  of  the  seventeenth 
century  was  the  age  of  the  English  magicians. 

*  These  verses,  and  Dee's  petition,  were  printed  in  the  shape 
of  hand-bills,  copies  of  which  are  preserved  in  the  British 

Museum- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


246  SORCERY   AND   MAGIC. 

The  autobiography  of  William  Lilly  is  a  singular 
picture  of  the  credulity  of  Englishmen  at  this 
period.  In  his  younger  days  he  was  acquainted 
with  Forman,  of  whom  he  has  preserved  several 
anecdotes,  and  he  assures  us  that  he  had  seen  one 
of  his  magical  books,  in  which  was  written  with 
his  own  hand,  "  This  I  made  the  devil  write  with 
his  own  hands  in  Lambeth  Fields,  in  1596,  in  Jime 
or  July,  as  I  now  remember/'  His  own^  instructor 
in  astrology,  Evans,  was  less  fortunate  in  an  adven- 
ture with  the  evil  one  in  the  same  neighbour- 
hood, which  seems  to  have  been  celebrated  as  a 
scene  of  such  transactions.  "  Some  time  before  I 
became  acquainted  with  him,''  says  Lilly,  "  he  then 
living  in  the  Minories,  was  desired  by  the  lord 
Bothwell  and  sir  Eenelm  Digby  to  show  them  a 
spirit.  He  promised  so  to  do :  the  time  came,  and 
they  were  all  in  the  body  of  the  circle,  when,  lo, 
upon  a  sudden,  after  some  time  of  invocation,  Evans 
was  taken  from  out  the  room,  and  carried  into  the 
field  near  Battersea  Causeway,  close  to  the  Thames. 
Next  morning,  a  countryman  going  by  to  his  labour, 
and  espying  a  man  in  black  clothes,  came  unto  him 
and  awaked  him,  and  asked  him  how  he  came 
there  ?  Evans  by  this  understood  his  condition,  in- 
quired where  he  was,  how  far  from  London,  and  in 
what  parish  he  was :  which,  when  he  understood, 
he  told  the  labourer  he  had  been  late  at  Battersea 
the  night  before,  and  by  chance  was  left  there  by 
his  friends.  Sir  Kenelm  Digby  and  the  lord  Both- 
well  went  home  without  any  harm,  and  came  next 
day  to  hear  what  was  become  of  him  ;  just  as  they, 
in  the  afternoon,  came  into  the  house,  a  messenger 


Digitized 


by  Google 


LILLY  AND   THE  TREASURE   HUNTERS.  247 

came  from  Evans  to  his  wife,  to  come  to  him  at 
Battersea.  I  inquired  upon  what  account  the  spirit 
carried  him  away ;  who  said  he  had  not,  at  the  time 
of  invocation,  made  any  suffumigation,  at  which  the 
spirits  were  vexed.'' 

One  night  Lilly  went  a  treasure  himting.  It  was 
in  1634,  the  year  of  his  second  marriage.  "  Davy 
Ramsey,  his  majesty's  clock-maker,  had  been  in- 
formed that  there  was  a  great  quantity  of  treasure 
buried  in  the  cloister  of  Westminster  Abbey;  he 
acquaints  dean  Williams  therewith,  who  was  also 
then  bishop  of  Lincoln  ;  the  dean  gave  him  liberty  to 
search  after  it,  with  this  proviso,  that  if  any  was 
discovered,  his  church  should  have  a  share  of  it 
Davy  Ramsey  finds  out  one  John  Scott,  who  pre- 
tended the  use  of  the  Mosaical  rods,  to  assist  him 
herein ;  I  was  desired  to  join  with  him,  unto  which 
I  consented.  One  winter's  night,  Davy  Ramsey, 
with  several  gentlemen,  myself  and  Scott,  entered 
the  cloisters.  We  played  the  hazel-rod  round  about 
the  cloisters ;  upon  the  west  side  of  the  cloisters  the 
rods  turned  one  over  another,  an  argument  that  the 
treasure  was  there.  The  labourers  digged  at  least 
six  foot  deep,  and  then  we  met  with  a  coflSin ;  but 
in  regard  it  was  not  heavy,  we  did  not  open,  which 
we  afterwards  much  repented.  From  the  cloisters 
we  went  into  the  abbey  church,  where,  upon  a 
sudden,  (there  being  no  wind  when  we  began,)  so 
fierce,  so  high,  so  blustering  and  loud  a  wind  did 
roar,  that  we  verily  believed  the  west  end  of  the 
church  would  have  fallen  upon  us  ;  our  rods  would 
not  move  at  all ;  the  candles  and  torches,  all  but 
one,  were    extinguished,    or    burned   very  dimly. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


248  SOBCEEY   AND  MAGIC. 

John  Scott,  my  partner,  was  amazed,  looked  pale, 
knew  not  what  to  think  or  do,  until  I  gave  direc- 
tions, and  commenced  to  dismiss  the  demons; 
which,  when  done,  all  was  quiet  again,  and  each 
man  returned  unto  his  lodging  late,  about  twelve 
o'clock  at  night  I  could  never  since  be  induced  to 
join  with  any  in  such  like  actions/'  Lilly  adds  in 
a  note,  "  Davy  Ramsey  brought  a  half  quartern  sack 
to  put  the  treasure  in/' 

Another  of  Lilly's  magicians  was  William  Hodges, 
who  was  also  an  intimate  friend  of  John  Scott 
"  Scott  having  some  occasions  into  Staffordshire, 
addressed  himself  for  a  month  or  six  weeks  to 
Hodges,  assisted  him  to  dress  his  patients,  let  blood, 
&c.  Being  to  return  to  London,  he  desired  Hodges 
to  show  him  the  person  and  feature  of  the  woman 
he  should  marry.  Hodges  carries  him  into  a  field 
not  far  from  his  house,  pulls  out  his  crystal,  bids 
Scott  set  his  foot  to  his,  and,  after  a  while,  wishes 
him  to  inspect  the  crystal,  and  observe  what  he  saw 
there.  *  I  see,'  saith  Scott,  ^  a  ruddy-complexioned 
wench  in  a  red  waistcoat,  drawing  a  can  of  beer/ 
'  She  must  be  your  wife,'  said  Hodges.  '  You  are 
mistaken,  sir,'  said  Scott ;  *  I  am,  so  soon  as  I 
come  to  London,  to  marry  a  tall  gentlewoman  in 
the  Old  Bailey.'  *  You  must  marry  the  red  waist- 
coat,' said  Hodges.  Scott  leaves  the  country,  comes 
up  to  London,  finds  his  gentlewoman  married :  two 
years  after  going  into  Dover,  in  his  return,  he  re- 
freshed himself  at  an  inn  in  Canterbury,  and  as  he 
came  into  the  hall,  or  first  room  thereof,  he  mis- 
took the  room,  and  went  into  the  buttery,  where  he 
espied  a  maid,  described  Iby  Hodges  as  before  said. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


HODGES  THE   CONJURER.  249 

drawing  a  can  of  beer,  etc.  He  then  more  nar- 
rowly viewing  her  person  and  habit,  found  her  in 
all  parts  to  be  the  same  Hodges  had  described; 
after  which  he  became  a  suitor  unto  her,  and  was 
married  unto  her ;  which  woman  I  have  often  seen. 
This  Scott  related  unto  me  several  times,  being  a 
very  honest  person,  and  made  great  conscience  of 
what  he  spoke.  Another  story  of  him  is  as  follow- 
eth,  which  I  had  related  from  a  person  which  well 
knew  the  truth  of  it  A  neighbour  gentleman  of 
Hodges  lost  his  horse ;  who  having  Hodge's  advice 
for  recovery  of  him,  did  again  obtain  him.  Some 
years  after,  in  a  frolick,  he  thought  to  abuse  him, 
acquainting  a  neighbour  therewith,  viz.,  That  he 
had  formerly  lost  a  horse,  went  to  Hodges,  reco- 
vered him  again,  but  saith  it  was  by  chance ;  '  I 
might  have  had  him  without  going  unto  him  : 
come,  let's  go,  I  will  now  put  a  trick  upon  him  ;  I 
will  have  some  boy  or  other  at  the  town's-end  with 
my  horse,  and  then  go  to  Hodges  and  inquire  for 
him.'  He  did  so,  gave  his  horse  to  a  youth,  with 
orders  to  walk  him  till  he  returned.  Away  he  goes 
with  his  friend,  salutes  Mr.  Hodges,  thanks  him  for 
his  former  courtesy,  and  now  desires  the  like,  hav- 
ing lost  a  horse  very  lately.  Hodges,  after  some 
time  of  pausing,  said,  *  Sir,  your  horse  is  lost,  and 
never  to  be  recovered.'  '  I  thought  what  skill  you 
had,'  replies  the  gallant,  '  my  horse  is  walking  in  a 
lane  at  the  town's-end.'  With  that  Hodges  swore, 
(as  he  was  too  much  given  unto  that  vice,)  *  Your 
horse  is  gone,  and  you  will  never  have  him  again/ 
The  gentleman  parted  in  great  derision  of  Hodges, 
and  went  where  he  left  his  horse ;  when  he  came 

M  5 


Digitized 


by  Google 


250  SORCERY  AND  MAGIC. 

there,  he  found  the  boy  fast  asleep  upon  the  ground, 
the  horse  gone,  the  boy's  arm  in  the  bridle.  He 
returns  again  to  Hodges,  desiring  his  aid,  being 
sorry  for  his  former  abuse.  Old  Will  swore  like  a 
devil.  This  business  ended  not  so ;  for  the  mali- 
cious man  brought  Hodges  into  the  star-chamber, 
bound  him  over  to  the  assizes,  put  Hodges  to  great 
expenses :  but,  by  means  of  the  lord  Dudley,  if  I 
remember  aright,  or  some  other  person  thereabouts, 
he  overcame  the  gentleman,  and  was  acquitted.'^ 

One  of  Lilly's  acquaintance  was  a  female 
"  skryer ;"  which  is  singular  enough,  since  Dr.  Dee's 
spirits  told  him,  on  one  occasion,  that  females  were 
not  admitted  to  these  mysteries.  "  I  was  very  fa- 
miliar,'' he  says,  "  with  one  Sarah  Skelhom,  who 
had  been  speculatrix  unto  one  Arthur  Gauntlet 
about  Grray's  Inn  Lane,  a  very  lewd  fellow,  pro- 
fessing physick.  This  Sarah  had  a  perfect  sight, 
and  indeed  the  best  eyes  for  that  purpose  I  ever 
yet  did  see.  Gauntlet's  books,  after  he  was  dead, 
were  sold,  after  I  had  perused  them,  to  my  scholar 
Humphreys ;  there  were  rare  notions  in  them. 
This  Sarah  lived  a  long  time,  even  until  her  death, 
with  one  Mrs.  Stockman  in  the  Isle  of  Purbeck, 
and  died  about  sixteen  years  since.  Her  mistress 
one  time  being  desirous  to  accompany  her  mother, 
the  lady  Beconsfield,  unto  London,  who  lived 
twelve  miles  from  her  habitation,  caused  Sarah  to 
inspect  her  crystal,  to  see  if  she,  viz.,  her  mother, 
was  gone,  yea  or  not :  the  angels  appeared,-^  and 
shewed  her  mother  opening  a  trunk,  and  taking  out 
a  red  waistcoat,  whereby  she  perceived  she  was  not 
gone     Next  day  she  went  to  her  mother's,  and 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   QUEEN  OF   THE   FAIRIES.  251 

there,  as  she  entered  the  chamber,  she  was  opening 
a  trunk,  and  had  a  red  waistcoat  in  her  hand. 
Sarah  told  me  oft,  the  angels  would  for  some  years 
follow  her,  and  appear  in  every  room  in  the  house, 
until  she  was  weary  of  them.    This  Sarah  Skelhom 
her  call  unto  the  crystal  began,  ^  Oh  ye  good  angels, 
only  and  ordy,   &a    Ellen  Evans,  daughter  of  my 
tutor  Evans,  her  call  unto  the  crystal  was  this  : — 
*  0    tu  Micol,    0    tu    Micoly    regina    pigmeorum, 
veniy   &c     Since  I  have  related  of  the  queen  of 
fairies,   I  shall  acquaint  you,  that  it  is  not  for 
every  one,  or  every  person,  that  these  angelical 
creatures  will  appear  unto,  though  they  may  say 
over  the  call,  over  and  over,  or  indeed  is  it  given  to 
very  many  persons  to  endure  their  glorious  aspects ; 
even  very  many  have  failed  just  at  that  present 
when  they  are  ready  to  manifest  themselves ;  even 
persons  otherwise  of  undaunted  spirits  and  firm  re- 
solution are  herewith  astonished,  and ,  tremble,  as 
it  happened  not  many  years  since  with  us.     A  very 
sober  discreet  person,  of  virtuous  life  and  conversa- 
tion, was  beyond  measure  desirous  to  see  something 
in   this  natura      The  queen  of  fairies  was  invo- 
cated ;  a  gentle  murmuring  wind  came  first ;  after 
that,  amongst  the  hedges,  a  smart  whirlwind ;  by 
and  by  a  strong  blast  of  wind  blew  upon  the  face 
of  the  friend, — and  the  queen  appearing  in  a  most 
illustrious  glory,  *  No  more,  I  beseech  you  \'  quoth 
the  friend.     '  My  heart  faUs;   I  am  not  able  to 
endure  longer.'     Nor  was  he ;   his  black  curling 
hair  rose  up,  and  I  believe  a  bullrush  would  have 
beat  him  to  the  ground ;  he  was  soundly  laughed 
at,  &c.    Sir  Bobert  Holbom,  knight,  brought  one 


Digitized 


by  Google 


252  SORCERY  AND   MAQIC. 

unto  me,  Gladwell  of  Suffolk,  who  had  formerly  had 
sight  and  conference  with  Uriel  and  Raphael,  but 
lost  them  both  by  carelessness ;  so  that  neither  of 
them  both  would  but  very  rarely  appear,  and  then 
presently  be  gone,  resolving  nothing.  He  would 
havie  given  me  two  hundred  pounds  to  have  as- 
sisted him  for  their  recovery,  but  I  am  no  such 
man.  Those  glorious  creatures,  if  well  commanded, 
and  well  observed,  do  teach  the  master  anything  he 
desires  ;  Amant  secreta,  fugitmt  aperta.  The  fairies 
love  the  southern  side  of  hills,  mountains,  and  groves. 
Neatness  and  cleanliness  in  apparel,  a  strict  diet, 
and  upright  life,  fervent  prayers  unto  Grod,  conduce 
much  to  the  assistance  of  those  who  are  curious 
these  ways/' 

The  delusion  of  this  branch  of  superstition, 
which  more  especially  affected  the  minds  of  the 
learned,  neither  held  its  sway  so  long  nor  prevailed 
so  generally  as  the  belief  in  witchcraft  It  seemed 
like  a  visitation  of  providence  to  show  that  the 
boasted  intellect  of  man  was  but  frailty,  and  that 
even  the  wisest  were  sometimes  liable  to  stumble. 
We  must  not  forget  that  in  lp59  the  learned  scholar 
Meric  Casaubon,  who  was  a  believer  in  many  of 
these  wonders,  thought  the  ravings  of  Dee  and 
Kelly  worthy  of  publication,  and  that  a  numerous 
impression  of  that  strange  book  was  quickly  bought 
up.  The  contemporary  possessor  of  a  copy  now  in 
the  British  Museum,  who  had  studied  it  and  loaded 
it  with  manuscript  notes,  has  left  the  following 
note  among  other  memoranda  at  the  commence- 
ment. "  I  remember  well  when  this  book  was  first 
published,  that    the  then  persons  who  held  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


DiL  dee's  book  publisher  253 

government  had  a  solemn  consult  upon  the  sup- 
pressing it,  as  looking  upon  it  as  published  by  the 
Church  of  England  men  in  reproach  of  them  who^ 
then  pretended  so  much  to  inspiration  :  and  Good- 
wyn,  Owen,  and  Nye,  &c.,  were  great  sticklers 
against  it,  but  it  was  so  quickly  published  and 
spread,  and  so  eagerly  bought  up  as  being  a  great 
and  curious  novelty,  that  it  was  beyond  theyr  power 
to  suppresse  it/' 


Digitized 


by  Google 


254 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


THE  WITCHES   OF  WARBOYS. 


In  the  low  grounds  of  the  county  of  Huntingdon, 
on  the  road  between  Huntingdon  and  Ramsey,  and 
about  four  miles  from  the  latter  town,  stands  the 
village  of  Warboys.  It  is  a  considerable  village, 
consisting  of  detached  houses  built  partly  round  the 
village  green,  and  partly  running  in  a  line  from  the 
green  to  the  churcL  One  of  the  best  houses  in  the 
place,  which  was  then  called  a  town,  was  occupied 
in  the  latter  part  of  the  reign  of  queen  Elizabeth  by 
Robert  Throgmorton,  esq.,  a  gentleman  of  respecta- 
bility, who  lived  on  terms  of  intimacy  with  the 
Cromwells  of  Hinchinbrook  and  Ramsey,  —  sir 
Henry  Cromwell,  grandfather  by  his  first  wife  of 
the  protector  Oliver,  was  at  this  time  lord  of  the 
manor, — and  with  the  other  gentry  of  the  neighbour- 
hood. The  family  of  Robert  Throgmorton  con- 
sisted of  himself  and  his  wife,  five  daughters,  of 
whom  the  eldest,  Joan,  was  fifteen  years  of  age,  the 
others  being  named  severally  Jane,  Elizabeth,  Mary, 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  THBOGMOBTONS  OP  WARBOYS.  255 

and  Grace,  and  a  rather  numerous  family  of  ser- 
vants. 

It  iiras  about  the  tenth  of  November,  1689,  that 
Jane  Throgmorton,  then  a  child  under  ten  years  of 
age,  was  suddenly  attacked  with  strange  convidsive 
fits,  with  which  she  was  seized  several  times  in  the 
day,  and  which  continued  *daily  and  with  very  little 
intemussion.  Among  the  villagers  was  a  labouring 
family  of  the  name  of  Samwell,  or  Samuel  (as  it  is 
spelt  in  the  printed  record  of  those  transactions), 
consisting  of  a  man  and  his  wife,  and  their  grown- 
up daughter  Agnes,  whose  cottage  stood  next  to 
that  of  Robert  Throgmorton,  and  who  were  in  the 
habit  of  visiting  the  house  to  seek  employment  or 
the  charitable  hospitality  which  the  poor  usually 
found  in  the  kitchens  or  halls  of  their  betters.  One 
day,  soon  after  the  illness  of  Jane  Throgmorton, 
mother  Samwell,  as  the  old  woman  was  popularly 
called,  came  into  the  house  and  seated  herself  ac- 
cording to  custom  in  the  chimney  comer  by  the 
side  of  a  woman  who  was  holding  in  her  arms  the 
child,  which  was  just  recovering  from  one  of  its  fits, 
and  it  no  sooner  saw  her  than  it  began  to  cry  out, 
pointing  to  mother  Samwell,  "  Did  you  ever  see  one 
more  like  a  witch  than  she  is  ?  Take  off  her  black 
thrumbed  cap,  .for  I  cannot  abide  to  look  at  her  f' 
Little  attention  was  paid  to  these  expressions  at  the 
time,  except  that  the  mother  of  the  child  rebuked 
it  for  its  crossness  ;  and  a  day  or  two  after,  as  they 
found  no  abatement  of  the  child's  malady,  they  sent 
to  Cambridge  to  consult  Dr.  Barrow,  a  celebrated 
physician  there,  but  neither  he  nor  another  medical 


Digitized 


by  Google 


256  SORCERY   AND  MAGIC. 

man,  named  Butler,  could  discover  any  disease  in 
the  child. 

Things  went  on  in  this  manner  for  about  a 
month,  when  two  other  daughters,  respectively  of 
the  age  of  about  twelve  and  thirteen,  were  attacked 
with  similar  fits,  and  they  also  cried  out  on  mother 
Samwell,  "  Take  her  away !  look  where  she  standeth 
there  before  us  in  a  black  thrumbed  cap !" — this 
was  her  usual  head-dress,  though  it  apppears  that 
she  did  not  wear  it  on  the  present  occasion — "  it  is 
she  that  hath  bewitched  us,  and  she  will  kill  us  if 
you  don't  take  her  away  I"  The  parents  now  for 
the  first  time  began  to  suspect  that  their  children 
were  bewitched,  a  suspicion  which  it  appears  had 
already  been  harboured  by  the  doctors,  though  they 
had  concealed  it ;  and  it  was  increased  when,  a 
month  later,  the  youngest  daughter,  who  was  about 
nine  years  of  age,  was  seized  with  the  same  fits,  and 
cried  also  upon  mother  SamwelL  About  the  same 
time,  the  eldest  daughter,  Joan  Throgmorton,  was 
attacked  in  the  same  manner,  and  like  the  others 
cried  after  mother  Samwell. 

Joan  Throgmorton's  fits  were  much  more  violent 
than  those  of  the  younger  children,  and  while  sufier- 
ing  from  them  her  mind  seemed  to  wander,  she 
said  strange  things,  and  appeared  to  hold  converse 
with  some  person  or  thing  which  was  not  visible. 
Among  other  things,  she  declared  that  the  spirit 
told  her  that  twelve  persons  would  be  bewitched  in 
the  house,  all  through  the  agency  of  mother  Sam- 
well,  and  she  named  the  other  seven,  who  were  all 
Mrs.    Throgmorton's    servants.      Accordingly,   the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   WITCHES  OF   WARBOYS.  257 

servants  were  soon  after  attacked  in  the  same  man- 
ner, and  called  likewise  on  mother  Samwell  as  their 
persecutor,  saying,  "  Take  her  away,  mistress  !  for 
God's  sake,  take  her  away,  and  burn  her !  for  she 
will  kill  us  all  if  you  let  her  alone  V  The  servants 
soon  left  their  places,  and  no  sooner  had  they  done 
this  than  they  were  perfectly  well,  and  remained  so, 
while  those  who  came  into  their  places  were  imme- 
diately exposed  to  the  same  attacks. 

It  was  observable  of  them  all,  that  when  they 
were  out  of  their  fits,  they  were  totally  unconscious 
of  everything  they  had  said. 

On  St.  Valentine's  eve,  the  thirteenth  of  February, 
1590,  Robert  Throgmorton  was  visited  by  his  bro- 
ther-in-law, Gilbert  Pickering,  esq.,  of  Titchmarch- 
grove,  in  Northamptonshire,  who  found  the  children 
to  all  appearance  in  perfect  health.  He  had,  how- 
ever, heard  of  their  condition,  and  learning  on 
his  arrival  that  some  of  the  friends  of  the  Throg- 
mortons  were  gone  to  fetch  mother  Samwell  to  the 
house,  and  finding  that  they  had  been  long  with 
her,  he  "  concluded  that  she  would  not  come,  though 
she  had  promised  that  she  would  come  and  see  them 
whenever  their  parents  should  send  for  her ;  and 
that  she  would  venture  up  to  her  chin  in  the  water, 
and  lose  some  of  her  best  blood,  to  do  them  a  ser- 
vice. But  now  her  mind,  it  seemed,  was  altered, 
because,  as  she  said,  all  the  children  cried  out  of 
her,  and  said  that  she  had  bewitched  them,  and  she 
also  feared  that  the  common  practice  of  scratching 
would  be  used  upon  her,  which,  indeed,  was  in- 
tended. But  both  her  parents  and  Mr.  Pickering 
had  taken  advice  of  good  divines  of  the  unlawful- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


258  SORCERY   AND   MAGIC. 

ness  of  it  Wherefore  Mr.  Pickering  went  to  mother 
SamwelVs  house,  both  to  see,  and  to  persuade  her 
that,  if  she  was  any  cause  of  the  children's  trouble, 
to  amend  it  When  he  came  to  the  house,  he  found 
there  Mr.  Whittle,  Mrs.  Audley,  and  others,  endea- 
vouring to  persuade  her,  but  she  refused  it ;  where- 
upon Mr.  Pickering  told  her  that  he  had  authority 
to  bring  her,  and  if  she  would  not  go  willingly,  he 
would  compel  her,  which  he  accordingly  did,  along 
with  her  daughter  Agnes,  and  one  Cicely  Burder, 
who  were  all  suspected  to  be  witches,  or  in  con- 
federacy with  mother  SamwelL  As  they  were  going 
to  Mr.  Throgmorton's  house,  Mr.  Whittle  and  Mrs. 
Audley  and  others  going  on  before,  mother  Samwell, 
Agnes  Samwel,  and  Cicely  Burder,  in  the  middle, 
and  Mr.  Pickering  behind,  Mr.  Pickering  perceived 
that  mother  Samwel  would  have  talked  with  her 
daughter  Agnes,  if  he  had  not  followed  so  close  that 
they  could  have  no  opportunity ;  and  when  they 
came  to  Mr.  Throgmorton's  door,  mother  Samwell 
made  a  curtsey  to  Mr.  Pickering,  offering  him  to  go 
in  before  her,  that  she  might  have  an  opportunity 
to  confer  with  her  daughter  in  the  entry,  but  he  re- 
fused ;  also  she  thrust  her  head  as  near  as  she 
could  to  her  daughter's  head,  and  said  these  words  : 
'  I  charge  thee,  do  not  confess  anything.'  Mr. 
Pickering,  being  behind  them,  and  perceiving  it, 
thrust  his  head  as  near  as  he  could  betwixt  theirs, 
whilst  the  words  were  speaking,  and  hearing  them 
presently,  replied  to  old  mother  Samwell,  *  Dost  thou 
charge  thy  daughter  not  to  confess?'  To  which 
she  answered,  *  I  said  *not  so,  but  charged  her  to* 
hasten  home  to  get  her  father  his  dinner.'    Whilst 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  WITCHES   OF   WARBOYS.  259 

these  words  were  speaking,  Mr.  Whittle,  Mrs.  Aud- 
ley,  and  the  rest,  went  into  the  house,  and  three  of 
the  children  stood  in  the  hall  by  the  fire,  perfectly 
well;  but  no  sooner  had  mother  Samwell  entered  the 
hall,  but  these  three  children  fell  down  at  one  mo- 
ment on  the  ground,  strangely  tormented,  so  that 
if  they  had  been  let  alone,  they  would  have  leaped 
and  sprung  about  like  a  fish  newly  taken  out  of  the 
water,  their  bellies  lifting  up,  and  their  head  and 
heels  still  remaining  on  the  ground.""  When  mother 
Samwell  was  brought  to  the  children,  they  were  vio- 
lent in  their  attempts  to  scratch  her,  which  was  re- 
garded as  a  sure  sign  of  her  being  a  witch. 

The  next  day  Mr.  Pickering  took  Elizabeth 
Throgmorton  home  with  him  to  Titchmarsh-grove, 
where  she  remained  till  the  eighth  of  September  fol- 
lowing, always  troubled  with  her  disorder,  which  at 
tacked  her  in  a  variety  of  ways.  Sometimes  the 
reading  of  anything  spiritual,  or  even  saying  grace 
at  table,  threw  her  into  a  fit  immediately ;  some- 
times she  would  be  in  a  state  of  insensibility  except 
to  one  thing  on  which  she  was  occupied  ;  sometimes 
a  particular  game  alone  kept  her  tranquil ;  at  other 
times  she  was  for  a  long  period  in  violent  hysterics, 
and  then  she  would  cry  out  against  mother  Samwell. 
On  the  second  of  March  after  her  arrival  at  Titch- 
march-grove,  "  all  her  fits  were  merry,  full  of  ex- 
ceeding laughter,  and  so  hearty  and  excessive,  that 
if  she  had.  been  awake,  she  would  have  been 
ashamed  of  being  so  full  of  trifling  toys,  and  some 
merry  jests  of  her  own  making,  which  would  occa- 
sion herself,  as  well  as  the  standers  by,  to  laugh  at 
them.     In  this  fit  she  chose  one  of  her  uncles  to  go 


Digitized 


by  Google 


260  SORCERY   AND  MAGIC. 

to  cards  with  her ;  and  desiring  to  see  the  end  of 
it,  they  played  together.  Soon  after,  there  was  a 
book  brought  and  laid  before  her,  upon  which  she 
threw  herself  backwards ;  but  that  being  taken 
away,  she  presently  recovered  and  played  again : 
which  was  often  tried,  and  found  true.  As  she 
thus  played  at  cards,  her  eyes  were  almost  shut,  so 
that  she  saw  the  cards,  and  nothing  else  ;  knew  her 
uncle,  and  nobody  else ;  she  heard  and  answered 
him,  and  no  other  person ;  she  perceived  when  he 
played  foul  or  stole  from  her  either  counters  or 
cards,  but  another  might  steal  them  out  of  her 
hands  without  her  seeing  or  feeling  of  them.  Some- 
times she  would  chide  another  whom  she  did  see 
and  hear  ;  sometimes  a  little  child,  but  never  above 
one  in  a  fit  The  fifth  of  March  she  fell  into  a  fit 
in  the  morning,  and  longed  to  go  home  to  her 
father's.  The  sixth,  one  of  her  father  s  men  came 
over  to  Titchmarch-grove,  whom  she  had  often 
called  in  her  fit  to  carry  her  to  Warboys  to  her 
father's,  saying,  if  she  were  but  halfway,  she  knew 
that  she  should  be  welL  To  try  this,  they  carried 
her  towards  Warboys  on  horseback;  and  being 
scarce  gone  a  bow-shet,  by  a  pond  side,  she  awaked, 
wondering  where  she  was,  not  knowing  anything,  but 
no  sooner  the  horse's  head  was  turned  back,  but 
she  fell  into  her  fit  again ;  and  for  three  days  after, 
and  no  longer,  as  often  as  she  was  carried  to  the 
pond,  she  awaked,  and  was  well ;  but  as  soon  as 
she  turned  back  again,  her  fit  returned.  The  eighth 
day  of  March  she  had  a  new  antick  trick  ;  for  she 
would  go  well  enough  three  steps,  but  the  third  she 
downright  halted,  giving  a  beck  with  her  head  as 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   WITCHES  OP  WAEBOYS.  261 

low  as  her  knees ;  and  as  she  was  sitting  by  the 
fire,  she  would  suddenly  start  up,  saying  she  would 
go  to  Warboys ;  but  she  was  stopped  at  the  door, 
when  going  out,  with  a  nod  she  hit  her  forehead 
against  the  latch,  which  raised  a  lump  as  big  as  a 
walnut ;  and  being  carried  to  the  pond,  and  there 
awaking,  she  asked  how  she  came  to  be  hurt. 
There  she  continued  all  day  well,  playing  with  other 
children  at  bowls,  or  some  other  sport,  for  the 
foolisher  sport  she  made  use  of,  the  less  she  was 
tormented  with  the  spirit ;  but  as  soon  as  any  mo- 
tion was  made  of  coming  into  the  house,  the  fit  pre- 
sently took  her,  so  that  for  twelve  days  she  was 
never  out  of  her  fit  within  doors,  eating  and  drink- 
ing in  it,  but  neither  seeing,  hearing,  nor  under- 
standing, and  without  memory  of  speaking." 

About  the  middle  of  March,  1590,  the  Cromwell 
family  residing  at  this  time  at  Ramsey,  lady  Crom- 
well came  with  her  daughter-in-law,  Mrs.  Cromwell, 
(wife  of  Sir  Henry's  son  Oliver,)  on  a  visit  to  the 
Throgmortons.  She  was  much  affected  at  the  suf- 
ferings of  the  children,  and  sent  for  mother  Sam  well, 
whom  she  charged  with  being  the  cause  of  them, 
using  threatening  words  towards  her.  Mother  Sam- 
well  denied  all,  declaring  that  the  Throgmortons 
did  her  wrong,  and  that  they  blamed  her  without 
cause  ;  to  which  lady  Cromwell  replied  that  neither 
Mr  Throgmorton  nor  his  wife  accused  her,  but  the 
children  themselves  in  their  fits,  "  or  rather  the 
spirit  within  them."  A  divine  named  Dr.  Hall 
was  present,  and  he  and  the  lady  wished  to  examine 
the  accused  more  closely,  but  she  refused.  "  When 
the  lady  found  that  neither  she  nor  anybody  else 


Digitized 


by  Google 


262  SORCERY   AND   MAGIC. 

could  prevail,  and  that  she  wanted  to  be  gone,  she 
suddenly  pulled  off  her  kercher,  and  with  a  pair  of 
scissors  cut  off  a  lock  of  her  hair,  and  gave  it  pri- 
vately to  Mrs.  Throgmorton  with  her  hair-lace,  de- 
siring, her  to  burn  them."  This  was  an  approved 
antidote  against  witchcraft.  "  Mother  Samwell, 
finding  herself  so  served,  spoke  thus  to  the  lady, 
*  Madam,  why  do  you  use  me  thus  ?  I  never  did 
you  any  harm  as  yet'  These  words  were  after- 
wards remembered,  though  not  taken  notice  of  at 
that  time/' 

Lady  Cromwell  returned  to  Ramsey  the  same 
day,  and  "  that  night  my  lady  Cromwell  was  sud- 
denly troubled  in  a  dream  about  mother  Samwell ; 
and  as  she  imagined  was  mightily  disturbed  in  her 
sleep  by  a  cat  which  mother  Samwell  had  sent  her, 
which  offered  to  pluck  off  the  skin  and  flesh  off  her 
bones  and  arms.  The  struggle  betwixt  the  cat  and 
the  lady  was  so  great  in  her  bed  that  night,  and  she 
made  so  terrible  a  noise,  that  she  waked  her  bed- 
fellow, Mrs.  Cromwell,  [both  their  husbands  were 
from  home,]  who,  perceiving  the  lady  thus  dis- 
quieted, awaked  her,  whom  the  lady  thanked  for  so 
doing,  and  told  her  how  much  she  had  been  troubled 
with  mother  Samwell  and  her  cat,  with  many  other 
circumstances,  which  made  her  so  uneasy,  that  she 
coidd  not  rest  all  that  night  for  fear  of  the  same." 
Next  day  lady  Cromwell  was  seized  with  an  illness 
from  which  she  never  recovered. 

Various  other  attempts  were  made  to  persuade 
mother  Samwell  to  acknowledge  her  fault  and  re- 
lieve the  children  from  their  sufferings,  but  for 
months  no  attempt  was  made  to  press  the  matter 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   WITCHES   OF  WARBOYS.  263 

against  her  in  a  judicial  manner,  although  the  fits 
continued  unabated.  In  1592,  the  spirits  began  to 
show  themselves  to  the  children  in  their  fits,  and 
sometimes  when  they  were  not  in  their  fits,  and  to 
converse  with  them  in  a  familiar  manner,  always 
accusing  mother  Samwell,  and  prognosticating  that 
she  would  at  last  suffer  the  reward  of  her  crimes. 
They  began  now  only  to  be  quiet  when  the  pre- 
sumed witch  was  near  them,  and  it  was  found  ne- 
cessary to  introduce  her  into  the  house  as  their 
nurse,  which  was  done  much  against  the  inclination 
of  her  husband,  old  Samwell. 

The  suspicions  of  witchcraft  were  now  strength- 
ened by  the  occurrences  of  every  day ;  mother  Sam- 
well herself  was  once  attacked  with  fits,  and  she 
said  the  house  was  haunted  with  evil  spirits,  and 
she  would  leave  it ;  the  spirits  themselves  became 
hourly  more  familiar ;  and  new  efforts  were  made 
to  persuade  the  old  woman  to  confess  and  amend 
what  she  had  done.  Tormented  with  these  impor- 
tunities, she  one  day  let  herself  be  persuaded  to 
pronounce  an  exorcism  against  the  spirits,  and  the 
children  were  immediately  relieved  from  their  in- 
fluence. "  Mr.  Throgmorton^s  face  was  then  to- 
wards the  children,  and  his  back  to  the  old  woman, 
and  seeing  them  start  up  at  once,  he  said, '  Thanks 
be  to  God !'  In  the  meantime  the  old  woman  fell 
down  on  her  knees  behind  him,  and  said,  '  Good 
master,  forgive  me."  He,  turning  about,  and  seeing 
her  down,  said,  '  Why,  mother  Samwell,  what  is  the 
matter  !^  *  0,  sir,"  said  she,  '  I  have  been  the  cause 
of  aU  this  trouble  to  your  children/  '  Have  you, 
mother  Samwell  f    said    he  ;   '  and  why  ?     What 


Digitized 


by  Google 


264  SORCERY    AND   MAGIC. 

cause  did  I  ever  give  you  to  use  me  and  my  chil- 
dren thus  V  '  None  at  all/  said  she.  *  Then/  says 
he,  ^  you  have  done  me  the  more  wrong/  *  Good 
master/  said  she,  *  forgive  me/  ^  God  forgive  you,' 
said  he,  '  and  I  do  ;  but  tell  me  how  you  came  to 
be  such  a  woman/  '  Master,'  said  she,  M  have  for- 
saken my  Maker,  and  given  my  soul  to  the  devil' 
Then  the  grandmother  and  mother  of  the  children, 
who  were  in  the  hall,  hearing  them  so  loud  in  the 
parlour,  came  in,  whom  mother  Samwell  asked  par- 
don of  likewise.  Mrs.  Throgmorton,  the  mother, 
presently  forgave  her  with  all  her  heart,  but  could 
not  well  tell  what  was  the  matter.  Then  mother 
Samwell  asked  the  three  children  that  were  there, 
and  the  rest,  forgiveness,  and  kissed  them,  the  chil- 
dren easily  forgiving  her.  Mr.  Throgmorton  and 
his  wife  perceiving  the  old  woman  so  penitent  and 
cast  down,  she  weeping  and  lamenting  all  the  time, 
did  all  they  could  to  comfort  her,  and  told  her  they 
would  freely  forgive  her  from  their  hearts,  provided 
their  children  were  no  more  troubled.  She  said, 
she  trusted  in  God  they  would  never  be  troubled 
again,  yet  could  not  be  comforted.  Mrs.  Throg- 
morton then  sent  for  Dr.  Dorrington,  minister  of 
the  town,  and  told  him  all  the  circumstances ;  and 
all  of  them  endeavoured  to  make  her  easy,  but 
nevertheless  she  wept  all  that  night  The  next  day, 
being  Christmas  even,  and  the  sabbath.  Dr.  Dor- 
rington chose  his  text  of  repentance  out  of  the 
Psalms,  and  communicating  her  confession  to  the 
assembly,  directed  his  discourse  chiefly  to  tha^t  pur- 
pose, to  comfort  a  penitent  heart,  that  it  might 
affect  her.     All  the  sermon-time  mother  Samwell 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MOTHER   SAMWBLL's   CONFESSION.  265 

wept  and  lamented,  and  was  frequently  so  loud  in 
her  passions,  that  she  drew  the  eyes  of  the  congre- 
gation upon  her." 

The  next  day  mother  Samwell  contradicted  all 
she  had  said,  declaring  that  she  was  drawn  into 
the  confession  by  her  surprise  at  finding  that  her 
exorcism  had  relieved  the  children,  and  that  she 
hardly  knew  what  she  was  saying.  It  was  believed 
that  this  denial  was  the  result  of  a  compact  with 
her  husband  and  daughter,  and  all  other  means 
proving  ineffectual  to  bring  her  back  to  her  confes- 
sion, they  carried  her  at  the  end  of  December 
(1592)  before  the  bishop  of  Lincoln.  The  old 
woman  was  now  thoroughly  frightened,  and  she 
made  a  new  confession,  that  she  was  really  a  witch, 
that  she  had  several  spirits  whose  names  she  re- 
peated, one  of  which  appeared  in  the  shape  of  a 
dun  chicken,  and  often  sucked  her  chin,  and  that 
they  were  given  to  her  by  an  "  upright  man,'"  of 
whose  name  and  dwelling-place  she  was  equally 
ignorant  On  this  confession,  both  mother  and 
daughter  were  committed  to  Huntingdon  jail,  but 
the  latter  was  bailed  in  accordance  with  Mr.  Throg- 
morton's  wish  to  take  her  to  his  house,  in  order  to 
see  if  her  presence  would  have  the  same  effect  on 
his  children  as  that  of  her  mother. 

Dr.  Dorrington  and  a  Cambridge  "  scholar''  were 
also  in  the  house,  and  the  evidence  of  the  former  as 
to  what  happened  in  the  house  when  Agnes  Sam- 
well  was  brought  there  was  of  great  weight  against 
her  on  her  trial  On  the  10th  of  February,  1593, 
according  to  Dr.  Dorrington's  statement,  "  in  the 
afternoon,  she  (Jane  Throgmorton)  lay  groaning  in 

VOL.   I.  N 


Digitized 


by  Google 


266  SORCERY   AND   MAGIC. 

her  fit  by  the  fire-side,  and  suddenly  was  taken 
with  a  bleeding  at  the  nose,  which  surprised  her 
very  much,  fearing  ill  news  after  it.  When  she  had 
bled  much  in  her  handkerchief,  she  said  it  was  a 
good  deed  to  throw  it  in  the  fire  and  burn  the 
witch.  After  she  had  talked  thus,  it  appeared  that 
the  spirit  came  to  her ;  she  smiling  and  looking 
about  her,  saying,  '  What  is  this,  in  God's  name, 
that  comes  tumbling  to  me  ?  it  tumbles  like  a  foot- 
ball, it  looks  like  a  puppet-player,  and  appears 
much  like  its  dame's  old  thrumb-cap.  What  is  your 
name,  I  pray  you  ?'  said  she.  The  thing  answered 
his  name  was  Blew.  To  which  she  answered,  '  Mr. 
Blew,  you  are  welcome ;  I  never  saw  you  before ; 
I  thought  my  nose  bled  not  for  nothing  ;  what  news 
have  you  brought?  What!'  says  she,  'dost  thou 
say  I  shall  be  worse  handled  than  ever  I  was? 
Ha !  what  dost  thou  say  ?  that  I  shall  now  have  my 
fits,  when  I  shall  both  hear  and  see  and  know 
everybody?  that's  a  new  trick  indeed.  I  think 
never  any  of  my  sisters  were  so  used,  but  I  care  not 
for  you ;  do  your  worst,  and  when  you  have  done, 
you  will  make  an  end.'  After  this  she  was  silent 
awhile,  but  listening  to  something  that  was  said, 
presently  called  for  Agnes  Samwell,  asking  where 
she  was,  and  saying  that  she  had  too  much  liberty, 
and  that  she  must  be  more  strictly  looked  to  ;  *  for 
lately  she  was  in  the  kitchen-chamber  talking  with 
her  spirits,  and  intreated  Mr.  Blew  not  to  let  me 
have  any  such  extreme  fits,  when  I  spoke,  heard, 
and  knew  everybody.  But  he  says  he  will  torment 
me  more,  and  not  rest  till  dame  Agnes  Samwell  is 
brought  to  her  end ;  so  that  now,'  says  she  to 
8 


Digitized 


by  Google 


DIALOGUES   WITH   THE   SPIRITS.  267 

Agnes  Samwell,  who  was  just  come  to  her,  *  it  will 
be  no  better  with  us  tiQ  you  and  your  mother  are 
both  hanged/  The  maid  confessed  she  was  in  the 
kitchen-chamber  and  alone,  but  denyed  that  she 
talked  with  spirits,  or  knew  any  such.  Mrs.  Jane 
bid  her  not  deny  it,  for  the  spirits  would  not  lye. 
Soon  after  she  came  out  of  this  fit,  and  com- 
plained of  great  pain  in  her  leggs,  and  being  asked 
where  she  had  been,  and  what  she  had  said,  she 
answered,  that  she  had  been  asleep,  and  said  no- 
thing she  knew  of,  and  wondered  how  her  hanker- 
chief  came  to  be  so  bloody,  saying,  some  body  else 
had  bloodyed  it,  and  not  she,  for  she  was  not  used 
to  bleed." 

The  other  children  were  much  affected  this  day 
and  the  next,  and  all  seemed  to  conspire  against 
Agnes  Samwell ;  but  it  was  Jane  Throgmorton  who 
appears  to  have  been  most  familiar  with  the  spirits. 
On  the  11th  of  February,  she  "  was  sick  and  full  of 
pain  all  day ;  when  night  came,  after  supper,  she 
fell  into  her  fit  as  the  night  before,  being  able  to 
see,  hear,  and  understand  everjthing  that  was 
asked  of  her ;  and  having  continued  in  this  fit 
some  time,  she  fell  into  her  senseless  fit,  and  being 
silent  awhile,  and,  her  mouth  shut,  she  fetched  a 
great  groan,  and  said,  *  Whence  came  you,  Mrs. 
Smack,  and  what  news  do  you  bring  X  The  spirit 
answered,  that  he  came  from  fighting.  Said  she, 
'  With  whom  X  The  spirit  answered,  *  with  Pluck.' 
'  Where  did  you  fight,  I  pray  you  X  said  she.  The 
spirit  answered,  in  old  dame's  back-house,  which 
stood  in  mother  Sam  well's  yard  ;  '  and  they  fought 
with  great  cowlstaves  last  night'    *  And  who  got 

N   2 


Digitized 


by  Google 


268  SORCEKY   AND   MAGIC. 

the  mastery,  I  pray  you  X  said  she.  He  answered, 
he  broke  Pluck's  head.  Says  she,  ^  I  wish  he  had 
broke  your  neck  also.'  Saith  the  spirit,  *  Is  that  all 
the  thanks  I  shall  have  for  my  labour  X  *  What,' 
says  she,  *  do  you  look  for  thanks  at  my  hand  ?  I 
wish  you  were  all  hanged  up  against  one  another, 
for  you  are  aU  nought;  but  God  will  defend  me 
from  you  ;*  so  he  departed  and  bid  her  farewell. 
Being  asked  when  he  would  come  again,  he  said, 
*  On  Wednesday  night.'  He  was  no  sooner  gone, 
but  presently  came  Pluck  to  her,  to  whom  she  said, 
'  From  whence  come  you.  Pluck,  with  your  head 
hanging  down  sof  He  answered  just  as  Smack 
had  told  her.  Then  said  the  spirit  to  her,  *  When 
saw  you  Smack  X  She  answered,  that  she  knew  no 
such  feUow.  '  Yes,'  says  he,  *  but  you  do,  but  you 
will  not  be  known  of  him.'  *  It  seems,'  says  she, 
'  that  you  have  met  with  your  match.'  And  after 
such  like  expressions,  he  went  away,  and  presently 
she  came  out  of  her  fit,  and  complained  of  pain  in 
her  legs.  The  next  day  she  was  very  sick  all  day, 
it  being  Monday^  and  in  the  afternoon  fell  into  a 
very  strange  fit,  having  lost  all  her  senses  for  about 
half  an  hour  ;  Agnes  Samwell  seeing  the  extremity 
of  which,  seemed  to  pray  earnestly  for  her  along 
with  the  rest ;  and  being  asked  whether  it  pro- 
ceeded from  wantonness,  as  she  used  to  say,  she 
could  not  deny  but  it  must  proceed  from  some 
supernatural  power.  When  the  fit  was  over,  she 
was  well,  except  the  pain  in  her  legs.  After  sup- 
per, as  soon  as  her  parents  were  risen,  she  fell  into 
the  same  fit  again,  as  before,  and  then  became 
senseless,  and  in  a  little  time  opening  her  mouth. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


DIALOGUES   WITH   THE   SPIRITS.  269 

she  said,  '  Wai  ^his  hold  for  ever  ?  I  hope  it  will 
be  better  one  day.  From  whence  came  you  now, 
Catch  V  said  she,  '  limping.  I  hope  you  have  met 
with  your  match.'  Catch  answered,  that  Smack 
and  he  had  been  fighting,  and  that  Smack  had 
broken  his  leg.  Said  she,  *  That  Smack  is  a  shrewd 
fellow,  methinks  I  would  I  could  see  him.  Pluck  came 
last  night,"  said  she,  *  with  his  head  broke,  and  now 
you  have  broken  your  leg ;  I  hope,'  said  she,  *  he 
will  break  both  your  necks  before  he  hath  done 
with  you.'  Catch  answered,  that  he  would  be  even 
with  him  before  he  had  done.  Then  said  she,  '  Put 
forth  your  other  leg,  and  let  me  see  if  I  can  break 
that,'  having  a  stick  in  her  hand.  The  spirit  told 
her  that  she  could  not  hit  him.  *  Can  I  not  hit  you  V 
said  she ;  '  let  me  try.'  Then  the  spirit  put  out 
his  leg,  and  she  lifted  up  the  stick  easily,  and  sud- 
denly struck  the  ground  *  You  have  not  hurt  me,' 
said  the  spirit.  '  Have  I  not  hurt  you  V  said  sha 
'  No,  but  I  would  if  I  could,  and  then  I  would 
make  some  of  you  come  short  home.'  So  she 
seemed  divers  times  to  strike  at  the  spirit,  but  he 
leaped  over  the  stick,  as  she  said,  like  a  Jack-an- 
apes.  So  after  many  such  tricks  the  spirit  went 
away,  and  she  came  out  of  her  fit,  continuing  all 
that  night,  and  the  next  day,  very  sick,  and  full  of 
pain  in  her  legs.  At  night,  when  supper  was 
ended,  she  fell  into  her  sensible  fit  again,  which 
continued  as  usual,  and  then  she  grew  senseless, 
and  after  a  little  time,  as  usual,  fetching  a  great 
groan,  she  said,  *  Ha,  sirrah !  are  you  come  with 
your  arm  in  jbl  sling,  Mr.  Blew  ?  Who  hath  met 
with  you,  I  pray  ?'     The  spirit  said,  '  You  know 


Digitized 


by  Google 


270  SORCBKT  AND   MAGIC. 

well  enough/  She  answered,  *  Do  I  know  well 
enough  ?  how  should  I  know  X  *  Why/  said  the 
spirit,  ^  Smack  and  I  were  fighting,  and  he  hath 
broken  my  arm."  Said  she,  *  That  Smack  is  a  stout 
fellow  indeed ;  I  hope  he  will  break  all  your  necks, 
because  you  punish  me  without  a  cause.  I  wish,' 
said  she,  *  that  I  could  be  once  acquainted  with 
him.'  *  We  will  be  even  with  him,'  said  Blew,  *  one 
day.'  *  Why,'  said  she,  *  what  will  ye  do  f  The 
spirit  said  they  would  all  fall  upon  him  and  beat 
him.  Saith  she,  '  Perhaps  he  cares  not  for  you  all, 
for  he  has  broken  Pluck's  head,  Catch's  leg,  and 
your  arm  ;  now  you  have  something  to  do,  you  may 
go  and  heal  your  arm.'  '  Yes,'  saith  the  spirit, 
^  when  my  arm  is  well,  we  will  beat  Smack.'  So 
they  parted,  and  she  came  out  of  her  fit,  and  com- 
plained of  most  parts  of  her  body ;  so  that  she 
seemed  easier  while  the  spirit  was  talking  with 
her,  than  when  she  came  out  of  her  fit.  The  next 
day,  which  was  Wednesday,  she  was  very  ill,  and 
when  night  came,  she  first  fell  into  her  sensible  fit, 
and  then  into  her  senseless  one,  and  after  fetching 
a  great  sigh,  she  said,  *  Whence  came  you,  Mr. 
Smack  f  He  said  he  was  come  according  to  his 
promise  on  Sunday  night.  Said  she,  ^It  is  very 
likely  you  will  keep  your  promise,  but  I  had  rather 
you  would  keep  away  till  you  are  sent  for;  but 
what  news  have  you  brought  ?'  Said  he,  *  I  told 
you  I  had  been  fighting  last  Sunday  night,  but  I 
have  had  many  battles  since.'  *  So  it  seems,'  said 
she,  '  for  here  was  both  Pluck,  Catch,  and  Blew, 
and  all  came  lame  to  me.'  *  Yes,'  said  he,  *  I  have 
met  with  them   all.'      *  But  I   wonder,'  said  she, 


Digitized 


by  Google 


SCRATCHING  THE   WITCHES.  271 

*  you  could  beat  them,  for  they  are  very  great,  and 
you  are  but  a  little  one.'  Said  he,  *I  am  good 
enough  for  two  of  the  best  of  them  together.'  *  But/ 
said  she,  '  I  can  teU  you  news.'  '  What's  that  X 
said  he.  *  They  will  all  of  them  fall  upon  you  at 
once,  and  beat  you.'  He  said  he  cared  not  for 
that,  he  would  beat  two  of  the  best  of  them.  *  And 
who  shall  beat  the  other  two  X  said  she,  *  for  there 
is  one  who  hath  been  often  spoke  of,  called  Hard- 
name,  his  name  standing  upon  eight  letters,  and 
every  letter  standeth  for  a  word,  but  what  his 
name  is  otherwise,  we  know  not'  The  spirit  an- 
swered that  his  cousin  Smack  would  help  him  to 
beat  the  other  two.  There  are  also  two  other 
Smacks,  as  appears  from  the  old  woman's  confes- 
sion. *  What  X  said  she,  *  will  your  cousin  Smack 
help  you  ?  is  there  kindred  amongst  devils  ?  I  never 
heard  of  that  before,  God  keep  me  from  that  kin- 
dred!'" 

This  strange  scene  was  also  a  part  of  Dr. 
Dorrington's  evidence.  Things  continued  thus  till 
the  month  of  April,  when  it  was  determined  again 
to  put  in  practise  the  remedy  of  scratching. 

"  On  Monday  foUpwing,  which  was  the  day  ap- 
pointed for  scratching,  Mrs.  Joan  fell  into  her  fit  a 
little  before  supper,  and  continued  so  all  supper- 
time,  being  not  able  to  stand  on  her  legs.  As  soon 
as  they  began  to  give  thanks  after  supper,  she 
started  up  upon  her  feet  and  came  to  the  table  side, 
and  stood  with  her  sisters  that  were  saying  of  grace ; 
and  as  soon  as  grace  was  ended,  she  feU  upon  the 
maid.  Nan  Samwell,  and  took  her  head  under  her 
arms,   and  first  scratched    the  right  side  of  her 


Digitized 


by  Google 


272  SOECEEY  AND   MAGIC. 

cheeks ;  and  when  she  had  done  that,  *  Now/  said 
she,  *  I  must  scratch  the  left  side  for  my  aunt  Pick- 
ering/ and  scratched  that  also  till  blood  came  on 
both  sides  very  plentifully.  The  maid  stood  still, 
and  never  moved  to  go  away  from  her,  yet  cried 
pitifully,  desiring  the  Lord  to  have  mercy  on  her. 
When  she  had  done  scratching,  Mrs.  Joan  sat  herself 
upon  a  stool,  and  seemed  to  be  out  of  breath,  taking 
her  breath  very  short,  yet  the  maid  never  struggled 
with  her,  and  was  able  to  hold  never  a  joint  of  her, 
but  trembled  like  a  leaf,  and  called  for  a  pair  of 
scissars  to  pair  her  nails  ;  but  when  she  had  them, 
she  was  not  able  to  hold  them  in  her  hands,  but  de- 
sired some  one  to  do  it  for  her,  which  Dr.  Dorring- 
ton's  wife  did.  Mrs.  Joan  saved  her  nails  as  they 
were  paired,  and  when  they  had  done  threw  them 
in  the  fire,  and  called  for  some  water  to  w'ash  her 
hands,  and  then  threw  the  water  into  the  fire. 
Then  she  fell  upon  her  knees,  and  desired  the  maid 
to  kneel  by  her,  and  prayed  with  her,  saying  the 
Lord's  Prayer  and  the  Creed ;  but  Mrs.  Joan  seemed 
as  if  she  did  not  hear  the  maid,  for  she  would  say 
amiss  sometimes,  and  then  the  company  would  help 
her  out ;  but  Mrs.  Joan  did  not  stay  for  her,  so  that 
she  had  ended  before  the  maid  had  half  done  her's. 
After  this  Dr.  Dorrington  took  a  prayer-book  and 
read  what  prayers  he  thought  fit ;  and  when  he  had 
done,  Mrs.  Joan  began  to  exhort  the  maid,  and  as 
she  was  speaking  she  fell  a  weeping  extremely,  so 
that  she  could  not  well  express  her  words,  saying, 
that  she  would  not  have  scratched  her,  but  she  was 
forced  to  it  by  the  spirit.  As  she  was  thus  com- 
plaining, her  sister  Elizabeth  was  suddenly  seized 


Digitized 


by  Google 


TRIAL  OF  THE   WITCHES.  273 

with  a  fit,  and  turning  hastily  upon  the  maid, 
catched  her  by  one  of  her  hands,  and  fain  would 
have  scratched  her,  saying,  the  spirit  said  she  must 
scratch  her  too ;  but  the  company  desired  the  maid 
to  keep  her  hand  from  her,  so  they  strove  a  great 
while  till  the  child  was  out  of  breath :  then  said  the 
child,  '  Will  nobody  help  me  V  twice  or  thrice  over. 
Then  said  Mrs.  Joan,  being  still  in  her  fit,  *  Shall  I 
help  you,  sister  Elizabeth  V  *  Ay,  for  God's  sake, 
sister,'  said  she.  So  Mrs.  Joan  came  and  took  one 
of  the  maid's  hands,  and  held  it  to  her  sister  Eliza- 
beth, and  she  scratched  it  till  blood  come,  at  which 
she  was  very  joyfuL  Then  she  pared  her  nails,  and 
washed  her  hands,  and  threw  the  paring  and  the 
water  both  in  the  fire.  After  all  this,  before  the 
company  departed,  the  maid  helped  Mrs.  Joan  out 
of  her  fit  three  several  times,  one  after  the  other,  by 
three  several  charges;  and  likewise  brought  Mrs. 
Elizabeth  out  of  her  fit  by  saying,  as  she  hath  be- 
witched Mrs.  Elizabeth  Throgmorton  since  her  mother 
confessed." 

The  sessions  at  Huntingdon  began  on  the  fourth 
of  April,  and  then  the  three  Samwells  were  put  upon 
their  trial,  and  all  the  foregoing  evidence  and  much 
more  was  repeated.  The  indictments  against  them 
specified  the  offences  against  the  children  and  ser- 
vants of  the  Throgmortons,  and  the  "  bewitching 
unto  death"  of  the  lady  CromwelL  The  grand  jury 
found  a  verdict  immediately,  and  then  they  were 
put  upon  their  trial  in  court,  and  after  much  evi- 
dence had  been  gone  through,  "  the  judge,  justices, 
and  jury,  said  the  case  was  apparent,  and  their  con- 
sciences were  well  satisfied  that  the  said  witches 

n5 


Digitized 


by  Google 


274  SORCERY   AND  MAGIC. 

were  guilty,  and  deserved  death."  Afterwards  their 
confessions  were  put  in,  and  "  when  these  were  read, 
it  pleased  Grod  to  raise  up  more  witnesses  against 
those  wicked  persons,  as  Robert  Poulton,  vicar  of 
Brampton,  who  openly  said,  that  one  of  his  parish- 
ioners, John  Langley,  at  that  time  being  sick  in  his 
bed,  told  him,  that  one  day,  being  at  Huntingdon, 
he  did,  in  mother  Samwell's  hearing,  forbid  Mr. 
Ehowles,  of  Brampton,  to  give  her  any  meat,  for 
she  was  an  old  witch  ;  and  upon  that,  as  he  went 
from  Huntingdon  to  Brampton  in  the  afternoon, 
having  a  good  horse  under  him,  he  presently  died  in 
the  field,  and  within  two  days  after  he  escaped 
death  twice  very  dangerously,  by  God's  providence ; 
but  though  the  devil  had  not  power  over  his  body 
at  that  time,  yet  soon  after  he  •  lost  many  good  and 
sound  cattle,  to  men's  judgment  worth  twenty 
marks,  and  that  he  himself,  not  long  after,  was  very 
seriously  handled  in  his  body ;  and  the  same  night 
of  the  day  of  assize  the  said  John  Langley  died. 
Mr.  Robert  Throgmorton,  of  Brampton,  also  said, 
that  at  Huntingdon  and  other  places,  he  having 
given  very  rough  language  to  the  said  mother 
Samwell,  on  Friday,  the  tenth  day  following,  one  of 
his  beasts,  of  two  years  old,  died ;  and  another  the 
Sunday  following.  The  next  Friday  after  a  hog 
died,  and  the  Sunday  following  a  sow  which  had 
sucking  pigs  died  also ;  upon  which  he  was  advised, 
the  next  thing  that  died,  to  make  a  hole  in  the 
ground,  and  burn  it.  On  Friday,  the  fourth  week 
following,  he  had  a  fair  cow,  worth  four  marks,  died 
likewise,  and  his  servants  made  a  hole  accordingly, 
and  threw  faggots  and  sticks  on  her,  and  burnt  her, 


Digitized 


by  Google 


EXECUTION  OF   THE   WITCHES.  276 

and  after  all  his  cattle  did  well  As  to  the  last 
matter,  mother  Samwell  being  examined  the  night 
before  her  execution,  she  confessed  the  bewitching 
of  the  said  cattle.  Then  the  jaylor  of  Huntington 
gave  his  evidence,  that  a  man  of  his,  finding  mother 
Samwell  was  unruly  whilst  she  was  a  prisoner, 
chained  her  to  a  bed-post,  and  not  long  after  he  fell 
sick,  and  was  handled  much  as  the  children  were, 
heaving  up  and  down  his  body,  shaking  his  anns, 
legs,  and  head,  having  more  strength  in  his  fits 
than  any  two  men  had,  and  crying  out  of  mother 
Samwell,  saying  she  bewitched  him,  and  continuing 
thus  five  or  six  days,  died.  And  the  jaylor  said, 
that  not  long  after  one  of  his  sons  fell  sick,  and  was 
much  as  his  servant  was,  whereupon  the  jaylor 
brought  mother  Samwell  to  his  bedside,  and  held 
her  till  his  son  had  scratched  her,  and  upon  that  he 
soon  mended.'^ 

When  judgment  of  death  was  pronounced  against 
her,  the  old  woman,  a  miserable  wretch  of  sixty 
years  of  age,  scarcely  knowing  what  she  was  doing 
or  saying,  pleaded  in  arrest  of  judgment  that  she 
was  with  child,  a  plea  which  only  produced  a  laugh 
of  derision.  She  confessed  to  whatever  was  put  in 
her  mouth.  The  husband  and  daughter  asserted 
their  innocence  to  the  last  They  were  all  hanged, 
and  the  historian  of  this  strange  event  assures  us 
that  from  that  moment  Robert  Throgmorton's  chil- 
dren were  permanently  freed  from  all  their  suflFer- 
ings.  In  memory  of  the  conviction  and  punishment 
of  the  witches  of  Warboys,  sir  Henry  Cromwell,  as 
lord  of  the  manor,  gave  a  certain  sum  of  money  to 
the  town  to  provide  annually  the  sum  of  forty  shil- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


276  SORCBRT   AND  MAGIC. 

lings  to  be  paid  for  a  sermon  against  witchcraft  to 
be  preached  by  a  member  of  Queen's  College,  Cam- 
bridge, in  Warboys  church,  on  Lady-day  every  year. 
I  have  not  ascertained  if  this  sermon  is  still  con- 
tinued. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


277 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


THE   POETRY   OF  WITCHCRAFT. 

The  case  described  in  the  foregoing  chapter 
gives  us  a  very  good  notion  of  the  general  form  of 
witchcraft  in  England  during  the  reign  of  Elizabeth, 
and  shows  us  how  universally  it  then  received  credit 
from  persons  of  rank.  It  shows,  however,  a  slow- 
ness, probably  an  unwillingness,  to  prosecute,  which 
proves  that  the  persecution  of  the  witches  was  not 
as  yet  so  general  in  this  country  as  in  othera 

In  England,  indeed,  the  crime  of  witchcraft  ap- 
pears to  have  attracted  less  public  attention  than  in 
other  countries  during  the  fifteenth  and  earlier  part 
of  the  sixteenth  centuries.  During  the  former 
period,  however,  we  have  several  instances  in  which, 
as  in  Scotland,  charges  of  this  nature  were  adopted 
as  means  of  political  revenge.  In  the  reign  of 
Henry  VI.  (a.  d.  1441)  it  was  made  one  of  the  chief 
accusations  against  the  duchess  of  Gloucester,  the  wife 
of  the  "  good  duke  Humphry,''  that  she  had  employ- 
ed a  miserable  woman  known  to  fame  as  the  witch 


Digitized 


by  Google 


278  SORCERY   AND   MAGIC. 

of  Eye,  and  a  "  clerk "  named  Roger,  to  effect  the 
king's  death  by  means  of  sorcery.  The  witch  was 
burnt  in  Smithfield ;  the  sorcerer  "  was  brought 
into  Poules,  (to  St  PauVs,)  and  there  he  stood  up  on 
high  on  a  scaffold  ageyn  Poulys  cross  on  a  Sunday, 
and  there  he  was  arraied  like  as  he  schulde  never 
the  (thrive)  in  his  garnementys,  and  there  was 
honged  rounde  aboute  hym  alle  his  instrumentis 
whiche  were  taken  with  hym,  and  so  shewyd  among 
all  the  peple,"  and  he  was  eventually  hanged,  drawn, 
and  quartered  as  a  traitor ;  the  duchess  was  com- 
mitted to  perpetual  imprisonment  In  Shakespeare 
the  sorcerers  are  made  to  raise  a  spirit  in  a  circle, 
who  answers  to  their  questions  concerning  the  fate  * 
of  the  king  and  his  favourites.  In  the  reign  of  Ed- 
ward IV.  a  political  party  set  abroad  a  report  that 
the  marriage  of  the  king  with  the  lady  Elizabeth 
Gray  was  the  result  of  witchcraft  employed  by  the 
lady's  mother,  the  duchess  of  Bedford.  The  plot 
was  at  the  moment  successfully  exposed,  andone 
"  Thomas  Wake,  esquier,"  was  proved  "  to  have 
caused  to  be  brought  to  Warrewyk  ...  an 
image  of  lede  made  lykft  a  man  of  armes,  contaynyng 
the  lengthe  of  a  mannes  fynger,  and  broken  in  the 
myddes,  and  made  fast  with  a  wyre,''  asserting  that 
it  was  made  by  the  duchess  "  to  use  with  the  said 
witchcraft  and  sorsery;''  yet  the  story  appears  to 
have  been  believed  by  many,  and  at  the  commence- 
ment of  the  reign  of  Richard  III.  it  was  revived  as 
one  of  the  grounds  for  condemning  the  marriage  in 
question  and  bastardizing  the  children.  In  this 
last  reign  the  same  crime  of  sorcery  formed  part  of 
the  charges  brought  against  the  queen's  kinsmen,  as 


Digitized 


by  Google 


FIKST  ACT  AGAINST   SORCERY.  279 

well  as  against  the  frail  and  unfortunate  Jane 
Shore,  and  subsequently  against  archbishop  Morton 
and  other  adherents  of  the  duke  of  Richmond.  The 
great  dramatist  has  made  Richard  accuse  queen 
Elizabeth  and  Jane  Shore  of  a  plot  against  his  own 
person — 

"  Look  how  I  ambewitcli*d ;  behold  mine  arm 
Is,  like  a  blasted  sapling,  wither'd  up ; 
And  this  is  Edward's  wife,  that  monstrous  witch, 
Consorted  with  that  harlot,  strumpet  Shore, 
That  by  their  witchcraft  thus  have  marked  me." 

The  first  Act  in  the  statute-book  against  sorcery 
and  witchcraft,  was  passed  in  the  thirty-third  year 
of  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII.  a.  d.  1 541,  whereby  this 
supposed  crime  was  made  felony  without  benefit  of 
clergy.  It  had  probably  then  been  pushed  into 
more  prominent  notice  by  some  remarkable  occur- 
rence now  forgotten.  Six  ye?irs  after,  in  1547,  when 
the  power  was  entirely  in  the  hands  of  the  religious 
reformers  under  Edward  VL,  his  father's  law  against 
witchcraft  was  repealed.  Under  Elizabeth,  in  1562, 
a  new  act  was  passed  against  witchcraft,  punishing 
the  first  conviction  only  with  exposure  in  the  pil- 
lory. During  the  latter  half  of  Elizabeth's  reign, 
prosecutions  for  witchcraft  seem  to  have  become 
numerous  in  various  parts  of  the  country,  and  the 
infection  was  spread  by  the  number  pf  printed 
pamphlets  to  which  they  gave  rise,  and  of  which 
many  are  still  preserved.  Among  these  are  accounts 
of  a  witch  hanged  at  Barking  in  1575  ;  of  four  exe- 
cuted at  Abingdon  in  1579  ;  of  three  at  Chelmsford 
and  two  at  Cambridge  in  the  same  year ;  of  a  num- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


280  SOECBRY   AND   MAGIC. 

ber  of  witches  tried  and  condemned  at  St.  Osythe's, 
in  1582 ;  of  one  at  Stanmore,  and  of  another  hanged 
at  Tyburn,  both  in  1585  ;  of  three  at  Chelmsford  in 
1589  ;  of  the  three  at  Warboys  in  1593  ;  of  three  at 
Barnet  and  Brainford  in  1596  ;  and  of  several  in 
the  counties  of  Derby  and  Stafford  in  1597.  The 
frequency  of  such  accusations  at  this  period,  and  the 
number  of  persons  who  were  on  such  slight  pretexts 
brought  to  an  ignominious  death,  made  witchcraft  a 
subject  of  discussion,  and  the  principles  of  modera- 
tion, which  had  been  espoused  by  Wierus  on  the 
continent,  found  enlightened  advocates  in  this  coun- 
try. In  1584,  Reginald  Scott  published  his  "  Dis- 
covery of  Witchcraft,''  in  which  he  exposed  the  ab- 
surdity of  the  charges  brought  against  this  class  of 
offenders,  and  the  weakness  of  the  evidence  on 
which  they  were  usually  convicted.  Scott's  book  is 
one  of  the  most  valuable  works  we  have  on  the  su- 
perstitions prevalent  in  England  at  this  time,  but, 
like  most  other  old  works,  it  is  compiled,  in  a  great 
degree,  from  foreign  authorities.  The  county  of  Essex 
had  been  especially  haunted  by  witches,  and  an  intel- 
ligent and  noted  preacher  of  Maldon,  George  Griffard, 
who  belonged  in  some  measure  to  the  same  school 
as  Scott,  published,  in  1587,  "  A  Discourse  of  the 
Subtill  Practices  of  Devilles  by  Witches  and  Sor- 
cerers ;"  and,  in  1593,  the  public  received,  from  the 
same  writer,  "  A  Dialogue  concerning  Witches  and 
Witchcraft,"  of  which  another  edition  was  printed 
in  1603.  This  latter  edition  of  a  very  curious  book 
has  been  reprinted  by  the  Percy  Society. 

English  witchcraft,  at  this  time,  seems  to  have 
been  entirely  free  from  the  romantic  incidents  which 


Digitized 


by  Google 


NAMES   OF   FAMILIARS.  281 

formed  so  striking  a  characteristic  of  the  popular 
creed  in  other  countries.  We  have  no  voyages  out  ^ 
to  sea  in  sieves ;  no  witches'  sabbaths ;  not  even 
any  direct  compact  with  the  fiend.  The  witches 
are  the  mere  victims  of  their  own  vindictive  feel- 
ing, and  find  ready  instruments  in  certain  imps,  of 
a  very  equivocal  character,  to  wreak  their  malice 
on  man  or  beast.  These  imps  are  represented  as 
appearing  in  the  form  of  small  animals — ^generally 
those  which  come  under  the  repulsive  title  of  ver- 
min— or  cats,  and  they  serve  merely  in  return  for 
their  food.  They  bear  undignified  names,  like 
TyfBn,  Piggin,  Titty,  Jack,  Tom,  and  the  like. 
Mother  Samwell,  the  witch  of  Warboys,  confessed  ' 
that  she  had  nine  spirits  or  imps,  given  her  by  an 
old  man,  and  that  three  of  them  (cousins  to  each 
other)  were  named  each  of  them  Smack ;  the  names 
of  the  others  being  Pluck,  Blue,  Catch,  White,  Cali- 
cot,  and  Hardname.  One  of  the  women  arraigned 
at  Chelmsford,  in  1579,  was  accused  by  her  own 
son  (a  child  of  eight  years  of  age,  who  was  examined 
in  court  as  a  witness  against  his  mother)  of  keeping 
three  spirits ;  one,  which  she  called  Great  Dick,  was 
enclosed  in  a  wicker-bottle ;  the  second,  named 
Little  Dick,  was  placed  in  a  leather-bottle ;  and  the 
third,  which  went  by  the  name  of  Willet,  was  kept 
in  a  woolpack.  "  And  thereupon  the  house  was 
commaunded  to  be  searched.  The  bottles  and  packe 
were  found,  but  the  spirites  were  vanished  awaie." 
One  of  the  witches  of  St  Osythe's  had  been  heard  to 
talk  in  her  house  when  she  was  known  to  be  alone, 
and  it  was  at  once  judged  that  she  then  held  conver- 
sation with  her  imps.     A  witness  in  this  trial  de- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


282  SORGEBT   AND  MAGIC 

posed,  that  caUing  on  one  of  the  accused,  and  finding 
her  not  at  home,  she  looked  in  through  the  <;hamber 
window,  and  there  "  espied  a  spirite  to  looke  out  of 
a  potcharde  from  under  a  clothe,  the  nose  thereof 
beeing  browne  like  unto  a  ferret/'  These  imps  were 
represented  as  usually  making  a  voluntary  offer  of 
their  services,  although  they  sometimes  persecuted 
their  victims  until  they  made  use  of  them.  One  of 
the  Chelmsford  witches  was  going  from  the  door  of 
a  man  who  had  refused  to  give  her  yeast  for  her 
bread,  when  she  was  met  by  a  dog  which  undertook 
to  revenge  her  on  the  man  who  had  driven  her  away 
empty-handed.  The  imps  were  often  transferred 
from  one  person  to  another. 

One  witch,  mentioned  in  Giffard's  "  Dialogue,'' 
confessed  before  a  justice  that  she  had  three  spirits ; 
one  like  a  cat,  which  she  called  Lightfoot ;  another 
like  a  toad,  which  she  called  Lunch ;  and  a  third 
like  a  weazel,  which  she  called  Makeshift  She 
said  that  one  mother  Barlie  sold  her  Lightfoot 
about  sixteen  years  before,  in  exchange  for  an  oven- 
cake,  and  "  told  her  the  cat  would  do  her  good  ser- 
vice; if  she  would,  she  might  send  her  of  her 
errand ;  this  cat  was  with  her  but  a  while  ;  but  the 
weazel  and  toad  came  and  offered  their  services. 
The  cat  would  kill  kine,  the  weasel  would  kill 
horses,  the  toad  would  plague  men  in  their  bodies." 
Another  witch  had  a  spirit  in  the  likeness  of  a  yel- 
low dun  cat,  which  first  came  to  her,  she  said,  as 
she  sat  by  the  fire,  when  she  had  fallen  out  with  a 
neighbour  of  hers,  and  wished  the  vengeance  of 
God  might  fall  on  him  and  his.  "  The  cat  bade  her 
V  not  be  afraid,  she  would  do  her  no  harm,  she  had 


Digitized 


by  Google 


WHITE  WITCHES.  283 

served  a  dame  five  years  in  Kent,  that  was  now 
dead,  and  if  she  would,  she  would  be  her  servant 
'  And  whereas,'  said  the  cat,  '  such  a  man  hath 
misused  thee,  if  thou  wilt  I  will  plague  him  in  his 
cattle/  She  sent  the  cat,  which  killed  three  hogs 
and  one  cow/'  Another  woman  confessed  "  that 
she  had  a  spirit  which  did  abide  in  a  hollow  tree, 
where  there  was  a  hole,  out  of  which  he  spake  unto 
her.  And  ever  when  she  was  offended  with  any, 
she  went  to  that  tree  and  sent  him  to  kill  their 
cattle."  The  writer  above  quoted  tell  us  that  "  there 
was  one  mother  W.  of  Great  T.  which  had  a  spirit 
like  a  weazel;  she  was  offended  highly  with  one 
H.  M. ;  home  she  went,  and  called  forth  her  spirit, 
which  lay  in  a  pot  of  wool  under  her  bed  ;  she  willed 
him  to  go  and  plague  the  man.  He  required  what 
she  would  give  him,  and  he  would  kill  H.  M.  She 
said  she  would  give  him  a  cock,  which  she  did,  and 
he  went,  and  the  man  fell  sick  with  a  great  pain  in 
his  belly,  languished,  and  died'' 

Such  is  the  general  picture  of  the  vulgar  and  un- 
itnaginative  sorcery-creed  of  England  in  the  reign 
of  good  queen  Bess.  It  was  extended  and  im- 
printed still  more  deeply  on  people's  minds  by  a 
class  of  designing  people  who  profited  by  their  cre- 
dulity, and  set  up  to  be  what  were  called  "  white 
witches."  These  people  pretended  to  be  masters  or 
mistresses  of  the  sorcerer's  art,  and  by  some  myste- 
rious means  to  know  when  people  were  bewitched, 
who  was  the  witch,  and  how  by  their  charms  to 
counteract  her  evil  influence.  Many  who  had  ex- 
perienced losses,  or  who  laboured  under  disease,  re- 
paired to  such  persons  as  these,  and  they  hesitated 


Digitized 


by  Google 


284  80RCBRY   AND  MAGIC. 

not  to  charge  their  misfortunes  to  any  poor,  aged, 
and  defenceless  woman  in  their  neighbourhood 
Sometimes  they  showed  them  the  witch  in  a  magical 
glass ;  at  other  times,  they  instructed  them  in  cer^ 
tain  charms  and  other  processes  which  would  make 
the  witches  come  and  show  themselves.  The  reme- 
dies of  the  white  witch  were  generally  of  a  ridiculous 
character,  but  the  popular  credulity  of  the  age  was 
open  to  every  kind  of  deception. 

The  efforts  of  Reginald  Scott  and  George  Giffard 
were  rendered  inffectual  by  the  accession  of  James 
of  Scotland  to  the  English  throne,  who  passed  a 
new  and  severe  law  against  witchcraft,  in  which  it 
now  became  almost  a  crime  to  disbelieve.  We  are 
told  that  king  James  carried  his  hostility  to  the 
writings  of  Scott  to  the  length  of  causing  his  "  Dis- 
covery of  Witchcraft''  to  be  burnt,  whenever  he  had 
an  opportunity. 

It  was  under  the  influence  of  this  reign  that 
witchcraft  not  only  became  a  subject  of  deep  public 
attention,  but  that  it  came  into  especial  favour 
among  the  poets.  The  vulgar  form  under  which  it 
had  shown  itself  in  the  preceding  reign  would  lead 
us  to  look  for  anything  rather  than  the  poetry  of 
witchcraft ;  but  in  the  wilder  legends  of  France 
and  Scotland,  there  were  many  traits  of  a  highly 
imaginative  and  romantic  character,  which  made 
the  witches  no  unfit  instruments  of  supernatural 
agency  in  the  conceptions  of  the  poet.  Nature's 
own  bard  seems  to  have  been  the  first  who  called 
in  this  new  agency  to  his  aid ;  and  he  clothed  it 
with  new  attributes  which  appear  to  show  an  ac- 
quaintance with  the  ancient  popular  mythology  of 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Shakespeare's  witches.  285 

the  northern  people.  The  three  witches  in  Macbeth 
appear  as  the  weird  sisters  or  fates  of  the  Scandina- 
vian mythology,  fixing  and  watching  the  fate  of 
individuals  in  the  hour  of  battle ;  and  almost  in  the 
same  breath  they  answer  the  calls  of  their  familiar 
imps,  like  the  witches  of  Elizabeth's  time. 

}8t  Witch.  When  shall  we  three  meet  again, 
In  thunder,  lightning,  or  in  rain  ? 

2nd  Witch.  When  the  hurly-burly's  done, 
When  the  battle's  lost  and  won. 

Srd  Witch.  That  will  be  ere  set  of  sun 

Ist  Witch.  Where  the  place  ? 

2nd  Witch.  Upon  the  heath. 

Srd  Witch.  There  to  meet  with  Macbeth. 

lit  Witch.   1  come,  Graymalkin ! 
AU.  Paddock  calls. — ^Anon ! 

On  their  second  appearance,  the  three  witches 
have  been  employed  in  occupations  perfectly  in 
agreement  with  their  popular  character. 

ist  Witch.  Where  hast  thou  been,  sister  ? 

2nd  Witch.  Killing  swine. 

Srd  Witch.  Sister,  where  thou  ? 

Ut  Witch.  A  sailor's  wife  had  chestnuts  in  her  lap, 

And  mounch'd,  and  mounch'd,  and  mounch'd. — 
Give  me,  quoth  I. 

Aroint  thee,  witch  !  the  rump-fed  ronyon  cries. 

Her  husband's  to  Aleppo  gone,  master  o'  the 
Tiger; 

But  in  a  aiaire  I'll  thither  sail. 

And  like  a  cat  without  a  tail, 

I'll  do,  I'll  do,  and  I'U  do. 

When  they  next  come  on  the  scene,  we  find  that 
they  have  a  superior,  to  whom  Shakespeare  gives 
the  classic  name  of  Hecate,  and  by  whose  permis- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


286  SORCERY   AND   MAGIC. 

sion  it  appears  that  they  exercise  their  arts.     He- 
cate meets  the  three  witches — 

Ut  Witch.  Why,  how  now,  Hecate  ?  you  look  angrily. 
Hec,  Have  I  not  reason,  beldames  as  you  are, 
Saucy  and  over-bold  ?    How  did  you  dare 
To  trade  and  traffic  with  Maxjbeth, 
In  riddles,  and  affairs  of  death ; 
And  I,  the  mistress  of  your  charms. 
The  close  contriver  of  all  harms. 
Was  never  caU'd  to  bear  my  part. 
Or  show  the  glory  of  our  art  ? 

Even  Hecate,  in  the  conclusion,  confesses  to  having 
a  familiar,  to  whose  call  she  obeys. 

Hark,  I  am  call'd ;  my  little  spirit,  see. 
Sits  in  a  foggy  cloud,  and  stays  for  me. 

Their  place  of  abode  is  a  dark  cave,  where  they 
mix,  'in  their  magic  cauldron,  the  horrible  and 
loathsome  ingredients  of  their  charms. 

Middleton,  Shakespeare's  contemporary,  whose 
witch-poetry  he  appears  to  have  imitated,  has  left  a 
play,  entitled  "  The  WitcL''  Here  aprain  the  abode 
of  Hecate  is  a  cave,  and  the  boiling  cauldron  figures 
in  it,  but  the  mystic  triad  of  the  witches  is  changed 
to  an  indefinite  number,  four  of  whom  bear  the 
names  of  Stadlin,  Hoppo,  Hellwain,  and  Puckle, 
and  their  familiars  are  called  Tetty,  Tiffin,  Suckin, 
Pidgen,  Liard,  and  Robin.  It  is  evident  from  this, 
and  several  other  circumstances,  that  Middleton  had 
been  studying  Reginald  Scott  and  the  witch  trials 
of  the  preceding  reign.  In  Middleton,  the  witches 
require  an  ointment  (like  the  witches  of  the  conti- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


middleton's  witches.  287 

nent)  to  transfer  themselves  to  a  distance.  The 
airiness  of  Shakespeare's  creations  has  totally  disap- 
peared. 

Hec.  Here,  take  this  unbaptized  brat; 

(Giving  the  dead  body  of  a  child.) 
Boil  it  well ;  preserve  the  fat; 
You  know  'tis  precious  to  transfer 
Our  'nointed  flesh  into  the  air, 
In  moonlight  nights,  on  steeple-tops, 
Mountains,  and  pine-trees,  that  like  pricks  or  stops 
Seem  to  our  height ;  high  towers  and  rooft  of  princes 
Like  wrinkles  in  the  earth :  whole  provinces 
Appear  to  our  sight  then  even  leek  (like) 
A  russet  mole  upon  a  lady's  cheek. 
When  hundred  leagues  in  air,  we  feast  and  sing, 
Dance,  kiss,  and  cuil,  use  everything ; 
What  yoimg  man  can  we  wish  to  pleasure  us. 
But  we  enjoy  him  in  an  incubus  ? 

We  cannot  but  feel  the  degradation  of  the  classic 
Hecate/  when  reduced  to  a  vulgar  witch,  and  re- 
venging herself  on  those  who  had  denied  her  trifling 
suits  : — 

Hec.  Is  the  heart  of  wax 

Stuck  full  of  magic  needles  ? 
Stadlin.  'Tis  done,  Hecate. 

Hec.  And  is  the  farmer's  picture  and  his  wife's 

Laid  down  to  th'  fire  yet  ? 
8tad,  They're  a  roasting  both  too. 
Hec.  Good !  (eocit  Stadlin.)    Then  their  marrows  are  a- 
melting  subtly. 
And  three  months'  sickness  sucks  up  life  in  'em. 
They  denied  me  often  flour,  bacon,  and  milk, 
Goose-grease,   and  tar,  when  I  ne'er   hurt  their 

•chumings. 
Their  brew-locks,  nor  their  batches,  nor  forespoke 


Digitized 


by  Google 


288  SOECBRY   AND   MAGIC. 

Any  of  their  breedings.    Now,  I'll  be  meet  with  'em  ; 

Seven  of  their  young  pigs  I've  bewitch'd  already, 

Of  the  last  litter ; 

Nine  ducklings,  thirteen  goslings,  and  a  hog, 

Fell  lame  last  Simday  after  even-song,  too ; 

And  mark  how  their  sheep  prosper,  or  what  sup 

Each  milch-kine  gives  to  th'  pail;   I'll  send  three 

snakes 
Shall  milk  em  all 

Beforehand ;  the  dew-skirted  dairy-wenches 
Shall  stroke  dry  dugs  for  this,  and  go  home  cursing, 
m  mar  their  syllabubs  and  swathy  feastings 
Under  cows'  bellies  with  the^  parish  youths. 

Hecate,  in  Middleton's  play,  has  a  son  named 
Firestone,  who  wishes  his  mother  dead  that  he  may 
have  her  property;  and  she  foreknows  that  her 
death  will  happen  that  day  three  years,  at  mid- 
night. The  next  time  we  are  introduced,  the 
witches  meet  in  a  field  by  moonlight,  prepared  to 
take  their  accustomed  flight ;  and  among  the  rest, 
Hecate  ascends  with  her  familiar  imp : — 

Hec.  Now  I  go,  now  I  fly, 

Malkin,  my  sweet  spirit,  and  I. 

0  what  a  dainty  pleasure  'tis 

To  ride  in  the  air 

When  the  moon  shines  fair. 

And  sing  and  dance,  and  toy  and  kiss ! 

Over  woods,  high  rocks,  and  mountains. 

Over  seas,  our  mistress'  fountains. 

Over  steep  towers  and  turrets. 

We  fly  by  night,  'mongst  troops  of  spirits. 

No  ring  of  bells  to  our  ears  sounds, 

No  howls  of  wolves,  no  yelps  of  bounds ; 

No,  not  the  noise  of  water's  breach, 

Or  cannon's  throat,  our  height  can  reach. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Shakespeare's  tempest.  289 

The  allusions  to  the  great  assemblies  of  the  witches 
become,  it  will  be  seen,  stronger  and  stronger ;  but 
it  was  left  to  the  genius  of  Gothe  to  bring  on  the 
scene  all  the  marvels  and  all  the  abominations  of 
the  witches'  SabbatL 

In  the  Tempest,  the  spiritual  part  of  the  plot  is 
more  delicately  imaginative.  Prospero  is  the  magi- 
cian in  Ids  most  refined  character — a  kind  of  tran- 
scendental Dr.  Dee ;  and  Ariel  is  a  spirit  that  has 
been  brought  under  the  witches'  power — not  a 
diabolical  imp,  but  one  of  the  fairies  or  good  people, 
a  class  we  have  already  seen  figuring  in  the  witch- 
craft cases  in  Scotland,  and  which  we  shall 
now  find  under  the  same  circumstances  in  South 
Britain. 


Hast  thou  forgot 
The  foul  witch  Syoorax,  who  with  age  and  envy 
Was  grown  into  a  hoop  ?  hast  thou  forgot  her? 

This  damned  witch  Sycorax, 

For  mischiefs  manifold,  and  sorceries  terrible 
To  enter  human  hearing,  from  Argier, 
Thou  knowst,  was  banished ;  for  one  thing  she  did, 
They  would  not  take  her  life.  *  .     .     .    . 
This  blue-eyed  hag  was  hither  brought  with  child, 
And  here  was  left  by  the  sailors ;  thou,  my  slave, 
As  thou  reportst  thyself,  wast  then  her,^servant : 
And,  for  thou  wast  a  spirit  too  delicate 
To  act  her  earthy  and  abhorred  commands, 
Refusing  her  grand  bests,  she  did  confine  thee, 
By  help  of  her  more  potent  ministers, 
And  in  her  most  unmitigable  rage. 
Into  a  cloven  pine ;  within  which  rift 
Imprisoned,  thou  didst  painfully  remain 
A  dozen  years ;  within  which  space  she  died. 
And  left  thee  there ;  where  thou  didst  vent  thy  groans, 
VOL.  L  0 


Digitized 


by  Google 


290  SORCBBT  AND  MAaiC. 

As  ffist  as  mill-wheels  strike.    Then  was  this  island, 
(Saye  for  the  son  that  she  did  litter  there, 
A  freckled  whelp,  hag-horn,)  not  honoured  with 
A  human  shape. 

An  unknown  dramatist,  contemporary  with  Shakes- 
peare and  Middleton,  brought  on  the  stage  the 
popular  character  of  the  magician,  in  the  play  of 
the  Merry  Devils  of  Edmonton.* 

"  Rare"  Ben  Jonson  completes  the  trio  of  con- 
temporary witchcraft-poets,  and  a  glorious  trio  it 
was.  Jonson  .descends  entirely  to  .the  supposed 
realities  of  the  day.  The  witches  in  his  **  Masque 
of  Queens,"  performed  before  king  James,  hold  a 
conventicle  like  those  of  Lothian,  with  whose  prac- 
tices his  majesty  was  so  thoroughly  conversant ;  and 
the  poet  has  in  the  margin  substantiated  almost 
every  word  by  a  mass  of  learned  quotations  from 
Bodinus,  and  Elich,  and  Remigius,  and  Delrio,  and 
a  whole  host  of  foreign  writers  on  the  subject  of 
demonology.  Eleven  witches  appear  at  their  place 
of  meeting,  and,  finding  that  the  one  chosen  for 
their  president  or  "  dame"  is  not  arrived,  Ihey  join 
in  calling  her  up : — 

The  weather  is  fair,  the  wind,  is  good, 
Up,  dame,  on  your  horse  of  wood : 

*  It  may  be  observed  that  the  legend  of  Peter  Fabel  of  Ed- 
monton, on  which  this  play  was  fbvnded,  was  evidently  iden- 
tical with  a  German  popular  story,  which  was  turned  into 
English  verse  under  the  title  of  "  lie  Smith  of  Apolda,**  and 
was  published  in  England  in  a  periodical  entitled"  The  Origi- 
nal," and  reprinted  in  Mr.  Thorns*  *'  Lays  and  Legends  of 
Germany." 


Digitized 


by  Google 


B8K  joNacm  291 

Or  dse  tiick  up  your  gray  frook. 

And  saddle  yoiur  goat,  or  your  green  cock, 

And  make  Ms  bridle  a  bottom  of  thread, 

To  roll  up  how  many  miles  you  haye  jid. 

Quickly  come  away ; 

For  we  all  stay. 

"  Of  the  green  cock,"  says  Jonson,  "  we  have  no 
other  ground  (to  confess  ingenuously)  than  a  vulgar 
fable  of  a  witch,  that  with  a  cock  of  that  colour, 
and  a  bottom  of  blue  thread,  would  transport  her- 
self through  the  air ;  and  so  escaped  (at  the  time 
of  her  being  brought  to  execution)  from  the  hand 
of  justice.     It  was  a  tale  when  I  went  to  school" 

This  is  a  solitary  tradition  of  the  Elizabethan 
witches,  which  is  worth  whole  pages  of  the  infor- 
mation contained  in  the  printed  accounts  of  their 
trials.  After  three  invocation^  in  the  above  style, 
the  "  dame"  makes  her  appearance,  and  they  then 
relate  to  one  another  the  evil  deeds  in  which  they 
have  been  employed.  One  had  been  gathering  the 
mandrake, — a  plant  of  superstition,  and  a  powerful 
ingredient  in  their  charms : — 

I  last  night  lay  all  alone 
On  the  ground,  to  hear  the  mandrake  groan ; 
And  pluok*d  him  up,  though  he  grew  fiill  low ; 
And,  as  I  had  done,  the  cock  did  crow. 

Another  had  smothered  an  infant  in  its  cradle : — 

Under  a  cradle  I  did  creep, 
By  day ;  and  when  the  child  was  asleep 
At  night,  I  suck'd  the  breath,  and  rose. 
And  pluck'd  the  nodding  nurse  by  the  nose. 

Another  had  obtained  the  fat  of  an  unbaptised  and 

0  2 


Digitized 


by  Google 


292  SORGBBT   AND   MAGIO. 

base-bom  child,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  was  a 
principal  ingredient  in  the  ointment  that  enabled 
them  to  pass  through  the  air  to  the  place  of  their 
meeting : — 

I  had  a  dagger,  what  did  I  with  that  ? 
KiU'd  an  infant  to  have  his  fat, 
A  piper  it  got  at  a  church  ale. 

Having  produced  their  ingredients,  the  witches 
commenced  their  charms  and  incantations,  the 
object  of  which  appears  to  be  to  produce  a  storm. 
This  seems  to  have  been  intended  to  remind  the 
king  of  the  tempests  which  he  believed  the  Scot- 
tish witches  had  raised  to  obstruct  him  on  his 
return  from  Denmark  a  few  years  before.  The  whole 
concludes  with  a  dance,  "  full  of  preposterous 
change  and  gesticulation." 

The  most  pleasing  composition  of  this  age,  in 
which  the  agency  of  witchcraft  is  introduced,  is 
Ben  Jonson's  unfinished  drama  of  the  "  Sad  Shep- 
herd." The  witch  here  transforms  herself  first  into 
a  raven,  then  into  Maid  Marian,  and  in  the  sequel 
it  seems  that  she  was  to  take  the  form  of  a  hare 
and  be  so  hunted.  These  changes  she  appears  to 
have  effected  by  means  of  a  magic  girdle, — 

But  hear  ye,  Douce,  because  ye  may  meet  me 

In  many  shapes  to-day,  where'er  you  spy 

This  browder  d  belt,  with  characters,  'tis  I. 

A  Gypsan  lady,  and  a  right  beldame, 

Wrought  it  by  moonshine  for  me,  and  starlight, 

Upon  your  grannam's  grave,  that  very  night 

We  earth'd  her  in  the  shades ;  when  our  dame  Hecate 

Made  it  her  gaing  night  over  the  kirk-y|u-d, 


Digitized 


by  Google 


BEN  JONSON.  293 

With  all  the  barkand  parish  tikes  set  at  her, 
While  I  sat  whyrland  of  my  brazen  spindle ; 
At  every  twisted  thrid  my  rock  let  fly 
Unto  the  sewster,  who  did  sit  me  nigh, 
Under  the  town  turnpike,  which  ran  each  spell 
She  stitched  in  the  work,  and  knit  it  well. 

The  Egyptians,  or  Gypsies,  occur  elsewhere  as 
agents  in  witchcraft.  It  may  also  be  observed, 
that  the  witch  spoken  of  appears  here  much  in 
the  same  character  as  in  Shakespeare  and  Middle- 
ton.  Jonson's  description  of  the  witch's  place  of 
resort  is  extremely  elegant. 

Within  a  gloomy  dimble  she  doth  dwell, 
Down  in  a  pit,  o'ergrown  with  brakes  and  briars. 
Close  by  the  ruins  of  a  shaken  abbey, 
Tom  with  an  earthquake  down  unto  the  ground, 
'Mongst  graves  and  grots  near  an  old  charnel-house, 
Where  you  shall  find  her  sitting  in  her  fourm, 
^As  fearful  and  melancholic  as  thaX 
She  is  about ;  with  caterpillars'  kells, 
And  knotty  cobwebs,  rounded  in  with  spells. 
Thence  she  steals  forth  to  relief  in  the  fogs, 
And  rotten  mists,  upon  the  fens  and  bogs, 
Down  to  the  drowned  lands  of  Lincolnshire ; 
To  make  ewes  cast  their  lambs,  swine  eat  their  farrow. 
The  housewives'  tun  not  work,  nor  the  milk  churn ! 
Writhe  children's  wrists,  and  suck  their  breath  in  sleep. 
Get  vials  of  their  blood !  and  where  the  sea 
Casts  up  his  slimy  ooze,  search  for  a  weed 
To  open  locks  with,  and  to  rivet  charms. 
Planted  about  her  in  the  wicked  feat 
Of  all  her  mischiefs,  which  are  manifold. 

There,  in  the  stocks  of  trees,  white  faies  do  dwell. 
And  span-long  elves  that  dance  about  a  pool. 
With  each  a  little  changeling  in  their  arms  1 


\ 


\ 


Digitized 


by  Google 


294  SOROERT  AKI>  MAGia 

There  airy  spirits  play  with  falling  stars. 
And  mount  the  sphere  of  fire  to  kiss  the  moon ! 
While  she  sits  reading  hy  the  glow-worm's  light. 
Or  rotten-wood,  o'er  which  the  worm  halii  crept, 
The  haneful  schedule  of  her  nooent  "charms, 
And  hinding  characters  through  which  she  wounds 
Her  puppets,  the  sigilla  of  her  witchcraft. 

It  b6C3.me  now  a  kind  of  fashion  to  introduce 
witches  upon  the  stage,  and  many  dramas  were 
produced  in  which  sorcery  formed  a  part  of  the 
plot.  Few  of  these  have  been  preserved,  or,  at 
least,  are  known  to  exist.  None  of  their  writers 
attempted,  like  Shakespeare,  to  spiritualize  the 
character ;  they  merely  proposed,  Kfce  their  de- 
scendants of  the  present  age,  to  profit  by  the 
mania  of  the  day,  and,  picturing  witches  as  they 
were,  or  as  they  were  supposed  to  be,  held  them  up 
to  the  public  odium.  One  play  still  eating,  "  The 
Witch  of  Edmonton,"'  is  said  to  be  the  joint  efforts 
of  several  authprs,  (among  whom  is  enumerated, 
perhaps  falsely,  the  dramatist  Ford  ;)  it  is  founded 
on  the  trial  and  execution  of  a  witch  of  that  place, 
named  Elizabeth  Sawyer,  in  1622,  and  its  object 
seems  to  have  been  to  show  that  old  women  were 
often  driven  to  their  presumed  compact  with  the 
devil  by  persecution.  "  Mother  Sawyer*'  is  intro- 
duced gathering  sticks  in  a  wood,  and  soliloquizing 
on  her  misery, — 

And  why  on  me  ?  why  should  the  envious  world 
Throw  aU  their  scandalous  malice  up<m  me? 
'Cause  I  am  poor,  deform'd,  and  ignorant, 
And  like  a  how  hucMed  and  bent  together. 
By  some,  more  strong  in  waaebk^  than  myi»l( 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  WITCH  OF  EDMONTON.  295 

Must  I  for  that  be  made  a  common  sink 

For  all  the  filth  and  rubbish  of  men's  tongues 

To  fall  and  run  into  ?    Some  call  me  witch, 

And,  being  ignorant  of  myself,  they  go 

About  to  teach  me  how  to  be  one ;  urging, 

Hiat  my  bad  tongue  (by  their  bad  usage  made  so) 

Forespeaks  their  cattle,  doth  bewitch  their  com, 

Themselyes,  their  servants,  and  their  babes  at  nurse. 

This  they  enforce  upon  me ;  and  in  part 

Make  one  to  credit  it. 

After  being  interrupted  by  the  entrance  of  a  party 
of  countrymen  who  insult  her,  she  continues  : — 

I  am  shunn'd 
And  hated  like  a  sickness ;  made  a  scorn 
To  all  degrees  and  sexes.    I  have  heard  old  beldams 
Talk  of  familiars  in  the  shape  of  mice, 
Bats,  ferrets,  weasels,  and  I  wot  not  what. 
That  have  appeared,  and  suck'd,  some  say,  their  blood ; 
But  by  what  means  they  came  acquainted  with  them, 
I  am  now  ignorant.    'Would  some  power,  good  or  bad, 
Instruct  me  which  way  I  might  be  revenged 
Upon  this  churl,  I'd  go  out  of  myself. 
And  give  this  fury  leave  to  dwell  within 
This  ruin'd  cottage,  ready  to  fall  with  age ; 
Abjure  all  goodness ;  be  at  hate  with  prayer; 
And  study  curses,  imprecations, 
Blasphemous  speeches,  oaths,  detested  oaths. 
On  anything  that's  ill ;  so  I  might  work 
Revenge  upon  this  miser,  this  black  cur, 
That  barks,  and  bites,  and  sucks  the  very  blood 
Of  me,  and  of  my  credit.    'Tis  all  one. 
To  be  a  witch  as  to  be  coimted  one. 

While  she  is  in  this  temper,  the  demon  appears  in 
the  shape  of  a  black  dog,  and  finds  little  difficulty 
in  seducing  her  to  his  purposes. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


296  SOBCEBT   AND  MAaiC. 

A  few  years  after  the  occurrence  which  furnished 
the  plot  of  the  piece  just  described,  the  witches  of 
Lancashire  were  brought  on  the  stage  in  a  synilar 
manner  in  the  joint  production^  of  Heywood  and 
Brome.  But  there  is  less  of  the  "  poetry''  of  witch- 
craft in  this  play,  than  in  one  on  the  same  subject 
composed  above  half  a  century  later  by  Thomas 
Shadwell,  and  certainly  not  one  of  the  worst  of  the 
compositions  of  this  dramatist  Shadwell  profess- 
edly collected  the  materials  for  his  witchcraft 
creations  out  of  the  writings  of  the  "  witch-mon- 
gers," as  he  calls  them,  and  he  has  turned  into 
verse  the  qualities  which  had  previous  to  his  time 
been  imputed  to  the  witches  of  various  countries 
and  timea 

The  poetry  of  witchcraft  forms  a  marked  point  of 
division  between  the  English  superstitions  of  the 
sixteenth  century  and  those  of  the  seventeenth. 
The  learned  credulity  of  James  I.,  and  the  influ- 
ence of  Scottish  prejudices,  had  a  fatal  effect  upon 
that  and  the  following  age.  But  our  sorcery  creed 
of  the  seventeenth  .century  contained  so  much 
adopted  from  the  recitals  of  foreign  writers,  that  it 
will  be  necessary  to  turn  from  it  awhile,  until  we 
have  passed  the  channel  to  pay  our  respects  to  the 
sorcerers  of  France. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


297 


CHAPTER  XV. 


WITCHCRAFT   IN  FRANCE  IN   THB   SIXTEENTH    CENTURY. 

In  England,  as  we  have  seen,  the  popular  creed 
with  regard  to  witchcraft  was  neither  elaborate 
nor  perfect,  while,  on  the  continent,  it  had  been 
assuming  a  form  far  more  systematic  and  complete 
than  that  which  it  presented  at  an  earlier  period. 
This  arose  on  one  side  from  the  decrees  of  eccle- 
siastical councils,  which  tended  more  than  anything 
else  to  impress  on  people's  minds  the  conviction  of 
its  truth,  and  on  the  other  from  the  numerous  trea- 
tises of  learned  men  who  imdertook  to  arrange .  and 
discuss  the  various  statements  put  into,  rather  than 
extracted  from,  the  mouths  of  the  innumerable  vic- 
tims to  the  superstition  of  the  age.  This  also 
tended  not  a  little  to  reduce  to  one  mode  the  popu- 
lar belief  of  different  countries,  and  we  shall  thus 
find  that  throughout  the  sixteenth  century  the 
sorcery- creeds  of  France,  Germany,  Italy,  and 
Spain,  scarcely  differ  from  each  other,  and  we  may 
fairly  take  the  first  as  a  type  of  them  alL 

0  6 


Digitized 


by  Google 


298  SOEOBBT  AND  MAOia 

During  the  earlier  part  of  the  sixteenth  century, 
trials  for  witchcraft  in  France  are  of  rare  occur- 
rence, and  there  are  no  cases  of  great  importance 
recorded  till  after  the  year  1660.  In  1561,  a  num- 
ber of  persons  were  brought  to  trial  at  Vernon, 
accused  of  having  held  their  Sabbath  as  witches  in 
an  old  ruined  castle  in  the  shape  of  cats  ;  and  wit- 
nesses deposed  to  having  seen  the  assembly,  and  to 
having  suffered  from  the  attacks  of  the  pseudo- 
feKne  conspirators.  But  the  court  threw  out  the 
charge,  as  worthy  only  of  ridicule.  In  ]  664,  three 
men  and  a  woman  were  executed  at  Poitiers,  after 
having  been  made  to  confess  to  various  acts  of 
sorcery :  among  other  things,  they  said  that  they 
had  regularly  attended  the  witches'  Sabbath,  which 
was  held  three  times  a  year,  and  that  the  demon 
wlio  presided  at  it  ended  by  burning  himself  to 
make  powder  for  the  use  of  his  agents  in  mischief 
In  1671,  a  mere  conjiupor,  who  played  tricks  upon 
cards.  Was  thrown  into  prison  in  Paris,  fwrced  to 
confess  that  he  was  an  attendant  on  the  Sabbath, 
and  then  executed.  In  1673,  a  man  was  burnt  at 
Drdle,  on  the  charge  of  having  changed  himself  into 
a  wolf,  and  in  that  form  devoured  several  children. 
Several  witches,  who  all  confessed  to  having  been 
at  the  Sabbaths,  were  in  the  sanve  year  condemned 
to  be*  burnt  in  different  parts  of  France.  In  1678, 
another  man  was  tried  and  condemned  in  Paris  for 
changing  himself  into  a  wolf ;  and  a  man  was  con- 
demned at  Orleans  for  the  same  supposed  crime  in 
1683.  As  France  was  often  infested  by  l^esexapa-  y 
cious  animals,  it  is  not  difficult  to  coiioeive  how  j 
popular  credulity  was  led  to  connect  their  tt^ 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  LOUPS-GABOUS.  299 

with  the  crime  of  witchcraft.     The  belief  in  what 
were  in  England  called  wer-wolves,   (men-wolves,) 
and  in  France  loups-garovs,  was  a  very  ancient 
superstition  throughout  Europe.     It  is  ass^ed  by 
a  serious  and  intelligent  writer  of  the  time  that, 
in  1588,  a  gentleman,  looking  out  of  the  window  of 
his^  ch&teau  in  a  village  two  leagues  from  Apchon, 
in  the  mountains  of  Auvergne,  saw  one  of  his.ac* 
quaintance  going  a  hunting,  and  begged  he  would 
bring  him  home  some  game.     The  hunter,  while 
occupied  in  the  chase,  was  attacked  by  a  fierce  she- 
wolf,  and,  after  having  fired  at  it  without  effect, 
struck  it  with  his  hunting-knife,  and  cut  off  the 
paw  of  its  right  fore-leg,  on  which  it  immediately 
took  to  flight.     The  hunter  took  up  the  paw,  threw 
it  into  his  bag  with  the  rest  of  his  game,  and  soon 
afterwards  returned  to  his  friend's  chateau,    and 
told  him  of  his  adventure,  at  the  same  time  putting 
his  hand  into  the  bag  to  bring  forth  the  wolfs  paw 
in  confirmation  of  his  story.     What  was  his  sur- 
prise at  drawing  out  a  lady's  hand,  with  a  gold  ring 
on  one  finger  !     His  friend's  astonishment  was  still 
greater  when  he  recognized  the  ring  as  one  which 
he  had  given  to  his  own  wife ;   and,   descending 
hastily  into  the  kitchen,  he  found  the  lady  warm- 
ing herself  by  the  fire,  with  her  right  arm  wrapped 
in  her  apron.    This  he  at  once  seized,  and  foiyid  to 
his  horror  that  the  hand  was  cut  off.     The  lady 
confessed  that  it  was  she  who,  in  the  form  of  a 
wolf,  had  attacked  the  hunter ;    she  was,  in  due 
course  of  time,  brought  to  her  trial  and  condemned, 
and  was  immediately  afterwards  burnt  at  Rioms. 
In  1578^  a  witch  was  burnt  at  Compiegne ;  she 


Digitized 


by  Google 


300  SOBOBET  Airi)  HA^ia 

confessed  that  she  had  giYen  herself  to  the  devil, 
who  appeared  to  her  as  a  great  black  man,  on 
horseback,  booted  and  spurred.  Another  avowed 
witch  was  burnt  the  same  year,  who  also  stated 
that  the  evil  one  came  to  her  in  the  shape  of  a 
black  man.  In  1582  and  1583,  several  witches 
were  burnt,  all  frequenters  of  the  Sabbaths.  Seve- 
ral local  councils  at  this  date  passed  severe  laws 
against  witchcraft,  and  from  that  time  to  the  end 
of  the  century,  the  number  of  miserable  persons  put 
to  death  in  France  under  the  accusation  was  very 
great.  In  the  course  only  of  fifteen  years,  from 
1580  to  1596,  and  only  in  one  province,  that  of 
Lorraine,  the  president  Remigius  burnt  nine  hun- 
dred witches,  and  as  many  more  fled  out  of  the 
country  to  save  their  lives ;  and  about  the  close  of 
the  century,  one  of  the  French  judges  tells  us  that 
the  crime  of  witchcraft  had  become  so  common, 
that  there  were  not  jails  enough  to  hold  the  pri- 
soners, or  judges  to  hear  their  causes.  A  trial 
which  he  had  witijessed  in  1568,  induced  Jean 
Bodin,  a  learned  physician,  to  compose  his  book 
"  De  la  Demonomanie  des  Sorciers,"  which  was 
ever  afterwards  the  text-book  on  this  subject. 

Among  the  English  witches,  the  evil  one  gener- 
ally came  in  person  to  seduce  his  victims,  but  in 
France  and  other  countries,  this  seems  to  have 
been  unnecessary,  as  each  person,  when  once  ini- 
tiated, became  seized  with  an  uncontrollable  desire 
of  making  converts,  whom  he  or  she  carried  to  the 
Sabbath  to  be  duly  enrolled.  Bodin  says,  that  one 
witch  was  enough  to  corrupt  five  hundred  honest 
persona    The  infection  quickly  ran  through  a  family, 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  witches'  sabbath.  801 

and  was  generally  carried  down  from  generation  to 
generation,  which  explained  satisfactorily,  according 
to  the  learned  commentator  on  demonology  just  men- 
tioned, the  extent  to  which  the  evil  had  spread 
itself  in  his  days.  The  novice,  at  his  or  her  recep- 
tion, after  having  performed  the  preliminaries,  and 
in  general  received  a  new  and  burlesque  rite  of 
baptism,  was  marked  with  the  sign  of  the  demon 
in  some  part  of  the  body  least  exposed  to  observa- 
tion, and  performed  the  first  criminal  act  of  com- 
pliance which  was  afterwards  to  be  so  frequently 
repeated,  the  evil  one  presenting  himself  on  these 
^  occasions  in  the  form  of  either  sex,  according  to 
that  of  the  victim. 

The  Sabbath  was  generally  held  in  some  wild 
and  solitary  spot,  often  in  the  midst  of  forests  or  on, 
the  heights  of  mountains,  at  a  great  distance  from 
the  residence  of  most  of  the  visitors.  The  circum- 
stance connected  with  it  most  difficult  of  proof,  yet 
of  no  small  importance  in  support  of  the  truth  of 
the  confessions,  was  the  reality  and  method  of 
transport  from  one  plsCce  to  another.  The  witches 
nearly  all  agreed  in  the  statement  that  they  di- 
vested themselves  of  their  clothes,  and  anointed 
their  bodies  with  an  ointment  made  for  that  espe- 
cial purpose.  They  then  strode  across  a  stick,  or 
any  similar  article,  and,  muttering  a  charm>  were 
carried  through  the  air  to  the  place  of  meeting  in 
an  incredibly  short  space  of  time.  Sometimes  the 
stick  was  to  be  anointed  as  well  as  their  persons. 
They  generally  left  the  house  by  the  window  or  by 
the  chimney,  which  latter,  for  some  reason  or  other, 
was  rather  a  favourite  way  of  exit.    Sometimes, 


Digitized 


by  Google 


302  soiKsaT  ijn>  ma-qr}. 

however,  the  witch  went  out  by  the  dooi^  and  there 
found  a  demon  in  tfie  shi^  of  a  goat^  or  at  iimts 
of  some  other  animal,  who  carried  her  awaj  on  his 
back,  and  brought  her  home  again  aft^  the  meet- 
ing was  dissolved.  In  the  confessions  extorted  front 
them  at  their  trials,  the  witdies  and  sorcerers  hore 
testimony  to  the  truth  of  ail  these  particidars ;  but 
those  who  judged  them,  and  who  wrote  upon  the 
subject,  asserted  that  they  had  many  oUier  inde- 
pendent proofs  in  corroboration. 

We  are  assured  by  Bodin  that  a  man  who  lived 
at  the  little  town  of  Loches  having  observed  that 
his  wife  frequently  absented  herself  from  the  house 
in  the  night,  became  suspicious  of  her  conduct,  and 
at  last  by  his  threats  obliged  her  to  confess  that  she 
was  a  witch,  and  that  she  attended  the  Sabbatha 
To  appease  the  anger  of  her  husband,  she  agreed  to 
gratify  his  curiosity  by  taking  him  with  her  to  the 
next  meeting,  but  she  warned  him  on  no  account 
whatever  to  allow  the  name  of  God  or  of  the  Sa- 
viour to  escape  his  lips.  At  the  appointed  time 
they  stripped  and  anointed  themselves,  and,  after 
uttering  the  necessary  formula,  they  were  suddenly 
transported  to  the  landes  of  Bordeaux,  at  an  im- 
mense distance  from  their  own  dwelling.  The  hus- 
band there  found  himself  in  the  midst  of  a  great 
assembly  of  both  sexes  in  the  same  state  of  d^ha- 
btUe  as  himself  and  his  wife,  and  in  one  part  he 
saw  the  devil  in  a  hideous  form ;  but  in  the  first 
moment  of  his  surprise  he  inadvertently  uttered 
the  exclamation,  "  Mon  Dieu  !  ou  sommes-wms  f 
and  all  disappeared  as  suddenly  from  his  view, 
leaving  him  cold  and  naked  in  the  middle  of  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


TH8  MAIDBK  IK  I^SIWBSS.  S(^ 

fields,  where  he  wandered  till  morning,  when  the 
ocrantrTinen  coming  to  ilieir  daily  occupations  told 
him  where  he  was,  and  he  made  his  way  home  in 
tiie  best  manner  he  could.  But  he  lost  no  time  in 
denouncing  his  wife,  who  was  brought  to  her  trial, 
confessed,  and  was  burnt. 

The  same  thing  is  stated  to  have  happened  to  a 
man  at  Lyons,  with  a  similar  result ;  and  other  in- 
stances are  given  by  Bodin  and  contemporary 
writers  on  the  same  subject.  In  Italy,  in  the  year 
1635,  a  young  girl  of  about  sixteen  years  of 
age,  in  the  duchy  of  Spoleto,  was  taken  to  the  Sab- 
bath for  the  first  time  by  her  mother,  who  had  cau- 
tioned her  against  making  the  sign  of  the  cross. 
But  when  the  damsel  saw  so  vast  a  multitude  of 
persons  collected  together  with  so  much  splendour, 
and  Satan  seated  on  a  high  throne  and  dressed  in 
garments  of  purple  and  gold,  she  was  so  much  asto- 
nished that,  involuntarily  crossing  herself,  she  ex- 
claimed, "  Jesu  benedetto  !  che  cosa  i  que^a  ?'  The 
lights  and  the  company  suddenly  disappeared  from 
her  sight,  and  she  was  thrown  with  some  violence 
on  the  ground,  where  she  recommended  herself  to 
the  protection  of  the  Virgin.  Towards  morning  an 
old  man  and  his  daughter  passed  near  the  spot  with 
an  ass,  and  hearing  a  female  voice  in  a  tone  of  la- 
mentation, he  approached  the  spot,  and  was  still 
more  astonished  to  find  a  young  maiden  in  a  state 
of  nudity.  She  at  once  told  him  her  story,  and  he 
gave  her  part  of  his  garments  to  cover  her,  carried 
her  home,  and  two  or  three  days  afterwards  restored 
her  to  her  family,  who  lived  at  some  distance  from 
the  spot  where  she  was  found,  and  who  supposed 


Digitized 


by  Google 


304  80R0BBT  AND  MAOIC. 

she  had  been  carried  off  by  some  of  the  many  law- 
less depredators  who  then  infested  the   country. 
The  mother,  who  carried  her  to  the  Sabbath,  was 
tried  as  a  witch,  and  burnt    Another  learned  Ita- 
lian writer  tells  us  a  no  less  extraordinary  story  as 
having  happened  within  his  own  knowledge.    A 
man  of  respectability,  residing  at  Venice,  was  sur- 
prised one  morning  to  find  the  daughter  of  an  old 
acquaintance,  who  lived  at  Bergomi,  lying  naked  on 
one  of  his  beds,  near  the  cradle  of  his  infant  son. 
After  being  clothed  and  comforted,  she  told  him 
that,  waking  in  the  night,  she  had  seen  her  mother 
rise  from  her  bed,  strip,  and  rub  her  body  with  an 
ointment,  and  then  disappear  through  the  window. 
Prompted  by  her  curiosity,  she  imitated  all  that  her 
mother  had  done,  when  she  was  suddenly  trans- 
ported into  the  place  where  he  had  found  her,  where 
she  beheld  her  mother  preparing  to  kill  the  child  in 
the  cradle.    Her  astonishment  at  this  sudden  ad- 
venture,  and  the  fright  caused  by  her  parent's 
threats,  had  made  her  cry  out  upon  Christ  and  the 
Virgin,  when  her  mother  vanished,  and  she  was 
left  there  in  darkness.    The  man  immediately  sent 
a  statement  of  this  affair  to  the  inquisitor  of  the 
district,  who  seized  upon  the  girFs  mother,  and  the 
latter  confessed  herself  a  witch,  and  said  that  she 
had  frequently  been  urged  by  the  evil  one  to  destroy 
the  child  of  her  acquaintance. 

The  Italian  trials  of  this  period  furnish  several 
similar  incidents.  In  1524,  Grillandus,  one  of  the 
most  eminent  writers  on  the  subject,  examined  a 
young  witch  at  Rome,  concerning  whom  the  follow- 
ing evidence  was  given.    She  was  returning  one 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   WITCH   AT   ROME.  305 

night  from  the  Sabbath  rather  later  than  was 
prudent,  carried  as  usual  on  the  back  of  her  fami- 
liar, when,  as  they  approached  the  town  at  which 
she  lived,  the  church  bells  began  to  sound  for 
matins.  The  demon  in  a  fright  threw  her  among 
the  bushes  by  the  river  side,  and  fled.  At  daybreak 
a  youth  of  the  town,  whom  she  knew,  passed  near 
the  spot,  and  she  called  to  him  by  his  name.  Ter- 
rified at  the  unexpected  call,  at  first  he  was  on  the 
point  of  leaving  her  with  as  little  ceremony  as  the 
evil  one  had  done,  till  recognizing  the  voice  he  went 
nearer,  and  was  not  a  little  surprised  to  see  the 
woman  in  such  a  position,  with  dishevelled  hair, 
and  in  a  state  nearly  approaching  to  nudity,  and 
asked  her  how  she  came  there.  She  replied,  in  evi- 
dent confusion,  that  she  was  seeking  her  ass.  The 
young  man  observed  that  it  was  not  usual  to  go  in 
such  a  pursuit  in  the  state  in  which  she  then  ap- 
peared, and  insisted  upon  a  more  probable  account 
of  her  adventure  before  he  would  lend  her  any  assist- 
ance ;  and,  after  he  had  solemnly  promised  to  keep 
the  secret,  she  confessed  the  truth,  and  she  subse- 
quently gave  him  more  substantial  rewards  for  his 
silence.  After  a  while,  however,  he  incautiously 
spoke  of  it  to  one  or  two  of  his  friends,  and  it  began 
to  be  rumoured  abroad,  until  it  reached  the  ears  of 
the  inquisitioners.  Then  the  woman  was  thrown 
into  prison,  and  her  confidant  was  brought  forward, 
and  obliged  to  depose  against  her. 

With  statements  like  these,  sent  abroad  under  the 
hand  of  men  of  known  learning  and  station  in  so- 
ciety, it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  if  men's  minds  be- 
came irrevocably  entangled  in  superstition. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


306  SaftCOBT  AVD  MAQIC. 

As  the  witches  generally  went  from  th^  beds  at 
night  to  the  meetings,  leaving  their  husbands  and 
fkmily  behind  them,  it  may  seem  extraordinaary  tiiat 
their  absence  was  not  more  frequently  perceived. 
They  had,  however,  a  method  of  providing  against 
this  danger,  by  casting  a  drowsiness  over  lliose  who 
might  be  witnesses,  and  by  placing  in  their  bed  an 
image  which,  to  all  outward  appearance,  bore  an 
exact  resemblance  to  themsdves,  although  in  reality 
it  was  nothing  more  than  a  besom  or  some  other 
similar  article.  But  the  bdief  was  also  inculcated 
that  the  witches  did  not  always  go  in  body  to  the 
Sabbath, — that  they  were  present  only  in  spirit, 
whilst  their  body  remained  in  bed.  Some  of  the 
more  rationalising  writers  on  witchcraft  taught  that 
this  was  the  only  manner  in  which  they  were  ever 
carried  to  the  Sabbaths,  and  various  instances  m^ 
deposed  to,  where  that  was  -manifestly  ike  case 
The  president  de  la  Tourettatold  Bodin  that  he  had 
examined  a  witch,  who  was  subsequently  burnt  in 
Dauphin6,  and  who  had  been  carried  to  the  Sabbath 
in  this  manner.  Her  master  one  night  found  her 
sketched  on  the  floor  before  the  fire  in  a  state  of 
insensibility,  and  imagined  her  to  be  dead.  In  his 
attemj^  to  rouse  her,  he  first  beat  her  body  with 
great  severity^  and  then*  applied  fire  to  the  more 
sensitive  parts,  which  being  without  efiect,  he  left 
her  in  the  belief  that  die  had  died  suddeidy.  His 
astonishment  was  great  when  in  the  morning  he 
found  her  in  her  own  bed,  in  an  evid^it  state  of 
great  suffering.  When  he  asked  what  ailed  her>  her 
only  answer  was,  "  Ha  !  mon  maistrty  tcmt  mi  ams 
hatue  r    When  ftirther  pressed,  however,  she  con- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  WOMAN  BBAniT.  307 

fbssed  that  during  the  time  her  foody  lay  in  »  state 
of  insensibility,  she  had  been  herself  to  the  witches' 
Sabbath,  and  upon  this  avowal  she  was  committed 
to  prieK)n.  Bodin  further  informs  us  that  at  Bor- 
deaux, in  1571,  an  old  woman,  who  was  condemned 
to  the  fire  for  witchcraft,  had  confessed  that  she  was 
taransported  to  the  Sabbath  in  this  manner.  One  of 
h^r  judges,  the  maitre-des-requetes,  who  was  per- 
sonaUy  known :  to  Bodih,  .while  she  iras  under  exa- 
mination, pressed  her  to  show  how  this  was  effected, 
and  released  her  from  her  fetters  for  that  purpose. 
She  rubbed  herself  in  different  parts  of  the  body 
witii  ^^  a  certain  grease,"'  and  immediately  became 
stiff  and  insensible,  and,  to  all  appearance,  dead 
She  remained  in  this  state  about  five  hours,  and 
then  as  quickly  revived,  and  ixAd  her  inquisitors  a 
great  number  of  extraordinary  things,  which  showed 
that  she  must  have  been  spmtually  transported  to 
&r  distant  places.     Thus  testifieth  Jean  Bodin. 

The  description  of  the  Sabbath  given  by  the 
witches  differed  only  in  slight  particulars  of  detail ; 
for  their  examinations  were  all  carried  on  upon 
one  model  and  measure — a  veritable  bed  of  Pro- 
crustes, and  equally  feital  to  those  who  were  placed 
upon  it.  The  Sabbath  was,  in  general,  an  immense 
assemblage  of  witdies  and  demons,  sometimes 
from  distant  parts  of  the  earth,  at  others  only  irom 
the  province  or  district  in  which  it  was  held.  On 
arriving,  the  visitors  performed  their  homage  to  the 
evil  one  with  unseemly  ceremonies,  and  presented 
their  new  converts.  They  then  gave  an  account  of 
all  the  mischief  they  had  done  since  the  last  meet- 
ing^   Those  who  had  ne^ected  to  do  evil,  or  who 


Digitized 


by  Google 


308  SORCBBY   AND  MAQia 

had  so  far  overlooked  themselYes  as  to  do  good, 
were  treated  with  disdain,  or  severely  punished. 
Several  of  the  victims  of  the  French  courts  in  the 
latter  part  of  this  century  confessed  that,  having 
been  unwilling  or  unable  to  fulfil  the  commands  of 
the  evil  one,  when  they  appeared  at  the  Sabbath  he 
had  beaten  them  in  the  most  cruel  manner.  He 
took  one  woman,  who  had  refused  to  bewitch  her 
neighbour's  daughter,  and  threatened  to  drown  her 
in  the  Moselle.  Others  were  plagued  in  their  bodies, 
or  by  destruction  of  their  property.  Some  were 
punished  for  their  irregular  attendance  at  the  Sab- 
bath ;  and  one  or  two,  for  slighter  oflfences,  were 
condemned  to  walk  home  from  the  Sabbath  instead 
of  being*  carried  through  the  air.  Those,  on  the 
other  hand,  who  had  exerted  most  their  mischievous 
propensities  were  highly  honoured  at  the  Sabbath, 
and  often  rewarded  with  gifts  of  money,  &c.  After 
this  examination  was  passed,  the  demon  distribirted 
among  his  worshippers  unguents,  powders,  and  other 
articles  for  the  perpetration  of  eviL 

It  appears,  also,  that  the  witches  were  expected, 
at  least  once  a  year,  to  bring  an  offering  to  their 
master.  This  circumstance  was  certainly  derived 
from  the  earlier  popular  superstitions  ;  offerings  to 
demons  are  mentioned  frequently  in  the  early  Ger- 
man and  Anglo-Saxon  laws  against  paganism,  and 
the  reader  will  remember  the  nine  red  cocks  and 
nine  peacocks'  eyes  offered  by  the  lady  Alice 
Kyteler.  A  French  witch,  executed  in  1580,  con- 
fessed that  some  of  her  companions  offered  a  sheep 
or  a  heifer;  and  another,  executed  the  following 
year,  stated  that  animals  of  a  black  colour  were 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   FAMILIAB  8PIRITS.  309 

most  acceptable.  A  third,  executed  at  Gerbeville 
in  3586,  declared  that  no  one  was  exempt  from  this 
offering,  and  that  the  poorer  sort  offered  a  hen  or  a 
chicken,  and  some  even  a  lock  of  their  hair,  a  little 
bird,  or  any  trifle  they  could  put  their  hands  upon. 
Severe  punishments  followed  the  neglect  of  this 
ceremony.  In  many  instances,  according  to  the 
confessions  of  the  witches,  besides  their  direct  wor- 
ship of  the  devil,  they  were  obliged  to  show  their 
abhorrence  of  the  faith  they  had  deserted  by 
trampling  on  the  cross,  and  blaspheming  the  saints, 
and  by  other  profanations. 

Before  the  termination  of  the  meeting,  the  new 
witches  received  their  familiars,  or  imps,  whom  they 
generally  addressed  as  their  "  little  masters,"  al- 
though they  were  bound  to  attend  at  the  bidding  of 
the  witches,  and  execute  their  desirea  These  re- 
ceived names,  generally  of  a  popular  character,  such 
as  were  given  to  cats,  and  dogs,  and  other  pet  ani- 
mals, and  the  similarity  these  names  bear  to  each 
other  in  different  countries  is  very  remarkable.  Ex- 
amples of  English  names  of  familiars  have  been  given 
in  the  last  chapter.  In  France,  we  have  such  names 
as  Minette,  (i  e.  puss,)  Robin,  Maistre  Persil,  Joly-bois, 
Verdelet,  Saute-buisson,  &c. ;  in  Germany,  the  names 
are  Ungluc,  (i.  e,  misfortune,)  Mash-leid,  (mischief,) 
Tzum-walt-vliegen,  (flying  to  the  wood,)  Feder- 
wiisch,  (feather-washer,)  and  the  like.  The  forms 
seem  to  have  been  generally  those  of  animals ;  and 
they  are  described  as  speaking  with  a  voice  like  that 
of  a  man  with  his  mouth  in  a  jug. 

After  all  these  preliminary  ceremonies — or  rather 
the  business  of  the  meeting — had  been  transacted,  a 


Digitized 


by  Google 


910  80BCB&T  AKD  UUnC 

great  banquet  was  laid  out,  and  the  whole  compan  j 
fell  to  eating  and  drinking  and  making  merry.  At 
times,  every  article  of  luxury  was  placed  before 
them,  and  they  feasted  in  the  most  sumptuous  man- 
ner. Often,  however,  the  meats  served  on  the  table 
were  nothing  but  toads  and  rats,  and  other  articles 
of  a  revolting  nature.  In  general  they  had  no  salt, 
and  seldom  bread.  But,  even  when  best  served,  the 
money  and  the  victuals  furnished  by  the  ^demotis 
were  of  a  most  unsatisfactory  character ;  a  circum- 
stance of  which  no  rational  explanation  is  given. 
The  coin,  when  brought  forth  by  open  daylight,  was 
generally  found  to  be  nothing  better  than  dried 
leaves  or  bits  of  dirt ;  and,  however  greedily  ihej 
may  have  eaten  at  the  table,  they  commonly  left 
the  meeting  in  a  state  of  exhaustion  from  hunger. 

The  tables  were  next  removed,  and  feasting  gave 
way  to  wild  and  uproarious  dancing  and  revelry. 
The  common  dance,  or  carole,  of  the  middle  ages 
appears  to  have  been  performed  by  parties  taking 
each  other's  hand  in  a  circle,  alternately  a  gentle- 
man and  a  lady.  This,  probably  the  ordinary  dance 
among  the  peasantry,  was  the  one  generally  prac- 
tised at  the  Sabbaths  of  the  witches,  with  this 
peculiarity,  that  their  backs  instead  of  their  faces 
were  turned  inwaixls.  The  old  writers  endeavour 
to  account  for  this,  by  supposing  that  it  was  de- 
signed to  prevent  them  from  seeing  and  recognising 
each  otlier.  But  this,  it  is  clear,  was  not  the  only 
dance  of  the  Sabbath;  perhaps  more  fashionable 
ones  were  introduced  for  witches  in  a  better  condi- 
tion in  society  ;  and  moralists  of  the  succeeding  age 
maliciously  insinuate  that  many  dances  of  a  not 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THB  BAKCfB  OF  THE   WITCHES.  SIl 

very  decorous  character,  invented  by  the  devil  him- 
self to  heat  the  ima^ations  of  his  victims,  had 
subsequ^itly  been  adopted  by  classes  in  society  who 
did  not  frequent  the  Sabbath.  It  may  be  observed, 
as  a  curious  dbrcumstance,  that  the  modem  waits 
is  first,  traced  among  the  meetings  of  the  witches 
and  their  imps !  It  was  also  confessed,  in  almost 
every  case,  that  the  dances  at  the  Sabbaths  produced 
much  greater  fatigue  than  commonly  arose  from 
such  exercises.  Many  of  the  witches  declared  ^at, 
on  their  return  home,  they  were  usually  unable  tQ 
rise  from  their  bed  for  two  or  three  days. 

Their  music,  also,  was  by  no  means  of  an  ordi- 
nary character.  The  songs  were  generally  obscene,  or 
vulgar,  or  ridiculous.  Of  instruments  there  was 
considerable  variety,  but  $31  partakii^  of  the  bur- 
lesque character  of  the  proceedings.  Some  played 
the  flute  upon  a  stick  or  bone ;  another,  was  seen 
striking  a  horse's  skull  for  a  lyre ;  there  you  saw 
them  beating  the  drum  on  the  trunk  of  an  oak, 
with  a  stick ;  here,  others  were  blowing  trumpets 
with  the  branches.  The  louder  the  instrument,  the 
greater  satisfaction  it  gave;  and  the  dancing  be- 
came wilder  and  wild^,  until  it  mei^ed  into  a  vast 
scene  of  confusion,  and  ended  in  scenes  over  which, 
though  minutely  described  in  the  old  treatises  on 
demonology,  it  will  be  better  to  throw  a  veil  The 
witches  sepM*ated  in  time  to  reach  their  homes  be- 
fore cock-crow. 

In  the  intervals  between    their  meetings,  the 

witches  passed  their  whole  time  in  devising  and 

performing  mischief;    and  to  them  were  ascribed 

the  storms  or  Uights  which  devastated  the  fields, 

10 


Digitized 


by  Google 


312  SOBOEBY  AND  HA6IC. 

and  destroyed  the  fruits  of  the  earth ;  the  loss  of 
cattle  or  of  property ;  ill-luck,  diseases,  and  death. 
They  thus  became,  among  the  peasantry,  a  hateful 
class ;  and  every  mouth  was  open  to  accuse  them, 
and  every  hand  to  persecute.  In  these  respects, 
and  in  the  nature  of  their  supposed  agency,  the 
witches  of  France  differed  in  no  respect  from  those 
of  England. 

The  truth  of  all  these  wondrous  recitals  depended, 
as  will  have  been  seen,  entirely  upon  the  confes- 
sions of  the  witches  themselves,  or  on  the  accusa- 
tions of  others  equally  under  arrest  as  criminals  of 
the  same  description.  When  we  read,  in  the  writers 
of  those  times,  the  systematically-arranged  direc- 
tions for  proceeding  against  criminals  of  this  class 
in  France,  Germany,  and  Jtaly,  we  feel  a  sentiment 
of  horror  in  contemplating  the  utter  neglect  of 
every  principle  of  justice,  and  in  considering  that 
this  arose  from  no  deliberate  intention  of  acting 
tyrannically,  but  from  the  mere  perversion  of 
human  judgment,  by  the  extraordinary  influence  of 
the  lowest  class  of  superstitions.  It  is  diflScult  to 
say  how  far,  under  peculiar  circumstances,  the  cre- 
dulity of  mankind  may  be  carried.  We  frequently, 
however,  observe  in  the  most  zealous  writers  against 
witchcraft,  the  involuntary  expression  of  a  kind  of 
instinctive  feeling  of  the  weakness  of  evidence, 
while  they  are  at  the  same  time  crying  up  for  its 
irresistible  force.  In  this  feeling,  they  catch  at 
anything  that  seems  to  offer  a  corroboration,  with 
little  inclination  to  examine  critically  into  its  truth. 
Popular  legends,  and  old  stories  and  fables,  thus 
often  raise  their  heads  among  the  learnedly  paraded 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   WITCHES   OF   THE   VOSGES.  313 

confessions  of  tEe  prisoners,  and  helped,  no  doubt, 
to  confuse  and  bewilder  the  minds  of  many  who 
entered  upon  the  study  of  the  theological  and  judi- 
cial treatises  on  witchcraft,  with  the  real  wish  to 
discover  the  truth.     It  was  from  tales  like  those 
alluded  to,   current  still  among  the  peasantry   in 
every  part  of  the  world,  that  they  brought  forward 
what  they  fondly  believed  were  independent  proofs 
of  the  accuracy  of  statements,  which  otherwise  de- 
pended only  upon  the  forced  confessions  of  crimi- 
nals.     From  these  latter,  alone,   the  public   were 
acquainted  with  the  astounding  details  of  the  Sab- 
baths.    But  Remigius,   and  other  foreign  writers, 
brought  forward  persons  who  were   avowedly  no 
witches,  and  who  had  accidentally  witnessed  some 
of  the  scenes,  the  description  of  which,  by  the  actors 
themselves,  had  caused  so  great  a  sensation.     The 
wilds  of  the  Vosges  were  celebrated  as  the  scene  of 
these  midnight  assemblies ;  in  the  year  1583,  the 
popular  festival  of  the  month  of  May  was  held,  as 
usual,  in  the  village  of  Lutzei,  at  the  foot  of  these 
mountains ;  and  at  night,  one  of  the  revellers  who 
had  come  from  a  place  called  Wisenbach,  at  some 
distance  in  the  mountains,  prepared  to  return  home, 
his  head  probably  filled  with  the  good  cheer  and 
revelry  of  the  day.     As  he  was  wending  his  way 
through  the  higher  part  of  the  mountain  which  lay 
between  the  two  villages,  he  was  surprised  by  a 
sudden   and  unusual  whirlwind,   which  the  more 
astonished  him  as  the  night  was  peculiarly  calm. 
Anxious  to  learn  the  cause  of  this  singular  inter- 
ruption, his  curiosity  l^d  him  from  his  path,  and, 
looking  into  a  retired  nook,  he  became  suddenly 
VOL.  I.  p 


Digitized 


by  Google 


314  SOECBEY  AND  MAGia 

aware  of  the  presence  of  beings  of  no  ordinary  cha- 
racter.  Six  women  were  dancing  round  a  table^ 
covered  with  vessels  of  gold  and  silver,  and  tossing 
their  heads  in  a  wild  manner ;  and  near  them  was 
a  man,  seated  on  a  black  bull,  and  apparently  en~ 
joying  the  scene,  on  which  he  was  quietly  gazing. 
Of  anything  beyond  this  group,  Claude  Chote  (for 
such  was  the  man's  name)  was  ignorant,  for  as  he 
bent  fonfard,  to  examine  them  more  carefidly, 
whether  he  made  a  noise,  or  uttered  a  prayer,  is 
not  said,  but  the  whole  disappeared  from  his  eyes. 
After  recovering  from  his  astonishment,  Claude  re- 
turned to  the  path,  and  continued  his  way ;  but  he 
had  not  gone  far  before,  like  Tam  O'Shanter,  he 
found  that  he  was  closely  pursued  by  the  women  he 
had  seen  dancing  round  the  table,  who  came  on 
wildly,  tossing  their  heads  about,  and  led  by  a  man 
with  a  black  face  and  eagle's  clawa  The  latter  was 
about  to  strike  Claude  Chot6,  when  he  had  the  pre- 
seJnce  of  mind  to  draw  his  sword,  and,  at  the  sight 
of  the  naked  steel,  his  pursuers  vanished  from  his 
sight.  The  women,  however,  again  made  their  ap- 
pearance, in  a  less  hostile  manner,  accompanied  by 
the  man  whom  Claude  had  seen  sitting  on  the 
black  bull,  whom  he  now  recognised  as  a  person  of 
his  acquaintance,  and  to  whom  he  made  a  promise 
that  he  would  be  silent  on  the  subject  of  what  he 
had  seen.  His  persecutors  then  left  him,  and  he 
found  that  he  had  wandered  far  out  of  his  way. 
After  his  return  home  he  soon  forgot  his  promise  of 
secrecy,  the  story  was  gradually  spread  abroad,  and 
Claude  ,was  carried  before  a  magistrate,  and  made 
a  full  confession,  the  consequence  of  which  wasi. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  MAGIC  DANCE.  315 

that  some  of  the  persons  he  had  recognised  in  the 
mountains  were  placed  under  arrest,  and  one  of  the 
women,  whose  natoe  is  given,  corroborated  his  story, 
differing  only  in  this,  that  she  said  they  had  pur- 
sued him,  not  because  he  looked  at  them,  but  be- 
cause he  attempted  to  steal  a  silver  goblet  from  the 
table  Remigius  gives  another  instance,  as  occur- 
ring in  the  year  1590,  in  the  same  part  of  France, 
and,  which  was  most  extraordinary,  at  mid-day.  A 
countryman  was  passing  along  a  path  in  the  woods, 
when,  turning  his  looks  to  one  side,  he  beheld,  in 
an  open  field,  a  number  of  men  and  women  dancing 
in  a  circle,  all  having  their  faces  turned  outwards. 
This  latter  circumstance  raised  his  curiosity,  and, 
examining  them  more  closely,  he  observed  that 
among  the  rest  were  two  or  three  men  with  feet  of 
goats  and  oxen.  Struck  with  sudden  horror,  he 
felt  himself  fixed  to  the  spot,  his  legs  trembled 
under  him,  and  he  screamed  out  involuntarily, 
"  Jesus,  help  !"  The  demons  vanished  in  an  instant 
from  his  sight ;  but,  as  they  swept  by  in  rising  into 
the  air,  he  had  just  time  to  recognise  one  man  as  a 
native  of  his  own  village.  The  story  was  soon 
made  public,  the  spot  was  visited,  a  circle  on  the 
grass  where  they  had  danced  was  distinctly  visible, 
with  here  and  there  the  marks  of  hoofs.  The  man 
who  had  been  recognised  was  arrested,  and  his  con- 
fession led  to  the  discovery  and  punishment  of 
several  of  the  others,  especially  of  the  women. 

Towards  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century,  the 
witchcraft  infatuation  had  risen  to  .its  greatest 
height  in  France,  and  not  only  the  lower  classes, 
but  persons  of  the  highest  rank  in  society,  were 

P  2 


Digitized 


by  Google 


316  SORCBBY  AND  MAGia 

liable  to  suspicions  of  dealing  in  sorcery.  We  need 
only  mention  that  suck  charges  were  publicly  mado 
against  king  Henri  III.*  and  queen  Catherine  de 
Medicis,  and  that,  early  in  the  following  century, 
they  became  the  ground  of  state  trials  which  had  a 
fatal  conclusion. 

*  The  following  account  Iq  taken  from  one  of  the  libelloua 
pamphlets  against  this  monarch,  published  by  the  partizans  of 
the  ligue,  under  the  title  of  "  Les  Sorcelleries  de  Henri  de  Va- 
lois,  et  les  oblations  qu'il  Msoit  au  diable  dans  le  bois  de  Yin- 
cennes.    Paris,  1589." 

"  On  a  trouve  demierement  au  bois  de  Vincennes  deux, 
satyres  d'argent,  de  la  hauteur  de  quatre  pieds.  lis  etaient  au- 
devant  d'une  croix  d'or,  au  milieu  de  laquelle  y  avait  en- 
chasse  du  bois  de  la  vraie  croix  de  notre  seigneur  Jesus  Christ, 
Les  politiques  (i.  e.  the  moderate  party)  disent,  que  c'^etaient 
des  chandeliers.  Ce  qui  fait  croire  le  contraire,  e'est  que, 
dans  ces  vases,  il  n'y  avoit  pas  d'aiguiUe  qui  passat  pour  y 
mettre  un  cierge  ou  ime  petite  chandelle ;  joint  qu'ils  tour- 
naient  le  derriere  a  ladite  Traie  croix,  et  que  deux  anges  ou 
deux  simples  chandeliers  y  eussent  ete  plus  decens  que  ces 
satyres,  estimes  par  les  payens  etre  des  dieux  des  forets,  ou  Ton. 
tient  que  les  mauvais  esprits  se  trouvent  plutot  qu'en  autres 
lieux.  Ces  monstres  diaboliques  ont  ete  vus  par  messieurs  de 
la  ville  (the  leaders  of  the  ligue).  .  .  .  Outre  ces  deux  figures 
diaboliques,  on  «^  trouve  une  peau  d'enfant,  laquelle  avait  ete  cor- 
royee ;  et  sur  icelle,  y  avait  aussi  plusieurs  mots  de  sorceUerie 
et  divers  caracteres  .  .  .  Tout  ce  qu'il  allait  souvent  au  bois  de 
Vincennes,  n'etait  que  pour  entendre  a  ses  sorcelleries,  et  non 
pour  prier  Dieu." 

Perhaps  the  two  satyres  were  antiques,  against  which  the 
peasantry  had  always  a  prejudice.  In  early  times,  when  people 
dug  up  the  Koman  bronzes  or  sculptures,  they  broke  them  and 
threw  them  away  in  the  belief  they  w^re  instruments  of  magic- 
It  appears  from  Mr.  CoUingwood  Bruce's  excellent  work  on 
the  Koman  wall,  that  this  feeling  still  exists  among  the  pea. 
santry  of  Northumberland. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


317 


CHAPTER  XVI. 


PIBBBB  DB-LANCEB  AND   THE   WITCHES   OF   LABOUED. 

In  the  south-western  comer  of  France,  stretch- 
ing from  the  foot  of  the  Pyrenees  to  the  shore 
of  the  Bay  of  Biscay,  bordering  on  Spain  to 
the  south,  and  extending  northwards  on  the 
flat  sandy  heaths  of  the  Landes,  is  a  small  dis- 
trict which,  from  a  Roman  station  named  Lapur- 
dvmiy  that  occupied  the  site  of  the  present  city  of 
Bayonne,  received  in  the  middle  ages  the  name  of 
Labourd.  The  coimtry  and  the  people  were  equally 
wild  and  uncultivated,  the  produce  of  the  former 
consisting  chiefly  of  fruits,  while  the  latter 
occupied  themselves  principally  in  fishing.  It 
was  the  men  of  Labourd  who,  at  the  commence- 
ment of  the  seventeenth  century,  carried  on  the 
fishery  at  Newfoundland,  and  they  are  said  to  have 
been  the  first  whalers.  Their  equivocal  position 
between  the  two  rival  countries,  France  and  Spain, 
and  their  alliance  more  by  consanguinity  with  their 
Basque  neighbours  on  the  other  side  of  the  Spanish 
border  than  with  the  people  to  the  north,  seemed 


Digitized 


by  Google 


318  80BCERT  AKB  MAGIC. 

almost  to  put  them  out  of  the  laws  of  either, — ^a 
people  separated  from  the  rest  of  the  world. 

Their  more  civilized  neighbours  looked  upon  them 
with  contempt  for  their  primitive  manners,  and  be- 
lieved that  the  demon  had  selected  the  wild  district 
they  inhabited  as  his  favourite  resort  The  women, 
deserted  a  great  part  of  the  year  by  their  husbands 
and  sons,  who  were  out  on  their  fishing  expeditions, 
were  more  exposed  to  temptation  than  those  of  any 
other  part  of  France,  and  the  witches  sf  Labourd 
had  become  proverbial  They,  it  was  said,  caused 
ihe  storms  which  so  often  visited  the  Bay  of  Biscay, 
and  when  the  fishermen  perished  in  the  pursuit  of 
their  adventurous  calling,  it  was  believed  that  the 
winds  which  overwhelmed  them  were  sent  by  their 
wives,  who  had  formed  other  connexions  in  their 
absence 

In  the  year  1609,  the  subject  of  sorcery  occupied 
the  attention  of  the  parliament  of  Bordeaux,  under 
whose  jurisdiction  this  country  lay,  and  it  was  re- 
solved to  attack  Satan  in  his  head-quarters  by 
purging  the  district  of  Labourd  of  his  worshippera 
For  this  purpose,  a  royal  commission  was  given  to 
two  conseiUers,  or  judges,  of  the  parliament,  Pierre 
de  Lancre,  and  the  president  Jean  d'Espaignet,  and 
they  went  to  Labourd  in  the  month  of  May,  in  the 
year  just  mentioned,  armed  with  full  authority  to 
bring  alljwho  had  been  seduced  by  the  fiend  to  imme- 
diate judgment  The  two  commissioners  remained 
in  Labourd  four  months,  at  the  end  of  which  time 
they  were  called  away  by  other  business ;  but  their 
crusade  against  sorcery  had  been  an  extraordinary 
active  one,  and  an  immense  number  of  wretched 


Digitized 


by  Google 


PIEBBE  DE  LAKOBE  IN  LABOUBD.  319 

people  were  sacrificed  to  their  zeal  Pierre  de 
Lancre,  especially,  became  so  profoundly  learned 
in  the  subject  of  witchcraft,  that  afker  his  return 
from  this  expedition,  he  compiled  a  large  book  on 
the  subject,  which  remains  as  one  of  the  most  ex- 
traordinary monuments  of  the  superstition  of  those 
ages.* 

De  Lancre  was  astonished  at  the  multitude  of 
sorcerers  he  found  within  the  limits  of  the  small 
district  of  Labourd,f  and  that  a  country  so  barren 
in  other  respects  should  be  fertile  only  in  servants  of 
Satan.  He  attributed  this  to  the  barbarous  condi- 
tion of  the  inhabitants,  to  the  deserted  state  of 
the  women  during  the  fishing  season,  and  to  the 
idle  and  dissolute  life  of  the  whole  population 
during  the  rest  of  the  year.  He  intimates  that  the 
priests  were  nearly  as  ignorant  and  vicious  as  the 
people,  that  they  were  the  usual  companions  of  the 
women  during  the  absence  of  their  husbands,  and 
that,  as  they  allowed  them  to  assist  in  the  services  of 
the  church,  so  they  joined  with  them  in  that  of  the 
devil,  who  not  only  gained  possession  of  the  clergy, 
but  even  of  the  churches  themselves,  in  some  of 
which  he  held  his  meetings  of  witchea    Thus,  we 

*  Tableau  de  rinconstance  des  Mauvais  Angea  et  Demons^ 
ou  il  est  amplement  traict^  des  Sorciers  et  Demons.  4to.  Paris, 
1612. 

f  Mais  de  voir  tant  de  demons  et  mauvais  esprits,  et  tant  de 
sorciers  et  soroieres  confinez  en  ce  pays  de  Labourt,  qui  n'est 
qu*un  petit  recoing  de  la  JFranee,  de  voir  que  c'est  la  pepiniere, 
et  qu'en  nul  lieu  de  TEurope,  qu*on  scache,  il  n*y  a  rien  qui  ap> 
proche  du  nombre  infiny  que  nous  y  en  avons  trouv^,  c'est  la 
merveille. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


320  SOBOEBY   AKD  MAOIO. 

are  told,  Labourd  became  the  general  refiige  of  all 
the  demons  whom  the  catholic  missionaries  had 
driven  away  from  India,  Japan,  and  other  distant 
lands,  and  De  Lancre  gravely  tells  us  that  the  Eng- 
lish, Scotch,  and  other  merchants,  who  came  to  pur- 
chase their  wines  at  Bordeaux,  assured  him  they 
had  seen  on  their  voyage  troops  of  demons  in  the 
shapes  of  monstrous  men  passing  through  the  air  to 
that  country. 

"  They  reckon,"  says  De  Lancre,  "  that  there  are 
thirty  thousand  souls  in  this  country  of  Labourd, 
counting  those  who  are  at  sea,  and  that  among  all 
this  people  there  are  very  few  families  not  affected 
with  sorcery  in  some  one  of  their  membera     If  the 
number  of  sorcerers  condemned  to  the  fire  is  so 
great,  one  of  them   said,  to  me  one  day,  it  will  be 
strange  if  I  have  not  a  share  in  the  cinders.    Which 
is  the  cause  that  we  see  most  frequently  the  son  ac- 
cuse the  mother  or  the  father,  the  brother  the  sister, 
the  husband  the  wife,  and  sometimes  the  reverse. 
Which  proximity  is  the   cause  that  many  heads 
of  families,  officers,   and  other  people  of  quality, 
finding  themselves  entangled  in  it,  prefer  suffering 
the  incommodity  that  may  be  in  this  abomination 
which  the   sorcerers  hold  always   in  some  doubt 
among  their  acquaintance,  than  to  see  so  many  exe- 
cutions, gibbets,  flames,  alid  fires  of  people  who  are 
so  near  in  affinity  to  them.     We  were  never  in  want 
of  proof ;  the  multiplicity  and  the  infinite  number 
caused   our  horror.     On  our  arrival  they  fled  in 
troops,  both  by  land  and  by  sea ;  lower  and  upper 
Navarre  and  the  Spanish  frontier  were  filled  with 
them  hourly.    They  pretended  pilgrimages  to  Mont- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


PLACES   OF  ASSEMBLY.  321 

serrat  and  St  James's,  or  voyages  to  Newfoundland 
and  elsewhere,  and  they  raised  such  an  alarm  in 
Navarre  and  Spain,  that  the  inquisitors  came  to  the 
frontier,  and  wrote  to  us,  that  we  would  please  to 
send  them  the  names,  age,  and  other  marks  of  the 
fugitive  sorcerers,  in  order  that  they  might  send 
them  back  to  us,  which  they  said  they  would  do 
willingly.  And  we  wrote  back  to  them  earnestly, 
that  we  wished  them  to  keep  them  carefully,  and 
prevent  their  returning,  as  we  were  more  anxious  to 
be  rid  of  them  than  to  get  them  back.  It  is  a  bad 
piece  of  furniture,  which  is  better  out  of  the  inven- 
tory r 

It  was  a  remarkable  characteristic  of  this  country 
that  the  witches  were  usually  young  women,  and 
many  of  those  tried  and  brought  up  as  witnesses 
were  mere  girls.  The  demons  were  so  bold,  that 
they  hardly  thought  it  necessary  to  seek  retired 
places  for  their  meetings,  but  assembled  sometimes 
in  public  thoroughfares.  Thus  they  often  met 
in  the  place  before  a  church,  and  in  the  church- 
yard— even,  at  times,  in  the  church  itself  They 
had  held  Sabbaths  in  houses  in  Bayonne  and  else- 
where. They  often  met  near  Bordeaux,  at  the 
palais  Oalienne,  as  the  Roman  amphitheatre  at  that 
place  was  called.  They  met  not  unfrequently  in 
the  cemetery  and  in  the  ruined  castle  of  St.  Pe. 
Most  of  the  witches  confessed  that  their  favourite 
resorts  were  at  cross-roads  (carrefours).  There 
were,  however,  two  or  three  principal  places  of  meet- 
ing for  the  grand  assemblies,  and  these  were  gene- 
rally in  wild  and  lonely  situations.  One  of  these 
was  on  the  bleak   summit  of  the  mountain  of  la 

p5 


Digitized 


by  Google 


322  SOKCEBT  AND  MAGIO. 

Rhune>  overlooking  the  sea.  Another  was  on  the 
coast  of  Andaye,  where  some  of  the  witches  con- 
fessed they  had  been  present,  when  there  were  at 
least  twelve  thousand  persons  assembled.  A  third 
was  on  the  landes,  at  a  place  which  was  called 
popularly  hme  de  Aquelarrey  or  the  lande  of  the  goa^ 
as  that  was  the  form  in  which  the  evil  one  usually 
presented  himself  there.  Marie  de  Naguille,  a  girl 
of  sixteen  years,  said  that  her  mother  used  to  take 
her  through  the  air  to  the  Sabbath  under  her  arm, 
having  first  anointed  herself  on  the  top  of  the  head 
with  an  ointment ;  that  their  Sabbath  was  held  at  a 
place  in  the  pass  of  ITstaritz ;  and  that  when  they 
separated  th^y  often  went  home  on  foot  A  girl  of 
Siboro,  of  the  same  age,  named  Jeannette  d' Abadie, 
stated  that  four  years  had  then  passed  since  she 
was  first  taken  to  the  Sabbath  by  a  woman  named 
Oratiane.  She  had  since  become  tired  of  this  life, 
and  had  watched  in  the  church  of  Siboro  all  night, 
in  consequence  of  which  the  demon  came  and  took 
her  away  by  day ;  and  that  on  Sunday  the  13th  of 
September,  1609,  after  watching  all  night,  the  evil 
one  came  and  took  her  away  at  mid-day,  in  church 
time,  as  she  was  laying  asleep  at  home.  She  wore 
round  her  neck  a  higa,  or  amulet  against  fasci- 
nation, which  was  made  of  leather,  and  represented 
a  hand  closed,  the  thumb  passing  between  two  of  the 
fingers ;  it  was  an  article  in  very  common  use. 
The  demon  tore  this  from  her  neck,  and  threw  it 
behind  the  door  of  her  chamber  as  they  went 
out  together. 

Jeannette  d'Abadie  said  that  her  conductor  Gra- 
tiane  often  took  her  to  Newfoundland;  that  they 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  WITCHES  AT  SEA.  328 

passed  through  the  air,  as  though  they  were  flying, 
she  holding  by  the  robe  of  Gratiane ;  and  that  they 
went  in  the  company  of  other  witches.  At  New- 
foundland she  saw  "  all  sorts  of  people"  from  La- 
bourd,  who  were  raising  storms  to  sink  the  ships 
and  other  vessels,  and  that  they  thus  sunk  one  be- 
longing to  Marticot  de  Miguelcorena  of  Siboro,  who, 
being  a  sorcerer,  helped  to  sink  his  own  ship. 
Several  women  told  Marie  de  la  Ralde,  a  witch 
examined  by  De  Lancre,  that  they  had  made  the 
voyage  to  Newfoundland  in  this  manner,  and  that 
there  they  perched  on  the  mast  of  a  vessel,  because, 
it  having  been  blessed,  they  dared  not  enter  it ; 
and  that  thence  they  threw  powders  to  poison  the 
fish  which  the  poor  mariners  had  spread  on  the 
beach  to  dry.  Another  witch,  Marie  d'Aspil- 
couette,  who  lived  at  Andaye^  said  that  once, 
when  at  the  Sabbath,  she  saw  witches  fly  away  in 
troops,  and  that  on  their  return  two  or  three  hours 
after,  they  boasted  of  their  feats  at  Newfoundland, 
whither  they  had  been  conducted  by  the  devil  in 
the  form  of  a  youth  of  fifteen  years  of  age.  From 
numerous  confessions,  it  appears  that  the  favourite 
excursion  of  the  witches  of  Labourd  was  to  New- 
foundland. 

The  people  of  Labourd  were  generally  witches 
from  their  childhood,  having  been  introduced  at  a 
tender  age  by  theirmother,orsomeother  woman,  who 
undertook  to  act  as  their  marrcdne,  and  who  was 
sometimes  rewarded  with  a  handful  of  gold  by  the 
evil  one  on  the  presentation  of  a  new  subject 
Others  were  introduced  at  a  more  advanced  age, 
and  this  seems  to  have  been  specially  the  case  with 


Digitized 


by  Google 


324  SOECBEY  AND  MAGia 

the  men.  A  native  of  the  town  of  Nerac,  named 
Isaac  de  Queyran,  who  was  twenty-five  years  of 
age  when  he  was  put  on  his  trial,  stated  that  when 
he  was  a  boy  between  ten  and  twelve  years  of  age, 
being  then  in  the  service  of  an  honest  man  near 
the  town  of  La  Bastide  d'Armaignac,  he  went  ta 
procure  a  light  from  an  old  woman  who  lived  near 
the  house  of  his  master.  As  he  was  taking  a  light 
from  her  fire,  the  old  woman  warned  him  not  to- 
stir  two  pots  which  were  on  it,  or  he  would 
suffer  for  his  carelessness  ;  for,  she  said,  they  con- 
tained poisons  which  the  "  grand  master "  had  or- 
dered her  to  make.  Seeing  that  he  took  an  interest 
in  what  she  said,  she  asked  him  if  he  would  go  to 
the  Sabbath  with  her,  "where  he  would  see  fine 
things."  The  boy's  curiosity  was  excited,  and  he 
returned  to  her  in  the  evening,  when,  it  being 
nearly  dark,  and  his  scruples  overcome,  she  anointed 
one  of  his  wrists  with  a  grease  of  which  he  could 
not  remember  the  nature  or  colour,  and  he  was  im- 
mediately carried  through  the  air,  at  no  great  ele- 
vation, to  the  spot  where  the  Sabbath  was  held, 
which  was  about  a  league  from  La  Bastide  There 
he  saw  a  number  of  men  and  women  dancing  and 
screaming,  with  which  he  was  so  much  alarmed, 
that  he  ran  away  home.  Next  day,  as  he  was 
going  alone  to  his  master's  farm,  he  met  on  the 
road  a  man  of  large  stature  and  very  dark,  who 
told  him  that  a  woman  assured  him  he  (the  boy) 
had  promised  to  go  to  the  Sabbath,  and  asked  him 
why  he  did  not  go.  Isaac,  in  reply,  asked  what 
business  it  was  of  his  to  go  there,  on  which  the 
dark  man  said,  "Stay,  stay,  and  I  will  give  thee 


Digitized 


by  Google 


ISAAC  BE  QtfitRAN.  325 

something  which  will  make  thee  come  !''  and  at 
the  same  time  he  beat  him  with  a  stick  over  the 
shoulder  that  he  felt  the  pain  three  days  after. 
Subsequent  to  this,  one  day  as  he  was  passing  over 
the  bridge  of  the  river  near  La  Bastide,  he  again 
met  the  dark  man,  who  asked  him  if  he  remem- 
bered the  beating  he  had  given  him,  and  if  he 
would  not  come  with  him,  for  which  purpose  he 
appointed  to  meet  him  the  same  evening  behind 
the  mill  near  the  bridge.  Isaac  went  to  the  place 
appointed,  and  there  he  saw  the  dark  man  come 
with  a  great  number  of  people,  and  he  asked  him  if 
he  was  ready  to  go  with  them.  Isaac  asked  where 
they  wanted  to  take  him ;  upon  which  the  dark 
man  took  him  upon  his  shoulders  to  throw  him 
into  the  mill-dam  and  drown  him,  "  which  he 
would  have  done,  but  he  cried  out  so  lowd  that  the 
people  came  out  of  the  mill,  on  which  the  dark 
man  and  his  followers  disappeared."  Two  days 
after,  Isaac  was  keeping  watch  in  his  master's  vine- 
yard at  night,  when  the  dark  man  suddenly  ap- 
peared, and  this  time  he  took  hold  of  him  and  car- 
ried him  through  the  air  over  the  sands  to  a  lande 
near  St.  Justin,  a  distance  of  about  a  quarter  of  a 
league.  There  he  found  more  than  fifty  persons 
dancing  to  the  sound  of  a  tabor  on  which  a  little 
black  devil  was  playing,  who  resembled  a  man  only 
in  his  face,  which  was  grim  and  frightful  to  behold. 
Others  were  eating  and  drinking  at  a  table,  at  the 
head  of  which  the  dark  man  took  his  seat.  They 
danced  in  a  circle,  holding  hands,  and  their  backs 
turned  inwards.  Thus  they  amused  themselves  till 
the  cock  crowed,  and  then  the  "  grand-master''  told 


Digitized 


by  Google 


326  60&0BE7  AND  HAOia 

them  to  go ;  most  of  them  were  carried  home 
through  the  air ;  but  Isaac,  not  haying  far  to  go, 
returned  on  foot 

Such  were  the  stories  which  suggested  the  fancies 
of  a  Callot  Isaac  de  Queyran,  having  once  com- 
menced, went  frequently  to  the  Sabbath,  and  con- 
tinued his  intercourse  with  the  dark  man  till  the 
time  of  De  Lancre's  terrible  mission. 

The  confessions  of  the  witches  of  Labourd  related 
chiefly  to  their  Sabbath,  at  which  they  assembled 
very  frequently.  The  ordinary  meetings  were  held 
every  Wednesday  and  Friday  night  But  besides 
these  and  a  number  of  occasional  meetings,  they 
had  general  assemblies  on  a  much  more  extensive 
scale,  which  were  usually  held  at  the  four  grand 
annual  festivals  of  the  churcL  ^e  scenes  enacted 
at  these  meetings  resembled  in  their  general  fea- 
tures the  ordinary  descriptions  of  the  Sabbath  in 
other  parts,  but  they  are  described  with  more  mi- 
nuteness. The  demon  who  presided  over  these 
meetings  appeared  not  always  in  the  same  form. 
According  to  one  confession,  when  the  witches  ar- 
rived, they  found  a  jug  in  the  middle  of  the  place 
of  meeting,  out  of  which  Satan  rose  in  the  form  of 
a  goat,  which  became  immediately  of  a  monstrous 
size,  and  then  before  they  separated  he  became 
small  and  shrunk  again  into  his  old  receptacla 
Others  said  they  had  seen  him  like  a  great  trunk  of 
a  tree,  with  an  obscure  visage,  but  without  arms  or 
feet,  seated  on  a  throne.  Sometimes  he  appeared 
in  the  shape  of  a  large  black  man,  with  horns,  and 
his  shape  more  or  less  definite.  Some  said  he  had 
two  faces,  one  in  the  right  place,  and  the  other  in 


Digitized 


by  Google 


DESCBIPTION  OF  THE  DBMOK.  327 

the  part  more  properly  intended  for  sitting  than 
seeing.  According  to  others,  the  second  face  was 
at  the  back  of  his  head.  Sometimes  he  appeared  as 
a  dog,  or  as  an  o^  He  is  represented  as  sitting  on 
a  throne,  more  or  less  richly  ornamented,  and  some- 
times of  gold.  The  ceremonies  of  worship,  the 
feasting,  the  dance,  and  the  license  which  followed, 
are  described  in  all  their  particulars,  in  a  multitude 
of  confessions  extorted  by  the  two  commissioners. 
According  to  these  confessions,  the  children  were 
kept  apart,  and  were  not  admitted  to  see  what  was 
going  on  among  their  elders  until  they  had  reached 
a  certain  age. 

Jeannette  d'Abadie,  of  Siboro,  whose  confession 
has  been  already  spoken  of,  described  the  demon  as 
a  hideous  dark  man  with  six  horns  on  his  head, 
and  two  faces.  She  saw  there  an  infinite  number 
of  persons,  many  of  whom  she  knew  She  said 
that  a  man  named  Anduitze  was  employed  at  Siboro 
to  give  notice  of  the  meetings  to  the  sorcerers  of 
that  place;  and  that  a  little  blind  musician  of 
Siboro  served  as  their  minstrel,  playing  on  the 
tabor  and  flute.  She  saw  sometimes  little  demons 
without  arms  amuse  themselves  at  the  Sabbaths 
with  lighting  a  great  fire  and  throwing  witches 
into  it,  and  afterwards  drawing  them  out  unhurt. 
This  was  by  way  of  hardening  them  against  the 
punishment  which  eventually  awaited  their  crimes. 
This  person  also  described  the  great  demon  who  pre- 
sided as  burning  himself  to  powder  to  be  distri- 
buted among  them  for  the  purpose  of  doing  mis- 
chief in  the  world.  She  had  seen  witches  change 
themselves  into  wolves,  dogs,  cats,  and  other  ani- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


328  SOllCERY  AND  MAGIC. 

mats,  by  washing  their  hands  in  a  certain  water 
which  they  kept  in  a  pot,  and  regain  their  natural 
form  at  pleasure.  She  said  they  were  unconscious 
that  their  acts  were  sinful ;  that  they  went  to 
church  as  well  as  to  the  Sabbaths ;  and  that  many 
of  the  priests  who  officiated  at  the  former  accom- 
panied them  also  to  the  latter,  and  shared  in  all 
their  excesses.  She  had  seen  the  whole  assembly 
at  the  close  of  the  Sabbath  proceed  to  the  cemetery 
of  St.  Jean  de  Luz  or  of  Siboro,  to  baptize  toads, 
which  were  clothed  in  red  or  black  velvet,  with  a 
bell  at  the  neck,  and  another  to  their  feet ;  and  she 
had  seen  the  dame  of  Martibelsarena  dance  at  the 
Sabbath  with  four  toads,  one  dressed  in  black 
velvet  with  bells  at  its  feet,  and  the  other  three 
unclothed ;  the  one  in  clothes  was  on  her  left 
shoulder,  another  sat  on  her  right  shoulder,  and  the 
other  two  perched  like  birds  on  her  wrists  ! 

Another  girl,  twenty-four  years  of  age,  gave  an 
extraordinary  description  of  the  grand  Sabbath. 
She  compared  it  to  a  great  fair,  in  which  some  were 
walking  about  in  their  own  shapes,  while  others 
were  transformed  into  dogs,  cats,  asses,  horses,  pigs, 
and  other  animals.  There  were  three  grades  of 
assistants  at  this  ceremony  ;  the  children,  who  were 
kept  at  a  distance  from  the  rest.  With  white  twigs 
in  their  hands,  tending  on  troops  of  toads  that 
were  at  pasture  by  the  side  of  a  stream  ;  those  who 
were  more  advanced  in  age,  but  were  as  yet  kept  in 
a  kind  of  noviciate,  and  were  allowed  to  see  every- 
thing, but  not  to  partake;  and  lastly,  those  who 
were  allowed  unrestrained  indulgence  in  all  the 
amusements  of  the  meeting.     Of  the  latter  some 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  POISONS  OF  THE   WITCHES.  329 

appeared  in  vails,  to  make  the  poorer  sort  think 
they  were  princes  and  great  people,  who  were 
ashamed  to  show  their  faces.  She  pointed  out  one 
Esteben  Detzail,  then  in  prison  on  the  same  charge, 
as  the  man  who  usually  held  the  basin  of  anything 
but  holy  water  with  which  the  initiated  were 
sprinkled.  She  said  that  there  were  continually 
departures  and  new  arrivals,  and  you  might  see 
them  "  fly,  one  into  the  air,  another  towards 
heaven,  another  towards  earth,  and  another  some- 
times towards  great  fires  that  were  lit  here  and  there, 
like  so  many  rockets  sent  into  the  air,  or  stars 
falling  to  the  earth." 

Many  of  these  witches  gave  extraordinary  ac- 
counts of  the  manner  in  which  they  mixed  their 
poisons  and  charms.  The  former  were  preserved  in 
pots  which  they  buried  underground,  or  conceakd 
in  some  very  unfrequented  place.  Some  of  the 
accused,  when  under  examination,  stated  that  one 
of  their  chief  hiding-places  was  on  a  precipitous 
cliff  upon  the  coast  near  the  Spanish  border.  Next 
day,  which  was  the  19th  of  July,  1609,  the  two 
commissioners,  with  a  multitude  of  people  on  horse 
and  foot,  sallied  forth  to  the  place  indicated,  but 
their  efforts  to  reach  the  summit  of  the  rock  were 
fruitless,  and  the  only  result  of  this  demonstration 
was  to  alarm  the  inhabitants  of  Fontarabia  Next 
day  they  returned,  and  this  time  they  were  more 
successful  in  climbing,  but  they  found  that  the 
witches  had  carried  their  treasure  away. 

Though  several  witches  in  Labourd  used  a  certain 
ointment  preparatory  to  their  voyage  to  the  Sab- 
bath, yet  this  application  appears  not  to  have  been 


Digitized 


by  Google 


330  SOBOEBT  Aim  MAQia 

absolutely    necessary,    as   they   often    transported 
themselves  thither  without  it    This  was  proved  by 
the  fact,  that  some  of  them,  who  were  so  addicted 
to  these  practices  that  they  were  tempted  to  perse- 
vere in  them  even  after  they  had  fallen  into  the 
hands  of  their  persecutors,  went  to  the  Sabbath 
from  their  prisons,  where  they  could  obtain  no  un- 
guent   Several  witnesses  deposed  to  having  met  a 
woman  named  Necato  at  a  Sabbath  on  the  coast  in 
the  direction  of  Fontarabia,  at  the  time  that  she 
was  known  to  be  in  prison.     On  another  occasion, 
six  children  declared  that  they  had  been  taken  to  a 
Sabbath  on  the  summit  of  the  mountain  La  Rhune 
by  a  witch  of  Urrogne,  named  Marissans  de  Tartas, 
who  was  on  that  very  night  confined  in  prison.    La 
Rhune  is  a  lofty  mountain,  its  base  stretching  into 
three  kingdoms,  France,  Navarre,  and  Spain,  and 
its  summit  seems  to  have  been  a  very  favourite  re- 
sort of  the  witches  of  these  parts.    Marie  de  la 
Parque,  a  girl  of  Andaye,  of  the  age  of  nineteen  or 
twenty,  and  several  others,  deposed  that  they  were 
present  at  a  Sabbath  held  on  the  top  of  this  moun- 
tain, when  a  woman  named  Domingina  Maletena, 
made  a  wager  with  another  which  could  leap  far- 
thest, and  that  Domingina  went  at  one  leap  from 
the  top  of  the  mountain  to  the  sands  between 
Andaye  and  Fontarabia,  a  distance  of  nearly  two 
leagues,  while  her  rival  dropped  in  the  town  of 
Andaye,  before  the  door  of  one  of  the  inhabitanta 
The  other  witches  flew  in  a  crowd  after  them  to 
adjudge  the  victory. 

The  witches  of  Labourd  were  known  not  only  by 
marks  on  the  body,  but  they  had  generally  a  dimi- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  PBIESTS  IN  DANOEB.  331 

nutive  mark  in  the  left  eye,  described  as  resembling 
a  frog's  foot.  Our  two  commissioners  had  with 
them  a  surgeon  from  Bayonne,  who,  from  his  exten- 
sive practice  in  examining  witches,  had  attained  to 
a  wonderftd  skill  in  discovering  their  marks,  and  a 
girl  of  seventeen,  who  had  an  instinctive  knowledge 
of  them;  they  employed  the  surgeon  to  examine 
the  old  women,  while  the  girl  was  employed  upon 
the  younger  members  of  the  sex.  Their  marks 
were  discovered  by  pinching  and  pri[cking  them  with 
a  pin. 

We  might  fill  a  volume  with  the  strange  stories 
told  by  these  Basque  witches.  Their  alarm  at  the 
arrival  of  De  Lancre  and  his  companion  was  not 
without  reason,  for  withiji  ^a  short  time  the  arrests 
were  so  numerous,  that  it  was  hardly  possible 
to  provide  prisons  to  hold  them.  Some  of  the  pri- 
soners confessed  that  the  devil  himself  was  terrified, 
and  they  said  that  he  had  made  several  attempts  to 
kill  or  bewitch  the  two  commissioners,  but  that  he 
had  found  himself  powerless  against  their  persons. 

From  judging  the  lower  orders,  De  Lancre  and 
his  companion  proceeded  to  the  better  class,  and 
especially  to  the  priests,  of  whose  character  in  La- 
bourd  he  gives  us  a  very  low  estimate.  The  first 
they  arrested  was  an  old  man,  a  priest  of  Bayonne, 
who  confessed,  and  was  condemned  to  death.  The 
execution  of  this  man  caused  a  great  sensation  at 
Bayonne  and  throughout  the  whole  country  of 
Labourd.  Other  priests  were  accused  and  placed 
under  arrest,  and  the  alarm  was  so  great,  that  many 
of  the  clergy  fled  the  country,  and  others  pretended 
vows  to  Ndtre  Dame  of  Montserrat,  as  a  pretext  for 


Digitized 


by  Google 


S32  SOECBRT  AND  MAGIC. 

absenting  themselves.  The  eagerness  of  the  clergy 
to  leave  was  construed  into  an  evidence,  or  at  least 
a  ground  for  suspicion,  of  their  guilt  The  commis- 
sioners arrestod  seven  of  the  most  notable  in  the 
whole  country,  who  had  charge  of  souls  in  the  best 
parishes  of  Labourd.  and  of  these  two  especially 
were  notoriously  criminal,  Migalena,  a  priest  of 
Siboro,  aged  nearly  seventy  years,  and  master 
Pierre  Bocal,  of  the  same  place,  aged  twenty-seven. 
These  were  both  accused  of  burlesquing  the  ceremo- 
nies of  the  church  in  the  devil's  Sabbaths,  in  addi- 
tion to  all  the  criminal  and  scoffing  acts  laid  to  the 
charge  of  the  other  witches.  There  were  twenty- 
four  witnesses  who  declared  they  had  seen  Migalena 
at  the  Sabbaths,  and  seventeen  who  brought  a 
similar  charge  against  the  other,  so  that  they  were 
both  convicted  and  executed,  but  they  made  no 
confession.  The  other  five  priests,  aware  that  the 
date  of  the  commission  of  their  two  judges  was  near 
its  expiration,  made  an  appeal  to  the  bishop  of 
Bayonne,  although  they  knew  he  had  consented  to 
the  execution  of  the  two  othera  The  commission 
expired  on  the  first  of  November,  and  the  commis- 
sioners left  the  five  priests  unjudged,  and  they 
perhaps  escaped,  to  the  great  regret  of  their  perse- 
cutors. 

De  Lancre,  after  filling  the  country  of  Labourd 
with  death  and  consternation,  returned  to  Toulouse. 
He  took  so  much  interest  in  the  subject  of  sorcery, 
that  he  soon  after  published  another  large  quarto 
volume  on  the  same  subject,  in  1622,  under  the 
title  of  "  Uincr6dulit6  et  mescr^ance  du  sortilege 
pleinement    convaincue."      His    felloow-inquisitor, 


Digitized 


by  Google 


d'espaignbt's  latin  poem.  333 

d'Espaignet,  contented  himself  with  writing  a  Latin 
poem  on  the  witches  of  Labourd,  which  he  printed 
at  the  commencement  of  De  Lancre's  work,  and  in 
which  he  boasts  of  the  havoc  they  had  made  among 
the  followers  of  Satan. 

Nuper  relicto  Cantabr^bn  sinu,  dfttis 

Partim  fugee,  partim  rogo, 
Sagis,  refixoque  ostio  Proserpinee 

Kegni,  ipsius  peculium 
Postquam  auximus,  turbsB  ut  Charontis  cymbula 

Impar  scelestse  vix  natet, 
Fatalis  umse  dum  movemus  calculos, 

Nigrumque  Theta  prsevalet. 
Gaudebam  ab  hac  prorsus  redemptum  me  cruce, 

Sat  jam  retectis  dsemonum 
Versutiis :  larvas,  stryges  decusseram, 

Dtdci  paratus  otio. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


334 


CHAPTER  XVIL 


MAGIC  IN  SPAIN;  THE  AUTO-DA-FE   OP  LOGEONO. 

We  may  probably  explain  the  notorious  character 
of  the  inhabitants  of  Labourd  at  this  time  by  sup- 
posing that  the  population  of  the  Basque  provinces 
had  retained,  like  the  Welch  in  England,  a  large 
portion  of  the  early  superstitions  of  their  race,  and 
that  these  had  so  much  influence  on  their  minds, 
that  under  a  sudden  excitement  the  whole  mass  of 
the  people  were  led  to  believe  themselves  witches. 
This  view  of  the  question  is  strengthened  by  the 
fact,  that  the  Basque  provinces  on  the  other  side  of 
the  border  were  proverbial  throughout  the  southern 
peninsula  as  the  principal  haunt  of  the  witches  of 
Spain.  Messire  Pierre  de  Lancre  complains  of  the 
number  of  sorcerers  who  fled  from  French  justice  to 
seek  refiige  in  Spain ;  but  they  found  Spanish 
justice  equally  relentless,  for  the  inquisitors  of  the 
south  came  upon  them,  and  seized  upon  all  alike. 
Frenchmen  or  Spaniards,  until  they  had  taken  so 
many  prisoners  that  they  were  (to  use  De  Lancre's 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  SPANISH  WITCHES.  335 

own  phrase)  fcyrt  empidiez  to  know  how  to  deal 
with  them  alL 

Spain  was  always  looked  upon  as  in  some  sort 
the  special  coimtry  of  superstition  :  in  the  belief  of 
the  middle  ages  it  was  the  cradle  of  sorcery  and 
magic.  The  inquisition  was  taking  root  in  the  dif- 
ferent provinces  of  the  Spanish  peninsula  during 
the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  century,  and  it  found 
there  a  rich  harvest  among  the  superstitions  of  the 
Christians,  and  theimbelief  of  the  Moors  and  Jews. 
Alfonso  de  Spina,  a  Franciscan  of  Castille,  where 
the  inquisition  was  not  then  established,  wrote, 
about  the  year  1458  or  1460,  a  work  especially  di- 
rected against  heretics  and  unbelievers,  in  which  he 
gives  a  chapter  on  those  articles  of  popular  belief 
which  were  derived  from  the  ancient  heathendom 
of  the  people.  Among  these,  witches,  under  the  name 
of  amrguine  (Jurgina)  or  bruxe,  held  a  prominent 
place.  But  the  Spanish  friar  of  the  fifteenth  cen- 
tury, with  much  more  good  sense  than  was  shown 
in  later  and  more  enlightened  ages,  taught  that  the 
acts  attributed  to  this  class  of  offenders,  such  as 
their  power  of  transporting  themselves  through  the 
air  to  distant  localities  in  an  incredibly  short  space 
of  time,  their  entering  houses,  and  the  various 
criminal  acts,  which  were  the  object  and  result  of 
their  transit,  their  power  of  transforming  them- 
selves, &c.,  existed  only  in  the  imagination.  He 
believed,  however,  that  the  people  who  bore  the 
character  of  witches  were  deluded  wretches,  whose 
minds  being  prepared  for  his  service,  the  devil 
made  use  of  them  as  instruments  of  evil  He  tells 
us  that  in  his  time  these  offenders  abounded  iu 


Digitized 


by  Google 


336  SOEOEBT  AND  MAGIC. 

Dauphiny  and  Gascony,  where  they  assembled  in 
great  numbers  by  night  on  a  wild  table  land,  carry- 
ing candles  with  them,  to  worship  Satan,  who  ap- 
peared in  the  form  of  a  boar  on  a  certain  rock, 
popularly  known  by  the  name  Mboch  de  Biteme, 
and  that  many  of  them  had  been  taken  by  the  in- 
quisition of  Toulouse  and  burnt  From  that  time 
we  find,  in  Spanish  history,  the  charge  of  witch- 
craft and  sorcery  not  unfrequently  brought  forward 
under  different  forms  and  circumstances,  of  which 
several  remarkable  examples  are  given  by  Llorente 
in  his  history  of  the  inquisition  in  Spain. 

The  first  auto-da-fe  against  sorcery  appears  to 
have  been  th^  of  Calahorra,  in  1507,  when  thirty 
women,  charged  before  the  inquisition  as  witches, 
were  burnt.  In  1527,  a  great  number  of  women 
were  accused  in  Navarre  of  the  practice  of  sorcery, 
through  the  information  of  two  girls,  one  of  eleven, 
the  other  only  of  nine  years  old,  who  confessed  be- 
fore the  royal  council  of  Navarre  that  they  had 
been  received  into  the  sect  of  the  jurginas,  and 
promised,  on  condition  of  being  pardoned,  to  dis- 
cover all  the  women  who  were  implicated  in  these 
practices.  The  two  children  declared  that  by  in- 
specting the  left  eye  of  the  person  accused,  they 
knew  instantly  if  she  were  a  witch  or  not;  and 
having  pointed  out  a  district  where  they  were 
numerous,  and  where  they  held  their  assemblies, 
the  council  sent  a  commissioner  thither  with  them, 
attended  by  an  escort  of  fifty  horsemen.  At  each 
village  or  hamlet  they  came  to,  they  confined  the 
two  girls  separately  in  two  houses,  and  brought  all 
persons  suspected  of  witchcraft  in  that  neighbour- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CEREMONY   OF   INITIATION.  ^37 

hood  before  them  both  in  succession.  All  those 
women  who  happened  to  be  declared  to  be  witches  by 
both  girls,  were  adjudged  to  be  guilty,  and  were 
thrown  into  prison,  where  they  were  soon  forced 
to  make  confessions.  They  declared  that  their  society 
consisted  of  a  hundred  and  fifty  women ;  that  on 
the  reception  of  a  new  proselyte,  if  she  were  of  a 
marriageable  age,  a  young  man,  veil  made  and 
robust,  was  given  to  her  as  a  companion  ;  that  she 
was  made  to  deny  her  Christianity  ;  and  that  when 
this  ceremony  took  place,  a  black  goat  appeared 
suddenly  in  the  middle  of  a  circle,  and  walked  round 
it  several  times;  that  as  soon  as  they  heard  the 
hoarse  voice  of  this  animal,  they  all  began  to  dance, 
to  a  noise  which  resembled  that  of  a  trumpet ;  that 
they  next  kissed  the  goat  in  the  same  manner  as 
has  been  described  in  other  relations ;  and  then 
they  feasted  on  bread,  wine,  and  cheese ;  after  this 
was  done,  their  male  companions  were  changed  into 
goats,  and  bore  them  through  the  air  to  the  place 
where  they  were  to  work  mischief ;  they  said  they 
had  poisoned  several  persons  by  the  order  of  Satan, 
and  that  for  this  purpose  he  introduced  them  into 
their  houses  through  the  windows  or  doors.  They 
had  general  assemblies  the  night  before  Easter,  and 
on  the  grand  festivals  of  the  church,  at  which  they 
indulged  in  all  the  excesses  of  the  witches^  Sabbath. 
We  are  assured  by  the  historian  who  has  recorded 
these  events  (don  Prudencio  de  Sandoval)  that  the 
commissioner  took  one  of  the  witches  and  offered 
her  pardon  if  she  would  perform  before  him  the 
operation  of  sorcery,  so  as  to  fly  away  in  his  sight 
To  this  proposal  she  agreed,  and  having  obtained 
VOL.  I.  Q 


Digitized 


by  Google 


338  SOBCEBT   AND   MAQIC. 

possession  of  the  box  of  ointment  which  was  found 
upon  her  when  arrested,  she  went  up  into  a  tower 
with  the  commissioner,  and  placed  herself  in  firoiit 
of  a  window.  A  number  of  other  persons,  we  axe 
assured,  were  present  She  began  by  anointing  with 
her  unguent  the  palm  of  her  left  hand,  her  wrist 
and  elbow,  and  by  rubbing  it  under  her  arm,  and 
on  the  groin  and  left  side.  She  then  said  with,  a 
loud  voice,  "  Art  thou  there  V  All  the  spectators 
heard  a  voice  in  the  air  replying,  *'  Yes,  I  am  here.'' 
The  woman  then  began  to  descend  the  wall  of  the 
tower  with  her  head  downwards,  crawling  on  her 
hands  and  feet  like  a  lizard;  and  when  she  was 
half  way  down,  she  took  a  start  into  the  air,  and 
flew  away  in  view  of  all  the  spectators,  who  fol- 
lowed her  with  their  eyes  till  she  was  no  longer 
visible.  The  commissioner  offered  a  reward  to  any- 
body who  would  bring  her  back,  and  two  days  after- 
wards she  was  brought  in  by  some  shepherds  who 
had  found  her  in  the  fields.  When  asked  by  the 
commissioner  why  she  did  not  fly  away  far  enough 
to  be  out  of  the  reach  of  her  pursuers,  she  said  that 
"her  master''  would  not  carry  her  further  than 
three  leagues,  at  which  distance  he  left  her  in  die 
field  where  the  shepherds  foimd  her.  The  witches 
arrested  on  this  occasion,  after  being  found  guiliy 
by  the  secular  judges,  were  handed  over  to  the  in- 
quisition of  Estella,  and  there  condemned  to  be 
whipped  and  imprisoned. 

The  moment  the  attention  of  the  inquisition  was 
thus  drawn  to  the  crime  of  sorcery,  the  prevalence 
of  this  superstition  in  the  Basque  provinces  became 
notorious ;  and  Charles  V.,  rightly  judging  that  it 

8 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A  NEW   PAPAL  BULL.  339 

was  to  be  attributed  more  to  the  ignorance  of  the 
population  of  those  districts  than  to  any  other 
cause,  directed  that  preachers  should  be  sent  to  in- 
struct them. 

The  first  treatise  in  the  Spanish  language  on  the 
subject  of  sorcery,  by  a  Franciscan  monk  named 
Martin  de  Castanaga,  was  printed  under  approba- 
tion of  the  bishop  of  Calahorra  in  1529.  About 
this  time  the  zeal  of  the  inquisitors  of  Saragossa 
was  excited  by  the  appearance  of  many  witches 
who  were  said  to  have  come  from  Navarre,  and  to 
have  been  sent  by  their  sect  as  missionaries  to 
make  disciples  of  the  women  of  Arragon.  This 
sudden  witch-persecution  in  Spain  appears  to  have 
had  an  influence  on  the  fate  of  the  witches  of 
Italy.  Pope  Adrian  IV.,  who  was  raised  to  the 
papal  chair  in  1522,  was  a  Spanish  bishop,  and  had 
held  the  oflBice  of  inquisitor-general  in  Spain.  In 
the  time  of  Julius  II.,  who  ruled  the  papal  world 
from  1503  to  1513,  a  sect  of  witches  and  sorcerers 
had  been  discovered  in  Lombardy,  who  were  ex- 
tremely numerous,  and  had  their  Sabbaths  and  all 
the  other  abominations  of  the  continental  witches. 
The  proceedings  against  them  appear  to  have  been 
hindered  by  a  dispute  between  the  inquisitors  and 
the  secular  and  ecclesiastical  judges  who  claimed 
the  jurisdiction  in  such  cases.  On  the  20th  of 
July,  1 523,  pope  Adrian  issued  a  bull  against  the 
crime  of  sorcery,  placing  it  in  the  sole  jurisdiction 
of  the  inquisitors.  This  bull  perhaps  gave  the 
new  impulse  to  the  prosecution  of  the  witches  in 
Spain. 

Of  the  cases  which  followed  during  more  than  a 


Digitized 


by  Google 


340  SORCERY   AND   MAGIC. 

century,  the  most  remarkable  was  that  of  the 
auto-da-fi  at  Logrono  on  the  7th  and  8th  of  No- 
vember, 1610,  which  arose  in  some  measure  from 
the  visitation  of  the  French  Basque  province  in  the 
preceding  year.  The  valley  of  Bastan  is  situated 
in  Navarre  at  the  foot  of  the  Pyrenees,  on  the 
French  frontier,  and  at  no  great  distance  from 
Labourd.  It  was  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the 
inquisition  established  at  Logrono  in  CastiUe.  The 
mass  of  the  population  of  this  valley  appear  to  have 
been  sorcerers,  and  they  held  their  meetings  or 
Sabbaths  at  a  place  called  Zugarramurdi.  Their 
practices  were  brought  to  light  in  the  following 
manner.  A  little  girl  from  the  neighbouring 
French  territory  was  sent  to  board  with  a  woman 
of  Zugarramurdi,  who  was  one  of  the  witches,  and 
was  in  the  habit  of  taking  the  child  with  her  to 
their  assemblies — she  was  as  yet  too  young  to  be 
formally  initiated.  After  her  return  home,  the 
child,  having  reached  a  proper  age,  became  a  witch 
at  the  instigation  of  one  of  her  countrywomen,  but 
she  subsequently  repented,  and  obtained  absolution 
from  thie  bishop  of  Bayonne.  She  afterwards  went 
again  to  reside  at  Zugarramurdi,  where  meeting  one 
day  a  woman  of  the  place  named  Maria  de  Jurre- 
teguia,  she  told  her  that  she  knew  she  was  a  witch. 
When  the  husband  of  Maria  heard  this,  he  loaded 
her  with  reproaches,  and,  having  been  confronted 
with  the  accused,  she  was  obliged  to  confess  her 
fault.  Maria  was  immediately  carried  before  the 
inquisition  of  Logrono,  and  she  was  givento  expect 
her  pardon  in  return  for  a  full  confession  of  the 
practices  of  her  associates. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  WITCHES   OF   BAST  AN.  34  J 

Maria  de  Jurreteguia  was  the  wife  of  Estevan  de 
Navalcoirea.      Terrified  at  the  accusation  of  the 
French  girl,  and  the  anger  of  her  husband,   she 
made  a  full  confession  to  the  inquisitors  of  Logrofio, 
in  which  she  gave  a  detailed  account  of  the  pro- 
ceedings of  the  "  sect "  of  sorcerers,  which  was  af- 
terwards confirmed  by  the  confessions  of  eighteen 
of  her  accomplices,  who  were  arrested   in  conse- 
quence of  the  information  she  gave.     She  had  been 
a  witch  from  her  infancy,  having  been  introduced 
to  the  witches'  meetings  by  her  maternal  aunts 
Maria  and  Juana  Chipia.      She  had  recently  left 
her  evil  ways,  and  made  a  confession  to  and  re- 
ceived absolution  from  the  cure  of  Zugarramurdi, 
in  consequence  of  which  she  had  been  persecuted 
by  the  devil  and  the  other  witches.     She  said  that 
when  her  aunts  took  her  to  the  Sabbath  meetings 
they  passed  out  of  the  house  through  little  holes  in 
the  doors,  the  latter   being  locked.      Among  her 
practices,  she  said  that  she  had  often  deceived  a 
priest  who  was  fond  of  hunting,  by  taking  the  form 
of  a  hare,  and  leading  him  a  long  course.     Miguel 
de  Goiburu  was  king  of  the  sorcerers  of  Zugarra- 
murdi ;  he  said  that  he  was  once  at  a  meeting  of 
the  sorcerers  in  a  spot  on  the  French  side  of  the 
frontier,  at  which  more  than  five  hundred  persons 
were  present,  on  which  one  of  his  party,  Estefania 
de  Tellechea,  exclaimed  in  astonishment,  "  Jesus, 
what  a  crowd  \"   and  the  whole  scene   disappear- 
ed,  and    the    assembly  separated   m  the  utmost 
consternation.      On    another    occasion,    a    witch 
named  Maria  Escain  having  persuaded  a  sailor  to 
join  their  society,  at  the  first  meeting  which  he 

Q  3 


Digitized 


by  Google 


342  SOitCEI^Y   AND  MAGIC. 

attended,  he  was  so  astonished  at  the  horrible 
figure  of  the  devil,  that  he  cried  out  involuntarily, 
"  Jesus,  how  ugly  he  is  I"  on  which  the  meeting 
broke  up  in  the  same  manner.  His  brother,  Joanes 
de  Goiburu,  confessed  that  he  had  played  on  the 
tabour  when  the  witches  danced  at  the  meeting  ; 
and  that  one  day,  having  accidentally  prolonged 
their  meeting  till  after "  cock-crow,  his  imp  disap- 
peared, and  he  was  obliged  to  return  to  Zugarra- 
murdi  on  foot  The  wife  of  this  man,  Graciana  de 
Barrenechea,  was  their  queen.  She  told  a  story  of 
her  jealousy  of  another  witch  named  Maria  Joanes 
de  Oria,  because  the  latter  was  too  great  a  favourite 
with  the  devil ;  and  after  succeeding  in  seducing 
the  evil  one  into  an  act  of  infidelity,  she  obtained 
his  permission  to  poison  her  rival.  Juan  de  Sansin, 
the  cousin  of  Miguel  de  Goiburu,  confessed  that  his 
office  had  been  to  play  on  the  flute  at  the  Sabbaths. 
Martin  de  Vizcay  was  the  overseer  of  the  children 
who  came  to  the  assembly,  and  it  was  his  business 
to  keep  them  at  a  distance,  where  they  could  not 
see  what  took  place  between  the  demon  and  his 
victims.  Two  sisters,  Estefania  and  Juana  de  Tel- 
lechea,  confessed  like  the  others  that  they  had  done 
much  injury  to  the  persons  and  properties  of  their 
neighbours  who  did  not  belong  to  their  society. 
The  latter  said  that  one  day,  according  to  an  an- 
cient usage  of  the  place,  the  inhabitants  of  Zugar- 
ramurdi  assembled  in  the  evening  of  St.  John's 
day  to  elect  a  king  of  the  Christians  and  a  king  of 
the  Moors,  who  were  to  command  the  two  parties  of 
Christians  and  Moors  in  the  sham  fight  which  took 
place  several  times  in  the  year  for  their  amusement. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


TIME    OF   THE    SABBATH.  343 

It  was  in  the  year  1608,  and  her  husband  was 
elected  king  of  the  Moors.  He  was  not  a  sor- 
cerer, and  as  he  received  that  night  the  visits  of  his 
neighbours  to  compliment  him  on  his  mock  dignity, 
she  was  obliged  to  remain  at  home  to  do  the  ho- 
nours of  the  house,  and  was  thus  hindered  from  at- 
tending the  witches'  assembly.  In  spite  of  this  rea- 
sonable excuse,  Juana  was  condemned  at  the  next 
Sabbath  to  be  severely  whipped  by  Juan  de 
Echalaz,  a  smith,  who  held  the  office  of  the  devil's 
executioner. 

All  the  persons  arrested  on  this  occasion  agreed 
in  their  description  of  the  Sabbath,  and  of  the  prac- 
tices of  the  witches,  which  in  their  general  features 
bore  a  close  resemblance  to  those  of  the  witches  of 
Labourd.  The  usual  place  of  meeting  was  known 
here,  as  in  Labourd,  by  the  popular  name  of  Aqv£'' 
larre,  a  Gascon  word,  signifying  the  meadow  of  the 
goat.  Their  ordinary  meetings  were  held  on  the 
nights  of  Monday,  Wednesday,  and  Friday,  every 
week,  but  they  had  grand  feasts  on  the  principal 
holidays  of  the  church,  such  as  Easter,  Pentecost, 
Christmas,  &c.  All  these  feasts  appear  to  have 
been  fixed  by  the  christian  teachers  at  the  period 
of  older  pagan  festivals.  The  form  ordinarily  as- 
sumed by  the  demon  when  a  new  convert  was  to  be 
received,  was  that  of  a  man  with  a  sad  and  coleric 
countenance,  very  black  and  very  ugly.  He  was 
seated  on  a  lofty  throne,  black  as  ebony,  and  some- 
times gilt,  with  all  the  accessories  calculated  to  in- 
spire reverence.  On  his  head  was  a  crown  of  small 
horns,  with  two  larger  ones  behind,  and  another 
larger  one  on  the  forehead  ;  it  was  the  latter  which 


Digitized 


by  Google 


344  SOROSRT   AND   MAGIO. 

gave  a  light,  somewhat  greater  than  that  of  the 
moon,  but  less  than  that  of  the  sun,  which  served  to 
illuminate  the  assembly.  His  eyes  were  large  and 
round,  and  terrible  to  look  at ;  his  beard  like  that 
of  a  goat,  and  the  lower  part  of  his  body  had  the 
form  of  that  animal :  his  feet  and  hands  were  like 
those  of  a  man,  except  l^at  the  ends  of  his  fingers 
were  curved  like  those  of  a  bird  of  prey  and  ended 
in  long  pointed  nails,  and  his  toes  were  like  those  of 
a  goose.  His  voice  bore  some  resemblance  to  the 
braying  of  an  ass,  his  words  being  ill  articulated, 
and  in  a  low  and  irregular  tone. 

Such  was  the  demon  of  the  Basque  siq)erstitions. 
His  worship  was  conducted  with  the  same  forms  and 
ceremonies  as  in  Labourd  The  hour  of  meeting 
was  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening,  and  the  assembly 
generally  broke  up  at  twelve.  After  the  worship  of 
the  demon,  followed  a  travestie  of  the  Christian  mass, 
at  which  the  king  and  queen  of  the  sorcerers  offi- 
ciated as  priests.  After  the  mass  was  finished, 
came  the  usual  scene  of  licentiousnesa  Many  of 
their  ceremonies  were  accompanied  with  popular 
rhymes  in  Spanish.^  Thus  when  the  witches  and 
sorcerers  were  married  together  after  the  devil^s 
mass,  the  devil  said  to  them, 

"  Esta  es  buena  parati, 
Este  parati  lo  toma." 

And  as  new  sorcerers  arrived  at  the  Sabbaths,  the 
assembly  chanted  joyfully  th(i  couplet, 

"  Alegremonos  alegremos, 
Que  gente  nueva  tenemoa." 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  witches'  toads.  346 

After  the  scene  last  alluded  to,  the  tables  were 
spread,  and  we  are  told  that  they  were  always 
covered  with  dirty  table-cloths.  Their  favourite 
viands  were  the  flesh  of  men,  women,  or  children, 
recently  dead,  whom  they  had  dug  up  from  their 
graves,  and  it  was  generally  the  nearest  relatives  of 
the  deceased  who  assisted  in  preparing  them  for  the 
feast.  Little  demons  served  at  table.  After  the 
feast,  they  all  danced  together  in  the  wildest  confu- 
sion. At  one  of  their  Sabbaths  there  was  a  dancing- 
girl,  who,  to  the  sound  of  castanets,  {castanuelas^ 
made  such  extraordinary  capers,  that  all  the  witches 
were  in  admiration,  and  one  of  them  exclaimed, 
"  Jesus,  how  she  leaps  \*'  on  which  the  whole  scene 
disappeared,  and  the  person  who  had  uttered  the 
imprudent  exclamation  was  left  alone  to  find  her 
way  home  how  she  could.  At  the  next  meeting 
she  was  severely  beaten  for  her  offence. 

Each  new  witch  had  a  toad  given  to  her,  which 
was  her  imp,  and  always  accompanied  her  to  the 
meetings.  From  this  animal  she  extracted  her  most 
deadly  poison.  Before  they  left  the  Sabbath,  the 
demons  preached  to  them  on  the  duties  they  had 
contracted  towards  him,  exhorted  them  to  go  and 
injure  their  fellow-creatures,  and  to  practise  every 
kind  of  wickedness,  and  gave  them  powders  and 
liquors  for  poisoning  and  destroying.  He  often  ac- 
companied them  himself  when  some  great  evil  was 
to  be  done,  and  to  carry  their  purposes  into 
effect  they  changed  themselves  into  the  forms  of 
vermin,  or  of  animals,  or  birds  of  prey.  In  these 
expeditions,  when  they  took  place  by  night,  the  de- 
mon carried  the  arm  of  an  unbaptized  infant,  lit  at 


Digitized 


by  Google 


346  SOBGERT   AND   MAGIC. 

the  ends  of  the  fingers,  which  served  the  place  of  a 
candle  or  torch.  When  they  entered  people's  houses 
they  threw  a  powder  on  the  faces  of  the  inmates,  who 
were  thrown  thereby  into  so  deep  a  slumber  that 
nothing  could  wake  them,  until  the  witches  were 
gone.  Sometimes  the  demon  opened  the  mouths  of 
the  people  in  their  beds,  and  the  sorcerer  placed 
something  on  the  tongue  which  produced  this  sleep. 
The  charm  was  then  accompanied  with  the  words — 

"  Be  las  mortifSaras  agaas 
Dos  tragos  dizen  te  applico, 
Con  quien  los  polvos  de  sagas 

Y  mueras  rabiando  tisico." 

Sometimes  they  threw  these  powders  on  the  fruits 
of  the  field,  and  produced  hail  which  destroyed 
them.  On  these  occasions,  the  demon  accompanied 
them  in  the  form  of  a  husbandman,  and  when  they 
threw  the  powders  they  said,* 

"  Polvos,  polvos, 
Pierda  se  tado» 
Queden  los  nuestros, 

Y  abrasense  otros," 

When  they  were  not  inclined  to  do  any  of  these  de- 
structive injuries,  they  amused  themselves  with 
creating  phantoms  which  they  threw  in  the  way  of 
travellers  to  frighten  them. 

Sometimes  the  witches  and  sorcerers  went  from 

*  These  rhymes  are  taken  from  the  report  of  this  transac- 
tion given  in  De  Lancre ;  they  bear  a  singular  resemblance 
in  general  character  to  those  of  the  Scottish  witches  that  will 
be  given  in  a  subsequent  chapter. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   TOADS.  347 

their  Sabbath  to  attend  a  larger  meeting,  which  was 
held  at  Pampeluna,  where  they  went  to  worship  a 
great  demon,  named  Barrabam,  who  was  higher  in 
dignity  than  the  other  devils,  and  his  ceremonies 
were  attended  with  greater  pomp.  They  called  him 
"  the  grand  master/'  Then  they  went  all  in  a  body 
aad  passed  over  the  frontier  into  France,  where 
they  met  other  troops  of  sorcerers,  and  they  were 
then  so  numerous  that  one  of  the  deponents  said 
that  when  the  assembly  broke  up,  the  sky  was  com- 
pletely clouded  with  the  troops  of  witches  flying 
away  in  all  directions. 

The  toad  acted  a  very  important  part  in  the 
witchcraft  of  the  Basque  provinces.  When  the  new 
witch  was  presented  to  the  meeting  for  the  first 
time,  the  toad  was  given  into  the  care  of  her 
marraine,  until  the  convert  had  completed  her  no- 
viciate, and  was  considered  fit  to  receive  it  into 
her  own  keeping.  It  was  dressed  in  a  little  sack, 
with  a  capuchin  or  cowl,  through  which  the  head 
passed,  and  open  under  the  belly,  where  it  was  tied 
with  a  band,  which  served  as  a  girdle ;  this  vest 
was  generally  made  of  green  or  black  cloth  or  vel- 
vet. It  was  to  be  taken  great  care  of,  and  to  be 
often  fed  and  caressed.  It  was  one  of  its  duties  to 
keep  its  mistress  or  master  in  mind  of  the  time  for 
attending  the  Sabbath,  and  to  wake  him  at  the  ne- 
cessary time  if  he  should  be  asleep.  The  toad  also 
furnished  the  liquor  with  which  the  witches  rubbed 
different  parts  of  their  bodies  when  they  were  pre- 
paring to  go  to  their  assemblies,  and  by  which  they 
were  enabled  to  fly  through  the  air,  carrying  the 
reptile  with  them.     Sometimes  the  sorcerer  tra- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


348  SORCEBT   Ain)   MAGia 

veiled  thither  on  foot,  and  then  the  toad  preceded, 
taking  large  leaps,  and  they  passed  over  immense 
distances  in  a  few  minutes,  as  when  they  fled 
through  the  air.  If  the  meeting  were  accidentally 
prolonged  till  after  cock-crow,  the  toad  disappeared  ; 
and  the  sorcerer  found  himself  reduced  to  his  natu- 
ral powers ;  but  the  animal  itself  soon  re-appeared 
in  the  place  where  it  was  usually  kept. 

The  witches  among  themselves  enjoyed  different 
degrees  of  rank  and  estimation,  according  to  their 
intimacy  with  the  evil  one,  and  their  zeal  and  apti- 
tude to  work  mischief  It  was  to  those  only  whom 
he  held  in  the  highest  esteem,  that  Satan  imparted 
the  more  deadly  poisons,  and  he  often  assisted  in 
person  at  their  composition. 

The  autO'da-fe  of  Logrono,  as  far  as  it  related  to 
the  sect  of  the  sorcerers  of  Zugarramurdi,  caused  a 
great  sensation,  and  brought  the  subject  of  witch^ 
craft  under  the  consideration  of  the  Spanish  theolo- 
gians.    These  were  so  far  more  enlightened  than 
the  body  of  their  contemporaries  in  other  countries, 
that  they  generally  leant  to  the  opinion  that  witch- 
craft was  a  mere  delusion,  and  that  the  details  of 
the  confessions  of  the  miserable  creatures  who  were 
its  victims  were  all  creations  of  the  imagination. 
They  were   punished  because  their  belief  was   a 
heresy,   contrary  to  the   doctrines   of  the   church. 
Llorente  gives  the  abstract  of  a  treatise  on  this  sub- 
ject by  a  Spanish  ecclesiastic  named  Pedro  de  Va- 
lentia,  addressed  to  the  grand  inquisitor  in  conse- 
quence of  the  trial  at  Logrono  in  1610,  and  which 
remained  in  manuscript  among  the  archives  of  the 
inquisition.     This  writer  adopts  entirely  the  opinion 


Digitized 


by  Google 


OPINIONS   OF   THE   SPANISH    DOCTORS.  S4^9 

that  the  acts  confessed  by  the  witches  were  imagi- 
nary ;  he  attributes  them  partly  to  the  method  in 
which  the  examinations  were  carried  on,  and  to  the 
desire  of  the  ignorant  people  examined  to  escape  by 
saying  what  seemed  to  please  their  persecutors,  and 
partly  to  the  effects  of  the  ointments  and  draughts 
which  they  had  been  taught  to  use,  and  which  were 
composed  of  ingredients  that  produced  sleep,  and 
acted  upon  the  imagination  and  the  mental  facul- 
ties.* 

*  On  this  sulvject  the  reader  is  referred  to  Salverte's  Philoso- 
phy of  Magic,  by  W.  Thomson,  vol.  ii.  chapters  1  and  2.  8vo. 
Bentley,  IH46.  * 


END   OF  VOL.   I. 


LONDON: 
O,   J.  PALMEB,   PRINTER,  SAVOY  STREET,   STRAND. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


< 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Digitized 


by  Google 


,  '.'  '  -^ 


Digitized 


by  Google 


iMMi 


THE  BORROWER  WILL  BE  CHARGED 
AN  OVERDUE  FEE  IF  THIS  BOOK  IS  NOT 
RETURNED  TO  THE  LIBRARY  ON  OR 
BEFORE  THE  LAST  DATE  STAMPED 
BELOW.  NON-RECEIPT  OF  OVERDUE 
NOTICES  DOES  NOT  EXEMPT  THE 
BORROWER  FROM  OVERDUE  FEES, 


*   *  V  D  c  w  r.    ;J 


i 


^™^il» 


Digitized 


by  Google 


.v» 


■ft:  .;:,.- 


