Google



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I



I



D



Ill


NARRATIVES



OF



SORCERY AND MAGIC,



FROM THE MOST AUTHENTIC SOURCES.



BY



THOMAS WRIGHT, ESQ., M.A., F.S.A., &c.

CORRESPONDIKO MEMBBR OF THE NATIONAL TN8TITUTB OF FRANCE,
(ACADEMIS DE8 INSCRIPTIONS ET BELLES LETTRE8.)



IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. n.



LONDON:
RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET.

1851.



LONDON :

G. J. PALMER, PRINTER, SAVOY STREET, STRAND.


t'


330-7 ;^


4-


CONTENTS-



OF VOLUME THE SECOND.



CHAPTER XVIII.

PAGE

Adventures of Doctor Torralva . . i



CHAPTER XIX.
Trial of the earl and countess of Somerset . .15

CHAPTER XX.
La marechale d'Ancre . . . . .43

CHAPTER XXI.
Louis GauMdi . . . . . .55

CHAPTER XXII.
The Ursulines of Loudun . . . .69

CHAPTER XXIII.
The Lancashire witches . . . .86



CONTENTS.

CHAPTER XXIV.

Witchcraft in England during the earlier part of the

seventeenth century . ... 1 10

CHAPTER XXV.

Witchcraft imder the commonwealth : Matthew Hopkins

the witch-finder ♦. . 145

CHAPTER XXVI.

Witchcraft in Germany, in the earlier part of the seven-
teenth century ... 182

CHAPTER XXVII.

The witches of Scotland under king James after his ac-
cession to the English throne . 199

CHAPTER XXVIII.
Confessions of Isohel Gowdie . 224

CHAPTER XXIX.

The witches of Mohra in Sweden . . 244

CHAPTER XXX.
Sir Matthew Hale and chief justice Holt . . 261

CHAPTER XXXI.

The doings of Satan in New England . . 284

. CHAPTER XII.
Conclusion ...... 315



SOUCERY AND MAGIC.



CHAPTER XVIIL .



ADVENTURES OF DOCTOR TORRALVA.



Spain had not in the sixteenth century ceased to
be celebrated for its magicians, as we learn from a
variety of allusions in writers of that and the sub-
sequent periods. We have seen that it was then
the country from which magical rings were pro-
cured, and that it was equally with other lands the
scene of treasure-hunting and of witchcraft Nor
was it wanting in great magicians. One of these
gave considerable celebrity to the village of Bar-
gota, near Viana, in the diocese of Calahorra. The
cure of Bargota, who is well known to every reader
of the glorious romance of Cervantes, astonished
the territories of Rioja and Navarre by his extra-
ordinary feats. Among other exploits he was in
the habit of transporting himself to distant coun-

VOL. U. - * B



2 SORCERY AND MAGIC.

tries, and returning in an incredibly short space of
time. In this way he witnessed most of the re-
markable occurrences of the wars in Italy at th^
commencement of the sixteenth century, in which
Spain had a special interest, and he announced his
intelligence the same day at Viana and Logroiio.
He was forewarned of each event by the demon, his
familiar. The latter told him one day that the
pope would that night die a violent death. It ap-
pears that his holiness had an intrigue with a lady
whose husband held a high office in the papal
court. The latter was afraid to complain openly, but
he was none the less eager for revenge, and he joined
with some desperate ruffians in a plot to take away
the pope's life. The demon was of course rejoiced
at the prospect of evil, but his friend the cure de-
termined to cheat him and save the head of the
church from the danger which threatened him.
He pretended to be seized with an eager desire to
proceed to Rome, that he might hear the rumours
to which such a remarkable occurrence must give
rise, and to witness the pope's funeral The desire
was no sooner expressed than it was gratified. On
his arrival at the eternal city, the cure hastened to
the papal palace, forced his way into the presence of
the sovereign pontiff, and told him the whole parti-
culars of the plot against his life, and thus defeated
the designs of the conspirators. After having thus
outwitted him, the cur6 wished to have no further
intercourse with Satan ; he made a voluntary confes-
sion to the pope, and in return for the signal ser-
vice he had performed, his holiness gave him a full
absolution. On his return, he was delivered, as a



DOCTOR TORRALVA. 3

matter of form, into the custody of the inquisitors
of Logrono, but he was acquitted, and restored to
his liberty.

There lived at the same thne a magician who
gained far greater celebrity than the cur6 of Bar-
gota, and who adopted the same extraordinary
mode of travelling. This was doctor Eugenic Tor-
ralva, a physician in the family of the admiral of
Castille.* Torralva was born at Cuenga, but at the
age of fifteen he was sent to Rome, where he be-
came attached to the bishop of Volterra, Francesco
Soderini, in the quality of a page. He now pur-
sued with great earnestness the study of philosophy
and medicine, under dom Cipion and the masters
Mariana, Avanselo, and Maguera, until he obtained
the degree of doctor in medicine. Under these
teachers, Torralva learnt to have doubts of the im-
mortality of the soul and the divinity of Christ,
and made great advances in scepticism. About the
year 1501, when he was already a practitioner in
medicine at Rome, he formed a very intimate ac-
quaintance with one master Alfonso, a man who
had first quitted the Jewish faith for Mahome-
danism, from which he had been converted to Chris-
tianity, and he had then finally adopted natural reli-

* Torralva, im grande hombre, y nigromante,
Medico, y familiar del almirante.

Luis Capata, Carlo Famoso*, canto xxviii.

The authority for the details of the history of this extraor-
dinary personage is Llorente, who derived his information
from the original papers relating to his trial, preserved in the
archives of the inquisition. Part of the story is told rather
differently in the metrical history of ^apata.

b2



I <



4 80BGEBY AlTD MAQIC.

gion or deism. This man's discourses overthrew
the little faith that still remained in Torralva's
mind, and he became a confirmed sceptic, although
he appears to have concealed his opinions from the
world, and perhaps he subsequently renounced
them.

Among Torralva's friends at Rome was a domi-
nican monk, called brother Pietro, who told him
one day that he had in his service " an angel of
the order of good spirits," named Zeqniel, who was
SO powerful in the knowledge of the future and of
hidden things that he was without his equal in the
spiritual world, and of such a peculiar temper that,
while other spirits made bargains with their em- <

ployers before they would give them their services,
Zequiel was so disinterested that he despised all
considerations of this kind, and served only tn
friendship those who placed their confidence in him
and deserved his attachment. The least attempt at
restraint, brother Pietro said, would drive him away
for ever.

Torralva's curiosity was excited, and when bro-
ther Pietro generously proposed to resign the fami-
liar spirit to his friend, the offer was eagerly ac-
cepted. It appears that the person most concerned
in this transaction made no objection to the change
of masters, and at the summons of brother Pietro,
Zequiel made his appearance, in the form of a fair
young man, with light hair, and dressed in a flesh-
coloured habit and black surtout. He addressed
himself to Torralva, and said, " I will be yours as
long as you live, and will follow you wherever you
are obliged to go.'' From this time Zequiel ap-



[



TOBRALVA AKD THE 8PIBIT ZBQUIBL. 5

peared to Torralva at every change of the moon,
and as often as the physician wanted his services,
which was generally for the purpose of transporting
him in a short space of time to distant places. In
these interviews, the spirit took sometimes the
semblance of a traveller, and sometimes that of a
hermit. In his intercourse with Torralva, he said
nothing contrary to Christianity, but accompanied
him to church, and never counselled him to evil ;
from which circumstances the physician concluded
that his familiar was a good angeL He always con-
versed in the Latin or Italian languages.

Rome had now become to Torralva a second
country ; but about the year 1602 he went to
Spain, and subsequently he travelled through most
parts of Italy, until he again fixed himself at Rome,
under the protection of his old patron the bishop of
Volterra, who had been made a cardinal on the
Slst of May, 1503. With this introduction he soon
obtained the favour of others of. the cardinals, and
rose to high repute for his skill in medicine. Hav-
ing met at this time with some books on chiro-
mancy, he became an eager student in that art, in
the knowledge of which he subsequently surpassed
most of his contemporaries. Torralva owed his
medical knowledge partly to his familiar, who
taught him the secret virtues of many plants, with
which other physicians were not acquainted ; and
when the practitioner took exorbitant fees, Zequiel
rebuked him, telling him that, since he had re-
ceived his knowledge for nothing, he ought to im-
part it gratuitously. And when on several occa-
sions Torralva was in want of money, he found a



6 SORCEBT AKD MAGIC.

supply in his chamber, which he believed was fur-
nished him by the good spirit, who, however, would
never acknowledge that he was the secret bene-
factor who had relieved him from his embarras-
ment.

Torralva returned to Spain in 1510, and lived for
some time at the court of Ferdinand the Catholic.
One day Zequiel, whose informations were usually
of a political character, told him that the king
would soon receive disagreeable news. Torralva
immediately communicated this piece of informa-
tion to Ximenes de Cisneros, archbishop of Toledo,
(who was subsequently raised to the dignity of car-
dinal, and made inquisitor general of Spain,) and the
grand captain Gonzalo Fernandez de Cordova. The
same day a courier arrived with dispatches from
Africa, containing intelligence of the ill success of
the expedition against the Moors, and of the death
of don Garcia de Toledo, son of the duke of Alva,
who commanded it

Torralva seems to have made no seci*et of his in-
tercourse with Zequiel. He had received his fami-
liar from a monk, and the spirit is said to have
shown himself to the cardinal of Volterra at the
physician's wish; the latter now did not hesi-
tate to acquaint the archbishop of Toledo and the
grand captain how he came by his early intelli-
gence. The archbishop earnestly desired to be per-
mitted to have the same privilege as the Italian
cardinal, and Torralva wished to gratify him, but
Zequiel refused, though he softened his refusal by
telling him to inform the archbishop that he would
one day be a king, a prophecy which was believed



I



TORBALVA AND THE APPARITION. 7

to be fulfilled when he was made absolute governor
of Spain and the Indies.

The physician was frequently favoured with reve-
lations of this kind. On one occasion, when Tor-
ralva was at Rome, Zequiel told him that his friend,
Pietro Margano, would lose his life if he went out of
th« city that day. He was not able to see him in
order to warn him of his danger, and Pietro went
out of Rome and was assassinated. Zequiel told
him on another occasion that the cardinal of
Sienna would end his life in a tragical manner,
which was verified in 1517, after the judgment of
pope Leo X. against him. Torralva re-established
himself in Rome in 1613, and soon after his arrival
he had a great desire to see his intimate friend
Thomas de Becara, who was then at Venice ; upon
which Zequiel took him thither and back in so
short a space of time that his absence was not per-
ceived by his^ friends in Rome.

It was not long before he again returned to Spain,
where, about the year 1516, the cardinal of Santa
Cruz, don Bernardino de Carbajal, consulted him on
a subject of some importance. A Spanish lady
named Rosales had complained to don Bernardino
that her nights were disturbed by a phantom which
appeared in the form of a murdered man. The car-
dinal had sent his physician. Dr. Morales, who
watched at night with the lady, but saw no appari-
tion, although she gave him notice of its appear-
ance, and pointed out the place where it stood.
Don Bernardino hoped to know more of the matter
by the means of Torralva, and he requested him to
go with the physician Morales to pass the night in



8 SOBCEBT AND MAGia

the lady's house. They went together, and an hour
after midnight they heard the lady's cry of alarm,
and went into her room, where, as before. Morales
saw nothing. But Torralva, who was better ac-
quainted with the spiritual world, perceived a figure
resembling a dead man, behind which appeared an-
other apparition in the form of a woman. He asked
with a firm voice, " What dost thou seek here V to
which the apparition repUed, "A treasure," and im-
mediately disappeared. Torralva consulted Zequiel
on this subject, and was informed that there waa
buried under the house the corpse of a man who had
been stabbed to death with a poignard.

Torralva was soon at Rome again, and among his
more intimate friends there w;as don Diego de
Zuniga, a relative of the duke of Bejar, and brother
to don Antonio, grand prior of the order of St. John
in Castile. In 1519, the two friends returned to
Spain together. On their way, at Barcelonetta near
Turin, while they were walking and conversing with
the secretary, Azevedo, (who had been adjutant-
general of the Spanish armies in Italy and Savoy,)
Azevedo and Zuiiiga thought they saw something
indefinable pass by Torralva's side. He told them
it was his angel Zequiel, who had approached him
to whisper in his ear. Zuniga had a great desire to
see Zequiel, but Torralva could not prevail with the
latter to show himself At Barcelona, Torralva
saw in the house of the canon. Juan Grarcia, a book
of chiromancy, and in the margin of one of the
leaves was written a magical process to enable a
person to gain money at play. Zuniga, who appears
to have been a man of no very exalted morality.



torealva's voyage to bomb. 9

wished to make himself master of this art, and Tor-
ralva copied the characters, and told his friend that he
must write them with his own hand on paper, using
for ink the blood of a bat, and that the writing
must be performed on a Wednesday, because that
day was dedicated to Mercury. This charm he was
to wear on his person when at play.

In 1520, Torralva went again to Rome. Being
at Valladolid, he told Diego de Zuniga of his inten-
tions, informing him that he had the means of tra-
velling there with extraordinary rapidity, that he
had but to place himself astride on a stick, and he
was carried through the air, guided by a cloud of
fire. On his arrival at Rome, he saw the cardinal
of Volterra and the grand prior of the order of St.
John, who were very earnest with him that he
should give them his familiar spirit Torralva en-
treated Zequiel to comply with their wish, but in
vain. In 1525, Zequiel recommended him to return
to Spain, assuring him that he would obtain the place
of physician to the infanta Eleanora, queen dowager
of Portugal, and subsequently consort of Franyois I.
of France. Torralva obeyed the suggestion of his
monitor, and obtained the promised appointment

It was after his return to Spain, and before he
obtained this appointment, that a circumstance oc-
curred which added greatly to Torralva's celebrity.
On the evening of the fifth of May, of the year last-
mentioned, (1525,) the physician received a visit
from Zequiel, who told him that Rome would be
taken next day by the troops of the emperor,* and

* ^apata, who gives an account of this voyage according to
the popular tradition, makes Torralva leave the admiral's town

B 5



10 SOftCERT AND MAOIO.

Torralva desired to be taken to Rome to see this
important event. They left Valladolid together at
eleven o'clock at night, on foot, as if to take a walk ;
but at a short distance from the town Zequiel gave
his .companion a stick full of knots, and said, " Shut
your eyes, and fear nothing ; take this in your hand,
and no harm will happen to you/' After a little
time, at Zequiel's bidding, Torralva opened his eyes,
and he found himself so near the sea that he could
have touched the water with his hand ; and the black
cloud which had previously enveloped him gave place
immediately to so bright a Ught, that he was afraid

of Medina de Bioseco instead of Valladolid. He says that Tor-
ralva was sitting pensive and sad in his chamber contemplating
the sky, when Zequiel appeared to him, who is described
thus : —

" Zaqueil un familiar, qu'en la figura
De un viejo sano ant'el se aparescia,
Con un bordon, y en cuerpo en vestidura
Blanca que hasta el suelo le cubria :
Y con la barba blanca a la cintura,
Gomo assi tan pensoso estar le via,
En la cerrada pie^a en este instante
Se aparescio a Torralva nigromante."

Gablo Famoso, cant. xxx.

Zequiel asked him why he was pensive, to which he replied
that he was puzzled with the stars. The familiar then informed
him that the constable of Bourbon was before Eome, which
would b© taken next day.

" Havra sangre y crueldad en abundancia,
Be. que yo espero haver muy grand ganahcia."

^apata imagined that the familiar might be a demon, and
that he would naturally delight in the horrors which attended
the sack of Bome.



TORRAIVA's VOTAGE to ROME. 11

of being burnt Zequiel saw his alarm, and re*
buked him for it in a familiar phrase, " No temas,
bestia fiera r (fear nothing, stupid fellow.) Tor-
ralva then shut his eyes again, and after awhile
felt himself on the solid ground, and heard his
companion bid him open his eyes, and see if he
knew where he was. He recognised the city of
Rome* spread out before him, and knew that he was
standing on the tower of Nona. The clock of the
castle of St Angelo was just striking the hour of
midnight, so that they had been exactly one hour
on their journey. The city was then shrouded in
night, and they waited till daybreak, when they
passed through the different parts of the city, and
witnessed the events of that terrible day, the attack
of the besiegers, the death of the constable of
Bourbon, the flight of the pope into- the castle of
St. Angelo, the terror and slaughter of the citizens,
the pollution of the churches, and the wild riot of
the conquerors. It took them an hour and a half
to return to Valladolid, and when Zequiel left the
doctor there, he said to him, " In future you will
believe all I tell you." Torralva immediately made
public all he had seen during this extraordinary
excursion, and when in due course of time news
arrived of the capture and sack of Rome, the court
of Spain was filled with astonishment^

Torralva's fame as a magician was now in every-
body's mouth, and it seems that men of high rank,
both in church and state, had been cognizant of,
if not accomplices in, his practices of forbidden arts.
It was at length by one of his intimate friends that
he was denounced to the inquisitors, who would



12 SOBCBBT AKD UAQia

perhaps have taken no notice of him had they not
been urged to the pursuit Diego de Zuniga, the
same who had been so long a confidant in his in*
tercourse with the familiar, and who had even
benefited by his arts to profit at the gambling-
table, had suddenly become fanatical and super-
stitious. Not satisfied with repentance for his own
sins, Zuniga denounced Torralva to the inquisition
of Cuenja, and when the doctor visited that city at
the beginning of the year 1 528, he was arrested and
thrown into prison. He immediately confessed all
his dealings with Zequiel, whom he persisted in re-
garding as a good angel, and made no less than
eight several written declarations, the same in
effect, but contradicting each other in some of the
particulars. As these seem to have been thought
not to be entirely satisfactory, Torralva was put to
the torture, the result of which was that he de-
clared himself convinced that Zequiel was a demon.
He said that his familiar had warned him that a
danger hung over him if he went to Cuen9a at that
time, but that he had disregarded the admonition.

The inquisitors now changed their severity to in-
dulgence, and on the 6th of March, 1629, they sus-
pended Torralva's process for a year. But before
the expiration of that period, a new accuser pre-
sented himself, and deposed to his disputes at Rome
in his younger days on the immortality of the soul
and the divinity of Jesus Christ. This placed the
question in a new light, and Torralva underwent
examination again on the 29th of January, 1530,
when he made a new declaration on the subject of
his early education and opinions. The case now



TOBBALVA BSFOBE THS IKQUISITIOK. 13

assumed a still more serious character, and the in*
quisitors of Cuenga having communicated with the
supreme council of the inqidsition in Spain, re-
ceived directions to appoint some pious and learned
persons to labour for the conversion of the accused,
and to persuade him to renounce, sincerely and
absolutely, the science of chiromancy, his inter-
course with Zequiel, and all treaties he might have
entered into with the evil one, for the imburthening
of his conscience and the salvation of his souL The
inquisitors intrusted this task to brother Augustino
Barragan, prior of the convent of Dominicans at
Cuen^a, and Diego Manriques, a canon of the cathe-
dral, and these men laboured with so much zeal and
eflfect„that Torralva agreed to do everything they
wished, except that he would not undertake to
see Zequiel no more. For it appears that the fami-
liar remained so far faithful to his original promise,
that he continued to visit Torralva in the prison of
the inquisition, and the doctor represented to his
converters that he was obliged to see him whether
he would or not The inquisitors themselves were
so credulous,' that they requested their prisoner to
inquire of Zequiel what was his opinion of the
doctrines of Luther and Erasmus ; and they were
gratified beyond measure when they learnt that he
condemned the two reformers, with this difference
only, that he considered Luther to be a bad man,
while he represented Erasmus as his superior in
cunning and cleverness. Perhaps this piece of in-
formation brought Torralva a little into favour, and
his treatment was not so rigorous as that experi-
enced by many at the hands of the same prosecutors.



14 SORCERY AND MAGIC.

On the 6th of March, 1531, he was condemned to
make the general ordinary abjuration of heresies,
to undergo the punishment of imprisonment and
the san benito as long as it might please the inqui-
sitor-general, to undertake to have no further com-
munication with the spirit Zequiel, and never to
lend an ear to any of his proposals.

Although Torralva had been betrayed by one
friend, he had others who remained faithful to him-
Before his celebrated journey to Rome in 1525, he
had been appointed to the office of physician to the
family of the admiral of Castile, don Frederico En-
riquez, which he still held at the time of his arrest.
The admiral had always proved himself a warm
friend and a staunch protector ; he did not desert
him in his trials, and it was no doubt to his inflfu-
ential interference that Torralva owed what indul-
gence was shown to him during his imprisonment.
We have every reason to believe that it was through
his protection also that soon after the process was
ended, the inquisitor-general gave Torralva his par-
don, and set him at liberty, in consequence, as it
was pretended, of his sincere repentance. The ad-
miral received the magician again as his physician,
and continued his favour and protection to him.

Such is the history, taken entirely from his own
declarations and confessions, of a magician whose
fame has been immortalised in Don Quixote.



15



CHAPTER XIX.



TRIAL OF THE EABL AND COUNTESS OF SOMERSET,

The Story of doctor Torralva has drawn us a
little from the chronological order of our chapters.
The wholesale persecution of the witches of La-
bourd in the French Basque territory, and the trial
of those of Zugarramurdi, on the Spanish side of the
frontier, give us a fair picture of the prevalence and
intensity of the belief in sorcery among all the
nations of Europe during the earlier years of the
seventeenth century. We cannot be surprised if,
under these circumstances, the charge was often
made a weapon of resentment and revenge, not
only in the lowest, but sometimes even in the
highest class of society, and if even people of rank
and education were credulous enough to have re-
course to the assistance of the sorcerer and witch.
We will proceed to take a few examples of each of
these cases, and our own country at this period
furnishes us with one of the most extraordinary,
and at the same time itiysterious, tragedies that are
to be found in our annals. •

10



16 SOItCBBT AKD HAOia

No period of English history offers us so much
that is dark and repugnant as the reign of James
I. The private history of that monarch's court is
very imperfectly known, and the few revelations
that have been made are calculated to convince us
that in this case " ignorance is bliss.'' Perhaps of all
the mysterious affairs of this reign, none present
more difficulties than the history of James's first
great favourite, Robert Carr.

This man was of a respectable Scottish family,
but he had received a mean education, and the
merits which gained him the royal favour were a
" comely personage " and a taste in dress. The
king's fondness for him was shown openly in an
undignified manner; for, to use the words of a
nobleman who was in constant attendance at king
James's court, the monarch " would lean on his
arm, pinch his cheek, smooth his ruffled garment,
and, when directing discourse to others, neverthe-
less gaze on him." Such was one of the principal
heroes of the tragedy now to be related, but the
person who appears most active in it was a lady.

The lady Frances Howard, daughter of Thomas,,
earl of Suffolk, and great niece of Henry Howard,
earl of Northampton and lord high treasurer of
England, had been married in 1606 to Robert, earl
of Essex, who was in after life distinguished as-
the parliamentary leader. It was a marriage of
family policy, and at the time it took place the
bride was thirteen years of age and the bridegroom
only fourteen. The lady grew up to be one of the
most dissolute of the ladies of James's court —
which was not remarkable for its morality — ^and


THE COUNTESS OF ESSEX. 17

according to the court scandal of the day, she
had intrigued with prince Henry, and had " been
cast off by him " on account of her notorious infi-
delity. At length the countess of Essex became
passionately enamoured of the king's favourite, who
was raised to the peerage in the spring of 1611,
under the title of viscount Rochester.

It appears that there were at the same time two
separate intrigues in progress to bring together lord
Rochester and the countess of Essex ; one had its
foundation in interest alone, and the other was the
offspring of ambition and love.

The old courtiers were alarmed at the power of
the young favourite, and were anxious to secure
themselves by obtaining his favour, and none more
SO than the aged treasurer Henry earl of North-
ampton. At a time when the commons of England
were preparing to assert their dignity and rights, a
great part of the nobility seem to have sunk into a
degree of baseness which it is not easy to imagine,
and there appears but too much reason for believ-
ing that the earl of Northampton did not shrink
from using the prostitution of his kinswoman to
secure his influence at court It was probably in
that ancient and sad-looking mansion which still
looks over the commencement of the Strand, and
was then the earl's residence, and known as North-
ampton (now Northumberland) house, that the plot
was managed which eventually led to the ill-fated
marriage of which I am going to teU the con-
sequences. The plotters are said to have employed in
this intrigue a follower of the new favourite,
named Copinger^ at whose house the meetings be-



18 SOBCBRY AND MAGIC.

tween lord Rochester and lady Essex sometimes took
place.

The lady, however, was too ardent in her passion
to wait the effect of this intrigue, or perhaps she
was not fully acquainted with the designs of her
relatives. She made her confidante of Mrs. Anne
Turner, the widow of a physician of respectability, a
woman not deficient in beauty, and who was at this
time the mistress of sir Arthur Mainwaring, an
attendant on the prince. With this worthy com-
panion in her evil doings, the countess repaired to
Dr. Simon Foreman, the magician who, as has
been stated, Was living at Lambeth, and with
whom Mrs. Turner appears to have been al-
ready acquainted It was soon agreed between
them that Foreman should by his magic bewitch
the lord Rochester, and so turn his affections that
they should be irrevocably fixed on lady Essex, and
he was in the same way to influence sir Arthur
Mainwaring towards Mrs. Turner. The intercourse
between the ladies and the conjurer became now
frequent, and he used all his skill in charms ^nd
images to effect their desire. At a subsequent
period Foreman's wife deposed in court " that Mrs.
Turner and her husband would sometimes be locked
upp in his studye for three or four howres toge-
ther;'' and the countess became so intimate that
she spoke of Foreman as her " sweet father."

The result of all these intrigues was that lord
Rochester became violently enamoured of the
countess, and they formed an intimacy which soon
assumed a criminal character. Their stolen meet-
ings were held at Mrs. Turner s house in Pater-



FOREMAN THE CONJURER. 19

noster-row, at Copinger's, and elsewhere, and be-
came a matter of public scandal But in the mean-
while a new obstacle had risen in the way of their
criminal enjoyments. The young earl of Essex,
who had been separated from his wife immediately
after their premature marriage, returned from the
wars abroad to claim his rights at home. The lady
Essex had scarcely known her husband, she could
have no love towards him, and she was unwilling
to relinquish her attachments and courtly tastes to
live in private with a nobleman who never seems
to have been much of a courtier. It required the
earnest expostulations of her father to bring the
young couple together, and when tjie earl of Essex,
disturbed at the reports which soon reached him of
her redeiit mode of life, took her to his house at
Chartley, her coldness towards her lord was turned
into intense hatred.

Mrs. Turner was again sent to Foreman, who un-
dertook to bewitch the earl of Essex in the con-
trary sense to that in which he had enchanted the
viscount Rochester. New images were made, and
new charms invented, and the doctor furnished
powders to be administered, and washes to bathe
his linen, which were to render the earl of Essex
incapable of loving his lady. The latter had been
convinced that Foreman's charms had procured her
the affection of her lover, and she was now disap-
pointed at finding them ineffectual against her
husband. Letters addressed by her at this time to
Mrs. Turner and Dr. Foreman were produced at a
later period, in which she complained that " my
lord is very well as ever he was," and expressed



20 SORCERY AND MAaiC.

her aversion to him and her wish to be rid of
him.

In the midst of these dark transactions a new
circumstance happened which threatened to impede
their intrigues. This was the sudden death of their
grand agent, doctor Foreman, who, to use the words
of a manuscript report of the subsequent trial, " a
little before his death desired he might be buryed
very deepe in the ground, or else (saith hee) I shall
feare you alL" * Foreman himself appears to have
been apprehensive of the consequences of his deal-
ings in this affair, for Lilly, who was acquainted
with his widow, tells us that " he professed to her
there would be much trouble about Carr and the
countess of Essex, who frequently resorted unto
him, and from whose company he would sometimes
lock himself in his study a whole day/' Mrs. Fore-



* Lilly received from Foreman's widow the following sin-
gular account of his sudden death. *' The Sunday night be-
fore he died, his wife and he being at supper in their garden-
house, she being pleasant, told him, that she had been
informed he could resolve whether man or wife should die
first; * Whether shall J,' quoth she, 'biuy you or no?* * Oh,
Trunco,' for so he called her, ' thou shalt bury me, but thou
wilt much repent it.' * Yea, but how long first?' * I shall
die,' said he, * ere Thursday night' Monday came, all was
well. Tuesday came, he not sick. Wednesday came, and
still he was well; with which his impertinent wife did much
twit him in his teeth. Thiursday came, and dinner was ended,
he very well : he went down to the water side, and took a pair
of oars to go to some buildings he was in hand with in Pud-
dle-dock. Being in the middle of the Thames, he presently
fell down, only saying, * An impost, an impost,' and so died.
A most sad storm of wind immediately following .'*



mmf^mmm^m^mmmm^'^'^maBmBSsmfi^^^^^mi



LADY Essex's divorce. 21

man, when afterwards examined in court, deposed,
" that Mrs. Turner came to her house immediatelye
after her husband's death, and did demaund cer-
taine pictures, which were in her husband's studdy,
namely, one picture in waxe, very sumptuously
apparrelled in silke and sattin, as alsoe another
sitting in forme of a nak^d woman, spreading and
layinge forthe her haire in a glasse, which Mrs.
Turner did confidentlye affirme to be in a boxe,
and that she knewe in what part of the roome in
the studye they were." Foreman is reported to
have said, in reply to the expostulations of the
countess, that -the devil, as he had learnt, had no
power over the person of the earl of Essex ; yet she
persisted in her designs, and after Foreman's death,
another conjurer was employed, one doctor Lavoire
or Savory, as the name is differently written in
different manuscripts.

But a more powerful agent than the conjurers
was now brought in. We have no means of ascer-
taining at what time king James was first made
acquainted with the amouix>us intrigues of his
favourite, but, as the latter was as anxious to get
the lady Essex away from her husband as she
was to leave him, the English Solomon resolved
that both shoTild be gratified. The countess was
instructed to bring against the earl of Essex a
charge of conjugal incapacity, a commission of reve-
rend prelates of the church was appointed to sit in
judgment, over whom the king presided in person,
and a jury of matrons was found to give their opi-
nion that the lady Essex was a maiden. James
seems to have gloated over this revolting process



22 SOBCEBT AND MAGIC.

with the same degree of pleasure which he had
derived from the examination of the witches in
Edinborough ; the earl of Essex appears to have
made no opposition, and the king pressed with in-
decent eagerness a judgment of divorce. This being
effected, the king, with no less indecency, hastened
a marriage between his favourite and the lady, with
whose character he could not have been unac-
quainted, and heaped new honours upon the former
for this occasion. On the third of November, 16 J 3,
Robert Carr, viscount Rochester, was elevated to
the rank and title of earl of Somerset ; and on St
Stephen^s day, (December 26,) king James gave the
lady to his minion at the altar, and the marriage
was celebrated by the court with unusual splen-
dour.

There was one circumstance connected with this
guilty marriage, or at least contemporaneous with
the intrigues which have just been described, that
became in the sequel the foundation of events still
more extraordinaxy.

Sir Thomas Overbury, who is known by literary
compositions of some merit, was almost as much
the favourite of Carr in the earlier period of his
fortunes, as Carr was of the king ; and although
represented in the common published accounts as a
man of honourable character, there appears to be
not wanting grounds for suspecting that he was a
fit companion for the monarch and his favourite.
It appears from documents afterwards brought for-
ward, that sir Thomas Overbury exercised for seve-
ral years the extraordinary vocation of imparting
ideas and language to the earl of Somerset, as to a



SIR THOMAS OVERBURY. 23

puppet, who, by means of his secret suggestions,
moved the inclinations of king James which way
he would, governed councils, and fascinated the
beauties of the court ; and that he crowned his
various achievements by writing love-letters in
his patron's name, through which lady Essex was
led to indulge a guilty passion. Yet strangely
enough, when his patron resolved to marry his
mistress, and was supported in that resolution by
the open approval and encouragement of his sove-
reign, Overbury is represented as putting himself
forward indiscreetly to oppose the marriage, and as
thus drawing upon himself the hatred of the fa-
vourite and his mistress. It was determined by
some means or other to get Overbury out of the
way ; the king, at the instigation (as it is said) of
Somerset and the earl of Northampton, offered to
send him ambassador to Russia, and when (also,
it is said, at Somerset's suggestion) he refused the
employment, James, in a fit of anger, ordered him
to be committed close prisoner to the tower.
Here Overbury lingered in a sickly state of body
till the 19th of October, 1613, when he died.

For a while after the marriage, the king's attach-
ment to the earl of Somerset seemed to increase
from day to day, and honours and riches were
shpwered thick upon him, but at length it was per-
ceived that James began to be tired of his fa-
vourite, and his enemies seized the opportunity to
conspire his ruin. Among these, the archbishop of
Canterbury, Abbot, with whom Somerset had quar-
relled, was one of the most active, and he has left
us an account of the way in which these intrigues



24 SOBCEBY AKP MAQia

were carried on. " We could have no way so
good/' says the archbishop, " to effectuate that
which was the common desire, as to bring in ano-
ther in his room ; one nail, the proverb is, being to
be driven out by another. It was now observed
that the king began to cast his eye upon George
Villiers, who was then cup-bearer, and seemed a
modest and courteous youth. But king James had
a fashion, that he would never admit any to near-
ness about himself, but such a one as the queen
should commend to him, and make some suit in
that behalf, in order that, if the queen afterwards,
being ill-treated, should complain of this dear one.
he might make his answer, ' It is come of yourself, |

for you were the party that commended him unto
me/ Our old master took delight in things of this
nature/' The queen hated Somerset, and after a
good deal of communications aiid intriguing, she
consented to act the part required ; and Villiers
was appointed a gentleman of the chamber, in
spite of the opposition of the old favourite, who
was made to feel more and more that he was losing
favour with the king. Still the king continued
outwardly to show him the same attention as be-
fore, and even increased his honours, by which he
was lulled into security, while a deep plot was laid
for his final overthrow, in which James, daily more
attached to the new object, appears to have con-
curred

All who looked forward for advancemeiit through
the new favourite were zealous in persecuting the
old one, and among these were sir Ralph Winwood,
one of the secretaries of state and a creature of



Somerset's fall. 25

Villiers, and sir Francis Bacon, to whom Villiers
held out the prospect of the chancellorship of Eng-
land. The first of these got up the accusation on
which Somerset was tried, and the second was
employed to conduct the prosecution. It was stated
that sir Thomas Overbury had been poisoned in
the tower by agents of the countess and earl of
Somerset, that his body had been hastily and pri-
vately buried without having been shown even to
his friends, and that Somerset's power over the
king had been used to hush up and conceal the
crima Several inferior agents were committed to
prison, and by the king's orders a warrant was
made to arrest the earl of Somerset, which is said
to have been executed after he left the king's pre-
sence at Royston. In the last scene of this court
drama, the king exhibited the most heartless dupli-
city. The following account is given by an eye-wit-
ness, sir Anthony Weldon.

" The king with this took his farewell for a time
of London, and was accompanied with Somerset to
Royston, where no sooner he brought him, but the
earl instantly took his leave, little imagining what
viper lay among the herbs. Nor must I forget to
let you know how perfect the king was in the art of
dissimulation, or, to give it his own phrase, king-
craft. The earle of Somerset never parted from him
with more seeming affection than at this time, when
he knew Somerset should never see him more ; and
had you seen that seeming affection, (as the author
himselfe did,) you would rather have believed he was
in his rising than setting. The earle, when he

VOL. II. C



26 SORCERY AND MAGia

kissed his hand, the king hung about his neck,
slabbering his cheeks, saying,

" * For God's sake, when shall I see thee againe ?
On my soule, I shall neither eat nor sleep until you
come again V

" The earle told him on Monday, (this being on
the Friday)—

" ' For God's sake, let me,' said the king, ' shall
I, shall I V then lolled about his neck. * Then for
God's sake, give thy lady this kiss for me/

" In the same manner, at the stayres* head, at
the middle of the stayres, and at the stayres' foot.
The earl was now in his coach when the king
used these very words, (in the hearing of four ser-
vants, of whom one was Somerset's great creature,
and of the bed-chamber, who reported it instantly to
the author of this history), ' I shall never see hid
face more/ "

The earl was placed under arrest on his return to
London, but instead of proceeding to an examina-
tion of the two principal offenders, the minor actors
in the tragedy were first brought to triaL The ob-
ject in view from the beginning appears to have
been to bring forward as little evidence as possible,
but to use every means of inducing the various per-
sons accused to confess themselves guilty and accuse
their supposed employers. Although at first some
of them obstinately denied any knowledge of the
crime imputed to them, they all ended by confessing
whatever was required, influenced either by hope or
fear, and when their confessions had been obtained,
they were hurried to the gallows with as little delay



i^i



TRIAL OF MRS. TURNER. 27

as possible. We can hardly doubt, from the evi-
dence, that the countess of Somerset had been
anxious for Overbury's death, and that she had
suborned persons to poison him, but it certainly did
not appear by the evidence that he had been poi-
srfned by them.

During these trials the public excitement was so
great that Westminster-hall was intensely crowded,
and immense sums were given for places on the
scaflfolding erected for the occasion. This was espe-
cially the case on the 7th of November, 1615,the
day when Mrs. Turner was arraigned, and a feel-
ing of superstitious fear seized upon the assemblage
when on that occasion the instruments of Foreman's
conjurations were exposed to view. It appears that
when Mrs. Turner was arrested, she sent her maid
in haste to Foreman's widow, to warn her that the
privy council would probably give orders to search
her house, and to urge her to bum any of her hus-
band's papers that were calculated to compromise
her. Mrs. Foreman saw that the trouble which her
husband foretold had arrived, and she followed the
suggestion thus conveyed to her, bu:t a few docu-
ments were preserved that were now brought into
court, and among these were the two guilty letters
addressed by lady Essex from Chartley to Mrs.
Turner and Foreman, which, according to some ac-
counts, had been found in the conjuror's pockets
after his sudden death. The various articles which
were seized in Foreman's house related to the at-
tempts to enchant the earls of Somerset and Essex,
and not to the murder of Overbury. " There was
shewed in court certeine pictures of a man and a

c 2



28 SOECEET AND MAGIC.

woman made in lead, and also a mould of brasse
wherein they were cast, a blacke scarfe alsoe full of
white crosses, which Mrs. Turner had in her cus-
todie \' in addition to which there were " inchanted
paps and other pictures/^ These might be innocent
enough, if they had not been followed by a parCel
of Foreman's written charms and conjurations.
" In some of these parchments,'' says the contempo-
rary report of the trial in the manuscript from which
we are quoting, " the devill had particular names,
who were conjured to torment the lord Somersett
and sir Arthur Mannering, if theirelovesshovli not
contynue, the one to the countesse, the other to
Mrs. Turner." The horror caused by these revela-
tions was so great, that the multitude assembled in
the hall were involuntarily led into the delusion
that the demons were present among them, witness-
ing the exposure of their victims, and suddenly in
the midst of this sensation, " there was heard a
crack from the scaffold which carry ed a great feare,
tumult, and commotion, amongst the spectators and
through the hall, every one feareing hurt, as if the
devill had bine present and growen angry to have
his workemanshipp knowne by such as were not
his owne schoUars." The reporter adds, ^* There
was alsoe a note showed in courte, made by doctor
Foreman, and written in parchment, signifying
what ladyes loved what lords in the court, but the
lord chiefe justice would not suffer it to be read
openly in courte." This *' note," or book, is under-
stood to have been a diary of Foreman's dealings
with the persons implicated ; and, according to the
scandal of the time, the reason why my lord chief



'



TBIAL OF THE EABL OF SOMERSET. 29

justice objected to reading it was, that his own wife's
name was the first which caught his eye on opening
it* Mrs. Turner had been a favourite with the
court ladies on account of her skill in inventing
new fashions ; fully aware that it was useless to
make any defence, she sought to move compassion
by representing that she was a mere servant to the
will of people of higher rank, on whom she had to
depend for the support of herself and children. Her.
fate is said to have excited much commiseration.

Several months were allowed to elapse after the
execution of the minor agents, on whose confessions
these charges rested, before the great offenders were
proceeded against The countess of Somerset was
brought to her trial on the 24th of May, 1616, and
she at once pleaded guilty, under the evident im-
pression that this plea was to merit a pardon.
This had no doubt been arranged before-hand.
There remained nothing now but to condemn the
earl, whose trial was fixed for the day following, the
25th of May ; but he, it appears, was more difficult
to- deal with than the other prisoners. The conduct
of the king and the earl on this occasion was calcu-
lated to excite extraordinary suspicions ; for the re-
ports of the trial and the version of the story which
came before the public were evidently drawn up for
the purpose of deceiving. An attempt has been made
to throw some light on these mysterious transactions

* Had we Foreman's private diaries for this period, they
would no douht throw much light on contemporary history.
The immorality of the conjuror's private character is suffi-
ciently evinced hy that portion of his secret diaries privately
printed hy Mr. Halliwell.



30 SOBCEBT AND MAGIC.

by Mr. Amos, who has examined the documents re-
lating to this trial preserved in the State Paper-
office, and has collected the materials which we are
now to use.*

The letters of Bacon, whose conduct throughout
these trials was, to say the least, most unmanly,
show us that the king looked forward to the trial of
Somerset with the greatest uneasiness, and that
every effort was made to induce him to admit the
justice of the prosecution, even by the promise of
the king's pardon. Bacon writes to sir George Vil-
liers, on the second of May, "That same little
charm, which may be secretly infused into Somer-
set's ear some few hours before his trial, was excel-
lently well thought of by his majesty, and I do ap-
prove it both for matter and time ; only, if it seems
good to his majesty .... I could wish it were
made a little stronger, by giving him some hopes
that his majesty wi^ll be good to his lady and child,
&c. . . . For the person that should deliver this mes-
sage, I am not so well seen in the region of his
friends, as to be able to make choice of a particu-
lar ; my lord treasurer, the lord KnoUys, or any of
his nearest friends, should not be trusted with it,
for they may go too far, and perhaps work contrary
to his majesty's ends. Those which occur to me
are my lord Hay, my lord Burleigh, of England I
mean, and sir Robert Carre." On the fifth of May,
Bacon writes to Villiers, after stating his opinion

* The Grand Oyer of Poisoning: the Trial of the Earl of
Somerset for the poisoning of Sir Thomas Overbury in the
Tower of London. By Andrew Amos, Esq. London, Bentley,
1846.



M-Ji^J _ ,*jmt XI I III! aiiiK^^w^MiHHHHHHHaip



TRIAL OF THE EARL OF SOMERSET. 31

that the "resuscitation of Somerset's fortune" would
be impolitic : " But yet the glimmering of that
which the king hath done to others, by way of talk
to him, cannot hurt, as I conceive ; but I would not
have that part of the message as from the king, but
added by the messenger, as from himself . .. . The
time I wish to be the Tuesday, being the even of
his lady's arraignment ; for, as his majesty first con-
ceived, I would not have it stay in his stomach too
long, lest it sour in the digestion.'^ He was, in fact,
to be taken by surprise, and not left time for calm
reflection. Several other letters and papers of Bacon
contain similar intimations ; and it appears from
one, that while the countess and her husband were
kept perfectly in the secret' as to what course the
other was pursuing, or what evidence existed against
the other, they were still played off against each
other. Bacon says, on the 10th of May, " It is
thought that at the day of her trial the lady will
confess the indictment ; which, if she do, no evi-
dence ought to be given. But because it shall not
be a dumb show, and for his majesty's honour in so
solemn an assembly, I purpose to make a declara-
tion of the proceedings of this great work of justice,
from the beginning to the end, wherein, neverthe-
less, I will be careful no ways to prevent or dis-
cover the evidence of the next day. In this my
lord chancellor and I have likewise used a point of
providence ; for I did forecast, that if in that narra-
tive, by the connection of things, anything should be
spoken that should show him guilty, she might break
forth into passionate protestations /or his clearing :
which, though it may be justly made light of, yet it
is better avoided; therefore, my lord chancellor



32 SOBGERT AKD MAGIO.

and I have devised, that upon the entrance into
that declaration she shall, in respect of her weaJcness,
and not to add further affliction, be withdrawn" In a
paper of questions for the management of the earl's
trial, in Bacon's handwriting, it ig suggested, " Whe-
ther, if my lord of Somerset should break forth into
any speech of taxing the king, he be not presently by
the lord steward to be interrupted and silenced;
and, if he persist, he be not to be told, that if he
take that course, he is to be withdrawn, and evidence
to be given in his absence" It must be observed,
that there is no intimation that Somerset had ever
threatened to save himself by accusing the king, so
that the fear on that head must have arisen from
some great misgiving on the part of the latter.

Sir George Moore had been appointed lieutenant
of the Tower when Somerset was committed, and in
his family have been preserved the autograph letters
which the king addressed to him during the prepa-
rations for the trial.* From these, we see how
anxiously James was acting in the views expressed
in the above extracts from Bacon's letters. In the
first of the king's letters, dated on the 9th of May,
James says to sir George Moore, " As the only con-
fidence I had in your honesty made me, without
the knowledge of any, put you in that place of trust
which you now possess, so must I now use your
trust and secresy in a thing greatly concerning my
honour and service ;" and he then desires him to
admit, in the greatest secresy, to his prisoner, a pri-
vate messenger, who was to persuade him to confess.
On the 13th of May, the king writes again, " Al-

* They are now at Losely, in Surrey, and were printed in
Kemp's ** Losely Papers."



THE king's fears. 33

though I fear that the last message I sent to your
unfortunate prisoner shall not take the effect that I
wish it should, yet I cannot leave off to use all
means possible to move him to do that which is
most honourable for me, and his own best. You
shall, therefore, give him assurance in my
name, that if he will yet before his trial confess
clearly unto the commissioners his guiltiness of this
fact, I will not only perform what I promised by
my last messenger, both towards him and his wife,
but I will enlarge it . . . Assure him that I protest
upon my honour, my endin this is for his and his wife's
good ; you will do well likewise, of yourself to cast
out unto him, that you fear his wife shall plead
weakly for his innocence, and that you find the com-
missioners have, you know not how, some secret as-
surance that, in the end, she will confess of him ;
but this must only be as from yourself, and there-
fore you must not let him know that I have written
to you .... if he remain obstinate, I desire not
that you should trouble me with an answer ; for it
is to no end, and no news is better than evil news''
In another letter, undated, the king speaks in the
same strain, and adds, " It is easy to be seen that
he would threaten me, with laying an aspersion
upon me of being in some sort accessory to his
crime;'' and in a fourth, which appears to have
been written early on the morning of the trial,
James gives some curjous directions what should be
done with the earl, in case he refused to go to the
trial. It appears that Somerset did not believe that
the king would allow him to be brought to a public
trial

c 5



34 SORCERY AND MAGIC.

These letters to sir George Moore furnish a
striking confirmation of sir Anthony Weldon's narra-
tive of what took place on the eve of the trial,
which will be best given in his own words : — " And
now, for the last act, enters Somerset himselfe on the
stage, who (being told, as the manner is, by the
lieutenant, that he must provyde to goe next day to
his tryal) did absolutely refuse it, and said they
should carry him in his bed — that the king had as-
sured him he should not come to any tryal, neither
durst the king bring him to tryal. This was in an
high strain, and in a language not weU understood
by sir George Moore, (then lieutenant in Elwaies
his room) that made Moore quiver and shake ; and
however he was accounted a wise man, yet he Ivas
neare at his wits' end. Yet away goes Moore to
Greenewich, as late as it was, (being twelve at night),
bounseth at the back stayres as if mad, to whom
came Jo. Loveston, one of the grooms, out of his bed,
inquires the reason of that distemper at so late a
season. Moore tells hinl he must speak with the
king. Loveston replyes, * He is quiet,' (which in
the Scottish dialect, is fast asleep.) Moore says,
' You must awake him.' Moore was called in, (the
chamber left to the king and Moore.) He tells the
king those passages, and desired to be directed by
the king, for he was gone beyond his owne reason,
to heare such bold and undutiful expressions from a
faulty subject against a just sovereigne. The king
falls into a passion of tears : ' On my soule, Moore, I
wot not what to do ! Thou art a wise man ; help
me in this great strait, and thou shalt finde thou
dost it for a thankful master ; with other sad



THE EABL IN GOUBT. 35

expressions. Moore leaves the king in that passion,
but assures him he will prove the utmost of his wit
to serve his majesty ; and was really rewarded with
a suit, worth to him «ei,500 (although Annandale,
his great friend, did cheat him of one half; so was
there falsehood in friendship). Sir George Moore
returns to Somerset about three next morning of
that day he was to come to triall, enters Somerset's
chamber, tells him he had been with the king,
found him a most affectionate master unto him, and
full of grace in his intentions towards himu * But,'
said he, ' to satisfie justice you must appeare, al-
though retume instantly againe, without any further
proceedings; only you shall know your enemies
and their malice, though they shall have no power
over you.' With this trick of wit he allayed his
fury, and got him quietly, about eight in the morn-
ing, to the hall ; yet feared his former bold language
might revert againe, and being brought by this trick
into the toile, might haVe more enraged him to fly
out into some strange discovery ; for prevention
whereof he had two servants placed on each side
of him, with a cloak on their arms, giving them
withall a peremptory order, if that Somerset did any
way fly out on the king, they should instantly hood-
wink him with their cloaks, take him violently
from the bar, and carry him away ; for which he
would secure them from any danger, and they
should not want also a bountiful reward. But the
earle, finding himself over-reached, recollected a
better temper, and went on calmly in his tryall,
where he held the company untill seven at night.
But who had seen the king's restlesse motion all



36 SOBCERT AND MAGIC.

that day, sending to every boat he saw landing at
the bridge, cursing all that came without tidings,
would have easily judged all was not right, and
there had been some grounds for his feares of Somer-
set's boldnesse ; but at last one bringing him word
he was condemned and the passages, all was quiet
This is the very relation from Moore's owne mouth,
and this told verbatim in Wanstead Parke, to two
gentlemen, (of which the author was one,) who
were both left by him to their own freedome, with-
out engaging them, even in those times of high dis-
temperatures, unto a faithful secresie in concealing
it, yet, though he failed in his wisdome, they failed
not in that worth inherent in every noble spirit,
never speaking of it till after the king's death/'

Somerset's trial was, in every respect, a mere
mockery of justice. He was tried, not by his peers
in parliament, but by a select number of peers
chosen for the occasion, who were his personal
enemies or creatures of the court. His judges again
urged him to plead guilty, intimating that his wife
had made a confession that implicated him, and
holding out the prospect of a full pardon as the re-
ward of his confession. When he still insisted upon
his innocence, they brought against him no wit-
nesses, but merely adduced as evidence the confes-
sions of the persons who had already been hanged,
and who had never been confronted with the man they
accused. On the contrary, one gentleman, sir John
Lidcot, no friend of Somerset's, having presumed, on
the scaffold, to ask Weston, who it was pretended had
delivered the poison, whether he had poisoned Over-
bury or not, was thrown into the Tower and treated



THE EARL OF SOMERSET'S TRIAL. 37

harshly. Late in the afternoon the earl began an
able and eloquent defence, in which he explained
away or denied every circumstance adduced to show
that he knew of the murder ; and he insisted that
his assertions ought to have greater weight with the
court than those of condemned felons, proved by
their own confessions to be persons of base cha-
racter, and whom he had no opportunity of cross
examining. The peers found him guilty.

When we look even at the report of Somerset's
trial which was published to the world by those
who were far from being friends to him, we are
struck with the unsatisfactory character of the
evidence upon which he was condemned But our
astonishment is increased when we read the original
depositions of the pretended agents, many of which
are fortunately preserved in the State Paper Office,
and are now, for the first time, published by Mr.
Amos. We there find these witnesses, in state-
ments drawn fi^m them, it would appear, by the
most unworthy means, contradicting one another,
and contradicting themselves; so much so that
these papers would lead us almost necessarily to the
conclusion that there was no poisoning at all. They
are mostly in the handwriting of Coke, who di-
rected the examination of the persons accused, and
are covered with notes and erasures by Bacon, who
conducted, under the immediate direction of the
king, the prosecution ; and we discover from these
notes, and from a comparison of the extracts read
in court at the trial, that Bacon not only suppressed
carefully everything that would tell in favour of the
earl of Somerset, but that he altered phrases and



38 SOBOEBT AND MAGIC.

falsified the original in order to make a direct accu-
sation of what in that original was little better than
a supposition.

It is clear from the original depositions that sir
Thomas Overbury was either not poisoned, or that
he must have been poisoned by the king's own physi-
cian, who constantly attended upon him in the Tower.
This is a very important circumstance, and was en-
tirely concealed from the public. In fact, during
the whole course of proceedings in this strange
affair, no attempt Was made to prove that Overbury
did die of poison, but that was taken as an acknow*
ledged fact The king and the public prosecutors
seem to have acted on the mere personal convic-
tion that such was the case. The king's physician,
Mayeme, who, as we have said, had attended on
the deceased, and prescribed constantly for him,
was not examined at all, nor were any medical men
brought forward to give an opinion on the cause
which had produced death. It is proved by the
depositions in the State Paper Office, that an in-
quest was held on the body, that his friends were
permitted to visit it, and that no particular secresy
was observed; yet not only were no physicians
brought forward on the trial to state if any marks
of the presence of poison had been observed on the
body, but the depositions on this subject were con-
cealed, and it was represented falsely that the body
had been buried hastily and privately, and that
Overbury's friends had not been allowed access to
it Several persons who might have given im-
portant evidence on the trial, had mere truth been
sought, were certainly kept out of the way.



MYSTERIOUS CHAEACTEK OF THE TRIAL. 39

Mr. Amos points out the improbability of tlje
whole story of the poisoning, as it was made the
groundwork of the trial, and we may fairly doubt
if it were not a fiction to cover circumstances which
could not safely be revealed. We learn from the
narrative of sir Anthany Weldon, that Franklin,
one of the minor agents, confessed that Sir Thomas
Overbury was smothered by him and Weston, and was
not poisoned. " The suspicious circumstance that
none of Franklin's examinations taken before his
trial are forthcoming, gives some countenance to
this report.'' Mr. Amos's book contains a mass of
evidence on this and other points which my space
will not allow me to transfer to this review of the
subject

It must be confessed that, even with the im-
portant additional evidence thus brought to light,
the history of sir Thomas Overbury's murder is
still clouded in mystery. The conclusion to which
we are naturally led by the foregoing facts is, that
any satisfactory evidence which could have been
brought forward would have involved other accom-
plices, whose names it was necessary to keep care-
fully from public suspicion, and that the real object
of the prosecution was the ruin and disgrace of the
favourite, whom at last James, actuated by fear or
some other motive, did not sacrifice to the utmost
extent of the wishes of his enemies. The presump-
tion is indeed strong that the murder was autho-
rised by king James himself This supposition,
at least, explains various circumstances which are
otherwise totally inexplicable. We thus understand
why the minor agents in the plot, and especially

5



40 SOBOEBT Ain> MAGIC.

the unfortunate Keutenant of the Tower, (sir Ger-
vais Helwysse,) and Overbuiy^s jailor, Weston, were
so summarily despatched out of the world. We
thus understand the tampering with their deposi-
tions, which, with all the arrangements for the
trial, were made according to the king's own direc-
tiona And still more, we understand James's
anxiety to prevent Somerset's anticipated revela-
tions.

With this new view of the subject, we are led
further to ask for a reason for this extraordinary
state murder, and here at present we are left en-
tirely to conjecture. The common story that Over-
bury's murder was a mere act of revenge for his
opposition to the marriage of Somerset with the
countess of Essex, has always appeared to me to
be in the highest degree improbable, when we con-
sider the part he appears to have previously acted
in promoting Somerset's amours, and the part which
he knew the king was acting in promoting the mar-
riage. It now appears in the light of a cover for
some other transactions, invented probably by the
king, but in which Somerset acquiesced in the
trial, because it did not necessarily involve his own
guilt, (as he only acknowledged to having been the
means of sending Overbury to the Tower,) and be-
cause he could not confute it without making reve-
lations which he had then determined not to make.
It is certain from passages of contemporary letters
and papers, that, at the time when sir Thomas
Overbury was committed to the Tower, no such ex-
cuse for his committal was talked of, but that, on
the contrary, it was looked upon generally as a



THE KING AND SIR THOMAS OVEEBURY. 41

mysterious transaction in which the favourite had
no direct share, except that some persons imagined
that the anger of the king towards his friend por-
tended a diminution in the influence of the favourite
himself A Mr. Packer, in a letter from the court
to sir Ralph Winwood, dated April 22, 16 J 3, men-
tions that the king sent the lord chancellor and
lord Pembroke to offer an " embassage" to sir Thomas
Overbury, which sir Thomas immediately refused,
and that, some said, " he added some other speech
which was very ill taken," and that thereupon the
king sent for the council, and after making an
angry speech, gave orders to them to send Overbury
to prison. Other reasons were also suggested. A
courtier, in a letter dated the 6th of May, 1613,
writes, " Some say, lord Rochester took sir T.
Overbury's committing to heart. Others talk as if
it were a great diminution of his favour and credit,
which the king doubting, would not have it so con-
strued ; but the next day told the council that he
meant him more grace and favour, as should be
seen in a short time, and that he took more delight
and contentment in his company and conversation
than in any man's living." On the 27th of May,
1613, sir H. Weston writes, " Sir Thomas Overbury
is still where he was, (in the Tower,) and as he
was, without any alteration; the viscount Rochester
no way sinking in point of favour, which are two
strange consistents." The earl of Southampton,
writing to sir Ralph Winwood, on the 4th of Au-
gust, 1613, says, " And much ado there hath been
to keep sir Thomas Overbury from a public cen-
sure of banishment and loss of office, such a rooted
hatred lyeth in the king's heart towards him,"



42 SOBCEBT AND MAQIC.

The most probable supposition that we can make
is, that Overbury was possessed of important royal
secrets, which the king had reasons for fearing he
might disclose, or that he had been a participator
in crimes or vices which made him a dangerous
person. According to hints thrown out by Mr.
*Amos, the discovery of the secret would, per*
haps, reveal scenes of royal depravity which it were
as well should remain imknown. It is certain that
there was at the time an opinion abroad, that sir
Thomas Overbury had been an agent in evil deeds.
He was even very commonly suspected of having had
some hand in procuring the death of prince Henry,
who was far from being a favourite with his father, who
hated the favourite, and who was popularly believed
to have been poisoned. There are a few very remark-
able passages in the papers of the time, relating to this
event, which certainly, when put together, tend to
raise suspicion, and sir Edward Coke excited the
king's anger to the highest degree, and was the
cause of sir Thomas Monson's trial being abruptly
put a stop to, by an unguarded expression in court,
which alluded to those suspicions against Over-
bury, and which it is said that James never for-
gave.



43



CHAPTER XX



LA MABECHALE D'aNOBE.

While this tragedy was acting in England, a
somewhat similar one, though under different cir-
cumstances, was in progress in Franca

On the death of Henri lY., slain by the assassin
Ravaillac in 1610, his son, Louis XIII. being but a
child, the royal power fell into the hands of the
queen mother, Marie de Medicis. Among the ser-
vants attached to Marie before her marriage, was a
woman of extraordinary address and talent, the
daughter of Marie^s nurse, named Eleonora Dori, or,
a name she adopted afterwards, Eleonora GaligaL
She soon became a great favourite with her mistress,
whom she accompanied into France as a confidential
attendant, and she gradually gained an imbound-
ed influence over Henri's queen. One of the gen-
tlemen followers of the queen was a Florentine,
named Concino Concini, whose grandfather was se-
cretary to the grand duke Cosmo, but the property
he had scraped together was dissipated by his chil-
dren, and Conchino, who had passed his youth so wildly



44 SOBCEBY AND MAGIC.

that it is said to have become almost proyerbial for
parents to warn their children of his example, was
in indigent circumstances. In consequence of this,
he went to seek his fortune at Rome, where he en-
tered the service of the cardinal of Lorraine, who
was then there, but he did not return with him to
France. On the marriage of Marie de Medicis, he
obtained, as has just been stated, a place in her
household, and seeing the influence of Eleonora Ga-
ligai, he paid his court to her, and with the queen's
approbation, married her. The king is said to have
looked on Concini with disfavour, and to have been
opposed to the marriage.

When Marie de Medicis became ruler of France,
the influence of Concini and his wife was imme-
diately apparent She was a woman of intelligence
and prudence, but her husband was bold and hardy
of temper, ambitious and overbearing, and was never
at rest till he made his influence apparent to every
one. His insolence increased with the queen*s
power, and he exhibited it in an ofiensive manner to-
wards the old French nobles of the court of the great
Henri These frequently leagued together against
him, and had recourse to arms, but having the power
of the state at his command, he proceeded against
them as rebels, and forced them to submission!
Thus the period while the Concini were in power
was for France a time of turbulence and distress

Immediately after the king's death, Concini was
made first gentleman of the chamber, and was re-
warded with other lucrative posts. He was thus
enabled to purchase the marquisate of Ancre, in
Picardy, which title he now assumed. In 1613, the



THE MABEOHAL d'aNCBE. 45

marquis d'Ancre was for a short time in disfavour,
but he was soon restored, and then he was created
marechal of France. With all these dignities, he
also held the important office 6f governor of Nor-
mandy.

In 1615, the nobles, irritated at the manner in
which they were treated by one whom they looked
on as a mere upstart, and who had no talents to
support his influence, which he owed only to his
wife and to his own devotion to the service of the
queen, were already plotting his overthrow; and
although they then failed, they were indefatigable
in their eflbrts to aggravate the populace and men
of all ranks against him. During this and the fol-
lowing years his unpopularity increased daUy. In
1616, he offered an unnecessary and unwise provo-
cation to the Parisians. A citizen named Picard
had the command of the watch, at the gate of Bussy,
one night when the queen's Italian minister was
passing that way with his carriage. Picard, urged
probably by the general dislike which the people of
Paris bore to tho mar6chal d'Ancre, refused to open
the gate till the latter had shown his passport. The
marechal ordered two of his valets to seize Picard,
and administer a severe beating to him, as a punish-
ment for the afiront. The populace rose, seized the
two valets, and hanged them on two gallows at the
door of Picard's house, who from this moment be-
came a hero among the Parisians

Although the marechal's wife was more cautious
of giving personal offence, her manners and charac-
ter were equally unpopular. She was eccentric,
loved to live apart from the world, and was of a



wm



46 SOECEBT AJSTD MAGIC.

suspicious and unsociable temper. She was, more-
over, superstitious, and attributed her constant
state of ill-health to the effects of sorcery. She
caused herself frequently to be exorcised by Italian
priests, and always had her face veiled in public to
screen her from the gaze of i giiardatori, as she ex-
pressed it, — ^against the influence of the evil eye.
These peculiarities, joined with the belief that she
principally ruled the queen-mother, made her^
equally with her husband an object of popular odium.
People accused her of practising the very sorcery
which she suspected in others, and it was widely
believed that she had bewitched the queen.

The marechal had two children by his wife, a son
and a daughter. The latter died in I6I6, to the
great grief of her parents ; her father is said to
have looked upon this blow to his affections as a
warning from above that his own fall was approach-
ing, and his apprehensions were so great, that he
proposed to his wife to retire from political life, and
take refuge in Italy. But she was confident in
her influence with the queen, and persuaded him to
stay.

As the period of the favourite's downfall ap-
proached, people became bolder in their attacks
upon both, and less reserved in their speech. Scan-
dalous anecdotes were sent abroad, and bitter and
angry epigrams were published in abundance.
People assailed them in coarse puns on the words
(mere and encre^ and these were even uttered in the
queen's presence* It is reported, that when one
day the queen-mother said to one of her attendants,
" Apportez-mcd mon voiU" the comte du Lude, who



CONSPIRACY AGAINST THE MARECHAL. 47

was standing by, remarked, with a smile, " Un
navire qui est a TAncre na pas av/trement besoin de
voiles"

It was to one who had risen into importance
at court partly by his favour, Charles d' Albert
due de Luynes, that the marechal d'Ancre even-
tually owed his fall This nobleman saw that his
own power would be the immediate consequence of
the destruction of his rival He nourished in every
possible way the popular feeling against him, and
he instilled all sorts of suspicions into the mind of
the young king. The latter was getting tired of his
mother s rule, and the restraint in which he waa
held by her minister, and though still not much
more than a child, he was anxious to assume the
reins of government He therefore entered eagerly
into the conspiracy; and when the duke and the
other conspirators saw their time was come, they
strengthened the king's resolution by dark insinua-^
tions that the minister was meditating the destruc-
tion of his royal person as a means of rendering his
own influence perpetual

Even with the king's authority, the enemies of
the marechal d'Ancre did not dare to attack their
victim in a fair and open way, but it was resolved
to effect their object by assassination. For this
purpose they took into their confidence the baron
de Vitry, d'Ancre's bitterest personal enemy, and
his brother Du Hallier, and the king not only ah-
thorised them to commit the murder, but promised
to reward Vitry with the mar^chal's staff. Some
other desperate characters were joined with them.

On the morning of the 24th of April, 1617| the



48 SOBOERY AND MAGIC.

king rose early in the morning and announced a
parti de chasse. Preparations were immediately
made, and the horses and carriages brought out
Under cover of this announcement, Vitry, Du Hal-
lier, and their fellow-assassins, were collected within
the gateway of the palace. The marechal d'Ancre
had not himself apartments in the Louvre, but he
lodged in a house which formed what was called
the capitainerie of the Louvre, at the end of the
garden towards the present Rue du Coq, where this
garden was entered by a little bridge which was
called popularly the Pont d'Amour. A person was
placed to watch this bridge, while the conspirators
waited for the signal to inform them that the mare-
chal was in view. This signal was given about ten
o'clock in the forenoon, and the conspirators over-
took their victim as he was entering upon the Pont
du Louvre. The baron de Vitry was so fierce and
eager that he passed the marechal before he was
aware of him, and was called back by his brother
Du Hallier. One or two pistols were then dis-
charged at him, on which he fell wounded, and
they instantly dispatched him with their swords.

The young king, in the utmost anxiety, had
seized his arquebuse, and he now came forward to
the window to encourage the assassins, shouting
out publicly, " I thank you, gentlemen : now I
am king indeed I" The persons to whom these
words were addressed had the baseness not only
to share the plunder of the marechal's person,
but they afterwards disputed the merit of having
struck the first blow, for the sake of the reward.
When the marechale heard of her husband's fate.



OUTRAGES ON THE MAB^GHAL's BODY. 49

she hurried t6 her chamber, undressed herself, and
went to bed, hiding under her her own jewels, and
the jewels of the crown, which were entrusted to
her care, to save them. But the assassins came
and, dragging her roughly out of her bed, carried
off all the jewellery and whatever they found in
the room of value, as lawful plunder. The same
day the king gave d'Ancre's staff of marechal to
the baron de Vitry, and the others were all largely
recompensed. The estates of the Concinis were
granted to the due de Luynes. The queen-mother
saw that her government was at an end, and she
quietly resigned herself to her fate; she was
exiled from court, and sent to reside at Blois.

^fhe mar^chal's enemies at court had now had
their triumph, and it remained only for the popu-
lace to take theirs. The body of the murdered
favourite had been carried off by some of his fol-
lowers, and was buried secretly and by night in the
church of St Germain TAuxerrois. Next morning
some traitor gave information to the Parisians, and
pointed out the place where he was interred. The
populace rose tumultuously, hurried to the church,
and, in spite of the remonstrances of the guardians
of the church, who appealed to their respect for the
dead, they forced their way in, broke up the floor,
and tearing open the grave— it was said, with their
finger-nails — ^broke the coffin, and drew the body
naked into the street. There they dragged it along
ferociously through mud and dirt, tiU they reached
the head of the Pont Neuf, where stood a gallows,
which had been erected by the marechal's orders.
They suspended the corpse on this gallows, and let

VOL. II. D



50 SOBGEBT AKD MAOIC

it hang there a short time, during which they cut
oflFthe nose and ears, and otherwise mutilated it,
with horrible curses and vociferations, obliging
everybody they met to join in shouting vive le roi !
Then they took it down, and dragged it to the
bronze statue of Henri IV., where it was passed
through a fire, which had been hastily made for the
purpose. Thence the mob, continually increasing
in numbers and ferocity, dragged the body to the
place before the hotel of the mar^chal, in the Fau-
bourg St. Germain, where they repeated their out-
rages, beating the corpse with stones and sticks,
amid the most horrible yells and screams. The
same scene was repeated in front of the marechal's
lodgings at the Louvre. It is said that the king,
who was looking on from the balcony of the Louvre,
encouraged the mob. After similar exhibitions in
all the public places of Paris, the mutilated and
disfigured body was at last carried to the place of
the Greve, where a large fire was ready to receive
it. The populace had become savage with drink,
and before the remains of the mar^chal were com-
mitted to the flames, the flesh was torn in shreds
from the bones in the struggles of individuals to
obtain a portion to carry home and bum at their
own houses. It was reported that people had ob-
tained high prices for sheep's kidneys, under the
pretence that they were the kidneys of the marechal
de TAncre.

The due de Luynes was now at the head of the
government, and he determined to complete his
work by the destruction of the mar^chale. On the
29th of April she was committed to the Bastile,



ii



THE MAI^tOHALB VILLIPIED. 51

where she wjts treated with cruelty and insult
Her son, a mere child, was also thrown into prison^
lifter haying been stripped naked, and it is said he
was left a whole day without clothes or food. When
at length inquiries were made after him, so great
was the inhumanity of the enemies of the late fa-
vourite, that some of the principal ladies of the court
had the boy brought before them to dance a sara-
bande, a dance in which he was said to excel.

Meanwhile no means were neglected to vilify the
name of the favourite, and prejudice people against
his widow. Writers were eipployed to traduce
them both ; numerous pamphlets were published,
detailing the insolence of the marechal, and the
sorceries of the marechale ; they were both made
the subject of indecent raillerie ; brutal and licen-
tious songs and epigrams were composed,* in many

* The following is one of the more temperate of these effu-
sions.

A LA HEMOIBE DE LA MABQUISE ET DU MABQUI8.

L'on parle d'une marquise

Et du coyon Florentin,

Qui eut pour son entreprise

Le royaume de Pantin.

S'eUe estoit bonne sorciere, •

Ainsi que chacim croyoit,

Au Hen d'estre pnsonniere,
I Maintenant elle riroit.

^ Mais sa finesse et ses oharmes

^ Que deux monstret^ de I'enfer

N'ont peu empescher lea armes

Yengeresse des coyons.

Aussi n'est-il pas propice,

Que deux monstres de I'enfer

D 2



52 SORGEBY AKD MAGia

of which the Parisians were invited to treat the
widow as they had treated her husband.*

The only accusations brought against the mare*
chale d'Ancre at her trial, were those of being a
witch, of holding communication with witches, and
of having bewitched the queen-mother. The proofs
were her familiar intercourse with Montalto, the
Jew physician who had accompanied Marie de
Medicis from Italy, the exorcisms to which she had
subjected herself as a defence against the witch-
craft to which she believed herself exposed, and
which were performed by ItaUan priests in die
church of the Augustins, and the extraordinary in-
fluence she had always exerted over the queen. It
appears that at times, when suffering from dreadful
pains in the head, the fancy or the superstition of
her medical attendants had ordered the application
of a newly-killed cock, or other bird, and this was
now represented as a sacrifice to the demons. Her
retired and in many cases strange manners were
also cited against her. She often sat alone,
strangely pensive and absti'acted, and at such times
it was her habit to continue rolling bits of wax

S'opposent a la justice
Tant des flames que du fer.

* As in the foUowiiig sample.

SUB LA SORCIERE DE GONCHINE.

G'est assez, c'est assez, execrable Megere»
Infemalle furie, engence dd vipere,
D'avoir desus la France vomy tant de venin !
Peuple, dresses un feu, pour brusler la sorciere ;
Jettes la cendre au vent, escartes la poussiere,
Qu'on luy fasse de mesme qu'on a faict au faquin.



^^ma^mmm^m^m



THE MAB&OHALE ACCUSED OF SOBCEBT. 53

between her fingers until they assumed the form of
little bullets, which she threw into a coffer that
lay by her. When her room was searched, after
her arrest, a number of coffers filled with thes^
bullets of wax were found, and these were taken
for corroborative evidence that she was a sorcerer.
It was looked upon as a circumstance of more im-
portance that the astrological nativities of the
qneen and her children, carefully drawn up, were
found in her possession ; these, which in truth
only showed the interest the favourite took in the
fate of the royal family, were looked upon as in-
struments of sorcery. It was further reported
abroad, to increase the popular hatred, that they
found in her cabinet a quantity of books of magic,
with virgin parchment, and a great number of ma-
gical characters.*

On several occasions between the end of April
and the beginning of July, the marechale was put
to the torture for the purpose of compelling her to
confess that she had bewitched the queen-mother,
but she bore it all with firmness. It is said, that
when asked what were the charms she used to gain
possession of the queen's affections, she replied
proudly, that it was but the power of a weak mind
over a strong one. The proofs against her were,
however, pronounced to be sufficient to convict her

* One of the scurrilous pamphlets published after the assas-
sination of the marechal d'Ancre, under the title of "La
Medee de la France^ depeinte en la personne de la marquise
^Ancre" tells us, " lis ont trouve dans son cabinet quantite de
livres de magie, du parchemin vierge, et grand nombre de
caract^res."

6



54 SORCERY AND MAGIC.

of the (»ime of high treason, and she wds con-
demned to be beheaded and then burnt, her house
to be razed to the gi-ound, and all her blood sttuck
with incapacity.

The ma^^chale d'Ancre expected that the utmost
severity she had to expect vas banishment and
confiscation of her property, and when she heard
heir sentence, she waa struck with the utmost asto-
nishment, cried out i*epeatedly in her distress,
" Oimepovretta !" afid declared in arrest of judg-
ment that she was with child. This plea, howevet,
she immediately retracted, and wh^n she was led
to execution on the 8th of July, she submitted to her
fate with firmness and resignation* The fury of
the Parisian mob had itself abated, and the hated
Italian favourite became on the scaffold an Object
of general commiseration.



55



CHAPTER XXL



LOUIS GAUFEIDI.



The belief in witchcraft was at this time turned
to a new purpose by the Romish priesthood They
had long claimed exclusively for the church of
Rome a transcendental authority and power which
they were fain, in their present contest with the
Protestant reformers, to support with pretended
miracles ; and the belief which gained ground in
the latter half of the sixteenth century, that people
under the influence of witchcraft were possessed
with demons in the same manner as the demoniacs
of the New Testament, was too favourable to their
plans to be neglected. Perhaps a great number of
the Catholic cler^ believed conscientiously in
the reality of these possessions, but in the more
remarkable cases which have been chronicled, the
patients were evidently persons tutored for the
occasion ; and upon the evidence of such people
men of character were hurried to the gallows or the
stake.



■•Wii"^^"^^"'^«»we^BWi^"^WB^i^W«WMI^^WiBWBBWlBB^B«B^^B^iM^^^'^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^"^^^^ *(



56 SOBOEBY AND MAGIC.

There were many of these pretended cases of ob-
session in England, but they were generally dis-
couraged by the church, and were in most cases
detected and exposed. In 1575, a woman of West-
well, in Kent, named Mildred Nerrington, pretended
to be possessed, and accused a poor old woman of
the neighbourhood of having sent a devil into her.
The affair went so far, that the vicar of the parish,
with a neighbouring clergyman, believed that they
had expelled the demon by their prayers, and
printed a relation of it. The civil power in this
case was more effectual in establishing truth than
the ecclesiastical, for the pretended demoniac con-
fessed before two justices of the peace that it was
an imposture, and she explained the way in which
she had deceived the two clergymen. In 1579, a
Welch girl, named Elizabeth Orton, pretended to
fall into trances, and see visions, which were pub-
lished with great solemnity by some Roman Ca-
tholic priests ; but she also was detected, and made
a public confession in Chester cathedral. Two
years afterwards, another case of pretended demo-
niacs, in which some Jesuits were implicated, was
similarly exposed. In 1598, a Protestant clergyr
man, named William Darrell, made a great noise by
his pretended dispossessing of demoniacs in Not-
tinghamshire ; but his practice also ended in ex-
posure With a view to such cases, which were
multiplying alarmingly, the convocation of the
clergy, in the first year of king James, made a
canon, " that no minister or ministers, without
license and direction of the bishop, imder his hand
and seal obtained, attempt, upon any pretence what-



POPISH EXOECISEES. 57

soever, either of possession or obsession, by fasting
and prayer, to cast out any devil or devils, under
pain of the imputation of imposture or cozenage,
or deposition from the ministry/'

Such cases were diflferently treated by the church
in countries where the Romish faith was established,
and where, though many of the more honest and bet-
ter informed of the popish clergy regarded them at
least with suspicion, they were encouraged by the
teaching and example of those who were looked
upon as the greatest authorities. Solemn forms of
invocation were composed for the purpose of exor-
cising the demons, and driving them away from
their victims ; and these were as various and as
superstitious sis the charms of the magicians. The
grand authority on this subject was an Italian
ecclesiastic of the sixteenth century, named Gero-
nimo Mengi, who published two collections of these
6!xorcisms, which in the Latin edition are entitled
FlageUum Dcemonvmiy the* whip or scourge of de-
mons, and Fustis Dcemonum, a club for the demons.
In the introductory chapters of these books, the
author describes the manner in which the exorcist
was lo prepare for his important office, treats of the
nature of the evil beings with whom he was to deal,
and warns him against their cunning and tergiver-
sation. Among other things, he discusses the ques-
tion whether it be lawful to make use of insulting
language to the demons, and he resolves it in the
affirmative. Another recommendation of this au-
thor shows the spirit of the whole — ^the demons
were to be compelled to give some open testimony
to the truth of the Romish faith. Sometimes, he

D 5



5s soaosBt aITb MAaic.

says, the demons are rerj obstinate, bat the ezor-
ciser was to persevere day after day with great
patience, and, above all, he was to endeavour to
obtain possession of the instruments of sorcery,
which, being burnt, would greatly weaken the power
of the evil one. Finally, he directs that the demo-
niacs should, if possible, be exorcised in an open
church, before as large a congregation of people as
possible.

These doctrines became in France and other
countries, the groundwork for extraordinary cases
of individual persecution, of which the one I am
now going to relate was not the least remarkable.

At Aix, in Provence, there Was a convent of Ur-
suline nuns. It was one of the jA^orest of the
monastic orders of females^ for which reason they
were allowed several ways of gaining a livelihood ;
and they seem to have been easily made the tools
of the priests. Among the ITrsulines of Aix there
was, in the year 1610, a young lady named Mag-r
dalen de la Palude, who appears then to have been
a new convert She was the daughter of the sieur
de la Palude, a Provencal gentleman, who lived in
the neighbourhood of Marseilles. Magdalen had
not been long among the sisters of St. Ursida before
she was seized with trances, and these soon commu-
nicated themselves to one of the nuns named
Louise Capeau, whom she had chosen to be her in-
timate fiiend, and subsequently to some of their
companions. It was evident they were possessed,
and the superior of the priests proceeded to exorcise
them in a little chapel, but to no purpose, and for
A full year the demons continued obstinate.



LA SAIKTi: BAUME. 59

Among the mountains, about three leagues from
Aix, is the cave of La Sainte Baume, or " the holy
cavern," in which Mary Magdalen, according to the
popish tradition, was said to have passed her latter
days, and which was now looked upon as a very
holy place of pilgrimage. A convent had been
founded on the spot, dedicated to the two patron
saints of Provence, St. Magdalen and St Maximin,
the prior of which, at the time these events oc-
curred, was Sebastian Michaelis, who was of sufficient
importance to hold the office of an inquisitor of the
faith. The superior of the priests of Aix, finding
his own exorcisms of no avail, applied to the inqui-
sitor Michaelis, by whose direction the two patients,
Magdalen de la Palude, and Louise Capeau, were
carried to the Sainte Baume. The demons now be-
came more tractable, and the exerciser learnt that
Magdalen was possessed by Belzebub, and her com-
panion by a less potent imp, named Verrine, who con-
fessed that they had taken possession of the sufferers
by order of Louis Gaufridi, who was the prince and
commander of all the magicians in Spain, France,
England, and other countries, as far as Turkey, and
who had Lucifer for his demon. This Gaufridi was
a native of the mountains of Provence, born at
Beauvezer les Colmaret ; he was now a priest at
Marseilles, enjoying, it would appear, no very good
reputation, especially on account of his intrigues
with women, and he seems to have been an object
of jealousy and ill-feeling among his fellow-clergy.

Sister Magdalen was induced to confess that
when she was very young, Louis Gtiufridi was a
frequent visitor at her father's house in the coun-



60 SOBGSBY Jl^D MAGIC.

try, and that one day when they were in the fields^
he lured her away to a cavern at no great distance
from her home. When they entered the cavern,
she saw a great number of people, at which she
was amazed, but her companion encouraged her
and said, " These are our friends, you must be
marked like them.'" The poor girl was in such
astonishment that she made no resistance, but sub-
mitted to be marked and abused, and then she
returned home, telling nobody, not even her father
or mother, what had occurred. After this she was
frequently carried to the meeting of the witches, of
whom she was made princess, as Gaufridi was their
prince. Although she still remained in her father's
house, her intercourse with Gaufridi continued,
until she suddenly took a fancy to enter the con-
vent of the nuns of St. Ursula. When she con-
sulted Gaufridi on this step, he earnestly dissuaded
her from it, urged her to marry, and promised to
find her a rich and handsome husband; but when he
saw that she was fixed in her determination, he
became angry, and threatened that, if she became a
nun, his punishment should be not only upon her,
but upon all the sisterhood, and the consequence
was the visitation under which they were now suf-
fering. Such was the statement made by Mag-
dalen de la Palude to the inquisitor of the Sainte
Baume.

The two nuns arrived at the Sainte Baume on
the 27th of November, 1610, and the prior Mi-
chaelis seems to have taken a pleasure in exercising
the office of exorcist, for he continued his exami^
jiations almost daily till the month of April follow^



^^^^PWW»Bi^^-Tr?



THE SPIRITS EXORCISED. 61

lowing. On their first arrival at the convent of the
holy cave, the demons were extremely violent, and,
imtated by the prior's exorcisms, they threw their
victims into violent contortions, raised them up- in
the church, (the place of exorcising,) and attempted
to carry them out by an opening over the choir,
but they were prevented. In the course of a day
or two the exorcisms began to produce their effect,
and on the 7th of December, Verrine, who was the
weaker demon and had possession of sister Louise,
was compelled to talk. He said that Le^uise was
possessed by three devils' himself and two others,
named Gresil and Sonneillon. Next day Verrine
gave a long account of the beauty, merits, and
glory of the Virgin Mary. Meanwhile Belzebub,
who possessed sister Magdalen, was enraged at the
informations given by his fellow-demon, and during
his discourse on the merits of the Virgin Mary, he
began to bellow like a mad bull, turning his vic-
tim's head and eyes in dreadful contortions, and
taking off one of her shoes, threw it at Verrine and
struck sister Louise on the head. On the 9th of
December, the demon Verrine accused sister Mag-
dalen of being a witch, and exhorted her to repent-
ance, but he said that sister Louise was innocent.
Belzebub was again turbulent, and threatened Ver-
rine with punishment, but the latter treated his
menaces with contempt; he said he owed obedi-
ence to Belzebub when they were in hell together,
but that under circumstances like the present he
was his equal. On the 10th, Verrine entered into
details relating to the punishments of the other
world, and Belzebub was less unruly, though he



62 ISOSCBBT AKB MAGia

tossed his Tictim, sister Magdalen, from one side of
the church to the other, saying that was the way
they tossed about the souls of sinners in the regions
below. During all these strange proceedings, the
church was crowded with pilgrims, who went away
" much edified."'

It was decided on the 12th of December that in
future, while one priest exorcised and questioned
the demons, another should commit their answers
to writing. These depositions were collected and
printed seriously by the exorciser Sebastian Mi-
chaelis, whose book made a great sensation, and
went through several editions. It forms a sort of
compendium of transcendental divinity ; for the
exorciser directed his examinations to the express
object of obtaining " authentic'' information on dif-
ferent points respecting which doubts might exist
in the minds of christians. Among other things
the demons told them that Antichrist was bom ; and
when questioned as to the condition of Solomon
and Nebuchadnezzar, whether Henri IV. (then
lately dead) was saved, and on other similar mat-
ters, they gave replies which were highly satisfac-
tory to all zealous Catholics. On one occasion Bel-
zebub spoke with great bitterness against the art of
printing, cursing the inventors of it, those who
exercised it, and the doctors who gave their ap-
probation to the books 1 These exorcisms, as
I have stated above, were continued till the month
of April, 1611 ; the demons appear to have suffered
severely under the compulsion by which such con-
fessions were extorted, and from time to time they
became rebellious, and howled and shouted, invok-
ing other demons to their assistance !



PBOCEEDIKaS AGAIirST GAt7FBIDI. 63

The priests who conducted this affair seem ahnost
to have lost sight of Louis Gbufridi, in their
anxiety to collect these important evidences of the
true faith. It was not till towards the close of
winter that the reputed wizard was again thought
of A warrant was then obtained against him, and
he was taken into custody and confined in the pri-
son of the conciergerie at Marseilles. On the 5th
of March he was for the first time confronted with
sister Magdalen, but without producing the result
anticipated by his persecutors. Little information
is given as to the subsequent proceedings against
him, but he appears to have been treated with
great severity, and to have persevered in asserting
his innocenca Sister Magdalen, or rather the
demon within her, gave information of certain
marks on his body which had been placed there by
the evil one, and on search they were found exactly
as described. It is not to be wondered at, if, after
the intercourse which had existed between them,
sister Magdalen were able to give such information.
Still G-aufridi continued unshaken, and he made no
confession, until at length, on Easter Eve, the 26th
of March, 1611, a fuU avowal of his guilt was
drawn from him, we are not told through what
means, by two capuchins of the convent of Aix, to
which place he had been transferred for his trial.
At the beginning of April, another witness, the
demoiselle Victoire de Courbier, came forward to
depose that she had been bewitched by the rene-
gade priest, who had obtained her love by his
charms, and he made no objection to their adding
this new incident to his confession.



64? SORCEBY AND MAQIC.

Gaufridi acknowledged the truth of all that had
been said by sister Magdalen or by her demon. He
said that an uncle, who had died many years ago^
had left him his books, and that one day, about five
or six years before his arrest on this accusation, he
was looking them over, when he found amongst
them a volume of ma^ic, in which were some writ-
ings in French verse, accompanied with strange
characters. His curiosity was excited, and he
began to read it, when to his great astonishment
and consternation, the demon appeared in a human
form, and said to him, " What do you desire of me,
for it is you who have called me V Graufridi was
young, and easily tempted, and when he had reco-
vered from his surprise, and was re-assured by the
manner and conversation of his visitor, he replied
to his offer, " If you have power to give me what I
desire, I ask for two things ; first, that I shall pre-
vail with all the women I like ; secondly, that I
shall be esteemed and honoured above all the
priests of this country, and enjoy the respect of
men of wealth and honour."' We may see perhaps
through these wishes the reason why Graufridi was
persecuted by the rest of the clergy. The demon
promised to grant him his desires, on condition
that he would give up to him entirely his " body,
soul, and works;'' to which Gaufridi agreed, ex-
cepting only from the latter the administration of
the holy sacrament, to which he was bound by his
vocation as a priest of the church.*

From this time Louis Gaufridi felt an extreme
pleasure in reading the magical book, and it always
had the effect of bringing the demon to attend



MAGDALEN DE LA PALUDE. 65

f

upon him. At the end of two or three days the
agreement was arranged and completed, and, it
having been fairly written on parchment, the priest
signed it with his blood. The tempter then told
him that, whenever he breathed on maid or woman,
provided his breath reached their nostrils, they
would immediately become desperately in love with
him. He soon made a trial of the demon's gift, and
used it so copiously, that he became in a short time
a general object of attraction to the women of the
district He said that he often amused himself with
exciting their passions, when he had no intention
of requiting them, and he declared that he had
already made more than a thousand victims.

At length he took an extraordinary fancy to the
young Magdalen de la Palude ; but he found her
difficult of approach on account of the watchfulness
of her mother, and he only overcame the difficulty
by breathing on the mother before he seduced the
daughter. He thus gained his purpose, took the
girl to the cave in the manner she had already
described, and became so much attached to her
that he often repeated his charm on her to make
her more devoted in her love. Three days after
their first visit to the cave, he gave her a familiar
named Esmodes. Finding her now perfectly de-
voted to his will, he determined to marry her to
Belzebub, the prince of the demons, and she readily
agreed to his proposal. He immediately called the
demon prince, who appeared in the form of a hand-
some gentleman ; and she then renounced her bap-
tism and Christianity, signed the agreement with
her blood, and received the demon's mark. When



/



66 ' SOBCEBT AKD MAOIO.

the book of magic and the various agreements, vrhich
Gaufridi said he had preserved, were sought for,
they were not forthcoming; but he got over this
difficulty by stating that he had burnt the one,
when under fear of arrest, and that the evil one had
carried away the others. He declared further, that
he had had intercourse with sister Magdalen sinc^
she was at the Sainte Baume ; that he had often
been at Sabbaths at the Baume de Bolland, the
BltUme de Loubieres, and other places in the moun-
tains about, and that two or three times he had
wished that these meetings should be held at th^
8ainte Baume. Once the devil had sent him to
fetch sister Magdalen thence, and he declared that
he had dragged her from one place to another
through all the woods around

The priest gave an account of the v Sabbaths, at
which he was a regular attendant. When he was
ready to go — ^it was usually at night — ^he either went
to the open window of his chamber, or left the
chamber, locking the door, and proceeded into the
open air. There Lucifer made his appearance, and
took him in aai instant to their place of meeting?
where the orgies of the witches and sorcerers last-ed
usually from three to four hours. Gaufridi divided
the victims of the evil one into three classes, — ^the
masques^ (perhaps the novices,) the sorcerers, and
the magicians. On arriving at the meeting, they all
worshipped the demon, according to their several
ranks, the masques falling flat on their faces, the
sorcerers kneeling with their heads and bodies
humbly bowed down, and the magicians, who stood
highest in importance, only kneeling. After this,



GAUFBIDI CONDBMKED AKD EXECUTED. 67

they all went through the formality of denying God
and the saints. Then they had a diabolical service
in burlesque of that of the church, at which the
evil one served as priest in a violet chasuble ; the
elevation of the demoii hoste was announced by a
wooden bell, and the sacrament itself was made of
unleaven bread. The scenes which followed resem-
bled those of other witch-meefings. Gaufridi ac-
knowledged that he took Magdalen thither, and that
he made her swallow magical " characters,'" that were
to increase her love to him ; yet he proved unfaith-
ful to her at these Sabbaths with a multitude* ol
persons, and among the rest, with " a princess of
Friesland."' The unhappy sorcerer confessed, among
other things, that his demon was his constant com-
panion, though generally invisible to all but him-
self, and that he only left him when he entered the
church of the Capuchins to perform his religious
duties, and then he waited for him outside the
church-door.

Gaufridi was tried before the court of parliament
of Provence, at Aix. His confession, the declara-
tions of the demons, the marks on his body, and
other circumstances, left him no hope of mercy ;
judgment was given against him on the last day of
April, and the same day it was put in execution-
He was burnt alive.

All true Catholics had derived so much edification
from the declarations of the demons of Aix, that
cases of possession became more frequent, especially
among the nuns. Among the more remarkable
ca^es, we may merely cite those of the nuns of Lou-
viers, in 1643, and of the nuns of Aussonne, in



68 SOBCEBT AKD MAGIC.

1662. I will, however, content myself with one
more narrative of this class, which is perhaps the
most extraordinary of them all. We are left to
guess at the reasons for the persecution of Louis
Graufridi, but our next chapter will detail a history
of which the motives were more apparent.



U



69



CHAPTER XXII.



THE URSULINES OF LOUDDN.



Soon after the period of the persecution of Louis
Gaufridi, there was in the town of Loudun in the
ancient province of Anjou a priest named Urbain
Grandier, a canon of the church there, and a man
who was as remarkable for his learning and talent
as for his handsome person and courtly manners.
He was bom towards the end of the sixteenth cen-
tury at Bouvere near Sable, at which latter place
his father Pierre Grandier exercised the profession
of a notary, and his uncle, Claude Grandier, was,
like himself, a priest. Urbain Grandier had studied
in the college of the Jesuits at Bordeaux, had dis-
tinguished himself so much by his attainments 'and
by his eloquence that he became very popular at
Loudun, where he obtained two benefices, as a
preacher. This excited the jealousy and hatred of
his brother clergy, whom his proud and resentful
spirit hindered him from conciliating. He seems
to have given them some hold upon him by certain



70 SORCERY AND MAGIC.

irregularities in his life, especially by his familiari-
ties with the other sex, which were a matter of
scandal in the town. Loudun, moreover, contained
a large population of Protestants, and Urbain Gran-
dier perhaps had a leaning towards them.

Between the year 1620 and 1629, Urbain Gran-
dier had had several serious quarrels and some law-
suits with the clergy of Loudun. A priest named
Mounier had published libels upon him, and
Urbain prosecuted and obtained a judgment
against him, and exacted the full penalty with un-
feeling rigour. He had gained an action against
another priest named Mignon, a canon of the
church of St. Croix, in a matter relating to a house
which the latter claimed, and he had made Mignon
his personal enemy by the offensive manner in
which he exulted in his defeat. By such pro-
ceedings as these, and by his real or reputed
amours, he had gained many enemies. In 1629, he
was accused before the court of the bishop of
Poitiers of scandalous intrigues, and even of having
secretly introduced women into his church for im-
proper purposes, and he was condemned by the
official to be ejected from all his benefices. But some
irregularity having been discovered in the proceed-
ings, Urbain appealed, and obtained a decree of
parliament, referring the case to the presidial of
Poitiers, and he was acquitted of the charges
brought against him, which his accusers were com-
pelled to retract. This judgment was delivered
on the 25th of May, 1631. It increased the exas-
peration of his enemies to such a degree, that the
archbishop of' Bordeaux, as Urbain's friend, ad-



THE URSULIinSS OP LOUDUN. 71

vised him to quit Loudim, and establish himself in
some other place out of the way of his persecutors.
But the angry priest was too proud and resentful
to listen to counsel like thia

In the year 1626, a small convent of Ursuline
nuns had been established at Loudun, and being
very poor, they rented a private house, and were
allowed to support themselves by taking as boarders
a few young ladies whom they educated. Their
first confessor or " director of conscience,'' was a
priest named Mussaut, who died soon after the
acquittal of Urbain Grrandier by the presidial of
Poitiers. Urbain, rather imprudently, became a
candidate for Mussaut's place, but was rejected, it
was afterwards said, on account of his scandalous
character. The office of director of conscience to
the tJrsulines was given to his old enemy Mignon.
This afiair seems to have caused a revival of animo-
sities which might otherwise have sunk into obli-
vion.

Meanwhile the young scholars of the convent
appear to have felt dull in the company of their
teachers, and they determined to amuse themselves
with frightening them. For this purpose they left
their beds by night, made dreadful noises about the
house, and took advantage of secret passages and
peculiarities they had discovered in the building to
play a variety of pranks, which they laid to the
charge of the ghost of the late spiritual director,
father Mussaut. The nuns communicated their
terrors to Mussaut's successor, who soon suspected
the intrigue ; he saw to what advantage it might
be turned, and obtained the confidence of the girls



m^Fw^mmmt



nSHFV*



vw^^Bsaim



^w^r-wwHOPi



fmm^K^'



!v^mi



72



SORCEBT A17D MAGIC.



who were carrying it on. He not only encouraged
them to proceed, but he soon brought the nuns
themselves to join in his plans.

Mignon now proceeded more systematically in
instructing his patients in the parts they were to
act, and taught them to counterfeit all the strange
postures and contortions of one supposed to be pos-
sessed. He gained the nuns to his purposes, not
only by holding out to them the hope of enriching
and glorifying their order, but by telling them that
they would be the means of confounding and per-
haps converting the numerous heretics in and
about the town of Loudun, and he assured them
that Urbain Grandier was himself a secret heretic.
As far as we can judge, the motive which had most
weight with the nuns was the prospect of enriching
themselves by this " pious fraud,'" and the superior
of the convent entered warmly into the design.
Having prepared everything for his purpose,
Mignon sent for a bigoted priest of the neighbour-
hood of Loudun, named Pierre Barre, a man who
had assumed the character of a saint, to support
which he performed a variety of extravagancies. With
the assistance of this man, who was rejoiced at the
opportunity of exhibiting the effects of his own
holiness, Mignon began by exorcising the superior
and two of her nuns, and they carried on their pro-
ceedings in great secret for two or three days
They then entered into communication with ano-
ther priest, who bore a very indifferent character,
and made him their messenger to two magistrates,
whom they invited to witness the exorcising of two
nuns of the convent of the Ursulines possessed^ as



THE SPIRITS TALK LATIN. 73

they said, by evil spirits. The first exhibition be-
fore the magistrates took place on the 11th of
October, 1 632. Before the proceedings began, Mig-
non informed the magistrates, that the nuns had
been troubled for some time T^th a visitation of
spectral appearances, which had ended in some of
them being possessed with demons. He said that
the superior of the nuns was possessed by the
grand demon Astaroth, and that one of the nuns
was in the possession of another devil whose name
was Sabulon ; and, although the nuns themselves,
as he assured the magistrates, were totally ignorant
of the learned languages, the demons knew all
languages, and preferred making use of those which
were no longer spoken. They were then ushered
into a chamber where the superior lay in bed, and
Mignon and his fellow exorcist began their opera-
tions. When the patient first saw the priests and
their companions, she appeared to be seized with
dreadful spasms and screamed fearfully ; but under
the hands of the exorcists she became calmer, and
Mignon proceeded to interrogate her spirit in Latin.
To his first question, " Propter quam causam in-
gressus es in corpus hujus virginis f (for what
cause did you enter the body of this virgin ?) As-
taroth answered with the utmost docility, " Causa
cmimositaJtis^' (from animosity.) " Fer quod pac-
tum r (by what pact ?) said Mignon. '^ Per fioreSy'
(by flowers,) replied the demon. " Quales ?' (what
flowers ?) asked the priest. " Rosas'' was the reply.
" Qais misit f (who sent them ?) " TJrhanus!'
" Die cognomen," (tell us his surname.) To this de-
mand the demon replied with the utmost readiness,

VOL. IL B



■^P— *^i^«i»»W^WP



74 SOBCERT AND MAGia

" Grrandler/' Determined to possess all the parti-
culars, the exorcist continued, " Die qualitatem/'
(telL us his profession.) " Sacerdos," (a priest,)
said the spirit. " GujiLs ecclesice f (of what church ?)
" /S'anc^i FetT%;[ (of St Peter's.) Then said the
priest, " Qytm persona aUulit flares f (what person
brought the flowers ?) to which the instant reply
was, " diaholica" (a demon.)

With this, the fit ended, and of course the exa-
mination could be carried on no longer. Mignon
took the magistrates aside, and discoursed with
them on the extraordinary scene they had wit-
nessed, pointing out to them its resemblance to the
afikir of Louis Gaufridi which had occurred twenty
years before. The Romish clergy in general seemed
inclined to believe implicitly in the possession, and
the capuchins showed a particular animosity against
Grandier. The laity were astonished at these ex-
traordinary revelations, and it is not to be won-
dered at if a great portion of them were led by the
priests, and thus easily prejudiced against the
accused. The calling in of the magistrates had given
the affair more importance ; the two first invited
had probably been selected as those most likely to
be imposed upon by priestcraft. They were ad-
mitted to another experiment next day, (the 32th
of October,) and after the demon who possessed the
superior of the convent had been duly exorcised,
he repeated the charges against Grandier, adding
that he was not only a priest, but magus (a ma-
gician). On this occasion the guilty roses were
asked for, and a bunch of those flowers were pro-
duced and burnt before the company, but to



\



m^^"^^' ■" J- ,1



IKTERFEBENGE OF THE MAGISTRATES. 75

the disappointment of them all, they did not, as
was expected, emit a noxious odour unde:f the
action of the fire. The principal civil officers of
the municipaHty now interfered, and on the 13th
of October the bailli of the town, with the lieute-
nant civil, the lieutenant criminal, the proOureur
du roi, the lieutenant a la pr^v6te, and other offi-
cers, went together to the convent of the UrsuUnes.
It would appear that some of these municipal
officers were Protestants, and the bailli, especially,
was known as a man of good sense and justice.
When they arrived at the house occupied by the
nuns, they were shown into a waiting-room, where
they were left a considerable time, until Mignon
condescended to make his appearance, and inform
them that the demon that morning had refused to
answer except in private, that the examination had
been a very extraordinary one, and that he would
give them a report of it in writing.

Urbain Grandier professed to despise the in-
trigues of his enemies, but he could not help feeling
alarmed at the formidable league which had been
raised against him. He determined first to apply
for protection to the spiritual power, and he hurried
to lay his complaint before the bishop of Poitiers.
This prelate, however, as we have seen before, was
not friendly to Grandier, who could not obtain a
personal audience, but was referred back to the
civil authorities for redress. On his return to Lou-
dun, Grandier went to the civil court, and pre-
sented a formal charge of conspiracy against the
priest Mignon; and on the 28th of October, the
bailli issued a public order of the court against

£ 2



76 SOBCEBY AND MAGIC.

the calumnies of the priests. Mignon protested
earnestly against this proceedings and the whole
town became violently agitated by the dispute be-
tween the priests and the civil authorities. The
bailli followed up his decree by taking a decided
part against the nuns, and he gave Grandier
warning of every new step which they took.
The priests, however, now set the civil power at
defiance, and, preparing to act under the authority
$)f the bishop of Poitiers, they continued their ex-
orcisms of the nuns, and, having collected together
a number of the least reputable medical practi-
tioners of the place, men they knew were will-
ing from credulity or knavery to be their tools,
they obtained their signature to a statement of the
truth of the possession. Upon this the bailli pub-
licly inhibited the priests from exorcising or further
proceeding in this case, but they again refused to
acknowledge his jurisdiction.

They accordingly went on exorcising more openly
and boldly than ever. Another nun was now found
to be possessed, and her demon confessed that he
was Asmodeus, and that he had five companions in
the possession of this single victim. He also de-
clared that Urbain Grandier was the magician who
had sent them. This occurred on the 24th of No-
vember ; on the 25th, the civil officers, who were
present, insisted on trying the pretended powers of
the demons to speak all languages, and the bailli
asked the patient what was the Hebrew word signi-
fying water. She held down her head and mut-
tered something, which one of the witnesses who
stood very near her declared was a mere refusal in



THE BISHOP OF POITIERS. 77

French to answer. But one of the priests, who was
suggesting to her, insisted that she said zaquaq,
which he declared meant in Hebrew aquam effudi !
On a previous occasion thej had risked an exposure
by making the demon speak bad Latin.* They
now, therefore, began to be more cautious, and
carried on their examination of the demons in a
more secret manner. At the same time they tried
to gain the bailli over, but in vain. The confes-
sions of the demons still turned mainly upon the
delinquences of Grrandier, but they began also to
talk against the huguenots, provoked no doubt by
the incredulity of the civil magistrate& As the
latter had exposed some of their tricks, and had
given them considerable embarrassment, the nuns
were now made to say in their fits that they would
no longer give any answers in the presence of the
bailli or other municipal officers.

The priests now made their appeal to the bishop
of Poitiers, who at last openly espoused their cause,
and on the 28th of November he appointed two
commissioners, the deans of the canons of Cham-
pigni and of the canons of Thouars, to examine
into this strange affair. With their countenance
and assistance the exorcisms commenced anew, and
when, on the 1st of December, the bailli went to
the convent, and insisted upon being admitted to
the examination and upon being permitted to put
questions to the nuns when exorcised, he was re-
fused by Barr6, who now acted as chief exorcist

^ In allusion to their bad Latin, and to the classes in the
schools, a wit of the day said, *' Qtte les diddles de Loudun
VLavment etudie quejusqu'en troisiime"



78 SORCEBY AND MAGIC.

The bailli then formally forbade him to put any
questions to the pretended demons tending to de-
fame individuals ; but Barr6 merely replied that it
was his intention to use his own discretion in this
respect. The priests had now everything at their
own will, and they were sanguine of success, when
their plot was deranged by the unexpected an-
nouncement that the archbishop of Bordeaux was
on his way to Loudun. On several occasions the
priests had declared, to explain some temporary in-
termission of the fits, that they had succeeded in
driving away the demons, but that they had subse-
quently been sent back by the magician. When
news came of the approach of the archbishop, they
disappeared entirely, and the nuns became quiet
and tranquil Some prudent directions given by
the archbishop seem to have put a stop to further
proceedings, and even Mignon and Barr6 let the
matter drop, so that little more was heard of it.

The Ursulines were now the sufferers. They fell
into general discredit ; people took away their
daughters,* and they fell into distress. They laid
the blame of their sufferings on their director, Mig-
non, who had led them into the expectation of de-
riving great profit from their imposture.

Before the embers of this flame were quite ex-
tinct, an unexpected circumstance rekindled them.
Among the pamphlets which had appeared against

* Tallemant des R^aux, who has preserved so many anec-
dotes of this period, tells us that Le Couldray Montpensier,
who had two daughters hoarding with these nuns, immediately
took them away, and had them well whipped, which he found
an efficacious method of driving out the demons.



LIBEL AGAINST OABDINAL RICHELIEU. 79

cardinal Richelieu^ who then ruled the destinies of
France, was a very bitter satire, entitled, in allu-
sion to some low intrigue of the cardinals con-
nected with this town, La C&rchnnih'e de Loudun.
M. de Laubardemont, a creature of the cardinal,
who at this time held the office of master of the
requests, was sent to Loudun, in 1633, to direct
the demolition of the castle of that place. Mignon
and his fellow-plotters immediately obtained an in-
troduction to this minister, and they not only re-
counted to him the affair of the nuns, in a manner
very disadvantageous to Urbain Grandier and his
friends, but they persuaded him that Urbain was
the author of the satire just mentioned. Laubarde-
mont returned to Paris, and communicated what he ,
had heard to the cardinal, who seldom spared the
authors of personal attacks on himself when they
were in his power, and who is said to have been
urged on to sacrifice the cure of Loudun by his
confidential adviser, the celebrated pere Joseph.
The result was, that Laubardemont returned to
Loudun, commissioned by the king to inquire into
the possession of the nuns, and into the charges
against Grandier. He arrived at Loudun with this
commission on the 6th of December, 1633.

The case now assumed a much more serious coun-
tenance. The demons returned to the sisters with
redoubled fury, and with an increase of numbers,
and nearly all the nuns were attacked by them.
Mignon and his fellow-priest had already got up
an exhibition of exorcism for Laubardemont before
that functionary's departure for Paris, and he
brought back with him a writ for the apprehension



80 SOBOEBY AND MAGIC.

of Grandier, in which were blazoned forth all the
crimes which had ever been imputed, rightly or
wrongly, to that individual Upon this he was
thrown into prison, and his house searched for ma-
gical books, which were not found. Two only
proofs against him, considered of any importance,
were discovered among his papers, some French
verses, which are characterised in the procis verbal
as being sales et impudiques — a somewhat strange
accusation in that licentious age, but they perhaps
served to corroborate the suspicion that Grandier
was the author of the libel on the cardinal — ^and a
book which he had written, but never published,
against the celibacy of the clergy. At the begin-
ning of the year a series of examinations were
taken, and being committed to writing and duly
attested, Laubardemont carried them to Paris to
lay them before the minister. He then received a
new commission from the king to act as supreme
judge of this cause, independent of all other juris-
diction whatever ; and he returned to Loudun with
this extensive power on the 9th of April, 1 634.

Laubardemont began by selecting as judges a
certain number of persons from the local magis-
tracy who were most likely to be devoted to his will,
and such physicians and others were chosen to as-
sist in the examinations as were known to bear en-
mity to the accused. The numerous victims of the
pretended possession were now distributed into two
bands, for the convenience of the exorcists. On the
23rd of April the superior of the nuns declared
that the demons who possessed her had entered her
in the forms of a cat, a dog, a siag, and a goat. On



KEW REVELATIONS. 81

the 24th, she declared the Grandier had the demon's
marks on his body. On the authority of this state-
ment, next day a surgeon, selected as being the bit-
terest of his enemies, was sent to Grandier in his
prison to search for his marks, and the miserable
victim was stripped and treated with extreme inhu-
manity. He ended by discovering, as he pretended,
five marks, or insensible spots. The demons were
not always very accurate in the information they
gave to the exorcists. When questioned as to Gran-
dier s books of magic, they indicated a certain
demoiselle to whom he had entrusted them before
his arrest, and in whose house they said that the
books would be found. Laubardemont and others
went immediately to the house indicated, which
they examined from top to bottom, but they found
no books of the description of those of which they
were in search. They returned, and scolded the
demons for their false information. The latter pre-
tended that a niece of the demoiseUe had carried
them away after the information had been given.
They then went to the niece, but they found that
she was at church, and that she had been so occu-
pied all day that it was impossible she could have
acted as the demons stated. But the exorcists were
not discouraged by a few slips like these, and they
were especially active in their examinations at the
beginning of the month of May. Some new demons
then appeared on the scene, under the names of
Eazas, Cerberus, Beherit, &c. Other statements of
the demons were found to be false, and the conspi-
rators had much difficulty in concealing some of the

E 5



82 SOBOEBT AND MAGIC.

tricks they employed. But all these difficxUties
were passed over as matters of little moment.

The examinations were now exhibited publicly in
the church, and a crowd of people, both Catholics
and Huguenots, were always present The matter
had already created so much sensation throughout
France, that many people of quality came from
Paris and other parts, so that all the hostelries in
the town were filled with visitors. Among the rest
was Quillet, the court poet, who fell into temporary
disgrace by his imprudence on this occasion. At
one of the exhibitions, Satan, speaking from the
mouth of one of the sisters, threatened that he
would toss up to the ceiling of the church any one
who should dare to deny the possession of the nunsL
Quillet took him on his word, and was not tossed to
the ceiling, but he provoked so much the anger of
Laubardemont, that he is said to have found it ad-
visable to make a journey to Rome. On another
occasion the devil boasted that he would take the
protestant minister of Loudun in his pulpit and
carry him up to the top of the church steeple, but
he did not put his threat in execution. This
same protestant minister was present at one of the
examinations, when the priests, who were adminis-
tering the consecrated host, told him contemptu-
ously, to show their superiority over the Huguenots,
that he dared not put his fingers into the mouths
of the nuns as they did. He is said to have replied,
that "he had no familiarity with the devil, and
would not preiJume to play with him." The priests
made the nuns utter a great mass of nonsense, and



EXAMINATIONS OF THE NUNS. 83

much that was profane and indecent. They caused
them to say many things irreverent even to those
who conducted the prosecution, which was consi-
dered as proving how little they were influenced by
them. One day the devil, by the mouth of one of
the sisters, closed the examination by declaring,
" M, de Lavbardemont est cocu," In the evening, as
usual, Laubardemont took the written report, wrote
under these words as a, matter of course, " Cfe que
fatteste ^re vrai," and signed it with his nama
When the depositions were sent to Paris, this cir-
cumstance was the source of no little amusement at
court

As the trial went on, doubts and ridicule began to
be thrown upon it, which alarmed the compiissioners,
and it was resolved to hasten the proceedings.
Every precaution was taken to secure the condem-
nation of Grandier. His brother, an advocate of
parliament, was accused of sorcery and placed under
arrest, that he might not be capable of appealing.
Every circumstance that told in favour of the ac-
cused wag carefully suppressed, while whatever
could be turned against him was magnified into
undue importance. Those who expressed any doubts
were threatened with prosecution ; and the bishop
of Poitiers now came forward again, and not only
gave the prosecution the full advantage of his eccle-
siastical authority, but he caused placards to be ex-
hibited about the town forbidding any one to speak
disrespectfully of the nuns. This at once shut the
mouths of all Grandier's friends.

His enemies had, however, another embarrassing
circumstance to contend witL Some of the actors



84 fiORCTBBT AKD MAaiO.

appear to have become ashamed of their parts, and
to have been surprised with scruples of conscience.
At the beginning of July, sister Clara declared be-
fore the multitude assembled in the church, that all
her confessions for some months past had been mere
falsehood and imposture, which had been put into
her mouth bj Mignon and the priests, and she
rushed from the church and endeavoured to make
her escape ; but she was seized and brought back.
This, howeyer, did not hinder another nun, sister
Agnes, from following her example, and she made a
similar declaration. The commissioner immediately
adopted measures for hindering the recurrence of
such accidents, and the priests declared that it was
only one of the demon's vagaries, and that the unruly
patients were at that moment under his influence.
They carried their measures of intimidation so far,
that they accused not only a sister of Qrandier, but
the wife of the bailli of Loudun, of being witches,
intending thus at one blow to strike fear into his
friends and relations. And they declared openly
that the attempt to throw discredit on the proceed-
ings was a mere trick of the Huguenots, who were
afraid that the miracles performed by the priests
on this occasion would throw discredit upon them.

Thus, overruling every form of law and justice,
did the curb's enemies hurry on to their object. As
soon as it was known that the all-powerful cardinal
was resolved on the destruction of the victim, few
were bold enough to stand up in his defence. On
the 18th of August, 1634, the judges assembled in
the convent of the Carmelites, and on the faith of
evidence testified by Astaroth, the chief of the



EXECUTION OP UBBAIN GRANDIER. 8$

devils, and a host of other demons,* they pronounced
judgment on Urbain Grandier, convicted of magic
and sorcery, to the effect that he should perform
penance before the public, and that then he should
be conducted to the stake, and burnt alive along
with his magical covenants and characters, (these
were probably invented,) and with his manuscript
treatise on the celibacy of the clergy. The sentence
was put in execution the same day.

Thus perished another victim of superstition
adopted as the instrument of personal revenge. The
process of the cure of Loudun made an extraordi-
nary noise, the bigotted priests holding it up as a
miraculous proof of the truth and efficacy of the
Romish faith, while the Protestants decried it as
loudly as an infamous inposture. £ven in England
it excited considerable interest. It gave rise to many
publications in France, where also the evidence was
analysed and it weakness exposed, and the whole
affair soon fell into discredit. Some years after-
wards, the materials of this tragic story were col-
lected together and arranged in a small volume
printed at Amsterdam, in 1693, under the titl^ of
the Histoire des Didbles de Loudun.

* The original depositions, with the autograph signatures
of the demons (!), are still preserved among the manuscripts in
the national library in Paris. The signatures are strange
scrawls, evidentiy written by trembling hands guided by others.



86



CHAPTER XXIIL



THE LANOASHIBE WITCHES.

There was something extraordinary in the sudden
prevalence of sorcery during the years 1610, 1611,
and 1612, through most of the countries of western
Europe. It was in the last of these years that
occurred one of the most romantic, if not one of the
most remarkable, cases of witchcraft in England.

One of the wildest districts in Lancashire, even
at the present day, is that known as the forest of
Pendle, on the borders of Yorkshire. Above it
rises the dark and lofty mountain kngwn as Pendle
hill, from the declivity of which the forest extended
over a descent of about five miles to a barren and
dreary tract called the water of Pendle. The view
from the summit of the hill was grand and extensive,
and near at hand beneath lay the splendid remains of
the abbey of Whalley. The tract included under the
name of the forest was barren and desolate, thinly
inhabited, and its population very rude and uncul-
tivated. On a brow of the descent from Pendle



THE MALKIN TOWER. 87

hill, at a considerable distance from any other
habitation, stood a solitary and deserted building,
of some antiquity, no doubt in ruins, known popu-
larly as the Malkin tower. It was inhabited at the
time of which we are speaking by an old woman,
whose real name was Elizabeth Southernes, but
who was better known in the neighbourhood by
that of old Demdike. She was at this time about
eighty years of age, and exhibited all the characte-
teristics of a confirmed witch in their most exagge-
rated forms. She had a son named Christopher,
and a daughter named Elizabeth, who married a
labourer of the Pendle district, named John Device.
The Devices had three children, James, Alizon, and
Jennet, the latter being, in 1612, nine years of age.
It is one of the doctrines of sorcery, that the de-
scendants of a witch follow, from a sort of inevit-
able necessity, the same profession, and all the
members of this family then living, through the
three generations, bore the same evil reputation.

They were not, however, alone in their dealings
with the evil one, for the district of Pendle was at
this time little better famed in the north of England
than the territory of Labourd in France. There
was another :^amily which held a high rank among
the witches of Pendle, the principal member of
which was Anne Whittle, who went by the popular
name of old Chattox, and was of the same age as old
Demdike ; she had an only daughter named Anne,
who was married to Thomas Redferne. ' Old Demdike
was the senior or queen of the witches of Pendle
and the neighbourhood, but she had a jealous rival



88 SOBCSBT AND MAGia

in old Chattox, and the animosity created by their
rivalry was shared by their families.

Mother Demdike, however, had long reigned su-
preme in her quarters, the terror of her neighbours.
According to her own confession, she had been a
witch fifty years, (the printed book says twenty,
but there are other circumstances mentioned which
show this was a misprint.) Her own account of her-
self, when brought to trial was, that at the period
just mentioned, she was one day ''coming home-
ward from begging, when there met her near unto
a stone-pit in Goldshaw, in the said forest of
Pendle, a spirit or devil, in the shape of a boy, the
one .half of his coat black, and the other brown,
who bade her stay, sajdng to her, that if she would
give him her soul, she should have anything that
she would request Whereupon she demanded his
name, and the spirit answered his name was Tibb.
And so in hope of such gain as was promised by
the said devil or Tibb, she was contented to give
her soul to the said spirit. And for the space of
five or six years next after, the said spirit or devil
appeared at sundry times unto her about daylight-
gate, [twiKght,] always bidding her stay, and ask-
ing her what she would have or do. To whom she
replied, nay, nothing; for she said she wanted
nothing yet. And so about the end of the said six
years, upon a sabbath day, in the morning, this
examinate, having a little child upon her knee, and
she being in a slumber, the said spirit appeared
unto her in the likeness of a brown dog, forcing
himself to her knee, to get blood under her left



TnE DEYICBS OF PSNDLE. 89

ann ; and she being without any apparel saving her
smock, the said devil did get blood under her left
arm And she awaking, said, * Jesus, save my
child y but had no power, nor could not say, Jesus
save herself! whereupon the brown dog vanished
out of her sight ; after which she was almost stark
mad for the space of eight weeks."

The child here spoken of must have been Eliza-
beth Device, one of the heroines of the present
history, who in due time was betrayed by the evil
one, and made a witch by her mother. It was the
old woman, also, who inducted her grand-children,
or was the means of introducing them, to the same
evil and dangerous calling. James Device, the
eldest of these, said in his confession, " that upon
Sheare Thursday was two years (Easter-eve, 1610,)
his grandmother, Elisabeth Southemes, alias Dem-
dike, did bid him, this examinate, go to the church
to receive the communion, (the next day after being
Good Friday,) and then not eat the bread the minister
gave him, but to bring it and deliver it to such a
thing as should meet him in his way homeward.
Notwithstanding her persuasion, this examinate did
eat the bread," and so in his coming homeward some
forty roodes off the said church, there met him a
thing in a shape of a hare, who spoke unto this
examinate, and asked him whether he had brought
the bread that his grandmother had bidden him,
or no. Whereupon this examinate answered, he
had not ; and thereupon the said thing threatened
to pull this examinate in pieces ; and so this ex-
aminate thereupon marked himself to God, and so
the said thing vanished out of this examinate^s



90 SOBGBBY AND MAGia

sight And within some four days after that,
there appeared in this examinate's sight, hard by
the new church in Pendle, a thing like unto a
brown dog, who asked this examinate to give him
his soul, and he should be revenged of any whom
he would ; whereunto the examinate answered,
that his soul was not his to give, but was his Sa-
viour Jesus Christ's ; but as much as was in him
this examinate to give he was contented he should
have it And within two or three days after, this
examinate went to the Carre Hall, and upon some
speeches betwixt mistress Towneley and this exami-
nate, she charging this examinate and his said
mother to have stolen some turves of her, bad him
pack the doores ; and withall as he went forth of
the door, the said mistress Towneley gave him a
knock between the shoulders. And about a day
or two after that, there appeared unto this exami-
nate in his way a thing like unto a black dog,
who put this examinate in mind of the said mis-
tress Towneley's falling out with him, and bad him
make a picture of clay like unto the said mistress
Towneley ; and he dried it the same night by the
fire, and within a day after, he, this examinate, be-
gan to crumble the said picture, every day some,
for the space of a week ; and within two days after
all was crumbled away, the said mistress Towneley
died And he further saith, that in Lent last one
John Duckworth of the Launde promised this ex-
aminate an old shirt ; and within a fortnight
after, this examinate went to the said Duckworth's
house, and demanded the said old shirt ; but the
said Duckworth denied him thereof And going



ALIZON DEVICE. 91

out of the said house, the said spirit Dandy ap-
peared unto this examinate, and said, ' Thou didst
touch the said Duckworth/ Whereunto this exa-
minate answered, he did not touch him. * Yes,^ said
the spirit again, * thou didst touch him, and there-
fore I have power of him." Whereupon this exami-
nate agreed with the said spirit, and then wished
the said spirit to kill the said Duckworth : and
within one week, then next after, Duckworth
died."

His sister Alizon^s account of her conversion to
witchcraft was as follows. She said, " that about
two years agon, her grandmother (called Elisabeth
Southernes, alias old Demdike) did sundry times in
going or walking together as they went begging,
persuade and advise this examinate to let a devil
or familiar appear unto her ; and that she, this ex-
aminate, would let him suck at some part of her,
and she might have and do what sh^ would And
she further saith, that one John Nutter, of the
Bulhole in Pendle aforesaid, had a cow which was
sick, and requested this examinate's grandmother
to amend the said cow ; and her said grandmother
said she would, and so her said grandmother about
ten of the clocke in the night, desired this exami-
nate to lead her forth, which this examinate did,
she beijig then blind ; and her grandmother did
remain about half an hour forth ; and this exami-
nate's sister did fetch her in again ; but what she
did when she was so forth, this examinate cannot
tell. But the next morning this examinate heard
that the said cow was dead. And this examinate
verily thinketh that her sai J grandmother did be-



92 SOBOEBT AND MAGIC.

-witch the said cow to death. And further, this
examinate saith, that about two years agon, this
examinate having gotten a piggin full of blue milk
by begging, brought it into the house of her grand-
mother, where (this examinate going forth pre-
sently, and staying about half an hour) there was
butter to the quantity of a quartern of a pound in
the said milk, and the quantity of the said milk
still remaining ; and her grandmother had no butter
in the house when this examinate went forth,
during which time this examinate's grandmother
8tm lay in her bed And forther. this examinate
saith, that Richard Baldwin of "Weethead, within
the forest of Pendle, about two years ago, fell out
with this examinate's grandmother, and so would
not let her come upon his land : and about four or
five days then next after, her said grandmother did
request this examinate to lead her forth about t«n
of the clocke in the night, which this examinate
accordingly did, and she stayed forth then about an
houre, and this examinate's sister fetched her in
again. And this examinate heard the next mom- *
ing that a woman child of the said Richard Bald-
win was fallen sick ; and as this examinate did
then hear, the said child did languish afterwards by
the space of a year, or thereabouts, and died.
And this examinate verily thinketh that her said
grandmother did bewitch the said child to death.''

The youngest of the Devices, "Jennet, a child of
nine years, was as yet too young to be a witch her-
self, but she had been a careful watcher of the
doings of her relatives, and appears to have been
usually admitted to their secret meetings.



MOTHERS DSMBIKE AND C^ATTOX. 93

Old Demdike must certainly have obtained the
special favour of the evil one, if it was to be gained
by the number of her converts, for she was not only
the perverter of those of her own party, but of
those of the rival faction also ; for old Chattox, her
equal in age and decrepitude, if not in power, con-
fessed that it was mother Demdike who first se-
duced her to listen to the tempter. The records of
the court testify that '^ the said Anne Whittle, alias
Chattox, said, that about fourteen years past she
entered, through the wicked persuasions and coun-
sel of Elizabeth Southemes, alias Demdike, and was
seduced to condescend and agree to become subject
unto that devilish abominable profession of witch-
craft. Soon after which, the devil appeared unto
her in the likeness of a man, about midnight, at
the house of the said Demdike ; and thereupon the
sjbid Demdike and she went forth of the said house
unto him ; whereupon the said wicked spirit moved
this examinate that she would become his subject
and give her soul unto him. The which at first she
refused to assent unto ; but after, by the great per-
suasions made by the said Demdike, she yielded to
be at his commandment and appointment. Where-
upon the said wicked spirit then said unto her, that
he must have one part ef her body for him to suck
upon ; the which she denied then to grant unto
him ; and withall asked him, what part of her body
he would have for that use ; who said, he would
have a place of her right side, near to her ribs, for
him to suck upon ; whereunto she assented. And
she further said, that at the same time there was a
thing in the likeness of a spotted bitch, that came



94 SORCEEY AND MAGIC.

with the said spirit unto the said Demdike, which
then did speak unto her in this examinate's hearing,
and said, that she should have gold, silver, and
worldly wealth, at her will ; and at the same time
she saith there was victuals, viz. flesh, butter,
cheese, bread, and drink, and bid them eat
enough. And after their eating, the devil called
Fancy, and the other spirit calling himself Tibb,
carried the remnant away. And she saith, that
although they did eat, they were Viever the fuller
nor better for the same ; and that at their said
banquet the said spirits gave them light to see what
they did, although they neither had fire nor candle-
light; and that they were both she spirits and
devils."

Anne Redfeme, mother Chattox's daughter, held
a special rank among these miserable people, for
she was the most skilful of them all in making
those terrible instruments of evil, the images of
clay. Old Demdike, in her confession, declared,
" that about half a year before Robert Nutter died,
as this examinate thinketh, this examinate went to
the house of Thomas Redferne, which was about
midsummer, as this examinate remembereth it
And there, within three yards of the east end of
the said house, she saw the said Anne Whittle, alias
Chattox, and Anne Redferne, wife of the said Tho-
mas Redfeme, and daughter of the said Anne
Whittle, alias Chattox, the one of the one side of
the ditch, and the other on the other, and two
pictures of clay or marie lying by them ; and the
third picture the said Anne Whittle, alias Chattox,
was making ; and the said Anne Redfeme, her said



THE IMAGES OF CLAY. 95

daughter, wrought her clay or marie to make the
third picture withall. And this examinate passing
by them, the said spirit, called Tibb, in the shape
of a black cat, appeared unto her this examinate,
and said, ' Turn back again, and do as they do/
To whom this examinate said, ^ What are they
doing f Whereunto the said spirit said, * They are
making three pictures/ Whereupon she asked
whose pictures they were. Whereunto the said
spirit said, ' They are the pictures of Christopher
Nutter, Robert Nutter, and Mary, wife of the said
Robert Nutter/ But this examinate denying to go
back to help them to make the pictures aforesaid,
the said spirit, seeming to be angry therefore, shove
or pushed this examinate into the ditch, and so
shed the milk which this examinate had in a can
or kit, and so thereupon the spirit at that time
vanished out of this examinate's sight Biit pre-
sently after that, the said spirit appeared to this
examinate again in the shape of a hare, and so
went with her about a quarter of a mile, but said
nothing to this examinate, nor sh6 to it^'

The two factions under these two rivals in mis-
chief — ^the Erictho and Canidia, as they have been
aptly termed, of the forest of Pendle — were the
terror of the neighbourhood. Those who were not
witches themselves, were glad to buy on any terms
the favour of mother Demdike and her familiar Tibb,
or that of mother Chattox and her imp Fancy ; and
those who offended the two powerful sorceresses or
their friends, or who failed to propitiate them,- were
sure to meet with some kind of severe punishment.
Several of their deeds are recounted in the exami-



»T^



96 SOnCEBT AVD MAQIG.

nations taken down at the trials. Their vengeance
was often the result of very trifling provocations,
and they at times exerted their blighting influence
without any provocation at all In her second exa-
mination, Alizon Device, after telling the manner of
her seduction by her grandmother, says that not
long after, " being walking, towards the Rough-Lee,
in a close of one John Robinson's, there appeared
unto her a thing like unto a black dog, speaking
unto her, and desiring her to give him her soul,
and he would give her power to do anything she
would : whereupon this examinate being there-
withall inticed, and setting her down, the said
black dog did with his mouth (as this examinate
then thought) suck at her breast, a little below her
paps, which place did remain blue half a yeare next
after; which said black dog did not appear to
this examinate, until the eighteenth day of March
last ; at which time this examinate met with a
pedlar on the highway called Colne-field, near unto
Colne ; and this examinate demanded of the said
pedlar to buy some pins of him; but the said
pedlar sturdily answered that he would not loose
his pack ; and so this examinate parting with him,
presently there appeareth to this examinate the
black dog which appeared unto her as before;
which black dog spake unto her in English, saying,
' What wouldst thou have me to do with yonder
man ?' To whom this examinate said, * What canst
thou do at him V And the dog answered again,
^ I can lame him/ Whereupon this examinate an-
swered, and said to the said black dog, * Lame him ;'
and before the pedlar was gone forty rods further.



FEUDS AMONG THE WITCHES. 97

he fell down lame; and this examinate then went
after the said pedlar ; and in a house about the dis-
tance aforesaid, he was lying lame/\

We have seen that Alizon Device accused her
grandmother Demdike of causing the death of a
daughter of Richard Baldwin, the miliar, about two
years before the time of her arrest The feud between
them seems to have been lasting, for the old woman
confessed that, a little before the Christmas of 1611,
her daughter Elizabeth Device had been employed "in
helping the folks at the mill," and asked her to call
upon Richard Baldwin to demand some remuneration
for her work. Probably Elizabeth Device had given
some cause of anger to the miliar, for, as 6ld Dem-
dike, led by her granddaughter Alizon, (for she was
herself blind,) approached his house, he met them,
and applying certain opprobrious epithets to both,
threatened he would bum the one and hang the
other unless they went their ways. As they were
passing the next hedge, the old witch's familiar
.Tibb made his appearance, and obtained a commis-
sion to take vengeance " of the miliar or his.'' What
that vengeance was, we are not informed.

As far as we can discover from the facts deposed
at the trial, the hostility between mother Demdike
and mother Chattox arose from the depredations of
the latter or of her family, which happened about
the close of the reign of queen Elizabeth. Eliza-
beth Device was robbed, and some of the articles
stolen were found immediately afterwards on the per-
son of Anne, the daughter of Chattox, (she was not at
this time married to Redferne,) and reclaimed. The
anger of mother Chattox was now gr,eat against the

VOL. II. F



98 SOBCEBT AND MAGia

Devices, and, she being apparently powerless against
old Demdike and her blood, her son-in-law John De-
vice, the husband of Elizabeth, became so alarmed for
his own safety, that he covenanted with Chattox to
pay her yearly a measure of meal on condition that she
should not hurt him or his goods by her charms.
"This,'' said Alizon, " was yearly paid, until the year
which her father died in, which was about eleven
years since ; her father, upon his then death-bead,
taking it that the said Anne Whittle, alicis Chat-
tox, did bewitch him to death, because the said
meal was not paid the last year I"

Many other persons seem to have been gradually
drawn into this feud, among whom were some
branches of the Nutters, a family rather extensively
spread among the lesser gentry and yeomanry of
this district. The Redfemes were tenants of the
Nutters of Pendle in the time of old Robert Nutter,
whose wife, Elizabeth Nutter, had employed mother
Chattox to effect the destruction of her own grand-
son, known as " young Robert Nutter,'' in order that
her husband's lands might go to some member of
the same family who stood higher in her favour.
This circumstance we learn from the confession of
mother Chattox herself, who tells us, that " Eliza-
beth Nutter, wife to old Robert Nutter, did request
this examinate, and Loomeshaw's wife of Burley,
and one Jane Boothman of the same, who are now
both dead, to get young Robert Nutter his death, if
they could, all being together then at that time, to
that end, that if Robert were dead, then the women
their cousins might have the land ; by whose per-
suasion they all consented unto it After which



DEATH OP BOBBET NXITTBR. 99

time^ this e:£aimnafe's son-in-law Thomas Redfeme
did persuade this examinate not to kill or hurt the
said Robert Nutter ; for which persuasion the said
Loomeshaw's wife had like to have killed the said
Redfeme, but that one Mr. Baldwyn (the late school-
master at Coin) did by his learning stay the said
Loomeshaw's wife, and therefor had a capon from
Redfeme/'

Baldwyn the schoolmaster, was probably a " white
wizard/'

Robert Nutter was thus saved from death, but
his fate was only deferred, for not long after, as mo-
ther Chattox further informs us, Robert Nutter
who was probably ignorant of the plot from which
he had already escaped, " did desire her daughter,
Redferne's wife, to have his will of her, being then
in Redferne's house ; but the said Redferne's wife
denied the said Robert Whereupon the said Ro-
bert seeming to be greatly displeased therewith, in
a great anger took his horse an/went away, saying in
a great rage, that if ever the ground came to him she
should never dwell upon his land.'' Anne Redfeme
told her mother of the threat and the circumstance
which had given rise to it, and the latter imme-
diately consulted her familiar Fancy, " who came to
her in the likeness of a man, in a parcel of ground
called the Launde, asking this examinate what she
would have him to do ; and this examinate bade
him go and revenge her of the said Robert Nutter/'
The result was the death not only of Robert Nutter,
but of his father, Christopher Nutter, the particu-
lars of which were told at the trial by young Ro-
bert's brother John and his sister Margaret

p 2



100 SORCERY AND MAGIC.

Elizabeth Nutter had now fully obtained her de-
sire, and the Redfernes were allowed to remain in
their house. Some years after, however, we still
find hostility existing between the Redfernes and the
Nutters of Pendle. Anthony Nutter had now, per-
haps, inherited Elizabeth Nutter's property, and
lived in the house at Pendle with his daughter
Anne. One day they offended mother Chattox,
when she came to their house, and next day Anne
Nutter fell sick, and, after languishing three weeks,
died, James Device, on his examination at the
trial, told a strange story connected with this event.
He said, " that twelve years ago, Anne Chattox, at
a burial at the new church in Pendle, did take
three scalps of people which had been buried and
then cast out of a grave, as she the said Chattox
told this e^aminate ; and took eight teeth out of the
said scalps, whereof she kept four to herself, and
gave other four to the said Demdike, this exami-
nate's grandmother j which four teeth now shown
to this examinate are the four teeth that the said
Chattox gave to his said grandmother as aforesaid j
which said teeth have ever since been kept, until
now found by Henry Hargreaves and this exami-
nate, at the west-end of this examinate's grands
mother's house, and there buried in the earth, and a
picture of clay there likewise found by them about
half a yard over in the earth where the said teeth
la,y, which said picture so found was almost withered
away, and was the picture of Anne, Anthony Nut^
ter's daughter/'

We have no account of the circumstances which,
^fter these witches had so long enjoyed impunity.



THE WITCHES ABBESTED. 101

led at last to their seizure. Perhaps the enmity of
the Nutters had something to do with it ; but Tho-
mas Potts, who collected and printed the records of
a trial in which he seems to have taken a very par-
ticular interest,* ascribes their discovery and arrest
to the zealous endeavours of that " very religious
honest gentleman," Roger Nowell, esq., " one of his
majesty's justices in these parts,"' the representa-
tive of the old family of the No wells of Read in the
Pendle district. Four of the most notorious of these
witches, Demdike and Chattox, with Alizon Device
and Anne Redferne, were captured by Nowell's
orders, and, having each made a " full " confession,
probably in the hope of saving their lives, he com-
mitted them as prisoners to Lancaster castle on the
second of April, 1612, to take their trials at the
next assizes.

Their chief place of resort, Malkin tower, re-
mained as yet unVisited and untouched. It was a
place looked upon with awe by the peasantry, and

* Potts was the author of " The Wonderfdl Discoverie of
Witches in the Countie of Lancaster," (4to. Lond. 1613,; a
book of some rarity, of which a reprint, with a considerable
mass of valuable information, was edited, in 1845, for the
Ohetham Society, by James Crossley, esq. of Manchester. The
present account of l^e Lancashire witches is compiled entirely
from the materials preserved by Potts, which are the authentic
copies of the confessions of Uie offenders and the depositions
of witnesses. The common chap-book tract, entitled " The
Lancashire Witches," which has been inserted by Mr. Halli-
well' in his " Palatine Anthology," was a mere catch-penny
invention.

The reader will remember the admirably conceived character
of master Thomas Potts, in Ainsworth's romance.



102 SOBOEBT AND KAGIC.

few but old Demdike and her confederates cared to
approach it. Strange noises were heard about it^
and it was haunted by beings still more stranga
James Device, in his examination before justice
Nowell, deposed that, " about a month ago, as this
examinate was coming towards his mother s house,
and at day-gate [twilight] of the same night, he met
a brown dog coming from his grandmother s house,
about ten roods distant from the same house ; and
about two or three nights aft^, he heard a voice of
a great number of children shrieking and crying
pitifully, about daylight-gate, and likewise about
ten roods distant of this examinate's said grand-
mother's house. And about five nights then next
following, within twenty roods of the said Eliza-
beth Southerners house, he heard a foul yelling like
unto a great number of cats ; but what they were,
this examinate cannot telL"'

It was here that, during mother Demdike's life,
the witches of these parts held their grand and so-
lemn meetings, which took place annually on Good
Friday. The day of assembly was just at hand
when Demdike was arrested, but many of the
witches who had escaped met as usual, in spite of
her absence. In fact, the meeting at the Malkin
tower, on the Good Friday of 1612, seems to have
been better attended than usual There was, we
are told, " great cheer, merry company, and much
conference.'' The objects of this conference were of
some importance. It was Elizabeth Device who
presided, and of course now the object of most in-
terest to her was the delivery of her mother. It
was, we are told, proposed to kill the jailer of Lan-



THE MSSTIKa AT MALKIN TOWER. 103

caster castle, set all the prisoners at liberty, and blow
up the castle itself, by a few old women assembled
in an old ruinous tower. But what might not old
women do, when they had Satan to assist them ?
The matters which were intended to be originally
debated or performed at this meeting were the
christening of a familiar for Alizon Deyice, and the
bewitching of certain individuals who had recently
given them offence.

But while thus consulting, the witches were not
aware that a young traitor was sitting amongst
them. This was Jennet Device, the youngest of
the granddaughters of old Device and the child of
the very woman who was presiding over the meeting
in her absence. This ill-conditioned child, a girl of
nine years old, gave information to the zealous jus-
tice NoweU of the meeting at the Malkin tower, and
told him who were present Within a few days the
number of persons implicated in this affair, impri-
soned in Lancaster castle,, was increased to twelve,
among whom were Elizabeth Device, her son
James> and Alice Nutter of Bough Lee, a lady of
fortuna

From the informer Jennet Device, the worthy
justice extracted a more particular account of the
feast at the Malkin tower. She said there were
about twenty persons present, of whom three only
were men, and that the hour of meeting was, twelve
o'clock of the day. They had to their dinner, beef,
bacon, and roasted mutton ; '^ which mutton, as this
examinate's brother said, was of a wether of Chris-
topher Swyer's of Barley ; which wether was larotight
in the night before into this examinate's mother's



104 SOaCERT AND MAOIO.

house by the said James Device, and in this exami-
nate's sight was killed and eaten as aforesaid."'
John Balcock, one of the men present at this meet-
ing, turned the spit A woman named Preston, of
Craven in Yorkshire, was brought by her familiar,
who had taken the form of a white foal for that
purpose. James Device, who confessed that he had
been present at the meeting in Malkin tower, added,
" that all the witches went out of the said house in
their own shapes and likenesses. And they all, by
that they were forth of the doors, got on horseback
like unto foals, some of one colour, some of another ;
and Preston's wife was the last : and when she got
on horseback, they all presently vanished out of this
examinate's sight And before their said parting
away, they all appointed to meet at the said Pres-
ton's wife's house that day twelvemonths ; at which
time the said Preston's wife promised to make them
a great feast And if they had occasion to meet in
the mean time, there should warning be given, that
they all should meet upon Romleyes Moor."

Several of the persons at this meeting were related
in some way or other to the Devices or to their
rivals, and they appear to have been generally of a
very equivocal character in other respects. One
person now implicated in this affair, Alice Nutter
of Rough Lee, alone excites much sympathy. She
was a woman of considerable property, and held a
respectable position among the better families in the
county. Rough Lee, her residence, is still stand-
ing, and is a good specimen of the gentleman's house
of that period. Jennet Device, the little girl, was
evidently suborned to swear away the lives of her



DEATH OF MOTHER DEMDIKE. 105

relatives, and there appeared good reason for be-
Keving that she introduced Alice Nutter into the
plot at the desire of some of that lady's relatives,
who were eager to obtain her property, which would
come to them by heritage on her death. It has
been further handed down by tradition that justice
No well owed the lady a grudge on account of a long-
disputed question of a boundary between their
lands, and that he at least gave encouragement to
this conspiracy against her.

The charges brought against Alice Nutter on
the trial were chiefly remarkable for their weakness.
Jennet Device and her brother James declared that
she was at the meeting at the Malkin tower on
Good Friday, and Elizabeth Device said she joined
with her and old Demdike in bewitching a man
named Mitton to death, merely because the said
Mitton had refused to give Demdike a penny.

Old Demdike escaped the cruelty of the law by
dying in prison a few days after she had been com-
mitted. Thus mother Chattox became the chief
of the witches who were brought into court for
trial on the 19th of August. She is described as " a
very old, withered, spent, and decrepid creature, her
sight almost gone.'' Mother Chattox was quite
blind ; her lips were " ever chattering and talking,
but no man knew what ;" and she was " always
more ready to do mischief to men's goods than
themselves ;" in this respect the contrary of Dem-
dike, who took delight in killing and tormenting the
persons of her enemies. She was, nevertheless, no-
torious as " a dangerous witch," and was " always
opposite to old Demdike, for whom the one favour-

p 5



( »



106 SOBGERT AND MAGIC.

ed, the other hated deadly." Between them no
doubt the forest of Pendle must have been an
agreeable neighbourhood. Yet mother Chattox had
some feelings of affection, for when judgment was
pronounced upon her, she cried out in a distracted
manner that God would be merciful to her, and
falling on her knees, supplicated the judge that he
would " be merciful unto Anne Redfeme, her
daughter.'' Demdike's daughter, Elizabeth Device,
was next brought to the bar. " This odious witch
was branded with a preposterous mark in nature,
even from her birth, which was her left eye standing
lower than the other; the one looking down, the
other looking up, so strangely deformed that the best
that were present in that honourable assembly and
great audience did affirm they had not often seen the
like.'' When this woman saw her own child stand
up in evidence against her, she burst into a violent
passion, ^^ according to her accustomed manner,
outrageously cursing, cried out against the child in
such a fearful manner, as all the court did not a
little wonder at her, and so amazed the child, as
with weeping tears she cried out to my lord the
judge, and told him she was not able to speak in
the presence of her mother." In the end they were
obliged to take Elizabeth Device away, and then the
daughter gave her evidence unconcerned. The other
prisoners were then brought to their trial in succes-
sion Four, Chattox, Elizabeth Device, and the
two children of the latter, (James and Alizon,) had
made confessions, and therefore they had little to
hope. With them were convicted Anne Redferne,
Alice Nutter, Katharine Hewit, John Bulcock and



EXBOOTIOK OP THE WITCHES. 107

his wife Jane, all of Pendle, and Isabel Roby of
Windle, in the parish of Prescot, who maintained
their innocence to the last They were all burnt
the day after their trial> "at the common place of
execution near to Lanpasteir/V One Margs^et
Pearson of Padiham, though convicted of being a
witch, was dealt more leniently with, being only
condemned to exposure on the pillory. Two others^
were acquitted.

Young Jennet Device, who for her age appears to
have possessed at least as evil disposition as any of
them, was spared as the principal evidence against
the accused. Her declaration proved that she was
not unacquainted with the practices of her parents,
and she confessed, " that her mother had taught her
two prayers, the one to cure the bewitched, and the
other to get drink.'^ *

* The prayer, or rather charm, to cure those bewitched,
which Jennet Device had learnt from her mother, was as fol-
lows, and from its phraseology was evidently then of consider-
able antiquity.

Upon Good Friday, I will fast while I may

Untill 1 heare them knell

Our Lord's owne belL

Lord in his messe

With his twelve apostles good>

What hath he in his hand ?

Ligh in leath wand.

What hath he in his other hand ?

Heaven's doore key.

Open, open, heaven doore keyes.

Stock, steck, hell doore.

Let crizum chHd

Ooe to its mother mild.



108 SOBGEBY Am> MAGia

One other of the witches who met at the fatal
assembly in Malkin tower was brought to the scaf-
fold at the same time. This was Jennet Preston,
of Gisbome in Craven, who was tried at York for
bewitching some members of the family of Lister in
Craven, and for other similar offences ; but the
principal evidence against her was derived firom the
confessions of Elizabeth, James, and Jennet Device.
It was she who rode to the Malkin tower on a
white foaL She died without confession.

Jennet Device only escaped the scaffold on this oc-
casion, as it has been supposed, to undergo somewhat
later the same dreadful punishment that she had
brought on so many of her relatives. Twenty years
after the events detailed above, the witches stiU conti-
nued to hold their meetings in the forest of Pendle,

What is yonder that casts a light so farrandly ?
Mine owne deare sonne thatf s naild to the tree.
He is niuld sore by the heart and hand,
And holy hame panne.
Well is that man,
That Fryday spell can,
His child to leame ;
A cross of blew, and another of red.
As good Lord was to the roode.
Gabriel laid him downe to sleepe
Upon the ground of holy weepe ;
Good Lord came walking by,
Sleepst thou, wakst thou, Gabriel ?
No, Lord, I am sted with sticke and stake.
That I can neither sleepe nor wake.
Kise up, Gabriel, and goe with me,
The stick nor the stake shall never deere thee.
Sweet Jesus, our Lord, amen.
It is a mere farrago of popish religious verses.


EDMUND Robinson's stobt. 109

in greater numbers than ever, but for some reason or
.other the old rendezvous at Malkin tower seems to
have been deserted, and they now assembled at a place
at some distance from it named the Hoar-stones, a
house which is said to be still standing. On the
30th of February, 1633, a lad named Edmund
Robinson, the son of a poor mason in Pendle forest,
made the following strange declaration before two
justices of the peace. He said that on All Saints'
day, in the preceding year, he was gathering bullies
or wild plums in Wheatley-lane, when he saw two
greyhounds, one black and the other brown, run-
ning over the next field towards him. They came
to him familiarly, and then he perceived they had
each a collar, which ^' did shine like gold,'' and to
which a string was attached. Seeing that nobody
followed the greyhounds, he imagined they belonged
to some of the neighbours and had broke loose,
and, as at that moment a hare started up at a short
distance from him, he thought he would set them
to hunt it, and pointing at it, he cried, " Loo, loo !"
but to no purpose, for the dogs would not run.
" Whereupon, being very angry, he took them, and
with the strings that were at their collars, tied
either of them to a little bush at the next hedge,
and with a rod that he had in his hand he beat
them ; and instead of the black greyhound one
Dickinson's wife stood up, a neighbour whom this
informer knoweth, and instead of the brown grey-
hound a little boy whom this informer knoweth
not" Young Robinson proceeded to state that, in
his terror, he attempted to run away, but was ar-
rested by the woman, who " put her hand into her



110 SOBCSBT AND MAOIO.

pockety and pulled out a piece of silyer mudi like
unto a fair shilling, and offered to give him to hold
his tongue, and not to tell, which he refused, saj*^
ing, ' Nay, thou art a witch T Whereupon she put
her hand into her pocket again, and piilled out a
string Uke unto a bridle that jingled, which she put
upon the little boy^s head that stood up in tJie
brown greyhound's stead, whereupon the said boy
stood up a white horsa"" The woman now seieed
upon Edmund Biobinson, placed him on the horse
before her, and rode with him to Hoar-stonea,
where " there were divers persons about the door,
and he saw divers others coming riding upon horses
of several colours towards the house, which tied
their horses to a hedge near to the said house ; and
which persons went into the said house, to the
number of threescore or thereabouts, as this in-
former thinketh, where they had a fire and meat
roasting, and some other meat stirring in the
house, whereof a young woman, whom he this in-
former knoweth not, gave him flesh and bread upon
a trencher, and drink in a glass, which after the
first taste he refused, and would have no more, and
said it was naught And presently after, seeing
divers of the company going to a barn near adjoin-
ing, he followed after, and there he saw six of
them kneeling and pulling at six several ropes
which were fastened or tied to the top of the house,
at or with which pidling came then in this in-
former's sight flesh smoking, butter in lumps, and
milk, as it were, syleing {straining) from the said
ropes, all which fell into basins which were placed
under the said ropes. And after that these six had



TOTJNG Robinson's adventures. Ill

done, there came other six which did likewise, and
during all the time of their so pulling, they made
such foul faces that feared this informer, so as he
was glad to steal out and run home/' He further
stated that the women in the barn had there ".pic-
tures " or images, which they were pricking with
thorns.

No sooner was young Robinson's flight disco-
vered, than a party of the witches, of whom the
foremost were Dickinson's wife just mentioned, the
wife of a man named Loynd or Loyne, and Jennet
Device,* joined in the pursuit, and they had nearly
overtaken him at a spot which bore the somewhat
ominous name of Boggard-hole, when the appear-
ance of two horsemen caused them to desist His
troubles, however, were not thus ended, for on his
return home in the evening, " his father bade him
go fetch home two kyne to seale (tie up in their
statts), and in the way, in a field called the Oilers,
he chanced to hap upon a boy who began to quaj>
rel with him, and they fought so together till this
informer had his ears made very bloody by fighting,
and looking down he saw the boy had a cloven foot,
at which sight he was afraid, and ran away from
him to seek the kyne. And in the way he saw a
light like a lantern, towards which he made haste,
supposing it to be carried by some of Mr. Robin-
son's people [one of their more wealthy neigh-
bours] ; but when he came to the place, he only

* There is some room, after all, for doubt if this Jennet
Device be the same who figured in the trials in 1612. In the
copy of the deposition in lord Londesborough's manuscript
she is described as " Jennet Device uxor WiUielmi Device."



112 SORCERY AND MAGIC.

found a woman standing on a bridge, whom, when
he saw her, he knew to be Loynds' wife, and know-
ing her, he turned back again, and immediately he
met with the aforesaid boy, from whom he offered
to run, which boy gave him a blow on the back
which caused him to cry/" The boy's father, in
confirmation of this story, acknowledged send-
ing him for the two kyne, and added that,
thinking he stayed longer than he should have
done, '^ he went to seek him, and in seeking him
heard him cry very pitifully, and found him so afraid
and distracted, that he neither knew his father, nor
did know where he was, and so continued very
near a quarter of an hour before he came to him-
self,'' when he told his father the same story which
he now repeated before the magistrates.

The boy Robinson, in his deposition, mentioned
the names of such of the persons present at the
meeting at Hoar-stones as he knew, who were im-
mediately seized and committed to Lancaster castle.
As he said that he should recognize the others if he
saw them, he was carried about by his father and
others to the churches of the neighbouring parishes
to examine the congregations, and in this way he
gained a considerable sum of money. John "Web-
ster, whose "Displaying of Witchcraft" is one of
the best books on the subject published during the
seventeenth century, has given us a curious account
of these proceedings. " It came to pass," he says,
" that this said boy was brought into the church of
KUdwick, a large parish church where I (being
then curate there) was preaching in the afternoon,
and was set upon a stall (he being but about ten



A YOUNG WITCH-FINDER. 113

or eleven years old) to look about him, which
moved some little disturbance in the congregation
for a while. And after prayers I inquiring what
the matter was, the people told me that it was the
boy that discovered witches, upon which I went to
the house where he was to stay all night, where I
found him and two very unlikely (iUrlooking) per-
sons that did conduct him and manage his business.
I desired to have some discourse with the boy in
private, but that they utterly refused. Then, in
the presence of a great many people, I took the
boy near me, and said, ' Good boy, tell me truly,
and in earnest, did thou see and hear such strange
things of the meeting of witches as is reported by
many that thou dost relate, or did not some person
teach thee to say such things of thyself?' But the
two men not giving the boy leave to answer, did
pluck him from me, and said he had been exa-
mined by two able justices of the peace, and they
did never ask him such a question ; to whom I re-
plied, the persons accused therefore had the more
wrong.''

By means like these, a number of wretched
persons were thrown into prison, to the amount
of nearly thirty. They were no sooner arrested,
than people were found to accuse them of a variety
of crimes, chiefly that of killing or seriously injur-
ing people by witchcraft. It is rather a singular
coincidence of names, that Jennet Device was
charged with killing Isabelle the wife of William
Nutter. The crime of another, Mary Spencer, was
" causeing a pale or cellocke to come to her full of
water fourteen yards up a hill from a well.'' Ano-



-Jl



114 SOSGEBT llO) MAOia

ther, named Margaret Johnson, was accused of kill-
ing Henry Heape, and of wasting and impairing
the bodj of Jennet Shackleton. As the evidence
appears to have been otherwise rather deficient, all
these persons were searched for marks, which were '
found in great abundance, and it is stated, at the
end of the list^ that against one person put on her
trial, there was '^ no evidence found, only in search H

a mark found on her body/'* At the ensuing
assizes at Lancaster the prisoners were all put upon
their trial, and no less than seventeen were on such
evidence found guilty. One of them at least, Mar-
garet Johnson, had made a confession, which, as
containing apparently an abstract of the full cha-
racter of a witch according to the belief of Lanca-
shire at this period, deserves to be printed. It is
here given, verbatim, from lord Londesborough's
manuscript Margaret Johnson, on the 9th of
March, 1633, before the same justices who had
taken the deposition of the boy Robinson, said,
" that betweene seven or eight yeares since, shee
beeing in her house at Marsden in greate passion
and anger, and discontented, and withall oppressed
with some want, there appeared unto her a spirit
or devill in the similitude and proportion of a man,

* A very curious volume of manuscripts relating to magic
and sorcery, recently published by lord Londesborough, con-
tains early copies of the depositions of Edmund Bobinson and
his father, of the confession of Margaret Johnson, which is
given farther on, and of the list of persons brought to trial,
with the description of their marks, and an enumeration of
the crimes with which they were charged. The marks are
described too minutely to allow of this curious paper being
printed in a work like the present.



MARGARET JOHNSON's CONFESSION. 115

apparrelled in a suite of blacke, tied about with
silke pointes, whoe offered her, yf shee would give
him her soule, hee would supply all her wantes,
and bring to her whatsoever shee wanted or needed,
and at her appointment would helpe her to kill and
revenge her either of men or beasf e, or what she de-
sired; and after a sollicitacion or two, shee contracted
and condicioned with the said devill or spiritt for her
soule. And the said devill bad her call him by the
name of Memillion, and when shee called hee would
bee ready to doe her will And shee saith that in all
her talke and conference shee called the said Mamil-
lion her god .. . 5 And shee furthersaiththat shee wa»
not at the greate meetinge of the witches at Hare-
stones in the f orrest of Pendle on All Saintes day
last past^ but saith that shee was at a second meet-
inge the Sunday after All Saintes day at the place
aforesaid, where there was at that time betweene
thirty and forty witches, which did all ride to the
said meetinge. And thend of the said meetinge
was to consult for the killing and hurting of man
and beastes ; and that there was one devill or spiritt
that was more greate and grand deviU then the
rest, and yf anie witch desired to have such an
one, they might have such an one to kill or hurt
anie body. And shee further saith, that such
witches as have sharpe boanes are generally for
the devill to prick them with which have no papps
nor duggs, but raiseth blood from the place pricked
with the boane, which witches are more greate and
grand witches then they which have papps or
dugs. And shee beeing further asked what per*



116 SOBGBET AJSD MAGIC

sons were at their last meetinge, she named one
Carpnall and his wife, Rason and his wife, Pick-
hamer and his wife, Da£^ and his wife, and one
Jane Carbonell, whereof Pickhamer's wife is the
most greate, grand, and auncyent witch ; and that
one witch alone can kill a beast, and yf they bidd
their spirit or devill to goe and pricke or hurt anie
man in anie particuler place, hee presently will doe
it And that their spiritts have usually knowledge
of their bodies. And shee further saith the men
witches hare woemen spiritts, and woemen witches
have men spiritts ; and that Good Friday is one
of their constant dales of their generall meetinge,
and that on Grood Friday last they had a meetinge
neere Pendle water side ; and saith that their spirit
doeth tell them where their meetinge must bee, and
in what place ; and saith that if a witch desire to
bee in anie place upon a suddaine, that on a dogg
or a rod or a catt their spiritt will presently convey
them thither, or into any roome in any man's
house. But shee saith it is not the substance of
their bodies that doeth goe into anie such roomes,
but their spiritts that assume such shape and forme-
And shee further saith that the devill, after hee
begins to sucke, will make a papp or a dug in a
short time, and the matter hee sucketh is blood.
And further saith that the devill can raise foule
wether and stormes, and soe hee did at their
meetinges. And she further saith that when the
devill came to suck her pappe, he came to her in
the lickness of a catt, sometimes of one collour and
sometimes of another. And since this trouble



J



THE IMPOSTURE DISCOVERED. 117

befell her, her spiritt hath left her, and shee never
sawe him since/'

Although the jury were satisfied with the evi-
dence in this case, such was not the case with the
judge, who respited the prisoners, and the affair was
reported to the king in council Charles I. had
not the same weak prejudices in these matters as
his father, and by hif orders, an inquixy was insti-
tuted at Chester, under the direction of the bishop,
the result of which was that four of the convicted
witches, Margaret Johnson, (whose confession has
just been given,) Frances Dickenson, Mary Spencer,
and the wife of one of the Hargreaves, were sent to
London, and there examined, first by the king's
physicians, and then by the king in person. Strong
suspicions having arisen, the boy was separated
from his father, (they had both been brought to
London,) and then he confessed that the whole was
an imposture, and that he had been taught to say
what he had said by his father and some other per-
sons who had conspired to get up this story as a
profitable speculation. He declared that on the
day when he said he was carried to the meeting at
Hoar-stones, he was a mile off gathering plums in
another man's orchard. Fortunately none of the
pretended witches had been executed.

Such was the end of the second great case of
witchcraft in Lancashire, which became from many
circumstances, but especially by the king's inter-
ference and the transferring of the case to London,
one of the most celebrated in England. The Lan-
cashire witches have gained a new celebrity at the
present day by furnishing the plot of one of the



118 60B0BBT AND MAGIC.

best romances of one of the most popular and ad-
mired of our writers, Harrison AinswortL The
term itself had become so famous that it has long
been in that county transferred to a class of witches
of the same sex, but of a very different character,
and no festival there is now considered perfect
until the toast of " the Lancashire Witches " of the
present day has been drunk.



119



CHAPTER XXIV.



WITCHCRAFT IN ENGLAND DURING THE EARLIER PART
OF THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY.

The case of the Lancashire witches, in 1612,
seems to have been the first grand exemplification
of king James's witchcraft doctrines in England.
Yet though the published cases of witchcraft during
that monarch's reign are not very numerous, there
can be no doubt that the superstition itself was
widely prevalent throughout the country, and that it
gave rise to innumerable instances of persecution.
In the same year, 1612, five witches were executed
at Northampton, of whom one only, a man, made a
confession. He said that he had three spirits, whom
he called Grissill, Ball, and Jack. In 1615, there
was a rather remarkable case of witchcraft at Lynn,
in Norfolk. Relations of both these cases were
printed, and dispersed abroad. In 1618, an event ♦
of this kind occurred on the borders of the counties
of Leicester and Lincoln, which was still more re-



120 SOBGERT AND MAGia

markable as haying occurred in one of the noblest
families in the land.

Sir Francis Manners succeeded his brother Roger
in the earldom of Rutland in 1612, and soon distin-
guished himself by the magnificent hospitality which
he exercised at his castle of Belvoir. He had two
sons, Henry and Francis, and a daughter Kathe-
rine ; the first of these died about the year 1614,
and he was followed to the grave by his younger
brother within two years. The only remaining
child, who afterwards married the duke of Bucking-
ham, was also taken with a severe illness, from
which she was hardly expected to recover. In the
hamlet adjoining to the castle there lived an old
woman named Joan Flower, with two daugh-
ters, whose poverty excited the compassion of the
,earl and his lady, and the mother was employed in
the castle as a chairwoman, while her eldest daugh-
ter Margaret was received into the household as a
servant. It was soon found, however, that mother
Flowers was undeserving of the kindness thus shown
to her ; she gave offence by her evil manners, and
by the disorders of her house, where people of no
good reputation came to visit her younger daughter
Philip, and at last Margaret Flower was discharged
from her place for purloining the provisions of the
castle to furnish the visitors at her mother s house.
All this had occurred before the death of the earl's
children, and, as the countess had acted generously
towards the daughter when she was discharged, they
were never suspected of malice.

However, reports of a sinister character touching
the proceedings of the family of Joan Flower soon



THE WITCHES OF BELVOIH 121

spread abroad They had gained the reputation of
being witches, and it began to be whispered about
that the earl's children had perished by their agency.
Witches appear to have been rather numerous in
this Ticinity, and as the reports became more rife, a
number of arrests, including the three Flowers and
other persons, were made just before the Christmas
of 1617, and the prisoners were lodged in Lincoln
jaiL The mother, Joan Flowers, when she was
committed to prison, is said to have asked for bread
and butter, which she wished impiously might be
her death if she were guilty of the crime of which
she was accused ; but she no sooner attempted to
swallow it, than she was choked and instantly ex-
pired. The earl of Rutland was at the time in Lon-
don ; when, however, he heard of the imprisonment of
the witches, and the crimes that were imputed to
them, he hastened with his brother, sir George
Manners, to Lincoln, and assisted at their examina-
tion. They all confessed, were, as might be ex-
pected, duly convicted, and were executed early in
the March of the year 1618.^

Among the witnesses on this occasion was a wo-
man — apparently an old one — named Joan Willi-
mott, of Goodby in Leicestershire, who confessed
" that she hath a spirit which she calleth Pretty,
which was given unto her by William Berry of
Langholme in Rutlandshire, whom she served three
years ; and that her master, when he gave it unto
her, willed her to open her mouth, and he would

* The earl and the countess were so far satisfied that their
children died hy witchcraft, that it was stated in the inscription
on their monument in Bottesford church,

VOL. 11. a



122 8OB0EBT AKB MAGIC.

blow into her a fairy which should do her good ;
and that she opened her mouth, and he did blow
into her mouth ; and that presently after his blow-
ing there came out of her mouth a spirit, which
stood upon the ground, in the shape and form of a
woman, which spirit asked of her her soul, which
she then promised unto it, being willed thereunto
by her master. She further confessed, that she
never hurt anybody, but did help divers that sent
forj her, which were stricken or forespoken ; and
that her spirit came weekly to her, and would tell
her of divers persons that were stricken and fore-
spoken. And she saith, that the use which she had
of the spirit, was to know how those did which she
had undertaken to amend ; and that she did help
them by certain prayers which she used, and not by
her own spirit ; neither did she employ her spirit in
anything, but only to bring word how those did
which she had undertaken to cure/'

Another witness, named Ellen Green, of Sta-
thorne in the same county, said, " that one Joan
Willimott of Goodby came about six years since to
her in the "Wolds, and persuaded this examinate to
forsake God, and betake her to the devil, and she
would give- her two spirits, to which she gave her
consent, and thereupon the said Joan Willimott
called two spirits, one in the likeness of a kitten^
and the other of a moldiwarp (a mole) ; the first,
the said "Willimott called Pusse, the other Hiffe-
hiffe, and they presently came to her; and she
departing left them with the examinate, and they
leaped on her shoulder; and the kitten sucked
under her right ear or her neck, and the moldiwarp



ss=:pBMpv^ips;^aeB



THE WITCHES OF BELYOIR. 123

on the left side in the like place. After they had
sucked her, she sent the kitten to a baker of that
town, whose name she remembers not, who had
called her witch and struck her ; and bade her said
spirit go and bewitch him to deatk The moldi-
warp she then bade go to Anne Dawse of the same
town and bewitch her to death, because she had
called this examinate witch and jade ; and within
one fortnight they both died. And further, this
examinate saith, that she sent both her spirits to
Stonesby, to one Willison, a husbandman, and Ro-
bert WiUiman, a husbandman's son, and bade the
kitten go to Willison and bewitch him to death,
and the moldiwarp to the other and bewitch him to
death, which they did, and within ten days they
died. These four were bewitched while this exami-
nate dwelt at Waltham aforesaid. About three
years since, this examinate removed thence to
Stathome, where she now dwelt ; upon a difference
between the said Willimott and the wife of John
Patchet of the said Stathorne, yeoman, she, the said
Willimott, called her, this examinate, to go and
touch the said John Patchet's wife and her child,
which she did, touching the said John Patchet »
wife in her bed, and the child in the grace-wife's
arms, and then sent her said spirits to bewitch them
to death, which they did, and so the woman lay
languishing by the space of a month and more, for
then she died : the child died the next day after
she touched it. And she further saith, that the
said Joan Willimott had a spirit sucking on her
under the left flank in the likeness of a little white
dog, which this examinate saith that she saw the

o 2



124 SORCEBT AND HAOIG.

same sucking in barley-harvest last, being then at
the house of the said Joan Willimott''

Both the daughters of mother Flowers confessed,
and Margaret gave the following account of the pro-
ceedings relating to the earl of Rutland's family.
" She saith and confesseth, that about four or five
years since her mother sent her for the right-hand
glove of Henry lord Bosse, afterward that her mother
bade her go again into the castle of Belvoir, and
bring down the glove or some other thing of Henry
lord Bosse ; whereupon she brought down a glove,
and delivered the same to her mother, who stroked
Rutterkin, her cat, with it ; after it was dipped in
hot water, and so pricked it often, after which Henry
lord Rosse fell sick within a week, and was much
tormented with the same. She further saith, that
finding a glove about two or three years since of
Francis lord Rosse on a dung-hill, she delivered it
to her mother, who put it into hot water ; and after
took it out and rubbed it on Rutterkin the cat,
and bade him go upwards ; and after her mother
buried it in the yard, and said a mischief light on
him, but he will not mend again. She further said,
that her mother and she, and her sister, agreed to-
gether to bewitch the earl and his lady, that they
might have no more children ; and being demanded
the cause of this their malice and ill-will, she saith,
that about four years since the countess (growing
into some mislike with her) gave her forty shillings,
a bolster, and a mattress, and bade her bide at home
and come no more to dwell at the castle ; which
she not only took in ill part, but grudged at it ex-
ceedingly, swearing in her heart to be revenged ;



THE WITCHES OF BELYOIB. 125

after tliis her mother complained to the earl against
one Peake, who had offered her some wrong, wherein
she conceived that the earl took not her part, as
she expected, which dislike with the rest exaspe-
rated her displeaisure against him, and so she watch-
ed the opportunity to be revenged : whereupon she
took wool out of the said mattress, and a pair of
gloves, which were given her by Mr. Vavasor, and
put them into warm water, mingling them with
some blood, and stirring it together ; then she took
the wool and gloves out of the water, and rubbed
them on the body of Butterkin her cat, saying the
lord and the lady should have more children, but it
should be long first She farther confessed, that
by her mother's commandment, she brought to her
a piece of a handkerchief of the lady Eatherine, the
earl's daughter ; and her mother put it into hot
water, and then taking it' out rubbed it on Butter-
kin, bidding him fly and go, whereupon Butterkin
whined and cried ' Mew;' whereupon she said, that
Butterkin had no power over the lady Eatherine to
hurt her/' Her sister, Philip Flowers, declared,
^' that about the 30th of January last past, being
Saturday, four devils appeared unto her in Lincoln
jail, at eleven or twelve o'clock at midnight ; the
one stood at her bed's foot, with a black head like
an ape, and spake unto her, but what she cannot
well remember, at which she was very angry, be-
cause he would speak no plainer, or let her under-
stand his meaning : the other three were Butterkin,
little Bobin, and Spirit, but she never mistrusted
them, nor suspected herself till then."
The Bpman Catholics in England were very active



126 SOBGEBT AND MAQia

during the reign of James L, and they attempted to
take advantage of the popular credulity in getting
up cases of possession in imitation of their brethren
on the continent ; one of the most remarkable cases
of this kind occurred in Lancaster in 1612, and led
to a trial on the same day with that of the witches
of Pendle.

The village of Samlesbury is at some distance from
the Pendle district, nearer to Preston, but it was
probably the reports of the deeds of mothers Demdike
and Chattox that suggested the plot now to be re-
lated. The principal family in this township were
the South worths, who had their head seat at Samles-
bury park, and who seem to have been much
divided among themselves — a division which was
increased by religious differences, for some of them
were Protestants and others Catholics. Lancashire
was at this time remarkable for the n amber of
papists which it harboured — it was the grand asyluni
of the English seminary priests, and there are docu-
ments which show that Samlesbury-park was a
well-known resort of the partizans of Rome. One
of these priests was Christopher Southworth, who
for concealment had assumed the name of Thomp-
son, and who appears to have been nearly related to
sir John Southworth, the occupier of the park,
who was then recently dead. Between sir John
and one of his female relations, Jane South-
worth, there was a bitter feud, for what reason is
not stated ; a servant of sir John's, named John
Singleton, deposed, that '^ he had often heard his
old master say, that the said Jane Southworth was,
as he thought, an evil woman and a witch f and he



■HtUl^kkt.



THE WITCHES OF SAMLESBUBT. 127

added, '^ that the said sir John Southworth, in his
coming or going between his Own house at Samles-
bnry and the town of Preston, did for the most part
forbear to pass by the house where the said wife
dwelt, though it was his nearest and best way, and
rode another way, only for fear of the said wife, as
this examinate verily thinketL"' This statement
WES confirmed by another witness, a yeoman of
Sandesbury, named William Alker, who deposed,
" that he had seen the said sir John Southworth
shun the said wife when he came near where she
was, and hath heard the said sir John say that he
liked her not, and that he doubted she would be-
witch him."' As far as we can gather, it appears
further, that Jane Southworth was a recent convert
from Romanism to the Church of England.

There was in the same village a family of the
name of Bierley. Jennet Bierley was an aged woman,
who appears to have lived with a daughter-in-law,
Ellen Bierley; her own daughter had married Thomas
Sowerbuts of Samlesbury, a husbandman, and by her
he had a daughter, Grace Sowerbuts, who was at this
time about fourteen years of age. Jennet and Ellen
Bierley were Protestants, while Thomas Sowerbuts
was a Catholic, and there was probably a quarrel
between them on account of the religion of the
child, which Thomas Sowerbut resolved should be
that of Rome, and for that purpose he sent her for
reli^ous instruction to the priest Thompson {alias
Southworth).

Soon after or about the time of the seizure of the
witches of Pendle, Grrace Sowerbuts pretended to
be seized with strange fits, and she was found in a



128 80BGEBY AHD MAOIO.

aort of trance among the hay and straw in a bam,
whence she was taken to her father's house, and
there told a story which led to the arrest of Jane
Southworth, and Jennet and Ellen Bierley, and they
were committed to Lancaster jaiL They were
brought to trial on the 19th of August^ 1612, and
then Grace Sowerbut made a statement in court, to
the effect that, after having been " haunted and
vexed'' for some years by the prisoners and another
confederate, named old Doewife, these four women
had lately drawn her by the hair of the head to the
top of a hay-mow, where they left her. Not long
after this. Jennet Bierley met her near her home,
lE^pearing to her first in human likeness, "and
after that in the likeness of a black dog," and at-
tempted to terrify her. The girl told her father
what had haj^ened, and how she had often been
'' haunted" in this manner ; and being asked by
the court why die never told anybody before,
she said, " She could not speak thereof, though she
desired so to do." Soon after this, on the fourth of
April, " going towards Samlesbury back to meet her
mother, coming from Preston, she saw the said
Jennet Bierley, who met this examinate at a place
called the Two Brigs, first in her own shape, and
afterwards in the likeness of a black dog with two
legs, which dog went close by the left side of this
examinate till they came to a pit of water, and then
the said dog spake, and persuaded this examinate
to drown herself therein, saying it was a fair and an
easy death; whereupon this examinate thought
there came one to her in a white sheet, and carried
her away from the said pit, upon the coming



THE WITCHES OF SAMLESBUBT. 129

whereof the said black dog departed away/' The
dog subsequently returned, and carried her to a
neighbour's bam, where it left her in a trance on
the floor. She went on to describe other instances
of persecution by the witches, and declared that
on one occasion her grandmother and aunt had
taken her by night to the house of a man named
Thomas Walshmah, which they entered " she knew
not how,'' and Jennet Bierley caused the death
of an infant child; and the night after the
burial of the child, " the said Jennet Bierley, and
Ellen Bierley, taking this examinate with them,
went to Samlesbury church, and there did take up
the said child, and the said Jennet did carry it out
of the churchyard in her arms, and then did put it
in her lap and carried it home to her own house,
and having it there, did boil some thereof in a pot,
and some did broil on the coals, of both which the
said Jennet and Ellen did eat, and would have had
this examinate, and one Grace Brierley, daughter
of the said Ellen, to have eaten with them, but
they refused so to do. And afterward the said
Jennet and Ellen did seethe (boil) the bones of the
said child in a pot, and with the fat that came out
of the said bones they said they would anoint them-
selves, that thereby they might sometimes change
themselves into other shapes. And after all this
being done, they said they would lay the bones
again in the grave the next night following, but
whether they did so or not this examinate knoweth
not ; neither doth she know how they got it out of
the grave at the first taking of it up." She next
stated, that " about half a year ago, the said Jennet

a 5



130 80BCEBT AND HAGia

Bierley, Ellen Bierley, Jane Southworth, and this
examinate, (who went hj the appointment of the
said Jennet, her grandmother,) did meet at a place
called Redbank, upon the north side of the water
of Ribble, every Thursday and Sunday at night,
by the space of a fortnight, and at the water-side
there came unto them, as they went thither, four
black things, going upright, and yet not like men
in the face, which four did carry the said three
women and this examinate over the water ; and
when they came to the said Redbank, they found
something there which they did eat. .... And
after they had eaten, the said three women and this
examinate danced, every one of them with one of
the black things aforesaid.'' .... She proceeded to
describe further acts, familiar to those who enter
into the minutiaa of sorcery, and which seem to
have been taken from the foreign books on the sub-
ject, and then described other persecutions to which
she had been subjected, until the time of the arrest
of the prisonera

It was not the fashion at this time to submit wit-
nesses in such cases to a strict cross-examination, nor
did any one think of opening the grave of the child to
ascertain in what condition the body might then
be ; but Thomas Walshman deposed that his child
died about the time stated, though he said that it
had been sick for some time. Witnesses were also
examined as to Grace Sowerbuts' fits, and the
father and one or two other witnesses gave their
evidence in corroboration of her statements. The
evidence was thus in due order taken, and the jury
was no doubt ready to give a verdict against the



THE WITGHBS OF SAMLB8BUBT. 13J

prisoners, when the judge, sir Edward Bromlej,
demanded of the latter what they had to saj for
themselves. The sequel maj be told best in the
rather dramatic language of the report of the triaL
The three prisoners, instead of being abashed as
persons under such circumstances usuaUj were,
" humbly upon their knees, with weeping tears,
desired him for God's cause to examine Grace
Sowerbuts, who set her on, or by whose means this
accusation came against them. Immediately the
countenance of this Grace Sowerbuts changed ; the
witnesses, being behind, began to quarrel and ac-
cuse one another. In the end his lordship exa*
mined the girl, who could not for her life make any
direct answer, but strangely amazed, told him she
was put to a master to learn, but he told her no-
thing of this. But here, as his lordship's care and
pains were great to discover the practices of these
odious witches of the forest of Pendle and other
places now upon their trial before him, so was he
desirous to discover this damnable practice to
accuse these poor women and bring their lives in
danger, and thereby to deliver the innocent And
as he openly delivered it upon the bench, in the
hearing of this great audience, that if a priest or
Jesuit had a hand in one end of it, there would
appear to be knavery and practice in the other end
of it , and that it might the better appear to the
whole world, exa>mined Thomas Sowerbuts what
master taught his daughter ; in general terms he
denied all. The wench had nothing to say, but her
master told her nothing of that. In the end, some
that were present told his lordship the truth, and



132 SOROEBT AIO) MAGIO.

the prisoners informed him how she went to learn
with one Thompson, a seminary priest, who. had
instructed and taught her this accusation against
them, because they were once obstinate papists, and
now came to churcL Here is the discovery of this
priest, and of his whole practice. Still this fire in-
creased more and more, and, one witness accusing
another, all things were laid open at laige. In
the end, his lordship took away the girl from her
father, and committed her to Mr. Leigh, a very re-
ligious preacher, and Mr. Chisnal, two justices of
the peace, to be carefully examined.'^

Grace Sowerbuts now made a full confession ;
she declared that all she said before had been
taught her by the priest ; that it was a mere in-
vention ; that her fits were counterfeit ; and that
she had, by her own will, gone into the barn and
other places where she was found.

Eight years after this trial, in 1620, occurred a
somewhat similar case, which made a great sensa-
tion at the time. There was at Bilston, in Stafford-
shire, a poor boy of twelve years old, named Wil-
liam Percy, the son of a husbandman of that place.
One day as he was coming home from school, he
met an old woman whom he had never seen before,
but who, as it was afterwards pretended, was a
poor woman of the neighbourhood, named Joan
Cock ; she taxed him that he did not wish her
good day, and told him that he was a foul thing,
xmd that it had been better for him if he had
flftluted her. This was the account which the lad
gave, and he had no sooner reached home than he
was seized with dreadful fits. It appears that there



THE BOT OF BILSTOK. 133

were many Roman Catholics residing in the neigh-
bourhood of Bilston, and to some of these the boy's
parents applied for advice and assistance. As soon
as the boy was exorcised according to the forms
directed by the Romish church, he became calm,
and in reply to questions put to him, he declared
that he was bewitched, and that he was possessed
by three devils. Besides the exorcisms, the priests
were very liberal with holy water and with holy
oil, by the plentiful application of which, " with ex-
treme fits and hearings, he brought up pins, wool,
knotted thread, thrums, rosemary, walnut leaves,
feathers, &c/' This we learn from the priest, who
drew up the account of the " miracle,'' which was
afterwards printed, and who informs us, among
other things, that " on Thursday, being Corpus
Christi day, I came again, and found the child in
great extremities In this time he had brought up
eleven pins, and a knitting needle folded up in
divers folds, &c. He said the spirit bad him
not to hearken to me in any case ; that the witch
said she should make an end of him, &c. I wished
him to pray for the witch, which he did ; then the
child did declare that now he was perfectly himself,
and desired that his books, pens, ink, cloaths, might
be blessed, wishing his parents, sisters, and bro-
thers, to bless themselves, and become Catholics ;
out of which faith, by God's grace, he said, he
would never live or die. On Sunday I exorcised
him, and learned of him, that while puritans were
in place, he saw the devil assault him in form of a
blackbird."

The boy's fits and trances continued, sometimes



134 SOBOEBT AND MAGia

apparently yielding to the exorcisms of the priests,
and then again returning as violent as ever. Mean-
while the woman accused of the witchcraft by the
possessing devils, was arrested and carried before
the chancellor of the bishop of Litchfield, by, whose
directions William Perry was brought to confront
her, when he immediately fell into his usual fits,
declaring that she was his tormenter. On this evi-
dence she was committed to Stafford jail, and
brought to trial on the tenth of August, but the
jury, not satisfied with the evidence, acquitted
her.

The judges, who seem to have suspected the
truth, committed the boy to the care of the bishop
of Coventry and Litchfield, who happened to be
present, and he carried him home with him to
EccleshaU castle. There his fits and convulsions
were repeated, and the bishop for some time could
make nothing of him. At length he bethought
himself of an experiment which would at least
satisfy himself. It appears that the trial verse used
by the priests was the first verse of the first chapter
of the gospel of St John, the words of which were
no sooner commenced than the boy was seized with
the most violent symptoms. The bishop took a
GFreek Testament in his hand, and said to the pa-
tient, " Boy, it is either thou or the devil that
abhorrest those words of the Gospel, and if it be the
devil, he (being so ancient a scholar as of almost
«ix thousand years' standing) knows and under-
stands all languages, so that he cannot but know
when I recite the same sentence out of the Greek
text ; but if it be thyself, then art thou an execra-

7



THE BOY OF BILSTON. 135

ble wretch, who plays the devil's part, wherefore
look to thyself, for now thou art to be put to trial,
and mark diligently whether it be that same scrip-
ture which shall be read/' Then the bishop read
the twelfth verse of the chapter, and the boy sup-
posing it was the first, fell into his usual convul-
sions : but, after the fit was passed over, and the
bishop read the first verse, the boy thinking it was
some other passage, was not affected at all.

The bishop was thus convinced of the imposture,
but there were still some extraordinary features
about the case which required explanation, and he
let it go on, that it might be in the end more fully
exposed. At length a hole was made through the
partition of the room in which the boy slept, and
the bishop placed one of his servants secretly to
watch. A discovery was thus made which left no
further doubt on the matter, and when the boy
found himself detected, he changed countenance
and confessed. The story he told was, that an old
man called Thomas, with gray hair and " a cradle
of glasse,'' met him not far from his father's house,
and, entering into conversation with him, suggested
this imposture as ,a, means of staying from schooL
He then taught him to roll about, groan, cast up
his eyes, &c., and told him to accuse somebody who
was reputed a witch. Some papists, he said, re-
commended him to seek help of the Catholic priests.
When the bishop asked him if he did not design to
yield to their exorcisms, he replied that he did, but
that he had continued the imposture so long, be^
cause- much people resorted to him, and brought
him good things, and because he was not willing to



136 SORCE&T AND MAOIO.

go to school again. It is not impossible that the
story of the old man had been suggested by the
priests themselves, in order to conceal their own
complicity in case of a discovery of the fraud.

The dangerous doctrine, which had long before
been acted upon in the case of the witches of War-
boys, was now widely promulgated, that the decla-
ration of the person bewitched, while in the fits
caused by witchcraft, was sufficient evidence against
the supposed offender. This was opening a door
for the indulgence of personal enmity which could
not fail to be often taken advantage of, and such
cases appear to have been of ygtj frequent occur-
rence. In lord Londesborough's volume of manu-
scripts already alluded to, there are the notes of
two very curious affairs of this kind. The first of
these cases occurred in and near London in the
year 1622. The lady Jennings, living at Thistle-
worth, had a daughter named Elizabeth, of the age
of thirteen years. One day she was " frighted with
the sight of an old woman who suddainly appeared
to her att the dore and demaunded a pin of her," —
this seems to have been the usual article which the
witches asked of those they were going to torment
— and from that time the child suffered from con-
vulsive fits of the most painful description. A
variety of remedies were tried in vain, and in the
course of this treatment a woman named Margaret
Russell, who went by the name of Countess, fre-
quently attended — she appears to have been well
known at the house, and to have interfered with
the medical arrangements. On the 25th of April,
at the end of one of her fits, Elizabeth Jennings



THE LADY JENNINGS. 137

uttered the names of this woman and three others,
and then went on talking incoherently, " These
have bewitched all my mother's children — east,
west, north, and south, all these lie — ^all these are
witches. Set up a great sprig of rosemary in the
middle of the house — I have sent this child to
speak to show all these witches. Put Countess in
prison this child will be well. — ^If she had been
long ago, all together had been aUve [it appears
some other children of the lady Jennings had died].
— ^Them she bewitched ijith a cat-stick — ^Till then
•I shall lie in great pain. — ^Till then by fits I shall
be in great extremity. — They died in great misery.^'
These and some other speeches are duly attested by
nine persons, among whom was the medical at-
tendant.

The same day Countess was arrested and carried
before sir WiUiam Slingsby, a justice of the peace,
and her account of herself is a curious picture of
the time. She isaid, "that yesterday she went to
Mrs. Dromondbye in Blacke-and- White-court in the
Old Bayly e, and told her that the lady Jennings had
a daughter strangely sicke, whereuppon the said
Dromondbye wished her to goe to inquire att Clerk-
enwell for a minister's wifie that cold helpe people
that were sicke, but she must not aske for a witch
or a cunning woman, but for one that is a phisi-
tion woman, and there this examinate found her
and a woman sitting with her, and told her in what
case the child was, and she said shee wold come
this day, but shee ought her noe service, and said
she had bin there before and lefte receiptes there,
but the child did not take them. And she said



138 SOBCEBY AND MAOIO.

further, that there was two children that the lady
Jennins had by this husband that were bewitched
and dead, for there was controversie betweene two
bowses, and that as long as they dwelt there they cold
not prosper, and that there shold be noe blessing in
that house by this man. And being demaunded
what she meant by the difference betwixt two
howses, she answered it was betwixt the house of
God and the house of the world ; but being urged
to expresse it better, she said wee knewe it well
enough, it was the difference betwixt Higgins the
apothecarie, the next neighbour, and the lady Jen-
nins. And shoe further confesseth that above a
moneth agoe she went to Mra Saxey, in Grunpouder-
alley, who was forespoken herselfe, and that had a
booke that cold helpe all those that were fore-
spoken, and that shee wold come and shewe her the
booke and helpe her under Grod. And further said
to this examinate, that none but a seminary preist
cold cure her.'' We have here another instance
how busy the seminary priests, or Jesuits, were in
obtruding themselves in such cases.

Countess was now committed to Newgate, and
next day new revelations were obtained from the
bewitched child confirmatory of the former accusa-
tion. But meanwhile the minister's wife, (Mrs.
Goodcole,) with her husband and some friends,
went to the Old Bailey, and being confronted with
the prisoner, the latter denied the most important
part of what she had said. In fact, the accusation
seems to have arisen out of a private quarrel, and on
application to an experienced physician, Dr Napier,
the lady Jennings was set at ease as to the ailment



THE BEWITCHING OF EDWARD DINHAM. J 39

of her daughter — so we learn from a note at the
end of the paper.

The other case recorded in lord Londesborough's
manuscript occurred in 1626, and is still more re-
markable. On the 13th of August in that year, a
man named Edward Bull and a woman named
Joan Greedie were indicted at Taunton assizes for
bewitching one Edward Dinham. This man, when
in his fits, had two voices besides his own, " whereof
one is a very pleasant voice and shriU, the other
deadly and hollow ;"" the third was his own voice.
When the two first (who were good and evil spirits
that possessed him) spoke, there was no motion of
his lips or tongue, which however moved as was
usual with a man talking when his own voice was
heard. No doiibt he was a ventriloquist. The
dialogue, as taken down in the paper before me,
bears a close resemblance to the conversations of
the possessed nuns in France— it is too gross an
imposture to deceive any one for a moment. (I use
good and had, for the two spiritual voices, and man
for the natural voice, as more simple than the mode
of expressing than in the manuscript.) The conver-
sation began as foUows : —

" Oood. Howe comes this man to bee thus tor-
mented ?

" Bad. He is bewitched.

" Oood. Who hath done it ?

" Bad. That I may not tell.

" Good. Aske him agayne.

" Man. Come, come, prithee tell me who hath
bewitched me.

^^ Bad. A woman in greene cloathes and a blacke



140 SORCEBY Ain> MAGIO.

hatt; with a longe poll ; and a man in gray srite
with blewe stockinges.

" Oood. But where are they ?

*^ Bad. Shee is at her house ; and hee is at a
taveme in YeohuU in Ireland

" GfoocL But what are theire names ?

" Bad. Nay, that I will not telL

" Good. Aske him againe.

" Man. Come, come, prithee tell me what are
their names.
,. '* Bad I am bound not to telL

" Ghod. Then tell half of their names.

" Bad. The one is Johane, and the other Ed-
ward.

" Oood. Nowe tell me the other half

" Bad That I may not

" Oood. Aske him agajme.

^' Man. Come, come, prithee tell me the other
half

" Bad The one is Grreedie, and the other BulL''

Having obtained this information, a messenger
was sent to a house '^ suspected,'^ and finding a
woman dressed according to the description, he caused
her to be arrested and committed to safe custody.
The conversation then went on as follows.

" Ghod. But are these witches ?

" Bad Yes, that they are.

" Chod. Howe came they to bee soe ?

" Bad. By discent.

" Oood. But howe by discent ?

*' Bad. From the grandmother to the mother, and
from the mother to the children.

^* Oood, But howe were they soe ?



\



THE BEWITCHING OF EDWARD DINHAM. 141

" Bad. They were bound to us, and wee to
them.

" Ghod, Lett me see the bond.

"Bad. Thou shalt not.

" Good. Let me see it, and if I like I will seale
alsoe.

" Bad. Thou shalt if thou wilt not reveale the
contentes thereof.

" Good. I will not''

The bond is now supposed to be shown, on which
the good spirit exclaims, —

" Good. Alas ! oh pittifuU, pittifull, pittifiill !
what? eight scales, bloody scales, four dead, and
four alive ? ah, miserable !

"Man. Come, come, prithee tell me, why did
they bewitche me ?

" Bad. " Because thou didst call Johane Greedie
witche.

" Man. Why, is shee not a witche ?

" Bad. Yes, but thou shouldest not have said
soe.

" Good. But why did Bull bewitche him ?

" Bad. Because Greedie was not stronge
enough.''

Inquiry is again made after Bull, and on follow-
ing the direction given by the spirit, the messenger
finds the spot from which he had just escaped, and
meets with people who had seen him running away.
A conversation follows on the mischiefs which the
witches had perpetrated before they attacked this
man, and we learn that they had bewitched a person
to death. The conversation is resumed in another
fit six days after, and another attempt to



144 SOROEBT AUD MAGIO.

his opinions would, if followed out, have led him
much further than he would venture then to go.
Cotta requires that the eyidence against persons
accused of witchcraft should be of a direct and
practical description. He recommended that in all
cases of supposed witchcraft or possession, skilful
physicians should be employed to ascertain if the
patient might not be suffering from a natural ma-
lady, and he pointed out the faUacy which attended
the doctrine of witches' mark& He showed how
little faith could generally be placed in the con-
fessions of the witches, both from the manner in
which they were obtained, and the characters of
the individuals who made theuL He exposed in
the same rational manner the uncertainty of such
objectionable modes of trying witches, as swimming
them in the waters, scratching, beating, pinching,
or drawing blood from them. He objected also
to taking the supernatural revelations in those who
were bewitched as evidence against those who were
accused of bewitching them. It will be seen that
all the evidence at that time considered conclusive
would thus have been rendered of no account But
Cotta was in advance of his age ; he published his
book in 1616, when king James's doctrines pre-
vailed in full force, and it attracted little attention;
a new and much enlarged edition, published in
1624, does not appear to have been much better
received — at least it had no effect in checking the
persecution to which so many unfortunate creatures
were exposed.



145



CHAPTER XXV.



WITCHCRAFT UNDEK THE COMMONWEALTH : MATTHEW
HOPKINS, THE WITCH-FINDBE.

The great witch persecution in England arose
under the commonwealth. The ardent religious
feelings of the puritans led them to believe not only
that they were themselves supported by divine in-
spiration and favoured with special revelations, but
that Satan was as actively at work against them,
and that, as with the heroes of the Homeric age,
the warfare in which they were thrown engaged the
spiritual no less than the carnal world. It was na-
tural, therefore, that they should look with especial
horror and hostility on that union of Satan and
mankind which was embodied in the witch or sor-
cerer. They were the more apparent manifestations
of the devil's own interference in the attempt to
bring back the double tyranny of kingship and
popery. It is impossible now to say how far the
prosecutions of witches at this period belonged to
the personal animosities of religious and political

VOL. IL p



' m m f m



146 SOBOEBT AKD MAGIO.

party, but there can be Kttle doubt that some at
least of those who suffered were martyrs to their
loyalty. The first name which ushers in the melan-
choly list during this period is that of Dr. Lamb,
who had been the favourite Buckingham's domestic
magician, and who was torn to pieces by the London
mob in 1640.

The great outbreak of fanaticism and superstition
which followed began in the county of Essex. In
the spring of 1645, several witches were seized at
Manningtree, and were subsequently condemned
and hanged One of these was an old woman named
Elizabeth Clarke, and the most important witness
against her was " Matthew Hopkins of Manningtree,
gent.'' It appears that this Hopkins had watched
with her several nights in a room in the house of a
Mr. Edwards, in which she was confined, to keep her
from sleeping until she made a confession, and to
see if she were visited by her familiars. He de-
clared, among other things, that on the night of the
24th of March, which appears to have been the
third night of watching, after he had refused to let
her call one of her imps or familiars, she confessed
that about six or seven years before she had surren-
dered herself to the devil, who came to her in the
form of " a proper gentleman, with a laced band."
Soon after this a little dog appeared, fat and short
in the legs, in colour white with sandy spots, which,
when he hindered it from approaching her, va-
nished from his sight. She confessed that it was
one of her imps, named Jarmara. Immediately
after this had disappeared, another came in the
form of a greyhound, which she called Vinegar



MATTHEW HOPKINS AND JONN STERNE. 147

Tom ; and it was followed by another in the shape
of a polecat. " And this informant [Hopkins] fur-
ther saith, that going from the house of the said
Mr. Edwards to his own house about nine or ten
of the clock that night, with his greyhound with
him, he saw the greyhound suddenly give a jump,
and ran as she had been in a full course after a
hare ; and that when the informant made haste to
see what his greyhound so eagerly pursued, he
espied a white thing about the bigness of a kitlin,
{kitten,) and the greyhound standing aloof from it ;
and that by and by the said white imp or kitten
danced about the said greyhound, and by all likeli-
hood bit a piece of the flesh of the shoulder of the
greyhound, for the greyhound came shrieking and
crying to this informant with a piece of flesh torn
from her shoulder. And this informant further
saith, that coming into his own yard that night, he
espied a black thing, proportioned like a cat, only it
was thrice as big, sitting on a strawberry-bed, and
fixing its eyes on this informant; and when he
went towards it, it leaped over the pale towards this
informant, as he thought, but ran quite through the
yard, with his greyhound after it to a great gate,
which was underset with a pair of tumbrill-strings,
and did throw the said gate wide open, and then
vanished ; and the said greyhound returned again
to this informant, shaking and trembling exceed*

ingly."

Hopkins had not ventured to remain with the
witch alone in his watchings, for he had with him
one John Sterne, of Manningtree, who also added
" gentleman'' to his name, and who confirmed every-

H 2



148 SOBCERT AND MAGIC.

thing that Hopkins had said, deposing to the coming
of the imps, and adding that the third imp was
called Sack-and-sugar. They watched at night with
another woman, named Rebecca West, and saw her
imps in the same manner. She confessed, and
stated that the first time she saw Satan, he came to
her at night, told her he must be her husband, and
married her. The severe treatment to which the
persons accused were exposed soon forced confes-
sions from them all, and they avowed themselves
guilty of mischiefs of every description, from the
taking away of human life to the spoiling of milk.
Some of their imps had caused storms at sea, and
thus the ships of people against whom they were
provoked were cast away. The names and forms of
their imps were equally fantastic. Rebecca Jones,
*a witch brought from St Osythe's, said that she had
met a man in a ragged suit, with great eyes that
terrified her exceedingly, and that he gave her three
things like moles, but without tails, which she fed
with milk. Another had an imp in the form of a
white dog, which she called Elimanzer, and which
she fed with milk-pottage. One had three imps^
which she called Prick-ear, Jack, and Frog ; ano-
ther had four, named James, Prick-ear, Robin, and
Sparrow. Several witnesses — poor and ignorant
people — were brought to testify to the mischief
which had been done by these means; and some
declared that they had seen their imps. A coun-
tryman gravely related how, passing at day-break
by the house of one of the women accused, named
Anne West, he was surprised to find her door
open at that early hour, and looking in, he saw



^^^^^^^^■"""^^^P**^^ J "-^', r- if



Hopkins's pbogeedinos. 149

three or four things like black rabbits, one of
which ran after him. He seized upon it and tried
to kill it, but it seemed in his hands like a piece of
wool, and stretched out in length as he pulled it
without any apparent injury. Then recollecting
that there was a spring near at hand, he hurried
thither and attempted to drown it, but it vanished
from his sight as soon as he put it in the water.
He then returned towards the house, and seeing
Anne West standing outside the door in her smock,
he asked her why she sent her imps to torment
him.

This seems to have been the first appearance of
Matthew Hopkins in the character of a witch-finder,
for which he became afterwards so notorious, and
which he now assumed as a legal profession. He
proceeded in a regular circuit through Suffolk,
Norfolk, Cambridgeshire, and Huntingdon, accom-
panied with John Sterne and a woman whose busi-
ness it was to examine the bodies of the females in
search of their marks. In August of 1645, we find
them at Bury, in Suffolk, where, on the 27th of that
month, no less than eighteen witches were executed
at once, and a hundred and twenty more were to
have been tried, but a sudden movement of the
king's troops in that direction obliged the judges to
adjourn the session. Some of the imps here ap-
peared in the shapes of snakes, wasps, and hornets,
and even of snails. They were mostly employed in
petty offences ; one man and his wife were guilty
only of having bewitched the beer in a brewhouse
and making it stink. Others, however, confessed
that they had raised tempests and storms, and



150 80BCEBT AND MAaiC.

caused mischief of a much more serious character.
One woman declared that she had conceived two
children by the devil, " but as soon as she was deli-
vered of them they ran away in most horrid long
ugly shapes.'' Anne Leach, of Mistley, Essex, who
was tried here, said that the imps '' did mischief
wherever they went, and that when this examinant
did not send and employ them abroad to do mis-
chief, she had not her health, but when they were
employed she was healthful and well/'

The most remarkable victim of this inquisition at
Bury was an aged cle]:gyman named Lowes, who
had been vicar of Brandeston near Framlingham in
that county, fifty years, a well-known opponent of
the new church government. This man, we are
told by Sterne, one of the inquisitors, " had been
indicted for a common imbarrator, and for witch-
craft, above thirty years before, and the grand jury
(as I have heard) found the bill for a common im-
barrator, who now, after he was found with the
marks, in his confession he confessed that in pride
of heart to be equal, or rather above God, the devil
took advantage of him, and he covenanted with
the devil, and sealed it with his blood, and had
those familiars or spirits, which sucked on the
marks found on his body, and did much harm both
by sea and land, especially by sea, for he confessed,
that he being at Lungarfort [Landguard-fort] in
Suffolk, where he preached, as he walked upon the wall
or works there, he saw a great sail of ships pass by,
and that, as they were sailing by, one of his three
imps, namely, his yellow one, forthwith appeared to
him and asked him what he should do, and he bad



PARSON LOWES. 151

it go and sink such a ship, and showed his imp a
new ship amongst the middle of the rest, (as I re-
member,) one that belonged to Ipswich, so he con-
fessed the imp went forthwith away, and he stood
still and viewed the ships on the sea as they were a
sailing, and perceived that ship immediately to be
in more trouble and danger than the rest ; for he
said the water was more boisterous near that than the
rest, tumbling up and down with waves, as if water
had been boiled in a pot, and soon after (he said) in
a short time it sunk directly down into the sea as
he stood and viewed it, when all the rest sailed
down in safety ; then he confessed he made fourteen
widows in one quarter of an hour. Then Mr. Hop-
kins, as he told me, (for he took his confession,)
asked him, if it did not grieve him to see so many
men cast away in a short time, and that he should
be the cause of so many poor widows on a sudden ;
but he swore by his Maker, no, he was joyful to see
what power his imps had : and so likewise confessed
many other mischiefs, and had a charm to keep him
out of the jail and hanging, as he paraphrased it
himself, but therein the devil deceived him ; for h^
was hanged that Michaelmas time, 1645, at Bury St.
Edmunds ; but he made a very far larger confession,
which I have heard hath been printed ; but if it
were so, it was neither of Mr. Hopkins' doing nor
mine own, for we never printed anything until
now."

Perhaps Hopkins, when scared by the royal troops,
returned homeward from Bury to Ipswich, where
a poor woman named Lakelaw was burnt on the
ninth of September. She confessed that she had



152 SOBCEBT AKD MAGIC.

been a witcH nearly twenty years, and that she had
bewitched to death her own husband and a person
who had refused to give her a needle, besides de-
stroying several ships, yet she had always appeared
to be a very religious woman, and was a constant
attendant at church. She had three imps in the
shapes of two little dogs and a mole.

At Yarmouth, Hopkins sacrificed sixteen persons,
all of whom made confessions. One woman had
been in the habit of doing work for one of the alder-
men, who was a stocking merchant. One day, when
he was absent from home, she went to his house to
ask for work, and was turned away contemptu-
ously by his man. She then applied to the maid-
servant for some knitting, but was received no more
favourably. She went home in great distress and
anger, and in the middle of the night, hearing a
knock at the door, she rose from her bed to look out
at the window, and there saw a tall black man. He
told her he knew of the ill-treatment she had re-
ceived, and that he was come to give her the means
of revenge ; and, after having made her write her
name in a book he drew from his pocket, he gave her
some money, and went away. Next night he ap-
peared again, and told her he had not the power to
injure the man because he went regularly to hear
pious ministers and said his prayers night and morn-
ing ; and it was then agreed that he should punish the
maid. The night following he returned with the same
story as regarded the maid, but he said there was a
child in the family that might be injured. The
woman having consented, he came next night with
an image of wax intended to represent the child,



THE WITCHES AT FAYEBSHAM. \62

and they went together to the churchyard and
buried it The child was immediately taken ill,
and it had languished in this condition eighteen
months, when the witch was seized and brought to
the witch-finder's "justice." She was taken to the
room where the child lay, and she had no sooner re-
peated her confession there, than it began to recover.
They took the woman next morning to the church-
yard, where she pointed to the exact spot where the
waxen image was buried, but when they dug they
found nothing. The devil, it seems, had carried it
away. This woman's familiar came to her in the
shape of a blackbird.

The infection thus set a going by Hopkins in one
part of the kingdom, soon spread itself to others,
and the whole island seemed on a sudden to be filled
with malignant witches. In this same month of
September, 1645, three witches were executed at
Faversham in Kent. They had signed covenants
to the evil one with their blood. One of them said,
that about three-quarters of a year before, when she
first became a witch, " as she was in the bed about
twelve or one of the clock in the night, there lay a
ragged soft thing upon her bosom, which was Very
soft, and she thrust it off with her hand ; and she
saith that when she had thrust it away, she thought
God forsook her, for she could never pray so well
since as she could before ; and further saith, that
she verily thinks it was alive." Another, who had
been twenty years acquainted with a demon which
first appeared to her in the shape of a hedgehog,
but as soft as a cat, " at her first coming into the
jail spake very much to the others that were appre-

H 5



164 SOBCEBY AKD KAGIG.

hend^d before her to confess if they were guilty ;
and stood to it very perversely that she was clear of
any such thing, and that if they put her into the
water to try her, she should certainly sink. But
when she was put into the water, and it was appa-
rent that she did float upon the water, being taken
forth, a gentleman to whom before she had so confi-
dently spoken, and with whom she offered to lay
twenty shillings to one that she could not swim,
asked her how it was possible that she could be so
impudent as not to confess herself, when she had so
much persuaded the others to confess ; to whom she
answered, that the devil went with her all the way,
and told her that she should, sink, but^ when she
was in the water, he sat upon a cross-beam and
laughed at her/' The third of the Faversham
witches, whose term of twenty years for which she
had sold herself to Satan was nearly expired, and
whose familiar was a little dog named Bun, deposed
** that the devil promised her that she should not
lack, and that she had money sometimes brought
her she knew not whence, sometimes one shilling,
sometimes sixpence, never more at once.'' The in-
capacity of the tempter to give more than a small
sum of money at a time to any of his victims was a
peculiar article in the English popular creed. " In
1645," says Baxter, " in Dorsetshire, I lodged at a
village on a hill, called (I think) Evershot, in the
house of the minister, a grave man, who had with
him]|a son, also a learned minister, that ^ had been
chaplain to sir Thomas Adams in London. They
both told me, that they had a neighbour that had
long lain bed-rid, that told all the occasion f that
7



MATTHEW HOPKINS AT HtTNTINGDON. 155

for a long timej being a poor labouring ndan, every
morning when he went out of his door, he found a
shilling under his door, of which he told no man, so
that in a long time, he buying some sheep or swine,
and seeming rich, his neighbours marvelled how he
came by it. At last he told them, and was suddenly
struck lame and bed-rid. They would have me
speak with the man ; but the snow covering the
ground, and I being ill, and the witnesses fully cre-
dible, I forbore."

Hopkins and his colleagues were encouraged in
their new profession by the tacit recognition of par-
liament, who sent a commission of puritanical mi-
nisters to assist the judges in the assizes. We can
trace his course imperfectly by the pamphlets of the
time, which give reports of at least some of the dif-
ferent trials in which he figured as grand accuser,
but some of these are now exceedingly rare, and
many no doubt are lost He was perhaps at Cam-
bridge towards the end of the year 1645, as a witch
was hanged there who had an imp in the form of a
frog. Towards spring the witch-finder-general reach-
ed Huntingdon, where a rich harvest awaited him.

The imps of the witches of Huntingdon often as-
sumed the form of mice, and they were transferable
from one person to another. They had different
powers, some being able to kill men, others only
cattle and animals, while the power of others ex-
tended only to inanimate things. This was the
reason why one witch had often several familiars.
John Winnick, a husbandman, said that having lost
his purse with seven shillings in it, at which he
was much grieved, he was one day at noon in the



156 SORCEBT AND KAOia

bam, making hay-bottles for horses, '^ swearing,
cursing, and raging,^' and wishing he might have
help to restore his loss, when the evil one appeared
to him in the form of a black shaggy beast, with
paws like a bear, but not quite so large as a coney or
rabbit, and tempted him by a promise of restitution.
One of the Huntingdon witches, Joan Wallis, said
that she one day met a man in black clothes, who
said his name was Blackman, and asked her if she
was poor. She " saw he had ugly feet," and was
afraid. He told her that he would send her two
familiars named Grrissell and Greedigut, and " with-
in three or four days Grissell and Greedigut came
to her, in the shapes of dogs with great bristles of
hog's hair upon their backs, and said to her they
were come from Blackman to do what she would
command them, and did ask her if she did want
anything, and they would fetch her anything ; and
she said she lacked nothing. Then they prayed her
to give them some victuals, and she said she was
poor and had none to give them, and so they de-
parted." Yet she confessed that Blackman, Grissell,
and Greedigut, divers times came to her afterwards,
and brought her two or three shillings at a time.
Elizabeth Chandler was accused of having two imps
named Belzebub and Trullibub ; but she denied it,
and stated that she called a certain log of wood
Belzebub, and a stick near it Trullibub. Another
woman was constrained to confess that she sent her
familiar, named Pretty, to kill a man's capons.
The man being brought forward as a witness, de-
posed, '^ that she coming to bake a loaf at his house
about three or four years since, being denied, his



JOHN GAULB BESISTS HOPKINS. 157

capons did fall a fluttering, and would never eat
after. And also saith, that about the same time,
she having a hog in his yard, some of his servants
set a dog on the same ; for which she said she
would be revenged, and the next day one of his
hogs died."

It was apparently just before his visit to Hunting-
don to undertake these examinations, which took
place during the months of March and April of the
year 1646, that Hopkins went to Kimbolton. The
reports of his sanguinary proceedings had spread
consternation far and wide, and it was only here
and there that any one durst raise a voice against
him. One of these courageous individuals was John
Gaule, the minister of Great Staughton, near Kim-
bolton in Huntingdonshire, who took up the cudgels
against Hopkins, and provoked his wrath to such a
degree, that he wrote the following insolent letter to
one of the chief persons in his parish. " My service
to your worship presented, I have this day received
a letter to come to a town called Great Staughton,
to search for evil-disposed persons called witches,
(though I hear your minister is far against us
through ignorance,) I intend to come (God willing)
the sooner to hear his singular judgment in the be-
half of such parties. I have known a minister in
Suffolk preach as much against the discovery in a
pulpit, and forced to recant it (by the committee)
in the same place. I much marvel such evil mem-
bers should have any, much more any of the clergy
who should daily preach terror to convince such
offenders, stand up to take their parts against such
.as are complainants for the king and sufferers them-



158 SOBGEBT AKD MAGIC.

selves with their families and estates. I intend to
give your town a visit suddenly. I am to come to
Eimbolton this week, and it shall be ten to one but
I will come to your town first ; but I would cer-
tainly know afore whether your town afibrds many
sticklers for such cattle, or willing to give and afford
us good welcome and entertainment, as other where
I have been, else I shall waive your shire, (not as
yet beginning in any part of it myself,) and betake
me to such places where I do and may persist with-
out controU, but with thanks and recompence. So I
humbly take my leave, and rest your servant to
be commanded. Matthew Hopkins.''

So far was John Gaule from being terrified by
this threatening epistle, that he immediately made
it the text of a treatise against the witch-finder
and his followers, which he published the same
year under the title of " Select Cases of Conscience
touching Witches and Witchcraft.'' Gaule was not
in advance of his age in point of intelligence,
though his better and more generous feelings re-
volted at the wholesale cruelties which had been
provoked by Hopkins and his accomplices. He
fully believed in the existence of the witches, and
in the evils which they perpetrated, but he wished,
like Cotta, that the evidence should be more cau-
tiously sifted and discriminated. In his enumera-
tion of the objectionable methods of trying witches,
he lets us into a secret of Hopkins's practices, which
show us at once the horrible character of the per-
secution that was carried on under the direction
of the witch-finder generaL " To all these signs,"
says Ghaule, " I cannot but add one at large, which



TOBMKNTS FOE WITOHBS. 169

I have lately learnt, partly from some communica-
tions I had with one of the witch-finders, (as they
call them,) partly from the confessions (which I
heard) of a suspected and committed witch, so
handled as she said, and partly as the country
people talk of it. Having taken- the suspected
witch, she is placed in the middle of a room, upon
a stool or table, cross-legged, or in some other un-
easy posture, to which, if she submits not, she is
then bound with cords ; there is she watched and
kept without meat or sleep for the space of four-
and-twenty hours (for they say within that time
they shall see her imp come and suck). A little
hole is likewise made in the door for the iftip to
come in at ; and lest they should come in some less
discernible shape, they that watch are taught to
be ever and anon sweeping the room, and if they
see any spiders or flies, to kill them, and if they
cannot kill them, then they may be sure they are
her imps."

The provision of making a hole in the door shows
no very intelligent appreciation of the nature of
spirits^ but it agrees tolerably well with the confes-
sions of several of Hopkins' victims. Elizabeth
Clarke, at Manningtree, is said to have confessed
that when the devil visited her at night, she was
obliged to rise and let him in when he knocked at
the door. One witch kept her imp a year and a
half with oatmeal, and then lost it. Another killed
her imp ; and another had imps which sucked one
another.

The horror at first excited by the atrocities com-
mitted under the regime of the witch-finder-general



160 80B0EET AKD MAGIC.

soon gave place to a widely^xtended feeling of in-
dignation. A lady who lived near Hoxne in Suf-
folk, told Dr. Hutchinson (the author of the Essay
on Witchcraft) that when the witch-finders came
into that neighbourhood, they took a poor woman,
and by keeping her fasting and without sleep, in-
duced her to confess that she had an imp named
Nan. '^ This good gentlewoman told me that her
husband (a very learned ingenious gentleman)
having indignation at the thing, he and she went
to the house, and put the people out of doors, and
gave the poor woman some meat, and let her go to
bed ; and when she had slept and come to herself
she knew not what she had confessed, and had no-
thing she called Nan but a pullet, that she some-
times called by that name.'' Tortures like these,
and even worse, were exercised on parson Lowes
of Brandeston, to force a confession from him. Dr,
Hutchinson learnt " from them that watched with
him, that they kept him awake several nights to-
gether, and run him backwards and forwards about
the room, until he was out of breath ; then they
rested him a little, and then ran him again ; and
thus they did for several days and nights together,
till he was weary of his life, and was scarce sensible
of what he said or did. They swam him at Fram-
lingham, but that was no true rule to try him by ;
for they put in honest people at the same time, and
they swam as well as he.''

To escape the odium which pursued him through
the counties in which he had made himself so con-
spicuous, Hopkins appears to have now removed
the scene of his labours into other parts of the



MATTHEW HOPKINS AT? WOltCESTEE. 161

kingdom. We find him not long after this at Wor-
cester. On the fourth of March, probably of the
year 1647, four witches were condemned in that
city, and Matthew Hopkins was one of the prin-
cipal witnesses. After the same process of watch-
ing her, he extracted from one of them a confession
that Satan had appeared to her as a handsome
young man, that he said he came to marry her, and
that he accordingly took her as his wife. Another
said that she only enjoyed her health while her imp
was employed in doing mischief. These were imi-
tations of the confessions made in Essex and Suf-
folk. The witches at Worcester said they tormented
and killed people by making figures of wax, and
sticking pins and needles into them. On their
trial, one of them denied their confession, and said
that when they confessed they were not in their
senses.

On his return to his native county, Hopkins was
assailed on every side by the outcries of his enemies,
and he was alarmed at the indignation which his
cruelties had excited. The extraordinary scale on
which he had carried on his prosecutions, gave rise
to a popular report that he was not himself unac-
quainted with Satan, from whom it was pretended
by some that he had obtained the list of his sub-
jects. Complaints had been publicly made against
him, and his method of proceeding was laid aside
as too rigorous and tyrannical. In fact, a great
reaction had followed him in his course, and the
witch-finder was now in disgrace. Hopkins felt
this, and winced under the popular attacks. It ap-
pears that he was of a weak constitution, and vex-



182 SOBOEBT AND MAGIC.

ation and regret hastened the hereditary consump-
tion to which he was a prey. He returned to Man-
ningtree in 1647, printed a pamphlet in his own
defence,* and then died. This we learn from his
coadjutor Sterne, who assures us that he had " no
trouble of conscience for what he had done, as was
falsely reported of him.'* A report was afterwards
circulated, apparently without any foundation in
truth, although adopted by Butler, that in the
midst of the popular indignation against the witch-
finder, some gentlemen had seized on him and put
him to the trial of swimming, on which, as he hap-
pened to swim, he was adjudged to be himself a
wizard.'f Upon the death of Hopkins, the popular

* " The Discovery of Witches, in answer to several queries
lately delivered to the judge of assize for the county of Nor-
folk; and was published by Matthew Hopkins, witch-finder»
for the benefit of the whole kingdom. Printed for E. Boyston,
at the Angel, in Iron Lane. 1647." This is a very rare tract,
and the only copy I know of was in the possession of sir Walter
Scott, from whose " Letters on Demonology and Witchcraft " I
take the title.

f The lines of Hudibras have been often quoted —

Hath not this present parliament

A lieger to the devil sent,

Fully empower'd to set about

Finding revolted witches out ?

And has he not within a year

Hanged threescore of them in one shire ?

Some only for not being drown'd,

And some for sitting above ground

Whole days and nights upon their breeches,

And feeling pain, were hang'd for witches.

And some for putting knavish tricks

Upon green geese or Turkey chicks ;



JOHN sterne's defence. 163

odium seems to have fallen on his colleague Sterne,
who had taken up his residence at Lawshall, near
Bury St Edmunds. In 1648, provoked by the
reflections that had been cast on himself and his
colleague Hopkins, he published a defence of their
conduct, under the title of " A Confirmation and
Discovery of Witchcraft," in which he boasts that
he had been part an agent in convicting about two
hundred witches in Essex, Suflblk, Northampton-
shire, Huntingdonshire, Bedfordshire, Norfolk, Cam^
bridgeshire, and the Isle of Ely. He assures us
" that in many places I never received penny as
yet, nor any am like, notwithstanding I have hands
for satisfaction, except I should sue ; but many
rather fall upon me for what hath been received,
but I hope such suits will be disannulled, and that
where 1 have been out of moneys for towns in
charges and otherwise, such course will be taken
that I may be satisfied and paid with reason.''*
Hopkins himself, in defending himself against the
charge of interestedness, tells us that his regular
charge was twenty shillings for each town, in-
cluding the expenses of living, and journeying
thither and back. In his book, he confesses that



Or pigs that suddenly deceased
Of griefs unnatural, as he guess'd,
Who proved himself at length a witch,
And made a rod for his own hreech.

HuDiBRAs, Part ii. Canto 8.
* A copy of this excessively rare hook is in the rich library
of works on demonology of Mr. James Grossley of Manchester.
I only know it through the extracts given in that gentleman's
recent edition of Potts' Discovery of Witches.



164 SOBGERY AKD MAGIC.

besides the other practices of stripping the yictims
naked, and thrusting pins into various parts of
their body, in search of marks, and swimming them,
he had practised the new torture of keeping them
awake, and forcing them to walk, which was an in-
vention of his own ; but he acknowledges that he
had been so far obliged to yield to public opinion
in the latter part of his course, as to lay aside this
his own favourite remedy.

The violent persecution excited by Hopkins had
now subsided, and it was followed by a calm, during
which we hear but little of accusations of witch-
craft The independents, who had gained the
ascendancy, seem to have discouraged prosecutions
of this kind. Yet, in 1649, soon after the execu-
tion of the king, we perceive an inclination to
revive the prosecutions against witches. In the
May of that year, the city of Worcester was again
the scene of a tragedy of this kind. A boy, at Droit-
wich, whose mother, a poor woman, had a cow that
had strayed, was sent in search of it As he came
near a brake, he thought he saw the buUrushes
move in one place, and, imagining the cow might
be grazing amongst them, he approached the
spot ; but he had no sooner come near, than an old
woman suddenly jumped up and cried " boh \"
The lad was seized with sudden terror, became
speechless, and hurried home in a state of distrac-
tion. He remained in the house till the evening,
and then he was seized with a sudden fit, ran out,
and directed his steps towards the house of sir
Richard Barret, where, as was usual in the olden
time, a number of poor people were collected at the



THE OLD WOMAN OF DEOITWITCH. 165

door feeding upon the charity of the family. Among
these the lad discovered the old woman of the
brake, who it appears was a vagrant from Lanca-
shire/sitting doJJ^ and suppingTpon a mass of hot
pottage, and he ran furiously at her, thew her pot-
tage in her face, and struck her. The people who
stood round interfered, and, when the state of the
case was known, the old woman was taken and
committed to the prison, which was there called the
" Chequer." About the middle of the night, the
boy's mother heard a noise above her, and hurried
up to the garret where the boy slept, where she
found him out of bed, with the leg of a stool
in his hand, striking furiously at the window. He
then put on his clothes, ran down into the street,
and went direct to the prison. It appears that in
the meantime the jailor, who compassionated the
sufferings of the boy, had threatened his prisoner
that she should have nothing to eat until she had
said the Lord's prayer and a blessing on her victim,
which with some difficidty she was prevailed upon
to do. The consequence of this was, that when the
boy arrived at the prison, he had recovered his
speech, and was enabled to ask the jailor why he
had allowed his prisoner to go at large. The jailor
insisted that she was safe under lock and key.
" Nay," replied the boy, " I have just seen her my-
self," and he proceeded to tell him how the old
woman had come in at his window while he was in
bed, and how he had jumped up and struck her two
blows with a stool-leg as she was making her exit,
which must have left their marks on her body.
A woman was sent to examine the prisoner's per-



166 SOBOEBT AND MAGIC.

son, and to her great astonishment she found dis-
tinct marks of blows, just as the boj had described
them. These circumstances were deposed to at the
assizes at Worcester hj the boy, his mother, the
jailor, and the woman who searched, and the witch
of course stood duly convicted. About the same
time a man at Tewkesbury had a sow with a nu-
merous litter of pigs, and was surprised at the short
allowance of milk she gave to them. Suspecting
there might be something wrong, he watched at
night, and saw a black thing like a polecat come
and suck the old sow greedily. He immediately
struck at the depredator with a fork he held in his
hand, and stuck the prongs into its thigh ; but it
made its escape through the door, and he lost sight
of it He followed, however, in the direction which
he supposed it had taken, and meeting with a man
he knew, asked him if he had not seen such an
animal as he described. The man declared he had
seen nothing but a " wench,'' who passed him appa-
rently in great haste. This wench was taken and
examined, and the wounds caused by the prongs of
the fork were found on her thigh. She was ta]cen
to Gloucester, and at the next assizes tried and
convicted. In the month of July following, a man
and woman were executed at St. Albans ; the man
confessed he had been a witch sixty years, and that
he had generally exercised his profession as a white
or beneficent witch. He was probably one of those
miserable impostors who gained their living by con-
juring to cure diseases, and help people to what was
lost or stolen. His accomplice was a kinswoman,
who lived with him, and had a familiar in the



THE DISTUEBANOES AT WOODSTOCK. 167

shape of a cat. She acknowledged that this fami-
liar had promised to bring her anything she wanted,
except money. They said there were plenty of other
witches about the neighbourhood, and accused seve-
ral persons by name.

This year, however, witnessed a much more re-
markable affair than any of these, and one which
made a considerable sensation. It has gained in
modern times an additional importance from the
circumstance that our great historical novelist, sir
Walter Scott, has made it the foundation of one of
his romances. I shall give it nearly in the words
of the report written at or near the time.

After Charles's death, the royal property was con-
fiscated to the state, and commissioners were ap-
pointed by parliament to survey and sell the crown
lands. Among the royal estates was the manor of
Woodstock, of which the parliamentary commis-
sioners were sent to take possession in the month
of October, 1649. The more fanatical part of the
opponents of royalty had always taught that,
through witches and otherwise, the devil was ac-
tively engaged in the service of their opponents,
battling against them; and they now found him
resolved upon more open hostilities than ever. On
the 3rd of October the commissioners, with their
servants, went to the manor-hall, and took up their
lodgings in the king's own rooms, the bed-chamber
and withdrawing-rodjiv : the former they used as
their kitchen, the council-hall was their brewhouse,
the chamber of presence served as their place of sit-
ting to dispatch business, and the dining-room was
used as a wood-house, where they laid the wood of



168 SOBCEBT AND MAGIC.

'' that ancient standard in the high park, known of
all by the name of the king's oak, which (that
nothing might remain that had the name of king
affixed to it) they digged up by the roots." On
the 14th and 15th they had little disturbance ; but on
the 16th there came, as they thought, something
into the bed-chamber, where two of the commis-
sioners and their servant lay, in the shape of a dog,
which going under their bed, did, as it were, gnaw
their bed-cords ; but on the morrow finding them
whole, and a quarter of beef which lay on the
ground untouched, they " began to entertain other
thought&'' October 1 7th. — Something, to their think-
ing, removed all the wood of the king's oak out of
the dining-room to the presence-chamber, and hurled
the chairs and stools up and down that room ;
from whence it came into the two chambers where
the two commissioners and their servants lay, and
hoisted up their bed feet so much higher than
their heads, that they thought they should have
been turned over and over, and then let them fall
down with such force, that their bodies rebounded
from the bed a good distance ; and then shook the
bedsteads so violently, that they declared their
bodies were sore with it. On the 1 8th something
came into the chamber and walked up and down,
and fetching the warming-pan out of the withdraw-
ing-room, made so much noise that they thought
fire-bells could not have made more. Next day
trenchers were thrown up and down the dining-
room, and at those who slept there ; one of them
being wakened, put forth his head to see what was
the matter, and had trenchers thrown at him. On



THB DISTURBAKCES AT WOODSTOCK. 169

the 20th, the curtains of the bed in the withdraw-
ing-room were drawn to and fro ; the bedstead was
much shaken, and eight great pewter dishes and
three dozen of trenchers thrown about the bed-
chamber again. This night they also thought a
whole armful of the wood of the king's oak was
thrown down in their chamber, but of that in the
morning they found nothing had been moved. On
the 21st, the keeper of their ordinary and his bitch
lay in one of the rooms with them, and on that night
they were not disturbed at alL But on the 22nd,
though the bitch slept there again, to which circum-
stance they had ascribed their former night's rest,
both they and it were in **apitiful taking,'' the latter
" opening but once, and then with a whining fearful
yelp." October 23. — They had all their clothes
plucked off them in the withdrawing-room, and the
bricks fell out of the chimney into the room. On
the 24th they thought in the dining-room that all
the wood of the king's oak had been brought
thither, and thrown down close by their bed-side,
which being heard by those of the withdrawing-
room, "one of them rose to see what was done, fear-
ing indeed his fellow-commissioners had been killed,
but found no such matter. Whereupon returning
to his bed again, he found two or three dozen of
trenchers thrown into it, and handsomely covered
with the bed-clothes."

. The commissioners persisted in retaining posses-
sion, and were subjected to new persecutiona On
the 25th of October the curtains of the bed in
the withdrawing-room were drawn to and fro,
and the bedstead shaken, as before; and in the
VOL. II. ;



170 80BCBRY AND MAOIG.

bed-chamber, glass flew about so thick (and
yet not one of the chamber-windows broken,)
that they thought it had rained money ; whereupon
they lighted candles, but " to their grief they found
nothing but glass."" On the 29th something going
to the window opened and shut it, them going into
the bed-chamber, it threw great stones for half an
hour's time, some whereof fell on the high-bed,
others on the truckle-bed, to the number in all of
above fourscore. This night there was also a yery
great noise, as if forty pieces of ordnance had been
shot off together. It astonished all the neighbour-
hood, and it was thought it must have been heard a
great way off. During these noises, which were heard
in both rooms together, the commissioners and their
servants were struck with so great horror, that they
cried out one to another for help ; whereupon one of
them recovering himself out of a ^* strange agony"' he
had been in, snatched a sword, and had like to
have killed one of his brethren coming out of his
bed in his shirt, whom he took for the spirit that
did the mischief However, at length they got all
. together, yet the noise continued so great and ter-
rible, and shook the walls so much, that they
thought the whole manor would have fallen on
their heads. At the departure of the supernatural
disturber of their repose, " it took all the glass of the
windows away with it"" On the first of November,
something, as the commissioners thought, walked
up and down the withdrawing-room, and then
made a noise in the dining-room. The stones
which were left before, and laid up in the with-
drawing-room, were all fetcht away this night, and



THE DlSTUEBAlirOBS AT WOODSTOCK. 171

a great deal of glass (not like the former) thrown
about again.

On the second of November, there came something
into the withdrawing-ro6m, treading, ^ they con^
ceived, much like a bear, which began by walking
about for a quarter of an hour, and then at length it
made a noise about the table and threw the warming-
pan aoviolentlythat itwas quite spoiled It threwalso
a glass and great stones at the commissioners again,
and the bones of horses ; and all so violently, that
the bedstead and the walls were bruised by them.
That ni^t they planted candles all about the
rooms, and made fires up to the " rantle-trees'" of the
chimney; but all were put out, nobody knew how,
the fire and burnt wood being thrown up and down
the room ; the curtains were torn with the rods from
their beds, and the bed-posts pulled away, that the
test^ fell down upon them, and the feet of the
bedstead were cloven into two The servants in the
truckle-bed, who lay all the time sweating for fear,
ware treated even worse, for there came upon
them first a little which made them begin to
stir, but before they could get out, it was fol-
lowed by a whole tubful, as it were, of stink-
ing ditch water, so green, that it made their
shirts and sheets of that colour too. The same
night the windows were all broke by throwing
of stones, and there was most terrible noises in
three several places together near them. Nay, the
very rabbit-stealers who were abroad that night
were so afirighted with the dismal thundering, that
for haste they left their ferrets in the holes behind
them, beyond Rosamond's well Notwithstanding

I 2



172 SOROEBT AND MAGIC.

all this, one of them had the boldness to ask, in
the name of God, what it was, what it would have,
and what they had done that they should be so dis^
turbed after this manner. To which no answer was
given, but the noise ceased for a while. At length it
came again, and, as all of them said, brought seven
devils worse than itself Whereupon one of them
lighted a candle again, and set it between the two
chambers in the doorway, on which another fixing
his eyes saw the similitude of a hoof, striking the
candle and candlestick into the middle of the bed-
chamber, and afterwards making three scrapes on
the snuff to put it out Upon this, the same person
was so bold as to draw his sword, but he had scarce
got it out, but there was another invisible hand
had hold of it too, and tugged with him for it ; and
prevailing, struck him so violently, that he was
stunned with the blow. Then began violent noises
again, insomuch that they, calling to one another,
got together, and went into the presence chamber,
where they said prayers, and sang psalms ; not-
withstanding all which, the thundering noises still
continued in other rooms. After this, on the 3rd
of November, they removed their lodging over the
gate ; and next day, being Sunday, went to Ewelm,
" where, how they escaped the authors of the rela-
tion knew not, but returning on Monday, the devil
(for that was the name they gave their nightly
guest) left them not unvisited, nor on the Tuesday
following, which was the last day they stayed.''
The courage even of the devout commissioners of
the parliament was not proof against a persecution
like this, and the manor of Woodstock was relieved



A WITCH-PINDBR AT NEWCASTLE. 173

from their presence. It is said that one of the old re-
tainers of the house, years afterwards, confessed
that he had entered the service of the commissioners,
in order by playing these tricks upon them, which
he jf as enabled to do by his intimate acquaintance
with the secret passages of the lodge, to rescue it
from their grasp.

Hopkins and Sterne were not without their imi-
tators in other parts of the country. About the
end of the year of which we have just been speak-
ing, the magistrates of Newcastle-upon-Tyne were
alarmed at the reports of witches in that town, and
they sent into Scotland for a practiser in the art of
discovering them. They agreed to pay his travel-
ling expenses, and give him twenty shillings for
every witch who should be convicted — an excellent
method of increasing their number. No sooner was
the Scotchman arrived in Newcastle, than the bell-
man was sent round the town to invite all persons
to bring their complaints against women suspected,
and about thirty were brou^t to the town hall,
and subjected, in the sight of all the people collected
there, to his examination. We are told that his
practise was to lay the body of the person suspected
naked to the waist, and then run a pin into her
thigh, after which he suddenly let her coats fall,
and asked her if she had nothing of his in her
body which did not bleed ; the woman was hin-
dered from replying by shame and fear, and he
immediately took out the pin and set her aside as a
convicted witch. By this atrocious process, he as-
certained that twenty-seven persons were practisers
of sorcery, and at the ensuing assizes fourteen



174 SOBCBBT XSJ) XAOia

women and a man were found guilty and execnted.
The names of the suffererB are recorded in the re-
gister of the parish of St Andrew's.

Just at the time when the commonwealth was
merging into the protectorate, in the years 1^52
and 1653, we find cases of witchcraft becoming
suddenly more numerous, or, which is perhaps
nearer die truth, there were for some cause or other
more printed reports of them. In the former year
a witch was hanged at Worcester. On the 11th of
April, 1652, one Joan Peterson, known as the
witch of Wapping, was hanged at Tyburn. She
lived in Spruce Island, near Shadwdl, and was
said to have done on the whole more good than
harm, for she practised chiefly as a white witdL
Strange things, however, were told of her. A man
deposed that he was sitting with her in her house
and saw her £ajniliar, in the shape of a black dog,
come in and suck her. And two women said that,
as they were watching with a child of one of their
neighbours that was strangdy distempered, ^ about
midnight they espied (to their thinking) a greai
black cat come to the cradle's side and stopt the
cradling, whereupon one of the women took up the
fire-fork to strike at it, and it immediately
vanished. About an hour after the cat came again
to the cradle side; whereupon the other woman
kicked at it, but it presently vanished, and that
leg that she kicked with began to swell and be
very sore, whereupon they were both afraid, and
calling upon the master of the house, took their
leave As they were going to their own homes,
they met a baker, who was likewise a neighbour's



>



THB WITCHSS AT MAIDSTOKE. 175

servant, who told them that he saw a great black
cat that had so frightened him that his hair stood
an end ; whereupon the women told him what they
had seen, who said he thought in his conscience
that Peterson had bewitched the aforesaid child,
for, (quoth the baker,) I met the witch a little
before going down the island.'' The baker gave
his testimony in court, and when asked by the
judge the very pertinent question, " whether he had
not at other times as well as that been afraid of a
cat, he answered, no, and that he never saw such a
cat before, and hoped in Grod be should never see
the like again/'

On the 30th of July, 1652, no less than six
witches were condemned at Maidstone in E«nt. In
addition to the usual circumstances in such cases,
they confessed that the devil had given them a
piece of flesh, "which whensoever they should
touch they should thereby effect their desires ; that
this flesh lay hid amongst grass, in a certain place
which she named, where upon search it was found
accordingly." The flesh was brought into court as
an evidence against them, and the author of the
printed report informs us that it '' was of a sinewy
substance, and scorched, and was seen and felt by
this observator, and reserved for public view at the
sign of the Swan in Maidstone." Other witches
were brought to trial, and some found guilty, but
four only were hanged. " Some there were that
wished rather they might be burnt to ai^es ; al-
ledging, that it was a received opinion amongst
many that the foody of a witch being burnt, her
blood is prevented thereby from becoming here-



176 SORCSRT AND MAOIC.

ditary to her progeny in the same evil, while by
hanging it is not ; but whether this opinion be
erroneous or not, I,'' says the narrator, " am not to
dispute/'

The following year (1 65S) witnessed the execu-
tion at Salisbury of a woman who had been in her
yoimger days the servant of the famous Dr. Lamb.
Her name was Anne Bodenham, and she appears to
have been initiated into Lamb's practices, and to
have settled at Salisbury in the character of a wise
woman. She helped people to recover things
stolen, cured diseases, and seems to have carried on
the practice of poisoning. Many of those charged
with the crime of witchcraft appear to have been
secret professors of the art of poisoning. The de-
positions against Anne Bodenham were of a re-
markable character. It appears that a little girl
had been bewitched, and the wise woman Boden-
ham was accused of being in some way or other
concerned in it. A servant girl was sent to consult
her, and she deposed that Anne Bodenham, having
taken her into ia room in her house, made a circle
on the floor and carefully swept the space within
it. She then looked in a glass, and in a book, ut-
tering certain mysterious words, and placed an
earthen pan full of coals in the middle of the circle.
Five spirits then appeared in the shape of ragged
boys, and at the same time there arose a high wind
which shook the house. She gave the spirits
crumbs of bread, which they picked from the floor
and ate, and then, after they had all leaped over
the pan of coals, they danced with the witch and
the maid servant The latter had witnessed this



_— ,^ - -» ™—



8IE ROBERT FILMOIL 177

scene more than once, and on one occasion she was
carried to a meadow at Wilton to gather vervain
and dilL She declared that she had seen Anne
Bodenham transform herself into a great black cat.
The improvement in intelligence and liberality
under the protectorate is shown by the publication of
two treatises, which contained the boldest protests
against the iniquity of the witch persecution that
had appeared since the days of Reginald Scott. The
trials at Maidstone in 1653 had so much shocked
the good sense of some of the gentlemen of Kent,
that it produced from one of them, sir Robert
Filmor, a tract entitled, " An Advertisement to the
Jury-men of England, touching Witches," in which
he pointed out the ridiculous absurdity of the
proofs by which this class of offenders were usually
convicted- " The late execution of witches at the
summer assizes in Kent,'' he says, *' occasioned this
brief exercitation, which addresses itself to such as
have not deliberately thought upon the great diffi-
culty in discovering what or who a witch is. To
have nothing but the public faith of the present
age, is none of the best evidence, unless the univer-
sality of elder times do concur with these doctrines,
which ignorance in the times of darkness brought
forth, and credulity in these days of light hath con-
tinued.'' Language like this must have sounded
strange within six or seven years after the fury of
persecution which had been excited by Matthew
Hopkins ; yet in this spirit Filmor proceeds calmly
to consider and refute each of the reasons on which
the witch-finders depended, ending with the crown-
ing proof supposed to be derived from the devil

I 6



178 SOSOBRT AJSD MAOia

himself declaring against his victims, '* which, how
it can be well done, except the deyil be bound over
to giye in evidence against the witch, cannot be
understood.'^

This book, which marked the commencement of
the protectorate, was published anonymously ; but
two years after, in 1655, a minister of the name of
Thomas Ady put forth in the same, or even in a
more enlightened, spirit, a book entitled, ^^ A Candle
in the Dark, or a treatise concerning the nature of
witches and witchcraft; being advice to judges,
sheriffs, justices of the peace, and grand jurymen,
what to do before they pass sentence on such as are
arraigned for their u4'aa witches." Ady has en-
livened his book with a variety of anecdotes and
scraps of information relating to the popular super-
stitions of the day, and in speaking of charms,
which he regards as mere relics of popery, he gives
the following as the most approved remedy against
the bewitching of milk when it will not work pro-
perly in the churn. The maid, while churning, was
to repeat the words, —

Come, butter, come ; come, butter, come ;
Peter stands at the gate.
Waiting for a butter'd cake ;
Come, butter, come.

This, Ady says, was told by an old witch who de-
clared that her grandmother had learnt it in the
good days of queen Mary.

The reign of the protector Oliver was certainly
not favourable to the persecution of witches. Yet
two persons, a mother and daughter, were hanged at



JANE BROOKS, THB SOMERSET WITCH. 179

Bury St Edmunds about the year 1655, and in the
November of 1657 a rather remarkable case oc-
curred at Shepton Mallet in Somersetshire. A
woman named Jane Brooks was accused of be-
witching a boy named Jones, by giving him an
apple, which he roasted and ate. He was imme-
diately seized with strange fits, and while under
their influence he cried out against Jane Brooks
and her sister as the cause of his suffering. It was
deposed at the trial that, one Sunday afternoon, in
company with his father and a cousin named Gib-
son, he was suddenly visited Ttrith a fit, and he said
that he saw Jane Brooks against the wall of the
room, pointing to the spot where he preteQded she
stood. Gibson took up a knife and struck at the
part of the wall to which the boy pointed, and the
latter immediately exclaimed, '^ Oh, father 1 cousin
Gibson hath cut Jane Brooks's hand, and it is
bloody I'' They immediately took a constable, and
went with him to the woman's house, where they
found her sitting on a stool, with her hands before
her, one placed on the other. The constable in-
quired how she did, and she replied, not well. He
then asked her why she sat in that position, with
her hands before her, to which she replied that it
was her wont to do so. When he asked further if
nothing ailed her hand, she said, " No, it was well
enougk'' Still not satisfied, he forced one hand
from under the other, and found it bleeding just as
the boy had described. On being asked how this
happened, she said she had scratched her hand
with a great pin.* This was suflicient matter for
* The following story is given in Dr. Hutchinson's Histo-



180 SOaCBBY AVD MAGIC.

carrying the woman to prison. It was pretended
that the boy was often lifted about in an extraordi*
nary manner; and one woman declared that on
the 25th of February, 1658, bein^ seized with one
of her fits while in her house, he went out of the
house into the garden, and she followed him.
There she saw him gradually lifted up into the air,
and pass away over a wall, and she saw no more of
him till he was found lying at the door of a house
at some distance, when he declared that he had
been carried there by Jane Brooks. She was tried
at Chard assizes, on the 26th of March, 1658, and,
as might be expected from such conclusive eyi-
dence, condemned.

About the period of the protector's death, a
witch was hanged at Norwich, and several punished
in the same way in Cornwall ; and in 1659, two
were hanged at Lancaster, who protested their in*



rical Essay on Witchcraft. " About the year 1645, there was
at Chehnsford an afflicted person, that in her fits cried out
against a woman, a neighbour, which Mr. Clark, the minister
of the gospel there, could not believe to be guilty of such a
crime. And it happened, while that woman milked her
cow, the oow struck her with one horn upon the forehead, and
fetched blood; and while she was thus bleeding, a spectre in
her likeness appeared to the person afflicted, who, pointing at
the spectre, one struck at the place, and the afflicted said,
* You have made her forehead bleed.* , Hereupon some went
to the woman, and found her forehead bloody, and acquainted
Mr. Clark with it; who forthwith went to the woman, and
asked how her forehead became bloody ; and she answered,
' by a blow of the cow's horn ;* whereby he was satisfied that
it was a design of Satan to render an innocent person sus-
pected."



Wimmmm^mmmmmmmmm^'''i^mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmfmmmmmmK^^9m



A EBPUBLIOAN WITCH. 181

nocence to the last. The approach of a great poli-
tical change, and the animosities of party which
attended it, always furnished the opportunity, even
in humble life, of gratifying personal resentments ;
and we shall find immediately after the restoration
that the cases of witchcraft were again numerous.
At the beginning of the period of the interregnum,
the devil was the enemy of the republicans, — at its
close he was opposed to the royalists. On the 14th
of May, 1660, four persons at Kidderminster, a
widow, her two daughters, and a man, were charged
with various acts of witchcraft, and carried to Wor-
cester jail. The eldest daughter was accused of
saying that, if they had not been taken, the king
should never have come to England, " and, though
he now doth come, yet he shall not live long, but
shall die as ill a death as they ; and that they
would have made corn like pepper." These were
the mere ravings of puritanical discontent, repeti-
tions probably of sentiments they had heard among
their neighbours. The relator continues, " Many
great charges against them, and little proved, they
were put to the ducking in the river : they would
not sink, but swam aloft. The man had five teats,
the women three, and the eldest daughter one.
When they went to search the women, none were
visible; one advised to lay them on their backs
and keep open their mouths, and then they would
appear ; and so they presently appeared in sight.''



182



CHAPTER XXVI.



WITCHCBAFT IN GERMANY, IN THE EARLIER PART OF

THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY.

In Germany, since the fifteenth century, sorcery
had been undergoing much the same fate as in
France and Spain. In the writers of the sixteenth
century we trace a system of demonology differing
only in some of its details from that of the other
countries which we have reviewed, and in some re-
spects perhaps more complete. It has more bold
and striking points, a circumstance arising no doubt
from the fact that here the ancient Teutonic mytho^
logy retained a stronger hold upon the popular
mind. The sites of primitive worship are more dis-
tinctly marked ; and such mountains as Blocksberg,
Inselsberg, Weckingstein near Minden, Staffelstein
near Bamberg, Kreidenberg near Wurzburg, Bon-
nigsberg near Loccum, Fellerberg near Treves,
Eandel in Brisgau, and Heuberg in the Schwarz
forest, which occur as the scenes of the great sab-



WITCHES IN GERMANY. 183

baths of the witches of this period, were no doubt
sacred places of the early Germans.

The witchcraft trials in Germany during the six-
teenth century were numerous and curious, and
there as elsewhere we can trace their origin often
in personal feuds, in political enmities, and more
especially in religious differences.* It was, how-
ever, at the commencement of the seyenteenth
century, on the eve of those terrible religious wars
which tore Germany to pieces, that the prosecu-
tions against witchcraft took there their girand de-
velopement They were most remarkable at the
cities of Bamberg and Wiirzburg, and other places
where the Roman Catholic religion was prevalent,
and which were under the immediate influence of
the Jesuits. Some of the earlier writers on sorcery
had declared that the increasing number of witches
in the sixteenth century was owing to the spread of
protestantism, and the Jesuits now seized upon this
doctrine as a means of influencing the minds of the
vulgar against the heretics. It is probable, there^
fore, that of the multitudes of persons who perished
at the stake in Germany during the first half of the
seventeenth century for sorcery, the only crime of

♦ The best general treatise on witchcraft in the German
language is, I believe, that by Dr. W. G. Soldan, '' Ges-
chichte der Hexenprocesse, aus den Quellen dargestellf'
(Stuttgart, 1843.) The great collections of materials are
Horst's Zauber-Bibliothek, and Hauber's Bibliotheca Magica.
The present chapter is taken chiefly from Soldan's book, with
which 1 was not acquainted when the earlier part of this book
was written. ^



184 SOBCERY AND MAQIO.

many was their attachment to the religion of
Luther.

The period of the great persecutions of witches in
Wiirzburg and Bamberg was one of great suffering,
when the country had been reduced to poverty by a
merciless war, and when the petty princes of the
empire were not unwilling to seize upon any pretence
to fill their coffers ; and it has been remarked that
in Bamberg, at least, the persons prosecuted were in
general those, the confiscation of whose property was
a matter of consideration. At Bamberg, as well as
at Wiirzburg, the bishop was a sovereign prince in
, his dominions. There had long been a sUent war
in this place between Catholicism and the reforma-
tion, for the latter had gained a footing in the pre-
ceding age from which its opponents had not yet
been able to drive it The prince-bishop John
George IL, who ruled Bamberg from 1 622 to 1 633,
after several unsuccessful attempts to root out
Lutheranism from his dominions, commenced his at-
tacks upon it in 1625, under another name, and the
rest of his reign was distinguished by a series of
sanguinary witch-trials which disgrace the annals of
that city. His grand agent in these proceedings was
Frederic Forner, suffragan of Bamberg, a blind
supporter of the Jesuits and a great enemy of here-
tics and sorcerers, against whom he published a
treatise imder the formidable title of Panaplia
armaturce Dei We may form some notion of the
proceedings of this worthy from the statement of the
most authentic historians of this city that between
1625 and 1630, not less than nine hundred trials



WITCHCRAFT TBIALS AT BAMBBBa. 185

took place in the two courts of Bamberg and Zeil ;
and a pamphlet published at Bamberg by authority^
in 1659, states the number of persons which bishop
John George had caused to be burnt for sorcery to
have been six himdred.

Among the persons thus sacrificed were the chan-
cellor, his son doctor Horn, with his wife and two
daughters, and many of the lords and counciUers of
the bishop's court, and these are stated to have con-
fessed that above twelve hundred of them had con-
federated together, and that if their sorcery had not
been brought to light, they would have brought it
to pads within four years, that there would have
been neither wine nor com in the country, and that
thereby man and beast would have perished with
hunger, and men be driven to eat one another.
There were even some catholic priests, we are told,
among them, who had been led into practices too
dreadful to be described, and they confessed, among
other things, that they had baptized many children
in the devil's name. It must be stated that these
confessions were made under tortures of the most
fearful kind, far more so than anything that was
practised in Prance or other countrie& Two of the
city magistrates, (burgermeisters,) besides other ex-
traordinary things they had done, said that they

had often raised such terrible storms, that houses
were thrown down and trees torn up by the roots,
and that it had been their intention to raise such a
wind as should overthrow the great tower of Bam-
berg. The wives of one of the burgomasters and
of the town butcher declared that it was their task
to make the ointment for the sorcerers, from each



186 SOBCBBT AND HAQIC.

of wliich they received two pennies a-week, and that
this amounted in a year to six hundred guldera or
florins. The burgomaster Neidecker acknowledged
that he had assisted in poisoning the wells by bgt'-
eery, so that whoever drank of them would imme-
diately be struck with pestilence, and that thus
great multitudes had perished. The history of Ger-
many shows how easy it was at this time to point
out the ravages of war, pestilence, and famine It
was also acknowledged that no less than three thou-
sand sorcerers and witches assembled at the dance
on the Ereidenberg mountain near Wurzburg, on
the night of St. Walpurgis, and that each having
given a kreuzer to the musician, he gained no less
than forty giUdera, and that at the same dance they
drunk seven " fudder " of wine which they had
stolen from the bishop of Wiirzburg's cellar. There
were little girls of from seven to ten years of age
among the witches, and seven-and-twenty of them
were convicted and burnt The numbers brought
to trial in these terrible proceedings were so great,
and they were treated with so little consideration,
that it was usual not even to take the trouble of
setting down their names, but they were cited as the
accused No. 1, 2, 3, and so on. The Jesuits took
their confessions in private, and they made up the
lists of those who were understood to have been de-
nounced by them.

Lutheranism had been gaining ground in Wiirz-
burg more even than in Bamberg, and when bishop
Julius came to the see in 1575, the majority of the
population was protestant The energy with which
he set about making converts alarmed many of those



THE BURKINQS AT WUREBURO. 187

who had anything to lose in the worlds and the
number of " heretics'" was thus soon dimmished.
Nevertheless, bishop Philip Adolph, who came to
the see in 1623, found a sufficient number of Pro-
testants to excite his alann, and not daring, in the
political position of Grermany at that moment, to
persecute them openly for their religion, he adopted
the plan of his neighbour of Bamberg. A great
confederacy of sorcerers was suddenly discovered,
and during two or three years hundreds of people of
all ages and conditions were hurried to the stake.
A catalogue of nine-and-twenty brdnde, or burn-
ings, during a very short period of time previous to
the February of 1629, will give the best notion of
the horrible character of these proceedings; it is
printed from the original record in Hauber's BiUiO'
theca Magica.

" In the first bu/ming, fowr persons.

The wife of Liebler.
Old Ancker's widow.
The wife of Gutbrodt
The wife of H8cker.

In the second burning^ fov/r persons.

The old wife of Beutler.

Two strange women.

The old woman who kept the pot-house.

In the third burning, five persons,

Tungersleber, a minstrel.
The wife of Kuler.



183 SORCERY AND MAOIC.

The wife of Stier^ a proctor.
The brushmaker's wife.
The goldsmith's wife.

In the fourth burning^ five persons.

The wife of Siegmund the glazier, a burgomaster.
Brickmami's wife.

The midwife. N.B. She was the origin of all the
mischief.

Old Rume's wife.
A strange man.

In the fifth burning, nine persons.

Lutz, an eminent shop-keeper.
Rutscher, a shop-keeper.
The housekeeper of the dean of the cathedral.
The old wife of the court rope-maker.
Jo. Stembach's housekeeper.
The wife of Baunach, a senator.
. A woman named Znickel BabeL
An old woman.

In the sixth burning, six persons.

The steward of the senate, named Gering.

Old Mrs. Canzler.

The fat tailor's wife.

The woman cook of Mr. Mengerdorf

A strange man.

A strange woman.

In the seventh burning, seven persons.
A strange girl of twelve years old.



THE BUBNIN06 AT WURZBUBa 189



A strange man.

A strange woman.*

A strange bailiff (schrdtheUs).

Three strange women.



In the eighth burning, seven persons.

Baunach, a senator, the fattest citizen in WUrz-
burg.
The steward of the dean of the cathedral
A strange man.
The knife-grinder.
The ganger's wife
Two strange women.

In the ninth bwming, five persons,

Wunth, the wheelright
A strange man.
Bentze's daughter.
Bentze's wife herself
The wife of Eyering.

In the tenth burning, three persons,

Steinacher, a very rich man.
A strange woman.
A strange man.

In the eleventh hwmvngy four persons,

Schwerdt, a vicar-choral in the cathedral.
Rensacker's housekeeper.

* It must be understood that strange means, not a citizen of
Wiirzburg. Perhaps the numerous strange men and women
were Protestant refugees from other parts.



190 SOBCEBT AKD MAGIC.

The wife of Stiecher.
Silberhans, a minstrel

In the twelfth burning^ tufo persona.
Two strange women.

In the thirteenth bumingy four persons.

The old smith of the court.
An old woman.

A little girl nine or ten years old
A younger girl, her little sister.

ir

In the fourteenth burning, two persons.

The mother of the two little girls before-men-
tioned.
Liebler's daughter, aged twenty*-four yeaxs.

In the fifteenth burning, two persons.

A boy of twelve years of age, in the first sdiooL
A butcher's wife.

In the siaieenih bwnvingy sias persons,

A noble page of Ratzenstein, was executed in the
chancellor's yard at six o'clock in the morning, and
left upon his bier all day, and then next day burnt
with the following : —

A boy of ten years of age.

The two daughters of the steward of the senate,
and his maid.

The fat rope-maker's wife.

In the seventeenth burning, fov/r persons.

The inn-keeper of the Baumgarten.

7



THE BUBKIKOS AT WUBZBUBG. 191

A boy eleyen years old.

The wife of the apothecary at the Hirsch (the
Stag)y and her daughter.

N.B. A woman who played the harp had hanged
herself.

In the eighteenth burning, six persons,

Batsch^ a tanner.
Two boys of twelve years old.
The daughter of Dr. Junge.
A girl of fifteen years of age .
A strange woman.

In the nineteenth burning, six persons.

A noble page of Botenham was beheaded at six
o'clock in the chancellor's yard, and burnt the fol-
lowing day.

The wife of the secretary Schellhar.
A woman.

A boy of ten years of age.
Another boy twelve years old.
Brugler's wife, a cymbal-player (ji>eckin), was
burnt aUve.

In the twentieth burning, six persons

. GobeFs child, the most beautiful girl in Wurzburg.

A student on the fifth form, who knew many
languages, and was an excellent musician vocaliter
et instrwnentaliter.

Two boys from the new minister, each twelve
years old.

Stepper's little daughter.

The woman who kept the bridge-gate.



192 SOBOEBT AND HAGIO.

In the twenty-first hwming, six persons.
The master of the Dietricher hospital, a very
learned man.

Stoffel Holtzmann.

A boy fourteen years old.

The little son of senator Stolzenberger.

Two (dAMnni.

In the twenty-second burning, six persons,

Sturman, a rich cooper.

A strange boy.

The grown-up daughter of senator Stolzenberger.

The wife of Stolzenberger herself

The washerwoman in the new building.

A strange woman.

In the twenty-third bu/ming, nine persons,

David Croten's boy, of nine years old, on the se-
cond form.

The two sons of the prince's cook, one of four-
teen years, the other of ten years, from the first
school

Melchior Hammelmann, vicar at Hach.

Nicodemus Hirsch, a canon in the new minster.

Christopher Berger, vicar in the new minster.

An aiu/mnus.

N.B. the bailiff in the Brennerbach court and an
cUummLS were burnt alive.

In the twenty-fourth burning, seven persons.

Two boys in the hospital.

A rich cooper.

Lorenz Stiiber, vicar in the new minster.



THE BURNINGS AT WURZBURa 193

Batz, vicar in the new minster.
Lorenz Roth, vicar in the new minster.
A woman named Rossleins Martin.

In the twenty-fifth burning, six person^.

Frederick Basser, vicar in the cathedral.

Stab, vicar at Hach.

Lambrecht, canon in the new minster.

The wife of Gallus Hansen.

A strange boy.

Schelmerei the huckstress.

In the twenty-sixth burning, seven persons.

David Hans, a canon in the new minster.

Weydenbusch, a senator.

The innkeeper's wife of the Baumgarten.

An old woman.

The little daughter of Valkenberger was privately
executed and burnt on her bier.

The little, son of the town council bailiff.

Herr Wagner, vicar in the cathedral, was burnt
alive.

In the twenty-seventh burning, seven persons.

A butcher, named Kilian Hans.

The keeper of the bridge-gate.

A strange boy.

A strange woman.

The son of the female minstrel, vicar at Hach.

Michel Wagner, vicar at Hach.

Knor, vicar at Hach.

VOL. IL K



194 SOBCERT AKD XAOia

In the twenty-eigkOi burning, after CancUenuis, 1 629,

six persons.

The wife of Enertz the batcher.
The infant daughter of Dr. Schiitz.
A blind girl.

Schwartz, canon at HacL
Ehling, a vicar.

Bemhard Mark, vicar in the cathedral, was burnt
alive.

In the twenty-ninth burning, seven persons.

Viertel Beck.

The innkeeper at Klingen.

The bailiff of Mergelsheim.

The wife of Beck at the Ox-tower.

The fat noble lady (edelfrau).

N.B. A doctor of divinity at Hach and a canon
were executed early at five o'clock in the morning,
and burnt on their bier.

A gentleman of Adel, called Junker Fleisch-
baum/'

We are assured at the end of this document that
there were many other burnings besides those here
enumerated. It appears that, except in particular
oases, the judges showed so much mercy as to cause
their victims to be put to death by beheading be-
fore they were burnt.

One of the victims on this occasion excited espe-
cial commiseration, because he was of high rank, a
kinsman of the bishop himself, on whom he at-
tended as a page of the court, and because he was



wmm^f



EBNST VON EHBENBBRG. 195

young, handsome, and interesting. The youthful
Ernst von Ehrenberg, we are told, was remarkable
chiefly for the the attention he paid to his studies
in the university of Wiirzburg, and for the progress
which he made in them, until he was seduced by
his aunt, a lady of rank in that city, who received
him as a kinsman into her family. This lady, the
Jesuits tell us, was an abandoned witch — ^perhaps
she was a Protestant — ^and she soon taught her
nephew to pursue evil courses, until from an undue
familiarity with herself he proceeded to become a
familiar of the devil For a while he had sufficient
dissimulation to conceal his wickedness, until the
change became evident from his increasing neglect
of his studies and his religious duties, and instead
of being as before, remarkable for his attention to
his books, he now spent his time at play and among
the ladies. The Jesuit inquisitors were alarmed at
his conduct, and undertook to discover the cause.
They found, or pretended to find, by the confessions
of some of the sorcerers brought to the stake, that,
through the seductions of his aunt, he had sold
himself to the devil, and that he had attended the
sabbaths of the witches. The bishop determined
to convert his kinsman, if possible, to a different life.
On his profession of repentance and promise of
amendment, he was delivered to the care of the
Jesuits, that he might profit by their teaching, and
they took him to their house, where they loaded him
with holy amulets, agnus-Deis, relics, and holy water,
and appointed one of their order to attend upon him
both day and night, to protect him against the at-
tempts of the fiend. The Jesuits, however, soon found,

K 2



196 SORCERY AND MAGIC.

as they declared, that no distemper was so incurable as
sorcery. Whenever he had the opportunity, he lay
aside the holy articles with which he was encum-
bered at night, and then the devil came to him and
carried him away to the witches' meetings, from
whence he contrived to return before four o'clock
in the morning, the hour when his spiritual in-
structors rose. Once or twice, however, perhaps
rising earlier than usual, they found his bed empty,
and they discovered from this and some other cir-
cumstances how he spent his nights. They now
declared that all his promises of amendment were
only intended to deceive, and that they, entertained
no further hopes of him. He was accordingly con-
demned to death, and the judgment was held over
him in terrorem with the hope that he might still
be induced to repent. The conclusion of his story
is dramatically told by the Jesuit who has left us
a relation of it. The Jesuits were to prepare him
for death. Early on the morning of the day ap-
pointed for his execution, — ^it appears that he had
not been made acquainted with his sentence, — they
went to him and told him, in ambiguous language,
that he was to prepare for a better life than that he
had hitherto led, and then toek him into the castle.
Here he recognized with an innocent joy the scenes
of his childish gambols ; " There/' said he, " I
played, there I drank, there I danced,'' and went on
making remarks of this kind, until he was con-
ducted into a room hung with black, where a
scaffold was erected. Then he turned pale, and
for a few minutes stood trembling and speech-
less ; but when the executioners attempted to lay



THE CAUTIO GRIMINALIS. 197

their hands upon him, he raised such a cry of
distress that the judges themselves were moved by
it, and they went to intercede with the bishop in his
favour. The prince made a last attempt, and sent
a messenger to offer him forgiveness if he would
promise a thorough reformation. But the mes-
senger returned with an answer that all was in vain,
for the devil had so hardened the youth, that he
boldly declared he would remain as he was, that
he had no need of repentance or change, and
that if he were not so already, he would wish to
become so. Then the prince sternly signified his
will that justice should take its course. They
dragged the youth again into the dark chamber,
supported on each side by a Jesuit, who urged him
to repentance ; but he persisted in saying that he
needed no repentance, begged for his life, tried to
wrest himself from the grasp of the officers, and
gave no attention to the exhortations of the priests.
At last the executioner seized a favourable mo-
ment, and in the midst of his struggles to escape
struck the head from his body at a blow.

We will not multiply our list of executions of
witches in Germany. The persecution raised by
the Jesuits against the sorcerers seemed increasing
rather than otherwise, when one of their order, a
pious and learned man, named Frederick Spee, a
native of Cologne, raised his voice against its
cruelty, by publishing, in the year 1631, a treatise
on the subject, under the title of Cautio Criminalism
in vhich he pointed out the necessity of taking
with more caution the sort of evidence which it
was usual to adduce against offenders of this class



198 SORGBRT AKD HAOIO.

It was, as its author states in the title, '^ a book
very necessary at that time for the magistracy
throughout Grermany/' (liber ad magistratvs Oer-
manioB hoc tempore necessarius^ and it no doubt
had a great influence in putting a stop to the
wholesale prosecutions which had become so pre-
yalent



199



CHAPTER XXVII.



THE WITCHES OF SCOTLAND UNDER KING JAMES AFTER
HIS ACCESSION TO THE ENGLISH THRONE.



In the earlier ages of society, the practice of medi-
cine, which consistedin a curing of wounds, was usually
entrusted to the women. It was their business to
gather the best herbs, and to know their several
virtues. The remedies were often very simple, and
required no great knowledge to prepare and apply
them, and the professed healers, who themselves
believed in the efficacy of charms and " characters,"
and imagined that the properties of different herbs
were given to them by the spirits who presided
over woods and fields, found an advantage at the
same time in clothing their remedies in adven-
titious mystery. To what an extent this was prac-
tised will be fully understood by any one who is
conversant with the collections of medicinal re-
ceipts in mediaeval manuscripts. After the Roman
civilization had introduced itself among the various



200 SOBCEBT AJSTD HAGIO.

branches of the Teutonic race, and schools of medi-
cine were established, a new race of practitioners
sprang up, superior to the others by their learning
and theoretic knowledge, but still judging it con-
venient to create a popular reverence for their art
by clothing it in a similar garb of mystery. Thus
medicine, in whatever circumstances it was found,
was deeply intermixed with superstition.

In process of time these two classes of medical
practitioners became more and more widely sepa-
rated from each other, the scholastic physicians
rising in professional character, while the others
went on degenerating until they became literally
" old women doctors/' This vulgar medicinal know-
ledge became at last united with sorcery in the per-
son of the witch, as it had formerly been united
with the religious worship of the people in the
functions of the priestess. The latter received her
knowledge by the inspiration of the gods ; the for-
mer derived her knowledge of the virtues of herbs
by the gift of the fairies or of the devil. Many of
them added to these a profession of a far more hor-
rible character. They were acquainted with herbs
of which the properties were noxious, as well as
with those which were beneficial, and they ac-
quired at times an extraordinary skill in concocting
poisons of different degrees of force, and which
acted in different manners. The witches were the
great poisoners of the middle ages, and their prac-
tice was no doubt far more extensive than, even
with what we have recently witnessed among our
peasantry, we can easily imagine.

Nearly all the Scottish witches of the first half



J



;



JAMES EEIDTHE MEDIGINEB. 201

of the seventeenth century were such vulgar practi-
tioners in the healing art, and some of them at
least were poisoners. Our materials are again
furnished almost entirely by Robert Pitcaim, whose
collection of early Scottish criminal trials is one of
the most curious works of the kind that has ever
been published.

The first instance of an offender of this class in
the seventeenth century that occurs in these re-
gisters is that of James Reid of Musselburgh, who
was brought to trial as a " common sorcerer,
charmer, and abuser,'" on the 2Jst of July, 1602.
James Reid professed to heal all kinds of diseases,
" quhilk craft he lernit fra the devill, his maister,
in Bynnie craigis and Corstorphin craigis, quhair he
met with him and consultit with him to lerne the
said craft ; quha (i. e. James Reid) gaif him thrie
pennies at ane tyme, and a peice creische (grease)
out of his bag at ane uther tyme/' The devil's
terms, on this occasion, were not very exorbitant.
This first interview took place some thirteen years
before the time of his trial, and he had since that
had frequent meetings with the evil one, who ap-
peared sometimes in the form of a man, and some-
times in that of a horse. His grand specific in
efiecting his cures was water from a south-running
stream. Among the crimes enumerated in his in-
dictment were several " cures " performed, to use
the words of the record, " in his devilish manner ;"
but the most serious charge against him was a con-
spiracy against the life of one David Libbertoun, a
baker of Edinburgh. There was a feud between
this man and the family of John Crystie, of Crys-

K 5



202 8OB0BKT AHB MAOia

tiesoun's mjine, or mill, arising perhaps from some
dishonest transactions between them^ for in form^
days the roguery of bakers and miUers was proTerbiaL
Crystie's daughter Jonet,and some otherwomenof the
family, applied to James Reid for revenge, and he
held a consultation with the fiend for the purpose
of bringing destruction on Libbertoun, his family,
goods, and com. James's instructor made him take
a piece of raw flesh, on which he made nine nicks
or notches, and '' enchanted the same/' The flesh
was giren to Jonet Crystie, one half to be laid
under the door of Libbertoun's mill, and the other
under the door of his stable ; the object of the
latter being to bewitch his horses and cattle. Satah
also enchanted nine stones, which were to be
thrown on David Libbertoun's lands, to destroy his
corn. They next made a " picture"' of wax, which
the fiend also " enchanted ;" and this the women
roasted at a fire in Crystie's house, to eflect the de-
struction of Libbertoun himself The latter in due
course died.

In England they were contented with the cheaper
and easier process of hanging the witches, but in
Scotland, as in Germany, the good old system of
burning was still persevered in, although they now
generally put the victims to death by strangling, or
some other means, before they were committed to
the flames. This act of mercy was probably occa-
sioned by the horrible scenes that burning alive
continually gave rise to. We learn from the mi-
nutes of the Scotch privy council, that, on the 1st
of December, 1608, " the earl of Mar declared to
the council that some women were taken in



PATBICK LOWBIE. 203

Broughton (the suburb of Edinburgh) as witches,
and, being put to an assize, and convicted, albeit
they persevered constant in their denial to the end,
yet they were burnt quick, afker such a cruel man-
ner, that some of them died in despair, renouncing
and blaspheming ; and others, half-burnt, broke out
of the fire, and were cast quick in it again, till they
were burnt to death/'

James Beid was wirreit, or strangled, and then
burnt

We learn from these same registers, that a man
named Patrick Lowrie, of Halie in Ayrshire, com-
monly known by the name of Pat the witch, suf-
fered the same fate in the July of the year 1605.
This man had been in confederacy with several
women witches, wid on the Whitsunday of 1604
they had held a meeting with the evil one on the
Sandhills in Kyle, near the burgh of Irvine. On
Hallow-Eve, the same year, they assembled again
on Lowdon-hill, where a spirit, in the likeness of a
woman, who called herself Helen M'Brune, ap-
peared to them, and after a long consultation, gave
Patrick a hair-belt, " in one of the ends of which
belt appeared the similitude of four fingers and a
thumb, not far different from the claws of the
devil." They afterwards visited the neighbouring
chiu'ches and churchyards, to dig up the dead from
their graves, and dismember them, " for the prac-
tising of their witchcraft and sorcery.^' This man,
like the former, injured some people, and performed
cures for others ; he was charged especially with
curing a child of " ane strange incureabM disease."

The practices of Isobel Griersoune, the wife of a



204 SOBCEBT AND MAQIC.

labourer at Preston-pans named John Bull, were
still more extraordinary. She was tried on the
10th of March, 1607, and it appeared that, having
conceived a " cruel hatred and malice'' against one
Adam Clark, of the same place, she used during Ja.
year and a half " all devilish and ungodly means''
to be avenged upon him. One night, in the No-
vember of 1606, between eleven o'clock and mid-
night, when the whole family, consisting of Adam,
his wife, and a woman servant, were asleep in their
beds, she entered their house in the likeness of her
own cat, accompanied with a great number of other
cats, and made such an uproar that the inmates went
nearly mad. Then, to increase the tumult, the
devil, in the shape of a black man, made his appear-
ance, and, in a fearful manner, seizing the servant
as she stood in the middle of the floor, tore her cap
from her head and threw it in the fire, and dragged
her up and down the house with so much violence
that she was obliged to keep her bed for six weeks
after. Such scenes as this seldom occur in the
stories of English witchery. Previous to this occur-
rence, at the beginning of the year 1600, the same
Isobel had taken offence against a man of the same
town, named William Burnet. She threw a piece
of raw " enchanted" flesh at his door, and he was
immediately struck with a dreadful malady, and
for the space of a year the demon haunted the
house nightly, in the shape of a " naked infant
bairn." In consequence of these and other similar
persecutions, William Burnet languished three years
and died. Another man refused to pay her the sum
of nine shillings and fourpence, which he owed her,



ISOBEL GRIBRSOUNE. 205

ahd he was seized with a grievous sickness, which
never left him till the debt was discharged. An
ale-house keeper afironted her, and all his ale be-
came " thick like gutter dirt/' and smelt so bad
that nobody would touch it. An innkeeper's wife
gave her some cause of offence, and she went ''under
silence and cloud of night," and, entering the house
" after a devilish and unknown way," dragged her
by the hair out of bed from the side of her husband,
and threw her on the floor, " whereby her spirit
failed her," and she continued in a helples3 state
during five or six days. On this occasion, Isobel
Griersoune was publicly accused of being the cause of
the woman's sickness, and she therefore employed her
neighbours to bring her and the innkeeper's wife to
drink together, after which the latter recovered ;
but she again called her a witch, whereupon Isobel,
who appears to have possessed anything but a
gentle temper, flew into a rage, and said to her,
" The faggot of hell light on thee, and hell's caul-
dron may thou seeth in !" Her weakness returned,
and remained with her till the time of Isobel's trial.
Isobel Griersoune was burnt on the Castle-hill at
Edinburgh. In the December of the same year a
man was burnt there for the same crime ; he was
accused of poisoning people, as well as curing.
Other similar cases occur in the following years,
and no doubt many might be instanced from other
parts of Scotland.

On the 27th of May, 1608, a woman named Beigis
Tod, of " Lang Nydrie," was tried for sorcery, and
condemned to the stake. It was stated that in the
August of 1594, she, with her sister and some



206 SOBCBBT AKD MAOia

others, met another party of witches at " Deane-
fute of Lang Nydrie/' where the devil appeared to
them, and reproved Beigis Tod " very sharply" for
her long tarrying. She said, " Sir, I could win na
sooner." They all passed together to Beigia's house
in Lang Nydrie, where, after they had drunk toge-
ther ^^ a certain space,"' they took a cat and drew it
nine times through the " cruik,'' or iron on which
the pot was hung over the fire ; and then they
went with aU speed to Seatoun thorn, to the north
of the gate. Thorns were always favourite meeir
ing-places of witches and spirits. When they came
to the thorn, the devil left them to fetch Cristiane
Tod, a sister of Beigis, '^ and passed to Robert
Smart's house, and brought her out; and as she
was coming with him, she took a great fright,
and said to the devil, ' Sir, what will you do with
me f wbo answered her, * Tak na feir, for ye sail
gang to your sister Beigis, and to the rest of hir
cumpanie quha ar stayand upon your cuming
at the thorn."' Then they all went with Satan
to the iron gate of Seatoun, where they again took
a cat, and drew it nine times through the iron gate.
Immediately afterwards they went to a bam, where
they christened the cat, and called her Margaret
They then returned to Deane-fute, where they first
met, and cast the cat to the evil one. We are not
told the object of these strange proceedings.

The year 1613 was rendered remarkable in the
annals of Scottish sorcery by two very extraordinary
cases, one of which belonged to high life. John
Erskine, laird of Dun in the county of Angus, and
grandson of the celebrated John Erskine who held



TRAG^Y OF !FHS mLSKTSEQ. 207

the ofE^ce of superintendent of Anguis and Meames,
and distinguished himself hj his exertions in sup--
port of the Reformation, had two sons, David,
Vfho inherited the lordship, and Robert, and three
daughters, Helen, Isobcjl, and Anne. David Ers-
kine, the elder brother, died young, leaving two
boys, John and Alexander, the former of whom
was acknowledged as the young laird. Robert Ers-
kine and his three sisters seem to have been more
attached to one another than to their late brother ;
the sisters especially seem tohave beenwicked women,
and, now that only two children stood between him
and the hereditary estates of the family, they urged
their surviving brother to secure the lairdship and
property by one of those bold bad actions which
were so common in feudal times* It appears that
a dispute had arisen relating to the wardship of the
children, and that Robert Erskine was disappointed
at not getting his nephews into his own ward.
About the midsummer of 1610, a meeting between
Robert and his three sisters took place in his man-
sion of Logy, and it was resolved that the children,
of whom one seems to ha-we been on a visit to Logy
and the other was residing with his mother in
Montrose, should be carried off by poison, which
must be prepared and rendered effectual by witch-
craft. Two of the sisters, who appear to have been
the most active in this afiair, proposed to one
David Blewhouse that he should find a witch and
see the work done without their direct interference,
and in return for this service he was to receive five
hundred marks of silver and a piece of land. An
agreement to this effect was drawn up, but for some



208 SORGEBT Ain> MAGia

reason or other it was subsequently broken off, and
the two sisters, Anne and Helen, determined to
take the matter in hand themselves. They accord-
ingly set off together, and went over the Caime-
mouth towards " Mure-ailhouse," to a notorious
witch named Janet Irwing, from whom they re-
ceived a "great quantity '' of herbs, with particular
directions how to use them These they carried
home to Logy, but Robert Erskine was not satisfied
that they were sufficiently powerful for his purpose,
and paid a visit in person to the witch, who took
away all his scruples on this head. They now pro-
ceeded to make the poisonous drink, according to
the witch's directions, and everything being ready,
Robert Erskine rode over to Montrose, taking the
boy who was with him home to his brother and
mother. There the drink was secretly adminis-
tered, and the victims were suddenly plunged into
dreadful sufferings, and exhibited every symptoms
of being poisoned, till they both died, " and sa was
crewallie and tressonabillie murthoret," to use the
expressive words of the record. The murderers did
not long enjoy the resuli of their crime ; how the
discovery was made is not told, but it seems pro-
bable that David Blewhouse turned traitor. On
the 30th of November, 16 J 3, Robert Erskine was
brought for examination before the Scottish privy
council, and though he denied all knowledge of the
murder at first, he ended by making a full confes-
sion. The course of justice was quick at this time,
and he was beheaded on the 1st of December at the
" Mercat '' cross in Edinburgh. His sisters seem to
have possessed stronger nerves, for in face of his



THE STORT OF MARGARET BARCLAT. 209

confession, and the evidence of Blewhouse and
other witnesses, they continued " obdurate in a con-
stant denial"" They were not brought to a trial till
the 22nd of June, 1614, but the evidence against
them was so conclusive, that they were at once
found guilty, and two of them were like their bro-
ther beheaded at the Mercat-cross. The third ob-
tained a respite from the king, who subsequently
changed her punishment from death to perpetual
banishment.

The other Scottish tragedy of the year 1613 was,
in some respects, of a more romantic character, and
we only know it from a copy of the record of the
trial sent to sir Walter Scott Two brothers,
Archibald and John Dein, lived in the town of
Irvine, of which they were burgesses ; the first had
married a woman named Janet Lyal, while the wife
of Alexander was Margaret Barclay. It appears
that there was a quarrel between the two families,
and John Dein and his wife publicly accused Mar-
garet Barclay of theft. Margaret Barclay raised an
action of slander before the church court, which
was discharged, and the opponents were directed to
be reconciled. But Margaret did not possess a con-
ciliating temper, and she declared that she only
gave her hand in obedience to the kirk-session, but
that her animosity against John Dein and his
spouse was unabated. Soon after this occurrence,
John Dein's ship prepared to smI for France, and
he took with him the provost of the burgh of
Irvine, Andrew Tran, who was one of the owners
of the vessel. As they were starting, Margaret
Barclay was heard to pray that sea nor salt



210 SOBOBBT AND MAOia

water might never bear the ship, and that partan^,
or crabs, might eat the crew at the bottom of the
sea. The first news of the ship which reached
Irvine came by a wandering juggler named John
Stewart, who called at the house of the provost,
and dropped broad hints that he knew by some
mysterious means that the vessel was lost, and that
the provost himself had perished. After a short
period of anxiety in the provost's family, all doubt
was removed hj the arrival of two of the crew, who
stated that their ship had been wrecked on the
coast of England near Padstow, and that they
were the sole survivors of all who who were on
board. People remembered Margaret Barclay's im-
precations, and suspicions of sorcery were imme-
diately excited against her and John Stewart, whose
knowledge of the state of the ship seemed so ex-
traordinary.

Margaret Barclay appears to have been no fa-
vourite in the town of Irvine, and proceedings were
commenced in a way most likely to turn to her
confusion. The wandering juggler was first ar-
rested, and fear or torture wrung from him a confess
sion, in which he cleared himself by seriously com-
promising the other person suspected. He said that
Margaret Barclay, presuming perhaps on his cha-
racter of a juggler, had applied to him to teach her
some magic arts, "in order that she might get
gear, kyes milk, love of man, her heart's desire on
such persons as had done her wrong, and finally
that she might obtain the fruit of sea and land."
He replied that he neither possessed such arts, nor
was able to communicate them to others, and thus



THE STOBT OF MARGARET BARCLAY. 211

the matter ended. But he said that subsequent to
this, and shortly after the ship set sail, he came
accidentally one night to Margaret's house, and
there he found her with two other women making
clay figures, one of which was made handsome and
with fair hair, he supposed to represent provost
Tran. They proceeded to make a figure of a
ship in clay, and while they were thus occupied,
the devil appeared in the shape of a handsome
black lap-dog. When the ship was made, the
whole party, Satan and all, left the house together,
and went into an empty waste-house near the sea-
port. They afterwards proceeded to the sea-side,
and cast in the figures of clay representing the ship
and the men, and immediately the sea raged,
roared, and became red like the juice of madder in
a dyer's cauldron. Margaret Barclay's female ac^
quaintances were next convened, and when John
Steward was introduced to them, he at once fixed
upon an old woman named Insh, as one of the per-
sons engaged in making the figures. This woman
stoutly denied all knowledge of the matter, and
said she never saw her accuser before ; but the
magistrates now brought forward her own daughter,
a girl only eight years old, who lived in Margaret
Barclay's house as a servant, and who had been
made by some means or other to declare that she
had been a witness to the scene described by the
juggler, and that her mother was one of the persons
engaged in it. This little girl improved upon the
details given by Stewart ; she described other per-
sons as being present, added a black man to the
black dog, and said that the latter breathed flames



212 SORCERY AND MAQIC.

from its jaws and nostrils, which illuminated the
witches during the performance of the spelL She
said that they had promised her a pair of new shoea
to keep the secret, and that h€r mother Isobel Insh
remained in the waste-house, and was not present
when the images were thrown into the sea.

John Stewart now underwent a new examina-
tion, and added to his own story so as to make it
agree with that of the child. When asked how he
gained the knowledge of things to come, he told a
strange story of his adventures with the fairies; it was
probably a tale he had been accustomed to recount
among the people where he visited in the exercise
of his craft to give himself importance in their eyes,
and which he now half unconsciously repeated be-
fore his judges. He stated that about twenty-six
years before, as he was travelling on the night of
AU-hallow's Eve, between the towns of " Monygoif "
and " Clary,'" in the county of Galway, (in Ireland,)
he met with the king of the fairies and his com*
pany, and the king struck him over the forehead
with a white rod, which deprived him of the power
of speech and the use of one eye. After remaining
in this condition during three years, his speech and
eye-sight were restored to him by the king of the
fairies and his company, whom he again met on a
Hallowe'en night near Dublin, since which time he
had been in the habit of joining these people every
Saturday at seven o'clock in the evening, and re-
maining with them all that night They likewise
met every Hallowtide, sometimes on Lanark-hill,
or, as Scott supposes, Tintock, and sometimes on
Eilmaurs-hill, when he was taught by them.



r



^H"



THE STORY OF MARGARET BARCLAY. 21 S

Stewart pointed out the spot on his forehead where
the king of the fairies struck him with a white
rod, whereupon, after he had been blindfolded by
order of the magistrates and ministers who were
directing the examination, they pricked the spot
with a large pin, of which he appeared to be quite
insensible. He repeated the names of many per-
sons whom he had seen at the court of faerie, and
declared that all persons who were taken away by
sudden death went thither.

After these confessions, Isobel Insh was more
hardly pressed to " tell the truth,'" and at length
she confessed that she was present at the making
and drowning of the clay images, but declared that
she took no part in the proceedings. She was at
this moment in such a state of mind, that she evi-
dently knew not what she was doing, and she sup-
plicated her jailor. Bailie Dunlop, to let her go, pro-
mising him, for he also was a mariner, that if he
did so, he should never make a bad voyage, but
have success in all his dealings by sea and land, a
promise that was easily construed into an acknow-
ledgment that she possessed the powers attributed
to her. Before she was conducted back to her pri-
son in the belfry, she was made to promise that
she would fully confess next day, but in the
night she made a desperate attempt at escape.
Although secured with iron bolts, locks, and fet-
ters, she succeeded in getting out at a back window,
and reached the roof of the church, for here she
lost her footing and fell to the ground. She was so
much hurt and bruised, that she survived but five
days, during which time she resolutely persisted in

5



214 SOBGBRT AND MAOIC

asserting her innocence, and denied all that she had
before admitted In spite of the evident causes
of her death, the inhabitants of Irrine attributed
it to poison.

A commission was now granted for the trial of
John Stewart and Margaret Barclay, and when the
appointed day arrived, " my lord and earl of Eglin-
toune (who dwells within the space of one mile to
the said burgh) having come to the said burgh at
the earnest request of the said justices, for giving
to them of his lordshq)'s countenance, concurrence,
and assistance, in trying of the foresaid devilish
practices, conformable to the tenor of theforesaidcom-
mission, the said John Stewart, for his better pre-
serving to the day of assize, was put in a sure lock-
fast booth, where no manner of person might have
access to >him till the down-sitting of the justice-
court ; and for avoiding of putting hands on him-
self, he was very strictly guarded, and fettered by
the arms, as use is. And upon that same day of
the assize, about half an hour before the down-
sitting of the justice-court, Mr. David Dickson,
minister at Irvine, and Mr. George Dunbar, mi-
nister of Ayr, haviivg gone to him to exhort him to
call on his God for mercy for his bygone wicked
and evil life, and that God would of his infinite
mercy loose him out of the bonds of the devil,
whom he had served these. many years bygone, he
acquiesced in their prayer and godly exhortation,
and uttered these words, — ' I am so straitly
guarded, that it lies not in my power to get my
hand to take off my bonnet, nor to get bread to my
mouth.' .And immediately after the departure of



THE STOBT OF MABaA&ST BARCLAT. 215

the two ministers from him, the juggler being sent
for, at the desire of my lord of Eglintoune, to be
Qcmfronted with a woman of the burgh of Ayr
called Janet Bous, who was apprehended by the
'magistrates of the burgh of Ayr for witchcraft, and
sent to the burgh of Irvine purposely for that affair,
he was found, by the burgh officers who went about
him, strangled and hanged by the cruik of the
door, with a tait^ or string, of hemp, supposed
to have been his garter or string of his bon-
net, not above the length of two span long, his
knees not being from the ground half a span,
and was brought out of the house, his life not being
totally expelled. But, notwithstanding of wbatso-
ever means tised in the contrary for remeid of his
life, he revived not, but so ended his life miserably,
by the help of the devil his master/'

Margaret Barclay was the only one who now
remained for trial, and it was determined to proceed
with her at once, lest she should follow the example
of the othera " Therefore, and for eschewing of the
like in the person of the said Margaret, our sove-
reign lord's justice in that part, constituted by
commission, after solemn deliberation and advice of
the said noble lord, whose concurrence and advice
was chiefly required and taken in this matter, con-
dluded with all possible diligence, before the down-
sitting of the justice court, to put the said Margaret
to torture ; in respect the devil, by God's permission,
had made her associates, who were the lights of the
cause, to be their own * burrioes' (ecoecvMoners).
They used the torture underwritten as being most
safe and gentle (as the said noble lord assured the



216 SORCEEY AKD MAGIC.

said justices,) hj putting of her two bare legs in a
pair of stocks, and thereafter by on-laying of certain
iron gauds (bars) severally one by one, and then
eking and augmenting the weight by laying on
nlore gauds, and in easing of her by off-taking of the
iron gauds one or more as occasion offered, which
iron gauds were but little short gauds, and broke
not the skin of her legs After using of the which
kind of gentle torture, the said Margaret began, ac-
cording to the increase of the pain, to cry and crave
for God's cause to take off her shins the foresaid
irons, and she would declare truly the whole matter.
Which being removed, she began at her former de-
nial; and being of new arrayed in torture as of before,
she then uttered these words, ' Take off ! take off !
and before Grod I shall show you the whole form !'
And the said irons being of new, upon her faithful
promise, removed, she then desired my lord of Eglin-
toune, the said four justices, and the said Mr. David
Dickson, minister at the burgh, Mr. George Dunbar,
minister of Ayr, and Mr. Mitchell Wallace, minister
of Kilmarnock, and Mr. John Cunninghame, minister
of Dairy, and Hugh Kennedy, provost of Ayr, to
come by themselves, and to remove all others, and
she should declare truly as she should answer to
God the whole matter. Whose desire in that being
fulfilled, without any kind of demand, freely, with-
out interrogation, God's name by earnest prayer
being called upon for opening of her lips, and easing
of her heart, that she by rendering of the truth,
might glorify and magnify his holy name, and dis-
appoint the enemy of her salvation/'
Margaret Barclay's confession was a mere ac.-



THE STOBT OF MABGABET BABCLAT. 217

-knowledgment of the truth of what had been said by
the others, but she declared that her purpose was to
kill none but her brother-in-law and provost Tran.
To make up the number of persons pretended to have
been present at the making of the images, she intro-
duced the name of another woman of Irvine, Isobel
Crawford ; who was thereupon arrested, and in great
terror confessed it alL But when they proceeded
with the trial, Alexander Dein, the husband of Mar-
garet Barclay, appeared in court with a lawyer to
act in her defence, and she was asked by the lawyer
if she wished to be defended, to which she made
answer, " As you please ; but all I have confessed
was in agony of torture, and, before God, all I have
spoken is false and untrue ;'' adding pathetically,
" Ye have been too long in coming/' The jury were
unmoved by this appeal ; it was considered that as
the iron bars were off her legs at the moment of her
making the confession, it could not be said to be made
under compulsion, and she was unanimously found
guilty. After her sentence was passed, she returned
to her confession, influenced, perhaps, by the hope in
some way or other of better treatment. She was
strangled at the stake, and then burnt to ashes.

Before her death, Margaret Barclay had entreated
earnestly for Isobel Crawford, the woman implicated
in her confession, that no injury should be done to
her, but in vain. A new commission was obtained
for her trial, and, as she was now obstinate in her
denial, the same torture was applied to her, and
with the same effect She made a new confession,
acknowledged everything that was imputed to her,
and avowed that she had lived in intercourse with

VOL. II. L



218 SORCERY AND MAGIC*

the evil one for several years. But when her sen-
tence was passed; she again denied all that she had
confessed, and persisted in her denial to the last

It appears to have been a mere quarrel among the
wives of the burghers of Irvine which led to this
tragical conclusion. The singularly detailed report
of the proceedings of the trial, which was published
by sir Walter Scott, furnishes a most remarkable
illustration of the manner in which they were con-
ducted. We now return to the registers published
by Mr. Pitcaim for a few examples illustrative of
the character of the Scottish witches of this period
They show us not only how generally these " weird''
women were employed to cure diseases, but the par-
ticular character of their remedies.

Margaret Wallace, the wife of a burgess of Glas-
gow, was tried for sorcery on the 20th of March,
1622. The particular crime for which she was
brought into court was the bewitching of a burgess
of the same town named Cuthbert Greg, a cooper,
who had excited her " deadly hatred,'" by publicly
calling her a witch. It was deposed that she had
been heard to threaten that she would make him
within a few days unable to earn a cake of bread by
his work. Shortly after this, he feU into sickness
and extreme debility. His Mends were convinced
that Margaret Wallace was the cause of this visita-
tion, and they went to her to beg her to restore him
to his health. After many " malicious refusals,"
she yielded to their request, and went with them to
his house, where she "took him by the shakel
{tvrist bone) with one hand, and laid the other hand
upon his breast, and without one word speaking,

8



J



SRPVnsa^iHHVlP.. - ■■ JLJLs^- ■_! ! ".^l—^-rsaBIPSSSBSS^WHH^HSSJ



MARGARET WALLACE. 219

save only by moving of her lips, passed from him at
that instant ; and upon the morn thereafter, return-
ing back again to the said Cuthbert, she took him
by the arm and bade him arise, who at that time
and fifteen days before was not able to lift his legs
without help ; yet she, having urged him to rise,
and taking him by the hand, as said is, brought
him out of his bed, and thereafter led him about the
house ; who immediately thereafter, by her sorcery
and charming practised upon him, walked up and
down the floor, without help or support of any ; and
from that time quickly recovered and convalesced of
the former grievous disease/'

Margaret Wallace had formerly been intimate
with a woman of Glasgow named Cristiane Grahame,
who was burnt three years before as a notorious
witch, and they seem to have been in the habit of
assisting one another. On one occasion, when the
child of one of her neighbours was taken ill,
she recommended Grahame to be sent for, and,
on an objection being made, she protested
" Cristiane Grahame could do as mickle in that
errand in curing of that disease, as if God himself
would come out of heaven and cure her ; and albeit
the death-stroke were laid on, she could take it off
again; and without her help there could be no
remedy to the bairn.'' She further showed her con-
fidence in the healing powers of this woman by
sending for her when she was in want herself A
woman made the following deposition. It appeared
that a man named Robert Stewart went with Mar-
garet Wallace to an inn in Glasgow kept by one
Alexander Vallange, where this deponent was

L 2



220 SORCERY AND MAGIC.

servant, and, as she said, they there " called for a
choppine of ale, which was brought by a boy to
them, named James Symsone ; and in drinking
thereof, betwixt Robert Stewart his taking the cup
and offering it to Margaret Wallace, the said Mar-
garet took a sudden ' brasche' of sickness, unknown
to the deponent what sickness it was, wherein the
said Margaret was so extremely handled that she
was likely to rive herself In her convulsions she
cried, " Bring me hither my dear bird I" Margaret
Montgomerie, the "good- wife'' of the house, who
was present, and who imagined that she was calling
for her husband, said, " What dear bird would you
have ? I believe he is not at home/' " Na," an-
swered Margaret Wallace, " bring me Cristiane
Grahame, my dear bird !" " All this while Mar-
garet Montgomerie was holding her by the one hand,
and Cristiane M'Clauchlane by the other. There-
after, at her desire, Robert Stewart past, and with
great diligence brought Cristiane Grahame to her,
at whose sudden coming Margaret Montgomerie
said to Robert Stewart, ' Jesus save us ! I believe
thou has met her by the way !' And Cristiane
Grahame answered, ^ Faith, he met me not ; but
came and brought me out of my own chamber ; and
fra I heard that my bird was sa diseased, I sped
me hither.' Says, thereafter, that Cristiane Gra-
hame took Margaret Wallace by the shackel bone,
and kist her ; and in her arms carried her down the
stairs, saying to her, nothing should ail her." Ano-
ther witness, a " chirurgeon," named Andro Mure,
who deposed relating to the cure of one Margaret
Mure, reveals a little glimpse of Scottish character.



_i



ISOBEL HALDANE AND THE FAIRY FOLK. 221

This man said, " He knows nothing of Margaret
Mnre's sickness, except that he himself coming
down the bridge-gate, he saw Cristiane Grahame
come forth of Marioun Mure's house ; who thereafter
came to the deponent, and desired him to gang in
to the said Marioun; and the deponent, at
her desire, having passed into the house, at his in-
coming a roasted hen was set down on the board ;
and the deponent, with David Scheirar and the said
Marioun Mure, sat down at the the board together ;
and within a short space thereafter, Margaret Wal-
lace came in to them ; declares, at Margaret Wal-
lace's incoming, a goose was set down on the board ;
and the deponent, perceiving that such entertain-
ment would draw him to charges, he paid his chop-
pine of wine and came his way, and left the rest of
the company behind him ; and further he knows
not/'

Some pains seem to have been taken in this
woman's defence, and the worst accusation against
her appears to have been her acquaintance with
Cristiane Grahame; but the jury brought her in
guilty, and she was strangled and burnt

In the May of 1 623, a woman named Isobel Hal-
dane made a " voluntary" confession at the sessions
kt Perth, in which she described the manner in
which she cured diseases, chiefly by the use of
crosses and charms such as Tthose found in the old
medical manuscripts. Being asked if she had any
conversation with the fairy folk, she said that ten
years before , while she was lying in her bed,
she was taken forth she knew not how, and was
carried to a hill side, which opened, and she went



222 SOBCEBT AND MAGIC.

in and remained there three days, from Thureday to
Sunday at noon. She met a man with a grey
beard, who brought her forth again. This man
with the grey beard, resembling the Thome Reid of
a former story, was the person from whom she re-
ceived her knowledge of hidden things, and who im-
parted to her the art by which she worked her cures.
She often delivered people from the witchcraft of
others. One Patrick Ruthven acknowledged that
he had been bewitched, and that Isobel had cured
him. " She came into the bed, and stretched herself
above him, her head to his head, her hands over him,
and so forth, mumbling some words, he knew not
what they were.'^ Isobel seems to have been famous
for curing " bairns.'' She confessed that, for this
purpose, she made three several cakes, every one of
them of nine handfuls of meal obtained from nine
women that were married maidens, and that she
made a hole in the crown of every on^ of them, and
put a bairn through it three times, in the name of
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost''

A man named Thomas Greave was burnt at the
beginning of August, 1623. He was accused of
causing sickness in some people, and curing it in
others. His cures were performed with crosses and
signs, and by washing the patient's sark, or shirt,
in the water of a south-running stream, or with
water from the holy well. He sometimes passed his
patients through a hasp of yam. He took one wo-
man's sickness from her, and put it on a cow.
"Item, about Martinmas, 1621, Elspeth Thomesone,
sister to John Thomesone, portioner of Petwar,
being visited with a grievous sickness, the said Thomas



^_ 1 TiM 11.1' M



THE COLD-WATER CURE. 223

came to her house in Corachie, where, after sighing
and ' gripping' of her, he promised to cure her
thereof; and for this effect called for her sark, and
desired two of her * nearest friends' to go with him,
like as John and "William Thomesone, her brothers,
being sent for, past with the said Thomas, in the night
season, from Corachie towards Burley, by the space
of twelve miles, and enjoyned the two brothers not
to speak a word all the way ; and whatever they
heard or saw, no ways to be afraid, saying to them,
it might be that they would hear great rumbling, and
such imcouth and fearful apparitions, but nothing
should annoy them. And at the ford by East
Burley, in a south-running water, he there washed
the sark ; during the time of the which washing of
the sark, there was a great noise made by fowls, or
the ' lyll beasts,' that arose and flittered in the
water. And coming home with the sark, put the
same upon her, and cured her of her sickness."

As I have before intimated, there may be some
affinity between this process and the modern cure by
wet sheets ; in the instance of Thomas Grreave the
cold-water cure was punished with death.



224



CHAPTER XXVIII.



CONFESSIONS OF ISOBEL GOWDIE.

The extraordinary cases related in the last chap-
ter give us but a faint notion of the immense num-
ber of prosecutions for the crime of sorcery which
occurred in Scotland during the first half of the
seventeenth century. The cases which came before
the high court of justiciary were few indeed when
compared with those which were disposed of no less
summarily in the multitude of inferior courts
throughout that kingdom. The superstitious feelings
of the Scottish clergy assisted the popular imagina-
tion, and it is not surprising if the persecution
against this miserable class of people was increased,
rather than otherwise, when the presbyterians were
in power. Matthew Hopkins had his reflection in
a number of Scottish witch-finders, or, as they were
called, prickers, who gained their living by going
from town to town to search suspected women or
men for their marks, and we have even seen that



^biiSd^amtt



I



THE WITCHES OF AULDEARN. 225

on the eve of the restoration they were sent for from
Scotland to assist in witch prosecutions in the north
of England. At this period, and in the years im-
mediately following the accession of Charles IL, the
mania seems to have suddenly extended itself in Scot-
land, and the year 1661 was especially remarkable
for the number of trials it witnessed. We are in-
formed that on the 7th of November, in the year
just mentioned, at one session of the superior court,
no less than fourteen commissions were issued for
trying witches in different parts of the country. A
case which occurred in the spring of the year fol-
lowing, is deserving of particular notice for its pecu-
liarities.

The district about the village of Auldearn, on
the coast of the little county of Nairn, contained at
this time so many witches, that Satan was obliged
for convenience to divide them into companies
named covines, each covine consisting of thirteen
persons. This number was anciently called the
devil's dozen, from which we understand why still,
wherever the popular superstitions leave their
traces, it is looked upon as an unlucky number for
a party at table, but another more useful indi-
vidual has since taken the place of the evil one in
the name applied to it. To one of these covines,
which seems to have belonged especially to the
village of Auldearn, belonged a woman of that
place named Isobel Growdie, who during the months
of April and May, in the year 1662, made, without
compulsion of any kind, (as it is said in the docu-
ment,) before the clergy and magistrates of the dis-
trict, four several confessions, all agreeing together,

L 5



226 SOBCEBT AND HAGTC,

though some of them were rather fiiller in detail
than others.

Isobel Gowdie said that once as she was going
between the farms of Dramdevin and the Heads,
she was accosted by Satan, who made her promise
to meet him at night For some reason or other,
in Scotland Satan preferred churches for the place
of meeting of the witches, and on this occasion the
rendezvous was to be in the kirk of Auldearn.
Thither Isobel went on the night appointed, and
she found a number of individuals who were well
known to her in the kirk ; the evil one stood in
the reader's desk, and held a black book in his
hand. After being duly introduced to the com-
pany, the new convert was made to deny her bap-
tism, and then, placing one hand on the crown of
her head and the other under the sole of her foot,
she gave everything between them to the fiend.
Margaret Brodie, of Auldearn, acted as her foster-
mother, and held her up to the devil to be bap-
tized. He marked her on the shoulder, and sucked
the blood, which "spouted'" into his hand, and
with this he sprinkled her on the head, re-baptizing
her in his own name by the nickname of Janet.
After this ceremony, the whole party separated.
Shortly afterwards the devil met Isobel again,
alone, at the " Now Wards " of Inshoch, and there
the bond between them was completed. She de-
scribed her new lord as a " mickle, black, rough
man,'' with forked and cloven feet, which he some-
times concealed by wearing boots or shoes. Some-
times he appeared in the shape of a deer, or roe, or
other animal



NICKNAMES OF THE WITCHES. 227

To each covine was one female of more consider-
ation than the others, Satan's favourite, who was
chosen as the best looking of the younger witches,
and she was called the maiden of the covine ; and
there was a man, who was their officer. The
witches had only power to do injuries of an infe-
rior kind when the maiden was not with them.
They met from time to time to dance at places
which seem to have been under fairy influence,
such as the hill of Earlseat, the mickle bum, and
the Downie hills, generally one or two covines at a
time, where they danced; but they had larger general
meetings towards the end of each quarter of a year.
Jane Martin, a young lass of Auldearn, was the
maiden of the covine to which Isobel Gowdie be-
longed. We have seen that in her intercourse
mth the evU one, each witch was known by a new
name. Thus Jane Martin was named " Over-the-
dyke-with-it,'' because she used to sing these words
when she was dancing with the deviL Her mother,
Isobel Nicoll, went by the name of Bessie Rule ;
Margaret Wilson was named Pickle-nearest-the-
wind ; Bessie Wilson's name was Through-the-com-
yard ; Elspet Nishie was named Bessie BaiQd ; and
Bessie Hay rejoiced in the name of Able-and-stout
Their familiar spirits, who were distinguished by
the colour of their liveries, had names equally sin-
gular. Isobel Growdie's own familiar was called
Saunders-the-red-reaver, and was clothed in black ;
one of them had a spirit called Thomas-a-fairie ;
Margaret Wilson's spirit had a grass-green dress,
and was called Swein ; Bessie Wilson's spirit was
Rorie, dressed in yellow ; that of Isobel Nicoll was



228 SOBCEBT AND MAOIO.

Roaring-lion, and his colour sea-green ; that of
Margaret Brodie was called Robert-the-rule, and
dressed in a sad dress ; Bessie Wilson's familiar had
the strange name of Thief-of-hell-wait-upon-her ;
Elspet Nishie's was Hendrie Laing ; the familiar of
Bessie Hay (old Able-and-stout) was named Robert-
the-Jakis, and was always ^'clothed in dun, and
seems aged ; he is ane glaiked gowked spirit/' Jane
Martin, the maiden of the covine, had a spirit
named M'Hector, who was a "young-like'' devil,
and his colour grass-green. These spirits were
much smaller than the devil who presided at their
meetings. .

Isobel said that they sometimes went into the
Downie hills, where they found a fair and large
" brawe " room, where it was daylight There she
got meat from the queen of faerie more than she
could eat The queen was " brawlie " clothed in
white linen, and in white and brown clothes. The
king of faerie was a " brawe " man, well favoured,
and broad faced. " There," says Isobel, " was elf-
bulls rowtting and skoylling up and down, and
affrighted me." She alluded repeatedly to the fear
which she always felt on seeing these elf-buUs. In
the caverns of the Downie hills, Isobel Gowdie
saw the "elf-boys" making the elf-arrowheads.
These elf-boys were " little ones, hollow and boss-
backed, (humpbacked;) they spoke gowstie-like."
The devil shaped the arrow-heads with his own
hand, and gave them to the elf-boys, who sharp-
ened and " dighted " them with a sharp thing like
a packing-needle. When they were finished, the
devil delivered them to the witches, saying, —



SABBATH QUABBBLS. 229

Shoot these in my name.

And they shall not go heal hame {whole home).

And when the witch shot at anybody with them,
she said, —

I shoot yon man in the deyil*s name,

He shall not win heal hame !

And this shall be all so true,

There shall not be one bit of him on liew I (aUve)

When they shot the arrow-heads at their victims,
they " spang " them from their thumb-nails ; some-
times they missed their object, but if they touched
they carried certain death, even if the victim were
cased in armour.

The account of what passed at the sabbaths of
th,ese Scottish witches is very imperfect, and the
little that is told will be better passed over. The
arch-fiend seems to have taken great deUght in
beating his subjects cruelly with ropes and thongs,
and he resented bitterly any act of disrespect.
" Sometimes among ourselves,,'' says Isobel Gowdie,
" we would be calling him Black John, or the like,
and he would ken it, and hear us well enough ;
and he even then come to us and say, ' I ken wele
eneugh what ye were saying of me ' And then he
would beat and buffet us very sore.'' They were
often beaten for absence from the meetings, or for
neglect when present ; some bore their punishment
quietly, but others would resist, and there were
some beldames in the company who did not hesi-
tate to exchange blows with Satan. Alexander
Elder, of Earlseat, was often beaten ; " he is but



230 SOBGEBT AKD MAGIO.

soft, and could never defend himself in the least,
but 'greit' (lament) and cry when he would be
scourging him ; Margaret Wilson would defend her-
self finely, and cast up her hands to keep the
strokes off her; and Bessie Wilson would speak
crusty with her tongue, and would be belling again
to him stoutly/' On the whole, Satan appears to
have been but an ill master, for he was easily of-
fended, and " when he would be angry at us, he
would grin at us Uke a dog, as if he would swaUow
us up." However, as a peace-offering at the end of
the meeting, he sometimes gave them the '^ brawest
like money that ever was coined," but if they had
the misfortune to keep it more than twenty-four
hours in their possession, they found it was nothing
but horse-dung !

Isobel Gowdie stated that when they went to the
meetings, they took a straw or a bean-stalk, placed
it between their feet, and said, —

Horse and hattock, horse and gOy
Horse and pellattis, ho ! ho !

Then they were immediately carried into the air,
" as straws would fly upon a highway." If it were
at night, and the witch were afraid that her hus-
band might miss her from his bed, she took a
besom or three-legged stool, placed it beside him in
bed, and said thrice,—

I lay down this hesom (or stool) in the devil's name,
Let it not stir tiU I come again,



«



and immediately it seems a woman beside our



i3^

p *• •



'T



/



THE BLF-AEROWS. 231

husbands/' They often travelled in this way by
day, and then it was that they amused themselyea
by shooting people with the elf-arrowheads ; and
people who see straws flying about the air in a
whirlwind on a fine day, are recommendedto bless
themselves devoutly, because if they omit that pre-
caution they are liable to be shot by the witches
who ride on them. " Any that are shot by us,"
Isobel informs us, " their souls will go to heaven,
but their bodies remain with us, and will fly as
horses to us, as small as straws/' Isobel Gowdie
confessed to having killed many people in this
manner. The first time she went to her covine was
to Ploughlands, where she shot a man between the
" plough- stilts,'' and he presently fell on his face to
the ground. The devil gave her an arrow to shoot
at a woman in the fields, which she did, and the
victim dropped down dead. As they were riding
one day, Isobel by the side of Satan, and Margaret
Brodie and Bessie Hay in close company with
them, they met Mr. Harry Forbes, the minister of
Auldearn, going to Moynes, on which the devil gave
Margaret Brodie an arrow to shoot at him. Mar-
garet shot and missed her mark, and the arrow was
taken up again by Satan ; but when she offered to
shoot again he said, " No, we cannot have his life
this time." Presently afterwards they saw the laird
of Park, and the devil gave Isobel an arrow. She
shot at him as he was crossing a burn, and, perhaps
owing to this circumstance, missed him, for which
Bessie Hay gave her " a great cuff"."

The witches seem to have entertained an espe-
cial hostility towards these two gentlemen. In the



232 SOBCERT AND MAQia

winter of J 660, Mr. Forbes was sick, it appears, in
consequence of a conspiracy of these enemies.
They made a mixture of the galls, flesh, and en-
trails of toads, grains of barley, parings of finger
and toe nails, the liver of a hare, and " bits of clouts."
These ingredients were mixed together and seethed,
or boiled, all night in water. Satan was with them
during this process, and they repeated after him,
thrice each time, the words —

He is lying in his bed, be is lying sick and sair,

Let bim lie intill bis bed two months and tbree days mair.

And then —

Let bim lie in bis bed, let bim lie intill it sick and sair,
Let bim lie intill bis bed two montbs and tbree days mair.

And then finally —

He sball lie in bis bed, be sball lie sick and sair,

He shall lie intill bis bed two montbs and three days mair.

At night they went into Forbes's chamber to swing
this mixture over him as he lay sick in bed, but
for some reason or other they were not able to do
it. They now chose one of their covine who was
most intimate and familiar with the minister,
which happened to be Bessie Hay, who, as they
could not injure him by night, was to visit him by
day, and swing the noxious mixture over him ; but
she failed, because there were some other " worthy
persons'' with him at the time, though she " swung''
a little of the mixture on the bed where he lay.



/"



THE LAIBD OF PARK. 235

Mr. Harry Forbes appears to have received no
serious injury from the witches, as he was one of
those who sat in court to hear Isobel's confession.
The laird of Park was less fortunate in his family, if
he escaped in his person. A meeting was held at
the house of John Taylor of Auldearn, at which the
devil was present with Isobel Gowdie, John Taylor
and his wife, and one or two others, for the purpose
of making a picture of clay, to destroy the laird of
Park's male children. John Taylor brought home
the clay in "his plaidnewk" (a corner of his plaid),
and they broke it into fine powder, and passed it
through a sieve. Then they poured water on it to
make a paste, and " wrought it very sore like rye-
bowt'' As they threw the water in, they said, in
the devil's name, —

We pour in this water among this meal,

For lang dwining {languishing) and ill heal;

We put it into the fire,

That it may he humt with stick and btowre,

It shall he humt, with our will,

As any stickle (stubble) upon a hill.

" The devil,'' says Isobel, " taught us these words,
and when we had learnt them, we all fell down
upon our bare knees, and our hair about our eyes,
and our hands lifted up, looking stedfastly upon
the devil, still saying the words thrice over, till it
was made." They moulded the paste into the figure
of a male chUd, having aU its members complete,
and its hands folded down by its sides ; and they
laid it with the face to the fire till it was almost
dry, then in the devil's name they put it in the fire.



234 SORCSRT AND MAGIC.

and let it remain till it was red like a coal, when it
was drawn out with the same ceremony. This
image was entrusted to the care of John Taylor and
his wife ; it was kept wrapped up in a " clout/' in
a cradle of clay, and hung up in a " knag " in their
house. As often as they wanted to kill a male
child of the laird of Park, they took it down, wet
it, and roasted it every other day till the child died,
and then put it away again ; and as soon as another
male child was bom to him, they let it live six
months, and then destroyed it by the same process.
We are told in the confession that " till it be
broken, it will be the death of all the male children
that the laird of Park will ever get Cast it over a
kirk it will not break, till it be broken with an axe,
or some such like thing, by a man's hand If it be
not broken, it will last a hundred years.'' This
seems to be a remnant of the early belief which led
the Teutonic invaders to destroy the Roman sta-
tuary ; we continually find, on Roman sites, bronzes
that have been intentionally mutilated with an axe,
or some other sharp instrument.

These Scottish witches appear to have h^ no
eating and drinking at their Sabbaths, but they
went for this purpose into the houses of the lairds
and gentlemen round about, to feast by night on
the provisions which were always found there in
plenty. They went thus into the house of the earl
of Murray himself On the Candlemas before this
confession was made, they visited Grrangehill, the
house of Brodie of Lethin, where they got " meat
and drink enough." On these occasions the devil
always sat at the head of the table, and the maiden



am



TRANSFORMATIONS OP THE WITCHEa 235

of the covine sat next to him, and was served first
and best. The grace they said before meat was as
follows : —

We eat this meat in the devil's name,

With sorrow, and ** sych," (sighing) and mickle shame;

We shall destroy house and hold,

Both sheep and neat intill the fold.

Little good shall come to the fore

Of all the rest of the little store.

In these excursions the witches did not always
go in their own semblances, for they had the power
of transforming themselves into the shape of any
animals except lambs or doves, which, as emblems
of innocence, they might not assume. Isobel
Gpwdie describes minutely the process of transfor-
mation. When the witch would change herself into
a hare, the form that appears to have been adopted
most commonly, she said thrice, —

I shall go into a hare,

With sorrow, and sych, and mickle care ;

I shall go in the devil's name,

Ay till I come home again..

" and instantly we start in a hare.'' When they
wished to return to their own shape, they repeated
thrice the words —

Hare, hare, God send the care !

I am in a hare's likeness just now.

But I shall he in a woman's likeness even now.

When they chose the likeness of a cat, which was
the next favourite form, they said thrice —



236 SORCERY AND MAGIC.

T shall go intill a cat,
With sorrow, and sych, and a black shot;
And I shall go in the devil's name,
A J till I come home again.

The formula was similarly varied for other animals.
As thus transformed they passed by the houses of
other witches, they called them out, and they came
in similar shapes. Travelling in these assumed
shapes was not always safe. Isobel Gowdie, who
often went in the form of a hare, was sent one day,
about day-break, in this shape, with one of Satan's
messages to some of her neighbours, and on her way
met with the servants of Patrick Pepley of Killhill,
who happened to have his hounds with them. The
latter immediately gave chase to the transformed
witch, and ran after her a long course, until weary
and hard pressed, she gained her own house, and
ran behind a chest. The door being open, the
hounds followed her, but they happening to go to the
other side of the chest, she had just time to run
out and enter the house of a neighbour, where she
was able to say the disenchanting charm, and re-
covered her shape. She said that, while thus trans-
formed, the hounds had not power to kill them, but
if they chanced to be bitten, the wound remained
after they had recovered their natural shape.
" When we would be in the shape of cats, we did
nothing but cry and ' wraw,' [a very expressive word
for caterwauling,] and ' rywing' (tearing) and, as it
were, worrying one another ; and when we come to
our own shapes again, we will find the scratches
and * rywes * on our skins very sore !" About the
summer of 1659, " they went in the shape of rooks



STORM-RAISING. 23 7

to the house of Mr. Robert Donaldson, where the
devil, with John Taylor and his wife, went down
the kitchen chimney, and perched on the crook, or
iron on which the pot was suspended over the fire.
The others seem not to have liked this mode of
entry, and they waited till their friends opened a
window, and then they all went into the house,
and feasted on beef and drink, " but did no more
harm.''

Isobel Gowdie repeated in her confessions a great
number of the verses which they used in their in-
cantations, some of which are curious. Their me-
thod of raising a tempestuous wind was to take a
rag of cloth, wet it in water, and then take a beetle
(with which washerwomen beat their linen) and
knock it on the stone, repeating thrice —

I knock this rag upon this stane,

To raise the wind in the devil's name I

It shall not lie until I please again !

To appease the wind, they dried the rag, and
said, —

We lay the wind in the devil's name, ^

It shall not rise till I like to raise it again !

If the wind, on this appeal, did not instantly
abate, the witch called her spirit, and said to him,
" Thief, thief, conjure the wind, and cause it to lie !"
Isobel said that they had no power over rain. One
of the witches, whose husband sold cattle, used to
put a swallow's feather in the hide of the beast, and
say thrice over it, before it went, —



238 SOBCEBT AND MA^IC.

" I put out this beef in the devil's name,
That mickle silver and good price come hame !"

They had many charms for curing diseases, as well
as for sending them. It was common with them,
by such charms, to appropriate to themselves the
property or gain of others. When they wished to
" take the fruit of fishes " from the fishermen, they
went to the shore before the boat came in, and
standing on the brink of the water, they said
thrice, —

** The fishers are gone to the sea,
And they will bring home fish to me ;
They will bring them hame intill the boat,
But they shall get of them but the smaller sort"

As soon as the boat arrived, they stole a fish, or
bought or begged one, and with it came to them
" all the fruit of the whole fishes in the boat, and
the fishes that the fishermen themselves will have
will be but froth."

• At Lammas, (the first of August,) the witches
usually appropriated to themselves, in a similar
manner, the corn and other produce of the fields,
though the particular ceremonies for this purpose
varied. Isobel Growdie told, in her confession, how,
soon after her conversion to sorcery, she, with John
Taylor and his wife, and some others, met in the
kirk-yard of Nairn, and raised from its grave the
corpse of an unchristened child. With this and
some other ingredients, such as parings of finger and
toe-nails, grains of different sorts, and leaves of cole-
work, chopped very small, she formed a noxious
mixture, and going to the end of the cornfields op-



"• -— — — —



THE PLOUGHING OF THE DEVIL. 239

posite the mill of Nairn, they threw some on the
land. By this means, while the farmers reaped no-
thing but straw, all the grain was conveyed to the
secret storehouse of the witches, who usually kept
it there till the following Christmas or Easter, and
then shared it among the covine. She further
stated, that one night before the Candlemass of
1661, she went with the other witches to some fields
* be-east' Kinlos, where they yoked a plough of pad-
docks, or frogs ; the braces were of quickens, (quick
or dog-grass,) and a riglen's or ram's-horn was the
coulter. The officer of their covine, one John
Young, was driver, while the devil held the plough.
Thus they went several times about, all they of the
covine going up and down with it, praying Satan
for the fruit of that land, " and that thistles and
briers might grow there,'' i. e. that this might be
the only fruit reserved to the owners of the land.
When they wished to take a cow's milk, they took
tow or hemp, and twined and plaited it the wrong
way, in the devil's name. They then drew the rope
thus made in between the cow's two hind feet, and
out between the fore feet, always in the name of
the arch-fiend, and milked the rope. To restore the
cow its milk, they must cut the rope in two. They
had similar methods of taking and transferring the
strength of people's ale, and of abstracting various
other things. Isobel Gowdie further stated, that
when any one of them fell into the hands of justice,
she lost all her power, which was thereupon shared
amongst the rest of her covine, in addition to that
which they already possessed.

We are not informed what became of Isobel



240 SOBGEBY AKD MAGIC.

Growdie, but her case must have been considered, at
least in the district where it occurred, an important
one, for the examinations were continued through
two months. Her first confession is dated on the
13th of April, 1662, and her last bears date of
the 27th of May. Her most intimate associates ap-
pear to have been John Taylor and his wife, th«
latter of whom made a confession corroborating in
some important points, especially in the history
of the conspiracy against the laird of Park, those of
Isobel Growdie. These confessions have been printed
entire by Robert Pitcaim.

Such were the confessions of Isobel Gowdie of
Auldearn. If, as we are assured, they were purely
voluntary, we must imagine that this woman was
labouring under some strange delusion of the mind,
and that she really believed the story she told.
From the circumstantial character of her narrative,
we can hardly avoid supposing that there were per-
sons so far influenced by the popular superstitions,
that they joined together in practising such ceremo-
nies as are above described, and that they really be-
lieved in their efficacy. That such delusion was
possible on an extensive scale is shown by the cele-
brated example of major Weir and his sister, who
were executed less than ten years after the date of
Isobel's confessions. This man had distinguished
himself by his extraordinary zeal in the cause of the
covenant, and had been appointed, in 1649, with
the rank of major, to command the city guard of
Edinburgh. He lived in a retired manner with a
maiden sister. Both professed in their utmost rigour
the severe doctrines of the party whose cause



MAJOR WEIB AND HIS SISTER. 241

tbey had espoused, and the major, who always ap-
peared in his ordinary behaviour reserved and me-
lancholy, was especially endowed with the gift of
prayer, which made him a welcome visitor to the
side of a sick-bed. After the restoration, the me-
lancholy of the major and his sister appeared to
have become more and more sombre, until it settled
into a kind of lunacy, and they believed themselves
guilty of the most revolting crimes which disgrace
humanity. The major now began to make extraor-
dinary confessions to his friends, declaring that his
sins were of that character, that he had no hopes of
salvation, unless he should be brought to a shame-
ful end in this world. His presbyterian friends did
their utmost to restrain him, alarmed at the scandal
that Weir's conduct was likely to bring on their re-
ligion ; but the affair soon reached the ears of the
royalists, who were just as glad to seize upon any
occasion of hurting the cause of their opponents.
Major Weir and his sister were arrested, and both
made what was called a full confession, involving
crimes of a degrading character. As these were
most of them vices which the king's party had long
been in the habit of ascribing to their religious ad-
versaries, we are perhaps justified in believing that
they may have taken advantage of their state of mind
to suggest to them some of these self-accusations.
They found two or three witnesses to those parts of
his story which were most improbable. His sister
declared that he had a magical staff, which he
always carried with him, and which gave him elo-
quence in prayer. She said, that once a person
called upon them at noon-day with a fiery chariot,
vol.. II. M



/ '



242 80BCEBT AKD MAGIC.

visible only to themselves, and took them to visit a
friend at Dalkeith, where her brother received in-
formation, by supernatural means, of the event of
the battle of Worcester, and that she herself had in-
tercourse with the queen of the fairies, who assisted
her in spinning an unusual quantity of yam. There
was a woman who lived in the West Bow, at no
great distance from major Weir's house, who gave
the following evidence. She was a substantial
merchant's mfe, and " being very desirous to hear
him pray, for that end spoke to some of her neigh-
bours, that when he came to their house she might
be sent for. This was done, but he could never be
persuaded to open his mouth before her, no, not to
bless a cup of ale ; he either remained mute, or up
with his staff and away. Some few days before he
discovered himself, this gentlewoman coming from
the castle-hill, where her husband's niece was lying-
in of a child, about midnight perceived about the
Bow-head three women in the windows, shouting,
laughing, and clapping their hands. The gentle-
woman went forward, till just at major Weir's door,
there arose, as from the street, a woman about the
height of two ordinary females, and stepped forward.
The gentlewoman, not as yet excessively feared, bid
her maid step on, if by the lantern they could see
what she was ; but haste what they could, this long-
lesrged spectre was still before them, moving her
body with a vehement cachinnation, a great unmea-
surable laughter. At this rate the two strove for
place, till the giantess came to a narrow lane in the
Bow, commonly called the Stinking-close, into
which she turning, and the gentlewoman looking



- I II T-ra-



MAJOB WEIB AND HIS SISTER. 243

after her, perceived the close full of flaming torches,
(she could give them no other name,) and as it had
been a great multitude of people, stentoriously
laughing, and gaping with tahees of laughter. This
sight, at so dead a time of the night, no people
being in the windows belonging to the close, made
her and her servant haste home, declaring all what
they saw to the rest of the family, but more pas-
sionately to her husband. And though sick with
fear, yet she went the next morning with her maid
to view the noted places of her former night's walk,
and at the close inquired who lived there. It was
answered, major Weir ; the honest couple now re-
joicing that to Weir's devotion they never said
amen.'' When 'major Weir's sister was brought to
the place of execution, and saw the multitude of
spectators, she exclaimed, " Many weep and lament
for a poor old wretch like me ; but, alas ! few are
weeping for a broken covenant." A clear proof of
the stat^ of mind in which thes^ miserable people
suffered,



M 2



244



CHAPTER XXIX.



THE WITCHES OF HOHRA IK SWIE^EK.

In general the countries of northern Europe ap-
pear to have been less subject to these extensive
witch-prosecutions than the south, although there
the ancient popular superstitions reigned in great
force. Probably this latter circumstance contri-
buted not a little to the extraordinary character as-
sumed by a case of this nature, which, during the
years 1669 and 1670, caused a great sensation
throughout Sweden, and drew also the attention of
other countries. It began in a district which would
seem by its name of Elfdale to have been the pecu-
liar domain of the fairies, and the chief actors in it
were children, whom, according to the old popular
belief, the fairies were always on the look out to
carry away.

The villages of Mohra and Elfdale are situated in
the dales of the mountainous districts of the central
part of Sweden. In the first of the years above-men-
tioned, a strange report went abroad that the chil-



-<::S-



THE VISIT TO BLOCKULA. 245

dren of the neighbourliood were carried away nightly
to a place they called Blockola, where they were re-
ceived by Satan in person ; and the children them-
selves, who were the authors of the report, pointed
out to numerous women who they said were witches
and carried them thither. We have no information
as to the manner in which this affair arose, or how
it was first made public, but within a short space of
time nearly all the children of the district became
compromised in it, and agreed in nearly the same story.
They asserted in the strongest manner the fact of
their being carried away in multitudes to the place
of ghostly rendezvous, and we are told that the pale
and emaciated appearance of these juvenile victims
gave consistency to their statements, although there
was the testimony of their own parents that during
their pretended absence they had never been missed
from home.

Some of the incidents in this singular and tragi-
cal case seem to have been borrowed from the
witchcraft-cases in France and Germany, although
it is not very easy to understand how this could
have been the case in what was evidently a very
retired part of the country. The minister seems to
have shared largely in the delusion, and he may per-
haps have been involuntarily the means of working
the story of the children into its finished form. The
alarm and terror in the district became so great^
that a report was at last made to the king, who no-
minated commissioners, partly clergy and partly
laymen, to inquire into the extraordinary circum-
stances which had been brought under hi^ notice,
and these commissioners arrived in Mohra and an-



246 SOEGEBT AND HAQIC.

nounced their intention of opening their proceed-
ings on the 13th of August, 1670.

On the ] 2th of August, the commissioners met at
the parsonage-house, and heard the complaints of
the minister and several people of the better class,
who told them of the miserable condition they were
in, and prayed that by some means or other they
might be delivered from the calamity. They gravely
told the commissioners that by the help of witches
some hundred of their children had been drawn to
Satan, who had been seen to go in a visible shape
through the country, and to appear daily to the
people ; the poorer sort of them, they said, he had
seduced by feasting them with meat and drink.
Prayers and humiliations, it appears, had been
ordered by the church authorities, and were
strictly observed, but the inhabitants of the village
lamented before the commissioners that they had
been of no avail, and that their children were car-
ried away by the fiend in spite of their devotions.
They therefore earnestly begged that the witches
who had been the cause of the evil might be rooted
out, and that they might thus regain their former
rest and quietness, " the rather," they said, " be-
cause the children which used to be carried away in
the country or district of Elfdale, since some
witches had been burnt there, remained unmo-
lested.'" This certainly was a cogent argument for
persecution.

The 13th of August was the last day appointed
for prayer and humiliation, and before opening their
commission the commissioners went to church,
" where there appeared a considerable assembly



THE COMMISSION AT MOHBA. 247

both of young and old. The children could read
most of them, and sing psalms, and so could the
women, though not with any great zeal and fervour.
There were preached two sermons that day, in which
the miserable case of those people that suffered
themselves to be deluded by the devil was laid
open; and these sermons were at last concluded
with very fervent prayer. The public worship being
over, all the people of the town were called together
in the parson's house, near three thousand of them.
Silence being commanded; the king's commission
was read publicly in the hearing of them all, and
they were charged, under very great penalties, to
conceal nothing of what they knew, and to say no-
thing but the truth, those especially who were
guilty, that the children might be delivered from
the clutches of the devil; they all promised obe-
dience ; the guilty feignedly, but the guiltless weep-
ing and crying bitterly."

The commissioners entered upon their duties on
the next day with the utmost diligence, and the re-
sult of their misguided zeal formed one of the most
remarkable examples of cruel and remorseless per-
secution that stain the annals of sorcery. No less
than threescore and ten inhabitants of the village
and district of Mohra, three-and-twenty of whom
made confessions, were condemned and executed.
One woman pleaded that she was with child, and
the rest denied their guilt, and these were sent to
Fahluna, where most of them were afterwards put
to deatL Fifteen children were among those who
suffered death, and thirty-six more, of different
ages between nine and sixteen, were forced to run



248 80ECEBT Aim KA6IG.

the gauntlet, and be scourged on the hands at the
church-door every Sunday for one year; while twenty
more, who had been drawn into these practices more
unwillingly, and were very young, were condemned
to be scourged with rods upon their hands for three
successive Sundays at the church-door. The num-
ber of the children accused was about three hun-
dred.

It appears that the commissioners began by taking
Ae confessions of the children, and then they con-
fronted them with the witches whom the children
accused as their seducers. The latter^ to use the
words of the authorized report, having "most of
them children with them, which they had either se-
duced or attempted to seduce, some seven years of
age, nay, from four to sixteen years," now appeared
before the commissioners. " Some of the children
complained lamentably of the misery and mischief
they were forced sometimes to suffer of the devil
and the witches." Being asked, whether they were
sure, that they were at any time carried away by
the devil .^ they all replied in the affirmative.
" Hereupon the witches themselves were asked,
whether the confessions of those children were true,
and admonished to confess the truth, that they
might turn away from the devil unto the living
GroA At first, most of them did very stiffly, and
without shedding the least tear, deny it, though
much against their will and inclination. After this
the children were examined every one by them-
selves, to see whether their confessions did agree or
no, and the commissioners found that all of them,
except some very little ones, which could not tell all



THE WITCHBS OONPBSS. 249

the circumstances, did punctually agree in their
confessions of particulars. In the meanwhile, the
commissioners that were of the clergy examined the
witches, but could not bring them to any confes-
sion, all continuing stedfast in their denials, till at
last some of them burst out into tears, and their
confession agreed with what the children said ; and
these expressed their abhorrence of the fact, and
begged pardon. Adding that the devil,' whom they
called Locyta, had stopped the mouths of some of
them, so loath was he to part with his prey, and
had stopped the ears of others. And being now
gone from them, they could no longer conceal it ;
for they had now perceived his treachery.'^

The various confessions, not only of the witches
and children in Mohra, but of those of Elfdale,
presented a remarkable uniformity, even in their
more minute details. They all asserted that they
were carried to a place called Blockula, although
they appear to have been ignorant where or at
how great a distance it lay, and that they were there
feasted by the arch-fiend. The confession of the
witches of Elfdale ran thus : — " We of the province
of Elfdale do confess, that we used to go to a
gravel-pit, which lies hard by a cross-way, and
there we put on a vest over our heads, and then
danced round ; and after this ran to the cross-way,
and called thox devil thrice, first with a still voice,
the second time somewhat louder, and the third
time very loud, with these words, — ' Antecessor,
come and carry us to Blockula.' Whereupon im-
mediately he used to appear ; but in different
habits ; but for the most part we saw him in a grey

M 5



250 SOBCEBT AND MAGIC.

coat and red and blue stockings ; he had a red beard, a
high-crowned hat, with linen of divers colours wrapt
about it, and long garters upon his stockings. (It is
very remarkable, — says the report, — ^that the devfl
never appears to the witches with a sword by his
side.) Then he asked us, whether we would serve
him with soul and body. If we were content to do
so, he set us on a beast which he had there ready,
and carried us over churches and high walls, and
after all we came to a green meadow where
Blockula lies. We must procure some scrapings of
altars, and filings of church clocks ; and then he
gave us a horn, with a salve in it, wherewith we do
anoint ourselves, and a saddle, with a hammer and a
wooden nail, thereby to fix the saddle ; whereupon
we call upon the devil, and away we go/^

The witches of Mohra made similar statements ;
and being asked whether they were sure of a real
personal transportation, and whether they were
awake when it took place, they all answered in
the afiirmative ; and they said that the devil some-
times laid something down in their place that was
very like them ; but one of them asserted that he
did only take away " her strength,'^ while her body
lay still upon the ground, though sometimes he
took away her body also. They were then asked,
how they could go with their bodies through chim-
neys and unbroken panes of glass ; to which they
replied, that the devil did first remove all that
might hinder them in their flight, and so they had
room enough to go. Others, who were asked how
they were able to carry so many children with
them, said that they came into the chamber where



CHILDREN CARRIED TO BLOCKULA. 251

the children lay asleep, and laid hold of them, upon
which they awoke ; they then asked them whether
they would go to a feast with them. To which
some answered, Yes ; others, No, " yet they were
all forced to go;" they only gave the children a
shirt, and a coat and doublet, which was either ried
or blue, and so they set them upon a beast of the
devil's providing, and then they rode away. The
children confessed that this was true, and some of
them added, that because they had very fine clothes
put upon them, they were very willing to go. Some
of the children said that they concealed it from
their parents, while others made no secret of their
visits to Blockula. " The witches declared, more-
over, that till of late, they had never power to
carry away children, but only this year and the
last ; and the devil did at that time force them to
it ; that heretofore it was sufficient to carry but
one of their own children, or a stranger's child with
them, which happened seldom ; but now he did
plague them and whip them, if they did not pro-
cure him many children, insomuch that they had
no peace nor quiet for him. And whereas that for-
merly one journey a week would serve their turn
from their own town to the place aforesaid, now
they were forced to run to other towns and places
for children, and that they brought with them
some fifteen, some sixteen children every night"

The journey to Blockula was not always made
with the same kind of conveyance ; they commonly
used men, beasts, even spits and posts, according
as they had opportunity. They preferred, however,
riding upon goats, and if they had more children



252 0OROBBT AKD MAGIC.

with them than the animal could conyenimtiT
carry, they elongated its back by means of a spit
anointed with their magical ointment It was fwp-
ther stated, that if the children did at anj time
name the names of those, either man or womaa,
that had been with them, and had carried th^a
away,, they were again carried by force, either to
Blockula or the cross- way, and there beaten, inso-
much that some of them died of it ; ^^ and this
some of the witches confessed, and added, that now
they were exceedingly troubled and tortured in
their minds for it/' One thing was wanting to
confirm this circumstance of their confession. The
marks of the whip could not be found on the per-
sons of the victims, except on one boy, who had
some wounds and holes in his back, that were
given him with thorns ; but the witches said they
would quickly vanish.

The confessions were very minute in regard to
the effects of the journey on the children after their
return. " They are," says the history, " exceed-
ingly weak ; and if any be carried over night, they
cannot recover themselves the next day, and they
often fall into fits ; the coming of which they
know by an extraordinary paleness that seizes on
the children, and when a fit comes upon them, they
lean upon their mother's arms, who sits up with
them, sometimes all night, and when they observe
the paleness, shake the children, but to no purpose.
They observe, further, that their children's breasts
grow cold at such times, and they take sometimes
a burning candle and stick it in their hair, which
yet is not burned by it. They swoon upon this



_i..)t •JB'.wDa . liSs



DESOBIPflOK OF BLOOKULA. 253

paleness, which swoon lasteth sometimes half aa
hour, sometimes an hour, sometimes two hours, and
when the children come to themselves again, they
ma^rn and lament, and groan most miserably, and
beg exceedingly to be eased. This the old men
declared upon oath before the judges, and called
the inhabitants of the town to witness, as persons
that had most of them experience of the strong
symptoms of their children/'

One little girl in Elfdale confessed that, happen-
ing accidentally to utter the name of Jesus, as she
was carried away, she fell suddenly upon the
ground, and received a hurt in her side, which the
devil presently healed, and away he carried her.

A boy of the same district said that one day he
was carried away with his mistress ; and to per-
fonn the journey he took his father's horse out of
the meadow, where it was feeding, and upon his
return, she let the horse go into her own ground
The next morning the boy's father sought for the
horse, and not finding it in its place, imagined that
it was lost, till the boy told him the whole story,
emd the father found the horse according to his
child's statement.

The account they gave of Blockula was, that it
was situated in a large meadow, like a plain sea,
" wherein you can see no end." The house they
met at had a great gate painted with many divers
colours. Through this gate they went into a little
meadow distinct from the other, and here they
turned their animals to graze* When they had
made use of men for their beasts of burthen, they
set them up against the wall in & state of helpless



254 60BCBBT AND UAGIG.

slumber, and there they remained till wanted for the
homeward flight In a very large room of this
house, stood a long table, at which the witches sat
down; and adjoining to this room was another
chamber, where there were "lovely and delicate
beds/'

As soon as th^y arrived at Blockula, the visitors
were required to deny their baptism, and devote
themselves body and soul to Satan, whom they pro-
mised to serve faithfully. Hereupon he cut their
fingers, and they wrote their name with blood in his
book. He then caused them to be baptized anew, by
priests appointed for that purpose. Upon this the
devil gave them a purse, wherein there were filings
of clocks, with a big stone tied to it, which they
threw into the water, and said, " As these filings
of the clock do never return to the clock, from
which they were taken, so may my soul never re-
turn to heaven !" Another difficulty arose in veri-
fying this statement, that few of the children had
any marks on their fingers to show where they had
been cut. But here again the story was helped by
a girl who had her finger much hurt, and who de-
clared, that because she would not stretch out her
finger, the devil in anger had thus wounded it

When these ceremonies were completed, the
witches sat down at the table, those whom the fiend
esteemed most being placed nearest to him ; but
the children were made to stand at the door, where
he himself gave them meat and drink. Perhaps we
may look for the origin of this part of the story in
the pages of Pierre de Lancre. The food with
which the visitors to Blockula were regaled, consisted



Satan's amusements. 255

of broth, with coleworts and bacon in it ; oatmeal
bread spread with butter, milk, and cheese. Some-
times, they said, it tasted very well, and sometimes
very ill. After meals they went to dancing, and it
was one peculiarity of these northern witches' sab-
baths, that the dance was usually followed by fight-
ing. Those of Elfdale confessed that the devil used
to play upon a harp before them. Another pecu-
liarity of these northern witches was, that children
resulted from their intercourse with Satan, and
these children having married together, became the
parents of toads and serpents. Satan loved to play
tricks upon his subjects. One day he pretended to
be dead, and, singularly enough, there was great
lamentation among the witches at Blockula; but
he soon showed signs of life. If he had a mind to
be merry with them, he let them all ride upon spits
before him, and finished by taking the spits and
beating them black and blue, and then laughed at
them. Then he told them that the day of judg-
ment was at hand, and set them to build a great
house of stone, promising that in this house he would .
preserve them from Grod's wrath, and cause them
to enjoy the greatest delights and pleasures; but
while they were hard at work, he caused a great
part of the work to fall down upon them, and some
of the witches were severely hurt, which made him
laugh.

Some of the children spoke of a very great demon
like a dragon, with fire round about him, and
bound with an iron chain ; and the devil told them
that if they confessed anything, he would set that



256 80BCBBT AND MAGIC.

great devil loose upon them, whereby all Sweden
should come into great dang^^ They said that the
devil had a church there like that in the village oS
If ohra. When he heard that the commissioners were
eoming, he told the witches thej should not fear
them, for he would certainly kill them alL And
they confessed some of them had attempted to
murder the commissioners, but had not been suc-
cessful. Some of the children improved upon these
stories, and told of ^' a white angel, which used to
forbid them what the devil had bid them do, and
told that these things should not last long ; what
had been done had been permitted, because of the
sin and wibkedness of the people and their parents ;
and that the carrying away of the children should
be made manifest. And they added, that this
white angel would place himself sometimes at the
door betwixt the witches and the children, and
that when they came to Blockula he pulled the
children back, but the witches went on.''

The witches of Sweden appear to have been less
noxious than those of most other countries, for,
whatever they acknowledged themselves, there seems
to have been no evidence of mischief done by them.
Hey confessed that they were obliged to promise
Satan that they would do all kind of mischief, and
that the devil taught them to milk, which was after
this manner. They used to stick a knife in the
wall, and hang a kind of label on it, which they
drew and stroaked ; and as long as this lasted, the
persons they had power over were miserably plagued,
and the beasts were milked that way, till some-



• «



.•JL-:Z t— t"'" — -f^T'SriS »• -



THE MUSriSTER OF ELFDALB's HEAD. 257

times they died of it. A woman confessed that
the devil gave her a wooden knife, wherewith,
going into houses, she had power to kill anything
she touched with it ; yet there were few that would
confess that they had hurt any man or woman.
Being asked whether they had murdered any chil-
dren, they confessed that they had indeed tor-
mented many, but did not know whether any of
them died of these plagues, although they said that
the devil had showed them several places where he
had power to do mischief The minister of Elfdale
declared, that one night these witches were, to his
thinking, on the crown of his head, and that from
thence he had a long continued pain of the head.
And upon this one of the witches confessed that
the devil had sent her to torment that minister, and
that she was ordered to use a nail, and strike it
into his head ; but his skull was so hard that the
nail would not penetrate it, and merely produced
that headache. The hard-headed minister said
further, that one night he felt a pain as if he were
torn with an instrument used for combing flax, and
when he awoke he heard somebody scratching and
scraping at the window, but could see nobody ; and
one of the witches confessed, that she was the per-
son that had thus disturbed him. The minister of
Mohra declared also, that one night one of these
witches came into his house, and did so violently
take him by the throat, that he thought he should
have been choaked, and awaking, he saw the per-
son that did it, but could not know her ; and that
for some weeks he was not able to speak, or per-


258 80&CEBY AND MAGia

form divine service. An old woman of Elfdale con-
fessed, that the devil had helped her to make a
nail, which she struck into a boy's knee, of which
stroke the boy remained lame a long time. And
she added, that, before she was burned or executed
by the hand of justice, the boy would recover.

Another circumstance confessed by these witches
was, that the devil gave them a beast, about the shape
and bigness of a cat, which they called a carrier,
and a bird as big as a raven, but white ; and these
they could send anywhere, and wherever they came
they took away all sorts of victuals, such as butter,
cheese, milk, bacon, and all sorts of seeds, and carried
them to the witch. What the bird brought they kept
for themselves, but what the carrier brought, they
took to Blockula, where the arch-fiend gave them as
much of it as he thought good. The carriers, they
said, filled themselves so full oftentimes, that they
were forced to disgorge it by the way, and what
they thus rendered fell to the ground, and is found
in several gardens where coleworts grow, and far
from the houses of the witches. It was of a yellow
colour like gold, and was called witches' butter.

" The lords commissioners," says the report,
" were indeed very earnest, and took great pains to
persuade them to show some of their tricks, but to
no purpose ; for they did all unanimously declare,
that since they had confessed all, they found that
all their witchcraft was gone ; and the devil at this
time appeared very terrible, with claws on his
hands and feet, with horns on his head, and a long
tail behind, and showed them a pit burning, with a



wmmmmiP'^ssam'm'mv^SBB'^m^^^gm^fm



"x



END OF THE INQUIRY. 259

band out ; but the devil did thrust the person
down again with an iron fork, and suggested to the
witches that if they continued in their confession,
he would deal with them in the same manner/'

Such are the details, as far as they can now be
obtained, of this extraordinary delusion, the only
one of a similar kind that we know to have oc-
curred in the northern part of Europe during the
" age of witchcraft/' In other countries we can
generally trace some particular cause which gave
rise to great persecutions of this kind, but here, as
the story is told, we see none, for it is hardly likely
that such a strange series of accusations should
have been the mere involuntary creation of a party
of little children. Suspicion is excited by the pecu-
liar part which the two clergymen of Elfdale and
Mohra acted in it, that they were not altogether
strangers to the fabrication. They seem to have
been weak superstitious men, and perhaps they had
been reading the witchcraft books of the south till
they imagined the country round them to be over-
run with these noxious beinga The proceedings at
Mohra caused so much alarm throughout Sweden,
that prayers were ordered in aU the churches for
delivery from the snares of Satan, who was believed
to have been let ^ loose in that kingdom. On a
sudden a new edict of the king put a stop to the
whole process, and the matter was brought to a
close rather mysteriously. It is said that the witch
prosecution was increasing so much in intensity,
that accusations began to be made against people
of higher class in society, and then a complaint was
made to the king, and they were stopped. Perhaps



zr''



260 60B0B&T jiJn> XAGia

the. two clergymen themselyes became alarmed, but
one thing eeems certain^ that the moment the com-
mission was revoked, and the persecution ceased, no
more witches were heard oi It was thus in most
coimtries ; as long as the poor alone were the vic-
tims, their sufferings excited little commiseration,
but the moment the persecution began to reach the
rich, it excited their alarm, and means were found
to put a stop to it, except when it had some ulte-
rior object which it was the interest of those in
power to pursue.



261



CHAPTER XXX.



SUl MATTHEW HALB AND CHIEF JUSTICE HOLT.

On the tenth of March, 1664, there was a remark-
able trial of witches at Bury St. Edmunds, in Suf-
folk, the scene of the labours of Matthew Hopkins
nearly twenty years before. The victims were
two poor widows of Lowestoff, who appear to
have obtained a Uving by performing a number of
menial offices for their neighbours. One of the
chief witnesses was a woman of the same town,
named Dorothy Durent, who deposed that, about
five or six years before, she had employed Amy
Duny, one of the prisoners, to nurse her infant
child while she went out of the house about her
affairs, and that on her return she quarrelled with
her for having acted contrary to her directions,
upon which Amy Duny went away in anger,
uttering " many high expressions and threatening
speeches.^" The same night her child was seized
with strange and dangerous fits. " And the said
examinant further said, that she being exceedingly
troubled at her child's distemper, did go to a cer-



262 SOKCEBT AND MAGIC.

tain person named doctor Job Jacob, who lived at
Yarmouth, who had the reputation in the country
to help children that were bewitched ; who advised
her to hang up the child's blanket in the chimney-
comer all day, and at night, when she put the child
to bed, to put it into the said blanket ; and if she
found anything in it she should not be afraid, but
to throw it into the fire. And this deponent did
according to his direction, and at night, when she
took down the blanket with an intent to put her
child therein, there fell out of the same a great
toad, which ran up and down the hearth, and she
having a young youth only with her in the house,
desired him to catch the toad and throw it into the
fire, which the youth did accordingly, and held it
there with the tongs ; and as soon as it was in the
fire, it made a great and horrible noise, and after a
space there was a flashing in the fire Uke gun-
powder, making a noise like the discharge of a
pistol, and thereupon the toad was no more seen
nor heard. It was asked by the court, if that after
the noise and flashing there was not the substance
of the toad to be seen to consume in the fire ; and
it was answered by the said Dorothy Durent, that
after the flashing and noise, there was no more
seen than if there had been none there. The next
day there came a young woman, a kinswoman of
the said Amy, and a neighbour of this deponent,
and told this deponent that her aunt (meaning the
said Amy) was in a most lamentable condition,
having her face all scorched with fire, and that she
was sitting alone in her house, in her smock,
without any fire. And thereupon this deponent



THE TWO WITCHBS OP LOWBSTOFF. 263

went into the house of the said Amy Duny to see
h^, and found her in the same condition as was
related to her, for her face, her legs, and thighs,
which this deponent saw, seemed very much
scorched and burnt with fire, at which this depo-
nent seemed much to wonder, and asked the said
Amy how she came into that sad condition ; and
the said Amy replied that she might thank her for
it, for that she, this deponent, was the cause there-
of, but that she should live to see some of her chil-
dren dead, and she upon crutches. And this de-
ponent further saith, that after the burning of the
said toad her child recovered, and was well again,
and was living at the time of the assizes/'

Subsequent to these new threats, another child
of Dorothy Durent's was taken ill and died, and
she herself was seized with a lameness in her legs,
in consequence of which she had remained a cripple
ever since.

The next offence laid to the charge of Amy Duny
was the bewitching of the children of Samuel Pacy,
a merchant of Lowestoff, who " carried himself
with much soberness during the trial.'' This man
deposed " that his younger daughter, Deborah,
upon Thursday the tenth of October last, was sud-
denly taken with a lameness in her leggs, so that
she could not stand, neither had she any strength
in her limbs to support her, and so she continued
until the seventeenth day of the same month,
which day being fair and sunshiny, the child de-
sired to be carried on the east part of the house, to
be set upon the bank which looketh upon the sea ;
and whilst she was sitting there. Amy Dimy came



tM SOBCSBT AlTD UAGld

to this deponent's honse to buy some herrings, bnt
being denied, she went away discontented, and pre-
sently returned again, and was denied, and like*
-wise the third time, and was denied as at first ;
and at her last going away, she went away gram-
bling, but what she said was not perfectly iindeiv
stood. But at the very same instant of time the
said child was taken with most violent fits, feeling
most extreme pain in her stomach, like the prick-
ing of pins, and shrieking out in a most dreadftil
manner, like unto a whelp, and not like unto a sen-
sible creature. And in this extremity the child
continued, to the great grief of the parents, until
the thirtieth of the same month. During this time
this deponent sent for one Dr. Feavor, a doctor of
physick, to take his advice concerning Ms child's
distemper. The doctor being come, he saw the
child in those fits, but could not conjecture (as he
then told this deponent, and afterwards he affirmed
in open court at this trial) what might be the
cause of the child's affliction. And this deponent
further saith, that by reason of the circumstances
aforesaid, and in regard Amy Duny is a woman
of an ill fame, and commonly reported to be a
witch and a sorceress, and for that the said child
in her fits would cry out of Amy Duny as the cause
of her malady, and that she did affright her with
apparitions of her person (as the child in the in-
terval of her fits related), he, this deponent, did
suspect the said Amy Duny for a witch, and
charged her with the injury and wrong to his chad,
and caused her to be set in the stocks on the
twenty-eighth of the same October ; and during the



\



DECLABATIOHJS OF THE CHILDREN.



265



tiifie of her continuance there, one Alice Letteridge
and Jane Buxtpn demanded of her (as they also
affirmed in court upon their oaths) what should
be the reason of Mr. Pacy's child's distemper, telling
her that she was suspected to be the cause thereof.
She replied, ^Mr. Pacy keeps a great stir about his
child, but let him stay until he hath done as much
by his children as I have done by mina' And
being further examined what she had done to her
children, she answered that she had been fain to
open her child's mouth with a tap to give it vic-
tuals. And the said deponent further deposeth,
that within two days after speaking of the said
words, being the thirtieth of October, his eldest
daughter Elizabeth fell into extreme fits, inasmuch
that they could not open her mouth to give her
broth to preserve her life without the help of a
tap, which they were enforced to use ; and the
younger child was in like manner afflicted, so that
they used the same also for her relief"

The children were now continually visited with
fits, similar to other supposed sufferers from witch-
craft, including the vomiting of crooked pins, nails,
&c., and the spasmodic trances, in the latter of
which they were in the habit of crying out against
various women of ill-repute in the town, who, they
said, were present tormenting them, but more espe-
cially against Amy Duny and the other prisoner,
whose name was Rose Cullender. The children de-
clared that these two women appeared to them
sometimes in the act of spinning, and at other times
in a variety of postures, threatening and mocking
them. A friend of the family appeared in court as

VOL. IL N



266 SOBCEBT AKB MAGIC.

an independent witness, and deposed, that in her
presence " the children would in their fits cry out
against Rose Cullender and Amy Duny, affirming
that they saw them ; and they threatened to tor-
ment them ten times more if they complained of
them. At some times the children (only) would see
things run up and down the house in the appear-
ance of mice ; and one of them suddenly snapt one
with the tongs, and threw it into the fire, and it
screeched out like a bat At another time, the
younger child being out of her fits, went out of
doors to take a little fresh air, and presently a little
thing like a bee flew upon her face, and would
have gone into her mouth, whereupon the child ran
in all haste to the door to get into the house again,
shrieking out in a most terrible manner ; where-
upon this deponent made haste to come to her, but
before she could get to her, the child fell into her
swooning fit, and at last, with much pain and strain-
ing herself, she vomited up a twopenny nail with a
broad head ; and after that the child had raised up
the nail she came to her understanding, and being
demanded by this deponent how she came by this
nail, she answered that the bee brought this nail
and forced it into her mouth. And at other times
the elder child declared unto this deponent that
during the time of her fits, she saw flies come unto
her, and bring with them in their mouths crooked
pins ; and after the child had thus declared the
same, she fell again into violent fits, and afterwards
raised several pins. At another time the said elder
child declared unto this deponent, and sitting by
the fire suddenly started up and said she saw a



tgi^^smm^m^^tmmmmmmei^^mfsimB^g^



mmt



ROSS CULLENDER. 267

mouse, and she crept under the table looking after
it, and at length she put something in her apron,
saying she had caught it ; and immediately she
ran to the fire and threw it in, and there did appear
upon it to this deponent, like the flashing of gun-
powder, though she confessed she saw nothing in
the child's hands."

Another person bewitched was a servant girl
named Susan Chandler, whose mother, besides de-
posing to the discovery of Satan's marks on the
body of one of the witches, said, "that her said
daughter being of the age of eighteen years, was
then in service in the said town, and rising up
early the next morning to wash, this Rose Cul-
lender appeared to her, and took her by the hand,
whereat she was much affrighted, and went forth-
with to her mother, (being in the same town,) and
acquainted her with what she had seen ; but being
extremely terrified, she fell extreme sick, much
grieved at her stomach, and that night, after being
in bed with another young woman, she suddenly
shrieked out, and fell into such extreme fits as if
she were distracted, crying against Rose Cullender,
saying she would come to bed to her. She conti-
nued in this manner beating and wearing herself,
insomuch that this deponent was glad to get help
to attend her. In her intervals she would declare
that sometimes she saw Rose Cullender alone, at
another time with a great dog with her ; she also
vomited up divers crooked pins ; and sometimes she
was stricken with blindness, and at another time
she was dumb, and so she appeared to be in court
when the trial of the prisoners was, for she was not

N 2



268 SOBOEBT ASJ> MAGIC.

able to speak her knowledge ; but being brought
into court at the trial, she suddenly fell into her
fits, and being carried out of the court again, within
the space of half an hour she came to herself and
recovered her speech, and thereupon was immedi-
atelj brought into the court, and asked by the
court whether she was in condition to take an oath,
and to give evidence. She said she could. But
when she was sworn, and asked what she could say
against either of the prisoners, before she could
make any answer she fell into her fits, shrieking
out in a miserable manner, crying, * Bum her,
bum her!' which was all the words she could
speak.''

Such was the evidence against the two miserable
women dragged before the court as prisoners ; and
the barrister who advocated their cause earnestly
pleaded its insufficiency as the mere effect of the
imaginations of the persons aggrieved, which was
supported by no direct and substantial evidence
fixing the crime on the two persons accused, even
supposing that the accusers had really been be-
witched. The celebrated Sir Thomas Brown was
next brought forwards in court, and on being asked
what he thought of the case, declared that " he was
clearly of opinion that the persons were bewitched,"
with some further remarks, which appear strange
as coming from the mouth of the great exposer of
" vulgar errors."

Doubts still existed among some of those who
were present in court, and they attempted to dispel
these by a practical experiment. " At first, during
the time of the trial, there were some experiments



T^^^WW



PBAOTIOAL EXPEBIMENTk 269

made with the persons afflicted, by bringing the
persons to touch them ; and it was observed, that
when they were in the midst of their fits, to all
men's apprehension wholly deprived of all sense
and understanding, closing their fists in such a
manner as that the strongest man in the court
covld not force them open, yet by the least touch
of one of those supposed witches. Rose Cullender
by name, they would suddenly shriek out, opening
their hands, which accident would not happen by
the touch of any other person. And lest they
might privately see when they were touched by
the said Rose Cullender, they were blinded with
their own aprons, and the touching took the same
effect as before. There was an ingenious person
that objected there might be a great faUacy in this
experiment, and there ought not to be any stress
put upon this to convict the parties, for the chil*
dren might counterfeit this their distemper,' and
perceiving what was done to them, they might in
such manner suddenly alter the motion and gesture
of their bodies, on purpose to induce persons to
believe that they were not natural, but wrought
strangely by the touch of the prisonera Wherefore
to avoid this scruple, it was privately desired by
the judge that the lord Cornwallis, sir Edmund
Bacon, and Mr. Serjeant Keeling, and some other
gentlemen there in court, would attend one of the
distempered persons in the farthest part of the hall,
whilst she was in her fits, and then to send for one
of the witches, to try what would then happen,
which they did accordingly ; and Amy Duny was
conveyed from the bar and brought to the maid ;



270 SOBOEBT AHD MAGIC.

they put an apron before lier eyes, and tlien one
other person touched her hand, which produced the
same effect as the touch of the witch did in the
court Whereupon the gentleman returned, openly
protesting that they did belieye the whole transac-
tion of this business was a mere imposture. This
put the court and all persons into a stand ; but at
length Mr. Pacy did declare, that possibly the maid
might be deceived by a suspicion that the witoh
touched her when she did not For he had ob-
served divers times, that although they could not
speak, but were deprived of the use of their tongues
and limbs, that their understandings were perfect,
for that they have related divers things which have
been when they were in their fits, after they were
recovered out of them.'' ^

Disappointed in this experiment, the accusers
now brought forward some other evidence to prove
the character of the prisoners, the principal of
which was ^^ one John Soam of Lowestoff, yeoman,
a sufficient person,'' who deposed, ^^ That not long
since, in harvest time, he had three carts whieh
brought home his harvest, and as they were going
into the field to load, one of the carts wrenched the
window of Rose Cullender's house, whereupon she
came out in a great rage and threatened this de-
ponent for doing that wrong, and so they passed
along into the fields and loaded all the three carts,
the other two carts returned safe home, and back
again, twice loaded that day afterwards ; but as to
this cart which touched Rose Cullender's house,
after it was loaded it was overturned twice or
thrice that day ; and after that they had loaded it



tMJ^fjSSSSM



THB CART BBWITCHBD. 271

again this second or third time, as they brought
it through the gate which leadeth out of the field
into the town, the cart stuck so fast in the gate-
stead, that they could not possibly get it through,
but were enforced to cut down the post of the gate
to make the cart pass through, although they could
not perceive that the cart did of either side touch
the gate-post And this deponent further said,
that after they had got it through the gateway,
they did with much difficulty get it home into the
yard ; but for all that they could do, they could
not get the cart near into the place where they
should unload the com, but were fain to unload it
at a great distance from the place ; and when they
began to unload, they found much difficulty therein,
it being so hard a labour that they were tired that
first came ; and when others came to assist them,
their noses burst forth a bleeding; so they were
fain to desist, and leave it until the next morning,
and dien they unloaded it without any difficulty at
alL Robert Sh^rringham also deposeth against
Rose Cullender, that about two years since, passing
along the street with his cart and horses, the axle-
tree of his cart touched her house, and broke down
some i)art of it, at which she was very much dis-
pleased, threatening him that his horses should
suffer for it, and so it happened, for all those horses,
being four in number, died within a short time
after ; since that time he hath had great losses by
sudden dying of his other cattle ; so soon as his
sows pigged, the pigs would leap and caper, and
immediately fall down and dia Also, not long



272 90BCEBT AJSTD MAOIC.

after, he was taken with a lameness in his limbs
that he could neither go nor stand for some dajs.
After all this, he was rerj much vexed with a great
number of lice of an extraordinary bigness, and
although he many times shifted himself, jet he was
not anything the better, but would swarm again
with them ; so that in the conclusion he was forced
to bum all his clothes, being two suits of apparel,
and then was clean from thent''

This was the kind of evidence brought forward
in a public court of justice in the year 1664,. in a
trial which has obtained especial celebrity from the
circumstance that the lord chief baron who pre-
sided over it was the gi*eat lawyer, sir Matthew
Hale. Yet even he was not exempt from the su-
perstitious feeling of his own age, and the cau-
tiously-worded declaration in his charge to the
jury, — " that there were such creatures as witches
he made no doubt at all ; for first the Scriptures
had affirmed so much ; secondly, the wisdom of all
nations had provided laws against such persons,
which is an argument of their confidence of such a
crime, and such hath been the judgment of this
kingdom, as appears by that act of parliament
which hath provided punishments proportionable to
the quality of the offence'' — ^was considered as a
public declaration of the judge's opinion in favour
of the witchcraft prosecutions. The jury retired,
passed half an hour in deliberation, and returned
with an unanimous verdict against the prisoners.
Sir Matthew Hale interfered no further, but pro-
ceeded on his circuit ; and the two poor widows of



II .. _ .»■«» LJ1. '9 L.^— J **-



JUDGMENT OF SIB MATTHEW HALE. 273

Lowestoff were hanged on the following Monday,
They persisted to the last in asserting their inno-
cence.

The trial before sir Matthew Hale had a great
influence in increasing the number of trials for the
crime of sorcery under the restoration, although
the return of the Stuarts seemed from the first to
have brought back some of the spirit which had
been spread in England by the first of their race
who came to the throne. Among other rather ridi-
culous cases, it will be sufficient to instance that of
Julian Coxe, a wretched old woman, who, in the pre-
ceding year, had been convicted and hanged at Taun-
ton in Somersetshire, on the evidence of a huntsman,
who declared that, having given chase to a hare, it was
lost in a bush, and that on examining the spot, he
found on the other side of the bush this woman in
such an attitude and condition as convinced him that
he had been hunting a witch who had taken the
opportunity of the shelter afforded by the bush to
regain her own shape. In the same year that wit-
nessed the trial before sir Matthew Hale at Bury,
a justice of the peace in Somersetshire, named
Hunt, was ambitious of becoming another witch-
finder-general, and had already put twelve persons
under arrest, when a stop was put on his proceed-
ings by the interference of a higher authority. In
1679, a witch condemned at Ely was saved by a re-
prieve from the king, and her accuser is said to
have subsequently avowed his imposture, yet three
years afterwards the city of Exeter witnessed the
execution of three witches under circumstances well
calculated to expose the absurdity of such charges.

N 5



274 SOBCBET AHD XAGIC.

Seaport towns appear to have been rather fire*
quently the haunts of witches, and the scenes of
some of their more extraordinary operations^ At
the town of Biddeford on the coast of Devon dwelt
three women, named Temperance Lloyd, Ifary
Trembles, and Susanna Edwards, who seem to
have enjoyed a character similar to that of Aioy
Duny and Rose Cullender at Lowestofi^ and they
were arrested and carried prisoners to Exeter in
the summer of 1682. One of the persons who ac-
cused them was a mariner's wife named Dorcas
Cloleman, who said that in the year 1680 she had
been taken with '^ tormenting pains by prickling in
her arms, stomach, and heart, in such a manner as
she was never taken so before/' She applied to
one doctor Beare, a professed physician, who told
her it was past his skill to save her, inasmuch as
she was bewitched. We thus see, what has indeed
occurred often before, how unskilful physicians, in
the attempt to conceal their own ignorance, added
to and strengthened the prejudices of the vulgar.
Dorcas Coleman had no suspicion of the person
that had bewitched her, until Susanna Edwards
was thrown into prison, and then she went to her
to ask if she were her persecutor, and received an
answer in the affirmative. Another woman of Bid-
deford, named Grace Thomas, was attacked some-
what in the same manner, and declared that as
soon as Temperance Lloyd was committed to prison,
she ^' immediately felt her pricking and sticking
pains to cease and abate.'' Upon this one of the
friends of Grace Thomas ^^ did demand of the said
Temperance Lloyd whether she had any wai^ or



r3S*5



THE TRIAL AT BXBTBB. 275

clay in the form of a picture whereby she had
pricked and tormented the said Grace Thomas ;
unto which the said Temperance made answer, that
she had no wax nor clay, but confessed that she
had only a piece of leather which she had pricked
nine times." Temperance Lloyd was searched, and .
they found on her body two " teats," which she
confessed had been sucked by ^' the black man \"
and one of the searchers, who i^ an acquaintaiice
of the accused, declared that on the morning of the
preceding Thursday, "she, this informant, did see
something in the shape of a magpie to come at the
chamber window where the said Grrace Thomas
did lodge. Upon which this informant did demand
of the said Temperance Lloyd whether she did
know of any bird to come and flutter at the said
window ; unto which question the said Temperance
did then say that it was the black man in the
shape of the bird." Having obtained thus much
of foundation to build upon, the account of the
black man was soon amplified, and "being de-
manded of what stature the said black man was,"
she was prevailed upon te describe him as being
" about the length of her arm ; and that his eyes
were very big ; and that he hopped or leaped in the
way before her." The very picture, in fact, of a
" puck^' or hobgoblin.

It is hardly necessary to enter further into the
rather numerous depositions made on this occasion.
A piece of leather was found, in which tne prose-
cutors and judges " conceived there might be some '
^ichantment ;" a child's doll was also produced,



276 SOBOVET AITD luaiG.

■wliicli it was further itnagined might have faten
pricked vith pins ; it was deposed tl^t TempeTanec
JJojd bad appeared in the form of a red pig to a
woman while she was brewing ; and npon this evi-
dence, and more of the same description, the thre«
women were convicted by the jury, and they w«re
all hanged at Exeter. When these wretched womea
were on the scaffold, they were again tormented
with questions, and returned such answers as might
be expected from persons in a condition that they
hardly knew what they were asked or what they
said in reply. Among other things, Temperance
Lloyd was asked, " How did you come in to hurt
Mrs. Grace Thomas ? did you pass throu^ the key-
hole of the door, or was the door open ?

" Temp. The devil did lead me up-stairs, and
the door was open : and this is all the hurt I
did.

" Q. How do you know it was the devil ?

" Temp. I knew it by his eyes.

" Q. Had yon no discourse or treaty with him I

" Temp. Ko ; he said I should go along with
him to destroy a woman, and I told him I would
not ; he said he would make me ; and then the
devil beat me about the head.

" Q. Why had you not called upon God /

" Temp. He would not let me do it.

" Q. You say you never hurt ships nor boats-
did you never ride over -an aim of the sea on a
cow?

" Temp. No, no, master, 'twas she {meaning
Suaan)."



EXECUTIONS AT BXBTBB. 277

- Another interrogator, equally unfeeling, closed
the scene with asking the victim if she had never
seen the devil but once.

** Temp, Yes, once before ; I was going for
brooms, and he came to me and said, ' that poor
woman has a great burthen,' and would help and
ease me of my burthen ; and I said, ' The Lord
had enabled me to carry it so far, and I hope I
shall be able to carry it further/

" Q. Did the devil never promise you any-
thing ?

" Temp, No, never.

" Q, Then you have served a very bad master,
who gave you nothing. Well, consider you are
just departing from this world; do you believe
there is a God ?

''Temp, Yes.

" Q. Do you believe in Jesus Christ ?

" Temp, Yes ; and I pray Jesus Christ to pardon
all my sins. And so was executed,"

These three women are said to have been the last
persons who were executed in England for the crime
of witchcraft A great change in opinion on this
subject was now taking place in the minds of re-
flecting people. The vice of the court of Charles 11/
was scepticism rather than credulity, and although
bigotry and superstition again appeared under the
influence of his brother, their reign was of short du-
ration. Two books were published during this
period which certainly had some influence in breaks
ing the strength of the popular prejudice on the
subject. The first of these was a small volume by a
gentleman of education named John Wagstaffe,



278 SOBOSET AKD HAGIO.

which appeared in 1669, under the title of '* The
Question of Witchcraft Debated'" In the opening
of this workWagstaffe expresses in strong terms his
horror at ihe multitudes of human beings who had
been during so many ages sacrificed to ^ this idd,
Opinion ;" and he protests against the " evil and
base custom of torturing people to confess them*-
selves witches, and burning them after extorted
confessiona Surely the blood of men ought not to
be so cheap, nor so easily to be shed by those who,
under the name of God, do gratify exorbitant pas-
sions and selfish ends ; for without question, under
this side heaven, there is nothing so sacred as the
life of man, for the preservation whereof all policies
and forms of government, all laws and magistrates
are most especially ordained"" Wagstaffe's book was
replied to in a tone of flippant self-sufficiency by
Meric Casaubon, in a treatise published in the follow-
ing year under the title of, " Of Credulity and In
credulity in Things Divine and SpirituaL"'

A still greater champion soon afterwards stepped
into the field of controversy thus opened This was
John Webster, a native of Lancashire, the same
whom we have already seen in his youth oppbsing
in vain the imposture of the boy of Pendle. Webster
had lived, a careful observer, throughout the whole
period of the great witchcraft mania in England,
and now in his old age he published his matured
judgment on the subject which had so long agitated
men's minds, under the title which at once indi-
cated the view he took of it, of " The Displaying of
supposed Witchcraft"' This stately folio appeared
in the year 1677, and there can be little doubtof its



. J--" - r— • « ■ I ■ I ■*! ■■*■" " *■ " S * :



CHIBP JUSTICE HOLT. 279

hating made a strong impression on the succeeding
generation. Webster attacked with all the force of
argument and wit the superstition to which so many
viotims had been sacrificed, and he exposed the fal-
lacies by which it had been sustained. He made no
concessions to public opinion, like most of those
who preceded him on the same side of the question,
and who were afraid to push too far the reasons on
which they rested their cause ; but he boldly pub-
lished the opinion that witchcraft was nothing but
a Vulgar error, and that all the instances which had
occurred and which had led to such a fearful de-
struction of human life, were founded only in deli-
berate imposture, in statements made under fear of
torture, in mental delusion, or in, natural pheno-
mena which were easily explained by science and
reason without the necessity of calling in superna-
tural causes.

Books like these were chiefly calculated to influ-
ence the educated part of society, and we soon per-
ceiye their effects in the courts of justice. After
the revolution of eighty-eight, there seems to have
been a strong tendency to renew the persecution
against witches, but sir Matthew Hale had been
succeeded by a judge of no less weight and talent^
who was in this respect at least more enlightened —
the lord chief justice Holt. Three women were
thrown into prison in 1691 for bewitching a person
near Frome, in Somersetshire, of whom one died be-
fore she was brought to trial ; but the other two,
having chief justice Holt for their judge, were acquit-
ted. This case seems to have been the first check put
upon the courts of law; and the populace, disappointed


280 SORCEBT AND MAGIC.

of what they called justice, had recourse, without ap*
pealingtothe law, to the old popular trial of swimming^
the persons suspected, of which there were numerous
instances during this and the following year in the
counties of Essex, Suffolk, Cambridge, and North-
ampton. Some of the patients died under the inflic-
tion. The scene of the labours of Matthew Hopkins
seems to have retained its witch-persecuting cele-
brity. In 1693, one widow Chambers of Upaston in
Suffolk, who is described by Dr. Hutchinson as ** a
diligent industrious poor woman," died in Beccles
jail in consequence of the treatment she had expe-
rienced. She had been walked between two men,
according to the celebrated plan of the witch-finder
Hopkins, and was thus drawn to confess a number
of absurdities, such as the bewitching to death of
persons who were then living and in good health.
In the year following, another poor woman named
mother Munnings, of Hartis in Suffolk, was tried
before the lord chief justice Holt at Bury St. Ed-
munds ; many things were deposed concerning her,
such as spoiling of wort, and hurting cattle, and it
was stated that several persons upon their death-beds
had complained that she killed them. It was fur-
ther deposed, that her landlord, Thomas Pennel,
wishing to force her out of a house she had of him,
took away the door, and left her without one. Some
time after, she said to him as he passed by the door,
" Go thy way, thy nose shall lie upward in the
church-yard before Saturday next.'' On the Mon-
day following we are assured he sickened, and died
on Tuesday, and was buried within the week, ac-
cording to her word. To confirm this, it was added



tfaaosaaa



CttlEF JtrSTICfi HOLT. 281

by another witness, that a doctor whom they had
consulted about an afflicted person, when mother
Mannings was mentioned, said she was a dangerous
woman, for she could " touch the Kne of life/' In
her indictment, she was charged with having an
imp like a pole-cat ; and one witness deposed, that
coming from the alehouse about nine at night, he
looked in at her window, and saw her take out of
her basket two imps, one black the other white. It
was also deposed, that one Sarah Wager, after a
quarrel with this woman, was taken dumb and
lame, and was in that condition at home at the
time of the trial. Many other such things were
sworn, but in consequence of the charge from the
judge, the jury brought her in not guUty. Dr. Hutch-
inson, who obtained the notes of this trial through
chief justice Holt himself, adds on this statement,
" Upon particular inquiry of several in or near the
town, I find most are satisfied that it was a very
right judgment. She lived about two years after,
without doing any known harm to anybody, and
died declaring her innocence. Her landlord was a
consumptive spent man, and the words not exactly
as they swore them, and the whole thing seventeen
years before. For by a certificate from the register,
I find he was buried June 20, 1667. The white imp
is believed to have been a lock of wool, taken out of
her basket to spin, and its shadow it is supposed
was the black one/'

The same year, a woman of the name of Margaret
Elmore was tried at Ipswich before the lord chief
justice Holt She was accused of having^ bewitched
one Mrs. Rudge of that town, who was three years



282 80ECBBY AND MAQia

in a languishing condition, because, as it was al'-
leged, Mr. Rudge, the husband of the afflicted pafson^
had refused to let her a house. Some witnesses
said that Mrs. Rudge was better upon the confine-
ment of the woman, and worse again when her
chains were o£ Other witnesses gave an account,
that her grandmother and her aunt had formerly
been hanged for witches, and that her grandmother
had said she had ei£^ht or nine imps, and that she
had giyen two or tl^e imps a-piece to her chOdren.
This grave accusation was considered to be fuUj
confirmed, when a midwife who had searched Mar-
garet Elmor's grandmother, who had been hanged,
said, this woman had plainer marks than she.
Others deposed to their being covered with lice after
quarrels with her. But notwithstanding these de-
positions, the jury brought her in not guilty, " and,"
says Dr. Hutchinson, ^^ though I have made parti-
cidar inquiry, I do not hear of any ill consequence."
In 1695, Mary Guy was tried before the lord
chief justice Holt at Launceston in Cornwall, for
supposed witchcraft upon a girl named Philadelphia
Row. It was deposed, that the aqpearance of the
said Mary Gruy was often seen by the girl, and that
she vomited pins, straws, and feathers ; but notwith-
standing such depositions, the prisoner was ac-
quitted. One Elizabeth Homer] was tried before
the same intelligent judge at Exeter, in 1696, for
bewitching three children of William Bovet, one of
whom was dead. It was deposed, that another had
her legs twisted, and yet from her hands and knees
she would spring five feet higL The children vo-
mited pins, and were bitten, (if the depositions were



^fgigg



weammmm^mmSBmmmmifg^sammH^^f^m^i^^^^^mm^^mmmmimmmmm^pmmm



CHIEF JUSTICE HOLT. 283

true^) and pricked, and pinched, the marks ap-
pearing ; the children said, Bess Horner's head
would come off from her body, and go into their bel-
lies ; the mother of the children deposed, that one
of them walked up a smooth plastered wall, to the
heusht of nine feet, her head standing off from
itTthis, she said, she did five or six times, and
laughed and said, Bess Homer held her up. This
poor woman had something like a nipple on her
shoulder, which the children said was sucked by a
toad. Many other strange things were asserted by
different witnesses ; but the jury brought her in
not guilty, ^'and no inconvenience hath followed
from her acquittal."'



28 It



CHAPTER XXXL



THE DOINGS OP SATAN IN NEW ENGLAND.

As Satan found that, beaten hj the force of public
opinion, he was losing his hold on the mother coun-
try, he seemed resolved to fix a firmer grasp upon
her distant colonies, and the new world presented
at this moment a scene which exemplifies the hor-
rors and the absurdities of the witchcraft persecu-
tions more than anything that had occurred in the
old world

New England, or, as it has been since called,
Massachusetts, was essentially a religious — a puri-
tanical settlement One of the congregations of the
English presbyterians who sought refuge in Holland
from the intolerance of James L, finding their posi-
tion there uneasy, came to the resolution of esta-
blishing themselves in the wilds of north America,
where they could worship the Almighty after their
own convictions, unseen and untroubled by those
who differed from them. They made arrangements
for settling in the English colony of Virginia^ and



PLANTATION OP NEW ENGLAND. 285

set sail for America in 1618, but carried out of their
course by stress of weather and other causes, they
arrived on a coast more to the north, on which no
settlement had hitherto been made. In the last
days of the year they laid the foundations of the
first town in New England, to which they gave the
name of Plymouth. They formed an alliance with
an Indian chief by whom this territory had been
previously occupied, a great part of whose tribe had
been carried off by the small-pox, and who was glad
of their support against the hostile tribes of Nar-
raghansetts. Several other settlements were subse-
quently attempted on this coast, but the settlers
were ill-fitted for amalgamating with the puritans
of New Plymouth or to struggle with the difficulties
they had encountered, and they therefore soon aban-
doned their enterprize. Under Charles I. the reli-
gious emigration from England was greatly increased,
and the old settlers on these distant shores were
soon joined by multitudes of friends who shared in
their principles and feelings. Some of these fpunded,
in 1628, the town of Salem. Soon afterwards
Boston was founded, which became at once the
principal town of Massachusetts bay. From the pe-
culiar constitution of this singular colony, it became
as intolerant as it was religious, and its earlier his-
tory presents us with frequent instances of persecu-
tion for the sake of conscientious convictions. Re-
ligious discussions here took the place of political
dispute^ and disturbed from time to time the peace
of the infant colony. A school having been founded
at a small town called Newtown, it was erected into a
university in 1638, and named Haward College, from



288 SOBOEBT Ain> HAGia

which stmck the colonists with no little dismay
A mason of that town, named John Goodwin, who
had six children, was in the habit of employing as
a washerwoman one of his neighbours named
Glover, an Irishwoman and a papist, neither of
them any great recommendation in the state of New
England. About the midsummer of the year last-
mentioned, some linen having been missed, Good-
win's wife accused the woman of theft, on which
she became angry and abusive, and used cross lan-
guage to one of the children, a little girl. Imme-
diately afterwards, this girl was seized with fits and
strange afflictions, which soon communicated them-
selves to three of her sisters. The Irishwoman fell
under suspicion, and was arrested, and in her exa-
mination she answered so incoherently, and with
such a strange mixture of Irish and broken English,
that she was soon brought in guilty, and the so-
lemnity of the examination and execution made, a
deep impression on the minds of the people of
Boston.

There were in that town two ministers, (fadier
and son,) who, for many reasons, held a distin-
guished ^lace among the clergy of New England,
and their opinions were looked up to with the
utmost respect. These were Increase and Cotton
Mather, the first principal, and the second a fellow
of Haward College. These men seem to have
studied deeply the doctrines on the subject of witch-
craft which had so long been held in Europe, and
to have been fully convinced of their truth. Cotton
Mather was called in to witness the afflictions with
which Goodwin's children were visited, and npt



' ^ • ^ •f-^^ , ^ m nn » _ i 1 ^1 __iiJ iri



COTTON MATHBB. 289

content with what he saw there, he took the girl
whose visitations seemed most extraordinary to his
own home, that he might examine her more
leisurely, and he has left us a printed account of his
observations; It appears that some of the stories of
European witchcraft had been impressed on her
mind, for when in her fits she believed that the
witches came for her with a horse on which she
,rode to their meetings. Sometimes, in the presence
of a number of persons, she would suddenly fall
into a sort of trance, and then she would jumpinto
a chair, and placing herself in a riding posture, move
as if she were successively ambling, trotting, and
gallopping. At the same time she would talk with
invisible company, that seemed to go with her, and
she would listen to their answers. After continuing
in this way two or three minutes, she seemed to
think herself at a meeting of the witches, a great
distance from the house where she was sitting ; then
she would return again on her imaginary horse, and
come to herself again ; and on one occasion she told
Cotton Mather of three persons she had seen at the
meeting. Dr. Mather's simplicity, to say the least,
was shown by the sort of experiments he made on
this fantastical patient. When she was in her fits,
and therefore under the influence of Satan, she
read or listened to bad books with pleasure, but
good books threw her into convulsions. He tried
her with the Bible, the Assembly's Catechism, his
grandfather Cotton Mather's " Milk for Babes," and
his father Increase's " Remarkable Providences,"
with a treatise written to prove the reality of witch-
craft, and the existence of witches. These good

VOL. IL



290 SOBCB&X ABD HAOIO.

books, Ootton Uather tells ub, " vere mortal to Ii6r,"
they threw her into trances and convulBious. Next
he tried her vith books of a different character,
Bucb ae quaken' books, (the quakers were lo^ed
upon with a very evil eye in New En^^d,)
popish books, the Cambridge and Oxford Jests, a
Prayer-book, (against which the puritans alwa^
professed the greatest hostility,) and a book writt^i
to proTe that there were no witches. These the
deril let her read as long as she liked, and he showed
particular respect to the Prayer-book, even allowing
her to read the passages of scripture in it, ahhoagh
he threw her into the most dreadful sufferings if
she attempted to read the same texts in the
Bible.

Dr. Cotton Mather gave the world a full account
of this case in a little book entitled, " Late memo-
rable Providences relating to Witchcraft and Pos-
session," in which he also collected together a few
other cases of witchcraft in New England, which
show that there was already a strung excitement
abroad on the subject This he increased by repeat-
ing to the colonists the details of the trial before



■pqpBK=;aeiBMim^PBKiaB«E5«^«p



INDIAN WITCHES. 291

A Mr. Paris had been for some years minister of
Salem village. He appears to have been on indif-
ferent terms with his parishioners, on account of
some disputes relating to the house and land he oc-
cupied as their minister, of which he had obtained
a gift in fee simple. Towards the end of February
of 1692, some young persons in his family, and
some others of their neighbours, began to act after
a strange manner, creeping into holes and under
chairs and stools, using antic gestures, uttering ridi-
culous speeches, and falling into fits. The physi-
cians were consulted, but they were unable to dis-
cover the nature of the disorder, or to effect a cure,
ftnd they declared their belief that they were be-
witched. Mr. Paris had an Indian man and woman
— ^the latter named Tituba — as servants in his
house, and they, with Mr. Paris's consent, made an
enchanted cake, according to the custom of their
tribes, and this being given to a dog belonging to
the family, was to enable the persons afflicted to
declare who had bewitched them. The result wa^
that they accused the two Indians, and the woman
confessed herself guilty, and was thrown into prison :
she was subsequently sold to pay the prison fees.
Several private fasts were now held in the house of
Mr. Paris, and a public fast was directed throughout
the colony, to avert God's wrath.

Bing visited and noticed, the children and others
afflicted proceeded to other denunciations, and other
persons exhibited similar fits and contortions. At
fiist they ventured only on accusing poor women,
who were of ill-repute in the place, and they talked
of a black man who urged them to sign ,a book,

^



292 80BCEBT AND MAGIC.

which they said was red, very thick, and about a
cubit long. They were gradually encouraged to ac^
case persons of a more respectable position in life,
and among the first of these were goodwife Cory and
goodwife Nurse, menj^ers of the churches at Salem
village and Salem town. On the 21st of March
goodwife Cory was subjected to a solemn examina-
tion in the meeting-house of the village. Ten
afilicted persons accused her of tormenting them.
They said that in their fits they saw her likeness
coming with a book for them to sign. She earnestly
asserted her innocence, and represented that they
were poor distracted creatures, who knew not what
they were saying. Upon this they declared, " that
the black man whispered to her in her ear now,
(while she was upon examination,) and that she
had a yellow bird, that did use to suck between
her fingers, and that the said bird did suck now in
the assembly.* Order being given to look in that
place to see if there were any sign, the girl that pre-
tended to see it said that it was too late now, for
she had removed a pin, and put it on her head.
It was upon search found that a pin was there stick-

* These yellow birds — ^perhaps canaries — form a peculiar
feature of witchcraft in New England. " In sermon time,
when goodwife 0. was present in the meeting-house, Abigail
Williams called out, * look where goodwife C. sits on the beam
suckling her yellow bird betwixt her fingers !* Anne Pitman^
another girl afflicted, said, ' there was a yellow bird sat on my
liat as it hung on the pin in the pulpit;' but those that were
by restrainad her fVom speaking loud about it." Increase Ma-
ther's ♦* Further Account of the New England Witches,"



mmmmmmmmmmmmBmmmmmmmm'S^^Si



INCBBASB OP THE ACCUSATIONS. 293

ing upright When the accused had any motion of
her body, hands, or mouth, the accusers would
cry out ; as when she bit her lip, they would cry out
of being bitten ; if she grasped one hand with the
other, they would cry out of being pinched by her,
and would produce marks ; so of the other motions
of her body, as complaining of being pressed, when
she leaned to the seat next her ; if she stirred her
feet, they would stamp and cry out of pain there.
After the hearing, the said Cory was committed to
Salem prison, and then their crying out of her
abated/'

On the 24th of March goodwife Nurse was sud-
denly examined before the ministers and magis-
trates in the meeting-house, with the same result
A child between four and five years old was now
also committed. The accusers said that this child
came invisibly, and bit them, and they would show
the marks of small teeth on their arms to corrobo-
rate the statement ; and when the child cast its
eye upon th^em, they immediately cried out that
they were in torment

The number of accusers and accused now in-
creased fast, and some of the latter, as the only
means of saving themselves, made confessions, and
accused others They all spoke of a black man,
and some described him as resembling an Indian, a
circumstance we can easily understand. We are
told by one of the historians of these events of a
converted Indian, who was' a zealous preacher of
the Gospel among his countrymen ; " being a little
before he died at work in the wood making of tar,
there appeared unto him a black man, of a terrible



294



SOBCEBT AKD MAQIO.



aspect and more than human dimensions, thi^ten^
ing bitterly to kill him, if he would not promise to
leave off preaching to his countrTmen." This is
said to hare occurred just before the events I am
now relating ; the black man of the confessions was
of ordinary stature, but he made no secret of his
design to destroy the Christian settlement, and he
held meetings of his converts — those who had
signed his book — where they had mock ceremonies
and participated in a mock sacrament One of tiie
accused, who saved himself by confessing, told how
the devil appeared " in the shape of a black man,
in the evening, to set my name to his book, as I
have owned to my shame ; he told me that I should
not want, so doing. At Salem village, there
being, a little off the meeting-house, about a hun-
dred fine blades, some with rapiers by their sides,

and the trumpet sounded, and bread and

wine, which they called the sacrament ; but i had
none, being carried over all on a stick, and never
was present at any othet meeting/' — " The design
was to destroy Salem village, and to begin at the
minister's house, and to destroy the churches of
God, and to set up Satan's kingdom, and then all
will be well/'

The ministers and magistrates went on with
their fastings and examinyigs, as the number of
persons accused increased, until, on the 11th of
April, there was a grand public hearing at Salem
before six magistrates and several ministers. One
goodwife Procter was among the persons accused
on this occasion. Her husband attended to assist
and advise her, and when he took her part, the



la y , , . ^ .. J^ wa. i^



SIB WILLIAM PHIPPS. 295

aecusers " cried out on him/' and both were accord-
ingly committed.

On the 1 4th of May, 1 692, sir William Phipps
arrived) bringing with him the new charter of the
colony. Instead of being the harbinger of peace by
importing the liberal principles which were now
gaining ground in England, the new governor
either shared in the prejudices of the colonists, or
wished to gain popularity among them by appear-
ing to do so, and he ordered all the prisoners who
were charged with witchcraft to be thrown into
chains. Upon this the afflicted persons are said to
have been in general relieved from their tortures.
The accusations were now multiplied, and people
of the greatest respectability in society became sub-
ject to the denunciations of the afflicted. On the
24jth of May, a Mrs. Gary of Charlestown, having
been accused by some of the girls and an Indian,
was arrested and brought before the ministers and
magistrates for examination. Her husband went
with her, to support her in her trials, and we have
his account of the manner in which the examina-
tion was carried on. " Being brought before the
justices," he says, "her chief accusers were two
girls. My wife declared to the justices that she
never had any knowledge of them before that day.
She was forced to stand with her arms stretched
out. I did request that I might hold one of her
hands, but it was denied me. Then she desired
me to wipe the tears from her eyes and the sweat
from her face, which I did. Then she desired she
might lean herself on me, saying she should faint.
Justice Hathorn replied, she had strength enough



296 sosoB&T Ajn> hagto.

to torment those persons^ and she should have
strength enough to stand. I speaking something
against their cruel proceedings, thej commanded
me to be silent, or else I should be turned out of
the room. The Indian before mentioned was also
brought in to be one of her accusers ; being come
in, he now (when before the justices) fell down and
tumbled about like a hog, but said nothing. The
justices asked the girls, who afflicted the Indian.
They answered, ' she,' (meaning my wife,) and now
lay upon him ; the justices ordered her to touch
him, in order to his cure, but her head must be
turned another way, lest instead of ciuring she
should make him worse by her looking on him, her
hand being guided to take hold of his ; but the
Indian took hold on her hand, and pulled her down
on the floor, in a barbarous manner ; then his hand
was taken ofi^, and her hand put on his, and the
cure was quickly wrought.''

When this man proceeded to expostulate in fa-
vour of his wife, he only provoked the court by his
interference, and the afflicted were ready to " cry
out '' against him. Both, however, succeeded in
making their escape ; and they proceeded to Rhode
Island, and thence to New York. The prosecutors
now adopted some of the modes of trial which they
learnt from the printed books that had been im-
ported from England, such as making the accused
say the Lord's Prayer, and searching for teats.
One of the latter was said to have been found on
the person of goodwife Bishop. On the 81st of
May the accusers struck a step higher, and " cried
out" upon a sea-captain of Boston named John



m,-f^a n i| _y i H »



THE BXEGUTIONS COMMENCE. 297

Aldin, who was brought to Salem for examination.
He asked his accusers, " Why they should think
that he should come to that village to afflict those
persons that he never knew or saw before T But
he found expostulation vain, and he was comtnitted
to prison in Boston. The jaUor, however, began to
treat his prisoners with less rudeness, and after a
long imprisonment, captain Aldin escaped, perhaps
with the jailor's connivance.

On the 2nd of June a special commission was
opened at Salem for the trial of the offenders. The
depositions were many of them of such an extraor-
dinary character, that we cannot be surprised at
being told that on the fifteenth of the same month
governor Phipps found it necessary to consult with
the ministers of Boston, and that he was advised by
them to proceed with caution. Five days before,
Bridget Bishop had been hanged, which was the
first of this series of executions.

The actors in this tragedy began, as I have
already intimated, by accusing persons who were
already despised and disliked by their neighbours,
whose ears therefore were open to any charges
against them. Bridget Bishop, the first woman
executed, and Susanna Martin, who was condemned
about the same time, belonged to this class, and, to
judge by the extraordinary depositions on their
trials, both had been for some time regarded as
dangerous individuals. One of the " afflicted '"
stated that ** the shape " of the prisoner appeared
to her frequently, and bit, pricked, and otherwise
tormented lier. Another testified, " that it was the
shape of this prisoner (Bishop) with another, which

o 5



298 fiOBGKBY AKD MAGIC.

one day took her from her wheel, and carried her to
the river side, threatening there to drown her if dhe
did not sign the book/' It is added, " one DeliTer-
ance Hobbes, who had confessed her being a witch^
was n6w tormented by the spectres for her confes-
sion. . And she now testified, that this Bishop
tempted her to sign the book again, and to deny
what she had confessed. She affirmed that it was
the shape of this prisoner which whipped her with
iron rods to compel her thereunto. And she af-
finned that this Bishop was at a general meeting of
the witches, in a field at Salem village, and there
partook of a diabolical sacrament in bread and
wine there administered." Several persons stated
that they had been disturbed in their beds by noc-
turnal visits of the " shape " of Bishop ; and one
man complained of her for bewitching his sow.

Other witnesses accused Bridget Bishop of still
mcnre extraordinary pranks, such, for example, as
that recounted by one John Louder, who deposed,
" that upon some little controversy with Bishop
about her fowls going well to bed, he did awake in
the night by moonlight, and did see clearly the
likeness of this woman grievously oppressing him ;
in which miserable condition she held him, unable
to help himself, till near day. He told Bishop of
this ; but she denied it, and threatened him very
much. Quickly after this, being at home on a
Lord's day, with the doors shut about him, he saw
a black pig approach him ; at which he going to
kick, it vanished away. Immediately after, sitting
down, he saw a black thing jump in at the window,
and come and stand before him. The body was



BRIDGET BISHOP AND SUSANNA MARTIN. 299

like that of a monkey, the feet like a cock's, but
the face much like that of a man's. He being so
extremely affrighted that he could not speak, this
monster spoke to him, and said, ' I am a messenger
sent unto you, for I understand that you are in
some trouble of mind, and if you will be ruled by
me, you shall want for nothing in this world.'
Whereupon he endeavoured to clap his hands upon
it ; but he could feel no substance ; and it jumped
out of the window again ; but immediately came in
by the porch, though the doors were shut, and said,
* You had better take my counsel T He then
struck at it with a stick, but struck only the
groundsel, and broke the stick. The arm with
which he struck was presently disenabled, artd it
vanished away. He presently went out at the back
door, and spied this Bishop in her orchard going
towards her house, but he had no power to set one
foot forward unto her. Whereupon, returning into
the house, he was immediately accosted by the
monster he had seen before ; which goblin was now
going to fly at him ; whereat he cried out, * The
whole armour of God be between me and you.' So
it sprang back, and flew over the apple-tree, shak-
ing qtany apples of the tree in its flying over. At
its leap it flung dirt with its feet against the sto-
mach of the man ; whereupon he was then struck
dumb, and so continued for three days together."

As to Susanna Martin, who was also accused of
paying visits to people through their chamber win-
dows, a man named Bernard Peache deposed in
court, " that being in bed, on the Lord's day at
nighty he heard a scrabbling at the window, whereat



300 80RCBBT AND MAGIC.

he then saw Susanna Martin come in and jump
down upon the floor. She took hold of this dqpo*
nent's foot, and drawing his body into a hei^, she
lay upon him near, two hours, in all which time he
could neither speak nor stir. At length, when he
could begin to move, he laid hold on her hand, and
pulling it up to his mouth, he bit some of her
fingers, as he judged, unto the bone. Whereupon
she went ftom the chamber, down stairs, out at
the door. This deponent thereupon' called out to
the people of the house, to advise them of what had
passed ; and he himself did follow her. The people
saw her not, but there being a bucket at the left
hand of the door, there was a drop of blood found
upon it, and several more drops of blood upon the
snow newly fallen abroad. There was likewise the
print of her two feet just without the threshold,
but no more sign of any footing further on. At
another time this deponent was desired by the
prisoner to come unto a husking of corn at her
house, and she said if he did not come it were
better that he did. He went not ; but the night
following Susanna Martin, as he judged, and an-
other came towards him. One of then said, ' Here
he is/ but he having a quarter-staff, made a^blow
at them. The roof of the barn broke his blow, but
following them to the window, he made another
blow at them, and struck them down ; yet they got
up and got out, and he saw no more of them.
About this time there was a rumour about the town
that Martin had a broken head, but the deponent
could say nothing to that."' Another neighbour,
whose name was John Eembal, stated that, '^ being



■• lip JW^i^»l^«PWiWW«»»'"«»^i"i"^w»>^^^'W>iii-^"i^^wpilWiWiP"iiWH«»IW



MISADYENTUBES OF JOHN KEMBAL. 301

desirous to furnish himself with a dog, he applied
himself to buy one of this Martin, who had a bitch
with whelps in her house. But she not letting him
hare his choice, he said he would apply himself
then at one Blezdel's. Having marked a puppy
which he liked at Blezdel's, he met George Martin,
the husband of the prisoner, going by, who asked
him whether he would not have one of his wife's
puppies, and he answered no. The same day, one
Edward Elliot, being at Martin's house, heard
George Martin relate where this Eembal had been,
and what he had said. Whereupon Susanna Martin
replied, ' If I live I'll give him puppies enough.'
Within a few days after this, Kembal coming out of
the woods, there arose a little black cloud in the
north-west, and Eembal immediately felt a force
upon him, which made him not able to avoid run-
ning upon stumps of trees that were before him,
albeit he had a broad plain cart way before him ;
but though he had his axe also on his shoulder to
endanger him in his falls, he could not forbear
going out of his way to tumble over them. When
he came below the meeting-house, there appeared
to him a little thing like a puppy, of a darkish
colour, and it shot backwards and forwards between
his legs. He had the courage to use all possible
endeavours of cutting it with his axe, but he could
not hit it ; the puppy gave a jump from him, and
went, as to him it seemed, into the ground. Going
a little further, there appeared unto him a black
puppy, somewhat bigger than the first, but as black
as a cole. Its motions were quicker than those of
^his axe ; it flew at his belly, and away ; then at his



302



SOBCEBT AND MAOIG.



throat; so over his shoulder one way, aad tliexi
oyer his shoulder another way. His heart n.i>'w
b^gan to fail him, and he thought the dog i^oxild
have tore his throat out ; but he recovered himself
and called upon God in his distress, and naming^ th^e
name of Jesus Christ, it vanished away at once.^^
Another witness, John Pressy, declared "that being
one evening very unaccountably bewildered, near a
field of Martin's, and several times, as one under
an enchantment, returning to the place he had left,
at length he saw a marvellous light, about the big-
ness of a half-bushel, near two rods out of the way.
He gave it near forty blows, and felt it a palpable
substance. But going from it, his heels were struck
up, and he was laid with his back on the ground,
sliding, as he thought, into a pit, from whence he
recovered by taking hold on the bush ; although
afterward Ke could find no such pit in the place.
Having, after his r^nery, gone five or six rods, he
saw Susanna Martin standing on his left hand, as
the light had done before; but they changed no
words with one another. The next day it was
upon inquiry understood that Martin was in a mi-
serable condition by pains and hurts that were
upon her."

These tales have somewhat of novelty, but others
were decidedly adopted from the witches' trials in
Europe, and they even went so far as to make the
pretended sufferers, when under the influence of
the " spirit,'* talk languages which they had never
learnt, such as Latin, and Greek, and even Hebrew,
although it appeared that even Satan himself would
not condescend to talk the barbarous jargon of the


THE LANGUAGE OF THE INDIANS. 308

Indians.* It was the " shapes," or spectral ap-
pearances of the witches who tormented the suf-
ferers, and performed all these mischievous pranks,
and the strange perversion of justice which allowed
the presumed acts of these spectres to be considered
as the crimes of the individuals they represented,
rendered the only possible defence, the plea of
alibi, inadmissible. The statement regarding these

* Dr. Cotton Mather gives the following humourous descrip-
tion of the difficulty of acquiring the Indian language : " Be-
hold new difficulties to be surmounted hy our indefatigable
Elliot ! He hires a native to teach him this exotic language,
and, with a laborious care and skill, reduces it into a grammar,
which afterwards he published. There is a letter or two of our
alphabet which the Indians never had in theirs ; but if their
alphabet be short, I am sure the words composed of it are long
enough to tire the patience of any scholar in the world ; they
are sesquipedaUa verhay of which their lingo is composed ; one
would think they had been growing ever since Babel unto the
dimensions to which they are now extended. For instance, if
my reader will count how many letters there are in this one
word, Nummatchehodtantamoongawunnonashj when he has
done, for his reward, I'll tell him it signifies no more in
EngUsh than * our lusts ;* and if I were to translate * our loves,*
it must be nothing shorter than Noowomantammononkantman-
nashy Or, to give my reader a longer word than either of these,
KumfnogkodonattooUummooetite<iongannunnon(i8h, is, in Eng-
lish, ' our question ;' but I pray, sir, count the letters ! Nor
do we find in all this language the least affinity to, or deriva-
tion from, any European speech that we are acquainted with.'*
He then adds, " I know not what thoughts it will produce in
my reader when I inform him, that once finding that the
daemons in a possessed yoimg woman understood the Latin
and Greek and Hebrew languages, my curiosity led me to
make trial of this Indian language, and the dsBmons did seem
€u if they did not understand it," — Mather's Maonalia, book
iii. p. 198.



304 SOROEBT AND MAGIC.

spectral appearances were often as bold as they
were extraordinary, and they found corroborative
witnesses to support them. " It is well known,"
says Cotton Mather, in a s .ibsequent history of the
colony, " that these wicked spectres did proceed so
far as to steal several quantities of money from
divers people, part of which individual money was
dropt sometimes out of the air, before suflGicient
spectators, into the hands of the afflicted, while the
spectres were urging them to subscribe their cove-
nant with deatL Moreover, poisons, to the standers
by wholly invisibly, were sometimes forced upon
the afflicted ; which,- when they have with much
reluctancy swallowed, they have swoln presently,
so that the common medicines for poisons have
been found necessary to relieve them. Yea, some-
times the spectres in the struggle have so dropt the
poisons, that the standers by have smelt them, and
viewed them, and beheld the pillows of the miser-
able stained with them. Yet more, the miserable
have complained bitterly of burning rags run into
their forcibly distended mouths ; and though no-
body could see any such cloths, or, indeed, any fires
in the chambers, yet presently the scalds were seen
plainly by everybody on the mouths of the com-
plainers, and not only the smell, but the smoke, of
the burning sensibly filled the chambers. Once
more, the miserable exclaimed extremely of brand-
ing irons heating at the fire on the hearth to mark
them ; now, though the standers by could see no
irons, yet they could see distinctly the print of them
in the ashes, and smell them too as they were car-
ried by the unseen furies unto the poor creatures



EFFECT OF THE EXECUTIONa 305

for whom they were intended ; and those poor crea-
tures were thereupon so stigmatised with them, that
they will bear the marks of them to their dying
day. Nor are these the tenth part of the prodigies
that fell out among the inhabitants of New Eng-
land. — Flashy people may burlesque these things,
but when hundreds of the most sober people in a
country, where they have as much mother- wit cer-
tainly as the rest of mankind, know them to be
true, nothing but the absurd and froward spirit of
Sadducism can question them. I have not yet
mentioned so much as one thing that will not be
justified, if it be required, by the oaths of more
considerate persons than any that can ridicule these
odd phenomena."

The moment the executions commenced, the evil,
instead of stopping, spread wider and wider. The
accused were multiplied in proportion to the accu-
sers, and no one was for one moment sure that the
next moment he might not be denounced and or-
dered for trial, which was almost equivalent to
being convicted. For so fully convinced were ma-
gistrates and ministers that Satan was in the midst
of them, using human instruments to effect his pur-
poses, that the slightest evidence was received with
the utmost eagerness. The court met again on the
30th of June, and five more were condemned, who
were all executed' on the 19th of July. Among
these were Sarah Good and Rebecca Nurse, the two
" good-wives " above mentioned. " On the trial of
Sarah Good, one of the afilicted fell in a fit, and
after coming out of it, she cried out of the prisoner
for stabbing her in the hand with a knife, and that



306 SOSOEBT AND MAOia

she had broken the knife in stabbing of her ; ac-
cordingly a piece of the blade of a knife was found
about her. Immediately information being given
to the court, a young man was called, who produced
a haft and part of the blade, which the court having
viewed and compared, saw it to be the same. And
upon inquiry, the young man affirmed that yester-
day he happened to break that knife, and that he
cast away the upper part, this afflicted person being
then present, The young man was dismissed, and
she was bidden by the court not to tell lies ; and
was improved after (as she had been before) to give
evidence against the prisoner." As to goodwife
Nurse, the jury at first brought her in not guilty ;
on which the accusers and the afflicted suddenly
raised a hideous outcry, pretending that she was
tormenting them again, and it being represented to
the jury that they had not given due consideration
to one expression of hers, they returned to recon-
sider their verdict, and sent her to the gallows.
Like her companions in suffering, she persisted in
declaring her innocence.

At another court, on the 5th of August, six were
condemned, who were all executed on the 19th,
except Procter's wife, who pleaded pregnancy.
Among these was Mr. George Burroughs, a minister
of the gospel, who provoked his judge by resting his
defence on the bold argument, " that there neither
are, nor ever were witches that, having made a
compact with the devil, can send a devil to torment
other people at a distance.'' When brought to the
place of execution, he addressed the multitude as-
sembled around him with so much feeling, that



EXECUTION OF OBOROE BUftBOUaHS.-^ 307

many of the spectators were in tears, and all seemed
to relent. The accusers cried out upon him, and
said the black man was standing by him and dic-
tating his discourse ; and Dr. Cotton Mather, who
was present on horseback, came forward to address
the crowd, assuring them that he was not a miniBter
regularly ordained, intimating that his piety was
all deception, and telling them '^ that the devil has
often been transformed into an angel of light.''
Thus was the rising sympathy of the people checked,
and the executioner suffered to go through with his
duties.

Some persons began now to feel alarmed at the
manner in which these proceedings multiplied, or
were disgusted at the injustice which they exhibited,
though for some time it was dangerous to express
such sentiments. One John Willard, who had been
emi^oyed to arrest those accused, refused to perform
the office any longer, and he was immediately cried
out upon by the accusers. He sought safety in
flight, but he was pursued and overtaken, and he
was one of those executed with Burroughs.' Giles
Cory was brought up for trial on the J 6th of Sep-
tember, but indignant at the injustice which was
shown to others, he refused to plead, and he was
pressed to death. In the infliction of this punish-
ment his tongue was forced out of his mouth, and
the unfeeling sheriff forced it in again with his cane
as the victim lay in the agonies of death. On the
22nd of September, eight more were executed ; on
their way to the place of execution the cart which
conveyed them was upset, and the " afflicted *' de-
clared that the devil accompanied the cart, and



308 SOBCBBT AND MAOIC.

that he overthrew it in order to retard their punish-
ment.

Nineteen individuals had now been hanged, in ad-
dition to the man who was pressed to deaths and the
magistrates themselves seem to have been anxious
to find some justification for their conduct There-
upon Cotton Mather, at the express desire of thegOver-
nor, prepared for the press reports of seven of the
trials, and justified them by examples taken from the
similar trials in England and by the doctrines of the
English writers in favour of the prosecutions for
this crime. His book, entitled, " More Wonders of
the Invisible World," was published in the month of
October. The persecution received a check at this
time from another circumstance. Mr. Hale, minis-
ter of Beverley, had been one of the warmest pro-
moters of these prosecutions ; but in the month of
October the accusers, who were now aiming at more
respectable people than at first, cried out upon this
minister's wife. As he and his friends were fully
convinced of her purity and innocence, this charge
was treated as absurd, but it convinced Mr. Hale
and others of the injustice of the whole proceedings.
Still the leaders of the persecution persisted in their
course, and to get over this serious difficulty, they
raised the question whether the devil could assume
the " shape'' or spectre of a good person to afflict
his victims. Increase Mather, the principal of
Haward College, was requested to treat this ques-
tion, which he did very learnedly, in a book en-
titled, " Cases of Conscience concerning witchcraft
and Evil Spirits personating Men," resolving it in
the affirmative. People's faith, however, was so far



'n--- I -T



BXBCTJTioNs OP Doas. 309

sliaken by these latter occurrences, that though the
accusations continued, and new arrests were made
daily, there were no more executions. The persecu-
tors, disappointed in their thirst after the blood of
their own species, now vented their rage upon infe-
rior animals. A dog was strangely afflicted at
Salem, upon which those who had the spectral sight
declared that a brother of one of the justices afflicted
the poor animal, by riding upon it invisibly. The
man made his escape, but the dog was very oinjustly
hanged. Another dog was accused of afflicting
others^ who fell into fits the moment it looked upon
them, and it also was killed !

The infection was now communicated from Salem
to other places. " About this time," says one of
the writers of these events, "a new scene began.
Oae Joseph Ballard, of Andover, whose wife was ill,
sent to Salem for some of those accusers, to tell him
who afflicted his wife ; others did the like. Horse
and man were sent from several places to fetch
those accusers who had the spectral sight, that they
might thereby tell who afflicted those that were any
way ill. When these came into any place where
such were, usually they fell into a fit ; after which,
being asked who it was that afflicted the person,
they would for the most part name one who they
said sat on the head and another that sat on the
lower part of the afflicted. More than fifty people
of Andover were thus complained of for afflicting
their neighbours. Here it was that many accused
themselves of riding upon poles through the air ;
many parents believed their children to be witches,
and many husbands their wives.''



SIO 80BCBBT AH]> MAGIC.

At Andover the accusations multiplied so irapidly,
that a justice of the peace of that place named
Dudley Bradstreet, after committing thirty or forty,
became alarmed, and refused to grant any more war-
rants. The afflicted now cried upon the justice and
his wife ; they said that he had killed nine persons
by witchcraft, and they declared that they saw the
ghosts of the murdered people hovering about him.
Justice Bradstreet saw how things were going, and
judged it advisable to make his escape. Soon after
this, they cried out against a gentleman of Boston,
who immediately obtained a writ of arrest against
his accusers on a charge of defamation, and laid his
damages at a thousand pounds. This bold proceed-
ing did more than anything else to stop the accusa-
tions, which from that time began to fall into dis^
credit Some of those who had confessed, retracted
their confessions. On the 3rd of January, 1693, in
the superior court of Salem, of fifty-six bills of in-
dictment containing charges of this kind, thirty
were ignored, and of the other six-and-twenty, when
they were put on their trial, three only were found
guilty. At the end of January, seven who lay under
condemnation were reprieved.

About the month of April governor Phipps was
recalled, and he signalised his departure by setting
at liberty all the prisoners charged with witchcraft.
. They amounted at this time to about a hundred and
fifty, of whom fifty had confessed themselves witches-
About two hundred more had been accused, who
were not yet placed under arrest The people of
Salem expected the worse consequences from this,
as they considered it, mistaken leniency, and they



ii



WITCHCRAFT IN DISFAVOUR. 311

were astonished to find that the moment the accu-
sations were discountenanced, there were no more
afflicted — ^the witchcraft ceased. People in general
now began to reflect, were convinced of their error,
and lamented it. Seized with remorse, their Present-
ment fell first and principally on Mr. Paris, the
minister of Salem village, with whom the accusa-
tions commenced ; many of his congregation with-
drew from his communion, and they drew up arti-
cles against him. The disputes between the minis"
ter and his people lasted two or three years, and
although he acknowledged his mistakes and pro-
fessed that he should be far from acting again upon
the same principles, they were not satisfied till he
left them. In a strong remonstrance against him^
they enumerated the setting afloat of these accusa-
tions as his principal crime, and declared their opi-
nion that, " by these practices and principles, he
had been the beginner and precursor of the sorest
afflictions, not to this village only, but to this whole
country, that did ever befall them.'/

Some persons persisted in believing in the witch-
craft, and in Satan's active agency in this a£^ir,
though they acknowledged that the accusations had
been carried too far ; and among these were the two
Mathers. Before the conclusion of the year an op-
portunity occurred for reviving the subject. On the
10th of September, 1693, a girl at Boston, named
Margaret Rule, was seized with convulsions, and
stated that she was visited by eight spectres, some
of which she recognized as being those of persons
she knew. Cotton Mather visited her, professed
himself convinced of the truth of her statement, and



312 gOBCEBY AKD MAQIC.

would soon have raised up a new flame. But there
was an influential and intelligent merchant of
Boston, named Robert Calef, who also visited Mar-
garet Rule, and who formed a totally different opi-
nion to that expressed by Cotton Mather, whose doc-
trine of witchcraft he controverted, and he gained the
better in the argument. From a book published by
Calef, published at Boston under the title of " More
Wonders of the Invisible World," we obtain the best
and most intelligible account of the extraordinary
proceedings at Salem and Andover.

From this time we hear no more of witches in
New England. Ashamed of their weakness, the
people of Salem seem to have brooded over their
past folly for several years. On the 17th of Decem-
ber, 1696,. a fast was proclaimed, one of the reasons
for which was, " That God would show us what we
knew not, and help us wherein we have done amiss
to do so no more ; and especially that whatever mis-
takes on either hand had been fallen into, either by
the body of this people, or any orders of men, refer-
ring to the late tragedy raised among us by Satan
and his instruments through the awful judgment of
God, he would humble us therefore, and pardon all
the errors of his servants." At this fast one of the
judges stood up to declare publicly his remorse for
the part he had taken in these lamented transac-
tions. The jurors signed a paper also proclaiming
their repentance, and ending with the declaration,
" that we justly fear that we were sadly deluded and
mistaken, for which we are much disquieted and
distressed in our minds ; and do therefore humbly
beg forgiveness, first of God, for Christ's sake, for

6



THE DELUSION EXPOSED. 313

this our error ; and pray that God would not impute
the guilt of it to ourselves or others ; and we also
pray that we may be considered candidly, and aright,
by the living sufferers, as being then under the
power of a strong and general delusion, utterly un-
acquainted with, and not experienced in, matters of
that naturew^' The delusion was further exposed by
voluntary confessions of those who had previously
confessed themselves witches, which they declared
they had done only to save their lives. The follow-
ing declaration, signed by several of the women who
had acted as accusers, no doubt acquaints us with
the secret of many of the witch-delusions in England-
" Joseph Ballard of Andover's wife being sick,"" say
they, " he either from himself, or the advice of
others, fetched two of the persons called the affliqted
{Persons from Salem village to Andover, which was
the cause of that dreadful calamity which befel us
at Andover. We were blindfolded, and our hands
were laid on the afflicted persons, they being in
their fits, and falling into these fits at our coming
into their presence, and then they said that we were
guilty of afflicting them, whereupon we were all
seized as prisoners by a warrant from the justice of
peace, and forthwith carried to Salem ; and by reason
of that sudden surprisal, we knowing ourselves alto-
gether innocent of that crime, we were all exceed-
ingly astonished, and amazed, and consternated,
and afirighted out of our reason ; and our deajrest
relations seeing us in that dreadful condition, and
knowing our great danger, they, out of tender love
and pity, persuaded us to confess what we did con-
fess ; and, indeed, that confession was no other than

VOL. IL p



314



SOBOEBT AND MAaiC



what was suggested to us by some gentlemen, they
telling us that we were witches, and they knew it,
and we knew it, and they knew that we knew it,
which made us think that we were so, and our un-
derstanding, and our reason, and our faculties being
almost gone, we were not capable of judging of our
condition ; as also the hard measures they used with
us rendered us incapable' of making any defence,
but we said anything and everything they desired,
and most of what we said was, in fact, but a consent-
ing to what they said/'



^^WWi. ■■ ' WJI.J^1."L ^WJi-^afcg



315



CHAPTER XXXIL



OONCLUfilON.



The narrative of Satan's doings in New England
may be looked upon as an appropriate conclusion to
a historical sketch of the prosecutions for witch-
craft. We see here combined in one short act the
sudden force exercised by the superstition over the
popular mind, the disasters to which it led, and the
final triumph of good sense and honest feelings in
dispelling the illusion. It was that good sense
which was now overcoming popular ignorance in
most of the countries of Europe.

In France, where in the earlier period the perse-
cution of witches was most, intense, the same cir-
cumstances had not existed to keep it up as in
England and Scotland. With the exception of
several cases of pretended possession, intrigues of
the Catholic priesthood, who thus practised on the
credulity of the populace, which occurred at this
time, we hear little of witchcraft in France during

P 2



316 BOBCERT AND MAGIC.

the latter half of the seventeenth century. The
belief still existed among the peasantry, who, when
blights and diseases fell upon their produce or stock
unexpectedly, were too apt to ascribe it to such
agency, but they were discountenanced by the
better classes of society. In 1 672, a great number
of shepherds were arrested in Normandy, on a
charge of witchcraft, and prosecuted before the par-
liament of Rouen ; but when the king was informed
of it, heat once put a stop to the process by an order
of council, directing the prisoners to be set at liberty.
This proceeding on the part of the king had the
immediate effect de faire taire le demon! Yet
a similar accusation was brought against the shep-
herds of Brie in 169 J.

Still the belief existed in suiEcient force to admit
of its being used as an instrument for indulging per-
sonal animosity, and that between a minister of
the crown and one of the most distinguished and
celebrated of the marechals of Louis XIV. There
lived at Paris four men who professed to be magi-
cians, and pretended to be able to raise the devil
at will ; they told people's fortunes, helped them to
recover things stolen or lost, and sold powders and
unguents. Their names were Lavoisin, Lavigou-
reux and his brother, the latter a priest, and an-
other priest named Lesage. In the year 1680 these
men were arrested, and as the crimes in which
they and many others were involved had usually
been punished by burning, a tribunal was appointed
to sit at the Arsenal, under the title of a chambre
ardente. Although few fires were eventually lit by
the judgments of this court, a great number of per-


^^^i^mmBmsKfmmKmmma^9'^^'^^^''^smi^mmf^ jm r— ", i j — . ^m . j*i~ * -'.ljjjl



^mm^



THB MAKECHAL DE LtJXBMBOURG. 3J 7

so»3 were more or less compromised, and many of
them belonging to the highest classes of society.
Among them were two nieces of cardinal Ma-
zarin ; the countess of Soissons, who was cited be^
fore this tribunal, was so far implicated, that she
was obliged to leave Paris and retire to Brussela
Most of these personages were probably led to con-
sult the conjurers more by curiosity than from any
other motive, and the whole matter was made a
subject of ridicule and raillerie in the fashionable
world. When the duchess of Bouillon, who was
one of the ladies implicated in this affair, was ex-
amined before the chambre ardente, one of the
judges, la Reynie, who was not remarkable for
beauty or politeness, asked her if she had seen the
devil, and what he was like ; she replied, " Yes, I
see him now ; he is fort laid et fort vilain, and
appears in the disguise of a conseiller d'etat i"

It appears that the marechal de Luxembourg had
employed Lesage to draw his horoscope, and thus
the name of this great man was introduced into the
process. Louvois was at that time prime minister
of France, and having some cause of hostility against
the marechal, he determined to make this an oppor-
tunity for indulging his animosity, and the mare-
chal de Luxembourg was thrown into the Bastille.
It appears that one of the marechal's agents named
Bonard had lost some papers of consequence belong-
ing to his employer, and that, unable to discoved
any traces of them, he had consulted the priest
Lesage, who instructed him how he was to visit the
churches, recite psalms, and make confessions.
Bonard did all this, but still he was as far from



318 SOBOEBT AND MAGIC.

recoyering his papers as ever. Then Lesage told
him that a girl named Dupin knew something
about them, and, under his directions, Bonard per-
formed a conjuration to force her to bring them
back, but without effect. Upon this it appears that
Bonard had obtained the marechal's signature to a
paper which turned out to be a compact with Satan,
and which was produced at the trial It would seem
that the mar^chal had been concerned in some in^
trigue with the girl Dupin. Lesage deposed that the
marechal had addressed himself to him, and through
him to the devil, to effect the death of this girl, who
perhaps had been murdered, for men were brought
forward who confessed themselves the assassins,
and who declared that, bj order of the marechal
de Luxembourg, they had cut her in pieces and
thrown the fragments into the river. The mare-
chal was confronted with Lesage, and with another^
priest and conjurer named Davaux, with whom he
was accused of practising sorcery, for the purpose
of killing more than one person. But he rebutted
all these and other charges with indignation, and,
instead of bringing him to a trial, Louvois caused
him to be kept in close confinement, and took care
that the process should be carried on as slowly as
possible. It was only after fourteen months of im-
prisonment that he was set at liberty ; the accusa-
tions were dropped without any judgment, atfd he
was restored to favour and to the high offices he
had previously held. The four magicians were less
fortunate, for they had all been burnt.

France had, however, the honour of leading the
way in discouraging prosecutions of this kind. Hie


■^p



THE WITCH OF WALKIEK. 319

irreligion and scepticism of the court of Charles II.
contributed no doubt towards producing the same
effect in England, where many, who before ven-
tured only to doubt, now hesitated not to treat the
subject with ridicule. Although works like those
of Baxter and Qlanvill had still their weight with
many people, yet, in the controversy which was
now carried on upon this subject through the in-
i?trumentality of the press, those who wrote against
the popular creed had certainly the best of the
argument Still it happened jGrom their form and
character that the books written to expose the ab-
surdity of the belief in sorcery, were restricted in
their circulation to the more educated classes, while
popular tracts in defence of witchcraft, and collec-
tions of cases, were printed in a cheaper form, and
widely distributed among that class in society
where the belief was most firmly rooted. The effect
of these popular publications has continued in
some districts down to the present day Thus the
press, the natural tendency of which was to en-
lighten mankind, was made to increase ignorance by
pandering to the superstitions of the multitude.

An instance of the continuance of the belief
which had in former times produced the sacrifice of
so much human life, occurred at the beginning of
the year 1712, in the village of Walkern, in the
north of the county of Hertford. There was a poor
woman in that town named Jane Wenham, who, it
appears, had for some time been looked upon by
the more ignorant of her neighbours as a witch.
When the horses or cattle of the farmers of that
parish died, they usually ascribed their losses to thiF

10



320 SOROEBY AND MAaiO.

woman's sorcery. This was particularly the case
with a farmer named John Chapman, one of whose
labourers, named Matthew Gilson, examined on
the fourteenth of February, declared " that on ISew
Year's day last past, he carrying straw upon a fork
from Mrs. Gardiner's bam, met Jane Wenham, who
asked him for some straw, which he refused to give
her ; then she said she would take some, and ac-
cordingly took some away from this informant.
And further this informant saith, that on the 29th
of January last, when this informant was threshing
in the bam of his master John Chapman, an old
woman in a riding-hood or cloak, he knows not
which, came to the barn door, and asted him for a
pennyworth of straw ; he told her he could give her
none, and she went away muttering. And this in-
formant saith, that after the woman was gone he
was not able to work, but ran out of the barn as far
as a place called Munder's-hill, (which was above
three ipiles from Walkern,) and asked at a house
there for a pennyworth of straw, and they refused
to give him any ; he went further to some dung-
heaps, and took some straw from thence, and pulled
off his shirt, and brought it home in his shirt ; he
knows not what moved him to this, but says he
was forced to it he knows not how." Another wit-
ness declared that he saw Matthew Gilson return-
ing with the straw in his shirt ; that he moved
along at a great pace, and that instead of passing
over a bridge,^ he walked straight through the
water.

John Chapman conceived now that his suspicions
were fully verified, and meeting Jane Wenham soon


*P^— ^^^""^^^Cr— "^■■i^^i^l^MM^^^^^^^^^^^^HBHBi



JANE WENHAM AND JOHN CHAPMAN. 321

afterwards, he applied to her in anger several offen-
sive epithets, of which that of " witch"' was the least
opprobrious. On the 9th of February, Jane Wenham
made her complaint to sir Henry Chauncy,. who
was a magistrate, and obtained a warrant against
Chapman for defamation. In the sequel, at the re-
commendation of this magistrate, the quarrel be-
tween Jane Wenham and the farmer was referred
to the decision of the minister of Walkem, the Rev.
Mr. Gardiner, who appears to have spoken some-
what harshly to the woman, advising her to live
more peaceably with her neighbours, and condemned
Chapman to pay her one shilling.

As far as we can' see, Jane Wenham took the
most sensible course to retrieve herself from the
imputation of being a witch ; but Mr. Gardiner,
although a clergyman of the church of England,
was as fitm a believer in witchcraft as farmer Chap-
man, and he fancied that he had provoked the
poor woman by not giving her the justice she ex-
pected. Hisjudgment was delivered in the kitchen of
the parsonage-house, where a maid-servant, between
sixteen and seventeen years of age, named Anne
Thorn, was sitting by the fire-side, who had put her
knee out the evening before, and had just had it
set. It appears that the supposed witch resolved to
take vengeance on this poor girl for the offence
committed by her master. Jane Wenham and
Chapman were gone, and Mr. Gardiner had entered
the parlour to his wife, accompanied by a neighbour
named Bragge. These three persons deposed at the
subsequent trial, that " Mr. Gardiner had not been
in the parlour with his wife and Mr. Brags^e above

P 5



322 SOBCB&T AlTD MAGfia

six or seven minutes ftt most since he left Anne
Thorn sitting by the fire, when he heard a strsMge
yelling noise in the kitchen, and when he went ooi
and found this Anne Thorn stripped to her shirt
sleeves, howling and wringing her hands in a
dismal manner, and q^eechless, he calling out, Mrs.
Gardiner and Mr. Bragge came immediately to hiin.
Mrs. Gbtrdiner seeing her servant in that sad con*
dition, asked her what was the matter with her;
She not being able to speak, pointed earnestly at a
bundle which lay at her feet, which Mr& Gardiner
took np and unpinned, and found it to be the girFs
gown and apron, and a parcel of oaken twigs with
dead leaves wrapt up therein. As soon as this
bundle was opened, Anne Thorn began to speak,
crying out, ' I^m ruined and undone ; and after she
had a little recovered herself, gave the following re-
lation of what had befallen her. She said when sbe
was left alone she found a strange roaming in her
hand (I use her own expressions) ; her mind ran
upon Jane Wenham, and she thought she must run
some whither; that accordingly she ran up Hne
close, but looked back several times at the hous^
thinking she should never see it more; that she
climbed over a five-bar gate, and ran along the
highway up a hill ; that there she met two of John
Chapman^s men, one of whom took hold of her band,
saying, she should go with them ; but she was
forced away from them, not being able to speak,
either to them, or to one Daniel Chapman, whom,
she said, she met on horseback, and would fain
have spoken to him, but could not ; then she made
her way towards Cromer, as far as a place called



--n— ■-—'-———■



•A^M



n



ANNB thorn's ADYEHTinEtES. 388

Hackney-lane, where she looked behind her, and
saw a little old woman muffled in a riding-hood,
who asked her whither she was going. She an-
swered, to Cromer to fetch some sticks to make her
a fire ; the old woman told her there were now no
sticks at Cromer, and bade her go to that oak-tree,
and pluck some from thence, which she did, and
laid them upon the ground. The old woman bade
her pull off her gown and apron, and wrap the
sticks in ih&n, and asked her whether she had
e'er a pin. Upon her answering she had none, the
old woman gaye her a large crooked pin, bade her
pin up her bundle, and then vanished away ; after
which she ran home with her bundle of sticks, and
sat down in the kitchen stript, as Mr. Gardiner
found her. This is the substance of what she re-
lated, upon which Mrs. Gardiner cried out, ' The
girl has been in the same condition with Chapman's
man ; but we will bum the witch ; alluding to a
reoeiyed notion, that when the thing bewitched is
burned the witch is forced to come in ; accordingly
she took the sticks, together with the pin, and threw
them into the fire. Immediately, in the instant
that the sticks were flaming, Jane Wenham came
into the room, and inquired for Elizabeth, the
mother of Anne Thorn, sajdng she had an errand
to do to her from Ardley Bury, (sir Henry
Chauncy's house,) to wit, that she must go thither
to wash the next day. Now this mother Thorn
had been in the house all tiie time that Jane Wen-
ham was there with John Chapman, and heard
nothing of it» and was then gone homei Mrs. Gar-
diner bad Jane Wenham go to Elizabeth ThorQ,



324 80BCBBT AKD XAGia

and tell her there vae work euongli for her tiiere ;
on which she departed. And upon inquiry made
Kflerwards, it was found that she neyer was of-
dered to deliver any such errand from Ardl^
Bury."

Here was an excellent groundwork for an accusa-
tion of witchcraft. Chapukan's two -men, and the
horseman, deposed to meeting Anne Thome on the
road, as she described ; and others of Jane Wen-
ham's enemies testified that other people had heen
bewitched by her. All received encouragement
from the readiness of the clergyman to promote the
prosecution, and a warrant was obtained from sir
Henry Chauncy to arrest the supposed witch. The
examinations were taken before sir Henry at
Ardley Bury, and he directed four women to search
Jane Wenham's body for marks, but none were
found. Next day the examination was continued,
and the evidence of the Gardiners was taken. Jane
Wenham expressed her horror of being sent to jail,
earnestly protested her innocence, entreating Hrs.
Gardiner not to swear against her, and offering to
submit to trial by swimming in the water. Sir



TRIAL OF JANE WEKHAM. 925

Jane Wenham was now committed, and her trial
came on on the 4th of March before justice Powell,
when no less than sixteen witnesses, among whom
were three clergymen, were heard against the pri-
soner. The lawyers refused to draw up the indict-
ment for any other charge than that of " convers-
ing with the devil in the form of a cat,'' which, to
the great anger of the prosecutors, threw an air of
ridicule over the whole proceeding. Yet upon this
indictment, in spite of her declarations of inno-
cence, the Hertfordshire jury found her guilty.
The judge was obliged to pronounce sentence of
death, as a matter of form ; but he subsequently
obtained her pardon, and a gentleman of more en-
lightened mind than the people of Walkern, Colonel
Plummer, of Gilston in the same county, took her
underbids protection, and placed her in a cottage
near his own house, where she passed the rest of
her life in a quiet inoffensive manner.

Few events of this kind have caused a greater
sensation than the case of Jane Wenhaxn. The
report of the trial passed through several editions
in a few days, and gave rise to a very bitter con-
troversy, in which several clergymen joined in the
cry against the innocent victim. The dispute seems
to have become in some degree identified with the
bitter animosities then existing between the church
and the dissenters — ^it was just the time when the
intolerant party, with their hero Sacheverell, had
gained the upper hand, and they seemed not
unwilling to recall into force even the old degrad-
ing belief in witchcraft if they could make it an
instrument for effecting their purposes. But the



326 SORCERT AKD MAGia

most important result of this trial, and the contro-
▼ersy to which it gave rise, was the pubMcatioa,
two or three years afterwards, of the '^ Historical
Essay concerning Witchcraft,^' by the king's chi^
lain in ordinary. Dr. Francis Hutchinson. This
book may be considered as the last blow at
witchcraft, which firom this time found credit
only among the most ignorant part of the poptda*
tion.

The case of Jane Wenham is the last instance of
a witch being condemed by the verdict of an Eng*
lish jury. When the prosecutors were no longer
listened to in courts of justice, they either ceased
to find objects of pursuit, or they appealed for jud^
mentto the passionsof the uneducated peasantry. An
occurrence of this kind, no less brutal than tragical, is
said to haye led to the final repeal of the witchcraft
act. The scene is again laid in Hertfordshire. In
the middle of the last century, there lived at Tring
in that county a poor man and his wife of the
name of Osborne, each about seventy years of age.
During the rebellion of forty-five, mother Osborne,
as she was popularly called, went to one Butter*
field, who kept a dairy at G^ubblecot, to beg for
some butter-milk, but he told her with great bru-
tality that he had not enough for his hogs. The
old woman, provoked by this treatment, went away,
telling him that the pretender would soon have
him and his hogs too. The connexion with what
followed perhaps axose from the popular outcry
which had long coupled the pretender with Satan>
Some time afterwards, some of Butterfield's calves
became distempered, and the ignorant people of the



THB MURDER AT TRINO. S27

neighbourhood, who had heard the story of the
buttermilk, declared that they were bewitched by
mother Osborne. In course of time Butterfield
left; his dairy, and took a public-house in the
same Tillage, where, about the beginning of the
year 1 751, he was troubled with fits, and, although
he had been subject to similar fits in former times,
these also were now ascribed to mother Osborne.
He was persuaded that the doctors could do him no
good, and was advised to send for an old woman
out of Northamptonshire, a white witch, who had
the reputation of being skilfal in counteracting the
effects of sorcery. This woman confirmed the opi-
nion already afloat of the cause of Butterfield's dig*
order, and she directed that six men should watd&
his house day and night, with staves, pitchforks,
and other weapons, at the same time hanging some*
thing about their necks, which she said was a
charm to secure them from being bewitched them-
selves. This produced, as might be expected, no
effect, and the accusation might have dropped ; but
some persons, desirous of collecting together a large
number of persons with a lucrative object, caused
notice to be given at several of the market-towns
around that witches were to be tried by ducking at
Longmarston on the 22nd of April. The conse-
quence was that a vast concourse of people assem-
bled at Tring on the day announced. The parish
officers had removed the old couple from the work-
house into the church, for security; upon which
the mob, after searching in vain the workhouse, and
even looking into the salt-box to see if the witch
had transformed herself into any diminutive form



328 SOBOEBT AND HAGia

that could be concealed there, exhibited their dis-
appointment in breaking the windows, pulling*
down the pales, and demolishing a part of the
housed They then seized upon the governor, and
collecting together a quantity of straw, threatened
to drown him and set fire to the town unless the
unfortunate couple were delivered up to them.
Fear at length induced the parish officers to yield,
and the two wretches were stripped stark naked by
the mob, their thumbs tied to their toes, and thus,
each wrapped in a loose sheet, they were dragged
two miles and thrown into a muddy stream. A
chimney-sweeper named Colley, one of the ring-
leaders,' seeing that the poor woman did not sink,
went into the pond and turned her over several
times with a stick, by which her body slipped out
of the sheet and was exposed naked. In this con-
dition, and half choaked with mud, she was thrown
on the bank, and there kicked and beaten till she
expired Her husband died also of the injuries he
had received. The man who had superintended
these brutal proceedings went round to the crowd
collecting money for the amusement he had afforded
them ! The coroner's inquest brought a verdict of
wilful murder against several persons by name, but
the only one brought to justice was the sweep
Colley, who was executed, and afterwards hung in
chains, for the murder of Ruth Osborne.

From this time witchcraft has attracted no atten-
tion in £ngland, except as a vulgar superstition in
some rude localities where the schoolmaster had
not yet penetrated. In Scotland the struggle be-
tween superstition and common sense continued



STORY OF SANDIE HUNTER. 329

loiig^ and was more obstinate. A few of the later
oases of Scottish sorcery were collected by George
Sinclair, in a little book published in the beginning
of the last century, under the title of " Satan's In-
visible World Discovered/' One or two of these
will serve to show the form which witchcraft as-
sumed in Scotland at the time when it was falling
into discredit among men of education.

There was a man named Sandie Hunter who
called himself Sandie Hamilton, but was better
known by the nickname of Hattaraick, given him,
it se^DQs, by the deviL He was first a " noltherd "
in East Lothian, but he had assumed the character
of a conjuror, curing men and beasts by spells and
charma " His charms sometimes succeeded, somer
times not'' However, the extent of Hattaraick's
practice seems to have raised the jealousy of Satan.
" On a day herding his kine upon a hill-side in
the summer-time, the devil came to him in the
form of a medeciner, and said, * Sandie, you have too
long followed my trade, and never acknowledged
me for your master ; you must now take with me,
and be my servant, and I will make you more per-
fect in your calling/ • Whereupon the man gave
up himself to the devil, and received his mark,
ynth this new name. After this he grew very
famous through the country, for his charming, and
curing of diseases in men and beasts, and turned
a vagrant fellow, like a jockey, gaining meal and
flesh and money by his charms ; such was the igno-
rance of many at the time, whatever house he
came to, none durst refuse Hattaraick an alms,
rather for his ill than his good. One day he came.



330 BOaCBBY iXD HAOIO.

to the Tftit (gate) of Samnelston, vhen some friends
after dinner were going to horse, a youag gentle*
man, brother to the lady, ae^g him, switched him
about the ears, saying, 'You wariock caiiie, what
have you to do here f Whereupon the fdlow goes
away grumbling, and was overheard say, ' Yon
^all dear buy this ere it be long.' This was
danimtm minatum. The young gentleman con-
veyed hia ftiends a way off, and came home that
way again, where he supped. After sapper, taking
his horse, and crossing Tyne water to go home, he
rode through a shady piece of haugh, commonly
called Cotters, and the evening hnng somewhat
dark, he met with some persons there that be^t
a dreadful consternation in him, which, for the
most part, he would never reveal This was mtdmn.
secutum. When he came home, the servants ob-
served terror and fear in his countenance. The
next day he becatae distracted, and was bound for
neveral daya His sister, the lady Samuelston,
hearing of it, was heard say, ' Surely that knave
Hattanuck is the cause of his trouble, call for him
in all hasta' When he had come to hw, ' Sandie,'
sud she, ' what is this you have done to my brother



CHEISTIAN SHAW. 331

Wlien Hattaraick came to receive his wages, he
toM the lady, * Your brother William shall quickly
go off the country, but shall never return/ She
knowing the fellow's prophecies to hold true, caused
her brother to make a disposition to her of all his
patrimony, to the defrauding of his younger bro-
ther George. After that this warlock had abused
the country for a long time, he was at last appre-
hended at Dunbar, and brought into Edinburgh, and
burnt upon the castle hill.'^

Another extraordinary case occurred about the
end of August, 1696. One Christian Shaw, the
daughter of John Shaw of Bargarran, in the shire
of Renfrew, about eleven years of age, perceiving
one of the maids of the house, named Catharine
Campbell, to steal and drink some milk, she told her
mother of it Whereupon the maid, " being of a
proud and revengeful humour, and a great curser
and swearer, did, in a great rage, thrice imprecate
the curse of Ood upon the child, and utter these
words, * the devil harle your soul through hell \'
On Friday following, one Agnes Nasmith came to
Bargarran's house, where she asked the said Chris-
tian, how the lady and young child was? and how
old the young child was ? To which Christian re-
plied, ' What do I know f Then Agnes asked,
how herself did, and how old she was ? To which
she answered that she was well, and in the
eleventh year of age. On Saturday night thereafter,
the child went to bed in good health ; but so soon
as she was asleep, she began to cry, ^ Help, help ;'
and did fly over the resting-bed where she was
lying, with such violence, that her brains had been



332 soBcsaT aku » aoic

dashed out, if a voman tad not broken the force of
the child's motion, and remained as if she bad been
dead, for the space of half an hour. After this she
was troubled with sore pains, except in some short
intervals, and -when any of the people present
touched any part of her body, she did cry and
screech with such vehemence, as if they bad been
killing her, but would not speak. Some days there-
after she fell a crying that Catharine Campbell and
Agnes Nasmith were cutting her side and other
parts of her body. In this condition she continued
a month, with some variation, both as to the hts
and intervals. She did thrust out of her mouth
parcels of hair, some curled, some plaited, some
knotted, of different colours, and in large quanti-
ties, and likewise coal cinders, which were so hot that
they could scarcely be handled One of which Dr.
Brisbane, being by her when she took it out of her
mouth, felt to be hotter than any one's body could
make it. The girl continued a long time in this
condition, till the government began to take notice
of it, and gave commission to some honourable gen-
tlemen for the trials of those two, and several
others concerned in these practices ; and being
brought before the judges, two of their accomplices
confessed the crime; whereupon they were con-
demned and executed."

Somewhere about the same time an equally
strange affair occurred at the town of Pittenweem
in Fife, which may also be told in the words of
Sinclair. " Peter Morton, a smith at Pittenweem,
being desired by one Beatie Laing to do some work
for her, which he refused, excusing himself in re-



THE WITCH OF PITTENWEEM. 333

. spect he had been pre-engaged to serve a ship with
nails, within a certain time ; so that till he had
finished that work, he could not engage in any-
other ; that notwithstanding the said Beatie Laing
declared herself dissatisfied, and vowed revenge.
The said Peter Morton afterwards being indisposed,
coming by the door, saw a small vessel full of
water, and a coal of fire * slockened' in the water ; so
perceiving an alteration in his health, and remem-
bering Beatie Laing's threatdnings, he presently
suspects devilry in the matter, and quarels the
thing. Thereafter, finding his indisposition grow-
ing worse and worse, being tormented and pricked
as with bodkins and pins, he openly lays the blame
upon witchcraft, and accused Beatie Laing. He
continued to be tormented, and she was, by war-
rant, apprehended, with others in Pittenweem. No
natural reason could be given for his distemper, his
face and neck being dreadfully distorted, his back
prodigiously rising and falling, his belly swelling
and falling on a sudden, his joints pliable, and con-
stantly so stiff as no human power could bow
them. Beatie Laing and her hellish companions
being in custody, were brought to the room where
he was, and his face covered, he told his tormentors
were in the room, naming them. And though for-
merly no confession had been made, Beatie Laing
confessed her crime, and accused several others as
accessories. The said Beatie having confessed her
compact with the devil, and using of spells, and
particularly her ' slockening' the coal in water, she
named her associates in revenge against Peter Mor-
ton, viz., Janet Cornfoot, Lillie Wallace, and Lawson,



334 80BCEBY Alno MAQIG.

who had Iramed a picture of wax, and ey^7 ime of
the forenamed persons having put their pin in tke
picture for torture They could not tell -what
had become of the image, but thought the devil
had stolen it, whom they had seen in the prison.
Beatie Laing likewise said, that one Isobel Adams,
a young lass, was also in compact with the devil.
This woman was desired to see with Beatie^ whidi
she refused ; and Beatie let her see a man at the
other end of the table, who appeared as a gentleman,
and promised her all prosperity in the world ; she pro-
mised her service to him, and he put his mark on her
flesh, which was very painfuL She was shortly after
ordered to attend the company, to go to one Mac 6ri-
gor s house to murder him ; he awaking when they
were there, and recommending himself to Grod, th^
were forced to withdraw. This Isobel Adams appeared
ingenuous, and very penitent in her confessions;
she said, he who forgave Manasseh's witchcrafts
might forgive hers also ; and died very penitent,
and to ike satisfa^etion of momy. This Beatie Laing
was suspected by her husband, long before she was
laid in prison by warrant of the magistrates. The
occasion was thus : she said, that she had packs of
very good wool, which she instantly sold, and
coming home with a black horse which she had
with her, they drinking till it was late in the night
ere they came home, that man said, ^^ What shall I
do with the horse f* She replied, " Cast the bridle
on his neck, and you will be quit of him ;"' and, as
her husband thought, the horse flew with a great
noise away in the air. They were, by a comj^nt
to the privy council, prosecuted by her majesty's



,«i^i^iir ' — — — ..-..ir--



BRUTALITY OF THE MOB. 385

advocate^ in 1 704, but all set at liberty save one
who died in Pittenweem. Beattie Laing died un-
desired, in her bed, in St. Andrews; all the rest
died miserable and violent deaths."

80 sajs Mr. Greorge Sinclair, who has, however,
omitted to inform us of the most frightful part of
this story. Janet Comfoot, one of the persons ac-
cused, made her escape from prison, but she was re-
captured, and brought back to Pittenweem, where,
falling into the hands of a ferocious mob, they
pelted her with stones, swung her on a rope ex-
tended from a ship to the shore, and at length
put an end to her sufferings by throwing a door
over her as she lay exhausted on the beach,
and heaping stones on it till she was pressed
to death. This was the woman who, according
to Sinclair, " died in Pittenweem.'' The ma-
gistrates had made no attempt to rescue the mi-
serable woman from the hands of her tormentcmi,
and they were now violently attacked in print for
their conduct, and were as warmly defended by
some advocates. The citation on the subject of
the union with England contributed to the impunity
with which the murderers escaped. But the con-
troversy it occasioned, joined with the horror which
such a barbarous outrage excited, tended more than
anything else to open people's eyes in Scotland to
the absurdity and wickedness of the prosecutions
for witchcraft. It required, however, a few more
instances, remarkable chiefly for their absurdity, to
bring them entirely into discredit. In 1718, a car-
pentear in the shire of Caithness, named William



386 80BCEBT ASO KAQIC

Montgomery, vas infested at night with catfi, irhich,
according to the evidence of his serrant-maid,
" spoke among themselves," and in a violent attack
upon them with every weapon within his reach, lie
inflicted personal injury to a very considerable ex-
tent. Two women were believed to have died in
consequence of these injuries, and a third, in a weak
state, was imprisoned and compelled to confess not
only that she was one of the offending cats, but to
declare against a number of her confederates in
witchcraft. A century earlier, no doubt this con-
fession would have been fatal to most of the old
women in the neighbourhood ; but times were
changed, and the lord advocate, on being applied to,
put a stop to all further proceedings. In 1720,
some old women of Calder were- imprisoned for cer-
tain pretended sorceries exercised on a boy, the son
of James lord Torphichen, but the ofEcera of the
crown would not proceed to a trial Yet two years
later, a poor woman was burnt as a witch in the
county of Sutherland, by order of the sheriff, captain
David Ross, of Littledean. This was the last sen-
tence of death for witchcraft that waa ever passed
in Scotland.

It appears that in Ireland the law against witch-
craft has never been repealed, a circumstance that



WITCHCRAFT IN THE ISLAND MAGEE. 337

that persuasion, that it has been printed over and
oyer again, the edition I have before me bearing
date in 1822, upwards of a hundred years after
that of the event it commemorates. There is some-
thing peculiarly Irish in the story — it is a house, or
rather a family, haunted by a spirit sent by witches.
Mrs. Anne Hattridge was the widow of the presby-
terian minister of the district just mentioned, and
was living with her son James Hattridge. At the'
beginning of September^ 1710, the house began to
be disturbed by an invisible visitor, who threw
stones and turf about, pulled the 'pillows and bed-
clothes q£F the bed, and played a variety of other
disagreeable pranks. . Once it appeared in the shape
of a cat, which they killed and threw into the yard,
but when they looked for the body it had disap-
peared. " There was little remarkable for several
days after, unless it were that her cane would be
taken away, and be missing several days together ;
until the 11th of December, 1710, when the afore-
said Mrs. Hattridge was sitting at the kitchen-fire,
in the evening, before daylight-going, a little boy
(as she and -the servants supposed) came in and sat
down beside her, having an old black bonnet on his
head, with short black hair, a half-worn blanket
about him, trailing on the ground behind him, and
a torn black vest under it. H^ seemed to be about
ten or twelve years old, but he still covered his face
holding his arm with apiece of the blanket before it.
She desired to see his face, but he took no notice of
her. Then she asked him several questions ; viz. if
he was cold or hungry ? if he would have any meat ?
where he came from, and whither he was going ? To

VOL. IL Q



THE TROUBLESOME VISITOR. 339

" CUrl, How came it that you did not take the
Bible too ?

" Appar, It was too heavy to carry.

" Oirl. Will you give it back ? for my mistress
can^t want it any longer.

" Appar, No, she shall never get it again.

" Oirl Can you read on it ?

" Appar. Yes.

" Oirl Who taught you ?

" Appar, The devil taught me.

" Oirl The Lord bless me from thee ! thou. hast
got ill lear Qearning),

" Appar, Aye, bless yourself twenty times, but
that shall not save you.

" Oirl, What will you do to us ? (Mr. Hattridge's
son, about eight years of age, was with her at the
time.)

" Upon which it pulled out a sword and thrust it
in at the window, and said it would kill all in the
house with that sword ; at which the child said^
' Meg, let us go into the room and bar the door, for
fear it should kill us ; which they did ; then it
jeered them, saying, ' Now you think you are safe
enough, but 111 get in yet.'

" Oirl, What way ? for we have the street-door
shut.

" Appar, I can come in by the least hole in the
house, like a cat or mouse, for the devil can make
me anything I please.

" Oirl, Grod bless me from thee, for thou art no
earthly creature if you can do that.

" Upon which it took up a stone of considerable
bigness, and threw it in at the parlour-window,



340 SORCERY AKD MAGIC.

which upon trial could not be put out at the same
place, and then went away for a little time A little
after, the girl and -one of the children came out of
the parlour to the kitchen, and looking out of the
window, saw the apparition catching a turkey-cock,
which he threw over his shoulder, holding him bj
the tail ; and the cock making a great sputter ^th
his feet, the book before-mentioned was, as thej
thought, spurred out of the loop of the blanket he
had about him : but he, taking no notice, run along
the side of the house, and leapt, with the cock on
his back, over a wall at the west-end of the garden,
leaping a great deal higher than the wall. The
girl, thinking this a good opportunity to get the
book, told Mrs. Hattridge ; upon which she, with
the girl and a little boy, went to the garden, and
got the booky. without any harm done to it. At the
same time they looked about the garden and fields
adjoining, but could see nobody. There was no
other person about the house at that time except
children. A little after, the girl went to the window
in the parlour, and looking out of the casement,
saw the apparition again, with the turkey-cock
lying on its back before him, he endeavouring to
get his sword drawn to kill it, as she apprehended,
but the cock got away. It then looked for the
book in the loop of the blanket, and missing it, as
she apprehended, threw away the blanket, and ran
nimbly up and down upon the search for it. A
little after, it came back with a club, and broke the
glass of the side window in the parlour, and then
went to the end window, through which the girl
was looking, and pulled off the casement glass, (not



THE TROUBLESOME VISITOR. 341

leaving one whole quarry in it,) and left it lying on
the south side of the garden. A little after, the
girl ventured to look out of the broken window, and
saw it as it were digging near the end of the house
with the sword. She asked what he was doing ?
He answered, ^ Making a grave/
" Girl For whom ?

" Appar. For a corpse which will come out of
this house very soon.
''Girl Who will it be?

" Appar, Til not tell you that yet. Is your master
at home ?
" Girl Yes.

" Appar, How can you lie ? he is abroad, and is
dead fourteen days ago.

" Girl Of what sickness did he die ?
" Appar, 111 not tell you that.
" After this it went over the hedge, as if it had
been a bird flying. Some persons of the neighbour-
hood came in immediately after, and being told^
made a diligent search, but nothing could be seen.
Thus it continued from eight in the morning till
two or three in the afternoon, throwing^ a great
many stones, turf, etc., in at the windows, to the
great terror of those in the house.''

Not long after this old Mrs. Hattridge was taken
ill, and died. But the spirit still haunted the house,
and tormented a young lady, a relative of the family,
who had come to live there. Mary Dunbar, for this
was her name, was seized with a strange disease on
the 28th of February, accompanied with fits, in the
course of which she had the spectral vision, as it
was called, of certain women of the neighbourhood,

VOL. IL R



5ii SORCERT AKD ICAQIC.

who she said, had sent thither the tormenting spirit.
All the other symptoms usually exhibited by persons
bewitched followed in due course, and several per-
sons whom she accused in her trances were taken
into custody and imprisoned at Carrickfergus to
await their trial The jury brought them in guiltj,
but they appear not to have been executed.



^ ' ^ ~^. — - «



?



3 9015 03020 4997



I



